The New Testament from the Syriac Peshitta
James Murdock, trans. (1852)
Source: Internet Archive
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

New Testament : or The book of the hoh
of our Lord and our God, Jesus the Mess
iranslalion from ihe Syriac Peshito versio


d^, i/^cCcCLks^^^ Cy4LY


CiLiCU^


L^C- CJL-<^O^^^^^y^


Lc^c-


w^w._^ / S' . f ^'ri_^


i . 'h


S


y^ J


J i •


THE


NEW TESTAMENT:


TRANSLATED VBOU


THE SYRIAC PESHITO VERSION.


f



• •''••HI?



— -^ — ^ — J

m-


B^rr hrM H, .tUl.rcj,


/.„./.' h, J S JmuJyi


K K Y,. J a\aM ¥. ^ MiriRBO^C! Ik\ , ^ JTAl.M cTB.


• KKSSr)l: OK lOi'f'T.K S I A .* T I I'A


Chc^-^y^ (/CeyjA_je.cyc/-.,,^_^.yC'^^


^yy-C^-t^^ /f(>.y>.M.^^ ^Cry-i^r^. ^-^^^i^V, /(/*J^/,


""Bi^ye. u:". .


THE


NEW TESTAMENT;


OB,


THE BOOK OF THE HOLY GOSPEL


OF OUR LORD AND OUR GOD,


JESUS THE MESSIAH.


% Xllml €xmMm frnin Ijre liirinr l^fsjjito 'Mmn.


BY JAMES MURDOCK, D.D.


NEW YORK:
PUBLISHED BY STANFORD AND SWORDS,

NO. 137 BROADWAY.

1852.


Entered, according to Act of Congiess, in the year One Thousand
Eight Hundred and Fifty-one,

By JAMES M U R D O C K, D. D.,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States for the District of Connecticut.


BTBREOTyPKD BT

BILUN & BROTHERS,

10 KORTH WILLIAM-STREBT. H. T.
M'GOWN, PRINTKR, AKK-BTaXST.


PREFACE


To extend his own long cherished but scanty knowledge of the Syriac
language, the writer commenced reading the Peshito Syriac New Testa-
ment in January, 1845, and at every step he found increasing delight.
The artless simplicity, directness, and transparency of the style, — the
propriety and beauty of the conceptions of Christ and his followers, as
expressed in a Shcmitish dialect very nearly identical with their vernacular
tongue, — the pleasing thought that the words were, probably, in great part,
the very terms which the Saviour and his Apostles actually uttered in their
discourses and conversations, — and especially the full comprehension which
the Syriac translator seemed to have of the force and meaning of the
inspired original, served to chain attention and hold the mind spell-bound
to the book. Such exquisite pleasure the writer longed to have others
share with him ; but as few persons, even among the clergy, have cither
leisure or facilities for acquiring the Syriac language, he soon came to the
conclusion, that he could do nothing better than first read the book care-
fully through, and then give a literal and exact translation of it. Accord-
ingly he furnished himself with several of the best editions of the book,
and the best Syriac Lexicons and Grammars, and commenced his transla-
tion early in August, 1845, and completed it on the IGth of June, 1846.
This is briefly the history of the work here presented to the public.


vi PREFACE.


The Syriac text followed in the first part of this translation, was that
of the beautiful edition printed by the British and Foreign Bible Society,
London, 1816, 4to., which was prepared for the press, as far as the Acts of
the Apostles, by the late Rev. Claudius Buchanan, D.D., Author of
"Christian Kt'searches," "Star in the East," «SiC., and the remainder by the
Rev. Samuel Lee, D.D., Professor of Arabic in the University of
Cambridge, England. The latter part of the translation was made from
the second edition of the same Bible Society, London, 1826, 4to. ; but the
text of Leusden and Schaafs edition, Leyden, 1717, was everywhere
consulted, and much use was made of their Latin translation of it. The
pocket edition of Gutbir, Hamburgh, 1664, 12mo., Avas also generally con-
sulted. The Lexicons constantly used throughout, were the Lexicon
Syriacum Concordantiale in Nov. Testamcntum of Charles Schaaf, Leyden,
1717, 4to. ; the Lexicon Syriacum of Edmund Castell, revised and
enlarged by J. D. Michaelis, Gottingen, 1788, 4to. ; and the small Lex-
icon Syriacum in Nov. Testamentum of Giles Gutbir, bound up with his
Syriac New Testament. The Grammars relied upon were, the elaborate
Grammaticte Syriacae Libri iii. of Andr. Theoph. Hoffmann, Philos. et
Theol. Doctor, Halle, 1827, 4to. ; and the Elementarlehre der syrischen
Spracho, by Prof. Fred. Uhlcmann, Berlin, 1829, 8vo.

In this translation, the Books of the New Testament are divided into
Paragra[)hs, according to the sense ; just as in Campbell's translation of
the l-^jur Gospels, and in the Greek Testaments of Bengel, Griesbach,
Knapp, and others. The common divisions into Chapters and Verses are
noted in the margin, and the Verses are also put in parentheses in the
middle of the lines. For the benefit of those who have some knowledge
of the Syriac language, the more important words are frequently placed in
the side margin, with references to the corresponding words in the transla-
tion. Deviations of the Syriac text from the Greek, and also the suscep-
tibilities of the Syriac words, or phrases, of a different rendering from that


PREFACE. VU


in the text, are likewise indicated in the side margin. The foot margin is
reserved for occasional comments and critical observations.
The principles adopted in this translation, were :

(1) To translate, as literally as possible, in consistence with idiomatic
and perspicuous English.

(2) To use Saxon phraseology in preference to Latin, as better accord-
ing with the spirit of the Peshito original.

(3) To adopt the obsolescent and solemn style of the English Bible,
e. g. thou spcakest, he speaketh^ ye speak, instead of you speak, he speaks,
&;c., as more seemly for this holy Book.

(4) To write the proper names of persons and places, which are men-
tioned in the Old Testament, as they are written in our English Old
Testament ; and those which occur only in the New Testament, as they
are written in our English New Testament. This is the rule adopted by
Dr. Campbell in his translation of the Four Gospels. Yet X*^ i a V)
(Meshihha) has been translated Messiah, and not Christ ; and ^QiiCL*
(Shemun) has been translated Simon, and not Peter.

(5) In general, to avoid using technical theological terms, when good
substitutes could be found, in order to call away attention from the word
to the thin^ : thus |-»«kjlX.» (an Apostle) is rendered Legate ; and
P « K- V> (^Saviour) is rendered Vivijier, as being more literal, for the verb
|-i-K» (especially in the Cbnjug. Aphel, »i-»w»l) properly signiiies to make
alive, to vivify; and its derivatives ^ ■'« »a and (1 i h*lD properly signify
life, and life-giver, or vivifler. These are the usual terms of the Syriac
version, denoting that salvation which Christ bestows on fallen men, who
are represented as " dead in trespasses and sin." The terms |.O0^2
{liberator, deliverer) and (j_D5GLa {deliverance) are indeed sometimes
used of this salvation, but less frequently. — Yet there is one family of
Syriac technicals, which have been rendered by the English technicals for
the same ideas, to the neglect of their primary meaning. They are y^ns>


VUl


PREFACE.


(properly, intransitive, to stand tip, to stand firm,) which is translated, to he
baptized: — ^V>v] (literally, transitive, to cause another to stand, to
establish), translated, to baptize .— Ij.V^SV) (an estahUsher, one who makes
others to stand), translated, a baptizer : — and ]Aj5QiniiD (a standing up),
translated, baptisin.

(6) To translate idiomatic phrases not fully naturalized in the English
language, by equivalent English phrases, and not to transfer them in their
foreign coltume. Thus, ^.j-Q-ikO] (a feeder on detraction), an epithet of
Satan, is translated a calumniator: — 1'^*^,\\0 {lord of enmity) is
translated an enemy: — JAa£:i *C)5 {jnajor-dom^is) is rendered, a s^eioarc?:
— jZoAxD Ao5 {inastershiji of the house) is rendered steioardship : —
1^1^ ,*~^rr,^n {accepting faces) is rendered, having respect of persons, or
partiality : — f^io ■» «^m i {assumers of faces) is rendered hypocrites : —
]_».j05 « n<^^0 {letting out breath), apologizing, or defending one''s self:
and ]_»j05 L-r.^iJiD {holding the breath), being patient, or long suffering : —
l^ltf ^^J {living aivay from roofs, roaming infields) are lunatics. So also
many compounds of ;^, a son, and of A.^^, a house or home, are para-
phrased ; e. g. son of his city, rendered, his felloio-citizeii : — son of my
yoke, rendered, my yoke-fellow, or colleague: — son of forty years, rendered,
forty years old: — son of their /raJe, rendered, one of their occupation: —
«on. 0/ a wa;i., rendered, a man: — sons of men, rendered men; &c. And
house of tlie prisoners, translated, a prison : — house {home) of the dead,
translated, a grave, or sepulchre: — hoitse of gatherings, translated, a garner,
or store-house: — house of the publicans, translated, a custom house : — house
{home) of olives, translated, an olive yard: — house {home) of the eyes,
translated, the forehead ; &c.

When the translator had finished his work, he supposed that ho had
produced the only English translation of the New Testament ever made
from the Peshito ; but after about three months, the London press issued
a book, entitled, " A Literal Translation of the Four Gospels from the


PREFACE.


IX


Peshito, by J. W. Etheridge;" and announced, as in preparation, by the
same author, "The Apostolical Acts and Epistles, from the Peshito."
The Gospels of Mr. Etheridge were speedily procured; but, on comparing
them with this version, the plan and aims of Mr. Etheridge were found to
be so diverse from his own, that the translator had no hesitation in going
forward with his work. Accordingly, he continued to revise and correct
it ; and, for the sake of improving it, as he found opportunity, he pursued
the study of the Syriac language and literature, for more than four years.
The result he now presents to the Christian public, hoping it may prove
both interesting and useful to all such as are anxious to perfect themselves
in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures of the New Testament.


JAMES MURDOCK.


New-Haven, July 28, 1851.


The Holy Gospel, the Announcement of Matthew the Legate.


I. The book of the nativity^ of Jesus the Messiah,
the son of David, son of Abraham.

2 Abraham begat Isaac: Isaac begat Jacob: Jacob

3 begat Judah and his brothers: (3) Judah begat
Pharez and Zara of Taniar: Pharez begat Hezron:

4 Hezron begat Kam: (4) Ram begat Aminadab:
iViiiinadab begat Nahshon : Nahslion begat Sal-

5 mon : (5) Salmon begat Boaz of Rahab : Boaz

6 begat Obed of Ruth : Obed begat Jesse : (6) Jesse
begat David the king : David begat Solomon of

7 the wife of Uriah : (7) Solomon begat Rehoboam :

8 Rehoboam begat Abia : Abia begat Asa : (8) Asa
begat Jelioshaphat : Jehoshaphat begat Joram :

9 Joram begat Uzziah: (9) Uzziah begat Jotham:

10 Jotham begat Ahaz : Ahaz begat Ilezekiah : (10)
Ilezckiah begat Manasseh : Manasseh begat Amon :

11 Anion begat Josiah: (11) Josiah begat Jeconiah
and his brothers, in the captivity of Babylon. ^ ^ Sy.

12 (12) And after the captivity of Babylon, Jeconiah

13 begat Salathiel : Salathiel begat Zerubbabel : (13)
Zerubbabel begat Abiud: Abiud begat Eliakim;

14 Eliakim begat Azor : (14) Azor begat Zadok :

15 Zadok begat Achim: Achim begat Eliud: (15)
Eliud begat Eleazar : Eleazar begat Matthan

16 Matthan begat Jacob : (16) Jacob begat Joseph,
the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus

17 who is called the Messiah, <= (17) All the genera-
tions, therefore, are, from Abraham to David
fourteen generations, and from David to the cap-
tivity of Babylon fourteen generations, and from
the captivity of Babylon to the Messiah fourteen

generations.
1


MATTHEW, II.


And the birth of Jesus the Messiah was thus. 18
AVhilc his mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph,
before they liad cohabited, slie was found to be

«Sv Voibb ^^''^^^ ^^^^^^^ ^y ^^^"^ ^^'^^•>' ^V'^^''^^- (^^) ^^^^ Joseph 19
' . jher husband" was a righteous-i man, and unwilhng

to expose her: and he thought of putting her
away privately. (20) And while he contemplated 20
these things, an angel of the Lord appeared to him
in a dream, and said to hhii : Joseph, son of
I David, fear not to take Mary thy wife; for that
{wliich is conceived in her, is from the Holy Spirit:
(21) and she will bear a son; and thou shalt call 21
• Sy. <iCLft_i liis name Jcsus,^ for he will resuscitatef his people
root yu:"^, from their sins. (22) Now all this that occurred, 22
Hiph. ^f-'-::-.::, ^^'as to fulfill what was spoken of the Lord by the
salvatit. prophct : (23) Behold, a virgin will conceive, and 2o

' Sy. o « v- 1 i will bear a son, and thou shalt call his name
Gr. tfwc.i. I Emmanuel,? which is interpreted. Our God with
g Sv. "^^- (2-1) And when Joseph rose from his sleep, 24

^"JQ_llciL he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him,

.and took his Avife. (25) And he knew her not, 25
until she had borne her firstborn son, and called
:his name Jesus.


Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of II.
iJudit'a, in the days of IIerod=i the king, there came
jMagi"^ from the east unto Jerusalem, (2) saying: 2
I Where is the king of the Jews that is born? For
;we have seen his star in the cast, and have come
jto worship him. (3) And Herod the king heard, 3
I and he was disturbed; and all Jerusalem with
I him. (4) And he assembled all the chiefs of the 4
priests^ and the scribes of the people, and inquired
jof tliem, AVhere is the birthplace of the Messiah?
I (5) And they said: In Bethlehem of Judaea; for 5
> [thus it is written in the prophet: (6) Thou also, 6
I Bethlehem of Judasa, art not the little among the
j kings of Judaea, for a king shall come from thee
or,bcsh.:j'lurd\who shall rulc'' my people Israel. (7) Then Herod


Sy. »£Djo5cn


' Sy.


"/■


privately called the Magi, and learned from them
at what time the star appeared to them. (8) And
he sent tlicm to Bethlehem, and said to them. Go,
searcli diligently for the child; and when ye have
found him, come and tell me, that I also may go
and worship him. (9) And they, when they had
heard from the king, went forward: and lo, the


MATTHEW, II.


star they had seen in the east went before them,
until it came and stood over where the child was.

10 (10) And when they saw the star, they rejoiced

11 much, with great joy. (11) And they entered the
house ; and they saw the child, with Mary his
mother; and they fell down and worshipped him:
and they opened their treasures, and presented to

12 him gifts, gold, and myrrh, and frankincense. (12)
And it was shown them in a dream, that they
should not return to Herod. And by another
way, they returned to their country.

13 And when they were gone, an angel of the Lord
appeared to Joseph in a dream, and said to him.
Arise, take the child and his mother, and flee into
Egypt ; and be thou there, until I tell thee : for

14 Herod will seek for the child, to destroy it. (14)
Then Joseph arose, took the child and his mother,

15 b}' night, and lied to Egypt. (15) And he was
there, until the death of Herod ; that so might be
fulfilled that which Avas spoken of the Lord by the
prophet, saying, From Egypt have I called my

16 son. (16) Then Herod, when he saw that he had
been deluded by the Magi, was very angry. And
he sent and slew all the children in Bethlehem,
and in all its confines, from a child of two years
and under, according to the time that he had

17 carefully learned from the Magi. (17) Then was
that fullilled, which was spoken by Jeremiah the

18 prophet, saying : (18) A voice was heard in Eama,
weeping and great lamentation; Rachel bemoaning
her children, and unwilling to be comforted, be-

19 cause they are no more. (19) But when king
Herod was dead, an angel of the Lord appeared

20 in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, (20) and said to
him : Arise, take the child and his mother, and go
into the land of Israel ; for they are dead who

21 sought the life of the child. (21) And Joseph
arose, and took the child and his mother, and

22 went to the land of Israel. (22) But when he
heard that Archelaus was king in Judaea, instead
of his father Herod, he feared to go thither. And
it was revealed to him in a dream, that he should

23 go into the land of Galilee.*' (23) And he came
and dwelt in a city that is called Nazareth :^ that
so might be fulfilled that which was said by the
prophet, that he should be called a Nazarene.s


• Sy. ]]^
f Sy. 25^

e Sy. ]-»'^J»
an adjective
from tlie pre-
ceding.


MATTHEW, III.


Sy.

,_1_K.Q-J

Sy. "^JjiOLlD


• Sy. ] ^ .; g^
^ Sy. ]JLdo?1


• 1. e. so common
life teaclies us.


' or, makcih.
So also tlic
other verbs.

f i. c. fire suffer-
ed to burn on
and consume
what is in it.

^ Sy. 1Z.Qj"[r)


And in those days came Johna the Bapti- III.
zcv.^ And he proclaimed in the desert of Judaea,
(2) and said: Repent; the kingdom of heaven hath 2
approached. (3) For this is he of whom it was said, 3
by Isaiah the prophet : The voice of one crying in
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make smooth his paths. (4) And as to this John, 4
his raiment was of camel's hair, and a girdle of
skin was npon his loins ; and his food was locusts
and wild honey. (5) Then went out to him 5
Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the country
about the Jordan. {(]) And they were baptized 6
by him in the river Jordan, while they confessed
their sins. (7) But when he saw many of the 7
Pharisees'^ and of the Sadducees,<i who came to be
baptized, he said to them : Greneration of vipers,
who hath taught you to flee from the wrath that
comcth ? (8) Bring forth the fruits therefore, that 8
accord with repentance. (9) And do not think, 9
and say within yourselves, that Abraham is our
father : for I say to you, that God is able of these
stones to raise up children to Abraham. (10) And 10
lo, the ax is put to the root of trees.^ Every tree,
therefore, m hi^'h beareth not good fruit, is felled,
and falleth into the fire. (11) I indeed baptize 11
you with water unto repentance ; but he that
comcth after me is more powerful than I; whose
sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize
you with the Holy Spirit and with fire. (12) His 12
winnowing shovel is in his hand ; and. he will
make^ clean his threshing-floor. The wheat he
will gather into his storehouse; and the chaff he
will burn with fire not extinguished.?

Then came Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan 13
unto Jolm, to be baptized by him. (14) But John 14
refused him; and said, I need to be baptized by
thee, and hast thou come to me? (15) And Jesus 15
answered, and said to him : Allow it now, for thus
it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.'* Then
he permitted him. (16) And when Jesus was 16
baptized, he Avent up immediately from the water.
And heaven was opened to him ; and he saw the
Holy Spirit descending like a dove, and it came
upon him. (17) And lo, a voice from heaven, 17
which said : This is my beloved Son, in whom I
have delight


MATTHEW, IV.


IV. Then was Jesus led by the Holy Spirit into

the desert, to be tempted by the Calumniator.^

2 (2) And he fasted forty days and forty nights, and

'S afterward he hungered. (3) And the Tempter

came, and said to liim: If thou art the Son of

■i God, command these stones to become bread. (4)

But he replied, and said : It is written, that not by

bread only, doth man live ; but by every word

5 proceeding from the mouth of God. (5) Then the
Calumniator took him to the holy city, and set

6 him on a pinnacle of the temple, (6) and said to
him: If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself
down : for it is written, that he will give his
angels charge of thee, and in their hands will they
sustain thee, lest thou strike thy foot against a

7 stone. (7) Jesus said to him : It is moreover
written, that thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy

8 God. (8) Again the Calumniator took him to a
mountain that Avas very high, and showed him all

9 the kingdoms of the world, and their glory ; (9)
and said to him : All these will I give thee, if thou

10 wilt fall down and worship me. (10) Then Jesus
said to him : Begone, Satan ]^ for it is written, that
thou shalt worship the Lord, thy God ; and him

11 only shalt thou serve. (11) Then the Calumniator
left him : and lo, angels came, and ministered to
him.

And when Jesus had heard that John was
delivered up, he retired to Galilee. (18) And he
left Nazareth, and came and dwelt in Capernaum,^
by the side of the sea, on the confines of Zebulon
and Naphthali. (14) That so might be fulfilled that
wl«ch was spoken by Isaiah the prophet, who said:
15 (15) The land of Zebulon, the land of Na})lithali,
the way of the sea, the ford of Jordan, Galilee of
the Gentiles; (16) the people that sat in darkness,
have seen great light ; and to them who sat in the
region and shadow of death, light is arisen.

From that time began Jesus to proclaim and
say : Repent ; for the kingdom of heaven hath
approached. (18) And as he walked on the shore
of the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon'^
called Cephas," and Andrew^ his brother, who were
casting nets into the sea ; for they were fishermen.

19 (19) And Jesus said to them: Follow me; and I

20 will cause you to become fishers of men. (20) And


» an appellation
of Satan.


12
13


14


16


17
18


Sy. "JLa^ID


= Sy.


J Sy. ^OLkL,
« Sy. ]S)]d
f Sy. .CColipj]


MATTHEW, V.


t Sy.

" Sy. ^y-1
' Sy. ^ 1 KtCU
^ or, (/"IS heard.
' Sy. ViJOID

■" Sy. McLj,
IV. "jcuj,
a (Irmon.

' or, rnamrrs,
Ihe huvsele.ss,
or, ."tur/i as
roam in the
fields.

" or, Ihe fcrd of.


• Sy. *_>,jO;^
'' or, </i« land.


immediately, they left their nets, and went after him.
(21) And as he passed on from there, he saw two 21
other brothers, Jamesg the son of Zebedee,^ and
.Tolm' his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their
lather, who were mending their nets. And Jesits
called them. (22) And they immediately left the 22
ship and their father, and went after him.

And Jesus travelled over all Galilee: and he 23
taught in their synagogues, and proclaimed the
tidings of the kingdom ; and he cured every
I disease and malady among the people. (24) And 2-i
!his lame spread^^ through all Syria.i ^nd they
j brought to him all them that were very sick
with diverse diseases, and them that were aflflicted
with pains, and demoniacs,™ and lunatics,n and
jxaraly tics ; and he healed them. (25) And there 25
Hollowed him great multitudes from Galilee, and
jfroin the Ten (jities, and from Jerusalem, and from
JucLea, and from beyond° the Jordan.


V.


' or, icord.


^ Sy. sahed.
^ Sy. goes for.

' Sy. "j^nNs


And when Jesus saw the multitudes, he ascend-
ed a hill ; and when he was seated, his disciples
drew near him: (2) and he opened his mouth, and
taught them, and said: (3) Blessed are the poor
in spirit:^ for the kingdom of heaven is theirs!
(4) lilessed are the mourners : for they shall be
comforted! (5) Blessed are the meek: for they
shall inherit tlic earth!'' (6) Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst for righteousness: for they shall
be satiated ! (7) Blessed are the merciful : for on
them shall be mercies ! (8) Blessed are the clean
in heart: for they shall behold God! (9) Blessed
are the cultivators of peace : for they shall be
called sons of God ! (10) Blessed are they that
are persecuted on account of righteousness : for
the kingdom of heaven is theirs ! (11) Blessed
are ye, when they revile you and persecute you,
and s})eak every evil things against you, falsely,
on my account. (12) At that time, rejoice and be 12
glad : for your reward in heaven is great. For so
they persecuted the prophets that were before you.

Ye are the salt of the earth ! But if the salt 13
become insipid, with what shall it he seasoned ?d
It is fif^ for nothing ; but to l)e thrown out, and be
trodden under foot by men. (14) Ye are the light 14
of the world !f A city built upon a hill, cannot


9


10


11


MATTHEW, V.


15


16


17


19


20


21


22


23


be concealed. (15) And they do not light a lamp
and place it under a bushel ;e but upon a light-
stand, and it giveth light to all that are in the
house. (16) Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and may
glorify your Father who is in heaven.

Do not suppose that I have come to subvert the
law,*! or the prophets: [I have come] not to sub-

18 vert, but to fulfill. (18) For verily 1 say to you,
that until heaven and earth shall pass away, one
iota or one letter' shall not pass from the law,
until all shall be fulfilled. (19) Therefore, who-
ever shall break one of these small commands, and
shall so inculcate on the children of men, shall be
called little in the kingdom of heaven : but every
one that shall do and teach [them], shall be called
great in the kingdom of heaven. (20) F'or I say
to you, that unless your righteousness shall abound
more than that of the Scribes'^ and Pharisees,^ ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Ye have heard that it was said to the ancients,
Thou shalt not kill : and every one that killeth, is
obnoxious to judgment. (22) But I say to you,
That every one who is angry with his brother
rashly,'" is obnoxious to judgment: and every one
that saith to his brother, Eaka!" is obnoxious to
the council:" and every one that shall say, Fool !p
is obnoxious to hell''-fire. (23) If therefore thou
shalt bring thy oblation to the altar, and shalt
there remember that thy brother hath any offence^

21 against thee, (21) leave there thy oblation before
the altar, and go first and be reconciled with thy
brother ; and then come and present thy oblation.

25 (25) Be at agreement with thy prosecutor, forth-
with, and while on the way with him; lest the
prosecutor deliver thee up to the judge, and the
judge deliver thee over to the sheriff,'^ and thou

26 fall into the house of prisoners. (26) Verily I say-
to thee, Thou wilt not pome out from there until
thou hast paid the last farthing. -^

27 Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt

28 not commit adultery. (28) But I say to you. That
whoever gazeth on a woman with concupiscence, at
once comraitteth adultery with her in his heart.

29 (29) If therefore thy right eye make thee offend,
pluck it out, and cast it from thee ; because it is


Sy. Ul^O
Ileb. mo


Sy. ]mr)<.ni


'^ Sy. li'^ro

' Sy. "U^'^

- Sy. ]nJ\

" Sy. i£55

°Sy.

P Sy. ]J1
' Sy. pCTLy,
' Sy. lAol

'Sy.Um^

» Sy. ]jQin*


MATTHEW, V.


" Sy. prq/Itoifc. better^ for thee that thy one member perish, than''

khat thy whole body fall into hell.y (30) And if 30
' Sy. and }iot. W^j right hand make thee offend, cut it off, and
, cast it from thee ; because it is better for thee that

» <■ y. W^-"^ one of thy members perish, than that thy whole
jbody fall into hell.

I It hath been said, That if a man will put away his 31
wife, he must give her a writing of divorcement.
(32) But I say to you, That whoever putteth away 32
'his wife, except for the offence of whoredom,
', causcth her to commit adultery : and he that
taketh tlie divorced woman, committeth adultery.
. Again, ye have heard that it hath been said to 33
I the ancients. Thou shalt not be false in thy oaths ;
but thou shalt perform thine oaths to the Lord.
(34) But I say to you. Swear not at all: not by 34
I heaven, for it is the throne of God: (35) and not 35
I by the earth, for it is the footstool under his feet:
I and likewise not by Jerusalem, for it is the city
of the great king. (36) Moreover, thou shalt not 36
, swear by tliy head, for thou canst not make one
!hair in it either black or white. (37) But let your 37
I language be. Yes, yes; or No, no; for whatever is
beyond these proceedeth from evil.

Ye have heard that it hath been said : An eye 38
I for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. (39) But I say 39
I to you: Resist not evil ; but if a person smite thee
on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
(40) And if one is disposed to sue thee and get 40
' Sy. ^Z.ao,;away thy coat,^ relinquish to him also thy cloak.a
(]r. x'Twva. j(41) Whoever compcllcth thee to go one mile, go 41
I with him two. (42) Whoever demandeth of thee, 42
• Sy. ^Q^jio give to him: and whoever wisheth to borrow of
Ithee, deny him not.

Ye have heard that it hath been said: Thou 43

b


•■ Sy.


shalt \ovQ. tliy neighbor, and hate thy enemy,
(44) liut I say to you : Love your enemies ; an^
bless him that curseth you; and do good to him


that hateth you ; and pray, for them that lead you
m bonds, and that persecute you: (45) that ye 45
may be the children of your Father that is in
heaven, who causeth his sun to rise upon the good
and upon the bad, and sendeth his rain upon the
righteous and upon the unrighteous. (46) For, if 46
ye love them that love you, what reward have ye?
Do not even the publicans do this ? (47) And if 47


MATTHEW, VI.


ye salute your brethren only, what do ye that is
not common? Do not even publicans do this?
48 (48) Be ye therefore perfect ; even as your Father
who is in heaven is perfect.

YI. Bo cautious in your alms-giving, not to perform
it before men, so that ye may be seen of them:
otherwise, ye have no reward from your Father

2 who is in heaven. (2) Therefore, when thou
doest alms thou shalt not sound a trumpet* before
thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and
in the streets, "^that they may get praise from men.
Verily I say to you, They have gotten their re-

3 ward! (3) But thou, when doing alms, let not
thy left hand know what thy right hand docth :

4 (4) that thy alms may be in secret. And thy
Father, who seeth in secret, will reward thee
openly.

5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be like
the hypocrites, who are fond of standing up in
the synagogues and at the corners of streets to
pray, so that they may be seen by people.'' Verily
I say to you. They have gotten their reward.

6 (6) But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy
closet and close the door, and pray to thy Father
who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in

7 secret, will reward thee openly. (7) And when ye
pra}^, be not garrulous''' like the heathen; for they
expect to be heard for their abundance of words.

8 (8) Therefore, be not like them; for your Father
knoweth what is needful for you, before ye ask

9 him-ii (9) In this manner, therefore, pray ye:
Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy

10 name: (10) Thy kingdom come: Thy will« be

11 done; as in heaven, so on earth: (11) Give us

12 our needful bread, this day: (12) And forgive us

13 our debts, as we forgive our debtors : (13) And
bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power,f

14 and the glory, for ever and ever:g Amen. (14) For
if ye forgive men their faults, your Father who is

15 in heaven will also forgive you. (15) But if ye
shall not forgive men, your Father also forgiveth
not you your faults.

16 And when ye fast, be not sad like the hypocrites.
For they distort their faces, that they may be seen


Sy. a horn.


•> Sy. the sons of


Sy.


^ or, it.


or, j)leasure.


f or, might.

« Sy. y)\s\


10


MATTHEW, VI.


•> or, light.
' or, simple.


>■ Sy. lords.
' Sy. ]ioV>Vr>


"or, and.

" or, superior to.


' or, the tcild
lilies.

P Sy. cZoi/iei.


Sy. IkiloL
Sy. ]<^Vv


of men to fast Verily I say to you, they have
gotten their reward. (17) But, when thou fastest, 17
wash thou thy face, and anoint thy head : (18) that 18
thou mayest not be seen by men as a faster, but by
thy Fatlicr who is in secret : and thy Father who
seeth in secret, will recompense thee.

Lay not up for yourselves treasures on the earth, 19
where moth and rust spoil, and where thieves dig
through and steal. (20) But Jay up for yourselves 20
treasures in heaven, where no moth and no rust
can spoil, and no thieves dig through nor steal.
(21) For where your treasure is, there will your 21
heart also be.

The lamp'i of the body is the eye. If therefore 22
thy eye shall be sound,' thy whole body will be
luminous. (23) But if thy eye shall be diseased, 23
thy whole body will be dark. If then the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great will be thy
darkness !

No man can serve two masters:'^ for either he 24
will hate the one and love the other, or he will
honor the one and neglect the other. Ye cannot
serve God and mammon. • (25) Therefore I say to 25
you: Be not anxious about your life, what ye
shall eat, and what ye shall drink ; nor about your
body, how ye shall clothe yourselves. Is not the
life more important than food, and the body than
raiment? (26) Look at the birds of heaven ; which 26
sow not, and reap not, and gather not into store-
houses, iiut"! your Father who is in heaven feedeth
them. Are not ye more important" than they?
(27^ And who of you that shall be anxious, can add 27
to his stature a cubit? (28) And about raiment, 28
why are ye anxious? Consider the lilies of the
desert, o in what manner they grow. They toil
not ; and they spin not. (29) Yet I say to you, that 29
not even Solomon in all his glory, was arrayed?
like one of thein. (30) And if God so clothe the 30
grass of the Held, which exists to-day, and to-
morrow falls into the oven, will he not much more
[clothe] you, ye small in faith? (31) Therefore 31
be not anxious; nor say. What shall we eat, or
what shall we drink, or wherewith be clothed?
(32J For, all these things the people of the world^ 32
seek after. And your Father, who is in heaven,
knoweth that all these things are needful to you.


33 (33) But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness : and all these things shall be

34 added to you. (34) Therefore be not anxious
about the morrow : for the morrow hath its own
anxieties. Sufficient for the day, is its own evil.

YIT. Judge not, that ye be not judged. (2) For with

2 the judgment that ye judge, ye shall be judged;
and by the measure that ye measure, shall it be

3 measured to you. (3) And why observest thou
the straw in thy brother's eye, and regardest not

4 the beam that is in thine own eye ? (4) Or how
canst thou say to thy brother. Allow me to .pluck
the straw from thy eye ; and lo ! a beam is in thy

5 own eye. (5) Thou hypocrite ; pluck first the
beam from thy own eye ; and then thou wilt see
clearly, to pluck the straw out of thy brother's
eye.

6 Give not a holy thing to dogs: and cast not
your ])earls before swine ; lest they tread them
under their feet, and turn and lacerate you.

7 Ask, and it shall be given to you: seek, and ye
shall find : knock, and it shall be opened to you.

8 (8) For, every one that asketh, receiveth : and he
that seekcth, findeth : and to him that knocketh,

9 it shall be opened. (9) For what man is there
among you, of whom if his son ask bread, will he

10 reach him a stone? (10) Or if he ask of him a

11 fish, will he reach him a serpent? (11) If ye
then, wlio are evil, know how to give good gifts
to 3'our children, how much more will your Father
who is in heaven give good things to them that
ask him?

12 Whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you ; so also do ye to them : for this is the law^

13 and the prophets. (13) Enter ye in by the strait
gate; for wide is the gate and broad the way
which leadcth to destruction ;b and many are they

14 that walk in it. (14) How small the gate and
straitened the way that leadeth to life, and few
they who find it !

15 Beware of false prophets; who come to you in
the garb of sheep, but internally they are rapacious

16 wolves. (16) And from their fruits ye shall know
them. Do men gather grapes from thorn bushes ;

17 or figs from thistles? (17) So every good tree


Sy. "jrOQlQj,
from the Gr.

Sy. ]j^1


12


MATTHEW, VIII.


<=■ Sy. fallelh.
"* or, pleasure.

e Sy. i";u

' Sy. |Xjl^


K or, streams,
rivers.


• U


»y. Lk»o-»


or, itie fall.


^ or, doctrine.


• Sy. in <?ia<

hour.
^ Sy.

' Sy. in the
house.


bcareth good fruits; but a bad tree beareth bad
fruits. (18) A good tree cannot bear bad fruits ; 18
nor can a bad tree bear good fruits. (19) Every 19
tree that bearetli not good fruits, is cut down and
consigned'"' to the fire. (20) Wherefore, by their 20
fruits ye shall know them.

Not whoever may say to me, My Lord, my 21
Lord, will enter into the kingdom of heaven : but
he that doeth the will*^ of 'my Father who is in
heaven. (22) Many will say to me in that clay, 22
My Lord, my Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name? and in thy name cast out demons?*^ and
in thy name wrought many works^ of power?
(23) And then will I declare to them; I never 23
knew you. Depart from me, ye doers of evil.

Every one therefore that heareth these my dis- 24
courses, and doeth them, will be like to a wise
man, one that built his house upon a rock.
(25) And the rain descended, and the floods? 25
came, and the winds^* blew; and they rushed upon
tliat house ; and it fell not, for its foundations were
I laid upon a rock. (26) And every one that hear- 26
jeth these my discourses, and doeth them not, will
be like a foolish man that built his house upon
sand. (27) And the rain descended, and the floods 27
came, and the winds blew ; and they rushed upon
that house, and it fell; and great was the ruin»
of it.

_ And so it was, that when Jesus had ended these 28
discourses, the multitudes were astonished at his
teoching:^ (29) for he taught them as one having 29
authority ; and not as their Scribes and Pharisees.

And as he descended from the mountain, VIIL
great multitudes gathered around him. (2) And be- 2
hold, a leper came and worshipped him, and said :
My Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. (3) 3
And Jesus stretched forth his hand, touched him,
and said : I will : be thou clean. And immediate-
ly'^ his leprosy was cleansed. (4) And Jesus said 4
to him, See, thou tell no man : but go, show thy-
self to the priests, and present an oblation** as
Moses enjoined, for a testimony to them.

And when Jesus had entered into Capernaum, 5
a centurion came to him, and besought him, (6) 6
and said: My Lord, my child lieth at home,c and


4k


MATTHEW, VIII.


13


7 is paralytic, and badly afflicted. (7) Jesus said to

8 liim, I will come and heal him. (8) The centurion
replied, and said : My Lord, I am not worthy that
thou shouldst come under my roof: but speak the

9 word only, and my child will be healed, (9) For
I also am a man under authority, and there are
soldiei-s under my hands, and I say to this one,
Go, and he goeth ; and to another, Come, and he
cometh; and to my servant. Do this thing, and he

10 doeth [it]. (10) And when Jesus heard [this], he
admired [it] ; and he said to those walking with
him, Verily 1 say to you, I have not found faith

11 like this even in Israel. (11) And I say to you,
tliat man}'- shall come from the east, and from the
west, and shall recline with Abraham an.d Isaac

12 and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven; (12) but
the children of the kingdom shall go forth into
the outer darkness. There will be weeping and

13 gnashing of teeth. (13) And Jesus said to the
centurion, Go ; be it to thee as thou hast believed.
And his child was cured in that same hour,

14 And Jesus came to the house of Simon,^ and
saw his wife's mother prostrate, confined by a

15 fever. (15) And he touched her hand, and the
fever left her: and she arose and ministered to

16 them, (16) And when it was evening, they
brought many demoniacs before him ; and he ex-
pelled their demons by a word, and healed all

17 them that were diseased: (17) that so might be
fulfilled that which was spoken by Isaiah the
prophet, who said : He will bear our sorrows, and
our infirmities he will take upon him,

18 And when Jesus saw great multitudes around
him, he ordered that they should go to the oppo-

19 site shore.<= (19) And a Scribe came and said to
him : Rabbi, <" I will follow thee to the place

20 whither thou goest, (20) Jesus said to him, For
foxes there arc holes, and for the birds of heaven
there arc nests ; but for the Son of man, there is

21 not where he may recline liis head. (21) And
another of his disciples said to him: My Lord,

22 suffer me first to go and bury my father. (22) But
Jesus said to him : Follow thou me, and leave the
dead to bury their dead.

23 And when Jesus entered the ship, his disciples

24 embarked with him. (24) And lo, a great com-


i. e. Simon

Peter.


Sy, ilie other
side, i. e. of
the lake.

Sy. «jk25


14


MATTHEW, IX.


' Sy. ]JQ_,>

Sy. place of
graves.


^Sy. fell.
> Sy. dkd.


• Sy. the easy.


motion arose in the sea, so that the vessel was
covered by the waves. But Jesus was asleep:

(25) and his disciples came to awake him, and said 25
to him : Our Lord, deliver us ; we are perishing !

(26) Jesus said to them. Why are ye afraid, ye 26
small in faith! Then he arose, and rebuked the
wind and the sea; and there was great tranquillity.

(27) And the men were amazed; and they said, 27
What a man is this, to whom the winds and the
sea arc obedient !

And when Jesus arrived at the farther shore, in 28
the country of the Gadarencs,? there met him two
demoniacs,!' who came out from the sepulchres,'
very furious, so that no one could pass that way.

(29) And they cried out, and said: What have we 29
to do with thee ? Jesus, thou Son of God. Hast
thou come hither before the time to torment us ?

(30) And at a distance from them there was a herd 30
of many swine feeding. (31) And the demons 31
entreated of him, and said : If thou cast ns out,
suffer us to go into the herd of swine. (32) And 32
Jesus said to them, Go ye. And immediately they
came out, and entered into the swine; and that
whole herd ran straight to a precipice, and plunged^
into the sea, and perished' in the waters. (33) 33
And the herdsmen fled, and entered the city, and
related all that had occurred, and concerning the
demoniacs. (34) And all the city came out to 34
meet Jesus: and when they saw him, they be-
sought him to retire from their coasts.

And he entered the ship, and passed over and IX.
came to his own city. (2) And they brought to 2
him a paralytic, lying on a bed. And Jesus saw
their faith, and said to the paralytic: Take cour-
age, my son; thy sins are forgiven thee. (3) And 3
some of the Scribes said in their minds. This man
blasphemeth. (4) But Jesus knew their thoughts : 4
and he said to them. Why do ye think evil [things]
in your heart? (5) For, which is the easier, ^^ to 5
say. Thy sins arc forgiven thee; or to say, Arise
and walk? (6) But that ye may know that the 6
Son of man hath authority on earth to forgive
sins, he said to the paralytic: Arise, take up thy
bed, and go to thy home. (7) And he arose and 7
went to his home. (8) And when the multitudes 8


L.


MATTHEW, IX.


15


saw [it], they were struck with awe; and they
praised God, who had given authority like this to
men.
9 And as Jesus passed on from there, he saw a
man sitting at the custom-house, whose name was
Matthew.'' And he said to him, Follow me: and

10 he arose and followed him. (10) And as they
were reclining in a house, many publicans and
sinners came and reclined with Jesus and his dis-

11 ciples. (11) And when the Pharisees saw [it],
they said to his disciples. Why doth your Eabbi<=

12 eat with jniblicans and sinners? (12) And as
Jesus heard [it], he said to them : They who are
in health have no need of a physician, but they

13 that are very sick. (13) Go and learn what that
is : I require compassion, and not a sacrifice ! For
I did not come to call the righteous, but the sinful.

14 Then came to him the disciples of John,'' and
said: Why do we and the Pharisees fast much,

15 and thy disciples fast not? (15) Jesus said to
them : Can the children^ of the nuptial chamber
fast, so long as the bridegroom is with them? But
the days will come when the bridegroom will be

16 taken from them, and then they will fast. (16) No
one inserteth a piece of new cloth on an old gar-
ment; lest that which filleth up, tear from that

17 garment, and the rent become greater. (17) And
they do not put new wine into old sacks ; lest the
sacks burst, and the Avine run out, and the sacks
perish. But they put new wine into new sacks;
and they are both preserved.

18 And while he was thus discoursing with them,
a certain ruler'' came, drew near, Avorshipped him,
and said : My daughter is already dead, but come,

19 lay thy hand upon her, and she will live. (19)
And Jesus rose up, and his disciples; and they

20 followed him. (20) And behold, a woman whose
l)lood had flowed fourteen years, came up behind

21 him, and touched the extremity of his robe: (21)
for she had said in her mind, If i but touch his

22 garment I shall be cured. (22) And Jesus turned
himself, looked at her, and said to her: Take
courage, my daughter; thy faith hath given thee
life.ff And the woman was cured from that very

23 hour. (23^ And Jesus came to the house of the
ruler: and he saw there pipers, and multitudes


Sv. »^Z\k)


Sy. ^no5


Sy. ^«l_KjQ_,


or, guests.


Sy. 'Uqjd;],

Gr. app^cjv.


f Sy. hath vivi-
fied thee.


16


MATTHEW, X.


Sy. Iq,,:


» Sy.

' Sy. Vki\«
' Sy.


making outcry. (24) And lie said to them : Eetire ; 24
for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And thej
scoffed at him. (25) And when he had ejected 25
the throngs, he entered in, and took her by the
hand, and the maid rose up. (26) And the fame 26
of this [thing] spread in all that land.

And when Jesus had passed from there, two 27
blind men followed after him, and said: Have
[mercy on us, Thou Son of David ! (28) And 28
when he had entered a house, those blind men ap-
proached him, and Jesus said to them : Believe ye
that I am able to do this ? They said to him. Yes,
our Lord. (29) Then he touched their eyes, and 29
said : As yc have believed, so shall it be to you,
(30) And forthwith their eyes were opened. And 30
Jesus charged them and said: See, that no man
know [of it]. (31) But they went out and spread 31
the fame of it in all that land.

And as Jesus went out, they brought to him a 32
dumb man in whom was a demon. ^ (33) And 33
when the demon had gone out, the dumb man
conversed. And the multitudes admired, and
said: Never was it so seen in Israel! (34) But 34
the Pharisees said : It is by the Prince of demons,
he casteth out demons.

And Jesus travelled over all the cities and the 35
villages: and he taught in their synagogues, and
proclaimed the tidings of the kingdom, and healed
all diseases and all pains. (36) And when Jesus 36
looked on the multitudes, he pitied them ; because
they were wearied and dispersed, like sheep that
have no shepherd. (37) And he said to his dis- 37
ciples, The harvest is great, and the laborers few.
(38) Entreat, therefore, of the Lord of the harvest, 38
that he would send laborers into his harvest.

And he called his twelve disciples^ [to him], X.
and gave them authority over unclean spirits'' to
cast them out, and to heal every pain and disease.
(2) And the names of those twelve Legates<= are 2
these: The first of them,d Simon who is called
Cephas, and Andrew his brother ; and James the
son of Zebcdee, and John his brother; (3) and 3
Philip, and Bartholomew, and Thomas, and Mat-
thew the publican; and James the son of Alpheus,
and Lebbeus who was called Thaddeus; (4) and 4


MATTHEW, X.


17


Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot,^ he who

5 betrayed him. (5) These twelve Jesus sent forth :
and he commanded them and said : Go not in the
way of the Gentiles •/ and enter not the cities of

6 the Samaritans. (6) But, go ye rather to the lost

7 sheep of the house of Israel. (7) And as ye go,
proclaim and say: The kingdom of heaven hath

8 approached. (8) Ileal ye the sick; cleanse the
leprous; [raise the dead;]? and cast out demons.

9 Freely ye have received ; freely give. (9) Provide

10 not gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses; (10)
nor a wallet for the journey : neither two coats,
nor shoes, nor a staff. For the laborer is worthy

11 of his food. (11) And into whatever city or town
3'e enter, inquire, who in it is worthy ; and there

12 stay until ye depart. (12) And when ye enter a
1,") house, salutc'i the household. (13) And if the

liouse be worthy, your peace' will come upon it;
but if it be not worthy, your peace will return

1-1 upon }-ourselves. (14) And whoever will not re-
ceive you, nor hear your discourses, when ye de-
part from that house or that town, shake ofi" the

15 dust from your feet. (15) Verily I say to you,
tliat it will be comfortable for the land of Sodom
and Gomori-ah in the day of judgment, rather than
for that city.

1(> Behold, I send you forth as sheep among wolves,
'^fherefore be ye sagacious as serpents, and guile-

17 less as doves. (17) And beware of men ; for they
will deliver you over to the tribunals, and will

18 scourge you in their synagogues. (18) And they
will bring you before governors'* and kings, on
my account, for a testimony to them and to the

11) Gentiles. (19) And when they deliver you up, be
not anxious how or what ye shall speak ; for it

20 sliall be given you in that hour Avhat to say. (20)
For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your

21 Father speaking in you. (21) And brother shall
deliver up his brother to death, and a father his
son ; and children shall rise up against parents,

22 and cause them to die. (22) And ye shall be
hated by every one, on account of my name. But
he that shall endure to the end, shall have life.

23 (23) And when they persecute you in one^ city,
flee to another : for verily I say to you, Ye shall
not have completed all the cities of the house of


14q-.;j:ico

^ Sy. /.he yro-
farw..


Omitted in
most copies.


I" Sy. ask after
the peace of it

' i. e. your sa-
lam, or sahi-
tation.


]joVi..cni,

Gr. ■JwspLovoj.


Sy. this.


18


MATTHEW, X.


or, members.


Sy. ]jaT-yt

Sy. ^1,
Gr. dtftfapiov.


' Sy. to cast, or
disssminalc.

' Sy. a sword.

' Sy. to divide.

' Sy. children
(f his house.


' Sy.findr.l!i.


Israel, till the Son of man sball come. (24) No 24
I disciple is better than his rabbi; nor a servant,
[than his lord. (25) It is sufficient for the dis- 25
iciplc, that he be as his rabbi; and the servant,
las his lord. If they call the lord of the house
I Beelzebub, how much more the children"' of his
jdimily? (2(3) Therefore be not afraid of them ; 26
I for there is nothing covered up, that shall not be
lexpo.sed; nor concealed, that shall not become
I known. (27) Whatever I saj to you in the dark, 27
[that spcuk ye in the light; and what ye have
; heard in your ears, proclaim ye on the housetops.
i (28) And be not afraid of them that kill the body, 28
■ but cannot kill the soul ; but be afraid rather of
' Him who can destroy both soul and body in hell."
[ (29) Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ?» 29
I Yet one of them doth not fall to the ground with-
out your Father. (30) As for you, even the hairs 80
of your head are all numbered. (31) Therefore be 31
not afraid : ye are more important than many
■sparrows. (32) Wherefore, whoever shall confess 82
'me beforo men, him will I also confess before my
Father who is in heaven. (33) But whoever shall 88
deny me before men, him will I also deny before
my Father who is in heaven.

; Think not that I have come to sowp quietness 84
on the earth: I have not come to sow quietness,
ibut conflict.'" (35) For I have come to set^ a man 35
.against his father, and a daughter against her
mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-
I in-law. (36) And a man's foes will be the mem- SQ
jbers of his household.^ (37) lie that loveth father 37
or mother more than me, is not worthy of me:
and he that loveth son or daughter more than me,
j is not worthy of me : (38) and he that doth not 38
bear his cross and follow after me, is not worthy
of me. (39) lie that preserveth^ his life, shall lose 39
it: and he that loseth his life for my sake, shall
preserve it. ' (40) He that entertainetfi you, enter- 40
taineth me: and he that entertaineth me, cnter-
taineth him that sent me. (41) He that entertain- 41
eth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall re-
ceive a proi)het's reward : and he that entertaineth
a righteous man in the name of a righteous man,
shall receive a righteous man's reward. (42) And 42
whoever shall give one of these little ones to drink


MATTHEW, XI.


19


9


a cup of cold [water] only, in the name of a dis-
ciple, verily I say to you, he shall not lose his
Xl.reward. (XL) And when Jesus had ended the
instructions"- to his twelve disciples, he went from
there, to teach and to proclaim in their cities.

2 Now when John, in the house of prisoners,
heard of the works of Messiah, he sent by the hand

3 of his disciples, (3) and said to him : Art thou he

4 that Cometh, or are we to expect another? (4) Jesus
answered, and said to them : Go, teU John the

5 things that ye hear and see : (5) the blind see, and
the kime walk, and the leprous arc cleansed, and
the deaf hear, and the dead rise up, and the needy

6 hear good tidings : (6) and happy is he, who shall

7 not be stumbled at me. (7) And Avhen they were
gone, Jesus began to say to the multitudes, con-
cerning John : What went ye into the wilderness

8 to see? A reed that waved in the wind?'' (8)
And if not ; what went ye out to see ? A man
clothed in delicate robes? Lo, they that are
clothed in delicate [robes], are in the dwelling^ of
kings. (9) And if not ; what went ye out to see ?
A prophet ? Yes, say I to you, and more than a

10 prophet. (10) For this is he of whom it is writ-
ten : Behold, I send my messenger'^ before thy
face, that he may prepare the way before thee.

11 (11) Yerily I say to you. Among those born of
women, there hath not arisen a greater than John
the Baptizer: yet the small one in the kingdom

12 of heaven, is greater than he. (12) And from the
days of John the Baptizer, until now, the kingdom
of heaven is assailed by force, and the violent
seize it. (13) For all the prophets and the law
prophesied, until the time of John. (14) And, if
ye are willing, receive ye, that this is he who was
to come. (15) He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear!

But to what shall I compare this generation?
It is like to children, that sit in the market-place
17 and call to their associates, (17) and say : We nave
sung to you, and ye did not dance : we have wailed
to you, and ye did not lament. (18) For John
came, not eating and not drinking; and they said,
He hath a demon. ^ (19) The Son of man came,
eating and drinking; and they say: Behold, a


13
14

15

16


18
19


Sy. commands,
or, precepts.


Sy. *|^o5
Sy. house.

Sy. UL^^lliD


' Sy. 1zL5o1,
tlic Pentalevxli.


Sy. lo..?


20


MATTHEW, XII.


SyAa


Sy. place of
seeds.


gluttonous man, and a wine drinker, and a friend
of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified
bj her works.

Then began Jesus to reproach the cities, in 20
which his many deeds of power were wrought,
yet they repented not. (21) And he said: Woe to 21
thee, Chorazin ! Woe to thee, Bethsaida I For if
the deeds of power done in you, had been done in
Tyre and Sidon, doubtless, they would long ago
have repented in sackcloth and ashes. (22) But I 22
say to you. It will be comfortable for Tyre and
Sidon, in tlie day of judgment, rather than for
you. (23) And thou, Capernaum, which hast been 23
lifted up to heaven, shalt be brought down to the
graves Foi if those deeds of power which were
done ill thee, had been done in Sodom, it would
have stood to this day. (24) But I say to thee, 24
It will be comfortable for the land of Sodom, in
the day of judgment, rather than for thee.

At that time Jesus answered and said : I praise 25
thee, 0 my Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that
tliou hast hid these things from the wise and know-
ing, and hast revealed them to little children. (26) 26
Yes, my Father ; for so it seemed good before thee.

(27) Every thing is given up by my Father to me. 27
And no one knoweth the Son, except the Father.
Also, no one knoweth the Father, except the Son,
and he to whom the Son is pleased to reveal [him].

(28) Come unto me, all ye wearied and heavily 28
burdened, and I will ease you. (29) Take my 29
yoke upon you; and learn from me, that I am
gentle and subdued in my heart : and ye will find
rest for your souls ; (30) for my yoke is pleasant, 30
and my burden is light.

At that time Jesus, on the sabbath, walked XII.
in tlie tillage grounds:* and his disciples were
hungry, and began to pluck the cars and to eat.
(2) And when the Pharisees saw them, they said 2
to him : See ; thy disciples are doing that which
it is not lawful to do on the sabbath. (3) But he 3
.said to them. Have ye not read what David did
when lie was hungry, and they that were with
him? (4) Uow he went to the house of God, and 4
ate the bread of the Lord's table ; which it was
not lawful for him to cat, nor for them that were


MATTHEW, XII.


21


6


9
10


11


with him, but solely for the priests ? (5") Or have
ye not read in the law,'' how that in tne temple
the priests profane the sabbath, and are without
fault? (G) But I say to you, that a greater than
the temple is here. (7) And if ye had known
what that is, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice;
ye would not have criminated them Avho are with-
out fault. (8) For the Son of man, is lord of the
sabbath.

And Jesus went from there, and came to their
s3'nag-oguc. (10) And a man was there, whose
hand was withered. And they questioned him,
and said. Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath ? that
they might defame him. (11) And he said to
them, What man among you is there, who, if he
have a sheep, and it fall into a pit on the day of
the sabbath, doth not lay hold of it and lift it out?

12 (12) Now, how much better is a human being<= than
a sheep ! Wherefore it is lawful to do what is
good, on the sabbath. (13) Then said he to the
man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched
out his hand ; and it was restored, and like the
other.'' (14) And the Pharisees went out and
held a consultation against him, that they might
destro}' him.

But Jesus knew [it] ; and he retired from there.
And great multitudes followed him : and he cured
them all. (16) And he charged them not to make
him known: (17) that what was spoken by the

18 prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled, saying: (18) Be-
hold my servant, in whom I have complacency ;
my beloved, in whom my soul delighteth. I will
put my spirit upon him ; and he shall proclaim
judgment to the Gentiles. (19) He shall not con-
tend, nor be clamorous, nor shall any one hear his
voice in the market-place.*' (20) The crushed
reed he will not break ; and the flickering lamp he
will not extinguish ; until he bring judgment^ to
be vietorious.5.' (21) And in his name shall the
Gentiles trust.

Then they brought to him a demoniac that was
dumb and blind; and he healed him, so that the
dumb and blind man both talked and saw. (23)
And all the multitude were amazed, and said : Is
not this the son of David? (21) But when the
Pharisees heard [it], they said : This man doth not


1 o


11


15

16
17


19


20


21


99


21


Sy."|A^5olo,

in the Penta-
teuch.


Sy. a son of
man.


^ Sy. ilsfdlow.


• or, public
street.

' i. e. law, or
justice.

e Sy. to a vic-
tory.


22


MATTHEW, XII.


'• Sy. Ka'dcreLh
to scailsr.


Sy. IliAi.


or, useless.


' Sy. li g^Vn
-Sy.UI
• Sy. ^CU


cast out demons, except by Beelzebub the prince
of (lemons. (25) And Jesus knew their thoughts, 25
and said to them: Every kingdom that is divided
against itself, will become desolate; and every
house or city which is divided against itself, will
not stand. (26) Now if Satan cast out Satan, he 26
is divided against himself; how then doth his king-
dom stand? (27) And if I by Beelzebub cast out 27
demons, by whom do your children cast them out?
Wherefore they will be your judges. (28) But if 28
I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, the king-
dom of God hath come near to you. (29) Or how 29
can one enter the house of a strong man^and plun-
der his goods, unless he first bind the strong man ?
and then ho may plunder his house. (30) He that 30
is not with me, is against me ; and he that gather-
eth not with me actually scattereth.'^ (31) There- 31
fore I say to you, that all sins and contumelies
shall be forgiven to men ; but the contumely which
is against the Spirit, shall not be forgiven to men.
(32) And whoever .shall speak a word against the 32
Son of man, it will be forgiven him : but whoever
shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it will not be
forgiven him ; — -not in this world,' and not in the
world to come. (33) Either make the tree good, 33
and its fruits good ; or make the tree bad, and its
fruits bad: for a tree is known by its fruits. (34) 34
OlYspring of vipers, how can ye who are evil, speak
good things ? For out of the fullnesses of the heart
the mouth speaketh. (35) A good man out of good 35
treasures bringeth forth good things, and a bad man
out of bad treasures bringeth forth bad things.
(36) For I say to you. That for every idlci^ word 36
that men shall speak, they shall give account of it
in the day of judgment. (37) For by thy words 37
thou shalt be justified; and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.

Then answered some of the Scribes and of the 38
Pharisees, and said to him : Teacher,i we wish to
scL! from thee a sign."' (39) But he replied and 39
said to them : A wicked and adulterous generation
demandcth a sign : but a sign will not be given to
it, urdess it be the sign of Jonahf* the prophet.
(40) For as Jonah was in the belly of the fish three 40
days and three nights ; so will the Son of man be
in the heart of the earth three days and three


MATTHEW, XIII.


23


the end of that
So will it be to


41 nights. (41) The people of Nineveh will stand up
in the judgment against this generation, and will
condemn it : for they repented at the preaching of
Jonah ; and lo, a greater than Jonah is here.

42 (42) The queen of the south^ will stand u[) in the
judgment against this generation, and will con-
demn it : for she came from the extreniitiesP of the
earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon ; and lo, a

43 superior to Solomon is here, (43) And when an
unclean spirit goeth out of a man, it wandereth in
places where is no water, and seeketh comfort and

44 liudeth [it] not. (44) Then it saith : I will return
to my house, from which I came out. And it
Cometh, and findeth it vacated, and swept clean,

45 and set in order. (45) So it goeth and taketh
with it seven other spirits, worse than itself, and
they enter and dwell in it; and
man is worse than his beginning,
this evil generation.

40 And while he was discoursing to the multitudes,
his mother and his brothers came and stood with-

47 out, and sought to speak with him. (47) And a
person said to him: Lo, thy mother and thy
brothers stand without, and seek to speak with

48 thee. (48) But he replied, and said to him that
informed laim: Who is my mother? and who are

49 my brothers? (49) And he stretched forth his
hand towards his disciples, and said: Behold my

50 mother, and behold my brothers ! (50) For every
one that doetli the good pleasure of my Father who
is in heaven, that person is my brother, and my
sister, and my mother.

XIII. And on that day Jesus went out of the house,

2 and sat by the side of the sea. (2) And great
multitudes assembled around him; so that he
embarked and seated himself in a ship, and all the

3 multitude stood on the shore of the sea. (3) And
he discoursed with them much, by similitudes.*
And he said. Behold, a sower went forth to sow.

4 (4) And as he sowed, some [seed] fell upon the
side of a path : and a bird came and devoured it.

5 (5) And other [seed] fell upon a rock, so that it
had not much soil : and it sprung up forthwith,

6 because there was no de])th of earth. (6) But
when the sun was up it wilted. And, because it


* or, parables.
Sy. lZ]J^£o


1 4'


24


MATTHEW, XIII.


or, parables.


or, he turned ;
or, turn them-
selves.


' Sy. temporary.


lacked root, it dried up. (7) And other [seed] fell 7
among thorns : and the thorns shot up, and choked
it. (8) And other [seed] fell on good ground ; and 8
bore fruits, some a hundredfold, some sixtyfold,
and some thirtyfold. (9) He that hath ears to 9
hear, let him hear.

And his disciples came and said to him, Why 10
discoursest thou to them in similitudes ?'' (11) And 11
he answered, and said to them .* Because, to you it
is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, but to them it is not given, (12) For to 12
him that hath, shall be given; and he shall abound:
but from him that hath not, even Avhat he hath
shall be taken from him. (13) For this cause I 13
discourse to them in similitudes, because they see
and do not see, and they hear and do not hear, nor
understand. (14) And in them is falfilled the 14
prophecy of Isaiah, who said ; By hearing ye shall
near, and shall not understand ; and by seeing yc
see, and shall not know : (15) For the heart of this 15
people hath grown fat, and with their ears they
have heard heavily, and their eyes they have closed;
lest they should see with their eyes, and should
hear with their ears, and should understand with
their heart, and should turn;<= and I should heal
them. (16) But happy are your eyes, for they 16
see ; and your ears, for they hear. (1?) For verily 17
I say to you. That many prophets and righteous
[men] longed to see what ye see, and did )iot see
[it] ; and to hear what ye hear, and did not hear
[it]. (18) But hear ye the similitude of the seed. 18

(19) Every one that heareth the word of the king- 19
doin, and understandeth it not, the evil one cometh
and snatcheth away the seed sowed in his heart:
this is what was sowed by the side of the path.

(20) And that which was sowed on the rock, is he 20
that heareth the word, and at once I'eceiveth it
with joy. (21) Yet hath he no root in him, but is 21
of short duration ;'^ and when there is trouble or
persecution on account of the word, he soon stum-
bleth. (22) And that which was sowed among 22
thorns, is he that heareth the word ; and care for
this world<^ and the deceptiveness of riches, choke

I the word; and he is without fruits. (23) But that 23
which was sowed on good ground, is he that
I heareth my word, and understandeth, and beareth


MATTHEW, XIII.


25


fruits, and yieldeth, some a hundredfold, some six-
tjfold, and some thirtyfold.

24 Another simiHtudc he proposed*" to them, and
said: The kingdom of heaven is hke to a man who

25 sowed good seed in his field. (25) And while
people were asleep, his enemy came and sowed tares

26 among the wheat, and went away. (26) And
Avhen the plant shot up and bore fruits, then ap-

27 pcared also the tares, (27) And the servants of
the householders caoie, and said to him. Our lord,
didst thou not sow good seed in thy field ? From

28 whence arc the tares in it. (28) And he said to
them, An enemy hath done this. The servants
said to him. Is it thy pleasure that we go and

29 gather them out? (29) And he said to them,
[No,] lest, while ye gather out the tares, ye also

30 eradicate the wheat with them. (30) Let them
both grow together until the harvest ; and at the
time of harvest, I will say to the reapers, Gather
out first the tares, and bind them in bundles to be
burned; but the wheat gather ye into my granary.

31 (31) Another similitude proposed he to them,
and said: The kingdom of heaven is like to a
kernel of mustard seed, which a man took and

32 sowed in his field. (32) And this is the least of
all seeds ; but when it is grown, it is greater than
all the herbs, and becometh a tree, so that a bird
of heaven may come and nestle in its branches

33 (33) Another similitude spake he to them. The
kingdom of heaven is like the leaven, which a
woman took and buried in three measures^ of meal,

34 until the whole fermented. (34) All these things
Jesus discoursed to the multitude in similitudes;'
and without similitudes he did not discourse with

35 them. (35) That so might be fulfilled that which
wiis spoken by the prophet, who said : I will open
my mouth in similitudes ; I will utter'^ things con-
cealed from before the foundation of the world.

36 Then Jesus sent away the multitudes, and went
into the house. And his disciples came to him,
and said : Explain to us the similitude of the tares

37 and the field. (37) And he answered, and said to
them : He that soweth the good seed, is the Son of

38 God. (38) And the field is the world.' And the
good seed are the children of the kingdom ; but
the tares arc the children of the wicked One.


Sy. allego-
rized.


5 Sy. lord of the
house.


Sy. ^JTO
or, parables.


Sy. eructate.


Sy. ]V^Ns


26


MATTHEW, XIII.


■Sy. Vl4^

Sy. consume
malion.

Sy ]^nVv


p or, good.

' Sy.


Sy.
Gr.


ysvog.


Sy. consum-
malion.


» or, f arables.


Sy.


39


40
41


44


(39) The enemy tliut sowed them, is Satan.^
The harvest is the end" of the world :" and the
reapers are the angels. (40) As therefore the
tares arc gathered and burned in the fire ; so will
it be in the end of the world. (41) The Son of
man will send forth his angels, and they will
gather out of his kingdom all the stumbling blocks,
and all the doers of evil ; (42) and will cast them 42
into a furnace of fire. There will be wailing and
gnashing of teeth. (43) The-n will the righteous 43
shine as the sun, in the kingdom of their Father.
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. (44) Again,
the kingdom of heaven is like a treasure that is
hid in a field ; Avliich when a man findeth, he con-
cealeth it, and, from his joy, he goeth and selleth
all that he hath, and buyeth that field. (45) Again, 45
the kingdom of heaven is like a merchantman, who
sought after ricliP pearls :■" (46) and when he found 46
one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that
he had, and bought it. (47) Again, the kingdom
of heaven is like a sweep net, which was cast into
the sea, and collected [fishes] of every kind.^ (48)
And when it was full, they drew it to the shores of
the sea ; and they sat down and culled over : and
the good they put into vessels, and the bad they
cast away. (49) So will it be in the end^ of the
world. The angels will go forth, and will sever
the wicked from among the just; (50) and will
cast them into a furnace of fire. There will be
wailing and gnashing of teeth.

Jesus said to them: Have ye understood all
these things? They say to him: Yes, our Lord.
(52) He said to them : Therefore every Scribe who 52
is instructed for the kingdom of heaven, is like a
man who is master of a house, who bringeth forth
from his treasures things new and old. (53) And
it was so, that when Jesus had ended these simili-
tudeSjV he departed thence.

And he entered into his own city. And he
taught them in their synagogues, in such manner
that they wondered, and said: Whence hath he
this wisdom and [these] works of power ? (55) Is 55
not this man the carpenter's son?w Is not his
mother called Mary, and his brothers James and
Joses and Simon and Judas? (56) And all his 56
sisters, are they not with us ? Whence then hath


47


48


49


50


51


53


54


MATTHEW, XIV.


27


67 this man all these things? (57) And they were
stumbled at him. But Jesus said to them : There
is no prophet who is little, except in his own city

68 and in his own house. (58) And he did not per-
form there many works of power, because of their
unbelief.

XIV. And at that time Herod the Tetrarch heard

2 the fame of Jesus: (2) and he said to his ser-
vants: This is John the Baptizer: he is risen
from the grave :'^ therefore works of power are

3 wrought by him. (3) Now this Herod had seized
John, and bound him and cast him into prison ;•>
on account of Herodias, the wife of his brother

4 Philip. (-1) For John had said to him : It is not
6 lawful for her to be thy wife. (5) And he had

wished to kill him ; but he was afraid of the peo-
ple, seeing that they regarded*^ him as a prophet.

6 (6) But when Herod's birthday festival^ occurred,
the daughter of Herodias danced befcrre the guests;

7 and she pleased Herod. (7) Therefore he swore to
her by an oath, that he would give her whatsoever

8 she might ask. (8) And she, as she had been in-
structed by her mother, said : Give me here in a

9 dishe the head of John the Baptizer. (9) And it
troubled the king: nevertheless, on account of
the oath, and the guests, he commanded that it

10 should be given her. (10) And he sent and cut

11 off the head of John in the prison. (11) And the
head was brought in a dish and given to the girl ;

12 and she brought it to her mother. (12) And his
disciples came and bore away the corpse, and
buried [it] ; and they went and informed Jesus,

13 (13) And Jesus, when he had heard [it], retired
alone, in a ship, to a desert place. And when the
multitudes heard [of it], they folloAved him by dry
land from the cities.

14 And when Jesus disembarked, he saw great
multitudes ; and he had compassion on them, and

15 healed their sick, (15) And when it was evening,
his disciples came to him, and said to him : This
is a desert place, and the time is gone ; send away
the throngs of people, that they may go to the

16 villages, and buy themselves food. (16) But he
said to them : It is not necessary for them to go ;

17 give ye them to eat. (17) And they said to him:


Sy. house of
the dead.

Sy. house of
prisoners.


Sy. Md.

Sy. house of
his nativity.


> Sy. ]^i »g^
Gr. rfiva^-axog


28


MATTHEW, XIV.


' or, Jillad.

« Sy. aside from.


»" Gr. Peter.


Sy. fPfM


A


23


24


25

26


We have nothing here but five cakes and two
fishes. (18) Jesus said to tliem : Bring them here 18
to nie. (19) And he commanded the multitudes 19
to rechnc on the ground: and he took the five
cakes and two fishes, and he looked towards
heaven, and blessed, and brake, and gave to his
disciples; and the disciples placed before the mul-
titudes. (20) And they all ate, and were satisfied :f 20
and they took up the brokeh remains, twelve full
baskets. (21) And the men who had eaten were 21
five thousand, besides? the women and children.

And immediately he constrained his disciples to 22
embark in a ship, and to go before him to the other
side, while he sent away the multitudes. (23) And
when he had sent the multitudes away, he ascended
a mountain alone to pray. And Avhen it was dark,
he was there alone. (24) And the ship Avas dis-
tant from land many furlongs : meanwhile it was
much tossed by the waves ; for the wind was ad-
verse to it. (25) And in the fourth watch of the
night, Jesus came up to them, walking upon the
waters. (26) And his disciples saw him as he walk-
ed upon the waters, and they were perturbated:
and they said. What we see is a spectre : and they
cried out through fear. (27) But Jesus immediately 27
spoke to them, and said: Have courage: it is I; be
not afraid. (28) Cephas^ replied, and said to him : My 28
Lord, if it be thou, bid me come to thee on the
waters. (29) And Jesus said to him. Come. And
Cephas descended from the ship, and walked upon
the waters to go to Jesus. (30) But when he saw
the wind to be violent, he was afraid, and began to
sink. And he raised his voice, and said : My
Lord, rescue me. (31) And immediately our Lord 31
reached forth his hand, and caught him, and said
to him: 0 small in faith, why didst thou distrust!
(32) And as they entered the ship, the wind sub- 32
sided. (33) And they that were in the ship, came 33
and worshipped him, and said : Truly thou art the
Son of God ! (34) And they rowed on, and came 34
to the land of Gcnnesaret.' (35) And the men of 35
that place knew him : and they sent to all the vil-
lages around them ; and they brought to him all
that were very sick; (36) and they entreated of 36
him, that they might touch at least the extremity
of his garment. And they Avho touched, were healed.


29


0


MATTHEW, XV.


29


XV. Then came to Jesus Pharisees and Scribes that

2 were from Jerusalem, and said : (2) Why do thy
disciples transgress the tradition of the elders, »■
and wash not their hands when they eat bread ?

3 (3) Jesus replied and said to them : Why do ye
also transgress the commandment of God, on ac-

4 count of your tradition ? (4) For God hath said :
Uonor thy father, and thy mother; and he that
revilcth his father or his mother, shall bo put to

5 deaths (5) But ye say : AVhosoever shall say to
a father or to a mother, Be that my offering, by
which ye get profit from me : then'^ he must not

6 honor*^ his father or his mother. (G) And [thus]
ye make void the word of God, for the sake of

7 your tradition. (7) Yc hypocrites, well did the

8 prophet Isaiah prophesy of you, and say : (8) This
people honoreth mo with the lips, but their heart

9 is far from me. (9) And in vain they pay me
liomage, while they teach doctrines that are the

10 ])recepts of men. (10) And he called the multi-
tudes, and said to them, Hear and uiiderstand.

11 (11) Not that which cntereth the mouth, defileth
a man ; but that which procccdcth from the mouth,

12 that defileth a man. (12) Then came his disciples,
and said to him : Knowest thou, that the Pharisees

13 were offended when they heard that speech ? (13)
And he replied, and said to them : Every plant, "^
which my Father who is in heaven hath not planted,

14 shall be eradicated. (14) Let them alone: they
are blind leaders of the blind. And if a blind man
leadeth one blind, they will both fall into the ditch.

15 (15) And Simon Cephas^ answered and said to
him: My Lord, explain to us this similitudes

16 (16) And he said to them: Are ye also, up to this

17 time, without understanding? (17) Know ye not,
that whatever entereth the mouth, passeth into the
belly, and from there is ejected by purgation?

18 (18) But that which proceedeth from the mouth,
cometli from the heart : and that is what defileth

19 a man. (19) For, from the heart proceed evil
thoughts, adultery, murder, whoredom, theft, false

20 testimony, reviling. (20) These are the things
that defile a man. But if a man cat while his
hands are unwashed, he is not defiled.

21 And Jesus departed from there, and went to

22 the confines of Tyre and Sidon. (22) And lo, a


sy-l


« a > n


'' Sy. to die
shall die.

" Sy. and.

•' 1. e. bij kind

offices.


or, planting.


f Gr. Peter.
5 or, parable.


^


30


MATTHEW, XV.


" Sy.

i Sy. ]yl»


Sy. breads.
Cir. tf'ffupi'iJ.-f.


O woman, great is
And her


woman, a Canaanitess^ from those confines, came
forth, calling out and saying : Compassionate me,
mj Lord, thou son of David: my daughter is
grievously distressed by a demon.' (23) But he
answered her not a Avord. And his disciples came
and requested of him, and said : Send her away,
for she crieth after us. (24) But he answered and
said to them : I am not sent, except to the sheep
that have strayed from the house of Israel. (25)
And she came, and worshipped him, and said:
Help me, my Lord. (26) Jesus said to her: It is
not proper, to take the bread of the children and
throw it to the dogs. (27) And she said: Even so, 27
my Lord ; yet the dogs eat of the fragments that
fall from the tables of their masters, and live.
(28) Then Jesus said to her
thy faith : be it to thee, as thou desirest.
daughter Avas cured from that hour.

And Jesus departed from there, and came to the 29
side of the sea of Galilee: and he ascended a
mountain, and sat there. (30) And great multi-
tudes came to him ; and with them were the lame,
and the blind, and the dumb, and the maimed, and
many others : and they laid them at the feet of
Jesus, and he healed them, (31) So that the mul-
titudes were amazed, when they saw the dumb
speaking, and the maimed made whole, and the
lame walking, and the blind seeing: and they
praised the God of Israel. (32) Then Jesus called
his disciples, and said to them: I pity this multi-
tude ; for lo, these three days they have continued
with me, and they have nothing to eat : and I am
unwilling to send them away fasting, lest they
faint by the way. (33) His disciples say to him :
Whence can we get bread in the wilderness, to
satisfy all this multitude? (34) Jesus said to
them. How many loaves have ye ? They said to
him, Seven, and a few little fishes. (35) And he
commanded the multitudes to recline on the
ground. (36) And he took the seven loaves^ and
the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave
to his disciples ; and the disciples gave to the mul-
titudes. (37) And they all ate, and were satisfied.
And they took up the remains of fragments, seven
full baskets.i (38) And they that had eaten were 38
four thousand men, besides women and children.


23


24
25


26


28


30


31


32


33


35
36


37


MATTHEW, XVI.


51


39 (39) And when he had sent away the multitudes,
he took ship, and came to the coasts of Magdala."'


XVL


6


11


12


13


Sy. the heaven


Sy. jj^:^


And Pharisees and Sadducces came near, tempt-
ing him, and asking him to show them a sign
from heaven. (2) But he answered, and said to
them : When it is evening ye say, It will be fair
weather ; for the heavens"- are red, (8) And in the
morning ye say, There will be a storm to-day;
for the heavens are sadly red. Ye hypocrites, ye
are intelligent to discover the aspect of the heavens,
but the signs of this time ye have no skill to dis-
cern. (-1) A wicked and adulterous generation
asketh for a sign ; but no sign shall be given it,
but the sign of the prophet Jonah. And he left
them, and departed.

And when his disciples had come to the farther
shore,'' they had forgotten to take bread with
them. (6) And he said to them: Take heed, and
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sad-

7 dueees. (7) And they reasoned among themselves,
and said, | it was] because they had taken no bread.

8 (8) But Jesus knew [it] and said to them : O ye
small in faith ! why reason ye among yourselves

9 because ye have taken no bread? (9) Have ye
not yet understood ? Do ye not remember the live
loaves and the five thousand, and the many bask-

10 etsc ye took up ? (10) Nor the seven loaves and
the four thousand, and the many baskets'^ ye took
up? (11) IIow is it that ye do not understand
that it was not concerning bread that I spoke to
you ; but that ye should beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees and of the Sadducces? (12) Then
understood they, that he did not bid them beware
of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine'^ of the
Pharisees and of the Sadducees.

And when Jesus came into the region of Cso-
sarea Philippi, he questioned his disciples, and
said : What do men say concerning me, that I the

14 Son of man, am? (14) And they said: Some say
that [thou art] John the Baptizer; but others,
Elijah ; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the proph-

15 ets. (15) He said to them: But, who do ye

16 yourselves say that I am? (16) Simon Cephas^ r Gr. Simon Pe-
answered and said : Thou art the Messiah, the Son

17 of the living God. (17) Jesus answered, and said|


Sy. o


•^


Sy.


Sy.


"r£^]


T


1.21


1.QL*


ter.


32


MATTHEW, XVII.


s Sy. \£i]D ;
i. c. a rock.

" Sy. aZjA

' Sy. ^aa-»,
^Ae grave.

' Sy. l,:iiD,
Gr. xX;i^a^.

' Sy. I .» « » o
""Sy.

- Gr. Peter.

• Sy. ■^l^CD


p Sy. <o /if cp his
soul alive.


Sy. CT_aL.2U


• Gr. Peter.


to him : Blessed art thou, Simon son of Jonas ;
for flesh and blood have not revealed [it] to thee,
but my Father Avho is in heaven. (18) Also I say 18
to thee, that thou art Cephas: and upon this rock,g
I will build my church :h and the gates of death"
shall not triumph over it. (19) To thee will I 19
give the keys^^ of the kingdom of heaven : and
whatever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven: and whatever thou shalt unbind on
earth, shall be unbound in heaven. (20) Then 20
he enjoined on his disciples, that they should tell
no man that he was the Messiah.

And from that time Jesus began to show to 21
his disciples, that he was to go up to Jerusalem,
and to suffer much from the Elders,' and from
the chief priests™ and Scribes, and be killed, and
on the third day arise. (22) And Cephas" took 22
him, and began to rebuke him ; and he said : Far
be it from thee, my Lord, that this should be to
thee. (23) But he turned, and said to Cephas: 23
Get thee behind me, Satan :« Thou art a stumbling-
block to me ; for thou thinkest not the things of
God, but the things of men.

Then said Jesus to his disciples : If any one de- 24
sireth to come after me, let him deny himself; and
let him bear his cross, and come after me. (25) 25
For, whoever chooseth to preserve his life,P shall
lose it; and whoever will lose- his life for my
sake, shall find it. (26) For what will it profit 26
a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and
shall lose his soul?"" Or Avhat will a man give
in exchange for his soul? (27) For the Son of 27
man is to come in the glory of his Father, with
all his holy angels ; and then will he recompense
to every man as his deeds are. (28) Verily I 28
say to you : There are some persons standing
here, who shall not taste death, till they see the
Son of man coming in his kingdom.

And after six days Jesus took Cephas,'"' XVII.
and James, and John his brother, and conducted
them alone to a high mountain. (2) And Jesus 2
was changed before them : and his face shone like
the sun; and his vestments became white like the
light. (3) And there appeared to them Moses and 3
Elijah, in conversation with him. (4) Then Ce- 4


MATTHEW, XVII,


38


pbas answered and said to Jesus : My Lord, it is
good for us to bo here: and, if it please thee, we
will make here three booths ; one for thee, and

5 one for Moses, and one for Elijah. (5) And while
he was yet speaking, lo, a bright cloud over-
shadowed them : and there was a voice from the
cloud which said: This is my beloved Son, in

G whom 1 have pleasure; hear ye him. (6) And
when the disciples heard [it], they fell on their

7 faces, and were much afraid. (7) And Jesus came
lo them and touched them, and said: Arise, and

8 be not afraid. (8) And they raised their eyes,

9 and they saw no person, except Jesus only. (9)
And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus
charged them, and said to them : Speak of this
vision before no person, until the Son of man shall

10 have arisen from the dead. (10) And his disciples j
asked him, and said to him: Why then do the;

11 Scribes say, that Elijah must first come? (11) Je-
sus answered, and said to them: Elijah doth first

12 come, to fulfill every thing. (12) And I say to I
3'ou, That, behold, Elijah hath come, and they did
not know him; and they have done to him what-
ever the}'' pleased: and, in like manner, also the

13 Son of man is to suffer from them. (13) Then the
disciples understood, that he spake to them of John
the Baptizer.

1-i And when they came to the multitude, a man
approached him, and bowed himself on his knees,

15 (15) and said to him: My Lord, compassionate
me. I have a son who is a lunatic, and grievously
afflicted; for often he falleth into the fire, and often

16 into the water. (16) And* I brought him to thy

17 disciples, and they could not heal him. (17) Je-
sus answered and said: O unbelieving and per-
verse generation ! How long shall I be with you?
and how long bear with you? Bring him here to

18 me. (18) And Jesus rebuked the demon, and it
departed from him : and from that hour the child

19 was healed. (19) Then came the disciples to Je-
sus, apart^ and said to him : Why could not we

20 heal him ? (20) Jesus said to them : Because of

your unbelief. For verily I say to you, That if

there be in 3'ou faith like a grain of mustard seed,

ye may say to this mountain, Remove hence, and

it will remove: and nothing will be too hard for
3


tj-x


MATTHEW, XVIII.


Or. ys'.o;.
' or, comcrsanl.


• or, S01UI <f
frccdoin.


Gr. tfrar^pa.
• Sy. l.A^
^Sy.


■' Sy. causes of
stuinblin<x.


Sy.


you. (21) But this kind'* goetli not out, except 21
by fasting and prayer.

And while they were resident^ in Galilee, Jesus 22
said to them : The Son of man is to be betrayed
into the hands of men; (23) and they will "kill 23
him ; and the third day he will arise. And it
saddened them much.

And when they came to Capernaum, those who 24
{receive the two drachmas'^ t)f capitation money
I came to Cephas, and saitl to him : Doth not your
j rabbi pay his two drachmas? (25) He said to 25
them, Yes. And Avhcii Cephas had entered the
house, Jesus anticipated him raid said to him:
IIow doth it appear to thee, Simon? The kings
'of the earth, of whom do they receive tribute and
j capitation money? of their children, or of aliens?
1(20) Simon said to him: Of aliens. Jesus said to 26
jhim: Tlien the children are frcc.« (27) But still, 27
I lest they be stumbled Avitli us, go thou to the sea
land cast in a fish-hook, and the fish that shall first
jcome up, open its mouth, and thou wilt find a
I stater:^' that take, and give for me and lor thyself.

i In that hour the disciples approached Je- XVIII.
isus, and said: Who is the greatest in the king-
[dom of heaven? (2) And Jesus called a child, ^^ 2
land placed him in the midst of them, (3) and said: 3
j Verily I say to you, that unless ye be converted,
and become like children,^ ye will not enter the
kingdom of heaven, (4) He therefore that shall 4
humble himself like this child, he will be great in
the kingdom of heaven. (5) And he that shall 5
receive in my name [one who is] like to this child,
he recciveth me. (6) And whosoever shall stum- 6
ble one of these little ones^ that believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were suspended
to his neck, and that he were sunk in the depths
of the sea. (7) Woe to the world because of stum- 7
bling blocks !d For it must be, that stumbling
blocks come. But, woe to the person by whose
means the stumbling blocks come. (8) If then thy 8
hand or thy foot make thee stumble, cut it off and
cast it from thee : for it is good for thee to enter
into life lame or mutilated, and not that, with two
hands or two feet, thou fall into eternal'^ fire.
(9) And if thine eye make thee stum.ble, pluck it 9


MATTHEW, XVIII.


85


out and cast it from tliee : for it is good for thee to
enter into life with one eye, and not that, with two

10 eyes, thou fall into the helK of fire. (10) Sec that
ye desiiisc not one of these little ones ; for I say to
you, Tluit their angels? in heaven, at all times, are
beholding the face of my Father who is in heaven.

11 (11) For the Son of man, hath come to give life''

12 to that Avhich was lost.' (12) IIow doth it appear
to you ? If a man should have a hundred sheep,
and one of them should go astray, will he not
leave the ninety and nine in the mountains, and

13 go and seek the one that stra3'-ed? (13) And if he
lind it, verily I say to you, that he rcjoiceth in it,
more than in the ninety and nine that did not

14 stray. (14) Just so, it is not the pleasure of your
Father who is in heaven, that one of these little
onesi^ should perish.'

15 Moreover, if thy brother commit an offence"*
against thee, go and admonish him between thee
and him only. If he hear thee, thou hast gained

16 thy brother. (16) But if he hear thee not, take
with thee one or two, that at the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word" may be established.

17 (17) And if he will also not hear them, tell [it]
to the church. o And if he will also not hear the
church, let him be to thee as a publican and b,

18 heathen. P (18) Verily I say to you. That whatever
ye shall bind'' on earth, shall be bound in heaven :
and whatever ye shall unbind on earth, shall be

19 unbound in heaven. (19) Again I say to you,
That if two of you shall agree^ on earth concerning
any thing that they shall ask, it shall be to them''

20 from my Father who is in heaven. (20) For where
two or three [are] assembled in my name, there
[am] I in the midst of them.

21 Then Cephas^ approached him, and said to him:
^fy Lord, how many times, if my brother commit
offence against me,^^ shall I forgive him? up to

22 seven times? (22) Jesus said to him: I do not
say to thee, up to seven times, but up to seventy

23 times seven. (23) Therefore the kingdom of
heaven is like to some king, who wished to have

24 a reckoning with his servants. (24) And when
he began to reckon, they brought to him one

25 debtor of ten thousand talents.^ (25) And as he
had not wherewith to pay, his lord commanded i


•Sy.

' Sy. I^^kJ

Sy. ^^,

' Sy. 'j]lD ^

■ Sy. Ua\,

ihe regular
meeting.

' or, profane
man.

■ Sy. ^■^]L
' or, accord.

■ i. e. they shall
have it.

' Gr. Peter.

- Sy.


>y.^r=>=i


36


MATTHEW, XIX.


V Sy. ]'',±^y,

about 15^
cents each.


* Sy. house of
prisoners.


or, evil, haJ.


or, words.


liim to be sold, him and liis wife and liis children,
and all that he possessed, and payment to be
made. (26) And that servant fell down and wor- 26
shipped him, and said: My lord, have patience
with me, and I will pay thee the whole. (27) And 27
his lord had compassion on that servant, and set
him free, and forgave him his debt. (28) Then 28
that servant went out, and found one of his fellow-
servants who owed him a hunUred denarii. y And
he laid hold of him and choked him, and said to
him: Pay me what thou owest me. (29) And 29
that fellow-servant fell at his feet and entreated
him, and said : Have patience with me, and I will
pay thee the whole, (30) But he would not, but 30
went and cast him into prison, ^ until he should
pay him what he owed him. (31) And when 31
their fellow-servants saw what was done, it grieved
them much ; and they came and made known to
their lord all that had occurred. (32) Then his 32
lord called him, and said to him : Thou vile^ ser-
vant ! Lo, I forgave thee that whole debt, because
thou entreatedst of me: (33) oughtest not thou 33
also to -have compassion on thy fellow-servant, as
I had compassion on thee ? (3-1) And his lord 34:
was angry, and delivered him over to the torturers,
until he should pay all he owed him. (35) So 35
will my Father who is in heaven do to 3^ou, unless
ye from your heart forgive each his brother his
offence.

And when Jesus had ended these dis- XIX.
courses, -"^ he removed from Galilee, and came to
the confines of Judoea on the other side of Jordan.
(2) And great multitudes followed after him, and 2
he healed them there. (3) And Pharisees came 3
to him, and tempted him and said: Is it lawful
for a man to divorce his wife for every cause ?
(4) And he answered and said to them : Have ye 4
not read, that he who made [them] at the begin-
ning, made them a male and a female? (5) And 5
he said : For this reason, a man shall leave his
fiither and his mother, and adhere to his wife ;
and they two shall be one flesh. (6) Wherefore 6
they were not two, but one flesh. What there-
fore God hath united, let not man sunder. (7) 7
They say to him : Why then did Moses command


^


MATTHEW, XIX.


37


11


12


to give a bill'' of divorce, and to put her away?

8 (8) lie said to them : Moses, on account of the
hardness of your heart, permitted you to divorce
your wives : but from the beginning it was not so.

9 (9) And I say to you, That whoever Icaveth his
wife not being an adulteress, and taketh'^ another,
committeth adultery. And whoever taketh her

10 that is divorced, committeth adultery. (10) His
disciples say to him: If such is the case between
man and wife, it is not expedient to take a wife.
(11) But he said to them: Not every one is ca-
pable of that thing,'' but he only to whom it is
given. (12) For there are some eunuchs, born so
from their mother's womb ; and there are some
eunuchs, who were made eunuchs by men ; and
there arc some eunuchs who have made themselves
eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven.
He that can be contented let him be contented.

Then they brought children^ to him, that he
might lay his hand upon them and pray. And

14 his disciples rebuked them. (14) But Jesus said
to them : Allow children to come to me, and for-
bid them not ; for of those that are like them is
the kingdom of heaven. (15) And he laid his
hand upon them, and departed from there.

And one came, drew near, and said to him :
Good Teacher, f what good thing must I do, that
eternal life may be mine? (17) And he said to
him : Why callest thou me good ? There is none
good, except one, [namely,] God. But if thou
wouldst enter into life,? keep the commandments.^

18 (18) He said to him. Which ? And Jesus said to
him: Thou shalt not kill ; and thou shalt not com-
mit adultery ; and thou shalt not steal ; and thou
shalt not bear false testimony ; (19) and honor thy
father and thy mother; and thou* shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself (20) The young man saith
to him : All these have I kept from wiy childhood.
What do I lack? (21) Jesus saith to him: If
tliou dcsirest to be perfect, > go, sell thy property,
and give to the poor; and there shall be'' for thee
a treasure in heaven ; and come thou after me
(22) And the 3'oung man heard that speech,' and
he went away in sadness; for he had much proper-
ty, (28) And Jesus said to his disciples : Verily
I say to you, It is difficult for a rich man to enter


13


15

16


17


19

20


21


22


23


or, writing.


or, marrieth.


•^ or, word.


Sy.UX^


f Sy.

e Sy. \x^

" Sy. ]j^a£)


• Sy. lrJLin.v5^

^ or, thmi shalt
have.


' or, word.


38


MATTHEW, XX.


Sy. can live.


• dr. Pe\'-r.

• or, slid! be to
us?


f Sy.
' or, rule.

•Sy. ,

• Sy. ];JL^J,

about 15}
cents.

* About 9 A. M.

« Noon, and 3
V. tA.

<• About 5 r. M.


' Sy.


24


25


26


29


80


into the kingdom of heaven. (24) And again, I
say to you: It is easier for a camel to enter the
aperture of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
the kingdom of God. (25) And when the disci-
ples heard [it], they wondered greatly, and said:
I Who then can attain to life !•" (20) Jesus looked
on them, and said to them: With men this is not
'practicable, but with God every thing is practi-
cable. (27) Then answered Cephas," and said to 27
him : Lo, we have forsaken every thing, and come
after thee: what therefore shall we receive ?« (28) 28
Jesus said to them : Verily I say to you, that, as
for you who have followed me, when the Son of
man shall sit on the throne of his glory in the
new world,P ye also shall sit on twelve seats, and
.shall judge"" the twelve tribes of Israel. (29) And
every man that relinquisheth houses, or brothers
or sisters, or father or mother, or wife or children,
or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an
hundredfold, and shall inherit eternal life.^ (30)
f>ut there are many first who shall be last, and
last [who shall be] iirst. (XX.) For the kingdom XX.
of heaven is like a man, the lord of a house, who
went out, at dawn of day, to hire laborers for his
vineyard. (2) And he contracted with the labor- 2
ei's for a denarius* a day : and sent them into his
vineyard, (3) And he went out at the third hour, '^ 3
and saw others standing idle in the market-place:
(4) and he said to them, Go ye also into ray vine-
yard, and what is right I will give you ; (5) and
they went. And again he went out at the sixth
and ninth hours, •= and did the same. (6) And
about the eleventh hour,^ he went out and found
others who were standing and idle ; and he said to
them: Why stand ye all the day, and are idle?
(7) They say to him. Because no one hath hired
us. lie saith to them: Go ye also into the vine-
yard ; and wkit is right ye shall receive. (8) And
when it was evening, the lord of the vineyard said
to his steward :<> Call the laborers, and give them
their wages; and commence with the last, and
proceed to the first. (9) And those of the eleventh
hour came, and received each a denarius. (10)
And when the first came, they supposed they
should receive more ; but they also received each
a denarius. (11) And when they received [it],


9
10


11


12


13


IG


17
18


19


20


21


they murmured against, the lord of the house,
(12) and siiid : These hast have labored but one
hour, and thou hast made them equal with us who
have borne the burden of the day ''^nd the heat of
it. (13) But he answered, and said to one of
thom: My friend, I do thee no injustice: was it not
for a denarius that thou didst contract with me?

14 (14) Take what belongeth to thee, and go : for I

15 am disposed to give to this last, as to thee. (15)
Is it not lawful for me, to do what I please with
what belongeth to me ; or is thy eye evil,^ be-
cause I am good?fe' (16) Thus the last shall be
first, and tlic first last : for the called are many,
but the chosen are few.

And Jesus wai5 about to go up to Jerusalem :
and he toolc his twelve disciples aside, on the way,
and said to them : (18) Behold, we are going to
Jerusalem ; and the Son of man will be delivered
up to the chief priests'^ and to the Scribes, and they
will condemn him to death. (19) And they will de
liver him over to the Gentiles:' and they will mock
him, and will scourge him, and will crucify him ;
and the third day, he will arise. (20) Then came
to him the mother of Zebedee's children, she and
her sons; and she worshipped him, and asked
something from him. (21) And he said to her,
What dcsirest thou? She said to him: Say, that
these my two sons shall sit, the one on thy right
hand and the other on thy left, in thy kingdom.
22 (22) Jesus answered and said : Ye know not what
ye ask for. Can ye drink of the cup, of which I
am to drink? or be baptized^ with the baptism,!
that I am baptized with ? They say to him : We
can. (28) He saith to them : Ye will [indeed] drink
of my cup, and will be baptized with the baptism
that I am baptized with : but that ye should sit on
my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give,
except to those for whom it is prepared by my
Father. (24) And when the ten heard [it], they
were angry against the two brothers. (25) And
Jesus called them, and said to them: Ye know
that the princes"> of the nations are their lords, and
their great men" exercise authority over them.

26 (26) Not so Bhall it be among you. But whoever
among you desireth to be great, let him be to

27 you, a ministcrerro (27) and whoever among you


i. e. envious.


p i. e. generous.


O'J


24
2o


'Sy.


Sy. "i^nVisN


^ Sy. ^yimJL

'Sy.


Sy.


'Sy.


40


MATTHEW, XXL


Sy. ]^^

Sy. ]jj25a£5


• Sy. gave voice.


•Sy.

^ or, near to.


' Sy. a multi-
tude of throngs.


^ Sy. 1 \ \ %6\

" i. 0. 'places, or
the heavens.


desireth to be first, let him be your servant:?
(28) even as the Son of man came, not to be 28
.served, but to serve ; and to give his life a ransom''
for many.

And as Jesus passed out of Jerieho, a great 29
multitude followed him. (80) And lo, two blind 80
men were sitting by the way side. And when
they heard that Jesus was passing, they called out,8
and said : Have compassion on us, my Lord, thou
son of David! (31) And the multitudes rebuked 31
them, that they might be silent. But they raised
their voice the more, and said: Our Lord, have
compassion on us, thou son of David. (32) And 32
Jesus stopped, and called them, and said: What
wish ye, that I should do for you? (33) They 33
said to him: Our Lord, that our eyes may be
opened. (34) And he had compassion on them, 34
and touched their eyes: and immediately their
eyes were opened, and they followed him.

And as he approached Jerusalem, and came XXI.
to Bcthpliagc,^ by the side^ of the mount of
Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples ; (2) and said 2
to them : Go into this village which is over against
you, and directly ye will find an ass tied, and a
colt with her. Untie and bring [them] to me.
(3) And if any man say ought to you, tell him, 3
That they arc needed by our Lord : and at once he
will send them hither. (4) Now this whole occur- 4
rence was, that so might be fulfilled that which
was spoken by the prophet, saying: (5) Tell ye 5
the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy king cometh to
thee, meek, and riding on an ass, and on a colt the
foal of an ass. (6) And the disciples went, and did 6
as Jesus commanded them. (7) And they brought 7
the ass and the colt. And they placed their gar-
ments on the colt, and set Jesus upon it. (8) And 8
a very groat throng^ strewed their clothes in the
path ; and others cut branches from the trees, and
cast them in the path. (9) And the multitudes 9
that went before him, and that followed after him,
shouted and said: Hosanna'* to the son of David :
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord:
Oosanna in the highest.^ (10) And as he entered 10
Jerusalem, the whole city was in commotion; and
they said, Who is this? (11) And the multitudes 11


MATTHEW, XXI.


41


said, This is Jesus the prophet, who is from Naza-

12 reth of Galilee. (12) And Jesus entered into the
temple of God, and expelled all them that bought
and sold in the temple, and overset the counters
of the money-brokers, and the seats of them that

13 sold doves. (13) And he said to them : It is writ-
ten, my house shall be called the house of prayer;

14 but ye have made it a den of robbers. (14) And
there came to him in the temple the blind and the

15 lame ; and he healed them. (15) And when the
chief priests and Pharisees saw the wonderful
things which he performed, and the children
shouting in the temple and saying, Ilosanna to
the son of David, their indignation was excited.

16 (16) And they said to him: Ilearest thou what
these are saying? Jesus said to them: Yes.
Have ye never read, Out of the mouth of children

17 and infants thou hast acquired praise? (17) And
he left them, and retired out of the city to 13ethany,f

18 and lodged there. (18) And in the morning, when

19 he returned to the city, he was hungry. (19) And
he saw a fig-tree by the way, and came to it and
found nothing on it, except leaves only. And he
said to it: There shall no more be fruit on thee
for ever.s And immediately the fig-tree withered.

20 (20) And the disciples saw [it], and admired, and
said: How suddenly hath the fig-tree withered!

21 (21) Jesus replied and said to them : Verily I say
to you, That if there be faith in you, and ye shall
not doubt, ye may not only do this thing of the
fig-tree, but also if ye shall say to this mountain,
be thou lifted up, and fall into the sea, it will be so.

22 (22) And whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, and

23 shall believe, ye shall receive. (23) And when
Jesus came to the temple, the chief priests and
the Elders'' of the people came to him as he was
teaching, and said to him: By what authority
docst thou these things? And who gave thee this

24 authority? (24) Jesus replied and said to them :
I also will ask you one question,' and if 3'e will
tell me, I also will tell you by what authority I do

25 these things. (25) The baptismi^ of John, from
whence was it? From heaven, or from men?
And they reasoned among themselves,' and said :
If we should say, From heaven; he will say to us,

26 Why did ye not believe in him? (26) And if we


Sy.


Sy. y^\s\


Sy.la"!! n O


' or, word.

;sy.

|ZU?nV)SV)

' or, with them'
selves.


42


MATTHEW, XXI.


Sy. 12.qj]d


or, parable.


Sy. badhj, bad-


should say, From men ; we are afraid of the multi-
tude, for they all hold John as a prophet. (27) 27
And they answered, and said to him : We do not
know. Jesus said to them : Neither do I tell you
by what authority I do these things. (28) But 28
how appeareth it to you? A certain man had
two sons; and he came to the first and said to
him, ]\Iy son, go, labor to-day in the vineyard.
(29) And he answered and said, I am not willing. 29
But afterwards he repented and went. (30) And 30
he came to the other, and said the same to him.
And he answered and said : I [go], my lord ; but
did not go. (31) Which of these two performed 31
the pleasure of his father? They say to him, The
first. Jesus said to them : Verily I say to you,
That publicans and harlots go before you into the
kingdom of God. (32) For John came to jow in 32
the way of righteousness,"' and ye believed him
not; but the publicans and harlots believed him:
and ye, afler ye had seen [it], did not even then
I repent and believe in him. (33) Hear ye another 33
similitude." A certain man, the lord of a house,
planted a vineyard, and inclosed it with a hedge,
and digged in it a wine-press, and built a tower in
it, and leased it to cultivators, and removed to a
distance. (34) And when the time for the fruits 34
arrived, he sent his servants to the cultivators,
that they might remit to him of the fruits of the
vineyard. (35) And the cultivators laid hold of 35
his servants, and beat one, and stoned another,
and one they slew. (36) And again he sent 36
other servants, more numerous than the first ; and
they did the like to them. (37) And at last he sent 37
to them his son : for he said, Perhaps they will
respect my son. (38) But the cultivators, when 38
they saw the son, said among themselves : This is
the heir: Come; let us kill him, and retain his
inheritance. (39) And they laid hold of him, 39
thrust him out of the vineyard, and slew him.

(40) When the lord of the" vineyard, therefore, 40
sjiall come ; what will he do to those cultivators ?

(41) They say to him: He will utterly^ destroy 41
them ; and will lease the vineyard to other culti-
vators, who will render him the fruits in their
seasons. (42) Jesus said to them : Have ye never 42
read in the scripture, The stone which the"^ builders


MATTHEW, XXII.


43


45
46


rejected, hath become the head of the corner : this
is from the Lord; and it is marvellous in our eyes?

43 (43) Therefore I say to you, That the kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and shall be given

44 to a people that will yield fruits. p (44) And who-
ever shall fall upon this stone, will be fractured;
but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will crush him
to atoms ? •■ (45) And when the chief priests and
Pharisees had heard his similitudes, ^ they under-
stood that he spoke in reference to them. (46) And
they sought to apprehend him, but were afraid
of the multitude, because they accounted him as a
prophet.

XXII. And Jesus answered again by similitudes, ^^

2 and said : (2) The kingdom of heaven is like to
a ro3al person, who made a feasf^ for his son.

3 (3) And he sent his servants to call those that
had been invited, to the feast : and they would not

4 con^e. (4) And again he sent other servants, and
said : Tell those invited, Behold, my entertainment
is prepared, my oxen and my fatlings are slain,
and every thing is prepared ; come ye to the feast.

5 (5) But they showed contempt, and went away,
one to his farm, and another to his merchandise;

6 (6) and the rest seized his servants, and abused

7 them, and slew them. (7) And Avhen the king
heard [of it], he was angry ; and he sent his military
forces, •= and destroyed those murderers, and burned

8 their city. (8) Then said he to his servants. The
feast is prepared, but they who were invited Avere

9 unworthy. (0) Go ye therefore to the termina-
tions of the streets ; and as many as ye find, bid
to the feast. (10) And those servants went out
into the streets, and collected all they found, both
bad and good ; and the place of feasting^ was filled
with guests. (11^ And the king went in to see
tlie guests : and lie saw there a man who was not
elad in the festal garments. (12) And he said to
him : My friend, how camest thou here without the
festal robes? But he was silent. (13) Then said the
king to the servitors : Bind his hands and his feet,
and cast him into the outcr^ darkness : there will
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. (14) For the
called are many, and the chosen are few.

Then went the Pharisees and took counsel, how|


10


11


12


13


14
15


P Sy.

' or, scalier him
in particles.

' or, parables.


' or, parables.

' or, marriage-
feasl.


or, Ms armies.


^ Sy. AxCi


or, outside.


u


MATTHEW, XXII.


' Sy. IZO^LoiIi
e Sy. A^f^J

''Sy.])g^\V>


' Sy.

k Sy. ]T^Vn


16


' Sy.


' or, might,
abilitij.


•Sy.


" Sy. Iroaloj,

Gr. \'ip.og.
P Sy. jl g^ Vo


they might ensnare him in discourse/ (16) And
they sent to him their disciples, with domestics of
Ilerod,!? and said to him : Teacher, ^ Ave know that
thou art veracious, and teachest the way of God
with truth, regardless of man, for thou hast no
respect of persons. (17) Tell us, therefore, how
doth it ap[)ear to thee : is it lawfid to pay capita-
tion money to Caesar, or not ? (18) But Jesus knew 18
their wickedness, and said: 'Why tempt ye me,
ye hypocrites? (19) Show me a denarius of the
capitation money. And they brought to him a
denarius. (20) And Jesus said to them : Whose
is this image and inscription? (21) They say,
Ciesar's. He saith to them: Give then Caesar's
things to Cajsar, and God's things to God. (22) 22
And when they heard [it] they were surprised :
and they left him, and went away.

The same day came Sadducees, and said to him :
There is no life of the dead.i And they questioned
him, (24) and said to him: Teacher ;k Moses com-
manded us, tliat if a man should die childless, his
brother must take his wife and raise up seed to
his brother. (25) Now there were with us seven
brothers. The first took a wife, and deceased ; and,
as he had no children, he left his wife to his bro-
ther. (26) In like manner also the second, and
the third, and up to the whole seven, (27) And
after them all, the woman also herself died. (28) 28
In the resurrection,! therefore, to which of those
seven will she be the wife ? For they all had taken
her? (29) Jesus answered, and said to them: Ye
do err, from not knowing the scriptures, nor the
power "> of God. (30) For in the resurrection of the
dead, they do not take wives, nor are wives given
to husbands; but they arc as the angels of God in
heaven. (31) But as to the resurrection of the dead, 31
have ye not read what was spoken to you by God,
who said: (32) I am the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, the God of Jacob ? Now he is not
the God of the dead, but of the living. (33) And
when the multitude heard [it] they were astonished
at his doctrine."

! And when the Pharisees heard that he had put 34
jthe Sadducees to silence, they assembled together;
j(35) and one of them, who was expert in the law," 35
,to tempt him, inquired: (36) Tcacher,P which is the 36


17


19

20
21


23
24


25


26
27


29
30


32
33


MATTHEW, XXIII.


45


37 great command in the ]aw ?■■ (37) Jesus said to him :
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might,^ and

38 Avith all thy mind.t (38) This is the great and first

39 connnand. (39) And the second, which is like it,

40 is, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. (-iO)
On these two commands hang the law^' and the

41 prophets. (41) And while the Pharisees were

42 assembled, Jesus questioned them, (42) and said:
What say ye respecting the Messiah? Whose son
is he? They say to him; The son of David.

43 (43) He saith to them : How then doth David, by

44 the Spirit, call him Lord ? for he said : (44) The
Lord said to my Lord, vSeat thyself at my right
hand, until I place thy enemies under thy feet.

45 (45) If David then call him Lord, how is he his

46 son? (46) And no one was able to give him an
answer? And from that day, no one dared to
question him.

XXIIL Then Jesus conversed with the multitude

2 and with his disciples, (2) and said to them :
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in the seat of Moses.

3 (3) Whatever therefore they tell you to observe,
that observe and do. But according to their deeds,

4 ])ractise ye not: for they say, and do not. (4)
They tie up heavy burdens, and lay [them] on
men's shoulders ; but will not themselves touch

5 them with their finger. (5) And all their works
they do, to be seen of men : for they make their
j)hylacteriesa broad, and extend the fringes^ of

6 their garments. (6) And they love the highest
couches at suppers, «= and the highest seats in the

7 synagogues, (7) and* the greeting in the market
places, and to be addressed by men with l-labbi.<J

8 (8) But be not ye called Rabbi ; for one is your

9 llabbi, and ye are all brethren. (9) And ye shall
not call younselves Father^ on earth ; for one is

10 your Father, who is in heaven. (10) And be ye
not called guides;*" for one is your Guide, the
Messiah. (11) And the great one among you will
be your servitor.ff (12) For whoever shall exalt
himself, will be abased: and whoever shall abase
himself, will be exalted.

Woe to you. Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites:
ft)r ye devour the houses of widows, under the dis-


11
12


13


' Sy. "IcDQiDJ,
Gr. vo'fjLoj.

' or, strength.

' or, reason.

" Sy. lA.5ol,

the Pentateuch.


Sy.


'- Sy. IAIdZ
' or, dinners.
^ Sy. »i^5
e Sy. l^l

' Sy. b^LyiO,
Lat. duces.

e Sy.


46


MATTHEW, XXIIl.


5y. "J5q_il


> Sy


^!^


■^


cn^TD


Sy. a debtor.


Sy. a debtor.


Sy. IcdoLQJ


Sy.

]jQj


?1 ^.1


guise of protracting your prayers. Therefore ye
shall receive greater condemnation. (14) Woe to
you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites : for ye hold
the kingdom of heaven closed before men ; for ye
enter not yourselves, and those that would enter
ye suffer not to enter. (15) Woe to you, Scribes
and Pharisees, hypocrites: lor ye traverse sea and
land to make one proselyte ;^ ^nd when he is gain-
ed, ye make him a child of hell' twofold more
than yourselves. (16) Woe to you, ye blind guides:
for ye say. Whoever shall swear by the temple, it
is nothing; but whoever shall swear by the gold
that is in the temple, he is holden.^ (17) Ye fools,
and blind : for which is greater, the gold, or the
temple that sanctifieth the gold? (18) And, who-
ever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing: but
whoever shall swear by the oblation upon it, he is
holden.' (19) Ye fools, and blind: for which is
greater, the oblation, or the altar that sanctifieth
the oblation ? (20) He therefore who sweareth by
the altar, sweareth by it, and by all that is upon it.
(21) And he who sweareth by the temple, sweareth 21
by it, and by him that dwelleth in it. (22) And 22
he who sweareth by heaven, sweareth by the
throne of God, and by him that sitteth on it. (23)
Woe to 3^ou, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites : for
ye tithe mint, and anise, and cummin, and omit
the graver [matters] of the law,"i judgment, and
merc}^, and fidelity: these ought ye to do, and
those not -to omit. (2-4) Ye blind guides, who
strain out gnats, and swallow down camels. (25)
Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for
ye cleanse the outside of th^ cup and the dish,
while within they are full of rapine and wicked-
ness. (26) Ye blind Pharisees, cleanse first the
inside of the cup and dish, that their outside may
be clean also. (27) Woe to you. Scribes and Phari- 27
sees, hypocrites: for ye are like whitcd sepulchres,
which appear comely without, but are within full
of bones of the dead and all impurity. (28) So ye 28
also, outwardly, appear to men as righteous;" but
within, ye are full of iniquity and h3-pocrisy. (29) 29
Woe to you. Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites : for
ye build the tombs of the prophets, and ye adorn
the scpulclires of the righteous ; (30) and ye say: 30
If wc had been in tlie days of our fothers, we


14


15


16


17
18


is 19


20


23


24
25


26


MATTHEW, XXIV.


47


would not have been participators with them in I

31 the blood of the prophets. (31) Wherefore yej
are witnesses, against yourselves, that ye are the

32 children of them that killed the prophets. (32)!
And as for you, fdl ye up the measure of your!

33 llithers. (33) Ye serpents, ye race of vipers: how!

34 can ye escape the condemnation of hell?'' (34)!° %• .
Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and H^^T^ ^l_ij
\Vise men, and scribes; some of whom ye will killj

and crucify, and some of them j'c Avill scourge in
your synagogues, and will persecute them from

35 city to city : (35) so that on 3'-ou ma}* come all the
blood of the ri[rhteous, which hath been shed on
the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel untoi
the blood of Zachariah,P son of Barachiah, whom p Sy.

'SQ ye slew between the temple and the altar. (36) j^ Ij^^I?
Ycrily I say to 3'ou, that all these things will

37 com.e upon this generation. (37) 0 Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, who killcst the prophets, and stonest
them that arc sent to thee : how often would I
liave gathered thy children, as a hen gathereth
her 3'oung under her wings, and ye would not.

38 (38) Behold, your house is left to you desolate!

39 (3'J) For I say to you, That ye shall not see me
lienceforth, until ye shall say : Blessed is he that
cometh in tlie name of the Lord.


XXIV. And Jesus jjasscd out of the temple to go
away : and his disciples came to him, showing him

2 the structure^ of the temple. (2) And he said
to them: See ye not all these? Yeril}^ I say to
you, There will not be left here a stone upon a

3 stone, that is not demolished. (3) And as Jesus
sat on the mount of Olives, his disciples came, and
said between themselves and him : Tell us when
these things are to be ; and what will be the sio;n


of thy coming,'' and of the consummation of the


Avorld." (4) Jesus answered and said to them
Take heed, that no one deceive you. (5) For
many will come in my name, and will say, I am
the Messiah: and they will deceive many. (6)
And ye are to hear of conflicts, and the rumor of
battles. See that ye be not disquieted : for all
these things must come; but the consummation is
not yet. (7) For nation will rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom ; and there will be


U^r^


Sy. CTI D m


Sy. j^A-.Z]iD

Sy. ]^n\s.


48


MATTHEW, XXIV.


' Sy. ]Vo\s
' Sy. ]Vn\r} «


e Sy. >0\\
»'Sy.")oC7l]jLj^


9
10
11
12

13
14


15


16

17
18


famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in divers
places. (8) But all these are only the commence-
ment of sorrows. (9) And thej will deliver you
up to tribulation, and will kill you : and ye will be
hated by all nations, on account of my name. (10)
Then many will be stumbled : and they will hate
one another, and will betray one another. (11)
And many false prophets will rise up ; and they
will deceive many. (12) A'nd on account of the
abounding of iniquity, the love of many will de-
cline. (18) But he that shall persevere to the end,
will have life.<J (14) And this announcement of
the kingdom shall be published in all the world,^
for a testimony to all nations: and then will come
the consummation.^ (15) And when ye see the
abominable sign of desolation, which was spoken
of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy
place ; then let the reader consider ; (16) and then
let them who are in Judaea, flee to the mountain :
(17) and let him who is on the roof, not come
down to take what is in his house : (18) and let
him who is in the field, not return back to take
his clothing. (19) But woe to those with child, and 19
to them that are nursing, in those days. (20) And 20
pray ye, that your flight be not in winter, or on
the sabbath. (21) For there will then be great 21
distress, such as hath not been from the commence-
ment of the world, s until now, and will not be.
(22) And unless those daj's should be cut short, no 22
flesh would remain alivc^^ But, for the elect's
sake, those days will be cut short. (23) Then, if
any one shall say to you, Lo, the Messiah is here,
or is there ; give no credence. (24) For there will
arise false Messiahs, and mendacious prophets ; who
will exhibit great signs, so as to deceive, if possible,
even the elect. (25) Behold, I have told you
beforehand. (26) If therefore they say to you.
Behold, he is in the desert; go not out: or,
Behold, he is in a secret chamber; give no credence.
(27) As the lightning cometh out of the east, and
shineth unto the west, so will be the coming of the
Son of man. (28) And wherever the carcass may 28
be, there will the eagles be congregated. (29) And 29
immediately after the distress of those days, the
sun will be darkened, and the moon will not show
her liglit, and the stars will fall from heaven, and


23


24


25
26


27


0


MATTHEW, XXIV.


49


30 the powers' of heaven Avill be agitated. (30) And
then will be seen the signal"^ of the Son of man in
heaven: and then will all the tribes of the earth
mourn, when' they sec the Son of man coming on
the clouds of heaven, with power and great giorj.

31 (31) And he will send his angels with a great
tnunjK% and they will collect together his elect
from the four winds, from one extremity of heaven

32 to the other. (82) And leaiTi ye an illustration""
from the fig-tree. As soon as its branches become
tender and its leaves shoot forth, ye know that

\ 33 sammer is coming on, (33) So also ye, when ye
]>erceivc <ill these things, know yc, that he is nigh

34 [even] at the door. <o-i) Verily I say to you, That
tliis generation" shall not pass away, till all these

35 things shall be. (35) Keavcn and ecirth will pass

36 away ; but my v/ords" shall not pass away, (36)
But of that day and of that hour, knowcth no man,
nor even the angels of heaven, but the Father only.

37 (87) A-nd as the da^-s of Noah, so will the coming

38 of the Son of man be-. {38) For as, before the
llood,? they were eating and drinking, taking
wives and giving to husbands, ii[) to the day that

39 Noah entered the ark,"" (39) and knew not, until
, the flood came and took tkem all av;ay^ so will

40 the coming of the Son of man be. (40) Then will
two [men] be in the field ; the one will be taken,

41 and the other left. (41) Two [women] will be
grinding at the mill ; the one taken, and the other

42 left. (42) Watch, therefore-, sipxe ye know not at

43 what hour j^our Jjord cometh. (43) But know
this, that if the lord* of the house had known in
what watch tlie thief would come, he would have
been awake, and would not have suffered his house

44 to be broken into. (44) Therefore, be ye also
ready ; for at an hour ye do not expoct, the Son of

45 man will come, (45) Who then, is that faithful
and wise servant, whom his lord hath placed over
his domestics,' to give them their food in its time?

4f^ (40) Happy is that servant, whom, when his lord

47 shall come, he will find so doing. (47) Verily I
say to you, He will place him overall that he hath,

48 (48) But if that servant, being wicked, shall say ia

49 his heart. My lord delayeth his coming ; (49) and
shall begin to beat his fellow-servants, and shall be

50 oating and drinking with drunkards; (50) the lord


' or, armies.
^ Sy. "U^

' or, and they
u-ill


Sy. IZPa


or, race.
Sy. ..\V>

Sy. )i£)a^

Sy. iloD


or, mcsler.


♦ Sy.


oJLO


50


MATTHEW, XXV.


Sy. likened to.


or, potver.


or, others


of that servant will come in a claj lie will not ex-
pect, and in an hour he knoweth not, (51) and will 51
cut him asunder, and will assign him his portion
with the hypocrites ; there will be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.


9


Then may the kingdom of heaven be XXY
shadowed'^ forth by ten virgins, who took their
lamps and went out to meet ^he bridegroom and
bride, (2) And five of them were wise, and five
were foolish. (3) And the foolish took their
lamps, but took no oil with them, (-i) But the
wise took oil in vessels, with their lamps, (5) And
while tlie bridegroom delayed, they all became
sleepy and fell asleep. (G) And at midnight there
was an outcry : Behold, the bridegroom corneth ;
go ye out to meet him. (7) Then all those virgins
arose, and trimmed their lamps. (8) And the
foolish said to the wise : Give us of your oil ; for,
behold, our lamps have gone out. (9) The wise
answered and said: [We must refuse,] lest there
should not be enough for us and for joxl; but go
ye to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.
(lO) And while they went to buy, the bridegroom 10
came; and they that Avere ready, went with him
into the house of the nuptials, and the door was
shut. (11) And at length came also the other
virgins, and said: Our lord, our lord, open to us,
(12) But he answered, and said to them: Yerily
1 say to you, I know you not. (13) Watch, there- 13
fore, seeing ye know not the day nor the hour.

(14) For, as a man that took a journey, called his l-l
servants and delivered to them his property:

(15) to one he gave five talents; to another, two; 15
and to another, one : to each, according to his
ability :i' and he immediately departed. (16) Then 16
he that received five talents, went and traded with
them, and gained five more." (17) And likewise 17
the one of two [talents], by trading gained two
more. (18) But he that received one, went and 18
digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money.

(19) And after a long time, the lord of those ser-
vants came, and received account from them.

(20) And he who had received the five talents,
came and brought five others ; and said, My lord,
thou gavest mo i}vc talents ; behold, I have gained


11


12


19

20


^


MATTIiEW, XXV.


61


22


S>?.


2J


21 by trading five more to them. (21) His lord said
to him: Well done!*^ good and faithful servant:
thou hast been faithful with a little; I will set
thee over much: enter thou into the joy of thy
lord. (22) And he of the two talents came, and
said : My lord, thou gavest me two talents ; be-
hold, I have by trading gained two more to them.
(23) Ilis lord said to him : Well done ! good and
faithful servant: thou hast been faithful with a
little; I will set thee over much: enter thou into
the joy of thy lord. (24) And he also that re-
ceived the one talent, canic and said : My lord, I
knew thee, that thou art a hard man, reaping
where thou hast not sowed, and gathering where

25 thou hast not scattered ; (25) and I was afraid, and
I went and hid thy talent in the earth. Behold,

26 thou hast what is thine. (26) His lord answered,
and said to him : Wicked and slothful servant !
Thou knewcst me, that I reap where I have not
sowed, and gather where I have not scattered !

27 (27) Thou oughtest to have cast my money into
the exchange;'' and I might have come and de-

28 mandcd my property with its interest.^ (28) Take
therefore the talent from him, and give it to him

29 that hath ten talents. (29) For, to him that hath,
shall be given, and he shall have more ; but from
him that hath not, even what he hath shall be

30 taken away. (30) And cast ye the unprofitable
servant into the outer darkness : there will be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

31 And when the Son of man shall come in his
glory, and all his holy angels with him, then will

32 he sit upon the throne of his glor}^. (32) And
before him will be gathered all nations ; and he
will separate them one from another, as a shepherd

33 scvereth the sheep from the goats. (33) And he
will place the sheep on his right hand, and the

31 goats on his left. (31) Then will the king say to
those on his right hand : Come, ye blessed of my
Father ; inherit the kingdom that was prepared for

35 3*ou from the foundation of the world.s (35) For I
was hungry, and ye gave me food ; I was thirsty,
and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye

36 took me home ; (36) I was naked, and ye clothed
me ; I was sick, and ye visited me ; I was in

37 prison, •> and ye came to me. (37) Then will the


i Sy. cul =

Eu!


« Sy. ]ycl:^

' Sy. OlAiLliJ


eSy. ]^n\s


k or, hoiLse of
prisoners.


52


MATTHEW, XXVl


* Sy. i^b^i^j


'Sy.lnAXi*!

■= Sy. XZt-j


"■Sy. "j^ljuO


rigbteoiJS saj to him: Our Lord, when saw we
thee hungry, and fed thee? or thu\sty, and gave
theo drink"? (38) And when saw we thee a 38
stranger, and took thee home? or naked, and
clothed thee? (39) And when saw we thee sick, 39
or in prison, and came to thee? (40) And the 40
king will answer, and say to them: Verily I say
to you, That inasmuch as ye did so to one of these
my litLle brothers, ye did so to me. (41) Then will 41
he say also to them on his left hand: Go from
mc, ye accursed, into everlasting' fire, which was
prq)ared for the Calumniator^ and his angels,
(42 1 For I was hungry, and ye gave me no food ^ 42
an(l I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink-,
(43) and I was a stranorer, and ye took me not 43
home ; and I was naked, and ye clothed me not ;
and I was sick and in prison, and ye did not visit
me, (44) Then will they also answer and say: 44
Our Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty,
or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and
did not minister to thee? (45) Then Avill he an- 45
swcr, and say to them : Verily I say to you, That
inasmuch as ye did not so to one of these little
ones, yc did not so to me. (46) And these will go 46
into everlasting torment,^ and the righteous into
everlasting life.™

And it came to pass, Avhen Jesns had con- XXVL
eluded all these discourses, that he said to his dis-
ciples: (2) Ye knov/- that after two days is the 2
passovcr ;^ and the Son of man is betrayed to be
crucified. (3) Then assembled the chief priests 3
and the Scribes and the Elders of the people, at the
hall of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas.*'
(4) And they lield a counsel against Jesus, that they 4
might take him by guile, and kill him. (5) But 5
they said : Not on the festival, lest there be a com-
motion among the people. (6) And v/hen Jesus 6
was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
(7) there came to him a woman having a vase of 7
aromatic ointment very precious, and she poured it
on the head of Jesus as he was reclining. (8) And 8
when his disciples saw [it] they were displeased,
and said : Why is this waste ? "(9) For this [oint- 0
mcnt] might have been sold for much, and have
been given tc the poor. (10) But Jesus knew 10


MATTHEW, XXVI.


53


{their dissatisfaction], and said to them: Why
trouble ye the woman? She hath performed a

11 good deed towards me. (II) For the poor ye
have at all times with you; but I am not with you

12 always. (12) And this her act, pouring the oint-
ment on my body, she hath doPxC as it were for my

13 burial. (13) Verily I say to you, That wherever
this my gospel*' shall be proclaimed, in all the
world, <^ this thing that she hath done shall be told
for a memorial of her.

14 Then one of the twelve, named Judas Iscariot,

15 went to tlie chief priests, (lo) and said to tliem:
What will ye give me, if I will deliver him to you?
And they promised him thirty pieces of silver.

16 (16) And from that time he sought opportunity to

17 betray him. (17) And on the tirst day of unleav-
ened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, and said
to him : Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee

18 to cat the passovcr? (18) And he said to them:
Go ye into tlie city, to such<^ a man, and say to
him : Our Rabbi saith. My time approaches : with
thee will I keep the passovcr with my disciples.

19 (19) And his disciples did as Jesus directed them,

20 and made ready the passover. (20) And when it
was evening, he reclined with his twelve disciples.

21 (21) And as they were eating, he said: Verily I
say to you. That one of you will betray me.

22 (22) And it troubled them much. And they
began each one of them to say to him; My Lord,

23 is it I? (23) And he answered and said: One
that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, he will

2-1 betray me. (24) And the Son of man gocth, as it
is written of him : but woe to that man, by whom
the Son of man is bctra^'cd. It would have been
better for that man, if he had not been born.

25 (25) Judas the betrayer answered and said: Rabbi,
is it I? Jesus said to him: Thou hast said.

26 (26) And as they were eating, Jesus took bread,
and blessed, and brake; and gave to his disciples,

27 and said: Take, eat; this is my body.f (27) And
he took the cup, and offered thanks ; and gave [it]
to them, saying: Take, drink of this all of you.

28 (28) 'I'liis is my blood of tiie new testament,? which,
in behalf of many, is shed fi)r the remission of sins.

29 (29) But I say to you, that I will henceforth not
drink of this product*" of the vine, until the day in


JSy.


Sy. Vg^


'Sy.
rSy.
"Sy.


1.^


54


MATTHEW, XXVI.


or, sutmbled.


^ Gr. Peter.


' Sy. IjoO J


Sy. 5;3ote.


which I shall drink it with you new in the king-
dom of God.

And they sang praises, and went forth to the 80
mount of OUves. (81) Then said Jesus to them: 31
Ye will all bo otTended' in" me this night ; for it is
written, I will smite the shepherd, and tlie sheep
of his Hock will be dispersed. (32) But after I am 32
arisen, I will go before you into Galilee. (33) Ce- 33
phask replied, and said to hiirt: Though all men
should be olfcnded in thee, I will never be oiiended
in thee. (34) Jesus said to him: Verily I say to 3-1
thee. That this night, before the cock crow, thou
wilt thrice deny me. (85) Cephas said to him : If 35
I were to die with thee, I would not deny thee:
and so also said all the disciples.

Then came Jesus Avith them to a place called 36
Gethsemaue :' and he said to his disciples. Sit ye
here, while I go and pray. (37) And he took Ce- 37
phas and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be
dejected and sorrowful. (38) And he said to 38
them: There is anguish in my soul,"^ even unto
death. AYait for me here ; and watch with me«
(39) And retiring a little, he fell on his face, and 39
prayed, and said : My Father, if it can be so, let
this cup pass from me. Yet not as I choose, but
as thou. (-10) And he came to his disciples, and 40
found them asleep: and he said to Cephas: So!
could ye not watch vrith me one hour? (41) Wake 41
ye, and pray, lest ye fiiU into temptation. The
mind" is prepared, but the body is infirm.

(42) Again he went away the second time, and
prayed, and said : My Father, if it cannot be that
this cup pass, except I drink it, thy will be done.

(43) And he came again and found them sleeping,
for their eyes were heavy. (44J And he left themj
and went again and prayed the third time, and
used'^ the same language, (45) Then he came to
his disciples, and said to them: Sleep on now, and
take rest. Behold, the hour is come : and the Son
of n:ian is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
(46) Arise, let us go. Behold, he that betray eth 46
me hath come. (47) And while he Avas yet sj^eak- 47
ing, lo, Judas the betrayer, one of the twelve,
arrived; and a great multitude with him, with
swords and clubs, from the presence of the chief
priests and elders of the people. (48) And Judas 48


42


43
44

45


the betrayer had given them a sign, saying: He it

49 is, whom I shall kiss: him seize ye. (49) And
forthwith he ajiproachcd Jesus, and said: Hail,P

oO Eabbi; and kissed him. (50) And Jesus said to
liim: My friend, is it for this thou hast come?
Then they came up, and laid their hands on Jesus,

51 and took him. (51) And lo, one of them with
Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew a sword,
and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off

52 his ear. (52) Then Jesus said to him: Heturn the
sword to its place ; for all the}^ that take swords,

53 shall die by swords. (58) Supposes! thou that I
cannot tisk of my Father, and he now assign me

54 more tlian twelve legions of angels? (54) But
how then would the scriptures be fulfilled, that

55 thus it must be? (55) At that time Jesus said to
the multitude: Have ye come out, as against a
cut-throat, with swords and clubs, to take me?
I daily sat with you, and taught in the temple, and

50 ye did not apprehend me. (56) And this occurred,
that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled-
Then the disciples all forsook him and fled.

57 And the}' who apprehended Jesus carried him
to Caiaphas the high priest, where the Scribes and

5S Elders were assembled. (58) And Simon Cephas''
followed after him at a distance, unto the high
priest's hall, and entered, and sat with the servants

59 within, that he might see the issue. (59) And the
chief priests and the Elders and the whole assem-
bly sought for witnesses against Jesus, that they

60 might put him to death; (60) and found them not.
And many false witnesses came; and at last, two

61 came forward, (61) and said: This man said, I can
destroy tlie temple of God, and in three days re-

62 build it, (62) And the high priest rose up and
said to him: Hespondcst thou nothing? What do

Qo these testify against thee? (63) And Jesus was
silent And the high priest answered, and said to
him: I adjure thee by the living God, that thou
tell us whether thou art the Messiali, the Son of

•64 God. (64) Jesus saith to him: Thou hast said.
And I say to you. That hereafter ye will see the
Son of man sitting on the right hand of power,^

65 and coming on the clouds of heaven. (65) Then
the high priest rent his clothes, and said : Behold,
he hath blasphemed! Why therefore should we


Sy. i^oV^


ari>


' Gr. Peter.


or, might


56


MATTHEW, XXVII.


' or, opimim.
' or, obnoxious.


- Gt. Pea


or, immediate-
ly.


Rv.


Gr. *i^'£,a&va.


Sy. flace cf
offerings.


'Sy.


seek for witnesses? Behold, ye have now heard
hi.s blasphemy. (GG) What is your pleasure?' 66
They answered and said: lie is liable^ to death.
(67^ Then they spit in his face, and buffeted him; 67
ana others smote him, (G8) and said to him: 68
Prophesy to us, thou Alessiah, who is it smote
thee ?

And Ceph.as^'*' was sitting without in the hall, 69
and a certain maid approachdd him, and said to
him: Tliou also wast with Jesus the Nazarean.
(70) But he denied [it] before them all, and said : 70
I know not what thou sayest. (71) And as he 71
went out into the porch, another maid saw him,
and said to them : This man was also there with
Jesus the Nazarean. (72) And again he denied, 72
with oaths: I know not that man. (7o) And a 73
little after, those standing [there] came up and said
to Cephas : Ccrtainl}^ thou too art one of them ;
and thy speech maketh thee manifest. (74) Then 7-4
he began to imprecate, and to swear, I know not
that man. And in that hour^ the cock crew.
(75) And Cephas remembered the declaration of 75
Jesus, who said to him: Before tlie cock croweth,
thou wilt three times deny me. And he went out,
and wept bitterly.

»

And when it was morning, the chief priests XXVII.
and the ciders of the people held a council against
Jesus, how they might put him to death, (2) And 2
they bound him, and carried him and delivered
him up to Pilate, the president. =^

Then Judas the betrayer, when he saw that Jesus 3
was condemned, repented. And he went and re-
turned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests
and elders; (4) and said: I have sinned, by 4
betraying innocent blood. And they said: What
is that to us? See to it thyself (5) And he cast 5
down the silver in the temple, and retiring, went
and strangled himself (6) And the chief priests 6
t0(jk up the silver, and said: It is not lawful to
put it into the treasury,'' because it is the price of
blood. (7) And they took counsel, and bought 7
with it the potter s field, for a place to bury stran-
gers. (8) Wherefore that field is called the field 8
of blood, c unto this day. (9) Then was fulfilled 9
that which was spoken by the prophet, saying: I


MATTHEW, XXVII.


57


11


12
13


took the thirty [shekels] of silver, the price of the
precious one, which they of the children of Israel
10 had stipulated; (10) and I gave tlicm for the pot-
ter's lield, as the Lord directed me.

And Jesus stood before the president. And the
president asked him, and said to him : Art thou
the king of the Jews? And Jesus said to him:
Thou hast said. (12) And when the chief priests
and elders accused him, he made no reply. (13)
Then Pilate said to him: Ilearost thou not how

14 much they testify against thee ? (1-1) But he gave
him no answer, not even one Avord: and therefore

15 Pi late wondered greatly. (15) And at each festi-
val, the president was accustomed to release to the

IG people one prisoner, such as they preferred. (16)
And they had then in bonds a noted prisoner,
called Bar Abas.'i (17) And when they were
assembled, Pilate said to them: Whom will ye, that
I release to you, Bar Abas, or Jesus Avho is called
Messiah ? (IS) For Pilate knew that it Avas from

ly enmity they had delivered him up. (19) And as
the president Avas sitting on his tribunal,^ his Avife
sent to him, and said : Have thou nothing to do
Avith that just man ; for I have suffered much this
day in a dream because of him. (20) But the
chief priests and the elders persuaded the mul-
titude, that they should demand Bar Abas, and
destroy Jesus. (21) And the president ansAvered,
and said to them : Which of the tAA^o, Avill ye, that
I release to you ? And they said : Bar Abas. (22)
Pilate said to them : And Avhat shall I do to Jesus
Avho is called Messiah ? They all replied : Let
him be crucified. (23) The president^said to them:
But Avhat hath he done, that is evil ? And they
cried out the more, and said : Let him be crucified.

2-i (24) And Pilate, Avhcn he saAV that it availed
nothing, but rather that tumult Avas produced, took
Avater, and Avashed his hands before the eyes of the
multitude, and said: I am pure from the blood of
this just man : sec ye to it. (25) And all the
j^eoplc answered, and said : His blood be on us,
and on our children ! (2G) Then released he to
them Bar Abas ; and scourged Jesus Avith Avhi}is,ff
and delivered him to be crucillcd. (27) Then the
soldiers of the president took Jesus into the Prro-
toriam ,'• and assembled the Avholc resimeut' against


17


18


20


21
22


9.q


25


20
27


J Gr.


Sy. 1>OjD,
Gr. /3j;jxa.


' i. c. Pilate.


5 Sy. V^^iHi,
from Greek.

i" Sy.

. Sy. jig^m],

Gr. tfcrfrpa.


^


58


MATTHEW, XXVII.


Sy. io!!..


Sy.


^t^


■Sy.llfi.cal,

Gr. "K'ftlrcn.


" or, saved.
* or, save.


him. (28) And they stripped him, and put on 28
him a scarlet military cloak. (29) And they wove 29
a crown of thorns, and set it on his head, and
[put] a reed in his hand, and they bowed their
knees before him, and mocked him, and said :
Hail,k thou king of the Jews. (30) And they spit 30
in his face, and took the reed, and smote him on
his head. (31) And when they had mocked 31
him, they divested him of the cloak, and clothed
him in his own garments, and led him out to be
crucified. *

And as they went out, they found a man of 32
Gyrene whose name was Simon; him they com-
pelled to bear his cross. (33) And they came to 33
a place Avhich is called Golgotha, ^ which is inter-
preted a skull. (3-1) And they gave him to drink 3i
vinegar mixed with gall. And he tasted [it], and
would not drink. (35) And when they had cruci- 35
fied him, they distributed his garments by lot.*

(36) And they sat down, and watched him there. 36

(37) And they placed over his head the cause of 37
his death, in the writing: This is Jesus, the
KING OF the" Jews. (38) And there were cruci- 38
fied with him two robbers, "» the one on his right
hand, and the other on his left. — (39) And they 39
that passed by reviled him, and shook their heads,
(40) and said: Destroyer of the temple, and 40
builder of it in three days, deliver thyself, if thou
art the Son of God, and come down from the
cross. (41) So also the chief priests mocked, with 41
the Scribes and Elders and Pharisees, (42) and 42
said: He gave life" to others, his own life he can-
not preserve." If he is the king of Israel, let him
now descend from the cross, and we will believe

in him.f (43) lie trusted in God ; let him rescue 43
him now, if he hath pleasure in him : for he said,


* In the editions of 1815 and 1826 is the following note: —

« According to some of the Greek copies, there is added, thus : that so might
be fulfilled iliat which was spoken hij the prophet David: They distributed my gar-
ments among them, and upon my vesture they cast the lot.'^

This addition is not found in four of the most ancient editions of the Syriac
New Testament, and it is put in the mrtrgiii of the more modern editions. It was
doubtless a modern addition to the Syriac New Testament, borrowed from the
Greek. — Translator.

t In some editions : that we may see, and believe in him.


MATTHEW, XXVIL


59


44
45
46
47
48


49
50

51


52
53

54


bo
56

57

58

59
60


I am the Son of God. (44) In like manner the
maraudersP also, that were crucified with him,
reproached him. — (45) And from the sixth hour
there Avas darkness over all the land,"" until the
ninth hour. (46) And about the ninth hour, Jesus
cried with a loud voice and said : O God, O God ;
why host thou forsaken me ? " (47) And some of
them that stood there, when they heard [it], said:
Hd calleth for Elijah.^ (48) And immediately one
of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with
vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to
drink. (49) 13ut the rest said : Desist ; we will
see if Elijah will come to reseue him. (50) Then
Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and yielded up
his spirit.^ — (51) And instantly, the curtain^ of the
door of the temple was torn asunder, from the
top to the bottom ; and the earth shook ; and the
rocks rived ; (52) and graves were opened ; and
many bodies of saints who slept, arose, (53) and
came forth ; and, after his resurrection, entered into
the holy city, and appeared to many. (54) And
the centurion, and they that were with him
guarding Jesus, when they saw the earthquake
and the things that occurred, feared greatly, and
said : Verily, this was the Son of God. (55) And
many women were there, looking on from a
distance ; the same who had followed Jesus from
Galilee, and had ministered to him. (56) One of
them was Mar}-- of Magdala, also Mary the mother
of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's
children. (57) And when it was evening, there
came a rich man of Ilamath,^ whose name was
Joseph, who was also a disciple of Jesus. (58)
This man went to Pilate, and begged the body
of Jesus. And Pilate directed the body to be
given him. (59) And Joseph took the body, and
wrapped it in a winding-sheet of clean linen ;

(60) and. laid it in his new sepulchre,'^ that was
excavated in a rock. And he rolled a great stone
against the door of the sepulchre, and departed:

(61) And there were present Mary of Magdala,


Sy. l£DjL^

or, earth.


Ilio.


Sy. (TLk»05
Sy. face.


Sy. ]6:^y


^Sy.


61

62 grave. — (62) And on the day that was next after


and the other ^lary, who sat over a.2:ainst the


Sy. ,aJ AaCL» 1<^\ ^1 ^1 ; 11, lU lembno shebdkihone i


eo


MATTHEW. XXVIII.


Sy. eicnivg.


«« Sy. said.


Sy. U\\»


the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees
assembled before Pilate, (63) and said to him: 63
Oar Lord, we remember that this deceiver said,
while he was alive. After three da3^s, I shall arise.
(6i) Command, therefore, to guard the sepulchre, 64
until the third day; lest his disciples come and
steal him away by night, and say to the people,
that he hath i-isen from the dead; and the last
delusion be worse than the first. (65) Pilate said 65
to them: Ye have soldiers: go and guard it, as
ye know how. (66) And they went and set a 6Q
guard to the sepulchre, and sealed the stone.

And in the close^ of the sabbath, as the XXVIII.
first [day] of the week began to dawn, came
Mary of Magdala and the other Mary, to view
the sepulchre. — (2) And lo, there was a great 2
earthquake : for an angel of the Lord descended
from heaven, and came and rolled away the stone
from the door, and sat upon it. (3) And his 3
aspect was like the lightning; and his raiment
white like snow : (4) and from fear of him 4
the keei)ers were astounded, and became as dead
men. — (5) And the angel answered, and said to 5
the women : Be not ye afraid, for I know that
ye seek Jesus who was crucified. (6) He is not 6
here ; for he is risen, as he predicted. ^ Come
ye, see the place where our Lord was laid. (7) 7
And [then] go quickly, tell his disciples, that he
is risen from the dead ; and lo, he precedeth you
to Galilee; there will ye see him. Behold, I have
told you. — (8) And they went quickly from the 8
sepulchre, with fear and great joy, and ran to tell
his disciples. (9) And lo, Jesus met them, and 9
said to them: llail,^ ye. And they came and
clasped his feet, and worshipped him. (10) Then 10
Jesus said to them : Be not afraid ; but go, tell
my brethren, that they go into Galilee, and there
they will see me.

And while they were going, some of the guards 11
came into the city, and told the chief priests all
that had occurred. (12) And they assembled with 12
the Elders, and held a council ; and they gave
no little money to the guards, (13) and said to 13
ihem: Say ye, that his disciples came and stole
him away by night, while we were asleep. (14) 14


MARK, I.


61


And if this should be reported before the Presi-
dent, we will pacify liim, and cause you not to

15 be troubled. (15) And they, having received the
money, did as they were instructed. And this
storyJ is current among the Jews to this day.

16 And the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to
the mountain which Jesus had appointed forthem<

17 (17) And when they beheld him, they worshipped

18 him: but some doubted, (18) And Jesus came
near, and discoursed with them, and said to them ;
All authority is given to me, in heaven and on
earth. And as my Father sent me, so also I send

19 you. (19) Go ye, therefore, and instruct" all na-
tions; and baptize them in the name of the Father,

20 and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. (20) And
teach^ them to observe all that I have commanded
you. And, behold, 1 am with you alwa3^s,8: unto
the consummation of the world.'' Amen.


Comple.lion of the Ilohj Gospeb as published by Matthew;
and v-hicli he published in IlebTiw^ in the Idiid of the Pales-
tincaiis.


Sy. lAl^:


sayinr


= Sy. O^L
K Sy. all days,

• Sy.

* Sy. ^li^^-k


The Holy Gospel, the Annunciation of Mark the Evangelist.


I. The beginning of the gospel'^ of Jesus the

2 Messiah, the Son of God. — (2) As it is written in
Isaiah the prophet: Behold, 1 send my messenger

3 before tliy face, who shall prepare thy way. (8)
The voice of one crying in the wilderness:
Prepare yc the way of the Lord; make smooth

4 bis paths. (4) John baptized in the wilderness,
and proclaimed the baptism'' of repentance for the

5 remission of sins. (5) And there went out to him
all the region^ of Judaea, and all the peoi)le'i of
Jerusalem ; and he baptized them in the river

6 Jordan, while they confessed their sins. (6) And


Sy.


'• Sy.

<= Sy. 5as,

Cr. x^P«'
=> Sy. children.


62


MARK, I.


sy. U-^si


Sy-U


>njCD


t-i


Py. -^c>i


' or, tenchinr;'


this John was clad in raiment of camels' hair;
and was girded with a cincture of skin about his
loins; and his food Avas locusts and wild honey.
(7) And he proclaimed, and said: Behold, after 7
me Cometh one more powerful than I, of whom I
am not worthy to stoop and untie the liistcnings of
his shoes. (8) I have baptized you with v.-ater ; 8
but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.

And it occurred, in those 'days, that Jesus came 9
from Nazareth in Galilee, and was baptized in
Jordan by John. (10) And immediately on his 10
coming from the water, he saw the heavens cleft,
and the Spirit descending like a dove upon him.

(11) And there was a voice from the heavens: 11
Thou art my beloved Son^ in whom I delight. —

(12) And directly the Spirit carried him into the 12
wilderness: (13) and he was there in the wilder- 13
ness forty days, being tempted by Satan.*^ And

he Vr^as with the Avild beasts ; and angels minis-
tered to him.

After John was delivered up, Jesus came into 14
Galilee, and proclaimed the tidings^" of the king-
dom of God, (15) and said: The time is com- 15
pleted, and the kingdom of God is near. Eepent
yC) and believe the tidings, — (16) And as he 16
walked near the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and
Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea,
for they were fishermen. (17) And Jesus said to 17
them : Come after me, and I will make you fishers
of mcHi (18) And immediately they left their
nets, and went after him. (19) And as he passed
on a little, he saw James the son of Zebedee,? and
John his brother, who also were in a ship, and
mending their nets, (20) And he called them:
and immediately they left Zebedee their lather in
the ship) with the hired servants, and went after
him.

And when they entered Capernaum, ^ he im-
mediately taught on the sabbath in their syna-
gogues. (22) And they were astonished at his
doctrine ;' for he taught tlicra, as having authority,
and not as their "Scribes. — (23) And in their 23
synagogue was a man, in whom was an unclean
spirit ; and he cried out, (24) and said : What
have wc to do with thee ? Jesus thou Nazarean.
Plast thou come to destroy us ? I know thee, who


18
19


20


21
22


21


MARK, L


63


25 thou art, the Holy One of God. (25) And Jcsua
rebuked him, and said : Shut thy mouth, and

26 come out of him. (26) And the unclean spirit
threw him down, and cried with a loud voice, and

27 came out of him. (27) And they were all amazed,
and inquired one of another, and said: What is
this'/ What new doctrine is this? For with
authority he- commandcth the unclean spirits, and

28 they obey him.. (28) And inmicdiatcly his fame

29 spread^ into all the land of Galilee.— (29) And he
retired from the synagogue, and entered into the
house of Simon and Andrew, with James and
John. (30) And Simon's mother-indaw was lying
sick with a fever: and they told him about her.
(ol) And he came, and took her hand, and
raised her up ; and immediately the fever left her,
and sl>e ministered to them. — (32) And in the
evening, at the setting of the sun, they brought to
him all them that Were diseased, and demoniacs,
(33) And all the city was collected at the door.
(3-i) And he healed many who labored under
divers diseases, and cast out many demons ;• and
he suftered not the demons to speak, because they
knew him.

And in the morning, he rose much before others,
and retired to a solitary place, and there prayed.
{Sij) And Simon and his associates"^ sought for
him. (37) And when they found him, they said
to him: Every body" is seeking for thee. (38)
And he said to them : Go into the adjacent
villages and towns; for there also I will preach
because therefore have I come. (89) And he
preached in all their synagogues, in all Galilee,
and cast out demons.

And a leper came to him, and fell at his feet,
and entreated him, and said to him : If thou wilt,
thou canst make me clean. (41) And Jesus had
compassion on him, and stretched out his hand,
and touched him, and said : I will ; be thou clean.

42 (42) And in that hour, his leprosy departed from

43 him, and he became clean. (43) And he charged

44 him, and sent him away, (44) and he said to him :
See that thou tell no person ; but gOj show thyself
to the priests, and offer an oblation on account of
thy purification, lus Moses commanded, for a tcsti-

45 mony to them. (45) And he, as he went out,


SO
31


52


33

34


6d

36
37

38


40
41


Sy. went.


Sy. ]al3


■" or, those with

him.
" or, everT/ one.


i


64


MARK, IL


Sy.lAlv£j


Sy. spake.


Sy. C^Lw0^r2
Sy. r'icse


^ Sy. i.'tc e?/cx.


Sy. iSi ^q\


2


began to proclaim [it] much, and to divulge the
matter;" so that Jesus could not openly go into
the city, but was without, in desert places; and
they came to him from every quarter.

And Jesus again entered into Capernaum, after II,
some days. And when they heard that he was in
the house, (2) many were assembled, so that [the
house] could not contain th«m, not even before
the door. And he held^ discourse v/ith them.
(3) And they came to him, and brought to him a
paralytic, borne between four persons. (1) And
as they could not come near him on account of the
crowd, they ascended to the roof, and removed the
covering of the place where Jesus was, and let
down the bed on which the paralytic lay. (5) And
when Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic:
My son, thy sins arc forgiven thee. (6) And there
were some Scribes and Pharisees thero^ who sat and
reasoned in their hearts: (7) Who is this speaking
blasphem-y? Who can forgive sins, except God
only ? (8) And Jesus knew, in his spirit,"^ that they
thus reasoned in themselves ; and he said to tlsem t
Why reason ye thus*= in your heart? (9) Which
is the easier, to say to a paralytic. Thy sins are for-
given thee ? or to say, Arise, take up thy bed, and
walk? (10) But that ye may know that the Son 10
of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, — he
said to the paralytic, (11) I say to thee. Arise, take 11
thy bed, and go to thy house. (12) And he arose 12
in that hour, took up his bed, and departed in
presence'' of them all : so that they were all amazed,
and praised God, saying : Wc never saw the like.

And he went again to the sea ; and all the multi^
tude came to him, and he taught them,. (14) And
as he passed along he saw Levi the son of Alphe*
use sitting among the publicans. And he said to
him: Come after me. And he arose and went
after him. — (15) And it was so, that as he reclined 15
in his [Levi's] house, many publicans and sinners
reclined with Jesus and with his disciples : for they
v/ere many, and they followed Jiim. (IG) And
when the Scribes and Pharisees saw that he ate
with publicans and with sinners, they said to his
disciples: AVhy doth he eat and drink with pub-
licans and sinners? (17) When Jesus heard [it], 17


9


13
14


16


MARK, III.


65


he said to them : The healthy need not a physician,
but those hiboring under disease: I came, not to

18 call the rij^^hteous, but sinners. — (18) And the dis-
ciples of John and of the Pharisees were fasters;
and they came and said to him : Why are the dis-
ciples of John and of the Pharisees fasters, and thy

19 disciples fast not? (19) Jesus said to them: Can the

guests'' of the nuptial chamber fast so long as the ^ Sy. cliiUreru

20 bridegrooua is with them ? No. (20) But the days
will come, when the bridegroom will be taken from

21 them, and then they will fast, in that day. (21) No
one takcth a patch of new cloth and seweth it upon
an old ganucnt, lest the supplemental new should
take from the old, and the rent become the greater,

22 (22) And no one putteth new wine into old sacks,
lest the wine burst the sacks, and the sacks be
spoiled, and the wine spilled; but they put new

1o wine into new sacks. — (23) And it was so, that as
Jesus on a sabbath walked in the tillage grounds,!

21 his disciples walked and plucked the ears. (24) And{
the Pharisees said to him: See, how on the sabbath, i

25 they do that which is not lawful ? (25) Jesus said
to them: Have ye never read what David did,
when he had neecl and was hungry, he and his at- ^ „ . ,

2G tendants?? (26) How he entered the house of God, I ,/' ^^^'"^
wlien Abiathar was high priest, and ate the bread
of the Lord's table, which it was not lawful for any]
but priests to cat, and gave [it] also to those with

27 him"/ (27) And he said to them: The sabbath
was made on man's account, and not man for the!

28 sake of the sabbath. (28) Therefore also the Son|
of man is lord of the sabbath. I


III. And again Jesus entered into a synagogue. And
there was a man there, whose hand was withered.

2 (2) And they watched him, that if he should heal

3 on the sabbath, they might accuse him. (3) And
he said to the man of the withered hand : Stand up

4 in the midst. (4) And he said also to them : Is it
lawful to do good on the sabbath, or to do evil?
to give life to a person,'^ or to destroy? But they

5 were silent. (5) And he looked on them with in-
dignation, being grieved with the hardness of their
heart. And he said to the man : Stretch forth thy
hand. And he stretched forth, and his hand was

6 restored. (G) And the Pharisees went out, that


Sy. "U.2SJ


66


Sy, rebuked.


'Sy.

OTJocn ^

'' or, parables.


9


13

14


MARK, III.

very hour, with the domestics of Herod, and held
a consultation against him, how they might destroy
him.

And Jesus retired with his disciples to the sea.
And many people joined him from Gralilee, and
from Judaea, (8) and from Jerusalem, and from
Idumtca, and from beyond Jordan, and from Tyre,
and from Sidon: — great multitudes, when they
heard all that he did, came t® him. (9^ And he
told his disciples to bring him a ship, on account
of the multitude, lest they should crowd upon him.
(10) For he had healed many, so that they rushed 10
upon him, in order to touch him. (11) And they 11
who were afflicted with unclean spirits, when they
saw him, fell down and cried out, and said : Thou
art the Son of God. (12) And he charged'' them 12
much, not to make him known.

And he ascended a mountain, and called whom
he pleased ; and they came to him. (11) And he
chose twelve to be with him, whom ho would send
out to preach, (15) and who would have power to 15
heal the sick, and to cast out demons. (16) And to 16
Simon he gave the name of Cephas.'' (17) And to 17
James the son of Zebedee and to John the brother
of James, he gave the name of Boanerges, '^ that is.
Sons of thunder. (18) And [he chose also] An-
drew, and Philip, and Bartholomew,'' and Matthew,
and Thomas, and James the son of Alpheus,*" and
Thaddous,s_ and Simon the Canaanite, (19) And
Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.

And they came to the house : (20) and the mul- 20
titude assembled again, so that they could not eat
bread. (21) And his kinsmen^ heard, and went
out to take him ; for they said : He is out of his
reason.* (22) And those Scribes that had come
down from Jerusalem, said : Beelzebub is in him ;
and by the prince of demons he expelleth demons.
(23) And Jesus called them, and said to them, by 23
similitudes:'' How can Satan cast out Satan?
(21) For if a kingdom be divided against itself, 24
tiiat kingdom cannot stand. (25) And if a house 25
be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
(26) And if Satan rise up against himself and be 26
divided, he cannot stand, but' is at an end. (27) No 27
one can enter the house of a strong man, and plun-
der h\3 goods, unless he first bindlhe strong man ;


18


19


21


22


28 and then he may rob his house. (28) Verily I say
to you : All sins, and the blasphemies that men

29 may utter,' may be forgiven them: (29) but who-
ever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit, to
him for ever'" there is no forgiveness ; but he is ob-

30 noxious" to eternal** judgment. (30) Because they

31 had said: An unclean spirit is in him. — (31) And
his mother and his brothersP came, and, standing

32 without, sent to call him to them. (32) And the
multitude Avere sitting around him, and they said
to him : Lo, thy mother and thy brothers, without,

33 call for thee. (33) lie replied, and said to them :
Who is my mother? and who are my brothers?

3-1: (34r) And he looked upon those who sat by him,
and said : Behold my mother ! and, behold my

35 brothers ! (35) For whoever shall do the jllcasure
of God, he is my brother, and my sister, and my
mother.

IV. And again he began to teach by the side of the
sea. And great multitudes were assembled about
him ; so that he embarked and sat in a ship on the
sea, and all the multitude stood on the land b}^ the

2 side of the sea. (2) And he taught thcni much
by similitudes.^ And in his teaching, he said:

3 (3) Hear ye : Behold a sower went forth to sow.

4 (4) And as he sowed, some [seed] fell on the side
of the path ; and a bird came, and devoured it.

0 (5) And other [seed] fell on a rock, so that it had not
much earth ; and it soon shot up, because it had

G no depth of earth. (6) But when the sun was up,
it wilted ; and because it had no root, it dried up.

7 (7) And other [seed] fell among thorns. And the
thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no

8 fruits. (8) And other [seed] fell on good ground,
and came up, and grew, and yielded fruits ; some

9 thirty, some sixty, and some a hundred. (9) And
he said : "Whoever hath ears to hear, let him hear.

10 — (10) And when they were by themselves, those
Avith him, together with the twelve, asked him

11 [concerning] this similitude.'' (11) And Jesus
said to them : To you it is given to know the
mystery of the kingdom of God; but to them

12 without, all is in similitudes: (12^ that when they
see, they may sec and not see, ana when they hear,
they may hear and not understand; lest they


' Sy.

-Sy
"Gy.
o Sy.
pSy.


blaspheme,
debtor.


or, ^arables.


^ or, parable.


68


MARK, IV.


Sy. doth come.


* Sy.faL
" or, parable.


should be converted, and their sins be forgiven
them, (lo) And he said to them: Do ye not 13
understand this similitude? And how will ye
understand all similitudes? (14) The sower that 14
sowed, sowed the word. (15) And those by the 15
side of the path, are they in whom the word is
sown ; and as soon as they have heard [it], Satan
Cometh, and taketh away the word that was sown
in their hearts. (16) And those sown on the rock, 16
are they who, when they hear the word, immedi-
ately with joy receive it. (17) And they have no 17
root in them, but are temporary ; and when there
is affliction or persecution on account of the word,
they are quickly stumbled. (18) And those sown 18
among thorns, arc they that hear the word, (19) 11)
and the cares of thirf world, and the dcceitfulness
of riches, and the residue of other lusts enter in,
and choke the word, and it is without fruits. (20) 20
And those sown on good ground are they that
hear the word, and receive it, and bear fruits, by
thirties, and by sixties, and by hundreds. — (2i) 21
And he said to them : Is a lamp brought" to be
placed under a bushel, or under a bed? Is it not
to be placed on a light-stand? (22) For there is 22
nothing hid, which will not be exposed ; and
nothing concealed, which will not be made mani-
fest. (28) If any one have ears to hear, let him 23
hear. — (24) And he said to them : Take heed what 24
ye hear : with what measure ye measure, it shall
be measured to you : and there shall more be given
to you who hear. (25) For to him that hath, Avill 25
more be given ; and Irom him that hath not, even
what he hath, will be taken from him.— (26) And 26
he said : So is the kingdom of God, as if a man
should cast seed into the ground, (27) and should 27
sleep and rise, by night and by day, and the seed
should grow and shoot up, he knoVcth not how.
(28) For the earth bringeth forth the fruit; first 28
the plant, and subsequently the car, and at last the
complete wheat in the ear. (29) And when the 29
fruit is ripe,*! immediately comcth the sickle, be-
cause the harvest hath arrived. — (30) And he said: 80
To what shall we liken the kingdom of God ? and
with what similitude^ shall we compare it? (31) 81
It is like a grain of mustard seed which, when it
is sown in the earth, is the least of all seeds sown


84


35


40


41


MARK, V.

32 on the cartli ; (32) and wlicn it is sown it spring-
cth up, and bccomcth greater than all herbs, and
producetli great branches, so that birds can lodge

33 under its shadow. — (33) And by many such
similitudes, — similitudes such as they could hear,
— Jesus discoursed Avith the people. (34) And
without similitudes he did not converse with them:
but to his disciples, between himself and them, he
explained every thing.

And he said'^to them, the same day at evening:
Let us pass over to the other side. (36) And they
sent away the multitudes : and they conducted
him in the ship as he was. And there were also

37 Avith him other little ships. (37) And there was a
great tempest and wind : and the waves beat upon

38 the ship, and it was near being filled. (38) And
Jesus was asleep on a pillow in the hinder part of
the vship. And they came and awoke him, and
said to him : Our Rabbi, carest thou not, that we

39 perish? (39) And he arose, and rebuked the
wind, and said to the sea: Cease; be still. And
tiie wind ceased, and there was a great calm. (40^
And he said to them : AVhy were ye so fearful c
and why have ye not faith? (41) And they
feared with great fear: and they said, one to
another: Who is this, that even the winds and
the sea obey him !

V, And he came to the other side of the sea, to the

2 country of the Gadarenes.'^ (2) And as he went out
of the ship, there met him from the place of sepul-

3 chres a man in whom was an unclean spirit.^ (3)
And he dwelt in the place of sepulchres ; and no

4 one could confine him with chains: (4) because,
as often as he had been confined with fetters and
chains, he 'had broken the chains and burst the

5 fetters : and no one could subdue him. (5) And
continually, by night and by day, he was in the
])lacc of sepulchres, and cried and wounded himself

G with .stones. (G) And when he saw Jesus at a

7 distance, he ran and worshipped him; (7) and
cried with a loud voice, and said : What have I to
do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the High God ?
I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not.

8 (8) For he had said to him: Come out of the man,

9 thou unclean spirit. (9) And he demanded of him:


69


"Sy.

'|Anr-(^'UjO>


V


70

« Sy. vC^^
^ or, the land.
' Sy. "jjjj

' Sy.


f Sy. he of ike
demons.


^ Sy. the ten
cities.

' Sy.

■= Sy. w^5]q_»


' or, multitude.


MARK, V.

What is thy name? And he replied to him : Our
name is Legion ;<= for we are many. (10) And he
besought him much, that he would not send him
out of the country.'^ (11) And there was there
by the mountain, a great herd of swine grazing,
(12) And the demons^ besought him, and said: Send 12
las upon those swine, that we may enter them.
I (18) And he permitted them. And those unclean
[spirits*' went out, and entered , the swine : and the
I herd, of about two thousand, ran to a precipice,
land fell into the sea, and were strangled in the
waters. (1-i) And they who tended them, fled and
told [it] in the city and in the villages: aiKl they
came out to see what had occurred. (15) And
they came to Jesus, and saw him in whom the
i demons had been, — liim in whom had been the
legion, — clothed, and sober, and sitting; and they
were afraid, (16) And those who had seen [it]
told thorn how it occurred to him Avho had the
demon.s, and also concerning the swine. (17) And
I they began to request him, that he would go from
[their border. (18) And as he ascended the ship, 18
the late demoniacs requested that he might con-
tinue with hira. (19) And he suffered him not,
but said to him : Go home to thy people, and tell
them what the Lord hath done for thee, and hath
compassionated thee, (20) And he went, and
began to publish in Decapolis,^ what Jesus had
done for him. And they were all amazed.

And when Jesus had passed by ship to the
other side, great multitudes again assembled
about him as he was on the shore of the sea.
(22) And one of the rulers' of the synagogue,
whose name was Jairus,^ came, and, on seeing him,
fell at his feet, (23) and besought him much, and 23
said to him: My daughter is very sick ; but come
and lay thy hand on her, and she will be cured,
and will live. (24) And Jesus went Avith him;
and a great company! attended him, and pressed
upon him.— (25) And a woman who had had a 25
deflexion of blood twelve years, (26) and who had 26
suffered much from many physicians, and had ex-
pended all she possessed, and was not profited, but
was even the more afflicted ; (27) when she heard
of Jesus, came behind him in the press of the
crowd, and touched his garment, (28) For she


10


11


13


1-4


15


16
17


19


20


21


22


24


27


28


A*-


MARK, VI.


71


said : If I but touch his garment, I shall live,

29 (29) And immediately the fountain of her blood

dried up; and she felt in her body that she was

oO healed of her plague. (30) And Jesus at once

kucw in himself, that virtue had issued from him :

and he turned to the throng, and said: Who

31 touched my clothes? (31) And his disciples said

to him : Thou secst the throngs that press upon

thee ; and sayest thou, Who touched me ? (32)

And he looked around, to see who had done this.

(33) And the Avoman, fearing and trembling, for
she knew what had taken place in her, came and
fell down before him, and told him all tlie truth.

(34) And he said to her : My daughter, thy faith
hath made thee live: go in peace; and be thou
healed of th\' plague. — (So) And while he was
speaking, some domestics of the ruler of the
synagogue canu>, and said : Thy daughter is
dead : why therefore troublest thou the teacher ?«"
(3(3) But Jesus heard the word they spoke, and said
to the ruler of the synagogue: Fear not; only

37 believe. (37) And he suffered no one to go with
him, excej)t ISinion Cephas," and James, and John

38 the brother of James. (38) And they came to the
house of the ruler of the synagogue ; and he saw,
that they were in a tumult, and weeping, and
howling. (39) And he entered in and said to
them: Why are ye in a tumult, and weep? The
maid is not dead, but is asleep. (40) And they
laughed at him. But Jesus put them all out.
And he took the maid's father, and her mother,
and those that accompanied him, and entered into
where the maid lay. (41) And he took the maid's
hand, and said to her: Maiden, arise." (42) And
immediately the maid arose, and walked; for she
was twelve years old. And they were astonished
with a great astonishment. (43) And he enjoined
it upon them much, that no one should know of it.
And he directed, that they should give her to
eat.


Of)


34


60


3G


39
40


41
42


43


VI. And Jesus departed from there and came to his

2 own city, and his disciples attended him. (2) And

when the sabbath came, he began to teach in

the synagogue. And many who heard [him]

were astonished, and said : Whence hath he


Sy ]i as\\n


Gr. Peler.


72


MARK, VI.


Sy. IXjLkj


or, in his
house.


or, small coins.


Sy.|]:
Sy.U^


Sy. house nf
prisoners.
i. e. to wife.


6


9

10
11


obtained these things? And, what wisdom is this,
which is given to him! and that such mighty
works'^ are done by his hands I (3) Is not this
the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of
James and of Joses and of Judas and of Simon ?
And are not his sisters here with us? And they
were stumbled in him. (4) And Jesus said to
them: There is no prophet who is little, except
in his own city, and among 4iis kindred, and at
homc.^ (5) And he could not there do even one
mighty work, except that he laid his hand on a
few sick, and healed them. (6) And he wondered
at the defect of their faith. And he travelled
about the villages and taught.

And he called his twelve, and began to send
them forth, two and two; and he gave them
authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out.
(8) And he commanded them to take nothing for
I the journe}', except a stall" only; neither a wallet,
nor bread, nor brass^ in their purses ; (9) but to
be shod with sandals, and not put o-n two coats.
1(10) And he said to them: Into whatever house
ye enter, there abide till ye leave the place. (11)
And whoever will not receive you, nor hear you,
when ye go out from that place shake off the dust
that is under your feet, for a testimony to them.
Verily I say to you. There will be comfort for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment,
rather than for that city. (12) And they went
out and proclaimed, that [men] should repent.
(13) And they cast out many demons, and many 13
of the sick they anointed with oil, and healed them.

And Ilerod the king heard of Jesus, — for his 14
name had become known to him, — and he said:
John tlie Baptizer hath risen from the dead : and
therefore it is, mighty deeds'^ are done by him.
(15) Others said: Ue is Elijah :" and others: He
is a prophet, like one of the prophets. (16) But
when Ilerod heard [of him], he said : He is that
John whose head I struck ofl^ he is risen from the
dead. (17) For Ilerod had sent and seized John,
and bound him in })rison,f on account of Herodias,
his brother Pliilij)'s wife, whom he had taken.s
(18) For John had said to Ilerod: It is not lawful
for thee to take thy brother^s wife, (19) And
Herodias herself was an enemy to him, and wished


12


15

16


17


18
19


MARK, VI.


73


20 to kill him, but was not able. (20) For Ilerod
was afraid of John, because lie kuew hiiri to be a
just and holy man: and he observed him, and
gave ear to liim in many things and did [the

21 things], and he heard him with satisfaction. (21)
And tlicre was a noted day, when Ilerod made
a supper, in the house of his nativity, for his
nobles and the ehiliarchs and the chiefs of Galilee.

22 (22) Anil the daughter of llerodias came in, and
danced ; and she pleased Ilerod and those reclining
with him. And the king said to the maid: Ask
of ine what tliou pleasest, and I will give it thee.

23 (23) And he swore to her : Whatever thou shalt
ask, I will give thee, even to the half of my king-

2-1 dom. (24) And she went out, and snid to her
mother: What shall I ask of him? She said to

25 her : The head of John the Bapti/.cr. (25) And
she soon entered with eagerness to the king, and
said: I desire that thou, this hour, give me in a

26 dish the head of John the Baptizer. (26) And it
pained the king greatly ; yet, on account of the
oath, and on account of the guests, he would not

27 denyi> her: (27) and the king sent inimcdiatcl}^ an
executioner,' and commanded [him] to bring the
liead of John. And he went, and struck oil the

28 head of John in the prison ; (28) and brought it
on a dish, and gave it to the maid ; and the maid

29 gave it to her mother. (29) And his disciples
heard [of it] ; and they came and took up the
corpse, and laid it in a sepulchre.'^

30 And the legates' assembled before Jesus, and
told him all they had done, and all they had

31 taught. (31) And he said to them: Come, Ictus
go into a desert by ourselves, and rest a little.
For there were many going and comiiig, and they

32 had not opportunity even to eat bread, (32) And
they went by ship to a desert place by themselves.

S3 (33) But many saw them, as they de])arted, and
knew them ; and from all the cities, they ran

34 thither by land before him. (34) And Jesus dis-
embarked and saw great multitudes: and he com-
passionated them, because the}' were like sheep
having no shepherd. And he began to teach them

35 many things. (35) And when tlie time was
advanced,"' his disciples came to him, and said to
him: This is a desert place, and the time is ad-


'' Sy. defraud.
'Sy.

= Gr.

^ or, flacc of
burial.

' Sy. U>'»N»

Gr. dirorfoXoi.


"Sy. greaL


74


MARK, VI.


Sy. ICDJ'O^


Sy. ^,1^?


P Sy.
^i1 'iaOQ


Sy.


Sy. torturing.


» Sy. f/iicL
' Sy. ;.EQJ.


^5.


vanced.
into the
and may buy
notliinj? to cat.


(36J Dismiss
fielcls'i around


them, that they may go
us and into the villages,
themselves bread ; for they have
(37) And he said to them : Give


36


37


38


39

40
41


ye them to eat. They say to him : Shall we go
and buy bread of the value of two hundred
denarii," and give them to eat? (38) And he said
to them : Go, see how many loaves ye have here.
And when they had seen, they say to him : Five
loaves and two lishes. (39) And he bid them
make the people reeline on the grass by companies,
(40) And they reclined, by companies of a hundred,
and of fifty. (41) And he took the five loaves
and the two fishes, and looked towards heaven,
and blessed and brake the bread, and gave to his
disciples to set before them : and they divided
[alsoj the two fishes among them all. (42) And 42
they all ate, and were satisfied. (43) And they 43
took up twelve baskets? full of the fragments
and of the fishes. (44) And they who had eaten 44
bread were iive thousand men. (45) And he im- 45
mediately constrained his disciples to take ship,
and go before him to the other side, to Bethsaida,""
Avhile he dismissed the multitudes. — (46) And 46
when ho had dismissed them, he went to a moun-
tain to pray. (47) And when evening came, the 47
ship was in the middle of the sea, and he alone on
the land. (48) And he saw them straining^ them- 48
selves in rowing ; for the wind was against them.
And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus came
to them walking on the waters; and he was
disposed to pass by them. (49) And they saw 49
him walking on the waters, and they supposed
that the appearance was a spectre : and they cried
out. (50) For they all saw him, and were afraid. 50
And immediately he spoke with them, and said to
them: Take courage; it is I ; fear not. (51) And 51
he entered into the ship to them; and the wind
ceased. And they were greatly amazed, and
astonished among themselves. (52) For they did 62
not learn by the bread ; because their heart was
stupid.t— (53) And when they had passed to the 53
other shore, they came to the land of Gennesaret.v
(54) And when they went out of the ship, imraedi- 54
ately the men of the place knew him. (55) And 55
they ran through all that region, and began to


MARK, VII.


75


bring forth them that Avcrc sick, bearing them on
56 beds to where thcj heard he was. {56) And
wherever he entered into villages or cities, the sick
were laid in the streets : and they besought him,
that they might touch but the extremity of his
raiment. And all they that touched him, were
liealed.

VII. And tliere gathered about him Pharisees and

2 Scribes, who had' come from Jerusalem. (2) And
they saw some of his disciples eating bread, with

3 their hands unwashed; and they censured it. (3)
For all the Jews and the Pharisees, unless they
carefully wash their hands, do not eat; because

4 they hold fast the tradition of the Elders. (4) And
[coming] from the market-place, except they bap-
tize, =^ they do not eat. And there arc many other
things which they have received to observe, [such
as] the baptisms'-* of cups, and of pots, and of

5 brazen vessels, and of couches. (o) And the
Scribes and Pharisees asked him : AVny walk not
thy discijiles according to the tradition of the
Elders, but eat bread with their hands unwashed?

0 (0) And ho said to them : Well did Isaiah the
prophet prophecy concerning you, ye hypocrites;
as it is written: This people honoreth mc with its

7 lips, but their heart is very far from me. (7) And
in vain do they give me reverence, while teaching

8 as doctrines the precepts of men. (8) For yc have
forsaken the commantlment of God, and hold fast
the tradition of men, the baptisms of cups, and of

9 pots, and many things like these. (9) lie said
[also] to them : Full well do ye spurn the precept

10 of God, that ye may establish your tradition! (10)
For Moses said: Honor thy father and thy mother;
and whoever shall revile his father or his mother,

11 shall surely die.<^ (11) But ye say : If a man say
to his father or to his mother. Be it my oblation,

12 whatever thou mayest gain from me: (12) then ye
sutfor him not to do any thing for his father or his

13 mother. (13) And ye reject the word of God, on
account of the tradition which ye hand down.

14 And many things like these, ye do. — (14) And
Jesus called all the multitude, and said to them:

15 Hear, all yc; and understand. (15) There is
nothing without a man which, by entering him, can


» Sy. ^_,,,Vr)\

•> Sy.


or, dying die.


^ OT,jjarabk.


or, iL


Sy.


Sy. word.


•• Sy. the ten cit-


Sy. ^>jAs2.1


polluts liim. But that which cometh out of him,
that it is that polluteth a man. (16) Whoever 16
hath ears to hear, let liim hear.— (17) xind when 17
Jesus had entered the house, apart from the multi-
tude, his disciples asked him about this similitude.*!
(18) And he said to them: Are ye likewise so 18
uudiseerning? Do ya not know, that whatever
from without entereth into a man, cannot defile
liim? (19) For it doth not enter into his heart, 19
but into his belly, and is thrown into the diges-
tive process, which carries off all that is eaten.
(20) But that which proceedeth from a man, that 20
delileth a man. (21) For from within, from the 21
heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adultery,
whoredom, (22) theft, murder, avarice, malice, 22
deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, reviling, haugh-
tiness, folly. (23) All these evil things come from 23
within, and delile a man.

Thence Jesus arose, and went to the border of 24
Tyre and Sidon. And he entered a house, and
wished no man to know him;*^ but he could not
be concealed. (25) For immediately a woman, 25
whose daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of
him; and she came, and fell before his feet, (26) 26
(the woman was a Gentile from Phenicia of
Syria),*" and besought him, that he would expel
the demon from her daughter, (27) Jesus said 27
to her: Permit the children first to be satisfied;
for it is not becoming, to take the children's
bread and cast it to dogs. (28) And she replied, 28
and said to him : Yes, my Lord : and yet the
dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs.
(29) Jesus said to her : Go thou ; because of this 29
speech, >i the demon hath departed from thy
daughter. (30) And she went to her house, and 30
found her daughter lying on a bed, and the demon
gone from her.

Again Jesus departed from the border of Tj^re 31
and Sidon, and came to the sea of Galilee, to the
border of Dccapolis.'» (32) And they brought to 32
him a deaf and stammering man, and besought
him to lay his hand on him."" (33) And he led him 33
aside from the multitude, and put his fingers
into his ears, and spit, and touched his tongue,
(34) and looked towards heaven, and sighed, and 34
said to him: Be opened.' (35) And immediately 35


MARK, VIII.

]iis cars were opened, and the bond of his tongue

36 was loosed, and he spake plainly. (3(5) And he
charged them to tell no man of it : and the
more he charged them, the more they proclaimed

37 it. (37) And they admired exceedingly, and said:
He doeth every thing excellently: he maketh
the deaf to hear, and the speechless to talk.

VIII. And in those days, when the multitude was
great, and had nothing to eat, he called his dis-

2 ciplcs, and said to them : (2) I compassionate this
multitude; for, lo, three days have they continued

3 with me, and tlicy have nothing to eat. (3) And
if I send them to their homes fasting, they will
faint by the way: for some of them have come

4 from a great distance. (4) His disciples say to
him : Whence can one, here in the desert, satisfy

o all these vv'ith bread? (5) And he asked them:
How many loaves have ye? They say to him,

6 Seven. (G) And he directed the multitudes to
recline on the ground: and he took the seven
loaves, and blessed, and brake, and gave to his
disciples to set forth ; and they set before the

7 multitudes. (7) And there were a few fishes;
and them he also blessed, and ordered them set

8 foilh. (8) And they ate, and were satisfied : and
they took up seven baskets of the remaining

9 fragments. (9) And the men who had eaten,
were about lour thousand: and he sent them
away.

10 And immediately he entered a ship, with his
disciples, and came to the place Dalmanutha,*^

11 (11) And the Pharisees came out, and began to
dis[)ute with him; and, to tempt him, they dc-

12 manded of him a sign from heaven. (12) And
he sighed with his breath, ^ and said : Why doth
this generation seek after a sign ? Verily I say
to you, No sign will be given to this generation.

13 (13) And he left them, and embarked in the
1-1 sliiji ; and they passed to the other shore. — (14)

And they had forgotten to take bread with them,
and had but a .single cakc- in the ship with

15 them. (15) And he charged them, and .said to
them : Take heed, and beware of the leaven of

16 the Phari.secs, and of the leaven of Herod. (16)
And they reasoned one with another, and said :


77


Sv.


I' Sy. spirit.


• ^y- 1 V^^i


78


MARK, VIII.


1


r^


Ax^


• Gr. Peter.


' Sy. the word.
f Gr. Pelcr.

^ Gr. Peter.
* Sy. Ij^IO


It is, because we Lave no bread. (17) And Jesus 17
knew [it], and said to them : Why reason ye,
because ye have no bread ? Do ye still not know,
nor understand? How long will your heart be
hard? (18) and je have eyes, but see not? 18
and have ears, but hear not, nor reflect? (19) 19
When I broke the five loaves to five thousand,
how manv baskets full of the fragments took ye
up? They say to him: Twelve. (20) He sai'th 20
to them : And when the seven to four thousand,
how many baskets full of the fragments took ye
up? They say: Seven. (21) He saith to them: 21
Why is it that, to this time, ye do not consider ?

And he came to Bethsaida 'A and they brought 22
to him a blind man, and besought him to touch
him. (23) And he took the blind man by the 23
hand, and led him out of the village, and spit
on his eyes, and laid on his hand: and asked him,
what he saw. (24) And he gazed, and said: I 24
see men like trees which walk. (25) Again he 25
laid his hand on his eyes, and he was recovered,
and saw every thing plainly. (26) And he sent 26
him to his house, and said to him : Neither
enter into the village, nor tell any person in the
village.

And Jesus and his disciples went to the villages 27
of Csesarca Philippi. And he asked his disciples
by the way, and said to them: Who, do men say
of me, that I am ? (28) And they said to him : 28
That [thou art] John the Baptizer; and others:
That [thou art] Elijah; and others: That [thou
art] one of the prophets. (29) Jesus said to them: 29
And who, do ye yourselves say of me, that I am?
Simone replied, and said to him: Thou art the
Messiah, the Son of the living God. (30) And he 30
charged them, that they should say [this] of him to
no person.— (31) And he began to teach them, 31
that the Son of man was about to suffer much, and
be rejected by the Elders and by the chief priests
jand by the Scribes, and be killed, and rise on the
I third day. (32) And he spoke out the thingf dis- 32
jtinctly. And Cephas? took him, and began to
rebuke him. (33) But he turned, and looked 38
upon his disciples, and rebuked Simon, '> and said :
Get thee behind me, Satan :' for thou dost not
consider what is of God, but what is of men. —


MARK, IX.


70


«S4 (34) And Jesus called the multitude, together with
his disci})les, and said to them : Whoever will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his

35 cross, and come after me. (35) For, whoever will
preserve his life,'' shall lose it ; and whoever will
lose his life on my account, and on account of my

36 tidings,! shall preserve it. (36) For, what will a
man be profited, if he gain the whole world,™ and

37 lose his life?" (37) Or what will a man give in

38 exchange for his life? (38) For, whoever shall
be ashamed of me, and of my words," in this sinful
and adulterous generation, of him also will the
Son of man be ashamed, Avhen he cometh in the

IX.glory of his Father, with his holy angels. — [IX.]
And he said to them : Verily I say to you. There
are some standing here, who will not taste of death,
until they shall see the kingdom of God to be
coming with power,

2 And after six days, Jesus took Cephas^^ and
James and John, and led them to a high moun-
tain, apart ; and was transformed before them,*'

3 (3) And his raiment shone, and was very Avhite,
like snow, so as men on earth can never whiten.

4 (4) And there appeared to them Moses and

5 Elijah, in conversation \Vith Jesus. (5) And
Cephas'"- said to him: Rabbi, it is delightful for us
to be here. And let us make three booths ; one
for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.

6 (6) But he did not know what he said, for they

7 were in trepidation. (7) And there was a cloud,
and it overshadowed them. And a voice issued
from the cloud, which said ; This is my beloved

8 Son. Hear yc him. (8) And suddenly, when the
disciples looked up, they saw no one with them,

9 except Jesus only. — (9) And as they descended the
mountain, he commanded them to tell no man
what they had seen, till after the Son of man

10 should be risen from the dead. (10) And they
kept that saying in their mind •,^ and inquired,
AVhat doth this saying mean: " When he shall be

11 risen from the dead !" (11) And they asked him,
and said : Why then do the Scribes say, that

12 pjlijah must first come? (12) lie said to them:
Elijah [truly] first cometh, to prepare all things:
ami, as it is written of tlie Son of man, he will


^ Sy. CTLa-^XJ

' Sy. ^Li'^m
"• Sy. |^n\s
■■ Sy. C7La_2LJ
" or, teachings.


Gr. PetS-.


' Sy. their eyes.


Gr, Peter.


or, among
themselves.


'Sy. ]l n\V)


Sy. "im-L^
Gr. fivog.


14


15
16

17
18


19


20


21


suffer much, and be rejected. (13) But I say to 13
3^ou: That Elijah hath come; and they have done
to him all that they desired, as it was written of
him.

And when he came to his disciples, he saw a
great multitude with them, and the Scribes dis-
puting with them. (15) And immediately the
multitude saw him, and were surprised : and they
ran and saluted him. (16) 'And he asked the
Scribes : What were ye disputing with them ?
(17) And one of the multitude replied, and said :
Teacher, e I have brought to thee my son, who hath
a spirit that will not speak. (18) And wherever
he scizeth him, he shakcth and teareth him : and
he gnasheth his teeth, and pineth away. And I
spoke to thy disciples, to cast him out ; and they,
could not. (19) Jesus answered, and said to them :

0 incredulous generation! How long shall I be
with you ? how long bear with you ? Bring him
to me. (20) And they brought him to him. And
when the spirit saw him, immediately he shook
him ; and he fell upon the ground, and wallowed
and foamed. (21) And Jesus asked his father, how
long a time he had been thus. He said to him :
Lo, from his childhood. (22) And many times it 22
hath thrown him into the fire, and into the water,

to destroy him. But, if thou canst do any thing,
aid me and have compassion on me. (23) Jesus 23
said to him : If thou canst believe; every thing can
be-, to him that believeth. (24) And immediately 24
the father of the child cried out, while he wept and
said : I believe ; aid thou the defect of my faith.
(25) And when Jesus saw that the people were
running and collecting around him, he rebuked the
unclean spirit, and said to him : Thou deaf and
unspeaking spirit, I command thee, come out of
him ; and no more enter him. (26) And the
demon cried out greatly, and bruisea him, and
came out. And he was as a dead person ; so that
many would say, he is dead. (27) And Jesus took
him by the hand, and raised him up. — (28) And
when Jesus entered the house, his disciples asked
him privately: Why could not we cast him out?
(29) He saith to them: This kind<" can come out,
jby nothing but fasting and prayer,

1 And when he departed from there, they passed SO


25

26

27
28

29


MARK, IX.


81


through Galilee : and he desired that no one might

31 know him. (31) For he taught his disciples, and
said to them: The Son of man is delivered into
the hands of men, and they will kill him ; and
when he is killed, on the third day, he will rise.

32 (32) But they did not understand that speeeh;&
and they were afraid to ask him.

33 And they came to Capernaum. And when they
entered the house, he asked them : What disputed

3-1 ye among yourselves by the way ? (34) And
ithey were silent ; for by the way they had con-
tended with one another, which should be the

35 great among them. (35) And Jesus sat down,
and called the twelve, and said to them : Whoever
would be first, let him be last of all, and servitor

36 to all. (36) And he took a child, and set him in
the midst, and took him in his arm? ane' said to

37 them: (37) Whoever rcceiveth one in my name,
like this child, he receiveth me ; and he that
receiveth me, receiveth not me [only], but him

38 that sent me. — (38) John said to him : Rabbi, we
saw one casting out demons in thy name, and we

39 forbad him, because he adhereth not to us. (39)
Jesus said to them : Forbid him not ; for there is
no one who doeth mighty works'^ in my name,

40 that can readily speak evil of me. (40) Whoever

41 therefore is not against you, is for you. (41) For
whoever shall give you to drink a cup of water
only, on the ground that ye are Messiah's [follow-
ers], verily I say to you, he will not lose his

42 reward. (42) And whoever shall cause one of
thcvse little ones that believe in me to stumble, it
Avere better for him, if a millstone were put to his

43 neck, and he cast into the sea. (43) And if thy
hand make thee offend, cut it off: it is better for
thee to enter into life maimed, than, having two

44 hands, to go into hell;' (44) where their Avorm

45 dieth not, and their fire is not extinguished. (45)
And if thy foot make thee offend, cut it off: it is
better for thee to enter into life lamed, than, having

46 two feet, to lall into hell ; (46) where their worm

47 dieth not, and their fire is not extinguished. (47)
And if thy eye make thee offend, pluck it out : it
is better for thee to enter with one eye into the
kingdom o

48 the hell of


K or, word.


Sy.|3L


Sy.]jai.^


Sy.


f God, than, having two eyes, to fall i'^^o h. J^ h(Tu
fire ;'' (48) where their worm dieth not, [ ' • ^^^


82


MARK, X.


•Sy.UX^


Ifi^-


" Sy. ]i g^Vn
'Sy.


and their fire is not extinguished. (49) For every 49
thing will be salted with fire ; and every sacrifice
will be salted with salt. (50) Salt is a good thing : 50
but if the salt become insipid, Avith what will it be
salted? Let there be salt in you: and be ye in
peace, one with another.

And he arose from there, and came to the border X.
of Judasa, on the other sido the Jordan. And
great multitudes came to him there ; and again he
instructed them, as he was accustomed. — (2) And 2
the Pharisees came to him, and, tempting him,
inquired if it were lawful for a man to divorce
his wife. (3) He said to them : What did Moses 3
command you ? (4) They said : Moses permitted 4
us to write a bill of divorce, and send [her] away.
(5) Jesus answered and said to them : On account 5
of the hardness of your heart, Moses wrote you
this precept. (6) But, from the beginning, Grod 6
made them a male and a female. (7) Therefore 7
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and
adhere to his wife : (8) and they two shall be one 8
flesh. Wherefore they are not two, but one flesh.
(9) What therefore God hath conjoined, let not 9
man separate. (10) And in the house, the disci- 10
pies asked him again of this matter. (11) And he 11
said to them : AVhoever shall divorce his wife, and
take another, committeth adultery. (12) And if a 12
woman shall leave her husband, and marry another,
she committeth adultery.

And they brought little children'^ to him, that 13
he might touch them. But his disciples rebuked
those who brought them. (14) And when Jesus 14
saw it, he was displeased ; and he said to them.
Suffer little children to come to me, and forbid
them not ; for of those like them is the kingdom
of God. (15) Yerily I say to you. That whoever 15
doth not receive the kingdom of God, like a little
child, shall not enter it. (16) And he took them 16
in his arms, and laid his hand on them and blessed
them.

And as he walked in the Avay, one ran and fell 17
upon his knees, and asked him, and said : Good
Teacher, h what must I do, to inherit eternal
life?c (18) Jesus saith to him: Why callest thou 18
me good? There is none good, but one, God.


19 (19) Thou knowest the commandments ; thou shalt
not commit adultery, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt
not kill, thou shalt not give false testimony, thou
shalt not defraud ; honor thy father and thy

20 mother. (20) And he answered, and said to him :
Teacher, all these have I kept from my childhood.

21 (21) And Jesus looked on him, and loved him,
and. said to him : One thing thou lackest. Go, sell
all that thou possessest, and give to the poor, and
there will be a treasure for thee in heaven ; and

22 take thy cross, and come after me. (22) And he
was made sad by that speech,'^ and went away

23 sorrowing : for ho possessed great riches. (23)
And Jesus looked upon his disciples, and said to
them : How hard for those who possess wealth, to

2 1 enter into the kingdom of God I (24) And the
disciples wondered at the remark. ^ And Jesus
replied again, and said to them : My children,
how hard it is, for those who trust in riches, to

25 enter into the kingdom of God. (25) It is easier
for a camel to enter the eye of a needle, than for a

26 rich man to enter the kingdom of God, (26) And
they wondered the more, and said among them-

27 selves : Who can obtain life 1 (27) And Jesus
looked on them again, and said to them: With
men, this is not possible, but with God [it is] ; for

28 with God all things are possible. — (28) And
Cephas^ began to say : Lo, we have left every

29 thing, and have cleaved to thee. (29) Jesus
answered and said : Verily I say to you. There is
no man that leaveth houses, or brothers or sisters,
or father or mother, or wife or children, for my

80 sake, and for the sake of my tidings, (30) Avho will
not receive a hundredfold, here in the present
time, — houses, and brothers and sisters, and mothers
and children, and lands, with persecution ; and in

81 the world to come eternal life. (31) But many
are first, who will be last ; and last, [who will be]
first.

82 And as they were in the way, going up to Jerusa-
lem, Jesus Avent before them : and they were
amazed, and walked after him with trembling
And he took his twelve, and began to tell them

33 what was to befall him. (33) Behold, we arc
going to Jerusalem ; and the Son of man will be
delivered up to the chief priests and the Scribes ;


''or, word.


''or, word.


' Gr. Peter.


84


MARK, X.


Sy.ll g^Vo


"• Sy. \jy_,j

' Sy.


Sy. ..m^


and they will condemn him to die, and will deliver
him over to the Gentiles. (34) And they will 34
mock him, and will scourge him, and will spit in
his face, and will kill him ; and on the third day
he will arise. — (35) And James and John, the sons 35
of Zebeclce, came to him, and said to him : Teacher, &
we desire that thou wouldst do for us all that we
ask. (36) lie saith to them : What would ye, that 36
I should do for you? (37)' They say to him: 37
Grant to us, that one may sit on thy right hand,
and the other on thy left, in thy glory. (38) But 38
he said to them : Ye know not what ye ask. Are
ye able to drink the cup, of which I drink ? and
to be baptized with the baptism, that I am baptized
with? (39) They say to him: We are able. 39
Jesus saith to them : The cup that I drink, ye will
drink, and the baptism that I am baptized with, ye
will be baptized with : (40) But tliat ye should 40
sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine
to give, except to those for whom it is prepared.
(41) And when the ten heard [it], they began to 41
murmur against James and John. (42) And Jesus 42
called them, and said to them : Ye know, that
they who are accounted chiefs^ of the nations, are
their lords ; and their great men have authority'
over them. (43) But it shall not be so among 43
you : but he that would be great among you, must
be a servitor to you. (44) And he of you that 44
would be first, must be servant to every one.
(45) And also the Son of man came, not to be 45
served, but to serve ; and to give his life a ran-
som for many.

And they came to Jericho. And as Jesus went 46
out of Jericho, he and his disciples and a great
multitude ; Timeus,^ the son of Timeus, a blind
man, was sitting by the side of the way, and beg-
ging. (47) And he heard that it was Jesus the 47
Nazarcan ; and he began to cry out, and to say :
Thou Son of David, have mercy on me. (48) 48
And many rebuked him, that he might be silent.
But he cried out the more, and said : Thou Son of
Da\dd, have mercy on me. (49) And Jesus stood, 49
and directed him to be called. And they called
the blind man, and said to him : Take courage :
arise, he callcth thee. (50) And the blind man 50
cast off his garment, and arose, and went to Jesus.


MARK, XI.

61 (51) Jesus said to liim : What wilt tliou, that I do
for thee ? And the bUnd man said to him : Kabbi,

52 that I may have sight. (52) And Jesus said to
him : Go ; thy faith hath procured thee life. And
immediately his sight was restored; and he fol-
lowed after him.

XI. And as they approached Jerusalem, near by
Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives,

2 he sent two of his disciples, (2) and said to them :
Go ye to the village that is over tigainst us, and
as soon as ye enter it, ye will find a colt tied, on
which no person hath ridden : loose [him], and

3 bring him hither. (3) And, if any one say to you,
Why do ye this ? Say ye to him : Because our
Lord hath need of him. And immediately he will

4 send him hither. (4) And they went, and they
found the colt tied, by the door, without in the

5 street. And as they were loosing [him], (5) some
of those standing there, said to them : What do

G 3'e, untying the colt ? (6) And they said to them,
as Jesus had commanded them ; and they per-

7 mitted them. (7) And they brought the colt to
JesLis, and cast their garments upon him, and set

8 Jesus upon him. (8) And many spread their gar-
ments in the way ; and others cut branches from

9 the trees, and strewed them in the way. (9) And
those preceding him, and those following him,
shouted and said : Ilosanna : Blessed is he that

10 Cometh in the name of the Lord. (10) And
blessed is the advancing kingdom of our father

11 David. Ilosanna in the highest [heavens]. (11)
And Jesus entered Jerusalem and the temple,
and surveyed every thing. And when evening
arrived, he went out to Bethany with the
twelve.

12 And the following day, as he left Bethany, he

13 Avas hungry : (13) and he saw a fig-trcc at a dis-
tance, on which were leaves, and he came to it, if
he could find somewhat on it. And Avhcn he
had come, he found on it only leaves; for the

11 time of figs had not arrived. (14) And he said
to it: IIcMiceforth and for ever, let no man eat
fruit from thee : and the disciples heard it. And

15 they came to Jerusalem. (15) And Jesus entered
the temple of God : and he began to cast out those


85


Sy.

(71


I-qIk


» Gr. Peter.


Sy. word.


who bouglit and sold in the temple ; and he over-
turned the counters of the money-brokers, and the
seats of them that sold doves. (16) And he 16
suffered no one to carry goods through the temple.
(17) And he taught them, and said: Is it not 17
written, My house shall be called the house of
prayer for all nations? But ye have made it a
den of robbers. (18) And the chief priests and 18
the Scribes heard [him], and they sought how they
might destroy him ; for they were afraid of him,
because all the people admired his doctrine. ^^ —
(10) And when it was evening, they went out from 19
the city. (20) And in the morning, as they passed 20
by, they saw tlie fig-tree dried up, as it were, from its
root. (21) And Simon'' remembered, and said to 21
him : Kabbi ; behold, the fig-tree which thou
cursedst, is dried up. (22) And Jesus replied, and 22
said to them : Have fliith in God. (23) Verily I 23
say to you, That whoever shall say to this moun-
tain, Be thou removed, and fall into the sea ; and
shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that
what he said will occur, to him will be the thing
he spoke. (21) Therefore I say to you. That 24
whatsoever ye shall pray and ask for, believe that
it will be, and it will be to you. (25) And when 25
ye stand up to pray, forgive what ye have against
any one ; that your Father who is in heaven may
also forgive your offences. (26) For if ye forgive 26
not, your Father also who is in heaven will not
forgive you your offences.

And they came again to Jerusalem. And as he 27
was walking in the temple, the chief priests and
Scribes and Elders came to him, (28) and said to 28
him : By what authority doest thou these things ?
And who gave thee the authority to do these
things ? (29) And Jesus said to them : I also will 29
ask you one thing,c that ye may tell me, and I will
tell you by what authority I do these things. (30) 30
The baptism of John, whence was it ? from heaven,
or from men ? Tell me. (31) And they reasoned 31
with themselves, and said: If we should say to
him. From heaven ; he will say to us, Why then
did ye not believe him ? (32) But if we should 32
say. From men ; there is fear from the people ;
for they have all held John to be truly a prophet.
(33) And they answered, and said to Jesus : We 33


MARK, XII.


87


do not know. He said to them : Neither do I tell
you by what authority I do these tilings.

XIL And he began to discourse with them in simili-
tudes."^ A certain man planted a vineyard, and
inclosed it with a hedge, and dug in it a wine vat,
and built a tower in it, and put it into the hands

2 of liusbandiucn, and removed to a distance. (2)
And at the proper time, he sent his servant to the
husbandmen, to receive of the fruits of the vine-

3 yard. (8) And they beat him, and sent him away
tt empty, (-i) And again he sent to them another

servant; and him also they stoned, and wounded,

5 and sent him away under indignities. (5) And
again he scut another ; and him they killed. And
he sent many other servants, some of whom they

6 beat, and some they killed. (6^ At last, having an
only and dear son, he sent him to them ; for he

7 said, rerha{)s they will respect my son. (7) But
those husbandmen said among themselves : This is
the heir ; come, let us kill lam, and the inheritance

8 will be ours. (8) And they took him, and slew

9 [him], and east [him] out of the vineyard. (9)
What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do?
He Avill come and destroy those husbandmen, and

10 transfer the vineyard to others. (10) And have
ye not read this scripture, The stone which the
builders rejected, hath become the head of the

11 corner: (11) From the Lord, was this; and it is

12 wonderful in our eyes? — (12) And they sought to
apprehend him, but were afraid of the people ;
for they knew that he spoke this similitude against
them. And they left him, and went away.

13 And they sent to him some of the Scribes and
of the household of Herod, to ensnare him in dis-

14 course. (14) And these came, and asked him:
Teacher;'' we know that thou art veracious, and
hast no fear of man ; for thou regardest not the
face of men, but teachest the way of God in truth.
Is it lawful to give capitation money to Ca?sar; or

15 not ? Shall we give, or not give ? (15) And he
knew their \vile, and said to them : Why tempt ye

16 me ? Bring me a denarius, that I may see it. (16)
And they brought [one] to him. And he said to
them : W hose is this image and inscription ? They

17 said to him: Caesar's. (17) Jesus said to them:


* or, parables.


Sy.'jj.SlliD


88


MARK, XII.


Sv.ll ^\So


raise up seed to his
seven brothei*s : and
died, and left no seed,
her, and died, and he
third in like manner,
her, and left no seed.


What is Cesar's, give to CiBsar ; and what is God's,
[give] to God. And they wondered at him. — (18) 18
Then came to him Sadducees, who say that there
is no resurrection ; and they asked him, and said :
(19) Teacher ;<= Moses wrote to us, that if a man's 19
brother die, and leave a widow, but leave no
children, his brother shall take his widow, and

brother. (20) There were 20
the first took a wife, and

(21) And the second took 21
also left no seed : and the

(22) And the seven took 22
Last of all, the woman also

died. (23) In the resurrection, therefore, of which 23
of them will she be the wife ? For all the seven
took her. (24) Jesus said to them : Is it not on 24
this account that ye err, because ye understand not
the scriptures, nor the power of God ? (25) For 25
when they rise from the dead, they do not take
wives, nor are Avives given to husbands ; but they
are as the angels that are in heaven. (26) But 26
concerning the dead, that they rise, have ye not
read in a book of Moses, how God said to him from
the bush : I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob ? (27) He is not 27
the God of the dead, but of the living. Ye, there-
fore, do err greatly. — (28) And one of the Scribes 28
came, and heard them as they discussed, and he
saw that he gave them an excellent answer; and
he asked him. Which is the first of all the com-
mandments? (29) Jesus said to him: The first 29
of all the commandrnents [is] : Hear, O Israel ; the
Lord our God is one Lord : (30) and thou shalt 30
love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with
all tliy might. This is the first commandment.
(31) And the second, which is like it, [is] : Thou 31
shalt love thy neighbor, as thyself. There is no
other commandment greater than these. (32) The 32
Scribe said to him : Excellently! Rabbi; thou hast
spoken the truth ; for he is one [God], and there is
no other beside him. (33) And for a man to love 33
him, with all the heart, and with all the mind, and
with all the soul, and with all the might ; and to
love his neighbor, as himself; is better than all
holocausts and sacrifices. (34) And Jesus per- 34


MARK, XIII.


89


ceived that he replied wisely; and he answered,
and said to him : Thou art not far from the king-
dom of God. — And no one dared again to question
him.

35 And as Jesus was teaching in the temple, he
answered and said : How can the Scribes say, that

3G Mcssiali is the son of David? (36) For David
himself suith, by the Holy Spirit : The Lord said
to my Lord ; Seat thyself on my right hand, until
I place thy enemies as a footstool beneath thy feet.

37 (37) David therefore calleth him " My Lord ;'" and
how is he his son ? And all the multitude heard

38 him with pleasure. (38) And he said to them in
his teaching •.'^ l>eware of the Scribes, who choose
to Avalk in long robes, and love the salutation in

39 tiie streets, (3'J) and the chief seats in the syna-
•iO gogues, and the chief couches at feasts. (40) They

devour the houses of widows, under pretence that
they prolong their prayers. These shall receive a

41 greater condemnation. — (41) And as Jesus sat
over against the treasury-room, he saw how the
multitude cast money into the treasury. And

42 many rich ones cast in much. (42) And a poor
widow came, and cast in two mites, which are a

43 brass farthing.^ (43) And Jesus called his disci-
ples, and said to them : Verily I say to you. That
this poor Avidow hath cast into the treasury more

44 than all they that cast in. (44) For they all cast
in of that which abounded to them, but she, of her
poverty, hath crust in all that she possessed, the
whole of her property.

XIIL And as Jesus retired from the temple, one of
his disciples said to him: Teacher ;=i behold; see

2 these stones, and these structures ! (2) And Jesus
said to him: Admirest thou these groat structures?
There will not be left here one stone upon another,

3 not demolished. (3) And as Jesus was sitting on
the mount of Olives, over against the temple, Ce-
phasi' and James and John and Andrew asked him,

4 privately: (4^ Tell us, when will these things be?
and what [wdl be] the sign that these things ap-

5 proach their consummation? (5) And Jesus be-
gan to say to them : Beware, that no one mislead

6 you : (0) for many will come in my name, and will
say : 1 am he. And they will mislead many.


' Sy.


Sy. "jjoki*


Sy. "ji g^Vo


^ Gr. Peter.


90


• OT, gospel.


MARK, XIII.

(7) But when ye shall hear of battles, and the 7
rumor of battles, be not afraid ; for this must be ;
but the end is not yet. (8) For nation will rise 8
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and
there will be earthquakes in several places, and there
will be famines and insurrections. These are the
beginning of sorrows. — (9) And take heed to your- 9
selves ; for they will deliver you up to the tribunals ;
and ye Avill be beaten in the ^synagogues, and ye
will stand before kings and governors, on my ac-
count, for a testimony to them. (10) And my 10
tidings^ must first be proclaimed among all the
nations. (11) And when they shall lead you to 11
deliver you up, be not solicitous beforehand what
ye shall say, neither premeditate ; but, that which
shall be given you in that hour, speak ye ; for it is
not ye that speak, but the Holy Spirit. (12) And 12
brother will deliver up his brother to death, and
the fither his son ; and children will rise up against
their parents, and will kill them. (13) And ye 13
will be hated of every man, on account of my
name. But whoever shall persevere to the end,
shall live. — (14) And when ye see the profane 14
sign of desolation, which was mentioned by Daniel
the prophet, standing where it ought not; — (let him
that readeth, understand;) then let those that are
in Judoea, flee to the mountain : (15) and let him 15
that is on the roof, not come down and enter [it],
to take any thing from his house: (16) and let him 16
that is in the field, not return back to take his
clothing. (17) But, woe to those with child, and to 17
those who nurse children, in those days ! (18) And 18
pray ye, that your flight be not in winter. (19) For 19
in those days will be affliction, such as hath not
been from the beginning of the creation that God
made until now, and shall not be. (20) And, unless 20
God sliould shorten those days, no flesh would live.
But, on account of the elect whom he hath chosen,
he hath shortened those days. — (21) Then, if any 21
one shall say to you: Lo, here is Messiah, or lo,
there ; give not credence. (22) For false Messiahs 22
will arise, and lying prophets ; and they will give
signs and wonders ; and will deceive, if possible,
even the elect. (23) But take ye heed. Lo, I 23
have told you the whole beforehand. — (24) And in 24
those days, after that a-ffliction, the sun will be


MARK, XIV.


91


27


darkened ; and the moon will not give her light ;

25 (25) and the stars will fall from heaven ; and the

26 powers of heaven will be shaken. (20) And then
will they see the Son of man coming in the clouds,
witli great power and glory. (27) And then will
he send forth his angels, and will assemble his elect
from the four winds, from the extremity of earth

28 to the extremity of heaven. — (28) And, from the
lig-troe, learn yc a simile. 'i When its twigs are
tender, and its leaves bud forth, ye know that

29 summer approacheth. (29) So also, when yc shall
sec these occurrences, know yc, that it is near, at

30 the door. (30) Verily I say to you. That this
generation^ shall not pass away, until all these

31 things oecur. (31) Heaven and earth will pass
82 away, but my words will not pass away. — (32) But

of that day and that hour, knowcth no man ; nor
the angels of heaven ; neither the Son, but the
Father. (33) Take heed, watch, and pray ; for ye
know not when the time is, (34) For it is as a
man, who took a journey, and left his home ; and
he gave authority to his servants, and to each his
service ; and he commanded the porter to be
watchful. (35) Watch ye, therefore ; for ye know
not when the lord of the house cometh; at even-
ing, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in
the morning: (36) lest he come suddenly, and find
87 you sleeping, (37) And what I say to you, I say
to you all : Be ye watchful.


35


86


XIV, And after two days, was the passover of un-
leavened cakes. And the chief priests and the
Scribes sought how they might take him by strata-

2 gem, and kill him. (2) But they said: Not on
the festival, lest there be commotion among the

3 people. — (3) And when he was at Bethany in the
house of Simon the leper, as he reclined, a woman
came having an alabaster box of precious ointment
of spikenard, of great price; and she opened and

4 poured upon the head of Jesus. (4) And there
were certain of the disciples, who were dissatisfied
among themselves, and said : Why was this waste

5 of the ointment? (5) For it might have been sold
for more than three hundred denarii, and been
given to the poor. And they were indignant at

6 her. (6) But Jesus said : Let her alone ; why


or, allegory.


Sy. ]I^;


92


MARK, XIV.


" Sy. ^L'^£D
^ Sy. ]^n\ S


trouble ye her? She liath done an excellent act
to'wards me. (7) For the poor ye have always 7
with yovi ; and when ye please, ye can do them
kind offices : but I am not always with you,
(8) What was in her power, she hath done; and 8
by anticipation, hath perfumed my bod}^, as if for
burial. (9) Verily I say to you,'^ That wherever 9
this my gospel^ shall be proclaimed, in all the
world, i* this also which she hath done shall be told,
in memory of her. — (10) And Judas Iscariot, one 10
of the twelve, went to the chief priests, in order to
betray Jesus to them. (11) And Avhen they heard 11
[him], they rejoiced; and they promised to give
him money. And he sought for opj^ortunity to
betray him.

And on the first day of unleavened cakes, on 12
which the Jews slay the passover, his disciples
said to him : Where wilt thou that we go, and
prepare for thee to eat the passover? (13) And 13
he sent two of his disciples, and said to them : Go
3'e to the city, and behold, there will meet you a
man bearing a pitcher of water. Go ye after him,
(14) and where he entereth in, say ye to the lord of 14
the house : Our Rabbi saith, Where is the place of
refreshment, in Avhich I may eat the passover with
my disciples? (15) And lo, he will show you a 15
large upper room, furnished and prepared: there
make ready for us. (16) And his disciples went, 16
and entered the city, and found as he had told
them : and they made ready the passover. (17) And 17
when it was ev^ening, he came with his twelve.
(18) And as they reclined and ate, Jesus said: 18
Verily I say to you. That one of you that eateth
with me, will betray me. (19) And they began 19
to be distressed. And they said to him, one by
one, Is it I? (20) And he said to them: It is 20
one of the twelve that dippeth with me in the
dish. (21) And the Son of man goeth, as it is 21
written of him : but woe to that man, by whom the
Son of man is betrayed. Better would it have
been for that man, if he had not been born. —
(22) And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, 22
and blessed, and brake, and gave to them, and said
to them : Take ; this is my body. (23) And he 23
took the cup, and gave thanks, and blessed, and
gave to them. And they all drank of it. (24) And 24


MARK, XIV.


93


26
27


28
29

30


31


he said to them: This is my blood of the new
testament,'^ which is shed in behalf of many.
25 (25) Verily I say to you, That I will not drink
again of the product of the vine, until the day in
Avhicli I shall drink it anew in the kingdom of
God.

And they sang praise, and went out to the
mount of Olives. (27) And Jesus said to them:
All of you will this night be stumbled in me : for
it is written, "I will smite the shepherd, and his
sheep will be scattered." (28) And when I am
risen, I will precede yon into Galilee. (29) And
CophasJ said to him : Though they all should be
stumbled, yet I will not be. (30) Jesus said to
him : Verily I say to thee, That this day, on this
night, before the cock shall crow twice, thou wilt
thrice deny me. (31) And he said, in addition :
If I were to die with thee, I will not deny thee,
my Lord. And like him, spake all the disciples.

32 — (32) And they came to the place called Geth-
scmane;^ and he said to his disciples, Sit ye here,

33 while I pray. (33) And he took with him Cephas
and James and John, and began to be gloomy and
distressed. (3-i) And he said to them: My soul
hath anguish, even to death. Wait for me here,
and be Avatchful. (35) And he advanced a little,
and fell upon the ground, and prayed that, if it
were possible, the hour might pass from him.
(3G) And he said : Father, my Fatlier, thou canst
do all things. Let this cup pass from me. Yet
not my pleasure, but thine. (37) And he came
and found them sleeping. And he said to Cephas:
Sleepest thou, Simon? Couldst thou not watch
with me one hour ? (38) Watch and pra}^, lest ye
enter into temptation. The spirit^ is willing and

39 ready, but the bodyff is weak. (39) And he went
again and prayed, speaking the same language.

40 (-10) And returning he came again and found them
sleo})ing, for their eyes were heavy. And they

41 knew not what to say to him. (41) And he came
the third time, and said to them : Sleep on now,
and take rest. The end is near ; the hour is come ;
and lo, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands

42 of sinners. (42) Arise yc ; let us go. Lo, he that

43 betrayeth me is at hand. (43) And while he was
yet speaking, Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve,


34


6iJ


56


38


Sy. loA-?


<• Gr. Peter.


Sy.


^^iOCDj^


Sy. VwOJ

Sy. 1^^^


94


MARK, XIV.


»> Sy-I^Tian


Gr. Peter.


4A


Sy. ^O^ ]J

= nol equal.


48
49


' or, his xhir/.,


arrived, and mucli people, with swords and clubs,
from before the chief priests and Scribes and Elders.

(44) And the traitor who betrayed [him], had given
them a sign, and said: He whom I shall kiss is
the man. Seize promptly, and lead him away.

(45) And immediately he came up, and said to 45
him: Rabbi, Rabbi; and kissed him. (46) And 46
they laid hands on him and took him. (47) And 47
one of them that stood by, 'drcAV a SAVord, and
smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off his
ear. (48) And Jesus answered and said to them :
Have ye come out against me, as against a robber,
with swords and clubs, to apprehend me ? (49) I
was daily with you, while I taught in the temple,
and ye seized me not. But this occurs, that the
scriptures may be fulfilled. (50) Then his disciples 50
left him and fled. (51) And a young man fol- 51
lowed after him, who was clad with a linen cloth

on [his] naked [body] : and they laid hold of him.
(52) And he left the linen cloth, and fled naked. 52
And they led away Jesus to Caiaphas'' the high 53
priest. And with him were assembled all the
chief priests and the Scribes and the Elders.

(54) And Simon' followed after him, at a distance, 54
into the hall of the high priest; and ho sat with
the servants, and warmed himself by the fire.

(55) And the chief priests and all the assembly 55
sought for testimony against Jesus, to put him to
death: but they found it not. (56) For while 56
many testified against him, their testimonies were
inadequate. k (57) And some false witnesses stood 57
up against him, and said : (58) We have heard him 58
say: I will destroy this temple, which is made
with hands ; and in three days I will build another,
not made with hands. (59) Nor even thus were
their testimonies adequate. (60) And the high
priest arose in the midst, and interrogated Jesus,
and said: Rcturnest thou no answer? What do
these testify against thee? (61) And Jesus was
silent, and made no reply. And again the chief
priest interrogated him, and said: Art thou the
Messiah, the Son of the Blessed ? (62) And Jesus
said to him : I am. And ye will see the Son of
man sitting on the right hand of power, and he
will come on the clouds of heaven. (63) And the
high priest rent his tunic,i and said : What need


59

60


61


62


63


64 of witnesses have we, any more? (64^ Behold,
from his own mouth ye have heard blasphemy.
How doth it appear to you ? And they all deci-

65 ded, that he deserved to die. (65) And some be-
gan to spit in his foce, and to buffet him, saying:
Prophesy tliou. And the servants smote him on

66 the cheeks. — (66) And as Simon'" was below in the •» Gr. Peter.

67 court, a maid of the high priest came, (67) and saw
him warming himself; and she looked upon him,
and said to him: And thou too wast with Jesus

68 the Nazarean. (68) But he denied, and said: I
know not what thou saycst. And he went out

69 into the porch ; and the cock crew. (69) And
the maid saw him again, and she began to say to
those standing b}^, This man also is one of them.

70 (70) And he again denied [it]. And a little after,
those standing there said again to Cephas: Surely,
thou art one of them ; for thou art likewise a

71 Galilean, and thy speech answers to it. (71) And
he began to imprecate, and swore : I know not

72 that man, of whom ye speak. (72) And immedi-
ately the cock crew the second time. And Simon
remembered the declaration of Jesus, who said to
him : Before the cock shall crow twice, thou wilt
thrice deny me. And he began to weep.


XV. And forthwith, in the morning, the chief priests
with the Elders and the Scribes, and the whole
Sanhedrim, a held a consultation. And they bound
Jesus, and led him away, and delivered him over

2 to Pilate the president.'' (2) And Pilate asked
him : Art thou the king of the Jews ? He replied

3 and said to him : Thou hast said, (3) And the

4 chief priests accused him of many things. (4) And
Pilate again questioned him, and said to him:
Makest thou no reply ? See how much they

5 testify against thee! (5) But Jesus gave no

6 answer ; so that Pilate wondered. (6) And it was
his custom, at each festival, to release to them one

7 prisoner, whom they might desire. (7) And there
was one named Bar Abas,<= who was confined with
the movers of sedition, who had committed murder

8 in the insurrection. (8) And the people clamored,
and began to demand, that he should do to them as

9 he was accustomed. (9) And Pilate answered, and
said : Will ye, that I release to you the king of the


Sy.H ^O


Sy.

Sy. ',jl21££>1
Gr. (ffeTpa.


Sy.


Sy.


•^t\


' L e. 9 A. M.


12


13
14


Jews? (10) For Pilate knew that the chief priests, 10
from envy, had delivered him up. (11) But the 11
chief priests farther persuaded the multitudes, that
Bar Abas should be released to them. (12) And
Pilate said to them : AVhat will ye, therefore, that
I do to him whom ye call king of the Jews?

(13) And they again cried out: Crucify him.

(14) And Pilate said to them : But what evil hath
he done ? And they cried ou^ the more : Crucify
him. (15) And Pilate was willing to gratify the 15
wishes of the multitudes ; and he released to them
Bar Abas ; and, having scourged Jesus, he delivered
him to them to be crucified. — (16) And the soldiers 16
led him into the hall which was the Prietorium ;«^
and they called together the whole regiment ;e
(17) and they clothed him in purple, and braided a 17
crown of thorns and put upon him ; (18) and began 18
to salute him with, " Hail, king of the Jews !"
(19) And they smote him on the head with a reed, 19
and spit in his face, and bowed upon their knees
and Avorshipped him. (20) And having mocked
him, tbcy divested him of the purple, and clothed
him in his own garments, and led him forth to
crucify him.

And they compelled a passer-by, Simon the
Cyrenian,^ the father of Alexander and Rufus, who
was coming from the fields, to bear his cross.
(22) And they brought him to Golgotha, g the
place which is interpreted a Skull. (23) And
they .^ave him to drink wine in which myrrh was
mixed; and he would not receive it. (24) And
Avhen they had crucified him, they divided his
garments ; and cast the lot upon them, what each
should take. (25) And it was the .third hour^
when they crucified him. (26) And the cause of
his death was written in the inscription : This
IS THE KING OF THE Jews. (27) And they cru-
cified with him two robbers, the one on his right
hand, and the other on his left. (28) And the
scripture was fulfilled which saith: He was ac-
counted among the wicked. (29) And they also 29
that passed by, reviled him; and, nodding their
heads, they said: Aha, thou that destroyest the
temple and bulkiest it in three days, (30) rescue 30
thyself, and come doAvn from the cross. (31) And 31
so also the chief priests, jeering one with another,


20


21


22
23

24


25
26

27

28


MARK, XVI.


97


and the Scribes, said: lie gave life to others, his

32 own life he cannot save. (32) Let Messiah, the
king of the Jews, now descend from the cross, that
we may see [it] and believe in him. And those
also who were crucified with him, derided him. —

33 (33) And when the sixth hour' was come, there
was darkness over all the land until the ninth

34 hour.k (34) And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried
with a loud voice, and said : II, II, leraono shebak-
thone ;i that is : My God, my God ; why hast

35 thou forsaken me ? (35) And some of them that
stood by, when they heard it, said : He calleth

36 for Elijah. (36) And one ran and filled a sponge
with vinegar, and tied it on a reed, to oiFer him
drink. And they said: Desist; let us see if

37 Elijah will come to take him down. — (37) And
Jesus cried with a loud voice, and expired.™

38 (38) And the curtain of the door of the temple was

39 rent, from the top to the bottom. (39) And when
the centurion, who was standing near him, saw
that he so cried and expired, he said : Verily, this

40 was the Son of God. — (40) And there were women
looking on, from a distance, Mary Magdalena, and
Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses,

41 and Salome ; (41) who, when he was in Galilee
adhered to him, and ministered to him ; and many
other Avomen, who had come up with him to
Jerusalem.

42 And, as it vv^as the eve of preparation, which

43 precedcth the sabbath, (43) Joseph of Ramath, an
honorable counsellor," who also himself waited for
the kingdom of God, came, and assuming courage,
went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus.

44 (44) And Pilate wondered that he should be
already dead. And he called the centurion, and

45 inquired if he had been any time dead. (45) And
when he learned it, he gave his body to Joseph.

46 (46) And Joseph bought iine linen, and took it
down, and wrapped it in the linen, and deposited
it in a sej)ulchre that was hewed in a rock, and
rolled a stone against the door of the sepulchre.

47 (47) And Mary Magdalena and Mary [the mother]
of Joses saw where he was laid.

XVI. And Avhen the sabbath had passed, Mary
Magdalena, and ^Nlary [the mother] of James, and


' or, noon.
^ or, 3 P. M,

' Sy.

"■ Sy. V^V«0


-Sy.
Gr.


98


MARK, XVL


Sy.


or, gospsl.
Sy. |jL>j


sy.


^L^


Salome, bouglit aromatics, that tliey might come
and anoint him. (2) And in the morning of the 2
first day of the week, they came to the sepulchre
as the sun arose. (3) And they said among them- 3
selves : Who will roll back for us the stone from
the door of the sepulchre ? (4) And they looked, 4
and saw that the stone was rolled away; for it
was very great. (5) And entering the sepulchre, 5
they saw a youth sitting on the right hand, and
clothed in a white robe : and they were in pertur-
bation. (6) But he said to them : Be not affright- 6
ed. Ye are seeking Jesus the Nazarean, who was
crucified. He is risen ; he is not here. Behold,
the place where he was laid. (7) But go, tell his 7
disciples and Cephas : Lo, he precedeth you into
Galilee ; there will ye see him, as he said to you.
(8) And when they heard, they fled and left the 8
sepulchre ; for astonishment and trembling had
seized them; and they said nothing to any one,
for they were in fear. — (9) And in the morning 9
of the first day of the week, he arose ; and he
appeared first to Mary Magdalena, from whom he
had cast out seven demons. (10) And she went 10
and told them that had been with him, while they
were mourning and weeping. (11) And they, 11
when they heard [the women] say that he was
alive, and that he had appeared to them, — did not
believe them. (12) After this he appeared, under 12
another aspect, =i to two of them as they walked
and went into the country. (13) And these went 13
and told the rest ; but they would not believe
them. (14) And at last, he appeared to the eleven 14
as they reclined at table ; and he reproved the
slenderness of their faith, and the hardness of their
heart; because they believed not those who had
seen him actually risen. (15) And he said to 15
them : Go ye into all the world, and proclaim my
tidings'* in the whole creation. (16) He that 16
j believeth, and is baptized, livethc ; but he that
[belicvcth not, is condemned. <! (17) And these 17
signs shall attend them that believe : In my name,
they will cast out demons; and in new tongues
will they speak. (18) And they will take up 18
serpents; and if they should drink a deadly
poison, it will not harm them ; and they will lay
their hands on the sick, and they will be healed. —


LUKE, I.


99


19 (19) And Jesus, our Lord, after he liad conversed
with them, ascended to heaven, and sat on the

20 right hand of God.— (20) And they went forth,
and preached everywhere : and our Lord aided
them, and confirmed their discourses by the signs
which they wrought.


Completion of the Holy Gospel,* the announcement of Mark ,
which he uttered and proclaimed in Latin^' at Rome.


Sy.

'Sy
Aa|iDOC7l5


The Holy Gospel, the Aniiimciallon of Luke the Evangelist ;

which he uttered and preached, in Greek, at Great Alexandria.


I. Since many have been disposed to write narra-
tives of those events, of which we have full assur-

2 anee, (2) as they delivered them to us, who from
the first were eye-witnesses and ministers of the

3 word ; (3) it seemed proper for me also, as I had
examined them all accuratel}^, to Avrito out the
whole, methodically, for thee, excellent'^ Thcoph-

4 ilus: (-i) that thou mayest know the truth of the
statements,'' which thou hast been taught.

5 In the days of Ilerod the king of Judoca, there
was a certain priest, whose name was Zachariah,<=
of the ministration^ of the house of Abijah;*^ and
his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her

6 name was Elisabeth. <" (6) And they were both
upright before God, and Avalked in all his com-
mandments, and in the righteousness of the Lord,

7 without reproach. (7) But they had no child, be- j
cause Elisabeth was barren : and they were both |

8 advanced in life.ff — (8) And it occurred, that as he

Eerformcd the priestly functions'' in the order of
is ministration before the Lord, (9) according tOj
the usage of the priesthood, it f«ll to him to offer!


• Sy. ].j>.»^3
'' Sy. words.

' Sy. l.iD\

^ Sy.

« Sy. "Usl


Sy.


^1


■ Sy. many in
their days.

Sy. acted
priesL


100


LUKE, 1


Sy. ^, 1.„K>Q-«


Sy. in her
days.

Sy.


' Sy. nodded to
nod.


the incense. And he went into the temple of the
Lord, (10) and the whole multitude of the people 10
were praying without, at the time of incense.
(11) And the angel of the Lord appeared to 11
Zacliariab, standing on the right side of the altar
of incense. (12) And when Zachariah saw him, 12
he was agitated, and fear fell upon him. (13) And 13
the angel said to him : Fear not, Zachariah ; for
thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elisabeth will
bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.'
(14) And thou wilt have joy and gladness: and 14
many will rejoice at his birth. (15) For he will be 15
great before the Lord ; and he will not drink wine
nor sti'ong drink, and will be fdlcd with the Iloly
Spirit even from his mother's womb. (16) And 16
many of the children of Israel will he convert to
the Lord their God. (17) And he will go before 17
him, in the spirit and power of Elijah the prophet,
and will turn the heart of the fathers unto thft
children, and them that are disobedient to the
knowledge of the righteous, and will prepare a
perfect people for the Lord. (18) And Zachariah 18
said to the angel : How shall I know this ? For I
am old, and my wife is advanced in life.'' (19) The 19
angel answered, and said to him: I am Gabriel,^
who stand before God ; and I am sent to converse
with thee, and to tell thee these things. (20) Hence- 20
forth tliou Avilt be dumb, and unable to speak, un-
til the day when these things take place: because
thou belie vedst not my words, which v/ill be ful-
filled in their time. — (21) And the people were 21
standing and waiting for Zachariah; and they
wondered at his tarrying so long iu the temple.

(22) And when Zachariah came forth, he could 22
not speak with them : and they u/jderstood that

he hud seen a vision in the temple : and he made
many signs'" to them, and remained speechless.

(23) And Avhen the days of his ministration were 23
accomplished, he came to his house. — (24) And it 24
was alter those days, that Elisabeth his wife con-
ceived. And she secluded herself five months;
and she said: (25) These things hath the Lord 25
done for me, in the days when he looked upon me

to take away my reproach among men.

And in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was 26
sent by God into Galilee, to a city named Naza-


LUKE, I.


101


27 rctli," (27) to a virgin espoused to a man whose
name was Joseph, » of the house of David; and the

28 virgin's name was Mary.P (28) And the angel
entered the house, and said to her : Peace to thee,
thou full of grace ! The Lord is with thee : and

29 blessed art thou among women. (29) And when
she saw [him], she Avas agitated by his speech;
and she pondered, what this salutation could mean.

30 (30) And the angel said to her : Fear not, Mary ;

31 for thou hast found favor with God. (31) For lo,
thou wilt conceive in thy womb, and wilt bear a

32 son, and wilt call his name Jesus.'' (32) He will
be great, and will be called the Son of the Most
Uigh, and the Lord God will give him the throne

33 of his father David. (33) And he will reign over
the house of Jacob for ever; and of his reign there

3-1 will be no end. (34) And Mary said to the angel:
How can this be, as I have not known a man?

35 (35) The angel replied, and said to her : The Holy
Spirit will come, and the power of the Most High
will overshadow thee ; therefore he that is born
of thee is holy, and will be called the Son of God

36 (36) And lo, Elisabeth thy kinswoman, even she
too hath conceived a son in her old age ; and this
is the sixth month with her who is called bar-

87 ren. (37) Because nothing is difficult for God.

38 (38) Mary said: Behold, I am the handmaid of
the Lord; be it to me, according to thy word.
And the angel departed from her.

39 And Mary arose in those days, and went hastily
to the mountain [district], to a city of Judaia;

40 (40) and entered the house of Zachariah, and

41 saluted Elisabeth. (41) And it was so, that when
Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the child
leaped in her womb, and she was filled with the

42 Holy Spirit. (42) And she cried out with a loud
void", and said to Mary: Blessed art thou among |
women ; and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

43 (43) And whence is this to me, that the mother

44 of my Lord should come to me ? (44) For lo, as
the voice of thy salutation fell upon my ears, with

45 great joy the child leaped in my womb. (45) And
hapjiy is she that believed; for there will be a
fulliliment of those things that were told her by

46 the Lord. — (46) And Mary said : My soul doth

47 magnify the Lord : (47) and my spirit rejoiceth in


Sy. ^e^rctn ,
Sy. iO_.;iD


Sy. ^Oju.


102


LUKE, I.


Sy.

Sy. give.


Sy. cliildren
of her kindred.


or, was.


God the authors of my hfe. (48) For he hath 48
looked upon the humble condition of his hand-
maid ; and lo, henceforth all generations will ascribe*
blessedness to me. (49) And He that is mighty" 49
hath done for me great things; and holy is his
name. (50) And his mercy is on them that fear 50
him, for generations and posterities. (51) He hath 51
wrought victory witli his arm ; and hath scattered
the proud in the imagination of'their heart, (52) He 52
hath cast down the mighty from their thrones, and
hath exalted the lowly. (53) The hungry hath he 53
satisfied with good things, and the rich hath he
sent away empty. (54) He hath aided Israel his 54
servant, and remembered his mercy, (55) (as he 55
spoke with the fathers,) with Abraham and his
seed, for ever. — (56) xind Mary remained with 56
Elisabeth about three months, and returned to her
home.

And Elisabeth's time of bringing forth arrived ; 57
and she bore a son. (58) And her neighbors and 58
relatives^ heard that the Lord had magnified his
mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her. (59) And 69
it occurred, that on the eighth day they came to
circumcise the child. And they called him by the
name of his father, Zachariah. (60) Anri his 60
mother answered and said: Not so; but John,
shall he be called. (61) And they said to her: 61
There is no one among thy kindred called by that
name. (62) And they made signs to his father, how 62
he v/ould have him named. (63) And he asked for 63
a tablet, and wrote, and said: John is his name.
And every one was surprised. (64) And imme- 64
diately his mouth was opened, and. his tongue;
and he spoke, and praised God. (65) And fear 65
camew upon all their neighbors ; and these things
were talked of in all the mountain [district] of
Judica. (QQ) And all who heard, pondered them 66
in their heart, and said : What will this child be?
And the hand of the Lord was with him.— (67) And 67
Zachariah his father was filled with the Holy Spirit,
and prophesied, and said: (68) Blessed be the Lord 68
God of Israel, who hath visited his people, and
wrought redemption for them: (69) And hath 69
raised up a horn of redemption for us, in the house
of David his servant: (70) as he spake by the 70
mouth of his holy prophets, who were of old,


LUKE, II.


103


71 (71) that he would redeem us from our enemies,

72 anci from the hand of all that hate us. (72) And
he hath exercised his mercy to our fathers, and

78 hath remembered his holy covenants,'^ (73) and
the oath that he sware to Abraham our father, that

74 he would grant to us, (74) to be redeemed from
the hand of our enemies; and that we should wor-

75 ship before him, Avithout fear, (75) all our days, in

76 rectitude and uprightness, (76) And thou, child,
wilt be called a prophet of the Most High; for
thou wilt go before the face of the Lord, to pre-

77 pare his way, (77) that he may give the knowledge
of lifey to his people, and forgiveness of their sins,

78 (78) through the compassion of the mercy of our
(jod; whereby the day-spring from on high Avill

79 visit us, (79) to give light to them that sit in dark-
ness, and in the shadow of death; and to guide

80 our feet into the way of peace. — (80) And the
child grew, and Avas strengthened in spirit.^' And
he Avas ia the wilderness, until the day of his
manifestation to Israel.

11. And in those days it occurred, that a decree
Aveut forth from Augustus Csesar, that all the

2 people of his dominion should be enrolled. (2)
And this enrollment Avas first made under the

3 presidency:^ of Quirinus in Syria. (3) And every

4 one Avcnt to his oAvn city to be enrolled. (4) And
Joseph also Avent up from Nazareth of Galilee to
Judiea, to the city of David which is called Bethle-
hem, because he Avas of the house and lineage of

5 David, (5) Avith Mary his espoused, then pregnant,

6 to be enrolled. (6) And it Avas Avhile they Avere
there, that the days for her to bring forth Avere

7 completed. (7) And she brought forth her first
born son, and Avrapped him in bandages, and laid
him in the stall; for they had no place Avhere
they could lodge.

8 And there were shepherds in that region, Avho
abode there and kept Avatch of their flocks by

9 night. (9) And lo, the angel of God came to them,
and the glory of the Lord shone upon them : and

10 they feared with great fear. (10) And the angel
said to them : Fear not ; for, behold I announce
to you great joy, Avhich Avill be to all the Avorld.^

11 (11) For there is bom to you this day a deliverer,"


' Sy.


Sy."Ul.


or, mind.


•^Sy.


»CDQlJ_i5cLDJ


Sy. lifl^l.

Sy. Iiso^a


104


LUKE, II.


■' Sy. ]^n\i


Sy. word.


Sy. word.


Sy. words.


Sy. gioe.


Sy.


^\^n»


12


15


18
19


21


who is the Lord Messiah, in the city of David,
(12) And this is the sign for you : Ye will find
the babe wrapped in bandages, and placed in a
stall. (13) And instantly there were seen with 13
the angel, the many hosts of heaven, praising God,
and saying: (14) Glory to God in the highest 14
[heavens], and on earth peacci and good hope for
men. — (15) And it was so, that when the angels
had gone from them into heav*en, the shepherds con-
ferred with one another, and said : Let us go down
to Bethlehem, and see this thing^^ which hath
occurred, as the Lord hath made known to us.
(16) And they came hastily, and found Mary and 16
Joseph, and the babe laid in the stall. (17) And 17
when they saw, they made known the information^
which was given to them concerning the child.
(18) And all that heard, wondered at the things
that were told them by the shepherds. (19) And
Mary laid up all these things, s: and pondered them
in her heart. (20) And the shepherds returned, 20
glorifying and praising God for all that they had
seen and heard, as it was told them.

And when the eight days for the circumcision
of the child were completed, his name was called
Jesus ; as he was named by the angel, before he
was conceived in the womb.

And when the days of their purification were 22
completed, according to the law of Moses, they
carried him to Jerusalem, to present him before
the Lord : (23) (as it is written in the law of the
Lord, that every male opening the womb shall be
called holy to the Lord:) (24) and to offer^ a
sacrifice, according as it is written in the law of
the Lord, A pair of turtle-doves, or two young
pigeons. (25) And there was a certain man in
Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon.' This man
was upright and just, and was waiting for the con-
solation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon
hina. (26) And it had been told him by the Holy
Spirit, that he would not see death, until he should
see the Messiah of the Lord. (27) This man came,
by the Spirit, into the temple; and Avhen his
parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him
as is commanded in the law, (28) he took him in
his arms, and blessed God, and said: (29) My
Lord, now release thou thy servant in peace, as


23


24


25


26

27


28
29


LUKE, II.


105


30 tbou hast said : (30) for lo, my eyes have seen thy

31 mercy, (31) which thou hast prepared in the pres-

32 ence of all nations, (32) a light for a revelation to
the Gentiles, and a glory for thy people Israel. —

33 (33) And Joscj)!! and his mother were astonished
at those things which were spoken concerning him.

3-1 (34) And Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary
his mother : Behold, this [child] is set forth for
the fall and for the rising of many in Israel, and

35 for a standard'' of contention; (35) (and also a dart
will pierce thy own soul); that the thoughts of the

36 hearts of many may be disclosed.— (36) And llan-
na,i a prophetess, the daughter of Phanucl, of the
tribe of Asher,— she also was aged in days, and,
from her maidenhood, had lived seven years with

37 her husband, (37) and was a widow of about
eighty and fcjur years, and departed not from the
temple, but worshipped by day and by night, with

38 fasting and i)rayer; — (38) and she too stood up, in
that hour, and gave thanks to the Lord, and spoke
of him to every one that waited for the redemption

39 of Jerusalem. — (39) And Avhen they had accom-
plished all things, according to the law of the Lord,
they returned to Galilee, to their city Nazareth.

40 (40) And the child grew, and was strengthened in
spirit,'" and was filled with wisdom ; and the grace
of God was upon him.

41 And his people went up to Jerusalem every

42 year, at the feast of the passover. (42) And when
he was twelve years old, they went up to the feast,

43 as they were accustomed. (43) And when the
days were completed, they returned : but the child
Jesus remained at Jerusalem, and Joseph and his

44 mother knew not [of it] ; (44) for they supposed
he was with his companions." And when they had
travelled a day's journey, they sought him among
their people, and [inquired] of every one that

45 knew them. (45) And they did not find him.
And tliey returned again to Jerusalem, searching for

46 him. (46) And after three days, they found him
in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers,"
and listening to them, and asking them questions.

47 (47) And all they that heard him, were astonished

48 at his wisdom and his answers. (48) And when
they saw him they were amazed.. And his mother
said to him : My son, why hast thou done so to us?


Sy. U^


■" or, mind.


Sy. sons of
the company.


Sy ]i ^\\n


106


•Sv.

'' Sy. ■JJOO^
Sy.


'Sy.
B Sy. ]^ » n
" Sy. ]Aq^uZ
' Sy. words.


' Sy. Ul»,

Gr. TO (fwrrjptov.


LUKE, Ilf.

For lo. I and thy father have been seeking for
thee with great anxiety. (49) He said to them : 49
Why did ye seek me ? Do ye not know, that it
behoovcth me to be in ni}'- Father's house? (50) But 50
they did not comprehend the word that he spoke
to them. (51) And he went down with them, and 51
came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them. And
his mother laid up all these things in her heart.
(52) And Jesus increased in stature, and in wisdom, 52
and in s;race, before God and men.


And in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius III,
Cicsar, in the presidency''- of Pontius Pilate in
Juda3a, while Herod was Tetrarchi* in Galilee, and
Philip his brother Tetrarch in Itursea*^ and in the
region of Trachonitis,'^ and Lysanias Tetrarch of
Abilene,*' (2) in the high priesthood of Annas^ and 2
of Caiaphas ;s the word of God was -upon John the
son of Zachariah, in the wilderness. (3) And he S
came into all the region about the Jordan, pro-
claiming the baptism of repentance^ for the for-
giveness of sins. (4) As it is written in the book 4
of the discourses' of Isaiah the prophet, who said :
The voice of one crying in the wilderness. Prepare
ye the way of the Lord ; and make straight paths
in the plain for our God. (5) All valleys shall be t
filled up, and all mountains and hills be lowered;
and the hillock shall be levelled down, and the
rough place become smooth. (6) And all flesh i
shall see the life'^ which is of God. — (7) And he 7
said to the multitudes, who came to him to be
baptized: Ye progeny of vipers, who hath in-
structed you to flee from the future wrath ? (8)
Bring forth, therefore, fruits comporting with re-
pentance. And begin not to say in yourselves:
We have Abraham for our father; for I say to
you, that God can, from these stones, raise up sons'
to Abraham. (9) And lo, the ax is put to the 9
root of trees. Every tree therefore that beareth
not good fruits, is hewed down, and falleth into
the firc.~(10) And the multitudes asked him, and 10
said: What, then, shall we do? (11) He answered, 11
and said to them : Whoever hath two tunics, let
him give [one] to him that hath none; and who-
ever hath food, let him do the same. (12) And 12
publicans also came to be baptized. And they said


8


LUKE, III.


107


13

14

15

16


18
19


20
21
99


23
21
25
26
27
28
29
80


to him: Teacher, • what shall we do? (13) And
he said to them: Exact no more than ye are re-
quired to exact. (14) And those serving in war
inquired of him, and said : And what shall we do ?
He said to them: Be insolent to no one, and
oppress no one, and let your pay satisfy you. —
(15) And while the j^eople were thinking of John,
and all pondered in their heart, whether he were
the Messiah ; (16) John answered and said to
them : Behold, I baptize you with water ; but
after me cometh one mightier than I, the strings
of whose shoes I am not worthy to untie ; he will
baptize'" you with the Holy Spirit and with lire.

(17) He holdeth his winnowing shovel in his hand,
and he will make clean his threshing door ; and
the wheat he gathereth into his garners, and the
chaff lie will burn with iire not extinguished.

(18) And many other things also, he taught and
])roclaimed to the people. — (19) But Ilerod the
Tetrarch, because he was reproved by John, on
account of Ilerodias the wife of his brother Philip,
and on account of all the evil things he had done,
(20) added this also to them all, that" he shut up
John in prison.

And it occurred, when all the people were bap
tized, that Jesus also was baptized. And as he
prayed, the heavens were opened ; (22) and the
Holy Spirit descended upon him, in the bodily
likeness of a dove : and there was a voice from
heaven, which said : Thou art my beloved Son, in
whom I have delight.

And Jesus was about thirty years old. And he
Avas accounted the son of Joseph, the son of Heli,

(24) the son of ^fatthat, the son of Levi, the son
of ^[clchi, the son of Janna, the son of Joseph,

(25) the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son
of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,

(26) the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the
son of Shimei, the son of Joseph, the son of Judah,

(27) the son of Joanna, the son of Rhesa, the son
of Zorubbabel, the son of Salathiel, the son of
Neri, (28) the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the
son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of Er,

(29) the .son of Joses, the .son of Eliczer, the son
of Joram, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,

(30) the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son


' Sy ]it7>\vo


Sy.


" Sy. and.


108


Sy.


Sy. iaCL^A^
Sy. |j4cQ
Sy. ]a51


LUKE, IV.

of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,

(31) the sou of Melcah, the son of Hainan, the son 31
of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,

(32) the son of Jesse, the son of Obcd, the son of 32
Boaz, the sou of Sahnou, the son of Nahshon,

(33) the son of Ammiuadab, the sou of Ram, the 33
son of Hezron, the son of PJiarez, the son of Judah,

(34) the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of 34
Abraham, the son of Terah^ the son of Nahor,

(35) the sou of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of 35
Peleg, the sou of Eber, the son of Salah, (36) the 36
son of Caiuau, the son of Arphaxad, the son of
Shem, the sou of Noah, the sou of Lamech, (37) 37
the sou of Methuselah, the sou of Enoch, the son

of Jared, the son of Meliakdcel, the son of Cainan,
(38) the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the sou of 38
Adam, the sou of God,

And Jesus, being full of the Holy Spirit, re- IV.
turned from the Jordan. And the Spirit led him
into the wilderness, (2) forty days, to be tempted 2
by the Calumniator. ^^ And during those da3"s, he
ate nothing; and when he had completed them,
he was at last hungry. (3) And the Calumniator 3
said to him : If thou art the Son of God, command
this stone to become bread. (4) Jesus replied, and 4
said to him : It is written. Not by bread only,
doth man live; but by every thing^* of God.
(5) And Satan*^ conducted him to a high mountain, 5
and showed him all the kingdoms of the land,*^ in
a little time. (6) And the Calumniator said to 6
him: To thee will I give all this dominion, and
the glory of it, which is committed to me, and to
whom I please, I give it: (7) if therefore thou 7
wilt worship before me, the whole shall be thine.
(8) But Jesus replied, and said to him : It is written, 8
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shalt thou serve. (9) And he brought him 9
to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the
temple, and said to him : If thou art the Son of
God, cast thyself down hence: (10) for it is written, 10
lie will give his angels charge over thee, to keep
thee: (11) and in their arms will they sustain thee, 11
lest thou strike thy foot against a stone. (12) And 12
Jesus replied and said to him: It is said. Thou
1 shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. — (13) And when 13


LUKE, IV.


109


the Calumniator had finished all his temptations,
he departed from him for a time.

14 And Jesus returned, in the power<= of the Spirit,
to Galilee ; and fame concerning him spread in all

15 the region around them. (15) And he taught in
their synagogues, and was lauded by every one. —

16 (16) And he came to Nazareth, where he had been
brought up : and he went, as he was accustomed,
into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and rose

17 up to read. (17) And there was delivered to him
the book of Isaiah the prophet. And Jesus opened
the book, and found the place where it is written :

IS (18) The Spirit of the Lord is upon me; and there-
fore he hath anointed me to proclaim tidings to
the poor ; and hath sent me to heal the contrite in
heart, and to proclaim release to the captives, and
sight to the blind ; and to send away the contrite

19 with forgiveness [of their sins] ; (19) and to pro-

20 claim the acceptable year of the Lord. (20) And
he rolled up the book, and gave it to the servitor,^
and went and sat down. And the eyes of all in

21 the synagogue were gazing upon him. (21) And
he bei2:an to say to them : This day, is this scrip-

22 ture which ye have heard, fulfilled. (22) And all
bare him witness, and admired the gracious words
which proceeded from his mouth ; and they said: Is

23 not this the son of Joseph ? (23) Jesus said to them :
Perhaps, ye will speak to me this proverb, Physician,
heal thyself: and whatever Ave have heard of thy
doing in Capernaum, do thou here also in thy city.

21 (24) And he said to them: Verily I say to you.
There is no prophet who is acceptable in his own

25 city. (25) And I tell you the truth, that there
were many widows in the house of Israel, in the
days of Elijah the prophet, when the heavens were
closed up three years and six months, and there

2G was a great famine in all the land: (20) but to no
one of them was Elijah sent, except to Sareptae

27 of Sidon, unto a widow woman. (27) And there
were many leprous in the house of Israel, in the
days of Elisha the prophet ; but none of them was

28 cleansed, except Naaman the Syrian.^ — (28) And
when they hoard these things, those in the syna-

29 gogue were all filled wTth wrath. (29) And they
rose u]), and thrust him out of the city, and
brought him to the top of the hill on which the


Sy-]3.


.L».0


Sv.


Sy. ASf


Sy. U^'l


110


' or, doctrine.
' Sy. IjU


• Sy. 'i].fc_»^iD


Sy. great.


LUKE, V.

city was built, that they might cast him down from
the rock. (30) But he passed through the midst 80
of them, and went away.

And he went down to Capernaum, a city of 81
Galilee; and taught them on sabbath days. (32) 82
And they were astonished at his teaching, » for his
word was authoritative. ^ (33) And there was in 83
the synagogue a man, in whom was an unclean
demon:' and he cried out, with a loud voice,
(34) and said : Let me alone : What have I to do 31
with thee, Jesus, thou Nazarean?™ Hast thou
come to destroy us ? I know thee, who thou art,
the Holy One of God. (35) And Jesus rebuked 35
him, and said : Shut thy mouth ; and come out of
him. And the demon threw him down in the
midst, and came out of him, having not harmed
him at all. (36) And wonder seized every one ; dQ
and they talked together, and said : What a word is
this! For, with authority and efiiciency," he com-
mandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out.
(37) And his fame went out into all the surround- 87
ing region.

And when Jesus went out of the synagogue, he 38
entered the house of Simon. And the mother-in-
law of Simon was afflicted with a severe^ fever:
and they besought him in her behalf (89) And 89
he stood over her, and rebuked the fever ; and it
left her. And immediately she arose and min-
istered to them. — (10) And when the sun was set, 40
all those that had sick persons, afflicted Avith divers
diseases, brought them to him; and he laid his
hand on every one of them, and healed them.
(41) And demons went out of many, crying out 41
and saying : Thou art the Messiah, the Son of God.
And he rebuked them, and suffered them not to
say, that they knew him to be Messiah. — (42) And 42
at the dawn of da}', he went out and retired to a
desert place. And the multitudes sought him,
and went out to him, and held him fast, that he
might not retire from them. (43) And Jesus sard 43
to them : It behooveth me to announce the king-
dom of God to other cities also ; for therefore was
I sent. (44) And he preached in the synagogues 44
of Galilee.

And it occurred, that a multitude gathered about Y.


LUKE, V.


Ill


him, to hear the word of God. And he was stand-

2 iug by the side of the sea of Gennesaret, (2) and
he saw two ships standing near the sea, and the
fishermen were gone out of them, and were Avash-

3 ing their nets. (3) And one of them belonged to
Simon Cephas:"^ and Jesus entered and sat in it.
And he told them to draw off a little from the
sliore, into the sea: and he seated himself, and taught

4 the multitude from the ship.- — (4) And when he
ceased from s})eaking, he said to Simon : Launch
out into the deep, and cast your net for a draught.

5 (5) Simon answered, and said to him : Rabbi,!' all
the night we have toiled, and have caught nothing:

G but, at thy bidding,^ I will cast the net. (6) And
when they had done so, they inclosed very many

7 fishes, so that the net was rent. (7) And they
made signs to their associates, in the other ship, to
come and help them. And when they came, they
filled both the ships, so that they were near to

8 sinking. (8) And when Simon Cephas saw [it],
he fell before the feet of Jesus, and said to him :
I beseech thee, my Lord, that thou leave me, for I

9 am a sinful man. (9) For astonishment had seized
him, and all that were with him, at the draught of

10 fishes whieh they had caught: (10) and in like
manner also James and John, the sons of Zebedee,
who were partners of Simon. But Jesus said:
Fear thou not; henceforth thou shalt catch men

11 unto life.J (11) And they brought the vessels to
the land : and they left all and followed him.

12 And when Jesus was in one of the cities, a man
came all full of leprosy, and seeing Jesus, he fell
upon his face, and besought him, and said to him :
My Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me.

13 (13) And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched
liim, and said to him : I will [it] ; be thou clean.
And immediately his leprosy went from him.

14 (14) And he charged him : Speak to no one ; but go
and show thyself to the priests, and offer the obla-
tion for thy purification, as Moses hath commanded,

15 for a testimony to them. — (15) And his fame spread
abroad still more: and much people assembled
to hear him, and to be cured of their diseases.

16 (16) And he retired into a desert, and prayed.

17 And it occurred, on one of the days when Jesus
was teachiuGf, that Pharisees and Doctors of the


» Gr. Simon.


Sy. uJDJ

or, xDord.


Sy. "(IIA


'#


112

« Sy. ..g^^V)
jnnnVni
' Sy. ]l.t^


Sy. la


'X


I.


■• Sy. Icn^V)

• Sy. ocA


Sy. sons.


LUKE, V.

lawe were sitting by, who bad come from all the
villages of Galilee and of Judcea, and Jerusalem :
and the power*" of the Lord was present to heal
them. (18) And some persons brought a para- 18
lytic man, on a couch, and sought to bring him in,
and to place him before him. (19) And when 19
they could not thus introduce him, because of the
multitude of the people, they ascended to the roof,
and let him down Avith the cquch, from the cover-
ing, into the midst, before Jesus. (20) And when 20
Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic:
Man, thy sins are forgiven thee. (21) And the 21
Scribes and Pharisees began to reason, and to say :
Who is this that speaketh blasphemy ?s Who can
forgive sins, but God only ? (22) And Jesus knew 22
their thoughts, and said to them : What think ye
in your heart ? (23) Which is the easier, to say, 23
Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and
walk ? (24) But that ye may know, that the Son 24
of man is competent to forgive sins on the earth, —
he said to the paralytic : I say to thee. Arise, take
up thy couch, and go to thy home. (25) And in- 25
stantly, he rose up before their eyes, and took up
his couch, and went home, glorifying God. (26) 26
And astonishment seized every one; and they
praised God ; and they were filled with awe, and
said : We have seen wonders to-day.

And after these things, Jesus went out and saw 27
a publican, h named Levi,' sitting among the publi-
cans; and he said to him: Come after mc. (28) 28
And he left every thing, and arose, and went after
him. (29) And Levi made a great entertainment 29
for him at his house ; and there was a numerous
company of publicans and others who reclined with
them. (30) And the Scribes and Pharisees mur- 30
mured, and said to his disciples : Why do ye eat
and drink with publicans and sinners ? (31/ And 31
Jesus answered and said to them : A physician is
not sought after for the well, but for those very
sick. (32) I came not to call the righteous, but 32
sinners, to repentance.

And they said to him : Why do the disciples of 33
John fast often, and pray, and also [those] of the
Pharisees; but thine eat and drink? (34) And 34
he said to them : Ye cannot make the guests^ of
the nuptial chamber fast, while the bridegroom is


LUKE, VI.


113


ou


witli them. (35) But the days will come, when the
bridegroom will be taken up from them, nnd then
will they flist, in those days. (36) And he spoke
a similitude' to them : No one teareth a patch from
a new garment, and putteth it to an old garment ;
lest he tear the new, and the patch from the new
cease to make the old [garment] whole. (37) And
no one putteth new wine into old sacks ; otherwise,
the new wine will burst the sacks, and the wine
will run out, and the sacks be ruined. (38) But
tlicy put new wine into new sacks, and both are
preserved. (39) And no one drinketli old wine,
and immediately callcth for new; for he saith. The
old is the delicious.


Vnd on a sabbath it occurred, as Jesus walked
among the tilled grounds, that his disciples plucked

2 ears, and rubbed them in their hands and ate. (2)
And some of the Pharisees said to them : Why do
3'e that, which it is not lawful to do on the sabbath ?

3 (3) Jesus replied, and said to them: Have ye not
read what David did, when he was hungry, he and

4 those with him ? (4) How he entered into the
house of God, and took and ate the bread of the
Lord's table, and gave [it] to those that were with
him; which it was not lawful, except for the

5 priests only, to eat? (5) And he said to them:
The Son of man is lord of the sabbath.

C) And on another sabbath, he entered a synagogue
and taught. And a man was there, whose right

7 liand Avas withered. (7) And the Scribes and
Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on
the sabbath ; that they might be able to accuse

8 him. (8) And as he knew their thoughts, he said
to the man with a withered hand : Rise and come
into the midst of the congregation. And when he

9 came and stood [there], (9) Jesus said to them : I
ask )'ou. What is it lawful to do on the sabbath ?
that which is good ? or that which is evil ? to save

10 life ? or to destroy [it] ? (10) And he looked upon
them all ; and [then] said to him, Stretch forth
thy hand. And he stretched out his hand, and it

11 was restored like the other. "^ (11) And they were
filled with envy ; and they conferred one with
another, what they should do to Jesus.

12 And in those days, Jesus retired to a mountain


or, parable.


Sy. ils fellow


114


or, Apostles.
<^ Gr. Usrpog.
a Sy.

f Sy.

%Sy.

i" or, wo7-cI.
' Sy. IJ.B.Kj


LUKE, VI.

to pray ; and lie passed the night there, in prayer
to God. (13) And when the day dawned, he called 13
his disciples, and selected from them twelve, whom
he named Legates i^* (1-1) Simon whom he named 14
Cephas, c and Andrew his brother, and James, and
JohD, and Philip, and Bartholomew, (15) and 15
Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Al-
pheus,** and Simon who was called Zelotes,^ (16) 16
and Judas the son of James, f' and Judas Iscariot,?
who became a traitor.— (17) And Jesus descended 17
with them, and stood in the plain; and a great
company of his disciples, and a multitude of assem-
bled people, from all Judaea, and from Jerusalem,
and from the sea-shore of Tyre and Sidon ; who
came to hear his discourse,i^ and to be healed of
their diseases; (18) and they who were afflicted by 18
unclean spirits : and they were healed. (19) And 19
the whole multitude sought to touch him ; for
there went a virtue' out of him and healed them
all.

And he lifted his eyes upon his disciples, and 20
said : Blessed are ye poor ; for the kingdom of God
is yours. (21) Blessed are ye that hunger now ; 21
for ye will be satisfied. Blessed are ye that weep
now ; for ye will laugh. (22) Blessed are ye, 22
when men shall hate you, and repel you, and re-
vile you, and cast out your names as base, for the
Son of man's sake. (23) Eejoice in that day and 23
exult, for your reward is great in heaven ; for so
did their fethers to the prophets. (24) But, woe to 24
you that are rich ; for ye have received your con-
solation. (25) Woo to you that are full ; for ye 25
will hunger. Woe to you that laugh now ; for ye
will weep and mourn. (26) Woe to you, when 26
men shall speak your praise ; for so did their fa-
thers to the false prophets, — (27) And to you who 27
hear, I say : Love your enemies ; and do favors to
them that hate you ; (28) and bless them that curse 28
vou ; and pray for them that drag you with vio-
lence. (29) To him that smiteth thee on thy 29
cheek, olfer the other: and from him that taketh
away thy cloak, keep not back thy tunic. (30) To 30
every one that asketh of thee, give thou : and from
him that taketh thy property, demand it not.
(31) And as ye would that men should do to you, so 31
do ye also to them. (32) For, if ye love them that 32


LUKE, VI.


115


love yoii, what goodness is it in you ? For even
83 sinners love those that love them. (33) And if ye
do good to them that do good to you, what good-
ness is it in you ? For even sinners do the same.

34 (3-i) And if yc lend to one from whom ye expect
recompense, what goodness is it in you? For
sinners also lend to sinners, to receive adequate

35 recompense. (35) But love je your enemies, and
do them good; and lend ye, and disappoint the
ho])cs of no one : and great will be your reward,
and ye will be children of the Highest ; for he is

36 kind to the evil, and to the unthankful. (36) Be
ye therefore merciful, as also your Father is merci-

' 37 ful. (37) Judge not, and ye will not be judged :
condemn not, and yc will not be condemned : re-

38 lease, and 3'e Avill be released. (38) Give 3'e, and
it will be given to j^ou ; in good measure, })rcssed
down, and running over, will they cast into your
lap. For, with what measure ye measure, it will

39 be measured to you. — (39) And he spake a simili-
tude'^ to them: Can a blind man lead a blind?

40 AVill not both fall into the ditch?— (40) No disci-
ple is better than his teacher;' for whoever is per-

41 feet, will be like his teacher. — (41) And wliy
observest thou the straw that is in thy brother's
eye, but regardest not the beam that is in thy own

42 eye ? (42) Or how canst thou say to th}'- brother.
My brotlier, allow me to pluck the straw from thy
eye ; when, lo, the beam that is in thy own eye,
thou regardest nbt. Hypocrite ! first cast the beam
out thy eye, and then thy vision will be clear to

43 pluck the straw from thy brother's eye. (43) There
is no good tree, that beareth bad fruits ; nor a bad

44 tree, that beareth good fruits. (44) For every tree
is known by its fruits. Do men gather figs from
thorn-bushes? So, neither do they pluck grapes

45 from brambles. (45) A good man, from the good
treasure that is in his heart, bringcth out good
things: and a bad man, from the bad treasure that
is in his heart, bringeth out bad things. For, from

46 the abundance of the heart, the lips speak. (4(5) And
wh}' call ye me, ^[y Lord, my Lord ; while ye do

47 not that which I command you ? (47) P]very one
that cometh to me, and hcareth my words, and
doeth them, I will show to whom he is like:

48 (48) lie is like a man that built a house ; and he


.if"


or, pm


iblc.


Sy. Rahhi.


116


LUKE, VII.


Sy. \,a.


* «» n


' or, a si/na-
gogue.


Sy. hand.


Sy.


dug and went deep, and laid the foundations on a
rock : and when a flood occurred, the flood rushed
upon that liouse, and could not move it, for its
foundation rested on a rock. (49) But he that 49
heareth and doeth not, is like a man that built his
house upon the earth, without a foundation ; and
when the torrent rushed upon it, it fell immediatelj,
and the ruin of that house was great.

And when he had finished all these discourses VII.
in the audience of the people, Jesus entered
into Capernaum. (2) And the servant of a cen- 2
turion, v/ho was dear to him, was very sick, and
near to death. (3) And he heard of Jesus, and 3
sent the Elders^ of the Jcavs to him, and requested
of him that he would come and save the life of his
servant. (4) And when they came to Jesus, they 4
entreated him earnestly, and said: He is worthy
that thou shouldst do this for him ; (5) for he loveth 5
our nation, and hath also built us a house of
assembly.*^ (G) And Jesus went with them. And 6
when he was not far from the house, the centurion
sent his friends to him, and said to him : M}^ Lord,
trouble not thyself, for I am not worthy that thou
shouldst come under my roof: (7) therefore I 7
deemed myself not worthy to approach thee
myself; but speak the word only, and my young
man will be healed. (8) For I also am a man 8
subjected to authority ; and I have soldiers under
my command ;c and I say to this one. Go; and he
goeth : and to another. Come ; and he cometh :
and to my servant. Do this ; and he doeth [it.]
(9) And when Jesus heard these things, he admired 9
him ; and he turned, and said to the throng that
followed him: I say to you, I have not found faith
like this even in Israel. (10) And they that were 10
sent, returned to the house ; and they found the
servant that had been sick, now well.

And the following day, he went to a city called 11
Nain ;J and liis disciples [were] with him, and a
great multitude. (12) And as he approached the 12
gate of the city, he saw a procession bearing a dead
man, the only sone of his mother, and she a widow ;
and a great company of the people^ of the city
were with her. (13) And Jesus looked upon her, 13
and had compassion on her ; and he said to her,


LUKK, VII.


u";


15


16


17


18
19


20


21


22


14 TVeep not. (14) And he went, and touched the
bier ; and they that bore him stood still. And he
said : Young man, I say to thee, Arise. (15) And
the dead man sat up, and began to speak : and he
delivered him to his mother. (16) And awe
seized all the people ; and they glorilicd God, and
said: A great prophet bath arisen among us, and
God hath visited his people. (17) And that
sayings resj^ccting him went out through all Judtea
and all the surrounding region.

And the disciples of John told him all these
things. (19) And John called two of his disciples,
and scut them to Jesus, and said : Art thou
he that cometh, or shall we look for another?
(20) And the}' came to Jesus, and said to him:
John the Baptizcr hath sent us to thee, and
saith : Art thou he that cometh, or shall we look
for another? (21) And in that hour he healed
many persons of their diseases, and of plagues, and
of unclean spirits, and gave sight to many blind
persons. (22) And Jesus replied, and said to
them : Go ye, and tell John all that ye have seen
and heard ; that the blind see, and the lame walk,
and the leprous are cleansed, and the deaf hear,
and the dead arise, and to the poor good news is

23 proclaimed:'' (23) and blessed is he that is not

24 stumbled in me.— (24) And when John's disciples
were gone, Jesus began to say to the multitude,
concerning John : What went ye into the wilder-

25 ness to see ? — a reed agitated by the wind? (25) Or
if not ; what went ye out to see ?— a man clad in
soft raiment ? Lo, they that use splendid garments

26 and luxuries, are in kings' palaces.' (26) Or if
not; what went ye out to see? — a prophet? Yea,

27 say I to you ; and more than a prophet. (27)
[For] this is he, of whom it is written : Behold I
send my messenger'' before thy face, to prei)are

28 thy way before thee. (28) I say to you, that no
prophet, among those born of women, was greater
than John the Baptizer : and yet the little one in

29 the kingdom of God, is greater than he, (29) And
all the people that heard liim, justified God, as they

30 had been baj)tized with John's baptism. (30) But
the Pharisees and Scribes rejected the good pleasure
of God, against themselves; as they were not

31 baptized by him. (31) To what, therefore, shall I


e or, word.


-Sy.


or, houses.


Sy. aSi]l^


118


LUKE, VII.


• Sy. l.^^


compare this generation ? and to what are they
lilvc ? (32) They are hkc children, that sit in the 32
market-place, and call to their fellows and say :
We have piped to you, and ye did not dance ; we
have howk'd to you, and ye did not weep.
(33) For John the Baptizer came, not eating bread, 33
and not drinking wine ; and ye say : He hath a
demon. (3-1) The Son of man came, eating and 3-1
drinking ; and ye say : Behold, a gluttonous man,
and a wine drinker, and one fond of publicans and
sinners. (35) But wisdom^ is justified by all her 35
children.

And one of the Pharisees canre, and asked him 30
to eat with him. And he entered the house of the
Pharisee, and reclined. (37) And there was a 37
woman in the city, who was a sinner; and when
she learned that he reclined in the Pharisee's
house, she took an alabaster box of perfume,
(38) and stood behind him, at his feet, and wept ; 38
and she began to bathe his feet with her tears, and
to wipe them with the hair of her head ; and she
kissed his feet, and anointed [them] with the per-
fume. (39) And when the Pharisee that invited 39
him, saw it, he thought within himself, and said :
If this man v^ere a prophet, he would know who
she is, and what is her reputation ; for the woman
that toucheth him, is a sinner. (40) And Jesus 40
answered, and said to him : Simon, I have some-
thing to say to thee. lie said to him: Say it,
Kabbi. Jesus said to him : (41) There were two 41
debtors to a (pertain creditor ; the one owed him
five liundrcd denarii, and the other fifty denarii.
(42) And as they had not the means of pa}^, he 42
released them both. Which of them, therefore,
will love him most? (43) Simon replied, and 43
said : I suppose he to whom most was released.
Jesus said to him: Thou hast judged correctly.
(44) And he turned to the woman, and said to 44
Simon : Seest thou this woman ? I entered thy
house, and thou gavest [me] no water for my
feet ; but slie hath bathed my feet with her tears,
and wiped them with her hair. (45) Thou gavest 45
me no kiss ; but this woman, since she came in,
hath not ceased to kiss my feet. (46) Thou didst 46
nut anoint my head with perfume ; but she hath
anointed my ieet with perfumed ointment. (47) I 47


LUKE, VIII.^


119


4


6


therefore say to thee : Ilcr many sins are forgiven
her, for she loveth much. But he, to whom little

48 is forgiven, loveth little. (48) And he said to the

49 woman: Thy sins are forgiven thee. (49) And
they that were reclining, began to say in them-
selves: Who is this, that even forgiveth sins?

50 (50) And Jesus said to the woman : Thy faith
hath given thee life. Go, in peace.

VIII. And after these things Jesus travelled about
the cities and the villages, and proclaimed and
announced the kingdom of God. And with him

2 were his twelve [disciples,] (2) and those women
who were healed of inlirmities and of unclean
spirits, A[ary called Magdalona,'! out of whom went

3 seven demons, (3) and Joauna'i the wife of Chusa,
Herod's steward, and Susanna,*' and many others,
Avho ministered to them of their property.

And when a great multitude was assembled, and
people came to him from all the cities, he said, in
similitudes :'J (5) A sower went out to sow his
seed : and as he sowed, some fell by the side of
the path, and was trodden upon, and a bird
devoured it. (6) And other fell upon a rock, and
sprung up forthwith ; but, as it lacked moisture, it
dried up. (7) And other fell among thorns, and
the thorns sprung up with it, and choked it.
(8) And other fell on good and fair ground, and
sprung up, and bore fruits, a hundred for one.
llaving said these things, he cried: He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear.

And his disciples asked him: what meaneth
this similitude ? (10) And he said to them : To
you it is given, to know the mysteries*^ of the
kingdom of God ; but to others, it is spoken in
allegories -J that, while seeing, they may not see,
and while hearing, may not understand. (11) But
this id the similitude: The seed is the word of
GotL (12) And those by the side of the path, are
they that hear the word, and the enemys cometli
and taketh the word out of their heart, that they
may not believe and live. (13) And those upon
the rock, are they who, when they hear, receive
the word with joy : but they have no root in
them, and their faith is temporary, and in time of
14 temptation'' they arc stumbled. (14) And that


9
10


11


12


13


Sy.

Sy. ,_K»Q-.

Sy. ^Q-»

' or, parables


Sy. 1Z]J.2irD


:Sy.


•> or, trial.


120


LUKE, VIII.


or, lusif.


Sy.


' S\


U^


•^


wliicli fell among thorns, are those who hear the
word, but are choked by cares, and by riches, and
by worldly desires,' and bear no fruits. (15) And 15
that on good ground, are those who, with a
humble and good heart, hear the word, and retain
it, and Avith patience bring forth fruits. — (16) No 16
one lighteth a lamp, and covereth it with a vessel,
or placeth it under a bed, but setteth it upon a
light-stand, that all who come in, may see the light
of it. (17) For there is nothing covered, that shall 17
not be uncovered; nor concealed, that shall not
be known and become manifest. (18) Take heed 18
how ye hear : for to him that hath, shall l)e given;
and from him that hath not, shall be taken even
what he thinketh he hath. — (19) And his mother 19
and his brothers came to him, and they could not
speak with him, because of the multitude. (20) 20
And they say to him : Thy mother and thy
brothers stand without, and wish to see thee.
(21) And he answered and said: My mother and 21
my brothers, are they who liear the word of God,
and do it.

And on a certain day Jesus embarked and sat 22
in a ship, he and his disciples. And he said to
them; Let us pass over to the other side of the
sea. (23) And while they were rowing, Jesus fell 23
asleep. And there was a tempest of wind on the
sea ; and the ship was near to sinking. (24) And 24
they came and awaked him, and said to him:
Our Kabbi, our liabbi,^ we are perishing ! And
he arose, and rebuked the winds and the agita-
tions of the Avater; and they ceased, and there
was a calm. (25) And he said to them : Where 25
is your faith ? And they being in awe, wondered,
and said one to another : Who is this, that com-
mandcth even the winds, and the waves, and the
sea ; and they obey him ?

And they rowed on, and came to the country of 26
the Gadarenes,! which heth over against Galilee.
(27) And when he went out upon the land, there 27
met him a man of the city, in whom had been a
demon for a long time ; and he wore no clothing,
and did not reside in a house, but among the
tombs. (28) And when he saw Jesus, he cried 28
out, and fell down before him, and said, with a loud
voice : What have we to do with thee? Jesus, thou


4


LUKE, VIII.


121


Son of the exalted God. I entreat of thee, torment
29 me not. (29) For Jesus bad commanded tlic
unclean spirit, to come out of the man : for, of a
long time he had been held captive bv him; and
he had been bound with chains, and held in
fetters ; but he had burst the bonds, and had been
80 driven by the demon into the desert. (oO) And
Jesus demanded of him : What is thy name ?
And he said to him: Legion:'" because many

31 demons had entered into him. (31) And they
besought him, not to command them to depart

32 into the abyss." (32) And there was a herd of
many swine grazing on the mountain. And they
besought him, that he Avould permit them to enter

33 the swine. And he permitted tliom. (33) And
the demons went out of the man, and entered the
swine ; and the whole herd ran to a precipice,"
and plunged into the sea, and were strangled.

34 (34) And when the herdmen saw what had
occurred, they fled, and told [it] in the cities and

35 the villages. (35) And the men went out to see
what was done. And they came to Jesus, and
found the man, out of whom the demons had
gone, now clothed, and modest, and sitting at the

3G feet of Jesus ; and they were awed. (3(3) And
they that saw [it], related to them in what manner

37 the demoniac was cured. (37) And the whole
throngp of the Gadarenes requested him, that
lie would depart from them: for great fear had
sei/A'd them. And Jesus embarked in a ship, and

38 retired from among them. (38) And the man,
from whom the demons had gone out, requested
that he might remain with him. But Jesus dis

39 missed him, and said to him : (39) Return to thy
home, and relate what God hatli done for thee
And he went awa}", and proclaimed through all
the city what Jesus had done for him.

40 And when Jesus returned, a great multitude
received him; for all were looking for him.

41 (41) And a man, whose name was Jairus,"" a chief
of the synagogue,' fell down at the feet of Jesus,

42 and besought him to enter his liouse; (42) for lie
had an only' daughter, about twelve years old,
and she was near dying. And as Jesus went with
him, a great multitude pressed upon him. —

43 (43) And a certain woman, whose blood liad


Sy. ^a«_^

Sy. llDCOlZ


or, clijf.


p or, multitude.


Sy. ,.j51q_i


Sy. w.e_i9

Sv.


Gr.


• Sy.
y Sy.


•Sy,


Peter.
^'

eyes.


Sy.
Sy


flowed twelve years, and who had expended all
her property among ph3'siciaus, and could not be
cured by any one, (44) came up behind him, and 44
touched the border of his garment; and imme-
diately the flow of her blood stopped. (45) And 45
Jesus said: Who touched me? And when all
denied, Simon Cephas^ and those with him said
to him: Our Kabbi,^ crowds press upon thee;
and say est thou, Who touched me? (46) And 46
he said : Some one touched me ; for I perceive,
that energy-^ hath gone out from me. (47) And 47
the woman, when she saw that she had not escaped
his notice, came trembling, and fell down and wor-
shipped him. And in the presencey of all the
people, she declared for what cause she had touched
him, and that she was instantly healed. (48) And 48
Jesus said to her: Take courage, my daughter:
Thy faith hath given thee life: Go in peace. —
(49) And while he was speaking, one came 49
from the house of the chief of the synagogue, ^
^^-^~^ *^' j and said to him : Thy daughter is dead ; trouble
]i g^Vvnlnot the teacher.^ (50) And Jesus heard [it], and 50
said to the father of the maid: Fear not; believe
only, and she will live. (51) And Jesus came 51
to the house ; and he suffered none to go in with
him, except Simon, and James, and John, and
the father and mother of the maid. (52) And all 52
were weeping and wailing over her. And Jesus
said : Weep not ; for she is not dead, but sleepeth.
(53) And they derided him, knowing that she was 53
dead. (54) And he put every one out, and took 54
her by the hand, and called, and said: Maid, arise.''

(55) And her spirif- returned, and she instantly 55
arose. And he directed them to give her food.

(56) And her jnirents were astonished: and he 56
charged them to tell no one what had occurred.

And Jesus called his twelve, and gave them IX.
power and authority over all demons and diseases,
to heal [them], (2) And he sent them forth, to pro- 2
claim the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.
(3) And he said to them: Take nothing for the 3
journey, neither a staff^ nor a wallet, nor bread,
nor money; neither have two tunics. (4) And 4
into whatever house ye enter, there stay, and
thence depart. (5) And against them that receive 6


1AA2.


LUKE, IX.


123


6


0


10


11


12


jou not, when ye go out of that city, shake off
even the dust of your feet against them, for a testi-
mony. (0) And the Legates^ went forth, and trav-
elled about the villages and cities, and preached
and healed everywhere.

And Ilcrod the Tetrarch licard of all the things
done b}' him, and he Avas disturbed; because some
said, that .John had arisen from the dead. (8) But
others said, that Elijah hath appeared ; and others,
that a prophet from among the ancient prophets
hath ai'isen. (9) And Ilerod said: The head of
.lolni, 1 have cut off; but who is this, of whom I
ln'ar these things? And he was desirous to see
him.

And when the Legates^ returned, they narrated
to Jesus all the}-' had done. And he took them
aside, to the desert part of Bethsaida. (11) And
when tlic multitude knew [it], they followed him :
and he received them, and conversed with them
respecting the kingdom of God : and such as had
need of healing, he healed. (12) And when the
da}" began to decline, his disciples came near, and
Siud to him : Send away the multitude, that they
may go to the villages around us and to the
towns, to lodge in them, and to procure themselves
13 food,* for we are in a desert place. (13) Jesus said
to them : Give ye them to eat. And they say :
We have no more than five loaves and two fishes ;
unless we go and buy food for all this people:
(14) for they were about five thousand men. Jesus
said to them : Make them recline by companies,
fifty persons in a company. (15) And the disci-
j)les elid so, and made them all recline. (16) And
Jesus took the five loaves and two fishes, and
looked towards heaven, and blessed, and brake,
and gave to his disciples to set before the multi-
tudes, (17) And they all ate, and were satisfied :
and they took up the fragments of remains, twelve
baskets.^

And as he was praying in private with his dis-
ciples, he asked them, and said : Who, do the mul-
19 titudes say of me, that I am? (19) They answer
and say to him: John the Baptizer; others, Elijah;
and others, a j)rophet, one of the ancient prophets
arisen. (20) lie said to them: But who, do ye
say, that I am ? Simon answered, and said : The


14

15
16


17


18


20


» or, Apostles.


^ or. Apostles.


Sy.


.1 .c^nr^


124


LUKE, IX.


Sy.


or, every one.


Sv. OT-A-SU


e Sy. cn.ft.,eiJ


i" or, words.


Sy.


Sy. /to// /;ecn.


Messiali<i of God. (21) And lie chided them, and 21
charged them, that they shoukl say this to no one.
(^22) And he said to them: The Son of man is to 22
suffer many things, and to be rejected by the Elders
and the chief priests and Scribes ; and they will
kill him; and on the third day, he will arise. —
(2o) And he said before all the people:'^ He that 23
would follow me, must deny himself, and take up
his cross daily, and [so] comef after me. (24) For 24:
he that will preserve his life,^ shall lose it; but he
that shall lose his life, for my sake, will preserve it.
(25) For, what will a man be profited, if he gain 25
the whole world, and lose his lifeS' or be dejirived
[of it] ? (26) And whoever shall be ashamed of 26
me and of my words, of him will the Son of man
be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his
Father, with his holy angels. — (27) I tell you the 27
truth, that there are some standing here, who will
not taste death, nntil they shall see the kingdom of
God.

And it was about eight days after these dis- 28
courses,'' that Jesus took Simon and James and
John, and went up a mountain to pray. (29) And 29
while he prayed, the aspect of his countenance was
changed, and his garments became white and bril-
liant. (80) And lo, two men were talking with 80
him: and they were Moses and Elijah, (31) who 31
appeared in glory.i And they were conversing on
his departure, which was to be consummated at
Jerusalem. (32) And Simon and those with him 32
were oppressed with drowsiness ; and being scarcely
awake, they saw his glory, "^ and those two men
who stood near him. (33) And when they began 33
to retire from him, Simon said to Jesus : Rabbi, it
is delightCul for us to be here. And let us make
here three booths, one for thee, and one for Moses,
and one for Elijah. But he knew not what he
said. (34) And as he thus spoke, there was a cloud ; 34
and it overshadowed them ; and they were afraid,
when they saw Moses and Elijah go up into the
cloud. (35) And there was a voice from the cloud, 35
which said: This is my beloved Son ; hear ye him.
(30) And when the voice had passed, i Jesus was 36
Ibund to be alone. — And they kept silence, and
told no one in those days what they had seen.

And the next day, as they came down from the 37


"^ItM,


LUKE, IX.


125


42


48


44
45


46


48


38 mountain, a great multitude met them. j^38) And
a man from the throng cried out, and said :
Teacher,"" 1 beseech thee, turn thyself to me. Here

39 is ni}^ only" son: (39) and a s])irit comcth upon
him, and he suddenly crietli out, and gnasheth his
teeth, and foametli ; and he hardly Icaveth him,

40 when he hath crushed him. (40) And I requested
thy disciples to expel him; and they could not.

41 (41) And Jesus answered, and said : 0 the unbe-
lieving and perverse generation! How long shall
I be with you, and bear with you? Bring hither
thy son. (42) And while he was bringing him,
the demon threw him down, and convulsed him.
And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed
the lad, and delivered him to his father. (43) And
they were all amazed at the majesty « of God. —
And while every one admired at all that Jesus
did, he said to his disciples: (44) Lay up these
words in your minds :p for the Son of man is to
be delivered into the hands of men. (45) But
the}" understood not that speech;'' because it was
hidden from them, that they should not know it :
and they feared to ask him concerning that speech.

And the thought arose among them, which of
47 them [was to be] the greatest. (47) And Jesus
knew the thought of their heart : and he took a
child, and placed him near to him ; (48) and said
to them : Whoever receiveth a child like this, in
my name, receiveth me ; and he that receiveth me,
receiveth him that sent me. For he that shall be
least among you all, he will be the great one. —
49 (49) And John answered, and said: Our Rabbi,
we saw a man casting out demons in thy name;
and wc forbad him, because he doth not, Avith us,
follow thee. (50) Jesus said to them : Forbid not:
for, whoever is not against you, is for you.

And when the days for his ascension were com-
pleted, so it was, that he set his face to go up to
Jerusalem. (52) And he sent messengers before
his face; and they went, and entered a village of
the Samaritans, to prepare [lodgings] for him.

53 (53) And they received him not, because he had

54 set his face to go up to Jerusalem. (54) And
when his disciples James and John saw [it], they
said to him : Our Lord, wilt thou that wc speak,
and fire come down from heaven, and consume


Sy.].


50


51


r>9


Sy.


p Sy. ears.
or, icord.


126


Sy. lA^LsiJ
Sy.


Sy. sons of my
house.


•Sy.
lit. your peace.


^n^n\«,


LUKE, X.

them, as. also did Elijah ? (55) And he turned, 55
and rebuked them, and said : Ye know not of what
spirit ye are. (oQ) For the Son of man hath not 56
come to destroy souls ;» but to quicken* [them].
And they went to another village.

And as they went by the way, one said to him : 57
I will follow thee to whatever place thou goest,
my Lord. (58) Jesus said to him: The foxes 58
have holes, and the birds of heaven have coverts ;
but the Son of man hath not where he may lay his
head. (59) And he said to another : Come thou 59
after me. And he said to him : My Lord, permit
me first to go and bury my father. (60) And 60
Jesus said to him : Allow the dead to bury their
dead; and go thou and proclaim the kingdom of
God. (61) Another said to him: I will follow 61
thee, my Lord ; but allow me first to bid adieu to
my household, V and I will come. (62) Jesus said 62
to him : No man putting his hand to the ox-plough,
and looking backward, is fit for the kingdom of
God.


And after these things, Jesus separated, from X
among his disciples seventy other persons, and sent
them, two and two, before his face, to every place
and city Avhither he was to go. (2) And he said
to them: The harvest is great, and the laborers
few : pray ye, therefore, the lord of the harvest,
that he would send laborers into his harvest.
(3) Go ye: lo, I send you forth, as sheep among
wolves. (4) Take to you no purses, nor wallets,
nor shoes ; and salute no man by the wa}^ (5) And
into whatever house ye enter, first say : Peace be
to this house. (6) And if the son of peace is there,
your salutation^- will rest upon it ; but if not, your
salutation will return to you. (7) And remain in 7
that house, eating and drinking of what it affords ;
for the laborer is worthy of his hire. And pass
not from house to house. (8) And into whatever 8
city ye enter, and they receive you ; eat that which
is set before you. (9) And heal them that are sick 9
in it ; and say to them : The kingdom of God hath
come near you. (10) And into Avhatever city ye 10
enter, and they receive you not; go out into the
street, and say: (11) Even the dust of your city 11
which adhereth to our feet, we shake off against


2


LUKE, X.


127


you : but this know ye, that the kingdom of God

12 "hatli come near to you. (12) I say to you, that for
Sodom there will be comfort in that day, rather

13 than for that city. (13) AVoe to thee, Chorazin;
woe to thee, Bethsaida ; for if in Tyre and Sidon
there had been the mighty deeds, that were in you,
ihey would long ago have repented in sackcloth

1-1 and ashes. (14) But for Tyre and Sidon there will
be comfort in the day of judgment, rather than for

15 you. (15) And thou Capernaum, that art lifted
n\) to heaven, shalt be brought down to hell.^ —

IG (l()) He that hearcth you, heareth me ; and he that
despiscth you, despiseth me ; and he that dcspiscth
me, dcspiscth him that sent me.

17 And the seventy whom he sent forth, returned
with great joy, and say to him : Our Lord, even the

IS demons were subject to us, in thy name. (18) And
he said to them: I saw Satan" tail, like the light-

VJ ning from heaven. (19) Behold, I give you author-
ity to tread on serpents, and scorpions, and on all
the power'i of the adversary:'' and nothing shall

20 harm 3'ou. (20) Yet rejoice not in this, that the
demons are subject to you ; but rejoice, that your

21 names are written in heaven. — (21) In that hour
Jesus exulted in the Holy Spirit, and said : I thank
thee, my Father, thou Lord of heaven and earth,
that thou hast hid these things from the wise and
intelligent, and hast revealed them to babes: yes,

22 my Father, for such was thy good pleasure. (22)
And he turned himself to his disciples, and said to
them: Every thing is committed to me by my
Father : and no one knoweth who the Son is, but
the Father ; or who the Father is, but the Son, and
lie to whom the Son is pleased to reveal [him].

23 (23) And he turned to his disciples, privately, and
said : Blessed are the eyes that see, what ye see,
(24) For I say to you, that many prophets and
kings desired to sec what ye see, and did not see
[it 1 ; and to hear what ye hear, and did not hear

Lit].

And behold, a Scribe stood up to try him, and
said : Teacher,'" what must I do, to inherit eternal'' Sy ]i <?\\vi
life? (2G) And Jesus said to him: How is it
written in the law ?ff IIow rcadest thou? (27) He ^ Sy.
answered and said to him: Thou shalt love the! tcDO^m n
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy |


24


25

26
27


Sy. "U^TD

Sy. rn\. ^.

Sy.


128


LUKE, XL


Sy. U^J,

intellect.


3^


' Sy. ]AiLD
^ Sv. Ulu'^


soul, and with all thy might, and with all thy
mind;'i and thy neighbor, as th^^self. (28) Jesus 28
said to him : Thou hast said correctly ; do thus, and
thou Avilt live. (29) And he, being disposed to 29
justify himself, said : And who is my neighbor ?

(30) Jesus said to him : A certain man was going SO
down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and robbers fell
upon him, and plundered him, and smote him, and
left him with little life in him,' and went their way.

(31) And a certain priest went down by that way ; 31
and he saw him, and passed on. (32) So also a 32
Levite came, approached the spot, and saw him,
and passed on. (33) But a Samaritan, as he trav- 33
elled, came where he was, and saw him, and took
pity on him, (34) and went to him, and bound up 34
his wounds, and poured wine and oil on them, and
placed him upon his ass, and brought him to the
inn, and took care of him. (35) And on the morn- 35
ing of the [next] day, he took out two denarii and
gave to the host, and said : Take good care of
him ; and if thou expendest any more, when I re-
turn, I will repay thee. (36) Which therefore of 36
these three, appears to thee, to have been neigh-
bor to him that fell into the hands of marauders ?
(37) And he said: He that had pity on him. Jesus 37
said to him : Go, and do thou also the like.

And it occurred, as they travelled by the way, 38
that he entered a certain village, and a woman
whose name was Martha,' received him at her
house. (39) And she had a sister whose name 39
was Mary :k and she came and seated herself at the
feet of our Lord, and listened to his discourses.
(40) But Martha was occupied with much service ; 40
and she came, and said to him : My Lord, hast thou
no concern, that my sister hath left me to serve
alone ? Bid her assist me. (41) Jesus answered; 41
and said to her : Martha, Martha, thou art anxious
and troubled about many things: (42) yet but 42
one thing is necessary; and Mary hath chosen for
herself the good part, which shall not be taken
from her.

And as he was praying in a certain place, it XI,
occurred, that when he ceased, one of his disciples
said to him : Our Lord, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his disciples. (2) Jesus said to them : 2


LUKE, XL


129


When ye pray, thus speak ye : Our Father who
art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy king-
dom come ; thy pleasure be done, as in heaven, so

3 on earth; (3) give us daily the bread we need;

4 (4) and remit to us our sins, for we also remit to all
that are indebted to us; and bring us not into

5 trials, but deliver us from evil. — (5) And he said
to them : AVhich of you shall have a friend, that
shall come to him at midnight and say to him, My

6 friend, lend me three cakes ; (6) for a friend hath
come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to

7 set before him ? (7) And his friend within shall
answer, and say to him : Uo not disturb me, for lo,
the door is closed, and my children with me in

8 bed ; I cannot rise and give thee. (8) I say to you :
If he give him not, on account of friendship, yet
on account of [his] importunity, he will arise and

9 give [him] as much as he asketh, (9) I say also
to you: Ask, and it will be given you; seek, and
ye will find ; knock, and it Avill be opened to you.

10 (10) For every one that asketh, receiveth ; and he
that secketh, findcth; and to him that knocketh,

11 it is opened. (11) For which of 3'ou being a flither,
if his son shall ask him for bread, will he reach to
him a stone ? Or, if he ask of him a fish, will he,

12 instead of a fish, reach to him a serpent? (12) Or,
if he ask of him an egg, will he reach to him a

13 scorpion? (13) And if ye, who are evil, know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much
more will your Father from heaven give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask him ?

14 And as he was casting out a demon that was
dumb, it occurred, that when the demon had gone
out, the dumb [man] conversed: and the multi-

15 tudes admired. (15) But some of them said : It is
by Beelzebub,'^ the prince of demons,'' that he cast-

16 cth out demons. (16) And others, to tempt him,

17 asked of him a sign from heaven. (17) But Jesus,
as he knew their thoughts, said to them: Every
kingdom that is divided against itself, will become
a desolation : and a house that is divided against

18 itself, will fall. (18) And if Satan be divided
against himself, how Avill his kingdom stand ? since
ye say, that I by Beelzebub cast out demons.

19 (19) And if I, by Beelzebub, cast out demons, by
whom do your sous cast [them] out ? Therefore


Sy.


2Cic:\


\'


] a jj


130


LUKE, XI.


Sy. entry, hall.


* Sy. scatterclh
to scatter.


sy-U;


■£LtL


' or. laiid.


23


24


25


f Sy. V^« m/^


will they be to you judges. (20) But if I, by the 20
linger of God, cast out demons, the kingdom of
God hath come near to you. (21) When a strong 21
man armed keepeth his doorway, <= his property
rests securely. (22) But if a stronger than he come 22
and overpower him, he taketh away all his arms
on which he relied, and divideth the spoil of him.

(23) He that is not for me, is against me ; and he
that gathereth not with me, actually scattereth.'^ —

(24) An unclean spirit, when he goeth out of a
man, goeth wandering in places where no water is,
in order to iind rest ; and, as he cannot find [it],
he saith: I will return to my habitation, from
which I came. (25) And when he cometh, he
findeth it swept clean and set in order. (26) Then 26
he goeth and taketh seven other spirits, worse than
himself, and they enter in and dwell there ; and
the last state of that man is worse than the first. —
(27) And while he was saying these things, a cer- 27
tain woman from the crowd, lifted up her voice,
and said to him : Blessed is tlie womb that carried
thee, and the breasts that nursed thee. (28) He 28
said to her : Blessed are they who hear the word

of God, and keep it. — (29) And when multitudes 29
were assembled, he began to say : This evil genera-
tion secketh a sign ; and no sign will be given it,
but the sign of Jonah the prophet. (30) For as
Jonah was a sign to the Ninevitcs, so also will the
Son of man be a sign to this generation. (31) The
queen of the south*^ will stand up in the judgment
with the men of this generation, and will condemn
them; for she came from the other side of the
earth,^ to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and lo, one
superior to Solomon is here. (32) The men of
Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this
generation, and will condemn it ; for they repented
at the preaching of Jonali, and lo, one superior to
Jonah is here. — (33) No one lighteth a lamp, and
putteth it in a secret place, or under a bushel, but
upon a light-stand ; that they who come in, may
see its light. (34) The lamp of thy body is thy 34
eye. Therefore, when thy eye is sound, g thy
whole body will be enlightened ; but if it be bad,
thy body also will be dark. (35) See to it, there- 35
fore, lest the light that is in thee, be darkness.
(36) For if thy whole body be enlightened, and no 36


0


31


32


33


LUKE, XI.

part in it be dark, the whole will be luminous, as
if a lamp enlightened thee by its radiance.

37 And while he was speaking, a certain Pharisee
requested him to dine with him : and he went in,

38 and reclined. (38) And the Pharisee noticing him,
wondered that he did not previously baj^tizo'^ before

39 dinner. (39) And Jesus said to him: Now ye
Pharisees make clean the exterior of the cup and
the dish ; but your interior is full of extortion and

40 wickedness. (40) Ye deficient in understanding!
did not he who made the exterior, make also the

41 interior? (41) But, give ye alms from what ye
possess ; and lo, every thing will be clean to you.

42 (42) But woe to 3^ou, Pharisees ! for ye tithe mint
and rue, and every pot-herb ; but pass over justice'
and the love of God. Now ye ought to do these

43 things, and not to omit those. (43) Woe to you,
Pharisees! who love the chief seats in the syna-

44 gogues, and a salutation in the streets. (44) Woe
to you. Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye
are like graves that arc unknown, and men Avalk

45 over them and do not know [it], (45) And one of
the Scribes replied, and said to him: Teacher,''
wliile saying these things, thou reproachest us also.

4G (46) And he said : Woe to you also ! ye Scribes,
who lade men with heavy burdens ; yet ye your-
selves will not touch those burdens with one of

47 your fingers. (47) Woe to you! who build the
sepulchres of the prophets, whom your fathers

48 slew. (48) Thus ye testify, that ye acquiesce in
the deeds of your fathers ; for they slew them, and

49 ye build their sepulchres. (49) Therefore hath wis-
dom said : Lo, I will send to them prophets and
legates ;i and some of them the}'' will persecute and

60 slay; (50) that. from this generation may be re-
quired, the blood of all the prophets, which hath

51 been shed since the world was created ; (51) from
the blood of Abel, to the blood of Zachariah who
was slain between the temple and the altar. Yea,
say I to you : It will be required of this generation.

52 (52) Woe to you, Scribes ; for ye have taken away
the keys of knowledge : yc yourselves enter not,

53 and them that are entering ye hinder. — (53) And
when he had said these things to them, the Scribes
and Pharisees began to be offended, and became

54 angry, and carped at his discourses, (54) and prac-


131


Sy. jin:^


Sy. U-i?


k Sy. ]i<^Vv>


Sy. ] >- « V


132


Sy. mouth.


Sy. cars.


«• Sy. JJCTL^

" = Tiiofa de-
narius.


<■ or, blaspheme.


« Sy. \a!L

* or, f arable.


LUKE, XII.

tised many wiles upon bira, seeking to catcTi some-
thing from liis lips,r" that they might accuse him.

And when great multitudes were assembled by XII.
myriads, so that they trod one upon another, Jesus
began to say to his disciples : First of all, beware
for yourselves of that leaven of the Pharisees,
which is hypocrisy. (2) For there is nothing 2
hidden, which will not be revealed ; nor concealed,
that will not be known. (3) For whatever ye 3
speak in the dark, will be heard in the light ; and
what in secret chambers, ye whisper in the earj^^
will be proclaimed on the house-tops, (-i) And to 4
you, my friends, I say : Be not afraid of them that
kill the body, and afterwards have nothing more
they can do. (5) But I Avill show you, of whom 5
to be afraid : of him Avho, after he hath killed,
hath authority to cast into hell.^ Yea, say I to
you: be afraid of him. (6) Are not live sparrows 6
sold for two assarii ?« and not one of them is
forgotten before God. (7) And as for you, the 7
very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear
not, therefore ; for ye are superior to many sparrows.
(8) And I say to you, that every one that shall 8
confess mo before men, the Son of man will also
confess him before the angels of God. (9) But he 9
that shall deny me before men, shall himself be
denied before the angels of God. (10) And every 10
one that shall speak a word against the Son of
man, it shall be forgiven him: but he that shall
reproach^i the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven
him. (11) And when they shall bring you into 11
the synago.i^ues, before chiefs and men in authority,
be not anxious how ye shall make defence, or Avhat
ye shall say ; (12) for the Holy Spirit Avill, in that 12
hour, instruct you what to say.

And one of the assembly said to him : Teacher, 13
tell my brother, to divide the inheritance with me.
(14) But Jesus said to him : Man, who' established 14
me a_ judge and distributor over you? (15) And 15
he said to his disciples : Beware of all avarice, for
hfe«-' consisteth not in abundance of riches. (16) IG
And he spoke to them a similitude \^ The laud of
a certain rich man brought forth produce in
abundance. (17) And he considered with himself, 17
and said : What shall I do ; for I have not where


I can store up my produce ? (18) And he said :
This will I do ; I will pull down my storehouses,
and build them larger ; and thei'e will I store up

19 all my corn and my good things : (19) and I will
say to my soul : My soul,s thou hast good things
in abundance, which are stored up for many 3'ears ;
take thy ease; cat, drink, and live in pleasure.

20 (20) But God said to him: Thou void of reason!
This night, thy soul will be required of thee ; and
to whom will belong these things provided by

21 thee ? (21) Such is he that laycth up treasures for
himself, and is not rich in God.

22 And he said to his disciples: Therefore I tell
you, Be not anxious for your life,^' what ye shall
eat ; nor for your body, what ye shall put on.

23 (23) For the life' is more important than food, and

24 the body than raiment. (24) Consider the ravens,
which sow not, nor reap, nor have cellars and store-
liouses ; yet God provideth them food. How
much more important now are ye, than the birds !

25 (25) And which of you, by taking pains, can add

26 one cubit to his stature ? (26) And if ye are im-
potent for that which is least, why are ye anxious

27 about the rest? (27) Consider the lilies, how they
grow : they toil not, nor do they spin. Yet I say
to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory,

28 was clothed like one of these. (28) And if God
so clothe the herb, which to-day exists in the
field, and to-morrow falls into the oven, how much

29 more you, ye little in faith? (29) And inquire not,
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink ; nor let

30 your mind wander upon these things. (30) For
all these things the people of the world seek after;
and your flither knowetli that, for you also, these

31 things are needful. (31) But seek ye the kingdom
of God, and all these things will be added to you.

32 (32) Fear not, little flock; "for your Father is dis-

33 posed to give you the kingdom. (33) Sell your
propert}^ and give alms: make for yourselves
bags that do not become old, and a treasure that
is not transient, in the heavens ; where no thief

34 ap})roacheth, and no moth catcth. (34) For
where your treasure is, there also will your heart

35 be. (35) Let your loins be girded, and your

36 lamps burning. (36) And be yc like peVsons'who
arc waiting for their lord, when he shall return


s Sy. .j,.«, g^ 1


Sy.


Sy.l


S_£L}


134


LUKE, XII.


' Gr Ppipr


Sy.

" Sy. .^nv"}^
' Sy. to cast.


from the house of feasting, that, when he shall
come and knock, thoj may open to him immedi-
ately. (37) Ilappy are those servants, whom 87
their lord, when he comcth, shall lind so doing.
Verily I say to you : He will gird his loins, and
make them recline, and will pass around and serve
them. (38) And if in the second watch, or in the 38
third, ho shall come and so find [them], happy are
those servants. (39) And tins know ye, that if 39
the lord of the house had known at what watch
the thief would come, he would have been awake,
and would not have sufiered his house to be
broken into. (40) Therefore be yc also ready ; 40
for at an hour that ye think not, the Son of man
Cometh, (41) Simon Cephas^ saitli to him: Our 41
Lord, spcakest thou this similitude to us, or also to
all men ? (42) Jesus said to him : Who then is 42
that faithful and wise steward, Avhom his lord will
place over all his domestics, to give them their
portion in due time ? (43) Happy is that servant 43
whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so
doing. (44) Verily I say to you : He will place 44
him over all his po.ssessions. (45) But if that 45
servant shall say in his heart. My lord delayeth
his coming; and shall begin to smite the servants
and the maidens of his lord; and shall begin to
eat and to drink and be drunk ; (46) the lord of 46
that servant will come in a day he thinketh not,
and in an hour he knoweth not, and will cut him
in two ; and will assign him his portion with them
that are unfaithful. (47) And the servant that 47
knew his lord's pleasure, and did not prepare for
him according to his pleasure, shall be beaten with
many [stripes]. (48) But he that knew not, yet 48
did that which deserved stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes. For to whomsoever much is
given, from him. will much be required; and to
whom much is committed, the more will be
required at his hand. — (49) I have come to cast 49
fire on the earth; and I would, that it already
burned. _ (50) And I have a baptism^ to be bap- 50
tized'" with; and I am much pressed until it be
accomplished. (51) Suppose ye, that I have come 51
to produce" tranquillity on the earth ? I tell you.
No : but division. (52) For from this time, there 52
will be five [persons] in one house, who will be


LUKE, XIII.


135


divided, three against two, and two against three.

53 (53) For a father will be divided against his son,
and. a son against his flithcr ; a mother against her
daughter, and a daughter against her mother; a
rnothcr-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and a
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law,

54 And he said to the multitudes : When you see
a cloud rising out of the west, ye at once say:

55 liain is coming ; and it is so. (55) And when a
south wind bloweth, ye say : It will be hot : and

50 it is so. (5()) Ye hypocrites, jg know how to
distinguish the aspect of the heavens and the
earth ; and wh}'- can ye not distinguish the present

57 time? (57) And why do ye not, of yourselves,

58 judge correctly ?o — (58) And when thou goest
with thy adversaryP to the ruler,r Avhilc on the
way, make effort to be released by him ; lest he
bring thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee
to the exactor, and the exactor cast thee into

59 prison. (59) For verily I say to thee : Thou wilt
not come out thence, until thou pay the last mite.«

XIII. And at that time, some came and told him of
those Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled

2 with their sacrifices. (2) And Jesus replied, and
said to them : Suppose 3'e, that these Galileans
were sinners beyond all the Galileans, because this

3 occurred to them ? (3) No. And I say to you,
That all of you also, unless ye repent, will likewise

4 perish. (4) Or those eighteen, on whom the tower
in Siloara» fell, and slew them, suppose ye, that
they were sinners beyond all the men inhabiting

5 Jerusalem ? (5) No. And I say to you, That ex-
cept ye repent, ye like them will all of you perish,

6 — (6) And he spoke this similitude : A man had a
fig-tree that was planted in his vineyard : and he
came, seeking fruits upon it, and found none,

7 (7) And he said to the cultivator : Lo, these three
years, I have come seeking fruits on this fig-tree,
and I find none. Cut it down: why should it

8 cumber the ground? (8) The cultivator said to
him : My Lord, spare it this year also, until I shall

9 work about it, and manurcit. (9) And if it bear
_ fruits, [well ;] and if not, f thou wilt cut it down :

why should it live? '

10 And when Jesus was teaching in one of the


Sy. truth.
or, prosecvtor.

Sy. jjoajl

Sy. "jjoiDji


Sy.


136


LUKE, XIII.


12


1 ^


' Sy. to drill'':.
*■ Sy.


Sy.


16


17


synagogues, on the sabbath, (11) a woman was there, 1 1
who had had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years ;
and she was bent over, and could not straighten
herself at all. (12) And Jesus saw her, and called
her, and said to her: Woman, thou art released
from thy infirmity. (13) And he put his hand
upon her ; and immediately she straightened her-
'' Sy. s^n^j I self up, and glorified God. (14) And the chief' of 14
the synagogue, being angry that Jesus had healed
I on the sabbath, answered, and said to the multi-
tude : There are six days, on which it is lawful to
work ; on them come ye, and be healed, and not
on the sabbath day. (15) But Jesus replied, and 15
said to him : Thou hypocrite ! Doth not every one
of you, on the sabbath, loose his ox or his ass from
the stall, and lead him to water ?<= (16) And this
woman, a daughter of Abraham, whom the Ca-
lumniator'' hath bound, lo, these eighteen years,
ought she not to be loosed from this bond on the
sabbath day? (17) And when he had said these
things, all those that stood up against him were
ashamed : and all the people rejoiced in all the
miracles^ that were wrought by his hand. —

(18) And Jesus said : To what is the kingdom of 18
God like? and with what shall I compare it?

(19) It is like a grain of mustard, which a man
took and cast into his garden ; and it grew, and
became a large tree ; and a bird of heaven made
her nest in its branches. (20) Jesus said again:
With what shall I compare the kingdom of God?
(21) It is like leaven, which a woman took and 21

' Sy. -lijifl i ^^^ ill three seahs^ of meal, until the whole was
I fermented.

j And he travelled through the villages and cities,
teaching and going towards Jerusalem. (23) And
la person asked him, whether they were few,
Sy. ^|>jj who would have life?s (24) And Jesus said to
them : Strive to enter the narrow gate : for I say
to you, many will seek to enter, and will not be
able. (25) From the time that the lord of the 25
house shall rise and close the door, then ye will
stand without, and knock at the door; and ye will
begin to say: Our Lord, our Lord, open to us;
and he will answer, and say: I tell you, I know
you not, whence ye are. (26) And ye will begin 26
to say : We have eaten and drunken before thee ;


19


20


22
23

24


LUKE, XIV


137


27 and tliou hast tauglit in our streets. (27) And lie
will say to you: 1 know you not, whence ye are:

28 depart from me, ye doers of falsehood, (28) There
will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye
will see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the prophets, in tlie kingdom of God; and your-

29 selves will be thrust out. (29) And they will
come from the east and from the west, and from
the south and from the north, and will recline in

30 the kingdom of God, (80) And lo, there are last
that will be first, and there are first that will bo
last.

31 On the same day came some of the Pharisees,
and said to him: Go, dei)art hence; for llerod

32 purposeth to kill thee. (32) Jesus said to them:
Go ye and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out demons
and perform cures, to-day and to-morrow, and on

33 the third day I shall be consummated. (33) But I
must labor to-day and to-morrow, and on the fol-
lowing day I will go; because it cannot be, that a
prophet should perish away from Jerusalem. —

34 (31:) O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the pro-
phets, and stonest them that are sent to thee;
how many times would I have gathered thy chil-
dren, as a hen that gathereth her young under

35 her wings, and ye would not? (35) Behold, your
house is left to you desolate. For I say to you :
Ye will not see me, until ye will say, Blessed is he
that Cometh in the name of the Lord,

XIV, And it occurred, that, as he entered the
house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread,

2 on the sabbath da}^, they watched him, (2) And

3 lo, a dropsical^ man was before him. (3) And
Jesus answered, and said to the Scribes and Phari-

4 sees : Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath ? (4) And
they were silent. And he took him, and healed

6 him, and dismissed him. (5) And ho said to them:
Which of you, if his son or his ox fall into a pit
on the sabbath day, doth not immediately lift and

6 draw him out? (G) And they could give him no

7 answer to that. — (7) And he spoke a similitude
to the guests that were ])rcsent, as he noticed how

8 they chose places on the highest couches, (8) When
thou art invited by any one to a house of feasting,
go not and recline on the highest couch ; lest there


' Sy. who had
collected water.


138


LUKE, XIV.

should bo invited there, one more honorable than
thou ; (9) and he that invited both him and thee, 9
come and saj to thee. Give place to this man ;
and thou be ashamed, when thou risest, and takest
a lower couch. (10) But when thou art invi- 10
ted, go and recline on the lowest [couch] ; that
when he who invdted thee come, he may sa}'- to
thee: My friend, come up higher and recline.
And thou wilt have honor, before all that recline
with thee. (11) For, every one that exalteth him- 11
self, will be humbled : and every one that hum-
bleth himscll^ will be exalted. — (12) And he said 12
to him that invited him: When thou makest a
dinner or a supper, invite not thy friends, nor thy
brothers, nor thy relatives, nor thy rich neigh-
bors; lest they also invite thee, and thou have
this recompense. (13) But when thou makest a 13
feast, invite the poor, the maimed, the lame, the
blind, (14) And thou wilt be blessed. For they 14
cannot recompense thee ; but thy recompense will
be at the resurrection of the just. — (15) And when 15
one of those reclining heard these things, he said to
him : Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the king-
dom of God. (16) Jesus said to him: A certain 16
man made a great supper, and invited many.
(17) And at the time for supper, he sent his ser- 17
vant to say to those invited : Lo, every thing is
ready for you; come. (18) And they all to a man, 18
began to excuse themselves. The first said to him :
I have bought a field, and am constrained to go out
and see it. I pray thee, allow me to be excused.
(19) Another said: I have bought five yoke of 19
oxen, and I go to inspect them. I pray thee, allow
me to be excused. (20) Another said: 1 have 20
married a wife, and on this account I cannot come.
(21) And the servant came, and told his lord these 21
things. Then the lord of the house was angry :
and he said to his servant. Go out quickly into the
market-places and streets of the city, and bring in
hither the poor, and the diseased, and the lame,
and the blind. (22) And the servant said: My 22
lord, it is done as thou commandedst; and still
there is room. (23) And the lord said to his ser- 23
vant: Go out to the by-paths, and among the
hedges, and constrain them to come in ; that my
house may be filled. (24) For T declare to you, 24


LUKE, XV.

that not one of those men that were invited, shall
taste of my supper.

25 And wli'en great multitudes were travelling with

26 him, he turned himself, and said to them : (26) He
that cometh to me, and hateth not his father and
his mother, and his brothers and his sisters, and
his wife and his children, and his own life** also,

27 oaimot become a disciple to me. (27) And he that
doth not take up his cross and come after me, can-

28 not become a disciple to me. (28) For, which yf
you, wishing to build a tower, doth not first sit
down and compute the expense, whether he have

29 the means to complete it? (29) lest, when he hath
laid the foundation, and is unable to finish, all that

oO see it begin to deride him; (30) and say: This
man began to build, and was unable to finish.

?>l (31) Or what king, that is going to contend in bat-
tle with his neighbor king, doth not first consider,
whether he is able, with ten thousand, to meet him
that is coming against him with twenty thousand ?

32 (32) and if not; while he is yet far from him, he

33 sendeth envoys, and sueth for peace. (33) So
every one of you who doth not give up all his

34 possessions, cannot be my disciple. — (34) Salt is a
good thing : but if the salt itself hath become in

35 sipid, wherewith shall it be salted? (35) It is fit^
for neither the earth, nor the dunghill. They cast
it away. — lie that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

XV. And publicans and sinners came to him, to hear

2 him. (2) And the Scribes and Pharisees mur-
mured, and said : This man receiveth sinners, and

3 cateth with them. (3) And Jesus spoke to them

4 this similitude:^ (4) What man among you, that
hath a hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth
not leave the ninety and nine in the desert, and go
and seek for that which is lost, until he find it?

5 (5) And when he findeth it, he rejoiceth, and

6 taketh it upon his shoulders; (6) and he cometh
lioine, and he calleth together his friends and
neighbors, and saith to them : Rejoice Avith me ;

7 for I have ibund my sheej) that Avas lost. (7) I
say to you, that there will thus be joy in heaven,
over one sinner that repenteth, more than over
ninety and nine just ones, to whom repentance was

8 not necessary. — (8) Or what woman is there, who,


139


Sy. crUfc_2LJ


Sy. goes to.


or, parable.


140


LUKE, XV.


^ Sy. sons cf lac
city.

'Sy.


Sy. shoe him.


9


10

11
12


if she have ten drachmas, and lose one of thera,
doth not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and
search for it carcfnllj, until she lind it ? (9) And
when she hath found it, she calleth together her
friends and neighbors, and saitli to them : Eejoice
with me, for I have found mj drachma that was
lost. (10) I say to you, That there will thus be
joy, before the angels of God, over one sinner
that rcpenteth. — (11) And 'Jesus said to them
again: A certain man had two sons. (12) And
his 3-ounger son said to him : My father, give me
the "portion that falleth to me from thy house.
And he divided to them his property. (13) And
after a few days, the younger son collected together
all that fell to him, and went to a distant place ;
and there squandered his property, by living in
dissipation. (II) And when he had consumed all
that he had, there occurred a great famine in that
place ; and he began to be in want. (15) And he
went and connected himself with one of the citi-
zens^ of that place : and he sent him into the field,
to tend swine. (16) And he longed to fill his belly 16
with those pods which the swine ate : and no one
gave to him. (17) And when he came to himself, ^^
he said : How many hired servants are now at my
father's house, Avho have bread enough, and I am
here perishing with hunger. (18) I will arise and
go to my fother, and say to him: My hither, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee;
(19) and am no longer worthy to be called thy son.
Make me like one of thy hired servants. (20) And 20
he arose and went towards his father. And he
was yet at a distance, when his father saw him ;
and he pitied him, and ran, and fell upon his neck,
and kissed him. (21) And his son said to him:
My father, I have sinned against heaven, and be-
fore thee, and am not worthy to be called thy son.
(22) But his father said to his servants: Bring
forth the best robe, and clothe him, and put a
ring on his hand, and supply^ him with shoes.
(23^ And bring forth and slay the flitted bullock ; 23
and let us eat, and be merry. (24) For, this my
son was dead, and is alive ; he was lost, and is
found. And they began to be merry. (25) But
his older son was in the field; and as he came and
drew near to the house, he heard the sound of the


14


15


17


18


19


21


22


24
25


LUKE, XVL


141


26 singing of many. (26) And lie called to one of

27 tlie boys, and asked him what it meant. (27) And
he said to him : Thy brother hatli come ; and thy
father hath killed the fatted bullock, because he

28 hath received him in health. (28) And he was
angry, and would not go in : and his father went

29 out and entreated him. (29) And he said to his
father : Lo, these many years have I labored in thy
service, and never transgressed thy command ; and
thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make

30 merry with my friends. (30) Bat for this thy son,
when he had dissipated thy property v/ith harlots,
and came [home], thou hast slain the fatted bul-

31 lock for him. (31) Ilis father said to him: My
son, thou hast been ever with me, and all that I

82 have, is thine. (32) But it was proper for us to
be merry, and to rejoice ; because this thy brother
was dead, and is alive ; he was lost, and is found.

XVI. And he spoke a parable to his disciples. There
was a certain rich man, who had a steward ; and
accusations were brought to him of him, that he

2 squandered his property. (2) And his lord called
him, and said to him : What is this that I hear of
thee? Kender to me an account of thy steward-
ship ; for thou canst no longer be my steward,

3 (3) And the steward said with himself; What
shall I do, since my lord is .about to take from me
the stewardship? To dig, I am unable; and to

•1 become a beggar, I am ashamed. (-1) I know what
to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship,

5 they may receive me to their houses. (5) And he
called each one of his lord's debtors ; and he said
to tlic first. How much owest thou to my lord?

6 (6) And he said to him, One hundred measures^ of
oil. And he said to him : Take thy bill, and sit

7 down quickly, and write Fifty measures. (7) And
he snid to another; And how much owest thou to
my lord ? And he said to him, One hundred corsi^
of wheat. And he said to him ; Take thy bill, and

8 sit down, and write P]ighty cors. (8) And our Lord
praised the unrighteous steward, for having acted
sagaciously ; for the children of this world are more
sagacious than the children of light, in this their

9 generation. (9) And I also say to you : Make to
yourselves friends, with this unrighteous mammon ;«=


Sy.
Cr.


>y.^


•)QD


' Sy. ] inV><r>


"" or, the truth.


« Sy. Vo5, high.


' Sy. 5p^


' Sy. liDai.

i- Sy. ^
Gr. ot^jjff.


so that when it is finislied, they may receive you
to their everlasting tabernacles. (10) He that is 10
faithful in the little, is also faithful in the much;
and he that is unjust in the little, is also unjust in
the much. (11) If therefore ye have not been 11
faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will
intrust to you the reality?'^ (12) And if ye have 12
not been found faithful in that which is not
yours, who will give to you 'that which is yours ?
(18) There is no servant, who can serve two lords. 13
For, either he will hate the one and love the other,
or he will honor the one and despise the other.
Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

And the Pharisees, when they heard all these 14
things, because they loved money, derided him.
(15) And Jesus said to them: Ye are such as jus- 15
tify yourselves before men ; but God knowcth
your heart : for that which is exalted^ among men,
is abominable before God. (16) The law and the 16
prophets were until John : since then, the kingdom
of God is proclaimed, and every one presseth it to
enter in. (17) And it is easier for heaven and 17
earth to pass away, than for one letter to pass from
the law. — (18) Whoever putteth away his wife, 18
and taketh another, committeth adultery ; and
whoever taketh her that is put away, committeth
adultery. — (19) And there was a certain rich man, 19
who was clothed in fine linen and scarlet, and
passed every day in splendid luxury. (20) And 20
there was a certain poor man, whose name was
Lazarus ;f and he was laid at the gate of the rich
man, smitten with ulcers. (21) And he desired to 21
fill his belly with the fragments that fell from the
rich man's table: and the dogs also came and
licked his ulcers. (22) And so it was, that the 22
poor man died; and angels transported him to
Abraham's bosom.? The rich man also died, and
w;xs buried. (23) And being tormented in hell,h 23
he raised his eyes from afar oft* and saw Abraham,
and Lazarus in his bosom. (24) And ho called with 24
a loud voice, and said : Abraham, my father, have
pity on me ; and send Lazarus, that he may dip the
tip of his finger in water, and moisten my tongue ;
for, lo, I am tormented in this flame. (25) And 25
Abraham said to him: My son, remember, that
thou receivedst thy good things in thy lifetime,


LUKE, XVII.


143


and Lazarus his evil things : and now, behold, he

26 is here at rest, and thou art tormented. (26) And
with all these, there is a great barrier' between us
and you ; so that they who would pass from here
to you, cannot; neither [ean they] pass irom there

27 to us. (27) lie said to him : I pray thee, there-
fore, my father, that thou wouldst send him to my

28 father's house ; (28) for I have five brothers ; that
he may go and protest to them ; lest they also come

29 to this place of torment. (29) Abraham said to
him : They have Moses and the prophets, let them

30 hear them. (30) But he said to him : No, my
father Abraham : but if one shall go to them from

31 the dead, they will repent. (31) Abraham said to
him: If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
they will not believe, though one should rise from
the dead.

XVII. And Jesus said to his disciples : It cannot be,
but that oifences=^ will come : but woe to him, by

2 whom they come. (2) Better for him were it, if a
millstone were suspended to his neck, and he cast
into the sea, than that he should cause one of these

3 little ones to stumble. (3) Take heed to your-
selves.— If thy brother transgress, rebuke him;

4 and if ho repent, forgive him. (4) vVnd if he shall
oftend against thee seven times in a day, and, seven
times in a day, shall turn himself to thee, and say,

5 I repent ; forgive him. — (5) And the Legates'' said

6 to our Lord: Increase our faith. (6) He said to
them : If ye had faith like a grain of mustard seed,
ye might say to this mulberry -tree, Be thou torn
u}) by the roots, and be thou planted in the sea ;

7 and it would obey you. — (7) Which of you, having
a servant driving a yoke of oxen, or tending sheep,
will say to him when he cometh from the field,

8 Pass on at once, and recline for supper ? (8) But
he will say to him : Prepare for me what I may
sup upon, and gird thy loins and serve me, until I
have eaten and drunken ; and afterwards thou shalt

0 cat and drink. (9^ Ilath he thanks for him, be-
cause the servant aid what was commanded him ?
10 I think not. (10) So also ye, when ye have done
all the things commanded you, say : We are un-
profitable servants, for we have done only what
we were obligated to do.


Sy.]klk£Q


stumbling'
blocks.


or, Apostles.


.:\\


144


LUKE, XVIL


Sy.


^ Sy. j^Aj_k.1


Sy.


14


15


16


And it occurred as Jesus advanced towards Jeru- 11
salem, that he passed, among tlie Samaritans into
Galilee.'^ (12) And when he drew near to enter a 12
certain village, there met him ten leprous men;
and. they stood at a distance, (13) and raised their 13
voice, and said : Our Kabbi, Jesus, have compas-
sion upon us. (14) And when he had looked up-
on them, he said to them : Go, show yourselves to
the priests. And as they we're going, they were
cleansed. (15) And one of them, when he saw
that he was cleansed, returned, and with a loud
voice, gloritied God. (16) And he fell on his face,
a,t the feet of Jesus, and thanked him. And he
was a Samaritan. (17) And Jesus answered, and 17
said: Were they not ten who were cleansed?
Where are the nine? (18) Have they so gone as 18
not to come and give glory to God ; except this
one, who is of another nation? (19) And he said
to him: Arise, and go: thy faith hath given thee
life.d

And as [some] of the Pharisees asked him.
When the kingdom of God would come ; he an-
swered, and said to them: The kingdom of God
will not come with observables.^ (21) And they
will not sa}' : Behold, here it is ! or. Behold, it is
there ! For lo, the kingdom of God is within you.
— (22) And he said to his disciples : The days will 22
come, when ye will long to see one of the days of
the Son of man, and ye will not see [them].
(23) And if they shall say to you : Lo, here he is !
or, Lo, there he is! go not forth. (24) For, as
the lightning dartcth from the heavens, and illu-
minateth all beneath the heavens; so will the Son
of man be, in his day. (25) But, previously, he 25
is to suffer many things, and to be rejected by this
generation. (26) And as it was in the days of
Noah, so will it be in the days of the Son of man.
(27) They ate and drank, they took wives and
were given to husbands, until the day that Noah
entered the ark ; and the flood came, and destroyed
every one. (28) And again, as it Avas in the da3^s 28
of Lot; they ate and drank, bought and sold,
planted and built. (29) But in the day that Lot 29
went out of Sodom, the Lord rained fire and
sulphur from heaven, and destroyed them all.
(30) Thus Avill it be, in the day when the Son of 80


19


20


21


23
24


26
27


LUKE, XVIIl.


145


32
33
3-4

35

36

37


31 man shall be revealed. (31) In that day, let him
that is on the house-top, and his goods in tlic house,
not come down to take them : and let him that is
in the held, not return [after what is] behind him.
(32) Remember Lot's wife. (33) He that desireth
to preserve^ his life, will lose it; and he that
will lose his life, shall preserves it. (34) I tell
you, that, in that night, two will be in one bed ;
one will be taken, and the other left. (35) And
two females will be grinding together; one will be
taken, and the other left. (36) Two men will be
in the lield ; one will be taken, and the other left.
— (37) They answered, and said to him : Whither,
our Lord ? He said to them : Where the body
is, there will the eagles assemble themselves. —

XVIIL And he spoke to them a siniilitude also, that
men should pray at all times, ^^ and not become

2 weary. (2) There was a judge in a certain city,
who feared not God, and regarded not men.

3 (3) And there was a certain Avidow in that city ;
and she came to him, and said : Vindicate me

4 against my adversary. (4) And he would not, for
a long time : but afterwards, he said to himself:
Though I fear not God, and regard not men,

5 (5) yet, because this widow troublcth mc, I will
vindicate her; that she may not be always coming

6 and troubling me. (6) And our Lord said : Hear

7 what the unjust judge saith, (7) An-d will not
God, much more, vindicate his chosen, who call
upon him by day and by night; and have patience
with them ? (8) I tell you. He will vindicate them
speedily. Yet the Son of man will come ; and
will he find faith on the earth ?

And he spake this similitude, against certain
persons, who had confidence in themselves that
they were righteous, and despised every one.

10 (10) Two men went up to the temple to pray ; the

11 one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. (11) And
the Pharisee stood by himself, and prayed thus :
God, I thank thee that I have not been like the
rest of men, rapacious, oppressive, and adulterous ;
nor like this publican. (12) But I fast twice in a
week, and tithe all I possess. (13) And the pub-
lican stood afar ofi', and would not even lift his eyes
to heaven, but smote upon his breast, and said :

14 God, be merciful to me, a sinner. (14) I say to


8


9


12
13


' Sy. "Ujj

f Sy. cru_K>j


• Sy.

or, every op-
porhmity.


146


" Sy. sCitLD


LUKE, XVIII.


<= Sy. ]\ (> .3
^ Sy. ]i gsVvn


Sy. t»^n\


' Gr. Peter.


you, that this [man] went down to liis house justi-
fied,^ rather than the Pharisee. For every one
that exaltcth himself, will be humbled ; and every
one that humbleth himself, will be exalted.

And they brought to him infants, that he might 15
touch them : and his disciples saw them, and re-
buked them. (16) But Jesus called them, and 16
said to them: Suffer little children to come to
me, and forbid them not ; for of those that are
like them, of such is the kingdom of heaven.
(17) Verily I say to you. That he who shall not 17
receive the kingdom of God, as a little child, will
not enter it.

And one of the chiefs^ asked him, and said to 18
him: Good Teacher, '^ what shall I do, that I may
inherit eternal life ? (19) Jesus said to him : Why 19
callest thou me, good? For, there is none good,
except one ; God. (20) Thou knowest the com- 20
mandments : Thou shalt not kill ; and thou shalt
not commit adultery ; and thou shalt not steal ;
and thou shalt not testify a false testimony ; honor
thy father and thy mother. (21) He said to 21
him : All these have I kept, from my childhood.

(22) And when Jesus heard these [words], he said 22
to him: One thing is lacking to thee: go, sell all
that thou hast, and give to the poor; and thou
wilt have a treasure in heaven ; and come after me.

(23) And he, when he heard these [words], was 23
dejected ; for he was very rich. (21) And Avhen 24
Jesus saw that he was dejected, he said: How
difficult [it is], for those that have wealth, to enter
into the kingdom of God ! (25) It is easier for a 25
camel to enter the eye of a needle, than a rich
nian the kingdom of God. (26) They who heard 26
[it], said to him: Who then can liave^ life?
(27) And Jesus said: Those things which, -with 27
men, cannot be, with God, can be.— (28) Simon 28
Cephas^ said to him : Lo, we have left every thing,
and come after thee. (29) Jesus said to him: 29
Verily I say to you : There is no man, who hath
left houses, or parents, or brothers, or wife, or chil-
dren, for the sake of the kingdom of God, (30) that 30
shall not receive manifold in the present time,
and, in the coming world, eternal life.

And Jesus took his twelve, and said to them : 31
Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem ; and all the


LUKE, XIX.


147


things written in the prophets, concerning the Son
82 of man, will be fumiled. (32) For he will be de-
livered over to the Gentiles ; and they will mock
33 him, and spit in his face ; (33) and will scourge him,
and will treat him with ignominy, and will kill
him ; and, the third day, he will arise, (34) But
not one of these things, did they understand ; but
this subject? was hidden from them, and they knew
not the things told to them.

And as they came near to Jericho, a blind man
was sitting by the side of the way, begging.
(36) And he heard the noise of the multitude that
passed, and inquired what it was. (37) They
say to him : Jesus the Nazarean is passing by.
(38) And he called out, and said: Jesus, Son of
David, have mercy on me. (39) And they that
went before Jesus rebuked him, that he might be
silent. But he cried out the more. Son of David,
have mercy on me. (40) And Jesus stood, and
commanded him to be called to him. And when
he came to him, he asked him, (41) and said to
him: What wilt thou, that I do for thee? And
he said : My Lord, that I may see. (42^ And
Jesus said to him : See thou ; thy fiiith hath vivi-
fied'' thee. (43) And immediately he saw. And
he followed after him, and glorified God. And all
the people who beheld, gave glory to God.


34


35

36
37

88
39


40
41


42


43


XIX. And as Jesus entered and passed through

2 Jericho, (2) [there was] a certain man, whose name
was Zacchcus,''^ who was rich, and chief' of the

3 publicans; (3) and he wished to see Jesus, who he
was ; and could not, on account of the crowd ; be-

4 cause Zacchcus was small in stature. ^4) And he
ran forward of Jesus, and climbed a wild lig-tree,
in order to see him ; for he was to pass that Avay

5 (5) And when Jesus came to the place, he saw
him, and said to him : Make haste and come down,
Zacchcus; for I must be at thy house to-day.

6 (6) And he hastened, and came down, and received

7 him with gladness. (7) And when they all saw
[it], they murmured, and said: He hath gone in

8 to he guest with a man that is a sinner. (8) And
Zacchcus stood up, and said to Jesus : Behold, my
Lord, the half of my riches I give to the poor;
and to every man, whom I have wronged in any


e Sy. word.


SJ^ »^Z\juK»]


Sy. .mS)]

Sy. ^^j


148 LUKE, XIX.

tiling, I restore fourfold. (9) Jesus said to him: 9

Sy. ]jL>j This day, lifec is to this house ; for he also is a son

of Abraham. (10) For the Son of man came, to 10
^ Sy, "|.>,kJO seek and to vivify^ that which was lost.

And when they heard these things, he proceeded 11

or, jparahh. to Utter a similitude ]^ because he was near to Jeru-
salem, and they supposed that the kingdom of God
was to be soon developed. (12) And he said: A 12
certain man of high birth wa§ going to a distant
place, to obtain royalty, and return again. (13) And 13
^Ry . i<-n— he called his ten servants, and gave them ten

Gr. ixvaj. pounds :'" and he said to them, Traffic until I come.

(14) But the inhabitants? of his city hated him ; 14

Sy. sons. and they sent envoys after him, saying: We wish

this man not to reign over us. (15) And when he 15
had obtained the royalty, and had returned, he
commanded those servants to be called, to whom
he had committed his money ; that he might know
what each of them had gained by trading.
(16) And the first came, and said: My Lord, thy 16
pound hath gained ten pounds. (17) He said to 17
him: Well done, good servant! As thou hast
been faithful over a little, thou shalt have author-
ity over ten towns. (18) And the second came, 18
and said : My lord, thy pound hath produced five
pounds. (19) He said likewise to him: Thou also 19
shalt have autliority over live towns. (20) And 20
another came, and said : My lord, lo, this is thy
pound, which hath been with me, laid up in fine
linen. (21) For I was afraid of thee, because thou 21
art a hard man, and takest up that which thou lay-
cdst not down, and rcapcst that which thou sowedst
not. (22) He said to him: Out of thy own mouth 22
will I judge thee, thou evil servant. Thou knew-
cst me, that I am a hard man, and that I take up
what I laid not down, and reap what I sowed not !
(23) Why didst thou not put my money into the 23
broker's liands, that when I came, I might have
demanded it with interest? (24) And he said to 24
them that stood before him: Take from him the
pound, and give it to him with whom are the ten
pounds. (25) They say to him : Our lord, there 25
are with him ten pounds, (26) He said to them : 26
I tell you, that to every one that hath, will be
given ; and from him that hath not, even what he
hath will be taken away. (27) But as for those 27


LUKE, XIX.


149


my enemies, who would not have me to reigu over
them, bring them and slay them before me.

28 And when Jesus had spoken these things, he

29 went forward, to go to Jerusalem. (29) And when
he arrived at Bethphagc and Bethany, near to the
mount called the place of Olives, he sent two of

SO his disciples, (30) and said to them: Go ye to the
village that is over against us, and as yc enter [it],
ve will find a colt tied, on which no man ever rode ;

81 loose [him] and bring [him]. (31) And if any
man ask you. Why do ye loose him ? say to liim :

32 Our Lord needeth him. (32) And they went who
were sent, and they found, as he said to them.

33 (33) And as they loosed the colt, the owner of
him said to them : Why do ye loose that colt ?

0-4 (31) And they said: Because our Lord needeth

35 him. (35) And they brought him to Jesus. And
they cast their garments upon the colt, and set

36 Jesus upon him. (36) And as he went, they

37 spread their garments in the way. (37) And when
he came near to the descent of the place of Olives,
the whole multitude of the disciples began to re-
joice, and to praise God, with a loud voice, for all

38 the mighty deeds'' which they had seen. (38) And
they said : Blessed be the king, that comctli in the
name of the Lord : peace in heaven, and glory on

39 high. (39) And some of the Pharisees from among
the crowd, said to him : Rabbi, rebuke thy disci-

40 pies. (40) He said to them : I tell you, that, if
these should be silent, the stones would cry out. —

41 (41) And as he drew near, and beheld the city, he

42 wept over it: (42) and said: 0, hadst thou known
the things that are of thy peace, at least in this thy
day : but now they are hidden from thy eyes.

43 (43) For the days will come upon thee, when thy
enemies will encompass thee, and besiege thee on

44 every side. (44) And they will destroy thee, and
thy cliildrcn within thee ; and will not leave in
thee one stone' upon another ; because thou knew-

45 est not the time of thy visitation. — (45) And when
he entered the temple, he began to expel those

46 who bought and sold in it. (46) And he said to
them : It is written, My house is a house of prayer ;

47 but ye have made it a den of robbers. — (47) And
he taught daily in the temple : and the chief })ricsts
and Scribes and Elders of the people, sought to'


Sy. ]Jj


Sy. f^fom upon
stone.


loO


LUKE, XX.


• Sy. he added
and.

*> Sy. he added
and.


destroy him. (48) But they found not, what they 48
could do to him ; for all the people hung upon him
to hear him.

And on one of those days, as he was teaching XX.
the people in the temple, and preaching, the chief
priests and Scribes, with the Elders, came upon
him, (2) and said to him : Tell us, by what author- 2
ity thou doest these things? 'And who is it, that
gave thee this authority? (3) Jesus answered, 3
and said to them: I also will ask you a word,
and tell ye me. (4) The baptism of John, was it 4
from heaven, or from men? (5) And they rea- 5
soncd with themselves, and said : If we say. From
heaven ; he will say to us, And why did ye not
believe him ? (6) But if we say. From men ; all 6
the people will stone us ; for they are persuaded
that John was a prophet. (7) And they said to 7
him : We do not know, whence it was. (8) Jesus 8
said to them : Neither do I tell you, by what au-
thority I do these things.

And he began to utter this similitude to the 9
people : A certain man planted a vineyard, and
leased it to cultivators, and went abroad for a long
time. (10) And in time, he sent his servant to the 10
cultivators, that they might give him of the fruits
of the vineyard. But the cultivators beat him,
and sent him away empty. (11) And again^^ he 11
sent another servant ; and him also they beat, and
treated with rudeness, and sent empty away.
(12) And agaiub he sent the third. And they 12
wounded him, and cast him out. (13) The lord 13
of the vineyard said: What shall I do? I will
send my dear son. Perhaps they will look upon
him, and be ashamed. (14) But when the cultiva- 14
tors saw him, they reasoned with themselves, and
said : This is the heir ; come, let us kill him, and
the inheritance will be ours. (15) And they east 15
him out of the vineyard, and slew him. What
therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them ?

(16) He will come, and destroy those cultivators, 16
and will lease the vineyard to others. — And when
they heard [it], they said: 'This shall not be.

(17) And he looked upon them, and said: What 17
is that which is written. The stone, which the
builders rejected, is become the chief corner stone ?


LUKE, XX.


151


19


20


22
23

24

25

26


27

28


80

31

32
33

34


36


18 (18) And whoever shall fall upon this stone, will be
broken ; and on whomsoever it shall fall, it will
crush him in pieces. (19) And tlie chief priests
and Scribes sought to lay hands on him, at that
time;c but they were afraid of the people; for
they knew, that he spoke this similitude against
them.

And they sent to him spies, who feigned them-
selves righteous men, that they might insnarc him
in discourse, and deliver him up to a court, and to

21 the authority of the jjresident.'i (21) And they
questioned him, and said to him: Teacher,^ we
know that thou speakest and teachest correctly,
and hast no respect of persons, but teachest the
way of God in truth, (22) Is it lawful for us to
pay head-money to Crcsar, or not? (23) But he
perceived their craftiness, and said: Why tempt ye
me? (24) Show me a denarius. Whose is this
image and superscription upon it? Thej^ said to
him, Caesar's. (25) Jesus said to them : Then, give
to Ciissar what is Ca?sar's, and to God what is God's.
(26) And they could not catch from him a word
[of accusation] before the people: and they were
surprised at his answers, and were silent.

And some of the Sadducees, who say there is no
resurrection, came and questioned him, (28) and
said to him: Teacher, Moses wrote to us, that if a
man's brother die, who had a wife without chil-
dren, his [surviving] brother shall take his wife, and

29 raise up seed to his [deceased] brother. (29) Now,
there were seven brothers; and the first took a
wife, and died without children, (30) And the
second took her to Avife; and he died without chil-
dren. (31) And again, the third took her, and in
like manner also all the seven; and they died, and
left no children. (32) At last, the woman likewise
diccL (33) In the resurrection, therefore, of which
of them will she be the wife, for the seven took her ?

(34) Jesus said to them: The children of this
world take wives, and wives arc given to husbands.

(35) But they who are worthy of that world, and
of the resurrection from the dead, do not take
wives, nor are wives given to husbands. {S6) Nei-
ther can they die any more; for they arc as the
angels, and are the children of God, because they

37 are children of the resurrection. (37) But that


Sy. hour


lOl


152


LUKE, XXI.


»'^'^\^'-^


Sy. "jjoio!*


the dead will arise, even Moses showed ; for, at the
bush, he maketli mention, while he saith: The
Lord, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob. (38) Now God is not [the God] 38
of the dead, but of the living; for they all live to
him. (39) And some of the Scribes answered, 39
and said to him : Teacher, thou hast spoken well.
(40) And they did not again venture to question 40
him, on any matter.

And he said also to them : How do the Scribes 41
say of Messiah, that he is the son of David ?
(42) And David himself said, in tlie book of 42
Psalms: The Lord said to my Lord, seat thyself
at my right hand, (43) until I shall ph^ce thy foes'" 43
under thy feet. (44) If David, therefore, called 44
him. My Lord; how is he his son? (45) And 45
while all the people heard, he said to his disciples:
(46) Beware of the Scribes, who choose to walk in 46
long robes, and love a salutation in the streets, and
the chief seats in the synagogues, and the chief
couches at suppers: (47) who eat up the houses of 47
widows, under pretence that they prolong their
prayers. They will receive a greater condemnation.

And Jesus looked upon the rich, who cast their XXL
oblations into the treasury. (2) And he saw also 2
a certain poor widow, who cast in two mites.^
(3) And he said : Truly I say to you, that this poor 3
widow hath cast in more than any one. (4) For 4
all they, from what was superfluous to them, have
east into the receptacle of oblations to God ; but
she, from her penury, hath cast in all that she
possessed.

And when some spoke of the temple, as adorned 5
with goodly stones and oblations, Jesus said to
them : (6) [As for] these things, on which ye gaze, 6
the days will come, in which there will not be left
a stone upon a stone, that is not cast down. (7) And 7
they questioned him, and said: Teacher, when
will these things be? And what is the sign that
they are near to take place ? (8) And he said to 8
them : See, that ye be not deceived ; for many
will come in my name, and will say : I am Messiah ;
and the time is near. But go ye not after them.
(9) And when ye shall hear of wars and commo- 9
tions, be not afraid ; for these things are previously


LUKE, XXI.


153


13
14

15

16


17


10 to take place, but the end is not jct come. (10) For
n.ation will rise against nation, and kingdom against

11 kingdom ; (11) and great earthquakes will occur in
several places, and lamines, and pestilences;'' and
there will be terrors, and trepidations, and great signs
from heaven will bo seen, and there will be great

12 tempests. — (12) But before all these things, they
will lay hands upon you, and will persecute you,
and will deliver you up to councils^ and to ]jrison,
and will arraign you before kings and governors,''
on account of my name. (13) But it will be to
you for a testimony. (14) And settle it in 3'our
hearts, that ye will not ])reviously seek instruction
for making a defence. (15) For I will give you a
mouth and wisdom, wliich all your enemies will
be unable to withstand. (16) And your parents,
and your brothers, and your relatives, and your
friends, Avill deliver you up, and cause some of you
to die. (17) And ye will be hated by every one,

18 on account of my name. (18) But a hair of your

19 head shall not perish. (19) And by your patience,

20 will 3'e preserve your souls. — (20) And when ye
shall sec Jerusalem with an army encompassing it,
then know ye, that its destruction draweth nigh.
(21) Then let them who shall be in Judaea, flee to
the mountain [district] ; and let them, who are in
the midst of it,^ flee away; and those in the lields,
not enter it. (22) For these arc da^'s of vengeance,
to fulfill all that is written. (23) But woe to them
that .iire with child, and to them that nurse chil-
dren, in those days ; for then will be great distress

24 in the land,^ and wrath upon this people. (24) And
they will fall by the edges of the sword, and be
carried captive to every place. And Jerusalem
will be trodden down by the Gentiles, until the
times of the Gentiles shall be completed. — (25) And
there will be signs in the sun, and in the moon,
and in the stars; and distress of nations on the
earth ; and clasping of hands, from astonishment
at the noise of the sea; (26) and dismay that
driveth out the souls of men, from fear of that
whieh is to come on the cartli; and the powers'"
of heaven will be moved. (27) And then will
tliey sec the Son of man coming in the clouds, with
much ])Owcr, and with great glory. (28) And
when these things shall begin to be, take courage,


21


22
23


25


26


27
28


' Sy. mortalities.


'^ or,synagogues.


« i. e. Jerusalem.


•" Sy. earth.
K Sy. mouth.


or, armies.


Sy. lAsj


^ Sy. earth.


Sy. "^4eD


and lift up your heads, for your deliverance dravv-
eth nigh. — (29) And he uttered a similitude to 29
them. Look at the ii2;-tree, and all the trees.
(30) When they bud forth, ye at once understand 30
from them, that summer approacheth. (31) So also, 31
when yc shall see all these things take place, know
ye that the kingdom of God is near. (32) Verily 32
I say to you, That this generation' will not pass
away, until all these things occur. (33) Heaven 33
and earth will pass away ; but my word will not
pass away. — (34) Take heed to yourselves, that 34
your hearts be, at no time, stupefied by gluttony
and ebriety and Avorldly care; and so that day
come upon you unawares. (35) For, like a hunter's So
snare, it will spring upon all them that dwell upon
the face of the Avhole land.^ (36) Be ye there- 36
fore vigilant, at all times, and prayerful ; that ye
may be worthy to escape the tilings that are to
take place, and may stand before the Son of man.
— (37) And, in the daytime he taught in the tem- 87
pie, and at night he went out and lodged in the
mount, called the Place of Olives. (38) And all 38
the people came early to him in the temple, to hear
his discourse.

And the feast of unleavened cakes, which is XXII.
called the passover, drew near. (2) And tlic chief 2
priests and Scribes sought how they might kill
him, for they were afraid of the people. (3) And 3
Satan^ entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was
of the number of the twelve. (4) And he went 4
and conferred with the chief priests and Scribes,
and the military commanders of the temple, how
he might betray him to them. (5) And they were 5
glad, and covenanted to give him money. (6) And 6
he promised them, and sought opportunity to be-
tray him to them, in the absence of the multitude.

And the day of unleavened cakes arrived, on 7
which it was customary for the passover to be slain.
(8) And Jesus sent Cephas and John, and said to 8
them: Go, prepare for us the passover, that we
may eat it. (9) And they said to him: Where 9
wilt thou, that we prepare ? (10) He said to them : 10
Lo, when ye enter the city, there will a man meet
you, bearing a vessel of water. Go after him ;
(11) and where he cntereth, say ye to the lord of 11


LUKE, XXII.


155


the house : Our Rabbi saith, Is there a place of re-
frcslimcnt, in which I may cat the Passover, with

12 my disciples? (12) And lo, he will show you a
large uj^per room that is furnished ; there ])rcpare

13 ye. (lo) And they went, and found as he had
said to them : and they made ready the passover.

14 — (1-1) And when the time arrived, Jesus came
and reclined; and the twelve Legates'' with him.

15 (lo) And he said to them : I have greatly desired^
to cat this passover with you, before I suffer.

IG (!()) For I say to 3'ou, That henceforth 1 shall not
eat it, until it be fullilled in the kingdom of God.

17 (17) [And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and

18 said: Take this, and divide it among you. (18) For
I say to you, That I shall not drink of the product
of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come.*]

19 — (19) And he took bread, and gave thanks, and
brake, and gave to them, and said: This is my
body, which is given for your sakes. This do ye,

20 in remembrance of me. (20) And in like manner
also concerning the cup, after they had supped, he
said : This cup is the new testament*^' in my blood,

21 which, for your sakes, is poured out! — (21) But,
behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is on

22 the table. (22) And the Son of man goeth, as it
was determined; but woe to that man, by whom

23 he is betrayed. (23) And they began to inquire
among themselves, which of them it was, that
would do this,

24 And there was contention also among them, who

25 among them would be greatest. (25) And Jesus
said to them: The kings of the nations, are their
lords; and those exercising authority over them,

26 are called benefactors. (26) But ye, not so: but
he that is great among 3'ou, must be as the least;

27 and he that is chief, as the servitor. (27) For,
which is the greater, he that reclineth, or he that
serveth? Is not he that reclineth? But I am

28 among you, as he that sers-eth. (28) Ye are they

29 who have continued with me in my trials : (29) and
I promise to you, as my Father hath promised to

80 mc, a kingdom: (30) that ye may eat and drink at
the tabic of my kingdom, and may sit on throne
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.


or, Apostles.
Sy.


.aJ


Sy. .« n .A >j


* Adlcr says, versos 17, 18, are wanting in all MSS. of the PcRliito.


156


LUKE, XXII.


And Jesus said to Simon : Simon, lo, Satan hatli 31
desired to sift thee, as wheat: (32) but I have 32
prayed for thee, that thy faith may not fail And
thou also, in time, turn ; and confirm thy brethren.
(33) And Simon said to him : My Lord, with thee 33
I am ready, both for prison and for death.
(31) Jesus said to him: I tell thee, Simon, the 84
cock will not crow this day, until thou hast three
times denied that thou knowcst me. — (35) And he 35
said to them: When I sent you without purses,
without Avallets and shoes, lacked 3'e any thing?
They say to him : Nothing. (36) He said to them : 36
Henceforth, let him that hath a purse, take it ; and
so likewise a wallet. And let him that hath no
sword, sell his garment, and buy himself a sword.
(37) For I say to j^ou, That this also, which was 37
written, must be fulfilled in me : I shall be num-
bered with transgressors. For, all that relates to
will be fulfilled. (38) And they said to him


38


me.

Oar Lord, lo, here are two swords. He said to

them : They are sufficient.

And he we'nt out, and proceeded, as was his cus- 39
tom, to the mount of the place of Olives ; and his
disciples followed him. (40) And when he arrived 40
at the place, he said to them : Pray ye, that ye en-
ter not into temptation. (41) And he retired from 41
them, about a stone's throAv; and kneeled down,
and prayed, (42) and said : Father, if it please thee, 42
let this cup pass from me. Yet not my pleasure,
but thine, be done. (43) And there appeared to 48
him an angel from heaven, Avho strengthened him.
(44) And as he was in fear, he prayed earnestly ; 44
and his sweat was like drops of blood ; and it
fell on the ground. (45) And he arose from his 45
prayer, and came to his disciples: and he found
them sleeping, from sorrow. (46) And he said to 46
them: Why sleep ye? Arise, and pray, lest ye
enter into temptation. — (47) And while he was 47
speaking, lo, a multitude, and he that was called
Judas, one of the twelve, came at their head. And
he came up to Jesus, and kissed him. For he had
given them this sign: Whom I shall kiss, he it is.
(48) Jesus said to him: Judas, is it with a kiss 48
thou bctrayest the Son of man? (49) And when 49
they that were with him, saw what occurred, they
said to him : Our Lord, shall we smite them with


■t^"


LUKE, XXII.


157


50 the sword? (50) And one of them smote a ser-
vant of the high priest,*' and took off his right ear.

61 (51) And Jesus answered, and said: Sufficient,
thus far. And he touched the ear of him that

52 was smitten, and healed him. — (52) And Jesus
said to those wlio had come upon him, — the chief
priests and Elders and military captains^ of the
temple : Have ye come out against me, as against
a robber, with swords, and with clubs, to take me ?

53 (53) I was with you daily in the temple, and ye
laid not hands upon me. But this is your hour,

5-1 and the reign of darkness. (54) And they took
him, and conducted him to the house of the high
priest. And Simon followed after him, at a dis-

55 tance. (55) And they kindled a fire in the middle
of the court, and sat around it ; and Simon also sat

56 among them. (56) And a certain maid saw him
sitting at the fire, and she looked upon him, and

57 said : This man also was with him. (57) But he
denied, and said: Woman, I have not known him.

58 (58) And a little after, another [person] saw him,
and said to him : Thou too art one of them. And

59 Cephas said : I am not. (59) And an hour after,
another contended and said: Certainly, this man
also was with him, for he likewise is a Galilean.

60 (60) Cephas said: Man, 1 know not what thou
sayest. And immediately, while he was speaking,

61 the cock crew. (61) And Jesus turned, and looked
upon Cephas. And Simon remembered the word
of our Lord, which he spoke to him : Before the
cock shall crow, thou wilt deny me three times,

62 (62) And Simon went out, and wept bitterly. —

63 (63) And the men who had taken Jesus, insulted

64 him, and blinded him, (6-1) and smote him on his
face, and said : Prophesy thou, who smote thee ?

Qo {60) And many other things they revilingly ut-
tered, and spoke against him.

66 And when the day dawned, the Elders and chief
priests and Scribes assembled together; and they

67 led him to the place of their meeting, (67) and said
to him : If thou art the Messiah, tell us. He said
to them : If I tell you, ye will not believe in me.

68 (68) And if I should ask you, ye will not return

69 me an answer; nor will ye release me. (69) From
this time, the Son of man will sit on the right hand

70 of the majestys of God. (70) And they all said :


Sy.


*^i


or, power.


158


LUKE, XXIIL


Sy.


^ Sy. words.
• Sy.


■> Sy. IjoD*)]


Thou art then, the Son of God ? Jesus said to
them : Ye say that I am. (71) They say : AVhat
farther need have we of witnesses ? For we have
heard from liis own mouth.


71


6


And the whole company of them arose, and XXIIL
carried him before Pilate. ^ (2) And they began 2
to accuse him, and said : We have found this man
seducing our people, and f6rbidding to pay the
capitation money to Caesar, and declaring himself
to be king Messiah. (3) And Pilate interrogated 3
him, and said to him : Art thou king of the Jews?
He said to him: Thou hast said, (4) And Pilate 4
said to the chief priests and the compan}^ : I find
no crime upon this man. (5) And they vocifera- 5
ted, and said: He raiseth disturbance among our
people, by teaching in all Judaea, commencing from
Galilee, and quite to this place. (6) And Pilate,
when he heard the name Galilee, inquired if the
man were a Galilean. (7) And having learned
that he was from under Herod's jurisdiction, he
sent him to Herod; for he was'at Jerusalem on
those days. — (8) And Ilerod rejoiced greatly when
he saw Jesus, for he had been desirous to sec him
for a long time, because he had heard many things
of him, and he hoped to see some sign from him.
(9) And he asked him many questions;'^ but Jesus
gave him no reply. (10) And the chief priests 10
and Scribes stood up, and accused him vehemently.
(11) And Ilerod and hiswarriors^ contemned him.
And when he had mocked him, he clothed him in
a purple robe, and sent him to Pilate. (12) And
on that day, Pilate and Ilerod became iVicnds to
each other ; for there had i)reviously been enmity
between them. — (13) And Pilate called the chief
priests and the rulers'^ of the people, (14) and said 14
to them : Ye have brought this man before me, as a
disturber of your people ; and lo, I have examined
him before you, and I find in the man no crime,
among all that ye charge upon him. (15) Neither
yet Herod: for I sent him to him, and lo, nothing
deserving death hath been done by him. (1(3) I
will therefore chastise liim, and release him.—
(17) For it was a custom, that he should release one 17
at the festival .^ — (18) And all the company vocifer- 18
ated, and said : Away with this man ; and release


9


11


12


13


15


16


LUKE, XXIII.


159


19


20

21
22


23


to us Barabbas.*^ (19) He was one wlio bad been
tbrown into prison, on account of a sedition and
murder ■\vbicU bad occurred in tbc city. (20) And
Pilate, being disposed to release Jesus, conversed
witb tbem again, (21) But tbey cried out, and
said: Crucify him; crucify bim. (22) And be
said to tbem tbe third time : But, what evil bath
be done? I find no crime in bim deserving of
death. 1 will scourge him, therefore, and release
him. (23) But they were urgent, with a loud
voice ; and demanded of him, that tbey might cru-
24: cify him. (24) And Pilate decreed, that their re-
25 quest be granted. (25) And be released to tbem
him, who for sedition and murder had been cast
into prison, for whom tbey petitioned ; and be de-
livered up Jesus to their pleasure.

And as they led him away, they seized Simon
tbe Cyrenian, coming from the fields, and laid upon
him the cross, to bear [it] after Jesus. (27) And
there followed after him a great multitude of peo-
ple ; and those women [also] who wailed and la-
mented over bim. (28) And Jesus turned to tbem,
and said to them : Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me ; but weep rather for yourselves, and
for your children. (29) For lo, the days are com-
ing,' in which they will say : Happy the barren,
and the wombs that never bore, and the breasts
that never nursed. (30) Then will they begin to
say to the mountains, I'all upon us! and to the
bills, Cover us ! (31) For if they do these things
in a green tree, what will be in tbc dry? —
(32) And there went along with him two others,
malefoctors, to be crucified.

And when tbey came to a certain place which is
called a Sivull,'' they crucilied him there; and tbe
two malefactors, tbe one on bis right band, and tbe
other on bis left. (34) And Jesus said: Father,
forgive them ; for they know not what they do.
And they divided bis garments, casting a lot upon
them. (35) And tbc i)eople stood and looked on ;
and tbe rulersff also derided him, and said: He " Sy. ]ja2;»")
quickened'' others; let bim quicken himself, if be »> Gr. iiu^a.
is tbe Messiah, the chosen of God. (36) And the
soldiers likewise mocked him, coming to bim and
offering bim vinegar, (37) and saying to bim :
If thou art the king of the Jews, quicken' thyself.


26


28


29


30
31
32
33


34


35


36


37


• Sy. lol;^


Gr. Cuidoy.


160


LUKE, XXIII.


k Sy. \sCLt')'^


or, earth.


» Sy. juKjOJ


Sy. ^
.11 i^oNon


(38) And there was likewise a superscription over 38
bira, written in Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew:
This is the King of the Jews.

And one of the malefactors wbo were crucified 39
with bim, reproacbed bim, and said: If tbou
art tbe Messiab, rescue tbyself, and rescue us.
(40) Bat bis fellow [malefactor] rebuked bim, and 40
said to bim : Art tbou not afraid even of God, see-
ing tbou art under tbe same Sentence ? (41) And 41
we justly ; for we liave a retribution according to
our deserts, and according to our deeds ; but noth-
ing bateful batb been done by bim. (42) And be 42
said to Jesus : My Lord, remember me, wben tbou
comestinto tby kingdom. (43) Jesus said to bim: 43
Verily I say to you, Tbat tbis day tboa sbalt be
witb me in paradise."^

And it was about tbe sixth hour ; and darkness 44
was over all tbe land,' until the ninth hour.
(45) And tbe sun was darkened, and tbe curtain of 45
tbe door of tbe temple was rent through its mid-
dle. (46) And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and 46
said : My Father, into'thy band I commit my spirit."'
Thus he spake, and expired. (47) And wben tbe 47
centurion saw what occurred, be glorified God,
and said: Certainly, tbis was a righteous man.
(48) And all tbe multitudes wbo bad assembled at 48
this spectacle, on seeing what occurred, returned,
smiting upon their breasts. (49) And there were 49
standing at a distance, all they that knew Jesus,
and those women who came with bim from Galilee ;
and they beheld these things.

And there was a certain man, whose name was 50
Joseph, a counsellor," from Earaath a city of Judcea,
wbo was a good man and righteous ; (51) and be 51
bad not consented to their decision and deed ; and
he was waiting for the kingdom of God. (52) Tbis 52
man went to Pilate, and begged tbe body of Jesus.
(53) And he took it down, and wrapped it in a 53
winding-sbcet of linen ; and laid it in an excava-
ted sepulcbre, in which no one bad hitherto been
laid. (54) And it was tbe day of preparation, 54
and tbe sabbath began to dawn. (55) And those 55
women wbo came witb bim from Galilee, approach-
ed, and viewed tbe sepulcbre, and the manner in
which tbe body was deposited. (56) And they 56
returned, and prepared perfumes and aromatics;


LUKE, XXIV.


161


and they rested on the sabbath, as it is command-
ed.

XXIV. And on the first day of the week, in the
morning-, while it was yet dark, they came to the
sepulchre, and brought the aromatics they had
prepared. And there were other women with

2 them. (2) And they found the stone rolled from

3 the sepulchre. (3) And they entered, and found

4 not the body of Jesus. (4) And as they wondered
at this, behold, two men stood opposite them ; and

5 their raiment was effulgent. (5) And they were
in fear, and bowed their faces to the ground. And
the men said to them : Why seek ye the living

6 among the dead? (6) He is not here; he is risen.
Remember how he conversed with you, v/hen he

7 was in Galilee, (7) and said. That the Son of man
was to be delivered into the hands of sinful men,
and to be crucified, and to rise on the third day.

8 (8) And they remembered his words. — (9) And

9 they returned from the sepulchre, and related all
these things to the eleven, and to the rest.

10 (10) Now they were Mary Afngdalena, and Joan-
na,» and Mary the mother of James, and the others
with them, Avho related these things to the Legates.''

11 (11) And these words appeared in their eyes as

12 dreams: and they believed them not. (12) But
Simon arose, and ran to the sepulchre, and looked
in, and saw the linen lying by itself: and he went
away wondering in himself at what had occurred.

13 And lo, two of them, on the same day, were
going to a village named Emmaus,<= distant sixty

14 furlongs'! from Jerusalem. (14) x\nd they talked

15 together of all that had occurred. (15) And as
they conversed, and questioned each other, Jesus
came, and drew near, and walked with them.

16 (16) And their eyes were held, that they did not

17 recognize him. (17) And he said to them : What are
these discourses, which ye hold with each other, as

18 ye walk and are sad ? (18) And one of them, whose
name was Cleopas,«= answered and said to him : Art
thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, that thou know-
est not the things that have occurred there in these

19 days? (19) He said to them: What things? They
say to him : In regard to Jesus of Nazareth, a man
who was a prophet, and mighty in discourse and


Sy. ,_»iw»Q_.
'' or, Apostles.


Sy. ^cllOL
Sy.

Gr. tfraJia.


Sy.


162


LUKE, XXIV.


in action, before God, and before all the people.

(20) And the chief priests and Elders delivered 20
him up to a sentence of death, and crucified him.

(21) But we expected that he was to deliver Israel. 21
And lo, three days [have passed], since all these
things occurred. (22) And moreover, certain 22
women of ours astonished us ; for they went early

to the sepulchre ; (23) and as they did not find the 23
body, tliey came and said to' us: We saw angels
there, and tliey said that he is alive. (24) And 24
also some of us went to the sepulchre ; and they
found, as the women reported ; but him they saw
not. — (25) Then Jesus said to them : O deficient in 25
understanding, and slow of heart to believe all the
things that the prophets uttered. (26) Were not 26
these things to be ; that the Messiah should suffer,
and that he should enter into his glory ? (27) Then 27
he began from Moses, and from all the })rophets, and
expounded to them concerning himself from all the
scriptures. (28) And they drew near to the vil- 28
lage to which they were going ; and he made them
feel, as if he would go to a more distant place.
(29) And they urged him, and said to him : Tarry 29
with us, for the day inclineth towards dark. And
he went in to remain with them. (30) And it 30
occurred, while he reclined with them, that he took
bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to them.

(31) And instantly, their eyes were opened, and 31
they knew him. And he took himself from them.

(32) And they said one to another : Did not our 32
heart burn* within us, while he talked with us by
the way, and explained to us the scriptures? —

(33) And they arose, the same hour, and returned 83
to Jerusalem. And they found the eleven assem-
bled, and those with them, (34) who were saying : 34
Certainly, our Lord hath risen ; and he^_ hath ap-
peared to Simon. (35) And they also related what 35
occurred by the way, and how he became known

to them, when he broke bread.

And while they were talking of these things, 36
Jesus stood in the midst of them, and said to them :
Peace be with you! It is I; be not afraid.


* The printed copies read, , »ri , *)o(JI, was burning ; but an old MS. at
Oroomiah reads, if,f>- JOOI was heavy, or dull. — Perkin's Residence in Persia,


p. 11
I


LUKE, XXIV.


163


37 (37) And they were in trepidation and fear, for

38 they supposed they saw a spirit/ (38) Jesus said
to them: Why arc ye agitated? And why do

39 iraaginationss arise in your hearts ? (39) Look at
my hands and my feet, that it is myself. Uandlc
me, and know; for a spirit^ hath not flesh and

40 bones, as ye sec me have. (40) And as he said
thus, he showed them his hands and his feet.

41 (41) And while they still believed not, for their
joy, and were astonished ; he said to them : Ilave

42 ye here any thing to eat? (42) And they gave
him a piece of broiled fish, and of honeycomb.

43 (-13) And he took, [and] ate before them.i

44 (44) And he said to them : These are the things^
which I said to you while I was with you. That all
things written of me, in the law of Moses and in
the prophets and in the psalms, must be fulfilled.

45 (45) Then he opened their mind to understand the

46 scriptures. (46) And he said to them : Thus it
is written, and thus it was right^ for Messiah to
suffer, and rise from the dead on the third da}^ ;

47 (47) and that, in his name, repentance for the re-
mission of sins should be preached among all
nations, and that the commencement be at Jeru-

48 salem. (48) And ye are the witnesses of these

49 things. (49) And I will send upon you tlie promise
of my Father. But remain ye at Jerusalem, until
ye shall be clothed with energy" from on high.

50 And he led them out as far as Bethany, and

51 lifted his hands, and blessed them. (51) And
it occurred, while he blessed them, that he was
separated from them, and ascended to heaven.

52 (52) And they worshipped him, and returned to

53 Jerusalem with great joy. (53) And they were con-
tinually in the temple, praising and blessing God.

Amen.


Completion of the holy Gospel* of Luke the Evangelist.^


' Sy. 'Uo5
s or, thoughts.
" Sy. '^jo5


' Sy. their eyes.
''or, words.


Sy. »r)5l


Sy.U


Sy.

Sy.

p.-nnnV)


J


Ij^lo ^^iDj ]]0-rO ,_J-»oQ_.J UoiC;^ "U-^j-D ^Q-A^ol

The Holy Gospel, the Proclamation of John the Herald;

which he uttered and proclaimed, in Greek, at Ephcsus.


'Sy.Ai d.i;.0

" Sy. 1^0^^

* Sy. )Lk»
^ Sy. "JJOTQJ


"Sy-tj-^Oj*
' Sy. Orl^i.1
E Sy. ") T » n^
"Sy.

locn l;.mo

' Sy. |_.,jL.K»-»

k Sy. IrDQlOJ
» Sy. l3i-.


9


In tlie beginning, =1 was the AVord;'^ and the
Word was with God; and the Word was God.
(2) lie was in the beginning witli God. (3) Every
tiling was by his hand ; and without him, was not
any thing whatever tliat existed. (4) In him was
hfe ;<= and the hfe was the hghf^ of man. (5) xind
this light shineth in the darkness ; and the dark-
ness apprehended it not. — (6) There was a man
sent from God, whose name was John. (7) He
came for testimony, to bear witness concerning the
light. (8) He was not himself the light, but [came]
to bear witness concerning the light. — (9) The true
light was that, which enlighteneth every man who
Cometh into the world. (10) He was in the world ; 10
and the world was by his hand; and the world did
not know him. (11) He came to his own [people] ; 11
and his own [people] received him not. (12) But 12
such as received him, to them gave he the pre-
rogative'' to be children of God ; [even] to them
that believe on his name; (13) who are born, ^ not
of blood, nor of the pleasures of the flesh, nor of
the pleasure of man, but of God. — (14) And the
Word became flesh, ^ and tabernacled with us :
and we saw his glory, a glory as of the only be-
gottcni from the Father, that he was full of grace
and truth. (15) John testified of him, and cried, 15
and said: This is he, of whom I said. That he
Cometh after me, and is before me; for he was
{)rior to me. (16) And of his plenitude have we 16
all received, and grace for grace. (17) For the 17
lawk was given by the hand of Moses; but the
rcalityi and grace was by the hand of Jesus Mes-


13
14


^r


JOHN, I.


165


18


19

20


21


siah. (18) No man hath ever seen God ; the only
begotten God, he who is in the bosom of his Father,
he hath declared [him].

And this is the testimon}^ of John, when the
Jews of Jerusalem sent to him priests and Levites,
to ask him, Who art thon? (20) And he confessed,
and denied not, but confessed : I am not the Mes-
siah. (21) And they asked him again : Who then ?
Art thou EUjah ? And he said : I am not. Art

22 thou a i)rophet? And he said, No. (22) And
they said to him: Who art thou? that wo may
give answer to them that sent us. What sayest

23 thou of thyself? (23) He said : I am the voice of
one crying in the wilderness, Make smooth the
way of the Lord ; as said the prophet Isaiah.

24 (24) And they who were sent, were of the Phari-

25 sees. (25) And they asked him, and said to him :
Why then baptizcsf" thou, if thou art not the
Messiah, nor Elijah, nor a prophet? (26) John
answered, and said to them; I baptize with water;
but among you standeth one, whom ye do not
know. (27) He it is that cometh after me, and
was before me, whose shoe-strings I am not worthy
to untie. (28) These things occurred in Bethany,"
where John was baptizing. — (29) The day after,
John saw Jesus coming towards him, and said :
Behold, the Lamb of God, that bcareth the sin of
the world. (30) This is he of whom I said, After
me cometh a man, who is before me, for he was
prior to me. (31) And I knew him not; but that
he might be known to Israel, therefore am I come

32 baptizing Avith water, (32) And John testified,
and said : I saw the Spirit descend from heaven,
as a dove,o and rest upon him. (33) And I did
not know him ; but he who sent me to baptize
with water, he said to me: On whom thou secst
the S})irit descend, and rest upon him, he baptizeth
with the Holy Spirit. (34) And I saw; and I
testify, that this is the Son of God.

And the next day, John was standing, and two
of his disciples. (o(i) And he looked upon Jesus
as he walked, and said : Behold, the Lamb of God !
(37) And his two disciples heard him when he
said [it], and they went after Jesus. (38) And Je-
sus turned, and saw them coming after him, and he
said to them : What seek yc? They said to him


20


27

28
29


SO
31


33


34

35

3(3

37
38


' Sy.


Sy.


166


JOHN, II.


p Sy.^joJUBuLD


Sy. truly a son
of Israel.


• Sy.


Sy.M^


Sy. ^ iSn?
= Lat. quad-
rantalia^ or
amphora ;
vnne-jars.


Our Rabbi, where stayest thou ? (39) He said to 39
them: Come, and see. And they came and saw
where he lodged; and they were with him that
day, for it was about the tenth liour. (40) And 40
one of those who heard John and went after Jesus,
was Andrew, the brother of Simon. (41) He first 41
saw Simon his brother, and said to him : We have
found the Messiah.? (42) And he brought him to 42
Jesus. And Jesus looked u|*)on him, and said:
Thou art Simon the son of Jona ; thou shalt be
eallcd Cephas. — (43) The next day, Jesus was dis- 43
posed to depart for Galilee: and- he found Philip,
and said to him, Come after me. (44) And Philip 44
was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Simon.
(45) And Philip found Nathaniel, and said to him: 45
We have found him, of whom Moses wrote in the
law, and the prophets, Jesus the son of Joseph, who
is of Nazareth. (46) Nathaniel said to him : Can 46
there be any good thing from Nazareth? Philip
said to him : Come, and see. (47) And Jesus saw 47
Nathaniel coming towards him, and said of him:
Behold a real Israelite, •" in whom is no deceit.

(48) Nathaniel said to him : Whence knowest thou 48
mo ? Jesus said to him : Before Philip called thee,
wlien thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee.

(49) Nathaniel answered, and said to him : Rabbi, 49
thou art the Son of God;^ thou art the King of
Israel. (50) Jesus said to him : Because I said to 50
thee, that I saw thee under the fig-tree, believest
thou? Thou wilt see greater things than these.
(51) He said to him : Verily, verily, I say to you, 51
That hereafter ye will see heaven opened, and the
angels of God ascending and descending unto the
Son of man.

And on the third day there was a feast in Cana,!^ 1.L
a city of Galilee : and the mother of Jesus was
there. (2) And also Jesus and his disciples were 2
invited to the feast. (3) And the Avine fell short : 3
and his mother said to Jesus : They have no wine.
(4) Jesus said to her : What is [in common] to me 4
and thee ? Not yet hath my hour come. (5) His 5
mother said to the waiters :' Whatever he saith to
you, do [it]. (6) And there were there six water- 6
pots of stone, set for the purification of Jews, con-
taining each two or three quadrantalia.^ (7) Jesus 7


said to tliem : Fill those water-pots with water.

8 And thcj filled them to the top. (8) lie said toje g,.
them : Draw now, and carry to the master''- of the '■

9 feast. And they carried. (9) And when the mas- 1
ter of the feast tasted the water that had become
wine, and did not know whence it came, (although
the waiters knew, as they had filled the pots with
water,) the master of the feast called the bride-

10 groom, (10) and said to him: Every man first
bringeth Ibrward the good wine, and when they
are satiatetl, then that which is inferior ; but thou

11 hast kept the good wine till now. (11) This is the
first sign,'! which Jesus wrought at Cana in Galilee,
and manifested his glory : and his disciples be-
lieved on him.

12 Afterwards he went down to Capernaum, he and
his mother and his brothers and his disciples ; and

13 they were there a few days. (13) And the pass-
over of the Jews drew near; and Jesus went up to

14 Jerusalem. (14) And he found in the temple those
who sold beeves and sheep and doves, and the

15 money-changers sitting [there]. (15) And he made
himself a whip from a cord, and turned them all
out of the temple, and the sheep and the beeves
and the money-changers ; and he poured out their

16 mone}^, and overset their tables : (16) and he said
to them that sold doves, Take away these things;
and make not my Father's house a house of traffic,

17 (17) And his disciples remembered, that it is writ-
ten: The zeal of thy house hath devoured me,

18 (18) But the Jews replied, and said to him : What
sign showest thou to us, since thou docst these

19 things ? (19) Jesus answered, and said to them :
Demolish this temple, and in three days I will

20 again erect it, (20) The Jews said to him : Forty
and six years, this temple was building ; and wilt

21 thou build it again in three days? (21) But he

22 spake of the temple of his body." (22) And whenp Sy.
he was arisen from the dead, his disciples remem-
bered, that he spoke this: and they believed i
the scriptures, and the word that Jesus spake. —

23 (23) And while Jesus was in Jerusalem, at the
feast of the passover, many believed on him, be-

24 cause they saw the signs he wrought. (24) But
Jesus did not confide himself to them ; because he

25 knew all men : (25) And he needed not that any


liiLnjCD


sy.U1


Ji


Ol^


168


Sy. \2aDy]


' Sy. ,>\.ALp

Sy.

5? ^


"^ Sy. lojOJ
• Sy. ]j^o3
^aylloVn


e Sy.
"Sy.U,,


Sy. by his
hand.


JOHN, III.

one should testify to liim respecting any man ; for
lie himself knew what is in man.

And there was a man of the Pharisees there, III,
whose name was Nicodemus, a ruler^ of the Jews.
(2) And he came to Jesus by night, and said to 2
him: Eabbi, we know that thou art a teacher sent
from God ; for no one can work those signs which
thou workest, unless God be with him. (3) Jesus 3
replied, and said to him : Verily, verily, I say to
thee, That, unless a man be born'' anew,<= he can-
not behold the kingdom of God. (4) Nicodemus 4
said to him : How can an old man be born ? Can
he enter a second time into his mother's womb,
and be born ? (5) Jesus replied, and said to him : 5
Verily, verily, I say to thee, That, unless a man be
born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the
kingdom of God. (6) That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit,
is spirit. (7) Be not surprised that I said to thee,
Ye must be born anew. (8) The wind^ bloweth,
where it chooseth ; and thou hearest its sound, but
knowest not whence it cometh, and whither it
goeth : so is every one, that is born of the Spirit.^

(9) Nicodemus answered, and said to him: How
can these things be? (10) Jesus answered, and 10
said to him : Art thou a teacher^ of Israel, and
knowest not these things? (11) Verily, verily, I 11
say to thee : We speak, what we know ; and we
testify to what we have seen ; but ye receive not
our testimony. (12) If I have spoken to you of 12
things on earth, and ye believe not; how will ye
believe, if I speak of things in heaven? (13) And 13
no one hath ascended to heaven, but he that de-
scended from heaven, the Son of man who is in
heaven. (14) And as Moses elevated the serpent 14
in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted
up: (15) that every one who believeth in him, 15
may not perish, but may have life eternal. ff

(10) For God so loved the world, that he gave his 16
only begottcn'» Son, that whosoever believeth on
him, should not perish, but .should have life eternal.
(17) For God sent not his Son into the world, to 17
condemn the world ; but that the world might live

by means' of him. (18) He that believeth on him, 18
is not condemned: but he that believeth not, is


9


i9i^.


JOHN, III.


169


already condemned; because he hath not believed
on the name of the only begotten Son of God.

19 (19) And this is the [ground of] condemnation,
that light hath come into the world, and men liave
loved darkness rather than light, for their deeds

20 have been evil (20) For every one that doeth
abominable things, hateth the light, and cometh
not to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

21 (21) But he that doeth right, '^ cometh to the light,
that hi.-^ works may be known to be done in God.

22 After these things, came Jesus and his disci])les
into the land of Judaea; and there he abode with

23 them, and baptized. (28) And John also Avas
baptizing m j5]non,i which is near to Salim,'" be-
cause there were many waters tliere : and the

2-4 people came, and were baptized. (24) For John
25 had not yet fallen into prison. — (25) And one of
.John's disciples and a certain ,Jew had disputed
res[)ecting purification. — (2()) And they came to
John, and said to him : Our Kabbi, he who was
with thee beyond Jordan, and of whom thou gavest
testimony, lo, he also baptizcth; and many go after
him. (27) John answered, and said to them: A
man cannot take any thing by his own choice, un-
less it be given him from heaven. (28) Ye are
witnesses for me, that I said : I am not the ^Messiah,
but am sent to go before him. (29) He that hath
the bride, is the bridegroom : and the fjicnd of the
bridegroom, who standeth and listeneth to him,
rejoiceth with great joy on account of the bride-
groom's voice : this my joy, therefore, lo, it is full.

(30) To him must be increase, and to me decrease.

(31) For he that cometh from above, is above all;
ancl he that is from the earth, is of the earth, and
talkcth of the earth. He that cometh from heav'cn,

32 is above all ; (32) and what he hath seen and heard,
he testifietli ; and his testimony, no one rcceiveth.

33 (33) But he that rcceiveth his testimony, hath set

34 liis seal, that God is true. (34) For he whom God
liath sent, speaketh the words of God; for God
hath not given the Sj)irit by measure [to him].

35 (35) The Father loveth the Son, and hath given

36 every thing" into his hands. (36) He that be-
lie veth on the Son, hath life eternal ; but he who
obeyeth not the Son, shall not sec life, but the
wrath of God will abide upon him.


26


27
28


29


SO
31


Sy. l5j


"Sy. :>Oi\fi>


Sy.


170


JOHN, IV.


Sy. ;Ji3


Sy.

Sy.


And Jesus knew, that the Pharisees had heard IV.
that he made many disciples, and baptized more
than John, (2) Yet Jesus himself did not baptize, 2
but his disciples. (3) And he left Judtea, and 3
went again into Galilee. (4) And in going, he had 4
occasion to pass through the midst of the Samari-
tans. (5) And he came to a city of the Samaritans 5
called Sychar,"- near the field which Jacob gave to
his son Joseph. (6) And Jacob's well of water 6
was there. And Jesus was weary with the toil of
travelling, and seated himself by the well : and it
was at the sixth hour. (7) And a woman from 7
Samaria came to draw water. And Jesus said to
her : Give me water to drink. (8) And his disci- 8
pies had gone to the city, to buy themselves food.
(9) The Samaritan woman said to him: How dost 9
thou, a Jew, ask drink of me, who am a Samaritan
woman? For the Jews have no familiarity with
Samaritans. (10) Jesus replied and said to her: 10
If thou hadst known the gift'' of God, and who it
is that saith to thee. Give me to drink, thou
wouldcst have asked of him, and he would have
given thee living waters. « (11) The woman said 11
to him : My lord, thou hast no bucket, and the
well is deep; how hast thou living waters?
(12) Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who 12
gave us this well, and drank from it himself, and

his flocks ? (13) Jesus replied 13
Whoever shall drink of these
again ; (14) but whoever shall 14
drink of the waters which I shall give him, will not
thirst for ever ; but the waters, which I shall give
him, will be in him a fountain of waters, springing
up unto life eternal. (15) The woman said to him: 15
My lord, give me of these waters, that I may not
thirst again, and may not come to draw from here.
(16) Jesus said to her : Go, call thy husband, and 16
come hither. (17) She said to him : I have no 17
husband. Jesus said to her : Thou hast well said,
I have no husband; (18) for thou hast had five 18
husbands, and he whom thou now hast, is not thy
husband. In this thou didst speak truly. (19) The 19
woman said to him : My lord, I perceive thou art
a prophet. (20) Our fathers worshipped in this 20
mountain ; but ye say, that in Jerusalem is the
place where it is proper to worship. (21) Jesus 21


his children, and
and said to her:
waters, will thirst


JOHN, IV.

said to her: "Woman, believe mo, the hour cometh,
when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem,

22 ye will worship the Father. (22) Ye worship, yc
know not what; but we worship what we know ;

23 for lifo'i is from the Jews. (23) But the hour
cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers
will worship the Fatlicr in spirit and in truth ; for
the Father requireth that worshippers be such.

2-1 (24) For God is a Spirit; and they that worship

25 him, should worship in spirit and in truth. (25) The
woman said to him: I know that Messiah will
come ; and when he cometh, he will teach us every

26 thing. (20) Jesus said to her: I, who talk with

27 thee, am he. — (27) And while he was speaking, his
disciples came. And they wondered that he would
converse with the woman ; yet no one said. What
seekest thou? or. Why talkest thou with her?

28 (28) And the woman left her water-pot, and went

29 to the city, and said [to the people] : (29) Come,
see a man that told me every thing I ever did : is

80 not this the Messiah ? (30) And tlie people went

31 out of the city, and came to him. — (31) In the mean
time, his disciples entreated him, and said to him:

32 Our Habbi, eat. (32) But he said to them : I have

33 food to eat, of which ye are ignorant. (33) The
disciples said among themselves : Hath any one

34 brought him something to eat? (34) Jesus said to
them : My food is to do the pleasure of him that

35 sent me, and to accomiilish his work. (35) Do ye
not say, that after four months cometh the harvest?
Behold, I say to you, and lift up your eyes, and
look upon the grounds,^ that they are white, and

36 have already come to the harvest. (36) And he
that rcapeth, receiveth wages, and gathereth fruits
unto lile eternal ; and the sower and the reaper

87 cfpially rejoice. (37) For in this, is the proverb*"
true, that one is the sower, and another the reaper.

88 (38) I sent you to reap tliat, on which ye labored
not: for others toiled, and ye entered into their

39 labor. — (39) And many Samaritans of that city
believed on him, because of the discourse of the
woman, who testified, lie told me all that I ever

40 did. (40) And when these Samaritans came to
liim, they requested him to tarry with them ; and

41 he rcmain(!d with them two days, (41) And many

42 believed on him, because of his discourse. (42) And


171


'^ Gr. tfwTijpj'a.


•or, lands.


Sy. word.


172


sSy.
Gr. ffxTTip.


•Sy.

"Sy.

* Sy. much peo-
ple.


JOHN, V.

they said to tlic woman : Henceforth we believe in
him, not on account of thy word ; for we have
heard him ourselves, and we know that he truly is
the Messiah, the Life-Giver^ of the world.

And after two days Jesus departed from there, 43
and went into Galilee. (4-i) For Jesus himself 44
testified, that a prophet is not honored in his own
cit^^ (45) And when he came to GaUlee, the 45
Galileans received him, having seen all the signs
which he wrought in Jerusalem at the feast ; for
they too had gone to tlie feast. — (46) And Jesus 46
came again to Cana of Galilee, where he made the
water wine. And there was at Capernaum a king's
servant, whose son was sick. (47) He heard that 47
Jesus had come from Judcca to Galilee; and he
went to him, and besought him that he would come
dov/n and heal his son ; for he was near dying.
(48) Jesus said to him: Unless ye see signs and 48
wonders, ye Avill not believe. (49) The king's 49
servant said to him : My lord, come down, before
the child dieth. (50) Jesus said to him : Go, thy 50
son liveth. And the man believed the word which
Jesus spake to him, and went away. (51) And as 51
he was going down, his servants met him, and in-
formed him and said to him : Thy son liveth.
(52) And he asked them, at what time he recovered. 52
And they said to him : Yesterday, at the seventh
hour the fever left him. (53) And his father knew, 53
that it was at the hour in which Jesus said to him,
Thy son liveth. And he believed, and all his
house. (54) This again was the second sign that 54
Jesus wrought, when he came from Judtoa to
Galilee.


After these things there was a feast of the Jews,
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. (2) And there was
there in Jerusalem a certain place of baptizing,!^
which was called in Hebrew Bethesda;'^ and there
were in it five porches. (3) And in them were laid a
great multitude^ of the sick, and the blind, and the
lame, and the withered, Avaiting for the moving of
the waters. (4) For an angel, from time to time, de-
scended into the baptistery, and moved the waters;
and he who first went in, after the moving of the
waters, was cured of whatever disease he had.
(5) And a certain man was there, who had been


V.

2


JOHN, V.


173


6 diseased thirty and eight years. (6) Jesus saw
him lying, and knew that [his disease] had been a
long time upon him, and said to him : Desircst

7 thou to bo healed ? (7) And the sick man answered
and said : Yes, my lord ; but I have no one who,
when the water is moved, Avill put me into the
baptistery; but while I am coming, another dc^

8 sccndeth before me. (8) Jesus said to him : Arise,

9 take up thy bed, and walk. (9) And immediately
the man was healed; and he arose, took up his
bed, and walked ; and it was the sabbath day.

(10) And the Jews said to him that was healed :
It is the sabbath ; it is not lawful for thee to bear
thy bed. (11) But he answered, and said to them:
He that made me whole, he said to me, Take up
thy bed and walk. (12) And they asked him :
Who is the man that said to thee, Take up thy
bed and walk ? (13) But the man that was healed,
knew not who it was; for Jesus had slid away,
in the great multitude that was in the place.

(11) After a time, Jesus found him in the temple,
and said to him : Lo, thou art healed ; sin not
again, lest something worse come upon thee than
before. (15) And the man went and told the Jews,
that it was Jesus who had cured him. (16) And
for tins cause the Jews persecuted Jesus, and sought
to kill him ; because he liad done these things on
the sabbath. (17) But Jesus said to them : My
Father worketh until now, and I work. (18) And
for this, the Jews sought the more to kill him, not
only because he had broken the sabbath, but be-
cause he had said of God, that he was his Father,

19 and had equalled'^ himself with God. (19) And
Jesus answered, and said to them : Yerily, verily,
I say to you: The Son can do nothing of his own
pleasure, but what he secth the Father do : for what
things the Father docth, these in like manner doeth
the Son. (20) For the Father loveth his Son, and
showeth him every thing he doeth: and greater
works than these, will he show him, that ye may
wonder. (21) For as the Father raiscth the dead,
and vivifieth them ; so also the Son vivifieth whom
he plcaseth. (22) For iicither doth the Father
judge any one, but hath given all judgment to the
Son : (23) that every man may honor the Son, as
he honoreth the Father. He that honoreth not the


10
11


12


11


15
16


17
18


20


21


00


23


' Sy,

]zai ]qjb.


ik


174


JOHN, V.


Sy.CTL^l


Sy.1


Sy-lr^


Son, honoreth not the Father that sent him.
(24) Verilj, verily, I say to you, That he who hear- 24
eth my word, and beheveth on him that sent me,
hath hfe eternal, and will not come into condemna-
tion, but hath passed from death to life. (25) Verily, 25
verily, I say to you. That the hour cometh, and is
even now come, when the dead will hear the voice
of the Son of God ; and they that hear, A\dll live.

(26) For, as the Father hath life in himself, so hath 26
he given to the Son also, to have life in himself:

(27) and hath moreover given him authority^ to 27
execute judgment.* But that he is the Son of man,

(28) wonder not at this; for the hour cometh, 28
when all that are in their graves will hear his
voice; (29) and will come forth; they that have 29
done good, to the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil, to the resurrection of con-
demnation. (80) I can do nothing of my own 30
pleasure; but as I hear, so I judge. And m}'-
judgment is just; for I seek not my own pleasure,
but the pleasure of him that sent me. (31) If I 31
should bear testimony respecting myself, my testi-
mony would not be valid.f (32) There is another 32
that beareth testimony concerning me ; and I know
that the testimony which he beareth concerning
me is true, (33) Ye sent unto John ; and he bore 33
testimony to the truth. (34) And I have not re- 34
ceived testimony from men: but these things I
say, that ye may live. (35) He was a burning and 35
shinino- lamp ; and ye were willing for a time, to
glory in his light. (36) But I have a testimonj^, 36
which is greater than that of John ; for the workss
which my Father hath given me to accomplish,
these works which I do, testify of me that the
Father hath sent me. (37) And the Father who 37
sent me, he testifieth of me. Ye have not at any
time heard his voice, nor have ye seen his visage.
(38) And his word abideth not in you, because ye 38
believe not in him whom he hath sent. (39) Search 39
the scriptures ; for in them, ye think, there is life


* The Syriac punctuation here differs from tlic Greek, and greatly alters the
sense. If the Greek punctuation were applied to the Syriae, this and the follow-
ing verse might be rendered thus: — (27) "and hath moreover given him authority
to execute judgment, as he is also the Son of man. (28) Marvel not at this; for
the hour cometh," &.c. Tiiis is probably the true rendering of the passage ; since
the other scarcely makes any intelligible sense.


JOHN, VI.


175


41
42
43


44


40 eternal for you ; and they testify of me. (40) And
yc arc unwilling to come to me, that life eternal
may be yours, (41) I do not receive glory from
men, (42) But I know you, that the love of God
is not in you. (43) I came in the name of my
Father, and yc receive me not: if another ahall
conic in his own name, him ye will receive,
(44) How can yc believe, who receive glory from
one anotlicr, and seek not the glory which cometh

45 from God only ? (45) Do ye suppose, that I shall
accuse you before the Father ? There is one that
will accuse you, that Moses, on whom ye rely.

46 (46) For, if ye believed Moses, ye would also
believe mc; for Moses wrote concerning me.

47 (47) But if yc believe not his writings, how will
yc Dclieve my words?

VI, After these things, Jesus went to the other side

2 of the sea of Galilee [or] of Tiberias.=i (2) And
great multitudes Avcnt after him ; because they had
seen the signs'* which he Avrought upon the sick.

3 (3) And Jesus ascended a mountain, and there he

4 seated himself with his disciples. (4) And the

5 feast of the Jewish passover was near, — (5) And
Jesus raised his eyes, and saw a great multitude
coming towards him ; and he said to Philip ;
Whence shall wc buy bread, that these may eat ?

0 (6) And this he said, to try him ; for he knew

7 what he was about to do. (7) Philip said to him ;
Two hundred denarii in bread would not suffice

8 them, that each might take but a little. (8) One of
his disci])les, Andrew, the brother of Simon Cephas,

9 said to him: (9) There is a lad here, who hatb
with him five cakes of barley, and two fishes ; but

10 what arc these for all those [people] ? (10) Jesus
said to them : Make all the people recline. Now
there was much grass in that place : and the people

11 reclined, in number five thousand. (11) And Jesus
took the bread, and blessed, and distributed to them
that reclined. And so also, Avith the fish ; as much

12 as they desired. (12) And when they were satisfied,
he said to his disciples : Gather up the fragments

13 whicli remain, so that nothing be lost. (13) And
they collected and filled twelve baskets, with frag-
ments of what remained to them that had eaten of

14 the five barley cakes. — (14) And those people,


Sy.

Sy. ]lol]


176


JOHN, VI.


• Sy. "^ilD


when they saw the sign which Jesus had wrought,
said: Certainly, this is that prophet who was to
come into the world. (15) And Jesus knew, that 15
they were about to come and take him b}^ force,
and make him king ; and he retired into a moun-
tain alone.

And when it was evening, his disciples went 16
down to the sea, (17) and sat in a ship, and were 17
going over to Capernaum. Ahd darkness came on,
and Jesus had not come to them. (18) And the 18
sea was boisterous against them, for a violent wind
was blowing. (19) And they had gone about five 19
and twenty or thirty furlongs, when they saw Jesus
walking upon the sea : and as he drew near to the
ship, they were afraid. (20) But Jesus said to 20
them : It is I ; be not afraid. (21) And they were 21
glad to receive him into the ship. And, directly,
the ship was at the land to which they were going.

(22) And the next day, the multitude, who had 22
remained on the other side of the sea, saw that
there was no other ship there, except that in which
the disciples embarked, and that Jesus did not
embark in that ship with his disciples ; (23) j-et 23
that other ships had come from Tiberias, near to
the place where they ate the bread when Jesus
blessed [it]. (24:) And when the multitude saw, 2-4
that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples; they
embarked in ships, and came to Capernaum, and
sought for Jesus. — (25) And when they found him 25
on the other side of the sea, they said to him: Our
Eabbi, when camest thou hither? (2G) Jesus 26
replied and said to them : Verily, verily, I say to
you. Ye seek me, not because ye saw the signs,
but because ye ate the bread and were satislied.
(27) Labor not for the food that perisheth, but for 27
the food that abideth unto life eternal, which the
Son of man will give to you ; for him hath God
the Father sealed. (28) They said to him: AVliat 28
shall we do, in order to work the Avorks of God ?
(29) Jesus replied and said to them : This is the 29
work of God, that ye believe on him ivhom he hath
sent. — (30) They "'say to him: What sign doest 30
thou, that we may see and believe in thee t What
workestthou? (31) Our fathers ate the manna,^ 31
in the wilderness ; as it is written, He gave them
bread from heaven to eat (32) Jesus said to them : 32


JOHN, VI.

Verily, verily, I say to you, Moses gave you not
tlie bread from heaven ; but my Father giveth you

33 the real bread from heaven. (33) For the bread
of God is, he that came down from heaven, and

34 giveth life to the world. (3-i) They say to him :

35 Our Lord, give us at all times this bread. (35) Jesus
said to them: I am the bread of life: he that
Cometh to me, shall not hunger; and he that

36 belie veth on me, shall not thirst, for ever. (36) But
I said to you, That ye have seen me, and do not

37 believe. (37) All that my Father gave me, will
come to me : and liim, that cometh to me, I will

38 not cast out. (38) For I came down from heaven,
not to do my own pleasure, but the pleasure of

39 him that sent me. (39) And this is the pleasure
of him that sent me, that whatever he hath given
me, I should lose nothing of it, but should raise it

40 up at the last day. (40) For this is the pleasure of
my Father, that every one who seeth the Son, and
believeth on him, should have life eternal ; and I

41 will raise him up at the last day. — (41) Then the
Jews murmured at him, because he said : I am the

42 bread, who have descended from heaven. (42) And
they sAid : Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph,
whose father and mother we know? And how

43 doth he say : I came down from heaven ? (43) Jesus
replied and said to them : Murmur not, one Avith

44 another. (44) No man cau^ come to me, unless
the Father Avho sent me, shall draw" him ; and I

45 will raise him up at the last day. (45) For it is
written, in the prophet: And they shall all be
taught of God. Whoever, therefore, hearcth from
the Father, aud leai'neth from him, cometh to me.

46 (46) Not that any one hath seen the Father, except
him who hath come from God ; he it is, hath seen

47 the Father. — (47) Verily, verily, I say to you :
That, to him who believeth in me, there is life

48 eternal. (48) I am the bread of life.f (49) Your

49 fathers ate tne manna, in the wilderness, and they

50 died. (50) But this is the bread which cometh
from heaven, that a man may eat of it, and not die,

51 (51) I am the bread of life, who have come down
from heaven : and if a man shall eat of this bread,
he will live for ever. And the bread which I shall
give, is my body,? which I give for the life of the

52 world. — (52) Then the Jews contended one with


177


"^f*'


•^ Sy. o^kILaId


f Sy.


Sy.


.^


178


JOHN, VII.


" Sy. Vi^Ao


Sy.
■ Sy.


word.


' Sy. Ij^CD


another, and said : How can he give us his body
to eat ? (53) And Jesus said to them : Verily, 53
verily, I say to you. That, unless ye eat the body of
the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life within you. (54:) But he that eateth of my 54
body, and drinketh of my blood, to him is life
eternal ; and I will raise him up at the last day.
(55) For my body truly is food, and my blood 55
truly is drink. (56) He that' eateth my body, and 56
drinketh my blood, abideth in me, and I in him.
(57) As the living Father hath sent me, and I live 57
because^ of the Father ; so he that shall eat me, he
also will live because of me. (58) This is the bread 58
that came down from heaven : not as your fathers
ate the manna, and died; whoever shall eat of this
bread, will live for ever. — (59) These things he 59
uttered in the synagogue, while teaching at Caper-
naum. (60) And many of his disciples who heard 60
[him], said : This is a hard speech, who can heai'
it. — (61) And Jesus knew in himself, that his dis- 61
ciples murmured at this ; and he said to them,
Doth this stumble you ? (62) If then, ye were to 62
see the Son of man ascend, to where he was from
the beginning ! — (63) It is the Spirit that vivificth ; 63
the body profiteth nothing. The words which I
have used with you, they are spirit, and they are
life. (64) But there are some of you, that believe 64
not. For Jesus knew, from the beginning, Avho
thev were that believed not, and who it was that
would betray him. (65) And he said to them : 65
For this reason, I said to you. That no one can'
come to me, unless it be given to him by my
Father. — (66) On account of this speech,'^ many of QQ
his disciples turned back, and walked not with him.
(67) And Jesus said to the twelve : Are ye also 67
disposed to go away ? (68) Simon Cephas replied, 68
and said : My Lord, to whom shall we go ? The
words of life eternal are with thee. (69) And we 69
believe, and know, that thou art the Messiah, the
Son of the living God. (70) Jesus said to them : 70
Have not I chosen you twelve ? Yet one of you
is a devil.' (71) This he spoke of Judas Iscariot, 71
the son of Simon ; for he was afterwards to betray
him, being one of the twelve.

After these things Jesus walked in Galilee ; forVII.


JOHN, vn.


179


he would not walk in Juda3a, because tlie Jews

2 sought to slay him. — (2) And the Jewish feast of

3 tabernacles drew near. (3) And the brothers^- of
Jesus said to him : Leave here, and go into Juda-'a ;
that thy disciples may see the works thou doest.

4 (4) For there is no one who doeth any thing in
secret, while he wisheth to become public. If
thou doest these things, show thyself to the world.

6 (5) For even his brothers did not believe in Jesus.

6 (6) Jesus said to them : My time hath not yet come :

7 but your time is always ready. (7) The world
cannot hate you, but me it hateth ; because I testify

8 of it, that its deeds are evil. (8) Go ye up to the
feast ; I do not go up to this feast now, because my

9 time is not yet completed. (9) These things he

10 said, and remained still in Galilee. (10) But when
his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also
went up, not openly, but as it were secretly. —

11 (llj And the Jews sought for him at the feast;

12 and they said. Where is he ? (12) And there was
much altercation among the people respecting him ;
for some said, lie is a good man ; while others said,

13 No; but he deceiveth the people. (13) Yet no
one spoke openly of him, from fear of the Jews.

14 And in the midst'' of the days of the feast, Jesus

15 went into the temple, and taught. (15) And the
Jews wondered, and said : IIow knoweth this man

16 literature, having not been educated? (16) Jesus
answered and said : My doctrine is not from me,

17 but from him that sent me. (17) He that wisheth
to do his pleasure, will understand my doctrine,
whether it is from God, or whether I speak from

18 my own pleasure. (18) lie that speaketh accord-
ing to the pleasure of his own mind, seeketh glory
for himself: but he who seeketh the glory of him
that sent him, is veracious, and evil is not in his

19 heart. (19) Did not Moses give you the law?

20 Yet no one of you observeth the law. (20) Why
do ye seek to kill me ? The multitude answered
and said : Thou hast a demon : who seeketh to

21 kill thee? (21) Jesus replied, and said to them:
I have wrought one work, and ye all wonder.

22 (22) Because Moses gave you circumcision, (not
that it was from Moses, but it was from the fathers,)

23 ye circumcise a child on the sabbath. (23) And if
a child is circumcised on the sabbath day, that the


Sy. *jCnCLK»l


*" Sy. ivhen the
dai/s of the
feast were,
divided.


180


JOHN, VII.


* Sy. IZoIl


or, is.


law of Moses may not be violated, do ye murmur
at me, because I have made a man entirely sound
on the sabbath, day ? (24) Judge not, with a re- 24
spect for persons ; but judge ye a righteous judg-
ment.— (25) And some from Jerusalem said: Is 25
not this he, whom they seek to kill? (26) And 26
lo, he discourseth publicly, and they say nothing
to him. Do our Eklers*"- know, that he really is
the Messiah ? (27) Yet we l:now this man, whence 27
he is; the Messiah, when he shall come, no one
knoweth whence he is. (28) And Jesus, while 28
teaching in the temple, raised his voice and said:
Ye both know me, and ye know from whence I
am. And I did not come of my own accord ; but
he that sent me is true. Him ye know not;
(29) but I know him ; because I am from him, and 29
he sent me. — (30) And they sought to apprehend 30
him ; but no one laid hands on him, because his
hour was not yet come. (31) And many of the 31
multitude believed on him, and said: When the
Messiah cometh, will he work greater signs'^ than
these which this man doeth ? (32) And the Phari- 32
sees heard the multitude say these things of him :
and they and the chief priests sent constables to
take him. (33) And Jesus said: A little while 33
longer 1 am with you, and then I go to him that
sent me. (34) And ye will seek me, and will not 34
find me; and where I am, ye cannot come.
(35) The Jews said among themselves: Whither 35
is he about to go, that we cannot find him? Will
he go to some region of the Gentiles, and teach the
prohme? (36) What means^ this speech he ut- 36
tered: Ye will seek me, and will not find me;
and where I am, ye cannot come ?

And on the great day, which was the last of the 87
feast, Jesus stood and cried, and said : If any man
thirst, let him come to me and drink. (38) Who- 38
ever believeth in me, as the scriptures have said,
Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters.
(39) (This he said of the Spirit, which they who 39
believe in him were to receive: for the Spirit
had not yet been given, because Jesus was not
yet glorified.) (40) And many of the multitude 40
who heard his discourses, said: Certainly, he is
a prophet. (41) Others said : He is the Messiah. 41
Others said: Doth Messiah come from Galilee?


JOHN, VIII.

_ ^ — .

42 (42) Doth not the scriptures say, That Messiah
Cometh of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem

43 the town of David ? (43) And there was a division

44 among the multitude respecting him, (44) And
there were some of them who wished to apprehend

45 him. But no one laid hands on him. — (45) And the
constables came to the chief priests and Pharisees ;
and the priests said to them : Why have ye not

46 brought him ? (46) The constables say to them :
Never did a man speak, as this man speaketh.

47 (47) The Pharisees said to them : Arc ye also de-

48 ceived? (48) Have any of the chiefs, ^ or of the

49 Pharisees, believed in him? (49) But this peo-

50 pie, who know not the law, are accursed. (50) One
of them: Nicodemus, he who came to Jesus by

61 night, said to them: (51) Doth our law condemn a
man, unless it first hear him, and know what he

52 hath done ? (52) They answered, and said to him :
Art thou also from Galilee ? Search, and see, that

63 no prophet ariscth from Galilee, (53) So they
went every one to his own house.*

VIII. And Jesus went to the mount of Olives.

2 (2) And in the morning he came again to the tem-
ple ; and all the people came to him, and he sat

3 down and taught them. (3) And the Scribes and
Pharisees brought forward a woman that was
caught in adultery. And when they had placed

4 her in the midst, (4) they say to him: Teacher,
this woman was caught openly in the act of adul-

5 tery, (5) And in the law of Moses, [God] hath
commanaed us to stone such persons. What therc-

6 fore dost thou say ? (6) And this they said, tempt-
ing him, so that they might have [ground] to accuse
him. But Jesus having stooped down, was writing

7 on the ground. (7) And as they continued asking
him, he straightened himself up, and said to them:|
AVhoever among you is without sin, let him first

8 cast a stone at her. (8) And, having again stooped'

9 down, he wrote on the ground. (9) And they,,
when they heard [it], went out one by one, begin-;
ning with the older ;=^ and the woman was left!

10 alone, where she had stood in the midst. (10) And]


181


Sy, Xm^j


^•y.l


m ti m n


* This 53d verse in wantint,' in many early editions of tlic Syrijic N. Testament.
So also the wliole story of the adiiltereas, in the following chapter, v. 1-11,


182


JOHN, VIII.


■> Sy. corporeal-


when Jesus had straightened himself up, he said
to the woman: Where are they? Doth no one
condemn thee? (11) And she said: No man, 11
Lord. And Jesus said: Neither do I eondemn
thee. Go thou, and henceforth sin no more.

And Jesus again conv^ersed with them, and said : 12
I am the hght of the world : he that cometh to
nic, will not walk in darknqss; but will find for
himself the light of life. (13) The Pharisees said 13
to him : Thou bearest witness of thyself, thy testi-
mony is not certain. (14) Jesus answered and said 14
to them : Although I bear witness of myself, my
testimony is certain, because I know whence I
came, and whither I go. But ye do not know,
whence I came, and whither I go. (15) Ye judge 15
accordingto the flesh :b Ijudgenoone. (16) Yet 16
if I judge, my judgment is certain, because I am
not alone, but I and my Father who sent me.
(17) And in your law it is written, that the testi- 17
mony of two persons is certain. (18) I am one 18
who bear witness of myself, and my Father who
sent me, beareth witness of me. (19) They say to 19
him: Where is thy Father? Jesus replied, and
said to them : Ye neither know me nor my Father.
If ye had known me, ye would also have known
my Father. — (20) These words spake Jesus in the 20
treasury, as he taught in the temple : and no one
laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet
come.

Again Jesus said to them : I go away, and ye 21
will seek me, and will die in your sins. And
whither I go, ye cannot come. (22) The Jews said: 22
Is he about to kill himself, that he should say,
Whither I go ye cannot come? (23) And he said 23
to tliem: Ye are from below, I am from above;
ye are of this world, I am not of this world.
(24) I said to you. That ye will die in your sins; 24
for if ye believe not that I am he, ye will die in
your sins. (25) The Jews said to him : Who art 25
thou? Jesus said to them : Although I have begun
to converse with you, (26) I have yet many things 26
to say and to judge concerning you. But he that
sent me is true : and the things which I have heard
from him, them I speak in the world. (27) And 27
they did not know, that he spake to them of the
Father. (28) Jesus said to them again : When ye 28


JOHN, VIIL


183


shall have lifted up the Son of man, then will ye
know that I am he, and that I do nothing from, my
own pleasure, but as my Father taught me, so I

29 speak. (29) And he that sent me, is with me;
and my Father hath not left me alone, because I

30 do, at all times, that which pleaseth him. — (30) And
when he had spoken these things, many believed

31 oa him, (31) And Jesus said to those Jews who
believed on him; If ye continue in my word, ye

32 will be truly my disciples. (32) And ye will
know tlie truth; and the truth will make you

33 free. (33) They say to him : We are the seed of
Abraham, and never were in servitude to any
man ; and how sayest thou, Ye will be freemen ?

34 (34) Jesus said to them: Verily, verily, I say to
you. That whoever committeth sin, is the servant

35 of sin. (35) And a servant abideth not for ever^
30 in the house ; but the Son abideth for ever. (36) If

therefore the Son shall make you free, ye will

37 really be free men. (37) I know that ye are the
children of Abraham ; but ye seek to kill me, be-

38 cause ye do not acquiesce in my word. (38) I
speak that which I have seen with my Father, and
ye do that which ye have seen with your father.

39 (39) They answered, and said to him : Our father
is Abraham. Jesus said to them: If ye were
children of Abraham, ye would do the works of

40 Abraham. (40) But now ye seek to kill me, a
man who hath told you the truth, which I have

41 heard from God : this did not Abraham. (41) But
ye do the works of your father. They say to him :
We are not [the offspring] of Avhoredom ; we have

42 one Father, God. (42) Jesus said to them : If God
Avere your Father, ye would love me; for I pro
ceeded and came from God ; I did not come of my

43 own accord, but he sent me. (43) Why do ye not
understand my speech ? It is because ye cannot

44 hear my speech. (44) Ye are of your father, the
calumniator -^^ and the lust of your father ye are
disposed to do. He was from the beginning a
manslayer, and abode not in the truth ; for the truth
is not in him, and when he speaketh a lie he s})eak-
cth from himself, for he is a liar, and tlie father

45 of it. (45) But me, because I speak the |ruth, ye

46 believe me not. (46) Which of you convicteth me
of sin ? And if 1 speak the truth, why do ye not


Sy. y^\\\


Sy.


184


JOHN, IX.


• Sy. ^L\J\


Sy.


believe me ? (47) He that is of God, heareth the 47
words of God. Tlierefore ye do not hear, because
ye are not of God. (48) The Jews answered, and 48
said to him : Did we not well say, that thou art a
Samaritan, and hast a demon ? (49) Jesus said to 49
them : I have no demon : but I honor God ; and
ye contemn me. (50) But I seek not my own 50
glory : there is one that seeketh [it], and judge th.
(51) Verily, verily, I say to you : He that keepeth 51
my word, will never sec death. (52) The Jews 52
say to him : Now we know, that thou hast a demon.
Abraham is dead, and the prophets ; yet thou
sayest : He that keepeth my word, will never taste
death. (53) Art thou greater than our father 53
Abraham who is dead, or than the prophets who
died ? What dost thou make thyself? (54) Jesus 54
said to them: If I glorify myself, my glory is noth-
ing. It is my Father that glorilieth me, of whom
ye say, He is our God. {bo) And ye know him 55
not. But I know him ; and if I should say, I know
him not, I should be a liar, like you: but I do
know him, and I observe his word. (56) Abraham 56
your father desired to see ni}'^ day : and he saw it,
and rejoiced. (57) The Jews say to him: Thou 57
art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen
Abraham ? (58) Jesus said to them : Verily, verily, 58
I say to you. That before Abi^aham existed, ^ I was.
(59) And they took up stones to stone him. But 59
Jesus concealed himself, and went out of the
temple, and passed along among them, and went
away.

And while passing, he saw a man blind from his IX.
mother's womb. (2) And his disciples asked him, 2
and said : Our Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his
parents, that he was born blind ? (3) Jesus said to 3
them : Neither did he sin, nor his parents ; but
that the works of God might be seen in him. (4) I 4
must work the works of him that sent me, while it
is day ; the night cometh, in which no one can
work. (5) So long as I am in the world, I am the 5
light of the world. (6) And having spoken thus, 6
he spit on the ground, and made mud with the
spittle, a^d spread it on the eyes of the blind man ;
(7) and said to him : Go, wash in the baptistery^ of 7
Siloam. And he went, and washed, and came


JOHN, IX.


185


9
10


13
14

15


away seeing. (8) And liis neighbors, and they by
whom he had before been seen begging, said : is
not this he, who sat and begged? (9) Some said. It
is he: and others said. No ; but he is very like him.
But he said : I am he. (10) And tliey said to him:

11 How were thy eyes opened? (11) lie answered,
and said to them : A man whose name is Jesus,
made mud and spread it on my eyes, and said to
me. Go, wash in the waters of Siloam. And I
went, and washed, and my sight was restored.

12 (12) They said to him: Where is he? He said to
them : I know not.

And they brought him that had been Wind,
before the Pharisees. (U) Now it was on the sab-
bath that Jesus made the mud, and opened his
eyes. (15) And again the Pharisees asked him:
IIow was thy sight restored? And he said to
them : He put mud upon my eyes, and I washed,

16 and my sight was restored. (16) And some of the
Pharisees said : This man is not of God, for he doth
not observe the sabbath. But others said : How
can a man that is a sinner, work these signs ? And

17 there was a division among them. (17) They say
again to the blind man: What sayest thou of him,
seeing he hath opened thy eyes ? lie said to them :

18 I say, that he is a prophet. (18) And the Jews
would not believe concerning him, that he had
been blind, and recovered sight, until they called

19 the parents of him who recovered sight. (19) And
they aaked them : Is this your son, of whom ye say
that he was born blind ? And how doth he now
see? (20) And his parents answered and said:
We know that this is our son, and that he was born
blind; (21) but how he now seeth, or-who opened
his eyes, we know not. He hath come to his years,
ask him ; he will speak for himself. (22) 'Phcse
things said his parents, because they feared the
Jews : for the Jews had decided, that if any one
should confess him to be Messiah, they would
expel him from the synagogue. (23) For this
reason his parents said, lie hath come to his years,

2-4 ask him. — (21) And they called a second time the
man who had been blind, and said to him: Give
glory to God; for we know that this man is a
sinner. (25) lie replied, and said to them : Whether
he is a sinner, I know not; but, one thing I know,


20


22


23


25


186


JOHN, X.


'■ Sy. not from
of old.


that I was blind, and lo, now I see. (26) They 26
said to him again : What did he to thee ? How did
he open thy eyes ? (27) He said to them : I have 27
told you, and ye did not hear. Why would ye
hear again ? Do ye also wish to become his disci-
ples ? (28) But they reproached him, and said to 28
him : Thou art his disciple, but we are the disci-
ples of Moses, (29) And we know that God con- 29
versed with Moses ; but as for this man, we know
not whence he is. (30) The man replied and said 30
to them: In this therefore is [something] to be
admired, that ye know not whence he is, and yet
he hath opened my eyes. (31) Now we know, that 31
God heareth not the voice of sinners ; but him that
feareth him, and doeth his pleasure, him he hear-
eth. (32) Never'' hath it been heard, that any one 32
opened the eyes of one born blind, (33) If this 33
man were not of God, he could not do this thing.
(34) They replied, and said to him: Thou wast 34
wholly born iu sins ; and dost thou teach us ? And
they expelled him.

And Jesus heard that they had expelled him ; 35
and he found him, and said to him : Believest thou
on the Son of God ? (36) And he that was healed, 36
answered and said : My Lord, who is he, that I
may believe on him ? (37) Jesus said to him : 37
Thou hast seen him, and it is he that talketh with
thee. (38) And he said : My Lord, I believe : and 38
he fell down, and worshipped him. — (39) And 39
Jesus said : For the judgment of this world, have
I come ; that they who see not, might see ; and
that they who see, might become blind. (40) And 40
[some] of those Pharisees who were with him, heard
these things ; and they said to him : How ? Are
we also blind ? (41) Jesus said to them : If ye 41
were blind, ye would be without sin ; but now ye
say, We see ; therefore your sin is established.

Verily, verily, I say to you. That he who doth not X.
enter by the door into the fold of the flock, but
climbeth np in some other place, he is a thief and a
robber. (2) But he that entereth by the door, is the 2
shepherd of the flock. (3) And to him the door- 3
keeper opcneth the door; and the sheep hear his
voice. And he calleth the sheep by their names, and
leadeth them out. (4) And when he hath led out his 4


JOHN, X.


187


flock, he goctli before it ; and his sheep follow him,
because they know his voice. (5) But after a
stranger the iloek will not follow, but it flceth from


him :
ger.
they 1
Jesus


9
10


11


lo


14


15


Sy. U]3£)


because it knoweth not the voice of a stran-
(G) This allegory^ spake Jesus to them ; but
:new not what he said to them. — (7) And
said to them again : Verily, verily, I say to
you, That I am the door of the flock. (8) All those
who have come, were thieves and robbers: but
the flock did not hear them. (9) I am the door :
and if any enter by me, he will live, and will come
in and go out, and will find pasture. (10) The
thief Cometh not, but that he may steal, and kill,
and destroy. I have come, that the}'- may have
life, and may have that which is excellent. (11) I
am a good shepherd. A good shepherd exposeth
12 his life for the sheep. (12) But a hireling, who is
not the shepherd, and to whom the sheep do not
belong, when he seeth the wolf coming, leaveth the
flock, and flceth ; and the wolf comi Lh, and teareth,
and dispcrseth the flock. (13) And a hireling
fleeth, because he is a hireling, and hath no concern
for the flock. (14) I am a good shepherd ; and I
know my own [sheep], and am known by my own.
(15) As my Father knoweth me, so know I my

16 Father ; and I expose my life for the flock. (16) And
I have other sheep, which are not of this fold : and
them also I must bring ; and they will hear my
voice ; and the whole will be one flock, and one

17 shepherd. (17) For this cause my Father loveth
me, that I lay down my life, to resume it again.

18 (18) There is no one that taketh it from me ; but I
lay it down of my own ])leasure: for I have
authority to lay it down, and authority to resume
it again ; because I have received this command
from my Father. — (19) And again there was a
division among the Jews, on account of these say-
ings. (20) And many of them said : He hath a
demon, and is wholly beside himself; why hear ye
hitn? (21) But others said; These are not the
discourses of a demoniac : can a demon o})en the
eyes of one blind ? I

And the feast of the dedication^ was [held] at,'' Sy. IZjcuj
Jerusalem, and it was winter. (23) And Jesus
walked in the temple, in the porch of Solomon.
24 (24) And the Jews gathered around him; and said I


19


20
21


22
23


f w


188


JOHN, XI.


* or, perish,


Sy.liTU^


« Sy. l;ns\


Sy. 5]a\


to liim : how long lioldest thou our mind in sus-
pense? If thou art the Messiah, tell us plainly.

(25) Jesus answered, and said to them : I have told 25
you, and yc did not believe. The works which I

do in the name of my Father, they testify of me.

(26) But ye do not believe, because ye are not of 26
my sheep, as I have said to you. (27) My sheep 27
hear my voice: and I know them: and they go af-
ter me. (28) And I give to thfem life eternal: and 28
they will never be lost:<= nor will any one pluck
them from my hand. (29) For my Father, who gave 29
[them] to me, is greater than all ; nor can any pluck
from my Father's hand, (30) I and my Father are 30
one. (81) And again the Jews took up stones, to 31
stone him. (82) Jesus said to them : Many good 32
works have 1 showed you from my Father; for
which of those works do ye stone me ? (33) The 33
Jews said to him : It is not on account of good
works, that we stone thee : but because thou blas-
phemest ; and, whilst thou art a man, thou makest
thyself God. (34) Jesus said to them: Is it not 84
written in your law, I have said, Ye are gods'/'^
(35) If he called them gods, because the word of 35
(jod was with them, and the scripture cannot be
nullified ; (36) do ye say to him, whom the Father 36
hath sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blas-
phemest ; because I said to you, I am the Son of
God ? (37) And if I do not the works of my Father, 37
believe me not. (38) But if I do [them], although 38
ye believe not me, yet believe the works ; that ye
may know and believe, that my Father is in me,
and I in my Father. — (39) And again they sought 39
to lay hold of him ; but he escaped out of their
hands ; (40) and retired to the other side^^ of the 40
Jordan, to the place where John at first baptized,
and tarried there. (41) And many persons came 41
to him : and they said, John indeed wrought not
even one sign ; but every thing that John said of
this man, was true. (42) And many believed on 42
him.

And a certain man was sick, Lazarus'^ of the XI.
town of Bethany, the brother of Mary and Martha.
(2) It was that Mary who anointed the feet of Jesus 2
with perfume, and wiped [them] with her hair,
whose brother Lazarus was sick. (3) And his two 3


JOHN, XI.


189


9


10
11


sisters sent to Jesus, and suid : Our Lord, he

4 whom thou lovest is sick. (-4) And Jesus said :
This sickness is not that of death, but for the
glory of God, tliat the Son of God may be glori-

5 tied by means of it. (5) Now Jesus loved Martha

6 and Mary, and Lazarus, (6) And when he heard
that he was sick, he remained in the place where

7 he was two days. (7) And afterwards he said to
his disciples : Come, let ns go again into Judaea.

8 (8) His disciples say to him: Our Kabbi, the Jews
have just sought to stone tliee ; and goest thou
again thither. (*,)) Jesus said to them : Are there
not twelve hours in the day ? And if a man walk
in the daytime, he stumbleth not; because he
seeth the light of the world. (10) But if one
walk in the night, he stumbleth; because there is
no light in him. (11) These things said Jesus, and
afterwards he said to them: Lazarus our friend

12 reposcth.i^ But I go to awake him. (12) His dis-
ciples say to him : Our Lord, if he sleepeth, he is

13 recovering. (13) But Jesus spoke of his death ;
and they thought, he spoke of the sleep of repose.

14 (14) Then Jesus said to them explicitly ; Lazarus

15 is dead. (15) And I rejoice, for your sakcs, that I
was not there ; that ye may believe. But let us go
there. (16) Thomas, who is called the Twin, said
to his fellow-disciples : Let us also go [and] die
with him.

And Jesus came to Bethany, and found that he
had been in the grave four days. (18) Now Beth-
any was near to Jerusalem, distant from it about
fifteen furlongs. (19) And many of the Jews had
come to Martha and Mary, to comfort <^ them con-
cerning their brother. (20) And Martha, when
she heard that Jesus was coming, went out to meet
him ; but Mary was sitting in the house. (21) And
^[artha said to Jesus : My Lord, if thou hadst been
here, my brother had not died. (22) But even
now, I know, that whatever thou wilt ask of God,
ho will give it thee. (23) Jesus said to her: Thy
brother will rise. (24) Martha said to him: I
know, that he will rise in the consolation, *! at the

25 last day. (25) Jesus said to her : I am the conso-
lation, and life. And he that believeth in me,

26 though he should die, will live. (26) And every
one that livcth, and believeth in me, will not die


16


17

18

19

20

21

22

23
24


Sy. .nn»


Sy. to apeak to
their hearts.


•^ or, resurrec-
tion.


for ever. Believest thou this? (27) She said to 27
him : Yes, my Lord ; I believe, that thou art the
Messiah, the Son of God, that cometh into the
world. — (28) And when she had thus said, she 28
went and called her sister Mary, secretly, and said
to her : Our Rabbi hath come, and calleth for thee.
(29) And Mary, Avhen she heard [it], rose up 29
quickly, and went to meet him. (30) And Jesus 80
had not 3'ct entered the village, but Avas in the
place where Martha met him. (31) Those Jews 31
also, Avho were with her in the house and consoled
her, when they saw that Mary rose up quickly and
went out, followed after her; for they supposed,
she was going to the grave to weep. (32) And 82
Mary, when she came Avhere Jesus was and saw
him, fell at his feet, and said to him : If thou hadst
been here, my Lord, my brother had not died.
(33) And when Jesus saw her weeping, and the 33
Jews weeping who came with her, he was moved
in spirit, and was agitated. (34) And he said: 84
Where have ye laid him? They say to him : Our
Lord, come, and see. (35) And the tears of Jesus 35
came. (36) And the Jews said : See, how much he 8Q
loved him. (37) And some of them said: Could 37
not he who opened the eyes of the blind man, have
caused that this also should not have died ? — (38) 38
And Jesus, still agitated within, came to the grave.
Now the grave was a cave, and a stone was laid
upon its entrance. (39) And Jesus said: Take 39
away this stone. Martha, the sister of the de-
ceased, said to him: My Lord, by this time he is
putrid; for four days have elapsed. (40) Jesus 40
said to her: Did I not tell thee, that if thou
wouldst believe, thou shouldst see the glory of
God ? (41) And they took away the stone. And 41
Jesus raised his eyes on high, and said: Father, I
thank thee that thou hast heard me. (42) And I 42
know that thou hearest me always; but on account
of this multitude that standeth' here, I say these
things ; that they may believe, that thou hast sent
ma (43) And when he had thus spoken, he called 43
with a loud voice: Lazarus, come forth! (44) And 44
the dead man came forth, with his hands and his
feet swathed with bandages, and his face with a
napkin. Jesus said to them : Loose him, and let
him gOk


JOHN, XII.


191


45 And many of the Jews who had come to Mary,
when they saw what Jesus did, believed on him.

46 (46) But some of them went to tlie Pharisees, and

47 told them all that Jesus had done.— (47) And the
chief priests and Pharisees assembled together, and
said: What shall we do? For this man worketh

48 many signs. (48) And if we thus let him alone,
all the ]>eoplc will believe in him ; and tlie Ro-
mans c Avill come, and will take away our place

49 and our nation. (49) But, one of them, named
Caiapha?, was the high priest of that year ; and he

50 said to them : Ye know not any thing. (50) Nei-
ther do ye consider, that it is expedient for us,
that one man die for the people, and not that this

51 whole people perish. (51) This he said, however,
not from the })romptings of his own mind ; but be-
ing the high priest of that year, he prophesied, that

52 Jesus was about to die for the people: (52) and
not only for the people,*" but also that he might
collect together the sons of God that were dis-

53 persed. (53) And from that da}^, they plotted to

54 kill him. — (54) And Jesus did not walk openly
among the Jews ; but retired from them to a place
near the wilderness, to a town called EphraimjS

55 and there he abode with his disciples. — (55) And
the passover of the Jews drew near: and many
went up from the villages to Jerusalem, before the

56 feast, that fliey might purify themselves. (56) And
they souglit for Jesus; and they said one to another,
in the temple : What think ye ? that he will not

57 come to the feast? (57) And the chief priests and
the Pharisees had commanded that if any one knew
where he was, he should make it known to them,
that they might take him.

XII. And six days before the passover, Jesus came
to Bethany, where was that Lazarus whom Jesus

2 raised from the dead, (2) And they made a sup-
per for him there: and Martha served, and Laz-

3 arus was one of the guests^ with him. (3) And
Mary took an alabaster box of perfume of choice
spikenard, of great price ; and anointed the feet of
Jesus; and she wiped his feet with her hair. And
the house was filled with the odor of the perfume.

4 (4) Then said Judas Iscariot, one of the disciples, he

5 that Avas about to betray him: (5) Why was not


Sy. ] iVoogi?


'' i. c. the Jews
in Judcca,


^ Sy. Ul^\^\


Sy. recliners.


192


or, fell into it.


« Sy. ] 1 S eol


JOHN, XII.

this ointment sold for three hundred denarii, and
given to the poor ? (6) And this he said, not be- 6
cause he cared for the poor, but because lie was a
thief, and held the purse, and carried what was put^
in it. (7) But Jesus said : Let her alone ; she hath 7
kept it for the day of my burial (8) For the poor 8
are always with you, but 1 am not with you always.
— (9) And great multitudes of the Jews heard that 9
he was there : and they came, not only on ac-
count of Jesus, but also that they might see Laz-
arus, whom he raised from the dead. (10) And 10
the chief priests deliberated about killing even
Lazarus: (11) because many of the Jews, on his 11
account, went and believed in Jesus.

And the next day, a great multitude who had 12
come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was
coming to Jerusalem, (13) took boughs of palm- 13
trees, and went out to meet him. And they cried,
and said: Hosanna,«^ Blessed is he that coraeth in
the name of the Lord, the king of Israel ! (14) And 14
Jesus found an ass, and sat upon it ; as it is written,
(15) Fear not, daughter of Sion. Behold, thy king 15
Cometh to thee; and he rideth upon a colt, the
foal of an ass. (16) These things understood not 16
his disciples, at that time ; but when Jesus was
glorified, then his disciples remembered that these
things were Avritten of him, and that th^ did them
to him. — (17) And the multitude that had been with 17
him, testilied that he had called Lazarus from the
grave, and raised him from the dead. (18) And 18
for this reason, great multitudes went out to meet
him, as they had heard that he wrought this sign.
(19) But the Pharisees said, one to another: Do 19
ye see, that ye are gaining nothing ? For, lo, the
whole world is going after him.

And there were also among the people, some 20
who had come up to worship at the feast. (21) These 21
came, and approached Philip, who was of Bethsai-
da in Galilee, and said to him: M}'^ lord, we are
desirous to see Jesus. (22) Philip came and told 22
Andrew; and Andrew and Philip told Jesu.s.

(23) And Jesus answered, and said to them: The 23
hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified.

(24) Verily, verily, I say to you, That a kernel of 24
wheat, unless it fall and die in the ground, remaineth
alone ; but if it die, it produceth numerous fruits.


JOHN, XII.


193


25 (25) lie that lovcth his life,'i will lose it; and he "* Sy. 0T_«_aJ
that hateth his life, in this world, will preserve it

26 unto lifec everlasting. (26) If any one is servant e gy, ]'.' ^,\
to me, he will come after mc; and where I am,
there also will my servant be. Ilim that serveth

27 me, will the Father honor. (27) Behold, now is
my souK troubled ; and what shall I say ? My ' Sy. ■» » c^?
Father, deliver me from this hour ? But for this

28 very cause, came I to this hour, (28) Father,
glorify thy name ! And a voice was heard from
heaven : I have glorified [it] ; and I will glorify

29 [it] again. (29) And the multitude standing by,
heard [it] ; and they said : There was thunder.
But others said: An angel spoke with him.

30 (30) Jesus answered, and said to them : This voice

31 was not for my sake, but for yours. (31) Now is
the judgment of this world : now the rulers of this ^ Sy- pODJ j

32 world is cast out. (32) And I, when I am lifted
up from the earth, will draw all men to me.

33 (33) And this he said, to show by what manner of
3-1 death, he was to die. — (34) The multitude said to

him : We have heard from the law, that the Mes-
siah abideth for ever : [and] how sayest thou, that
the Son of man is to be lifted up ? Who is this

35 Son of man ? (35) Jesus said to them : A short
time longer, the light is with you. Walk, while ye
have the light, lest the darkness overtake you. He
that walketh in the dark, knoweth not whither he

36 goeth. (36) While the light is with you, confide
in the light ; that ye may be children of the light.
— These things said Jesus, and departed, and con-
cealed himself from them.

37 And although he Avrought all these signs before

38 them, they believed him not; (38) that the word
of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, who said :
My Lord; who hath believed our report? Andj

39 to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed ? (39) For
this reason they could not believe, because Isaiah

40 said again: (40) They have blinded their eyes, and!
darkened their hearts; that they might not see
with their eyes, and understand with their heart,
and be converted ; and I should heal them.

41 (41) These things spake Isaiah, when he saw his'

42 glory, and spoke of him. (42) And of the chiefs^ i- Sy. ] « >•»
also, many believed on him ; but on account of the!
Pharisees, they did not confess [him], lest they]


P


194


rf^


• or, save.


Sy. Xi^


Sy. U4£D


*> Gr. Simon Pe-
ter.


JOHN, XIII.

should be put out of the synagogue ; (43) for they 43
loved the praise of men, more than the praise of
God. — (44) And Jesus cried, and said: He that 44
believeth in me, bclieveth not in me, but in him
that sent me. (45) And he that seeth me, seeth 45
him that sent me. (46) I have come into the 46
world, a light, that whoever believeth in me, might
not abide in darkness. (47) And whoever shall 47
hear my words, and not observe them, I judge him
not; for I did not come to judge the world, but to
vivify' the world. (48) AVhoever rejectcth me, 48
and receiveth not my words, there is one to judge
him ; the word which I speak, will judge him, at
the last day. (49) For I have not spoken from 49
myself; but the Father Avho sent me, he gave me
commandment, what I should speak, and what I
should say. (50) And I know that his command- 50
ment is life'^ eternal. Therefore, these things which
I speak, as my Father hath said to me, so I
speak.

And before the feast of the paasover, Jesus XIII.
knew that the hour had come when he should de-
part from this world unto the Father. And he
loved his own [people], who were in the world;
and he loved them unto the end. (2) And when 2
the supper was passed, it had been injected by
Satan"- into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of
Simon, to betray him. (3) And Jesus, because he 8
knew that the Father had given all things into his
hands ; and that he came out from the Father, and
was going to God; (4) arose from the supper, and 4
laid aside his long garments, and took a linen cloth,
and wrapped it about his loins; (5) and poured 5
water into a wash-basin, and began to wash the feet
of his disciples : and he wiped them with the linen
cloth with which he had girded his loins. (6) And 6
when he came to Simon Cephas, ^» Simon said to
him : Dost thou, my Lord, wash ni}'' feet for me ?
(7) Jesus answered, and said to him : What I do, 7
thou understandcst not now: but hereafter thou
wilt understand. (8) Simon Cephas said to him: 8
Never shalt thou wash my feet. Jesus said to him:
Unless I wash thee, thou hast no part with me.
(9) Simon Cephas said to him: Then, my Lord, not 9
my feet only shalt thou wash, but also my hands


JOHN, XIII.


195


10 and my head. (10) Jesus said to him: He that
hath bathed,^ nccdeth not but to wash his feet; for
he is all clean. And ye also are clean ; but not all

11 of you. (11) For Jesus knew, who would betray
him : therefore he said, Ye arc not all clean. —

12 (12) And when he had washed their feet, he re-
sumed his long garments,^ and reclined. And he
said to them : Understand ye what I have done to

13 you ? (13) Yc call me, Our Rabbi, and Our Lord ;

14 and ye speak well ; for I am so. (14) If then I,
your Lord and your Rabbi, have washed your feet,
how much more ought ye to wash the feet of one

15 another ? (15) For I have given you this example,

16 that yc might do, as I have done to 3^ou. (16)
Verily, verily, I say to you. That no servant is
greater than his lord; and no legate is greater

17 than he who sent him. (17) If yc know these

18 things, happy will ye be if ye do them. (18) Not
of }■ ou all, do I speak : I know whom I have
chosen. But that the scripture may be fulfilled,
He that eateth bread with me, hath lifted his heel

19 against me.' (19) From this time, I tell you, before
it occurs, that when it shall occur, yc may know

20 that I am he. (20) Verily, verily, I say to you r
He that rcceiveth him whom I send, receiveth me;
and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent
me.

21 These things said Jesus, and he was agitated in
his spirit ;f and he testified, and said: Verily,
verily, I say to j'ou. That one of you will betray

22 me. (22) And the disciples stared at one another ;

23 because they knew not, of whom he spake. (23) And
there Avas one of his disciples, who was reclining

24 on his bosom, he whom Jesus loved ; (24) to him
Simon Cephas beckoned, that he should ask him,

25 who it was of whom he spoke. (25) And that
disciple fell upon the breast of Jesus, and said to

26 him: My Lord, which is he? (26) Jesus an-
swered and said: He it is, to whom I give the
bread when I have dipped it. And Jesus dipped
the bread, and gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of

27 Simon. (27) And after the bread, then Satan
entered into him. And Jesus said to him : What

28 thou docst, do quickly. (28) And no one of those
reclining, knew, wherefore he said this to him.

29 (20) For some of them supposed, because the purse


Sy. "U^JDj


Sy.


(->v» t\»


' Sy. CTLkjO;^


196


e Sy.
>• Sy.


JOHN, XIV.

was in the hands of Judas, that Jesus expressly
charged him to buy something needful for the
feast, or that he should give something to the poor.
(30) And Judas took the bread at once, and went 30
out of the house. And it Avas night when he went
out.

And Jesus said : Now is the Son of man glori- 31
fied;s and God is glorified in him. (32) And if 32
God is glorified in him, God will glorify him in
himself ;'> and will glorify him speedily. (33) My 33
children, a little longer I am with you ; and ye
will seek for me ; and, as I said to the Jews,
Whither I go ye cannot come, so I now say to you.
(34) A new commandment I give to you, that ye 34
be affectionate to each other. As I have loved
you, do ye also love one another. (35) By this 35
will every one know that ye are my disciples, if
ye have love for each other. — (36) Simon Cephas 36
said to him: Our Lord, whither goest thou? Je-
sus answered, and said to him : Whither I go, thou
canst not now come after me ; but thou wilt at last
come. (37) Simon Cephas said to him': My Lord, 37
why can I not come after thee? I would lay
down my life for thee, (38) Jesus said to him: 38
Wouldst thou lay down thy life for me ? Verily,
vcriljr, 1 say to thee, Tlie cock will not crow, until
thou hast three times denied me.

Let not your heart be troubled : believe in XIY.
God, and, believe in me. (2) There are many 2
mansions in the house of my Father : and if not, [
would have told you ; for I go to prepare a place
for you. (3) And if I go to prepare for you a 3
place, I will come again and take you to myself;
that where I am, there ye may be also. (4) And 4
whither I go, ye know ; and the way ye know. —
(5) Thomas said to him : Our Lord, we know not 5
whither thou goest; and how can we know the
way? (6) Jesus said to him: I am the way, and 6
truth, and life : no one cometli unto my Father,
but by me. (7) If ye had known me, ye would 7
also have known my Father: and henceforth, yc
know him, and have seen him. — (8) Philip said to 8
him : Our Lord, show us the Father, and it will
suffice for us. (9) Jesus said to him: Have I 9
been all this time with you, and hast thou not


JOHN, XIV.


197


11
12


13


15
16


known me, Philip? He that seeth me, seeth the
Father : and how saycst thou. Show us the Father ?

10 (10) Bclicvcst thou not, that I am in my Father,
and my Father in me ? And the words which I
speak, I speak not from myself: but my Father,
who dwcllcth in me,"- he doeth these works.
(11) Believe, that I am in my Father, and my
Father in me. And if not, believe, at least, on
account of the works. (12) Verily, verily, I say to
you : lie that belie veth in me, the Avorks which I
do, will he also do. And greater than these will
he do, because I go unto my Father. (13) And
what ye shall ask in my name, I will do for you ;

14 that the Father may be glorified in his Son. (14)
And if ye shall ask of me, in my name, I will do
[it]. — (15) If 3''e love me, keep my commands.
(16) And I will ask of my Father, and he will
give you another Comforter, ^ that he may be with

17 you for ever, (17) the Spirit of truth; whom the
world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, and
knoweth him not: but ye know him, because he

18 abideth with you, and is in you. (18) I shall not
leave you orphans : for I shall come to you in a

19 little while. (19) And the world will not see me ;
but ye will see me. Because I live, ye will live

20 also. (20) In that day ye will know, that I am in
my Father; and that ye are in me, and I in you.

21 (21) He, with whom are my commands, and who
keepeth them, he it is that loveth me. And he
that loveth me, will be loved by my Father : and
I will love him, and will manifest m3'sc-lf to him.

22 — (22) Judas, — not Iscariot, — said to him: My
Lord, how is it that thou art to manifest th3'self to

23 us, and not to the world? (23) Jesus answered,
and said to him : He that loveth me, obscrveth m}'-
instruction ;c and my Father will love him, and we
will come to him, and make our abode with him.

24 (24) But he that loveth me not, observeth not my
instruction. And the instruction which ye hear, is

25 not mine, but the Father's who sent me. — (25) These
things have I said to you, while I was with you.

26 (26) But the Comforter, the Iloly Spirit, whom the
Father will send in my name, he will teach you
every thing, and will remind you of all that I say to

27 you. (27) PeacC^ I leave with you; my peace I
give to you. It is not as the world" giveth, that l|


Sy.


t-Sy.

from Gr.
itupaxXyiTog.


" or, discourse


Sy. ]^n\ •

Sy. ]<^Vv


198


JOHN, XV.


'Sy.


Sy. words.


' or, lovers.


Sy. .'^^n^A


give to you. Let not your heart be troubled, nor
be afraid. (28) Ye have heard what I said to 28
you that I go away, and come [again] to you. If
ye had loved me, ye would have rejoiced, tliat I go
to my Father ; for my Father is greater than I.
(29) And now, lo, I have told you, before it occur- 29
reth ; so that when it shall have occurred, ye may
believe. (30) Hereafter I shall not converse much 30
with you ; for the ruler^ of thfs world coineth, and
hath nothing in me. (31) But that the worlds may 31
know, that I love my Father, and as my Father
commanded me, so I do. Arise ; let us go hence.

I am the true vine ; and my Father is the culti-XV.
vator. (2) Every branch in me, which yieldeth 2
not fruits, he takcth it away: and that which
yieldeth fruits, he cleanseth it, that it may yield
more fruits. (3) Ye henceforth are clean, on ac- 3
count of the discourse I have held with you.
(4) Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch 4
cannot yield fruits of itself, unless it abide in the
vine ; so also, neither can ye, unless ye abide in
me. (5) I am the vine, and ye are the branches. 5
He that abideth in me, and I in him, he yieldeth
much fruit; for without me, ye can do nothing,
(6) And if a man abide not in me, he is cast forth 6
as a witliercd branch ; and they gather it up, and
cast it into the fire to be burned. (7) But if ye 7
shall abide in me, and my instructions^ shall abide
in you, whatever ye shall be pleased to ask, it will
be given to you. — (8) In this is the Father glori- 8
fied, that ye bear much fruit; and ye will be my
disciples. (9) As my Father hath loved me, I also 9
have loved you : abide ye in the love of me. (10) If 10
ye shall keep my commands, ye will abide in the
love of me, as I have kept the commands of my
Father, and abide in his love. (11) These things 11
have I spoken to you, that my joy may be in you,
and that your joy may be complete. (12) This is 12
my command, that ye love one another, as I have
loved you. (13) There is no greater love than 13
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends,'*
(14) Ye are my friends, if ye do all that I command 14
you. (15) I no longer call 3'-ou servants; because 15
a servant knoweth not what his lord doeth : but I
have called you my friends ;<= because, whatever I


JOHN, XVI.


199


have heard from my Father, I have made known

16 to you. (16) It is not ye that chose me, but I that
have chosen you ; and I have appointed you, that
ye also should go and yield fruits, and that your
fruits should continue; so that whatever yq may
ask of my Father in my name, he may give it you.

17 (17) These things I command you, that ye should

18 love one another. — (18) And if the world hate you,

19 know ye, that it hated me before you. (19) And
if ye were of the world, the world would love what
is of it. But ye are not of the world, for I have
chosen you out of the world; for this cause, the

20 world hateth you. (20) Remember the word that
I spoke to you. That there is no servant, who is
greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute 3'ou; and if they have ob-
served my teaching, tliey will also observe yours.

21 (21) But all these things will they do to you, on
account of my name, because they know not him

22 that sent me. (22) If I had not come and dis-
coursed with them, sin would not have been to
them ; but now there is no excuse for their sins.

23 (23) lie that hateth me, hateth my Father also.
2i (24) If I had not wrought before them works which

no other person ever did, sin would not have been
to them : but now they have seen, and have hated,

25 both me and my Father ; (25) so that in them will
be fulfilled the word which is written in their law:

26 They hated me, without a cause.<^ — (26) But when
the Comforter shall come, whom I will send to you
from ray Father, that Spirit of truth who proceed-

27 cth from the Father, He will testify of me. (27)
And do ye also testify ; for ye have been with me
from the beginning.

XVL These things have I said to you, that ye may

2 not be stumbled. (2) For they will eject you from
their synagogues ; and the hour will come, that
whoever shall kill you, will suppose that he pre-

3 senteth an offering to God. — (3) And these things
will they do, because they have not known either

4 my Father, or me. (4) These things have I spoken
to you, that when the time of them cometh, ye may
recollect, that I told you of them. And I did not
tell you these things from the beginning, because I

5 was with you. (5) But now, I am going to Ilim


gratuitously.


200


JOHN, XVI.


• Sy.

'• or, rebuke.


Sy. )jc1d51


oSy.


• Sy. V«-3r^


6


8

9
10


that sent me ; and none of jou asketh me, "Whither
goest thou? (6) And because I have told you
these things, sorrow hath come and hath filled your
hearts. (7) But I tell you the truth, that it is
profitable for you that I go away ; for, if I go
not away, the Comforter^ will not come to you;
but if I go, I will send him to 3^ou. (8) And when
he is come, he will convict''^, the world of sin, and
of righteousness, and of judgment. (9) Of sin,
because they believe not in me : (10) and of righ-
teousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see
me no more: (11) and of judgment, because the 11
ruler^" of this world is judged, (12) Moreover, I 12
have much to say to you : but ye cannot compre-
hend [it] now, (13) But when the Spirit of truth 13
shall come, he will lead you into all the truth.
For he will not speak from his own mind ; but
whatever he heareth, that will he speak : and he
will make known to you things to come. (14) He 14
will glorify me ; because he will receive of what is
mine, and will show [it] to you. (15) AVhatever'^
the Father hath, is mine: therefore said I to you,
that he will receive of what is mine, and will show
[it] to you. — (16) A little while, and ye will not
see me; and again a httle while, and ye will see
me; because I goto the Father. (17) And his dis- 17
ciples said one to another : What is this that he
saith to us, A little while, and ye will not see me,
and again a little while, and ye will see me, because
I go to my Father ? (18) And they said : What
is this little while, of which he speaketh? We
know not what he saith. (19) And Jesus knew,
that they desired to ask him ; and he said to them :
Are ye debating with each other, of what I said to
you, A little while, and ye will not see me, and
again a little while, and ye will see me? (20) Verily, 20
verily, I say to you, That ye will weep and lament :
and the world will rejoice, while to you will be
sorrow. But your sorrow will be turned to joy.
(21) A woman, in bringing forth, hath sorrow, for 21
the day of her travail hath come : but when she
hath brought forth a son, she remembcreth not her
anguish, because of the joy that a human bcinge jg
born into the world. (22) Ye also now have sor-
row ; but I will see you again, and your heart will
rejoice, and no one will deprive you of your joy.


15


16


18
19


22


JOHN, XVII.


201


23 (23) And in that day yc will ask me nothing.
Verily, vcril}^, I say to you, That whatsoever ye
shairask of my Father in my name, he will give to

24 you. (24) Hitherto yc have asked nothing in my
name. Ask, and ye will receive; that your joy

25 may be complete. — (25) These things have I spoken
to you in allegories -J but the hour will come, when
I shall not speak to you in allegories, but I will

26 speak to you plainly of the Father. (2G) In that
day ye will ask in my name; and I do not say to

27 you, that I will pray to the Father for you ; (27) for
the Father himself loveth you, because ye have
loved me, and have believed that I proceeded from

28 the presence of the Father. (28) I proceeded forth
from before the Father, and came into the world;
and again I leave the world, and go to the Father.

29 —(29) His di.sciplcs say to him : Lo, now thou
speakcst plainly, and thou uttcrest no allegory.

30 (30) Now know wc, that thou knowest every thing ;g
and thou hast no need, that any one should ask
thee: by this wc believe, that thou didst proceed

31 from God. (31) Jesus said to them : Do ye believe ?

32 (32) Behold, the hour comcth, and hath now come,
when ye will be dispersed, each to his place ; and
ye will leave mc alone. But I am not alone, for

33 the Father is with me. (33) These things have I
said to you, that in me yc might have peace. In
the world ye will have trouble : but, take courage,
I have vanquished the world.

XVII. These things spake Jesus, and lifted up his
eyes to heaven, and said : My Father, the hour is
come : glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify

2 thee. (2) As thou hast given him authority =>• over
all flesh, that he might give life eternal to as many

3 as thou hast given him. (3) And this is life eter-
nal, that they may know thee, that thou art the
only true God, and whom thou hast sent, Jesus

4 Messiah. (4) I have glorified thee on the earth ;
the work*' which thou gavcst me to do, I have

5 finished. (5) And now, my Father, glorify thou
mc, with that glory which 1 had with thee before

6 the world was. — (G) I have made known thy name
to the men, whom thou gavcst mc from the world :
thine they were, and thou gavcst them to me; and

7 they have kept thy word. (7) Now I<= have known,


sy. UP


g^o


Sy.


"^O


Sy.]j_4Va^


Sy-lr^i:.


« Gr. they.


or, which
name.


Sy. \i^],^


Sy.


tliat whatever tliou hast given mc, was from thee.

(8) For, the words thou gavest tome, I have given 8
to them ; and they have received them, and have
known certainly, that I came from thy presence ;
and they have behoved that tliou didst send me.

(9) And I pray for them ; it is not for the world 9
that I pray, but for them whom thou hast given
me, for they are thine. (10) And all that is mine 10
is thine, and what is thine is mine; and lam glori-
fied in them. (11) Henceforth I am not in the 11
world ; but these are in the world, and I go to thee.
Holy Father, keep them in that thy name, which**
thou hast given to me ; that they may be one, as
we are. (12) While I have been with them in the 12
world, I have kept them in thy name. Those thou
gavest mc, have 1 kept; and none of them is lost,
but the son of perdition, '^ that the scripture might

be fulfilled. (13) But now I come to thee ; and 13
these things I speak in the world, that my joy may
be complete in them. (14) I have given them thy 14
word: and the world hath hated them, because
they are not of the world, even as I am not of the
world. (15) I pray not, that thou wouldst take 15
them out of the world, but that thou wouldst keep
them from evil: (16) for they are not of the 16
world, even as I am not of the world. (17) Father, 17
sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is the truth.
(18) As thou didst send me into the world, so have 18
I also sent them into the world. (19) And for 19
their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also may be
sanctified by the truth. — (20) And it is not for 20
them only that I pray, but also for those who
shall believe in me through their discourse ;f
(21) that they all may be one ; as thou, my Father, 21
[art] in me, and I in thee ; that they also may be
one in us ; so that the world may believe, that thou
didst send me. (22) And the glory which thou 22
gavest me, I have given them ; that they may be
one, as we are one. (23) I in them, and thou in 23
me ; that they may be perfected into one ; and that
the world may know that thou didst send me, and
that thou hast loved them as also thou hast loved
me. (24) Father, I desire that those whom thou 24
hast given me, may also be with me where I am ;
that they may see that glory of mine which thou
hast given me, as thou lovedst me before the fouu-


JOHN, XVIII.


203


25 dation of the world. (25) My riglitcous Father,
the world hath not known thee ; but I have known
thee, and these have known, that thou didst send

26 me. (2G) And I have made known to them thy
name ; and I will make it known ; so that the love,
with whieh thou lovedst me, may be in them, and
I in tbem.

XVIII. These things spake Jesus, and went forth
with his disciples over the brook Ccdron,^ where
there was a garden, into which he and his disciples

2 entered. (2) And Judas also, the betrayer, knew
the place ; because Jesus often there met with his

3 disciples. (3) Then Judas received a regiment,''
and from the presence of the chief priests and
Pharisees he had oflicials ;•= and he came to the place

4 with lanterns and lamps and weapons. — (4) And
Jesus, as he knew every thing that was to befall
him, went forth and said to them : Whom seek ye?

5 (5) They say to him : Jesus the Na •'.arean. Jesus
said to them : I am he. And Judas the betrayer

6 was also standing with them. (0) And when Jesus
said to them, I am he, they drew back and fell

7 upon the ground. (7) And again Jesus asked
them: AVhom seek ye? And they said : Jesus the

8 Nazarean. (8) Jesus said to them: I have told
you that I am he ; and if yc seek me, let these go

9 away : (9) that the speech might be fulfilled, which
he uttered: Of them, whom thou hast given me, I

10 have lost not even one. — (10) And Simon Cephas
had upon him a sword ; and he drew it, and smote
a servant of the high priest, and cut oif his right
ear. And the servant's name was Malchus.*^

11 (11) And Jesus said to Cephas: Put the sword
into its sheath. The cup which my Father hath
given me, shall I not drink it?

12 Then tlie regiment and the chiliarchs^ and the
oflicials of the Jews laid hold of Jesus, and bound

13 him ; (13) and they led him first to the presence
of Annas;'" for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas,

14 who was the high priest of that year. (14) And
it was Caiaphase who counselled the Jews, that it
was expedient, one man should die for the people.

15 — (15) And Simon Cephas and one other of the
disciples went after Jesus. And that other disciple
knew the high priest; and he entered with Jesus


"" Sy. ^y^n


Sy. ;a^m')
Gr. (f'jrsTpa.
Lat. cohors.

Sy. ]JLk»5


Sy ^AV>


jet',' i \ » n


f Sy.

s Sy. "jg^ « n


204


JOHN, XVIII.


^ Sy. hour.


Sy.


'CL^r^,


Lat. Prcclo-
rium.


16


17


18


20


into the hall. (16) But Simon stood without at
the door; and that other disciple, who knew the
high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper,
and brought in Simon. (17) And the maid who
kept the door, said to Simon: Art not thou also
one of this man's disciples ? And he said : I am
not. (18) And the servants and officials were
standing, and had placed a fire to warm themselves.
— (19) And the high priest 'interrogated Jesus re- 19
specting his disciples, and resj^ecting his doctrine.
(20) And Jesus said to him : I have discoursed
openly with the people, and have at all times
taught in the synagogue and in the temple, where
all the Jews assemble ; and I have uttered nothing
in private. (21) Why dost thou interrogate me? 21
Ask them who have heard, what I said to them :
lo, they know what I have said. (22) And as he
said these things, one of the officials standing by,
smote the cheek of Jesus, and said to him : Givest
thou such an answer to the high priest ? (23) Jesus
replied, and said to him: If I have spoken evil,
bear witness of that evil ; but if well, why smitest
thou me ? (24) Now Annas had sent Jesus bound
to Caiaphas the high priest.— (25) And Simon
Cephas was standing and warming himself; and
they said to him: Art not thou also one of his disci-
ples? And he denied, and said: lam not. (26) And 26
one of the servants of the high priest, a kinsman
of him whose ear Simon cut oflF, said to him: Did
I not see thee with him in the garden? (27) And
again Simon denied: and at that moment^ the
cock crew.

And they led Jesus from the presence of Caia-
phas unto the Prffitorium;' and it was morning.
But they did not enter the Prtetorium, lest they
should defile themselves before they had eaten the
passovcr. (29) And Pilate went forth to them
without, and said to them : What accusation have
ye against this man ? (30) They replied, and said 30
to him : If he were not a malefactor, we should not
have delivered him up to thee. (31) Pilate said to 31
them: Take ye him, and judge him according to
your law. The Jews said to him: It is not lawful
for us to put a man to death : (32) that the speech 32
of Jesus might be fulfilled, when he made known
by what death he was to die. (33) And Pilate 33


22


23


24
25


27


28


29


JOHN, XIX.


205


went into the Proetorium, and called Jesus, and
said to him : Art thou the king of the Jews ?

34 (3-1) Jesus said to him: Saycst thou this of thyself,

35 or have others said [it] to thee of me? (35) Pilate
said to him : Am I a Jew? Thy countrymen and
the chief priests have delivered thee to mc. What

36 hast thou done? (36) Jesus said to him: My king-
dom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of
this world, my servants would have fought, that I
might not be delivered up to the Jews: but now,

37 my kingdom is not from hence. (37) Pilate said
to him : Then thoii art a king? Jesus said to him :
Thou hast said, that I am a king. For this was I
born ; and for this came I into the world, that I
might bear testimony to the truth. Every one that

38 is of the truth, hearcth my voice. (38) Pilate said
to him : What is the truth ? ^ And as he said this,
he went out again to the Jews, and said to them :

39 I lind not any crime in him. (39) And ye have a
custom that 1 should release one to you at the pass-
over; will ye, therefore, that I release to you this

40 king of the Jews? (40) And they all cried out,
and said: ISTot this man, but Barabbas.' Now this

XIX, Barabbas was a robber.'" — XIX, Then Pilate

2 scourged Jesus. (2) And the soldiers braided a
crown of thorns, and. put it on his head ; and they

3 clothed him in purple garments: (3) and they said :
nail,=i king of the Jews! and smote him on his

4 cheeks. (4) And Pilate went out again, and said
to them : Lo, I bring him out to you, that ye may
know that I find against him no oftcnce whatever.

5 (5) And Jesus went forth, having on him the
crown of thorns, and the purple garments. And

6 Pilate said to them : Behold, the man ! (6) And
when the cliicf priests and officials saw him, they
cried out, and said : Hang ^ him ; hang him.
Pilate said to them : Take ye him, and crucify <=

7 him ; for I find no oftence in him. (7) The Jews
say to him : Wc have a law, and, according to our
law, he deserveth death, because he made himself

8 the Son of God. (8) And when Pilate heard that

9 declaration, he feared the more. (9) And he went
again into the Pra^torium ; and he said to Jesus:
AVhence art thou ? And Jesus gave him no an-

10 swer. (10) Pilate said to liim: Wilt thou not
speak to mc ? Knowcst thou not, that I have au-


k Sy.


Sy-H r^
Sy. jm^


^ Sy. Peace to

thee.


i-Sy.
^Sy.


<» Sy. 4ju\j


Sy.
Gaphiphtha.


'Sy.

« Sy. ^2ian\]


' Sy.
= GasuUha.


Sy. ZLl;.!^!.
Aj"ijQ_.0

AjIIdooijo


ouljAod


15


16


thoritj <^ to release thee, and have authority to cru-
cify thee? (11) Jesus said to him: Thou wouldst 11
have no authority at all over me, if it were not
given to thee from on high : therefore his sin who
delivered me up to thee, is greater than thine.
(12) And for this reason, Pilate was disposed to 12
release him. But the Jews cried out : If thou
release this man, thou art npt Cccsar's friend : for
whoever maketh himself a king, is the adversary
of Caesar. (13) And when Pilate heard this dec- 13
laration, he brought Jesus forth, and sat upon the
tribunal, in a place called the pavement of stones;
but in Hebrew it is called Gabbatha.^ (11) And 14
it was the preparation for the passover ; and it was
about the sixth hour. And he said to the Jews :
Behold, your king. (15) But they cried out:
Away with him, away with him; hangf him,
hang him. Pilate said to them : Shall I crucify s
your king? The chief priests said to him: We
have no king, but Caesar. (16) Then he delivered
him to them, that they might crucify him.

And they took Jesus, and led him away, (17) 17
bearing his cross, to a place called a Skull, and in
Hebrew called Golgotha ; ^ (18) where tliej^ cru- 18
cified him; and two others with him, the one on
this side, and the other on that, and Jesus in the
middle. (19) And Pilate also wrote a tablet, and 19
affixed it to his cross. And thus it was written :
This is Jesus the Nazarean, king of the Jews.
(20) And many of the Jews read this label ; be- 20
cause the place where Jesus was crucified, was
near to Jerusalem ; and it was written in Hebrew
and Greek and Latin.i (21) And the chief priests 21
said to Pilate : Write not that he is king of the
Jews, but that he said I am king of the Jews.
(22) Pilate said: What I have written, I have 22
written. — (23) And the soldiers, v>rhen tliey had 23
crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four
parcels of them, a parcel for each of the soldiers.
And his tunic ^ was without seam from the top,
woven throughout. (24) And they said one to 24
another : We will not rend it, but will cast the lot
upon it, whose it shall be. »And the scripture was
fulfilled, which said: They divided my garments
among them ; and upon my vesture they cast the
lot. These things did the soldiers. — (25) And 25


JOHN, XIX.


207


' Sy. C7L*j05
"" i. e. Friday.

° or, comity on^


there were standing near the cross of Jesus, his
mother, and his mother's sister, and Mary [the

26 Avif'eJ of Cicophas, and Mary Magdalena. (2G) And
Jesus saw his mother, and that disciple whom he
loved, standing by, and he said to his mother :

27 Woman, behold, thy son. (27) And he said to
that disciple : Behold, thy mother. And from
that hour, the disciple took her near himself — ■

28 (28) After those things, Jesus knew that every
thmg was finished ; and, that the scripture might

29 be fulfilled, he said: I thirst. (29) And a vessel
Avas standing there, fall of vinegar. And they
filled a sponge with the vinegar, and put it on a

30 hyssop [stalk], and bore it to his mouth. (30)
And when Jesus had received the vinegar, he
said: Lo; Done. And he bowed his head, and
yielded up his spirit.^

31 And because it was the preparation,'" the Jews
said: Those bodies must not remain all night upon
the cross: because the sabbath was dawning;" and
the day of that sabbath Avas a great day. And
they requested of Pilate, that they should break
the logs of those crucified, and take them down.

32 (32) And the soldiers came, and broke the legs of
the first, and of the other that was crucified with

33 him. (33) But when they came to Jesus, they
saw that he was already dead ; and they broke not

3-i his legs. (34) But one of the soldiers thrust a
spear into his side ; and immediately there issued

35 out blood and water. — (35) And he who saw [it],
hath testified : and his testimony is true : and he
knoweth, that he speaketh the truth, that ye also

36 may believe. (36) For these things occurred, that
the scripture might be fulfilled, which said: A

37 bone of him shall not be broken, (37) And again
another scripture, which saith : They will look on
him, whom they pierced,

38 After these things, Joseph of Ramath, (for he was
a disciple of Jesus, and kept concealed through
fear of the Jews,) requested of Pilate, that he might
take away the body of Jesus. And Pilate permit-
ted. And he came, and bore away the body

39 of Jesus. (39) And ,therc came also Nicodemus,
(he who prcvioiLslv came to Jesus by night,) and
he brought with him a com2)ound of myrrh and

40 aloes, about a hundred pounds." (40) And thcy!= Cr. X»Vpai


Sy. ^;4»^


208


Sy. known.


JOHN, XX.

bore away the body of Jesus, and wound it in
linens and aromatics, as it is tlie custom of the
Jews to bury, (41) And there was a garden in 41
the place where Jesus was crucified, and in the
garden a new sepulchre in Avhich no person had
ever been laid, (42) And there they laid Jesus, 42
because the sabbath had commenced, and because
the sepulchre Avas near.

And the first day of the week, in the morning, XX.
while it was yet dark, Mary Magdalena came to the
sepulchre : and she saw that the stone was removed
from the grave. (2) And she ran, and came to 2
Simon Cephas, and to that other disciple whom
Jesus loved, and said to them : They have taken
away our Lord from the sepulchre, and I know not
where they have laid him. (3) And Simon set 3
out, and the other disciple, and they were going to
the sepulchre. (4) And they both ran together; 4
but that disciple outran Simon, and came first to
the sepulchre. (5) And he looked in, and saw the 5
linen cloths lying : but he did not go in. (6) And 6
after him came Simon ; and he entered the sepul-
chre, and saw the linen cloths lying ; (7) and the 7
napkin, that had been wrapped about his head, was
not with the linen cloths, but was folded up, and
laid in a place by itself (8) Then entered also the 8
disciple who came first to the sepulchre ; and he
saw, and believed. (9) For they had not yet 9
learned^i from the scriptures, that he was to arise
from the dead. (10) And those disciples went 10
away again to their place. — (11) But Mary re- 11
mained standing at the sepulchre, and weeping;
and as she wept, she looked into the sepulchre,
(12) and saw two angels in white, who were sitting, 12
one at the pillows and one at the feet, where the
body of Jesus was laid. (13) And they said to 13
her: Woman, why weepest thou? She said to
them : Because they have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him.

(14) Ilaving said this, she turned round, and saw 14
Jesus standing, but did not know that it was Jesus.

(15) Jesus said to her : Woman, why weepest thou ? 15
and, whom dost thou seek? And she supposed
that he was the gardener: and she said to him:
My lord, if thou hast borne him away, tell me


L_..


JOHN, XX.


209


where thou hast laid him, [and] I will go and take

16 him uwaj. (16) Jesus said to her : Mary ! And
she turned, and said to him in Hebrew : Rabbuni ;b

17 which is interpreted Teacher." (17) Jesus said to
her : Touch me not ; for not yet have I ascended
to my Father. But go to my brethren, and say to
them : I ascend to my Father and your Father, and

18 to my God and your God. (18) Then came Mary
Magdalcna, and told the disciples that she had seen
our Lord ; and that he had said these things to her.

19 And on the evening of that first day of the week,
the doors being shut where the disciples were, for
fear of the Jews, Jesus came, and stooa in the midst
of them, and said to them : Peace be with you.**

20 (20) Having said this, he showed them his hands
and his side. And the disciples rejoiced, when

21 they saw our Lord. (21) And Jesus said to them :
Peace be with you. As my Father hath sent me,

22 I also send you. (22) And as he said these things,
he breathed on them, and said to them : Receive ye

23 the Holy Spirit. (23) If ye shall remit" sins to any
one, they will be remitted to him ; and if ye shall
retain^ [those] of any one, they will be retained.

24 But Thomas, who was called the Twin,? one of
the twelve, was not there with them, when Jesus

25 came. (25) And the disciples said to him : We
have seen our Lord. But he said to them : Unless
I see in his hands the places of the nails, and put
my fingers into them, and extend ray hand to his

26 side, I will not believe. — (26) And after eight days,
the disciples were again within, and Thomas with
them : and Jesus came, while the doors were closed,
stood in the midst, and said to them : Peace be

27 Avith you. (27) And he said to Thomas : Reach
hither thy finger, and look at my hands ; and reach
out thy hand and extend it to my side: and be not

28 incredulous, but believing. (28) And Thomas
answered, and said to him: My Lord, and my

29 God!'> (29) Jesus said to him: Now, when thou
hast seen me, thou bclicvest : blessed are they, who

30 have not seen me, yet believe. — (30) And many
other signs did Jesus before his disciples, which are

31 not written in this book. (31) But these arc writ-
ten, that ye may believe that Jesus is the Messiah,
the Son of God ; and that when ye believe, ye may
have life eternal by his name.


-■ Sy. lV)\ I


^nV)S


• Sy.

' Sy. ^0^^.12.
s Sy. MZ


'■ Sy. ufiD


210


JOHN, XXI.


Sy. U4^


^Sy.U^


After these things, Jesus showed himself again XXI.
to his disciples, at the sea of Tiberias : and he
showed himself thus: (2) There were together, 2
Simon Cephas, and Thomas called the Twin, and
Nathaniel who was of Cana^ in Galilee, and the
sons of Zebedee, and two other of the disciples.
(3) Simon Cephas said to them: I will go [and] 3
catch fishes. They said to ,him : We will go with
thee. And they went, and embarked in a ship :
and that night, they caught nothing. (4) And 4
when it was morning, Jesus stood on the shore of
the sea : and the discijjles did not know that it was
Jesus. (5) And Jesus said to them: Lads,^ have 5
ye any thing to eat? They saj^ to him: No.
(6) He said to them : Cast your net on the right 6
side of the ship, and ye will find them. And they
cast;- and they could not draw up the net, because
of the multitude of fishes it contained. (7) And 7
that disciple whom Jesus loved, said to Cephas:
That is our Lord. And Simon, Avhen he heard
that it was our Lord, took his tunic, and girded his
loins, (for he had been naked,) and threw himself
into the sea, to go to Jesus. (8) But the other 8
disciples came in the ship, (for they were not very
far from the land, only about two hundred cubits,)
and they dragged the net with the fishes (9) And 9
when they came upon the land, thay saw coals
placed, and fish laid on them, and bread. (10) And 10
Jesus said to them : Bring [some] of the fishes,
which ye have just caught. (11) And Simon 11
Cephas embarked, and drew the net to land, full of
huge fishes, one hundred and fifty and three. And
with all this weight, the net was not rent. — (12) And 12
Jesus said to them: Come and dine. And no one
of the disciples presumed to ask him, who he was ;
for they knew that it was our Lord. (13) And
Jesus came, and took bread and fishes, and gave to
his disciples. (14) This is the third time that
Jesus appeared to his disciples when he had arisen
from the dead.

And when they had dined, Jesus said to Simon 15
Cephas : Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me, more
than these do ? He said to him : Yes, my Lord :
thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus said to him :
Feed my lambs for me. (16) Again, he said to 16
him the second time : Simon, son of Jonas, lovest


13


14


?r


JOHN, XXI.

thou mc ? He said to him : Yes, my Lord ; tliou
knowest that I love thee. Jesus said to him : Feed

17 my sheep for me. (17) Again, Jesus said to him
the third time : Simon, son of Jonas, lovcst thou
me ? And it grieved Cephas, that he said to him
the third time, Lovest thou me; and he said to
him: My Lord, thou understandesf^ all things,
thou knowcst that I love thee. Jesus said to him :

18 Feed my sheep for me. (18) Verily, verily, I say to
thee : When thou wast young, thou girdcdst thy
own loins, and walkcdst whither it ];)leased thee :
but when thou shalt bo old, thou wilt extend thy
hands, and another will gird thy loins for thee, and
will conduct thee whither thou wouldst not.

19 (19) And this he said, to show by what death he
was to glorify God. And having said these things,

20 he said to him: Follow me. — (20) And Simon
turned himself, and saw coming after him, that
disciple whom Jesus loved, who fell on tlic breast
of Jesus at the supper, and said. My Lord, who is

21 it will betray theer (21) Him Cephas saw, and
said to Jesus: My Lord, as for this man, what?

22 (22) Jesus said to him : If I will, that he abide
here until I come, what [is that] to thee ? Follow

23 thou me. (23) And this saying went forth among
the brethren, that this disciple would not die.
Yet Jesus did not say, that he would not die ; but,
If I AVill that he abide here until I come, what [is
that] to thee.

24 This is the disciple who hath testified of all
these things, and hath written them : and we know,

25 that his testimony is true. — (25) And there are also
many other things, which Jesus did; which, if
written out Avith particularity, <^ the world itself, as
I suppose, would not suffice for the books that
would be written.


Completion of the Holy Gospel, the announcement of John
the Evangelist ; which lie uilered, in Greek, at Ephesus.


211


.Sy i>acuj


Sy. one by one.


jJLD5


The Book of Acts; that is, Narratives of the Blessed Legates:

Compiled by Saint Luke, the Evangelist.


The former book have I written, O Theophilus, I.
concerning all the things which our Lord Jesus
Messiah began to do and teach, (2) until the day 2
when he was taken up, after he had instructed
those legates^ whom he had chosen by the Holy
Spirit. (3) To whom also he showed himself alive 3
after he had suffered, by numerous signs, during
forty days, while he was seen by them, and spoke
of the kingdom of God. (4) And when he had 4
eaten bread with them, he instructed them not to
depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise
of the Father, which (said he) ye have heard from
me. (5) For John baptized with water; but ye 5
will be baptized with the Holy Spirit after not
many days. — (6) And they, when assembled, asked 6
him and said to him : Our Lord, wilt thou at this
time restore the kingdom to Israel? (7) He said 7
to them: It is not yours, to know the time or times
which God hath placed in his own power. (8) But 8
when the Holy Spirit shall come upon you, ye will
receive energy, ^ and will be witnesses for me in
Jerusalem, and in all Judffia, and also among the
Samaritans, and unto the ends of the earth. —
(9) And when he had said these things, while they 9
beheld him, he was taken up, and a cloud received
him, and he was hidden from their eyes. (10) And 10
while they were looking toward heaven, as lie de-
parted, two men were found standing near them,
in white garments, (11) and saying to them: Ye 11
Galilean men, why stand ye and look toward
heaven? This Jesus, who is taken up from you
to heaven, will so come, as ye have seen him as-
cend to heaven.


ACTS, I.


213


12 And afterwards they returned to Jerusalem from
the mount called the place of Olives, which was
near to Jerusalem, and distant from it about sevens

13 furlongs. (13) And when they had entered, they
went to an upper chamber ; where were Peter, and
John, and James, and Andrew, and Philip, and
Thomas, and Matthew, and Bartholomew, and
James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zclotcs,'^

14 and Judas the son of James. (14) All these uni-
tedly persevered in prayer, with onesoul,^ together
with the women, and with Mary the mother of

15 Jesus, and with his brothers. — (15) And in those
days stood up Simon Cephas in the midst of the
disciples, (the persons there assembled being about

16 one hundred and twenty,) and said: (16) Men,
brethren, it was right^ that the scripture should
be fulfilled, which the Iloly Spirit spake, by the
mouth of David, concerning Judas who was guide

17 to them that apprehended Jesus. (17) For he was
numbered with us, and had a parts in this ministry.

18 (18) He purchased a field with the wages of sin;
and he fell upon his face on the ground, and burst
in the middle, and all his entrails were poured out.

19 (19) And this was known to all that dwelt at Jeru-
salem ; so that the field was called, in the language
of the country, Aceldama, ^ which is interpreted

20 Field of Blood. (20) For it is written, in the book
of Psalms: Let his habitation be desolate, and
let no resident be in it; and let another take his

21 service.' (21) It should therefore be, that one of
these persons, who have been with us all the time
that our Lord Jesus went in and out with us,

22 (22) commencing from the baptism of John, unto
the .day he was taken up from us, — should be,

23 with us, a witness of his resurrection. (23) And
they proposed two, Joseph called Barsabas, whose

24 surname was Justus, and Matthias. (24) And when
they had prayed, the}'' .said : Thou, Lord, knowest
what is in the hearts of all, manifest which thou

25 hast chosen of these two, (25) that he should take
part"* in this ministry and legateship,' from which
Judas broke away, that he might go to his own

26 place. (26) And they cast lots, and it came upon
Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven
legates.™


Gt. a sabbath
day's journey.


Sy. - « CM


Sy. ^,y


e or, lot.


Sy.


or, lot.

or, aposlleship.


or, Apoatles.


214


ACTS, II.


Sy. |>j03

or, fire.
Sy. \i^0'->


Gr. Masopnta-
niia.


Sy. 1)a.


-^


or, middle of
the. forenoon.


B or, Elders,


And when the days of pentecost were fully come, 11.
while they were all assembled together, (2) sud- 2
denly there was a sound from heaven, as of a
violent wind;=i and the whole house where they
were sitting was filled with it. (3) And there ap- 3
peared to them tongues, which were divided like
liame;'' and they rested upon each of them. (4) 4
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit,'^ and
began to speak in diverse languages, as the Spirit
gave them to speak. (5) Now there were resident 5
at Jerusalem persons who feared God, Jews from
all the nations under heaven. (6) And when that 6
sound occurred, all the people collected together ;
and they were agitated, because they every one
heard them sj^eaking in their own languages. (7) 7
And they Avere all astonished, and wondered,
saying one to another: All these who speak,
behold, are they not Galileans ? (8) And how 8
do we hear, each his own language, in which we
were born '/ (9) Parthians, and Medes, and Elam- 9
ites, and those dwelling between the rivers,d Jews
and Cappadocians, and those from the region of
Pontus and of Asia, (10) and those from the 10
region of Phrygia, and of Pamphylia, and of Egypt,
and of the parts of Lybia near Gyrene, and those
who have come from Rome, Jews and proselj^tes ;«
(11) and those from Crete, and Arabians. — Lo, 11
we hear them speak in our own languages the
wonders of God. (12) And they all wondered and 12
were astonished, saying one to another: From
whom is this thing? (13) Others however ridi- 13
culed them, saying : They have drunken new wine.
and are intoxicated.

And afterwards Simon Cephas rose up, with the 14
eleven legates, and elevated his voice, and said to
them : Men, Jews, and all ye that reside at Jerusa-
lem; be this known to you, and hearken ye to my
words. (15) For these are not intoxicated, as ye 15
suppose: for lo, it is yet but the third hour.f
(16) But this is what was spoken by Joel the 16
prophet: (17) It shall be in the last days, saith 17
God, that I will pour my Spirit upon all flesh :
and your sons shall prophesy, and your daughters :
and your young men shall see visions, and your
olds men shall dream dreams. (18) And upon 18
my servants and my handmaids will I pour my


ACTS, II.


215


19
20


99


23


Spirit, in those days, and they shall prophesy.

(19) And I will give signs in heaven, and prodi-
giesh on earth, blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke.

(20) And the sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood, before that great and

21 fearful day of the Lord come. (21) And it shall be,
that whoever will call on the name of the Lord,
shall live.' (22) Men, sons of Israel, hear yc these
words : Jesus the Nazarean, a man made manifest
among you by God, by those deeds of power and
prodigies which God wrought among you by his
hand, as ye yourselves know ; (23) him, being
hereto appointed'' by the prescience and the good
jjleasure of God,— ye have delivered into the hands
of the Avicked ; and have crucified and slain.

24 (24) But God hath resuscitated him, and hath loosed
the cords^ of the grave ; because it could not be,
that he should be held in the grave,'" (25) For
David said of him: I foresaw my Lord at all
times ; for he is on my right hand, so that T shall
not be moved. (26) Therefore my heart doth re-
joice, and my glory exult, and also my body shall
abide in hope. (.27) For thou wilt not leave my
soul in the grave, nor wilt thou give thy pious one
to see corruption. (28) Thou hast revealed to me
the path of life ; thou wilt fill me with joy with

29 thy presence. (29) Men, brethren, I may speak to
you explicitly of the patriarch David, that he died,
and also was buried ; and his sepulchre is with

30 us to this da^'. (30) For he was a prophet, and he
knew, that God had sworn to him by an oath :
Of the fruit of thy bowels, I will seat [one] on thy

31 throne. (31) And he foresaw, and spoke of the
resurrection of Messiah, that he was not left in
the grave, neither did his body see corruption.

32 (32) This Jesus hath God resuscitated ; and we all

33 are his witnesses. (33) And he it is, who is ex-
alted by the right hand of God, and hath received
from the Father a promise respecting the Holy
Spirit, and hath sent this gift which, lo, ye see and

34 hear. (34) For David hath not ascended into
heaven ; because he himself said : The Lord said to

35 my Lord, scat thyself at my right hand, (35) until
I shall place thy enemies a footstool to thy feet.

36 (36) Therefore, let all the house of Israel know,


25


26

27


28


Sy.


-^


or. be saved.


^ Sy. separated.


or, pav'^s.


216


ACTS, III.


■ or, be saved.


" or, persons.
p or. Apostles.

' Sy.

=: Gr. ivya-


*.;'


38


39


40


assuredly, that God hath made that Jesus whom ye
crucified, to be Lord and Messiah.

And when they heard these things, they were agi- 37
tated in their heart; and they said to Simon and to
the rest of the legates : Brethren, what shall we do ?
(38) Simon said to them : Repent, and be bap-
tized every one of you, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, for the remission of ^ns; so that ye raay
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. (39) For the
promise is to you, and to your children, and to all
those afar off' whom God will call. (40) And in
many other words he testified to them, and en-
treated of them, saying: Live ye" from this per-
verse generation. — (41) And some of them readily 41
received his discourse, and believed, and were
baptized. And there were added, on that day,
about three thousand souls.^ (42) And they per-
severed in the doctrine of the legates;? and were
associated together in prayer, and in breaking the
eucharist."" — (43) And fear Avas on every mind:
and many signs and prodigies were [wrought] by
the hand of the legates in Jerusalem. (44) And
all they who believed, were together; and what-
ever belonged to them, was of the community.
(45) And they who had a possession, sold it, and
divided to each one as he had need. (46) And
they continued daily in the temple, with one soul:
and at home, they broke bread and took food
rejoicing, and in the simplicity of their heart.
(47) And they praised God, and had favor with all
the people. And our Lord added daily to the as-
sembly those who became alive.


42


43


44


45

4S


47


And it occurred, as Simon Cephas and John IIL
went together up to the temple, at the time of
prayer, being the ninth hour, (2) that, lo, those 2
accustomed to bring a man lame from his mother's
womb, brought him and laid him at the gate of the
temple called Beautiful; that he might ask alms
of those going into the temple. (3) This man, 3
when he saw Simon and John going into the tem-
ple, asked them to give him alms. (4) And Simon 4
and John looked on him, and said to him : Look
on us, (5) And he looked on them, expecting to 5
receive something from them. (6J Simon said to 0
him : Gold and silver, I have not ; but what I have,


-T*^ -

/••y


ACTS, III.

I give to thcc; in the name of our Lord Jesus

7 Messiah, the Nazarean, rise up and walk. (7) And
he took him by the right hand, and raised him
up: and forthwith, his feet and his heels recov-

8 ered strength. (8) And he sprang, stood up, and
walked : and he entered with them into the temple,

9 walking, and leaping, and praising God. (9) And all
the people saw him, as he walked and praised God.

10 (10) And they knew that he was the beggar, who
sat dail}' and asked alms, at the gate called Beauti-
ful: and they were fdled with wonder and admira-
tion at what had occurred.

11 And as he held fast to Simon and John, all the
people admiring ran to them at the portico called

12 Solomon's. (12) And when Simon saw [it], he
answered and said to them : Men, sons of Israel,
why do ye wonder at this ? or why do ye gaze on
us, as if by our own power or authority we had

13 made this man to walk? (13) The God of Abra-
ham and of Isaac and of Jacob, the God of our
fathers, hath glorified his Son Jesus; whom ye
delivered up, and denied in the presence of Pilate,
when he would have justified him and set him free.

14 (14) But ye denied the holy and just One, and de-
manded that a murderer should be released to you.

15 (15) And that Prince of life" ye slew; and him,
hath God raised from the dead, and all of us are

16 witnesses of it.'^ (16) And, by the faith in his
name, he hath strengthened and cured this man,
whom ye see and know ; and faith in him hath
given the man this soundness before you all.

17 (17) And now, my brethren, I know that through
misapprehensions ye did this, as did also your

18 chiefs:*^ (18) and God, according as he had pre-
viously announced by the mouth of all the prophets
that the Messiah would suffer, hath in this manner

19 fulfilled [it]. (19) liepent, therefore, and be con-
verted; that so your sins may be blotted out,

20 (20) and times of rest may come to you from before
the face of the Lord ; and he may send to you him,
who was made ready for you, Jesus the Messiah :

21 (21) whom the heavens must retain,fi until the
completion of the times of those things, which God
hath spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets of

22 old. (22) For Moses said : A prophet, like me,
will the Lord raise up \/) 3'ou, from among your


217


»Sy.

^ or, his wil-
nesses.


Sy.


^ or, receive.


218-


ACTS, IV,


• or, person.
' Sy. a^lZ


eSy.'Jr)ZUj =
Gr. Stctdrixri.


Sy. Ijod?!


Sy. \\f»t
Sy. |i'a25l


or, redemption.
or, 6e saved.


bretliren; to him hearken ye, in all that he shall
say to you. (23) And it will be, that every soul^ 23
who will not hearken to that prophet, that soul
shall perishf from his people. (24) And all the 24
prophets that have been, from Samuel and those
after him, have spoken and proclaimed of these
days, (25) Ye are the children of the prophets : 25
and that covenants which God made with o^r
fathers, — when he said to Abraham, that in thy seed
shall all the families of the earth be blessed, —
(26) he hath first established to you : and God 26
hath sent his Son to bless you, if ye will be con-
verted, and repent of your wickedness.

And Avhilc they Avere speaking these words to IV.
the people, the priests and the Sadducecs and the
rulers =^ of the temple rose up against them; (2) 2
being angry with them, that they taught the peo-
ple, and preached a resurrection from the dead by
the Messiah. (3) And they laid hands on them, 3
and kept them until the next day ; because even-
ing was drawing near. (4) And many who had 4
heard the word, believed ; and they were, in num-
ber, about five thousand men. — (5) And the next 5
day, the rulers and the Elders and the Scribes
assembled ; (6) and also Annas the high priest, 6
and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and they
who were of the kindred of the high priests.
(7) And when they had set them in the midst, 7
they interrogated them: By what power '» or
what name, have ye done this ? — (8) Then Simon 8
Cephas was filled with the Holy Spirit, and said to
them: Ye rulers'^ of the people, and Elders of the
house of Israel, hear ye. (9) If we are judged by 9
you this day, respecting the good deed done to the
infirm man, by Avhat means he was healed ; (10) be 10
it known to you, and to all the people of Israel,
that by the name of Jesus Messiah the Nazarean,
whom ye crucified, and whom God hath raised
from the dead, lo, by him, doth this [man] stand
here before you recovered. (11) This is the stone, 11
which ye builders rejected ; and it hath become the
head of the corner. (12) Neither is there deliv- 12
erancefi in any other; for there is not another
name under heaven, which is given to men, where-
by to live.<= — (13) And when they heard the speech 33


-t'


ACTS, IV.


219


of Simon and John, wLicb they pronounced confi-
dently, they reflected that these were unlearned and
plebeian f men; and they were surprised at them,
and recognized them as having been conversant

14 with Jesus. (1-4) And they saw that the lame
man, who had been healed, stood near them ; and

15 they could say nothing to confront them. (15)
Then they commanded to remove them from the
presence of the council ; and said one to another :

IG (10) What shall we do to these men? For lo, that
a manifest sign hath been wrought by them, is
known to all that reside at Jerusalem, and we can-

17 not deny it. (17) But that the fame of it spread
no further, let us interdict their speaking any

18 more to any man in this name. (18) And they
called them, and commanded them not to speak

19 nor to teach at all in the name of Jesus. (19) Si-
mon Cephas and John answered, and said to them:
Whether it be right before God, that we hearken

20 to you more than to God, judge ye. (20) For we
cannot but speak that which avc have seen and

21 heard. (21) And they threatened them, and dis-
missed them. For they found no ground for pun-
ishing them, because of the people : for every one

22 praised God for what had been done ; (22) for the
man, on whom this sign of healing had been
wrought, was more than forty years old.s .

23 And when they were dismissed, they went to
their brethren, and told them all that the priests

21 and Elders had said. (24) And they, when they
heard [it], unitedly lifted uj) their voice to God,
and said: Lord, thou art God, who hast made
heaven, and earth, and seas, and every thing in

25 them. (25) And it is thou who hast said, by the
Holy Spirit in the mouth of David thy servant :
Why do the nations rage, and the people imagine

26 a vain thing? (2G) The kings of the earth and
the potentates stood up, and they consulted to-
gether, against the Lord, and against his anoint-

27 ed.h (27) For, in reality, against thy holy Son
Jesus whom thou hast anointed,' Ilerod and Pi-
late, with the Gentiles and the congregation of
Israel, have been combined together in this city,

! 28 (28) to do whatever thy hand and thy ])leasure

20 previously marked out to be done. (29) And

also now, Lord, behold and sec their menaces:


Sy. llo^i/n

r= Gr. 15 tu-


s Sy. son of
more than 40
years.


'Sy.

OI-KK ■ B V),

his Messiah.
Sy. Aj.>»V>


.* %^f.-


220


' Sy. ]].^

' Sy. lZnn»^


« Sy. ]in K.
*• Sy. ];j_£L»


Sy. 4i.\


ACTS, V.

and grant to thy servants, that they may proclaim
thy word boldly, (30) while thou extendest thy 30
hand for cures and prodigies, to be done in the
name of thy holy Son Jesus. — (31) And when 31
they had prayed and made supplications, the place
in which they were assembled was shaken ; and
they were all filled with the Iloly Spirit, and spoke
the word of God boldly.

And in the assembly of the persons that be- 82
lieved, there was one soul, and one mind : and no
one of them said, of the property he possessed, that
it was his own ; but whatever was theirs, it was the
community's. (33) And with great power, '^ the 33
legates testified to the resurrection of Jesus Mes-
siah : and great grace ' was with them all. (34) 34
And no one among them was destitute ; for those
who possessed lands or houses, sold, and brought
the price of what was sold, (35) and placed [it] at 35
the feet of the legates ; and distribution was made
to ever}^ one, as he had need. (36) And Joseph, 36
who by the legates was surnamed Barnabas, (which
is interpreted Son of Consolation,) a Levite of the
country of Cyprus, (37) had a field : and he sold 37
it, and brought the price of it, and laid [it] before
the feet of the legates.

And a certain man whose name was Ananias, » V.
with his wife whose name was Sapphira,!^ sold his
field, (2) and carried away [part] of the price and 2
concealed it, his wife consenting ; and he brought
[a part] of the money, and laid [it] before the feet
of the legates. (3) And Simon said to him : Ana- 3
nias, why hath Satan so filled thy heart, that thou
shouldst lie against the Holy Spirit, and conceal of
the money of the price of the field? (4) Was it 4
not thine own before it was sold ? And when sold,
again thou hadst authority^ over the price of it.
Why hast thou set thy heart to do this purpose?
Thou hast not lied against men, but against God.
(5) And when Ananias heard these words, he fell 5
down, and died. And great fear was upon all
them that heard [of it]. (6) And the young men 6
among them arose, and gathered him up, and car-
ried [him] out, and buried him.— (7) And when 7
three hours had passed, his wife also came in,
without knowing what had occurred. (8) Simon 8


said to lier: Tell me, if ye sold the field for this
9 price ?<i And she said: Yes, for this price. (9)
Simon said to her: Since ve have been equals in
temj)ting the Spirit of the Lord, lo, the feet of the
buriers of thy husband arc at the door, and they

10 will carry thee out. (10) And immediately she
fell before their feet, and died. And those young-
men came in, and found her dead ; and they took
up, carried forth, and buried her by the side of her

11 husband. — (11) And great fear was on all the as-
sembly, "= and on all them that heard [it].

12 And there Avere many signs and prodigies
wrought by the legates among the people. x\nd
they were all assembled together in the porch of

13 Solomon, (13) And of the others, no one ventured
to come near them ; but the people magnified

1-1 them. (11) And the more were those added who
feared the Lord, a multitude both of men and of

15 women. (15) So that they brought out into the
streets the sick, laid on beds, that when Simon
should pass, at least his shadow might cover them.

16 (10) And many came to them from other cities
around Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those Avho
had unclean spirits ; and they were all cured.

17 And the high priest was filled with indignation,
and all those with him who were of the doctrine^

18 of the Sadducees. (18) And they laid hands on the
legates, and took and bound them in prison,

19 (19) Then the angel of the Lord, by night, opened
the door of the prison, and let them out; and said

20 to them : (20) Go, stand in the temple, and speak

21 to the people all these words of life. (21) And in
the nwrning, they went and entered into the tem-
ple, and taught. And the high priest and those
with him, convoked their associates and the Elders
of Israel, and sent to the prison to bring forth the

22 legates. (22) And when those sent by them went,
they found them not in the prison ; and they re-

23 turned and came back, (23) and said : We found
the prison carefully closed, and also the keepers
standing before the doors; and we opened, but

24 found no one there. (24) And when the chief
priests and rulers of the temple heard these words,
they were astonished at them ; and they studied

25 what this could mean. (25) And one came and
informed them : Those men, whom ye shut up in


Sy. these pri-


Sy.


ia=


the church.


&r, secL


222


• Sy.


prince and
Saviour.


Sy. words.


Sy.


Sy. ],oL


' Sy. fie.
Sy. It comeih
not to your
hand


ACTS, V.

the prison, lo, they are stcanding in the temple, and
teaching the people. — (26) Then went the rulers 26
with attendants, to bring them without violence ;
for thc}^ feared, lest the people should stone them.
(27) And when they had brought them, they 27
placed them before the whole council ; and the
high priest began to say to them : (28) Did we not 28
strictly charge you, to teq,ch no person in this
name ? And behold, jg have filled Jerusalem
with your doctrine ;? and ye would bring the blood
of this man upon us. — (29) And Simon, with the 29
legates, answered and said to them : God is to be
obeyed, rather than men. (30) The God of our 80
fathers hath raised up that Jesus, whom ye slew
when ye hanged him on a tree. (31) Him hath 31
God established as a head and vivifier;^ and hath
exalted him to his own right hand, so that he
might give repentance and remission of sins to
Israel. (32) And we are the witnesses of these 32
things;' and also the Holy Spirit, whom God
giveth to them that believe in him. — (33) And 33
when they heard these things, they burned with
indignation, and thought of putting them to death.
(3-1) Then rose up one of the Pharisees whose name 34
was Gamaliel,'^ a teacher of the law, and honored by
all the people ; and he directed them to put the
legates aside for a short time. (35) And he said 35
to them : Men, sons of Israel, take heed to your-
selves, and consider what ye ought to do in regard
to these men. (36) For before this time, rose up 36
Thcudas,! and said of himself, that he was some
great one ; and there went after him about four
hundred men. And he was slain ; and they who
went after him, were dispersed and became as
nothing. (37) And after him, rose up Judas a 37
Galilean, in the days when the people were enrolled
for the capitation tax ; and he seduced much
people after him. And he died, and all they that
went after him were dispersed. (38) And now, I 38
say to you : Desist from these men, and let them
alone. For if this device and this work originate"'
from men, they will dissolve and come to nothing.
(39) But if it be from God, it is not in your powcr'^ 39
to frustrate it : that ye may not be found placing
yourselves in opposition to God. — And they as-
sented to him. (40) And they called the legates, 40


ACTS, VI.

aud scourged them, and commanded tliem not to
teach in the name of Jesus, and dismissed them-

41 (41) And thcj went from before them, rejoicing
that they were worthy to suffer abuse on account

42 of that name. (42) x\nd they ceased not to teach
daily, in the temple and at home, and to preach
concerning our Lord Jesus Messiah.

VI. And in those days, when the disciples had be-
come numerous, the Grecian disciples murmured
against the Uebrew, because their Avidows were
neglected in the daily ministration^^ [to the needy].

2 (2) And the twelve legates convoked the whole
company of the disciples, and said to them : It is
not proper,*^ that we should neglect the word of

3 God, and serve tables. (3) Therefore brethren,
search out, and elect from among you, seven men
of whom there is good testimony, men full of the
Spirit of the Lord, and of wisdom ; that we may

4 place them over this business : (4) and we will
continue in prayer, and in the ministration of the

5 word. (5) And this proposal'^ was acceptable be-
fore all the people. And they elected Stephen, a
man who was full of faith and of the Holy Spirit ;
and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and
Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas an Antiochian

6 proselyte. <i (6) These stood before the legates ;
and when they had prayed, they laid the hand on

7 them. — (7) And the word of God increased, and
the number of disciples was enlarged at Jerusalem
greatly ; and many people from among the Jews,
were obedient to the faith.

8 And Stephen was full of grace and energy ;c
and he wrought signs and prodigies among the

9 people. (9) And there rose up some of the syna-
gogue which is called that of the freed men, Cyre-
nians, and Alexandrians, and persons from Cilicia
and from Asia; and they disputed with Stephen.

10 (10) And they could not withstand the wisdom and

11 the Spirit that spoke by him. (11) Then they
sent men, and instructed them to say: We have
heard him speak words of blasphemy, against

12 Moses and against God. (12) And they excited
the people, and the Elders, and the Scribes; and
they came, and rose upon bim, and seized him, and

13 carried him into the midst of the counciL (13) And


22J


Sy.
lA.m..V0 »Z


Sy.


Sy. word.


Sy. ]5glx.^


Sy.]J.


224


ACTS, VII.


or, in Mesopo-
tamia.


Sy. ^jj^


Sy. I^AjJ


Sy. }.a^3


14


15


they set up false witnesses, who said: This man
ceaseth not to utter words contrary to the law, and
against this holy place. * (14) For we have heard
him say, that this Jesus the Nazarean will destroy
this place, and will change the rites which Moses
delivered to you. (15) And all they who were
sitting in the council looked upon him, and
they beheld his face, as the face of an angel. —
(Vil.) And the high priest jlsked him : Are these VII.
things so ? (2) And he said : Men, brethren, and 2
our fathers, hear ye. The God of glory appeared
to our father Abraham, when he was between the
rivers,^ before he came to reside in Charran;
(3) and he said to him: Depart from thy country, 3
and from thy kindred, and go to a land which I
will show to thee. (4) And then Abraham de- 4
parted from the land of the Chaldeans, and came
and dwelt in Charran.^ And from there, after his
father had died, God removed him to this land, in
which ye this day dwell. (5) And he did not give 5
him an inheritance in it, not even a foot-track : but
he promised that he would give it him, as an inher-
itance to him and to his seed, when as yet he had
no son. (6) And God conversed with him, and
said to him: Thy seed will be a sojourner in a
foreign land ; and they will reduce it to servitude,
and will treat it ill, during four hundred years.

(7) And the nation, to whom they perform bond-
service, I will judge, saith God. And afterwards,
they will go out, and will worship me in this land.

(8) And he gave them the covenant" of circumci-
sion. And then he begat Isaac, and circumcised
him the eighth day. And Isaac begat Jacob : and
Jacob begat our twelve fathers. — (9) And those
our fathers envied Joseph, and sold him into
Egypt: but God was with him, (10) and delivered 10
him from all his afflictions ; and gave him favor and
wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and he
made him chiefs over Egypt, and over all his house.
(11) And there was a famine and great distress in
all Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, and our
fathers lacked food. (12) And when Jacob heard
that there was bread-stuff in Egypt, he sent our
fathers a first time. (13) And when they went the 13
second time, Joseph made himself known to his
brethren ; and the kindred of Joseph was known


6


9


11


12


ACTS, VII.


225


14 to Pharaoh. (14) And Joseph sent and brought
his father Jacob, and all his family ; and they were

15 in number seventy and five souls.^ (15) And
Jacob went down into Egypt ; and he died there,

16 he and our fathers. (16) And he was transported
to Sychem, and was deposited in the sepulchre
which Abraham bought with money of the sons of

17 Emmor. — (17) And when the time arrived for that
which God had promised to Abraham with an
oath, the people had multiplied and become strong,

18 in Egypt: (18) until there arose another king over

19 Egypt, who knew not Joseph. (19) And he dealt
craftily with our kindred, and ill-treated our fathers,
and gave orders that their infants should be cast

20 away, and should not live. — (20) At that time was
Moses born; and he was lovely to God:'" and he
was nursed three months in his father's house.

21 (21) And when he was cast out, by his people, the
daughter of Pharaoh found him, and brought him

22 up lor her own son. (22) And Moses was instructed
in all the wisdom of the Egyptians ; and he was
eminent? in his words, and also in his deeds.

23 (23) And when he was forty years old, it came
into his heart to visit his brethren, the children of

24 Israel. (24) And he saw one of the race'' of his
kindred treated with violence; and he avenged
him, and did him justice, and killed the Egyptian

25 who had abused him. (25) And he supposed
that his brethren the sons of Israel would have un-
derstood, that by his hand God would give them

26 deliverance ; but they understood not. (26) And
on another day, he appeared to them, as they were
quarrelling one Avith anotlier. And lie exhorted
them to become reconciled, saying: Men, ye are
brethren ; why do ye seek to harm each other ?

27 (27) But he who did the wrong to his fellow, re-
pulsed him from him, and said to him : Who con-

28 stituted thee a ruler and a judge over us? (28) Dost
thou seek to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian

29 yesterday ? (29) And Moses fled at that speech,
and became a sojourner in the land of Midian."

30 And he had two sons. — (30) And when forty years
had been passed by him'' there, the angel of the
Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of mount

31 Sinai, in a lire that burned in a bush. (31) And
when Moses saw [itj, he admired the sight: and as


or, persons.


or, very lovely.


5 Sv. LaAl


Sy.


Sy. were full
to Uiin.


226


ACTS, VII.


' Sy. in a voi •£.


" Sy. / seeing
have seen.


Ki:


Sy.

Sy. ^5


he drew near to behold [it], the Lord said to him,
audibly :' (32) I am the God of thy fetliers, the God 32
of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob. And
Moses trembled, and dared not to gaze at the sight.
(33) And the Lord said to him: Loose thy shoes 33
from thy feet; for the ground on whicli thou stand-
est is holy. (34) I have attentively seen™ the afflic- 34
tion of my people, who are in Egypt ; and I have
heard their groans, and have'come doAvn to deliver
them. And now, come, I will send thee to Egypt.
— (35) Tliis Moses, whom they rejected, saying, 35
Who constituted thee a ruler and judge over us?
this same did God, by the hand of the angel that
appeared to him in the bush, send to them to be
their captain and deliverer. (36) He it Avas that 36
brought them out, working signs and wonders nnd
prodigies in the land of Egypt, and at the sea of
rushes, and in the desert, forty years. — (37) This 37
Moses is the man who said to the children of Israel :
A prophet, like me, will the Lord God raise up
to you from among your brethren; to him give
ear. (38) He it was, who was in the congregation 38
in the wilderness, with the angel that conversed
with him and with our fathers at mount Sinai;
and he it was, received the living words to ^ive
[them] to us. (39) And our fathers would not 39
hearken to him, but forsook him, and in their
hearts returned again to Egypt; (40) when 40
they said to Aaron : Make us gods who may go
before us; because, as for this Moses who brought
us from the land of Egypt, we know not what hath
become of him. (41) And he made them a calf in 41
those days ; and they offered sacrifices to idols, and
were voluptuous with the work of their hands.
(42) And God turned away, and gave them up to 42
worship the hosts of heaven : as it is written in the
book of the prophets: Did ye, for forty years, in
the wilderness, present to me a slain animal or a
sacrifice, ye sons of Israel? (43) But ye bore the 43
tabernacle of Malchum," and the star of the god
Rephon," images which ye had made, that ye
might bow down to them. T will transport you
beyond Babylon. — (44) Lo, the tabernacle of the 44
testimony of our fathers, was in the wilderness ; as
he who talked with Moses, commanded to make it
after the form which he showed him. (45) And 45


ACTS, VIII.


227


46

47
48


50
51


this same tabernacle, our fathers, with Joshua,
actually brought into the land which God gave to
them for an inheritance from those nations which he
drove out before them ; and it was borne about,
until the days of David. (46) He found favor
before God; and he requested, that he might find
a residence for the God of Jacob. (47) But Solo-
mon built the house. (48) Yet the most High
lodgeth not in a work of [human] hands ; as saith
49 the prophet': (49) Ilcavcn is my throne, and earth
the footstool under my feet. What is the house,
ye will build for me ? saith the Lord : or, what is
the place of my repose ? (50) Lo, hath not my
hand made all these things? — (51) O ye stiff of
neck, and uncircumcised in their heart, and in their
hearing; ye do always set yourselves against the

52 nol}^ Spirit ; as your fathers, so also ye. (52) For,
which of the prophets did not your fiithcrs perse-
cute and kill, [even] them, who foretold the coming

• of the Just One, whom ye delivered up and slew ?

53 (53) And ye have received the law by the ordina-
tion? of angels, and have not kept it.

And when they heard these things, they were
filled with rage in their souls ; and they gnashed
their teeth against him. {55) And he, as he Avas
full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, looked towards
heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus stand-
ing at the right hand of God. (56) And he said :
Lo, I see heaven open, and the Son of man standing
on the right hand of God. (57) And they cried

* out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and
58 all rushed upon him. (58) And they seized him,

and hurried him out of the city, and stoned him.
And they who testified against him, laid their
clothes at the feet of a certain young man who was
called Saul. (59) And the}'- stoned Stephen, while
he prayed and said : Our Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit. (60) And when he had kneeled down,
he cried with a loud voice, and said : Our Lord,
establish not this sin against them. And when he
VIILhad said this, he fell asleep.^ (VIIL) And Saul
was consenting and participating in his death. —
And there was, in that day, a great persecution
against the church^ that was at Jerusalem ; and
they were all dispersed, except the legates, among
the villages of Juda?a and likewise anion"- the Sa-


54
55


57


59
60


= precept.


^h


Sy. ,nn» =
he laid himself
down.


!Sv


Ur^


i


228


ACTS, VIII.


*' or, word.


Sy.


^QIQjlCD


Sy.]].


Sy. ^OLLQj


f Sy.


maritans. (2) And believing men gathered up and
buried Stephen. And they lamented over him
greatly. (8) And Saul persecuted the church of
God, entering houses, and dragging forth men and
women and committing them to prison.

And they who were dispersed, travelled about,
and preached the word of God. (5) And Philip
went down to a city of the Samaritans, and preached
concerning the Messiah. (6) And whqn the people
who were there heard his discourse,*^ they gave ear
to him, and acquiesced in all that he said ; because
they saw the signs which he wrought. (7) For
many who were possessed by unclean spirits, cried
with a loud voice, and came out of them : and
others, who were paralytic and lame, were healed.
(8) And there was great joy in that city. — (9) And
there was a certain man there, Avhose name was
Simon, e who had resided in that city a long time,
and who seduced the people of the Samaritans by
his sorceries, magnifying himself, and saying, I am
a great personage. (10) And they all inclined
towards him, great and small ; and they said, This
is the mighty power'' of God. (11) And they ac-
quiesced in him, because for a long time he had
astonished them by his sorceries. (12) But when
they gave credence to Philip, as he preached the
kingdom of God, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Messiah ; they were baptized, both men and women.

(13) And Simon himself also believed, and was
baptized, and adhered to Philip. And when he
saw the signs and mighty deeds which were wrought
by his hand, he Avas surprised and astonished. —

(14) And when the legates at Jerusalem, heard that
the people of the Samaritans had received the word
of God, they sent out to them Simon^ Cephas and
John. (15) And they went down, and prayed
over them, that they might receive the IIolj^ Spirit.
(IG) For he was not yet on any one of them ; and
they had only been baptized in the name of our
Lord Jesus. (17) Then they laid the hand on
them ; and they received the Holy Spirit. — (18) And
when Simon saw that, by the imposition of a hand
of the legates, the Holy Spirit was given, he offered
them money, (19) saying: Give mo also this pre-
rogative, f that he on whom I impose a hand, may
receive the Holy Spirit. (20) Simon Cephas said


10
11
12

13

14

15

16

17
18

19
20


ACTS, VIII.


229


to him: Thy money go with thee to perdition!
because thou hast supposed, that the gift of God

21 may be purchased by a worldly substance. (21)
Thou hast no part nor lot in this faith ; because

22 thy heart is not right before God. (22) Neverthe-
less, repent of this thy wickedness, and entreat of
God, if perhaps the guile of thy heart may be for-

23 given thee. (23) For I perceive that thou art in
21 the bitter gall and in the bonds of iniquity. (21) Si-
mon answered and said : Intercede yc with God for
me, that nothing of which yc have mentioned may

25 come upon me. — (25) And Simon and John, when
they had testified, and had taught them the word
of God, returned to Jerusalem. And they had
preached in many villages of the Samaritans.

2G And the angel of the Lord spake with Philip,
and said to him: Arise, go to the soutli, along the
desert way that Icadeth down from Jeursalem to

27 Gaza. (27) And he arose and went. And there
met him a eunuch, who had come from Cush,s an
officer of Candace, queen of the Cushites, who had
charge of all her treasure ; and he had come to

28 worship at Jerusalem. (28) And as he turned to
go, he was sitting in his chariot, and was reading

29 in Isaiah the prophet. (29) And the Holy Spirit
said to Philip: Go near, and join thyself to the

30 chariot. (30) And wlien he came near, he heard
him reading in Isaiah tlie prophet; and he said to
him: Understandcst thou what thou rcadest?

31 (31) And he said: How can I understand, unless
sorno one instruct me? And he requested of
Philip, that he would come up and sit with liim.

32 (32) And the section of scripture in which he was
reading, was this : As a lamb to the slaughter he
was led away, and as a sheep before the shearer is
silent, so also he in his humility opened not his

33 mouth. (33) From prison and from judgment he
was carried : and liis generation,!^ who will de-
clare? for his life is taken away from the earth.

31: (31) And the eunuch said to Philip: I pray thee,
of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or

35 of .some other person ? (35) Then Philip opened
his mouth, and, from that scripture, began to preach

36 to him concerning our Lord Jesus. (36) And as
they proceeded on the way, they came to a certain
place in which there was water. And the eunuch


Sy. _«Q.O


h Sy. 013 J


230


ACTS, IX.


• or, way.


' or, sharp
points.


Sy. ]jJLL»a


said: Lo, [here is] water; what doth forbid, that I
should be baptized? (37) [And Philip said: If 37
thou believest with all thy heart, it is allowable.
And he answered, and said : I believe that Jesus
Messiah is the Son of God.]* (38) And he com- 38
mandcd the chariot to stop ; and thej both went
down to the water, and Philip baptized the eunuch.
(39) And when they came up from the water, the 39
Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip ; and the
eunuch saw him no more ; but he Avent on his way
rejoicing. (40) And Philip was found at Azotus; 40
and from there he travelled about, and preached
in all the cities, until he came to Casarea.

And Saul was still full of threats and deadly IX.
hatred against the disciples of our Lord. (2) And 2
he requested that a letter from the high priest
might be given him, unto Damascus to the syna-
gogues; that if he should find persons pursuing
this course,'^ men or women, he might bind and
bring them to Jerusalem. (3) And as he was 3
going, and began to approach Damascus, suddenly
there was poured upon him a light from heaven.
(4) And he fell to the ground ; and he heard a 4
voice which said to him : Saul ! Saul ! why perse-
cutest thou me ? It will be hard for thee to kick
against the goads. "^ (5) He replied, and said : 5
Who art thou, my Lord? And our Lord said: I
am Jesus the Nazarean, whom thou persecutest.
(6) But arise and go into the city, and there it will 6
be told thee what thou oughtest to do. (7) "And 7
the men who travelled with him in the way, stood
amazed ; for they heard merely the voice, and no
one was visible to them. (8) And Saul arose from 8
the ground; and nothing was visible to him, with
his eyes opened. And they took him by the hand,
and led him into Damascus. (9) And he had no
sight for three days ; and he neither ate nor drank.
— (10) And there was in Damascus a certain disci-
ple, whose name was Ananias.*^ And the Lord
said to him, in a vision : Ananias ! And he said :
Lo, I [am here], ray Lord. (11) And our Lord
said to him : Arise, go to the street which is called
Straight ; and inquire in the house of Judas, for


9


10


11


* This 37Ui verse is not in any of the earlier editions, and is excluded from
the text of the London editions of 1816 and 1826.


ACTS, IX.


231


12 Saul who is from the city of Tarsus : for, lo, while
he prayed, (12) he saw in vision a man named
Ananias, who came and laid liis hand upon him,

13 that his eyes might be opened, (13) And Ananias
said: My Lord, I have heard of this man, from
many, how much evil he hath perpetrated towards

14 thy saints at Jerusalem. (14) And, lo, here also,
he hath authority from the chief priests, to bind all

15 them that call on thy name. (15) The Lord said
to him: Arise and go; for he is to me a chosen
vessel, to carry my name to the Gentiles, 'i and to

16 kings, and among the sons of Israel. (16) For I
will show him, how much he is to suffer on account

17 of my name. — (17) Then Ananias went to the
house to him; and he laid his hand upon him, and
said to him : Saul, my brother, our Lord Jesus, he
who appeared to thee by the way as thou camest,
hath sent me, that thy eyes might be opened, and

18 thou be filled with the''lloly Spirit. (18) And im-
mediately there fell from his eyes something like
a scab ; and his eyes were opened. And he arose

19 and was baptized. (19) And he took food, and
was invigorated. — And he was [some] da3^s with

20 the disciples of Damascus. (20) And forthwith he
announced Jesus, in the synagogues of 'the Jews,

21 that he is the Son of God. (21) And all they that
heard him Avere amazed ; and they said : Is not
this he, who persecuted all them that call on this
name in Jerusalem ? And lo, for this very thing
also, was he sent hither, that he might bind and

22 carry them to the chief priests. (22) But Saul was
the more strengthened ; and he confounded those
Jews who dwelt at Damascus, while he demonstrated

23 that this is the Messiah. — (23) And when he had
been there many days, the Jews formed a con-

24 spiracy against him, to kill him. (24) And the
plot wiiich they sought to execute upon him, was
made known to Saul : and they watched the gates
of the city by day and by night, in order to kill

25 him. (25) Then the disciples placed him in
a basket,^ and let him down from the wall by
night.

26 And he went to Jerusalem ; and he wished to
join himself with the disciples, but they were all
afraid of him, and did not believe that he was a dis-

27 ciplc. (27) But Barnabas took him, and brought


^ or. n/itions.


= Gr. airvpk-


Gr. churches.


' Sy. )a\


•^ Sy. I^Qj


Sy


him to the legates, and related to them bow the
Lord appeared to him in the way, and how he con-
versed with him; and how, in Damascus, he had
discoursed openly in the name of Jesus. (28) And 28
he went in and out with them, at Jerusalem.
(29) And he spoke openly in the name of Jesus, 29
and disputed with those Jews who understood
Greek. But they wished to kill him : (30) and 30
when the brethren knew [it], 'they conducted him
by night to Cossarea, and from there they sent him
to Tarsus,^ — (31) Moreover the church,^ in all Judoea, 31
and in Galilee, and in Samaria, had peace and was
edified; and it walked in the fear of God, and
abounded in the consolation of the Iloly Spirit.

(32) And it occurred, that, as Simon travelled 32
about the cities, he came down to the saints also
who dwelt in the city of Lydda.s (33) And he 33
found a certain man whose name was ^Eneas, who
had lain on a bed and been paralytic eight years.
(34) And Simon said to him : ^neas, Jesus the 34
Messiah doth heal thee ; arise, and spread thy bed.
And he rose up immediately. (35) And all they 35
that dwelt at Lydda and Sarou, saw him; and they
turned to God.

And there was in the city of Joppa,'» a certain 36
female disciple named Tabitha ; [and] she was rich
in good works, and in the alms which she did.

(37) And she fell sick in those days, and died ; and 37
they washed her, and laid her in an upper room.

(38) And the disciples heard that Simon was in the 38
city of Lydda, which is near to Joppa ; and they
sent two men to him, to request of him that he
would not delay to come to them. (39) And 39
Simon arose and went with them. And when he
arrived, they conducted him to the chamber ; and
there were assembled around her all the widows,
weeping, and showing him the tunics and the
cloaks which Tabitha had given them when alive.

(40) And Simon put all the people out, and fell on 40
his knees and prayed ; and he turned to the corpse,
and said : Tabitha, arise.' And she opened her
eyes; and when she saw Simon, she sat up.

(41) And he reached to her his hand, and raised 41
her up : and he called the saints and the widows,
and presented her to them alive. (42) And this 42
became known throughout the city; and many


ACTS, X.


233


11


12

13
14

15


16


43 believed on our Lord. (43) And he tarried in
Joppa not a few days : and lie lodged in the house
of Simon a tanner.

X. And tlicre was a certain man in Cii^sarea, whose
name was Cornelius, a centurion of the regiment=^

2 called the Italian. (2) And he was righteous, and
feared God, he and all his house ; [and] he did
much alms among the people, and prayed to God

3 at all times. (3) This man distinctly saw, in a
vision, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel
of God, who came in to him and said to him : Cor-

4 nelius! (4') And he looked upon him, and was
afraid; and he said: What, my Lord? And the
angel said to him : Thy prayers and thy alms have

5 come up in remembrance before God. (5) And
now, send men to the city of Joppa, and bring

6 Simon who is called Cephas. (0) Lo, he lodgeth
in the house of Simon the tanner, which is by

7 the side of the sea. (7) And when the angel that
talked with him was gone, he called two of his
household,'' and a soldier who feared God and was

8 obedient to him. (8) And he related to them all

9 that he had seen, and sent them to Joppa. — (9)
And the next day, as they travelled the road and
approached the city, Simon ascended the roof to

10 pray, at the sixth hour. (10) And he became
hungry, and desired to eat. And while they
were providing for him, he fell*^ into a trance.
(11) And he saw the heavens opened, and a certain
vessel fastened at the four corners, and it was like
a great sheet; and it descended from heaven to the
eailh. (12) And there were in it all fourfooted
animal?, and creepiil*; things of the earth, and
fowls of heaven. (13) And a voice came to him,
which said : Simon, arise, slay and eat. (14) And
Simon said : Far be it, my Lord : for never have I
eaten any thing unclean and polluted. (15) And
again the second time, there was a voice to him :
Wiiat God hath cleansed, make thou not unclean.
(16) And this was done three times; and the


vessel was taken up to heaven.
17 And while Simon was wondering with himself,
what the vision he had seen could denote, the men
wlio were sent by Cornelius arrived; and they
inquired for the house in which Simon lodged, and


or, cohort.


Sy. sons of his
house.


■ Sy. a trance
fell on him.


234


ACTS, X.


^ Sy. sons of his
liindred.


• Sy. up to now,


came and stood at the gate of the court. (18) And 18
there they called out, and asked if Simon who is
called Cephas lodged there? (19) And while 19
Simon was reflecting on the vision, the Spirit said
to him: Lo, three men are inquiring for thee.

(20) Arise, go down, and accompany them; and 20
let not thy mind hesitate, for I have sent them. —

(21) Then Simon went down to the men, and said 21
to them : I am he for whom ye inquire : what is
the cause for which ye have come? (22) Tliey 22
say to him: A certain man whose name is Cor-
nelius, a centurion fearing God, and of whom all
the people of the Jews bear good report, was told

in vision, by a holy angel, to send and bring thee
to his house, that he might hear discourse from
thee. (23) And Simon led them in, and enter- 23
tained them where he lodged.

And the following day, he arose, departed, and
went with them: and some of the brethren of
Joppa also went with them. (24) And the next 24
day, they entered Ccesarea. And Cornelius was
expecting them : and all the kindred'^ of his femily,
and also such intimate friends as he had, were
assembled with him. — (25) And as Simon came up, 25
Cornelius met him, and fell down worshipping at
his feet. (26) And Simon raised him up, and said 26
to him : Arise ; I also am'a man, (27) And as he 27
talked with him, he went in, and found that many
had come there. (28) And he said to them : Yc 28
know, that it is not lawful for a Jewish man, to
associate with an alien who is not of his race : but
God hath showed me, that I should not say of any
one, that he is defiled or unclean. (29) Therefore 29
I came readily, when ye sent for me. But, I
ask you, for what cause did ye send for me?
(30) And Cornelius said to him : It is four days 30
ago,*' that, lo, I was fasting; and at the ninth hour,
while I was praying in my house, a certain man
stood before me, clothed in white, (31) and said to 31
me: Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and there is
remembrance of thy alms before God. (32) But 32
send to the city of Joppa, and bring Simon who is
called Cephas: lo, he lodgeth in the house of
Simon the tanner, which is by the side of the
sea. And he will come and converse with thee.
I (33) And immediately I sent to thee; and thou 33


ACTS, XI.

hast done well to come : and lo, we are all of us

before tlicc, and desirous to hear whatever is com-
manded thee from God.

Si And Simon opened his mouth, and said: Truly,
I discover that God is no respecter of persons:

85 (35) but, among all the nations, he who fearcth
him, and worketh riglitcousness, is acceptable with

36 him. (36) For [this is] the word, whicli he sent to
the sons of Israel, announcing to them peace and
rest by Jesus Messiah, — He is Lord of all ; —

37 (37) and yc also know the word, whicli was in
all Judrea, which commenced from Galilee, after the

88 baptism that John preached, (38) concerning Jesus,
who was of Nazareth, whom God anointed with
the Holy Spirit and with power. *" And he it was,
who went about and healed those that were sufter-

39 ing from evil, because God was with him. (39)
And we [are] his witnesses, as to whatever he did
in all the region of Judica and in Jerusalem. This
same person tlie Jews hanged on a tree, and slew

40 him. (40) And him did God raise up, on the third
day ; and caused him to be seen with naked eyes ;

41 (41) not indeed by all the people, but by us, who
were chosen of God to be his witnesses, [and] who
ate and drank with him after his resurrection from

42 the dead. (42) And he commanded us to proclaim
and testify to the people, that he is appointed? of
God to be judge of the living and of the dead,

43 (43) And of him all the prophets testify, that Avho-
evcr believcth in his name, will receive remission

44 of sins. — (44) And while Simon was uttering these
things, the Holy Spirit overshadowed'' all them

45 that were hearing the word, (45) And the circum-
cised brethren *who came with him, were amazed
and astonished, that the gift of the Iloly Spirit Avas

46 poured out upon the Gentiles also, (46) For they
heard them speak with diverse tongues, and mag'

47 nily God. (47) And Simon said: Can any one
forbid Avatcr, that those should not be baptized,
they who liave received, lo, the Holy Spirit, as well

48 as we? (48) Then he commanded them to be bap-
tized in the name of our Lord Jesus Messiah. And
they requested him to remain with them [some]
days,

XL And it Avas reported to the legates and the


235


sy-U


e Sy. separated.


^ or, covered.


236


ACTS, XI.


Sy. words.
or, be saved.


Sy. were sill.
or, salvation.


2


6


9


brethren in Judsea, that the Gentiles also had re-
ceived the word of God. (2) And when Simon
went up to Jerasalem, they who were of the cir-
cumcision contended with him, (3) saying; that he
had gone in to be with uncircumcised persons, and
had eaten with them. — (4) And Simon began to
address them methodically : (5) As I was in Joppa,
praying, I saw in vision, that a certain vessel de-
scended, which was like a sheet, and it was tied at
its four corners; and it descended from heaven,
and came to me. (6) And I looked upon it, and
I saw that in it were fourfooted animals, and rep-
tiles of the earth, and fowls of heaven. (7) And
I heard a voice, which said to me: Simon, arise,
slay and eat. (8) And I said : Far be it, my Lord.
For never hath any thing polluted or unclean
entered my mouth. (9) And again, a voice from
heaven said to mc : What God hath cleansed, make
thou not unclean. (10) And this was done three 10
times: and the whole was taken up to heaven.

(11) And at the same instant, three men, who 11
were sent to me by Cornelius from Cassarea, came
and stood at the gate of the court where I lodged.

(12) And the Spirit said to me: Go with them, 12
without hesitation. And these six brethren went
also with me, and we entered the man's house.

(13) And he related to us, how he had seen an 13
angel in his house, who stood and said to him :
Send to the city of Joppa, and bring Simon who

is called Cephas; (l-l) and he will utter to thee 14
discourses, a by which thou wilt live,i* thou and all
thy house. (15) And when I there commenced 15
speaking, the Holy Spirit overshadowed them, as it
did us from the beginning. (16) *And I remem-
bered the word of our Lord, when he said : John
baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with
the Holy Spirit. (17) If then God equally gave 17
the gift to the Gentiles that believed in our Lord
Jesus Messiah, as he did to us : who was I, that I
could forbid God?— (18) And when they heard 18
tliese words, they desisted ;c and they glorihed
God and said : Now to the Gentiles also doth God
give repentance unto lifc^

_ And they who were dispersed, by the oppres- 19
sion which occurred on account of Stephen, trav-
elled as far as Phenicia, and even to the country


IG


ACTS, XII.


237


20


23


2-1


of Cyprus, and to Antioch, speaking the word to
none cxcc})t to Jews only. (20) And there were
some of them from Cyprus and from Cyrene, who
went up to Antioch, and spoke to the Greeks, and

21 preached concerning our Lord Jesus. (21) And
the hand of the Lord was with them ; and many

22 believed, and turned to the Lord, (22) And this
came-' to the ears of the sons of the church at
Jerusalem: and they sent Barnabas to Antioch.
(23) And when he came there, and saw the grace
of God, he rejoiced: and he entreated them, that
with all their heart, they Avould adhere to our
Lord. (24) For he was a good man, and was full
of the Holy Spirit, and of faith. And many

25 people were added to our Lord. — (25) And he

26 went awa}^ to Tarsus, to seek for Saul, (26) And
when he had found him, he brought him with him
to Antioch. And a whole year they met together
in the church, and instructed many people. — From
that time forth, the disciples were first called
CiiKi3TiANS,f at Antioch.

In those days came prophets thither from Jeru-
salem. (28) And one of them whose name was
Agabus, stood up and informed them, by the
Spirit, that there would be a great famine in all
the country. And that famine occurred in the
days of Claudius Cnesar. (29) And moreover the
disciples, each of them according to his several
ability, g determined to send to the relief of the
brethren who dwelt in Judi.ca. (30) And they
sent, by the hand of Barnabas and Saul, unto the
Elders there.


27

28


29


30


XIL And at that time Herod the king, who was sur-
namcd Agrip])a, laid hands on some of the church,

2 to maltreat them. (2) And he killed James the

3 brother of John witli the sword. (3) And when
he saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded''
also to arrest Simon Cephas. And the days of

4 unleavened bread were then passing, (4) He
seized him and cast him into prison, "^ and deliv-
ered him to sixteen soldiers, who were to guard
him; that he might, after the passover, deliver

5 him up to the people of the Jews. (5) And while
Simon was in cu.stody in the prison, continual
prayer to God in his behalf, was oflcred to God


Sy. was heard
by.


Sy.

= Gr.

XpitfTiavo/,


e or, means.


" Sy. added.

^ Sy. house of
prisoners.


238


ACTS, XII.


Sy. pertaining
to.


' Sy. turned up-
on her course.

" Sy. art con-
fused to be
confused


by the church. — (6) And on the night before*^ the 6
morning in which he was to be deUvered up, while
Simon was sleeping between two soldiers, and was
bound with two chains, and others Avere guarding
the doors of the prison ; (7) an angel of the Lord 7
stood over him, and a light slione in all the building;
and he pricked his side, and awaked him, and said
to him: Arise, instantly. And the chains fell from
his hands. (8) And the angel said to him: Gird 8
thy loins, and put on thy sandals. And he did so.
And again he said to him : Wrap thyself in thy
cloak, and come after me. (9) And he went out 9
and followed him, not knowing that what had
been done by the angel was a reality ; for he sup-
posed, that he saw a vision. (10) And when the 10
first ward was passed and the second, they came
to the iron gate, and it opened to them of its own
accord. And when they had gone out, and had
passed one street, the angel departed from him.
(11) Then Simon recognized [where he was] ; and 11
he said : Now I know, in reality, that God hath
sent his angel, and delivered me from the hand of
Ilerod the king, and from what the Jews were
devising against me. — (12) And when he had con- 12
sidered, he went to the house of Mary, the mother
of John surnamed Mark ; because many brethren
were assembled there and praying. (13) And he 13
knocked at the gate of the cout-t; and a maid
named Rboda came to reply to him. (1-4) And 14
she recognized the voice of Simon: and, in her
joy, she did not open to him the gate, but ran
back,d and told them: Lo, Simon is standing at
the gate of the court. (15) They said to her : 15
Thou art delirious." But she maintained that it
was a fact. They said to her: Perhaps it is his
ghost. (16) And Simon was knocking at the gate; 10
and they went out, saw him, and were astonished.
(17) And he beckoned to them with the hand to 17
be still ; and he went in, and related to them how
the Lord had released him from the prison. And
he said to them : Tell these things to James and to
the brethren. And he went out, and departed to
another place. — (18) And when it was morning, 18
there was a great dispute among the soldiers con-
cerning Simon, what had become of him. (19) And 19
Ilerod, when he soudit him, and could not find


ACTS, XIll.


289


him, arraiguedf the keepers, and sentenced them
to die. And he went from Judtea, antl resided at
Cuesarea.

20 And because he was angry against the Tyrians
and Sidonians, they assembled and came to him
in a body ; and having persuaded Blastus, the
king's chamberlain, they begged of him that they
might have peace; because the supplies of their
country were derived from the kingdom of Ilerod.

21 (21) And on a day ap})ointed,s Ilerod was arrayed
in royal apparel, and sat on a tribunal, and made a

22 speech to the assembly. (22) And all the people
shouted, and said : These are the utterances'' of a

23 God, and not of a mortal. (23) And, because he
gave not the glory to God, immediately the angel
of God smote him ; and he was eaten of worms,

24 and died.— (24) And the gospel of God was pro-
claimed, and made' progress.

25 And Barnabas and Saul, after they had com-
pleted their ministration, returned from Jerusalem
to Antioch. And they took with them John, who

Xni. was suruamed Mark. — (XIII.) Now there were
in the church at Antioch, [several] prophets and
teachers ; Barnabas, and Simon called Niger, and
Lucius who was from the city Cyrene, and Mcnaen,
a son of the guardians of Ilerod the Tetrarch, and

2 Saul. (2) And while they were fasting and ma-
king supplication to God, the Holy Spirit said to
them : Separate to mc Saul and Barnabas, for the

3 work to which I have called them. (3) And after
they had fasted and prayed, they laid the hand on

4 them, and sent ihem away. — (4) And they, being
sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went down to Se-
leucia, and iVom there they Avent by sea as far as

5 Cyprus. (5) And when tiiey entered the city of
Salamis, they announced the word of our Lord in
the synagogues of the Jews. And John minis-

6 tcred to them. (G) And when they had travelled
over the whole island as far as the city Paphos,
they found a certain man, a sorcerer, a Jew, who
was a false prophet, and whose name was Bar-'

7 Suma.!^ (7) Uc adhered to a wise man, who was'
the proconsul, and was called Sergius Paulus. '
And the proconsul sent for Saul and Barnabas,!
and requested to hear from them the word of God.

8 (8) And this sorcerer, Bar-Suma, (whose namej


Sy. Judged.


K or, celebrated.

^ Sy. daughters
of the voice.


Sy. grew.


Sy.


r^


240


*• Sy. I « . a. ri


^


ACTS, XIII.

is interpreted, Eljmas,) withstood them; because
he wished to divert the proconsul from the faith.
(9) And Saul who is called Paul, was filled with 9
the Holy Spirit; and he looked upon him, (10) and 10
said : O thou full of all subtilties, and all mischiefs,
thou child of the calumniator, and enemy of all
righteousness; wilt thou not cease to pervert the
right ways of the Lord? (11) And now, the hand 11
of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind,
and shalt not see the sun for a time. And imme-
diately there fell upon him a mist and darkness;
and he went about, inquiring who would take him
by the hand. (12) And when the proconsul saw 12
what occurred, he was astonished; and he believed
the doctrine of the Lord.

And Paul and Barnabas went by sea, from the 13
city of Paphos, and came to Perga, a city of Pam-
phylia. And John separated from them, and went
away to Jerusalem. (14) And they departed from 14
Perga, and came to Antioch, a city of Pisidia: and
they entered the synagogue, on the sabbath day,
and sat down. (15) And after the law had been 15
read, and the prophets, the Elders'' of the syna-
gogue sent to them, and said: Men, brethren, if ye
have a word of exhortation, address the people. —
(16) And Paul arose, and waved his hand, and 16
said: Men, sons of Israel, and ye that fear God,
hear ye. (17) The God of this people chose our 17
fathers, and raised them up, and multiplied them,
when they resided in the land of Egypt; and, with
a high arm, he brought them out of it. (18) And 18
he fed them in the wilderness forty years. (19) And 19
he extirpated seven nations in the land of Canaan,
and gave them their land for an inheritance.
(20) And for four hundred and fifty years he gave 20
them judges, until Samuel the prophet. (21) And 21
then they asked for themselves a king: and God
gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe
of Benjamin, during forty years. (22) And he re- 22
moved him, and raised up to them David as king:
and he testified of him, and said: I have found
David the son of Jesse, a man after my heart : he
will do all my pleasure. (23) From the seed of 23
this man, hath God raised up to Israel, as he
promised, Jesus a deliverer. (24) And, before his 24
advent, he sent John to proclaim the baptism of


ACTS, XIII.


241


26


27


28
29


25 repentance to all the people of Israel. (25) And
while John was fulfilling his ministry, he said:
Who, suppose ye, that I am ? I am not he. But
lo, he Cometh after me ; of whom I am not worthy
to untie his shoe-strings. — (26) Men, brethren,
children of the stock of Abraham, and all who,
with you, fear God, to you is this word of life<=
sent, (27) For, those inhabitants of Jerusalem
and their chiefs, did not apprehend it; neither
[did they apprehend] also the writings of the
prophets, which are read every sabbath ; but they
condemned him, and fulfilled all the things writ-
ten. (28) And while they found no ground for
[his] death, they desired of Pilate that they might
kill him. (29) And when they had falfilled all
that was written concerning him, they took him
down from the cross, and laid him in a sepulchre.

30 (30) But God raised him from the dead. (31) And

31 he was seen many days, by them who came up
with him from Galilee to Jerusalem; and they are

32 now his witnesses to the people. (32) And lo,,we
also announce to you, that the promise, which was

33 made to our fathers, (33) lo, God hath fulfilled it to
us their children, in that he raised up Jesus ; as it
is written in the second psalm : Thou art my Son ;

34 this day have I begotten thee. (3-4) And God hath
so raised him from the dead, that he will not return
again and see corruption ; as he said : I will give

35 to you the sxire^ grace of David. (35) And again
he said, in another place : Thou hast not given thy
devout one to see corruption. (36) For David, in
his generation, served the pleasure of God, and
went to rest,c and was added to his fathers, and
saw corruption. (37) But this person, whom God
raised up, did not see corruption. (38) Know
therefore, brethren, that through this man remis-
sion of sins is proclaimed to you. (39) And every
one that believeth in this man, is made just^" from
all things, from which ye could not be made just

40 by the law of Moses. (40) Beware, therefore, lest
that come upon you, whicli is written in the proph-
ets: (41) Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and
perish ; for I work a work in your days, which ye
will not believe, though a man relate it to you.

And when they had gone from them, they be-
sought them to speak the same things? to them the

16


36


37

38

39


41


42


or, salvation.


^


or, faithful.


or, fell asleep.


Sy. »DJjl!i3


Sy.

these words.


^'»^


'' or, sahaiion.


Sy. ■ a^OtrO


next sabbatli day. (43) And when tlie synagogue 43
was dismissed, many Jews went after them, and
likewise proselytes who feared God. And they
conversed with them, and persuaded them to ad-
here to the grace of God. — (44) And the next sab- 44
bath, the whole city assembled to hear the word
of God. (45) And when the Jews saw the great 45
assembly, they were filled Avitl^ envy, and set them-
selves against the words which Paul spoke, and
blasphemed. (46) And Paul and Barnabas said, 46
openly : To you first, ought the word of God to
be spoken ; but because ye repel it from you, and
decide, against yourselves, that ye are not worthy
of life eternal, lo, we turn ourselves to the Gen-
tiles. (47) For so hath our Lord commanded us ; 47
as it is written : I have set thee a light to the
Gentiles ; that thou shouldst be for life'' unto the
ends of the earth. (48) And when the Gentiles 48
heard [this], they rejoiced and glorified God. And
those believed, who were appointed' to life eternal.
(49) And the word of the Lord was talked of in 49
all that region. — (50) But the Jews stirred up the 50
chiefs of the city, and the opulent women who
with them feared God, and set up a persecution
against Paul and against Barnabas, and expelled
them from their borders. (51) And when they 51
went out, they shook off the dust of their feet
against them, and went to the city of Iconium.
(52) And the disciples were filled with joy, and 52
with the Holy Spirit.

And they came and entered into the synagogue XIV.
of the Jews, and so spoke with them, that many
of the Jews and of the Greeks believed. (2) But 2
Jews of the class of unbelievers, excited the
Gentiles, to maltreat the brethren. (3) And they 3
continued there a long time, and spoke openly
concerning the Lord ; and he gave testimony to the
word of his grace, by the signs and prodigies
which he wrought by their hands. (4) And the 4
whole multitude of the city was divided ; and a part
were with the .Tews, and a part adhered to the
legates. (5) And an assault was made on them, by 5
the Gentiles, and by the Jews and their chiefs, to
insult them, and to stone them with stones. (6) And 6
when they know [it], they departed and fled t(» the


ACTS, XIV.


248


10


11


cities of Lycaonia and Lystra and Derbe, and to the

7 villages around them ; (7) and there they preached.

8 — (8) And a certain man dwelt in the city Lystra,
who was afflicted in his feet, a cripple from his

9 mother's womb, who had never walked. (9) He
heard Paul speak : and when Paul saw him, and
knew that he had faith to live;'^ (10) he said to
him, with a loud voice: In the name of our Lord
Jesus Messiah, I say to thee, Rise uj)on thy feet.
And he sprang up, stood, and walked. (11) And
the assembly of people, when they saw what Paul
had done, raised their voice, and said, in the lan-
guage of the country : The gods have assumed
the likeness of men, and have come down to us.

12 (12) And they named Barnabas the Lord of the
Gods; and Paul Hermes, ^^ because he commenced

13 the speaking. (13) And the priest" of the Lord of
the Grods, who was without the city, brought oxen
and garlands to the gate of the court where they
lodged, and was disposed to offer sacrihces to

14 them. — (14) But Barnabas and Paul, when they
heard [it], rent their garments, and sprang and

15 went among the throng, '^ (15) and called out, and
said : Men, what do ye ? We also are frail mortals
like yourselves, who preach to you, that ye should
turn from these useless things, unto the living God,
who made heaven and earth and seas, and what-

16 ever is in them. (16) He, in former ages, left all

17 the nations to go in their own ways : (17) although
he did not leave himself without testimony, while
he did them good from heaven, and sent down the
rain, and made the fruits to grow in their seasons,
and filled their hearts with food and pleasure.

18 (18) And, by saying these things, they with diffi-
culty prevented the people from oftering sacrifice
to them.

But Jews came hither from Iconium and An-
lioch, and excited the people against them. And
they stoned Paul, and dragged him out of the city,
supposing that he was dead. (20) And the disci-
ples assembled around him ; and he arose, and went
into the city. — And the next day, he departed from
there, with Barnabixs ; and they came to the cit}'- of
Derbe. (21) And while they were preaching to
the inhabitants of that city, they made many disci:
pics. And turning back, they came to the city


19


20


21


or, be cured.


"Sy.

Gr. Ep|x^j.
<= Sy. ]^C1D


Sy.

Gr. rj-yXoj-.


244


« Sy. nV^iO]
' Sy ] « '^ « O


or, he saved.


Sy. home.


or, doctrine.


"• Sy. word.


ACTS, XV.

Lystra, and to Iconium, and to Antiocb, (22) con- 22
firming the souls of the disciples, and entreating
them to persevere in the faith ; and they told them,
that it was necessary, through much affliction, to
enter into the kingdom of Grod. (23) And they 23
established^ for them Elders^ in each church, while
they fasted with them, and prayed, and commended
them to our Lord in whom they believed. (24) And 24
when they had travelled over the region of Pisidia,
they came to Pamphylia. (25) And when they 25
had spoken the word of the Lord in the city of
Perga, they went down to Attalia. (26) And 26
thence they proceeded by sea, and came to Anti-
och ; because from there they had been commended
to the grace of the Lord, for that work which they
had accomplished. (27) And when they had col- 27
Iccted together the whole church, they narrated all
that God had wrought with them, and that he had
opened a door of faith to the Gentiles. (28) And 28
they remained there a long time with the disciples.

And certain men came down from Judaea, and XV.
taught the brethren, that unless ye be circumcised,
in accordance with the rite of the law, ye cannot
have life.^ (2) And Paul and Barnabas had much 2
trouble and disputation with them. And it re-
sulted, that Paul and Barnabas, and others with
them, went up to the legates and Elders at Jerusa-
lem, because of this matter. (3) And the church 8
waited on them, and sent them away; and they
travelled through all Phenicia and the territoryi^ of
the Samaritans, narrating the conversion of the
Gentiles, and causing great joy to all the brethren.
(4) And when they came to Jerusalem, they were 4
received by the church, and by the Elders, and by
the legates ; and they recounted all that God had
wrought by them. (5) And some who from the 5
secf^ of the Pharisees had believed, rose up and
said : It is necessary for you to circumcise them,
and to command them to observe the law of Moses.

And the legates and Elders assembled, to look 6
into this matter.'' (7) And when there had been 7
much discussion, Simon arose and said to them:
Men, brethren, ye know that, from the earlier days,
God chose that from my mouth the Gentiles should
hear the word of the gospel, and should believe.


ACTS, XV.


245


10


11


14
15


16


17


18
19

20


21


22


23


« or, ie saved.


f Sv. were silent.


8 (8) And God, who knoweth wliat is in hearts, bore
testimony concerning them, and gave the Holy

9 Spirit to them, even as to us. (9) And he made no
distinction between them and us ; because he puri-
fied their hearts by faith. (10) And now, why
tempt ye God, by putting a yoke on the necks of
the disci])les, which neither our fathers nor we could
bear? (11) But we believe, that we as well as
they, are to have life" by the grace of our Lord

12 Jesus Messiah. — (12) And the whole assembly were
silent, and listened to Paul and Barnabas, who re-
lated how God by their hands had wrought signs

13 and prodigies among the Gentiles. — (13) And after
they ceased, <" James arose and said : Men, brethren,
hearken to me. (14) Simon hath related to you,
how God hath begun to elect a people for his name
from among the Gentiles. (15) And with this the
words of the prophets accord, as it is Avritten:
(16) After these things I will return, and will set
up the tabernacle of David that had fallen ; and
will build that which was in ruins in it, and will
raise it up : (17) so that the residue of men may
seek the Lord, and all the nations on whom my
name is called ; saitli the Lord, who doth all these
things. (18) Known, from of old, are the works of
God. (19) Therefore I say to you, let them not
crush those who from among the Gentiles have
turned unto God. (20) But let word be sent to
them, that they keep aloof from the defilement of
a sacrifice [to idols], and from whoredom, and from
what is strangled, and from blood. (21) For in
every city, from former ages, Moses hath hei'alds
in the synagogues, who read him every sabbath.

Then the legates and Elders, with all the church,
chose men from among themselves, and sent them
to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas; [namelj''],
Jude, who was called Barsabas, and Silas, g men
who were chiefs'^ among the brethren. (23) And
they wrote a letter by them, thus : The legates and
Elders and brethren, to them that arc in Antioch, |
and in Syria, and in Cilicia, brethren who are from|
24 the Gentiles, greeting:' (24) We have heard, that,' Sy. peace.
some have gone from us and disquieted you, by •
discourses, and have subverted your minds, ■« hyy^ or, souls.
saying, That ye must be circumcised and keep the!
law ; thino-s which we have not commanded them. I


e Sy. (]jL^
'' Sy. "U^"j


246


ACTS, XV.


or, in discourse.


Sy. A^TiJ


i


(25) Therefore we all have thought fit, when assem- 25
bled, to choose and send men to jou, with our be-
loved Paul and Barnabas, (26) men who have 26
given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus
Messiah. (27) And we have sent with them Jude 27
and Silas, that they may tell you the same things
orally.i (28) For it was pleasing to the Holy Spirit, 28
and to us, that there should not be laid upon you
any additional burden, besides these necessary
things: (29) that ye keep aloof from a sacrifice [to 29
idols], and from blood, and from what is strangled,
and from whoredom. And if ye keep yourselves
from these, ye will do well. Be ye steadfast in the
Lord.

And they who were sent, came to Antioch, and 30
assembled all the people, and delivered the letter.
(81) And when they had read [it], they rejoiced 31
and were comforted. (32) And with abundant dis- 32
course they strengthened, the brethren ; and the
associates'" of Jude and Silas established them, be-
cause they also were pi'ophets. (33) And when 33
they had been there some time, the brethren dis-
missed them in peace to the legates. [(34)* But it 34
was the pleasure of Silas to remain tliere.] (35) 35
Paul also and Barnabas remained at Antioch ; and
they taught and proclaimed, with many others, the
word of God.

And after [some] daj^s, Paul said to Barnabas : 36
Let us return, and visit the brethren in every city,
in which we have preached the word of God; and
let us see what they are doing. (37) And Barua- 37
bas was disposed to take John, who was surnamed
Mark. (38) But Paul was not willing to take him 38
with them ; because he left them when they were
in Pamphylia, and went not with them. (39) In 39
consequence of this strife, they separated from each
other: and Barnabas took Mark, and they trav-
elled by sea and went to Cyprus. (40) But Paul 40
chose Sihis for his companion, and departed, being
commended by the brethren to the grace of God.
(41) And he travelled through Syria, and through 41
Cilicia, and strengthened the churches.


* This verse is removed to tlie margin in the editions of tiie Britisli and Foreign
Bible Society.


,^%mL


r


9


ACTS, XVI.

XYI. And he came to the city Derbe, and to Lystra.
And there was a certain disciple there, whose name
was Timoth}^, the son of a believing Jewess, but his

2 father was a Gentile.'^ (2) And all the disciples of
Lystra and leonium gave good testimony of him.

3 (o) Ilim Paul was disposed to take with him : and
he took him, and circumcised him, because of the
Jews that were in that region ; for they all knew

4 that liis fother was a Gentile. (4) And as they
went among the cities, they preached and taught
them, that they should observe those injunctions
which the legates and Elders at Jerusalem had

5 written. (5) And so were the churches established
in the fliitli, and were increased in number daily.

6 (6) And they travelled through the regions of
Phrygia and Galatia ; and the Holy Spirit forbid

7 them to speak the word of God in Asia. (7) And
when they came into the region of Mysia, they
were disposed to go from there into Bithynia, but

8 the Spirit of Jesus permitted them not. — (8) And
when they departed from Mysia, they came down
to the region of Troas. (9) And in a vision of the
night, there appeared unto Paul, a man of Mace-
donia, who stood and besought him, saying: Come

10 to Macedonia and help us. — (10) Ancl when Paul
had seen this vision, immediately we were desirous
to depart for Macedonia ; because we inferred, that
our Lord called us to preach to them.

11 And we sailed from Troas, and came direct to
Samothrace ; and from there, on the following day,

12 we came to the city Neapolis. (12) And from
there to Philippi, which is the chiefs [city] of
Macedonia, and is a colony. And we remained in

13 that city certain days. (13) And on the sabbath
day, we went without the gate of the city to the
side of a river, because a house of prayer was seen
there. And when we were seated, we conversed

1-1 Avith the women who there assembled. (14) And
a certain woman who feared God, a seller of pur-
ple, whose name was Lydia, from the city of Thy-
atira, [was there]. Ilcr heart our Lord opened,

15 and she hearkened to what Paul spake. (15) And
she was baptized, and her household.^ And she

16 entreated us, saying: If ye are really persuaded
that I have believed in our Lord, come and take
lodging in my house. And she urged us much. —


247


' Sy. "UiD'l,

or, Aramaean.


Sy. "U-^J


-^Sy.


.. 1 o


248


ACTS, XVI.


^ Sy. divined.


or, salvation.


'Sy.
Gr. tf^-pccTriyoh


s or, he saved.
•» or, he saved.


18


19


(16) And it occurred that, as we were going to the 16
house of prayer, a certain maid met us, who had

a spirit of divination, and who procured for her lords
great gain by tlie divination whicli she performed.^

(17) And she followed after Paul and us, and cried, 17
saying: These men are the servants of the Most
High God, and they announce to you the way of
lifec (18) And this she did many days. And
Paul was indignant ; and he said to that spirit, I
command thee, in the name of Jesus Messiah, that
thou come out of her. And it came out the same
hour. (19) And when her lords saw that the pros-
pect of their gain from her was gone, they seized
Paul and Silas, and dragging them along brought
them to the market-place, (20) and set them before 20
the prefects^ and chiefs of the city, and said : These
men disturb our city ; for they are Jews, (21) and 21
they preach to us customs, which it is not lawful
for us to receive and to practise, because we are
Romans. (22) And a great company was collected 22
against them. Then the prefects rent their gar-
ments, and commanded to scourge them. (23) And 23
when they had scourged them much, they cast them
into tlie prison, and commanded the keeper of the
prison to keep them with care. (21:) And he, hav- 21:
ing received this command, carried and immured
them in the inner part of the prison, and confined
their feet in the stocks. (25) And at midnight 25
Paul and Silas were praying and glorifying God :
and the prisoners heard them. (26) And suddenly 26
there was a great shaking, and the foundations of
the pi'ison were moved ; and at once all the doors
opened, and the bands of all were loosed. (27) And 27
when the keeper of the prison awoke, and saw that
the doors of the prison were open, he took a sword
and sought to kill himself; because he supposed
the prisoners had escaped. (28) But Paul called 28
to him, in a loud voice, and said : Do thyself no
harm, for we are all here. (29) And he lighted for 29
himself a lamp, and sprang ancl came in, trembling,
and fell at the feet of Paul and Silas. (30) And
he brought them out, and said to them : My lords,
what must I do, that I may have life ?s (31) And
they said to him: Believe on the name of our Lord
Jesus Messiah, and thou wilt have life,'' thou and
thy house. (32) And they spoke the word of the 32


30


31


ACTS, XVII.


249


Lord to him, and to all the members' of his house.

33 (33) And the same hour of the night, he took and
washed them from their stri})es ; and he was bap-
tized immediately, he and all the members'' of his

34 house. (34) And he took them and brought them
into his house, and set a table for them ; and he re-
joiced in the fiiitli of God, he and all the members'

35 of his house. — (35) And when it was morning, the
prefects sent rod-bearers'" to say to the superior" of

36 the prison : Let those men loose. (36) And when
the superior of the prison heard [it], he went in,
and said the same thing" to Paul; [namely], that
the prefects have sent [word] that ye be set free.
And now, [said he,] Go ye out, and depart in

37 peace. (37) But Paul said to him : Tiiey have
scourged us, unoffending men, and Komans, before
all the world, and have cast us into prison; and
now, do they secretly let us out ? No, surely :
but let them come themselves and bring us out.

38 (38) And the rod-bearers went and told to the pre-
fects the words which were told to them: and
when they heard that they were Romans, they

39 were afraid, (39) and came to them, and entreated
of them that they would come out, and that they

40 would leave the city. (40) And when they came
out from the prison, they entered the house of
Lydia ; and there they saw the brethren, and com-
forted them, and departed.

XVIL And they passed through the cities of Am-
phipolis and ApoUonia, and came to Thessaloniea,

2 where was a synagogue of the Jews. (2) And
Paul, as was his custom, went in to them ; and
during three sabbaths he discoursed with tliem

3 from the scriptures ; (3) expounding and showing,
that the Messiah was to suffer, and to arise from the
dead, and that this Jesus whom I announce to you

4 is the Messiah. (4) And some of them believed,
and adhered to Paul and Silas ; and of those Greeks
who feared God, a great many ; and also of noted

5 women, not a few. (5) But the Jews were indig-
nant, and gathered to themselves evil men from the
market-place of tlie city, and formed a great mob ;
and they alarmed the city, and came and assaulted
the house of Jason, and sought to draw them from

6 it, and to deliver them up to the mob. (6) And


Sy.


Sy. sons.


Sy. sons.

' i. e. lictors.
Sy. s^h

" or, word.


250


Sy. —.VU',


tngenuous.


^ Sy. made bit-
ter.


" Sy. collector of
words.

■> Sy. "joi^,
gods.


ACTS, XVII.

when they found them not there, they drew Jason
and the brethren who were there, and brought
them before the chiefs of the city, crying out :
These are they who have terrified all the country ;
and lo, they have come hither also: (7) and this 7
Jason is their entertainer : and they all resist the
commands of Coesar, saying that there is another
king, one Jesus. (8) And the chiefs of the city, 8
and all the people, were alarmed when they heard
these things. (9) And they took sureties from 9
Jason, and also from the brethren, and then re-
leased them.^ — (10) And the brethren immediately, 10
on the same night, sent away Paul and Silas to the
city of Berea. And when they came there, they
entered into the synagogue of the Jews. (11) For 11
the Jews there were more liberal ^ than the Jews
of Thessalonica ; and they gladly heard the word
from them daily, and searched from the scriptures
whether these things Avere so. (12) And many of 12
them believed ; and so likewise of the Greeks,
many men, and women of note. (13) And when 13
the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the
word of God was preached by Paul in the city of
Berea, they came thither also, and they ceased not
to excite and alarm the people. (14) And the 14
brethren sent away Paul, that he might go down
to the sea. But Silas and Timothy abode in that
city.

And they who conducted Paul, went with him 15
to the city of Athens. And when they departed
from him, they received an epistle from him to
Silas and Timothy, that they should come to him
speedily. (16) And while Paul was waiting [for 16
them] at Athens, he was pained^ in his spirit ; be-
cause he saw that the whole city was full of idols.

(17) And in the synagogue he spoke with the Jews, 17
and with those that feared God, and in the mar-
ket-place with them who daily assembled there.

(18) And also philosophers of the sect of Epicure- 18
ans, and others who were called Stoics, disputed
with him. And one and another of them said:
What doth this word-monger ^ mean ? Others
said: He announceth foreign deities ;'' because he
preached to them Jesus and his resurrection.

(19) And they took him and brought him to the 19
place of judgments called Areopagus, and said to


ACTS, XVII.


251


him : jNfay wo know what this new doctrine which

20 thou prcaehcst is? (20) For thou scattcrcst'' in
our ears strange words ; and we wish to know

21 what they arc. (21) For all tlie Athenians and
the foreigners residing there, cared for nothing else

22 but to tell or to hear something new. — (22) And
as Paul stood in the Areopagus, he said: Men,
Athenians, 1 perceive that in all things ye are ex-

23 cessive in the worship of demons. (23) For, as I
was rambling about, and viewing the temples of
your worship, I met with an altar, on which was
inscribed, To the iiiduex God. llim, therefore,
whom ye worship while ye know him not, the

21: very same I announce to you. (24) For the God
who made the world and all that is in it, and who
is Lord of heaven and of earth, dwelleth not in

25 temples made with hands. (25) Nor is he minis-
tered to b}'' human hands, neither hath he any
wants ; for he it is giveth life and breath ^ to every

2G man. (26) And of one blood hath he made the
whole world of men, that they might dwell on the
face of all the earth: and he hath separated the
seasons by his ordinance ; and hath set bounds to

27 the residence of men : (27) that they might inquire
and search after God, and, by means of his crea-
tions, might find him; because he is not afar off

28 from each one of us : (28) for in him it is we live,
and move, and exist : as one of 3'our own wise men

29 hath said : From him is our descent. (29) There-
fore we, whose descent is from God, ought not to
suppose that the Deity e hath the likeness of gold,
or silver, or stone, sculptured by the art and skill

00 of men. (30) And the times of this error God hath
made to pass away ; and at the present time, he
commandeth all men, tliat each individual, in every

31 place, should repent. (31) Because he hath appoint-
ed a day, in which he will judge all the earth, with
righteousness, by the man whom he hath designa-
ted : and he turneth every man to faith in him, in

32 that he raised hira from the dead. — (32) And when
they heard of the resurrection from the dead, some
of them ridiculed, and others of them said : At
another time, we will hear thee on this matter.

33 (33) And so Paul departed from among them.
3-4 (34) And some of them adhered to him, and be-
lieved; one of these was Dionysius from among


Sy. sowest.


' or, a soul.


^Sy.]laJ\lL


252


ACTS, XVIII.


Sy. son of
their trade.


^ Sy. the pro-
fane.


« Gr. Justus.

^ Sy. ^5
« Sy. sons.


'Sy.
Gr. dv^uirarog.


the judges of Areopagus, and a woman named
Damaris, and others with them.

And when Paul departed from Athens, he XVIII.
went to Corinth. (2) And he found there a man, a 2
Jew, whose name was Aquila, who was from the re-
gion of Pontus, and had just then arrived from the
country of Italy, he and Priscilla his wife, because
Claudius Caesar had commanded that all Jews
should depart from Rome. And he went to them ;
(3) and, because he was of*^ their trade, he took 3
lodgings with them, and worked with them; for
by their trade they were tent-makers. (4) And he 4
spoke in the synagogue every sabbath, and persua-
ded the Jews and Gentiles. ^ (5) And when Silas 5
and Timothy had come from Macedonia, Paul was
impeded in discourse, because the Jews stood up
against him, and reviled, as he testified to them
that Jesus is the Messiah. (6) And he shook his 6
garments, and said to them : Henceforth I am
clean ; I betake myself to the Gentiles. (7) And 7
he went away, and entered into the house of a cer-
tain man named Titus, <= one who feared God, and
whose house adjoined the synagogue. (8) And 8
Crispus, the president*^ of the synagogue, believed
on our Lord, he and all the members" of his house.
And many Corinthians gave ear, and believed in
God, and Avere baptized. (9) And the Lord said 9
to Paul in a vision : Fear not, but speak and be
not silent : (10) for I am with thee, and no one is 10
able to harm thee ; and I have much people in
this city. (11) And he resided in Corinth a year 11
and six months, and taught them the word of
God.

And when Gallio was proconsuF of Achaia, the 12
Jews assembled together against Paul ; and they
brought him before the judgment-seat, (13) sa3ang: 13
This man pcrsuadeth the people to worship God
contrary to tlie law. (14) And when Paul re- 14
quested that he might open his mouth and speak,
Gallio said to the Jews : If your accusation, 0 Jews,
related to any wrong done, or any fraud, or base
act, I would listen to you suitably. (15) But if the 15
contests are about words, and about names, and
concerning your law, ye must see to it among
yourselves, for I am not disposed to be a judge of


ACTS, XIX.


253


16 such matters. (16) And ho repelled them from

17 his judgment-scat. (17) And all the GentilesS
laid hold of Sosthcnes an P]ldcrh of the synagogue,
and smote him before the judgment-scat. And
Gallio disregarded these things.

18 And when Paul had been there many days, he
bid adieu to the brethren, and departed by sea to
go to Syria. And with him Avent Priscilla and
Aquila, when lie had shaved his head at Cenchrea,

10 because he had vowed a vow. — (19) And they came
to Eplicsus; and Paul entered the synagogue, and

20 discoursed with the Jews. (20) And they requested
him to tarry with them : but he could not be per-

21 suaded. (21) E'or he said: I must certainly keep
the approaching feast at Jerusalem. But, if it

22 please God, I will come again to you. (22) And
Aquila and Priscilla he left at Ephcsus, and he
himself proceeded by sea and came to CiX'sarea.
And he went up and saluted the members' of the

23 church, and went on to Antioch. — (23) And when
he had been there some days, he departed, and
travelled from place to place in the regions of
Phrygia and Galatia, establishing all the disciples.

21: x\nd a certain man named Apollos, a Jew, a na-
tive of Alexandria, Avho was trained to eloquence,
and well taught in the scriptures, came to Ephesus.

25 (25) lie had been instructed m the ways of the
Lord, and was fervent in spirit ; and he discoursed
and taught fully respecting Jesus, while yet he

26 knew nothing except the baptism of John. (26) And
he began to speak boldly in the synagogue. And
when Aquila and Priscilla heard him, they took him
to their house, and fully showed him the way of the

27 Lord. (27) And when he was disposed to go to
Achaia, the brethren anticipated him, and wrote
to the disciples to receive him. And, by going,
through grace, he greatly assisted all them that be-

28 lieved. (28) For he reasoned powerfully against
the Jews, before the congregation ; and showed
from the scriptures, respecting Jesus, that he is the
Messiah.

XIX. And while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul trav-
elled over the upj)er countries to Ephesus. And
he inquired of the disciples whom he found there,
2 (2) Have ye received the Holy Spirit, since ye be-


■ Sy. tfie pro-
fane.


Sy.


254


ACTS, XIX.


sy-

Aramaeans.


«Sy.

^ Sy. "jancD
• Sy. ,ri5


Sy.

Aramaeans.


lieved ? They answered and said to him : If there
be a Holy Spirit, it hath not come to our hearing.

(3) He said to them : Into what then were ye bap- 3
tized? They say: Into the baptism of John.

(4) Paul said to them: John baptized the people 4
with the baptism of repentance, while he told them

to believe in him who was to come after him, that
is, in Jesus the Messiah. (5), And when the}^ heard 5
these things, they were baptized in the name of
our Lord Jesus Messiah. (6) And Paul laid [his] 6
hand on them; and the Holy Spirit came upon
them, and they spoke in various tongues, and pro-
phesied. (7) And all the persons were twelve. — 7
(8) And Paul entered into the synagogue, and 8
spoke boldly three months, persuading in regard to
the kingdom of God. (9) And some of them were 9
hardened, and disputatious, and reviled the way of
God before the assembly of the people. Then
Paul withdrew himself, and separated the disciples
from them. And he discoursed with them daily
in the school of a man named Tyrannus. (10) And 10
this continued for two years, until all who resided
in [Proconsular] Asia, both Jews and Gentiles,^
heard the word of the Lord. (11) And God 11
wrought very great miracles^ by the hand of Paul :
(12) so that, from the clothes on his body, napkins 12
and rags were carried and laid upon the sick, and
the diseases left them, and demons also Avent out.
— (13) And. moreover certain Jews, who went 13
about exorcising^ demons, were disposed to exor-
cise in the name of our Lord Jesus over those who
had unclean spirits, by saying: We adjure you, in
the name of that Jesus whom Paul announceth.
(14) And there were seven sons of one Sceva,^ a 14
Jew, and chiefs of the priests, who did this. (15) 15
And the evil demon answered and said to them :
Jesus I well know, and Paul I know, but as for
you, who are ye? (16) And the man in whom 16
was the evil demon leaped upon them, and over-
powered them, and threw them down: and they
fled out of the house denuded and bruised. (17) 17
And this became known to all the Jews and Gen-
tiles, <" who resided at Ephcsus. And fear fell on
them all, and the name of our Lord Jesus Messiah
was exalted. — (18) And many of them that be- 18
lieved, came and narrated their faults, and confess-


ACTS, XIX.


255


19 ed what they had done. (19) And also many ma-
gicians collected their books, and brought and
burned them before every body : and they compu-
ted the cost of" them, and it amounted to fifty thou-

20 sand [pieces] of silver. (20) And thus with great
power was the faith of God strengthened and in-
creased.

21 And when these things had been accomplished,
Paul purposed in his mind, to make the circuit of
all Macedonia and Achaia, and [then] go to Jeru-
salem. And he said : After I have gone thither, I

22 must also see Rome. (22) And he sent two per-
sons, of those that ministered to him, Timothy and
Erastus,? into Macedonia; but he himself remained

23 for a time in vVsia. — (23) And at that time there
was great commotion respecting the way of God.

24: (21) For a certain silversmith was there, named
Demetrius, who made silver shrines for Diana, and
afforded great profits to the artisans^ of his trade.

25 (25) lie assembled all the artisans of his trade,
and those who labored with them, and said to them :
Gentlemen, i ye know that our gains are all from

26 this manulacture. (26) And ye also know and see,
that not only the citizens'^ of Ephcsus, but also the
mass of all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and en-
ticed away, by saying, that those are not gods,

27 which are made by the hands of men. (27) And
not only is this occupation slandered and impeded,
but also the temple of the great goddess' Diana is
accounted as nothing ; and likewise the goddess
herself of all 2\sia, and whom all nations worship,

28 is contemned. — (28) And when they heard these
things they were filled with wrath ; and they cried
out, and said: Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

29 (29) And the whole city was in commotion ; and
they ran together, and entered the theatre. And
they caught, and bore along with them. Gains and
Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, and associates of

30 Paul. (30) And Paul was disposed to go into the

31 theatre: but the disciples restrained him. (31) And
likewise the chiefs'" of Asia, because they were his
friends, sent and requested of him, that he would
not expose himself by going into the theatre.

32 (32) And the multitudes that were in the theatre
were in great confusion, and cried, some one thing,
and some another: and many of them knew not


K Sy, Aristus.


Sy.


Sy. Men.
Sy, sons.


Sy. ]L(Tl3>


Sy. 'tiL.J


256


Sy. ■U_.)


* Sy. ]j_»ClLO


Sy. "U-La


ACTS, XX.

for what cause they had come together. (33) And 33
the Jewish people who were there, brought for-
ward one of their men, a Jew, named Alexander.
And he, rising up, waved his hand, and wished to
make a defence before the people. (34) But they, 34
knowing him to be a Jew, all cried out with one
voice, about two hours : Great is Diana of the Ephe-
sians. (35) But the chief" of the city tranquillized 35
them, by saying : Men of Ephesus, What person
is there, among men, who doth not know the city
of the Ephesians to be devoted to the worship of
the great Diana, and of her image that descended
from heaven? (36) Since therefore no one can 36
gainsay this, ye ought to be tranquil, and to do
nothing with precipitancy. (37) For ye have 37
brought forward these men, when they have robbed
no temples, and have not reviled our goddess.

(38) But if Demetrius and the men of his trade 38
have a controversy with any one, lo, there is a pro-
consul in the city, they are men of dexterity, let
them approach and litigate with one another.

(39) Or if you desire any other thing, it may be 39
determined in the place assigned by law for an as-
sembly.» (40) Because too we are now in danger 40
of being accused as seditious, since we cannot give

a reason for the meeting of this day, because we
have assembled needlessly, and been tumultuous
without a cause. And having said these things,
he dismissed the assembly.?

And after the tumult had subsided, Paul called XX.
the disciples to him, and comforted them, and
kissed them, and departed, and went into Mace-
donia, (2) And when he had travelled over those 2
regions, and had comforted them with many dis-
courses, he proceeded to the country of Greece.
(3) And he was there three months. And the 3
jews formed a plot against him, when he was about
to go to Syria : and he contemplated returning to
Macedonia. (4) And there departed Avith him, as 4
far as Asia, Sopater of the city Berea, and Aristar-
chus and Secundus who were of Thessalonica, and
Gains who was of the city of Derbe, and Timothy
of Lystra, and of Asia Tychicus and Trophimus.
(5) These proceeded on before us, and waited for 5
us -at Troas, (6) And we departed from Philippi, 6


ACTS, XX.


257


10
11


a city of the Macedonians, after the days of unleav-
ened bread ; and proceeded by water and arrived
at Troas in five days, and remained there seven
days. — (7) And on the first day of the week, when
we assembled to break the eucharist,^ Paul dis-
coursed with them, because he was to depart the
next day ; and he continued his discourse till mid-
night. (8) And there were many lamps burning in
the chamber where we were assembled. (9) And
a young man named Eutychus was sitting in a win-
dow and listening. And while Paul prolonged his
discourse, he sunk into a deep sleep; and, in his
sleep, he fell from the third loft, and was taken up
as dead. (10) And Paul went down, and bent
over him and embraced him, and said: Be not
agitated, for his soul^^ is in him. (11) And when
he had gone up, he broke the bread and tasted [it],
and discoursed until the morning dawned. And

12 then he departed to go by land. (12) And they
brought the young man alive, and rejoiced over

13 him greatly. — (13) And we went on board the ship,
and sailed to the port of Thesos;'' because, there
we were to take in Paul : for so had he bidden us,

14 when he proceeded on by land. (14) And when
we had received him at Tliesos, we took him on

15 board ship and proceeded to Mitylene. (15) And
from there, the next day, we sailed over against
the island Chios ; and again, the next day we ar-
rived at Samos, and stopped at Trogyllium ; and

16 on the foHowing day we arrivt.>d at Miletus. (16) For
Paul had determined with himself to pass by Eph-
csus, lest he vshould be delayed there ; because he
hasted on, if possible, to keep the day of pentecost
in Jerusalem.

17 And from Miletus, he sent and called the Elders^

18 of the church" at Ephesus. (18) And when they
had come to him, he said to them : Ye yourselves
know, liow, at all times, since the first day that I

19 entered Asia, I have been with you ; (19) laboring
for God, in great humility, *" and with tears, amid
the trials which beset me from the plottings of

20 Jews : (20) and I shunned not that which was ad-
vantageous to your souls, that I might preach to

21 you, and teach in the streets and in houses, (21)
while I testified to Jews and to Gentiles,? as to
repentance towards God and faith in our Lord Je-


• Sy.


Sy. Ola m


' Gr. Assos.


' Sy. ] « '» « o
^ Sy. ]Lj\

' or, depression.


Sy.
Aramaeans.


'k-^'


258


ACTS, XX.


" Sy. li


:nm


' Sy.*..


^1


^ In the Nesto-
rian MSS.,
Messiah.


sus Messiah. (22) And now I am bound in spirit, 22
and I go to Jerusalem ; and I know not what will
befall me there ; (23) except that the Holy Spirit, 23
in every city, testifieth to me and saith : Bonds
and afflictions await thee. (24) But my life is ac- 2-i
counted by me as nothing, so that I may but finish
my course, and the ministration which I have re-
ceived from our Lord Jesus, to bear testimony to
the gospel'' of the grace of God. (25) And now, I 25
know that ye will see my face no more, all of you
among whom I have travelled and preached the
kingdom of God. (26) I therefore protest to you, 26
this day, that I am pure from the blood of you all.
(27) For I have not shunned to acquaint you with 27
all the will of God. (28) Take heed therefore to 28
yourselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy
Spirit hath established you bishops ;'* that ye feed
the church of God,^^ which he hath acquired by his
blood. (29) For I know, that after I am gone, 29
fierce wolves will come in among you, and will
have no mercy on the flock. (30) And also, from 30
among yourselves, there will rise up men speaking
perverse things, that they may turu away the dis-
ciples to go after them. (31) Therefore be ye vigi- 31
lant ; and remember, that for three years I ceased
not to admonish each one of you, by day and by
night, with tears. (32) And now I commend you 32
to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance
among all the saints. (33) Silver, or gold, or gar- 33
ments, I have not coveted. (34) And ye yourselves 34
know, that these hands ministered to my wants,
and to them that were with me. (35) And I have 35
showed you all things ; that thus it is a duty to
labor, and to care for the infirm, and to remember
the words of our Lord Jesus ; for he hath said.
That he is more blessed who giveth, than he who
receiveth.— (36) And when he had said these things, 36
he fell on his knees and prayed, and all the people
witli him. (37) And there was great weeping 37
among them all. And they embraced him, and
kissed him. (38) And they 'had the most anguish, 38
because of the word he uttered, that they would see


* This is the only place in this version of the New Testament in which the
word Bishop occurs.


ACTS, XXI.


259


his face no more,
the ship.


And they accompanied him to


XXI. And we separated from them, and proceeded in
a straight course to the island of Coos : and the next
day, we reached Rhodes, and from there Patara.

2 (2) And we found there a ship going to Pheiiicia;

3 and we entered it, and proceeded on. (3) And we
came up Avitli the island of Cyprus, and leaving it
on the left we came to Syria; and from there we
went to Tyre, for there the ship was to discharge

4 her cargo. (4) And, as wc found disciples there,
we tarried with them seven days : and they, by the

5 Spirit, told Paul not to go to Jerusalem. (5) And
after those days, we departed and went on [our]
way ; and they all clung to us, they and their wives
and their children, until [we were] without the
city ; and they fell on their knees by the seaside,

6 and prayed. (6) And wc kissed one another : and
we embarked in the ship, and they returned to their

7 homes. — (7) And we sailed from Tyre, and arrived
at the city Acco;=i and we saluted the brethren

8 there, and stopped with them one day. (8) And
the next day, we departed and came to Cajsarea ;
and we went in and put up in the house of Philip

9 the Evangelist,'' who was one of the seven. (9) He
had four virgin daughters, who were prophetesses.

10 (10) And as we were there many days, a certain
prophet came down from Judaea, whose name was
Agabus. (11) And he came in to us, and took the
girdle of Paul's loins, and bound his own feet and
hands, and said : Thus saith the Holy Spirit, So
Jerusalem bind the man, who
and they will deliver him into
Gentiles. (12) And when we
heard these words, we and the residents'' of the
place begged of him, that he would not go to Jcru-

13 salem. (13) Then Paul answered and said : What
do ye, weeping and crushing my heart? For I am
prepared, not only to be bound, but also to die at
Jerusalem, for the name of our Lord Jesus Messiah.

1-4 (14) And as he was not to be persuaded by us, we
desisted ; and we said : Let the pleasure of our

15 Lord take place. — (15) And after those days, we
prepared ourselves and went up to Jerusalem.

16 (16) And some disciples of Caesarea went along


11


12


will the Jews in
owns this girdle ;
the hands of the


■' f


Sy. on\
Gr. Ptolemais.


Sy.


-1


Sy. sons.


260


ACTS, XXI.


Sy.U-


« « <^


Sy. walk 'uu


li


Sy.
Arafnaeans.


witli us, taking with them a brother from among
the earher disciples, whose name was Mnason, and
who was from Cyprus ; that he might entertain us
at his house.

And when we arrived at Jerusalem, the brethren 17
received us joyfully. (18) And the next day, with 18
Paul, we went unto James, when all the Elders'^
were with him. (19) And we gave them saluta- 19
tion : and Paul narrated to them", with particularity,
what God had wrought among the Gentiles by his
ministry. (20) And when they heard [it] they 20
glorified God, And they said to him : Our brother,
Tliou seest how many myriads there are in Judaaa
who have believed : and these are all zealous for the
law. (21) And it hath been told them, of thee, 21
that thou teachest all the Jews that are among the
Gentiles to depart from Moses, by telling them
not to circumcise their children, and not to observe^
the rites of the law. (22) jSTow, because they have 22
heard that thou hast arrived here, (23) do thou 23
what we tell thee. We have four men, who have
vowed to purify themselves. (21) Take them, and 24:
go and purify thyself with them, and pay the ex-
penses along with them, as they shall shave their
heads ; that every one may know, that what is said
against thee is false, and that thou fulfil lest and ob-
servest the law. (25) As to those of the Gentiles 25
who have believed, we have written, that they
should keep themselves from [an idol's] sacrifice,
and from whoredom, and from what is strangled,
and from blood. — (2(5) Then Paul took those men, 26
on the following day, and was purified with them;
and he entered and went into the temple, manifest-
ing to them the completion of the days of the puri-
fication, up to the presentation of the offering by
each of them.

And when the seventh day arrived, the Jews 27
from Asia saw him in the temple : and they exci-
ted all the people against him, and laid hands on
him, (28) crying out and saying : Men, sons of 28
Israel ; help. This is the man, who teacheth in
every place, against our people, and against the
law, and against this place ; and he hath also
brought Gentiles^ into the temple, and hath pollu-
ted this holy place. (29) For they had previously 29
seen with him in the city Trophimus the Ephesian ;


ACTS, XXII.


261


and tliey supposed, that lie had entered tlic temple

80 with Paul. (30) And the whole city was in com-
motion ; and all the people assembled together,
and laid hold of Paul, and dragged him out of the
temple: and instantly the gates were closed. —

31 (31) And while the multitude were seeking to kill
im, it was reported to the Chiliarch of the cohort,?

S2 that the whole city was in uproar. (32) And im-
mediatel}' he took a centurion and many soldiers,
and they ran upon them. And when they saw the
Chiliarch and the soldiers, they desisted from beat-

33 ing Paul. (33) And the Chiliarch came up to him,
and seized him, and ordered him to be bound with
two chains : and he inquired respecting him, Avho

84 he was, and what he had done. (34) And persons
from the throng vociferated against him this thing
and that. And, because he could not, on account
of their clamor, learn what the truth was, he com-

35 mandcd to conduct him to the castle. (35) And
when Paul came to the stairs, the soldiers bore
him along, because of the violence of the people.

3Q (36) For a great man}^ people followed after him,

87 and cried out, saying : Away with him. (37) And
when he came near to entering the castle, Paul said
to the Chiliarch : Wilt thou permit me to speak
Avith thee ? And he said to him : Dost thou know

38 Greek ?•» (38) Art not thou that Egyptian who,
before these days, madest insurrection, and Icadest
out into the desert four thousand men, doers of

39 evil? (39) Paul said to him : I am a Jew, a man
of Tarsus, a noted cit}'' in Cilicia, in which I was
born : T pray thee, suffer me to speak to the people.

40 And when he permitted him, Paul stood upon
the stairs, and waved to them his hand ; and when
they were quiet, he addressed them in Hebrew,' and

XXII. said to them: (XXII.) Brethren, and fathers,

2 hearken to my defence before you. (2) And
when they perccivcd=i that he addressed them in
Hebrew, they were the more quiet : and he said to

3 them : (3) I am a man who am a Jew ; and I was
born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but was brought up in
this city, at the feet of Gamaliel,'' and instructed
perfectly in the law of our fathers ; and I was zeal-

4 ous for God, as ye also all are. (4) And I perse-
cuted this way, even to death; for I bound, and
delivered up to prison, [both] men and women.


K Sy. jA^rVi],


Sy. A^jjQ^


Sy. A^f;jClL


Sv. heard.


b Sv.


^


Sy. 1 fli, 1, B O


^ Sy. injliclion
on the head.


oy. . i^n > n]


' or, nations.


6


(5) As the high priest is my witness, and likewise 5
all the Elders ;<= from whom I received letters, that
I might go to the brethren in Damascus, and bring
those who were there prisoners to Jerusalem, to
receive capital punishment, '^ (6) And as I travelled
and began to approach Damascus, at noonday, from
amidst tranquillity, a great light from heaven burst
upon me. (7) And I fell t^ the earth : and I
heard a voice, which said to me : Saul, Saul ! why
pcrsecutest thou me? (8) And I answered and
said : Who art thou, my Lord ? And he said to
me : I am Jesus the Nazarean, whom thou perse-
cutest. (9) And the men who were with me, saw
the light, but heard not the voice that talked with
me. (10) And I said: My Lord, what must I do ? 10
And our Lord said to me : Arise, go to Damascus ;
and there will be told thee, all that it is commanded
thee to do. (11) And as I could see nothing, be-
cause of the glory of that light, those with me took
me by the hand, and I entered Damascus. (12) And 12
a certain man, Ananias, who was upright according
to tlie law, as all the Jews there testified concern-
ing him, came to me. (13) And he said to me:
My brother Saul ! open thine eyes. And instantly
my eyes were opened ; and I looked upon him.
(1-i) And he said to me : The God of our fathers
hath ordained^ thee to know his will, and to behold
the Just One, and to hear the voice of his mouth.
(15) And thou shalt be a witness for him before
all men, concerning all that thou hast seen and
heard. (16) And now, why delay est thou? Arise,
be baptized, and be cleansed from thy sins, while
thou invokest his name. — (17) And I returned and
came hither to Jerusalem. And I prayed in the
temple. (18) And I saw him in a vision, when he
said to me : Make haste, and get thee out of Jeru-
salem ; for they will not receive thy testimony
concerning me. (19) And I said : My Lord, they 19
well know that I have delivered up to prison, and
have scourged in all synagogues, those who believed
in thee. (20) And when the blood of thy martyr 20
Stephen was shed, I also was standing with them,
and performed the pleasure of his slayers, and took
charge of the garments of those that stoned him.
(21) But he said to me: Depart; for I send thee 21
afar, to preach to the Gentiles/


9


11


13


14


15


16
17


18


ACTS, XXIII.


263


22


23
24


And when they had heard Paul as far as this

sentencCjg they raised their voice, and cried out :
Away with sucli a man from the earth ! for he
ought not to live ! (23) And as they vocift;rated,
and cast off their garments, and threw dust into the
air, (24) the Cliiliarch gave orders, to carry him
into the castle : and he commanded, that he should
be examined with stripes ; that he might know, for

25 what cause they cried out ngainst him. (25) And
as they were stretching him with ropes,'' Paul said
to the centurion who stood over him : Is it lawful
lor you to scourge a man, who is a Roman,' and

26 not yet found guilty ? (26) And when the centu-
rion heard [it], he went to the Chiliarch, and said
to him: What docst thou? For this man is a
Roman. (27) And the Chiliarch came to,him, and
said to him : Tell me ; Art thou a Roman ? And
he said to him : Yes. (28) The Chiliarch I'oplied
and said to him : With much money I acquired
Roman citizenship.'^ Paul said to him : And I was
born in it. (29) And immediately they who were
intending to scourge him, fled from him : and the
Chiliarch was afraid, when he learned that he was
a Roman, because he had stretched him [for
scourging].

And the next day, he wished to know truly what
the accusation was, which the Jews brought against
him: and he unbound him, and commanded the
chief priests, and the whole company of their
head-men,' to assemble; and he took Paul, and
brought him down, and placed him among them. —
[XXIII.] xVnd when Paul had looked on the as-
sembly of them, he said : Men, my brethren ; I
have lived in all good conscience before God up to

2 this day. — (2) And Ananias, the priest, commanded
those who stood by his side, to smite Paul on the

3 mouth. (3) And Paul said to him : God is here-
after to smite thee, [thou] Whited Wall ! For, sittest
thou judging me agreeably to law, while thou
transgressest the law, and commandest to smite

4 me ? (4) And those standing by, said to him :

5 Dost thou reproach the priest of God ! (5) Paul
said to them : I was not aware, my brethren, that
he was the priest : for it is written. Thou shalt not

6 curse the rulers of thy people. — (6) And, as Paul
knew that a part of the people were of the Saddu-


27
28


29


30


Sy. woTd.


or, thongs.
or, Ro7nan ciU


Sy. Roman-
ship,


Sy.


0CT1 » ■ ,i>


^


Sy. ].■_,>


264


ACTS, XXIII.


'Sy. QiQ;^"|0


Sy. "U-^i


cees, and a part of the Pharisees, he cried out, in
the assembly : Men, my brethren ; I am a Pharisee,
the son of a Pharisee ; and fur the hope of the
resurrection of the dead, I am judged. (7) And
when lie had said this, the Pharisees and Sadducees
fell upon one another, and the people were divided.
(8) For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrec-
tion, nor angels, nor a spirit: but the Pharisees
confess all these. (9) And thfere was great vocifer-
ation. And some Scribes of the party of the Phar-
isees rose up, and contended with them, and said :
We have found nothing evil in this man : for if a
spirit or an angel hath conversed with him, what
is there in that ? — (10) And, as there was great


10


commotion among them, the Chiliarch was afraid
lest they should tear Paul in pieces. And he sent
Komans, to go and pluck him from their midst, and
bring him into the castle. (11) And when night 11
came, our Lord appeared to Paul, and said to him :
Be strong ; for as thou hast testified of me in Jerusa-
lem, so also art thou to testify at Rome. — (12) And 12
when it was morning, several of the Jews assembled
together, and bound themselves by imprecations,''
that they would neither eat nor drink until they
had slain Paul. (13) And they who had established 13
this compact by oath, were more than forty persons.
(1-1) And they went to the priests and Elders, and 14
said : We have bound ourselves by imprecations,
that we will taste of nothing, until we shall have
slain Paul. (15) And now, do ye and the chiefs" 15
of the congregation request of the Chiliarch, that
he would bring him unto you, as if ye were desirous
to investigate truly his conduct: and we are prepared
to slay him, ere he shall come to you. — (16) And 16
the son of Paul's sister, heard of this plot : and he
went into the castle, and informed Paul. (17) 17
And Paul sent and called one of the centurions,
and said to him : Conduct this youth to the
Chiliarch ; for he hath something to tell him. (18) 18
And the centurion took the young man, and
introduced him to the Chiliarch, and said: Paul
the prisoner called me, and requested me to bring
this youth to thee, for he hath something to tell
thee. (19) And the Chiliarch took the young 19
man by his hand, and led him one side, and asked
him : What hast thou to tell me ? (20) And the 20


young man said to him : The Jews have projected
to ask tliec to bring down Paul to-moiTow to their
assembly, as if wishing to learn something more

21 from him. (21) But be not thou persuaded by
them : for, lo, more than forty persons of them
watch for him in ambush, and have bound them-
selves by imprecations, that they will neither eat
nor drink until they shall have slain him : and lo.
they are prepared, and arc waiting for thy promise.

22 (22) And the Chiliarch dismissed the young man,
after charging him : Let no man know, that thou

23 hast showed me these things. — (23) And he called
two centurions, and said to them : Go and prepare
two hundred Romans to go to Ca^sarea, and sev-
enty horsemen, and shooters with the right hand'^
two hundred ; and let them set out at the third

2-1 hour of the night. (24) And provide also a saddle
beast, that they may set Paul on it, and carry him

25 safely to Felix the governor. (25) And he wrote

26 a letter and gave them, in which was, thus: (26)
Claudius Lysias to the excellent governor Felix ;

27 greeting. (27) The Jews seized this man, in order
to kill him ; but I came with Romans, and rescued

28 him, when I learned that lie was a Roman. (28)
And as I wished to know the offence, for which they
criminated him, I brought him to their assembly.

29 (29) And I found, that it was about questions of
their law they accused him, and that an offence
worthy of bonds or of death, was not upon him.

30 (30) And when the wiles of a plot formed by the
Jews against him came to my knowledge, I forth-
with sent him to thee. And 1 have directed his
accusers, to go and contend with him, before thee.

31 Farewell. — (81) Then the Romans, as they had
been commanded, took Paul by night, and brought

32 him to the city of Antipatris. (32) And the next
day, the horsemen dismissed the footmen their as-

33 sociates, that they might return to the castle. (33)
And they brought him to Ciicsarea: and they de-
livered the letter to the governor, and set Paul

3-4 before him, (31) And when he had read the
letter, he asked him of what province he was?

35 And when he learned that he was of Cilicia, (34)
he said to him : I will give thee audience, when thy
accusers arrive. And he ordered him to be kept
in the Praatorium of Ilcrod.


or, javelm


266


ACTS, XXIV.


• Sy. "U_.5

'' or, doctrine.


And after five days, Ananias the high XXIV.
priest, with the Elders, and with Tertulkis the
orator, went down, and made a communication to
the governor against Paul. (2) And when he 2
had been called, Tertullus began to accuse him,
and to say : (3) Through thee, we dwell in much 3
tranquillity ; and many reforms have come to this
nation, under thy administration; and we all, in
every place, receive thy grace, excellent Felix.
(4) But, not to weary thee with numerous [partic- 4
ulars], I pray thee to hear our humbleness, in
brief. (5) For we have found this man to be an 5
assassin, and a mover of sedition among all Jews
in the whole land : for he is a ringleader^ of the
sect'' of the Nazareans. (6) And he was disposed 6
to pollute our temple. And having seized him,
we wished to judge him according to our law.
(7) But Lysias the Chiliarch came, and with great 7
violence took him out of our hands, and sent him
to thee. (8) And he commanded his accusers to 8
come before thee. And if thou wilt interrogate
him, thou canst learn from him respecting all these
things of which we accuse him. (9) And the 9
Jews also pleaded against him, saying that these
things were so; — (10) Then the governor made 10
signs to Paul, that he should speak. And Paul
answered and said : I know thee to have been a
judge of this nation for many years, and I there-
fore cheerfully enter upon a defence of myself.
(11) Because thou canst understand, that there 11
have been but twelve days, since I went up to
Jerusalem to worship. (12) And they did not 12
find me talking with any person in the temple, nor
collecting any company, either in their synagogues,
or in the city. (13) Nor have they the power to 13
prove, before thee, the things of which they now
accuse me. (14) But this indeed I acknowledge, 14
that in that same doctrine of which they speak, I
do serve the God of my fathers, believing all the
things written in the law and in the prophets.
(15) And I have a hope in God, which they also 15
themselves expect, — that there is to be a resurrec-
tion of the dead, both of the righteous and the
wicked. (16) And for this reason, I also labor to 1(5
have always a pure conscience before God, and
before men. (17) And, after many years, I came 17


ACTS, XXV.


267


to the people^ of my own nation, to impart alms,<i

18 and to present an oifering. (18) And when I had
purified ni3-sclf, these men found me in tlie temple ;
not with a throng, nor with a tumult. But certain

19 Jews, who came from Asia, were tumultuous; (19)
who ought, with me, to stand before thee, and

20 make accusation of their own affair. (20) Or let
these here present say, whether they found any
olfonce in me, when I stood before their assembly ;

21 (21) except this one thing," that I cried, while
standing in the midst of them: Concerning the
resurrection of the dead, am I this day on trial

22 before you. — (22) And Felix, because he under-
stood that way fully, deferred them, saying:
AVhen the Chiliarch shall come, I will give hearing

23 between you. (23) And he commanded a centu-
rion to keep Paul, at rest ; and that no one of his
acquaintances should be forbidden to minister to

2J: him. — (2-1) And after a few days, Felix, and Dru-
silla his wife who was a Jewess, sent and called for
Paul ; and they heard him concerning faith in the

25 Messiah. (25) And Avhile he was discoursing with
them on righteousness, and on holiness, and on the
future judgment, Felix was filled with fear; and
he said : For the present time, go : and when I

26 have opportunity, I will send for thee. (2G) lie
hoped, moreover, that a present would be given
him by Paul; [and] therefore, he often sent for

27 him, and conversed with him. — (27) And when
two years were fulfilled to him, another governor,
whose name was Porcius Festus, came into his
place. And Felix, that he might do the Jews a
favor, left Paul a prisoner.

XXV. And when Festus arrived at Cicsarea, he, after

2 three days, Avent up to Jerusalem. (2) And the
chief priests and the head men'"' of the Jews made

3 representations to him concerning Paul. (3) And
they petitioned him, asking of him the fovor, that
he would send for him to come to Jerusalem ;
they placing an ambush to slay him by the way.

4 (4) But Festus made answer: Paul is in custody

5 at Cicsarea, whither I am in haste to go. (5) There-
fore, let tho.se among you who are able, go down
with us, and make presentment of every offence

6 there is in the man. — (6) And when he had been


Sy. sons.

Sy. "I Aojl


Sy. word.


Sy. ( « .1


268


■> Sy. give me to
them as a gift.

« Sy. sons of his
counsel.


Sy. ^


ACTS, XXV.

there eight or ten days, he came down to Cajsarea.
And the next day, he sat on the tribunal, and com-
manded Paul to be brought. (7) And when he 7
came, the Jews who had come from Jerusalem sur-
rounded him, and preferred against him many and
weighty charges, Avhicli they were unable to sub-
stantiate. (8) Meanwhile Paul maintained, that he 8
had committed no oficnce, either against the Jew-
ish law, or against the temple, or against Cffisar.
(9) But Festus, because he was disposed to con- 9
ciliate the favor of the Jews, said to Paul : Wilt
thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be tried before
me for these things? (10) Paul rephed, and said: 10
1 stand before Caesar's tribunal : here I ought to be
tried. Against the Jews I have committed no of-
fence, as thou also well knowest. (11) If I had 11
committed any crime, or done any thing worthy of
death, I would not refuse to die. But if none of
the things of which they accuse me, is upon me,
HO one may sacrifice me to their pleasure. ^ I an-
nounce an appeal to Cajsar. (12) Then Festus 12
conferred with his counsellors, <" and said: Hast
thou declared an appeal to Cffisar? Unto Ciesar,
shalt thou Efo.

And when [some] days had passed, Agrippa the 13
king, and Bernice, came down to Ca^sarea to salute
Festus. (14) And when they had been with him 14
[some] days, Festus related to the king the case of
Paul, saying : A certain man was left a prisoner
by Felix : (15) And when I was at Jerusalem, the 15
chief priests and the Elders of the Jews informed
me respecting him, and desired that I would pass
judgment upon him in their favor. (16) And I 16
told them. It is not the custom of the Romans, to
give up a man gratuitously to be slain ; until his
accuser appeareth and chargcth him to his face,
and opportunity is afforded him to make defence
respecting what is charged upon him, (17) And 17
when I had come hither, without delay, I the next
day sat on the tribunal, and commanded the man
to be brought before me. (18) And his accusers 18
stood up with him; and they were not able to
substantiate any criminal charge against him, as I
had expected; (19) but they had certain contro- 19
versics witli him respecting their worship,*^ and
respecting one Jesus, who died, but who, as Paul


ACTS, XXVI.


269


20 said, was alive. (20) And because I was not well
established in regard to these questions, I said to
Paul : Dost thou ask to go to Jerusalem, and there

21 be jitdged concerning these matters? (21) But he
requested to be reserved for a trial before Ctesar:
and I ordered hiin to be kept, till I could send

22 him to Caesar, — (22) And Agrippa said: I should
like to hear tliat man. And Festus said : To-mor-

23 row thou shalt hear him. (23) And the next day,
came Agrippa.and Bernice, with great pomp, and
entered the house of trials, with the Chiliarchs and
chiefs of the city : and Festus commanded, and

24 Paul came. (24) And Festus said: King Agrippa,
and all persons present with us; concerning this
man whom ye see, all tlie people of the Jews ap
})lied to me, at Jerusalem and also here, crying

25 out, tliat he ought no longer to live. (25) Yet on
investigation, 1 found that he hath done nothing
deserving death. But, because he requested to be
reserved for the hearing of Caesar, I have ordered

26 him to be sent. (26) And I know not what I can
Avritc to Caesar, in regard to him : and therefore I
wished to bring him before you, and especially
before thee, king Agrip})a ; that when his case
shall have been heard, I may lind what to write.

27 (27) For it is unsuitable, when we send up a pris-
oner, not to designate his offence.

XXYI. And Agrippa said to Paul : Thou art per-
mitted to speak in thy own behalf. Then Paul
extended his hand, and made defence, saying :

2 (2) In regard to all the things of which I am ac-
cused by the Jews, king Agrippa, I consider my-
self highly favored, that I may this day make

8 defence before thee : (3) especially, as I know thee
to be expert in all the controversies^ and laws of
the Jews. I therefore request thee to hear me

4 with indulgence. — (4) The Jews themselves, if
they would testify, know well my course of life
from my childhood, which from the beginning was

5 among my nation and in Jerusalem. (5) For they
have long been persuaded of me, and have known,
that I lived in the princely** doctrine<= of the Phari-

6 sees. (6) And now, for the hope of the promise
wbich was made by God to our liithers, I stand

7 and am judged. (7) To this hope, our twelve


Gr. ZvjTrjaara.


i" Sy. (■ n ..3

« or, seel.


270


ACTS, XXVI.


<> Sy. \^,JD


Sy. ImJIsH


tribes hope to come, witli earnest prayers by day
and by niglit: and for this same hope, king
Agrippa, I am accused by the Jews. (8) How 8
judge ye? Are we not to believe, that God will
raise the dead? — (9.) For I myself, at first, re- 9
solved in my own mind, that I would perpetrate
many adverse things against the name of Jesus
the Nazarean. (10) Which, I also did at Jerusa- 10
lem; and by the authority I received from the
chief priests, I cast many of the saints'^ into prison ;
and when they were put to death by them, I took
part with those that condemned them. (11) And 11
in every synagogue I tortured them, while I press-
ed them to become re viler s of the name of Jesus.
And in the great wrath, with which I was filled
against them, I also went to other cities to perse-
cute them. (12) And, as I was going for this 12
purpose to Damascus, with the authority and li-
cense of the chief priests, (13) at mid-day, on the 13
road, I saw, 0 king, a light exceeding that of the
sun, beaming from heaven upon me, and upon all
those with me. (14) And we all fell to the ground ; 14
and I heard a voice, which said to me, in Hebrew :
Saul, Saul ! why persecutest thou me ? It will be
a hard thing for thee to kick against the goads.
(15) And I said : My Lord, who art thou ? And 15
our Lord said to me : I am Jesus the Nazarean,
whom thou persecutest. (16) And he said to me : 16
Stand upon thy feet ; for I have appeared to thee,
for this purpose, to constitute thee a minister and
a witness of this thy seeing me, and of thy seeing
me hereafter. (17) And I will deliver thee from 17
the people of the Jews, and from other nations ; to
whom I send thee, (18) to open their eyes; that 18
they may turn from darkness to the light, and
from the dominion of Satan unto God ; and may
receive remission of sins, and a portion Avith the
saints,o by faith in me. (19) Wherefore, king 19
Agrippa, I did not contumaciously withstand the
heavenly vision : (20) but I preached from the first 20
to them in Damascus, and to them in Jerusalem
and in all the villages of Juda3a ; and I preached
also to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and
should turn to God, and should do the works
suitable to repentance. (21) And on account of 21
these things, the Jews seized me in the temple, and


ACTS, XXVII.


271


22 sought to kill me. (22) But unto this clay God
hath helped me ; and lo, I stand and bear testi-
mon}', to the small and to the great ; yet saying
nothing aside from Moses and the proj^hets, but the
very things "whieh they dcelared were to take place:

2t> (23) [namely,] that Messiah would sufler, and would
become the lirst fruits'" of the resurrection from the
dead ; and that he would proclaim light to the

2-1 people and to the Gentiles. — (24) And when Paul
had extended his defence thus far, Festus cried,
with a loud voice : Paul, thou art deranged : much

25 study hath deranged thee. (25) Paul replied to
him : I am not deranged, excellent Festus ; but

26 speak Avovds of truth and rectitude. (26) And
king Agrip})a is also well acquainted with these
things ; and I therefore speak confidently before
him, because I suppose not one of these things hath
escaped his knowledge ; for they were not done in

27 secret. (27) King Agrippa, believest thou the

28 prophets? I know that thou believest. (28) King
Agrii)})a said to him : Almost, thou persuauest me

29 to become a Christian. (29) And Paul said: I
would to God, that not only thou, but likewise all
that hear me this day, were almost, and altogether,

30 as I am, aside from these bonds. (30) And the
king rose up, and the governor, and Bernice, and

31 those Avho sat with them. (31) And when they
had gone out, they conversed with one another, and
said : This man hath done nothing worthy of death

32 or of bonds. (32) And Agrippa said to Festus;
The man might be set at liberty, if he had not an-
nounced an appeal to Caesar.

XXVII. And Festus commanded, respecting him
that he should be sent to Italy, unto Ciesar. And
he delivered Paul, and other prisoners with him, to
a certain man, a centurion of the Augustan cohort,'^

2 whose name was Julius. (2) And when we were
to depart, we embarked in a ship which was from
the city of Adramyttium, and was going to the
country of Asia. And there embarked with us in
the ship, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of the city of

3 Thessalonica. (3) And the next day, we arrived at
Zidon. And the centurion treated Paul with
kindness, and permitted him to visit his friends

4 and be refreshed. (4) And on sailing from there.


Sy. lAia .3


or, Tegiment.


272


ACTS, XXVII.


f


■"i. con the 10 th
of Tisri, or
Sept. 20th.


« Sy. Phoanix.
^ Sy. looked.


Sy. wind of
tempest.


' Sy. hand.
c Gr, Clauda.


^ Gr. a quick-
sand.


because tlie winds were against us, we sailed around
to Cyprus. (6) And we passed over the sea of 5
Cilicia and Pamphylia, and arrived at Myra, a city
of Lycia. — (6) And there the centurion found a 6
ship of Alexandria, which was going to Italy;
and he set us on board of it. (7) And as it was 7
hard navigating, we had scarcely arrived, after
many days, over against the i^le of Cnidos. And,
because the wind would not allow us to pursue a
straight course, we sailed around by Crete, [and
came] opposite the city of Salmone. (8) And with 8
difficulty, after sailing about it, we arrived at a
place called the Fair Havens, near to which was
the city called Lassa. — (9) And we were there a y
long time, and till after the day of the Jewish fast.^
And it was hazardous [then] for any one to go by
sea; and Paul counselled them, (10) and said: 10
Men, I perceive that our voyage will be [attended]
with peril, and with much loss, not only of the
cargo of our ship, but also of our lives. (11) But 11
the centurion listened to the pilot, and to the
owner of the ship, more than to the v/ords of Paul.
(12) And, because that harbor was not commodious 12
for wintering in, many of us were desirous to sail
from it, and if possible, to reach and to winter in a
certain harbor of Crete, which was called Phenice,"
and which opened'^ towards the south. — (13) And lo
when the south wind breezed up, and they hoped
to arrive as they desired, we began to sail around
Crete. (14) And shortly after, a tempest of wind<^ 14
arose upon us, called Typhonic Euroclydon. (15) 15
And the ship was whirled about by the wind, and
could not keep head to it ; and we resigned [the
ship] to its power. f (16) And when we had passed 16
a certain island, called Cyra,s we could hardly re-
tain the boat. (17) And after hoisting it [on 17
board], we girded the ship around [the waist], and
made it strons;. And, because we were afraid of
falling upon a precipice^ of the sea, we pulled
down the sail ; and so we drifted. (18) And as 18
the storm raged violently upon us, avc the next
day threw goods into the sea. (19) And on the 19
third day, with our own hands, we threw away the
tackling of the ship. (20) And as the storm held 20
on for many days, and as no sun was visible, nor
moon, nor stars, all hope of our surviving was


ACTS, XXVII.


273


21 wholly cut off. — (21) And as no one had taken a
meal of food, Paul now stood up in the midst of
them, and said: If ye had given heed to me, 0
men, we should not have sailed from Crete, and
we should have been exempt from this loss and

22 peril. (22) And now, I counsel you to be without
anxiety ; for not a soul of you will be lost, but

23 only the ship. (23) For there appeared to me
this night, the angel of that God whose I am, and

24 Avhoni I serve;' (2-1) and he said to me: Fear
not, Paul ; for thou art yet to stand before Ceesar ;
and, lo, God hath made a gift to thee of all them

25 that sail with thee. (25) Therefore, men, be ye
courageous ; for I confide in God, that it Avill be as

26 was told to me. (26) Yet Ave are to be cast upon

27 a certain island. — (27) And after the fourteen days
of our roaming and tossing on the Adriatic sea,
at midnight, the sailors conceived that they ap-

28 proached land. (28) And they cast the lead, and
found twenty fathoms.^ And again they advanced

29 a little, and they found fifteen fathoms. (29) And
as we feared lest wc should be caught in places
where were rocks, they cast four anchors from the
stern of the ship, and prayed for the morning.^ —

80 (30) And the sailors sought to flee out of the ship
And from it they lowered down the boat into the
sea, under pretence that they were going in it to

31 make fast'" the ship to the land. (31) And when
Paul saw [it], he said to the centurion and to the
soldiers : Unless these remain in the ship, ye can

32 not be saved. (32) Then the soldiers cut the boat-

33 rope from the ship, and let the boat go adrift. — (33)
vVnd while it was not yet morning, Paul advised
them all to take food, saying to them : In conse-
quence of the peril, it is now the fourteenth day

3-1 that ye have tasted nothing. (34) Therefore I
entreat you, to take food for the sustenance of your
life ; for not a hair from the head of any of you,

35 Avill perish. (35) And having said these things,
he took bread, and gave glory to God before them

36 all ; and he broke [it], and began to cat. (36)
And they were all consoled ; and they took nourish-

37 ment. (37) And there were of us in the ship two

38 hundred and seventy-six souls. (38) And when
they were satisfied with food, they lightened the
ship, and took the wheat and cast it into the sea. —

18


or, worship.


Sy. statures,
i. e. of .a man.


• Sv. dun.


Sv. to tie.


274


ACTS, XXVIII.


Sy. high place.
Sy. deeps.


%


P Sy. \^^=
give life to.


Now, Malta.


^ Sv. which teas.


Sy. I « .1


(39) And when it was day, the sailors knew not 39
what land it was : but they saw on the margin of
the land an inlet of the sea ; whither, if possible,
they intended to drive the ship. (40) And they 40
cut away the anchors from the ship, and left them
in the sea. And they loosened the bands of the
rudder, and hoisted a small sail to the breeze, and
made way towards the land.' (41) And the ship 41
struck upon a shoal" between two channclso of the
sea, and stuck fast upon it. And the forward part
rested upon it, and was immovable ; but the after
part was shattered by the violence of the waves. —
(42) And the soldiers were disposed to slay the 42
prisoners ; lest they should resort to swimming, and
escape from them. (43) But the centurion kept 43
them from it, because he was desirous to preserve?
Paul. And those who Avere able to swim, he com-
manded to swim off first, and pass to the land. (44) 44
And the rest, he made to transport themselves on
planks, and on other timbers of the ship. And so
they all escaped safe to land.

And we afterwards learned, that the island XXYIII.
was called Melita.^^ (2) And the barbarians who 2
inhabited it, showed us many kindnesses. And
they kindled a fire, and called us all to warm our-
selves, because of the great rain and cold at that
timc^* — (3) And Paul took up a bundle of fagots 3
and laid them on the fire : and a viper, [driven]
by the heat, came out of them, and bit his hand.
(4) And when the barbarians saw it hanging on 4
his hand, they said : Doubtless, this man is a mur-
derer ; whom, though delivered from the sea, jus-
tice will not sufier to live. (5) But Paul shook 5
his hand, and threw the viper into the fire: and
he received no harm. (6) And the barbarians 6
expected, that he would suddenly swell, and fall
dead on the ground. And when they had looked
a long time, and saw that he received no harm ;
they changed their language, and said, that he was
a god. — (7) And there were lands in that quarter, 7
belonging to a man named Publius, who was the
chief mane of the island : and he cheerfully re-
ceived us at his house three days. (8) And the 8
father of Publius was sick with a fever and dysen-
tery. And Paul went in to him, and prayed, and


' ,r^i


ACTS, XXVIII.


275


10


11


12
13


laid his hand on him, and healed him. (9) And
after this event, others also in the island who were
sick, came to him and were healed. (10) And
they honored us with great honors : and when we
left the place, they supplied us with necessaries.

And after three months we departed, sailing in
a shi}-) of Alexandria, which had wintered in the
island, and which bore the signal of the Twins.''
(12) And we came to the city of Syracuse ; and
remained there three days. (13) And from there
we made a circuit, and arrived at the city Ehegium.
And, after one day, the south wind blew [favor-
ably] for us, and in two days we came to Puteoli,

14 a city of Italy. (14) And there we found breth-
ren ; and they invited us, and we remained with
them seven days : and then we proceeded towards
Rome. (15) And the brethren there, hearing [of
our approach], came out to meet us as far ns the
village called Appii Forum, and as far as the Three
Taverns. And when Paul saw them, he gave
thanks to God, and was encouraged. (16) And
we went on to Eome. And the centurion allowed
Paul to reside where he pleased, with a soldier
who guarded him.

And after three days, Paul sent and called for
the principal Jews. And when they were assem-
bled, he said to them : Men, my brethren, al-
though I had in nothing risen up against the
people or the law of my fathers, I was at Jeru-
salem delivered over in bonds to the Eomans :

18 (18) and they, when they had examined me, were
disposed to release me, because they found ini
me no offence deserving death. (19) And, as the!
Jews withstood me, I was compelled to utter an
appeal to Cajsar ; but not because I had any thing |
of which to accuse the people^ of my nation.
(20) For this reason I sent for you to come, that I
might sec you, and might state these things to
you : for it is on account of the hope of Israel,
that I am bound with this chain. (21) They said
to him : We have received no epistle from Judaea
against thee ; and none of the brethren who have
come from Jerusalem, have told us any evil thing
of thee. (22") But we are desirous to hear from
thee what tnou thinkest; for this doctrine, Ave
know, is not received by any one. — (23) And they


15


16


17


4


19


20


21


22
23


Sy. '\<h]L,
i. e. Castor
and Pollux.


Sy. sons.


276


ACTS, XXVIII.


Sy. against.


Sy. made fat.


t Sy.


appointed him a day ; and many assembled, and
came to him at his lodgings. And he explained
to them respecting the kingdom of God, testifying
and persuading them concerning Jesus, out of the
law of Moses, and out of the prophets, from morn-
ing till evening. (2-i) And some of them as- 24
sented to his discourses, and others did not assent.
(25) And they went out from him, disagreeing 25
among themselves. And Paul addressed to them
this speech : Well did the Holy Spirit, by the
mouth of Isaiah the prophet, speak concerning^
your fathers, (26) saying: Go unto this people, 26
and say to them. Hearing ye will hear, and will
not understand ; and ye will see, and will not
comprehend. (27) For the heart of this people is 27
stupefied,? and their hearing they have made heavy,
and their eyes they have closed ; lest they should
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and be converted
unto me, and I should forgive them. (28) There- 28
fore, be this known to you, that to the Gentiles is
this redemption'^ of God sent : and, moreover, they
will hear it. (29) And when he had thus said, 29
the Jews retired ; and there were great disputations
among them.*

And Paul hired a house, at his own cost, and 30
resided in it two years ; and there he received all
that came to him. (31) And he preached concern- 31
ing the kingdom of God, and taught boldly con-
cerning our Lord Jesus Messiah, without hinder-
ance.


Completion of the Acts of the blessed Legates ; that is, their
Histories.


* This verse (29) is not in the MSS., nor in any of the earlier editions : and
the later editions place it in the margin.


The Epistle of Paul the Legate, to the Romans.


I. Paul, a servant of Jesus the Messiah, called
and seut;=i and separated unto the gospel'' of God,

2 — (2) (which he had before promised, by his pro-

3 phets, in the holy scriptures, — (3) concerning
his Son, (who was born in the flesh, « of seed of

4 the house of David, (4) and was made known as
the Son of God, by power, "^ and by the Holy
Spirit,) who arose from the dead, Jesus Messiah,

5 our Lord, — (5) by whom we have received grace,
and a mission among all the Gentiles, to the end

6 that they may obey the faith in his name; (6)
among whom, ye also are called by Jesus

7 Messiah;) — (7) to all those who are at Eome,
beloved of God, called and sanctified : — Peace and
grace be with you, from God our Father, and from
our Lord Jesus Messiah.

8 In the iirst place, I give thanks to God by Jesus
Messiah, on account of you all; because your

9 faith is heard of in all the world. (9) And God,
wliom in spirit I serve in the gospel of his Son, is
my witness, that I unceasingly make mention of you,

10 at all times, in my prayers. (10) And I likewise
supplicate, that hereafter a door may be opened to
me, by the good pleasure of God, to come unto

11 you. (11). For I long much to see you; and to
impart to you the gift of the Spirit, whereby ye may

12 be established ; (12) and that we may have com-
fort together, in the faith of both yourselves and

13 me. (13) And I wish you to know, my brethren,
that I have many times desired to come to you,
(though prevented hitherto,) that I might have
some fruit among you also ; even as among other


or, a Legate.

Sy.

Sy. ;mnn

or, display of
power.


278


ROMANS, I.


* or, energy.
' or, salvation.
^ or, him.

^ Sy. ]LaSio


Sy. ]1nofo«

' Sy.

aiZocnl^


15
16


17


18
19


20


Gentiles, (14) Greeks and barbarians, the wise and 14
the unwise : for to every man am I a debtor, to
preach [to him]. (15) And so I am eager to
preach to you also who are at Kome. (16) For I
am not ashamed of the gospel ; for it is the power"
of God unto life/ to all who believe in it ;?
whether first they are of the Jews, or whether they
are of the Gentiles. (17) For in it is revealed the
righteousness^ of God, from faith to faith ; as it is
written. The righteous by faith, shall live.

For the wrath of God from heaven is revealed
against all the iniquity and wickedness of men,
who hold the truth in iniquity. (19) Because a
knowledge of God is manifest in them ; for God
hath manifested it in them. (20) For, from the
foundations of the world, the occult things of God
are seen, by the intellect,' in the things he created,
even his eternal power and divinity ;'^ so that they
might be without excuse ; (21) because they 21
knew God, and did not glorify him and give
thanks to him as God, but became vain in their
imaginings, and their unwise heart was darkened.
(22) And, while they thought within themselves 22
that they were wise, they became fools. (23) 23
And they changed the glory of the incorruptible
God into a likeness to the image of a corruptible
man, and into the likeness of birds and quadrupeds
and reptiles on the earth. — (24) For this cause, 24
God gave them up to the filthy lusts of their
heart, to dishonor their bodies with them. (25)
And they changed the truth of God into a lie ; and
worshipped and served the created things, much
more than the Creator of them, to whom belong
glory and blessing, for ever and ever : Amen.
(26) For this cause, God gave them up to vile
passions : for their females changed the use of
their natures, and employed that which is unnatu-
ral. (27) And so also their males forsook the use
of females, which is natural, and burned with lust
toward one another ; and, male with male, they did
what is shameful, and received in themselves the
just recompense of their error. (28) And as they 28
did not determine with themselves to know God,
God gave them over to a vain mind ; that they
might do what they ought not, (29) being full of 29
all iniquity, and lewdness, and bitterness, and


25


26


27


ROMANS, IL


279


malice, and covetousness, and envy, and slaughter,

30 and strife, and guile, and evil machinations, (30)
and backbiting, and slander ; and being haters of
God, scoffers, proud, vain-glorious, devisers of evil
things, destitute of reason, disregardful of parents,

31 (31) and to whom a covenant is nothing, neither
affection, nor peace, and in whom is no compassion.

32 (32) These, while they know the judgment of God,
that he condemneth those to death who perpetrate
such things, are not only doers of them, but the
companions of such as do them.

n. There is therefore no excuse^ for thee, 0 man,
that judgest thy neighbor; for by judging thy
neighbor, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that

2 judgest, dost practise the same things. (2) And
we know that the judgment of God is in accord-
ance with trutli,'* in regard to those who prac-

3 tise these things. (3) And what thinkcst thou, O
man, that judgest those who practise these things,
while practising them thyself, — that thou wilt es-

4 cape the judgment of God? (4) Or wilt thou
abuse<= the riches of his benevolence, and his long
suffering, and the opportunity^ which he giveth
thee ? And dost thou not know, that the benev-
olence of God should bring thee to repentance?

6 (5) But, because of the hardness of thy unrepent-
ing heart, thou art treasuring up a store of wrath
against the day of wrath, and against the revelation

6 of the righteous judgment of God : (6) who will
recompense to every man, according to his deeds ;

7 (7) to them who, by perseverance in good works,
seek for glory and honor and immortality, to them

8 he will give life eternal ; (8) but to them who are
obstinate and obey not the truth, but obey iniqui-

9 ty, to them he will retribute wrath and ire. (9)
And tribulation and anguish [will be] to every
man that doeth evil ; to the Jews first, and also to

10 the Gentiles: (10) but glory and honor and peace
to every one that doeth good ; to the Jews first, I

11 and also to the Gentiles. — (11) For there is no re-j

12 speet of persons with God : (12) for those without
law, who sin, will also perish without law; and'
those under the law, who sin, will be judged by]

13 the law, — (13) (for not the hearers of the law, j
are righteous before God ; but the doers of the|


Sv. -rigAVr.


or, is true.


or, space.


280


ROMANS, III.


Sy.
Sy.


^ Sy. lAlXo


^or,inteUigeiice,


' Sy. 7'jrkmg.


law are justified; (14) for if Gentiles who have 14
not the law, shall, by their nature, « do the things
of the law ; they, while without the law, become
a law to themselves : (15) and they show the work 15
of the law, as it is inscribed on their heart ; and
their conscience^ beareth testimony to theni, their
own reflections rebuking or vindicating one
another,) — (16) in the day in which Grod will 16
judge the secret [actions] of «nen, as my gospel
[teacheth], by Jesus the Messiah. — (17) But if 17
thou, who art called a Jew, and re}x»sest thyself
on the law, and gloriest in God, (18) that thou 18
knowest his good pleasure, and disoernest obliga-
tionSjg because thou art instructed in the law; (19) 19
and hast confidence in thyself, that thou art a
guide to the blind, and a light to them who are in
darkness, (20) and an instructor of those lacking 20
knowledge, 'i and a preceptor to the young; and
thou hast the appearance of knowledge and of
verity in the law:— (21) Thou therefore, who 21
teachest others, teachest thou not thyself? And
thou who teachest that men must not steal, dost
thou steal ? (22) And thou who sayest, Men must 22
not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery ?
And thou who contemnest idols, dost thou plun-
der the sanctuary ? (23) And thou who gloriest 23
in the law, dost thou, by acting contrary to the
law, insult God himself? (24) For, the name of 24
God, as it is written, is reviled among the Gentiles
on your account. — (25) For circumcision profiteth, 25
indeed, if thou fulfillest the law : but if thou de-
partest from the law, thy circumcision becometh
uncircumcision. (26) And if uncircumcision should 26
keep the precepts of the law, would not that uncir-
cumcision be accounted as circumcision ? (27) 27
And the uncircumcision, which from its nature ful-
filleth the law,, will judge thee ; who, with the
scripture, and with circumcision, transgressest
against the law. (28) For he is not a Jew, who is 28
so in what is external : nor is that circumcision,
which is visible in the flesh. (29) But he is a Jew, 29
who is so in what is hidden : and circumcision is
that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter,'
whose praise is not from men, but from God.

What then is the superiority of the Jew ? Or III.


ROMANS, III.


281


2 what is the advantage of circumcision ? (2) Much,
every way. And first, because to them were in-

3 trusted the oracles'* of God. (3) For if some of
them have not believed, have they, by their not
believing, made the faith of God inefficient?

4 (4) Far bo it : for God is veracious, and every man
false : as it is written : That thou mightest be
upright,'' in thy declarations; and be found pure,

5 when they judge thee. (5) But if our iniquity
establish the rectitude of God, what shall we say ?
Is God unrighteous, when he inflicteth wrath ? (I

6 speak as a man.) (6) Far from it. Otherwise how

7 will God judge the world? (7) But if the truth
of God hath been furthered by my falsehood, to
his glory ; Avhy am I then condemned as a sinner?

8 (8) Or shall we say — as some have slanderously
reported us to say : — We will do evil things, that
good [results] may come ? — The condemnation of

9 such is reserved for justice. — (9) What then, have
WE the superiorit}^, when we have before decided
as to both Jews and Gentiles, that all of them are

10 under sin ? (10) As it is written : There is none

11 righteous; no, no one: (11) and none that under-

12 staudeth ; nor that seeketh after God. (12) They
have all turned aside, together ; and become repro-
bates. There is none that doeth good ; no, not

13 one. (13) Their throats are open sepulchres, and
their tongues treacherous ; and the venom of

14 the asp is under their lips. (14) Their mouth is

15 full of cursing and bitterness ; (15) and their feet

16 are swift to shed blood. (16) Destruction and

17 anguish are in their paths: (17) and the path of

18 peacefulness they have not known : (18) and the

19 fear of God is not before their eyes, — (19) Now
we know, that whatever the law saith, it saith to
them who are under the law ; that every mouth
may be stopjjed, and all the world be guilty before

20 God. (20) Wherefore, by the deeds of the law,
no tlesh<= is justified before him: for, by the law,
sin is known.

21 But now, the righteousness^ of God without the
law, is manifested ; and the law and the prophets

22 testify of it: (22) even the righteousness of God,
which is by faith in Jesus Messiah, for every one,
and on every one, that believeth in him : for there

23 is no distinction ; (23) for they have all sinned,


Sy.]\<b


Sy.^b


or, mail.


Sy. ]LQJih


282


ROMANS, IV.


' Sy. ]i Dync^
5 Sy. ] « rpo .. .


^ or, righteously.


' or wifflfce rofc?.


• Sy. Q,CL.5li^

>> Sy. QjIil^
« Sy.'jZon .)!


""Sy.lZoJ^


and failed of the glory of God. (24) And they 24
are justified gratuitously, ^ by grace, and by the
redemption f which is in Jesus Messiah; (25) whom 25
God hath preconstituted a propitiation,? by faith
in his blood, because of our sins, which we before
committed, (26) in the space which God in his 26
long suffering gave to us, for the manifestation of
his righteousness at the present time; that he
might be righteous, and might with righteousness*>
justify him who is in the faith of our Lord Jesus
Messiah. — (27) AVhere then is glorying? It is 27
anniliilated. — By what law ? by that of works ?
Nay : but by the law of faith. (28) We therefore 28
conclude, that it is by faith a man is justified, and
not by the works of the law. (29) For, is he the 29
God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles ?
Nay : of the Gentiles also. (30) Because there is 30
one God, who justifieth the circumcisiou by faith,
and the uncircumcision by the same faith, (31) Do 31
we then nullify' the law by faith ? Far be it. On
the contrary, we establish the law.

What then shall we say concerning Abraham IV.
the patriarch, that by the flesh he obtained ? (2) 2
But if Abraham was justified by works, he had
[ground of] glorying; yet not before God. (3) 3
For what saith the scripture ? That Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness. a (4) But to him that worketh, the 4
reward is not reckoned as of grace, but as a debt
to him. (5) Whereas, to him that worketh not, 5
but only believeth in him that justifieth sinners,
his faith is accounted to him for righteousness. ^
(6) As David also speaketh of the blessedness of 6
the man, to whom God reckoneth righteousness''
without works, (7) saying : Blessed are they, whose 7
iniquity is forgiven, and whose sins are covered
up : (8) and, Blessed is the man, to whom God 8
will not reckon his sin. (9) This blessedness, 9
therefore, is it on the circumcision ? or on the un-
circumcision ? For we say, that Abraham's faith
was reckoned to him for righteousness. (10) How 10
then was it reckoned to him ? In circumcision, or
in uncircumcision? — Not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision. (11) For he received circumcision, 11
as the sign and the seal of the righteousness<i of his


ROMANS, V.


283


faith while in uncircumcision : that he might be-
come the father of all them of the uncircumcision
who believe ; and that it might be reckoned to them

12 also for righteousness i^ (12) and the father of the
circumcision ; not to them only who are of the cir-
cumcision, but to them also who fulfill the steps of
the faith of our father Abraham in [his] uncircum-

13 cision, — (18) For the promise to Abraham and to
his seed, that he should become the heir of the
world, was not by the law, but by the righteousness

14 of his laith. (14) 'For if they who are of the law were
heirs, faith would be made void, and the promise

15 of no force. (15) For the law is a worker of wrath ;
because where no law is, there is no transgression

16 of law. (16) Wherefore, it is by the faith which is
by grace, that we are justified^ : so that the prom-
ise may be sure to all the seed ; not to that only
which is of the law, but also to that which is of
the fiiith of Abraham, who is the father of us all :

17 (17) as it is written: "I have constituted thee a
ftither to a multitude of nations ;" [namely] before
God, in whom thou hast believed ; who quickeneth
the dead, and calleth those things which are not, as

18 if they were. (18) And without hope, he confided
in the hope of becoming the father of a multitude
of nations ; (as it is written : So will thy seed be.)

1 9 (19) And he was not sickly in his faith, while con-
templating his inertg body, (for he was a hundred

20 years old,) and the inert^ womb of Sarah. (20)
And he did not hesitate at the promise of God, as
one lacking faith ; but he was strong in faith, and

21 gave glory to God ; (21) and felt assured, that what
God had promised to him, he was able to fulfill,

22 (22) And therefore it was accounted to him for

23 righteousness. — (23) And not for his sake alone,
was it written, that his faith was accounted for

24 righteousness ; (24_) but for our sakes also ; because
it is to be accounted [so] to us, who believe in him
that rai.sed our Lord Jesus Messiah from the dead ;

25 (25)- who Avas delivered up, on account of our sins ;
iQ arose, that he might justify'


Sy. aj]al


Sy. *OjjlJ


anc


us.


V. Therefore, because we are justified"^ by faith, we

shall have peace with God, through our Lord

2 Jesus Messiah. (2) By whom we are brought

by faith into this grace, in which we stand and


Sy. dead,
Sy. dead.


Sy. ^?P?
Sy. ^?>ll


284


ROMANS, V.


•^ or, it.

' Sy. oAjZl

''or, be saved.
* Sy. "jZoJ^jZ


' or, likeness.

e Sy. ■jAi.Saj


Sy.

Sy. aj"ia\


*= justification^
or, acquittal.


rejoice in tlie liope of the glory of God. (3) And 3
not only so, but we also rejoice in afflictions ;
because we know that affliction perfecteth in us
patience ; (4) and patience, experience ; and expe- 4
rience, hope : (5) and hope maketh not ashamed, 5
because the love of God is diffused in our hearts,
bj the Holy Spirit who is given to us. (6) And if, 6
at this time, on account of our weakness, Messiah
died for the ungodly : (7) — -'(for rarely doth one 7
die for the ungodly; though for the good, some
one perhaps might venture to die :) — (8) God hath 8
here manifested his love towards us. Because, if
when we were sinners, Messiah died for us ; (9) how 9
much more, shall we now be justified by his blood,
and be rescued from wrath by him 'l^ (10) For 10
if when we were enemies, God was reconciled^ with
us by the death of his Son ; how much more shall
we, in his reconciliation, livC^ by his life ? (11) And 11
not only so, but we also rejoice in God, by means
of our Lord Jesus Messiah, through whom we
have now received the reconciliation, «

As by means of one man, sin entered into the 12
world, and, by means of sin, death ; and so death
passed upon all the sons of men, inasmuch as they
all have sinned : — (13) For until the law, sin, al- 13
though it was in the world, was not accounted sin,
because there was no law. (14) Yet death reigned 14
from Adam until Moses, even over those who had
not sinned after the likeness of the transgression
of the command by Adam, who was the type^ of
him that was to come. — (15) But not, as the fault, 8; 15
so also the free gift. For if, on account of the fault
of one, many died ; how much more, will the grace
of God and his free gift, on account of one man,
Jesus Messiah, abound unto many? (16) And 16
not, as the offence'' of one, so also the free gift. For
the judgment, which was of one [offence], was unto
condemnation ; but the free gift was, of many sins,
unto righteousness.' (17) For if, on account of the 17
offence of one, death reigned ; still more, they "who
receive the abundance of the grace, and the free
gift, and the righteousness, will reign in life, by
means of one, Jesus Messiah. (18) Therefore, as 18
on account of the offence of one, condemnation was
to all men ; so on account of the righteousness of
one, will the victory unto life^ be to all men. (19) 19


ROMANS, VI.


285


For as, on account of the disobedience of one man,
many became sinners ; so also, on account of the

20 obedience of one, many become righteous. — (20)
And the entrance given to the law, was that sin
might increase: and where sin increased, there

21 grace abounded. (21) So that, as sin had reigned
in death, so grace might reign in righteousness^ unto
life eternal, by means of our Lord Jesus Messiah.


YI. What shall we then sav?
2


Shall we continue in
sin, that grace may abound ? (2) Far be it : for if
we are persons tliat have died to sin, how can we

3 again live in it? (3) Or do ye not know, that we
who are baptized into Jesus Messiah, are baptized

4 into his death ? (1) For we are buried with him
in baptism unto'^ death ; that as Jesus Messiah arose
from the dead iuto the glory of his Father, so also

5 we, to walk in a new life. (5) For if we have been
planted together with him into the likeness of his
death, so shall we be also into his resurrection.

6 (6) For we know, that our old man is crucified
with him ; that the body of sin might be abolished,

7 and we be no more servants to sin : (7) for he that

8 is dead [to it], is emancipated from sin. (8) If
then we are dead with Messiah, let us believe that

9 we shall live with the same Messiah. (9) For we
know that Messiah rose from the dead, and no
more dieth ; death hath no dominion over him.

10 (10) For in dying, he died for sin, once ; and in

11 living, he liveth unto God. (11) So also do ye ac-
count yourselves as being dead to sin, and alive to

12 God, through our Lord Jesus Messiah. — (12) There-
fore let not sin reign in your dead^ body, so that

13 ye obey its lusts. (13) And also give not up your
members as instruments of evil unto sin, but give
up yourselves to God, as those who have been re-
suscitated from the dead ; and let your members be

1-1 instruments for the righteousness*^ of God. (14)
And sin shall not have dominion over you ; for ye

15 are not under the law, but under grace. — (15) What
then? Shall we sin, because Ave are not under the

16 law, but under grace ? Far be it. (16) Know ye
not, that to whomsoever ye give up yourselves to
serve in bondage, his servants ye are, whom ye
serve ; whether it be to sin, or whether it be to

17 righteousness, that ye give ear? (17) But thanks


'Sy.]ZQj]ari


or, into


^ or, mortal.


Sy. IZqjIiA


286


ROMANS, VII.


or, tn ; i. e. m
the s'piriiual
body of Mes-
siah.


•* or, excited


Sy. writinfr.


be to God, that ye were [once] the servants of sin,
but have [now] from the heart obeyed that form of
doctrine to which ye are devoted. (18) And when 18
ye were emancipated from sin, ye became servants
to righteousness. (19) — (I speak as among men, 19
because of the infirmity of your flesh.) — As ye
[once] gave up your members to the servitude of
pollution and iniquity, so alsq now give je up your
members to the servitude of righteousness and
sanctity. (20) For when ye were the servants of 20
sin, ye were emancipated from righteousness.
(21) And what harvest had ye then, in that of 21
which ye are now ashamed ? For the result thereof
is death, (22) And now, as ye have been emanci- 22
pated from sin, and have become servants to God,
your fruits are holy ; and the result thereof is life
everlastiug. (23) For the wages of sin is death ; 23
but the free gift of God is life eternal, through our
Lord Jesus Messiah.

Or do ye not know, my Brethren. — (for I amYII.
speaking to them that know the law,) — that the
law hath dominion over a man, as long as he is
alive ? (2) Just as a woman, by the law, is bound 2
to her husband, as long as he is alive : but if her
husband should die, she is freed from the law of
her husband. (3) And if, while her husband is 3
alive, she should adhere to another man, she would
become an adulteress : but if her husband should
die, she is freed from the law ; and would not be an
adulteress though joined to another man. (4) And 4
now, my brethren, ye also have become dead to the
law, by=i the body of Messiah ; that ye might be
joined to another, [even] to him who arose from the
dead ; and might yield fruits unto God. (5) For 5
while we were in the flesh, the emotions of sin
which are by the law, were active'^ in our members,
that we should bear fruits unto death. (6) But now 6
we are absolved from the law, and are dead to that
which held us in its grasp ; that we might henceforth
serve in the newness of the spirit, and not in the
oldncss of the letter.^

What shall we say then ? Is the law sin? Far 7
be it. For I had not learned sin, except by means
of the law : for I had not known concupiscence, had
not the law said, Thou shalt not covet: (8) and 8


ROMANS, VIII.


287


by this commandment, sin found ocea&ion, and

perfected in me all concupiscence : for without the

9 law, sin was dead. (9) And I, without the law, was

alive formerly; but when the commandment came,

10 sin became alive, and I died ; (10) and the command-
ment of life was found by me [to be] unto death,

11 (11) For sin, by the occasion which it found by
means of the commandment, seduced me ; and

12 thereby slew me. (12) Wherefore, the law is holy ;
and the commandment is holy, and righteous, and

13 good. — (lo) Did that which is good, therefore,
become death to me ? Far be it. But sin, that it
might be seen to be sin, perfected death in me by
means of that good [law] ; that sin might the more
be condemned, by means of the commandment.

14 fl4) For we know, that the law is spiritual ;'' but I am

15 carnal,'' and sold to sin. (15) For what I am doing,
I know not: and what I would, I do not perform;

16 but what I hate, that I do. (16) And if I do what
I would not, I testify of the law, that it is right.*"

17 (17) And then, it is no more I Avho do that thing;

18 but sin, which dwclleth in me. (18) For I know,
that in me, (that is, in my flesh,) good dwelleth not:
because, to approve the good, is easy for me ; but

19 to do it, I am unable. (19) For I do not perform
the good, Avhich I Avould perform ; but the bad,
which I would not perform, that I do perform,

20 (20) And if I do what I would not, it is not I that

21 do it, but sin which dwelleth in me. (21) I find
therefore a law coinciding Avith my conscience, s
which assenteth to my doing good, whereas evil is

22 near to me. (22) For I rejoice in the law of God,

23 in the interior man. (23) But I see another law in
my members, which warrcth against the law of my
conscience, and maketh me a captive to the law of

24 sin which existeth in my members. (24) 0, a mis-
erable man, an\ I ! Who will rescue me from this

25 body of death ? (25) I thank God ; by means of
our Lord Jesus Messiah [I shall be rescued.]

26 (26) Now, therefore, in my conscience,'' I am a
servant of the law of God ; but in ray flesh, I am a
servant of the law of sin.

VIII. There is therefore no condemnation, to them

who, in Jesus Messiah, walk not after the flesh.

2 (2) For the law of the spirit of life, which is in


' Sy. of the

Spirit.
' Sy. of the
flesh.

■ Sy. ;,><^ ■»


K or, reason.
Sy. .1 1.1 S>


or, reason.
Sv.


288


ROMANS, VIII.


" Sy. IZqjIo

•' Sy. ,_«^5AlD
« Sy. ]Lxl.hl


^ Sy. ^^

' Sy. ^^


f or mortal.


8 or, conduct.


If


^ Sy, sons.


' or, revealed.

^ or, revelation.
' Sy. l^;ri


Jesus Messiah, hath emancipated thee from the law
of sin and death. (3) Inasmuch as the law was im- 3
potent, by means of the weakness of the flesh, God
sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account
of sin ; that He might, in his flesh, condemn sin ;
(4) so that the righteousness^ of the law might be 4
fulfilled in us; since it is not in the flesh that we
walk, but in the Spirit. (5) Eor they who are in the 5
flesh, do mind^ the things of the flesh : and they who
are of the Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit.
(6) For minding*^ the things of the flesh, is death ; 6
but minding the things of the Spirit, is life and
peace. (7) Because minding the things of the flesh, 7
is enmity towards God : for it doth not subject it-
self to the law of God, because it is not possible.
(8) And they who are in the flesh cannot pleaae 8
God. — (9) Ye, however, are not in the flesh, but in 9
the Spirit; if the Spirit of God truly dwell eth in you.
And if in any one there is not the Spirit of Messiah,
he is none of his. (10) But if Messiah is in you, 10
the body is dead, in regard*^ to sin ; and the Spirit is
alive in regard^ to righteousness. (11) And if the 11
Spirit of him, who raised our Lord Jesus Messiah
from the dead, dwelleth in you ; he who raised our
Lord Jesus Messiah from the dead, will also vivify
your deadf bodies, because of his Spirit that dwelleth
in you.

Now we are debtors, my Brethren, not to the
flesh, that we should walk according to the flesh : —
(13) (For if ye live according to the flesh, ye are to
die. But if, by the Spirit, ye mortify the practices^
of the body, ye will live. (14) For they who are 14
led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God :) —

(15) For ye have not received the spirit of bondage, 15
again to fear ; but ye have received the Spirit of
adoption, by which we cry. Father, our Father.

(16) And this Spirit testifieth to our spirit, that we 16
are the sons of God. (17) And if sons, then heirs ; 17
heirs of Gpd, and participators^ of the inheritance

of Jesus Messiah : so that, if we suffer with him, we
shall also be glorified with him. — (18) For I reckon,
that the sufferings of the present time, are not com-
parable with the glory which is to be developed'
in us. (19) For the whole creation is hoping and
waiting for the development'^ of the sons of God.
(20) For the creation^ was subjected to vanity, not by 20


12


13


18


19


21


24:


25 h


its own choice, but because of him who subjected it,
(21) in the hope, that also the creation itself would
be emancipated from the bondage of corruption,
into the liberty of the glory of the sons of God.

22 (22) For we know, that all the creatures'" are groan-

23 ing and travailing in pain unto this day. (23) And
not only they, but we also in whom are the first
fruits of the Spirit, wc groan within ourselves, and
look anxiously for tlie adoption of sons, the redemp-
tion of our bodies. (24) IBccause we live in" hope.
But hope that is seen, is not hope : lor if we saw it,
"low shouhl we hope for it? (25) But if we. hope
for that wliich is not seen, we are in patient waiting.

26 (26) So also the Spirit aideth our weakness. For
Ave know not what to pray fur, in a proper manner ;
but the Spirit praycth for us, with groans not

27 expressible: (27) and the explorer of hearts, he
knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit ; because he
praycth for the saints, agreeably to the good pleas-

28 ure of God. — (28) And we know that he aideth

hem in all things, for good, who love God ; them

29 Avhom he predestined^ to be called. (29) And he
knew them, previous!}'-; and he sealcdP them with
the likeness of the image of his Son ; that He might

30 be the first-born of many brothers. (30) And
those whom he previously sealed, them he called :
and those whom he called, them lie justified: and

31 those whom he justified, them he glorified, (31)
What then shall we say of tlicse things? If Goa
[is] for us; who [is] against us? (32) And, if he
spared not his Son, but gave him up for us all,
how shall he not give us all things, with him ?
(33) Who will set himself against the chosen of
God? It is God who justifieth. (34) Who is it
that eondcmncth ? Messiah died, and arose, and is
on the right hand of God, and maketh intercession
for us. (35) What"^ will sever me from the love
of Messiah ? Will afihction ? or distress ? or perse-
cution? or famine? or nakedness? or peril? or the
sword ? (36) As it is written : For thy sake, we
die daily : and, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter. (37) But in all these things we are vic-
torious, by means of him who loved us. (38) For
I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things

89 present, nor things to come, (39) nor height, nor


?.o


33
34


35


36

37
38


Sy. IZL'jJs


" or, by.


o Sy.

p or, marked.


' Sv. Who?


290


ROMANS, IX.


• Sy. liOjjj
'' Sy. .g^V-.
= in behalf of.

• Sy. ]Vn»<->


* Sy. fallen to
fall.


depth, nor any other creature, will be able to sever
me from the love of God, which is in oar Lord Je-
sus Messiah.

I say the truth in Messiah, and do not misrepre- IX.
sent; and my conscience beareth me witness in the
Holy Spirit ; (2) that I have great sorrow, and the 2
sadness of my heart is unceasing. (3) For I have 3
prayed, that I myself might' be accursed^ from
Messiah, for'' my brethren and my kinsmen in the
flesh : (4) who arc sons of Israel, to whom belonged 4
the adoption of sons, and the glory, and the cove-
nants,'"- and the law, and the ministration, and the
promises, and the fathers ; (5) and from among 5
whom, Messiah appeared in the flesh, who is God
over all ; to whom be praises and benediction, for
ever and ever; Amen.

Not, however, that the word of God hath 6
actually failed. '^ For all are not Israel, who are
of Israel. (7) Neither are they all sons, because 7
they are of the seed of Abraham: for it was said.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called. (8) That is, it 8
is not the children of the flesh, who are the chil-
dren of God ; but the children of the promise, are
accounted for the seed. (9) For the word of pro- 9
mise was this: At that time will I come, and Sarah
shall have a son. (10) Nor this only ; but Rebecca 10
also, when she had cohabited with one [man], our
father Isaac, (11) before her children were born, or 11
had done good or evil, the choice of God was pre-
dcclared ; that it might stand, not of works, but of
him who called. (12) For it was said: The elder 12
shall be servant to the younger. (13) As it is 13
written: Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated. (14) What shall we say then? Is there 14
iniquity with God? Far be it. (15) Behold, to 15
Moses also he said: I will have pity, on whom I
will have pity; and I will be merciful, to whom I
will be merciful. (16) Therefore, it is not of him 16
who is willing, nor of him who runneth, but of the
merciful God. (17) For in the scripture, he said 17
to Pharaoh : For this very thing, have I raised
thee up ; that I might shew my power in thee, and
that my name miglit be proclaimed in all the earth.
(18) Wherefore, he hath pity upon whom he 18
pleaseth ; and whom he pleascth, he hardeneth. —


ROMANS, X.


291


19 (19) But, perhaps thon wilt say : Of what [then]
di)th he complain ? For, who hath resisted his

20 pleasure? (20) Thou, thus! Who art thou? O
man; that thou repliest against God! Shall the
jiotter's vessel say to the former of it, AVhy hast

21 thou formed me so? (21) Hath not tlic potter
dominion over his clay out of the same mass to
make vessels, one for honor, and another for dis-

22 honor? (22) And if God, being disposed to ex-
liibit his wrath and to make known his power, in
abundance of long-suffering, brought wrath upon
tlie vessels of wrath which were complete for dc-

23 struction ; (23) and made his mercy flow forth
upon the vessels of mercy, which were prepared

24 by God for glory ; (24) namely, upon us who are
called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gen-

25 tiles : — (25) As also he said in Ilosea : I will call
them my people, who were not my people; and

26 will pity, whom I have not pitied: (26) For it
shall be, that in the ])lace where they were called
Not my people, there shall they be called The

27 children of the living God. (27) And Isaiah pro-
claimed concerning the children of Israel : Though
the number of the children of Israel should be as
the sand on the sea, a remnant of them will live.^

28 (28) He hath finished and cut short the matter i^

29 and the Lord will do it on the earth. (29) And
according to what Isaiah had before said : If the
Lord of hosts had not favored us with a residue,
we had been as Sodom, and had been like Gomor-
rha.

30 What shall we say then ? That the Gentiles,
who ran not after righteousness, g have found
righteonsness, even the righteousness which is by

31 faith : (31) But Israel, who ran after the law of
righteousness, hath not found the law of rightcous-

32 ness. (32) And why? Because [they sought it],
not by faith, but by the works of the law. For

33 they stumbled at that stumbling-stone: (33) As it
is written. Behold, I lay in Zion a stumbling-stone,
and a stone of ollence : and he who believcth in
him,'' shall not be ashamed.

X. My Brethren, The desire of my heart, and my

intercession witli God for them, is, that they might

2 have life* (2) For I bear them witness, that there


« or, he saved.
' Sy. the word.


f Sy. IZqjLaS


Sy. it.


• or, be saved.


292


ROMANS, X.


' Sy, j^JCD =
end, scope,
summary.

' Sy.


'Sy.^(

• Sy. "jlo^vE)

' or, he saved.

* or, is saved.


•* or, he saved.


' Sy. daughter
of our voice.

* Sy. daughter
of their voice.


is in tliem a zeal for God ; but it is not according
to knowledge. (3) For they know not the righ-
teousness of God, but seek to establish their own
righteousness: and therefore thej^ have not sub-
mitted themselves to the righteousness of God.

(4) For Messiah is the aim'' of the law, for righte-
ousness.c unto every one that belie veth in him. —

(5) For Moses describeth the righteousness, wh.ich is
by the law, thus: Whoever snail do these things,
shall live by them. (6) But the righteousness which
is by faith, saith thus: Thou shalt not say in thy
heart, Who ascendeth to heaven, and bringeth
Messiah down? (7) Or, Who descendeth to the
abj'ss of the grave, *^ and bringeth up Messiah from
the ])lace of the dead? (8) But what saith it?
The thing'' is near to thy mouth, and to thy heart:
that is, the word of faith, which we proclaim.

(9) And if thou shalt confess with thy mouth our
Lord Jesus, and shalt believe with thy heart, that
God hath raised him from the dead ; thou shalt live.^

(10) For the heart that belicvcth in him, is justified ; 10
and the mouth that confesseth him, is restored? to
life. (11) For the scripture saith : Every one that
believeth in him, shall not be ashamed. (12) And
in this, it discriminatcth neither Jews nor Gentiles.
For there is one Lord over them all, who is rich,
towards every one that callcth on him. (13) For
every one that shall call on the name of the Lord,
will have'' life. (14) How then shall they call on
him, in whom they have not believed? Or, how
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? Or, how shall they hear, without a preach-
er? (15) Or, how shall they preach, if they are 15
not sent forth ? As it is written : How beautiful
are the feet of the heralds of peace, and of the her-
alds of good things? — (16) But all of them have 16
not obeyed the proclamation of the gospel. (For,
Isaiah said: My Lord, who hath believed our
proclamation?') (17) Therefore, faith is from the
hearing of the car ; and tlie hearing of the eai', is
from the Avord of God. (18) But I say : Have
they not heard? And, lo, their proclamation^
hath gone out into all the earth ; and their words
to the ends of the world. (19) But I say : Did
not Israel know ? First, Moses said, thus : I will
awaken your emulation, by a people which is not a


6


8


0


11

12


13


14


17
18


19


ROMANS, XI.


293


people; and by a disobedient people, I will pro-

20 voke you. (20) And Isaiah was bold, and said :
I was seen by those who sought me not; and I was

21 found by those who inquired not for me. (21) But
to Israel, he said : All the day, have I stretched out
my hands to a contentious and disobedient people.

XL But I say: Ilath God cast off his people? Far
be it. For I also am of Israel, of the seed of Abra-

2 ham, of the tribe of Benjamin. (2) God hath not
cast off those his jieoplc whom he before knew.
Do ye not know, what, in the scripture of God, he
said to Elijah? When he had eomiilaincd to God

3 against Israel, and said: (3) My Lord, they have
slain tliy ]irophels, and have thrown down thy
altars; and I am left alone; and they seek my

4 life. (4) And it was said to him, by revelation:
Behold, I have reserved for myself seven thousand
men, who have not bowed their knees, and have

5 not worsliiiipcd Baal. (5) So also at the present
time, a remnant is preserved, by the election^ of

6 grace. (6) But if by grace, it is not by works:
otherwise, grace'' is not grace.'' And if by works,
it is not by grace : Otherwise, work<= is not work.<=

7 — (7) What then ? Israel did not obtain that which
it sought: but the election'' obtained it; and the

8 rest of them were blinded in their heart, (8) — (as
it is written : God gave them a stupid spirit, and
eyes to see not, and ears to hear not,) — unto this

9 very day. (9) And again, David said : Let their
table become a snare before them ; and let their

10 recompense be a stumbling block. (10) Let their
eyes be darkened, that they .see not; and let their

11 back, at all times, be bowed down. — (11) But I
sny: Have they .so stumbled as to fall entirely?
Far be it. Bather, by their stumVjling, lifc*^ hath
come to the Gentiles, for [awakening] their jeal-

12 onsy. (12) And if their stumbling was riches to
the world, and their condemnation riches to the
Gentiles; how much more their completeness?'"

13 (13) But [it is] to you Gentiles, lam speaking:
as 1 an\ a legate to the Gentiles, I honor my

1-i ministry; (14) if, perhaps, I may j)rovokc emula-
tion in the children of my flesh, and mny vivify^f

15 some of them, (lo) For if the rejection of them,
was a reconciliation of the world ; what will their


« or. sahalion.


' Sv.


V^,


OOlv IgCLa


vr


f or, save.


294


ROMANS, XI.


^ or, be saved.


Sy. \ob^\


k Sy.

Oil i;nn


conversion be, but life from the dead? (16) For, 16
if the first-fruits [are] holy, then the mass [is] also :
and if the root is holy, then also the brandies.—

(17) And if some of the branches were plucked 17
oif ; and thou, an olive from the desert, wast in-
grafted in their place, and hast become a partici-
pator of tlie root and fatness of the olive-tree ;

(18) do not glory over the branches. For if thou 18
gloricst, thou sustainest not the root, but the root
sustaineth thee. (19) And shouldst thou say. The 19
branches were plucked off, that I might begn.fted
into their place. (20) Very true. Tliey were 20
plucked off, because they believed not ; and thou
standest by faith. Be not exalted in thy mind, but
fear. (21) For if God spared not tiic natural 21
branches, perhaps he will not spare you. — (22) Be- 22
hold now the benignity and the severity of God :

on them who fell, severity ; but on thee, benignity,
if thou continuest in that benignity; and if not,
thou also wilt be plucked off. (23) And the^^ if 23
they do not continue in their destitution of faith,
even they v/ill be grafted in ; for God is able to
graft them in again. (2-4) For if thou wast pluck- 24
ed from the wild olive-tree, which was natural to
thee, and wast grafted, contrary to thy nature,
into a good olive-tree ; how much more may they
be grafted into their natural olive-tree? — (25) And 25
that ye, my brethren, may not be wise in your
own apprehension, I wish you to know this mys-
tery, tlicit blindness of heart hath in some measure
befallen Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles
shall come in: (26) and then, will all Israel live.'' 26
As it is written: A deliverer will come from Zion,
and will turn away iniquity from Jacob. (27) And 27
then will they have the covenant' that proceedeth
from me, when I shall have forgiven their sins.
(28) Now, in the gospel, they are enemies for your 28
sake; but in the election, they are beloved for the
fathers' sake. (29) For God is not changeable in 29
his free gift and in his calling."^ (30) For as 3^e 30
too were formerly disobedient to God, and have
now obtained mercy, because of their disobedience ;
(31) so also are they now disobedient to the mercy 31
which is upon you, that there mav be mercy on
them likewise. (32) For God hath shut up all 32
men in disobedience, that upon all men he might


ROMANS, XII.


295


33 have mercy. — (33) 0 the depth of the riches, and
the wisdom, and the knowledge of God! For
man hath not searched out his judgments; and his

34 ways are inscrutable. (34) For who hath known
the mind of the Lord ? Or who hath been a coun-

35 sellor to him? (35) Or who hath first given to

36 him, and then received from him? (3G) Because,
all is from him, and all by him, and all through
liim: to whom be praises and benedictions, for
ever and ever : Amen.

XII, I beseech you, therefore, my brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a liv-
ing sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, by a ra-

2 tional service [of liim], (2) And be not conformed
to this world ; but be ye transformed, by the reno-
vation of your minds: and discern ye what is the
good and acceptable and perfect pleasure of God.

3 (3) And, by the grace given to me, I say to you
all : Do not carry thoughts, beyond what ye ought
to think ; but think with modesty, as God hath
distributed to each one his measure of faith.

4 (4) For as we [severally] have many members in
one body, and all those members have not the

5 same functions; (5) so also we, who are [collec-
tively] many persons, arc one body in Messiah,

6 and are naturally members of each other. (6) But
we have diiferent gifts,'' according to the grace
given to us. There is that of prophecy, according

7 to the measure of his faith. (7) And there is that
of ministration, possessed by one in his ministry.
And there is that of a teacher, in his teaching.

8 (8) And there is that of a consoler, in his conso-
ling: And that of a giver, *» with simplicity: And
that of a presider,'"- with dexterity : And of a sj^m-

9 pathizer, with cheerfulness.* — (9) Let not 3'our
love be guileful: but be haters of evil things, and

lOadherers to good things, (10) Be affectionate to
your brethren : and love one another. Be foremost

llin honoring one another. (11) Be active ; and not
slothful. Be fervent in spirit. Be laborers for


ip


Sy-


or, distributor.
Sy. standing
at the head.


* In this cat.ilogue of gitlH, verses 6, 7, 8, the Syriac merely describes them,
piving no diroctions lor the ri;^ht use of tliem. Whether the Gri'ok oripnal will
admit the same exposition, the learned will decide. I see no evidence, that the
Syriiie translator had an essentially different Greek text before him.


296


ROMANS, XIII.


Sy.

Gr. |5vo)\


n<=^,


Sy.
commanded.


»Sy.


our Lord. (12) Be joj^ful in your hope. Be pa- 12
tieut under your afilictions. Be persevering in
prayer. (13) Be communicators to the wants of 13
the saints. Be kind to strangers.'* (l-l) Bless 1-1
your persecutors: bless, and curse not. (15) lie- 15
joice with them who rejoice : and weep with them
who weep. (16) What estimation ye make of 16
yourselves, [make] also of your brethren. And
ndulge not high thoughts; 'but unite yourselves
with the lowly minded. And be not wise in your
own estimation. (17) And repay to no man evil 17
for evil : but let it be your study to do good,
before all men. (18) And if possible, so far as it 18
dependeth on you, live in peace with every man.
(19) And be ye not avengers of yourselves, my 19
beloved : but give place to wrath. For it is writ-
ten : If thou dost not execute judgment for thyself,
I will execute judgment ftjr thee, saith God. (20) 20
And if thy adversary be hungry, feed him: and if
he be thirsty, give him drink. For if thou doest
these things to him, thou wilt heap coals of fire ou
his head. (21) Be ye not overcome by evil ; but 21
overcome evil with good.

Let every soul be subject to the authorities of XIII.
magistrac3\ For there is no authority which is
not i'rom God : and the authorities which exist, are
established^^ by God. (2) He therefore who oppo 2
seth the authority, opposeth the establishment of
God; and they who oppose them, shall receive
judgment. (3) For judges are not a terror to good 3
deeds, but to evil deeds. Wouldst thou then not
be afraid of the authority? Do good, and thou
shall have praise from it. (4) For he is the min- 4
ister^ of God ; but it is to thee for good. But if
thou doest evil, be afraid ; for he is not girded
with the sword in vain; for he is a minister of
God, and an avenger of wrath to them that do evil
things. (5) And therefore, it is necessary for us 5
to be obedient, not only on account of wrath, but
likewise on account of our consciences. (6) For 6
this cause also ye pay tribute money; for they are
the ministers of Gocl, established for these same
objects. (7) Render tlierefore to every one, as is 7
due to him ; tribute-money, to whom tribute-monej^;
and excise, to whom excise; and fear, to whom


ROMANS, XIV.


297


8 fear ; and honor, to whom honor. — (8) And owe
nothing to any one; but to love one another.
For he that lovoth his neighbor, hatli fullilled the

0 hiw. (0) For this Hkewise, which it saith : Thou
shalt not kill; nor eonnnit adulter}'; nor steal;
nor covet ; and if there is any other eonirnandinent,
it is eoin[)letcd in this sentence: Thou shalt love

10 thy neighbor as thyself. (10) Love doeth no evil
to one's neiglibor; because love is the fulfillment

11 of the law. — (11) And this also know ye, that it is
the time and the hour, that we should henceforth
be awake from our sleej). For now our life*^ hath

12 come nearer to us, than when we believed. (12)
The night now jiasseth away, and the day draweth
near. Let us therefore cast from us the works of
darkness; and let us put on the armor of light.

13 (18) And let us walk tlecorously, as in daylight;
■ not in merriment, nor in drunkenness, nor in im-

1-1 purity of the bed, nor in envy and strife. (11) But
clothe yourselves with our Lord Ji'sus Messiah:
and be not thoughtful about your flesh, for the in-
dulgence of appetites.

XIV. To him who is feeble in the fiith, rcacli forth

the hand. And be not divided in your thoughts.

2 (2) For one man believeth, that he m;iy eat every

H thing: and lie that is feeble, eateth herbs, (o) And

he that eateth, should not despise him that eateth

not; and he that eateth not, should not judge him

4 that eateth, for God hath received him. (4) Who
art thou, that thou judgest a servant not thine;
and who, if he standeth, he standeth to his Lord;
and if he falleth, he falleth to his Lord? But he
will assuredl}' stand ; i'or his Lord hath jiower to

5 establish him. (o) One man discriminateth be-
tween days;*^ and another judgeth all days alike.
But let every one bj surc^, in regard to his knowl-

G edge. (()) lie that csleemeth a day, esteemeth [it]
for his Lord : and he that esteemeth not a dav, for
Lis Lord, he doth not esteem [it.] And he that
eateth, eateth to liis Lord, and giveth thanks to
God : and he that eateth not, to his Lord he eateth

7 not, anil giveth thanks to God. (7). Fi;r there is
not one of us, who livelh for liimself: and there

8 is not one, who dieth for himself. (8) Because, if
wc live, to our Lord it is we live; or if we die, to


" or, salvation.


' Sy. a day
from a day.


'T^


298


ROMANS, XV.


k Sy. Zo->NV)


Sy. ja.£L»


Sy.


our Lord it is we die. Whether we live, therefore,
or whether we die, we are our Lord's. (9) More- 9
over, for this cause Messiah died, and revived, and
arose ; that he might be Lord of the dead and of
the living. (10) But thou, why dost thou judge 10
thy brother? or, why dost thou despise thy bro-
ther? For we must all stand before the judgment
scat of Messiah, (11) as it is written: As I live, 11
saith the Lord, to me evei^y knee shall bow ; and
to mc every tongue shall give pi\aise. (12) So 12
then, every one of us must give account of himself
to God, — (13) Uenceforth, judge ye not one anoth- 13
er; but rather, judge ye this, that thou erect not
a stumbling-block for thy brother, (l-l) I know, 14
indeed, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing which is unclean in itself; but to
him who thiiiketh any thing to be unclean, to him
only it is djfiled. (15) But if thou grievest thy 15
brother, because of food, thou walkest not in love.
On account of food, destroy not him for whom
Messiah died. — (16) And let not our good thing be 16
mutter of reproach. (17) For the kingdom^ of 17
God, is not food and drink ; but is righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. (18) For 18
he who is in these things a servant of Messiah,
is pleasing to God, and approved before men.
(19) Now let us strive after peace, and after the edi- 19
iication of one another. (20) And let us not, on 20
account of food, destroy the work of God. For
every thing is, [indeed,] pure; yet it is evil, to the
man who eateth with stumbling. (21) It is proper,^ 21
that we neither eat flesh, nor ih'ink wine, nor [do]
any tiling, whereby our brother is stumbled.
(22) Thou art one in whom there is faith ; keep it 22
to thyself, before God. Blessed is he, who doth
not condemn himself, in that thing which he al*
loweth. (23) For he who eateth and doubteth, is 23
condemned; because [he eateth] not in faith. For
every thing which is not of faith, is sin.

We then who are strong, ought to bear the XV.
infirmity of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
(2) But each of us should please his neighbor, in 2
good tiling.-^, as conducive to ediQcation.^ (3) Be- 3
cause Messiah also ditl not please himself; but, as
it is written: The reviling of thy revilers fell upon


ROMANS, XV.


299


4 mc. (4) For every thing written of old, was written
for our instruction ; that we, by patience and by the
consoUition of the scriptures, might possess hope.

5 (5) And may the God of patience and of consola-
tion, grant to you, to think in harmony one with

6 another, in Jesus Messiah ; (6) so that with one
miiul and one mouth, ye may glorify God, the

7 Father of our Lord Jesus Messiah. — (7) Wherefore,
receive ye and boar up one another, as also Messiah

8 received you, to the glory of God. (S) Now I say,
that Jesus Messiah ministered to the circumcision,
in behalf of the truth of God, in order to confirm

9 the jiromise [made] to the fathers ; (9) and that the
Gentiles might glorify God for his mercies upon
them, as it is written : I will confess to thee among
the Gentiles, and to thy name will I sing psalms.

10 (10) And again he said : Kcjoice, ye Gentiles, with

11 his people. (11) And again he said: Praise the
Jjord, all ye Gentiles; [and] laud him, all ye na-

12 tions. (12) And again Isaiah said : There will be
a root of Jesse ; and he that shall arise, will be a
])rincc for the Gentiles ; and in him will the Gen-

13 tiles hope. — (13) Now may the God of hope fill
you with all joy and peace, by faith ; that ye may
abound in his hope, by the power ^ of the Uoly
Spirit.

1-1 Now I am persuaded, my Brethren, even I, con-
cerning you ; that ye too are full of goodness, and
are replenished with all knowledge, and are able

15 also to instruct others. (15) Yet I have written
rather boldly to you, my Brethren, that I might
put you in remembrance; because of the grace

16 which is given to me by God, (16) that I should be
a minister of Jesus Messiah among the Gentiles,
and should subserve the gospel of God, that the
oblation*" of the Gentiles might be acceptable, and

17 be sanctified by the Holy Spirit. (17) I have
therefore a glorying in Jesus Messiah, before God.

18 (18) Yet I presume not to speak of any thing [done]
for the obedience of the Gentiles, which Messiah
Inth not wrought by me, in word and in deeds,

19 (19) by the power of signs and wonders, and by
the power of the Holy Spirit; so that from Jerusa-
lem I have made a circuit quite to Illyricum, and
hive fuUilled the aiinounccinent of the Messiah ;

20 (20) while I w;is careful not to preach where the


or, energy.


300


ROMANS, XVI.


<» Sy. thai a

communica-
tion should he.


Sv.


Sy.


LoaId


"> Sy. asfc ye of
the peac : (f.


name of Messiah had been invoked, lest I should
build u})on another man's foundation ; (21) but, as 21
it is written : They, to whom mention of him had
not been made, will sec him ; and they, who had
not heard, will be obedient. — (22) And on this 22
account, I have been many times prevented from
coming to you. (23) But now, since I have no 23
])lace in these regions, and as I have been desirous
for many years past to come to you, (2i) when I 24:
go to Spain, I hope to come and see you ; and that
ye will accompany me thither, when I shall have
been satisfied, in some measure, with visiting you.
— (25) But I am now going to Jerusalem, to minis- 25
ter to the saints. (26) For they of Macedonia and 2G
Achaia, have been willing to make up a contribu-
tion'' for the needy saints who are at Jerusalem.
(27) They were willing, because they were also 27
debtors to them : for if the Gentiles have been par-
ticipators with them in the Spirit, the}'- are debtors
to serve them also in things of the flesh. (28) 28
When therefore, I shall have accomplished this,
and shall have sealed to them this fruit, I will pass
by you into Spain. (29) And I know that when I 29
come to you, I shall come in the fullness of the
blessing of the gospel of Messiah. — (30) And I 30
beseech you, my Brethren, by our Lord Jesus Mes-
siah, and by the love of the Spirit, that ye labor
with me in prayer to God for me; (31) that I may 31
be delivered from them in Judaja, who believe not;
and that the ministration," which I carry to the
saints in Jerusalem, may be well received ; (32) and 32
that, by the good pleasure of God, I may come to
you with joy, and miy take comfort with you. —
(33) And may the God of peace be with you all : 33
Amen.

And I commend to you Phebe, our sister, who XVJ.
is a servant^ of the church in Cenchrea: (2) that 2
ye may receive her in our Lord, as is just for saints ;
and that ye may assist her, in whatever thing she
may ask of you : for she also hath been assistant to
many, and 'to me also. — (3) Salute^ ye Priscilla 3
and Aquila, my fellow-laborers in Jesus Messiah ;.
(4) who, for my life, surrendered their own necks ; 4
and to whom, not only I am grateful, but also all
the churches of the Gentiles. (5) And give a salu- 5


ROMANS, XVI.


SOI


tation to tlic churcli<^ which is in their house.

Siihitc my bckjvod Epcnctus, who was the lirst-

G fiuits of Achaia in Messiah. (G) Sahitc Maiy, who

7 hath toilet! much with you. (7) Salute Andro-
]iicns and Junia, my relatives,'^ who were in cap-
tivity with mc, and are of note among the legates,

8 and were in Messiah before mc. (8) Salute Am-

9 ])Has, my beloved in our Lord. (9) Salute Urbanus,
a hiborer with us in J^lcssiah ; and my beloved

10 Stachys. (10) Sahite Apelles, chosen in our Lord.
Sahite the members'^ of the liousc of Aristobulus.

11 (11) Salute Ib.Todion, my kinsman. Salute the
members*^ of tliQ house of Narcissus, who are in

12 our Lord. (12) Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa,
who toil in our Loi'd. Salute my beloved Persis,

13 who toiled much in our Lord, (13) Salute Rufus,
chosen in our Lord ; and his and my mother.

1-1 (14) Salute As3-ncritus, and Phlcgon, and Ilcrmas,

and Patrobas, and Ilcrmcs, and tlie brethren who
15 arc with them. (15) Salute Philologus and Julio,

Nercus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the
IG saints who are with them. (16) Salute one another,

with a holy ki.ss. All the churches of Messiah

salute 3'ou.

17 And I beseech you, my Brethren, that ye be-
ware of them who cause divisions and stumblings
[among you], aside from the doctrine w'hich ye
iiave learned : and that ye stand aloof from them.

18 (18) For they who are such, do not serve our Lord
Jesus Messiah, but their own belly : and by bland
sj)eeclics and good wishes,^ they beguile the hearts

19 of the simple. (19) But your obedience is known
to every one. I therefore rejoice in you : and I
would have you be wise in what is good, and

20 blameless in what is evil. (20) And the God of
})eacc will soon crush Satan under your feet. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Messiah, be with you,

21 Timothy, my fellow-laborer, and Lucius, and
Jason, and Sosipatcr, my kinsmen, salute you,

22 (22) I Tcrtius, who have written this epistle, .salute

23 you in the Lord. (23) Gaius, liospitablc to me and
to all the church, saluteth you. Erastus, the
steward of the city, and Quartus a brother, salute

25 Now unto God, who is able to establish you, —
(according to my gospel, which is proclaimed


Sy- Ur^


Sy.


-1


cy. sonn.


or, benedic'

tions.


302


1 CORINTHIANS, I.


« Sy. from the
times of ages.


or, deaconess.


concerning Jesus Messiah ; and according to the
revelation of the mystery, which was hidden from
the times that arc past,? (26) but is at this time 26
revealed, by means of the scriptures of the prophets;
and by the command of the eternal God, is made
known to all the Gentiles, for the obedience of
faith ;) (27) [to him] who only is wise, be glory, 27
through Jesus Messiah, for pver and ever: Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Messiah, be with 24
you all : Amen.*

End of the epistle to the Romans ; which nms written from.
Corinth; and was sent by the hand of Phebe, a faithful
servant."


The First Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians.


Sy.Ur^


or, by.


• or, revelation.


Paul, called and sent by Jesus Messiah in the
good pleasure of God; and Sosthenes, a brother;
(2) to the church^ of God which is at Corinth, to
the [people] called and sanctified, who are sanctified
in Jesus Messiah ; and to all them, in every jilace,
who invoke the name of our Lord Jesus Messiah,
their and our [Lord] : (3) Grace [be] with you, and
peace ; from God our Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Messiah.

I thank my God at all times on your behalf, for
the grace of God which is given to you in'' Jesus
Messiah; (5) that in every thing ye arc enriched
by him, in all discourse, and in all knowledge ;
(6) even as the testimony of Messiah was confirmed
among you : (7) so that ye are not inferior in any
one of his gifts ; but are waiting for the manifesta-
tion'^ of our Lord Jesus Messiah : (8) who will
confirm you unto the end, so that ye may be blame-


* In the Syriac, tlie 24th verse is tlius placed ;it the end of the Epistle.


1 CORINTHIANS, I.


803


9


10


11
12


less in the day of our LordJcsus Messiah. (9) God
is fnithful ; by whom yc heave been called into'' the
fellowship of his Son, Jesus Messiah, our Lord.

And 1 be.seech you, niy Brethren, by tlie name
of our Lord Jesus Messiah, that to you all there
may be one language ;'' and that there may be no
divisions among you : but that ye may become
perfectly of one mind, and of one way of thinking.
(11) For concerning you, my Brethren, it hath been
reported to me by the house of Chloe, that there
are contentions among you. (12) And this I state :
That one of you saith, I am of I'aul ; and another
saith, I am of Apollos; and another saith, I am of
Cephas; and another saith, I am of Messiah.

13 (18) Now was Messiah divided ? Or was Paul
crucified for you? Or Avere ye bnjitizcd in the

14 name of Paul? (14) I thank my God that I bap-
tized none of you, exce)>t Crispus and Gaius ;

15 (15) lest any one should say, that I baptized in my

16 own name. (16) I moreover baptized the house-
hokK of Stephanas: but further. 1 know not that I

17 baptized any other. — (17) For Messiah did not send
me to baptize, but to ])reach ; not with Avisdom of
w^ords, lest the cross of Messiah should be inefficient.

18 (18) For a discourse concerning the cross is, to them
who j)crish, foolishness; but to ns who live,? it

19 is the energy of God. (19) For it is written : I
will destnn' the Avisdom of the wise; and I will
dissipate the intelligence of the sagacious. (20)
Where is the wise? Or where is the scribe? Or
where is the disj)utant of this world ? Lo, liath not
God showed, that the wisdom of this world is folly?
(21) For in the wisdom of God, because the world
by wisdom knew not God, it j)leased God, by the
foolishness of preaching, to quicken'' them who

22 believe. (22) Because the Jews ask for signs, and

23 the Gentiles' demand wisdom. (23) But we preach
Messiah as crucified; [which is] a stumbling-block
to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles;'

2*1 (24) but to them who are called, ])oth Jews and
Gentiles,' Messiah is the energy of God, and the
wisdom of (jod. (25) Because the foolishness of
God, is wi.ser than men ; and the feebleness of God,
is stronger than men. — (26) For look also at your
calling, my Brethren ; that not many among )'ou
arc wise, according to the flesh ; and not many


20


21


25
26


or, inito.


or, word, or,
discourse.


Sy. housgy


5 or, arc


saved.


Sy.
Aramaeans.


304


1 CORINTHIANS, II.


^Sy-llon .;!
» Sy.


• or, philosophic
suhtilty.

«• ^y. judge.


« Sy. lALoaj

•> Sy.


27


among you are mighty, and not many among you
are of liigli birth. (27) But God hath chosen the
foolish ones of the work], to shame the wise ; and
he hath chosen the feeble ones of the world, to
shame the mighty ; (28) and he hath chosen those 28
of humble birth in the world, and the despised, and
them who arc nothing, to bring to naught them
who are something: (29) so that no flesh might
glory before bim, (80) And ye, moreover, are of
him in Jesus Messiah ; who hath become to us
wisdom from God, and righteousness^ and sanctifi-
cation,' and redemption :'" (31) according to that
which is written : lie that glorieth, let him glory
in the Lord.


29
30


91


And I, my Brethren, when I came to you, did II.
not preach to you the mystery of God in magnifi-
cent speech, nor in wisdom, '^ (2) And I did not 2
govern'^ mj^self among you, as if I knew any thing,
except only Jesus Messiah ; and him also as cru-
cified. (3) And in much fear and much trembling, 3
was I with you. (4) And my speech and my 4
preaching were not with the persuasiveness of the
discourses of wisdom ; but with the demonstration
of the Spirit, and with power : (5) that your faith 5
might not arise from the wisdom of men, but from
the power of God. — (6) Yet we do speak wisdom,*^ 6
among the perfect ; the wisdom not of this world,
nor of the potentates'" of this world, who will come
to naught. (7) But we speak the wisdom of God, 7
in a mystery ; the wisdom which was hidden, and
which God predetermined before the world was,
for our glory : (8) which no one of the potentates 8
of this world knew ; for had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
(9) But, as it is written : The eye hath not seen, 9
nor hath the ear heard, nor hath it entered into the
heart of man, that which God hath prepared for
those who love him. (10) But God hath revealed 10
it to us, by his Spirit; for the Spirit cxplorcth all
things, even tlie profound things of God. (11) For 11
what man is there, who knoweth that v.diich is in a
man, except it be the spirit of the man, which is in
him? So also, that which is in God, no one know-
eth, except the Spirit of God. (12) Now we have 12
received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit


which is from God ; that we might know the free

13 gifts, which arc given to us by God, (13) Which
things we also speak; not in the teaching of the
wonls of man's wisdom, but in the teaching of the
S))irit; and we compare spirituals with spirituals.

14 (14) For a man in his natural self,<= rcccivoth not
spirituals; for they arc foolishness to him. Neither
can he know them ; for they arc discerned by the

15 Spirit. (15) But he that is spiritual, judgeth of all
1(3 tilings: and he is judged of by no one. (16) For

who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he
should instruct him? But we have the mind of
Messiah.

III. And 1, my Brethren, could not talk with you, as
with spiritual=^ [persons], but as with the carnal,*'

2 as with babes in ^[cssiah. (2) I gave you milk,
and did not give you solid food : for ye were not
then able to receive it; and even now, ye are not

3 able. (3) For ye are still in the flesh.^ For, as
there are among you envying, and contention, and
parties, are ye not carnal, and walking in the flesh?

4 (4) For, while one of you saith, I am of Paul ; and
another saith, I am of Apollos; are ye not carnal?

5 — (5) F'or, who is Paul, or who is Apollos, but the
ministers by whom ye believed, each one as the

6 Lord gave to him? (6) I planted, and Apollos

7 watered ; but God produced the growth. (7) Not
therefore he that planted, is to be accounted of, nor
he that watered, but God who ])roduced the growth.

8 (8) And he that planted, and he that watered are
on a par \^ each receiveth his reward, according

9 to his labor. (9) For we labor with God : and ye

10 arc God's husbandry, and God's edifice. (10) Ac-
cording to the grace of God which was given me, I
laid the foundation like a wise architect; and
another buildeth on it. But let each one see, how

11 he buildeth on it. (11) P'or any other foundation
can no man la}^, different from that which is laid,

12 which is Jesus Messiah. (12) And if any one
buildeth on this foundation, cither gold, or silver,
or ])rccious stones, or wood, or ha}', or stubble ;

13 (13) the work of each will be exposed to view ; for
the day will expose it; because it is to be tested by
lire; and the lire will disclose the work of each, of

14 what sort it is. (14) And that builder whose work

£0


Sy.

Gr. iv ■\'^XV'


Sy. 'j.l.K.O
Sy. U^-v^

Sy. ;mo»->


Sy. are one.


306


1 CORINTHIANS, IV.


Sy.


SOffiV)


shall endure, will receive his reward. (15) And 15
he, whose work shall burn up, will suffer loss ;
yet himself will escape ; but it will be, as from
the fire. — (16) Know ye not, that ye are the temple 16
of God? and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in
you? ,(17) Whoever shall mar the temple of God, 17
God will mar him : for the temple of God is hol}^,
which [temple] ye are. (18) Let no one deceive 18
himself. Whoever among you thinkcth that he is
wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he
may be wise. (19) For the wisdom of this world 19
is fatuity with God : for it is written, Ue catcheth
the wise in their own craftiness. (20) And again : 20
The Lord knowcth the devices of the wise, that
they are vain. (21) Wherefore, let no one glory 21
in men : for all things are yours ; (22) whether 22
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life,
or death, or things present, or things to come ; all
things are yours : (23) and ye are Messiah's, and 23
Messiah is God's.— [I V".] Let us be so accounted IV.
of by you, as the servants'* of Messiah, and the
stewards of the mysteries of God. (2) Now it is 2
required of stewai'ds, that each be f^und faithful.
(3) But to me, it is a light matter to be judged of 3
by you, or by any man whatever ; nay, I am no
judge of myself (4) (For I am not conscious in 4
myself of any thing [flagrant]; yet I am not by
this justified ; for the Lord is my judge.) (5) There- 5
fore pronounce not judgments before the time, [or]
until the Lord come, who will pour light upon the
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the thoughts of [men's] hearts: and then will each
one have [due] praise from God.

These things, my Brethren, I have stated con- 6
cerning the person of myself and of Apollos, for
your sakes ; that, in us,, ye might learn not to
think [of men], above what is written ; and that
no one might exalt himself in comparison with his
fellow, on account of any person. (7) For who 7
exploreth thee? Or what hast thou, which thou
didst not receive ? And if thou receivedst it, why
gloriest thou, as if thou didst not receive it?

(8) Now ye are yourselves full, and enriched ; and, 8
without us, are on thrones ! And I wish ye were
enthroned ; that we also might reign with you.

(9) But I suppose, that God hath placed us legates 9


1 CORINTHIANS, V.


307


the last, as for death; since we have become a
spectacle to the world, to angels and to men.

10 (10) We are fools, on account of Messiah ; but ye
arc wise in Messiah! We arc feeble ; but ye are

11 strong! Yc are lauded, we are contemned. (11)
Unto this hour, we hunger, and thirst, and are
naked, and are buffeted, and have no permanent

12 home : (12) and we toil, working with our own
hands : they defame us, and we bless : they persecute

13 us, and we endure it: (18) they revile us, and we
entreat them : we are as the filth of tlic world, and

14 the expiation for all men, up to this time.- — (14) I
write tliese things, not to shame you ; but I instruct

15 you, as dear children, (15) For though ye have
a m3'riad of teachers in Messiah, yet not many
fathers ; for in Jesus Messiah, I have begotten you

10 by preaching.^ (K!) I beseech you, therefore, that

17 .yc be like me. — (17) For this cause have I sent to
you Timothy, who is my beloved son, and faithful
in the Lord, that he might bring to your recollection
my ways in Messiah, agreeably to what I teach in

18 all the churches. (18) Now some of you arc in-
flated, as though I would not [dare] come to you.

19 (19) But I will come to you speedily, if God be
willing : and I will know, — not the speech'' of them

20 who exalt themselves, but their power: (20) for
the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.

21 (21) What will yc? Shall I come to you with
the rod, or with love and a gentle spirit?

V. In short, ^ it is reported, there is whoredom
among you ; and such whoredom as is not even
named among the heathen, that a son should even

2 take the wife of his father. "(2) And ye are infla-
ted, and have not rather sitten down in gi'ief, that
he who hath done this deed might be separated

3 from you. (3) And I, while distant from you in
body but present with you in spirit, have already,
as if present, judged him who pcrpctrateth this

4 deed; (4) that yc all assemble together, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Messiah, and I with you
in spirit, together with the energy^ of our Lord

5 Jesus Messiah ; (5) and that ye deliver him over
to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh,'' that in
spirit he may have life, in the day of our Lord
Jesus Messiah.


or, the Gospel.


Sv. word.


Sy. Imfli


Sy. ot\i »«


or, bodij.


308


1 CORINTHIANS, VI.


Sy. ;.x£l^


• alii: unleav-
ened.


* or, wicked per-
son.


'Sy.]V)\\
"• Sy. VdUSd


Your glorying is not praiseworthy.^ Know ye 6
not, that a little leaven leaveneth the whole mass?

(7) Purge out from you the old leaven, that ye 7
may be a new mass, as ye are unleavened. For
our passover is the Messiah, who was slain for us.

(8) Therefore let us celebrate the festival, not with 8
the old leaven, nor with the leaven of wickedness
and bitterness, but with the l^javenc of purity and
sanctity. — (9) I wrote to you by letter, not to com- 9
mingle with whoremongers. (10) But I say not, 10
with the whoremongers who are in the world, nor
[speak 1] of the avaricious, or of the rapacious, or

of the idol-worsliippers, otherwise ye would be
obliged to go out of the world. (11) But tiiis is 11
what I wrote to you, that ye commingle not, if anj^
one is called a brother, and is a whoremonger, or
avaricious, or an idol-worshipper, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or rapacious, — with him who is such,
not even to eat bread. (12) For what business 12
have I to judge them who are without? But
those within the body, judge ye, (13) and those 13
without, God judgeth ; and remove ye the wicked-
ness'" from among you.


Dare any of you, when he hath a controversy VI.
with his brother, litigate before the iniquitous, and
not before the sanctified? (2) Or know ye not, 2
that the sanctified will judge the world ?'^ And if
the world will be judged by you, are ye unfit to
decide trivial causes? (3) Know ye not, that we 3
shall judge angels?'' How much more things that
arc of the world ? (1) But if ye have a controversy 4
about a worldly matter, seat ye on the bench for
you those who are contemned in the church 1
(o) For shame to you I say [it]. So, there is not 5
even one wise man among you, who is competent
to do equity between a brother and his brother :
(6) but a brother litigateth with his brother, and 6
also before them that believe not ! (7) Now there- 7
fore ye condemn yourselves, in that ye have litiga-
tion one with another. For why do ye not rather
suffer wrong ? why not rather be defrauded ?
(8) But ye yourselves commit wrong, and ye de-
fraud even your brethren. (9) Or do ye not know,
that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom
of God? Do not mistake ; neither whoremongers,


9


1 CORINTHIANS, VII.


309


nor idol-worshippers, nor adulterers, nor debau-

10 chccs, nor Hers with males, (10) nor the avaricious,
nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor railcrs, nor extor-

11 tioners, — will inherit tlie kingdom of God. (11)
And tlicse things have been in some of you : but
ye are washed, and are sanctified, and made righ-
teous, in the name of our Lord Jesus the Messiah,
and by the Spirit of our God.

12 Every thing is in my power :<= but every thing is
not })roritablc to me. Every thing is in my power;
but none [of them] shall have dominion over me.

13 (13) Food is for the belly ; and the belly is for
food ; but God will bring them both to naucfht.
But the body is not for whoredom, but for our

14: Lord; and our Lord for the body. (14) And God
hath raised up our Lord ; and he will raise us up,

15 by his power. (15) Know ye not, that your bodies
are the members of the Messiah? Shall one take
a member of the Messiah, and make it the member

16 of a harlot? Far be it. (IG) Or know ye not,
that whoever joineth himself to a harlot, is one body
[with her]? For it is said. They twaiu shall be

17 one body. (17) But he that joineth himself to our

18 Lord, is with him one spirit. (18) Flee whoredom.
For every [other] sin which a man eommitteth, is
external to his body ; but he that eommitteth

19 whoredom, sinneth against his own bod3\ (19) Or
know ye not, that your body is the temple of the
Holy Sj)irit who abideth'' in 3'ou, whom ye have
received from God? And ye are not your own.

20 (20) For ye are bought^ with a price. Therefore,
glorify ye God, with your body, and with your
s|)irit, which are God's.

VIL And concerning the things of which ye wrote to
me, it is praiseworthy for a man not to approach

2 a woman. (2) But, on account of whoredc^m, let
each have his own wife; and let a woman have

3 her own husband. (8) And let the man render
to his wife the kindness which is due; and so

4 also the woman to her husband. (4) The woman
is not the sovereign'' over her IkxI}', but her hus-
band : so also the man is not the sovereign over

5 his body, but the wife. (5) Therefore, deprive not
one another, except when yc lx)th consent, at the
time ye devote yourselves to fasting and prayer;


'Sy.


" Sy. ]A^j
" Sy.


Sy. ^a«^»


S}-. 14^^


310


1 CORINTHIANS, VII.


• Sy.


and return again to the same disposition, that Satan
tempt you not because of the concupiscence of
your bo.ly. (6) But this I say, as to weak })er- G
sons, not of positive precept.*^ (7) For I would 7
that all men might be like me in purity. But
every man is endowed with his gift of God ; one
thus, and another so. (8) And I say to them wlio 8
have no wives, and to widows, that it is advanta-
geous to them to remain as I am. (D) But if they 9
cannot endure [it], let them marry : for it is more
profitable to take a wife, than to burn with concu-
piscence. (10) And on them who have wives, I 10
enjoin, — not J, but my Lord, — that the woman
separate not from her husband. (11) And if she 11
separate, let her remain without a husband, or be
reconciled to her husband; and let not the man
put away his wife. (12) And to the rest, say J, — 12
1, not my Lord, — that if there be a brother, who
hath a wife that believeth not, and she is disposed
to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
(13) And that woman, who hath a husband that 13
believeth not, and he is disposed to dwell with her,
let her not forsake her husband. (11) For the It
husband who believeth not, is sanctilied by the
wife that believeth ; and the wife who balieveth
not, is sanctihed by the husband that believeth:
otherwise their children would be impure ; but now
are tliey pure.«^ (15) But if the unbeliever sjpa- 15
ratcth, let him separate : A brother or sister is not in
bondage in such cases: it is to peace, God hath called
us. (15) For how knowest thou, 0 wife, whether IG
thou wilt ])rocure life to thy husband ?<= Or, thou
husband, knowest thou, whether thou wilt procure
life*" to thy wife? (17) Every one, however, as 17
the Lord hath distributed to him, and every one as
God hath called him, so let him v/alk. And also
thus I enjoin upon all the churches. (18) Is a cir- 18
cumciscd person called, let him not revert to uncir-
cumcision : and if one uneireumcised be called, let
him not become circumcised. (ID) For oircum- 19
cision is nothing, neither is uncircumcision ; but the
keeping of God's commands. (20) Let every one 20
continue in the vocation, in which he was called.
(21) If thou wert called, being a servant ; let it not 21
trouble thee. But if thou canst be made free,
choose it rather than to serve. (22) For he that 22


Sy. ,^jLDy


Sy.


f Sy. ]^U


1 CORINTIHANS, VII.


311


is called by our Lord, being a servant, is God's

freedman : likewise, he that is ealled, being a free
23 man, is the Afessiah's servant. (23) Ye arc bought

with a price ; become not the servants of men.
2-1 (2-1) Let every one. my Brethren, continue with

God, in whatever [state] he was called.
2o And concerning virginit}', I have no precept

from God; biit I give counsel, as a man who hath

obtained mercy from God to be a believer.
2G (20) And 1 think this is suitable,!? on account of

the necessity of the times; it is advantageous for a

27 man to remain as he is. (27) Art thou bound to a
wife? Seek not a release. Art thou fiee from a

28 wife? Seek not a wife. (28) But if thou takest
a wife, thou sinnest not. And if a maiden is given
to a husband, she sinneth not. But they who are
such, will have trouble in the bod}^ : but T am for-

29 bearing to you. (29) And this I say, my Brethren,
that the time to come is short; so that they who

30 have wives, should be as if they had none ; (80) and
they who weep, as if they wept not ; and they who
rejoice, as if they i*ejoiced not; and tliey who buy,

31 as if ihcy acquired not; (31) and those occupied
with this world, not going beyond the just using:
for the fashion'' of this world is passing away.

32 (32) And theref«)rc I wish you to be without
solicitude. For he who hath not a wife, consider-
eth the things of his Lord, how he may please his

33 Lord. (33) And he who hath a wife, is anxious
about the world, how he may please his Avife.

31 (31) There is a difference also between a wife and
a maiden. She who is witlujut a husband, think-
eth of things pertaining to her Lord, that she may
be holy in her body and in her spirit. But she
who hath a husband, thinketh of things pertaining
to the world, how she may please her husband.

35 (35) And this I say for your advantage ; I am not
laynig a snare for you ; but that ye may bo faith-
ful towards your Lord, in a suitable manner, while

36 not minding worldly things. (36) But if any one
thinketh that there is reproach, on account of his
maiden [daughter], because she hath passed her
time, and he hath not presented her to a husband,
[and] it be fitting that he present her; let him do
what he desireth, he sinneth not; let her be mar-

87 ried. (37) But he who hath firmly determined


^ Sy. l; > n »


Sy. •


SiTD]


812


1 CORINTHIANS, VHI.


' Sy. I «g^ •

k Sy. ZL1^_.A^
; «g^ •^ or,
wore cowj-
mendably.


1. e. conscien-


tiously.


►Sy,


^a£UL4-J^Q_»


in his own mind, and nothing compelleth him, and
he can act his own j)lcasure, and he so judgeth in
his heart, that he keep his maiden [daugliter],
he doeth commendably.' (38) And therefore, he 38
who prcsenteth his maiden [daughter], doeth com-
menchibl y ; and he who presenteth not his maiden
[daughter], doeth very commendably^ (39) A 30
woman, while her husband liveth, is bound by the
law ; but if her husband sleepeth [in death], she is
free to marrj^ whom she pleaseth, [yet] oidy in the
Lord. (40) But she is hajipicr, in my opinion, if 40
she remain so : and I think also, that I have the
Spirit of God.

And concerning sacrifices to idols, we know, VIII.
that in all of us there is knowledge ; and knowledge
inflatcth, but love cdiiieth. (2) And if any one 2
thinketh that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth
nothing yet, as he ought to know [it]. (3) But if 3
any one loveth God, tiiat man is known of him.
(4) As to the eating of the sacrifices of idols, there- 4
fore, we know that an idol is nothing in the world ;
and that there is no other God, but one. (5) For 5
although there are what are called gods, whether
in heaven, or on earth, (as there are gods many,
and lords many,) (6) yet to us, on our jxart, there 6
is one God, the Father, from whom are all things,
and we in him; and one Lord, Jesus the Messiah,
by whom are all things, and we also by him.

(7) But there is not [this] knowledge in every 7
man ; for there are some, who, to the {)resent time,

in their conscience,^ eat [it] as an offering to idols ;
and because their conscience is weak, it is defiled.

(8) But food doth not bring us near to God ; for if 8
we eat, we do not abound ; and if we eat not, we
are not in want. (9) See to it, however, lest this 9
your authority^' become a stumbling-block to the
weak. (10) For if one should see thee in whom 10
there is knowledge, reclining in the temple of idols,
will not his conscience, seeing he is a weak person,

be encouraged to eat what is sacrified ? (11) And 11
by thy knowledge, he who is feeble, and on account
of whom the Messiah died, will perish. (12) And 12
if ye thus sin against your brethren, and wound
the consciences of tlie feeble, ye sin against the
Messiah. (13) Wherefore, if food is a stumbling- 13


1 CORINTHIANS, IX.


313


block to my brother, I will for ever cat no flesh,
lest I should be a stumbling-block to my brother.

IX, Am I not a free man? Or, am I not a lefrate?^
Or, have 1 not seen Jesus Messiah our T.onl ? Or,

2 have ye not been my work in my Lord ? (2) And
if I liavc not been a legate to others, yet I have
been so to you ; and ye arc the seal of my legate-

3 ship. (8) And [my] aj^ology to my judgcrs, is

4 this: (4) Have we not autlx^rity,'' to cat and to

5 drink? (o) Or have we not authority to carry
about with us a sister as a wife; just as the other
legates, and the bn)thers of our Lord, and as Ce-

6 })has? (0) Or I only, and Barnabas, have we no

7 right to forbear labor ? (7) Who, that scrveth in
war, [doth so] at his own expense? Or who, that
])lanteth a vineyard, eateth not of its fruits? Or
who, that tendeth sheep, eateth not of the milk

8 of his flocks? (8) Is it as a man, I say these
y things? Behold, the law also saith them. "(9) P'or

it is written in the law of Moses, Thou slialt not
muzzle the ox that threshcth.c Hath God regard

10 for oxen ? (10) But manifest it is, for whose sake
he said it. And indeed, for our sakes it was writ-
ten : because the ])lougher ought to plough in hope,

11 and the thresher in hope of fruit. (11) If we have
sowed among you the things of the Spirit, is it a
great matter, if we reap from you the things of

12 the body? (12) And if others have this preroga-
tive'' over you, doth it not belong still more to us?
Yet we have not used this prerogative; but we
have endured every thing, that we might in noth-
ing impede the announcement of tlie Messiah.

13 (13) Know yc not, that they who serve in a tem-
])le,'^ are fed from the temple? And they who
serve at the altar, ])articipate with the altar?

14 (14) Thus also hatli our Lord commanded, that
they who proclaim his gospel, should live by his

15 gospel. (15) But I have used none of these things:
and I write not, that it may be so done to me ; for
it would be better for mc to actually die, than that

16 .inv one should make void my glorying. (10)
For while I preach, I have no [ground of] glory-
ing; because ncces.'^itv is laid upon me, and woe

17 to me, if I ])reach not. (17) For if I do this vol-
untarily, there is a reward for me : but if involun-


Sy. ]^» iN »


Sy.>^»\n


Sy; treadeth.


"Sy.U^^Qj*


Sy. a holy
house.


t:.


3U


1 CORINTHIANS, X.


f Sy.


V


^lo


Sy. "U1


^Sy.

Gr. ayuva.
' or, mind.

* Sy.yW = uri


avjp.


' Sy. Ojini.


Sy.


Gr.


tarilj, a stewardship is intrusted to me. (18) What 18
then is my reward? [It is,] that when I preach, I
make the announcement of the Messiah without
cost, and use not the prerogative given me in the
gospel. f (19) Being free from them all, I have 19
made myself servant to every man ; that I might
gain many : (20) and with the Jews, I was as a 20
Jew, that I might gain the Jews; and with those
under the law, I was as under tlie law, that I might
gain them who are under the law; (21) and to 21
those who have not the law, I was as without the
hxw, (ahhough I am not without law to God, but
under the law of the Messiah,) that I miglit gain
them that are without tiie law. (22) I was with 22
the weak, as weak, that I might gain the weak : I
was all things to all men, that I might vivifys
every one. (23) And this I do, that I may par- 23
ticipate in the announcement. — (21) Know ye not, 21
tiiat they who run in the stadium, run all of them;
yet it is one who gaineth the victory. Run ye, so
as to attain. (25) For every one ay ho engageth in 25
thecontest,^ restraineth his desires' in eveiy tiling.
And they run, to obtain a crown that perisheth ;
but we, one that perisheth not. (26) I therefore so 26
run, not as for something unknown ; and I so
struggle, not as struggling against air:^ (27) but 27
I subdue my body, and reduce it to servitude ; lest,
when I have preached to others, I myself should
be a reprobate.

And, my Brethren, I would have you know, that X.
our fathers were all of them under the cloud, and
they all passed through the sea ; (2) and they 2
were all baptized-* by Moses, in the cloud and in
the sea; (3) and they all ate the same spiritual 3
food; (1) and they all drank the same spii-itual 4
drink; for they drank from the spiritual rock that
attended them, and that rock Avas the Messiah.
(5) Bat with a multitude of them, God was not 5
pleased ; for they fell in the wilderness. (6) Now G
these things Averc an example'' for us, that we
should not hanker after evil things as tlicy hank-
erod, (7) Neither should Ave serve idols, as some 7
of them served ; as it is Avritten, The people sat
down to eat and to drink, and rose up to sport.
(8) Neither let us commit Avhoredom, as some of 8


1 CORINTHIANS, X.


315


tlicm committed ; and there fell in one day twenty

9 and three thousand. (9) Neither hit us tempt the

Messiah, as some of tliem templed ; and serpents

10 destroyed them. (10) Neither mnrmui' ye, as some
of them murmured; and they perislied by the

11 destroyer.^ (11) All these things which befell
them, were for an example to us ; and they are
written for our instruction, on whom the end of the

12 world J liath come. (12) Wherefore, let him who

13 thiids-eth he standeth, beware lest he fall. (13) No
trial comctli on you, but what pertaineth to men :
and God is faithful, who will not ])ermit you to be
tried beyond your ability, but will make an issue
to your trial, that ye may be able to sustain it. —

14 (11) Wherefore, my Beloved, flee from idolatry.

15 (lo) I speak as to the wise ; judge ye what I say.
1(3 (1(3) The cup of thanksgiving which we bless, is it

not the connnunion of the blood of the Messiah?

And .the bread which we break, is it nut the com-
17 inunion of the body of the Messiah? (17) As

therefore that bread is one, so we are all one body ;

lor we all take to ourselves from that one bread.
IS (18) Behold the Israel who are in the flesh; are

not they who cat the victims, participators of the

19 altar? (19) What then do I say? That an idol is
any thing ? Or, that an idol's sacrifice is any thing?

20 No. (20) But that what the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice to dci^ons,*' and not to God. And I would

21 not, that ye should be associates of demons. (21) Ye
cannot drink the cup of our Lord, and the cup of
demons ; and \'c cannot be partakers at the table

22 of our Lord, and at the table of demons. (22) Or,
would wcsedulou.sly provoke our Lord's jealousy ?
Are we stronger than he?

23 Every thing is in my })ower ;'' but every thing
is not profitable. Every thing is in my power;

2-1 but cveiy thing doth not edif)'. (24) Let no one
s.vk his own things, but also tlie things of his

25 l'elli)w-man. (25) Whatever is sold in the flesh-
market, cat ye, without an inquiry on account of

2() conscience: (2(5) "for the earth is the Lord's, in its

27 iullness. (27) And if one of the Gentiles invite
you, and ye are disposed to go, eat ye whatever is
set before you, without an inquiry on account of

28 conscience. (28) But if any one shall sa}'- to you.
This pertaineth to a .sacrifice ; eat not, for the sake


Sy.


ft


Sy. l?]i


Sy.


316


1 CORINTHIANS, XI.


Sy.

Aramaeans.


^ or, be saved.

• Sy. ^jtj?
•■ Sy. IiijALd


'Sy.

' Sy. ]2,]]^

• or, exclusive
of.


' Sy. UaD


of him who told 3'^ou, and for conscience's sake.
(29) The conscience I speak of, is not your own, 29
but his who t(jld yow. But why is my liberty
judged of, by thj conscience of others? (30) If I 30
by grace ])artakc, why am I reproached for that,
for which 1 give thanks? (31) If therefore ye eat, 31
or if ye drink, or if ye do any thing, do all things
for the glory of God. (32) Be ye without offence 32
to the Jews, and to the Gentiles,? and to the
church of God : (33) even as I also, in every thiu'j-, 33
please every man ; and do not seek what is profita-
ble to me, but what is profitable to many ; that
tlicy may live.*» [XL] Be ye imitators of me, as XL
[ am of the Messiah.

Moreover I commend yon, my Brethren, that in 2
all things ye are mindful of me, and that yo, hold
fast the pi'ecepts as I delivered them to you. (3) 3
And I would have you know, that the head=^ of
every man is the Messiah, and tlie head of the
woman is the man, and the head of the Messiah is
God. (1) Every man, who ])rayeth or pro})hesi- 4
cth'* with his head covered, dishoiioreth his head.
(5) And everv woman, who pi-ayeth or prophesi- 5
eth with her head uncovei'cd, dishonorcth her
head; for .she is on a level with her whose head is
shaven, ((j) For if a woman be not covered, let 6
iier also be shorn ; but if it be sliameful for a
wom:ni to be shorn or shaven, letAer be covered.
(7) The man, indeed, ought not to cover his head, 7
because he is tlie likeness and glory of God : but
the woman is the glory of the man. (8) For the 8
man was not from the woman, but the woman from
the man. (9) Neither was the man created for the 9
woman's sake, but the woman for the man's sake.
(10) For this cause ought the woman to have on 10
her head [the mark of] authority,'"' because of the
angels. '1 (11) Nevertheless, the" man is not with- 11
ouf-' the woman, nor the woman without the man,
in our Lord. (12) For as the woman [was] from 12
the man, so the man is bv the woman ; and every
thing is from God. (13) Judg'e for yourselves, 13
among yourselves; is it becoming, that a woman
pray to God with her head Uncovered? (14) Doth 11
not nature'" teach you, that in a man, if his h.iir
groweth long, it is a reproach to him ? (15) But 15
for a woman, if her hair is abundant, it is a glory


1 CORINTHIANS, XI.


117


to her; for her hair is given to her for a covering. I
10 (16) But if any one is contentious about those
things, we on our part have no such custom, nor
hatii the church of Goch

17 This which I now enjoin, is not as praising you;
for ye liave not made progress, but have deteriora-

18 ted. (IS) Because, first ; when ye assemble in the
churcli, there are, 1 hear, divisions among you; and

19 I partly believe it. (It)) For there are to be con-
tentionss among you, that the approved among % Sy. \\ ."..>

20 you may be known, (20) AVhen therefore ye
come together, ye eat and drink, not as is becom-

21 iiig on tlie day of our Lord. (21) But, one and
another proeeedeth to eat his own supper; and one

22 is hungry, and another is drunken. (22) What!
have ye no houses in Avhich ye can eat and drink?
or, despise ye the church of God, and shame them
who have notiiing? What shall I say to you?
Shall I ]iraise you ? In this I praise you not.

23 (23) For I have received from our Lord, that which
I imjxartcd to you ; that our Lord Jesus, on the

2-1 night he was betrayed, took bread, (21) and blessed,
and brake [it], and said: "Take, eat; this is my
body, which is broken for your sahes : thus do ye,

25 in remembrance of me." (25) So, after they had
supped, he gave also the cup, and said : " Thia cup '' Sy.

is the new testament^ in my blood : thus do ye, as {.QjAjJ =
often as ye drink [it], in remembrance of me." Gr. Jiaflr.xv].

26 (2(5) For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink
tiiis cu]\ ye commemorate the death of our ]^ord,

27 until his advent. (27) lie therefore, who eateth
of the l)read of the Lord, and drinketli of liis cup,
and is not worthy of it, is guilty of the blood of the

28 Lord, and of his body, (28) For this reason, a
man should examine himself, and tlien eat of this

20 bread, and drink of this cuj) : (29) for, whoever
eatetii and drinketli of it, while he is unworthy,
eateth and drinketh condemnation on himself, by

30 not discerning the body of the Lord. (30) For this
cause, many among you are diseased and sickly,

81 and many .sleep.' (31) For if we would judge • or, /laret/jW.

32 ourselves, we should not be judged. (32) V>\xl\
when wc arc judged by our liord, we are really!
chastised,'' that we may not be condemned \^'\\\\\^ ^y . are chas-

33 the world. (33) Wherefore, my Jiri'thrcn, when ye I thediobe

34 assemble to eat, wait ye one for another. (31) Andj chastised.


318


1 CORINTHIANS, XII.


•Sy.

•> Sy. "i^J-K*

* or, voice.

' Sy. i;0^
•Sy.

'Sy.

* or, speech.
» Sy. PIk.


Sy.
A rnmasans.


let liim who is Imngiy, cat at home ; that ye may
a.ssemble, not for condemnation. And as to other
things, 1 will uive you directions when I come.

And concerning spirituals, a- my brethren, XIL
I would have you know, (2) that ye have been 2
pagans;'* and have been, without distinction, led
away after idols, in which there is no speech. ^
(o) 1 therefore inform you, that there is no man, 3
that speaketh by the Spirit of God, who saith that
Jesus is accursed:'^ neither can a man say that
Jesus is the Lord, except by the Holy Spirit.
(4) Now there are diversities of gifts ;<= but the 4
S[)irit is one. (5) And there are diversities of min- 5
istrations ; but the Lord is one. (6) And there 6
are diversities of energies ;f but God, who worketh
all in all men, is one. (7) And to each man, there 7
is given a manifestation of the Spirit, that it may
aid him. (S) To one, by the Spirit, there is given 8
a words of wisdom ; and to another, by the same
Spirit, there is given a word of knowledge : (9) to
another, by the same Spirit, faith : to another, by
the same Spirit, gifts of healing: (10) and to
another, miracles :'i and to another, prophecy:
and to another, the discerning of spirits : and to
another, [divers] kinds of tongues : and to another,
the intcrj)rctation of tongues. (11) But all these,
worketh that one Spirit; and he distributeth to
every one as he pleaseth. (12) For as the body is 12
one, and in it are many members ; and all those
members of the body, though many, arc one body ;
so also is the Messiah. (13) For all of us, likewise, 13
by one S])irit, have been baptized into one bod}^,
whether Jews or Gentiles,' whether slaves or free;
and all of us have drinked in one Spirit. (11) For 14
a body also, is not one member, but many. (15) For 15
If the foot should say. Because I am not the hand,
I am not of the body; is it, on that account, not
of the body? (IG) Or if the ear should say, Be- IG
cause I am not the eye, I am not of the body ; is
it, on that account, not of the body? (17) And if 17
the whole body were an eye, where would be the
hearing? Or if it were all hearing, where would
be the smclhng? (18) But now hath God placed IS
every one of the members in the bodj'-, according
to his pleasure. (19) And if they were all one 19


9


10


11


1 CORINTHIANS, XIII.


3ia


20 member, where would be the body? (20) But
now tlicy arc many members, yet but one body.

21 (21) The eye cannot say to the hand, Thou art not
needful to me : nor can the head say to the feet, Ye

22 arc not needful to me. (22) But rather, tliose
members which are accounted feeble, are indispen-

23 sable. (23) And those which we think dishonora-
ble in the body, on them we heap more honor ;
and those that are uncomely, on them wc put the

2-4 more decoration. (24) For the honorable members
in us, have no need of honor : for God hath tem-
pered the body, and given moi'c honor to the mem-

25 l)er which is iid'erior; (2.3) that there might be no
disunion'^ in the body, but that all the members,

20 equally, might care for one another; (2G) so that,
when one member is in pain, they will all s^'mpa-
thizc ; and if one member is exalted, all the mem-

27 bers will be exalted. (27) Now ye arc the body

28 of Messiah, and members in your place. (28) For
God hath placed in his church, first, legates; after
them, prophets; after them, teachers ; after them,
workers of miracles; after them, the gifts of heal-
ing, and helpers, and leaders, and [various] kinds

29 of tongues. (29) Arc they all legates? Are they
all i)ro]>hets? Are they all teachers? Are they

30 all workers of miracles? (30) Have all of them
the gifts of healing? Do they all speak with

31 tongues? Or do they all interpret? — (31) And if
ve are emulous of the superior gifts, on the other
Land, I show to you a better way,

Xlir. If I could speak in every tongue of men, and
in tiiat of angels, and there should be no love=^ in
me, I should be like brass that resoundeth, or the

2 cymbal that maketh a noise. (2) And if there
should be in me [the gift of J prophecy, and I should
understand all the mysteries, and every science;
and if there should be in me all faith, so that I
couUl move mountains, and love should not be in

S me, I should be nothing. (3) And if I should feed
out to the destitute all I possess; and if I should
give my body to be burned ; and there should be no

4 love in me, I gain nothing. — (4) Love is long-suf-
fering, and is kind ; love is not envious ; love is not

5 boisterous; and is not inflated; (5) and doth noth-
ing that causeth shame ; and sceketh not her own ;


■= or, division.


Sy. IriiQj.j


320


1 CORINTHIANS, XIV.


Sy. a little of
muck.


Sy. a little of
much.


is not passionate; and thinketli no evil; (6) re- 6
joiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth ;
(7) beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth 7
all, and cnJurcth all. (8) Love will never cease. 8
But prophesyings will end ; and tongues will be
silent; and knowledge Avill vanish. (9) For we 9
know but partially ; ^ and we prophesy but partially.
(10) But when completeness ahall come, then that 10
which is partial will vanish away. (11) When I 11
was a child, I talked as a child, and I reasoned as a
child, and I thought as a child : but when I became
a man, I laid aside the things of childhood.

(12) And now Ave see, as by a mirror, in simili- 12
tudc ; but then face to face: now I know partially ;<=
but then shall I know, just as I am known.

(13) For these three things are abiding, faith, and 13
hope, and love ; but the greatest of these is love.

Follow after love ; and be emulous of the gifts XIV.
of the Spirit, and especially, that ye may prophesy.
(2) For he that speaketh in a tongue, speaketh not 2
unto men, but unto God ; for no one understandeth
what is said ; yet in the spirit, he speaketh a mys-
tery, (o) But he that prophcsieth, speaketh unto 3
men, for edification, and exhortation, and consola-
tion. (4) lie that speaketh in a tongue, editieth 4
himself: and he that prophcsieth, cdificth the
church. (5) Now I would that ye all sjioke with 5
tongues, but rather that ye prophesied ; for greater
is he that prophcsieth, than he that speaketh in a
tongue, unless he interpret ; and if he interpret, he
edilieth the church. (6) And now, my brethren, if C
I should come among you, and speak to you in
tongues, what should I profit you ; unless I should
speak to you citlier by revelation, or by knowledge,
or by prophecy, or by doctrine? (7) For even in- 7
animate things that emit sound, whether pipe or
harp, if they make no distinction between one sound
and another, how will it be known, what is sung or
what is harped ? (8) And if the trumpet shall give 8
an uncertain sound, who will prepare himself for
the battle ? (9) So likewise if ye utter a discourse 9
m a tongue, and there is no interpretation given,
how will it be known what ye have said ? Ye will
have been as if ye spoke into the air. (10) For lo, 10
there are many kinds of tongues in the world; and


1 CORINTHIANS, XIV.


821


there is not one of them without meaning.*

11 (11^ But if I do not know tlie import^ of the sound,
I snail be a barbarian'^ to him that speaketh, and

12 the speaker will be a barbarian to me. (12) So
also ye, since ye are emulous of the gifts of the
Spirit for the edification of the chnrch, seek ye to

13 excel. (13) And let him that speaketh in a tongue,

14 pray that he may interpret. (14) For if I should
pray in a tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my under-

15 standing is without fruits. (15) What then shall I
do? I will pray with my spirit, and will pray
with my understanding; and 1 Avill sing with my
spirit, and will sing with my understanding.

16 (16) Otherwise, if tliou blessest in the spirit, how
shall he that fillcth the place of one unlearned,*^ say
Amen, on thy giving thanks ; for he knoweth not

17 what thou saycst ? (17) Thou blessest, indeed,

18 very well ; but thy neighbor is not edified. (18) I
thank God, that I speak with tongues more than all

19 of you. (19) But in the church, I would rather
speak five words Avith my understanding, that I
jnight instruct others, than a myriad of words in a

20 tongue. — (20) My brethren, be ye not children in
your thoughts ; l)Ut to evil things be ye infants ;

21 and in your thoughts be men.<^ (21) In the law it
is written. With a foreign speech, and in another
tongue, will I s])cak with this people ; and even so
also the}' will not hearken to me, saith the Lord.

22 (22) Wherefore, tongues are established for a sign,
not to the believers, but to them that believe not.
But prophesyings are not for those who believe not,

23 but for them that believe. (23) If therefore the
whole church^ assemble, and they all speak with
tongues, and there come in unlearned persons, or
such as believe not, will they not say : These peo-

24 pie are crazy ? (24) But if ye should be all pro-
phesying, and one unlearned or an unbeliever
should come among you, he is explored by you all,

25 and rebuked by you all ; (25) and the secrets of his
heart are laid open [to him] : and so he will fall
upon his face, and will worship God, and say :

26 Verily, God is in you. — (26) I therefore say [to
you] my brethren, that when ye assemble, whoever
of you hath a psalm, let him speak ; and whoever
hath a doctrine, and whoever hath a revelation, and
whoever hath a tongue, and whoever hath an


Sy. a voice.
Sy. (n\i »>
Sy. "U'^iSH


Sy.

Gr. (JiJjTa.


• Sy. full, corru
plete.


sy-Ur^


322


1 CORINTHIANS, XV.


or, immodest.


•Sy.

^ or, are saved.


interpretation. Let them all be for edification.
(27) And if any speak in a tongue, let two speak, 27
or at most, three; and let tliem speak one by one;
and let [some] one interpret. (28) And if there is 28
none to interpret, let him that speaketh in a tongue,
be silent in the church ; and let him speak to him-
self and to God. (29) And as to prophets, let two 29
or three speak, and let the re^t judge. (30) And 30
if to another sitting b}^, there should be a revela-
tion, let the first stop .speaking. (31) For ye can 31
all prophesy, one by one ; so that every one may
learn, and every one be comforted. (32) For the 32
spirit of the prophets is subject to the prophets.
(33) Because, God is not [the author] of tumult, but 33
of peace, as in all churches of the saints. — (31) Let 31
your women be silent in the church : for it is not
permitted them to speak, but to be in subjection, as
also the law saith. (35) And if they wi.sh to be 35
informed on any subject, let them ask their hus-
bands at home: for it is unbecoming? for women to
speak in the church. (30) What! was it from you 36
that the word of God came forth ? Or did it reach
only to you? (37) And if any one among you 37
thinketh that he is a prophet, or that he is spiritual,
let him recognize the things which I write to you,
as being the precepts ofour Lord. (38) But if any 38
one be ignorant, let him be ignorant. — (39) Where- 39
fore, my brethren, be emulous of prophesying : and
to speak with tongues, j^rohibit not. (40) But let 40
every thing be done with decency and regularity.

And I make known to you, my brethren, the XV
gospel^^ which I preached to you, and which ye
received, and in which ye stand, (2) and by which 2
ye have life.^ In what terms I preached to yon,
ye remember; unless ye have believed in vain.
(3) For I delivered to yt;u from the first, as I had 3
received it ; that the Messiah died on account of
our sins, as it is written : (4) and that he was 4
buried and arose on the third day, as it is written:
(5) and that he was seen by Cephas; and after 5
him, by the twelve: (6) and after that, he was 6
seen by more than five hundred brethren at once ;
many of Avhom survive at the present time, and
some of them sleep. (7) And subsequently to this, 7
he was seen by James ; and after him, by all the


1 CORINTHIANS, XV.


323


8 legates. (8) And last of them all, he was seen by

9 me, as it wore by an abortion. (9) I am the least
of the legates ; and am not worthy to be called a
legate; because I persecuted the church of God.

10 (10) But by the grace of God, I am what I am:
and his grace, that was in me, was not in vain ; but
1 labored more than they all : — not I, but his grace

11 that was with me. (11) Whether I, therefore, or
whether the}', so we preached ; and so ye believed.

12 — (12) And if the Messiah is jjroclaimcd, as rising
from the dead ; how is it that there are some among
you, who say, Tliero is no reviviscence of the

13 dead?c (13) And if there is no reviviscence of the

14 dead, the Messiah also hath not risen. (1-1) And
if the Messiah hath not risen, our preaching is vain,

15 and your faith also vain. (15) And we too are
found false witnesses of God ; for we have testified
concerning God, that he raised up the Messiah,

16 when he did not raise him up. (16) For, if the
dead will not arise, the Messiah also hath not risen.

17 (17) And if the ^fessiah rose not, your Hiith is

18 inane •,'^ and ye arc yet in your sins : (18) and also,
doubtless, they who have fallen aslec]) in the Mes-

19 siah, have perished. (19) And if, in this life only,
we have hope in the Messiah, we are the most

20 miserable of all men. — (20) But now the Afessiah
hath risen from the dead, and become the first-fruits

21 of tiiem that slept. (21) And as by a man came
death, so also by a man came the reviviscence of

22 the dead. (22) For as it was by Adam, that all men

23 die, so also by the Messiah they all live : (23) every
one in his order; the Messiah was the first-fruits ;
afterwards, they that are the Messiah's, at his

24 coming. (24) And then will be the end, when he
shall have delivered up the kingdom to God the
Father; when every prince, and every sovereign,

25 and all jtowers shall have come to nauglit. (25) For
he is to reign, until he shall put all his enemies

26 under his feet. (26) And the last enemy, death,

27 will be abolished. (27) For he hath subjected all
under his feet. But when he said, that every thing
is subjected to him, it is manifest that he is cx-

28 cepted, who subjected all to him. (28) And when
all shall be subjected to him, then the Son himself
will be subject to him who subiectc.d all to him, so

29 that God will be all in all. — (29) Otherwise, what


« Sy.


Sy. W^


824


1 CORINTHIANS, XV.


Sy. -g^V^^


' Sy. the body
cf its nature.


1 Sy. ^a '^2


Sy. > 1 <^1


shall they do wbo are baptized for^ the dead, if the
dead rise not? Why arc they baptized for the
dead? (30) And why also do we stand every 30
hour in peril? (31) I protest, my brethren, by 31
your exultation, which is mine in our Lord Jesus
the Messiah, that I die daily. (32) If, as amongst 32
men, I was cast to wild beasts at Ephesus, what
did it profit me, if the dead rise not ? " Let us eat
and drink; for to-morrow we die." (33) Be not 33
deceived; "Evil stories corrupt well-disposed
minds." (34) Let your hearts be righteously exci-
ted, and sin not: for there are some, in whom is
not the love of God : it is to your shame, I say it.
But some one of you may say : JIow will the
dead arise? and with what body will they come
forth? (36) Foolish man ! The seed which thou
sowest, is not quickened, unless it die. (37) And
that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body
that is to be, but the naked kernel of wheat or bar-
ley, or of the other grains : (38) and God giveth it 38
a body, as he pleascth ; and to each of the grains
its natural body.** (39) And every body is not
alike ; for the body of a man is one thing, and that
of a beast is another, and that of a bird is another,
and that of a fish is another. (40) And there are
bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial ; but the
glory of the celestial [bodies] is one, and that of
the terrestrial is another. (41) And the glory of 41
the sun is one thing, and the glory of the moon is
another, and the glory of the stars is another ; and
one star exccedeth another star in glory. (42) So 42
also in the reviviscence of the dead. They arc
sown in corruption, they arise without corruption :

(43) they arc sown in dishonor, they arise in glory : 43
they are sown in weakness, they ai'ise in power :

(44) it is sown an animal bod\-, it ariseth a s]iirit- 44
ual body. For there is a body of tlie animal life,?
and there is a body of the spirit. (45) So also is it 45
written : " Adam, the first man, became a living
soul ;"h the second Adam [became] a quickening
spirit. (46) And the spiritual was not first ; but
the animal, and then the spiritual. (47) The first
man was of dust from the earth ; the second man
was the Lord from heaven. (48) As he was of the 48
dust, so also those who are of the dust ; and as was

he who was from heaven, so also are the heavenly.


34


35

36
37


9


40


46
47


1 CORINTHIANS, XVI.


325


49 (49) And as wc have worn the likeness of him
Irom the dust, so shall we wear the likeness of him

50 from heaven. — (50) But this I say, my brethren,
that flesh and blood eanuot inherit the kingdom of
heaven : neither doth corruption inherit ineorrup-

51 tion. (51) Lo, I tell you a mystery ; we shall not

52 all sleep, but we shall all be changed, (52) sud
denly, as in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
truni{)et, when it shall sound ; and the dead will
arise, without corruption ; and we shall be changed.

53 (53) For this which is corruptible, is to put on in-
corruption; and that which dieth, will put on iq:i-

54 mortality. (54) And when this that is corruptible,
shall put on incorruption, and this that dieth, im-
mortalit}- ; then will take jilaec the word that is

55 written, "Death is absorbed in victory." (55) Where
is thy sting, O death? And where is thy victory,

56 0 grave?' (50) Now the sting of death is sin ; and

57 the strength •« of sin is the law. (57) But thanks
be to God, that givcth us the victory, through our

58 Lord Jesus the Messiah. (58) Wherefore, my
brethren and my beloved, be ye steadfast, and be
not vacillating ; but be ye at all times abundant
in the work of the Lord ; seeing 3^0 know, that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord.

XVI And as to the collection for the saints, as I
directed the churches of the Galatians, so do ye.

2 (2) On each first day of the week, let every one of
you lay aside and preserve at home, what he is
able ;* that there may be no collections when I

3 come. (3) And when I come, those whom ye
shall select, I will send with a letter, to carry your

4 bounty to Jerusalem. (4) And if it should be
suitable that I also go, they shall go with me.

5 (5) And I will come to you. when I pass from
^[accd(jnia ; for I am about to pass through ^lace-

6 (l(Miia. (0) And perhaps I shall remain with you,
or winter with you; that ye may accompany me

7 whither I g(\ (7) For I am not disposed to see
you now, as I pass along ; because I hope to spend

8 some time with you, if my Lord permit me. (8) For

9 I shall continue at Kphcsiis until Pentecost : (II) be-
cause a great door is opened to me, which is full
of occupations i"* and the opposers are numcrou.s.

10 And if Timothy come to you, see that he may


Sy. what coin-
eth to his
hand.


Sy. Ij^^am


^■


326


1 CORINTHIANS, XVI.


or, for.


Sy. ^;_K.

Sy. ]L] y^


be without foar among you ; for he doeth the work
of the Lord, as I do. (II) Therefore, let no one 11
despise him ; but conduct him on in peace, that ho
may come to me ; for I wait for him with the
brethren. — (12) As for Apollos, my brethren, I en- 12
treated him much to go with tlie brethren to you;
but his inclination was not to go to you now ; but
when he shall have opportunity, he will goto you.
— (iu) Watch ye, stantl firm in the faith, act like 13
men, be valiant. (1-1) Let all your aftUirs be con- 14
ducted with love.

1 beseech you, my brethren, concerning the 15
household of Stephanas ; (for ye know, tliat they
were the first-fruits of Achaia, and that they have
devoted themselves to ministering to the saints ;)
(16) that ye also give ear to them who are such ; 16
and to every one, that laboreth with us and aideth.
— (17) And I rejoice at the arrival of Stephanas 17
and Fortunatus and Achaicus : for they have sup-
plied that wherein ye were deficient towards me.
(18) Aud^^ they have refreshed my spirit, and 18
yours: therefore acknowledge ye them who are
such. — (19) All the churches that are in Asia, 19
salute you. Aquila and Priscilla, with the church
in their house, salute you much in the Lord.
(20) All the brethren salute you. Salute ye one 20
another with a holy kiss.

The salutation in the handwriting of nu'self, 21
Paul. (22) Whoever loveth not our Lord Jesus 22
the Messiah, let him be accursed i*^ our Lord com-
eth.e (23) The grace of our Lord Jesus the Mes- 23
siah be with you. (24) And my love be with 2-4
you all, in the Messiah, Jesus. Amen.


End nf the first epistle to the Corinthians ; which loas roriflen
at Philippi of Alacsdonia, and was sent bij the hand of Timolhjj.


The Second Episllc of Paul to the Corinlhians.


I. Paul a legate of Jesus the Messiah, by the good
pleasure of God ; and Timothy a brother ; to the
ehureli of God that is at Coriuth, and to all the

2 saints that are in all Achaia. (2) Graee be with
you, and peace, from God our Father, and from our
Lord Jesus the Messiah.

3 Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
tlie Messiah, the Father of mercies, and the God of

4 all consolation ; (4) who comforteth us in all our
afflictions, that we also might be able to comfort
those who are in all afflictions, Avith the consolation

5 wherewith we are comforted by God. (5) B'or, as
the sufferings of the Messiah abound in us, so also

6 our consolation abonndeth by the Messiah. (6) And
whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation
and for your life^ that we are afflicted ; or whether
we be comforted, it is, that ye may be comforted ;
and that there may be in you an eagerness, !>
wherewith ye may endure those sufferings which

7 we also suffer, (7) And our hope concerning you
is steadfast : for we know, that if ye pai'take of the
sufferings, ye will also partake of the consolation.

8 — (8) But, my brethren, we wish you to know,
respecting the affliction that was upon us in Asia,
that we were afflicted exceedingly, beyond our
strength, insomuch that our life was ready to ter-

9 minate. (9) And we passed a sentence of death
upon ourselves, that our confidence might not be
in ourselves, but in God, who raiseth up the dead ;

10 (10) who rescued us from imminent death : and we

11 hope that he will again rescue us, (11^ by the aid
of your prayers in our Ix^half ; so that nis gift to us
may be a favor done for the sake of many, and
many may praise him on our account.

12 For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our


or, salvaiion.
Sy.


A"


328


2 CORINTHIANS, II.


• Sy. ^mn>

' Sy. is faithful


« Sy.
il 0113013 =

Gr. apf)a/3wv.


conscience, <= that in simplicity and purity, and by
the grace of God, and not in the wisdom of the
flesh, J we iiavc conducted ourselves in the world,
and es])ecially towards you. (13) We write no 13
other things unto you, than those which ye know
and acknowledge. And I trust, ye will acknowl-
edge them to the end : (14) as ye have also par- 14
tially acknowledged that we are your rejoicing, as
ye also ai-e ours, in the day of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah. (15) And in this contidence, I was be- 15
fore disposed to come to you, that ye might receive
the grace doubly; (16) and to pass by you into 16
Macedonia, and agani to come to 3'ou from Mace-
donia, and [so] ye would accompany me to Judiea.
(17) When therefore I thus purposed, did I pur- 17
pose as one inconsiderate ? Or, were the things
I purposed, things of the flesh j*^ so that there
slioidd be in them Yes, yes, and No, no ? (18) God 18
is the witness,^ that our word to you was not Yes
and No. (19) For tiie Son of "God, Jesus the 19
Messiah, who was preached to you by us, [nameh',]
by me, by Sylvanus, and by Timotheus, — was not
Yes and No; but it was Yes in him. (20) For all 20
the promises of God in him, the Messiah, are Yes ;
for which cause, we through him give [our] Amen,
to the glory of God. (21) Now it is God who 21
establisheth us, with you, in the Messiah, and hath
anointed us, (22) and hath sealed us, and hath 22
given the earnests of his Spirit in our hearts.

Moreover, I call God for a witness on my soul, 23
that it was in order to spare you, that I came not
to Corinth, (21) Not thtit we are lords over your 24
faith, but we are helpers of your joy ; for it is by
faith ye stand. (II.) And I determined this with II.
myself, that I would not again come to you in sad-
ness. (2) For if I should make you sad, who 2
would make me joyful, unless he whom I had
made sad ? (3) And I wrote that very thing to 3
you, lest when I came, those persons whom I ought
to make joyful, should make me sad. For I have
confidence concerning you, that my joy is the joy
of you all. (4) And in much affliction, and in 4
anguish of heart, I wrote those things to you, with
many tears ; not that ye might have sorrow, but
that ye might know the exceeding love I have for
you.— (5) A.nd if one hath caused grief, he hath 5


2 CORINTHIANS, III.


329


Gr. irpotfu'ffov.


not grieved me [only], but, — that the declaration
may not bear too lianl on you — in a measure, all

6 of you. (G) And suflicicnt for liim, is this rebuke

7 proceeding from many : (7) so that, on tlie other
hand, ye ought to forgive him and console him ;
lest ho who is such a man, should be swallowed up

8 with excessive grief. (8) I therefore beseech you,

9 that ye confirni to him your love. (9) For it was
for this also that I wrote [to you], that I might
learn by a trial, whether ye would be obedient in

10 every tiling. (10) And whom ye forgive, I also
[forgive] : for that which I forgave to any one, for
your sakes I forgave it, in the presence*^ of the

11 'Messiah; (11) les't Satan, should overreach us ; for
we know his devices.

12 Moreover, when I came to Troas in announcing
the Messiah, and a door was opened to me b^^ the

13 Lord, (lo) there was no quietude in my spirit, be-
cause I found not Titus my brother: and I took

14 leave of them, and went into Macedonia.— (14) But
thanks be to God, who always ]irocureth us a tri-
umph in the Messiah, and manifesteth by us the
odor of the knowledge of him in every ])lace.

15 (15) For, through the ^fessiah, we are unto God a
sweet odor, in them that live^ and in them that

16 perish: (U!) to these, an odor of death unto death ;
and to those, an odor of life unto life. And who

17 is adequate to these things! (17) For we are not
like others,'" who dilute the words of God ; but as
of the truth, and as of God, we speak in the Mcs-

m. siah before God. — (HI.) Do Ave begin again to
show you who we are? Or do we, like others,
need that letters recommendatory of us should be
written to you? Or, that 3'e should write rccom-

2 mendations of us? (2) Ye are our epistle, written
on our hearts, and known and read by every man.

3 (3) For ye know that ye are an epistle of the Mes-
siah, ministered by us; not written with ink, but
b}' the Spirit of the living God ; not on tables of
stone, but on the tablets of the heart of llesh. —

4 (4) Ami such confidi-nce have we in the Messiah

5 towards God, (5) Not that we are sufficient to
think any thing, as of ourselves ; but our efficiency" 1

6 is fron^ God : (G) who hath fitted us to be ministers]
of the new Testament,'' not in the letter, but in the,'' Sy. ].d_iAj>
Spirit; for the letter killetli, but the Spirit givcth|


*> or, are taxed.


Sv. tlxe rest.


■}••


.X^


•^^(^ ISkr


3S0


2 CORINTHIANS, IV.


or, saveth.


*Sy.1IaQ_,jl


S^'. lo^-i


Sy.


^


life.<= (7) Now if the ministration of death was en- 7
graved upon stones in writing, and was so glorious
that the children of Israel could not look on tho
face of ]\loses, on account of the glory upon his
face which vanished away ; (8) how then shall not 8
the ministration of the Spirit be still more glorious?
(9) For if there was glory in the ministration of 9
condemnation, how much more shall the ministra-
tion of justificationfi excel in glory ? (10) For that 10
which was glorious, was as if not glorious, in com-
parison with this which excelleth in g\ory. (11) For
if that which is abolished was glorious, much more
must that which abideth be glorious. — (12) Seeing
therefore we have this hope, we the more speak
witli boldness; (13) and are not like Moses, who 13
threw a vail over his face, that the children of Israel
might not behold the termination of that whicli was
abolished. (14) But they were blinded in their un-
derstanding; for until this day, when the old Tes-
tament'' is read, the same vail resteth upon them ;
nor is it manifest [to them], that it is abolished by
the Messiah. (15) And unto this day, when Mo-
ses is read, a vail is thrown u])on their hearts.
(16) But when any of them is turned unto the
Lord, the vail is taken from him. (17) Now the
Lord himself is the Spirit. And where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is freedom. (18) And we all, 18
with uncovered faces, behold as in a mirror tho
glory of the Lord ; and are transformed into the
same likeness, from glory to glory, as by the Lord
the Spirit.


11


12


14


15

16
17


Therefore, we are not weary in this ministry IV.
which we have received, according to the mercies
that have been upon us : (2) But we have renounced
the concealments of dishonor, and we walk not in
craftiness, nor do we treat the word of God deceit-
fully ; but by the manifestation of the truth, we ex-
liibit oursclv^es to all the consciences of men before
God. — (3) And if our gospel'^ is vailed, it is vailed
to them that perish ; (4) to them whose minds the
God of this world hath blinded, in order that they
might not believe, lest the light of the gospel of the
glory of the Messiah (who is the likeness of God)
should dawn upon them. ,(5) E'or it is not ourselve*
that wo preach, but the Messiah, Jesus our Lord ;


2


2 CORINTHIANS, V.


331


and, as to ourselves, that wo are your servants for
Jesus' sake, (6) Because God, who comnianded tlic
light to arise Irorn darkness, hatli hinisell'shined in
our hearts, that wc might be illuminated with the
knowledge of the glory of God on the face of Jesus
the Messiah. — (7) But we have this treasure in an
earthen vessel, that the excellency of the power''


Sy.p.


» mignt be from God, and not from us. (8) And in
owcry tiling wc are oppressed, but not suffocated ;

9 we arc corrected, but not condemned ; (D) we are
])erseeuted, but not forsaken ; we are prostrated, but

10 pei'ish not. (10) For wc bear in our body, at all
times, the dying of Jesus ; that the life also of Jesus

11 might be manilestcd in our body. (11) For if we
are delivered over alive unto death, for Jesus' sake,
even so also will the life of Jesus be manifested in

12 tliis our mortal body. — (12) Now therefore, in us

10 death is active, but in^you, life. (13) Ilavinj^ there-
fore the same spirit of faith,— (as it is written, I
believed, therefore also have I spoken,) we also

11 believe, and therefore speak ; (11) knowing that he,
who resuscitated our Lord Jesus, will also resusci-
tate us by Jesus, and will receive us, with you, to

15 himself. (15) For all things arc for your sakes, that
while grace aboundeth by means of many, thanks-
giving may abound to the glory ol'God.

16 For this cause we Hunt not; for thougli our out-
ward man perish, yet the inner [man] is renovated

17 day by day. (17)" For the allliction of the present
time, though very small and light, prepareth for us
great glory, without end, for ever and ever

18 (18) while we look not at these seen things, but at
those not seen ; for these seen things are tempo-

y. rary, but those not seen are eternal. (V.) For we
know that, if our house on earth — this of the body,
were diss(.)lved, yet we have a building of God, a
house not made with hands, eternal in heaven.

2 (2) And on this account also, we groan, and wish

3 to bo clothed with our house from heaven : (3) if
indeed, when clothed, we shall not be found naked

4 (1) For while wc are here in this house, wc groan
under its burden ; yet ye desire, not to throw it
oil", but to be clothed over it, so that its mortality

5 may be absorbed in life. (5) And he that pre-
pareth us for this thing, is G(kI ; who hath given

6 ua the earnest"' of his Spirit. (6) Therefore, becausei" or, pledge.


^#


332


2 CORINTHIANS, VI.


we know and arc persuaded, that while we lodge in
tlie body wc sojourn away iVom our Lord ; (7) (for 7
we walk by faith, and not by sight ;) (8) therefore 8
we are contident, and desirous to be away from the
body, and to be with our Lord. (9) We are assid- 9
uous, that whether we are absent, or whether at
home, we m:iy please him. (10) For we ai'e all to 10
stand before tlie judginout-seat'^, of the Messiah, that
each may receive retribution in the body, [for] what
he hath done in it, whctlier of gjood, or whether of


Sy. Ulh'-) =
Gr. /S^fxa.


Sy. lA^^O
]L,^ 0C71


-■ Sy. "jZo^jl
''Sy.'jAa4>j

'Sy. "jlan-jji

» or, sahalion.


evil


11


12


Therefore because we know the fear of our Lord,
we persuade men ; and we are made manifest unto
God ; and I hope also, we are made manifest to your
minds. (12) \Ye do not again laud ourselves to
ytni; but we give you occasion to glory in us, to
them who glory in appearance and not in heart.
(13) For if we are extravagant, it is for God : and 13
if we are discreet, it is for you. (14) For the love 1-1
of the Messiah constraincth us to reason thus:
One died for all; therefore are all dead. (15) And 15
he died for all, that they who live should not live
to themselves, but to him who died 'lor them and
rose again. (16) And therefore, we know no person 16
af er tlic flesh : and if we have known the Messiali
after the ilesh, yet henceforth we know [him] no
more. (17) Whoever therefore is in the Messiah, 17
is a new creature :" old things have passed away ;

(18) and all things are made new, by God; who 18
iiaih reconciled us to himself by the Messiali, and
hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation.

(19) For God was in the Messiah, who hath recon- 19
eiled the world with his majesty, and did not reckon

to them their sins; and who hath placed in us the
word of reconciliation.^— (20) We are therefore
amUissadoi-s for the Messiah, and it is as if God was
beseeching you by us. In behalf of the Messiah,
therefore, we beseech [\'0u], be ye reconciled to
God. (21) For, on your account, he hath made him
who knew no sin to be sin,^ that we might by him
bec()mc the righteousness'' of God.— (Vl.) And VI
as aiders we entreat of you, that the grace of God
which ye have received, may not be ineffectual in
you. (2) For he hath said. In an acceptable time 2
have I heard thee, and in the day of life^ I have
aided thee. Behold, now is the acceptable time !


20


21


2 COIIINTIIIANS, VIl.


333


3 and behold, now is the day of life ! (3) Give ye no
occasion of offence to any one in any thing, that

4 there may be no reproach on our ministry. (4) But
we, in ail things, would show ourselves to be the
ministers of God, in much endurance^ in alHictions,

5 ill necessity, in distresses, (5) in scourgings, in impris-
oiunents, in tumults, in toil, in watching, in fasting;

6 (()) by purity, by knowledge, by long suffering, by
benignity, by the lloly Spirit, by love unfeigned,

7 (7) by the speaking of truth, by tlic energy of God,
by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and

8 on tlie left; (8) amid honor and dishonor, amid
praise and contumely ; as deceivers, and yet true ;

9 (9) as not known, and yet we arc well known ; as
dying, and behold, wc live ; as chastised, yet not

10 killed; (10) as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as
imligcnt, yet enriching many; as possessing noth-

11 ing, yet having all things.— (11) O ye Corinthians,
our mouth is opened towards you, and our heart

12 expanded. (12) Ye are not straitened in us, but

13 ye are straitened in your own bowels.^ (13) I
speak as to [my] children. Pay me the debt which
ye owe,"-" and cx})and your love towards me. —

11 (1-1) And be ye not yoke-fellows with them that
believe not : for what fellowship hath righteousness
with iniquity ? or what communion hath light with

15 darkness? (15) or what concord hath the Messiah
with Satan? or what part hath a believer with an

16 unbeliever? (16) or what agreement hath the tem-
ple of God with that of demons? For ye are the
temple of the living God ; as it is said, I will dwell
among tiiem, and walk among them, and will be

17 their God, and they shall be my people. (17) "Where-
fore, come 3'e out from among them, and be ye
separate from them, saith the Lord ; and come not
near the unclean thing, and I will receive you ;

18 (18) and will be to you a Father, and ye shall be
.sons and daughters to me, saith the Lord Almighty.

Vll. — (VIL) Seeing, therefore, wc havethe.se promises,
my beloved, let us clean.se our.selves from all delile-
ment of the flesh and of the spirit ; and let us work
righteousncs.^!, in the fear of God.

2 Bear with us, my brethren; wc have done evil
to no one ; wc have corrupted no one ; we have

3 wronged no one. (3) I speak [thus], not to con-
demn you ; for I have said before, that ye are trcas-


** or, affections.

' or, the interest'
money which
is with you.


334


2 CORINTHIANS, VII.


Sy.

Gr. leap'prijia.


^ Sv. LoL


or, saha'.ion.


or, ajfeclions.


ured in our hearts, to die and to live together.
(4) I have great assurance^^ before you, and have
much glorying in you; and I am full of comfort.
And joy greatly aboundeth to me, in all my afflic-
tions. (5) For, after we came to Macedonia, there
was no rest for our bodj', but we were distressed in
every thing; without was conflict, and within was
fear. (B) But God who comfo^-teth the depressed,
comforted us by the arrival of Titus. (7) And not
merely by his arrival, but also by the refreshing
with which he was refreshed by you. For he told
us of 3-our love towards us, and of 3'our grief, and
of your zeal in our behalf : and wdien I heard it, my
joy was great. (8) And although I made you sad
by the epistle, I do not regret it, though I did re-
gret it ; tor I see that that epistle, thougli for a tim3
it m.ade you sad, (9) yet it procured me joy, — not
because ye had sorrow, but because your sorrow
brought you to repentance; for 3'e sorrowed in
godly sorrow ; so that 3-0 received no detriment
from us. (10) For, sorrowing on account of God,
worketh a conversion'^ of the soul which is not re-
versed, and a turning unto life :'^ but the sorrowing
of the world worketh death. (11) For behold this
same thing, that 3'e were distressed on account of
God, what solicitude it wrought in 3'ou, and apolo-
gizing, and indignation, and fear, and love, and zeal,
and revenge? And in all things ye have shown,
that ye are [now] pure in that matter. (12) And it 12
will be [seen] that I wrote to you, not for the sake
of him who did the wrong, nor for the sake of him
who received the wrong, [only,] but that your solici-
tude in respect to us might be known before God.
(lo) Wherefore we were comforted; and with our


consolation, we were the more joyful for the joy of
Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by you all :
(li^ so that I was not ashamed of that in "which I
had gloried to him, respecting you ; but as in every
thing we spoke the truth to you, so also our glorv-
ing before Titus, is found to be in truth: (15) and
also his bowels'! are the mm'e enlarged towards you,
while he remembereth the submission of you' all,
and how ye received him with fear and trembling.
(16) I rejoice, that in every thing I have full conti-
dencc in 3'ou.


9


10


11


13


14


15


16


2 CORINTHIANS, VIII.


835


VIII. And, my brethren, we make known to you the
grace oi" God which was conferred on the churches
2 of the Macedonians ; (2) that in the great trial of
their alUiction, there was an abounding to their joy,
and" the depth of their jwverty was exuberant in
S the riches of their liberahty.'i (3) For I testify
that, according to their ability,^ and beyond their

4 abihty, in the spontaneity of their mind, (4) tliey
besought us, with much entreaty, that they might
participate in the beneficence of the ministration to

5 th'e saints. (5) And not [only] as we had expected,
but they first gave themselves unto the Lord, and

6 to ns by the will of God. (G) So that we requested
Titus, that as he had begun, so he would perfect in

7 you also the same benelieenee. — (7) And as ye are
cnricheil in every thing, in faith, and speech, and
knowledge, and in all diligence, and in our love
towards you, so abound ye in this beneficence also<

8 (8) I do not actually command^ you, but by the
promptitude of your fellow [disciples], I would test

9 the sincerity of your love. (9) For ye know the
goodness^ of our Lord Jesus the Messiah, who
when he was rich, for your sakes became poor, that

10 by his poverty ye might be made rich. (10) And
1 urgently reeommendc to you, that which is for
your advantage ; inasmuch as ye began, a year ago,

11 not only to purpose, but also to perform. (11) And
now complete ye by action, what ye purposed ; that
as ye had a promptitude in your purposing, so ye
may fulfill [it] in action, according to your ability.*"
(12) For if there is a willingness, a person is ac-
cepted according to what he hath, and not accord-
ing to what he hath not. (13) For it is not, that
others may have easement, and you pressure ;

11 (14) but that ye may be on equality at the present
time ; and that your abundance may be [a supply]
to their want; that their abundance likewise may
bo [a supply] to your want ; that there may be

15 equality. (15^ As it is written, He who gathered
much, iiad notning over ; and he that gathered little,

16 was not deficient. — (16) But thanks be to God,
who put into the heart of Titus this solicitude for

17 you. (17) For he received our exhortation ; and,
b3cause he was very anxious, he cheerfully set out

18 to visit you, (18) And we also sent with him that
our brother, whose praise in the gospel is in all


12


13


■' or, simplicitjj.

'■ Sy. ]].»j^, or
power.


= Sy. command-
ing command.

« Sy.
recommending
recommend.


' Sy. from what
ye have.


536


2 CORINTHIANS, IX.


t Sy.


Gr. dirorfToXoi.


• Sy."jAr)5a:2i


20


21
22


24


the churches ; (19) inasmuch as he likewise had 19
beeu expressly chosen by the churches, to accom-
pany me with this beneficence which is ministered
by us to the glorj'- of God and to our cordiahty.s
(20) And we hereby guarded, that no one should cast
censure on us, in [respect to] this abundance which
is ministered by us. (21) For we are attentive to
things commendable, not only before God, but also
before men. (22) And we also sent with them that
brother of ours, who hath often, and in many things,
been proved diligent by us ; and is now particu-
larly diligent, from the great confidence [he hath]
in you. (23) And therefore, if Titus [be inquired 23
about], he is my associate and assistant among
3'ou : or if our other brethren, they are the legates^
of the churches of the Messiah's glory. (24) There-
fore, exhibit ye to them, in the presence of all the
churches, a demonstration of your love and of our
glorying respecting you. — (IX.) And concerning IX
the ministration by the saints, it would be super-
fluous for me to write to you : (2) for I know the ^
goodness of your mind ; and therefore I gloried of
you before the Macedonians, that Achaia was ready
a year ago ; and your zeal hath excited many.
(3) Yet I sent the brethren, lest the glorying with 2
which we have gloried in you in regard to this
matter, should prove vain ; and that ye, as I said,
may be i-eady ; (4) so that, if the Macedonians 4
should come with me, and should find you unpre-
pared, we — not to say, ye — should be put to shame
for that glorying in which we gloried. (5) There-
fore I was careful to request these my brethren, to
go before me unto you, that they might make up
this benefaction, i"- of which ye were advised long
before to have it ready, as being a benefaction, and
not a matter of cupidity. (6) And this [I say] :
lie that soweth sparingly, shall also reap sparingly ;
and he that soweth bountifully, shall also reap
bountifully. (7) Every man, according to his own
views, not witli sadness, not by constraint: for the
Lord loveth a joyous giver. (8) For it is in the
power of God, to make all good abound to you, so
that yc may have, at all times, and in every thing,
what is sufficient for you ; and may abound in
every good work. (9) As it is written, lie hath
dispersed and given to the poor ; and his righteous-


5


6


^


a CORINTHIANS, X.


337


10 ness'' is established for ever. (10) Now he that
giveth seed to the sower, and bread for food, may
he give and multiply your seed, and increase the

11 fruits of your rigiiteoiisness : (11) so that in every
thing, )-e may be enriched unto all liberality,c to

12 the completion of our thanksgiving to God. (12)
For the performance of this ministration, not only
SLipplieth the want of tiie saints, but is also rich in

13 many thanksgivings to God. (13) For on account
of the test of this ministration, we glorify God, that
ye do subject yourselves to the profession of the
gospel"! of the Messiah, and that in j^our liberality,^
ye communicate with them and with all men:

14 (14) and they put up prayer for j^ou, with much
love, because of the abundance of the grace of God

15 that is upon you. (15) Thanks be to God for his
unspeakable gift.

X. Now I, Paul, beseech you, by the mildness and
gentleness of the Messiah, — although I am mild to-
wards you when present, but bold towards you

2 when absent! — (2) yet I beseech of you that, Avhen
I come, I may not be compelled by the boldness
that is in me to be daring, as I estimate it, towards
the persons who think we walk according to the

3 flesh. (3) For, although we walk in the flesh, oar

4 warfare is not after the flesh. (4) For the arms of
our warfare arc not those of the flesh, but those of
the power of God ;^ by which we subdue rebellious

5 castles. (5) And we demolish imaginations, and
every lofty thing that exalteth itself against the
knowledge of God, and subjugate all reasonings to

6 obedience to the ^lessiah. (6) And we are pre-
pared, when your obedience shall be complete, to

7 execute judgment on all the disobeying. — (7) Do
ye look on outward appearances ? If any one is
confident in himself that he is of the Messiah, let
him know, from himself, that as he is of the Mes-

8 siah, so also arc we. (8) For if I should glory
somewhat more, in the authority'' which our Lord
hath given me, I should not be ashamed ; for he
gave it to us for your edification, and not for your

9 destruction. (9) But I forbear, lest I should be
thought to terrify you terribly, by my epistles.

10 (10) For there arc some who say, [His] epistles are
weighty and forcible, but his bodily presence*^ is


Sy. ^ioCUjl


or, simplicity.


' Sy. ]Li:OSD
• or, simplicity.


or, divine
power.


Sy.


« Sy. presence
of his body.


338


2 CORINTHIANS, XI.


* or, ont of our
province.


Sy. a jealousy
of God.


»- Sy. "jZi^.m


« Sy. commit-
ting commit.


weak, and his speech contemptible. (11) But let 11
him who saith so, consider this, that such as we are
in our epistolary discourse, when absent, such also
are we in action, when present. (12) For we dare 12
not value, or compare ourselves, with those who
vaunt : but they, because they compare themselves
with themselves, are not wise. (13) But we will 13
not glory beyond our measwe,'^ but within the
measure of the limits which God hath imparted to
us, that we should reacli as far as you. (14) For 14
we do not stretch ourselves, as if not reaching to
you ; for we do reach as far as you in the annunci-
ation of the Messiah. (15) And we do not glory 15
beyond our measure, in tiie toil of others: but we
have the hope, that when your faith shall mature,
we shall be magnified by you, as [being within] our
measure ; (16) and that we shall so abound also, as 16
to make announcements beyond you. It is not in
the measure of others, [and] in things ready pre-
pared, that we will glory. (17) But let him that 17
will glory, glory in the Lord. (18) For not he 18
who praiseth himself, is approved ; but he whom
the Lord praiseth.

I would that ye could bear with me a little, that XI.
I might talk foolishly : and indeed, bear ye with
me. (2) For I am jealous over you, with a godly 2
jealousy -.^ for I have espoused you to a husband
as a chaste virgin, whom I would present to the
Messiah. (3) But I fear, lest, as the serpent be- 3
gulled Eve by his craftiness, so your minds should
be corrupted from simplicity towards the Messiah.
(4) For if he that cometh to you, had proclaimed 4
to you another Jesus, whom we have not proclaim-
ed ; or if ye had received another Spirit, which ye
have not received; or another gospel, ^ which ye
have not accepted ; ye might well have given as-
sent.— (5) For, I suppose, I came not short of those 5
legates who most excel. (6) For, though I be rude 6
in speech, yet not in knowledge ; but in all things
we have been manifest among you. (7) Did I 7
indeed commit^ an offence, by humbling myself
that ye might be exalted ? and by proclaiming the
gospel of God to you gratis? (8) And I robbed 8
other churches, and I took pay [of them] for min-
istering to you. (9) And when I came among you 9


*<


2 CORINTHIANS, XL


S39


and was needy, I was burdensome to none of you ;
for the brethren who came from Macedonia, sup-
plied my wants : and in all things I kept myself, —
and I will keep myself, from being burdensome to

10 you. (10) As the truth of the Messiah is in me,
this glorying shall not be made vain as to me in

11 the regions of Achaia. (11) Why? Because I

12 do not love you? God knoweth. (12) But what
I do, that also I will do ; that I may cut off occa-
sion, from them who seek occasion: so that in the
thing wherein they glory, they may be found even

13 as we. (13] For they are false legates, crafty
workers, ancl feign themselves to be legates of

11 the Messiah, (14) And in this there is nothing
strange. For if Satan feigneth himself an angel of

15 light, (15) it is no great thing if his ministers feign
themselves ministers of righteousness; whose end

16 shall be according to their works. — (16) Again I
say, let no one think of me, as being a fool : or if
otherwise, receive me as a fool, that I may glory a

17 little. (17) What I am [now] saying, I bay not in
our Lord, but as in folly, in this matter*^ of glory-

18 ing, (18) Because many glory after^ the flesh, I

19 also will glory. (19) For ye hear with indulgence

20 them who lack reason, seeing 3^0 arc wise. (20)
And ye give ear to him, who putteth you in bon
dage ; and to him, who dcvourcth you ; and to
him, who taketh from you ; and to him, who ex-
alteth himself over you ; and to him, who smiteth

21 you in the face. (21) I speak as if under contempt
I speak as if we were impotent, through deficiency
of understanding ; that in whatever thing any one

22 is prcsumiug,^ I also am presuming. (22) If they
are Hebrews, so I also : or if they are Israelites, I
also. If they are the seed of Abraham, I also.

23 (23) If they are ministers of the Messiah, (in de
feet of understanding, I say it,) I am superior to
them : in toils more than they, in stripes more than
they, in bonds more than they, in deaths many

21 times. (24) By the Jews, five times was I scourged,

25 each time with forty stripes save one. (25) Three
times was I beaten with rods: at one time I was
stoned : three times I was in shipwreck, by day and
by night; I have been in the sea, without a ship.

26 (26) In journeyings many, in peril by rivers, in
peril by robbers, in j)eril from my kindred, in peril


^ or. placK.
' or, in.


or, bold,
daring.


340


2 CORINTHIANS, XII.


•Sy.

• Sy. "Pib

'Sy. 4,,1>

'or, of this
{thing.)


« or, abundance.


' Sy. »i^x>j


from Gentiles : I have been in peril in cities ; I
have been in peril in the desert, in peril in the sea,
in peril from false brethren. (27) In toil and 27
weariness, in much watching, in hanger and thirst,
in much fasting, in cold and nakedness : (28) be- 28
sides many other things, and the thronging around
me every day, and my anxiety for all the churches.
(29) Who becometh weak, and I become not weak? 2d
Who is stumbled, and I burn not ? (30) If I must 30
glory, I Avill glory in my infirmities. (31) God, 31
the Father of our Lord Jesus the Messiah, blessed
for ever and ever, — he knoweth that I lie not.
(32) At Damascus, the commander of the army of 32
Aretas the king, guarded the city of the Dama-
scenes, to seize me. (33) And from a window, in a 33
basket, they let me down from the wall, and I es-
caped from his hands. — (XII.) Glor3nng must be, XII.
but it is not profitable : so I proceed to visions and
revelations of our Lord. (2) I knew a man in the 2
Messiah fourteen years ago, (but whether in a
body, or whether out of a body, I know not; God
knoweth ;) who was caught up to the third [region]
of heaven. (3) And I knew this same man ; (but 3
whether in a body, or out of a body, I know not ;
God knoweth ;) (i^ and he was caught up to Para- 4
disc,^ and heard ineffable words, ^^ which it is not
permitted^ a man to utter. (5) Of hini'^ I will 5
gloiy : but of myself I will not glory, except in my
infirmities. (6) Yet if I were disposed to glory, 1 6
should not be without reason ; tor I declare the
truth. But I refrain, lest any one shouUl think of
me, beyond what he sceth in me and heareth from
me. — (7) And, that I might not be uplifted by the 7
excellency of the revelations, there was imparted
to me a thorn in my flesh, the angel of Satan, to
buffet me, that I might not be uplifted. (8) lie- 8
specting this, I thrice besought my Lord, that it
might depart from me. (9) And he said to me, 9
My grace is sufficient for thee ; for my power'' is
perfected in weakness. Gladly, therefore, will I
glory in my infirmities, that the power of the Mes-
siah may rest upon me. (10) Therefore I have 10
pleasure in infirmities, in reproach, in afflictions, in
persecutions, in distresses, which are for the Mes-
siah's sake : for when I am weak, then am I strong.
— (11) Behold, I have become foolish in my glory- 11


2 CORINTHIANS, XIII.


341


ing, for 3'c compelled me. For ye ought to bear
witness for me ; because I was inferior in nothing
to those legates who most excel, although I was

12 nothing. (12) I wrought among you the signs? of
the legates, Avith all patience ; and in prodigies, and

13 in wonders, and in mighty deeds.^ (13) For in
what fell ye short of the other churches, except in
thi.s, that I was not burdensome to you ? Forgive

14 me tliis fault. (14) Behold, this third time I am
ready to come to you, and I will not burden you ;

. for I seek not yours, but 3'ou : for children ought
not to lay up treasures for the parents, but the pa-

15 rents for their children. (15) And cheerfully Avill
I both pay [my] ex[)enses, and also give myself for
your souls; although the more I love 3'ou, the less

16 ye love me. — (10) But perhaps, though I was not
burdensome to you, yet, like a cunning man, I

17 filched from 3'ou by craftiness! (17) Was it by the
hand of some other person whom I sent to you,

18 that I pilfered from 3'ou ? (18) I requested Titus,
and with him I sent the brethren : did Titus pilfer
any thing from 3'ou? Did we not walk iu one
spirit, and in the same steps?

19 Do ye again sujipose, that we would apologize
to you ? Ijefore God, in the Messiah we speak :
and all these things, my beloved, [are] for the sake

20 of 3'our edification. (20) For I fear, lest I should
come to you and not find you such as I would
wish ; and lest I also should be found 133" 3'OU, such
as ye would not wish ; lest [there should be] con-
tention, and envying, and anger, and obstinac3'',
and slandering, and murmuring, and insolence, and

21 commotion ; (21) lest, when I come to you, my
God should humble me ; and I should mourn over
many, who have sinned, and have not repented of
the impurit3', the whoredom, and the lasciviousness,
which they have conunitted.

XIII. This is the third time that T have prepared to
come to 3'OU ; that, b\- the moutli of two or three

2 witnesses, every word=' may be established. (2) I
have before said to you, and again I say to you
beforehand, (as also 1 said to you a second time,
while I was with you ; and now also, while absent,
I write to tho.se who have sinned and to the others,)

3 that if I come again, I will not spare : (3) because


^ Sy. ]lol]
Sy.]Jx


or, //lin^, |JSD


^1


342


2 CORINTHIANS, XIII.


or, ITU


Sy.
Sy.


Sy. y^\ »


ye demand proof, that it is the Messiah that speak-
eth by me, who hath not been powerless among
you, but powerful among you. (4) For, though he 4
was crucified in weakness, yet he livetli with^ the
power of God, We also are weak with him ; yet
we are alive with him, by that power of God which
is among you. (5) Examine yourselves, whether 5
ye stand in the faith: prove yourselves. Do ye
not acknowledge that Jesus the' Msesiah is in you ?
And if [he is] not, ye are reprobates. (6) But, I 6
trust, ye will know that we are not reprobates.
(7) And I beseech God, that there may be no evil 7
in you ; so that the proof of us may appear : and
yet, that ye may be doers of good things, though
we be as reprobates. (8) For we can do nothing 8
against the truth, but [only] for the truth. (9) And 9
we rejoice, when we are weak and ye are strong.
And this also we pray for, that ye may be per-
fected.'' (10) Therefore, while absent, I write 10
these things ; lest when I come, I should act with
rigor, according to the authority^ which my Lord
hath given me for your edification, and not for your
destruction.

Finally, my brethren, rejoice, and be perfected, 11
and be comforted: and may harmony and quiet-
ness be among you ; and the God of love and of
peace will be with you. — (12) Salute ye one 12
another, with a holy kiss. AH the saints salute
you. (13) The peace^ of our Lord Jesus the Mes- 13
siah, and the love of God, and the communion of
the Holy Spirit be with you all. Amen.


End of the second epistle to the Corinikians : which was wrillen
from Philippi of Macedonia, and was sent by the hands of
Tilus.


The Epislle of Paul to the Galalians.


~i


I. Paul, a legate, not from men, nor by man, but
by Jesus tlio Messiah, and God his Father, who

2 raised him from the dead ; (2) and all the brethren
who arc with me ; unto the churches which are in

3 Galatia. (3) Grace be with you, and peace, from
God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus the Mes-

4 siah ; (4) who gave himself for our sins, that he
might deliver us from this evil world,* agreeably

5 to the pleasure of God our Father : (5) to whom
be giory for ever and ever. Amen,

6 I admire, how soon ye have turned from the
Messiali, who called you by his grace, unto another

7 gospel.;'' (7) which doth not exist, except as there
are some who would disquiet you, and are disposed

8 to pervert the gospel of the Messiah. (8) But if
we, or an angel from heaven, sliould announce to
you differently from what we have announced to

9 you, let him be accursed.^ (9) As I have just said,
and now I again say it, that if any one announce
to you differently from what ye received, let him

10 be accursed. (10) For do I now persuade men, or
God ? Or do I seek to please men ? For if I had
till now pleased men, I should not have been a

11 servant of the ^[essiah. — (11) But I make known
to you, my brethren, that the gospel*^ announced

12 by me, was not from man. (12) For I did not re-
ceive it and learn it from man, but [I had it] by

13 revelation from Jesus the Messiah. (13) For ye
have heard of my former course of life in Judaism,
that I persecuted the church of God exceedingly,

14 and destroyed it : (14) and that I went much far-
ther in Judaism than many of my contemporaries
who were of my nation, and was peculiarly zealous

15 for the doctrine of my fatliers. (15) But wlien it
pleased him, who separated me from my mother's


Sy- lV)\s


Sy. IZ-iLCD


Sy. ^i^


Sy. lZ;^i£D


344


GALATIANS, II.


• or, iru


* Gr. Peier.


or, by face.


or, on account
of.


Sy. lo be some-
thing.

or, priiatcly.
Sy.
an Aramaean.


* Sy. U;.-£0

• or, to be some-
thing.


' Gr. Peler.


womb, and called me by bis grace, (16) to reveal 16
his Son bye me, that I should proclaim liim among
the Gentiles ; forthwith, I did not open it to flesii
and blood; (17) nor did I go to Jerusalem, to them 17
who were legates before me; but I Avent into Ara-
bia, and returned again to Damascus: (18) and 18
after three years, I went to Jerusalem to see Ce-
phas ;*" and I remained with him jBfteen days.
(19) But others of the legate's I saw not, except 19
James, oar Lord's brother. (20) In the things 20
which I am writing to you, behold, before God ! I
lie not. (21) And after that, I went to the ]-egions 21
of Syria and Cilicia. (22) And the churches in 22
Judoea which were in the Messiah, did not know
me personally -.s (23) but this only had they beard, 23
that he who before persecuted us, now preacheth
that faith which in time preceding be subverted :
(24) and they glorified God in^ me. — (11.) And II.
at>-ain, after fourteen years, I went up to Jerusalem
with Barnabas ; and I took with me Titus. (2) 2
And I went up by revelation : and I explained to
them the gospel which I announce among tiie Gen-
tiles; and I stated it to them who were esteemed
prominent,a between m>'self and them:^ lest I
should have run, or might run in vain. (3) Also 3
Titus, who was with me, and was a Gentile,^ was
not compelled to be circumcised. (4) And in re- 4
gard to the false brethren, who had crept in to spy
out the liberty we have in Jesus the Messiah, in
order to bring me under subjection ; (5) not for 5
the space of an hour, did we throw ourselves into
subjection to them ; so that the truth of the gospel'i
might remain with you. (6) And they who were 6
esteemed prominent,^ (what they were, I care not;
for God regardeth not the persons of men,)-— even
tliese persons added nothing to me. (7) But, other- 7
wise ; for they saw, that the gospel of the uncir-
cumcision was intrusted to me, as to Cephas*" was
intrusted that of the circumcision. (8) For he that 8
was operative with Cephas in the le^atcship of tlie
circumcision, was also operative with me in the
legateship of the Gentiles. (9) And James, Ce- 9
phas, and John, wlio were accounted pillars, Avhen
they perceived the grace that was given to me,
gave to me and Barnabas the right liand of fellow-
ship ; that we [should labor] among the Gentiles,


G A L A T I A N S, 1 11.


S45


10

11

12

13
14

15
16


17

18
19

20

21


and tliev among llie circumcision. (10) Only
[tliev desired] that wc would be mindful of the
needy ; and 1 was solicitous to do I'lc same. —
(11; Rut when Cephass was come to Antioeh, T
rebuked him to his face; because they were stum-
bled by him. (12) For before certain ones came
from .lames, he ate with the Gentiles: but when
they came, he withdrew himself, and sei)arated ;
because he was afraid of them of the circumcision,
(lo) And the rest ol' the Jews also were with him
in this thing; insomuch that even Barnabas was
induced to regard persons. (14) And when I saw,
that they did not waltc correctly, in the truth of
the gospel,'' I said to Cephas, before them all : If
thou art a Jew, and livest in the Gentile way, and
not in the Jewish, why dost thou compel the Gen-
tiles to live in the Jewish way? (15) For if we,
who are Jews by nature, and are not sinners of the
Gentiles, (16) — because wc know that a man is not
made just' by the works of the hiw, but by iaith in
Jesus the Nicssiah ; — even wc have believed in
Jesus the Messiah, in order to be made just by
faith in the Messiah, and not by the works of the
law : for, by the deeds of the law, no flesh is made
just. (17) And if, while we seek to become just
by the ^Icssiah, we urc found to be ourselves sin-
ners, is Jesus the Messiah therefore the minister of
sin'/ Far be it! (18) For if I should build up
again the things I had demolished, I should show
my.self to be a transgre.ssoi" of the precej)t. (ID) For
1, by the law, have become dead to the law, that I
might live to God ; and T am crucified with the
Messiah. (20) And henceforth it is no more I who
live, but the Messiah liveth in me: and the life I
now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of
God, who love<l me and gave himself for me. (21) I
do not sjiurn the grace of Gotl. For if righteous-
ness is b}' means of the law, the Messiah died in
vain.


III. O ye Galations, deficient in understanding!
Who hath fiscinated you? For lo, Jesus the Mes-
siah hath been portrayed as in a ))ieture, ciucified
2 before your eyes. (2) This only would I learn
from you. Was it by woiks of the law, that ye
received the Spirit? or by the hearing of faith?


? Gr. Peter.


Sv.


,Q-A^JC1


or, J uslijied.


346


GALATIANS, III.


Sy.]]J


•" or, he justified.


• or, is justified.

* or, he saved.


Sy. loA^j


^ Sy. ] , S^^o


(3) Are ye so foolish, that having begun in the 3
Spirit, ye now would consummate in the flesh ?

(4) And have ye borne all these things in vain ? 4
And I would, it were in vain ! (5) He therefore 5
who giveth the Spirit in you, and who worketh
rairaclesa among you, [doth he these things] by the
deeds of the law ? or by the hearing of faith ?
(6) In like manner Abraham believed God, and it 6
was accounted to him for righteousness. (7) Know 7
ye, therefore, that those who are of faith, they are
the children of Abraham. (8) For, because God 8
knew beforehand that the Gentiles would be mada
just^^ by faith, he preannounced it to Abraham ; as
saith the holy scripture, In thee shall all nations be
blessed. (9) Believers, therefore, it is, who are 9
blessed with believing Abraham. (10) For they 10
who are of the deeds of the law, are under the
curse : for it is written, Cursed is every one who
shall not do every thing written in this law.
(11) And that no one becometh jusf^ before God,
by the law, is manifest : because it is written. The
just by faith, shall live.'^ (12) Now the law is not
of faith ; but, whoever shall do the things written
in it, shall live by them. (13) But the Messiah
hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, and
hath been a curse for us; (for it is written, Cursed

is every one that is hanged on a tree;) (14) that 14
the blessinsj of Abraham mij^ht be on the Gentiles,
through Jesus the Messiah ; that we might receive
the promise of the Spirit by faith. — (15) My breth- 15
ren, I speak as among men ; a man's covenant*^
which is confirmed, no one setteth aside, or chan-
geth any thing in it. (16) Now to Abraham was 16
the promise made, and to his seed. And it said to
him, not, to thy seeds, as being many ; but to thy
seed, as being one, which is the Messiah. (17) And 17
this I say : That the covenant which was previously
confirmed by God in the Messiah, the law which
was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot set
it aside, and nullify the promise. (18) And if the
inheritance were by the law, it would not be by
promise: but God gave it to Abraham by promise.
What then is the law? It was added on ac-
count of transgression, until that seed should
come, to whom belonged the promise : and the
law was given by angels through a mediator.*"


11
12


13


18


19


GALATIANS, IV.


347


20 (20) Now a mediator is not of one ; but God is

21 one. (21) Is the law then opposed to the promise
of God? Far be it. For if a law had been
given, which could make alive,? certainly, righ-

22 teousness would have been by the law. (22) But
the scripture hath inclosed all under sin, that the
promise by faith in Jesus the Messiah might be

23 given to them that believe. (23) But before the
laith came, the law kept us shut up unto the faith

24 that was to be revealed. (24) The law, therefore,
was a monitor'' for us unto the Messiah, that we

25 might become just' by faith. (25) But the faith
having come, we are not under the monitor.

20 (26) For ye are all the children of God, by faith in

27 Jesus the Messiah. (27) For they who have been
baptized into the Messiah, have put on the Messiah.

28 (28) There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither
slave nor free-born, neither male nor female ; for

29 ye are all one in Jesus the Messiah. (29) And if
ye are the Messiah's, then are ye the seed of Abra-

IV ham, and heirs by the promise. — (IV.) But I say,
that the heir, so long as he is a child, differeth not

2 from a servant, although he is lord of all ; (2) but
he is under supervisors and stewards, until the time

3 established by his father. (3) So also we, while
we were children, were in subordination under the

> 4 elements^ of the world. (4) Bat when the consum-
mation of the time arrived, God sent forth his Son ;
and he was from a woman, and was under tlie law ;

5 (5) tliat he might redeem them that were under the
law ; and tiiat we might receive the adoption of

6 sons. (0) And, because ye are sons, God hath sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into 3'our hearts, who

7 crieth. Father, our Father.'' (7) Wherefore, ye
are no longer servants, but sons ; and if sons, then

8 heirs of God, through Jesus the Messiah. (8) For
then, when ye knew not God, ye served them who

9 in their nature are not gods. (9) But now, since
ye have known God, — or rather, nave been known
by God, ye turn yourselves again to the weak and
beggarly elements, and wish again to be under

10 them ! (10) Ye observe days and moons, and set

11 times, and years! (11) I am afraid, lest I have

12 labored among you in vain. (12) Be ye like me;
because I have been like you.

My brethren, I beseech you. Ye have not in-


' or, save.


' or, be justified.


0
•Sy.

(jr. gojp^fi'a.


Sy.


348


GALATIANS, IV.


^aiegories.

•^ Sy.


jured me at all. (13) For ye know, that under the 13
infirmity of my flesh, I at lirst announced the gos-
pel to you ; (U) and the trial in my flesh, ye did 1-i
not despise nor nauseate: but ye received me as
an angel of God, and as Jesus the Messiah. (15) 15
Where then is your blessedness? For I testify of
you, that if it had been possible, ye would have
plucked out your eyes, ancj have given them to
me. (1(5) Have I become an enemy to you, by 16
preaching to you the trutli ? — (17) Tbey are zealous 17
towards you, j^et not for good ; but they wish to
shut you up, that ye may be zealous towards them.
(18) And it is a good thing to be zealous at all 18
times in good things; and not merely when I am
present with you. (19) [Ye are] my children, of 19
whom I travail in birth again, till the Messiali be
formed in you. (20) And I could wish to be now 20
with you, and to change the tone of my voice ; be-
cause I am astonislied at you. — (21) Tell me. ye 21
who desin; to be under the law, do ye not hear the
law? (22) For it is written, that Abraham h:ul 22
two sons, one by the bondmaid, and one by the
free woman. (23) But he that was by the bond- 23
maid, was born after the flesh ; and he that was by
the free woman, was by the promise. (2-1) And 24
these are allegorical*^ of the two covenants ;'i the
one from mount Sinai, which bringeth forth for ''
bondage, is Hagar. (25) For Ilagar is the mount 25
Sinai in Arabia, and eorrcs[)ondeth with the pres-
ent Jerusalem, and is serving in bondage, she and
her children. (26) But the Jerusalem above, is the 26
free woman, who is the mother of us. (27) For 27
it is written, Be joyful, thou barren, who bearest
not: exult and shout, thou who hast not travailed :
for more numerous are the children of the desolate
than the children of the married woman. (28) Now 28
we, my brethren, like Isaac, are the children of the
promise. (29) And as then, he that was born after 29
the flesh, persecuted him [who was born] of the
Spirit; so also [is it] now. (30) But what saith 30
the scripture? Cast out the bondmaid, and her
son ; because the son of the bondmaid shall not in-
herit with the son of the free woman. (31) So 31
then, my brethren, we are not sons of the bond-
woman, but sons of the free woman.


GALATIANS, V.


349


y. Stand fust, therefore, in the liberty with which
the Messiah hath made us free ; and be not sub-

2 jected again to the yoke of bondage. (2) Behold,
1 Paul say to you, That if ye become circumcised,

3 the Messiah is of no advantage to you. (3) And
again, 1 testify to every one who becometh circum-
cised, that he is bound'^ to fulfill the whole law.

4 (4) Ye have renounced the j\lessiah, ye who seek
justification by the law: and ye have apostatized

5 from grace. (5) l^'or we, through the Siiirit, which
is from faith, arc waiting for the hope of righteous-

(3 ness. (6) For, in the Messiah Jesus, circumcision
is nothing, neither is uncircuincision, but the faith

7 that is perfecteil by love. (7) Ye did run well:
who hath interrupted you, that ye acquiesce not in

8 the truth ? (8) The bias of j'our mind'' is not from

9 him who called you. (9) A little leaven leaveneth

10 the whole mass, (10) I confide in you through
our Lord, that yc will entertain no other thoughts
And he that disquieteth you, shall bear his judg-

11 ment, whoever he may be. (11) And I, my breth-
ren, if 1 still preached circumcision, why should I
suffer persecution? Hath the offonsivcness of the

12 cross ceased ? (12) But I would, that they who
disquiet you, were actually cut off.'-'

13 And yc, my brethren, have been called into
liberty : only let not your liberty be an occasion to
the ilesh ; but, by love, be ye servants to each

14 other. (14) For the whole law is fulfilled in one
sentence ;'' in this, Thoushalt love thy neighbor as

15 thyself (15) But if ye bite and devour one
another, beware, lest ye be consumed one by anoth-

10 er. — (10) And 1 say : Walk ye in the Spirit; and

17 never follow*^ the cravings of the flesh. (17) For
the flesh craveth that which is repugnant to the
Sjvrit; and the Sprit craveth that which is repug-
nant to the flesh : and the two arc the opposites of
each other, so that ye do not that which ye desire.

18 (18) But if ye are guided by the Spirit, ye are not

19 under the law, (19) For the works of the flesh are
known, which are whoredom, impurity, lascivious-

20 ness, (20) idol-worshij), magic, malice, contention,

21 rivahy, wrath, .strife, divisions, discord.*^, (21) envy,
murder, drunkenness, revelling, and all the like
things. And they who perpetrate these thing.s, as
I have before told you^ and also now tell you, do


Sy. oo> »i?


Sy.


Sy. cutting
icere cut off.


or, umrd.


or, do.


350


GALATIANS, VI.


or, affections.


or, reclaim.


or, by which.


not inherit the kingdom of God. (22) But the 22
fruits of the Spirit are, love, joj, peace, long suffer-
ing, suavity, kindness, fidelity, modesty, patience,
(23) Against these there standeth no law. (24) And 23
they who are of the Messiah, have crucified their 24
flesh, with all its passions'" and its cravings. (25) 25
Let us therefore live in the Spirit ; and let us press
on after the Spirit. (26) And let us not be vain- 26
glorious, despising one another, and envying one
another.

My brethren, if one of you should be overtaken VI.
in a fault, do ye who are of the Spirit recover^ him,
in a spirit of meekness : and be ye cautious, lest ye
also be tempted. (2) And bear ye one another's 2
burdens, that so ye may fulfill the law of the Mes-
siah. (3) For if any one thinketh himself to be 3
something, when he is not, he dcceiveth himself
(4) But let a man examine his own conduct ; and 4
then his glorying will be within himself, and not
in others. (5) For every man must take up his 5
own load, — (6) And let him that heareth the word, 6
communicate to him who instructeth him, in all
good things, — (7) Do not mistake ; God is not de- 7
ceived ; for what a man sowcth, that also will he
reap, (8) He who soweth in the flesh, reapeth
from the flesh corruption: and he who sowetli in
the Spirit, will from the Spirit reap life everlasting.
(9) And while we do what is good, let it not be
wearisome to us ; for the time will come when we
shall reap, and it Avill not be tedious to us. (10)
Now, therefore, while we have the opportunity, let
us practice good works towards all men, and espe-
cially towards them of the household of faith.

Behold, this epistle have I written to you with 11
my own hand. (12) They who are disposed to 12
glory in the flesh, they urge you to become circum-
cised, only that they may not be persecuted on
account of the cross of the Messiah. (13) For 13
not even they themselves, who are circumcised,
keep the law : but they wish you to become cir-
cumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.
(14) But as for me, let me not glory, except in the 14
cross of our Lord Jesus the Messiah ; by whom''
the world is crucified to me, and I am crucified to
the world. (15) For circumcision is nothing ; nei- 15


8


9


10


EPHESIANS, 1.


351


16 ther is uncircumcision ; but a new creation." (16)
And they who press forward in this path, peace be
on them, and mercy ; and on the Israel of God. —

17 (17) Henceforth let no one put trouble upon me;
for I bear in my body th(t marks of our Lord Jesus

18 the Messiah.— (18) My brethren, the grace of our
Lord Jesus the Messiah, be with your spirit.
Amen.

End of the Epistle to the Galatians ; which was written from
Rome.


= Sy.


The Epistle of Paul lo the Ephesians.


L Paul, a legate of Jesus the Messiah by the pleas-
ure of God, to them who arc at Ephcsus, sanctified,

2 and believing in Jesus the Messiah : (2) Peace be
with you, and grace from God our father, and
from our Lord Jesus the Messiah.

3 Rlesscd be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah, who hath blessed us with all blessings of

4 the Spirit in heaven, by the Messiah: (4) accord-
ing as he had previously chosen^ us in him, before
the foundation of the world, that we might be holy
and without blame before him ; and, in love, pre-

5 destinatcd'' us for himself; (5) and adopted us for
sons, in Jesus the Messiah, as was agreeable to his

6 pleasure : (6) that the glory of his grace might be
glorified, which he poured upon us by his Beloved

7 One ; (7) by whom we have redemption, <= and the
forgiveness of sins by his l)Iood, according to the

8 riches of his grace, (8) which hath abounded in
us, in all Avisdom and all s})iritual understanding.

9 (9) And he hath made us know the mystery of his
pleasure, which he had before determined in hini-

10 self to accomplish, (10) in the dispensation of the
fullness of times ; that all things might again be
made new in the Messiah, things in heaven and


,Sy.

Sy. ^^i£L»5

Sy. ]xo5a2)


352


EPHESIANS, II.


• Sy.


' or, salvation.


f or, are saved.


Sy.]]j


Sy. "[jtjj


13


14


15


17


[things] on earth. (11) And in him we are elected, <^ 11
according as lie predestined^ us and willed, who
worketh all things according to the counsel of his
pleasure ; (12) that we should be they who first 12
hoped in the Messiah, ta the honor of his glory.
(13) In whom, ye also nave heard the word of
truth, which is the gospel of your life,^ and have
believed in him; and have, been sealed with the
Iloly Spirit, who was promised, (1-1) who is the
earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of
them that are alive,? and for the praise of bis glory.
Therefore, lo I also, since I heard of your faith
in our Lord Jesus the Messiah, and of your love
towards all the saints, (16) cease not to give thanks 16
on your account, and to remember you in my pray-
ers; (17) that tiie God of our Lord Jesus the Mes-
siah, the Father of glory, may give to you the
Spirit of wisdom and of revelation, in the recogni-
tion of him ; (18) and that the eyes of your hearts 18
may be enlightened, so that ye may know what is
the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the
glory of his inheritance in the saints; (19) and
what is the excellence of the majesty of his powerii
in us who believe ; according to the efficiency of
the strength of his power, (20) which he put forth
in the Messiah, and raised him from tlie dead, and
eeated him at his right hand in heaven, (21) high
above all principalities, and authorities, and powers,
and lordships, and above every name that is named,
not only in this world but also in that to come:
(22) and he hath subjected all things under his
feet; and hath given him who is high over all, to
be the head of the church ;' (23) which is his body, 23
and the fullness of him who filleth all in all :
(II.) and also you, [he filleth,] who were dead in II.
your sins, and in your offences, (2) in the which 2
ye before walked, according to the worldliness of
this world, and according to the pleasure of the
prince potentate of the air, that spirit which is ac-
tive in the children of disobedience : (3) in which 3
deeds we also, formerly, were conversant, in the
cravings of our flesh ; and we did the pleasure of
our flesh, and of our mind, and were altogether the
children of wrath, like the rest. (4) But God who 4
is rich in his mercies, because of the great love with
which he loved us, (5) when we were dead in our 5


19


20
21


00


EPHESIANS, III.


353


sins, quickened us with the Messiah, and rescued^

6 us by his grace ; (6) and resuscitated us with him,
and seated us with him in heaven, in Jesus the

7 Messiali : (7) tliat he might show to the coming
ages^ the magnitude of the riches of his grace, and
his benignity towards us in Jesus the Messiah.!

8 (8) For it is by his grace we arc rescued, through
faith ; and this is not of yourselves, but it is the

9 gift of God : (9) not of worlds, lest any one glory.

10 (10) For we are his creation ;c who are created in
Jesus the Messiah, for good works, which God hath
before prepared for us to walk in.

11 Wherefore be mindful, that ye formerly were
carnal Gentiles ; and yc were called the uncircum-
cision, by that which is called the circumcision,
and which is the work of the hands in the flesh.

12 (12) And ye were, at that time, without the Mes-
siah ; and were aliens from the regulations'^ of Is-
rael ; and strangers to the covenant of the promise ;
and were without hope, and without God, in the

13 world. (13) But now, by Jesus the Messiah, ye who
before were afar off, have been brought near by the

1-1 blood of the Messiah. (14) For he is himself our
peace,*' who hath made the two [become] one, and
hath demolished the wall which stood in the midst,

15 and the enmity, by his liesh ; (15) and by his
prescriptions Ijc hath abolished the lav/ of ordi
nances ; that, in himself, he might make the two to

16 be one new man ; and he hath made peace, (16)
and hath reconciled'" both with God, ins one body,

17 and hath slain the enmity by his cross. (17) And
he came, and proclaimed peace to you afar off, and

18 to those near : (18) because, by him there is access

19 for us both, by one Spirit, unto the Father. — (19)
Wherefore, ye are not strangers, nor sojourners,
but ye are fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the

20 household of God. (20) And ye are built upon the
foundations of the legates and the prophets ; and
Jesus the Messiah hath become the head of the

21 corner in the edifice. (21) And in him all the
edifice is framed together, and groweth into a holy

22 temple in the Lord ; (22) while ye also are builded
in him, for a habitation of God through the Spirit.

III. On this account, I Paul am a prisoner of Jesus
2 the Messiah, for the sake of you Gentiles : (2) if so


» Sy. r^;g^
' Sy. l^nVv

Sy. ]L^^


Sy. Ij^OJ


or, peace-
maker.


f Sy. ^A^j

r or, hy.


354


EPHESIANS, III.


Sy.


"Sv


Sy. ]]a_K.


Sy. full of
diversifies.

or, ■prepared.


i. Q. faith in
him.


or, poiocr
above all.


4


6


be, ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace
of God, which was given to me among you : (3) that
by revelation there was made known to me the
mystery, (as I have [now] written to you in brief,
(4) so that while ye read, ye might be able to un-
derstand my knowledge of the mystery of the Mes-
siah,)— (5) which in other generations was not
made known to the sons of men, as it is now re-
vealed to his holy legates ancl to his prophets, by
the Spirit ; (6) that the Grentiles should be sharers'^'
of his inheritance, and partakers of his body, and
of the promise which is given in him by the gos-
pel 'j^ (7) of which I have been a minister, accord-
ing to the gift of the goodness of Grod, which was
imparted to me by the operation of his power:" —
(8) to me, who am the least of all the saints, hath
this grace been given, that I should announce
among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of the
Messiah, (9) and should shovvr to all men what is
the dispensation of the mystery, Avhich for ages was
hid up in God the Creator of all [things] : (10) so
that, by means of the church, the manifold'^ wisdom
of God might become known to the principalities
and powers that are in heaven: (11) which [wis- 11
dom] he arranged^ ages before, and he hath execu-
ted it by Jesus the Messiah our Lord ; (12) through
whom we have boldness and access, in the confi-
dence of his faith.^' (13) Therefore I pray, that I
may not be discouraged by my afflictions, Avhich
are for your sakes ; for this is your glory. (14) And 14
I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus
' Sy."jZoCTLo"Jlthe Messiah, (15) from whom the whole family? in 15
heaven and on earth is named; (16) that he would 16
grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to
be strengthened with might by his Spirit ; that in
your inner man (17) the Messiah may dwell by 17
faith, and in your hearts by love, Avhile your root
and your foundation waxeth strong; (18) and that 18
ye may be able to explore, with all the saints, what
is the height and depth, and length and breadth,
(19) and may know the greatness of the Messiah's
love ; ancl [that] ye may be filled with all the full-
ness of God.— ('iO)" Now to him who is able, by his
almighty power, 'i to do for us even more than we
ask or think, according to his power that worketh
in us; (21) to him be glor}^, in his church, by Je-


8


9
10


12


13


19


20


21


sus the Messiah, in all generations, for ever and
ever. Amen.

IV. I therefore, a prisoner in our Lord, beseech of
you, that ye walk, (as it becometh the calling where-

2 with yc are called,) (2) with all lowliness of mind,
and quietness, and long suffering ; and that ye be

3 forbearing one towards another, in love. (3) And
be ye solicitous to keep the unity^ of the Spirit, in

4 a bond of peace ; (4) so that yc may become one
body, and one Spirit ; even as ye are called unto one

5 hope of your calling. (5) For, the Lord is one, and

6 the faith one, and the baptism one ; (6) and one God
is the Father of all, and over all, and by all, and in

7 us all. — (7) And to each of us grace is given, ac-
cording to the measure of the gift of the Messiah.

8 (8) Wherefore it is said : He ascended on high, and
carried captivity captive, and gave gifts to men.

9 (9) Now that he ascended, what is it but that he
also previously descended to the inferior [regions]

10 of the earth ? (10) lie who descended, is also the
same that ascended up, high above all the heavens

11 that he might fulfill i^ all things. (11) And he gave
some, legates ; and some, prophets ; and some
evangelists ;<= and some, pastors'^ and teachers:'

12 (12) for perfecting the saints, for the Avork of the
ministry, for the edification of the body of the Mes

13 siah ; (13) until we all become one and the same/
in faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God,
and one complete man according to the measure of

14 the stature of the fullness of Messiah : (14") and that
we might not be children, agitated and turned
about by every wind of the crafty doctrines of men

15 Avho plot to seduce by their subtilty : (15) but that
we might be established in our love; and that
every thing in us might progress in the Messiah,

16 who is the head: (16) and from him [it is], the
whole body is framed together and comjvicted by
all the junctures, according to the gift that is im-
parted by measure to each member, for the growth
of the body ; — that his edifice may be perfected in
love.

17 And this I say, and testify in the Lord, that
henceforth yc walk not as the other Gentiles, who

18 walk in the vanity of their mind: (18) and they
are dark in their understandings, and are alienated


Sy. IZo^ol


H


" Sy.

^ Sy. ]Zai.>
« Sy. ]y c^\<^
' Sy. :>0^ ^


356


EPHESIANS, V.


m'


e Sy.
understandings.


>> Gr. to the
Devil.


Sy. word,
speech.


» Sy. il.
•> Sy. be named
to name.


from the life of God, because there is not in them
knowledge, and because of the blindness of their
heart, (19) They have cut off their hope, and 19
have given themselves over to lasciviousness, and
to the practice of all uncleanness in their greediness.

(20) But ye have not so learned the Messiah; 20

(21) if ye have truly heard him, and by him have 21
learned as the truth is in Jesu^. (22) But [ye have 22
learned], that ye should lay aside your former prac-
tices, the old man that is corrupted with the lusts

of error ; (23) and should be renewed in the spirit 23
of your minds ;s (24) and should put on the new 24
man, that is created by God in righteousness and
in the holiness of truth. — (25) Wherefore, put away 25
from you lying, and speak ye the truth each with
his neighbor ; for we are members one of another.
— (26) Be ye angry, and sin not: and let not the 26
sun go down upon your wrath. (27) And give no 27
place to the Accuser. 'i— (28) And let him that 28
stole, steal no more; but let him labor with his
hands, and do good acts ; that he may have to
give to him who needeth, — (29) Let no hateful Ian- 29
guage' come from your mouth, but that which is
decorous, and useful for edification, that it may
convey grace to those who hear. (30) And grieve 30
not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed
for the day of redemption. — (31) Let all bitterness, 31
and an2;er, and wrath, and clamorino", and reviling-,
be taken from you, with all malice : (32) and be 32
ye aifcctionate towards one another, and sympa-
thetic ; and forgive ye one another, as God by the
Messiah hath forgiven us, (V.) Be ye therefore V.
imitators of God, as dear children : (2) and walk in 2
love ; as the Messiah also hath loved us, and hath
given up himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice
to God, for a sweet odor.

But whoredom, and all impurity, and avarice, 3
let thema not be at all heard of ^ among you, as
it becometh the saints ; (4) Neither obscenities, nor 4
words of folly, or of division, or of scurrility, which
are not useful ; but instead of these, thanksgiving.
(5) For this know ye, that every man who is a 5
whoremonger, or impure, or avaricious, or a wor-
shipper of idols, hath no inheritance in the king-
dom of the Messiah and of God. (6) Let no man 6
deceive you with vain words ; for it is on account


EPHESIANS, V.


357


10


14
15


of these things that the wrath of God cometh on
the children of disobedience. (7) Therefore be ye
not like them, (8) For ye were heretofore dark-
ness, but now are ye light in our Lord : therefore,
as the children of light, so walk ye. (9) For the
fruits of the light are in all goodness, and righteous-
ness, and truth. (10) And search out what is

11 pleasing before our Lord: (11) And have no com-
merce with the works of darkness which are

12 unfruitful, but reprove them. (12) For the things
they do in secret, it is nauseous even to mention.
(13) For all things are exposed and made manifest
by the light : and whatever maketh manifest,^ is
light. (11) Wherefore it is said : Awake thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead, and the Messiah
will illuminate tliee. (15) See therefore, that ye

16 walk circumspectly ; not like the simple, (16) but
like the wise, who purchase their opportunity;

17 because the days are evil. (17) Therefore, be not
lacking in understanding ; but understand ye what

18 is the pleasure of God. (18) And be not drunk
with wine, in which is dissoluteness ;'^ but be ye
filled Avith the spirit. (19^ And converse with
yourselves^ in psalms and nymns ; and with your
hearts sing to the Lord, in spiritual songs. (20)
And give thanks to God the Father, at all times,
for all men, in the name of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah. (21) And be submissive one to another,
in the love of the Messiah.

Wives, be ye submissive to your husbands, as to
our Lord. (23) Because the husband is the head
of the wife, even as the Messiah is the head of the

21 church ; and he is the vivifier^ of the body. (21)
And as the churcli is subject to the Messiah, so
also let wives be to their husbands in all things.
(25) Husbands, love your wives, even as the Mes-
siah loved his church, and delivered himself up for
it; (26) that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it,

27 by the washing of water, and by the word ; (27)
and might constitute it a glorious church for him-
self, in which is no stain, and no wrinkle, and
nothing like them ; but lliat it might be holy and
without blemish. (28) It bcliooveth men so to love
their wives, as [they do] their own bodies. For he
that loveth his wife loveth himself. (29) For no
one ever hated his own body ; but nourisheth it,


19
20


21

22
23


:iu


26


28
29


■ Sy. uncoverelk.


' Sy.

Gr. drfwria.
- or, your souls


or, Saviour.


858


EPHESIANS, VI.


sy- lll5


Sy. ll]o


Sy.UJiO.
lords.


32


33


« Gr. the Dei 11.
i Sy.

Gr. dpxij.


' Sy. shoe your
feel.

' Sy. l^-O-OD


6


and provideth for it, even as the Messiah the
church. (30) For we are members of his body, 30
and of his flesh, and of his bones. (31) For this 31
reason, a man should quit his father and his mo-
ther, and adhere to his wife ; and the two should
be one flesh. (32) This is a great mystery ;g but I
am speaking of the Messiah, and of his church.
(33) Nevertheless, let each of you severally so love
his wife, even as himself: and let the wife rev-
erence her husband.— (VI.) Children, obey yourVI.
parents in our Lord ; for this is right.^ (2) And 2
the first commandment with promise, is this:
Honor thy father and thy mother ; (3) that it may 3
be well with thee, and that thy life may be pro-
longed on the earth. — (4) And parents, anger not 4
your children ; but train them up in the discipline
and doctrine of our Lord. — (5) Servants, be obe- 5
dient to your masters after the flesh, with fear, and
with trepidation, and with simplicity of heart, as
junto the Messiah. (6) Not in the sight of the eye,
as if ye were pleasing men ; but as the servants of
the Messiah, who are doing the Avill of God. (7)
And serve them with your whole heart, in love, as
if serving our Lord and not men ; (8) knowdng that
whatever good thing a man may do, the same will
be recompensed to him by our Lord, whether he be
a servant or a free man. — (9) Also ye masters, *> do
ye so to your servants. Forgive them a fault ;
because ye know, that ye have a master in heaven ;
and there is no respect of persons with him.

Finally, my brethren, be strong in our Lord, and
in the energy of his power: (11) And put ye on
the whole armor of God, so that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the Accuser.^ (12) For
our conflict is not with flesh and blood, but with
principalities, d and with those in authority, and
with the possessors of tliis dark world, and with the
evil spirits that are beneath heaven. (13) There-
fore put ye on the whole armor of God, that ye may
I be able to meet the evil [one] ; and, being in all
j respects prepared, may stand firm. (14) Stand up 14
I therefore, and gird your loins with truth ; and put
on the breastplate of righteousness; (15) and 15
defend^ your feet with the'preparation of the gos-
pel of peace. (16) And herewith take to you the 16
confidencef of faith, by which ye will have power


9


10
11

12


13


PHILIPPIANS, I.


S59


17 to quench all the fiery darts of the evil [one]. (17)
And put on the helmet of rescue ;g and take hold
of the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of

18 God. (18) And pray ye, with all prayers and
supplications, in spirit, at all times : and in prayer
be watchful, at all seasons, praying constantly, and

19 interceding for all the saints ; (19) and also for
me ; that language'' may be given me, in the
opening of my raoutli ; so that I may boldly pro-

20 claim the mj'stcry of the gospel, (20) of which I
am a messenger in chains ; that I may utter it
boldly, as I ought to utter it.

21 And that ye also may know my affairs, and what
I am doing, lo, Tychicus, a beloved brother, and a
faithful niiuister iu our Lord, will acquaint you ;

22 (22) whom I have sent to you for this purpose,
that ye might know what is [going on] with me,
and that your hearts may be comforted.

23 Peace be with the brethren, and love with faith,
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus the

21 Messiah.— (21) Grace be with all them who love
our Lord Jesus the Messiah without corruptness.
Amen.

End of ihe Epistle to the Ephesians ; which loas writien from
Rome, and was sent by the hand of Tychicus.


Sy.

dr. tfwTyjpt'ov.


Sy. word,
discourse.


The Epistle of Paul to the Philippians.


Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus the Mes-
siah, to all the paints that are in Jesus the Messiah
at Philippi, with the elders'^ and deacons.'' (2)
Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father,
and from our Lord Jesus the Messiah.

I thank my God at the constant recollection of
you, (1) in all my pra^'crs respecting you; and
while I rejoice, I adore ; (5) on account of your
fellowship in the gospel, from the first day until


^Sy.|« I ■ n

tSy.
1 1 ^<n^Kn


360


PHILIPPIANS, I.


■ Sy. are viani-
Jested.


or, for life to


6


9


10


now. (6) Because I am confident of this, tliat lie
who hath begun the good Avorks in you, will ac-
complish them until the day of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah. (7) For thus it is right for me to think
of you all, because ye are permanently in my
heart, and because, both in my bonds and in the
vindication of the truth of the gospel, ye are my
associates in grace. (8) For* God is my witness,
how I love you in the bowels of Jesus the Messiah.
— (9) And this I pray for, that your love may still
increase and abound, in knowledge, and in all
spiritual understanding: (10) so that ye may dis-
cern the things that are suitable ; and may be pure
and without offence, in the day of the Messiah, (11) 11
and be full of the fruits of righteousness which are
by Jesus the Messiah, to the praise and glory of
God.

And I would that ye might know, my brethren, 12
that the transaction in regard to me, hath eventu-
ated rather for the furtherance of the gospel ; 13
so that my bonds, on account of the Messiah, are
matter of notoriety*^ in all the court, and to all others.

(14) And many of the brethren in our Lord have 14
become confident, on account of my bonds, and are
more bold to speak the word of God without fear. —

(15) And they herald [it], some from envy and con- 15
tention ; but others with good will, and with love
for the Messiah ; (16) because they know that I am 16
appointed for the vindication of the gospel. (17) 17
And they who herald the Messiah in contention,

do it not sincerely ; but they hope to add pressure
to my bonds. (18) And in this I have rejoiced, and 18
do rejoice, that in every form, whether in pretence
or in truth, the Messiah is heralded. (19) For I
know, that these things will be found [conducive]
to my life,*' through your prayers and the gift of
the Spirit of Jesus the Messiah. (20) So that I
hope and expect, that I shall in nothing be put to
shame; but with uncovered face, as at all times,
so now, the Messiah will be magnified in my
body, whether by life or by death.— (21) For my 21
life is, the Messiah; and if I die, it is gain to me.

(22) But if I have fruits of my labors in this life 22
of the fiesh, I know not what I shall choose.

(23) For the two press upon me : I desire to be 23
liberated, that I may be with the Messiah ; and this


19


20


PHILIPPIANS, II.


861


II


24 would be very advantageous to me. (24) But also
the business in regard to you, virgcs upon nie to

25 remain in the body. — (25) And this I confidently
know, that I shall continue and remain, for your joy,

26 and for the furtherance of your faith ; (26) so that
when I come again to you, your glorying, which is
in Jesus the Messiah ordy, will abound through me.

27 Let your conduct be as becomcth the gospel of
the Messiah ; so that if I come I may see you, and
if absent I may hear of you, that ye stand fast in one
spirit and in one soul,^ and that ye strive together

28 in the faith of the gospel. (28) And in nothing be
ye startled, by those who rise up against us ; [which
is] an indication of their destruction, and of life^

29 for you. (29) And this is given to 3'ou by God,
that ye not only really believes in the Messiah, but

30 also that ye sulfer on his account ; (80) and that ye
endure conflict, as ye have seen in me, and now hear
concerning me. — {II.) If, therefore, ye have conso-
lation in the Messiah, or if a commingling* of hearts
in love, or if a fellowship of the Spirit, or if com-

2 passions and sympathies ; (2) complete ye my joy,
by having one apprehension, and one love, and one

3 soul, and one mind. (3) And do nothing in strife,
or in vain glory; but, with lowliness of mind, let
each esteem his neighbor as better than himself

4 (4) And let not each be solicitous [only] for him-

5 self, but every one also for his neighbor. (5) And
think ye so in yourselves, as Jesus the Messiah also
thought ; (6) who, as he was in the likeness of God,
deemed it no trespass'' to be the coequal*^ of God ;
(7) yet divested'' himself, and assumed the likeness
of a servant, and was in the likeness of men, and
was found in fashion as a man ; (8) and he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross. (9) Wherefore, also, God hath
highly exalted him, and given him a name which

10 is more excellent than all names; (10) that at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of [beings]

11 in heaven, and ou earth, and under the earth; (11)
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus the
Messiah is the Lord,«= to the glory of God bis

12 Father. — (12) Therefore, my beloved, as ye have
at all times obeyed, not only when I was near to
you, but now when I am far from you, prosecute
the work of your life,'' more abundantly,? with fear


6


9


Sy. »jL.£U


' or, salvation.

^ Sy. helievmg
ye believe.


Sy. converse
with the heart.


or, robbery.
Sy. ]Sn»»^
or, emptied.


Sy. l^jiD

' or, sah alien.
f Sy. AjImA-


362


PIIILIPPIANS, III.


or, pure.


or, salvation.


•^ Sy. 1^ A>
« Sy.


and with trembling. (13) For God is operating in 13
you, both to purpose, and also to perform that
which ye desire. (14) Do all things without mur- 14
muring, and without altercation ; (15) that ye may be 15
perfect and without blemish, as the sincere^ children
of God, who are resident in a perverse and crooked
generation ; and that ye may appear among them
as luminaries in the world; (16) so that ye may be 16
to them in place of life ;' for my glory in the day
of the Messiah, that I may not have run in vain,
or toiled for naught. — (17) And if I should be 17
made a libation upon the sacrifice and service of
your faith, I rejoice and exult with you all. (18) 18
And so also do ye rejoice and exult with me.

But I hope in our Lord Jesus, that I shall 19
shortly send Timothy unto you, so that I also may
have composure, when informed concerning you.
(20) For I have no other one here, who, like my- 20
self, will sincerely care for your welfare. (21) For 21
they all seek their own, not the [things] of Jesus
the Messiah. (22) But ye know the proof of him, 22
that as a son with his father, so he labored with me
in the gospel. (23) Him I hope shortly to send to 23
you, when I shall have seen how [things result]
with me. (24) And I trust in my Lord, that I 24
shall shortly come myself to you. — (25) But now, 25
a circumstance urged me to send to you Epaphro-
ditus, the brother who is an assistant and laborer
with me, but is your legate'^ and minister' to my
wants. (26) For he longed to see you all, and was 26
anxious, because he knew ye had heard, that he
was sick. (27) And indeed he was sick, nigh unto 27
death : but God had mercy on him : nor was it on
him only, but also on me, that I might not have
trouble upon trouble. (28) Promptly, therefore, 28
have I sent him to you ; so that when ye see him,
ye may again be joyful, and I may have a little
breathing. (29) Eeceive him then in the Lord, 29
with all joy ; and hold in honor those who are
such. (30) For, because of the Messiah's work, he 30
came near to death, and little regarded his life, that
he might fulfill what you lacked in the ministration
to me.

Finally, my orethren, rejoice in our Lord. To IIL
write these [things] again and again to you, is not


PIIILIPPIANS, III.


363


irksome to me, because they make you cautious.

2 (2) Beware of dogs; beware of evil doers; beware

8 of the cHpped in llesh. (3) For we are the [real]

circumcision, who worship God in spirit, and glory

in Jesus the Messiah, and place no reliance on the

4 fiosh. (4) And yet I might place reliance on the
flesh. For, if any one thinketh that his reliance
should be on the flesh, I might [do so] more than

5 he. (5) Circumcised when eight days old ; of the
stock of Israel ; of the tribe of Benjamin ; a Ile-
brew, descendant of Hebrews ; as to the law, a

G Pharisee ; (6) as to zeal, a persecutor of the church ;
and as to the righteousness'^ of the law, ] was with-

7 out fault. (7) But these things, which had been
my excellence, I have accounted a detriment, be-

8 cause of the Messiah. (8) And now also I account
them all a detriment, because of the excellency of
the knowledge of Jesus the Messiah my Lord ; for
the sake of whom, I have parted with all things,
and have accounted [them] as duni, that I might

9 gain the Messiah, (9) and be found in him; since
my righteousness is not [now] that from the law,
but that which is from faith in the Messiah, that is,

10 the righteousness'' which is from God ; (iO) that
thereby I might know Jesus, and the efficacy^ of
his resurrection ; and might participate in his suf-

11 ferings, and be assimilated to his death: (11) if so
be, I may attain to the resurrection from the dead.

12 (12) Not as though I had already taken [the prize],
or were already complete ; but I run [in the race],
if so I may take that, for which Jesus the Messiah

13 took rae. (13) My brethren, I do not consider
myself, as having taken [it]. But one thing I
know, that I forget the things behind me, and reach

14 for the things before me ; (14) and I run straight
for the goal,'^ that I may obtain the [prize] of vic-
tory of the call of God from on high, by Jesus the

15 Messiah. (15) Therefore let those who are perfect,
have these views ; and if ye differently view any

IG thing, God will reveal that also to you. (16) Never-
theless, that we may attain to this, let us proceed on

17 in one path, and with one consent. — (17) Be like me,
my brethren; and contemplate them, who walk

18 after the pattern ye have seen in us. (18) For there
are many who walk otherwise ; of whom I have
often told you, and I now tell you, with weeping,


gy-Uoo .?!


^ Sy. ]]u_K.


^ or, standard.


364


PHILIPPIANS, IV.


« or, Saviour,


or, mildness,
sweetness of
disposiliun.


'■ or, trained,
disciplined.


that they are adversaries of the cross of the Messiah ;
(19) whose end is destruction ; whose god is their 19
belly, and their glory their shame ; whose thoughts
are on things of the earth. (20) But our concern is 20
with heaven ; and from thence we expect our Vivi-
fier,e our Lord, Jesus the Messiah ; (21) who will 21
change the body of our abasement, that it may have
the likeness of the body of his glory, according to
his great power, whereby all things are made sub-
ject to him. — (IV.) Wherefore, my beloved and IV.
dear brethren, my joy and my crown ! — so stand
ye fast in our Lord, my beloved!

I beseech of Euodias and Syntyche, that they be 2
of one mind in our Lord. (3) I also beseech of 3
thee, my true yokefellow, that thou assist those
women who toiled with me in the gospel ; together
with Clement, and with the rest of my helpers,
whose names are written in the book of life. — (4) 4
Rejoice ye in our Lord, at all times ; and again I
say, Rejoice. (5) Let your humility^ be recognized 6
among all men. Our Lord is near. (6) Be 6
anxious iov nothing ; but at all times, by prayer
and supplication with thanksgiving, make known
your requests before God. (7) And the peace of 7
God, which surpasseth all knowledge, will keep
your hearts and your minds, through Jesus the
Messiah. — (8) Finally, my brethren, what things 8
are true, and what things are decorous, and what
things are right, and what things are pure, and
what things are lovely, and what things are com-
mendable, and deeds of praise and approbation, —
on these be your thoughts. (9) What things ye 9
have learned, and received, and heard, and seen, in
me, — these do ye : and the God of peace will be
with you.

And I rejoice greatly in our Lord, that ye have 10
[again] commenced caring for me ; even as ye had
before cared [for me,] but ye had not the opportu-
nity. (11) Yet I say this, not because I was in 11
want ; for I have learned to make that satisf)'- me,
which I have. (12) I know how to be depressed, 12
and I also know how to abound in every thing ;
and in all things am I exercised, ^ both in fullness
and in famine, in abundance and in penury. (13) 13
I fmd strength for every thing, in the Messiah who
strengtheneth me. (14) Yet ye have done well, in 14


COLOSSIANS, I.


365


15 that yo commuuicated to my necessities.^ — (15)
And ye know also, Philipuians, that in the begin-
ning of the annunciation, when I left Macedonia,
not one of the churches communicated with me in
respect to receiving and giving, except ye only ;

16 (16) that also at Thessalonica, once and again ye

17 sent me relief. (17) Not that I desire a gift ; but

18 I wish fruits may multiply unto you. (18) I have
[now] received all, and I abound, and am full :
and I accepted all that ye sent to me by Epaphro-
ditus, a sweet odor, and an acceptable saci'ifice that

19 plcaseth God. — (19) And may God supply all your
necessity, «J according to his riches, in the glory of

20 Jesus the Messiah. (20) And to God our Father,
be glory and honor, for ever and ever. Amen.

21 Salute all the saints who are in Jesus the Messiah.

22 The brethren who are with me, salute you. (22)
All the saints salute you, especially those of Caesar's

23 household. — (23) The grace of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah, be with you all. Amen.

End of the Epistle to the Philippians ; which was written
from Rome, and sent by the hand of Epaphroditus.


Sy. .1 1 Ao")


or, want,
indi<rence.


The Epistle of Paul to the Colossians.


I. Paul, a legate of Jesus the Messiah by the plea-

2 sure of God, and Timothy a brother, (2) to them
who are at Colosse, the brethren, holy and believ-
ing in Jesus the Messiah : peace be with you, and
grace from God our Father.

3 We give thanks to God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus the Afessiah, at all times, and pray for you ;

4 (4) lo, ever since we heard of your faith in Jesus
the Messiah, and of your love to all the saints ;

5 (5) because of the hope that is laid up for you in
heaven, of which yo heard before in the word of

6 truth of the gospel; (6) which is announced to


Sy. "jViNs


' or, supplicate.
Sy. ^jl


"* Sy. '|j.r)3a£5

• Sy. "jiolDJ


f or, standelh, is
established.

e Sy. .jtlDr^


10


13


you, as also to all the world; a and which groweth
and yieldeth fruits, as it doth also among you from
the day ye heard and knew the grace of God in
reality : (7) as ye learned from Epaphras, our be-
loved fellow-servant, who is for you a faithful
minister of the Messiah ; (8) and who hath made
known to us your love in the Spirit. — (9) There-
fol-e we also, from the day we heard [of it], have
not ceased to pray for you ; and to ask^ that ye
may be filled with a knowledge of the good pleas-
ure of God, in all wisdom, and in all spiritual
understanding; (10) that ye may walk as is right, <=
and may please God with all good "vvarks, and may
yield fruits, and grow in the knowledge of God ;
(11) and may be strengthened with all strength, 11
according to the greatness of his glory, in all
patience and long suffering; (12) and may, with 12
joy, give thanks to God the Father, who hath
fitted us for a portion of the inheritance of the
saints in light; (13) and hath rescued us from the
dominion of darkness, and transferred us to the
kingdom of his beloved Son ; (14) by whom we 14
have redemption*^ and remission of sins : — (15) 15
who is the likeness*^ of the invisible God, and the
first-born of all creatures: (16) and by him was 16
created every thing that is in heaven and on earth,
all that is seen and all that is unseen, whether
thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or sov-
ereignties; every thing was through him_, and
was created by him : (17) and he was prior
to all, and by him every thing exists. ^ (18)
And he is the head of the body the church ; as
he is the head and first-born from among the
dead, that he might be the firsts in all things. —
(19) For it pleased [the Father], that in him all 19
fullness should dwell ; (20) and by him, to reconcile 20
all things to himself; and through him, he hath
pacified, with the blood of his cross, both [those]
on earth and those in heaven. (21) And also to
you, who were before alienated and enemies in
your minds, because of your evil deeds,— (22) to
you, he hath now given peace, bv the body of his
flesh, and by his death; that he might establish
you in his presence, holy, without blemish, and
without offence ; (23) provided ye continue in your 23
faith, your foundation being firm, and ye be not


17

18


21


99


COLOSSIANS, 11.


367


removed from* the hope of the gospel ; of which
ye have heard, that it is proclaimed in all the
creation'' beneath heaven ; of which [gospel] I
Paul am a minister.
2i And I rejoice in the sufferings which are for
your sakes; and, in my Hcsh, I fill up the defi-
ciency in the alliictions of the Messiah, in behalf of

25 his body, which is the church ; (25) of which I am
a minister, according to the dispensation of God
which is given to me among you, that I should

26 fulfill the word of God, (26) [namely,] that mystery,
which was hidden for ages and generations, but is

27 now revealed to his saints; (27) to whom God
would make known what is the riches of the glory
of this mystery among the Gentiles ; which [mys-
tery] is the Messiah ; who in you is the hope of

28 our glory ; (28) whom we proclaim, and teacli and
make known to every man, in all wisdom ; that we
may present every man perfect in Jesus the Mes-

29 siah. (29) And for this also, I toil and strive, with
the aid of the strength that is imparted to me.


8y. cn\no


Sv


II. And I wish you to know, what a struggle"- 1 have
for you, and for them of Laodicea, and for the
others who have not seen my face in the flesh;

2 (2) that their hearts may be comforted, and that
they, by love, may come to all the riches of assu-
rance, and to the understanding of the knowledge
of tlie mystery of God the Father, and of the Mes-

3 siah, (3) in whom arc hid all the treasures of wis-

4 dom and of knowledge. (4) And this I say, lest
any one should mislead you by the persuasiveness

5 of words. (5) For though I am separated from
you in the flesh, yet I am with you in spirit; and
I rejoice at beholding your good order, and the

6 stabiUty of your fliith in the Messiah. — {6) As
therefore ye have received Jesus the Messian ouri

7 Lord, walk ye in him, (7) strengthening your}
roots and building up yourselves in him, and es- '' Sy.
tablishing yourselves in the faith which ye have |ZQ.£)Q.DDaIlA£D
learned, in which may ye abound in thanksgiv-j

8 ing. (8) Beware, lest any man make you naked, ''-;.

by philosophy, •> and by vain deception, according IrODa^IC I =
to the doctrines of men, according to the rudi-i Gr. coix-fa-
mcntsc of the world, and not according to the I

9 Messiah, (9) in whom dwelletli all the fullucssdjj Sy. |ju^QiD


Or. u.yCyva.,


.^


368


COLOSSIANS, III.


• Sy. *jZocTL!:i»1


or, body.


e Sy. ^QIDjOjJ

"Sy.'i^ui
' or, substance.


See verse 8.


10


of the Divinitje corporeally. (10) And in him
ye are also complete, because he is the head of
all principalities and authorities. (11) And in 11
him ye have been circumcised with a circumcision
without hands, by casting off the flesh^ of sins, by
a circumcision of the Messiah. (12) And ye have 12
been buried with him, by baptism ; and by it ye
have risen with him ; while ,ye believed in the
power of God, Avho raised him from the dead.

(13) And you, who were dead in jo\xr sins, and by 13
the uncircumcision of your flesh, he hath vivified
with him; and he hath forgiven us all our sins:

(14) and, by his mandates, he blotted out the hand- 14
writing of our debts, which [handwriting] existed
against us, and took [it] from the midst, and affixed
[it] to his cross. (15) And, by yielding up his 15
body, he showed contempt for principalities and
authorities ; and put them to shame, openly, in his
own person. — (16) Let no one therefore disquiets 16
you about food and drink, or about the distinctions

of festivals, and new moons, and sabbaths ;'i (17) 17
which were shadows of the things then fature ; '
but the body' is the Messiah. (18) And let no 18
one wish, by abasing the mind, to bring you under
bonds, that ye subject yourselves to the worship
of angels ; while he is prying into that which he
hath not seen, and is vainly inflated in his fleshly
mind, (19) and holdeth not the head, from which 19
the whole body is framed and constructed, with
joints and members, and groweth with the growth
[given] of God. — (20) For if ye are dead with the 20
Messiah from the rudiments'^ of the world, why are
ye judged as if ye were living in the world? (21)
But, touch thou not, and taste thou not, and han-
dle thou not: (22) for these things perish in the
using; and they are the commandments and doc-
trines of men. (23) And they seem to have a kind
of wisdom, in a show of humility, and of the fear
of God,^ and of not sparing the body ; not in any
thing of excellence, but in things subservient to the
body.— (III.) If then ye have risen with the Mes-III.
siah, seek the things on high, where the Messiah
sitteth on the right hand of God. (2) Think of 2
things on high ; not of the things on earth : (3) for 3
ye are dead ; and your life is hidden with the Mes-
siah, in God. (4) And when the Messiah, who is 4


21


22


o.q


COLOSSIANS, III.


369


'' i. e. in which
new man.

Aramaean.


our ]ife,=^ shall be manifested, then shall yc also be • or, source of
manifested with him in glory. uje.

5 Mortify therefore your members that are on the
earth; whoredom, impurity, and the passions, and
evil concupiscence, and avarice which is idolatry.

6 (6) For on account of these [things], the wrath of

7 God cometh on the children of disobedience. (7)
And in these [things] ye also formerly walked,

8 when ye lived in them. (8) But now, put away
from you all these, wrath, anger, malice, reviling,

9 filthy talking: (9) and lie not one to another; but
10 put off the old man, with all his practices ; (10) and

put ye on the new [man], that is renewed in k no wi-
ll edge, after the likeness of his Creator; (11) where''
there is neither Jew nor Gentile,^ neither circum-
cision nor uncircumcision, neither Greek nor bar-
barian, neither bond nor free ; but the Messiah is

12 all, and in all. — (12) Therefore, holy and beloved,
as the elect of God, put ye on compassions, and ten-
derness, and suavity, and humbleness of mind, and

13 gentleness, and long suffering, (13) And be ye in-
dulgent towards one another, and forgiving to one
another: and if any one has a complaint against
his neighbor, as the Messiah forgave you, so also

14 do ye forgive. (14) And with all these, [join]

15 love, which is the girdle'' of perfection. (15) And
let the peace of the Messiah direct^ your hearts;
for to that ye have been called, in one body ; and

16 be ye thankful to the Messiah. — (16) And let his
word dwell in you richly, in all wisdom. And
teach and admonish yourselves, by psalms and
hymns and spiritual songs, and with grace in your

17 hearts sing ye unto God. (17) And whatever ye
do in word or act, do it in the name of our Lord
Jesus the Messiah, anvd give thanksgiving through
him to God the Father.

18 Wives, be ye subject to your husbands, as is right

19 in the Messiah. (19) Ilusband.s, love ye your wives,

20 and be not bitter towards them. — (20) Children,
obey your parents in every thing ; for this is pleas-

21 ing before our Lord. (21) Parents, anger not your

22 children, lest they be discouraged. — (22) Servants,
obey in all things your bodily masters ;<" not in thejr or, hnis.
sight of the eye only, as those who please men, but!
with a simple heart, and in the fear of the ]jord.

23 (23) And whatever ye do, do it with your whole

24


Sy. \nw

or, leady
govern.


J


370


COLOSSIANS, IV.


Sy. Uqj]o
Sy. "jjiD,
a lord.


or, whow.


See Num.
xxxvi. 11.

Sy. Via^a-u


soul, as unto our Lord, and not as to men : (24) and 24
know ye, that from our Lord ye will receive a
recompense as the inheritance; for ye serve the
Lord the Messiah. (25) But the delinquent will 25
receive a recompense, according to the delinquency ;
and there is no respect of persons.

Masters, do equity and justice'^ to your servants; IV,
and be conscious that yc alsb have a master^ in
heaven.

Persevere in prayer ; and be watchful in it, and 2
in giving thanks. (3) And pray also for us, that 3
God would open to us a door of speech, for uttering
the mystery of the Messiah, for the sake of which"
I am in bonds ; (4) that I may unfold it, and utter 4
it, as it behooveth me. — (5) Walk in wisdom to- 5
wards them without : and redeem yoar opportunity.
(6) And let yoar speech at all times be with grace, 6
as it were, seasoned with salt : and know ye, how
ye ought to give answer to every man.

And what is [occurrent] with me, will Tychicus 7
make known to you; who is a beloved brother, and
a faithfid minister, and our fellow-servant in the
Lord : (8) whom I have sent to you for this pur- 8
pose, that he might know your afflxirs, and might
comfort your hearts ; (9) together with Onesimus, 9
a faithful and beloved brother, who is from among
you. These will make known to 3^ou what is [oc-
current] with us. — (10) Aristarchus, my fellow-cap- 10
tive, saluteth you ; also IMarcus, an uncle's son<i to
Barnabas, of whom ye have received directions,
that if he come to you, ye may kindly receive him :
(11) also Jcsus,° who is called Justus. These are of 11
the circumcision, and they only have aided me in
the kingdom of God ; and they have been a comfort
to me. (12) Epaphras saluteth you, who is from 12
among you, a servant of the Messiah, always
laboring for you in prayer, that ye may stand per-
fect and complete in all the good pleasure of God.
(13) For I testify for him, that he hath great zeal 13
for you, and for them of Laodicea, and for them of
Hierapolis. (14) Luke the physician, our beloved, 14
saluteth you; also Demas. (15) Salute ye the 15
brethren in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church
in his house. (16) And when this epistle shall have 16
been read among you, cause it to be read also in the


i.


1 THESSALONIANS, I.


cburcli of the Laodiceans ; and that which is writ-

17 ten from Laodicea, do ye read. (17) And say to
Arehippus: Be attentive to the ministry which
thou hast received in our Lord, that thou fulfill

18 it. — (18) This salutation is by the hand of me
Paul. Ecmember my bonds. Grace be with you.
Amen,

End of the Epistle to the Colossians ; which ivas written from
Rome, and loas sent by the hands of Tt/chicus. '


371


^


The First Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians.


Sy.


^


^


I Paul and Sylvanus and Timothy, to the church I
of the Thessalonians, which is in God the Father}
and in our Lord Jesus the Messiah : Grace be with i
you, and peace. I

2 We give thanks to God at all times, on account I
of you all, and remember you continually in our

3 prayers : (S) and we call to mind before God the
Father the works of your faith, and the toil of your
love, and the j^aticnce of your hope in our Lord

4 Jesus the Messiah. (4) For v/e know your election, ^ '

5 my brethren, beloved of God. (5) For our preach- ,
iug among you, was not in words onlj' ; but also in i
power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in genuine per- 1
suasion. Ye also know, how we were among you I

6 for your sakes. (G) And ye became imitators of i
us, and of our Lord, in that ye received the word
in great affliction, and with the joy of the Holy'

7 Spirit. (7) And ye were a pattern for all thej
believers who are in Macedonia and in Achaia.

8 (8) For from you the word of our Lord sounded^
forth ; [and] not only in Macedonia and Achaia,
but in every place, your faith in God is heard of;
so that we have no need to say any thing concern-

9 ing you. (9) For they declare, what an ingress
we had to you, and how ye turned from the wor-i


'■ Sy. was heard.


372


1 THESSALONIANS, II.


Sy.


ship of idols unto God, that ye might worship the
living and true God ; (10) while ye wait for his Son 10
from heaven, that Jesus whom he raised from the
dead, who delivereth us from the wrath to come.

And ye yourselves, my brethren, know our II
entrance among you, that it was not in vain : (2) 2
biit we first suffered and were treated with indignity,
as ye know, at Philippi ; and then, in a great agony,
with confidence in our God,'^ we addressed to you
the gospel of the Messiah. (3) For our exhortation 3
proceeded not from deceit, nor from impurity, nor in
guile : (4) but as we had been approved of God to 4
be intrusted with the gospel, so we speak, not as
pleasing men, but God who searcheth our hearts.
(5) For at no time have we used flattering speech, 5
as ye know ; nor a cloak of cupidity, God is wit-
ness. (6) Neither have we sought glory from 6
men, either from you or from others, when we
mio'ht have been charcreable as le2"ates of the
Messiah. (7) But we were lowly among you ; and 7
like a nurse, who fondleth'^ her children, (8) so we 8
also fondled [you], and were desirous to impart to
you, not the gospel of God merely, but also our own
soul, because ye were dear to us.' (9) For ye recol- 9
lect, brethren, that we labored and toiled, working
with our own hands, by night and by day, that we
might not be chargeable to any one oF you. (10) Ye 10
are witnesses, and God [also], how we preached to
you the gospel of God, purely, and uprightly, and
were blameless towards all them that believe :
(11) as yourselves know, we entreated each one of 11
you, as a father his children, and comforted*^ your
hearts: (12) and we charged you, to walk as it 12
bocometh God, who hath called you to his kingdom
and his glory, — (18) Therefore also we give thanks 13
unceasingly to God, that the word of God which ye
received from us, ye did not receive as the word of
men, but as being truly the word of God, which
worketh elBciently in you and in them that believe.
(14) For ye, my brethren, became assimilated to the 14
churches of God in Judaea, the persons who are in
Jesus the Messiah; in that ye so suffered, even ye
from your own countrymen, as also they from the
Jews, (15) the persons who slew our Lord Jesus the 15
Messiah, and persecuted their own prophets and us ;


Sy.


Sy. conversed
with.


1 THESSALONIANS, III.


373


and they please not God, and are made hostile to all

16 men ; (16) and they forbid us to speak to the Gen-
tiles, that they may have life j^ — to fill up their
sins at all times. And wrath cometh on them to
the uttermost.

17 But wc, my brethren, have been bereaved of you
for a short time, (in visible presence,*' not in
our hearts,) and have the more exerted ourselves,

18 to behold your faces, with great aficction. (18)
And we purposed to come to you, — I Paul, once

19 and again ; but Satan hindered me. (19) For what
is our hope, and our joy, and the crown of our glo-
rying; unless it be ye, before our Lord Jesus at

20 his coming ? (20) For ye are our glory, and our
Ill.joy. — (III.) And, because we could no longer en-
dure it, we were willing to be left alone at Athens,

2 (2) and to send to you Timothy our brother, a
servant^"- of God, and our assistant in the announce-
ment of the Messiah; that he might strengthen

3 you, and inquire of you respecting your iaith : (3)
lest any of you should be disheartened^ by these
afflictions; for ye know, that we are appointed

4 thereto. (4) For also when we were with you, we
forewarned you, that we were to be aflllicted; as

5 ye know did occur. (o) Therefore also I could
not be quiet, until I sent to learn your faith ; lest
the Tempter should have tempted you, and our

6 labor have been in vain. — (6) But now, since
Timothy hath come to us from among yon, and
hath informed us respecting your faith and your
love, and that ye have a good remembrance of us
at all times, and that ye desire to see us, even as

7 we [to see] you ; (7) therefore we are comforted in
you, my brethren, amid all our straits and afflic-

8 tions, on account of your faith. (8) And now,

9 wc live,c if ye stand fast in our Lord. (9) For
what thanks can we render to God in your behalf,
for all the joy with which wo arc joyful on your

10 account ; (l6) unless it be, that we the more sup-
plicate before God, by night and by day, that we
may see your faces, and may perfect what is lack-

11 iiig in your faith ? — (11.) And may God our Father,
and our Lord Jesus the Messiah, direct our way

12 unto you ; (12) and increase and enlarge your love
towards one another, and towards all men, even as

13 we love you ; (13) and establish your hearts un-


"• or, be saved.


Sy. by face.


or, minisier.


'> Sy.


Sy.^


.1


ST4


1 THESSALONIANS, IV.


vi^


^


^


* Sy. be in need
of.


Sy.


blamable in holiness, before God our Father ; at
the advent of onr Lord Jesus the Messiah, with
all his saints.

Wherefore, ray brethren, I entreat you, and IV.
beseech you by our Lord Jesus, that, as ye have
received from us how ye ought to walk, and to
please God, so ye would mak$ progress more and
more. (2) For ye know what command we gave you 2
in our Lord Jesus the Messiah. (3) For this is the 3
pleasure of God, your sanctification;=^ and that ye
be separated from all whoredom ; (4) and that each 4
one of you might know how to possess his vessel,
in sanctity and in honor ; (5) and not in the concu- 5
piscence of lust, like the rest of the Gentiles who
know not God : (6) and that ye dare not to trans- 6
gress and to overreach any one his brother, in this
matter ; because our Lord is the avenger of all these,
as also we have said and testified to 3^ou in time 7
past. (7) For God did not call you unto impurity,
but to sanctification. (8) He therefore who spurn- 8
eth, spurneth not man but God, who hath given
his Holy Spirit in you. — (9) Now concerning love 9
to the brethren, ye need not that I should write to
you ; for ye yourselves arc taught of God to love
one another. (10) Ye likewise do so, to all the 10
brethren who are in all Macedonia : but I entreat
you, my brethren, to be exuberant: (11) and that 11
ye strive to be quiet, and to attend to 3'our own
affairs ; and that ye labor with your own hands, as
we directed you; (12) and that ye walk becoming- 12
]y towards those without ; and that ye be depend-
ent'' on no man.

And, I wish you to know, my brethren, that ye 13
should not mourn over them who have fallen
asleep, like other people who have no hope. (14) 14
For if Ave believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them who sleep, will God, by Jesus, bring
with him. (15) And this we say to you, by the 15
word of our Lord, that we who may survive and be
alive, at the coming of our Lord, shall not precede
them who have slept. (16) Because our Lord will 16
himself descend from heaven, Avith the mandate, «=
and with the voice of the chief angel, and with the
trump of God ; and the dead who arc in the Mes-
siah, will first arise ; (17) and then, we who survive 17


and are alive shall be caught up together with them
to the clouds, to meet our Lord in the air; and so
18 shall we bo ever with our Lord. (18) AVherefbre,
comfort ye one another with these words.

V. But concerning the times and seasons, mj breth-
2 ren, ye need not that I write to you ; (2) for ye '
know assuredly, that the day of our Lord so
8 Cometh, as a thief by night. (3) While they will
be saying, Peace and quietness, then suddenly de-
struction will burst upon them, as distress upon a

4 child-bearer, and they will not escape. — (4) But
ye, my brethren, are not in darkness, that that day

5 should overtake you as a thief. (5) For ye are
all children of the light, and children of the day ;
and are not children of the night, and children of

6 darkness. (6) Let us not therefore sleep, like
others; but let us be vigilant and considerate.*^

7 (7) For they who sleep, sleep in the night; and
they who are drunken, are drunken in the night.

8 (8) But let us who are children of tlie da}^, be
wakeful in mind, and put on the breastplate of
faith and love, and take*^ the helmet of the hope

9 of life'=. (9) For God hath not appointed us to
wrath, but to the acquisition of lifc^, by our Lord

10 Jesus the Messiah: (10) who died for us«", that
whether Ave wake or sleep, Ave might live together

11 Avith him. (11) Therefore comfort one another,
and edify one another, as also ye have done.

12 J\nd Ave entreat you, my brethren, that ye recog-
nize them Avho labor among you, and who stand
before your faces^ in our Lord, and instruct you :

13 (13) that they may be esteemed by you Avith abun-
dant love ; and, on account of their work, live ye in

14 harmony^ Avith them. (14) And we entreat you,
my brethren, that ye admonish the faulty, and en-
courage the faint-hearted, and bear the burdens of
the Aveak, and be long suffering towards all men.

15 (lo) And beware, lest any of you return evil for
evil, but alwa3's follow'' good deeds, toAvards one

IG another, and towards all men. — (16) And be joyful

17 always. (17) And pray Avithout ceasing. (18) And

18 in every thing be thankful : For this is the pleas-

19 ure of God in Jesus the Messiah, concerning you.

20 (19) Quench not the Spirit. (20) Despise not pro-

21 phesying. (21) Explore every thing, and hold fast


Sv.


impose.


or, salvation.
or, salvation.
Sy.


Sy.
QJ_.A.*1


I" Sy. run after.


2 THESSALONIANS, I.


the good: (22) and % from every thing evil. 22
(23) And may the God of peace sanctify you all, 23
perfectly, and keep blameless your whole spirit,
and your soul, and your body, till the coming of
our Lord Jesus the Messiah. (24) Faithful is he 24
i that hath called you, who will do it.

My brethren, pray for us. — (26) Salute all our 26
brethren with a holy kiss. (27) I conjure you by 27
our Lord, that this epistle be read to all the holy
brethren. — (28) The grace of our Lord Jesus the 28
Messiah be with you. Amen.

End of the first Epistle to the Thessalonians ; which was
written frorn Atheris, and loas sent by the hands of Timothy.


The Second Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians.


' Sy. ^CL.mL'i


" Sy. IJj.K*
' Sy. ]3ia^

"» Sy. lZ;nm


Paul and Sylvanus and Timothy, to the church
of the Thessalonians, which is in God our Father
and our Lord Jesus the Messiah : (2) Grace be with
you, and peace, from God our Father, and from our
Lord Jesus the Messiah.

We are bound to give thanks to God always, on
your account, my brethren, as it is proper ; because
your Mth groweth exceedingly, and, in you all, the
love of each for his fellow increascth. (4) Inso-
much that we also boast of 3^ou in the churches of
God, on account of your faith, and your patience in
all the persecution and trials that ye endure ; (5) for
a demonstration of the righteous judgra.ent of God;
that ye may be worthy^ of his kingdom, on account
of which ye suffer. (6) And since it is a righteous
thing with God, to recompense trouble to them that
trouble you : (7) and you, who are the troubled, he
will vivify, with us,"^at the manifestation of our
Lord Jesus the Messiah from heaven, with the host^
of his angels ; (8) when he will execute vengeance,
with the burning^ of fire, on them that know not
God, and on them that acknowledge not the gospel^^


as


1


2 THESSALONIANS, II.


377


9 of our Lord Jesus the Messiah. (9) For these will
be recompensed with the judgment of eternal
destruction, from the presence of our Lord, and

10 from the glory of his power ; (10) when he shall
come to be glorified in his saints, and to displa}'- his
wonders in his faithful ones; for our testimony
concerning you, will be believed, in that day.—

11 (11) Therefore we pray for you, at all times; that
God would make you worthy of your calling, and
would fill you with all readiness for good deeds,

12 and with the works of fiiilh by power; (12) so that
the name of our Jjord Jesus the Messiah, may be
glorilicd in you, (and) ye also in him; according
to the grace of God, and of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah.

II. But we entreat of you, my brethren, in regard to
the coming of our Lord Jesus the Messiah, and in

2 respect to our being congregated unto him, (2) that
ye be not soon agitated in your mind, nor be
troubled, — neither by word, nor b}^ spirit, nor by
letter, as coming from us, — that lo, the day of our

3 Lord is at hand. (3) Let no one deceive you in any
way ; because [that day will not come], unless there
previously come a defection,'^ and that man of sin

4 be revealed, the son of perdition ; (1) who is an
opposer, and exalteth himself above all that is called
God and Worshipful;'* so that he also sitteth in
the temple of God, as a God, and displayeth him-

5 self, as if he were God. — (5) Do ye not remember,
that, when I was with you, 1 told you these things ?

6 (6) And now, ye know what hindereth his being

7 manifested in his time. (7) For the mystery of the
evil One already beginneth to be operative : and
only, if that which now hindereth shall be taken

8 from the midst ; — (8) then at length will that evil
One be revealed; wiiom our Lord Jesus will con-
sume by the breath'^ of his mouth, and will bring to

9 naught by the visibility of his advent. (9) For the
coming of that [evil One], is the working of Satan,
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders,

10 (10) and with all the deccptiveness of iniquity, in
them that perish ; because they did not receive the
love of the truth, by which they might have lifc^

11 (11) Therefore God will send upon them the opera-
tion of deception, that they may believe a lie ;


or, rebellion.


Sy. ]J..K*jo


Sy. k^aOj^D


^ or, be saved.


378


2 THESSALONIANS, III.


or, salvation.


(12) and that thej all may be condemned, who be- 12
lievc not the truth, but have pleasure in iniquity.
— (13) But we are bound to give thanks to Grod al- 13
waj^s, on your account, my brethren beloved of our
Lord, that God hath from the beginning chosen
you unto life,*' through sanctification of the Spirit,
and through faith in the truth. (14) For unto these 14
it was, that God called you by our preaching ; that
ye might be the glory to our Lord Jesus the Mes-
siah. (15) Therefore, my brethren, be established, 15
and persevere in the precepts which ye have been
taught, whether by word or by our epistle. (16) 16
And may our Lord Jesus the Messiah himself, and
God our Father, who hath loved us, and given us
everlasting consolation and a good hope through
his grace, (17) comfort your hearts, and establish 17
[you] in every good word, and in every good
work.

Henceforth, brethren, pray ye for us, that the III.
word of our Lord may, in every place, run and be
glorified, as with you ; (2) and that we may be 2
delivered from evil and perverse men ; for faith is
not in all. (3) And faithful is the Lord, who will 8
keep you and rescue you from the evil One. (4) 4
And we have confidence in you, through our Lord,
that what we have inculcated on you, ye both have
done, and will do. (5) And may our Lord direct 5
your hearts to the love of God, and to a patient
waiting for the Messiah. — (6) And we enjoin upon 6
you, my brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus
the Messiah, that ye withdraw from every brother
who walketh wickedly, ^ and not according to the
precepts which ye received from us. (7) For ye 7
know how ye ought to imitate us, who did not
walk wickedly among you. (8) Neither did we 8
eat bread gratuitously from any of you ; but, with
toil and weariness, we labored by night and by day,
that we might not bo burdensome to any of you.
(9) It was not because we have no authority, ^^ but 9
that we might give you an example in ourselves,
that yc might imitate us. (10) And while we were 10
with you, we also gave you this precept, That every
one who would not work, should likewise not eat.
I (11) For we hear, there are some among you who 11
Gi: disorderly. I walk wickedly,c and do nothing except vain things.


Sy. ^»-%.'^

Gr. disorderly.


^ Sy. 4A.


1 TIMOTHY, I.


379


12 (12) Now such persons, we command and exhort,
by our Lord Jesus the Messiah, that in quietness

13 they work, and eat their own bread. (13) And
my brethren, let it not be wearisome to you, to do

14 what is good.*i (14) And if any one hearkeneth
not to tliesc [my] words in this epistle, separate
that man from you, and have no intimacy with him,

15 that he may be ashamed. (15) Yet, hold him not
as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. —

16 (16) And may the Lord of peace give you peace,
always, in every thing. Our Lord be with you all.

17 The salutation in the writing of my own hand, I
Paul have written it ; which is the token in all my

18 epistles, so I write. (18) The grace of Jesus the
Messiah be with you all, my brethren. Amen.

End of (he s^icond Epistle to tlie Thessalonians ; which was
nvittenfrom Laodicea of Pisidia, and was sent by the hands of
Tychicus.


Sy. ; ig\ »


The First Epistle of Paul to Timothy.


I. Paul, a legate of Jesus the Messiah, by the
command of God our life-giver, =i and of the Mes-

2 siah, Jesus our hope ; (2) to Timothy, [my] true
son in the faith : grace and mercy and peace, from
God our Father, and the Messiah, Jesus our Lord.

3 When I was going into Macedonia, I requested
thee to remain at Jl^phesus, and to charge certain

4 pei'sons not to teach dilYereat doctrines ; (4) and
not to throw themselves into fables and stories
about genealogies, of which there is no end, which
produce contention rather than edification in the

5 faith of God. — (5) Now the eud^ of the command
is love, which is from a pure heart, and from a

6 good conscience, and from true faith. (6) But from
these some have strayed, and have turned aside to

7 vain words ; (7) because they wished to be teachers


or, our Sa-


Sy. OTOm,
i. e. scope,
design.


380


1 TIMOTHY, II.


Sy. ;.j..e>..g>


Sy. Gospel of
the glory of,


or, to save.


f Sy. ^SjD^^


of the law, while they understood not what they
speak, nor the thing about Avhich they contend.
(y) Now, we know, that the law is a good^ thing, if 8
a man conduct himself in it, according to the law,

(9) he knowing that the law was not established for 9
the righteous, but for the evil, and the rebellious,
and the ungodly, and the sinful, and the perverse,
and for the impure, and for smite rs of their fathers
and smiters of their mothers, and for murderers,

(10) and for whoremongers, and for copulators with 10
males, and for the stealers of free people, and for
liars, and for violators of oaths, and for whatever is
contrary to sound doctrine, (11) [namely] that of 11
the glorious gospel'^ of the blessed God, with which

I am intrusted. (12) And I thank him who 12
strengthened me, [even] our Lord Jesus the Mes-
siah ; who accounted me fliithful, and appointed
me to his ministry ; (13) mo [I say], who before 13
was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and a reviler ;
but I obtained mercy, because I did it while igno-
rant and without faith. (14) And in me the grace 1-4
of our Lord abounded, and faith and love, which
is in Jesus the Messiah. (15) Faithful is the dec- 15
laration, and worthy to be received, that Jesus the
Messiah came into the world to give life«= to sinners,
of whom I was the primary.^ (16) But for this 16
cause had he mercy on me, that in me first Jesus
the Messiah might display all his long suffering, for
an example to them who were to believe on him
unto life eternal. (17) And to the king eternal, 17
incorruptible, and invisible, the sole God, be honor
and glory for ever and ever ! Amen. — (18) This 18
injunction I commit to thee, my son Timothy, ac-
cording to the former predictions concerning thee,
that in them thou mightest war this good warfare,

(19) in foith and a good conscience ; for they who 19
have repudiated this, have become destitute of faith ;

(20) like Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have 20
delivered up to Satan, that they may learn not to

be blasphemers.

I exhort thee, therefore, first of all, that thou IL
present to God supplication, and prayer, and inter-
cession, and thanksgiving, for all men : (2) for 2
kings and magistrates, that we may dwell in a quiet
and tranquil habitation, with all reverence for God,


3 and with purity. (3) For this is good and acccpt-

4 able bclbro God our life-giver;^ (4) who Avould
have all men live,^ and be eonverted to the knowl-

o edge oC the truth. (5) For God is one ; and the
mediator^ between God and men is one, [numclyj

6 the man Jesus the Messiah; (G) who gave himself a
ransom'' for every man ; — a testimony that arrived

7 in due time, (7) of which I am constituted a herald
and legate. I speak the truth, and do not lie, for I
am the teacher of the Gentiles in the belief of the

8 truth. — (cS) I desire therefore, that men may pray
in every place, while they lift up their hands with
purity, without wrath, and without disputations.

9 (9) So also, that women [appear] in a chaste fashion
of dress ; and that their adorning be with modesty
and chastity ; not with curls, or with gold, or with

10 pearls, or with splendid robes ; (10) but with good
works, as bccometh women who profess reverence

11 for God. — (11) Let a woman learn in silence, with

12 all submission : (12) for I do not allow a woman to
teach, or to be assuming over the man ; but let her

13 remain in stillness. (13) For Adam Avas first form-

14 ed, and then Eve. (14) And x\dam was not seduced,
but the woman was seduced and transgressed the

15 command. (15) Yet she shall live^ by means of
her children, if they continue in the faith, and in
love, and in sanctity, and in chastity.

m. It is a liiithful saying, that if a paan desireth the

2 eldership, a he desireth a good work. (2) And an
elder'' ought to be such, that no blame can be found
in him ; and he should be the husband of one wife,
with a vigilant mind, and sober and regular [in his
habits], and affectionate to strangers, and instruct-

3 ive ;<^ (3) and not a transgressor in regard to wine,
and whose hand is not swift to strike ; but he
should be humble, and not contentious, nor a lover

4 of money ; (4) and one that guidcth^ well his own
house, and holdeth his children in subjection with

5 all purity. (5) For if he knoweth not how to guide
his own house well, how can he guide the church

6 of God. (6) Neither let him be of recent disciple-
ship ; lest he be uplifted, and foil into the condcmna-

7 tion of Satan. (7) And there ought to be good
testimony of him from those Avithout ; lest he fall

8 into reproach and the snare of Satan. — (8) And so


or, Saviour.
or, be saved.


or, be saved.


• Sy,

Uc

iheGr.i'gKfxi'^YI-
^Sy.

Gr. sriVxo'T'oj.


Sy.


lISoc


Sy. j.Or!iD0


882


1 TIMOTHY, IV.


Sy.

Gr. ^jaxovo).
Sy.


' Sy- 1^2


•■ Sy. IJOT 1ll5
■Sy.


or, abornina-
icd.

Sy.


9
10


12
13


14


also the deacons^ should be pure, and not speak
double, nor incline to mucTi wine, nor love base
gains ; (9) but should hold the mystery of the faith
with a pure conscience. (10) And let them be first
tried, and then let them serve,^ if they are without
blame. (11) So also should the wives be chaste, 11
and of vigilant minds ; and they should be foithfal
in all things ; and they shoulfl not be slanderers.

(12) Let the deacons be such as have each one wife,
and guide well their children and households.

(13) For they who serve well [as deacons], procure
for themselves a good degree, s and much boldness
in the faith of Jesus the Messiah.

These things I write to thee, while hoping soon
to come to thee ; (15) but if I should delay, that 15
thou mayest know how thou oughtest to conduct
thyself in the house of Grod, which is the church of
the living God.* — The pillar and the foundation of
the truth, (16) and truly great, is this mystery of 16
righteousness, h which was revealed' in the flesh, and
justified in the spirit, and seen by angels, and pro-
claimed among the Gentiles, and believed on in the
world, and received up into glory. — (IV.) But the IV.
Spirit saith explicitly, that in the latter times, some
will depart from the faith ; and will go after decep-
tive spirits, and after the doctrine of demons.

(2) These will seduce, by a false appearance ; and will 2
utter a lie, and will be seared in their conscience ;

(3) and will forbid to marry; and will require 3
abstinence from meats, which God hath created for
use and for thankfulness, by them who believe and
know the truth. (4) Because whatever is created 4
by God is good ; and there is nothing which should

be rejected'! if it be received with thankfulness ;
(5) for it is sanctified by the word of God and by 5
prayer. — (6) If thou shalt inculcate these things on 6
thy brethren, thou wilt be a good minister^ of Jesus
the Messiah, being educated in the language of the
faith, and in the good doctrine wdiich thou hast
been taught. (7) Bat the silly tales of old women, 7
shun thou ; and occupy thj^self with righteousness.
(8) For, exercising the body is profitable a little 8


* The structure of these sentences is the same in the Syriac and in the Greek ;
and by followin;^ the punctuation of Gricsbach, Kaapp, and otlicr modern editors
of the Greek Testament, the Syriac is accurately transhited as above. The read-
ing of 0^ or 0: instead of Qtlg, in verse 16, is supported by the Syriac version.


1 TIMOTHY, V.


38S


16


V


Sy.

(Z.cu».t.«.n


or, fave.

Sy. \.m h n n


while ; but righteousness is every way profitable and

hath promise of the life of the present time and of that

9 to come. (J)) This is a faithful saying, and worthy of

10 reeeption. (10) For on this account, we toil and suffer
reproach ; because we trust in the living God, who
is the lile-giver'= of all men, especially of the believers. " or, Saviour.

11 (11) These things teach thou, and inculcate.

12 And let no one despise thy youth ; but be thou a
pattern for tlie believers, in speech, and in behavior,

13 and in love, and in faith, and in purity. (13) Un-
til I come, be diligent in reading, and in prayer,

l-l and in teaching. (14) Despise not the gift that is
in thee, which was given thee by propliee}^, and by

15 the laying on of the hand of the eldership.^ (15) On
these things meditate ; give thyself wholly to them :
that it may be obvious to all that thou makest ad-
vances. (16) Be attentive to thyself, and to thy
teaching ; and persevere in them. For in doing
this, thou wilt procure lifc^ to thyself and to them
who hear thee. — (V.) Chide not an elder, ^^ but
entreat him as a father; and the younger men, as

2 thy brothers ; (2) and the elder women, ^ as mothers; ^ ^Y-
■ and the younger women, as thy sisters, with all "jA.

3 purity. — (3) Uonor widows, who are truly widows.

4 (4) But if a widow hath children, or grandchildren,
let them first learn to show kindness to their own
households, and to repay the obligations to their

5 parents ; for this is acceptable before Gotl. (5) Now
she who is truly a widow, and solitary, — her hope
is in God; and she persevereth in prayers, and in|

6 supplications, by night and by day : (G) ]3ut she
who followeth pleasure, is dead while she liveth.

7 (7) These things enjoin thou on them, that they

8 may be blameless. (8) But if any one careth not
for them who are his own, and especially for them
who are of the hou.sehold«= of faith, he hath rejected c Sy. so7u^ ofilus
the faith, and is worse than the unbelievers. Jiouse.

9 (9) Therefore elect thou the widow, who is not less
than sixty years [old], and who hath been the wife!

10 of one man, (10) and hath a reputation for goodj
works ; — if she have trained up ciiildren, if she have;
entertained strangers, if she have washed the feetj
of i^aints, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she

11 have walked in every good work. (11) IBut the
younger widows do thou reject; for they wax wan-
ton'i against the Messiah, and desire to be married '.\^^\'


/ <>


r^-S^


384


1 TIMOTHY, VI.


« Sy. ] a '» B n
f Sy.


t Sy. ] • . « n


'' Some copies
read men.


Sy. UOf^i^


(12) and their condemnation is fixed, because tliey 12
have cast off their former faith. (13) And they 13
also learn idleness, wandering from house to house ;
and not only idleness, but also to talk much, and
to pursue vanities, and to utter what they ought
not. (14) I would therefore, that the younger wo- 14
men marry, and bear children, and regulate their
houses ; and that they give no occasion to the ad-
versary for reproach. (15) For some have already 15
begun to turn aside after Satan. (16) If any be- 16
lieving man or believing woman have Avidows, let
them support them ; and let them not be a burden
on the church ; so that there may be a sufficiency
for such as are really widows. — (17) Let the elders^ 17
who conduct^ themselves well, be esteemed worthy
of double honor ; especially they who labor in the
word and in doctrine. (18) For the scripture saith, 18
Thou shalt not muzzle the ox in threshing ; and.
The laborer is worthy of his pay. — (19) Against an 19
elder,^ receive not a complaint, except at the mouth
of two or three witnesses.— (20) Those who sin be- 20
fore all, rebuke; that the rest of the people may
fear. — (21) I charge thee, before God, and our Lord 21
Jesus the Messiah, and his elect angels, that thou
observe these things; and let not your mind be
preoccupied by any thing : and do nothing with a
respect for persons. — (22) Lay not the hand hastily 22
on any man ; and participate not in the sins of
others; keep thyself pure. — (23) And hereafter 23
drink not water, but drink a little wine ; on account
of thy stomach, and thy continuing infirmities. —
(24) There are persons, whose sins are known, and 24
go Dcfore them to the place of judgment ; and there
are some, whom they follow after. (25) So also 25
good deeds'! are known : and those which are other-
wise cannot be hid.

Let them who are under the yoke of servitude, ^VL
hold their masters in all honor ; lest the name of
God and his doctrine be reproached. (2) And let 2
them who have believing masters, not treat thera
with disrespect, because they are their brethren ;
but let them be more obedient, because they are
believers and beloved, in whose service they enjoy
quietness. These things teach thou, and request of
them.


1 TIMOTHY, VI.


385


3 But if tbere be any one, who teaclieth a different
docti-ine, and doth not accede to the salutary words
of our Lord Jesus the Messiah, and to the doctrine

4 of the fear of God, (4) he is one that exalteth him-
self, while he knoweth nothing ; and he languish-
eth'' in the-eearch and inquiry about words, from
which come envy, and contention, and railing, and

5 evil surmising, \o) and the disputation of men,
whose minds are corrupt and destitute of the truth,
and who suppose that gain is godliness. But from

6 these stand thou aloof (6) But great is our gain,
which is the fear of God, with the use of our com-

7 petence. (7) For we brought nothing into the
world ; and wc know that we can carry nothing out

8 of it. (8) Therefore, food and clothing satisfy us.

9 (9) But they who desire to become rich, fall into temp-
tations, and into snares, and into many lusts which
are foolish and hurtful, and which drown men in

10 destruction and perdition : (10) for the love of
money is the root of all these evils. And tliere
are some who, coveting it, have erred from the
foith, andbrought themselves into many sorrows. —

11 (11) But thou, Oman of God, flee from these things;
and follow after righteousness, and rectitude, and
faith, and love, and patience, and humility.

12 (12) And contend in the good contest of faith; and
lay hold of life eternal, to which thou art called,
(uid [of which] thou hast confessed a good confes-

13 sion before many witnesses. (13) I charge^ thee
before God, who quickeneth all, and [before] Jesus
the Messiah who attested a good testimony before

1-1 Pontius Pilate, (14) that thou keep the injunction,
without stain, and without blemish, until the mani-

15 festation of our Lord Jesus the Messiah ; (15) which*^
God will, in due time make visible; [God] the bless-
ed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and the

16 Lord of lords; (!<)) who only is incorruptible, and
dwelleth in light to which no one can approach ; and
whom no man hath seen, or even can see : to him
l>e glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

17 Charge the rich of this world, that they be not
uplifted in their minds; and that they confide not
in riches, in which is no security; but in the living
God, who giveth us alf things abundantly for our

18 comfort: (18) and that they do good works, and
be rich in well-doings ; and be ready to give and

23


Sy. aij;.rD


Sv. -tmtTi^n


•^ or, whom.


386


2 TIMOTHY, I.


to communicate : (19) and that thej lay up for 19
themselves a good foundation for that which is
future ; that they may take hold of real life.

O Timothy, be careful of that which is committed 20
to thee ; and shun vain words, and the oppositions
of false science : (21) for they who profess it, have 21
erred from the faith. Grace be with thee. Amen,

End of the first Epistle to Timothy ; which was written from
Laodicea.


The Second Epistle of Paul to Timothy.


or. salvation.


Sy. icake up.


« or, saved.


Paul, a legate of Jesus the Messiah by the pleas- I,
ure of Grod, according to the promise of life^ which
is in Jesus the Messiah ; (2) to Timothy a beloved 2
son ; grace, and mercy, and peace, from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus the Messiah.

I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers 3
with a pure conscience, that I continually remem-
ber thee in my prayers, by night and by day :
(4) and I desire to see thee, and I call to mind thy 4
tears; that I may be lilled with joy, (5) by the 5
recollection which I have, by thy genuine faith,
which dwelt lirst in thy grandmother Lois, and in
thy mother Eunice, and also, I am persuaded, in
thee. — (6) Wherefore I remind thee, that thou ex- 6
cite^ the gift of God, that is in thee by the imposi-
tion of my hands. (7) For God hath not given us 7
a spirit of fear, but of energy, and of love, and of
instruction. (8) Therefore, be not thou ashamed of 8
the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner ;
but endure evils in connection with the Gospel,
through the power of God ; (9) who hath vivified^ 9
us, and called us with a h^ly calling ; not accord-
ing to our works, but according to his good pleas-
ure, and his grace that was given us in Jesus the
Messiah from time before the ages, (10) and is 10


2 TIMOTHY, II.


!87


11


12


13


14


16


18


now made known hy the appearing of our Vivifier,^
Jesus the Messiah; who hath abohshed death, and
hath made manifest hfe and immortaUtv, by the
gospel: (11) of whieh I am constituted a herald
and a legate, and a teacher of the Gentiles.
(12) Therefore I suffer these things : and I am not
ashamed ; for I know in whom I have believed, and
I am persuaded that he is competent to keep for
me my deposit against that day. — (13) Let the
form«= of sound words, which thou hast heard from
me, abide with thee ; with faith and love, in Jesus
the Messiah. (14) Keep thou the good deposit, by
15 the Holy Spirit who dwelleth in us. — (15) This
thou knowest, that all those in Asia have turned
from me ; and that among them are Phygellus and
Ilermogenes. (16) May our Lord bestow mercy
on the house of Onesiphorus; for, many times, he
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of the chains
of my imprisonment. (17) But also, when he came
to Kome, he sought for me with diligence, and
found me. (18) May our Lord grant him, that he
may find mercy with our Lord, in that da}^ And
how he ministered to me at Ephesus, thou very
welK knowest.

11. Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace

2 which is by Jesus the Messiah. (2) And the things
thou hast heard from me by many witnesses, these
commit thou to faithful men, who are competent to

3 teach others also.^3) And endure evils, as a good

4 soldier of Jesus the Messiah. (4) No man, on be-
coming a soldier, entangleth himself with the busi-
ness of the world ; that lie may jilcase him who en-

5 listed'"* him. (5) Andif one contend [in the games],
he is not crowned, unless he contendeth according

6 to the rules. (6) The husbandman who laboreth,

7 ought first to feed on his fruits. (7) Consider what
I say. Our Lord give thee wisdom in all things.

8 (8) Be mindful of Jesus the MeSvsiah, that he arose
from the dead ; who was of the seed of David, ac-

9 cording to my gospel, (9) in which I sutler evils
imto bonds, as if an evil-doer : but the word of God

10 is not in bonds. (10) Therefore I endure every
thing, for the elect's sake ; that they also may ob-
tain life,'' in Jesus the Messiah, with eternal glory.

11 (11) Faithful is the saying. For if we shall have


^ or, Saviour,


palterny exem-
flar.


S'y. abifii-
danlly.


Sy. selected.


-i:


or, salvation.


388


2 TIMOTHY, III.


Sy.]]<b


JSy.")ArolAj


l-r-»r-»


or, may come
to their con-
sciousness.


died with him, we shall also live with him ; (12) and, 12
if we shall have sutfered, we shall also reign with
him. But if Ave shall have rejected him, he will
reject us, (13) And if wo shall have not believed in 13
him, he abideth in his fidelity ; for he cannot reject
himself. — (14) Of these things admonish thou them ; 11
and charge [them,] before oar Lord, that they dis-
pute not, with unprofitable wo^ds, to the subversion
of those who hear them, (15) And study to present 15
thyself before God, perfectly, a laborer who is not
ashamed, one who correctly aunoanceth the word of
truth. (16) Avoid vain discourses,'' in which there is IG
no profit ; for they very much add to the wickedness
of those occupied with them. (17) And their dis- 17
course, like an eating cancer, wjll lay liold upon many.
And one of these is Hymeneus, and another Phile-
tus ; (18) who have wandered from the truth, while 18
they say, The resurrection of the dead hath passed :
and they subvert the faith of some. (19) But the 19
firm foundation'! of God standeth ; and it hath this
seal. The Lord knoweth them who are his : and,
Let every one who invoketh the name of our Lord,
stand aloof from iniquity. (20) But in a great 20
house, there are not only vessels of gold or silver,
but also of wood and of pottery ; and some of them
for honor, and some for dishonor. (21) If there- 21
fore any one purge himself from these things, he
will be a pure vessel for honor, fit for the use of his
Loi'd, and prepared for every good work. — (22) Fly 22
from all the lusts of youth; and follow after righ-
teousness, and faith, and love, and peace, with them
that invoke our Lord with a pure heart. (23) Avoid 23
those foolish discussions which afford no instruc-
tion ; for thou knowest, that they generate contests,
(24) And a servant of our Lord ought not to con- 24
tend, but to be mild towards every one, and in-
structive, and patient ; (25) that with mildness he 25
may enlighten those who dispute against him, if
perhaps God may give them repentance, and they
may acknowledge the truth, (26) and may recollect 26
themselves," and may escape out of the snare of Sa-
tan, at whose pleasure they have been held ensnared.

But this know thou, that in the latter days hard III,
times will come: (2) and men will be lovers of 2
themselves, and lovers of money, boasters, proud,


2 TIMOTHY, IV.


389


censorious, unyielding towards their own people,

3 denyers of grace, wicked, (3) calumniators, addict-
ed to concupiscence, ferocious, haters of the good,

4 (4) treacherous, rash, inflated, attached to pleasure

5 more than to the love of God, (5) having a ioTin'^
of respect for God, but wide from the power of God.

6 Them who arc such, repel from thee. (6) For of
them arc they who creep into this and that house,
and captivate the women who are plunged in sins

7 and led away by divers lusts, (7) wlio are always
learning, and can never come to the knowledge of

8 the truth. (8) Now as Jannes and Jambres with-
stood Moses, so also do these withstand the truth :
men whose mind is corrupted, and [they] repro-

9 bates from the faith. (9) But they will not make
progress, for their infatuation will be understood by

10 every one, as theirs also was understood. — (10) But
thou hast followed after my doctrine, and my man-
ner of life, and my aims, and my faith, and my
long suffering, and my love, and my patience

11 (11) and my persecution, and my sufferings. And
thou knowest what I endured at Antioch, and at
Iconium, and at Lystra; what persecution I en-
dured: and from all these my Lord delivered me,

12 (12) And likewise all, who choose to live in the
fear of God, in Jesus the Messiah, will be perse-

13 cuted. (13) But evil and seducing men will add
to their wickedness, while they deceive and are de-

14 ceived. (14) But continue thou in the things thou
hast learned and been assured of; for thou knowest

15 from whom thou learnedst ; (15) because from thy
childhood, thou wast taught the holy book's, which
can make thee wise unto life,'' by faith in Jesus the

16 Messiah. — (10) All scripture that was written by
the Spirit, is profitable for instruction, and for con-
futation, and for correction, and for erudition in

17 righteousness; (17) that the man of God may be-
come perfect, and complete for every good work. —

IV.(1V.) 1 charge thee, before God, and our Lord Je-
sus the Messiah, who is to judge the living and the

2 dead, at the manifestation of his kingdom, (2) Pro-
claim the word; and persist [in it) with diligence,
in time and out of time ;■» admonish, and rebuke,

3 with all patience and instructiveness. (3) For the
time will come, when they will not give ear to
sound teaching; but, according to their lusts, will


'Sy.

Gr. fjuopqjwCfv.


or, sahalion.


i. e. at regular
times, and
limes not
re<rular.


390


2 TIMOTHY, IV.


"Sy.


or, appearing.


Sy. "IZoiO^


multiply to themselves teachers, in the itching of
their hearing ; (4) and will turn away their ears 4
from the truth, and incline after fables. (5) But be 5
thou vigilant in all things; and endure evils, and
do the work of an evangeUst,'^ and fulfill thy minis-
try.— (6) But I am soon to be immolated; and the 6
time of my dissolution hath come. (7) I have 7
fought a good combat, I have,completed my race,
I have preserved my fidelity ; (8) and henceforth 8
there is preserved for me a crown of righteousness,
with which my Lord, the righteous Judge, will re-
compense me in that day ; and not me only, but
them also who love his manifestation.*^

Exert thyself to come to me quickly. (10) For 9
Demas hath left me ; and hath loved this world, 10
and gone away to Thessalonica ; Crispus to Gala-
tia, Titus to Dalmatia. (11) Luke only is with me. 11
Take Mark, and Hring him with thee; for he is
suitable for me, for ministration. (12) And Tych- 12
icus I have sent to Ephesus. (13) And when thou 13
comest, bring the bookcase, which I left at Troas
with Carpus, and the books, but especially the roll
of parchments. — (14) Alexander the coppersmith 14
showed me many ills: our Lord will reward him
according to his doings. (15) And do thou also 15
beware of him ; for he is very insolent against our
words. — (16) At my first defence, no one was with 16
me, but they all forsook me. Let not this be reck-
oned to them. (17) But my Lord stood by me, 17
and strengthened me ; that by me the preaching'i
might be fulfilled ; and [that] all the Grentiles might
hear : and I was rescued from the mouth of the lion.
(18) And my Lord will rescue me from every evil 18
work ; and will give me life in his heavenly king-
dom.— To him be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Present a salutation to Priscilla and Aquila, and 19
to the household of Oncsiphorus. (20) Erastus 20
hath stopped at Corinth ; and Trophimus I left sick
at the city of Miletus. (21) Exert thyself to come 21
before winter. — Eubulus saluteth thee, andPudens,
and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren. —
(22) Our Lord Jesus the Messiah be with thy spirit. 22
Grace be with thee. Amen,

End of the Seccmd Epistle to Timothy ; iohich was written
from Rome.


r~


The Epistle of Paul lo Titus.


Sy. "jV^Ns

or, Saviour.
Gr. tfcjTijp.

or, Saiiovr.


S^» n/n


I


I. Paul, a servant of God, and a legate of Jesus
tlie Alessiali; aceording to the faith of the elect of
God, and the knowledge of the truth which is in

2 the fear of God, (2) concerning the hoi)e of eternal
life, which the veracious God promised before the

^ times of the world ;» (8) and in due time he hath
manifested his word, by means of our announce-
ment, which was confided to me by the command

4 of God our Life-giver;'' (4) to Titus, a real son
after the common faith: — Grace and peace from
God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus the Mes-
siah, our Life-giver. •=

5 For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thouj
mightest regulate the things deficient, and establish p Sy

6 elders'^ in every city, as 1 directed thee: (G) him,
who is blameless, who is the husband of one wife,
and hath believing children, who are no revellers,

7 nor ungovernable in sensuality. (7) For an elder«
ought to be blameless, as the steward of God ; and
not be self-willed, nor irascible, nor excessive in
wine, nor with hands swill to strike, nor a lover of

8 base gains, (8) But he should be a lover of stran-
gers, and a lover of good [deeds], and be sober,
upright, kind-hearted, and restraining himself from

9 evil passions; (9) and studious of the doctrine of
the word of faith, that he may be able by his
wholesome teaching both to console, and to rebuke

10 them that are c<:>ntcntious. — (10) For many are un-
submissive, and their discourses vain; and they
mislead the minds of people, especially such as arc

11 of the circumcision. (11) The month of these
ought to be stopped : they corrupt many families ;f ( Sy. houses.
and they teach what they ought not, for the sake

12 of base gains. (12) One of them, a prophet? of ^ Sy. "jinJ
their own, said, Tlie Cretans are always menda-

13 cious, evil beasts, idle bellies, (13) And this tes


a-O


Sy.l

Gr. sViVkotoc


392


TITUS, II.


' Sy. ^ a > ■ n


lA a I ■ n


« Gr. Saviour.


^ Gr. Saviour.


timony is true. Therefore chide them sharply ;
that they may be sound in the faith, (14) and may 14
not throw themselves into Jewish fables, and into
the precepts of men who hate the truth. (15) For 15
to the pure, every thing is pure; but to them who
are deliled and unbelieving, nothing is pure ; but
their understanding is defiled, and their conscience.
(16) And they profess that they know God, but in 16
their works they deny him ; and they are odious,
and disobedient, and to every good work repro-
bates.

But speak thou the things that belong to whole- 11.
some doctrine. (2) And teach the older men'*' to 2
be watchful in their minds, and to be sober, and to
be pure, and to be sound in the faith, and in love, *
and in patience. (3) And so also the elder wom- 3
en,b that they be in behavior as becometh the
fear of God ; and not to be slanderers ; and not to
be addicted to much wine ; and to be iuculcators of
good things, (4) making the younger women to be 4
modest, to love their husbands and their children,
(5) to be chaste and holy, and to take good care of 5
their households, and to be obedient to their hus-
bands ; so that no one may reproach the word of
God. — (6) And likewise exhort young men to be 6
sober. (7) And in every thing show thyself a pat- 7
tern, as to all good works: and in thy teaching, let
thy discourse be healthful, (8) such as is sober and 8
uncorrupt ; and let no one despise it : so that he
who riseth up against us, may bs ashamed, seeing
he can say nothing odious against us. — (9) Let ser- 9
vants obey their masters in every thing, and strive
to please them, and not contradict, nor pilfer;
(10) but let them manifest that their fidelity, in all 10
respects, is good : so that the}^ may adorn the doc-
trine of God our Life-giver, <= in all things. — (11) For 11
the all-vivifying grace of God, is revealed to all
men; (12) and it teacheth us, to deny ungodliness 12
and worldly lusts, and to live in this world in so-
briety, and in uprightness, and in the fear of God,
(13) looking for the blessed hope, and the manifes- 13
tation of the glory of the great God, and our Life-
giver, 'J J(,'sus the Messiah; (14) who gave himself 14
for us, that he might recover us from all iniquity,
and purify for himself a now people, who are zeal-


'■%k»


TITUS, in.

15 ous in good works. (15) These things speak thou,
and exhort, and inculcate, with all authority ;« and
let no one despise thee.

III. And admonish them to be submissive and obe-
dient to princes and ])otentates ; and that they be

2 ready for every good work ; (2) and that they
speak ill of no man ; that they be not contentious,
but mild; and that in every thing they manifest

3 benignity towards all men. — (8) For we also were
formerly reckless, and disobedient, and erring, and
serving divers lusts, and living in malice and envy,
and were hateful and also hating one another.

4 (4) But when the kindness and compassion of God
6 our Life-giver* was revealed, (5) not by works of

righte(jusness which we had done, but according!
to his mercy, he vivilied'' us, by the washing of the
new birth, and by the renovation of the HolySpir-

6 it, (6) which he shed on us abundantly, by Jesus

7 the Messiah our Life-giver :« (7) that we might be
justified*! by his grace, and become heirs in the

8 hopeof eternal life. — (8) Faithful is the word: and
in these things, I would have thee also establish
them ; so that they, who have believed in God, may
be careful to cultivate good works : these are the
things, which are good, and profitable to men.

9 (9) But foolish questions, and stories of genealo-
gies, and the disputes and contests of the scribes,
avoid : for there is no profit in them, and they are

10 vain. (10) An heretical^ man, after thou hast in-

11 structed him once and again, avoid: (11) and
know thou, that such a man is perverse, and sinful,
and self-condemned.

12 When 1 shall send Artemas to thee, or Tychicus,
strive thou to come to me at Nicopolis ; for 1 have

13 purposed to winter there. (13) As for Zenas the
scribe, and Apollos, endeavor to help them well on

1-1 their way, that they may want nothing. (14) And
let our people learn also to j)erform good works, on
occasions of emergency, that they may not be un-

15 fruitful. — (15) All they that arc with me salute
thee. Salute all them who love us in the faith. —
Grace be with you all. Amen.

End of the Epistle to Titus ; which was written from Nicop-
olis, and was sent by the hands of Zenas and Apollos.


393


Sy. _^a£)


Gr. Saviour.
or, saved.

Gr. Saviour.
Sy. *0>?|J


eSy.

Ho im3cn —

Gr. atpcTucos.


The Epistle of Paul to Pliilemon.


Sy.


*" Sy. beseech: ni
I beseech.


Paul, a prisoner of Jesus the Messiah, and
Timothy a brother ; — to the beloved Philemon, a
laborer with us, (2) and to our beloved Apphia, and 2
to Archippus a laborer with us, and to the church
in thy house. — (3) Grace be with you, and peace 3
from God our father, and from our Lord Jesus the
Messiah.

I thank my God always, and remember thee in 4
my prayers, (5) lo, from the time that I heard of 5
thy faith, and of the love thou hast towards our
Lord Jesus, and towards all the saints ; (6) that there 6
may be a fellowships of thy faith, yielding fruits in
works, and in the knowledge of all the good things
ye possess in Jesus the Messiah. (7) For we have 7
great joy and consolation, because the bowels of the
saints are refreshed by thy love. — (8) Therefore I 8
might have great freedom in the Messiah, to enjoin
upon thee the things that are right. (9) But for 9"
love's sake, I earnestly beseech i^ thee — even I, Paul,
who am aged, as thou knowest, and now also a
prisoner for Jesus the Messiah. (10) I beseech thee 10
for my son, whom I had begotten in my bonds — ^for
Onesimus; (11) from whom formerly thou hadst 11
no profit, but now very profitable w^ill he be both
to thee and to me ; and whom I have sent to thee.

(12) And receive thou him, as one begotten by me, 12

(13) For I was desirous to retain him with me, that 13
he might minister to me in thy stead, in these bonds
for the gospel. (14) But I would do nothing with- 14
out consulting thee; lest thy benefit should be as

if by compulsion, and not with thy pleasure. — (15) 15
And, perhaps, also, he therefore departed from thee
for a season, that thou mightest retain him for ever ;
(16) henceforth, not as a servant, but more than a 16
servant, a brother dear to me, and much more to
thee, both in the flesh and in our Lord '/ (17) If 17


HEBREWS, I.


395


therefore thou art in fellowship" with me, receive him

18 as one of mine. (18) And if he hath wronged thee,

19 or oweth thee aught, place it to my account. (19)
I, Paul, have written [itj with my own hand, I will
rejia}'' : — not to say to thee, that to me thou owest

20 thy ownself (20) Yes, my brother, let me be re-
freshed by thee in our Loi'd : refresh thou my

21 bowels in the Messiah. (21) Being confident that
thou wilt hearken to me, I have written to thee:
and I know that thou wilt do more than I say.

22 And herewith, prepare also a house for me to
lodge in ; for I hope that, by your prayers, I shall

23 be given to you. (23) Epaphras, a fellow-captive
21 with me in Jesus the Messiah, saluteth thee; (24)

and ^[ark, and Aristarchus, and Demas, and Luke,
25 my coadjutors. — (25) The grace of our Lord Jesus
the Messiah be with your spirit, my brethren. —
Amen.

End of the Epistle to Philemon ; which ivas written from
Rome, and was sent by the hands of Onesiinus.


Sy. ]£iL


Q-B


<. i;:^^ Lo\. u^
The Epislle to the Hebrews.


I. In many ways, and many forms, God anciently

2 conversed with our fathers, by the prophets : (2)
But in these latter days, he hath conversed with us,
by his Son ; whom he hath constituted heir of all

3 things, and by whom he made the worlds j"^ (3) who
is the ?j)lcndor of his glory, and the image of him-
self,*' and upholdeth all by the energy of his word ;
and by himself he made a purgation of sins, and
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.

4 (4) And he is altogether superior to the angels, as
he hath also inherited a name which excelleth theirs.

5 (5) For to which of the angels did God ever say,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee ?
And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall

6 be to me a Son ? (0) And again, when bringing the


Sy. ]<n\\
Sy. ]V)\^

of his Being.


396


HEBREWS, II.


Sy. ,_kj05


Sy.'i4^_*.S


8 Gr. salvation.


Gr. salvaiion.


i-Sy.


first begotten into the world, he said : Let all the
angels of God worship him. (7) But of the angels 7
he tlius said : — Who made his angels a wind,^
and his ministers a flaming fire. (8) But of the Son 8
he said : Thy throne, 0 God, is for ever and ever ; a
righteous'' sceptre is the sceptre of thy kingdom.
(9) Thou hast loved rectitude, and hated iniquity; 9
therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the
oil of gladness more than .thy associates, (10) And 10
again, Thou hast from the beginning laid the foun-
dations of the eartli, and the heavens are the work
of thy hands: (11) they will pass away, but thou 11
endurest; and they all, like a robe, wax old; (12) 12
and like a cloak, thou Avilt fold them up. They
will be changed ; but thou wilt be as thou art, and
thy years will not be finished. — (13) And to which 13
of the angels did he ever say : — Sit thou at my right
hand, until I shall place thy enemies a footstool
under thy feet? (14) Are they not all spirits of 14
ministration, who arc sent to minister on account of
them that are to inherit life?^


Therefore we ought to be exceedingly cautious,
in regard to what we have heard, lest we fall away.
(2) For if the word uttered by the medium of angels
was confirmed, and every one who heard it, and
transgressed it, received a just retribution ; (3) how
shall we escape, if we despise the things which are
our life,=^ things Avhich began to be spoken by our
Lord, and were confirmed to us by them who heard
from him, (1) while God gave testimony concerning
them, by signs and wonders, and by various mir-
acles and distributions of the Holy Spirit, which
were given according to his pleasure ?— (5) For to
the angels he hath not subjected the world to come,^
of which we speak. (6) But as the scripture testi-
fieth, and saith : — What is man, that thou art mindful
of him? and the son of man, that thou attendest to
him? (7) Thou hast depressed him somewhat
lower than the angels : glory and honor hast thou
put on his head ; and thou hast invested him with
authority over the work of thy hand. (8) And all
things hast thou subjected under his feet. And in
this subjecting of all things to him, he omitted noth-
ing, which he did not subject. But now, we do not
yet see all things subjected to him. (9) ]3ut we see


IL


HEBREWS, HI.


397


him, who was depressed somewhat lower than the
angels, to be this Jesus, because of the passion of
his death; and glorj and honor are pbcod on his
head ; for God himself, in his grace,* tasted death

10 for all men. (10) For it became him, by whom are
all things, and on account of whom are all things,
and [who] bringeth many sons unto his glory, to

11 J )erlect the prince of their life'^ by sulfei-ing. (11)
For he that sanctilieth, and thoy who are sanctified,
are all of one [nature]. Therefore he is not ashamed

12 to call them brethren ; (12) as he saith, I will
announce thy name to my brethren ; in the midst of

13 the assembly,'' I will praise thee. (13) And again,
I will confide in him. And again. Behold me, and
the children whom thou, God, hast given to me.

14 (14) For because the children participated in flesh
and blood, he also, in like manner, tocjk part in the
same; that, by his death, he might bring to naught
him who held the dominion of death, namely Satan ;

15 (15) and might release them, who, through fear of

16 death, are all their lives subject to bondage. (16)
For he did not a.ssume [a nature] from angels, but
he assumed [a nature] from the seed of Abraham.

17 (17) Wherefore it was right, that he should be in all
respects like his brethren ; that he might be merci-
ful, and a liigii priest^ faithful in the things of God,
and might make expiation for the sins of the peo-

18 pie. (18) For, in that he himself hath suffered, and
been tempted, he is able to succor them who are
tempted.


' Gr. salvation.


Sy. Ua


Sy-


%^y


Sy.


m. AVherefore, my holy brethren, who are called with j

a calling that is from heaven, consider this Legate^i" Sy- (».>. i\»
and High Priest'' of our ])rofession, Jesus the)

2 Messiah : (2) who was flxithful to him that made

3 him, as was Moses in all his house. (3) For much
greater is the glory of this man, than that of Moses; !
just as the glory of the builder of a house, is greater

4 than that of the edilice. (4) For every house is
built by some man ; but he who buildeth all things'

5 is God. (5) And Moses, as a servant, was faithful}
in all the house, for an attestation to those things;


* So the Jacobite copies read; but the Nestorian copies read, But he, apart
from GixJ, lasted, t^. The Greek is, Qtu)g J^aj/iri 0aou . , . yijdr^ral^ &e. : but
gome copies have, oiruf X'^P'S' *='^^'>^> ^*'-


398


HEBREWS, IV.


<= Sy. showing

effaces.
^ Sy. his hope.


• Sy. "jvo r n


Sy. UlJtJD


that were to be spoken by him : (6) but the Messiah, 6
as the Sox, [is] over his own house ; and we are his
house, if we retain unto the end assurance,^ and the
triumph of hope in him.'^ (7) Because the Holy 7
Spirit hath said : To-day, if ye will hear his voice,
(8) harden not your hearts to anger him, like the 8
provocators, and as in the day of temptation in the
wilderness, (9) when your fathers tempted me, and 9
proved, [and] saw my works forty years. (10) 10
Therefore I was disgusted with that generation, and
said : — This is a people, whose heart wandereth, and
they have not known my ways : (11) so that I swore 11
in my wrath, that they should not enter into my
rest. (12) Beware, therefore, my brethren, lest 12
there be in any of you an evil heart that believeth
not, and ye depart from the living God. (13) But 13
examine yourselves all the days, during the day
which is called to-day; and let none of you be
hardened, through the deceitfulness of sin. (14) For 1-4
we have part with the Messiah, if we persevere in
this firm confidence, ^ from the beginning to the
end : (15) as it is said, To-day, if ye will hear his 15'
voice, harden not your hearts, to auger him. (16) 16
But who were they that heard, and angered him ?
It was not all they, who came out of Egypt under
Moses. (17) And Avith whom was he disgusted 17
forty years, but with those who sinned, and whose
carcasses fell in the wilderness ? (18) and of Avhom 18
swore he, that they should not enter into his rest,
but of those who believed not ? (19) So we see that 19
they could not enter, because they believed not. —
(IV.) Let us fear, therefore, lest while there is a IV.
firm promise^ of entering into his rest, any among
you should be found coming short of entering.
(2) For to us also is the announcement, as well as 2
to them : but the v^rord thej^ heard did not profit
them, because it was not mingled with the faith of
those who heard it. (3) But we, who have believed, 3
do enter into rest. But as he said, As I have sworn
in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my rest :
for lo, the works of God existed from the founda-
tion of the world. (4) As he said of the sabbath, 4
God rested on the seventh day from all his works.
(5) And here again, he said. They shall not enter 5
into my rest. (6) Therefore, because there was a 6
place, Avhitlier one and another might enter ; and


HEBREWS, V.


399


those earlier persons, to whom the announcement
was made, entered not, because they believed not : —

7 (7) again he established another day, a long time
afterwards ; as above written, that David said, To-
day, if yc will hear his voice, harden not your

8 hearts. (8) For if Joshua,"^ the son of Nun, had
given them rest, he wouM not have spoken after-

9 wards of another day. (9) Therefore it is estab-
KsIkmI, that the people of God are to have a sab-

10 bath.<-' (10) For he who had entered into his rest,
hath also rested from his works, as God did from

11 his. (11) Let us, tlierefore, strive to enter into
thai rest ; lest we fall short, after the manner of

12 them who believed not. (12) For the word of God
is living, and all-efUcient, and sharper than a two-
edged sword, and entercth even to the severance of
the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the
marrow and the bones, and judgeth the thoughts

13 and reasonings of the heart : (13) neither is there
any creature, which is concealed from before him ;
but every thing is naked and manifest before his
eyes, to whom we are to give account.

11 Seeing then that we have a great High Priest, <i
Jesus the Messiah, the son of God, who hath as-
cended to heaven; let us persevere in professing

15 him. (15) For we have not a high priest, who
cannot sympathize with our infirmity ; but [one]
who was tempted in all respects like us, aside

16 from sin. — (16) Let us, therefore, approach with
assurance^ to the throne of his grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and may find grace for assistance in

V. the time of alfliction. — (Y.) For every high priest, f*
who is from among men, is established over the
things of God, in behalf of men, that he may pre-

2 sent the offering and the sacrifices for sin : (2) and
he can humble himself, and sympathize with the
ignorant and the erring, because he also is clothed

3 with infirmity. (3) And, therefore, he is obliged as
for the people, so also for himself, to present an of-

4 fering lor liis sins. — (4) And no one taketh this
honor on himself, but he who is called of God, as

5 Aaron [wasj. (5) So also the Messiah did not ex-
alt himself to become a High Priest; but lie [ap-
pointed him] who said to him, Thou art my Sou;

6 this day have I begotten thee. (6) As he said also
in another place : Thou art a priest'' for ever, after


Jesus.


or, a rest.


Sy. _^


Sy. 7cith open

countenance.

Sy.


"l^o^


400


HEBREWS, VI.


-= Sy. "IAX:.

^ Gr. salvation.


» Sy. a time.
f Sy.

e Sy,


5>


Sy. jjjaj

Sy.


* Gr. Tovg d'tal


9


10


11


the likeness of MelcliisedeG. (7) Likewise, when he
was clothed in flesh, he presented supplication and
entreaty with intense invocation, and with tears, to
him who was able to resuscitate him from death ;
and he was heard. (8) And though he was a son,
yet, from the fear and the sufferings he endured, he
learned obedience. (9) And thus he was perfected
and became the causc^ of etp rnal lifc^ to all them
who obey him. (10) And he was named of God,
the High Priest after the likeness of Melchisedec.

ISTow, concerning this person, Melchisedec, we
have much discourse, which we might utter ; but it
is difficult to explain it, because ye are infirm in
your hearing. (12) For ye ought to be teachers, 12
seeing ye have been long^ in the doctrine. But now,
ye need to learn again the first lines^ of the com-
mencements' of the oracles of God : and ye have
need of milk, and not of strong food. (13) For every 13
one whose food is milk, is unversed in the language
of righteousness, because he is a child. (14) But 14
strong food belongeth to the mature who, being in-
vestigators, have trained their faculties to discrimi-
nate good and evil. — (VI.) Therefore let us leave VI.
the commencement^- of the word of the Messiah, and
let us proceed to the completion.'' Or will ye
again lay another foundation for the repentance
which is from dead works, and for the faith in God,
(2) and for the doctrine of baptism, and for the lay- 2
ing on of a hand, and for the resurrection from the
dead, and for the eternal judgment? (3) We will 3
do this, if the Lord permit. — (4) But they who have 4
once descended to baptism, «= and have tasted the gift
from heaven, and have received the Holy Spirit,
(5) and have tasted the good word of God, and the 5
power of the world to come, — (6)* cannot again 6
sin, and a second time be renewed to repentance ;
or a second time crucify and insult the Son of God.
(7) For the earth that drinketh the rain which
Cometh often upon it, and produceth the herb
that is of use to those for whom it is cultivated, re-
ceiveth a blessing from God. (8) But if it should
put forth thorns and briers, it would have reproba-


7


* The Syriac translation supposes the Greek in thia verse to be, w'apoccr'sVeiv,
xai nakn dvaxaivi'^stf^ixi, «fcc. ; instead of the received reading, xai ■rapa-rErfovrag-,


HEBREWS, VII.


401


11


tion, and be not far from a curse, and its end would
9 be a burning. (9) But, in regard to you, my
brethren, we are persuaded better things, and things
10 pertaining to life,'' although we thus speak. (10)
For God is not unrighteous, to forget your works,
and your charity which ye have shown in his name,
in that ye have ministered and do minister to the
saints. (11) And we desire, that each one of you
may show this same activity, « for the completion of

12 your hope, even to the end : (12) and that ye faint
not ; but that ye be emulators of them who by
faitli and patience have become heirs of the promise.

13 (13) For when God made the promise to Abraham,
because there Avas none greater than himself by
whom he could swear, he swore by himself; (14)
and said : Blessing, I will bless thee, and multiplying
I Avill multiply thee. (15) And so he was patient,

16 and obtained the promise. (16) For men swear by
one greater than themselves : and in every contro-
versy that occurs among them, the sure termination
of it is by an oath. (17) Therefore, God, being
abundantly willing to show to the heirs of the
promise, that his promising was irreversible, bound

18 it up in an oath ; (18) so that, by two things which
change not, and in which God cannot lie, we, who
have sought refuge in him, might have great con-
solation, and might hold fast the hope promised to
us ; (19) which is to us as an anchor, that retaineth
our soul, so that it swerveth not ; and it entereth
into that within the veil, (20) whither Jesus hath
previously entered for us, and hath become a priest^
forever, after the likeness of Melchisedec.ff


14


15


17


19


20


VII. Now this Melchisedec was king of Salem, -i a
priest of the most high God : and he met Abraham,
when returning from the slaughter of the kings ;

2 and blessed him. (2) And to him Abraham im-
parted tithes of all that he had with him. More-
over his name is interpreted king of righteousness -j^
and again [he is called] King of Salem, that is King

3 of Peace.c (3) Of whom neither his father nor his
mother are written in the genealogies; nor the
commencement of his days, nor the end of his life ;
but, after the likeness of the Son of God, his pricst-

4 hood^i remaineth for ever." (4) And consider ye,
how great he was ; to whom the patriarch Abraham

ac


^ Gr. salvation.


Sy. ]tlDQS
• Sy.

Sy. -^AVr>

Sy. ]nVn

Sy. "IoILD
Sy

Sy.y^NsN


4:02


HEBREWS, VII.


Sy.
complel$ness.


'' Sy. Ij^OS)


' Sy. ■|.Q_.A^5
''Sy.l-D^


gave tithes and first-fruits. (5) For they of the sons 5
of Levi who received the priesthood, had a statute
of the law, that they should take tithes from the
peojDle ; they from their brethren, because they also
are of the seed of Abraham. (6) But this man, who 6
is not enrolled in their genealogies, took tithes from
Abraham ; and blessed him who had received the
promise. (7) But it is beyQnd controversy, that 7
the inferior is blessed by his superior, (8) And 8
here, men who die, receive the tithes ; but there,
he of whom the scripture testifieth that he liveth.

(9) And through Abraham, as one may say, even 9
Levi who receiveth tithes, was himself tithed.

(10) For he was yet in the loins of his father, when 10
he met Melchisedec. (11) If, therefore, perfection^ 11
had been by means of the priesthood of the Levites,

in which the law was enjoined on the people ; why
was another priest required, who should stand up
after the likeness of Melchisedec? For it should
have said. He shall be after the likeness of Aaron.
(12) But as there is a change in the priesthood, so 12
also is there a change in the law. (lo) For he of 13
whom these things were spoken, was born of another
tribe, of which no one ever ministered at the altar.
(14) For it is manifest that our Lord arose from 14
Judah, from a tribe of which Moses said nothing
concerning a priesthood. (15) And moreover this 15
is further manifest, from his sajnng that another
priest will stand up, after the likeness of Melchise-
dec, (16) who was not according to the law of cor- 16
poreal injunctions, but according to the energy of
an indissoluble life. (17) For he testified of him : 17
Thou art a priest for ever,? after the likeness of
Melchisedec. (18) And the change which was 18
made in the first statute,^ was on account of its im-
potency, and because their was no utility in it.
(19) For the law perfected nothing; but in the 19
place of it there came in a hope, which is better than
it, and by which we draw near to God.— (20) And 20
he confirmed it to us by an oath. (21) For they 21
became priests without an oath ; but this man by an
oath. As he said to him bv David : The Lord
hath sworn, and will not lie. Thou art a priest for
eyer,_ after the likeness of Melchisedec. (22) By all 22
this, is that a better covenant' of which Jesus is the
sponsor. k— (23) And they as priests were numerous, 23


because tliey were mortal, and were not permitted

24 to continue : (2-i) but this man, because he standeth

25 up for ever, his priesthood doth not pass away : (25)
and he is able to vivify^ for ever, them who come
to Grod by him ; for he always liveth, and sendeth

2G up })rayers lor them. — (26) For, a priest like to him,
was also suitable for us ; one pure, and without evil
and without stain ; one separated from sius, and

27 exalted higher than heaven ; (27) and who is not
obliged, every day, like the [Aaronio] high priest,
to first ofl\3r sacj-iiices for his own sins, and then for
the people ; for this he did once, by olfering up him-

28 self (28) For the law constituted feeble men priests ;
but the word of the oath, which was subsc(|ucnt to
the law [constituted] the Son perfect for ever,

VIII. Now the sum'i of the whole is this, we have a
High Priest, who is seated on the right hand of the

2 throne of the Majesty in heaven : (2) And he is the
minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle,

3 Avhich God hath pitched, and not man. (3) For
every high priest is established, to oiler oblations
and sacrifices ; and therefore, it was ])ropcr that this

4 one should also have something to offer. (4) And,
if he were on earth, he would not be a priest ; be-
cause there are priests [there], who offer oblations

5 agreeably to the law : (5) [namely] they, who
minister in the emblem and shadow of the things
in heaven : as it was said to Closes, when he was
about to build the tabernacle, See, and make ever}''
thing according to the pattern which was showed

6 thee in the mount. (6) But now, Jesus the jMes-
siah hath received a ministry which is better than
that : as also the covenant,^ of which he is made the
Mediator, <= is better, and is given with better prom-

7 ises than the former. — (7) For, if the first [cove-
nant] had been faultless, tliere would have been no

8 placefor this second [one]. (8) For he chidetli them
and saith : Behold, the days come, saith the Lord,
when I will com})leto with the llmiily of the house
of Israel, and with the family of the house of Judali,

9 a new covenant; (9) not like the covenant which 1
gave to their fathers, in the day when I took them
by the hand, and brought them out of the land of
Egypt ; [and] because they continued not in my

10 covenaat, I also rejected them, saith the Lord. (10)


' Gr. save.


Sy. ].«-»J


^ By. "jnjAj?


404


HEBREWS, IX.


^ Sy. give.


Sy.liioaa


Sy. the holy
houss.


Sy. ]>rr)


Q.K»


Sy. pALo


Sy.

= Eng. hajy-
tism.


But this is the covenant which I will give to the
family of the house of Israel after those days, saith
the Lord : I will puf^ my law in their minds, and
inscribe it on their hearts ; and 1 will be to them a
God, and they shall be to me a people. (11) And 11
one shall not teach his fellow-citizen, nor his brother,
nor say : Know thou the Lord : because they shall
all know me, from the youngest of them to the oldest.
(12) And I will forgive them their iniquity ; and 12
their sins will I remember no more. (13) In that 13
he said a New [Covenant], he made the first old ;
and that which is old and decaying, is near to dis-
solution.

Now, under the first [covenant], there were or- IX.
dinances'^ of ministration, and a worldly sanctuary.
(2) For in the first tabernacle which was erected, 2
there was the candlestick, and the table, and the
bread of the presence ; and this was called the
Sanctuary. *» (3) But the inner tabernacle, which 3
was within the second veil, was called the Holy of
Holies. (4) And there were in it the golden censer, 4
and the ark of the covenant, which was all over-
laid with gold ; and in it were the golden urn which
contained the manna, and the rod of Aaron which
sprouted, and the tables of the covenant ; (5) and 5
over it were the cherubim of glory, which over-
shadowed the mercy seat." But there is not time
to speak particularly of each of the things which
were so arranged. (6) And into the outer taber- 6
nacle the priests, at all times, entered, and perform-
ed their ministration. (7) But into the interior 7
tabernacle, once a year only, the high priest entered,
with the blood which he offered for himself and for
the sins of the people. (8) And by this the Holy 8
Spirit indicated, that the way to the holy [places]
was not yet manifested, so long as the first taber-
nacle was standing: (9) and it was a symbol, ^ for 9
that time, during which oblation and sacrifices were
offered that could not make perfect the conscience
of hi ni who offered them: (10) but [they consisted] 10
only in food and drink, and in the ablutions^ of
divers things ; which were carnal ordinances, and
were set up until the time of a reformation. — (11) 11
But the Messiah who came, was a High Priest of
the good things which he wrought : and he entered


HEBREWS, IX.


405"


19


20
21


Sy. ]jLD5a2)


Sy. toA^j
Sy. \u2iya£i


k fix


which is both
a cox>enanl and
a tcslament.


into the great and perfect tabernacle, which was not
made with hands and was not of these created things.

12 (12) And he did not enter with the blood of goats
and calves ; but with the blood of himself, he enter-
ed once into the sanctuary, and obtained eternal re-

13 demption.'" (13) For if the blood of goats and calves,
with the ashes of a heifer, was sprinkled upon them
that were defiled, and sanctified them as to the

14 purification of their flesh ; (14) then how much more
will the blood of the Messiah, who by the eternal
Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purge
our consciences from dead works, so that we may

15 serve the living God ? (15) And for this reason he
became the Mediator of the new covenant,'' that he
might by his death be redemption,' to them who had
transgressed the first covenant ; so that they, who
are called to the eternal inheritance, might receive

16 the ])romise. — (16) For where there is a testament,)^ it

17 indicateth the death of him who made it. (17) For
it is valid, only of a deceased [person] ; because it

18 hath no use, so long as the maker of it liveth. (18)
Therefore also the first [covenant] was not confirm-
ed without blood. (19) For when the whole ordi-
nance' had been proj)ounded by Moses to all theji Sy, ]j ppg^
people, according to the law; Moses took the blo6dj
of a heifer, and water, with scarlet wool and hj-ssop, j
and sprinkled upon the books and upon all the peo-
ple ; (20) and said to them. This is the blood of the
covenant which is enjoined by God. (21) With
that blood he also sprinkled upon the tabernacle,

22 and upon all the vessels of ministration : (22) be-
cause every thing, according to the law, is purified
with blood: and without the shedding of blood, there

23 is no remission. (23) For it was necessary that
these, the emblems of heavenly things, should be
purified, with those things; but the heavenly things

24 themselves, with sacrifices superior to them. (24);
For the Messiah entered not into the sanctuary made'

with hands, which is the embleni"» of the true m Sy "j^i^^n^
[sanctuary]: but he entered into heaven itself to |

25 appear in the presence of God for us. (25) Neither i
[was it necessary], that he shouhlolfcr himself many
times, as tiie high priest entered every year into

26 ihe sanctuary, with blood not his own : (26) other-
wise, he must have suliered many times, since the
commencement of the world ; but now in the end


•406


HEBREWS, X.


Sy. IVoVv


Gr. sahalinn.


-Sy.


r^


]iDA^J


kSy.

* Sy-.« mn'vni


of the world, 1 he bath once oflfered himself iu a
self-sacrilice, to abolish sin. (27) And, as it is ap- 27
pointed to men, that tbej must once die, and after
their death is the judgment ; (28) so also the Mes- 28
siah was once offered ; and, by himself, he immola-
ted the sins of man}^: and a second time, without
sins, will he appear for the life° of tbem who ex-
pect him. — (X.) For in the law there was a shadow X.
of the good things to come ; not the substance of
the things themselves. Therefore, although the
same sacrifices were every year offered, they could
never perfect those who offered them. (2) For, if 2
they had perfected them, they would long ago have
desisted from their offerings; because their con-
science could no more disquiet them, who were
once purified, on account of their sins, (3) But in 3
those sacrifices, they every year recognized their
sins. (4) For the blood of bulls and of goats can- 4
not purge away sins. (5) Therefore, when entering 5
the world, he said : In sacrifices and oblations, thou
hast not had pleasure ; but thou hast clothed me
with a body. ((3) And holocausts on account of
sins, thou hast not asked. (7) Then I said : Behold
I come, as it is written of me in the beginnings of
the books, to do thy pleasure, O God. (8) He first
said : Sacrifices and oblations and holocausts- for
sins, which were offered according to the law, thou
desiredst not; (9) and afterwards he said: Behold
I come to do thy pleasure, O God : hereby, he
abolished the former, that he might establish the
latter. (10) For by this his pleasure, we are sancti- 10
fied ; through the offering of the body of Jesus the
Messiah a single time. (11) For every high priest 11
who stood and ministered daily, offered again and
again the same sacrifices, which never were sufficient
to purge away sins. (12) But this [Priest] offered one 12
sacrifice for sins, and for ever sat down at the right
hand of God ; (13) and thenceforth waited, until his 13
foes should be placed as a footstool under his fbet.
(14) For by one offering, he hath perfected for ever, 14
them who are sanctified by him. (15) And the 15
Holy Spirit also testifieth to us, by saying: (16) 16
This is the covenant^' which I will give them after
those days, saiththe Lord; I will put my law^ into
their minds, and inscribe it on their hearts ; (17) 17
and their iniquity and their sins, I will not remem-


9


18 ber against tliem. (18) Now, where there is a re-
mission of sins, there is no ollcring for sin demanded.

19 We have therefore, my brethren, assurance^ in
entering into the sanctuary, by the blood'of Jesus,

20 and by a way of life, (20) which he hath now con-
secrated for us, through the veil, that is his flesh.

21 (21) And we liave a high priest over the house of


22


(22


I) Let us, therefore draw near, with a true
a with the confidence of faith, being:


God

heart, an

sprinkled as to our hearts, and pure from an evil

conscience, and our body being washed*^ witli pure

23 water. (23) And let us persevere in the profession
of our hope, and not waver; ibr he is laithful who

24 hath made the promise to us. (2-1) And let us look
on each other, for the excitement of love and good

25 works. (25) And let us not forsake our meetings, ^
as is the custom of some ; but entreat ye one an-
other; and the more, as ye see that day draw near. —

2u (20) For if a man sin, voluntarily, after he hath re-
ceived a knowledge of the truth, there is no longer a

27 sacrifice which maybe offered ibr sins: (27) but the
fearful judgment impendeth, and the zeal of iireg

28 that consumeth the adversaries. (28) For if he, who
transgressed the law of Moses, died without mercies,

29 at the moutl* of two or three witnesses ; (29) how
much moiv, think ye, will he receive capital punish-
ment, who hath trodden upon the Son of God, and
hath accounted the blood of his covenant, by which
he is sanctilied, a,s the blood of all men, and hath

30 treated the Spirit of grace with contumely ? (30)
For we know him who hath said, Ketribution is
mine ; and I will repay : and again, The Lord will

31 judge his people. (31) It is very terrible,'' to fall

32 'into the hands of the living God— (32) Therefore,
recollect ye the former days, those in which ye re-
ceived baptism,' and endured a great conflict of suf-

33 ferings, with reproach and atllietion ; (33) and ye
were a gazing stock, and also were the associates of

31 persons who endured these things : (34) and ye were
grieved for those who were imprisoned; and ye
cheerfully endured the plundering of your gooas,
because ye knew that ye had a possession in heaven,

35 superior and not transitory, (35) Therefore cast not
away your assurance^ which is to have a great re-

36 ward. (30) For ye have need of patience ; that ye may.
do the pleasure of God, and may receive the prom-


^ iSy. open face.


Sy.


jl^qjlS:


f Gr. irupoff


^ Sy. a great
fear.

•Gr.

(pwritfSi'vriff.


^ Sy. openness
of counte-
nance.


408


HEBREWS, XI.


Sy. "jmi-g^


or, (lie fiat.


Sy. uJAj]


• Gr. sahaiion.


ise. (37) Because, yet a little, — and it is a very 37
little time, — when he that cometh, will come, and
will not delay. (38) Now the just by my faith, 38
will live: but if he draw back, my soul will not
have pleasure in him. (39) But we are not of that 39
drawing-back, which leadeth to perdition ; but of
that faith, which maketh us possess our soul.

Now faith is the persuasion^- of the things that XI.
are in hope, as if they were in act ; and [it is] the
manifestnessb of the things not seen. (2) And 2
for it the ancients are well testified of — (3) For by 3
faith, we understand that the worlds were framed
by the word'' of God ; and that things seen, origi-
nated from those that are not seen. — (-l) By faith, 4
Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than that of
Cain ; and on account of it, he is testified of that he
was righteous, and God bore testimony to his offer-
ing ; and in consequence thereof, though dead he
yet speaketh. (5) By faith, Enoch was translated,'^ 5
and did not taste death ; and he was not found, be-
cause God had translated him : for, before he trans-
lated him, there was testimony of him, that he
pleased God. (6) But, without faith, a man cannot 6
please God. For he that draweth neai*to God, must
believe his existence, and that he will recompense
those who seek him. (7) By faith Noah, when he 7
was told of things not seen, feared ; and he made
himself an ark, for the life^ ofhis household ; where-
by he condemned the world, and became an heir
of the righteousness which is by faith. — (8) By faith 8
Abraham, when he was called, obeyed, and depart-
ed to the place which he was to receive for an in-
heritance: and he departed, while he knew not
whither he was going. (9) By faith, he became a 9
resident in the land that was promised him, as in a
foreign land ; and abode in tents, with Isaac and
Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise.
(10) For he looked for the city that hath a founda- 10
tion, of which the builder and maker is God. (11) By 11
faith, Sarah also, who was barren, acquired energy
to receive seed ; and, out of the time of her years,
she brought forth ; because she firmly believed, that
he was faithful who had promised her. (12) There- 12
fore, from one man failing through age, numbers
were born, like the stars in the heavens, and like


HEBREWS, XL


409


the saud on the shore of the sea which is innumer-

13 able. (13) All these died in faith, and received
not their promise ; but they saw it afar off, and re-
joiced in it; and they confessed that they Avere

14 strangers and pilgrims on the earth. (14) Now
they who say thus, show that they seek a city.

15 (15) But if they had been seeking that city from
which they came out, they had opportunity to re-

16 turn again and go to it. (10) But now it is manifest
that they longed for a better [eit}'] than that, [name-
ly,] for that which is in heaven. Therefore God did
not rel'use to be called their God ; for he prepared

17 for them the city. (17) By laith Abraham, in his
trial, offered up Isaac ; and he laid on the altar his
only sou, whom he had received by promise. (18)
For it had been said to him. In Isaac shall thy seed
be called. (19) And he reasoned with himself, that
God was able even to raise [him] from the dead :
and therefore, in the similitude*" [of a resurrection],
he was restored!? to him, (20) By faith in what was
to be, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau. (21) By faith
Jacob, when dying, blessed each of the sons of
Joseph, and bowed himself on the top of his staff.

22 (22) By faith Joseph, when dying, was mindful of
the de{)arture of the children of Isra(;l, and gave
direction concerning his bones. — (23) By faith the
parents of Mo.ses, after he was born, hid him three
months ; because they saw he was a goodly child ;
and they were not deterred by the command of the

24 king. (24) By fuith Moses, when be became a man,
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter.

25 (25) And he chose to be in aflhction with the peo-
ple of God, and not to live luxuriously in sin for a

26 short season : (26) and he esteemed the reproach of
the Messiah a greater treasure than the hoarded
riches of Egypt ; for he looked upon the recompense

27 of reward. (27) By faith, he left Egypt, and was
not terrified by the wrath of the king; and he con-
tinued to hope, just as if he saw the invisible God.

28 (28) By faith, they kepti" the passover, and the
sprinkling of blood, that he who destroyed the first-

29 born might not approach them. (29) By failh, they
passed the Red Sea,' as on dry land ; and in it the
Egyptians were swallowed up, when they dared to

30 enter it. — (30) By fuith, the walls of Jericho fell
down, when they had been encompassed seven days.


18
19


20
21


23


' Sy. |]Akio


'' Sy. made.


■Sy.


sy.^].


or, burdens.


^ or, selves.


(31) By faith Rahab, the harlot, perished not with 81
them who beheved not, when she received the spies
in peace. (32) What more shall I say ? For I 32
have little time to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and
of Sampson, and of Jephtha, and of David, and of
Samuel, and of the other prophets : (33) who, by 33
faith, subdued kingdoms, and wrought righteous-
ness, and received promises, ^md shut the mouths of
lions, (34) and quenched the forcei^ of fire, and were 34
rescued from the edge of the sword, and were healed
of diseases, and became strong in battle, and routed
the camps of enemies, (35) and restored to women 35
their children, by a resurrection from the dead.
And some died under tortures, and did not hope to
escape, that there might be for them a better resur-
rection ; (36) and others endured mockings and 36
scourgings ; others were delivered up to bonds and
prisons; (37) others were stoned ; others were saw- 37
ed ; others died by the edge of the sword ; others
roamed about clothed in sheep skins and goat skins,
and were needy, and afflicted, and agitated ; (38) 38
persons of whom the world was not worthy, and
yet they were as wanderers in the desert, and in
mountains, and in caves, and in caverns of the earth.
— (39) And all these, of whose iaith there is testimo- 39
ny, received not the promise : (40) because God had 40
provided the aid for us ; so that without us they
should not be perfected. — (XII.) Therefore let us XIL
also, who have all these witnesses surrounding us
like clouds, cast from us all encumbrances, ^^ and sin,
which is always prepared for us ; and let ns run
with patience the race that is appomted for us. (2) 2
And let us look on Jesus, who hath become the
commencement and the completion of our faith ;
who, on account of the joy there was for him, en-
dured the cross, and surrendered himself to oppro-
brium ; and is seated on the right hand of the throne
of God. (3) Behold, therefore, how much he suffered 3
from sinners, from them who are adversaries of their
own soul,b that ye may not be discouraged, nor
your soul become remiss.

Ye have not yet come unto blood, in the contest 4
against sin. (5) And ye have forgotten the moni- 5
tion, which saith to you, as to children, My son, dis-
regard not the chastening of the Lord ; nor let thy
soul faint, when thou art rebuked by him. (6) For, 6


HEBREWS, XII.


411


10


11


whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth ; and he
Kcourgetli those sons, for whom he hath kind re-
gards. (7) Therefore endure ye the ehastisemcnt ;
because God is dealing with you as with sons.
¥oY what son is there, Avliom liis father chasteneth
not? (8) But if ye are without tliat chastisement,
with which every one is chastened, ye are become
strangers and not sons. (9) And if our fathers of
the flesh chastened us, and we revered them, how
much moi-e ought we to be submissive to our spirit-
ual fathers, p* and live ? (10) For they chastened us
for a short time, according to their pleasure ; but
God, for our advantage, that we may become par-
takers of his holiness. (11) Now all chastisement,
in the time of it, is not accounted a matter of joy,
but of grief: yet, afterwards, it yicldcth the fruits
of peace and righteousness to them who are exer-

12 cised by it. — (12) Wherefore, strengthen ye your

13 relaxed hands, and your tottering knees : (18) and
make straight paths for your feet, that the limb which
is lame may not be wrenched, but may be healed.

1-1 (14) Follow after peace with every man ; and after
holiness, without which a man will not see our

15 Lord. (15) And be careful, lest any be found among
you destitute of the grace of God; or lest some root
of bitterness shoot forth germs, and trouble you ;

16 and thereby many be defiled : (IG) or lest any one
be found among you a fornicator ; or a heedless one
like Esau, who for one mess of food, sold his prirao-

17 geniturc. (17) For ye know that, afterwards when
he wished to inherit the blessing, he was rejected ;
for he found not a place for repentance, although

18 he sought it with tears. — (IS) For ye have not
come to the fire that burned, and the tangible
[mount] ; nor to the darkness and ob.scurity and

19 tempest; (19) nor to the sound of the trumpet, and
the voice of words, which they who heard, entreated

20 that it might no more be spoken to them ; (20) for
they could not endure what was commanded. And
even a beast, if it aj)proachcd the nmnntain, was to
bo stoned. (21) And so terrible was the sight, thatl
Moses said, I fear and tremble. (22) But ye have'
come to Mount Zion, and to the city of the living!


•^ Gr. Tw 'n'arpi

ruv crvsu/jiarwv.


21

22


* This, undoubtedly, is a spurious rending; for it conflicts with the Greek, and
disagrees with the context.


412


HEBREWS, XIII.


Sy. Ua


Sy-U^


.Id


or, tn you.


bSy.

•= or, discourse
of God.


God, the Jerusalem that is in heaven ; and to the
assembhes of mj-riads of angels; (23) and to the 23
church'i of the first-born, who are enrolled in heaven ;
and to God the judge of all ; and to the spirits of
the just, who are perfected; (2-4) and to Jesus,_the 2-i
Mediator'^ of the now covenant; and to the sprink-
ling of his blood, which speaketh better than that
of Abel. — (25) Beware, therefore, lest ye refuse [to 25
hear] him who speaketh with you. For if they
escaped not, who refused [to hear] him who spake
with them on the earth, how much more shall we
not, if we refuse [to hear] him who speaketh with
us from heaven ? (26) Whose voice [then] shook 26
the earth ; but now he hath promised, and said, yet
again once more, I will shake not the earth only,
but also heaven. (27) And this his expression, 27
Once more, indicateth the mutation of the things
that are shaken, because they are fabricated ; that
the things which will not be shaken, may remain.
(28) Since, therefore, we have received a kingdom 28
that is unshaken, let us grasp the grace whereby
we may serve and please God, with reverence and
fear. (29) For our God is a consuming fire. 29

Let love for the brethren dwell amonga- you. XIIL
(2) And forget not kindness to strangers ; for 2
thereby some have been privileged to entertain an-
gels, unawares. (3) And remember those in bonds, 3
as if ye were bound with them : and recollect
those in affliction, as being yourselves clothed in
flesh. — (4) Marriage is honorable in all ; and their 4
bed undefiled : but whoremongers and adulterers,
God Avill judge. (5) Let not your mind love 5
money ; but let what ye have, satisfy you. For
the Lord himself hath said, I will never leave thee,
nor slacken the hand towards thee. (6) And it 6
belongeth to us, to say confidently. My Lord is my
aider, I will not fear. What can man do to me ?
(7) Kemember your guides, ^ who have spoken to 7
you godly discourse ;'' examine the issue of their
course, and imitate their faith. — (8) Jesus the Mes- 8
siah is the same, yesterday, to-day, and for ever.
(9) Be not led away by strange and variable doc- 9
trines. For it is a good thing, that we strengthen
our hearts with grace, and not with meats; for
those have not been benefited, who walked in them.


10 (10) And we have an altar, of which they who
minister in tlie tabernacle have no right to cat.

11 (11) For the flesh of those animals, whoso blood
tlio high priest brought into the sanctuary for sins, I

12 was burned without the camp. (12) For this rca-'
son, Jesus also, that he might sanctify his people |

13 with his blood, suffered without the city. (13)
Therefore, let us also go forth to him, without the

14 camp, clothed with his reproach : (14) (for we have
here no abiding city ; but we expect one that is

lo I'uture :) (15) and through him, let us at all times
olTer to God the sacrifices of praise, that is, the
fruits of li])S which give thanks to his name.

16 (16) And forget not commiseration and communi-
cation with the poor ; for with such sacrilices a

17 man plcaseth God. (17) Confide in your guides, "^
and hearken to them ; for they watch for your
souls, as meu who must give an account of you,
that they may do this with joy and not with an-
guish ; for that would not be profitable to you.

18 — (18) Pray ye for us ; for we trust we have a good
consciousness, that in all things we desire to con-

19 duct ourselves well. (19) Especially do I request
you to do this, that I may return to you speedily.

20 May the God of peace, — who brought up from
the dead the great Shepherd of the flock, by the
blood of the everlasting covenant, namely Jesus

21 the Messiah, our Lord, — (21) make you perfect in
every good work, that ye may do his pleasure ;
and himself operate in you that which is pleasing
in his sight, through Jesus tlic Messiah ; to whom
be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

22 And I beseech you, my brethren, that ye be pa-
tient under this word of exhortation ; for it is in

23 few words I have written to you. — (23) And know
ye, that our brother Timothy is set at liberty : and
if he come soon, I, with him, shall see you. —

24 (24) Salute all your guides,'' and all the saints.

25 All they of Italy salute you. — (25) Grace be with
you all. Amen.

End of the Epistle lo ihc Hebrews; ichich was written from
Italy of Rome ; and was sent by the hands of Timothy.


Sv.


^OOaJ^


The Epistle of James the Legate.


or, peace.


Sy.


« Sy.

m ftis doiu'j's.


■5 Sy.
1^


inn


James, a servant of God, and of our Lord Jesus L
the Messiah ; — to the twelve tribes dispersed among
the Gentiles ; — greeting. =^

Let it be all joy to you, my brethren, when ye 2
enter into many and various trials. (3) For ye 8
know, that the trial of [your] faith, maketli 3-ou
possess j)atience. (4) And let patience have its 4
perfect work, so that ye may be complete and per-
fect, and may lack nothing. — (5) And if any of you 5
lacketh wisdom, let him ask [it] of God, who giv-
eth to all freely, b and reproacheth not ; and it Avill
be given him. (6) But let him ask in faith, not 6
hesitating: he who hesitateth is like the waves of
the sea, which the wind agitateth. (7) And let not 7
that mail expect to receive any thing of the Lord,
(8) who is hesitating in his mind, and unstable in 8
all his ways. — (9) And let the depressed brother 9
rejoice, in his elevation ; (10) and the rich, in his 10
depression ; because, like the flower of an herb, so
he passeth away. (11) For the sun riseth in its 11
heat, and drieth up the herb ; and its flov/er fall-
eth, and the beauty of its appearance perisheth ;
so also the rich man withcreth in his waj's.^ —
(12) Blessed is the man who cndureth temptations; 12
so that when he is proved he may receive a crown
of life, which God hath promised to them that love
him. (13) Let no one when he is temjDted, say, 1 13
am tempted of God : for God is not tempted with
evils,'' nor doth he tempt any man. (14) But every 14
man is tempted by his own lust; and he lusteth,
and is drawn away. (15) And this [his] lust cou- 15
cciveth, and bringeth forth sin ; and sin, when ma-
ture, bringeth forth death.— (16) Do not err, my 16
beloved brethren. (17) Every good and perfect 17
gift cometh down from above, "from the Father of


21


22


24:

25


26


lights, with whom is no mutation, not even the

18 shadow of change. (18) He saw fit, and begat ns
by the word of trutli ; that we might be tlie first-

19 fruits of his creatures. — (19) And be ye, my be-
loved brethren, every one of j'^ou, swift to hear, and

20 slow to speak; and slow to wrath: (20) for the
wrath of man Avorketh not the righteousness of
God. (21) Wherefore, remove far from you all
impurity, and the abundance of wickedness ; and,
witii meekness, receive the word that is implanted
in our nature, which is able to vivify^ these your
souls.

But be yc doers of the word, and not hearers
only ; and do not deceive yourselves. (23) For if
any man shall be a hearer of the word, and not a
doer of it, ho will be like one who seeth his face in
a mirror : (24) for he seeth himself, and })asseth on,
and forgcttcth what a man he was. (2o) But every
one that looketh upon the perfect law of libert}^,
and abideth in it, is not a hearer of something to
be forgotten, but a doer of the things ; and he will
be blessed in his work. (26) And if any one
thinketh that he worshippcth God, and doth not
restrain his tongue, but his heart deceiveth him ;

27 his worship is vain. (27) For the worship^" that is
pure and holy before God the Father, is this : to
visit the fatherless and the widows in their afflic-
tion, and that one keep himself unsjDOtted from the

11. world. — (II.) My brethren, hold yc not the faith
of the glory =- of our Lord Jesus the Messiah, with

2 a respect to persons. (2) For if there come into
your assembly a man with rings of gold or splen-
did garments, and there come in a poor man in

3 sordid garments ; (o) and yc show respect to him
who is clothed in splendid garments, and say to
him. Scat thyself here, conspicuously ; while to the
poor man, ye say, Stand thou there, or sit thou

4 hero before my footstool ; (4) arc ye not divided
among yourselves, and become expositors of evil

5 thoughts ? (5) Hear, my beloved brethren ; hath
not God cliosen the poor of the world, but the rich
in faith, to be heirs in the kingdom which God

6 hath promised to them that love him ? (6) But
ye have despised the poor man. Do not rich men
exalt themselves over you, and drag you before the

7 tribunals ? (7) Do they not revile that worthy


e Gr. saxe.


Sy.


i„V? eZ


or, i\ie glo-
rious faith.


416


JAMES, III.


'' Sy. .n a K>Z1


* Gr. save.


« Sy. *D55liD


name, which is invoked upon you ? (8) And if in 8
this ye fulfill the law of God, as it is written, Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, ye will do well :
(9) but if ye have respect of persons, ye commit sin ; 9
and ye are convicted by the law, as transgressors of
the law. (10) For he that shall keep the whole 10
law, and yet fail in one [precept], is obnoxious*' to
the whole law. (11) For he who said. Thou shalt 11
not commit adultery, said also, Thou shalt not
kill. If then thou commit no adultery, but thou
killest, thou hast become a transgressor of the law.
— (12) So speak ye, and so act, as persons that are 12
to be judged by the law of liberty. (18) For 13
judgment without mercy shall be on him, who hath
practised no mercy : by mercy, ye will be raised
above judgment.

What is the use, my brethren, if a man say, I 14
have faith ; and he hath no works? can his faith
vivify^ him ? (15) Or if a brother or sister be na- 15
ked, and destitute of daily food, (16) and one of 16
you say to them, Gro in peace, warm yourselves, and
be full ; and ye give them not the necessaries of
the body, what is the use? (17) So also faith 17
alone, without works, is dead. — (18) For a man 18
may say. Thou hast faith, and I have works ;
show to me thy faith that is without works ; and I
will show to thee, my faith by my works. (19) 19
Thou believest that there is one God ; thou dost
well ; the demons also believe, and tremble. (20) 20
Wouldst thou know, O frail man, that faith with-
out works is dead? (21) Abraham our father, was 21
not he justified by works, in offering his son Isaac
upon the altar? (22) Seest thou, that his faith 22
aided his works ; and that by the works his faith
was rendered complete? (23) And the scripture 23
was fulfilled, which saith: Abraham believed in
God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness,
and he was called the Friend of God.— (24) Thou 24
seest, that by works a man is justified^, and not by
faith alone. (25) So also Rahab, the harlot, was 25
not she justified by works, wlien she entertained
the spies, and sent them forth by another way ?
(26) As the body without the spirit, is dead ; so 26
faith witliout works, is dead also.

Let there not be many teachers among you, aiy III.


6


brethren ; but know ye, that we* are obnoxious to
a severer judgment. (2) For we all offend in many
things. Whoever offendeth not in discourse, is a
perfect man, who can also keep his wholfe body in
subjection. (3) Behold, we put bridles into the
mouth of horses, that they may obey us ; and we
turn about their whole body. (4) lluge ships also,
when strong Avinds drive them, are turned about by
a small timber, to what place the pleasure of the
pilot looketh. (5) So likewise the tongue is a
small member, and it exalteth itself. Also a little
fire inflameth large forests. (0) Now the tongue
is a fire, and the world of sin is like a forest. And
this tongue, which is one among our members,
marreth our whole body ; and it inflameth the
series of our generations that roll on like a wheel ;

7 and it is itself on fire. (7) For all natures^ of beasts
and birds and reptiles, of the sea or land, are sub-

8 jugated by the nature" of man. (8) But the tongue
hath no one been able to tame : it is an evil thing,

9 not coercible, and full of deadly poison. (9) For
with it, we bless the ]jord and Father; and with it
we curse men, who were made in the image of God :

10 (10) and from the same mouth, proceed curses and
blessings. My brethren, these things ought not to
be so. (11) Can there flow from the same fountain,
sweet waters and bitter? (12) Or can the fig-tree,
my brethren, bear olives? or the vine, figs ? So also
salt waters cannot be made sweet. — (18) Who is
wise and instructed among you ? Let him show his
works in praiseworthy actions, Avith modest wisdom.
(1-1) But if bitter envy be in you, or contention in


11
12

13


14


i. e. the leacli-
ers.


your hearts, exalt not yourselves against the truth,

15 and lie not. (15) P^or this wisdom cometh not!
down from above ; but is earthly, and from the |

16 devices'! of the soul, and from demons. (16) For'j Ry ]'»-. •n ..^
where envy and contention are, there also is confu-l

17 sion, and every thing wrong. (17) But the wisdom!
which is from above, is pure, and full of peace, and
mild, and submissive, and full of compassion and of
good fruits, and without partiality, and without re-

18 spect of persons. (18) And the fruits of righteous-
ness are sown in stillness, by them Avho make
peace.


IV.


Whence is it, that there are among you fightings

87


418


JAMES, V.


• Sy. it cometk
not into your
hand.


or, superior.


Gr.


and broils ? Is it not from the lusts, which war in
your members? (2) Ye covet, and possess not; 2
and ye kill, and envy, and effect nothings : and ye
fight and make attacks ; and ye have not, because
ye ask not. (3) Ye ask, and receive not ; because 3
ye ask wickedly, that yo may pamper your lusts.
(4) Ye adulterers, know ye not, that the love of the 4
world is hostility towards God ? lie therefore who
chooseth to be a lover of this world, is the enemy
of God. (5) Or think ye, that the scripture hath 5
vainly said : The spirit dwelling in us lusteth with
envy ? (6) But our Lord hath given us more'' 6
grace. Therefore he said : The Lord humbleth the
lofty, and giveth grace to the lowly. (7) Subject 7
yourselves therefore to God ; and stand firm against
Satan, and he will flee from you. (8) Draw nigh 8
to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse
your hands, ye sinners: sanctify your hearts, ye
divided in mind. (9) Ilumble yourselves, and 9
mourn : let your laughter be turned into mourning,
and your joy into grief (10) Humble yourselves 10
before the Lord, and he will exalt you.— (11) Speak 11
not against each other, my brethren ; for he that
speaketh against his brother, or judge th his brother,
speaketh against the law, and judgeth the law.
And if thou judgest the law, thou art not a doer
of the law, but its judge. (12) There is one Law- 12
giver and Judge, who can make alive,^ and [can]
destroy : but who art thou, that thou judgest thy
neighbor ?

But what shall we say of those, who say : To-day 13
or to-morrow we will go to such or such a city, and
will abide there a year; and we will traffic, and
get gain ? (14) And they know not what will be 14
to-morrow : for what is our life, but an exhalation
that is seen a little while, and then vanisheth and is
gone? (15) AVhcrcas they should say: If the 15
Lord please, and we live, we will do this or that.
(16) They glory in their vaunting. All such 16
glorying is evil. (17) He that knoweth the good, 17
and doetli it not, to him is sin.— (V.) 0 ye rich V.
ones, wail and weep, on account of the miseries
that are coming upon you. (2) For your wealth is 2
spoiled and putrid ; and your garments are moth-
eaten : (3) and your gold and your silver have con- 3
tracted rust ; and the rust of them will be testimony


JAMES, V.


419


6


17


18


9
10


11


12


13


Gr.


against you ; and it will eat your flesli, Yc have
heaped up a fire to you against the latter days.

4 (4) Behold, the wages of the laborers who have
reaped your ground, ivhieh ye have wrongfully re*
tained, crieth out ; and the clamor of the reapers
hath entered the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.

5 (5) For yc have lived in pleasure on the earth, and
revelled, and feasted your bodies as in a day of
slaughter. (6) Ye have condemned and slain the
just, and none resisted you.

But, my brethren, be ye patient until the advent
of the Lord ; like the husbandman, who waiteth for
the precious fruits of his ground, and is patient as
to them, until he receive the early and the latter
rain. (8) So also be ye patient, and fortify your
hearts ; for the advent of our Lord drawcth nigh.
— (9) Be not querulous* one against another, ray
brethren, lest ye be judged: for lo, the judgment
standeth before the door. (10) For patience in
your afflictions, my brethren, take to you the ex-
ample of the prophets, who spoke in the name of
the Lord. (11) For lo, we ascribe blessedness to
them who have borne suffering. Ye have heard of
the patience of Job ; and ye have seen the result
which the Lord wrought for him : for the Lord is
merciful and compassionate.

But above all things, my brethren, swear ye not;
neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any
other oath : but let your language be 5'es, yes, and
no, no ; lest ye become obnoxious to judgment.

And if any of you shall be in affliction, let him
pray; or if he be joyous, let him sing psalms. | ..

14 (14) And if one is sick, let him call for the elders^ r' -'^y- ]■» * ^.O
of the church ; and let them pray for« him, and
anoint him with oil in the name of our Lord :

15 (L5) and the prayer of faith will heal him who is
sick, and our Lord will raise him up ; and if sins
have been committed by him, they will be forgiven

10 him. (1<5) And confess ye your faults one to another,
and pray ye one for another, that yc may be heal-
ed ; for great is the efficacy of the prayer which a
righteous man prayeth. (17) Elijah also was a
man of sensations like us, and he prayed that rain
might not descend upon the earth ; and it descended
not, for three years and six months. (18) And
again he prayed, and the heavens gave rain, and


or, over hinu


420


1 PETER, I.


<>Gr.


the earth gave forth its fruits, — (19) My brethren, 19
if one of you err from the way of truth, and any
one convert him from his error; (20) let him 20
know, that he who turneth the sinner from the
error of his way, will resuscitate^ his soul from
death, and will cover the multitude of his sins.

E7id of the Epistle of James, the Legate.


♦ ]£d1o ^1cl» "U^-»^-» SDOi^£i} "|Z;-J ^oZ

Again ;
The Epistle of Peter, the Legate ; Simoii Cephas.


Sy.


'■ Gr. sahaiion.


• Gr. salvation.


Peter, a legate of Jesus the Messiah, — to the I.
elect and sojourners, who are dispersed in Pontus,
and in Galatia, and in Cappadocia, and in Asia, and
in Bitliynia, — (2) to them who have been chosen, 2
by the foreknowledge of God the Father, tl] rough
sanctilication of the Spirit, unto the obedience and
the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus the Messiah :
— May grace and peace abound towards you.

Blessed be Grod, the Father of our Lord Jesus tlie 3
Messiah, who in his great mercy hath begotten^' us
anew, by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah, to the hope of life, (4) and to an inherit- 4
ance incorruptible, undeiiled, and unfliding, which
is prepared for you in heaven; (5) while ye are 5
kept, by the power of God and by faith, for the
life*^ that is prepared and will be revealed in the
last times ; (6) wherein ye will rejoice for ever, not- 6
withstanding ye at the present time are pressed a
little, by the various trials that pass over you ;
(7) so that the proof of your faith may appear more 7
precious than refined gold that is tested by fire,
unto glory and honor and praise, at the manifesta-
tion of Jesus the Messiah : (8) wliom having not 8
seen, ye love ; and in the faith of whom ye rejoice,
with joy that is glorious and ineffable, (9) that ye 9
may receive the recompense of your faith, the
life'^ of your souls; (10) that life [namely], about 10


1 PETER, I.


421


13


U


which the prophets inquired, when they were
prophesj-inr^ of the grace which Avas to be given

11 to you. (11) And they searched for the time,
which the Spirit of the Messiah dwclhng in them
did show and testify, when the sufferings of the
Messiah were to occur, and his subsequent glory.

12 (12) And it was revealed to them, [in regard to]
all they were searching, that,'i not for themselves
were they inquiring, but for us they were prophe-
sying of those things, which are now manifested to
you by means of the things we have announced to
you, by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven ; which
things the angels also desire to look into.

Wherefore, gird up the loins of your minds, and
be awake perfectly, and wait for the joy, which will
come to you at the revelation of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah, (14) as obedient children : and be ye not
conversant again with those former lusts, with

15 which ye lusted when without knowledge. (15) But
be ye holy in all your conduct, as he is holy who

16 hath called you. (16) Because it is written: Be

17 ye holy, even as I am holy. (17) And if so be ye
call on the Father, — with whom is no respect of
persons, and who judgcth every one according to his
deeds, — pass the time of your sojounmient with

18 fear; (18) since ye know, that neither Avith perish-
able silver, nor with gold, ye were redeemed from
your vain doings, which ye had by tradition from

19 your fathers ; (19) but Avith the precious blood of
that Lamb in Avhich is no spot nor blemish, namely,

20 tlie Messiah : (20) Avho Avas predestined to this, be-
fore the foundation of the Avorld ; and was mani-
fested at the termination of the times, for your

21 sakes ; (21) Avho, by m \iiis of him, have believed
iu G(xl, Avho raised him from the dead and confer-
red glory on him ; that your faith and hope might

22 be in God, (22) while your minds became sancti-
fied, by obedience to the truth ; and ye be full of
love, Avithout respect of persons, so that 3''e love one

23 another out of a ])ure and perfect heart ; (23) like
persons born again,*-' not of seed that perishcth, but
of that which doth not perish, by the living Avord

24 of God, Avho abidcth for ever. (24) Because all
flesh is as grass, and all its beauty like the flower
of the field. The grass drieth up, and the flower

25 Avithereth away ; (25) but the word of our God


•* or, becauK.


Sv.


yi


Sy. Xj^d}


''Sy. ,^ iV)im


abidcth for ever : and this is the word that is an-
nounced to you.— (II.) Therefore, cease ye from all II.
malice, and all guile, and hypocrisy, and envy, and
backbiting. (2) And be like infant children ; and 2
crave the word, as being the pure spiritual milk
by which ye are nourished up to hfe ; (3) if ye 3
have tasted and seen that the Lord is good : (4) to 4
whom ye have come, because he is a living stone,
rejected indeed by men, but with God elect and pre-
cious. (5) And ye also, as living stones, are budded 5
and become spiritual temples, and holy priests, for
the offering of spiritual sacrifices, =^ acceptable before
God, tlirough Jesus the Messiah. (6) For it is said 6
in the scripture, Behold, in Zion I lay a chosen
and precious stone, for the head of the corner;
and whoever believeth in him, will not be ashamed.
(7) On you therefore who believe, is this honor 7
conferred : but to them who believe not, (8) he is a 8
stone of stumbling and a rock of offence. And
they stumble at it, because they believe not the
word : whereto they were appointed.^ (9) But ye 9
are an elect race, officiating as priests of the king-
dom ; a holy people, a redeemed congregation ;
that ye should proclaim the praises of him who
called you out of darkness to his precious light :
(10) who formerly were not accounted a people, but 10
now arc the people of God ; and also, there were
[once] no mercies on you, but now mercies are
poured out upon you.

My beloved, I entreat you as strangers and pil-
grims, separate yourselves from all lusts of the
body ; for they war against the soul. (12) And
let your behavior be decorous before all men ; so
that they who utter evil speeches against you, may
see your good actions, and may praise God in the
day of trial. — (13) And be ye submissive to all the 13
sons of men, for God's sake ; — to kings, on account
of their authority ; (14) and to judges, because they 14
are sent by him for the punishment of offenders,
and for the praise of them that do well. (15) For 15
so is the pleasure of God, that by your good deeds
ye may stop the mouth of the foolish, who know
not God : (IG) as free men, yet not like men who 16
mak-e their freedom a cloak for their wickedness,
but as the servants of God. (17) Honor all men; 17
love your brethren ; fear God ; and honor kings.


11


12


18


19


22
•23


24


And those among j'ou who are servants, be sub-
ject to your masters, «= with reverence ; not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the harsh and
morose. (19) For there is favor before God for
them who, for the sake of a good conscience, en-
dure sorrows that come upon them wrongfully.

20 (20) But they who endure alflictions on account of
their oifences, what praise have they ? But if, when
ye do well, they vex you, and ye endure it ; then

21 great is your praise with God. (21) For unto this
were ye called ; because the Messiah also died for
us, and left us this pattern, that ye should walk in
his steps. (22) He did no sin ; neither was guile
found in his mouth. (23) When he Avas reviled,
he reviled not ; and he suffered and threatened not,
but cominitled his cause to the Judge of righteous-
ness. (21) And he took away*^ all our sins, and,
in his body, lifted them to the cross ; that Ave, when
dead to sin, might live by his righteousness: for

25 by his wounds, ye are healed. (25) For ye, [once]
went astray, like sheep; but ye have now returned
to the Shepherd and Curator*^ of your souls.

TIL So also ye wives, be ye subject to 3-our hus-
bands; that, by your pleasing behavior, ye may
gain over, without difficulty, those who obey not

2 the word, (2) when they see, that ye conduct your-

3 selves with reverence and chastity. (3) And adorn
not yourselves with the external ornaments of curls
of the hair, or of golden trinkets, or of costly gar-

4 ments. (4) But adorn yourselves in the hidden
person of the heart, =^ with a mild and uncorrupted
spirit, an ornament that is precious before God.

5 (5) For so also the holy women of old, Avho trusted
in God, adorned themselves, and were subject to

6 their husbands: (6) just as Sarah was subject to
Abraham, and called him. My lord : Avhose daugh-
ters ye are, by good works, Avhile ye are not terri-

7 fied by any fear, — (7) And ye husbands, likcAvise,
dwell with your Avives according to knowledge;
and hold them in honor, as the feebler vessels ; be-
cause they also Avill inherit Avith you the gift of
eternal life : and let not your prayers be hindered.

8 The summing up,^ is, that ye all be in harmony,
that ye be sympathetic with them who suffer, and
affectionate one to another, and be merciful and


Sy. to your
lords.


Sy.WfN^


Sy-

Gr. sir'Kfxo-iros.


Sy.\oi^y


'■ Sy. ]Vn\n «


424


1 PETER, IV.


« some : the.


Sy.

Gr. saved.
Gr. saved.

Sy.


kind. (9) And that ye recompense to no one evil 9
for evil, neither railing for railing ; but, in contra-
riety to these, that ye bless: for to this were ye
called, that ye might inherit a blessing. (10) There- 10
fore, whoever chooseth life, and desireth to see good
days, let him keep his tongue from evil, and his
lips that they speak no guile; (11) let him turn 11
away from evil, and do good'; let him seek peace,
and follow after it. (12) Because the eyes of the 12
Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears [ready]
to hear them : but the face of the Lord is against
the wickod. (13) And who will do you harm, if 13
ye are zealous of good works? (14) But if it 14
should occur, that ye suffer on account of righteous- •
ness, happy are ye. And be not terrified, by those
who would terrify you, nor be agitated : (15) but 15
sanctify the Lord the Messiah, in your hearts.

And be ye ready for a vindication, before every
one who demandeth of you an account of the hope
of your*^ faith, (16) in meekness and respect, as 16
having a good conscience ; so that they who speak
against you as bad men, may be ashamed, for hav-
ing calumniated your good conduct in the Messiah.

(17) For it is profitable to you, that ye suffer evil 17
while ye do good deeds, if this should be the pleas-
ure of God ; and not, while ye do evil deeds.

(18) For the Messiah also once died for our sins, 18
the righteous for sinners ; that he might bring you

to God. And he died in body, but lived in spirit.

(19) And he preached to those souls, which were 19
detained in IIades,«i (20) which were formerly dis- 20
obedient, in the days of Noah, when the long suf-
fering of God commanded an ark to be made, in
hope of their repentance ; and eight souls only en-
tered into it, and were kept alive'' in the waters.
(21) And ye also, by a like figure, are made alive*" 21
by ba))tism,g (not when ye wash your bodies from
filth, but wiien ye confess God with a pure con-
science,) and by the resurrection of Jesus the Mes-
siah ; (22) wlio is taken up to heaven, and is on 22
the right hand of God, and angels, and authorities,
and ])owers, are subject to him.— (IV.) If then the lY.
Messiah hath suffered for you in the flesh, do ye
also arm yourselves with the same mind : for every
one that is dead in his body, hath ceased from all
sins, (2) that he may no longer be alive to the 2


ii


m.


1 PETER, IV.


425


6


10


11


lusts of men, while he is in the body, but [only] to
8 do the pleasure of God. (3) For the time that is
past was enough, when ye wrought the pleasure of
the profane,'^ in dissolutencs.-^, and in ebriety, and
in lasciviousness, and in revelling, and in the wor-
4 ship of demons. (4) xA-nd lo, they now wonder,
and reproach you, because ye revel not with them
^ in the same former dissoluteness ; (5) who must
give account to God, who is to judge the living and
the dead. (6) For on this account the announce
mcnt is made also to the dead, that they may be
judged as persons in the flesh, and may live accord-
ing to God in the spirit.

But the end of all things approachcth: therefore
be sober, and be wakeful for prayer. (8) And
above all things, have fervent love one towards
another; for love covereth a multitude of sins. (9)
And be ye compassionate to strangers, without
murmuring. (10) And let each of you minister to
his associates the gift which he hath received from
God ; as being good stewards of the manifold grace
of God. (11) Whoever will speak, let him speak
as the word of God : and whoever will minister,'' —
as of the ability that God hath given him : so that
in all ye do. God may be glorified, through Jesus
the Messiah ; to whom belongeth glory, and honor,
for ever and ever. Amen.

My beloved, be not dismayed at the trials that
befall you, as if some strange thing had come upon
you ; for these things are for your j)robation. (13)
But rejoice, that ye participate in the sufterings of
the Messiah, that so ye may also rejoice and exult
14 at the revelation of his glorv. (14) And if ye are
reproached on account of the name of the Messiah,
happy are ye: for the glorious Spirit of God rcsteth
U[)on you. (15) Only let none of you suffer, as a
rnurd(!rer, or as a thief, or as an evil-doer. (16)
But if he suffer as a Christian. <= let him not be
a.shamed; but let him glorify God on account of
this name. (17) For it is the time when judgment
will commence v/ith the house of God: and if it
commence with us, what will be the end of those

18 who obey not tlie gospel of God? (18) And if the
righteous scarcely liveth,^ where will the ungodly

19 and the sinner be found ! — (19) Wherefore, let
them who sufter according to the pleasure of God,


12


1o
O


15
16


17


Sy. I^iLk*


Sy.


Sy.


' Gr. is savea.


426


1 PETER, V.


' Sy. hy good
deeds.

' Sy. ") a 1 « n
' Sy ] « « « r^


« Sy.


''Sy.li^fiD


• Sy. lAaSoLl
^Sy. \\>nn


6


commend their souls to him in well doing, « as to a
faithful Creator.

And I, an Elder/ your associate, and a witness V.
of the sufferings of the Messiah, and a participator
in his glory which is to be revealed, — entreat the
Elders'* who are among you: — (2) Feed ye the 2
flock of God which is committed to you : have care
[for it], spiritually ; not from compulsion, but
voluntarily ; not for base gain, but with all your
heart; (3) not as lords of the flock, but so as to be 3
a good example for them: (4) that when the chief 4
shepherd shall be revealed, ye may receive from
him a crown of glory that fadeth not. — (5) And ye 5
juniors submit yourselves to your seniors*^; and
clothe yourselves, stringently, with lowliness of
mind one towards another ; because God resisteth
them who exalt themselves, and giveth grace to
the humble. (6) Humble yourselves, therefore,
under the powerful hand of God : and it will exalt
you in due time. (7) And cast all 3^our solicitude
upon God; for he careth for you. (8) Be sober
and guarded, because Satan^ your adversary, like
a lion, roareth, and goeth about, and seeketh whom
he may devour. (9) Therefore resist him, being
steadfast in the faith : and know ye, that the same
sufferings befall your brethren that are in the
world.

Now it is the God of grace, who hath called us 10
to his eternal glory by Jesus the Messiah, that hath
given us, while we sustain these light afflictions, to
be strengthened, and confirmed, and established by
him for ever : (11) to whom be glory, and power,
and honor, for ever and ever. Amen.

These as I account [them] few [things], « I have
written to you by Sylvanus, a faithful brother.
And I would persuade, and would testify, that this
is the true grace of God, — this in which ye stand.
— (13) The elect church which is in Babylon, f sa-
luteth you; also Mark, my son. (14) Salute ye
one another with a holy kiss. — Peace be with you
all, who arc in the Messiah. Amen.

End of the first Epistle of Peter the Legate.


9


11
12


13
14


The Second Epistle of Peter.


Simon PetI':r, a servant and legate of Jesus tlie
Messiah, — to those who have obtained equally pre-
cious faith with us, through the righteousness of

2 our Lord and Eedecmer, Jesus the Messiah ; — (2)
May grace and peace abound to 3'ou tlirough the

3 recognition''- of our Lord Jesus the Messiah, (3)
as the giver to us of all things that be of the
power of God, unto life and the fear of God, through
the recognition of him who hath called us unto his

4 own glory and moral excellence: (4) jvherein he
hath given you very great and precious promises ;
that b}'' them ye might become partakers of the
nature of God, while ye flee from the corruptions

5 of the lusts that are in the world, (5) And, while
ye apply i* all diligence in the matter, add to your
faith moral excellence ; and to moral excellence,

6 knowledge ;•= (G) and to knowledge, perseverance ;
and to perseverance, patience ; and to patience, the

7 fear of God ; (7) and to the fear of God, sympathy
with the brotherhood ; and to sympathy with the

8 brotherhood, love. (8) For, while these are found
in you, and abounding, they render you not sloth-
ful, and not unfruitful, in the recognition of our

9 Lord Jesus the Messiah, (9) For he, in whom
these things are not found, is blind and seeth not,
and hath forgotten the purgation of his former sins,

10 (10) And therefore, my brethren, be ye exceedingly
diligent to make your calling and election sure,<i
by your good actions: for, by so doing, ye will

11 never fall away, (11) For thus will entrance be
given you abundantly, into the everlasting king-

' dom of our Lord and IJedccmcr Jesus the Messiah,

12 And for this reason I am not wearied in remind-
ing you continually of these things; although ye
know them well, and are established in this truth,

13 (13) And it scemeth right to me, so long as I am


or, acknoioU
edsment.


^ Sy. introduce.
" or, intelli-
gence.


' Sy. U?;*^


r^'

•^


428


2 PETER, II.


Some copic-
st.rive ve.


1. e. %s not its
own exposi-
tor*


» Sy. .m»ro?l

=Gr. atosV;!-;.


in this body, to excite you by monition ; (14) since 14
I know, that the demise of my body is speedy, as
also my Lord Jesus the Messiah hath showed me.
(15) And 1 am anxious, ^ that, after my departure, 15
ye too may have it always with you to make men-
tion of these things. (16) For we have not gone 16
after fables artfully framed, in making known to
you the power and advent of our Lord Jesus the
Messiah ; but [it Avas] after we had been spectators
of his majesty. (17) For, when he received from 17
God the Father honor and glory, and, after the
splendid glory of his majesty, a voice came to him,
thus: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased ; (18) we also heard this identical voice 18
from heaven, which came to him while we were
with him in the holy mount. (19) And we have 19
moreover a sure word of prophecy ; and ye will do
well, if ye look to it as to a light that shineth in a
dark place, until the day shall dawn, and the sun
shall arise in your hearts; (20) ye having the pre- 20
vioas knowledge, that no prophecy is an exposition
of its own iQxXS (21) For at no time was it by the 21
pleasure of man, that the prophecy came ; but holy
men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy
Spirit.

But in the world, there have been also flilse pro- 11.
phets, as there will likewise be false teachers among
you, who will bring in destructive heresies, =i deny-
ing the Lord that bought them; thus bringing on
themselves swift destruction. (2) And many will 2
go after their profaneness; on account of whom,
the way of truth will be reproached. (3) And, in 3
the cupidity of raving words, they will make
merchandise of you: — whose judgment, of a long
time, is not idle ; and their destruction slumbereth
not. (-1) For, if God spared not the angels that 4
sinned, but cast them down to the infernal regions'^
in chains of darkness, and delivered them up to be
kept unto the judgment of torture, (5) and spared 5


* The Greek of this dilTu-uU passage reads: itala. -irpo^v^rsia 7pa(p% iStag
sntCk^gS'^g h\j ylvSTat. Tlie Syriac requu-es sViXuCij, for s^iX-jfTsw^; and then,
supporting 7pc.(p^ff to dopeiid on sViXufTij, it obtnina the significant interpretation,
that no prophecy exjil lins itself, and consequently cannot well be understood,
until its fulfillment shall make it clear.


2 PETER, II.


429


not the former world, but preserved jSToah the
eighth^ person, apreacher of righteousness, when he

6 brought a flood on the world of the wicked; (6)
[and] burned up the cities of Sodom and Gomor-
rah, and condemned them by an overthrow, making
them a demonstration to the wicked Avho should

7 come after them; (7) and also delivered righteous
Lot, vviio was tormented with the filthy conduct

8 of the lawless ; (8) — for that upright man dwelling
among them, in seeing and hearing from day to
day, was distressed in his righteous soul by their

9 lawless deeds ; — (9) the Lord knoweth how to res-
cue from afllictions those who fear him ; and he
will reserve the wicked for the day of judgment to

10 be tormentoil, (10) and especially them who go
after the flesh in the lusts of pollution, and despivse
government. Daring and arrogant, they shudder

11 not with awe while they blaspheme; (11) whereas
angels, greater than they in might and valor, bring

12 not against them a reproachful denunciation. (12)
But tliese, like the dumb beasts that by nature are
for slaughter and corruption, while reviling the
things they know not, will perish in their own cor-

13 ruption ; (13) they being persons with whom ini-
quity is tlie reward of iniquity, and by them riot-
ing in the daytime is accounted delightful ; defiled
and full of spots [are they], indulging themselves
at their ease, while they give themselves up to

14 pleasure; (1-1) having eyes that are full of adultery,
and sins that never end; seducing unstable souls;
and having a heart exercised in cupidity ; children

15 of malediction: (15) and, having left the way of
rectitude, they have wandered and gone in the way
of Balaam the son of Beor, who loved the wages

16 of iniquity, (10) and who had for the reprover of his
transgression a dumb ass, which, speaking with the
speech of men, rebuked the madness of the prophet.

17 (17) These are wells without water, clouds driven
by a tempest, 'J persons for whom is reserved the

18 blackness of darkness. (18) For, while they utter
astonishing'- vanity, they seduce, with obscene lusts
of the flesh, them who have almost abandoned

19 these that walk in error. (19) And they promise
them liberty, while they themselves arc the slaves
of corruption : for, by whatever thing a man is

20 vanquished, to that is he enslaved. (20) For if,


i. e. one of the
cimht vcrsons.


■^ Some copies:
from above.

« Some copies:
ridiculous.


430


1 PETER, III.


' or, aclinoicl-


Sy. in the end
of days.


''Sy.
Gr. rfToij^sict.


when tliey have escaped the pollutions of the world
by the knowledge of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus
the Messiah, they become again involved in the
same, and are vanquished, their latter state is worse
than the former. (21) For it would have been 21
better for them, not to have known^ the way of
righteousness, than after having known [it], to turn
back from the holy commandment that was deliv-
ered to them. (22) But the true proverb hath 22
happened to them : the dog returneth to his vomit ;
and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire.

This second epistle, my beloved, I now write to III.
you; in [both of] which I stir up your honest
mind by admonition : (2) that ye may be mindful 2
of the Avords which were formerly spoken by the
holy prophets, and of the injunction of our Lord
and Redeemer by the hand of the legates: (3) 3
knowing this previously, that there will come in
the last days" scofl'ers, who will scoff, walking ac-
cording to their own lusts ; (4) and saying, Where 4
is the promise of his coming? for, since our fathers
fell asleep, every thing remaineth just as from the
beginning of the creation. (5) For this they will- 5
ingly forget, that the heavens were of old: and
the earth rose up from the waters, and by means
of water, by the word of God. (6) [And,] by means 6
of these [waters], the world Avhich then was, [being
submerged] again perished in the waters. (7) And 7
the heavens that now are, and the earth, are by his
word stored up, being reserved for the fire at the
day of judgment and the perdition of wicked men.
— (8) And of this one thing, my beloved, be not 8
forgetful, That one day, to the Lord, is as a thou-
sand years ; and a thousand years, as one day. (9) 9
The Lord doth not procrastinate his promises, as
some estimate procrastination; but he is long suf-
fering, for your sakes, being not willing that any
should perish, but that every one should come to
repentance. (10) And the day of the Lord will 10
come, like a tliief ; in which the heavens will sud-
denly pass away ; and the elements, ^ being ignited,
will bo dissolved; and the earth and the works
in it, will not be found,— (11) As therefore all these 11
things are to be dissolved, what persons ought ye


1 JOHN, 1.


431


12 to be, in holy conduct, and in the fear of God, (12)
expccti)ig and desiring the coming of tlie day of
God, in which the heavens being tried by fire will
be dissolved, and the elements being ignited will

13 melt ? (13) But wc, according to his promise,
exi)oct new heavens, and a new earth, in which
righteousness dwelleth,

11 Therefore, my beloved, as ye expect these things,
strive that ye may be found by him in peace, with-

15 out spot and without blemish. (15) And account
the long suffering of the Lord to be redemption;
as also our beloved brother Paul, according to the

16 wisdom conferred on him, wrote to 3'ou; (IG) as
also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these
things, in which there is something dilRcult to be
understood; [and] which they who are ignorant
and unstable, pervert, as they do also the rest of

17 the scriptures, to their own destruction. — (17) Ye
therefore, my beloved, as yc know [these things]
beforehand, guard yourselves, lest, by going after
the error of the lawless, ye fall from 3'our steadfast-

18 ness. (18) But be yc growing in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus the
Messiah, and of God the Father : whose is the glory,
now, and always, and to the days of eternity.^
Amen.


End of the second Epistle of Peter the Legate.


A<;aiii ;
The Episilo of John the Legate.


We announce to you that, which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, and have seen
with our eyes, looked upon, and handled with our
hands, that which is the word of life.'' (2) And
the life was manifested, and we have seen and do
testify and announce to you, the life which is etcr-l
ual ; which was with the Father, and was revealed!


432


1 JOHN, II.


» Sy.

Gr.

flrapixxXrjroj.

'• Sy. *|j.CDQ-K»


L


to US. (3) And what we have seen and heard, we 3
make known to you also, that ye may have fellow-
ship with us ; and our fellowship is with the Fa-
ther, and with his Son Jesus the Messiah. (4) And 4
these things we write to you, that our joy in you
may be complete.

And this is the announcement, which we have 5
heard from him and declare' to you, that God is
light, and no darkness at all is in him. (6) And 6
if we say that we have fellowship with him, and we
walk in the darkness, we are liars, and walk not in
the truth. (7) But if we walk in the light, as he 7
is in the light, we have fellowship with each other,
and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanseth us from
all our sins. — (8) And if we say that we have no 8
sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in
us. (9) But if we confess our sins, he is faithful 9
and righteous, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse
us from all our iniquity. (10) If we say that we 10
have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word
is not with us.

My children, these things I write to you, that ye II.
sin not. But if any one should sin, we have an
Advocate=i with the Father, Jesus the Messiah, the
righteous. (2) For he is himself the propitiation'' 2
for our sins ; and not for ours only, but also for all
the world. — (3) And by this we shall be sensible 3
that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
(4) For he that saith, I know him, and doth not 4
keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is
not in him. (5) But he that keepeth his word, in 5
him is the love of God truly completed: for by this
we know that we are in him. (6) He that saith, 6
I am in him, is bound to walk according to his
walkings. — (7) My beloved, I write no new com- 7
mandment to you, but the old commandment which
ye had from the beginning ; and the old command-
ment is the word, which ye have heard. (8) Again, 8
a new commandment I write to you, which is true
in him and in you; because the darkness hath
passed away, and the true light beginneth to ap-
pear. (9) Whoever therefore shall say that he is 9
in the light, and liateth his brother, is in darkness
until now. (10) He that loveth his brother, abi- 10
deth in the light, and in him is no stumbUng.


1 JOHN, II.


433


11 (11) But he that hateth his brother, is in darkness,
and walketh in darkness ; and he knoweth not
whither he goeth, because the darkness hath bUnded
his eyes.

12 I write to you, ye children, because your sins

13 are forgiven you for his name's sake. (13) I write
to you, ye fathers, because ye have known him
who existed from the beginning. I write to you,
ye 3'oung men, because ye have vanquished the

14 evil one,*^ (14) I have written to you, ye little
ones, because ye have known the Father. I have
written to you, ye fathers, because ye have known
him who [was] from the beginning. I have written
to you, ye young men, because ye are strong, and
the word of God dwelleth in you, and ye have van-

15 quished the evil one. (15) Love not the world,
nor any thing in it ; for wliocver loveth the world,

16 hath not the love of the Father in him. (IG) For
all that is in the world, is, the lust of the body, and
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of the world ;
which are not from the Father, but from the world

17 itself. (17) And the world is passing away, [both]
it and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the pleas-

18 ure of God, abideth for ever. — (18) My children,
it is the latter time ; and as ye have heard tliat a
false Messiah'^ was to arise, so there are now many
false Messiahs ;«■ and from this we know that it is

19 the latter time. (19) From us they went out, but
they were not of us ; for if they had been of us,
they would have continued with us : but they went
out from us, that so it might be known, that they

20 were not of us. (20) But ye have an unction^'from
the Holy [One] ; and ye discriminate every per-

21 son. (21) I have not written to you, because ye
know not the truth, but because ye know it, and

22 because no falsehood is of the truth. (22) Who is
false, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Messiah ?
And that person is a false jNfessiah. He that deni-

23 eth the Father, denieth also the Son. (23) And
he that denieth the Son, also believeth not the
Father. Ue that confesscth the Son, confesseth

24 also the Father. (24) And what ye heard from
the first, let that remain with you. For if that,
which ye heard from the first, remaineth with you,
ye also will remain in the P'atlier and in the Son.

25 (25) And this is the promise, which he hath prom-


sy-l


m nf:^


• Sy. ^

f Sy.


c or. it.


i. e. confi-
dence.


i. e. the Mes-
siah.

Sy. IJq^


Sy. \l^SQ


- Sy. ^Z]


ised us, [even] life eternal. (26) And these things 26
I have written to you, on account of those who se-
duce you. (27) And ye also, if the unction which 27
ye have received from him remaineth in you, need
not that any one should teach you ; but as that
unction is from God, it teacheth you all things ; and
it is true, and no falsehood is in it. And as it hath
taught you, remain ye in hinLS

And now, my children, remain ye in him ; that 28
so, when he shall be manifested, we may not be
ashamed before him, but may have an open coun-
tenance'» at his coming. (29) If ye know that he 29
is righteous, ye also know, that whoever doeth
righteousness, is from him. (III.) And ye see. III.
how great is the love of the Father towards us, who
hath called us sons, and made us [such]. There-
fore the world knoweth us not, because it likewise
knoweth him not. (2) My beloved, now are we 2
the sons of God ; and hitherto, it hath not appeared
what we are to be : but we know that, when he
shall appear, we shall be in his likeness, and we
shall see him as he is. — (3) And every one that 3
hath this hope from him,''' puriiieth himself, as he
is pure. (4) And eveiw one that practiseth sin, 4
perpetrateth iniquity ; for all sin is iniquity.^
(5) And ye know, that he was manifested to take 5
away our sins ; and in him was no sin. (6) And 6
every one that abideth in him, sinneth not : and
every one that sinneth, hath not seen him, nor
hath known him. (7) My children, let no one 7
deceive you : he that doeth righteousness, is righ-
teous, as the Messiah also is righteous. (8) And 8
he that committeth sin, is of Satan ;" because Satan
was a sinner from the besjinnino-; and for this
cause, the Son of God appeared, that he might de-
stroy the works of Satan, (9) Every one that is 9
born of God, doth not practise sin ; because his
seed is in him, and he cannot sin, because he is
borii'^ of God. (10) By this are the children of 10
God discriminated from the children of Satan.

Every one that practiseth not righteousness, and
thatloveth not his brother, is not of God: (11) be- 11
cause this is the commandment, which ye heard
from the beginning, that ye should "love one
another. (12) Not Tike Cain, who was of the evil 12
one, and slew his brother. And why did he slay


1 JOHN, IV.


435


him, but because his own works were evil, and those

13 of his brother righteous? (13) And wonder not,

14 my brethren, if the world hate you. (14) Wo
know that wc have turned from death unto life, by
this, that wc love the brethren. lie that loveth

15 not his brother, rcmaineth in death. (15) For every
one that hateth his brother, is a man-slayer ; and
ye know, that no man-slayer can have eternal life

16 abiding in him. — (16) By this we know his love
towards us, because he gave up his life^ for us :
and we also ought to give up our lives'" for our

17 brethren. (17) But whoever hath worldly posses-
sions, and seetli his brother in want, and sbutteth
up his bowels from him, how is the love of God in

18 him ? (18) My children, let us not love one another
in words and in tongue, but in acts and in truth.

19 (19) And by this, we recognize that we are of the
truth ; and, before he shall come, we make our

20 hearts confident. (20) But if our heart condemneth
us, how much greater is God than our heart, and

21 knowing all things? (21) My beloved, if our heart
condemneth us not, we have open countenances? be-

22 fore God. (22) And whatever we ask, we receive
from him ; because we keep his commandments, and

23 do acceptable things^ before him. (23) And this is
his commandment, that we believe on the name of
his Son Jesus the Messiah, and that we love one

24 another as he hath commanded us. (24) And he
that keepeth his commandments, is kept by him,
and he dwelleth in him : and by this we under-
stand that he abideth in us, from his Spirit which
he hath given to us-

IV. My beloved, believe not all spirits ; but discrimi-
nate among spirits, whether they are of God : for
many false prophets have gone out into the world.

2 (2) i3y this the Spirit of God is known, every spirit
that confcpseth that Jesus the Messiah hath come in

3 the flesh, is of God. (3) And every spirit which
confcsseth not that Jesus the Messiah hath come in
the flesh, is not of God ; but he is of the false
Messiah, of whom ye have heard that he cometh,

4 and now is he already in the world. (4) But ye,
children, are of God ; and ye have overcome them;
because greater is he who is in you, than he who is

5 in the world. (5) And they are of the world:


•^ or, himself.
' or, ourselves.


f or, confidence..
>• Sy. 1^; «g^ »


436


1 JOHN, V.


•" i, e. be saved.
<= Sy. |jl£DQ-k»


* Sy. "jonlD


• Sy. \dO\£^


or, confidence.


Sy.^


therefore they speak from the world, and the
world heareth them. (6) But we are of God ; and 6
he that knoweth God, heareth us ; and he that is
not of God, heareth us not. By this, we know the
spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.— (7) My be- 7
loved, let us love one another: because love is
from God ; and whoever loveth, is born of God,
and knoweth God. (8) Because God is love ; and 8
whoever loveth not, doth not know God. (9) By 9
this was the love of God towards us made known,
because God sent his only-begotten=^ Son into the
world, that Ave by him might livc^ (10) In this is 10
love; it was not that we loved God, but that God
loved us, and sent his Son a propitiation^ for our
sins. (11) My beloved, if God hath so loved us, 11
we also ought to love one another. (12) No one 12
hath ever seen God ; but if we love one another,
God abideth'i in ^s, and his love is perfected in us.
(13) And by this we know, that we abide in him, 13
and that he abideth in us, because he hath given of
his Spirit to us.— (14) And Ave have seen, and do 14
testily, that the Father hath sent his Son, a Re-
deemerc for the world. (15) Whoever confesseth 15
Jesus to be the Son of God, God abideth in him,
and he abideth in God. (16) And Ave have believed 16
and known the love, which God hath tOAvards us :
for God is love, and whoever abideth in love, abi-
deth in God. (17) And hereby is his love perfected 17
Avith us ; that Ave may have open countenances^ in
the day of judgment; because as he Avas, so also
are Ave in this Avorld. (18) In love there is no fear; 18
but perfect love casteth out fear; because fear
existeth in peril, and he that fearetli is not perfected
in love. (19) Let us, therefore, love God ; because 19
he hath first loved us. (20) And if any one shall 20
say, I love God, and yet hateth his brother, he is
a liar: for he that loveth not his brother Avho is
visible, how can he love God Avho is invisible? (21) 21
And this command we have received from him,
that whoever loveth God, must love also his brother.
— (V.) Whoever believeth that Josus is the Messiah, V.
is born=>- of God. And AvhocA^er loveth the beget-
ter, loveth him also that is begotten of him. (2) 2 (
And by tliis we know, that Ave loA^e the children
of God, Avhen Ave love God, and follow his com-
mandments. (3) For this is the love of God, that 3


I JOHN, V.


487


6


9


10


11


we keep his commandments: and his command-
ments are, not burdensome. (4) Because, whoever
is born of God, overcometh the world : and this is
the victory that overcometh the world, — our faith.
(5) For who is he that overcometh the world, but
he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God ?

This is he who came by the Avater and the blood.
— Jesus the Messiah ; not by the water onl}'-, but
by the water and the blood. And the Spirit testi-
fieth ; because the Spirit is truth. [(7*) For there
arc three that testify in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Iloly Spirit: and these three are
one.] (8) And there are three witnesses, the
Spirit, and the water, and the blood : and these
three arc in union. (9) If we receive the testimony
of men, how much greater is the testimony of God?
And this is the testimony of God, which he hath
testified concerning his Son. (10) Whoever be-
lieveth in the Son of God, hath this testimony in
himself. And whoever believeth not God, hath
made him a liar, by not believing the testimony
whith God hath testified concerning his Son. (11)
And this is the testimon}^, fhat God hath given to
12 us life eternal, and this life is^ in his Son. (12) |
Every one that taketh hold<= of the Son, takcthj
hold of life ; and every one that taketh not hold of j
the Son, hath not life. j

These things have I written to j^ou, that ye may j
know that ye have life eternal, — ye who believe in'
the name of the Son of God. (14) And this is thei
confidence^ that we have towards him, that what- ;
ever we ask of him, agreeably to his will, ho hear-!
eth us. (15) And if we are persuade^! that hej
heareth us respecting what we a.sk of him, we arej
confident of receiving presently the petitions wliich
we asked of him. — (16) If any one shall see his!
brother sin a sin which doth not deserve death, he}
shall ask, and life will be given him, — to them [I|
say] who sin not as unto death. For there is a sin
of death; and I do not say of this, that a man
should pray for it. (17) For all iniquity is sin;
and there is a sin which is not of death. (18) And !
we know, that every one who is born of God, sin- 1
ncth not: for he that is born of God keepeth him-|


13
14


15


IG


17

18


Sy. exists.
Sy. fjuj-j]:


Sy.

Gr. •s'KppTjfl'ia.


* This verse is wauling in most MSS., and is omitted in tiie edit. London, 1826.


438


2 JOHN.


• Sy. ll^jiD
eSy.


self, and the evil one touch etli him not. (19) We 19
know, that we are of Grod ; and all tha world is
reposing on the evil one. (20) And we know, 20
that the Son of God hath come, and hath given us
knowledge^ that we might know the True One;f
and that we might bo in the True One, — in his Son
Jesus the Messiah. He is the true God,g and the
life eternal. (21) My children, keep j^ourselves 21
from idolatry.

End of the first Epistle of John the Legate.


The Second Epistle of John.


Sy-l


■n-O


''Sy."tj5Q_D =

Gr. Kupi'a.

Eng. Lady.


The Elder, a toKuria^ the elect, and to her ^lil-
dren : whom I love in the truth, and not I only, but
all they who know the truth ; (2) for the sake of the
truth, which abideth in us and is with us for ever.
(3) May grace be with you, and mercy, and peace,
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus the
Messiah, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.

1 have rejoiced greatly, that I found [some] of
thy children, who walked in the truth, as we have
received commandment from the Father. (5) And
now, I beseech thee, Kuria, — (I write no new com-
mandment to thee, but that which was with us from
the beginning,) — that we should love one another.
(6) And this is love, that we walk according to the
commandment. This is the commandment, as ye
have heard from the beginning, that we should
walk in it.^ (7) Because many seducers have gone
forth into the world, who confess not that Jesus the
Messiah hath come in the flesh. This is a seducer
and Antichrist.'! (8) Take heed to yourselves, that
«.rOO^f]n t.-'^i.iDj] ye lose not what ye have wrought ; but that ye
I may be recompensed with a full reward. (9) Every
one who transgresseth, and abideth not in the doc-
trine of the Messiah, God is not in him. And he
who abideth in his doctrine, he hath the Father and


• or, him.


Sy.


3 JOHN.


439


11


12


10 the Son. (10) If any one cometb to you, and
bringetli not this doctrine, entertain him not in your
house, nor say to him, Joy<^ to thee: (11) for lie • Sy. u,_»^
that saith to him, Joy to thee, is a participator in
his evil deeds.

Having many thingsl could write to you, I would
not with paper*" and ink ; but I hope to come to ' Sy.
you, and to converse mouth to mouth, that our joy ]m . ,/.^ ~

13 may be complete. — (18) The children of thy elect' Gr. ^apT»if
sister salute thee. Grace be with you. Amen. | Lat. Charia

Eiid of the second Epistle of John the Legate. I


The Third Epistle of John.


10


11


The Elder, a to my beloved Gaius, whom I love
in the truth. — (2) Our beloved ; in all things, I
pray for thee that thou mayest prosper and be in
health, as thy soul doth prosper. (3) For I re-
joiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified
concerning thy integrity, even as thou walkest in
the truth. (4) And I have no greater joy, than to
hear that my children walk in the truth. (5) Our
beloved, thou doest in faith, what thou pcrformest
towards the brethren ; and especially towards stran-
gers, (6) who have borne testimony to thy charity
before the whole church, to whom thou doest good,
as is pleasing to God. (7) For they went forth in
behalf of his name, taking nothing of the Gentiles.
(8) We therefore ought to receive such persons,
that we may be aiders of the truth.

I was desirous of writing to the church ; but he
who loveth to be foremost among them, Diotrephes,
receiveth us not. (10) Therefore, if he come, re-
member those his doings, that he treated us with
malignant words; and this not sufficing him, he re-
ceived not the brethren ; and those who would
receive [them], he prohibited, and even ejected
them from the church. (11) Qur beloved, be not


Sy. ] m I w o


440


JUDE.


or, imitator.


Sy. reed.


a follower^ of what is evil, but of what is good.
lie that doeth good, is of God ; but he that doeth
evil, hath not seen God. — (12) Of Demetrius, there 12
is good testimony from every one, and from the
church, and from the truth itself: and we also bear
[him] testimony, and ye know that our testimony
is true.

I had many things to write to thee ; but I will 13
not write [them] to thee with ink and pen.^
(14) But I hope soon to see thee, and to converse 14
mouth to mouth. (15) Peace be with thee. — The 15
friends salute thee. Salute the friends, severally,
by name.

End of the third Epistle of John the Legate.


The Epistle of Jude, the Brother of James.


• Gr. salvation.


or, pnority.


JuDE, a servant of Jesus the Messiah, and the
brother of James, — to the called people, the beloved
of God the Father, the preserved by Jesus the Mes-
siah : — (2) Mercy and peace in love, be multiplied
to you.

My beloved, while I take all pains to write to
you of our common life,^ it is needful for me to
write to you, exhorting you to maintain a conflict
for the faith which was once delivered to the saints.

(4) For some have obtained entrance, who from the
beginning were registered beforehand under this
condemnation : wicked men, who pervert the grace
of God to impurity, and deny him who is the only
Lord God and our Lord, Jesus the Messiah. —

(5) And I wish to remind you, — though ye all
know it, — that God, after once rescuing the people
from Fgypt, again destroyed them who believed
not. (6) And the angels that kept not their pri-
macy, ^ but left their station, he hath reserved in
chains unknown, utder darkness, unto the judgment


JUDE.


441


7 of the great day. (7) As Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the surrounding cities, which in like manner
followed whoredom and went after strange flesh,
are placed beneath everlasting fire, being doomed

8 to judgment. — (8) In the same manner, too, these
sensual dreamers^ defile the llesh. and despise au-

9 thorit}', and revile excellency. (9) But ^lichael
the archangel, who, in debate with the Accuser, con-
tended about the body of Moses, did not venture to
bring against him a reviling declaration ; but said,

10 The Lord will rebuke thee. (10) But these [men]
revile things which they do not understand ; and
in the things of which they have a natural })ersua
sion as animal beings, in these they corru})t thcm-

11 selves. (11) Woe to them ; for they have gone in
the way of Cain ; and, after the error of Balaam,
they have lusted for gain ; and, in the rebellion

12 of Korah, they have perished.'^ — (12) These are
they who, in their feastings, riot while polluting
themselves, feeding themselves without fear; clouds
without rain, moved about by the winds ; trees
whose fruit hath failed, and they are without fruit,

13 twice dead, and uplifted from their root; (13) ra-
ging waves of the sea, which, by their foam, mani-
fest their confusion ; shooting-stars," for which is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. —

14 (14) And of them also pro])hesied Enoch, who was
the seventh from Adam, when he said: Behold,
the Lord cometh, with myriads of his saints ;

15 (15) to execute judgment upon all ; and to convict
all the wicked, because of all the deeds they have
wickedly committed; and because of all the hard
speeches, which they, ungodly sinners, have ut-

16 tered. (16) These arc they who murmur and com-
plain of every thing, while they walk according to
their lusts; and their mouth speaketh shocking
things; and they Hatter people, for the sake of

17 gain. — (17) But do ye, my beloved, remember the
words which were before spoken by the legates of

18 our Lord Jesus the Messiah ; (18) because they told
you, that in the end of the times there would be
scoffers, going after wickedness, according to their
lusts.

These are they that separate [themselves], sen


or, debauched
in dreams.


19
20


sual persons, *" not having the Spirit. (20) But, my
beloved, be ye built up anew, in your holy faith,


.e. will perish.


or, meteors.


Sy.


_£LJ


442


APOCALYPSE, I.


through the Holy Spirit, Avhile ye pray. (21) And 21
let us keep ourselves in the love of God, while we
wait for the mercy of our Lord Jesus the Messiah,
unto our eternal life. (22) And some of them, 22
snatch ye from the fire. (23) And when they repent, 23
have compassion on them, with fear, hating even
the tunic that is defiled by the flesh.

And to him who is able to |)reserve you flmltless, 24
and spotless, and to establish you without a blemish,
(25) before his majesty, with joy, — [namely,] the 25
only God, our Deliverer, by means of Jesus the
Messiah our Lord, — be praise, and dominion, and
honor, and majesty, both now and in all ages.
Amen.

End of the Epistle of Jude the Legate, the brother of James
and Joses.


The Revelation, which was made by God to John the Evangelist,
in the Island of Patmos,

To which he was banished by Nero the Emperor.


The Revelation of Jesus the Messiah, which God
gave to him, to show to his servants the things that
must shortly occur : and he signified [it] by send-
ing, through his angel, to his servant John; (2)
who bore witness to the word of God, and to the
testimony of Jesus the Messiah, as to all that he
saw. (3) Blessed is he that readeth, and they who
hear the words of this prophecy, and keep the
things that are written in it; for the time is near.

John to the seven churches which are in Asia :
Grace to you and quietude, from him who is, and
who was, and who is to come ; from the seven
Spirits wliich are before his throne; (5) and from
Jesus the Messiah, the Witness, the Faithful, the


"%


APOCALYPSE, I.


443


First-born of the dead, and the Prince of the kings
of the earth ; who hath loved us, and released us

6 from our sins by his blood ; (6) and hath made us
a kingdom sacerdotal^^ to God and his Father: to
whom be glory and power, for ever and ever.

7 Amen. — (7) Behold, he comcth with clouds; and
all eyes shall see him, and also they who speared
him ; and all the tribes of the earth shall mourn on

8 account of him. Yes: Amen. (8) I am Alpha,
also Omega, b saith the Lord God ; who is, and was,

9 and is to come, the omnipotent.<= — (9) I John, your
brother, and partaker with you in the affliction and
suffering that are in Jesus the J\Iessiah, was in the
island called Putmos,*' because of the word of God,
and because of the testimony of Jesus the Messiah.

10 (10) I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day ; and I
heard behind .me a great voice, as of a trumpet,

11 which said: (11) That which thou seest, write in a
book, and send to the seven churches, to Kphesus,
and to Smyrna, and to Pergamos, and to Thyatira,
and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.

12 — (12) And I turned myself to look at the voice
that talked with me ; and when I had turned, I saw

13 seven candlesticks of gold ; (13) and, in the midst
of the candlesticks, one like the Son of man, clothed
to the feet,<^ and girded about his paps witli a girdle

14 of gold. (14) And his head and his hair were
"vvhite, like white wool, like snow; and his eyes,

15 like a flame of fire : (15) and his feet were like fine''
brass, llaming in a furnace: and his voice, like the

16 sound of many waters. (16) And he had in his
right hand seven stars ; and from his mouth issued
a sharp two-edged sword ; and his visage was like

17 the sun shining in its strength. (17) And when I
saw him, I fell at his feet like one dead. And he
laid his right hand upon me, and said. Fear not :

18 I am the Firet and the Last ; (18) and who liveth
and was dead ; and behold, I am alive for ever and
ever. Amen. And 1 have tlie keys of death and

19 of the unseen world.t' (19) Therefore, write what
thou hast seen, and the things that are ; and the

20 things that are to be hereafter: (20) the mystery of
these seven stars which thou sawest in my right
hand, and the seven candlesticks of gold. Those
seven stars are the angels'' of the seven churches;
and the seven candlesticks are the seven churches.


•Sy.


I- Sy. Olaph,
and also Tau
= A di- Z.

<= Sy. Who
holdeth all in
his power.

^ Sy. ^QiD|425


« Sy. 155025=

f Sy.


Sy.^


Sy. ]}^]1^


444


APOCALYPSE, II.


Sy. |D]3k)


Sy.


or. <^a>r(h>ti.


^ Sy. "^LjjZ


To the angel* of the church which is at Ephesus, II.
write : These things saith he who holdeth all things,
and the seven stars, in his right hand ; he that walk-
eth in the midst of tlie seven candlesticks of gold ;
(2) I know thy works, and thy toil, and thy patience ; 2
and [that] thou canst not endure the wicked ; and
thou hast tried them who say they are legates, and
are not; and thou hast found' them liars. (3) And 3
thou hast had patience, and hast borne the burden, on
account of my name, and hast not fainted. (4) Yet 4
I have [a charge] against thee, on account of thy
former love,, which thou hast left. (5) Therefore, 5
remember whence thou hast fallen ; and repent,
and do the former works : or if not, I will come to
thee quickly, and I will remove thy candlestick
from its place, except thou repent. (6) But this 6
thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nico-
laitans,'' which I also [hate]. — (7) He that hath 7
ears, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
churches. To him who is victorious, will I give to
eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise^ of
my God.

And to the angel of the church which is at 8
Smyrna, write: These things saith the First and
the Last, he who was dead, and liveth. (9) I know 9
thy works, and the affliction, and the poverty, —
(yet thou art rich ;)— and the railing which is from
them who say they are Jews, and they are not,
but are of the congregation of Satan. (10) Be not 10
terrified at any of the things thou art to suffer.
For lo, the Accuser will throw some of you into
custody, that ye may be tried ; and there will be
trouble to you ten days. Be faithful unto death,
and I will. give thee tiie crown of life. — (11) He 11
that hath ears, let him hear what the Spirit saith to
the churches. lie that is victorious, shall not be
harmed by the second^ death.

And to the angel of the church at Pergamos, 12
write : Thus saith he who hath the sharp two-edged
sword ; (13) I know thy works, and where thou 13
dwcllest, [even] where the throne of Satan is: and
thou boldest fast my name, and hast not denied
the faith of me, in those days when my faithful
witness, who was slain among you, was made a
spectacle where Satan dwelleth. (14) Yet I have a 14
small [charge] against thee. Thou hast there them


15


16


18


10


20


25
26


27


28
29


who hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught
Balak to throw a stunibrmg-block bclbi-e the (.'hil-
dreii of Israel, that they ini^ht eat the sacrilices of
idols,c and might commit whoredom. (15) So also
thou hast tlicm who hold the doctrine of the Nico-
laitans.f In like manner, repent thou. (16) Or if
not, I will come to thee quickly, and I will war upon
17 them with the sword of my mouth. — (17) He tluit
hath ears, let him hear what tlie Spirit saith to the
churches. To him that is victorious, will I give
to cat of the hidden manna ; and I will give him a
white counter, s and upon the counter a new name
written, which no one knoweth but he that rcceiv-
eth it.

And to the angel of the church at Thyatira,
write : These things saith the Son of God, who hath
his eyes like a llame of fire, and his feet like fine
brass : (19) I know thy works, and love, and faith,
and service, and also tuy patience ; and that these
tiiy latter works are more than the former. (20)
But I have [a charge] against thee, because thou
suflbrest thy woman^ Jczabel, who saith she is a
prophetess, and teachcth, and seduceth ni}^ servants
to whoredom, and to eating of the sacrifices of idols.

21 (21) And I gave her a season lor repentJince, and

22 she is not disposed to repent of her whoredom.
(22) Behold, 1 will cast her upon a bed, and them
who commit adultery witli her into great affliction,

23 unless they repent of their deeds. (23) And her
children will I slay with death : and all the churches
shall know, that I am he who searcheth reins and
hearts; and I will render to each of ^''ou according

2-4 to your works. (24) And I say to you, — to the
rest that are in Thyatira, to all them who have not
received this doctrine, the men who have not known
the profound things of Satan, as the}' say ; — I lay
no other burden upon you : (25) but, what ye
have, hold fast until I come. — (26) And to him
that is victorious, and to liim that observeth my
works unto the end, to him will I give authority'
over the nations; (27) and he shall rule them with
a rod of iron ; and like vessels of pottery, shall
they be broken : as I also liave received of my
Father. (28) And I will give him the morning
star.— (29) He that hath ears, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches.


Some MSS.,
vJiiit idolaters
ih.


or, vnfe.


Sy.


jSS


• i. e. will cavse.


And to the angel of the cliurcli which is at Sar-III.
dis, write : These ihings saith he who hath the
seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars : I know
thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest,
and thou art dead. (2) Awake, and j^reserve the 2
things that remain, whicli are ready to die ; for I
have not found thy works complete before my God,
(3) Remember therefore how thou hast received 3
and heard ; and observe [those precepts], and re-
pent. If then thou wilt not wake up, I will come
upon thee as a thief; and thou shalt not know at
what hour I will come upon thee. (4) Yet thou 4
hast a few names in Sardis, who have not defiled
their garments; and they shall walk with me in
white, for they are worthy. — (5) He that is victo- 5
rious, shall be so clothed in white robes ; and I will
not blot out their name from the book of life ; and
I will confess their name before my Father, and be-
fore his angels. (6) He that hath ears, let him hear 6
what the Spirit saith to the churches.

And to the angel of the church which is at 7
Philadelphia, write: These things saith he that is
holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David,
who openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and
no man,openeth ; (8) I know thy works. And lo, 8
I have set before thee an open door, which no man
can shut: because thou hast a little strength ; and
thou hast kept my word, and hast not denied my
name. (9) Behold, I will give^ them of the con- 9
gregation of Satan, who say they are Jews, and are
not, but lie, — behold I will make them to come and
do obeisance before thy feet ; and to know that I
have loved thee. (10) Because thou hast kept the 10
word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the hour of temptation, that is to come on all the
inhabited world, to try them who dwell on the
earth. (11) I come quickly: hold fast what thou
hast, so that no one take "thy crown. — (12) Him
that is victorious, will I make a pillar in the temple
of my God ; and he shall not again go out : and I
will write upon him the name of my God, and of
the new Jerusalem which descendeth from heaven
from my God, and my own new name. (13) He
that hath cars, let him hear what the Spirit saith to
the churclies.

And to the angel of the church which is at Lao- 14


11
12


13


dicea, write : These things saith the Amen, the
Witness, the faithful, the true, the Chief ^^ of the

15 creation of God: (15) I know thy Avorks, that thou
art neither hot, nor eold; I would that thou wert

16 cold or hot. (IG) So, because thou art lukewarm, ^
neither hot nor cold, I am about to vomit thee

17 from my mouth. (17) Because thou sayest, I am
rich and aflluent, and have no want of any thing;
and thou knowest not, that thou art impotent, and

18 miserable, and needy, and blind, and naked ; (18)
I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire,
that thou ma^-est become rich; and white raiment,
to be clothed, and that the shame of thy naked-
ness may not be seen; and put eye-salve on thine

19 eyes, that thou mayest sec. (19) As many as I
love, I rebuke and chasten. Be emulous there-

20 fore, and repent. (20) Behold, 1 have been stand-
ing at the door, and I will knock : if any man hear
my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him,

21 and will sup with him, and he with me. — (21) And
to him that is victorious, to him will I give to sit
Avitli me on my throne, even as I was victorious, and

22 sat down with my Father on his throne. (22) lie
that hath ears to hear, let bira hear what the Spirit
saith to the churches.

IV. After these things, I looked and lo, a door [was]
open in lieaven. And the first voice which I heard,
was as of a trumpet talking with me. It said
Come up hither; and I will show thee the things

2 that must occur hereafter. (2) Instantly, I was in
the Spirit : and lo, a throne was placed in heaven ;

3 and there was [one] seated on the throne. (3) And
he who sat, was like the appearance of a jasper-
stone, and of a sardine, and of a rainbow of the
clouds, round about the throne, in form as the ap-

4 pearance of emeralds, (-i) Around the throne were
twent}' and four seats; and upon those scats sat
twenty and four Elders,'^ who were clothed in white
robes, and on whose heads were coronets of gold.

5 (5) And from the throne proceeded lightnings, and
the sound of thunders ; and seven lamps of fire
were burning before his throne, which arc the

6 seven Spirits of God. (6) And before the throne,
as it were a sea of glass like crystal; and in the
midst of the throne, and around it, and befure the


.Sy. ].m.^y
Sy. ')5aju£)


Sy.i


* ft n O


J


us


APOCALYPSE, V.


" Sy, lZai-K>


Sy. lo^,
equal, or loor-
thi


Sy. l;^]


throne, Avere four Animals,^ full of eyes in their
front and in their rear. (7) And the first Animal 7
resembled a lion ; and the second Animal resembled
a calf; and the third Animal had a face like a man;
and the fourth Animal resembled an eagle when
flying. (8) And these four Animals had, each of 8
them, six wings around it: and within they were
full of eyes: and they have no cessation, day or
night, from saying: Holy, Holy, Holy, the Lord
God, the Omnipotent, who was, and is, and is to
come. (9) And when these Animals give glory 9
and honor and praise to him that sitteth on the
throne, to him who liveth for ever and ever, (10) 10
the twenty and four Elders fall down before him
who sitteth on the throne, and they worship him
who liveth for ever and ever; and they cast their
coronets before the throne, saying, (11) Worthy art 11
thou, 0 Lord our God, the Holy, to receive glory
and honor and power; for thou hast created all
things, and by thee they exist ; and because of thy
pleasure they had being and were created.

And I saw, at the right hand of him who sat on V.
the throne, a book, which Avas written within and
on the back side, and which was sealed with seven
seals. (2) And I saw a strong angel, who pro- 2
claimed with a loud voice, Who is competent'^ to
open the book, and to loose the seals thereof? (3) 3
And no one either in heaven above, or on the earth,
or beneath the earth, was able to open the book, or
to look thereon. (4) And I wept much, because no 4
one was found, who was competent to open the
book, or to look on it. (5) And one of the Elders 5
said to me, Weep not ; behold, the Lion of the tribe
of Judah, the Root of David, hath been victorious:
He will open the book, and its seven seals. — (6) 6
And I looked, and in the midst of the Elders stood
a lamb,^' as if slain; and it had seven horns, and
seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God that
are sent into all the earth. (7) And he came, and 7
took the book from the right hand of him who sat
on the throne. (8) And when he took the book, 8
the four Animals and the twenty and four Elders
fell down before the Lamb, each of them having a
harp, and cups of gold full of odors, which are
the supplications of the saints. (9) And they sung 9


APOCALYPSE, VI.


%

449


10


11


a new anthem, saying : Competent art thou, to take
the book, and to open the seals thereof; because
thou wast shiin, and hast redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, and peo-
ple, and nation ; (10) and thou hast made them
kings and j)riests to our God ; and they reign on
the earth. (11) And I looked, and I heard, as it
were the voice of many angels, around the throne,
and the Animals and the Elders; and the number
of them was a myriad of myriads, and thousand of
12 thousands, (12) who said, with a loud voice ; Com-
petent is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power,
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and blessing ; (13) and [to be over] every
created thing, that is in heaven, or on earth, or
under the earth, or in the sea ; and all that are in
them.c And I heard him who sat on the throne say :
Unto the Lamb be given, blessing, and honor, and
glory, and power, for ever and ever. (14) And
the four Animals said: Amen. And the Elders
fell down, and adored.


13


14


VI. And, when the Lamb had opened one of the
seven seals, I looked, and I heard one of the four
Animals say, as with a voice of thunder. Come, and

2 see. (2) And I looked, and there was a white
horse : and he who sat on it, had a bow ; and a
coronet was given to him, and he went forth con-

3 quering, that he might conquer. — (8) And when he
had opened the second seal, I heard the second

4 Animal sa}'. Come. (4) And there went forth
another, a red horse; and to him who sat thereon,
it was given, to take tranquillity from the earth ;
and that they should kill one another ; and there

5 was given to him a great sword. — (5) And when
he had opened the third seal, I heard the third
Animal say. Come, and see. And I looked, and lo,
a black horse ; and he that sat thereon, had a bal-

6 ancc in his hand. (6) And I heard a voice in the
midst of the four Animals, saying: A choenix of
wheat for a denarius, ^^ and three choenices of barley
for a denarius ; and hurt not the oil and the wine.

7 — (7) And when he had opened the fourth seal, I

8 heard the fourth Animal say. Come, and see. (8)
And I looked, and lo, a pale horse; and the name
of him who sat thereon was Death;** and Hades'^

29


The Syriac
here differs
much from
the Greek.


i. e. about a
quart for 15
cents.

Sy. UoiD
Sy.^.


450


APOCALYPSE, VII.


S^'. beast of
tooth.


• or movement.


followed after him. And there was given him
authority over the fourth part of the earth, to slay
with the sword, and by famine, and by death, and
by the ravenous beast^ of the earth. — (9) And when 9
he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar,
the souls of them who were slain on account of
the word of God, and on account of the testimony
to the Lamb which was \Ht\i them. (10) And 10
they cried with a loud voice, saying: How long, O
Lord, thou holy and true, dost thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth ?
(11) And to each one of them was given a white 11
robe ; and it was told them, that they must be quiet
yet a little while, until the consummation of their
fellow -servants and brethren, who were to be killed
as they had been. — (12) And I looked, when he 12
had opened the sixth seal, and there was a great
earthquake ;«= and the sun became black, like sack-
cloth of hair; and the whole moon became like
blood. (13) And the stars of heaven fell on the I'd
earth, as a lig-tree casteth its unri|)e figs, when it is
shaken by a strong wind. (14) And the heavens 1-4
separated, as a book is rolled up : and all moun-
tains and ih'lands were removed cut of their places.
(15) And the kings of the earth, and the nobles, 15
and the captains of thousands, and the rich men,
and the men of valor, and every servant and free
man, hid themselves in caves, and in the clefts of
the mountains; (16) and they said to the moun- 16
tains and to the clefts. Fall over us, and hide us
from the face of him who sittetli on the throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb : (17) For the 17
great day of their wrath is come ; and who is able
to stand ?

And after these things I saw four angels, who VII.
stood on the four corners of the earth ; and they
held the four winds of the earth, so that the wind
blew not on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on the
trees. — (2) And I saw another angel, and he carile 2
up from the rising of the sun ; and he had the seal
of the living God; and he called out, with a loud
voice, to the four angels to whom it was given to
hurt the earth and the sea, saying: (3) Hurt ye 3
not the earth, nor the sea, nor "the trees, until we
shall have sealed the servants of our God upon


APOCALYPSE, VIII.


451


4 their foreheads.^ (4) And I heard the number of
them that were scaled, a hundred and forty and four

5 thousand, seah^d from every tribe of Israehtes. (5)
of the tribe of Judah, twelve thousand were sealed:
of the tribe of Reuben, twelve thousand : of the

6 tribe of Gad, twelve thousand: (0) of the tribe of
Ashur, twelve thousand: of the tribe of Naphtali,
twelve thousand: of the tribe of Manasseb, twelve

7 thousand: (7) of the tribe of Simeon, twelve thou-
sand: of the tribe of Levi, twelve thousand: of the

8 tribe of Issachar, twelve thousand: (8) of the tribe
of Zebulon, twelve thousand: of the tribe of Jo-
seph, twelve tliousand : of the tribe of r)cnja-

9 min, twelve thousand. — (9) And after these things,
I looked, and lo, a great multitude, which no one
could number, from all kindreds, and nations, and
tribes, and tongues; who stood before the throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, and

10 palms in their hands ; (10) and they cried, with a
loud voice, saying: Salvationi^ to our God, to him

11 who sitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb. (11)
And all the angels stood around the throne and the
3:l]lders and the four Animals; and they fell upon
their faces before his throne, and worshipped God,

12 (12) saying: Amen. Blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power,
and might, [be] to our God, for ever and ever :

13 Amen. (13) And one of the Elders turned, <= and
said to me : These who are clothed in white robes,

14 who are thc}^, and whence came they? (14) And I
said to him : My lord, thou knowest. And he said
to me : These are thc}^ who came from great afflic-
tion ; and they have Avashed their robes, and made

15 them white in the blood of the Lamb. (15) There-
fore are they before the throne of God ; and they
serve him day and night, in his temple; and he

16 who sitteth on the throne, will protect them: (16)
they will not hunger, nor thirst any more; nor
will the sun fall on them, nor any heat. (17) Be-

17 cause the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne,
will feed them ; and will lead them to fountains of
living water; and God will wipe every tear from
their eyes.

VIII. And when he had opened the seventh seal, there
was silence in heaven, for about hall" an hour.


Sy. bettoeen
their eyes.


Sy. IjLOJOS)


or, answer ecL


452


APOCALYPSE, VIII.


Sy. give.


I" or, movements.


' Sy.

»CDoAim.a"|,

Gr. *A4.iva5g.


or, was ab-
sorbed.


(2) And I saw the seven angels, who stood before 2
God; and to thera were given, seven trumpets.

(3) And another angel came and stood by the al- 3
tar; and he held a golden censer: and much incense
was given him, so that he might offer, ^ with the
prajei's of all the saints, upon the golden altar be-
fore the throne. (4) And the smoke of the incense 4
of the prayers of the saints went up before God,
from the hand of the angel. (5) And the angel 5
took the censer, and filled it with fire from the
altar, and cast it upon the earth : and there were
thunders, and lightnings, and voices, and an earth-
quake.'' (6) And the seven angels, who had the 6
seven trumpets, prepared themselves to sound. —
(7) And the first sounded ; and there was hail, and 7
fire, which were mingled with water: and these
were thrown upon the earth ; and a third part of
the earth was burned up, and a third part of the
trees were burned, and till green grass was burned.

— (8) And the second angel sounded, and, as it 8
were a great mountain burning with fire, was cast
into the sea ; and also a third part of the sea be-
came blood. (9) And a third part of all the crea- 9
tures in the sea, that had life, died; and a third
part of the ships were destroyed. — (10) And the 10
third angtl sounded, and there fell from heaven a
star, burning like a lamp ; and it fell upon a third
part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of water.
(11) And the name of the star was called Worm- 11
\vood;c and a third part of the waters became
wormwood ; and many persons died from the
waters, because they were bitter.— (12) And the 12
fourth angel sounde'd, and a third part of the sun
was smitten,'! and the third part of the moon, and
the third part of the stars ; so that the third part
of them were dark, and they became dark ; and
the day did not give light for the third part of it,
and the night in like manner. (13) And I saw and 13
heard an eagle, which flew in the midst, and it had
a tail of blood,* while it said, with a loud voice:
Woe, woe, to them who dwell on the earth, because


* The Greek word is, fiS(roL'pavy)|xar(, in mid heaven; compounded of fjigVo?,
middle, and oupavoj, heaven. But tlie Syriac translator supposed it to be a com-
pound of (isVo^ middle, oupa tail, and a't'^ia. blood; and he rendered it accordingly.


^


APOCALYPSE, IX.


453


of the remaining sounds of the trumpets of the three
IX. angels, who are to sound. — (IX.) And the fifth an-
gel sounded ; and I saw a star, which fell from
heaven upon the earth. And there was given to

2 him the key of the pit of the abyss.^^ (2) And he * Sy. IsdooiZ,
opened the pit of the abyss ; and smoke issued from

the pit, like the smoke of a furnace that is in blast ;
and the sun and the air were darkened by the

3 smoke of the pit. (3) And out of the smoke, came
locusts upon the earth : and power was given them,

4 like that which scorpions have on the earth. (4)
And it was commanded them, that they should not
hurt the grass of the earth, nor any herb, nor any
tree ; but [only] the persons, who had not the seal

5 of God upon their foreheads. (5) And it was given
them, that they should not kill them, but should
torment them five months : and their torment was
like the torment of a scorpion, when it striketh a

6 person. (6) And in those days, men will desire
death, and will not find it ; and they will long to

7 die, and death will fly from them. (7) And the
appearance of the locusts [was this] ; they were like
the appearance of horses prepared for battle ; and
on their heads, was, as it were a coronet, resembling
gold ; and their laces were like the faces of men.

8 (8) And they had hair, like the hair of women :

9 and their teeth were like those of lions. (9) And}
they had breastplates, like breastplates of iron:|
and the sound of their wings, was like the sound!
of the chariots of many horses rushing into battle. |

10 (10) And they had tails like those of scorpions, audi
stings; and with their tails they had tlic power i

11 of hurting men five months. (11) And they liatlj
a king over them, the angel of the abyss; and his I
name, in Hebrew, is Abaddon ;'' and in Greek, his I

12 name is Apolljon.'' (12) One woe is past; lo, Ug^., o V.n <^]

13 there come yet two woes after them. — (13) Andj
the sixth angel sounded; and I iu.'ard a voice from
the horns of the golden altar which was before God,

14 (14) that said to the sixth angel iiaving a trumpet:
Loose the four angels that arc bv)un(l at the great

15 river Euphrates. (15) And the four angels were
loosed; who arc prepared, for an hour, and a da}',
and a month, and a year, to slay the third part of

16 men. (1(5) And the number of the warrior horse-
men was two myriads of myriads : and I heard


Sy. Ofi


1L


454


APOCALYPSE, X.


or, is about to.


their number. (17) And while I looked on the 17
horses in the vision, and on them who sat on them,
[I saw] that the breastplates were of fire, and of
jacinth, and of sulphur. And the heads of the
horses were like the heads of lions ; and fi'ora their
mouths issued fire, and smoke, and sulphur, (IS) 18
And by these three plagues, a third part of the
men were slain ; [namely,] by the fire, and by the
smoke, and by the sulphur, which issued from their
mouths. (19) For the power of the horses was in 19
their mouth, and in their tails; for their tails were
like serpents, having heads to strike with. (20) 20
And the residue of men who were not slain by
these plagues, repented not of the works of their
hands, so as not to worship demons, and idols of
gold, and of silver, and brass, and stone, and wood,
which cannot see, nor hear. (21) And they re- 21
pented not of their murders, nor of their sorceries,
nor of their whoredom, nor of their thefts.


And I saw another mighty angel, that descended
from heaven, clothed with a cloud ; and a cloud-
bow was over his head, and his face was like the
sun, and his feet like pillars of fire. (2) And he
had in his hand an open little book : and he placed
his right foot upon the sea, and his left upon the
land : (3) and he cried with a loud voice, as a lion
roareth : and when he had cried, the seven thun-
ders uttered their voices. (4) And when the seven
thunders had spoken, I was about to write. And
I heard a voice from heaven, saying : Seal up the
things which the seven thunders have uttered, and
write them not. (5) And the angel whom I saw
standing upon the sea and the land, raised his
right hand to heaven, (6) and swore, by him who
liveth for ever and ever, who created heaven and
the things in it, and the earth and the things in it,
and the sea and the things in it, — that the time
should be no longer ; (7) but, in the days of the
voice of the seventh angel, when he^liall=^ sound,
and the mystery of God shall be consummated; as
he announced to his servants the prophets. —
(8) And the voice which I heard from heaven,
spoke to me again, and said: Go, take the little
open book in the hand of the angel that standeth
on the sea and on the land. (9) And I went to


X.


APOCALYPSE, XL


455


1


the unge], telling him to give inc the little book.
And he said to me, Take, and cat it: and it will
make thy bowels bitter, but in thy mouth it will

10 be sweet as honey. (10) And I took the little
book from the hand of the angpel, and ate it : and it
was in my mouth sweet like honey : and when I

11 had eaten it, my bowels were bitter. (11) And
he said to me, Thou must again j^roplicsy uponi^
many nations, and peoples, and princes, and kings.

XL — (XL) And a reed was given to me, like a rod;
and the angel stood, saying. Arise, and measure the
temple of God, and the altar,* and them that wor-

2 ship therein. (2) But the court which is without
the temple, leave out, and measure it not ; because
it is given to the Gentiles ; and they will tread down

3 the holy city forty and two months, (3) And I
will give my two witnesses; and they will })ropli-
esy a thousand and two hundred and sixt}' days,

4 clothed in sackcloth. (4) These are the two olive-
trees, and the two candlesticks which stand before

5 the Lord of the earth. (5) And if any person will
harm them, fire cometh out of their mouth, and
consumeth their adversary ; and if any one will

6 harm them, thus must he be slain. (6) They have
power to shut up heaven, so that the rain shall
not f dl in those da3's : and they have power over
the waters, to turn them into blood ; and to smite
the earth with all plagues, as often as they please.

7 (7) And when they shall have completed their tes-
timony, the beast of prey that came up from the
abyss, will make war upon them, and will over-

8 come them. (8) And their dead bodies [will be]
in the open street of that great cit\^, which is spirit-
ually called Sodom and Egypt, where also their

9 Lord was cruoified. (9) And [the}']'' of the nations
and tribes and peoples and tongues, will look upon
their dead bodies, three days and a half; and will
not sailer their dead bodies to be laid in the grave

10 (10) And they who dwell on the earth will rejoice
over them, and will be merry, and will send pres
ents to one another ; because those two })rophets

11 tormented them who dwell on the earth. (11) And
after these three days and a half, the spirit of life
from God entered into them, and they stood upon
their feet: and great fear fell on those who saw

12 them. (12) And they^ heard a great voice from


Sv.^


» i. e. th* inner
OGurt.


or, somr


Some copies:
/ heard.


456


APOCALYPSE, XII.


^ or, movement.


or, movernent.


Sv.


^^


heaven, whicli said to them : Come up hither.
And thej ascended to heaven in a cloud; and their
enemies saw them. (13) And in the same hour 18
there was a great earthquake, <^ and the tenth part
of the city fell : andithe persons killed in the earth-
quake, were seven thousand names : and they who
remained were afraid, and gave glory to God. —
(14;) The second woe is passed : behold, the third 14
woe cometh quickly.

And the seventh angel sounded ; and there were 15
voices and thunders, which said : The kingdom of
the world hath become [the kingdom] of our Lord
and of his Messiah ; and he will reign for ever and
ever. (16) And the twenty and four Elders, who 16
are before the throne of God, [and] who sit upon
their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped
God, (17) saying: We praise thee, O Lord God, 17
Omnipotent, who art, and wast ; because thou hast
assumed thy great power, and hast reigned. (18) 18
And the nations were angry ; and thy anger is
come, and the time of the dead, that they should be
judged : and that thou shouldst give a reward to
thy servants, the prophets, and the saints, and to
them that fear thy name, the small and the great ;
and that thou shouldst destroy them who destroyed
the earth.

And the temple of God in heaven was opened ; 19
and the ark of his covenant was seen in his temple:
and there were lightnings, and thunders, and voices,
and an earthquake," and great hail. — (XII.) And XII,
a great wonder was seen in heaven ; a woman
clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet,
and on her head a coronet of twelve stars. (2) And, 2
being with child, she cried, and travailed, and had
the pangs of bringing forth. (3) And there ap- 3
peared another wonder in heaven ; and lo, a great
fiery dragon, which had seven heads and ten horns,
and upon his head seven diadems.=i (4) And his 4
tail drew along the third part of the stars of heaven,
and cast them on the earth. And the dragon was
standing before the woman, who was about to bring
forth, so that, when she should bring forth, he
might devour her child. (5) And she brought 5
forth a male child, who was to rule all nations with
a rod of iron. And her child was caught up to God
and to his throne. (6) And the woman fled into 6


APOCALYPSE, XIII.


457


»■ Sy. ^^^iD


tlie wiltlerness, whore she had a place whicli was
prepai'cd for her by God ; so that they might
nourish Jber there a thousand and two hundred and

7 sixty days. — (7) And there was war in heaven:
Michael and his angels fought against the dragon;

8 and the dragon and his angels fought, (8) and
prevailed not; nor was their place found any more

0 in heaven. (9) And the great dragon was cast
out, the old serpent, who is called the Deceiver, and
Satan, who seduceth all the inhabited world: he
was cast upon the earth, and his angels were cast

10 out with him. (10) And I heard a great voice in
heaven, which said : Now is tliere deliverance, and
the ])ower and the kingdom of our God, and the
dominion of his Messiali : because the Accuser of
our brethren is cast out, who accused them day and

11 night before our God. (11) And they overcame
him, because** of the blood of the Lamb, and be-
cause of the word of their testimony : and they

12 loved not their life, even to death. (12) Therefore,
be jo3'fal, O heaven, and ye that dwell there. Woe
to the earth, and to the sea ; for the Deceiver hath
come down to you, being in great wrath since he

13 knoweth that his time is short. -^(13) And when
the dragon saAv that he was cast out upon the earth,
he persecuted the woman who brought forth tlie

14 male child. (14) And to the woman were given
the two wings of the great eagle, that she might fly
into the wilderness, to her place ; where she is
nourished a time"^ and times and half a time, from

15 the face of the serpent, (lo) And the serjient
ejected from his mouth waters like a river, after the
woman, that he might cause her to be carried away

16 by the flood. (10) And the earth helped the
woman : and the earth opened its mouth, and drank
up the flood which the ser])ent ejected iVom his

17 mouth. (17) And the dragon was enraged against
the woman ; and he went to make war upon the
residue of her seed, who keep the commandments

18 of God, and have the testimony of Jesus. (18) And
he stood on the sand of the sea.


XIIT. And I saw a beast of pre}'* come up from the sea, * Sy. of tooth.
having ten horns, and seven heads; and upon his
horns ten diadems, and upon his heads names of
2 blasphemy. (2) And the beast of prey which I


Sy-VJA


J^


I r


458


Sy. \^y


APOCALYPSE, XIII.


Sy. }L6L]


•i Sy. \^0J,

a spirit.


• Sy. "jiajBO?


6


saw, was like a leopard ; and his feet like [those]
of a wolf,'' and his mouth like the mouth of lions:
and the dragon gave to him his own power and his
throne, and great authority. (3) And one of his
heads was wounded as it were to death ; and his
deadly wound was healed. And all the earth
wondered after the beast of prey, (-i) And they
worshipped the dragon, bccaHsc he had given au-
thority to tins beast of j^rey ; and [tjiey said], who
can make war upon him? (5) And there was given
to him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphe-
mies : and authority was given him to operate forty
and two months. (6) And he opened his mouth
in blasphemy towards God, lo blaspheme his name,
and his tabernacle, and them Avho dwell in heaven.
(7) And authority was given him over every tribe
and people and tongue and nation : and it was
given him to wage war with the saints, and to
overcome them. (8) And all that dwell on the
earth, whose names are not written in the book of
life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world, will worship him. (9) If any one hath ears,
let him hear. (10) If [any one] carrieth into cap-
tivity, he shall Ifimself go into captivity; and if
any one slayeth with the sword, he must be slain
with the sword : here is the patience and the faith
of the saints. — (11) And I saw another beast of
prey, which came out of the earth ; and he had
two horns like those of a lamb, and he spoke like
the dragon. (12) And before him he exercised all
the authority of the first beast of prey, whose
deadly wound was healed. (13) And he wrought 13
great signs, <= even so as to make fire come down
from heaven upon the earth, before men. (14)
And he seduced them that dwell on the earth, to
erect an image to the beast of prey who had the
wound from a sword and recovered. (15) And it
was given him to put life'i into the image of the
beast of prey; and to cause that all they who
would not worship the image of the beast of prey,
should be slain : (16) and to cause that all, great
and small, rich and poor, bond and free, should re-
ceive a markc on their right hands, or upon their
foreheads; (17) so that no one might be able to
buy or to sell, except those who had the mark of
the name of the beast of prey, or the number of his


9
10


11


12


14


15


16


17


APOCALYPSE, XIV.


459


"^Z


18 name. (18) Here is wisdom : let him that hath in-
telligence/ compute the number of the beast of
prey ; for it is the iiumber of a man : and its num-
ber is six hundred and sixty and six,

XIV. And I looked, and behold, a Jjamb stood on
mount Zion ; and with Iiini tlie number of a hun-
dred and forty and four thousand, having his name
and the name of his Father written upon their

2 Ibreheads. (2) And I heard a sound from heaven,
as the sound of many waters, and as the sound of
great thunder; and the sound which I heard, was

3 like that of harpers striking on their harps, (3)
And they sang a new song before the throne, and
before the four Animals and the Elders: and
no one was able to learn that song, except the
hundred and forty and four thousand who were

•i ixdccmed from the earth. (^) These are they who
liave not defiled themselves with women, for they
are virgins. These are they who followed the
Lamb, wliitiicrsoever he went. The;i;e have been
redeemed b}'' Jesus from among men, the first fruits

5 to God and the Lamb, (5) And in their mouth
was found, no falsehood ; for they are without faults.

6 — (Gj And I saw another angel flying in heaven :
and with blood, he had the everlasting gospel, to
proclaim to dwellci's on the earth, and to every

7 nation and tribe and tongue and people ; (7) saj'ing
with a loud voice, Worshij) God, and give glory
to him ; because the hour of his judgment is come ;
and adore j'c II im, who made heaven and earth,

8 and the sea, and the fountains of water. (8) And
another, a second angel followed him, saying:
Fallen, fallen is Babylon^ the great, which made
all nations drink of the wine of tlie rage of her

9 whoredom. (9) And another, a third angel follow-
ed them, saying with a loud voice: If any man
shall worship the beast of prey and its image, and
shall receive its mark upon his forehead or on his

10 hand, (10) he also shall drink of the wine of the
wni'oh of God, which is poured undiluted'' into the
cup of his in<lignation, and shall he tormented with
lire and suljihur, belbre tlie holy angels, and be-
fore the throne. (11) And the smoke of their tor-

11 mcnt ascendeth up fur ever and ever; and there is
no rest, by day or by night, to those that worship


Sy. "JJOOI


Sy V\o^


Sy.

Gr. oxparov.


460


APOCALYPSE, XV.


or, vintage-
knife.


Sv-Ul


Sy. Ikili.,

worlds, or
acres.


i. e. the hohj
of holies.


the beast of prey and its image, (12) Here is the
patience of the saints, who keep the commandments
of God, and the faith of Jesus. (13) And I heard
a voice from heaven, saying: Write, Blessed are
the dead tliat die in the Lord, henceforth : yes, saith
the Spirit, that they may rest from their toils ; for
their deeds do accompany them. — (14) And I
looked, and lo, a white clbud; and upon the
cloud sat one who was like the Son of man ; and
on his head was a crown of gold, and in his hand a
sharp sickle. (15) And another angel came out of
the temj)le, crying with a loud voice, to him that
sat on the cloud. (16) And he thrust his sickle
over the earth ; and the earth was reaped. (17)
And another angel came out of the temple that is
in heaven, having also a sharp sickle. <= (18) And
another angel came out from the altar, having au-
thority over fire. An^ he cried with a loud voice,
to him who had the sharp sickle, saying : Thrust
in thy sickle which is sharp, and gather the clusters
of the vineyard of the eartli, because the grapes of
the eartli are ripe. (19) And the angel thrust in
his sickle on the earth, and gathered the vintage of
the earth, and cast [it] into the wine-press of the
wrath of the great God. (20) And the wine-press
was trodden, up to the horses' bridles, for a thou-
sand and six hundred furlono;s.


12
13


14


15

16

17

18


19


20


And I saw another prodigy^ in heaven, great XV.
and wonderful ; seven angels, having seven plagues,
the last in order, because with them the wrath of
God is consummated. (2) And I saw as it were, a 2
sea of glass mixed with lire : and they, who had
been victorious over the beast of prey, and over its
image, and over the number of its name, were
standing on the sea of glass; and they had the
harps of God. (3) And they sing the song of Moses 3
the servant of God, and ithe song of the Lamb,
saying: Great and marvellous are thy deeds. Lord
God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, 0
King of worlds. b (4) Who shall not fear thee, O 4
Lord, and glorify thy name? Because thou only
art holy and just: Because all nations shall come
and worship before thee, since thy righteousnesses
have been revealed. — (5) And after this I beheld, 5
and the temple'' of the tabernacle of the testimony in


6 heaven, Avas opened. (6) And the seven angels who
had the .seven phigues, went forth from the temple,
clothed in clean splendid linen, and girded about

7 their breast with girdles of gold. (7) And one of
the four Animals gave to those seven angels seven
cups'i of gold, full of the wrath of God who liveth

8 for ever and ever. (8) And the temple was filled
with smoke, from the glory of God and from his
]iower ; and no one was able to enter the temple,
until the ^icvon plagues of the seven angels were
accomplished.

XVI. And I heard a voice, which said to the seven
angels : Go forth, and pour those seven cups of the

2 wrath of God upon the earth. — (2) And the first
went, and poured his cup upon the earth ; and there
was a malignant and painful ulcer upon those men
who had the mark of the beast of prey, and who

3 worshipped its image. — (3) And the second angel
jwured his cup upon the sea ; and it became blood,
hke that of a dead person; and every living soul

4 of things in the sea, died. — (4) And the third angel
poured his cup upon the rivers and the fountains

6 of water ; and they became blood. (5) And I
heard the angel of the Avaters say : Eighteous art
thou, who art and who wast, andartlujly ; because

6 thou hast done this judgment. ((3) For they have
shed the blood of saints and pro})hets; and thou
hast given them blood to drink, for they deserve it.

7 (7) And I heard [one frornj the altar^ say: Yes,
Lord God Almighty : true and righteous is thy

8 judgment. (8) And the fourth poured his cup
upon the sun: and it was permitted him, i^ to scorch

9 men with fire. (0) And men were scorched with
great heat; and men blasphemed the name of God,
who hath authority over these plagues; and they

10 repented not, to give glory to him. — (10) And the
filth poured his cup on the throne of the beast of
prey; and his kingdom became darkness; and they

11 gnawed their tongues, from pain ; (11) and they
bhusphemed the God of heaven, on account of their
pains and their ulcers, and did not repent of their

12 deeds. — (12) And the sixth poured his cup upon
the great river Euphrates ;<= and its waters dried up,
so that a way might be prepared for the kings

13 from the rising of the sun. (13) And I saw [issu-


or, it.


sy.:^


462


APOCALYPSE, XVII.


•> Sy. lZoi.1


Sy.


^-031


• Sy. JCQD


ing] from the moutli of the dragon, and from the
mouth of the beast of prey, and from the mouth of
the false prophet, three unclean spirits like frogs :
(14) (for they are the spirits of demons, who work 14
prodigies ;d)'' and they go forth to all the kings of
all the hai3itable world, to gather them to the battle
of the great day of God Alnjighty, (15) (And lo, 15
I come as a thief Blessed is he that watcheth,
and keepeth his garments ; lest he walk naked, and
they see his shame.) (16) And they collected them 16
together in a place called, in Hebrew, Armaged-
don.<= — -(17) And the seventh poured his cup on 17
the air ; and there issued a loud voice from the
temple, from the throne, which said : It is done !
(18) And there were lightnings, and thunders, and 18
voices; and there was a great earthquake, the like
of which there was never, since men were on the
earth, such an earthquake, and so great. (19) And 19
the great city became three parts. And the cit}^
of the nations fell ; and Babylon the great was
remembered before God, to give her the cup of
the wine of the heat of his wrath. (20) And 20
every island fled away ; and the mountains were
not found. (21) And a great hail, as it were 21
of a talent weight, fell from heaven upon men :
and the men blasphemed God, on account of the
plague of hail ; for the plague of it was verj^ great.

Then came one of the seven angels who have XVII.
the seven cups, and talked with me, saying : Come,
I will show thee the judgment of the great harlot,
who sittcth upon many waters ; (2) with whom the 2
kings of the earth have practised whoredom, and
the inhabitants of the earth have been inebriated
with the wine of her whoredom. (8) And he led 3
me in spirit into the wilderness : and I saw a wom-
an sitting on a red beast of prey, v.diich was full
of names of blasphemy, and had seven heads and
ten horns. (4) And the woman was clothed in 4
purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, and pre-
cious stones, and pearls ; and she had a cap^ of gohl
in her hand, which was full of the pollutions and
impurit}'- of her whoredoms of the earth. (5) And 5
upon her forehead was the name written : Mys-
tery: Babylon the great; the Mother of Harlots,
and of the contaminations of the Earth. (6) And G


APOCALYPSE, XVIII.


4n3


I saw that the woman was intr)xicated with the
blood of the saints, and with the blood of the wit-
nesses i^ of Jesus. And Avhcn I saw her, I wondered

7 with great amazement, — (7) And tlic Angel said
to me, Why dost thou wonder? I will tell thee the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast of prey
that beareth her, wiiich hath the seven heads and

8 the ten horns. (8) The beast of prey which thou
sawest, was, and is not; and he will ascend from
the abyss and go into })erdition : and the dwellers
on the earth, whose names are'^ not written in the
book of life from the foundation of the world, will
wonder when they sec the beast of prey, which

9 was, and is not, and approachcth. (9) Here is in-
telligence, for him who hath wisdom. Those seven
heads are the seven mountains,'^ on which the

10 woman sitteth. (10) And there are seven kings :
of whom five have fallen, one exists, and the other
hath not yet come; and when he cometh lie must

11 continue for a short time. (11) And the beast of
prey, which was and is not, is the eighth, and is

12 from the seven, and is for perdition. (12) And the
ten horns which thou sawest, are ten kings. These
persons have not yet received royalty ; but they
receive authority, as if kings, with the beasts of

13 prey, for one hour. (13) They have one mind ;c
and they will give their power and authority unto

14 the beast of prey. (11) They will make war upon
the Lamb ; and the Lamb will vanquish them ;
because he is Lord of lords, and King of kings, and
those with him [are] called and chosen and faithful.

15 (15) And he said to me : The waters which thou
sawest, where the harlot sitteth, are peoples, and

IG multitude.^, and nations, and tongues. (16) And
the ten horns v\'hieh thou sawest, and the beast of
prey, will hate the harlot; and they will make her
desolate and naked, and will eat her flesh, and

17 burn her with fire. (17) For God hath put into
their heart.'^, to do his pleasure,*" and to execute one
purpose, and to give their kingdom to the beast of
prey, until these words of God shall be fulfilled.

18 (18) And th(! woman whom thou sawest, is the
great city,? which hath dominion over the kings of
the earth.

XVTII. After these things, I saw another angel come


or, martyrs.


Sv. name is.


' SyJfQ_l


eSy,
or,


h-^r.,


will.


Sv,


K Sv


464


APOCALYPSE, XVIII.


Sy. 1l5a4j


'' Sy. adhered to.


Sy. duplicate
to her double.


down from lieaven ; and he had great authority,
and the earth was illumined by his glory. (2) And 2
he cried with a strong voice, saying: Fallen, fallen,
is Babylon the great : and hath become a cavern
of demons, and the homc^ of every unclean spirit,
and the home of every unclean and hateful bird,
and the home of every unclean and hateful beast
of prey. (3) For all the nations have drunken of 3
the wine of her wrath ; and the kings of the earth
have practised whoredom with her ; and the mer-
chants of the earth have been enriched by the
abundance of her luxuries. — (4) And I heard 4
another voice from heaven, saying: Come ye out
of her, my people ; that ye may not participate in
her sins, and may not partake of her plagues.
(5) For her sins have reached^ up to heaven ; and 5
God hath remembered her iniquities. (6) Recom- 6
pense ye to her, as she also hath recompensed ; and
render to her double, <= according to her deeds; in
the cup which she hath mixed, mix ye to her two-
fold. (7) As much as she pleased herself with 7
lasciviousness, so much of anguish and sorrow give
ye to her. Because she saith in her heart, I sit a
queen, and am no widow, and I shall see no sor-
row; (8) therefore, in one day, shall these her 8
plagues come, death, and mourning, and famine ;
and she shall be burned with fire : for strong is the
Lord God who judgeth her. — (9) And the kings 9
of the earth who committed whoredom and were
lascivious with her, shall weep, and mourn, and be-
wail her, when they shall see the smoke of her
burning, (10) standing afar off, from fear of her 10
torment, [and] saying, Alas, alas ! that great city
Babylon, that powerful city ; for in one hour is thy
judgment come! (11) And the merchants of the 11
earth will mourn over her, because no one pur-
chascth their cargo ; (12) no more, the cargo of 12
gold, and silver, and precious stones, and pearls,
and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet,
and every aromatic wood, and all vessels of ivory,
and all vessels of very precious wood, and of
brass, and of iron, and of marble, (13) and cinna- 13
mon, and amomum, and aromatics, and unguents,
and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour,
and wheat, and beasts of burden, and sheep, and
horses, and chariots, and the bodies and souls of


14 men. (14) And the fruits wliicli thy soul desired,
have departed from thee ; and all things delicious
and splendid have perished from thee ; and the

15 traders in them shall obtain them no more. (15)
And tliey who were enriched from her, will stand
afiir oil', for fear of her torment ; and will weep and

16 mourn, (16) saying: Alas, alas! that great city,
which was clothed in line linen, and purple, and
scarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious stones,
and pearls ; because, in one hour, such riches

17 are laid waste. (17) And every pilot, and every
navigator to the place, and the sailors, and all who

18 do business by sea, stood atar ofi', (18) and cried,
when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying:

19 What [other] is like this great city! "(19) And
they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping,
and mourning, and saying : Alas, alas ! that great
city, in which all that have ships in the sea became
rich, by her preciousness ; for in one hour she hath

20 become desolate. — (20) Kejoice over her, O heaven,
and ye Angels, and Legates, and Prophets ; because

21 God judgeth your cause'^ with her. — (21) And an
angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and
cast it into the sea, saying : So shall Babylon, the
great city, be thrown down with violence, and shall

22 no more be found : (22) and the voice of harpers
and musicians and i)ipers and trumpeters, shall no
more be heard in thee ; and no artificer of any

23 trade, shall be found any more in thee. (23) And
the light of a candle, shall not be seen in thee ;
and the voice of a bridegroom and bride, shall no
more be heard in thee : for thy merchants were the
great men of the earth, because all nations were

24 seduced by thy sorceries. (24) And in her was
found the blood of prophets and saints, and of all
those that have been slain on the earth.


I heard a loud voice of
saying : llallolujah :=^


XIX. And after these things,
a great multitude in heaven
Deliverance, and strength, and glory, and honor,

2 unto our God : (2) for, true and righteous are his
judgments; for he hath judged that great harlot,
who corrupted the earth with her whoredom ; and
hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.

3 (3) And again they said: Hallelujah: and her

4 smoke ascendeth up for over and ever. (4) And


Sy. judgment.


Sy. I^ol^cn


'i6Q


APOCALYPSE, XIX.


Sy. \h}]


« Sy. lAlSo


tlie twenty-four Elders fell down, and the four

Animals, and worshipped God who sitteth on the
throne, saying : Amen : nallelujah ! (5) And a 5
voice came forth from the throne, saying : Praise
our God, all ye his servants ; and such as fear him,
small and great. (6) And I heard, as it were the 6
voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of heavy thunders, saying :
Hallelujah ; for our Lord God, Omnipotent, reign-
eth. (7) Let us rejoice and exult, and give glory 7
to him : for the marriage supper of the Lamb hath
come, and his bride hath made herself ready.
(8) And it was granted her to be clothed in fine 8
linen, bright and clean : for fine linen is the righ-
teousnesses^ of the saints. — (9) And he said to me, "9
Write ; Blessed are they who are called to the sup-
per of the marriage feast of the Lamb. And he
said to me. These my [sayings] are the true words
of God. (10) And I fell at his feet, to worship 10
him. And he said to me. See, [thou do it] not ;
I am thy fellow-servant, and of those thy brethren
who have the testimony of Jesus. AVorship ye*
God : for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophecy.

And I saw heaven opened : and lo, a white 11
horse ; and he that sat on it, is called Faithful and
True : and in righteousness he judgeth, and maketh
war. (12) His eyes [were] like a flame of fire, and 12
on his head [were] many diadems; and he had
names inscribed ; and the name which was written
on him, no one knew, except himself. (13) And 13
he was clothed with a vesture sprinkled with
blood; and his name is called. The Word of God."
(1-1) And the soldiery of heaven followed him, on 14
white horses, clad in garments of fine linen, pure
[and] white. (15) And from his mouth issued a 15
sharp two-edged sword, that with it he could smite
the nations ; and he will rule the nations with a
rod of iron ; and he will tread the wine-press of the
wrath of God Almighty. (16) And he hath upon 16
his vesture and upon his thigh the words written :
King of kings, and Lord of lords.— (17) And I saw 17
an angel standing in the sun ; and he cried with a
loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the
midst of heaven : Come ye, assemble unta this
great supper of God ; (18) that ye may eat the 18


f^^


APOCALYPSE, XX.


467


flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains of thou-
sands, and the flesh of valiant men, and the flesh
of horses and of those who sit on them, and the
flesh of all the free-born and of slaves, and of the

19 small and the great. — (19) And I saw the beast of
])rev', and the kings of the earth, and their warriors,
that they assembled to wage battle with him who
sat on the [white] horse, and with his warriors.

20 (20) And the beast of prey was captured, and the
false prophet that was with him, who did those
prodigies before him, whereby he seduced them
who liad received the mark of the beast of prey
and who worshipped his imago. And they were
both cast alive into the lake'' of fire, which burnetii

21 with sulphur. (21) And the rest were slain by
the sword of him that sat on the horse, by that
[swordj which issueth from his mouth : and all

XX. the fowls were satiated with their flesh. — (XX.) And
1 saw an angel that descended from heaven, having
the key of the abyss, and a great chain in his hand.

2 (2) And he sei/ied the dragon, the old serpent, who
is the Deceiver^ and Satan, who seduced the whole
habitable world : and he bound him a thousand

o years, (u) And he cast him into the abyss, and
closed and sealed upon him ; so that he might de-
ceive the nations no more, until these thousand
years shall be completed : but after that, he will be

4 loosed for a little time. (4) And I saw thrones,
and [persons] sat on them, and judgment was given
to them, and to the souls that were beheaded for
the testimon}^ of Jesus and lor the word of God:
and these are they who had not worshipped the
beast of prey, nor its image, neither had they re-
ceived the mark upon their forehead or on their
hand; and they lived and reigned with their Mes-

5 siah those thousand years. (5) This is the flrst

6 resurrection.'' (6) Bles.sed and uoly is he that hath
part in this flrst resurrection : over them the second
death hath m^ dominion ; but they shall be, — [nay]
are, priests of God and of his Messiah ; and they

7 will reign with him the thousand years. — (7) And
when these thousand years siiall be comi)leted,

8 Satan will be released from his prison ; {6) and
will go forth to seduce the nations that are in the
four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog ; and to
a.s8emble them for battle, whost; number is as the


"jjQjjlAla*


Ry.

p tV>iV>


Sy. lAlQ


aJD


468


APOCALYPSE, XXI.


Sy.


Sy .^^


Q_a_»


Sy. Olaph
and Tau.


sand of the sea. (9) And they went up on the 9
breadth of the earth, and encompassed the camp of
the saints, and the beloved city. And fire came
down from God out of heaven, and consumed them.
(10) And the Accuser^ who seduced them, was cast 10
into the lake of fire and sulphur, where also were
the beast of prey and the false prophet : and they
shall be tormented, day and night, for ever and ever.

And I saw a great white throne, and Him who 11
sitteth thereon ; from whose presence the eartli and
heaven fled away, and this their place was not
found. (12) And I saw the dead, great and small, 12
standing before the throne; and the books were
opened ; and another book was opened, which is
[the book] of life. And the dead were judged
from the things written in the books, according to
their deeds. (13) And the sea gave up the dead 13
in it ; and death and the grave*^ gave up the dead
in them. And they were judged, each one accord-
ing to his deeds. (11) And death and the grave 14
were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second
death, [namely,] this lake of fire. (15) And if any 15
one was not found enrolled in the book of life, he
was cast into this lake of fire.

And I saw new heavens, and a new earth : for XXI.
the former heaven and the former earth had passed
away : and the sea was no more. (2) And I saw 2
the holy city, the New Jerusalem, descending from
God out of heaven, prepared like a bride adorned
for her husband. (3) And I heard a great voice 3
from heaven, which said: Behold, the tabernacle
of God is with men ; and he dwell eth with them :
they will be his people; and God will be with
them, a God to them. (4) And every tear will be 4
wiped from their eyes; and there will no more be
death, nor mourning, nor wailing ; nor shall pain
be any more ; because the former things are passed
away. (5) And He who sat on the throne, said : 5
Behold, I make all things new. And he said-
Write; because these are the faithful and true
words of God. (6) And he said to me: I am 6
Alpha and Omega, ^ the Beginning and the Com-
pletion : to him who thirsteth, will I give of the
fountain of living water, gratis. (7) He that over- 7
Cometh, shall inherit these things ; and 1 will be his


APOCALYPSE, XXL


469


8 God, and he shall be my son. (8) But to the timid,
and tlie unbelieving, and to the sinful, and polluted,
and to manslayers, and whoremongers, and sorcer-
ers, and idolaters, and to all false pcrsiHis, their
portion shall be in the lake that burnetii with fire

9 and sulphur, which is the second death, — (9) And
there came one of those seven angels, who have the
seven cups tilled with the seven last plagues, and
talked with me, saying : Come, I will show thee

10 the bi'ide, the wife of the Lamb. (10) And he bore
nie away in the spirit, to a mountain great and
high, and he showed me the holy city, Jerusalem,

11 descending out of heaven from God ; (11) in which
was the glory of God, as a brilliant light, and re-
sembling a very precious gem ; like a jasper stone,

12 resembling crystal. (12) And it had a wall great
and lofty, which had twelve gates, and names in-
scribed on them, which arc the names of the twelve

13 tribes of the chihlren of Israel. (18) On the east,
three gates; on the north, three gates; [on the
south, three gates; and on the west, three gates].

14 (14) And the wall of the city had twelve founda-
tions, and upon them the twelve names of the

15 twelve legates of the Lamb. (15) And he that
talked with me, had a measure, a golden reed ; so
that he could measure the city, and its gates, and

IG its wall. (16) xind the city stood up four square;
and its length was the same as its breadth. And
he measured the city with the reed, to twelve fur
longs of twelve thousand ;'J and the length and the
breadth and the height of it were [all] equal

17 (17) And he measured fts wall, a hundred and forty
and four measures of the cubits of a man, that is,

18 of the angel. (18) And the structure of its wall
[was of] jasper; and the city was of pure gold,

19 like pure glass. (19) And the foundations of the
wall of tiie city were adorned with every precious
stone. The iirst foundation, a jasper ; the second,
a sapphire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth, an

20 emerald; (20) the fifth, a sardonyx; the sixth, a
sardius; the seventh, a chrysolite; the eighth, a
beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a chryso-
prasus ; the eleventh, a jacinth ; the twelfth, an

21 amethyst. (21) And the twelve gates [were] twelve
])carls; each [pearl] one gate, and each [gate] one
pearl : and the broad street of the city was pure


'■ Gr. to 12,000
furlongs.


470


APOCALYPSE, XXII.


Sy.


Sy. ]5Aj


gold, like brilliant glass. (22) And I saw no tern- 22
pie in it ; for the Lord Almighty is its temple, and
the Lamb. (23) And the city hath no need of the 23
sun or of the moon, to enlighten it ; for the glory
of God enlighteneth it, and the Lamb is the lamps
of it. (24) And the nations that were saved, (^ 24
shall walk by means of its light, and the kings of
the earth will bring their glory and the wealth of
the nations into it. (25) And its gates shall not be 25
shut by day ; for there is no night there. (26) And 26
they will bring the glory and honor of the nations
into it. (27) And there shall not enter it, any 27
thing polluted, or that practiseth impurity and
falsehood ; but they who are registered in the
Lamb's book of life. (XXIL) And he showed XXIL
me a river of living water, transparent [as] crystal,
wliich proceeded from the throne of God and the
Lamb. (2) And in the middle of its broad avenue, 2
and near the river, on this side and on that, [was]
the tree of life ; which bore twelve [sorts of] fruits,
yielding one of its fruits each month : and the
leaves of the tree [were] for the healing of the na-
tions. (8) And there will be no blight=^ any more : 3
and the throne of God and the Lamb will be in it ;
and his servants will minister to him. (4) And 4
they will see his face, and his name [will be] on
their foreheads. (5) And there will be no more 5
night ; and they have no need of the light of a
candle, or of the light of the sun ; because the Lord
God giveth them light : and they will reign for
ever and ever.

And he said to me : These words [are] faithful 6
and true. And the Lord God of tlie spirit of the
prophets, hath sent me, his angel, to show unto liis
servants the things that must soon occur. (7) And, 7
lo, I come quickly : Blessed is he that keepeth the
words of the prophecy of this book. — (8) And more- 8
over I am John, the hearer and the seer of these
things. And when I heard and saw, I fell down to
worship at the feet of the angel who showed me
these things. (9) And he said to me : See, [thou i>
do it] not: I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy
brethren the prophets, and of them that observe the
words of this book. Worship God. (10) And he 10
said to me : Seal not the words of the prophecy of
this book ; for the time is near. (11) He that doth 11


APOCALYPSE, XXII.


471


evil, let him do evil still ; and lie that is filthy, let
him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, lot him
practise righteousness still ; and he that is sanctified,

12 let him be sanctified still. — (12) Behold, I come
quickly ; and my reward is with me, to recompense

13 every one according to his work. (13) I am Alpha
and Omega,'' the First and the Last, the Com-

1-i mencement and the Comj)letion. — (14) Blessed are
they who do his commandments, that they may
have a right<^ to the tree of life, and may enter

15 tlirough the gates into the city. (15) Without
[will be] dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers,
and manslayers, and idolaters, and every one that

16 loveth and doeth falsehood. — (10) I Jesus have
sent my angel, to testify to 3'ou these things before
the churches. I am the root and ofi'spring of Da-
vid : like the splendid star of the morning. —

17 (17) And the S})irit and the bride say, Come thou.
And let hun that heareth, say. Come thou. And
let him who thirsteth, come ; and he that is inclined,
let him take the living water gratis.

18 I testify to every one that heareth the words
of the prophecy of this book, that if any one shall
add to them, God will add to him the plagues that

19 are written in this book. (19) And if any one
shall take away from the words of the book of this
pro})hecy, God will take away his portion from the
tree of life, and from the holy city, which are de-

20 scribed in this book. — (20) lie who tcstifieth these
things, saith : Yes, I come quickly. — Amen. Come,
Lore I Jesus I

21 The grace of our Lord Jesus the Messiah, [be]
with all the saints. Amen.

End of the Reielalion of John the Evangelist ; and ff the
whok New Texlam3nt, as translated into the language (f the
Syrians.*


Sy. Olaph
and Tau.

Sy.


Sy.^iLuVaCD


(Clarij k to §A


APPENDIX I.


DISTRIBUTION OF THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT INTO LESSONS

AS READ IN TUE PUBLIC WORSHIP.


The manuscripts of the Syriac New Testament are strangers to the
modern division of the Books into Chapters and Verses : instead of which,
they divide the several Books (except the Apocalypse) into reading Les-
sons^ ]j_.^, which are of different lengths, but will average about fifteen
of our verses.

The printed Syriac New Testaments exhibit our division into Chapters
and Verses, marked commonly in the side margin. The text of the
London editions of 181G and 1820 (which were intended for circulation in
the East) is divided (except the Apocalypse) into paragraphs correspond-
ing with the reading Lessons in the common manuscripts. These Lessons
are separately numbered in each Book, and the occasions are stated on
which they are to be read. — This distribution into reading Lessons, its
correspondence with the division into Chapters and Verses, and the
occasions to which the Lessons are appropriated, are contained in the
following Table : —

Lessons for Pcblic Worship.

The occasions which arc starred [ * ] are omitted in the edition of 1826.


Lessons.


I.

II.
III.

IV,

V.
VI.

VII.

vni.


Matthiw.
Chap, and Ver.

i.

1-17.

18-25.

ii.

1-12.

13-18.

19-23.

iii.

1-17.

iv.

1-11.

12-26.

OCX^ASIONS.


Sunday before Christmaa ({,N. ■■)

The Revelation to Joseph.

Vespers of Christmaa (],\ .^ ] » V>i).

M.itins (|iJ2)» ) of Slaughter of the Infants.

Oblation (jlDJCLD) at Slau<rhtor of the Infants,

Fe.a.st of Epiphany (|>,»J)5 l'|^)-
j Sunday, commencement of I-ent (|lDOt ) : ^n^i Obla-
\ tion of the Forty.

Sunday after Epipliany (]j.^j).


474


APPENDIX I.


Lessons for Public Worship — Continued.


Lessons.


IX.

X.

XL

XII.

XIII.

XIV.

XV.

XVI.

XVII.

XVIII.

XIX.

XX.

XXI.

XXII.

XXIII.

XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.

XXVIII.

XXIX.

XXX.

XXXI.

XXXII.

XXXIII.

XXXIV.

XXXV.

XXXVI.

XXXVII.

XXXVIII.

XXXIX.
XL.

XLI.

XLII.

XLIII.

XLIV.

XLV.

XLVI.

XLVII.

XLVIII.

XLIX.

1..

LI.

LIL


MA.TTHEW.

Chap, and Ver.


OCCASIONS.


V.

vi.

vii.

viii.

viii.
i.x.
ix.

ix.

X.
X.


XI

xil
xii


1
20

1
16
25

1
13-

1
14
23

8,

9-
18-
27-
36-
15.
16-
34-

1-
16-

5-


-20
-48
-15
-24
-34
-12
-29
-13
-22
- }

f
17.
26.
35.
• }

f
33.
42.
•15.


( XI. 2o- I
\ xii. 8. \


< xiii.

{ xiv.

xiv.

XV.


\ XV. 32- )
\ xvi. 12. \


XV

xvi
xvi


( xvu.
xvii.


Tiie Apostles and Patmrchs.
Matins, Tuesday, 1st Week in Lent.
3Iatins, Wednesday, 1st Week in Lent.
Monday of 2d Week imLent.
Tuesday, 1st Week in Lent.
Tuesday of 2d Week in Lent.
Matins on Friday, 1st Week in Lent.
Lesson for Vespers, 2d Sunday in Lent.
Lesson, Oblation, 1st Saturday in Lent.

Vespers, 3d Sunday in Lent.

Thursday of Week in Albis (Wiiitsun-week).
*Cominemoration of the Dead.
Frid.ay of otli Week in Lent.

Commemoralion of the holy Apostles.

*Commemoration of tlie holy Martyrs.
*Lesson for the Dead.

Oblation, Decapitation of John.

Monday of 3d Week in Lent.

Vespers, 2d Sunday after Epiphany.

Saturday of 3d Week in Lent.

Vespers, the Sunday commencino; Lent.
*Vespers, Commemoration of the Mother of God.

Wednesday, 2d Week in Lent.
*Oblation, Sunday of Priests.

Vespers, Decapitation of John.

Oblation on any day.

Vespers, 2d Sunday after the Resurrection.

Sunday after Pentecost.

Vespers, 4th Sunday in Lent.

Oblation on any day.

Commemoration of the holy Apostles.
2d Sunday after Pentecost.

* Vespers, Feast of the Slaughtered.

Monday, 3d Week in Lent.

Tuesday, 3d Week in Lent,

3d Sinulay after Pentecost.

4th Sundiv after Pentecost.

Friday, 2(1" Week in Lent.
*Maliiis, Sunday after Feast of the Cross.
^Commemoration of F. Anthony and his Brethren,

Matins, Feast of Peter the Apostle.

Lesson for Paul the Apostle.

5th Sunday after Pentecost.

Oblation, ,5th Sunday in Lent.


APPENDIX r.


475


Lessons foh Pudlic Woiisiiip — CoiUinucd.


MATTHEW.


Lessons. Chap, and Ver.


LIII.

LIV.

LV.

LVI.

LVU.

LVIII.

LIX

LX

LXI.

LXll.

LXIII.

LXIV.

LXV.

LXVI.
LXVII.

LXVIII.


( xxii.

^xxiii,

xxiii.

xxiv.


1-16.
17-27.
28-4(1.

1-14.
15-22.
23-33.
34- )
12. \
13-28.
29-39.

1-35
36-4 I.
45-51.

1-13


OCCASIONS.


Vespers, Sunday of Ho.sann.is (Palm Sunday.)
Lesson for Tinirsday, 4tli Week in Lent.
2d Station, 2d NijrliL in Passion Week.
1st Service, 2d Night in Passion Week.
Vespers, Tuesday in I'assion Week.
*Le8son for the Dead.

Matins, Tuesday in Passion Week.

1st Station, 3d Night in Pas.sion Week.

2d Serviee, 3d Niglit in Passion Week; and, of Stephen.
*Vesper.s on P'east of the Cross.
*Lesson for tlie Dead.
*01)lalion, Sunday of Priests.

3d Station, 2d Nigiit in Passion Week:
*Also, Commemoration of the iioly Women.
14-30. *Sunday of the Priests.
31-46. Conunenioration of the Just and Righteous:

Also, Friday in Albis, (Whitsiin Week.)
x.wi. 1-16. Thursday of the 3Iysteries, (\\\h,) Holy Thursday.
*Also, Conseeration of the Chrism, same day.

Thursday in Week of My.steries, (Passion Week.)

Night of Preparation for the Crueifixion,

Matins, Preparation for the Crucitixion.

Lesson for the 3d Hour, (on D;iy of Crucifixion.)

Le.sson for the 6th Hour, (Noon', Day of Crucifixion.)

Lesson for the 9th Hour, (Day of the Crucilixioii.)

Vespers, S.aturday of Annunciation.

Matins, Saturday of Annunciation.

Vespers, Sunday of the Resurrection.


Lesson, Feast of Epiphany.

Vespers, Sunday after Epipiianv.

Matins, 2d Sunday in Lent.

Oblation, 3d Sunday in Lent.

Matins, 3d Sunday after the Resurrection.

Fourth Saturday in Lent.

6th Sunday after Pentecost.

*Matins, Commemoration of Jlary, Mother of God.

Saturday in Alliis, (Whitsun Week.)
Thursday, 5th Week in Lent.
Matins, Thursday, 5th Week in Lent.
♦Lesson, the .Martyrs, and the Dead.
Oblation, 6ih Sunday after Epipiiany.
7tli Sunday after Epiphany.
Matin.s, Decapitation of John Baptist
Oblation, any Day.
Lesson, for any Day, in general.


LXLX.

17-30

LXX.

31-75

LXXL

xxvii

. 1-25.

Lxxn.

26-37.

LXXIII.

38-44.

L.XXIV.

45-56.

LXXV.

67-61.

LXXVI.

62-66.

LXXVII.

M

xxviii
ARK.

. 1-20.

I.

i

1-13.

II.

n-34.

III.

35-45.

IV.

ii

1-13.

V.

14-22.

VI.

11
■ iii

23- )
12.

VII.

1.3-30.

VIII.

iv

31- )
23. \

IX.

24-34.

X.

35-41.

XI.

V.

1-20.

XII.

21-43.

XIII.

vi.

1- 6.

XIV.

7-13.

XV.

14-29.

XVI.

30-46.

XVIIJ

47-56.

M


476


APPENDIX I.


Lessons for Public Worship — Continued.


MARK.


Lessons.

Chap.

and Ver.

XVIII.

vii

1-23.

XIX.

24-37.

XX.

viii.

1-10.

XXI.

11-33.

XXII.

34-38.

XXIII.

l.X

1-13.

XXIV.

14-32.

XXV.

33-50.

XXVI.

.\

1-16.

XXVII.

17-27.

XXVIII.

28-34.

XXIX.

35-52.

XXX.

XI.

1-18.

XXXI.

xii.

19- )
17. \

XXXII.

18-27.

XXXIII.

28-40.

XXXIV.

xu.

xiii.

41- )
37. \

XXXV.

XIV.

1-26.

XXXVI.

27-72.

XXXVII.

XV.

1-20.

XXXVIII.

21-28.

XXXIX.

29-32.

XL.

33-41.

XLI.

( XV.

j xvi.

1:1

• XLII.

2-1 3.

XLIII.

LI

JKE.

14-20.

I.

i. 1-25.

II.

26-38.

III.

39-56.

IV.

57-80.

V.

11

1-20.

VI.

21-35.

VII.

36-41.

VIII.

42-62.

IX.

111

1-22.

X.

23-38.

XI.

IV

1-13

XII.

14-30.

XIII.

31-44.

XIV.

V

1-11.

XV.

12-39.

XVI.

vi

1-11

XVII.

12-19

XVIII.

20-36

XIX.

37-49

OCCASIONS.


Lesson for Mid Lent.

Matins, 4lh Snnday in Lent.

Oblation, any Dav.

Thursday of Week in Albis, (Whitsun Week.)
*Lesson for the Martyrs.
*Obhition, on Feast of Tabernacles.

Sunday, 4th Week in Lent.

Fifili Sunday after Pentecost.

Blessing a Bridegroom and Bride.

Vespers, 4th Sunday after Epiphany.

Peter tiie Apostle.

Oblation, 6th Sunday in Lent.

Matins, Hosanna Sunday, (Palm Sunday.)

Saturday, 2d Week in Lent.

*Oblation for the Dead.
Matins, 4th Sunday after Epiphany.

*Matins, on Feast of the Cross.

*Consecration of the Chrism, (on Holy Thursday.)
Night of the Crucitixion.
Matins, Friday of the Crucifixion.
Third Hour (= 9. a. m.) Day of Crucifixion.
Mid-day, (noon,) on Day of Crucifixion.
Ninth ilour, (= 3. p. M.) Day of Crucifixion.

Vespers, Saturday in Passion Week.

Oblation, Sunday of Resurrection, (Easter Sunday.)
Oblation, on Ascension Day,


Matins, Annunciation to Zacharias.
Annunciation to the Mother of God.
Visit of Mary to Elizabeth.
Matins, Nativity of John.
Mai ins. Feast of the Nativity, (Christmas.)
Matins, Entrance of our Lord into the Temple.
Oblation, our Lord's Entrance into the Temple
Sunday after the Nativity.
Oblation, Feast of Epiphany,
Vespers, 2d Sunday after Epiphany.
Sunday, commencement of Lent.
Circumcision of our Lord.
VespiTs, 4th Friday in Lent.
Matins, 2d Sunday after the Resurrection.
Matins, Sunday, 6th Week in Lent.
Matins, Tuesday, 5th Week in Lent.
The Apostles ; ■*and the Martyrs.
Friday, 4th Week in Lent.
Vespers, Wednesday, Week before Lent.
*And Commemoration of the Patriarchs.


APPENDIX I.


477


Lessons for Public Worship — Continued.


LUKE.


Lessons. Chap, and Ver.


XX.
XXI.
XXII.

xxm.

XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.

XXVIII.

XXIX.

XXX.

XXXI.

XXXII.

XXXIII.

XXXIV.

XXXV.

XXXVI.

XXXVII.

xxxvm.

XXXIX.

XL.

XLI.

XLII.

XLIII.

XLIV.

XLV.

XLVI.

XLVII.

XLVIU.

XLIX.


LI.

LII.

LIII.

LIV.

LV.

LVI.

LVII.

LVIII.

LIX.

\X.

LXI.

LXIl.

LXIIL

LXIV.

LXV.


1-10.
11-18.
19-35.
3G-50.

1-15.
16-21.
'J:>-39.
40-56.

1-11.

12-17.
18-'J6.
27-36.
37-50.
51-62.

1-24.
25-37.
38-41.

1-13.
14-26.
27-36.
37-48.
49-54.

1-12.
13-31.
32-48.
49-59.

1- 9.
10-22.
23-35.

1-24.
25- )
10. \
11-32.

1-18.

19-31.

. 1-10.

11-19.

20-37.

, 1-17.

18-30.

31- ,

27. )•

28-40.

41-48.

.\.\. 1-26.

27-40.

i 41- /

"< x\\. 4. S

5-28.


OCCASIONS.


\ .MX.


Oblation, Sunday, 4th Week in Lent.

Oblation, Sunday, 5tli Week in Lent.

Sunday after Epipliany.

Third Hour, Thursday of the Mysteries.

Thursday, 2d Week in Lent.
^Commemoration of Mary the Mother of God.

Vespers, 5th Sunday in Lent.

Matins, 5tli Sunday in Lent.

Vespers, 5th Sunday after the Resurrection.

And Commemoration of the Apostles.

Oblation on any Day.

Feast of the Apostles.
*Matins, Feast of Tabernacles.

Monday, 2d Week in Lent.

Vespers, 6th Sunday after the Resurrection.

Wednesday, Week in Albis, (Whitsun Week.)

Vespers, 6th Sunday in Lent.
*Commemoration of the Holy Women.

Vesper.s, Tuesday, 1st Week in Lent.

Tuesday, 6th Week in Lent.
*Feast of Marv tiie Mother of God.

Wedne.sdny, 6th Week in Lent.

Oblation, Annunciation to Zacharias.
*C()mmemoration of the Martyrs.

Friday, 3d Week in Lent.
*Lesson for (the Ordination of) Bishops.

Lesson for (Days of) Supplication, (Rogation Days.)
*Lesson, 2d Sunday after Feast of the Cross.

Vcsper.s, 5th Saturday in Lent.
♦Commemoration of the Just, and the Patriarchs.

Tuesday, 4lh Week in Lent.

♦Commemoration of the Monks.

Vespers, Thursday before Lent.

Matins, Sunday commencing Lent.
♦Vespers, Sunday of the Dead.

Vespers, Friday, 1st Week in Lent.

Oblation, Sunday of 2d Week in Lent.

'JMiursday, 3J Week in Lent.

Vespers, 1st Saturday in Lent.
^Commemoration of 1^. Anthony and his fellow Saints.

Thursd.iy, 6th Week in Lent.

Sunday of IIosann::.s, (Palm Sunday.)
Vespers. Monday of I\i.ssion Week.
.3d Staliiin, 3d M^'ht in Pa.ssion Week.
♦Lesson for tiie Dead.

Oblation, 5th Sunday after Epiphany.

Oblation, on Feast of the Crucifi.\ioii.


478


APPENDIX I.


Lessons for Public Worship — Continued.


LUKE.


Lessons.


LXVI.
LXVII.

LXVIII.

LXIX.

LXX.

LXXI.

LXXII.

LXXIII.

LXXIV.
LXXV.


Chap, and Ver.


XXI,

xxii.
jxxiii,

|xxiv.


29-38.
1-30.
31-65.
66- )
25. S
26-33.
34-43.
44-49.
50- )
12. \
13-35.
36-53.


OCCASIONS.


.lOHN.


I.

U.
III.
IV.

V.
VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

X.

XI.

XII.

XIII.

XIV.

XV.

XVI.

XVII.

XVIII.

XIX.

XX.

XXI.

XXII.

XXIII.

XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.

XXVIII.

XXIX.


21.


i iv.1: \


4-4i


43-

1-

19-

30-

1-

16

30

47-

61-

1-

37

45

53-

11.

12-

28-

1-

1-

22-
1-

47-


-54.
-18.
-29.
-47.
-15.
-29.
-46.
-60.
-71.
-36.
-44.
-52.


-27.
-59.
-41.
-21.

■42.
■46.
■54.


Vespers, Sunday after Feast of Crucifixion.
Vespers, Friday of tJie Crucifixion.
Lesson, Night of Friday of the Crucifixion.

Matins, Friday of the Crucifixion.

Third Hour, on Friday of the Crucifixion.
Midday, Friday of the Crucifixion.
Ninth Hour, on Friday of the Crucifixion.

Twilight, Saturday of Annunciation.

Monday of Week in Albis, (Whitsun Weeli.)
The Ascension of our Lord.


Feast, Nativity of our Lord, (Christmas.)

Matins, Sunday after Epiphany.

Obhition, Sunday after Epiphany.

Oblation, 3d Sunday after Epiphany.

Matins, Sunday commencing Lent.

Oblation, Saturday of Resurrection of Lazarus.

Matins, Sunday after Epiphany.

Matins, Mid Lent.

Oblation at Dedication of a Church.

Night of consecrating Water, (at Epiphany.)
*And, the Genuflection at Pentecost.

Vespers, Tuesday, 5th Week in Lent.

Matins, 3d Sunday in Lent.
*Lesson for the Dead.

Matins, 3d Sunday after Epiphany.

Oblation, 4th Sunday after Epiphany.

Wednesday, 5th Week in Lent.

Oblat'ion, any Day.

Oblation, any Day.

Matin.s, Wednesday of Passion Week.

Matins, Wednesday, 5th Week in Lent.
*Comniemoration of Doctors of the Church.

Matins, Saturday, 5th Week in Lent.

Lesson of the sinning Woman : [not in MSS.]

Oblation, 2d Sunday after Epiphany.
Wednesday of Week in Albis, (Whitsun Week.)
Matins, 6th Sunday in Lent.
Vespers, Consecration of a Church :
*And, Creation of Bishops.
Lesson, at Consecration of a Church.
Oblation of the Forty: [Quadragesima?] —
Matins, Wednesday of Passion Week.


APPENDIX I.


479


Lessons for Public Wousiiip — Continued.


JOHN.


Lessons. | Chap, and Ver.


XXX.


XI.


XV.


XXXI.

XXXII.i

XXXIII.I

XXXIV.!

XXXV. I

XXXVI., j

XXXVII. i

XXXV III. 1
XXX1X.I

XL.ii ..

XLI.l
XLII.j xviii,

XUII.i .

\\ XIX.

XLIV.l

XLV.!

XLVI.

XLVII.

XLVIII.

XLIX.

L.

U.

LU.


LIII.


55- I
11. \
12-22.
23-50.

1-30.
31-38.

1-14.


3. i
4-15

16-30

31-


31- )

12. \

5-26.

1-27.

1:1


13-26

1-27.
28-

4

5-14.
14-22.
23-30.
31-42.

1-18.
19-25.
26-31.

1-14.
15-19.


20-26.


OCCASIONS.


Matins, Saturday of Resurrection of Lazarus.

Hosanna Sunday, (Palm Sunday.)
Matins, Wednesday of Passion Week.
Lesson of tlie mystical Washing (of Feet.)
Matins, 5tli Sunday after the Resurrection.
Commemoration of Tliomas and Piiilip, Apostles.

Vespers, Pentecostal Sunday.

Matins, Pentecostal Sunday in Albis, (Whitsunday.)

Oblation, Pentecost, (Wiiitsunday.)

Vespers, 3d Sund.ay after the Resurrection.

Matins, 6th Sunday after the Resurrection :
*.\nd, at ("reation of Presbyters.
*3d Sunday after the Feast of the Cross.

Night, Friday of the Crucifixion.

Matins, Friday of the Crucifixion.

Third Hour, Frid.ay of the Crucifixion.
Sixth Hour, Friday of the Crucifixion.
Ninth Hour, Friday of the Crueitixion.
Vespers, Saturday of the Annunciation.
Matins, Sunday of the Resurrection, (Easter Day.)
Vespers, New Sunday, (Whitsunday.)
Matins, New Sunday, (Wiiitsunday.)
Oblation, New Sunday, (Whitsunday.)
Commemoration of Sinum Peter: and.
Consecration of a Church : and
♦Creation of Bishops.
Commemoration of John the Evangelist.


ACTS.


I.

i.

1-14.

II.

15-26.

ni.

11.

1-21.

IV.

22-36.

V.

37-47.

Vl.

111.

1-10.

VIL

1 1-26.

VIII.

IV.

1-18.

L\.

19-31.

X.

32-37.

XI.

V.

1-11.

XII.

12-28.

XIII.

29-42.

XIV.

\i.

1-12.

XV.

\^ vii.

13- /
10. \

Ascension of our Ijord.

Oblation, Thursday of the Mysteries.

The Genuflection.

Twilijrht, frreat Sunday of the Resurrection, (E.aster.)

Monday, 6th Week in Lent.

(ioiden Friday.

Monday in Albis, (in Whitsun Week.)
♦Commemoration of the Martyrs.
*Lesson for the Martyrs.

Tuesday in .Alijis, (in Whitsun Week.)
♦For the Dead.

For the Apostles.

Wednesday in .'VIbis, (Whitsun Week.)

Friday of Repose : and, of Saints in GenersU.

Thursday in Albis, (Whitsun Week.)


480


APPENDIX I.


Lessons fob Public Worship — Continued.


ACTS.


Lessons.


XVI.

XVII.

XVIII.

XIX.

XX.

XXI.

XXII.

XXIII.

XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.

XXVIII.

XXIX.

XXX.

XXXI

XXXII

XXXIII,

XXXIV.

XXXV.
XXXVI.

XXXVII.

XXXVIII.

XXXIX.

XL.

XLI.

XLII.

XLIII.

XLIV.

XLV.

XLVI.

XLVII.

XLVIII.

XLIX.

L.

LI.

LII.

LIII.

LIV.

LV.

LVI.

LVII.


Chap, and Ver.


i ... 54- )
I vui. 2. \


xu.
xiii.


( xiii
( xiv.


XVlll.

xix.


11-29.
30-36.
37-43.
44-53
64-

2.

3-13.
14-25.
26-40.

, 1-21.

22-35.

36-43.

1-

9-24.
25-33.
34- )

2-18.
19-30.

1-24.
25- I
12. \
13-25.
26-43.
44- )

6. \

7-19.
20-

3.

4-12.
13-22.
23-33.
35-41.

1- 7.

8-15.
16-35
36-

1

2-14
15-21.
22-34.

1-11.
12-28.

1-12.
13-22.
23-29.
30- I

6. )

7-16.


OCCASIONS.


I xvii. 1. )


Slaughter of the Children.
Matins, Hosanna (Palm) Sunday.
Saturday in Albis, (Whitsun Week.)
For Baptism : *and, the^ Mother of God.

Commemoration of Stephen.

Third Sunday after the Resurrection.
Monday, lat Week in Lent.
Benediction of Waters, (on Night of Epiphany :)
And, at Baptism.
Sunday commencing Lent.
Second Sunday in Lent.
*For the Dead.
Third Sunday in Lent.
The Apostles : and, Golden Friday,
Tuesday, 1st Week in Lent.

Wednesday, 1st Week in Lent.

Thursday, 1st Week in Lent.
Friday, 1st Week in Lent.
Saturday, Ist Week in Lent.

Sunday, 4th Week in Lent.

Monday of Passion Week.

Great Sunday of the Resurrection, (Easter Day.)

Tuesday of Passion Week.

Wednesday of Passion Week.

Monday, 4th Week in Lent.

Vespers, Thursday of the Mysterie?

Tuesday, 4th Week in Lent

Mid Lent.

Thursday, 4th Week in Lent.

Friday, 4th Week in Lent.

Saturday, 4th Week in Lent.

Sunday, 5th Week in Lent.

Sunday, 6th Week in Lent.

Night of the Crucifi.xion.

4lh Sunday after liie Resurrection.

5tli Sunday after the Resurrection.

Commemoration of the Saints.

5th Sunday after Pentecost.

Matins, Pentecostal Sunday, (Whitsunday.)

First Sunday after Pentecost.

Second Sunday after Pentecost.

Third Sunday after Pentecost.

*For the Dead.


APPENDIX I.


481


Lessons for Public Woksiiip — Continued.


ACTS.


LusaoDS. Chap, and Ver.


LVIII.

LIX.

LX.

LXI.

LXII.

LXIII.

LXIV.

LXV.

LXVI.

LXVII.

LXVIII.

LXIX.


OCCASIONS.


j XX. 17- I

i xxi. 12. )

( xxii. 29. )

... 30- [

(XXUl. 11. )


XX. 17

xxi. 12.

13

xxii. 29.

30

xxiii. 11.

12

(xxiv. 1-

( XXV, 12

13

xxvi. 23

j 24

(xxvii. 8

9

27

xxviii. 1

11

23


35.


I XXVI. 23. )


)
26.
44.

10.


-31.


*For the Saints and Martyrs.

Fourth Sunday after Pentecost.

Matina, Friday of tlie Crucifixion.
Third Hour, Friday of the Crucifixion.
Mid-Day, Friday of the Crucifixion.

Ninth Hour, Friday of the Crucifixion.

Fifth Sunday after Pentecost.

Sixth Sunday after Pentecost.
Seventh Sunday after Pentecost.
Eightli Sunday after Pentecost.
Ninth Sunday after Pentecost,
Tenth Sunday after Pentecost.


ROMANS.

I
II


m.

IV
V

VI.


VII

VIII.

IX

X

XI

XII

XIII.

XIV.

XV.

XVI.
XVII.

xvm.

XIX.

XX.

XXI.

XXII.

XXIII.


2-13.
14-27.

\ - ^^- i
( lu. 18. f

. 19- i
i IV. 12. S


VI.

vii.


xn.
xiii.


1-12
13-25
26-

1.

2-13
14-27.
28
18
19-
12.
13-25.

1-11.
12-21.

1-23.

1-25.
26-
11.

12-27
28-

5

6-21.
22-29.
30- )

4. f
6-21.
1-12.
13-36.
1-21.
1-10.


} vui. 11. \
12-27.

\ ix. 5. \


Lesson for any Day.
Friday, 2d Week in Lent.

Lesson for any Day

Friday, 3d Week in Lent.
Any Day.

Any Day.

*For the Martyrs.

Any Day.

Monday in Albis, (in Whitsun Week.)

Saturday, 1st Week in Lent.

Monday, 6tti Week in Lent : and, at Baptism.

Tuesday of Passion Week.

Twilight, great Sunday of the Resurrection.

Tuesday, 6th Week in Lent.

*Les3on for the Martyrs.

Annunciation to Zacharias.

Lesson for Pilgrims.

Entrance of our Lord into the Temple :

And, Commemoration of Prophets and Apostles.

Middle of Pentecost.

Tuesday in Passion Week.

Hosiinna (Palm) Sunday.

-Monday, 1st Week in Lent.

Time when a Church makes an Election.


482


APPENDIX I.


Lessons for Public Worship — Continued.


ROMANS.


Lessons. Chap, and Ver.


XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.


( xiii. 11- )
I xiv. 23. \


xiii. 11-

xiv

XV. 1-13

14-38

xvi. 1-24.


1 CORINTHIANS.


II.
III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

X.

XI.

XII.

XIII.

XIV.
XV.

XVI.

XVII.
XVIII.

XIX.

XX.

XXI.

XXII.

XXIII.

XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.


10-16.
iii. 1-15.

] iv. 5. \
6-16.


VI.


V)l.


1. 1-17

18-
n. 4

10-16

m. 1-15

16-

5

6-16.
17-
6

6-13

1-11.

12-20.

1-24.

25-40.

vm. 1-

i,\. 12

13-27.
X. 1-13.

14-

xi. 22

23-34.

1-27

28-

3.

4-

19.

20-33.
34-40.
1-19.
20-33.
34-58.
1-12.


( viii. 1- )

( \\. 12. \

13-27.

X. 1-13.

\ XI. 22. S


xn.


\ ... ^^- I
( xm. 3. J

I xiv. 19. [


XV.


XVI.


13-24.


2 CORINTHIANS.


I.
II.

III.
IV.

V.


i. 1- 7.

8-22.

23- )

ii. 11. (

12-
ui. 3.
4-18.


\ m. 3. f


OCCASIONS.


Matins, Sunday commencing Lent.

Tuesday, 1st Week in Lent.
Second Sunday in Lent,
*For the Holy Women.


Friday of the Crucifixion.

Matins, Friday of the Crucifixion.

First Sunday after Pentecost.
Second Sunday after Pentecost.

Third Sunday after Pentecost.

Fourth Sunday after Pentecost.

Fifth Sunday after Pentecost.

Sunday after the Resurrection.
Sixth Sunday after Pentecost.
Thursday, 1st Week in Lent,
Wednesday, 1st Week in Lent.
For the holy Martyrs.

For any Day.

*Commemoration of Anthony and his Companions.
Oblation, on Epiphany Day.

Matins, Thursday of the Mysteries.

Oblation, Thursday of the Mysteries.
Sunday of Pentecost, (Whitsunday.)

The Apostles.

The Washing.

The Genuflection.

Seventh Sunday after Pentecost.

Matins, Resurrection (Easter) Day.

Oblation, Resurrection (Easter) Day.

For the Dead.

Fifth Sunday after Epiphany.

Tuesday, 4th Week in Lent.

Matins, Saturday of Annunciation.
Fourth Sunday "after Epiphany.

Thursday, 4th Week in Lent.

^''Consecration of the Chrism.
*Basil and his Associates.


APPENDIX I.


483


Lessons kok Public Worship — Continued.


3 CORINTHIANS.

Chap, and Ver.


Lessons.


VI.
VII.
VIII.

IX.


XL

XII.
XIII.
XIV.

XV. I

XVI. I

XVII. [

XVlII.jj
XIX.|]


1- 6.

7-18.

, 1-10.

11-19.

20- 1

10. \

":[

4-16.

1- 8.

9-24.

1-15.

1-18.

1-15.

16- i

18. \

19- /

. 13. )


OCCASIONS.


GAL.4TIANS.


I.

II.
III.

IV.


VI.
VII.

VIII.

IX.
X.


1. 1-10

11-24

ii. 1-10

11-16

17-;ii. 14./

15-29.)"

iv. 1-r

19-27
28-
V. 12.
13-
vi. 6. )■
7-18.


i v.S-i


EPHESl.'VNS.


II.
III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

X.

XI.


) H. 'I: }


1. 1-14.

15-
11. 3.

4-18.

... 19- )

111. 12. I

13-21.

1-16.

17-24.

25- }

2. J

3-21.

22-

9


IV.


I in or\


Third Sunday after Epiphany.
*The Martyrs.
*The Dead.

New Sunday, (Whitsunday.)

Sunday commencing Lent: and, Rogations.

Friday, 1st Week in Lent.

Any Day.
Any Day.

Sixth Sunday after Epiphany.

Mid-Lent.

Sixth Sunday in Lent.

Monday, 4th Week in Lent.

Commemoration of Paul.
Friday of Mid-Lent.


For any Day.

For StepluMi.
*For the Putriarch-s.

For any Day.
*Thc Adoration of the Cross.
*Tho Annunciation of the Mother of God,

Oblation, on the Nativity, (Christmas.)

The Nativity of John.

The Circumcision of our Lord.

The 3d Sunday in Lent.

Matins, Wednesday of Passion Week.

For Baptisms.

After the Resurrection, (on Easter Day.)

Thursday of Repose.

Thursday after the Resurrection.

*Elevation of tlie Cross.
Ascension of our Lord.
New Sunday, (Whitsunday.)

Friday of Repose.

Seventh Sund.ny after Epiphany.

For any Day.


10-20. *The Tonsure of Monks.


484


APPENDIX I.


Lessons for Public Worship — Continued.


PHIL.IPPIANS.

OCCASIONS.

Lessons.

Chap, and Ver.

I.
II.
III.

IV.
V.

VI.

VII.

i. 1-11.

12-20.

ii. 1-11.

12-30.

iii. 1-12.

\ ■ 'I- ^

IV. 7. )

8-23.

For any Day.

Commemoration of Peter and Paul.

Twilight, Wednesday of Passion Week.

For any Day. ,

For any Day.

For any Day.

For any Day.

cnr OSSIANS.
I.

n.
m.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.


i

1-

- 8.

9-

-20.

21-

■\

n.

5.

6-

■15.

16-

-23.

ni.

1-

17.

18-

■

)V.

18.

THFjSSALONIANS.

I


II.
III.

IV.

V.

VI.


li. 12. \
13-16.

... 1'^- I
in. 13. \

iv. 1-12.

13-

11

12-28.


) v.lt I


8 THESSALONIANS.
1. 1.

iii. 19.


•|| iii. 19. [I


1 timothy,

I.
II.

m.


IV.

V.
VI.


1-20
1-15
1-


] iv! 8. [

I V. 23. [

23- )

1 vi. 12. f


For any Day.

4th Sunday after the Resurrection.

Thursday after the Resurrection.

Mid-Day, Friday of the Crucifixion.

For any Day.

Wednesday of the Week of Repose.

For any Day.


For any Day.

Twilight, Saturday of the Annunciation.
For any Day.
For Baptism.
''For the Dead.
Fourth Sunday in Lent.

Twilight on Epiphany.

Friday, 5th Week in Lent.
For Rogations.

Second Sunday after Epiphany.

Tiiursday after the Resurrection.

Fifth Sunday in Lent

Fifth Sunday after the Resurrection.


2 TIMOTHY.

I. >• jj" o H*Commemoration of Aegenetus and Companions,


'.f,


APPENDIX I.


485


Lessons for Public Worship — Continued.


2 TIMOTHY.

OCCASIONS.

Lessons. | Chnp. and Ver.

II.
III.

IV.
V.

\ iiL 9. 1

10-15.

i 16- 1

( iv. 8. \

9-22.

*Coinmctnoration of Peter of Alex;indri;i.
♦Commemoration of our Lord Severus.
*0n the death of a Bishop.
♦Commemoration of Gregory.

TITUS.


"•Il


1. 1-

ii. 10.

11-

iii. 15.


On making a Presbyter.

At Baptism : also, Sunday after Epiphany.


PHILEMON.

I.| 1-25. 1 For any D.-iy.


HEBREWS

i

ii.


I

II
UI.

V.

VI.

VII.
VIII.

IX.

X.

XI.

XII.

XIII.

XIV.

XV.

XVI.
XVII.

XVIII.

XIX.
XX.

XXI. j

XXII.I


ill; 1: 1

5-13.
\ iii. 13. f
j iv. 13. [

1 v.JM

( VI. 20. I


VI.

vii


1-

4

5-13
14-
13.
1

13.
14-
11
12-
20

1-17
18-28.

1-
10.
11-15
16-28.

1-14.
15-25.
26-38.
33- /

8-22.
23-31.
32-


(viii. 1- )
( IX. 10. j


} .xii. 2. }


3-11

12-27.

28- \
8. [
9-25.


Twiliglit and ]\Iatins, on the Nativity.
First Station, Friday of the Crucifixion.
*For the IMother of God.

Saturday in Albis, (VVhitaun Weeii.)

Second Station, Friday Night of the Crucifixion.

Second Night in Passion Week.

*For tiie Mother of God.

Tuesday in Albis, (VVliitsun Week.)

The Nativity: and,

The Con.secration of a Church, or an Altar.

Third Station, Friday Night of the Crucifixion.

Twiliglit, Thursday of the My.steries.

Third Sunday after the Resurrection.
*Night of Blessing Water.

For Baptism.

Matins, Monday in Passion Week.

Twilight, Tuesday in Passion Week,
Slaughter of the Infants.

Tlie Prophet.s, Apostles, *and Patriarchs.

" When there is Wrath," (Time of Calamity.)
Oblation on the Forty, (Quadragesima?)
♦The 318 Fathers, (Council of Nice:)
*Al.s(), Commemoration of believing Kings.
Ninth Hour, Friday of the Crucilixion.


486


APPENDIX I.


Lessons for Public Worship — Continued.


JAMES.


J^essoiia. I Cbap. and Ver,


f-


\ 1 1: \


I.

II.

III.

IV.

V.
VI.

1 PETEK.

LI i
II. ii

m|

IV.


i. 1-21

22-
ii. 13. j
1 4-26
iii. 1
6.


I- I
6. \
7-20.


OCCASIONS.


^•i^


VI.
VII.


J -25.

1-lU.

11- }

iii. G. f

7-15.

t\

7-19.
1-14 '


2 PETER.


I..


1- )

8. f

^ ^

18. \


1 JOHN
I


II.
III.

IV.
V.

VI.


1 r,i. r [


111. 1

2-24.

1-10

11-21


2 JOHN.

1. 1

3 JOHN.

I.!


JUDB.
1. 1


1-21.


1-13.


1-15.


1-25.


Commemoration of the Martyrs.
Second Sunday after Epiphany.
Eleventh Sunday after Pentecost.
Third Sunday after Epiphany.

Twelfth Sunday after Pentecost.
Fourth Sunday after Epiphany.


New Sunday, (Whitsunday.)
Fifth Sunday after Epiphany.

John the Baptist.

Sixth Sunday after Epiphany.
Thirteenth Sunday after Pentecost :
And, at Consecration of Bishops.
Seventli Sunday after Epiphany.
I'ourteenth Sunday after Pentecost.


Lesson for Mount Tabor.
Great Feast of Ascension.

First Sunday after the Nativity.

Obhition, Hosanna (Palm) Sunday.

*The Mother of God.
Nativity of our Lord.
The mystical Washing : .ind,
Sunday after Epipliany.
The Fea.st of Lights, (Candlemas.)

Entrance of our Lord into the Temple.


Wednesday, 2d Week in Lent : and,
Wednesday in P.assion Week.


* Anthony and his Companions :
Tuesday in Passion Week :
Also, the Prophets.


•v^


APPENDIX 1.


487


The Apocalypse is not divided into Lessons, nor is it, in the London
editions, broken into Paragraphs, but is printed in one solid mass. Yet it
has the Chapters and Verses noted in the margin, like the other Books.

The Four Gospels contain 248 Lessons, of which 7 are unappropriated,
or serve for any day, and the lemaining 241 serve for 252 dilFcrent occa-
sions. Tlie Acts and the Epistles (which arc collectively called the
Apostles) contain 242 Lessons, of which 20 are unappropriated, and the
remaining 222 serve for 241 occasions. On most of the occasions, there was
one Lesson appointed from the Gospels, and one also from the Apostles.

This Table designates the Lessons for forty successive Sundays, from
the Sunday before the Nativity onward to .the 14th Sunday after Pente-
cost. The remaining twelve Sundays appear not to have been always
designated in the same manner by the Syrian Christians, and therefore
they arc not provided for in the London editions, which we follow.
Asseman tells us, (Bibiioth. Orient. Clem. Vat. torn, i, p. 530, note,) that
the Chaldean Christians denominate the four Sundays next before Christ-
mas, Advent Sundays, and the four preceding them, Sundays of the
Consecration of Churches. Other Syrian Christians designated the Sundays
in the latter part of the ecclesiastical year, by the Gospels that were
read.


The Sundays mentioned in this Table, derive their names from the two
immovable Festivals, the Nativity, {{r-^, Christmas, December 25th,) and
Epiphany, (|>.»J>, January 6th ;) and from the movable Feasts dependent
on the day of our Lord's Resurrection, ((ASQxjD,) that is, Easter Sunday.
From the Nativity are named the Sundays before, and the Sunday after
Christmas. From Epiphany are named the seven Sundays after Epiph-
any, if there should be so many before Lent commences. The Sundays
in Lent (]Ldo», the Fast) are numbered 1st to the Gth in Lent. Then
fuUows Ilosanna {Hallelujah, or Palm) Sunday, which is the Sunday
before Easter. The week before Easter is called Passion Week, being the
week on which our Lord was crucified. The Thursday of that week was
called Thursday of the ^[ysterics, because on that day Christ instituted
the Holy Supper. The Friday of that week was called Friday of the
Crucifixion. l"Tie Sunday following was the great Suu<lay of our Lord's
Resurrection. (]AV>an,) or Easier Day. The fve next succeedit/g Sun-
days were called the second to the sixth after the Kesurrectiou j after which
came the Sunday of Pentecost, (»*_^CDCin,x^-L2),) called also^<°;<' Sunday,
and Sunday in White, (in Albis,) Whit-Sunday ; and the succeeding week


488


.#:


APPENDIX I.


was called the Week in White, (in Albis,) Whitsun-Week. This was
followed by fourteen Sundays, named the Jirst, second, &c,, ailer Pentecost.


Besides the forty Sundays provided for as above, this Table assigns
particular Lessons for the Nativity of our Lord, or Christmas Day ; for
Epiphany, and the annual Consecration of Water on that Festival ; for
daily public worship during the six weeks of Lent, and the week before
Easter, or Passion Week ; also for the annual Consecration of the Chrism
on Thursday of Passion Week, and for daily worship throughout the week
in Albis, or Whitsun-Week. The other appropriations are for Saints'
Days, commemoration of Martyrs, Ordinations, Baptisms, &c.


APPENDIX 11.

THE SYRIAC TRANSLATIONS OF THE SCRIPTURES.


There are three Syriac translations of the New Testament, which are
denominated the Peshiio, the PIdloxenian, and the Hierosolijmitan versions ;
and also two Syriac translations of the Old Testament, which are known
by the designations of the Pcshlto, and the Syriac Hexapla. Of the^rs^
of these five versions, the Pcshito Neio Testament, it is here proposed to
give a pretty full account •, and then to treat, more summarily, of the other
versions in their order.


THE PESHITO SYRIAC VERSION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

CHARACTER AND CONTENTS OF THIS VERSION.

This is not only much older than the Philoxenian or the later Syriac
version, but is very generally admitted to be the oldest version that has
come ^ovm to us, of the New Testament in any language. It is called by
the Syrians the Peshito version, on account of its style or character. The
Syriac verb -^ » ^^ signifies to unfold or spread out that which was folded
up, so that it can be seen in its true form, dimensions, and character.
Hence the participle ( 5 * * '^ signifies spread out, not involved or folded up,
simplex and not duplex ; or, as aj)plied to a translation, explicit, free from
ambiguities, direct, si)n])le, and easy to be tinderstood. And precisely such
is, in fact, the character of this venerable version.*

* It was therefore a great mistake of Bertholdl, (in his Einleitung in das Alt. u. Neue
Testament, § 18, vol. i. ii. p. 693,) to suppose, that this version was called the Ptshito,
because it was the version in common u»c, among the sects of Syrian Christians ; thus
making the -word Peshito equivalent to (he Greek tj xoivr;, and the I.jitin vulgata.
The word does not denote an expansion or extension ad exlera, or over a larger spacp,
but an internal development, an unfolding, which exhibits the thing in iU fair and
full proportions.


490 APPENDIX II.


The Pesliito version embraces all the canonical books of the New Tes-
tament, except the second Epistle of Pete7\ the second and third Epistles
of John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse ; that is, all the 'ypa(pai
ofjooXoyou/xsvai of Eusebius, together with one only of the dvn'ks'yofxsvai
viz., the Epistle of James. Thus the Peshito Canon embraces all the
books, which were universally admitted to be genuine in the early ages of
the Church; and it excludes all but one of^the books concerning which
there was for a time doubt and uncertainty. It is almost precisely the
same with the CanoTFi derived from the writings of Irenseus, Tertullian, and
others in the first ages of the Church. And this may be considered as
evidence of the high antiquity of the version. It was made before the
New Testament Canon was fully settled.


THK TIME. PLACE, AND Al THORS OF THIS VERSION.

Among the Aramaean Christians the tradition is universal, and uniform
everywhere, that this version was made at the time when Christianity was
first preached, and when Christian churches were first established, in Syria
and Mesopotamia : and, of course, that it was made by some one or more
of the primitive Apostles and Evangelists, or by persons who were their
companions and associates. Some name Mark the Evangelist; others,
Thaddeits the reputed Apostle of Mesopotamia ; others, Achaeus or Ag-
kaeus, a pupil and immediate successor of Thaddeus.

Anterior to the present century, most of the Euroj^cans who gave
attention to Syriac learning, so far assented to this Syrian tradition, as to
maintain, that the Peshito version must have been made either by an
Apostle, or by some companion and assistant of the Apostles. A few,
however, men of talents and erudition, but not versed in Syriac learning, —
e. g. Up. Fuller, Groiius, and J. J. Welstein, — maintained that the Philox-
enian was the only Syriac version of the New Testament; and that, as
this version was not made till the sixth century, of course that must be the
date of our Syriac New Testament. Such reasoning needs no confutation
at the present day. And accordingly, since the middle of the last century,
all the learned men of Europe seem to be agreed, that the Peshito version
was probably in existence in the latter part of the second century, and
certainly in the beginning of the third. Thus Michaelis, Storr, Adler,
Eichhorn, Hog, Bcrtholdt, Hoffman, Uhlmaiin, Home, Giterike, Roedi-
ger, &c.

The more recent German writers content themselves with tracing back
the existence of this version to the latter part of the secojid century. But


APPENDIX II.


491


the English, and also the Germans before the year 1800, very generally
believed, and argued, that it must have been made cither near the close
of the jirst century, or early in the second century. Says the Rev. T. H.
Horne^ in his Introduction, (vol. i. p. 270. ed. New York, 1844) : " Bishop
Walton^ Carpzov, Leusden, Bishop Lowlh, and Dr. Kennicod, l\x its date
to the Jirsf century ; Buner, and some other German writers, to the second
or third century; Jahn fixes it, at the least, to the second century; De
Rossi pronounces it to be very ancient, but does not specify any ])rccise
date. The most probable opinion, (he adds,) is that of Michaelis, (Intro-
duction to New Testimient, vol. ii. P. 1, pp. 29-38,) who ascribes the Syriao
version of both Testaments to the close of the Jirst, or to the earlier part
of the second century ; at which time the Syrian churches flourished most,
and the Christians at Edcssa had a temple for divine worship erected after
the model of that at J erusalem : and it is not to be supposed that they
would be without a version of the Old Testament, the reading of which had
been introduced by the Apostles."

Those who attempt to trace back the existence of this vei"sion, by means
of historical proofs, tell us, that the Peshito version certainly existed, and
was in common use, in the middle of the fourth century. For, at that
period, Ephraim Syrns composed his voluminous writings, which abound
in quotations and expositions of the sacred books, as they are found in this
version. And going back of that period, we are able to trace a solid
Christian literature, and a series of well-informed theologians reaching up
to the age of Bardesancs, in the latter part of the second century. Now
such able theologians, and such a Christian literature, could not have
existetl without a knowledge of the Scriptures : and yet, through all this
period, we have no intimation that the Aramaean churches lacked the holy
Scrij>tures in their vernacular tongue. We therefore infer that the Peshito
version existed, and was in common use from at least as early as the latter
part of the second century. And this inference seems to have the support
of direct testimonij. For Euscbius says, (H. E. iv. 22,) that Ilegesippus,
(who lived and wrote about a. d. 188,) "made some quotations from
the Gospel according to the Hebrews, and from the Sijriac Oospel ."—
ix. T£ ToC xa^' l,'3paiou5 suayysXi'ou xai <toZ tfupiaxoij. This language (as
Hug has clearly shown: Einleitung, vol. i. p. 367, ed. 182G) implies that
there was, in the days of Hegesipjms, a Stjriac Gospel, and that it was a
different book from the Gospel according to the Hebrews. — And in the
Passio Sancti Procopii Martyris, (annexed by Valesius to the Hist. Ecclcs.
of Busebius, lib. viii. c. 1, ed. Amsterdam, 1095. Annotatt, p. 154,) the
martyr is said to have been born at Jerusalem, and to have passed his
life at Scythopolis, where he performed three functions in the church, —


492 APPENDIX II.


" unum in legend! officio, alterum in Syri ititerpretatione sermonis, et ter-
tium adversus daemones manus impositione consummans ;" until his
martyrdom, under Diocletian, a. d. 303. The words Syri interpretatione
sermonis, explicitly, make him the public translator^ (of the Scriptures,
undoubtedly.) from the Syriac langva(je into some other, the Greek, most
probably : for we may suppose there were ^ome Greeks in the Syrian
church of Scythopolis, for whose benefit the Scripture lessons were trans-
lated as they were read.

The arguments for carrying back the origin of this version to the last
part of the first century and the first part of the second^ are the follow
ing :—

1. This accords with the constant and uniform tradition of all the
Aramaean churches, Nestorian, Monophysite, Melchite, and Maronite ; in
all of which this version has been in public use, time out of mind, and has
ever been revered as coeval with the origin of those churches. Moreover,
there is no contradictory tradition from any quarter; nor does ecclesiastical
history afford any invalidating testimony. All the evidence in the case is
therefore on one side, or stands uncontradicted and unopposed by any con-
trary evidence. By what laws of historic reasoning, then, can the tradition
just referred to be set aside 1

2. The uncertainty which is found in the tradition, respecting the pre-
cise time, and pfoce, and author of this version, is good evidence of the truth
of the tradition ; for it shows, that this version was made at so early a
period, that the particular circumstances attending its formation were hid
in obscurity.

Tliis argument may be thus stated : — We know, that there was an
uninterrupted series of learned writers in the Aramaean churches, from the
times of Bardesanes, who was cotemporary with Irenasus and Clemens
Alex., in the latter part of the second century, — down to Barhehrceus in
the thirteenth century. Yet not one of them could authenticate the uni-
versal tradition, or trace it to its source, or correct the minuter details of
it. They could only repeat the generally received fact, that this version
was made when their first churches were planted by the Apostles and their
coadjutors; and then give their conjectures respecting the precise time,
and place, and author of the version. And the early Greek Fathers, many
of whom lived in Syria and Palestine, were equally in the dark respecting
these points. Now the fair inference from these fiicts is, that the transla-
tion must have been made in the very earliest times of the Church, and so
long before the days of the learned ecclesiastical writers, — (that is, before
the times of Justin Martyr, Irenseus, Bardesanes, Clemens Alex., &c.) —
that the circumstances of the time, place, and author of the version could


^^^-


APPENDIX U. 493


not be ascertained, and therefore the door was open for different conjectures
respecting them.

For the due appreciation of this argument, it should be recollected, that
from the termination of the New Testament narratives to about the middle
of the second century, — (that is, for about CO or 80 years,) — the only
Christian writers were those called the Apostolic Fathers ; whose writings
are few and meagre, and scarcely throw any light on sacred literature and
the occurrences in the churches. Hence, that early period was, emphatically,
the OBSCURE AGE of thc Church, and one which it has baftled the attempts
of learned theologians to explore, from the times of Eusebius to the present
day. Alter tlut period, learned Christian writers began to arise, and to
multiply more and more ; so that from that time onward, and especially
after the commencement of the third century, all the more important
occurrences in thc Church became tolerably well known, being mentioned
by the cotemporary writers ; while all that occurred in the latter part of
the first century, and in the first half of the second, is almost as little known
as thc events before the flood.

This argument receives confirmation from the fact, that the very early
translation of the Scriptures into Latin, (which no one calls in question,) is
exactly parallel with this asserted early origin of the Syriac version. Both
versions were supposed to have been made in the times of the Apostles, or
shortly after, and by an author, or authors, unknown to the subsequent
ages. The chief diflerence in regard to them is, that there are said to have
been several early Latin versions, one of which, being superior to thc others,
obtained the greatest circulation, and was called the Itala, whereas we
read of only one early Syriac version, that cfilled the Peshito. Augustine's
declaration concerning those early Latin versions is well known. lie says,
(de Dootrina Christ. 1. ii. c. 11 :) "One cm easily enumerate those who
translated the holy Scriptures from Hebrew into Greek ; but not s-o, the
Latin translators. For, in those early times of Christianity, whoever got
hold of a Greek ^IS., and thought he possessed some knowledge of both
languages, at once undertook to translate it." — hi regard to these very
early versions, both Latin and Syriac, the entire ignorance of all the burned
fathers, in subsequent ages, as to their authors, and as to thc precise time
and place of their coni|X)sitioii, arises from the same causes; namely, the
very early period at which the versions were nuide, and the scantiness of
the records of those times. And hence the vagueness, or the want of
uniformity and con.sistency in the details, is the very Ijc-t internal evidence
of the general truth and authenticity of both tradititjns.

3. The character and circumstances of the first Syrian Christians, and
of their teachers, would both demand and facilitate an early trajislation


494 APPENDIX II,


of the New Testament into the common language of the country. The
first converts of that country were, doubtless, to a great extent, from among
Jews. And we know that the first Christians were, generally, from the
humbler walks of life, or from the common people, — that class of persons
who, in Syria and Mesopotamia, spoke and understood no language but
the Syriac. An early translation of the Scriptures into this language was
therefore exceedingly necessary. Indeed, it was nearly indispensable for
the due instruction of the new converts, and for qualifying their principal
men to be teachers and guides in the new-formed churches. What modern
missionary attempts to propagate Christianity, and to establish Christian
churches, in any unevangelized country, without at once putting the Bible
into the hands of the common people, in a language they can understand ?
— The first preachers of the Gospel in Syria and Mesopotamia, and the
founders of the first Aramaean churches, we may suppose, were for the
most part Palestine Jews. For such were all the Apostles, the seventy
disciples, the seven Deacons, and among the Evangelists, Mark, Barnabas,
Silas, and perhaps others. But to all the Jews of Palestine, an Aramaean
dialect very similar to the Syriac, was vernacular, and was the ordinary
language of all public addresses in the synagogues of their country. Hence
we may suppose, that the Gospel was first preached among the Syrians
in the Aj-ainaean language, either in pure Syriac or in the dialect of the
Jews. And if so, the first founders of the Syrian churches were fully
competent, to give them Syriac translations of the several books of the
New Testament, as soon as they successively arrived in the country. And
we can hardly suppose it possible, that they would neglect a work so easy
of accomplishment, so necessary to lighten their own labors, and so indis-
pensable to the full establishment and permanent prosperity of the churches.
4. The character of the version itself affords evidence that it was pro-
duced in the very earliest ages of the Christian Church. Its style has all
the simplicity and directness of those sincere and honest-hearted men who
first propagated Christianity. It is, precisely, what its name Peshito
implies — a perfectly explicit and lucid version, every word of which seems
to be the spontaneous efflux of a warm heart, and of a mind fully master
of its own conceptions. There is no pomp of words, no artificial construc-
tions or phraseology, nothing that betrays vanity or ostentation, nothing
factitious, elaborate, and studied. It exhibits no undue veneration for the
technical terms of the new religion, or of the Church and its organization.
Indeed, it seems not to know that there are technical words and phrases,
belonging to the now dispensation. And although it is the translation of
a sacred book, it seems to have no superstitious reverence for the mere
words, the phraseology, or the grammatical constructions of the original


APPENDIX II. 495


text To give the substance of what is written, and in the plainest,
simplest manner possible, seems to be its sole aim. fn these respects it
stands alone among all the ancient vei-sions of the Bible; and especially
is it totally unlike the second Syriac version, which will be described here-
after. And this fascinating artlessness of the Pcshito version, while it
affords strong evidence of its very early formation, will account for its
permanent and very strong hold on the affections of all Aramaean Chris-
tians in every age of the Church.

o. If tliis version was not made till near the end of the second century,
it is utterly unaccountable that neither any notice of the time, place, and
circumstanees of its formation, nor any intimation whatever of its recent
origin, can bo found in any cotemporary, or any subsequent ecclesiastical
writer, Syrian, Greek, or Latin. For if the Aramaean Christians had
been destitute of the holy Scriptures in a language they could understand,
during one hundred and fifty years, and had then first received the full light
of the Gospel from this translation, surely the publication of it must have
produced an astonishing change in the character and condition of the Ara-
maean churches. It must have formed a grand epoch in their history ; and
the learned writers of those times, witnessing the wonderful changes that
occurred, could not have failed to notice them, and to dwell on them with
wonder and delight. And yet no notice is taken of any such occurrences
by any writer of those times, either Syrian or Greek. Surely this is very
strange; and the advocates of this hypothesis may be challenged to produce
a parallel case in the whole history of the Christian Church. For what
other equally venerated version can be named that was made as late as
A. D. *200, and for so numerous a body of Christians, previously for ages
destitute of a vernacular Bible, the formation of which is not noticed, nor
even alluded to, by so numerous a body of writers, all deeply interested
in the momentous transaction ?

If these arguments, collectively, affbixi satisfsictory evidence in the case,
then we are to believe that most of the books called o,aoXo/oi)fjirvai, or
the greater part of those forming the proper Peshito Canon, were translated
in the latter part of the first century, for so early they must have been
well known in Syria, having been written before the destruction of Jeru-
salem, A. D. 70. — Tlie only books forming an exception are the Gospel
and the Epistles of St. John, which, if written (as many suppose) near
the end of the century, may not have reached Syria in time to be trans-
lated before the commencement of the second century. — 'flic Peshito avn-
XsyofAEvai (namely, the 2d Epistle of Peter, the 2d and 3d of John, the
Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse) were undoubtedly translated con-
siderably later. Their style, which diifers somewhat from the rest of the


496 APPENDIX II.


Pesliito, and approximates towards that of the Philoxenian, is e\'idence of
this, ffuff, indeed, (Introduction, i. p. 356,) maintains that these books
originally formed a part of the Peshito Canon, and were afterwards left
out of it; while others maintain that they belong exclusively to the
Philoxenian version. Neither of these opinions is admissible. For if,
according to Hug, they originally belonged to the Peshito version, it is
strange that they should differ so much from the usual style of the Peshito,
and also that they are found, almost invariably, omitted in the MSS. of
this version. The opinion that they belong to the Philoxenian version, is
equally objectionable, for the style of these books coincides more with
that of the Peshito than with that of the Philoxenian, though differing from
both. It is, moreover, scarcely supposable, that these important books
remained unkno^vn to the Syrians, and untranslated by them, until so late
as the sixth century. Besides, they are actually quoted by Ephraim Syrus,
in the middle of the fourth century, or more than 200 years before the
Philoxenian version was produced. (Sec Htig, Introduction, vol. i. p. 356,
and Michaelis, Introduction, ii. i. p. 55.) It is therefore probable that they
were translated after the decease of those excellent men who translated the
Peshito canonical books ; and that, for this and other reasons, they were
held in less estimation by the Syrian Christians, and were but rarely
inserted among their canonical books.

THE PLACE OF TRANSLATION.

Most of those who carry back the origin of this version to the close of
the ^rs<, and the commencement of the second century, regard Antioch as
most probably the place where it was produced : because, there the first
Syrian church was gathered, and chiefly by the labors of Barnabas and
Paul ; there also the Apostle Peter taught; and John, surnamed Mark ;
and Silas, a companion of Paul ; and there the disciples first bore the name
of Christians. That city was the capital of all Syria ; and thither Paul
and Peter, and other apostolical men, often resorted. There the mother
church of all Syria long flourished ; and from it, undoubtedly, Christianity
was propagated, not only throughout Syria, but also in Mesopotamia, and
in all the countries in which the Syriac language prevailed. No place, in
that early age, afforded such advantages, or afforded such inducements, for
producing a correct Syriac version of the Christian Scriptures.

Michaelis, however, (Intioduction, ii. i. 39,) dissents from this opinion :
and he has been followed by most of the later German writers. He says :
" The common opinion in Europe, that the version was made at Antioch —
was never entertained in Asia :" and " it is highly improbable in itself:


APPENDIX II. 497


for, Greek being the current language in all the cities to the west of the
Euphrates, and especially at Antioch, no motive could have existed for
making a translation of the Greek Testament in that city. Though no
tradition were still extant, that the Syriac version was written at £Jes.sa,
it would naturally oocur as the most probable place, it being a city where
the Christian religion was planted in the first century, was adopted by its
sovereigns, who erected churches with all the magnificence of heathen
temples, — was thence early and widely propagated in the eastern parts of
Asia; — and a city, not only whose language was Syriac, but which, during
many ages, was the easteni metropolis of the Christian world." — Again he
says, (p. 74,) "Syria had an established church at an earlier period than
any country in Europe, for the kings of Edessa were converted to Cluisti-
anity before the middle of the first century, and the ceremonies of the Church
were attended with solemnity and pomp. When a religion is thus publicly
introduced, the first care is to procure an authentic version of the sacred
writings for the public service." — But, surely, it is assuming a great deal,
to afiirm, that Greek was so far the current language of all Syria west of
the Euphrates, and was so universally understood by the common people,
that no translation of the Scriptures into Syriac was there needed. (See
Dr. E. Robinson's Biblical Repository, vol. i. pp. 309-3(53, Andover, 1831.)
And, although we admit that Christianity early gained a footing in Osrhoena,'
and particularly at Edessa, yet theri; is so much uncertainty about the
conversion oi' Ab{/arus, and his making Christianity the religion of the state,
in theirs/ century, and so little evidence of the frequent resort of Apostles
and apostolic^T men to that city, or that it was really "the eastern metrop-
olis of the Cliristian world," till far into the second century, — that we may
suitably hesitate on this subject. In our \new, Antioch has as strong claims
as Eilessa, to be regarded as the birthplace of the Peshito, provided it
originated from Apostles or apostolical men, and was written as early as
the first century.

THE VALCE OK THE PESHITO VERSION.

The great value of this translation depends on its high antiquity, on
the competence and fidelity of the translators, and on the near affinity of
its language to that spoken by our T^ord and his Apostles. In all these
respects it stands pre-eminent among the numerous versions of the New
Testament.

On this subject we will here give the published statements of various
learned men who have devoted particular attention to this unrivalled
version.

33


498 APPENDIX II.


James Martini, a Professor at Wittemberg, in his elaborate Preface
to the Syriac New Testament, edited by Trostius, in 1010, says: "Let
those who speak lightly of this version know, that the Syriac, if not the
very language in which Christ himself conversed with his Apostles,
approaches very nearly to the vernacular tongue of our Saviour and his
companions, and that into it the recent books of the New Testament
were the first of all translated, and that, too, at the very time when the
Apostles, (those divine teachers whom Christ himself had educated, and
who were enlightened and instructed by the Holy Spirit,) were laying the
first foundation of the Christian church among the nations. I admit that
it is a version, but it is the Jirst and most ancient of all versions. It is a
version, I say, but one to be preferred before all others, as being more
authentic and more correct. It is a version, I say again, but made either
by some one of the Evangelists, or certainly by one of those who had the
Apostles present with them at Antioch, whom they could consult and hear
speak on many of the obscurer passages. And therefore to this version
only can we safely go, when any obscurity or difficulty occurs in the
original Greek. This only can be safely consulted and relied upon, when-
ever there is doubt respecting the import or the rendering of any passage.
By this only is the Greek text illuminated and correctly explained. For
the authority of this version very nearly approximates (proxime accedit)
to that of the Greek original."

Wolfgang Francius, a colleague of Martini, in his Treatise on Her-
meneutics, (p. 46.) says : " This version, all the learned pronounce and
declare to be the purest of all versions : and, doubtless, it was so exactly
transferred by the holy men, because Christ spoke and discoursed in the
Syriac language : so that we cannot doubt, that the Apostles and the apos-
tolical men carefully inquired after and laid up the very words of Christ,
and, with a holy veneration, endeavored to record them in this version." —
And (p. 38) he says : " Among all the versions of the New Testament,
that which holds the first rank, and is the most exact, felicitous, and divine,
is certainly the Syriac, which, undoubtedly, was most fiithfully handed
down by apostolical men, who remembered well the recently uttered words
of Christ and his Apostles, and understood their meaning. For Christ
himself used this language."

Emanuel Tremellius, in tlie Preface to his Syriac New Testament,
A. D. 1568, says: "It is entirely consonant with truth, that this version
was formed at the very commencement of the Christian church, either by
the Apostles themselves or by their disciples : unless we would suppose
that in writing they had regard only to strangers, and cared little or nothing
for their own countrymen."


APPENDIX II. 499


Brian Walton, in the Prolegomena to his Biblia Polyglotta, (p. 92,)
says: "The Syriac version of the New Testament exhibits the native
aspect, (fucicni nativam.) of the original text, and confirms its integrity.
For it follows the Greek text for the most part, xara. "jr^oa, strictly. For,
the New Testament being written in Greek, by men whose vernacular
language was Syriac, everywhere savors of Sijriasins. Hence, L'udovicus
de Dieu (in his Ilarmonia trium Linguarum) affirms, that the true import
of the phraseology of the New Testament can scarcely be learned, except
from the Syriac. For no one will say that the phraseology of the Evan-
gelists and Apostles is pure Greek : and it would be easier for Europeans
to imitate the elegance of Plato and Aristotle, than for Plato and Aristotle
to explain to us the New Testament, because the holy men conceived in
Syriac, that which they wrote in Greek, injecting the force of their ver-
nacular tongue into foreign words." After accounting for some diversity in
the orthography of certain Syriac words, such as Golgotha, Aceldama,
Mammnna, &c., in the Greek and Syriac New Testaments, by saying, that
the Peshito of both Testaments is written in the Antiochian dialect, and
not in the dialect of Jerusalem, he concludes thus : " From these most
ancient versions we infer, that this (the Syriac) language is of the highest
importance, because the writers of the New Testament, to whom this
language was vernacular, first preached the divine oraclos in it to the Jews,
and to the nations around them, and afterwards wrote theiji out in Greek,
yet retaining everywhere the s^nrit (yustiaii) of the Syriac. Nay, it was
vernacular to the Lord and Saviour himself; He drew it in with his
mother's milk : and in it, the only-begotten Son of God revealed to the
world the will of God, and the express promises of eternal life. This
language, lie consecrated by his holy lips ; in this language, He taught the
doctrines of the Gospel ; in it, He offered his prayers to the Father, laid
open the mysteries hidden from the world, and heard the voice of the
Father coming from heaven : so that we may say,

' Lingua honiinum est lingua nobilitata Dei.'

And. as a poet has said of a Syrian lexicographer,

' No9 docet hie unus, Numinia ore loqui."

Moreover, this is the language of the Christian doctors through nearly all
the East, as appears from the Liturgies and Divine Offices almost every-
where performed in it."

Rev. Ezra Stiles, D.D., Prcg. of Yale College, in his Inaugural
Oration, says : " Kindred with this, [the Hebrew,] or rather a hath-kol, and
daughter-voice, is the Syriac, in which the greater part of the New Testa-


500 APPENDIX II.


merit (I believe) was originally written, and not merely translated, in the
Apostolic age. . . . The Syriac Testament, therefore, is of high authoritt/ ;
nay, with me, of the same authority as the Greek."

The opinion of Dr. Stiles, that the greater part of the books of the
New Testament were originally written in Syriac, and not merely
translated, is far from being so strange as to have no other advocate.
Many have believed that Matthew's Gospel and the Epistle to the
Hebrews, if not also some other books, were originally written in Hebrew
or Jewish Aramaean. And J. A. Bolten (in his German Translation of the
Epistles, with Notes, Altona, 1800, 2 vols. 8vo.) maintains, that nearly all
the Epistles must have been first composed by the Apostles in Aramaean,
their native tongue, and then committed by them to some of their Greci-
zing companions, (e. g. Titus, Timotliy, Tertius, Sosthenes, &c.,) by v.'hom
they were translated into Greek before their publication. And Bcrtholdt
(Einlcitung, § 46, vol. i. p. 148-154) accedes to, and defends, this opinion.
And he thinks that, after due time for reflection, the learned world will
generally come into it. Such an hypothesis does not militate at all against
the authority of the original Greek, because it supposes the Greek transla-
tion to have been made by the special direction of the Apostles, and to
have been inspected, and fully approved by them. But it does show us
that the Syriac version may be something more than a mere translation,
and may have nearly, or quite equal authority, with the Gi-eek.

John D. Miciiaelis, in his Jntrod. to the New Testament, (translation
of Marsh, ed. London, 1802, vol. ii. P. I. p. 40, &c.,) says: "The Peschito is
the very best translation of the Greek Testament that I have ever read ;
that of Luther .... holding the second rank. Of all the Sysiac authors
with which I am acquainted, not excepting Ephraim and Bar-IIebiaeus, its
language is the most elegant and pure ; not loaded with foreign words, like
the Philoxenian version and other later writings, and discovers the hand
of a master in rendering those passages where the two idioms deviate from
each other. It has no marks of the stiffness of a translation, but is written
with the ease and fluency of an original : and this excellence of its style
must be ascribed to its antiquity, and to its being written in a city that
was the residence of Syrian kings. ... It is true that the Syriac version,
like all human productions, is not destitute of faults, and (what is not to
be regarded as a blemish) diflers fi'cquently from the modern mode of
explanation. But I know of none that is so free from error, and none
that I consult with so much confidence, in case of difficulty and doubt. I
have never met with a single iiistancc where the Greek is so interpreted,
as to betray any weakness or ignorance .in the translator : and though in
many other translations, the original is rendered in so extraordinary a


APPENDIX II. 501


manner as almost to excite a smile, the Syriac version must ever be read
with profound veneration." After a few sentences, Michaelis adds: "The
affinity of the Syriac to the dialect of Palestine, is so great as to justify,
in some respects, the assertion that the Syriac translator has recorded the
actions and speeches of Christ in the very language m which he spoke. . .
The diflcrence between the dialect which was spoken by Christ, and that
of the Syriac translator, consisted almost wholly in the mode of pronoun-
cing ; and if a proper use had been made of this advantage, the Syriac
version would be the most valuable commentary on the New Testament.
Many obscure passages would be made clear, if the words were still on
record which Jesus spoke with his disciples in the Aramaean language.
But the translator appears not to have been fortunate in rendering passagas
of this nature. . . . This circumstance alone affords sufficient evidence
that the Syriac vei"sion was not written by one of Christ's immediate
disciples.'''' — (Ibid. p. 44.) "The Syriac version .... leads us sometimes
to just and beautiful explanations, where other help is insufficient, e. g.
Matt. vi. 7; John, xvi. 2; Rom. ix. 22; and xiii. 3; and confirms some
ancient rites in which we are deeply interested, such as the celebration of
Sunday, 1 ■Cor. xi. 20. And in discovering cither the moaning of an
unusual word, or the unusual meaning of a common word, where no
assistance can be had from the Greek authors, the Syriac version may be
of singular service, as the translator was probably acquainted with the
language of common life, as well as the language of books ; and is, at
least, of equal authority with a Greek lexicon of later ages." — (p. 45.)
"The chief advantage to be derived from the Syriac version is, in applying
it to the purposes of criticism. Its high antiquity, and frequent deviation
from the common reading in pr.jsages of importance, must recommend the
use of it to every critic, who in general will find himself rewarded for his
trouble. . . . The difference between the Syriac version ai;d the greatest
part of the Greek manuscripts, is no ground fir condemning the former.
It is natural to suppose, from its groat antiquity, that it must deviate in
many cases from the Greek manuscripts, the olde*<t of which wore written
above four hundred years later, and arc mostly the productions of coun-
tries remote from Syria."


MANUSCRIPTS OF THE PESHITO NKW TESTAMENT.

In his Novi Test, Versiones Syriaca?, Ilafii. 17S1>, 4to.. /. G. C. Adler di-
vides the manuscripts of the Peshito New Testament into two classes, the
Jacobite and the Nestorian, the former written in Mesopotamia, Syria, Pales-


502


APPENDIX II.


tine, ind Egypt, the latter written in Persia and in the East Indies ; but there
is very little difference between the texts of the two. Most of the copies
of both omit the 2d Epistle of Peter, the 2d and 3d Epistles of John, the
Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse. They likewise generally omit the
story of the Adulteress, John, vii. 53 to viii. 11 ; and the disputed text,
1 John, V. 7 ; and also Luke, xxii. 17, 18.

The jVestorian manuscripts arrange the books of the New Testament
in an order peculiar to themselves. After the Four Gospels, which they
commonly put into into a separate volume, and denominate the Gospel,
they arrange the other books, which they call the Apostles, in the follow-
ing order: (1) the Acts; (2) the three Catholic Epistles, (1st Epistle of
Peter, 1st Epistle of John, and the Epistle of James) ; (3) the Fourteen
Epistles of Paul, in the same order as in our Bibles.

Both the Jacobites and the Nestorians divide all these books into
Lessons for public worship, and in such a manner, that the whole are read
over once a year. The Lessons from the Gospels are 248 ; and those
from the Acts and Epistles are 245. The length of the Lessons varies,
according to the solemnity of the days for wliich they were appointed, and
the connection and sense of the passages. The average length of the
Lessons is about 15-|- of our verses, or half the average length of our
chapters, Besides this division into Lessons for the public worship, there
is a division into Chapters or Paragraphs^ according to the sense. One
Nestorian manuscript divides these books in 165 Chapters ; each, on an
average, being equal to one and a half of our chapters. Another, a
Jacobite Codex Evengeliorum, divides the Four Gospels into 1389 short
Chapters or Paragraphs^ averaging less than three verses each.

Till recently, the greatest collection of Syriac manuscripts was to be
found in the Vatican Library at Rome, of which Asseman has given a
good account in his Bibliotheca Orientalis Clementina Vaticana. But
others were to be found at Florence, Milan, Paris, Vienna, Oxford, and
elsewhere. Adler (in the work above mentioned) gives account of Iburteen
Peshito manuscripts of the New Testament, eight of them Jacobite, and si:{
Nestorian. Of the eight Jacobite, seven contained only the Four Gospels,
and the eighth only the Acts and Epistles. Of the six Nestorian, three con-
tained all the books of the proper Peshito Canon ; one contained only the
Four Gospels ; and two contained only the Epistles of Paul. The dates of
these fourteen manuscripts ranged from a. d. 548, down to the Pteformation.
Those written before A. d. 800, were all in the Estrangelo character. Those
of later date, if Jacobite, slide more and more into the cursive chai-acter
terminating at last in the modern Syriac letters. The Nestorian manu-
scripts since a. d. 800, are written in the character still in use among the


APPENDIX II. • 503


Nestorian Christians, a modified form of the Estrangelo, differing con-
siderably from <^ur printed Syriac.

Dr. Buchanan^ who travelled extensively among the Syrian Christians
of India, in the years 1800 and 7, "discovered and obtained," (says Dr.
Home,) " numerous ancient manuscripts of the Scriptures, which are now
deposited in the public library at Cambiidge. One of these, which was
discovered in a remote Syrian church near the mountains, is particularly
valuable. It contains the Old and New Testaments, engrossed with
beautiful accuracy in the Estrangelo character, on strong vellum, in large
folio, and having three columns in a page." '"In the opinion of Mr.
Yeales, who has published a collation of the Pentateuch, it was written
about the seventh century." Mar Johanan, the Bishop of Gavalan in
Oroomiah, who visited this country a few years since, brought with him
a Syriac New Testament, written on vellum, in the Nestorian character,
and forming a very thick 4to. volume. Its date is not ascertained, but
from the character of the writing, it is probably not very ancient. This,
and some other Syriac manuscripts, are lodged in the Missionary Rooms
of A. B. For. Miss, at Boston. The Library of the American Oriental
Society, at Boston, likewise contains some Syriac manuscripts.

The " London Quarterly Keview," for December, 1845, has an article
on Valuable Manuscripts recently brought to England from the Monas-
teries of Egypt. This treasure was first discovered by Lord Prudhoe, in
1828, and has since been almost wholly bought up and transported to
England. The manuscripts arc in Coptic, Ethiopic, Syriac, and Arabic.
Their ages vary from a. d. 411 downwards. A manuscript, dated a.d. 4(M, of
the Syriac Peshito Pentateuch, is the oldest biblical manuscript. There are
about (kirti/ volumes of this version of portions of the Old Testament, dated
about the sixth century. Of the Peshito New Testament, there are forti/
manuscripts, of about the same date. The age of these, and the authority
of this version, will make them of great value to critical students of the
Bible. Among other works in this collection, there is said to be "the
Recension of the Old and New Testament, by Mar Jacob, Bishop of
Edessa" (in the seventh century.) Besides these biblical works, in this rich
collection there is a largo number of theological productions, of the same
ancient times.


EDITIONS OF THE PESniTO NEW TESTAMENT.

The first edition was printed at Vienna, in Austria, a. d. 1555, at the
expense of the Emperor Ferdinand 1., prompted by his Clianeellor. Albert
Widmansted. It was intended fi)r distribution among the Jacobite Christians


604 APPENDIX 11.


ill the East, whose Patriarch, in the year 1552, sent Moses of Mar den as his
envoy to Europe, for the twofold purpose of cementing a union with the
See of Rome, and procuring the printing of the Syriac New Testament for
the use of his people. Moses of Mar den brought with him a manuscript copy,
prepared in the East ; and likewise superintended the press. One other
manuscript, containing the Four Gospels, was also consulted. The edition
was neatly and accurately printed in 4to., containing the simple text, and
embracing all the Books of the New Testament, except the 2d Epistle of
Peter, the 2d and 3d of John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse.
It also omitted the story of the Adulteress. As this edition was nearly
all sent to the East, copies of it are rare in Europe.

2. In 1568, Emanuel Tremellius republished, at Heidelberg, in folio, the
edition of Vienna, in Hebrew characters, and accompanied it with a Latin
translation made by himself. He likewise had a Syriac manuscript, but
he made little use of it.

3. In 1571, Guij le Fevre de la Boderie^ [Bodet'iamis,) reprinted the
same text, both in Syriac and Hebrew letters, accompanied with a Latin
translation, in the third volume of the Antwerp Polyglott Bible. Boderie
also had a Syriac manuscript, brought from the East by William Postell,
from which he drew some various readings.

4 and 5. The fourth and fifth editions were in Hebrew letters, and
without points, printed at Antwerp, by Fhntin, in 1573 and 1575 ; the
first in 8vo. the other 18mo.

6. In 1584, La Boderie reprinted, at Paris, 4to., the Syriac text in
Syriac letters, with an interlineary Latin translation,

7. In 1579, Flias Hutter inserted Tremellius Hebrew-Syriac text in
his Polyglott New Testament, and supplied the deficient Books by Syriac
of his own making.

8. In 1621, Martin Trost, at Kothen, in Anhalt, reprinted the Syriac
text of the Vienna edition, in fair Syriac types, with a Latin translation ;
1 vol. 4to.

Hitherto, the 2d Epistle of Peter ; the 2d and 3d of John, the Epistle
of Jude, and the Apocalypse, had not been printed fmm manuscripts.
But in 1627, Lewis de Dieu published, at Leyden, the Apocalypse, from a
manuscript brought from India, which had been the property of Scaliger;
and in 1630, Edward Pocock published, also at Leyden, the four lacking
Epistles, from a manuscript in the Bodleian library at Oxfoid. And since
that time, the editions of the Peshito New Testament have contained all
the books that compose the New Testament Canon.

9. In 1645, the Peshito New Testament was inserted in the Paris
Polyglott; copied from the Antwerp Polyglott, and enlarged by the


APPENDIX II. 505


insertion of the wanting Epistles and the Apocalypse ; the whole being
revised and coiTcctcd by Gabriel Sionita.

10. In 1053, the London Polyglott republished the entire Syriac New
Testament from the Paris Polyglott, and added, for the first time, the
history of the Adulteress, from a manuscript belonging to Archbishop
Usher.

11. In \{)G4, Giles Guibir published his Syriac New Testament at
Hamburg, in a moderate sized 12mo. volume, for common use. Ilis text
is that of Trost, with some amendments, and is followed with a list of
various readings, chiefly derived from the printed editions. This is a
cheap edition and veiy common, and it would be a good edition, if the
typography were what it should be. It is generally accompanied with a
good compendious Lexicon to the Syriac New Testament.

12. In 1G84, Christian Knorre reprinted, in r2mo., at Salzbach,
Plantin's edition of 1573, in Hebrew letters.

13. In 1713, the Congregatio de Propaganda Fide, at Rome, printed
the New Testament, Syriac and Arabic, in 2 vols., ft)lio, for the use of the
Maronites.

14. In 1708, John Lcusden and Charles Schauf published at Lcyden
their excellent edition, Syriac and Latin, in large 4to., with a copious list of
the various readings in different editions. This edition was reprinted by
Schaaf in 1717. lie also published, with both editions, his highly-
esteemed Lexicon Syriacum Concordantiale in Novum Test. Syr., in large
4to,

15. In 1713, the Sehaafian text was inserted in the Biblia Quadralinguia
of Christian IteineccitcSy Leyden, folio.

10. In 1805, Richard Jones republished, at Oxford, in 4to., the
Sehaafian text, corrected by two Syriac manuscrij)ts in the Bodleian
Library, and by the Commentary of Bar-llebraeus, existing in the same
library.

17. In 1816, the British and Foreign Bible Society published at London,
[Richard Watts, printer,) a very beautiful edition of the Syriac text,
corrected by manuscripts, in 552 pages, 4to., intended for distribution in
India. " This edition"' (says Mr. Home) " was corrected for the press, as
far as the Acts of the Apostles, by the late Itev. Dr. Buchanan, and was
completed by Rev. Samuel Lee, D.D., Professor of Arabic in the University
of Cambridge."

18. In 1820, the British and ]'^oreign Bible Society reprinted tlieir
edition of 1810, in a fair, but smaller type, in 300 I'Ogcs, 4to. This edition
was, probably, superintended by Professor Lee.

19. Lastly : In 1840, the Missionaries of the A. B. C. F. ^L, at


606 APPENDIX II.


Oroomiah, in Persia, having completed their translation of the New
Testament into the vernaciilar dialect of the modern Nestorians, printed it,
■svith the Syriac text, in parallel columns, and both in the modern Nestorian
character, with a marginal notice of all the deviations of the Syriac from
the Greek text : printed at Oroomiah, in one vol., large 4to. The Syriac
text of this edition appears to coincide with that of the British and Foreign
Bible Society.

It has often been regretted, that the editors of the Peshito New Testa-
ment hiivo taken so little pains to collate manuscripts, and to obtain a
correct text. They have, for the most part, followed the editio princeps,
with some changes in the vowel points, and have admitted but few changes
of words on the authority of manuscripts. The received text, it is said,
appears to have been derived chiefly from the Nestorian family of manu-
scripts, and needs a thorough collation, especially with manuscripts of the
Jacobite family.


THE PHILOXENIAN VERSION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
ITS ORIGIN.

The history of this version is given in the Syriac Indorsements on its
manuscripts. One of the fullest of these Indorsements is subjoined to a
manuscript of the Four Gospels, in the Bibliotheca Angelica of the Augus-
tinians at liomc. It may be thus rendered in English : — " This Book has
been collated with two approved manuscripts. — This Book of the Four
Holy Evangelists was translated from the Greek tongue into Syriac, with
much accuracy and great labor ; and first, in the city of Mabvg (itO-OlD),
in the days of the holy Philoxenus, Confessor, and Bishop of that city.
It was afterwards collated, M'ith much care, by me, Thomas, a poor sinner,
with two highly approved and correct Greek copies, at Antonia, of the
great city Alexandria, in the Monastery of St. Anthony. Its completion
will, surely, conduce to the benefit of my sinful soul, and of the many who
love and desire to know and preserve this accuracy in the sacred books.
It was written and collated, at the place above named, in the year 927 of
Alexander, in the 4th Indiction. But, how much labor and anxiety I had,
in this and the other [books], the Lord only knoweth, who will recompense
every man according to his works in the day of his righteous judgment."
— The Indorsements on two other manuscripts, as cited by Adler, are sub-
stantially the same with this, although more concise. Instead of the two


4t?


APPENDIX II. 507


first sentences, they simply say : — " This is the Hool< of the Four Holy
Evangelists, which was translated fi-om the Greolt tongue in the year of
Alexander the Macedonian, 819, in the days of the holy Mar Philox-

ENUS," &C.

From these Indorsements, it appears that this translation was made at
Mabug, or Menbij, as it is called in Arabic, the Ilierapolis of the Greeks,
a city of Syria, near the Euphrates, and the See of both a Nestorian and
a Jacobite Bishop: and that it was made in the year 819 of Alexander,
that is, A. D. 508, and in the days of Philoxenvs, the Bishop of Mabug. It
is not said that it was made by Philoxenus, but only in his da )/.<;. This
Fhiloxenus, otherwise called Xenaias, was the Monoi)hysite Bishop of Ma-
bug, from A. D. 488 to a. d. 518, (see ^ssema/i's Bibliotheca Orient, torn. ii. p.
10-t(>;) but ho did not sit quietly on his throne. Being a warm parti>an
of Peter Fiillo, he was in sharp conflict nearly all his life, and he could
have had but little leisure for biblical studies. The persecutions he suf-
fered, procured for him the title of Confessor among his own sect. Ac-
cording to Moses Affhaeus, (in Assematis Bibliotheca Orient, torn. ii. c. 10,)
one PoLYCARP, a rural Bishop under Fhiloxenus, made this translation; and
dedicated it, in the year specified, to Philoxenus, by whom he had been
prompted to imdertakc the work. And hence this version is often called
the Translation of Pohjcarp.

It farther appears, from these Indorsements, that about 100 years afi:er
this version was made by Polycarp, one Thomas, a monk, at Antonia, a
quarter in the city of Alexandria, and in the monastery of St. Anthony, ir
that city, revised and rc-wrotc this translation, collating it with two (or
some indorsements say, three) highly approved Greek manuscripts. This
was in the year of Alexander 927, or a. d. 616. Who this Thomas was,
and when and where he lived, we learn from Bar-IIebraeus'' Chronicon,
(year of the Seleucidae 927, or a. d. 016.) Bar-Hebraeus there says: —
"About this time flourished Thoma-t Ilarclensis, (i. e. Thomas of Harkela,
or narkla,^\o;-»j, an obscure village in Palestine,) a monk of the monas-
tery of Taril ; who, in his childhood, learned Greek in the Kenserine
monastery, and was afterwards Bishop of Mabug. Being persecuted by
Domitian, the Meletian, he went to Egypt, and resided in Antonia of
Alexandria, in the holy monastery of the Antonies ; where, with praise-
worthy diligence, he restored, by a very exact and accurate emendation,
the holy Codex of the Gospels, and the other 13ooks of the New Testa-
ment, after the first version of them by the procuration of Philoxenvs, of
IMabug." — From this statement, and from an inspection of the manu-
scripts, it appears, that Thomas Harclmsis corrected the text of Poli/carp's
translation ; added various readings, derived from his collation of Greek


508 APPENDIX II.


manuscripts ; and subjoined other marginal notices, especially the division
into Lessons for the public worship through the year. That he did not
materially alter the text of Polycarp, Adler infers from a manuscript that
he examined at Florence, Avhich had none of the marginal notes and
indorsements of the Hardension recension, yet contained almost precisely
the same text ; whence he concluded, that it Avas copied from an ancient
manuscript of Polycarp's version, written before its revision by Thomas
Harclensis.

Such is the orir/in of the so-called PMloxenian version. It is the
translation of Poli/carj), as revised, and furnished with marginal notes, by
Thomas Harclensis. It was exclusively of Jacobite origin ; and it never
obtained currency among the other oriental sects. Yet it was not made
for any sectarian purposes ; nor in hostility to the Peshito version. The
sole aim of its author and reviser, was, to produce a Syriac version, which
should more perfectly resemble the Greek original as it existed in their
times. — It embraces all the books of the New Testament, except the
Apocalypse. The history of the adulteress, is also wanting ; but not so,
the 2d Epistle of Peter, the 2d and 3d of John, and the Epistle of Jude;
which are here found in the same style with the other books, and differing
from the style of the same Epistles in the Peshito version.

CIIAKACTEK AND VALUE OF THIS VERSION.

The prominent characteristic of the Philoxcnian version, is extreme
servilit)/, even to the habitual sacrifice of the purity and propriety of the
Syriac language. It generally copies the Greek phraseology, so exactly,
that it would often not be difficult to translate it back again into the identi-
cal words of the original. As the Syi-iac has no Article, the definite Article
of the Greek is often expressed by the Syriac pronouns for he, she, and
they. The Greek expletives, which could not be expressed in Syriac, are
sometimes transcribed in the translation. Greek comiwunds are awkwardly
expressed, by two or moi'c words in strange combination. Greek dimiim-
tives are imitated in the Syriac. The Greek construction is followed, as
closely as possible, without regard to the laws of Syriac construction.
And in all the proper names, even those of Hebrew origin, the Greek or-
thojrophy is imitated in Syriac letters, though subversive of every trace of
the etymology, and perverting the true pronunciation. Even the case
endings of these names are retained ; which could only serve to puzzle the
brains of a Syrian who did not understand Greek.

Of the value of this translation,^. I). Michaelis, (in his Introduction to
the New Testament, vol. ii. P. 1. p. G7, &c., ed. Marsh,) says: "The in-


APPENDIX II.


509


trinsic worth of the Pluloxcniau vorsion, ad-nifs no coin])arison with that
of the Poshito. The style is much inforior, aiul more Jidicult to be undfr-
stood ; the version is less accurate; and the traiishitor was loss acquainted
with the Greek. It is neither so valuable to a (Urine, i'or the puri^osc of
instruction in the Christi;ui relif^ion ; nor to the kwirned expositor, a»a mean
of explaining dillicult and doubtful passages. But the version is not devoid
of value, and is of real importance to a critic.^ whose object is to select a
variety of readings, with the view of restoring the genuine text of the
Greek original. For he nuiy be fully assured, that every phrase and
expression is a precise copy of the Greek text, as it stood in the manuscript
from which the version was made. But it is not prior to the sixth century ;
and as (he Peshito was written either at the end of the Jirst, or at the be-
ginning of the second century, it is of less importance to know the readings
of the Greek manuscript, that was used in the former, than those of the
original employed in the latter."


EDITIONS AND MANUSCRIPTS OF THE PHILOXENIAN VERSION.

No portion of this version was printed prior to the year 17T8. Of
course, up to that time, the learned had not the means of examining it, and
ascertaining its true character. The Rev. Oloucester Ridley, LL.D., Prebend
of Salisbury, about the middle of the last century, received a copy of the
entire version, brought from Amida in Mesopotamia, by a ^Ir. Palmer.
Ridley immediately applied himself to the study of Syriac: and in 17G1,
published a learned Dissertation, ilc Syriacarum Jiovi Tesfamenti ^^emionum
Indole et Usu ; in which he gave the first good account of both translations,
and a full description of the Philoxcnian. lie also prepared for the press,
a copy of the four Gospels, transcribeil from his Amidan manuscript, and
collated with another found at Oxford. But he did not live to see it
published. It was printed at Oxford, Syriac and Latin, with critical notes
&c., by Joseph White, Professor of Arabic, in 1778, 2 vols, in 1, 4to.
Profi'ssor White then proceeded to prepare the remainder of the work for
the press; and published the book of Acts and the seven Catholic Epistles,
in 1799; and the fourteen Epistles of Paul, in 1S03, uniform with the
previous volumes. The whole is ordinarily bound in two large vols, 4to.
This edition, so fir as I have learned, is the only one ever printed. — The
Manuscrijits of this version are less numerous than those of the Peshito.
Adler examined six manuscripts of the Gospels ; and he learned the exist-
ence of some others, containing the Epistles, Perhaps some of the forty
manuscripts of the New Testament, lately brought from Egypt, will be
found to bcloii'T to this version.


510 APPENDIX II.


OTHER SYRIAC VERSIONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

Besides the manuscripts of the Peshito and Philoxenian versions, Adler
found in the Vatican at Rome, one manuscript of the four Gospels, in a
translation different from either. It is more servile and inelegant than the
Peshito ; but is not so servile as the Philoxenian. Its idiom also differs
from both ; for it is not pure Syriac, but is a species of Chaldee, or Jewish

. Aramaean : and the characters in which it is written, approximate to the
Hebrew. Adler supposed it was made by some Jewish Christian, about
the fourth century. And as it is written in Jewish Aramaean, and not
Syriac, he called it the Hierosolymitan version. It has never been pub-
lished, and is not considered of any great value.

What some have called the Karkaphension version, is found not to be

^ a new version, but merely a recension of the Peshito Old and New Testa-
ments, made near the close of the tenth century, by a Jacobite monk
named David, residing in the monastery of St. Aaron, on Mount Sigari, in
the northeastern part of Mesopotamia. Dr. Wiseman, in his Horae Syri-
acae, (Rome, 1828, 8vo.,) has carefully investigated the history and charac-
ter of this recension, and he pronounces it to be the Peshito text, with
merely a change in the orthogra2)hy of proper names, and of Gracco-Syriac
words, conformably with the orthography of the Philoxenian version. Ho
also declares it to be of Monophysite or Jacobite origin. Dr. Lee, how-
ever, defends the old opinion, that it was intended for use among the
Nestorians.


SYRIAC TRANSLATIONS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.

Passing on to the Old Testament, we there find two distinct translations
of nearly the whole, as we before fotmd two of the New Testament. One
of these is likewise called the Peshito, and is very ancient. The other is
more modern, resembles the Philoxenian, and bears the name of the Sijriac
Hexapla^


APPENDIX II.


511


THE PESHITO SYRIAO OLD TESTAMENT.


ITS ORIGIN AND CIIAllACTER.


This version, as appears from internal evidence, was made directly
from the llehrca\ and before the Masoretic points came into use. It
is quoted and coiamented on by Ephraim Syrus, in the fourth century ;
was received by all the Aramaean Christians, of whatever sect, and
is held by them all in high estimation at the present day. They
have a tradition, that it is of the same age with the Peshito New Testa-
ment, and that it was made in the days of Thaddeui, the Apostle of
Mesopotamia, The learned also of modern times, suppose it to be
at least as old as the Peshito New Testament, placing its formation in the
latter part of the /I'rst century, or early in the second. From some diver-
sity in the mot^ of translating the difierent books, it is supposed not to
have been the work of one man : and from certain peculiarities of diction,
and tVom other considerations, it is concluded that the translators were
Christians. It is universally pronounced a judicious and faithful translation.
Bathe regarded it as a sure guide to the true state of the Hebrew text, in
the second centuiy : and both Dr. Kennkott and De Rossi derived from it
many valuable readings. "Indeed," (says Mr. Home, Introd, vol. i. p, 270,)
'■'■De Rossi prefers it to all the other ancient versions, and says that it closely
follows the order of the sacred text, rendering word for word, and is more
pure than any other," After comparing a large portion of the Syriac Pen-
tateuch with the Hebrew, the Septuagint, and the Latin Vulgate, the
impression on our own mind is, that the Syriac does not yield precedence,
in accuracy or fidelity, to either of the. other two versions; while in its
style, it is much more easy and natural. It is, undoubtedly, more servile
than the Pesliito New Testament, and throws less light on the true mean-
ing of the original ; yet, on the whole, it is a noble version. — It embraces
all the books of the Old Testament; but it arranges them in a different
order. First comes the Pentateuch ; then the book of Job ; then Joshua,
Judges, the two books of Samuel, the two books of Kings, and the two
books of Chronicles; then the Psalms, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastcs ; then
Piuth and the Canticles; then Esther; then Ezra and Nehemiah ; then
Isaiah, f .)llowed by the twelve minor Prophets ; then Jeremiah, followed
by Lamentations ; then Ezekiel ; and lastly, Daniel. — Most of the Apocry-
phal books of the Old Testament are extant in Syriac ; and several of
them arc found in the Peshito Codices of the canonical books: but I have
not the moans of ascertiiining their character as translations. According


:12 APPENDIX II.


to Mr. Home, four of them, viz. : Tobit, Judith, the third book of Macca-
bees, and the Story of Bel and the Dragon, were translated from the Greek.
Five others are said to be found in Syriac, viz. : Ecclesiasticus, Susanna,
Baruch, and the second and fifth books of Maccabees. But I have not
learned from what language they were translated.

EDITIONS OF THE PESHITO OLD* TESTAMENT.

(1.) The first edition was that in the Paris Polyglott, printed a. d. 1645.
The manuscript from which this was printed was imperfect, and Gabriel
Sionita supplied its deficiencies with translations of his o\vn, from the
Latin Vulgate. He also annexed the vowel points to the Syriac of the
manuscript. (2.) Waltoii's Pohjglott, a. d. 1657, also contained the
Peshito Old Testament, derived from four manuscripts, and from the text
of the Paris Polyglott. This edition, therefore, is purged from the facti-
tious additions of Gabriel Sionita. (3.) In 1823, the British and Foreign
Bible Society printed, at London, all the canonical books of the Old Testa-
ment, in this version ; 1 vol. 4to. pp. 705. In this edition, which was in-
tended for circulation among Eastern Christians, the voivel jjoinis are not
added, except to the proper names, and to here and there an ambiguous
word. Prof. Lee, who prepared the work for the press, made use of three
manuscripts. One of them, of great value, was brought by Dr. Buchanan
from India ; and this was collated by Dr. Lee very carefully. Another
belonged to the late Dr. Adam Clarke. The third was a Syriac Penta-
teuch, which Prof. Lee found in a college library at Oxford. Tliis is the
edition which I use. — ^These, so far as I know, are the only editions of the
entire Old Testament in this version. Of the book of Psalms only, there
have been six editions ; the last and best by Dathc, 1768, 8vo. Of the
Pentateuch there has also been a separate edition, by Kirsch, 1787, 4to. —
Of the mamiscripts of this version I can say little more than has already
been incidentally mentioned. Among those manuscripts lately brought from
Egypt, it is said, there is a Peshito Syriac Pentateuch, dated in the year
a. d. 464, besides thirty other volumes of this version, containing portions
of the Old Testament, and dated about the sixth century.


THE SYRIAC HEXAPLA.

Of this version I have heard of only tico manuscripts, and one of them
containing only a single book. These manuscripts lay hidden at Milan and
Paris, or rather were overlooked and not carefully examined, until after the


APPENDIX II. 513


middle of the last century. Thoy contain a Syriac translation of the cor-
rected Greek text oiiho Septuagint version in OrigerCs IIexapla, with all its
marginal notes and various readings, and hence its name, the Syriac Hexapla.
From the indorsements on the manuscripts of the Syriac IIexapla, we gather
the following facts. The Greek HexajAa of Origen was left by him at Caisarea
in Palestine, and fell into the hands of E'usebius, the ecclesiastical histori-
an, who was bishop of Cassarca ; and Eusebius, aided by his friend Pam-
phylus, early in the fourth century, extracted from this IIexapla a corrected
Greek text of the Septuagint, with all its marginal readings and glosses.
Of this Eusebian text, with such a margin, a copy, indorsed by Eusebius
himself, was found at Alexandria, in the beginning of the seventh century;
and Athanasius, at that time the Jacobite Patriarch of Alexandria, caused
one Mar Paulus, a monk and bishop, to translate that Greek copy into
Syriac, retaining all its marginal readings and glosses. This task Mar
Paulus accomplished, at Alexandria, in the year a. d. 016.

TRANSLATIOXS OF SOME OF THE SYRIAC INDORSEMENTS.

The tliird Indorsement to the second book of Kings. "And (now) this
(book) of the four kingdoms, [this second book of Kings,] is added (to
this volume), being translated from the Greek into Syriac. And this, here
present, is from the Heptajila Codex, which has seven compartments, and
which belongs to the library of Cicsarea, in Palestine; and from which,
likewise, the interpretations [fragments of versions, or the various read-
ings] arc annexed. And it was collated carefully, with the Codex of seven
compartments, there being at the end of it this inscription; — 'Fourth
Book of the Kingdoms, according to the seventy : and I, Eusebius, have
carefully corrected it, Pamphylus having commenced the correction." —
Immediately after, follows the fourth Indorsement, thus : — " This book is
translated from the Greek tongue into Syriac, from the version of the Seventy-
Two, by the religious monk, Mar Paulus, Bishop of the Faithful, in the
great city of Alexandria, by the injunction and solicitude of the holy and
blessed Athanasius, Patriarch of the Faithful, in the monastery of Mar
Zacchaeus Callinicensis, while they resided at Alexandria, in the days of
the religious Mar Theodorus, Prefect of the house of his monastery ; in
the year dccccxxviii., in the fifth Indiction, [that is, in the year of the
Greek, 928, or a. d. 617.] Whoever reads, let him pray for the religious
Mar Thomas, Deacon, and Syncellus of the holy and blessed Patriarch, Mar
Athanasius, Avho labored and was at pains ; and for the others who toiled
and labored with him, that God may grant them the salvation of their souls,
on account of their labor and pains, through the prayers of his [God's]


514 APPENDIX II.


Mother, and of all saints." — At the end of most of the other books are
Indorsements of much the same general import : thus, at the end of the
Book of Isaiah, there is the following : — " End of the Prophecy of Isaiah.
This is annexed (to the other books), from the Codex of Eusebius and
Pamphylus, which also they corrected from the Bibliotheca of Origen." —
See also the Indorsements at the end of the twelve minor Prophets, at
the end of the Book of Proverbs, end of the Book of Canticles, and of the
Book of Ecclesiastes-. In all these places, it is stated that the Syriac
translation was made from a Codex, set forth by Eusebius and Pamphylus,
from the Bibliotheca of Origen, containing various readings and marginal
notes.

PUBLICATION OF THE SYRIAC TIEXAPLA.

Both manuscripts of the Syriac Hexapla are written in the Estrangelo
character ; and are apparently ancient. That of Paris contains only the
4th [2d] Book of Kings : and it was first brought into notice in 1770, by
Paul Jacob Bruns. Tliat in the Ambrosian library at Milan, contains
nearly or quite all the Old Testament. To this valuable manuscript, John
Baptist Branca, a doctor in the Ambrosian college, directed the attention
of Dr. Kennicott and of J. P. Bruns, while on a visit to Milan, about the
year 1767. A few years after, /. J. Bjornthal, of Sweden, visited Milan,
examined the manuscript, sent some specimens of it to England and
Sweden, and also published a description of it. De Rossi then became
interested in it, and in 1778, published the first Psalm as a specimen, ac-
companied by a full account of the manuscript. In the same year, Matthew
Norberg, of Sweden, visited Milan, and took a copy of a large part of it :
and in the year 1787, he published at Lund, in 4to., the books of Jeremiah
and Ezekiel, from his copy. The next year, Cajetan Bugatus, of Milan,
published the book of Daniel, Syriac and Latin, 4to. He also commenced
the publication of the book of Psalms, about the same time; but it was
not carried through the press till 1820. In the mean time, Bruns had
procured a copy of the Paris inanuscrlpt. But neither he nor Norberg,
met with sufficient encounigomont to proceed with the publication of their
copies. They left their manuscripts in the hands of Eichhorn ; who at
length transfei-red them to Henry Middledorpf, a professor in the university
of Breslau, hi Silesia ; and he published so much of these transcripts, as had
not before been published, — (viz. the 4th [2d] book of Kings, Isaiah, the
twelve minor Prophets, Proverbs, Job, Canticles, Lamentations, and Eccle-
siastes,) — in one large vol. 4to., Berlin, 1835; with a learned Preface,
containing the facts above statetl. The following books, we suppose, have
never been published, viz. : the entire Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Ruth,


w^'m


APPENDIX 11. 515


first and second of Samuel, first of Kings, the two books of Chronicles,
Ezra, Nchemiah, and Esther.

This Syriac version adheres very closely to the Greek ; and therefore
will aid us, so far as it extends, in ascertaining zvhat text of the Septuagint
was approved by Origcn, and by Eusebius and Painphylus. It may also
help us to recover some of the deviations from the Septuagint, in the
several Greek versions collated by Origen. Of course, for criticism of the
Septuagint Greek text^ it is of great value. But for the interpretation of
the Scriptures, it cannot be of much use, on account of its servility, and its
adherence to the Septuagint. As a translation, it is very like the Philox-
enian New Testament : which Thomas Harclensis was fevising afc Alexan-
dria at the very time, when Mar Paulus was producing this version. As
the Pesliito New Testament is far more valuable, for excgetical purposes,
than the Philoxenian version ; so the Peshito Old Testament which is a
faithful translation from the Hebrew, must be far more valuable to an in-
terpreter, than the Syriac Hexapla, which is a servile translation from the
Septuagint Greek,


THE WfV.


J


?SfTSent:orTheboo.ofthe

Prmcelon Theological Semmary-Speer Ubrar^^
