The Decades of the Newe Worlde (The First Three English Books on America) (Peter Martyr d'Anghiera (Richard Eden, trans.; Edward Arber, ed.), 1555)
==========================================================
Peter Martyr's De Orbe Novo (1511-30) in Richard Eden's 1555 English translation - the first history of the New World and the first English book on America. Arber's 1885 reprint of Eden's text, with the two companion early English books on America.

The  Decades  of  the  newe  worlde  or  west  India,  conteynyng  the  nauigations\
and  conquestes  of  the  Spanyardes,  with  the  pai'ticular  description  of  the  moste
ryche  aud  large  landes  and  Ilandes  lately  fozinde  in  the  west  Ocean  perteynyng
to  the  inhe7'itaunce  of  the  hinges  of  Spayne.  In  the  which  the  diligent  reader
may  not  only  consyder  what  commoditie  may  hereby  channce  to  the  hole  christian
world  in  tyme  to  come,  but  also  learne  many  secrecites  touchynge  the  lande,  the  sea,  )
and  the  staj^res,  ve^y  necessarie  to  be  knozven  to  al  such  as  shal  attempte  any  natn-
gations,  or  otherwise  hatte  delite  to  beholde  the  stra^tge  and  woondcrfull  woorkes
of  God  and  fiature.  Wrytten  in  the  La  tine  tounge  by  Peter  Martyr  of
Angleria,  and  translated  into  Englysshe  by  Rycharde  Eden.

Londini,  In  sedibus  Guilhelmi  Powell. Anno.  1555.

/

4t-  ->

98

The  Table  of  the  Contents  of  this  Booke  (besyde  the  Decades)
(Richard)  Eden. Latin  Epistle  to  King  Philip  and  Queen  Mary  .....

(Richard)  Eden. To  the  Reader  ......-•''

45

46-48

49-60

[Section  I. .....  .

(Pictro)  Martire's  Epistle  to  the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  30  September  1516

61-204.]

C3-64

Contents.

IX

The  First  Decade  (or  Ten  Books)

Book  I. .

Book  II. .

Book  III.  .

Book  IV. .

Book  V. .

Book  I. .

Book  II. .

Book  III.  .

Book  IV. .

Book  V. .

Book  I. .

Book  II. .

Book  III.  .

Book  IV.  .

Book  V. .

(/"<?;•  cotileii/s,  see  pp

391-3)

{For  contents,  see  pp

393-4)

(/br  contents,  see  pp.

395-7)

65-68
68-72

73-79
79-82
82-87

Book  VI. .
Book  VI  r.
Book  VII r.
Book  IX. .
Book  \. .

The  Second  Decade
106-111  Book  VI.  .
III-114  Book  VII.

I14-118  BookVIII.
118-120  Book  IX.  .
120-122 Book  X. .

The  Third  Decade

137-142

Book  VI.  .

142-145

Book  VII.

146-150

Book  VIII

150-156

Book  IX.

156-160

Book  X.

Of  the  Landes  and  Ilandes  lately  founde
Pope  Alexander  VT. Bull  dividing  the  New  World  between  the  Spaniards  and  the  Portuguese,
4  May  1593 . .  .  .In  Latin  and  English.  .....

65-105

87-90

90-93

94-96

96-102

103-105

106-136

122-125
1 26- 1 29
129  130

130-134
134  136

137-185
161-165
165-169
170-174

175-178

178-185

186-2CO

201-204

[Section  II.  .  ,  .  205-242.]

(Richard)  Eden. To  the  Reader . " .

(Gonzalo)  Fernandez  de  Oviedo  y  Valdes, Epistle  to  the  Emperor  Charles  V. .

The  [Natural]  Hystorie  of  the  weste  Indies

Of  the  ordinary  nauygation  from  Spayne  to  the  Weste
Indies  ......

Of  twoo  notable  thynges  as  touchyng  the  West  Indies :
And  of  the  great  rychesse  brought  from  thense  into
Spayne  ......

Of  the  mynes  of  golde,  and  the  maner  of  vvoorkynge  in
theym  ......

Of  the  maner  of  fyshynge  for  perles

Of  the  familiaritie  which  certeyne  of  the  Indians  haue
with  the  deuyll,  and  howe  they  receaue  answere  of
hym  of  thynges  to  coome ....

Of  the  temperature  of  the  regions  vnder  or  neare  to  tlie
burnt  lyne  cauled  TorriJa  zona  or  the  Equinoctiall :
and  of  the  dyuers  seasons  of  the  yeare

Of  dyuers  particular  thynges,  as  woormes,  serpentes,
beastes,  foules,  trees,  etc. ....

01  trees,  fruites,  and  plantes  ....

2X0

211

211-213
213-215

215-216

217-21S

219-225
225-227

Of  Reedes  or  Canes  .....

Of  venemous  apples  wherwith  they  poyson  theyr  arrowes

Of  fysshes  and  of  the  maner  of  fysshynge  .

Of  th[e]increase  and  decrease,  (that  is)  rj-synge  and
faullynge  of  our  Ocean  sea  and  Southe  sea  cauUed  the
sea  of  Sur ......

Of  the  strayght  or  narowe  passage  of  thelandelyingebetwene
the  North  and  South  sea,  by  the  whiche  spyces  may
much  sooner  and  easlyer  be  brought  from  the  Ilandes
of  Molucca  into  Spayne  by  the  West  Ocean  then  by
that  way  wherby  the  Portugales  sayle  into  East  India

Of  the  maners  and  customes  of  the  Indians  of  the  firme
lande,  and  of  theyr  women ....

Of  the  chiefe  Ilandes  Hispaniola  and  Cuba

Of  the  Ilande  of  Cuba  and  other ....

Of  the  lande  of  Bacoaleos  cauled  Terra  Baccalearuni,
situate  on  the  North  syde  of  the  firme  lande.  .

207
208-209
210-242

227-229
229-230
230-233

233-234

234-236

237-23S

239-241

241

242

[Section  III.

Of  the  Universal  Carde  and  Newe  Worlde  .  .  245

(Richard) Eden. A  Discourse  of  the  Vyage  made  by

the  Spanyardes  rounde  abowte  the  Worlde .  .  246-247

Maximilian Transilvanius. Epistle to the Emperor

Charles  V. .  .  .  .  .  .  247-248

243-280.]

(Antonio)  Pigafetta. A  briefe  Declaration  of  the  Vyage

or  Navigation  made  abowte  the  Worlde . .  249-262

Of  the  prices  of  Precious  Stones  and  Spices . .  263-269

Cadamosto  of  the  Dooues  of  the  Ilande  of  Midera .  270

Of  the  Ilande  of  saynt  Thomas  under  the  Equinoctiall  line  270

(Francisco)  Lopez  de  Gomara. The  Debate  and  Stryfe  betwene  the  Spanyardes  and  Portugales

for  the  diuision  of  the  Indies  and  the  trade  of  Spices  [at  the  Conference  at  Badajos,  in  1524] 271-274

(Amerigo)  Vespucci.
(Andreas)  de  Corsali.

}

Of  the  Pole  A.ntartike  and  the  Starres  about  the  same,  &c.

277-2S0

[Section  IV.

Of  Moscouie  and  Cathay

(Galeazzo)  Butrigarius
(Sebastian)  Cabot  .

2S3
2S3

281-334-]

(Sebastian) Miinster. (Jacopo) Gastaldo. A briefe
description  of  Moscouia  ....

2S3-294

291-393

Contents.

(Jacobus)  Ziglerus.

Of  the  North  Regions  and  of  the  modernte  and  conlinuall
hcate  in  couKle  regions  aswell  in  the  nyght  as  in  the
day  in  the  sooninier  season

Schondia ......

Cironh\nde  .....

Islande ......

Of  the  North  Regions

Laponia

Norwegia  or  Norway

Suecia  or  Svcthlande

Bothnia

Gothia  or  Gothlande

Finland  and  Eningia

295-298
298-299

299

300

(Girolamo)  Cardano. Of  the  difference  of  Regions,  and  causes  of  great  cities

(Paolo)  Giovio,  Bishop  of  Nocera. The  Historic ... of  the  Legation  or  Ambassade  of  ths

greate  Basilius  Prince  of  Moscouia  to  Pope  Clement  VII.  of  that  name .
(Sigismund)  Liber, Other  notable  Things  concerning  Moscovia

The  description  of  the  regions,  people,  and  ryuers,  lying

North  and  Easte  from  Moscouia
Of  the  famous  ryuer  of  Tanais ....  324-325 The  nauigation  by  the  frosen  sea

Edward  VI.  The  Copy  of  the  Letters  Missive  .  .  .  sent  to  the  Kynges,  Princes,  and  other
potentates  inhabytynge  the  Northeast  partes  of  the  worlde  towarde  the  myghtye
Empire  of  Cathaye. 1553 .  . In  Latin  and  English. .  .

322-324

IMore  directly  from  Moscouia  to  Cathay
Of  the  Tartars

}

[Section  V.
(Francisco)  Lopez  de  Gomara.
(Sebastian)  Cabot.

Of  the  foreknovvleage  that  the  Poet  Seneca  had  of  the
fyndynge  of  this  new  Worlde  and  other  Regions  not
then  knowen  ......

Of  the  great  Ilande  which  Plato  cauled  Atlantica  or
Atlantide ......

Of  the  colour  of  the  Indians  ....

Why  they  were  cauled  Indians ....

The  fyrste  discouerynge  of  the  Weste  Indies

What  maner  of  man  Chrystopher  Colon  was :  and  howe
he  Came  fyrst  to  the  knowleage  of  the  Indies

What  labour  and  trauayle  Colon  tooke  in  attemptyng  his
fyrst  vyage  to  the  Indies  ....

Of  newe  Spayne  cauled  Noua  Hispania,  or  Mexico

Of  Peru .......

Of  the  great  ryuer  cauled  Rio  de  la  Plata  (that  is)  the
ryuer  of  syluer  .....

335-352.]

Other  notable  thynges  as  touchinge  the  Indies

337

337-338
338
339
339

340

340-342
342
343

343-344

Of  the  hygher  East  India  cauled  India  Teicera  or  Terciera
Of  the  landes  of  Laborador  and  Baccalaos,  lyinge  west  and

northwest  from  Englande,  and  beinge  parte  of  the

firme  lande  of  the  West  Indies
The  discouerynge  of  the  lande  of  Floryda
An  opinion  that  Europa,  Africa,  and  Asia,  are  Ilandes :

and  of  certeyne  nauigations  abowt  the  same  .
That  the  Spanyardes  haue  sayled  to  the  Antipodes  (that

is)  suche  as  go  fiete  to  fiete  ageynst  vs,  and  inhabite

the  inferiour  hemispherie  or  halfe  globe  of  the  earthe,

contrarie  to  th[e]oppinion  of  the  owlde  writers
Who  fyrst  founde  the  needle  of  the  compasse,  and  the  vfe

therof  ......

The  Situacion  and  byggenes  of  the  earth .

What  degrees  are  ......

(Richard)  Eden. A  demonstration  of  the  roundnesse  of  the  Earth  ....

Diodorus,  Sicidus. What  credit  ought  to  bee  gyuen  to  Wryters  as  touchynge  the  workes  of  nature

295-306

301-303
303-304
305
305
306
306

307

308-317

318-321

325-326
327-330
330-332

333-334

337-350
344

344-345
345-346

346-347

347-348

348-349

349

349-350

350
351

[Section  VL  .  .  .  353-369-]

(Richard)  Eden. Th.Q  ^re^3.cQ  io  The  Booke  of  Metals ,  .  .  .  .  '355

(Vannuccio)  Biringuccio. Of  the  generation  of  Metalles,  and  their  mynes ;  with  the  maner  of

fyndinge  the  same ..........  356-362

Of  the  myne  of  golde  and  the  qualitie  therof  in  particular  362-366 | Of  the  myne  of  siluer  and  the  qualitie  therof  .  366-36S

Diodorus,  Sicuhis. The  maner  of  vvorkynge  in  golde  mynes  in  Egipt  in  owld  tyme .  .  369

[Section  VII.  .  .  .  37I-390.]

(Richard) Eden. The  Description  of  the  two  Viages  made  owt  of  England  into  Guinea
(Richard)  Eden, A  breefe  Description  of  Afifrike ......

The  fyrst  Vyage  to  Guinea .........

The  Second  Vyage  to  Guinea  ........

Gemma  Phrysius. The  maner  of  fyndynge  the  Longitude  of  Regions  by  dyuers  waycs .

373

374

375-378

389-390

A BRYEFE REHERSAL OF THE CONTENTES OF THE DECADES
(Richard)  Eden. Th[e]  Interpret  ours  excuse  .....

Index.

391-398

398

399-408

f  3a  e  df  ^  c  e.

the  united  wit  and  genius  of  the  nation  (through  all  the
vicissitudes  of  earthly  empire)  can  raise  it.  It  rests  not  long
at  the  summit ;  but  first  declines,  and  then  decays.  In  its  full
ripeness,  it  oftentimes  lights  up  the  mind  of  younger  and  suc-
ceeding races  ;  and  so,  at  length,  its  life  and  vitality  pass  away.
Thus  has  the  now  blazing,  now  dim,  torch  of  human  knowledge
and  mind-craft  been  handed  down  to  us  over  the  heads  of
the  nations,  through  all  the  successive  Ages  of  Time.

Human  literature  is  also,  like  human  nature,  in  many  essen-
tials evermore  the  same  in  all  Ages.  As  is  the  life  of  a  Man ;
so  is  the  mind,  that  is,  the  higher  life,  which  is  the  glory  of  a
Nation.  Both  alike  pass  through  Inception,  Growth,  Flores-
cence, Decay,  and  Death :  both  alike  but  minister  to  the
purposes  of  a  Power  greater  than  they,  until  the  cycle  of  His
plans  shall  be  completed.  Then  cometh  the  end,  when  the
World  shall  crack  at  the  fiat  of  the  Almighty  Trinity.

Instances  of  this  Law  of  successive  Literary  Cycles
inter-ringing  one  with  the  other,  readily  suggest  themselves.
Such  was  the  Literature  of  Greece  in  its  earlier  relations  to  Egypt
and  Phoenicia ;  and  in  its  later  to  Rome.  Such  also  that  of
the  Renaissance  in  Italy,  in  respect  to  the  Greek  literature  of
Byzantium ;  and  to  its  subsequent  influence  (which,  either  as
to  fulness  or  extent,  has  hardly  yet  been  measured)  on  the
rawer nations of Spain, Germany, France, and England.

TILL  labouring  in  the  diffusion  of  English  Literature :  we  here,  with  heart-felt
pleasure,  present  the  reader  with  reprints  of  three  exceedingly  rare,  curious,
and  costly  Cosmographical  Works;  which  are  also  the  very  earliest  printed
documents  in  our  language,  relating  to  South,  Central,  and  North  America.

It  rarely  falls  to  the  lot  of  man  to  be  able  to  put  one's  hand  on  the  very
earliest  beginnings  of  a  mighty  literature.  Yet  it  is  not  too  much  to  say,  that  of
all  the  vast  multitude  of  English  books  that  have  been,  or  ever  will  be,  pro-
duced, either  in,  or  relating  to,  what  we  call  our  New  World ;  the  three  Works
reprinted  in  this  Volume  are  the  very  first  and  earliest.  However  mighty  and
majestic,  however  subtle  and  eloquent,  however  deep  and  far-reaching,  the
American-English  literature  may  become ;  here  are  its  first  fruits  !  Whatever
period  of  mental  florescence  and  splendour  may  yet  be  in  store  for  the  EngUsh-
speaking  races  on  that  vast  Continent;  with  these  three  Works  begins  the
printed  English  Story  of  their  Action,  their  Mind,  and  their  Progress.

Almost  all  nations  light  their  lamp  with  fire  borrowed  from  their  predeces-
sors. They  commence  with  translations ;  progress  to  imitations  ;  and  then,
often  by  distinctly  marked  steps,  the  Literature  mounts  up  to  the  height  to  which
Such  was  that  of  Spain  (which  now  we  consider  so  dead),  with
reference  to  the  anterior  civilisation  and  letters  of  the  Moorish
kingdom  there.  Such  undoubtedly  has  been,  and  will  be  the
literature  of  England ;  now,  it  may  be,  in  the  early  afternoon
of  its  glory.  And  such  has  been,  and  will  be  that  of  English-
America;  now  in  the  morning  of  its  strength  and  power.
In  the  words  of  the  great  and  wise  Preacher,  "  To  evcrj'
thing  there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  to  every  purjjose  under
heaven."

Under  any  circumstances,  therefore,  the  present  Texts  would
excite  great  interest;  whatever  might  be  the  nature  of  their
contents.  It  is  pleasant,  however,  to  find  that  each  of  them  has
for  us  modern  readers,  a  distinct  interest  and  a  strong  charm  :
while  all  three  do  aflford  us  a  most  vivid  picture  of  those  early
days  of  oceanic  discovery;  of  the  terrible  real  dangers,  and  the
still  more  terrible  imaginary  ones,  undergone  and  dared  by  the
many  noble-hearted  Portuguese  and  Spaniards  for  themselves
and  for  us ;  when  they  wan,  in  their  little  cockboats,  for  the
succeeding  Human  Race,  a  truer  knowledge  of  the  Globe  in
which,  by  the  Divine  Providence,  it  has  been  placed.

But  the  first  impression — the  most  salient  and  significant
interest  of  this  volume — is  that  it  contains  reprints  of  T/ie
first  Three  English  books  on  AmcrUa.

Xll

Preface.

II.

Ur  next  consideration  respects  their  contem-
porary standpoint ;  their  relation  to  the
story  of  the  nation,  for  whom  the  three
Texts  were  printed:  and  especially  to
supply  Eden's  omissions,  as  regards  the
very  early  oceanic  voyages  of  the  English,
both  East  and  West.
These  publications  are  of  great  and  perpetual  interest,
inasmuch  as  they  photograph  for  all  time,  the  fragmentary  and
imperfectly  attained  knowledge,  and  the  vast  and  credulous
wonderment,  prevailing  in  England  in  respect  to  far-distant
countries,  during  the  reigns  of  Henry  VIII.  and  his  two  im-
mediate successors.  The  Texts  of  tliis  volume  embrace,  in  fact,
all  that  the  gentry  and  merchants  of  England  could,  down
to  the  year  1555,  a.d.,  read  in  the  tongue  in  which  they  were
bom,  of  the  wonderful  discoveries,  and  still  more  marvellous
conquests,  of  the  Portuguese  and  Spaniards  in  the  two  Indies.
Neither  was  this  amount  of  printed  information  much  added
to,  in  Eden's  lifetime.  His  greatest  literary  feat — the  Compila-
tion of  1555 — found  no  immediate  imitators  :  so  that  it  was  left
to  himself  (after  twenty  years  more,  of  great  vicissitude,  had
passed  over  his  head)  to  undertake  its  repetition,  in  the  form
of  a  Second  and  much  revised  Edition  of  this  labour  of
love ;  in  the  preparation  of  which  he  died.  This  revised  Com-
pilation finally  appeared  in  1577,  "set  in  order,  augmented,
and  finished  "  by  Richard  Willes,  under  the  fresh  title  of  The
History  of  Traitayle  in  the  West  atid  East  Indies,  and  other
conn  treys  lying  cither  way,  (5^<r.  It  was  five  years  later  (1582),
that  R[ichard]  H[akluyt]  published  his  first  Collection,  under
the  title  of  Diners  voyages,  6-r.

An  enquiry  into  the  printed  naval  literature  of  Queen
Elizabeth's  reign,  has  also  elicited  the  fact,  that  it  was  not
until  about  that  same  year  (1577),  that  our  Oceanic  Literature
fairly  began  to  constitute  a  distinct  section  of  English  books.
It  soon,  however,  greatly  increased  in  bulk,  variety,  and
interest ;  until  now,  it  has  no  compeer  in  any  other  language.
Eden  is  therefore,  in  very  deed,  the  Pioneer  of  British
geographic  research,  the  very  First  of  our  Naval  Chroni-
clers, and  the  Herald  and  Forerunnei  of  all  our  subsequent
discoveries  and  victories  at  sea.  So  that  in  English  literary
history,  Richard  Eden  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Richard
Hakluyt,  that  Richard  Hakluyt  does  to  Samuel  Purchas ;  and
Samuel  Purchas,  to  our  present  Hakluyt  and  Royal  Geo-
graphical Societies.

This  multifarious  volume  should  be  studied  in  conjunction
with  the  inland  Chronicles  of  Halle,  Grafton,  Stow,  and  others;
together  with  the  more  modern  histories  of  the  Reformation
Age.  These  are  chiefly,  if  not  exclusively,  occupied  with  home
and  continental  affairs ;  and  but  rarely  travel  further  abroad.
In  this  direction,  this  Work  will  help,  in  a  very  important
manner,  to  complete  for  us,  the  external  history  of  England,
during  the  period  1511-1555,  a.d.

2.  It  will  soon,  however,  be  seen  that  it  docs  this  rather  by
way  of  narrating  the  deeds  of  other  nations,  and  thereby  teaching
and  guiding  our  forefathers  to  do  the  like ;  than  by  describing

the  English  navigations  of  its  own  time.  Indeed,  there  are
only  two  English  voyages  described  in  it  with  any  detail,  and
those  are  rather  late  ones,  viz.,  the  voyages  to  Guinea  in  1553
and  1554.  Yet  these  accounts  (the  very  earliest  of  their  kind
ever  printed  in  our  language)  were  not,  as  it  is  quite  evident
from  page  388,  included  in  the  original  conception  and  plan
of  the  Work:  but  were  added,  just  as  the  book  was  being  com-
pleted, by  way  of  a  postscript ;  the  extra  expense  of  Avhich,  was
borne  by  Master  Toy,  the  London  printer  and  publisher.

It  is  also  to  be  especially  noted,  that  this  omission  did  not
arise  because  there  were  no  English  Voyages  to  relate  ;  but  be-
cause the  custom  of  narrating  them  in  print  had  not  yet  arisen
in  our  language.  Sea-Histories  had  not,  as  yet,  become  an
section  of  our  Literature.

Inasmuch,  therefore,  as  so  large  a  portion  of  this  Volume  is
occupied  with  the  famous  deeds  of  other  nations,  and  particu-
larly of  those  of  the  Spaniards  ;  it  may  be  well  (as  it  is  indeed
but  just  to  our  own  race)  to  place  in  the  forefront  of  them  all,
a  very  slight  account,  by  way  of  a  rescue  from  oblivion,  of  the
sea-doings  and  sea-daring  of  our  forefathers  in  the  reigns  of
Henry  VIII.,  Edward  VI.,  and  Mary  : — narrating  the  Oceanic
voyages  with  fuller  detail  than  those  to  the  Continent  and  the
Levant,  as  they  were  the  more  adventurous  and  difficult.

3.  From  the  capture  of  Constantinople  in  1454,  till  after  the
battle  of  Lepanto  in  1572  ;  there  was  an  almost  ceaseless  fight
between  the  Christians  and  the  Turks  along  the  eastern  shores
of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  The  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jeru-
salem, after  they  had  been  driven  from  Rhodes  in  1522,  finally
settled  at  Malta  in  1530;  where  by  their  heroic  valour  in  the
frightful  siege  in  1565,  they  materially  contributed,  with  the
great  naval  victory  of  Don  John  of  Austria,  to  stem  the  flow
of  Turkish  invasion,  which  else  threatened  to  swallow  up  all
Christian  States.

Recollecting  that  the  formidable,  ruthless,  and  barbaric  power
of  the  Turkish  empire  was  at  this  time  ever  surging  onward
and  westward  in  those  eastern  seas;  it  will  interest  most  of  us  to
know  that  there  was  a  regular  organised  and  direct  commerce
by  sea  between  England  and  the  Levant  so  early  as  15 11,  a.d.;
and  for  many  years  afterwards.  For  our  knowledge  of  this  we
are  indebted  to  our  great  English  Worthy  and  famous  Cosmo-
grapher  Richard  Hakluyt,  Preacher;  sometime  a  Student  of
Christ  Church  in  Oxford :  who,  in  the  second  edition  of  his  great
work  entitled  The  Principal  Navigations,  Voyages,  Traffi(jues,and
Discouerics  of  the  English  Nation,  oj^r.  6^^.,  London,  1 599-1 600
fob,  has  preserved  for  us  the  following  important  note  on —

The  aidiqnitie  of  the  trade  with  Engli/Ji  JJiips  into  the  Leuant.

|N  theveeresofoure  Lord,  1511,  1512,  &c.,  till  the  yccre  1534.
diuers  tallfliipsofZ^JW^/c;/,  namely,  The  Chrijlophcr  Cainpion,
wherein  was  Factor  one  Rogci-  IVhitco/iie;  the  Mary  George,
wherein  was  Factor  William  GreJIiam;  the  great  Mary
Grace,  the  Owner  whereof,  was  William  Gttit/oit,  rnd  the
mafler  one  John  Hcly;  the  Trinitie  /■itz-rcilliams,  whereof  was  mafler
Laurence  Arkcy;  the  Matthew  of  London,  whereof  was  mafter  Willia/n
CapHiig,  with  certaine  other  (hips  oi  Southam/'ton  and  Bri/low,  had  an
ordinarie  and  vfuall  trade  to  Sicilia,  Catidie,  Chio,  and  fomewhilcs  to
Cyprus,  as  alfo  to Tripolis  and  Barutti  [Beyrout]  in  Syria. The  com-

Preface.

Xlll

modities  which  they  caried  thither  were  fine  Kerfies  of  diuers  colours,
courfe  Kerfies,  white  Wefteme  dozens.  Cottons,  certaine  clothes  called
Satutes,  and  others  called  Cardinal-whites,  and  Caluefkins  which  were  well
fold  in  Sicilie,  &c.  I'he  commodities  which  they  returned  backe  were
Silks,  Chainlets,  Rubarbe,  Malmefies,  Muflcadels  and  other  wines,  fweete
oyles,  cotten  wooll,  Turkic  carpets,  Galles,  Pepper,  Cinamom,  and  fome
other  fpices,  &c.  Befides,  the  naturall  inhabitants  of  the  forefayd  places,
they  had,  eucu  in  those  dayes,  traffique  v/^ith  lewes,  Turkes,  and  other
forreiners.  Neither  did  our  merchants  onely  eniploy  their  owne  Englifh
(hipping  before  mentioned,  but  fundry  flrangers  alfo  :  as  namely,  Cat:diois,
Ragufeans,  Sicilians,  Genouczes,  Venetian  galliaffes,  Spanish  and  Portugale
(hips.  All  which  particulars  doe  moft  euidently  appeare  out  of  certaine
auncient  Ligier  bookes  {i.e.  Ledgers']  of  the  R[ight].  W[or(hipful].  Sir
William  Locke  Mercer  of  London,  of  Sir  William  Bowyer  Alderman  of
London,  of  mafter  lohtt  Gre/Jiatn,  and  of  others;  which  I  Richard  Hakluyt
haue  diligently  perufed  and  copied  out. —  Vol.  II.,  Part  1.,  p.  96,  Ed.  1599-

4.  Next  in  the  order  of  time  comes  the  mythical  voyage  of
1517  of  Sebastian  Cabot  and  Sir  Thomas  Pert  from  England
towards  Cathay ;  the  sole  authority  for  which  is  Eden's  state-
ment at  page  6  of  this  Volume  :  in  which,  so  far  as  we  have
been  able  to  inquire,  we  believe  him  to  have  been  utterly
mistaken,  and  that  the  voyage  had  no  existence  ;  and  the  more
especially  because  Sebastian  Cabot  was  at  that  date  in  Spain,
where  he  remained  until  after  the  Conference  of  Badajos  in
1524,  which  (as  Gomara  tells  us  at/.  272)  he  attended  as  an
expert  on  behalf  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V.

5.  Important  and  authentic  as  is  that  early  Levant  traffic ;
it  was  a  very  different  thing  from  a  voyage  across  the  then  but
half  discovered  Atlantic.  As  Pietro  Martire  vaunts,  few  or
none  but  Spaniards  were  licensed  to  go  from  Spain  to  the
New  World.  It  is,  therefore,  very  striking  to  find,  ere  Cortes
had  consolidated  his  marvellous  conquest  of  Mexico,  or  Pizarro
had  finally  set  forth  to  imitate  him  in  Peru  ;  and  while  at  home,
the  great  Cardinal  was  in  serene  prosperity  and  unruffled
power,  our  first  printed  New  Testaments  were  being  secretly
read  in  the  principal  English  towns,  and  our  nation's  Reforma-
tion was  just  beginning  to  bud  forth  :  it  is  indeed  surprising  to
trace  one  Englishman  at  least  in  the  West  Indies;  to  learn,  of
a  certainty,  that  one,  if  not  two  English  expeditions  had
reached  the  American  coast ;  and,  most  startling  of  all,  to
know  that  one  of  these  squadrons  found  in  the  harbour  of
St  John's,  Newfoundland,  not  another  royal  fleet  of  discovery,
but  a  fleet  of  fourteen  fishing-boats  (and,  if  Spanish  reports  be
correct,  thirty  or  forty  more  in  the  neighbourhood),  that  had
ventured  (at  a  time  when,  to  us,  so  little  appears  to  have  been
known  of  the  north-eastern  seaboard  of  America  j  and  so  much
to  have  been  dreaded  in  a  voyage  thither)  across  the  wide
Atlantic,  simply  for  the  sake  of  codfish.

6.  Hakluyt  gives  the  following  account  of  Thomas  Tyson
or  Tison,  the  first  Englishman  known  to  have  reached  the
West  Indies  : —

A  briefe  note  concerning  an  ancient  trade  of  the  EngliJJt  Marchants  to  the
Canarie-ilands,  gathered  out  of  an  olde  ligier  booke  [ledger]  of  M.  Nicolas
Thome  the  elder  a  worfliipfull  marchant  of  the  city  ^Brifloll.

J  T  appeareth  euidently  out  of  a  certaine  note  or  letter  of  remem-
brance, in  the  cuftody  of  me  Richard  Haklnyt,  written  by  M.
Nicolas  Thome  the  elder  a  principall  marchant  of  Brifloll,
to  his  friend  and  factour  Thomas  Midnall  and  his  owne
feruant  William  Ballard  at  that  time  refident  in  S.  Lucar
in  Andeluzia  ;  that  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1526  (and  by  all  circumstances

and  probabilities  long  before)  certaine  Engli(h  marchants,  and  among  the
reft  himfelfe  with  one  Jhomas  Spacheford  exercifed  vfuall  and  ordinary
trade  of  marchandife  vnto  the  Canarii  Hands.  For  by  the  fayd  letter
notice  was  giuen  to  Thomas  Midnall  and  William  Ballard  aforefayd,  that
a  certaine  fliip  called  The  Chriflopher  of  Cadiz  bound  for  the  Wefl  Indus
had  taken  in  certaine  fardels  of  cloth  both  courfe  and  fine,  broad  and  nar-
row of  duers  forts  and  colours,  fome  arouas  [arobas]  of  packthreed,  fixe
cerons  or  bagges  of  fope,  with  other  goods  of  M.  Nicolas  Thome,  to  be
deliuered  at  Santa  Cruz,  the  chiefe  towne  in  Tenerifa,  one  of  the  feuen
Canaiy-ilands.  All  which  commodities  the  fayd  Thomas  and  William  were
authorized  by  the  owner  in  the  letter  before  mentioned  to  barter  and  fell
away  at  Santa  Cruz.  And  in  lieu  of  fuch  mony  as  fhould  arife  of  the  fale
of  thofe  goods,  they  were  appointed  to  retume  backe  into  England  good
ftore  of  Orchell  (which  is  a  certaine  kinde  of  mode  growing  vpon  high
rocks,  in  thofe  dayes  much  vfed  to  die  withall),  fome  quantity  of  fugar,  and
certaine  hundreds  of  kid-(kinnes.  For  the  procuring  of  which  and  of
other  commodities,  at  the  beft  and  firft  hand,  the  faid  Thomas  and  William
were  to  make  their  abode  at  Sa7ita  Cruz,  and  to  remaine  there  as  factours
for  the  abouefaid  M[after]  Nicolas  Thome.

And  here  alfo  I  thought  good  to  fignifie,  that  in  the  fayd  letters  mention
is  made  of  one  Thomas  Tifon,  an  Englifh  man,  who  before  the  forefayd
yere  1526  had  found  the  way  to  the  Wefl  Indies,  and  was  there  refident,
vnto  whom  the  fayd  M[after]  Nicolas  Thome  fent  certaine  armour  and
other  commodities  fpecified  in  the  letter  aforefayd. — Principal  Navigations,
&^c.  (Sr'r.  0/ the  English  Nation,  Vol.  II.,  Part  11.,/.  3,  Ed.  1599.

Hakluyt,  referring  again  to  this  note,  hazards  the  following
surmise  : —

This  Thomas  Tifon  (fo  faire  as  I  can  coniecture)  may  feeme  to  haue  bene
fome  fecret  factour  for  M.  Thome  aud  other  Englifh  marchants  in  thofe
remote  partes,  whereby  it  is  probable  that  fome  of  our  marchants  had  a
kind  of  trade  to  the  Weft  Indies,  euen  in  thofe  ancient  times  and  before
alfo.— /atw.  Vol.  III.,/.  500,  Ed.  1600.

This  conjecture  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  Nicolas  Thome,
at  his  death  in  1527,  owed  this  Thomas  Tyson  the  sum  of
;^i2  :  5s.  (probably  on  account  of  business). — See  Letters  and
Papers  on  the  Reign  of  Hetiry  VIII.,  Edited  by  the  Rev.  J.  S.
Brewer,  M.A.,  IV.  (2),/.  1256.

7.  Imbedded  in  Halle's  Chronicle  is  the  following  note,
quite  unconnected  with  anything  going  before  or  after,  and  to
which  also  he  makes  no  subsequent  allusion  whatever : —

This  fame  moneth  [May  1527,  19  Hen.  VIII.],  the  kyng  fent  two  fa)Te
fliippes,  well  manned  and  vitailed,  hauing  in  theim  diuers  conning  men,  to
feke  ftrange  regions ;  and  fo  turth  thei  fet,  out  of  the  Thamis,  the  twentie
day  of  May,  if  thei  fped  well  you  fhall  here  at  their  retome. fol.  158,  b.

This  note  Richard  Grafton,  who  had  printed  Halle's  Chro-
nicles in  1548,  transferred  (with  but  variations  of  spelling)  to/.
1 149  of  his  own  Chronicle,  printed  by  Henry  Denham  in  1569.

Richard  Hakluyt,  in  his  Principal  Navigations,  Voyages,  and
Discoveries,  thus  records  his  researches  as  to  this  expedition : —

iND  whereas  mafter  Hall  and  mafter  Grafton  fay,  that  in  thofe
fliips  there  were  diuers  cunning  men,  I  haue  made  great
inquirie  of  fuch  as,  by  their  yeeres  and  delight  in  nauigation,
might  giue  me  any  light  to  !•  low  who  thofe  cunning  men
(liould  be,  which  were  the  directers  in  the  aforefayd  voyage.
And  it  hath  bene  told  mee  by  Sir  Martin  Frobifher,  and  mafter  Richard
Allen  a  Knight  of  the  Sepulchre,  that  a  Canon  of  S.  Paul  in  London,
which  was  a  great  Mathematician,  and  a  man  indued  with  wealth,  did  much
aduance  the  action,  and  went  therein  himfelfe  in  perfon,  but  what  his  name
was,  I  can  not  learne  of  any.  And  further  they  told  mee  that  one  of  the
fliips  was  called  the  Dominus  vobiscum,  which  is  a  name  likely  to  bee  giuen
by  a  religious  man  of  thofe  dales,  and  that  failing  very  farre  Northweft-
ward,  one  of  the  fliips  was  caft  away  as  it  entred  into  a  dangerous  g\ilphe,
about  the  great  opening,  bctweene  the  North  partes  of  New  found  land,
and  the  countrey  lately  called  by  her  maieftie  Mcta  Incognita  \i.e.  Labrador].

XIV

Preface.

Whereupon  the  other  fliip  lliaping  her  courfe  towards  Cape  Brittof,  and  the
coaft  of  AWumbega  [Hakhiyt  substitutes  Aramhec  in  his  1600  Edition],
and  oftentimes  putting  their  men  on  land  to  fearch  the  flate  of  thofe
vnknowon  regions,  returned  home  about  the  beginning  of  October,  of  the
yeere  aforefaid.  And  thus  much  (by  reafon  of  the  great  negligence  of  the
writers  of  thofe  times,  who  fliould  haue  vfed  more  care  in  preferuing  the
memories  of  the  worthie  actes  of  our  nation)  is  all  that  hitherto  I  can  learne,
or  find  out  of  this  voiage. — ■/.  517,  Ed.  1589;  also,  iii 129,  Ed,  1600.

Of  this  enterprise,  Purchas  some  thirty-five  years  later  has
preserved  for  us,  at  //.  808-91  of  the  Third  volume  of  his
Pi/grimes,  1625,  the  following  more  authentic  testimony: —

EE  will  recreate  you  with  a  plaine  Mariners  Letter  endorsed
in  homely  phrafe,  To  the  Honourable  Kings  Grace  oi  Eng-
land, here  (as  I  thinke)  giuen  you  from  the  Originall. I
haue  alfo  another  written  to  Cardinal  Wolfcy  touching  the
fame voyage in Latin,  by Albertus  de  Prato  ; for the
anliquitie  rather  then  any  remarkable  raritie,  worthy  here  to  be  mentioned.^
-  I  mentioned  before  Mafter  Thorites  fathers  finding  out  NccV-found  Land,
with  Mafter  Eliot. Thefe  animated  King  Henrie  the  eight  to  fet  forth
two  fliips  for  difcouerie,  one  of  which  perifhed  in  the  North  parts  of  Nrw-
found  Land. The  Mafter  of  the  other,  lohn  Rut,  writ  this  Letter  to  King
Hairie,  in  bad  EngUJli  and  worfe  Writing. Ouer  it  was  this  fuperfcription.  *
Mafter  Grubes  two  ftiips  departed  from  Plymouth  the  10.  day
of  lune,  and  arriued  in  the  Ncw-found-LaJtd  in  a  good  Harbour,
called  Cape  de  Bas,  the  21.  day  of  luly :  and  after  we  had  left  the
fight  of  Selle  [?  Scilly],  we  had  neuer  fight  of  any  Land,  till  we
had  fight  of  Cape  de  Bas.

leafing  your  Honorable  Grace  to  heare  ofyoitrferuant  lohn  Rut,
-with  all  his  Company  here,  in  good  health,  thanks  be  to  God,
and  your  Graces  fliip.  The  Mary  of  G[u]il[d]ford  with  all
her  thanks  be  to  God:  And  if  it  pleafe your

honorable  Grace,  we  ranne  in  our  courfe  to  the  Northward,  till
ive  came  into  53.  degrees,  and  there  zve  found  many  great  Hands  of  Lee  and
dcepe  water,  we  fouttd  no  founding,  and  then  we  durfl  not  goe  no  further  to
the  Northward  fr  fea7  e  of  more  Lee,  and  then  we  cafl  about  to  the  Southward,
and  within  foure  dayes  after  we  had  one  hundred  and  fixtie  fathom,  and  then
zvee  came  into  52.  degrees,  and  fell  with  the  may ne  Land,  attd  withifz  ten
leagues  of  the  mayne  Land  we  met  with  a  great  Lland  of  Lee,  and  came  hard
by  her,  for  it  was  flanding  in  deept  water,  andfo  went  in  with  Cape  de  Bas,
a  good  LLarbor,  and  many  small  Llands,  ajtd  a  great  frefJi  Riuer  going  vp far  re
into  the  mayne  Land,  and  the  mayiie  Land  allwilderneffe  aiid  mountaincs  and
woods,  and  no  nattir all  ground  but  all  7}ioffe,  and  no  inhabitation  nor  no  people
in  thefe  parts :  and  in  the  woods  we  found  footing  ofdiuers  great  beafls,  but  we
faw  none  not  in  ten  leagues.  And  pleafe  your  Grace,  the  Samfon  and  wee  kept
company  all  the  way  till  within  two  dayes  before  wee  met  with  all  the  Llands  of
lee.  Thatzuas  the firfl  day  of  Luly  at  night,  and  there  rofe  a  great  and  a  mar-
uailoiis  great  florme,  a7id  much  foule  weather;  L  trufl  in  Almightie  Lefu  to
heare  good  nerves  of  her.  A )ui pleafe  your  Grace,  we  were  confcdering  and  a
writing  of  all  our  order,  how  we  wottld  wafli  [?  watck]  vs,  and  what  courfe
wee  would  draiu,  and  ivhen  God  doe  fend  foule  weather,  that  with  Cape  de
Sper_/7zi?  [i.e.  each  fliipl  fliould  goe,  and  he  that  came  firfl  fi„ould  tarry  the
fpace  of  fixe  weeks  one  for  another,  and  watered  at  Cape  de  Bas  ten  dayes,
ordering  of  your  Graces  fliip,  andfifhing,  andfo  departed  toward  the  South-
ward to  feeke  our  fellotv:  the  third  day  of  Augufi  we  entered  iftto  a  good
Hatien,  called  Saint  lohn,  and  there  we  found  eleuenfaile  of 'i>iorma.ns,  and
one  Brittaine,  and  two  Portugall  Barkes,  and  all  a  fifiing,  and  fo  we  are
readie  to  depart  towai  d  Cape  de  Bas,  *  aitd  that  is  tiventie  fiue  leagues,  as

1  The  very  high  antiquity  of  these  letters — which  are  the  earliest  ever  known  to  have
been  sent  home  by  Englishmen  from  America — constitutes  their  great  modern  value.

2  The  next  two  sentences  are  a  jumble  of  error.  It  is  clear  from  the  text  that  the
expedition  consisted  of  three  ships  :  Master  Grube's  or  Grub's  two  ships,  one  of  which  was
called  the  Sampson,  the  name  of  the  other  does  not  transpire  (if  it  could  be  ascertained
to  be  the  Domimis  Vobiscuni,  the  chain  of  testimony  would  be  complete):  together  with
the  King's  ship,  the  Mary  n/Gnildford,  commanded  by  John  Uut.

•<  Purchas  evidently  intends  us  to  understand  that  the  endorsement  is  contemporary
with  the  letter.

4  This  is  evidently  a  mistake  through  the  hurry  in  wriiing.  It  should  be  Cape  de  Sper
[Cabo  de  Spera,  "the  Cape  0/  the  Spear"\ For  the  two  ships,  after  having  stayed

fJiortly  as  we  haue  fifJud,  and  fo  along  the  coq/l  till  we  may  mcete  with  our
fellow,  andfo  with  all  diligence  that  lyes  in  me  towards  parts  to  that  Llands
that  %ve  are  commanded  by  the  grace  of  God,  as  we  were  commanded  at  our
departing.  And  thus  Lefu  faue  and  keepe  your  honorable  Grace,  and  all
your  honourable  Reuer.,  in  the  LLauen  of  Saint  lohn,  the  third  day  of  Auguft,
written  in  hafle. 1527.

By  your  feruant  Lohii  Rut,  to  his  vttermoft  of  his  power.

I  haue  by  me  alfo  Albert  de  Praia's  ^  originall  Letter,  in  Latin  ftille,
almoft  as  harsh  as  the  former  Erglifit,  and  bearing  the  fame  date,  and  was
indorfed,  Reuerend  in  Chriflo  Patri  Domino  Domino  Cardinali  et  Domino
Legato  Anglics:  and  began,  Reuerendiflme  in  Chrifio  Pater  falutetn.
Rejierendiffime  Pater,  placeat  Reuerendifiimce  paternitati  veflrce  fcire  Deo
fauefite  pofiquam  exiuimus  a  Plemut  quce  fuit  x.  Lunij  &^c.  (The  fubftance
is  the  fame  with  the  former,  and  therefore  omitted.)  Datum  apudle  Baya
Saint  Lohan  in  Terris  Nouis,  die  x.  Augufi  1527,  Reuer.  Patr.  vcfl.
humilis  fermts,  Albertus  de  Prato  (the  name  written  in  the  loweft  comer  ot
the  flieet).

We  are  fortunately  able  to  trace  this  expedition  still  further.
By  "  towards  parts  to  that  llands  that  we  are  commanded,"
John  Rut  meant  the  West  Indies ;  and  we  have  accounts  by
two  Spanish  historians  of  his  arrival  there,  which  will  demand
of  us  some  further  attention.

Gonzales  Fernandez  de  Oviedo  y  Valde's — b.  at  Madrid  1478,
d.  at  Valladolid  1557,  and  who  resided  for  many  years  in  the
West  Indies — wrote,  in  addition  to  the  Natural  hystoi'ia  de  las
Indias  printed  at  Toledo  on  15th  February  1526,  from  which
Eden  has  translated  large  extracts  at  pp.  208-242  of  this
Volume;  another  and  his  most  important  work,  entitled  La
historia  general  de  las  Indias,  the  printing  of  which  was  com-
pleted at  Seville  on  30th  September  1535  (or  about  eight  years
after  Rut's  expedition) ;  every  copy  of  which  is  attested  with
Oviedo's  written  signature.  It  does  not  appear  that  Eden  had
met  with  this  important  work,  or  he  would  have  assuredly
have  made  the  following  extract  from  it.

On  folio  clxj.  of  this  work,  being  the  Thirteenth  chapter  of
the  Nineteenth  book,  is  the  following  passage,  for  the  literal
translation  of  which  we  are  much  indebted  to  the  courtesy
and  kindness  of  the  celebrated  Spanish  scholar,  Don  Fascial
de  Gayangos.

Before  we  come  to  the  extract ;  an  error  as  to  its  date  (which
misled  Hakluyt,  and  may  mislead  others)  must  be  noted  for
avoidance,  in  the  Third  Volume  of  J.  B.  Ramusio's  Navigationi
e  ViaggL  Each  Volume  of  this  celebrated  Collection  was  printed
in  a  different  year  by  L.  A.  Giunti  at  Venice.  Vol.  I.,  of  which
a  First  Edition  had  been  printed  in  1550,  appeared  corrected
and  enlarged  in  March  1554.  Of  Vol.  II.,  the  Preface  of  which
is  dated  7th  July  1554,  the  earliest  known  is  that  of  1559;
while  Vol.  III.,  the  Preface  of  which  is  dated  20th  June  1553,
appears  to  have  been  first  printed  in  1556;  that  is  to  say,  in
the  year  after  Eden's  Compilation  was  published  in  London.

Now,  at  p.  204  of  this  Third  Volume,  of  1556,  occurs  this
important  typographical  error. Oviedo  in  1535  begins  Elanno

ten  days,  21-31  July  1527,  at  Cape  de  Bas,  sailing  southward,  had  reached  St.  John's
harbour  on  the  3d  of  August,  and  then  purposed  to  go  75  miles  more,  evidently  to  the
southward,  to  Cape  de  Sper,  the  appointed  rendezvous,  where  they  hoped  to  meet  the
Sampson.  From  the  date  of  the  priest's  letter,  however,  it  fs  evident  that  the  two
English  ships  stayed  a  week  longer  at  St.  John's.  These  letters  were  probably  sent  to
England  in  one  of  the  Norman  or  Breton  fishing  boats.

1  I  have  quite  failed  to  find  any  notice  of  this  Albertus  de  Prato.  Might  that  be  a
latinised  form  of  Albert  Prat?  or  was  the  bearer  of  the  name  a  foreigner?  I  can  trace
no  such  name  in  Le  Neve's  Fasti  ot  tievicown'i  Repertorinm.  It  would  be  intercslin"
if  he  couM  be  identified  with  Hakluyt's  mathematical  Canon  of  St.  Paul's.

Preface.

XV

de  M.d.xxviJ.  annos,  (Zrc;  which  Ramusio  in  1556  translates
Nel  i^ij  instead  oi  Ncl  1^27.  Hakluyt  in  1589,  not  suspect-
ing any  falsification,  thereupon  adduces  the  following  extract
in  support  of  fabulous  English  voyage  of  15 17,  hereafter
asserted  by  Eden  at  /.  6  :  but  the  date  being  wrong,  his
argument,  of  course,  falls  to  pieces.

It  would  also  seem  that  Oviedo  was  residing  in  the  city  of
Santo  Domingo,  when  he  wrote  this  portion  of  his  history.

Chapter  13. Of  certain  foreign  coi-sairs  which  passed  to  these  parts  and
Indies,  and  -what  has  been  the  cause  and  origin  of  their  bad  thoughts,

)N  the  year  Mdxxvii.  an  English  corfair,  under  colour  or  pre-
tence that  he  was  going  to  discover  land,  came  with  a  large
ship  to  the  Brazil  on  the  coast  of  Tierra  Firme,  and  from
thence  crossed  to  this  Island  Hispanola,  and  arrived  close  to
the  mouth  of  the  harbour  of  this  city  [Santo  Domingo].  He
sent  his  boat  properly  manned,  and  asked  for  permission  to  come  into  port,
saying  that  he  came  with  merchandise  and  to  barter  [with  the  inhabitants].
At  the  same  moment  the  Governor,  Francisco  de  Tapia,  ordered  a  gun  to
be  fired  against  the  said  [English]  ship,  which  was  coming  straight  into
the  harbour ;  which  being  observed  by  the  English,  they  went  away,  after
taking  on  board  the  said  boat's  crew.  And,  to  tell  the  truth,  the  Governor
[Tapia]  was  wrong  in  what  he  did,  for  had  the  English  vessel  entered  the
harbour,  armed  though  she  was,  she  could  not  have  left  without  the  con-
sent of  this  city  and  castle.

So  that  the  English,  seeing  the  reception  that  was  made  to  them,  sailed
in  the  direction  of  the  Island  of  San  Juan,  and  having  entered  the  Bay  of
San  German,  spoke  to  the  inhabitants  of  that  town,  and  asked  for  provi-
sions :  uttering  complaints  against  the  people  of  this  island  [Hispaniola],
and  saying  that  they  had  not  come  to  annoy  the  people,  but  to  traffic  with
them,  if  they  consented,  for  money  or  merchandise .  Provisions  were  given
to  them,  and  they  gave  pewter  vessels  and  other  goods  in  return.  After
which  the  ship  sailed  for  Europe ;  but  it  is  supposed  that  she  never  reached
her  destination,  for  nothing  more  was  heard  of  her.

Considering  that  Oviedo  printed  the  above  less  than  eight
years  after  the  event,  there  can  hardly  be  any  mistake  as  to  the
year  being  1527.  Yet  in  a  later  Spanish  historian  we  find  these
circumstances,  in  much  fuller  detail,  narrated  as  occurring  in
1519.  So  that  of  the  three  dates  1517,  1519,  and  1527;  the
last  is  the  true  one.

Antonio  de  Herrera  Tordesillas,  [^.i559atCuella  de  Segovia;
d.  29th  March  1625  at  Madrid],  was  born  two  years  after  the
death  of  Oviedo.  The  first  four  Decades  of  his  Bistoria  General
de  los  Hechos  de  los  Castellanos  en  las  Islas  i  tierra  firme  were
printed  in  1601,  the  last  four  in  i6i5;both  at  Madrid.  In  the
second  Decas,  which  was  published  seventy-four  years  after
Rut's  voyage,  we  have  an  account  of  him  and  his  doings,  evi-
dently derived  from  a  written  deposition  ;  as  Oviedo's  had  been
either  from  hearsay  or  from  personal  observation.  It  consists
of  the  narrative  (for  the  translation  of  which  I  am  indebted
to  my  friend,  the  late  H.  Pyne,  Esq.,  Assistant  Tithe
Commissioner)  of  Gines  Navarro,  master  of  a  Spanish  caravel,
who  apparently  piloted  Rut's  ship  from  Porto  Rico  by  the
island  of  Mona  to  Santo  Domingo,  and  then  back  again  to
San  German©  in  the  island  of  Porto  Rico.

The  Arrival  of  an  English  Ship  in  the  Indies,  and  the  State
OF  Affairs  in  the  Islands.

FTER  the  departure  of  the  ships  which  carried  [?  to  Spain']
the  gold  pearls  and  ordinary  merchandise  ;  a  caravel  of
Saint  Domingo  being  in  the  island  of  San  Juan  [de  Porto
Rico],  loading  with  casava  ;  there  arrived  [at  Porto  Rico]  a
ship  of  three  masts,  and  of  the  burden  of  1 50  tons. The

master  of  the  caravel,  [who]  went  out  in  his  boat  to  this  ship,  supposing
it  to  be  a  Spanish  vessel,  discovered  [coming  towards  him]  a  pinnace
containing  twenty-five  men  armed  with  corslets  and  cross-bows,  and  having

two  pieces  of  artillery  in  its  prow.

They  said  that  they  were  Englishmen,  and  that  their  ship  was  from
England  ;  that,  in  company  with  another  armed  ship,  they  had  sailed  to
seek  the  country  of  the  Great  Khan,  but  that  the  ships  had  been  separated
in  a  tempest  :  and  that  theirs,  proceeding  on  its  voyage,  came  to  a  frozen
sea,  where  they  found  large  islands  of  ice  ;  that  they  had  then  altered  their
course,  and  came  to  a  hot  sea  [?  the  Gulf  Streani],  which  seethed  like  water
in  a  caldron  ;  and  in  order  that  the  caulking  of  the  ship  might  not  be
melted,  they  went  in  search  of  the  Baccalaos,  >  where  they  found  fifty*
Spanish,  French,  and  Portuguese  ships,  and  that  they  wishing  to  land  there
in  order  to  obtain  an  Indian  interpreter,  they  [the  Indians]  killed  the  pilot,
who  was  a  Piedmontese.  From  thence,  they  had  coasted  as  far  as  the
Rio  de  Chicora  [the  River  of  Chicora,  i.e.  River  in  Carolina],  and  had
crossed  over  from  that  river  to  the  island  of  San  Juan  [de  Porto  Rico].

Upon  being  asked.  What  they  were  searching  for  in  those  blands?  they
said  that  they  were  desirous  of  seeing  them,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  an
account  of  them  to  the  King  of  England,  and  to  take  a  cargo  from  Brazil.

They  invited  the  master  of  the  caravel,  who  was  called  Gines  Navarro,
to  come  on  board  their  ship,  and  to  show  them  the  course  to  Saint  Dom-
ingo. He  saw  in  the  ship  a  quantity  of  wine,  flour,  and  other  provisions ;
as  well  as  much  cloth,  linen,  and  other  articles  of  merchandise.  They
carried  much  artillery  and  a  forge,  and  carpenters  for  ship-building,  and  an
oven  for  baking  bread  ;  and  there  wen  [in  the  ship]  threescore  men.

Gines  Navarro  further  stated  that,  if  he  could  have  read  them,  the
captain  of  the  ship  wished  to  show  him  the  instructions  which  he  brought
from  the  King  of  England  ;  that  they  had  sent  a  company  ashore  at  the
Island  of  Mona,'  and  that  they  had  bartered  some  pewter  in  the  Island  of
San  Juan.

This  ship  went  to  the  port  of  Santo  Domingo,  and  sent  the  bark  ashore,
saying  That  they  were  desirous  of  trading  ;  and  [it]  tarried  there  two  days,
The  governor  of  the  Castle,  upon  the  arrival  of  the  ship,  sent  to  inform  the
Magistrates  [?  the  Royal  Audience],  for  the  purpose  of  their  gi^ng  him
orders  what  to  do  ;  and  as  they  returned  no  answer,  he  discharged  a  gun
at  the  ship,  in  consequence  of  which,  she  forthwith  recalled  the  bark,  and
by  and  by  set  sail.

The  ship  then  returned  to  the  back  of  the  island  of  San  Juan,  and
tarried  a  short  time  there,  trading  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of
Saint  Germans  ; and  did  not  appear  again.

The  magistrates  [of  Saint  Domingo]  arrested  the  governor,  saying  that
he  ought  to  have  waited  for  their  answer  ;  and  sent  information  of  this  affair
to  the  King  [of  Spain],  as  well  as  of  the  bad  condition  of  the  fortress,  so
that  orders  might  be  given  for  the  fortification  of  it,  and  [that]  there  should
be  directions  [given]  for  the  providing  it  with  men,  artiller)',  and  military
stores. — Decades,  ii.,  Booh  v.,  Chapter  3.,  £d.  1601.

Thus  from  four  perfectly  distinct  and  independent  sources,
comes  to  us  the  certainty  of  this  English  voyage  across  the
Atlantic  in  1527;  for  a  further  discussion  of  which  see  that
masterpiece  in  its  way,  and  rare  book  (in  the  Fasterii
hemisphere  at  least),  Mr.  J.  G.  Kohl's  History  of  the  Disancry
of  Maine,  published  by  the  Maine  Historical  Society  at  Port-
land, in  1869;  and  Mr.  Biddle's  Memoir  of  Sebastian  Cabot,
London  1832.  Both  these  writers  think  that  the  Piedmontese
pilot  was  the  celebrated  Verazzano.

It  is  interesting  to  know  that  John  Rut  got  back  safely  to
England. For  in  Sept.-Dec.  152S,  while  still  in  the  command

1  The  Indian  word  for  codfish,  applied  by  S.  Cabot  to  the  land  he  first  discovtred,
and  afterwards  loosely  and  vaguely  apphed  to  the  American  coast  from  Labrador  far  to
the  southward.  Here  it  evidently  includes  Newfoundland,  Nova  Scotia,  and  the  north-
ern seaboard  States  of  the  United  States.

■■>  This  number  may  be  an  exaggeration.  If  it  be  correct,  the  English  squadron  mrst
have  met  thirty  or  forty  other  fishing-boats  on  the  Newfoundland  '  luuks,'  beside  the
fourteen  they  saw  in  St.  John's  harbour

•*  Mona  is  a  small  island  in  the  track  from  Port  Rico  to  Santo  Doiuiiigo.

XVI

Preface.

of  the  Ma>y  of  Guildford,  he  was  employed  in  freighting
home,  on  the  King's  behalf,  wine  from  Bourdeaux.  See  Royal
M.S.  14.  B.  xxix.,  in  the  British  Museum.

8.  We  have  seen  by  the  above  that  the  King's  ships  left  the
Thames  on  20th  May  1527.  Whatever  else  may  be  doubtful,
that  is  certain :  and  therefore  it  is  equally  certain  that  the
'  Book  '  which  Robert  Thorne,  the  Bristol  merchant,  wrote  at
Seville  in  that  year,  and  sent  to  Doctor  Leigh,  the  King's
almoner,  and  the  English  ambassador  in  Spain,  had  nothing  to
do  with  the  fitting  out  of  that  London  expedition.

This  far-seeing  discourse,  with  its  preliminary  exhortation  to
the  King,  was  first  printed  by  R[ichard]  H[akluyt]  in  his
Diners  Voyages,  o^c.  in  1582.  Its  only  date  is  1527,  which
occurs  twice ;  each  time  after  the  author's  signature — '  Robert
Thorne.  1527.'  As  Hakluyt  reproduced  Thome's  curious
'  Carde  '  or  map,  it  is  quite  evident  that  he  had  before  him,  in
1582,  the  original  and  autographic  book  penned  by  the  author ;
and  therefore  the  date  1527  must  be  accepted  by  us  without  a
doubt.

Now  it  was  the  English  custom  at  that  time,  to  reckon  the
year  from  the  25th  March,  the  Feast  of  the  Annunciation  of
the  Virgin.  The  '  Book  '  was  therefore  written  at  the  earliest
after  the  25th  March  1527.

The  two  following  passages  in  it,  taken  together,  would  seem
to  show  that  it  was  not  writtoi  till  the  summer  was  far  advanced,
probably  while  Rut's  expedition  was  skirting  the  American  coast.

In  a  flote  of  three  fhippes  and  a  carauell  that  went  from  this  citie,  armed
by  the  merchauntes  of  it,  which  departed  in  Aprill  lafl  pafl,  I  and  my
partner  haue  1400.  Ducates  that  we  employed  in  the  fayd  fleete,  principally
for  that  two  Englifhmen  friends  of  mine  \see  p.  xiii.]  whiche  are  fomewhat
learned  in  Cofmographie,  fhoulde  go  in  the  fame  fhippes,  to  bring  mee
certaine  relation  of  the  fituation  of  the  countrey,  and  to  bee  experte  in  the
Nauigation  of  thofe  feas,  and  there  to  haue  informations  of  many  other
things,  and  aduife  that  I  defire  to  know  efpecially.  Seeing  in  thefe
quarters  are  fhips,  and  marriners  of  that  countrey,  and  cardes  [charts]  by
which  they  fayle,  though  much  vnlike  ours,  that  they  fhould  procure  to
haue  the  faid  cards,  and  leame  howe  they  vnderftande  them,  and
efpecially  to  know  what  Nauigation  they  haue  for  thefe  Ilandes  North-
wardes  and  Northeaftwarde. B.  4.

But  if  it  pleafe  God  that  into  Englande  I  may  come  with  your  Lordfhip,
I  will  (hewe  fome  coniectures  of  reafon  though  againfl  the  generall  opinion
of  Cofmographers,  by  which  fhall  appeare  this  that  I  fay  not  to  lacke  fome
foundation.  And  tyll  that  time  I  befeeche  your  Lordfhip  let  it  bee  put  to
filence  :  and  in  the  meane  feafon,  it  may  pleafe  God  to  fende  our  two
Englifhmen,  that  are  gone  to  the  fpicerie,  which  may  alfo  bring  more  plaine
declaration  of  yat  which  in  this  cafe  might  be  required. . . Z?.  3.

It  would  seem  that  Thorne  by  '  April  lafl  pafle '  means  April
1527;  for  if  he  had  intended  April  1526,  and  wrote  this  'Book'
in  the  seven  days  of  25-31  March,  then  by  English  custom
reckoned  as  the  first  days  of  1527,  he  would  assuredly  have
said  'April  lafl.  year.'  It  is  also  evident  from  the  allusion  that
a  considerable  time  had  elapsed  since  the  two  Englishmen  had
left  for  the  West  Indies;  and  that,  at  the  time  of  writing,  Thorne
was  looking  forward  to  their  return.  The  earliest  approximate
date  that  can  therefore  be  assigned  to  its  composition  is  the
summer  of  1527.  Dr.  Leigh  did  not  return  to  England  till
January  1530.

We  must  therefore  assign  the  occasion  and  preparation  of
this  English  voyage  of  Oceanic  discovery  of  1527  to  other

persons  than  Robert  Thorne.  Such  an  important  effort,  as  this
expedition  most  certainly  was,  could  not  have  been  suddenly
determined  upon,  and  probably  originated  in  the  previous  year.
Thome's  '  Book '  is  also  interesting  for  another  reference  to
a  very  early  English  voyage  across  the  Atlantic.

So  that  as  afore  is  fayde,  if  betweene  our  Newe  founde  landes  or  Noiivay,
or  Iflande  the  Seas  towarde  the  north  be  Nauigable,  wee  flioulde  goc  to
thefe  Ilandes  a  fliorter  way  by  more  then  2000.  leagues.  And  though  wee
went  not  in  the  faide  Ilandes,  for  that  they  are  the  Emperours  or  Kinges
of  Portingale,  wee  fhoulde  by  the  way,  and  comming  once  to  the  line  Equi-
noctiall,  finde  landes  no  lelTe  riche  in  Golde  and  fpicerie,  as  all  other  landes
are  vnder  the  faide  line  Equinoctiall :  and  alfo  flioulde,  if  wee  may  paffe
vnder  the  North,  enioye  the  Nauigation  of  all  Tartaric.

Which  fliould  bee  no  lefTe  profitable  to  our  commodities  of  clothe,  then
thefe  fpiceries  to  the  Emperour,  and  King  of  Portugale.

But  it  is  a  generall  opinion  of  all  Cofmographers  that  paffing  the  feuenth
clyme,  the  fea  is  all  ice,  the  colde  fo  much  that  none  can  fuffer  it.  And
hitherto  they  had  all  the  like  opinion  that  vnder  the  line  Equinoctiall  for
muche  heate  the  landfe  was  inhabitable.

Yet  fmce  by  experience  is  proued  no  lande  fo  much  habitable  nor  more
temperate.  And  to  conclude,  I  thinke  the  fame  flioulde  bee  founde  vnder
the  North,  if  it  were  experimented.  For  as  all  iudge,  Nihil  fit  vacuum  in
rerum  natum,  fo  I  iudge  there  is  no  lande  inhabitable  [i.e.  uninhabiiable],
nor  Sea  innauigable.  If  I  fhould  write  the  reafon  that  prefenteth  this
vnto  me,  I  fhoulde  be  too  prolixe,  and  it  feemeth  not  requifite  for  this
prefent  matter.  God  knoweth  that  though  by  it  I  fhoulde  haue  no  great
interefl,  yet  I  haue  had  and  flill  haue  no  little  minde  of  this  bufineffe  :  So
that  if  I  had  facultie  to  my  will,  it  fhoulde  bee  ye  firfl  thing  that  I  woulde
vnderflande,  euen  to  attempt,  if  our  Seas  Northwarde  be  nauigable  to  the
Pole  or  no.  I  reafon,  that  as  fome  fickeneffes  are  hereditarious,  and  come
from  the  father  to  the  fonne,  fo  this  inclination  or  defire  of  this  difcouerie
I  inherited  of  my  father,  which  with  another  merchant  of  Briflowe  named
Hugh  Eliot  were  the  difcouerers  of  newe  found  lands,  of  the  which  there
is  no  doubt,  as  now  plainly  appeareth,  if  the  marriners  would  then  haue
been  ruled  and  folowed  their  pilots  mind,  the  lands  of  the  Wefl  Indies,
from  whence  all  the  gold  commeth,  had  beene  ours.  For  all  is  one  coafle,
as  by  the  carde  appeareth,  and  [as]  is  aforefaide. . . . D.  2.

A  most  excellent  account  of  the  merchant  family  of  the
Thornes  of  Bristol  will  be  found  in  English  Merchants,
1869,  written  by  my  fellow-student  at  King's  College,  Mr.  H.
R.  Fox  Bourne.

9.  The  next  English  Voyage  on  our  record  introduces  us  to
a  very  famous  name. It  is  thus  preserved  to  us  by  Hakluyt.

A  Voyage  to  Brasill,  made  by  the  worshipfull  M[aster]  Wil-
liam Haukins  of  Plimmouth,  father  to  sir  Iohn  Haukins,
Knight,  now  living,^  in  the  yeere  1530.

Lde  M.  William  Haukins  oi Plimmouth,  a  man  for  his  wifdome,
valure,  experience,  and  fkill  in  fea  caufes,  much  efleemed  and
beloued  of  King  Henry  \he  eight,  and  being  one  of  the  prin-
cipal! Sea  Captaines  in  the  West  partes  in  his  time,  not  con-
tented with  the  fhort  voyages  commonly  then  made  onely  to
the  knowen  coafles  of  Europe,  armed  out  a  tall  and  goodly  fliip  of  his  owne
of  the  burthen  of  250  tunnes,  called  the  Pole  {Paule,  Ed.  1600]  oi  Flim-
mouth,  wherewith  hee  made  three  long  and  famous  voyages  vnto  the  coaft
of  Brafill,  a  thing  in  thofe  dayes  very  rare,  efpecially  to  our  Nation.  In
the  courfe  of  which  voyages  he  touched  at  the  Riuer  of  Scfios  vpon  the
coafl  of  Guinea,  where  hee  trafiqued  with  the  Negroes,  and  tooke  of  them
Oliphants  [Elephants,  Ed.  1600]  teeth,  and  other  commodities  which  that

1  As  this  was  printed  in  isSg,  old  William  Hawkins  lived  to  see  the  overthrow  of  the
Spanish  Armada,  and  so  is  very  properly  introduced  by  the  Rev.  Canon  Kingsley,  with
his  usual  truthfulness  in  details,  in  his  celebrated  Elizabethan  romance  of  WestTvard  Ho  !
as  a  very  old  man,  present  at  Plymouth  with  the  Captains  who  were  waiting  the  arrival  ot
the  great  Spanish  Fleet.

XVI

Preface.

XV 11

place  yeeldeth :  and  fo  arriiiing  on  the  coaft  of  Brafd,  vfed  there  fuch  dif-
cretion,  and  behaued  himfelf  fo  wifely  with  thofe  fauage  people,  that  he
grew  into  great  familiaritie  and  friendfliip  with  them.  Infomuch  that  in
his  2.  voyage,  one  of  the  fauage  kings  of  the  countrey  of  Brafdl,  was  con-
tented to  take  fhippe  with  him,  and  to  bee  tranfported  hither  into
England,  whereunto  AI\aJler\  Haukins  agreed,  leauing  behinde  in  the
Countrey  as  a  pledge  for  his  fafetie  and  returne  againe,  one  Martin  Cocke-
ram  ol Plimmouth.  This  Bra/clian  king  being  arriued  [i.e.  in  I53i]j  was
brought  vp  to  London,  and  prefented  to  King  Henry  the  8.  lying  as  then
at  Whitehall:  at  the  fight  of  whome,  the  King  and  all  the  Nobilitie  did  not
a  little  marueile,  and  not  without  caufe  :  for  in  his  cheekes  were  holes  made
according  to  their  fauage  maner,  and  therein  fmall  bones  were  planted,
flanding  an  inche  out  from  the  faid  holes,  which  in  his  owne  Countrey  was
reputed  for  a  great  brauerie.  He  had  alfo  another  hole  in  his  nether  lippe,
wherein  was  fet  a  precious  flone  about  the  bigneffe  of  a  peafe.  All  his
apparell,  behauiour,  and  geflure  were  very  flrange  to  the  beholders.

Ilauing  remained  here  the  fpace  almofl  of  a  whole  yere,  and  the  king
with  his  fight  fully  fatiffied,  M\ajler'\  Haukins  according  to  his  promife
and  appointment,  purpofed  to  conuey  him  againe  into  his  Countrey  :  but  it
fell  out  in  the  way  that,  by  change  of  ayre  and  alteration  of  diet,  the  faid
fauage  king  died  at  Sea,  which  was  feared  would  turne  to  the  loffe  of  the
life  of  Martin  Cockeram  his  pledge.  Neuertheleffe,  the  Sauages  being  fully
perfwaded  of  the  honefl  dealing  of  our  men  with  their  Prince,  reflored
againe  the  faide  pledge,  without  any  harme  to  him,  or  any  man  of  the  com-
panie  :  which  pledge  of  theirs  they  brought  home  againe  into  England,
with  their  fhippe  fraighted  and  fumifhed  with  the  commodities  of  the
Countrey.  Which  Martine  Cockeram,  by  the  witneffe  of  Sir  lohn  Haukins,
being  an  officer  in  the  towne  of  Plimmouth,  was  liuing  within  thefe  fewe
yeares.— /.  520,  Ed.  1589.

10.  Let  us  now  look  eastward.  In  1592,  (three  years  after
the  appearance  of  the  First  edition  of  his  Voyages,  &c.),  Hakluyt
became  acquainted  with  a  very  old  man,  a  I^ondoner  named
John  Williamson,  then  apparently  the  sole  suivivor  of  our  first
traffic  in  the  Levant;  which  dying  out,  had  been  revived  in  1580.

These  early  Levant  voyages  were  veiy  important;  inasmuch
as  they  were  the  school  in  which  some  of  the  principal  Agents
and  Captains  of  the  Moscovy  Company,  like  Richard  Gray  and
Richard  Chancellor,  received  their  chief  training.

A  voyage  made  with  the  JJiippes  called  the  Holy  Croffe,  and  the  Matthew
Gonfon,  to  the  lies  of  Candia  and  Chio,  about  the  yere  1534,  according  to
a  relation  tnade  to  Majler  Richard  Hackluit  by  lohn  Williamfon,  Cooper
and  citizen  0/  London,  who  liued  in  the  yere  1592,  and  went  as  cooper  in
the  Mathew  Gonfon  the  next  voyage  after.

\  He  fliippes,  called  the  Holy  CroJJe  and  the  Matthew  Gonfon,
made  a  voyage  to  the  Ilandes  of  Candia  and  Chio  in  Turkic,
about  the  yeere  1 534.  And  in  the  Matheiu  went  as  Captaine
M[afler]  Richard  Gonfon,  fonne  of  old  Mailer  William
Gonfon,  paymafler  of  the  kings  Nauie.  In  this  firfl  voyage
[i.e.  of  the  two  described  by  Williamson]  went  IVilliam  Holftocke  (who  after-
wards was  Controuller  of  her  Maieflies  \i.e.  Queen  Elizabeth's]  Nauie,  lately
deceafed)  as  page  to  M[afler]  Richard  Gonfon  aforefaid,  which  M[afler]
Gonfon  died  in  Chio  in  this  his  firil  voyage.  The  Ihip  called  the  Holy
Croffe  was  a  fliort  (hippe,  and  of  burden  160  tunnes.  And  hauing  beene
a  full  yeere  at  the  fea  in  performance  of  this  voyage,  with  great  danger  fhe
'■eturned  home,  where,  vpon  her  arriuall  at  Blackwall,  in  the  riuer  of  Thames,
her  wine  and  oyle  caflce  was  found  fo  weake  that  they  were  not  able  to
hoyfe  them  out  of  the  fhip,  but  were  conftrained  to  draw  them  as  they  lay,
and  put  their  wine  and  oyle  into  new  veffels,  and  fo  to  vnlade  the  fliippc.
Their  chiefe  fraight  was  very  excellent  Mufcatels  and  red  Malmefie,  the  like
whereof  were  feeldome  feene  before  in  England.  They  brought  home  alfo
good  quantitie  of  fweete  oyles,  cotton  woolles,  Turkic  Carpets,  Galles,
Cynamon,  and  fome  other  fpices.  The  faide  fliippe  called  the  Holy  Croffe
was  fofhaken  in  this  voyage,  and  fo  weakened,  that  (he  was  layd  vp  in  the
docke,  and  neuer  made  voyage  after. —  Vol.  II.,  Part  I.,  p.  98,  Ed.  1599.
Eden.

Another  voyage  to  the  lies  (^Candia  and  Chio  made  by  the  fhippe,  the  Mathew
Gonfon,  about  the  yeere  1535,  according  to  the  relation  of  lohn  Williamfon,
then  Cooper  in  the  fame  ffiip,  made  to  M[q/ler]  Richard  Hackliut,  in  the
yeare  1592.

^^nrT^^j?  He  good  fliippe  called  the  Mathew  Gonfon,  of  burthen  300
Xi3l  (\^  tunnes,  whereof  was  owner  old  M[after]  William  Gonfon^
pay-mafler  of  the  Kings  Nauie,  made  her  voyage  in  the  yere
1535.  In  this  fliip  went  as  Captaine,  Richard  Gray,  who  long
after  died  in  Ruffia.  Mailer  William  Holflocke,  afterward
Controuller  of  the  Queenes  Nauie,  went  then  as  purfer  in  the  fame  voyage.
The  Mailer  was  one  lohn  Pichet,  feruant  to  old  M  [after]  William  Gonfon.
lames  Rumnie  was  Mafters  mate.  The  mafter  cooper  was  lohn  William-
fon, citizen  oi  London,  liuing  in  the  yeere  1592,  and  dwelling  in  Sa[i'\nt
Dunflons  parish,  in  the  Eaft.  The  M[after]  Gunner  was  Lohn  Godfrey  of
Brifloll.  In  this  fhip  were  6  gunners  and  4  trumpetters,  all  which  foure
trumpetters  at  our  returne  homewards  went  on  land  at  Meffma  in  the  Hand
of  Sicilia,  as  our  fliip  road  there  at  anker,  and  gat  them  into  the  Gallies
that  lay  neere  vnto  vs,  and  in  them  went  to  Rome.  The  w^hole  number  of
our  companie  in  this  fhip  were  about  100.  men,  we  were  alfo  fumifhed  with
a  great  bote,  which  was  able  to  carry  10  tunnes  of  water,  which  at  our
returne  homewards  we  towed  all  the  way  from  Chio  vntil  we  came  through
the  ftraight  of  Gib[r]altar  into  the  maine  Ocean.  W'e  had  alfo  a  great
long  boat  and  a  fkiff.  We  were  out  vpon  this  voyage  eleuen  months,  yet
in  all  this  time  there  died  of  ficknefle  but  one  man,  whofe  name  was  George
Forrefl,  being  feruant  to  our  Carpenter  called  Thomas  Plummer. — Ldem.

The  Island  of  Scio,  the  extreme  point  of  the  above  \y<o
voyages,  had  long  been  the  property  of  a  Genoese  family,  the
Jiistiana,  under  the  sovereignty  of  the  Senate  of  that  city.
How  the  Turks  first  put  it  to  tribute,  and  finally  took  posses-
sion of  it  in  1568,  is  thus  narrated  in  two  letters,  w-ritten  on
the  14th  of  February  1569  by  an  Englishman,  Caspar  Campion,
who  had  "  traded  in  this  countrey  [i.e.  the  island  and  its  vici-
nity] about  this  30.  yeres  [i.e.  1 539-1 569],  and  haue  beenc
maried  in  the  towne  of  Chio  full  24.  yeres  [i.e.  1544-1569]."

Ir,  you  fliall  vnderftand  that  the  Ifland  of  Chio  in  time  paft
hath  bene  a  Signiorie  or  lordfhip  of  it  felfe,  and  did  belong
to  the  Genffwaies.  There  were  24.  of  them  that  gouemed
the  ifland  which  were  called  Maunefes.  But  in  continuance
of  time  the  Turke  waxed  fo  ftrong  and  mightie,  that
they,  confidering  they  were  not  able  to  keepe  it,  unleffe  they  fhould
become  his  tributaries,  becaufe  the  Ifland  had  no  come,  nor  any  kind  of
vitailes  to  fuftaine  themfelues,  but  onely  that  which  muft  of  neceffitie  come
out  of  the  Turkes  dominions,  and  the  fayd  ifland  being  inclofed  with  the
Turks  round  about,  and  but  12.  miles  from  the  Turks  Continent,  therefore
the  faid  GenowaiesdXA.  compound  and  agree  to  be  the  Turkes  tributaries,  and
to  pay  him  14000.  thousand  duca'ts  yeerely,  Ahvayes  prouided  that  they  fhould
keep  their  lawes  both  fpiritual  and  temporall,  as  they  did  when  the  Hand
was  in  their  owne  hands.  Thus  he  granted  them  their  priuiledge,  which  they
inioyed  for  many  yeeres,  fo  that  all  ftrangcrs  and  alfo  many  Englifh  men
did  trade  thither  of  long  continuance,  and  went  and  came  in  fafety.  In  this
meane  time,  the  prince  Pedro  Doria  ^being  a  Genouois)  became  a  captaine
to  ferue  the  Emperour  with  30.  or  40.  gallies  againft  the  Turke.  And  fince
that  time  diuers  other  captaines  belonging  to  Genoa  haue  beene  in  the
feruice  of  king  Philip  againft  the  Turke.  Morcouer,  whenfoeuer  the  Turke
made  out  any  army,  he  perceiued  that  no  nation  did  him  more  hurt  then
thofe  Genouois,  who  were  his  tributaries.  Likewife  at  the  Turkes  fiege  of
Malta,  before  which  place  he  lay  a  great  while,  with  lofTe  of  his  men,  and
alfo  of  his  gallies,  he  found  none  fo  troublefome  vnto  his  force  as  one
Luanette  Doria,  a  Genouois,  and  diuers  others  of  the  Hand  of  Chio,  who
were  his  tributaries.  At  which  fight,  he  tooke  fuch  difpleafure  againft  them
of  Chio,  that  he  fent  certaine  of  his  gallies  to  the  Hand,  for  to  feife  vpon  all
the  goods  of  the  24.  Maunefes,  and  to  tume  them  with  their  wiues  and
children  out  of  the  Hand  ;  but  they  would  let  none  other  depart,  becaufe
the  Hand  fliould  not  be  vnpeopled.  So  that  now  the  Turke  hath  fent  one
of  his  chiefe  men  to  rule  there. —  Hakluyt,  Vol.  II.,  Parti.,  p.  114,  Ed.  1599.

XVlll

Preface.

Another  letter  of  Campion's,  begins  thus  :

>T  may  pleafe  your  woifliip  to  vnderftand,  that  as  concerning
the  voyage  to  C/iio,  what  great  profit  would  be  gotten,  both
for  merchants  and  alfo  for  owners  of  fliippes  (as  it  was  well
knowen  in  thofe  dayes  when  \.htMatt/ie-<i'  Goii/on,  the  Trinitie
Fit:nvilliants,  and  the  Sauiour  of  Brijlcnv,  with  diuers  other
fliips,  which  traded  thither  yerely,  and  made  their  voyage  in  ten  or  twelue
moneths,  and  the  longcft  in  a  yeere),  M[afler]  Francis  Lambert,  M[afl;er]
John  Brooke,  and  M[after]  Draufr  can  truely  inform  you  hereof  at  large.
And  by  reafon  that  wee  haue  not  traded  into  thofe  parts  thefe  many  yeeres
\i.e.  previous  to  1569],  and  the  Turke  is  growen  mighty,  whereby  our  fliips
doe  not  trade  as  they  were  vvoont  ,  .  ,  . — Haklnyt,  Voyages,  Vol.
II.,  Part  I.,/.  116,  Ed.  1599.

Finally  we  may  take  leave  on  this  occasion  of  the  interesting
subject  of  the  early  English  trade  in  the  Mediterranean,  with
the  following  note  of  Hakluyt's.

^p'Tr|'>^3>&  His  trade  into  the  Leuant.  .  .  .  was  very  vfuall  and  much
^^XS  VWf*  frequented  from  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  15 11  till  the  yeere
C^^  \^Si  I534>  ^"'^^  afterwards  alfo,  thou£;h  not  fo  commonly,  vntil  the
yeere  1 550,  when  the  barke  Aiicher  under  the  conduct  of
M [after]  Roger  Bodenham  made  a  profperous  voyage  into
Sicilia,  Caiidio,  Sio,  and  other  places  within  the  Leuant.  Since  which
time  the  forefaid  trade  (notwithftanding  the  grand  Signiors  ample  priuilege
granted  to  M[afterJ  Anthony  lenkenfon  1553,  and  the  flrong  and  weighty
reafons  of  Gafpar  Catnpion  for  that  purpofe)  was  vtterly  difcontinued,  and
in  maner  quite  forgotten,  as  if  it  had  neuer  bene,  for  the  fpace  of  20.  yeares
or  more  \i.e.  from  the  date  of  Jenkinson's  privilege  of  1553  until  1575  ;  when
the  preliminary  steps  which  resulted  in  the  formation  of  the  Turkey  Com-
pany, were  taken]. Voyages,  Vol.  II.,  Part  \.,  p.  136,  Ed.  1599.

11.  We  now  come  to  the  tragical  English  voyage  to  New-
foundland, in  1536  ;  as  narrated  by  Master  Oliver  Daubeny,  a
London  merchant,  to  Hakluyt's  cousin  and  namesake,  Richard
Hakluyt  of  the  Inner  Temple  ;  and  by  Master  Thomas  Butts
of  Norfolk,  to  himself  It  will  ever  be  thought  one  of  the
worthiest  acts  of  our  younger  Hakluyt's  worthy  life,  that,  for  the
simple  assurance,  with  further  details,  of  this  voyage,  he  travelled
200  miles  on  horseback,  probably  into  Norfolk  and  back.

The  voyage  of  majler  Hore  and  diuers  other  Gentleinen,  to  Newfound  land
and  Cape  Breton,  in  the  yeere  1536.  and  in  the  28.  yeere  of  King  Henry
the  ei^ht.

^Ne  mafler  Hore  of  London,  a  man  of  goodly  flature  and  of
great  courage,  and  giuen  to  the  fludie  of  Cofmographie,  in
the  28.  yeere  of  King  Henry  the  8.  and  in  the  yeere  of  our
Lord  1536.  encouraged  diuers  gentlemen  and  others,  being
affifled  by  the  kings  fauour  and  good  countenance,  to  accom-
pany him  in  a  voyage  of  difcouerie  vpon  the  Northwefl  partes  of  America :
wherein  his  perfwafions  tooke  fuch  effect,  that  within  fhort  fpace  many
gentlemen  of  the  innes  of  court,  and  of  Chauncerie,  and  diuers  ether  of  good
worfliip  defirous  to  fee  the  flrange  things  of  the  world,  very  willingly  entered
into  the  action  with  him,  fome  of  whofe  names  were  as  followeth  :  M[after]
Wickes,  a  gentleman  of  the  Well  countrey  of  hue  hundred  markes  [e</u-
valent  to  an  income  of  £'2,^X1  of  the  present  day]  by  the  yeere  liuing .  Mafler
Tucke,  a  gentleman  of  Kent.  Mafter  Tuckfield.  M[after]  Thomas  Buts,
the  fonne  of  Sir  William  Buts,  Knight  of  Norfolke,  which  is  yet  aliue,  and
from  whofe  mouth  T  wrote  mofl  of  this  relation.  Mafler  Hardie,  Mafler
Biron,  Mafter  Carter,  Mafter  Wright,  Mafter  Raftall  Sarieant  Raftals
brother,  Mafter  Ridley,  and  diuers  other,  which  all  were  in  the  admirall
called  the  Trinitie,  a  fliip  of  feuen  fcore  tunnes,  wherein  M[after].  Hore  him-
felfe  was  imbarked.  In  the  other  (hippe,  whofe  name  was  the  Minion,
went  a  very  learned  and  vertuous  gentlemen,  one  mafter  Armigil  Wade,
father  to  the  worfliipfuU  mafter  William  Wade,  now  clerke  of  the  priuie
counsell,  Master  Oliuer  Daubeney  merchant  of  London,  M[after]  loy  after-
ward gentleman  of  the  kings  chappell,  with  diuers  other  of  good  account.
The  whole  number  that  went  in  the  two  tall  fliips  aforefayd,  to  wit,  the

Trinitie  and  the  Minion,  were  about  fix  fcore  pcrfons,  whereof  30.  were
gentlemen,  which  all  were  muftered  in  warlike  maner  at  Grauefcnd,  and
after  the  receiuing  of  the  facrament,  they  embarked  thenifelues  at  the  end
of  Aprill,  1536.

From  the  time  of  their  fetting  out  from  Graiiefe/tde,  they  were  very  long
at  fea,  to  witte,  aboue  two  moneths,  and  neuer  touched  any  lande  vntill
they  came  to  part  of  the  Weft  Indies  about  Cape  Breton,  fliaping  their
courfe  thence  Northeaftwards,  vntill  they  came  to  the  Ifland  of  Penguin,
which  is  very  full  of  rockes  and  ftones,  whereon  they  went  and  founde  it
full  of  great  foules  white  and  gray,  as  bigge  as  geefe,  and  they  fawe  infinite
nombers  of  their  egges.  They  draue  a  great  nomber  of  the  foules  into  their
boates  vpon  their  failes,  and  tooke  vp  many  of  their  egges,  the  foule  they
flead  and  their  fkinnes  were  like  hony  combes  full  ofholes  being  flead  off:
they  dreffed  and  eate  them,  and  found  them  to  be  very  good  and  nourifhing
meate.  They  fawe  alfo  ftore  of  beares  both  blacke  and  white,  of  wlionie
they  killed  fome,  and  tooke  them  for  no  badde  foode.

M[after]  Oliiicr  Dawbeney,  which  (as  it  is  before  mentioned)  was  in  this
voyage,  rnd  ir  the  Minion,  tolde  AI[afIei-\  Richard  Haldiiyi  of  the  middle
Temple  thefe  things  following:  to  wit.  That  after  their  arriuall  in  Nnvfound
land,  and  hauing  bene  there  certaine  dayes  at  ancre,  and  not  hauing  yet
feene  any  of  the  naturall  people  of  the  Countrey,  the  fame  Dawbeny  walk-
ing one  day  on  the  hatches  fpied  a  boate  with  Sauagcs  of  thofe  partes,
rowing  downe  the  bay  towarde  them,  to  gafe  vpon  the  fliippe  and  our  people,
and  taking  viewe  of  their  comming  aloole,  hee  called  to  fuch  as  were  vnder
hatches,  and  willed  them  to  come  vp  if  they  would  fee  the  naturall  people
of  the  Countrey,  that  they  had  fo  long  and  fo  much  defired  to  fee :  Where-
upon they  came  vp  and  tooke  view  of  the  Sauages  rowing  toward  them  and
their  (hippe,  and  vpon  the  viewe  they  manned  out  a  fliipboote  to  meete
them  and  to  take  them.  But  they  fpying  our  fliipboote  making  towards
them,  returned  with  niaine  force,  and  fled  into  an  Ifland  that  laye  vp  in  the
bay  or  riuer  there,  and  our  men  purfued  them  into  the  Ifland,  and  the
Sauages  fledde  and  efcaped :  but  our  men  founde  a  fire,  and  the  fide  of  a
beare  on  a  wodden  fpit  left  at  the  fame  by  the  Sauages  that  were  fledde.

There  in  the  fame  place  they  founde  a  boot  of  leather  garniflied  on  the
vtter  fide  of  the  calfe  in  certain  braue  trailes,  as  it  were  of  rawe  filke,  and
alfo  founde  a  certaine  great  warme  mitten :  And  thefe  carried  with  them,
they  returned  to  their  fliippe,  not  finding  the  Sauages,  nor  feeing  any  thing
elfe  befides  the  foyle,  and  the  things  growing  in  the  fame,  which  chiefly
were  ftore  of  fire  and  pine  trees.

And  further,  the  faid  M.  Dawbeny  told  him,  that  lying  there  tliey  gi-ewe
into  great  want  of  victuals,  and  that  there  they  found  fniall  reliefe,  more  then
that  they  had  from  the  neft  of  an  Ofprcy,  that  brought  hourely  to  her  yong
great  plentie  of  diuers  forts  of  fiflies.  But  fuch  was  the  famine  that  increafed
amongft  them  from  day  to  day,  that  they  were  forced  to  feeke  to  relieue
themfelues  of  rawe  herbes  and  rootes  that  they  fought  on  the  maine :  but
the  famine  increafing  and  the  reliefe  of  herbes  being  to  little  purpofe  to
fatiffie  their  infatiable  hunger,  in  the  fieldes  and  defertes  here  and  there,  the
fellowe  killed  his  mate  while  hee  ftouped  to  take  vp  a  roote  for  his  reliefe,
and  cutting  out  pieces  of  his  body  whome  hee  had  murthered,  broyled  the
fame  on  the  coles,  and  greedily  deuoured  them.

By-  this  meane  the  company  decreafed,  and  the  officers  knewe  not  what
was  become  of  them ;  and  it  fortuned  that  one  of  the  company  driuen
with  hunger  to  feeke  abroade  for  reliefe,  founde  out  in  the  fields  the  fauour
of  broyled  flefli,  and  fell  out  with  one  that  hee  would  fuffer  him  and  his
fellowes  to  fterue,  enioying  plentie  as  he  thought :  And  this  matter  growing
to  cruel  fpeaches,  he  that  had  the  broyled  meate,  burft  out  into  thefe  wordes,
If  thou  wouldeft  needes  knowe,  the  broyled  meate  that  I  had,  was  a  piece
of  fuch  a  mans  buttocke.  The  report  of  this  brought  to  the  fhip,  the
Captaine  found  what  became  of  thofe  that  were  mifhng,  and  was  perfwaded
that  fome  of  them  were  neither  deuoured  with  wilde  beaftes,  nor  yet  deftroyed
with  the  Sauages  :  And  hereupon  he  ftcod  vp  and  made  a  notable  Oration,
containing.  How  much  thefe  dealings  offended  the  Almightie,  and  vouched
the  Scriptures  from  firft  to  laft  what  God  had  in  cafes  of  diftrefle  done  for
them  that  called  vpon  him,  and  told  them  that  the  power  of  the  Almightie
was  then  no  lefTe,  then  in  al  former  time  it  had  bene.  And  added,  that  if
it  had  not  pleafed  God  to  haue  holpen  them  in  that  diftreffe,  that  yet  it  had
been  better  to  be  puniflied  in  body,  and  to  haue  lined  euerlallingly,  then
to  haue  relieued  for  a  poore  time  their  mortal  bodies,  and  to  bee  con-
demned euerlastingly  both  body  and  foule  to  the  vnquenchable  fire  of  hel.

P  R  E  F  A  C  F.

XIX

And  thus  hauing  ended  to  that  effect,  he  began  to  exhort  to  repentance,  and
befought  all  the  company  to  pray,  that  it  might  pleafe  God  to  looke  vpon
their  miferable  prefent  flate,  and  for  his  owne  mercie  to  relieue  the  fame.
And  fuch  was  the  mercie  of  God,  that  the  fame  night  there  arriued  a
French  fliippe  in  that  port,  well  furniflied  with  vittaile,  and  fuch  was  the
policie  of  the  Englifli,  that  they  become  mafters  of  the  fame  ;  and  changing
fliip:;  and  vitayling  them,  they  fet  faile  to  come  into  England.

In  their  ioumey  they  were  fo  farre  Northwards,  that  they  favve  mightie
Iflands  of  yce  in  the  fummer  feafon,  on  which  were  haukes  and  other
foules  to  reft  themfelues,  being  wearie  of  flying  ouer  farre  from  the
maine.  They  fawe  alfo  certaine  great  white  foules  with  redde  bils  and
redde  legs,  fomewhat  bigger  then  Herons,  which  they  fuppofed  to  be  ftorkes.
They  arriued  at  S[aint].  lues  in  Cornewall  about  the  ende  of  October.
From  thence  they  departed  to  a  certaine  Caftle  belonging  to  sir  /o/m
Luttrel,  where  M{ajler\  Thomas  Butszxi^  M\ajler\  I\a/iallz.nd  other  gentle-
men of  the  voyage  were  very  friendly  intertained  :  after  that  they  came  to
the  Earle  of  Bathe  at  Bathe,  and  thence  to  Brijloll,  and  fo  to  London.
l\f\a/ler\  Buts  was  fo  changed  in  the  voyage  with  hunger  and  miferie,  that
sir  William  his  father  and  my  Lady  his  mother  knewe  him  not  to  be  their
fonne,  vntill  they  found  a  certaine  fecret  marke  which  was  a  wart  vpon  one
of  his  knees,  as  he  tolde  me  Richard  Hakluyt  of  Oxforde  himfelfe,  to  whome
I  rode  200.  miles  onely  to  leame  the  whole  traeth  of  this  voyage  from  his
owne  mouth,  as  being  the  onely  man  now  aliue  \i.e.  in  or  about  1589]  that
was  in  this  difcouerie.

Certaine  moneths  after,  thofe  Frenchmen  came  into  England,  and  made
complaint  to  king  Henry  \\).q?>:  tlie  King  caufmg  the  matter  to  be  exa-
mined, and  finding  the  great  diftreffe  of  his  fubiects,  and  the  caufes  of
the  dealing  fo  with  the  French,  was  fo  moued  with  pitie,  that  hee  punifhed
not  his  fubiects,  but  of  his  owne  purfe  made  full  and  royal  recomj^enfe  vnto
the  French.

In  this  diftreffe  of  famine,  the  Englifli  fomewhat  relieue  their  vitall
fpirits  by  drinking  at  the  fprings  the  frefh  water  out  of  certaine  wooden
cups,  out  of  which  they  had  drunke  their  Aqua  compofita  before. — Hakluyt,
Voyages,  pp.  517-519,  Ed.  1589.

12.  These  are  all  the  oceanic  voyages  performed  by  the
English  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  which  we  have  been
able  to  trace.  It  was  under  Edward,  that  our  sailors  first  began
to  creep  down  the  African  coast.  The  special  significance  of
these  voyages  lay  in  the  then  accredited  proprietorship  (through
the  Papal  Bull,  reprinted  at  pp.  201-204)  of  the  Portugese  to
the  entire  continent  of  Africa;  and  in  the  intentional  and  studied
ignorance  of  its  coast  line,  in  which  the  World  was  kept  by  that
nation.  Every  English  voyage  to  its  west  coast  was  therefore
at  once  an  act  of  revolt  against  the  Papacy,  and  a  challenge  to
the  pretensions  of  Portugal.

The  Levant  trade  was  open  to  all  who  would  dare  to  run
the  gauntlet  of  the  Turks.  The  Spaniards  recognised  the  claim
of  the  English  discovery,  by  the  Cabots,  of  Baccalaos  \  and  had
not  yet  worked  up  northward  to  it.  But  the  African  sea  coast,
so  honourably  and  so  patiently  discovered,  was  (by  all  laws,
human  and  divine,  hitherto  accepted)  the  possession  of  its  brave
discoverers.  It  was  therefore  a  new  impulse,  that  made  our
English  ships,  passing  the  familiar  Straits  of  Gibraltar  on  their
left  hand,  to  go  forward  southward,  first  to  Barbary,  and  then
to  Guinea  ;  cost  what  it  might.

Discoveries  are  made  by  successive  steps,  one  after  another ;
and  the  passage  of  English  ships  around  the  world  and  to  the
Eastern  seas  was  but  the  succession  and  development  of  these
first  attempts  to  Marocco.  All  that  we  know  of  these  Barbary
voyages  is  preserved  to  us  by  Hakluyt,  who  collected  his
information  forty  to  fifty  years  after  the  event,  and  has  thus
transmitted  it  to  us.

The  First  Voyage  to  Barbary  i.n  1551,  described  bv  James
Alday,  Servant  to  Sebastian  Cabot.

The  originall  of  the  firft  voyage  for  traffique  into  the  kingdom  of  Marocco
in  Barbaric,  begun  in  the  yeere  1 55 1,  with  a  tall  (hip  called  the  Lion  of
London,  whereof  went  as  captaine  Mafter  Thomas  Windham,  as  appeare'h
by  this  ex'^ract  of  a  letter  of  lames  Aldaie,  to  the  worihipfull  mafter  Michael
Locke,  which  Aldaie  profeffcth  himfelfe  to  haue  bene  the  firft  inuenter  of
this  trade.

Oi-ftiipfuU  Sir,  hauing  lately  bene  acquainted  with  your  intent
to  profecute  the  olde  intermitted  difcouerie  for  Catai,  if
therein  with  my  knowledge,  trauell  or  induftrie  I  may  doe
you  feruice,  I  am  readie  to  doe  it,  and  therein  to  aduenture
my  life  to  the  vttermoft  point.  Traeth  it  is,  that  I  haue  bene
by  fome  men  (not  my  friends)  euill  fpoken  of  at  London,  faying  that
although  I  be  a  man  of  knowledge  in  the  Arte  of  Nauigation  and  Cofmo-
graphie,  and  that  I  haue  bene  the  inuenter  of  fome  voyages  that  be  now
growen  to  great  effect ;  yet  fay  they  malicioufly  and  without  iuft  caufe,  that  I
haue  not  bene  willing  at  any  feafon  to  proceed  in  thofe  voyages  that  I  haue
taken  in  hand,  taking  examjile  efpecially  of  two  voyages.  The  one  was
when  I  was  mafter  in  the  great  Barke  Aucher  \vjhich  left  Grcn'esend  on
\Tyth  November  1550]  for  the  /..euant,  in  which  voyage  I  went  not,  but  the
caufes  they  did  not  know  of  my  let  from  the  fame,  nor  of  the  other.  But
firft  the  very  trueth  is,  that  I  was  from  the  fame  voyage  letted  by  the
Princes  letters,  which  my  Mafter  Sebajl.'an  Gubota  had  obatiued  for  that
purpofe,  to  my  great  griefe.

And  as  touching  the  fecond  voyage  which  I  inuented  for  the  trade  of
Barbaric,  the  lining  God  knoweth  that  I  fay  moft  true,  that  when  the  great
fvveate  was  YThe  sweating  sickness  began  in  London  on  ()th  July  1 55 1,  and
continued  till  the  following  Septemberl  (whereon  the  chiefe  of  thofe  with
whom  I  ioyned  in  that  voyage  died,  that  is  to  fay,  Sir  Lohn  Lutterell,  fohv
I'ldcher,  Henry  Oflrich  and  others),  I  my  felfe  was  alfo  taken  with  the
fame  fweate  in  London,  and  after  it,  whether  with  euill  diet  in  keeping,  or
how  I  know  not,  I  was  caft  into  fuch  an  extreame  feuer,  as  I  was  neither
able  to  ride  nor  goe;  and  the  fhippe  being  at  Portfmmtth,  Thomas  Wind-
ham had  her  away  from  thence  before  I  was  able  to  fland  vpon  my  le^es,
by  whom  I  loft  at  that  inftant  fourefcore  pound  [  =  ;^8oo  of  the  present  day],
Befides  I  was  appointed  by  them  that  died  (if  they  had  liued)  to  haue  had
the  whole  gouernment  both  of  fhippe  and  goods,  becaufe  I  was  to  them
the  fole  inuenter  of  that  trade.

In  the  firft  voyage  to  Barbary  there  were  two  Moores,  being  noble  men,
whereof  one  was  of  the  Kings  blood,  conueyed  by  the  faid  Mafter  Thomas
Windham  into  their  countrey  out  of  England.

Yours  humble  at  your  commandement, James  Alday.

The  Second  Voyage  to  Barbary  in  1552,  described  by
Master  James  Thomas.

The  fecond  voyage  to  Barboy  in  the  yeere  1552.  Set  foorth  by  the  right
worfliipful  Sir  John  Yorke,  Sir  William  Gerl^rlard,  Sir  Thomas  Wroth,
Mafter  Frances  Lambert,  Mafter  Cole,  and  others.  Written  by  the  relation
of  Mafter  Lames  Thomas,  then  Page  to  Mafter  Thomas  Windham,  :hiefe
Captaine  of  this  voyage.

He  fliippes  that  went  on  this  voyage  wert  three,  whereof  two
were  of  the  Riuer  of  Thames,  That  is  to  fay,  the  Lyon  of
London,  whereof  Mafter  Thomas  JVindkam  was  Captaine
and  part  owner,  of  about  an  hundred  and  fiftie  tunnes:  The
other  was  the  Buttolfe  [Botolpli]  about  fourefcore  tunnes,  and
S.  Portugall  Carauel,  bought  of  certaine  Portugals  in  Xeiiport  in  Wales,  and
fraighted  for  this  voyage,  of  fumme  fixtie  tunnes.  The  number  of  men  in
the  Fleete  were  an  hundred  and  twentie.  The  Mafter  of  the  Lyon  was
one  Lohn  Kerry  of  Mynhe[(.i\d  in  Somcrfetfnire,  his  Mate  was  DauiJ
Landman.  The  chiefe  Captaine  of  this  fmall  Fleete  was  Mafter  Thomas
IVindham  a  Norfolke  gentleman  borne,  but  dwelling  at  MarfJifield-parke  in
Somerfctfliire.

This  Fleete  departed  out  of  King\s\-rode  neere  Brijloll  about  the  begin-
ning of  May  1552.  being  on  a  Monday  in  the  morning  \^The  2d  and  ^h  of

XX

P  R  E  17  A  C  E.

Miiy  155?,  We're  MonJiiys],  anil  the  Monday  fortnight  next  enfuing  in  the
euening  came  to  an  ancker  at  their  firfl  part  in  the  roade  Zajia  or  A/afi  on
the  coaft  of  Barbarie,  flanding  in  32.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  there  put  on
land  part  of  our  marchandife  to  be  conueid  by  land  to  the  citie  of  Marocco:
which  being  done,  and  haue  refrcflied  our  fclues  with  victuals  and  water,
we  went  to  the  fecond  port  called  Santa  Cruz,  where  we  difcharged  the
reft  of  our  goods,  being  good  quantitie  of  linnen  and  woollen  cloth,  corall,
amber,  let,  and  diuers  other  things  well  accepted  of  the  Moores.  In  which
road  we  found  a  French  fliip,  which  not  knowing  whether  it  were  warre  or
peace  between  ^//^•■A:;/^/ and  France,  drewe  her  felfe  as  neere  vnder  the
towne  wals  as  flie  could  polTible,  crauing  aide  of  the  towne  for  her  defence,
if  need  were,  which  in  deed  feeing  vs  drawe  neere,  ftiot  at  us  a  piece  from
the  wals,  which  came  ouer  the  Lion  our  Admirall,  between  the  maine
mafte  and  foremaft.  Whereupon  we  comming  to  an  anker,  prefently  came
a  pinnes  aboord  vs  to  know  what  we  were,  who  vnderftanding  that  we
had  bene  there  the  yere  before  [  This  confirms  Aldafs  statcrncni\  and  came
with  good  leaue  of  their  king  in  merchant  wife,  were  fully  fatiffied,  and
gaue  vs  good  leaue  to  bring  our  goods  peaceably  on  fliore,  where  the  Viceroy,
whofe  name  was  Sibill  Manache,  within  fliort  time  after  came  to  vifite  vs,
and  vfed  vs  with  all  curtefie.  By  diuers  occafions  we  fpent  here  very  neere
three  moneths  before  we  could  get  in  our  lading,  which  was  Sugar,  Dates,
Almonds,  and  MalalTos  or  fugar  Syrrope.  And  for  all  our  being  here  in
the  heate  of  the  Sommer,  yet  none  of  our  company  periflied  by  fickneffe.

Our  fliips  being  laden,  wee  drew  into  the  Sea  for  a  Wefterne  wind  for
England.  But  being  at  fea,  a  great  leake  fell  vpon  the  Lion,  fo  that  we
were  driuen  to  Lancerota  and  Fortenentura,  where,  betweene  the  two
Hands,  we  came  to  a  road,  whence  we  put  on  land  out  ol  our  fayd  fliip  70.
cheftes  of  Sugar  vpon  Lancerota  with  fome  dozen  or  fixteene  of  our  com-
pany, where  the  inhabitants  fuppofing  we  had  made  a  wrongfuU  prize  of
our  carauell,  (uddenly  came  with  force  vpon  our  people,  among  whom  I
my  felfe  was  one,  tooke  vs  prifoners,  and  fpoiled  the  fugars :  which  thing
being  perceiued  from  our  lliips,  they  manned  out  three  boates,  thinking  to
refcue  vs,  and  draue  the  Spaniards  to  flight,  whereof  they  flewe  eighteene,
and  took  their  gouernour  of  the  Hand  prifoncr,  who  was  a  very  aged  gentle-

man about  70.  yeeres  of  age.  But  chafing  the  enemie  fo  farre  for  our
recouerie,  as  pouder  and  arrowes  wanted,  the  Spaniardes  perceiuing  this,
returned,  and  in  our  mens  retire  \retreai\  they  flewe  fix  of  them.  Then  a
Parle[y]  grew,  in  the  which  it  was  agreed,  that  we  the  prifoners  fliould  be
by  them  reftored,  and  they  receiue  their  old  gouernour,  giuing  vs  a  tefti-
monie  vnder  his  and  their  hands  what  damages  wee  had  there  receiued  ;
the  which  damages  were  there  reftored,  and  made  good  by  the  King  of
Spaine  his  marchantes  on  our  relurne  into  England.

After  we  had  fearched  and  mended  our  eake,  being  returned  aboord,
we  came  vnder  faile,  and  as  wee  were  going  to  the  fea  on  the  one  fide  of
the  Hand,  the  Cacafuego  and  other  fliips  of  the  King  of  I^ortugals  Armada
entered  at  the  other,  and  came  to  anker  in  the  road  from  whence  we  were
but  newly  departed,  and  fliot  off  their  great  ordinance  in  our  hearing.  And
here  by  the  way  it  is  to  bee  vnderftood  that  the  Portiigals  were  much
offended  with  this  our  new  trade  into  Barbarie,  and  both  in  our  voiage  the
yeere  before,  as  alfo  in  this  they  gaue  out  in  England  by  their  marchants,
that  if  they  tooke  vs  in  thofe  partes,  they  would  vfe  vs  as  their  mortall
enemies,  with  great  threats  and  menaces.  But  by  God  and  good  proui-
dence  wee  efcaped  their  handes.

From  this  Hand  fliaping  our  courfe  for  England,  we  were  feuen  or  eight
weekes  before  we  could  reach  the  coaft  of  England.  The  firft  port  vee
entered  into  was  the  hauen  of  Plimmouth,  from  whence  within  fliort  time
wee  came  into  the  Thames,  and  landed  our  merchandife  at  London,  about
the  ende  of  the  moneth  of  October  ii)'^2. —LJalduyt,  Voyages,  Vol.  II.,
Part  II.,  //.  7-9,  Ed.  1599.

13.  All  these  English  Voyages,  therefore,  had  been  planned
and  carried  out  before  either  of  the  two  following  Works,  trans-
lated &c.  by  Eden,  had  come  from  the  press.  As  he  has
given  no  account  of  them ;  it  has  been  all  the  more  necessary
to  say  thus  much  here,  in  order  to  shew  that  in  these  very
early  days  of  oceanic  discovery,  our  forefathers  were  not
altogether  idle.

III.

Unique,  imperfect,  copy  of  A  neiv  interlude
atid  a  mery  of  the  7iaiiire  of  the .  iiij.  elcmentes,
6^<r.,  written  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.,  and
probably  printed  [  ?  by  John  Rastel]  about
1519,1$  in  the  Garrick  Collection  of  Plays,
in  the  British  Museum  (Press  mark,  C.  39,
b.  17).
This  interlude  contains [at  C  /.]  the following  reference

to the  New  World,  in  a  dialogue between  Experyence  and

Studyous  desire: —

Ex.  C  Syr  this  ys  ynglande  lyenge  here

And  this  is  skotlande  yat  loyneth  him  nere

Compassyd  a  boute  euery  where

With  the  occian  see  rownde

C  And  next  from  them  westwardly

Here  by  hym  selfe  alone  doth  ly.

Irelande  that  holsome  grounde

<r  Here  than  is  the  narowe  seey

To  Calyce  and  Boleyne  the  next  wey

And  flaunders  in  this  parte

Here  lyeth  fraunce  next  hym  ioynynge

And  spayn  southwarde  from  thens  standynge

And  portyngale  in  this  quart

This  contrey  is  called  Italye

Beholde  where  Rome  in  ye  myddes  doth  ly

And  Naples  here  be  yonde

And  this  lytell  See  that  here  is

Is  callyd  the  Gulfe  of  Venys

And  here  venys  doth  stande

C  As  for  almayne  lyeth  this  way

Here  lyeth  denmarke  and  norway

And  northvvarde  on  this  syde

There  lyeth  Iselonde  when  men  do  fyshe

But  be  yonde  that  so  colde  it  is

No  man  may  there  abyde

C  This  See  is  called  the  great  Occyan

So  great  it  is  that  never  man

Coude  tell  it  sith  the  worlde  began

Tyll  nowe  within  this.  xx.  yere

Westwarde  be  founde  new  landes

That  we  neuer  harde  tell  of  before  this

By  wrytynge  nor  other  meanys

Yet  many  nowe  haue  ben  there

C  And  that  contrey  is  so  large  of  rome

Muche  lenger  than  all  cristendome

Without  fable  or  gyle

Tor  dyuers  maryners  haue  it  tryed

And  sayled  streyght  by  the  coste  syde

Aboue.  v,  thousand  myle

C  But  what  commodytes  be  within

No  man  can  tell  nor  well  Imagin

But  yet  not  longe  a  go

Some  men  of  this  contrey  went

By  the  kynges  noble  consent

It  for  to  serche  to  that  entent

And  coude  not  be  brought  therto

C  But  they  that  were  the  ventere[r]s

Preface.

XXI

Ilaue  cause  to  curse  their  niaryners

Fals  of  promys  and  dissemblers

That  falsly  them  betrayed

Which  wold  take  no  paine  to  saile  farther

Than  their  owne  lyst  and  pleasure

Wherfore  that  vyage  and  dyuers  other

Suche  kaytyffes  haue  distroyed

C  O  what  thynge  a  had  be  than

Yf  that  they  that  be  englyshe  men

Myght  haue  ben  the  furst  of  all

That  there  shulde  haue  take  possessyon

And  made  furst  buyldynge  and  habytacion

A  memory  perpetuall

And  also  what  an  honorable  thynge

Bothe  to  the  realme  and  to  the  kynge

To  haue  had  his  domynyon  extendynge

There  into  so  farre  a  grounde

Whiche  the  noble  kynge  of  late  memory

The  most  wyse  prynce  the.  vij.  He[n]rry

Causyd  furst  for  to  be  found  e

C  And  what  a  great  meritoryouse  dede

It  were  to  haue  the  people  instructed

To  lyue  more  venuously

And  to  lerne  to  knowe  of  men  the  maner

And  also  to  knowe  god  theyr  maker

Whiche  as  yet  lyue  all  be[a]stly

For  they  nother  knowe  god  nor  the  deuell

Nor  neuer  harde  tell  of  heuyn  nor  hell

Wrytynge  nor  other  scripture

But  yet  in  the  stede  of  god  almyght

The[y]  honour  the  sone  for  his  great  lygg[h]t

For  that  doth  them  great  pleasure

C  Buyldynge  nor  house  they  haue  non[e]  at  all

But  wodes  /  cotes  /  and  cauys  small

No  merueyle  though  it  be  so

For  they  vse  no  maner  of  yron

Nother  in  to[o]le  nor  other  wepon

That  shulde  helpe  them  therto

C  Copper  they  haue  which  is  founde

In  dyuers  places  aboue  the  grounde

Yet  they  dyg  not  therfore

For  as  I  sayd  they  haue  non[e]  yryn

Wherby  they  shuld  in  the  yerth  myne

To  serche  for  any  wore

C  Great  haboundaunce  of  woddes  ther  be

Moste  parte  vyr  and  pyne  aple  tre

Great  ryches  myght  come  therby

Both  py[t]che  and  tarre  and  sope  asshys

As  they  make  in  the  eest  landes

By  brynnyng  therof  only

C  Fyshe  they  haue  so  great  plente

That  in  hauyns  take  and  slayne  they  be

With  stauys  withouten  fayle

Nowe  frenchemen  and  other  haue  founden  the  trade

That  yerely  of  fyshe  there  they  lade

A  boue  an.  C.  yhundred]  sayle

C  But  in  the  south  parte  of  that  contrey

The  people  there  go  nakyd  alway

The  lande  is  of  so  great  hete

And  in  the  north  parte  all  the  clothes

That  they  were  /  is  but  be[a]stes  skynnes

They  haue  no  nother  fete  [feat]

But  howe  the  people  furst  began

In  that  contrey  or  whens  they  cam

For  clerkes  it  is  a  questyon[.]

Other  thynges  mo  I  haue  in  store

That  I  coude  tel  therof  but  now  no  more

Tyll  a  nother  season

Sill.  C  Than  at  your  pleasure  shew  some  other  thinge
Yt  lyketh  me  so  wel  your  commyninge
Ye  can  not  talke  a  mys

Ex.  C  Than  wyl  I  tome  a  gayne  to  my  matter
Of  Cosmogryfy  where  I  was  err  {ere]
Beholde  lake  hede  to  this
C  Loo  estwarde  beyonde  ye  great  occyan
Here  entereth  the  see  callyd  mediterran
Of.  ii.  M.  \_two  thousand]  myle  of  lengthe
The  Soudans  contrey  lyelh  here  by
The  great  Turke  on  ye  north  syde  doth  ly
A  man  of  merueylous  strengthe
C  This  sayde  north  parte  is  callyd  europa
And  this  south  parte  callyd  affrica
This  eest  parte  is  callyd  ynde
But  this  newe  landes  founde  lately
Ben  callyd  america  by  cause  only
Americus  dyd  furst  them  fynde
C  Loo  Iherusalem  lyeth  in  this  contrey
And  this  be  yonde  is  the  red  see
That  moyses  maketh  of  mencyon
This  quarter  is  India  minor
And  this  quarter  India  maior
The  lande  of  prester  lohn
C  But  northwarde  this  way  as  ye  see.
Many  other  straunge  regions  ther  be
And  people  that  we  not  knowe
But  estwarde  on  the  see  syde
A  prynce  there  is  that  ruleth  wyde
Called  the  Cane  of  catowe  ^
C  And  this  is  called  the  great  eest  see
Which  goth  all  a  longe  this  wey
Towardes  the  new  landis  agayne
But  whether  that  see  go  thyther  dyrectly
Or  if  any  wyldernes  bytwene  them  do  ly
No  man  knoweth  for  certeyne
But  these  newe  landes  by  all  cosmografye
Frome  the  cane  of  catous  lande  can  not  lye
Lytell  paste  a  thousand  myle
But  from  those  new  landes  men  may  sayle  plajne
Estwarde  and  cum  to  englande  againe
Where  we  began  ere  whyle
C  Lo  all  this  parte  of  the  yerth  which  I
Haue  here  discryuyd  openly
The  north  parte  we  do  it  call
But  the  south  parte  on  the  other  syde
Ys  as  large  as  this  full  and  as  wyde
W^hiche  we  know  e  nothynge  at  all
C  Nor  whether  ye  most  parte  be  lande  or  see
Nor  whether  the  people  that  there  be
Be  be[a]styall  or  connynge
Nor  whether  they  knowe  good  or  no
Nor  howe  they  beleue  nor  what  they  do
Of  this  we  knowe  nothynge

The  Voyage  referred  to,  clearly  took  place  in  Henry  VIII. 's
reign.  It  was  probably  the  Bristol  expedition  sent  out  by  N.
Thome's  father  and  Hugh  Eliot,  which  discovered  Newfound-
land ;  of  which  Thorne  tells  us,  at/,  xvi,  "  There  is  no  doubt,
as  now  plainly  appeareth,  if  the  marriners  would  then  haue
been  ruled  and  folowed  their  pilots  mind,  the  lands  of  the
West  Indies,  from  whence  all  the  gold  commeth,  had  beene
ours."

1  Klui>t  oj  Cat/uzy.

C 2

XXll

Preface.

IV.

HE  special  purpose  of  this  Preface  has  now
been  carried  out.  It  has  been  to  shew
what  our  forefatliers  actually  accomplished,
ere  Eden  set  about  the  following  Trans-
lations, or  during  the  time  he  was  actually
engaged  upon  them  :  and  so  to  supplement
the  other  accounts  of  Oceanic  Discovery
contained  in  the  volume.

We  have,  in  conclusion,  only  space  briefly  to  touch  upon  one
other  point,  and  that  is  but  a  simple  act  of  justice.

Most  notable  is  Eden's  position  as  a  Man  of  Science  in  the
Tudor  Age.  He  had  the  true  modest  scientific  spirit ;  as
when  he  wrote  in  1562,  to  Sir  W.  Cecil,  "Syth  only  the
respecte  of  suche  vertues  as  it  hathe  pleased  you  to  thinke
commendable  in  me,  hath  moved  your  Honour  not  only  in
maner  to  seeme  carefull  for  me  howe  I  maye  hereafter  with
quietnesse  spende  my  tyme  in  studie  (as  is  my  most  desire),"
/.  xliii.;  and  likewise  when,  in  1574,  he  thus  dwelt  at  large
upon  what  he  did  not  know,  a  list  of  disqualifications  that
must  not  be  pressed  too  literally,  "  For  yf  there  be  any  thing  in
me,  wherein  I  maye  by  good  reason  please  my  selfe,  it  is
cheefely  this,  that  I  haue  euer  loued  and  honoured  men  of

singular  vertue  or  qnalitie,  in  what  so  euer  laudable  Art  or
Science,  euen  of  those  whereof  mee  selfe  have  litle  know-
ledge, as  are  Geometric,  Astronomic,  Architecture,  Musicke,
Payntyng,  feates  of  Armes,  inuentions  of  Ingcns,  and  suche
lyke,"  p.  xlvi.

But  whatever  may  have  been  his  knowledge  or  his  ignorance,
actual  or  relative  ;  Eden  had  already  grasped  the  Inductive
Method.  His  life  overlapped  that  of  Lord  Bacon.  May  he
not  be  regarded  as  a  near  Herald  and  Forerunner  of  the
Father  of  Scientific  Enquiry,  when  he  uses  such  language  as
this ;  of  which  his  whole  life  was  but  the  fuller  expression  ?

"  Experience,  the  teacher  and  mestres  of  all  sciences,  for
lacke  of  whose  ayde  (experience  I  meane)  lyke  as  many  greate
wittes  haue  fallen'  into  great  errours,  so  by  her  ayde,  many
base  and  common  wittes  haue  attayned  to  the  knowledge  and
practise  of  such  wonderful!  effectes,  as  could  hardely  be
comprehended  by  the  discourse  of  reason

"  Nought  els  to  say,  but  that  experience  to  be  most  certayn
which  is  ioyned  with  reason  or  speculacion,  and  that  reason  to
be  most  sure  which  is  confirmed  with  experience." /.  9.

And  thus,  from  henceforth  will  the  reputation  of  Richard
Eden  continue  to  increase,  both  as  a  Scholar  and  a  Scientist.

[The  First  English  book  on  America.

H  (if  tht  txt\Mt  XmiXft^  mxtf  ot  ^t  people
founUe  i)j)  tfte  mesJsfengersJ  at  tfte  lt|jn
^t  ot  poitgngale  naineU  0tnjtmteX.

#f  tfte.  >%  trjjuev^  naej)0n!S  (i|)5teitetr.

#£  pope  Koftn  antf  ftt^  lantre^  antr  at
tfte  cosJtelu  ftegesJ  irntf  iuonUersJ  mala
tfjje^  tftat  in  tftat  Imxtft  i^,']

\r

T

XXV

[A  Note on
Jan  van  Doesborch,

a  printer  at  Antwerp,  between  1508-1530  a.d

Nything  that  concerns  the  printer  of  the
first  English  Work  relating  to  America,
must  henceforth  be  of  increasing  interest.
There  does  not  appear  to  be  in  exist-
ence, any  typographical  history  of  Ant-
werp for  the  period  during  which  the
first  Text  in  this  volume  was  produced.
The  learned  and  most  courteous
Librarian  of  the  Royal  Library  at  the  Hague,  Dr  M.  F.  A.
G.  Campbell,  the  author  of  the  well-known  Annales  de  la
Typographic  nkrlandaise  an  XVe  siecle,  La  Haye,  1874-8,
8vo,  thus  writes,  on  the  21st  April  1885.

How  glad  should  I  have  been  if  I  had  been  able  to  give  you  full
information  about  Jan  van  Doesborch,  the  Antwerp  printer  in  the  first
half  of  the  sixteenth  century.  But,  alas,  the  History  of  Printing  in
that  century  has  been,  without  any  sound  reason,  neglected  to  that
point  that  even  sixteenth-century  books  are  now-a-days  more  rare  than
their  predecessors  of  the  fifteenth.  If  Jan  van  Doesborch  had  had  only
one  foot  in  the  fifteenth  century,  I  should  have  been  able  to  give  you
matter  enough  to  compose  his  history  :  because  I,  and  my  predecessor
as  Librarian  of  this  Library  (Mr  Holtrop),  have  devoted  the  better  part
of  our  lives  to  the  study  of  the  typography  and  typographers  before  the
year  1500.  Now  John  of  Doesborch  did  not  print  till  after  1508,
because  in  that  year,  he  entered  the  Guild  of  St  Lucas  at  Antwerp,  as
verlkhtere,  "miniature  painter."

When  such  an  authority  as  Dr  Campbell  writes  thus,
the  present  Editor  may  be  excused  of  his  ignorance  on  this
subject.  Nevertheless  the  following  is  offered  as  a  mere
beginning  of  this  study.

2.  Doesburg  is  a  Dutch  town,  about  ten  miles  to  the  east
of  Arnheim.

Jan  van  Doesborch,  Doesborcke,  Doesburgh,  or  as  he
styles  himself  in  (/)  the  a"Z'.  tokens,  lohan  fro  doesborch,  may
have  succeeded  to  the  printing  business  of  Roeland  van  der
Dorpe,  at  Antwerp.  He  was  contemporary  with  our
Wynkyn  de  Worde  and  Richard  Pynson :  and  occupies  a
similar  position  in  Antwerp  typography,  to  that  filled  by
those  two  English  printers  at  Westminster  and  London.

He  seems  to  have  printed  in  three  different  houses.  His
earliest  books  were  printed  at  the  sign  of  Aen  dijsere  wage,
"the  Iron  balance."  Those  produced  about  15 18,  are
printed  "besides  the  Camer  porte.^^  His  latest  books,
finished  about  1530,  are  at  die  Zotiibaerde  vcste,  "the  Lom-
bard fortress."

It  is  very  remarkable  that  Doesborch  should,  at  such  an
early  date,  have  printed  the  English  books  that  he  did ;

especially  such  an  important  work  as  Arnold's  Chronicle.
He  was  probably  employed  in  this  work  by  some
of  the  merchants  of  the  English  House  at  Antwerp.  He
stknds  in  the  same  relation  to  our  Literature  at  this  time,
■  that  Hans  Luft  of  Marburg  did  fifteen  or  twenty  years  later.
No  books  are  so  scarce  as  the  early  English  books  printed
by  foreign  printers  on  the  Continent ;  of  which  the  following
Text  is  one  of  the  earliest.

3.  The  first  book  attributed  to  this  printer,  by  P.  C
van  der  Meersch,  in  his  Recherches  sur  la  vie  et  les  travaux
des  iniprimeurs  Beiges  et  Ncerlandais  etablis  a  Vetrangcr-^  i.
131,  Gand  1856,  is —

(a)  Die  destructie  van  Ttoyen,  "the  destruction  of  Troy."  Antwerp,
folio,  no  date.

The  late  eminent  bookseller  of  Amsterdam,  Mr  Frederick
Muller,  issued,  in  1872,  a  Catalogue  of  Books,  Maps,  Plates
on  America;  afid  of  a  remarkable  Collection  of  Early  Voy-
ages, offered  by  him  for  sale.  At  /.  6,  he  states  that  he
acquired,  in  187 1,  at  the  sale  of  an  insignificant  library  at
Antwerp,  a  volume  containing  four  pieces,  "  all  printed
there  in  the  first  ten  years  of  the  i6th  centtury."

One  of  these  was —

(b)  Van  der  nieiiwcr  wereli  oft  laiidtscap  jiituwelier  ghenoden  vaditi
door  luck  tighen  conn,  van  Portugad  door  den  aldcrbeste  pyloet  ofU  zecken-
edr  d'wcrelt,  *'  Of  the  new  world  or  landscape,  newly  found  for  the
illustrious  King  of  Portugal  by  the  best  pilot  or  mariner  in  the  world."
This  is  a  translation  from  the  Italian  (through  the  Latin)  into  Dutch,
of  the  Third  Letter  of  '\merigo  Vespucci.  The  colophon  runs,
Gheprent  Thantwcrpen  aen  Dyseren  ~uaghe.  Bi  fan  van  Doesborch,
"  Printed  at  Antwerp,  at  the  iron  balance,  by  Jan  van  Doesborch."

It  consists  of  eight  unnumbered  leaves,  [with]  6  woodcuts.  The  verso
of  the  last  leaf  is  filled  up  by  a  wood  engraving.  On  the  recto  of  the
first  leaf  [is  the  identical  cornerwise  engraving  that  is  described  here-
after at  p.  xxix. ,  col.  2] ;  on  the  verso  of  leaf  i,  Jonas  thrown  into  the
mouth  of  the  whale ;  recto  of  leaf  3,  four  female  aborigines  [see  p.
xxviii.l;  verso  of  leaf  4,  fighting  Indians  [see/,  xxix.];  verso  of  leaf  6,
repeated  from  the  recto  of  leaf  I  ;  and  verso  of  the  last  leaf,  repeated
from  the  recto  of  leaf  3.

Mr  Muller  states —

The  book  bears  no  date,  but  it  is  out  of  question,  that  it  has  been
printed  in  the  period  1506-9,  the  time  when  all  the  separate  editions  of
Vespuccius  were  published.  It  is  one  of  the  first  productions  of  the
famous  printer,  Jan  van  Doesborgh,  at  Antwerp ;  whose  publications
(principally  romances  of  chivalry  with  woodcuts,  curious  popular  books,
&.C.)  rank  among  the  rarest  of  the  Antwerp  printers.  Just  the  kind
of  publications  that  makes  it  easy  to  understand  that  they  have  dis-
appeared, as  it  were,  under  the  hands  of  the  reading  public.

xxvi  [^/  Note  on  yan  van  Docsborch,  a  printer  at  Antwerp,  between  1508- 1530  a.d.]

Another  text  in  this  precious  volume  is  thus  described,  at
/.  277,  by  Mr  Muller —

(r)  Van  dc  iwndcrlichcdc  ett  cosleHchen  van  Pape  Inns  landendcs,
•'  Of  the  wonders  and  preciou^  things  of  Pope  John's  lands."

The  remainder  of  the  first  page  filled  with  four  curious  woodcuts,
representing  i^  a  wild  man  with  a  beast's  heail  hearing  a  fish  [see  /.
xxxv.]  ;  2^  an  elephant  [see/,  xxxii.] ;  3°,  a  grilTon  with  a  man  in  his
paws  [see  /.  xxxiv.];  and  4",  three  men  fighting  against  three  birds
[see/,  xxxiii.]

Recto  of  the  last  leaf,  Ghiprint  Thanhvcrpcn.  Aoi  dijsere  wage  by
my  Jan.  ran  Docsborch.  "  Printed  at  Antwerp  at  the  iron  balance  by
me,  \^\\  van  Doesborch."

Eleven  different  woodcuts  in  the  text,  four  of  them  repeated  from
the  recto  of  leaf  l.  On  the  5th  le.if,  a  woodcut  of  the  bird  Phoenix  in
flames  [see/,  xxxiv.]  The  verso  of  the  last  leaf  filled  with  two  wood
engravings,  one  representing  the  Virgin  with  the  Child,  the  other  the
printer's  mark  of  Roeland  van  der  Dorpe,  used  in  1497,  &c.  [a  herald
with  his  attributes,  holding  a  trumpet].

It  is  therefore  perfectly  clear  that  the  First  English  book
on  America  is  mainly  a  translated  compilation  from  these
two  early  Dutch  tracts;  and  that  most  of  the  woodcuts
of  the  English  text  had  already  appeared  in  its  Dutch
originals.

We  therefore  place  next —

[d)  Of  the  new  landes,  <^c.

Clearly,  the  latest  date  that  can  be  assigned  to  this  tract
is  151 1.  Had  it  been  written  later,  the  information  con-
tained in  it  would  not  have  been  so  crude.  See  the  pro-
gress of  knowledge  as  shewn  in  the  English  Interlude  of
15 1 9,  quoted  at  /.  xx.  It  would  seem  to  have  been
translated  by  a  priest  in  the  Low  Countries,  who  had  but  an
imperfect  acquaintance  witli  English  ;  for  he  uses  Aem/s  for
heavens  ;  drycantyche^  for  three-cornered,  fcrstvyiimygnes,
ketters,  &:c.

The  Catalogue  of  the  Grenville  Collection,  in  describing
the  unique  copy  here  reprinted  (Press  mark,  G.  7106),
states —

"From  mentioning  Emanuel,  King  of  Portugal,  and  exclaiming
against  Luther,  the  present  tract  may  be  about  1521  or  1 522,  when
Kug  Emmanuel  died,  and  Luther  was  burned  in  effigy."

There  is  not  a  word  about  Luther  in  the  tract ;  and  it  is
typographically  evident  from  the  above,  that  the  tract  can
hardly  be  later  than  15 11.

4.  It  is  quite  impossible,  at  present,  to  give  a  chrono-
logical list  of  books  produced  by  Jan  van  Doesborch.  A
few  only  can  be  cited.

{e)  [The  compilation  by  R.  Arnold,  known  as  ArnohVs  Chronicle.'\
In  this  booke  is  conteyned  the  names  of  ye  bayliffs  of  the  cite  of  Lon-
don from  the  tyme  of  king  richard  the  furst,  and  also  th[e]  artycles  of
the  Chartur  and  libarties  of  the  same  Cyte,  &c.  No  date  or  place  of
printing. British  Museum  (Press  mark,  21,  a.  10).

This  is  attributed  to  Doesborch's  press,  and  was  a  very
large  work  to  be  undertaken  by  him,  in  what  was  probably
a  foreign  language  to  him.  It  contains  the  original  text  of
the  poem  of  The  Nut-brouni  Maid.

In  the  British  Museum  (Press  mark,  C.  25,  e.  29)  there  is
an  imperfect  copy  of  a  tract  on  the  Fifteen  tokens  of  the
Day  of  Doom.  It  wants  the  title  page.  The  colophon  is
as  follows : —

(/)  "  A  lytill  treatyse  that  whiche  is  called  thexv.  tokens  which  been
ate  translated  out  of  frenshe  in  to  Englishe.

*  Emprinted  by  me  lohan  fro  doesborch  dwellinge  at  Anwerpe  by
the  Iron  ballaunce,  &c.

These  six  texts  are  probably  among  the  earliest  productions
of  Doesborch's  press.

5.  We  now  come  to  the  middle  period  of  his  life's  work.
In  the  British  Museum  (Press  mark,  1073,  b.  32)  there  is

a Dutch  life  of  the  fabulous  necromancer  of  the  Middle

Ages,  Virgilius.

(  g  )  Virgilitis  ^[  Van  zijn  leuen  doot  \  ende  vaitten,  iS;c.  No  date  or
place  of  printing.

This  tract  is  probably  the  original  of  the  rare  English
Virgilius  among  the  Douce  books  at  the  Bodleian,  which
has  been  reprinted  by  Mr  Utterson,  and  also  by  Mr  Thoms,
in  his  Early  English  Prose  Romances,  Vol.  2,  Ed.  1858.

(//)  The  title  runs  thus  :

The  lyfe  of  Virgilius  and  of  his  deth  and  many  marvayles  that  he  dyd
in  his  lyfe  tyme  by  whychcrafle  and  nygramancye  thorowgh  the  helpe
of  the  devyls  of  hell.

The  colophon  is

Thus  endethe  the  lyfe  of  Virgilius  with  many  dyuers  con-
saytes  that  he  dyd.  Emprynted  in  the  cytie  of  Anwarpe  By  me
lohnn  Doesborcke  dwellynge  at  the  camer  porte.

Mr  W.  C.  Hazlitt,  in  his  Handbook  of  Popular  Lite-
rature, Cfc,  p.  381^  Ed.  1867,  quotes  the  following  title  of  a
Work  apparently  at  present  in  an  English  pyvate  library.

(z)  Here  begynneth  a  lytell  story  that  was  of  a  trewthe  done  in  the
land  of  Gelders,  of  a  mayde  that  was  named  Mary  of  Ncmegen  that  was
the  dyuils  paramoure  by  the  space  of  vij  yere  longe.

Imprinted  at  Anwarpe  by  me  lohn  Duisbrowghe  dwellynge  besyde
the  camer  porte.

Dr  Campbell  states  that  in  the  Royal  Library  at  the  Hague,
is  a  cojDy  of  the  following  Work,  printed  by  Doesborch.

(/)  Den  oostpronck  onser  Solicheyt.  Printed  at  Antwerp  on  31  May
15 17. With  woodcuts  and  printer's  mark.

Also,  a  Work,  sometimes  erroneouslyattributed  to  Jan  van  Naeldwyck,
(/•)  Die  alder  excellcntste  Crony ke  va  Brabant  1 5 18, With  woodcuts
and  printer's  mark.

Of  this  work,  there  is  a  copy  of  an  earlier  edition  printed
in  October  15 12  in  the  British  Museum  (Press  mark,  G.  405,
f.) This  may  also  have  been  printed  by  Doesborch.

The  next  Work  that  we  can  quote  is,  for  the  time  it  was
produced,  a  wonderful  book.  It  is  a  pictorial  representa-
tion of  all  the  birds,  beasts,  and  fishes,  real  and  imaginary,
of  the  time. It  is  in  three  Parts.

(/)  Der  dieren  palleys  en  die  vgaderinge  vandeti  beesten.  The  colo-
phon is  Gliep7-ent  bi  my  Jan  van  doesborch  Thantwerpen  Int  iaer  ons
heeren  M.CCCCC.  ende.  XX.  den  vijfsten  dach  in  A/eye. [5  May  1520.]

Copies  are  in  the  British  Museum,  the  Royal  Library  at
the  Hague,  and  elsewhere.

Mr  Hazlitt,  Handbook,  &c.,  p.  8,  gives  the  following
account  of  Lawrence  Andrewe's  translation  of  this  work.

(;«)  The  noble  lyfe  and  natures  of  man,  of  beestes,  serpentys,  fowles,
and  fysshes,  that  be  made  known.

Andwarpe  by  John  of  Doesborowe,  n.d.  fol.

In  the  prologue,  Andrewe,  the  translator,  says,  "  In  the  name  of  oure
Saviour  criste  lesu  maker  and  redemour  of  al  mankynd,  I  Laurens
andrewe  of  the  towne  of  Calis  haue  translated  for  lohnes  doesborrowe
book  prenter  in  the  cite  of  Andwarpe  this  present  volume  deuyded  in
thre  partes  which  was  neuer  before  in  no  maternall  langage  prentyd  till
now."

6.  One  other  Work  will  complete  our  present  provisional
list  of  this  printer's  productions.

(«)  Van  Brabant  die  exccUcnte  Cj-onike.  Of  which  the  colophon  runs,
GJieprent  tot  Antwerpen  op  die  Lombaerde  veste,  bi  mi  Jan  van  Doesborch,
int  iaer  ons  heren  M.  ccccc.  xxx,  in  Iiiino.

Copies  of  this  work  are  in  the  British  Museum,  the  Royal
Library  at  the  Hague,  and  elsewhere.

7.  This  is  all  we  have  been  able  to  learn,  so  far,  of  the
printer  of  the  First  English  book  on  America.  ]\Iuch
more,  no  doubt,  remains  to  reward  the  researches  of  the
bibliographer.]

XXVll

(I  #£  tfte  nelue  Xantre^  antf  0J  ye  people
fountfe  ij|)  tfte  me^^engcisi  of  titc  Itijn
gt  of  poitgngaXe  nametr  (^mmxwtl.

<©f  tfte*  jT*  trj)tter^  na(j)onsS  cru^tcnctr*

#f  pope  3£oJtn  antr  ftt^  Xantress  antr  of
tite  co0telg  lit^t^  antr  luontfeviS  molo
trj)e^  titat  tii  tJtat  lantre  i^*

^

^

jEre  aforetymes  in  the  yere  of  our  Lorde  god.  M.CCCC.xcvi.  [1496]  and  fo  be/  we
with  fliyppes  of  Luffeboene  fayled  oute  of  Portyngale  thorough  the  commaunde-
nient  of  the  Kynge  Emanuel  So  haue  we  had  our  vyage/  For  by  fortune
ylandes  ouer  the  great  fee  with  great  charge  and  daunger  fo  haue  we  at  the  lafle
founde  oon  lordfhyp  where  we  fayled  well.  ix.  C.  [900]  mylee[s]  by  the  coofle  of
Selandes  there  we  at  ye  lafle  went  a  lande  but  that  lande  is  not  nowe  knowen
for  there  haue  no  mailers  wryten  therof  nor  it  knowethe  and  it  is  named
Armenica/  there  we  fawe  meny  wonders  of  beefles  and  fowles  yat  we  haue  neuer
feen  before/  the  people  of  this  lande  haue  no  kynge  nor  lorde  nor  theyr  god
But  all  thinges  is  comune/  this  people  goeth  all  naked  But  the  men  and  women
haue  on  theyr  heed/  necke/  Armes/  Knees/  and  fete  all  with  feders  bounden  for
there  bewtynes  and  fayrenes.  Thefe  folke  lyuen  lyke  befles  without  any  refon-
ablenes  and  the  wymen  be  alfo  as  comon.  And  the  men  hath  conuerfacyon
Avith  the  wymen/  who  that  they  ben  or  who  they  fyrfl  mete/  is  (he  his  fyfler/
his  mother/  his  daughter/  or  any  other  kyndred.  And  the  A\ymen  be  very
hoote  and  dypofed  to  lecherdnes.  And  they  ete  alfo  on[e]  a  nother  The  man
etethe  his  wyfe  his  chylderne/  as  we  alfo  haue  feen  and  they  hange  alfo  the  bodyes  or  perfons  fleefhe  in  the  fmoke/  as  men
do  with  vs  fwynes  flelhe.  And  that  lande  is  ryght  full  of  folke/  for  they  lyue  commonly,  iii.  C.  [300]  yere  and  more  as  with
fykeneffe  they  dye  nat/  they  take  much  fyfflie  for  they  can  goen  vnder  the  water  and  fe[t]che  fo  the  fyflTies  out  of  the  water,
and  they  werre  alfo  on[e]  vpon  a  nother/  for  the  olde  men  brynge  the  yonge  men  therto/  that  they  gather  a  great  company  therto
of  towe  partyes/  and  come  the  o:^.[e]  ayene  the  other  to  the  felde  or  bateyll/  and  flee  on[e]  the  other  with  great  hepes.  And  nowe
holdeth  the  fylde/  they  take  the  other  pryfoners  And  they  brynge  them  to  deth  and  ete  them/  and  as  the  deed  is  eten  then
fley  they  the  rea  And  they  been  than  eten  alfo/  or  otherwyfe  lyue  they  longer  tymes  and  many  yeres  more  than  other  people  for
they  haue  coRely  fpyces  and  rotes/  where  they  them  felfc  recouer  with/  and  hele  them  as  they  be  feke.

xxviii \TJicfiyJl  EngliJJi  book  containing  the  ^loord  America  {Armenica),  &c?[

^

[(Here  follows  a  woodcut  of  the  Natives  of)  GENNEA]

Of  tJie  blacke  Mores.

?!L^i.^.L>vri;,AV

T  the  fyrfle  cam  we  in  the  lande  of  Canarlen/
whyche  is.  C.  and.  1.  [150]  myles  from  Lyffe-
bone.  And  ther  betwyn  been.  ij.  ylandes.
In  yat  one  is  well  made  people  and  men
make  there  moche  cheefe  of  great  wylde
gootes.  alfo  is  ther  fiflhe  and  suykere  good
cheep. That  other  yland  is  not  enhabite

ther  be  lytell  people  therin/  and  they  be  all  a  frayde  and
wylde/  alfo  ther  ayeen  lyeth  the  lande  of  Barbera/  and  is  from
them  in  to  ye  Gennea.  CC.l.  [250]  myles.  and  that  is  the
blackes  mores  land,  and  ayen  ye  begynnyng  of  this  lande  is
oon  aforemontayen  and  booth  caput  viride/  and  thereby  is  ye
towne  Bitfagitfch.  v.  C.[[5oo]  myles  from  Luffebonen  there*  by
be  many  w[h]alefyfnies  and  flyinge  fyffhes  on  the  on  fyde  of
Bifagitfche.  ij.  C.  and  1.  [250]  myles  fayle  men  vnder  yat  fone
fo  ferre/  that  men  the  northe  fayle  flerre  or  pollumarticum/  or
the  waghen  called/  no  more  may  be  feen/  but  poUum  ante
articum  or  yat  fowth  layd  flerre  fawe  we  fourth  with[.]  the
forfayde  Morelande  is  M.  iiij.  C.  [1400]  myles  great/  there
ye  people  goeth  all  naked  with  golden  ryngcs  on  handes
and  fete.

[{Here  comes  a  woodcut  of  Natives)  IN  •  ALL  A  GO]

U-

'Hat  lande  of  AUago  is.  v.  C.  [500]  myles
greater  And  gothe  ayenfle  the  begynnynge
of  Arabien  and  there  is  that  kyngdom
Safale[.]  in  this  lande  Allago  is  the  people
clothed  as  aboue  is  marked/  the[y]  were
and  bere  for  there  clothes  fkynnes  of  wylde
befles.  The  men  bere  clokes  made  of  barkes
of  trees  and  ledder  to  kyuer  theyr  members  with.  And  the
women  kyuer  theym  with  fkynnes  of  befles.  and  take  vpon
there  heddes  for  kerchers  fkynnes  of  oxen  or  other  befles[.]
alfo  py[t]che  the[y]  theyr  mennes  forhed  lyke  as  men  pytche  the
fhyppes/  and  there  dwellynge  is  vnder  the  erthe.  There  is
many  cowes.  oxen/  great  flnepe  and  other  fayre  befles.  This
is  on  fayre  and  lufly  lande  of  good  water  and  fwete  herbes.
This  people  hathe  a  fwyfte  hafly  fpeche.  There  is  no  money
but  of  yrou  [?  /;w/]  and  that  euery  body  take  it  for  there  ware
they  bere  whyte  flaues  there  wepyns  is  lange  pykes  and  Rones
ther  they  cafle  myghtly  with.  That  Lande  is  fo  full  of  fandc
yat  they  raufle  goo  vpon  brode  trenchers  that  they  falle  not
and  fynke. After  that  cometh  men  into  the  lande  of  arabyen.

[(Here  is  another  woodcut  representing  Natives)  IN:  ARABIA]

4

Arabia.

\

Omyng  in  Arabia  fawe  we  ye  people  clothed
lyke  as  here  is  figured  flande.  and  out  [of]
this  kyngdome  hath  be  oon  of  the  three  holy
kyngys.  Item  ther  bynde  they  ther  oxe  fon
with  Arabic  gold  about  ther  homes/  and
erys.  And  alfo  goldyn  rynges  aboute  th[e]yr
legges.  And  for  gold  take  they  of  mar-
chaundes  fylkyng  kerchers  and  lynen  clothe.  Item  ther  after
fe  we  now.  v.  ylandes.  the  fyrfl  yland  named  Momfabith.
fixty  myles  from  Safalen.  is  leeid  ye  towne  Quiola  that  was
founde  of  the  kynges  folke  of  portyngal  And  they  flewe
there  moche  people  and  robbed  the  towne.  And  there  without
had  there  kynge  edyfyed  on  caflell  that  is  named  feynt  lacobis
caflell  there  in  lyeth  a.  C.  [100]  bolde  and  hardy  men  that
lyeth  and  kepeth  it.

[Here  is  a  striking  woodcut  representing,  with  great  life  and  action,  a
S]3inted  attack  on  the  gate  of  some  European  town;  which  has  evi-
dently been  borrowed  by  John  of  Desborough  from  some  other  printed
book,  chronicle,  or  other  work,  printed  by  himself  or  other  printer.]

He[n]  feuente  myles  from  Quiola  lyeth  the
towne  Bombaffa  that  they  alfo  byrned  and/
robbed  that  alfo  there  they  gatte  moche
goodes.  From  thens  nowe.  xxiiij.  myle[s]
lyeth  the  great  towne  Meli[n]da  and  they
be  frendes/  and  there  be  many  floueynes
and  fell  people  out  of  Geneen  From
Melinda  it  is.  iiij.  fcore  and.  x.  myles  to  on  Periia  there  gowe
they  ouer  the  fee.  For  by  the  towne  Megha  into  the  jdande.
Auxendia  There  is  alfo  one  that  hath  be  of  ye  tliree  holy
kynges  of  the  eefl.  C.  [100]  myles  into  the  Kyngdome  of
Canenor  and  there  begyn  the  fpyces  to  growe  and  from  thens
fare  they  forthe  in  to  the  great  lande  of  great  Indyen.

•T  Of  great  Indyen.

[(Here  follows  a  woodcut  of  the  Inhabitants  of)  MAIOR:  INDIA]

Hey  gowe  from  Cananor  into  great  Indyen
jthere  the  people  goo  all  naked  but  yat
'the[y]  kyuer  there  members  with  lyneiT
cloth  and  they  be  brounde  blacke/  with
longe  here  and  of  tho  women  is  not  wrytcn
but  on  kaute  the  fee  fawe  men  manye  mer-
ueloufe  people  of  manercrcn  the  women
bere  there  chyldren  and  tlieyr  houfeholde  fluffe.  Here  fynde
men  gynger/  pcper/  comcyn/  and  all  manere  of  fpyces/  and

^"^

y

I

v\-

S^A  JJiort  defcription  of  Africa  and  India :  writ  ten  after  1509  a.d.'J  xxix

collely  Hones  for  lytell  nioneye.  There  be  alfo  many  maner
of  frute  fygges  of  good  fauyour.  vij.  ynches  longe  and.  iij.
ynches  brode.  There  be  bulfeldes  and  coyes  but  the  coyes
flepe  they  not/  there  groweth  good  wyne/  muche  honeye/  ryfe/
coflely  come  whyte  as  wete  mele/  Ther  by  flandeth  the
towne  of  Banderana  and  it  is.  vij  myles  into  CalHenten
from  thens  is.  xl.  myles  there  men  goo  for  all  maner  of
fpyces  that  men  were  wonte  to  caray  and  conuey  ouer  the
redde  fee  thorowgh  Alexander  but  nowe  is  there  one  newe
way  founden  ouer  the  the  fee[.]  in  Calacuten  is  many  folke  out
of  feynt  thomas  lande  yat  alfo  be  cryflened/  and  folke  of  other
landes  and  nacyons  they  goo  ouer  into  that  kyngdome  Kyng-
ryche  Gutfchyn  as  hereafter  flandes  wryten.

C  Of  Gtitfchin  that  Kyngedome.

[Here  is  a  woodcut  representing  two  Natives  fighting,  see/,  xxv.]

Nd  than  cam  we  in  the  kyngdome  of  Gut-
fchyn and  ther  hath  the  kynge  of  portyngale
do  make.  ij.  Cafleyles  from  here  was  the  thre
holy  kynges.  there  groeth  much  peper  and
the  properefl  flapell  therof  That  kyngdom
Colen  is.  xxiiij.  myles  from  there/  and  there
been  many  kryRened  men/  we  fynde  alfo
great  Olyfantes  and  many  dyuers  maner  and  wonders  befles  and
other  thynges  that  men  cannot  wryghte  all.  gardeynes  frutes  is
there  muche  gretter  than  in  our  landes  of  Europa.  That  ylande
Melaqua  is  from  thens.  viij.  C.  [800]  myles/  There  alfo  is
moche  coflely  fpyces.  !  There  is  nowe.  ij.  ylandes  the  on  is
Bandan  and  therin  groweth  the  cloues.  That  other  Tanagora
or  Narnaria  and  there  groeth  not  no  other  wodde  than  whyte
and  red  fandelen  wodde/  This  is  fortuned  that  for  a  bell  of  a
glaffe  men  may  haue  one  handfuU  of  peerles.  In  Gutfchin
bere  fome  tymes  tliere  kynge  but  that  do  the  people  of  his
\  courte  and  holde  obedyance  vnder  theym  one  with  a  nother
y  They  doo  all  there  thynges  all  fleyghtly  For  as  as  they  be
aflembled  in  one  gatherynge/  than  cryeth  the  capitayne  I  will
fowe/  and  as  the  fubiectes  here  theyr  capitayne  crye  fowe  than
take  they  parte  of/  the  fede  and  no  man  fayth  the  contrary  and
letteth  the  other  lye  and  that  takethe  the  lorde  with  out  any
body  contrary  fayngc/  and  fo  do  they  in  all  merchaundyfe.
Forthe  by  that  kyngdome  Gutfliyn/  Colum/  Bandan/  and
Nagaria.  xxx.  [thirty]  myles[.]  in  Arfmia  there  hath  the  kynge.
xij.  kynges  vnder  hym/  and  there  lyeth  buryed  feynt  Thomas
apoitelL

[Here  is  a  woodcut  of  a  tree  apparently  intended  to  represent  a  fig-tree.
It  might  do  equally  well  for  many  other  kinds  of  trees.]

N  fome  of  thefe  aforfayde  wrytten  landes  ben
great  and  fayre  frutes  and  they  be  greater
than  in  thefe  our  landes  of  Europa  In  Ifla
mandra  be  great  hygh  trees  for  the  people  of
yat  contrey  hewe  great  (leppes  aboute  to
clyme  vp  in  to  the  tree  to  gather  the  frutes
that  groweth  there  on  for  whan  they  be  a
thrufl  to  take  there  of  In  Arfmia  is  great  brode  fygge  Trees
with  great  fygges  well.  vij.  ynches  longe  and.  iij.  ynches  brode
and  the  Fygge  tre  is  fo  brode  of  braunche  and  leues  that  xL
[forty]  men  may  be  hydde  vnder  the  forefayd  braunches  and
leues  for  the  hete  of  the  fonne/  and  there  for  to  rede  all  to
gather  at  theyr  one  pleafure.

[Here  are  two  woodcuts  comer\vise,  one  representing  two  Indians,  the
other  two  men  and  a  woman  of  Europe,  see/,  xxv.]

E  haue  in  this  vyage  fayled  aboute  the  forth
parte  of  the  worlde  for  to  reken  from  Luf-
fyngboren  whiche  is  ferre  equinoccyall  fcher
linien.  xxxix.  [thirty-ninejgrades  and  on  halfe
fo  haue  we  fayled  ouer  ye  linie  equinocciall.
1.  [fifty]  grades  that  maketh  xc  [ninety]
grades  therfore  they  of  Luffbone  is  vnder  yat
forfayde  linie.  xxxix.  grade  and  one  halfe  in  the  hygh  hed  of  the
hemels  is  the  breyde  of  wefles/  fo  is  them  of  Luffbone  to  thefe
folke  to  fene  the.  1.  [fifty]  grades  is  ouer  the  felfe  lyne  foth
cornerwyfe.  v.  grades  in  perpendiculer  linia  whiche  linie  as  we
flande  ryght  of  yat  poynt  the  hemls  hange  vpon  our  hed  and
thefe  folke  in  theyr  fydes  or  rj'bbes  and  woort  fet  in  the  maner
of  on  tryanghel  or  on  drycantyche  cornard.  therfore  it  mufl.  nedes
be  yat  the  fowth  landes  be  tempered  with  fwete  erthe  for  the
northe  wyndes  can  nat  there  blowe.

[Here,  across  the  middle  leaf  of  the  tract,  is  an  excellent  representation  o.
the  King  of  Cochin  seated  ^n  a  kind  of  tressel,  carried  by  four  men,  sur-
rounded with  armed  attendants :  and  with  an  umbrella  borne  by  one
man,  and  not  a  canopy  borne  by  four  men,  as  stated  below  in  the  text.
The  woodcut  extends  across  about  two- thirds  of  the  folio,  in  the  niiigin
of  which  occurs  the  following  note.]

Fter  this  maner  of  fourme  is  the  K}Tige  of
Gutfchym  borne  wi«^h  the  noblefle  of  his
lande/  And  before  hym  is  borne  many
inflrumentes  of  mufyke  as  trompettes  and
other  and.  iiij.  of  the  noblefle  bereth  the
canapie  ouer  his  hed  IcI  that  the  foon
fnuld  burne  hym/  and  this  kynge  is  bcloued
of  all  his  eflates  and  common  people.

XXX  \TJic  Jiyjl  EiigliJJi  book  coniaimiig  tJie  word  Amci'ica  {Armcnica),  &c?^

[Tliis  fresh  tract  is  headed  by  a  woodcut  representing  angels  bearing  the  pyx.  ]

C Of the. X. DYVERCE CRISTENED NACIONS.

iwnifiinn

.5=

•

trif  "

^^^^1

^^{

te^.  :

^^"W*^

t^/

nw^'^^^k

^M

h

1^^

^^^^

x>

^v©/a\i@i :

^^^^

X

^^^^

IpJwJjjgM

W^^m  ^^^

Bk/m|KS^^^^^9 (

BflSi'

^^S^

T  is  to  knowe  that
ye  people  of  cry  (l-
indomisdeuided
and  ben  in.  x.
Nacyons.  That
is  to  vnder-
flandtheLatyne/
(irekcs/  Indien/
lacobites/neflor-
ijnes/moionites/
Aimenes/  georg-
ianes/  Surianes/
mororabes/wher-
ofyemooftdeyle
iskettersandkyt
of/  of  the  holy
Romes  chyrche.

C  The  fyrjle  nacyon.

[Two  woodcuts,  evidently  taken  from  some  Martyrology,  come  in  here.
One  represents  an  angel  standing  by  the  cross,  the  other  a  female
saint  with  a  sword  sticking  in  her  breast.]

Irfle  nac3-on  is  the  I.atynes  and  they  haue  to
theyr  lorde  the  Emperour  of  Almayne  and
many  Kynges/  as  the  kynge  of  caflyly  an
of  Aragon/  of  portyngale/  of  naiiaryen/  and
thefe  kynges  is  for  fpaynnes  nacyon.  In
yat  nacion  of  the  frenche  lande  is  one  kynge
of  Fraunce  and  many  dukes  and  Erles.  In
the  nacion  of  Italian  is  the  kynge  of  Cicylian/  the  kynge  of
Naples  and  many  dukes  and  Erles  and  there  is  alfo  many  lord-
fhyppes  as  Veneyfe  Florence  feuen  lenuen  [?  Sienna,  Gc7wa\.

C  TJie  fecoude  nacyoji.

N  the  nacyon  ot  Germanien  is  nowe  many
kynges  with  out  the  emperoure/as  the  Kynge
of  Englande/  of  Scotlande/  of  Vngerien/  of
Bohemen/  of  Polen/  of  Denmark e/  of  fweden/
of  Northwegen/  of  Dalmacyen/  and  there  is
many  Dukes  and  Erles  &c.  In  that  ylande
of  Sypers  [?  Cyprus]  is  the  kynge  of  Sypers/

All  thefe  a  fore  wryten  is  vnder  the  obeyifaunce  or  iJof]  the

chyrche  of  Rome.

He  Grekes  haue  fpyryttially  the  Patriarcke  of
Conftantynnoplen/andmanyArchebyffliops/
byffliops/  and  abbottes.  And  in  ye  tem-
peralte  haue  they  one  Emperour  and  many
,  dukes  and  erles/  and  there  is  but  fewe  of
them  that  be  cryflened/  For  the  Agarenen
and  Turkes  hath  nowe  the  mood  parte  of
Grekes/  and  is  not  obedient  to  the  chyrch  of  Rome.  And  they
haue  a  great  erre  for  they  faye  that  the  holy  ghofl  cam  not  of
the  fone  but  alone  of  the  fader.  And  they  fay  alfo  that  there
is  no  purgatory/  that  is  all  a  yenfle  our  belefe.

€1  The  thyrde  nacyon.

[Here  follows  a  woodcut  representing  St.  Thomas  kneeling  to  our  Saviour.]

Hey  of  Indyen  hath  one  prynce  and  that  is
pope  lohn  whofe  myghtynes  and  rychedome
amounteth  aboue  all  prynces  of  the  world
for  he  hath  vnder  hym.  Ixxij.  [feuenty-two]
kynges  and  as  pope  lohn  dayely  rydeth  he
here  a  fore  hym  one  croffe  of  wode  for  to
thynke  on  at  all  tymes  and  remember  vpon
the  paffion  of  I[es]hu  and  to  the  batayle  doth  he  here.  xij.
croffes  of  golde  made  and  fet  with  precyoufe  flones  for  his
baners/  in  this  lande  is  the  body  of  feynt  Thomas.

C  The  four tJi  nacyon.

Acobyten  named  alfo  of  on  ketter  lacob  and
was  be  one  dyffyple  of  the  Patryarche  of
Alexandryne/  and  this  helde  the  one  great
land  in  Oryenten  and  Afyen  and  is  naiaied
that  lande  of  Mambrone  and  it  is  by  Egyp-
ten  and  gothe  to  Ethyopen  and  into  Indien
to/  and  hathe  vnder  hym  well.  xl.  [forty]
kynges  rychedom/  thefe  be  kytte  and  chryflened  with  a  byrn-
ynge  yren  for  they  branne  the  token  of  the  holy  croffe  in  theyr
forehed/  vpon  the  brefle/  vpon  the  arme/  they  confefTe  them  to
God  alone  and  none  prefles/  and  they  fay  that  in  chriRo  is  alone
the  godhed  without  the  manhod/  and  fome  of  them  fpeketh
Caldefche  fome  Arabier/  fome  other  fpe[e]ches  after  theyr  lang-
age  of  the  lande/  and  thefe  been  condemned  of  the  holy
chyrche  in  that  counfayll  of  Ceden.

[Of  the  ten  divers  chyiftian  nations?^

XXXI

C  The  fyth  nacyon.

Here  be  alfo  Neflorijnen  named  of  the  ketter
Neflorinus  that  was  one  byffhope  of  the
byffhops  of  ConRantynenoplen  and  they
fett  ij.  perfones  in  chriflo  that  is  the  Godhcd
and  ye  perfones/  and  they  forfake  that
maria  is  the  moder  of  god/  but  they  beleue
well  of  I[es]hu.  and  theyr  wrytynge  is  in
caldenfflier  fpeche  and  they  make  the  facrament  in  broune
brede  and  there  be  great  multytude  of  theym  and  they  dwell
in  Tartarien  and  in  great  Indyen/  and  theyr  lande  is  as  great
as  a  thoiifande  of  Italy/  and  thefe  ketters  be  condamned  in  that
tliyrde  counfayll  of  Ephefyn  and  is  departed  of  the  holy  Romes
chyrche  and  abyde  in  theyr  opynion.

C  The  fyxte  nacyon.

Y  the  ketter  Moren  they  be  named  Moroniten
they  fay  alone  in  chriflo  is  one  vnderflande
and  one  wyll  and  thofe  dwell  by  Lybien  in
the  lande  of  Phenicen  and  there  be  great
multitude  and  they  be  bolde  and  hardey
men.  and  great  warryars  with  the  bowe/
And  they  haue  theyr  byffliops  clothed  as
the  Latynes  with  the  biffliops  myter  on  his  hed/  and  with  the
croyfers  flafife  and  rynges/  Thefe  hath  ben  fome  tyme  vnder
the  obeyiffaunce  of  the  chyrche  of  Rome  whan  Innocentius
was  pope/  but  afterwarde  came  they  ayen  in  theyr  opynion
and  there  abyde  in  theyr  opynyon.

C  The  feuenth  nacyon.

PRmennyten  is  alfo  named  for  that  they  dwell
in  the  lande  of  Armeneten  nere  vnto  Anthi-
ochyen  and  there  is  whrythyn  feruyce  of  the
maffes.  and  theyr  other  tydes  is  all  in  theyr
one  comon  fpeche  fo  that  they  all  mey
vnderflande  it  what  they  fynge  or  rede/  and
they  haue  theyr  hed  or  fader  to  whome  they
do  reuerence  as  we  do  the  pope.  And  they  fafte  the  lenton
with  greatter  deuocyon  than  we  doo/  for  they  ete  in  the  lenton
no  fyffhe/  nor  they  drynke  no  wyne/  but  they  ete  fleffhe  vpon
frydays.

[Here  is  a  woodcut  representing  a  squadron  of  English  knights,  with  St.
George's  flag,  armed  cap  h  pie,  and  galloping  in  battle.  It  has  notliing
whatever  to  do  with  the  text.]

C  The  eyght  nacyon.

His  nacyon  is  named  Georgidni  of  feynt
George  for  they  haue  hym  in  theyr  batelles
for  theyr  patrone/  and  they  dwell  in  the
lande  of  Oryenten/  and  they  be  fayer/  lufly/
and  Rronge  pepyll/  and  they  be  fore  a  drad
of  the  Medon  perffen  Afliryen  there  they
aboute  dwelle And  they  haue  theyr  fcryp-

ture  in  ye  Greekes  fpeche  and  they  haue  theyr  (acramentes  as
the  Grekes/  and  the  clarkes  haue  rounde  crownes/  and  they
leke  the  holy  graue  to  Iherafalem  with  open  or  fpred  baners.
And  they  gyue  the  farafons  no  trybute  for  the  farafons  fereth
thofe  folke  very  fore/  there  women  here  hameyfe  lyke  the
men  and  they  haue  alfo  beardes  as  ye  men  and  they  here
vpon  theyr  heddes  and  vpon  hye  cubettes  bye  hattes  and
as  the[y]  wryte  to  the  Sodan  than  gyueth  he  them  that  they
dyflyre.

C  The  Nynthe  nacion.

He  Surianen  is  named  after  the>T  towne  Sunc
that  is  the  grettefl  in  all  Sur}'en  or  Affyr)-en
theyr  fcrypture  and  feruyce  of  god  in  ye
Grekes  fpeche  but  they  fpeke  farafons
fpeche  and  they  holde  the  manere  of  ye
grekes/  and  haue  byffhoppes  that  in  all
thynges  be  obedyent  and  they  make  the)Tn
facrament  of  browne  brede  and  they  haue  the  opynyon  of  the
Grekes  ayen  the  Latynes  there  be  fome  cryflened  that  in  the
holy  lande  is  namyd  Samerytanes  that  were  conuerted  in  the
tyme  that  the  apoflels  preched  brt  they  vnderllande  them  not
well  in  the  cryften  beleue.

C  The  tenthe  nacyon.

Ororaben  fo  called  afTter  the  laten  for  they  holde
and  vfe  the  maner  of  the  cryflen  of  Ar[a]bicn/
and  of  thefe  were  wonte  to  be  manye  people
in  Afrijken  and  in  Spaengnien  but  nowe  is
there  lytell  in  the  tellyng/  They  haue  in
theyr  feruyce  of  god  lateyne  as  we  do/  And
they  be  vnder  the  obeyifaunce  of  the  ch}Tche
of  Rome.  And  the  latynes  prelates  but  in  many  thynges  ben
they  dyuerfe  departed  for  alfo  the  day  hath  xxiiij.  houres/  Alfo
many  tymes  hymnes  and  pfalmes  and  other  orafouns  haue  they
and  very  longe/  And  that  that  ye  Latyns  rede  in  the  beg}-n-
nyng  of  theyr  feruice  that  rede  they  in  the  mydle  or  in  the
lafle  ende.  And  that  facrament  of  the  auter  breketh  fome  of
them  in.  vij.  partes  and  fome  in.  x.  partyes/  and  thefe  people
be  very  deuoute  and  they  mareye  but  ones  in  tlieyr  Ij-fe  and  as
the  women  hath  lofte  theyr  fyrfl  hufbond  fo  dothe  they  meddle
no  more  with  no  man/  but  abyde  fro  thenflburth  in  chaflyte.

Or.  ij.  caufes  cometh  the  departynge  of  ye
cryflen  nacyons.  The  fyrlle  caufe  is  that
men  in  olde  tyme  myght  the  cr}'flen  haue
only  haue  generall  confilium/  Therfore
as  the  ketters  ftode  vp  ayen  the  cr}ilcn
belefe  fo  was  there  no  body  turned  nor
fought  counfoyll  there  ayen.  The  other
caufe  was  the  ferfwynmyngnes  of  ye  oppreP.  pope  of  ye  fchole
of  Rome  that  no  meffengere  nor  lerned  flnilde  to  the  kr)-flen
thow  that  were  come  in  feche  lodyng/  for  had  they  do  that
they  flvalde  haue  be  conuerted  to  the  r>ght  belefe.  Thorowllh
whiche  ryght  belefe  brynge  vs  to  the  hyghell  glor)-e  the  fader
the  fone  the  holy  ghofte  thre  perfones  and  one  god. Amen.

xxxii. \TIic  frjl  Eiig/iJJi  book  containing  the  ivoni  Amcyica  {A rnienica),  &c.\

[An  Abridgment  of  the  Medieval  Legend  of  Prester  John].

[This  third  Tract  has  a  very  large  initial  letter  I,  containing;  what  appears  to  be  a  representation  of  Prester  John,  and  of  a  Roman  Catholic  monk  or

pilgrim  kneeling  beneath  him.]

Pope  lohn  by  ye
grace  of  god  the
moofte  myghtyfle
kyngc  a  boue  all
kyngys  of  ye
woilde  gyue  fal-
uytc  the  Eniperour
of  Rome,  and  alfo
thekingeofFrance.
Oure  wel  be-
louyd  frynde  We
late  you  vnder-
flande  and  knowe
of  our  lande  And
the  maner  of  oure  lyuinge  and  of  our  people  beefles  and  fowles.
C  And  you  faye  that  we  beleue  not  in  god  and  praye  not
to  hym  as  you  do.  So  late  we  you  vnderftande  that  we  be-
leue in  god  the  father,  in  god  the  fonne.  and  in  god  the  holy
goofle.  The  whyche  be  vnpartyble  and  one  very  god.  and  is
all  thynge  myghty.

And  alfo  certefye  yow  with  oure  lettres  fealed  and  doo  you
knowelege  of  oure  folke  or  people  and  of  our  lande.  And  yf
there  be  ony  thynge  yat  we  kan  doo  for  you.  fende  vs  worde
and  we  fliall  it  doo  with  good  herte  and  wyll.  And  yf  it  pleafe
ony  of  you  to  come  in  oure  lande  we  fliall  gyue  theym  gold
and  fyluer  to  th[e]yr  neceffitie/  and  make  them  great  lordis.  and
gyue  to  them  alfo  lande  and  good[s]  to  lyue  on.  and  do  to  [t]hem
worfliyp  and  honor.  For  the  goodnes  that  we  haue  herde  fay
of  you.  And  we  do  you  knowledge  that  we  haue  the  richefle
crowne  of  the  worlde  as  of  golde  and  syluer  and  of  precyous
flones  in  great  multitude  And  we  haue  alfo  vnder  vs  mighty.
xlij.  kingdomes  and  al  good  criflen  people,  and  we  kepe  alfo
the  poure  people  with  our  almes  alle  that  cometh  be  it  (Irenger
or  of  oure  owne  people  thorough  the  loue  of  almyghty  god
oure  lorde  Ihefu  Crifte.

^  Item  Oure  lande  is  parted  in.  iiij.  For  the  landes  of
InJien/  there  be  two.  and  in  that  grettefl  Indien  is  the  body
of  feynt  Thomas. And  this  fame  Indien  is  partiner  of  ye  cofle

of  orient  for  it  lyclh  bcfyde  a  toure  ye  whych  is  caalled  babel/
and  it  id  [?  is\  not  ferre  fro  Babilonyen.  And  alfo  that  other
parte  of  Indien  is  aboute  Septentryon.  and  there  is  great
plenty  of  wyne/  br'edde  and  all  maner  of  vytayle.

^[  Item  alfo  in  our  lande  be  gryffons/  and  it  is  a  great  byrde
and  a  myghty.  for  he  wyll  well  cary  in  his  nefle  an  oxe/  or  an
horfe  for  his  yonge  byrdes  to  ete.  Alfo  in  Saxen  is  a  towne
whych  is  called  Grounzwyk  ther  is  one  of  the  clawes  yat  which
is  well  as  great  as  an  horn  of  an  oxe.

[Here  comes,  in  the  original,  at  the  side  of  the  page,  a  woodcut  of  an
elephant  with  a  castle  on  its  back.]

^  In  our  lande  be  olyphantes/  dromedaries/  wylde  oxes
the  whyche  haue.  vij.  homes,  alfo  Beeres  and  Lyons  of  dyuers
colours/  as  ye  redd/  grene/  blacke/  and  whitte

^  Item  and  also  be  wylde  affes  the  whych  haue  longe  eeres/
and  haue  twoo  fmale  homes.  &c.

N  our  lande  be  alfo  fowles  ye  whyche  that
haue  the  mayflery  of  all  birdes  of  the  worlde/
and  haue  a  colour  lyke  ye  fyer/  and  his
wingis  kyt  [?<:«/]  lyke  a  rafour.  and  this  byrdes
ben  called  Ilerion.  and  in  alle  the  worlde  is
no  more  than  two.  and  they  lyuen.  iij.  fkore
yere  and  thenne  they  laye  eggis  and  fytte  vpon  theym.  xl.
dayes  and  as  fone  as  they  haue  yongcs  they  flee  awaye/  fader
and  moder  to  the  zee  and  ther  they  drowne  theym  felf.  and
alle  tho  byrdes  yat  come  ayenfl  them  do  them  company  to  the
zee.  and  as  fone  as  the[y]  be  drowned  all  the  other  byrdes
tourne  ayen  to  the  nefle  there  they  yonge  byrdes  ben  lefte/
and  gyue  them  mete  and  drinke  to  the  tyme  that  the[y]  can
flee  and  nurter  them  felfe.  &c.

^  Yet  ben  there  other  byrdes  the  whyche  ben  called
Tygris/  and  they  be  fo  flronge  that  they  wyll  here  or  cary  in
theyr  nefle  a  man  fytting  vpon  an  horfe  all  armyd  fro  the  hede
to  ye  fote.

[The  Mediaval  Legend  of  Prejler  yohn?^

XXXlll

[Here,  at  the  side  of  the  page,  is  the  representation  of  a  naked  man  with
one  eye  in  his  forehead,  and  bearing  a  club.]

C  Item  In  our  lande  is  alfo  a  grete  deferte  or  foreft.  therin
dweleth  people  bothe  men  andwymmenthewhychehauenomore
than  one  eye  afore,  and  behinde  they  haue.  iij.  or.  iiij.  eyen

C  Yet  is  in  oure  lande  an  other  maner  of  people  the  whiche
ete  none  other  than  rawe  fleflie.  and  they  care  not  yf  it  were
of  man  or  woman  or  of  beeflis  and  alfo  the[y]  care  not  of  ther
owne  deth.  and  as  fone  as  there  one  of  them  dyeth  the[y]  ete
theym  all  rawe/  both  there  one  [?  own\  fader  or  moeder.  And
they  faye  yat  mans  fleyfhe  is  good  and  natur[a]ly  to  ete  rawe/
for  they  faye  that  they  doe  it  for  parte  of  penaunce  for  there
fynnes.  And  they  be  alfo  curfed  of  god/  and  they  be  called
Gog  and  Magog  And  of  them  be  no  more  than  one  maner
of  people  of  this  worlde  and  they  fliall  be  dyflributed  or  parted
thorough  all  the  world  whan  Antechryfl  fhall  come,  and  thefe
fame  were  the  people  or  folke  the  whych  they  hadde  put  in
pryfone  or  in  holde  the  great  kynge  Alexander  of  Macedonien.
But  for  all  that  he  wente  his  way  And  of  this  people  fhalbe
no  iugenent  at  the  dredefuU  day  of  dome  lyke  the  prophete
fayeth. |[  Nefcio  quis.  &>€.

But  neuertheles  thonder  and  lytenynge  (liall  come  fro  heuen
and  bourne  theym  all  in  po[w]der  And  whan  that  we  haue
ony  enemyes  thanne  gyue  we  theym  lycence  to  put  theym
downe  and  ete  them  that  be  ayenffe  vs  and  then  make  we
them  to  tourne  ageyne  into  there  owne  lande.  For  if  they
fliolde  abyde  longe  with  vs  they  fhuld  vndo  vs  all  and  ete  vs
lyke  as  they  do  there  owne  propre  folke.

[Here,  also  at  the  side,  is  the  pictorial  representation  of  the  creature
described  in  the  next  paragraph.]

C  And  yet  is  there  another  manere  of  people/  the  whyche
hath  rownde  fete  lyke  an  horfe/  and  alfo  they  haue.  iiij.  fharpe
clawes  behynde/  at  there  Heles,  Wherewith  they  flrongely
fyght  that  there  is  no  manere  thyng  can  flonde  ayenfte  them/
nether  harnayfe/  yrone/  nor  flele  they  paffe  all  thorowth/  and
this  people  gyue  vnto  vs  great  trybute.  and  they  be  alfo  with-
out dowte  great  labourers.

^[  Yet  is  there  a  nother  fmale  lande  in  a  parte  of  that  fame
forefl.  aforefayde/  and  it  is.  xlij.  [forty-two]  dayes  lourneyes  longe.
And  it  is  called  Feminie  the  great.  And  in  that  fame  lande
there  be  thre  Quenes  without  all  other  landes/  thowe  that
holden  there  been  of  thefe  quenes  forcfayde  And  whan  thefe
quenes  fhall  goo  to  felde/  then  eche  of  them  hath.  iij.  hondered.
M.  [300,000]  wymen  and  all  in  harneyfe/  with  out  all  the
other  women  the  whych  that  caray  vytayle  with  carte  horfe
and  alfo  with  olyfauntes.  And  thefe  women  be  very  manly
in  fytynge  and  hardy. |[  And  in  this  fame  lande  may  come

EUEN.

no  men  but.  ix.  daycs  in  the  yere  and  no  lenger/  and  than
they  haue  conuerfacion  and  felyffhyp  with  the  men  and  nomore
of  the  hole  yere.  For  if  the  men  there  wolde  abyde  the
women  fhulde  them  flee  all.

C  And  this  fame  lande  is  clofed  all  aboute  with  a  water
called  Cyphon  comynge  out  of  paradyfe  And  in  this  fame
lande  may  come  no  man  without  a  great  ftiyp  or  a  great  barke.

C  Of  the  people  named  Pygnies.

[Here  is  a  woodcut  representing  the  battle  of  the  Pigmies  and  the  storks.]

Nd  yet  is  there  a  nother  fmale  lande  and  alfo
another  Ryuer  called  Pyconye  that  is.  x.
dayes  ioumeye  longe/  and.  vij.  brode  and
this  people  of  this  forfayde  lande  be  not
great/  but  they  be  lyke  chyldren  of.  vnj.
yere  of  age  and  they  haue  horfeys  as  great
as  a  great  dogge  and  they  be  good  crjflened  folke  and  they
haue  no  warre  ayenfte  noman/  But  they  haue  warre  ayenflf
the  fowles  euery  yere/  whan  they  ftiall  haue  in  there  frute  and
come  And  than  the  kynge  putteth  on  his  harneyfe.  and  than
they  fyght  ayenfle  the  byrdes.  And  than  there  be  flayn  on
bothe  partyes  many  on/  and  alfo  they  be  great  labourers/  and
whan  the  fylde  is  don  than  the  byrdes  flee  a  waye  fro  them.

[Here,  at  the  side, is  a  circular  woodcut  of  Sagittarius, evidently  one
of  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  taken  from  some  illustrated  almanac]

f[  Alfo  in  our  lande  been  ye  Sagittar}-.  the  whyche  ben  fro
the  myddel  vpward  lyke  men/  and  fro  ye  myddell  donwarde
ben  they  lyke  the  halfe  neder  parte  of  an  horfe.  and  they  bere
bowes  and  arowes.  And  the[y]  fhute  flronger  than  ony  other
nacyon  of  people.

U  And  in  our  lande  be  alfo  vnicomes  and  they  been  of  the
manere  with  blacke  and  grene/  and  thefe  vnicomes  flee  many
Lyons,  and  the  Lyon  lieeth  the  vnicome  with  fubtylnes.
Whan  the  Vnicome  hath  put  hym  to  reft,  at  a  tree/  and  than
cometh  the  Lyon  and  ronnyth  aboute  the  tree  and  after  h)-m
than  ronnyth  the  vnycome  and  wolde  fayne  fley  hym/  and  than
he  ronnyth  hym  felfe  into  the  tree  with  his  home  fo  harde  that
he  cannot  pull  it  out  a  geyne.  than  commeth  the  Lyon  and
hath  the  maflery  vpon  the  vnicome.

C  Item  there  is  a  nother  parte  of  a  foreft  therin  dwelleth
another  maner  of  folke  and  this  people  ben.  xx.  Cubettes  of
heythe.  But  they  were  in  tyme  pafte  to  bo  of  the  heyth  of,
xl.  Cubettes.  And  they  haue  nat  the  pore  to  come  out  of  that
deferte  or  forefte  and  all  is  thorowe  the  myghte  of  almyghty
god.  For  if  they  fliolde  come  out  by  there  ftrength  and
hardyneffe  the[y]  wolde  conquere  all  the  worlde.

xxxtii

xxxiv \Tlic  fiyjl  EngUJJi  book  containing  the  word  America  {/Irnicnica),  &c?^

[Here,  at  the  side,  is  a  curious  cut  representing  the  Pha^nix burning.]
C  Here  beg}ninlth  of  yc  biide  the  whychc  is  called  Fcnix.

fl  In  cure  lande  is  alfo  a  byrde  ye  whyche  is  called  Phenix
and  is  ye  fixyrefl.  byrde  of  all  ye  world  and  there  is  nomore
than  one  in  all  ye  cours  of  nature,  and  he  lyueth  C.  [loo]  yere.
and  thenne  flyeth  he  fo  hyghe  that  the  fonne  fett  the  fyre  in  his
wynges/  and  thenne  cometh  he  don  ayen  to  his  nefl  and  there
he  burneth  to  p[o]udre  and  of  the  affiles  comyth  a  worme/  and
within.  C  [loo]  dayes  after  growyth  there  out  another  byrde
as  fayre  as  euer  that  other  was.

C  Item  Alfo  in  our  lande  is  plenty  of  wyne  bredde/  fleflie.
All  that  is  neceflary  for  mannys  body

^  Item  In  our  lande  maye  come  none  venyn  beefte  on  that
one  fyde

#[  Item  Betwene  oure  lande  and  the  Turkes  lande  is  a  ryuer
ronnjTige  and  is  called  Sydon  it  commeth  out  of  paradyfe  of
the  erthe/  and  is  full  of  precyous  flones.

^[  And  alfo  in  oure  lande  ben  ronnynge  many  fmale  riuers
the  whyche  that  come  out  of  this  forfayde  riuer.  and  they  alfo
ben  fulle  of  precyous  flones.  As  Yfmaraddus  lafpis  Saphyrus
Scobaffus  Dyamant  Topafius/  Carbonkel.  Rubin,  and  yet  more
other  they  whyche  I  not  all  can  reherce.

C  Alfo  in  oure  lande  groweth  on  herbe  and  is  called  Par-
manabel/  and  that  fame  herbe  is  fo  myghty  euer  foo  who  that
fame  herbe  beryth  a  boute  hym  he  may  coniure  the  deuyll  of
helle  and  do  hym  faye  what  fo  euer  he  wyl  axe  of  hym  and
therfore  the  deuyll  dare  not  come  in  to  our  lande.

Item  alfo  in  our  lande  growith  pepper  in  foreflis  full  of
fnakes  and  other  venym  beefles.  and  whan  it  is  rype  than  fende
we  for  our  folke  and  they  put  that  fyre  ther  in/  and  than  they
venym  beeflys  flee  awaye.  than  we  gadder  it  and  carj'ed  to
oure  houfes  and  waffhed  in  two  or.  iij.  waters/  and  than  we
drey  it  ayen/  and  alfo  it  waxed  black  and  good

^  Item  aboute  this  paffage  is  a  fonteyne  or  a  conduyte/  fo
who  of  this  watere  drinked.  iij.  tymes  he  fhall  waxe  yonge/
and  alfo  yf  a  man  haue  had  a  fykenes.  xxx.  yere  and  drynked
of  thys  fame  water  he  (hall  therof  be  hole  and  fonde.  And
alfo  as  a  man  therof  drinked  hym  femeth  that  he  had  occu-
pyed  the  befle  mete  and  drinke  of  the  worlde.  and  this  fame
fonteyne  is  full  of  the  grace  of  the  holy  goofl.  and  who  fo  we
in  this  fame  water  wafflied  his  body  he  fhall  become  yonge  of.
xxx.  yere.

And  ye  fliall  knowe  that  I  am  haloweth  in  my  moder  wombe/
and  I  am  old.  v.  C.lxij.  [562]  yere.  and  I  haue  me  wcfflicd.  vi.
tymes  in  tliat  fame  water.

[Here,  at  the  side,  is  a  woodcut  of  a  flying  griffon  carrying  a  man.]

C[  Item  In  our  lande  is  alfo  a  zee  very  pcruulyous/  and
there  can  we  haue  noo  paflage  with  noo  maner  of  fliyppyng
and  than  do  we  vs  cary  there  ouer  with  our  gryffons,

C  Item  at  that  one  fyde  of  this  zee  ronnyth  a  fmale  ryucre
and  therin  be  many  precyous  flones.  and  alfo  ther  growyth  a
certen  herbe  that  is  good  to  all  maner  of  medycyne.

f[  Alfo  ye  fliall  vndcrflande  that  betwene  vs  and  the  lewes
ronnyth  a  great  ryuer  that  is  full  of  precyous  flones  and  it  is
fo  flronge  in  here  ronnyng  yat  noman  ther  ouer  can  paffe/
excepte  ye  faterdaye/  and  than  parted  fhehere  and  toke  with
here  all  that  flie  fyndeth  in  here  waye.  And  this  fame  lande
mofle  we  flrongely  kepe  for  oure  ennemyes.  an[d]  vp  thefe
cofles  haue  we.  xlij.  [42]  flronge  cartels  none  flronger  in  ye
world,  and  ben  well  kepte  of  people.  To  vndeflande.  x.  M,
[10,000]  knyghtes  on  horfbacke.  vi.  M.  [6000]  Croffe  bowes.
XV.  M.  [15,000]  longe  bowes.  and.  xl.  M.  [40,000]  othere  men
on  horfbacke  well  armed,  ye  whyche  thefe  Cartels  haue  in
kyping  by  caufe  that  the  great  kynge  of  Ifrahel  fhall  not  ther-
paffe  with  his  people.  For  he  is  twyes  as  rtronge  as  I  am.
And  his  lande  is  twyes  as  grete  as  all  Cryrtente  and  turkey.
For  he  hath  in  his  kepynge  the  feconde  parte  of  the  worlde.
And  the  great  kynge  of  Ifrahel  hath  vnder  hym  iij.C.  [300]
kynges.  iiij.  M.  [4000]  princes,  duces,  erles.  barons  knyghtes/
fquyers  without  nombre.  and  all  thefe  be  fubgette  to  the  great
kynge  of  Ifrahel.  But  yf  he  myght  paffe  ouer  this  forfayde
ryuer  with  his  people  they  fholde  flee  both  cryrten  and  turkes.
And  ye  fhall  knowe  that  we  all  faterdaye  late  paffe.  viij.C.  or.
M.  [800  or  a  1000]  men  for  beye  fuche  manere  good[s]  or  mar-
chaundyfe  as  they  wyll  haue.  but  we  late  them  not  come  with
in  ye  wallis  of  thys  cartels,  for  they  bye  it  without  ye  walles
of  thys  fortreffes.  and  they  paye  ther  marchaundyfes  with
platis  of  fyluer  or  of  gold  for  they  haue  none  other  money,
and  whan  they  haue  don  ther  befynes  they  tourne  home  ayen
in  theyr  owne  lande.  and  thefe  forfayde  cartels  be  fete  to  gyder
within  a  bowe  ftiotte.  And  ye  fhall  vnderrtande  that  within  a
myle  of  thefe  cartels  is  a  great  Cite  and  a  fayre  and  it  is  the
rtrongert  of  all  the  worlde.  the  whyche  cite  is  in  our  kepyng  of
one  of  our  kyngis.  and  he  receyueth  tribute  of  the  great  kyng
of  Ifrahel.  And  alfo  gyueth  vs  euery  yere.  ij.C.  [200]  horfes
laden  with  golde/  fyluer/  and  precyous  rtones.  Except  alle
charges  and  cortes  that  men  doth  in  the  cyte  and  in  thyfe
forefayde  cartels.  And  whan  that  we  haue  warre  ayenrt  them/
than  flee  we  them  alle  and  late  noman  alyue.  and  therfore
they  wyll  kepe  no  warre  ayenrte  vs.  and  the  wymmen  of  the
lewes  be  very  fayre  none  fayrer  in  erth  nowe  a  dayes  lyuinge.
And  by  this  forfayJe  ryuer  is  a  zee  ther  noman  may  parte/  but

[  The  Mediceval  Legend  of  Prejler  yohn?[

XXXV

vhan  the  wynde  blowythe  fro  benethe  flrongcly  than  parted  fhe
here/  and  thanne  the[y]  paffe  with  great  hafl.  and  than  they
take  with  hym  all  maner  of  precious  Hones,  but  they  may
felle  none  therof  [be]for[e]  that  wee  haue  taken  therof  our  chofe.

C  In  a  parte  of  our  lande  is  an  hylle  there  noman  may
dwelle  for  hete  of  the  fonne/  and  there  bee  wormes  many  on
without  fyre  can  not  lyue.  And  by  this  fame  hylle  we  kepe.
xl.M.  [40,000]  people  that  no  thyngeells  but  make  fyre/  and
whan  this  wormes  feele  the  fyre  than  thei  come  oute  of  the
erthe  and  goo  in  too  that  fyre.  and  there  they  fpynne  lyke  the
wormes  yat  the  fylke  fpynneth  And  of  that  fame  fpynnyng
we  make  our  clot[h]ynge  that  we  were  on  fefle  dayes.  and
whan  they  be  foule/  than  they  be  cafl  in  to  ye  fyer  and  they
becom  as  fayre  as  euer  they  were  afore

And  ye  fhall  vnderflande  that  faint  Thomas  doeth  more
myracles/  than  ony  feynt  in  heuen  For  he  comyth  bod[i]ly
euery  yere  in  his  chirche  and  doth  a  fermon/  and  alfo  in  a
palays  there  ye  here  after  of  hym  fliall  here.

[Here,  at  the  side,  is  the  representation  of  the  creature  described  in  the

next  paragraph.]

|[  And  ye  fliall  alfo  knowe  that  there  be  dyuers  of  people
of  fafon  in  our  lande/  alfo  there  be  people  that  haue  the  body
of  a  man  and  the  hede  lyke  a  dogge  and  they  be  good  takers
of  fyfflie.  and  they  be  good  to  vnderflande  of  theyre  fpeeche.
and  they  wyll  goo  in  to  the  zee  a  hole  daye  longe  to  the  tyme
that  they  haue  taken  fuche  as  they  wolde  haue/  and  than  ye
\they\  come  ayen  charged  with  fyffhe.  and  bere  them  in  to  ye
houfes  for  they  haue  there  dwellinge  places  vnder  erthe.  and
thenne  take  we  part  of  there  fyfflies  that  vs  befle  lyketh.  and
they  do  great  harme  among  our  bee  thow  yat  be  wylde.  and
they  fyghte  alfo  ayenfle  our  archers.  &c.

f[  In  oure  londe  is  alfo  one  manere  of  byrdes  and  laye  ther
eggis  in  the  zee.  xxi.  and  ther  out  growen  yonge  byrdes.  and
than  the[y]  flee  away  and  we  take  fomtyme  of  theym  for  they
bee  good  for  to  ete  whan  they  be  yonge  For  yf  theyr  were
ony  man  that  hathe  lofl  his  nature  and  ete  of  this  fame  byrde
he  fhoU  it  gete  ayen  and  becom  as  flronge  as  euer  he  was
afore.

[Here  is  a  woodcut  of  a  tree  dropping  oil,  guarded  by  a  dragon,  as  described

in  the  next  paragraph.

C  Alfo  in  our  lande  is  that  fame  tree/  ther  yat  holy  creflen-
dom  or  olye  [?  oyle\  out  ronnith.  and  this  tree  is  dreye/  and
ther  is  a  great  ferpent  which  yat  tree  hath  in  kepynge  all  the
hole  yere  nyght  and  daye  but  alone  vp[on]  feynt  lohns  daye
and  night  and  than  flepyth  the  ferpent  or  dragon,  and  than
goo  we  to  the  tree  and  take  yat  crifma.  and  of  this  fame  is
nomore  than  iij.  po[uJnd.  and  than  tourne  we  ayen  fccrctely

with  great  drede  and  fere  yat  he  vs  not  fee/ for  ells  he  wyll
flee  vs.  and  this  fame  tree  is  a  dayes  ioumey  fro  ye  paradys  of
ye  erthe.  but  whan  this  ferpent  is  a  waked  than  maked  he
great  mone  and  forow.  and  this  dragon  hath.  ix.  hedes  and.  ij.
wynges.  and  is  as  great  as  twoo  horfes.  But  for  all  yat  it
followeth  vs  Rylle  tyl  we  ben  come  to  the  zee  ayen.  and  than
tourned  it  ayen.  and  thenne  bere  we  that  crifma.  to  ye  patriarch
of  feynt  thomas  and  he  haloweth  it/  and  ther  with  they  make
vs  al  cryflen.  and  ye  remenaunt  fende  we  to  ye  patriarche  of
Iherufalem.  and  he  fende  it  forth  to  the  Pope  of  rome.  and  he
puth  therto  olye  tof  lyfe  [?  oyle  of  lyfe\  and  than  halowy th  it/
and  then  he  fendeth  all  cryfl,ente  through

fj[  Alfo  ye  fhall  vnderflande  whan  we  fhall  goo  to  warre  than
doo  we  afore  vs  bere  with,  xiiij.  [14]  kynges.  xiiij.  [14]  cofers
with  golde  and  fyluer  really  wroght  with  precious  Hones,  and
the  other  kynges  come  after  vs  with  grete  flremers  and  baners
of  fylke  and  fyndale  very  rychely  wrought.  Ye  fhall  knowe
alfo  that  afore  vs  gone.  xl.  M  [40,000]  clerkis  and  alfo  many
knyghtis.  and  men  afote  there  be  ij.C.  M.  [200,000]  without
cariers  and  cariers  that  go  with  the  olyphantes  and  cary  our
barneys  and  vitales.

^  Ye  fliall  vnderflande  alfo  as  we  goo  to  fylde  than  put  we
oure  lande  in  the  kepyng  of  the  Patriarche  of  feynt  thomas.
And  whan  we  pecefably  ryde  than  do  we  bere  afore  vs  a  crofle
of  wodde  in  worfliyp  of  oure  lorde  Ihefu  Cr)'fl.e.  Alfo  in  the
incomynge  of  euery  cyte  flande.  iij.  croffes  made  of  wodde/  for
to  remembre  ye  pafflon  of  oure  lord  Ihefu  cryfle.  And  whan
we  ryde  pecefably  than  do  we  alfo  bere  afor  vs  a  bafyn  full  of
erthe  to  remembre  yat  we  be  come  of  erthe  and  that  we  fliall
waxe  erth  ayen.  and  we  do  alfo  bere  for  vs  another  bafyn  full
of  fyne  gold  to  a  token  that  we  be  the  noblefle  and  myghtyeft
kyngis  of  all  the  worlde.

0[  There  is  alfo  in  our  lande  noman  fo  hardy  that  dare  breke
his  wedloke,  but  yf  he  dyde  he  fliolde  be  incontynent  be
burnyd.  For  our  lorde  hym  felfe  hath  ordeyned  wedlok  ther-
fore  it  fliold  be  kept  by  reafon  yf  that  we  louyd  oure  lorde
Ihefu  Cryfl.e.  For  it  is  oue  of  the  facranientes  of  the  holy
chyrche.

C  Alfo  there  dare  noman  make  a  lye  in  oure  lande.  foi  of
he  dyde  he  fholde  incontynent  bee  fleyn  and  we  be  feythful  in
oure  faying  and  doying.

f[  Alfo  ye  fliall  vnderfland  that  we  euery  yere  goo  vj'fite
the  holy  body  of  the  prophete  danycl  m  oure  foreft/  and  we

take  with  vs.  x  M.  [10,000]  clerkis  and  as  many  knyghtys.
and.  CC.  [200]  caflels.  made  vpon  Olyphantes  fore  to  kcpe  vs
from  ye  dragons  ye  whyche  haue.  vij.  hedes.  :he  whych  that

haue  theyr  dwellynge  in  that  foreft

C  And  there  bee  alfo  in  that  fame  place  dates  ye  winter
and  fomer  hange  on  the  trees  fayr  and  grene.  And  ye  forefte
is great a. C. and  xxx. [130] dayes  journey,  and ye.  ij.

xxxvi \TJic  firjt  Eiiglijh  book  containing  the  word  America  {Armenica),  &c?^

patriarches  ben  before  vs  at  table  for  they  haue  the  myght  of  the
pope  of  rome.  And  we  haue  twyes  as  many  abbotes  in  oure
lande  as  there  be  dayes  in  the  yere.  [and]  xv.  more  And  euerich
one  of  them  cometh  ones  in  ye  yere  and  faythe  mafle  vpon
faint  Thomas  auter.  And  I  my  felf  feye  alfo  mafle  in  the  grete
feflis  of  ye  yere.  and  ther  for  I  am  called  pope  lohn.  For  I
[am]  prirte  after  the  outfliewyng  of  facrificie  of  the  auters.  and
kinge  after  outfliewing  of  luflice.  f[  And  I  pope  lohn  was
halowid  afore  T  was  borne,  for  oure  lorde  fende  his  angell  to  my
fader  and  fayde  to  hym  make  a  pallays  the  whyche  fhall  be  of
the  gi-ace  of  god  and  a  chamber  of  that  paradyfe  for  your  fonne
comynge  For  hi  fliall  be  the  grettefl.  kynge  of  the  worlde.  and
he  fhalle  a  longe  tyme  lyye.  So  who  that  in  this  pallays
comyth  he  fliall  haue  no  hongre  or  thryfle.  and  he  (hall  not
deye  and  as  fone  as  my  fader  was  a  wakyd  he  was  very  mery/
and  incontynent  he  began  to  make  thys  pallays  lyke  ye  fliall
here.  At  fyrfl,  of  ye  incomynge  of  thys  pallays  is  made  of
criftall  and  the  couerynge  of  it  is  of  precious  ftones  and  with
in  realy  wrought  with  ft.erres  lyke  yf  it  were  ye  heuen.  and
that  pauing  is  alfo  of  criftall  and  within  this  fame  pallays
be  none  wyndowes.  and  within  this  fame  pallays  be.
xxiiij.  [24]  pyllers  of  fyne  gold  and  of  precyous  ftones  of  all
maner  fortes,  and  ther  am  I  at  great  fefte  dayes  of  the  yere
and  feynt  Thomas  prechyth  in  middell  of  this  pallays  to  the

people.  And  whithin  this  fame  pallays  is  a  conduyte  or  a  fon-
teyne  is  lyke  wyne  in  drynkynge/  fo  who  thereof  drincketh  he
defyred  none  other  mete  nor  drinke  and  noman  can  telle  fro
whens  it  cometh  or  whyther  it  gothe.  Alfo  ther  is  another
great  merueyll  in  this  fame  pallays  whan  we  fliall  goo  to  our
dyner/  fo  is  there  no  maner  of  mete  made  redy  for  vs/  nor
there  is  no  manner  of  inftrumentes  to  make  mete  redy  with
all.  but  there  coniith  before  vs  all  maner  of  delycious  mete
that  comyth  there  thoroughe  the  holy  gooft.  And  it  is
not  wel  poffyble  to  wrytte  all  maner  of  goodnes  they  [haue]
whiche  yat  be  in  oure  lande.  And  ye  fhall  vnderftande  that
we  wntte  nothinge  to  you  but  trewe  is.  For  if  we  fliolde  wryte
lyes  to  you/  god  and  feynt  thomas  fliolde  punyffhe  vs/  for  we
fliolde  lefe  all  our  dignyte  and  oure  worfliyp.
And  we  praye  you  that  ye  wyl  writte  vs  ayen  with  the  berer
of  this  lettre.  and  fende  to  vs  ayen  a  good  knyght  of  ye  genera-
cyon  of  fraunce.

And  we  praye  the  kynge  of  Fraunce  that  he  wyll  vs  recom-
maunde  to  the  myghty  kyng  of  Englande.  and  alfo  to  all  other
kynges  the  whyche  yat  dwelle  be  yonde  the  zee  thovv  that  ben
cryftened  and  we  praye  god  that  he  you  wyl  gyue  the  grace  of
the  holy  gooft  Amen.

Written  in  oure  holy  pallays  in  the  byrth  of  my  felfe.  v.
[five]  hondred.  and  feuen.

CBmprcntctb  iJS  ntf  lojbn  of  Bofsborotnc:

XXXV 11

The
Life and Labours

of

Richard Eden

Scholar,  and  Man  of  Science.

[?i52i]— 1576.

•  Probable  or  approximate  dates.
The  best  Life  of  our  Author  hitherto,  is  in  Cooper's  Alhcme  CaiitabrigUnses,  ii.,  2,  Ed.  lS6r.

1526.
1526.

Feb.

15C3.  Apr.  22. fljnuji  Vill.  romrs  to  tfje  tfjvone.

1521.  *  The  year  of  our  Author's  birth  has  not  yet  been  ascer-

tained, but  it  cannot  be  much  later  than  1521.  He
would  therefore  be  of  nearly  the  same  age  as  Sir
William  Cecil,  Lord  Burleigh,  who  was  born  on  13th  September  1520.
He  stated  in  1573  {see  under  that  year)  that  'he  was  of  a  respectable
family  in  Hertfordshire  ;  where  he,  in  that  year,  had  a  sister  still  living.'
1526  *-1534.*  He  is  well  educated  as  a  boy.  '  When  I  was  a  yonge
scoler,  I  haue  read  in  the  Poet  IlesiodusJ — p.  .\li.  col.  2.
Pietro  Martire  of  Anghiera  dies.

The  printing  of  the  Sumario  de  la  natural  y  general
istoria  de  las  Indias,  written  by  Gon9alo  Fernandez  de
Oviedo  y  Valdes,  is  finished  at  Toledo.
1530.  Jan,  25.  Sir  Thomas  Smith  [b.  2Sth  March  15 14  at  Saffron
Walden],  being  then  B.A.,  is  elected  Fellow  of  Queen's
College,  Cambridge.

The  printing  of  the  Third  edition  of  Pietro  Martire's
Latin  Decades  is  finishal  at  Basle.  It  is  undoubtedly
the  text  from  which  Eden  translated  //.  63-200  of
this  present  work.

Sir  T.  Smith  is  resident  at  Cambridge.
Vaunuccio  Biringuccio's  Pyrotcclniia  is  first  printed  ;
at  Venice.

Eden  studies  at  Cambridge  for  ten  years  {see  under
'573)-  What  he  states  there,  he  confirms  elsewhere,  see
p.  1.  col,  I,  '  that  the  ryght  worfliypfuU  and  of  fingular

D

1533.  Aug.  3L

1533-1539.
1540.

1535-1544.

leamynge  in  all  iciences,  Sjt  Thomas  Smyth,  in  my  t\-me  the  floure  of
the  Vniuerfitic  of  Cambridge,  and  sometyme  my  tutor.' He  does  not,  how-
ever, seem  to  have  taken  any  degree,  while  up  at  the  University.
1539-1541.  Sir  T.  Smith  is  travelling  abroad.

1542.  A  folio  edition  of  Chaucer's  works  is  publisheil,  re-

markable for  being  an  early  instance  of  joint  enterprise
amongEnglish  printers,  'each  having  his  own  name  alone
as  printer,  in  the  colophon  cf  so  many  copies  as  were  his  proper  share.' —
Herbert's  Typographical  Antiquities,  p.  557,  Ed.  1785-90.  The  joint
partners  in  this  edition  were  W.  Bonlwm,  F.  Petit,  R.  Kele,  and  R.  Toy.
(J^42-1547.  Sir  T. Smith  is  again  resident at Cambridge. It

was  probably  during  this  periotl,  that  he  taught  Eden :
who  had, for  his  fellow  pupils  under  Sir  T. Smith,
Edward  Vere,  afterwards  the  Earl  of  Oxford  and  a  most  exquisite  poet ;
and  John  Ponet,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Winchester.

1544-1546.  Eden  comes  to  Court,  and  holds  a  position  in  thi

Treasur)-,  for  about  two  yoar^  ;  which  is  his  first  appoint-
ment in  the  Civil  Service.
1545.  Oct.  The  First edition of  Thomas  Geminus' important

'  Epitome  of  The  Fabric  of  the  Human  B.\iy,  by  A.
Vcsalius,'  is  published  in  Latin  ir  London,  in  folio  size ;
illustrated with renurkable engravings, 'all drawen  out, and graven
in  bralTe,  and fo impriented  by  my  own  labour.' The deilication to
Henry  VIII.  is  dated  London,  4  Kal.  Oct.  [2Sth  September]  1545.

Geminus,  in  his  next  ctlition  of  1553,  states  that  King  Henry  very  much
wished  that  this  anatomical  work  should  be  widely  publish«xl  abraul :  and
that  he  himself  had  subsequently  heard  that  it  had  been  '  notably  well

XXXV  111

TiiiL  Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Edfn.

accepted,  and  hath doen muche  good  in  Italyc,  Frauncc,  Spainc,  and
Germaine,  and  other  foien  parties. '

1547.  Kden  is  destined  to  the  office  of  the  Distillery  ;  when

the  King  dies  :  see  /.  xlv.

1547.  Jan.  28. EtitoaiH  2ilJ.  succcrta  to  H)e  «rvo\un.

1547.  The  Loixl  Protector,  however,  gives  the  Distillery  to
one,  who  held  it  down  to,  at  least,  so  late  as  1573.

1547.*  Eden  marries;  and  has  by  his  wife  twelve  children  in

the  next  foiutcen  years  :  who  all  apparently  grow  up  to
manhood  ;  else  the  argument  and  appeal  then  used  by
him  in  1573,  would  seem  to  be  faulty.

1548.  Sept.  Master  William  Cecil,  a;t.  28,  is  appointed  Secretary

to  the  Lord  Protector  Somerset.

1549.  Oct.  10. In  the  political  revolution,  occasioned  by  the  advent

to  power  of  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  afterwards  the  Duke
of  Northumberland^to  whom  Eden,  in  1553,  dedicated
his Treatyfe  of  the  ne-i.vc  India — Master  W. Cecil  is
Nov.  confined  to  his  house  (Oct.  10) ;  and  in  November  is

sent  to  the  Tower ;  from  w  hence  he  is  set  free  on  the  25th

1550.  Jan.  25.  January  following.

The  First  edition  of  Girolamo  Cardano's  work,  Dc
Subtilitatc,  is  printed  at  Nuremberg  in  folio.  It  was  written  in  eight
months  ;  but  under  constant  correction  for  three  years  before  it  appeared.
Eden  thought  very  highly  of  it.

1550.  May.  The  First  edition,  of  the  First  Volume  only,  of  Navi-

gatioiii  c  Via'^gi  [collected  by  J.  B.  Ramusio]  is  printed
at  Venice. It  was  probably  this  First  impression  ;  and

not  the  Second  edition  of  the  same  Volume  printed  in  March  1554,  that

Eden  made  use  of  in  his  Compilation.

Sept.  5. Master  W^.  Cecil  is  appointed  one  of  the  Secretaries
of  .State  and  a  Privy  Councillor.

1551.  July  3.  The sweating sickness,  which  had  begim on 15th

April  at  Shrewsbury,  begins  in  London  ;  where  500
persons  die  in  the  first  week. At  this  time, the  first

English  ship  that  ever  went  to  Barbary,  leaves  Portsmouth  ;  under the

command  of  T.  Windham  (see/,  xix).

Oct.  11. Sir  W.  Cecil  is  knighted.

1552.  Spring. Eden  writes  thus,  at  p.  355,  about  the  middle  of  1555,

'  And  wheras  as  concernynge  the  knowleage  of  metals,
I  was  once  mynded  to  haue  tranflated  into  Englylhe
the  hoole  worke  of  Pyrotechnia,  wherof  I  fynyffhed.  xxii.  chapitures  now
more  then  three  yeares  fence,  and  lefte  the  copie  therof  in  the  handes  of
one  of  whome  I  coulde  neuer  get  it  ageyne  (omyttynge  to  fpeake  of  other
ingratitudes)  I  was  therby  difcouraged  to  proceade  any  further  in  that
woorke.'  From  this,  it  is  evident  that,  by  this  time,  Eden  was  a  good
Italian  scholar. His  translation  of  the  first  three  chapters  will  be  found  at

//■  356-368.

1552.  About  this  date,  Eden  was,  I  believe,  acting  as  private

secretary  to  Sir  W.  Cecil. I  have,  however,  lost  the

reference  to  the  authority  for  this.

1552.  April  22. Sir  W.  Cecil  is  made  Chancellor  of  the  Order  of  the

Garter.

May  2  or  9. The  second  English  voyage  sets  out  for  Barbary,

p.  xix.
June  3. Girolamo  Cardano,  on  his  way  from  Italy,  reaches
London ; and after  a  rest of  three days, travels in
twenty-three  days  to  Edinburgh:  where  he  somewhat
successfully  prescribes for  Cardinal Beaton. After  a
stay  of  seventy-five  days  there  ;  he  leaves  Edinburgh  on
Sept.  12. 1 2th  September,  on  his  return  towards  Italy.
See  further  respecting this  famous  Italian  magician  or  physician — this
considerable  genius— this  prolific  author  (he  wrote  in  all  222  treatises,  large
and  small) — this most impudent liar and profligate  liver,  in  Professor
^lor\ey\  Life  of  jferome  Cardan,  1856. It  is  quite  possible  that  Eden  saw
Cardano — whose  works,  he  quotes  as  of  the  highest  authority — while  he
was  staying  in  London.

1552.  July  20. Geminus,  in  the  Dedication  prefixed  to  the  Second
edition  of  his "Epitome  of  Vesalius'  Anatomy  ^c."

(with  tlic  explanations  to  the  plates,  greatly  augmented  and  in  English),
which  is  dated  "  At  Windfore,  the.  xx.  July  1552,"  (the  engraved
title  is,  however,  dated  1553)  goes  on  to  stale,  after  what  we  have  already
quoted  above,  under  1545,  as  follows  : — '  And  now  of  late  by  the  informa-
cion  of  fund  rye  frendes  and  alfo  of  diucrfe  furgeons,  I  haue  ben  borne
in  hande,  that  the  fame  worke  beeyng  fet  foorth  in  the  Englidi  tounge
might  greatly  auaile  to  ye  knowledge  of  the  vnlatined  Surgeons,
and  by  meane  of  them,  fliould  bee  muclie  more  bcncficiall,  then  in  latin
it  is  to  an  infinite  nombre  of  people  in  tliys  your  Maiefties  Royalme  of
Englande.  Wherefore  myndyng  to  rendre  vnto  this  Countrey,  in  which
by  your  graces  proteccion  and  bounteous  liberalilie  I  Hue,  as  muche
fruite  as  my  poorc  induflrie  and  continuall  trauaile  may  poffibly  bee  hable
to  yelde,  I  haue  earneflly  applyed  my  felfe  to  make  common  and  familiar
to  all  Engliflie  people  that  which  hath  ben  found  profitable  among  fo
many  foren  nacions.  Whereunto  forafmuch  as  I  am  not  my  felfe  fo
perfeict  and  expeite  in  the  Englifiie  tonge  that  I  dare  warraunt  or  trufl
myne  owne  dooynges,  I  haue  vfed  the  ftudious  peines  of  Nicholas  Vdall
[the  author  of  Roister  Doister,  our  earliest  known  English  comedy]  and
certain  other  learned  men  whofe  exercife  in  tranflaccions  and  pennyng  in
this  tounge  hath  ben  (as  I  vnderflande)  not  without  fome  fruite  to  the
common  wcale.' Eden  edited  the  next  edition  in  1559.

1552.  Dec.  2. The  printing  of  the  first  edition  of  Fiancisco  Lopez  de

Gomara's  Istoria  de  las  Indias  y  conqiiista  de  Mexico,  is
finished  at  Saragossa.

1553.  May  9. The  date  of  the  Ordinances  &c.  for  the  English  fleet

going  for  the  discovery  of  Cathay  by  the  North- East  ;
given  by  SeLastian  Cabot,  as  '  Gouernour  of  the  myflerie
and  companie  of  the  Marchants  aduenturers  for  the  difcouerie  of  Regions,
Dominions,  Hands,  and  places  vnknown  ; '  who  were  not,  however,  incor-
porated by  royal  charter,  until  6th  February  1555  (i  and  2  Philip  and  Mary).
For  these  Ordinances,  see  Hakluyt's  Voyages,  &=€.,  p.  259,  ed.  1589.
1553.  May  20. The  first  English  fleet,  consisting  of  the  Bona  Espe-
ranza,  120  tons,  Captain  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,  General
of  the  whole  fleet  ;  the  Edzuard  Bonavcnture,  160  tons,
Captain  Richard  Chancellor,  Pilot  Major,  with  Stephen  Burrough  (or  as
Eden  calls  him  at/,  xli.  col.  2,  Steuen  a  Burrough),  for  Master  ;  and  the
Bona  Confidentia,  90  tons, Cornelius  Deerfoorth, Master  :  leave  RatclitT
on  their  voyage,  and  get  as  far  as  Deptford.

May  21.  About  2  p.m.  they  leave  Deptford.  Then  occurred
the  scene  thus  vividly  described  to  us  by  Clement
Adams  :  of  which  it  is  almost  certain  that  Eden  was
an  eye-witness.
'  The  greater  fliippes  were  towed  downe  with  boates,  and  oares,  and
the  mariners  being  all  apparelled  in  watchet  or  Ikie  coloured  clothe,
rowed  a  maine,  and  made  way  with  diligence.  And  being  come  neere  to
Greenewich  (where  the  Court  then  laye)  prefently  vpon  the  newes  thereof
the  Courtiers  came  running  out,  and  the  common  people  flockt  together,
{landing  very  thicke  vpon  the  (hoare  :  the  priuie  Counfell,  they  lookt  out
at  the  windowes  of  the  Court,  and  the  refl  ranne  vp  to  the  toppes  of  the
towers  :  the  fliippes  hereupon  difcharge  the  Ordinance,  and  flioote  off  their
pieces  after  the  maner  of  warre,  and  of  the  fea,  infomuch  that  the  tops  of
the  hilles  founded  therewith,  the  valleys,  and  the  waters  gaue  an  Eccho,
and  the  mariners  they  fliouted  in  fuch  fort,  that  the  flcie  rang  againe
with  the  noyfe  thereof.  One  ftoode  in  the  poope  of  the  fliippe,  and  by
this  gefture  biddes  farewell  to  his  friends  in  the  beft  manner  he  coulde.
Another  walkes  vpon  the  hatches,  another  climbes  the  fhrow[d]es,  another
ftandes  vpon  the  maine  yarde,  and  another  in  the  toppe  of  the  fliippe.
To  bee  fliort,  it  was  a  very  triumphe  (after  a  fort)  in  all  refpects  to  the
beholders.  But  (alas)  the  good  King  Edwarde  (in  refpect  of  whome
principally  all  t\is  was  prepared)  hee  only  by  reafon  of  his  ficknefle  was
abfent  from  this  fliewe,  and  not  long  after  the  departure  of  thefe  fliips,
the  lamentable  and  moft  forowfuU  accident  of  his  death  followed.' —
Ilakhiyt,  Voyages,  p.  282,  Ed.  1589.

May  This  voyage  seems  to  have  aroused  a  general  interest

in  cosmography. People  began  to  think  of  the  great
unknown world  outside  and  beyond  England. Some
one  printed  a  tract  or  single  sheet,  entitled  Of  the  ne-cu  found  lands,  which
Eden  derides  at/.  5. This  publication  stirred  him  up  to  a  rapid  trans-
lation of  a  part  of  the  Fifth  book  of  Mucnstcr's  colossal  Cofinography.

The  Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Eden.

XXX IX

June.*  TIuis  appeared Richard  Eden's first literary work,

(see  title  at  p.  3),  printed  by  Edward  Sutton.  lie
dedicates  it  to  John  Dudley,  Duke  of  Northumber-
land, the  then  all-powerful  Protector.  The  Dedication  is  important
in  relation  to  the  controverted  life  of  Sebastian  Cabot.  It  is  to  be  noticed
that  in  it  Eden  boasts  of  having  already  read  the  Decades.  To  this  month
and  year  is  therefore  also  to  be  assigned  the  composition  of  his  address
'To  the  Reader'  at  //.  7-1 1  ;  in  which  he  so  manfully  strives  to  uproot
the  general  ignorance  and  timidity  of  his  time.

1553.  July  6. fHavg's  rrign  commcntrs.

1553.  Aug.  12. The first  English voyage to Guinea  leaves  Ports-

mouth, see  /.  375.
Aug.  20. The printing of the second edition of  Lopez de

Gomara's  Historia  is  finished  at  Medina  del  Campo.
Aug.  22. John Dudley,  Duke  of  Northumberland  (to  whom,

Eden  had  dedicated,  within  less  than  three  months  before,

his  first  work),  is  beheaded  at  the  Tower  ;  with  Sir  T.

Gates,  and  Sir  T.  Palmer.

1554.  Summer.*  Richard  Chancellor's  ship,  the  Edward  Bonaventure,

returns  to  England  ;  but  is  robbed  on  the  way  home,  by
some  Flemings.  The  crews  of  the  other  two  ships,
Spring.*  under  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,  to  the  number  of  seventy
persons,  are  frozen  to  death;  while  wintering  at  Arzina  fiord,  for  'want
of  experience  to  have  made  caues  or  stoues.'  It  appears  from  a  will
found  in  one  of  the  ships,  that  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  and  most  of  his
company,  were  alive  in  January  1554.

1554.  July  25. Queen  Mary  is  married  to  Philip,  Prince  of  Spain,  at

Winchester. '  Shortly  after  King  Philip  and  Queene

Mary  remooued  from  Winchester  to  Basing,  [and]  from

Aug.  5. thence  to  Windsor,  where,  on  the  fifth  of  August, the

King  was  stalled  in  the  noble  order  of  the  garter,  where  he  kept  a  great

feast,  and  at  that  time  the  Earle  of  Sussex  \fzs>  made  knight  of  the  garter. '

— St<nv,  p.  1057,  Ed.  1600.

Aug.  17. '  The  King  and  Quene  remooued  to  Richmond,  from

thence  by  water  to  Southwarke,  accompanied  with  the

noble  men  and  ladies,  the  King  in  one  barge,  the  Queen

in  another,  and  landed  at  the  Bishop  of  Winchesters  staires  neere  to  S.

Maries  Queries  church,  and  so  passed  through  that  place  and  park  into

Suffolke  place,  where  they  rested  that  night.'— i'/^7£',  idem.

Aug.  18.  'And  the  next  day,  being  the  18  of  August,  they  rode
through  Southwarke  ouer  the  bridge,  and  so  through
London,  where  they  were  with  great  prouision  received  of
the  citizens,  pageants  in  places  accustomed,  the  crosse  in  Cheape  new  gilt,
&c. ,  and  passing  through  Paules  churchyard,  a  man  came  sliding,  as  it  were
flying  upon  a  rope,  from  Paulessteeple  down  tothe  deans  wall.' — Stmi\  idem.
As  Eden  tells  us,  at  /.  46,  intoxicated  by  the  shows,  the  triumphs,  and
universal  acclamations  that  greeted  the  gorgeous  royal  procession  through
the  City,  he  was  led  first  to  debate  within  himself  as  to  whether  he  could
by  any  original  publication  perpetuate  to  future  Ages,  not  so  much  the
glorious  reception,  as  its  worthiness  and  significance  :  but  thinking  of
nothing  sufficiently  worthy,  he  was  led  to  consider  the  marvellous
discoveries,  conquests,  and  empire  of  the  Spanairds  ;  all  of  which  bade
fair  to  become  (should  the  royal  pair  have  issue)  the  joint  heritage  of
England.  Hence  his  great  Compilation  is  distinctly  the  result  of  the
Marriage  Procession  of  this  day.

Within  the  following  twelve  months  (working  incessantly,  and  for
nothing),  Eden  translated  or  wrote  all  that  is  reprin/ed  in  this  volume,
between  //.  43  and  398.  Inasmuch  as  the  work  was  one  of  great  bulk
(though,  at  the  time,  of  national  importance),  several  printers  combined
together  for  its  risk  of  its  publication  :  while  the  printing  of  it  was
wholly  intrusted  to  William  Powell.  There  are  copies  extant  with  the
colophons  of  Robert  Toy,  Richard  Jugge,  Edward  Sutton,  and  also,  as
Herbert  states  at  /.  738,  William  Seres,  and  perhaps  others.  These  are
the  "parteners"  to  whom  Eden  refers  at/.  330. — See  1542  above.

Leonhardus  Gorecius,  a  Polish  knight,  writes  a  congratulatory  Latin
Oration  to  the  people  and  nobles  of  England  on  the  royal  marriage,  which
was  printed  by  William  Powell,  who  was  also,  at  the  same  time,  busily
engaged  on  Eden's  Compilation. Eden  refers  to  this  Oration  at/.  47.

1554.  Oct.  2.  'There  came  to  the  Tower  in  twenty  carts  made  for  the
show,  accompanied  with  certain  .Spaniards  of  the  King's
Guard,  ninety-seven  little  chests,  of  a  yard  long  and  four
inches  broad,  of  silver,  which  will  make  by  estimation  fifty  thousand
pounde'  [equivalent  to  ^^750,000  of  the  present  day]:  I/arl.  MS.  194
[which  is  a  '  Pocket  Diary  of  a  resident  in  the  Tower  between  July  1553
and  October  1554']  reprinted  by  the  Camden  Society  under  the  title  of
77te  Chronicle  0/  Queen  Jane,  1850.  John  Foxe,  in  his  Actes  and  Monumentes,
^T'c,  Ed.  1563,  states  that  the  silver  was  'matted  about  with  mats,  and
mayled  in  little  handles,  about  two  feet  long  and  almoft  half  a  frx)t  thick,  and
in  eucry  cart  fixe  of  thofe  bundles.'  I  presume  this  is  what  E<lcn  refers
to  at  /.  56,  as  the  i8,ood  pounds  '  weyght  of  fy'uer  which  was  coyned
to  the  Kynges  vfe  in  the  towre  of  I^ndor.  where  neuer  fo  much  Ijath
byn  feene  at  once  as  fuche  as  haue  byn  owlde  officers  in  the  mjTite  df^j
affirme.'  It  was  brought  there  from  Peru  and  Rio  de  la  Plata,  by  the
celebrated  Spanish  historian  Augiistin  de  Zarate  ;  whose  Historia  dd
descuhrimienlo  y  conquista  del  Peru  was  published  at  Antwerp  in  the
next  year.

It  was  probably  after  the  formation  of  this  acquaintanceship  with  2^r3te,
and  while  his  great  Collection,  here  reprinted,  (itself  an  honour  to  the
.Spanish  nation)  was  in  the  press  ;  that  by  the  favour  of  certain  Spanish
nobles,  Eden  obtained  a  place  in  the  English  Treasury  of  the  Prince  of
Spain.

1554.  Oct.  11. The  second  expedition  to  Guinea  leaves  the  River
Thames,  see  /.  379.
Oct.  12. The  third  edition  of  Gomara's  I/istoria  Ls  finished  at
Saragossa.
1554.  Nov.  28. The  Council  of  State  announce  by  letter,  at  Dr.  Ched-
sey's  sermon  at  Paul's  Cross,  that  the  Queen  is  enceinte.

1554.  Nov.  11. ^  Parliament  sits  at  Westminster.

1555.  Jan.  16.  )  Among  oth.er  Acts  passed  by  it,  was  the  following

short  01. c.  new  known  as  I  &  2  Philip  and  Mary,
c.  6 — entitled  An  Acte  for  renueng  of  three  EJlatutes
made  for  the  puniJJiement  of  Herefies : — "For  th[e]exchuing  and
avoiding  of  Erronrs  and  Herefies  which  of  late  haue  ryfen  growen
and  much  encreafed  within  this  Realme,  for  that  th[e]ordinaries
haue  wanted  aucthoritee  to  precede  agaynfte  thos  that  were  infected
therwithe  :  Be  it  therfore  ordeinetl  and  enacted  by  th[e]aucthorite
of  this  prefente  Parliament,  That  the  Statute  made  in  the  fifthe  yere  of
the  Reigne  of  King  Richarde  the  Seconde,  concerning  th[e]arrefling  and
apprehencion  of  erronious  and  hereticall  Preachers,  And  one  other  Statute
made  in  the  feconde  yere  of  the  Reigne  of  King  Henrje  the  Fourthe
concerning  the  repreffing  of  Herefies  and  punifliment  of  Heretikes,  .And
alfo  one  other  Eflatute  made  in  the  feconde  yere  of  the  Reigne  of  King
Henrye  the  Fifthe,  concerning  the  fuppreffion  of  Herefie  and  Lolbnlye,
and  euery  Article,  Branche  and  Sentence  containe«l  in  the  fame  three
fcuerall  Actes  and  every  of  them,  fliall  from  the  xxth  day  of  lanuarj'e  next
coming  [1555]  be  revived  and  be  in  full  force  ftrengthe  and  effecte  to  all
Intentes  conflruccions  and  purpofes  for  ever." — Statutes  of  the  Jieaim,
iv.  244,  ed.  1 8 19.

1555.  Jan.  1.  The  date  of  John  Elder's  letter  describing  the  mar-

riage of  the  King  antl  Queen  in  the  previous  July  ;  which
letter  was  immediately  printed.
Jan.  20. The  burning  of  Protestants  becomes  lawful  on  and

after  this  day,  by  the  above  .\ct  of  Parliament.
Feb.  4. John  Rogers,  the  first  of  the  Marian  martyrs,  is  burnt

at  Smithfield.
Feb.  6. The  Moscovy Company is incorporatetl by  Ro}-al
Charter:  having  for  its E.^ecutive ; Sebastian Cal>ot,
Governor  ;  four  Consuls  ;  and  twenty-four  Assistants.
Eden  must  have  watchetl  the  proceedings  of  this  Company  with  the  deepest
interest. Indeed,  it  is  probable  that  the  entire  section,  Of  M^'sc^^^ie  and
Cathay  (which  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  »itle-page  or  original
j)lan  of  his  Compilation  ;  at  which  he  must  have  been  working  harvl,  all
through  this  winter)  was  suggestal  by  the  return  of  Richaal  Chancellor
and  the  subsequent  Incorporation  of  this  Comjxiny  ;  and  put  forth  by  him,
as  a  gooilwill  offering  towanls  their  success  and  information.
1555.  Feb. 8. Laurence  Saunders  is  burnt  at  Coventry ;  and  so  the
legalized  religious  massacre  goes  on.

\

xl

The  Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Eden.

May  21.  Is  the  latest  actual  date  in  Eden's  Compilation,  and
therefore  in  the  three  Works  here  reprinted.  It  will
be  found  towards  the  bottom  of  /.  382.  On  this  day
the  English  ships,  returning  on  their  way  home  from
Guinea,  were  in  39°  30'  N.  At  their  rate  of  progress
they  could  hardly  have  reached  England  before  the  end

July.* of  July.

Aug.*  Therefore  Section  VII.  of  Eden's  Compilation  was

written  and  printed  in  August;  and,  at  the  earliest,
his  newly  printed  Compilation  and  the  printing  of  the
entire  book could  hardly have  been finished  before

Sept.* September.

Immediately  after  which  ;  Thomas  "Watson,  Bishop  of

Lincoln,— the fellow-student of  Roger  Ascham  ; by

whom  his  Latin play of  Absalom [?  if  the  MS. is

now  at  Wilton  House]  is  exceedingly  praised  in  his  Schoolmaster,  1570

— accuses  Eden  before  Gardiner,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  for  heresy  ; of

which  his  ne^vly  printed  Compilation  would  afford  ample  evidence.

Oct.  24.  Bishop  Gardiner,  however,  dies  ;  and  Eden  somehow
escapes  punishment,  with  simply  the  loss  of  his  office  :
and  then  seems,  for  the  next  three  years  to  be  living  in
retirement  ;  his  family  steadily  increasing  all  the  while.

1556.  Jan.  10. The  printing  of  Martin  Cortes'  Brt-ue  compendio  de  la

spheray  de  la  arte  de  nauegar  is  finished  at  Seville.
Nov.  7.  Richard  Chancellor,  in  the  wreck  of  his  ship  the  Philip

and  Mary  in  Pettislego  Bay,  Scotland,  is  drowned — while
endeavouring  in  a  boat  to  save  the  Russian  Ambas-
sador's life  ;  in  accomplishing  which,  he  loses  his  own.

1557.  Feb.  27-28. Eden  probably  witnessed  the  splendid  reception

by  the  Moscovy  Company,  of  Osep  Gregorevitch
Napea,  the  first  Russian  Ambassador,  on  his  arrival
in  London,  for  the  proces  verbal  of  which,  see  Hakluyt,  Voyages,  &re.,
p.  321,  Ed.  1589.  From  the  omission  in  this  notarial  document  of  all
allusion  to  Sebastian  Cabot  ;  it  is  evident  that  he  was  but  recently  dead.
For  Eden's  account  of  his  death — the  only  one  extant — see/,  xlvii.,  col.  2.
It  probably  occurred  about  this  date  :  for  when  Eden,  about  the  Summer
of  1555,  wrote  the  heading  at/.  283,  '  that  woorthy  owlde  man  Sebaftian
Cabot e,  yet  liuynge  in  Englande,'  was  still  '  Gouernour  of  the  coompany
of  the  marchantes  of  Cathay.'

1558.  Nov.  17. 3£li{abtt{)  BurcrrTJs  to  tf)c  tfjvone.

We  now  come  to  the  two  earliest  printed  notices  of  Eden.  His  reputa-
tion had  travelled  over  the  Continent  to  the  English  Protestant  exiles
in  Switzerland  ;  and  two  of  them  thus  vaguely  and  incorrectly  refer  to  his
literary  labours,  but  give  him  the  wrong  Christian  name.

1558.  Lawrence  Humphrey  (who  died  Dean  of  Winchester,
on  I  Feb.  1590),  in  his  three  books  of  Interpretatio
lingHarum,  the  Dedication  of  which  is  dated,  Basiliae,

Feb.  3,  1559,  thus  refers  to  our  Editor-Author,  at/.  520.  '  Petrum  quoque
Martyrem  A rgleriensem  Joannes  Eden,  Cosmographus  et  Alchumista  uertit
De  insulis  nuper  itivent's. '

1558.  Bp.  Bale,  at/.  1 10  of  his  Supplement  (written  in  1558),
to  his  Scriploriutn  illustrium,  is-c.  the  printing  of  which
was  finished  in  Feb. 1559,  is- a  little  more  explicit  ;  but

still  follows  Humphrey  closely.  "Johannes  Eden,  Cosmographus  et
alchumista  ut  a  quibusdam  \i.e.  L.  Humphrey]  narratur,  ingeni.^sus  ac
peritissimus,  inter  alia  scripsit  De  nanigationibus  Porttigalensium,  Lib.  I.
[This  is  evidently  Eden's  first  publication.  Of  the  nezve  India.']  Transtulit
Petrum  Martyrem  Angleriensem.  De  insulis  7ii(per  inucntis.  Lib.  i.  [or
rather  the  Z'^'Az^/a]. Aliaque  fecit  multa. Clariut  anno  Domini. 1556."

1559.  Sept.  The  printing  of  the  Third  edition  of  Geminus'.,4«a/^;;/j',

i^c,  '  enlarged,  amplified,  and  fo  corrected  and  diligently

perufed,  that  it  maye  seeme  a  newe  worke,  and  rather  an

other  than  it  was  before,'  is  finished. Richard  Eden  is,  this  time,  the  English

reviser  ;  and  the  fresh  Dedication  to  the  new  Queen  is  evidently  written  by

bim  for  Geminus,  as  its  smooth  connected  style  abundantly  demonstrates.

1561.  Eden's  next  literary  work seems  to  have  been  the

translation  (and  probably  also,  in  part,  the  devising  of

the  numerous,  and,  for  that  time,  difficult  woodcuts  of

xl

this  work  of  Martin  Cortes'  Arte  de  Navigar,  at  the  expense  of  certain
members  of  the  Moscovy  Company  :  towards  which,  Eden  appears,  at  this
time,  to  have  stood  in  the  same  relation  as  Hakluyt  did,  fifty  years  later,  to
our  East  India  Company.  This  work  is  remarkable  not  only  for  the  num-
ber of  the  wood  engravings  (some  of  them  moveable)  of  different  mathe-
matical instruments  ;  but  also  for  a  small  outline  map  of  The  Newe  IVorlde,
or  more  properly  of  the  North  Atlantic  basin.  This  is  probably  the
earliest  printed  map  of  America  ever  produced  in  England  :  and  is
evidently  copied  from  the  original  in  Cortes'  Compendio.

To  this  translation,  Eden  prefixed  the  following  excellent  Preface  :
in  respect  to  which,  it  is  significant  to  notice  that  Sebastian  Cabot's  name
is  omitted  from  the  inscription.

To  the  ryght  worjliypfull  fyr  VVyllyam  Garrerd  R'nyght,  and
Majler  Thomas  Lodge,  Aldermen  of  the  Citie  of  London,  and
Goner nours  of  the  honorable  felo7cfliyp  or  focietie,  afwell  of  certeine
of  the  Nobilitie,  as  of  Marchauntes  aduenturers,for  the  difcouery
of  Landes,  Territories,  Ilandes,  and  Seignories  vnlcno7uen,  and  not
be  fere  their  firfl  adiienture  or  enterprife  by  Seas  or  Nauigations
comtnonly  frequented :

And  to  the  right  zaorfJiypfull  the  Confnllcs,  Affiflentes,  and  com-
minaltie  of  the  fame  focietie,  Richarde  Eden  7vyfflieth  health  and
profperitie.

Hat  foeuer  he  was  (ryght  honorable  and  worfliypfull)  that
fyrfte  beleued  that  the  frame  and  coaptacion  of  the  bodye
of  man,  with  the  functions,  offices,  and  duities  of  the  partes
and  members  of  the  fame,  knytte  together  in  a  certen
vnitie  to  a  common  miniflration,  dyd  reprefent  a  lyuely
Image  and  fimilitude  of  a  perfecte  common  wealth  :  I  thynke  that  he  was
a  man  of  no  vulgare  iudgement  or  abiecte  mynde,  but  rather  of  finguler
wyfdome  and  prudence  in  the  contemplacion  of  Diuine  and  humane
thynges.  For  he  fawe,  that  as  in  the  fmall  natiue  feede  of  all  gi-owyng  or
lyuing  thinges,  is  conteyned  the  fourme  that  bryngeth  them  to  theyr
perfection  :  fo  in  certeyne  fmall  and  obfcure  members  of  the  common
wealth,  confifleth  no  fmall  increafe  to  the  perfection  of  the  whole.
He  fawe  lykewyfe  that  herein,  as  in  the  bodye  of  man  reprefentyng
the  partes  and  members  of  the  worlde  (as  I  haue  fayde)  are  dyuers  partes
of  dyuers  and  fundrye  actions  and  motions,  greatly  dyffeiyng  in  fourme,
number,  and  quantitie,  yet  all  the  fame  to  be  fo  knytte  together,  and  fo
to  confent  in  one  vniformitie  to  the  common  profyte  of  the  whole,
that  a  greater  concorde  and  harmonye  can  not  be  imagined,  then  is
proportioned  by  the  frendly  vnitie  of  dyuers  and  contrarye.  He  fawe  lyke-
wyfe in  the  fame,  fuch  a  mutuall  compaffion  of  parte  to  parte,  and  member
to  member,  by  one  common  fence  exiflent  in  them  all,  that  no  one  part  or
member  can  feele  eyther  ioye  or  payne,  but  that  in  maner  all  the  other
are  parttakers  therof  more  or  leffe,  yf  they  be  lyuely  members,  and  not
wythered  or  otherwyfe  vnfenfate  by  reafon  of  dead  fleflie,  which  oncly
by  cutty ng  and  burning  ought  to  be  deuyded  from  the  founde  and
whole.  But  as  in  man  (whom  Plato  calleth  the  leffe  world)  the
vigour  and  agilitie  of  the  immortall  foule  and  mynde,  neuer  ceaffeth
from  continuall  mouyng,  but  is  euer  exercyfed  in  excogitacions  and  inuen-
tions  of  great  thinges  (herein  refemblyng  God,  whofe  caracte  it  beareth)
by  prouidence  forefeing,  and  by  intelligence  vnderflandyng  and  deuyfyng
what  is  to  be  done,  and  what  to  be  efchewed,  doth  immediatly  moue  and
rayfe  vp  the  faculties,  powres,  and  members  of  the  body  to  execute  the
fame  :  Euen  fo  in  the  greater  worlde,  the  prouidence  of  God,  and  vniuerf-
all  counfayle  and  confent  of  men,  hath  elected  and  appoynted  certen  prin-
cipall  men,  to  beare  lyke  rule  and  auctoritie  in  the  bodye  of  the  common
wealth,  as  hath  the  intellectiue  foule  in  the  members  of  our  bodye  to  moue
and  commaunde  *.he  fame.  To  Princes  therefore  counfaylours,  rulers,
gouernours  and  magiflrates,  as  to  the  moft  intellectiue  and  fenfitiue  partes
of  the  focietie  of  men,  hath  God  and  nature  geuen  preeminence  and  gouern-
aunce  of  the  common  wealth,  that  by  theyr  prouidence,  wyfdome,  and  ayde,
it  may  vniuerfally  floryfli,  not  onely  by  iufle  adminiflration  of  good  lawes,
with  due  correction  of  malefactours,  but  alfo  by  lyberall  rewardyng  of
fuche  as  haue  well  deferued  :  and  efpecially  by  maintenaunce  of  fuche  artes
and  fciences,  as  the  common  wealth  can  not  well  be  without.  And  to
draw  nearer  to  the  applyinge  of  my  fimilitude  :  I  faye,  that  whatfoeuer
vertue,  whatfoeuer  arte,  or  the  ingenious  indufliy  of  men  hath  to  this  day
inuented,  all  the  fame  is  to  be  imputed  to  the  bcneuolence  and  liberalitie

The  Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Eden.

xli

of  fuche  as  haue  honourablye  maintayned  and  freelye  rewarded  the  trauay-
les,  paynes,  and  charges  of  them  that  haue  fpente  theyr  lyues,  goodcs,  and
wyttes  (as  many  haue  done)  in  the  inuentions  of  neceffarye  and  profytable
artes  and  fciences.  For  euen  as  holfome  and  temperate  ayre  with  fcafon-
able  wether  and  fauorable  influence  of  the  heauens  and  pianettes,  caufeth
fruitefulnes  on  the  earth,  and  contrary  wyfe,  barenneffe  by  the  contrarye :  Euen
fo  the  fauour  of  Princes  and  Magiftrates  noryfheth,  augmenteth,  and  amp-
lyfyeth  all  artes  and  fciences  by  liberalitie,  and  extynguyflieth  the  fame
by  miferable  couetoufnes  and  parcimonie.  And  althoughe  in  fome  men  of
rare  and  noble  nature,  the  defyre  of  honour  and  fame  onely  for  vertues
fake,  and  fludy  toward  theyr  countrye  and  common  wealth,  hath  moued
them  in  maner  to  theyr  owne  vndoyng  through  theyr  greate  loffe  and
hynderaunce,  to  fette  foorth  and  inuent  diuers  thynges  for  the  commoditie
of  the  common  wealth  and  other,  rather  then  for  theyr  owne :  yet  vndoubt-
edly,  who  fo  wel  confidereth  and  indifferently  wayeth  that  I  haue  fayde,
flial  fynde  and  fee  by  daylye  experience,  that  in  maner  onely  munificence,
liberalitie,  and  rewarde,  or  the  hope  thereof,  geueth  fpurres  to  them  that
attempte  great  and  vertuous  enterprifes,  as  I  coulde  more  largely  proue  by
fo  many  teftimonies  of  Hyftories,  both  holy  and  prophane,  that  the  rehear-
fall  therof  flioulde  be  but  tedious  and  not  greatelye  neceffarye  for  my
purpofe,  efpecially  wrytyng  vnto  your  honoures  and  worfliyps,  of  whofe
munificence  and  liberalitie,  I  haue  had  great  experience,  bothe  in  my  felfe
and  others,  who  by  your  ayde  and  mainteynaunce  haue  attempted  and  per-
fourmed  many  goodly  inuentions,  viages,  nauigations  and  difcoueries  of
landes  and  Seas  heretofore  vnknowen.  Wherein,  what  great  charges  you
haue  fufteyned,  and  howe  lyberall  and  conftant  you  haue  ben  in  furtherynge
the  fame,  doth  well  declare  that  hyther  to  you  are  rather  lofers  than  gayners
therby.  The  whiche  thyng  doubtelefie  is  the  more  to  your  commendation,
in  that  it  maye  hereby  appeare  that  you  haue  attempted  the  fame  rather
for  knowledge  and  vertues  fake,  then  for  couetoufnes  of  gaynes  :  as  is
furthermore  well  knowen  by  your  fyrfte  viages  of  difcouerye  attempted  to
Cathaye  by  the  Northeafl  feas,  vpon  certen  lofie  and  detriment,  for  vncer-
teyne  hope  eyther  of  gajaies,  or  of  any  fuch  way  to  be  founde,  otherwyfe
then  by  certen  lykely  coniectures  :  not  much  vnlyke  to  the  fliynyng  flowres
of  Marchafites,  which  outwardly  appearyng  in  minerall  mountaynes,  are
fignes  and  token  wherby  is  coniectured  what  metal  is  conteyned  therein,
and  whether  the  fame  is  to  be  folowed  or  not.  And  although  it  fometyme
fo  chaunce  that  fuch  fignes  are  fayleable,  fliewyng  more  in  appearaunce
then  they  conteyne  in  fubflaunce :  yet  are  not  fuch  fignes  tokens,  or  fliewes
to  be  contemned,  but  rather  eameflly  to  be  folowed,  forafmuch  as  it  hath
ben  often  proued  and  founde  by  experience,  that  by  folowyng  the  fame,
haue  ben  founde  great  and  riche  mynes  of  metalles  :  as  Gcorgius  Agrkola
in  his  bookes  De  rebus  metallicis,  doth  largely  declare  and  proue  by  manye
examples.  But  to  wryte  at  large  what  greate  thynges  haue  proceaded  of
fmall  and  obfcure  begynninges,  and  in  maner  mere  coniectures  :  it  woulde
fo  farre  exceade  the  meafure  of  an  Epiftle  or  Preface,  that  it  woulde  rather
mcreafe  to  the  iufl  quantitie  of  a  booke.  For  in  maner  all  the  late  dif-
coueries both  of  the  Spanyardes  and  Portugales,  had  theyr  begynnyng  of
fuch  fmall  coniectures,  with  vncerteyne  hope  (as  it  were  preter fpem  fub  fpe)
vntyll  God  and  good  happe,  by  the  conftant  trauayle  and  valiaunt  mynde
of  fuch  as  fyrfl  attempted  the  fame,  gaue  them  to  enioye  that  they  hoped
for.  But  whatfoeuer  they  haue  obteyned  and  do  enioy,  this  may  I  boldly
fay  in  your  behalf  (right  honorable  and  worfhipfull)  that  there  hath  not
lacked  in  you  eyther  the  lyke  or  greater  promptnefle  of  mynde,  forwardnes
in  attemptyng,  magnificence  in  expences,  and  liberall  in  rewardes.  For
befyde  the  great  charges  and  loffes  that  you  haue  ben  at  otherwyfe,  what
fiiould  I  fpeake  of  the  great  gyftes  that  you  haue  fente  to  the  Emperour  of
Ruffia?  What  of  your  lafl  chargeable  vyage  of  difcouerye  among  the
innumerable  Rockes,  Ilandes,  and  moueable  mountaynes  of  Ice  in  the
frofen  fea,  by  innumerable  landes  and  Ilandes  vnknowen  to  the  Antiques,
euen  vnder  and  farre  within  and  beyonde  the  circle  Artike,  where  they
thought  that  no  lyuynge  creature  coulde  drawe  breath  or  Hue  for  extreme
colde  :  wheras  neuertheleffe  the  fame  hath  ben  by  you  difcouercd  euen  vnto
the  myghtye  ryuer  of  Ob,  that  falleth  into  the  Scithian  Ocean,  or  Oceanus
I/yperborms,  not  farr  from  the  mountaynes  called  Hypcrborei,  fo  named
becaufe  they  are  fituate  almoft  vnder  the  North  pole,  and  thought  therfore
to  be  inacceffable.  A  vyage  doubtleffe  of  fuch  difficultie  and  in  maner
impoflibilitie,  that  confyderyng  the  infinite  daungiours  therof  (as  I  haue
learned  by  t]i[e]information  of  Steuen  a  Burrough,  that  was  then  the  chiefe

Pilote  of  the  fame  vyage)  it  may  feme  impolTible  that  they  fhoulde  euer
haue  efcaped,  excepte  the  myghtye  hande  of  God,  by  the  experte  fkylful-
neffe  of  fo  excellent  a  Pilot,  had  delyuercd  them  from  thofe  daungers.
And  although  in  dede  (as  religion  byndeth  vs)  it  is  conuenient  in  all
thynges  to  gcue  all  honour,  gIor)'e  and  thankes  to  God,  yet  are  we  not
thereby  "cflrayned  to  be  thankfull  to  fuch  men,  as  by  theyr  arte,  ingeniouf-
nes,  trauayle,  and  diligence,  haue  deferued  both  iufte  commendation  and
large  rewarde.  And  therfore  referryng  the  rewarde  to  you  (rj-ght  honorable
and  worfhypfull,  to  whom  it  apperteyneth)  yf  I  fhould  not  here  geue  hym
at  the  leafte  fuche  commendation,  as  in  my  iudgement  he  hath  well  deferued,
I  myght  feme  both  to  defraude  hym  of  his  worthye  defertes,  and  alfo  to
forgette  the  frendfhyp  and  good  wyll  I  beare  hym,  onely  for  his  vertues
and  excellencie  in  his  profeffion.  For  certeynly  when  I  confider  how
indigent  and  deflitute  this  Realm  is  of  excellent  and  expert  Pilottes,  I  can
do  no  lefle  of  confcience,  then  in  refpect  of  your  owne  commoditie,  yea
rather  for  the  commoditie  of  the  Queenes  Maiellie  and  the  whole  Realme,
to  exhort  you  and  put  you  in  remembraunce  (although  I  may  herein  feme
to  put  the  fpurres  to  a  nmnyng  horfe,  as  faith  the  Prouerbe)  fo  to  regard
hym  and  efleme  hym  and  his  faythfuU,  true,  and  painefull  feruice  towarde
you,  that  he  maye  thereby  be  further  encouraged,  and  not  difcouraged,
eyther  for  lacke  of  maintenaunce,  or  other  wyfe  by  the  iniurious  aflauites
of  fuch  his  enemies,  as  onely  his  vertues  and  excellencie  haue  moued  to
beare  hym  difpleafure,  as  enuye  doth  euer  folowe  vertue,  as  faith  the
Latine  Prouerbe,  Virtuti  comes  imiidia.  And  howe  true  a  fentence  this  is,
is  well  verified  by  the  faying  of  a  certayne  Philofopher  (whofe  name  I  do
not  remember)  who  hearynge  one  va}Tiely  reioyce  that  he  had  no  enemies,
aunfwered  that  that  was  a  token  he  hadde  done  lyttle  good  :  Mean}-ng
thereby  (as  dayly  experience  proueth)  that  yf  he  had  excelled  in  any  vertue,
he  coulde  not  haue  lacked  fome  enemies.  And  hau}Tig  here  touched  to
fpeake  of  enuye,  I  remember  that  -when  I  was  a  yonge  fcoler,  I  haue  read
in  the  Poet  Hefwdus  of  two  kyndes  of  enuye,  whereof  the  one  is  called
Inuidia,  and  the  other  Aemulatio,  which  is  more  tollerable  then  the  fyrfle,
for  that  it  is  ioyned  with  fome  vertue,  and  enuyeth  that  anye  Ihoulde  e.xcell
hym  in  any  excellent  qualitie  that  he  profelfeth.  But  forafmuch  as  this
enuy  of  emulation  proceadeth  of  fome  finguler  vertue  of  them  that  are  fo
maliced,  they  maye  herein  reioyce,  that  they  fhall  euer  haue  a  hundreth
frendes  for  one  enemie  :  yea  and  although  they  hadde  none,  yet  is  vertue
a  rewarde  to  it  felfe,  and  to  be  embrafed  for  it  felfe  onelye,  as  the  Philo-
fophers  aftirme.  What  then  (hall  we  fay  to  fuch,  as  forgettyng  this  rewarde
of  vertue,  do  not  onely  [not]  fauour,  but  rather  hynder  the  preferment  and
mayntenaunce  of  fuch  experte  men,  more  eflemjTig  certaj-ne  Fyfiiermen
that  go  a  trawlyng  for  fyflie  in  Catches  or  mongers,  and  dradgies  for  Oyflers
about  the  fandes,  betwene  the  South  furlande  and  Wynterton  nefle,  and  the
fandes  about  Temmes  mouth,  then  they  do  fuche  excellent  Pylotes  as  are
able  without  any  Rutter  or  Carde  of  Nauigation,  not  onlye  to  attempte
longe  and  farre  viages,  but  alfo  to  difcouer  vnknowen  landes  and  Ilandes,
as  haue  doone  of  late  yeares  many  excellent  men,  to  the  great  honour  and
enrychyng  of  their  Prj'nce  and  countrye.  But  as  touching  Steuen  A  Bur-
rough,  the  chiefe  Pylote  of  your  viagies  of  difcouery,  it  may  hereby  well
appeare  yat  he  is  neyther  malicious  nor  enuious  of  his  arte  and  fcience,  in
that  he  defireth  ye  fame  for  the  common  profite  to  be  commen  to  al  men  :
And  for  the  fame  intent  was  the  fyrfl  that  moued  certen  worfhj-pfull  of  your
company,  as  Syr  William  Garrerd,  Maifter  William  Mericke,  Maifter  Blafe
Sanders,  and  Maifler  Edwarde  Cafllen,  to  haue  this  worke  tranflated  into
the  Englifli  tongue.  Who  of  their  own  good  nature  fauourjng  al  vertuous
fludies  and  the  profeffours  of  the  fame,  did  fone  incline  to  his  honed  requeft
herein  :  and  therewith  not  only  defired  me,  jut  alfo  with  liberall  rewanie
enterteined  me,  to  take  in  hande  the  tranflation.  Whiche  being  nowe
finiflied  as  w'ell  as  my  poore  learn yng  may  perfourme,  I  defyre  your  honours
and  worfliyppes,  to  accepte  in  as  good  parte  as  I  haue  ment  herein  to
gratifie  you,  and  doe  fuche  feruice  as  my  abilitie  mav  fuffice.  Nowe  ther-
fore this  worke  of  the  art  of  Nauigation,  beyng  publyflied  in  our  \-uIgar
tongue,  you  may  be  allured  to  haue  more  (lore  of  Ikylful  Pilotes.  Pilotes
(I  faie)  not  Pirottes,  Rulers,  not  Rouers,  but  fuche  as  by  their  honeft
behauour  and  conditions  ioyned  with  arte  and  experience,  may  doe  you
honefl  and  trae  feruice  :  whiche  is  not  to  be  looked  for  of  fuche  as  beynge
deflitute  as  well  of  the  feare  of  God  as  of  all  moral  vertues,  fuperbounde  in
all  notorious  vyces,  accoumpting  defperatnelTe  for  boldnelTe,  ralhnelTe  for
hardiucfTe,  impudencie  for  (loutucfle,  and  cmeltie  for  manhod. What  other

xlii

The  Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Eden.

thyug  (I  faye)  is  to  bee  looked  for  of  fuche,  then  of  fuche  trees  fuch  fraites,
Et  malt  cortii  malum  oiiiiin.  But  for  as  muche  as  thcfe  haue  no  place
appointed  them  in  the  bodie  of  our  common  wealth,  whiche  we  haue  here
before  compared  to  the  members  of  the  bodie  of  man  :  therefore  are  they
no  otherwyfe  to  be  eflemed  then  as  excrementcs  of  the  bodye,  to  whom
nature  hath  appointed  no  place  in  the  fame,  but  laboureth  continuallye  to
caft  them  forth  dyucrs  wayes,  leafte  by  theyr  filthyneffe  they  fliould  infectc
the  other  members,  euen  as  the  pompc  of  the  fliyppe  if  it  be  not  auoyded,
is  noyous  to  the  fliippe  and  all  that  are  therein.  But  the  wyfe  and  honeft
Pylot,  fyrfl  hauyng  before  hii  eyes  the  feare  of  God,  and  puttyng  his  chief
trufl  in  hym,  fliall  fecondarely  tnifl  to  his  arte  and  fcience,  without  any
fuche  vayne  obferuations  as  the  fupertlitious  Ilorofcopers  (Allrologiers  I
nieanc,  and  not  Aflronomei-s)  are  accuflomed  to  vfe  in  the  elections  of
houres,  tymes,  and  daycs,  by  contlellations  and  afnectes  of  the  Starres  and
Planetes,  as  many  fonde  menne  haue  doone,  thynkynge  thereby  to  haue
efcaped  fuche  daungers,  as  they  haue  thereby  the  rather  fallen  into,  throughe
contempte  of  arte  and  fcience  by  folyflie  confidence  in  fuperflitious  Aflro-
logie  :  which  for  the  vanitie  and  vncertaintie  thereof,  the  ryght  wordiyp-
fuU  and  of  fmgular  leamynge  in  all  fciences,  Syr  Thomas  Smyth,  in  my
tynie  the  floure  of  the  Vniuerfitie  of  Cambridge,  and  fometyme  my  Tutor,
was  accuflomed  to  call  lugoiiofij/lmain  artem  vicntiendi.  (That  is)  the  mode
ingenious  arte  of  lyinge.  Omitting  therefore  the  fuperflitious  and  phanta-
flicall  obferuations  of  the  iudicials  of  Aflrologie,  it  flialbe  better  and  more
nccelTary  for  all  Pylotes  that  defyre  to  excelle  in  theyr  profeffion,  to  learne
and  obferue  the  principles  of  thys  booke,  whereby  they  may  haue  fuche
knowledge  of  the  Sphere,  as  may  inftructe  them  the  makynge  and  vfe  of
dyuers  goodly  Aftronomicall  inflrumentes  perteyninge  to  the  arte  of  Naui-
gation,  by  knowledge  of  the  mouynges  of  the  Sunne  and  Moone  in  their
Spheres,  and  the  other  Planetes  and  fixte  Starres  :  thereby  to  attayne  to
the  true  knowledge  of  houres,  tymes  and  tydes,  with  the  variation  of  the
Compaffe,  and  many  other  goodly  naturall  obferuations  of  weathers,
tempefles,  and  calmes,  by  certain  infaileable  fygnes  and  tokens  of  the  fame,
very  ncceffary  to  be  obferued.  And  this  by  the  true  principles  of  Aflro-
nomie  and  not  of  Aflrologie.  And  this  is  the  true  Aflronomie  wherof
the  Diuine  Philofopher  Plato  hathe  wrytten  fo  diuine  a  fentence,  that
I  haue  thoughte  the  fame  here  worthy  to  be  alleaged,  that  by  the  auctho-
rilie  of  fo  famous  an  aucthcur,  we  maye  knowe  what  is  true  Aflronomie,
with  the  vfe  and  commoditie  therof.  Therfore  in  his  booke  intituled
Timeiis  vel  De  A'alura,  thefe  are  his  wordes.  Rerum  aiitem  optwiai-um
coi^nitioium,  nobis  ocidi  attulciunt.  N^atn  hccc  qucc  de  miindo  difputantur,
nunquam  inucnta  fuiffent,  fi  neque  fydera,  neque  Sol,  ncque  Coelum  fufpici
potuiffd.  Co'^itilio  vera  diei  ac  noctis,  ab  ociilis  orta,  fecit  vt  dimenfione  quadciii,
vicnfium  annoritviqiie  ambitus  metireiina;  tempus  cognofceremus,  ac  vniuerfcc
natures  ordincm  fcrutaremur.  Quibus  ex  rebus,  philofophiam  adeptifumus.
That  is  to  faye.  Our  eyes  haue  brought  vnto  vs  the  knowledge  of  mofle
excellent  thinges.  For  what  fo  euer  is  difputed  of  the  vvorkle,  had  neuer
bene  inuented,  yf  neither  the  Starres,  neither  the  Sunne,  neither  heauen,
coukle  haue  bene  fecne.  For  the  knowledge  of  the  daye  and  nyght,
takyng  beginning  at  ye  eyes,  caufed  vs  as  it  were  by  certen  limites  and
boundes  to  meafure  the  circuites  of  monethes  and  yeares,  wherby  we  came
to  the  knowledge  of  tymes  and  the  order  of  vniuerfall  nature.  And  hereby
alfo  we  obteyned  the  knowledge  of  Philofophie.  &c.  And  thus  by  the
aucthoritie  of  Diuine  Plato  (whome  for  hys  excellencie  Cicero  called  Deum
Philofophoruin  (that  is)  the  God  of  Philofophers)  we  maye  vnderflande  that
the  true  Aflronomie,  is  the  perfecle  knowledge  of  the  miraculous  niouinges
of  ye  Planetes,  Starres,  and  heauens  (and  efpecially  of  the  Sunne  and
Moone)  whereby  is  caufed  tlie  varietie  of  times  and  dyuerfitie  of  all  natu-
rall thynges,  by  naturall  caufes  :  as  by  the  qualities  of  Elementes,  as  hoate,
colde,  moyfle  and  drye,  whyche  are  augmented  or  dymynythed  by  the  more
or  leffe  influence  of  thefe  twoo  Luminaries,  as  they  comme  nearer  vnto  vs
at  fome  tymes,  or  depart  further  from  vs  at  other  tymes,  with  diuers  motions
in  diuers  climates  whiche  caufeth  not  onely  varietie  of  tymes  in  fundry
climates,  but  alfo  the  varietie  of  diuers  complexions,  formes,  and  difpofi-
tions  of  all  creatures  vnder  the  face  of  heauen,  none  other  accidentall  con-
tyngent,  voluntarie  or  violent  caufe  to  the  contrarie  notwithflandinge.
And  this  is  it  that  Plato  meaneth  by  thofe  wordes.  Vt  tempus  cognofceremus
ac  viiiueiftr  naturcc  ordincm,  &^c.  That  is,  to  knowe  the  tymes  and  vniuer-
fall order  of  nature.  And  doubtleffe,  who  fo  well  confidereth  the  maruei-
lous  cffcctes  that  are  caufed,  efpecially  by  the  variable  mouing  of  the  Sunne

in  the  Zodiac,  mufl  needes  acknowledge  it  to  be  the  chiefe  inflrument  and
meane  that  God  vfeth  in  the  generation,  perferuation,  and  alteration  of  all
creatures  that  are  conteyned  in  the  worlde  of  generation  and  corruption.
And  for  this  confideration,  certen  of  the  auncient  Philofophers  called  it  the
foule  of  the  worlde  :  Other  the  eye,  and  other  alfo  the  heart  of  the  worlde.
Plato  alfo  affirmeth  that  the  foule  of  the  worlde  is  in  the  Sunne  :  And  that
all  other  liuing  thynges,  receyue  lyfe  from  hence.  And  hereof  commeth
the  fayinge  of  the  Philofopher,  Sol  et  homo  gencrant  homincm  :  (that  is)  the
Sunne  and  man,  begette  man.  And  therefore  (as  wryteth  Alarciinis
Ficinus)  of  all  Idolaters  they  are  mod  tollerable  that  honour  the  Sunne  for
God.  The  whiche  although  it  bee  not,  yet  vndoubtcdlye  are  his  effectes
fo  greate  and  wonderful!  in  this  inferiour  worlde,  that  it  may  feme  in  maner
to  be  Gods  Viceregent,  Lieftenant  and  Viceroy  in  al  the  woorkes  of  nature,
excepte  where  and  when  it  pleafeth  hym  in  any  thyng  myraculouflye,
otherwyfe  then  by  the  common  order  and  courfe  of  nature,  to  commaunde
the  contrarie.

And  yf  it  may  not  be  tedious  vnto  you  (ryght  honorable  and  worfliypfull)
it  flialbe  a  pleafure  vnto  me,  for  the  better  declaracion  hereof,  to  make  a
briefe  difcourfe  of  the'  marueilous  and  (Iraunge  effectes  that  are  caufed  by
the  Sunne  :  whiche  perhappes  fewe  haue  done,  otherwyfe  then  difpcarfedly
here  and  there,  as  occafion  hath  ferued.  Fyrfl  therfore  let  vs  confider  what
it  hath  done  ouer  the  Equinoctiall  line,  and  vnder  both  the  poles  at  one
inflant,  yet  diuerfely  and  contrarely  the  one  to  the  other.  For  fo  hath  the
infinite  wyfedome  of  the  greate  God  of  nature,  the  fupreme  Architecture  of
the  vniuerfall  worlde,  difpofcd  all  thynges  in  fuch  perfecte  order,  that  to
them  that  are  vnder  the  Equinoctial!,  and  haue  theyr  Horizon  palTyng  by
the  two  Poles,  the  daye  is  of  xii.  houres  and  the  nyght  as  much,  and  theyr
yeare  alfo  is  deuyded  into.  xii.  monethes  :  But  they  that  dwell  iufl  and
perpendiculerly  vnder  our  pole,  and  that  haue  their  Horizon  paffyng  ouer
the  fayde  line,  haue  the  daye  of  fyxe  monethes.  That  is  to  faye  :  begyn-
nyng  from  the  tenth  daye  of  Marche,  when  the  Sunne  commeth  ouer  the
fayde  Horizon,  whyle  it  returne  to  palTe  vnder  the  fame  at  the  tenth  of
September.  And  contrarywyfe  one  nyght  of  fyxe  monethes  haue  th[e]
inhabitauntes  vnder  the  Pole  Antartyke  :  whofe  yeare  (that  is  to  faye,  all
the  courfe  that  the  Sunne  maketh  by  the.  xii.  fignes  of  the  Zodiac)  is
accomplyfflied  in  one  daye  and  one  nyght.  A  thyng  doubtleffe  mofle
wonderful!  and  marueylous.  l.ykewyfe,  when  we  haue  Sommer,  they  that
are  vnder  our  Pole  haue  the  daye  of  fyxe  monethes,  and  they  of  the
oppofite  or  contrary  Pole,  haue  theyr  nyght  of  the  fame  length.  Agayne,
when  it  is  wynter  with  vs,  then  vnder  our  Pole  is  the  nyght  of  the  fayde
fyxe  monethes  :  and  vnder  the  oppofite  Pole,  is  the  day  of  the  fame  length.
So  that  as  it  were  courfe  by  courfe,  when  we  haue  the  night,  they  haue
the  day  :  And  contrarywyfe,  when  we  haue  the  day,  they  haue  tlie  night.
The  which  although  it  be  fo  longe  and  of  fo  great  fpace  of  tyme,  yet  is  it
not  continuallye  obfcured  wdth  darkeneffe.  For  the  Sunne  maketh  his
courfe  in  fuch  order,  that  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  that  parte,  lyue  not  durynge
that  tyme  altogether  in  darkeneffes,  as  Moles  lyue  vnder  the  grounde,  but
as  other  creatures  that  lyue  vpon  the  globe  and  face  of  the  earth,  they  haue
fuche  lyglit  as  maye  fuffice  to  fuflayne  and  mayntayne  tlieyr  lyfe.  For  the
bodye  of  the  Sunne  declineth  no  more  eyther  beneath  tlie  Equinoctiall  line,
eyther  aboue  the  fame  line  (which  is  the  Horizon  to  both  the  Poles)  than.
23.  degrees  :  That  is  to  faye,  no  lower  or  hygher  then  the  Tropikes,  wliiche
are  no  more  then  23.  degrees  or  there  about  from  the  fayde  Equinoctiall
that  is  theyr  Horizon,  as  is  aforefayde.  And  yet  in  thefe  23.  degrees  he
maketh  not  his  courfe  by  the  oppofite  Diameter,  but  goeth  continually
rounde  about  in  circuite  :  fo  that  his  beames  reuerberatyng  heauen,  ropre-
fente  fuche  a  maner  of  lyght,  as  we  haue  in  Sommer  two  lioures  before  the
Sunne  ryfe.  And  this  example  which  we  haue  talcen  of  the  diuerfitie  of
the  Horizons  oi  the  Equinoctiall  and  vnder  the  two  Poles,  is  to  demonflrate
the  marueylous  effecte  that  the  Sunne  maketh  departyng  ffrom  the.  xii.
houres  of  the  Equinoctiall  (that  is  to  fay,  from  Aries  to  Libra)  and  commyng
by  lyttle  and  lyttle,  illuminatyng  the  globe  of  the  earth,  and  fo  reducejTig  the
yere  of  xii.  monethes,  into  one  onely  day  and  one  n)'ght,  as  is  fayde  before.
Vnder  the  infinite  varietie  of  the  which  courfe,  fometyme  with  k-ng  dayes
and  fometyme  with  fliorte,  all  the  inhabitauntes  of  the  worlde  are  fourmed
and  difpofed  of  fuche  complexion  and  flrength  of  body,  that  euery  of  them
are  proportionate  to  the  Climate  affigncd  vnto  them,  be  it  hotte  or  colde  :
And  may  dwel  and  abyde  there,  as  in  theyr  natural  place  and  temperament,
not  lamentyng  or  defyryng  to  dwel!  clfwhere,  fo  grete  a  louc  refleih  in

The  Life  and  Labours  oi-  Richard  Eden.

xliii

them  to  their  natiue  fituation. But  not  to  departe  from  the  vyage  whiche
(lie  Sunne  maketh  in  one  whole  yearc,  as  fometymc  approchyng  neare  vnto
vs,  and  fometynie  dcpartyng  from  vs. I  faye  that  at  one  felfe  fame  tyme
in  dyuers  partes  vpon  the  rounde  globe  of  the  earth,  it  caufeth  the  Spryng,
Sommer,  Autumne,  and  Wynter. And  neuertheleffe  at  the  fame  inftant
and  punct  of  time  it  maketh  day  and  high  noone  in  one  place,  and  nyght  and
mydnyght  on  the  oppofite  part. The  which  varietie  although  it  appeare
incomprehenfible  to  the  flenderneffe  of  our  wyttes,  yet  beholdynge  the  fame
with  the  eyes  of  vnderflandyng,  and  therwith  confideryng  the  vneftimable
mouyng  that  the  Sunne  maketh  continually,  we  fliall  fynde  it  to  be  true,
hauyng  refpecte  to  the  dyuers  fituations  of  the  earth,  as  it  is  continuallye
illuminate  more  or  leffe  by  the  Sunne. And  this  varietie  is  made  with  fuch
a  Harmonye  and  confonancie,  and  fuch  a  lawe  perpetuall  and  immutable,
that  yf  any  poynt  or  pricke  therof  flioulde  fayle,  it  is  to  be  doubted  leafl  the
elementes  fliould  be  confounded  together,  and  returne  to  their  fyrfl  Chaos.
And  to  haue  fayde  thus  muche  of  the  wonderfull  effectes  of  the  courfe  of
the  Sunne,  it  maye  fuffice  for  an  example  to  proue  howe  neceffary  a  thyng
it  is,  not  onlye  for  all  Pilottes  and  Sea  men  to  haue  the  knowledge  hereof,
but  alfo  for  all  other  such  as  (hall  attempt  great  and  farre  viagies  in  vnknowen
landes  and  flraunge  countryes,  as  dyd  of  late  mafler  Jenkynfon  a  worthye
gentleman,  fette  foorth  by  you  and  mainteyned  at  your  charges,  more  lyke
an  Ambaffatoure  fente  from  anye  Prince  or  Emperour,  then  from  a  com-
panye  of  marchaunt  men. Wherein,  what  commendation  you  haue  defer-
ued,  to  the  encreafe  of  your  perpetual  fame  and  honour,  I  referre  it  to  that
I  haue  fayde  before. And  as  touching  mailer  lenkynfon,  what  trauayles,
paynes,  and  daungers  he  hath  fufteyned,  and  hardely  efcaped,  and  what
diligence  and  arte  he  hath  vfed  in  the  fearching  of  ftraunge  countryes,  and
in  the  defcription  of  thofe  his  viages,  it  were  but  in  vayne  for  me  to  wryte
much  vnto  you,  vnto  whom  the  fame  is  better  knowen  then  to  me. And
therfore to conclude, with  rendring  iuft  commendations  both  vnto  you
and  him,  I  can  fay  no  more,  but  as  Plato  wryteth  in  his  booke  De  Legibus.
Deceits  cjl  eos  dues  laudibus  oriiare,  qui  corporis  vel  animi  viribus,  res  arduas
preclara/que  gefserunt,  et  legibus  libcnter  paruerunt. That  is  to  fay  :  It  is
decent  to  commende  thofe  Citifens  that  by  theyr  induftry  of  bodye  or
mynde,  haue  done  greate  affayres,  and  haue  willingly  obeyed  good  lawes.
And  thus  eftfones  defyryng  your  Honours  and  Worfhyppes  to  accept
in  good  parte  whatfoeuer  I  haue  faide  of  good  wyll  and  affection
towarde  you  and  your  proceadynges,  and  with  your  fliielde
of  luftice  and  auctoritie,  to  defende  me  agaynfte  the
affaultes  of  fuch  as  are  enemies  to  vertue,  and  cap-
tious of  other  mens  doinges:  IreRe  at  yourcom-
maundement  to  the  vttermoR  of  my  powre,
to  do  you  what  feruice I maye.

1562.  March  1.  John  Taisnier,  Doctor  of  Laws  \b.  at  Ath,  in  Brabant],
a  writer  in  astrology  and  chiromancy,  publishes  at
Cologne  a  tract,  De  natura  magnetis  et  ejus  effectibus.

Graesse,  in  his  Tresor,  states  that  it  is  a  gross  plagiary  from  Pellegrine

de  Maricourt's  De  Magnete,  printed  in  August  1558.

1562.  The  Civil  Wars  in  France  begin  by  the  unpremeditated

massacre  of  Hugenots  at  Vassy  by  the  Duke  of  Guise.

1562.  Eden's wife is apparently dead, and he himself

residing  in  the  house  of  a  friend  ;  when  the  following

Aug.  1. letter  was  written. It  is  manifestly  addressed  to  Sir  W.

Cecil,  who  was  brother-in-law  to  Sir  John  Chcke. Both

the  writer  and  the  Secretary  of  State  were  now  about  forty-two  years  of  age.

Apparently  Eden  was  to  receive  ^^20  [  =  ;^I50  now]  as  an  earnest  penny

for  a  translation  of  Pliny  into  English.

» HE  only  fearcher  of  mens  hartes  the  etemall  god  I  take  to
wytneffe  (right  Honorable)  that  neuer  the  greefesof  aduerfe
fortune  (wherof  I  haue  had  my  parte),  dyd  fo  muche  proflrate
my  mynde  and  pearce  my  harte  with  forowes,  as  the  vnder-
ftonding  of  your  honours  fauour  and  goodneffe  towarde  me  in
your  lately  erneft  travaile  in  my  behalfe  (as  I  was  informed  by  the  Mafter  of
Savie)  hathe  reioifed  me  and  revived  my  Difcouragied  fpirites,  heretofore  no
leffe  languyffhed  for  iacke  of  fuche  a  Patrone,  then  nowe  encouragied  by  the
fauoure  of  fuche  a  Macenas,  as  I  haue  iufl  caufe  to  name  your  honoure,  fyth
only  the  refpecte  of  fuche  vertues  as  it  hathe  pleafed  you  to  thinke  commend
able  in  me,  hath  moved  your  Honour  not  only  in  maner  to  fceme  carcfull  for

me  howe  I  maye  hereafter  with  quietneffe  fpende  my  tyme  in  ftudie  (as  is  my
mofl  defire)  but  alfo  to  be  more  emefl  in  folowing  the  fame,  then  I  might
without  prefumplion  demaunde,  and  muche  leffe  without  defertes  dequire.
As  touchinge  the  which  matter  (right  Honorable)  as  it  was  no  parte  of  my
diuife,  but  fuche  as  the  Mafler  of  Savoy  had  then  in  hande  as  I  fuppofe  no
leffe  to  pleafure  hym  felfe  and  his  frende  then  for  xx''  therof  to  be  lotted
to  me  for  an  eamefl  penye  to  begynne  the  booke  (as  he  faith),  Even  fo
am  I  right  forie  that  for  fo  fmaule  a  matter,  and  not  fo  favorable  a  fute  as
I  wolde  have  wyffhed,  not  only  your  Honour  hathe  taken  fuche  paynes,
but  that  alfo  fuche  contention  is  ryfen  therof  betwene  the  Mafler  of  Sanoy
and  Mafler  Baptifl  of  the  privie  chamber,  that  by  reafon  therof  the  pardon
being  fleyed  be  your  Honour,  the  younge  gentleman  his  kynfman  (as  he
hathe  informed  me)  is  in  Daungiour  of  his  lyfe.  But  vnder  your  honours
fauour  to  fpeake  playnelye  as  I  thinke,  I  fuppofe  that  here  AUquid  laM
quod  7ion  apparel,  ffor  as  this  fute  for  dyuers  confyderations  at  the  firfl
dyd  not  greatly  like  me,  yet  perceauing  his  emeflnelTe  therin  for  the  fafe-
garde  of  his  kinfmans  life  and  gratifying  his  frendes,  I  no  leffe  willing
therin  to  do  hym  pleafure  alfo,  was  well  contented  to  affent  to  his  requefl,
and  to  flande  to  his  appoyntment,  not  fufpecting  hLs  frendefhippe,  but
rather  commending  his  wyfdome,  fo  to  doo  for  his  frende  as  ther^vith  not
to  forget  hym  felfe,  quia  nihil fapil  qui/ibi  non/apit.  But  if  at  that  tyme,
I  might  fo  boldelye  haue  prefumed  vppon  your  honours  fauour,  as  by  your
erneflneffe  in  my  behalfe  I  nowe  perceaue  I  might  haue  doonne,  I  wolde
haue  moued  your  Honour  of  an  honefler  fute  (for  a  leafe  to  be  had  at  the
queenes  liandes)  wherof  I  made  hym  priuie,  and  was  longe  fenfe  fo  mynded
to  haue  doonne,  but  that  he  Deterred  me  frome  the  fame,  alleaging  certen
commiffionars  to  haue  the  Doinges  therof,  and  that  therfore  no  fuche  thing
might  be  had  at  her  Maieflies  handes :  Albeit,  I  haue  fythens  hard  of
Dyvers  that  haue  obteyned  the  like.  Notwithflonding  (as  in  my  former
letters  I  wrotte  to  your  Honour)  my  meaning  is,  fo  to  move  your  Honour
hereof,  as  neyther  to  be  an  importunate  futer ;  or  otherwyfe  to  thinke  the
fame  to  be  folowed,  then  fliall  feeme  good  vnto  your  Honour,  Mito  whof[e]
will  I  fubmitte  my  ielfe  in  all  thinges :  Only  putting  your  Honour  in  re-
memberaunce  of  the  commodious  place  and  tyme  that  I  nowe  enioye  for  that
purpofe  :  for  the  contynuance  wherof,  I  was  a  futer  \T.to  your  Honour  for
your  letters  vnto  the  gentleman  my  frende  in  whofe  house  I  yet  remayne,
Who  alfo  being  one  that  fauoureth  leaminge,  and  my  greate  frende,  and  no
leffe  gladde  to  further  fo  good  a  purpofe,  is  well  willing  the  rather  to  my
vfe,  to  departe  frome  a  piece  of  his  commoditie,  in  fuche  forte  as  appearcth
by  the  byll  herein  inclofed.  Wherof,  further  to  aduertyfe  your  Ilonour  if
you  fhall  fo  thinke  it  convenient,  he  will  hym  felfe  repayre  vnto  your  Honour
to  giue  you  perfecte  informacon  of  all  thinges  as  touching  the  fame.

And  wheras  the  Mafler  of  Savoye  tolde  me  that  your  Honour  fum-
what  Doubted  that  the  booke  coulde  not  be  tranflatcd  into  the  Englyffhe
toonge,  I  affure  you  Honour  that  this  I  Dare  faye  without  arrogancie,  that
to  tranflate  the  variable  hiflorie  of  Plinie  into  our  toonge,  I  wolde  be
afhamed  to  borowe  fo  muche  of  the  Latine  as  he  Dothe  of  the  Greke,
althowgh  the  Latine  toonge  be  accompted  ryche,  and  the  Englyffhe  indigent
and  barbarous,  as  it  hathe  byn  in  tyme  pafl,  muche  more  then  it  nowe  is,
before  it  was  enriched  and  amplyfied  by  fundry  bookes  in  manner  of  all
artes  tranflated  owt  of  Latine  and  other  toonges  into  Englyflhe.  And  it
is  not  vnkno«  en  vnto  your  Honour  that  the  Latins  receaving  bothe  the
fcience  of  philosophic  and  phifike  of  the  Grekes,  Do  flill  for  the  mofl  parte
in  all  ther  tranfiacions  vfe  the  Greke  names,  in  fo  muche  that  for  the
better  vnderflondyng  of  them,  one  Otto  Bnimfelfitts,  a  learned  man,  hathe
writen  a  large  booke  Intiteled  Onomajiicon  ntedicimr,  where  he  hathe  thefe
woordes.  Kes  ip/as,  atqiieartium  vocabula,fcite,  appojite,  dejignatuque cffrrrf,
atqtie  ad  Polyclcti  regulam  (quod  aiunt)  exptrimere,  res  ejl  non  minus  difficilis
quam  gloriofa.  Quo,  nullum  JIudii  genus,  maiori  ccn/lat  mohjlia.  Id  quod
in  cau/a  ejfe  reor,  quod  hodie  tarn  pauci  in  ea  pahcjlra  fcj'e  excrceant  etc.
Agen,  it  is  not  vnknowen  vnto  your  Honour  that  ons  all  toonges  were
barbarous  and  needie,  before  the  knowleage  of  thinges  browght  in  plentie
of  woordes  and  names.  Wherby  it  maye  well  appeare  that  men  in  the
firfl  age  of  the  worlde,  had  a  fliorte  language,  confiflingc  of  fewe  woordes:
which  eucr  after  increafcd  by  the  knowleage  and  inuention  of  thinges.
Exercife  alfo  maketh  fuche  woonles  familier,  which  at  the  firfl  were
Difficulte  to  be  vnderflode.  ffor  children  at  the  firfl  (as  faithe  Ariflotle)
caule  all  men  fathers.  But  fliortely  after  by  exercife,  caule  them  by  there
names. And  I  haue  learned  by  experience,  that  the  maryners  vfe  manye

xliii

xliv

Thi- Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Eden.

tnglyfnie  \vooi\les  which  were  as  vnknowcn  vnto  me  as  the  Clialdean
toonijo  before  I  was  conucrfant  with  them.  It  maye  therfore  fuflice  that
the  woordes  and  ternies  of  artes  and  fciences  be  knowen  to  tiie  profelTours
therof,  as  partely  by  experience,  and  partely  by  the  helpe  of  dictionaries
defcribing  tlieni.  Per  proprium,  genus,  et  dtffercntiam,  as  the  logitians
teache,  and  as  Geor^itts  Agricola  vfeth  to  do  in  the  Germanye  toonge  :
which  as  well  in  that  parte  of  phiIofo]>hic  as  in  all  other,  was  barbarous
and  indigent  before  it  was  by  longe  experience  browght  to  perfection.
But  not  to  trouble  your  Honour  any  longer  with  this  matter,  one  thinge
remayncth  wherof  I  wolile  gladlye  haue  certified  your  Honour  at  my  laft
being  at  the  courte  at  Grenewich,  if  I  might  haue  had  conuenient  acccffe
vnto  you.  And  this  is.  That  pcrccauinge  your  Honour  to  take  pleafure
in  the  wonderful  woorkes  of  arte  and  nature  (wherin  doubtlefle  fliyneth  the
fparke  of  the  diuine  Spirite  that  god  hathe  gyuen  you)  I  was  then  myndcd
to  ha[ue]  delyuered  vnto  your  Honour  this  philofophicall  booke,  whe[r]in
is  defcribed  (as  appeareth  in  folio,  ii.)  fo  excellent  and  precious  an  experi-
ment, wrought  by  arte  to  the  fimilitude  of  the  vniuerfall  frame  of  the  worlde
made  by  the  omnipotent  and  greate  God  of  nature,  that  I  bcleue  the  like
was  neuer  doonne  fynfe  the  creacion  of  the  worlde.  And  maye  therfore  in
my  iudgement,  more  woorthely  be  cauled  Mic/iroco/ntos,  then  eyther  man
or  any  other  creature  that  euer  was  made  of  corporall  fubflance.  Aitgdus
PcUtianus  in  his  epiflells,  defcribeth  an  inflrument  cauled  Autoinato)i  made
in  his  tyme  in  the  citie  of  Fflorence,  obfeiiiing  the  exacte  mouing  oi  Prhiiiiin
Mobile  and  Octaua  SpJucra,  with  alfo  the  mouinges  of  the  7  planetes  in  there
fpheres,  in  all  poyntes  agreable  to  there  mouing  in  the  heaucn.  Of  the
like  inftniment  alfo,  our  Roger  Bacon  wrotte  longe  before  in  his  booke  De
Alirabili  potejlatc  artis  et  natunv,  where  he  writelh  in  this  maner.  Maius
omnium  figurationuni  et  rerum  figu7-atarum  ejl  vt  Ccclcjlia  dcfcriberentur
fecundutn  fiias  longitudines  et  latitudines  in  figura  corporali,  qua  7uoucntur
corporalitcr  ttiotu  diiirno.  Et  /lire  valeret  Regnuin  /wmini/npieiiti  etc.  The
which  inflrumcnte  doubtlede,  althowgh  it  be  of  a  diuine  inucntion  :  yet
dothe  this  Mickroec/mos  fo  far  furmount  it,  as  nature  paffeth  arte,  and  as
Alotus  animalis  paffeth  A/otus  violentiis,  for  as  the  other  is  moued  only  by
waight  or  wynde  inclofed  (as  is  feene  in  clockes  and  organs)  fo  is  this
moued  by  the  fame  Spirite  of  life  wherby  not  only  the  heauen,  but  alfo  all
nature  is  moued  :  whofe  mover  is  god  hym  felfe  as  faith  S.  Paule  :  Ip/us
eft  in  quo  vivimus,  niouemur,  etftimus.  As  alfo  Ariftotle,  Plato,  and  Philo,
in  there  bookes  De  Mundo,  do  affirme.  And  efpecially  Alarcus  Manilms
in  AJlronomicis  ad  Augujiutn  Cafarem,  writing  thus  :

Hoe  opus  immenfi  eonjlnictum  corpore  Miindi,
Membraque  naturcc  diucrfa  conditajorina,
A^ris  atque  ignis,  Terra:,  pelagiqne  iaccntis.
Vis  animae  diuina  regit :  Sacroque  meatu
Confpirat  Dais,  et  tacita  ratione  gubernat,  etc.
ALre  Ubratum  vacuo,  qui fu/linct  orbcm.  Item  Lncamis

Totius  pars  magnus  louis.
And  wheras  the  autoure  that  defcribeth  this  Michrocofmos  affirmeth  that
the  Chaos  therof,  is  Materia  Lapidis  Philofophorum  (which  is  alfo  Chaos,  vel
Ouum,  vel  prima  Materia  Mundi  maioris)  it  feemeth  to  agre  with  that
Cornelius  Ag>  ippa  hathe  written  in  his  feconde  booke  De  Occulta  philo-
fophia,  in  Scala  Vnitatis,  where  he  wryteth  thus  :  Lapis  philo/ophorutn  cjl
vnum  fubiectum  et  ifijlruinentum  omnium  virtutum  naturalium  et  tranf-
naturalium  etc.  And  that  this  greate  and  diuine  fecreate  of  this  Michro-
cofmos maye  not  feeme  incredible  vnto  your  Honour,  I  affure  you  that  I
that  am  Minimus  Philofopho7-um,  dyd  long  fenfe  (as  I  haue  to  wytneffe  Mr
Thomas  Whalley,  th[e]elder  foonne  of  Mr  Richard  Whalley)  woorke  a
fecreate  practife  fumwhat  like  vnto  this,  in  maner  as  foloweth.  I  diffolued
two  fubflances  in  two  waters.  Then  I  put  the  waters  togyther  in  a  glaffe,
fuffering  them  fo  to  remayne  for  a  tyme.  Then  I  flilled  of[f]  the  water
frome  the  maffe  or  Chaos  lefte  of  them  bothe.  And  put  it  on  ageyn.  And  fo
dyd  dyuers  tymes.  In  fine,  the  maffe  being  diffolued  in  the  water,  I  let  it
refl  all  night  in  a  coulde  place.  In  the  morning,  I  founde  fwymming  on
the  water  and  in  the  myddeft  therof,  a  little  rounde  Hand  as  brode  as  [a]
riall  or  fumwhat  more,  with  at  the  leaft  a  hundreth  fyluer  trees  abowt  an
ynche  high,  fo  perfectly  formed  with  trankes,  flalkes,  and  leaves,  all  of
mofl  pure  and  glyflering  fyluer,  that  I  fuppofe  no  lymnc[r]  or  paynter  is
able  to  conterfecte  the  like.  Then  fliaking  the  glaffe,  all  fell  in  pieces  into
the  water,  and  fille[d]  it  with  glyflering  fparkes,  as  the  firmament  (liyncth
w[ith]  flarres  in  a  clcare  wynter  nyght. Then  putting  the  glaffe  to  a  fofte

xliv

fyre  vppon  warme  affhes,  all  turned  agen  into  cleare  water,  which  agen
being  put  in  a  colde  place  all  night,  made  an  Hand  with  the  like  t  ees  as
before.  What  this  M'olde  haue  byn  in  fine,  god  knowcth,  and  not  I.  But
of  this  I  am  fure,  that  if  the  floure  of  learning  of  our  tyme  and  fumtyme
Tutor  and  brother  in  lawe  vnto  your  Honour  Mr  \i.c.,  Sir  John'\  Cheeke.
had  feene  any  of  thefe  two  fecreates,  he  wolde  greatly  haue  reioyfcd :  As  I
knowe  the  diuine  fparke  of  knowleage  that  is  in  your  Honour  partely  receaved
of  hym,  will  move  you  to  doo  the  like,  fythe  to  a  philofophicall  and  vertuous
man,  there  is  nothing  fo  delectable  as  to  beholde  the  infinite  poure  and
wyfdome  of  God  in  his  creatures,  in  the  which,  his  deitie  is  not  only  vifible,
but  in  maner  palpable,  as  fum  philofophers  haue  written.  And  as  touching
thcfe  matters,  I  haue  red  a  maruclous  fcntence  in  an  olde  written  booke
where  thefe  woordes  are  written :  Qui  potcjl  facere  Mediant  naturam,  potejl
crcarc  Alundos  nouos.  But  to  difcourfe  of  this  oracle,  or  to  interprete  the
fame,  it  were  to  muche  to  molefl  your  Honour  therewith  :  and  an  argument
muche  meeter  for  a  feconde  Socrates  then  for  me.  And  of  thefe  fecreates,
writeth  Roger  Bacon  in  his  booke  before  alleaged,  where  he  hathe  thefe
woordes  :  Alulta  funt  archana  admiranda  in  operibus  artis  el  natures:  Que?
licet  multatn  vtilitatem  non  habeanl  (hahent  vera  maxim[am]  vt  fapientibus
coifnitum  ejl)  tamcn  fpectaculuni  incffabile  fapientiie  prcebcnt  et  poffunt
applicari  ad  probationem  oimtium  occultorum  quibus  vulgus  inexpert um
contradicit,  et  indicat  fieri  per  opei-a  Dcemoniorum,  etc.

And  thus  mofl  humbly  defyring  your  Honour  to  pardon  myboldnefle  in
writing  vnto  you,  and  according  vnto  your  accuflomed  clemencie  to  accept
in  good  parte  this  my  prefumptuous  attempte  which  only  the  loue  I  beare
to  your  vertues  hath  moued  me  vnto,  my  trufl  is  that  thefe  thinges  fhall
not  be  all  togyther  vnpleafaunt  vnto  your  Honour  otherwyfe  occupied  in
greate  aflfayres  bothe  in  the  courte  and  common  wealthe,  as  was  Plato  with
King  Dyonifius,  Ariftotle  with  greate  Alexander,  and  Cicero  Senator  and
Conful  of  Rome.  The  eteinall  God  and  immortall  mover  of  the  greate
worlde  and  the  lefTe,  preferue  your  Honour  in  healthe  and  profperitie.

Ffrome  the  fTolde  byfyde  Barnet. The  firft  of  Auguft.  1562.
Mofl  bownde  to  your  Honour.

RicH.\RDE  Eden.

Tim  Doiiiiiiaiioni  addktus,  alios  non  giicrro poenates.
Sententia  Hippocratis. — In/ccretis  et  occultis,/ecretus  et  occultus  ejlo.
Endorsed — Primo  Augufti.  1562. Richard  Eden.

Lands.  MS.  loi,  art.  5.
The  advancement  which  Eden  sought,  came  almost  immediately  after  he
wrote  this  letter  :  but  it  is  sad  to  know,  that  it  ultimately  ruined  him  both
in  health  and  fortune,  and  brought  him  to  a  premature  grave.

We  must  now  introduce  a  celebrated  historical  personage,  with  whose
wanderings  and  trials  Eden's  life  was  for  the  next  ten  years  indissolubly
identified  ;  and  in  the  narration  of  which,  we  shall  be  telling  the  story  of
our  Author's  life  during  the  period  he  was  on  the  Continent.  In  doing
which,  we  thankfully  acknowledge  our  obligations  to  the  Vie  de  Jean  de
Ferricres,  Vidame  de  Charires,  Seigneur  de  Maligny,  by  a  Member  [Count
L.  de  Bastard]  of  the  Historical  and  Natural  Science  Society  of  the
Yonne. 170  copies  only  of  which,  were  printed  at  Auxerre  in  1858.

A  Vidame  was  originally  the  principal  lay  officer  of  a  bishop.  In
France,  however,  only  five  bishops  had  such  an  officer,  viz.,  those  of
Rheims,  Amiens,  Mans,  Laon,  and  Chartres ;  together  with  certain
Abbeys.  In  process  of  time,  however,  it  became  a  mere  hereditaiy  title  ;
dependent  for  its  renown  on  the  person  who  held  it  and  the  wealth  where-
of he  was  possessed.

Jean  de  FERRifeRES,  disinherited  by  his  father,  Frangois  de  Ferrieres,
in  1540:  became  Seigneur  de  Maligny  in  1544;  went  to  Rome  in  the
embassy  of  M.  de  Urfe  in  1549  ;  accompanied  the  then  Vidame,  Fran9ois
de  Vendome,  to  the  relief  of  the  Siege  of  Metz  in  1553  ;  and  went  to
Piedmont  in  1557'  Francois  de  Vendome  having  died  on  22d  December
1560:  the  Seigneur  of  Maligny  then  became  Vidame  of  Chartres;  and
thereby  immensely  rich,  if  he  could  have  enjoyed  liis  own  in  peace.  But
not  daring  to  administer  to  his  vast  estate  in  person,  for  fear  of  attracting
the  attention  of  his  enemies  to  it :  his  sister  Beraude,  by  secret  agreement
with  him,  presented  herself  as  the  sole  heir  to  Fran9ois  de  Vendome.

On  the  breaking  out  of  the  Civil  Wars,  Conde  sent  the  new  Vidame
(whose  riches  gave  him  great  influence  among  the  Protestant  party)  over  to
England,  with  the  Seigneur  de  Saint  Aubin,  to  induce  Elizabeth  to  join

TiiK  Life  and  Labours  op  Richard  Eden.

xlv

in  so  holy  and  just  a  quarrel.  Being  joined  by  La  Ilaye,  they  finally
arrived  in  England  about  15th  August  1562  ;  and  after  many  secret  con-
ferences, the  Treaty  of  Hampton  Court  was  signed  by  them,  on  20th  Sep-
tember following.  Co't.  MS.  Cal.  E.  v.  f.  113,  is  a  copy  of  this  Treaty
bearing  the  signature  of  the  Vidame.

At  this  moment,  Eden,  who  was  an  excellent  linguist,  entered  the  service
of  the  Vidame.  Time  pressed.  3000  men  under  Sir  Adrian  Poynings,  and
with  them  the  Vidame  and  Eden,  left  Portsmouth  on  2d  October,  and
wore  in  Havre  on  the  4th  :  the  majority  of  them  to  be  killed,  or  die  of
the  plague  by  the  29th  of  July  following,  when  Havre  was  surrendered  to
the  French.  Such  as  survived  brought  with  them  to  England,  the  plague
which  they  had  there  caught.

In  the  meantime,  the  Civil  Wars  had  been  stopped  by  the  Edict  of  the
Pacification  of  Ambois  on  19th  March  1563.

All  the  goods  of  the  Vidame  were  pronounced  confiscated,  under
pretence  that  he  had  brought  the  English  into  Havre.  The  French  Court,
while  in  progress  after  the  Pacification,  reached  Troyes  on  the  23d  March
1564 ;  when  the  Vidame  [and  Eden]  joined  on  the  8th  April  the  Prince  de
Conde  there,  and  received  a  simulated  welcome  from  Charles  IX.  and
Catherine  de  Medecis.  Leaving  the  Court  at  Vitry  on  27th  April,  he
rejoined  Conde,  at  Paris  ;  where  he  appears  to  have  chiefly  resided  for
the  next  two  or  three  years.

Eden  states  below,  and  at  /.  xlvii.,  that  he  had  been  in  Germany,  and,  among
other  places,  at  Strasburg. He  probably  accompanied  the  Vidame  there.

A  fresh  rising  of  the  Protestants  occurred  on  27th  September  1567,  when
they  nearly  captured  by  a  coup  de  main  the  entire  French  Court.  Then
came  the  Battle  of  St.  Denis  on  loth  November,  and  the  Pacification  of
Longjumeau  on  the  23d  March  1568.

The  Vidame  and  his  newly  married  wife  (Francoise  Joubert,  widow  of
Ch.  Chabot)  and  suite  [including,  it  is  presumed,  Eden]  arrived  on  the
Cornish  coast,  on  28th  April  1569  ;  and  after  some  delay,  were  allowed  to
come  to  London.  The  Vidame  was  received  by  the  Queen,  on  i8th  July,
at  Greenwich.  On  the  23d  September  1569,  he  was  burnt  in  effigy,  for
the  second  time  within  a  year,  on  the  Place  de  Greve,  at  Paris,  by  an  arret
of  the  French  Parliament.

In  consequence  of  the  Peace  of  St.  Germain  ;  the  Vidame,  after  about  a
year's  stay  in  England,  returned  in  October  1570,  by  Dieppe,  to  Paris  :
where  some  of  his  servants  being  attacked  in  the  street,  he  retires  to  Boubige,
in  Poitou. In  February  1572,  he  was  at  La  Ferte,  on  private  affairs.

Soon  afterwards  he  returned  to  Paris  ;  where  he  found  all  the  chiefs  of
the  Huguenot  party  lulled  into  a  belief  of  perfect  safety,  through  their  trust
in  the  King's  word.  He,  however,  did  not  trust  the  Court,  and  would  not
reside  in  the  city,  but  in  the  Faubourg  of  St.  Germain.  When  questioned  for
the  reason  of  this ;  he  replied  'that  the  air  of  the  Faubourgs  was  better  than
that  of  the  City,  and  that  of  the  fields  better  than  that  of  the  Faubourgs.'

Maurevert,  the  assassin  of  the  Count  de  Mouy,  attempted  the  assassination
of  Admiral  Coligny ;  but  fails  to  kill  him.  Charles  IX.  had  hardly  left  the
wounded  Huguenot  chief ;  when  the  Vidame  called  on  him,  and  let  loose
his  indignation  at  the  dastard  cowardice  of  the  act.

On  the  next  day,  Saturday,  23d  August,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Protestant
chiefs  at  Coligny's  house,  the  Vidame  urged  that  the  Admiral  should  be
conveyed  out  of  Paris  ;  and  that  the  Protestants  should  quit  the  city  :  but
he  was  overruled.

That  night,  occurred  the  M.\ssacre  of  St.  Bartholomew,  com-
mencing on  the  right  bank  of  the  Seine.  The  Vidame,  his  brother-in-law
Jean  de  la  Fin,  and  ten  others  [including  probably  Eden],  who  were  living
on  the  left  bank  of  the  river — warned  by  the  firing — escaped  for  their  lives,
riding  first  to  La  Ferte.  Hearing,  however,  that  the  Duke  de  Guise  had
sent  the  Sieur  de  St.  Leger  to  take  them  :  they  hurriedly  left  the  Chateau,
and — after  some  wandering  up  and  down  the  country — managed  to  reach
the  coast ;  where  they  found  a  ship,  which  carried  them  safely  to  England.
The  Vidame  arrived  in  London  on  7th  September  1573.
1573.  Sept.  The  Vidame,  in  a  very  flowery  letter,  solicits  of  the

Queen,  that  Richard  Eden,  who  had  given  him  good
and  faithful  companionship  for  the  space  of  ten  years,
may  be  admitted  one  of  the  poor  knights  of  Windsor.  He  also  refers  to
his  erudition,  and  the  experience  he  had  acquired  in  the  secrets  of  Nature.
He  further  encloses  the  three  following  autogi-aphk  memoranda ;  by  the
side  of  which,  we  have  put  an  English  translation  ; —

I.

Si  placeat  suae  Maiesfaticoncedere
Richaido  Eden  proximam  vocation-
em  Militum  illorum,  qui  Winsori
Milites  Oratorij  vocanlur,  a  Rege
Henrico  8'  fundali.

If  it  may  please  Her  Majesty  to
grant  to  Richard  Eden  the  next
vacant  place  among  the  Knighis,
who  are  called  the  Knights  of  the
Oratory  of  Windiior,  founded  by
King  Henry  VIIL

11.

Richardus  Eden  natione  Anglus,
ex  honesta  familia  natus  in  agro
Herfordensi,  ubi  adhucsororem  habet
viventem,  suae  Maiestati  bene  cogni-
tam,  nempe  uxorem  equestris  ordinis
viri  lohannis  Butleri  de  Lamer  :  A
pueritia  educatus  in  bonis  literis,
studuit  in  Achademia  Cantabrigiensi
decem  annis  sub  tutore  doctissimo
viro,  domino  Thoma  Smyth,  nunc
Secretario  sure  Maiestati,  qui  de  eius
eruditione  et  morum  integritate  satis
testari  potest.

Deinde  a  serenissimo  Rege  Hen-
rico Octavo  ab  achademia  vocatus,
ipsius  Regis  mandato,  in  ^rario
officium  oblinuit,  ubi  usque  ad
mortem  Regis,  hoc  est  duobas  annis,
permansit  ;  qui  etiam  moriens  illius
non  immemor  assignavit  illi  domus
distillatorii  officium.  Quod  tamen
Rege  mortuo  Sumerseti  Dux  illi
concessit  qui  nunc  fruitur.

Postea  uxorem  duxit,  ex  qua  in
xiiij.  annis  xij.  infantes  generavit,  ut
vel  hac  ratione  videatur  de  patria
bene  meritus.

Qui  etiam  tempore  aliquot  Rei-
publicae  utiles  libros  ex  sermone
Latino  Italico  Hispanico  traduxit,
qui  typis  impressi  extant,  ut  Decades
de  Novo  Orbe,  liber  iusti  voluminus,
vizt.  600  foliorum ;  ac  deinde  librum
de  Arte  Navigandi  a  Martino  Cor-
tesio  in  lingua  Hispanica  ad  Carolum
V.  scriptum  ;  insuper  ex  Pyrotechnia
Italica  multa  de  rebus  metallicis,  quce
antea  in  nostra  lingua  extittre.

Tempore  vero  Marioe  Regince  His-
panorumquorundamnobilium  fauore,
denuo  in  Regis  Philippi  ^^rarlum
electus  :  hereseos  apud  Wintoniense
Episcopum  accusatus  a  Watsone  Lin-
colinensi  Episcopo,  officio  privatus
est.

Mortua  vero  uxore,  illius  fama  ad
illustrissimi  Domini  Vidami  aures
pervenit.  Cum  quo,  quomodo  his  x.
annis  et  amplius  in  Germania  et
Gallia  vixent  in  utraque  fortuna,  nee
mercenarius  nee  desertor,  et  semper
illi  charissimus,  ipsemet  Domiuus
Vidamus  pro  sua  humanitate,  veri-
tate  testimonium  feret.  A  quo  etiam
multis  amplissimis  muneribus  dona-
tus,  si  tamen  non  ditatus  nulla  pro-
fecto  illustrissimi  Domini  incuria  vcl

Richard  Eden,  an  Englishman,
bom  of  a  respectable  family  in  Here-
fordshire,— where  he  still  has  a  sister
living,  well  known  to  Her  Majesty,
being  the  wife  of  a  knight,  John
Butler  of  Lamer, — was  well  educated
as  a  boy,  studied  at  Cambridge  for
ten  years  under  that  most  learned
man,  Sir  Thomas  Smyth,  now  Her
Majesty's  Secretary  [of  State],  who
can  testify  to  his  erudition  and  blame-
less character.

Afterwards,  being  summoned  from
the  University  by  the  most  serene
King  Henr>^  VIIL,  he  held,  by  his
order,  an  office  in  the  Treasury,
where  he  remained  for  two  years
until  the  King's  death  ;  who,  when
dying,  did  not  forget  him,  but  as-
signed to  him  the  office  of  the  distil-
lery. After  the  King's  death,  the
Duke  of  Somerset  granted  the  office
to  the  present  holder.

Afterwards  he  married,  and  in
fourteen  years  begot  twelve  child-
ren, so  that  for  this  reason  also  he
seems  to  deserve  well  of  his  country.

At  this  time  he  translated  from  the
Latin,  Italian,  and  Spanish  several
books  useful  to  the  State,  which  are
still  in  print,  as  Decades  de  Novo  Orbe,
a  book  of  good  size,  viz.  six  hundred
folios ;  and  a  book  De  A  rtc  Naz-igandi,
written  by  Martin  Cortes  to  Charles
V.  in  Spanish  ;  and  in  addition  many
portions  of  Pyrotechnia  Italica  con-
cerning metals  ;  which  did  not  exist
before  in  our  language.

In  the  time  of  Queen  Mary,  he
was  again  placed  in  the  Treasury
of  King  Phillip,  through  the  favour
of  certain  Spanish  nobles  :  but  being
accused  of  heresy  before  [Gardiner]
the  Bishop  of  Winchester  by  Watson,
Bishop  of  Lincoln  ;  he  was  deprived
of  hii  office.

After  the  death  of  his  wife,  his
repute  came  to  the  ears  of  the  most
illustrious  Lord  the  Vidame.  How
he  lived  [with  him]  for  ten  years
and  more  in  Germany  and  France,
with  var}'ing  fortune,  neither  a  mer-
cenary nor  a  deserter,  and  always
most  dear  to  him  ;  the  Lord  \'idame
himself  will  kindly  bear  witness.
From  whom  also  he  received  many
large  gifts.  And  assuredly  it  is  not
through  carele'.snec«  or  oblivion  on

xlvi

The  Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Eden.

oblivio  in  causa  fuit,  sed  sola  volu-
bilis  et  nouercit  forluna  culpa.

Nunc  vero,  senio  affectus,  et  cor-
poris in  firmitate,  cogitur  peregrinancU
finem  f.icere  ;  nihil  niagis  habeas  in
votis  quam  ut  su.v  Maiestatis  gratia
et  favore,  possit  tandem  in  patria
honeslis  studiis  et  Reipublicx  utili-
bus  vitam  finire.  Nulla  vero  magna-
rumdivitiarum.aut honoris  ambit  ione
fiagrans  solam  vitam  tranquillam  et
studiis  conimodam  exoptat.

Deus  optimus  niaximus  suam  Ccel-
situdinem  semper  seruet  incolumen.

the  part  of  his  illustrious  Lord,  but
only  in  consctiucnce  of  changeful  and
adverse  fortune  ;  that  he  was  not
enriched.

Now  affected  by  age  and  bodily
infirmity,  he  is  obliged  to  make  an
end  of  wandi  ring  ;  desiring  nothing
more  ih.an,  by  Ilcr  Majesty's  favour,
to  end  his  life  in  his  own  country,
in  honourable  studies,  and  useful  to
the  State.  lie  has  no  ambition
for  great  riches  or  honour ;  but  only
desires  a  quiet  life,  suitable  for  study.

May  God  ever  preserve  Her  Ma-
jesty.

HI.

Quandoquidem  maxima  parshomi-
num  non  est  semper  melior  pars,  sed
reperiuntur  quamplures  Ardeliones
quibus  nihil  est  magis  gratum  quam
ex  quauis  leuissima  occasibne  bonos
viros  calumniari.  Ideoque  ut  agni  a
luponmi  faucibus  in  tuto  vivant,  ne-
cessum  erit  ut  leonis  animalium  regis,
hoc  est,  Regia  autoritate  tueantur.

Quis  enim  nunc  in  Anglia  potest
Paracelsi  admiranda  medicamenta  ex
metallis  et  mineralibus  componere
(quce  cum  Alchimiaaliquomodosym-
bolizantur)  nisi  statim  ab  ignaris  et
calumniatoribus  Alchimiis  legibus
prohibitoe  infamiam  et  periculum  in-
currat.  Cui  malo  obuiando  Principis
diplomats  opus  erit.  Nee  dubito
quin  quum  Brocardo  multisque  aliis
peregrinis  libere  permittitur  exercere.
Idem  mihi  requiori  iuditio  Principis
autoritate  concedatur.

Since,  indeed,  the  greater  part  of
mankind  is  not  always  the  better
part,  but  many  busybodies  are  found
who  have  no  greater  pleasure  than
in  calumniating  good  men  on  the
most  trifling  occasions ;  therefore
that  lambs  may  live  safe  from  the
jaws  of  wolves,  they  must  be  pro-
tected by  the  lion,  the  king  of  beasts
— that  is,  protected  by  royal  autho-
rity.

Who  can  at  this  present  time,  in
England,  compound  the  admirable
medicaments  of  Paracelsus  from
metals  and  minerals  (which  are  sym-
bolized by  an  alchymical  method),
without  immediately  incurring  from
ignorant  calumniators  the  infamy
and  peril  of  practising  alchmy,
which  is  prohibited  by  the  laws.
To  obviate  this  evil,  a  royal  license
is  needed.  Neither  do  I  doubt  that
since  it  is  permitted  to  Brocardus
and  many  other  foreigners  freely  to
practise  [the  art] ;  that  the  same  will,
with  more  justice,  be  granted  to  me
by  the  royal  authority. — State  Papers,
Dom.  Eliz.,  Vol.  92,  No.  32.

There  were  thirteen  poor  knights  of  Windsor,  whose  annual  allowance
was  paid  by  the  Dean  of  Windsor.  It  consisted  of  ^18  :5s.  in  money  ;
a  gown  or  coat  of  red  cloth  ;  and  a  blue  or  purple  cloth  mantle  with
the  badge  of  St.  George  embroidered  on  the  left  sleeve.  Eden's  application
does  not  appear  to  have  been  successful. — See  Tighe  and  Davis,  Annals
of  Windsor,  i.  223. Ed.  1858.

1573,  Sir  W.  Winter  is  knighted  this  year. — See  Sylvanus
Morgan's  Sphere  of  Gentry,  Book  3,/.  14,  Ed.  1661.

1574.  "Win-  Eden  writes  the  following  dedication  to  Sir  W.  Winter
tertide. of  his  translation of  John Taisner's  book  De  natnra

magnctis,  d^c,  which  he  designed  as  a  complement
to  a  new  edition  of  his  previous  translation  of  Martin  Cortes'  Arte  de
Navigar.  Though  written  at  this  time,  it  did  not  appear  in  print  for  four
or  five  years  afterwards,  in  consequence  of  the  successive  deaths  of  Eden,
Richard  Jugge  the  printer,  and  his  son  John  Jugge.

The  most  important  allusion  in  it  is  the  account  of  Sebastian  Cabot's
death,  the  only  one  on  record.

A  very  neceffarie  and  profitable  Booke  concerninge  Nauigation,
compiled.in  Latin  by  Joannes  Taifnicrns,  a  pul)like  profeffor  in
Rome,  Ferraria,  and  other  Vniuerfities  in  Italie  of  the  Mathema-
ticalles,  named  rl  treatife  Of  continuall  /notions.  Tranflated  into
Engliflie,  by  Richarde  Eden.

Imprinted  at  London  by  Richarde  Jugge.

To  the  ryght  tvootfliipfuU  Syr  Wylliam  Wyntcr,  A'nyght,  Maiflcr
of  the  Ordiuauiue  of  the  Queenes  Maicjlies  Shipfes,  and  Sur-
veyor of  the  fayd  Shippcs,  Richarde  Eden  wyflieth  health  and
prosperitie.

'^^T  is  nowe  about  twelue  yeeres  pafte  (gentle  Maiflcr  Wyntcr)
fince  the  curtefie  and  fauour  which  long  before  I  founde  at
your  hande,  mooued  me  no  leffe  for  the  good  wyll  that  I
haue  euer  borne  you  and  your  vertues,  to  excogitate  or
deuife  fomethyng,  within  the  compaffe  of  my  poore  abilitic,
that  myght  be  a  witneffe,  and  as  it  were  a  feale,  to  teflifie  both  that  I  haue
not  forgotten  your  gentleneffe,  and  alfo  how  defyrous  I  am  to  pay  the
debtes  of  frendefliyp  which  then  I  promifed  you,  and  alfo  attempted  to
perfourme  :  But  beyng  at  that  tyme  preuented,  by  meanes  of  my  fodayne
departyng  out  of  Englande,  with  my  good  Lorde  the  Vidaine,  with  whom  I
remayned  for  the  fpace  of  ten  yeeres,  vntyll  the  calamities  of  that  miferable
countrey,  with  loffe  of  goods,  and  danger  of  lyfe,  hath  dryuen  me  home
agayne  into  my  natiue  countrey:  Where  fyndyng  my  felfe  at  fome  leyfure,
and  defyrous  to  paffe  foorth  parte  of  my  tyme  in  fome  honefl  exercife,
which  myght  be  profytable  to  many,  domagable  to  none,  and  a  meanes  to
geat  me  newe  freendes,  the  olde  in  my  fo  long  abfence,  in  maner  vtterly
wafted  :  I  chaunced  in  the  meane  tyme,  to  meete  with  my  olde  acquayn-
tance  and  freend,  Richard  lugge,  Printer  to  the  Queenes  Maieftie,  who
had  many  yeeres  before,  printed  the  Booke  of  Marten  Ciirtes,  of  the  Art  of
Nauigation,  by  me  tranflated  out  of  Spanyflie  tongue.  Whereof,  hauyng
with  him  fome  conference,  he  declared  that  he  woulde  prynt  that  booke
agayne,  yf  I  woulde  take  the  paynes  to  deuife  fome  addition  toucliyng  the
fame  matter,  that  myght  be  ioyned  thereto.  At  whiche  tyme,  hauyng  with
me  in  the  Latine  tongue,  thefe  books  here  folo wyng  printed,  whiche  I  brought
with  me  out  of  Fraunce,  I  foone  agreed  to  his  honefl  requefl,  to  tranflate
them  into  Englyflie  :  Whiche  beyng  accomplyflied,  this  onely  remayned,
accordyng  to  the  common  cuftome,  to  confecrate  and  dedicate  the  fame  to
fome  worthie  perfonage,  whofe  fame,  auc[t]horitie,  and  dignitie,  myght
defende  them  from  the  euyll  tongues  of  fuch  as  are  more  redie  rather  to
reprooue  other  mens  dooynges,  then  to  doo  any  good  them  felues.  And
therfore  (gentle  Mailler  Wynter)  knowing  your  aucthoritie  and  fame  in
well  deferuyng,  and  honorable  feruice  vnto  your  Prince  and  Countrey,  to
be  fuche  as  all  men  thynke  fo  well  of,  and  fo  greatlye  efteeme,  to  whom
(rather  then  to  you)  may  I  dedicate  this  booke  of  Nauigation  ?  In  con-
fyderation  whereof,  and  the  hope  that  I  haue  in  your  approoued  curtefie,
fauourably  to  accept  this  dedication,  as  procee[d]yng  from  one  that  defyreth
nothyng  more  then  to  doo  you  feruice,  and  remayne  in  your  grace,  I  fliall
thynke  my  trauayle  wel  beftowed,  and  fufficiently  recompenced,  yf  it  fhall
pleafe  you  to  accept  the  fame  as  thankfully,  as  I  wyllyngly  offer  it  vnto
you.

For  yf  there  be  any  thyng  in  me,  wherein  I  maye  by  good  reafon
pleafe  my  felfe,  it  is  cheefely  this,  that  I  haue  euer  loued  and  honoured
men  of  finguler  vertue  or  qualitie,  in  what  fo  euer  laudable  Art  or  Science,
euen  of  thofe  whereof  I  mee  felfe  haue  litle  knowledge,  as  are  Geometric,
Aflironomie,  Architecture,  Muficke,  Payntyng,  feates  of  Armes,  inuentions
of  Ingens,  and  fuche  lyke  :  Of  the  whiche,  this  our  age  maye  feeme  not
onely  to  contende  with  the  Auncientes,  but  alfo  in  many  goodly  inuentions
of  Art  and  wyt,  farre  to  exceede  them.  For  (not  to  fpeake  agaynflall  the
marueylous  inuentions  of  our  tyme)  what  of  theirs  is  to  be  compared  to  the
Artes  of  Printyng,  makyng  of  Gunnes,  Fyre  woorkes,  of  fundry  kyndes  of
artificial  Fyres,  of  fuche  marueylous  force,  that  mountaynes  of  mofle  harde
rockes  and  ftones,  are  not  able  to  refyfl  their  violence,  but  are  by  them
broken  in  peeces,  and  throwen  into  the  ayre  with  fuche  violence,  that
neyther  the  fpirite  of  Deinogorgon,  or  the  thunderboltes  of  infernal  Pluto
can  doo  the  lyke  What  flioulde  I  here  fpeake  of  the  woonderfall  inuen-
tions of  Fartalio,  in  his  booke  De  Arte  maiori  ?  or  of  many  other,  whereof
Vannucius  Beringocius  wryteth  in  his  booke,  entituled,  Pyrotechnia.  As
touchyng  which  terrible  inuentions,  and  the  lyke,  although  fome  men  be  of
opinion  that  they  were  inuented  by  the  inlligation  of  the  deuyll,  for  the
defl,ruction  of  mankynde  :  yet  other  weyghyng  the  matter  more  indifferently
thynke  that  the  inuention  of  Gunnes  hath  ben  the  fauyng  of  many  mens
lyues,  becaufe  before  the  vfe  of  them,  men  were  not  woont  fo  long  tyme  to
lye  batteryng  in  the  befieg)'ng  of  Townes  or  Fortreffes,  but  in  fliort  fpace
to  come  to  hande  flrokes,  and  to  foughtcn  feeldes,  to  the  great  flaughter  of
great  multitudes. And  feeyng  that  nowe  our  cnimies  the  Turkes,  and

Tiiu  Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Eden.

xl\ii

other  Infidels,  haue  llie  vfe  of  tliefe  deuylyihe  inuentions  (as  they  name
tliem)  it  may  be  thought  requifite  for  vs,  agaynfl  fuchc  deuylles  to  vfe  alfo
the  lyke  deuylyflie  inuentions,  left  refufyng  the  fame,  and  geuyng  place  to
euyl,  we  flioulde  wyllyngly  fuffer  the  kyngdome  of  the  deuyll  to  triumphe
ouer  vs,  not  otherwyfe  able  to  refyft,  and  much  Icffe  to  ouercome  fo  puiffant
and  horrible  enimies  (except  befyde  al  hope)  myght  aryfe  in  our  defence
fome  newe  Moyfes,  or  Elias,  or  the  Prieftes  of  lericho,  vvhiche  onely  with
the  noyfe  and  founde  of  Homes  or  Trumpettes  ouerthrewe  the  walles  of
tlie  towne.  Neyther  wyl  the  example  of  Dauid  and  Goliath,  or  of  Samfon
and  the  Philiftines,  ferue  our  tume  at  this  tyme,  although  I  beleeue  that
the  arme  of  the  Lorde  is  not  weakened,  yf  there  lacked  not  a  Moyfes  with
his  rodde,  and  woorthie  Afi/ftentes,  which  myght  helpe  to  holde  vp  his
weerye  arme.

Bui  to  returne  to  fpeake  of  ingens,  and  ingenious  inuentions,  whiche
inuented  and  vfed  to  the  glorie  of  God,  and  defence  of  his  people,
againft  the  furie  and  tyrannic  of  Infidelles,  they  may  as  woorthyly  be
called  the  gyftes  of  God,  as  were  the  inuentions  and  Art  of  them  that
buylded  eyther  the  Temple  of  Hierufalem,  or  the  Arke  of  God  :  And
P ,  yet  is  it  there  wrytten  of  thofe  Artificers, that  God  gaue

Bezaleel  and  them  the  fpirite  of  knowledge  and  cunnyng  in  fuche  Artes.
Ahaliab.  j^^^^  therefore  I  thynke  it  may  alfo  be  fayde  without  offence,

that  the  knowledge  oi  Archittiedes,  and  other  men  in  fuche  commendable
inuentions,  are  the  gyftes  of  God,  for  as  muche  as  the  gyftes  of  God  are
free,  and  not  bounde  to  any  nation  or  perfon.

And  yf  it  may  be  graunted  that  the  fpirites  of  men,  or  the  fpirite  of
God  in  men,  may  be  diuided  (as  was  the  fpirite  of  Moyfes  to  twelue  other)
or  otherwyfe  that  the  fpirites  of  dead  men  may  reuiue  in  other  (after
the  opinion  and  tranfanimation  of  Pythagoras)  we  may  thynke  that  the
foule  of  Archimedes  was  reuiued  in  BcJJon,  that  excellent  Geometer  of
our  tyme,  whom  I  knewe  in  Fraunce  the  Maifter  of  the  engins  to  the
Freuche  kyng,  Charles  the  nienth,  vnder  whom  that  lamentable  flaughter
at  Paris  was  committed,  in  the  whiche  were  flayne  fo  many  noble  men.
Whiche  crueltie  the  fayde  Be/son  abhorryng,  fled  hythei  into  England,
and  here  dyed,  in  the  yeere.  1573.  and  left  in  witneffe  of  his  excellencie
in  that  Art,  a  booke  in  prynt,  conteynyng  the  fourmes  or  portractes  of
fyxtie  engins  of  marueylous  flrange  and  profytable  deuice,  for  diuers
commodious  and  neceffary  vfes.  Of  the  whiche,  for  as  muche  as
three  of  them,  that  is  to  meane,  the  54.  57.  and  60.  be  engines  cheefely
parteyning  vnto  Shyppes,  it  fhall  not  be  from  my  purpofe  here  to  make  a
breefe  rehearfal  of  them.

The.  54.  therefore  (as  he  wryteth)  is  an  engin  not  vnlyke  vnto  that
whiche  in  auncient  tyme  Archimedes  inuented  for  the  Syracu/iaiis,  where-
with a  man  with  the  ftrength  of  onely  one  hande,  by  helpe  of  the
inflniment  called  Trifpajlon  (which  in  our  tongue  fome  cal  an  endlefle
Scrue),  brought  a  Shyp  of  marueylous  greatneffe  from  the  lande  into
the  fea,  in  the  fyght  of  kynge  Hieron,  and  an  infinite  multitude,  whiche
with  all  their  force  coulde  not  doo  the  fame.  &c.  Of  the  which  alfo,  our
countrey  man,  Roger  Bacon,  a  great  Philofopher  (and  no  Nicromancer,  as
that  ignorant  age  (laundered  him)  feemed  to  haue  had  fome  knowledge  :
For  in  his  booke  of  the  marueylous  power  of  Art  and  Nature,  he  maketh
^,  ,. .  mention  of  an  Inftrument  (as  farre  as  I  remember)  no  bygger

Of  this  instru- ,  -i ,  1  •  1  1.^ j  ^

ment  reade,  the  then  a  mans  hande,  wherev/ith  one  man  mygnt  drawe  to
Cosmolabe  of  jjy^^  f^g  ftrength  of  three  hundred  men.  And  I  well  re-
member, that  at  my  beyng  in  Fraunce,  I  hearde  credible
reporte,  that  the  Earle  of  Rocumdolfe,  an  Almaine,  made  an  engin,  where-
with the  fayde  kyng  Charles  when  he  was  but.  xvi.  yeeres  of  age,  lyfted
from  the  grounde  a  weyght,  whiche  the  ftrongeft  man  in  the  courte  was  not
able  to  remooue.  Almofte  the  lyke  deuice  we  vfe  in  the  bendyng  of  a
Croffebowe.  Alfo  at  my  being  in  Germanic  in  the  citie  of  Strofburge,  a
woorthy  and  learned  Gentleman,  Monfieur  de  Sakno,  tolde  me  that  in  that
citie  one  had  inuented  an  engin  of  iron,  no  bygger  then  a  mans  hande,
wherevnto  faftenyng  a  rope,  with  a  hooke  of  iron,  and  caftyng  the  hooke
vpon  a  wal,  tree,  or  other  place,  where  it  myght  take  holde,  he  coulde  with
that  engin  lyft  hym  felfe  vp  to  the  wal,  or  other  place.  But  to  returne  to
the  other  two  engines  of  Bejfott,  parteynyng  to  our  purpofe.  Therefore
the.  60.  fygure  (as  he  there  wryteth)  is  the  inuention  of  an  engin,  fcarfely
credible,  wherewith  by  ballance  and  eafie  motion,  beyond  the  order  of
nature,  a  Shyp  may  be  fo  framed  and  gouerned,  that  in  the  calme  fea  it
fliall  moouc  forewarde,  and  in  litle  wynde  liaftcn  the  couifc,  and  in  too  much

wynde  temper  and  moderate  the  fame :  A  thyng  woorth  tl.e  knowledge  to
a  kyng,  as  he  faycth.  Of  the  ihyrd  engin,  which  is  the.  57.  fygure  of  hLs
booke,  he  wryteth  thus.  An  Artifice  not  yet  diuulgate  or  fet  forth,  whiche
placed  in  the  pompe  of  a  Shyp,  whyther  the  water  hath  recourfe,  and
mooued  by  the  motion  of  the  Shyp,  with  wheelcs  and  weyghtcs,  dooth
exactl)  (hewe  what  fpace  the  Shyp  hath  gone.  &c.  By  whiche  defcrip-
tion,  fome  doo  vnderftand  that  the  knowledge  of  the  longitude  myght  fo  be
founde,  a  thyng  doubtleffe  greatly  to  be  dcfyred,  and  hythcrto  not  certajTJcly
knowen,  although  Sebajlian  Cabot  on  his  death  bed  told  me  that  he  had  the
knowledge  thereof  by  diuine  reuelation,  yet  fo,  that  he  myght  not  teache
any  man.  But  I  thinke  that  the  good  oldc  man,  in  that  extreme  age,  fome-
what  doted,  and  had  not  yet  euen  in  the  article  of  death,  vtterly  fhaken  of
all  worldlye  vayne  glorie.

As  touchyng  whiche  knowledge  of  the  longitude,  to  rehearfe  the  faying
of  that  excellent  learned  man,  lohannes  Fernelius,  in  his  incomparable
booke  De  abditis  rcrutn  cattjis,  where  in  the  Preface  to  King  Henrie  of
Fraunce,  he  writeth  in  this  maner.  We  haue  put  our  helpyng  hande
to  the  Arte  of  Nauigation  and  Geographic :  forby  obferuation  of  the  houres
of  the  Equinoctialles,  we  haue  inuented  howe,  in  what  fo  euer  region  or
place  of  the  world  e  a  man  flialbe,  he  may  knowe  in  what  longitude  it  is  :
which  certaynly  we  haue  not  taken  of  the  fountaynes  of  the  ancientes,  but
fyrfte,  of  all  other  (as  I  thynke)  haue  drawen  it  of  our  ryuers,  as  our  owTie
inuention.  &c.  So  that  (faith  he)  whiche  way  fo  euer  you  tume  your  eyes,
you  may  fe  that  the  pofteritie  hath  not  ryotoully  wafted  the  inheritance  of
Artes  and  sciences,  left  them  by  their  predeceffors,  but  haue  greatly  en-
creafed  the  fame,  and  inuented  other  :  P"or  certaynely,  the  multitude  of
thinges  incomprehenfible,  is  infinite,  and  fo  therfore  inuentions  mufl
needes  aifo  be  infinite,  and  without  ende.  And  therefore,  as  touchyng  this
thing  (fayth  he)  to  fpeake  freely  what  I  thynke,  they  feeme  to  me  to  offcnde
as  muche,  whiche  contende  that  the  auncientes  haue  inuented  and  compre-
hended al  thynges,  as  doo  they  whiche  attribute  not  vnto  them  the  fyrft
inuentions,  fo  depryuyng  them  of  theyr  right  poffeffion.  Forwhereasnoweby
the  benefite  of  almightie  God  (who  hath  geuen  vs  his  Chrifte,  and  with  hym
all  good  thynges)  the  lyght  of  tmeth  fliyneth  in  our  vnderftandyng  by  go<lly
infpiration,  there  is  no  iuft  caufe  why  we  flioulde  in  fuche  th)-nges  thinke  vs
inferior  to  the  auncientes.  Of  which  Argument,  who  lyfteth  may  reade  more
in  the  fayde  Epiftle  of  Fernelitis.

And  for  as  much  as  I  haue  made  mention  of  fuch  inuentions,  it  fhal  not

be  from  the  purpofe,  to  defcribe  the  goodly  inftrument  wherof .

Angeltis  Policiamts  in  the  fourth  booke  of  Epiftles  to  Fran-  ;„  motion  .igree-

cifiis  Cafa,  wryteth  in  this  manner,  I  haue  receyued  your  yng  with  the

;.  ,- -r  L  tLi mouon  of

Epiftle,  wherem  you  fignifie  vnto  me,  that  you  haue  hearde  heauen.

of  the  ftranee  enirine  or  inftrument  Automaton  inuented,  and  Ajno  Doma
made  of  late  by  one  Laurence  a  Florentine  :  in  the  which  is
expreffed  the  courfe  and  .notions  of  the  Pianettes,  conformable  and
agreeyng  with  the  motions  of  heauen  :  And  that  (for  as  muche  as  the
reporte  thereof  is  hardly  beleeued)  you  {greatly  defjTe  that  I  ftiould  wryte
vnto  you,  what  certayne  knowledge  I  haue  of  that  thing,  wherein  I  am
redie  to  obey  your  requeft.  And  although  nowe  it  be  long  fince  I  fiwe
it,  yet  as  farre  as  I  beare  in  memorie,  I  vvyll  breefely  declare  the  fourme,
reafon,  and  vfe  thereof.  And  yf  the  defcription  of  it  flial  feeme  vnto
you  fomewhat  obfcure,  you  fliall  not  afcribe  it  altogcather  to  my  declara-
tion, but  partly  to  the  fubtiltic  and  nouiltie  of  the  thyng.  It  is  in  foum\e
of  a  fquare  pyller,  fliarpe  towarde  the  top,  in  maner  of  a  Pry-amis,  of
the  height  of  almoft  three  cubitcs :  ouer  and  aboue  it,  in  maner  of  a
couer,  is  a  flat  or  playne  rounde  plate  of  gylted  copper,  gamyflied
with  fundry  colours,  on  whofe  other  part  is  expreffed  the  whole  courfe  of
the  Planets,  and  whofe  dimcntion  or  meafurc  is  fomewhat  (horter  then  a
cubite,  and  is  within  tumcd  or  moued  with  certayne  litle  denticle  wheeles.
an  immouable  circle  comprehendyng  the  hygheft  border  or  margent,  and
diuided  with  the  fpaces  of  xxiiii.  houres  within  it,  in  the  hyghell  turaj-ng
mndel,  the  t  .velue  fignes  are  difcerned  by  three  degrees.  Further,  within  .are
feene  eyght  rundels,  in  maner  all  of  one  greatneffe.  Of  thefe,  two  obteyne  the
niyddle  poynt,  the  one  faftened  in  the  other,  fo  that  the  loweft  bej-ng  fome-
what bygger,  reprefcnteth  the  Sunne,  and  the  hyghcr  the  Moone.  From  the
Sunne  a  beame  commyng  to  the  circle,  flieweth  in  it  the  houres :  and  in  the
Zodiacke,  the  monethcs,  dayes  and  number  of  degrees,  .-md  .-dfo  the  true
and  halfe  motion  of  the  Sunne.  From  the  Moone  alfo  procedeth  a  pynne,
or  wyrc,  whiche  bencathe  or  downwardc  in  the  bonier  or  margent  of  the

xlviii

The  Life  and  Labours  of  Richard  Eden.

greateft  rwndell.  fliewcth  the  houres  :  ami  pafTing  by  the  center  of  the  Epi-
cicle  of  the  Moonc,  ami  cxtemlyng  to  the  Zodiackc,  flioweth  the  halfe
motion  of  his  Planet.  Another  alfo  ryfynjj  from  thence,  and  cuttyng  the
border  of  the  center  of  the  Moone  (that  is  of  the  Epicicle)  flieweth  her  true
place,  whereby  are  feene  the  ilownene.  fwyftnclTe,  al  motions  and  courfes,
coniunctions  alfo,  and  ful  Mooncs.  About  thefe  are  fyxe  other  rundels :
of  the  whiche,  one,  whom  they  calle  the  head  and  tayle  of  the  Dragon,
flieweth  the  Eclipfes  both  of  the  Sunne  and  Moone.  The  other  are  attri-
butal  to  the  Planets  :  from  euery  of  whiche,  proceede  two  poyntes,  affign-
ing  the  motions  (as  we  haue  fayd)  of  the  Moone  :  but  they  alfo  goe  back-
wanlc,  whiche  chaunceth  not  in  the  Moone,  whofe  Eclypfe  is  mooued
contrarywyfe.  And  thus  the  reafon  of  coniunctions,  departynges,  and  lati-
tudes, is  manifeft  in  all.  There  is  alfo  an  other  border  lyke  vnto  a  Zodi-
acke,  cutting  or  diuidyng  vpwarde  or  aboue.  thofe  fyxe  litle  rundels  (whereof
we  haue  fpokcn)  being  the  rundels  of  the  Pianettes  :  whereby  appearcth
the  degrees  of  the  Eafl  fignes,  and  the  fpaces  of  the  dayes  (that  is  to  fay)
at  what  houre  the  Sunne  rifeth,  by  the  whiche,  euery  of  the  Pianettes  are
carried  in  their  nindels  or  circles  by  courfe,  in  the  day  tyme  to  the  Eafl:,
and  in  the  nyght  to  the  Weft  Agayne  contrarywyfe,  the  greateft  rundel
of  al,  di-aweth  with  it  al  the  Pianettes,  in  the  nyght  to  the  Eafl,  and  in  the
day  to  the  Weft,  in  the  fpace  of.  24.  houres.  Az  which,  to  agree  with  the
motions  of  heauen,  both  reafon  and  experience  doo  confyrme.  And  ther-
forc  ought  ye  not  to  marueyle,  yf  thefe  thynges  feeme  incredible  to  many.
For  (as  fayth  the  wyfe  Prouerbe)  fayth  is  flowlye  geuen  to  great  thynges,
for  euen  we  fcarfely  beleeue  our  owne  eyes,  when  we  fee  fuche  thynges.
And  therefore,  whereas  in  tyme  paft  I  read,  that  fuche  a  lyke  inftrument
was  made  by  Archimedes,  my  faith  yet  fayled  me  to  geue  credite  to  fo  great
an  Aucthour,  which  thyng  neuertheleffe  this  our  Florentine  hath  perfourmed.
The  worke  doubtleffe  beyng  of  fuch  excellence,  that  all  prayfe  is  inferior  to
it,  and  can  not  therfore  for  the  woorthynelTe  thereof  be  otherwyfe  praifed,
then  to  fay  that  it  paffeth  all  prayfe.  The  Artificer  him  felfe  alfo  being  a
man  of  fuch  integritie  of  maners,  that  the  funne  is  nothing  inferior  to  the
excellencie  of  his  wyt :  in  fo  much  that  he  may  feeme  a  man  fent  from
heauen,  where  he  learned  the  makyng  of  this  heauen,  by  the  example  of  the
other.  Hytherto  Policianus.  Of  the  lyke  inftrument,  Roger  Bacon  alfo
maketh  mention  in  his  fayde  booke,  of  the  maraellous  power  of  Art  and
Nature,  affyrmyng  the  fame  to  be  woorth  a  kyngdome  to  a  wyfe  man.

But  for  as  muche  as  the  lubiect  whiche  I  haue  nowe  in  hande,  is  cheefely
touchyng  inuentions  parteinyng  to  Shyppes,  and  the  Art  of  Nauigation,  I
thynke  good  to  fpeake  fomewhat  of  the  inuention  of  a  certayne  Italian
wryter,  named  Leonardo Fiorananti,  who  in  his  booke,  entitled
'  ^"  ^  ^  •  Specchio  de  fcicntia  vniuei-fale,  doeth  greatly  glory  in  the  in-
uention of  Shyppes,  whiche  can  not  peryflie  eyther  on  the  fea,  or  the  lande,
affyrmyng  that  the  lyke  was  neuer  inuented  fmce  the  creation  of  the  worlde.
But  I  feare  me,  left  vayne  glorie  of  difcourfyng  in  the  Italian  tongue,  hath
caufed  him  more  then  needes,  to  commende  his  owne  inuention,  as  for  the
mofte  parte  is  the  maner  of  the  Italian  writers.  Therfore
ofa  ShTp"^'""  committing  the  iudgement  hereof  to  men  of  greater  experi-
which  can  not  ence  and  knowledge  in  thefe  thynges,  I  wyl  onely  tranllate
e  rowne  .  j^j^  woordes,  whereby  in  the  booke  before  named,  he
defcribeth  the  fayde  Shyppe  in  this  maner.  Take  beames  of  Eyre,  or
Pyne  tree,  which  of  their  owne  nature  can  neuer  goe  downe,  or  fyncke,  or
abyde  vnder  the  water,  and  with  thefe  beames  forme  an  engine  (Afachina,
yf  I  may  fo  call  it)  of  the  length  of  three  fcore  foote,  and  of  the  breadth  of
twentie  foote,  and  of  the  heyght  of  fyxe  foote,  laying  the  fyrfte  raiike  in
length,  and  the  other  trauerfe,  or  ouerthwarte,  and  the  thyrde  againe  in
length,  fafliionyng  the  fore  parte  lyke  vnto  other  Shyppes,  and  in  lyke
manner,  bryngyng  the  poupe  or  hynder  parte  to  good  forme :  then  vvith
fuch  irons  as  apparteync,  bynde  it,  and  ftrengthen  it  in  fuche  maner  that  it
can  not  breake.  And  vpon  this  frame  or  fundation  buylde  your  Shyppe,
of  fuche  fafliion  as  you  thynke  beft.  &c.  It  were  here  too  long  to  rehearfe
with  what  proude  woordes  and  oflentation  he  magnifieth  this  inuention.
But  whether  this  frame  or  engine  fhoulde  be  bylden  vpon  the  keele  or
bottome  of  the  Shyp,  or  otherwyfe,  I  commit  it  to  them  of  better  iudge-
ment, as  I  haue  fayde.

But  wheras  it  may  for  this  tyme  fuffife  to  haue  wrytten  thus  muche
of  thefe  thynges,  I  wyll  make  an  ende  with  onely  a  breefe  rehearfal  of
the  inuention  and  encreafe  of  the  Art  of  Nauigation.  After  that  the  Art
of  Nauigation  was  founde,  euery  man  began  to  chalenge  vnto  hym  the

xlviii

dominion  of  the  fea,  and  there  to  dwel  and  kepe  vvarre  euen  as  on  the  land.
Minos  (as  wryteth  Strabo)  was  the  fyrft  that  ruled  on  the  fea,  whiche
neuerthelcffe,  other  afcribe  to  A\ptnnus,  who  fyrft  founde  the  Art  of  Naui-
gation, and  was  therefore  (as  wryteth  Diodorus)  appoynted  by  Satiirntts  to
be  Admiral  of  the  fyrfte  Nauie :  and  thereby  the  pofleritie  afterwarde
afcribed  to  him  the  gouernaunce  of  the  fea,  and  named  him  the  God
thereof.  After  whom  the  Cretenfes  euer  were  efteemed  moft  expert  in  the
Art  of  Nauigation.  But  (as  wryteth  Plinie)  boates  were  fyrft  inuented,
and  with  them  was  the  fyrfte  faylyng  in  the  Ilandes  of  the  redde  fea,  vnder
kyng  Erythra,  as  alfo  witnetTeth  Quintilian,  faying.  If  none  had  proceeded
further  then  the  inuentions  of  our  predeceffors,  we  had  had  nothyng  in  the
Poets  aboue  Andronicus,  and  nothing  in  hiftories  aboue  the  Annales  or
Cronicles  of  Byfflioppes,  and  had  yet  haue  fayled  in  troughes  or  in  boates.
Other  haue  afcribed  this  inuention  to  diuers  other  nations  and  perfons,  as
to  the  Troians  and  Myfians  in  Hellefponto,  and  alfo  that  the  ancient  Britanes
made  boates  of  leather  or  hydes,  and  fayled  with  them  in  the  Ocean  fea,
Plinie  wryteth,  that  Danaus  was  the  fyrft  that  brought  a  .Shyppe  out  of
Grece  into  Egypt.  Some  alfo  geue  the  fime  to  Mincrica.  But  moft  ryght-
fully,  the  inuention  both 'of  the  Shyp,  and  Art  of  Nauigation,  is  afcribed  to
Noe,  who  (as  wryteth  Eufehtis)  was  longe  before  N'eptune  or  Danaus.
For  doubtlefle  (fayth  he)  the  Arke  of  Noe  was  none  other  then  a  Shyp,  and
the  fyrfte  and  onely  exemplar  of  the  buyldyng  of  all  other  Shyppes  or
veffelles  of  faylyng.  Alfo  the  mofte  ancient  wryter  ^(.r^y/zj  the  Chaldean
(as  wryteth  lo/ephus)  calleth  the  Arke  of  Noe,  a  Shyp.  The  fame  lo/ephus
alfo  fayth,  that  the  Nephues  of  Noe,  departyng  to  inhabite  diuers  partes  of
the  worlde,  vfed  many  Shyppes.  &c.  Long  after  Noe,  the  Tyrians  were
counted  moft  expert  in  the  Arte  of  Nauigation  :  and  after  them,  diuers
other  nations.  For  whereas  no  Art  is  fo  perfect,  but  may  receaue  encreafe,
hereof  doth  it  folowe,  that  this  Art  alfo  hath  been  greatly  augmented,  and
brought  to  further  perfection  by  witty  inuentions  of  the  pofteritie,  euen
vnto  our  age  :  whereof,  who  fo  lyfteth  to  know  further  more  particulerly
who  inuented  all  other  partes  and  inftrumentes  parteyning  to  al  fortes  of
Shyppes,  and  Art  of  Nauigation,  may  read  ye  thyrde  booke  of  Polidor
Virgil,  Cap.  xv.  De  Inuentorib.  Rer.  and  Bayjius,  de  re  nauali.

Thus  gentle  Maifter  Wynter,  befeechyng  your  woorfhyp  to  take

in  good  part  this  teftimonie  of  my  thankfuU  hart  (fuche  as  it

is)  I  befeeche  the  immortall  God  to  profper  all  your  doo-

inges  to  his  honor,  and  the  benefite  of  your  Countrey.

1576.  The  last  work  wliich  it  was  permitted to Eden to

undertake,  was  an  English  translation  from  a  Latin
version  of  Ludovico  Barthema's Travels  in  the  Eajl  in

1503,  which  was  posthumously printed  by R. Willes, the next year.

He  was  also  endeavouring  to  collect  the  Reports  of  the  Agents  of  the

Moscovy  Company,  which  form  so  important  a  part  of  Hakluyt's  Collection ;

when  death  exchanged  his  earthly  life  of  troubles  and  labours,  for,  we  can

but  think,  the  blessed  peace  of  heavenly  rest.

I  am  indebted  to  my  friend  the  late  Mr.  C.  Bridger,  Hon.  Mem.  of  the
Soc.  of  Ant.  of  Newcastle,  for  the  following  note  :

1576.  July  20. Letters  of  Administration  were  granted,  in  the  Pre-

rogative Court  of  Canterbury,  to  the  estate  of  Richard

Eden,  of  the  parish  of  St  Dunstan's  in  the  East,  (the  same

parish  in  which  Sir  John  Hawkins  lived),  in  favour  of  Alban  Eden,  his  son,

1577.  Summer. R.  Willis  published  a  second  and  altered  edition  of

the  Third  Work  here  reprinted,  under  the  title  of  The
History  of  Trauayle  in  the  West  and  East  Indies,  ^t'c.
1586.  April,  It  would  appear  from  T.  A.T)'Av.h\^\\e!sHisioire[I^ni-

■jjersclle,  iii.  book  i.  c.  3,  /,  15,  Ed.  1620,  that  the  Vidame,
after  many  wanderings,  was  captured  by  one  Captain
Carles:  who  (not  crediting  that  a  member  of  so  good  a
family  was  unable  to  pay  his  ransom)  suffered  this  distinguished  Nobleman,
whom  the  King  of  Navarre  had  called  his  Uncle,  and  who  was  now  about
sixty-six  years ;  to  die  like  a  dog,  while  bound  to  the  magazine  at  the  bottom
of  the  hold  of  his  galley.  A  prisoner  so  placed  would  be  situated  immedi-
ately below  the  planking  of  the  passage  which  extended  between  the  two
rows  of  galley  slaves  from  the  prow  to  the  stern  of  the  galley  :  and  there-
fore, when  the  galley  was  in  motion,  would  ceaselessly  suffer  from  all  the
noise  of  the  sixty  or  eighty  rowers ;  from  \vhom  he  would  be  separated,  only
by  the  thickness  of  the  planking  above  his  head.

Richard Eden's

Contributions  to  our  Literature,

during  the  reigns  of

Edward  VI.  and  Mary.

I553-I555 A.D,

[The  Second  English  book  on  America.]

C  ^  treatgCe  at  Hxt  ntVot  India,
iuitit 0tfter neiu fflttntre XantrtsJ

iuejSttuaitre,  a^  titeg  are  fenoiueu

anXr  fountr  iw  Wxtit  ottte  tragcjS,  .

after tire trcj^cripcion  0£ ^eBa^S^

tian  jHun^tn*  in  Iti5  ioite  of  bni*

unCall  C0Cm0jg:tapftie :  luftrrin  i\\t

triXigent  reaUer  wag  ^tt  i\\t  ijootr

jSuccefCe  antf  rrtoattre  tii  wtMt

anXr  Iione^te  cntevjpigfesJ,

Bg tfrt luftitft nfft ffnio iuffrtlf'

Ib vBcfttfS are ofitajjitt'ff,

but  alsSff  «Sotf  tii  slffi=

tftfjr,  antf  tftc  Cftit=

stiait  fagtft  f  it=

laigtW.

JCvan^Iatflr  out  nl  itatiit  titto  «?it3lioTrf. 3Bi»

ivDtftaiHt  ©VciT.

1^°  Prceter  spem  sub  spe.

^[ To THE RIGHT HYGHE AND MIGHTY PrINCE,

THE Duke of Northumberlande,

HYS GRACE.

Reade  in  auncient  writers  (moft  noble  prince)  how
that  mightie  kyng  and  conquerour  of  the  world,
Alexander  the  great,  at  fuch  tyme  as  he  beheld  ye
tombe  of  fearfe  Achilles,  and  therewith  called  to  his
remembraunce  howe  excellently  the  Poet  Homere
had  fet  forth  his  heroical  factes,  which  notwithftand-
ing  he  thoughte  to  be  muche  inferiour  vnto  his,  he
fighed  and  fayde  :  Oh  the  moft  fortunate,  which  hafte
founde  fuche  a  trompe  to  magnifi  thi  doinges,  mean-
ing hereby,  that  the  fame  of  Achilles  was  no  leffe
notable  to  hys  pofteritie  by  homers  writing,  then
it  was  in  hys  lyfe  tyme  by  hys  owne  marcial
affayres.  Wherby  we  maye  perceue  fuch  magna-
nimitie  to  haue  ben  in  our  prediceffours,  men  of
noble  and  ftout  courage,  yat  they  thought  it  not  fufficiente  in  their  life  time  to  deferue  prayfe
and  honour,  except  the  fame  might  alfo  redounde  to  theyr  pofteritie,  yat  they  mighte  therby
bee  encouraged  to  do  the  like.  Whyche  thing  truely  hath  ben  ye  caufe,  yat  in  al  ages
noble  enterprifes  haue  ben  commended,  and  fuch  as  haue  attempted  ye  fame,  haue
bene  honoured.  Wherfore  if  honeft  commendacions  be  a  iuft  reward  dew  to  noble
enterprifes,  fo  much  do  they  robbe  and  fpoyle  from  ye  dignitie  therof,  which  in  any
poynt  diminifhe  the  fame  :  no  leffe  confoundinge  the  order  of  thinges,  than  he  whiche
cloteth  an  ape  in  purple,  and  a  king  in  fackecloth.  This  I  fpeake  ye  rather,  beecaufe
there  chaunfed  of  late  to  come  to  my  handes,  a  fhiete  of  printed  paper,  (more  worthy  fo  to
bee  called  then  a  boke)  entytuled  of  the  newe  founde  landes.  The  whyche  tytle  when  I
readde,  as  one  not  vtterlye  ignoraunt  hereof,  hauynge  before  in  my  tyme  readde  Decades,
and  alfo  the  nauigations  de  nouo  orde,  there  feemed  too  me  no  leffe  inequalitye  betwene  the
tytle  and  the  booke,  then  if  a  man  woulde  profeffe  to  wryte  of  Englande,  and
entreated  onelye  of  Trumpington  a  vyllage  wythin  a  myle  of  Cambrydge.  Wherefore
partelye  moued  [by]  the  good  affeccion,  whyche  I  haue  euer  borne  to  the  fcience  of
Cofmographie,  whyche  entreately  of  the  defcripcion  of  the  worlde,  whereof  the  newe
founde  landes  are  no  fmal  part,  and  much  more  by  ye  good  wyll,  whych  of  duetie  I
beare  to  my  natyue  countrey  and  countreymen,  which  haue  of  late  to  their  great  praife
(whatfoeuer  fuccede)  attempted  with  new  viages  to  ferche  ye  feas  and  newe  found
landes,  I  thought  it  worthy  my  trauayle,  to  their  better  comfort,  (as  one  not  othenvife
able  to  further  theyr  enterprife)  to  tranflate  this  boke  oute  of  latin  into  Engliflie.
The  which,  albeit  it  do  not  fo  largely  or  particulerlye  entreate  of  euery  part,  region  or
commoditie  of  ye  fayd  new  found  landes,  as  the  worthines  of  the  thing  might  requyre  :
yet  fure  I  am  that  afwel  they  which  fet  forth  or  take  vpon  them  this  viage,  as  alfo
they  which  fhal  hereafter  attempt  ye  lyke,  may  in  this  fmal  boke  as  in  a  little  glaffe.
fee  fome  cleare  light,  not  only  how  to  learne  by  the  example,  dammage,  good  fticceffe,

Eden.

E2

{Dcdicafiou  to  the  Duke  of  Noythuinbcrland\

and  aduentures  of  other,  how  to  behaiie  them  fekies  and  direct  theyr  vlage  to  their
moft  commoditie,  but  alfo  if  dew  fucceffe  herein  fhoiilde  not  chaunce  according-  vnto
theyr  hope  and  expectation  (as  oftentimes  chanceth  in  great  affaires,)  yet  not  for  one
foyle  or  fal,  fo  to  be  difmayd  as  with  fhame  and  diflionor  to  leaue  wyth  loffe,  but
rather  to  the  death  to  perfifl;  in  a  godly,  honefte,  and  lawful  purpofe,  knowing  that
whereas  one  death  is  dewe  to  nature,  the  fame  is  more  honourably  fpent  in  fuch
attemptes  as  may  be  to  the  glorye  of  God  and  commoditie  of  our  countrey,  then  in
foft  beddes  at  home,  among  the  teares  and  weping  of  women.  Which  manlye
courage  (like  vnto  that  which  hath  ben  feen  and  proued  in  your  grace,  afwell  in  forene
realmes,  as  alfo  in  this  oure  countrey)  yf  it  had  not  been  wanting  in  other  in  thefe
our  dayes,  at  fuche  time  as  our  fouereigne  Lord  of  noble  memorie  Kinge  Henry  the.
viij.  about  the  fame  yere  of  his  raygne,  furniflied  and  fent  forth  certen  fliippes  vnder
the  gouernaunce  of  Sebaftian  Cabot  yet  liuing,  and  one  fyr  Thomas  Perte,  whofe
faynt  heart  was  the  caufe  that  that  viage  toke  none  effect,  yf  (I  fay)  fuch  manly
courage  whereof  we  haue  fpoken,  had  not  at  that  tyme  bene  wanting,  it  myghte
happelye  haue  comen  to  paffe,  that  that  riche  treafurye  called  Perularia,  (which  is  now
in  Spayne  in  the  citie  of  Ciuile,  and  fo  named,  for  that  in  it  is  kepte  the  infinite  ryches
brought  thither  from  the  newe  found  land  of  Peru,)  myght  longe  fince  haue  bene  in
the  towre  of  London,  to  the  kinges  great  honoure  and  welth  of  this  his  realme.
What  riches  the  Emperoure  hath  gotten  oute  of  all  the  newe  founde  landes,  it
may  wel  appeare,  wheras  onlye  in  the  I  landes  of  Hifpana  or  Hifpaniola  and  Ciiba
and  other  I  landes  there  aboute,  were  gathered  in  two  monethes  twelue  thoufand
poundes  weyght  of  gold  as  youre  grace  maye  reade  in  this  boke,  in  the  defcripcion  of
the  Ilandes.  Yet  fpeake  I  here  nothynge  of  perles,  precious  ftones,  and  fpices.
Neyther  yet  of  the  greate  aboundaunce  of  golde,  whiche  is  engendred  almoft  in  al
regions  neare  vnto  the  yEquiiw^ial  line.  And  whereas  I  am  aduertifed  yat  youre
grace  haue  bene  a  greate  fortherer  of  thys  viage,  (as  you  haue  bene  euer  ftudious  for
the  commoditie  of  your  countrey,)  I  thought  my  trauayl  herein  coulde  no  wayes  be
more  worthely  beftowed,  then  to  dedicate  the  fame  vnto  your  grace  :  Moft  humbly
defiringe  youre  honoure  fo  to  accepte  mine  Intente  herein,  as  one  whofe  good  will
hath  not  wanted  to  gratifie  your  grace  with  a  better  thing  if  mine  abilitie  were
greater.  Thus  Almighty  God  preferue  your  grace  in  health  and  honour  long  to
continue.

C  Your  graces  poore  o-
ratour  Rychard  Eden.

C  Rycharde  Eden  to  the  reader.

Hereas in this Booke (welbeloued Reader)  thou mayefl
reade  many  llraunge  thinges,  and  in  maner  incredible,  except
the  fame  were  proued  mofl  certayn  by  dayly  experience,  and
approued  auctoritie,  (as  (hall  hereafter  appeare) I thought it
good  for  thy  better  inflruction  to  make  this  Preface,  wherby
thou  mightefl  more  playnly  and  fenfibly  comprehend  the  reafon?
and  caufes,  yf  not  of  al,  yet  of  fome  of  the  chiefefl  thinges,
which  are  conteyned  in  the  fame. Therfore  wheras  thou  (halt
reade  of  the  great  abundaunce  of  gold, precious flones and
fpices,  which  the  Spaniardes  and  Portugales  haue  brought  from
the  South  partes  of  the  worlde,  as  from  the  newe  founde  landes
and Ilandes, the  fodeyn  flraungenes  or greatnes  of  the  thing
fhal not fo much amafe thy wittes, and gender in thee
incrudelitie,  yf  thou  confider  the  faying  of  wyfe  Salomon,  who
affyrmeth  yat  there  is  no  new  thing  vnder  the  Sunne,  and  that
the  thing  that  hath  been,  cometh  to  paffe  again  :  which  faying
doeth  greatly  confyrme  the  trueth,  of  fuch  thinges  as  are  fpoken
of  in this Boke, wheras the  fame perhappes  to  fome men might otherwyfe  feme  in maner  incredible,
yf  the  lyke  had  not  been  fene  in tyme  pafle,  and  approued  by  auctoritie  of  mode  holy  fcripture,  which
declaring  the  great  wyfdom,  ryches,  and  noble  viages  of  King  Salomon,  fayth  that  God  gaue  him  wifdom
and  vnderflanding  exceding  muche,  and a large heart,  and that  he  prepared a  nauie  of  fhippes,  in  the
porte  of  AzioH  Gaber,  by  the  brinke  of  the  redde  fea,  which  fayled  to Ophir,  and  brought  from  thence,
xxi.  fcore  hundreth  (which  is.  xlii.M.  [forty-two  thousand])  weyght  of  golde. Agaj-ne,  that  the  weyghte  of
golde  which  was  broughte  to  Salomon  in  one  yere,  was.  vi.  hundreth,  thre  fcore  and.  vi.  talentes  of  gold,
wheras  the Hebrue talente,  called Talcnie  Habraicum  fanfluarij,  was  of  our  flerling  money  500.  pounde,
and  Takfit  H(Ebraicu7n  uulgare,  was  halfe  fo  much Lykewyfe  yat  filuer  was  nothing  worth  in  the  dayes  of
Salomon,  and  yat  he  made  filuer  and  gold  in  Hierufalem  as  plentious  as  flones Agayn, that  he  ouerlayd
the  houfe  of  the  Lord  with  precious  flones  beautifully,  and  the  gold  whenvith  he  couered  it,  was  golde  of
Paruaim. Alfo  that the kinges  nauie of  fhippes  went once in  thre  yere  to Tharfis,  and  brought  Gold,
Siluer,  Apes,  Peacockes,  and  Elephantes  teeth. Which  wordes  furely  feme  fo  to  confirme  fuch  thinges  as  are
fpoken  of  in  the  nauigacions  wherof  this  boke  entreateth,  that  nothinge  can  make  more  for  the  truth  of  the
fame :  and  briefely  to  fpeake  of  the  places  whether  Salomons  fliippes  fayled  for  Gold,  as  Tharfis  and  Ophir.
This  ought  to  be  confydered  for  a  general  rule,  that  nearefl  vnto  the  fouth  partes  of  the  world  betwene  the
two  Tropikes  vnder  ye  Eqiibwdial  or  burning  lyne,  where  the  funne  is  of  greatefl.  forfe,  is  the  chiefefl  place
where  gold  is  engendred,  although  it be  fometymes founde  in  colde  regions  as  in  Scotland,  in  Crayford
more,  likewyfe  in  Hungary,  yet  nether  pure  of  it  felf,  nor  in  great  quantitie :  the  reafon  whereof  is  largely
declared  in  the  Bookes  of  George  Agric,  and  Albertus  Magnus. And  wheras  it  is  written  in  ye  Boke  of
Kinges  in  the  Actes  of  Salomon  that  he  prepared  his  fhippes  in  Azion  Gaber,  beyng  by  the  brinke  of  the
readde  fea,  and  fayled  from  thence  to Ophir  for  Golde,  it  is  apparaunt,  that  (howfoeuer  the  names  of  thinges
haue  altered  and  periffhed  in  tyme)  he  fayled from  thence  fouthwarde  towarde  the Equinoctial  l}Tie, for
afmuche  as  there  is  none  other  paflage  oute  of  the  narowTieffe  of  the  readde  fea,  but  onely  into  the  mayne
South  fea,  by  the  which  the  Portugales  euen  at  this  daye  make  theyr  viage  to Calicut,  Samotra,  Mtdagafcar,
and  fuch  other  Ilandes  in  the  South  eaR  partes  of  the  worlde,  where  Golde,  Spyces,  Apes,  and  Elephantes
are  nowe  founde  in  lyke  manner. But  as  for Tharfis  beynge  a  cytye  of  Cilicia  in  Afia  the  lefle  and  the
natiue  countreye  of  S.  Paule  the  Apoflle,  and  fituate  muche  more  toward  the  North,  then  is  ludea,  and  in
maner  directlye  ouer  againfte  ludea  on  the  otherfyde  of  the  fea  called Mare Mediteraneum,  and  in  the
fame  clime,  in  the  which  flandeth  the  Ilande  of  Sicilia,  and  the  cytie  of  Ciuile  in  Spayne,  it  hardelye  agreeth
with  the  principles  of  Philofophie  and  common  experience,  that  golde  fliould  be  there  engendred  in  lyke
abundaunce  as  in  Regions  more  towarde  the  fouth,  much  lefTe  Elephantes  and  Apes,  which  are  no  where
engendred  farre  from  the  ^qiiino^ial  lyne,  or  beyonde  the  two  Tropikes,  nor  yet  wil  engendre  yf  they  be

Nothing  neir
vnder  the  Sunn&

3-  Re^:.  4
3-  Reg-  9
3.  Re.  i<x

2.  Par.  I

I  Par.  3.
Tharsis.
Golde Apes
Elephantes.

Salomons
shippes.

Ophir.

Where  Gold  is
engendred.

Scotl.and.

Hungary

3-  Reg.  9
AaoH  Cabrr.

The  Equitucinl
line.

Calicut

Tharsis  In
Cilicia.

Sicilia.

Ciuile  in  Spii)-!!^

\EpistIc  to  the  Reader]

Spycei

Pepper.
Orange  tree.

E.ist  India.

Solomon  boughte
golde  of
uuirchauntes.

The  south  and
soucheasL

Mat.  12.
3  Reg-  X
1.  P.ir.  9

The  queue  of
S.iba,  the  queue
of  the  south.

a  par.  9

3  Reg.  X

Saba  •->  "  tj.:„±:„
vnder  Egipt.

Saba  in  Arabia.

Trie  quene  of
Saba  came  from
the  Hand  of
JMerotr.

From  Rome  to
England.

The  viage  of  our
men  to  catJuiy

Norway,  Lappia,
Finmarchia.

Globes  and
mappes.

Ptolomeus.

A  tnerica.

The  strayghtes  of
Magellanits.

The  Ilandes  of
Molucca.

Passage  by  the
north  sea  into
the  East.

Pius  secundus.
lib.  i.  Capit.  ii.

Note  wel  the
ijassage  by  ye
North  sea.

Augustus
th[e]emperour

Civtbria.

Ctispia.

The  warres  of  ye

Macedonians

bronghte  into  thofe  partes  of  the  world.  The  lyke  is  to  be  vnderaande  of  Popingiayes  and  fpyces,  and
d\uers  other  beaRes,  fruites,  and  trees,  which  are  engendered  in  certayne  chmes  of  the  worlde,  and
wyll  not  profpere  in  other  places :  the  rcafon  wherof  were  here  to  longe  [to]  declare.  For  lyke  as  pepper
wyll  not  growe  in  Spayne,  no  more  wyll  the  Orange  tree  bringe  foorth  fruite  in  Englande.  Wherefore,  it
may  feme  by  good  reafon,  that  the  Golde,  Apes,  and  Elephantes  teeth  which  were  bronghte  from  Tharfis  (yf  it
were  Tharfis  of  Cilicia)  were  not  engendered  there,  but  rather  brought  thether  by  merchauntes  from  the  fouth  partes
of  the  world,  out  of  Mauritania,  Marmarica,  Ethiopia,  Libia,  and  Arabia,  or  otherwife  by  lande,  from  the  Eaft
India,  lyke  as  at  this  daye,  the  greate  multitude  of  Spyces,  Golde,  Precious  flones,  Sylke,  and  luerye,  whyche  is  at
Calicut  and  Cambaia,  growe  not  al  in  the  regions  there  about,  but  are  brought  thether  from  dyuers  other  countreys,
as  doeth  more  largely  appeare  in  this  Poke.  And  that  Salomons  factours  for  exchaunge  of  other  marchaundyfc,
bought  the  fame  in  Tharfis,  beyng  brought  thether  from  other  countreyes,  as  it  is  written  in  the  thyrde  Poke
of  the  Kinges,  that  Salomon  had  great  plentie  of  Gold  of  Marchauntes  and  Apothecaries.  So  that  to
conclude,  I  would  rather  thinke  (fauing  reformacion  of  other  better  learned)  that  this  Tharfis  (and  not
Tharfis  of  Cilicia,)  from  whence  Salomon  had  fo  great  plentie  of  Gold  and  luerie,  were  rather  fome  other
countrey  in  the  fouth  partes  of  the  world,  then  this  Tharfis  of  Cilicia.  For,  not  onely  olde  and  newe
Hiftories,  dayly  experience,  and  the  principles  of  natrral  Philofophigjiee-agfee,  yat  the  places  mod  apte  to
bring  forth  gold,  fpices,  and  precious  Rones,  are  the  South  aild  Southeaft  partes  of  the  world,  but  alfo  our
Sauiour  Chrift  approueth  the  fame,  declaring  tlut  the  Quene  of  the  South  (meaning  the  Quene  of  Saba)
came  from  the  vtmoae  partes  of  the  wojl^e  to  heare  the  wyfdom  of  Salomon.  And  lyke  as  by  the  auctoritie
of  thefe  woordes  it  is  plaync  irom  what  partes  of  the  world  flie  came,  the  fame  to  a  philofophical  head  is
apparent  by  fuche  ry^ies  and  prefentes  as  fhe  broughte  with  her.  For  albeit  that  in  the  Chronacles  of
Salomon  it  is-Yiot  written  by  expreffed  wordes  that  fhe  came  from  the  Sou  the,  yet  is  it  wrytten  that  flie  came
to  HierVj-falem  with  a  very  great  trayne,  with  camels  laden  with  fpyces,  fwete  odours,  and  exceading  much
gold  and  precious  flones,  which  defcripcion  doeth  well  agree,  both  with  the  fituation  of  the  cytie  of  Saba  in
Ethiopia  vnder  Egipt :  and  alfo  with  the  countrey  of  Saba,  being  in  the  middel  of  Arabia,  inuironned  about
with  great  rockes  wherein  is  a  great  wood  of  Precious  trees,  fome  of  Cinomome  and  Caffia,  and  fome  bring-
ing forth  frankencenfe  and  myrre,  as  writeth  Plinius  lib.  12.  and  Theophrajlus  li.  9.  de  Hif.  Plant.  Wherefore
the  Quene  of  Saba  myghte  worthely  be  called  the  quene  of  the  South,  forafmuch  as  bothe  Saba  (or  rather
Sabat)  in  Ethiopia,  whiche  lofephus  thinketh  to  be  the  Hand  of  Meroe,  now  called  Elf  aba,  beinge  in  the  ryuer
of  Niliis,  and  that  the  quene  came  from  thence,  and  alfo  Saba  in  Arabia,  are  fituate  farre  Southwarde  from
Hierufalem,  euen  in  maner  in  the  middefl  of  the  lyne,  called  Tropicus  Cancri,  and  the  Equinoflial  lyne,  where
the  Pole  Artike  is  eleuate  not  paffing.  13.  degrees  or  thereabout  (as  in  Meroce)  where  as  the  fame  pole  is  eleuate
at  Hierufalem.  32.  degrees  :  whereby  it  may  appeare  yat  the  quene  of  Saba  (whom  Chrifle  calleth  the  quene
of  ye  fouth,)  came  from  the  fouth  partes  about,  xi.  hundreth  and.  xl.  miles  from  Hierufalem  for  the  fame
diflaunce  is  from  Saba  in  Meroe  to  Hierufalem,  as  betwene  Rome  and  England.  Put  as  touching  this
matter,  it  fhall  fuffyfe  to  haue  fayde  thus  muche.  Nowe  therefore  to  returne  home  from  thefe  farre  countreys,
and  to  fpeake  fomewhat  of  this  viage  which  oure  countreymenne,  haue  attempted  to  fayle  into  the  Eafle
partes,  by  the  coafles  of  Norway,  Lappia,  and  Finmarchia,  and  fo  by  the  narrovve  tracte  of  the  Sea  by  the
coaftes  of  Grouelande,  into  the  frofen  fea,  called  Mare  Congelatiim,  and  fo  forth  to  Cathay  (yf  any  fuche
paffage  may  be  found)  whiche  onely  doubte  doeth  at  this  daye  difcorage  many  faynte  hearted  men,  fpeciallye
beecaufe  in  the  mofle  parte  of  Globes  and  Mappes  they  fee  the  continente  or  fyraie  land,  extended  euen  to
the  North  Pole  without  any  fuch  paffage.  Which  thing  ought  to  moue  no  man  greatly,  forafmuch  as  the
mofl  parte  of  Globes  and  mappes  are  made  after  Ptolomeus  Tables :  Who,  albeit  he  was  an  excellent  man,
yet  were  there  many  thinges  hyd  from  his  knowledge,  as  not  fufificientelye  tryed  or  fearched  at  thofe  daies,  as
manifeflly  appeareth  in  that  he  knew  nothing  of  America  with  the  hole  fyrme  lande  adherent  thereunto,
which  is  nowe  found  to  be  the  fourth  parte  of  the  earth.  Neyther  yet  knew  he  any  thinge  of  the  paffage  by
the  Wefle  into  the  Eafle,  by  the  flrayghtes  of  Magellamis  as  you  flial  reade  in  this  Poke.  Neyther  of  the
Ilandes  in  the  Wefle  Ocean  Sea,  nor  of  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca  fituate  in  the  mayne  Eafle  Indian  Sea.  And
as  touchinge  this  paffage,  albeit,  it  were  not  knowen  in  Ptolomeus  dayes  yet  other  auctors  of  later  time,  who
perhappes  haue  hadde  further  experience  of  the  thing  (as  good  reafon  is)  doe  wryte  not  onely  that  there  is
a  paffage  by  the  Northe  Sea  into  the  mayne  Eafle  Sea,  but  doe  alfo  further  declare,  howe  certayne  fhippes
haue  flitely  fayled  throughe  the  fame,  as  Pius  fecundus  (othervvyfe  called  yEncas  Sihiius)  an  excellente
auctour  defcrybeth  in  his  Poke  of  Cofmographie,  where  he  hath  thefe  wordes  folowing.  Of  the  North  Ocean
Sea,  whether  it  may  be  fayled  aboute  or  not,  the  contencion  is  greater,  yet  is  it  apparaunte  that  the  greatefle
parte  thereof  aboute  Germanic,  hath  been  fearched  by  the  commaundemente  of  Auguflus  th[e]emperour,  euen
vnto  the  promontorie  or  landes  ende  of  the  people,  called  Civibri.  The  feas  alfo  and  coafles  of  Cafpia  were
fo  fearched  during  the  warres  of  the  Macedonians  vnder  the  dominion of  Seleucus  and  Anthiocus,  that  al

\Episile  to  the  Reader.]

mofl  all  the  Noith  on  euery  fyde  was  fayled  about.  Plinie  rehearfeth  the  teflimonie  of  Cornelius  Nepos,  who
wryteth  that  the  King  of  Sueuia  (or  Swethelande)  gaue  to  Metellus  cekr,  proconfull  or  leauetenaunte  of
Fraunce,  certayne  Indians  or  menne  of  Inde,  whiche  faylinge  out  of  India  for  marchaundyfe,  were  by
temped  drieuen  into  Germanie.  We  alfo  reade  in  Otho,  that  vnder  th[e]empyre  of  the  Germaynes,  there  was
a  fhippe  of  Indians  taken  in  the  North  fea  of  Germanie,  and  drieuen  thether  by  contrary  wynd  from  the
Eafl  partes:  which  thing  coulde  by  no  meanes  haue  comen  to  paffe,  yf  (as  many  menne  thinke)  the  North
fea  were  not  nauigable  by  reafon  of  extreme  cold  and  Ife.  And  thefe  be  the  very  wordes  of  Pius  Seaindus,
whereunto  I  adde,  that  thys,  notwithflandinge,  yf  it  fhould  fo  chaunce,  that  ether  there  can  no  fuch  paf-
fage  be  found,  or  the  fame  fo  daungerous,  or  otherwyfe  that  the  very  cutte  thereof  by  which  onely  perhappes
any  fhippes  might  paffe,  could  not  be  founde,  yea,  or  to  cafle  the  worfle,  yf  they  fhoulde  periflie  in  this  viage,  yet
I  woulde  wifhe  all  men  to  be  of  fuch  corage  and  conftancie  in  thefe  affayres,  as  are  valiauni  capita)Ties
in  the  warres :  who,  yf  by  miffortune  they  take  a  foyle,  doe  rather  fludie  how  by  fome  other  wayes  to  recouer
theyr  honour  and  reputacion  diminifhed  by  the  fame,  then  with  fliame,  loffe,  and  diflionour,  euer  afterwarde
to  geue  place  to  theyr  enemyes,  or  forfweare  the  warres.  Wherefore,  to  conclude,  yf  no  good  can  be  done  this
way,  it  were  worthy  the  aduenture  to  attempt,  yf  the  fame  viage  may  bee  broughte  to  paffe,  another  waye,  as
by  the  flrayght  called  Fretum  trimn  fratrum,  vveflward  and  by  North  from  England,  whiche  viage  is  fufficiently
knowen  to  fuche  as  haue  any  fkyll  in  Geographic.  As  for  other  landes  and  Ilandes  in  the  wefl  fea,  where
the  Eagle  (yet  not  in  euery  place)  hath  fo  fpled  his  winges,  that  other  poore  byrdes  may  not  without  offence
feke  theyr  praye  within  the  compaffe  of  the  fame,  I  wyll  fpeake  nothing  hereof,  bycaufe  I  wold  be  loth  to  lay
an  egge,  wherof  other  men  might  hatche  a  ferpent.  Wherfore  to  let  this  paffe,  and  to  entre  into  another
matter.  Forafmuch  as  in  thefe  our  daies  hath  chaunced  fo  great  a  fecret  to  be  found,  as  the  like  hath  neuer
been  knowen  or  heard  before,  (what  foeuer  God  meant  to  kepe  this  miflery  hyd  fo  long)  I  thoughte  it  good
to  fpeake  fomwhat  hereof :  trufling  yat  the  pleafaunt  contemplacion  of  the  thing  it  felfe,  fhal  make  the  length
of  this  preface  leffe  tedious,  efpecially  yf  it  find  a  reader  whofe  foule  delyteth  to  prayfe  God  in  his  workes.
The  thing  therfore  is  this,  how  the  hole  globe  of  the  world  (of  the  earth  and  water  I  meane)  hath  been  fayled
aboute,  by  the  Wefl  into  the  Eafl,  as  doth  more  largely  appeare  in  this  boke  in  the  nauigacions  of  Magellanus,
who  from  Spayne  fayled  Weflward  to  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca  being  in  the  Eaft.  fea,  farre  beyond  ye  furthefl
partes  of  Eafl  India :  and  the  portugales  came  to  the  fame  Ilandes  from  Spayne  fayling  Eaflward  by  the
coafles  of  Aphrica,  Arabia,  and  the  vttermoft.  India  beyond  the  ryuer  of  Gafiges  where,  in  yat  Indian  fea  the
fayd  Ilandes  of  Molucca  are  fituate.  A  thing  furely  mofl  wonderful,  and  in  maner  incredible,  but  that  the
fame  is  proued  mofl  certayne  by  experience,  the  teacher  and  meflres  of  all  fciences,  for  lacke  of  whofe  ayde
(experience  I  meane)  lyke  as  many  greate  wittes  haue  fallen  into  great  errours,  fo  by  her  ayde,  many  bafe
and  common  wittes  haue  attayned  to  the  knowledge  and  practife  of  fuch  wonderfuU  efifectes,  as  could  hardely
be  comprehended  by  the  difcourfe  of  reafon.  Which  thing  or  other  lyke,  I  fuppofe  was  the  caufe  why  the
noble  Philofopher  Arifloteles  fayde :  Quod  nihil  ejl  in  intelleciu  quod  non  fuit  pritis  in  fc/ifu,  that  is,  that
nothinge  is  in  vnderRandinge,  but  the  fame  was  fyrfl  in  fenfe,  that  is  to  faye  subiect  to  ye  fenfes.  Yet  would
I  not  that  any  rafhe  witte  flioulde  hereby  take  holde,  as  thoughe  eyther  Ariflotle  or  I,  meant  that  fence
were  more  excellent  then  reafon,  but  rather  that  reafon  vfing  fenfe,  taketh  his  principles  and  f}Tfl  fedes  of
thinges  fenfyble,  and  afterwarde  by  his  owne  difcourfe  and  fearching  of  caufes,  encreafeth  the  fame  from  a
feede  to  a  tree,  as  from  an  acome  to  an  oke.  Nought  els  to  fay,  but  that  experience  to  be  mofl  certayn
which  is  ioyned  with  reafon  or  fpeculacion,  and  that  reafon  to  be  mofl.  fure  which  is  confirmed  with
experience,  accordinge  as  the  Phificians  determen  in  theyr  fcience,  that  neyther  practyfe  is  fafe  without
fpeculacion,  nor  fpeculacion  without  practyfe.  Wherfore,  whereas  men  of  great  knowledge  and  experience,
are  to  great  affaires,  theyi-  attemptes  haue  for  the  mofl:e  parte  good  fucceffe,  as  doeth  mofle  playnly  appeare
in  all  hifl,ories  :  notv/ithflanding  that  fome  ignoraunt  men  wyl  alledge  that  certayn  rafhe  aduentures  haue
profpered  well :  which  fayinge  proueth  no  more  then  yf  a  man  fhould  fay,  that  twife  or  thrife  a  man  vnarmed
flew  a  man  armed  (as  dyd  fometyme  the  wyld  Irifhmen  at  bullen)  Ergo,  it  were  better  to  fight  vnarmed
then  armed.  And  wheras  I  haue  here  fpoken  of  knowledge  ioyned  with  experience,  I  meane  by  knowledge
yat  which  we  commonly  call  learning,  whether  it  be  gotten  out  of  bokes  (which  are  the  writinges  of  wyfe
and  expert  men)  or  otherwyfe  by  conference  and  educacion  with  fuch  as  are  lemed  :  meaning  nought  els  by
learning,  but  ye  gathering  of  many  mens  wittes  into  one  mans  head,  and  the  experience  of  many  yeres,
and  many  mens  lyues,  to  the  lyfe  of  one,  whom  we  call  a  learned,  wyfe,  and  expert  man.  The  which
defynicion  and  effect  of  learning,  the  noble  and  learned  cortier  Baltaffar  Cafl.aglione  (the  auctour  of  the  boke
called  in  the  Italian  tongue  il  cortcgiono,)  diligently  confideringe,  doeth  greatlye  blame  and  reproue  the
frenflimen  in  that  they  thinke  yat  the  knowledge  of  letters  doeth  hinder  the  affayres  of  warre,  ye  which
perfwafion  he  proueth  by  many  reafons  and  examples  to  be  mofl.  falfe.  But  as  concerninge  the  matter
whereof this  boke  entreateth the greate Philofopher Albertus Magnus, onelye by learninge, wythoute

Pliniut.

Comeliiu  Sepoi.

Sueuia,  callc<i  also
Suecia  nerc  \'nto
Kothland  and
norway.

A  ship  of  Indians
driucn  from  the
East  into  the  N  urth
seas.

The  viage  to
Cathay

Westwarde  and
by  north.

The  earth
compassed  about

The  vinge  of
MageUauiis.

The  Ilandes  of
Molucca,

Experience,  ye
teacher  of  ai
sciences.

Sense  and
vnderstandinge.

A  senter.ce  cf
AxistotelL

Experience  ioined
unth  speculatiun

A  perticuler
proueth  no
vniuersalL

^\■hat  is
knowlei^ge  and
learning

BaJtassar
Castaglione.
A  false

pcrs»-asion  of  ye
Krcnihracn.

Allfr/us  Jf,i^:ts

10

\Epistle  to  the  Reader^

Temperat  regions
vnder  ye
EqutHOctial  line.

An  error  of  S.
Aiigu&tine  and
I^ticitmtius.

A  ntipodes.

Afianut.

LactaHttus.

The  roundnes  of
ye  earth.

S.  augustyne.

A  planus.

The  apostles,
Antipodes  the
one  againste
th[e]other.

The  spanyardes
and  the  Indians
are  Atiiipocies.

S.  augustine  of
the  heresie  of
Manickeus.

S.  augiistines
boke  of  retractes.

Mountaynes,  let
not  ye  roundnes
of  the  earth.

A  galle.

A  Sentence  of  S.
augustines.

Commendacion  of
s.  augustin

I.aci/i.ntius.

experyence,  affyrmed  that  habitable  or  temperate Regions  niyghte  be  vnder  the  Equinoctial  or  buminge
lyne,  as  appeareth  in  hys  Boke  de  Nahtra  loconim,  contrarye  to  the  opinion  of  other  wryters  whyche  were  before
hys  tyme,  and  yet  is  nowe  proued  by  experience  to  bee  mofle  true,  albeit  not  in  all  places  vnder  the  fayde
lyne,  the  caufe  whereof  were  here  to  longe  to  declare. And  lyke  as  Albertus  Magnus  by  knowledge  of
Aftronomye  (wherein  he  excelled)  came  to  the  vnderftandinge  hereof,  euen  fo  that  greate  Gierke  (but  better
dyuyne  then  Phylofopher)  Sayncte  Auguftyne  and  alfo  Lactantius,  for  lacke  of  lyke  knowledge  in  that  fcience,
fell  into  a  chyldifhe erroure,  denyinge  that  there  is  anye people,  called Antipodes,  of  whom  the greate
Aftronomer  of  our  tyme,  Apianus  wryteth  in  thys  maner. Antipodes  are  they,  whyche  walke  wyth  theyr  fete
dyrectelye  contrarye  agaynfle  oures,  and  haue  the  heauen  dyrectelye  ouer  theyr  heades  as  we  haue. Yet  haue
we  nothinge  common  wyth  them,  but  all  thinges  contrarye :  for  when  the  Sunne  caufeth  Sommer  wyth  vs,
then  is  it  Myddewynter  wyth  them :  and  when  it  is  day  wyth  vs,  it  is  nyghte  wyth  them  :  And  when  the  daye
is  longefte  wyth  vs,  then  is the  longefle  nyghte  wyth  them,  and  the  fliortefle  daye. Whiche,  Lactantius,  a
manne  otherwyfe  well  learned,  in  his  thyrde  Booke,  Capittulo  foure  and  twentye,  childifOielye  erringe,  wyth
hys  lyghte  and  opinionate  argumentes,  denyeth  that  there  is  anye  fuche,  and  mocketh  the  Aflronomers,
beecaufe  they  affyrme  the  earth  to  bee  rounde,  whiche  neuertheleffe  they  proue  wyth  moRe  certayne  and
apparente demonftracions of Geometrye, and  vnfayleable experymentes. Whome, Sayncte Auguftyne
folowing,  in  his  fixtenth  Booke.  de Ciuitat.  Dei. dxpittu.  ix. wryteth  after  thys  forte. Suche  as  fable  that
there  is  Antipodes,  that  is  to  faye,  menne  of  the  contrarye  parte,  where  the  funne  ryfeth  when  it  falleth  to  vs,
and  to  haue  theyr  feete  agaynfte  oures,  we  oughte  by  no  reafon  to  beeleue. Thofe  bee the woordes  of
Sayncte  AuguH-yne. Nothwithftandinge  (fayeth Apianus) putte thou  no doubte  Gentle Reader,  that  the
Apoftles  of  Chrifte  w^ere  Antipodes  the  one  to  the  other, and  ftode feete  to  feete  the  one  agaynfte  the
other,  when  lames  th[e]elder  and  brother  to  lohn  the  Euangelifte,  the  fonne  of  Zebedeus,  was  in  Spayne  in
Galitia,  and  Thomas  the  Apoftle  in  the  hygher  India,  they  were  moofte  certaynelye  Antipodes,  walking  feete
to  feete  one  agaynfte  the  other,  almoft  as  directly  as  a  diametrical  lyne. For  the  Spanyardes  are  Antipodes
to  the  Indians,  and  the  Indians  in  lyke  maner  to  the  Spanyardes. Which  thinge  alfo  the  excellente  and
aunciente  Auctour  Strabo  confyrmeth  to  bee  true,  and  likewife  Plinius  Nat.  Hi/I.  lib.  2.  Cap.  67. Dolateranus
alfo,  and  all  other  Cofmographers  and  Aftronomers. Hetherto  Apianus :  and  to  declare  my  opinion  in  fewe
woordes,  I  thinke  it  no  greate  marueyle  that  Saincte  Auguftyne  fhoulde  fall  into  an  erroure  in  the  fcience
of  Aftronomie  in  whiche  he  trauayled  but  as  a  ftraunger,  forafmuche  as  he  erred  in  many  thinges  in  diuinitie
which  was  his  chief  profeffion : and  was  longe  of  the  herefye  of  Matiicheus  beefore  he  was  conuerted  by
Saincte  Ambrofe  :  and  wrytte  alfo  at  the  lengthe  a  Booke  of  retractes,  in  whych  he  correcteth  hys  owne
errours. And  I  beleue  playnely  that,  that  excellent  witte  of  hys,  could  not  haue  remayned  in  yat  errour  yf
he  had  been  wel  exercyfed  in  Aftronomy,  or  had  knowen  any  fuche  experyence  as  is  fpoken  of  here  beefore,
howe  the  Spanyardes  by  the  Wefte  and  the  Portugales  by  the  Eafte  compaffed  aboute  the  earth,  whiche
coulde  neuer  haue  come  to  pafle  yf  the  earthe  were  not  rounde  (Quantum  ad  maximas  fui  partes)  as  they  call
it. For,  as  for  hylles  and  Mountaynes,  though  they  be  neuer  fo  greate,  yet  in  refpecte  to  the  byggenes  of  the
earth,  they  doe  no  more  lette  the  roundneffe  hereof,  then  doe  the  lyttle  knobbes  of  the  berrye,  which  we  call
a  galle,  lette  the  roundneffe  of  the  fame. Wherefore  I  am  certaynely  perfwaded,  that  yf  Sayncte  Auguftyne
had  continued  hys  ftudye  in  Aftronomye  (as  it  hadde  been  pytye  he  fhoulde)  or  were  alyue  at  thys  daye,  he
woulde  alfo  haue  retracted  this  erroure. But  yf  here  anye  fuperfticious  head  fhall  thinke  it  a  heynous  matter
in any  poynte  to contrary  Sainct Auguftyne,  lette  hym hearken howe  Auguftine hym  felfe fayeth : that
he  wyll neyther  hys  writynges  or  other  mennes,  of  howe  greate  name  or  fame foeuer they  be, otherwife
to  be  beleued  then  the  fame  fhall,  by  reafon  bee  approued  to  be  true  :  Neque  quorumlibet  difputaciones,  6^^.
And lyke as the  greate  Philofopher  Ariftotel,  when  he  wryte  agaynfte  hys  mayfter  Plato  of  the  queftion
de  Idais,  and  agaynfte  Socrates  who by  the  oracle  of  Apollo  was  proued  to  be  moft  wyfe,  and  certayne
of  hys frendes afked hym  why  he durfte be fo  boulde, he  aunfwered that Plato was  hys frende, and
fo was Socrates : but trueth hys frende more then they bothe, euen fo I thinke it no iniurye nor
contumelye  to  Saynct  Auguftyne,  yf  the fame  were  fayde  of  hym  alfo  geuynge  hym  othenvyfe  hys  dewe
commendacions,  as  he  was  furelye  an  excellente  man,  of  dyuyne  witte,  and  knowledge,  and  fo  trauayled  in
fettynge  foorth  Chriftes  true  Relygion  in  thofe  turmoylous  dayes,  in  perpetual  combatte,  agaynfte  learned
heretykes  and  Prynces  of  the  worlde,  that  he  is  worthelye  called  a  Doctour  and  Pyller  of  Chriftes  Churche.
And  as  for  Lactantius,  the  intente  of  whofe  wrytinges  was  chiefelye  to  thys  ende,  to  dyminifhe  th[e]eftimacion
of  Philofophye, (as  at  thofe  dayes  it  was  neceffarie  to  doe  amonge  the  Gentyles)  and  to  aduaunce  Goddes
woorde,  (whyche  they  contemned  for  the  fimplicitie  of  the  fame,)  albeit,  he  attempted  as  farre  as  hys  learn-
inge  woulde  feme  hym,  to  make  all  thynges  in  Philo[fo]phie  vncertayne,  yet  are  hys  argumentes  fo  flender,
that  vnleffe  G  O  D  by  the  fecrete  working  of  hys  fpyrjte,  hadde  called  the  Gentyles  to  the  true  Faythe,  I  feare
me  leafte  fewe  or  none  of  them,  (fpecyallye  of  the  greate  wyttes)  woulde  haue  been  conuerted  by  Lactantius

[Epistle  to  the  Reader.']

II

argunientes.  Howe  he  dalyeth  in  denyinge  the  yearth  to  bee  rounde,  and  that  it  is  poflyble  that  it
myghte  bee  longe  and  rounde,  (lyke  an  Egge,)  or  othenvyfe  longe  and  holowe  lyke  a  bote,  (meanynge  I
fuppofe  that  the  Sea  myghte  bee  conteyned  in  the  holowneffe  of  the  fame,  wyth  fuche  other  opinyons
grounded  of  no  reafon,  it  were  to  longe  to  rehearfe.  Yet,  forafmuche  as  he  was  a  learned  manne,  and
for  the  better  fatiffyinge  of  fuche  wyttes  as  are  defyreous  to  know  fome  apperaunce  of  truth  by  naturall
reafon  and  demonflracions,  lette  vs  admytte  that  the  earth  were  rounde  after  anye  of  thofe  faffhions  whiche
he  defcrybeth  :  yet  can  it  not  bee  denyed,  but  that  it  is  conteyned  wythin  the  holoweneffe  (yf  I  maye
fo  call  it)  of  the  ayre,  hauynge  the  heauen  in  euerye  place  dyrectelye  ouer  euery  parte  of  the  fame,  as  fayeth
the  Poete  and  Philofopher  Virgin,  Ccehim  undique  fiirfiim  :  Excepte  perhappes  Lactantius  fhoulde  thinke
that  it  honge  by  fome  thynge,  or  were  otherwyfe  borne  vppe  wyth  pyllers  as  the  Poetes  Fable,  that  the
Gyaunte  Ai/as  beareth  the  worlde  on  hys  fhoulders,  whereby  they  meane  that  a  manne  of  valiente  mynde
mufl  ftoutelye  beare  the  chaunces  of  the  worlde.  Of  whyche  hangeinge  or  bear)Tige  of  the  earth,  I  reade
a  better  and  more  true  fayinge  in  the  holye  Scripture,  where  it  is  written,  Ferf  oiruiia  uerbo  oris  fui,  that
is,  that  God  fuflayneth  and  beareth  all  thinges  with  the  woorde  of  hys  mouth.

Holye  lob  alfo  fayeth,  that  the  LORD  flretcheth  oute  the  Northe  ouer  the  emptye,  and  hangeth  the
earth  vpon  nothynge :  Meaninge  by  nothinge,  the  ayre,  becaufe  to  oure  fenfes  it  appeareth  in  maner  as
nothynge  :  Or  otherwyfe  that  it  is  not  dependynge  of  anye  other  flibflaunce,  but  to  bee  fufla)Tied  onelye  by
the  power  of  G  0  D  who  hath  appoynted  the  Elementes  theyr  places  and  lymittes,  and  caufeth  the  heuye  to
flande  fade :  as  wytneffeth  Moyfes  in  hys  fonge,  fa^nnge  :  By  the  wynde  of  thy  noflrels  the  waters  gathered
together,  the  flouddes  floode  llyll  as  an  heape,  and  the  deepe  water  congeled  togeather  in  the  heart  of  the  Sea.
Wlierefore  yf  the  heauen  be  rounde  (whiche  no  manne  can  reafonably  denye  that  euer  fawe  the  Sunne  and
flerres  moue.)  And  yf  the  earth  bee  the  center  of  the  worlde  dependinge  as  we  haue  fayde  beefore,  then
mufte  it  needes  folowe,  that  they  whiche  inhabiting  the  Northwefte  partes  of  the  earth,  haue  the  Pole  Artike
eleuate  thyrtye  degrees,  mufl  needes  bee  Antipodes  to  them  whiche  inhabitinge  the  Southeade  partes  of  the
earth,  haue  the  Pole  Antartike  eleuate  in  the  fame  degree,  and  fo  the  lyke  to  bee  vnderfland  of  all  other
eleuacions  and  degrees.  And  yf  here  anye  wyll  obiect,  that  eyther  the  earth  or  firme  land  is  not  fo  large,  or
fo  farre  extended,  or  other  wyfe  not  inhabited  althoughe  it  were  fo  large,  or  that  the  fea  is  greater  then  the
lande,  to  thys  I  aunfwere,  that  no  man  knoweth  further  hereof  then  is  tryed  and  founde  by  experience,  as
we  haue  fayde  beefore.  And  albeit  that  the  fea  were  larger  then  the  firme  lande,  yet  forafmuche  as  there  are
Ilandes  founde  in  all  places  of  the  mayne  Sea,  and  in  maner  all  inhabited,  there  is  no  reafon  to  the  con-
trarye,  but  that  the  people  of  thofe  Ilandes  maye  be  Antipodes  to  fuch  as  dwel  on  the  fyrrae  lande,  on  the
contrary  parte,  whether  the  earth  bee  round  and  longe,  yea  or  fquare,  (yf  you  wyll)  notwythdandynge.  But
wyth  what  certayne  demonflracions  the  Aflronomers  and  Geometricians,  proue  the  earth  to  bee  rounde,  and
the  Sphericall  or  rounde  forme  to  bee  moofle  perfecte,  it  were  to  longe  to  declare.  I  wyll  therefore  make
an  ende  of  thys  matter  wyth  the  fayinge  of  Sayncte  Paule  in  hys  Oracion,  to  the  menne  of  Athens.  That
GOD  made  of  one  bloudde,  all  nacions  of  menne,  to  dwell  vpon  the  hole  face  of  the  earth.

C  I  hadde  entended  here  (well  beeloued  Reader)  to  haue  fpoken  fomewhat  of  fuche  flraunge  th}Tiges
and  Monflers,  whereof  mencion  is  made  in  thys  Booke,  to  th[e]ende  that  fuche  as  by  the  naro^Aoies  of  the}T
vnderflandinge  are  not  of  capacitie  to  conceaue  the  caufes  and  natures  of  thynges,  myghte  partely  haue  been
fatiflfyed  wyth  fome  fenfyble  reafons.  But  beynge  at  thys  tyme  otherwyfe  hindered,  it  fhall  fuffife  al  good
and  honefl  wittes,  that  whatfoeuer  the  Lorde  hath  pleafed,  that  hath  he  done  in  heauen  and  in  earth,  and  in
the  Sea,  and  in  all  depe  places.

C  Ecclefiallicus.  Capit.  i.
C  The  eye  is  notfatiffyed  withfyght,  and  tJu  eare  is  not  fy lied  with  hcariiige.

Of  the  roandoK**
of  ye  eaitlk

The  earth  hangeth
in  ye  aire

The  table  of
AtUu.

The  word  of  God
beareth  rppe  the
world.

lobw  26.

The  elementei.

Exo.  XT.

The  eletiatioa  of
the  pole.

The  largenes  of
the  earth.

Ilandes

Astronomers  and
Geometricians.

Act.  xvij

Ps.a.i3S

II

12

il  The  Table.

C  Of  the  Ilande  of  laua.

Of  the  Ilande  of  Madagafcar.

Of  the  Ilande  of  Zanzibar.

Of  the  two  Ilandes  in  the  which  men  and  women  dwell  a  funder.

Of  the mightie Empyre  of  Cathay, fubiect  vnder  the  dominion of  the  great  Cham  oi'  Cane,

Emperour  of  Tartaria.
Of  certayn  Prouinces  fubiect  vnder  the  dominion  of  the  great  Cham.
Of  the  Prouince  of  Mangi.
Of  the  Region  of  Tangut.

Of  the  newe  Ilandes,  howe,  when,  and  by  whom  they  were  founde.
Of  the  two  Ilandes  lohanna  and  Hifpana.
Of  the  Canibales,  which  eate  mens  fleflie.
Of  the  maners  of  the  inhabitantes  of  Hifpana.
How  Chriflophorus  Columbus,  after  that  he  had  founde  the  newe  Ilandes,  returned  to  Spayne :

and  preparing  a  new  nauie,  failed  agayn  to  ye  Canibales.
How  Columbus  the  Admiral,  paffed  many  Ilandes  and  what  chaunced  to  hym  and  his  in  that  viage.
Of  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  founde  and  knowen  in  thefe  oure  dayes.
Of  the  Adamant  flone,  otherwife  called  the  Diamant.
Of  the  Kingdoms  and  cities  of  Narfmga  and  Canonor
Howe  the  Elephantes  in  India  are  prepared  to  the  warres.
Of  the  beafle  called  Rhinoceros.
Of  Calicut,  the  mofle  famous  markette  towne  of  India,
Of  the  maners  of  the  Indians  in  Calicut.

Of  Pepper  and  other  fpyces  which  growe  in  the  Region  of  Calicut.

Of  the  byrdes  and  beafles  which  are  found  in  the  Region  of  Calicut :  and  of  the  wyne  of  the  tree.
From  whence  all  kyndes  of  fpyces  are  brought  to  the  cytie  of  Calicut.
Of  the  Hand  of  zaylon,  and  of  the  cinomome  tree.
Of  the  cytie  of  TarnafTeri,  and  of  the  maners  of  the  cytezyns.
Of  the  excellent  cytie  and  Kingdom  of  Pego.
Of  the  Ilande  of  Sumatra,  or  Taprobana.
Of  the  Ilande  of  Bornei.
Of  the  Ilande  of  Giaua.

Howe  the  Spanyardes  abufed  the  fubmiffion  and  frendfhip  of  the  inhabitauntes  of  the  Ilandes.
Howe  the  Portugales  foughte  newe  Ilandes  in  the  Eafl  partes,  and  howe  they  came  to  Calicut.
Howe  Magellanus  by  a  flrayght  or  narow  arme  of  the  Sea,  fayled  by  the  WeRe  into  the  Eafle

to  dyuers  Ilandes,  where  alfo  he  was  flayne.
Howe  the  Spanyardes  came  to  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca,  and  of  the  people  with  great  hanging  eares.
The  third  nauigacion  of  Chriflophorus  Columbus.
[How  Petrus  Alonfus  foughte  newe  Ilandes.
How  Pinzonus  companion  to  the  Admiral,  fought  newe  Ilandes.
The  foure  nauigacions  of  Americus  Vefputius  to  the  newe  Ilandes.
The  fyrfle  viage  of  Vefputius.
The  fecond  viage  of  Vefputius.
The  thyrde  viage  of  Vefputius.
The  fourth  viage  of  Vefputius.

Howe  the  Kyng  of  Portugale  fubdued  certayne  places  in  India,  and  of  the  ryche  cytie  of  Malacha.
Of  the  Ilande  of  Medera,  and  the  fortunate  Ilandes,  otherwyfe  called  the  Ilandes  of  Canaria.
[Whether  vnder  the  Equinoctial  circle  or  burninge  lyne  (called  Torrida  Zona)  be  habitable  Regions.

[A

23-]

[/.

23-.

.P-

2Z-.

[/•

24.

IP-

24.'

IP-

25-.

[A

26.'

IP-

26.]

[/•

28."

[/•

28."

J>-

29]

\J>-

29]

!>•

29.;

[/•

3°-.

./■

I3-.

.A

14.

P-

14.

[A

15-

J>-

16.

.P-

16."

0-

17-

>

18.

[A-

19.

A

20.

.A

20.

/•

20.

JP-

21.]

Jp-

22.

P-

22.

.P-

23-.

[A

3I-.

[/.

32..

[A-

Z?>\

A

34-.

0-

35-]

P-

36."

[A

36.]

A-

37-.

jp-

37-

A

38.-

A

39-.

J>-

39-.

.A

40.

[A

40.

A

41.J

J[  Finis.

13

il  Of  the  newe  India,

as  it  is  knowen  and  found  in  tbefc  our  daycs.
In  the  yeare  of  oure  Lordc.  M.D.LIII.

After  the  defcripcion  of  Sebaftian  Munfter  in

his  Booke  of  the  vniuerfall  Cofmographie.

Libr. V.  De terris  AsicB  Maioris.

And tranflated into Englifhe

by  Richard  Eden.

Here  are  two  viages  or  nauigacions  made  oute  of  Europa  into
India, The one foutheafl from fpayne, by the coafles of
Aphrica and Ethiopia, euen  vnto Arabia  to  the  citie  called
Aden. And  from  thence  to  the  Ilande  of  Ormus,  and  from
Ormus  to  the  citie  of  Cambaia,  and  from  thence  euen  \-nto  the
citie  of  Calicut. Cambaia  is  fituate  nere  vnto  the  floudde  Indus.
This  citie  is  of  great  powre,  riche,  and  abundaunt  in  al  kyndes  of
grayne and come. The  foyle  hereof  bringeth forth fondry
kyndes  of  fwete  oyntmentes,  and  cotten  which  groweth  on  certain
trees  called  Gofsampini,  this  cotton,  is  otherwyfe  called  Bot?ibage
or  fylke  of  the  trees. The  Kynge  of  Portugall  fubdued  this
cytie,  and bylded  hard  by  the  fame  a  llrong  fortreffe : with
which  thing  the  Turke  beeing  fore  greued,  commaunded  a  greate
nauie  of  fhippes  with  greate  fumptuoufnes  to  bee  fumifhed  in
the  goulfe  called  Sinus  Arabiais : to  the  ende  that  he  might
dryue  the  Portugalles  out  of  India,  and  the  better  to  accom-
plifhe  this  his  purpofe,  he  appointed  one  Soliman  a  noble  man  of
warre  (beyng  alfo  the  Captayne  of  Alcayre,)  to  be  the  admiral  general,  or  gouemour  of  his  nauie,  hauing  in  his
retenue.  xx.  thoufand  fouldiers  beefyde  mariners  and  gonners,  whiche  were  in  numbre  foure  thoufand. This
nauie  was  appointed  in  the  hauen  Suezio,  beeinge  a  port  of  the  redde  fea,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifl.  1538. And
arryued  fyrfle  at  the  citie  Aden :  where  laying  anker,  the  gouemour  of  the  nauie  fent  letters  to  the  king  of
Aden,  certifying  him  that  he  woulde  take  his  viage  into  India,  from  thence  to  expell  the  King  of  Portugall.
The  Kinge  of  Aden  whiche  was  then  tributarye  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  receyued  the  Turkes  letters  thanke-
fully,  offering  him  felfe  and  all  that  he  might  make,  to  fo  mightie  an  Emperoure,  defyringe  the  gouemoure  to
come  forth  of  the  fhip,  and  to  beholde  the  cytie  obedient  and  readye  at  his  commaundeniente,  in  the  which  alfo
accordinge  vnto  his  dignitie  and  office,  he  fhould  be  worthely  interteyned  :  but  the  gouemour  agayne  allured  and
entyfed  hym  to  come  out  of  his  citie,  and  fo  by  crafte  circumuented  him,  that  he  toke  him  priefoner,  and  com-
maunded him  to  be  hanged  on  the  fayle  yarde  of  the  fhyp,  and  with  hym  foure  other  of  the  rulers  of  the  citie  of
Aden,  afifyrming  that  he  was  commaunded  of  the  Turke  fo  to  handel  them,  becaufe  the  cytiezins  of  Aden  had
not  only  made  a  leage  with  the  Portugales,  but  had  alfo  payde  them  tribute  :  whiche  nacion  the  Turke  pla)Tiely
entended  to  drieue  out  of  India. And  thus  after  the  Kynges  death,  that  mofl  riche  and  beautiful  cytie,  was  euer
a  praye  to  theues,  fpoylers,  and  murtherers  without  refyftaunce. Then  the  gouemoure  departing  from  thence,  lefte
there  behynde  him  a  garrifon  of  two  thoufand  men  of  warre,  and  faylyng  forwarde  on  hys  viage,  he  came  to  the
citie  called  Diiwi,  whiche  the  Portugales  held  :  and  his  armie  was  greatly  encreafed  by  the  waye,  as  wel  by  land
as  by  fea,  by  reafon  of  the  great  confluence  of  the  Turkes  which  on  euery  fide  reforted  to  him,  fo  that  in  a  fliort
fpace  they  rowled  before  them  a  bulwarke  or  countremure  of  earth,  in  maner  as  bigge  as  a  mountayne,  which
by  little  and  litle  they  moued  neare  vnto  the  trenche  or  ditche  of  the  caftell,  fo  that  they  might  fafely  fland
Dehynde  the  bulwarke,  (thus  rayfing  a  mount,)  they  befieged  the  caflell  on  euery  fyde,  and  battered  the  walks
and  towres  thereof  very  fore :  yet  that  notwithflanding,  were  at  the  length,  enforfed  to  departe,  not  withoute
greate  lofle  and  flaughter  of  theyr  fouldiers  :  for  this  Dium,  is  the  flrongefl  citie  that  is  vnder  the  dominion  of

»3

The  —
ther  is
Southwest  e.

The  citie  of
Cambaia

Calicut,

Gossipium,
Bombage  or
cotton  of  the  tree

The  turkes  nauie
agaynste  the
king  of  Portuftale.

The  cytie  of  AJea

The  kince  of
Aden  is  hanged.

The  destruction
of  the  citie  of

Aden.

The  ttirke
besiegeth  the
cytie  of  D  un.

The  turke  is
repulsed.

14

\0f  tJic  nciue  India,  as  it  is  knowcn  &  found,  &c?^

The  excellencie
of  the  citie  of
Cambaia,

Lacktj  is  guinme
of  :\  tree,  and  is
vseJ  in  dying  of
silke.

Cambaia  :  but  the  cytie  of  Cambaia,  is  fituate  in  the  goulfe  called  Guzerat,  and  is  well  inhabited,  and  in  maner
moll  excellent  of  all  the  cities  of  India,  and  is  therefore  called  Caynis,  or  Akayr,  or  Babilon  of  India.  It  is
cnuironned  with  a  walk,  and  hath  in  it  very  fayre  byldinges.  Ye  Soldan  or  chefe  ruler  hereof,  is  of  Mahumets
fecte  as  are  ye  Turkes.  Lacha  groweth  there  more  plentifully  then  in  any  other  countre.  The  inhabitauntes,
for  the  mofle  parte  goe  naked,  couering  only  theyr  priuie  partes :  they  bynd  theyr  heades  about  with  a  clothe
of  purple  color.  The  Soldan  or  prince  of  this  citie,  hath  in  a  redines  for  the  warres.  xx.  thoufand  horfemen,
he  hath  alfo  a  mightye  and  magnifical  court.  When  he  waketh  in  ye  morning  there  is  heard  a  great  noyfe  of
cimbals,  drumflades,  timbrcUes,  fliames,  pipes,  flutes,  trumpettes,  and  diuerfe  other  mufical  inftrumentes,  hereby
fignifying  that  the  king  lyueth  and  is  in  health  and  merye :  in  lyke  maner  doe  they  whyle  he  is  at  dyner.  To
the  kyngdom  of  Cambaia,  is  the  Kingdom  of  loga  nexte  adioyning,  which  reacheth  farre  on  euerye  fide.  In  this
kingdom,  by  reafon  of  the  greate  heate  of  the  fonne,  the  bodyes  of  men  begin  to  waxe  blacke  and  to  be  fcorched:
the  people  of  thys  countreye  haue  ringes  hanging  at  their  eares  and  colers  aboute  theyr  neckes  of  fundry  fortes,
al  befet  and  fliyninge  with  precious  flones.  The  foyle  hereof  is  not  very  fruitful,  this  region  is  rough  with
mountaynes,  the  byldinge[s]  are  defpicable,  and  euyl  to  dwel  in  :  there  is  beyonde  this,  another  Kingdom
called  Dcchan  :  this  cytie  is  very  beautiful  to  behold,  and  fruitful  in  maner  of  al  thinges  :  the  king  hereof  vfeth
great  pride,  and  folemnitie :  his  pompes  and  triumphes  are  in  maner  incredible,  they  that  wayt  vpon  the  kinge,
weare  on  the  vpper  partes  of  theyr  flioes  certayne  fliyning  precious  flones,  as  Piropi  (whiche  are  a  kind  of
Rubies  or  Carbuncles)  with  Diamandes  and  fuch  other.  But  what  maner  of  lewelles  they  vfe  in  ye  flede  of
coUers,  eareringes,  and  ringes,  you  may  well  confyder,  whereas  they  geue  fuche  honour  to  theyr  fete.  In  this
kingdom  is  faid  to  be  a  mountayne,  out  of  the  which  Diamandes  are  digged.

The  Kyngdom  of

The  Kyngdom  of
Dechatu

The  diamonde
stone.

The  stone
Sideritei.

The  hardnes  of
the  diamond.

How  the  diamand
is  made  softe.

The  montayne  of
diamantes.

C  Of  the  Diamande  ftone,  called  in  Latine  Adamas.

He  Diamande  is  engendred  in  the  mynes  of  India,  Ethiopia,  Arabia,  Macedonia,  and  Cyprus,
and  in  the  golde  mynes  of  the  fame  countries.  That  of  India  excelleth  all  other  in  beautie
and  clearenes :  that  which  is  of  the  coloure  of  yron,  is  called  Siderites,  it  is  often  tymes  found
in  colour  like  vnto  criflal,  and  though  it  be  fometimes  lyke  thereto  in  whytnes,  yet  doth  it
differ  from  criflall  in  hardnes,  in  fo  much  that  if  it  be  layd  vpon  an  anuil  and  flrongly  flriken
with  a  hammer,  the  anuyl  and  hammer  fhall  foner  be  wounded  and  leape  away,  then  the  flone
perifhed  or  diminifhed :  it  doth  not  onelye  refufe  the  forfe  of  Iron,  but  alfo  refifleth  the  power
of  fyre,  v/hofe  heate  is  fo  farre  vnable  to  melte  it,  that  it  can  not  fo  muche  as  heate  it,  if  we  geue  credit
to  Plinie,  and  is  alfo  rather  made  purer  therby,  then  anye  wayes  defyled  or  corrupted:  neuertheles,  the
fmguler  and  excellent  hardnes  of  this  flone,  is  made  fo  fofte  with  ye  hoate  blood  of  a  Goate  or  a  Lyon,
that  it  may  be  broken :  and  if  it  be  put  with  molten  lead  in  hoate  fornaces,  it  waxeth  fo  hoate  that  it  wylbe
diffolued :  yet  are  not  all  Diamandes  of  fuch  hardneffe,  for  that  of  Cyprus,  and  alfo  that  of  the  coloure  of
Iron  called  Siderites,  may  be  broken  with  hammers  and  perced  with  another  Diamand:  his  vertue  is  to
bewray  poifons,  and  to  fruflrate  th[e]opperacion  therof,  and  beeing  therefore  greatly  eflemed  of  Kinges  and
Princes,  it  hath  euer  been  of  great  price.  The  mountaine  of  India  out  of  the  which  the  Diamandes  are
digged,  is  compaffed  with  a  walle  on  euery  fyde,  and  kepte  with  a  flrong  defence.

The  citie  of
Narsinga,

The  Icinge  of
Narsinga.

€1

Of  the  kingdoms  and  cities  of  Narfmga  and  Caitonor.

He  King  of  Narfmga,  in  riches  and  dominion  excelleth  all  other  Kinges  in  thofe  partes.  The
chiefe  cytie  where  the  King  is  refident,  is  in  fituacion  and  fynenes,  much  lyke  vnto  the  cytie
of  Milayne,  but  that  it  flandeth  in  a  place  fomewhat  declyning  and  leffe  equalL  This  king
hath  euer  in  a  redines  manye  thoufandes  of  men  of  armes,  as  one  that  is  euer  at  warre  with
other  countreys,  borderers  nere  aboute  him.  He  is  geuen  to  mofle  vile  Idolatrie,  and
honoureth  the  deuyll,  euen  as  doth  the  king  of  Calicut.  The  maners  and  fafhions  of  the
inhabitantes,  are  after  this  forte.  The  gentlemen  or  fuch  as  are  of  greatefl  reuenewes,  vfe  to
weare  an  inward  cote  or  peticote,  not  very  long :  hauing  theyr  heades  bounde  aboute  with  lifles  and  rowles  of
fundry  coloures  after  the  maner  of  the  Turkes.  The  common  people,  couer  onli  their  priuie  parts  and  are
befyde  all  together  naked.  The  Kynge  weareth  on  his  head  a  {lately  cap  made  of  the  riche  cloth  of  Afia,
beyng  two  handfuUes  in  length.  When  he  goeth  to  ye  warres,  he  weareth  a  veflure  of  ye  filke  called  Goffampine,
which  he  couereth  with  a  cloke  adorned  with  plates  of  gold :  ye  hemme  or  edge  of  his  cloke  is  befet  with  all
maner  of  ouches  and  lewelles. Hys  horfe  is  iudged  to  be  of  fuch  valure  if  you  refpect  ye  price,  as  is  one  of

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  found,  &c.]

our  cities.  And  this  is  by  the  mcanes  of  ye  innumerable  multitude  and  fundrie  kindes  of  precious  ftones,  and
perles  wherewith  ye  trappers,  barbes,  and  other  furnitures  of  his  horfe  are  couered,  with  an  incredible  pompe  and
glori.  The  foyle  of  Narfmga,  beareth  nether  wheate  nor  grapes,  and  is  in  maner  without  al  kinde  of  fruites,
except  citrons  and  gourdes :  the  inhabitantes  eate  no  bread,  but  ryce,  fifhe  and  flefTie,  and  alfo  walnuttes,  which
that  countrey  beareth,  there  begin  fpyces  to  be  found,  as  ginger,  pepper,  mirabolanes,  Cardamorae,  Caffia,  and
dyuers  other  kyndes  of  fpyces,

Canauu.  is  a  very  excellente  cytie,  fayre  and  beautifull  in  all  thinges,  fauing  that  the  Kinge  thereof  is  an
Idolater.  This  citie  hath  a  hauen  whether  the  horfes  of  Perfia  are  brought,  but  theyr  tribute  or  cuflome,  is
excedinge  great:  the  inhabitantes  lyue  with  ryce,  fleffhe,  and  fyfhe  as  do  they  of  Narfmga:  in  the  warres  they  vfe
the  fweorde,  the  round  target,  fpeares  and  bowes,  and  haue  nowe  alfo  the  vfe  of  gonnes,  they  are  all  naked
fauing  their  prieuie  partes,  and  go  beare  headed,  except  when  they  goe  to  the  warres,  for  then  they  couer  theyr
heades  with  a  redde  hatte  which  thei  folde  double,  and  bind  it  fafl.  Avith  a  lyfl  or  bande.  In  the  warres  they
vfe  neither  horfe,  mule,  or  affe,  neither  that  kynde  of  camels  which  we  commonly  call  dromedaries :  but
vfe  onely  Elephantes.  There  is  alfo  in  the  kingdom  of  Narfmga  another  godly  citie  called  Bifmagar :  it  is
compaffed  aboute  with  a  walle,  and  fituate  on  the  fide  of  a  hyll,  beeyng.  viij.  myles  in  circuite  hauinge  alfo  in  it
a  famous  market  place.  The  foyle  is  very  fruitful,  there  are  all  delicate  thinges  to  be  found  that  may  encreafe
the  pleafures  of  this  lyfe.  There  maye  no  where  be  found  more  pleafaunt  feldes  and  woddes  for  hauking  and
huntinge,  a  man  woulde  thinke  it  were  a  very  Paradyfe  of  pleafure.  The  king  of  this  citie  is  of  great  power,  he
keepeth  dayly  many  thoufandes  of  men  at  armes,  vfmge  Elephantes  in  the  flede  of  horfes.  And  hath  euer  foure
hundreth  Elephantes  prepared  for  the  warres.

c

How  the  Elephantes  in  India  are  prepared  to  luarre.

|;He  Elephant  is  a  beafl.  very  docible  and  apte  to  be  taught,  and  little  inferiour  from  humaine
fenfe,  excellinge  all  other  beaftes  in  fortitude  and  flrength.  Therfore  ye  Indians,  when  they
prepare  them  to  the  warres,  put  great  packfaddels  vpon  them,  which  they  bind  fafl  with  two
chaines  of  Iron,comming  vnder  theyr  belyes.  Vpon  the  packfaddels,  they  haue  on  euery  fide
a  little  houfe  or  towre,  or  cage  (if  you  lift  fo  to  call  it)  made  of  wood.  Thefe  towTes  ar  made
faft  to  the  necke  of  the  beafte  with  certayne  fawed  bordes  of  the  thickenes  of  halfe  a  hande
breath.  Euery  towre  receyueth  thre  men.  And  betwene  both  the  towres,  vpon  the  back  of
the  beaft  fytteth  an  Indian,  a  man  of  that  countrey  which  fpeaketh  vnto  the  beafte.  For  this  beafte  hath
marueylous  vnderftanding  of  the  language  of  hys  natyue  countrey,  and  doth  wonderfulli  beare  in  memorie
benefytes  fhewedvnto  him.  It  is  alfo  mofte  certayne  that  none  other  beaft  draweth  fo  nere  to  the  excellence
of  humayne  fenfe  or  reafon  as  doeth  this  beaft,  as  maye  moft  playnly  appeare,  yf  we  confidre,  how  he  is  geuen  to
loue  and  glory,  to  a  certeyn  frendly  gentlenes  and  honeft  maners,  ioyned  with  a  marueylous  difcrecion,  to  know
good  from  euil,  more  redy  to  recompence  benefites  then  reuenge  iniuries,  which  excellent  properties  are  not  to
be  found  in  other  brute  beaftes.  Therfore  when  the  Elephantes  go  forward  to  ye  warres,  feuen  armed  men
are  appoynted  to  be  caried  vpon  one  Elephant,  bearing  with  them,  bowes,  iauelins,  fweordes  and  targettes:
alfo  the  longe  fnout  of  the  Elephant  (which  thei  cal  his  hand)  is  armed  with  a  fweorde  of  two  cubites  in  length,
and  in  bredth  and  thickenes  a  handfull,  ftandinge  righte  forth,  tyed  fafte  to  the  fnowte  of  the  beaft,  and  thus
beeing  furnifhed,  they  procede  to  the  battaile:  and  whereas  occafion  requyreth  to  go  forward  or  backwarde,
the  ruler  of  the  beaft  geueth  him  warninge,  whofe  voyce  he  vnderftandeth  and  obeyeth :  ftrj-ke  hym,  fayth  the
niler,  forbeare  hym,  be  fearfe  agaynft  thefe,  abftayne  from  thefe,  the  beafte  obeyeth  hym  in  all  thinges,  as
though  he  had  humayn  reafon,  but  yf  it  fo  chaunce  that  being  made  afrayd  with  fire  (which  thinge  they  feare
aboue  all  other)  they  beginne  to  flye,  they  can  by  no  meanes  bee  allured  to  ftoppe  theyr  courfe,  or  retoume
agayne,  for  the  people  of  that  nacion,  can  with  many  fubtyl  deuifes  as  often  as  them  lifteth,  raife  vp  fires  to  make
thofe  beaftes  afrayde.  There  be  fome  men  which  thincke  that  Elephantes  haue  no  ioyntes  in  theyr  legges,
which  opinion  other  affirme  to  be  vntrue,  for  they  haue  ioyntes  as  haue  other  beaftes,  but  that  they  are  very  low
and  almoft  at  their  fete.  The  females  are  of  greater  fierceneffe  then  the  males,  and  of  much  greater  ftrength
to  beare  burdens :  they  are  fometime  taken  with  madnes,  declaring  the  fame  by  theyr  furious  running.  An
Elephant  excedeth  in  greatnes  thre  wilde  oxen  called  Bubali,  and  is  much  lyke  of  iieare,  and  eyed  lyke  a  fwine,
hauing  a  long  fnout,  hanging  downward,  with  the  which  he  putteth  into  his  mouth  whatfoeuer  he  eateth  or
drinketh,  for  his  mouth  is  vnder  his  throte,  not  muche  vnlyke  the  mouth  of  a  fwyne :  his  fnowte  hath  holes  in  it,
and  is  holowe  within,  with  this  they  ouerthrow  ye  ftumpes  of  trees :  and  that  of  fuche  bignes,  that  the  forfe  of.
xxiiij.  men  is  not  able  to  do  the  fame. The  two  great  tufkes  which  they  haue  comming  farre  oute  of  theyr

The  riche  trapping
of  the  luDgc*
hon«.

Spice*  of
Naninga.

The  cytie  of
CanaH4^.

The  vsc  of

Elephantes  in  the
warres.

The  cytie
Bitinagar.

Hauking  and
huntinge.

The  kinge  of
bUinagar.

The  Elephantes
lONvre.

Elephantes
vndersiaiideth  the
language  of  theyr
countrei.

Seuen  armecl
men  \-pon  one
Elephant

The  rule  .-
spe-ikcih  to  the
Elephant.

The  Elephantes
ioyntes.

The  bignes  .ind
sli.-ipe  of  t  he
Elephant.

i6

[0/  the  ncivc  India^  as  it  is  kii070cn  &  found, &c\

ITie  painters  erre
Uereiu.

Vnderstandc  the
handebredth  with
the  thumbs
stretched  forth.
The  Elephautes
pase.

The  Elephante  is
vexed  with  rtyes.

How  the  Elephant
kylleth  tiyes.

mouth,  or  placed  in  the  vppcr  iawe,  hauinge  on  euerye  fyde  lappcs  hanging  downe  of  the  bignes  of  two  hand
brea[d]th.  Thoyr  fete  are  round  Hke  vnto  a  Hat  trone  diflie,  hauing  fyue  toes  Hke  hocucs  vndeuided,  of  the  bignes
of  great  oyflerflielles.  Theyr  tayles  are  lyke  vnto  the  tayles  of  wilde  oxen,  thre  handful  in  length,  hauing  but
few  heares.  The  males  are  hygher  then  the  females.  They  are  of  fundry  bignes:  fome  are  of  xiij.  handfulle.*
hye,  fome  of  xiiij.  and  fome.  xvi.  Their  pafe  in  goyng,  is  fomewhat  flowe  and  walowinge,  by  reafon  whereof,
fome  whiche  ryde  on  them  and  haue  not  been  accuflomed  thereto,  are  prouoked  to  vomitte,  euen  as  they  were
tolled  on  the  fea.  Yet  it  is  great  plefure  to  ride  on  the  yong  Elephantes,  for  they  goe  as  foftely  as  ambeling
moiles.  When  you  attempt  to  geat  vp,  to  ryde  on  them,  they  bow  downe  toward  you,  as  though  they  would
cafe  you  with  a  flerope,  that  you  may  the  eafelier  geat  vp,  which  neuertheles  cannot  wel  be  done  without
helpe.  They  are  all  vnbrideled  hauinge  neither  withe  nor  coller  aboute  theyr  neckes,  but  goe  with  theyr  heades
al  together  lofe.  And  becaufe  they  are  not  couered  with  briflels  or  bigge  heares,  they  haue  not  fo  muche  as  in
theyr  tayle  anye  helpe  to  dryue  awaye  flyes.  For  euen  this  greate  beafle  alfo  (fayeth  Plinie)  is  troubled  with
tliis  lyttle  vermyne.  Theyr  flvinne  is  very  rowghe,  and  full  of  chappes,  and  riftes,  like  the  barke  of  a  tree,  being
fomwhat  filthye  and  full  of  fwette,  whiche  by  heate  refolued  into  vapoure,  by  fauour  draweth  flyes  vnto  it :  there-
fore when  any  flyes  or  other  creping  vermen  are  entered  into  the  fayde  riftes  of  theyr  fkinnes,  fodeynly  bending
and  drawing  together  their  flvinne,  they  hold  them  faft.  and  kyl  them,  and  this  is  to  them  in  the  flede  of  a  tayle,
a  mane,  or  rough  and  brifleled  heare.

C  Of  the  beafle  called  Rhinoceros.

Enmitie  betwene
the  Elephant  and
KJiituxeros.

The  Rhinoceros
ii  homes

The  fight  betwene
Rhinoceros  and
the  Elephant

Rhinoceros
naturally  armed.

Rliinoceros  sene
ui  Portugale.

Rhinoceros
ouercometh  the
Elephant.

Hinoccros  is  comonly  found  in  the  fame  countrey,  where  Elephantes  are  engendred,  and
is  borne  an  enemy  to  the  Elephant  (as  faith  Plinie)  no  leffe  feking  his  deflruction  then  doth
the  dragon  :  wherfore  the  Romaynes  confidering  the  natures  of  thefe  beafles,  were  wont  to
put  them  together  vpon  the  theater  or  flage,  for  a  fpectacle,  therby  to  declare  the  natures  of
enemies.  This  Rhinoceros  hath  two  homes,  whereof  the  one  is  of  notable  bignes,  growing
oute  of  his  nofethrilles,  and  is  of  flatte  forme,  and  as  harde  as  Iron.  The  other  groweth  aboue
in  his  necke,  and  is  but  a  little  one,  but  wonderful  flrong  :  when  this  beaft.  attempteth  to
inuade  the  Elephant,  he  fyleth  and  whetteth  his  home  on  a  flone  and  flryketh  at  the  belly  of  the  Elephant,
which  place  he  knoweth  to  be  niofl.  open  to  his  flripes,  and  eafyefl  to  receaue  hurt,  becaufe  of  the  foftenes  thereof,
which  he  cutteth  with  hi?  home  as  with  a  fweord.  Some  auctours  write  that  Rhinoceros  is  vnequall  in  bignes  to
the  Elephante :  but  luhus  Solinus  faith,  that  he  is  as  long  as  the  Elephante,  but  hath  fliorter  legges :  when
Rhinoceros  therfore  and  the  Elephant  ioyne  together  in  fighte,  they  vfe  theyr  naturall  weapons  :  the  Rhinoceros
his  home,  and  the  Elephante  his  tuflxcs,  wherewith  he  fo  violentlye  beateth  and  teareth  the  fkinne  oi Rhinoceros
being  as  harde  as  home  or  fliell,  and  fcarcelye  able  to  be  pearfed  with  a  dart,  that  he  neuertheles  enforfeth  him
to  fall  downe.  Rhinoceros  agayne  on  the  other  partie  fo  woundeth  the  belye  of  the  Elephante  with  the  home  of
hys  nofethrilles,  yf  he  doe  not  preuente  hys  flrokes,  yat  he  fainteth  with  bleding.  In  the  yere  of  Chrift.  15 13,
the  firfl  day  of  Maye,  was  broughte  oute  of  India  to  Emanuel  the  king  of  Portugale  Rhinoceros  alyue,  of  the
coloure  of  boxe,  fomwhat  variable  and  as  it  wer  chekered,  couered  with  fhelles  lyke  fcales,  or  rather  lyke  fhieldes.
This  beafl.  was  in  b'gnes  equall  to  an  Elephante,  but  had  fliorter  legges,  and  was  armed  on  euery  parte.  He
had  a  flronge  and  fliarpe  home  in  his  nofethrilles,  the  whiche  (as  I  haue  fayde)  he  fyleth,  when  he  prepareth
him  to  fight.  All  this  great  hatered  betwene  thefe  two  beafles,  is  for  ye  befl.  paflures  which  one  fl.riueth  to  take
from  the  other  as  fome  wryters  faye.  In  the  yeare  of  Chrifle.  1515.  King  Emanuel  fet  forth  a  fpectacle  in  the
citie  of  Lifbona,  in  which  was  a  combat  betwene  the  Elephant  and  Rhinoceros.  A  fight  doubtleffe  worthy  great
admiracion. But  in  this  fight,  the  Elephant  had  the  ouerthrowe.

Lowe  and  simple
houses.

c

0/ Calicut,  the  mofl  fanwits  market  towne  of  India.

He  cytie  of  Calicut  is  in  the  continente  or  mayne  lande.  And  the  houfcs  therof  adioyning  to
the  fea.  It  is  not  walled  about,  but  conteyneth  in  circuite.  vi.  thoufand  houfes,  not  adherent
together  as  the  maner  of  bylding  is  with  vs,  but  one  being  diflant  from  another,  a  further
fpace.  It  is  extended  in  length  a  thoufand  pafes.  The  houfes  thereof,  are  but  fimple  and  very
lowe,  not  paffinge  the  heygth  of  a  manne  on  horfebacke  from  the  grounde.  In  the  flede
of  a  roofe,  they  are  couered  with  bowes  of  trees,  harde  and  thicke  couched  together,  the  caufe
hereof  is,  that  yf  the  earth  there  be  in  anye  place  digged  fyue  handfull  depth,  the  water

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  found,  &c.]

17

fpringeth  forth,  by  reafon  wherof  they  can  lay  no  depe  foundacions  for  theyr  houfes,  fufficiente  to  beare  anye
heauye  roofe.  The  Kinge  of  thys  citie  is  geuen  to  Idolatrie,  and  honoureth  the  deuyll  himfelf  Yet  he  denieth
not  but  that  there  is  a  God  which  made  heauen  and  earth.  And  the  fame  to  be  the  chiefe  auctour  and  fyrfle
caufe  of  all  thinges.  But  fayth  that  he  hath  committed  the  nile  and  iudgemente  of  the  world,  to  the  deuil,  to
whom  he  hath  geuen  power  to  rewarde  men  with  good  or  bad  according  to  their  defertes.  This  deuil  they  cal
Deumo,  but  the  mightie  God  and  maker  of  the  world,  they  cal  lamcram.  The  king  hath  in  his  Chappell  the
Image  of  this  deuyl  Deunii,  fytting  with  a  diademe  or  crowne  on  his  head,  much  lyke  vnto  the  myter  which  the
Romayne  Bifhoppes  weare,  faue  that  this  deuils  myter  hath  foure  notable  homes.  He  fytteth  gapinge  and  hath
a  greate  wyde  mouthe,  with  foure  teeth  and  a  deformed  nofe,  lowringe  eyes,  a  grimme,  terrible,  and  threatening
countenaunce,  with  hooked  handes  lyke  flefhehookes,  and  feete  not  much  vnlyke  the  feete  of  a  cocke.  Al  fuch
as  behold  this  horrible  monfler,  are  fodeynly  aflonied.  For  it  is  furely  a  thing  mofl.  vyle  to  beholde,  and  no
leffe  terrible.  The  chappel  is  on  euery  fyde  ful  of  painted  deuyls  :  and  in  euery  comer  thereof  fytteth  a  deuyll
made  of  copper,  and  that  fo  workemanly  handeled,  that  he  femeth  like  flaming  fire,  miferably  confuming  the
foules  of  men.  This  deuyl  with  his  righte  hande,  putteth  a  foule  to  his  mouth,  and  with  his  lefte  hand,  he
taketh  another  from  a  place  beneth.  Euery  moming  their  Priefles  (called  Bramini)  waflie  the  Image  of  the
deuyll  with  rofe  water,  or  fuch  other  fwete  liquoure,  and  perfume  hym  with  dyuerfe  fwete  fauours,  kneling  on
theyr  knees  and  praying  vnto  him.  Euerye  feuenth  day,  thei  take  the  bloud  of  a  cocke  and  put  it  in  a  filuer
veffel,  ful  of  burning  coales  :  addinge  thereunto  innumerable  odoriferous  gummes  and  pouders  to  make  a  fwete
fmoke  or  fumigacion.  Then  the  Priefle  taketh  his  fenfer  with  burning  coles,  putting  therto  frankencenfe,  and
thus  maketh  his  oblacion  to  Sathan,  during  which  tyme  of  facrifice,  a  lyttle  fyluer  bell,  is  ronge  continuallye.
The  king  fytteth  not  downe  to  his  meate,  vntyll  foure  of  his  chapleins  haue  ofifred  parte  of  the  fame  meate  to
the  deuyl.  And  when  the  Kynge  goeth  to  dyner,  he  fytteth  on  the  grounde  withoute  eyther  carpet  or  table
cloth.  And  as  he  fytteth  at  diner,  foure  of  the  priefles  wayte  vpon  him  flanding  :  not  approchinge  nere  vnto
hym  by  the  diflaunce  of  foure  pafes,  geuing  reuerent  attendaunce  vnto  the  kinges  talke.  When  he  hath  dyned,
the  Priefles  take  the  meate  that  is  left,  and  geue  it  to  the  crowes  to  eate  :  which  byrdes  they  haue  in  fuch
efl.imacion,  yat  it  is  not  lawful  to  hurt  them.  When  the  king  flial  marie  a  wife,  he  goeth  not  to  bed  uith
her,  vntil  Ihe  be  defloured  of  ye  high  Prieil,  whom  the  king  for  his  paines  rewardeth  with.  v.  C.  [five  hundred]
pieces  of  golde.

c

Of  the  maners  of  the  Indians  in  Calicut.

k

Ext  after  the  King,  ye  priefles  which  feme  ye  Idols,  are  had  in  chiefe  reuerence.  Nexte  vnto
them,  the  Magiflrates,  called  Nerl,  are  no  leffe  eflemed  then  amonge  vs  Senatoures  or  Lordes
of  the  counfayl.  When  thefe  goe  abroade,  they  cary  with  them  fwordes,  targettes,  bowes  and
iauelins.  Such  as  are  counted  of  the  thyrde  order,  are  in  like  place  with  them,  as  are  Arti-
ficers with  vs.  They  of  the  fourth  order,  lyue  by  fifhinge.  And  to  them  of  the  fyfthe  order,
perteyneth  the  gathering  of  pepper,  wyne,  and  walnuttes.  The  bafeft  and  poorefl  fort,  are
they  which  fowe  and  gather  ryce,  beyng  contemned  both  of  the  priefles  and  Senatours.  The
Kinge,  the  Queue,  and  the  inhabitantes  of  the  cytie,  haue  almofl  no  apparel,  couering  onely  the>T  fylthy  partes
with  cotton  of  the  tree  called  Goffampine,  and  not  with  filke:  and  are  befide  altogether  naked.  They  goe
barefoted  and  bareheaded.  When  the  King  is  dead,  yf  there  remayne  al>-ue  any  heyres,  males,  either  children
or  brethren,  or  brethers  children,  they  fuccede  not  in  the  kingdome :  for  by  cuftome  of  the  countreye,  the
fyflers  fonnes  are  inheritours  to  ye  crown :  but  yf  there  bee  no  fuche  lyuinge,  he  fuccedeth  in  the  kingdom
which  is  nearefl  of  bloud  to  ye  king,  of  whiche  coflume,  the  reafon  is  (as  they  faye)  becaufe  the  Priefles  defloure
the  Queues.  When  the  King  taketh  any  farre  ioumey,  or  rydeth  a  hunting,  the  Priefles  wayte  vpon  the  Queue
at  home,  and  kepe  her  company :  for  nothinge  can  be  more  thankefull  to  the  kynge,  then  to  haue  the  Queue
thus  accuflomed  in  adulterye  with  the  Priefles,  by  whiche  common  proflitucion  of  the  quene,  he  maye  well  iudge
that  the  chyldren  borne  of  her,  are  not  to  be  eflemed  as  his  owne :  and  therfore  affigneth  the  right  of  his  inheri-
taunce  to  his  fyfters  children,  as  to  the  nerefl  of  his  bloude,  becaufe  his  brothers  children  (as  is  fayd  before)  may
not  fuccede  him  in  the  kingdome  by  the  cuflome  of  the  countrey.  The  noble  men  and  marchauntes  vfe  this
fafhion  among  themfelues.  Such  as  haue  wyues,  do  often  tymes  chaunge  thejT  w}-ues,  one  frende  with  an  other
for  th[e]encreafe  of  further  frendfhip.  At  which  exchaunging  of  wyues,  one  of  them  fpeaketh  to  another  after  tliis
manner.  Forafmuch  as  you  are  my  veri  frend,  let  vs  chaunge  ^vyues :  on  fuch  condicion,  that  I  maye  haue
yours  and  you  myne.  The  other  afketh  him  yf  he  fpeake  in  earnefle.  He  fweareth  yea:  let  vs  goe  then  (fa}th
hisfelow)to  myhoufe:  when  they  are  come  thether,  the  good  man  calleth  forth  his  \\ife,  faying  %-nto  her:

The  king  honoreth
the  deuiL

The  Image  of  the

deuill.

I  The  bUshop  of
Romes  vicar  at
Calicut.

The  deuil  eatetb
soules.

The  deuiles
chaplins.

Sacrifice  to  the
deuyL

The  chapleins
offer  to  the  deuyL

The  priestes  wait
on  the  kyng.

Crowes  had  in
estimadon
The  priestes
defloure  y.
queene.

Priestes.
Magistrates.

Artificers.
Labourers.

The  succession  of
the  kingdom.

As  are  ye  priestes,
such  is  ye  people.
The  priestes  kepe
the  quene.

Exchaunginge
of  w^-ues.

Eden.

»7

i8

[0/  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  foujtd,  &c.]

Obedience  in
euylL

One  woman
maried  to  seuen
meu.

The  punishment
of  muither.

Sinne  redemed
for  money.

Superstition.

Outeward
clenlynes.

Deuylishe
gestures.

Woman,  come  hether  and  folow  this  man :  for  he  (hall  from  henceforth  be  thy  hufband.  She  afketh  him  yf  he
fpeake  in  earneft. :  he  anfwereth,  in  good  earned.  Then  fayth  the  woman :  I  wil  folowe  him  gladly.  He  taketh
her  away  with  him,  and  in  lyke  maner  fendeth  his  wyfe  to  his  frende.  And  this  is  the  cuflome  which  thei  vfe
in  chaunging  of  wyues.  But  the  children  remaine  with  theyr  fyrfle  father.  Other  of  thcfe  Idolaters  vfe  dyuerfe
other  cuflomes.  For  among  feme  of  them,  one  woman  is  maried  to  feuen  hufbandes,  which  lie  with  her  by
courfe  one  after  another.  And  when  (he  hath  broughte  forth  a  child,  flie  fendeth  it  to  whichc  of  her  feuen  huf-
bandes file  lift :  who  maye  in  no  cafe  refufe  it.  When  they  eate,  they  lye  along  on  the  grounde,  and  haue  theyr
meate  in  great  difflies,  or  treys  of  copper.  In  the  flede  of  fpones,  they  vfe  leaues  of  trees.  Their  meate,  is  ryce,
fiflie,  fpyces,  and  fruites  of  the  common  forte.  Yf  any  man  committe  marther,  and  bee  apprehended,  he  is
punifhed  after  this  maner.

They  haue  a  kynde  of  gallowes  made,  with  a  pofle  of  the  lengthe  of  foure  pafes :  On  the  whyche,  not  farre
from  the  toppe,  are  faflened  two  flaues  with  fliarpe  endes,  ye  one  lying  ouer  the  other  after  the  maner  of
a  croffe :  then  the  body  of  ye  offender  is  thrufl  through  vpon  one  of  ye  flaues.  And  fo  the  miferable  wretche
hangeth  vntyll  he  haue  geuen  vppe  the  ghofl.  But  yf  any  man  wound  another,  or  beate  hym  with  a  ftaffe,
he  redemeth  th[e]ofifence,  payinge  to  the  king  a  certayn  of  golde.  When  they  pray,  they  go  fyrfl  before  the
rj'fmg  of  the  funne,  to  fome  rywer  or  flandinge  water,  wherein  they  plunge  themfelues,  to  th[e]intent  to  wafhe  them
cleane :  And  fo  beeinge  waflied,  they  touche  nothing  vntyll  they  haue  at  home  at  theyr  houfes,  poured  forth
theyr  prayers  before  theyr  Idols.  When  they  laye  them  felues  down  on  the  grounde,  fecretely  to  praye,  they
make  certayne  deuyliflie  geflures  lyke  vnto  madde  men,  flaring  with  theyr  eyes,  and  turning  them  inward
after  a  flraunge  forte,  wyth  no  leffe  deforminge  their  countenaunce,  very  monflrous  to  beholde.  When  the
kmg  prepareth  him  to  ye  warres  he  hath  in  a  readyneffe  a  hundreth  thouflmd  fotemen.  For  of  horfemen  they
haue  no  vfe,  but  only  of  fuch  as  fyght  on  Elephantes.  Al  that  are  of  the  Kinges  bande,  have  a  filken
fyllet  of  fcarlet  colour,  tied  about  their  heades.  When  thei  go  to  the  warres  they  vfe  round  fweordes,  targets,
iauelins,  and  bowes.

C  Of  Pepper  and  other  f pices  which  growe  in  the  region  of  Calicut.

Howe  pepper
groweth

Fruitful  ^ounde
without  tillage

Ginger.

A  rote  for  a  rede.

Fruytes  vnknowen
to  us.

Aloe.

Epper  groweth  in  ye  fuburbes  of  the  citie  of  Calicut.  There  is  fome  alfo  gathered  within  the
citie.  The  flalke  of  pepper  is  veri  weake :  fo  that  it  can  not  flande  vpryghte,  without  a  flake
or  proppe  to  fuflein  it,  as  haue  ye  vynes.  It  is  not  much  vnlike  vnto  luie :  and  in  Hke  maner
crepeth  and  ftretcheth  forth  it  felf  embrafmg  and  ouerfpreading  fuch  trees  as  grow  nere  vnto
it.  This  tree  (or  rather  fhrubbe)  is  deuided  into  many  braunches,  of  the  lengthe  of  two  or
thre  hand  bredth.  The  leaues  are  lyke  the  leaues  of  an  Orenge  tree:  fauinge  that  thefe  are
fomewhat  groffer  and  fatter,  with  fmall  vaynes  running  betwene  on  the  contrarye  fide.  On
euery  twigge  ther  hangeth  fixe  thicke  clufters  of  beries,  a  hand  breadth  in  length,  and  of  the  colour  of  wild
grapes.  They  are  gathered  in  the  monethes  of  October  and  Nouember :  Inclininge  yet  to  a  grene  colour,  and  fo
laying  them  on  mattes  or  couerlettes,  they  fet  them  in  the  funne  to  be  dried:  where,  within  the  fpace  of
thre  dayes,  it  waxeth  black,  euen  as  it  is  brought  hether.  They  vfe  neyther  cutting  nor  digging,  or  other  tillage,
but  onely  the  fimple  and  pure  fruitfulnes  and  encreafe  of  the  earth.  Plinie  fayth  that  the  trees  of  pepper  are  lyke
Tnto  oure  iuniper  trees.  And  that  in  his  time,  fome  affyrmed  yat  they  were  brought  foorth  only  in  the  front  of  ye
mount  Caucafiis  on  the  fouthfyde  toward  the  fonne.  But  the  Portugals,  whiche  in  this  our  daies  fayle  into  the
Eafl  partes,  haue  found  it  otherwife.  The  region  of  Calicut,  beareth  alfo  Ginger :  which  doubtles  is  a  roote,  and
is  often  tymes  founde  of  the  weighte  of.  xii.  vnces :  but  al  are  not  of  lyke  bignes.  This  roote  entreth  no  deper
into  ye  ground,  then.  iii.  or.  iiii.  handbredth,  like  vnto  the  rede.  When  ginger  is  digged  out  of  ye  ground,  they
leaue  the  knotte  or  ioynte  of  the  roote,  in  the  pytte  out  of  which  they  digged  the  ginger :  couering  ye  fame  with
earth  as  a  fede,  agaynfl  the  next  yeare  to  encreafe  and  bring  forth  more  ginger.  It  is  found  in  playn  ground  of
a  redde  erth,  as  ar  Mirabalanes.  Ther  groweth  alfo  diuers  other  frutes  and  fhrubbes  vnknowen  to  vs,  as  laceri,
graccara,  a^nba,  Carocapel,  Comolanga,  and  fuch  other  of  which  fome  haue  the  tafle  and  fauoure  of  quinces,  fome
of  peaches,  fome  of  damafke  prunes,  fome  of  melones,  and  fome  of  figges,  etc.  Aloe  groweth  alfo  in  that  region :
and  is  a  certayn  gumme,  gathered  from  a  litle  tree,  which  is  faflened  in  the  earth,  onely  with  one  roote  after  ye
maner  of  a  flafife,  pytched  in  the  grounde.  The  bodie  of  the  tree,  is  tender  and  redde,  of  flrong  fauour  and
bitter  tafl.  It  fomtyme  putteth  forth  droppes  of  gumme  '^^^thoute  anye  cuttinge.  And  this  of  India,  is  muche
better  then  that  which  groweth  in  luika.

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  if  is  knowen  &  found,  &c'\

19

C  Of  byrdes  and  beafles  which  are  found  in  the  region  ^Calicut:  and

of  the  wyne  of  the  merueylous  tree.

Here  is  found  in  Calicut,  diuers  and  fundry  kyndes  of  foure  footed  beafles  and  foules.  As  lions,
\vilde  boores,  hartes,  hyndes,  wolues,  kyne,  \vylde  oxen,  goates,  and  Elephantes :  whych  neuer-
theles  are  not  engendred  there,  but  brought  thether.  There  bee  alfo  grene  popingiays,  and
fome  [of]  white  fethers  of  variable  colours,  lying  like  fcoutchins.  Some  alfo  of  purple  coloure.
Of  thefe  there  is  fuch  plentie,  that  they  are  fayne  to  appoint  men  to  kepe  them  from  the  rice
which  groweth  there  in  the  feldes.  They  are  merueilous  chatteringe  and  of  fmall  price.
There  are  alfo  birdes  called  Sarau,  fomwhat  leffe  then  popingiayes,  but  make  a  much  fweter
noyfe.  There  are  alfo  manye  other  kyndes  of  byrdes  vnlyke  vnto  oures  :  Of  which,  euerye  morning  and  euening
is  hearde  fuche  a  harmonie  and  fo  fwete  a  noyfe,  that  nothing  can  be  more  delectable  :  In  fo  little  mouthes
confifleth  in  maner  al  muficke,  and  therfore  the  inhabitauntes  lyue  in  greate  pleafure,  as  though  they  were  in  an
earthly  paradife,  where  floures  are  euer  fpringing,  and  trees  continue  grene  al  the  hole  yeare.  The  heauen  is
beneficiall  vnto  them,  and  the  ayre  moft  temperate  continually.  So  that  thei  are  nether  bytten  ^\^th  colde  in
winter  nor  burnt  with  heate  in  fomer,  but  lyue  as  it  were  in  continual  fpringe  tyme.  The  fame  region  bringeth
forth  alfo  Marmafets  and  Munkeys,  whiche  are  great  hinderaunce  to  ye  men  of  the  countrey  :  and  fpecially  to  the
poore  forte,  beecaufe  they  clyme  the  walnut  trees,  and  fpylle  the  fweete  liquoure  of  the  fruyte  thereof,  of  which
the  Indians  make  mofl  pleafaunt  wyne.  For  thefe  Indians  haue  a  tree  mofl  excellent  aboue  all  other  trees  of
the  world,  which  bringeth  foorth  dates  lyke  vnto  the  Palme  tree.  This  tree  ferueth  them  for  firewood  :  and
beareth  a  kynde  of  walnuttes  mofl  dehcate  to  be  eaten  :  Alfo  a  kind  of  cordes,  fofte  cloth,  wine,  oyle,  and
fuger.  But  chiefly  it  bringeth  foorth  this  excellent  kynde  of  nuttes  like  vnto  dates.  From  thefe  they  take  awaye
the  fyrfle  rynde  or  barke  and  cafl  it  in  the  fire.  The  other  fruite  is  not  muche  vnlyke  Goffampme  cotton,  or  fylke.
Of  the  floures  they  make  cloth  lyke  filke  :  the  flaxe  whiche  is  lefte,  they  fpinne  agayne,  and  make  therof  fmal
roopes  or  cordes.  The  lafl  barke  or  rinde,  conteineth  the  nutte,  whofe  thickeneffe  is  no  more  then  the  Ijttle
fynger  of  a  mans  hande.  Furthermore  the  fweete  liquoure  or  wyne,  is  engendered  with  the  nutte,  fo  that  as  the
nutte  groweth,  the  liquoure  alfo  encreafeth  :  In  fo  much  that  when  the  nut  is  full  growen,  the  lyquoure  fyllethe
the  inne  warde  partes  of  the  fame.  And  thys  liquoure  or  wyne,  is  mofl  cleare,  not  muche  vnlyke  \-nto  rofe-
water  :  Of  which  neuertheles  is  made  a  very  fatte  oile.  They  cut  alfo  the  trunke  or  flocke  of  the  tree  in  ye
morning  and  euening :  by  whiche  meanes  they  gather  a  mofl.  excellent  liquour,  which  they  feeth  on  the  fjTe,
and  make  thereof  fo  merueylous  a  drinke,  that  if  a  man  drinke  thereof  beyond  meafure,  he  is  drieuen  into  furie
and  madnes.  This  liquour  is  vfed  there  in  the  fl.ode  of  wyne.  But  let  vs  nowe  retume  to  the  beafles  which  are
found  in  Calicut.  Serpentes  growe  there  vnto  fuch  houdge  greatneffe,  that  they  are  in  maner  as  bigge  as  fwjTie.
They  haue  heades  muche  larger  then  bores  heades.  Thei  are  foure  foted,  foure  cubites  in  length,  engendered
and  conuerfaunte  in  fennie  and  marrifhe  groundes.  The  men  of  that  countrei  faye  that  thefe  beafl.es  are  without
poyfon.  There  are  alfo  found  other  kyndes  of  ferpentes  :  of  the  whiche  one  kynde  hath  fo  mortal)  venime,  that
yf  they  drawe  neuer  fo  lyttle  blud,  it  caufeth  prefent  death.  There  are  other  ferpentes  which  in  quantite
reprefent  the  ferpent  called  Afpis.  Again,  otherfome  are  much  higher  of  whiche  tnere  are  greate  plentie.
The  men  of  the  countrey  thinke  yat  they  are  fpirites  fallen  from  heauen  :  and  therfore  haue  them  in  great
reuerence.  Thei  haue  conceaued  this  opinion  of  them,  becaufe  that  in  maner  with  touching,  they  bringe
prefent  death.  And  this  is  the  caufe  whi  there  is  fo  great  abundaunc[e]  of  ferpentes,  that  by  the  kinges
commaundement  it  is  not  lawful  to  hurt  them  :  and  therefore  they  wander  fafelye  where  them  lifleth,  and
are  eflemed  of  them  as  thinges  that  bring  good  fortune.  For  whereas  the  men  of  yat  countrey,  goe  abroade
aboute  anye  bufines,  thei  take  it  for  good  luck  to  mete  any  of  them  by  the  waye.  The  popingiays  of  India
are  for  the  mofl  part,  of  grene  colour  befyde  ye  head,  which  is  ether  redde  or  yelowe  like  golde.  They  haue
a  great  and  large  toung,  and  are  therfore  of  a  louder  voyce,  and  fpeake  more  plainly.  They  leame  the
fyrft  and  fecond  yeare  fuch  thinges  as  are  taughte  them.  And  beare  them  longer  in  memory.  They  drinke
wyne,  and  vfe  theyr  fete  in  the  ftede  of  handes  when  they  feede.

Papingiayes  of
dyuers  kyndes.

Sweete  smginge
of  birdes

Earthly  paradise
Temperate  aj-re.
Continual  spring.
Munkeys.

A  tree  of  sundrj-e
commodities.

Silke  of  trees.

Ropes  of  trees.
W'>-ne  of  tree*

Oyle  of  water

Serpents  as  bigge
as  s\«-ine

Serpents  without
poyson.

Serpentes  counted
for  heauenly
spirited

Grene
poping{i]aies.

20

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  foimd^  &c\

Ca  'itmffr.
ZayloK.

Corimucol.

Meluza.
Molucka.

Pego.

Ormus

Cambaitt.
A  raiia.

China,
Samoior.

Damasseri.

Elephantes.
Precious  stones.
Cinomome.

The  Equinoctial
lyne

Weapons  of  redes

Narsinga.

The  beast  whiche
beareth  the  furre
called  Sables.

Foules  of
ineruelous  bignes.

C  0/  the  fluid  rye  kindes  of  Spices,  which  are  fotinde  in  Calicut,  and  f'Ofu

whence  they  are  brought  thyther.

Tnger  groweth  in  Caliait,  yet  is  there  much  broiighte  thether  from  the  cytie  of  Canonor.

Cinamome  commeth  from  the  Ilande  of  Zaylon,  whyche  is  fyftye  leages  beeyonde  Calicut
Eaflwarde.

Pepper  groweth  in  Calicut :  but  muche  more  is  broughte  thether  from  Corim^icol,  whiche
is.  xij.  leages  beyonde  Calicut.

Cloues  are  gathered  in  a  place,  called  Meluza,  certayn  leages  diftant  from  Caliait.
Nutmegges  and  Mace,  growe  in  Molucha,  beyng  diftante  from  Calicut  hundreth  and  thre
fcore  leages,  and  fomewhat  more.

Mufke  and Cafloreum,  is  brought  from  the  region  of  Fego,  whiche  is  from  Calicut,  almofle  hundreth
and  fyftye  leages.

Pearles  of  the  biggefl  forte,  are  gathered  neare  vnto  the  Hand  and  cytie  of  Ormus,  fituate  in  the  goulfe
called  Sinus  Perfuus:  And  are  fente  from  thence  to  Calicut,  as  to  the  generall  market  towne  of  all  the  Eafl  partes.
Spikenarde,  and  Mirabalanes,  are  brought  from  Cambaia  to  Calicut.
Frankencenfe,  and  M>Tre,  come  from  Arabia.

Aloe,  and  Caviphyre,  are  brought  from  Kyui,  or  CJiiua.  1.  [fifty]  leages  from  Calicut.
Long  pepper  cometh  from  Samoior. Cardamome  ye  greater,  is  brought  from  Canonor.
Prefilium,  or  brafyll,  cometh  from  Daniqfseri,  othervvyfe  called  Tarmafferi,  almofl.  CC.  [two  hundred]
leages  from  Calicut.

C  Of  the  Hand  of  ZdiyXon,  and  of  Cinomome  found  there.

Aylon  is  a  very  large  region,  and  bringeth  foorth  chefelye  Elephantes  in  greate  plentie.  It  hath
alfo  Mountaynes  of  merueylous  length  :  at  the  rootes  wherof  are  found  Rubines,  Hiacinthes,
Saphyres,  Topafes,  and  fuche  other  precious  flones.  In  this  Hand  groweth  the  Cinomome
tree,  not  much  vnlyke  ye  bayetree,  fpecially  in  the  leaues.  It  bringeth  forth  graynes  much  lyke
vnto  baye  beries,  but  fomwhat  leffe  and  whytifhe.  That  which  we  commonly  call  Cinomome,
is  nothinge  els  but  the  barke  or  rynde  of  a  tree,  which  is  gathered  after  this  maner.  Euery
thyrde  yeare  they  cut  of  the  braunches  of  the  trees,  and  take  of  the  barke  or  rynde  thereof,
which  is  our  Cinomome.  They  cut  not  the  body  of  the  tree,  but  only  the  branches.  When  it  is  firfl  gathered,
it  is  grene,  and  not  perfectly  fwete  vntyll  it  be  kept  a  moneth.  This  Hand  is  fituate  vnder  the  Equinoctial  line,
where  is  continuall  fpringe  all  the  yeare.  The  inhabitauntes  weare  clokes,  with  one  arme  oute  vncouered,
and  haue  clothe  made  of  Goffampijie  cotton,  or  of  filke.  A  rede  is  to  them  in  the  flede  of  fworde,  rapyre,
and  iauelyne. And  are  therefore  feldome  llayne  in  the  warres.

C  Of  the  cytie  ^Tarnafseri,  and  the  maner  of  the  cytezins  there.

He  cytie  of  Tarnafferi,  is  diflaunte  from  the  Kingdome  of  Narfmga.  xiiij.  dayes  fayling
Eflward,  and  hath  a  king  of  great  puyffaunce  and  marueylous  riche.  The  foyle  of  this  citie,
bringeth  forth  wheate,  cotton  of  Gofsajnpine  trees,  and  plentie  of  filke.  The  fieldes  bringe
foorthe  all  kindes  of  fruites  ;  quinces  alfo  and  oranges.  It  is  repleniflied  with  manye  and
fundrye  kyndes  of  beafles  afwell  wyld  as  tame,  as  kyne,  (hepe,  gotes,  fwyne,  hartes,  hyndes,
wolues  and  lyons.  There  are  alfo  feene  thofe  kyndes  of  cattes  which  beare  the  riche  furres
called  Zibcllini,  which  we  call  Sables.  In  all  the  fieldes  and  woodes  of  this  region  are  founde
many  Peacockes,  Faulcons,  and  mofl  fayre  Popingiayes  of  white  colour  intermingled  with  feuen  variable  coloures.
There  is  alfo  maruelous  plentye  of  hares  and  partryches.  There  are  manye  of  other  flraunge  kyndes  of  foules  :
and  fpecially  fuch  as  lyue  by  praye,  whiche  are  muche  higher  then  Eagles  :  whofe  vpper  beakes  arc  of  fuche
bignes  and  hardnes,  that  handles  for  fweordes  are  made  thereof Alfo  the  cockes  and  hennes  of  thys  region  are

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  found,  &c.]

21

muche  hygher  and  bigger  then  ours.  When  the  people  of  the  countreye  goe  to  theyr  meate,  they  lye  downe  on
the  grounde  withoute  carpet  or  cloth  :  Yet  vfe  they  woodden  veffelles,  vvorkemanlye  made.  Theyr  drinke
is  water  myxte  with  fuger  :  but  the  poorer  forte,  drinke  onelye  water.  Their  beddes  are  made  of  Gofiampine
cotton,  wyth  couerlettes  alfo  of  cotton  or  fylke.  They  goe  all  in  generall  barefooted  excepte  the  Priefl.es.  The
Kynge  of  this  cytye,  doeth  not  commytte  his  wife  to  the  Priefles  to  bee  defloured,  as  doth  the  king  of  Caliait,
but  to  whyte  men,  as  are  the  chridians  and  Turkes.  For  this  office  i.  not  committed  to  the  Idoloters.  But
after  that  the  new  maried  quene  hath  been  thus  defloured  the  fyrfl.  night,  yf  euer  after  flie  doe  difhonour
the  Kyng  her  hufband,  by  violating  the  faith  made  to  him,  from  thencefoorth  neuer  to  knowe  any  other
man  carnally,  her  punifhment  is  death  incontinently.  When  the  Kynges  or  the  Priefl.es  dye,  their  bodies  are
laid  on  a  great  fyre,  and  the  aflies  thereof  referued  in  erthen  pottes,  putting  thereto  a  porcion  of  falte  petre,
and  buryinge  the  fame  in  theyr  owne  houfes.  While  the  bodies  are  burning,  they  cafl.  into  the  fyre  al
kyndes  of  fwete  fauouring  gummes,  and  fpices  :  as  Aloe,  Frankencenfe,  Myrre,  Storax,  Coralle,  fandalles,
and  fuche  other  innumerable  :  In  the  meane  tyme  blowing  tmmpets  and  fliawmes,  after  the  maner  of  them  which
amonge  the  gentiles  were  canonized  into  ye  numbre  of  the  goddes.  And  within  xv.  dayes  after  ye  hufbandes
death,  the  wyfe  calleth  to  her  all  her  kinffolkes,  bidding  them  to  a  banket :  and  fo  being  decked  with  al  her
iewels,  flie  procedeth  with  them  to  the  place  where  her  hufbande  was  buried,  where  a  graue  is  redye  digged  for
her,  inclofed  about  with  filken  cloth,  hauinge  in  it  a  fyre  made  of  fweete  wood.  WTien  the  woman  hath
thus  feafled  her  kynffolkes,  flie  eateth  much  of  the  herbe  called  Betola,  wherby  fhe  is  driuen  into  a  madnes.  In
thys  meane  whyle,  innumerable  trumpetters  (wearing  fuch  veftures  as  they  vfe  in  the  deuyls  feruice)  go  as  it  were
on  proceffion  aboute  the  graue,  while  the  woman  runneth  vp  and  down,  daunfmg  continually  Uke  a  franrike
bodie.  And  thus  when  the  ceremonies  are  fynifhed,  fhe  cafleth  her  felfe  headlong  into  the  fyre  and  graue  :
and  that  with  no  leffe  cherefulnes  then  yf  fhe  fliould  be  receaued  into  heauen.  And  vnlefle  the  \roman  fliould
performe  thys  cuflome,  flie  fhould  incurre  mofl.  vyle  infamie,  and  be  a  mocking  ftocke  to  all  her  nacion,  as  one
that  loued  not  her  hufband.  But  the  common  people  vfe  not  thys  cuflome  :  but  only  the  rulers  and
princes. And  therfore  the  king  him  felfe  is  often  tymes  prefente  at  thefe  folemnities.

C  Of  the  kingdoms  and  cities  of  Pego  and  Bangella.

Rom  the  cytie  of  Taniafferi,  to  the  cytie  of  Batigalla,  is.  xi.  dayes  faylinge.  This  cytie  hath  a
kynge :  and  the  countrey  is  very  fruyteful  with  great  plentie  of  wheat,  flefhe,  fuger,  ginger,  and
goffampine  cotton :  and  hath  therfore  very  rich  marchantes.  There  yearely  pafleth  from  this
citie  fyftie  fliyppes  frayghted  wyth  goffampine  cotton,  and  filke  clothes :  which  are  caried  from
thence  to  the  Turkes,  Syrians,  Arabians,  Periians,  Ethiopians,  and  Indians.  Here  are  alfo
founde  certayne  Chriflian  merchaunt  men,  which  come  out  of  Th[e]empire  of  the  great  Cham
of  Cathay :  bringing  with  them  Aloe,  Cafl:oreum  and  the  fwete  gumme  called  Laferpitiiim,  with
other  fwete  fauours.  In  this  cytie,  the  men  fpinne  and  carde  and  make  clothe,  and  not  the  womenne.  From
this  cytie  Eaflwarde,  is  another  great  citie  called  Pego,  beyng  fituate  by  a  verye  fayre  rjaier.  The  Kinge  of
thys  cytie,  is  an  Idolater,  and  hathe  innumerable  menne  of  warre,  both  horfemenne  and  footemenne.  The
foyle  beareth  wheate  plentifullye :  and  bringeth  foorth  in  maner  all  kyndes  of  beafles,  and  hath  therfore  great
abundaunce  of  fleflie,  yet  are  there  but  fewe  Elephants  :  But  of  other  beafl.es  and  foules,  great  plentie  as  is  at
Caliait:  and  fpeciallye  of  popingiayes,  whiche  are  of  louder  voice  then  in  any  other  place.  There  is  little
trafficque  or  marchaundife  in  this  region,  except  iewels  and  precious  flones,  and  fpeciallye  Rubies,  called  Pyropi,
whiche  are  broughte  thether  from  the  cytie  of  Capcla7i.  Thefe  precious  fl:ones  fliyne  fo  brighte  in  the  darke
nyghte,  as  thoughe  it  were  the  fonne  beames.  The  countrey  adioyning,  bringeth  forth  Lacha,  Sandalum,  called
faunders :  Alfo  brafile,  goffampine  cotton  and  fylke.  From  Pego  to  the  cytie  of  Malaccha  (whiche  fome  call
Melaqua)  is  eygh[t]e  dayes  faylinge:  where  on  the  other  fyde  is  fene  a  great  Hand  called  Sumatra,  other\vife
Samotra,  and  was  in  time  pafle  called  Taprobana.  This  Malaccha,  hath  a  goodly  and  commodious  hn  uen :  by
reafon  wherof,  moe  fliippes  arriue  there  then  in  any  other  place:  bringinge  Avith  them  fpyces  and  other
marchaundife  in  great  abundance.  The  region  is  not  generally  fruytful,  yet  hath  it  wheat  and  flefhe:  but
greate  fcarceneffe  of  wood.  The  foules  wander  in  the  feldes  as  they  doe  in  the  region  of  Calicut.  But  the
popingiayes  are  here  much  fayrer.  It  bringeth  foorth  alfo  fpices,  faunders,  tinne,  elephantes,  horfes,  ftiepe,
wilde  oxen,  pecokes,  and  fuch  other  kyndes  of  beafles.  It  is  not  lawfull  there  to  bye  and  fell,  except  you  bye
fpices  and  fylke.  It  is  alfo  there  very  daungerous  to  walke  in  the  citie  in  the  nighte  feafon,  beecaufe  of  the  theft
and  cruelnes  of  the  inhabitantes,  which  kil  one  another  like  dogges.  And  therfore  the  marchaund  flraungers
lodge  not  out  of  their  fhippes.  How  the  Portugales  fubdued  Malaccha,  flialbe  faid  hereafter  in  the  defcripcion
of  the  newe  Ilandes.

F2  ,,

Beddei  of  cilke.
Priestes.

The  queue
defloured  of  white

Adulteri  panished
u-ith  death

Howe  the  icioge
is  buried.

^finistrels.

ITie  quene  dyeth
willingly.

The  herbe  Betola.

What  credulitic
may-e  doe  in  false
religion.

Honour  dere
boughte.

The  king  and
citie  of  Bangella

SUke.

Christian  men  of
Cathay.

The  dtie  of  Pegrx

Rubies  shyningbj

night.

Lacha,  Lacca,  or
Lacta,  is  ye
gumme  of  a  tree
wherewith  silke  is
colored.

Alalacdka,

Sumatra,

TafrvbaHO.

22

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  found,  &c^

The  Hand  of
7"ii/n'Ai«iJ.

Men  of  a  hundreth
yeres  of  age.

SheUes  of  fishes
for  houses.

Great  pearles.

Coyned  golde  and
siluer  for  moneye.

Fishes  of

monstrous
bignesse.

Lacha.

Pepper  solde  by

measure.

Cathay.

The  Hand  of
banda.

The  nutmeg  tree.

Mace.

The  Hand  of

Mo>wch.

Cloues.

Charles  Waine.
Pole  Antartlke.

Idoloters.

Camphire.

C  Of  tJic greate  and  ryche  Ilande  ^Sumatra,  or  Samotra,  sometyme

called  Taprobana.

Ome  thinke  this  Sumatra,  to  be  that  Hand  which  of  the  old  writers  is  called  TaJ>roba?m.  It  is
verye  great  and  riche  :  and  hath  in  it  foure  Kinges  crowned  with  Diademes,  They  are
Idolaters:  in  religion,  maner  of  lyuinge,  and  apparell.  not  muche  vnlyke  the  Kinge  of
Taniafscri.  They  exceade  all  other  men  in  bigneffe  of  bodie.  They  haue  greye  or  blewe
eyes,  and  are  of  cruell  coimtenaunce,  and  terrible  voyce.  They  are  long  lyued  and  lyue  euen
vntyl  an  hundreth  yeares  of  age.  The  fea  in  certaine  chanels  is  of  fuch  heigth  and  depth,  that
no  anker  may  come  to  the  bottome  therof  The  inhabitantes  are  great  fyOiers  on  the  fea,  and
haue  great  pleasure  to  take  the  flielle  fyfhe,  called  the  Tortoyfe  of  the  fea :  of  whiche,  fome  are  of  fuche  houdge
bignes,  that  the  fhelle  of  one  of  them  may  fuffife  to  make  a  houfe  well  able  to  receaue  a  hole  famelie.  For
fome  of  them  beare  flielles  of  xv.  cubites  in  length :  and  are  therefore  apt  for  that  purpofe.  The  mofl  part  of
this  Ilande  is  burnte  with  heate,  and  hath  in  it  many  defolate  placed  and  wilderneffes.  There  are  founde  many
and  greate  Pearles.  For  theyr  money,  they  vfe  coyned  golde,  fyluer  and  tynne.  The  golden  coyne,  hath  on
the  one  fyde  a  deuils  head  grauen,  and  on  the  other  fyde  a  chariot  which  Elephantes  draw.  This  region
bringeth  foorth  more  plentie  of  Elephantes,  of  greater  flature,  and  a  better  broede,  then  are  found  in  any  other
place.  In  the  fea  about  this  Ilande,  are  often  tymes  fene  the  great  monflrous  fyfhes,  and  kynde  of  Whales,
called  Balene,  which  bring  many  incommodities  to  the  inhabitantes.  They  are  of  fuch  monflrous  bignes,  that
when  they  approche  to  the  Sea  bankes,  they  feeme  lyke  vnto  hylles :  they  haue  rough  backes  full  of  fharpe
prickes.  And  except  men  walke  very  warely  by  the  fea  bankes,  they  are  in  daunger  to  be  fodeynly  fwalowed
vp  of  thefe  monflers.  Some  of  them  haue  fo  greate  and  wyde  mouthes,  that  they  fometymes  fwallowe  whole
fhippes  with  the  men.  This  countrey  bringeth  foorthe  Lacha,  Lacca,  or  Lacia,  which  lleyneth  filke  and  cloth
in  high  redde  or  crimifon  coloure.  It  is  engendred  in  a  tree,  not  much  vnlyke  vnto  our  walnut  trees.  Ther  is
alfo  great  plenty  of  pepper,  higher  then  is  founde  in  other  places.  In  their  mother  tonge  pepper  is  called
Molaga.  It  is  folde  there  by  meafure,  as  wheat  is  with  vs,  and  not  by  weight.  There  is  fo  great  plentie  hereof,
that  there  are  yearely  certayne  fhippes  laden  therwith  to  Cathay,  where  ye  aire  is  colder.  From  Sumetra  to
the  Hand  of  Banda,  which  is  but  rude  and  barren,  and  of  playne  and  lowe  grounde,  whofe  inhabitantes  are
barbarous,  and  little  differinge  from  beafles,  hauing  lowe  houfes,  and  no  apparell  but  fhertes,  barefoted  and
bareheaded,  with  long  heare,  of  defpicable  flature,  dulle  witted,  of  no  flrength,  and  Idolaters.  The  foyle  of
this  countrey,  bringeth  forth  nothing  but  nutmegges,  and  a  few  other  fruites.  The  flalke  or  bodi  of  ye  nutmeg-
tree,  is  not  much  vnlike  ye  flalke  of  a  peache  tree,  bringing  forth  lyke  braunches  and  leaues,  but  fomewhat
narower.  Before  thefe  nutts  be  rype,  ye  mace  crepeth  on  the  tree,  lyke  a  fiorifliing  rofe.  And  when  the  nutte
waxeth  rype,  the  mace  embrafeth  it  round  about.  And  fo  they  gather  both  together  in  commune,  at  a  tyme
appointed :  for  they  vfe  no  diflribucion  thereof,  but  he  that  gathereth  mofl,  hath  mofl.  This  tree  bringeth
forth  his  fruyte  plentifully  without  any  arte  of  hufbandrye  or  tyllage.  They  are  gathered  at  fuch  time  as  we
gather  cheflnuttes.  From  this  Hand  within  fixe  dayes  fayling,  is  the  Hand  of  Monoch,  in  the  which  cloues  are
founde,  as  alfo  in  other  Ilandes,  therto  adioyninge.  The  tree  whiche  beareth  cloues,  hath  his  flalke  not  much
vnlike  vnto  the  boxe  tree,  with  leaues  lyke  the  Cinomome  tree,  but  fomewhat  rounder.  And  when  the  cloues
beginne  to  waxe  rype,  they  beate  the  trees  with  redes,  fpreding  fyrfl  couerlettes  or  mattes  vnder  ye  fame.  The
grounde  where  thefe  trees  grow,  is  of  ye  colour  of  cleye  or  fand.  This  region  is  fituate  fo  low,  that  ye  feuen
llarres  called  Septe7itriones  (being  not  farre  from  Vrfa  maior,  called  charles  wayne)  can  not  there  be  fene,
becaufe  ye  fouth  pole  (called  pole  Antartike)  appeareth  aboue  the  earth.

C  Of  the  Ilande  of  Bornei.

He  Hand  of  Bornei  (which  fome  call  Pome)  is  diflant  from  Monoch  fiftie  leages.  The  inhabi-
tantes are  Idolaters,  very  quick  witted,  and  of  maner  of  lining  not  greatly  to  be  difcommended.
Thei  vfe  not  al  one  kynde  of  apparell.  Some  weare  fhertes  of  goffampine  cotton,  fome
beafles  flcinnes,  and  fome  high  cappes  lyke  myters,  of  redde  colour.  This  Hand  bringeth
forth  yearely  great  plentie  of  Caviphora,  called  camphyre,  whiche  they  affirme  to  be  the
gumme  of  a  certayn  tree.  Of  this  Ilande  I  wil  fpeake  more  hereafter  in  the  nauigacions
toward  the  Eafl  partes.

\0f  the  newe  Indian  as  it  is  knowen  &  foimd,  &c\

23

C

Of  the  Hand  of  Giatia,

He  Hand  of  Gymia,  is  diilant  from  Bomei.  v.  dayes  fayling  towarde  the  fouth.  This  Hand  is
fo  great,  yat  it  conteineth  in  it  many  kingdoms :  >  e  inhabitantes  ar  geuen  to  idolatri.  It
bringeth  forth  filke,  which  of  it  felfe  groweth  there  plentifullye  in  the  wooddes.  The  precyous
flone  called  Smaragdus  (which  is  ye  true  Emerode)  is  found  there  more  excellent,  then  in  any
other  place  of  the  worlde.  It  hath  abundaunce  of  golde  and  copper  of  the  befl  kynd.  The
foyle  beareth  wheat  and  other  corne,  with  al  kindes  of  fruites  in  great  plentie.  \\Tien  the
men  of  this  countrie  goe  to  the  fea,  theyr  weapons  are  bowes,  and  arrowes  of  redes.  They
vfe  alfo  to  infect  theyr  arrowes  with  venime,  and  to  blowe  them  oute  of  a  trunke  as  we  doe  pellets  of  claye :
with  the  which  yf  they  drawe  neuer  fo  little  bloud,  prefente  death  foloweth  immedia[t]lye.  They  haue  alfo  this
cuflome,  that  when  they  fee  theyr  parentes  by  reafon  of  age  to  be  vnprofitable,  they  bring  them  to  the  market
towne,  and  there  fell  them  to  the  people  called  Anthropophagi,  which  eat  mens  flefhe,  of  whom  they  are  incon-
tinently flayne,  and  eaten. The  fame  doe  they  with  the  yonger  forte  alfo,  yf  they  fall  into  any  defperate  difeafe.

C  Of  the  Hand  of  latia.

Here  are  two  Ilandes  of  thys  name,  as  laua  the  more  and  laua  the  leffe.  The  biggefl
reacheth  forth  toward  the  South,  and  is  fayd  to  haue  in  it  many  kingdoms.  The
inhabitantes  are  Idolaters  and  haue  a  peculier  language.  In  this  Hand  is  greate  plentie
of  pepper,  Nuttemegges,  Spikenarde,  Galangale,  and  other  Ipices.  Mani  marchauntes  of
other  countreies  are  wont  to  reforte  thether,  and  geat  great  riches  by  ye  fpices  which
they  carie  from  thenfe.  In  this  Hand  alfo  are  people  called  Anthropophagi,  which  are
wont  to  eate  mens  flelhe.

C  Of  the  Hand  of  Madagafcar.

His  Hand  is  counted  to  be  one  of  the  greatefl  and  rychefle  Ilandes  of  the  worlde.  The
inhabitantes  are  of  Mahumets  fecte  as  are  the  Turkes.  It  bringeth  forth  many  Elephantes,
by  reafon  wherof  there  is  greate  plentie  of  luerye  which  is  the  Elephantes  tothe.  For  it
is  thought  that  there  is  no  greater  plentie  of  luerie,  then  in  this  Hand  and  in  the  Hand  of
Cuzibet.  They  eate  the  flefhe  of  none  other  beafles,  but  onely  of  Camels,  becaufe  the  Ilande
is  full  thereof,  and  alfo  that  it  is  founde  to  be  more  holefome  for  the  people  of  that
countrey  then  any  other  flefhe.  There  are  alfo  in  this  Hand  many  woddes  that  bringe
foorth  redde  fanders,  for  the  which  many  marchauntes  refort  thether.  In  the  fea  about  this  Hand,  great
whales  are  taken,  out  of  the  which  amber  is  gathered.  There  are  lions,  leopardes,  harteb,  hyndes,  goates,  and
many  other  beafles  and  foules,  by  reafon  whereof,  they  vfe  muche  haukinge  and  huntinge.

C  Of  the  Hand  of  Zanzibar.

He  Ilande  of  Zanzibar,  hath  a  peculier  Kinge  and  language.  The  inhabitantes  are  idolaters,
and  are  of  groffe  and  fliorte  flature  :  but  yf  theyr  heygth  dydde  aunfwere  to  theyr  thickenefl'e
and  breadth,  they  mighte  feme  to  be  giauntes.  They  arc  all  blacke,  and  goe  naked,
onely  couering  theyr  pryuie  partes.  The  heare  of  theyr  heades,  is  merueylouflye  corldc.
They  haue  greate  mouthes,  nofethrilles  flyrtting  vpwarde  and  wyde,  Avith  great  eares
and  cruell  eyes.  Theyr  women  are  deformed  by  reafon  of  theyr  greate  eyes,  greate  mouthes,
and  greate  nofethrilles. They  Hue  with  milke,  flefflie,  ryce,  and  dates. They  lacke  ^^yne  :

yet  they  make  a  pleafaunt  drinke  of  ryce,  fuger,  and  other  fpices. Many  marchauntes  reforte  thether  for  yuerie

and  Amber,  for  there  is  greate  plentye  of  Elephantes  and  greate  whales.

»3

Silke  groweth  in

wrxides.

The  smaragde  or

emerode.

Go!de  and  copper

Arrowes  of  redes

Arrowes  infected
with  venime.
A  strange
custome.

A  nth}  oJ>opha^.

Spyces.

Mahumetistes

Elephantes.

luerie

The  Hand  of
Cuzibet.

Camels  fleshc

eaten.

Woddes  of  reiUle

Sanders.

Whales

Amber.

Lions,  and
Leopardes.

i/^

Bigge  men  of
low  stature.

People  deformed

Ryce  and  Dates.
Drinke  of  spicei
Amber.

24

Fishing.

The  great  Cham
of  Tartar!

Famous  cities
\Tider  the  greate
Cham.

Manye  wyues.
What  naturall
affection  may  doe

A  strange
custome

The  people  of
Cathay.

Ido.otours.

Money  of  paper

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  found,  &c^

C  Of  the  two  Ilandes,  in  one  of  the  which  dwell  onely  men,  and  in  the

other  onely  women.

N  the  mayne  fca,  there  are  two  Ilandes,  didante  the  one  from  the  other  aboute.  viiij.  or.  ix.
leages  toward  the  fouth,  fituate  betwene  the  cytie  of  Aden  and  Calicut.  In  one  of  the  which
dwel  onely  men  without  the  company  of  women,  and  is  called  the  Ilande  of  men.  And  in
the  other  dwell  onely  women,  without  men,  and  is  called  the  Ilande  of  women.  They
are  Chriflians  and  contract  niatrimonie.  The  women  neuer  come  to  the  Ilande  of  men,  but
the  men  are  accuflomed  to  vyfyte  the  women  once  in  the  yeare,  and  tarye  with  them
thre  monethes  continually,  euery  man  with  his  owne  wife  in  his  owne  houfe  :  after  which  time
they  returne  agayn  to  [t]her  owne  Ilande,  where  they  remayne  all  the  yere  after.  The  women  kepe  the
men  children  with  them  vntyll  they  bee  xv.  yeares  of  age,  and  then  fend  them  to  theyr  fathers.  The
women  haue  nought  els  to  do,  but  to  take  charge  of  their  children,  and  to  gather  certayne  fruites.  But
the  men  labour  and  haue  care  how  they  may  fynde  theyr  wyfe  and  chyldren.  They  are  exercyfed  in
fyfliing,  and  fell  fyflies  both  newe  taken  and  olde  dryed,  to  marchaunte  flraungers,  whereby  they  receaue
great  commodities.

C  Of  the  greate  Empyre  of  Cathay,  being  vnder  the  dominion  of  the  great
Cham  (whiche  fome  call  the  great  Can)  Emperoure  of  Tartaria,  in

olde  tyme  called  Scythia.

He  fuperiour  or  high  India,  whiche  is  nowe  called  Cathay,  is  a  region  excedinge  large  and
of  greate  power,  whofe  Emperour  is  ye  great  Cham  of  Tartaria,  hauinge  vnder  him  many
Prouinces,  people  and  Princes,  and  innumerable  Ilandes  in  the  great  Eafl  fea,  called
the  greate  Ocean.  He  hath  vnder  his  dominion  great  and  famous  cities,  as  are  thefe  :
Cambalu,  Quenquinafu,  Mien,  Cacaufti,  Canglii,  Tadinfti,  Tingui,  and  dyuers  other.  Among
the  people  of  this  countrey,  one  man  hath  manye  wyues,  whiche  declare  theyr  loue  to
their  hufbandes  after  this  fort.  When  the  hufband  is  dead,  euery  one  of  his  wiues
pleade  their  caufe  before  a  iudge,  to  proue  which  of  them  was  mofl  louing  to  her  hufband  and  befte  beloued  of
him  :  fo  yat  fhe  which  by  the  fentence  of  the  iudges  is  found  to  haue  been  mofl  faythful  and  diligente,  decketh
her  felfe  mofle  gorgioufly  in  all  her  fumptuous  araye,  and  procedeth  like  a  Virago  floutly  and  cherefully  to  the
fire,  where  the  corps  of  her  hufbande  was  burnte,  caflinge  her  felfe  into  the  fame  fyre,  embrafmg  and  kiffmg  the
dead  bodi  of  her  hufband,  vntyll  fhe  alfo  be  confumed  by  the  fyre,  whiche  Ihe  reputeth  for  an  honourable
fepulture  :  whereas  his  other  wyues  are  eflemed  to  lyue  in  iTiame  and  infamie.  They  ioyne  in  manage,  neyther
in  refpect  of  riches  or  nobilite,  but  onlye  for  loue  and  beautie  :  and  rather  for  ye  encreafe  of  pofleritie,  then  for
pleafure.  There  is  alfo  another  llraunge  cuflome  among  thefe  Indians  :  and  yat  is,  that  whereas  the
poorer  fort  are  not  able  to  geue  any  dowry  M'ith  theyr  doughters  to  mariage,  they  bringe  them  forth,  euen  in  ye
floure  of  their  age  to  ye  market  place,  with  trumpettes  and  fuch  other  inflrumentes  as  they  vfe  in  the  warres.
Where,  the  multitude  beynge  called  together,  the  maydes  fyrfle  of  all,  difcouere  theyr  backe  partes,  euen  vp  to
the  fhoulders,  and  afterward  theyr  forepartes  in  lyke  maners.  And  vpon  this  declaring  their  pouertie  and
nakednes,  are  maried  to  fuch  as  lyke  them  befl.  This  people  of  Cathay,  are  of  the  nacion  of  them
which  in  tyme  paft  were  called  Scythians,  a  kind  of  men  (as  faith  Haithd)  of  fubtill  wyt :  afifyrming  that
onely  they  fee  with  two  eies,  and  that  all  other  men  befyde  them  are  blind  of  the  one  eye.  Theyr  quickenes  ot
witte  is  great,  but  their  boafling  is  more.  The  hole  nacion  is  perfwaded  that  they  greatly  excel  all  other  men
in  fubteltie  of  wit  and  knowledge.  The  inhabitantes  are  whyte  men,  with  fmall  eyes,  withoute  beardes,
and  vtterly  voyde  of  all  godly  knowledge.  For  fome  of  them  pray  to  the  funne,  fome  to  the  mone,
fome  to  Images,  fome  to  an  oxe,  and  fome  to  other  monflers  of  theyr  phantaflicall  fuperflicion.  They  haue  no
law  written,  and  are  of  no  faith.  And  albeit  that  in  workemanfliip  and  artes  they  are  marueylous  wyttie,
yet  haue  they  no  knowledge  of  dyuine  or  godly  thinges.  It  is  a  timorous  kynde  of  men,  and  greatly  fearinge
death.  And  are  therefore  in  theyr  warres,  more  politike  then  valient.  In  the  warres,  they  vfe  arrowes,  and
certayne  other  kyndes  of  weapons  vnknowen  to  men  of  other  countreis.  The  monie  which  they  vfe,  is  made  of
a  certayne  paper,  beeinge  foure  fquare,  with  ye  Kinges  ymage  printed  theron. Theyr  houfliolde  flufte  is

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  found,  &c?\

of  golde  and  fyluer  and  other  metals.  They  haue  greate  fcarcenes  of  oyle.  The  great  Emperour  of  Cathay,
keepeth  his  courte  in  the  riche  and  mightie  cytie  called  Cainbahi,  being  the  chefefl.  citie  of  all  the  Empyre,  and
of  fuch  greatneffe  that  it  conteyneth  in  circuite  fixe  leages.  This  citie  is  foure  fquare,  fo  that  euery  quadrature
or  fyde  of  the  wall,  hath  in  it  thre  principal  portes  or  gates.  Alfo  in  all  the  comers  of  the  walles,  are  veri  faire
palaces,  in  which  the  artillery  or  armure  of  the  cytie  is  referued.  The  (Iretes  are  made  very  flreyght  and  right
forth :  fo  that  from  any  one  gate  to  the  other  beinge  directly  ouer  againfl  the  fame,  a  man  may  fe  plainly
through  the  cytie,  hauing  ye  houfes  on  euery  fyde  lyke  palaces,  placed  in  goodly  ordre,  moft  beautiful!  to
behold.  Without  the  cytie,  there  are  twelue  great  fuburbes,  adherent  to  the.  xii.  gates  of  ye  cytie,  whether  the
marchauntes  and  flraungers,  haue  their  continual  recourfe  as  to  ye  burfe  or  flrete.  It  can  not  be  fpoken  what
great  abundaunce  of  marchaundife  and  riches  is  brought  to  [t]his  citie  :  a  man  wold  thinke  that  it  were  fufficient
to  ferue  all  the  worlde.  Precious  flones,  pearles,  filke,  and  fpices  of  dyuers  kindes  are  brought  thether,
from  India  and  Maiigi,  and  other  regions.  There  paffeth  not  a  daye  in  the  yeare  in  which  there  are  not  about  a
thoufand  waynes  laden  with  filke  which  are  brought  to  this  citie  by  flraunge  marchauntes.  "What  greate  pompe,
glory,  and  forniture  of  all  thinges,  is  obferued  in  the  Emperours  courte,  it  can  not  be  fpoken.  He  hath
in  his  courte  twelue  thoufand  horfemen,  whiche  haue  the  cuflodie  of  his  body :  and  diflribute  their
waytinge  dayes  after  this  order,  yat  whereas  one  of  ye  captaynes  of  this  garifon  with  his  thre  thoufand  fouldiers
hath  wayted  vpon  the  kinges  perfonne,  three  dayes,  another  captayne  in  lyke  order  wyth  as  manye
menne  fuccedeth  in  hys  rowme  for  other  three  dayes,  and  lykewyfe  an  other  after  hym,  executethe  the
fame  offyce.  Wlien  the  Emperoure  maketh  anye  bankette,  it  cannot  be  faid  what  great  pompe  is
obferued.  He  hath  fytting  at  his  lefte  hand  his  chefefl  quene  whom  he  mofl  eflemeth :  and  at  his
right  hand  hys  fonnes,  and  fuche  as  are  of  the  kinges  bloud  :  but  thei  fyt  fomwhat  lower  and  further  of.
The  other  noble  men  which  wayte  not,  fytte  in  a  place  yet  fomewhat  lower.  All  fuch  as  ir  the  court  fyt
at  meat,  vfe  none  other  drinking  cuppes  then  of  gold.  The  Princes  whiche  wayte  on  the  Emperoure  at
hys  meate,  haue  all  theyr  mouthes  couered  with  fyne  filken  clothes,  leafl  in  any  cafe  they  iTiould  blow  or
breath  on  the  kinges  meate  or  drinke.  And  when  the  Emperour  lifteth  vp  his  cup  to  drinke,  al  the  muficions
and  minftrels  that  fland  about  him,  playe  on  theyr  inflrumentes,  while  in  the  meane  time  all  fuche  as  wayte  on
hym,  floupe  downe  and  make  lowe  curtefie.  How  great  honoure  is  exhibited  to  this  Emperour,  and  howe  many
precious  and  riche  prefentes  are  ofifred  vnto  him  by  his  Princes,  Dukes,  Leauetenauntes  and  prefydentes
of  prouinces,  and  rulers  of  cities,  no  man  is  able  to  expreffe,  forafmuche  as  he  hath  v-nder  him  in  maner
innumerable  Kingdomes,  Prouinces,  Nacions  and  Dominions,  which  are  on  euery  fyde  about  Cathay,  and
acknoweledge  him  to  be  theyr  onelye  Lorde  and  King,  whom  they  honoure  and  reuerence  as  a  great  God
and  mighti  Mahumet.  In  what  pompe  and  triumphant  magnificence  he  fheweth  him  felf  when  he  goeth
to  hauke  or  hunt,  and  how  many  tentes  he  pitcheth  in  the  felde,  which  being  fene  a  farre  of,  a  man
would  thinke  to  be  a  greate  cytie,  he  that  defyreth  to  knowe,  let  him  reade  Pauhis  Venetus,  in  the  fecond
boke  of  hys  nauigacions  into  India,  where  he  fhal  find  thinges  to  marueyl  at.  In  Cathay  they  make  a  pleafaunt
drinke  of  ryce  and  certayne  fpyces,  which  in  drinking  excelleth  the  fwetenes  of  wine.  In  many  places  they  haue
great  lacke  of  wood  :  In  the  flede  wherof,  they  digge  out  of  the  mountaynes  a  certayn  kinde  of  blacke  flone
whiche  burne  in  the  fyre  like  coles,  and  continue  fo  long,  that  yf  they  be  kyndled  ouer  night,  they  kepe
fyre  vnto  the  morning.

C  Of  cert  aim  Prouinces  and  regions  fubiect  vnder  the  dominioji  of  the

greate  Cham  Emperour  of  C2,\}ii2,y.

Here  paffeth  through  the  kingdom  of  Cathay,  a  certayne  greate  ryuer  called  Pidifathnites,  which
emptieth  it  felfe  in  the  great  Ocean  Sea,  by  the  whiche  ryuer,  fhyppes  haue  their  paflage
into  that  lande.  Ouer  this  ryuer  is  a  very  fayre  bridge  of  marble,  beyng  in  length  three
hundreth  pafes,  and  in  breadth,  eyghte  pafes,  with,  xxiii.  arches,  and  grauen  Lions  on  euery
fyde,  adourning  the  rayles  or  higheft.  margentes  of  the  fame.  From  hence  it  is  not  farre  to
the  fayre  and  greate  kingdom  of  Tainfu,  in  the  which  are  many  goodli  v}'nes.  For  in  the
kingdom  of  Cathay  there  groweth  no  wyne,  but  is  brought  thether  from  this  region.  In  this
kingdome  is  greate  vfe  of  marchaundyfe,  and  hath  plentie  of  conning  artificers,  fo  that  al  the  armure  which  the
great  Cham  vfeth  in  his  warres,  is  made  there.  Toward  the  region  of  Mangi,  is  fituate  the  ryuer  Caromoram,
whiche  fi)r  the  greate  breadth  and  depth,  hath  no  bridge.  In  this  region  is  greate  abundaunce  of  Ginger,  filke,
byrdes,  and  fpeciallye  Phefantes.  Somewhat  beyonde  this,  is  the  great  cytie  of  Qiicnqiiinafii,  be}-nge  the  chief
cytie  of  the  lame  kingdome. In  this  region  are  founde  many  mufKCcattes. This  bead  in  this  countreye,  is

Golde  and  Syluer.

The  cytie  of
Camialu.

Marchandyse.

Precious  stones
and  spyces.

Note.

The  king  of
Cathay  his  court

The  Quene.

Golden  plate.
Worldly  glory.

A  liuing  IdoL

Paulus  Venetus.

Drinke  of  rice  and
spyces.

Digged  cole.

A  greate  bridge  of
marble.

The  kingdome  of

Tainfu.

ComijTig  artificers

Ginger.
Quenqtanafn.
The  muske  catta.

25

26

Siuet  or  muske.

Marchandyse.

Salts.

Sylke.

Cloth  of  golde.

Ryce.

vi.  M  [six
thousand]  bridges
of  stone.

The  great  citie  of
Quinsai.

xij.  M.  [twelve
thousand]  bridges
of  stone.

Artificers.
Marchauntes.

Common
banketinge  houses.

A  good  prouysion
againste  fyre.

Flesh  of  horses
eaten.

A  prouision
against  rebellion.

Atithrojiopltagi.

Hennes  hauinge
heare  in  the  stede
of  fethers.

The  way  from
Persia  to  Cathay.

The  cytie  of  Loj .

The  iomey  by  j  :
desertes.

Bvttcr  watcis.

[Of  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  found,  &c^

but  lyttle  and  fayre,  aboute  tlie  bignefle  of  a  meane  catte,  with  groffe  heare  lyke  a  harte,  hauinge  blunte  clawes
on  his  fete,  with  two  longe  teeth  in  the  vpper  iawe,  and  two  in  the  nether  iawe :  and  hath  nere  vnto  the  nauell
a  bladder  full  of  a  certayne  matter  like  vnto  bloud,  being  of  wonderful  fragrant  fauoure,  and  is  the  true
muflie.

C  Of  the  Prouince  {T/'Mangi,  and  merueylous  cyties  conteyned  in  the  fame.

He  Prouince  of  Maugi,  hath  in  it  many  notable  and  great  cities,  in  the  whiche  is  great  exercyfe
of  marcha.undyfe:  and  fpecially  in  the  citie  of  Conigangui,  is  folde  great  plentie  of  fait.  In
the  cytie  of  Faiic/u\  there  is  great  fale  of  filke.  In  the  cytie  of  Sianfu,  is  made  great  plentie
of  clothes  of  golde  and  filke.  In  the  cytie  Sitigiii  is  a  famous  market,  where  great  abundance
of  marchaundife  is  brought  by  the  ryuer.  Nere  vnto  the  citie  of  Caigui,  groweth  plentie  of
blade  and  ryce,  that  it  is  caried  from  thence  to  the  court  of  the  greate  Cham.  In  ye  citie  of
Si/igm,  are  numbred  to  be  about  fixe  thoufande  bridges  of  flone,  hauinge  fo  highe  arches,  that
greate  fliippes  maye  paffe  vnder  the  fame  without  bowing  down  of  the  mafl.  There  is  another  citie  called
Quinfai,  which  is  fo  fayre  and  great,  that  there  is  thought  to  be  no^bigger  in  al  the  worlde.  It  conteyneth  in
circuite,  a  hundreth  Italien  miles,  which  make.  xxv.  leages.  It  hath  twelue  thoufande  bridges  of  flone,  and  thofe
fo  highe  that  greate  (hippes  with  the  mafle  Handing  vp  right,  maye  paffe  vnder.  This  cytie  is  fituate  in  a  mariffhe
ground,  muche  lyke  vnto  venes.  Therfore  if  they  fhould  lack  bridges,  they  could  not  paffe  ouer  from  the  one
fyde  of  the  flreete  to  the  other.  It  hath  innumerable  artificers  and  many  marchauntes.  The  cytezins  lyue
pleafantly,  and  fpecially  the  women,  which  are  fayrer  then  in  other  partes  of  India.  Toward  the  South  fyde  of
the  cytye,  there  is  a  great  lake  or  poole  within  ye  walles  of  the  cytie,  v/hiche  conteyneth  in  circuite  about,  viii.
leages,  hauinge  about  the  bankes  therof  many  noble  mens  houfes,  very  fayre  both  without  and  within.  In  the
middelle  of  this  lake,  there  are  two  litle  Ilandes  and  in  euery  of  them  a  goodly  palace,  in  ye  which  are  referued
al  fuche  omamentes  and  vefTels  as  they  vfe  for  theyr  manages  and  folemne  feafles,  for  whereas  any  of  the
cytezins  entende  to  make  any  great  banket,  or  feafl,  they  bring  theyr  gefles  to  one  of  thefe  palaces,  where  they
are  honorably  enterteined.  In  the  flretes  of  ye  citie,  are  certaine  comon  towres,  into  ye  which,  al  fuch  as
dwell  neare  therto,  carie  theyr  goodes  and  fluffe,  yf  it  fo  chaunce,  yat  fyre  be  in  the  citie.  The  inhabitantes
are  Idoloters :  and  eate  the  flefhe  of  horfes  and  camels,  and  of  other  vnclene  beafles.  The  great  Cham  hath  in
this  cytie  a  myghtie  garifon  to  the  intente  to  auoyde  rebellion,  thefte  and  murther.  For  on  euery  bridge  there
wayteth  dayly  and  nightlye.  x.  watchmen  for  the  fame  purpofe :  and  becaufe  the  Prouince  of  Mangi  is  exceding
large,  the  great  Cham  hath  deuyded  it  into  nyne  Kingdomes,  affigninge  vnto  euery  one  a  peculier  Kynge :
whiche  are  al  of  greate  powre,  and  yet  fubiecte  to  the  greate  Cham.  One  of  them  dwelleth  in  the  citie  of
Quinfai.  In  thys  Prouince  of  Mangi,  is  an  other  Kyngdomme,  called  Fugui,  in  whiche  the  people  eate  mannes
fleffhe,  fo  that  they  dye  not  of  any  difeafe.  They  drinke  the  bloud  and  eate  the  flefhe  of  fuch  as  are  flayne  in
ye  warres.  There  are  hennes  found  in  this  region,  which  in  the  flede  of  fethers,  haue  heare  much  lyke  cattes
heare  of  blacke  colour :  And  laye  very  goode  egges.

C  Of  the  region  of  Tangut,  and  of  the  great  desertes,  and  voyces  of  deny  lies

hearde  in  the  same,  and  of  the  Salamandra.

Rom  the  Kingdome  of  Perfia,  there  are  two  iourneyes  to  the  region  of  Cathay.  For
either  the  fouth  fide  mufl  be  obferued  towarde  India,  or  elles  to  paffe  by  the  prouinces
of  Carcham,  Cotam,  and  Peim,  Northeaflwarde  to  the  citie  of  Lop,  beynge  the  greatefl
and  mofl  notable  cytie  in  all  that  region,  lying  betwene  the  Eafl  and  the  North  at  the
entraunce  at  the  great  defert.  In  this  cytie,  al  fuche  marchauntes,  as  entende  to  paffe
the  defertes,  make  preparacion  for  all  thinges  neceffarye  for  their  youmeye  :  And  refl,  in  the
fame,  vntill  they  are  well  prouided  of  flrong  affes  and  camels  to  carye  there  vitayles.
And  when  in  ye  defert  their  vitayles  begin  to  fayle  them,  they  kyl  their  affes  or  leaue  them  there  in  the
wyldemes,  becaufe  they  can  no  longer  prouide  them  of  paflure,  vntyll  they  haue  paffed  ouer  the  deferte.
But  they  preferue  theyr  camelles,  beecaufe  they  are  fufleyned  \vyth  leffe  meate,  and  beare  greater  burthens.
In  this  deferte  are  often  tymes  founde  bytter  waters  :  but  more  often  freffhe  and  fweete  waters  :  fo  that
in  maner  euerye  daye  for  the  fpace  of  thyrtye  dayes,  a  man  maye  fynde  frefflie  water,  but  that  in  fo
lyttle  quantitie  that  it  doeth  not  fuffice  al  the  marchauntes  whiche  paffe  that  waye  together.  That
26

\0f  the  newe  India,  as  it  is  knowen  &  foitnd,  &c?^

27

deferte  is  verye  full  of  mountaynes.  And  when  you  are  come  to  the  lowe  and  playn  ground,  the  refidue
of  the  iourney  is  all  together  by  the  fandes  :  it  is  throughout  baren  and  faluage,  fo  that  it  is  not  able  to  nourifhe
any  beafles  for  lacke  of  paflure.  In  this  wildernes  are  often  tymes  heard  and  fene,  as  well  by  daye  as  by  night,
fundrie  illufions  of  euyl  fpirites.  And  therefore  fuche  as  trauayle  throughe  the  fame,  haue  nede  to  take  great
hede  leafl  they  diffeuer  or  depart  farre  in  fundre,  or  leafle  any  linger  behynde  his  companie,  afwel  for  that  he
may  hereby  lofe  the  fight  of  them  by  reafon  of  mountaynes  or  hilles,  lyinge  beetwene,  as  alfo  becaufe
there  are  heard  voyces  of  deuyls,  calling  them  that  wander  alone,  by  theyr  proper  names,  conterfeyting
the  voyces  of  theyr  companie  that  goeth  beefore,  by  this  meanes  withdrawing  them  from  the  right  waye,
and  bringinge  them  to  deflruccion.  There  is  often  tymes  heard  in  the  ayre,  as  it  were  a  noyfe  of  muficall
inftrumentes  :  but  more  often  like  the  founde  of  drumflades  or  timbrels.  This  great  defert  being  paffed  ouer,
they  come  to  the  cytie  called  Sachiofi,  which  is  fituate  in  the  enteraunce  of  the  greate  Prouince  of  Tangut,  where
amonge  certayne  Mahumetifles,  are  found  a  fewe  Chriflian  men  called  Nejloriani  of  the  fecte  of  Neftorius.
There  are  alfo  manye  Idoloters,  hauinge  theyr  monafteries  confecrated  to  dyuers  Idols,  to  which  they
ofifre  many  facrifices  and  attribute  greate  honor  to  deuyls.  And  when  a  man  hath  a  fonne  borne,  he
forthwith  commendeth  him  to  fome  Idol,  in  whofe  honoure  he  nouriflieth  a  ramme  al  that  yeare,  which
after  that  his  fonne  be  twelue  monethes  olde,  at  the  nexte  feafle  of  the  fame  Idoll,  he  and  his  fonne
offre  with  many  ceremonies.  When  this  oblacion  is  finifhed,  thei  bringe  the  facrificed  fleflie  to  a  place
appoynted,  where  al  his  kinffolkes  being  gathered  together^  they  eate  that  flefhe  with  great  religion,  and
kepe  the  bones  reuerently  in  a  certayn  veffell  :  but  in  the  funeralles  of  the  dead  they  vfe  thefe  ceremonies  and
fuperilicions.  Al  the  neighbors  of  the  dead,  prouyde  that  the  dead  corps  be  burned  :  which  cuftome  all
the  people  of  the  Eafl  partes  do  obferue.  Yet  fome  of  them  kepe  ye  dead  bodye  by  them  certayne
dayes  beefore  they  burne  it  :  As  fome,  feuen  daies  :  fome  for  the  fpace  of  a  moneth  end  fome  fixe
monethes,  preparing  for  the  fame  a  clofe  chefle,  fo  inuoluinge  with  cereclothe,  and  pouderinge  with  fpyces  the
bodye  therein  inclofed,  that  no  euyll  fauoure  maye  paffe  foorth.  Thys  done,  they  paynte  the  chefle  very
curiouflye,  and  couer  it  with  a  precious  clothe,  placinge  theyr  dyninge  table  harde  by  the  fame,  where  they
dyne  continually  as  long  as  the  dead  bodie  is  thus  referued  at  home.  And  in  the  dyner  tyme  for  the
fpace  of  one  hole  houre,  they  fette  wyne  and  meat  vpon  the  chefle,  fuppofmg  the  foule  of  the  dead  bodye
to  be  partaker  of  the  fame.  The  Region  of  Ta?igtit,  is  verye  large,  and  conteyneth  in  it  many  priuate
Prouinces,  as  the  Prouince  of  Caviul,  of  Cinchiial,  and  Suchur,  wyth  dyuerfe  fayre  Cyties,  whiche  are  all
Subiecte  and  obeye  to  the  great  Cham  of  Cathay.  Some  of  the  inhabitantes  beleue  in  Mahumet :  fome
acknowledge  Chrifle  after  the  herefye  of  Nejlorius.  In  the  land  of  Chinchital,  is  a  Mountayne  oute  of  the  whyche
is  dygged  the  myne  of  flele  and  Audanici,  There  is  alfo  founde  the  Serpente  called  Salainandra,  which
lyueth  in  the  fyre  wythoute  any  hurte.  Of  the  heare  of  this  ferpent,  is  made  a  certayne  cloth,  which
being  call  in  the  fyre  when  it  is  foule,  is  thereby  made  cleane  and  very  white  if  it  remaine  there  for  ye  fpace  of
an  houre.  Such  other  innumerable  and  marueilous  thinges,  writeth  Paulus  uenetus  that  he  hath  fene  and
founde  in  his  nauigacions  into  thefe  partes  :  of  whom  alfo  I  haue  gathered  thus  muche,  lettinge  pafTe
manye  other  thinges  whereof  he  fpeaketh  more  at  large.

C  Here  endeth  the  defcripcion  of  the  Nattigacions
from  Spayne  to  the  newe  India  Eaftward,

and  foloweth

Of  the  newe  Ilandes  and  India  found  in  the  Wejl  Ocean  fea,

from  Spayne  Wejiward  and  Southwejle.

Illusions  of  eujrl
spirites

Voices  of  deayk.

Straunge  noises
in  the  ayre.

The  citje  of
Sachion.

Christians
of  tlie  heresie
of  Nettorius.

Monasteries  of
Idoloters.

A  strange  custome

Ceremonies  in
funerals

A  grossc  and
vayne  pcrswasion

The  region  of
Tangvt.

Mahumetistes.

Stele.
Salamandra.

Paulus  VciutHs

27

28

1  Of  the  newe  India,

and  Ilandes  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,
how,  when,  and  by  whom  they

were  found.

Christophonis
Columbus.

Great  enterprises
have  euer  ben
counted
phantasticalL

The  fyrst  viage
of  Christoph<rrus
Columbus.

The  Ilandes
called  Codes.

The  Ilandes  of
Canaria,

Hrijlophoriis  Columbus,  a  Gentleman  of  Italia,  and  borne  in  the
citie  of  Genua,  when  he  had  been  longe  conuerfaunt  in  the  Kyng
of  Spaynes  courte,  he  applyed  hys  niynde  to  fearche  vnknovven
partes  of  the  worlde.  And  for  his  better  furtheraunce  herein,
made  humble  peticion  to  the  kinge,  to  ayde  him  in  this  his
enterpryfe,  which  doubtlefie  flioulde  redownde  to  his  great
honour,  and  no  little  commoditie  to  all  the  hole  countreye  of
Spayne,  yf  by  his  helpe  and  charges,  he  might  fynde  new  regions.
But  the  Kinge  and  Quene  laughed  him  to  fcorne,  faying  :  that
his  ymaginacion  was  but  vayne  and  phantaflicall.  At  the  length,
eyght  yeares  beynge  passed  ouer,  and  Columbus  flyll  perfiflinge
m  his  purpofe  and  fute,  the  Kyng  began  to  geue  eare  to  his
talke,  and  after  muche  reafoninge  and  debating  of  the  matter,
determined  to  trie  the  witte  of  the  manne.  And  there  vpon
commaunded  a  foyfl  and  two  brigantines  to  be  furnifhed  with
all  kynde  of  ordinaunce  and  vitalyes :  which  being  pre-
pared, the  fyrll  of  September,  in  the  yere  of  Chrifl  1492,  Columbus  departed  from  the  coafles  of  Spayne,  and
wente  forwarde  in  his  viage  longe  defyred.  And  when  he  had  paffed  the  Ilandes  called  Gades,  he  diuerted
toward  the  fortunate  Ilandes  called  Infulce  Fortwiatce,  which  are  now  called  Canarice,  becaufe  they  are  full  of
dogges.  They  were  in  time  pafl  called  Fortunate,  for  the  excellente  temperatenes  of  the  ayre,  and  greate
fruytefulnes.  Columbus  departinge  from  henfe,  fayled  towarde  the  Wefle,  and  at  the  length  founde  certayne
Ilandes,  of  the  whiche  two  were  very  greate,  wherof  the  one  he  called  Hifpana,  and  the  other  lohamia.

lohanna.

Hispana  or
Hispaniola.

Gold  for  earth
and  glasse.

The  king  of  the
Hand.

Bylding  without
the  vse  of  Iron.

C  Of  the  two  Ilandes  lohanna  a7td  Hifpana.

jjS  Columbus  came  to  the  Ilande  whiche  he  called  lohanna,  he  hearde  a  merueylous  fweete  noyfe
of  innumerable  byrdes,  and  efpeciallye  of  Nightingales  whiche  wandred  in  the  thicke  wooddes
in  the  Moneth  of  Nouembre.  He  founde  alfo  moofle  fayre  Ryuers,  fwete  to  drinke,  and  many
goodly  hauens.  And  as  he  fayled  by  the  cofles  of  the  Ilande  Southwefle  warde,  and  coulde
fynd  no  ende,  he  thought  it  had  been  the  mayne  land,  and  therfore  determyned  to  drawe
backe,  being  partly  enforfed  by  roughnes  of  the  fea :  and  thus  returning  fome  what  Eaflward,
he  came  to  an  Hand  whiche  heafterwarde  cdWed  Ilifpafia,  where  arriuing  to  the  land,  he  and
his  companye  was  fene  of  the  Inhabitantes  of  the  Hand,  which  fodeinly  fled  into  the  thicke  woodes :  whom  the
Spanyardes  purfewinge,  toke  a  womanne  whome  they  brought  to  theyr  fhippe,  entreatinge  her  verye  gentillye,
fyUinge  her  with  delicate  meates  and  wyne,  and  clothing  her  in  fayre  apparel,  and  fo  let  her  depart :  for  thei  goe
naked,  and  are  not  vfed  to  delicates.  And  as  this  womanne  returned  to  her  companie,  fome  beyng  moued  by
the  lyberalitie  declared  vnto  her,  came  by  greate  multitudes  to  the  fea  bankes,  bringinge  golde  with  them,  which
they  chaunged  for  earthen  pottes,  and  drinkinge  glaffes.  Thus  a  further  frendfliip  by  this  meanes  contra6led,
the  Spanyardes  begonne  more  diligently  to  fearche  theyr  maner  of  lyuinge  and  maners,  and  fo  vnderflode  that
they  had  a  king.  And  therefore  entering  further  into  the  Hand,  they  were  honorably  receyued  of  the  king.  Thei
ve\vyde  their  houfes,  and  merueyled  to  fee  them  fo  bylded  without  the  vfe  of  Iron,  which  they  are  vtterly  without  :
in  the  fiede  whereof  they  vfe  a  certeyn  Hone,  wher^vith  the  cut  and  fawe  theyr  timbre.

\0f  the  newe  India,  and  Ilandes  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,  &c?^

29

C  Of  the  people  ca/ted  Odmhsdes  or  Anthropophagi,  which  are  accnJlo7ned

to  eate  mans  Jlejhe.

Heras  the  people  of  the  forenamed  Ilandes,  fled  at  the  fight  of  our  menne,  the  caufe  thereof
was,  that  they  fufpected  them  to  haue  been  Catiibah,  that  cruel  and  fearfe  people  which  eate
mans  flefhe,  which  nacion  our  men  had  ouerpaffed,  leauinge  them  on  the  fouthfyde.  But
after  they  had  knowledge  of  the  contrary,  they  made  greuous  complaynt  to  our  men,  of  the
beaflly  and  fearfe  maners  of  thefe  Canibales,  which  were  no  leffe  cruel  agaynfl  them,  then
the  Tyger  or  the  Lyon  agaynfle  tame  beafles.  Declaring  furthermore,  yat  when  foeuer  they
take  any  of  them  vnder  the  age  of.  xiiij.  yeares,  they  vfe  to  gelde  them,  and  francke  them
vntyll  they  be  very  fat,  as  we  are  wont  to  doe  with  capons  or  hennes:  and  as  for  fuche  as  drawe  towarde.  xx.
yeare  olde,  to  kyll  them  forthwith  and  pull  out  theyr  guttes,  and  eate  the  fame  frefhe  and  newe,  wyth  other
extreme  partes  of  the  bodye,  pondering  the  refidue  with  falte,  or  keping  it  in  a  certayne  pickle  as  we  do  iegottes
or  fanfages.  Yet  eate  they  not  the  women,  but  referue  them  to  encreafe,  as  we  doe  hennes  to  lay  egges.  And
if  thei  take  any  old  women,  they  kepe  them  for  drudges.  And  therfore  when  the  Canibales  make  incurfion,  the
people  of  thefe  Ilandes  flye  with  all  fpede.  For  albeit  they  vfe  arrowes,  yet  are  they  not  able  to  refylle  theyr
fearfenes.

C  Of  the  maners  of  the  inhabit  antes  of  the  //and  of  Hifpsina.  and  of  fuche

thynges  as  are  found  there.

He  inhabitantes  of  this  Ilande,  vfe  in  ye  flede  of  bread,  certayne  rotes  like  vnto  nauie  rotes,
hauing  the  tail  of  foft  and  grene  cheflnuttes.  Gold  with  them  is  in  eflimacion,  for  they  hange
certayne  peces  therof  at  their  eares  :  they  go  not  out  of  ye  limities  of  their  own  contrie,  nor
exercife  any  marchandife  with  flrangers  :  thei  gather  gold  in  ye  fandes  of  a  certen  riuer  which
fpringeth  out  of  veri  high  montaines  They  gather  it  with  great  laboure  and  melte  it  and
cafle  it,  fyrfle  into  maffes  or  wedges,  and  afterwarde  into  brode  plates.  They  haue  no  foure
foted  beafles,  except  Connies :  they  haue  ferpentes  of  monflrous  greatnes,  but  ^\'ithout  hurte
or  venime.  They  haue  alfo  wylde  turtle  doues  and  duckes,  muche  greater  then  ours,  and  gefe  whyter  then
fwannes,  fauing  yat  they  haue  redde  heades.  Thei  haue  alfo  many  popingiayes :  fome  grene,  fome  yelowe,
and  fome  not  muche  vnlyke  them  of  India,  with  redde  circles  about  their  neckes.  This  Hand  bringeth  forth
alfo  Majlix,  Aloe,  and  fuche  other  gummes:  and  efpecially  certayne  redde  graynes,  which  are  fharper
then  pepper.

C  How  Columbus,  after  he  had  found  new  Ilandes,  returned  agayne  to
Spayne,  where  preparinge  a  newe  nauie,  he  toke  his  viage  to

ye  Canibales.

Ohimbus,  not  a  Httle  ioyeful  of  the  landes  newly  found,  the  fpring  tyme  drawing  nere,  he
determined  to  retume  to  his  countrey:  leaning  with  the  king  of  the  Hand.  38.  men  which
fhould  diligently  fearche  the  fituacion  of  the  Ilande,  the  maners  of  the  people,  and  the
natures  of  trees  and  fruites.  But  he,  hoyfeninge  vp  his  fayles,  directed  hys  viage  towarde
Spayne,  bringing  with  him  tenne  menne  of  the  fayd  Ilande,  to  th[e]ende  that  they  mighte
leame  the  Spanifhe  tonge,  which  they  might  eafely  doe,  becaufe  al  the  wordes  of  the}T
language  may  well  be  written  with  our  letters.  Colimibtts,  after  thys  his  retume,  and  fortunate
fucceffe  in  his  fyrfle  viage,  was  honorablye  receyued  of  the  Kynge  and  Queue,  and  greatlye  magnified  with
innumerable  glorious  tittles  :  \villinge  that  he  fhould  no  more  thenceforth  be  called  Columbus,  but  the  Admiral
of  the  great  Ocean  Sea:  and  prepared  for  him  towarde  his  fecond  viage.  xvij.  foifles  and.  xij.  brigantines,  wel
fumifhed  with  al  kynd  of  artillerye  and  plentie  of  vitayles,  and  in  them  tsvelue  hundreth  men  wel  appoynted :

2»

Canibales
I  Anthropofhagi.

The  fearsenes  of
the  CanHaUs.

Mans  fleshe
poudered.

Rootes  In  ye
stede  of  bread

Gold  in  estimacioa

Howe  golde  is
gathred.

Serpents  wythowt
venime.

Popingi-'yes.

Spices  and
Gummes.

The  Indian  tong

Columbus,  at  his
retume.  is  made
Admiral  of  the
Ocean  sex

The  second  viag«
of  Columbus

30

[0/  the  neive  India,  and  Ilandes  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,  &c?\

GaJes.

The  Ilandes  of
Canaria.

The  Hand  of
Dominica,

Insula  Cntcis.
Lisertes.

Houses  of  trees.

Young  men  stalled
to  be  made  fatte.

Fine  cokerye.

Cnnibnles  allured
wyth  lyberalite.

Matinina  An

Hand  of  women
onelye.

The  names  of
sundry e  Ilandes.

Arrowes  infected
with  venime.

A  rchipelogus.
Buchema

Come  alfo  to  fowe,  and  al  kindes  of  feedes  and  plantes.  For,  excepte  pine  apple  trees  and  date  trees,  there
growe  none  in  thefe  Ilandes  that  are  knowen  to  vs.  The  Admirall  toke  alfo  with  him  al  fortes  of  Iron  tooles
to  th[e]intent  to  byld  townes  and  fortrefles  where  his  men  might  lye  in  fafegarde.  Therfore  the  firfl  day  of
September  departing  from  the  Ilandes  called  Gades,  with  a  profperous  wind  he  arryued  at  the  Hand  of  Canaria
the  fyrfl  daye  of  October:  from  whenfe  directing  his  viage  towarde  the  lefte  hande,  he  fayled  toward  ye  South,
and  at  ye  length  came  to  the  Ilandes  of  the  Canibals.  And  becaufe  he  came  thether  on  the  Sundaye  called  the
Dominical  day,  he  called  the  Hand  where  he  arryued,  Dominica:  which  when  he  perceyued  to  be  but  faluage
and  rude,  he  fayled  on  further:  and  in  twentie  dayes  fayling,  came  to  another  Hand  repleniflied  with  al  kindes
of  trees,  from  which  came  a  marueylous  fragrant  fauour:  By  reafon  whereof,  fome  being  allured  by  the  pleafant-
nes  of  the  place,  went  aland,  where  they  fawe  no  kynde  of  lyuinge  beafles,  fauinge  lyfertes  of  wonderful  houdge
greatnes.  This  Ilande  he  called  Infiila  Cn/cis,  whiche  was  alfo  an  Hande  of  the  Canibales,  as  afterward  they
proued  in  dede.  For  as  they  liiyled  about  the  Hand,  they  founde  certayne  lowe  cotages  made  of  trees,  lyke
vnto  flagies.  For  they  fet  trees  vpright  in  order  round  about,  faflening  pofles  in  them  croffe  ouer,  where  vnto
the  trees  cleaue  fafle,  fo  that  by  this  meanes  they  cannot  fall.  They  frame  the  roofes  of  thefe  cotages,  with
fharpe  toppes  after  the  maner  of  rownde  tentes.  And  lafl  of  al,  they  inclofe  and  couer  thefe  trees  thus  fet  in
order,  wyth  the  leaues  of  date  trees,  and  certen  other  trees,  to ,  th[e]intent  to  make  them  a  flronger  defence
agaynfl  \vy'nd  and  wether.  And  within  the  cotage,  they  tye  the  pofles  together  with  ropes  of  bombage  cotton,
and  a  certayne  longe  roote.  They  haue  couches  made,  one  aboue  another,  the  flowres  whereof  they  flrawe
wyth  heye  and  cotton.  And  as  foone  as  they  hadde  fpied  our  men,  they  fled  incontinente.  And  when  oure
men  came  into  theyr  houfes,  they  found  in  theym  certayne  young  men  bound  to  pofles,  and  kept  to  be  made
fatte,  and  lykewyfe  many  olde  w^omenne  whiche  thefe  Canibaks  kepte  to  be  their  drudges.  They  founde  there
alfo  earthen  veffelles  of  all  fortes,  in  which  they  fodde  mens  fleflie  with  popingiayes,  geefe,  and  duckes  fleflie,  al
together  in  one  veffell.  They  rolled  alfo  mans  fleflie  vpon  fpyttes,  referuing  the  bones  of  the  armes  and  legges,
whiche  they  vfe  in  the  flede  of  Iron,  to  piece  and  typpe  theyr  arrowes.  For  they  are  vtterlye  without  Iron.
The[y]  found  alfo  the  head  of  a  yong  man,  yet  bleding  and  fafl.ened  to  a  pofle.  But  certayne  womenne  whiche
had  fledde  from  the  Canibaks  to  oure  menne,  the  Admiral  commaunded  to  be  gorgioufly  decked  after  the
maner  of  our  women,  and  with  manye  rewardes  to  be  fent  agayne  to  theyr  owne  companye.  By  meanes
whereof,  the  Canibaks  beynge  allured  by  the  lyberalitie  and  gyftes  of  our  men,  hoping  tliat  they  alfo  fhoulde
be  lykew^de  rewarded,  came  running  toward  our  men :  but  when  they  drew  fomwhat  nere  vnto  them,  they
fled  immediatly  into  the  nexte  wooddes.  And  thus  our  men  departing  from  thence,  returned  to  the  Ilande
of  Hifpana.

C  How  the  Admirall pajfed  manye  Ilandes,  and  what  thynges  chaunced

to  hym  and  his  companie  in  that  viage,

S  the  Admirall  departed  from  the  Hand  of  the  Canibaks,  and  went  foreward  on  his  viage,
he  paffed  by  many  Ilandes  :  among  the  whiche  was  one  called  Matinina,  in  whyche
dwell  only  women,  after  the  maner  of  them,  called  Amazones,  as  he  learned  of  the  men
of  the  Ilandes  which  he  brought  with  him  into  Spayne  at  his  fyrfle  viage,  and  faued
them  from  the  fearfenes  of  the  Ca?iibaks.  He  paffed  alfo  innumerable  other  Ilandes  of
which  to  fome  he  gaue  names,  as  Mons  Farratus,  San^a  Maria  rotunda,  SanHa  Martimis,
SanHa  Maria  antiqua,  and  San^a  Crux.  Into  the  which  oure  men  entering  to  th[e]intent  to
fetche  frefhe  water,  found  foure  Canibaks,  which  had  taken  foure  yonge  women :  who,  as  foone  as  thei
had  fpied  our  men,  wringed  theyr  handes,  feming  therby  to  defyre  ayde  of  oure  men  :  at  whofe  coming
to  delyuer  them,  the  men  fled  into  the  woodes  and  left  the  women.  Shortly  after,  our  men  faw  a  bote  coming  on
the  fea  with.  viij.  men  and  as  many  women  :  with  whom  oure  men  bickeringe  loft,  one  of  theyr  companions,
by  reafon  that  thefe  barbariens  are  accuftomed  to  infecte  theyr  arrow^es  with  venime  :  yet  oure  men  preuayled
and  flewe  parte  of  them,  and  broughte  the  refydue  by  forfe  to  the  Admyrall.  As  they  departed  from
hence,  they  found  many  other  Handes,  but  fuch  as  they  could  not  come  to  for  the  roughnes  of  the  fea
and  multitude  of  rockes.  But  fome  of  the  fmalleft.  brigantines  w^hich  drewe  no  great  depth,  went  fomewhat
nearer,  and  noumbred  aboue  feuen  and  fortie  Ilandes,  and  called  the  place  Archipdagus.  SayHng  from  hence,
they  found  another  Hand  called  Buchema,  into  the  whiche  ye  Catiibaks  make  fundry  incurfions,  by  reafon
wherof  the  inhabitantes  are  at  continual  warre  with  them.  Thus  at  the  length,  the  Admiral  with  his  hole  nauie
ret'imed to the Hand of  Hifpaiia  : but in  an  euyl tyme. For  they  which  he  hadde  lefte  there  for  a

30

\0f  the  newe  India,  and  Ilandes  in  thi.'  /est  Ocean  Sea,  &c.]

31

garrifon,  were  all  dead  :  as  were  alfo  they  whiche  he  toke  with  him  from  the  fame  Ilande  into  Spayne  to
vfe  them  for  intrepretours.  Of  whiche  feuen  dyed  by  chaunge  of  the  ayre.  One  of  them  was  permitted  of  the
Admirall  to  departe,  when  the  nauie  came  neare  to  hys  countrey.  The  refidue  flole  awaye  priuelye,  and
fwamme  to  lande  :  but  the  Admirall  doubting  whether  all  his  men  were  dead  or  no,  whiche  he  lefte  in
the  Hand,  commaunded  certayne  ordinaunce  to  be  fhot  of,  that  by  the  noyfe  thereof  they  myghte  haue
warning  to  come  forth,  yf  any  laye  lurkinge  in  corners  :  but  none  appeared,  whofe  fatall  dayes  had
fynifflied  theyr  lyfe.  At  the  length,  the  kyng  of  the  Ilande  beyng  therto  enforfed,  declared  the  hole
matter  to  the  Admyrall  as  well  as  he  coulde  by  interpretours  :  affyrming  that  there  were  in  the  Hand
other  Kynges  befyde  him  :  and  of  greater  power  then  he,  which  were  fore  offended  that  the  Spaniardes
hadde  fubdued  the  Ilandes  :  and  in  reuenge  therof,  came  to  the  town  where  the  Spaniardes  lay,  which
they  ouercame  and  burnt,  and  flew  al  the  men  therin  :  and  that  he  alfo  at  the  fame  conflicte,  taking  part
with  our  men,  was  fore  wounded  with  an  arrow  on  the  arme,  for  the  better  tryall  whereof  he  bore  hys
arme  in  a  towell,  becaufe  it  was  not  yet  hole  of  that  wounde.  But  fhortelye  after  they  had  knowledge,
that  the  King  fayned  this  tale  :  fo  that  he  hardely  efcaped  the  handes  of  the  Admiral,  who  was  determyned
wyth  fome  kynd  of  punifhment  to  haue  examined  him  further.  But  he  fufpecting  the  matter,  fled  into  ye
inner  partes  of  the  Hand,  declaring  therby,  that  he  was  the  deflruction  of  our  men  :  whom,  certayn  of
our  companie,  purfuinge,  founde  manye  marueylous  thinges  :  and  efpeciallye  ryuers  in  whiche  is  founde  muche
golde,  and  a  mountayne,  whofe  fande  is  fparkeled  with  gold.  In  this  place,  the  Admiral  bylded  a  citie,  which
he  compaffed  about  with  a  walle.  And  departing  from  hence,  he  fearched  almofl.  all  the  Hand :  in  ye
inner  partes  wherof  he  bylded  a  towre,  and  named  it  S.  Thomas  towre,  whiche  he  made  to  th[e]intent  that
he  might  the  more  fafely  fearche  out  the  fecretes  of  fo  plentifull  a  region,  and  efpecially  the  gold  mines  of  the
fame  :  and  thus  leauinge  a  garrifon  there,  he  departed,  takinge  with  him  three  foyftes,  wherwith  he  fayled  to
feke  newe  Ilandes,  and  came  firfl  to  the  Ilande  of  Qil>a,  and  from  thence  to  lamaica,  being  greater  then  Sid/ia,
very  fruytfull  and  wel  inhabited.  Which,  when  he  had  vewed,  he  departed  from  thence,  and  fayled  about  the
fea  cofles  where  he  fawe  innumerable  other  fmall  Ilandes,  flandinge  fo  thicke,  that  the  fhip  was  in  maner
borne  a  lande  :  and  was  therfore  enforfed  to  returne  home,  the  fame  way  which  he  came.

€L  How  the  Spaniardes  abtifed  the  fubmijfion  and  frendejhippe  of  the

inhabit  antes  of  the  Ilandes.

N  this  meane  tyme,  the  Spaniardes  which  the  admiral  had  left  in  the  Hand  of  Hifpana,
had  euyll  entreated  the  inhabitauntes  :  fo  that  for  wante  of  vitayles  and  foode,  they  begonne
to  famyne  :  imputinge  the  fault  hereof  vnto  the  Chriflian  men,  which  had  digged  vp  al  the
rootes  wherwith  thei  were  accuftomed  to  make  theyr  bread.  And  whereas  they  yet  per
ceaued,  that  ye  Chriflien  men  entended  to  continue  there,  thei  fent  an  ambaffadour  to  the
admiral  to  defyre  him  to  reflrayne  the  outragioufnes  and  crueltie  of  his  men,  at  whofe  handes
they  fuflained  fuch  iniuries  and  violence,  as  they  fcarcely  loked  for  at  the  handes  of  mortal
enemies.  Declaringe  further,  that  vnder  the  pretence  of  feking  for  gold  they  committed  innumerable  \ATonges
and  mifchieuous  actes,  fpoyling  in  maner  all  the  hole  region  :  and  that  for  the  auoyding  of  'uch  enomiities  and
oppreffions,  they  hadde  rather  paye  tribute,  then  to  be  thus  dayly  vexed  with  incurfions,  and  neuer  to  be  at
quiete.  Vpon  this  complaynte  it  was  agreed,  that  they  flioulde  paye  yearely  tribute  to  the  Chriflian  king  and
that  they  fhould  applie  them  felues  to  gather  and  encreafe  theyr  rotes,  whiche  were  to  them  in  the  fl.ede
of  flowre  and  wheat,  and  fo  confumed  that  with  great  labour  they  coulde  fcarcely  fynde  any  in  the  wooddes.
They  payde  therefore  for  their  tribute,  euery  thre  monethes,  certayn  pound  weyghtes  of  gold  :  but  fuche  as  had
no  gold,  payde  fpyces,  and  goffampine  cotton.  In  the  meane  time  the  Spaniardes,  who  fliould  haue  been
occupied  in  digging  for  golde,  gaue  them  felues  to  play,  wantonnes  and  idlenes,  contemning,  and  falling
into  hatered  with  their  gouemour,  by  which  theyr  licentioufnes,  the  people  of  the  Hand  beyng  prouoked,  became
more  difobedient  and  wyld,  degeneratinge  from  al  kind  of  honeflie  and  faithfulnes  :  yea  ye  fpaniardes  alfo
became  fo  negligent  in  feking  for  gold,  yat  fomet)ane  the  charges  exceaded  the  gaynes.  Neuerthelefle  in  the
yere  of  Chrifl,  1501.  they  gathered  within  ye  fpace  of  two  monethes  twelue  thoufand  poundes  weyght  of  golde.
But  the  Admirall  appoyntinge  his  brother  Bartholomeus  Columbus,  to  be  gouemour  of  the  Hand,  he  in  the
yeare.  1495.  determined  to  returne  to  Spayne,  to  certifye  the  kyng  of  al  thefe  matters.  In  which  viage,
he  manfuUye  defended  him  felf  in  battayl  againfl  the  rebelles  of  certayne  other  Ilandes  which  had  confpjTed
agaynfl  the  Spanyardes.

Xi

Chatmge  of  ajrre
is  dauogeroos.

The  Icine
dissemblcth  with
the  AdmyraU.

Goldefound  in
riuers  and
mountaines.

The  Ilandes
of  Cuba  and
lamaica.

A  multitude  of
Ilandes

The  crueltie  of  the
Christian  men

Crueltie  of
couetousnes.

Bread  of  rotes.

The  tribute  of
the  barbarians

Disobedience
foloweth  Idlenes

Note.

Bartkclomeus
Columbus.

\

32

[Of  the  newe  India ^  and  Ilandes  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,  &c.]

The  bishop  of
ronie  deuidcth  ye
world.

Nesperities  or
Caput  ueride.

How  the

Spanyardes  and
ye  Portueales
deuided  tnc  world
betwene  them.

Gold  and  Pearles

The  Equinoctial

lyne.

The  rj'uer  of

Gauges.

Calicut.

Taprobana.

Satnotra.

The  great  cytie
of  Malaccha.

The  region  of
Sinarutn

The  Ilandes  of
Molucca.

Sayling  into  the
East  by  the  west

The  roundnes  of
the  erth.

The  firme  land

Spices

The  viage  from
the  West  vnto
the  Easte.

America.

The  firme  land.

Regio
Baccalearunt

Terra  Florida.

The  king  of

spayne  sendeth
foorth  shippes.

The  viage  of

Magellanus  by

the  west  into  ye

east

The  Ilandes  of

Molucca

The  Ilandes  of
canaria.

Proinotoriutn  S.

Marie.

Canibales

The  eleuacion  of
the  south  pole.  46
degrees

The  Region  of
giaunte'i.

C  How  the  Portugals  fougJit  new  Ilandes  in  the  Eaft  partes,  and  how

they  came  to  Calicut.

N  this  meane  tyme  that  ye  Spanyardes  foughte  newe  and  vnknowen  landes  in  the  Weft.
partes,  the  Portugales  attempted  to  doe  the  fame  in  the  Eaft.e  partes.  And  leaft.  one  of
them  fhould  be  a  lette  or  hinderaunce  to  the  other,  they  deuyded  the  world  betwene  them
by  the  aucthoritie  of  the  Bifhop  of  Rome,  Alexander  the.  vi.  of  that  name.  And  that  on
this  condicion,  that  from  the  Ilandes  called  Hefperides  (whiche  are  now  called  Caput  ueride)
the  one  fliould  fayle  Weftwarde,  and  the  other  towarde  the  South  pole,  thus  deuyding  the
world  betwene  them  in  two  equal  partes.  So  that  whatfoeuer  vnknowen  landes  fhoulde  be
difcouered  in  the  Eafte  partes,  the  fame  to  be  dewe  to  the  Portugales  :  And  all  fuche  as  fhoulde  be  founde  in
the  Wefte  partes,  to  appertayne  to  the  Spanyardes.  Whereby  it  came  to  paffe,  that  the  Spaniardes,  euer  by  the
South,  fayled  into  the  Wefte,  where  they  founde  a  large  mayne  land,  with  Ilandes  great  and  litle  innumerable,
hauing  in  them  great  plentie  of  golde  and  pearles,  and  other  great  riches.  But  the  Portugales,  by  the  Southe,
and  coftes  of  the  Ilandes  called  Hefperides,  and  EquinoBial  lyne,  and  Tropiais  Capricorni,  came  into  ye  Eaft,
by  the  goulfe  called  Sinus  Perficus,  euen  vnto  the  coftes  of  India,  within  the  riuer  of  Ganges,  whereas  is  now  the
great  market  towne,  and  kingedom  of  Calicut.  And  from  thence  to  the  Hand  of  Taprobana,  (now  called  Sumetra,
Zamara  or  Samotra)  and  fo  forth  to  Aurea  C/icrfoncfus,  whereas  is  nowe  the  great  cytie  of  Malaccha,  beyng  one
of  ye  moft.  famous  market  townes  of  al  ye  Eaft.  partes.  From  Malaccha,  they  entered  into  a  great  goulfe,
by  which  they  came  to  the  region  of  Sinarum.  Not  farre  from  Malaccha,  are  the  Ilandes  called  Molucca;,
in  which  al  kyndes  of  fpyces  growe  and  are  brought  to  the  cytie  of  Malaccha.  But  the  Spanyardes  hauing
knowledge  what  greate  coramoditie  the  Portugales  had  receyued  by  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca  attem[p]ted  to
proue  yf  they  alfo  might  find  the  fame  Ilandes  in  fayUng  fo  farre  Weft.ward  that  they  mighte  at  the  length  by
Weft,  and  fouthweft  come  into  the  Eaft,  as  by  good  reafon  they  prefuppofed  the  roundneffe  of  the  earth  would
permitte,  if  they  were  not  otherwyfe  lette  by  the  fyrme  or  mayne  land  lyinge  in  the  waye  and  ft.oppinge  theyr
paflage,  whereof  as  yet  was  no  certeyntie  knowen.  And  this  dydde  they  to  th[e]intent  that  by  this  meanes  they
myghte  more  eafelye  and  wyth  leffe  charge  bringe  fpyces  from  thence  into  Spayne.  Therefore,  the  maner  of
this  viage  was,  that  they  fhould  fayle  from  the  Wefte,  vnder  the  loweft.  hemifpherye  or  halfe  compaffe  of  the
earth,  and  fo  to  come  into  the  Eaft..  A  thinge  furelye  that  myghte  feeme  verye  harde  to  attempte,  beecaufe  it
was  vncertaine  whether  that,  moft:  prudente  and  beneficiall  nature,  (who  worketh  al  thinges  with  moft.
high  prouidence)  had  not  fo  deuided  and  feperated  the  Eaft.  from  the  Weft,  partely  by  fea,  and  partely
by  land,  that  there  might  by  this  way  haue  been  no  paffage  into  the  Eaft:.  For  it  was  not  yet  knowen,  whether
that  great  region  of  America,  (whiche  they  call  the  fyrme  or  mayne  lande)  dyd  feperate  the  Welle  fea  from  the
Eaft. :  But  it  was  founde  that  that  fyrme  lande  extended  from  the  Weft:  to  the  South.  And  that  alfo  towarde
the  North  partes  were  found  two  other  regions,  whereof  the  one  is  called  Rcgio  Baccalearufn,  and  the  other
Terra  Florida :  which,  if  they  were  adherent  to  the  fayde  fyrme  land,  there  could  be  no  paffage  by  the  Weft.e  feas
into  the  Eaft.  India,  forafmuch  as  ther  was  not  yet  founde  any  ftrayghte  of  the  fea,  wherby  any  enteraunce
mighte  be  open  into  the  Eaft..  In  this  meane  while,  the  kyng  of  Spayne  beynge  elected  Emperoure,  prepared
a  nauie  of  fyue  ftiippes,  ouer  the  whiche  he  appointed  one  Magellanus  to  be  captayne,  commaundinge  him  that
he  ftiould  fayle  towarde  the  coaft.es  of  the  fayd  fyrme  land,  dyrectinge  his  viage  by  the  fouth  partes  thereof,  untyl
he  had  eyther  found  the  ende  of  the  fame,  or  elles  fome  ft.reyghte  wherby  he  mighte  paffe  to  thofe  odoriferous
Ilandes  of  Molucca,  fo  famoufly  fpoken  of  for  the  great  abundaunce  of  fwete  fauours  and  fpices  founde  therein.
The  fhippes  therefore,  beyng  well  furnifftied  with  all  thinges  neceffarie,  Magellanus  departinge  from  Ciuile  in
Spayne,  the  tenth  day  of  Auguft,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrift.  1519.  came  fyrft.  to  ye  Ilandes  of  Canaria,  and
from  thence  to  ye  Ilandes  called  Hefperides:  from  whiche  dyrectinge  hys  courfe  betwene  the  Weft,  and
the  Eaft.  toward  the  fayd  fyrme  land,  in  few  dayes  with  profperous  fayling,  he  difcouered  a  corner  or  poynt  of
the  fayd  mayne  land,  called  Promontorium  S.  Marice,  where  the  people  dwell,  called  Canibales,  whiche  are
accuftomed  to  eate  mans  fleftie.  From  hence  he  fayled  on  fouthwarde  by  the  long  tracte  of  this  firme
land,  which  reacheth  fo  farre  into  ye  fouth  and  extendeth  fo  many  degrees  beyond  ye  circle  called  Tropicus
Capricorni,  yat  the  fouth  pole  (called  pole  Antartike)  is  there  eleuated  fortie  and  fy.xe  degrees.  And
thus  beyng  brought  into  the  Eaft,  they  faw  certayn  Indians  gatheringe  fhel  fyflies  by  the  fea  bankes  :
beyng  men  of  very  high  ft.ature,  clothed  with  beaft.es  Ikinnes.  To  whom,  whereas  certayne  of  the  Spaniardes
went  aland,  and  fhewed  them  belles  and  paynted  papers,  they  begon  to  daunce  and  leape  aboute  the
Spaniardes,  with  a  rude  and  murmuring  fonge. At  the  length  there  came  three  other,  as  thoughe they

\0f  the  iiewe  India,  and  Ilandes  in  t/ie  West  Ocean  Sea,  &c\

ZZ

vere  ambaffadours,  whiche  by  certayn  fignes  defyred  ye  Spaniardes  to  go  with  them  further  into  the  land,
making  a  countenaunce  as  though  thci  wold  intertayn  them  wel,  where  vpon,  ye  captayne  Mage/Iaiius  fent  with
them.  vii.  men  well  inftructed,  to  th[e]intent  to  fearche  ye  region  and  maners  of  the  people.  And  thus
they  went  with  them  into  ye  defertes,  wher  they  came  to  a  low  cotage  couered  with  wylde  beafl.es
n<innes,  hauing  in  it  two  manfions,  in  one  of  ye  which  were  women  and  children  and  in  the  other  only
men.  They  interteined  their  gefl.es  after  a  barbaros  and  beaflly  maner,  whiche  neuertheles  femed  to
them  princelike  :  for  they  killed  a  beafl.,  not  much  vnlike  a  wylde  affe,  whofe  flefthe  (but  halfe  rofled)  they  fet
before  our  men,  without  any  other  kind  of  meate  or  drinke.  Here  were  our  men  of  neceffitie  confl.rained
to  lye  al  night  vnder  thefe  fl<;innes,  by  reafon  of  the  great  abundaunce  of  fnowe  and  wynde.  And  when  it  was
clay,  our  men  were  very  earnefl.  with  them,  and  would  in  maner  haue  enforfed  them  to  goe  with  them  to
the  fliippe :  which  thing  thei  perceauing,  couered  them  felues  from  the  head  to  the  foote  with  certayn  horrible
beafl.es  fkinnes,  and  paynted  theyr  faces  with  fundrye  colours.  Thus  taking  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and
bringing  with  them  other  of  theyr  companie,  of  much  greater  fl.ature  and  terrible  afpect,  then  they  were,  they
fliewed  them  felues  to  oure  men  in  araye,  as  thoughe  they  were  ready  to  fight.  But  the  Spanyardes,  whiche
thoughte  that  the  matter  would  haue  comen  to  hand  flrokes,  commaunded  a  piece  of  ordinaunce  to  be  fliotte  of
The  which  although  it  dyd  no  hurte,  yet  thefe  hardy  giauntes,  which  a  little  before  femed  to  be  as  bold
as  though  they  durft  haue  made  warre  againfl.  lupiter,  were  by  the  noyfe  thereof  put  in  fuche  feare,  that
they  foorthwith  beganne  to  entreate  for  peace.  Our  men  entended  to  haue  brought  fome  of  thefe  Gyauntes
wyth  them  into  Spayne  for  the  ft,raungenes  of  the  thinge  :  but  they  all  efcaped  oute  of  theyr  handes.
Magelianui  therfore  vnderfl.andinge  that  it  were  vnprofy table  to  tarie  there  any  longer,  and  that  alfo  the  fea  was
very  rough,  and  the  wether  ftormie  and  boyfl.e[r]ous,  and  that  furthermore  the  firme  lande  extended  further
toward  the  fouth,  in  fo  muche,  that  the  further  they  fayled  that  waye,  they  fhould  fynde  it  fo  much  ye  colder,
he  deferred  hys  preceding  vnto  [in?]  the  moneth  of  may,  at  whiche  tyme,  ye  fharpenes  of  winter,  exceadeth  with
them,  when  as  with  vs,  fommer  is  begon.  He  found  there  greate  plentie  of  wood.  The  fea  alfo  minifl.red
vnto  them  great  abundaunce  of  flielfiflie,  befyde  other  fyfhes  of  fundrie  kyndes.  He  found  lykewj-fe
many  fpringes  of  freflie  and  holefome  waters:  and  vfed  huntinge  and  taking  of  foules.  Only  bread  and
wyne,  was  lackinge  in  the  fliippe. The  fouth  pole  was  there  eleuated  fortie  degrees.

C  How  Magellanus  by  a  Jlrayght  or  narrow  arme  of  the  fea,  fayled  by  the
weft  into  the  Eaft  to  dy  tiers  Ilandes:  where  alfo  he  was  fay  ne.

He  wynter  now  being  pafl:,  the.  xxiiij.  day  of  Augufl.e,  Magellamis  departed  from  the  place
aforefayde,  and  fl.yll  folowed  the  tracte  of  the  firme  land  toward  the  fouth,  vntyl  at  the  length,
the.  xxvi.  day  of  Nouember,  he  found  in  that  firme  land,  certayn  open  places  lyke  vnto
flrayghtes  or  narrow  feas.  Into  the  which  entring  with  his  nauie,  he  commamided  that
certayn  fliippes  fhould  fearche  the  goulfes  on  euerye  fyde,  yf  anye  way  or  paffage  might  be
found  into  the  Eafl.  At  the  length,  they  found  a  certayn  depe  flraight,  by  the  which  they
were  perfwaded  yat  there  was  enteraunce  into  fome  other  mayne  fea,  infomuch  that  Magel-
lanus attempted  to  fearche  ye  fame.  This  flraight  was  found  to  be  fomtime  of  ye  bre^ith  of  thre  Italian  myles,
fometyme  "  two,  and  fometime  of  tenne,  and  reached  fomwhat  toward  the  Wefl..  The  altitude  or  eleuacion  of
the  fouth  poic  in  this  place,  was  founde  to  be.  lii.  degrees.  They  coulde  fee  no  people  ftering  in  the  cofles  of
this  entraunce  Therfore  3fagella?uis  feing  thys  lande  to  be  rough  and  faluage,  and  vnpleafaunt  to  abide  in,
by  reafon  of  extreme  cold,  he  thought  it  not  worthye  the  trauayle,  to  fpend  any  time  in  ferching  the  fame.
Therfore  failing  forward  in  his  viage  thus  attempted  by  ye  faid  fl.rayghte,  (which  is  now  called  the  flrayght  of
Magellanus)  he  was  therby  brought  into  another  mayn  fea,  verye  greate  and  large.  The  length  of  this  flrayght
or  narrow  fea,  is  eftemed  to  be  a  hundreth  fpaniflie  miles.  The  land  which  he  had  on  his  right  hande,  he
doubted  not  to  be  mayne  lande :  and  that  on  the  left  hand,  he  fuppofed  to  bee  Ilandes.  Magellanus  fawe
lykewyfe  the  fyrme  lande  to  be  extended  directly  toward  ye  North :  \\herefore  letting  pafle  that  great  lande,  he
fayled  by  that  greate  and  large  fea  betwene  the  Wefl  and  the  North :  and  that  for  this  intente,  that  at  the  length
he  might  by  the  Wefl,  come  into  the  Eafl,,  and  agayne  vnder  the  burning  1^-ne  called  Zona  Torriila,  beynge  well
affured  that  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca  (which  he  foughte)  were  in  the  Eafl.e,  and  not  farre  from  the  EquinoHial  lyne.
When  they  hadde  thus  fayled  fortie  dayes,  and  came  now  agayne  vnder  the  line  or  circle  called  Tropiais  Capri-
corni,  they  founde  two  lyttle  Ilandes  inhabyted,  but  very  barren,  and  therfore  called  them  infortunate  Ilandes.
Departinge  from  thence  they  failed  on  for  a  great  fpace,  and  found  a  certayne  Ilande  which  ye  inhabitantes  called

Eden.  q,  .  33

Cotaees  couered
withbea&tes

Onager.

Abundaunce  of
snowe  and  wynda

I  The  Giauntes  arc
puttc  to  flyght.

Extreme  winter
in  maye.

The  south  pole
eleuate-Jtl-  degrees

The  strayght  of
Magellanus.

The  altitude  of
the  south  pole.  liL
degree;.

The  main  sea
beyond  the
strayghtes.

The  fyrme  land

The  burning  line
Torrida  Zena.

The  Ilandes  of
Molucca
Tropicus
ca^ricomL

34

[Of  t/ie  ite7ve  India.,  and  Ilaudcs  in  the  J  Vest  Ocean  Sea,  &c.]

The  Ilaml  of
iMUtigunii.

The  lUiriklos  cf
Citties  called
Cales  Males.

AcafiM,
Scitiui.

Massana.
Suiuth.

Bread  of  the
tninke  of  trees.

Drinke  of  the

dropping  of  date

trees.

Golde  and  Ginger

Mngrllanus  is
slayne.

The  new
caplaine  Serrnnus
is  betraied  of  his
bondman.

The  king  of
Subiit/t  conspyreth
agaynst  the
Spanyardes.

The  captayne
Serranus  is  taken
prisoner.

The  Tlandes  of
Gibeth  and  Fori.t

SilolL

Peace  and  Idleneii

Bread  of  Rice

Caniphire

Pearles  as  bigge
as  turtle  doues
egges.

A  manielous  big
shelfishe

Gilona.

Men  with
banging  eares.

Inuagana,  where  ye  eleuacion  of  the  Northe  pole,  (called  pole  Artike)  was.  xij.  degrees:  And  the  length  from  the
llandes  called  Gadcs,  by  the  Wefle,  was  iudged  to  bee.  c.lviii.  [one  hundred  and  fifty-eight]  degrees. Thus  preceding,
they  faw  dyuers  other  llandes,  and  that  fo  manye,  that  they  fuppofed  they  had  been  brought  into  a  great  fea  lyke  vnto
that  called  Archipehmis,  where  with  fygnes  and  poyntinges  (as  the  dumme  are  wont  to  fpeake  with  the  dumme)
they  afked  of  thefe  Indians,  the  names  of  the  llandes,  whereby  they  learned  that  thei  were  in  Acataii,  and  not
farre  from  the  Ilande  called  Sc/ufii,  wel  inhabited  and  repleniflied  with  abundaunce  of  al  thinges  ncceffarie  for
the  commodities  of  this  life. Sayling  therfore  toward  the  Ilande  of  Schvii,  thei  were  with  a  contrary  wind
drieuen  on  the  Hand  of  Maffana,  from  whenfe  they  came  to  the  greate  Hand  of  Siibitt/i,  where  ye  Spanyardes
were  wel  enterteyned  of  the  Kinge  of  the  Hand,  who  brought  them  into  a  certayn  cotage,  and  fet  before  them
fuch  delicates  as  he  hadde. Theyr  bread,  was  of  the  trunke  of  a  certen  tree,  cut  in  pieces,  and  fried  with  oyle.
Theyr  drinke  was  of  the  humoure  or  ioyfe  which  droppeth  out  of  die  braunches  of  the  date  trees,  when  they  are
cutte. Theyr  meate  was  fuche  as  they  toke  by  foulinge,  with  fuch  fruites  as  the  contrei  brought  forth. This
Ilande was very  riche of  gold  and  ginger. In  thefe  partes  Magellanus  made  warre  agaynfle  the  inhabi
tauntes  of  certayne  other  llandes:  In  whiche  conflicte,  the  fpaniardes  hauing  the  ouerthrow  Magellanus  was
flayne  with  feuen  of  hys  men. When  the  Spaniardes  hadde  thus  lofl  theyr  captayne,  they  elected  a  new
gouernoure  of  theyr  nauie,  appointing  one  lohannes  Scrraniis  to  that  office. Magellanus  had  alfo  a  bondman
borne  in  the  llandes  of  Molucca,  whom  he  had  bought  in  the  citie  of  Malaccha. This  bondman  vnderflode  the
Spaniflie  tonge :  and  where  as  the  captayn  Serranus  could  do  nothing  without  him,  who  now  lay ficke  by
reafon  of  the  woundes  which  he  had  receaued  in  the  faid  conflicte,  fo  that  he  was  fayne  to  fpeake  fliarpely  to
him  and  threaten  to  beate  him  or  he  could  geat  him  out  of  the  fliyppe,  he  here  vpon  conceaued  fo  great  hatered
and  indignacion  agaynRe  the  Spanyardes,  that  he  wente  immediately  to  the  Kinge  of  Subuth,  declaring  the
couetoufnes  of  the  Spaniardes  to  be  vnfaciable,  and  yat  thei  wold  fliortely  vfe  crueltie  againfl  him  alfo,  and
bring  him  into  fubiection  and  feruitude. The  barbarous  king  beleued  his  wordes,  and  therwith  pryuelye  with
the  ayde  of  the  other  llandes,  confpired  againfl  the  Spanyardes,  and  toke  or  flew  as  many  of  them  as  came  to
a  banket  whereunto  they  were  bidden  vnder  pretence  of  frendfliip. Among  the  which  alfo,  Serranus  the
Captaine  was  taken  priefoner. But  the  refydue  of  the  Spanyardes  which  remayned  in  the  fhippes,  beyng  taught
and  warned  by  the  euyll  chaunce  which  befell  to  theyr  companions,  and  fearing  greater  deceytes  and  confpira-
cies,  lyft  vp  their  ankers  and  gaue  wind  to  their  fayles. In  the  meane  tyme  was  Serranus  brought  bound  to
the  fea  bankes,  defiring  his  companions  to  delyuer  or  redeme  him  from  that  horrible  captiuitie  of  hys  enemies.
P.ut  the  Spaniardes,  albeit  they  toke  it  for  a  difhonour,  to  leaue  or  forfake  theyr  Captayne,  yet  fearing  fraude  or
further  difhmulacion,  they  fayled  afyde  from  that  Hand,  and  came  to  the  llandes  of  Gibeth  and  Pome. In  this
mayne  fea,  were  t^vo  great  llandes,  wherof  the  one  was  called  Siloli,  and  the  other  Porne  the  leffe,  where  our
men  were  wel  entreated. The  inhabitantes  o{  Porne  honoure  the  funne  and  the  mone:  they  keepe  alfo  a  certayn
ciuile  iuflice  and  frendiy  loue  one  to  another. And  aboue  all  thinges,  defyre  peace  and  ydlenes. Therfore  i^
theii  chiefe  uudie  is,  in  no  cafe  to  molefle  their  neyghboures  or  llraungers,  or  to  be  iniurious  to  anye  man.
They  haue  lytde  houfes,  made  of  earth  and  wood,  and  couered  partely  with  rubbifhe,  and  partly  with  ye  bowes
of  date  trees. They  take  as  manye  wyues  as  they  are  able  to  kepe. Theyr  comon  meat,  is  fuch  as  they  take
by  foulinge  or  fiffhinge. They  make  bread of  ryce :  and  drinke, of  the  liquor  whiche  droppeth  from the
braunches  of  date  trees,  cutte. Some  vfe  mxarchaundyfe  in  the  llandes  nere  about  them :  fome  applie  them-
felues  to  huntinge  and  fyffhing,  and  fome  to  hufbandry. Theyr  apparell,  is  of  Goffampine  cotton. They  haue
greate  abundaunce  of  camphyre,  ginger  and  cinomome.

C  How  the  Spaniardes  came  to  the  llandes  ^Molucca,  and  of  the

people  with  great  hanging  eares.

He  Spaniardes  takinge  theyr  leaue  of  the  king  of  Porne,  departed  :  dyrecting  theyr  viage
towarde  the  llandes  of  Molucca,  whiche  were  fliewed  vnto  them  by  the  fame  King.  They
came  fyrfl  to  the  cofles  of  the  Ilande  called  Solo,  where  are  found  Pearles  as  bygge  as
turtle  doues  egges  :  but  they  are  gathered  in  the  depth  of  the  fea.  The  inhabitantes
of  this  Ilande,  at  fuche  tyme  as  the  Spanyardes  came  thether,  toke  a  fhelfyfflie  of  fuche
houdge  bignes  yat  the  flefhe  therof  wayed.  xlvij.  pound  weyght.  Wherby  it  is  apparaunt  yat
great  pearles  fhould  be  found  there  forafmuch  as  pearles  are  the  byrth  of  certayn  fhelfifhes.
From  hence  thei  came  to  the  Hand  of  Gilo7ia,  in  which  are  certayn  people  hauing  hanging  eares  of
fuch  length, that  they  hang  downe  to  theyr  fhoulders. Wherat as the Spaniardes marueyled, the men

34

\0f  the  neive  India,  and  Ilamks  in  the  IVest  Ocean  Sea,  &r.]

35

of  the  Hand  lolde  them,  that  not  farre  from  thence  was  another  Hand  in  which  were  a  kind  of  men,  not  onely
with  hanging  eares,  but  alfo  with  eares  of  fuche  breadth  and  length,  that  with  one  of  them  they  myghte  couer
theyr  hole  head.  But  the  Spanyardes,  who  foughte  for  gold  and  fpyces,  and  not  for  mongers,  layled  dyrectly  to
the  Ilandes  oi  Molucca,  where  they  arryued,  the  eyghte  rroneth  after  the  death  of  their  gouemour  Magellanm.
Thefe  Ilandes  are  fyue  in  noumbre,  the  names  wherof  are  thefe  Tharant,  Muthil,  TJiedori,  Mare,  and  Mathien.
Some  of  thf;m  are  fytuate  on  thys  fyde  the  Equino^iall  lyne,  fome  vnder  it,  and  fome  beyonde  it.  Some
beare  cloues,  fome  Nutmegges,  and  fome  Cinomome.  They  are  not  farre  diflaunt  the  one  from  the  other.
They  are  but  little  and  narowe.  The  inhabitantes  are  very  poore,  becaufe  ther  is  no  encreafe  of  anye
other  thinge  faaing  onely  of  fpyces.  They  lyue  with  bread  and  fyfhe,  and  fometime  popingiayes.  They
lurke  in  lowe  cotages  :  And  in  fyne,  all  thinges  with  them  are  defpicable  and  vile,  befide  peace,  idlenes,
and  fpyces.  In  Thcdori  is  great  plentie  of  cloues,  as  alfo  in  Tarante  and  Mathien.  The  trees  which  bringe
forth  cloues,  growe  not,  but  on  rockes  and  broken  cliffes,  which  fometime  they  grow  fo  thicke,  that  they
appeare  lyke  a  lytde  woode  or  groue.  This  tree,  bothe  in  leaues,  biggenes,  and  heyght,  is  much  lyke  vnto  the
baye  tree.  It  beareth  the  fruite  in  ye  toppes  of  euery  braunche.  The  budde  fpringeth  out  fyrfl,  and  then  in
it  the  floure,  not  much  vnlike  the  floure  of  an  orange  tree.  The  cloue  is  fyrfl  redde  :  but  after  beyng  fcorched
by  the  heate  of  the  fonne,  it  is  made  blacke.  The  inhabitauntes  deuide  the  groues  of  thefe  trees  betwene  them,
as  we  doe  the  vynes.  The  Hand  of  Muthil,  bringeth  forth  cinomome.  This  tree,  is  ful  of  fmall  braunches  and
baren,  bed  lyking  in  a  drye  foyle,  and  is  very  like  vnto  the  tree,  that  beareth  the  pomgranate.  The  barke  of
this  tree,  by  reafon  of  the  great  heate  of  the  fonne,  ryfmg  from  the  braunches,  or  bodie  of  the  fame,  is  gathered
and  dried  at  the  fonne,  and  is  fo  made  perfecte  cinomome.  Neare  vnto  this,  is  another  Hand,  called
Beda,  greater  and  larger,  then  anye  of  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca.  In  this  Hand  groweth  the  Nutmegge,  whofe  tree
is  bigge  and  highe,  and  much  lyke  vnto  the  walnutte  tree,  for  as  is  the  walnutte,  fo  is  this  fruite  defended  with
a  double  couering,  as  fyrfle  with  a  grene  hufke,  vnder  the  whiche  is  a  thinne  fkinne  or  rimme  Hke  a
nette,  encompaffmg  the  fliell  of  the  nutte  :  which  fkinne  we  call  the  flowre  of  the  nutmegge,  but  of  the
Spanyardes,  it  is  called  mace,  an  excellent  and  holefome  fpyce.  The  other  couering,  is  the  fhell  of  the  nutte,
within  the  which  is  the  fruite  it  felfe,  which  we  call  ye  nutmegge.  Ginger  groweth  here  and  there  in  all
the  Ilandes  of  this  Archipelagiis,  or  mayne  fea.  Of  the  whiche,  fome  is  fowen,  and  fome  groweth  of  it
felfe.  But  that  which  is  fowen,  is  the  better.  The  herbe  of  this,  is  lyke  vnto  that  which  beareth  faffrane
and  hath  hys  roote,  (which  is  Ginger,)  much  lyke  vnto  the  fame.  In  this  meane  time  came  two  other  fh}'ppes
out  of  Spayne  :  whereof  the  one  fayled  directely  to  the  poynte  oi  Aphrica,  called  Promontoriutn  bonce  fpei:  And
the  other  by  the  greate  mayne  South  fea,  to  the  coafles  of  that  continent  or  fyrme  land  whereof  we  haue  fpoken
here  beefore.  It  fhallfuffyfe  that  we  haue  hetherto  declared  of  the  nauigacions  whiche  the  Spanyardes  attempted  by
the  Wefle  to  fayle  into  the  Eafle,  by  the  flrayghte  of  Magellanus,  where  the  paffage  by  Sea  is  open  into  the  Eafle,
by  the  continente  or  fyrme  lande  of  the  newe  worlde,  called  America.  Nowe  therefore  lette  vs  retoume  to  the
other  Nauigacions  of  Columbus,  otherwyfe  called  the  Admyrall,  who  longe  beefore  was  the  fyrfl  fynder  of
the  newe  Ilandes,  and  of  the  fayde  mayne  or  fyrme  land,  and  yet  founde  not  that  flrayght  or  narow  fea,  by  the
which  Magellanus  fayled  from  the  Wefl  into  the  Eafl,

C  The  thyrde  naiiigacion  ^Chriftophorus  Columbus.

^N  the  yeare  of  Chrifl.  1498.  Columbus  the  Admyral  departed  from  Spayne  with  eyght  foillcs,
and  arryued  fyrfl  at  the  Ilandes  of  Medera,  where  he  deuyded  hys  nauie  into  Iavo  partes.
For.  V.  of  thefe  fhippes  he  directed  to  the  Hand  of  Hifpana  :  and  with  the  refidue,  he  failed
towarde  the  fouth,  entendinge  to  paffe  ouer  the  ^quinoHial  line,  and  from  thenfe  to  tume
towarde  the  Wefle,  to  fearche  fuche  landes  as  were  hetherto  vnknowen  to  the  Chriilian  men.
Coming  therfore  to  Caput  ucride,  he  failed  to  the  burning  line,  called  Torrida  zona  where  he
found  fo  great  heate,  that  he  was  in  daunger  of  death  :  but  retuminge  his  fliyppcs  towarde
the  Wefl,  he  found  a  more  holefome  ayre  and  (as  God  woulde)  came  at  the  length  to  a  lande  well  inhabyted,
where  there  came  agaynfl  him  and  his,  a  bote  with,  xxiiij.  young  men,  armed  with  bowes,  arrowes,  and  fliieldes,
couering  only  theyr  priuie  members  with  a  clothe  of  Gofiampine  cotton,  hauing  alfo  very  longe  hcare.  The
admirall,  (as  well  as  he  could  by  fignes)  allured  them  to  communicacion.  But  they  trufled  not  our  men,  fearing
fome  deceate.  The  Admirall  perceauing  that  he  could  nought  preuayle,  by  fignes  and  tokens,  he  determined
with  Mufical  indrumentes  to  appeafe  their  wildneffe.  As  the  minRrelles  therefore  blewe  theyr  fliaulmes,
the  barbarous  people  drew  neare,  fufpecting  that  noyfe  to  bee  a  token  of  warre,  whereupon  they  made  ready
theyr  bowes  and  arrowes. But  the  Spaniardes  drawinge  nearer  vnto  them,  eafle  certa)ne  apparell  into  dieyr

TTie  spanyardes
arriue  at  ibe
Ilandes  of
Melutca,

The  tree  that
beareth  clones.

The  cinomone
tree.

The  nutmeg  tree

Mace.

The  nutineggs.

Ginger

Promon  toriutn
bona  sjti

Colttmhus  the
admyral,  first
finder  of  the  new
Ilandes

The  Ilindes  of
Hispana  or

Greate  heate  \-ndei
the  burning  lyne.

Signcs  anti
pointing

\0f  the  11C7VC  I/id/a,  and  Ilaiidcs  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,  &ci\

The  faire  region
of /'iir/iii.

Gold  and  Pe.irles

Fearse  bcastes.

The  Spanynrdes
refuse  to  obey  the
admiral.

bote,  willing  by  this  token  of  frendHiippe  to  concile  them,  although  all  were  in  vayne.  For  they  fled  all  awaye.
Wherefore  the  Ailniyrall  departing  from  thence,  came  to  a  region  called  Farias,  wel  inhabited  antl  ful  of  ciuile
people,  declaring  muche  humanitie  toward  flraungers.  1'hey  fliewed  our  men  Pearles  and  Gold,  and  fuch  other
richeS;  defyring  them  to  come  a  land,  where  they  gentelly  entreated  them.  When  our  men  aflced  them  where
they  had  fuche  jilentie  of  golde  :  they  (with  home  poynting  was  in  the  flede  of  fpeech)  declared  by  fignes  and
tokens,  that  thei  had  it  in  certayne  mountaines,  and  that  thei  could  not  without  great  daunger  relbrt  thether,  by
reafon  of  certaine  fearfe  beafles  in  thofe  partes,  and  alfo  becaufe  of  the  crucll  people  called  Ca/iibaks,  whiche
inhabite  thofe  mountaynes.  But  the  Admiral,  becaufe  his  wheate  fayled,  was  enforfed  to  departe  thence.
Dyrectinge  therfore  his  viage  toward  ye  North  eaRe,  he  came  to  the  Hand  of  Hifpana,  where  he  found
all  thinges  confounded  and  out  of  ordre.  For  the  Spanyardes  which  were  lefte  in  the  Ilandes,  refufed  to  obeye
the  Admirall  and  his  brother,  mouinge  greuous  complayntes  agaynRe  them  before  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  at
the  length  fente  them  thether  bound.

C  Howe  Petrus  Alonfus  foughte  newe  Ilandes.

P arias
Citrtana.
Pearles  for  belles
and  nedles

Peacockes.
Phesants.

The  Region  of
Canchiftt's

The  region  of
Ciniana

Pearles

Fter  that  the  Admyrall  hadde  incurred  the  indignacion  of  the  Kynge,  manye  of  his  companions,
fuche  as  hadde  been  broughte  vppe  with  him,  and  were  experte  Sea  menne,  decreede  to
fearche  other  partes  of  the  worlde  yet  vnknowen.  Among  which  number  was  Petrus  Alofifus,
who  with  a  fliippe  wel  furniflied,  fayled  to  Farias,  and  from  thence  to  Curtatia,  where  he
begon  to  exercyfe  merchaundife  with  the  inhabitantes,  receauinge  Pearles  for  belles  and
nedles.  Entring  alfo  into  the  land,  he  was  honourably  entertayned.  In  their  woodes,  he
faw  innumerable  Peacockes,  nothinge  vnlyke  vnto  oures,  fauing  that  the  males  differ  litle
from  the  females.  In  this  region  are  great  plentie  of  Phefantes.  Alonfus  departinge  from  henfe,  failed  to  the
region  of  Canchietes,  beynge  fixe  dayes  fayling  from  Curiana,  toward  the  Wefl.  In  this  region  is  great  abun-
daunce  of  golde,  Popingiayes,  Goffampine  cotton,  and  mofle  temperate  ayre.  From  hence  he  fayled  into
another  fruiteful  region,  but  inhabited  with  wilde  menne,  which  could  by  no  gentilnes  be  allured  to  frendfliippe.
Departinge  therefore  from  thence,  he  came  to  the  region  of  Ciniana,  whereas  pearles  are  found  in  great  plentie:
but  before  he  came  there,  he  chaunced  to  come  amonge  the  Canibales:  agaynfl  whom,  difchargeing  a  piece  of
ordinaunce,  he  droue  them  eafely  to  flight. But  Alonfus  laden  with  pearles,  returned  home  into  Spayne.

C  Howe  Pinzonus,  companion  to  the  Admirall,  fotight  newe  Ilandes.

Naked  people.
Gold  for  belles.

A  conflict  bptweTie
the  wild  men  and
the  Spanyardes

The  Region  of
Payra.

Woodes  of
Sanders.

The  tree  yat '

beareth  Cassia

fistula.

A  monsterous

beast.

Incentius,  otherwife  called  Fi?izonus  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifte.  1499.  prepared  foure  brigantines,
and  failed  fyrfi.  to  the  Ilandes  of  Cattaria,  and  from  thence  to  Caput  ucride.  From  whence
directinge  his  viage  toward  the  fouth  farre  beyonde  the  Equinoflial  lyne,  he  found  men  in  a
certayne  Hand,  but  fuch  as  he  could  by  no  meanes  concyle  vnto  him.  Therefore  leauinge
them,  he  came  to  another  lande,  in  whiche  w^ere  innumerable  naked  people,  diffirauling  that
thei  defired  to  ioyne  frendfhip  with  the  Spaniardes.  And  whereas  one  of  our  men  cafle  a
bell  amonge  them  oute  of  the  fliippe,  they  againe  cafl  to  the  Spanyardes  a  maffe  or  piece  of
golde :  which,  one  of  oure  companye  fomewhat  to  bolde,  attemptinge  to  take  vp,  they  fodeynlye  toke  him  and
caried  him  awaye  with  merueylous  fwiftenes :  but  our  men  leauing  their  fliippes,  made  hafl  to  help  their  fellowe,
in  fo  muche  that  the  matter  came  to  handflrokes.  This  conflict  was  fo  fliarpe,  that  our  men  hadde  much  a  doe
to  efcape  wyth  theyr  lyues,  by  reafon  of  the  fearfenes  of  the  barbarians.  Departing  therefore  from  thence,  they
fayled  toward  the  Northeafle,  and  came  to  the  region  of  Payra,  and  to  the  Ilandes  neare  aboute  the  fame  in
the  whiche  are  woodes  of  fanders  wherewith  the  marchauntes  lade  theyr  fliippes,  and  carie  it  into  other  coun-
treys.  In  this  Region  alfo  growe  the  trees,  whiche  beare  Cafsiajftula  of  the  befle  kynd.  There  is  alfo  founde
a  foure  foted  beafl  of  monflrous  fliape,  whofe  former  parte  is  lyke  vnto  a  wolfe,  fauing  that  the  feete  are  lyke
vnto  the  fete  of  a  man,  with  eares  like  an  owle:  Hauinge  alfo  beneath  his  comon  belye,  an  other  belye  lyke
vnto  a  purfe  or  bagge,  in  which  he  kepeth  his  yonge  whelpes  fo  longe,  vntyll  they  be  able  fafely  to  wander
abrode  alone,  and  to  geat  theyr  meate  withoute  the  helpe  of  theyr  parents.  The  whelpes  while  they  are  very
yong,  neuer  come  out  of  this  bagge  but  when  they  fucke.  This  portentous  beafl.  with  her  three  whelpes,  was
broughte  to  Ciuile  in  Spaine,  and  from  thence  to  Granata.
30

\0J  the  newe  India,  and  Ilandes  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,  &c.\

37

€1  Of  the  foure  nauigacions  r/Americus  Vcfputius  to  the  newe  Ilandes.

Mericus  Vefputius,  beyng  fent  with  Chrijlophonis  Columbus,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifl.  M.cccc.xcij.
at  the  commaundement  of  Ferdinando  King  of  Callile,  to  feke  vnknowen  landes,  and  wel
inflructed  in  fayling  on  the  fea,  after  a  fewe  yeares,  fet  fonvard  foure  viages  of  hys  owne
proper  charges.  That  is  to  witte,  two  vnder  the  fayd  King  Ferdinando,  and  two  other  vnder
Emanuel,  king  of  Portugale,  of  the  which  he  himfelfe  wryteth  after  this  maner.

C  The  fyyjle  viage  of  Axntncus  Vefputius.

N  the  yere  of  Chrid,  M.cccc.xcvij.  the.  xx.  daye  of  Maye,  we  came  with  foure  fhippes,  to
the  fortunate  Ilandes,  called  Infulce  fortunake,  where  the  North  pole  hath  his  eleuacion.
xxvij.  degrees,  and.  xl.  minutes.  And  from  thence  within  the  fpace  of.  xxvii.  dayes,
we  came  to  a  land  more  Wellwarde  then  the  fortunate  Ilandes,  where  the  North  pole
was  eleuate.  xvi.  degrees  :  where  alfo  we  founde  a  nacion  of  naked  people,  of  innumerable
multitude,  whiche  as  fone  as  they  fawe  vs,  fled  to  the  next  mountayne.  From  hence
within  two  dayes  fayling,  we  came  to  a  fafe  port  wher  we  founde  man)-e  men,  which
with  much  adoe,  we  could  fcarcely  allure  to  communicacion,  although  we  profered  them  belles,  lokinge
glaffes,  criflallyne  cuppes,  and  fuche  other  iewelles.  But  at  the  length  perceauing  our  good  wyll  and
liberalitie  towarde  them,  they  came  to  vs  by  heapes,  and  ioyned  frendfhyp  with  vs  without  all  feare.  They
goe  all  as  naked  as  they  came  forth  of  their  mothers  wombe.  They  fuffre  no  heare  on  their  bodie  fauing
only  on  theyr  head,  in  fo  much  that  they  pulo[f]ye  heares  of  their  browes.  They  are  all  fo  perfectelye
exercyfed  in  fwimminge,  that  they  can  continue  therein,  for  the  fpace  of  two  leages  without  any  thinge  to  beare
them  vp  and  efpeciallye  the  women.  Theyr  weapons  are  bowes  and  arrowes.  They  arme  theyr  arrowes  with
ye  teeth  of  beafles  and  fyflies,  bycaufe  they  lacke  Iron  and  other  metals.  They  kepe  warre  againfl  their
borderers  whiche  are  of  flraunge  language.  They  fyght  not  for  the  enlargeing  of  theyr  dominion,  forafmuche
as  they  haue  no  Magiflrates :  nor  yet  for  th[e]increafe  of  riches,  becaufe  thei  are  contente  with  their  owne  com-
modities :  but  onely  to  reuenge  the  death  of  theyr  prediceffours.  At  tlieyr  meate,  they  vfe  rude  and  barberous
fafliions,  lying  on  the  ground  without  any  table  clothe,  or  couerlet  They  flepe  in  certayne  greate  nettes  made
of  Goffampine  cotton  and  hanged  a  lofte  in  the  ayre  beetwene  trees.  Theyr  bodies  are  verye  fmothe  and  clene
by  reafon  of  theyr  often  wafhinge.  They  are  in  other  thinges  fylthy  and  withoute  fhame.  Thei  vfe  no  la\\-ful
coniunction  of  mariage,  but  euery  one  hath  as  many  women  as  him  lifleth,  and  leaueth  them  agayn  at  his
pleafure  The  women  are  very  fruiteful,  and  refufe  no  laboure  al  the  whyle  they  are  with  childe.  They
trauayle  in  maner  withoute  payne,  fo  that  the  nexte  day  they  are  cherefull  and  able  to  walke.  Neyther
haue  they  theyr  bellies  wrimpeled,  or  loofe,  and  hanginge  pappes,  by  reafon  of  bearinge  manye  children.  The}T
houfes  and  cabbens,  are  all  in  common.  Theyr  houfes  are  fafliyoned  lyke  vnto  belles  :  are  made  of  greate  trees
faftened  together,  couered  wyth  the  leaues  of  date  trees,  and  made  very  flronge  agaiml  wind  and  tempefles.
They  are  alfo  in  fome  places  fo  great,  that  in  one  of  them  fixe  hundreth  perfons  may  lodge.  Thei  vfe  euery
feuenth  or  eyght  yeare,  to  remoue  and  chaunge  theyr  dwelling  places,  becaufe  that  by  theyr  longe  continuaunce
in  one  place,  the  ayre  flioulde  bee  infected.  They  vfe  no  kynd  of  marchaundife  or  bying  and  felling,  be)'ng
content  onely  with  that  which  nature  hath  lefte  them.  As  for  Golde,  Pearles,  precious  flones,  iewelles,
and  fuche  other  thinges,  which  we  in  Europa  efleme  as  pleafures  and  delicates,  they  fette  noughte  by.  They
haue  no  kynde  of  come.  Theyr  common  fedinge,  is  a  certayne  roote  whiche  they  dr)-e  and  beate  and  make
floure  or  meale  therof.  They  eate  no  kynd  of  fleflie  except  mans  fleflie  :  for  they  eate  all  fuche  as  they  kyll  in
theyr  warres,  or  o[t]herwife  take  by  chaunce  When  we  had  thus  vewed  the  countreye,  and  confydered  the
maners  of  the  people,  we  determyned  to  fayle  further,  dovvne  by  the  landes  fyde,  and  came  after  a  few  daies,  to
a  certayn  hauen,  where  we  fawe  about  twentie  greate  houfes,  rayfed  vppe  muche  after  the  fafhion  of  belles.
There  came  vnto  vs  a  great  multitude  of  men  vnder  pretenfe  of  frendefliip.  Some  fwimminge,  and  fome  in
botes.  Who,  as  fone  as  thei  drew  neare  vnto  vs,  fodeynly  bent  theyr  bowes  againfl  vs,  where  we  defended  oure
felues  manfully.  In  this  bickeringe,  we  flewe  of  them  about  twentie,  beefyde  manye  that  were  wounded  :  But
of  our  men,  were  onlye  fyue  hurte,  whiche  were  all  perfectelye  healed.  Thus  departinge  from  this  hauen,  we
fayled  on,  and  came  to  anodier  nacion,  in  conuerfacion  and  tongue  vtterlye  diftering  from  the  fyrfL For

Edfn.  G  2  37

Ferdinando  lunge
of  castile.

I tuuUt  /ortunaUe.

Naked  menne.

Wylde  men
allured  wnth
gentlenes

People  expert  in
swimrainge.

Cabens  hanging
becweene  trees.

Women  in
commen.

Women  very
stronge  and
fruitful.

Hou<;cs  made  of
trees.

Houses  of
marueloas  bignes.

Ryches  and
supcrfluites
contemned

Bread  of  a  certain

roote.

Mans  flesh eaten

A  conflict

38

[Of  f/ic  ncive  India,  and  Ilandes  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,  &c.]

A  gentle  nacioii
Pjriits.

Fniites  \-nlike
viiio  ourcs.

Gold  everywhere,

Canibales.

An  expedicion
agaynst  ye
Cnnibalet

The  Equinoctial
line.

Catiibalet

Fyue  hundreth
pearles  for  one  bell.
Wine  of  the  iuyse
of  frutes

An  Hand  wythout
fresh  water.

Broad  leaucs.

The  land  of
Giauntes.

Pearles

A  hundreth  and
XXX.  pearles  in  one
shelfishe.
Antit^lia.
Caliciu  m

comming  oiite  of  our  fliippe,  we  were  very  frendly  entreated  of  them,  where  we  continued  for  the  fpace  of  nyne
dayes.  This  region  is  verye  foyre,  and  fruitefull,  hauinge  manye  pleafaunt  woodes,  which  continue  grenc  all  the
yearc  longe.  They  haue  fruites  innumerable,  vtterlye  vnlyke  vnto  oures.  The  Region  is  fituate  dyrectelye  vndcr
the  lyne,  called  Tropiais  Calicri.  The  inhabitantes  them  felues,  call  it  Farias.  Saylinge  farre  beyond  this
Region,  and  ouerpaiTinge  manye  countreyes  and  nacions,  fyndinge  Gold  euery  where,  (but  in  no  great
quantitie)  we  came  to  another  nacion  full  of  gentleneffe  and  humanitie,  where  we  refled.  xxxvij.  dayes.  Thefe
people  made  greuous  complaynte  vnto  vs,  that  there  was  not  farre  from  them,  a  ccrtayne  fearfe  and  cruell
nacion,  whiche  vexed  them  fore,  and  made  incurfion  into  theyr  countreye  at  a  certayne  tyme  of  the  yeare,
kyllinge  them  and  violentlye  carying  them  awaye,  to  th[e]intent  to  eate  them,  in  fo  muche  that  they  were  not
able  to  defend  them  felues  againfle  theyr  fearfeneffe.  Whiche  thinge  when  they  hadde  fo  lamentablye  declared
vnto  vs,  and  we  hadde  made  them  promyfe  that  we  woulde  reuenge  theyr  fo  manye  iniuries,  they  ioyned  vnto
oure  company  feucn  of  theyr  men.  Thus  we  wente  forward  :  and  after  feuen  dayes,  came  to  an  Ilande,  called
Jty:  where  thcfc  fearfe  people  dwelte.  Who,  as  fone  as  they  hadde  efpyed  vs,  came  armed  agaynfle  vs.
We  ioyned  with  them  in  battaile,  which  contynued  for  the  fpace  of  twoo  houres.  At  the  length  we
droue  them  to  flyghte,  and  flewe  and  wounded  a  greate  numbre  of  them,  and  toke.  xxv.  captiues.  But  of  our
men  was  onely  one  flayne,  and.  xxi.  wounded,  and  fliortely  after  reflored  to  health.  We  gaue  to  thofe  feuen
men  which  went  with  vs,  thre  menne  of  oure  prifouners  and  foure  women,  whom  with  greate  reioyfinge
they  aaried  with  them  into  theyr  countreye  :  and  we  returninge  home  toward  Spaine,  with  many  captiues  came
fyrfte  to  a  porte  of  Spayne  called  Caliciutn,  where  we  folde  oure  priefoners,  and  were  ioyefullye  receaued  :  In
the  yeare  of  Chrifl.  M.ccccxcix.  the.  xv.  daye  of  Octobre.

C  The  feconde  viage  ^Vefputius.

N  the  moneth  of  May  folowng  Vefputius  attempted  another  viage  and  came  by  Ilandes  of
Canaria,  euen  vnto  the  burninge  lyne,  called  Torrida  zona,  and  founde  a  lande  beeyonde  the
Equinoflial  line,  toward  the  South,  where  the  South  pole  is  eleuate  fyue  degrees.  And  wheras
he  coulde  fynde  no  apte  enteraunce  into  the  land,  and  fayled  vp  and  down  alonge  by  the
fame,  he  efpyed  a  bote  in  which  was  aboute  twentie  men  :  who,  as  fone  as  they  faw  the  Span-
yardes,  lepte  into  the  Sea  and  efcaped  all,  excepte  two,  which  they  toke.  In  theyr  bote  which
they  forfoke,  Avere  founde  foure  young  men  which  they  had  by  force  taken  oute  of  another
countrey,  hauinge  theyr  priuie  members  newelye  cutte  of  Thefe,  Vefputius  toke  into  his  fliippes  and  learned  by
theyr  fignes  and  tokens,  that  they  hadde  been  taken  of  the  Cauibalcs,  and  fhould  fhortly  haue  been  eaten.  But
departinge  from  thefe  cofles,  and  faylinge  on  forward,  they  came  to  a  commodious  hauen,  where  they  founde
muche  people,  with  whom  they  ioyned  frendfliyp,  and  fell  to  chaungeinge  of  ware,  receauinge  for  one  bell,  fyue
hundreth  Pearles.  In  this  lande  they  drinke  a  certayne  kynde  of  wyne,  made  of  the  iuyfe  of  fruites  and  fedes,
being  lyke  whyte  and  redde  fydar.  Departinge  from  hence,  and  faylinge  yet  further,  they  founde  a  certayne
Ilande  in  which  was  a  beaflly  kind  of  people,  and  fimple,  yet  very  gentle.  In  this  Ilande  is  no  freflie  water  :
but  they  gather  the  dew  which  in  the  night  feafon  falleth  vpon  certayne  leaues  muche  lyke  vnto  the  eare  of  an
Affe.  They  lyue  for  the  mofle  parte,  by  fea  fifhe.  They  haue  no  cotages  or  houfes  :  but  haue  certayne  broade
leaues,  wherewith  they  defende  them  felues  from  the  heate  of  the  Sunne,  but  not  from  fliowres  :  but  it  is  verye
lykely,  that  it  rayneth  but  lyttle  in  that  Hand  Vefputius  wyth  his  companye  departinge  from  hence,  fayled
vnto  another  Ilande  :  into  the  whiche  when  he  hadde  entered,  he  founde  certayne  cotages,  and  in  them  two  old
women,  and  three  young  wenches,  whiche  were  of  fo  greate  flature,  that  they  marueyled  thereat.  And  whereas
our  menne  flryued  with  them  to  bringe  them  to  the  fhyppe,  to  th[e]intente  to  haue  caryed  them  into  Spayne,
they  efpyed  cominge  toward  them  fyxe  and  thyrtie  men,  yet  of  muche  greater  flature  then  were  the  women,
bearing  with  them  bowes,  arrowes,  and  great  flakes  lyke  vnto  clubbes  :  at  the  fyghte  of  whome,  oure  menne
beinge  afrayd,  made  hafle  to  theyr  fliyppes.  But  thefe  Gyauntes  folowinge  them  euen  to  the  Seafyde,  bended
theyr  arrowes  towardes  the  Spanyardes,  vntyll  they  difcharged  two  pieces  of  ordinaunces,  wyth  the  horryble
founde  whereof,  they  were  immediatly  drieuen  to  flight.  Oure  menne  therefore  departinge  from  thence,  called
that  Ilande,  the  Ilande  of  Giauntes.  And  came  to  another  nacion,  which  frendlye  entreated  them,  and  offered
them  many  Pearles :  in  fo  muche  that  they  boughte.  xix.  markes  weyghte  of  pearles,  for  a  fmal  price.  They
gaue  vs  alfo  certayne  fhelfyflies,  of  the  whiche  fome  conteyned  in  them  a  hundreth  and  thyrtie  Pearles,
and  fome  fewer.  Departinge  from  thence  they  came  to  the  Ilande  oi  Antiglia,  which  Columbus  had  difcouered
a  few  yeares  before.  Leauinge  this,  they  fayled  directely  to  Calicium,  a  porte  of  Spayne,  where  they  were
honourablve  receaued.

[0/  the  newe  India ^  and  11  ancles  in  the  West  Ocea7t  Sea,  &c.]

39

C  The  thyrde  viage  of  Vefputius.

Efputius  beyng  called  from  Caflile  to  feme  Emanuel  the  King  of  Portugale,  in  the  yeare
of  Chrifle.  M.  ccccc.  ij.  the  tenth  daye  of  May,  departed  from  the  hauen  of  lifbume,  and
fayled  downe  by  the  coaftes  of  the  fea  Atlantike,  vntil  he  came  vnder  the  EquinoHial  lyne.
And  the.  xvij.  daye  of  Augufle,  they  arryued  at  a  certayne  lande  where  they  found  a  kind  of
beafl-ly  people.  This  land  is  fituate  toward  the  South,  fyue  degrees  beyonde  the  Equinoclial
lyne.  A  gieate  multitude  of  the  inhabitantes  wer  gathered  together,  and  as  wel  as  they  coulde
by  fignes  and  poyntinges,  defired  oure  men  to  come  alande  and  to  fee  thcjT  countrey.  There
were  two  in  the  fhippe,  which  toke  vpon  them  to  vewe  the  lande,  and  leame  what  fpyces  and  other  commodities
might  be  had  therein.  They  were  appoynted  to  returne  within  the  fpace  of  fiue  dales  at  the  vttermofl.  But
when  eyght  dayes  were  now  pafle,  they  whiche  remayned  in  the  fhippes,  heard  yet  nothing  of  thejT  returne :
wheras  in  the  meane  time  great  multitudes  of  other  people  of  the  fame  lande  reforted  to  the  Sea  fyde,  but  could
by  no  meanes  be  allured  to  communicacion.  Yet  at  the  length  they  broughte  certayne  women,  which  fliewed
them  felues  familier  towarde  the  Spaniardes:  Wherupon  they  fent  forth  a  young  man,  beyng  very  (Irong  and
quicke,  at  whom  as  the  women  wondered,  and  flode  gafmge  on  him  and  feling  his  apparell :  there  came  fodeynly
a  woman  downe  from  a  mountayne,  bringing  with  her  fecretely  a  great  flake,  with  which  fhe  gaue  him  fuch  a
flroke  behynde,  that  he  fell  dead  on  the  earth.  The  other  womenne  foorthwith  toke  him  by  the  legges,  and
drewe  him  to  the  mountayne,  whyle  in  the  mean  tyme  the  men  of  the  countreye  came  foorth  ^v•ith  bowes  and
arrowes,  and  fhot  at  oure  men.  But  the  Spaniardes  difchargeing  foure  pieces  of  ordinaunce  agaynfl  them,
droue  them  to  flighte.  The  women  alfo  which  had  flayne  the  yong  man,  cut  him  in  pieces  euen  in  the  fight  of
the  Spaniardes,  fhewinge  them  the  pieces,  and  rofling  them  at  a  greate  fyre.  The  men  alfo  made  certayn  tokens,
wherby  they  declared  that  not  pad.  viii.  dales  before,  they  had  in  lyke  maner  ferued  other  chriflian  men.
Wherfore  ye  Spaniardes  hauinge  thus  fuflayned  fo  greuous  iniuries  vnreuenged,  departed  with  euyl  wil :  fayling
therfore  further  toward  ye  fouth,  they  found  a  nacion  of  great  multitude,  and  of  much  genteler  condicions,  with
whom  thei  remained,  viij.  dayes,  bartering  and  changeing  ware  with  them.  Sayling  on  yet  farther,  they  went
beyond  ye  line  called  Tropiais  CaJ>ricor7ii, -whtrt  the  fouth  pole  is  eleuate.  32.  degrees:  and  wheras  in  thofe
parts  thei  found  no  great  riches,  they  failed  yet  further  fouthward  vntill  ye  pole  was  eleuate.  lij.  degrees:  where
thei  came  into  fuch  a  tempefle,  that  they  were  enforfed  to  gather  vppe  theyr  fayles,  and  to  rowe  only  with  the
mafle,  directinge  theyr  viage  toward  the  cofles  of  Ethiopia,  from  whence  they  returned  againe  to  Eifbume
in  Portugale.

C  The  fourth  viage  of  Vefputius.

His  nauigation  was  attempted  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifl.  M.  ccccc.  iij.  but  was  not  brought  to  the
ende  hoped  for,  by  reafon  of  a  miffortune  which  chaunced  in  the  goulfe  of  the  fea  Atlantike.
Vefputius  entended  in  this  viage  to  fayle  to  the  I  lande  of  Melcha,  beyng  in  the  Eafl,  in
which  is  fayde  to  be  great  ryches,  and  the  flacion  of  reflinge  place  of  all  fliippes  comming
from  the  goulfe  Gangeticus,  and  from  the  Indian  Sea.  This  Melcha,  is  fituate  more  toward
the  Wefl,  and  Calicut  more  enclininge  towarde  the  fouth.  Vefputius  came  fyrfl  to  ye  grene
Ilandes,  called  Infulcz  uerides:  and  fayled  from  them  to  Serralioua,  beynge  in  the  Southe
partes  of  Ethiopia:  from  whence  faylinge  on  yet  further,  he  fawe  in  the  middefl  of  the  fea  an  Hand,  high  and
merueylous:  where  alfo  the  Mfasfler].  Pilate  of  this  nauie,  lofl  his  fliippe  by  running  vpon  a  rocke:  but  all  the
mariners  efcaped.  This  fhippe  was  of  thre  hundreth  tunne,  and  had  in  it  al  tlie  power  of  the  nauie.  When
Vefputius  had  entered  into  the  Hand,  he  found  it  rude  and  vnhabited :  yet  was  it  full  of  byrdes :  but  had  no
beafles  except  Lifertes  with  forked  tayles,  and  Serpentes.  Thus  makinge  prouifion  for  neceffaries,  he  was
enforced  to  returne  to  portugale,  failing  of  his  purpofe.

The  sea  AtlantiVr

Three  of  the
Spanyardes  slayne
and  eaten.

Fearse  and  cniele
women.

'  A  ciuile  people

The  south  pole
eleuate.  lij-degrees.

LUbunie.

The  Hand  of
meUha,

Calicut.
InsuUt  Uft  ides

A  shippe  wraclct

Lisertes  and
Serpents

•59

40

\0f  the  neice  India,  and  Ilaiidcs  in  the  IVest  Ocean  Sea,  &€?[

The  Portiigales
liild  fortes  in  the
£aste  partes.

A  urea
chersoiifsiis.

The  great  and
ryche  cytie  of
Malaclui

Saracens.
Mataclui  besieged

The  king  fighteth
on  an  elephant.

Plenty  of  copper.

Marchaunts.
Spyces.

The  cytie  of  Gox

The  -Embassadors
make  a  league
wyth  A  lp)wnsus

The  west  I'.andes
Cuba,

lucatana.

Coziimel  or
S a  net  a  Crux.

Hispana.
Suger  presses.

The  wood  called
Cuaiacu?ii.

Medera  oi
Madera.

Sawe  miUes.
Fayre  tree

€1  How  the  king  of  Portngale  fubdncd  ccrtayn  places  i7t  India'.

and  of  the  ryche  Cytie  of  Malacha.

Orafmiiche  as  therefore  in  the  yeares  folowinge,  there  were  more  often  nauigacions  made  from
the  Wcfl  by  the  fouth  hito  the  Eaft,  and  the  Portugales  had  now  founde  a  fafe  paffage  by
ye  fea,  they  thought  it  expedient  for  theyr  better  fafetie,  to  make  certaine  fortifications  and
places  of  refuge  in  the  Eafle.  The  which  theyr  intent  the  better  to  accompHflie,  King
Emanuel  appoynted  one  Alphonfus  an  experte  man  on  the  fea,  to  be  captayne  of  this  viage.
\Vho,  defyring  to  reuenge  the  loffes  and  iniuries  which  the  Portugales  had  before  fuflained,
fayled  directly  to  Aurca  Cha-foncfus,  now  called  Afa/ac/ia,  a  merueylous  great  and  riche
citie,  whofe  king  is  an  infydel  of  the  fecte  of  the  Moores :  for  euen  thus  farre  was  the  fecte  of  Mahumet  extended.
A/^/io/i/its  therfore  at  his  coming  thether,  befieged  the  cytie,  and  made  warre  agaynfl.  the  Saracens  whiche  helde
the  fame.  In  this  conflict  a  grcate  noumber  of  theyr  enemies  beynge  flayne,  the  Portugales  entred  into  the
citie  by  forfe  and  kejrt  the  fame,  permitting  free  Kbertie  to  theyr  fouldiers  to  fpoyle,  kyll,  and  burne.  The
king  himfelfe,  fyghting  vpon  an  Elephante,  and  beyng  fore  wounded,  fledde  with  the  refydue  of  his  companye.
A  greate  numbre  of  the  Moores  were  flaine  with  the  lofTe  of  a  fewe  Portugales :  manye  were  taken,  and  great
fpoyle  caried  awaye,  in  the  whiche  were  feuen  Elephantes,  and  all  kyndes  of  ordinaunces  perteyning  to  the
warres,  made  of  copper,  to  the  noumbre  of  two  thoufande  pieces.  The  cytye  beinge  thus  taken  and  fackcd,
and  the  enemyes  drieuen  to  flyghte,  Alphonfus  the  Capitayne  the  better  to  prouyde  for  the  fauegarde  of  the
Chriflians,  buylded  a  (Irong  forte  at  the  mouth  or  entraunce  of  the  riuer  which  runneth  through  ye  citie.  At
this  time,  that  iu  to  witte,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrift.  M.  ccccc.  xij.  there  were  in  Malacha  many  flraungers  and  mar-
chauntes  of  dyuerfe  nacions,  whereby  the  cytie  was  repleniflied  with  great  ryches  and  abundaunce  of  fpyces.
They  of  theyr  owne  mocion,  defyred  to  make  a  leage  with  Alplionfus^  and  were  of  him  gently  receaued :  So
that  for  theyr  better  fafetie,  he  permitted  them  to  dwell  in  the  houfes  neare  about  the  forte.  And  by  this
meanes,  this  markette  fowne  was  reedified  and  broughte  to  muche  better  ftate  than  euer  it  was  before.  Thefe
thinges  thus  happely  atchiued,  and  al  thinges  in  Malacha  fet  in  good  order,  Alphonfus  leaning  in  the  forte  a
garrifon  of.  vi.  hundreth  valiante  fouldiours,  returned  into  India,  where  he  befieged  the  chiefe  caflell  of  the
cytie  of  Goa,  which  (he)  a  itwo.  yeares  beefore,  hadde  with  no  final  daunger  of  our  men,  and  great  flaughter  of
their  enemies,  fubdued  vnder  the  dominion  of  Emanuel  kynge  of  Portugale,  and  was  now  poffeffed  of  the  mores,
he  manfully  recouered  agayne,  and  enforfed  them  to  render  vp  the  fame.  Alfo  the  ambaffadours  of  the  Kinge
of  Narfingct,  the  Kinge  of  Cambaia,  and  the  King  of  Grofapha  with  the  legates  of  dyuers  other  kinges  and
Princes,  offered  them  felues  to  be  at  a  leage  wyth  Alphonfus,  and  thereupon  broughte  theyr  prefentes  vnto  hym.
No  leffe  power  and  dominion  obtayned  the  king  of  Spayne  in  the  Ilandes  of  the  Wefle  partes:  In  fo  muche
that  at  his  commaundement,  were  buylded  fixe  townes  in  the  Ilande  of  Cuba.  Lykewyfe  in  the  Ilande  of
lucatana.,  was  buylded  a  greate  cytie  wyth  fayre  houfes.  The  Ilande  of  Coziwiclla,  the  Spanyardes  called
Sancta  Crux,  beecaufe  they  came  fyrfle  thether  in  Maye,  on  the  daye  of  the  Inuencion  of  the  Croffe.  In  the
Ilande  oi  Hfpana  or  Hifpaniola,  were  erected.  28.  fuger  preffes,  to  preffe  ye  fugre  whiche  groweth  plentifully
in  certaine  canes  or  redes  of  the  fame  countrey.  From  hence  alfo  is  brought  the  wood  of  Guaiacum,  other  •
wyfe  called,  Lignum  Sanctum,  wherewith  dyuerfe  difeafes,  are  healed  by  the  order  of  the  newe  dyete.

C  Of  the  Hand  of  Medera,  and  the  fortunate  Ilandes,  otherwyfe

called  the  Ilandes  of  Canaria.

Etwene  Spaine  and  the  Ilandes  of  Canaria,  is  the  Ilande  of  Medera,  which  the  Spaniardes  in
our  time  founde  vnhabited  and  faluage.  But  perceauinge  that  the  foyle  thereof,  was  very
fruitefull,  they  burnt  the  woodes,  and  made  the  ground  apt  to  bringe  fooith  come,  and
buylded  many  houfes,  and  fo  tilled  the  fame,  that  at  this  day  is  no  where  founde  a  more
fruiteful  lande.  It  hath  in  it  many  fpringes  of  frefflie  water  and  goodly  ryuers,  vpon  the
which  are  bylded  manye  fawe  mylles,  wherewith  manye  fayre  trees,  lyke  vnto  Ceder  and
Cypreffe  trees,  are  fawed  and  cut  in  funder,  whereof  are  made  mofl  fayre  tables,  coberdes,
coferS;  and  chayres,  and  fuch  other  curious  workes  made  of  wood.  Thefe  trees  are  of  redde  colour,  and  fwete
40

\0f  the  newe  India,  and  Ilandes  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,  &c.]

41

fauour,  the  bodies  and  braunches  whereof  are  broughte  into  Spayne  in  great  plentie.  The  Kynge  of  Portugale
thought  it  goodc  to  plante  in  this  Hand,  that  kyndc  of  redes  in  which  fuger  groweth :  wherein  he  was  not
deceaued  in  his  opinion:  For  they  growe  there  mofle  fruitefully,  and  beare  fuger  which  excclleth  the  fagre  of
Candye  or  Sicilia.  There  were  alfo  vynes  broughte  out  of  Candye  and  planted  in  this  Ilande,  where  they
profper  fo  wel,  that  for  ye  mofle  parte  they  bring  forth  more  grapes  then  leaues,  and  thofe  very  great  In  this
Hand  is  alfo  great  plentie  of  Partriches,  wyld  doues,  and  Peacockes,  wild  bores,  and  diuers  kindes  of  other
beafles,  which  onely  poffefled  the  Hand  before  men  dyd  inhabite  the  fame.  Alfo  the  Ilandes  called  Infidce,
forhmatce,  (whiche  are  now  called  Catiaria,  for  the  multitude  of  dogges  which  are  in  them)  are  fayd  to  be  no
leffe  fruytefull.  Thefe  Ilandes  are  tenne  in  noumbre,  of  the  which  feuen  are  inhabited,  and  thre  remaine
defolate.  They  which  are  inhabited,  are  called  by  thefe  names:  FraHa  Imicea,  Magna  fors,  G^ancanaria,
Teneriffa,  Ginera,  Palma,  and  Ferrum.  At  Columbus  firfl  comming  thether,  the  inhabitantes  went  naked,
without  fhame,  religion,  or  knowledge  of  God.  But  in  fucceffe  of  time,  foure  of  the  greateft.  Ilandes  embrafed
the  Chriflian  faith:  They  haue  eche  of  them  a  priuate  language.  Tmeriffa  and  Gra?ica?iaria,  are  bigger  then
the  other.  Teneriffa  may  be  fene  afarre  of,  to  the  diflaunce  of  fiftie  leages,  in  a  fayre  and  clere  daye.  The
reafon  whereof  is,  that  in  the  middefl  of  the  Hand,  ryfeth  a  marueylous  great  and  flrong  rock,  which  is  thought
to  be.  XV.  leages  high,  and  cafleth  foorth  continuallye  greate  flames  of  fyre  and  pieces  of  brimflone,  as  doth  the
mount  Etna  in  the  Hand  of  Sicilia.  The  people  of  thefe  Ilandes,  lyue  with  barlye  bread,  fleffhe,  and  mylke.
They  haue  alfo  greate  plentie  of  Goates,  wylde  Affes,  and  Fygges. They  lacke  \vyne  and  wheate.

C  Whether  vnder  the  ^quinodlial  circle  or  bnrninge  lyne
{failed  Torrida  zona)  be  habitable  Regions.

||///x  fecundus  (otherwife  called  Eneas  Sihiius,)  of  this  queflion,  wryteth  in  this  maner.
It  hath  been  muche  doubted  whether  habitable  regions  maye  be  founde  vnder  the  Equi-
noHial  lyne.  EratoJlhe?ies  is  of  th[e]oppinion,  that  the  ayre  is  there  ver>'e  temperate.  So
thinketh  Polybiiis  alfo,  affirming  that  the  earth  is  there  verye  highe,  and  watered  with
many  fhowers.  Pofsidoniiis  fuppofed  that  there  is  no  Mountaynes  vnder  the  EquinoHial.
Some  thoughte  that  the  Eqidnonial  lyne  was  extended  beyond  the  earth  ouer  the  majne
Ocean  fea  :  whiche  thinge  the  Poete  Homere  femeth  to  infmuate,  where  he  faineth
that  the  horfes  which  drawe  the  chariote  of  [the]  funne,  drinke  of  the  Ocean  fea,  and  the  funne  it  felfe  to  take
his  norifhement  of  the  fame.  Whiche  fentence  Macrobius  alfO'  foloweth.  Neither  was  Albertus  Magnus  farre
from  this  opinion,  who  fuppofeth  yat  the  funne  draweth  vp  fo  much  moyflure  vnder  the  Egtiinoflial  circle,  as
engendreth  the  cloudes  vnder  the  poles,  where  by  reafon  of  th[e]excedinge  coldneffe,  ayre  is  continualli  turned
into  water.  But  Ptolomeus  thinketh  the  earth  to  bee  extended  beyonde  the  EquinoHial,  whereas  he  placeth  a
part  of  the  Hand  of  Taj>roba?ia,  vnder  the  FquinoHial,  and  alfo  many  nacions  of  the  Ethiopians.  Many
haue  thought  that  th[e]earthly  Paradyfe  Avas  fette  vnder  that  lyne  :  which  opinion  is  contrary  to  th[e]auctoritie  of
the  holy  fcripture  which  witneffeth  the  two  famous  fluddes  Tigris  and  Euphrates  to  fpringe  oute  of  Paradife  :
whiche  neuertheleffe  we  know  from  the  North  partes  to  fal  into  the  goulfe  called  Sinus  Perfims  :  but  as
concerninge  the  heate  vnder  the  EquinoH-ial  lyne,  the  neareneffe  of  the  funne,  or  the  directe  beames  of  the  fame,
are  no  fufficiente  caufes  why  vnder  that  line  fliould  be  no  habitable  regions,  if  we  confider  how  thofe  places  are
othervvyfe  fliadowed,  and  tempered  with  the  moyflenes  and  dewes  of  the  nightes,  which  are  all  the  yeare
throughe  of  equal  length  with  the  dayes.  Yet  wyl  no  man  denye,  but  that  vnder  the  Equinofual  throughoute
all  the  burninge  lyne  there  are  manye  wildernefles  and  defolate  places,  lacking  water,  and  incommodious  for  the
lyfe  of  man  :  Albeit  euen  in  Ethiopia,  people  dwell  neare  to  the  ryuers  and  woodes.  Plinie  alfo  fayth  that  one
Dalian,  and  Arijlocleon,  and  Bion,  and  Ba/ilides,  went  Southward  beyonde  Meroa;  whiche  is  almofl.e  vri'.er  the
EquinoHial.  And  that  Simonides  who  writte  the  defcripcion  of  Ethiopia,  dwelte  fyue  yeres  in  Meroee  :  whiche
Ilande,  (beeynge  in  the  fyrme  lande  and  compaffed  aboute  wyth  the  Ryuer  of  Ni/us)  he  afT>Tmed  to  bee  fituate.
972.  thoufande  pafes  beeyonde  Syenes  of  Egypte,  as  the  fearchers  of  Nero  declared.  But  at  Sienes  the
Aftronomers  appoynte  the  fommer  conuerfion  of  the  funne  :  and  that  there  the  burninge  lyne  beginneth,  being
diflaunte  from  the  ^quinoHial  foure  and  twentie  degrees,  that  is  twelue  thoufande  furlonges.  Wherby  we  maye
perceaue  that  Meroce  is  fituate  fome  what  beeyonde  tlie  myddefl  betwene  the  Equinodlial  and  Sienes.
Ptolomeus  alfo  defcrybeth  the  Region  of  Agifimba  to  bee  inhabited  beeyonde  the  EquinoBial.  Lykewyfe  the
Mountaynes  of  the  Mone,  called  Montes  Luna,  out  of  the  which,  the  fennes  or  marifes  of  the  riuer  Nilus  haue
their  fpring and  originall. He  addeth  hereunto  that  there  are  certayne  Ethiopians  called  Anthropophagi,

41

SugCT

Vynes

The  Ilandes  of
Canaria.

Christians

A  mcmnt  of

burninge

brimstone.

Fygge

Libr.  i.  Capit  t^

Era  thasiJuTus.

Polibius.

Possidonita.

The  Eqidnoctial

line

The  poet  Homere

MacrMus.
Albertus  Ma  putt.

Ptolomc  us.
Taprobana
Ethiopes

Tigris  and
Euphrates.

Sinus  Persic tts.

The  nearenes  of
the  sunne.

Temperatenes
vnder  the
EquinoctiaL

Torrida  ttma.

Etkicpa,
Plinie.

The  Hand  of
Meroa

Sjrenes  in  Egipte.
The  conuersion
of  the  sunne.
Of  the  furlonges
of  Italie  viii.  doe
inake  one  Iialicn
myle,  conte>-ning
a .  m.  [thousand]
pases.
Agisimttu
MoHtes  LuMti.
Palundes  S'ili.
Ethiopes

42

\0f  tJic  itcive  India,  and  Ilaudcs  in  the  West  Ocean  Sea,  &c]

Habitable  regions
how  f.irre
extended.

Clima,

that  is,  fuch  as  eate  mans  fleflie,  which  inhabite  regions  beyond  the  Equ'monial  about  the  fpace  of.  xvi.
degrees.  And  thus  the  inhabitacion  of  men  is  founil  to  be  extended,  x.  hundreth  thoufand  pafes  beyonde  the
Equinodia/  lyne.  ^^'hiche  fpace  conteyneth  no  leffe  then  two  clynics  of  earth.  And  a  clynie  is  a  porcion
of  the  worlde  betwene  South  and  North,  wherein  is  variacion  in  length  of  the  daye,  the  fpace  of  halfe  an
houre.

C  F

1  n  IS.

C  Thus  endeth  the  fyfth  bake  of  Sebajiian  M^mjter,

of  the  landes  of  Afia  the  greater,  and  of  the

newe  foimde  landes,  and  I  landes.

1553.

C  Imprinted  at  London,  in  Lom-

barde  Strde,  By  Edwai^d

SiUion.

C

To  at  aduenturers,  andfiuhe  as  take  in  ha7ide  greate  enterpryfes.

Who  hath  not  of  fowrenes  felte  the  bitter  tad,
Is  not  worthy  of  fwetenes  to  take  his  repaft.
To  cracke  the  nutte,  he  mufl.  take  the  payne,
I'he  which  would  eate  the  carnell  fayne.
Who  that  of  bees  feareth  the  flinge,
Shal  ;;eucr  by  hcny  liaue  great  wonninge.
As  the  fwete  Rofe  bringeth  forth  the  thorne,
So  is  man  truely  to  ioye  and  payne  borne.
The  byrde  vpon  hope  byldeth  her  nefle,
Where  oftentymes  (he  hath  but  euyll  refle,
Yet  is  fhe  not  therby  drieuen  to  fuche  feare,
But  yat  fhe  performeth  the  fame  the  nexte  yeare.
Much  cafling  of  periles  doth  noble  corage  fwage
Yet  do  not  I  commende  rafhenes  or  outrage.
What  foles  do  fable,  take  thou  no  hede  at  all,
For  what  they  know  not,  they  cal  phantafLical.
Nought  venter  nought  haue,  is  a  faying  of  old.
Better  it  is  to  blow  the  cole,  then  to  fyt  a  cold.
Fortes  fortima  adhniat,  the  Latin  prouerbe  faith,
But  fayleth  to  fuch  as  faynt  and  lacke  fayth.
God  giueth  al  thinges,  but  not  ye  bul  by  ye  home
The  plowman  by  trauaile  encreafeth  his  corne.
As  fortune  fauereth  thou  mayfl  be  riche  or  poore,
As  Crefus  or  Ints  that  beggeth  at  the  dore.

42

C  Omnis  iafla  fit  alca.

43

o

[The  Third  EngHsh  book  on  America.]

THE  DECADES

txjefl  3!ntife,

faiptiotiot  tije  moRc  tpc!}c  anD  (arg?  lanDcs

pemgngng  to  tljc  inlicritauEtcc  of  tijs  Umgcs

of^papp*  3ittt5jetoDicijtljeDm3suti'iai)sc

map  notottip  coitf^Uec  toljatcommoDitlcmn?

Ijcrcljp  cfjauucc  to  rlje  Ijolc  cljiiaianteoiit?  m

tgmc  £0  come,  but  alfo  leacKC  manp  recreates

toncljpngc  tl)t  laiiDgstlje  ft  a^anti  tOc  Oarccs,

hm  iim^me  to  fee  Itnotbe  to  al  fuci)  as  iT;3i

attcinpte  anpnauisations^o^  otljctbirc

t^mc  tselite  to  bcljolDe  ti^c  ni'auge

atiD  luconDcrfitU  boo^^cs  o^

fSoh  ntitj  natwrct

i3t?jpttcu  itt  tfje  Satsne  toinige  fe*^  i^ctcc

i39«ii;t?j  of  i^nfilcrja,  mh  tcaufj

lateD  mto  ^nglinlljc  h^

In  jcdibus  Cinlheltnt  PoweU>
ANNO. I5r55,

c

The  table  of  the  conteiites  of  this  booke.

45

Befyde  the  Decades  {the  table  of  whofc  conlcntcs  yo7v  may  reade  in  the  efide  of  the  booke  [see  pp.  391-397.])  arc.  conteyned

furthermore  in  this  boooke  thefe  thynges  fot/owynge.

149.
171.

[/.  186.]
\_p.  201.]

174.  [/.  208.]

175.  [/.  210.]

176.
177.
180.
181.

[/.  211.]
[p.  211.]
[/•  213.]

[/.  215.]

184.  [A  217.]

185.  [/.  218.]

204. [/.  233.]

205.
206.

[/•  234-]
[A  235-1

208.
210.

[A  237-]
[A  239.]
213.  [A  241.]
213.  [/.  242.]

C  Of  the  landes  and  Ilandes  lately  founde. . . Folio.
The  popes  bulla  and  donation , . .  167.  and.

The  hyflorie  of  the  Wefte  Indies,  wrytten  by  Gonzalus
P'crdinandus.  ........

Tlie  ordinarie  nauigation  from  Spayne  to  the  Wefle  Indies.
Of  two  notable  thynges  as  touchynge  the  Weft  Indies:
and  of  the  greate  ryches  brought  from  thenfe  into  Spaine.
Of  the  golde  mines  and  maner  of  woorkynge  in  them. .
The  maner  of  fyffliynge  for  pearles. ....

The  familiaritie  that  the  Indians  haue  with  the  deuyl. .
Of  temperate  and  habitable  regions  vnder  the  Equinoc-

tiall  line.  &c.  .

Of  dyuers particular thynges, as woormes,  ferpentes,

beaftes,  foules.  &c.

Oftrees,fruites,andplantes,&c.  l94.[/.225.]  [Of  ReedesorCanes.196. /.227.]
Of  the  venemous  apples  wherwith  the  Canibales  inueneme
theyrarrowe3.i99.[/.229.]  Of  fyffhes&theyr  maner  of  fyffliynge.  201.  [A230.]
Of  the  ryfynge  and  faulynge  of  owre  Ocean  fea  and  the
fouth  fea  called  the  fea  of  Sur. .....

Of  the  ftreight  of  lande  beinge  betwene  the  north  and
fouth  fea. .........

Howe  thynges  of  one  kynde,  dyffer  by  the  nature  of  the
place :  and  of  the  beaftes  cauled  Tygers-
Of  the  maners  and  cuflomes  of  the  Indians  oi  the  firme
lande  and  of  theyr  women. ......

Of  the  ftandes  Hifpaniola  and  Cuba. ....

Of  the  I  lande  of  Cuba  and  other. , ....

Of  the  lande  of  Baccallaos. ......

Other  notable  thynges  gathered  owt  of  dyuers  autours:
and  of  the  vniuerfall  carde  and  newe  worlde.
A  difcourfe  of  the  maruelous  vyage  made  by  the  Span-
yardes  rounde  about  the  worlde. .....

Tlie  order  of  the  ftarres  abowt  the  pole  Antartike.
The  prices  of  precious  ftones  and  fpices  with  their  weightes
and  meafures  as  they  are  foulde  bothe  of  the  Moores  and
Gentyles. .........

Of  the  weightes  of  Portugale  and  India,  and  howe  they  agree.

Of  the  dooues  of  the  Ilande  of  Madera.

Of  the  Ilande  of  faynt  Thomas  vnder  the  Equinoctial  line.

The  debate  and  ftrife  betwene  the  Spanyardes  and  Portu-

gales  for  the  diuifion  of  the  Indies  and  the  trade  of  fpyces.

Of  the  pole  Antartike  and  the  ftarres  about  the  laiBe :

and  of  the  qualitie  of  the  regions  and  difpofition  of  the

elementes  abowt  the  Equinoctiall  line  :  Alfo  of  certeyne

fecreates  touchynge  the  arte  of  faylynge.

A  difcourfe  of  dyuers  vyages  and  wayes  by  the  which

fpices,  precious  ftones,  and  golde  were  brought  in  owlde

tyme  from  India  into  Europe  and  other  partes  of  the  worlde.

Alfo  of  the  vyage  to  Cathay  and  Eafte  India  by  the  northe

fea  :  And  of  the  viages  of  Sebaftian  Cabot. .

Of  the  vyages  to  Mofcouia  and  Cathay.

A  breefe  defcription  of  Mofcouia

The  defcription  of  the  north  regions :  and  how  they  are

habitable,  contrary  to  th[e]opinion  of  the  owlde  wryters.

Scondia.  267.  [p.  298.] Gronlande.  268.  [p.  299.] Iflande.

Laponia.  270.  [A  301.]  Norway

Suetia  or  Suethlande.  275.  [/.  305.] Gothia  or  Gothlande.

Finlande  and  Eningia.  276.  [/.  306.]  Bothnia.

The  dyfference  of  regions  and  caufes  of  gi-eat  cities.

214.  [/.  245.]

215.  [/.  246.]
222.  [/.  253.]

233-
239-
239-
240.

[p.  263.]
[A  269.]
[/■  270.]
[/.  270.]

240.  [A  271.]

245-  [/•  277-]

249.
249.
259-

283.]

283.]

264.
269.

■273-
276.

275-
277.

[p-

IP-  ._
[/.  291.]

[A  29S-]
[/.  300.]

[A  303]
[A  306.]
[/■  305-]
[/•  307-]

294-  [/>■  322]

297.  [/.  324-]

298.  [p.  325.J

311.  [/.  338.]
1 1-  [A  339]
[/•  339]

o
312

The  hyftorie  of  Paulus  louius  of  the  ambatTade  of  great

Bafilius  Prince  of  Mofcouia  to  pope  Clement  the  feucnth. 278.  [/.  308.]

Other  notable  thynges  as  concemynge  .Mofcouia,  gathered

owt  of  the  bookes  of  Sigifmundus  Liberus. . . . 289.  [/.  318.I

The  defc  -iption  of  the  regions  and  people  lyinge  North

and  Eafte  from  Mofcouia  to  the  ryuer  Petzora  and  the  pro-

uince  of  lugaria  and  the  ryuer  Obi.  &c.

Of  the  famous  ryuer  of  Tanais

More  directly  from  Mofcouia  to  Cathay.

Of  the  Tartars.  299 .  [p.  327.]  The  nauigation  by  the  frofe'n  fea.'303.  Yp.  330.J

The  letters  miffuie  which  kynge  Edwarde  the  vi.  fent  to  the

kynges,  princes,  and  other  potentates  inhabitynge  the  north

eaft  partes  of  the  worlde  towarde  the  Empire  of  Cathay.  306.  and.  308.  [/.  333.]

The  letters  of  the  prince  of  Mofcouia  fente  to  kynge

Edwarde.  319. [  T/iese  are  not  included  in  the  work.^

Other  notable  thynges  as  touchynge  the  Indies :  and  of

the  foreknowleage  that  the  poet  Seneca  had  of  the  fynd-

ynge  of  the  newe  worlde  and  other  regions  not  then  knowen. 310. \j>.  337.]

Of  the  greate  Ilande  whiche  Plato  cauled  Atlantica  or  Atlan-

tide. 310. [/.  337.]  Of  the  coloure  of  the  Indians.

Why  they  were  cauled  Indians

The  fyrft  difcoueiynge  of  the  Weft  Indies.

What  maner  of  man  Chriftopher  Colon  was,  and  howe  he

came  fyrft  to  the  knowleage  of  the  Indies.

What  laboure  and  trauaile  he  tooke  in  attemptynge  his

firfte  vyage  to  the  Indies

Of  newe  Spaine  cauled  Noua  Hifpania  or  Mexico.

Of  Peru.  316.  [/.  343.]  Ofthegreat  r>'uer  cauled  Rio  de  la  Plata;'3"i6.''[;>.  343!]

Of  the  hygher or fuperior  India  cauled  India  Tercera

or  Terciera. .........

Ageyne  of  the  landes  of  Laborador  and  Baccalaos.
The  difcouerynge  of  the  lande  of  Florida.
An  opinion  that  Europe,  Africa,  and  Afia,  are  Ilandes :
and  of  certeyne  Nauigations  abowt  the  fame.  . . 320.  [/.  346.]

That  the  Spanyardes  haue  fayled  to  the  Antipodes  whiche
inhabite  the  vndermoft  halfe  of  the  baule  of  the  earth,  con-
trary to  th[e]opinions  of  the  owlde  wr>'ters. . . . 321.  [/.  347.]

Who  fyrft  founde  thenedleof  thecompafteandthe  vfethere-
of.  322.  \J>.  348.] The  fituation  and  byggenelTe  of  the  earth
What  degrees  are.  .......

A  demonftration  of  the  roundenefTe  of  the  earth. .
What  credit  owght  to  be  gyuen  to  wryters  as  touch}Tige
the  woorkes  of  nature. .......

The  preface  to  the  booke  of  metals

Of  the  generation  of  metalles  and  theyr  mines,  with  the

maner  of  fyndynge  the  fame. 327.

Of  the  mine  of  golde  and  the  qualitie  therof.  . . 334.

Of  the  myne  of  fyluer 3^0.  \jy.

The  maner  of  woorkynge  in  the  golde  mines  of  Eg}-pte

in  oulde  tyme ' . 342. [/.  369.]

The  difcription  of  the  two  %7agos  made  owt  of  Englande
to  Guinea  in  Afrike. . . .

313.  \J>.  340.]

313. [/.  340.]
315.  [/.  342.]

317-
318.
319-

[A  344-]
[A  344-]
[/•345-]

324-
324.

[/•  349]
[/•  349  ]
[/•350]

325-  [/•351I
326.  [/.  355.]

[A  356.1
[A  362.]
' 366.]

A  briefe  defcription  of  Afrike.

The  fyrfte  vyage  to  Guinea.  .

The  feconde  vyage  to  guynea.

The maner of fyndynge  the  Longitude

dyuers  wayes. .....

A  newe  maner  of  fyndynge  the  Longitudes  of  regions

of  regions

by

j43'
344-
345-
350.

373-1
374-1
375I
379-1

360.  [/.  3S9.]

361.  [/.  390.]

A  briefe  rehearfall  of  the  contentes  of  the  bookes  of  the  Decades,iS;c.  [/.  311.]

FINIS.

C  The  interpretacion  of  certeyne  luoordcs.

C  Continente  (that  is)  the  firme  lande  not  inclofed

with  water,  or  no  Ilande.
A  Caraucl  or  Cancel,  a  kynde  of  fliyppes.
Hetni/pkerium,  the  halfe  globe  of  the  earth  and

water.
Pefus,  a  ducate  and  a  halfe.

Equinoctial,  the  line  that  diuideth  the  heauen  and
the  earthe  in  the  myddeft  betwene  the  two  poles,
in  the  which  when  the  fonne  commeth,  the  days
and  nyghtes  are  of  equal  length

Clime,  is  a  portion  of  the  worlde  betwene  north
and  fouth.

The  hidian  language.

Paraileles,  are  lines  whereby  the  fonne  pafTynge

caufeth  variation  of  tyme.
Gaiii  Manimoni,  Monkeys.
Schoentis,  is  a  fpace  of.  xl.  furlong(S.
Wojl,  is  an  Italian  [?  Kujjlan\  mile.
Colonie,  an  habitacion.

C  Canoa,  a  boate  or  barke.
Caciqui,  kynges  or  gouernours,
Zemes  an  Idole.
Tuyra,  the  deuyll.

Machana,  a  fworde.  Quines,  preftes.

Areitos,  fonges  or  balades.  Chiuy,  a  man.

To)ia,  the  moone.  Ira,  a  woman.

Tonatico,  the  foonne.  Boa,  a  houfe.

C  Note  that  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  is  nowe  cauled  San  Domingo  by  reafon  of  the  chiefe  city  fo  named

cauled  lancti  lohannis,  or  Burichena,  is  otherwyfe  cauled  Boriquen.

Cauni,  golde.
Mayani,  nothyrige.  &C.

Alio  faynte  lohns  Ilande

4S

46

t POTENTISSIMO AC SERENISSIMO

PIIII.IPPO,  AC  SERENISSIM^E  POTENTISSIMyEOVE  MARINE,

Dei  gratia  Regi  ac  Reginae,  Angliae,  Franciae,  Neapolis,  lerufalem,  et

Hiberniae  :  Fidei  defenforibus,  Principibus  Hifpaniarum  et  Sicilias,

Archiducibus  Auftriae, Ducibus Mediolani, Burgundias,  et

Brabantias,  comitibus  Hafpurgi,  Flandriae,  et  Tirolis,

Richardus  Edenus  perpetuam  optat  foelicitatem.

VM  IN  PRIMO  VESTRO  ingreffu  in  banc  cele-
berimam  Londini  vrbem  (illuftrifsimi  Principes)
cernercm  quanto  omnium  applaufu,  populi  con-
curfii,  ac  ciuium  frequentia,  quanto  infuper
fpectaculorum  nitore,  nobilium  virorum  fplendore,
equorum  multitudine.tubarum  clangore,  caeterifque
magnlficis  pompis  ac  triumphis,  pro  dignitate
veftra  accepti  eftis  dum  omnes  quod  fui  eft  officij
facere  fatagebant,  vbi  in  tanta  hominum  turba  vix
vnus  reperiatur  qui  non  aliquid  agendo  aduentum
veftrum  gratulabatur,  ccepi  et  ego  quoque  aliorum
exemplo  (propiusprefertimad  meaccedentibus  Cel-
fitudinibus  veftris)  tanto  animi  ardore  ad  aliquid
aeendum  accendi  ne  folus  in  tanta  hominum  corona
otiofus  viderer,  quod  vix  me  continebam  quin  in  aliquam  extemporariam  orationem
temere  erupuiffem,  nifi  et  praefentise  veftrae  maieftas,  et  mea  me  obfcuritas  a  tam  audaci
facinore  deterruiffent.  Verum,  cum  poftea  penitius  de  hac  re  mecum  cogitaffem,  con-
fyderaffemque  quam  hsec  omnia  alioqui  per  fe  laude  digna,  veftris  tamen  meritis  ac
regise  dignitatis  eminentiae  comparata,  plebeia  ac  ludicra  videantur,  coepi  denuo  cum
animo  meo  reputare  qua  in  re  ita  cum  immortali  rerum  memoria  fcelicifsimum  veftrum
aduentum  gratularer,  vt  inde  nominis  veftri  fama  et  fplendor,  non  vllis  fpe61aculorum
temporarijs  oftentis,  fed  rerum  geflarum  gloria,  ad  pofteros  perpetuo  emanaret.  Excutio
ftatim  diuitias  meas.  Perfcrutor  fi  quid  ex  penu  meo  depromere  poffum  quod  me  ad
aliquid  agendum  veftris  heroicis  virtutibus  dignum  excitet.  Sed  cum  penes  me  nihil  tale
reperio,  agnofco  nuditatem  meam,  atque  ad  vos  confugio.  Patrum,  auorum,  proauorum,
atque  atauorum  vitas  et  fa6la  recolo.  Syluam  rerum  geftarum  video,  totque  precla-
rifsimorum  principum  propaglnes,  vt  merito  ab  ipfis  heroibus,  Saturno  videlicet,  loue,  ac
Hercule,  cseterifque  theanthropis,  originem  duxiffe  videantur.  Quod  cum  ita  fit,  non
aliunde  profe6to  quam  ex  hac  fylua  materies  mihi  petenda  erit  quo  in  ment'bus
hominum  et  aeterna  rerum  memoria,  perpetua  fpeftacula  rerum  a  vobis  et  progenitoribus
veftris  praeclare  geftarum,  in  mundi  theatro  ab  omnibus  cum  fumma  nominis  veftri  fama
ac  veneratione  cernantur.  Cum  itaque  inter  csetera  a  maioribus  veftris  praeclare  gefta,
nihil  fit  admirabilius  aut  maiori  laude  dignum,  quam  quod  incrediblH  fiducia  et  plus  quam
Herculels  laborlbus  fuperato Oceano, fcelicifsimo  tandem  euentu, Indiae Occldentalis

The  Epijlle.

47

ditifsimas  Insiilas  atqiie  Contlnentis  amplifsimas  reglones,  mortalium  pnmi  inuenerunt,
in  quibiis  infinitas  incolarum  myriades  ad  fidem  Chrlfti  conuerterunt  (quo  nihil  auguflius
aiit  Chrlftianis  principibus  magis  dignum  excogitari  poteft)  vifus  fum  mihi  quod  non  alia
in  re  magis  poffem  foelicitati  veflrae  merito  gratulari,  quam  fi  noftris  quoque  hominibus
quibus  haec  ha6lenus  nihil  aut  parum  cognita  funt,  innotefcere  faciam,  vt  perfpectis
illorum  fimul  et  veftrorum  amplifsimis  imperijs  non  fine  diuina  prouidentia  (vt  credere
par  eft)  ad  ipfos  vfque  Antipodes  etPLVS  VLTRA  terminatis,  omnes  boni,  ipfa  rerum
magnitudine  in  admirationem  du61i,  vos  ament  et  venerentur  :  Malis  vero  et  improbis,
OS  obflruatur  fi  quam  in  maledicendo  voluptatem  capiunt.  Haec  dum  cogito,  venit  mihi
in  mentem  quod  oHm  adolefcens  perlegi  Decades  de  Nouo  Orbe  a  Petro  Martyre  ab
Angleria,  illuflrifsimi  Ferdinandi  regis  Catholici,  ac  tui  (Serenifsime  rex)  proaui  oratore,
Latine  confcriptas,  atque  facrse  Csefarise  maieflati  patri  tuo  dedicatas,  Tanti  itaque
autoris  fide  et  eruditione  motus,  eum  prse  caeteris  in  noftram  linguam  traducendum  fufcepi,
quod  non  folum  vt  hiftoricus  res  Indicas  cum  fumma  fide  fcriptis  mandauit,  fed  etiam  vt
philofophus  (quod  in  caeteris  fcriptoribus  defyderatur)  naturalium  rerum  occultas  caufas
reddit,  ac  admirabilium  naturae  operum  (quibus  haec  vefhra  India  plena  eft)  rationes
inueftigat.  Atque  vt  huius  Indiae  pofterior  ftatus  cognofcatur,  quantufque  thefaurus  auri,
gemmarum,  aromatum,  aliarumque  ditifsimarum  mercium  ac  annui  cenfus  inde  quotannis
in  Hifpaniam  aduehitur,  adiunxi  do6lifsimi  viri  Gonzali  Ferdinandi  Ouiedi  libellum
quern  ille  Indicae  hiftoriae  generalis  Summarij  titulo  infcripfit,  eiufdemque  illuftrifsimi
Caroli  Imperatoris  patris  tui  nomini  confecrauit :  Caeteraque  plurima  ex  recentioribus
fcriptoribus  excerpfi,  quae  mihi  in  tam  immenfa  rerum  memorabilium  bibliotheca,  praecipue
adnotanda  videbantur.  Quae,  quanta  et  qualia  funt,  quantifque  parafangis,  omnium
heroum  ac  Argonautarum  res  geftas  toto  terrarum  orbe  tantopere  celebratas  fuperent,
haec  mea  fequens  praefacio  vulgari  fermone  ad  huius  hiftoriae  lectores  populumque
Anglicum  confcripta,  fatis  prolixa  oratione  indicabit,  adeo  vt  idem  hie  repetere  fuperua-
caneum  fit,  minimeque  neceffarium,  quandoquidem  Anglica  lingua  tibi  Serenifsima
Regina  vernacula  eft,  idemque  illuftrifsimo  Regi  quod  tibi  fcriptum  aut  di6lum  exiftimen,
non  folum  quod  diuino  vinculo  vnum  fitis  in  carne  vna,  fed  etiam  quod  eadem  animi
lenitate,  humanitate,  affabilitate,  caeterifque  virtutibus,  non  minus  animi  moribus  quam
carnis  vinculo  vnum  fitis.  Sed  neque  hie  opus  eft  vt  ego  Latino  fermone  veftras
virtutes,  animi  moderationem,  clementiam,  religionem,  pietatem,  educationem,  caftitatem
foelicitatem,  fortunas,  opes,  munificentiam,  vi6lorias,  imperia,  ftemmata,  caeteraque  huiuf-
modi  multa  enumerem,  cum  praefertim  vir  nobilis  et  doctus  Leonhardus  Goretius  Polonus
de  his  omnibus  deque  foelicifsimo  veftro  matrimonio,  oratlonae  fatis  fufa  ira6lauit,  in  qua
nihil  pretermifit  quod  ad  Celfitudinis  veftrae  et  progenitorum  veftrorum  gloriam  virtute
partam,  pertineat.  Caeterum  cum  regiae  veftrae  virtutes  nominifque  fplendor  ac  regnorum
amplitudo  alias  per  vniuerfa  Chriftiani  orbis  imperia  fatis  nota  fint,  nifi  forte  ibi  minime
vbi  maxime  nota  effe  deberent,  nempe  in  hoc  Angliae  regno,  ideo  opere  praecium  et  rem
omnibus  bonis  gratam,  quodque  mei  eft  officij  erga  Celfitudines  veftras  me  fa61nrum
exiftimaui,  fi  haec  noftris  (vt  dixi)  hominibus,  noftraque  lingua  ob  oculos  contemplanda
propofuero.  Quod  quam  foeliciter  aut  dextre  a  me  factum  fit,  aliorum  efto  indicium
Quam  vero  fidelitur,  fyncere,  ac  animo  in  Maieftatis  veftras  propenfo  hoc  idem  aggrefius
fum,  teftis  eft  mihi  confcientia  mea  in  confpectu  illius  qui  homirxum  corda  et  renes
fcrutatur.  Macte  igitur  virtutis  iftius  animi  veftri  eftote  Serenifsimi  Principes,  atque  Diuino
auxilio  freti,  pergite  ea  qua  coepiftis  fiducia,  huius  deploratae  ac  collapfae  reipublicae  noftrae
ftatum,  priftino  decori  reftituere,  id  quod  omnes  a  vobis  expe6tant  atque efflagitant,

47

48

The  Epijlle.

polllcentes  infiiper  vobis  in  eo  negotio  fuam  operam  in  nullo  defutiiram.  Ne  terreat  vos
quorundam  canum  latratus  qui  bonis  omnibus  oblatrant,  et  tunc  dcfinent  latrare  cum
definent  viuere.  Vulgatifsimum  femper  fuit  improbos  homines  viris  probis  vel  propter
inuidiam  vel  propter  difsimilitudinem,  folere  latrare.  Et  tamen  ille  probus  femper  habitus
eft,  quem  peruerfi  maxime  improbauerint.  Non  eft  igitur  curandum  quid  de  nobis
homunculi,  fed  quid  viri  boni  loquantur.  Cogitate  (Serenifsimi  Principes)  quod  mag-
nanimitate  ac  maiorum  infignijs,  aquilis  et  leonibus  fimiles  eftis.  Aquilae  natura
eft,  alta  petere,  et  aduerfus  folis  radios  in  altum  volare.  Leonis  proprium  eft  parcere
fubie61is  et  debellare  fuperbos.  Generofus  equus  per  plateas  incedens,  canes  vt
animalcula  imbella  praeterit  non  perturbatus,  Virtus  non  exercita  (inquit  Seneca  ad
Neronem)  paruam  laudem  meretur.  Non  admodum  magnificum  fuerit  mediocrem
fortunam  probe  adminiftrare  :  Sed  tanta  rerum  omnium  licentia  non  abuti,  hoc  vero
admirabile  eft  :  Multo  autem  admirabilius  in  'iuuenili  ac  lubrica  setate  cui  accedat  setas
magiftra  :  hijs  prsefertim  qui  contumelia  lacefcuntur,  quae  alioqui  homines  vel  placidifsi-
mos  folet  de  gradu  dejicere.  Sed  (vt  fupra  dixi)  non  eft  hie  mei  propofiti  (Serenifsimi
Principes)  veftras  laudes  pro  mentis  decantare,  aut  exprimere  quo  modo  in  fummo  rerum
faftigio  vos  humiles  praebuiftis,  de  quare  fufius  in  praefacione  ad  lectores  tra6laui.  lam
itaque  vt  huic  epiftolae  dedicatoriae  finem  imponam,  rogo  Serenifsimas  Maieftates  veftras
vt  has  meas  lucubrationes  in  hijs  autoribus  vertendis,  (quas  veftro  nomini  confecraui)  ea
humanitate  ac  fauore  fufcipiatis,  quibus  omnes  beneuolo  animo  ad  vos  accedentes,  facile
admittitis  ac  neminem  rejicitis.  Quem  admodum  enim  qui  pomarium  aut  vineam
plantauit  ac  maturos  inde  fructus  collegit,  illi  merito  primitias  foluit  a  quo  prima  femina
primafque  arborum  infitiones  habuit,  ita  et  ego  qui  a  maiorum  veftrorum  rebus  geftis
primis  fumptis  feminibus,  hos  qualefcumque  fructus  aedidi,  videor  profe61;o  mihi,  debito
veftro  honore  vos  defraudaffe,  nifi  eofdem  veftro  nomini  ac  numini  obtuliffem.
Deus.  Opt.  Max.  Cekit^dines  veftras  perpetuo  feruat  incolumes,
faxitque  vt  fcecunda  fobolis  propagine,  fummaque  pace
?c  tranquillitate,  huius  regni  habenas  ad  Diuini
nominis  gloriam,  diu  gubernetis.

FINIS.

49

Ryciiarde  Eden  to  the  reader.

He  mode  famous  oratoure  and  learned  Phylofopher  Marcus  Tullius
Cicero,  wryteth,  that  in  all  confultations  as  touchynge  owre
behauoure  and  order  of  lyuynge  amonge  men,  it  behoueth
vs  euer  to  beare  in  mynde  howe  farre  the  dignitie  of  mans
nature,  excelleth  the  condition  of  brute  beaRes.  For  they,
beinge  ruled  altogether  by  fence,  delyte  in  nothynge  but  beaflely
appetites,  whereunto  they  runne  headlonge  as  to  theyr  onely
felicitie.  But  the  mynde  of  man,  beinge  of  more  noble  nature,
is  nuryffhcd  with  knowleage,  and  taketh  pleafure  in  diuifynge
or  excogitatynge  fume  honefl  thynge,  whereby  it  not  onely
leaueth  amonge  men  a  memorie  of  his  immortall  nature,  but  alfo
engendereth  the  lyke  affection  in  other  that  delyte  to  fee  and
hcare  fuch  thinges  as  are  commendable  in  theyr  predicelTours.
And  this  furely  thynke  I  to  bee  the  caufe  that  eyther  the  famous
factes  of  woorthy  men,  or  ingenious  inuentions  of  experte  arti-
ficers, haue  not  onely  nobilitate  the  autours  and  diuifers  of  the
fame,  or  fuch  to  whom  they  haue  byn  dedicate,  but  alfo  that  parte
of  theyr  commendations  haue  redounded  to  all  fuche  as  haue  fpente  theyr  tyme  and  taken  peynes  in
illuftratynge  and  fettynge  furthe  theyr  doynges.  For  who  fhulde  at  this  daye  haue  knowen  Maufolus
the  kynge  of  Caria,  with  his  wyfe  Artemifia,  or  thefe  famous  artificers,  Scopa,  Br}'aces,  Timotheus,
Leochares,  or  Pythis,  if  the  wonderfull  and  fumptuous  woorke  of  the  fepulcher  whiche  Artemifia  made  for  kynge
Maufolus  her  hufband  (beinge  of  fuch  woorkemanfhyppe  that  it  was  accompted  for  one  of  the  marueyls  of  the
worlde)  had  not  geuen  vnto  all  thefe  immortall  fame,  whereas  neuertheleffe  it  coulde  not  defende  it  felfe  age}Ti(l
th[e]iniurie  of  tyme  confumynge  all  thynges.  There  remayneth  at  this  daye  no  token  of  the  laborious  Tabernacle
whiche  Moifes  buyldcd,  or  of  the  renoumed  and  mameilous  Temple  that  was  buylded  in  Hierufalem  by  Salomon
and  renewed  by  Efdras.  Yet  fliall  the  name  of  the  excellente  artificers  Ooliab  and  Befelchel,  and  Hyram  the
kynge  of  Tyrus,  lyue  for  euer  in  the  memory  of  men.  Furthermore  alfo,  Salomon  hym  felfe,  although  he  were
many  other  wayes  famous,  yet  gaue  he  a  greate  parte  of  his  glory  to  that  princely  buyldynge.  But  certeynely
the  mofl  trewe  and  permanent  glory,  procedeth  of  fuch  monumentes  as  brynge  fume  great  and  notable  commoditie
and  profite  to  the  lyfe  of  men,  rather  then  of  the  hugious  heapes  of  flones  of  the  Pyramides  of  Eg)'pt,  wherin  is
nought  els  to  fee  but  the  fonde  and  barbarous  oflentation  of  fuperfluous  riches :  Or  of  the  Mazes  cauled  Lab}Tinthi,
or  of  horryble  great  Images  cauled  Coloffi,  of  knottes  inexplicable,  of  brafen  caudrons  of  monflrous  byggenefle,
of  hauens  with  echo  feuen  tymes  reboundynge,  and  dyuers  fuche  other  portentous  inuentions,  the  which  as  they
do  dclite  vs  in  confiderynge  the  maruelous  arte  and  witte  of  fuche  artificers  as  diuifed  and  made  the  fame,  fo
are  they  otherwyfe  vnprofitable:  And  brynge  ratlier  a  fame  to  theyr  inuentoures,  then  trewe  glor}-e.  Perillus  was
famous  by  diuifynge  his  brafen  bulle :  yet  fo,  that  it  had  byn  better  for  hym  to  haue  byi;  obfcure  and  vnknowen.
They  haue  therefore  deferued  more  trewe  commendation  whiche  in  buyldynge  of  cities,  townes,  fortrefles,  bridges,
cundites,  hauens,  fliyppes,  and  fuche  other,  haue  fo  ioyned  magnificence  with  profecte,  that  bothe  may  remaine
for  an  eternal  teflimonie  of  abfolute  glory,  whofe  perfection  extendeth  to  the  gratifyinge  of  vniuerfal  mankind  as
farre  as  mans  mortalitie  wyll  permit.  The  whiche  thinge  whyle  I  confider,  and  caule  to  memorie  howe  Cicero
defineth  trewe  glory  to  bee  a  fame  of  many  and  greate  defertes  eyther  towarde  owre  citizens,  owre  countrey,  or
towarde  all  man  kynde,  and  the  fame  to  bee  of  fuch  excellencie  that  the  owlde  poetes  for  fume  effecte  fayned  it
to  bee  the  fweete  Ambrofia  and  Nectar  wherwith  the  goddes  are  fedde,  and  that  of  fuch  force  that  ^\  no  fo  may
drynke  therof,  fhal  alfo  become  a  god,  (that  is  to  fay  immortall  and  happy)  mee  thynke  verely  that  (yf  man  maye
be  a  god  to  men  as  holy  fcripturc  fpeakcth  of  Moifes  and  other)  the  kynges  of  Spayne  of  late  daycs  (if  I  may
fpeake  it  without  offence  of  other)  may  fo  much  the  more  for  theyr  iufl  defertes  and  good  fortune  be  comp-ired
to  thofe  goddes  made  of  men  (whom  the  antiquitie  cauled  Heroes  and  for  the)T  man)'folde  benefites  to  man
kynde  honoured  theym  with  diuine  honoure)  as  theyr  famous  factes  fo  farre  excell  al  other,  as  I  dare  not  fpeake
to  fuch  as  haue  not  yet  harde  or  rcddc  of  the  fame,  leail  the  greatneflfe  therof  fliuldc  at  the  firfl  bnmte  fo  muche
aflonyflie  the  reader  that  he  myght  gene  the  Icfie  credite  to  the  autourc  of  this  bookc,  who  neuertheleffe  hath
mofle  faythfully  wryttcn  this  hyllorye  of  fuche  thynges  whcrof  he  hath  fccne  a  greate  parte  him  felfe  (as  being  by

I  Commerdation
of  noble  factes.

Malleolus.

Cunnyngc
artificers.

The  Tabernacle
of  Moiscs.

The  Teraple  of

Salomoik

Hyram.

Trewe  glory.

Great  and
sumptuous  works

Fame  diflereth
from  true  glory.

Absolute  glory.

What  is  true
glory.

The  kynges  of

Spayne.

Heroes.

The  certentic  of
this  hystory

50

TJic  Preface  to  tJie  Reader.

The  house  of  the
contr.ictes  of
Indix

The  counsayl  for
the  Indies
The  heroicall
factcs  of  the
Spanyardes.

Great  Alexander.

The  Spanyardes
warres  in  the
Indies.

The  henefites  thai
the  Indians  haiie
receaued  by  the
Spanyardes.

Lybertie.
The  Canibalcs,

Feareful  idlenessc.

IsaL  65.

The  warres  of
Moises.

The  Indians
subdued  to  the
fayth.

Isai-  42.

The  contemplation
of  gods  workes.

The  Christian
Empire  enlarged

The  conuersion  of
thi".  gentyles.

Leuiathan.

the  mofle  catholyke  and  puiflhunt  kynge  Fcrdinnndo  appoyntcd  a  commiiTionarie  in  th[e]affayrcs  of  India)  and
gathered  the  rel'idewe  partly  by  information  and  partly  out  of  the  wrytinges  of  fuch  as  haue  byn  (as  Vyrgyll
wryteth  of  Eneas,  Et  quorum  pars  magna  fui)  that  is,  doers  and  parte  of  fuch  thynges  as  are  conteyned  in  the
hyflorie:  as  Gouernours,  Lieuetenauntes,  Capitaynes,  Admirals,  and  Pylottes,  who  by  theyr  paincful  trauayles
and  prowes,  haue  not  onely  fubducd  thefe  landes  and  feas,  but  haue  alfo  with  lyke  diliger  ce  commytted  th[e]order
thorof  to  wrvtinge :  And  not  this  onely,  but  for  the  better  tryall  of  the  trewth  herein,  haue  and  yet  doo  in  maner
dayly  fenile  from  thenfe  into  Spayne  fuch  monumentes  as  are  mofl  certeyne  teflimonies  of  theyr  doynge,  as  yow
may  reade  in  dyuers  places  in  this  boke.  This  newe  worlde  is  nowe  fo  much  frequented,  the  Ocean  nowe  fo
well  knowen,  and  the  commodities  fo  greate,  that  the  kynge  erected  a  houfe  in  the  citie  of  Siuile  (cauled  the
houfe  of  the  contractes  of  India)  perteynynge  onely  to  th[e]affayres  of  the  Ocean,  to  the  which  al  fuch  reforte  for
neceflliries  as  attempte  anye  vyage  to  this  newe  worlde,  and  lykewyfe  at  theyr  returne  make  theyr  accompte  to
the  counfiyle  for  the  Indies  for  the  golde  and  fuche  other  thynges  as  they  brynge  from  thenfe.  It  is  therefore
apparent  that  the  heroical  factcs  of  the  Spaniardes  of  thefe  days,  deferue  fo  greate  prayfe  that  th[e]autour  of  this
booke  (beinge  no  Spanyarde)  doth  woorthely  extolle  theyr  doynge  aboue  the  famous  actes  of  Hercules  and
Satiirnus  and  fuch  other  which  for  theyr  glorious  and  vertuous  enterpryfes  were  accoumpted  as  goddes  amonge
And  furely  if  great  Alexander  and  the  Romans  which  haue  rather  obteyned  then  deferued  immortall  fame

men.

amonge  men  for  theyr  bluddye  victories  onely  for  theyr  owne  glory  and  amplifyinge  theyr  empire  obteyned  by

flawghter  of  innocentes  and  kepte  by  violence,  haue  byn  magnified  for  theyr  doinges,  howe  much  more  then  dial

we  thynke  thefe  men  woorthy  iud  commendations  which  in  theyr  mercyfuU  warres  ageynfl  thefe  naked  people

haue  fo  vfed  them  felues  towarde  them  in  exchaungynge  of  benefites  for  victorie,  that  greater  commoditie  hath

therof  enfewed  to  the  vanquifflied  then  the  victourers. They  haue  taken  nothynge  from  them  but  fuch  as  they

them  felues  were  wel  wyllynge  to  departe  with,  and  accoumpted  as  fuperfluities,  as  golde,  perles,  precious  flones

and  fuch  other :  for  the  which  they  recompenfed  theym  with  fuche  thynges  as  they  muche  more  eflemed. But

fum  wyll  fay,  they  pofTefle  and  inhabyte  theyr  regions  and  vfe  theym  as  bondemen  and  tributaries,  where  before

they  were  free. They  inhabite  theyr  regions  indeede :  Yet  fo,  that  by  theyr  diligence  and  better  manurynge  the

fame,  they  maye  nowe  better  fufleyne  both,  then  one  before. Theyr  bondage  is  fuche  as  is  much  rather  to  be

defired  then  theyr  former  libertie  which  was  to  the  cruell  Canibales  rather  a  horrible  licencioufneffe  then  a

libertie,  and  to  the  innocent  fo  terrible  a  bondage,  that  in  the  myddefl  of  theyr  ferefuU  idleneffe,  they  were  euer

in  daunger  to  be  a  pray  to  thofe  manhuntynge  woolues. But  nowe  thanked  be  God,  by  the  manhodde  and

poUicie  of  the  Spanyardes,  this  deuelyfflie  generation  is  fo  confumed,  partely  by  the  flaughter  of  fuche  as  coulde

by  no  meanes  be  brought  to  ciuilitie,  and  partly  by  referuynge  fuch  as  were  ouercome  in  the  warres,  and  con-

uertynge  them  to  a  better  mynde,  that  the  prophecie  may  herein  bee  fulfylled  that  the  woolfe  and  the  lambe

fliall  feede  together,  and  the  Avylde  fieldes  with  the  vale  of  Achor,  fhalbe  the  folde  of  the  heard  of  gods  people.

Moifes  as  the  minifler  of  the  lawe  of  wrath  and  bondage  geuen  in  fyer  and  tempefles,  was  commaunded  in  his  warres

to  faue  neyther  man,  woman,  nor  chylde,  and  yet  brought  no  commoditie  to  the  nations  whom  he  ouercame  and

poffeffed  theyr  landes. But  the  Spaniardes  as  the  myniflers  of  grace  and  libertie,  browght  vnto  thefe  newe  gentyles

the  victorie  of  Chryfles  death  wherby  they  beinge  fubdued  with  the  worldely  fworde,  are  nowe  made  free  from  the

bondage  of  Sathans  tyrannic,  by  the  myghty  poure  of  this  triumphante  victourer,  whom  (as  fayth  the  prophet)  god

hath  ordeyned  to  be  a  lyght  to  the  gentyles,  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blynde,  and  to  delyuer  the  bounde  owt  of

prj^fon  and  captiuitie. What  other  men  do  phantafie  herein,  I  can  not  tell:  but  fuer  I  am,  that  lyke  as  the  flowe

and  brutyffhe  wyttes,  for  the  fdenderneffe  of  theyr  capacitie  and  effeminate  hartes,  do  neuer  or  feldome  lyfte  vp

theyr  myndes  to  the  contemplation  of  goddes  workes  and  maieflie  of  nature,  but  lyke  brute  beafles  lookynge

euer  do^mewarde,  thynke  the  worlde  to  be  in  maner  no  bygger  then  theyr  owne  dungehylles  or  cagies,

lyttle  paffynge  whether  the  ChryRian  fayth  do  fpreade  through  the  worlde, or  bee  dryuen  to  one  corner  :

Euen  fo  al  good  wyttes  and  honefl  natures  (I doubte  not)  wyl  not  onely  reioyce to fee  the  kyngedome

of  God  to  bee  fo  farre  enlarged  vppon  the  face  of  the earthe, to  the confufion of  the  deuyll and the

Turkyfflie Antichry{\e, but alfo do the vttermofl of  thejT poure to further the fame. For furely, as

Gonfalus  Ouiedus  \vryteth  to  the  Emperours  maieflie  in  his  hyflorie of  the  Wefle  Indies,  that  he  thynketh

hym  no trewe Spanyarde  whiche  reioyceth  not  in the  good  fortune of  theyr  kynges  by  whofe  ayde  and

godly  zeale this  myghtie portion of  the  worlde  hath  byn added to the  flocke of  Chryfles congregation,

Euen  fo  do  I  thinke  them  no  trewe  Chryflian  men  that  do  not  reioyce  with  the  Angels  of  heauen  for  the

deliuerie  of  thefe  owre  brootherne,  owtc  fiefflie,  and  owre  bones,  from  the  handes  of  owre  commune  enemie  the

oulde  ferpente  w^ho  hath  fo  longe  had  them  in  hys  poffeffion,  vntyll  the  fulneffe  of  the  gentyles  be  accomplyfflied

accordynge  to  the  time  prefinite  by  hym,  who  vnto  the  yeare  after  his  incarnation. M.  CCCC.  Ixxxxii.  hath

fuffered  the  greate  ferpente  of  the  fea  Leuiathan,  to  haue  fuche  dominion  in  the  Ocean  and  to  cafie  fuch

myfles  in  the  eyes  of  men, that  fence  the  creation  of  the  worlde  vntyll  the yeare  before  named, there

hath  byn  no  paffage  from  owr  knowen  partes  of  the  world  to  thefe  newe  landes,  whereas  nowe  the  fame

so

TJie  Preface  to  the  Reader.

51

are  mofte  certeynely  kiiowen  to  be  not  pafl.  xxx.  dayes  faylynge  from  Spayne.  Neyther  yet  had  the
church  of  Europe  any  knowleage  of  the  myghtie  Chryftian  Empire  of  Preciofus  lohanncs,  othenvyfe  cauled
Prefbyter  lohannes,  Emperour  of  many  Chryftian  nations  m  Ethiope,  vntyll  the  yeare  of  Chryfte.
M.  CCCC.  xxxiii.  as  largely  appeareth  in  the  nauigations  of  the  Portugales,  and  efpecially  in  the  booke  of
Damianus  a  Goes,  wrytten  to  the  byffhop  of  Rome,  Paule  the  thyrde  of  that  name,  of  the  fayth  and
religion  of  the  Ethiopians  which  they  haue  hadde  fence  the  tyme  of  the  Apoftles.  A  thynge  certes  moft
woonderfull,  and  fuche,  that  yf  the  fame  were  not  hydde  hetherto  by  gods  vnfercheable  prouidence,  I  can
not  but  thynke  much  negligence  or  ignorance  in  owr  forefathers  and  prediceffours  vntyll  the  dayes. of  the
ryght  noble,  prudent,  and  Catholike  kynge  of  Aragon  Don  Ferdinando  grandfather  to  Th[e]emperours
maieftie  by  his  eldeft  dowghter,  and  to  the  queenes  hyghneffe  by  his  feconde  dowghter  the  moft  vertuous
lady  queene  Catherine  her  graces  moother  :  A  prince  doubteleffe  of  fuche  nobilitie,  prowes,  ixiagnificence,
and  all  other  vertues  commendable  in  a  prince,  that  who  fo  fhall  indififerentely  way  all  his  doinges  and
good  fucceffe  in  all  his  affayres,  comparinge  the  fame  to  th[e]enterpryfes  and  doinges  atchyued  by  fuche
famous  princes  in  whome  the  Greekes  and  Romans  haue  fo  greately  glorj^ed,  maye  with  one  eye  perceaue
not  onely  howe  farre  his  noble  factes  do  furmount  theyrs,  but  alfo  wel  confyder  what  noble  braunches
of  ifftiewe  were  lyke  to  fprynge  owt  of  fo  woorthy  a  ftocke.  And  fuerly  if  fence  the  begj'nning  of  the
worlde,  the  fauour  of  god  toward  men  hath  byn  knowen  by  fuch  benefites  and  bleffynges  as  he  hath
geuen  to  men,  it  feemeth  to  me  that  in  maner  (onely  Chryfte  excepted)  there  neuer  lyued  man  to  whom
god  hath  geuen  greater  benefites  and  fhewed  more  fauoure.  Great  doubtleffe  was  the  fauour  and  mercie
that  god  fhewed  vnto  Noe,  by  whom  he  faued  the  remanent  of  mankynde  beinge  but  fewe  in  number.
But  much  greater  was  the  grace  which  he  ftiewed  to  kynge  Ferdinando  vnder  whom  and  by  whofe  meanes
he  faued  not  onely  the  bodies  but  alfo  the  foules  of  innumerable  millions  of  men  inhabyt)'nge  a  great
part  of  the  worlde  heretofore  vnknowen  and  drowned  in  the  deluge  of  erroure.  What  fhulde  I  here
fpeake  of  Abraham  the  father  of  fayth  whofe  promyfes  were  great,  and  he  cauled  the  frende  of  god  :  Dyd
he  or  his  pofteritie  fee  Ifraell  increafe  to  fuch  multitudes  and  nations  as  kyng  Ferdinandos  pofteritie  may
fee  th[e]increafe  of  this  fpirituall  Ifraell  vnto  whome  as  a  feconde  Abraham  he  was  the  father  of  fayth?
Moifes  was  fo  great  in  the  fyght  of  god  that  he  difclofed  vnto  hym  his  fecreate  name,  and  miraculoufly
caufed  a  comer  of  the  fea  to  open  at  his  prayer.  But  howe  greater  a  myracle  was  it  that  he  opened
vnto  the  nauie  of  Don  Ferdinando  the  greate  Ocean  thowght  before  that  tyme  to  bee  without  ende,
where  neuertheleffe  he  and  his  pofteritie  the  kynges  of  Spayne  haue  nowe  planted  a  newe  Ifraell  muche
greater  then  that  whiche  Moifes  ledde  throughe  the  red  fea.  It  were  here  fuperfluous  to  fpeake  of  Dauid
whom  Godde  founde  a  man  accordynge  to  his  hartes  defyre  :  and  yet  maye  it  be  doubted  whether  his
plages  and  fcourges  were  greater  then  his  benefites?  His  fonne  Salomon  for  al  his  inconftant  and
wauerynge  wyfedome  and  his  great  ryches  obteyned  by  his  nauigations  to  Ophir,  yet  was  there  at  this
tyme  no  knowleage  of  Antipodes,  neyther  dydde  any  of  his  fhyppes  fayle  abowt  the  hole  worlde,  perce
the  Ocean,  and  trauerfe  the  Equinoctial  line  to  th[e]inferiour  hemifpherie  or  halfe  globe  of  the  earthe  and  fea
as  dyd  the  famous  ftiyppe  Victoria  fent  furth  by  Th[e]emperours  maieftie.  A  thyng  doubtleffe  fo  ftrange
and  marueylous  that  as  the  lyke  w^as  neuer  done  before,  fo  is  it  perhaps  neuer  lyke  to  be  done  ageyne  :
fo  farre  haue  the  nauigations  of  the  Spanyardes  excelled  the  vyage  of  lafon  and  the  Argonautcz  to  the
region  of  Colchos,  or  all  that  euer  were  before.  And  although  in  the  booke  of  kynges  and  Paralipomenon  it
bee  hyperborically  \ATytten  that  in  the  dayes  of  Salomon  golde  and  fyluer  w^ere  in  Hierufalem  in  maner
as  plentiful  as  ftones,  and  that  his  feruantes  brought  from  Ophir  foure  hundreth  and  fifrie  talentes  of  gold,  yet
do  we  not  reade  that  any  of  his  fhyppes  were  fo  laden  \vith  golde  that  they  foonke,  as  dyd  a  fliyppe  of
kynge  Ferdinandos  as  yow  maye  reade  in  the  laft  booke  of  the  fyrfte  Decade.  Neyther  was  the  dominion  of
Salomon  extended  from  the  ryuer  of  Euphrates  to  the  lande  of  the  Philiftians  and  th[e]extreme  confines
of  Egypte  to  be  compared  with  the  large  Empire  whiche  the  kynges  of  Spayne  haue  in  the  weft  Indies  :
Nor  his  rjxhes  of  golde  to  be  thought  much  in  refpect  of  that  which  hath  byn  browght  from  thenfe  into
Spayne  as  ftiall  playnely  appere  to  al  fuche  as  wyll  feeke  to  knowe  the  truth  hereof.  But  to  let  pafle  to
fpeake  any  further  of  the  myracles  which  god  hath  wrought  by  the  handes  of  this  noble  prince  in  this
newe  world  among  thefe  newe  gentyles.  Is  it  not  well  knowen  to  all  the  world  what  a  defence  and
brafen  wall  he  hath  byn  to  all  Chryftendome  in  that  he  hath  quite  drjoien  out  of  Spayne  the  iMoores
or  Sarafens  and  lewes  which  fo  many  hundreth  yeares  poffeffed  a  greate  parte  of  Spayne  to  no  fmaule
daungioure  of  the  hole  Chriftian  Empire,  and  yet  coulde  neuer  before  bee  cleane  vanquyfflied  vntyll
the  dayes  of  this  noble  and  Catholyke  prince  fo  named  for  his  warres  ageynfte  the  infidelles,  whom  God
rayfed  for  a  Capitayne  of  his  people  as  an  other  Gedion  vnder  whofe  banner  they  myght  ouercome  theyr
enemies  and  pourge  his  vineyarde  from  fuche  wycked  weedes.  The  which  thynge  doubtelefle  may  feeme
fo  much  the  greater  and  more  difhculte,  forafmuch  as  in  the  myddeft  of  the  chiefe  heate  of  his  chargeable

Prester  lohn
the  Christian
Emperour  of
Ethiopc.

Don  Ferdinando
kynge  of  Aiagon.

The  fauour  ef  god
knowen  Uy  his
benefited

Xoe.

What  god  hath
wrought  by  kynge
Ferdmando.

Abraham.
Spirituall  Israeli

Moifes.

Dauid.

Salomon.
Ophir.

Antipodes.
The  nauigation
rounde  about  the
worlde.

The  dominion
of  Saloa.on.
Paial,  9.

The  Indies.

The  warres  of
kj-nge  Ferdinando
ageynst  the
Sarasens.

51

52

TJie  Preface  to  tJie  Reader.

Tl>e  conqueste  of

the  Indies

The  conqueste

of  Naples.

warres  ageynfle  the  Moorcs  of  Granada,  he  euen  then  and  at  the  fame  tyme  fcnte  furth  (liyppes  for  the
conqueflynge  of  the  Indies,  as  thowgh  he  and  the  nation  of  the  Spanyardes  had  byn  appoynted  by  god
eyther  to  fubdue  the  enemies  of  the  fayth  or  to  bringe  theym  to  Chriiles  rehgion.  The  felfe  fame  kynge
Ferdinando  alfo  abowte  the  yeare  of  Chryfl.  1503.  fente  a  nauie  of  fliyppes  into  Italy,  where  they  vanquyfflied,
chafed,  and  flewe  the  Frenchemen,  and  recouered  the  kyngedome  of  Naples  with  all  the  dominions  belongynge
thereunto.  By  which  noble  victory,  his  fucceffion  and  pofleritie  as  the[e]mperours  maieflie  and  nowe  his  fonne
the  kynge  owre  malTer  and  foueraigne  lorde  haue  euer  fence  enioyed  th[e]inheritaunce  of  the  fame  as  of
antiiiuitie  by  iufl,  and  rj'ght  tytle  dewe  to  them  and  theyr  prediceffours^  And  as  it  is  the  nature  of  god
not  only  to  fliewe  his  loue  and  fauour  to  fuch  as  haue  pleafed  hym,  but  alfo  to  poure  furth  the  plentie
of  his  grace  vppon  theyr  fucceflion  from  generation  to  generation,  fo  hath  he  with  lyke  felicitie  profpered
the  reigne  of  Th[e]emperours  maieflie  who  by  his  wifdome  and  prowes  hath  not  onely  pollitikly  gouerned.

The  Fmperours
muicslic

Gen.  17.

The  kinges
maieflie

Apostrophe  to
Englande.

IsaL  I.

but  alfo  augmented  and  inlarged  fuch  dominions  as  fel  to  hym  by  difcente  of  inheritaunce.  What  fliuld  I
fpeake  of  his  warres  and  conquefles  in  India,  in  Aphrike,  in  Italic,  in  Fraunce,  in  Germanie,  and  in  Flaunders  :
all  the  which  to  be  declared  accordyngely  wolde  rather  require  hole  volumes  then  fewe  flieetes  of  paper.  Yet
hath  one  in  fewe  woordes  effectually  expreffed  his  dominions  and  conquefles  in  thefe  verfes  folowynge,

Impiger  expaidt  rapidas  tranfire  per  vndas

Occani  Alcides :  continiiitque  gradum.
Maximus  at  CcBpar,  PL  VS  VL  TRA  tender e  ciirftim

Anfjis,  et  ignotis  ejl  dare  iura  locis.
Et  domita  aurifcra  mine  viHor  gente  reuerfus,

Ca;tera  fub  fecptro  ponat  vt  ipfefuo.
Nam  pater  otnnipotens  vtfamam  terminet  ajiris

lufsit,  et  i7npa-ium  fineat  OeeaJio.

^  An  other  alfo  breefely  hath  declared  the  fame  in  thefe  verfes.

Confortem  Imperij  voluit  quia  luppiter  orbis,
AJlra  Deo  eedimt,  Carole  terra  tibi.

And  certes  who  fo  well  confidereth  the  progenie  of  kynges  that  in  fo  fhorte  a  time  haue  linially  defcended  from

Don  Ferdinando,  and  howe  many  kyngedomes  they  poffeffe,  may  fee  that  God  hath  fulfylled  in  hym  alfo  the

promifes  and  bleffynges  of  Abraham,  as  to  make  hym  the  father  of  many  nations,  and  his  feede  to  growe  great

vpon  the  earth  :  Alfo  that  many  kynges  fhulde  come  furth  of  his  loynes,  and  to  make  a  perpetuall  league  and

conuenaunt  with  hym  and  his  pofleritie  to  bee  theyr  god  for  euer. And  here  to  omytte  to  fpeake  of  other  :  Was

there  euer  better  hope  or  more  likenes  then  now,  that  thefe  bleffynges  and  promyfes  of  god  fhulde  continewe  in

this  princely  progenie,  fyth  the  vertues  and  felicitie  of  them  al  doo  fo  fhyne  and  fioriffhe  in  owr  noble  and  gratious

prince  kynge  Phylyppe,  to  whom  euen  in  his  youth  his  father  (occupied  in  the  warres  of  Italye  and  Aphrike)

commytted  the  hole  gouernaunce  of  the  kyngedomes  of  Spayne  and  the  Indies. Of  his  behauour  in  Englande,

his  enemies  (wliich  canker,  vertue  neuer  lacked)  They  I  fay  (if  any  fuch  yet  remaine)  haue  greatefl  caufe  to

reporte  well :  ye  fo  well,  that  yf  his  naturall  clemencie  were  not  greater  then  was  theyr  vnnaturall  indignation

they  knowe  them  felues  what  myght  haue  folowed. The  properties  of  foole.s  and  wyfe  men  are  declared  in

thefe  owld  verfes.

Quid  Jlulti  p7-opriuni  1  Non  poffe  et  vdle  noeere.

Quid  fapientis  opus :  Non  velle  et  poffe  noeere.

That  is  to  fay  :  "What  is  the  propertie  of  a  foole  ?  To  wyl  to  doo  hurte  and  can  not.  What  is  the  woorke  of  a
wyfe  man  ?  Not  to  wyll  to  hurte  though  he  may.  But  whether  he  hath  lacked  poure  or  wyll,  it  is  knowen  to
barbers  and  blere  eyde  men.  Who  lamented  theyr  folly  more  then  he  ?  Who  more  humbly  admytted  theyr
futes  and  fupplications  ?  Ye  who  obteyned  theyr  pardon  but  he  ?  Beynge  a  Lion  he  behaued  hym  felfe  as  a
lambe,  and  flrooke  not  his  enemie  hauynge  the  fwoorde  in  his  hande.  Stoope  Englande  floope,  and  leame  to
knowe  thy  lorde  and  maRer,  as  horfes  and  other  brute  beafles  are  taught  to  doo.  Be  not  indocible  lyke  Tygers
and  dragons,  and  fuch  other  monflers  noyous  to  man  kynde.  God  by  the  mouth  of  Ifaias  the  prophet  reproueth
the  Ifraelites  that  they  knewe  not  fo  well  theyr  dewtie  towarde  hym  as  dyd  the  brute  beafles  the  mangiers  of
theyr  maflers.  The  oxe  and  the  affe  (fayth  he)  knoweth  the  mangier  of  theyr  mafter,  but  Ifraell  knoweth  not
me.  For  fliame  let  vs  not  be  woorfe  then  oxen  and  affes,  and  lyke  vnto  horfes  and  mules  in  whom  is  no  vnder-
flandynge.  But  O  vnthankefull  Englande  and  voyde  of  honefl.  fhame  ?  Who  hath  geuen  the  the  face  of  a  hoore
and  toonge  of  a  ferpent  withowt  fliame  to  fpeake  venemous  woordes  in  fecreates  ageynfl.  the  annoynted  of  god.
O  paynted  hoore  that  hafl  Chryfle  in  thy  mouth  and  the  deuyl  in  thy  harte.  Hathe  not  the  pocke  of  thy
licentioufneffe  brufle  furth  in  maner  to  thyne  owne  deflruction.  Howe  longe  wylt  thou  nuryffhe  in  thy  boofome
5a

The  Preface  to  the  Reader.

53

that  ferpente  whofe  nature  is  to  deuoure  her  moother?  Take  a  vomyte  in  tyme  leafl  thy  difeafe  become
vncurable.  What  nccde  I  rthearfe  vnto  the  thy  manyfolde  ijifirmities  and  deformities  whiche  thou  arte  faulen
into  by  thyne  owne  owtragiouiheffe?  If  the  greefes  of  them  bee  to  thee  vnfenfible  by  reafon  of  thy  feeblenefle
and  longe  fickenes,  take  vnto  the  that  glaffe  wherin  thou  gloryed  with  the  lewe  and  thynkefl  that  thou  feed  al
thynges  and  canfl  iudge  all  myfleries  :  Looke  I  fay  in  that  pure  glaffe  and  beholde  thy  owne  deformities,  which
thou  canlle  not  or  wylte  not  feele.  I  feare  greatly  that  if  thou  looke  th-^rein  diligently  and  looke  euen  throughe
thy  felfe,  thou  wylte  abhorre  thy  felfe  to  fee  howe  many  monflers  lye  hid  in  the  vnder  the  fhape  of  man.  There
is  euen  nowe  great  talke  of  the  in  the  mouthes  of  all  men  that  thou  hafl  of  late  yeares  brought  furthe  many
monflers  and  flraunge  byrthes,  wherof  dyuers  men  make  dyuers  interpretacions  more  monflrous  then  the
monflers  theim  felues.  But  fhall  I  breefely  and  fimply  declare  vnto  thee  the  fignification  of  thy  monflers  ?  Fyrfl
then  confyder  that  they  are  monflers  of  mankynde  and  not  of  other  beafles.  Secundarily  marke  well  that  in
them  al,  the  headde  is  perfect,  fo  that  the  monflrofitie  groweth  owt  of  the  body,  although  not  owt  of  the  hole
body  but  certeyne  partes  therof.  But  not  to  go  to  farre.  Confyder  ageyne  that  diforder  of  the  partes  is  a
deformitie  to  the  hole.  One  hath  well  interpreted  that  fuch  monflrous  byrthes  fignifie  the  monflrous  and
deformed  myndes  of  the  people  myffhapened  with  phantaflical  opinions,  diffolute  lyuynge,  licentious  talke,  and
fuch  other  vicious  behauoures  which  monflroufly  deforme  the  myndes  of  men  in  the  fyght  of  god  who  by  fuche
fignes  dooth  certifie  vs  in  what  fmiilitude  we  appere  before  hym,  and  thereby  gyueth  vs  admonition  to  amende
before  the  day  of  his  wrath  and  vengeance.  What  deformed  beafles  are  more  monflrous  then  lyinge,  rebellion,
flrife,  contention,  priuie  malice,  flaunderynge,  mutterynge,  confpiraces,  and  fuch  other  deuilyffhe  imaginations.
But  O  Englande  whyle  tyme  is  gyuen  thee,  circumcife  thy  harte.  Put  to  onely  thy  good  wyll,  and  thou  mayRe
fynde  grace  and  fauoure  to  recouer  thyne  aunciente  bewtie  whiche  hath  fo  longe  been  defaced.  Thou  hafle
nowe  a  kynge  and  queene  that  defyre  thee  to  remember  thy  dewtie,  and  holde  theyr  armes  abrode  to  embrafe
thee  yf  thou  wylt  drawe  nere  vnto  them.  They  are  fory  to  occupie  the  whyppe  yf  thou  mightefl  othen\yfe  bee
brought  to  obedience.  But  yf  thou  take  pleafure  to  perfifl  in  frowarde  floobbemeffe,  knowe  thou  that  they  are
Lions  whelpes  and  conquerours  of  monflers  whereof  thou  hafl  had  fuche  experience,  that  proudely  truflynge  in
thyne  owne  flrengthe,  and  attemptynge  lyke  an  other  Nemroth  to  buylde  a  newe  towTe  of  confufion,  the
woorkes  of  thy  giantes  were  miraculoufly  ouerthrowne  by  a  woman  who  deliuered  thee  from  that  captiuitie,
whereby  thou  oughtefle  to  knowe  the  daungiour  thou  wafl.  in,  and  bee  thankefull  to  thy  deliuerer.  Beware
therefore  leafle  whyle  thou  contemne  the  peaceable  princes  that  god  hath  fent  the,  thou  bee  lyke  vnto  Ifopes
frogges  to  whom  for  theyr  vnquietneffe,  lupiter  fent  a  hearon  to  picke  them  in  the  hedes.  Confider  what  bene-
fites  thou  mayfl  receaue  at  theyr  handes  if  thou  doo  thy  dewtie  towarde  them.  Confyder  ageyne  that  as  they
are  able,  fo  may  thy  gentelneffe  make  them  wyllynge  to  recompenfe  the  fame.  Stoppe  thyne  eares  from  va}Tie
fables  as  from  the  inchauntynge  Mermaydes.  For  as  manye  fpeake  of  Robbyn  Hoode  and  of  his  bowe  that
neuer  fhot  therin,  fo  doo  fooles  prate  of  fuch  thynges  as  they  knowe  not.  But  O  god  ?  what  phantafies  are
nowe  in  the  heades  of  men  ?  Howe  redy  they  are  to  inuent  lyes  and  tales  ?  and  of  howe  fmaul  fparkes  they
kyndle  great  flames  ?  Summe  are  fo  curious  to  fynde  faute  in  other,  that  for  lacke  of  iufl  matter  woorthy  reproche
in  them  whom  they  defyre  to  depraue,  they  fpeake  euyll  of  theyr  parentes  and  kynred  of  whom  they  knowe  as  lyttle.
And  not  fo  fatiffyed  they  difpife  and  with  lyinge  difprayfe  theyr  hole  nation  and  countrey.  Ye  fum  take  fuch
pleafure  herein,  that  if  they  can  fynde  noughte  els  to  difprayfe,  they  wyll  fynde  faute  in  fuche  as  they  fauour
not,  bycaufe  they  weare  not  theyr  apparell  as  they  doo,  or  perhappes  are  not  fo  effeminate  as  they,  or  eate  not
as  they  eate,  or  fight  not  as  they  fyght,  fo  parciall  is  the  iudgement  of  fooles  in  theyr  o^vne  rudeneffe,  thynkyng
them  felues  the  better  for  difprayfynge  of  other.  Spayne  is  a  beggerly  countrey  fayth  oiij  :  Th[e]emperour  is
but  poore  fayth  an  other :  He  is  deade  fayth  an  other :  The  Indies  haue  rebelled  fayth  an  other,  and  eyther
there  commeth  no  more  golde  from  thenfe,  or  there  is  no  more  founde  nowe  :  with  fuche  other  falfe  and  licentious
talke  diuifed  by  vnquiet  braines  in  whofe  heades  the  hammers  of  fedition  feafe  not  to  forge  ingens  of  iniquitie.
If  I  fhulde  here  anfwere  to  all  thefe  querels  particularly  and  as  the  woorthynefTe  of  the  thynge  requireth,  I
myght  fynde  matter  fufhcient  to  make  a  volume  of  iufle  quantitie  and  perhappes  be  tedious  to  fumme.  Yet  not
to  paffe  ouer  fo  great  a  matter  vntouched,  and  partely  to  floppe  the  mouthes  of  fuche  impudente  lyers,  I  haue
thought  good  to  fpeake  fumwhat  hereof  Fyrfl.  therfore  to  fpeake  of  Spayne,  and  by  the  teftimonie  of  oulde
autours  to  declare  the  commodities  therof:  Plinie  a  graue  and  faythful  autour,  in  the  lafl  boke  and  lafl  chapiture  of
his  natural  hiflory  greatly  commendynge  Italy  aboue  al  other  contreys,  gaueth  the  fecond  prayfe  vnto  Spaine,
afwel  for  al  fuch  thynges  as  in  maner  the  heuen  can  geue  and  the  earth  br}-nge  furth  for  the  commoditie  of  this
lyfe  as  alfo  for  the  excellente  wittes  of  men  and  Ciuile  gouemaunce.  Alfo  Diodorus  Siculus  in  the  fixt  booke  of
his  Bibliotheca  fpeakynge  of  Spayne  (cauled  of  the  Greekes  Iberia)  writeth  that  when  in  the  mountaines  named
Pyrinei  th[e]inhabitantes  burnte  vp  the  wooddes,  there  ranne  owt  of  the  mountaynes  as  it  were  dyuers  flreames  of
pure  fyluer  molten  by  the  heate  of  the  fyre.  But  the  eflimation  and  price  of  fyluer  beinge  at  thofe  dayes  to
them  vnknowen,  the  Phenician  marchauntes  bought  the  fame  of  them  for  thynges  of  fmaule  value :  And  car)inge

Eden.  Hz  S3

Monstrous
byrthes.

The  significatioas
of  monsirus
byrthes.

The  deformity
of  monstrous
myndes.

The  kyng  and
Queene.

^

How  curiotis
summe  are  to
f>-iide  faute  in
other.

Lyes  Imagwed.

Commendations
of  Spain

Kyche  syluer
myncs  in  Spayne

54

TJie  Pycface  to  the  Reader.

The  Romans

inriched  by  the
syluer  of  Spayne.

The

Carthaginensis
inriched  by  tlie
syluer  of  Spain.

The  commodities
of  Spain

The  sygne  of
the  steeple.

Englande
impouerisshed,
Spayne  inriched.

Siluer  mines
founde  of  late
in  Spayne.

Syluer  brought
frome  Peru  into
Englande.

Th[e]emperours
reuenues  from
the  Indies.

The  Ilandes  of
the  Southe  sea.

The  Ilandes  of
Maluco.

it  into  Grecia,  Afia,  and  other  countreys,  got  great  rychefle  therby. For  the  tlefyre  of  gayncs  (foyth  he)  fo  greatly

moued  the  marchauntes,  that  when  more  fyhier  remayned  then  myght  lade  theyr  fliyi)pes,  they  tooke  the  leade

frome  theyr  ankers,  and  put  fyluer  in  the  place  therof. The  Phenices  by  thcfe  gaynes  beinge  made  very  ryche,

dyd  afligne  many  colonies  both  in  Sicilie  and  the  Ilandes  there  abowt,  and  alfo  in  Libya,  Sardinia,  and  Iberia.

But  after  many  yeares  when  the  Iberians  (that  is  the  Spaniardes)  knewe  the  price  of  fyluer,  and  applyed  them

felues  to  the  feekynge  of  metals  and  founde  great  plentie  of  fyluer,  they  obteyned  greate  ryches  therby  forafmuch

as  in  maner  al  that  earth  of  the  mountaynes  is  fo  rei)lenyflhed  with  fyluer  that  it  is  a  marueylous  thynge  to  con-

fyder  the  nature  of  the  region  and  the  continual  laboure  of  the  woorkemen  in  thofe  mynes. Lykewyfe  when

afterwarde  the  Romans  fubdued  the  Iberians,  the  Italians  which  for  the  defyre  of  gaynes  fearched  thofe  metals,

gotte  great  rycheffe  by  the  fame. For  they  deputed  to  that  laboure  a  multitude  of  bowghte  feruauntes,  whiche

fearchynge  the  vaynes  of  metals  in  dyuers  places,  and  percyng  the  earth  dyuers  wayes  for  the  fpace  of  many

fiirlonges,  browght  furthe  great  plentie  of  golde  and  fyluer. But  the  rycheffe  of  thefe  mynes  was  fyrft  founde  at

fuch  tyme  as  tlie  Carthaginenfes  (the  enemies  of  the  Romane  Empire)  had  the  Iberians  in  fubiection :  which

was  the  caufe  that  theyr  poure  afterwarde  increafed. For,  with  monye  hyringe  the  befl  and  mofle  experte

fouldiers,  they  kepte  greuous  warres  ageynfl.  theyr  enemies. And  not  vfynge  the  ayde  eyther  of  theyr  owne

fouldiers  or  theyr  aflbciates,  they  were  a  terrour  to  the  Romanes,  Sicilians,  and  Libyans,  whom  they  browght

into  great  daungiour  by  reafon  they  palled  them  al  in  abundaunce  of  golde  and  fyluer. With  better  fortune

therefore,  and  greater  hope  of  gayne  are  ryche  metals  fought  in  Spayne,  the  goodneffe  of  whofe  foyle  yeldeth

cloddes  of  earth  conteynynge  much  golde  and  fyluer. And  thefe  be  the  very  wordes  of  IDiodorus  Siculus,  which

the  later  wryters  doo  alfo  confirme. For  lulius  Solinus  in  his  Polyhiflor,  compareth  Spayne  to  the  befl  contreys

in  plentie  of  grayne,  vyttayles,  oyle,  fyluer,  golde,  and  Iron. Likewyfe  Strabo,  Statins,  and  Claudius,  do  no  leffe

commende  it It  were  to  longe  here  to  fpeake  of  the  greate  plentie  of  fine  woolles  lyttle  inferiour  vnto  owrs :

alfo  abundaunce  of  fugar,  vines,  pomegranates,  limondes,  and  orangies  in  fuch  plentie  that  they  fuffice  not  only

Spayne,  but  alfo  in  maner  all  Europe :  whereas  the  apples  and  crabbes  of  Englande  are  fcarfely  able  to  ferue  it  felfe.

And  althowghe  here  fumme  wyll  obiecte,  that  they  lacke  come,  woodde,  and  certeyne  other  thynges,  yet  are  theyr

commodities  fo  greate  otherwyfe,  that  al  fuch  thynges  are  browght  them  owt  of  other  countreys  for  theyr  wares :

and  that  in  fuch  plentie,  that  they  are  there  better  chepe  then  euer  they  were  in  Englande  fence  the  figne  of  the

fleeple  the  poore  mans  Inne  was  pulled  downe  in  all  places. Summe  for  lacke  of  other  matter,  fynde  greate

faute  that  in  trauaylynge  in  Spayne,  men  fhalbe  ferued  with  halfe  a  henne,  and  go  to  the  cookes  for  theyr  meate

and  to  the  tauerne  for  theyr  drynke. And  what  then  I  praye  yow?  What  inconuenience  enfeweth  hereof?  Is  it

not  better  fo  to  doo  then  to  pay  thryfe  for  one  thinge  as  is  the  maner  to  doo  in  fumme  of  owre  Innes  and  in

tauernes  where  all  that  eate  rofle  meate  are  beaten  with  the  fpitte,  as  where  they  that  of  late  in  Barthelmewe

fayre  payde  fortie  penfe  for  a  pygge,  where  the  good  man  of  the  houfe  was  not  a  fliamed  to  make  his  vaunte  that

he  had  made  foure  fliyllynges  of  a  pygge,  and  had  in  one  day  taken  foure  pounde  for  pygges. But  if  I  fliuld

here  particularly  and  at  large  declare  howe  Englande  is  in  fewe  yeares  decayed  and  impoueryfflied,  and  howe

on  the  contrary  parte  Spayne  is  inryched,  I  fhulde  perhappes  difpleafe  more  in  defcrybyng  the  myferie  of  the

one,  then  pleafe  other  in  e.xpreffynge  the  floryffliynge  flate  of  the  other,  which  by  all  reafon  is  lyke  dayly  to

increafe,  afwell  for  the  great  rycheffe  that  are  yearely  browght  thyther  from  the  Indies,  as  alfo  for  the  ryche  fyluer

mynes  that  are  founde  of  late  in  Spayne  in  the  countrey  of  Aduria  as  I  was  credably  informed  by  the  woorthy

and  lerned  gentelman  Auguflinus  de  Ceratta,  Contador  (that  is)  the  auditour  of  the  kynges  myntes  who  had

longe  before  byn  furueyoure  of  the  golde  mynes  of  Peru,  and  browght  from  thenfe  and  from  Rio  de  Plata,  xiii.

thoufand  pounde  weyght  of  fyluer  which  was  coyned  to  the  kinges  vfe  in  the  towre  of  London  where  neuer  fo

much  hath  byn  feene  at  once  as  fuche  as  haue  byn  owlde  officers  in  the  mynte  doo  affirme. What  fliulde  I

heare  fpeake  of  the  golde  which  th[e]emperours  maieflie  receaueth  frome  all  the  Indies,  whereas  onely  in  the  two

meltynge  fhoppes  of  the  gold  mires  of  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  is  molten  yearely  three  hundreth  thoufande

pounde  weyght  of.  viii.  vnces  to  the  pound,  wherof  the  fyfte  parte  is  dewe  vnto  hym,  whiche  amounteth  to  three

fcore  thoufande  weyght  yearely. Yet  doo  I  not  here  fpeake  of  the  golde  mines  of  the  other  Ilandes  and  the

firme  lande  reachynge.  viii.  thoufande  myles  from  the  north  to  the  fouth:  Neyther  of  the  ryche  Ilandes  of  the

fouth  fea  cauled  Mare  del  Sur,  where  the  kynge  of  one  lyttle  Ilande  named  Tacarequi,  Margaritea,  or  de  las

Perlas,  lying  in  the  goulfe  of  Saynt  Michael,  payeth  yearely  for  his  tribute  a  hundreth  pounde  weight  of  perles :

Neyther  yet  of  the  fyfte  parte  of  other  thynges,  as  precious  flones,  brafile,  goffampine  cotton,  fpices,  and  dyuers

other  thynges,  wheras  alfo  the  ryche  Ilandes  cauled  the  Maluchas  perteyne  to  the  inheritaunce  of  Caflile,

althowgh  the  kynge  of  Portugale  enioy  them  for  certeyne  yeares  by  compofition. But  the  Indies  haue  rebelled

(fay  they)  and  there  commeth  no  more  golde  from  thenfe. But  what  if  fumme  of  them  haue  rebelled  ?  dooth  it

therby  folowe  that  there  commeth  no  more  gold  from  the  other  that  lyue  vnder  obedience  ?  But  if  thou  wylte  fay

that  they  haue  al  rebelled  at  once,  thou  mufl  proue  that  thou  fayefl  eyther  by  hyflorie  or  wytnefTe  of  fuch  as

know  the  truth  herof,  as  I  (hauing  made  diligent  fearche  for  the  fame)  am  able  to  proue  the  contrarie,  and  that

54

The  Preface  to  the  Reader.

55

fuche  talkc  is  onely  imagined  by  bufie  hcaddcs.  Agcync:  what  if  they  haue  rebelled  in  fumme  prouinces  ?
dooth  it  folowe  that  they  maye  not  ageyne  be  browght  vnder  fuljiection  as  were  oftentymes  the  prouinces  of  the
Romanes  and  as  were  in  owrc  dayes  dyuers  countreys  of  Englande  whiche  haue  byn  fore  afflicted  with  that
plage.  But  whether  the  fandes  of  the  ryuers  and  the  mountaynes  of  the  Indies  bee  fo  emptied  with  golde  that
no  more  can  be  founde  there,  I  thinke  it  here  fuperfluous  to  anfwere  to  this  obiection,  forafmuch  as  it  is  here-
after confuted  in  the  booke  of  metals  where  yow  fhall  fynde  by  experience  that  metals  growe  and  increafe,  and
that  after  certeyne  yeares.  fuche  owlde  caues  of  the  mynes  as  haue  byn  dygged,  are  ageyne  replenyfflied  with  vre :
Alfo  that  the  fprynges  of  fuche  mountaynes  turnynge  theyr  courfe  and  breakynge  furth  in  other  places,  brynge
with  them  greate  plentie  of  fuch  golden  fande  as  is  founde  in  the  ryuers  into  the  which  they  faule.  What
impudencie  is  it  therfore  with  woordes  of  reproche  to  caule  hym  poore  whofe  poure  is  fo  greate,  his  treafure  fo
infinite,  and  his  doinges  fo  chargeable,  that  I  beleeue  that  when  fo  euer  it  pleafe  almyghtie  God  to  caule  hym
frome  this  lyfe  to  the  greate  domage  of  all  Chryflendome,  it  fhalbe  harde  to  fynde  an  other  that  (hall  in  all  poyntes
bee  fo  well  able  to  fupplye  that  roome  and  maynteyne  th[e]imperiall  dignitie.  Let  al  honefl  natures  therfore  leame
to  fpeake  well  of  princes  accordynge  to  the  fentence  De  Principibus  nil  nifi  bonum,  forafmuch  as  they  are  the
miniflers  of  god  who  hath  theyr  hartes  in  his  hande  and  ruleth  the  fame  as  feemeth  befte  vnto  hym.  For  there
is  no  poure  neyther  good  nor  badde,  but  of  god :  and  he  that  refyfleth  or  fpeaketh  euyll  of  the  poure,  refideth
and  fpeaketh  euyll  of  god. Thou  flialt  not  fpeake  euyll  of  the  prince  or  ruler  of  thy  people  faith  faint  Paule.

But  wheras  nowe  by  the  poure  of  Neptunus  (I  wot  nere  with  what  \vynde)  I  haue  byn  dryuen  thus  farre
from  my  nauigations,  I  haue  thought  good  to  turne  my  fayles  and  to  folowe  the  ordinarie  courfe  which  I  beganne,
and  by  th[e]exemple  of  this  woorthy  capitayne  kynge  Ferdinando,  encourage  al  other  to  theyr  poure  to  attempte
the  lyke  vyages :  As  touchynge  the  which  in  fewe  woordes  to  declare  my  opynyon,  if  any  man  (hulde  a(ke  me
what  I  thynke  thefe  thinges  wyll  growe  to  in  tyme,  I  wyll  anfwere  as  dooth  the  autoure  of  this  booke,
that  when  I  confyder  howe  farre  owre  pofleritie  fliall  fee  the  Chriflian  religion  enlarged,  I  am  not  able
with  tounge  or  penne  to  expreffe  what  I  conceaue  hereof  in  my  mynd.  Yet  one  thyng  I  fee  which  enforceth
me  to  fpeake  and  lament,  that  the  haruefl  is  fo  great  and  the  workemen  fo  few.  The  Spanyardes  haue  (hewed  a
good  exemple  to  all  Chryftian  nations  to  folowe.  But  as  god  is  great  and  woonderfull  in  all  his  woorkes,
fo  befyde  the  portion  of  lande  perteynyng  to  the  Spanyardes  (beinge  eyght  tymes  bygger  then  Italye  as
yowe  maye  reade  in  the  lade  booke  of  the  feconde  Decade)  and  befide  that  which  perteineth  to  the  Portugales,
there  yet  remayneth  an  other  portion  of  that  mayne  lande  reachynge  towarde  the  northea(l,  thought  to  be
as  large  as  the  other,  and  not  yet  knowen  but  only  by  the  fea  coafles,  neyther  inhabyted  by  any  Chriflian  men  :
whereas  neuertheleffe  (as  wryteth  Gemma  Phrifms)  in  this  lande  there  are  many  fayre  and  frutefuU  regions,
hygh  mountaynes,  and  fayre  ryuers,  with  abundaunce  of  golde  and  dyuers  kyndes  of  beafles.  Alfo  cities
and  towres  fo  wel  buylded  and  people  of  fuch  ciuilitie,  that  this  parte  of  the  worlde  feemeth  lyttle  inferiour
to  owre  Europe,  if  th[ejinhabitauntes  had  receaued  o\\Te  religion.  They  are  wyttie  people  and  refufe  not
barterynge  with  flraungers.  Thefe  regions  are  cauled  Terra  Florida  and  Regio  Baccalearum  or  Bacchallaos
of  the  which  yow  may  reade  fumwhat  in  this  booke  in  the  vyage  of  the  woorthy  owlde  man  yet  l}'uing
Sebafliane  Cabote,  in  the.  vi.  booke  of  the  thyrde  Decade.  But  Cabote  touched  only  in  the  north  comer
and  mofl  barbarous  parte  hereof,  from  whenfe  he  was  repulfed  with  Ife  in  the  moneth  of  luly.  Neuertheleffe,
the  weft  and  fouth  partes  of  thefe  regions  haue  fence  byn  better  fearched  by  other,  and  founde  to  bee
as  we  haue  fayde  before.  The  chiefe  citie  in  the  fouthweft  partes  of  thefe  regions,  is  cauled  Temixtetan,
or  Mexico  in  maner  vnder  the  circle  cauled  Tropicus  Cancri,  and  ftrongely  defended  by  the  nature  of
the  place.  For  it  ftandeth  in  a  very  great  lake  hauynge  abowt  it  innumerable  britlges,  and  buyldynges
to  be  compared  to  the  woorkes  of  Dedalus.  Th[e]inhabitauntes  alfo  can  wr^-te  and  reade.  Summe  wnters
connecte  this  lande  to  the  firme  lande  of  Afia  :  But  the  truth  hereof  is  not  yet  knowen.  And  althoughe
the  Spanyardes  haue  certeyne  colonies  in  that  part  of  this  lande  that  is  nowe  cauled  Nona  Hifpania,  yet  are
the  people  for  the  mofte  parte  Idolatours.  Howe  much  therfore  is  it  to  be  lamented,  and  howe  greatly
dooth  it  founde  to  the  reproche  of  all  Chriftendome,  and  efpecially  to  fuch  as  dwell  nereft  to  thefe  landes
(as  we  doo)  beinge  muche  nearer  vnto  the  fame  then  are  the  Spanyardes  (as  within,  xxv.  da)es  faylinge
and  leffe)  howe  muche  I  faye  fliall  this  founde  vnto  owre  reproche  and  inexcufable  flothfulnelTe  and
negligence  bothe  before  god  and  the  worlde,  that  fo  large  dominions  of  fuch  tractable  people  and  pure
gentiles,  not  beinge  hytherto  corrupted  with  any  other  falfe  religion  (and  therefore  the  eafyer  to  bee  allured
to  embrafe  owres)  are  nowe  knowen  vnto  vs,  and  that  we  haue  no  refpecte  neyther  for  goddes  caufe  nor
for  owTe  owne  commoditie  to  attempte  fumme  vyages  into  thefe  coaftes,  to  doo  for  owr  partes  as  the
Spaniardes  haue  doone  for  theyrs,  and  not  euer  lyke  fheepe  to  haunte  one  trade,  and  to  doo  nothynge
woorthy  memorie  amonge  men  or  thankes  before  god,  who  maye  herein  woorthely  accufe  vs  for  the
(lackenelTe  of  owre  dewtie  towarde  hym.  Saynt  Paule  the  doctoure  of  the  gentiles  (to  whofe  Apoftelfhippe
alfo  thefe  newe  gentiles  doo  pcrteinc)  was  of  fuch  zeale  toward  the  lewcs  whom  god  had  reiectai,  that

The  nauigations
of  the  Spanyardes

Itali  is.  I020  myles
in  lengthc  ard.
126.  in  breadthe.

The  lande  cauled
Terra  florida,  and
regio  baccalearum.

Looke  the  last
booke,  thirde
.  decade.
This  region  is
now  cauled  Noua
Hispania. Sum
thinke  that  this
citie  is  Quinsai  of
Marcus  Paulus.

Looke  the  last
booke  of  the  >
decade,  and  the
beginning  of  the
booke  of  the
landes  lately
found.

The  godlye  reale
of.  S  Paule.

55

56

The  Preface  to  the  Reader

IsaL  66>

Cregorie  the  First

Threloffice  of
by!.hoppes.

England
converted  to  the
faith  of  Christ.

This  vnifride  was
afterwarde
named  Boneface.

\V'hether  any  may
bee  compelled  to
the  faythe.

The  tyme  of
miracles.

Miracles  of  late
dayes.

Howe  Israeli
possessed  the
lande  of
promesse.

Esdra.  i.
cap.  4.

he  wylTlied  hym  fclfe  to  bee  accurfed  of  god  for  thcyr  fakes. He  went  from  Damafcus  to  Arable,  preached

the  gofpell  in  Grecia, came  prifoner  to  Rome,  was  fcourgcd  and  floned,  and  fuffcred  thryfe  fliypwracke,

what  then  thinke  yow  he  wold  do  if  he  were  now  aHiie  ? Is  it  to  be  thought  that  lie  wolde  not  acUienture.

XXV.  dayes  faylynge  to  come  to  fuch  a  marte  of  foules  in  fuch  redineffe  to  bee  eafely  obteyned  ? I  beleue

verely  that  neyther  death,  nor  the  deuyll,  nor  Leuiathan,  nor  the  worlde,  fliulde  let  hym  but  that  he  wolde  geue

th[e]onfet  ageynfl  them  all  in  hope  of  victorie  by  hym  by  whom  he  fayth  he  can  doo  all  thynges. He  was  not

negligent  in  his  office  nor  ignorant  of  his  rewarde,  but  trufted  to  the  promcffe  of  him  that  fayde  by  the

mouth  of  the  prophet  Ifai : Of  them that flialbe faued,  I  wyl  fendc  fum  to  the  gentyles  in  the  fea,  into

Aphrike  and  Libia,  Italie,  and  Grecia,  and  into  the  Ilandcs  a  farre  of,  to  them  that  haue  not  harde  of  me,

and  haue  not  feene  my  glorie. The  like  zeale  that  Paule  had,  and  proceadynge  of  the  fame  fpirite,  hath

euer  fence  Chryfles  tyme,  moued  not  only  the  Apoflles,  but  alfo  many  other  famous  and  godly  men  (as

fuperuifours  of  his  teflamente)  to  fende  owte  preachers  into  dyuers  partes  of  the  worlde  to  fliewe  furth  the

gladde  tydynge  of  the  gofpell. By  this  zeale  dyd  Gregorye  byflhoppe  of  Rome  and  fyrfle  of  that  name,

when  he  fawe  Englyfflie  mens  chyldren  in Rome  and  aOced  what  nation  they  were, when anfwere was

made  hym  in the  laten  tounge  that  they  were  Angli, (that  is, Englyfflie  men)  he fayd  (alludyng  to  the

fimilitude of  the  worde) that they  myght  wel  be  canled Angcli, that  is. Angels  : Meanyng therby  that

lyke  as  god  had  done  his  part  in  geuyng  them  bodies  of  natural  bewtie  and  comelyneffe,  fo  it  apperteyned

to  his  office  beinge  the  cheefe  pafloure  of  goddes  flocke,  to  prouyde  that  theyr  foules might be made

woorthy  to inhabite fuch  bodies  and  the  hole  nation  confecrated  vnto  god  by  baptifme. For  he  fayde

furthermore  :  It  is  meete  that  vnto  thefe  alfo,  the  gofpell  of  life  bee  preached  :  And  hereuppon  immediatly

fent  preachers  into Englande  whereby the hole nation  was in fhorte tyme conuerted to  Chrifles faith,

although  fum  had  receaued  the  gofpell  long  before  euen  from  Chryfles  tyme  by  the  preachyng  of  lofeph

of  Arimathia  who  afked  the  body  of  Chryfle of  Pilote, and buryed it reuerently. I  wolde to  god  that

there  were  now  many  mo  fuch  Gregories  in  the  worlde*: And  that  there  might  lyke  zeale  and  gentelneffe

|_bee  founde  in  vs  Englyffhe  men  towarde  other  nations,  as  we  haue  founde  in  other  towarde  vs. Owre

prediceflbures  were  not  vtterlye  vnmyndefuU  of  thefe  benefites,  but  applyed  them  felues  lykewife  to  fpreade

the  gofpell  in  other  nations. For  Vadianus  in  his  booke  De  tribus  icrrcc  partibiis,  wryteth,  that  more  then

feuen  hundrethe  yeares  after  the  death  of  Chryfte,  one  Vnefride  an  Englyffhe  man  and  byfflioppe  of  Mogunce,

(nowe  cauled  Menfe)  was  the  fyrfle  that  tawght  the  fayth  of  Chryfle  amonge  the  Germaynes,  at  fuch  tyme

as  the  Frankes  and  Almaynes  had  paffed  ouer  the  ryuers  of  Rhene  and  Danubius,  and  by  puttynge  the

garryfons  of  the  Romans  to  flight,  had  poffeffed  a  great  parte  of  theyr  mofl  notable  prouinces. For  albeit

that  thefe  rude  and  barbarous  nations  then  accuflomed  onely  to  warre  and  robberie  did  hardly  admitte

that  holfome  doctrine  at  the  beginning. Yet  by  the  pollicie  and  wifedome  of  the  Frankes,  it  came  fo  to

pafle  that  in  maner  through  owt  all  Germanic,  greate  increafe  of  the  Chriflian  religion  folowed  there  mofle

ample  victories,  as  the  lyke  fucceffe  is  alfo  feene  in  thefe  barbarous  nations  fubdued  by  the  Spanyardes.

Whereby  it  is  apparent,  that  although  fum  holde  opinion  that  none  owght  to  bee  compelled  to  the  faythe,

yet  we  fee  by  experience  that  withowt  difputynge  of  opinions  (lefle  the  pacientes  fhulde  dye  before  the

phifitians  agree  of  the  remedie)  thefe  entreprifes  haue  taken  good  effect  to  the  great  glory  of  god  who  cauleth

men  vnto  hym  by  dyuers  meanes  and  at  dyuers  ages of  the declinynge worlde,  otherwyfe nowe  then  in

the  tyme  of  Chryfle  and  his  Apo'lles  vv'hen the  poure  of  miracles  was  giuen  vnto  men  to  confirme  the

newe  fayth  which  had  yet  preuaiied  no  where  in  the  worlde. Albeit,  I  beleue  verely,  that  if  we  wolde  take

the  matter  in  hande  accordyngly,  god  wolde  not  forget  to  ayde  vs  with  miracles  if  it  fliuld  fo  be  requifite,

as  yowe  may  reade  in  this  booke  hovve  he  wrought  miracles  by  the  fayth  of  a  fimple  mariner  euen  in

th[e]infancie  of  faythe. And  fuerlye,  lyke  as  there  is  no  caufe  why  we  fhulde  anye  thynge  doubte  of  goddes

goodneffe  in  this  behalfe  if  the  faut  be  not  in  owre  felues. Euen  fo,  if  we  wolde  fyrfle  fette  oavtc  handes

to  the  plowe,  we  ought  to  hope  that  he  wolde  giue  encreafe  and  woorke  with  vs  as  he  hath  doone  with

other,  by  whofe  profperous  fucceffe we  may  plainely  fee  that  it  was  his  wyll  that  fuche  thynges  fliulde

go  forwarde. For  euen  Ifraell  to  whom  promeffe  was  made  by  fignes  and  miracles  that  they  fliulde  poffeffe  the

lande  to  th[e]inheritaunce  wherof,  the  fea  opened  it  felfe  to  giue  them  free  paffage,  yet  were  they  commaunded  by

the  poure  of  the  fwoorde  to  make  way,  with  greate  loffe  and  flaughter  of  men  and  by  force  of  armes  to  obteyne

the  lande  promyfed  to  theyr  fathers,  whiche  neuertheleffe  fewe  of  them  poffeffed  that  firfl  fought  for  the  fame,

but  lefte  the)T  carkefes  in  the  wilderneffe. Is  it  not  alfo  written  of  the  luwes  which  repayred  the  walles

of  the  citie  of  Hierufalem  after  theyr  captiuitie  in  Babilon,  that  Neheniias  theyr  capitaine  fet  the  people  in

order  with  fwoordes,  fpeares,  and  bowes  to  defende  the  woorkemen  ? And  that  alfo  euen  the  Princes  of  luda

wrought  vppon  the  walles  and  caried  burdens  ?  lykewyfe  that  they  wrought  with  one  hande  and  held  theyr

fwoordes in the other  ? And if  it were  lawful  for  Ifraell  accordynge  to  the  fleffhe,  to  vfe  all  meanes  and

poUicies  to  buylde  vp  the  walles  of  earthly  Hierufalem,  howe  muche  more  then  ought  the  fpirituall  Ifraelites  to

S6

The  Preface  to  the  Reader.

57

vfe  all  poffible  meancs  to  buylde  vp  the  walles  and  temples  of  fpirituall  Hierufalem,  whofe  fundation  is  Chrifle,
wyllynge  all  the  nations  of  the  worlde  to  be  buylded  vppon  the  fame.  It  is  the  propertie  of  a  wyfe  buylder  to
vfe  fuch  tooles  as  the  woorke  requireth.  And  not  at  all  tymes  or  in  all  woorkes  to  vfe  one  toole.  For  that
that  ferueth  in  fofte  tymber,  wyll  not  feme  in  knottie  pieces,  nor  yet  for  flones.  Th[e]expert  phifitian  vfeth
vehement  remedies  for  defperate  difeafes :  And  cunninge  furgians  vfe  bumynge  and  cuttynge  if  the  cafe  fo
require,  as  in  cuttynge  of  the  fynger  to  faue  the  hande,  or  in  cuttyng  c'"  the  hand  to  faue  the  hole  body.  Ye  it
hath  fumtymes  fo  chaunfed  that  wheras  men  haue  entended  hurt,  there  hath  good  proceaded  therof  in  fine :  As
he  that  wolde  haue  flaine  Prometheus,  wounded  his  wenne  with  his  fwoorde,  whereby  he  was  healed  of  that
difeafe.  So  is  god  able  to  turne  euyll  into  good,  and  to  make  thynges  that  are  not,  as  thynges  that  are.  Euen
fo  although  fumme  wyll  obiecte  that  the  defyre  of  golde  was  the  chiefe  caufe  that  moued  the  Spanyardes  and
Portugales  to  fearche  the  newe  founde  landes,  trewly  albeit  we  fhulde  admitte  it  to  bee  the  chiefe  caufe,  yet  dooth
it  not  folowc  that  it  was  the  only  caufe,  forafmuch  as  nothyng  letteth  but  that  a  man  may  bee  a  warrier  or  a
marchaunte,  and  alfo  a  Chriftian.  Therefore  what  fo  euer  owre  chiefe  intente  bee,  eyther  to  obteyne  worldely
fame  or  rycheffe,  (althoughe  the  zeale  to  encreafe  Chriflian  religion  ought  chiefly  to  moue  vs)  I  wolde  to  god  we
wolde  fyrfl.  attempte  the  matter;  And  then  I  doubte  not  but  that  it  wolde  fo  comme  to  pafle  with  vs  as  it  dyd
with  them  who  of  longe  time  after  the  beginning  of  the  worlde  before  menne  were  accuflomed  to  eate  flefflie,
thought  it  firfl  fufficient  fo  to  vfe  them  felues  amonge  beaRes  that  they  were  not  hurte  of  them:  but  fhortly  after,
vfed  them  for  theyr  commoditie :  Then  begunne  to  weare  the>T  fkinnes :  And  in  fine,  fell  to  eatynge  of  thejT
flefflie,  and  to  vfe  certeine  partes  of  them  for  remedies  ageinfl.  difeafes.  Euen  fo  may  thefe  barbarians  by  the
only  conuerfation  with  the  Chriflians,  (although  they  were  enforced  therto)  be  brought  to  fuch  familiaritie  with
ciuilitie  and  vertue,  that  not  onely  we  maye  take  greate  commoditie  thereby,  but  they  may  alfo  herewith  imbibe
trewe  religion  as  a  thing  accidental  although  neyther  they  nor  we  fliulde  feeke  the  fame.  For  lyke  as  they  that
goo  much  in  the  foonne,  are  coloured  therewith  although  they  go  not  for  that  purpofe,  So  may  the  conuerfation
of  the  Chriflians  with  the  gentyles  induce  theym  to  owre  religion,  where  there  is  no  greater  caufe  of  contrarye
to  refyft.e  as  is  in  the  luwes  and  Turkes  who  are  alredy  drowned  in  theyr  confirmed  erroure.  But  thefe  fimple
gentiles  lyuinge  only  after  the  lawe  of  nature,  may  well  bee  lykened  to  a  fmoothe  and  bare  table  vnpainted,  or
a  white  paper  vnwritten,  vpon  the  which  yow  may  at  the  fyrfl  paynte  or  wryte  what  yow  lyfle,  as  yow  can  not
vppon  tables  alredy  paynted,  vnleffe  yow  rafe  or  blot  owt  the  fyrfle  formes.  They  may  alfo  th[e]eflyer  bee  allured  to
the  Chriflian  fayth,  for  that  it  is  more  agreable  to  the  lawe  of  nature  then  eyther  the  cerimonious  lawe  of  Moifes,
or  portentous  fables  of  Mahometes  Alcharon.  If  we  were  therfore  as  defyrous  to  enlarge  the  fayth  of  Chr)'fle
as  to  feeke  worldly  gooddes,  why  do  we  deferre  to  aduenture  that  wherin  we  may  doo  bothe.  We  mufl.e  not
nowe  looke  for  a  newe  Paule  or  doctoure  of  the  gentiles  to  bee  conuerted  by  heauenly  reuelations:  Or  for  a
newe  Moifes  to  leade  men  through  the  fea :  Or  for  an  Angel  to  cary  men  in  the  ayer  from  one  place  to  an  other
as  Habacucke  the  prophete  was  caryed  by  the  heare  of  his  heade  from  ludea  to  Babilon :  Or  as  Phylippe
th[e]appoflle  was  caryed  by  the  fpirite  from  Gaza  to  Azotus:  but  mufl.e  (as  fayth  the  prophete  Ifaias)  euery  man
exhorte  his  neyghboure,  and  bid  his  broother  be  of  good  chere :  That  the  mafon  and  carpenter  may  buylde
togyther,  and  fay  to  the  glewe  or  cemente,  it  is  good  and  fafle  byndynge.  What  negligence  and  flackenefle  hath
hytherto  byn  in  Chrifl.ian  men  in  this  kynde  of  buyldynge  of  goddes  lyuely  temple,  the  greate  clerke  Erafmus
hath  declared  in  his  booke  intiteled  Eccleffiafles,  whofe  woordes  for  the  woorthyneffe  of  the  autoure,  I  haue  here
thowght  good  to  rehearfe  as  they  are  wrytten  by  hym  in  the  laten  tounge  in  the  fyrfle  booke  of  the  fayde  woorke.
He  wryteth  therfore  as  foloweth.

Andimus  quotidianas  quercmonias  deplorantiuvi  collapfam  Chrijlianam  rdigioncm,  eamque  ditioncm  quce  quondam
conplexa  ejl  vtiiuei-fum  tcrrarum  orbem,  in  has  angnjlias  effe  contraclam.  Hoc  igitiir  qiiibus  ex  aniniodold,  cos  deed
ardentibiis  afsiduifqiie  votis  flagitare  a  Chrijlo  vt  operarios  digndur  mittere  in  meffem  fiiam,  aid  (vt  melius  dicam)
feminatores  mittere  in  fcgetem  fuam.  Deum  immortalem,  quantum  in  orbe  patet  agrorum  in  quibus  aut  non  dum
iaHiim  ejl  femen  Euangdiaim,  aut  ita  iaHum  ejt,  vt  plus  fd  zizaniarum  quam  tritici.  Orbis  minima  pars  ejl
Europa:  Omnium  fiorentifsima  pars  ejl  GrcBcia  d  Afia  minor  in  quam  magno  fucceffu  primutn  a  ludeea  d''nigrauit
Euangdium.  At  hcec  fere  tota,  nonne  tendur  a  Mahumdanis  d  ijs  qui  Chrijli  nomcn  Jiabait  inuifuml  Jam  in
Afia  maiore  qucB  latifsime  patet,  quid  obfccro  nojlrtun  ejl?  quum  ipja  Pakjlina  vnde  prima  efflux  it  lux  Eu  angelica,
Jeruiat  Allophylis?  In  Aphrica  vero  qidd  nojlrum  ejl?  Nee  dubitandum  ejl  quin  in  tanta  vajlitate  regionum  fint
populi  rudes  dfitnplices  qui  Jacile  pojfait  ad  Chrijlum  alici,fi  mittcrentur  qui  facer cnt  bonam  Jementem.  Quid  quod
quotidie  regiones  hafletms  incognitce  reperiuntur,  feriiniurque fuperejfc  quo  nullus  adhuc  noflraiium  peruaiit.  Omitto
nunc  infinitam  hidaorum  vim  nobis  admixtam :  omitto phirimos  qui  tit ulo  Chrijli  tegunt  Ethnicos:  omitto  tantas
fchifmaticorum  d  hcerdicorum  phalanges.  Quantus  in  his  ejfd  proumtus  Chrijlo,  fi  gnaui  ac  fddes  mittcrentur
operarij  qid  iaciantjemen  bonum,  qui  reuellant  zizaniam,  qui  plantent  plantulas  bonas,  ma  las  exterpent,  qui  extruant
domum  Dei,  demoliantur  Jlrufluras  non  innitentes  pdrce  Chrijlo,  dmique  qid  metant  maturam  Jegdcm,  fed  Chrijlo

The  buylding
of  spirituall
Hienisalcm.

n^

The  conuersion  rf
the  gentiles.

The  christian
faythr.

IsaL  45.

Augustia
Christian  t

ditioHis.

58

TJie  Preface  to  the  Reader,

FrtsteiiXH
Aethio/ia  rex.

FilapiL

Franciscani
Straphici.
Dotmnicani
Cherubici.

LlHgVtt

impericia.
Miracula.

DamJanus  a  Goes

To  the  christian
princes.

The  sheepe  of
Europe.

The  doctoure
of  diuinitie

An  admonition
to  riche  men.

The  marchant

mc  hint  nonfibi,  ct  an i mas  Domino  co//igant,  non  opes  fibi.  Nupcr  Aethiopia  rex  qucm  vulgus  appdlat  Frf/Ia'an,
pcroratorcmfuumfubmijltfefedi  Romanov,  non  nihil  cxpojlulans  aim  pontifice  quod  ca  gens  quum  a  fide  Chrijli
non  fit  a/iena,  tarn  din  fuerit  a  tociiis  orb  is  pajlorc  nei:;h-na.  Quidam  I'iri  boni,  et  propai:;aiidcz  relii:;ionis  Jlndiofi,
queruntur  Pilapios  ScythiiE  feptenirionalis  populum  mire  ftnipliccni  acrudem,  a  nefcio  quibus  principibus  Chrijlianis
teneri  ditione,fed  ita  duro  premi  iiigo  /nana no,  vt  eis  non  iniponatur  ftiatie  iuguni  Chrijli,  atquc  ita  fpoliari  bonis
externis,  vt  non  ditenfur  opihus  eiiangciicis.  Pulcherrimum,  Dcoque  gratifsitniim  erat  dare potius  quam  accipere  ijs
quos  Jludemus  Chrijlo  bierifaeere,  acfic  eos  in  ditionem  nojiram  reeipere  vt  gaiideant  fe  fiibieHos  effe principibus  fub
quorum  impcrio  commodius  degant  quam  ante  degebant.  Nouimus  ciairare  be/lias  fcras  et  horribiles,  vel  ad  volup-
tatem,  vel  ad  vfum  vulgarem:  et  non  nouimus  manfuefacere  homines  vt  feruiant  Chrijlo?  Monarclm  alunt  qui
doeeant  elephantos  ad  Jaltandum,  qui  doment  leones  ad  lujum,  qui  doment  lynccs  ct  leopardos  ad  venatum :  et
monarcha  ccclefiCB  non  inumit  quo  homines  alliciat  ad  amabile  Chrijli  feruicium  ?  Scio  vtx  vllam  reperiri  beluatn
domitu  difficiliorem  quam  eji  ludcrus  objlinatus,  et  obduratus  hcereticus :  quafiquatn  nulliwi  ejl  animal  tam  immite
quod  non  cicuretur  bencjicentia  ct  Juauitate.  E  rcpertis  regionibus  euchitur  aurum  et  gemmae :  Scd  triumpho  dignius
crat  illuc  inuehere  Chrijlianam  Japientiam  auro  prcciofiorenu,  ac  margaritum  euangeiiaim  quod  omnibus  diumditis
bcme  comparatur.  Dominus  iubet  Juis  rogare  dominum  mejsis  vt  exirudat  operarios  quod  mcjsis  ejfet  ampla,  operarij
pauci.  Non  minus  opus  ejl  nunc  rogare  deum  vt  in  tam  late  patentcs  agros  ejiciat  operarios,  Scd  cxcujant  omnes,
alius  aliud.  Atqui  Christiana  ditio  tot  habct  myriadas  Francijcanorum  hi  quibus  probabile  ejl  quamplurimos
ejfe  qui  vere  Jlagrant  igni  Jcraphico :  nee  pauciorcs  Junt  myriadcs  Dominicanorum,  ct  in  his  conjeutatieum  ejl
permultos  effe  Cherubici  fpiritus.  Ex  his  cohortibus  cligantur  virt,  mundo  vere  moriui,  Chrijlo  viui,  qui  Jyncere
apiid  barbaras  gaitcs  doeeant  verbum  Dei.  Exaijatur  lingua,  imperitia.  Atqui  principcs  ob  hufnanas  legationes
inucniunt  qui  varias  linguas  pcrdijcant :  Et  Themijloclcs  Athcnicnjes  vno  anno  fic  didicit  JermoJicm  Afiatiaim
vt  abjque  intaprete  aim  rege  loqui  pofjet :  An  idem  non  Jludcbimus  in  tam  Jublimi  ncgoeio  ?  Inter  barbaras
et  ignotas  nationcs  Apostoli  inuena-unt  vifliim  ct  amiHum :  ct  Deus  pollicitus  cjl  nihil  defuturum  qua;renii-
bus  regnum  Dei.  Nee  miracula  quidem  dcjutura  Junt  fi  res  pojlulet,  modo  ad  fit  Jynccra  fides  cum  feraphica
charitate,  dr^c.

Furthermore  Damianus a Goes, wryteth  in his booke  De  dcploratione  Lappiana;  gcntis, that  he  was  the

fyrfl.  that  moued  Erafmus  to  fpeake  fumwhat  hereof: And  that  he  (Erafmus  I  meane)  was  determined  to

write  a  iufl  vohime of  this matter  yf  he  had  not  byn  preuented by  death. Albeit (fayth Damianus)  in

his  booke  entiteled  Ecclefiafl.es,  he  dyd  not  keepe  filence  of  fo  wicked  an  vngodlyneffe,  whiche  furely  is

fuche, that  it  may  in  maner  make  all  Chrifl.ian  men  (and  efpeciallye fuch vnto  whom god  hath  gyuen

poure  and  knowleage)  giltie  of  fo  heyghnous  a  crime,  that  he  may  take  vengeance  of  them  in  the  day  of

iudgement  before  the  iufle  iudge  Chryfl.. Nowe  therfore  (fayth  he)  let  the  Chriflian  Monarches  take  heede

what  accoumpte  they  fhall  make  before  the  tribunal  of  Chryfl.e  at  the  lafl.e  daye,  when  neyther  fauoure,

nor  pardon,  or  flatterie  can  take  place  to  bee  any  excufe  for  the  loffe  of  fo  manye  foules. And  thefe  be

the  very  woordes  of  the  woorfhipful  and  lerned  man  Damianus  a  Goes,  wrytten  to  the  byffhoppe  of  Rome

Paule  the  thyrde  of  that  name,  whom  he  further  chargeth  to  looke  diligently  hereunto,  as  a  thynge  mofl.e

chiefely  perteynynge  to  the  office of  Chriflian prelates. Mee thynke  verely  that the  flieepe  of  Europe

fhulde  by  this  tyme  be  fo  well  fedde,  that  they  fhulde  by  good  reafon  be  fo  flronge  and  mightie  in  Chrifles

religion (excepte  they  be  infected  with the  dyfeafe  which  the  phificians caule  Cachexia, beinge  an euyl

difpofition  of  the  body  whereby  the  more  they  are  fed  the  worfe  they  lyke)  that  many  fheppardes  myght

well  bee  fpared  to  bee  fent  to  other  fheepe  which  ought  to  be  of  the  fame  foulde. For  this  purpofe  the

doctoure  of  diuinitie  when  he  commenfeth,  hath  .his  fcapular  cafl.  ouer  his  headde  in  token  that  he  hathe

forfaken  the  worlde  for  Chrifles  fake  :  And  his  bootes  on  his  legges  in  token  that  he  fliall  euer  bee  in  a

redineffe  to  go  fonvarde  in  preachynge  the  gofpell,  as  I  doubte  not  there  bee  many  in  Englande  wolde

gladly  doo  euen  amonge  thefe  newe  gentyles  if  they  were  therto  mainteyned  by  the  ayde  of  the  fecular

poupe  as  in  this  cafe  it  flialbe  requifite  for the furniture of  neceffaries hereunto apperteynynge, I  mufl.

nowe  therfore  appele  vnto  yow,  yow  riche  men  and  rulers  of  the  worlde,  to  whom  god  hath  giuen  gooddes

as  thynges  neyther  good  nor  badde  of  them  felues,  but  onely  as  they  are  vfed  wel  or  euil. If  yowe  vfe

them  well,  they  are  the  gyftes  of  god  wherwith  yow  may  doo  many  thynges  acceptable  both  to  god  and  men.

And  if  yow  vfe  them  otherwyfe,  yowe  poffeffe  not  them,  but  they  poffeffe  yow,  and  theyr  canker  and  rufle

(as  faythe  the  Apoflle)  flialbe  a  tefl-imonie  ageinft  yow  in  the  day  of  the  great  audit. Thinke  not  therfore

that  this thynge  perteyneth  not  vnto  yowe, if  yowe perteyne  vnto Chrifle  and  looke to haue  any  parte

with  hym. Confyder  with  yowre  felues  if  it  were onely  to  get  worldely  ryclies, howe  redye  and  greedy

yowe  wolde  bee  to  venture  a  greate  deale  to  get  a  thyrde  part,  withowt  cafl.ynge  of  any  perell  by  lande  or

by  fea,  as  the  wyttie  poet  Horafe  hath  in  fewe  wordcs  dcfcrybed  the  marchauntes  defyre  and  aduenture'

to  obteyne  rychcffe.
s8

TJie  Preface  to  the  Reader.

59

Ifiipigcr  extremos  ciirrit  mercatcr  ad  Iiidos,
J-er  mare  pauperie7n  fugiens,  per  faxa,  per  i^nes.

The  which  verfes  are  tlius  mucli  to  fay  in  effecte.

The  marchaunt  in  hope  greate  rycheffe  to  fynde,
By  fyer  and  by  water  paffeth  to  Inde,
By  the  burnte  hne  or  Equinoctiallj
To  flye  from  pouertie  and  hafarde  all.

As  the  poet  hath  in  thefe  verfes,  by  the  marchaunt  declared  the  defyre  that  couetous  men  haue  to
obteyne  flippery  riches,  the  lyke  aftection  to  obteyne  worldly  fame  and  honour,  maye  we  fee  in  valiant
and  noble  capitaynes  in  the  warres  where  they  contende  to  put  -them  felues  forwarde  to  the  mofle  daungerous
aduenture  as  to  haue  the  forewarde  of  the  battayle  :  a  token  furely  of  much  nobilitie  and  manly  corage.
But  oh  immortall  god  ?  Is  it  not  to  bee  lamented  that  men  can  be  fo  valient,  flowte,  and  in  maner  defperate  in
theyr  owne  priuate  matters,  perteynyng  onely  to  theyr  bodies,  and  yet  fo  coulde,  negligent,  and  fearefuU
in  goddes  caufe  and  thynges  touchynge  the  health  of  theyr  foules  ?  If  there  were  neyther  deuyll  nor  lawe
to  accufe  men  before  god  in  this  cafe,  fhall  not  theyr  owne  confciences  bee  a  lawe  of  condemnation  ageynfle
theym  in  that  they  haue  not  fliewed  that  loue  to  mankynde,  which  the  very  lawe  of  nature  moueth  brute
beafles  to  (hewe  one  to  an  other  in  theyr  generations  ?  But  what  hope  is  there  (excepte  god  wolde  in
maner  by  myracle  conuerte  the  hartes  of  fuch  men)  what  hope  is  there  I  fay,  that  they  ^vyll  depart  with
any  of  theyr  gooddes,  muche  leffe  aduenture  theyr  bodies,  to  the  furtheraunce  of  Chrilles  religion  in  thefe
regions  beinge  fo  fan-e  from  them,  wheras  many  fhewe  lyttle  loue,  charitie,  or  liberalkie  (if  not  rather  crueltie,
tyrannic,  and  oppreffion)  to  theyr  poore  neighbours  and  brootheme  dwelling  euen  at  home  at  theyr  owne
elbowes.  But  as  this  couetoufneffe  is  to  bee  reproued,  fo  is  the  liberalitie  of  fuch  to  be  commended  as  haue
'^byn  at  greate  coalle  and  charges  in  fettynge  torwarde  fuche  viages  :  wherein  not  onely  the  marchauntes
of  London,  but  alfo  diuers  noble  men  and  gentelmen  afwell  of  the  counfayle  as  other,  which  bothe  with
theyr  money  and  furtheraunce  otherwyfe  haue  furnyffhed  and  fent  furth  certeyne  fhyppes  for  the  difcouerj-nge
of  fuche  landes  and  regions  as  were  heretofore  vnknowen,  haue  herein  deferued  immortall  fame,  for  as
much  as  in  fuch  attemptes  and  daungerous  vyages,  they  haue  fhewed  no  fmaule  liberalitie  vppon  vncerteyne
hope  of  gayne :  wherein  they  haue  deferued  fo  much  the  greater  prayfe  as  theyr  intent  feemed  to  bee  rather
to  further  honefl  enterprifes  then  for  refpecte  of  vantage.  And  here  certeynely  in  the  mention  of  thefe
viages  I  myght  feeme  vngratefull  if  I  fliulde  omitte  to  giue  dewe  commendations  to  the  two  chiefe  capitaynes
of  the  fame  as  the  woorthy  knyght  fyr  Hugh  Wylloby  and  the  excellent  pilotte  Rycharde  Chaunceler  who
haue  therein  aduentured  theyr  lyues  for  the  commoditie  of  theyr  countrey  :  Men  doubtlefle  woorthye  for  the\T
noble  attemptes  to  bee  made  knightes  of  the  Ocean  or  otherwyfe  preferred  if  euer  god  fende  them  home
ageyne  although  they  fayle  of  theyr  purpofe.  For  as  fuche  haue  obteyned  ablblute  glory  that  haue  browght
great  thynges  to  paffe,  fo  haue  they  deferued  immortall  fame  which  haue  only  attempted  the  fame  :  forafmuch
as  fortune  (who  fumtymes  fauoureth  the  vnworthyefl.)  is  not  in  the  poure  of  man.  Xcrfes  obteyned  glorie
in  makynge  a  bridge  ouer  the  fea  Hellefpontus  ioynynge  Europe  to  Afia,  and  Darius  ouer  Bofphorus  when
he  paffed  with  his  armye  towarde  the  Scythians.  No  leffe  fame  and  commenda?tion  (although  not  lyke
glory)  deferued  Demetrius,  Cefar,  Calligula,  and  Seleucus  Nicanor,  whiche  attempted  to  cutte  in  fundre
certeyne  places  cauled  IUhmi,  (beinge  narrowe  portions  of  lande  fo  diuidynge  twoo  leas,  that  there  is  no
paffage  from  the  one  to  the  other)  and  yet  neuer  finiffhed  that  they  tooke  in  hande,  beinge  hyndered
eyther  by  deathe,  warres,  or  other  chaunces.  The  auncient  Romans  and  Greekes  gaue  fuch  glorye  vnto
them  that  had  eyther  well  deferued  of  the  common  welthe,  or  otherwyfe  attempted  fuch  great  enterprifes
as  might  bee  profitable  for  mankynde,  that  after  theyr  death  they  caufed  Images  of  golde,  fyluer,  bralTe,
luery,  and  marble  to  bee  made  to  theyr  lykeneffe,  and  the  fame  to  be  placed  in  theyr  folemne  hauies,
palaices,  or  temples,  with  certeyne  verfes  made  to  the  commendation  of  them  whom  the  Images  repr^fented.
And  this  no  leffe  to  prouoke  and  encorage  other  forwarde  natures  to  th[e]emulation  of  their  vertues,  then
alfo  to  geue  them  the  due  honoure  of  theyr  iufl  defertes.  And  furely  if  euer  fence  the  begy-nnynge  of  the
worlde  any  enterpryfe  haue  deferued  greate  prayfe  as  a  thynge  atchyued  by  men  of  heroicall  vertue,
doubtleffe  there  was  neuer  any  more  woorthy  commendation  and  admiration  then  is  that  whiche  o^\Te
nation  haue  attempted  by  the  north  feas  to  difcouer  the  mightie  and  riche  empire  of  CaUiay,  by  which
vyage  not  only  golde,  fyluer,  precious  flones,  and  fpices,  may  be  browght  hcther  by  a  fafer  and  fliorter
way,  but  alfo  much  greater  matters  may  hereof  enfewe  in  tyme  if  it  fliall  pleafe  God  to  gyue  vnto  Chrillian
men  fuch  paffage  into  thofe  regions,  whereby  fuch  familiaritie  may  further  growe  betwene  the  Chrillian  princes

The  dasyre  of
wordcly  fame

Men  are  slothftill
ia  gMldes  cau^>c.

Vyages  from
£ag.ande.

Syr  Hugh
Wylloby  and
Rycharde
Chaunceler.

Glory  and  fame.

The  rewarde  of
noble  enterpriser

The  vyage  to
Caihay  by  ihe
north  &ca:>.

59

6o

The  Preface  to  the  Reader.

Societie  betwenc
the  Tartars  and
the  Christians
U'he  Turke.
The  Sophie.
Tambulanes.

Baiosetes.

of  Europe  and  the  greate  emperoure  of  Cathay,  tliat  (as  wryteth  Haytho  De  focidate  Chrijiianormn  et
Tariarorum)  there  can  nothynge  be  imagined  more  cffectuali  for  the  confufion  of  the  Turke  if  the  great
Cham  of  Cathay  and  the  Sophie  of  Perfia  on  the  one  fyde,  and  the  Chriftian  Princes  on  the  other  fyde,
(luilde  with  one  confent  inuatle  his  dominions,  as  dyd  Tamburlanes  Th[e]emperoure  of  the  Tartars  who  abowte
the  yeare  of  ChriRe.  M.  CCC.  Ixxxxviii.  toke  prifoner  Baiafetes  Ottomanus  Th[e]emperoure  of  the  Turkes  and
newe.  XX.  thouilxnde  of  his  men  in  one  battayle  befyde  many  other  great  victories,  as  yowe  may  further
reade  in  this  booke  in  the  hyRorie  of  Paulas  louius.  And  to  haue  fayde  thus  muche  in  maner  of  a  preface  it
may  fuffice.

6a

6i

[The  Third  English  book  on  America,

Which  is  also

The First English Collection of  Voyages,  Traffics, & Discoveries.

Cfte  liecfttre^  at  i\\t  tteiue  iJJorXtre  qx  J»est  Sntfirr,  etc.

SECTION I.

Pietro Martire.

The  First  Decade, . Of  the  Ocean.

First  printed  in  151 1.

The  Second  Decade, . Of  the  supposed  Continent.

The  Third  Decade, . \T!he  discovery  of  the  Pacifc  by

Vasco  Nunez  de  Balboa, on  the
i^th  September  151  3.  The
voyages  of  Pedro  Arias,  and
Sebastian  Cabot.^

The  Second  and  Third  Decades  were  first  printed  in  1516.

Of  the  new  found  islands  (i.e. Yucatan  and  Mexico.)

First  printed  in  1521.]

The  epistle  of  Peter  Martyr.

63

[This  eloquent  Dedication  first  appeared  in  the  Second  and  enlarged  Edition  of  the  Decades,  the  printing  of  which  was  finished  at
Alcala  on  9th  November  1516.  Nearly  the  whole  of  the  following  First  Decas  {pp.  65-105)  had,  however,  been  previously
printed  in  1511,  and  was  for  the  most  part  ivritien  even  earlier  than  that  year.]

C To  THE  MOSTE  NOBLE  PrINCE  AND  CaTHOLIKE  KYNGE,  CiIARLES,

Peter  Martyr  of  Angleria  wysheth
perpetuall  felicitie.

He  diuine  prouldence,  frome  the  tyme  that  he  fyrfte
created  the  worlde,  hathe  referued  vnto  this  day  the
knowleage  of  the  great  and  large  Ocean  fea :  In  the
which  tyme  he  hath  opened  the  fame,  chiefely  vnto
yowe  (mofte  mightie  Prince)  by  the  good  fortune
and  happie  fucceffe  of  yowr  grandfather  by  yowr
mothers  fyde.  The  fame  prouidence  (I  knowe  not
by  what  deftenie)  hath  brought  me  owt  of  my  natiue
countrey  of  Milane,  and  owt  of  the  citie  of  Rome
(where  I  continued  almoft.  x.  yeares)  into  Spaine,
that  I  myght  particularlye  collecte,  thefe  marueylous
and  newe  thynges,  which  flioulde  otherw}fe  pcr-
happes  haue  hne  drowned  in  the  whirlepoole  of
obhuion  :  forasmuch  as  the  Spanyardes  (men
woorthy  [of]  greate  commendation)  had  onely  care  to  the  generall  inuentions  of  thefe
thynges.  Notwithftandinge,  I  doo  not  chalenge  vnto  me  only,  the  thankes  of  the  trauaile
beflowed  herein,  wheras  the  chiefe  rewarde  therof  is  due  to  Afcanius  vicounte  Cardinal,
who  perceauynge  that  I  was  wyllyng  to  departe  owt  of  the  citie  to  be  prefent  at  the  warres
of  Granatum,  diffuaded  me  from  my  purpofe.  But  feing  that  I  was  fully  refolued  to
departe,  exhorted  and  required  me  to  wryte  vnto  hym  fuch  newes  as  were  famous  in  Spayne
and  woorthy  to  be  noted.  I  tooke  therfore  my  iorney  into  Spaine  chiefely  for  the  defyre  I
had  to  fee  th[e]expedition  whiche  was  prepared  ageynft  the  enemies  of  the  fayth  :
forafmuche  as  in  Italye,  by  reafon  of  the  diffention  among  the  Princes,  I  coulde  fynde
nothynge  wherewith  I  myght  feede  my  wytte,  beinge  a  younge  man  defyrous  of  knowleage
and  experience  of  thynges.  I  was  therefore  prefente  at  the  warres  :  from  whenfe  I  writte
to  Cardinal  Afcanius,  and  by  fundry  epiftels  certifyed  hym  of  fuch  thynges  as  I  thought
mofte  woorthye  to  be  put  in  memorie.  But  when  I  perceaued  that  his  fortune  was  turned
from  a  natural  moother  to  a  fteppedame,  I  ceafed  from  wrytynge.  Yet  after  I  fawe,  that
by  th[e]ouerthrowe  of  the  enemies  of  owre  fay  the,  Spayne  was  pourged  of  the  IMoores  as
of  an  euyll  weede  plucked  vp  by  the  rootes,  Leafte  I  fliulde  beftowe  my  flippery  yeares
in  vnprofitable  Idleneffe  I  was  mynded  to  returne  to  Italie.  But  the  fmguler  benignitie
of  bothe  the  Catholyke  Kynge  and  queene  nowe  departed,  and  theyr  large  promifes
towarde  me  vppon  my  returne  from  my  legacie  of  Babilon,  deteyned  me  frome  my
purpofe.  Yet  dooth  it  not  repent  me  that  I  drewe  backe  my  foote  :  Afwel  for  that  I
fee  in  no  other  place  of  the  worlde  at  this  time  the  lyke  woorthy  thinges  to  bee  done  :
As  alfo  that  in  maner  throwgh  owt  all  Italy,  by  reafon  of  the  difcorde  of  the  Chriftian

The  largencs  of
the  Ocean
\-nknoweD  to  this
day.

Cardinal  Ascanius.

The  warres  of
Granatum  ageyns*
the  Moores.

The  autour  was
sent  amhassadour
to  the  Soltane  of
Alcayr  in  E5>-pte.

Italy  disquieted
with  warres.

64

The  epistle  of  Peter  Martyr.

The  sequelcs  of

KytiRe  Frederike.

Leo  the  tenth,
by&hoppe  of  Rome.

SpajTie  subdued
from  the  Moores.

The  k>Ti[g]dome  of
Naples.

Note,  frome  the
beg^Tinj-ng  of  the
worlde.

The  temperatne<;s
of  the  Equinocti.ll
vnknowen  to  the
cwlde  wryters.

Continente  or  firme
lande  as  bygge  as
thre  Europes

Ryches  are  the
instrumentes  of
conquestes.

Princes,  I  perceaued  all  thync^es  to  runne  hcadclonge  into  mine,  the  countreys  to  be
deflroyed  and  made  fatte  with  human  bliidde  :  The  cities  facked,  virgines  and  matroncs
with  theyr  gooddes  and  poffeffions  caried  away  as  captiiies  and  miferable  innocentes
without  offence  to  be  flayne  vnarmed  within  theyr  owne  houfes.  Of  the  which
calamities,  I  dyd  not  onely  heare  the  lamentable  owtcryes,  but  dyd  alfo  feele  the  fame.
For  euen  the  bhidde  of  mine  owne  kinffolkes  and  frendes,  was  not  free  from  that  crueltie.
As  I  was  therfore  mufynge  with  my  felfe  of  thcfe  thynges,  the  Cardinal  of  Arragonie,
after  that  he  had  feene  the  two  fyrfhe  bookes  of  my  Decades  wrytten  to  Afcanius,
required  me  in  the  name  of  kynge  Frederike  his  vncle,  to  put  foorth  the  other  eyght
epiftell  bookes.  In  the  meane  tyme  alfo,  while  I  was  voyde  of  all  care  as  touchynge  the
matters  of  the  Ocean,  the  Apoflolicall  meffengers  of  the  byfflioppe  of  Rome  Leo  the
tenth,  (by  whofe  holfome  counfayle  and  autoritie  we  trufte  the  calamities  of  Italy  flialbe
fynyfflied)  rayfed  me  as  it  were  frome  fleape,  and  encoraged  me  to  proceade  as  I  had
begunne.  To  his  holyneffe  I  writte  two  Decades  compryfed  in  fliort  bokes  after  the
maner  of  epiftels,  and  added  them  to  the  fyrft,  which  was  printed  withowt  myne  aduife,
as  fliall  further  appeare  by  the  preface  folowynge.

But  nowe I returne to  yow (moft noble  Prince) from whom I haue  fumwhat

digreffed. Therfore  wheras  yowr  graundefathers  by  your  moothers  fyde,  haue  fubdued

all  Spayne  vnder  yowr  dominion  except  onely  one  corner  of  the  fame,  and  haue  alfo  lefte

yowe  the  kyngedome  of  Naples  with  the  frutefull  Ilandes  of  owr  feas,  it  is  fuerly  a  greate

thynge  and  woorthy  to  be  noted  in  owre  cronacles. But  not  offendynge  the  reuerence  due

to  owre  prediceffors,  what  fo  euer  frome  the  begynnynge  of  the  worlde  hath  byn  doone

or  wrytten  to  this  day,  to  my  iudgement  feemeth  but  little,  if  wee  confyder  what  newe

landes  and countreys,  what  newe  feas,  what  fundry  nations and tounges,  what  golde

mynes,  what  treafuries  of  perles  they  haue  lefte  vnto  yowre  hyghneffe,  befyde  other

reuenues. The  whiche,  what  they  are  and  howe  greate,  thefe  three  Decades  fliall  declare.

Come  therfore  mofhe  noble  Prince  elected  of  God,  and  enioy  that  hyghe  eflate  of

thynges  not  yet  vnderftode  to  men. We  offer  vnto  yowe  the  Equinoctiall  line  hetherto

vnknowen  and  burnte  by  the  furious  heate  of  the  foonne  and  vnhabitable  after  the  opinion

of  the  owlde  wryters  a  fewe  excepted  : But  nowe  founde  to  bee  moft  repleniffhed  with

people,  faire,  frutefull,  and  mofte  fortunate,  with  athowfande  Ilandes  crowned  with  golde

and  bewtifull  perles,  befyde  that  greate  portion  of  earth  fuppofed  to  bee  parte  of  the  firme

lande,  excedynge  in  quantitie  three  Europes. Come  therfore  and  embrafe  this  newe  worlde,

and  fuffer  vs  no  longer  to  confume  in  defyre  of  yowr  prefence. P"rom  henfe,

from  henfe  I  faye  (moft  noble  younge  Prince)  fhall  inflrumentcs

be  prepared  for  yow,  whereby  al  the  worlde  fhalbe

vnder  yowr  obeyfaunce.

And thus I byd yowr maieftie farewell  : To whofe tafte if I (hal

perceaue  the fruites of this my tyllage to be  delectable, I wyll

hereafter  doo  my  endeuoure  that  yowe  maye  receaue  the

fame more abundauntly. From  Madrid. The

day before the Calendes of October,

In the yeare of. Chryfte.

M.  D.  XVI.

S^'^'kB^

65

€1  THE FIRSTE BOOKE OF THE DECADES

OF  THE  OCEAN,  WRITTEN  BY  PETER  MARTYR  OF

Angleria,  Milenoes,  counfiler  to  the  kyng  of  Spayne  and

Protonotarie Apoflolicall, To Afcanms

Sphorcia,  vicount  Cardinall.  etc.

HE  REVERENDE  AND  thanckefull  antiquitewas  accuftomed
to  efteme  thofe  men  as  goddes,  by  whofe  induRrie  and  mag-
nanimitie  fuche  Landes  and  Regions  were  difcouered,  as  were
vnknowen  to  theyr  prediceffoures.  But  vnto  vs  hauynge  onely
one  god  whom  we  honour  in  triphcitie  of  perfon,  this  reileth,
that  albeit  we  do  not  woorfl:iip  that  kind  of  men  with  diuine
honoure,  yet  do  we  reuerence  them,  and  woorthely  mamell
at  theyr  noble  actes  and  enterprifes.  Vnto  kynges  and  princes
we  gyue  due  obeyfaunce,  by  whofe  gouemaunce  and  further-
aunce  they  haue  bin  ayded,  to  perfurme  theyr  attemptes.  We
commende  bothe,  and  for  theyr  iufl  defertes  worthely  extoU
them.  Wherfore,  as  concernyng  the  Ilandes  of  the  wefl  Ocean,
lately  difcouered,  and  of  the  auctours  of  the  fame,  (whiche
thynge  you  defyre  by  your  letters  to  knowe)  I  wyll  begj-nne  at
the  fyrfl  auctoure  therof,  lefle  I  be  iniurious  to  any  man.  Take
it  therfore  as  foloweth.

^  Chrijlophorus  Colonus  (other  wife  called  Columbus)  A  gen-
tilman  of  Italy,  borne  in  the  citie  of  Genua,  perfwaded  Fernando  and  Elyzabeth,  catholike  pr>-nces,  that  he
doubted  not  to  fynde  certayne  Ilandes  of  India,  nere  vnto  owre  Occean  fea,  if  they  wolde  furnyffhe  hym  \nth
fhyppes  and  other  thynges  apperteynynge.  Affyrminge  that  therby  not  onely  the  Chriflian  religion  myght  be
enlarged,  but  Spayne  alfo  enryched  by  the  great  plentie  of  golde,  pearles,  precious  flones,  and  fpices,  whiche
might  be  founde  there.  At  the  lengthe  three  fhyppes  were  appoynted  hym  at  the  kinges  charges :  of  the  which
one  was  a  great  caracte  with  deckes :  and  the  other  twoo  were  light  marchaunte  fliyppes  without  deckes,  whiche
the  Spaniardes  call  Carauelas.  Thus  he  departed  from  the  cofles  of  Spaine  about  the  calendes  of  September,
in  the  yere  of  Chrid  1492.  and  fet  forward  on  his  viage,  being  accompanied  with.  CC.  xx,  [two  hundred  and  twenty]
Spanyardes.  The  fortunate  Ilandes  (as  manye  thinke  them  to  be,  whiche  the  Spaniardes  call  CanaricB,  found  but
of  late  dayes)  are  diflaunte  from  the  Ilandes  of  Gadcs,  a  thoufande  and  twoo  hundreth  myles,  accord}Tig  to  theyr
accompte :  for  they  fay  they  are  diflant  three  hundreth  leaques ;  wheras  fuch  as  are  experi  fea  men,  affyrme  that
euery  leaque  conteyneth  foure  myles,  after  theyr  fupputations.  Thefe  Ilandes  were  called  fortunate,  for  the  tem-
perate ayre  whiche  is  in  them.  For  neyther  the  coldeneffe  of  wynter  is  fliarpe  vnto  them,  nor  the  heate  of  fommer
intollerable.  Yet  fome  men  are  of  opinion,  that  thofe  were  in  olde  tyme  called  the  fortunate  Ilandes,  whiche
the  Portugales  call  Capo  Verde.  Colonus  therfore  fayled  fyrfle  to  the  Ilandes  of  Canarice,  to  the  intente  there
to  refrefhe  his  fliyppes  with  frefhe  water  and  fuell,  before  he  committed  him  felfe  to  thys  fo  laborious  a  vyage.
And  bycaufe  I  haue  here  made  mention  of  the  Ilandes  of  Canariee:  It  fliall  not  be  muche  from  my  purpofe  to
declare  howe  of  vnknowen  they  became  knowen,  and  of  faluage  and  wilde,  better  manured.  For  by  the  longe
courfe  of  manye  yeres,  they  wore  forgotten,  and  remayned  as  vnknowen.

Thefe  feuen  Ilandes  (therfore)  called  the  Canaries,  were  founde  by  chaunce  by  a  frenche  man,  called
Betanchor,  by  the  permiffion  of  queene  Katharine,  protectrixe  of  kyng  lohn  her  fon,  while  he  was  yet  in  his
nonage,  about  the  yere  of  Chrifle.  M.  CCCC.V,  This  Bcianchor  inuaded  twoo  of  thefe  Ilandes  called  Lance-
lotus  and  Foriifucntura,  whiche  he  inhabited  and  brought  to  better  culture.  He  beinge  deade,  his  fon  and
heire  folde  bothe  the  fayde  Ilandes  to  certayne  Spaniardes.

After  this,  Fernandus  Peraria  and  his  wyfe,  inuaded  Fcrrea  and  Gomcra.  The  other  three  were  fubdued
in  our  tyme. Grancafiana,  by  Petrus  de  Vera,  citezen  of  the  noble  citie  of  Xcricium,  and  Michaell  of  Moxica.

Eden.  I  65

The  reward  c  f
vcrtue

The  Ilandes  of
the  weste  Ocan

Christophoius
Colonus.

India.

Tlie  (yrst  viage
of  Colonus.

The  Ilandes  of
Canarie.

Gades  or

Cals  mals.

A  leaque,  what  it

conteyneth  by  sex

The  fortunate

Ilandes.

Cabouerde.

Thcseuen  Ilandes
of  Canarie.
Betanchor  A
frenche  mnn
subilued  the
ilandes  of  Can.irie
Lancelottts.
Fortisuentura.
Ferrea.
Gomera.
Gnincanaria.

66

The  fyyft  Decade.

Palma.
Tcnerifcn.
Alphonsus  Lugo.

Colonus  men  rebel
against  hyni

Faire  wordes  and
promises.

Hispaniola.
lohanna.

Nightingales
syngc  in
Nouember.

The  Ilande  of
Ophir.

The  ilandes  of
Antilia.

A  shypwrack

The  people  of
the  ilande.
Naked  people.

Expert  swimmers.
Gold  for  erth  and
glasse.
Many  kinges

Relygious  .ind
humaine  people-

Can  oas.

Monoryla.  \

They  haue  no
Iren.

Canibales  or
Caribes

Anthropophagi.

The  crueltie  of
the  Canibalos.

Palma  and  Tcnerifcn,  by  Alphonfus  Lugo,  at  the  kynges  charges.  Gotncra  and  Ferrca  were  eafely  fubdued :  But  the
matter  wente  harde  with  Alphonfus  Lugo.  For  that  naked  and  wylde  nation,  fyghtinge  oncly  with  flones  and  clubbes,
droue  his  armie  to  flighte  at  the  fyrfte  aflaulte,  and  flewe  about  foure  hundreth  of  his  men.  But  at  the  length  he
ouercame  them.  And  thus  all  the  Ilandes  of  Canaria  were  added  to  the  dominion  of  Spayne.  From  thefe
Ilandes  Colonus  directynge  his  viage  towarde  the  wefle,  folowinge  the  fallinge  of  the  fonne,  but  declining  fomr;'hat
towarde  the  left  hande,  fayled  on  for\varde.  x.xxiii.  dayes  continually,  hauynge  onely  the  fruition  of  the  heauen
and  the  water.  Then  the  Spanyardes  whiche  were  accompanied  with  hym,  beganne  fyrfle  to  murmure  fecretely
among  them  felues :  and  fliortly  after  with  wordes  of  reproche  fpake  euyll  of  Colonus  theyr  gouernoure,  and  con-
fulted  with  them  felues,  eyther  to  rydde  hym  out  of  the  waye,  orelles  to  cafl.  hym  into  the  fea  :  Ragyng  that  they
were  deceyued  of  a  (Iraunger,  an  outlandiflie  man,  a  Ligurian,  a  Genues,  and  brought  into  fuche  daungerous  places,
that  they  myght  neuer  returne  ageyne.  And  after,  xxx.  days  were  pafle,  they  furioufely  cryed  out  againfte  him,  and
threatned  him  that  he  fliulde  pafle  no  further.  But  he  euer  with  ientyll  wordes  and  large  promyfes,  appeafed
theyr  furie,  and  prolonged  day  after  day,  fome  tyme  defyring  them  to  beare  with  hym  yet  a  whyle,  and  fome
time  putting  them  in  remembrance  that  if  they  fhulde  attempte  any  thinge  agaynft.  him,  or  other  wife  difobey
hym,  it  wolde  be  reputed  for  treafon.  Thus  after  a  fewe  dayes,  with  cherefull  hartes  they  efpied  the  lande  longe
looked  for.  In  this  fyrfl  nauigation,  he  difcouered.  vi.  Ilandes,  wherof  twoo  were  exceding  great :  Of  whiche,
the  one  he  called  LLifpaniola,  and  the  other  Lohanna.  But  at  that  tyme  he  knewe  not  perfectely  that  Lohanna
(other  wyfe  called  Cuba,)  was  an  Ilande.  As  they  coaRed  alonge  by  the  fliore  of  certayne  of  thefe  Ilandes,  they
harde  nyghtingales  fynge  in  the  thycke  woodes  in  the  month  of  Nouember.  They  found  alfo  great  riuers
of  freflie  water,  and  naturall  hauens,  of  capacitie  to  harborowe  greate  nauies  of  fhippes.  Saylinge  by  the  coafl.es
of  Lohanna,  from  the  northe  poynte  to  the  weft,  he  rode  lyttell  leffc  then  eyght  hundreth  miles  (for  they  call  it  a
hundreth  and  foure  fcore  leagues)  fuppofyng  that  it  had  byn  the  continent  or  fyrme  land,  bicaufe  he  coulde
nother  fynd  the  landes  ende,  nor  any  token  of  the  ende,  as  farre  as  he  coulde  iudge  with  his  eye  :  wherfore
he  determined  to  returne  backe  agayne,  beyng  therto  pardy  enforced  by  the  roughneffe  of  the  fea.  For  the  fea
banckes  of  the  Ilande  of  Lohanna,  by  fondrye  wyndinges  and  turnynges,  bende  them  felues  fo  muche  towarde
the  Northe,  that  the  northnortheafte  wynde  roughely  toffed  the  fhyppes  by  reafon  of  the  wynter.  Tumynge
therfore  the  ftemmes  of  his  fhyppes  towarde  the  Eafte,  he  affyrmed  that  he  had  founde  the  Ilande  of  Ophir,
whyther  Salomons  fliyppes  fayled  for  golde.  But  the  defcription  of  the  Cofmographers  well  confidered,  it
feemeth  that  bothe  thefe,  and  the  other  Ilandes  adioynyng,  are  the  Ilandes  oi  Antilia.  This  Ilande  he  called
LLifpaniola :  on  whofe  northe  fyde  as  he  approched  nere  to  the  lande,  the  keele  or  bottome  of  the  biggefte
veflell  ranne  vpon  a  blynde  rocke  couered  with  water,  and  cloue  in  funder.  But  the  playneneffe  of  the
rocke  was  a  helpe  to  them  that  they  were  not  drowned.  Makynge  hafte  therfore  with  the  other  two  ftiips
to  helpe  them,  they  brought  awaye  al  the  men  without  hurte.  Here  comming  fyrft  a  land,  they  fawe  certayne
men  of  the  Ilande  :  who  perceauynge  an  vnknowen  nation  comminge  towarde  them,  flocked  together  and  ranne
al  into  the  thycke  wooddes,  as  it  hadde  byn  hares  courced  with  grehoundes.  Owre  men  purfuing  them,  tooke
onely  one  woman,  whom  they  brought  to  the  fliyppes  :  where  fyllinge  her  with  meate  and  wyne,  and
apparelinge  her,  they  let  her  departe  to  her  company.  Shortly  after  a  greate  multitude  of  them  came  runnynge
to  the  fliore  to  beholde  this  newe  nation,  whom  they  thought  to  haue  difcended  from  heauen.  They  caft  them
felues  by  heapes  into  the  fea,  and  came  fwimminge  to  the  fliyppes,  bryngyng  golde  with  them,  which  they
chaunged  with  owre  men  for  erthen  pottes,  drinking  glaffes,  poyntes,  pynnes,  hawkes  belles,  lokinge  glaffes,
and  fuche  other  trifles.  Thus  growing  to  further  familiaritie,  owre  men  were  honorably  enterteyned  of  the
kynge  of  that  parte  of  the  Ilande,  whofe  name  was  Guaccatiarillus  :  for  it  hath  many  kynges,  as  when
Eneas  arriued  in  Italy,  he  founde  Latium  diuided  into  many  kyngedomes  and  prouinces,  as  Latium,  Mezeutium,
Turnum,  and  Tarchonteni,  which  were  feperated  with  narow  boundes,  as  fliall  more  largely  appere  hereafter.
At  the  euen  tyde  about  the  faulyng  of  the  fonne,  when  owre  men  went  to  praier,  and  kneled  on  their
knees  after  the  maner  of  the  Chriftians,  they  dyd  the  lyke  alfo.  And  after  what  maner  fo  euer  they  fawe  them
praye  to  the  croffe,  they  folowed  them  in  all  poyntes  as  well  as  they  coulde.  They  fliewed  much  humanitie
towardes  owre  men  :  and  helped  them  with  theyr  lighters  or  fmall  boates  (whiche  they  call  Canoas)  to  vnlade
theyr  broken  fliyppe  :  And  that  with  fuche  celeritie  and  cherefulneffe,  that  no  frende  for  frende,  or  kynfeman  for
kynfeman,  in  fuche  cafe  moued  with  pitie,  coulde  do  more.  Theyr  boates  are  made  only  of  one  tree,
made  holow  with  a  certain  fliarpe  ftone  (for  they  haue  no  yron.)  And  are  very  longe  and  narowe.  Many  afiimie
that  they  haue  fene  fome  of  them  with  fortie  ores.  The  wylde  and  myfcheuous  people  called  Canibales  or
Caribes,  whiche  were  accuftomed  to  eate  mannes  flefflie  (and  called  of  the  olde  writers,  Anthropophagi)  moleft  them
excedyngly,  inuadynge  theyr  countrey,  takynge  them  captiue,  kyllyng  and  eatyng  them.  As  owre  men  fayled
to  the  Ilandes  of  thefe  meke  and  humayne  people,  they  lefte  the  Ilandes  of  the  Canibales,  in  maner  in
the  middeft  of  theyr  viage  towarde  the  fouth.  They  complayned  that  theyr  Ilandes  were  no  lefle  vexed  with
the  incurfions  of  thefe  manhuntyng  Canibales  when  they  go  forth  a  rouynge  to  feeke  theyr  praye  :  then  are

66

The  fyrjl  Decade.

67

other  tame  beafles,  of  Lyons  and  Tigers.  Such  chyldren  as  they  take,  they  geld  to  make  them  fat  as  we
doo  cocke  chikyns  and  younge  hogges,  and  eate  them  when  they  are  wel  fedde:  of  fuche  as  they  eate,  they  fyrfl
eate  the  intralles  and  extreme  partes,  as  handes,  feete,  armes,  necke,  and  heade.  The  othei  mode  flefrtiy  partes,
they  pouder  for  flore,  as  we  do  peftelles  of  porke  and  gammondes  of  bakon.  Yet  do  they  abfleyne  from
eatynge  of  women  and  counte  it  vyle.  Therfore  fuche  younge  women  as  they  take,  they  keepe  for  increace,  as
we  doo  hennes  to  leye  egges.  The  olde  women,  they  make  theyr  drudges.  They  of  the  Ilandes  (which
we  may  nowe  caul  owres)  bothe  the  men  and  the  women  when  they  perceaue  the  Ca?iil)aks  coming,  haue  none
other  fhyfte  but  onely  to  flie :  for  althoughe  they  vfe  very  fharpe  arrowes  made  of  reedes,  yet  are  they  of  fmall
force  to  repreffe  the  furie  of  the  Ca7iibales\  for  euen  they  them  felues  confeffe,  that  tenne  of  the  Canibals
are  able  to  ouercome  a  hundreth  of  them  if  they  encountre  with  them.  Theyr  meate  is  a  certeyne  roote  which
they  cal  Ages :  muche  lyke  a  nauew  roote  in  fourme  and  greatneffe :  but  of  fweete  taRe,  muche  lyke  a
greene  cheflnutte.  They  haue  alfo  an  other  kynde  of  rootes,  whiche  they  call  lua-a,  wherof  they  make
breade  in  lyke  maner.  They  vfe  Ages  more  often  rofled  or  fodden,  then  to  make  breade  therof.  But
they  neuer  eate  lucea,  excepte  it  be  firfle  fliced  and  preffed,  (for  it  is  ful  of  lycoure)  and  then  baked  or
fodden.  But  this  is  to  be  marueled  at,  that  the  iuyce  of  this  roote  is  a  poyfon  as  flrong  as  Aconiium,  fo
that  if  it  be  dronke  it  caufeth  prefent  death,  and  yet  the  breade  made  of  the  maffe  therof,  is  of  good  tafle
and  holfome,  as  all  they  haue  proued.  They  make  alfo  an  other  kynde  of  breade  of  a  certayne  pulfe,  called
Panicum,  muche  lyke  vnto  wheate,  wherof  is  great  plentie  in  the  dukedome  of  Mylane,  Spayne,  and  Granatum.
But  that  of  this  countrey  is  longer  by  a  fpanne,  fomewhat  fharpe  towarde  the  ende,  and  as  bygge  as  a  mannes
arme  in  the  brawne:  The  graynes  wherof  are  fette  in  a  maruelous  order,  and  are  in  fourme  fomwhat
lyke  a  peafe.  While  they  be  foure  and  vnripe,  they  are  white :  but  when  they  are  ripe  they  be  very  blacke.
When  they  are  broken,  tliey  be  whyter  then  fnowe.  This  kynde  of  grayne,  they  call  Maizivm.  Golde  is
of  fome  eflimation  among  them:  for  fome  of  them  hange  certain  fmall  pieces  therof  at  theyr  eares  and
nofethrilles.  A  lyttell  beyonde  this  place,  our  men  wente  a  lande  for  freffhe  water,  where  they  chaunced  vpon
a  Ryuer  whofe  fande  was  myxed  with  muche  golde.  They  founde  there  no  kindes  of  foure  foted  beaftes  excepte
three  kyndes  of  lyttell  conyes.  Thefe  Ilandes  alfo  nourifhe  ferpentes :  but  fuch  as  are  Avithout  hurt.  Lykewife
wylde  geefe,  turtle  doues,  and  duckes,  much  greater  then  ours,  and  as  whyte  as  fwannes,  with  heades  of  purple
coloure.  Alfo  Popiniaies,  of  the  whiche  fome  are  greene,  fome  yelowe,  and  fome  lyke  them  of  India,
with  yelowe  rynges  about  theyr  neckes,  as  PHnie  defcribeth  them.  Of  thefe  they  broughte  fortie  with
them,  of  mofle  liuely  and  delectable  coloures,  hauyng  theyr  fethers  entermengled  with  greene,  yelowe,
and  purple,  whiche  varietie,  deliteth  the  fenfe  not  a  litle.  Thus  muche  thought  I  good  to  fpeake  of  Popingiaies,
(ryghte  noble  Prynce)  fpecially  to  this  intente,  that  albeit  the  opinion  of  Chriflophorus  Colonus  (who  affirmeth
thefe  Ilandes  to  be  parte  of  hidid)  dothe  not  in  all  poyntes  agree  with  the  iudgement  of  auncient  wr}-ters
as  touchynge  the  bigneffe  of  the  Sphere  and  compaffe  of  the  Globe  as  concernynge  the  nauigable  portion
of  the  fame  beynge  vnder  vs,  yet  the  Popingiaies  and  many  other  thynges  brought  from  thence,  doo
declare  that  thefe  Ilandes  fauoure  fomwhat  of  India,  eyther  beynge  nere  vnto  it,  or  elles  of  the  fame  nature :
forafmuche  as  Ariflotle  alfo,  about  the  ende  of  his  booke  De  Ccelo  et  Mundo,  and  likewife  Seneca,  Avith  diuerfe
other  authours  not  ignorant  in  Cofmography,  do  affirme  that  India  is  no  longe  tracte  by  fea,  diflante
from  Spayne  by  the  wefle  Ocean,  for  the  foyle  of  thefe  Ilandes,  bryngeth  forthe  Maflix,  Aloes,  and  fundrj^e
other  fweete  gummes  and  fpyces  as  doth  India.  Cotton  alfo  of  the  goffampine  tree,  as  in  India  in  the
countrey  of  the  people  called  Seres.

C  The  languages  of  all  the  nations  of  thefe  Ilandes,  maye  well  be  Avritten  with  our  Latine  letters.  For
they  cal  heauen  Turei.  A  houfe.  Boa.  Golde,  Cauni.  A  good  man,  Taino.  Nothing,  Mayani.  All  other
wordes  of  theyr  language,  they  pronounce  as  playnely  as  we  doo  the  Latine  tongue.  In  thefe  Ilandes  they
founde  no  trees  knowen  vnto  them,  but  pyne  app[l]e  trees,  and  date  trees :  And  thofe  of  maruelous  heyght  and
exceding  harde,  by  reafon  of  the  greate  moyflneffe  and  fatneffe  of  the  grounde,  with  continuall  and  temperate
heate  of  the  fonne,  whiche  endureth  fo  all  the  hole  yere.  They  playnely  affyrme  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  to
be  the  mofl  fruiteful  lande  that  the  heauen  compaffeth  aboute,  as  fhall  more  largely  appere  hereafter  in  the
particular  defcription  of  the  fame,  whiche  we  intende  to  fettc  foorthe  when  we  fhall  be  better  inflructed.

Thus  makynge  a  leage  of  frendfhyppe  with  the  kynge,  and  leauynge  with  hym.  xxxviii.  men  to  fearche  the
Ilande,  he  departed  to  Spayne  takynge  with  hym.  x.  of  the  inhabitauntes  to  lerne  the  Spanifhe  tongue,  to  the
intent  to  vfe  them  afterwarde  for  interpretours.  Colonus  therfore  at  his  returne,  was  honorably  receaued  of  the
kyng  and  queene :  who  caufed  him  to  fytte  in  theyr  prefence,  whiche  is  a  token  of  great  loue  and  honoure
amonge  the  Spaniardes. He  was  alfo  made  Admirall  of  the  Ocean :  and  his  brother  goue[r]noure  of  the  Hand.

Towarde  the  fecond  viage,  he  was  furnifhed  with.  x[v]ii.  fhippes :  wherof  three  were  great  caractes  of  a
thoufand  tunne:  xii.  were  of  that  forte,  whiche  the  Spaniardes  call  Caraitelas:  A\-ithout  deckes:  and  twoo  other
of  the  fame  forte  fomewhat  bygger,  and  more  apte  to  beare  deckes,  by  reafon  of  the  gretnefle  of  the)T  mafles.

6;

Ages.

Rootes  in  the
steede  of  meate.

lucca.

Breade  of  rootes.

An  herbc  of  a
straunge  nature.

MaLzium.

Golde  in
estimation.

Golde  in  the
sandes  of  rj'uers.

Serpentes  without

venime.

Turtle  doues

Duckes.

Popingiayes.

Plini.

These  Ilandes  are
parte  of  India.

The  Indians  are
Antipodes  to  the
spanuirdes.

Aristotle.

Seneca.

India  not  far

from  Spaine

4

Mastix.

Aloe.

Gossampyne

cotton  or  bombasa

Seres.

The  language  of

these  Indi.-'ns-

Trees  and  frutes
vnknowen  to  vs.
Fat  and  moyste
grounde.
Heate  continuall
and  temperate.
The  fruit fulncs  of
hispaniola

The  seconde  viay?
of  Colonus.

68

The  fyrjl  Decade.

Come  and  sedes
to  sowe.

Tooles  and
artillerj-.

Water  droppyng
from  a  tree
cuntinually.

He  had  alfo  a  thoufaiid  and  two  hundreth  armed  footemen  well  appoynted:  Amonge  whiche  were  many
artificers,  as  fmythes,  carpenters,  myners,  and  fuche  other:  Certayne  horfemen  alfo,  wel  armed:  I.ikewife
mares,  Ihiepe,  heyghfers,  and  fuch  other  of  bothe  kindes  for  incrafe.  I^ykewife  all  kynde  of  pulfe  or  grayne
and  come,  as  wheate,  barlye,  rye,  beanes  and  peafe,  and  fuche  other,  as  well  for  food  as  to  fowe:  Befyde
vynes,  plantes  and  feedes,  of  fuche  trees,  fruites,  and  hcrbes,  as  thofe  countreyes  lacke.  And  (not  to  be  for
gotten)  fundry  kindes  of  artillery  and  iron  tooles,  as  bowes,  arrowes,  croffebowes,  bylles,  hargabufcs,  brodc
fwoordes,  large  targettes,  pikes,  mattockes,  flioouellcs,  hammers,  nayles,  fawes,  axes,  and  fuche  other.  Thus
beynge  furnilhed  accordyngely,  they  fet  forwarde  from  the  Ilandes  of  Gades,  (nowe  called  Cals,)  the.  vii.  day
before  the  calendes  of  October,  in  the  yere  of  Chrifle.  1493.  ^^'^^  arriued  at  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie,  at  the
calendes  of  October.  Of  thefe  Ilandes,  the  lade  is  called  Fcrrca,  in  whiche  there  is  no  other  water  that  maye
be  drunke,  but  onely  that  is  gathered  of  the  dcwe  whiche  continually  diflilleth  from  one  onely  tree  growynge
on  the  higheft  backe  of  the  Ilande,  and  falleth  into  a  rounde  trenclie  made  with  mannes  hande.  We  were
infourmed  of  thefe  thynges  within  fewe  dayes  after  his  departure.  What  flial  fuccede,  we  wyl  certifie  yowe
hereafter. Thus  fore  ye  well,  from  the  courte,  at  the  Id^s  of  Nouember.  1495.

C  The  seconde booke of the  fyrste Decade
to  Afcanius  Phorcia,  vicoimte  Cardinally  etc.

I

Methymna  CampL
Castclla  Vetus.

Gades

The  Il:md  of
Ferrea.

Ilands  of  the
Canibales.

The  Hand  of

Dominica.

viii  hundreth  and

XX.  leaques  in.  xxi.

dayes.

Lysertes,

The  Ilande  of
Galanta.

The  Hand  of
Guadalupea.

Vilages  of  xx  or.
XXX.  houses

The  building  of
theyr  houses.

Owe  repete  (ryghte  honorable  Prynce)  that  yowe  are  defirous  to  knowe  what  newes  we  haue  in
Spayne  from  the  newe  worlde :  and  that  thofe  thynges  haue  greatly  delyted  you  which  I  wrote
vnto  yowre  highneffe  of  the  fyrfle  nauigation.  Yowe  fhal  now  therefore  receaue  what  hath  fuc-
ceded.  Meihytnna  CamJ>i,  is  a  famous  towne  in  high  Spayne  in  the  refpecte  frome  yowe,  and  is
in  that  parte  of  Spayne  whiche  is  called  Cajlella  Vctus :  beynge  diflante  from  Gades  about,  xl.
myles.  Here  the  courte  remayned,  when  aboute  the.  ix.  of  the  kalendes  of  Aprell  in  this  yere
of  nynetie  and  foure,  there  were  pofles  fente  to  the  kynge  and  queene,  certifyinge  them  that
there  were.  xii.  fliippes  come  from  the  newe  Ilandes  and  arryued  at  Gades.  But  the  gouernoure  of  the  fhyppes
fente  worde  to  the  kynge  and  quene  that  he  had  none  other  matter  to  certifie  them  of  by  the  pofles,  but  onely
that  the  Admiral  with  fiue  fliippes  and.  iiii.  fcore  and  tenne  men  remayned  flyll  in  Hifpaniola,  to  fearche  the  fecretes
of  the  Ilande.  And  that  as  touching  other  matters,  he  hym  felfe  wolde  fliortly  make  relation  in  theyr  prefence,  by
worde  of  mouthe.  Therfore  the  daye  before  the  nones  of  Aprel,  he  came  to  the  courte  him  felfe.  What  I  learned
of  him  and  other  faythefull  and  credible  men  whiche  came  with  hym  from  the  Admirall,  I  wyl  reherfe  vnto  yowe
in  fuch  order  as  they  declared  the  fame  to  me  when  I  demaunded  them.  Take  it  therfore  as  foloweth.  The
thyrde  daye  of  the  Ides  of  October,  departynge  from  Ferrea,  the  lafle  of  the  Ilandes  of  Canarice,  and  from  the
cofles  of  Spayne  with  a  nauie  of.  xvii.  fliippes,  they  fayled.  xxi.  dayes  before  they  came  to  any  Ilande :  inclyning
of  purpofe  more  towarde  the  lefte  hand  then  at  the  fyrfl.  viage,  folowyng  the  northnortheafl  wynde :  and  arriued
fyrfle  at  the  Ilandes  of  the  Canibales,  or  Caribes  of  which,  onely  the  fame  was  knowen  to  our  men.  Amonge
thefe,  they  chaunfed  fyrfle  vpon  one,  fo  befet  with  trees,  that  they  coulde  not  fe  fo  niuche  as  an  elle  fpace
of  bare  earthe  or  flony  grounde.  This  they  called  Dominica,  bicaufe  they  found  it  on  the  funday.  They  taried
here  no  tyme,  bycaufe  they  fawe  it  to  be  deferte.  In  the  fpace  of  thefe.  xxi.  dayes,  they  thynke  that  they  fayled
viii.  hundreth  and.  xx.  leaques,  the  Northenortheafl.  wynde  was  fo  full  with  them,  and  fo  freffliely  folowed  the
flerne  of  theyr  fliyppes.  After  they  hadde  fayled  a  lyttell  further,  they  efpied  dyuerfe  Ilandes  replenyfflied
with  fundrye  kyndes  of  trees,  from  the  whiche  came  fragrant  fauours  of  fpyces  and  fweete  gummes.  Here  they
fawe  neyther  man  nor  beafle,  except  certayne  lifartes  of  huge  bigneffe,  as  they  reported  whiche  went  alande  to
viewe  the  countrey.  This  Hand  they  cauled  Galana,  or  Galanta.  From  the  cape  or  poynt  of  this  Hand,
efpying  a  mountayne  a  farre  of,  they  fayled  thyther,  Aboute.  xxx.  myles  from  this  mountayne,  they  fawe  a
ryuer  difcending  whiche  feemed  to  be  a  token  of  fome  great  and  large  fludde.  This  is  the  fyrfle  lande  whiche
they  founde  inhabited  from  the  Ilandes  of  Catiarice,  and  is  an  Ilande  of  the  Canibales,  as  they  lerned  by  the
interpretours  whiche  they  tooke  with  them  from  Hifpaniola  into  Spayne  at  theyr  fyrfle  viage.  Serchynge  the
Ilande,  they  founde  innumerable  villages  of  xx.  houfes  or.  xxx.  at  the  moofle,  fette  rounde  abowte  in  order,
makynge  the  flreete  in  coonipaffe  lyke  a  markette  place.  And  forafmuch  as  I  haue  made  mention  of  theyr
houfes,  it  flial  not  be  greately  from  my  purpofe  to  defcribe  in  what  maner  they  are  buylded.  They  are  made
rounde  lyke  belles  or  rounde  pauylions.  Theyr  frame  is  rayfed  of  excedynge  hyghe  trees,  fette  clofe  together
and  fafl  rampaired  in  the  grounde,  fo  fl.andyng  a  flope  and  bending  inward  that  the  toppes  of  the  trees  ioyne

68

Thefyrjl  Decade.

69

together  and  beare  one  agaynfle  an  other,  hauynge  alfo  within  the  houfe,  certayne  flronge  and  fhorte  props  or
pofles  whiche  fufteyne  the  trees  from  fallynge.  They  couer  them  with  the  leaues  of  date  trees  and  other  trees
Rrongly  compact  and  hardened,  wherewith  they  make  them  clofe  from  wynde  and  wether.  At  the  fhort  pofles
or  proppes  within  the  houfe,  they  tie  ropes  of  the  cotton  of  goffampine  trees,  or  other  ropes  made  of  certayne
long  and  toughe  rotes  much  lyke  vnto  the  flinibbe  called  Sparfimi,  wherof  in  olde  tyme  they  vfed  to  make
bondes  for  vynes  and  cabuls  and  ropes  for  fliyppes.  Thefe  they  tye  ouerthwarte  the  houfe  from  pofle  to  pofle.
On  thefe  they  ley  as  it  were  certayne  mattreffes  made  of  the  cotton  of  the  goffampine  trees,  whiche  growe
plentifully  in  thefe  Ilandes.  This  cotton  the  Spaniardes  call  Algodon,  and  the  Italians  Bombafine.  And  thus
they  fleepe  in  hangynge  beddes.  At  the  enteraunce  of  one  of  theyr  houfes,  they  fawe  two  Images  of  woodde
lyke  vnto  ferpentes,  whiche  they  thoughte  had  byn  fuch  idoles  as  they  honour.  But  they  lemed  after\varde  that
they  were  fette  there  onely  for  coomlyneffe.  For  they  knowe  none  other  god  then  the  Sunne  and  Moone,
althoughe  they  make  certaine  Images  of  goffampine  cotton  to  the  fimilitude  of  fuch  phantafies  as  they  fay
appere  to  them  in  the  nyghte.  Our  men  found  in  theyr  houfes,  all  kyndes  of  erthen  veffels,  not  muche  vnlyke
vnto  oures.  They  founde  alfo  in  theyr  kichens,  mannes  fleffhe,  duckes  fleffhe,  and  goofe  fleffhe,  al  in  one  pot :
and  other  on  the  fpittes  redye  to  be  layde  to  the  fire.  Entrynge  into  theyr  inner  lodgynges,  they  founde
faggottes  of  the  bones  of  mennes  amies  and  legges,  which  they  referue  to  make  heades  for  theyr  arrowes,
bycaufe  they  lacke  iron.  The  other  bones  they  cade  awaye  when  they  haue  eaten  the  fleffhe.  They  founde
likewife  the  heade  of  a  yonge  man  faflened  to  a  pofle  and  yet  bledinge.  They  haue  in  fome  villages,  one  great
haule  or  pallaice,  aboute  the  whiche  theyr  common  houfes  are  placed.  To  this  they  refort,  as  often  as  they
come  together  to  playe.  When  they  perceaued  the  commynge  of  our  men,  they  fledde,  in  theyr  houfes  they
founde  alfo  about,  xxx.  chyldren  and  women  captiues  which  were  refenied  to  be  eaten,  but  our  men  tooke  them
awaye  to  vfe  them  for  interpretoures.  Searchyng  more  diligently  th[e]ynner  partes  of  the  Ilande,  they  founde.
vii.  other  ryuers,  bygger  then  this  whiche  we  fpake  of  before,  runnyng  throughe  the  Ilande,  with  fruitefuU  and
pleafante  banckes,  delectable  to  beholde.  This  Ilande,  they  called  Guadahipea,  for  the  fimilitude  that  it  hath
to  the  mounte  Guadalupus  in  Spayne,  where  the  Image  of  the  virgin  MARIE  is  religioufly  honored.  But  the
inhabitauntes  caul  it  Caructieria,  or  Queraquiera.  It  is  the  chiefe  habitation  of  the  Canibales.  They  brought
from  this  Hand.  vii.  Popingayes,  bygger  then  phefantes,  muche  differj^nge  from  other  in  coloure :  hauynge  thejT
backes,  brefles,  and  beaUes  of  purple  coloure,  and  theyr  wynges  of  other  variable  coloures.  In  al  thefe  Ilandes
is  no  leffe  plentie  of  popingiayes  then  with  vs  of  fparrowes  or  flarlinges.  As  we  brynge  vp  capons  and  hennes
to  francke  or  make  them  fatte,  fo  do  they  thefe  bigger  kyndes  of  popyngaies  for  the  fame  purpofe.  After  that
they  hadde  thus  fearched  the  Ilande  and  dryuen  thefe  Canibales  to  flyghte,  (whiche  ranne  awaye  at  thejT  fyril
approche  as  fone  as  they  had  efpied  them)  they  cauled  theyr  company  together.  And  as  foone  as  they  had
broken  the  Canibals  boates  or  lyghters  (whiche  they  call  Canoas)  they  lowfed  theyr  ankers  the  daye  before  the
Ides  of  Nouember,  and  departed  from  Guadahipea.  Colonus  the  admirall,  for  the  defyre  he  hadde  to  fe  his
companions,  whiche  at  his  fyrfl  vyage  he  lefte  the  yere  before  in  Hifpa7iiola  to  fearche  the  countrey,  lette  pafTe
many  Ilandes  bothe  on  his  righte  hande  3.nd  lefte  hande,  and  fayled  directly  thyther.  By  the  waye,  there
appeared  from  the  Northe.  A  great  Ilande  which  the  captiues  that  were  taken  in  Hifpaniola,  cauled  Madanino,
or  Matinino :  Affirmynge  it  to  be  inhabited  only  with  women :  To  whom  the  Canibales  haue  acceffe  at  certen
tymes  of  the  yeare,  as  in  owlde  tyme  the  Thracians  had  to  the  Amazones  in  the  Ilande  of  Z^^i-.  The  men
children,  they  fende  to  theyr  fathers.  But  the  women  theye  kepe  with  them  felues.  They  haue  greate  and
flronge  caues  or  dennes  in  the  ground,  to  the  which  they  flye  for  fafegarde  if  any  men  reforte  vnto  them  at  any
other  tyme  then  is  appoynted.  And  there  defende  them  felues  with  bowes  and  arrowes,  agenfl  the  violence  of
fuche  as  attempte  to  enuade  them.  They  coulde  not  at  this  tyme  approche  to  this  Ilande,  by  reafon  of  the
Northenortheafi.  wynde  which  blewe  foo  vehemently  from  the  fame,  wheras  they  nowe  folowed  the  Eaflefouth-
eafl.e.  After  they  departed  frome  Madanino,  and  fayled  by  the  fpace  of  xl.  myles,  they  pafled  not  farre  frome
an  other  Ilande  which  the  captyues  fayde  to  bee  verye  peopulous,  and  replenyfhed  with  all  thynges  neceflarie
for  the  life  of  man.  This  they  cauled  Afons  Serrattis,  bycaufe  it  was  ful  of  mountaynes.  The  oiptyues
further  declared  that  the  Canibales,  are  wonte  at  fome  tyme  to  goo  frome  the}T:  owne  coafles  aboue  a
thoufande  myle  to  hunte  for  men.  The  daye  folowynge,  they  fawe  an  other  Ilande  the  whiche,  bycaufe  it  was
rownde,  they  cauled  Sancta  Maria  Rottmda.  The  nexte  daye,  theye  founde  an  other,  which  they  cauled  S.
Marti?ii.  Which  they  lette  pafTe  alfo  bycaufe  they  had  no  leafure  to  tarye.  Lykew}'fe  the  thirde  daye  they
efpyed  an  other,  whofe  Diametral  fyde  extendynge  frome  the  Eafle  to  the  wefle,  they  iudged  to  bee  a  hundreth
and  fyftie  myle.  Theye  affirme  all  thefe  Ilandes  to  be  maruelous  fiiyre  and  frutefull.  This  lafie,  they  cauled
Sancta  Maria  Antigua.  Saylyng  yet  forwarde,  and  leauynge  many  other  Ilandes,  after  they  had  liiyled  aboute  fortie
myle,  they  chaunced  vpon  an  other  muche  bygger  then  any  of  the  refi.e,  which  th[e]inhabitan[t]s  caule  ^_>' ^^',  but
they  named  it  Infula  criicis.  Heare  they  cafl  anker  to  fetche  freffhe  water.  The  Admiral  alfo  commaunded.
xxx.  men  to  go  a  lande  out  of  his  owne  fliyp,  and  to  fearch  the  Ilande Here  they  founde  fo^^Te  dogges  on  the

I  2  69

G'^ssamplne
cotton.

Bombase.
Hanginge  beddes

Images.

Fyne  cookery

Arrowe  heds  of
bones.

The  mount
Guadalupus.

Carucueria.

Pop>Tgayes
bygger  then
phesauntes

The  Canibales
dryuen  to  flyght

Matinino  an
Ilande  of  women.

The  Ilandes  of
Mons  Serratus.

Huntinge  for  mea

S.oncta  Maria
Rotunda.
Sanctus  Maninus.

Sancta  Maria
Antiqua.

Insula  crucis
An  Ilande  of  the
Canibals.

70

The  fyyjl  Decade.

The  Canibales  are
expert  archers.
Arrowes  infected
with  veneme.

A  conflict  with  the

Ouiibalcs.  _

7

The  fiercenes
and  terrible
countenaunce  of
the  Canibales.

Methynina  Campi.

Innumerable
ilandes.

The  myncs  of
Metalcs  and
precious  stones.

The  sea  cauled
Archipelagus.
Insula.  S.
lohannes  or
Buchena

Death  for  deathe

The  mountayncs
are  coulder  then
the  playnes.

From  Dominica
to  Hispaniola  fyue
hundreth  leaques

The  Spanyardes
lefte  in  the  Hand
are  slayne.
KjTige

Guaccanarillus
rebelleth.

Two  images  of
goulde.

8

Libertie  and
idlencs.

A  happy  kind  of
lyfe.

iTiore.  The  Inhabitants  are  Canibales,  and  maruelous  experte  in  fluitinge,  as  well  women  as  men :  And  vfe  to
infecte  theyr  arrowes  with  po)'fon :  when  they  had  taryed  there  two  dayes,  they  fawe  a  farre  of,  a  Canoa,  in  the
whiche  were  eight  men  and  as  manye  women  hauynge  with  them  bowes  and  arrowes.  Tliey  fearfly  aflayled
owre  men  withoute  all  feare,  and  hurte  fum  of  them  with  theyr  venemous  arrowes.  Amonge  thefe  there  was  a
certen  woman  to  whome  the  other  gaue  reuerence  and  obeyde  as  though  flie  were  theyr  queene.  Her  fonne
wayted  vppon  her,  beinge  a  younge  man,  flrongly  made,  of  terrible  and  frownynge  countenaunce  and  a  lyons
fiice.  Owre  men  leafle  they  fliolde  take  the  more  hurte  by  beinge  wounded  a  farre  of,  thowght  it  befle  to  ioyne
with  them.  Therfore  with  all  fpede  fettinge  forewarde  with  their  ores  the  brigantine  in  whiche  they  were  fette
alande,  they  ouerturned  their  Canoa  with  a  great  violence,  which  beinge  ouerwhelmed,  they  notwithHondinge,
as  well  the  women  as  the  men  fwymminge,  caRe  theyr  dartes  at  owre  men,  thicke  and  threefowlde.  At  the
lengthe,  gatherynge  them  felues  together  vpon  a  rocke  couered  with  the  water,  they  fowght  manfully  vntyll  they
w-ere  ouercome  and  taken,  one  being  flayne,  and  the  queenes  fonne  fore  wounded.  When  they  were  browght
into  the  Admirals  fliippe,  they  dyd  no  more  put  of  their  fiernes  and  cruell  countenances,  then  do  the  Lyons  of
Libia  when  theye  perceaue  them  felues  to  be  bownde  in  chaynes.  There  is  no  man  able  to  behowlde  them,
but  he  fliall  feele  his  bowelles  grate  with  a  certen  h'orrourc,  nature  hath  endewed  them  with  foo  terrible
menacynge,  and  cruell  afpccte.  This  coniecture  I  make  of  my  felfe  and  other  which  often  tymes  wente  with  me
to  fee  them  at  Mct/iymna  Campi.  But  nowe  to  retuine  to  the  viage.  Proceadinge  thus  further  and  further,
more  then  fine  hundrethe  myles,  firfle  towardes  the  Wedefouthewefle,  then  towarde  the  Southwell,  and  at  the
lengthe  towarde  the  Wefle  northe  welle,  they  entered  into  a  mayne  large  fea  hauinge  in  it  innumerable
Ilandes,  maruelouflye  diffcringe  one  frome  an  other,  for  fum  of  them  were  verye  frutefuU  and  full  of  herbes  and
trees.  Other  fum,  very  drye,  barren,  and  rowgh  with  high  rockye  mountaynes  of  flone,  wherof  fum  were
of  bright  blewe  or  afurine  coloure,  and  other  glyReringe  white :  wherfore  they  fuppofed  them  by  good  reafon  to
bee  the  mynes  of  metalles  and  precious  flones.  But  the  rowghnes  of  the  fea,  and  multitude  of  Ilandes
flandinge  fo  thicke  togj'ther,  hindered  them  foo,  that  they  cowlde  cafle  no  anker  leafle  the  bigger  veffelles
fliulde  runne  vppon  the  rockes.  Therefore  they  deferred  the  fearchinge  of  thefe  Ilandes  vntyl  an  other  tyme
They  were  fo  manye  and  Roode  fo  thicke,  that  they  coulde  not  number  them.  Yet  the  fmauler  veffelles  which
drewe  no  greate  depthe,  entered  emonge  them  and  numbered  fortie  and  fyxe  Ilandes.  But  the  bigger  veffelles,
kepte  aloofe  in  the  mayne  fea  for  feare  of  the  rockes.  They  caule  the  fea  where  this  multitude  of  Ilandes  are
fituate,  Archipdagus.  Frome  this  tracte  proceadinge  forrewarde,  in  the  mydde  waye  there  lyeth  an  Hand  which
th[e]inhabitantes  caule  Biirichcna,  or  Buchena.  But  they  named  it  Infula  S.  loJiannis.  Dyuers  of  theym
whome  we  had  delyuered  frome  the  Canibales,  fayde  that  they  were  borne  in  this  Ilande :  affirminge  it  to  be
very  peopulous  and  frutefull,  hauinge  alfo  manye  fayre  wooddes  and  hauens.  There  is  deadly  hatred  and
continual  battayle  betwene  them  and  the  Canibales.  They  haue  no  boates  to  paffe  from  their  owne  coafles  to
the  Canibales.  But  if  it  bee  their  chaunce  to  ouercome  them,  when  they  make  incurfion  into  theyr  countreye
to  feke  their  praye  (as  it  fumtyme  happeneth,  the  fortune  of  warre  beinge  vncerteyne)  they  ferue  them
with  Uke  faufe,  requitinge  deathe  for  deathe.  For  one  of  theym  mangeleth  an  other  in  pieces,  and  rofle  them
and  eate  them  euen  before  their  eyes.  They  taryed  not  in  this  Ilande.  Yet  in  the  wefte  angle  therof,  a  fewe
of  them  went  a  lande  for  freffhe  water,  and  fownd  a  greate  and  high  howfe  after  the  maner  of  their  buylding,
hauinge.  xii.  other  of  their  vulgare  cotages  placed  abowte  the  fame :  but  were  all  lefte  defolate,  whether  it  were
that  they  reforted  to  the  mountaynes  by  refon  of  the  heate  which  was  that  tyme  of  the  yeare,  and  to  returne  to
the  playne  when  the  ayre  waxeth  cowlder,  or  els  for  feare  of  the  Canibales  which  make  incurfion  into  the  Ilande
at  certen  feafons.  In  all  this  Ilande  is  only  one  kinge.  The  fouth  fyde  hereof  extendeth  abowte  two  hundrethe
myles.  Shortlye  after,  they  came  to  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  beinge  diflante  frome  the  firlle  Ilande  of  the
Canibales,  fyue  hundrethe  leaques.  Here  they  fownde  all  thynges  out  of  order,  and  theyr  felowes  flayne  which
they  lefte  here  at  their  fyrfle  vyage.  In  the  beginninge  of  Hifpaniola,  (hauinge  in  it  many  regions  and
kyngedomes  as  we  haue  fayde)  is  the  region  of  Xamana  whofe  kinge  is  named  Guaccanarilhis.  This
Giiaccanarilhis  ioyned  frendeHiippe  with  owre  men  at  the  fyrfle  viage,  and  made  a  league  with  them:  But
in  the  abfence  of  the  Admirall,  he  rebelled,  and  was  the  caufe  of  owre  mens  deflruction,  althowgh  he  diffimuled
the  fame,  and  pretended  frendlhip  at  the  Admirales  returne.  As  owre  men  fayled  on  yet  a  litle  further,  they
efpied  a  longe  Canoa  with  many  ores,  in  which  was  the  brother  of  Giiaccanarillus  with  only  one  man  waytinge  on
hym.  He  browght  with  hym  two  Images  of  goulde,  which  he  gaue  the  Admirall  in  the  name  of  his  brother.
And  towlde  a  tale  in  his  language  as  concerninge  the  deathe  of  owre  men,  as  they  proued  afterwarde,  but  at
this  tyme  had  no  regarde  to  his  communication  for  lacke  of  interpretours,  which  were  eyther  all  deade,  or
efcaped  or  floulne  awaye  when  they  drewe  nere  the  Ilandes.  But  of  the.  x.  [ten.]  vii.  [seuen]  dyed  by  change  of
ayre  and  dyet.  The  inhabitantes  of  thefe  Ilandes  haue  byn  euer  foo  vfed  to  hue  at  libertie,  in  playe  and  paftyme,
that  they  can  hardely  away  with  the  yoke  of  feruitude  which  they  attempte  to  fhake  of  by  all  meanes  they  maye.
And  furely  if  they  had  receaued  owre  religion,  I  wolde  thinke  their  life  mode  happye  of  all  men,  if  they  might

70

The  fyrft  Decade.

71

therwith  enioye  their  aunciente  libertie. A  fewe  thinges  contente  them,  hauinge  no  delite  in  fuche  fuperfluites,
for  the  which  in  other  places  men  take  infinite  paynes  and  commit  manie  vnlawfuU  actes,  and  yet  are  neuer
fatiffied,  wheras  many  haue  to  muche,  and  none  inowgh. But  emonge  thefe  fimple  fowles,  a  fewe  clothes  ferue
the  naked :  weightes  and  meafures  are  not  needefuU  to  fuch  as  can  not  fkyll  of  crafte  and  deceyte  and  haue  not
the  vfe  of  pefliferous  monye,  the  feede  of  innumerable  myfcheues. So  that  if  we  fliall  not  be  afhamed  to
confeffe  the  truthe,  they  feeme  to  lyue  in  that  goulden  worlde  of  the  whiche  owlde  wryters  fpeake  fo  much:
wherin  men  lyued  fimplye  and  innocentlye  without  inforcement  of  lawes,  without  quarrellinge  Judges  and
libelles,  contente  onely  to  fatiffie  nature,  without  further  vexation  for  knowelege  of  thinges  to  come. Yet  thefe
naked  people  alfo  are  tormented  with  ambition  for  the  defyre  they  haue  to  enlarge  their  dominions :  by  reafon
wherof  they  kepe  warre  and  deflroy  one  an  other :  from  the  which  plage  I  fuppofe  the  golden  world  was  not
free. For  euen  then  alfo,  Cede^  non  ccdam,  that  is,  gyue  place,  and  I  wyll  not  giue  place,  had  entied  emonge
men. But  nowe  to  returne  to  the  matter  from  which  we  haue  digreffed. The  admiral  defyrous  to knowe
further  of  the  death  of  his  men,  fent  for  Guaccanarillus  to  come  to  him  to  his  fhip,  diffimulinge  that  he  knew
any  thinge  of  the  matter. After  that  he  came  aboord  fhyp,  faluting  the  Admiral  and  his  company  gyuing  alfo
certen  golde  to  the  Capetaynes  and  offycers,  turned  him  to  the  women  captiues  which  not  longe  before  our
men  had  deliuered  from  the  Canibales. And  emeftly  beholding  one  of  them  whorne  owre  men  cauled  Cathar)'ne,  he
fpake  gentelly  vnto  her. And  thus  when  he  had  feene  and  marueyled  at  the  horfes  and  fuche  other  thinges  as
were  in  the  fhyppe,  vnknowen  to  them,  and  had  with  a  good  grace  and  merelye  afked  leaue  of  the  Admirall,  he
departed. Yet  fum  there  were  which  counfeyled  the  Admirall  to  kepe  hym  flyll :  that  if  they  might  by  any
meanes  proue  that  he  was  confentinge  to  the  deathe  of  owre  men,  he  might  bee  punifhed  accordinglie. But
the  Admirall  confidering  that  it  was  yet  no  tynie  to  incenfe  th[e]inhabitantes  myndes  to  -vvrathe,  dyfniyffed
hym. The  next  daye  folowing,  the  kinges  brother  refortyng  to  the  fhyppes,  eyther  in  his  owne  name  or  in  his
brothers,  feduced  the  women. For  on  the  next  nyght  about  mydnight,  this  Katherine  afwell  to  recouer  her
owne  libertie  as  alfo  her  felowes,  being  fuborned  therto  eyther  by  the  kinge  or  his  brothers  promifes  attempted
a  much  more  difficulte  and  daungerous  aduenture  then  dyd  Cloelia  of  Rome,  which  beinge  in  hoflage  with  other
maydes  to  the  kynge  Porcena,  deceaued  her  kepers,  and  rode  ouer  the  ryuer  Tiber,  with  the  other  virgins
which  were  pledges  with  her. For  wheras  they  fwamme  ouer  the  ryuer  on  horfebacke.  This  Katharyne  with
feuen  other  women,  truflynge  onlye  to  the  ftrengthe  of  theyr  owne  armes,  fwamme  aboue  three  longe  myles :
and  that  alfo,  at  fuche  tyme  as  the  fea  was  fumwhat  rowghe. For  euen  foo  farre  of  frome  the  fhore,  lay  the
fhippes  at  rode,  as  nigh  as  they  could  coniecture But  owre  men  folowinge  them  with  the  fhippeboates,  by  the  fame
light  feene  on  the  fliore  wherby  the  women  were  ledde,  tooke  three  of  them  :  fuppofinge  that  Katharj-ne  Anth
the  other  foure,  went  to  Guaccanarillus. For  in  the  fpringe  of  the  morninge,  certen  meffengers  beinge  fente  to
hym  by  the  Admirall,  had  intelligence  that  he  was  fledde  with  all  his  familie  and  fluffe,  and  the  women  alfo.
which  thinge  miniflred  further  fufpection  that  he  was  confentinge  to  the  death  of  owre  men. Wherfore  the
Admirall  fente  forthe  an  armye  of  three  hundrethe  men,  ouer  the  which  he  appoynted  one  Mclchior  to  be
capitayne,  wylling  him  to  make  diligent  fearche  to  fynde  owte  GnaccatiariUus. Mclchior  therfore  with  the
fmaulefle  veffels  enteringe  into  the  countreye  by  the  ryuers  and  fcouringe  the  fliores,  chaunced  into  certen
croked  goulfes  defended  with,  v  lyttle  and  ftiepe  hilles,  fuppofinge  that  it  had  byn  the  mouth  of  fum  greate
ryuer. He  founde  here  alfo  a  verye  commodious  and  fafe  hauen,  and  therefore  named  it  Portits  Regalis.
They  faye  that  the  enteraunce  of  this  is  fo  crooked  and  bendinge,  that  after  the  fliippes  are  once  within  the
fame,  whether  they  turne  them  to  the  lefte  hand,  or  to  the  ryght,  they  can  not  perceaue  where  they  came  in
vntyll  they  returne  to  the  mouth  of  the  ryuer :  Although  it  be  there  fo  brode  that  three  af  the  byggefte  veffels
may  fayle  together  on  a  froont. The  fharpe  and  high  hilles  on  the  one  fyde  and  on  the  other,  fo  brake  the
wynde,  that  they  were  vncerten  howe  to  rule  theyr  fayles. In  the  myddle  gulfe  of  the  r)'uer,  there  is  a
promontorie  or  point  of  the  lande  with  a  pleafaunte  groue  full  of  Popingayes  and  other  byrdes  which  breede
therein  and  finge  verye  fweetlye. They  perceaued  alfo  that  two  ryuers  of  no  fmaule  largenes  fell  into  the  hauen.
Whyle  they  thus  fearched  the  lande  betwene  bothe,  Mclchior  efpied  a  high  houfe  a  farre  of,  where  fuppofinge
that  Gicaccanarillus  had  lyne  hyd,  he  made  towarde  it. And  as  he  was  goynge,  there  mette  hym  a  man  with  a
frownynge  countenaunce  and  a  grymme  looke,  with  a  hundreth  men  folowynge  hym,  anned  with  bowes  and
arrowes,  and  long  and  fharpe  flaues  like  iauelynnes,  made  harde  at  the  endes  with  fyre. Who  approchyng
towardes  owre  men,  fpake  owte  alowde  with  a  terryble  voyce,  fayenge  that  they  were  Taini,  (that  is)  noble  men,
and  not  Canibales. But  when  owre  men  had  gyuen  them  fignes  of  peace,  they  lefte  bothe  theyr  weapons  and
fiercenes. Thus  geuynge  eche  of  them  certen  haukes  belles,  they  tooke  it  for  fc  greate  a  rewarde,  that  they
defyred  to  enter  bondes  of  nere  frendefhyppe  with  vs,  and  feared  not  immediatly  to  fubmitte  them  felues  vnder
owre  power,  and  reforted  to  our  fhyps  with  theyr  prefentes. They  that  meafured  the  houfe  (beinge  made  in
rounde  forme)  fownde  it  to  be  from  fyde  to  fyde.  xxxii.  greate  paces,  compafed  abowte  with.  xxx.  other  vulgare
houfes,  hauinge  in  them  many  beames  croffe  ouer,  and  couered  with  reedes  of  fundry  colours,  AVTCthed  and  as  it

Superfluite.

Many  haue  to
much  and  none
inough.

The  eoulden
worlde

Naked  men
troubled  with
ambicion.

GjTie  place.

The  Admiral
sendctb  for  the
kynge.

No  hordes  in
the  Ilandes

A  tyme  for  all
thynges.

A  desperate

aduenture  uf  a

Qoelia  of  Rome.

Guaccanarillus
is  soughL

Melchior.

Poping-.i J  es  and
byrdes.

Tainj.

Haukes  belles.
A  large  hous

7«

72

The  fyrji  Decade.

Reedes  of
sundry  colours.

Caccl[c]us.

Hoiedus  and
Gorual.inus.

Oolde  in  ryuers
fauliiige  from
niouiuaynes.

The  maner  of
gathering  golde.
Graynes  of  golde.

A  masse  of  rude
golde  weighinge.
IX  ounces.

Caunaboa,  kj-nge
of  the  house  of
gold

Holsome  water
and  plentie  of
fysshe.

I'he  day  and  nyght
of  equal  length
in  December.

Byrdes  breed  in
December
The  eleuation
of  the  pole
The  starres  are
cauled  gardens
of  the  pole. JQ

The  Equinoctial
l>Tie.

A  chapel  and
preestes.

Marchaunts
Sirophenicians.

The  Cynamome
tree.

Xiloaloes  or
lignum  Aloes

were  weaued  with  maruelous  art When  owre  men  afked  fum  of  them  where  they  myght  fynde  Guaccanarillus.

They  aunfwered  that  that  Region  was  none  of  his. But  theyr  kynges  beynge  there  prefente. Yet  they  fayde

the)-  fuppofed  that  Guaccanarillus  was  gone  from  the  playne  to  the  mountaynes. Makynge  therfore  a  brotherly

league  with  this  Caccicus,  (that  is  to  liiye  a  kynge)  they  retourned  to  the  Admyrall  to  make  relation  what  they

hadde  feene  and  harde :  whervppon  he  fent  forth  dyuers  other  Centurians  with  their  hundrethes  to  fearche  the

countrey  yet  further. Emonge  the  which  were  Hoiedus  and  Gorualanus,  noble  younge  gentlemen  and  of  great

courage. And  as  they  went  towarde  the  mountaines  to  feeke  Guaccanarillus,  dyuidinge  the  mountaynes  betwene

them,  one  of  them  fownde  on  the  one  fyde  therof  foure  ryuers  faulynge  frome  the  fame  mountaynes  :  and  the

other  founde.  iii.  on  the  other  fyde. In  the  fandes  of  all  thefe  ryuers  is  fownd  great  plentye  of  goulde,  which

th[e]inhabitantcs  of  the  fame  Ilande  which  were  with  vs,  gathered  in  this  maner. Making  holes  in  the  fande

with  theyr  handes,  a  Cubette  deape,  and  takynge  vp  fande  with  their  lefte  handes  from  the  botome  of  the  fame,

they  picked  out  graynes  of  goulde  with  their  ryght  handes  withowte  any  more  arte  or  cunnynge. And  fo

deliuered  it  to  owre  men :  who  affirme  that  many  of  them  thus  gathered,  were  as  bygge  as  tares  or  fytchis.

And  I  my  felfe  fawe  a  mafle  of  rude  goulde,  (that  is  to  fay,  fuch  as  was  neuer  molten)  lyke  vnto  fuche  flones  as

are  founde  in  the  bottomes  of  ryuers,  weighinge  nyne  ownces,  which  Hoieda  him  felfe  fownde. Beinge  contented

with  thefe  fignes,  they  returned  to  the  Admirall  to  certifie  him  hereof For  the  Admirall  had  commaunded

vnder  payne  of  punyfliement  that  they  fliuld  meddle  no  further  then  their  commiffion :  which  was  only  to

fearche  the  places  with  their  fignes. For  the  fame  went  that  there  was  a  certayne  kynge  of  the  mountaynes

from  whenfe  thofe  ryuers  had  their  faule,  whom  they  caule  Cacicus  Caunaboa  that  is,  the  lord  of  the  houfe  of

golde. For  they  caule  a  houfe  Boa,  goulde,  Cauni ;  and  a  kynge  or  Lorde,  Cacicus,  as  we  haue  fayde  before.

They  affirme  that  there  can  noo  where  be  found  better  fyfflie,  nor  of  more  pleafant  tafl,  or  more  holfome  then  in

thefe  ryuers  :  alfo  the  waters  of  the  fame  to  be  mofl  holfom  to  drynke. Mclchior  hym  felfe  towld  me,  that  in  the

moneth  of  December,  the  days  and  nyghtes  bee  of  equal  length  among  the  Canibales. But  the  fphere  or  circles

of  the  heauen,  agreeth  not  thervnto. Albeit  that  in  the  fame  moneth,  fume  byrdes  make  their  nefles,  and  fume

haue  alredy  hatched  their  egges  by  reafon  of  the  heate  beinge  rather  continuall  then  extreme. He  towlde  me

alfo  when  I  quellioned  with  hym  as  concernynge  the  eleuation  of  the  pole  from  the  horizontal  lyne,  that

al  the  flerres  cauled  Plajlrum  or  charles  wayne are  hydde  vnder  the  Northe  pole  to  the  Canibales. And

furely  there  returned  none  from  thenfe  at  this  viage, to  whome  there  is  more  credit  to  be  gyuen,  then

to  this  man. But  if  he  had  byn  fkilfull  in  Aftronomye, he  fhulde  haue  fayde  that  the  day  was  almofle

equall  with  the  night. For  in  no  place  towarde  the  flay  of  the  fonne  (cauled  Soljlicium) can the  night

be  equall  with  the  day. And  as  for  them, they  neuer  came  vnder  the  Equi?ioctiall,  for  afmuch  as  they

had euer the northe pole theyr  guyde,  and euer eleuate  in  fight aboue the  Horizontal. Thus  haue  I

briefely  ^\Titten  vnto  yowre  honoure,  as  muche  as  I  thought  fufficiente  at  this  tyme. And  Ihall  fhortly  hereafter

(by  Gods  fauoure)  wryte  vnto  you  more  largely  of  fuche  matters  as  flialbe  dayly  better  knowen. For  the

admirall  hym  felfe  (whome  I  vfe  famylyerly  as  my  verye  frende)  hathe  promyfed  me  by  his  letters,  that  he  wyl

gyue  me  knowlege  of  al  fuch  thynges  as  fhall  chaunce. He  hath  nowe  chofen  a  flronge  place  where  he  may

buyld  a  Citie  nere  vnto  a  comodious  hauen. And  hath  alredy  buylded  many  houfes  and  a  chapell  in  the

whiche  (as  in  a  newe  worlde  heretofore  voyde  of  all  religion)  god  is  dayly  ferued  with.  xiii.  preefles  accordinge

to  the  maner  of  owre  churches. When  the  tyme  nowe  approched  when  he  promyfed  to  fende  to  the  kynge  and

queene,  and  hauynge  profperous  wynde  for  that  purpofe,  fent  backe  the.  xii.  Carauelles  wherof  we  made  mencion

before  it  was  no  fmaul  hynderance  and  greefe,  vnto  hym :  Efpecially  confyderynge  the  death  of  his  men  whom

he  lefte  in  the  Ilande  at  the  fyrfl  vyage,  wherby  we  are  yet  ignorant  of  many  places  and  other  fecretes  wherof

we  might  otherwyfe  haue  had  further  knowleage. But  as  tyme  fhall  reueale  them  ageyne,  fo  wyll  I  aduertyfe

yowe  of  the  fame. And  that  you  may  the  better  knowe  by  conference  had  with  the  Apothecaries  and  marchaunt

flrangers  Sirophenicians,  what  thefe  Regions  beare,  and  howe  hotte  theyr  ground  is,  I  haue  fent  you  all  kyndes

of  graynes,  with  the  barke  and  inner  partes  of  that  tree  whiche  they  fuppofe  to  bee  the  Cinamome  tree. And

yf  it  be  your  pleafure  to  tafle  eyther  of  the  graynes,  or  of  the  fmaule  feedes  the  which  you  fhoulde  perceaue  to

haue  fawlen  from  thefe  graynes,  or  of  the  wodde  it  felfe,  touch  them  firfle  foftely  mouinge  them  to  your  lyppes.

For  although  they  bee  not  hurtefuU,  yet  for  theyr  exceffe  of  heate,  they  are  fharpe  and  byte  the  tongue,  yf  they

remayne  any  whyle  theron. But  if  the  tongue  be  blyflered  by  taflynge  of  them,  the  fame  is  taken  away  by

drynkynge  of  water. Of  the  come  alfo  wherof  they  make  theyr  breade,  this  brynger  fhall  delyuer  fume  graynes

to  your  Lordefhyppe  bothe  whyte  and  blacke :  And  therwith  alfo,  a  Trunke  of  the  tree  of  Aloes The  which  if

you  cutte  in  peeces,  you  fhall  feele  a  fweete  fauoure  to  proceade  from  the  fame. Thus  fare  you  hartely

wel. From  the  courte  of  Methimna  Campi. The  thyrde  day  before  the  Calendes  of  May. Anno.  Domini,

M.  cccc.  xcnii.

1*

The  fyrji  Decade.

73

C  The  thyrde  boke  of  the  fyrst Decade,
to  Lodouike  Cardinall  of  Aragonye  and  Neuie  to  the  kynge.

Owe  defyre  that  folyfhe  Phaeton  fhulde  ageine  rule  the  Chariotes  of  the  Sunne :  And  contende
to  drawe  fweete  lycoures  out  of  the  harde  flynte,  wheras  you  requyre  me  to  dyffcribe  vnto
you  the  newe  worlde,  fownde  in  the  wefle  by  the  good  fortune  and  gouemaunce  of  the
Cathohke  Princes  Ferdinandus  and  HeHfabeth,  your  Vncle  and  Aunte :  fliewyng  ine  alfo
the  letters  of  kynge  Frederike  your  vncle,  wrytten  to  me  in  the  fame  behalfe.  But  fythe
you  haue  layde  this  burden  on  my  backe,  in  whofe  power  it  is  to  commaunde  me  to  take
vppon  me  more  then  I  am  wel  able.  Ye  bothe  fhal  receaue  this  precious  (lone,  rudely
clofed  in  leade  after  my  maner  of  workemanfliyppe.  Wherfore  when  you  (hall  perceaue  the  lemed  forte  frend-
elye :  The  malicious,  enuioufly :  And  the  backebyters,  furioufly,  to  bende  theyr  fclaunderous  dartes  ageynfl
owre  fayre  Nimphes  of  the  Ocean,  you  fliall  freely  protefle  in  howe  fhort  tyme,  and  in  the  myddefle  of  what
troubles  and  calamities,  you  haue  enforced  me  to  \vryte  of  the  fame.  Thus  fare  you  well  frome  Granata  the
ninthe  day  before  the  Calendes  of  May.

fj  We  haue  declared  in  the  boke  here  before,  howe  the  Admirall  paffed  by  the  coafles  of  the  Canibales  to
the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  with  his  whole  nauie.  But  nowe  we  entende  further  to  fhewe  what  he  fownde  as
concernynge  the  nature  of  this  Ilande,  after  that  he  had  better  fearched  the  feacreates  of  the  fame :  Likew>-fe
of  the  Ilande  of  Ctiba  nere  vnto  it  which  he  yet  fuppofed  to  bee  the  firme  lande.  Hifpaniola  therfore
(which  he  affirmeth  to  bee  Ophir,  wherof  we  reade  in  the  thyrde  boke  of  the  kynges)  is  of  latitude,  fyue  fouthe
degrees :  hauynge  the  northe  pole  eleuate  on  the  northe  fyde.  xxvii.  degrees :  And  on  the  Southe  fyde  (as  they
faye)  xxii.  degrees.  It  reacheth  in  length  from  the  Eafle  to  the  Wefle,  feuen  hundrethe  and  foure  fcore  myles.
It  is  diflant  from  the  Ilandes  of  Gades  (cauled  Cales)  xlix.  degrees,  and  more  as  fum  faye.  The  forme  of  the
Ilande,  refembleth  the  leafe  of  a  chefnutte  tree.  Vppon  a  high  hyll  on  the  North  fyde  of  the  Ilande,  he
buylded  a  citie,  bycaufe  this  place  was  mofl  apte  for  that  purpofe  by  reafon  of  a  myne  of  flones  which  was
nere  vnto  the  fame,  feruynge  well  bothe  to  buylde  with,  and  alfo  to  make  lyme.  At  the  bottome  of  this  hyll,
is  there  a  great  playne  of  three  fcore  myles  in  lengthe :  and  in  bredth  fumwhere.  xii.  fumwhere.  xx.  myles  where
it  is  brodefl,  and.  vi.  myles  where  it  is  narowefl  Through  this  playne  runne  dyuers  fayre  ryuers  of  holfome
waters.  But  the  greatefl  of  them  which  is  nauigablC;  fauleth  into  the  hauen  of  the  citie  for  the  fpace  of  halfe  a
furlonge.  Howe  fertile  and  fruitful!  this  valley  is,  you  (hal  vnderlland  by  thefe  thynges  which  folowe.  On  the
fliore  of  this  ryuer,  they  haue  lymyted  and  enclofed  certeyne  grounde  to  make  gardeynes  and  orchiardes,  in  the
which  al  kyndes  of  bygger  herbes,  as  radyfhe,  letufe,  colewortes,  borage,  and  fuch  other,  waxe  rype  within.  x\t.
dayes  after  the  feede  is  fowen.  Lykewyfe  Melones,  Gourdes,  Cucumers,  and  fuche  other,  ^v^thin  the  fpace  of.
xxxvi.  dayes.  Thefe  garden  herbes,  they  haue  freflhe  and  greene  all  the  whole  yeare.  Alfo  the  rootes  of  the
canes  or  reedes,  of  the  lycour  wherof,  fuger  is  made,  growe  a  cubette  high  within  the  fpace  of.  xv.  dayes :  but
the  lycoure  is  not  yet  hardened.  The  lyke  they  affirme  of  plantes  or  fhrouddes  of  younge  vines :  And  that
they  haue  the  fecond  yeare  gathered  ripe  and  fweete  grapes  of  the  fame.  But  by  reafon  of  to  muche  rankenes,
they  beare  but  fewe  clullers.  Furthermore,  a  man  of  the  countrey  fowed  a  lyttle  wheat  about  the  Calendes  of
February,  and  brought  with  hym  to  the  citie  a  handefull  of  the  rype  eares  of  the  fame  the  thjTde  day  before
the  calendes  of  Aprell :  which  was  that  yeare  the  vigile  of  the  Refurrection  of  owre  Lorde.  Alfo,  al  kyndes  of
pulfe,  as  beanes,  peafon,  fytches,  tares,  and  fuche  other,  are  rype  tsvyfe  in  the  yeare,  as  all  they  which  come
from  thenfe,  afifirme  with  one  voyce :  Yet  that  the  grounde  is  not  vniuerfally  apte  to  beare  wheate.  In  the
meane  tyme  whyle  thefe  thynges  were  doinge,  the  Admirall  fent  owte  a  companye  of  xxx.  men  to  fearche  the
Region  of  Cipanga,  otherwyfe  cauled  Cibana  This  Region  is  full  of  mountaynes  and  rockes :  And  the  myddle
backe  of  the  hole  Ilande  in  the  whiche  is  greate  plentie  of  goulde.  When  they  that  went  to  fearche  th^  Region,
were  returned  they  reported  maruelous  thynges  as  touchinge  the  great  ryches  of  this  Region.  Frome  thefe
mountaynes,  defcende  foure  greate  ryuers,  which  by  the  maruelous  induftrj'e  of  nature,  deuided  the  hole  Ilande
into  foure  partes,  in  maner  equall,  ouerfpreadinge  and  wateringe  the  hole  Ilande  with  their  branches.  Of  thefe
foure  ryuers,  the  one  reacheth  towarde  the  Eafle.  This  the  inhabitantes  caule  Iiinna :  An  oUier,  towarde  the
Wefle,  and  is  cauled  Aitibunicus.  The  thirde  towarde  the  Northe,  named  lachan :  the  lafle  reacheth  into  the
Southe,  and  is  cauled  Naiba.  The  daye  before  the  Ides  of  Marche,  the  Admiral  him  felfe  with  al  his  horfe
men  and  foure  hundreth  footemen,  marched  directly  towarde  the  South  fyde  of  the  goulden  Region.  Thus
paffmge  ouer  the  ryuer,  the  plaine  and  the  mountayne  which  enuironed  the  other  fyde  of  the  playne,  he
chaunceti  vpon  an  other  vale  the  which  a  ryuer  muche  bygger  then  the  fyrfle,  and  many  other  meane  ryuers

73

TJie  faUe  of
Phaeton,

Kyngs

Fcrdmandiu  and
queeoe  Helizabeth

Nereides.
He  meaneth
the  Ilandes.

Hispaniola.

11

Ophir  whether
Salomons  ships
sayled  for  golde.

Isabella.

A  playne  of
threescore  myles
of  lengthe.

A  token  of

maruelous

fruitfulncs.

Herbes  grene  al
the  hole  yeare.
Suger  reeds
plantes  and  vines.

Come  and  gm>-ne
rj-pc  twise  a  yeare

The  Region  of
Cipanga  or
Cibana.
Golde.

Foure  greate
ryuers.

The  golden
region  of  Cibaii=.

74

TJic  fyyjl  Decade.

Vales  anJ
mount.ivnes

The  v.\le  of
Cibaiia.

Colde  for  haukes
bcls.  j2

Craynes  and
pipple  stones  of
golde.

They  passe  not
for  golde,  in  that
it  is  golde  onely
but.  L-tc.

Stones  of  golde  as
byg  as  the  heade
of  a  chylde.

Spyces.

Wylde  vines  of
pleasaunte  taste.

Fruitful
mountaynes

Golde  in  the
sandes  of  ryuers
faulinge  from  the
mountaynes.

Libertie  and
Idelnes.

The  mountaynes
are  coulde.

The  Ilande  of
Cuba.

Least  any  other
prince,  &c

Discencion
betweene  the
Portugales  and
Spaniardes,

The  Ilandes  of
Cobouerde  or
Hisperides

13

The  Portugales
viages

runne  throwgh.  When  he  had  alfo  conueighed  his  armye  ouer  the  ryuer  and  pafled  the  feconde  vale  whiche
was  in  no  part  inferiour  to  the  firfle,  he  made  away  through  the  thirde  niountayne,  where  was  no  paflage  before,
and  defcended  into  an  other  vale  which  was  nowe  the  beginninge  of  Cibaiia.  Through  this  alfo  runne  many
fluddes,  and  ryuers,  out  of  euery  hyll,  and  in  the  fandes  of  theym  all,  is  fownde  great  plentie  of  goulde.  And
when  he  had  nowe  entered  three  fcore  and  twelue  myles  into  the  goulden  region  from  the  citie  he  entended
to  buylde  a  fortrolTe  \ppon  the  toppe  of  a  hyll,  flanding  by  the  fliore  of  a  certeyne  great  ryuer,  that  he  might
the  better  and  more  fafelye  fearche  the  fecreates  of  the  inner  partes  of  the  Region.  This  he  cauled  the  fortreffe
of  lliynte  Thomas.  The  which  in  the  meane  tynie  whyle  he  was  buyldynge,  th[e]inhabitantes  beinge  defirous
of  haukes  belles  and  other  of  owre  thinges,  reforted  dayly  thyther.  To  vvhom  the  Admirall  declared,  that
if  they  wolde  brynge  goulde,  they  fliulde  haue  what  fo  euer  they  wolde  aflce.  Forthwith  turnynge  theyr
backes  and  runnynge  to  the  fliore  of  the  ne.xt  ryuer,  they  returned  in  a  fliort  tyme,  brynginge  with  them
their  handes  full  of  goulde.  Amongefl  al  other,  there  came  a  owld  man  bringynge  with  him  two  pybble  fl.ones
of  goulde  weighinge  an  vnce,  defyrynge  them  to  gyue  him  a  bell  for  the  fame  who  when  he  fawe  oure  men
maruell  at  the  byggenes  therof,  he  made  fignes  that  they  were  but  fmaule  and  of  no  value  in  refpecte  of  fume
that  he  had  feene.  And  takynge  in  his  hande  foure  flones  the  leafl  wherof  was  as  bygge  as  a  walnut,  and  the
byggefl.  as  byggc  as  an  orange,  he  fayde  that  there  was  fownde  peeces  of  goulde  foo  bygge  in  his  countrey,
beynge  but  halfe  a  dayes  iourney  from  thenfe,  and  that  they  had  no  regarde  to  the  gatheringe  therof.  Wherby
we  perceaue  that  they  pafle  not  muche  for  goulde  in  afmuch  as  it  is  goulde  only,  but  fo  farre  efleeme  it,  as  the
hande  of  the  artificer  hathe  fafliioned  it  in  any  coomely  fourme.  For  who  doth  greatly  efl.eeme  rowgh  marble
or  vnwTOught  luerye.  But  if  they  be  w  rought  with  the  cunninge  hande  of  Phidias  or  Praxiteles^  and  fliaped  to
the  fimilitude  of  the  fiiyre  nimphes  or  fayeres  of  the  fea  (cauled  Nereiades)  or  the  fayres  of  the  wods,  (cauled
Hamadriades)  they  flial  neuer  lacke  byers.  Befyde  this  owld  man,  there  came  alfo  dyuers  other,  brynginge  with
them  pypple  flones  of  gold  weighing,  x.  or.  xii.  drammes  :  And  feared  not  to  confeffe,  that  in  the  place  where  they
gathered  that  golde,  there  were  found  fumtyme  flones  of  gold  as  bygge  as  the  heade  of  a  chyld  When  he  had
taryed  heare  a  fewe  dayes,  he  fent  one  Luxanus,  a  noble  younge  gentylman  with  a  fewe  armed  men  to  fearche
all  the  partes  of  this  Region.  Who  at  his  returne,  reported  that  th[e]inhabitantes  fhewed  him  greater  thinges
then  we  haue  fpoken  of  here  before.  But  he  dyd  openly  declare  nothynge  therof:  which  they  thought  was
doone  by  the  Admirales  commaundement.  They  haue  wooddes  full  of  certeyne  fpyces  :  but  not  fuche  as  we
commonly  vfe.  Thefe  they  gather  euen  as  they  do  golde  :  that  is  as  much  as  wyl  ferue  for  theyr  purpofe,  euery
man  for  hym  felfe,  to  exchange  the  fame  with  the  inhabitantes  of  other  countreys  adioyninge  to  them,  for  fuch
thinges  as  they  lacke,  as  dyfflies,  pottes,  fl.ooles,  and  fuche  other  neceffaries.  As  Luxanus  returned  to  the
Admiral,  (which  was  about  the  Ides  of  Marche)  he  fownde  in  the  wooddes,  certeyne  wylde  vines,  rype  and  of
pleafaurt  tafl,e.  But  th[e]inhabitantes  paffe  not  on  them.  This  Region  though  it  bee  full  of  flones  and  rockes
(and  is  therfore  cauled  Cibana,  whiche  is  as  muche  to  faye  as  a  flone)  yet  it  is  well  replenyflied  with  trees  and
paflures.  Ye  they  inflantly  affirme,  that  if  the  graffe  of  thefe  mountaynes  bee  cutte,  it  groweth  ageyne  within
the  fpace  of  foure  dayes,  higher  then  wheate.  And  for  as  muche  as  many  fliowers  of  rayne  doo  faule  in  this
Region,  whereof  the  rjaiers  and  fluddes  haue  their  increafe,  in  euery  of  the  which,  golde  is  fownde  myxte  with
fande  in  all  places,  they  iudge  that  the  golde  is  dryuen  from  the  mountaynes,  by  the  vehement  courfe  of  the
flreames  which  faule  from  the  fame,  and  runne  into  the  ryuers.  The  people  of  this  Region  are  gyuen  to
Idelnes  and  playe.  For  fuche  as  inhabyte  the  mountaynes,  fyt  quakynge  for  coulde  in  the  wynter  feafon,  and
had  rather  foo  wander  vppe  and  downe  Idelly,  then  take  the  peines  to  make  them  apparell,  wheras  they  haue
wooddes  full  of  goffampine  cotton.  But  fuch  as  dwel  in  the  vales  or  plaines  feele  no  coulde  in  wynter.  When
the  AdmiraU  had  thus  fearched  the  beginninge  of  the  region  of  Cibana,  he  repayred  to  Ifabella  (for  fo  he  named
the  citie)  where,  leauinge  the  gouernance  of  the  Ilande  with  his  deputies,  he  prepared  hym  felfe  to  fearch  further
the  lymettes  of  the  Ilande  of  Cuba  or  Johanna,  which  he  yet  doubted  to  bee  the  firme  lande,  and  diflant  from
Hifpaniola,  onely  three  fcore  and  ten  myles.  This  dyd  he  with  more  fpeedy  expedicion,  caulyng  to  remem-
braunce  the  kinges  commaundement,  who  wylled  hym  fyrft  with  all  celeritie  to  ouer  runne  the  coafles  of  the
newe  Ilandes,  leafte  any  other  prince  fliulde  in  the  meane  tyme  attempte  to  inuade  the  fame.  For  the  Kynge
of  Portugale  affirmed  that  it  perteyned  only  to  hym  to  difcouer  thefe  vnknowen  landes.  But  the  byfliop  of
Rome  Alexander  the.  vi.  to  auoyd  the  caufe  of  this  difcention,  graunted  to  the  Kynge  of  Spayne  by  th[e]auc-
toritie  of  his  leaden  bulles,  that  no  other  prince  fhulde  bee  fo  boulde  as  to  make  any  viages  to  any  of  thofe
vnknowen  regions,  lyenge  without  the  precinct  of  a  directe  lyne  drawen  from  the  North  to  the  Southe  a
hundreth  leaques  weflwarde  without  the  paraleUes  of  the  Ilandes  cauled  Capud  Viride.  or  Cabouerde,  which  we
thynke  to  bee  thofe  that  in  owlde  tyme  were  cauled  Hefperides.  Thefe  perteyne  to  the  kynge  of  Portugale.
And  frome  thefe,  his  pylottes  whiche  doo  yearely  fearche  newe  coafles  and  regions,  directe  their  courfe  to  the
Eafte,  faylynge  euer  towarde  the  lefte  hande  by  the  backe  of  Aphrike  and  the  feas  of  the  Ethiopians  :  Neither
to  this  day  had  the  Portugales  at  any  tyme  fayled  Southwarde,  or  Weflewarde  from  the  Ilandes  of  Caboucrde.

74

The  fyrji  Decade.

IS

Preparyng  therfore  three  fliippes,  he  made  hade  towarde  the  Ilande  of  Johanna  or  Cuba  whyther  he  came  in
(horte  fpace,  and  named  the  poynt  therof  where  he  fyrfl  arryued,  Alpha  and  O :  that  is,  the  fyrfle  and  the  lafle  :
for  he  fuppofed  that  there  had  byn  th[e]end  of  o\vre  Eafle  bycaufe  the  fonne  fauleth  there  :  And  of  the  wefle,
bycaufe  it  ryfeth  there.  For  it  is  apparente,  that  weflwarde,  it  is  the  beginninge  of  India  beyonde  the  ryuer  of
Ganges ;  And  Eaftewarde,  the  furthefl.  ende  of  the  fame :  which  thinge  is  not  contrary  to  reafon  forafmuche  as
the  Cofmographers  haue  lefte  the  lymites  of  India  beyonde  Ganges  vndetermyned  :  where  as  alfo  fume  were  of
opinion  that  India  was  not  farre  from  the  coaftes  of  Spaine  as  we  haue  fayde  before.  Within  the  profpecte  of
the  begynnynge  of  Cuba,  he  founde  a  commodious  hauen  in  the  extreme  angle  of  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola.
For  in  this  part,  the  Hand  receaueth  a  greate  goulfe.  This  hauen,  he  named  faynt  Nycolas  porte,  beinge
fcarfely.  xx.  leaques  from  Cuba.  As  he  departed  from  henfe  and  fayled  weflwarde  by  the  fouth  fyde  of  Cuba,
the  further  that  he  went,  fo  muche  the  more  the  fea  feemed  to  bee  extended  in  breadth  and  to  bende  towarde
the  fouth.  On  the  fouth  fyde  of  Cuba,  he  fownde  an  Ilande  which  th[e]inhabitantes  caule  lamaica.  This  he
affirmeth  to  bee  longer  and  broder  then  the  Hand  of  Sicilie :  hauyng  in  it  only  one  mountayne,  which  on  euery
parte  begynninge  from  the  fea,  ryfeth  by  little  and  little  into  the  myddefl  of  the  Ilande  :  And  that  foo  playnely
without  rowghnes,  that  fuche  as  goo  vp  to  the  toppe  of  the  fame,  can  fcarfely  perceaue  that  they  afcende.  This
Ilande  he  affirmed  to  bee  very  fruitfull  and  full  of  people  as  well  in  th[e]inner  partes  of  the  fame  as  by  the  fhore  :
And  that  th[e]inhabitantes  are  of  quicker  Avytte  then  in  the  other  Ilandes,  and  more  experte  artificers  and
warrelyke  men.  For  in  many  places  where  he  woulde  haue  arryued,  they  came  armed  ageynfl  him  and
forbodde  him  with  threatening  wordes.  But  beinge  ouercome,  they  made  a  league  of  frendeiTiip  with  hym.
Thus  departynge  from  lamaica,  he  fayled  towarde  the  Wefle  with  a  profperous  ^^ynde  for  the  fpace  of  threefcore
and  tenne  dayes  :  thinkinge  that  he  had  paffed  fo  farre  by  the  compaffe  of  the  earth  being  vndemeth  vs,  that  he
had  byn  nere  vnto  Aurea  Cherfonefus  (nowe  cauled  Malaccha,)  in  owre  Eafle  India  beyonde  the  beginninge  of
Perfides.  For  he  playnely  beleued  that  he  had  lefte  onely  two  of  the  twelue  ho\\Tes  of  the  fonne,  which  were
vnknowen  to  vs,  for  the  owlde  wryters  haue  lefte  halfe  the  courfe  of  the  fonne  vntouched,  where  as  they  haue  but
onely  difcuffed  that  fuperficiall  parte  of  the  earth  which  lyeth  betwene  the  Ilandes  of  Gades  and  the  ryuer  of  Ganges :
or  at  the  vttermofte,  to  Aurea  Cherfonefus.  In  this  nauigation,  he  chaunced  on  many  furious  feas,  running  mth
a  faule  as  it  had  byn  the  flreames  of  fluddes  :  Alfo  many  whorlepooles,  and  fhelfes,  with  many  other  daungers,
and  flreyghtes  by  reafon  of  the  multytude  of  Ilandes,  which  ley  on  euery  fyde.  But  not  regardinge  all  thefe  perelles,
he  determyned  to  proceade  vntyl  he  had  certaine  knowledge  whether  Ctiba  were  an  Ilande  or  firme  lande.  Thus
he  fayled  forward  coaflinge  euer  by  the  fhore  towarde  the  wefle  for  the  fpace  of  CC.  xxii.  [two  hundred  and
twenty-two]  leaques,  that  is,  abowte  a  thoufande  and  three  hundreth  myles]:  And  gaue  names  to  feuen  hundreth
Ilandes  by  the  waye :  Leauynge  alfo  on  the  lefte  hande  (as  he  feared  not  to  reporte)  three  thoufande  here  and
there.  But  let  vs  nowe  returne  to  fuche  thinges  as  he  fownde  worthy  to  be  noted  in  this  nauigation.  Saylinge
therfore  by  the  fyde  of  Cuba,  and  fearchinge  the  nature  of  the  places,  he  efpied  not  farre  from  Alpha  and  O,  a
large  hauen  of  capacitie  to  harborowe  manye  fliippes  :  whofe  enteraunce  is  bendinge,  beinge  inclofed  on  bothe
fydes  with  capes  or  poyntes  which  receaue  the  water.  This  hauen  is  large  within,  and  of  exceadinge  depthe.
Saylinge  by  the  fhore  of  this  porte,  he  fawe  not  farre  frome  the  fame,  two  cotages  couered  mth  reedes,  and  in
many  places  fyer  kyndeled.  Here  he  fente  certeyne  armed  men  owte  of  the  fhippes  to  the  cotages  :  where  they
fo\vnde  nother  man  nor  woman,  but  roflemeate  enowgh.  For  they  fownde  certeyne  fpyttes  of  woodde  lyenge
at  the  fyre,  hauinge  fyfhe  on  theym  abowt  a  hundreth  pownde  weight,  and  two  ferpentes  of.  viii.  foote  longe  a
piece,  wherat  marueyUnge,  and  lokynge  abowt  if  they  coukle  efpye  any  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  and  that  none
appeared  in  fyght  (for  they  fledde  all  to  the  mountaynes  at  the  comminge  of  owi-e  men)  tiiey  fell  to  theyr  meate,
and  eate  the  fyfhe  taken  with  other  mens  trauayle  :  But  they  abfleyned  from  the  ferpentes,  which  they  affirme  to
differ  nothinge  from  Crocodiles  of  Egypt,  but  onely  in  byggenes.  For  (as  Plinie  fayth)  Crocodiles  haue  fumet}-mes
byn  fownde  of.  xviii.  cubettes  long.  But  of  thefe  the  byggefl  were  but  of.  viii.  fote.  Thus  beinge  well  refreffhed,
they  entered  into  the  next  woodde  where  they  fownde  many  of  the  fame  kynde  of  ferpentes  hang)'nge  vppon
bowghes  of  trees  :  of  the  which,  fume  had  theyr  mouthes  tyed  with  flrynges,  and  fume  theyr  teethe  taken  owte.
And  as  they  fearched  the  places  nere  vnto  the  hauen,  they  fawe  abowte.  Ixx.  men  in  the  toppe  of  a  hyghe  rocke,
whiche  fledde  as  foone  as  they  had  efpied  owre  men.  Who  by  fignes  and  tokens  of  peace,  caulinge  them  ageyne,
there  was  one  which  came  nere  them  and  floode  on  the  toppe  of  a  rocke,  feemynge  as  thowgh  he  were  yet
ferefuU.  But  the  Admiral  fent  one  Didacus  to  hym,  a  man  of  the  fame  countrey,  \vhom  he  had  at  his  f}Tfle
vyage  taken  in  the  Ilande  of  Guanahaini,  beinge  nere  vnto  Cuba :  ^vyllinge  hym  to  come  nere  and  not  to  Lee
afrayde.  Wlien  he  harde  Didacus  fpeke  to  him  in  his  owne  tonge  he  came  bowldly  to  hym  :  and  fliortly  after
reforted  to  his  company,  perfuadinge  them  to  come  without  all  feare.  After  this  meffage  was  doone,  there
defcended  frome  the  rockes  to  the  fhippes,  abowt  three  fcore  and  ten  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  proferinge  frende-
Ihippe  and  gentelnes  to  owre  men :  whiche  the  Admirall  accepted  thankefully,  and  gaue  them  dyuers  rewardes  :
And  that  the  rather,  for  that  he  had  intelligence  by  Dldcuus  th[e]enterpretoure,  that  they  were  the  k}'nges

75

Alpha  and  O

The  ende  of  the
Easte  and  west.

!  Note.

India  not  far
from  Spayne.

Saynt  Nycolas
porte.

The  Iland  of
lamaica.

lamaica.

QuickC  wytted
people.

The  compaseinge
of  the  earth.

Aurea
Chersonesus,  or
Malaccha.
A  secreate  of
Astronomie.

The  ryuer  of
Ganges.

Daungerous
streightes  by
reason  of  many
Ilandes.

The  Admiral  gaue
names  to  seuen
hundrethe  Ilandes
Thre  thousand
Ilandes.

A  large  hauen

Rested  fysshe  and
serpents  of.  viii.
foote  longe.

14

Crocodile,  of
Egypte.

Didacus
th[e]interpretoiir.

The  kj-nge»
I fv^^ers.

76

The  fyrjl  Decade.

Serpentes
esteemed  for
delicate  meat

Ophiophagi.

Blossomes  and
fruites  bothe  at
one  tyme.

Trees  which
bcare  gourds

A  multitude  of
Ilandes.

Hotte  water.

A  straimge  kynde
of  fysshynge.

A  huntynge
fysshe.

Abundance  of
tortoyses.

15

Fyssher  men.

The  fysshe
Guaicanum.

Humaine  people.

A  mountaine
fruitefull  and  well
inhabited.

Dogges  of  strange
shape  and  dumme.
Duckes.
Hearons.
Strewhtes.

fyflhers,  fent  of  theyr  lorde  to  take  fyfflie  ageynfl  a  folemne  feafle  which  he  prepared  for  an  other  kynge.  And
wheras  the  Admiralcs  men  had  eaten  the  fyflhe  whiche  they  lefte  at  the  fyre,  they  were  the  gladder  therof,
bycaufe  they  had  lefte  the  ferpentes.  For  there  is  nothinge  amonge  theyr  delicate  dyfflies,  that  they  efleeme  fo
muche  as  thefe  ferpentes  :  In  foo  muche  that  it  is  no  more  lawfull  for  the  common  people  to  eate  of  them,  then
peacockes  or  phefintes  amonge  vs.  As  for  the  fyfflies,  they  doubted  not  to  take  as  many  more  the  liime  nyght.
Beynge  afked  why  they  fyrfl  rolled  the  fyfflie  which  they  entended  to  beare  to  their  kynge.  They  anfwered,  that
they  might  bee  the  freflhor  and  vncorrupted.  Thus  ioyninge  handes  for  a  token  of  further  frendefliip,  euery
man  reforted  to  his  owne.  The  Admirall  went  fonvarde  as  he  had  appoynted,  folowing  the  faulinge  of  the
fonne  from  the  beginninge  of  Cuba  cauled  Alpha  and  O.  The  fliores  or  fea  bankes  euen  vnto  this  hauen,  albeit
they  be  ful  of  trees,  yet  are  they  rowgh  with  mountains.  Of  thefe  trees,  fume  were  ful  of  bloffoomes  and
flo\vres,  and  other  laden  with  fruites.  Beyonde  the  hauen  the  lande  is  more  fertile  and  peopulous,  whofe  inhabi-
tantes  are  more  gentyll  and  more  defyrous  of  owre  thinges.  For  as  fone  as  they  had  efpied  owre  fhippes,  they
flocked  all  to  the  fliore,  brynginge  with  them  fuche  breade  as  they  are  accuftomed  to  eate,  and  gourdes  full  of
water,  offeringe  theym  vnto  owre  men,  and  further  defyri'nge  them  to  coome  alande.  In  all  thefe  Ilandes  is  a
certeyne  kynde  of  trees  as  bygge  as  elmes,  whiche  beare  gourdes  in  the  fleade  of  fruites.  Thefe  they  vfe  only
for  drink}Tige  pottes,  and  to  fetche  water  in,  but  not  for  meate,  for  the  inner  fubflance  of  them,  is  fowrer  then
gaule,  and  the  barke  as  harde  as  any  flielle.  At  the  Ides  of  Maye,  the  watche  men  lokinge  owte  of  the  toppe
caftell  of  the  fliyppe  towarde  the  Southe,  fawe  a  multitude  of  Ilandes  flandinge  thicke  together,  beynge  all  well
repleniflied  with  trees,  grafle,  and  herbes,  and  wel  inhabyted.  In  the  fhore  of  the  continent,  he  chaunced  into
a  nauigable  ryuer  whofe  water  was  foo  hotte,  that  no  man  myght  endure  to  abyde  his  hande  therein  any  tyme.
The  day  folowinge,  efpying  a  farre  off  a  Canoa  of  fyflier  men  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  fearinge  leafl  they  fliulde  flye
at  the  fyght  of  owxo.  men,  he  commaunded  certeyne  to  affayle  them  pryuily  with  the  fliyppe  boates.  But  they
fearinge  nothinge,  taryed  the  comminge  of  owre  men.  Nowe  flial  you  heare  a  newe  kind  of  fyfhinge.  Lyke
as  we  with  greyhoundes  doo  hunte  hares,  in  the  playne  fieldes.  So  doo  they  as  it  were  with  a  huntyng  fyfflie,
take  other  fyfflies.  This  fyfflie  was  of  fliape  or  fourme  vnknowen  vnto  vs :  but  the  body  therof,  not  muche
vnlyke  a  greate  yele :  hauinge  on  the  hynder  parte  of  the  heade,  a  very  towgh  flcynne,  lyke  vnto  a  greate  bagge
or  purfe.  This  fyfflie  is  tyed  by  the  fyde  of  the  boate  with  a  corde  lette  downe  foo  farre  into  the  water,  that  the
fyfflie  maye  lye  clofe  hyd  by  the  keele  or  bottome  of  the  fame,  for  fliee  may  in  no  cafe  abyde  the  fight  of  the
ayer.  Thus  when  they  efpie  any  greate  fyfflie,  or  tortoyfe  (wherof  there  is  great  abundance  bygger  then  great
targettes)  they  let  the  corde  at  lengthe.  But  when  flie  feeleth  her  felfe  loofed,  fliee  enuadeth  the  fyfflie  or
tortoyfe  as  fwiftly  as  an  arrowe.  And  where  flie  hath  once  faflened  her  howld  fhee  cafl.eth  the  purfe  of  flcynne
wherof  we  fpake  before :  And  by  drawyng  the  fame  togyther,  fo  grafpeleth  her  pray,  that  no  mans  fl.rength  is
fufficient  to  vnloofe  the  fame,  excepte  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  drawinge  the  lyne,  fliee  bee  lyfted  fumwhat  aboue  the
brymnie  of  the  water.  For  then,  as  fone  as  flie  feeth  the  brightnes  of  the  ayer,  fhee  lettethe  goo  her  howlde.
The  praye  therfore,  beinge  nowe  drawen  nere  to  the  brymme  of  the  water,  there  leapeth  foodenly  owte  of  the
boate  into  the  fea  foo  manye  fyffliers,  as  maye  fuffice  to  holde  fafl.e  the  praye,  vntyll  the  refle  of  the  coompany
haue  taken  it  into  the  boate.  Which  thinge  doone,  they  loofe  fo  muche  of  the  cord,  that  the  hunting  fyfflie,
may  ageyne  retume  to  her  place  within  the  water:  where  by  an  other  corde,  they  let  downe  to  her  a  piece  of
the  praye,  as  we  vfe  to  rewarde  greyhoundes  after  they  haue  kylled  theyr  game.  This  fyfflie,  they  caule
Guaicamwi,  But  owcq  men  caule  it  Reiierfum.  They  gaue  owre  men  foure  tortoyfes  taken  by  this  meanes :
And  thofe  of  fuch  byggenes  that  they  almofle  fylled  theyr  fyffliinge  boate.  For  thefe  fyfflies  are  efl,eemed
amonge  them  for  delicate  meate.  Owre  men  recompenfed  them  ageyne  with  other  rewardes,  and  foo  lette  them
departe.  Beinge  aflced  of  the  coompaffe  of  that  lande,  they  aunfwered  that  it  had  no  ende  weflewarde,  Mofl
inftantly  defyringe  the  Admirall  to  coome  alande:  or  in  his  name  to  fende  one  with  them  to  falute  their
Caziais,  (that  is)  their  kinge :  Affirniynge  that  he  wolde  gyue  owre  men  many  prefentes,  yf  they  wolde  goo  to
hym.  But  the  Admiral,  leafl.e  he  fliulde  bee  hyndered  of  the  vyage  which  he  had  begunne,  refufed  to  goo  with
them.  Then  they  defyred  to  knowe  his  name,  and  towld  owre  men  lykewyfe  the  name  of  theyr  kyng.  Thus
fayling  on  yet  further  euer  toward  the  Wefl,  within  fewe  dayes  he  came  nere  vnto  a  certeyne  exceding  high
mountayne,  wel  inhabyted  by  reafon  of  the  great  fertilitie  of  the  fame.  Th[e]inhabitauntes  of  this  mountayne,
browght  to  owre  fliippe,  breade,  goffampine  cotton,  cunnies,  and  fundry  kyndes  of  wyldfowle :  demaundynge
relygioufly  of  th[e]interpretoures,  if  this  nation  defcended  not  from  heauen.  The  kynge  of  this  people,  and
dyuers  other  fage  men  that  floode  by  hym,  informed  hym  that  that  lande  was  no  Ilande.  Shortly  after,
enteringe  into  one  of  the  Ilandes  beinge  on  the  lefte  hande  of  this  lande,  they  fownde  no  body  therin :  for  they
fledde  al  at  the  commyng  of  owre  men.  Yet  fownde  they  there  fowre  dogges  of  maruelous  deformed  fliape,
and  fuche  as  coulde  not  barke.  This  kynd  of  dogges,  they  eate  as  we  do  goates.  Here  is  great  plentie  of  geefe,
duckes,  and  hearons.  Betwene  thefe  Ilandes  and  the  continente,  he  entered  into  foo  narowe  fl.reyghtes,  that
he  coulde  fcarfely  tume  backe  the  fhippes :  And  thefe  alfo  fo  flialowe,  that  the  keele  of  the  fliyps  fumtyme  rafed
75

The  fyrjl  Decade.

11

on  the  fandes  The  water  of  thefe  flreyghtes,  for  the  fpace  of  fortie  myles,  was  white  and  thycke  lyke  vnto
mylke,  and  as  thowgh  mele  had  byn  fparkeled  throwgh  owte  al  that  fea.  And  when  they  had  at  the  lengthe
efcaped  thefe  flrayghtes,  and  were  nowe  coome  into  a  mayne  and  large  fea,  and  had  fayled  theron  for  the  fpace
of  foure  fcore  myles,  they  efpyed  an  other  excedinge  hygh  mountayne,  whyther  the  Admirall  reforted  to  flore
his  fhyppes  with  freffhe  water  and  fuel.  Heare  amonge  certeyne  wooddes  of  date  trees,  and  pyneable  trees  of
excedyng  height  he  fownd  two  natiue  fprynges  of  freffhe  water.  In  the  meane  tyme  whyle  the  woodde  was
cuttynge  and  the  barrelles  fyllyng,  one  of  owre  archers  went  into  the  wood  to  hunt :  where  he  efpyed  a  certeyne
man  with  a  whyte  veflure,  foo  lyke  a  fryer  of  th[e]order  of  faynt  Marye  of  Menedis,  that  at  the  fyrfle  fight  he
fuppofed  it  had  byn  the  Admiralles  preefle  which  he  browght  Avith  hym,  beyng  a  man  of  the  fame  order.  But
two  other  folowed  hym  immediatlye  owte  of  the  fame  wooddes,  fhortly  after,  he  fawe  a  farre  of  a  hole  coompany
of  men  clothed  in  apparel,  beinge  abowte.  xxx.  in  nomber.  Then  turning  his  backe  and  cryinge  owte  to  his
felowes,  he  made  hafle  to  the  fhyppes  with  all  that  he  myght  dryue.  Thefe  apparelled  men,  made  fignes  and
tokens  to  hym  to  tary  and  not  to  bee  afrayde.  But  that  notwithflandinge,  he  ceafed  not  to  flye.  The  Admirall
beinge  aduertifed  hereof,  and  not  a  lyttle  reioyfynge  that  he  had  fownde  a  ciuile  people,  incontinently  fent
forth  armed  men,  with  commaundement,  that  yf  neede  fhould  foo  requyre,  they  fhulde  enter  fortie  myles  into
the  Ilande,  vntyl  they  myght  fynde  eyther  thofe  apparelled  men,  or  other  inhabitantes  of  that  countrey.  When
they  hadde  paffed  ouer  the  woodde,  they  came  into  a  greate  playne  full  of  graffe  and  herbes.  in  which  appeared
no  token  of  any  pathe  way.  Here  attemptinge  to  goo  throwgh  the  graffe  and  herbes,  they  were  foo  entangled
and  bewrapte  therin,  that  they  were  fcarfely  able  to  paffe  a  myle,  the  graffe  beinge  there  lyttle  lower  then  owtc
rype  come.  Beinge  therfore  weryed,  they  were  enforced  to  returne  ageyne,  fyndyng  no  pathe  way.  The  day
folowing  he  fent  foorth.  xxv.  armed  men  an  other  way:  Commaunding  them  to  make  diligent  fearche  and
inquifition  what  maner  of  people  inhabited  the  land.  Who  departinge,  when  they  had  fouTide  not  farre  from
the  fea  fyde  certeyne  fleppes  of  wylde  beafles,  of  the  which  they  fufpected  fum  to  bee  of  Lyons  feete  being
flriken  with  feare,  returned  backe  ageyne.  As  they  came  they  fownde  a  woodde  in  the  which  were  many
natiue  vines  here  and  there  crepinge  abowte  highe  trees,  with  many  other  trees  bearinge  aromaticall  fruites  and
fpyces.  Of  thefe  vines  they  browght  with  them  into  Spaine  many  cluflers  of  grapes  very  ponderous  and  full  of
lycoure.  But  of  the  other  fruites,  they  browght  none  bycaufe  they  putrified  by  the  waye  in  the  fhippe,  and  were
cafle  into  the  fea.  They  faye  alfo  that  in  the  laundes  or  medowes  of  thofe  wooddes,  they  fawe  flockes  of  greate
cranes  twyfe  as  bygge  as  owres.  As  he  went  forward  and  turned  his  fayles  towarde  certeyne  other  mountaines,
he  efpied  two  cotages  on  the  fhore,  in  the  which  e  he  fawe  onely  one  man :  who  beinge  browght  to  the  fhyppe,
fignified  with  heade,  fyngers,  and  by  al  other  fignes,  that  he  coulde  deuife  that  the  lande  which  lay  beyonde
thofe  mountaynes,  was  very  full  of  people.  And  as  the  Admirall  drewe  nere  the  fhore  of  the  fame,  there  mette
hym  certeyne  Canoas  hauinge  in  them  many  people  of  the  countrey,  who  made  fignes  and  tokens  of  peace  and
frendefhyp.  But  here  Didacus  th[e]interpretour  whiche  vnderfloode  the  language  of  th[e]inhabitantes  of  the
beginning  of  Ciiba,  vnderflode  not  them  one  whytte,  wherby  they  confydred  that  in  fundry  prouinces  of  Cuba,
were  fundry  languages  He  had  alfo  intelligence,  that  in  the  inlande  of  this  Region,  was  a  kynge  of  greate
power,  and  accuflomed  to  weare  apparell.  He  fayth  that  all  the  tracte  of  this  fhore,  was  drowned  with  water
and  full  of  mudde,  befette  with  many  trees,  after  the  maner  of  owre  maryfflies,  yet  whereas  in  this  place  they
wente  alande  for  frefflie  water,  they  fownde  many  of  the  fhel  fyffhes  in  the  whiche  pearles  are  gathered.  But
that  coulde  not  caufe  the  Admirall  to  tracte  the  tyme  there,  entendinge  at  this  viage,  only  to  proue  howe  many
landes  and  feas  he  coulde  difcouer  accordinge  to  the  kynges  commaundement.  As  they  yet  preceded  fonvarde,
they  fawe  here  and  there  al  the  waye  alonge  by  the  fliore,  a  great  fmoke  ryfmge,  vntyll  they  came  to  an  other
mountayne  foure  fcore  myles  diflant.  There  was  no  rocke  or  hyll  that  coulde  be  feene,  but  the  fame  was  all
of  a  fmoke.  But  whether  thefe  fyers  were  made  by  th[e]inhabitantes  for  their  neceffary  bufynes,  or  as  we  are
wont  to  fette  beacons  on  fyre  when  we  fufpecte  th[e]approche  of  owre  enemies,  thereby  to  gyue  warninge  to
theyr  neyghbours  to  bee  in  a  redines,  and  gather  togyther  if  perhappes  owre  men  fhulde  attempte  any  thinge
ageynfl  them,  or  otherwyfe  as  feemethe  mofl  lykely,  to  caule  them  togyther  as  to  a  wonder  to  behould  owre
fhippes,  they  knewe  yet  no  certentie.  In  this  tracte,  the  fhores  bended  fumetyme  towarde  the  Southe,  and
fumetyme  towarde  the  Wefle  and  weflefouthwefl :  And  the  fea  was  euery  where  entangeled  with  Ilandes:  by
reafon  whereof,  the  keeles  of  the  fhippes  often  tymes  rafed  the  fandes  for  flaalownes  of  the  water:  So  that  the
fliyppes  beinge  very  fore  brufed  and  appayred,  the  fayles,  cables,  and  other  tackelinges,  in  maner  rotten,  and
the  vytayles,  (efpecially  the  byfkette  breade)  corrupted  by  takynge  water  at  the  riftes  euyll  clofed,  the  Admirall
was  enforced  to  turne  backe  ageyne.  This  lafle  poynte  where  he  touched  of  Cuba  (not  yet  beinge  knowen  to
be  an  Ilande)  he  cauled  Euangelijla.  Thus  turning  his  fayles  toward  other  Ilandes  lyinge  not  farre  from  the
fuppofed  continente,  he  chaunced  into  a  mayne  fea  where  was  fuche  a  multitude  of  greate  tortoyfes,  that
fumtyme  they  flayed  the  fhyppes.  Not  longe  after,  he  entered  into  a  gulfe  of  whyte  water,  lyke  vnto  that
wherof  we  fpake  before. At  the  length  fearing  the  fhelfes  of  the  Hands,  he  returned  to  the  fhore  of  Cuba  by

Whyte  and  thicke
water.

Wooddes  of  date
trees.

Men  appareled
like  white  fryers.

16

Grasse  almost  as
hyghe  as  come.

Steppes  of  w)-Id
beastes  feete.

Natiue  vines

Trees  bearinge
spyces  and  sweete
fruites.

Greate  Cranes.

Dyuers  language?
in  the  Ilande  of
Cuba.

Pearles  in
shelfvsshes.

The  sea  entangeled
with  Ilandes

Euangelisti

A  multitude  of
great  tortoyses

»»

78

The  fyrjl  Decade.

A  goufe  of  whyte

water

Humaine  people.

Stock  doues  of
more  plcasauut
last  then
partriches.

17

The  hiimanitie  of
a  reiiereiide  owlde
goucniour.

An  oration  of  the
naked  gouemour.

Theyr  opinion  of
the  soul  of  man.

Desyre  of  golde
founde  that
which  religion
coulde  not  fynde.
Virtus  />ost
nummos.  <5r>(".

The  Hand  as

common  as  the
sunne  and  water.

The  golden
worlde.

Prouision  without
care.

Simple  diete

18

The  Hand  of
lamaica.

Hispaniola.

The  Canibales.

the  fame  way  which  he  came.  Here  a  multitude  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  as  well  women  as  men,  reforted  to  hym
with  cheerefull  countenaunce  and  without  feare:  bringynge  with  them  popingayes,  breade,  water,  and  cunnyes:
But  efpecially  flocke  doues  much  bygger  then  owres :  which  he  affirmeth,  in  fauour  and  tafte,  to  bee  muche
more  pleafount  then  owre  partryches.  Wherfore  where  as  in  eatinge  of  them  he  perceaued  a  certeyne  fauoure
of  fpyce  to  proceade  from  them,  he  commaunded  the  croppe  to  bee  opened  of  fuche  as  were  newely  kylled,  and
fownde  the  fame  full  of  fwcete  fpyces,  whiche  he  argued  to  bee  the  caufe  of  theyr  flrange  tafte.  For  it  ftandeth
with  good  reafon,  that  the  tleflhe  of  beaftes,  fluilde  drawe  the  nature  and  qualitie  of  theyr  accuftomed  nuryfliemente.
As  the  Admirall  harde  made  on  the  fliore,  there  came  towarde  hym  a  certeyne  gouernoure,  a  man  of  four  fcore
yeares  of  age,  and  of  great  grauitie,  althowgh  he  were  naked  fauinge  his  pryuie  partes.  He  had  a  great  trayne  of
menne  waytinge  on  hym.  All  the  whyle  the  preefte  was  at  maffe,  he  fliewed  hym  felfe  verye  humble  and  gaue
reuerente  attendaunce  with  graue  and  demure  countenaunce.  When  the  maffe  was  ended,  he  prefented  to  the
Admirall,  a  bafkette  of  the  fruites  of  his  countrey,  delyueringe  the  fame  with  his  owne  handes.  When  the
Admirall  had  gentelly  interteyned  hym,  defyringe  leaue  to  fpeake,  he  made  an  oration  in  the  prefence  of
Didacus  th[e]interpretoure,  in  this  effecte.  I  haue  byn 'aduertifed  (mofte  mighty  prince)  that  you  haue  of  late
with  greate  power  fubdued  many  landes  and  Regions  hytherto  vnknowen  to  you  :  and  haue  browght  no  Httle
feare  vppon  all  the  people  and  inhabitantes  of  the  fame.  The  which  your  good  fortune,  you  ftial  beare  with
leiTe  infolencie,  if  you  remember  that  the  foules  of  men  haue  two  iourneyes  after  they  are  departed  from  this
bodye.  The  one  fowle  and  darke,  prepared  for  fuche  as  are  iniurious  and  cruell  to  mankynde  :  The  other
pleafaunt  and  delectable,  ordeyned  for  them  which  in  theyr  lyfe  tyme,  loued  peace  and  quietnes.  If  therefore
you  acknowleage  your  felfe  to  bee  mortall,  and  confyder  that  euery  man  fliall  receaue  condigne  rewarde  or
punyfliement  for  fuch  thinges  as  he  hath  done  in  this  life,  you  wyl  wrongefuUy  hurte  no  man.  When  he  had
fayde  thefe  wordes  and  other  lyke,  which  were  declared  to  the  Admirall  by  th[e]interpretoure,  he  marueylinge
at  the  iudgemente  of  the  naked  owlde  man,  anfwered,  that  he  was  gladde  to  heare  his  opinion  as  touchinge  the
fundry  iourneys  and  rewardes  of  fowles  departed  from  theyr  bodyes  :  Suppofmge  that  nother  he,  or  any  other
of  th[e]inhabitantes  of  thofe  Regions,  had  had  any  knowleage  thereof.  Declaringe  further  that  the  chiefe  caufe
of  his  comminge  thyther  was  to  inftructe  them  in  fuch  godly  knowleage  and  trewe  religion :  And  that  he  was
fente  into  thofe  countreys  by  the  Chriftian  kynge  of  Spayne  (his  lorde  and  maifter)  for  the  fame  purpofe :  And
fpecially  to  fubdue  and  puniffhe  the  Canibales  and  fuch  other  mifcheuous  people :  And  to  defende  innocentes
ageynft  the  violence  of  fuch  euyl  doers  wyllynge  hym  and  all  other  fuch  as  embrafed  vertue,  in  no  cafe  to  bee
afrayde  :  But  rather  to  open  his  mynde  vnto  him,  if  eyther  he,  or  any  other  fuche  quiete  men  as  he  was,  hadde
fufteyned  any  wronge  of  theyr  neyghbours  :  and  that  he  wold  fee  the  fame  reuenged.  Thefe  comfortable
wordes  of  the  Admirall  foo  pleafed  the  owlde  man,  that  notwithftandyng  his  extreeme  age,  he  woulde  gladly
haue  gone  with  the  Admiral  as  he  had  doone  in  deede,  if  his  wyfe  and  chyldren  had  not  hyndered  hym  of  his
purpofe.  But  he  marueyled  not  a  lyttle,  that  the  Admirall  was  vnder  the  dominion  of  an  other:  And  muche  more,
when  th[e]interpretour  towlde  hym  of  the  glorye,  magnificence,  pompes,  greate  powre,  and  furnymentes  of
warre  of  owre  kynges,  and  of  the  multitudes  of  cities  and  townes  which  were  vnder  theyr  dominions.
Intendyng  therfore  to  haue  gonne  with  the  Admirall,  his  wyfe  and  children  fell  proftrate  at  his  feete,  with  teares
defyrynge  hym  not  to  forfake  them  and  leaue  them  defolate.  At  whofe  pytifull  requeftes,  the  worthy  owlde  man
beinge  moued,  remayned  at  home  to  the  comfort  of  his  people  and  famylie,  fatiffyenge  rather  them  then  hym
felfe.  For  not  yet  ceafinge  to  woonder,  and  of  heauy  countenaunce  bycaufe  he  myght  not  departe,  he  demaunded
oftentymes  if  that  lande  were  not  heauen,  which  browght  foorth  fuche  a  kynde  of  men.  For  it  is  certeyne,  that
amonge  them,  the  lande  is  as  common  as  the  fonne  and  water :  And  that  Myne  and  Thyne  (the  feedes  of  all
myfcheefe)  haue  no  place  with  them.  They  are  contente  with  foo  lyttle,  that  in  foo  large  a  countrey,  they  haue
rather  fuperfluitie  then  fcarfenes.  Soo  that  (as  wee  haue  fayde  before)  they  feeme  to  lyue  in  the  goulden  worlde,
mthout  toyle,  lyuinge  in  open  gardens,  not  intrenched  with  dykes,  dyuyded  with  hedges,  or  defended  with
waules.  They  deale  trewely  one  with  another,  without  lawes,  without  bookes,  and  without  ludges.  They  take
hym  for  an  euyll  and  myfcheuous  man,  which  taketh  pieafure  in  doinge  hurte  to  other.  And  albeit  that  they
delyte  not  in  fuperfluities,  yet  make  they  prouifion  for  th[e]increafe  of  fuche  rootes,  wherof  they  make  theyr
breade,  as  Maizmm,  lucca,  and  Ages,  contented  with  fuche  fimple  dyet,  wherby  health  is  preferued,  and
dyfeafes  auoyded.  The  Admirall  therfore  departinge  from  thenfe,  and  myndinge  to  retume  ageyne  Ihortly  after,
chaunced  to  coome  ageyne  to  the  llande  of  lamaica  beinge  on  the  fowthe  fyde  therof :  and  coafted  all  alonge
by  the  fhore  of  the  fame,  from  the  Wefte  to  the  Eafte.  From  whofe  laft  corner  on  the  Eaft  fyde,  when  he  fawe
towarde  the  North  on  his  lefte  hand,  certeyn  high  mountains  he  knewe  at  the  length  that  it  was  the  fowthe  fyde
of  the  llande  of  Hifpafiiola,  which  he  had  not  yet  paffed  by.  ^Vllerfore  at  the  Calendes  of  September,  enter-
inge  into  the  hauen  of  the  fame  llande,  cauled  faynt  Nycolas  hauen,  he  repayred  his  fhippes  to  th[e]intent  that
he  myght  ageyne  waft  and  fpoyle  the  Ilandes  of  the  Canibales,  and  burne  all  theyr  Canoas,  that  thofe  raueninge
vvolues  myght  no  longer  perfecute  and  deuoure  the  innocent  fheepe. But  he  was  at  this  tyme  hyndered  of  his

78

The  fyrft  Decade.

79

purpofe  by  reafon  of  a  dyfeafe  which  he  had  gotten  with  to  muche  watchinge.  Thus  beinge  feeble  and  weake,
lie  was  ledde  of  the  maryners  to  the  citie  of  Ifabella,  where,  with  his  two  brytherne  which  were  there,  and  other
his  famihers,  he  recouered  his  health  in  fhorte  fpace.  Yet  coulde  he  not  at  this  tyme  affayle  the  Canibales,  by
reafon  of  fedicion  that  was  ryfen  of  late  amonge  the  Spanyardes  which  he  had  lefte  in  Hifpaniola^  wherof  we
wyll  fpeake  more  heareafter. Thus  fare  ye  wel.

C  The  fourth  booke  of  the fyrst decade
to  Lodouike  Cardinall  of  Aragonie.

Olonus  the  Admirall  of  the  Ocean,  returning  (as  he  fuppofed)  from  the  continent  or  firme
lande  of  Eafl  India,  had  aduertifement  that  his  brother  Boiliis  and  one  Peter  Margarita,  an
owld  familier  of  the  kinges,  and  a  noble  man,  with  diuers  other  of  thofe  to  whom  he  had
left  the  gouernement  of  the  Hand,  were  of  corrupted  mynde  ageynfl  him,  departed  into  Spayne,
Wherfore  as  wel  to  purge  him  of  fuch  crimes  as  they  fhuld  ley  to  his  charge,  as  alfo  to  make
a  fupply  of  other  men  in  the  place  of  them  which  were  returned,  and  efpecially  to  prouyde
for  vitailes,  as  wheat,  wyne,  oyle,  and  fuch  other  which  the  Spanyardes  are  accuftomed  to
eate,  bycaufe  they  coulde  not  yet  well  agree  with  fuch  meates  as  they  fownde  in  the  Ilandes,  determined  fhortly
to  take  his  vyage  into  Spayne. But  what  he  dyd  before  his  departure,  I  wyll  brefely  rehearfe.

The  kynges  of  the  Ilandes  which  had  hytherto  lyued  quietly  and  content  with  theyr  lyttle  whiche  they
thowght  abundante,  wheras  they  nowe  perceaued  that  owre  men  began  to  fallen  foote  within  thejT  Regions  and
to  beare  rule  amonge  them,  tooke  the  matter  fo  greuoufly,  that  they  thowght  nothynge  elles  but  by  what  meanes
they  myght  vtterly  deftroy  them,  and  for  euer  abolyflhe  the  memory  of  theyr  name.  For  that  kynde  of  men
(the  Spanyardes  I  meane  which  folowed  the  Admirall  in  that  nauigation,)  was  for  the  moll  parte  vnruly,
regardynge  nothinge  but  Idlenes,  playe,  and  libertie:  And  wolde  by  no  meanes  abfleyne  from  iniuries:
Rauylhynge  the  women  of  the  Ilandes  before  the  faces  of  their  hufbandes,  fathers,  and  brethrene :  By  which
theyr  abhomynable  myfdemaynour,  they  difquieted  the  myndes  of  all  th[e]inhabitantes :  In  fo  much  that  where  fo
euer  they  fownde  any  of  owre  men  vnprepared,  they  flewe  them  with  fuche  fyercenes  and  gladnes,  as  thowgh
they  had  offered  facryfyce  to  God.  Intendynge  therefore  to  pacific  their  troubled  myndes,  and  to  punyfhe  them
that  flew  his  men  before  he  departed  from  thenfe,  he  fent  for  the  kynge  of  that  vale,  which  in  the  booke  before,
we  defcrybed  to  bee  at  the  foote  of  the  mountaynes  of  the  Region  of  Cibaua.  This  kynges  name  was  Guarionexius :
who,  the  more  flreyghtly  to  concyle  vnto  hym  the  frendefliyppe  of  the  Admirall,  gaue  hys  fyiler  to  wyfe  to
Didacus,  a  man  from  his  chyldes  age  browght  vp  with  the  Admiral,  whom  he  vfed  for  his  interpretoure  in  the
prouinces  of  Cuba.  After  this,  he  fent  for  Caunaboa,  cauled  the  lorde  of  the  howfe  of  goulde :  that  is,  of  the
mountaynes  of  Cibaiia.  For  this  Caunaboa,  he  fente  one  capitayne  Hoicda,  whom  the  ditionaries  of  Caiinaboa
had  enforced  to  keepe  his  howlde  byfiegeinge  for  the  fpace  of.  xxx.  dayes,  the  fortreffe  of  faynte  Thomas,  in  the
which  Hoieda  with  his  fyftie  fouldiers,  lloode  at  theyr  defence,  vntyll  the  comminge  of  the  Admirall.  Whyle
Hoieda  remayned  with  Catmaboa,  many  ambaffadours  of  the  kynges  of  dyuers  Regions  were  fent  to  Caunaboa,
perfuadinge  hym  in  no  condicion  to  permitte  the  Chriflians  to  inhabite  the  Ilande,  except  he  had  rather  ferue  then
rule.  On  the  other  parte,  Hoieda  aduertifed  Caunaboa  to  goo  to  the  Admirall,  and  to  make  a  league  of  frendefliip
with  hym.  But  the  ambaffadours  on  the  contrary  part,  threatened  hym,  that  yf  he  wolde  foo  doo,  the  other  kynges
wolde  inuade  his  Region.  But  Hoieda  aunfwered  theym  ageyne,  that  wheras  they  confpired  to  maynteyne  their
libertie,  they  ftiuld  by  that  meanes  be  browght  to  feruitude  and  defl.ruction  if  they  entended  to  refifl  or  keepe
warre  ageinft  the  Chriftians.  Thus  Caunaboa  on  the  one  fyde  and  the  other,  beinge  troubeled  as  it  were  a
rocke  in  the  fea,  beaten  with  contrary  fluddes,  and  much  more  vexed  with  the  flormes  of  his  g}'ltie  confcience
for  that  he  had  priuilie  flaine.  xx.  of  owre  men  vnder  pretence  of  peace  feared  to  coome  to  the  Admirah.  But
at  the  length,  hauing  excogitated  this  deceyte,  to  haue  flayne  the  Admirall  and  his  coompany  vnder  the  colour
of  frendfliippe  if  oportunitie  wold  foo  haue  ferude,  he  repayred  to  the  Admiral  mth  his  hole  famiUe  and  many
other  wayting  on  hym,  armed  after  theyr  maner.  Beinge  demaunded  why  he  browght  foo  greate  a  rout  of  men
with  hym,  he  aunfwered  that  it  was  not  decente  for  foo  great  a  prince  as  he  was,  to  goo  foorth  of  his  howfe
without  fuche  a  bande  of  men.  But  the  thinge  chaunced  much  otherwyfe  then  he  looked  for.  For  he  fell  into
the  fnares  which  he  had  prepared  for  other.  For  wheras  by  the  way  he  began  to  repente  hym  that  he  came
foorthe  of  his  howfe,  Hoieda  with  many  fayre  wordes  and  promyfes,  browght  hym  to  the  Admirall :  At  whofe
commaundement,  he  was  immediatly  taken  and  put  in  prifon :  So  that  the  fowles  of  owre  men  were  not  longe

79

Sickenes  of  to
much  watchinge.

Easte  India.

The  Spanyardes
rebelle  in  the
Admirals  absence.

The  kynges  of  the
Ilande  rebell.

The  Spaniardes
misbebauour.

Guarionexius  the
kynge  of  the
great  vale
Didacus  the
interpretour

Caunaboa,  the
kynge  of  the
house  of  golde.

Capitayne  Hoieda

19

Kynge  Caunaboa,
had  slain  the
Span>'ardes.

Caunaboa
conspireth  the
Admiralles  death.

Favre  words
make  fooles  fa>-ne.

8o

The  fyrft  Decade.

Famine  in  the
Ilande  of
hispnniola.

The  hunger  of
golde  causeth
great  famine.

The  tou-re  of
conception.

from  their  bodies  vnreuenged.  Thus  Caiinaboa  with  all  his  familie  beinge  taken,  the  Admirall  was  determined
to  runne  oner  the  Ilande.  But  he  was  certified  that  there  was  fuch  famine  amonge  th[c]inhabitantes,  that  there
was  alredye  fyftie  thoullinde  nienne  deade  therof :  And  that  they  dyed  yet  dayly  as  it  were  rotton  flieepe  :  The
caufe  wherof  was  wcl  knowen  to  bee  thoyr  owne  obftinacie  and  frowardnes.  For  where  as  they  fawe  that  owre
men  cntended  to  choofe  them  a  dwelling  place  in  the  Ilande,  fuppofinge  that  they  myght  haue  driuen  them  from
thence  if  the  vytailes  of  the  Ilande  flioulde  fayle,  they  determyned  with  them  felues,  not  only  to  leaue  fowing  and
plantyng,  but  alfo  to  deftroy  and  plucke  vp  by  the  rootes  euery  man  in  his  owne  region,  that  whiche  they  had
alredye  fowen  of  both  kyndes  of  breade  wherof  we  made  mencion  in  the  fyrfl  booke.  But  efpecially  amonge
the  mountaynes  of  Cibai/a,  otherwyfe  cauled  Cipanga,  for  as  muche  as  they  hadde  knoweleage  that  the  golde
which  abundeth  in  that  Region,  was  the  cheefe  caufe  that  deteyned  owre  men  m  the  Ilande.  In  the  meane  tyme,
he  fent  foorth  a  Capitayne  with  a  bande  of  men  to  fearche  the  fowthe  fyde  of  the  Ilande.  Who  at  his  returne,
reported  that  throwghe  out  all  the  Regions  that  he  trauayled,  there  was  fuche  fcarfenes  of  breade,  that  for  the
fpace  of.  xvi.  dayes  he  eate  nowght  elles  but  the  rootes  of  herbes,  and  of  younge  date  trees,  or  the  fruites  of
other  wylde  trees,  But  Guarionexius,  the  kynge  of  the  vale  lyinge  beneth  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua,  whofe
kyngedoome  was  not  foo  wafted  as  the  other,  gaue  owre  menne  certeyne  vytayles.

Witiiin  a  fewe  dayes  after,  bothe  that  the  iourneys  myght  bee  the  fliorter,  and  alfo  that  owre  men  myght  haue
more  fafe  places  of  refuge,  if  the  inhabitantes  fluild  herealter  rebell  in  lyke  maner,  he  buylded  an  other  fort[r]effe
(whiche  he  cauled  the  to^v^e  of  Conception)  betwene  the  citie  of  Jfabclla  and  faint  Thomas  fortreffe,  in  the
marches  of  the  kyngdome  of  this  Guarionexius  within  the  precincte  of  Cibaiia  vpon  the  fyde  of  a  hyll,  hauynge
a  fayre  ryuer  of  holfome  water  runnynge  hard  by  the  fame.  Thus  when  the  inhabitantes  fawe  newe  buyldynges
to  bee  dayly  erected,  and  owre  fliippes  lying  in  the  hauen  rotten  and  halfe  broken,  they  beganne  to  defpayre  of
any  hope  of  libcrtie,  and  wandered  vp  and  downe  with  heuie  chere.  From  the  towre  of  Conception,  fearchynge
diligently  the  inner  partes  of  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua,  there  was  a  certeine  kyng  whiche  gaue  them  a  maffe
of  rude  golde,  as  bygge  as  a  mans  fyll,  weighing,  xx.  vnces.  This  golde  was  not  fownde  in  the  banke  of  that
ryuer,  but  in  a  heape  of  drye  earthe  :  and  was  lyke  vnto  the  flone  cauled  Tofus,  whiche  is  foone  refolued  into
fande.  This  maffe  of  golde,  I  my  felfe  fawe  in  Caflile,  in  the  famous  citie  of  Mefhymna  Campi,  where  the
courte  lay  all  that  wynter.  I  fawe  alfo  a  great  piece  of  pure  ElcBnim :  of  the  whiche  belles  and  apothecaries
morters,  and  many  fuche  other  veffels  and  inflrumentes  maye  bee  made,  as  were  in  owlde  tyme  of  copper  of  the
citie  of  Corinthis.  This  piece  of  Elc^nim,  was  of  fuch  weight,  that  I  was  not  onely  with  both  my  handes
vnable  to  lifte  it  from  the  grownde,  but  alfo  not  of  flrengthe  to  remoue  it  eyther  one  waye  or  an  other.  They
affyrmed  that  it  wayde  more  then  three  hundreth  pownde  weight,  after,  viii.  vnces  to  the  pownde.  It  was
fo^^^^de  in  the  howfe  of  a  certen  prynce,  and  lefte  hym  by  his  predeceffours.  And  albeit  that  in  the  dayes  of
th[e]inhabitantes  yet  liuynge,  Ekdrimi  was  no  where  digged,  yet  knewe  they  where  the  myne  therof  was :  but
owre  men  with  muche  adoo,  coulde  hardely  caufe  them  to  fhewe  them  the  place,  they  bore  them  fuche  priuie
hatred.  Yet  at  the  length,  they  browght  theym  to  the  myne,  beyng  nowe  ruinate  and  flopped  with  ilones  and
rubbiffhe.  It  is  muche  eafier  to  dygge  then  is  the  iren  myne  :  and  myght  bee  reflored  agein,  if  myners  and
other  woorkemen  fkylfull  therin,  were  appoynted  therto.  Not  farre  from  the  towre  of  Conception,  in  the  fame
mountaynes,  is  fownd  great  plentie  of  Amber :  and  owte  of  certen  rockes  of  the  fame  diflilleth  a  fubflance  of
the  yelowe  coloure  whiche  the  paynters  vfe.  Not  farre  from  thefe  mountaynes  are  many  greate  wooddes,  in  the
which  are  none  other  trees  then  brafile,  whiche  the  Italians  caule  Verzino.  But  here  perhappes  (right  noble
prynce)  yowe  wolde  afke  what  fhoulde  be  the  caufe,  that  where  as  the  Spanyardes  haue  brought  owte  of  thefe
Ilandes  certen  fhyppes  laden  with  brafile,  fumwhat  of  goffampine  cotton,  a  quantitie  of  amber,  a  lyttel  golde,  and  fum
fpices,  why  they  haue  not  broughte  fuche  plentie  of  golde  and  fuche  other  ryche  marchaundies  as  the  fruitfulneffe
of  thefe  regions  feeme  to  promiffe.  To  this  I  anfwere,  that  when  Colomis  the  admirall  was  lykewife  demaunded
the  caufe  hereof,  he  made  anfwere  that  the  Spanyardes  whiche  he  tooke  with  him  into  thefe  regions,  were  gyuen
rather  to  flepe,  pley,  and  ydleneffe,  then  to  laboure:  And  were  more  fludious  of  fedition  and  newes,  then
defyrous  of  peace  and  quietneffe :  Alfo  that  beynge  gyuen  to  lycencioufnes,  they  rebelled  and  forfooke  hym,
fyndynge  matter  of  falfe  accufations  agaynfl  hym,  bycaufe  he  went  aboute  to  repreffe  theyr  owtragioufenes.  By
reafon  wherof  he  was  not  yet  able  to  breake  the  power  of  the  inhabytantes,  and  freely  to  poffeffe  the  full
dominion  of  the  Ilande.  And  thefe  hynderaunces  to  be  the  caufe  that  hitherto  the  gaynes  haue  fcarfely
counteruayled  the  charges.  Albeit,  euen  this  yere  whyle  I  wryte  thefe  thynges  at  yowre  requefle,  they  gathered
in  twoo  moonethes  the  fumme  of  a  thoufande  and  twoo  hundreth  poundes  weight  of  golde.  But  bycaufe  we
intende  to  fpeake  more  largely  of  thefe  thynges  in  theyr  place,  we  wyll  nowe  retourne  from  whenfe  we  haue
digreffed.  When  the  inhabitantes  perceaued  that  they  could  by  no  meanes  fhake  the  yoke  from  their  neckes,  they
made  humble  fupplication  to  the  Admirall  that  they  myght  flande  to  theyr  tribute,  and  apply  them  felues  to  reincreafe
the  fruites  of  theyr  countrey,  beinge  nowe  almofle  wafled.  He  graunted  them  theyr  requefle :  and  appoynted
fuch  order  that  euery  Region  fhulde  paye  their  tribute,  with  the  commodities  of  theyr  countreys,  accordinge  to

A  masse  of  gold
weighinge.  xx.
ounces.

Tofus.

Electrum  is  a
metall  naturally
mixt  of  one  portion
of  golde  and  an
other  of  siiuer
beinge  of  propertie
to  bewray  poyson,
and  was  OQ

therfore  in
owlde  tyme  in
greater  estimation
then  golde.

The  myne  of
Electrum.

An  other  kynde  of
amber  is  taken  out
of  greate  whale
fishes
Orpement  or  oker.
Wooddes  of
brasile  trees.

Causes  of
hinderance.
Licenciusnes  of
to  much  libertie

And  this  only
gathered  and  not
digged  out  of  the
bodi  of  the  mine

The  people  make
supplication  to
stand  to  their
tribute

80

The  fyrjl  Decade.

8i

theyr  portion,  and  at  fuche  tyme  as  they  were  agreed  vppon. But  the  violent  famine  dyd  fruflrate  all  thefe

appoyntmentes. For  all  the  trauayles  of  theyr  bodyes,  were  fcarfely  able  to  fuffice  to  fynde  them  meate  in  the

wooddes,  whereby  to  fufleyne  theyr  lyues,  beinge  of  long  tyme  contented  with  rootes  and  the  fruites  of  wylde

trees. Yet  manye  of  the  kynges  with  theyr  people,  euen  in  this  extreme  neceffitie,  browght  parte  of  theyr

tribute :  Mofle  humbly  defyringe  the  Admirall  to  haue  compaffion  of  theyr  calamities,  and  to  beare  with  them

yet  a  whyle,  \ntyll  the  Hand  were  reflored  to  the  owlde  flate. Promyfmge  farther,  that  that  which  was  nowe

wantinge,  fhulde  then  bee  dowble  recompenfed. But  fewe  of  the  inhabitantes  of  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua^

kepte  theyr  promyfe,  bycaufe  they  were  forer  oppreffed  with  famine  then  any  of  the  other. They  faye,  that  the

inhabitantes  of  thefe  mountaynes,  differ  no  leffe  in  maners  and  language  from  them  which  dwel  in  the  plajmes,

then  amonge  vs,  the  ruflicalles  of  the  countrey  from  gentylmen  of  the  courte :  wheras  notwithflandinge,  they  lyue

bothe  as  it  were  vnder  one  portion  of  heuen,  and  in  many  thinges,  much  after  one  faffhion,  as  in  nakednes,  and

rude  fimplicitie. But  nowe  lette  vs  returne  to  Cmuiaboa,  the  kynge  of  the  howfe  of  golde,  beinge  in  captiuitie.

When  he  perceaued  him  felfe  to  be  cafle  in  pryfon,  fretinge  and  gratinge  his  teethe  as  it  had  bin  a  lyon  oi Libia,  and

dayely  and  nightlye  deuifmge  with  hym  felfe  howe  he  myght  bee  delyuered,  beganne  to  perfuade  the  Admirall,  that

for  as  muche  as  he  had  nowe  taken  vnto  his  dominion  the  Region  of  Ci_pa?iga  or  Cibaua  (wherof  he  was  king)  it

Ihulde  bee  expedient  to  fende  thyther  a  garryfon  of  Chrillian  men,  to  defende  the  fame  from  the  incurfions  of  his

owld  enemy  es  and  borderers.  For  he  fayde,  that  it  was  fignyfied  vnto  hym,  that  the  countreye  was  wafled  and  fpoyled

with  fuche  incurfions. By  this  crafty  deuife,  he  thought  to  haue  browght  to  paffe,  that  his  brother  whiche  was  in

that  regyon,  and  the  other  his  kynfefolkes  and  frendes  with  their  adherentes,  fhoulde  haue  taken,  eyther  by

fleyghte  or  force,  as  many  of  owre  men,  as  myght  haue  redeemed  hym. But  the  Admyrall  vnderflandynge  his

crafty  meanynge,  fente  Hoieda  with  fuche  a  coompany  of  men,  as  might  vanquifhe  the  Cibauians,  if  they  fhulde

moue  warre  ageynfle  them. Owre  men  had  fcarfely  entered  into  the  Region,  but  the  brother  of  Caunaboa

came  agenfle  them  with  an  armie  of  fyue  thoufande  naked  menne,  armed  after  theyr  maner  with  clubbes,

arrowes  typte  with  bones,  and  fpeares  made  harde  at  the  endes  with  fyre. He  flole  vpon  owre  men  beyng  in

one  of  theyr  howfes :  and  encamped  rownde  about  the  fame  on  euery  fyde. This  Cibauian,  as  a  man  not

ignorant  in  the  difciplyne  of  warre,  abowte  the  diflance  of  a  furlonge  from  the  houfe,  diuided  his  armye  into

fyue  batayles,  appoyntinge  to  euery  of  them  a  circuite  by  equal  diuifion :  And  placed  the  froont  of  his  o^^^le

batayle,  directlye  ageynfl  owre  men. When  he  had  thus  fet  his  batayles  in  good  array,  he  gaue  certeyne

fignes  that  the  hole  army  fliulde  marche  forwarde  in  order  with  equal  paces,  and  with  a  larome  freffhly  affayle

theyr  enemies,  in  fuch  fort  that  none  might  efcape. But  owre  men  iudginge  it  better  to  encounter  with  one  of

the  batayles,  then  to  abyde  the  brunt  of  the  hole  army,  gaue  onfet  on  the  ma)aie  batayle  aranged  in  the  plajoie,

bycaufe  that  place  was  mofl  commodious  for  the  horfemen. AVhen  the  horfenien  therfore  hadde  gyuen  the

charge,  they  ouerthrewe  them  with  the  brefles  of  theyr  horfes,  and  flewe  as  many  as  abode  th[e]ende  of  the

fyght. The  refidue  beinge  flryken  with  feare,  difparcled,  and  fledde  to  the  mountaynes  and  rockes:  from

whenfe  they  made  a  pytifuU  houlynge  to  owre  men,  defyringe  them  to  fpare  them :  proteflinge  that  they  wolde

neuer  more  rebelle,  but  doo  what  fo  euer  they  woulde  commaunde  them,  if  they  wolde  fuffer  theim  to  lyue  in

theyr  owne  countrey. Thus  the  brother  of  Caunaboa  beinge  taken,  the  Admirall  licenced  the  people  to  reforte

euery  man  to  his  owne. Thefe  thinges  thus  fortunately  atchiued  this  Region  was  pacified. Amonge  thofe

mountaynes,  the  vale  which  Caunaboa  inhabited,  is  cauled  Magona,  and  is  excedynge  friiitfuU :  hauinge  in  it

many  goodly  fpringes :  and  ryuers,  in  the  fande  wherof,  is  fownde  great  plentie  of  golde. The  fame  yeare  in

the  mooneth  of  lune,  they  faye  there  rofe  fuche  a  boyfl[r]ous  tempefle  of  wynde  from  the  fowtheafle,  as  hath  not

lyghtly  ben  harde  of:  The  violence  hereof  was  fuch  that  it  plucked  vppe  by  the  roots  what  fo  euer  greate  trees

were  within  the  reache  of  the  force  therof When  this  whirle  wynde  came  to  the  hauen  of  the  citie,  it  beate

downe  to  the  bottome  of  the  fea,  three  Ihippes  which  lay  at  anker,  and  broke  the  cables  in  fundre :  and  that

(which  is  the  greater  maruail)  without  any  florme  or  rowghnes  of  the  fea,  onely  turnynge  them  three  or  foure

tymes  abowte. The  inhabitantes  alfo  affirme,  that  the  fame  yeare,  the  fea  extended  it  felfe  further  in  to  the

lande,  and  rofe  higher  then  euer  it  dyd  before  by  the  memory  of  man,  by  the  fpace  of  a  cubet. The  people

therfore,  muttered  amonge  them  felues,  that  owre  nation  hadde  trowbled  the  elementes,  and  caufed  fuch

portentous  fignes. Thefe  tempefles  of  the  ayer  (which  the  Grecians  caule Jlphones,  that  is,  whyrle  .\yndes)

they  caule,  Furacanes :  which  they  fay,  doo  often  tymes  chaunce  in  this  Ilande :  But  that  neyther  they  nor

theyr  great  grandfathers  euer  fawe  fuche  violent  and  furious  Furacanes,  that  plucked  vppe  greate  trees  by  the

rootes :  Neyther  yet  fuche  furges  and  vehement  motions  on  the  fea,  that  foo  walled  the  lande. As  in  deede  it

may  appeare,  for  as  muche  as,  where  fo  euer  the  fea  bankes  are  nere  to  any  plaine  there  are  in  maner  euery

where,  florifhing  medowes  reachinge  euen  vnto  the  fhore. But  nowe  let  vs  returne  to  Caunaboa. As  kynge

Caunaboa  therefore  and  his  brother  fhoulde  haue  binne  browght  into  Spayne,  they  dyed  by  the  waye  for  vtxyt

penfyuenes  and  anguyflie  of  mynde. The  Admiral,  Avhofe  fliippes  were  drowned  in  the  forfayde  tempefle,

perceauinge  him  felfe  to  bee  nowe  enclofed,  commaunded  foorthwith  two  other  fliippes  (which  the  Spaniardes

Eden.  K  8i

Farnine.

The  nature  of  the
Region  disposeth
the  maner  of  the
people.

K>-nge  Caunaboa
in  captiuitie.

The  persuasion
of  Caunaboa.

21

Caunaboa  his
brother  rebelleth.

A  conflict  betwene
the  Cibauians  and
the  Spanyardes.

The  Cibauians
haue  the
ouerthrowe.

A  great  tempest
in  the  moneth
of  lune.

Three  ships
drowned  ly.  ige
at  acker

Whyrle  wyndes
Furacanes.

The  death  of
kynge  Caunaboa
andnis  brother.

8:

The  fyrjl  Decade.

B.irtholomeus

Colonus  the
leauetcnaunt
searcheth  the
golde  mines.

22

The  golde  mynes
of  Salomon.

Golde  in  the
superfici.il  1  partes
of  the  cTXth.

The  Admiral
taketh  his  viage
to  spaine

The  golden  towrc.

Lacke  of  vytayles.

Huntinge
houndes.

Kynge
Manicautexjus.

Vytayles  browght
from  Spayne.

Saynt  Dominikes
towre.

Groues  of
date  trees.

Isabella.

23

caule  Carauelas)  to  bee  made.  For  he  had  with  hym,  all  maner  of  artificers  perteyninge  therunto.  Whyle  thefe
thinges  wore  dooinge,  he  font  foorth  Bartholomcus  Colonus  his  brother,  boinge  leauetenaunt  of  the  Ilande,
with  an  army  of  men  to  fearche  the  golde  mynes  boinge  dyflant  three  fcore  leaques  from  the  citie  of  JfabcHa,
which  wore  fownde  by  the  conducte  of  corteyne  people  of  the  Ilande,  beefore  the  mynes  of  Cipanga  or  Cibaua
were  knowen.  In  thofo  mynes,  they  fownde  certeyne  doepe  pittes  which  had  byn  digged  in  owlde  tyme,  owte
of  tliefe  pyttos,  the  Admirall  (who  affirmeth  this  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  to  bee  Ophir,  as  we  haue  fayde  before)
fuppofeth  that  Salomon  the  kynge  of  Hierufakm  had  his  greate  ryches  of  golde  wherof  we  reede  in  the  owlde
teflamente :  And  that  his  flaippes  fayled  to  this  Ophir  by  the  goulfe  of  Perfia  cauled  Sinus  Perficus.  But
whether  it  bee  foo  or  not,  it  lyoth  not  in  me  to  iudge,  but  in  my  opinion  it  is  farre  of  As  the  myners  dygged
the  fuperficiall  or  vppormofl  parte  of  the  earthe  of  the  mynes,  durynge  for  the  fpace  of  vi.  miles,  and  in  dyuers
places  fyfted  the  fame  on  the  drye  lande,  they  fownde  fuch  plentie  of  golde,  that  euery  hyred  labourer  could
eafely  fynde  euery  day,  the  weyght  of  three  drammes.  Thefe  mynes  beinge  thus  fearched  and  fownde,  the
Lieuetenaunte  certifyed  the  Admirall  hereof  by  his  letters.  The  which  when  he  had  receaued  the.  v.  daye  of  the
Ides  of  Marche.  Anno.  1495.  he  entered  into  his  newe  (hippos,  and  tooke  his  viage  directly  to  Spayne  to  aduertife
the  kynge  of  all  his  affayres,  leauinge  the  hole  regiment  of  the  Hand  with  his  brother  the  Lieuetenaunte,

€[  The  fyfte  booke  of  the  fyrst  decade,

to  Lodouike  Cardi7iall  of  Kvdigomt.

Fter  the  Admyralles  departyng  into  Spain  his  Brother  the  Lieuetenaunte,  buylded  a  fort[r]effe
in  the  golde  mynes,  as  he  had  commaunded  hym.  This  he  cauled  the  golden  towre,
bycaufe  the  labourers  fownde  golde  in  the  earth  and  flone  wherof  they  made  the  waules  of
the  fortreffe.  He  confumed  three  monethes  in  makynge  the  inflrumentes  wherwith  the
golde  fliulde  bee  gathered,  waflied,  tryed,  and  molten.  Yet  was  he  at  this  tyme  by  reafon
of  Avante  of  vitayles,  enforced  to  leaue  all  thynges  imperfecte,  and  to  goo  feeke  for  meate.
Thus  as  he  with  a  bande  of  armed  men,  had  entered  three  fcore  myles  further  within  the
lande,  the  people  of  the  countrey  here  and  there  refortynge  to  hym,  gaue  hym  a  certen  portion  of  theyr  breade
in  exchange  for  other  of  owre  thynges.  But  he  coulde  not  long  tary  here,  bicaufe  they  lacked  meate  in  the
fortreffe,  whyther  he  hafled  with  fuch  as  he  had  now  gotten.  Leauyng  therfore  in  the  fortreffe  a  garryfon  of
tenne  men,  with  that  portion  of  the  Ilande  breade  whiche  yet  remayned,  leauynge  alfo  with  them  a  hownde
to  take  thofe  kyndes  of  lyttle  beafles  which  they  caule  Vfias,  not  muche  vnlyke  owre  conyes,  he  returned  to
the  fortreffe  of  Conception.  This  alfo,  was  the  moonthe  wherin  the  kynge  Gtiarionexius,  and  alfo
Manicautexius,  bortherer  vnto  hym,  fliulde  haue  brought  in  theyr  tributes.  Remaynynge  there  the  hole
moonthe  of  lune,  he  exacted  the  hole  tribute  of  thefe  twoo  kinges,  and  v)'tayles  neceffary  for  hym
and  fuche  as  he  brought  with  hym,  whiche  were  abowt  foure  hundreth  in  number.  Shortely  after,  abowte
the  calendes  of  lulye,  there  came  three  Caraueles  from  Spayne,  bringynge  with  them  fundry  kyndes  of
vitayles,  as  wheate,  oyle,  Avyne,  bacon,  and  marckelmas  beafe :  whiche  were  dyuyded  to  euery  man  accord-
ynge  as  neede  required.  Sum  alfo  was  loft  in  the  cariage  for  lacke  of  good  lookyng  too.  At  the  arryuall
of  thefe  fhyppes,  the  lieuetenaunte  receaued  commaundment  from  the  kynge  and  the  Admyrall  his  brother,  that
he  with  his  men  fhulde  remoue  theyr  habitation  to  the  fowthe  fyde  of  the  Ilande,  bycaufe  it  was  nerer  to  the
golde  mynes :  Alfo  that  he  fhoulde  make  dilygent  fearche  for  thofe  kynges  whiche  had  flayne  the  Chrillian  men,
and  to  fende  them  with  theyr  confederates,  bownd  into  Spayne.  At  the  nexte  vyage  therfore,  he  fent  three
hundreth  captiues  with  three  Kinges :  And  when  he  had  diligently  fearched  the  coafles  of  the  fouth  fyde,  he
tranfported  his  habitation,  and  buylded  a  fortreffe  there,  vpon  the  toppe  of  a  hyll,  neere  vnto  a  fure  hauen.

This  fortreffe,  he  cauled  faynt  Dominikes  towre.  Into  this  hauen,  runneth  a  ryuer  of  holfome  water,  replenyfhed
with  fundrye  kyndes  of  good  fyffhes.  They  afifyrme  this  ryuer  to  haue  many  benefytes  of  nature.  For,  where
fo  euer  it  runneth  all  thynges  are  excedynge  pleafaunte  and  fruitfull :  hauynge  on  euery  fyde,  groues  of  date
trees,  and  dyuers  other  of  the  Ilande  frutes  fo  plentyfully,  that  as  they  fayled  alonge  by  the  fhore,  often  tymes
the  branches  therof  laden  with  flowres  and  fruites,  hunge  foo  ouer  theyr  heades,  that  they  mij,ate  plucke  them
with  theyr  handes.  Alfo  that  the  frutefulnes  of  this  grownde,  is  eyther  equall  with  the  loyle  of  Ifabella,  or
better.  In  Ifabella,  he  lefte  only  certeyne  ficke  men  and  fhippe  wrightes,  whom  he  had  appointed  to  make
certeyne  carauels  The  refidue  of  his  men,  he  conueighed  to  the  fowth,  to  faint  Dominickes  to\\Te.  After  he
had  buylded  this  fortreffe,  leauinge  therin  a  garryfon  of  xx.  men,  he  with  the  remanent  of  his  fouldiers,  prepared
82

The  fyrjl  Decade.

83

them  felues  to  fearche  the  inner  partes  of  the  Welle  fyde  of  the  Ilande,  hytherto  knowen  onely  by  name.
Therfore  abowte.  xxx.  leaques,  (that  is)  foure  fcore  and  tenne  myles  from  the  fortrefle,  he  chaunced  on  the
ryuer  Naiba,  whiche  we  fayde  to  defcende  from  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua,  ryght  towarde  the  fowth,  by  the
myddefl  of  the  Hand.  When  he  had  ouerpaffed  this  ryuer  with  a  coompanye  of  armed  men  diuided  into.  xxv.
decurions,  that  is,  tenne  in  a  company  with  theyr  capitaynes,  he  fent  two  decurions  to  the  regions  of  thofe
kinges  in  whofe  landes  were  the  great  woods  of  brafile  trees.  Inclyninge  towarde  the  lefte  hande,  they  fownde
the  woodes,  entered  into  them,  and  felled  the  hygh  and  precious  trees,  which  were  to  that  day,  vntouched.
Eche  of  the  decurions  fylled  certeyne  of  the  Ilande  howfes  with  the  trunkes  of  brafile,  there  to  be  referued
vntyll  the  fhyppes  came  which  fhulde  cary  them  away.  But  the  Lieuetenaunt  directinge  his  ioumey  towarde
the  ryght  hande,  not  farre  from  the  bankes  of  the  ryuer  of  Naiba,  fownde  a  certeyne  kynge  whofe  name  was
Baichius  Afiacauchoa,  encamped  ageynfl  th[e]inhabitantes  of  the  prouince  of  Naiba,  to  fubdue  them  '/uder  his
dominion,  as  he  had  doone  manye  other  kynges  of  the  Ilande,  bortherers  vnto  hym:  The  palaice  of  this  great
kynge,  is  cauled  Xaragita :  and  is  fituate  towarde  the  Wefle  ende  of  the  Ilande,  diflante  from  the  ryuer  of
Naiba.  xxx.  leaques.  All  the  prynces  which  dwell  betwene  the  Wefle  ende  and  his  palaice,  are  ditionaries
vnto  hym.  All  that  Region  from  Naiba,  to  the  furthefle  marches  of  the  wefle,  is  vtterly  -ftithowte  golde,
althowgh  it  bee  full  of  mountaynes.  When  the  kynge  had  efpied  owre  men,  layinge  a  parte  his  weapons,  and
gyuinge  fignes  of  peace,  he  fpake  gentelly  to  them,  (incerteyne  whether  it  were  of  humanitie  or  feare)  and
demaunded  of  them  what  they  woolde  haue.  The  Lieuetenaunte  aunfwered :  That  he  fhuide  paye  tribute  to
the  Admirall  his  brother,  in  the  name  of  the  Chriflian  kynge  of  Spayne.  To  whom  he  fayde :  Ho\.'e  can  yowe
requyre  that  of  me,  whereas  neuer  a  Region  vnder  my  dominion  bringeth  foorth  golde.  For  he  had  harde,
that  there  was  a  flrange  nation  entered  into  the  Ilande,  whiche  made  greate  fearche  for  golde.  But  he  fuppofed
that  they  defyred  none  other  thynge.  The  leauetenaunt  anfwered  ageyne :  God  forbydde  that  we  fhulde  enioyne
any  man  to  pay  fuch  tribute  as  he  myght  not  eafely  forbeare,  or  fuch  as  were  not  engendered  or  growinge  in  the
Region :  But  we  vnderfland  that  your  Regions  brynge  foorth  great  plentie  of  Goffampine  cotton,  and  hempe,
with  fuche  other,  whereof  we  defyre  yowe  to  gyue  vs  parte.  When  he  harde  thefe  woordes,  he  promyfed  mth
cherefull  countenaunce,  to  gyue  hym  as  muche  of  thefe  thynges  as  he  wolde  requyre.  Thus  difmiffmge  his
army,  and  fendynge  meffengers  beefore,  he  hym  felfe  accoompanyed  the  Leauetenaunte  and  browght  hym  to
his  palaice,  beinge  dyflante  (as  we  haue  fayde).  xxx.  leaques.  In  al  this  tracte,  they  paffed  throwgh  the  luris-
diction  of  other  princes  beinge  vnder  his  dominion :  Of  the  whiche,  fume  gaue  them  hempe,  of  no  leffe  goodnes
to  make  tackelinges  for  ftiippes  then  owre  woodde.  Other  fume,  browght  breade,  and  fum  goffampyne  cotton :
And  foo  euery  of  them  payde  tribute  with  fuche  commodities  as  theyr  countreys  browght  foorth.  At  the  lengthe
they  came  to  the  kinges  manfion  place  of  Xaragua.  Before  they  entered  into  the  palaice,  a  greate  multitude
of  the  kynges  feruauntes  and  fubiectes  reforted  to  the  courte,  honorably  (after  their  maner)  to  receaue  the}T
kyng  Beiichius  A?iacaiichoa,  with  the  llrangers  which  he  browght  with  hym  to  fe  the  magnificence  of  his  courte.
But  nowe  Ihall  yowe  heare  howe  they  were  interteyned.  Amonge  other  tryumphes  and  fyghtes,  two  are
efpecially  to  bee  noted.  Fyrfle  there  mette  them  a  company  of.  xxx.  women,  beinge  al  the  kynges  \vyues  and
concubines,  bearinge  in  theyr  handes  branches  of  date  trees,  finginge  and  daunfinge :  They  were  all  naked,
fauynge  that  theyr  pr)mie  partes  were  couered  with  breeches  of  goffampine  cotton.  But  the  virgins,  hauynge
theyr  heare  hangynge  downe  abowte  their  fhulders,  tyed  abowte  the  foreheade  with  a  fyllet,  were  vtterly  naked.
They  affirme  that  theyr  faces,  brefles,  pappes,  handes,  and  other  partes  of  theyr  bodyes,  were  excedj-nge  fmoothe,
and  well  proportioned :  but  fumwhat  inclyning  to  a  louely  brown.  They  fuppofed  that  they  had  feene  thofe
mod  beawtyfuU  Dryades,  or  the  natyue  nymphes  or  fayres  of  the  fontaynes  wherof  the  c^ntiquites  fpeake  fo
muche.  The  branches  of  date  trees  which  they  bore  in  theyr  right  handes  when  they  daunced,  they  deljoiered
to  the  Leauetenaunt  with  lowe  curtefy  and  fmylynge  countenaunce.  Thus  enteringe  into  the  kynges  howfe,
they  fownde  a  delycate  fupper  prepared  for  them  after  theyr  maner.  When  they  were  well  refrefhed  with
meate,  the  nyght  drawinge  on,  they  were  browght  by  the  kynges  officers,  euery  man  to  his  lodginge,  accordyng
to  his  degree,  in  certeyne  of  theyr  howfes  abowte  the  palaice,  where  they  refled  them  in  hang)'nge  beddes
after  the  maner  of  the  countrey,  wherof  we  haue  fpoken  more  largely  in  an  other  place.

C  The  daye  folowyng  they  browght  owre  men  to  their  common  haule,  into  the  whiche  they  coome  together
as  often  as  they  make  any  notable  games  or  triumphes,  as  we  haue  faid  before.  Here,  after  many  daunfymges,
fynginges,  mafkinges,  runnynges,  wrefllynges,  and  other  tryinge  of  maflryes,  foodenly  there  appered  in  a  large
plaine  nere  vnto  the  haule.  ii.  greate  armies  of  men  of  warre,  whiche  the  kynge  for  his  paflyme  had  caufed  to  bee
prepared,  as  the  Spaniardes  vfe  the  playe  with  reedes  whiche  they  caule  luga  de  Canias.  As  the  armies  drewe
neere  together,  they  affayled  the  one  the  other  as  fierfely,  as  if  mortal  ennemies  with  theyr  baners  fpleade,  fliulde
fight  for  theyr  goodes,  theyr  landes,  theyr  lyues,  their  libertie,  theyr  countrey,  theyr  wyues  and  theyr  chyldren.  Soo
that  within  the  momente  of  an  howre,  foure  men  were  flayne,  and  many  wounded.  The  battayle  alfo  fhoulde  haue
contynued  longer,  if  the  kynge  had  not  at  the  requeft  of  owre  men,  caufed  them  to  ceafe. The  thyrde  day,  the

83

The  ryuer  uf
Naiba

Wooddes  of
brasile  trees.

KInge  Beuchius
Anacauchoa.

The  palaice
of  xaragua.

Mountaynes
without  gold

Tribute.

The  woolfe
entreateth  the
sheepe.

Hempe  and
gossampine  cottou.

Howe  the
Lieuetenant  was
receaued  at  the
kynges  palaice.

The  kynges  wj-ues.

Well  fauered
women.

Drj-ades.

24

A  delicate  supper.
Hanginge  beddes.
A  common  haule.

A  pretie  pastyme.

Foure  men  slolne
in  sport

84

The  fyrjl  Decade.

Prouision  for
«lisea£cd  men

The  castels  or
towres  of
hispaniolx

The  golden
Diountaynes
of  Cibaua.

Bon:iuuni
Tribute.

The  kynges
rebelle.

Guarionexius

capitaine  of
the  conspiracie.

An  army  of  xv.

thousande

Barbarians.

25

The  kynges  are
taken  prisoners.

Kynge
Guarionexius
is  pardoned.

Lacke  of  vytaylei.

Beuchius
Anacauchoa,  the
kynge  of  Xaragua.

Lieuetenant  confelynge  the  kynge  to  fowe  more  plentie  of  gofllvrnpine  vppon  the  bankes  nere  vnto  the  waters
fyde,  that  they  myghte  the  better  paye  theyr  tribute  priuately  accordynge  to  the  multitude  of  theyr  howfes,  he
repayred  to  JfaheUa  to  vyfite  the  ficke  men  whiche  he  had  lofte  there,  and  alfo  to  fee  howe  his  woorkes  wente  for-
warde.  In  tlio  tyme  of  his  abfence.  xxx.  of  his  men  were  confumed  with  diuerfe  difcafes.  Wlierfore  beinge  fore
trowbled  in  his  mynde,  and  in  maner  at  his  wyttes  ende  what  he  were  beft  to  doo,  for  as  muche  as  he  wanted  al
thynges  neceflarie  as  well  to  reflore  them  to  healthe  whiche  were  yet  acrafed,  as  alfo  vitayles  to  mayntaine  the
hole  multitude,  where  as  there  was  yet  no  fliippe  coome  from  Spaine,  as  at  the  length  he  determyned  to  fende
abrode  the  ficke  men  here  and  there  to  iundr}'e  Regions  of  the  Ilande,  and  to  the  caflelles  which  they  had
erected  in  the  fame.  For  directly  from  the  citie  of  Ifabella  to  faynt  Dominikes  towre,  that  is,  from  the  north  to
the  fouth,  throwgh  the  Hand,  they  had  buylded  thus  many  caflelles.  Fyrfte.  xxxvi.  myles  diftante  from  Ifabella,
they  buylded  the  caflell  of  Sperantia,  from  Spcrantia.  xxv.  myles,  was  the  caflell  of  faynte  Catharine,  from  faynte
Catharines.  x.\.  myles,  was  faynt  lames  towre.  Other,  xx.  miles  from  faynte  lames  towre,  was  a  flronger
fortreffe  then  any  of  the  other,  which  they  cauled  the  towre  of  Conception :  which  he  made  the  flronger  bicaufe  it
was  fituate  at  the  rootes  of  the  golden  mountaynes  of  Cibaua,  in  the  greate  and  large  playne  foo  fruitefull  and
well  inhabited  as  we  haue  before  defcribed.  He  buylded  alfo  an  other  in  the  mydde  waye  betwene  the  towre
of  Conception  and  faynt  Dominikes  towre.  The  which  alfo  was  flronger  then  the  towre  of  Conception,  bycaufe
it  was  within  the  lymittes  of  a  great  kynge,  hauinge  vnder  his  dominion  fiue  thowfande  men :  whofe  chiefe  Citie
and  heade  of  the  Realme,  beynge  cauled  Bonauum,  he  wylled  that  the  caflell  fliulde  alfo  bee  cauled  after  the
fame  name.  Therfore  leauynge  the  ficke  men  in  thefe  caflels  and  other  of  the  Ilande  howfes  nere  vnto  the  fame,
he  hym  felfe  repayred  to  faynte  Dominikes,  exactinge  tributes  of  all  the  kynges  whiche  were  in  his  waye.  When
he  had  taryed  there  a  fewe  dayes,  there  was  a  rumor  fpredde,  that  all  the  kynges  abowte  the  borders  of  the
to\\Te  of  Conception,  had  confpyred  with  defperate  myndes  to  rebell  agenfle  the  Spaniardes.  When  the
Lieuetenaunte  was  certified  hereof,  he  tooke  his  iorneye  towarde  them  immediately,  not  beyng  difcoraged  eyther
by  the  lengthe  of  the  waye,  or  feebleneffe  of  his  fouldyers,  beynge  in  maner  forweried  with  trauayle.  As  he
drewe  nere  vnto  them,  he  had  aduertifement  that  kynge  Guario7icxius  was  chofen  by  the  other  prynces  to  bee
the  Capitayne  of  this  rebellion :  And  that  he  was  enforfed  therto  halfe  vnwilling,  beynge  feduced  by  theyr
perfwafions  and  prouocations.  The  whiche  is  more  lykely  to  be  trewe,  for  that  he  had  before  had  experience  of
the  power  and  policie  of  o\\Te  men.  They  came  together  at  a  daye  appoynted,  accoompanied  with.  xv.
thoufande  men,  armed  after  their  maner,  once  agen  to  proue  the  fortune  of  warre.  Here  the  Lieuetenaunte
confultynge  with  the  Capitayne  of  the  fortreffe  and  the  other  fouldiers  of  whom  he  had  the  conducte,  determyned
to  fette  vpon  them  vnwares  in  their  owne  howfes  before  they  coulde  prepare  theyr  army.  He  fent  foorthe
therfore  to  euery  kynge,  a  Centurian,  that  is,  a  capitaine  of  a  hundreth,  which  were  commaunded  vppon  a  fudden
to  inuade  theyr  howfes  in  the  night,  and  to  take  them  fleepinge,  beefore  the  people  (beinge  fcattered  here  and
there)  might  affemble  togyther.  Thus  fecreatly  enteringe  into  their  vylages,  not  fortified  with  waules,  trenches,  or
bulwarkes,  they  broke  in  vppon  them,  tooke  them,  bounde  them,  and  led  away  euery  man  his  prifoner  according
as  they  were  commaunded.  The  Lieuetenaunt  hym  felfe  with  his  hundreth  men,  affayled  kynge  Giiarionexius
as  the  woorthier  perfonage,  whom  he  tooke  pryfoner  as  dyd  the  other  capitaynes  theyr  kynges,  and  at  the  fame
howre  appoynted.  Foureteene  of  theym  were  browght  the  fame  nyght  to  the  towre  of  Conception.  Shortlye  after,
when  he  had  put  to  death  two  of  the  kynges  which  were  the  chiefe  autours  of  this  newe  reuolte,  and  had  fuborned
Guarionexius  and  the  other  kynges  to  attempte  the  fame :  leafl  the  people  for  forowe  of  theyr  kynges  fhulde
neglecte  or  forfake  their  countrey,  whiche  thinge  myght  haue  byn  greate  incommoditie  to  owre  men,  who  by
th[e]increafe  of  theyr  feedes  and  fruites  were  oftentymes  ayded,  he  freely  pardoned  and  difmiffed  Guarionexius
and  the  other  kynges.  The  people  in  the  meane  tyme  flocked  togyther  abowte  the  towre,  to  the  nomber
of  fyue  thowfande  withowte  weapons,  with  pytiful  houling  for  the  delyueraunce  of  theyr  kynges:  The  ayer
thundered,  and  the  earth  trembeled  throwgh  the  vehemencie  of  theyr  owtcry  The  Lieuetenaunt  warned
Guarionexius  and  the  other  kyiiges,  with  threatenynges,  with  rewardes,  and  with  promyfes,  neuer  hereafter  to
attempte  any  fuche  thynge.  Then  Guoj'iotiexius  made  an  oration  to  the  people  of  the  great  power  of  owre  men,
of  theyr  clemencie  towarde  offenders,  and  liberalitie  to  fuche  as  remayne  faithfuU :  defyringe  them  to  quiet  theyr
myndes :  and  from  henfefoorth  nother  in  deede  nor  thowght  to  interpryfe  any  thynge  ageynfl  the  Chriftians,  but
to  obeye  and  ferue  them,  excepte  they  wolde  dayly  brynge  them  felues  into  further  calamyties.  When  the
oration  was  fynyfhed,  they  tooke  hym  vp  and  fet  hym  on  they:"  fhulders,  and  foo  caryed  hym  home  to  his  owne
palaice.  And  by  this  meanes,  this  Region  was  pacified  for  a  whyle.  But  owre  men,  with  heauy  countenaunce,
wandered  vppe  and  downe,  as  defolate  in  a  flrange  countrey,  lackinge  vytailes,  and  worne  owte  of  apparell,
whereas,  xv.  moonethes  were  nowe  paffed  fence  the  Admirals  departure  :  duringe  which  tyme,  they  coulde  heare
nothynge  owte  of  Spayne.  The  Leauetenaunt  comforted  them  all  that  he  coulde  with  fayre  wordes  and  promyfes.
In  the  meane  tyme,  Beuchius  Anacauchoa,  the  kynge  of  the  Wefle  partes  of  the  Region  of  Xaragua  (of  whom
we  fpake  before)  fente  meffengers  to  the  Lieuetenaunt  to  fignifye  vnto  hym,  that  he  hadde  in  a  redynes  the
84

The  fyrjl  Decade.

85

goffampine  cotton  and  fuche  other  thinges  as  he  wylled  hym  to  prepare  for  the  paymente  of  his  trybute.
Whervppon  the  Lieuetenaunt  tooke  his  iorney  thyther,  and  was  honorably  receaued  of  the  kynge  and  his  fyfter,
fumtyme  the  wyfe  of  Cannaboa  the  kynge  of  Cibaua,  bearing  no  leffe  rule  in  the  gouemaunce  of  her  brothers
kyngedome,  then  he  hym  felfe.  For  they  affirme  her  to  bee  a  wyfe  woman,  of  good  maners,  and  pleafaunt  in
company.  Shee  erneflly  perfuaded  her  brother  by  th[e]example  of  her  hufbande,  to  loue  and  obeye  the
Chriftians.  This  woman  was  cauled  Anacao7ia.  He  fownde  in  the  palaice  of  Beiichhts  Anacauchoa.  xxxii.
kynges  whiche  hadde  browght  theyr  tributes  with  them,  and  abode  his  comminge.  They  browght  with  them
alfo  befyde  theyr  tr)'bute  affigned  them,  further  to  demerite  the  fauour  of  owre  men,  great  plentie  of  vytayles :
as  bothe  kyndes  of  breade,  cunnyes,  and  fyffhes,  alredy  dryed  bycaufe  they  fliulde  not  putrifie :  Serpentes  alfo
of  that  kynd  which  wee  fayd  to  bee  efleemed  amonge  them  as  mofl  delicate  meate,  and  lyke  vnto  Crocodiles
fauing  in  byggenes.  Thefe  ferpentes  they  caule  luajmas,  which  owre  men  learned  fumewhat  to  late  to  haue  byn
engendred  in  the  Ilande.  For  vnto  that  day,  none  of  them  durfle  aduenture  to  tafle  of  them  by  reafon
of  theyr  horrible  deformitie  and  lothefumnes.  Yet  the  Lieuetenaunt  beinge  entyfed  by  the  pleafantnes
of  the  kynges  fyfler,  determined  to  tafle  of  the  ferpentes.  But  when  he  felte  the  flefhe  therof  to  bee  fo
delicate  to  his  tonge,  he  fel  too,  amayne  without  al  feare.  The  which  thinge  his  coompanyons  perceauinge,
were  not  behynde  hym  in  greedines:  In  foo  muche  that  they  hadde  nowe  none  other  talke  then  of  the
fweetenes  of  thefe  ferpentes:  which  theyaffyrme  to  bee  of  more  pleafaunte  tafle,  then  eyther  o\vre  phefauntes
or  pertriches.  But  they  lofe  theyr  tafle,  excepte  they  bee  prepared  after  a  certeyne  faffhion :  as  doo  peacockes
and  phefauntes  except  they  bee  interlarded  beefore  they  bee  rofled.  They  prepare  them  therefore  after  this
maner.  Fyrfl.  takynge  owte  theyr  bowels  euen  from  the  throte  to  the  thyghes,  they  wafhe  and  rubbe  theyr
bodies  very  cleane  bothe  within  and  withowte.  Then  rouling  them  togyther  on  a  cyrcle,  inuolued  after  the
maner  of  a  flepynge  fnake,  they  thrufle  them  into  a  potte  of  no  bygger  capacitie  then  to  houlde  them  only.
This  doone,  puttinge  a  lyttle  water  vnto  them  with  a  portion  of  the  Ilande  pepper,  they  feethe  them  with  a
foft  fyer  of  fweete  woodde,  and  fuche  as  maketh  no  greate  fmoke.  Of  the  fat  of  them  beinge  thus  fodde,  is  made
an  excedinge  pleafaunte  brothe  or  potage.  They  fay  alfo,  that  there  is  no  meate  to  bee  compared  to  the  egges
of  thefe  ferpentes,  which  they  vfe  to  feethe  by  them  felues.  They  are  good  to  bee  eaten  as  fone  as  they  are
fodde :  And  may  alfo  bee  referued  many  dayes  after.  But  hauinge  fayde  thus  muche  of  theyr  intertaynement
and  daintie  fare,  let  vs  nowe  fpeake  of  other  matters.  When  the  Lieuetenaunt  had  fylled  one  of  the  Ilande
howfes  with  the  goffampine  cotton  which  he  hadde  receaued  for  trybute,  the  kyiiges  promyfed  furthermore  to
gyue  hym  as  muche  of  theyr  breade,  as  he  wolde  demaunde.  He  gaue  them  hartie  thankes  and  gentely
accepted  theyr  freendly  profer.  In  the  meane  time  whyle  this  breade  was  gatheringe  in  fundry  Regions  to  bee
browght  to  the  palaice  of  Beuchius  Anacauchoa  kynge  of  Xaragua,  he  fent  meffengers  to  Ifabella  for  one  of  the
two  carauelles  which  were  lately  made  there :  intendinge  to  fende  the  fame  thyther  ageyne  laden  with  breade.
The  maryners  gladde  of  thefe  tydynges,  fayled  abowte  the  Ilande,  and  in  fhort  fpace  browght  the  fliippe  to  the
coafles  of  Xaragua.  The  fyfler  of  kynge  Beuchius  Anacauchoa,  that  wyfe  and  pleafaunt  woman  Anacaona,  (the
wyfe  fumtyme  of  Caunaboa  the  kynge  of  the  golden  howfe  of  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua,  whose  hufbande  dyed  in
the  way  when  he  fhulde  haue  byn  caryed  into  Spayne,)  when  fhee  harde  faye  that  owtc  flij^pe  was  arrjoied  on
the  fhore  of  her  natiue  countrey,  perfuaded  the  kynge  her  brother  that  they  bothe  myght  goo  togyther  to  fee  it.
For  the  place  where  the  fhyppe  lay,  was  not  pafle.  vi.  myles  diflante  from  Xaragua.  They  refled  all  night,  in
the  mydde  way,  in  a  certeyne  vyllage  in  the  which  was  the  treafurye  or  iewell  howfe  of  Anacaona.  Her
treafure  was  nother  goulde,  fyluer,  or  precious  flones,  but  only  thynges  neceffarj'  to  bee  vfed,  as  cheyars,
ftooles,  fettels,  dyffhes,  potingers,  pottes,  pannes,  bafons,  treyes,  and  fuche  other  howfholde  fluffe  and  inflru-
mentes,  workemanly  made  of  a  certeyne  blacke  and  harde  fliyninge  woodde  which  that  excellent  lerned  phifition
lohn  baptifle  Elifms,  aflfirmeth  to  bee  hebene.  What  fo  euer  portion  of  wytte  nature  hath  g)^uen  to  the  inhabi-
tantes  of  thefe  Ilandes,  the  fame  doth  mofl.  appeare  in  thefe  kynde  of  woorkes,  in  whiche  they  fhewe  great  arte
and  cunnyng.  But  thofe  which  this  woman  had,  were  made  in  the  Hand  of  Guanabba,  fituate  in  the  mouth  of
the  wefle  fyde  of  Hifpaniola.  In  thefe  they  graue  the  lyuely  Images  of  fuch  phantafies  as  they  fuppofe  they
fee  walke  by  night  which  the  Antiquitie  cauled  Lemurcs.  Alfo  the  Images  of  men,  ferpents,  beafles,  and  what
foo  euer  other  thyng  they  haue  once  feene.  What  wolde  yowe  thinke  (mofl  noble  Prynce)  that  the>  coulde
doo,  if  they  had  the  vfe  of  Iren  and  fleele  ?  For  they  onely  fyrfle  make  thefe  fofte  in  the  fyre,  and  aftenvarde
make  them  holowe  and  carue  them  with  a  certeyne  flone  which  they  fynde  in  the  ryuers.  Of  ilooles  and
chayers,  fliee  gaue  the  Lieuetenaunt.  xiiii.  And  of  veffelles  perteynynge  to  the  table  and  kychen,  fliee  gaue  hpii
three  fcore,  fum  of  wood  and  fume  of  earthe.  Alfo  of  goffampine  cotton  ready  fpunne  foure  great  bottomes  of
excedinge  weight.  The  day  folowing  when  they  came  to  the  fea  fyde,  where  was  an  other  vylage  of  the  kynges,
the  Lieuetenaunt  commaunded  the  fhyppe  boat  to  bee  browght  to  the  fhore.  The  kyng  alfo  had  prepared  two
canoas,  paynted  after  theyr  maner :  one  for  hym  felfe  and  certeyne  of  his  gentelmen :  an  other  for  his  fyfler
Anacaona  and  her  waytinge  women. But  Anacaona  defyred  to  bee  caried  in  the  fliyppe  boate  with  the

K  2  85

Queene  Anacaona
the  wife  of  kynge
Caunaboa.

xxxiL  kynges.

Serpentes  eaten.

26

Tlie  dresbing  of
serpentes  to  be
eaten.

Serpentes
egges  eaten

Gossampine
cotton.

Queene  .\nacaona

The  treasurie  of
Queene  -Ajiacaona

Hebene  woode.

The  Ilande  of
Guanabba

Conn  inge  artificers

A  stone  in  the
steede  of  Iren

86

The  fyyjl  Decade.

Gunnes.

27

Miisic.ll
instrumentes.
lenoraiice  cause  th
aamiration.

Roldanus

Xerainus.

The  intemperancie

and  malice  of  a

seniile  witte

aduaunced.

Ciguaians.

Maiobanexiiis,  the
great  kynge  of
the  mountaynes

The  inhabytaiites
of  the  mountaynes.

Guarionexius
rebelleth  age>'ne.

Roldanus
Xeminus  rebelleth.

28

Licenciousnes
in  libertie

Hercules  pyllers.

A  violente
persasion.

Lieuetenaunte.  When  they  novve  approched  nere  vnto  the  fliyppe,  certeyne  great  pieces  of  ordinaunce  were
difcharged  of  purpofe.  The  fea  was  fylled  with  thunder,  and  tlie  ayer  with  fmooke.  They  trembled  and
quaked  for  feare,  fuppofinge  that  the  frame  of  the  world  had  byn  in  danger  of  fauling.  But  when  they  fawe
the  Lieuetenaunte  lawgh,  and  looke  cherefully  on  them,  they  cauled  ageyne  theyr  fpirites.  And  when
they  yet  drewe  nerer  to  the  fliippe,  and  harde  the  noyfe  of  the  fluites,  flialmes,  and  dnmnmes,  they
were  wonderfully  aflonyed  at  the  fweete  harmony  therof  Enterynge  into  the  fliyppe  and  beholdinge  the  fore-
fliippe  and  the  flerne,  the  toppe  cartel,  the  made,  the  hatches,  the  cabens,  the  keele,  and  the  tackelinges,  the
brother  fixinge  his  eyes  on  the  fyfler,  and  the  fyfler  on  the  brother,  they  were  bothe  as  it  were  dumme  and
amafed,  and  wyfle  not  what  to  faye  for  too  muche  wonderynge.  Whyle  beholdinge  thefe  thinges  they  wandered
vp  and  downe  the  fliippe,  the  Lieuetenaunt  commaunded  the  ankers  to  bee  loofed,  and  the  failes  to  be  hoyfed
vp.  Then  were  they  further  aflonyflied,  Avlien  they  fawe  foo  greate  a  mole,  to  moue  as  it  were  by  it  felfe,
without  ores  and  without  the  force  of  man.  For  there  arofe  from  the  earth  fuche  a  wynde  as  a  man  wolde  haue
w)nied  for  of  purpofe.  Yet  furthermore,  when  they  perceaued  the  fliyppe  to  moue  fumtyme  forwarde  and
fumtyme  backewarde:  fumtyme  towarde  the  ryght  ,hande  and  fumtyme  towarde  the  lefte,  and  that  with  one
Avynde  and  in  maner  at  one  inflante,  they  were  at  theyr  wyttes  ende  for  to  muche  admiracion.  Thefe  thynges
fyniflied  and  the  fliyppes  beinge  laden  with  breade  and  fuche  other  rewardes,  they  beinge  alfo  recompenfed
with  other  of  owre  thynges,  he  difmiffed  not  onely  the  kynge  Beuchius  Atiacauchoa,  and  his  fyfl.er,  but  lykewife
all  theyr  feruauntes  and  women  replenyflied  with  ioye  and  woonderinge.  After  this,  he  hym  felfe  tooke  his
iorney  by  foote  with  his  fouldiers  to  the  citie  of  IfahcUa :  where  he  was  aduertifed  that  one  Roldanus  Xivwius,
a  nawghty  felowe,  (whom  before  beinge  his  feruante,  he  had  preferred  to  bee  capitayne  of  the  myners  and
labourers,  and  after  made  hym  a  ludge  in  caufes  of  controuerfie)  had  vfed  hym  felfe  owtragioufly  and  was
malycioufly  mynded  ageinfl  hym,  and  further,  the  caufe  of  muche  mifchiefe  in  his  abfence.  For  kynge
Guarionexius  (who  a  whyle  before  was  pardoned  of  his  former  rebellion,  and  perfuaded  the  people  to  obeye  the
Spanyardes)  was  by  his  nawghty  vfage,  and  fuche  other  as  were  confethered  with  hym,  fo  accenfed  to  reuenge
the  iniuries  which  they  fufleyned  at  his  handes,  byfyde  the  abhominable  actes  which  they  folowynge  onely  the
lawe  of  nature,  abhorred  to  admytte,  that  he  with  his  famelie,  famylyers,  and  ditionaries,  of  defperate  mynde
fledde  to  the  mountaynes  beinge  diflant  from  Ifabella  onely  tenne  leaques  Wefl-warde,  towarde  the  north  fyde
of  the  fea.  Thefe  mountaynes,  and  alfo  the  inhabitantes  of  the  fame  they  caule  by  one  name  Ciguaios.  The
greate  kyng  of  al  the  kynges  and  regions  of  thefe  mountayne[s],  is  cauled  Maiobanexius:  and  his  courte  or
palaice  is  named  Caprotius.  The  mountaynes  are  rowgh,  hygh,  and  fuche  as  no  man  can  paffe  to  the  toppes
therof  They  are  alfo  bendynge :  and  haue  theyr  corners  reachinge  downe  to  the  fea.  Betwene  bothe  the
comers  of  the  mountaynes,  is  there  a  greate  playne,  by  the  which  many  riuers  faule  from  the  mountaynes  into
the  fea.  The  people  are  verye  fierfe  and  warlyke  men,  hauing  theyr  original  of  the  Canybales.  For  when  they
defcende  from  the  mountaynes  to  the  playnes  to  keepe  warre  with  theyr  bortherers,  they  eate  all  fuche  as  they
kyll.  Guarionexius  therfore,  flyinge  to  this  kyng  of  thefe  mountaynes,  gaue  hym  many  prefentes  of  fuche
thynges  as  are  wantinge  in  his  countrey :  therwith  declaringe  howe  vylely,  vylaynoufly,  and  violently,  he  had
byn  vfed  of  owre  men :  with  whom  he  could  nothinge  preuayle  notlier  by  fayre  meanes,  nor  by  foule :  nother
by  humilytie  nor  by  floutnes.  And  that  to  bee  the  caufe  of  his  refortinge  to  hym  at  that  tyme :  mofle  humbly
defyring  hym  to  bee  his  defence  ageynft.  th[e]oppreffions  of  fuche  myfcheuous  people.  Maiobanexius  here
vppon,  made  hym  promeffe  to  ayde  and  helpe  hym  ageynfl.  the  Chriflians  al  that  he  myght.  The  Lieuetenaunt
therfore  made  hafl  to  the  fortreffe  of  Conception :  whyther  as  foone  as  he  was  coome,  he  fent  for  Roldanus
Xeminus,  who  with  fuche  as  folowed  hym,  lay  in  certeyne  of  the  Ilande  vylages,  twelue  miles  diflant  from  the
fortres.  At  his  comminge,  the  Leauetenaunt  afked  hym  what  al  thefe  flurres  and  tumultes  ment.  He  anfwered
without  abafliement :  Yowre  brother  the  Admirall  hath  to  do  therwith,  and  fhall  anfwere  for  the  fame  before  the
kynge.  For  we  perceaue  that  the  kynge  hath  foo  put  hym  in  trufl.e,  that  he  hath  hadde  no  regarde  to  vs.
Here  we  peryflie  for  hunger  whyle  we  folowe  yowe :  and  are  dryuen  to  feeke  owre  vnhappy  foode  in  the  defertes.
Yowre  brother  alfo,  affigned  me  affiflant  with  yowe  in  gouerninge  the  Ilande.  Wherfore  fyth  yowe  haue  no
more  refpecte  vnto  vs,  we  are  determyned  noo  longer  to  bee  vnder  yowre  obedience.  When  Roldanus  had
fpoken  thefe  wordes  and  fuche  other,  the  Lieuetenaunte  wolde  haue  layde  handes  on  hym :  but  he  efcaped
his  fyngers,  and  fledde  to  the  wefl.e  partes  of  the  Region  of  Xaragua,  hauinge  with  hym  a  trayne  of
threefcore  and  tenne  men  whiche  were  of  his  confetheracie.  Here  this  fylthy  fynke  of  rebels  thus  confpired,
played  their  vages  and  lyued  with  loofe  brydels  in  al  kyndes  of  myfchefe,  robbynge  the  people,  fpoylinge  the
countrey,  and  rauyfliinge  bothe  wyues  and  virgines.  Whyle  thefe  thynges  were  doing  in  the  Ilande,  the  AdmJrall
hadde  eyght  fliyppes  appoynted  hym  by  the  kinge :  Of  the  whiche  he  fent  two  laden  with  vitayles,  from  Cales  or
Cades  of  Hercules  pyllers,  directly  to  the  Lieuetenaunt  his  brother,  Thefe  fliyppes  by  chaunce  arrj-ued  fyrfl.  on
that  fyde  of  the  Ilande  where  Rolandus  Xeminus  ranged  with  his  coompanyons.  Rolandus  in  fliorte  tyme  hadde
feduced  them:  promyfinge  them  in  the  fleade  of  mattockes,  wenches  pappes:  for  laboure,  pleafure:  for  hunger,

86

The  fyrft  Decade.

87

abundance :  and  for  wearynes  and  watchinge,  fleepe  and  quietnes.  Gtiarionexius  in  the  meane  tyme,  affemblynge
a  power  of  his  freendes  and  confetherates,  came  oftentymes  downe  into  the  playne,  and  flewe  as  many  of  the
Chriflian  men,  as  he  coulde  meete  conuenientlye,  and  alfo  of  the  Ilande  rnenne  whiche  were  theyr  freendes :
waflynge  theyr  grounde,  deflroyinge  theyr  feedes,  and  fpoyhnge  theyr  vylages.  But  Roldanus  and  his  adherentes,
albeit  they  had  knowleage  that  the  Admiral  wolde  fhortly  coome,  yet  feared  they  nothynge  bycaufe  they  had  feduced
the  newe  menne  whiche  came  in  the  fyrfle  fliippes.  Whyle  the  Lieuetenaunt  was  thus  toffed  in  the  middefl  of
thefe  flormes,  in  the  meane  tyme  his  brother  the  Admyrall  fet  forvvardt  from  the  coafles  of  Spayne :  But  not
directly  to  Hifpaniola:  For  he  turned  more  towarde  the  fouthe.  In  the  which  vyage,  what  he  dyd,  what  coaftes
bothe  of  the  lande  and  fea  he  coompafed,  and  what  newe  regions  he  difcouered,  wee  wyl  fyrfl  declare.  For  to
what  ende  and  conclufion  the  fayde  tumultes  and  feditions  came,  wee  wyll  expreffe  in  th[e]ende  of  the  booke
folowynge. Thus  fare  ye  well.

The  syxte  booke  of  the  fyrste  decade,
to  Lodouike  Cardmall  of  Av2igomt.

Olomis  the  Admyral,  the  thyrde  day  of  the  Calendes  of  lune,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifte.  1498.
hoyfed  vp  his  fayles  in  the  hauen  of  the  towne  Barratnedabas,  not  farre  diflante  from  Cales  :
and  fet  forwarde  on  his  vyage  with  eyght  fhippes  laden  with  vytayles  and  other  neceffaries.
He  diuerted  from  his  accuflomed  rafe  which  was  by  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie,  by  reafon  of
certeyne  frenchemen  pirates  and  rouers  on  the  fea,  whiche  laye  in  the  ryght  way  to  meete
with  hym.  In  the  way  from  Cales  to  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie,  abowte  foure  fcore  and  ten
myles  towarde  the  lefte  hande,  is  the  Ilande  of  Madera,  more  fouthwarde  then  the  citie  of
Ciuile  by  foure  degrees.  For  the  pole  artyke  is  eleuate  to  Ciuile,  xxxvi.  degrees:  But  to  this  Hand  (as  the
mariners  faye)  only  xxxii.  He  fayled  therfore  fyrfte  to  Madera.  And  fendinge  from  thenfe  directly  to
Hifpaiiiola,  the  refydue  of  the  fhippes  laden  with  vytayles  and  other  neceffaries,  he  hym  felfe  with  one  fhyppe
with  deckes,  and  two  marchaunt  carauelles  coafled  towarde  the  fouthe  to  coome  to  the  Equinoctial  lyne,  and
fo  furth  to  folowe  the  tracte  of  the  fame  towarde  the  Wefl,  to  th[e]intent  to  fearche  the  natures  of  fuche  places
as  he  coulde  fynde  vnder  or  nere  vnto  the  fame,  leauinge  Hifpaniola  on  the  north  fyde  on  his  ryght  hande.  In
the  myddle  of  his  rafe,  lye.  xiii.  Ilandes  of  the  Portugales,  whiche  were  in  owlde  tyme  cauled  Hefperides :  And
are  now  cauled  Caput  Viride,  or  Cabouerde.  Thefe  are  fituate  in  the  fea,  ryght  ouer  ageynft.  the  inner  partes  of
Ethiope,  Weflwarde  two  dayes  faylinge.  One  of  thefe  the  Portugales  caule  Bonauijla.  With  the  fnayles,  or  rather
tortoyfes  of  this  Ilande,  many  leprous  men  are  healed  and  clenfed  of  theyr  leprofitie.  Departing  fodainly  from  henfe
by  reafon  of  the  contagioufnes  of  the  ayre,  he  fayled.  CCCCLXXX.  [four  hundred  and  eighty]  myles  towarde  the
Wefle  fouthwefl,  which  is  the  myddell  betwene  the  wefte  and  the  fouthe.  There  was  he  fo  vexed  \\ith  maladies  and
heate  (for  it  was  the  moneth  of  lune)  that  his  fhyppes  were  almofle  fette  on  fyre.  The  hoopes  of  his  barrels  cracked
and  brake,  and  the  freffhe  water  ranne  owte.  The  men  alfo  complayned  that  they  were  not  able  to  abyde  that
extremitie  of  heate.  Here  the  northe  pole  was  eleuate  only.  v.  degrees  from  the  Horizontall.  For  the  fpace  of.
viii.  dayes  in  the  which  he  fuffered  thefe  extremites,  only  the  fyrfl  day  was  fayre:  but  all  Hie  other,  clowdy  and
rayny:  yet  neuertheleffe  feruent  hotte.  Wherefore  it  oftentymes  repented  hym  not  a  little  that  euer  he  tooke
that  way.  Beinge  toffed  in  thefe  dangiours  and  vexations  eyght  contynuall  dayes,  at  the  lengthe  an  Eaflfoutheafle
wynde  arofe,  and  gaue  a  profperous  blafle  to  his  fayles.  Which  wynde  folowinge  directly  towarde  the  wefle,  he
fownde  the  flarres  ouer  that  paralelle,  placed  in  other  order,  and  an  other  kynde  of  ayer,  as  the  Admirall  hym  felfe
towlde  me.  And  they  al  affirme,  that  within  three  dayes  fayHnge,  they  fownde  molle  temperate  and  pleafaunte
ayre.  The  Admirall  alfo  afifirmeth,  that  from  the  clime  of  the  great  heate  and  vnholfome  ayer,  he  euer  afcended
by  the  backe  of  the  fea,  as  it  were  by  a  hygh  mountayne  towarde  heauen.  Yet  in  all  this  tyme,  could  1  he  not
once  fee  any  lande.  But  at  the  length,  the  day  before  the  Calendes  of  luly,  the  watcheman  lookynge  foorth  of
the  toppecaflell  of  the  greatefl  fhyppe,  cryed  owte  alowde  for  ioy  that  he  efpyed  three  exced}Tige  hyghe
mountaynes :  Exhortinge  his  felowes  to  bee  of  good  cheere,  and  put  away  all  penfiuenes.  For  they  were  very
heauy  and  forowfuU,  as  well  for  the  greefe  which  they  fufleyned  by  reafon  of  th[e]intollerable  heate,  as  alfo  that
their  frefhe  water  fayled  them,  which  ranne  owte  at  the  ryftes  of  the  barels,  caufed  by  extreme  heate  as  we  haue
fayde.  Thus  beinge  wel  conforted,  they  drewe  to  the  lande.  Yet  at  theyr  f}T:ft  approche,  they  coulde  not  arr}'ue  by
reafon  of  the  (halownes  of  the  fea  nere  the  fhore.  Yet  lookyng  owte  of  theyr  fliyppes,  they  might  wel  perceaue
that  the  Region  was  inhabyted  and  well  cultured. For  they  fawe  very  fayre  gardens,  and  pleafaunte  medowes :

87

The  furie  of
guarionexius

The  thyTde  vyage
of  Cdlonus  the
AdmiralL

Frenche  men
pyrats.

The  Hand  of

Madera.

The  Admiral
[s]ayleth  to  the
Equinoctiall.

x!ii.  Ilandes  of
Hesperides,  now
cauled  Cabouerde

Healynge  of  the
leper.

Contagious  ayre
and  extreeme  heate

The  pole  eleuate.
V  degrees.

29

The  starres  placed
in  other  order.

A  sea  rysyng  lyke
a  mountayne.

Heate  cau?cth  the
barrels  to  breke.

88

The  fyrjl  Decade.

Swete  sauours
proceadynge
frome  the  lande.

TlielhndofPuta.

People  of  [good]ly
corporature  and
longe  heare  nere
the  Eiiiiinoctfhll.

The  higher  the
coulder.

Difference
betwene  people  of
one  clime.

Ethiopia.

Note  the  cause  of
difference.

Musical
instrumentes.

30

The  violent  course
of  the  water  from
the  Easte  to  the
Weste.

The  goulfe  cauled
Os  Draconis.

A  conflict  betwene
the  freshe  water
and  the  sake.

A  sea  of  fresh
water.

Marmasets  and
monkeys.

frome  the  trees  and  herbes  wherof,  when  the  mornynge  devves  beganne  to  ryfe,  there  proceaded  manye  fweete
fauoures.  Twentie  myles  diflant  from  henfe,  they  chaunced  into  a  hauen,  verye  apte  to  harborowe  (hippes,  but
it  had  no  ryuer  ninninge  into  it.  SayHnge  on  yet  fumwhat  further,  he  fownde  at  the  lengthe  a  commodious
hauen  wherin  he  might  repay  re  his  fliippes  and  make  prouifion  of  frefflie  water  and  fuell.  Arenalis  cauleth
this  lande  Futa.  They  fownd  no  houfes  nere  vnto  the  hauen :  but  innumerable  fleppes  of  certein  wilde  beafles
feete,  of  the  which  they  fownde  one  deade  much  lyke  a  goate.  The  day  folowynge,  they  fawe  a  Canoa
commynge  a  forre  of,  hauinge  in  it.  xxiiii.  younge  men  of  godly  corporature  and  high  flature,  al  armed  with
targets,  bowes  and  arowes  The  heare  of  theyr  heds,  was  longe  and  plaine,  and  cutte  on  the  forheade  much
after  the  maner  of  the  Spanyardes.  Theyr  priuie  partes  were  couered  with  fillettes  of  goffampyne  cotton,  of
fundry  coloures  enterlaced :  And  were  befyde  al  ouer  naked.  Here  the  Admirall  confideringe  with  hym  felfe
the  corporature  of  this  people  and  nature  of  the  lande,  he  beleaued  the  fame  to  bee  foo  much  the  nerer  heauen
then  other  Regions  of  the  fame  paralelle,  and  further  remoued  from  the  groffe  vapours  of  the  vales  and  maryfflies,
howe  muche  the  hyghefte  toppes  of  the  byggefl  mountaynes  are  diflante  from  the  deepe  vales.  For  he  erneftly
affirmeth,  that  in  all  that  nauigation,  he  neuer  wente^  owte  of  the  paralelles  of  Ethiope:  So  greate  difference  is
there  betwene  the  nature  of  th[e]inhabitantes  and  of  the  foyles  of  dyuers  Regions  all  vnder  one  clyme  or
paralelle:  as  is  to  fee  betwene  the  people  and  regions  being  in  the  firme  lande  of  Ethiope,  and  theym  of  the
Ilandes  vnder  the  fame  clime,  hauinge  the  pole  flarre  eleuate  in  the  fame  degree.  For  the  Ethiopians  are  all
blacke,  hauinge  theyr  heare  curld  more  lyke  wuUe  then  heare.  But  thefe  people  of  the  Hand  of  Ptita  (beinge
as  I  haue  fayde  vnder  the  clyme  of  Ethiope)  are  whyte,  with  longe  heare,  and  of  yelowe  colour.  Wherfore  it  is
apparente,  the  caufe  of  this  foo  greate  difference,  to  bee  rather  by  the  difpofition  of  the  earthe,  then  conflitucion
of  heauen.  For  wee  knowe,  that  fnowe  fauleth  on  the  mountaynes  of  the  Equinoctiall  or  burnte  lyne,  and  the
fame  to  endure  there  continually :  We  knowe  lykewyfe  that  th[e]inhabitantes  of  the  Regions  farre  diflante  frome
that  lyne  towarde  the  northe,  are  molefled  with  greate  heate.

f[  The  Admiral  that  he  myght  allure  the  younge  men  to  him  with  gentelnes,  fhewed  them  lokynge  glaffes,
fayre  and  brio'ht  veflelles  of  copper,  haukes  belles,  and  fuche  other  thynges  vnknowen  to  them.  But  the  more
they  were  cauled,  fo  much  the  more  they  fufpected  crafte  and  deceate,  and  fledde  backewarde.  Yet  dyd  they
with  create  admiracion  beholde  owre  men  and  theyr  thynges,  but  flyll  hauinge  their  ores  in  theyr  handes  redy
to  flye.  ^Vllen  the  Admirall  fawe  that  he  coulde  by  no  meanes  allure  them  by  gyftes,  he  thought  to  proue  what
he  coulde  do  with  muficall  inflrumentes  :  and  therefore  commaunded  that  they  which  were  in  the  greatefl  Ihippe,
fliulde  play  on  theyr  drummes  and  flialmes.  But  the  younge  men  fuppofinge  this  to  bee  a  token  of  battayle,
lefte  theyr  ores,  and  in  the  t\vyn[k]lynge  of  an  eye  hadde  put  theyr  arrowes  in  theyr  bowes  and  theyr  targettes
on  theyr  armes  :  And  thus  directinge  theyr  artowes  towarde  owre  men,  floode  in  expectacion  to  knowe  what
this  noyfe  myght  meane.  Owre  men  lykewife  preparinge  theyr  bowes  and  arrowes,  approched  toward  them  by
lyttle  and  lyttle.  But  they  departinge  from  the  Admirals  fhippe,  and  truftinge  to  the  dexteritie  of  theyr  ores
came  foo  neare  one  of  the  leffe  fhippes,  that  one  of  theym  plucked  the  cloke  from  the  gouernour  of  that  fhippe,
and  as  wel  as  they  coulde  by  fignes,  requyred  hym  to  coome  alande,  promyfinge  feyth  that  they  wolde  common
with  hym  of  peace.  But  when  they  fawe  hym  goo  to  the  Admirals  fhippe  whether  he  went  to  afke  leaue  that
he  mif^ht  common  with  them,  fufpectinge  heareby  fume  further  deceate,  they  lept  immediatly  into  the  Canoa,
and  fledde  as  fwyft  as  the  wynde.  So  that  to  conclude,  they  coulde  by  no  meanes  be  allured  to  familiaritie.
Wherfore  the  Admirall  thowght  it  not  conuenient  to  beflowe  any  longe  tyme  there,  at  this  vyage.  No  greate
fpace  frome  this  Ilande,  euer  towarde  the  wefle,  the  Admirall  faith  he  fownde  fo  owteragious  a  faule  of  water,
runninge  with  fuch  a  violence  from  the  Eafle  to  the  Wefle,  that  it  was  nothynge  inferioure  to  a  myghty  flreame
faulynge  from  hyghe  mountaynes.  He  alfo  confeffed,  that  fmce  the  fyrfl  daye  that  euer  he  knewe  what  the  fea
mente,  he  was  neuer  in  fuche  feare.  Proceadinge  yet  fumwhat  further  in  this  daungerous  vyage,  he  fownde
certeyne  goulfes  of  viii.  myles,  as  it  had  byn  the[e]nteraunce  of  fume  greate  hauen,  into  the  which,  the  fayde
violent  flreames  dyd  faule.  Thefe  goulfes  or  flreyghtes,  he  cauled  Os  Draconis,  that  is,  the  dragons  mouth.
And  the  Hand  directly  ouer  ageynfle  the  fame,  he  named  Margarita.  Owte  of  thefe  flreyghtes,  iffhewed  no
leffe  force  of  frefflie  water :  whiche  encounteringe  with  the  faulte,  dyd  flryue  to  paffe  foorth  :  Soo  that  betwene
bothe  the  waters,  was  no  fmaule  conflict.  But  enteringe  into  the  goulfe,  at  the  lengthe  he  fownde  the  water
therof  very  freffhe  and  good  to  drynke.  The  Admyrall  hym  felfe,  and  they  which  were  his  companions  in  this
v}'age,  beinge  men  of  good  credit,  and  perceauinge  my  diligence  in  fearchinge  for  thefe  matters,  towlde  me  yet
of  a  greater  thynge.  That  is,  that  for  the  fpace  of  xxvi.  leaques,  amountynge  to  a  hundreth  and  foure  myles,  he
fayled  euer  by  freflie  water :  In  fo  muche,  that  the  further  he  proceaded,  efpecially  towarde  the  wefl,  he  affirm-
eth the  water  to  bee  the  freffher.  After  this,  he  came  to  a  highe  mountayne,  inhabited  onely  with  moonkeys  or
marmafits  on  that  part  towarde  the  Eafl.  For  that  fyde  was  rowgh  with  rockye  and  flony  mountains  :  And  ther-
fore  not  inhabyted  with  men.  Yet  they  that  went  alande  to  fearche  the  countrey,  fownde  nere  vnto  the  fea,
many  fayre  fieldes  well  tylled  and  fowen  :  But  noo  people,  nor  yet  houfes  or  cotages. Parhappes  they  were

83

The  fyrfi  Decade.

89

gone  further  into  the  countrey  to  fowe  theyr  come  and  applye  theyr  hufbandry,  as  wee  often  fee  owre  hufbande
men  to  leaue  theyr  flations  and  vylages  for  the  fame  purpofe.  In  the  wefle  fyde  of  that  mountayne,  they
efpyed  a  large  playne,  whither  they  made  hafle,  and  cafl  anker  in  the  brode  ryuer.  As  foone  as  the  inhabi-
tantes  had  knowleage  that  a  flrange  nation  was  arryued  in  theyr  coafles,  they  came  flockinge  withowte  all  feare
to  fee  owre  men.  We  vnderflode  by  theyr  fygnes  and  poyntynges,  that  this  Region  was  cauled  Faria :  and
that  it  was  very  large  :  In  fo  muche  that  the  further  it  reacheth  towarde  the  welle,  to  be  fo  muche  the  better
inhabited  and  repleniihed  with  people.  The  Admiral  therfore,  takynge  into  his  (hyppe  foure  of  the  men  of
that  lande,  fearched  the  wefle  partes  of  the  fame.  By  the  temperatenes  of  the  ayer,  the  pleafauntnes  of  the
grownde,  and  the  multytude  of  people  which  they  faw  dayly  more  and  more  as  they  fayled,  they  coniectured
that  thefe  thynges  portended  fum  great  matter :  As  in  deede  their  opinion  fayled  them  not,  as  we  wyll
further  declare  in  his  place.  The  foonne  not  yet  ryfen,  but  beginninge  euen  now  to  ryfe,  beinge  one  day  allured
by  the  pleafauntnes  of  the  place  and  fweete  fauours  which  breathed  from  the  land  to  the  fhippes,  they  went
alande.  Here  they  fownde  a  greater  multytude  of  people  then  in  any  other  place.  As  owre  men  approched
towarde  them,  there  came  certeine  meffengers  from  their  Cadci,  that  is,  the  kynges  of  the  countrey,  to  defyre
the  Admirall  in  the  name  of  theyr  princes  to  coome  to  theyr  palayces  withowte  feare,  and  that  they  and  al
theyrs  fhulde  bee  at  his  commaundement.  When  the  Admirall  had  thanked  them  and  made  his  excufe  for
that  tyme,  there  came  innumerable  people  with  theyr  boates  to  the  fhippes  :  hauyng  for  the  mofl  parte  cheynes
abowte  theyr  neckes,  garlandes  on  theyr  heades,  and  brafelettes  on  theyr  armes  of  pearles  of  India  :  And  that
fo  commonlye,  that  owre  women  in  playes  and  tryumphes  haue  not  greater  plentie  of  flones  of  glaffe  and  cryflall
in  theyr  garlandes,  crownes,  gerdels,  and  fuche  other  tyrementes.  Beinge  afked  where  they  gathered  them,
they  poynted  to  the  next  fliore  by  the  fea  bankes.  They  fignified  alfo  by  certeyne  fcorneful  gieflures  which
they  made  with  theyr  mouthes  and  handes,  that  they  nothyng  efleemed  perles.  Taking  alfo  bafkettes  in  theyr
handes,  they  made  fignes  that  the  fame  might  bee  fylled  with  them  in  fhorte  fpace.  But  bycaufe  the  corne
wherwith  his  fhyppes  were  laden  to  bee  caryed  into  Hifpatiiola,  had  taken  hurt  by  reafon  of  the  falte  water,  he
determined  to  deferre  this  marte  to  a  more  conuenient  tyme.  Yet  he  fent  to  lande  two  of  the  fhippe  boates
laden  with  men,  to  th[e]intent  to  fetch  fum  garlandes  of  perles  for  exchange  of  our  thynges,  and  alfo  fumwhat
to  fearche  the  nature  of  the  Region  and  difpofition  of  the  people.  They  enterteyned  owr  men  gentelly :  and
came  flockynge  to  them  by  heapes,  as  it  hadde  byn  to  beholde  fume  flraunge  monflers.  Fyrile  there  came  to
meete  owre  men,  two  men  of  grauitie,  whome  the  multitude  folowed.  One  of  thefe  was  well  in  age,  and  the
other  but  younge.  They  thinke  it  was  the  father  with  his  foonne  whiche  fhulde  fuccede  hym.  When  the  one
had  faluted  and  embrafed  the  other,  they  browght  owre  men  into  a  certeyne  rownde  howfe,  nere  vnto  the
whiche,  was  a  greate  courte.  H  ether  were  browght  many  chayers  and  flooles  made  of  a  certeyne  blacke  woodde,
and  very  coonningely  wrowght.  After  that  owre  men,  and  theyr  Princes  were  fette,  theyr  wayting  men  came  in
laden,  fume  with  fundry  delicate  dyffhes,  and  fume  -with  wyne.  But  theyr  meate,  was  only  fruites :  and  thofe
of  dyuers  kyndes  and  vtterly  vnknowen  to  vs.  Theyr  wyne  was  both  whyte  and  redde :  not  made  of  grapes,
but  of  the  lycour  of  dyuers  fruites,  and  very  pleafaunte  in  drynkynge.  After  this  banquette  made  in  the  owlde
mans  howfe,  the  younge  man  browght  them  to  his  tabernacle  or  mancion  place,  where  was  a  greate  coompany
bothe  of  men  and  women,  but  they  floode  deceauered  the  one  from  the  other.  They  are  whyte,  euen  as  o\vre
men  are,  fauynge  fuche  as  are  much  conuerfant  in  the  fonne.  They  are  alfo  very  gentyll,  and  full  of  humanitie
towarde  flrangiers.  They  coouer  theyr  pryuie  partes  with  goffampine  cotton  A\TOwght  with  fundr}^  coloures:
and  are  befyde  all  naked.  There  was  fewe  or  none,  that  had  not  eyther  a  coUer,  a  cheyne,  or  a  brafelette  of
golde  and  pearles,  and  many  had  all.  Beinge  afked  where  they  had  that  golde,  the;  poynted  to  certeyne
mountaynes,  feemynge  with  theyr  countenaunce  to  diffuade  owre  men  from  goinge  thyther.  For  puttinge  theyr
armes  in  theyr  mouthes,  and  grynninge  as  thowgh  they  bytte  the  fame,  flylle  poyntinge  to  the  mountaynes,  they
feemed  to  infmuate  that  men  were  eaten  there :  But  whether  they  mente  by  the  Canibales,  or  wylde  beafles
owre  men  cowlde  not  well  perceaue.  They  tooke  it  excedinge  greeuouflye,  that  they  coulde  nother  vnderflande
owre  men,  nor  owre  men  them.  When  they  which  were  fente  to  lande,  were  returned  to  the  fhippes  abowte
three  of  the  clocke  at  after  noone  the  fame  daye,  bringinge  with  them  certeyne  garlandes  and  collers  of  pearles,
they  loofed  theyr  ankers  to  departe,  myndinge  to  coome  ageyne  fhortly,  when  all  thynges  were  fettc  in  good
order  in  Hifpaniola.  But  ht  was  preuented  by  an  other,  which  defeated  hym  of  the  rewarde  of  his  trauayle.
He  was  alfo  hyndered  at  this  tyme  by  reafon  of  the  fhalownes  of  the  fea  and  violent  courfe  of  the  water,  which
with  continual  toffing,  broofed  the  greatefl  fliip  as  often  as  any  great  gale  of  wynde  arofe.  To  auoyde  the
daungiours  of  fuche  flialowe  places,  and  flielfcs,  he  euer  fent  one  of  the  finaulefl  carauelles  before,  to  try  the
way  with  foundinge :  and  tlie  byggefl  fliyppes  folowed  behynde.  The  Regions  beinge  in  the  large  prouince  of
Paria  for  the  fpace  of  CCXXX.  [two  hundred  and  thirty]  myles,  are  cauled  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  Cumana,  and
Manacapana:  from  thefe  regions  diflant  three  fcore  leaques,  is  there  an  other  Region  cauled  Curiivia.  When
he  had  thus  pafTed  ouer  this  long  tract  of  fea,  fuppofmg  flyll  that  it  had  byn  an  I  lande,  and  doutinge  that  he

The  fayre  and
L-ir^e  region  of
pana.

Temperate  ayer
and  fnitful
grounde.

Swete  sauours
proceadynee
frome  the  lande.

Humayne  people.

Cheynes  and
garlandes  of  gold
and  perles

31

Baskettes  ful  of
pearles,  I  knowe
who  had  bags  fuL

Howe  the
Admirals  men
were  entertcj-ned.

Cheyers  and
stoles  of  hebcne.

Fruites  and  wj-ne.

Wyne  of  the
lycour  of  fruites.

Whyte  men  nere
the  Equinoctial

Mountaynes  are
the  matrices  of
golde.

Canibales

Shalownes  of  the
sea.

The  vse  of

careuelles  or
brigontines.

Cumana  and
M  anncapana
regions  of  the
prouince  of  Paria.
Curian?,

'ill

90

TJic  fyyjl  Decade.

A  ryuer  of
manielous  depth
and  bredth.

A  sea  of  weedes.

I.eiuiscus.

Mastix.

32

The  eleuation  of
the  pole  at  P.iria.

Note  a  secreate
as  concerning  the
pole  starre.

An  experience

A  inanieloiis
secreate.

That  the  earth  is
not  perfectly
rownde.

Paradise  is  in  the

mountaynes  of

paria.

Looke  the  ninth

booke  seconde

decade.

Paria  is  part  of
the  firine  lande  of
india

Tyme  reuealeth  al
things

Paria  more
southewarde  then
hispaniola

The  spanyardes
rebell  in  the
Admirals  absence

might  pafle  by  the  Wefle  to  the  Northe  directlye  to  Hifpaniola,  he  chaunced  into  a  ryuer  of.  xxx.  cubettes
depthe,  and  of  fuch  breadth  as  hath  not  lyghtly  byn  harde  of.  For  he  affirmeth  it  to  bee.  xxviii.  leaques.  A
lyttle  further  toward  the  Welle,  yet  fumwhat  more  fowthwarde  as  the  bending  of  the  fliore  requyred,  he  entered
into  a  fea  full  of  herbes  or  weedes.  The  feede  of  the  herbes  whiche  fwymme  on  tlie  water,  are  muche  lyke  the
berryes  of  the  tree  cauled  Laitifci/s,  which  bcareth  the  fweete  gumme  cauled  Majlix.  They  grewe  foo  thicke,
that  they  fumetyme  in  maner  flayed  the  fliippes.  The  Admirall  reported,  that  here  there  is  not  one  daye
thorowghe  owte  all  the  yeare  muche  longer  or  fliorter  then  an  other :  And  that  the  Northe  pole  is  here  eleaute
onely  fyue  degrees  as  at  Paria,  in  whofe  tracte  all  thefe  coafles  lye.  Hee  alfo  declared  certeyne  thynges  as
concerninge  the  variete  of  the  northe  pole :  The  which  becaufe  they  feeme  contrarye  to  th[e]oppinions  of  all  the
Allronomers,  I  wyll  touche  them  but  with  a  drye  foote  as  fayth  the  prouerbe.  But  it  is  wel  knowen  (moRe
noble  prince)  that  the  flarre  which  we  caule  the  pole  flarre,  or  northe  flarre,  (cauled  of  the  Italians  Tramontana)
is  not  the  very  poynte  of  the  pole  Artyke  vppon  the  whiche  the  axes  or  extremities  of  heauens  are  turned  abowte.
The  which  thynge  may  well  be  proued,  if  when  the  flarres  fyrfl  appeare,  yowe  beeholde  the  pole  flarre  throwgh
any  narowe  hole.  For  foo,  applyinge  yowre  inflrument  therto  in  the  morninge  fumwhat  before  the  day
fpringe  haue  blemyflied  theyr  lyght,  yf  then  yowe  looke  throwgh  the  fame  hole,  yowe  fliall  perceaue  it  to  bee
moued  from  the  place  where  yowe  faweit  fyrfl.  But  howe  it  commeth  to  paffe,  that  at  the  beginnynge  of  the  euenyng
twilight,  it  is  eleuate  in  that  Region  only  fyue  degrees  in  the  moneth  of  lune,  and  in  the  morninge  twylight  to
bee  eleuate.  xv.  degrees  by  the  fame  quaadrante,  I  doo  not  vnderflande.  Nor  yet  doo  the  reafons  which  he
bringeth,  in  any  poynt  fatyffye  me.  For  he  fayth,  that  he  hereby  coniectured,  that  the  earth  is  not  perfectlye
rownde:  But  that  when  it  was  created,  there  was  a  certeyne  heape  reyfed  theron,  much  hygher  then  the  other
partes  of  the  fome.  So  that  (as  he  faith)  it  is  not  rownde  after  the  forme  of  an  apple  or  a  bal  (as  other  thynke)
but  rather  lyke  a  peare  as  it  hangeth  on  the  tree :  And  that  Paria  is  the  Region  which  poffeffeth  the  fuper-
eminente  or  hyghefl  parte  thereof  nerefle  vnto  heauen.  In  foo  muche  that  he  erneflly  contendeth,  the  earthly
Paradyfe  to  bee  fituate  in  the  toppes  of  thofe  three  hylles,  which  wee  fayde  beefore,  that  the  watche  man  fawe
owte  of  the  toppe  caflell  of  the  fhippe:  And  that  the  outragious  flreames  of  the  freflie  waters  whiche  foo
violentlye  iffliewe  owte  of  the  fayde  goulfes  and  flryue  foo  with  the  falte  water,  faule  headlonge  from  the  toppes
of  the  fayde  mountaynes.  But  of  this  matter,  it  fliall  fuffice  to  haue  fayde  thus  muche.  Lette  vs  nowe  therfore
returne  to  the  hiftorye  from  which  we  haue  dygreffed.  When  he  perceaued  hym  felfe  to  bee  thus  inwrapped  in
foo  greate  a  goulfe  beyonde  his  expectacion,  foo  that  he  had  now  no  hope  to  fynde  any  paffage  towarde  the
northe  whereby  he  myght  fayle  directly  to  Hifpaniola,  he  was  enforfed  to  turne  backe  the  fame  way  by  the
which  he  came,  and  directed  his  viage  to  Hifpariiola  by  the  northe  of  that  lande  lyinge  towarde  the  Eafle.
They  which  afterwarde  fearched  this  lande  more  curiouflye,  wyll  it  to  bee  parte  of  the  continente  or  firme  lande
of  India,  and  not  of  Cuba  as  the  Admiral  fuppofed.  For  there  are  many  which  affirme  that  they  haue  fayled
rownd  abowt  Cuba.  But  whether  it  bee  fo  or  not,  or  whether  enuyinge  the  good  fortune  of  this  man,  they  feeke
occafions  of  querelinge  ageynfte  hym,  I  can  not  iudge :  But  tyme  fhall  fpeake,  which  in  tyme  appoynted,
reuealetli  both  truth  and  falfehod.  But  whether  Paria  be  Continent  or  not,  the  Admirall  dothe  not  muche
contende.  But  he  fuppofeth  it  to  bee  Continente.  He  alfo  affirmeth  that  Paria  is  more  fouthewarde  then
Hifpafiio/a,  by  eyght  hundreth  fourefcore  and  two  myles.  At  the  length  he  came  to  Hifpaniola  (to  fee  his
fouldiers  which  he  left  with  his  brethren)  the  thyrde  day  of  the  calendes  of  September:  In  the  yeare  1498.
But  (as  often  tymes  chaunceth  in  humayne  thynges,)  amonge  his  foo  many  profperous,  pleafaunte,  and  luckye
afifayres,  fortune  mengeled  fume  feedes  of  wormewoodde,  and  corrupted  his  pure  corne  with  the  malicious
weedes  of  coccle.

The  seventh  booke  of  the  fyrst  decade,
to  the  fame  Lodoiiike  Cardinall.  etc.

Hen  the  Admirall  was  nowe  coome  to  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  he  fownde  all  thynges
confounded  and  owte  of  order.  For  Poldanus  (of  whom  wee  fpake  beefore)  refufed  in  his
abfence  to  obey  his  brother,  truflinge  to  the  multitude  of  fuch  as  were  confethered  with  him.
And  not  onely  behaued  hym  felfe  proudely  ageynfl  the  Admiralles  brother  and  Lieuetenaunt
fumtyme  his  maifler,  but  alfo  fente  letters  to  his  reproche  to  the  kynge  of  Spayne,  therin
accufmge  bothe  the  brethren,  leying  heynous  matters  to  theyr  charges.  But  the  Admirall
ageyne,  fent  meffengers  to  the  kynge,  which  myght  informe  hym  of  theyr  rebellion :  Inflantly
defyringe  his  grace,  to  fende  hym  a  newe  fupplye  of  men,  wherby  he  myght  fuppreffe  theyr  licentioufnes  and

QO

The  fyrft  Decade.

91

punyflie  them  for  theyr  mifcheuous  actes.  They  accufed  the  Admirall  and  his  brother  to  bee  vniufl  men,  cruel
enemies  and  (headers  of  the  Spanyfhe  bludde :  declarynge  that  vppon  euery  lyght  occafion,  they  wolde  racke
them,  hange  them,  and  heade  them :  And  that  they  tooke  pleafure  therin.  And  that  they  departed  from  them
as  from  cruell  tyrantes  and  wylde  beafles  reioyfinge  in  bkidde,  alfo  the  kynges  enemyes.  Affyrminge  lykewyfe
that  they  well  perceaued  theyr  intente  to  bee  none  other  then  to  vfurpe  Th[e]empire  of  the  Ilandes:  whiche
thynge  (they  fayde)  they  fufpected  by  a  thoufand  coniectures.  And  efpecially  in  that  they  wolde  permitte  none
to  reforte  to  the  golde  mynes,  but  only  fuche  as  were  theyr  familiers.  The  Admirall  on  the  contrary  parte,
when  he  defyred  ayde  of  the  kynge  to  infringe  theyr  infolencie,  auouched  that  al  thofe  his  accufers,  which  had
deuifed  fuche  lyes  ageynfle  hym,  were  nowghtye  felowes,  abhominable  knaues  and  vylaynes,  theues  and  baudes,
ruffians  aduouterers  and  rauifliers  of  women,  faulfe  periured  vagabundes,  and  fuche  as  had  byn  eyther  conuict  in
pryfons,  or  fledde  for  feare  of  Judgment :  foo  efcaping  punyfhement,  but  not  leauinge  vice  wherin  they  flyll
contynued  and  browght  the  fame  with  them  to  the  Ilande,  lyuinge  there  in  lyke  maner  as  before,  in  thefte,
lechery,  and  all  kyndes  of  myfcheefe :  And  foo  gyuen  to  Idlenes  and  fleepe,  that  wheras  they  were  browght
thyther  for  myners,  labourers,  and  fcullyans,  they  wolde  not  nowe  goo  one  furlonge  from  thejT  houfes  except
they  were  borne  on  mens  backes,  lyke  vnto  them  whiche  in  owlde  tyme  were  cauled  Ediles  Cundes.  For,  to
this  office,  they  put  the  miferable  Ilande  men,  whom  they  handeled  mofle  cruelly.  For  leafle  theyr  handes
fhulde  difcontinewe  from  flieadinge  of  bludde,  and  the  better  to  trye  theyr  flrength  and  manhod,  they  vfed  nowe
and  then  for  theyr  pallyme  to  llryue  amonge  them  felues  and  proue  who  coulde  mofl  cleanely  Avith  his  fwoorde
at  one  llroke  flryke  of  the  heade  of  an  innocente.  Soo  that  he  which  coulde  with  mofle  agilitie  make  the
heade  of  one  of  thofe  poore  wretches  to  flye  quyte  and  cleane  from  the  body  to  the  grounde  at  one  flroke,  he
was  the  bed  man  and  counted  mofle  honorable.  Thefe  thynges  and  many  fuche  other,  the  one  of  them  layde
to  the  others  charge  beefore  the  kynge.  Whyle  thefe  thynges  were  doinge,  the  Admirall  fente  his  brother  the
lieuetenaunt  with  an  army  of  foure  fcore  and  tenne  footemen,  and  a  fewe  horfemen,  (with  three  thoufande  of
the  Ilande  men  which  were  mortall  enemies  to  the  Ciguauians)  to  meete  the  people  of  Cigieaiia,  \vith  Kynge
Guarionexius  theyr  graunde  capitayne,  who  had  doone  muche  myfcheefe  to  owre  men  and  fuche  as  fauoured
theyrn.  Therefore  when  the  Lieuetenaunt  had  conducted  his  army  to  the  bankes  of  a  certeyne  greate  ryuer
runnynge  by  the  playne  which  we  fayd  before  to  lye  betwene  the  corners  of  the  mountaynes  of  Ciguaua  and
the  fea,  he  fownde  two  fcoutes  of  his  enemyes  lurkinge  in  certeyne  bufflies :  wherof  the  one,  caflynge  hym  felfe
head  longe  into  the  fea,  efcaped:  and  by  the  mouthe  of  the  ryuer  fwamme  ouer  to  his  coompanyons.  The  other
beinge  taken,  declared  that  in  the  woodde  on  the  other  fide  the  ryuer,  there  lay  in  campe  fyxe  thoufande
Cyguauians  redy,  vnwares  to  affayle  owre  men  paffynge  bye.  Wherfore  the  Lieuetenaunte  fyndyng  a  fhalowe
place  where  he  myght  paffe  ouer,  he  with  his  hole  army  entered  into  the  ryuer.  The  which  thyng  when  the
Ciguauians  had  efpyed,  they  came  runnynge  owte  of  the  wooddes  with  a  terrible  crye  and  mofte  horrible  afpect,
much  lyke  vnto  the  people  cauled  Agathyrfi  of  whom  the  poete  virgile  fpeaketh.  For  they  were  all  paynted
and  fpotted  with  fundr)'  coloures,  and  efpeciall  with  blacke  and  redde  whiche  they  make  of  certeyne  fruites
nooryflied  for  the  fame  purpofe  in  theyr  gardens,  with  the  ioyce  wherof  they  paynt  them  felues  from  the  for-
heade,  euen  to  the  knees :  hauing  theyr  heare  (whiche  by  arte  they  make  longe  and  blacke  if  nature  deny  it
them)  wrethed  and  rowled  after  a  thoufande  faffhions.  A  man  wold  thinke  them  to  bee  deuylles  incarnate  newly
broke  owte  of  hell,  they  are  foo  lyke  vnto  helhoundes.  As  owre  men  waded  ouer  the  ryuer,  they  fhotte  at
them  and  hurled  dartes  foo  thicke,  that  it  almofle  tooke  the  lyght  of  the  fonne  from  owre  men.  In  fo  much
that  if  they  had  not  borne  of  the  force  therof  with  theyr  targettes,  the  matter  hadde  gonne  wTonge  with  them.
Yet  at  the  length,  many  beinge  wounded,  they  paffed  ouer  the  ryuer,  which  thynge  when  .Mie  enemies  fawe,  they
fledde :  v/home  owre  men  perfuinge,  flewe  fume  in  the  chafe :  but  not  many,  by  reafon  of  theyr  fwyftenes  of
foote.  Thus  beinge  in  the  wooddes,  they  fhotte  at  owre  men  more  fafely.  For  they  being  accuflomed  to  the
wooddes  and  naked  without  any  lette,  paffed  throwgh  the  buffhes  and  flirubbes  as  it  had  byn  Avylde  bores  or
hartes :  wheras  owre  men  were  hyndered  by  reafon  of  theyr  apparell,  targettes,  longe  iauelens,  and  ignorance  of
the  place.  Wherfore,  when  he  had  refled  there  all  that  nyght  in  vayne,  and  the  daye  folowynge  fawe  none
(leringe  in  the  wooddes,  he  went  (by  the  councel  and  conducte  of  the  other  Ilande  men  which  were  in  his
armye)  immediatly  from  thenfe,  to  the  montaynes  in  the  which  king  Maiobanexius  had  his  cheefe  manfion
place  in  the  vylage  cauled  Capronum,  by  the  which  name  alfo,  the  kynges  palaice  was  cauled,  beinge  in  the
fame  vylage.  Thus  marchinge  forwarde  with  his  army,  abowte  twelue  myle  of,  he  encamped  in  the  vylage  of
an  other  kynge,  which  th[e]inhabitantes  had  forfaken  for  feare  of  owre  men.  Yet  makynge  dyligent  fearch,
they  fownde  two,  by  whom  they  had  knowleage  that  there  was  tenne  k}'nges  with  Maiobanexius  in  his  palaice
of  Capronum,  Avith  an  army  of  eight  thoufand  Ciguauians.  At  the  Lieuetenantes  fyrfl.  approche,  he  durfl  not
gyue  them  battayle  vntyll  he  had  fumwhat  better  fearched  the  Region :  Yet  did  he  in  the  meane  tyme  fkymiyffhe
with  them  twyfe.  The  nexte  nyght  abowte  mydnyght,  he  fent  furth  fcoutes,  and  with  them  guydes  of  the  Ilande
men  which  knewe  the  countrey. Whom  the  Ciguauians  efpyenge  from  the  mountaynes,  prepared  them  felues

33

The  Spanyarde*
accuse  the
AdmiralL

The  Admirales
answcre.

In5wlencie  and
idelnes  of  libertie.

These  had  the
custodies  of  the
temples.

A  cruel  and

deuelyshe

pastyme.

Kynge
Guarionexius  is
capitaine  of.  vi.
thousand
Ciguauians.

Picti  Aga  thyrsi.
Naked  men
painted  with  the
loyce  of  certen
fruites.

Hesre  made  long
and  black  by  arte.

The  vse  of

targettes.

The  Cigtiauians

are  dryuen  to

flyght.

34

Kynge
Maiobanexius.

An  army  of  viiL

thousand

Ciguauians.

91

92

The  fyyjl  Decade,

A  Larome.

The  Cigii.iui.ins
put  to  flyght
ageine

The  Lieuctenaunt
his  amKissiige
to  kynge
Maiobane.\ius.

Kynge
Guanonexius.

Maiobanexius  his
answere.

Natural  hatred
of  vyce.

The
Lieueten.iuntes
gentelnes  toward
maiobanexius

35

A  rare  faythfulnes
in  a  b.arbarous
kynge.

The
Lieuetenauntes
messengers  are
slayne.

Al  the  kirges  are
dryuen  to  flyght.

to  the  battayle  with  a  terrible  crye  or  alarome  after  their  maner:  but  yet  durfl  not  coome  owte  of  the  wooddes,
fuppofing  that  the  Lieuetenaunt  with  his  mayne  army  had  byn  euen  at  hande.  The  day  folowynge,  when  he
brought  his  army  to  the  place  where  they  encamped,  leajiing  owt  of  the  wooddes,  they  twyfe  attempted  the
fortune  of  warre,  fiercely  aflayling  owre  men  with  a  mayne  force,  and  woundinge  manye  before  they  coulde
coouer  them  with  theyr  targettes.  Yet  owre  men  put  them  to  flyght,  flewe  many,  and  tooke  many.  The
refydewe  fledde  to  the  wooddes,  where  they  kept  them  flyll  as  in  their  mofle  fafe  houlde.  Of  them  which  were
taken,  he  fent  one,  and  wyth  hym  an  other  of  the  Ilande  men  which  was  of  his  parte  to  Maiobanexius  with
commaundement  in  this  effect.  The  Lieuetenaunt  brought  not  hether  his  army  (O  Maiobanexius)  to  kepe
warre  eyther  ageynfl  yowe  or  yowre  people :  For  he  greately  defyreth  yowre  frendefliippe.  But  his  entent  is,
that  Guarionexius  who  hath  perfuaded  yowe  to  bee  his  ayde  ageynfle  hym  to  the  greate  deftruction  of  yowre
people  and  vndoynge  of  yowre  countrey,  may  haue  dewe  correction  afwell  for  his  difobedience  towarde  him,  as
alfo  for  rayfmg  tumultes  amonge  the  people.  Wherfore,  he  requyreth  yowe  and  exorteth  yowe,  to  delyuer
Guarionexius  into  his  handes.  The  w^hich  thynge  yf  yowe  fliall  performe,  the  Admirall  his  brother  wyll  not
only  gladly  admitte  yowe  to  his  frcndefliyppe,  but  alfo  enlarge  and  defende  yowre  dominion.  And  if  herein
yowe  refufe  to  accomplyfflie  his  requefle,  it  wyll  folowe,  that  yowe  fliall  fliortelye  repent  yowe  therof  For
yowre  kyngedome  fhall  be  wafl.ed  with  fwoorde  and  fyer,  and  yowe  fliall  abyde  the  fortune  of  warre  wherof
yowe  haue  had  experience  with  fauour,  as  you  fliall  further  know  here  after  to  yowre  payne,  yf  with  fl.obernes
yowe  prouoke  hym  to  fliewe  the  vttermofl.e  of  his  poure.  When  the  meffenger  had  thus  doone  his  errante,
Maiobanexius  anfwered,  that  Guarionexius  was  a  good  man,  indued  with  many  vertues  as  all  men  knewe :  And
therfore  he  thought  hym  worthy  his  ayde :  efpecially  in  as  muche  as  he  fledde  to  hym  for  fuccoure,  and  that  he
had  made  him  fuch  promeffe,  whom  alfo  he  had  proued  to  bee  his  faithfull  frende.  Ageyne,  that  they  were
nawghty  men,  violent  and  cruell,  defyringe  other  mens  gooddes,  and  fuche  as  fpared  not  to  flieede  innocentes
bludde :  In  fyne,  that  he  wolde  not  haue  to  doo  with  fuche  myfcheuous  men,  nor  yet  enter  into  frendefliippe
w'ith  them.  When  thefe  thynges  came  to  the  Lieuetenauntes  eare,  he  commaunded  the  vylage  to  be  burnte
where  he  hym  felfe  encamped,  Avith  many  other  vylages  there  abowte.  And  when  he  drewe  nere  to  the  place
where  Maiobanexius  lay,  he  fent  meffengers  to  him  ageyne,  to  common  the  matter  with  hym,  and  to  wyll  hym,
to  fende  fume  one  of  his  mofle  feythful  frendes  to  entreate  with  hym  of  peace.  Where  vppon  the  kynge  fent
vnto  hym  one  of  his  cheefe  gentelmen,  and  with  hym  two  other  to  wayte  on  hym.  When  he  came  to  the
Lieuetenauntes  prefence,  he  frendly  requyred  hym  to  perfuade  his  lord  and  mafter  in  his  name,  and  ernellly
to  admonyfflie  hym,  not  to  fuffer  his  floryfliinge  kyngedome  to  bee  fpoyled,  or  hym  felfe  to  abyde  the  hafarde
of  warre  for  Guarionexius  fake :  And  further  to  exhorte  hym  to  delyuer  hym,  excepte  he  wolde  procure  the
deflruction  bothe  of  hym  felfe,  his  people,  and  his  countrey.  When  the  meffenger  was  returned,  Maiobanexius
affembled  the  people,  declaring  vnto  them  what  was  doone,  but  they  cried  owte  on  hym  to  delyuer  Guarionexius:
And  beganne  to  curfe  the  daye  that  euer  they  had  receaued  hym,  thus  to  diflurbe  theyr  quietnes.  Maiobanexius
anfwered  them,  that  Guarionexius  was  a  good  man,  and  had  well  deferued  of  him,  giuinge  h)mi  many  princely
prefentes :  And  had  alfo  tawght  both  his  wyfe  and  hym  to  fynge  and  daunce,  whiche  thynge  he  dyd  not  lyttle
efl-eeme.  And  w^as  therfore  fully  refolued  in  no  cafe  to  forfake  hym,  or  ageynfle  all  humanitie  to  betraye  his
frende  whiche  fledde  to  hym  for  fuccoure :  but  rather  to  abyde  al  extremities  with  him,  then  to  minifler  occaflon
of  obloquye  to  flaunderes  to  reporte  that  he  had  betrayed  his  gefle  whom  he  tooke  into  his  houfe  with  warran-
ties. Thus  difmiffmge  the  people  fighinge  and  with  forowfull  hartes,  he  cauled  Guarionexius  before  hym,
promyflnge  hym  ageyne,  that  he  wolde  bee  partaker  of  his  fortune  whyle  lyfe  lafl.ed.  In  fo  muche  that  he
thowght  it  not  befle  to  fende  any  further  woorde  to  the  Lieuetenaunt :  but  appoynted  hym  whome  before  he
fent  to  hym,  to  keepe  the  way  with  a  garryfon  of  men,  to  th[e]intent  that  if  any  meffengers  fliulde  be  fent  from
the  Lieuetenaunt,  to  fleye  them  by  the  way,  and  admitte  none  to  communication  or  further  entretie  of  peace.
In  the  meane  tyme,  the  Lieuetenaunt  fent  twoo,  wherof  the  one  was  a  captiue  Ciguauian,  and  the  other  an
Ilande  man  of  them  which  were  frendes  to  owre  men :  They  were  bothe  taken  and  flayne.  The  Lieuetenaunt
folowed  them  onely  with  ten  footemen  and  foure  horfemen.  Fyndinge  his  meffengers  deade  in  the  waye,  he
was  further  prouoked  to  wrathe,  and  determyned  more  extremely  to  deale  with  Maiobanexius.  And  therefore
wente  forwarde  incontinently  with  his  hole  army  to  his  cheefe  palaice  of  Capronum  where  he  yet  laye  in  campe.
At  his  approche,  all  the  kynges  fledde,  euery  man  his  way,  and  forfooke  theyr  capitayne  Maiobanexius:  who
alfo  with  all  his  famelye,  fledde  to  the  rowgh  mountaynes.  Sum  of  the  Ciguauians,  fowght  for  Guarionexius  to
fley  hym,  for  that  he  was  the  caufe  of  all  thefe  troubles.  But  his  feete  faued  his  lyfe.  For  he  fledde  in  tyme
to  the  mountaynes  where  he  lurked  in  maner  alone  amonge  the  defolate  rockes.

Whereas  nowe  the  Lieuetenauntes  fouldiers  w^ere  forweryed  with  longe  warre,  with  watchinge,  laboure,
and  hunger,  (for  it  was  nowe  three  moonethes  fence  the  warres  beganne)  many  defyred  leaue  to  departe  to
the  towre  of  Conception,  where  they  had  graneges  and  exercifed  tyllage.  He  gaue  them  theyr  paffeportes
\vith  alowance  of  vytayles,  foo  that  only  thyrtie  remayned  with  hym. Thefe  three  moonethes  warre,  they

9*

The  fyrft  Decade.

93

contynued  very  paynefuU  and  myferablye :  Soo  that  duryng  al  that  tyme,  they  had  none  other  meate  but  only
Cazibi'.  that  is,  fuche  rootes  whereof  they  make  theyr  breade,  and  that  but  fyldome  to  theyr  fyll:  Alfo  Vfias,
that  is,  lyttle  beafles  lyke  Conyes,  if  by  chaunce  now  and  then,  they  tooke  fume  with  theyr  houndes.  Their
drinke  was  none  other  then  water,  fuch  as  they  fownde,  fumtyme  fweete,  and  fumtyme  muddy  faueringe  of  the
maryffhes.  Emonge  thefe  delicates,  that  lyttle  fleepe  that  they  had,  was  euer  for  the  mofle  parte  abrode  vnder
the  firmamente:  And  that  not  without  watchemen,  and  in  contynual  remoouinge  as  the  nature  of  warre
requyreth.  With  thefe  fewe  therfore,  the  Lieuetenaunt  determined  tu  fearche  the  mountaynes,  dennes,  and
caues,  if  he  coulde  in  any  place  fynde  the  fleppes  of  Maiobanexius  or  Guarionexius.  In  the  meane  tyme  certeyne
of  his  menne  (whom  hunger  enforced  to  goo  a  huntinge  to  proue  if  they  coulde  take  any  conies)  chaunced
vppon  twoo  of  Maiobanexius  familyers,  whiche  were  fent  to  certeyne  vylages  of  his,  to  make  prouifion  of  breade.
Thefe  he  enforced  to  declare  where  theyr  lord  lay  hydde.  And  vfed  the  fame  alfo  for  guides  to  bnnge  oavtc
men  to  the  place.  Twelue  of  owre  men  tooke  this  enterpryfe  in  hand,  painting  them  felues  after  the  maner  of
the  Ciguauians.  Soo  that  by  this  ftratageme  or  policie,  they  came  fodenly  vppon  Maiobanexius,  and  tooke
hym  prifoner  with  his  wyfe,  children,  and  familie,  and  conueighed  them  to  the  towTe  of  Conception  to  the
Lieuetenaunt.  Within  a  fewe  dayes  after,  hunger  compelled  Guarionexius  to  coome  owte  of  the  dennes :
whome,  certeine  of  the  people  fearinge  the  Lieuetenaunt,  bewrayde  to  owre  hunters.  The  Lieuetenaunt  beinge
certified  hereof,  fent  furthe  a  bande  of  foote  men,  commaunding  them  to  lye  in  ambufhe  vntyll  fuche  tyme  as
Guarionexius  wente  from  the  playnes  to  the  mountaynes,  and  then  foodenly  to  intrappe  hym.  They  went  as
they  were  commaunded,  tooke  hym,  and  browght  hym  awaye  with  them.  And  by  this  meanes  were
all  the  Regions  nere  abowte,  pacified  and  quyeted.  A  certeyne  noble  woman  of  nere  kynred  to
Maiobanexius,  and  wyfe  to  an  other  kynge  whofe  dominion  was  yet  vntouched,  folowed  hym  in  al  thefe
aduerfities.  They  afiirme  this  woman  to  bee  the  fapefl  and  mofle  bewetifuU  that  euer  nature  browght  foorthe
in  the  Ilande.  Whom,  when  the  kynge  her  hufbande  who  looued  her  mofle  ardently  (as  her  bewetie  deferued)
harde  faye  that  fhee  was  taken  prifoner  he  wandered  vppe  and  downe  the  defertes  lyke  a  man  owte  of  his
wytte,  not  knowinge  what  to  doo  or  faye.  But  at  the  lengthe,  he  came  to  the  Lieuetenaunte,  promyfinge  mofle
faythfuUy  that  he  wold  fubmitte  hym  felfe  and  all  that  he  coulde  make,  vnder  his  poure,  foo  that  he  wolde
reflore  hym  his  wyfe.  The  Lieuetenant  accepted  the  condition  and  reflored  him  his  wife,  with  certeyne  other
rulers  and  gentelmen  which  he  had  taken  prifoners  before  :  Charginge  them,  and  byndinge  them  with  an  othe,
to  bee  euer  redye  at  his  commaundement.  Shortly  after,  this  kynge,  of  his  owne  free  motion,  came  age}Tie  to
the  Lieuetenaunt,  bringyng  with  hym  fyue  thoufande  men  without  weapons,  fauynge  onely  fuche  inflrumentes
as  they  vfe  in  tyllage  of  theyr  grownde.  He  brought  with  hym  alfo,  feedes  to  fowe  :  wherwith  at  his  owne
charge,  he  caufed  fuche  plentie  of  theyr  come  and  fruites  to  growe  in  fundry  places  of  the  large  vale  whereof
wee  fpake  before,  that  fhortely  after,  were  feene  manye  fayre  and  fruitefuU  fieldes  that  came  therof  And  for
his  gentelnes  beinge  rewarded  of  the  Lieuetenaunte  with  certeyne  of  owre  thynges,  he  departed  ioyfully.  When
the  report  hereof  came  to  the  Ciguauians,  it  mooued  the  myndes  of  the  kynges  to  hope  of  clemencie.  WTiere
vppon  they  came  togyther  to  the  Lieuetenaunt  with  humble  fubmiffion  and  faythful  promeffe  euer  after  to  bee
vnder  his  obedience  :  defyring  hym  to  reflore  vnto  them  theyr  kynge,  with  his  famylie.  At  theyr  requefle,  the
kynges  wyfe  and  his  houfeholde  was  fette  at  Libertie,  but  he  kepte  flyll  as  a  prifoner.  Thefe  thynges  dyd  the
Lieuetenaunt  in  the  Ilande,  not  yet  knowinge  what  his  aduerfaries  and  accufers  had  layde  to  his  charge  before
the  kynge  of  Spayne :  who  beinge  difquyeted  with  theyr  querelinges  and  accufacions,  and  efpecially  for  that  by
reafon  of  theyr  difcention,  of  foo  greate  abundaunce  of  golde  and  other  thynges,  there  was  as  yet  but  lyttle
browght  into  Spayne,  appointed  a  newe  gouernour  which  fhuld  fee  a  redreffe  in  thefe  thinges  :  And  eyther  to
punyfhe  fuche  as  were  fautie,  or  elles  to  fende  them  to  hym.  What  was  fownde  ageynfle  the  Admirall  and  his
brother,  or  age)aifl  his  aduerfaries  whiche  accufed  hym,  I  doo  not  wel  knowe.  But  this  I  am  fure  of,  that  both
the  brethrene  are  taken,  browght,  and  cafl  in  prifon,  with  their  goodes  confifcate.  But  as  foone  as  the  kynge
vnderfloode  that  they  were  browght  bounde  to  Cales,  he  fent  meffengers  in  pofle,  with  commaundemente  that
they  fhulde  bee  loofed  and  coome  freely  to  his  prefence :  wherby  he  declared  that  he  tooke  the}T  troubles
greeuouflye.  It  is  alfo  fayde,  that  the  newe  gouemoure  fent  letters  to  the  kynge,  wrytten  with  the  Admiralles
hande  in  flraunge  and  vnknowen  fypheringes,  to  his  brother  the  Lieuetenaunt  beinge  abfente,  \vyllynge  hym  to
bee  in  a  redynes  with  a  poure  of  armed  men  to  coome  and  ayde  hym  if  the  Gouemoure  fhulde  profer  hym  any
violence.  Wherof  the  gouernour  hauinge  knowleage  (as  he  faythe)  beinge  alfo  aduertifed  that  the  Leauetenaunt
was  gonne  to  his  brother  before  the  men  which  he  had  prepared  were  in  a  redines,  apprehended  them  bothe
vnwares,  before  the  multitude  came  togyther.  What  wyl  folowe,  tyme,  the  mofle  trewe  and  prudent  ludge,  \\y\\
declare. Thus  fare  ye  well.

The  Spanyardes
are  pemful  in  the

A  de<T)erate
aduenture  with

A  polic[i]e.

Kynge

Maiobanexius
is  taken.

Guarionexius  is
taken.

36

A  Bewtifull
woman.

A  kynge  sendeth
(he  lieuetenaunt
fyue  thousand  men
to  tyll  the  grownde.

The  kj-nges  submit
t)iemselues  to  the
Lieuetenaunt

A  newe  gouernour
of  the  ilande.

An  vnwoorthy
rewarde  ft  r  soo
greate  paynes.

93

94

The  fyrji  Decade.

The  Ocean  sea

heretofore

vnlcnowen.

Shipmasters  vnder
the  Admiral.

Thr  fiftf.  portion
dewe  to  the  kynge.

37

The  nauvgation  of
Petrus  Alphonsus.

Paria.

Cumatia.

Manacapana.

Curiana,

Perles  for  tryfels.

Great  plentie  of
pemlei
Humayne  people.

Shel  fyshes  :n
which  perles  are
engendred.
Beastes  and
foules.

Hunters  and
archers.

Theyr  maner  of
bargening

The  vse  of  pynncs.

Haukes  bels  in
great  estimation.

Roringe  of  wyld
beastes

C  The eygiith booke  of  the fyrste Decade,

to  Cardiiiall  Lodoitike.

He  greate,  ryche,  and  plentifull  Ocean  fea,  heretofore  vnknowen,  and  nowe  fownde  by  Chrijlo-
phorjis  Colomis  the  Admyrall,  by  th[e]autoritie  and  furtherance  of  the  Catholyke  kynge,  I
haue  prefented  vnto  yowre  honoure  (ryght  noble  Prince)  lyke  a  golden  cheyne  vnwoorkmanly
wrought.  But  yowe  fliall  nowe  receaue  a  precious  iewell  to  bee  appendaunt  therto.  Therfore
emonge  fuche  as  were  pylottes  or  gouernoures  vnder  the  Admyrall,  and  had  dylygently
marked  the  courfes  and  differences  of  the  wyndes,  many  had  licences  graunted  them  of  the
kynge  to  feeke  further  of  theyr  owne  charges,  vppon  condicion  to  pay  hym  faithfully  his
portion,  which  is  the  fyft  parte.  But  bycaufe  emonge  all  other,  one  Pdrus  Alphonfus  (cauled  Nignus  by  his
furname)  faylcd  towarde  the  Southe  with  more  profperous  fortune  then  any  of  the  other,  I  thinke  it  befl  firft  to
fpeake  fumwhat  of  his  vyage.  He  therfore,  with  only  one  fliippe,  well  furnyflied  at  his  owne  charges,  after  that
he  had  his  paffeporte  with  commaundement  in  no  cafe  to  cafle  anker  pafle  fyftie  leaques  diflante  from  any
place  where  the  Admyrall  hadde  touched,  fayled  fyrfle  to  Paria  where  the  Admyrall  fownde  bothe  the  men  and
women  foo  laden  with  cheynes,  garlandes,  and  brafelettes  of  pearles,  as  wee  haue  fayde  before.  Coaflynge
therfore  alonge  by  the  fame  fliore  accordinge  to  the  kynges  commaundement,  (yet  leauinge  behynde  hym  the
Regions  of  Cuina?ia  and  Manacapand)  he  came  to  the  Region  which  th[e]inhabitantes  thereof,  caule  Curiana :
where  he  fo>Mid  a  hauen  (as  he  faythe)  muche  lyke  the  porte  of  Gades  or  Cales.  In  to  the  which  enteringe,  he
fawe  a  farre  of  certeyne  howfes  on  the  fhore,  and  perceaued  when  he  drewe  nere,  that  it  was  a  vylage  of  onely
eyght  howfes.  Proceadynge  yet  further  for  the  fpace  of  three  myles,  he  efpyed  an  other  vylage  well  replenyfhed
with  people,  where  there  met  hym  fyftie  naked  men  on  a  coompany  hauinge  with  them  a  certeyne  ruler,  who
defyred  Alphonfus  to  coome  to  theyr  coafles.  He  browght  with  hym  at  this  tyme,  many  haukes  belles,  pynnes,
nedels,  brafelettes,  cheynes,  garlandes,  and  rynges  with  counterfet  flones  and  glaffes,  and  fuch  other  tryfelles,
the  which  ^\^thin  the  momente  of  an  houre,  he  hadde  exchaunged  for.  xv.  vnces  of  theyr  pearles  which  they
wore  abowte  theyr  neckes  and  armes.  Then  they  yet  more  erneflly  defyred  him  to  fayle  to  theyr  coafles :
Promyfynge  hym  that  he  fliulde  there  haue  as  many  pearles  as  he  wolde  defyre.  He  conde[f  ]cended  to  their
requefle :  And  the  daye  folowynge,  came  to  the  place  where  they  appoynted  hym :  Lyinge  there  at  anker,  a
great  multytude  of  people  reforted  to  hym,  inflantely  requyringe  hym  to  coome  alande.  But  when  he  confydered
the  innumerable  multytude  of  people  which  was  there  affembled,  and  that  he  had  only,  xxxiii.  men  in  his  coom-
pany, he  durfle  not  commyt  hym  felfe  to  theyr  handes,  but  gaue  them  to  vnderfland  by  fignes  and  tokens  that
they  fhulde  coome  to  the  fhyppe  with  theyr  canoas.  For  theyr  boates  (which  the  men  of  the  Hand  caule
Caiioas)  are  made  only  of  one  hole  peece  of  woodde  as  in  the  Handes :  yet  more  rude,  and  not  foo  artificially
as  theyrs  are.  Thefe  they  caule  GallUas :  They  fwarmed  therefore  to  the  fhyp  as  fafte  as  they  myght,  brynginge
with  them  great  plentie  of  pearles  (which  they  caule  Tenoras)  exchaunginge  the  fame  for  owre  marchaundies.
He  fownde  this  people  to  bee  of  gentyl  nature,  fimple  and  innocente,  beinge  conuerfant  with  them  in  theyr
houfes,  for  the  fpace  of.  xx.  dayes.  Theyr  houfes  are  made  of  woodde,  coouered  with  the  leaues  of  date  trees.
Theyr  meate  for  the  mofle  parte,  is  the  fhelfyffhes  in  the  whiche  pearles  are  engendred,  wherof  theyr  fea  coafles
are  ful.  They  haue  alfo  greate  plentie  of  wylde  beafles,  as  hartes,  wylde  bores,  and  coonys  lyke  vnto  hares,
both  in  colour  and  byggenes.  Stocke  doues  alfo,  and  turtle  doues.  Lykewyfe  geefe  and  duckes  which  they
nooryfhe  in  theyr  houfes  as  wee  doo.  Peacockes  flye  abowte  in  maner  in  euerye  woodde  and  groue :  but  they
are  not  diflinct  with  fundry  coloures  as  ours  are :  for  the  cockes  are  lyke  vnto  the  hennes.  Thefe  people  of
Curiajia,  are  craftie  hunters  and  exceding  cunning  archers,  foo  that  they  wyll  not  lyghtly  myffe  any  beafl  or
byrde  that  they  fhoote  at.  Owre  men  confumed  certeyne  dayes  here  very  plefauntely.  Durynge  which  tyme,
who  foo  euer  brought  them  a  peacocke,  had  for  the  fame,  foure  pynnes.  He  that  brought  a  pheafaunt,  had
twoo:  And  for  a  flocke  done  or  turtle  dout,  one:  And  for  a  goofe,  a  fmaul  lookyng  glaffe  or  a  lyttle  flone  of
glafTe.  Thus  they  bought  and  foulde  with  proferynge  and  byddynge,  denyinge  and  refufinge  as  it  had  byn  in
a  greate  market.  When  pynnes  were  profered  them,  they  afked  what  they  fhulde  doo  with  them,  beinge  naked.
But  owre  men  fatiffied  them  with  a  craftie  anfwere,  declaring  by  tokens  that  they  were  very  neceffary  to  picke
theyr  teeth  and  to  pul  thornes  owte  of  theyr  fieffhe.  But  aboue  al  thynges  haukes  belles  were  mofl  efleemed
amonge  them,  for  theyr  founde  and  faire  coloure :  And  wolde  therfore  gyue  much  for  one  of  them.  0\vre  men
lodginge  in  theyr  houfes,  harde  in  the  nyght  feafon  horryble  noyfes  and  rorynges  of  wylde  beafles  in  the
wooddes  whicli  are  full  of  exceadinge  greate  and  hygh  trees  of  fundry  kyndes. But  the  beaftes  of  thefe

94

The  fyrjl  Decade.

95

wooddes,  are  not  noyfome  to  men.  For  the  people  of  the  countrey  goo  dayly  a  hunting,  naked,  with  theyr
bowes  and  arrowes :  Yet  hath  it  not  byn  harde  of,  that  any  man  hath  byn  flayne  of  any  \vylde  beafle.  As  many
hartes  or  \vylde  bores  as  owre  men  woolde  defyre  them  to  brynge,  they  woolde  kyll  in  the  wooddes  with  their
bowes  and  arrowes,  and  not  fayle  to  brynge  theim.  They  lacke  kyne,  goates,  and  fhcepe.  Theyr  breade  is
made  of  rootes,  as  is  theyrs  of  the  Ilandes.  This  nation,  hath  blacke  heare,  groffe  and  fumwhat  curlde,  yet
longe  alfo.  They  keepe  theyr  teeth  very  whyte :  And  for  that  purpofe  vfe  to  cary  a  certeine  herbe  betwene
theyr  lyppes  for  the  mofl  parte  of  the  day,  and  to  waffhe  theyr  mouthes  when  they  cad  it  away.  The  women
doo  all  theyr  bufynes  at  home  in  theyr  howfes,  and  haue  alfo  the  cure  of  tyllage  of  the  grounde.  But  the  men
apply  them  felues  to  the  warres  and  huntynge,  to  playe,  fmgynge  and  daunfmg.  They  haue  fundry  kyndes  of
water  pottes,  iugges,  and  drinckinge  cuppes  made  of  earthe  in  other  places  abowt  theym  and  brought  thether
for  exchaunge  of  other  thynges:  For  they  vfe  fayres  and  markettes  for  the  fame  purpofe:  and  are  gretly
defyrous  of  fuch  thynges,  as  are  not  brought  forth  or  made  in  theyr  countrey,  as  nature  hath  gyuen  a  difpofition
to  al  men  to  defyre  and  bee  delyted  with  newe  and  flrange  thynges.  Many  of  them,  had  hangynge  at  theyr
pearles,  the  Images  of  certeine  beafles  and  birdes  very  artificioufly  made  of  golde,  but  not  pure.  Thefe  alfo
are  brought  them  from  other  places  for  exchange  of  other  thynges.  The  golde  wherof  they  are  made,  is  natiue,
and  of  much  lyke  finenes  to  that  wherof  the  florenes  are  coyned.  The  men  of  this  countrey,  inclofe  thejT
priuie  members  in  a  gourde,  cutte  after  the  fafhion  of  a  coddepiece :  or  els,  coouer  the  fame  with  the  fhelle  of
a  tortoyfe,  tyed  abowte  theyr  loynes  with  laces  of  goffampine  cotton.  In  other  places  of  that  tract,  they  thrull
the  fynew  within  the  Iheethe  therof,  and  bynde  the  fkinne  fall  with  a  flringe.  The  greate  ^vylde  beafles  wherof
wee  fpake  before,  and  many  other  thynges  whiche  are  not  founde  in  any  of  the  Ilandes,  teflitie  that  this  region
is  part  of  the  continent  or  firme  land.  But  the  chiefeft  coniecture  wherby  they  argue  the  fame,  is,  that  by  the
coafles  of  that  lande,  from  Paria  towarde  the  welle,  they  fayled  aboute  three  thoufande  myles,  fyndynge  no
figne  or  token  of  any  ende.  Thefe  people  of  Curiana  (whiche  fum  caule  Curtana)  beinge  demaunded  where
they  hadde  fuche  plentie  of  golde,  fignified  that  it  was  brought  them  from  a  Region  cauled  Canchida  or  Caiichieta,
being  diflant  from  them  fyxe  foonnes,  that  is,  fyxe  dayes  ioumey  weflwarde :  And  that  theyr  Images  of  goulde,
were  made  in  the  fame  Region.  Where  vppon  owre  men  directed  theyr  vyage  thyther  immediatly :  and
arryued  there  at  the  calendes  of  Nouember,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifl  a  thoufande  and  fyue  hundreth.  The  people
of  the  countrey  reforted  to  them  withoute  feare,  bryngynge  with  them  of  the  golde  which  we  fayde  to  bee.natyue
in  that  Region.  This  people  had  alfo  collers  of  pearles  abowte  theyr  neckes,  whiche  were  brought  them  frome
Curiana  for  exchange  of  theyr  marchandies.  None  of  them  wolde  exchaunge  any  of  thofe  thinges  which  they
had  owte  of  other  countreys :  as  nother  the  Curians  golde,  nor  the  Canchietans  pearles.  Yet  amonge  the
Canchietans,  they  fownde  but  little  gold  redy  gathered.  They  toke  with  them  from  thenfe,  certen  very  fayre
marmafets  or  munkeys,  and  many  popingayes  of  fundry  coloures.  In  the  monethe  of  Nouember,  the  ayer  was
there  moil  temperate,  and  nothyng  coulde.  The  guardens  of  the  north  pole,  were  owte  of  fyght  to  bothe  thefe
people,  they  are  foo  nere  to  the  Equinoctiall.  Of  the  degress  of  the  pole,  they  can  gyue  none  other  accoumpte.
Thefe  people,  are  wel  difpofed  men,  of  honefl  condicions,  and  nothinge  fufpicious.  For  all  mofl  all  the  nyght
longe,  they  reforted  to  the  fhippe  with  theyr  boates,  and  went  aboorde  fhip  withowte  feare,  as  dyd  the  Curians.
They  caule  pearles,  Corixas.  They  are  fumwhat  ielyous.  For,  when  any  flraungers  coome  emonge  them,
they  euer  place  theyr  women  behynd  them.  In  this  Region  of  Canchieta,  the  goffampine  trees  growe  of  them
felues  commonly  in  many  places,  as  doo  with  vs  elmes,  wyllowes,  and  falowes.  And  therfore  they  vfe  to  make
breeches  of  cotton,  wherwith  they  coouer  theyr  pryuie  partes  in  many  other  Regions  there  aboute.  "When
they  had  yet  fayled  on  forwarde  by  the  fame  coafles,  there  came  foorth  ageynfle  them  abowte  twoo  thoufande
men,  armed  after  theyr  maner,  forbydding  them  to  coome  aland.  Thefe  people  were  foo  rude  and  faluage,
that  owre  men  coulde  by  no  meanes  allure  them  to  familiaritie.  Owre  men  therfore,  contented  only  with  their
pearles,  returned  backe  the  fame  way  they  came :  where  they  remayned  with  the  Curians  continually  for  the
fpace  of  twentie  dayes,  and  fylled  theyr  bellyes  wel  with  good  meate.  And  here  it  feemeth  to  me,  not  farre
from  my  purpofe,  to  declare  what  chaunced  vnto  theim  in  theyr  returne,  when  they  came  nowe  ^\•ithin  the
fyght  of  the  coafle  of  Paria.  They  happened  therefore  in  the  way,  at  Os  Draconis  and  the  goulfes  of  Paria,
(wherof  wee  fpake  before)  to  meete  with  a  nauie  of.  xviii.  Canoas  of  Canibales  which  went  a  rouyng  to  hunt
for  men.  Wlio  as  foone  as  they  had  efpyed  owr  men,  affailed  theyr  fhippe  fiercely  and  without  feare  enclofed
the  fame,  diflurbing  owre  men  on  euery  fyde  with  theyr  arrowes.  But  owre  men  fo  feared  them  with  thejT
gunnes,  that  they  fledde  immediatly,  whom,  owre  menne  folowinge  with  the  fliippe  boate,  tooke  one  of  theyr
Canoas,  and  in  it,  only  one  Canibal  (for  the  other  had  efcaped)  and  with  hym,  an  other  man  bownde :  Who,
with  teares  runninge  downe  his  cheekes,  and  with  gieflure  of  his  handes,  eyes,  and  heade,  fignified  that  fyxe  of
his  coompanyons  had  byn  cruelly  cutte  in  pieces  and  eaten  of  that  myfcheuous  nation :  and  that  he  fhulde
haue  byn  lykewyfe  handeled  the  day  folowynge.  Wherfore  they  gaue  hym  poure  ouer  the  Canyball,  to  doo
with  hym  what  he  wolde. Then  with  the  Canibales  owne  clubbe,  he  layde  on  hym  al  that  he  might  drj'ue  with

Hartes  and  wyld
bores.

38

Blacke  and  curlde
heare.

White  teethe.

Earthen  vessels.

Conninge
artificers.

Base  golde.

A  strange  maner
of  coueringe  thejT
priuities.

Tokens  of  the
continent  or  firme
lande.

The  golden
Region  of
Canchieta.

Temperate  ayer
in  Nouember.

The  Equinoctial

lyne.

Humane  people

Gossampine  trees.
Chorlyshe  people

Alphonsus
retumeth  to  Paria

Canibales  in  the
goulfes  of  Paria.

39

Death  for  death.

95

96

The  fyrjl  Decade.

Howe  the
canibales  fortifie
theyr  campe

Haraia.

Sake  engendred
of  the  water  of
the  sea.

Spr>'nges  of  salt
water.

The  bodies  of
princes  dr>'ed  and
reserued

Threescore  and
xvi.  poundes
weight  of  perles
fir.  V.  shillynges.

The  course  of  the
sea  toward  the
weste.

Perles  as  common
as  chaffe

Petrus  Alphonsus
in  prison.

Orient  perles  as
bygge  as  hasel
nuttcs.

40

Cufiana
Os  Draconis.
Cumana.
Manacapana.

The  Hand  of
M.irgarita.

hande  and  foote,  grinninge  and  fretinge  as  it  had  byn  a  \vylde  bore :  Thinkynge  that  he  had  not  yet  fufficiently
reuenged  the  death  of  his  companyons,  when  he  had  beaten  owte  his  braynes  and  guttes. AVhen  he  was
demaunded  after  what  forte  the  Canibales  were  woont  to  inuade  other  contreys,  he  anfwered  that  they  euer
vfed  to  carye  with  them  in  theyr  Canoas,  a  greate  multitude  of  clubbes :  The  whiche,  where  foo  euer  they
lande,  they  pitche  in  the  grownde,  and  encampe  them  felues  within  the  coompaffe  of  the  fame,  to  lye  the  more
fofely  in  the  nyght  feafon. In  Curiana,  they  fownde  the  head  of  a  capitaine  of  the  Canibales,  nailed  ouer  the
doore  of  a  certeyne  gouernoure,  for  a  token  of  victorie,  as  it  hadde  byn  the  flanderde  or  helmette  taken  from
the  enemye  in  battayle. In  thefe  coaRes  of  Paria, is  a  Region  caulcd  Haraia, in  the  whiche, greate
plentie  of  falte  is  gathered  after  a  llrange  forte. For  the  fea  beinge  there  toffed  with  the  poure  of  the
wyndes,  dryueth  the  falte  waters into a  large playne by the fea fyde: where: afterward when the fea
waxeth  caulme,  and  the  foonne  begynnethe  to  fliyne,  the  water  is  congeled  into  mofle  pure  and  whyte  falte,
wherewith  innumerable  %ppes  might  bee  laden,  if  men  doo  rcforte  thether  for  the  fame  beefore  there  faule
any  rayne. For  the  rayne  meltethe  it,  and  caufeth  it  to  fynke  into  the  fande,  and  foo  by  the  pores  of  the  earthe,
to  returne  to  the  place  from  whenfe  it  was  dryuen. Other  fay,  that  the  playne  is  not  fylled  from  the  fea,  but
of  certeine  fpringes  whofe  water  is  more  fliarpe  and  fait  then  the  water  of  the  fea. Th[e]inhabitantes  doo
greatlye  efleeme  this  bay  of  falte. Which  they  vfe,  not  only  for  theyr  owne  commoditie,  but  alfo  woorkinge
the  fame  into  a  fquare  forme  lyke  vnto  brickes,  they  fell  it  to  ftrangers  for  exchaunge  of  other  thynges  whiche
they  lacke. In  this  Region,  they  (Iretche  and  drye  the  deade  bodies  of  theyr  kinges  and  noble  men,  layinge
the  fame  vpon  a  certeyne  frame  of  woodde  much  lyke  vnto  a  hurdle  or  grediren,  with  a  gentell  fyre  vnder  the
fame,  thus  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  confuminge  the  flefilie  and  keepinge  the  fkynne  hole  with  the  bones  inclofed
therein. Thefe  dryed  carcafes,  they  haue  in  greate  reuerence,  and  honour  them  for  theyr  houfeholde  and
famylier  goddes. They  fay  that  in  this  place  they  fawe  a  man,  and  in  an  other  place  a  woman,  thus  dryed  and
referued. When  they  departed  from  Curiana,  the.  viii.  day  of  the  Ides  of  February  to  returne  to  Spayne,  they
had  three  fcore  and.  xvi.  poundes  weight  (after,  viii.  vnces  to  the  pownde)  of  perles,  which  they  bought  for
exchange  of  o\\xt  thynges,  amountinge  to  the  value  of  fyue  fhyllinges. Departinge  therfore,  they  confumed
three  fcore  dayes  in  the>T  iourney  (althowgh  it  were  fhorter  then  frome  Hifpaniola)  by  reafon  of  the  contynuall
courfe  of  the  fea  into  the  wefle,  whiche  dyd  not  only  greately  fley  the  fhippe,  but  alfo  fumtymes  dryue  it  backe.
But  at  the  length  they  came  home  foo  laden  with  perles,  that  they  were  with  euery  maryner,  in  maner  as  com-
mon as  chaffe. But  the  mafter  of  the  fhyppe,  Petrus  Alphotifus,  beinge  accufed  of  his  coompanyons  that  he
had  ftowlen  a  great  multitude  of  precious  perles,  and  defrauded  the  kynge  of  his  portion  which  was  the  fyueth
parte,  was  taken  of  Fernando  dc Vega,  a  man  of  greate  lerninge  and  experience  and  gouernour  of  Galkcia,
where  they  arryued,  and  was  there  kepte  in  pryfon  a  longe  tyme. But  he  llyll  denyethe  that  euer  he  deteyned
anye  parte  of  the  perles. Many  of  thefe  perles  were  as  bygge  as  hafell  nuttes,  and  oriente,  (as  we  caule  it)  that
is,  lyke  vnto  them  of  the  Eafte  partes.  Yet  not  of  foo  greate  price,  by  reafon  that  the  holes  therof  are  not  foo
perfecte. When  I  my  felfe  was  prefente  with  the  ryght  honorable  duke  of  Methyna,  and  was  bidden  to  dyner
with  hym,  in  the  citie  of  Ciuile,  they  browght  to  hym  aboue  a  hundreth  and  twentie  vnces  of  perles  to  be
foulde  :  which  furely  did  greatly  delyte  me  with  their  fayrenes  and  brightnes. Sum  faye,  that  Alphonfus  hadde
not  thefe  perles  in  Curiana  being  diflante  from  Os  Draconis  more  then  a  hundreth  and  twentie  leaques,  but
that  he  had  them  in  the  Regions  of  Cumana  and  Manacapana,  nere  vnto  Os  Draconis  and  the  Ilande  of
Marmrita. For  they  deny  that  there  is  any  perles  fownde  in Curiana. But  fithe  the  matter  is  yet  in  con-
trouerfie,  we  ^vyll  paffe  to  other  matters. Thus  muche  yowe  haue  whereby  yowe  maye  coniecture  what
commoditie  in  tyme  to  coome  may  bee  looked  for  from  thefe  newe  landes  of  the  wefl  Ocean,  whereas  at  the
fyrfle  difcoueringe,  they  fhewe  fuch  tokens  of  greate  ryches. Thus  fare  ye  well.

C  The. IX.  BOOKE  of  the fyrst Decade

to  Cardynall  Lodouike.

The  nauigation  jf
Vincentius  and
Aries  Pinzonui

Licence  and
passeporte.

Incentiagnes  Pinzonus,  and  alfo  Aries  Pinzonu;,,  his  neuie,  by  his  brothers  fyde,  which  accom-
panyed  the  Admiral  Colonus  in  his  fyrfle  vyage,  and  were  by  him  appoynted  to  bee  maflers
of  twoo  of  the  fmaule  fhippes  which  the  Spaniardes  caule  Carauelas,  beinge  mooucd  by  the
greate  ryches  and  amplytude  of  the  new  landes,  furnyfhed  of  theyr  owne  charges,  foure
carauels  in  the  hauen  of  theyr  owne  countrey  which  the  Spanyardes  caule  Palos,  bortheringe
on  the  wefle  Ocean.  Hauynge  therfore  the  kynges  licence  and  pafTeporte  to  departe,  they
loofed  from  the  hauen,  abowte  the  Calendes  of  December,  in  the  yeare  1499. This  hauen

96

The  fyrjl  Decade.

97

of  Palos  is  three  fcore  and  twelue  myles  diflant  from  Gades,  commonly  cauled  Caks :  and  three  fcore  and  foure

myles  from  Ciuile. All  th[e]inhabitantes  of  this  towne,  not  one  excepted,  are  greately  gyuen  to  fearchinge  of

the  fea,  and  continually  exercyfed  in  fayling. They  alfo  directed  theyr  vyage  fyrft  to  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie  by

the  Ilandes  of  Hefperidcs,  nowe  cauled Cabouerde,  which  fum  caule Gorgodes  Mcdticias. Saylinge  therfore

directly  towarde  the  fouthe  frome  that  Hand  of  the  Hefpcrides  which  the  Portiigales  (being  poffeffers  of  the

fame)  caule  San^li  lacobi,  and  departinge  frome  thenfe  at  the  Ides  of  lanuary,  they  folowed  the  fouthwefl.  -svynde,

beinge  in  the  myddefl  betwene  the  fouth  and  the  wefle. When  they  fuppofed  that  they  had  fayled  aboute  three

hundrethe  leaques  by  the  fame  ^vynde,  they  fay  that  they  lofle  the  fyght  of  the  Northe  flarre  :  and  were  fhortelye

after,  toffed  with  excedinge  tempefles  bothe  of  wynde  and  fea,  and  vexed  with  intoUerable  heate. Yet  fayled

they  on  further  (not  without  greate  daunger)  for  the  fpace  of  twoo  hundrethe  and  fortie  leaques,  folowing  yet

the  fame  wynde  by  the  lofl  pole. Wherfore,  whether  habitable  Regions  bee  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  Ij^e  or  not,

let  thefe  men  and  the  owlde  wryters,  afwel  Philofophers  as  poetes  and  cofmographers  difcuffe. For  thefe  men,

affirme  it  to  bee  habitable,  and  marueloully  replenifhed  with  people  :  and  they,  that  it  is  vnhabitable  by  reafon

of  the  foone  beames  dependinge  peqDendicularly  or  directive  ouer  the  fame. Yet  were  there  many  of  the  oulde

wryters,  whiche  attempted  to  proue  it  habitable. Thefe  maryners  beinge  demaunded,  if  they  fawe  the  fouth

pole,  they  anfwered  that  they  knewe  no  flarre  there  lyke  vnto  this  pole,  that  myght  be  decerned  aboute  the

poynte. But  that  they  fawe  an  other  order  of  flarres,  and  a  certeyne  thicke  myfl  ryfynge  from  the  horizontall

lyne,  which  greatly  hyndered  theyr  fyght. They  contende  alfo,  that  there  is  a  great  heape  or  ryfynge  in  the

myddefl  of  the  earth,  which  taketh  away  the  fyght  of  the  fouthe  pole,  vntyll  they  haue  vtterly  pafled  ouer  the

fame. But  they  verely  beleue  that  they  fawe  other  images  of  flarres,  muche  differinge  from  the  fituation  of  the

flarres  of  owre  hemifpherie  or  halfe  circle  of  heauen. Howe  foo  euer  the  matter  bee,  as  they  informe  vs,  wee

certifie  yowe. At  the  lengthe,  the  feuenth  day  of  the  calendes  of  Februarye,  they  efpied  lande  a  farre  of. And

feinge  the  water  of  the  fea  to  bee  troubelous,  foundinge  with  theyr  plummet,  they  founde  it  to  bee.  xvi.  fathames

deepe. Goinge  a  lande,  and  tarienge  there  for  the  fpace  of  twoo  dayes,  they  departed  bycaufe  they  faw  no

people  fleringe,  althowghe  they  fownde  certeyne  fleppes  of  men  by  the  fea  fyde. Thus  grauinge  on  the  trees

and  the  flones  nere  vnto  the  fhore,  the  kynges  name  and  theyrs,  and  the  tyme  of  theyr  comming  thether,  they

departed. Not  farre  from  this  flation,  folowynge  the  fyers  on  the  lande  by  nyght,  they  founde  a  nation  lyinge

vnder  the  open  fyrmamente  after  the  maner  of  warre. Owre  men  thought  it  not  befle  to  trowble  them  vntyll

the  morninge. Therefore,  at  the  ryfmge  of  the  foone,  fortie  of  owre  men  well  armed,  wente  toward  them :

ageynll  whom  came  furth.  xxxii.  of  them,  with  bowes,  flinges  and  dartes,  euen  redy  to  the  feyght. The  other

coompanye  folowed  them,  armed  after  the  fame  maner. Owr  men  affinne  that  they  were  of  hygher  flature  then

eyther  the  Almaynes  or  Pannonians. They  behelde  owre  men  with  frownynge  and  threatenynge  countenaunce.

But  owre  men  thought  it  not  good  to  faule  to  bickeringe  with  them,  vncerteyne  whether  it  were  for  feare,  or

bycaufe  they  wolde  not  dryue  them  to  flight. Wherfore  they  went  aboute  to  allure  them  by  faire  meanes  and

rewardes. But  they  refufed  all  kynde  of  gentelnes,  and  floode  euer  in  a  redines  to  feight,  declaringe  the  fame

by  fignes  and  tokens. Thus  owr  men  reforted  to  theyr  fhippes,  and  they  to  the  place  from  whence  they  came,

without  any  further  bufynes. The  fame  nyght  abowte  mydnyght,  they  fiedde,  and  left  the  place  voyde  where

they  lay  in  campe. Owre  men  fuppofe  them  to  bee  a  vagabunde  and  wanderinge  nacion  lyke  vnto  the

Scythians,  withowte  houfes  or  certeyne  dwellinge  places,  lyuinge  onely  with  the  fruites  of  the  earth,  hauing

theyr  wyues  and  chyldren  folowinge  them. Such  as  meafured  their  footefleppes  in  the  fande,  affirme  with

greate  othes,  that  one  of  theyr  feete  is  almofl  as  longe  as  twoo  feete  of  owre  men  of  the  meane  forte. Saylinge

on  yet  further,  they  founde  an  other  ryuer,  but  not  of  deapth  fufficient  to  beare  the  c  irauels. They  fent

therfore  the  foure  fhippe  boates  to  lande,  ful  of  armed  men  to  fearch  the  countrey. They  efpyed  vppon  a

hyghe  hyll  nere  vnto  the  fea  fyde,  a  greate  multitude  of  people,  to  whom  owre  coompany  fent  furthe  one  man

with  certeyne  of  owre  thynges  to  allure  them  to  exchaunge. And  when  he  had  cafl  a  haukes  bell  towarde

them,  they  cafl  downe  a  wedge  of  golde  a  cubette  longe. The  which  as  he  flouped  to  take  vppe,  they  foodenly

inclofed  hym,  and  caryed  hym  awaye. But  he  was  fliortly  after  refcued  by  his  coompanyons,  to  fum  of  their

paynes :  for  they  flewe  eyght  of  owre  men,  and  wounded  many  a  farre  of,  with  theyr  arrowes,  and  dartes  made

of  wood  hardened  at  the  endes  with  fyre. After  this,  they  encoompafed  owre  fhippe  boates  within  the  ryuer,

and  came  raffhelye  within  the  reache  of  owre  men,  layinge  houlde  on  the  boates  fydes,  where  they  were  thrufl

throwgh  and  hewen  in  peeces  as  it  had  byn  fheepe,  by  reafon  they  were  naked. Yet  wolde  they  not  for  al

this,  gyue  ouer:  but  tooke  from  owre  men  one  of  their  boates,  hauing  noo  men  in  it. For  the  gouernour

therof  being  flayne  with  an  arrowe,  the  other  fiedde  and  efcaped. And  thus  they  lefte  this  fierce  and  warlyke

people,  faylinge  towarde  the  northwefle  alongt  by  the  fame  coaftes,  with  forowfull  hartes  for  the  death  of  the}T

coompanyons. When  they  had  fayled  abowte.  xl.  leaques,  they  chaunced  into  a  fea  of  fuche  freffhe  water,

that  they  fylled  theyr  barelles  and  hogges  heades  therwith. Searching  the  caufe  hereof,  they  vnderstoode  that  a

vehement  courfe  of  ryuers  difcended  with  great  violence  from  the  toppes  of  certeyne  greate  hylles. They  fay

C;iles.  Ciuile.

The  Ilandes  of
Canarie

CabouertU.

S.  lames  Ilande.

The  North  doIc
owte  of  syghc

Habitable  Regions
vnder  the
Equinoctial  l>iie.

An  other  order  of

starres

A  thyclce  mist
A  rysinge  in  the
myddest  of  the
earth.

41

People  of  hygh
stature.

A  vagabunde
kynde  of  men

Giantes.

Desperate
bouldenes.

A  sea  of  freshe
water.

Eden.

97

98

The  fyyjf  Decade.

Many  fruitefuU
llanJes.

Humane  people.

Mariatamball.

Camomorus.
Paricora.

Regions  of  Paria.

Golde  and  perles.

Os  Draconis.

CumtiMO,
Marutca/arttj.
Curiana
The  hole  earth
largely  taken,
raaye  Dee  caulcd
an  Ilande.

Maragnonus
a  rj'uer
of  exceadinge
breadth  and  full
of  Hands  looke
decade  ii.  liber,  ix.

42

Boriostomea,  and
Spiriostomea,
raouthes  of  the
rj-uer  of  Danubius.

The  commodities
of  the  Regions
and  Ilandes  about
Paria.
Brasile.

Mani  fruitful
Ilandes  lefte
desolate.
Canibales.

Trees  of  Cassia
fistula.

Trees  of  maruelous
byggenes.
A  monstrous
beastc.

Alteracion  of  ayer
and  change  of
meate

Cathay  in  India
beyonde  the
rjTjer  of  Ganges

A  shipwrake
by  tempest

alfo  that  there  lyeth  within  the  fea,  many  fortunate  and  friiitfuU  Ilandes,  and  well  inhabyted:  And  that  th[e]in-
habitantes  of  this  tracte  are  men  of  mceke  nature  and  fuche  as  doo  not  rcfufe  (Irangers:  Yet  lyttle  profy table
to  them,  bycaufe  they  had  noo  marchanilyes  for  their  purpofc,  as  golde  or  precyous  flones.  For  lacke  wherof,
they  brought  frome  thenfe  thyrtie  captiues  to  fell  for  flaues.  Th[e]inhabitantes  caule  this  Region  Mariatambal.
The  Region  of  the  eafle  parte  of  that  ryuer,  is  cauled  Camomorus:  And  that  of  the  wefle  parte,  Paricora:  in
the  mid  lande  wherof,  th[e]inhabitantes  fignified  that  there  is  greate  plentie  of  golde.  For,  folowynge  this
ryuer  directly  toward  the  Northe  (as  the  bendynge  of  the  fliore  requyred)  they  recouered  ageyne  the  fyght  of
the  north  pole.  All  the  coafte  of  this  tracte,  perteyneth  to  Paria,  the  which  (as  we  fayd  before)  was  fyrfl
founde  by  Colonus  hym  felfe,  and  hath  in  maner  in  euery  place,  greate  abundaunce  of  pearles.  They  faye  that
thefe  coaft.es  are  adioynynge  vnto,  and  all  one  with  Os  Draconis,  and  alfo  bortherynge  vppon  the  Regions  of
Cumana,  Manacapana,  Curiana,  Cauchieia,  and  Cuchibachoa.  Wherfore  they  thought  it  to  bee  parte  of  the
firme  lande  of  India  beyonde  the  ryuer  of  Ganges.  For  the  greate  and  large  coompaffe  therof,  dothe  not
permit  that  it  fliulde  bee  an  Ilande.  Albeit,  the  hole  earth  vncouered  with  water,  largely  taken,  may  bee
cauled  an  Ilande.  From  the  poynte  of  that  land  where  they  loft  the  fight  of  the  north  pole,  faylynge  by  a
continuall  tracke  abowte  three  hundreth  leaques  towarde  the  wefte  fyde  of  Paria,  they  fay  that  almoft.e  in  the
mydde  way,  they  chaunced  into  a  ryuer  cauled  Maragnonum,  which  they  aflirme  to  bee  of  fuch  excedinge
breadth,  that  it  myght  feeme  incredible,  if  the  antiquitie  dyd  not  make  mention  of  the  lyke.  Beinge
demaunded  of  me  if  it  were  not  falte  water  where  it  diuided  the  lande,  they  anfwered,  that  the  water  therof
was  verj'  freflhe  and  fweete :  And  that  the  further  it  ranne,  to  bee  foo  muche  the  frefflier :  Alfo  full  of  Ilandes
and  holfome  fyfhe.  They  dare  auouche  the  breadth  therof,  to  bee  more  then  thirtie  leaques.  Yet  if  wee  well
weighe  and  confyder  the  largenes  and  wydenes  of  BorioJIomca  and  Spiriojlotnea,  the  mouthes  of  the  famous
ryuer  of  IJlcr  (nowe  cauled  Danubius^  and  howe  farre  they  violate  or  corrupte  the  falte  water  with  their  freftienes,
wee  ftiall  ceafe  to  marueile,  althowgh  this  other  ryuer  bee  greater.  For,  who  can  diminyffhe  the  poure  of
nature,  but  that  it  may  make  this  bigger  then  the  other,  and  an  other  bygger  then  this.  And  I  fuppofe  this  to
bee  the  ryuer  wherof  Colonus  the  Admirall  made  mention  in  the  difcription  of  his  vyage  in  thefe  coaft.es.  But
wee  ftiall  hereafter  haue  further  knowleage  hereof  Let  vs  nowe  therfore  returne  to  the  commodities  of  thefe
Regions.  They  fownde  in  many  Ilandes  abowte  Paria,  great  wooddes  of  brafile  trees :  And  brought  awaye
with  them,  three  thoufande  poundes  weight  thereof  They  fay  that  the  brafile  of  Hifpaniola,  is  muche  better
then  this,  to  dye  clothe  Avith  a  more  fayre  and  durable  colour.  From  henfe,  folowynge  the  wynde  (whiche  the
Spanyardes  caule  Norduejl,  and  the  Italians  Grceco)  they  paffed  by  many  Ilandes  very  fruitefull,  yet  lefte
defolate  and  wafted  by  reafon  of  the  crueltie  of  the  Canibales.  For  they  went  alande  in  many  places,  and
fownde  the  ruines  of  many  deft.royed  howfes.  Yet  in  fum  places,  they  founde  men,  but  thofe  exceadinge
fearefull,  flpnge  to  the  mountaynes,  rockes,  and  wooddes  at  the  fight  of  euery  flraunger  or  fhippe,  and  wan-
deringe  \Adthout  houfes  or  certeyne  abydinge  places,  for  feare  of  the  Caniballes  layinge  wayte  and  huntinge  after
them.  Here  they  founde  thofe  great  trees  which  of  them  felues  in  dyuers  places  bringe  furth  the  fruite  or  fpice
whiche  the  Apothecaries  caule  Ca{fia  fijlula :  And  that  of  noo  leffe  goodnes  then  that  which  the  phifitians
minift.er  to  fuch  as  bee  difeafed  A\ith  the  ague.  But  it  was  not  ripe  at  theyr  beinge  there.  They  affirme  that
there  are  trees  of  fuche  byggenes,  that.  xvi.  men  ioyninge  handes  togyther  and  ft.andinge  in  coompaffe,  can
fcarfely  embrafe  fum  of  them.  Emonge  thefe  trees  is  fownde  that  monflrous  beafle  with  a  fnowte  lyke  a  foxe,
a  tayle  lyke  a  marmafette,  eares  lyke  a  batte,  handes  lyke  a  man,  and  feete  lyke  an  ape,  bearing  her  whelpes
abowte  mth  her  in  an  owtwarde  bellye  much  lyke  vnto  a  greate  bagge  or  purfe.  The  deade  carkas  of  this
beaft.,  you  fawe  with  me,  and  turned  it  ouer  and  ouer  with  yowre  owne  handes,  marueylynge  at  that  newe  belly
and  wonderful!  prouifion  of  nature.  They  fay  it  is  knowen  by  experience,  that  fliee  neuer  letteth  her  whelpes
goo  owte  of  that  purfe,  except  it  bee  eyther  to  play,  or  to  fucke,  vntyl  fuche  tyme  that  they  bee  able  to  gette
theyr  lyuing  by  them  felues.  They  tooke  this  beaft,e  with  her  whelpes :  But  the  whelpes  dyed  fliortely  after  in
the  fhyppes.  Yet  the  damme  liued  certeyne  moonethes :  But  at  the  length,  not  beinge  able  to  abyde  foo  greate
alteration  of  ayer,  and  chaunge  of  meate,  fhee  dyed  alfo  in  the  way.  But  of  this  beafle,  wee  haue  fayde  enowgh.
Let  vs  now  therfore  returne  to  the  autoures  of  thefe  thynges.  Thefe  twoo  Pinzoni,  the  vncle  and  the  neuie,
fufteyned  manye  great  trowbles  and  horrible  tempeft.es  and  perilles  in  this  nauigation.  For  when  they  had  nowe
fayled  by  the  coades  of  Paria  abowte.  vi.  hundreth  leaques,  and  (as  they  fuppofed)  beyonde  the  citie  of  Cathay
and  the  coaft.es  of  Eafte  India  beyonde  the  ryuer  of  Ganges,  ♦;here  rofe  foodenly  foo  fierce  a  tempefte  in  the
mooneth  of  luly,  that,  of  the  foure  carauels  which  they  had  with  them,  twoo  were  drowned  euen  beefcre  theyr
eyes :  and  the  th)T-de  lyenge  at  anker,  with  lyke  foodennes  caryed  owte  of  theyr  fyght  throwgh  the  violence  ol
the  tempefte :  The  fourth  alfo  lyinge  at  anker,  was  foo  fhaken  and  broofed,  that  al  the  feames  therof  were  almoft.
loofed.  Yet  came  they  to  lande  owt  of  this  lafte  fhyppe,  but  vtterlye  defpayrynge  of  the  ftiyppe.  Wherfore
confultynge  with  them  felues  what  was  beft.  to  bee  doone  in  foo  extreeme  a  cafe,  and  how  to  prouide  them  a
fafe  dwellinge  place  in  thofe  Regions  beinge  owt  of  al  hope  how  to  departe  from  thenfe,  they  determined
98

i
f

The  fyrjl  Decade,

99

to  fley  all  the  inhabitantes  of  the  contrey  nere  abowte  them,  leafle  they  with  the  other  fhulde  confpire  togyther
to  kyl  them,  but  theyr  fortune  was  better.  For  the  carauell  which  the  tempefte  had  caryed  away,  was  coome
to  them  ageyne.  This  had  in  it.  xviii.  men :  And  the  other  that  remayned,  was  faued  and  repayred.  With
thefe  two  therfore,  they  tooke  theyr  vyage  directly  to  Spaine  And  thus  beinge  toffed  with  tempeft.es  and  vexed
with  aduerfities,  they  returned  to  theyr  natiue  contrey  of  Palos,  to  theyr  wyues  and  children,  the  day  before
the  Calendes  of  October,  with  the  loffe  of  many  of  theyr  dere  frendes  and  neighbours.  They  browght  with
them  Cinamome  and  gynger :  but  not  very  good,  bycaufe  they  were  nc  t  there  fully  feafoned  with  the  heate  of
the  foone  before  they  brought  them  from  thenfe.  They  browght  alfo,  certeyne  precious  fl.ones,  whiche  Baptifia
Elyfiiis,  that  excellent  philofopher  and  yowre  lordefhippes  phifitian,  affirmeth  to  bee  trewe  Topafes.  After
thefe  mens  returne,  other  of  theyr  neighbours  beinge  moued  thereto  by  a  certeyne  emulation,  to  proue  yf  theyr
fortune  wolde  bee  anye  better,  lyke  men  of  good  corage,  beinge  nothing  difcomforted  by  the  harde  fortune  of
theyr  neighboures,  knowinge  that  it  often  tymes  chaunceth  that  that  which  is  one  mans  vndoinge  is  an  other
mans  makynge,  attempted  a  newe  vyage  towarde  the  fowthe  by  the  coaft.es  of  Paria,  folowynge  the  fleppes  of
Colonus  the  Admiral,  who  had  fyrft.  difcouered  the  fame.  They  alfo  browght  Avith  them  greate  plentie  of  CaJJla
fijlula :  And  fownde  that  precious  medicine  cauled  of  the  Spanyardes,  Animce  album,  whofe  perfume  is  of  moft.
excellent  effect  to  heale  the  reumes,  murres,  and  heauines  of  the  heade.  As  touchinge  this  vyage,  as  yet  I
knowe  noo  other  newes  that  I  thought  worthy  to  certifie  yowe  of.  Wherfore,  I  wyl  nowe  make  an  ende  of  this
booke,  bycaufe  yow  put  me  fo  often  in  rememberance  of  your  departure.  Yet  to  accomplyffhe  the  Decade,  I
wyll  declare  fumwhat  of  the  fuperftitions  of  Hifpaniola.  Yowe  fhall  nowe  therfore  vnderftand  the  illufions
wherwith  the  people  of  the  Ilande  haue  byn  feduced  after  the  errours  of  the  owlde  gentilitie,  and  wandered  in
the  ignorance  and  blyndenes  of  humane  nature  corrupted  by  the  difobedience  of  owr  fyrft:  parentes,  which  hath
remayned  in  all  nations  vpon  the  face  of  the  earth,  except  where  it  hath  pleafed  god  by  the  lyght  of  his  fpirite
by  his  woorde,  to  poure  vppon  his  electe  the  grace  of  renouation,  by  the  lyght  wherof  the  natarall  darkenes
receaueth  fume  clearenes  as  in  a  glaffe,  vntyll  imperfection  fhalbe  abolyfhed.  Owre  men  therefore,  were  longe
in  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  before  they  knewe  that  the  people  thereof  honorede  any  other  thynge  then  the
lyghtes  of  heauen,  or  had  any  other  Religion,  But  when  theye  had  byne  nowe  longe  conuerfante  with  them,
and  by  vnderft.andyng  their  language,  drewe  to  a  further  familiaritii3,  they  liad  knowleage  that  they  vfed  dyuers
rytes  and  fuperftitions.  I  haue  therfore  gathered  thefe  fewe  thynges  folowynge,  owte  of  a  booke  wrytten  by
one  Ramomis  an  heremyte,  whom  Colonus  had  lefte  with  certeyne  kynges  of  the  Ilande  to  inflruct  them  in  the
Chrift.ian  fayth.  And  bycaufe  in  maner  their  hole  religion  is  none  other  thing  then  Idolatry,  I  \yyll  begjome
at  theyr  Idoles,  It  is  therfore  apparente  by  the  Images  which  they  honour  openly  and  commonly,  that  there
appere  vnto  them  in  the  nyghte  feafons  certeyne  phantafies  and  illufions  of  euyll  fpirites,  feducinge  them  into
many  fonde  and  folyflie  errours.  For  they  make  certeyne  Images  of  goffampine  cotton  foulded  or  ^v^ethed
after  theyr  maner,  and  harde  flopped  within.  Thefe  Images  they  make  fytting,  much  lyke  vnto  the  pictures  of
fprites  and  deuelles  which  owr  paynters  are  accuftomed  to  paint  vppon  waules.  But  forafmuch  as  I  my  felfe
fent  yowe  foure  of  thefe  Images,  yowe  may  better  prefently  fignifie  vnto  the  kynge  yowre  vncle,  what  maner  of
thynges  they  are,  and  howe  lyke  vnto  paynted  deuelles,  then  I  can  expreffe  the  fame  by  wrytynge.  Thefe
Images,  th[e]inhabitantes  caule  Zemes :  wherof  the  leafte,  made  to  the  lykenes  of  younge  deuels,  they  bind  to
theyr  forheades  when  they  goo  to  the  warres  ageynft.  their  enemies :  And  for  that  purpofe  haue  they  thofe
ft.rynges  hangynge  at  them  which  yowe  fee.  Of  thefe,  they  beleue  to  obteyne  rayne  if  rayne  be  lackyng,  and
lykewyfe  fayre  wether.  For  they  thinke  that  thefe  Zemes  are  the  mediatours  and  meffengers  of  the  greate  god,
whom  they  acknowleage  to  be  only  one,  eternall,  withowte  ende,  omnipotent  and  inuifible.  Thus  euery  kynge
hath  his  particuler  Zemes  which  he  honoureth.  They  caule  the  eternall  god,  by  thefe  twoo  names,  locauna,
and  Guamaonocon,  as  theyr  prediceffours  tawght  them.  Affirminge  that  he  hath  a  father  cauled  by  thefe  f)Tie
names:  that  is,  Attabeira,  Mamona,  Guacarapita,  Liella,  Gui?nazoa.  Nowe  fhall  yowe  heare  what  they
fable  on  the  earth  as  touchinge  the  originall  of  man.  There  is  in  the  Ilande  a  Region  cauled  Caunana,
wher  they  fayne  that  mankynde  came  fyrft.  owte  of  twoo  caues  of  a  mountayne:  and  that  the  byggeft.
forte  of  men,  came  furth  of  the  mouth  of  the  byggeft.  caue,  and  the  leaft.  forte  owte  of  the  leafte
caue.  The  rocke  in  the  which  thefe  caues  are,  they  caule  Cauta.  The  greatefl.  denne,  th^y  name
Cazibaxagua,  and  the  leffe  Amaiauna.  They  fay,  that  before  it  was  lawful  for  men  to  come  foorth  of
the  caue,  the  mouth  of  the  caue  was  kepte  and  watched  nyghtly  by  a  man  whofe  name  was  Machochacl.  This
Machochael,  departinge  fumwhat  farre  from  the  caue  to  th[e]intente  to  fee  what  thynges  were  abrode,  was
foodenly  taken  of  the  foonne  (whofe  fight  he  was  forbydden)  and  was  turned  into  a  ft.one.  They  fayne  the  lyke
of  dyuers  other,  that  whereas  they  went  foorthe  in  the  nyghte  feafon  a  fyffhynge,  fo  farre  from  the  caue  that  they
coulde  not  returne  before  the  ryfynge  of  the  foone  (the  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  them  to  behold)  they  were
tranfformed  into  myrobalane  trees,  which  of  them  felues  growe  plentifully  in  the  Ilande.  They  faye  further-
more, that  a  certeyne  ruler  cauled  Vagoniona,  fent  one  furth  of  the  caue  to  goo  a  fyfftiynge,  who  by  lyke  chaunce

99

Extreme  remedie
in  a  desperat
case

43

Cinamome  and
gynger

Topascs.

Men  of  noble
corage.

A  nother  vyage
Anima  album.

The  superstitions

of  hispaniola.
The  errours  of  the
owlde  gentilitie.

The  grace  of
renouation.

Ramonus  an
heremyte.
Idolatry  and
Idoles.

Illusions  of  euyl
spirites.

Images  of
gossampine  cotton

Zemes.
Vounge  deuyls.

Mediatours.

Only  one  god
eternall.

The  names  of  god.

The  father  of  god.

The  originall  of
man  kvnde

Fables  much  lyke
Guide  his
transfonnations

44

The  original  of
Mirobalane  trees

lOO

TJic  fyrjl  Decade.

1

The  nightingale.

The  Hand  of
Mathinina

Children  turned
into  frogges.

A  speciall  grace.

Holy  reliques

Women  are
slippery  cattayle.

Al  wisedome  goeth
not  by  age.

Here  nedeth  sum

tropologicall

interpretour.

Myrmidones

Preachers  for  the
deuyL

A  vengeable
greate  gourd.

The  originall  of
the  sea.

45

The  originall  of
Ilandes.

A  holy  caue.

Images,

The  originall  of
the  soone  and
moone.

Pylgramage.

Walkynge  sprytes.
Incubi.

A  remedye
ageynst  walkyng
sprites.

was  turned  into  a  nyghtyngale  bycaufe  the  foonne  was  ryfen  beefore  he  came  ageyne  to  the  caue ;  And  that

yearelye  abowte  the  fome  tyme  that  he  was  turned  into  a  byrde,  he  dothe  in  the  nyght  with  a  moornynge  fonge

bewaNle  his  myflbrtune,  and  caule  for  the  helpe  of  his  niaifler  Vagoniona. And  this  they  thynke  to  bee  the

caufe  why  that  byrde  fingeth  in  the  night  feafon. But  Vago/iiona,  beinge  fore  troubled  in  his  mynd  for  the

loffe  of  his  famiher  frende  whom  he  loued  foo  intierly,  leauinge  the  men  in  the  caue,  brought  foorth  onely  the

women  with  theyr  fuckynge  chyldren,  leauinge  the  women  in  one  of  the  Ilandes  of  that  tracte,  cauled  Mathinmo,

and  caryed  the  chyldren  awaye  with  hym :  which  poore  wretches  oppreflcd  with  famine,  fainted  and  remained

on  the  banke  of  a  certcine  rj'uer  where  they  were  turned  into  frogges,  and  crycd  ioa,  ioa,  that  is,  iitama,  fnama,

as  ch)'ldren  are  wont  to  crye  for  the  mothers  pappe. And  hereof  they  fay  it  commeth  that  frogges  vfe  to  cry  fo

pytifully  in  the  fprynge  tyme  of  the  yeare :  And  that  men  were  fcattered  abrode  in  the  caues  of  Hifpaniola

withowte  the  companye  of  women. They  fay  alfo,  that  whereas  Vagoniona  hym  felfe,  was  accuflomed  to

wander  in  dyuers  places,  and  yet  by  a  fpeciall  grace,  neuer  tranfformed,  defccnded  to  a  certeyne  fayre  woman

whom  he  fawe  in  the  bottome  of  the  fea,  and  receaued  of  her  certeyne  pibple  flones  of  marble  (whiche  they

caule  Cihas)  and  alfo  certeine  yelowe  and  bright  plates  of  laton,  whiche  they  caule  Guaninos. Thefe  thynges

to  this  day  are  had  in  greate  eflimation  amonge  the  kynges,  as  goodly  ievvels  and  mofl  holy  reliques. Thefe

men  whiche  we  fayde  before  were  lefte  in  the  caues  withowte  women,  went  furth  in  the  nyght  (as  they  fay)  to

wafflie  them  felues  in  a  ponde  of  raine  water  and  fawe  a  farre  of  by  the  way  a  greate  multitude  of  certeine

beafl.es  in  (hape  fumwhat  lyke  vnto  women,  creping  as  thicke  as  antes  aboute  the  myrobalane  trees :  And  that

as  they  attempted  to  take  thefe  beafl.es,  they  flypped  owte  of  their  handes  as  they  had  byn  yeles. Where  vppon

they  confulted,  and  determyned  by  th[ejaduice  of  the  elders,  that  al  fuche  fliulde  bee  fowght  foorthe  amonge

them,  as  were  fcabbyd  and  leprous,  to  th[e]intente  that  with  theyr  rowghe  and  harde  handes,  they  myght  th[e]-

efelyer  take  holde  of  them. Thefe  men,  they  caule  Caracaracoles :  And  fente  them  foorthe  a  huntinge  to  take

thefe  beaftes. But  of  many  which  they  tooke,  they  coulde  keepe  but  only  foure :  The  whiche  as  they  wolde

haue  vfed  for  women,  they  fownde  that  they  lacked  womans  priuities. Wherefore  caulinge  th[e]elders  ageyne  to

counfayle,  to  confult  what  were  befle  to  bee  done  in  this  cafe,  theyr  aduice  was  that  the  byrde  which  wee  caule

the  Pye,  fhuld  bee  admitted  with  his  byll  to  open  a  place  for  that  purpofe,  whyle  in  the  meane  tyme  thefe  men

cauled  Caracaracoles,  fliulde  hould  fafl.  the  womens  thighes  abrode  with  theyr  rowgh  handes. Full  wyfely  ther-

fore  was  the  pye  put  to  this  office,  and  opened  the  womens  priuities,  and  hereof  the  women  of  the  Ilande  haue

theyr  original  and  offpringe. But  nowe  doo  I  ceafe  to  marueyle  that  the  owlde  Grekes  dyd  fable  and  wryte  fo

manye  bookes  of  the  people  cauled  Myrmidones,  which  they  fayned  to  bee  engendred  of  antes  or  piffemeres.

Thefe  and  fuche  lyke,  the  fagefl.  and  w}fefl.  of  the  people,  preache  continually  to  the  fimple  forte,  and  reherfe

the  fame  as  mofl.e  holy  oracles. But  it  is  yet  more  chyldyfflie  that  they  fable  as  touchinge  th[e]originall  of  the

fea. For  they  faye  that  there  was  once  in  the  Ilande,  a  man  of  greate  power,  whofe  name  was  laia  :  whofe  only

foonne  being  dead,  he  buryed  hym  within  a  greate  gourde. This  laia,  greuouflye  takyng  the  death  of  his

foonne,  after  a  fewe  moonthes,  came  ageyne  to  the  gourde  :  The  which  when  he  had  opened,  there  iffliewed

foorth  many  great  whales  and  other  monflers  of  the  fea :  where  vppon  he  declared  to  fuche  as  dwelt  abowte

hym,  that  the  fea  was  enclofed  in  that  gourde. By  which  report,  foure brethren  (borne  of  one  woman

who  dyed  in  her  trauail)  beinge  moued,  came  to  the  gourde  in  hope  to  haue  many  fyfflies. The  whiche

when  they  had  taken  in  theyr  handes,  and  efpied  laia  comming,  (who  oftentymes  reforted  to  the  gourd

to  vifet  the  boones  of  his  foonne)  fearing  leafl.  he  fliulde  fufpecte  them  of  thefte  and  facrileage,  fodaynely  let

the  gourde  faule  owte  of  theyr  handes :  which  beinge  broken  in  the  faule  the  fea  furthwith  brake  owte  at  the

rj'ftes  therof,  and  fo  fylled  the  vales,  and  ouerflowed  the  playnes,  that  only  the  mountaynes  were  vncouered,

whiche  nowe  conteyne  the  Ilandes  which  are  feene  in  thofe  coafl.es. And  this  is  the  oppinion  of  theyr  wyfe

men  as  concernynge  th[e]originall  of  the  fea. But  nowe  (mofl,  noble  prince)  you  fhall  heare  a  more  pleafaunt

fable. There  is  a  certeyne  caue  cauled  louanaboina,  in  the  territorye  of  a  certeyne  kynge  whofe  name  is

Machinnech. This  caue  they  honour  more  religioufly  then  dyd  the  Grekes  in  tyme  pafle,  Corinth,  Cyrrha,  or

Nyfa:  And  haue  adourned  it  with  pictures  of  a  thoufand  faffliions. In  th[e]enterance  of  this  caue  they  haue

tvvoo  grauen  Zemes,  wherof  the  one  is  cauled  Binthaitel,  and  the  other  Marobu. Beinge  demaunded  why  they

had  this  caue  in  foo  greate  reuerence,  they  anfwered  erneflly,  bycaufe  the  Soonne  and  the  Moone  came  fyrft.

owt  of  the  fame  to  gyue  lyght  to  the  worlde. They  haue  religious  concourfe  to  thefe  caues,  as  wee  are

accufl-onied  to  goo  on  Pylgramage  to  Rome  or  Vaticane,  Compoflele,  or  Hierufalem,  and  mofl.  holye  and  heade

places  of  owre  Religion. They  are  alfo  fubiect  to  an  other  kynde  of  fuperftition. For  they  thinke  that  deade

folkes  walke  in  the  nyght,  and  eate  of  the  fruite  cauled  Guannaba,  vnknowen  vnto  vs,  and  fumwhat  lyke  vnto  a

quynfe. Afiirmynge  alfo  that  they  are  conuerfant  with  lyuing  people,  euen  in  theyr  beddes,  and  to  deceaue

women  in  takynge  vpon  them  the  fliape  of  men,  fliewynge  them  felues  as  thowgh  they  wolde  haue  to  doo  \vith

them :  But  when  the  matter  commeth  to  actual  deede,  foodenly  to  vanyfflie  away. If  any  doo  fufpecte  that  a

deade  body  lyeth  by  hym  when  he  feeleth  anye  fl.raunge  thynge  in  the  bedde,  they  fay  hee  flialbe  owt  of  dout

The  fyrfi  Decade.

lOI

by  feelynge  of  the  belly  therof :  affirmyng  that  the  fpirites  of  deade  men  may  take  vppon  them  al  the  members
of  mans  body,  fauinge  only  the  nauell.  If  therfore  by  lacke  of  the  nauell  he  doo  perceaue  that  a  deade  body
lyeth  by  hym,  the  feelynge  is  immediatly  refolued.  They  beleue  verely,  that  in  the  nyght,  and  often  tymes  in
theyr  iourneys,  and  efpecially  in  common  and  hygh  wayes,  deade  men  doo  meete  with  the  lyuynge.  Ageynfte
whome,  if  any  man  bee  floute  and  owte  of  feare,  the  phantafye  vanyffheth  incontinentely.  But  yf  anye  feare,
the  phantafy  or  vyfion  doth  foo  affaute  hym  and  flryke  hym  with  further  feare,  that  manye  are  thereby  aflonyffhed
and  haue  the  lymmes  of  theyr  bodyes  taken.  Th[e]inhabytantes  bein^e  demaunded  of  whom  they  had  thofe
vayne  fuperflicions,  they  anfwered  that  they  were  lefte  them  of  theyr  forefathers  as  by  difcent  of  inheritance :
And  that  they  haue  had  the  fame  (before  the  memory  of  man)  compofed  in  certeine  rymes  and  fonges,  which
it  was  lawful  for  none  to  lerne  but  onely  the  kynges  foonnes,  who  commytted  the  fame  to  memorye,  bycaufe
they  hadde  neuer  any  knoweleage  of  letters.  Thefe  they  fynge  beefore  the  people  on  certeyne  folemne  and
fefliuall  dayes,  as  mofl  religious  ceremonies :  whyle  in  the  meane  tyme  they  play  on  a  certeyne  inflrumente
made  of  one  hole  peece  of  woodde  fumwhat  holowe  lyke  a  tymbrell.  Their  preefles  and  diuines  (whom  they
caule  Boitios)  inflructe  them  in  thefe  fuperflitions.  Thefe  preefles,  are  alfo  phifitians,  diuifmge  a  thoufande
craftes  and  fubtylties  howe  to  deceaue  the  fimple  people  which  haue  them  in  greate  reuerence.  For  they
perfuade  them  that  the  Zemes  vfe  to  fpeak  with  theym  familierlye,  and  tel  them  of  thynges  to  come.  And  if  any
haue  bin  ficke  and  are  recouered,  they  make  them  beleue  that  they  obteyned  theyr  healthe  of  the  Zemes.  Thefe
Boitii,  bynde  them  felues  to  muche  faflinge  and  owtewarde  clenlynes  and  pourgeinges :  Efpecially  when  they
take  vppon  them  the  cure  of  any  Prince.  For  then  they  drynke  the  pouder  of  a  certeyne  herbe,  by  whofe
qualitie  they  are  dryuen  into  a  furye :  At  whiche  tyme  (as  they  fay)  they  lerne  many  thynges  by  reuelation  of
the  Zemes.  Then,  puttinge  fecreatly  in  theyr  mouthes,  eyther  a  flone,  or  a  bone,  or  a  piece  of  flefhe,  they
coomme  to  the  ficke  perfon,  commaundinge  al  to  departe  owte  of  that  place,  excepte  one  or  twoo,  whom  it  Ihall
pleafe  the  ficke  man  to  appoynt.  This  doone,  they  goo  about  hym  three  or  foure  tymes,  greatly  deforminge
theyr  faces,  lyppes,  and  nofethrils  with  fundry  fylthy  gieflures :  blowynge,  breathinge,  and  fuckyng  the  forheade,
temples,  and  necke  of  the  pacient,  wherby  (they  faye)  they  drawe  the  euyll  ayer  from  hym,  and  fucke  the  difeafe
owt  of  his  veynes.  Then  rubbinge  hym  about  the  fhoulders,  thyghes,  and  legges,  and  drawynge  downe  theyr
handes  clofe  by  his  feete,  holdinge  them  yet  fade  togyther,  they  runne  to  the  dore  beinge  open,  where  they
vnclofe  and  fliake  theyr  handes,  affirminge  that  they  haue  dryuen  away  the  difeafe,  and  that  the  pacient  fhall
fhortely  bee  perfectly  reflored  to  health.  After  this,  commynge  behynde  hym,  he  conueygheth  the  piece  of
flefhe  owte  of  his  owne  mouth  like  a  iuggeler,  and  fheweth  it  to  the  ficke  man,  fayinge,  behoulde  what  you  haue
eaten  to  muche :  you  fhall  nowe  bee  hole,  bycaufe  I  haue  taken  this  from  you.  But  if  he  intende  yet  further  to
deceaue  the  pacient,  he  perfuadeth  hym  that  his  Zemes  is  angry,  eyther  bycaufe  he  hath  not  buylded  hym  a  chapell,
or  not  honored  hym  religioufly,  or  not  dedicated  vnto  him  a  groue  or  garden.  And  if  it  foo  chaunce  that  the
ficke  perfon  dye,  his  kinffolkes  by  wytchecrafte  enforce  the  deade  to  confeffe  whether  he  dyed  by  naturall  deflenye,
or  by  the  neglygence  of  the  Boitius,  in  that  he  had  not  fafled  as  he  fhulde  haue  doone,  or  not  myniflred  a
conuenient  medicine  for  the  difeafe.  Soo  that  yf  this  phifitian  bee  founde  fautie,  they  take  reuenge  of  hym.  Of
the  flones  or  bones  which  thefe  Boitii  carye  in  theyr  mouthes,  yf  the  women  can  coome  by  them,  they  keepe
them  religioufly  beleauinge  them  to  bee  greatly  effectuall  to  helpe  women  whiche  trauayle  with  chylde :  And
therfore  honoure  them  as  they  doo  theyr  Zemes.  For  dyuers  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  honour  Ze^nes  of  dyuers
faffhions.  Sume  make  theim  of  woodde,  as  they  were  admonyfhed  by  certeyne  viflons  apperinge  vnto  them  in
the  wooddes.  Others,  whiche  haue  receaued  anfwere  of  them  amonge  the  rockes,  make  them  of  flone  and
marble.  Sum  they  make  of  rootes  to  the  fimilitude  of  fuche  as  appeare  to  them  when  they  are  gathering  the
rootes  cauled  Ages,  wherof  they  make  theyr  breade,  as  we  haue  fayde  before.  Thefe  Zemes.,  they  beleue  to  fend
plentie  and  frutefulnes  of  thofe  rootes,  as  the  antiquitie  beleued  fuche  fayries  or  fpirites  as  they  cauled  Dryades,
Hamadryades,  Satyros,  Fanes,  and  Nereides,  to  haue  the  cure  and  prouidence  of  the  fea,  wooddes,  and  fprjTiges
and  fountaynes,  affigninge  to  euery  thynge,  theyr  peculier  goddes.  Euen  foo  doo  th[e]inhabitantes  of  this
Ilande  attribute  a  Zemes  to  euery  thynge,  fuppofinge  the  fame  to  gyue  eare  to  theyr  inuocations.  Wherfore,  as
often  as  the  k)Tiges  aflce  counfaile  of  their  Zemes  as  concerning  their  warres,  increafe  of  fruites  or  fcarfnes,  or
health  and  fickenes,  they  enter  into  the  houfe  dedicate  to  theyr  Zemes,  where,  fnuflfiinge  vp  into  theyr  nofethryls
the  pouder  of  the  herbe  cauled  Cohobba  (whenvith  the  Boitii  are  dryuen  into  a  furj^e)  they  fay  that  immediatly
they  fee  the  houfes  tume  topfy  turuye,  and  men  to  walke  with  theyr  heeles  vpwarde :  of  fuche  force  is  this
pouder  vtterly  to  take  away  all  fenfe.  As  foone  as  this  maddenes  ceafeth,  he  embrafeth  his  knees  with  his  amies,
holdynge  downe  his  heade.  And  when  he  hath  remayned  thus  a  whyle  aftonyfthed,  he  lyfteth  vp  his  heade  as
one  that  came  newe  owt  of  fleepe :  And  thus  loking  vp  towarde  heauen,  Fyrft.  he  fumbeleth  certeyne  confounded
woordes  with  hym  felfe.  Then  certeyne  of  the  nobilitie  or  chiefe  gentelmen  that  are  about  him  (for  none  of  the
common  people  are  admytted  to  thefe  myft.eries)  with  lowde  voyces  gyue  tokens  of  reioyfing  that  he  is  returned
to  them  from  the  fpeache  of  the  Zemes,  demaundynge  of  hym  what  he  hathe  feene. Then  hee  openinge  his

L  2  loi

Phantasies
proceadynge  of
feare.

Al  is  not  good  that
is  owlde

yn^;ynge
pfayinge

Preestes  and
diuines.

PhLsitians.
Ignorance  is
noryshed  with
superstition.

Fastynge  and
outward  clenlynes.

A  pouder  of
maruelous  effectc.

luggelynge.

A  strange  nianer
of  curing

46

Angery  gods

They  make  the
deade  to  speake.

Diuers  Idols  of
sundry  shape.

Fayries  or  spirites
of  the  gentjles.

Peculier  goddes.

They  aske
consaile  of  Idols

The  pouder  of  the
herbe  Cohobba.

Secreate  misteries.

I02

The  fyyjl  Decade,

Reuelations.

The  spirite  of
Apollo.
The  Sibilles

I  haue  harde  the
Ivke  of  other  in
'wnglande.

Hunger)'  and
lecherous  gods.

Children  with  two
crownes

47

V.inderinge
Iniacres.

Mediatours.

A  woman  zemes
of  great  poure.

Fyue  dayes
fastinge.

A  maruelous
illusion  of  the
deuyll.
The  deuyll
sumtyme  telleth
truth.

The  Idols
abolyshed.

mouthe,  doateth  that  the  Zones  fpake  to  hym  duryng  the  tyme  of  his  traunce :  declaring  that  he  had  reuelations
eyther  concerninge  victor)'e  or  deflniction :  foniyne  or  plentie:  health  or  fyckenes,  or  what  foo  euer  happeneth
fyrfl  on  his  toonge.  Nowe  (mode  noble  Prince)  what  neede  you  hereafter  to  marueyle  of  the  fpirite  of  Apollo
foo  fliakynge  his  Sibylles  with  extreme  furie?  Yowe  had  thowght  that  the  fuperRitious  antiquitie  hadde
peryflied.  But  nowe  wheras  I  haue  declared  thus  much  of  the  Zcmes  in  generall,  I  thowght  it  not  good  to  lette
palTe  what  is  fayde  of  them  in  particuler.  They  faye  therefore,  that  a  certeyne  kynge  cauled  Guamaretus^  had
a  Zcmts  whofe  name  was  Corochotum :  who  (they  fay)  was  often  tymes  woonte  to  defcende  from  tlie  hyghefle
place  of  the  houfe  where  Guamaretus  kepte  hym  fafte  bounde.  They  affirme,  that  the  caufe  of  this  his
breakynge  of  his  bandes  and  departure,  was  eyther  to  hyde  hym  felfe,  or  to  goo  feeke  for  meate,  or  els  for  the
acte  of  generation :  And  that  fumtymes  beinge  oftended,  that  the  kynge  Guamaretus  had  byn  negligent  and
flacke  in  honouringe  hym,  he  was  woont  to  lye  hyd  for  certeyne  dayes.  They  fay  alfo  that  in  the  kynges  vylage
there  are  fumtyme  chyldren  borne  hauing  twoo  crownes  which  they  fuppofe  to  bee  the  children  of  Corochotum
the  Zemes.  They  fayne  lykewyfe,  that  Guamaretus  beinge  ouercome  of  his  enemies  in  the  battayle,  and  his
vylage  with  the  palaice  confumed  with  fyer,  Corochot'us  brake  his  bandes  and  was  afterwarde  founde  a  furlonge  of,
fafe  and  withowte  hurte.  He  hath  alfo  an  other  Zemes  cauled  Epileguanita,  made  of  woodde,  in  fhape  lyke  a  foure
footed  beafte :  who  alfo  is  fayde,  often  tymes  to  haue  gonne  from  the  place  where  he  is  honoured,  into  the  wooddes.
As  foone  as  they  perceaue  him  to  bee  gonne,  a  great  multitude  of  them  gather  togyther  to  feeke  hym  with  deuoute
prayers :  And  when  they  haue  fownde  hym,  brynge  hym  home  religioufly  on  theyr  fliulders  to  the  chapell  dedicated
vnto  hym.  But  they  coomplayne  that  fence  the  commynge  of  the  Chriflian  men  into  the  Ilande,  he  fledde  for  all
togyther,  and  coulde  neuer  fence  bee  founde,  wherby  they  diuined  the  deRruction  of  theyr  countrey.  They  honoured
an  other  Zemes  in  the  lykenes  of  a  woman,  on  whom  wayted  twoo  other  lyke  men,  as  they  were  miniflers  to
her.  One  of  thefe,  executed  th[e]office  of  a  mediatour  to  the  other  Zetnes  which  are  vnder  the  power  and
commaundement  of  this  woman,  to  rayfe  wyndes,  cloudes,  and  rayne.  The  other  is  alfo  at  her  commaunde-
mente  a  meffenger  to  the  other  Zemes  whiche  are  ioyned  with  her  in  gouernaunce,  to  gather  togyther  the  waters
whiche  faule  from  the  hygh  hylles  to  the  valleys,  that  beinge  loofed,  they  may  with  force  burfl  owte  into  greate
fluddes  and  ouerflowe  the  countrey  if  the  people  doo  not  gyue  due  honoure  to  her  Image.  There  remayneth
yet  one  thynge  woorthy  to  bee  noted,  whervvith  we  wyll  make  an  ende  of  this  booke.  It  is  a  thynge  well
knowen,  and  yet  freffhe  in  memory  amonge  the  inhabitantes  of  the  Ilande,  that  there  was  fumetyme  twoo
kynges  (of  the  which  one  w^as  the  father  of  Guarionexius  of  whom  we  made  mention  before)  which  were  woont
to  abfteyne  fyue  dayes  togyther  continually  from  meate  and  drinke,  to  knowe  fumwhat  of  theyr  Zefnes  of  thynges
to  coome :  And  that  for  this  faftynge  beinge  acceptable  to  theyr  Zemes,  they  receaued  anfwere  of  them,  that
^vithin  fewe  yeares,  there  fliuld  coome  to  the  Ilande  a  nation  of  men  couered  with  apparell,  which  fliulde
deflroye  al  the  cuflomes  and  cerymonyes  of  the  Hand,  and  eyther  fley  all  theyr  chyldren,  or  brynge  them  into
feruitude.  The  common  fort  of  the  people,  vnderfloode  this  oracle  to  bee  mente  of  the  Canibales.  And
therefore  when  they  had  any  knowleage  of  theyr  commyng,  they  euer  fledde,  and  were  fully  determyned  neuer
more  [to]  aduenture  the  battayle  with  them.  But  when  they  fawe  that  the  Spanyardes  had  entered  into  the
Ilande,  confultinge  amonge  them  felues  of  the  matter,  they  concluded  that  this  was  the  nation  which  was  ment
by  th[e]oracle.  Wherin,  theyr  opinion  deceaued  them  not.  For  they  are  nowe  all  fubiecte  to  the  Chriflians,
all  fuche  beinge  flayne  as  floobernely  refifted.  Nor  yet  remayneth  there  anye  memory  of  theyr  Zemes :  for
they  are  al  brought  into  Spayne,  that  Ave  myght  bee  certified  of  theyr  illufions  of  euyl  fpirites  and  Idoles,  the
which  yowe  yowre  felfe  (mofl.  noble  Prince)  haue  feene  and  felte  when  I  was  prefente  with  yowe.  I  let  pafle
many  thynges  bycaufe  yow  put  me  in  remembrance  that  to  morowe  yowe  take  yowre  iorney  towarde  yowre
countrey,  to  brynge  home  the  queene  yowre  aunte,  whom  yowe  accoompanyed  hether  at  the  commaundemente
of  kynge  Frederyke  yowre  vncle.  Wherfore  I  byd  yowe  farewel  for  this  tyme,  defyrynge  yowe  to  remember
yowre  Martyr,  whome  yowe  haue  compelled  in  the  name  of  the  kynge  yowre  vncle,  to  gather  thefe  fewe
thynges  owte  of  a  large  feelde  of  hyftorj'cs.

The  fyrjl  Decade.

103

C  The  tenth  and  laste  booke  of  the  fyrst  decade,

as  a  conclujion  of  the  former  booke s'.
Wrytten  /^  Inacus  lopez  Mendocius,  coimtie  ^Tenailla,  and  viceroy  e  ^Granata.

T  the  fyrft  begynnynge  and  newe  attempte,  when  Colonus  had  taken  vppon  hym  th[e]enter-
pryfe  to  fearch  the  Ocean  fea,  I  was  erneflly  moued  and  requyred  by  the  letters  of  certeyne
of  my  frendes  and  noble  men  of  Rome  to  wTyte  fuche  thynges  as  (houlde  happen. For  they
whyfpered  with  greate  admiracion,  that  where  as  there  were  many  newe  landes  founde,  and
nations  which  lined  naked  and  after  the  lawe  of  nature,  they  coulde  here  noo  certentie
therof,  beinge  greately  defyrous  of  the  fame. In  this  meane  tyme  had  fortune  ouerthro\vne
Afcanius  (his brother  Lodouike beinge call owt of  Mylayne  by  the  frenchmen)  whofe
autoritie  wold  not  fuffer  me  to  bee  idle,  but  euer  to  haue  my  pen  in  hande. To  hym  I  uTyte  the  twoo  fyrR
bookes  of  this  decade,  befyde  many  other  of  my  hyd  commentaries  whiche  yowe  fliall  fee  (hortely. Fortune
dyd  noo  leffe  withdrawe  my  mynde  frome  wrytynge,  then  diflurbe  Afcanius  from  power. As  he  was  toffed  with
contrary  flormes  and  ceafed  to  perfuade  me,  euen  foo  flacked  my  feruentnes  to  enquyre  any  further,  vntyl  the
yeare  of  Chrifl,e. 1500. When  the  court  remayned  at  Granata  where  yowe  are  viceroye:  At  which  time
Lodouike  the  Cardinall  of  Aragonie,  neuie  to  kynge  Frederike  by  his  brothers  fyde  (beinge  at  Granata  with
the  queene  Parthenopea  the  fyfl,er  of  owre  catholike  kynge)  browght  me  kynge  Frederikes  letters,  wherby  he
exhorted  me  to  fynyftie  the  other  bookes  whiche  folowed  the  twoo  epyftell  bookes,  which  I  wryte  to  Afcanius.
For  they  both  acknowleaged  that  they  hadde  the  copie  of  all  that  I  wryte  to  cardinall  Afcafiiiis. And  albeit
that  euen  then  I  was  ficke  (as  yowe  knowe)  yet  tooke  I  the  burden  vppon  me,  and  applyed  my  felfe  to  \\Tytynge.
I  haue  therfore  chofen  thefe  fewe  thynges,  owte  of  a  greate  heape  of  fuche  as  feemed  to  me  mofl  woorthy  to
bee  noted  amonge  the  large  wrytynges  of  the  autoures  and  fearchers  of  the  fame. Wherfore,  forafmuch  as  yowe
haue  endeuoured  to  wrefl.e  owt  of  my  handes  the  hole  exemple  of  al  my  woorkes,  to  adde  the  fame  to  the
innumerable  volumes  of  yowre  librarie,  I  thowght  it  good  nowe  to  make  a  breefe  reherfall  of  thofe  thynges
which  were  done  from  that  yeare  of  a  thowfande  and  fyue  hundreth,  euen  vnto  this  yeare  which  is  the  tenth
from  that. For  I  entende  to  \vryte  more  largelye  of  thefe  thynges  hereafter,  if  god  graunte  me  lyfe. I  hadde
wrytten  a  hole  booke  by  it  felfe  of  the  fuperftitions  of  the  people  of  the  Ilande,  fuppofmge  therivith  to  haue
accomplyflied  the  hole  Decade  confiflynge  of  tenne  bookes. But  I  haue  added  this  to  the  tenthe  as  a  per-
pendiculer  lyne,  and  as  it  were  a  backe  guyde  or  rerewarde  to  the  other:  So  that  yowe  may  knytte  the  f>Tfl
tenthe,  to  the  nynthe,  and  impute  this  to  occupie  the  place  of  the  tenthe  to  fyll  vp  the  Decade. This  order
haue  I  appoynted,  lefl  I  fhulde  bee  compelled  often  times  to  wryte  ouer  the  hole  woorke,  or  fende  yowe  the
fame  defaced  with  blottes  and  interlynynge. But  nowe  let  vs  coome  to  owre  purpofe. The  fhippe  mafters
and  maryners  ranne  ouer  many  coaft.es  durynge  thefe  tenne  yeares :  But  euer  folowed  fuche  as  were  fpfte
fownde  by  Colonus. For  rafmge  continually  alonge  by  the  tracte  of  Faria,  which  they  beleue  to  bee  parte  of
the  firme  lande  or  continent  of  eaft.e  India,  fume  of  theym  chaunced  vppon  certeyne  newe  landes  towarde  the
eafte,  and  fume  towarde  the  weft.e,  in  which  they  fownde  bothe  goulde  and  frankenfence. For  they  browght
from  thenfe  many  iewels  and  ouches  of  golde,  and  greate  plentie  of  frankenfence,  whiche  they  had  of  the
people  of  thofe  countreys,  partely  for  exchange  of  fume  of  owre  thynges,  and  partely  by  force,  ouercommjaige
them  by  warre. Yet  in  fume  places,  althowgh  they  bee  naked,  they  ouercame  owre  men,  and  flewe  hole
armyes. For  they  are  excedinge  fierce,  and  vfe  venemous  arrowes,  and  longe  ftaues  lyke  iauelens,  made  harde
at  the  ende  with  fyer. They  fownde  many  beaft,es,  both  creepinge  and  foure  footed,  muche  differinge  from
owres,  variable  and  of  fundrye  ftaapes  innumerable :  yet  not  hurtfuU,  excepte  Lyons,  Tygers,  and  Crocodiles.
This  I  meane  in  fundry  Regions  of  that  greate  lande  of  Faria :  but  not  in  the  Ilandes :  Noo  not  foo  .nuch  as
one. For  all  the  beaft.es  of  the  Ilandes,  are  meeke  and  withowte  hurte,  except  men  which  (as  wee  haue  fayde)
are  in  many  Ilandes  deuourers  of  mans  fleffhe. There  are  alfo  dyuers  kyndes  of  foules. And  in  many  places
battes  of  fuch  bygnes,  that  they  are  equall  with  turtle  doues. Thefe  battes,  haue  often  tymes  aflauted  men  in
the  nyght  in  theyr  fleepe,  and  foo  bytten  them  with  theyr  venemous  teethe,  that  they  haue  byn  therby  almofte
dryuen  to  madnes,  in  foo  much  that  they  haue  byn  compelled  to  flye  from  fuch  places,  as  from  rauenous  harpies.
In  an  other  place,  where  certeyne  of  them  flepte  in  the  nyght  feafon  on  the  fandes  by  the  fea  fyde,  a  monfter
commynge  owte  of  the  fea,  came  vppon  one  of  them  fecreatly  and  caryed  hym  away  by  the  myddefte  owte  of
the  fight  of  his  felowes  to  whome  he  cryed  in  vayne  for  helpe  vntyll  the  beafte  lepte  into  the  fea  with  her  praye.

t03

The  Lawe  of
nature.

Milayne  in  the
hands  of  the
frenchmen

48

Epistel  books

The  historj-e
folownng,
conteymeth  the
actes  of  ten  yeare

Paria,  part  of  the
firme  land  of  East
India

Golde  and
frankensence.

The  fiercenes  of
the  naked  people.
Innumerable
beastes  vnlyke
vnto  owres.

Nothing  hurtful!
in  the  Ilandes.

Battes  as  bygge
as  turtle  doucs.

A  man  deuoured
of  a  monster  of
the  sea

104

The  fyrjt  Decade.

The  SpcinyarJes
prefer  them  selues
to  subdue  the
uewe  landes.

Note  the  l.xrgenes
of  the  newe  landes.

Commendacion  of
the  Spaniardes.

49

Antipodts.

The  autours
excusse.

Hisfaniola.

The  nature  of  the
place,  altereth
the  formes  and
qualities  of
thynges.

Wheate.

Herbes.

Catayle.

Hogges.

Plentie  of  beastes
and  foule.

Cuba,  is  an
Ilande.

The  description
of  Cubx

The  Hand  of
Burichema  or
S.  lohannis.

Golde  mynes

The  order  of
woorkynge  in  the
golde  mynes.
The  kynges
brynge  theyr
subiectes
to  woorke  in
the  golde  mynes.

Tyllage.

50

They  abhorre
laboure

They  are  docible.

The  kynges
chyldren.

It  was  the  kynges  pleafuie  that  they  fluilcle  remayne  in  thefe  landes,  and  buylde  townes  and  fortrefles. Where

vnto  they  were  foo  wel  wyllynge,  that  dyuers  profered  them  fehies  to  take  vppon  them  the  fubduing  of  the

lande,  makyng  great  fute  to  the  kynge  that  they  might  bee  appoynted  therto. The  coafle  of  this  tracte  is

e.xceadynge  greate  and  Lirge:  and  the  Regions  and  landes  therof  extende  maruelous  farre:  Soo  that  they

affirme  the  continent  of  thefe  Regions  with  the  Ilandes  abowte  the  fame,  to  bee  thryfe  as  bygge  as  al  Europe,

befyde  thofe  landes  that  the  Portugales  haue  fownde  fouthwarde,  whiche  are  alfo  exceadynge  large. Therfore

doubtlefle  Spayne  hathe  deferued  greate  prayfe  in  thefe  owre  dayes,  in  that  it  hath  made  knowen  vnto  us  foo

niany  thowfondes  of  Antipodes  which  leye  hyd  before  and  vnknowen  to  owre  forefathers  :  And  hath  thereby

mynyRred  fo  large  matter  to  wryte  of,  to  fuche  lerncd  wyttes  as  are  defyrous  to  fette  furthe  knowleage  to  the

commoditie  of  men  :  to  whom  I  opened  a  way  when  I  gathered  thefe  thynges  rudely  to  gyther  as  yowe  fee :

The  which,  neuerthelefle  I  trurt,  yowe  wyll  take  in  good  parte,  afwell  for  that  I  can  not  adourne  my  rudenes

with  better  veflure,  as  alfo  that  I  neuer  tooke  penne  in  hande  to  wryte  lyke  an  hiftoriographer,  but  only  by

epillels  fcribeled  in  hafle,  to  fatiffie  theym,  from  whofe  commaundementes  I  myght  not  drawe  backe  my  foote.

But  now  I  haue  digreffed  enowghe. Let  vs  nowe  therefore  returne  to  Hifpaiiiola. Owre  men  haue  founde  by

experience,  that  the  breade  of  the  Hand  is  of  fmaule  llrength  to  fuch  as  haue  byn  vfcd  to  owr  breade  made  of

wheate  :  And  that  theyr  flren[g]thes  were  much  decayed  by  vfynge  of  the  fame. Wherfore  the  king  hath  of  late

commaunded  that  wheate  fliulde  bee  fowen  there  in  diuers  places  and  at  fundry  tymes  of  the  yeare. It  groweth

into  holowe  reedes,  with  fewe  eares,  but  thofe  verye  bygge  and  frutefuU. Theyfynde  the  lyke  foftenes  or  delicatenes

to  bee  in  herbes,  which  growe  there  to  the  height  of  corne. Neat  or  cattail,  becoome  of  bygger  flature  and

exceadynge  fat,  but  theyr  flefflie  is  more  vnfauery,  and  theyr  bones  (as  they  fay)  eyther  withowte  marye,  or  the

fame  to  bee  verye  wateryffhe. But  of  hogges  and  fwyne,  they  affirme  the  contrarye,  that  they  are  more  holfoome

and  of  better  tafle,  by  reafon  of  certeyne  wylde  frutes  whiche  they  eate,  beinge  of  muche  better  nooryfhement

then  mafle. There  is  almofl  none  other  kynd  of  flefflie  commonly  foulde  in  the  market. The  multitude  of  hogges,

are  excedingly  encreafed,  and  becoome  wylde  as  foone  as  they  are  owte  of  the  fwyneheardes  keepynge. They

haue  fuche  plentie  of  beafl.es  and  foules,  that  they  fliall  heareafter  haue  noo  neede,  to  haue  any  brought  from

other  places. Th[e]increafe  of  all  beafles,  growe  bygger  then  the  broode  they  came  of,  by  reafon  of  the  rankenes

of  the  paflure,  althowgh  theyr  feadynge  bee  only  of  graffe,  withowte  eyther  barley  or  other  grayne. But  wee

haue  fayde  enowgh  of  Hifpaniola. They  haue  nowe  fownde  that  Cuba,  (which  of  longe  tyme  they  thowght  to

haue  byn  firme  lande  for  the  greate  length  therof)  is  an  Ilande. Yet  is  it  noo  maruell  that  th[e]inhabitantes  them

felues  towlde  owtc  men  when  they  fearched  the  length  therof,  that  it  was  withowte  ende. For  this  nacion  being

naked  and  contente  with  a  lyttle,  and  with  the  limittes  of  theyr  owne  contrey,  is  not  greatly  curyous  to  know

what  theyr  neyghbours  doo,  or  the  largenes  of  theyr  dominion. Nor  yet  knewe  they  if  there  were  any  other

thinge  vnder  heauen,  befyde  that  whiche  they  walked  on  with  theyr  feete. Cuba,  is  frome  the  Ealle  into  the

Wefl.e,  muche  longer  then  Hifpaniola :  And  in  breadthe  from  the  Northe  to  the  Southe,  much  leffe  then  they

fuppofed  at  the  fyrfl, :  for  it  is  very  narowe  in  refpecte  to  the  length :  And  is  for  the  mofte  parte,  very  frutefuU

and  pleafaunt,  Eaflwarde  not  farre  from  Hifpaniola,  there  lyethe  an  Ilande,  leffe  then  Hifpaniola  more  then  by

the  halfe,  which  owre  men  cauled  Sa7i6li  lohannis,  beinge  in  maner  fquare. In  this  they  founde  excedynge  ryche

golde  mynes. But  beinge  nowe  occupied  in  the  golde  mynes  of  Hifpaniola,  they  haue  not  yet  fent  labourers  into

that  Hand. But  the  plentie  and  reuenewe  of  golde  of  al  other  Regions,  gyue  place  to  Hifpaniola,  where  they

gyue  theim  felues  in  maner  to  none  other  thynge  then  to  gather  golde,  of  which  woorke  this  order  is  appoynted.

To  euery  fuch  wyttie  and  fkylfull  man  as  is  put  in  trufl.e  to  bee  a  furuoier  or  ouerfeer  of  thefe  woorkes,  there  is

affigned  one  or  more  kynges  of  the  Ilande  with  theyr  fubiectes. Thefe  kynges  accordyng  to  theyr  league,  coome

with  theyr  people  at  certeyne  tymes  of  the  yeare,  and  reforte  euery  of  them  to  the  golde  myne  to  the  which  he  is

affigned :  where  they  haue  all  maner  of  dygginge  or  myninge  tooles  deliuered  them :  And  euery  kynge  with  his

men,  haue  a  certeyne  rewarde  alowed  them  for  theyr  labour. For  when  they  departe  from  the  mynes  to  fowynge

of  corne,  and  other  tyllage  (wherunto  they  are  addict  at  certeyne  other  tymes,  leafle  theyr  foode  fliulde  fayle

them)  they  receaue  for  theyr  laboure,  one  a  ierken,  or  a  dublet,  an  other  a  flierte,  an  other  a  cloke  or  a  cappe.

For  they  nowe  take  pleafure  in  thefe  thynges,  and  goo  no  more  naked  as  they  were  wont  too  doo. And  thus

they  vfe  the  helpe  and  laboure  of  the  inhabitantes  both  for  the  tyllage  of  theyr  ground,  and  in  theyr  gold  mines

as  thowghe  they  were  theyr  feruauntes  or  bondemen. They  beare  this  yoke  of  feruitude  with  an  euyll  wyll :  but

yet  they  beare  it. They  caule  thefe  hyred  labourers,  Ajiaborias. Yet  the  kynge  doth  not  fufFer  that  they  fliulde

bee  vfed  as  bondemen :  And  onely  at  his  pleafure  they  are  fette  at  libertie  or  appoynted  to  woorke. At  fuche

tyme  as  they  are  cauled  together  of  theyr  kynges  to  woorke  (as  fouldiers  or  pioners  are  affembled  of  theyr

centurians)  many  of  them  fl.ele  away  to  the  mountaynes  and  wooddes,  where  they  lye  lurkynge,  beinge  content

for  that  tyme  to  lyue  with  wyld  frutes,  rather  then  to  take  the  paynes  to  laboure. They  are  docible  and  apte  to

lerne,  and  haue  nowe  vtterly  forgotten  theyr  owlde  fuperfticions. They  beleue  godly,  and  beare  wel  in  memory

fuche  thynges  as  they  haue  lerned  of  owre  faith. Theyr  kynges  children  are  brought  vp  with  the  chiefefl.  of  owre

104

The  fyrft  Decade,

105

men,  and  are  indructed  in  letters  and  good  maners.  When  they  are  growen  to  mans  age,  they  fende  them  home
to  theyr  countreys  to  bee  exemple  to  other,  and  efpecially  to  goueme  the  people  if  theyr  fathers  bee  dead  that
they  maye  the  better  fet  foorthe  the  Chriflian  Religion,  and  keepe  theyr  fubiectes  in  loue  and  obedience.  By
reafon  whereof,  they  coome  nowe  by  fayre  meanes  and  gentell  perfuafions  to  the  mynes  which  lye  in  twoo
Regions  of  the  Ilande  aboute  thirtie  myles  diflante  frome  the  citie  of  Dofninka :  wherof  the  one  is  cauled  Sanili
Chrijlophori:  And  the  other  being  diflante  aboute  foure  fcore  and  tenne  myles,  is  cauled  Cibaua,  not  farre  from
the  cheefe  hauen  cauled  Forties  Rcgalis.  Thefe  regions  are  very  large :  In  the  which  in  many  places  here  and
there,  are  fownd  fumtyme  euen  in  the  vpper  crufl  of  the  earth  and  fumtyme  amonge  the  flones,  certeyne  rounde
pieces  or  plates  of  golde,  fumtyme  of  fmaule  quantitie,  and  in  fum  places  of  great  v/eyght :  In  fo  muche  that  there
hath  byn  found  rounde  pieces  of  three  hundreth  pounde  weyght,  and  one  of  three  thoufande,  three  hundreth
and  tenne  pounde  weyght :  The  whiche  (as  yowe  harde)  was  fente  hole  to  the  kynge  in  that  fhyppe  in  the  which
the  gouernour  Boadilla  was  comming  home  into  Spayne,  the  fhyppe  with  all  the  men  beinge  drowned  by  the
way,  by  reafon  it  was  ouer  laden  with  the  weight  of  golde  and  multytude  of  men.  Albeit,  there  were  moo  then
a  thowefande  perfons  whiche  fawe  and  handeled  the  piece  of  golde.  And  wheras  here  I  fpeake  of  a  pounde,
I  doo  not  meane  the  common  pounde,  but  the  fumme  of  the  ducate  of  golde,  with  the  coyne  cauled  Trims,
which  is  the  thyrde  parte  of  a  pounde,  whiche  they  caule  Fefus.  The  fum  of  the  weyght  hereof,  the  Spanyardes
caule  Cajlella7iu7n  Atireum.  Al  the  golde  that  is  dygged  in  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua  and  Porte  Regale,  is
caryed  to  the  towre  of  Conception,  where  fhoppes  with  al  thynges  apperteyninge  are  redy  fumyffhed  to  f}Tie  it,
melte  it,  and  cafle  it  into  wedges.  That  doone,  they  take  the  kynges  portion  therof,  whiche  is  the  fyfte  parte,
and  foo  reflore  to  euery  man  his  owne  whiche  he  gotte  with  his  labour.  But  the  golde  whiche  is  fo\\iide  in
faynt  Chriflophers  myne  and  the  Region  there  aboute,  is  caryed  to  the  fhoppes  whiche  are  in  the  vylage  cauled
Bonauentura.  In  thefe  twoo  fhoppes,  is  molten  yerely,  aboue  three  hundreth  thoufand  pounde  weight  of  golde.
If  any  man  bee  knowen  deceatefully  to  keepe  backe  any  portion  of  golde,  whereof  he  hathe  not  made  the  kynges
officers  pryuie,  he  forfiteth  the  fame  for  a  fyne.  There  chaunce  amonge  them  often  tymes  many  contentions
and  controuerfies,  the  whiche  onleffe  the  magiftrates  of  the  Ilande  doo  fynyffhe,  the  cafe  is  remoued  by  appellation
to  the  hyghe  counfayle  of  the  courte,  from  whofe  fentence  it  is  not  lawfull  to  appele  in  all  the  dominions  of
Caflyle.  But  lette  vs  nowe  returne  to  the  newe  landes  frome  whenfe  we  haue  digreffed.  They  are  innumerable,
dyuers,  and  exceadynge  fortunate.  Wherfore  the  Spanyardes  in  thefe  owre  dayes,  and  theyr  noble  enterprj-fes,
doo  not  gyue  place  eyther  to  the  factes  of  Saturtms,  or  Hercules,  or  any  other  of  the  ancient  princes  of  famous
memorie  which  were  canonized  amonge  the  goddes  cauled  Heroes  for  theyr  fearchinge  of  newe  landes  and
regions,  and  bringinge  the  fame  to  better  culture  and  ciuilitie.  Oh  God  :  howe  large  and  farre  fhal  o-rtc
pofteritie  fee  the  Chriflian  Religion  extended?  Howe  large  a  campe  haue  they  nowe  to  wander  in,  whiche  by
the  trewe  nobilitie  that  is  in  theym,  or  mooued  by  vertue,  wyll  attempte  eyther  to  deferue  lyke  prayfe  amonge
men,  or  reputacion  of  well  doinge  before  god.  What  I  conceaue  in  my  mynde  of  thefe  thynges,  I  am  not  able
to  expreffe  with  penne  or  tonge.  I  wyll  nowe  therfore  foo  make  an  ende  of  this  perpendiculer  conclufion  of  the
hole  Decade,  as  myndinge  hereafter  to  fearche  and  gather  euery  thynge  particulerlye,  that  I  maye  at  further
leafure  wryte  the  fame  more  at  large.  For  Colonus  the  Admiral  with  foure  fhyppes,  and  a  hundreth  threefcore
and  tenne  men  appoynted  by  the  kynge,  difcouered  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifle.  1502.  the  lande  ouer  agejmfte  the
welle  comer  of  Cuba,  diflant  from  the  fame  aboute  a  hundreth  and  thirtie  leaques :  In  the  myddefl  of  which
tracte,  lyeth  an  Ilande  cauled  Guanaffa.  From  henfe  he  directed  his  vyage  backewarde  towarde  the  Eafle
by  the  fhore  of  that  coafl,  fuppofmge  that  he  fliulde  haue  founde  the  coafles  of  Paria:  but  it  chaunced
otherwyfe.  It  is  fayd  alfo  that  Vincetztiiis  Ag?ies  (of  whom  we  haue  fpoken  before)  and  one  Io/ia?wes  Diaz
(with  d)aiers  other  of  whofe  vyages  I  haue  as  yet  no  certeyne  knowleage)  haue  ouer  runne  thofe  coafles.
But  if  God  graunt  me  life,  I  trufl  to  know  the  truthe  hereof  and  to  aduertife  yowe  of  the  fame.  Thus  fare
ye  well.

C The  feconde  Decade  foloweth.

The  two  chiefe
eolde  mynes  of
hispaniola.

Golde  founde  in
the  vpper  part  of
the  earth.

A  piece  of  golde
weighinge  three
thousande  three
hundreth  and  ten
pounds.

A  coastly  ship
wrake.

Pesus.

The  fynynge  and
distribution  of
golde.

Three  hundreth
thousand  weyght
of  gold  molten
yerely  in
hispaniola.

Controuerses

The  newe  landes.

The  Spanyardes
noble  enterpryses.
are  not  inferiour
to  the  actes  of
Hercules  or
Satumus.  etc.

Enlarging  of  the
Christian  Religion.

The  originall  of
trewe  nobilitie.

51

The  Ilande  of
Guanassa

The  vyage  of
Johannes  Diaz.

io6

West  Antipodes.

The  increase  of
the  Christian
congregation.

Christoplwrus

Colonus.

Of  landes  distante

from  the

Equinoctiall  from

fyue  degrees  to

ten.

The  death  of

Colonus.

A  generall  lycence.

The  nauigation  of
Alphonsus  Fogeda,

52

Partus
Carthaginis.

The  Region  of
Caramairi.

People  of  goodly
stature

Apples  whiche
tume  into
woormes.

CTHE  FYRST BOOKE  OF THE  SECONDE DECADE,
TO  LEO  BYSSHOP  OF  ROME,  THE  TENTHE  OF  THAT  NAME,

Of  the  fuppofed  Continent  or  firme  lande.

JENSE  the  tyme  that  Galeatiiis  Butrigarius  of  Bononie,and  Johannes
Curfius  of  Florence  (mofle  holye  father)  came  to  the  catholyke
kynge  of  Spayne,  the  one,  of  yowre  holynes  ambafage,  and
th[e]other  for  th[e]affaires  of  his  common  welth,  I  was  euer  for
the  mofle  parte  in  theyr  coompanie,  and  for  theyr  vertues  and
wyfedoome,  had  theym  in  greate  reuerence. And  wheras  they
were  greatly  gyuen  to  fludye,  and continual! reuoluinge of
dyuers autours,  they  chaunced  vppon  certeyne  bookes  negli-
gently let  flyppe  owte  of  my  handes,  entreatinge  of  the  large
landes and Regions hetherto lyinge hyd,  and  almofl. wefl
Antipodes,  fownde of  late  by the  Spanyardes. Yet  beinge
allured  and  delited  with  the  newenes  and  flrangenes of  the
matter  althowgh  rudely  adourned,  they  commended  the  fame :
Therwith  erneflely  defyringe  me in theyr  owne  names,  and
requyring  me  in  the name of  yowr  holynes,  to adde  here
vnto  all  fuche  thynges  as  were  fownde  after  that  tyme,  and  to  gyue
them  a  copie  thereof  to  fende  to  yowre  holynes,  that  yowe  myght
therby  vnderflande,  bothe  howe  greate  commoditie  is  chaunced
to  the  progenye  of  mankynde,  as  alfo  increafe  of  the  militante  congregation  in  thefe  owre  dayes,  by  the  fortunate
enterpryfes  of  the  kynges  of  Spayne. For  lyke  as rafed  or  vnpaynted  tables,  are  apte to  receaue  what
formes  foo  euer  are  fyrft drawen  theron  by  the  hande  of  the  paynter, euen  foo  thefe  naked  and  fimple
people, doo  foone  receaue  the  cuftomes  of  owre  Religion,  and  by  conuerfation  with  owre  men,  fhake  of
theyr  fierce  and natiue barbaroufnes. I  haue  thowght  it good therfore to fatiffie  the  requefl of  thefe
wyfe men, efpecially  vfinge th[e]autoritie of yowre name, wherunto not to haue obeyed, I fliulde
efleeme  my  felfe  to  haue  commytted  a  heynous  offence. Wherefore  I  wyl  nowe  brefely  reherfe  in  order,  what
hyd  coafles  the  Spanyardes  ouerranne,  who  were  the  autours  therof,  where  they  refled,  what  further  hope  they
browght,  and  fynallye  what  great  thynges  thofe  tractes  of  landes  doo  promeffe  in  tyme  to  coome. In  the
declaration  of  my  decade  of  the  Ocean,  which  is  nowe  printed  and  difperfed  throwghowte  Chriflendome
vnwares  to  me,  I  defcribed  howe  Chrijlophorus  Colonus  fownde  thofe  Ilandes  wherof  we  haue  fpoken,  and  that
turnynge  from  thenfe  towarde  the  lefte  hande  fouthwarde,  he  chaunced  into  greate  regions  of  landes,  and  large
feas,  diflant  from  the  Equinoctial  lyne,  onely  from  fyue  degrees  to  tenne :  where  he  founde  brode  ryuers  and
exceadinge  hygh  mountaynes  couered  with  fnowe  and  harde  by  the  fea  bankes,  where  were  many  commodious
and  quyet  hauens. But  Colonus  being  now  departed  owte  of  this  lyfe,  the  kynge  beganne  to  take  care,  howe
thofe  landes  myght  be  inhabited  with  Chriflian  men  to  th[e]increafe  of  owre  fayth:  Where  vppon  he  gaue
licence  by  his  letters  patentes  to  al  fuch  as  wolde  take  the  matter  in  hand,  and  efpecially  to  twoo,  wherof  Diego
Niciiefa  was  one,  and  the  other  was  Alphonfiis  Fogeda. Wherfore  about  the  Ides  of  December,  Alphonfus
departinge  fyrfl  with  three  hundreth  fouldiers  from  the  Hande  of  Hifpaniola  {in  the  which  wee  fayde  the  Span-
yardes had  builded  a  citie,  and  planted  theyr  habitacion)  and  faylynge  in  maner  full  fouthe,  he  came  to  one  of
the  hauens  founde  before  whiche Colo7im  named  Portus  Carthaginis,  bothe  bycaufe  of  the  Hande  ftandynge
ageynfte  the  courfe  of  the  ftreame,  and  alfo  that  by  reafon  of  the  largenes  of  the  place  and  bendynge  fydes,  it
is  muche  lyke  to  the  hauen  of  Spaine  cauled  Carthago. Th[e]inhabitantes  caule  the  Hande  Codego,  as  the
Spanyardes  caule  the  Hande  of  theyr  hauen,  Scombria. This  Region  is  cauled  of  the  inhabitantes  Caramairi:
In  the  which  they  afifirme  bothe  the  men  and  women  to  bee  of  goodly  flature,  but  naked. The  men  haue
theyr  heare  cutte  rownde  by  theyr  eares,  but  the  women  were  it  longe. Bothe  the  men  and  women  are  very
good  archers. Owre  men  fownde  certen  trees  in  this  prouince,  which  bore  greate  plentie  of  fweete  apples,  but
hurteful,  for  they  tume  into  wormes  when  they  are  eaten. Efpecially  the  fhado\\e  of  the  tree,  is  contagious,
1 06

The  fecoude  Decade.

107

for  fuche  as  fleepe  vnder  it  any  tyme,  haue  theyr  headdes  fwolne  and  lofe  theyr  fight. But  if  they  fleepe  but  a
whyle,  theyr  fyght  commeth  ageyne  after  a  fewe  dayes. This  porta  is  dyftant  foure  hundreth  fyftie  and  fyxe
myles  from  that  parte  of  Hifpa?iiola  which  the  Spanyardes  caule  Beata,  in  the  which  alfo  they  fumyffhe  them
felues  when  they  prepare  anye  vyage  to  feeke  other  newe  landes. When  Fogeda  had  entered  into  the  hauen,
he  inuaded,  flewe,  and  fpoyled  the  people,  whome  he  founde  naked  and  fcattered. For  they  were  g>Tjen  hym
for  a  praye,  by  the  kynges  letters  patentes  bycaufe  they  hadde  bin  before  tyme  cruel  ageynfl  the  Chriflians,  and
coulde  neuer  bee  allured  to  permytte  them  quietly  to  coome  within  theyr  dominions. Here  they  founde  gold,
but  in  no  greate  quantitie,  nor  yet  that  pure. They  make  of  it,  certeyne  brefl  plates  and  brooches,  which  they
weare  for  coomelynes. But  Fogeda  not  content  with  thefe  fpoyles,  vfinge  certeyne  captiues  whiche  he  had
taken  before,  for  guydes,  entered  into  a  vyllage  twelue  myles  diflante  frome  the  fea  fyde  further  into  the  lande,
into  the  whiche  they  were  fledde  whom  he  fyrR  inuaded. Here  he  founde  a  naked  people,  but  apte  to  warre.
For  they  were  armed  with  targettes,  fhieldes,  longe  fwoordes  made  of  wood,  and  bowes  with  arrowes  typte  with
bone,  or  hardened  with  fyer. As  foone  as  they  had  efpyed  owre  men,  they  with  their  gefles  whom  they  had
receaued,  affayled  them  with  defperate  myndes,  beinge  therto  more  emeflly  prouoked,  beholding  the  calamitie
of  thefe  whiche  fledde  vnto  theym,  by  the  violence  doone  to  theyr  women  and  chyldren,  in  the  fpoyle  and
flawghter. In  this  conflicte  owre  men  had  the  ouerthrowe :  In  the  which,  one  lohannes  de  Lacoffa  (bemge  in
autoritie  nexte  vnto  Fogeda  the  capitayne,  and  alfo  the  fyrfle  that  gathered  golde  in  the  fandes  of  Vrada)  was
flayne  with  fyftie  fouldiers. For  thefe  people  infecte  theyr  arrowes  with  the  deadly  poyfon  of  a  certeyne  herbe.
The  other  with  theyr  capitayne  Fogeda  beinge  difcomfited,  fledde  to  the  fliyppes. Whyle  they  remayned  thus
in  the  hauen  of  Carthago  forowfuU  and  penfyue  for  the  loffe  of  their  companions,  the  other  capitayne  Diego
Nicuefa,  (whom  they  lefte  in  Hifpaniola,  preparyng  hym  felfe  towarde  the  vyage  in  the  hauen  Bcata)  came  to
theim  with  fyue  fhippes  and  feuen  hundrethe  foure  fcore  and  fyfteene  menne. For  the  greater  number  of
fouldyers,  folowed  Nicuefa,  both  bycaufe  free  libertie  was  gyuen  them  to  choofe  which  of  the  capytaynes  them
lyfl,  and  alfo  that  by  reafon  of  his  age,  he  was  of  greater  autoritie :  But  efpecially  bycaufe  the  rumoure  was  that
Beragua  beinge  by  the  kynges  commiffion  appoynted  to  Nicuefa,  was  rycher  in  golde  then  Vraba  affigned  to
Alphonfus  Fogeda. Therfore,  at  the  arryuall  of  Nicuefa,  they  confulted  what  was  befle  to  bee  doone :  And
determyned  fyrfle  to  reuenge  the  deathe  of  their  felowes. Where  vppon,  fettynge  theyr  battayle  in  arraye,  they
marched  in  the  nyght  towarde  them  whiche  flewe Coffa  with  his  coompanyons. Thus  flealynge  on  them
vnwares  in  the  lafl.  watche  of  the  nyght,  and  encoompafmge  the  vyllage  where  they  laye,  confiflynge  of  a
hundreth  howfes  and  more,  hauynge  alfo  in  it  thryfe  as  many  of  theyr  neyghbours  as  of  them  felues,  they  fet
it  on  fyer,  with  diligent  watche  that  none  myght  efcape. And  thus  in  fhorte  tyme  they  browght  theym  and
theyr  howfes  to  afQies,  and  made  them  pay  the  raunfome  of  bludde  with  bludde. For  of  a  greate  multitude  of
men  and  women,  they  fpared  onely  fyxe  chyldren,  al  other  being  deflroyed  \vith  fyer  or  fword  except  fewe
which  efcaped  priuilye. They  lerned  by  the  referued  chyldren,  that Coffa  and  his  felowes  were  cutte  in
pieces  and  eaten  of  them  that  flewe  them. By  reafon  wherof,  they  fuppofe  that  thefe  people  of  Caramairi
tooke  theyr  originall  of  the  Caribes  otherwyfe  cauled  Canibales. Here  they  founde  fume  golde  amonge  the
afflies. For  the  hunger  of  golde,  dyd  noo  leffe  encorage  owr  men  to  aduenture  thefe  perels  and  labours
then  dyd  the  poffeffynge  of  the  landes. Thefe  thynges  thus  fynyffhed,  and  the  death  of  Coffa  and  his  felowes
reuenged,  they  returned  to  the  hauen. After  this,  Fogeda  whiche  came  fyrfl,  fyrft,  lykewyfe  departinge  with  his
army  to  feeke  Vraba,  commytted  to  his  gouernaunce,  fayled  by  an  Ilande  cauled  Fortis,  lyinge  in  the  mydwaye
betwene  Vraba  and  the  hauen  of  Carthago. In  to  the  which  defcendinge,  he  fownde  it  to  bee  an  Ilande  of  the
Canybales,  brynginge  with  hym  frome  thenfe  two  men  and  feuen  women:  for  the  refiduc-  efcaped. Here  he
fownde  in  the  cotages  of  them  that  fledde,  a  hundrethe  foure  fcore  and  tenne  drammes  of  golde,  cafle  and
wTTought  in  dyuers  formes. Saylynge  forwarde  from  henfe,  he  came  to  the  Eafle  coaft.es  of  Vraba,  whiche
th[e]inhabitantes  caule  Caribana,  from  whenfe  the  Caribes  or  Canibales  of  the  Ilandes  are  fayde  to  haue  theyr
name  and  originall. Here  he  beganne  to  buylde  a  fortrefle,  and  a  vyllage  nere  vnto  the  fame,  therein  intendjTige
to  place  theyr  fyrft  habitacion. Shortly  after,  beinge  inftructed  by  certeyne  captyues  that  there  was  aboute
twelue  myles  further  within  the  lande,  a  certeyne  vyllage  cauled  Tirufi,  hauinge  in  it  a  rj-che  golde  mvne,  he
determyned  to  deftroye  the  vylage. To  the  which  when  he  came,  he  fo^vnde  th[e]inhabitantes  redye  to  defende
theyr  ryght:  And  that  foo  ftoutly,  that  encounteryng  with  them,  he  was  repulfed  with  fhame  and  domage. For
thefe  people  alfo,  vfe  bowes  and  venemous  arrowes. Within  a  fewe  dayes  after,  beinge  enforfed  for  lacke  of
vytayles  to  inuade  an  other  vyllage,  he  hym  felfe  was  ftryken  in  the  thyghe  with  an  arrowe. Sume  of  his  felowes
fay,  that  he  was  thus  wounded  of  one  of  th[e]inhabytantes  whofe  \vyfe  he  had  ledde  awaye  captiue  before.
They  fay  alfo  that  he  had  firft  frendly  comoned  with  Fogeda  for  redemynge  of  his  wyfe,  and  had  appoynted  a
day  to  brynge  a  portion  of  golde  for  her  raunfome :  And  that  he  came  at  the  daye  affigned,  not  laden  with  golde,
but  armed  with  bowes  and  arrowes,  with  eyght  other  confetherate  with  hym,  whiche  had  bin  before  partetakers
of  the  iniuries  doone  to  them  firft  at  the  hauen  of  Carthago,  and  afterward  at  the  burnyng  of  the  vyllage. In

A  tree  whose
shadowe  Ls
hurtfulL

Fogeda  his

autoritie  confirmed
I  by  the  kynges
I  letters  patents.

Warlyke  people.

The  Spanyardes
haue  the
ouerthrowe.

Arrowes  infected
with  poyson.

The  n.iuigation  of
Diego  Nicuesa.

The  regions  of
Vraba  and
Beragua.

The  Spanyardes
reuenge  the
death  of  theyr
companyons.

A  greate
slawghter.

Canibales.

The  hunger  of

golde.

53

The  Ilande  Fortis

Wrought  gold

Caribana.

A  gold  myne.

The  Spanyardes
are  repulsed.

Fogeda  is
wounded.

Ransome.

107

io8

The  feconde  Decade.

Fogeda  consumeth
by  force  of  the
[venenie.]

Beragua  ami

Vraba.

Nicuesa.

The  goulfe  Coiba.
Dyuers  languages.

Rergantynes  or
brigantynes.

Bartiardino  de
Calauera,

Aficisus.

54

Fogeda  retumeth
to  hispaniolx

Famyne

A  brigantlne
drowned  with  the
stroke  of  a  fyshe.

The  Ilande  Fortis.

A  luisus.

The  Region  of
Cuchibacoa.
Soiutn  gatti.

Mountaynes
couered  with
snowe.

Serra  Neuata.
Os  Draconis.

reuenge  wherof  they  had  defperatly  confecrated  them  fehies  to  death.  But  the  matter  beinge  knowen,  the
captayne  of  this  confpiracie  was  flayne  of  Fogeda  his  coompanyons,  and  his  wyfe  deteyned  in  captiuitie.  Fogeda
alfo  throwgh  the  maUcioufnes  of  the  veneme,  confumed  and  was  dryed  vp  by  lyttle  and  lyttle.  Whyle  thefe
th}Tiges  chaunced  thus,  they  efpyed  Niaiefa  the  other  capitayne  to  whom  Beragua  the  region  of  the  wefle  fyde
of  Vraba,  was  afligned  to  inhabite.  He  gaue  wynde  to  his  fayles  to  take  his  vyage  towarde  Beragua,  the  day
after  that  Fogrda  departed  owte  of  the  hauen  of  Carthago.  He  with  his  army  which  he  browght  with  hym,
coafled  euer  alonge  by  the  fliore  vntyll  he  came  to  the  goulfe  Coiba,  whofe  kynges  name  is  Careta.  Here  he
founde  theyr  kinguage  to  bee  in  manor  nothynge  lyke  vnto  that  of  Hifpaniola  or  of  the  hauen  of  Carthago :
wherby  he  perceaued  that  in  this  tracte  there  are  many  languages  dififeringe  from  theyr  owne  bortherers.  Niaiefa
departinge  frome  Coiba,  wente  to  the  prouince  or  Lieuetenauntfliippe  of  Fogeda  his  companion.  Within  a  fewe
dayes  after  he  hym  felfe  enteringe  into  one  of  thofe  marchaunt  fliippes  whiche  the  Spanyardes  caule  Carauelas,
commaunded  that  the  b}gger  veflels,  fhulde  folowe  farre  behynde.  He  tooke  with  hym  twoo  fmaule  (hyppes
commenly  cauled  bergantines  or  brygantynes.  I  haue  thowght  it  good  in  all  the  difcourfe  of  thefe  bookes,  to
vfe  the  common  names  of  thinges,  bicaufe  I  had  rather  bee  playne  then  curious :  efpecially  forafmuche  as  there
doo  dayly  aryfe  manye  newe  thynges  vnknowen  to  the  antiquitie,  wherof  they  haue  lefte  noo  trewe  names.
After  the  departure  oi  Niaiefa,  there  came  a  fliyppe  from  Hifpaniola  to  Fogeda,  the  capitayne  wherof,  was  one
Bartiardino  de  Calauera,  who  had  floulne  the  fame  from  Hifpaniola  with  three  fcore  men,  withowte  leaue  or
aduice  of  the  Admirall  and  the  other  gouernours.  With  the  vytayles  whiche  this  fhippe  browght  they  refreffhed
theym  felues  and  fumewhat  recouered  theyr  ftrengthes  muche  weakened  for  lacke  of  meate,  Fogeda  his
companyons  whyfpered  and  muttered  ageynfte  hym  daylye  more  and  more,  that  he  fedde  them  furthe  with
vayne  hope.  For  he  had  towlde  them  that  he  left  Ancifus  in  Hifpaniola  (whom  he  chofe  by  the  kynges
commiflion  to  bee  a  ludge  in  caufes,  bycaufe  he  was  lerned  in  the  lawe)  to  coome  fliortly  after  him  with  a  fhippe
laden  with  vytayles :  And  that  he  marueyled  that  he  was  not  coome  many  dayes  fenfe.  And  herein  he  faid
nothinge  but  trewth.  For  when  he  departed,  he  lefte  Ancifus  halfe  redy  to  folowe  hym.  But  his
felowes  fuppofmge  that  all  that  he  fayde  of  Ancifus  had  byn  fayned,  fume  of  them  determyned
priuilie  to  fteale  away  the  twoo  brigantynes  frome  Fogeda,  and  to  returne  to  Hifpaniola.  But  Fogeda
hauing  knowleage  hereof,  preuented  theyr  diuife.  For  leauynge  the  cuflodie  of  the  fortreffe  with  a
certeyne  noble  gentelman  cauled  Francifco  Pizarro,  he  hym  felfe  thus  wounded,  with  a  fewe  other  in  his
companie,  entered  into  the  fliyppe  wherof  we  fpake  before,  and  fayled  directly  to  Hifpatiiola,  both  to  heale  the
wound  of  his  thygh  if  any  remedy  myght  bee  found,  and  alfo  to  knowe  what  was  the  caufe  of  Aiicifus  taryinge :
Leauing  hope  wth  his  felowes  (which  were  nowe  browght  from  three  hundreth  to  three  fcore,  partly  by  famyne
and  partly  by  warre)  that  he  wolde  returne  within  the  fpace  of  xv.  dayes:  prefcribyng  alfo  a  condition  to
Pizarro  and  his  companions,  that  it  fhulde  not  bee  imputed  to  them  for  treafon  to  departe  from  thenfe  if  he
came  not  ageyne  at  the  day  appoynted  with  vytayles  and  a  newe  fupply  of  men.  Thefe.  xv.  dayes  beinge  nowe
pafle,  whereas  they  coulde  yet  heare  nothynge  of  Fogeda,  and  were  dayly  more  and  more  oppreffed  with  fharpe
hunger,  they  entered  into  the  twoo  brigantynes  which  were  lefte,  and  departed  from  that  land.  And  as  they
were  nowe  faylynge  on  the  mayne  fea  towarde  Hifpaniola,  a  tempefle  foodeynly  aryfynge,  fwalowed  one  of  the
brygantynes  with  all  that  were  therein.  Sum  of  theyr  felowes  affirme  that  they  playnely  fawe  a  fyfhe  of  houge
greatenes  fwymmyng  abowte  the  brygantyne  (for  thofe  feas  brynge  furthe  greate  monllers)  and  that  with  a
flroke  of  her  tayle,  flie  broke  the  rudder  of  the  fhyppe  in  peeces :  which  faylynge,  the  brigantine  beinge  dryuen
abowt  by  force  of  the  tempefl,  was  drowned  not  farre  from  the  Ilande  cauled  Fortis,  lyinge  betwene  the  coafles
of  the  hauen  Carthago  and  Vraba.  As  they  of  the  other  brygantyne  wolde  haue  landed  in  the  Ilande,  they
were  dryuen  backe  with  the  bowes  and  arrowes  of  the  fierce  barbarians.  Proceadynge  therfore  on  theyr  vyage,
they  mette  by  chaunce  with  Ancifus  betweene  the  hauen  of  Carthago,  and  the  Region  of  Cuchibacoa  in  the
mouthe  of  the  ryuer  whiche  the  Spanyardes  cauled  Boiuin  gatti,  that  is,  the  houfe  of  the  catte,  bycaufe
they  fawe  a  catte  firfl  in  that  place :  and  Boium,  in  the  toonge  of  Hifpaniola,  is  a  houfe.  Ancifus  came  wyth
a  Ihyppe  laden  ^vith  all  thynges  neceffarye,  bothe  for  meate  and  drynke,  and  apparell,  bryngynge  alfo
with  hym  an  other  brigantine.  This  is  he  for  whofe  comming  the  capitayne  Fogeda  looked  for  foo  longe.
He  loofed  anker  from  Hifpaniola  in  the  Ides  of  September:  And  the  fourth  day  after  his  departure,  he  efpyed
certeyne  hyghe  mountaynes,  the  whiche  for  the  abundance  of  fnowe  which  lyeth  continually  in  the  toppes  therof,
the  Spanyardes  cauled  Serra  Neuata,  when  Colonus  the  fyrfl  fynder  of  thofe  Regions  paffed  by  the  fame.  The
fyfte  daye,  he  fayled  by  Os  Draconis.  They  whiche  were  in  the  brygantyne,  towlde  Ancifus  that  Fogeda
was  returned  to  Hifpaniola.  But  Ancifus  fuppofing  that  they  had  fayned  that  tale,  commaunded  them  by
th[e]authoritie  of  his  commiffion  to  turne  backe  ageyne.  The  brigantiners  obeyed  and  folowed  hym :  yet  made
they  humble  fute  vnto  hym  that  he  woolde  graunte  them  that  with  his  fauour  they  myght  eyther  goo  ageyne  to
Hifpaniola,  or  that  he  hym  felfe  woolde  brynge  theim  to  Nicuefa :  And  that  they  woolde  for  his  gentelnes
declared  towarde  them  in  this  behalfe,  rewarde  hym  with  twoo  thoufande  drammes  of  golde. For  they  were

loS

The  feconde  Decade.

109

ryche  in  golde,  but  poore  in  breade.  But  Ancifus  affented  to  neyther  of  theyr  requefles :  affirmynge  that  he
myght  by  no  meanes  goo  anye  other  way  then  to  Vraba  the  prouince  affigned  to  Fogeda.  Where  vppon,  by
theyr  conduct,  he  tooke  his  vyage  directly  toward  Vraba.  But  nowe  let  it  not  feme  tedious  to  yowre  holynes
to  heare  of  one  thyng  worthy  to  bee  remembred,  which  chaunced  to  this  Lieuetenaunt  Ancifus  as  he  came
thether.  For  he  alfo  cafl  anker  in  the  coafles  of  the  region  of  Caramairi  whiche  wee  fayde  to  bee  famous  by
reafon  of  the  hauen  of  Carthago :  and  of  the  goodly  flature,  flrength,  and  beawty  of  both  men  and  women  beinge
in  the  fame.  Here  he  fent  certeyne  to  goo  alande  on  the  fliore,  botn  to  fetche  freffhe  water,  and  alfo  to
repaire  the  fhippe  boate  which  was  fore  broofed.  In  this  meane  tyme  a  greate  multitude  of  the  people  of  the
countrey  armed  after  theyr  maner,  came  aboute  owre  men  as  they  were  occupied  abowte  theyr  bufynes,  and
floode  in  a  redynes  to  feight,  for  the  fpace  of  three  dayes  contynually :  durynge  whiche  tyme,  neyther  durfl,  they
fet  vppon  owre  men,  nor  owre  men  affayle  them.  Thus  bothe  parties  keepynge  theyr  arraye,  floode  flyl  three
hole  dayes  the  one  gafynge  on  the  other.  Yet  all  this  tyme  owre  men  applyed  theyr  woorke,  placinge  the
fhippewrightes  in  the  myddelle  of  theyr  armye.  As  they  floode  thus  amafed,  twoo  of  owre  coompanye  wente
to  fyll  theyr  water  pottes  at  the  mouthe  of  the  ryuer  nere  vnto  them  both,  where  foodenly  there  came  furthe
ageynfle  them  a  capitayne  of  the  barbarians  with  ten  armed  men  which  inclofed  them,  and  ^\'ith  terrible
countenaunce  bent  theyr  arrowes  ageynfle  them,  but  fhotte  theym  not  of  One  of  owre  men  fledde :  but  the
other  remayned,  caulynge  his  felowe  ageyne  and  rebukynge  hym  for  his  fearefulnes.  Then  he  fpake  to  the
barbarians  in  their  owne  language  which  he  had  lerned  beinge  conuerfant  with  the  captiues  that  were  caryed
from  thenfe  longe  before.  They  marueylynge  to  here  a  llraunger  fpeake  in  their  natiue  tonge,  put  of  theyr
fiercenes  and  fell  to  frendly  communication,  demaundinge  who  were  the  capitaynes  of  that  coompanie  whiche
were  arryued  in  theyr  lande.  He  anfwered  that  they  were  Grangers  paffyng  by :  And  that  he  marueyled  v.-hy
they  wold  attempte  to  dryue  them  from  theyr  coafles  and  diflurbe  theyr  fhyppes :  arguinge  theim  of  foUye  and
crueltie,  and  further  threatinge  their  ruine  and  deflruction,  except  they  woold  vfe  them  felues  more  frendely
towarde  them.  For  hee  aduertifed  them  that  there  wolde  fhortly  coome  into  theyr  lande  armed  men,  in  nomber
lyke  to  the  fandes  of  the  fea :  And  that  to  theyr  vtter  deflruction,  not  only  if  they  refyfled  them  not,  but  alfo
excepte  they  receaued  them  and  enterteyned  them  honorably.  In  the  meane  tyme  Ancifus  was  enformed  that
his  men  were  deteyned.  Wherefore  fufpectinge  fume  deceate,  he  browght  furth  al  his  target  men  for  feare  of
theyr  venemous  arrowes :  And  fettinge  them  in  battell  arraye,  he  marched  forwarde  towarde  them  which  fleyed  his
men.  But  he  which  communed  with  the  barbarians,  gyuinge  him  a  figne  with  his  hande  to  procede  noo  further,
he  fleyed.  And  cauling  to  hym  the  other,  he  knewe  that  all  was  fafe.  For  the  barbarians  profered  him  peace,
bycaufe  they  were  not  they  whom  they  fufpected  them  to  haue  byn :  meanynge  by  Fogeda  and  N'icuefa,  who  had
fpoyled  the  vyllage  flandinge  there  by  the  fea  fyde,  and  caryed  away  many  captiues,  and  alfo  bumte  an  other
vyllage  further  within  the  lande.  And  therefore  (as  they  fayde)  the  caufe  of  theyr  comminge  thether,  was  to
reuenge  thofe  iniuries,  if  by  any  meanes  they  coulde.  Yet  that  they  woolde  not  exercyfe  theyr  weapons  ageynfle
the  innocente.  For  they  fayde  it  was  vngodly  to  feyght  ageynfl  any,  not  beinge  prouoked.  La)-inge  a  parte
therefore  theyr  bowes  and  arrowes,  they  enterteyned  owre  men  gentelly,  and  gaue  them  great  plentie  of  failed
fyffhe  and  breade  of  theyr  contrey :  And  fylled  theyr  veffels  with  fyder  made  of  thejT  contrey  frutes  and  feedes,
not  inferiour  to  wyne  in  goodnes.  Thus  Ancifus  hauinge  entered  into  frendfhyp  and  made  a  league  of  peace  with
th[e]inhabitantes  of  Caramairi  whiche  were  before  fore  prouoked  by  other  capitaynes,  he  lanched  from  that
lande,  and  directed  his  courfe  to  Vraba  by  the  Ilande  Fortis,  hauinge  in  his  fhippe  a  hundreth  and  fyftie  freffhe
men  whiche  were  fubflitute  in  the  place  of  fuche  as  were  deade.  Alfo  twelue  mares,  and  manye  fwine,  and  other
beafles  both  males  and  females  for  increafe.  Lykewyfe,  fyftie  pieces  of  ordinaunce,  with  a  greate  multytude  of
targettes,  fwoordes,  iauelyns,  and  fuche  other  weapons  for  the  warres.  But  all  this  with  euyl  fpeede  and  in  an
euyll  houre.  For  as  they  were  euen  nowe  enteringe  into  the  hauen,  the  gouernour  of  the  fliippe  which  fatte  at
the  helme,  flroke  the  fhyppe  vppon  the  fandes,  where  it  was  foo  fafl  enclofed,  and  beaten  with  the  wanes  of  the
fea,  that  it  opened  in  the  myddefle,  and  al  lofl  that  was  therin.  A  thynge  furely  miferable  to  beholde.  For
of  all  the  vytayles  that  they  had,  they  faued  onely  twelue  barels  of  meale,  with  a  fewe  chiefes,  and  a  lyttle  byfket
breade.  For  al  the  beafles  were  drowned :  And  they  them  felues  fcaped  hardly  and  halfe  naked  by  helpe  of  the
brigantine  and  fhip  boate,  caryeng  with  them  only  a  i&we.  weapons.  Thus  they  fell  from  one  calamitie  into  an
other,  beinge  nowe  more  careful!  fo  rtheyr  lyues  then  for  golde.  Yet  beinge  browght  alyue  and  in  health  to  that
land  which  they  foo  greatly  defyred,  they  coulde  doo  noo  leffe  then  to  prouide  for  the  fufleynynge  of  theyr  bodyes,
bycaufe  they  coulde  not  lyue  onely  by  ayer.  And  wheras  theyr  owne  fayled,  they  mufl  needes  lyue  by  other
mens.  Yet  amonge  thefe  foo  many  aduerfities,  one  good  chaunce  offered  it  felfe  vnto  them.  For  they  founde,
not  farre  from  the  fea  fyde,  a  groue  of  date  trees,  amonge  the  which,  and  alfo  amonge  the  reke  or  weedes  of  the
niaryfhes,  they  efpyed  a  multitude  of  wylde  bores,  with  whofe  fleflie  they  fed  them  felues  wel  certeine  dayes.
Thefe  they  fay  to  bee  leffe  then  owres :  And  with  foo  fhorte  tayles,  that  they  thought  they  had  byn  cutte  of
They  dyffer  alfo  from  owres  in  theyr  feete :  for  theyr  hynder  feete  are  hole  vndiuided,  and  alfo  withowte  any

X09

Riche  in  ao^^  ^"(1
pore  in  breade.

TTie  Region  of
Caramairi

Feare  on  both
partes.

Ship  wryghtes.

55

The  vse  of
targettes  agenst
venemous  arrowefi

The  barbarians
haue  respect  to
iustice

Salted  fishe.

Wyne  of  fruites
and  seedes.

Vraba.
Artillerie.

Ancisus  ship
wracke.

Meale,  cheeses,
and  bysket.

A  groue  of  date
trees.

Wylde  bores.

no

The  fecotide  Decade.

56

Apples  of  a

strange  kynd

CeJers  of  Libane.

Sorbes  are  cauled
in  french  Cormier
they  grow  not  in
Englande.
The  frute  cauled
zizipha  or  luiula

Canibales.

Men  of  desperat
boldnes.

The  goulfe  of
Vraba.

The  great  r>-uer
of  Darien,  fauleth
into  the  goulfe  of
Vraba.

Prayer  and  vowes.

The  souldiers
make  an  othe.

The  barbarians
are  dryuen  to
flight.

57

Chestnuttes.

The  ryuer  of
Darien,  but  viii.
degrees  from  the
Equinoctial.

Golde  founde  in  a
ihicket  of  reedes.

houfe.  But  they  affirme  that  they  haue  proued  by  experience  theyr  fleffhe  to  bee  of  better  tafle  and  more
holfoome  then  o\\Tes.  Durynge  this  tyme,  they  fedde  alfo  of  dates  and  the  rotes  of  younge  date  trees,  which
they  eate  hkewyfe  in  Ciiiile  and  Granata  where  they  caule  them  Palmitos,  of  the  leaues  wherof  they  make
biefomes  in  Rome.  Sumetymes  alfo,  they  eate  of  the  appels  of  that  Region,  whiche  haue  the  tafle  of  prunes,
and  haue  alfo  flones  in  them,  and  are  but  lyttle  and  of  redde  coloure.  I  fuppofe  them  to  bee  of  that  kynde
wherof  I  eate  in  the  citie  of  Alexandria  in  Egypt  in  the  moneth  of  Aprell :  The  trees  wherof,  the  lewes  that
dwel  there,  beinge  lerned  in  the  lawe  of  Moyfes,  affirme  to  bee  the  Ceders  of  Libane,  which  beare  owlde  fruites
and  newe  all  the  yeare  as  dothe  the  orange  tree.  Thefe  apples  are  good  to  bee  eaten,  and  haue  a  certeyne
fweetnes  myxte  with  a  gentell  fliarpnes,  as  haue  the  frutes  cauled  Sorbes.  Th[e]inhabitantes  plant  thefe  trees
in  theyr  orchyardes  and  garedens,  and  nooryflie  theym  with  greate  diligence  as  wee  doo  cheries,  peaches,  and
quynfes.  This  tree  in  leaues,  heyght,  and  trunke,  is  verye  lyke  vnto  the  tree  that  beareth  the  frute  cauled
Zizipha^  which  the  Apothecaries  caule  luinba.  But  wheras  now  the  wylde  bores  beganne  to  faile  them,  they
were  ageyne  enforced  to  confulte  and  prouyde  for  the  tyme  to  coome.  Where  vppon  with  theyr  hole  army,  they
entered  further  into  the  land.  The  Canibales  of  this  prouince,  are  mofle  experte  archers.  Ancifus  had  in  his
coompany,  a  hundreth  men.  They  mette  by  the  way  with  only  three  men  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  naked,  and  armed
with  bowes  and  venemous  arrowes,  who  without  al  feare,  affayled  owr  men  fiercely,  wounded  manye,  and  flewe
manye :  And  when  they  had  emptied  theyr  quyuers,  fledde  as  fwyftely  as  the  wynde :  For  (as  we  haue  fayde)
they  are  excedynge  fwyfte  of  foote  by  reafon  of  theyr  loofe  goinge  frome  theyr  chyldes  age  They  affirme  that
they  lette  flyppe  no  arrowe  owte  of  theyr  bowes  in  vayne.  Owre  men  therfore  returned  the  fame  waye  that  they
came,  much  more  infortunate  then  they  were  before  and  confulted  amonge  them  felues  to  leaue  that  lande:
efpecyally  becaufe  th[e]inhabitantes  had  ouerthrowne  the  fortreffe  which  Fogeda  buylded,  and  had  burnte
thirtie  houfes  of  the  vyllage,  as  soone  as  Pizarrus  and  his  company  lefte  of  Fogeda,  had  forfaken  the
lande.  By  this  occafion  therefore,  beinge  dryuen  to  feeke  further,  they  had  intelligence  that  the  wefte
fyde  of  that  goulfe  of  Vraba,  was  more  frutefull  and  better  to  inhabite.  Wherfore,  they  fent  the  one  halfe  of
theyr  men  thither  with  the  brigantine,  and  lefte  the  other  nere  to  the  fea  fyde  on  the  eafle  part.  This  goulfe,
is.  xxiiii.  myles  in  bredth :  And  howe  muche  the  further  it  entereth  into  the  firme  lande,  it  is  foo  muche  the
narower.  Into  the  goulfe  of  Vraba,  there  faule  many  ryuers :  but  one  (as  they  fay)  more  fortunate  then  the
ryuer  of  Niliis  in  Egypte.  This  ryuer  is  cauled  Darien,  vppon  the  bankes  whereof,  beinge  verye  frutefull  of
trees  and  graffe,  they  entended  to  playnte  their  newe  colonic  or  habitacion.  But  th[e]inhabitantes  maruelynge
at  the  brygantine  beinge  bygger  then  theyr  canoas,  and  fpecially  at  the  fayles  therof,  fyrfl  fente  away  theyr
chyldren  and  weakefle  forte  of  theyr  people  with  theyr  baggage  and  houfholde  flufife,  and  affembled  all  fuche
togyther  bothe  men  and  women,  as  were  meete  for  the  warres :  Thus  beinge  armed  with  weapons  and  defperate
myndes,  they  floode  in  a  redynes  to  feight,  and  taryed  the  comminge  of  owre  men  vppon  a  lyttle  hyl,  as  it  were
to  take  th[e]aduantage  of  the  grounde.  Owre  men  iudged  them  to  bee  aboute  fyue  hundreth  in  nomber.  Then
Ancifus  the  capitayne  of  owre  men,  and  Lieuetenaunt  in  the  fleede  of  Fogeda,  fettinge  his  men  in  order  of
battayle  array,  and  with  his  hole  coompany  kneelinge  on  his  knees,  they  al  made  humble  prayers  to  god  for
the  victorie,  and  a  vowe  to  the  Image  of  the  bleffed  virgin  whiche  is  honoured  in  Ciuile,  by  the  name  of  SanHa
Maria  Antiqua,  promyfmge  to  fende  her  manye  golden  gyftes  and  a  flraunger  of  that  contrey :  alfo  to  name
the  vyllage  Sancta  Maria  Antiqica  after  her  name :  lykewyfe  to  erecte  a  temple  cauled  by  the  fame  name :  or
at  the  leafte  to  dedicate  the  king  of  that  prouince  his  palaice  to  that  vfe,  if  it  fhulde  pleafe  her  to  affifle  them
in  this  daungerous  enterpryfe.  This  doone,  al  the  fouldiers  tooke  an  othe,  that  noo  man  (hulde  turne  his  backe
to  his  enemies.  Then  the  capytayne  commaundinge  them  to  bee  in  a  redines  with  theyr  targets  and  iauelens,
and  the  trumpyter  to  blowe  the  battayle,  they  fiercely  affayled  theyr  enemyes  with  a  larome.  But  the  naked
barbarians,  not  longe  able  to  abyde  the  force  of  owre  men,  were  putte  to  flyght,  with  iheyx  kynge  and  capitayne
Cemaccus.  Owre  men  entered  into  the  vyllage,  where  they  fownde  plentie  of  meate  fuche  as  the  people  of  the
contrey  vfe,  fufficiente  to  affuage  theyr  prefent  hunger,  as  breade  made  of  rootes,  with  certeine  fruites  vnlyke
vnto  owres,  whiche  they  referue  for  flore  as  wee  doo  cheflnuttes.  Of  thefe  people,  the  men  are  vtterly  naked :
but  the  women  from  the  nauell  downewarde,  are  couered  with  a  fyne  clothe  made  of  goffampine  cotton.  This
Region  is  vtterly  withowte  any  fharpenes  of  wynter.  For  the  mouthe  of  this  ryuer  of  Darien,  is  onlye  eyght
degrees  diflante  from  the  Equinoctiall  lyne :  So  that  the  commone  forte  of  owre  men,  fcarfely  perceaue  anye
difference  in  lengthe  betwene  the  day  and  nyght  all  the  hole  yeare.  But  bycaufe  they  are  ignorant  in  aflrono-
mie,  they  can  perceaue  noo  fmaule  difference.  Therfore  wee  neede  not  much  paffe  if  the  degree  do  differ  fum
what  from  theyr  opinion,  for  afmuche  as  the  difference  can  not  bee  greate.  The  day  after  that  they  arryued  at
the  lande,  they  fayled  alonge  by  the  ryuer,  where  they  founde  a  greate  thicket  of  reedes  continuinge  for  the
fpace  of  a  myle  in  length  fuppofing  (as  it  chaunced  in  deede)  that  the  bortherers  there  aboute  which  had  fledde,
had  eyther  lyne  lurkynge  there,  or  els  to  haue  hyd  theyr  fluffe  amonge  thofe  reedes :  Where  vppon,  armynge
them  felues  with  theyr  targettes,  for  feare  of  the  people  lyinge  in  ambuffhe,  they  fearched  the  thicket  dilygently,

The  feconde  Decade.

I II

and  founde  it  withowte  men,  but  replenyflied  with  houfeholde  fluffe  and  golde.  They  fo\vnde  alfo  a  great
multitude  of  fheetes,  made  of  the  fylke  or  cotton  of  the  goffampine  tree.  Lykewyfe  dyucrs  kyndes  of  veffels
and  tooles  made  of  woodde,  and  many  of  earth :  Alfo  many  brefle  plates  of  gold  and  ouches  wrought  after  theyr
maner,  to  the  fum  of  a  hundreth  and  twoo  pounde  weight.  For  they  alfo  take  pleafure  in  the  bevvtie  of  gold,
and  worke  it  very  artificially,  although  it  bee  not  the  price  of  thynges  amonge  them  as  with  vs.  They  haue  it
owte  of  other  Regions  for  exchaunge  of  fuch  thynges  as  theyr  contrey  bringeth  furthe.  For  fuche  Regions  as
haue  plentie  of  breade  and  goffampine,  lacke  golde :  And  fuche  as  brynje  furth  golde,  are  for  the  mofl  parte
rowght  with  montaynes  and  rockes,  and  therfore  baren.  And  thus  they  exercife  marchandies  withowte  the  vfe
of  money.  Reioyfing  therfore  with  double  gladdenes,  afwell  in  that  they  fawe  greate  lykenes  of  golde,  as  alfo
that  fortune  hadde  offered  them  foo  fayre  and  frutefull  a  contrey,  they  fent  for  theyr  felowes  whom  they  hadde
lefte  before  in  the  eafle  fyde  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba.  Yet  fume  faye  that  the  ayer  is  there  vnholfome,  bycaufe
that  parte  of  the  Region  lyethe  in  a  lowe  valley  enuironed  with  mountaynes  and  maryffhes.

ft  The  seconde  booke  of  the  seconde  decade,

Of  the  fitppofed  continente.

Haue  defcribed  to  yowre  holynes  where  Fogeda  with  his  coompany  (to  whome  the  large
tractes  of  Vraba  was  affigned  to  inhabite)  intended  to  faflen  there  foote.  Lette  vs  nowe
therfore  leaue  them  of  Vraba  for  a  whyle,  and  returne  ageyne  to  Nicuefa  to  whom  the  gouer-
naunce  and  Lieuetenauntefliippe  of  the  mofle  large  prouince  of  Beragiia  (beinge  the  wefte
fyde  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba)  was  appoynted.  We  haue  declared  howe  Nicuefa  departinge
with  one  carauell  and  twoo  brigantines  frome  Vraba  the  iurifdiction  of  his  frende  and  com-
panyon  Fogeda,  directed  his  courfe  wellwarde  to  Beragua,  leauinge  the  bygger  fhippes
fumewhat  behynde  hym,  to  folowe  hym  a  farre  of.  But  he  tooke  this  diuife  in  an  euyll  howre.  For  he  bothe
lofle  his  felowes  in  the  nyght,  and  went  pafl  the  mouth  of  the  ryuer  of  Beragiia,  which  he  chiefely  fowght.  One
Lupus  Olanus  a  Cantabrian,  and  gouernoure  of  one  of  the  greate  fliippes,  had  the  conducte  of  one  of  the
brigantines.  He  commynge  behynde,  lerned  of  th[e]inhabitantes  which  was  the  waye  Eallewarde  to  the  goulfe
of  Beragua  ouer  paffed  and  lefte  behynde  of  Nicuefa.  Olafius  therfore  directinge  his  courfe  towarde  the  Eafle,
mette  with  the  other  brigantine  which  had  alfo  wandered  owte  of  the  way  by  reafon  of  the  darkenes  of  the
nyght.  The  gouernour  of  this  brigantine,  was  one  Petrus  de  Vmbria.  Thus  bothe  beinge  gladde  of  the}^
meetinge,  they  confulted  what  was  befl  to  bee  doone,  and  which  way  they  coulde  coniecture  their  gouernour
had  taken  his  vyage.  After  deliberation,  they  iudged  that  Nicuefa  could  no  more  lacke  fum  to  put  him  in
rememberaunce  of  Beragua,  then  they  them  felues  were  myndful  therof,  hopynge  alfo  to  fynde  hym  there.
They  fayled  therefore  towarde  Beragua :  where  they  founde  within,  xvi.  myles  dyflant,  a  rj'uer  which  Colonus
named  Lagartos,  bycaufe  it  nooryfhethe  greate  lyfardes  whiche  in  the  Spanyffhe  toonge  are  cauled  Lagartos.
Thefe  lyfertes  are  hurtfull  bothe  to  man  and  beafle,  and  in  fhape  muche  lyke  vnto  the  Crocodiles  of  the  r}'uer
of  Nilus  in  Egypte.  In  this  ryuer,  they  founde  theyr  companyons  and  felowes  of  theyr  erroure  lyinge  at  anker
with  the  greate  fhippes  which  folowed  behynde  by  the  gouernours  commaundement.  Here  the  hole  afrembl[i]e
beinge  carefull  and  difquieted  by  reafon  of  the  gouernours  erroure,  after  confultacion,  by  th[e]aduife  of  the
capitaynes  of  the  brigantines,  who  had  rafed  nere  vnto  the  coafles  of  Beragua,  they  fayled  directly  thether.
Beragua,  in  the  language  of  th[e]inhabitantes  of  the  fame  prouince,  is  as  much  to  faye,  as  the  golden  ryuer.
The  region  it  felfe  is  alfo  cauled  by  the  fame  name,  takynge  name  of  the  ryuer.  In  the  mouth  of  this  rpxtx,  the
greatefl  veffels  cafl  anker,  and  conueighed  al  theyr  vytailes  and  other  neceffaries  to  lande  with  theyr  fhippe
boates:  and  elected  Lupus  Olanus  to  bee  theyr  gouernour  in  the  fleede  oi  Nicuefa  whom  they  had  lofle.  By
th[e]aduice  therfore  of  Olanus  and  the  other  vnder  capitaynes,  that  all  hope  of  departure  myght  bee  tak^-i  from
the  fouldiers  which  they  had  nowe  browght  thether,  and  to  make  them  the  more  -rtyllinge  to  inhabite  that  land,
they  vtterly  forfooke  and  eafle  of  thofe  fhyppes  beinge  nowe  rotten  for  age,  and  fufiered  them  to  bee  fliaken
and  broofed  of  the  furges  of  the  fea.  Yet  of  theyr  foundefle  plankes,  Avith  other  newe,  made  of  tlie  trees  of  that
Region  (which  they  fay  to  be  excedinge  bygge  and  hygh)  they  framed  a  newe  carauel  fhortly  after,  whiche  they
myght  vfe  to  ferue  for  theyr  neceffitie.  But  Beragua  was  founde  by  the  vnfortunate  dellenie  of  Petrus  de  Vmbria.
For  he,  beinge  a  man  of  prompt  wytte  and  apt  forwardenes  to  attempte  thynges  (in  whiche  fumetyme  fortune
wyll  beare  a  flroke  notwithflandinge  OAvre  prouidence)  tooke  vpon  hym  th[e]aduenture  to  fearche  the  fhore  to
th[e]intent  to  find  a  waye  for  his  felowes  where  they  myght  befle  coome  alande. For  this  purpofe,  he  chofe

Sheetes  of
goisampine.

Breste  plates  of
golde.

'ITic  golden
Regions,  are  for
the  moste  parte
baren.

Fogeda,  the
Lieuetenaunt  of
Vraba.

Nicuesa  the
Lieuetenaunt  of
Beragua.

Nicuesa  loste  his
felowes  in  the
night.

Lupus  Olanus

Petrus  de  vmbria

The  capitaynes
consulte  where  to
find  theyr  lost
gouernour.

The  rjTier
Lagartos.

58

The  golden  i  yuei
of  Beragua.

The  enterprise
and  death  of
Petrus  de  Vmbrii

112

The  feconde  Decade.

The  daungerous
place  of  SciU.i  in
the  sea  of  Cicilie.

Swymmlngc

The  f)-ssher  boate
of  Nicuesa  his
carauele.

The  miserable
case  of  Nicuesa.

59

The  Region  of
Gratia  Dei  or
Cerabaro.
The  rj'uer  of
Sancti  Matthei.

The  rigorousnes
of  Nicuesa.

Come  waxcth
rype  euerj'  fourth
month

The  commendation
of  a  younge  man
browght  vp  with
Colonus.

Partus  Bellus.

Weakenes  of
hunger.

Cafi,  M armor.

hym  twelue  maryners,  and  wente  ahoorde  the  (hippe  boate  whiche  ferued  the  greatefle  fhyppes. The  flowinge

of  the  fea,  raged  and  rored  there,  with  a  horrible  whurhnge  as  wee  reede  of  the  daungerous  place  of  Scylla  in  the

fea  of  Scicilie,  by  reafon  of  tlie  houge  and  ragged  rockes  reachyng  into  the  fea,  from  which  the  waues  rebounding

with  violence,  make  a  greate  noyfe  and  rowghnes  on  the  water,  whiche  rowghnes  or  reflowinge,  the  Spanyardes

caule  Rffacca. In  thefe  daungers  wretched  Vmbria  wrefleled  a  while. But  in  fliorte  fpace,  a  waue  of  the  fea

almofte  as  bygge  as  a  mounta)ne,  roboundinge  from  the  rockes,  ouerwhelmed  the  boate  and  deuoured  the  fame

with  the  men,  euen  in  the  fight  of  theyr  felowes :  So  that  of  them  all,  onely  one  efcaped  by  reafon  he  was

experte  in  fwymmynge. For  gettinge  holde  of  the  corner  of  a  rocke,  and  fufteynynge  the  rage  of  the  fea  vntyll

the  nexte  daye  when  it  wexed  caulme,  and  the  fliore  was  drye  by  the  faule  of  the  water,  he  efcaped  and  reforted

to  his  coompanye. But  V?nbria  with  the  other  eleuen,  were  vtterlye  cafle  away. The  refydue  of  the  coompany,

durfl.  not  commite  them  felues  to  the  fliippe  boates,  but  went  alande  with  theyr  brigantines. Where  remaynynge

a  fewe  dayes,  and  faylinge  alonge  by  the  ryuer,  they  founde  certeyne  vyllages  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  which  they

caule  Mumu. Here  they  beganne  to  build  a  fortreffe,  and  to  fowe  feedes  after  the  maner  of  theyr  countrey,  in

a  certeyne  vale  of  frutefull  grownde,  bicaufe  in  other'  places  the  region  is  baren. As  thefe  thynges  were  thus

dooinge  in  Bcragua,  one  of  their  coompanye  flandynge  vppon  the  toppe  of  a  hyghe  rocke  of  efpeciall,  and

lyftynge  his  eyes  towarde  the  Wefle,  beganne  to  crye,  Lynnyn  fayles,  lynnyn  fayles. And  the  nerer  it  drewe

towarde  hym,  he  perceaued  it  to  bee  a  fhyppe  boate  comminge  with  a  lyttle  fayle. Yet  receaued  they  it  with

muche  reioyfinge :  for  it  was  the  fyfOier  boate  of  Nicuefa  his  carauele,  and  of  capacitie  to  carye  onely  fyue  men,

and  had  nowe  but  three  in  it,  which  had  (loulne  it  from  Nicuefa  bycaufe  he  refufed  to  gyue  credit  to  theim  that

he  had  pafled  Bcragua,  and  lefte  it  behynde  hym  Eaflwarde. For  they  feinge  Nicuefa  and  his  felowes  to

confume  dayely  by  famynne,  thowght  they  woolde  proue  fortune  with  that  boate,  if  their  chaunce  myght  bee  to

fynde  Bcragua,  as  in  deede  it  was. Debatinge  therefore  with  theyr  felowes,  of  thefe  matters,  they  declared

howe  Nicuefa  erred  and  lode  the  carauele  by  tempefl,  and  that  he  was  nowe  wanderinge  amonge  the  maryffhes

of  vnknowen  coafles,  full  of  myferie  and  in  extreeme  penurie  of  all  thynges,  hauinge  nowe  lyued  for  the  fpace

of  three  fcore  and  tenne  dayes,  only  with  herbes  and  rootes,  and  fyldoome  with  frutes  of  the  countrey,  contented

to  drinke  water,  and  yet  that  often  tymes  faylynge,  bycaufe  he  was  inflant  to  trauayle  weflwarde  by  foote,  fuppofmg

by  that  meanes  to  come  to  Bcragua. Colonus  the  fyrfle  fynder  of  this  mayne  lande,  had  coafted  alonge  by  this  tracte,

and  named  it  Gratia  Dei:  but  the  inhabitantes  caule  it  Cerabaro. Throwghe  this  Region,  there  runneth  a  ryuer

which  owre  men  named  SanBi  Matthei,  diflante  from  the  wefle  fyde  of  Beragua  aboute  a  hundrethe  and  thirtie

myles. Here  I  lette  paffe  the  name  of  this  ryuer,  and  of  manye  other  places  by  the  names  which  th[e]inhabitantes

vfe,  bycaufe  owre  men  are  ignorant  thereof Thus  Lupus  Olanus  the  conductor  of  one  of  the  fhippes  of  Nicuefa,

and  nowe  alfo  vice  Leauetenaunt  in  his  fleede,  after  that  he  hadde  receaued  this  information  of  the  maryners,

fente  thether  a  brigantine  vnder  theyr  guydynge,  thefe  maryners  therfore,  which  came  in  the  fyffher  boate,

founde  Nicuefa,  and  browght  hym  to  the  place  where  Olanus  laye,  whome  at  his  commynge  he  cafle  in  pryfon,

and  accufed  hym  of  treafon  bycaufe  he  vfurped  th[e]autoritie  of  the  Lieuetenauntfhippe,  and  that  for  the  defyre

he  had  to  beare  rule  and  bee  in  autoritie,  he  tooke  no  care  of  his  errours :  alfo  that  he  behaued  hym  felfe

negligently :  demaundinge  further  more  of  hym,  what  was  the  caufe  of  his  foo  longe  delay. Lykewyfe  he  fpake

to  al  the  vnder  officers  fliarplye  and  Avith  a  troubled  mynde :  And  mthin  fewe  dayes  after  commaunded  them

to  truffe  vp  theyr  packes,  and  make  them  redye  to  departe. They  defyred  hym  to  quyet  hym  felfe,  and  to

forbeare  them  a  while  vntyl  they  had  reaped  the  come  that  they  had  fowne,  which  wolde  fhortly  bee  rype. For

all  kynd  of  corne  waxeth  rype  there  euery  fourth  moonethe  after  it  is  fowne. But  he  vtterly  denyed  to  tarye

any  whytte :  but  that  he  woolde  foorthwith  departe  from  that  vnfortunate  lande :  And  plucked  vp  by  the  rootes

al  that  euer  was  browght  into  the  goulfe  of  Beragua,  and  commaunded  them  to  directe  theyr  courfe  towarde

the  Eafle. After  they  had  fayled  aboute  the  fpace  of.  xvi.  myles,  a  certeyne  younge  man  whofe  name  was

Gregorie,  a  Genues  borne,  and  of  a  chylde  browght  vp  with  Colonus,  cauled  to  rememberance  that  there  was  a

hauen  not  farre  frome  thenfe :  And  to  proue  his  fayinge  trewe,  he  gaue  his  felowes  thefe  tokens :  that  is,  that

they  fhulde  fynde  vppon  the  fliore,  an  anker  of  a  lofle  fliyppe  halfe  couered  with  fande :  And  vnder  a  tree  nexte

vnto  the  hauen,  a  fprynge  of  cleere  water. They  came  to  the  lande :  founde  the  anker  and  the  fprj'nge,  and

commended  the  ^\7tte  and  memorye  of  the  younge  man,  that  he  only  amonge  many  of  the  maryne[r]s  whiche

had  fearched  thofe  coafles  with  Colo?tus,  bore  the  thynge  foo  well  in  mynde. This  hauen,  Colonus  cauled

Portus  Bellus. Wheras  in  this  vyage  for  lacke  of  vytayles  they  were  fumetymes  enforced  to  goo  alande,  they

were  euel  entreated  of  the  inhabitantes. By  reafon  wherof,  theyr  flrengthes  were  foo  Avekened  with  hunger,

that  they  were  not  able  to  keepe  warre  ageynfl.  naked  men,  or  fcarfely  to  beare  theyr  harnes  on  their  backes.

And  therfore  owre  men  lofle  twentie  of  theyr  coompanie,  which  were  flayne  with  venemous  arrowes. They

confulted  to  leaue  the  one  halfe  of  theyr  felowes  in  the  hauen  oi  Portus  Bellus:  And  the  other  parte  Nicuefa

tooke  with  hym  towarde  the  Eafle :  where  abowte  twentie  and  eyght  myles  from  Portus  Bellus,  he  intended  to

buylde  a  fortreffe  harde  by  the  fea  fyde  vppon  the  poynte  or  cape  which  in  tyme  pafle  Colonus  named  Mannor.

The  feconde  Decade.

113

But  they  were  foo  feeble  by  reafon  of  longe  hunger,  that  theyr  (Irength  ferued  them  not  to  fufleyne  fuche
laboure.  Yet  he  erected  a  lyttle  towre  able  to  refyfl  the  fyrd  affaute  of  the  inhabitantes.  This  towTe  he
cauled  Nomen  Dei.  From  the  tyme  that  he  left  Beragim,  what  in  the  iorney  amonge  the  fandie  playnes,  then
alfo  for  hunger  whyle  he  buylded  the  towre,  of  the  fewe  which  remayned  a  lyue,  he  lofle  twoo  hundreth.  And
thus  by  lyttle  and  lyttle,  the  multitude  of  feuen  hundreth  foure  fcore  and  fyue  men,  was  nowe  browght  to
fcarfely  one  hundreth.  Whyle  Nicuefa  lyued  mth  thefe  few  miferable  men,  there  arofe  a  contention  amonge
them  of  Vrada,  3iS  concerninge  the  Lieuetenantfhippe.  For  one  VafcJus  Nunncz^hy  the  iudgemente  of  all
men,  truflynge  more  to  his  flrengthe  then  wytte,  floured  vp  certeyne  lyght  felowes  ageynfl  Ancifus,  fayinge  that
Ancifiis  had  not  the  kynges  letters  patentes  for  that  office :  And  that  it  was  not  fufficient  that  he  was  autorifed
by  Fogeda,  And  therfore  forbodde  that  he  fhulde  execute  the  office  of  the  Lieuetenaunteffiippe :  And  wylled
theym  to  chufe  certeyne  of  theyr  owne  coompanye,  by  whofe  counfayle  and  authoritie  they  myght  bee
gouerned.

Thus  beinge  diuided  into  factions  by  reafon  that  Fogeda,  their  capitayne  came  not  ageyne,  whom  they
fuppofed  to  bee  nowe  deade  of  his  venemous  wounde,  they  contended  whether  it  were  befle  to  fubflitute  Nicuefa
in  his  place.  The  wyfefle  forte  fuche  as  were  famyHer  with  Nicuefa,  and  coulde  not  beare  th[e]infolencie  of
Vafchus  Nunnez,  thowght  it  good  that  Nicuefa  fhuld  bee  fowght  owt  throwgh  owt  all  thofe  coafles.  For  they
had  knoweledge  that  he  departed  from  Beragua  bycaufe  of  the  barennes  of  the  grounde:  And  that  by
th[e]exemple  of  Ancifus,  and  fuche  other  as  had  made  ffiippe\vracke,  it  were  poffible  that  he  might  wander  in
fume  fecreate  place :  And  that  they  coulde  not  be  quiete  in  theire  myndes  vntyll  they  knewe  the  certentie,
whether  he  with  his  felowes  were  alyue  or  deade.  But  Vafchus  Nmmez,  fearinge  leafle  at  the  commyng  of
Nicuefa  he  Ihulde  not  bee  had  in  autoritie  emonge  his  felowes,  fayde  they  were  mad  men  to  thinke  that  Nicuefa
lyued :  And  althowgh  he  were  alyue,  yet  that  they  hadde  noo  neade  of  his  helpe.  For  he  auouched  that  there
was  none  of  his  felowes,  that  were  not  as  meete  to  rule  as  Nicuefa.  While  they  were  thus  reafonyuge  too  and
froo,  one  Eoderims  Colmenaris  arryued  in  thofe  coafl.es  with  two  greate  fhippes  hauinge  in  theym  three  fcore
frefffie  men,  with  greate  plentie  of  vitailes  and  apparel.  Of  the  navigation  of  this  Colmenaris,  I  intende  to  fpeake
fumewhat  more.  He  therfore  departed  from  the  hauen  of  Hifpaniola  cauled  Beata  (where  they  prepare  and
fumyffhe  theym  felues  whiche  make  any  viage  into  thefe  landes)  aboute  the  Ides  of  October  in  the  yeare.
1 5 10:  And  landed  the.  ix.  of  Nouember  in  a  Region  in  the  large  prouince  oi  Paria  founde  by  Colonus  bet^vene
the  hauen  Carthago  and  the  Region  of  Cuchibachoa.  In  this  viage  what  by  the  rowghnes  of  the  fea  and  fiercenes
of  the  barbarians,  he  fuffered  many  incommodities.  For  when  his  frefflie  water  fayled,  he  fayled  to  the  mouthe
of  a  certeyne  riuer  which  th[e]inhabitantes  caule  Gaira,  beinge  apte  to  receaue  fliippes.  This  ryuer  had  his
courfe  from  the  toppe  of  an  exceadinge  hyghe  mountayne  couered  with  fnowe,  hygher  then  the  which,  all  the
coompanyons  of  this  capitayne  Rodericus,  faye  that  they  neuer  fawe.  And  that  by  good  reafon,  yf  it  were
couered  wyth  fnowe  in  that  Region  which  is  not  pafl:  ten  degrees  diftante  from  the  Equitiodial  lyne.  As  they
beganne  to  drawe  water  owt  of  their  ffiippeboate,  a  certeyne  Kynge  made  towarde  theym  appareled  with  vefl.ures
of  goflampine  cotton,  hauinge  twentie  noble  men  in  his  coompanye  appareled  alfo :  Whyche  thinge  feemed
fl.raunge  to  owre  men,  and  not  feene  before  in  thofe  parties.  The  Kinges  apparell,  hunge  loofe  from  his
ffioulders  to  his  elbowes:  And  from  the  gerdle  downewarde,  it  was  muche  hke  a  womans  kertle,  reachinge  euen
to  his  heeles.  As  he  drewe  neere  towarde  o\vre  men,  he  feemed  frendly  to  admonyfflie  theym  to  take  none  of
the  water  of  that  ryuer,  affirminge  it  to  bee  vnholfome  for  men :  And  fhewed  theym  that  not  farre  from  thenfe,
there  was  a  ryuer  of  good  water.  They  came  to  the  ryuer.  And  endeuouringe  to  coome  nere  the  fliore,  they
were  dryuen  backe  by  tempefle.  Alfo  the  burbulinge  of  the  fande,  declared  the  fea  to  bee  but  ffialowe  there.
They  were  therefore  enforced  to  retume  to  the  fyrfle  ryuer  where  they  myght  fafely  cafl.e  anker.  This  Kinge
layde  wayte  for  owre  men.  For  as  they  were  fyllinge  theire  barrelles,  he  fet  on  theym  with  abowt  feuen
hundreth  men  (as  owre  men  iudged)  armed  after  theire  maner,  althowgh  they  were  naked.  For  only  the
kynge  and  his  noble  men  were  appareled.  They  tooke  away  the  fhippeboate,  and  brooke  it  in  maner  to  chips :
foo  fiercely  affaylynge  owre  menne  with  theyr  venemous  arrowes,  that  they  llewe  of  them  fortie  and  feuen  beef  ore
they  coulde  couer  them  felues  with  theyr  targettes.  For  that  poyfon  is  of  fuch  force,  that  albeit  the  woundes
were  not  great,  yet  they  dyed  therof  immediatly.  For  they  yet  knewe  noo  remedie  ageynfle  this  kynde  of  puyfon,
as  they  after  lerned  of  th[e]inhabitantes  of  Hifpaniola.  For  this  Ilande  bringeth  foorth  an  herbe  which
quencheth  and  mortifieth  the  violent  poyfon  of  the  herbe  wherewith  thejT  arrowes  are  infected,  foo  that  it  bee
miniflred  in  tyme.  Yet  of  owre  coompany  whiche  went  for  water,  feuen  efcaped  that  conflicte,  and  h)-d  them
felues  in  a  hollowe  tree,  lurkynge  there  vntyll  nyght.  Yet  efcaped  they  not  the  handes  of  theyr  enemyes.  For
the  fhippe  departed  from  thenfe  in  the  nyght  feafon  and  lefte  them  there,  fuppofinge  that  they  had  byn  flayne.
Thus  by  manye  fuche  perels  and  daungers  (which  I  lyghtly  ouerpaffe  bicaufe  I  W7I  not  bee  tedious  to  yowre
holynes)  he  arrjnied  at  the  length  at  the  hauen  of  Vraba.  and  cafl  anker  at  the  eafte  fyde  therof,  from  whenfe  not
longe  before,  owre  men  departed  to  the  wefl  fyde  by  reafon  of  the  barennes  of  that  foyle. \Mien  he  had

Nomen  Dei.

Nicuesa  his  men
consumed

Contencion
about  the
lieuetenauntship
of  Vraba,
Vaschus  Nunnez
moueth  sedition.

Ancisus

lieuetenaunt  for
Fogeda.

60

Nicitesa.

Rodericus
Colmenaris.

The  nauigation
of  Rodericus
Colmenaris.

C  itchibacoa.

The  ryuer  Gaira.

An  exceding  hy?h
mountajTie
couered  with
snowe.

Appareled  men.

Seuen  and  forty
Spanyardes  are
slaine  w-ith
venemous  arrowes.

lerjia.

A  remedy  agenste

venemous  arrows

Seuen  men  left
behynde.

The  hauen  of
Vraba.

Eden.

M

"3

114

The  fee 01 1 dc  Decade.

61

The  goulfe  of

Vraba.

Dariena.

Famen.

What  became  of
the  contencion  of
Vraba

contynued  a  whyle  in  the  hauen,  and  fiiwe  noo  man  flouiynge,  marueylinge  at  the  filence  of  the  places
(for  he  fuppofed  there  to  hnue  fownde  his  felowes)  he  coulde  not  coniecture  what  this  fluilde  meane:
and  there  vppon  beganne  to  fufpecte  that  eyther  they  were  deade,  or  that  they  had  chaunged  the  place
of  theyr  habitacion.  To  knowe  the  certentie  hereof,  he  commaunded  all  the  greate  ordinaimce  and  other  fmaule
gunnes  which  he  had  in  his  fliippes,  to  bee  charged :  And  fyers  to  bee  made  in  the  nyght  vppon  the  toppes  of
the  rockes.  Thus  the  fyers  beinge  kyndeled,  he  commaunded  all  the  gunnes  to  bee  fliotte  of  at  one  inftante :
by  the  horrible  noyfe  whereof,  the  goulfe  of  Vraba  was  fliaken,  althowghe  it  were,  xxiiii.  myles  diflante :  for  foo
brode  is  the  goulfe.  This  noyfe  was  harde  of  theyr  felowes  in  Dariena :  And  they  aunfwered  them  ageyne
with  mutual  fyers.  Wherfore,  by  the  folowynge  of  thefe  fyers,  Colmenaris  browght  his  fliippes  to  the  Weft  fyde.
Here  thofe  wTetched  and  miferable  men  of  Dariena  which  nowe  thorowgh  famen  and  feeblenes  helde  theyr  wery
fowles  in  theyr  teethe  redy  to  departe  from  theyr  bodies  by  reafon  of  the  calamities  which  beefell  vnto  them
after  Ancifus  fhippe\\Tacke,  lyftinge  vp  theyr  handes  to  heauen,  with  the  teares  runnynge  downe  theyr  cheekes
bothe  for  ioye  and  forowe,  embrafed  Rodcricus  and  his  felowes  with  fuch  kynde  of  reioyfmge  as  their  prefente
neceffitie  feemed  to  requyre.  For  whereas  they  were  before  his  comminge,  withowte  vytayles  and  almofte  naked,
he  brought  them  abundance  of  meate,  drynke,  and  apparell.  It  reftethe  nowe  (mofte  holy  father)  to  declare
what  came  of  the  dilTention  amonge  them  of  Vraba,  as  concernynge  the  gouernaunce  after  the  loffe  of  theyr
capitaynes.

C  The  thyrde  booke  of  the  seconde Decade

Of  the  fuppofed  continent.

Beragita.

Nicuesa  is  sought
foorth

Nicuesa  is  founde
in  a  miserable
case.

Insolencie  of  to
much  felicitie.

62

Nicuesa  fauleth
from  one  miserie
mto  an  other.

T.l  the  chiefe  officers  in  Beragua,  and  fuch  as  were  moft  politike  in  counfayle,  determyned  that
Nicuefa  fliulde  bee  fowght  owte  if  by  any  meanes  he  coulde  bee  founde.  Where  vppon  they
tooke  from  Ancifus  the  gouernoure  refufmge  the  commynge  of  Nicuefa,  a  brygantyne  whiche
he  made  of  his  owne  charges :  And  agreed,  ageynft  bothe  the  wyll  of  Ancifus,  and  the  mafter
of  fence  Vafchus  Nunnez^  that  Nicuefa  fliulde  bee  fowght  foorthe  to  take  away  the  ftryfe  as
touchinge  the  gouemement  They  elected  therfore  Colmenaris  (of  whom  we  fpake  before)
to  take  this  matter  in  hande :  wyllynge  hym  to  make  diligent  fearch  for  Nicuefa  in  thofe
coaftes  where  they  fuppofed  he  erred.  For  they  harde  that  he  had  forfaken  Beragua,  the  region  of  an  vnfrute-
fuU  grounde.  They  gaue  hym  therfore  commaundement  to  brynge  Nicuefa  with  hym,  and  further  to  declare
vnto  hym  that  he  fhulde  doo  ryght  good  feruice  to  coome  thether,  in  takyng  away  th[e]occafion  of  theyr
feditions.  Colmenaris  tooke  the  thynge  vppon  hym  the  more  gladly  bycaufe  Nicuefa  was  his  very  frende :
Suppofmge  that  his  commynge  with  vytayles  fhulde  bee  noo  leffe  thankefull  to  Nicuefa  and  his  coompanie,
then  it  was  to  them  of  Vraba.  FurnyfQiynge  therefore  one  of  his  owne  fliippes  whiche  he  browght  with  hym
and  alfo  the  brigantyne  taken  frome  Ancifus,  he  frayghted  the  fame  with  part  of  the  vytayles  and  other
neceflaries  which  he  browght  with  hym  before  from  Hifpaniola  to  Vraba.  Thus  courfynge  alonge  by  all  the
coaftes  and  goulfes  nere  there  abowte,  at  the  length  at  the  poynte  called  Marmor,  he  founde  Nicuefa,  of  all
lyuynge  men  moft  infortunate,  in  maner  dryed  vppe  with  extreeme  hunger,  fylthye  and  horrible  to  beholde,
A\ith  onely  three  fcore  men  in  his  company,  lefte  alyue  of  feuen  hundreth.  They  al  feemed  to  hym  foo
miferable,  that  he  noo  leffe  lam.ented  theyr  cafe,  then  yf  he  had  founde  them  deade.  But  Colmenaris  conforted
his  frende  Nicuefa :  and  embra^mge  hym  with  teares  and  cherefuU  woordes,  relyued  his  fpirites,  and  further
encoraged  hym  Avith  greate  hope  of  better  fortune :  declarynge  alfo  that  his  commynge  was  looked  for  and
greatelye  defyred  of  al  the  good  men  of  Vraba,  for  that  they  hoped  that  by  his  autoritie,  theyr  difcorde  and
contention  fliulde  bee  fjoiyfflied.  Nicuefa  thanked  his  frende  Colmenaris  after  fuch  forte  as  his  calamitie
requyred.  Thus  they  tooke  fliyppe  to  gyther,  and  fayled  directly  to  Vraba.  But  fo  variable  and  vnconftant
is  the  nature  of  man,  that  he  foone  groweth  owte  of  vfe,  becommeth  infolente  and  vnmyndful  of  benefites  after
to  much  felicitie.  For  Nicuefa,  after  thus  many  teares  and  Nveepynges,  after  dyuers  bewaylinges  of  his  infortu-
nate defteny,  after  fo  many  thankes  geuynge,  ye  after  that  he  had  faulen  downe  to  the  grounde  and  kyffed  the
feete  of  Colmenaris  his  fauioure,  he  beganne  to  quarel  with  hym  before  he  came  yet  at  Vraba,  reprouinge  hym
and  them  all  for  th[e]alteracion  of  the  ftate  of  thynges  in  Vraba,  and  for  the  gatheringe  of  golde:  Affirming
that  none  of  them  owght  to  haue  layde  hande  of  any  golde  with  owte  the  aduice  of  hym  or  oi  Fogeda  his  coom-
panion.  When  thefe  fayinges  and  fuche  lyke,  came  to  the  eares  of  theym  of  Vraba,  they  foo  ftoured  vp  the
myndes  of  Ancifus  Lieuetenaunte  for  Fogeda,  and  alfo  of  Vafchus  Nunnez,  of  the  contrary  parte,  ageinfte  Niaiefa,

The  feconde  Decade.

115

that  fliortely  after  his  arryuall  ^vith  his  three  fcore  men,  they  commaunded  hym  with  threatenynge  to  departe
from  thenfe.  But  this  pleafed  not  the  better  fort.  Yet  fearynge  leafl  tumult  fhulde  bee  amonge  the  people
whom  Vafchus  Niinnez  had  flered  to  factions,  the  befl  parte  was  fayne  to  giue  place  to  the  greatefl.  This
Avretched  man  therfore  Niciiefa  thus  drowned  in  miferies,  was  thrufle  into  the  brigantyne  whiche  he  hym  felfe
browght :  and  with  hym  only  feuentene  men,  of  his  three  fcore  which  remayned  alyue.  He  tooke  fhyppe  in
the  Calendes  of  Marche  in  the  yeare.  15 11.  intendynge  to  goo  to  Hifpaiiiola  to  coomplayne  of  the  raffhenes  of
Vafchus  Nimnez,  and  of  the  violence  doone  to  hym  by  Aticifus.  But  he  entered  into  the  brigantine  in  an
vnfortunate  houre:  for  he  was  neuer  feene  after.  They  fuppofe  that  the  brigantine  was  drowned  with  all  the
men  therin.  And  thus  vnhappie  Nicuefa  faulynge  headlonge  owte  of  one  miferye  into  an  other,  ended  his  lyfe
more  myferablye  then  he  lyued.  Nicuefa  beinge  thus  vylely  reiected,  and  al  theyr  vytayles  confumed  which
Colmenaris  browght  them,  faulynge  in  maner  madde  for  hunger,  they  were  enforced  lyke  raueninge  woolues
feakynge  theyr  praye,  to  inuade  fuche  as  dwelte  abowte  theyr  confynes.  Vafchus  Nunnez  therefore,  theyr  newe
capitayne  of  theyr  owne  election,  affembling  togyther  a  hundreth  and  thirtie  men,  and  fettinge  them  in  order  of
battell  after  his  fwoordeplayers  fafQiion,  puffed  vppe  with  pryde,  placed  his  fouldiers  as  pleafed  hym  in  the
for^varde  and  rereward,  and  fume  as  pertifens  abowt  his  owne  perfon.  Thus  affociatinge  with  hym  Colmenaris,
he  wente  to  fpoyle  the  kynges  which  were  bortherers  there  abowte,  and  came  fyrfl  to  a  Region  abowte  that
coafle,  cauled  Coiba,  (wher  of  we  made  mencion  before)  imperioufly  and  with  cruel  countenaunce  commaund-
inge  the  kynge  of  the  region  whofe  name  was  Careta,  (of  whome  they  were  neuer  troubled  as  often  as  they
paffed  by  his  dominions)  to  gyue  them  vytayles.  But  Careta  denyed  that  he  coulde  gyue  them  any  at  that
tyme :  alleagyng  that  he  had  oftentymes  ayded  the  Chriflians  as  they  paffed  by  thofe  coafles :  by  reafon  wherof
his  (lore  was  nowe  confumed :  Alfo  that  by  the  meanes  of  the  contynuall  warre  which  he  kepte  euer  from  his
chyldes  age  with  a  kyng  whofe  name  is  Foncha,  bortheringe  vppon  his  dominion,  he  and  his  famelie  were  in
greate  fcarfenes  of  all  thynges.  But  Vafchus  woolde  admytte  none  of  thefe  excufes :  And  ther\  ppon  tooke
Careta  prifoner,  fpoyled  his  vyllage,  and  browght  hym  bownd  with  his  twoo  wyues  and  chyldren  and  all  his
famelie  to  Darietia.  With  this  kynge  Caj-eta,  they  founde  three  of  the  felowes  of  Nicuefa,  the  whiche  when
Nicuefa  paffed  by  thofe  coafles  to  feeke  Beragua,  fearynge  punyffhement  for  theyr  euyll  defertes  floule  away
from  the  fhyppes  lyinge  at  anker:  And  when  the  nauie  departed,  commytted  them  felues  to  the  mercie  of
Careta,  who  enterteyned  them  very  frendely.  They  had  nowe  bynne  there,  xviii.  moonethes,  and  were  there-
fore as  vtterly  naked  as  the  people  of  the  contrey.  Duringe  this  tyme,  the  meate  of  th[e]inhabitantes  feemed
vnto  them  delicate  difflies  and  princely  fare  :  efpecially  bycaufe  they  enioyed  the  fame  withowte  any  flryfe  for
myne  and  thyne,  which  twoo  thynges  moue  and  enforce  men  to  fuch  harde  fhyftes  and  miferies,  that  in  Ijnaing
they  feeme  not  to  lyue.  Yet  defyred  they  to  returne  to  theyr  owlde  cares,  of  fuche  force  is  education  and
natural  effection  towarde  them  with  whom  we  haue  byn  browght  vp.  The  vytayles  whiche  Vafchus  browght
frome  the  vyllage  of  Careta  to  his  felowes  lefte  in  Dariena,  was  rather  fumewhat  to  affuage  the}T  prefent  hunger,
then  vtterly  to  take  away  theyr  neceffitie.  But  as  touchinge  Ancifus  beinge  Lieuetenaunt  for  Fogeda,  whether
it  were  before  thefe  thynges  or  after,  I  knowe  not.  But  this  I  am  fure  of,  that  after  the  reiectinge  of  Nicuefa,
many  occafions  were  fought  agenfl,  Ancifus  by  Vafais  and  his  factionaries.  Howe  foo  euer  it  was,  Aficifus  was
taken,  and  cafl  in  pryfon,  and  his  goodes  confifcate.  The  caufe  hereof  was,  (as  Vafchus  alleaged)  that  Ancifus
hadde  his  commiffion  of  the  Lieuetenauntfhippe,  of  Fogeda  onely  whome  they  fayde  to  bee  nowe  deade,
and  not  of  the  kynge.  Sayinge  that  he  woolde  not  obey  any  man  that  was  not  put  in  office  by  the
kyng  hym  felfe  by  his  letters  patentes.  Yet  at  the  requefl  of  the  grauefle  forte,  he  was  fumwhat  pacified,
and  delt  more  gentelly  with  hym,  hauinge  fum  compaffion  of  his  calamities.  And  thervppon  commaunded
hym  to  bee  loofed.  Ancifus  beinge  at  libertie,  tooke  fhyppe  to  departe  from  thenfe  to  Hifpaniola.  But  beefore
he  had  hoyfed  vppe  his  fayle,  all  the  wyfefl  forte  reforted  to  hym,  humbly  defyringe  hym  to  returne  ageyne :
promyfynge  that  they  wolde  doo  theyr  diligence,  that  Vafchus  beinge  reconciled,  he  myght  bee  reflored  to  his
full  autoritie  of  the  Lieuetenauntfhippe.  But  Ancifus  refufed  to  confent  to  theyr  requefl  and  foo  departed.
Yet  fume  there  were  that  murmured  that  god  and  his  angels  fhe^\'ed  this  reuenge  \pon  Ancifus,  bycaufe  Nicuefa
was  reiected  throwgh  his  counfayle.  Howe  foo  euer  it  bee,  the  fearchers  of  the  newe  landes,  faule  headlonge
into  ruine  by  theyr  owne  follye,  confuminge  them  felues  with  ciuile  difcorde,  not  weighinge  foo  greate  a  matter,
nor  employinge  theyr  befle  endeuoure  aboute  the  fame  as  the  woorthynes  of  the  thynge  requyretli.  In  this
meane  tyme,  they  determyned  all  with  one  agreemente,  to  fende  meffengers  into  Hifpaniohi  to  the  younge
Admirall  and  viceroy,  fonne  and  heyre  to  Chriflophorus  Co/onus  the  fynder  of  thefe  landes,  and  to  the  other
gouemoures  of  the  Ilande  (from  whom  the  newe  landes  receaue  theyr  aydc  and  lawes)  to  fignifie  vnto  them
what  flate  they  floode  in,  and  in  what  neceffitie  they  lyued  :  alfo  what  they  had  founde,  and  in  what  hope  they
were  of  greater  thinges  if  they  were  furnyflied  with  plentie  of  vytayles  and  other  neceffaries.  For  this  purpofe
they  elected  at  the  affignement  of  Vafcus,  one  Vaidiuia,  beinge  one  of  his  faction,  and  inflructed  by  hym  ageinfl
Ancifus. And  to  bee  affiflant  with  hym,  they  appoynted  one  Zamudius  a  Cantabrian  :  So  that  commaunde-

"5

The  greatest  part
ouerconuneth  the
best

The  death  of
Nicuesa.

Famen  enforseth
them  to  faule  to
spoylynge.

Vaschus  vsurpeth
th[e]autoritieof  the
Lieuetenantshippe.

Careta,  kinge  of
Coiba.

KjTige  Careta  is
taicea  and  spoyled.

Hunger  is  the  best

sauce.

Myne  and  thine

the  seedes  of  al

mischefe.

Ancistis,
lieuetenaunt  for
Fogeda  is  cast  in
prison.

Ancisus  talcet
his  vj-age  to
hispaniola.

63

The  reueng[e]  of
God.

The
inconueniences  of
discorde.

The  Sonne  and
heyre  of  Colonus,
is  Admirall  and
Viceroy  of
hispaniola.

Valditda.

ii6

TJie  fccoude  Decade.

Zamudius  and
Aucisus,  take  their
vyage  to  Spayiic

Kinge  Poncha.

Swoordes  of
woodde.

Kynge  Careta
conspireth  with
the  Spnnyardes
aiienst  kynge
I'onchx

Wrought  gold

The  region  of
Comogra,  distant
frome  Dariena.
xxx.  leaques.

Kynge  Comogrus.

The  kynges
palaice.

64

Wyne  and  syder

Blacke  wine.

The  bodyes  of
deade  kynges
rehgiously
honoured.

Penates.

The  carcases  of
men  dryed

The  kynges  Sonne
a  yonge  man  of
excellent  wytte.

Foure  thousande
vnces  of  wrought
golde.

ment  was  o^yuen  to  VaUiuia  to  returne  from  Hifpa7iiola  with  vytayles:  And  Zamudius  was  appoynted  to  take

his  vyat^e  into  Spayne  to  the  kynge. They  tooke  fliippe  togyther  with  Ancifus,  hauinge  in  mynde  to  certifie  the

kynge  howe  thynges  were  handeled  there,  muche  otherwyfe  then  Zamudius  information. I  my  felfe  fpake  with

both  Ancifus  and  Zxmudius  at  their  commynge  to  the  comte. Whyle  they  were  occupied  aboute  thefe  matters,

thofe  wretched  men  of  Dariena  loofed  Carcfa  the  kynge  of  Coiba  vppon  condicion  that  he  fluilde  ayde  theym  in

thevr  warres  ageynfl  his  enemy  and  theyrs,  kynge  Foiicha  bortheringe  vpon  his  dominions. Careta  made  a  league

with  them,  pronnfinge  that  as  they  paflcd  by  his  kyngcdome,  he  woolde  gyuc  them  all  thynges  neceffarie,  and

meete  them  with  an  armie  of  men,  to  goo  forwarde  with  them  to  the  battaile  agenfl  Poncha. Theyr  weapons

are  nother  bowes  nor  venemed  arrowes,  as  we  fayde  th[e]inhabitantes  to  haue  which  dwel  eaflwarde  beyonde

the  f^oulfe. They  feight  therefore  at  hande,  with  longe  fwordes  (which  they  caule  Macanas)  made  of  wood

bycaufe  they  haue  noo  Iren. They  vfe  alfo  longe  flaues  lyke  iauelens  hardened  at  the  endes  with  fyer,  or  typte  with

bone. Alfo  certeyne  llynges  and  dartes. Thus  after  the  league  made  with  Careta,  bothe  he  and  owre  men  had

certeyne  dayes  appoynted  them  to  tyll  theyr  grounde  and  fowe  theyr  feedes. This  doone,  by  the  ayde  of

Careta  and  by  his  conduction,  they  marched  towarde  the  palaice  of  Poncha,  who  fledde  at  theyr  commynge.

They  fpoyled  his  vyllage  and  mytigated  theyr  hunger  with  fuch  vytayles  as  they  founde  there. Yet  coulde  they

not  helpe  their  felowes  therwith  by  reafon  of  the  farre  diflance  of  the  place,  althowghe  they  had  greate  plentie.

For  the  vylla<Te  oi Poncha,  was  more  then  a  hundreth  myles  diflant  from  Dariena:  wheras  was  alfo  none  other

remedy  but  that  the  fame  fliulde  haue  byn  caryed  on  mens  backes  to  the  fea  fyde  beinge  farre  of,  where  they

left  theyr  fliyppes  in  the  which  they  came  to  the  vyllage  of  Careta. Here  they  founde  certeyne  powndes

weyght  of  gold,  grauen  and  wrought  into  fundrye  ouches. After  the  facking  of  this  vyllage  they  reforted

toward  the  fliips  intendyng  to  leaue  the  kinges  of  the  inland  vntouched  at  this  tyme,  and  to  inuade  onely  them

which  dwelt  by  the  fea  coaftes. Not  farre  from  Coiba,  in  the  fame  tracte,  there  is  a  Region  named  Comogra,

and  the  Kin^-e  thereof,  cauled  Comogrus  after  the  fame  name. To  this  Kinge  they  came  fyrfl  next  after  the

fubvertion  of  Poncha :  And  founde  his  palaice  fituate  in  a  frutefuU  playne  of  twelue  leaques  in  bredthe,  at  the

rootes  of  the  further  fyde  of  the  nexte  mountaynes. Comogrus  had  in  his  courte  a  certeyne  noble  man  of  nere

confano-uinitie  to  Kynge  Careta,  whiche  had  fledde  to  Comogrus  by  reafon  of  certeyne  diffention  whiche  was

betwene  Careta  and  hym. Thefe  noble  men,  they  caule  lura. This  lura  therfore  of  Coiba,  mette  owre  men

by  the  way,  and  conciled  Comogrus  to  them,  bycaufe  he  was  well  knowen  to  owr  men  from  the  time  that

Nicuefa  paffed  fyrfl  by  thofe  coafles. Owre  men  therefore  went  quietlye  to  the  palaice  of  Comogrtis  beinge

diftante  from  Darima  thirtie  leaques  by  a  plaine  waye  abowte  the  mountaynes,  This  Kynge  Comogrtis,  had

feuen  fonnes,  younge  men  of  comelye  forme  and  flature,  whiche  he  had  by  fundry  wyues. His  palaice  was

framed  of  poftes  or  proppes  made  of  trees  faflened  togeyther  after  a  ftraunge  forte,  and  of  foo  aronge  bylding,

that  it  is  of  no  leffe  flrength  then  waules  of  flone. They  which  meafured  the  length  of  the  floure  thereof,

founde  it  to  bee  a  hundreth  and  fyftie  pafes,  and  in  breadthe,  foure  fcore  foote :  beinge  roofed  and  paued  with

maruelous  arte. They  founde  his  flore  houfe,  fumyffl-ied  with  abundance  of  delicate  vitailes  after  the  maner  of

theyr  countrey :  And  his  W7ne  celler  replenifhed  with  great  veffelles  of  earth  and  alfo  of  woodde  fylled  with

theyr  kynde  of  wyne  and  fyder. For  they  haue  noo  grapes. But  lyke  as  they  make  theyr  breade  of  thofe

three  kyndes  of  rootes  cauled  lucca,  agis,  and  Maizitim,  (whereof  we  fpake  in  the  fyrfte  decade)  Soo  make  they

theyr  w>Tie  of  the  frutes  of  date  trees,  and  fyder  of  other  frutes  and  feedes,  as  doo  the  Almaynes,  Flemynges,

Englyffhe  men,  and  owre  Spanyardes  whych  inhabite  the  mountaynes,  as  the  Vafcons  and  Aflurians :  likewife

in  the  mountaynes  of  the  Alpes,  the  Noricians,  Sueuians,  and  Heluetians,  make  certeyne  drynkes  of  barley,  wheat,

hoppes,  and  apples. They  fay  alfo  that  with  Comogrus,  they  droonk  wynes  of  fundry  tafles,  both  whyte  and

blacke. But  nowe  yow  fhall  heare  of  a  thynge  more  monftrous  too  behoulde. Enterynge  therfor  into  the

inner  partes  of  the  palaice,  they  were  browght  into  a  chamber  hanged  aboute  with  the  carkefes  of  men,  tyed

with  ropes  of  goffampine  cotton. Beinge  demaunded  what  they  ment  by  that  fuperftition,  they  anfwered  that

thofe  were  the  carkefes  of  the  father,  graundefather,  and  great  graundfather  with  the  other  aunceftours  of  theyr

Kyng  Comogrus. Declaringe  that  they  had  the  fame  in  greate  reuerence,  and  that  they  tooke  it  for  a  godly

thynge  to  honoure  them  religioufly:  And  therfore  appareled  euery  of  the  fame  fumptuouflye  mth  golde  and

precious  ftones  accordynge  vnto  theyr  eftate. After  this  forte  dyd  the  antiquitie  honoure  theyr  Penates,  whyche

they  thowght  had  the  gouernaunce  of  their  lyues. Howe  they  drye  thefe  carkefes  vppon  certeine  inflrumentes

made  of  wood,  like  vnto  hardels,  with  a  fofte  fyer  vnder  the  fame,  fo  that  onely  the  fkynne  remayneth  to  houlde

the  bones  together,  we  haue  defcribed  in  the  former  decade. Of  Comogrus  his  feuen  fonnes,  the  eldeft  had  an

excellente  naturall  wytte. He  therfore  thowght  it  good  to  flatter  and  pleafe  thys  wandrynge  kynde  of  men

{p\a  men  I  meane)  lyuynge  onely  by  fliiftes  and  fpoyle,  leaft  beinge  offended  and  feekynge  occafions  ageynRe

hym  and  his  familie,  they  fliuld  handle  hym  as  they  dyd  other  whiche  fowght  noo  meanes  howe  to  gratifie  theym.

Wherefore,  he  gaue  Vafchus  and  Colmenaris  foure  thoufande  ounces  of  golde  artificially  wrought,  and  alfo  fyftie

flaues  whyche  he  had  taken  in  the  warres. For  fuche,  eyther  they  fell  for  exchaunce  of  other  thinges,  or

ii€

The  feco7ide  Decade.

117

otherwife  vfe  them  as  theym  lyfteth:  For  they  haue  not  the  vfe  of  money.  This  golde  \vith  as  muche  more
which  they  had  in  an  other  place,  o\vre  men  wayed  in  the  porche  of  Comogrus  his  palaice  to  feparate  the  fyfte
parte  thereof,  whiche  portion  is  due  to  the  Kynges  efcheker.  For  it  is  decreed  that  the  fyft  parte  of  both  golde,
perles,  and  precious  flones,  fliulde  be  afligned  to  the  Kinges  treafourers:  And  the  refydue,  to  bee  diuided
emoonge  theym  felues  by  compofition.  Here  as  brabblynge  and  contention  arofe  emonge  owr  men  abowt  the
diuidinge  of  gold,  this  eldefle  foonne  of  Kynge  Comogrus  beinge  prefente,  whome  we  prayfcd  for  his  wyfedome,
commynge  fume  what  wyth  an  angery  countenaunce  towarde  hym  which;  helde  the  balences,  he  flrooke  theym
wyth  his  fyfle,  and  fcatered  all  the  golde  that  was  therein,  abowte  the  porche,  fharpely  rebukynge  theym  \vith
woordes  in  this  effecte.  What  is  the  matter  yowe  Chriflian  men,  that  yow  foo  greatly  efleme  foo  litle  a  portion
of  golde  more  then  yowr  owne  quietnes,  whiche  neuertheleffe  yow  entend  to  deface  from  thefe  fayre  ouches
and  to  melte  the  fame  into  a  rude  maffe.  If  yowre  hunger  of  goulde  bee  foo  infatiable  that  onely  for  the  defyre
yowe  haue  therto,  yowe  difquiete  foo  many  nations,  and  yow  yowre  felues  alfo  fufleyne  foo  many  calamit[i]es  and
incommodities,  lyuing  like  baniflied  men  owte  of  yowre  owne  countrey,  I  wyll  (hewe  yowe  a  Region  floweinge
with  goulde,  where  yowe  may  fatiffie  yowr  raueninge  appetites.  But  yowe  mufle  attempte  the  thynge
with  a  greater  poure:  For  it  flandeth  yow  in  hande  by  force  of  armes  to  ouercome  kynges  of  greate
puiffaunce,  and  rigorous  defenders  of  theyr  dominions.  For  befyde  other,  the  greate  kinge  Tumanama
will  coome  foorthe  ageynfle  yowe,  whofe  kengdome  is  mofle  ryche  with  golde,  and  diflante  from  henfe
onely  fyx  foonnes:  that  is,  fyx  dayes:  for  they  number  the  dayes  by  the  fonne.  Furthermore,  or  euer
yowe  canne  coome  thether,  yow  mufl  paffe  ouer  the  mountaynes  inhabited  of  the  crueU  Canybales
a  fierce  kynde  of  men,  deuourers  of  mans  flefflie,  lyuing  withowte  lawes,  wanderinge,  and  withowte  empire.
For  they  alfo,  beinge  defyrous  of  golde,  haue  fubdewed  them  vnder  theyr  dominion  whiche  before  inhabited
the  golde  mynes  of  the  mountaynes,  and  vfe  them  lyke  bondemen,  vfyng  their  laboure  in  dygginge  and  work-
ynge  theyr  golde  in  plates  and  fundry  Images  lyke  vnto  thefe  whiche  yowe  fee  here.  For  we  doo  no  more
efleeme  rude  golde  vnwrought,  then  we  doo  cloddes  of  earthe,  before  it  bee  formed  by  the  hande  of  the  worke-
man  to  the  fimilitude  eyther  of  fume  veffell  neceffarie  for  owre  vfe,  or  fume  ouche  bewetifuU  to  be  wome.
Thefe  thynges  doo  wee  receaue  of  theim  for  exchaunge  of  other  of  owre  thynges,  as  of  prifoners  taken  in  warre,
whiche  they  bye  to  eate,  or  for  fheetes  and  other  thynges  perteynynge  to  the  furnyture  of  houfeholde,  fuche  as
they  lacke  which  inhabite  the  mountaynes :  And  efpecially  for  vitayles  wherof  they  flande  in  greate  neede  by
reafon  of  the  barrennes  of  the  mountaynes.  This  iorney  therfore,  mufl  bee  made  open  by  force  of  men.  And
when  yowe  are  paflinge  ouer  thefe  mountaynes  (poyntinge  -with  his  fynger  towarde  the  fouthe  mountaynes)  yowe
fhal  fee  an  other  fea,  where  they  fayle  with  fhyppes  as  bygge  as  yowres  (meanynge  the  caraueles)  \'fmge  both
fayles  and  ores  as  yowe  doo,  althowghe  the  men  bee  naked  as  wee  are.  All  the  waye  that  the  water  runnethe
frome  the  mountaynes,  and  all  that  fyde  lyinge  towarde  the  Southe,  bryngeth  foorth  golde  abundantly.  As  he
fayde  thefe  woordes,  he  poynted  to  the  veffelles  in  whiche  they  vfe  to  ferue  theyr  meate,  afiirmynge  that  kynge
Tumanama^  and  all  the  other  kynges  beyonde  the  mountaynes,  had  fuche  and  al  their  other  houfeholde  (lufte  of
golde :  And  that  there  was  noo  leffe  plentie  of  golde  amonge  thofe  people  of  the  Southe,  then  of  Iren  with
vs.  For  he  knewe  by  relation  of  owre  men,  wherof  owre  fwoordes  and  other  weapons  were  made.  Owre
capitaynes  marueylyng  at  the  oration  of  the  naked  younge  man  (for  they  had  for  interpretours  thofe  three  men
whiche  had  byn  before  a  yere  and  a  halfe  conuerfant  in  the  court  of  kynge  Careta)  pondered  in  theyr  myndes,
and  erneflly  confidered  his  fayinges.  Soo  that  his  raffhenes  in  fcatteringe  the  golde  owte  of  the  balances,  they
turned  to  myrth  and  vrbanitie,  commendynge  his  dooinge  and  fayinge  therin.  Then  they  afked  hym  frendely,
vppon  what  certeyne  knoweleage  he  fpake  thofe  thynges :  Or  what  he  thowght  befle  h^-rein  to  bee  doone  }'f
they  fliulde  brynge  a  greater  fupplye  of  men.  To  this,  younge  Comogms,  flayinge  a  whyle  with  hjTii  felfe  as  it
were  an  oratour  preparinge  him  felfe  to  fpeake  of  fume  graue  matter,  and  difpofynge  his  bodye  to  a  gieflure
meete  to  perfuade,  fpake  thus  in  his  mother  tonge.  Gyue  eare  vnto  me  o  yowe  Chryflians.  Albeit  that  the
gredie  hunger  of  golde  hathe  not  yet  vexed  vs  naked  men,  yet  doo  we  deflroy  one  an  other  by  reafon  of  ambi-
tion and  defyre  to  rule.  Hereof  fpringeth  mortall  hatred  amonge  vs,  and  hereof  commethe  owre  deflruction.
Owre  prediceffours  kepte  warres,  and  foo  dyd  Comogrus  my  father  with  princes  beinge  bortherers  abowte  hym.
In  the  which  warres,  as  wee  haue  ouercoome,  fo  haue  wee  byn  ouercoome,  as  dothe  appere  by  the  number  of
bondemen  amonge  vs,  which  \.'e  tooke  by  the  ouerthrowe  of  owre  enemyes,  of  the  whiche  I  haue  gyuen  yowe
fiftie.  Lykewyfe  at  an  other  tyme,  owre  aduerfaries  hauinge  th[e]upi)er  hande  agenRe  vs,  ledde  away  manye
of  vs  captiue.  For  fuche  is  the  chaunce  of  warre.  Alfo,  amonge  owre  fomiliers  (wherof  a  great  number  haue
byn  captiues  with  them)  beholde  here  is  one  whiche  of  longe  tyme  ledde  a  paynefuU  lyfe  in  bondage  vnder  the
yoke  of  that  kynge  beyonde  the  mountaynes,  in  whofe  kyngdome  is  fuche  abundance  of  golde.  Of  hym,  and
fuche  other  innumerable,  and  lykewyfe  by  the  refort  of  free  men  on  theyr  fyde  comminge  to  vs,  and  ageyne  of
owre  men  refortinge  to  theim  by  fafe  conduct,  thefe  thynges  haue  byn  euer  as  well  knowen  vnto  vs,  as  owre
owne  poffeffions. But  that  yowe  maye  bee  the  better  affured  hereof,  and  bee  owte  of  all  fufpection  that  yowe

The  distribution
of  golde.

Voung  Comogrus
his  oration.

The  hunger  of

golde.

A  region  flowinge
wyth  golde.

Kynge
Tumanania.

Canibales.

65

The  golde  mynes
of  the  mountaynes.

Vnwrought  golde
not  estemed.

Exchaunge.

Abundance  of
golde.

Householde  stufle
of  gold

Naked  people
tormented  with
ambition.

A  vehement
persuasion.

M 2

117

ii8

66

A  token  of  hunger

TJie  fccoiidc  Decade.

fluil  not  bee  deceaued,  make  me  the  guyde  of  this  viage,  byndynge  me  fafl  and  keepyng  me  in  fafe  cuflodie  to
bee  hanged  on  the  next  tree,  yf  yowe  fynde  my  fayinges  in  any  point  vntrewe.  Folowe  my  counfayle  therfore,
and  fend  for  a  thoufonde  Chriflian  men  ai)te  for  the  wanes,  by  whofe  power  Ave  may  with  alfo  the  men  of
warre  of  Como^-us  my  father  armed  after  owre  manor,  inuade  the  dominions  of  owre  enemyes :  where,  bothe
yowe  may  bee  llxtiffycd  with  golde,  and  we  for  owre  conductinge  and  aydynge  yowe  in  this  enterpryfe,  fliall
thynke  owre  fehies  abundantly  rewarded,  in  that  yowe  fliall  helpe  to  delyuer  vs  from  the  iniuries  and  perpetuall
feare  of  owre  enemies.  After  thefe  woordes,  this  prudente  younge  Coviogrus  helde  his  peace.  And  owre  men
moued  with  greate  hope  and  hunger  of  golde,  beganne  ageine  to  fwalowe  downe  theyr  fpettle.

C  The  fovrth  booke  of  the  seconde  Decade,

Of  the  fiippofcd  Continejit.

Kynge  Comogrus
is  baptised  with
his  famely.

Valdiuia  retumeth
from  hispaniola.

Horrible  thunder
and  lightnynge  in
the  moneth  of
Nouember.

Bread  of  Maizius
and  hobba

Digestion
strengthened  by
owtwarde  colde.

Hunger.

A  newe  supply  of
a  thousande

souldyers.

Marcha,

Pestis.

A  thousande  and
fyue  hundreth
pounds  weyght
of  wrought  gold

67

Fter  that  they  had  taryed  here  a  fewe  dayes  and  baptifed  Cofnogrus  with  all  his  famelie,  and
named  hym  by  the  name  of  Charles  after  the  kynge  of  Spayne,  they  returned  to  theyr
felowes  in  Dariena  leauinge  with  hym  the  hope  of  the  thoufande  fouldyers,  which  his  fonne
requyred  to  paffe  ouer  thofe  mountaynes  towarde  the  South  fea.  Thus  enteringe  into  the
vyllage  which  they  had  chofen  to  inhabite,  they  had  knowleage  that  Valdiuia  was  returned,
within  fyxe  moonethes  after  his  departure :  but  with  noo  great  plentie  of  vytayles,  bycaufe
he  browght  but  a  fmaule  Ihippe :  yet  with  hope  that  fhortely  after,  there  fliulde  bee  fent
them  abundance  of  vytayles  with  a  newe  fupply  of  men.  For  younge  Colojiiis,  the  Admiral  and  viceroy  of
Hifpaniola,  and  the  other  gouernours  of  the  Ilande,  acknowleaged  that  hetherto  they  had  noo  refpecte  to  theym
of  Daricfia,  bycaufe  they  fuppofed  that  Ancifus  the  Lieuetenant  had  fafely  arryued  there  with  his  fliippe  laden
with  vatayles :  A\yllynge  them  from  henfefoorth  to  bee  of  good  cheere,  and  that  they  fliulde  lacke  nothynge
hereafter :  But  that  at  this  prefent  tyme,  they  had  noo  bygger  fhippe  wherby  they  myght  fende  them  greater
plentie  of  neceffaries  by  Valdiuia.  The  vytayles  therfore  which  he  browght,  ferued  rather  fumwhat  to  mytigate
theyr  prefent  neceffitie,  then  to  fatiffye  theyr  lacke.  Wherfore  within  a  fewe  dayes  after  Valdiuia  his  returne,
they  fel  ageine  into  lyke  fcarfnes :  efpecially  for  afmuch  as  a  great  florme  and  tempefl  whiche  came  from  the
hyghe  mountaynes  with  horrible  thunder  and  lyghtnynge  in  the  mooneth  of  Nouember,  browght  with  it  fuche
a  fludde,  that  it  partely  caryed  away  and  partly  drowned  all  the  corne  and  feedes  whiche  they  had  fowne  in  the
moonethe  of  September  in  a  frutefuU  grounde  before  they  went  to  kyng  Comogrus.  The  feedes  which  they  of
Hifpaniola  caule  Maizium,  and  they  of  Vraha  caule  Hobba :  Wherof  they  make  theyr  breade,  which  alfo  wee
fayde  to  bee  r}'pe  thryfe  euery  yeare,  bycaufe  thofe  Regions  are  not  bytten  with  the  fliarpnes  of  ^vynter  by
reafon  of  theyr  nerenes  to  the  Equinoctial  lyne.  It  is  alfo  agreable  to  the  principles  of  naturall  philofophie,
that  this  breade  made  of  Maizius  or  Hobba,  fliulde  bee  more  holfome  for  th[e]inhabitantes  of  thofe  contreys
then  breade  made  of  wheate,  by  reafon  that  it  is  of  eafyer  digeflion.  For  wheras  coulde  is  wantinge,  the
naturall  heate  is  not  dryuen  frome  the  owtewarde  partes  into  the  inwarde  partes  and  precordials,  whereby
digeflion  is  much  flrengthened.  Beinge  therfore  thus  fruflrate  of  the  increafe  of  theyr  feedes,  and  the  kynges
nere  abowte  them  fpoyled  of  both  vytayles  and  golde,  they  were  enforced  to  feeke  theyr  meate  further  of:  And
therwith  to  fignifie  to  the  gouernours  of  Hifpaniola  with  what  great  neceffitie  they  were  oppreffed :  And  what
they  had  lemed  of  Comogrus  as  concernynge  the  Regions  towarde  the  Southe :  wyllynge  them  in  confideration
therof  to  aduertyfe  the  k3mge  to  fende  them  a  thoufande  fouldiers,  by  whofe  helpe  they  myght  by  force  make
waye  throwghe  the  mountaynes  diuidynge  the  fea  on  bothe  fydes,  if  they  coulde  not  brynge  the  fame  to  paffe
quyetly.  The  fame  Valdiuia  was  alfo  fent  on  this  meffage,  caryinge  with  hym  to  the  kynges  treafourers  (hauinge
theyr  office  of  recepte  in  Hifpaniola)  three  hundreth  poundes  weyght  of  golde  after  eyght  ounces  to  the  pounde,
for  the  fyfte  portion  dewe  to  the  kynges  efcheker.  This  pounde  of.  viii.  vnces,  the  Spanyardes  caule  Marcha,
whiche  in  weyght  amounteth  to  fyftie  pieces  of  golde  cauled  Caflellani.  But  the  Caflilians,  caule  a  pound
Pefum.  We  conclude  therfore,  that  the  fume  hereof,  was.  xv.  thoufande  of  thofe  peeces  of  golde  cauled
Caflellani.  And  thus  is  it  apparente  by  this  accompte,  that  they  receaued  of  the  barbarous  kynges,  a  thoufande
and  fyue  hundreth  poundes  of  eyght  ounces  to  the  pounde.  All  the  whiche  they  founde  redy  wrought  in  fundry
kyndes  of  ouches,  as  cheynes,  brafelets,  tablets,  and  plates,  bothe  to  hange  before  theyr  brefles,  and  alfo  at
theyr  eares,  and  ncfethryls.  Valdiuia  therefore  tooke  ftiyppinge  in  the  fame  carauell  in  the  whiche  he  came
lad,  and  returned  alfo  beefore  the  thyrde  day  of  the  Ides  of  lanuary,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifl  M.  D.  XL  What
chaunced  to  hym  in  this  vyage,  we  wyll  declare  in  place  conuenient. But  let  vs  nowe  returne  to  them  which

ii8

The  feco7tde  Decade.

119

remayned  in  Vraba. After  the  difmiffinge  of  Va/ditiia,  beinge  pricked  fonvarde  with  owtragious  hunger,  they

determined  to  fearche  the  inner  partes  of  that  goulfe  in  fundry  places. The  extreme  angle  or  poynt  of  the

fame  goulfe  is  diflant  from  the  enterance  therof,  aboute  foure  fcore  myles. This  angle  or  comer,  the  Span-

yardes  caule  Culata. Vafchus  hym  felfe  came  to  this  poynte  with  a  hundreth  men,  coaflynge  alonge  by  the

goulfe  with  one  brygantine  and  certeyne  of  the  boates  of  thofe  regions,  which  the  Vrabians  caule  Vrn^  lyke

vnto  them  whiche  th[e]inhabitantes  of  Hifpaniola  caule  Canoas. From  this  poynt,  there  fauleth  a  ryuer  from

the  Eafl.  into  the  goulfe,  ten  tymes  bygger  then  the  ryuer  of  Dariena  which  alfo  fauleth  into  the  fame. Saylyng

alonge  by  the  ryuer  about  the  fpace  of  thirtie  myles  (for  they  caule  it  nyne  leaques)  and  fumwhat  inclynynge

towarde  the  ryght  hande  fouthwarde,  they  founde  certeyne  vyllages  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  the  Kynge  whereof,

was  cauled  Dabaiba. Owre  men  alfo  were  certifyed  before,  that  Cernacchiis  the  kynge  of  Dariena  whom  they

put  to  flyght  in  the  battayle,  fledde  to  this  Dabaiba. But  at  the  commynge  of  owre  men,  Dabaiba  alfo  fledde.

It  is  thowght  that  he  was  admonyffhed  by  Canacchiis,  that  he  fhulde  not  abyde  the  brunte  of  owre  men. He

folowed  his  counfayle  :  forfooke  his  vyllages,  and  lefte  all  thynges  defolate. Yet  o^vre  men  founde  heapes  of

bowes  and  arrowes  :  Alfo  much  houfehold  lluffe  and  many  fyffhyng  boates. But  thofe  mary-fhe  groundes  were

neyther  apte  for  fowinge  of  feedes  or  planting  of  trees. By  reafon  wherof,  they  founde  there  fewe  fuche  thynges

as  they  defyred:  that  is,  plentie  of  vytayles.  For  th[e]inhabitantes  of  this  Region,  haue  noo  breade  but  fuch  as

they  get  in  other  contreys  nere  abowte  them  by  exchaunge  for  theyr  fyfflie,  only  to  feme  theyr  owne  neceffitie.

Yet  founde  they  in  the  houfes  of  them  that  fledde,  golde  wrought  and  grauen,  amountynge  to  the  fume  of  feuen

thoufande  of  thofe  pieces  whiche  we  fayde  to  bee  cauled  Cajlellani :  Alfo  certeyne  canoas  :  of  the  which  they

brought  away  twoo  with  them,  and  great  plentie  of  theyr  houfholde  ftufife,  with  certeyne  bundels  of  bowes  and

arrowes. They  faye,  that  from  the  maryffhes  of  that  ryuer,  there  coome  certeyne  battes  in  the  nyght  feafon,  as

bygge  as  tiurtle  dooues,  inuadyng  men  and  bytinge  them  with  a  deadly  wounde,  as  fume  of  them  tellifie  whiche

haue  byn  bytten  of  the  fame. I  my  felfe  communing  with  Aiicifus  the  Lieuetenant  whom  they  reiected,  and

amonge  other  thynges  afkynge  him  of  the  venemous  bytinge  of  thefe  battes,  he  toulde  me  that  he  hym  felfe  was

bytten  by  one  of  them  on  the  heele,  his  foote  lyinge  vncouered  in  the  nyght  by  reafon  of  the  heate  in  fommer

feafon  :  But  that  it  hurt  hym  noo  more,  then  yf  he  hadde  byn  bytten  by  any  other  beafle  not  venemous. Other

faye,  that  the  bytynge  of  fume  of  them  is  venemous  :  Yet  that  the  fame  is  healed  incontinently,  if  it  be  wafflied

with  water  of  the  fea. Ancifus  toulde  me  alfo,  that  the  venemous  woundes  made  by  the  Canibales  arrowes

infected  with  poyfon,  are  healed  by  waffhynge  with  water  of  the  fea,  and  alfo  by  cauterifmg  with  hotte  Irens  :

And  that  he  had  experience  thereof  in  the  region  of  Cariba?ia,  where  many  of  his  men  were  fo  wounded.

They  departed  therfore,  from  the  poynte  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba,  not  well  contented  bycaufe  they  were  not  laden

with  vitailes. In  this  their  returne,  there  arofe  foo  greate  a  tempefl  in  that  wyde  goulfe,  that  they  were  enforced

to  cafle  into  the  fea,  all  the  houfeholde  lluffe  whiche  they  tooke  from  the  poore  wretches  whiche  lyued  onely  by

fiffhinge. The  fea  alfo  fwalowed  vpp  the  two  boates  that  they  tooke  from  theym,  wherewyth  the  men  were

likewife  drowned. The  fame  tyme  that  Vafchus  Nunnez  attempted  to  fearche  the  poynte  of  the  goulfe  towarde

the  fouthe,  euen  then  by  agremente,  dyd  Roderiacs  Cobnenaris  take  his  viage  towarde  the  mountajnes  by  the

eafle,  with  thre  fcor[e]  men,  by  the  ryuer  of  the  other  goulfe. Aboute  fortie  miles  diflante  from  the  mouthe  of

the  ryuer,  (for  they  caule  it  twelue  leaques)  he  founde  certeyne  vilages  fituate  vppon  the  bankes  of  the  ryuer,

whofe  Chilli,  (that  is,)  kinge,  they  caule  Turui. With  this  kinge  dyd  Cobnenaris  yet  remayne  when  Vafchus

after  his  returne  to  Dariena,  fayUng  by  the  fame  ryuer,  came  to  hym. Here  refreffhinge  theyr  hole  coompany

with  the  vitailes  of  this  Turui,  they  departed  from  thenfe  togyther. Otlier  fortie  myles  from  henfe,  the  ryuer

encoonipafeth  an  Hand  inhabited  with  fyffher  men. In  this,  bycaufe  they  fawe  greate  plentie  of  the  trees  which

beare  Caffia  fflula,  they  named  the  Hand  Cannafflula. They  found  in  it,  threefcore  villages  of  tenne  cotages

apiece. On  the  right  fyde  of  the  Hand  there  runneth  an  other  ryuer,  whofe  chanell  is  of  depth  fufficiente  to

beare  brigantines. This  ryuer  they  cauled  Riuum  Nigrum :  from  the  mouthe  wherof  about,  xv.  myles  diflante

they  founde  a  towne  of  fyue  hundreth  houfes  feuered:  whofe  Chebi,  (that  is,)  kinge,  was  cauled  Abenamachei.

They  all  forfooke  theyr  houfes  as  foone  as  they  harde  of  owre  mennes  commyng. But  when  they  fawe  that

owre  men  purfued  them,  they  turned  ageyne  and  ranne  vppon  them  with  defperate  mindes,  as  men  driuen  from

their  owne  poffeffions. Theyr  wepons,  are  fwordes  of  wod,  and  long  ilaues  like  iauelens,  hardened  at  the  ende

with  fyer:  But  they  vfe  neyther  bowes  nor  arrowes:  nor  any  other  of  th[e]inhabitantes  of  the  wefte  fyde  of  the

goulfe. The  pore  naked  wretches  were  eafely  dryuen  to  flight  with  ovat  weapons. As  owre  men  folowed  theym

in  the  chafe,  they  tooke  the  kinge  Abenamachei  and  certeine  of  his  noble  men. A  common  fouldier  of  owres

whom  the  kynge  had  wounded,  coomminge  to  hym  when  he  was  taken,  cutte  of  his  arme  at  one  fl.roke  with  his

fwoorde. But  this  was  doone  vnwares  to  the  capitaynes. The  number  of  the  Chrillian  men  which  were  here,

was  aboute  a  hundrethe  and  fiftie :  the  one  halfe  whereof,  the  capytaynes  lefte  here,  and  they  with  the  refydue,

rowed  vpp  the  ryuer  ageyne  with  twelue  of  the  boates  of  thofe  Regions,  whiche  they  caul,  Vru,  as  they  of

Hifpaniola  caule  them  Canoas,  as  we  haue  fayde. From  the  rj-uer  of  Riiais  Niger  and  the  Hand  of  Cannafiflula,

The  goulfe  of
Vraba.

Culata.

Vaschus  searcheth
the  goulfe  of
Vraba.

A  maruelous  great
ryuer,  faulyng
into  the  goulfe  of
Vraba.

Kynge  Dabaiba
and  Chemacchus,
are  dryuen  to
flyght.

Marysshe  grounde

Wrought  gold
wheyghynge
vii  thousand
Castellanes.

Battes  as  bygge  as
turtle  doues.

Aiicisus  bytten
of  a  batte

Remedies  ageynst
venemous  arrows

A  tempest.

Colmenaris  taketh
his  vyage  towarde
the  moatains

Kynge  Tiu^L

The  Hand  of
Cannaiistula.

68

The  rj'uer  cf
Riuus  Niger.

A  towne  of  v.
hundreth  houses.

Th[e]inhabltantes
of  the  west  syde
of  the  goulfe.

Kynge
Abenamachei,  is
taken  and  his
arme  cut  of

119

I20

TJic  fccojide  Decade.

Many  other
ryuers  f.mlin^
into  Riuus  Niger.

Kyn  J  abibeiba
dwellcthe  in  a
tree.

Abundance  of
moyster  and  heat
is  cause  of
byggenes.

The  rysynge  of
the  Ocean  sea.

Trees  of  maruclous
height

Plinie.

KrutefuU  grounde.

Cellers  in  the
grounde.

Abibelba,  the
kynge  of  the  tree,
yeldethe  to
Vaschus.

69

Gold  no  more
estemed  then
stones.

Canibales.

Kyng  Abraiba

for  the  fpace  of  threefcore  and  ten  ni)  les,  leaning  both  on  the  right  hande  and  on  the  lefte  many  riuers  fauHnge
into  it  bigger  then  it  felfe,  they  entred  into  one  by  the  conductynge  of  one  of  the  naked  inhabitantes,  beinge
appoynted  a  guyde  for  that  purpofe.  Vppon  the  banke  of  this  ryuer  next  vnto  the  mouthe  of  the  fame,  there
was  a  kynge  cauled  Abibciba :  who,  bycaufe  the  Region  was  full  of  maryfflies,  had  his  palaice  buylded  in  the
toppe  of  a  highe  tree,  a  newe  kynde  of  byldynge  and  feldome  fcene.  But  that  lande  bcareth  trees  of  fuche
oxceding  heig[h]ih,  that  emonge  theyr  branches,  a  man  may  frame  large  houfcs :  As  wee  reede  the  like  in  diuers
autoures  howe  in  many  Regions  where  the  ocean  fea  ryfethe  and  ouerflowethe  the  lande,  the  people  were
accuflomed  to  flye  to  the  high  trees,  and  after  the  faule  of  the  water,  to  take  the  fyfflie  lefte  on  the  lande.  This
maner  of  buyldinge,  is  to  laye  beames  crofle  ouer  the  branches  of  the  trees,  fade  bownde  togyther,  and  there
vppon  to  rayfe  theyr  frame,  flrongly  made  ageynfte  wynde  and  wether.  Owre  men  fuppofe  that  they  buylde
theyr  houfes  in  trees,  by  reafon  of  the  grcate  fluddes  and  ouerflowinge  of  ryuers  Avhiche  often  tymes  chaunce  in
thofe  Regions.  Thefe  trees  are  of  fuche  hcighth,  that  the  flrength  of  no  manes  arme  is  able  to  hurle  a  flone  to
the  houfes  buylded  therein.  And  therfore  doo  I  gyue  the  better  credit  to  Plinie  and  other  autours  whiche  wrytte
that  the  trees  in  fume  places  in  Lidia  are  foo  high  by  reafon  of  the  frutefulnes  of  the  grounde,  abundance  of
water,  and  heate  of  the  Region,  that  noo  man  is  able  to  finite  ouer  theym  with  an  arrowe.  And  by  iudgemente
of  all  men,  it  is  thought  that  there  is  noo  frutfuller  ground  vnder  the  foonne,  then  this  is  whereof  wee  nowe
cntreate.  Owr  men  meafuringe  manye  of  thefe  trees,  founde  theym  to  bee  of  fuche  biggnes,  that  feuen  men,
ye  funietymes  eight,  holdinge  hande  in  hande  with  theyr  amies  flreached  furthc,  were  fcarfely  able  too  fathame
them  aboute.  Yet  haue  they  theyr  cellers  in  the  grounde,  well  replenyfflied  with  fuch  wynes  wherof  wee  haue
fpoken  beefore.  For  albeit  that  the  vehemencie  of  the  wynde,  is  not  of  poure  to  cafle  downe  thofe  houfes,  or
to  breeke  the  branches  of  the  trees,  yet  are  they  toffed  therewith,  and  fwaye  fumwhat  from  fyde  to  fyde,  by
reafon  wherof,  the  wyne  fliulde  bee  muche  troubeled  with  moouinge.  All  other  neceffayre  thinges,  they  haue
with  theym  in  the  trees.  When  the  kynge  or  any  other  of  the  noble  men,  dyne  or  fuppe  in  thefe  trees,  theyr
wynes  are  browght  theym  from  the  celleres  by  theyr  feruantes,  whyche  by  meanes  of  exercife,  are  accuflomed
with  noo  leffe  celeritie  to  runne  vppe  and  downe  the  fleares  adherente  to  the  tree,  then  doo  owre  waytynge
boyes  vppon  the  playne  grounde,  fetche  vs  what  wee  caule  for  from  the  cobbarde  byfyde  owr  dyninge  table.
Owre  men  therfore,  came  to  the  tree  of  kinge  Abibciba^  and  by  th[e]interpretoures  cauled  hym  foorthe  to
communication,  gyuinge  hym  fignes  of  peace,  and  there  vppon  willinge  hym  to  coomme  downe.  But  he  denyed
that  he  woolde  coomme  owte  of  his  houfe :  Defyringe  them  to  fuffer  hym  to  lyue  after  his  faffliion.  But  owre
men  fell  from  fayre  woordes  to  threateninge,  that  excepte  he  wolde  defcende  with  all  his  famehe,  they  wolde
eyther  ouerthrowe  the  tree,  or  elles  fet  it  on  fyer.  When  he  had  denied  them  ageyne,  they  fell  to  hewinge  the
tree  with  theyr  axes.  Abibciba  feeinge  the  chippes  faule  from  the  tree  on  euery  fyde,  chaunged  his  purpofe,  and
came  downe  with  only  two  of  his  foones.  Thus  after  they  had  entreated  of  peace,  they  communed  of  gatheringe
of  golde.  Abibciba  anfwered  that  he  had  noo  golde,  and  that  he  neuer  had  any  neede  therof,  nor  yet  regarded
it  any  more  then  Hones.  But  when  they  were  inflante  vppon  hym,  he  fayde  vnto  them.  If  yowe  foo  greatly
defyre  golde,  I  will  feeke  for  fume  in  the  nexte  mountaynes,  and  bringe  it  vnto  yowe.  For  it  is  plentifully
engendred  in  thofe  mountaynes.  Then  he  a;  pointed  a  day  when  he  wold  bringe  this  golde.  But  Abibeiba
came  neyther  at  the  day,  nor  after  the  daye  appoynted.  They  departed  therfore  from  thenfe  well  refreffhed  with
his  vitailes  and  wyne,  but  not  with  goulde  as  they  hoped.  Yet  were  they  enformed  the  like  by  Abibeiba  and  his
ditionaries  as  concerninge  the  golde  mynes  and  the  Canibales,  as  they  harde  before  of  kinge  Co?)iogrus.
Saylinge  yet  further  aboute  thirtie  myles,  they  chaunced  vppon  certeyne  cotages  of  the  Canibales :  But  vtterly
voyde  with  owte  men  or  flufte.  For  when  they  had  knowleage  that  owre  men  wandered  in  the  prouinces  nere
aboute  theym  they  reforted  to  the  mountaynes,  caryinge  al  theyr  goodes  and  ftuffe  wyth  them.

C  The  fyfte  booke  of  the  seconde  Decade

Of  the  fuppofed  continent.

N  the  meane  tyme  whyle  thefe  thynges  were  doone  alonge  by  the  fhores  or  bankes  of  the
ryuer,  a  certeyne  Decurian,  that  is  a  capytayne  ouer  tenne,  of  the  coompanye  of  thofe  which
Vafais  and  Colmefiaris  had  lefte  for  a  garryfon  in  Riiio  Nigro  in  the  dominion  of  kynge
Abi;iaiiiac/iei,  whether  it  were  that  he  was  compelled  throwgh  hunger,  or  that  his  fataule  dayes
was  nowe  coome,  he  attempted  with  his  fouldiers  to  fearche  the  countreys  nere  there  about,
and  entered  into  the  vyllage  of  a  king  cauled  Abraiba.  This  capitaynes  name  was  Raia :
whom  Abraiba  flewe,  with  twoo  of  his  felowes :  but  the  refydue  fledde. Within  a  fewe  dayes

The  feconde  Decade.

121

after,  Abraiba  hauinge  conipaffion  of  the  calamitie  of  his  kynfeman  and  neyghbour  Abenamacheius  being  dryuen
from  his  owne  poffeffions  (whofe  arme  alfo  we  fayd  before  that  one  of  the  fouldiers  cut  of  at  the  riuer  of  Riuo
Nigro  and  nowe  reraaynynge  with  Abraiba  to  whome  he  fledde  by  flelth  after  he  was  taken,  went  to  Abibeiba
th[e]inhabitour  of  the  tree,  who  had  nowe  lykewyfe  forfaken  his  contrey  for  feare  of  owre  men,  and  wandered
in  the  defolate  mountaynes  and  wooddes.  When  he  had  therfore  founde  him,  he  fpake  to  him  in  this  effecte.
What  thynge  is  this  Oh  vnfortunate  Abibeiba :  or  what  nation  is  this  that  foo  tormenteth  vs  that  wee  can  not
enioye  owre  quyet  lybertie?  Howe  longe,  ho  we  longe  I  fay  fliall  wee  fuflfer  theyr  crueltie?  were  it  not  much
better  for  vs  to  die,  then  to  abide  fuch  iniuries  and  oppreffions  as  yow,  as  Abinamacheitis  owre  kynfeman,  as
Ccmacc/ms,  as  Carda,  as  Foncha,  as  I  and  other  princes  of  owr  order  doo  fufleyne  ?  Canne  any  thinge  bee  more
intoUerable  then  to  fee  owre  wyues,  owre  chyldren,  and  owre  fubiectes,  to  bee  ledde  awaye  captiues,  and  owre
goodes  to  be  fpoyled  euen  before  owre  faces.

I  take  the  goddes  to  wytnes,  that  I  fpeake  not  foo  much  for  myne  owne  part  as  I  doo  for  yowe  whofe  cafe
I  lament.  For  albeit  they  haue  not  yet  touched  me,  neuertheleffe,  by  the  example  of  other,  I  owght  to  thynke
that  my  deflruction  is  not  farre  of  Let  vs  therfore  (yf  wee  bee  men)  trye  owre  flrengthe  and  proue  owre
fortune  ageynfl  them  whiche  haue  delte  thus  cruelly  with  Abenamacheius,  and  dryuen  hym  owte  of  his  contrey.
Let  vs  fet  on  them  with  all  owre  poure,  and  vtterly  deflroy  them  And  yf  wee  can  not  fleye  them  al,  yet  fhall
wee  make  them  afrayde  eyther  to  affayle  vs  ageyne,  or  at  the  leafl  dimynyffhe  theyr  poure.  For  what  foo  euer
(hall  befaule,  nothynge  can  chaunce  woorfe  vnto  vs  then  that  which  we  now  fuffer.  When  Abibeiba  harde  thefe
wordes  and  fuch  other  like,  he  conde[f]cended  to  doo  in  al  thinges  as  Abraiba  wolde  requyre :  WTiere  vppon
they  appoynted  a  day  to  brynge  theyr  confpiracie  to  paffe.  But  the  thynge  chaunced  not  accordynge  to  their
defyre.  For  of  thofe  whiche  wee  fayde  to  haue  paffed  to  the  Canibales,  there  returned  by  chaunce  to  Riuus
Niger  the  nyght  before  the  day  appoynted  to  woorke  theyr  feate,  thirtie  men  to  the  ayde  of  theym  whiche  were
lefte  there  yf  anye  fedition  fhulde  ryfe  as  they  fufpected.  Therfore  at  the  daunyng  of  the  day,  the  confetherate
kynges  with  fyue  hundreth  of  theyr  ditionaries  armed  after  theyr  maner,  befeaged  the  vyllage  with  a  terrible
alarome,  knowynge  nothynge  of  the  newe  menne  which  came  thether  the  fame  nyght.  Here  owre  target  men
came  foorth  ageynil  them,  and  fyrfl  affayled  them  a  farre  of  with  theyr  arrowes,  then  with  theyr  pykes,  and  lafle
with  theyr  fwoordes  :  But  the  naked  feely  fowles,  perceauinge  a  greater  number  of  theyr  aduerfaries  then  they
looked  for,  were  foone  dryuen  to  flyght,  and  flayne  for  the  moft  parte  lyke  fcaterynge  flieepe.  The  kynges
efcaped,  they  flewe  manye,  and  tooke  many  captiues  whiche  they  fente  to  Dariena  where  they  vfe  them  for
labourers  to  tyll  and  fowe  they  grounde.  Thefe  thynges  thus  happely  atchyued,  and  that  prouince  quyeted,
they  returned  by  the  ryuer  to  Dariena,  leauinge  theyr  thyrtie  men  for  a  garryfon  vnder  the  gouernance  of  one
Fiiratado  a  capitayne.  This  Furaiado  therfore,  fente  from  Riuo  Nigro  where  he  was  appoynted  gouernoure,
twentie  of  his  felowes  and  one  woman,  with,  xxiiii.  captiues  to  Vafchus  and  his  company,  in  one  of  the  byggefl
Canoas  of  that  prouince.  As  they  rowed  downe  by  the  ryuer,  there  came  foorth  foodenly  ouerthwarte  the
ryuer  ageynfl  them,  foure  greate  Canoas,  which  ouerthrew  theyr  boate  and  llewe  as  many  of  them  as  they  coulde
coome  by,  bycaufe  they  were  vnprepared  fufpecting  noo  fuch  thinge.  Owre  men  were  all  drowned  and  flayne
excepte  twoo,  which  hyd  them  felues  amonge  certeyne  fagottes  that  fwamme  on  the  water,  in  the  whiche  they
laye  lurkynge,  and  foo  efcaped  to  theyr  felowes  in  Dariena :  who  by  them  beinge  aduertyfed  hereof,  beganne
to  cafl.e  theyr  wyttes  what  this  thyng  might  meane :  beinge  no  leffe  foUcitate  for  them  felues,  then  meditatynge
in  what  daunger  theyr  felowes  had  byn  in  Fitw  Nigro,  excepte  by  good  fortune,  thofe  thirtie  newe  men  which
were  fente  to  them,  had  coome  to  the  vyllage  the  nyght  before  the  confpiracie  fhulde  haue  byn  wrought.  Con-
fultinge  therefore  what  was  befl  to  bee  doone  herein,  at  the  lengthe  with  dylygent  iearchynge  they  had
intelligence  that  fyue  kynges,  that  is  to  wytte,  Abibeiba  the  inhabitoure  of  the  tree,  and  Cemacchiis  dryuen  from
his  vyllage  whiche  owre  menne  nowe  poffeffed,  Abraiba  alfo  and  Abenamacheius,  kynfemen,  with  Dabaiba  the
king  of  the  fyftier  men  inhabytinge  the  corner  of  the  goulfe  whiche  we  cauled  Culata,  were  all  affembled  to
confpire  the  Chrifl.ian  mens  defl.ruction  at  a  day  affigned.  Which  thynge  had  furely  coome  to  paffe,  if  it  had
not  byn  otherwyfe  hyndered  by  gods  prouidence.  It  is  therfore  afcrybed  to  a  myracle:  And  trewly  not
vnwoorthely  if  wee  weye  howe  chaunce  detected  and  bewrayed  the  counfayle  of  thefe  kynges.  And  bycaufe  it
is  worthy  to  bee  harde,  I  wyll  declare  it  in  fewe  woordes.  Vafchus  Nunnez  therfore,  who  rather  by  poure  then
by  election,  vfurped  the  gouernaunce  in  Dariena,  beinge  a  mafler  of  fence,  and  rather  a  rafflie  royfl.er  then
politike  capitayne  (althowgh  fortune  fumtyme  fauoureth  fooles)  amonge  many  women  which  in  dyuers  of  thefe
regions  he  had  taken  captyue,  had  one  whiche  in  fauoure  and  bewtie  excelled  all  other.  To  this  woman  her
owne  brother  often  tymes  reforted,  who  was  alfo  dryuen  owte  of  his  contrey  with  kynge  Cemacchus,  with  whom
he  was  very  familier  and  one  of  his  chiefe  gentelmen.  Amonge  other  communication  which  he  had  with  his
fyfl.er  whom  he  loued  entierly,  he  vttered  thefe  woordes.  My  deare  and  welbeloued  fyfl.er,  gyue  eare  to  my
fayinges,  and  keepe  molle  fecreatelye  that  whiche  I  wyll  declare  vnto  yowe,  yf  yowe  defyre  yowi-e  owne  wealth
and  myne,  and  the  orofperitie  of  owre  contrey  and  kynfefolkes. The  infolencie  and  crueltie  of  thefe  menne

Abraiba  causeth
the  kynges  to
rebeiL

Men  good
enowgh  yf  they
had  iren

Tlie  kynges  are
are  dryuen  to
flyght.

70

Captyues.

A  garyson  of  xxx.
men.

xviiL  Spanyardes
slayne  and
drowned

The  kinges  which
conspired  the
death  of  tht
Christians.

A  strange  chaunce
Vaschtts.

Women  can  keepe
no  counsayle.

122

TJie  fecondc  Decade.

An  army  of  C
[hundred]  canoas
and  fyiie.  M.
[thousand]  men.
'J'ryumphe  before
victory

Affection
corrupteth  trew
iudsenient.

71

The  conspiracle
of  the  kynges  is
detected.

Kyng  Cemacchus,
conspyreth  the
dcth  of  Vaschus.

Vaschus  purseweth
the  kynges  with
three  score  and
ten  men.

Colmenaris
sacketh  the
vyllage  of  Tichiri.

FjTie  rulers
hanged  and  shot
throwgh  with
arrows.

whiche  haue  dryuen  vs  owte  of  owre  poflcffions,  is  foo  intollerable,  that  the  princes  of  the  lande  are  determyned
noo  longer  to  fvilleyne  theyr  opproflions.

By  the  conductinge  therfore  of  fyue  kinges  (which  he  named  in  order)  they  haue  prepared  a  hundreth
greate  Canoas,  with  fyue  thoufande  men  of  warre  by  lande  and  by  fea,  with  vitailes  alfo  in  the  village  of  Tichiri,
fufficient  to  maintayne  fuch  an  army.  Declaringe  further,  that  the  kinges  by  agremente,  had  diuided  emonge
theym  the  goodes  and  headdes  of  owre  men :  And  therfore  admonyflicd  her,  at  the  daye  appoynted  by  fume
occ;\fion  to  conueigh  her  felfe  owte  of  the  way,  lefle  fhee  fluild  bee  flayne  in  the  confufion  of  the  bataile.  For
the  fouldier  victourer,  is  not  woonte  to  fparo  any  that  commethe  in  his  rafe.  And  thus  fliewinge  his  fyfler  the
daye  afligned  to  the  flawghter,  he  departed.  But  the  younge  woman  (for  it  is  the  fwoord  that  women  feare  and
obferue  more  then  the  grauitie  of  Cato^  whether  it  were  for  the  loue  or  feare  that  fliee  had  to  Vafchus,  for-
gettinge  her  parentes,  her  kynfiblkes,  her  countrey  and  all  her  frendes,  ye  and  all  the  kinges  into  whofe  throtes
Vafchus,  had  thrufle  his  fwoorde  fliee  opened  all  the  matter  vnto  hym,  and  conceled  none  of  thofe  thinges
whiche  her  vndifcrete  broother  had  declared  to  her.'  When  Vafchus  therfore  had  hard  the  matter,  he  caufed
Fu/uia,  (for  foo  had  they  named  her)  to  fende  for  her  brother,  who  came  to  her  immediatly,  was  taken,  and
enforced  to  tell  the  hole  circumflances  of  the  matter.  Where  vppon,  he  playnely  confeffed  that  kinge  Cemacchus
hys  lorde  and  mafler,  fente  thofe  foure  canoas  to  the  deflruction  of  owre  men,  and  that  thefe  newe  confpiracies
were  attempted  by  his  confaile.  Likewife  that  Cemacchus  fowght  the  deflruction  of  Vaschus  hym  felfe  when  he
fent  hym  fortie  men  vnder  pretence  of  frendlhippe  to  tyll  and  fowe  his  grownd  after  the  maner  of  the  contrey,
gyuinge  them  in  commaundement  to  fleye  Vafchus  at  Marris,  whyther  he  reforted  to  comforte  his  laboures  as
the  maner  is  of  all  good  hufbandes.  Yet  durfle  they  at  noo  tyme  execute  theyr  lordes  commaundemente  vppon
hym,  bycaufe  Vafchus  came  neuer  emonge  them  afoote  or  vnarmed,  but  was  accuflomed  to  ryde  to  theym  in
harnes  with  a  iauelen  in  his  hande  and  a  fwoorde  by  his  fyde.  Wherfore  Cemacchus  beinge  fruflrate  of  his
particuler  confaile,  tooke  this  lafle  thing  in  hande  to  his  owne  deflruction  and  his  neighbours.  For  the
confpiracie  beinge  detected,  Vafchus  cauled  threefcore  and  tenne  fouldiers,  commaundinge  them  to  folowe  him,
but  declared  nothing  vnto  them  whether  hee  wente  or  what  hee  entended  to  do.  He  wente  forwarde  therfore
fyrfle  towarde  Cemacchus  which  ley  from  hym,  onely  tenne  myles.  But  he  had  knowleage  that  he  was  fledde  to
Dabaiba  the  kinge  of  the  mariflies  of  Culata.  Yet  fearchinge  his  village,  he  founde  a  noble  man  a  ruler  vnder
hym  and  alfo  his  kinlTeman,  whome  he  tooke  prifoner  with  many  other  of  his  familiers  and  frendes  both  men
and  women.  The  fame  houre  that  he  fette  forwarde  to  feeke  for  Cemacchus,  Rodcricus  Colmenaris  rowed  vp  the
ryuer  with  foure  of  theyr  byggefle  Canoas  and  threefcore  men  by  the  conduction  of  the  maydes  brother  who
browght  hym  to  the  village  of  Tichiri,  in  the  which  we  fayd  all  their  vitailes  to  remayne  whiche  were  prepared
for  theyr  armye.  Cohnenaris  therfore,  facked  the  village,  and  poffeffed  all  their  vitayles  and  wyne  of  fundry
colours :  likewife  tooke  the  gouernoure  thereof  prifoner,  and  hanged  hym  on  the  tree  in  whiche  he  dwelte  hym
felfe,  commaundinge  hym  too  bee  fliotte  throwgh  with  arrowes  in  the  fight  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  and  with  hym
foure  other  rulers  to  bee  hanged  on  iebbettes  to  the  exemple  of  other  rebelles.  This  punyfQimente  thus
executed  vppon  the  confpiratours,  llrooke  the  hartes  of  all  th[e]inhabitantes  of  the  prouince  wyth  fuche  feare,
that  there  is  not  nowe  a  man  that  dare  ftoore  his  finger  ageynfl  the  wrathe  of  owre  men.  They  lyue  nowe
therefore  quietly :  And  the  other  kinges  by  theyr  exemple  doo  the  gladlyer  liue  in  fubiection,  with  leffe  offence
bearinge  the  yoke  whyche  they  can  by  noo  meanes  (liake  of.

The  syxte  booke  of  the  seconde  decade

Of  the  fuppofed  contiitente.

The  goldeu
regions  on  the
south  side  the
mountaynes.

The  death  of
Valdiuia  and
Zamudius.

Hefe  thynges,  thus  fynyffhed,  affembHnge  all  their  company  togither  they  determined  with  one
confente,  that  a  meffynger  fliulde  foorth  with  bee  fente  to  Hifpaniola  (from  whenfe  they  haue
their  lawes  and  ayde)  to  declare  the  hole  order  of  all  thefe  afifayres,  fyrfle  to  the  admirall  and
gouernoure  of  the  Ilande,  and  afterwarde  to  the  Kinge  of  Spayne,  and  to  perfuade  hym  to
fende  thofe  thoufand  men  which  younge  Comogrtis  faid  to  bee  expediente  to  paffe  ouer  the
mountaynes  lying  betwene  them  and  the  golden  regions  towarde  the  Southe.  Vafchus  him
felfe  dyd  greatly  affecte  this  embafage:  But  neyther  woolde  the  refydewe  of  his  felowes
electe  hym  therto,  nor  his  factionaries  fuffer  hym  to  departe :  Afwell  for  that  therby  they  thought  they  fliulde
bee  left  defolate,  as  alfo  that  they  murmured  that  if  Vafchus  fliulde  once  goo  from  theym,  he  wolde  neuer  returne
to  fuche  turmoyles  and  calamities,  by  th[e]example  of  Valdiuia  and  Zamudius,  who  had  byn  now  abfente  fence

The  fecojide  Decade.

123

the  mooneth  of  January,  in  foo  muche  that  they  thowght  they  woolde  neuer  coomme  ageine.  But  the  matter
was  otherwife  then  they  tooke  it,  as  I  wyl  fhewe  in  his  place.  For  they  were  periffhed.  At  the  lengeth  after
many  fcrutinies,  they  elected  one  lohn  Qidcedus,  a  graue  man  well  in  yeares,  and  treafourer  of  the  kings  efchcker
in  thofe  prouinces.  They  had  conceaued  a  good  opinion  of  this  Qiiicedus  that  all  thynges  fhulde  bee  well
browght  to  paffe  by  his  meanes,  afwell  for  his  wyfdome,  as  alfo  that  they  were  in  good  hop[e]  of  his  returne,  bycaufe
he  had  brought  his  wifife  with  hym  to  thofe  regions,  whome  he  lefte  with  his  felowes  for  a  pledge  of  his  comminge
ageyne.  When  they  had  thus  elected  Qiikcdus,  they  were  ageyne  of  diuers  opinions  whome  they  might  ioyne
with  hym  for  affiflance:  Affirminge  that  it  were  a  daungerous  thinge  to  committe  foo  weightye  a  matter  to  one
mans  handes.  Not  that  they  miftrufled  Qiiicedus,  but  bycaufe  the  life  of  man  is  frayle,  and  the  chaunge  of  the
ayer  perelous,  efpecially  to  theym  hauynge  nowe  of  longe  tyme  byn  accuflomed  to  the  temperature  nere  vnto
the  Equijioctiall,  if  they  fhulde  bee  compelled  to  returne  to  the  North  with  alteration  of  ayer  and  dyet.  They
thowght  it  therfore  good  to  appoynt  a  companion  to  Qiiicedus,  that  if  by  chance  the  one  fhuld  fayl  the  other
might  remayne :  And  that  if  they  both  efcaped,  the  king  fhuld  gyue  the  better  credit  to  the  relation  of  both :
After  longe  confultation  therfore,  they  chofe  Roderiais  Colmenaris  a  man  of  good  experience,  of  whom  we  haue
often  tymes  made  mencion.  For  from  his  youth,  he  had  trauayled  ouer  al  Europe  by  land  and  by  fea,  and  was
prefent  at  the  doinges  of  all  thynges  in  Italy  ageynfl  the  Frenchemen :  Of  whofe  returne  alfo,  they  had  noo
fmaule  hope  bycaufe  he  had  many  fermes  and  hadde  tylled  and  fowne  much  grounde  in  Dariena,  by  th[e]in-
creafe  wherof  he  might  get  much  gold  by  fellyng  the  fame  to  his  felows.  He  lefte  therfore  the  charge  of  al  his
afifayres  in  Dariena,  with  his  partener  Alphonfus  Niinnez,  a  ludge  of  the  lawe,  who  alfo  was  lyke  to  haue  byn
chofen  procuratoure  of  this  vyage  before  Colmenaris  if  one  had  not  put  theim  in  remembraunce  that  he  had  a
wyfe  at  Matritis:  fearyng  leaft  beinge  ouercoome  with  her  teares,  he  woolde  no  more  returne.  Colmenaris
therefore,  a  free  man  and  at  libertie  being  affociate  affiflant  with  Qiiicedus  they  tooke  fliyppyng  togyther  in  a
brigantine,  the  fourth  day  of  the  Calendes  of  Nouember,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifl.  15 12.  In  this  vyage,  beinge
toffed  with  fundry  tempefles,  they  were  by  the  violence  of  the  wynde,  cafl  vppon  the  Wefle  coafles  of  that  large
Ilande  whiche  in  the  fyrfle  Decade  we  cauled  Cuba,  fuppofed  to  haue  byn  fyrme  lande.  They  were  fore
oppreffed  with  hunger.  For  it  was  nowe  three  moonethes  fence  they  departed  from  theyr  felowes.  By  reafon
whereof,  they  were  enforced  to  take  lande  to  proue  what  ayde  they  coulde  gette  amonge  the  inhabitantes.
Theyr  chaunce  therefore,  was  to  arryue  in  that  part  of  the  Ilande,  where  Valdiiiia  was  dryuen  alande  by  temped.
But  oh  yowe  wretched  men  of  Darienal  Tary  for  Valdiiiia  whom  yowe  fent  to  prouide  to  helpe  yowre
neceffities  ?  Prouyde  for  yowre  felues  rather  and  trufl  not  to  them  whofe  fortune  yowe  knowe  not.  For  when
he  arryued  in  Cuba,  th[e]inhabitantes  flewe  him  with  al  his  felowes,  and  lefte  the  carauell  wherin  they  were
caried,  torne  in  pieces  and  halfe  couered  with  fande  on  the  fhore :  where  Quicedus  and  Colmenaris  fyndyng  the
fragmentes  therof,  bewayled  their  felowes  myffortune.  But  they  founde  none  of  theyr  carkefes:  luppofmge
that  they  were  eyther  drowned,  or  deuoured  of  the  Canibals,  which  oftentymes  make  incurfions  into  that  Ilande
to  hunte  for  men.  But  at  the  length,  by  twoo  of  the  Ilande  men  Avhich  they  had  taken,  they  had  knowleage  of
Valdiiiia  his  deflruction :  And  that  th[e]inhabitantes  the  more  greedely  attempted  the  fame,  for  that  they  had
harde  by  the  bablynge  of  one  of  his  felowes  that  he  had  great  plentie  of  gold.  For  they  alfo  take  pleafure  in
the  bewtie  of  gold,  which  they  forme  artificially  into  fundry  ouches.  Thus  owre  men  flryken  with  penfj^uenes
for  the  cruell  deflenie  of  theyr  felowes,  and  in  vayne  feekynge  reuenge  for  theyr  iniuries,  determyned  to  forfake
that  vnfortunate  lande,  departynge  from  thofe  couetous  naked  barbarians  with  more  forowe  and  neceffitie  then
they  were  in  before.  Or  euer  they  had  paffed  the  South  fyde  of  Cuba,  they  fel  into  a  thoufande  myffortunes :
and  had  intellygence  that  Fogeda  arryued  thereaboute,  leadynge  a  myferable  lyfe,  toffed  and  turmoyled  with
tempelles  and  vexed  with  a  thoufand  perplexities :  Soo  that  departing  from  thenfe  almofl  alone,  his  felowes
beinge  for  the  mofl  parte  all  confumed  with  maladies  and  famyn,  he  came  with  much  difficultie  to  Hifpaniola,
where  he  dyed  by  force  of  the  poyfon  of  his  venemous  wound  which  he  had  receaued  in  Vraba  as  we  haue  faid
before.  But  Ancifus  elected  Lieuetenaunt,  fayled  by  all  thofe  coafles  with  much  better  fortune.  For  as  he
hym  felfe  toulde  me,  he  founde  profperous  wyndes  in  thofe  parties,  and  was  well  enterteyned  of  th[e]inhabi-
tantes  of  Cuba.  But  this  fpecially  in  the  dominion  of  a  certeyne  kynge  whofe  name  was  Conimendator.
For  wheras  he  defyred  of  the  Chriflian  men  whiche  paffed  by,  to  bee  baptifed,  demaundynge  the
name  of  the  gouernour  of  the  Ilande  next  vnto  Hifpaniola,  beinge  a  noble  man  and  a  knyght  of
th[e]order  of  Calafraiia  of  Avhich  order  al  are  cauled  Commendatores,  this  kynges  defyre  was  to  bee  named
after  hym.  Kynge  Comtnendator  therfore,  frendely  receaued  Ancifus,  and  gaue  h}-m  greate  abundance
of  al  thynges  neceffarie.  But  what  Ancifus  lerned  of  theyr  religion  durynge  the  tyme  of  liis  remayn}Tige
there,  I  haue  thowght  good  to  aduertyfe  yowre  holynes.  Yowe  fliall  therefore  vnderftande,  that  certeyne
of  owre  men  faylinge  by  the  coaftes  of  Cuba,  lefte  with  kynge  Conimendator  a  certeyne  poore  maryner
beinge  difeafed.  Who  in  fliorte  fpace  recoueringe  his  health,  and  hauynge  nowe  fumwhat  lerned  theyr  language,
beganne  to  growe  into  great  eflimation  with  the  kynge  and  his  fubiectes,  in  foo  muche  that  he  was  oftentymes

lohannes
Quicedus  is  sent
to  Spain

72

Chaunge  of  the
ayer  is  daungerous.

Rodericus
Colmenaris,
assistant  with
Quicedus.

A  wyfe  is  a
hynderance

Cuba.

Three  moonethes
from  Dariena  to
Cuba,  by  reason
of  tempests

The  death  of
Valdiuia.

Hurt  of  lauyshenes
of  the  tonge.

The  calamitie  and
death  of  Fogeda.

Maladies  and
famen.

The  prosperous
vyage  of  Ancisus.

A  kj-ng  of  Cuha
baptised  by  the
name  of
Commendator.

Ancisus
73

A  maruelous
historie  howe  God
wrought  miracles
by  the  simple  fayth
of  a  maryner.

123

124

The  feconde  Decade.

Be  not  rashc  in
iuUgement

Ztmes.

A  chnpel  builded
to  the  picture  of
the  virgin  Mary

God  respecteth
the  infancie  of
faithe  for  zeles
sake

One  Religion
turned  into  an
other,  holdeth  styl
many  thinges  of
the  fyrsL

A  strange  fantasie.

The  effect  of
godly  zeale.

A  miracle  in  the
tyme  of  the
battayle

The  virgin  Mary,
is  present  at  the
battayle.

74

A  maruelus
experience  of
fayth

Muche  lyke  vnto
this,  is  redde  iii.
Keg.  xviiL

the  kynges  Lieuetenaunt  in  his  warres  ageynft.  other  princes  his  bortherers.  This  mans  fortune  was  foo  good,
that  all  thynges  profpered  well  that  he  tooke  in  hande.  And  albeit  that  he  were  not  lerned,  yet  was  he  a
vertuous  and  well  meanynge  man  accordynge  to  his  knowleage,  and  dyd  religioufly  honoure  the  bleffed  virgin,
bearynge  euer  about  with  hym  her  picture  fayre  paynted  vpon  paper  and  fowd  in  his  apparell  nere  vnto  his  breRe :
Signif)-inge  vnto  the  kyng,  that  this  holynes  was  the  caufe  of  al  his  victories :  perfuadynge  hym  to  doo  the  lyke,
and  to  cafl  away  all  his  Zcmes  which  were  none  other  then  the  fymilitudes  of  euyll  fpirites,  mofte  cruell  enemyes
and  deuourers  of  o\\Te  fowles:  And  to  take  vnto  hym  the  holy  virgin  and  moother  of  god  to  bee  his  patroneffe
if  he  defyred  all  his  aifayres  afwell  in  warre  as  in  peace  to  fucceed  profperoufly.  Alfo  that  the  bleffed  virgyn
woolde  at  noo  tyme  fayle  hym,  but  bee  euer  redy  to  helpe  him  and  his,  if  they  woolde  with  deuoute  hartes  caule
vppon  her  name.  The  maryner  had  foone  perfuaded  the  naked  nation :  And  there  vppon  gaue  the  kynge  (who
dcmaunded  the  fame)  his  pycture  of  the  virgin,  to  whom  he  buylded  and  dedicate  a  chapell  and  an  altare,  euer
after  contcmnynge  and  reiectynge  his  Zcmcs.  Of  thefe  Znncs  made  of  goffampine  cotton  to  the  fimilitudes  of
fprytes  walkynge  in  the  nyght  which  they  oftentymes  fee,  and  fpeake  with  them  familierly,  wee  haue  fpoken
fufficiently  in  the  nynth  booke  of  the  fyrfle  Decade.  Furthermore,  accordynge  to  the  inflitution  of  this  maryner,
when  the  foonne  draweth  towarde  the  faule,  this  kynge  Commaidator  with  all  his  famely  bothe  men  and  women,
reforte  daylye  to  the  fayde  chapell  of  the  virgin  Marie,  where  kneelyng  on  theyr  knees  and  reuerently  bowyng
downe  theyr  heades,  holdynge  theyr  handes  ioyned  togyther,  they  falute  th[e]image  of  the  virgin  with  thefe
woordes:  Aue  Maria,  Aue  Maria.  For  fewe  of  them  can  rehearfe  any  more  woordes  of  this  prayer.  At
Ancifus  his  beinge  there,  they  tooke  hym  and  his  felowes  by  the  handes,  and  ledde  them  to  this  chapell  with
reioyfmge,  fayinge  that  they  woolde  fhewe  theym  maruelous  thynges.  When  they  were  entered,  they  poynted
^\-ith  theyr  fyngers  to  the  Image  of  the  virgin  al  to  befet  and  hanged  abowte  with  ouches  and  iewels  and  many
earthen  pottes,  fylled  fum  with  fundry  meates,  and  fume  with  water,  rownde  aboute  all  the  tabernacle.  For
thefe  thynges  they  offer  to  the  image  in  the  fleede  of  facrifice,  accordyng  to  theyr  owlde  fuperflicion  towarde
theyr  Zemes.  Beinge  demaunded  why  they  dyd  thus,  they  anfwered,  leafle  the  image  fhulde  lacke  meate  if
perhaps  it  fliuld  be  a  hungerd.  For  they  mofl  certenly  beleue  that  images  may  hunger,  and  that  they  doo  eate
and  drynke.  But  what  ayde  and  helpe  they  confeffe  that  they  haue  had  of  the  godly  poure  of  this  image,  that
is  of  the  bleffed  virgin,  it  is  a  thynge  woorthy  to  be  harde,  and  mofl  affuredly  to  bee  taken  for  a  truthe.  For
by  the  report  of  owre  men,  there  is  fuch  feruent  godly  loue  and  zeale  in  thefe  fimple  men  toward  the  holy  virgin,
that  to  them  beinge  in  the  daungers  of  warre  ageynfl  theyr  enemies,  they  doo  in  maner  (yf  I  may  foo  terme  it)
compel  her  to  defcende  from  heauen  to  helpe  them  in  theyr  neceflities  :  For  fuch  is  the  goodnes  of  god,  that
he  hath  lefte  vnto  men  in  maner  a  pryce  wherby  wee  may  purchafe  hym  with  his  holy  angels  and  fayntes,  that
is  to  Avytte,  burnyng  loue,  charitie  and  zeale.  Howe  therfore  can  the  bleffed  virgin  at  any  time  be  abfent  from
them  which  cal  for  her  helpe  with  pure  faith  and  feruent  loue?  Commefidator  him  felfe,  with  al  his  noble  men
and  gentelmen,  doo  teflifie  with  one  voyce,  that  in  a  fought  battayle  in  the  which  this  maryner  was  capitayne,
bearyng  with  hym  this  picture  of  the  virgin  Marie,  the  Zemes  of  theyr  enemies  turned  their  backes  and  trembeled
in  the  prefence  of  the  virgins  Image  and  in  the  fyght  of  them  all.  For  euery  of  them  brynge  theyr  Zemes  to  the
battayle,  hopynge  by  theyr  helpe  to  obteyne  the  victorie.  Ye  they  fay  further,  that  duryng  the  tyme  of  the
battayle,  they  fawe  not  only  an  Image,  but  a  liuely  woman  clothed  in  fayre  and  whyte  apparel,  aydynge  them
ageinfl  theyr  enemies:  whiche  thynge  alfo  the  enemyes  them  felues  acknowleaged,  confeffynge  that  on  the
contrarye  parte  fliee  appeared  to  them,  fhakynge  a  fepter  in  her  hande  with  threatenynge  countenaunce,  whiche
caufed  theyr  hartes  to  fhake  and  faynt  for  feare.  But  after  that  this  maryner  departed  from  them,  beinge  taken
into  a  fhyppe  of  certeyne  Chriflians  paffynge  by  thofe  coafles,  Commendator  declared  that  he  with  all  his
fubiectes,  continually  obferued  his  inflitucions  :  In  foo  muche  that  beinge  at  contention  with  another  prince,
which  of  theyr  Zemes  were  mofle  holy  and  of  greatefle  poure,  the  matter  grewe  to  fuche  extremitie  that  they
tryed  it  with  hande  flrokes :  And  that  in  all  thefe  attemptes,  the  bleffed  virgin  neuer  fayled  hym,  but  was  euer
prefente  in  the  brunte  of  the  battayle,  and  gaue  hym  eafye  victorie  with  a  fmaule  poure  of  men,  ageynfl  a  mayne
armye  of  his  enemies.  Beinge  demaunded  with  what  woordes  they  cryed  vppon  the  virgin  Mary  when  they
affayled  theyr  enemies,  they  anfwered  that  they  had  lerned  noo  other  woordes  of  the  mariners  doctrine,  but
SanHa  Maria  adiuua  7ios,  SanHa  Maria  adiiiua  nos :  That  is,  holy  Mary  helpe  vs,  holy  Marye  helpe  vs :  And
this  alfo  in  the  Spanyfflie  tonge.  For  he  had  lefte  thefe  woordes  in  the  mouthes  of  all  men.  Whyle  they
murthered  and  deflroyed  them  felues  thus  on  bothe  fydes,  they  fell  to  entreatie  of  peace  and  agreed  to  trye  the
matter,  not  hande  to  hande  by  combatte  of  certeyne  chofen  for  bothe  parties  as  the  maner  was  amonge  the
Romaynes  and  dyuers  other  nations  in  the  owlde  tyme,  or  by  any  flyght  or  policie,  but  that  twoo  younge  men
fhulde  bee  chofen,  for  eche  partie  one,  with  theyr  handes  bounde  fafl  behynde  them  in  the  playne  fielde,  bothe
parties  beinge  fworne  to  acknowleage  that  Zcmcs  to  bee  the  better,  which  fyrfl  loofed  the  bandes  of  the  younge
man  whiche  fLoode  bounde  for  the  tryall  of  his  religion.  Thus  diuidinge  them  felues,  and  placeinge  the
fayde  younge  men  before  them  in  the  fyght  of  them  al,  with  theyr  handes  fafl  bounde  by  theyr  enemyes,  the

124

The  feconde  Decade.

125

contrary  parte  cauled  fyrfl.  on  theyr  Zemes  (that  is,  the  deuyll  to  whofe  fimiUtude  theyr  Images  are  made)  who
immediatly  appered  in  his  lykenes  aboute  the  younge  man  that  (loode  bounde  in  the  defence  of  Sathans
kyngedome.

But  as  foone  as  Cornmendator  \vith  his  coompanye  cryed  SanHa  Maria  adiima  nos,  Sancla  Maria  adiuua
nos,  forthwith  there  appeared  a  fayre  virgin  clothed  in  whyte,  at  whofe  prefence  the  deuell  vanquiffhed  immediatly.
But  the  virgin  hauinge  a  longe  rod  in  her  hande,  and  putting  the  fame  on  the  bandes  of  the  younge  man  that
ftoode  for  Commendator,  his  handes  were  loofed  immediatly  in  the  fyght  of  them  all,  and  his  bandes  founde
about  the  handes  of  hym  that  floode  for  the  other  partie,  in  fomuch  that  they  them  felues  foAvnde  hym  dowble
bounde.  But  for  all  this,  were  not  the  enemies  fatiffyed :  querelinge  that  this  thynge  was  doone  by  fum  flyght
or  diuife  of  man,  and  not  by  the  poure  of  the  better  Zemes.  And  there  vppon  requyred  for  th[e]aduoydynge
of  all  fufpection,  that  there  myght  bee  eyght  graue  and  fage  men  appoynted,  for  eche  fyde  foure,  whiche  fhulde
bynde  the  men  in  the  fyght  of  theim  all,  and  alfo  gyue  iudgemente  whether  the  thynge  were  doone  withowte
crafte  or  gyle.  Oh  pure  fimplicitie  and  conflant  fayth :  Oh  golden  and  bleffed  confidence.  Commendator  and
his  familiers,  doubted  not  to  graunte  theyr  enemies  theyr  lequefle  with  lyke  fay  the  wherwith  the  difeafed  woman
obteyned  healthe  of  the  fluxe  of  her  bludde,  and  wherby  Peter  feared  not  to  walke  on  the  fea  at  the  fyght  of
his  mafler  Chrifle.  Thefe  younge  men  therfore  were  bounde  in  the  prefence  of  thefe  eight  graue  men,  and
were  placed  within  theyr  lyfles  in  the  fyght  of  bothe  parties.  Thus  vppon  a  figne  gyuen,  when  they  cauled
vppon  theyr  Zemes,  there  appered  in  the  fyght  of  them  all,  a  deuyll  with  a  longe  tayle,  a  Avyde  mouthe,  greate
teeth,  and  homes,  refemblyng  the  fimilitude  of  the  Image  which  the  kyng  being  enemye  to  Commendator,
honoured  for  his  Zemes.  As  this  deuyl  attempted  to  loofe  the  bandes  of  his  cliente,  the  bleffed  virgin  was
immediatly  prefente  as  before  at  the  caule  of  Commendator  and  his  fubiectes,  and  with  her  rodde  loofed  the
bandes  of  her  fuppliant,  which  were  ageyne  lykewyfe  founde  fall  tyed  aboute  the  handes  of  hym  that  floode  for
the  contrarye  parte.  The  enemies  therefore  of  Commendator,  beinge  flryken  with  greate  feare  and  amafed  by
reafon  of  this  greate  miracle,  confeffed  that  the  Zemes  of  the  virgin  was  better  then  their  Zemes.  For  the  better
profe  wherof,  thefe  pagans  beinge  bortherers  to  Covimendator,  which  had  euer  before  byn  at  continuall  warre
and  enmitie  with  hym,  when  they  had  knowleage  that  Ancifiis  was  arryued  in  thofe  coalles,  they  fente  ambafa-
doures  vnto  hym,  to  defyre  hym  to  fend  them  preefles  of  whom  they  might  bee  baptifed :  Where  vppon  he  fent
them  twoo  which  hee  had  with  hym  there  at  that  prefent.  They  baptifed  in  one  day  a  hundreth  and  thirtie  of
th[e]inhabitantes,  fumtyme  enemyes  to  Commefidator,  but  now  his  frendes  and  ioyned  with  him  in  ahance.  All
fuche  as  came  to  bee  baptifed,  gaue  the  preefles  of  theyr  owne  liberalitie,  eyther  a  cocke  or  a  henne.  But  no
capons:  for  they  can  not  yet  fkyl  how  to  came  theyr  cocke  chykens  to  make  them  capons.  Alfo  certe}Tie
falted  fyfthes,  and  newe  fyne  cakes  made  of  theyr  breade :  likewife  certeyne  foules  franked  and  made  fatte.
When  the  preefles  reforted  to  the  fhippes,  fyxe  of  thefe  newe  baptyfed  men  accoompanied  theym  laden  with
vitailes,  wherwith  they  ledde  a  ioyfull  Eafler.  For  on  the  Sunday  two  dayes  before  faynte  Lazarus  day,  they
departed  from  Dariena,  and  touched  at  that  tyme,  onely  to  the  cape  or  angle  of  Cuba  nere  vnto  the  Eafle  fyde
of  Hifpaniola.  At  the  requefle  of  Co??itne?idator,  Ancifus  lefte  with  hym  one  of  his  coompanie,  to  th[e]intente
too  teache  hym  and  his  fubiectes  wyth  other  his  bortherers,  the  falutacion  of  the  angell  whiche  we  caule  the  Aue
Maria.  For  they  thinke  them  felues  to  be  foo  much  the  more  beloued  of  the  bleffed  virgin,  as  they  can
reherfe  the  more  woordes  of  that  prayer.  Thus  Ancifus  takinge  his  leaue  of  kynge  Conmietidator,  directed  his
courfe  to  Hifpaniola,  from  whiche  he  was  not  farre.  Shortely  after,  he  tooke  his  viage  to  Spayne,  and  came  to
Valladoleto  to  the  kynge,  to  whom  he  made  greuous  complaint  of  the  infolencie  of  Vafchus  Nimnez,  in  fo  muche
that  by  his  procuremente,  the  Kynge  gaue  fentence  ageynfle  hym.  Thus  muche  haue  I  thowght  good  (mofle
holy  father)  wherof  to  aduertyfe  yowr  holynes  as  concernyng  the  religion  of  thefe  nations,  not  only  as  I  haue
byn  inflructed  of  Ancifus  (wyth  whom  I  was  dayly  conuerfante  in  the  court  and  vfed  hym  familiarlye)  but  alfo
as  I  was  enformed  of  dyuers  other  men  of  greate  autoritie,  to  th[e]intente  that  yowre  excellencie  may  vnder-
ftande  howe  docible  this  kynde  of  men  is,  and  wyth  what  facilitie  they  may  bee  allured  to  embrafe  owr
religion.  But  this  can  not  bee  doone  foodenlye.  Yet  we  haue  greate  caufe  to  hope  that  in  fhorte  t}'me  they
wilbe  all  drawen  by  litle  and  litle  to  the  euangelicall  lawe  of  Chrifte,  to  the  great  encreafe  of  his  flocke.  But
let  vs  nowe  returne  to  the  meffengers  or  procuratours  as  concerniynge  the  affayres  of  Dariena.

The  deuil
appeaxeth  in  his
lykenes

An  other  miracle.

Math.  14.

The  deuyl
appereth  agein.

The  virgin  Mary
ouercoiiuneth  the
deuyll.

Infidels  conuerted
by  miracle,  and
baptised.

75

The  preestes
rewarde.

Aue  Maria.

Ancisus  vyage  to

Spain

Ancisus

cumplaj-neth  of
Vischus.

The  haruest  is
great,  but  the
labourers  .are  fcwe.

taj

126

The  fecoHcie  Decade.

il  The  seventh  booke  of  the  seconde  decade

Of  the  fuppofed  continente.

From  Dariena  to
Hispaniola  viii
dayes  saylyng.

The  procuratours
of  Dariena,  are
honorably
receaued  at  the

Their  complexion
is  altered

Of  whom  the
autour  had
information

76

The  greate  master
of  the  kynges  ships

Petrus  arias  is
elected  gouemour
of  Dariena.

Th[e]  oracion  of
the  byshop.  of
Barges  in  the
defence  of  Petrus
arias.

The  warres  of
Aphrica.

Rom  Dariena  to  Hifpatiiola  is  eyghte  dayes  failinge  and  fumtymes  leffe  with  a  profperous
w}nde.  Yet  Quiccdus  and  Colmenaris  the  procuratours  of  Dariena^  by  reafon  of  tempefles
and  contrary  wyndes,  could  fcarfely  faile  it  in  a  hundrethe  dayes.  When  they  had
taryed  a  fewe  dayes  in  Hifpatiiola,  and  had  declared  the  caufe  of  the  comminge  to  the
admirall  and  the  other  gouernours,  they  tooke  fliippinge  in  two  marchante  fliippes  beinge
redye  furnyfflied,  which  were  a,lfo  accuflomed  to  faile  too  and  froo  betwene  Spayne  and  the
Ilande  of  Hifpaniola.  They  departed  from  Dariena  (as  we  fayde  before)  the  fourthe  day
of  the  calendes  of  nouember  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifl.  15 12,  and  came  not  to  the  courte  before  the  calendes  of
May  in  the  yeare  folowinge  beinge  the  yeare  of  Chrifle.  15 13.  At  th[e]yr  commynge  to  the  courte,  Johannes
Fonfcca  (to  whom  at  the  begynnynge  the  charge  of  thefe  afitayres  was  committed,  whom  alfo  for  hys  faithful
feruice  towarde  the  kinge,  yowre  holynes  created  generall  commiffarie  in  the  warres  ageynfle  the  moores)
receaued  them  honorably,  as  men  comminge  from  the  newe  world,  from  naked  nations,  and  landes  vnknowen
to  other  menne.

C  By  the  prefermente  therefore  of  the  byffliope  of  B urges,  Quicedus  and  Colmenaris  were  brought  before
the  king,  and  declared  theyr  legacie  in  his  prefence.  Suche  newes  and  prefentes  as  they  brought,  were
delectable  to  the  kinge  and  his  noble  men,  for  the  newnes  and  flraungnes  therof  They  alfo  fuiorned  with  me
often  tymes.  Theyr  countenaunces  doo  declare  the  intemperatenes  of  the  ayer  and  region  of  Dariena.  For
they  are  yelowe  lyke  vnto  them  that  haue  the  yelowe  gaundies :  And  alfo  fwolne.  But  they  afcrybe  the  caufe
hereof,  to  the  hunger  which  they  fufleyned  in  tyme  part..  I  haue  byn  aduertifed  of  th[e]afrayres  of  this  newe
woorlde,  not  onely  by  thefe  procuratours  of  Dariena,  and  Ancifus,  and  Zainiidius,  but  alfo  by  conference  with
Baccia  the  lawier,  who  ranne  ouer  a  greate  parte  of  thofe  coafles.  Likewyfe  by  relation  of  Vincentius  Annez
the  patrone  of  the  fliippes,  and  AIfo?ifus  Nignus,  both  being  men  of  greate  experience  and  wel  trauayled  in
thofe  parties,  befide  many  other,  of  whom  wee  haue  made  mention  in  other  places.  For  there  came  neuer  any
from  thenfe  to  the  court,  but  tooke  greate  pleafure  to  certifie  mee  of  al  thynges  eyther  by  woorde  of  mouth  or  by
wrytynge.  Of  many  thynges  therfore  which  I  lerned  of  them,  I  haue  gathered  fuche  as  to  my  Judgement  feeme
mofle  worthy  to  fatiffie  them  that  take  delyte  in  hyftories.  But  let  vs  nowe  declare  what  folowed  after  the
comminge  of  the  procuratours  of  Dariena.  Therfore,  before  theyr  arryuall  there  was  a  rumoure  fpreade  in  the
courte,  that  the  chiefe  gouernoures  and  Lieuetenauntes  Nicuefa  and  Fogcda,  alfo  lohatines  De  la  Coffa  (a  man  of
fuch  reputacion  that  by  the  kinges  letters  patentes  he  was  named  the  greate  mart.er  of  the  kynges  (hyppes)  were
all  peryflied  by  mifchaunce :  And  that  thofe  fewe  which  yet  remayned  alyue  in  Darietia,  were  at  contencion  and
difcorde  amonge  them  felues :  So  that  they  neyther  endeuoured  theyr  diligence  to  allure  thofe  fimple  nations  to
owre  faythe,  nor  yet  had  regarde  to  fearche  the  natures  of  thofe  Regions.  In  confideration  wherof,  the  kynge
was  determyned  to  fende  a  newe  capitayne  thyther  whiche  fhulde  reflore  and  fet  all  thynges  in  good  order,  and
put  them  owte  of  autoritie  whiche  hadde  vfurped  th[e]empire  of  thofe  prouinces  withowte  the  kynges  fpeciall
commaundement.  To  this  office,  was  one  Petrus  Arias  affigned,  a  man  of  greate  prowes  and  a  citifen  ol  Segouia.
But  when  the  procuratours  of  Dariena  had  publifhed  in  the  courte  howe  greate  a  matter  it  was,  and  of  what
moment,  many  laboured  erneflly  to  the  kyng,  to  take  the  office  owte  of  his  handes.  But  the  byffhop  of  Surges
beinge  the  kinges  chiefe  chaplayne,  and  one  of  the  commiffioners  appoynted  by  hym  in  thefe  matters,  beinge
aduertifed  hereof,  came  immediatly  to  the  kynge,  and  fpake  to  hym  in  this  effect.  May  it  pleafe  yowre  hyghnes
to  vnderfland  (mort.e  catholyke  Prince)  that  wheras  Petrus  Arias  a  man  of  valiente  corage  and  greate  feruice,
hath  offered  hym  felfe  to  aduenture  his  lyfe  in  yowre  maieflies  affayres,  vnder  vncerteyue  hope  of  gayne  and
mort.e  certeyne  perels,  yet  that  notwithflandynge  fum  other  haue  ambicioufly  mahced  his  feUcitie  and  preferment
labouringe  for  th[e]office  whereto  he  is  elected :  It  maye  pleafe  yowre  grace  herein  fco  to  fhewe  hym  yowr  fauour
and  permit  hym  to  enioye  his  fayde  office,  as  yowre  maieflie  doo  knowe  hym  to  bee  a  woorthy  and  meete  man
for  the  fame,  hauyng  in  tyme  pafle  had  greate  experience  of  his  proweffe  and  valiantneffe,  afwell  in  behauinge
hym  felfe  as  orderinge  his  fouldiers,  as  yowr  hyghnes  may  the  better  confyder  if  it  flial  pleafe  yowe  to  caule  to
remembrance  his  doinges  in  the  warres  of  Aphrica,  where  he  fhewed  hym  felfe  bothe  a  wyfe  Capitayne,  and
valient  fouldier.  As  concerninge  his  maners  and  vfages  other  wayes,  they  are  not  vnknowen  to  yowre  maieflie,
vnder  whofe  wynge  he  hath  of  a  chylde  byn  browght  vp  in  the  courte,  and  euer  founde  faythfuU  towarde  yo^vre
hyghneffe. Wherfore,  to  declare  my  opinion  vnder  yowre  graces  fauour  (whom  it  hath  pleafed  to  appojTit  me  a

The  feconde  Decade.

127

commiffioner  in  thefe  afifayres)  I  think  it  were  vngodly  that  he  fliuld  bee  put  from  his  office  at  the  fute  of  any
other,  efpecially  beinge  thereto  moued  by  ambition  and  couetoufnes :  who  perchaunce  woold  proue  them  felues
to  be  the  fame  men  in  the  office  if  they  fhuld  obteyne  it,  as  they  nowe  Ihewe  them  feUies  in  the  ambitious
defirynge  of  the  fame.  When  the  byfflioppe  hade  fayde  thefe  woordes,  the  kynge  confirmed  the  election  of
Petrus  Arias  in  more  ample  maner  then  before :  wyllynge  the  byfhoppe  to  appoynt  hym  a  thoufande  and  twoo
hundreth  fouldiers  at  his  charges,  makynge  hym  a  warrante  to  th[e]officers  of  his  efcheker  to  delyuer  hym
money  in  prefle  for  the  fame  purpofe.  Petrus  Arias  therfore  beinge  thus  put  in  office  and  authorjfed  by  the
kynges  letters  patentes  vnder  his  brode  feale,  chofe  a  greate  number  of  his  fouldiers  in  the  court,  and  foo  departed
frome  Valladokfo  aboute  the  calendes  of  October  in  the  yeare  15 13:  And  fayled  fyrfl  to  Ciuile  beinge  a  verye
ryche  citie  and  well  replenyfhed  with  people :  where  by  the  kinges  raagiflrates  he  was  fumyfhed  with  men  and
vytayles  and  other  neceffaries  perteynynge  to  foo  greate  a  matter.  For  the  king  hath  in  this  citie  erected  a
houfe  feruinge  only  for  th[ejaffayres  of  the  Ocean,  to  the  which  al  they  that  goo  or  coome  from  the  newe  landes
and  Ilandes,  reforte  to  gyue  accomptes  afwell  what  they  cary  thyther  as  what  they  brynge  from  thenfe,  that  the
kynge  may  bee  truly  anfwered  of  his  cuflome  of  the  fyfte  part  bothe  of  golde  and  other  thynges  as  wee  haue
fayde  before.  This  houfe,  they  caule  the  houfe  of  the  Contractes  of  Indi,  Petrus  Arias  founde  in  Ciuile
aboue  twoo  thoufand  younge  men  which  made  great  fute  to  goo  with  hy-m :  lykewyfe  noo  fmall  number  of
couetous  owlde  men :  of  the  whiche,  many  offered  them  felues  to  goo  with  him  of  theyr  owne  charges  withowt
the  kynges  flipende.  But  lefle  the  fhippes  (hulde  bee  peflered  with  to  great  a  multitude,  or  lead  vytayles  fhulde
fayle  them,  the  libertie  of  free  paffage  was  reflraynt.  It  was  alfo  decreed  that  noo  flranger  might  paffe  withowt
the  kynges  licence.  Wherfore  I  doo  not  a  lyttle  maruaile  at  Aloifcus  Cadamiijlus  a  Venetian  and  wryter  of  the
Portugales  vyages,  that  he  was  not  a  fhamed  to  wryte  thus  of  the  Spanyardes  nauigations :  we  went :  we  fawe :
we  dyd.  Wheras  he  neuer  went,  nor  any  Venetian  fawe.  But  he  floule  certeyne  annotacions  owte  of  the  three
firfl  bookes  of  my  fyrfl  Decade  wrytten  to  Cardinal  Afcanius  and  Arcimboldiis,  fuppofmge  that  I  woolde  neuer
haue  publyffhed  the  fame.  It  myght  alfo  happen  that  he  came  by  the  copie  therof  at  the  hande  of  fum
ambafadoure  of  Venice.  For  I  haue  graunted  the  copie  to  many  of  them,  and  was  not  daungerous  to  forbyd
them  to  communicate  the  fame  to  other.  Howe  fo  euer  it  bee,  this  honefle  man  Aloifnis  Cadamujtus  feared
not  to  chalenge  vnto  hym  the  frute  of  an  other  mans  laboure.  Of  the  inuentions  of  the  Portugales  (which  furely
are  woonderfull)  whether  he  haue  wrytten  that  whiche  he  hath  feene  (as  he  fayth)  or  lykewife  bereaued  other
men  of  the  iufle  commendations  of  theyr  trauayles,  I  wyll  not  iudge,  but  am  content  to  let  hym  lyue  after  his
maner.  Emonge  the  company  of  thefe  fouldiers,  there  were  none  embarked  but  fuche  as  were  licenced  by  the
kynge,  except  a  fewe  Italians,  Genues,  who  by  frendfhippe  and  fute  were  admitted  for  the  Admirals  fake
younge  Colonus,  fonne  and  heyre  to  Chrijlophorus  Colonus  the  fyrfl  fynder  of  thofe  landes.  Petrus  Arias
therfore  tooke  fhippyng  in  the  ryuer  Bet  is  (nowe  cauled  Guadalqueuir)  runnyng  by  the  citie  of  Ciuile,  aboute  the
beginnynge  of  the  yeare  of  Chrifte.  15 14.  But  he  loofed  anker  in  an  euyll  houre.  For  fuche  a  tempefte  folowed
(hortly  after  his  departure,  that  it  rent  in  pieces  two  of  his  fliippes,  and  foo  toffed  the  other  that  they  were
enforced  to  heaue  ouer  boorde  parte  of  theyr  vytayles  to  lyghten  them.  All  fuch  as  efcaped,  fayled  backe
ageyne  to  the  coafles  of  Spayne :  where,  beinge  newely  furnyihed  and  refrefhed,  by  the  kynges  officers,  they
went  forwarde  on  theyr  viage.  The  mafler  pylot  of  the  gouernoures  fhyppe,  was  lohannes  Vefputius  a  Florentine,
the  neuie  of  Americus  Vefputius,  who  left  hym  as  it  were  by  difcente  of  inheritance,  th[e]experience  of  the
mariners  facultie,  and  knowleage  of  the  fea,  carde  and  compafle.  But  wee  were  aduertifed  of  late  by  certejue
which  came  from  Hifpaniola,  that  they  had  paffed  the  Ocean  with  more  profperous  wynde.  For  this  marchaunt
fliyppe  commynge  from  Hifpaniola  founde  them  landinge  at  certeyne  Ilandes  nere  there  ..boute.  But  in  the
meane  tyme  whyle  my  importunate  caulers  on,  Galeaceus  Butrigarius  and  lohannes  Curfius,  men  lludious  by  al
meanes  to  gratifie  yowre  holynes,  ceafed  not  to  put  me  in  rememberance  that  they  had  one  in  a  redines  to  depart
into  Italy,  and  taryed  onely  to  cary  with  hym  vnto  yowre  holynes  thefe  my  fayre  Nereides  althowgh  rudely  decked,
leafle  I  fhulde  beflow  muche  tyme  in  vayne,  I  haue  let  paffe  many  thynges,  and  wyll  reherfe  onel)'  fuch  as  feeme
in  my  iudgement  mofle  woorthye  memory,  althowgh  fumwhat  difordered  as  occafion  hath  ferued.  So  it  is
therfore  that  this  Petrus  Arias  hath  a  wyfe  named  Helifabeth  a  Boadilla,  beinge  niefe  by  the  broothers  fyde  to
the  marques  of  Boadilla,  which  rendered  the  citie  of  Segouia  to  Fernando  and  Helifabeth  princes  of  Spayne  at
fuch  tyme  as  the  Portugales  innaded  the  kingdome  of  Caflile :  by  reafon  wherof  they  were  encoraged  f}Tfle
to  refyfle,  and  then  with  open  warre  to  affayle  and  expulfe  the  Portugales  for  the  greate  trefure  which  kynge
Henry  brother  to  queene  Helifabeth  hadde  gathered  togyther  there.  This  marquefle  wh)'le  fliee  Ijiied,  dyd  euer
fhewe  a  manly  and  floute  mynde,  bothe  in  peace  and  warre,  fo  that  by  her  counfayle  manye  noble  thynges  were
browght  to  good  effecte  in  Caflile :  vnto  this  noble  woman,  the  wyfe  of  Petrus  Arias  was  niefe  by  her  brothers
fyde.  Shee  folowyng  the  magnanimitie  of  her  aunt,  perceauinge  her  hufbande  nowe  furnyfliyng  hym  felfe  to
depart  to  the  vnknowen  coafles  of  the  newe  woorlde,  and  thofe  large  trades  of  lande  and  fea,  fpake  thefe  wordes
vnto  hym. My  mofle  deare  and  welbeloued  hufbande,  we  owght  not  nowe  to  forget  that  from  owre  younge

Petrus  Arias
Lieuctenante  of
Dariena.

Petnas  Arius  hath
a  thousand  and
twoo  hundreth
men  appo>Tited  at
the  kynges
charges.

A  house  !n  Ciuile
appointed  to  the
a/Tayres  of  India.

Perularia.

77

Many  profer
them  selues  to  go
of  theyr  owne
charges.
Aloisius
Cadamustiis  is
reproued.

The  Portugales
inuentions.

The  nauigation  of
Petrus  Anas.

A  shipwracke

A  mericus
Vesputius.

.A  notable  exemple
of  <i  valient  woman.

Kynge  Henry.

The  wyfe  of
Petrus  Arias

127

128

The  fecoiide  Decade.

yeares  we  haue  byn  ioyned  togyther  with  the  yoke  of  holy  matrimonie  to  th[e]intente  that  wee  fliulde  foo  lyue
togyther  and  not  a  funder  durynge  the  tyme  of  owre  naturall  lyfe.  Wherefore  for  my  parte  to  declare  my  affection
herein,  yowe  fhall  vndorllande,  that  whyther  fo  euer  yowre  fatal  deflenye  fliall  dryue  yowe,  cyther  by  the  furious
waucs  of  the  greate  Ocean,  or  by  the  nianyfoulde  and  horrible  daungers  of  the  lande,  I  wyll  furely  beare  yowe
78  coompany.  There  can  no  perell  chaunce  to  me  fo  terrible,  nor  any  kynde  of  death  fo  cruell,  that  fhal  not  bee
much  eafyer  for  me  to  abyde,  then  to  hue  fo  farre  feperate  from  yowe.  It  were  muche  better  for  me  to  dye,  and
eyther  to  bee  cad  into  the  fea  to  bee  deuoured  of  the  fyfflies,  or  on  the  lande  to  the  Canibales,  then  with
continuall  mournynge  and  bewaylinge,  to  lyue  in  deathe  and  dye  lyuinge,  whyle  I  confume  in  lookyng  rather
for  my  hufbandes  letters  then  for  hym  felfe.  This  is  my  full  determinacion,  not  rafliely  nor  prefentely  excogitate,
nor  conceaued  by  the  lyght  phantafie  of  womans  brayne,  but  with  longe  deliberation  and  good  aduifement.
Nowe  therfore  choofe  to  whether  of  thefe  twoo  yowe  wyll  affente :  Eyther  to  thrufle  yowre  fwoorde  in  my  throte,
or  to  graunte  me  my  requefle.  As  for  the  chyldren  which  god  hath  giuen  vs  as  pledges  of  owr  infeperable  loue,
(for  they  had  foure  fonnes  and  as  many  dowghters)  fhal  not  flay  me  a  moment.  Let  vs  leaue  vnto  them  fuche
gooddes  and  pofleffions  as  haue  byn  left  vs  by  bwre  parentes  and  frendes  wherby  they  may  lyue  amonge  the
woorfliipful  of  theyr  order.  For  other  thynges  I  take  no  care.  When  this  noble  matrone  of  manly  vertue  had
fynifflied  thefe  woordes,  her  hufbande  feinge  the  conflant  mynde  of  his  wyfe,  and  her  in  a  redynes  to  doo
accordynge  to  her  woordes,  had  no  hart  to  denye  her  louinge  peticion :  but  embrafuige  her  in  his  armes,  com-
mended her  intente  and  confented  to  her  requefle.  Shee  folowed  hym  therfore  as  dyd  Ipfuratca  her  Mithridates
with  her  heare  hangcinge  loofe  aboute  her  fluilders.  For  fhee  loueth  her  hufbande  as  dyd  Halicarnaffca  of  Caria,
hers  beinge  deade,  and  as  dyd  Artcmifia  her  Maufolus:  We  haue  alfo  had  aduertifement  fence  their  departure
that  fhe  (being  browght  vp  as  it  were  amonge  foft  fethers)  hath  with  no  leffe  floute  corage  fufleyned  the  roringes
and  rages  of  the  Ocean,  then  dyd  eyther  her  hufband  or  any  of  the  maryners  brought  vp  euen  amonge  the
fourges  of  the  fea.  But  to  haue  fayde  thus  much  hereof,  this  flial  fufhce.  Let  vs  nowe  fpeake  of  other  thynges
no  leffe  woorthy  memorie.  Therfore,  whereas  in  the  fyrfle  Decade  we  haue  made  mencion  of  Vincentms  Annez
Fi/izonus,  ye  flial  vnderflande  that  he  accoompanyed  Chrijlophorus  Coloiius  the  Admirall  in  his  fyrfl  vyage,  and
afterwarde  made  an  other  vyage  of  his  owne  charges  with  onely  one  fhyppe.  Ageyne,  the  fyrfle  yeare  after  the
departinge  of  the  Capitaynes  Niciicfa  and  Fogeda,  he  ran  ouer  thofe  coafles  of  Hifpafiiola,  and  fearched  all  the
fouthe  fyde  of  Cuba  from  the  Eafle  to  the  wefle,  and  fayled  rownde  about  that  Ilande  which  to  that  day  for  the
greate  length  thereof,  was  thowght  to  haue  bin  part  of  the  continent  or  firme  land,  althowgh  fume  other  fay
that  they  dyd  the  lyke.  Vincaitius  Aimez  therfore,  knowyng  nowe  by  experience  that  Cnba  was  an  Ilande,  fayled
on  further,  and  found  other  landes  weRward  from  Cuba,  but  fuch  as  the  Admirall  had  fyrfl  touched.  Wherfore,
bemge  in  maner  encompafed  with  this  newe  lande,  turninge  his  courfe  towarde  the  lefte  hande,  and  rafmg  the
coafles  of  that  lande  by  the  Eafl,  ouerpaffinge  alfo  the  mouthes  of  the  goulfes  of  Beragtia,  Vraba,  and  Cnchi-
bac/ioa,  he  arryued  at  the  Region  which  in  the  fyrfl  Decade  we  cauled  Faria  and  Os  Draconis:  And  entered
into  the  greate  goulfe  of  freffhe  water,  which  Colonus  difcouered,  beinge  replenifhed  with  great  abundance  of
fyffhe,  and  famous  by  reafon  of  the  multitude  of  Ilandes  lyinge  in  the  fame,  beinge  diflant  Eaflwarde  from  Curiana
aboute  a  hundreth  and  thirtie  myles,  in  the  which  tract  are  the  Regions  of  Ctimana  and  Manacapana,  whiche
alfo  in  the  fyxte  booke  of  the  fyrfl  Decade  we  fayde  to  bee  Regions  of  the  large  prouince  of  Faria,  where  many
afitirme  to  bee  the  gretefte  plentie  of  the  befle  pearles,  and  not  in  Curiana.  The  kinges  of  thefe  regions  (whom
they  caul  Chiacones,  as  they  of  Hifpaniola  caule  theym  Cacici)  beinge  certified  of  the  comminge  of  owre  men,
fente  certeyne  fpyes  to  enquire  what  newe  nation  was  arryued  in  theyr  coaftes,  what  they  browght,  and  what
they  woolde  haue:  and  in  the  meane  tyme  fumyffhed  a  number  of  theyr  Canoas  (whiche  they  caule  Chichos)
with  men  armed  after  their  maner.  For  they  were  not  a  lytle  afloniffhed  to  beholde  owre  fhippes  with  the  fayles
fpreade,  wheras  they  vfe  no  fayles,  nor  can  vfe  but  fmaule  ons  if  they  woolde,  by  reafon  of  the  narownes  of  theyr
canoas.  Swarmynge  therfore  aboute  the  fhippe  with  theyr  canoas  (which  we  may  well  caule  Moftoxyla,  bycaufe
they  are  made  of  one  hole  tree,)  they  feared  not  to  fhute  at  owr  men  beinge  yet  within  their  fhips  and  keepinge
theym  felues  vnder  the  hatches  as  fafely  as  yf  they  had  byn  defended  with  flone  waules.  But  when  owre  men
had  fliotte  of  certeyne  pieces  of  ordinance  ageynfl  theym  they  were  foo  difcomfited  with  the  noyfe  and  flawghter
therof  that  they  droue  them  felues  to  flight.  Beinge  thus  difparcled,  owr  men  chafed  them  with  the  fhippe  bote,
tooke  many,  and  flewe  many.  When  the  kynges  harde  the  noyfe  of  the  gunnes,  and  were  certyfied  of  the  loffe
of  their  men,  they  fent  ambafadours  to  Vincentiiis  Agnes  to  entreate  of  peace,  fearinge  the  fpoyle  of  theyr  goodes
and  deflruction  of  theyr  people,  if  owTe  men  fhulde  coomme  alande  in  theyr  wrathe  and  furye.  They  defyred
peace  therfore,  as  could  bee  coniectured  by  their  fignes  and  poyntinges.  For  owre  men  vnderfloode  not  one
woorde  of  theyr  language.  And  for  the  better  proofe  that  they  defired  peace,  they  prefented  owre  men  with  three
thoufand  of  thofe  weights  of  gold  that  the  Spanyardes  caule  CaJIella?tumAureum,  which  they  commonly  caule  Fefum.
Alfo  a  greate  barell  of  woodde  full  of  mofle  excellente  mafculine  frankenfence,  weighing  about  two  thoufande
and  fyxe  hundreth  poundes  weight  after  eight  ounces  to  the  pounde : Whereby  they  knewe  that  that  lande

The  thyrde
naiiigation  of
Vincentius
Finzonus.

Cuba.

Beragtia.

Vraba.

Cucliibacoa.

Pari  a.

Os  Draconis

Curiana.

Cumana.

Manacapana.

Plentie  of  Pearles.

Monoxyla.

The  Barbarians
assayle  owre  men
beinge  in  theyr
shyppes.

The  vse  of  gunnes.

79

Great  abundance
of  gold  and
frankensence.
Olibanuui,

128

The  feconde  Decade.

129

browght  furthe  greate  plentie  of  frankenfence.  For  there  is  noo  entercourfe  of  marchaundies  betwene  th[e]inhabi-
tantes  of  Paria  and  the  fabeans  beinge  foo  farre  diflante,wheras  alfo  the[y]  of  Paria  knowe  nothynge  withowte
theyr  owne  coafles.  With  the  golde  and  frankenfence  whiche  the[y]  prefented  to  owre  men,  they  gaue  them  alfo  a
greate  multitude  of  theyr  peacockes,  bothe  cockes  and  hennes,  deade  and  alyue,  afwell  to  fatiffie  theyr  prefent
neccffitie,  as  alfo  to  cary  with  theym  into  Spayne  for  encreafe.  Lykewyfe  certeyne  carpettes,  coouerlettes,  table
clothes  and  hanginges  made  of  goffampine  filke  fynelye  wrought  after  a  flraunge  diuife  with  plefante  and  variable
colours,  hauing  golden  belles  and  fuche  other  fpangles  and  pendauntes  as  the  Italians  caule  SonagHos,  and  the
Spanyardes  Cafcaueks,  hanging  at  the  purfles  therof  They  gaue  theym  furthermore  fpeakinge  popingiais  of
fundry  colours  as  many  as  they  woolde  a(ke.  For  in  Paria,  there  is  no  leffe  plentie  of  popingiais,  then  with  vs
of  dooues  or  fparous.  Th[e]inhabitantes  of  thefe  Regions  both  men  and  women  are  appareled  with  veflures  made
of  goffampine  cotton,  the  men  to  the  knees,  and  the  women  too  the  calfe  of  the  legge.  The  faffliion  of  theyr
apparell,  is  fymple  and  playne  muche  like  vnto  the  Turkes.  But  the  mens,  is  double  and  quilted  like  that
whiche  the  Turkes  vfe  in  the  warres.  The  princes  of  Paria,  are  rulers  but  for  one  yeare :  But  their  autoritie  is  noo
leffe  emonge  the  people  both  in  peace  and  warre,  then  is  th[e]autoritie  of  other  kynges  in  thofe  Regions.
Theyr  villages  are  buylded  in  coompaffe,  along  by  the  bankes  of  all  that  greate  goulfe.  Fyue  of  theyr  princes
came  to  owi^e  men  wyth  theyr  prefentes,  whofe  names  I  thowght  worthy  to  bee  put  in  this  hiflorie  in  remembe-
rance  of  foo  notable  a  thinge  Chiaconus  Chiauaccha,  (that  is  the  prince  of  Chiauaccha,  for  they  caule  princes  or
kinge?  Chiaconos)  Chiacotius  Pintigiiaims,  Chiaconus  Chamailaba,  Chiaconus  Polomus,  and  Chiaconus  Potto.  The
goulfe  beinge  fyrfle  founde  of  the  admirall  Colonus,  they  caule,  Baia  Natiuitatis,  bycaufe  he  entered  into  the
fame  in  the  day  of  the  natiuitie  of  Chrifle :  But  at  that  tyme  he  only  paffed  by  it  withowte  anye  further  fearching,
and  Baia  in  the  Spanyfflie  tong,  fignifieth  a  goulfe.  When  Vincentius  had  thus  made  a  league  with  thefe  Princes,
folowinge  his  appoynted  courfe,  he  founde  many  regions  towarde  the  Eafl,  defolate  by  reafon  of  diuers  fluddes
and  ouerflowynges  of  waters :  alfo  many  flandynge  pooles  in  dyuers  places,  and  thofe  of  excedynge  largenes.
He  ceafed  not  to  folowe  this  tracte  vntyll  he  came  to  the  poynte  or  cape  of  that  mode  longe  lande.  This
poynte  femethe  as  though  it  woolde  inuade  the  monte  Atlas  in  Aphrica.  For  it  profpectethe  towarde  that  parte  of
Aphrike,  Avhiche  the  portugales  caule  Caput  Bonce.  Sperantice.  The  poyntes  or  capes  of  the  mount  Atlas,  are
rough  and  faluage  nere  vnto  the  fea.  The  cape  of  Botia  Speranza,  gatherethe  thirtie  and  foure  degrees  of  the
Southe  pole,  cauled  the  pole  antartike :  But  that  poynte,  onely  feuen  degrees.  I  fuppofe  this  lande  to  bee  that,
whiche  I  fynde  in  owlde  wryters  of  Cofmographie  to  bee  cauled  the  greate  Hand  Atlantike,  withowt  any  further
declaringe  eyther  of  the  fytuation,  or  of  the  nature  therof.

C  The  eight  booke  of  the  seconde  decade

Of  the  fiippofed  continente.

Hen  lohan  the  king  of  portugale  lyued  which  was  predicefToure  to  hym  that  nowe  reigneth,
there  arofe  a  great  contention  betwene  the  Caflilians  and  Portugales  as  conceminge  the
dominion  of  thefe  newe  founde  landes.  The  Portugales,  bycaufe  they  were  the  firfle  that  durfl
attcmpte  to  fearche  the  Ocean  fea  fence  the  memorie  of  man,  attirmed  tlii  1  all  the  nauigations
of  the  Ocean,  owght  to  perteyne  to  theym  onely.  The  Caflilians  argued  on  the  contrarie
parte,  that  what  fo  euer  god  by  the  miniflration  of  nature  hath  created  on  the  earth,  was  at
the  begynnynge  common  emong  men :  And  that  it  is  therfore  lawfull  to  euery  man  to  poffefe
fuche  landes  as  are  voyd  of  Chriflian  inhabitours.  Whyle  the  matter  was  thus  vncerteynly  debated,  bothe
parties  agreed  that  the  controuerfie  fhulde  bee  decerned  by  the  byffhope  of  Rome,  and  plighted  faithe  to  flande
to  his  arbitrimente.  The  kyngedome  of  Caflile  was  at  that  tyme  gouerned  by  that  great  Queene  Hclifabeth  with
her  hufbande :  for  the  roialme  of  Caflile  was  her  dowerye.  Shee  alfo  and  the  kynge  of  Portugale,  were  cofyn
germaynes  of  two  fyflers :  by  reason  wherof  the  diffention  was  more  eafely  pacified.  By  th[e]airent  therfore  of
both  parties,  Alexander  the  byflhop  [of]  Rome,  the.  vi.  of  that  name,  by  th[e]autoritie  of  his  leaden  bull,  drewe  a
right  Ime  from  the  North  to  the  South  a  hundreth  leaques  weflwarde  withowte  the  paralelles  of  thofe  Ilandes
whiche  are  cauled  Caput  Viride  or  Cabouerde,  Within  the  compafe  of  this  lyne  (althowgh  foomme  denye  it)
faulethe  the  poynte  of  this  lande  wherof  we  haue  fpoken,  which  they  caule  Caput  SanHi  Augujiini,  otherwyfe
cauled  Promontorium  SanHi  Augujiini,  that  is,  faynt  Auguftines  cape  or  poynte.  And  therfore  it  is  not  lawful
for  the  Caflilians  to  faflen  foote  in  the  beginnynge  of  that  lande.  Vincentius  Annez  therfore,  departed  from
thenfe,  beinge  aduertifed  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  that  on  the  other  fyde  of  the  hyghe  mountaynes  towarde  the

EUEN.

Sabea,  is  a  contrey
in  Arabic,  which
brinzeth  forth
frantenscnce

Paria.

Peacockes  which
wee  caule  Turkye
cockes.

Carpets  and
couerlettes  fynely
wrought.

Popyngayes.

Th[e]apparell  of
the  inhabitants
of  paria

Rulers  for  one
yeare.

The  greate  goulfe
of  Paria.

Baia  Natiuitatis
the  gret  goulfe  of
Pana.

Vincentius  maketh
a  league  with  v.
princes,  of  Paria.

Mount  Atlas  in
aphrike.

The  great  Hand
atlantike

Contention
betwene  the
Castilians  and
Portugales  for  the
newe  landes

80

The  bj'sshop  of
Rome  diuideth
the  land

Cabouerde  loke
decade  L  lib.  iii

N

izg

I30

TJie  fcconde  Decade.

The  golden  region
of  Ciamba.

The  Hand  of  S.
lohannes

Fyiie  byshoppes
of  the  Ilandls]
made  by  the
bysshop  of  Rome.

The  Canibales  of
the  Hand  of
Sancta  Crux.

81

Beragua  and
Vraba.

The  ryuers  of
Vraba.

South,  l}'inge  before  his  eyes,  there  was  a  Region  cauled  Ciamba,  which  browght  foorth  greate  plentie  of  golde.
Of  certeyne  captiues  whiche  he  tooke  in  the  goulfe  of  Paria  (which  certenly  perteyneth  to  the  dominion  of
Caftile)  he  browght  fume  with  hym  to  Hifpaniola,  and  lefte  them  with  the  younge  Achnirall  to  Icrne  owre
language.  But  he  hym  felfe,  ropa)  red  to  the  courte  to  make  ernefl.  fute  to  the  kynge  that  by  his  fliuoure,  he
m)ght  bee  gouernour  of  the  Ikvnd  of  Sa/iHi  lohannis  (otherwyfe  cauled  Burichciia,  beinge  diflante  from
Hifpaniola  onely.  xxv.  leaques)  bycaufe  he  was  the  fyrfl  fynder  of  golde  in  that  Ilande.  Before  Vincentius
made  fute  for  this  office,  one  Don  Chriflopher  a  Portugale,  the  foone  of  the  countie  of  Camigna,  was  gouernoure
of  the  Ilande:  whom  the  Canibales  of  the  other  Ilandes  llewe,  with  all  the  Chriflian  men  that  were  in  the  fame,
excepte  the  byfliop  and  his  familiers,  which  fledde  and  fliyfted  for  them  felues,  forfakynge  the  church  and  all
the  ornamentes  thereof  For  yowre  holynes  hath  confecrated  fyue  byfilioppes  in  thefe  Ilandes  at  the  requeft
of  the  moft.  catholyke  kynge.  In  SanHo  T>omiiiico  being  the  chiefe  citie  of  Hifpaniola,  Garfia  de  Fadilla,  a
reguler  fryer  of  the  order  of  faynt  Fraunces,  is  byffliop.  In  the  towne  of  Conception,  doctor  Petrus  Xuarez  of
Deza :  And  in  the  Ilande  of  faynte  lohn  or  Buric/iena,  Alfonfus  Manfus  a  licenciate,  beinge  bothe  obferuantes
of  th[e]in(litucion  of  faynt  Peter,  The  fourth,  is  fryer  Barnarde  of  Mefa,  a  man  of  noble  parentage,  borne  in
Toledo,  a  preacher,  and  byffliop  of  the  Ilande  of  Cuba.  The  fyfte  is  lohannes  Cabedus,  a  fryer  preacher,  whom
yowTC  holynes  annoynted  mynifler  of  Chrifl,  to  teache  the  Chriflian  faithe  amonge  the  inhabitantes  of  Dariena.
The  Canibales  fliall  fliortely  repent  them,  and  the  bludde  of  owre  men  flialbe  reuenged :  And  that  the  fooner,
bycaufe  that  (hortly  after  they  had  committed  this  abhominable  flaughter  of  owre  men,  they  came  ageyne  from
Iheyr  owne  Ilande  of  SanHa  Crux  (otherwyfe  cauled  Ay  Ay)  to  the  Ilande  of  Sanfli  loJiannis.  and  flewe  a  kynge
whiche  was  a  frende  to  owre  men,  and  eate  hym  and  all  his  famely,  vtterly  fubuertinge  his  vyllage,  vppon  this
occafion  that  violatinge  the  lawe  of  hoflage,  he  had  flayne  feuen  Canibales  whiche  were  lefte  with  hym  by
compofition  to  make  certeyne  canoas,  bicaufe  the  Hand  of  SanHi  lohannis  beareth  greater  trees  and  apter  for
that  purpofe,  then  doth  the  Ilande  of  SanHi  Crux  the  chiefe  habitacion  of  the  Canibales.  Thefe  Canibales  yet
remaynynge  in  the  Ilande,  certeine  of  owre  men  fayling  from  Hifpaniola,  chaunced  vppon  them.  The  thynge
being  vnderflode  by  th[e]interpretoures,  owre  men  quarelynge  with  theym  and  caulynge  them  to  accompte  for
that  mifcheuous  deede,  they  immediatly  directed  theyr  bowes  and  venemous  arrowes  ageynR  them,  and  with
cruell  countenaunces  threatened  them  to  bee  quyet,  leafl  it  flaulde  repent  them  of  theyr  commyng  thyther.
Owre  men  fearynge  theyr  venemous  arrowes  (for  they  were  not  prepared  to  fyght)  gaue  them  fignes  of  peace.
Being  demaunded  why  they  deflroyed  the  vyllage,  and  where  the  kynge  was  with  his  famelye,  they  anfwered
that  they  rafed  the  vyllage  and  cutte  the  kynge  with  his  famelie  in  peeces  and  eate  them  in  the  reuenge  of  theyr
feuen  workemen :  And  that  they  had  made  faggottes  of  theyr  bones  to  cary  theim  to  the  wyues  and  chyldren  of
theyr  flayne  woorkemen,  in  wytneffe  that  the  bodyes  of  theyr  hufbandes  and  parentes  lay  not  vnreuenged :  and
therewith  fliewed  the  faggottes  of  bones  to  o\vre  men :  who  beinge  aflonyfhed  at  theyr  fiercenes  and  crueltie,
were  enforced  to  diffimble  the  matter  and  houlde  theyr  peace,  quarelynge  noo  further  with  them  at  that  tyme.
Thefe  and  fuche  other  thynges  doo  dayly  chaunce,  the  which  I  doo  let  paffe  leafl  I  fliulde  offende  the  eares  of
yowr  holynes  with  fuche  bluddy  narrations.  Thus  haue  wee  fufficiently  digreffed  from  the  regions  of  Beragua
and  Vraba  beinge  the  chiefefle  foundations  of  owre  purpofe.  Wee  wyll  nowe  therefore  entreate  fumewhat  of
the  largenes  and  depthe  of  the  ryuers  of  V7-aba :  Alfo  declare  bothe  what  they  and  the  landes  whiche  they
runne  through  doo  brynge  foorth :  lykewife  of  the  greatnes  of  the  lande  from  the  Eafle  to  the  Wefl,  and  of  the
bredth  therof  from  the  Southe  to  the  North,  and  what  theyr  opinion  and  hope  is  of  thynges  yet  vnknowen  in
the  fame.  Wee  wyll  therfore  beginne  at  the  nevve  names  wherwith  the  Spanyardes  haue  named  thefe  prouinces
fence  they  were  vnder  the  dominions  of  the  Chriflians.

€1  The  nynth  booke  of  the  seconde  Decade,

0/  the  ftippofed  Continent.

Beragua,  cauled
Castella  aurifera,
and  Vraba,
Andaluzia  noua.

Sum  caule  Peru,
Noua  Castilia.

Beragua  and

Vraba,  regions  of

Paria.

The  frutefuhies

of  Vraba

Eragua  therfore,  they  cauled  Caflella  Au"ea,  that  is  golden  Caflile :  And  Vraba  they  named
Andaluzia  Noua,  that  is,  newe  Andalufia.  And  lyke  as  of  many  Ilandes  which  they  fubdued,
they  choofe  Hifpaniola  for  the  chiefe  place  of  theyr  habitacion,  foo  in  the  large  tract  of  Paria,
they  appoynted  theyr  colonic  or  bydyng  place  in  the  twoo  regions  Vraba  and  Beragua,  that
all  fuche  as  attempte  any  vyages  in  thofe  coafles,  may  reforte  to  them  as  to  fafe  portes  to  bee
refrefhed  when  they  are  wery  or  dryuen  to  neceffitie.  All  owre  feedes,  and  plantes,  do  nowe
marueloufly  encreafe  in Vraba. Lykewyfe  blades,  fettes,  flippes,  graffes,  fuger  canes,  and

T30

The  feconde  Decade.

131

fuche  other  as  are  brought  from  other  places  to  thofe  regions,  as  alfo  beafles  and  foules  as  we  haue  fayde  before.
O  maruelous  frutefulnes.  Twentie  dayes  after  the  feede  is  fowne,  they  gather  rype  cucumers,  and  fuch  lyke,
But  colwortes,  beetes,  Letufe,  Borage  are  rype  within  the  fpace  of  ten  dayes.  Gourdes,  melones,  and  pom-
pones,  within  the  fpace  of.  xxviii.  dayes.  Daricna  hathe  many  natiue  trees  and  frutes  of  dyuers  kyndes  with
fundry  tafl.es,  and  holfome  for  the  vfe  of  men :  of  the  which  I  haue  thovvght  it  good  to  defcrybe  certeyne  of  the
beft..  They  nooryfflie  a  tree  which  they  caule  Guaia?ia,  that  beareth  a  frute  much  refemblynge  the  kynde  of
citrons  which  are  commonly  cauled  limones,  of  tafl.e  fumwhat  fharpe  myxt  with  fwetencs.  They  haue  alfo
abundance  of  nuttes  of  pynetrees,  and  great  plentie  of  date  trees,  whiche  beare  frutes  bygger  then  the  dates
that  are  knowen  to  vs :  but  they  arc  not  apte  to  bee  eaten  for  theyr  to  much  fowerncs.  Wylde  and  baren  date
trees,  growe  of  them  felucs  in  fundry  places,  the  branches  wherof  they  vfe  for  biefommes,  and  eate  alfo  the
buddes  of  the  fame.  Gtiaraiiana,  being  higher  and  bygger  then  the  orange  tree,  bringeth  furth  a  great  frute
as  bygge  as  pome  citrons.

Ther  is  an  other  tree  much  lyke  to  a  chefl.nut  tree  whofe  frute  is  lyke  to  the  bygger  fort  of  fygs,  beinge

holfome  and  of  plefant  tafle. Mameis,  is  an  other  tree  that  bringeth  foorthe  frute  as  bygge  as  an  orange,  in

tafle  nothynge  inferioure  to  the  befle  kyndes  of  melones. Guanana/a,  beareth  a  frute  leffe  then  any  of  the

other,  but  of  fweete  fauoure  lyke  fpice,  and  of  delectable  tafl,e. Hoiios,  is  an  other  tree  whofe  frute  bothe  in

fhape  and  tafl.e,  is  much  lyke  to  prunes,  but  fumwhat  bygger. They  are  furely  perfuaded  that  this  is  the

Myrobalane  tree. Thefe  growe  foo  abundantely  in  Hifpaniola, that  the  hogges  are  fedde  with  the  frute  therof

as  with  mafle  amonge  vs. The  hogges  lyke  this  kynde  of  feadynge  foo  well,  that  when  thefe  frutes  wax  rype,

the  fwyneherdes  can  by  no  meanes  keepe  them  owte  of  the  wooddes  of  thefe  trees :  by  reafon  wherof,  a  greate

multytude  of  them  are  becoome  \vylde. They  alfo  affirme,  that  in  Hifpa7iiola,  fwynes  fleffhe  is  of  much  better

tafl-e  and  more  holfome  then  mutton. For  it  is  not  to  bee  doubted,  but  that  dyuers  kyndes  of  meates  do

engender  fundry  tafles  and  qualities  in  fuche  as  are  noryflied  therwith. The  mofle  puiffaunte  prince  Ferdi-

nandus,  declared  that  he  had  eaten  of  an  other  frute  browght  from  thofe  landes,  beinge  full  of  fcales  with  keyes

much  lyke  a  pine  apple  in  forme  and  coloure,  but  in  tendernes  equal  to  melopepones,  and  in  tafle  excedyng  all

garden  frutes. For  it  is  noo  tre,  but  an  herbe  much  lyke  vnto  an  archichoke,  or  Acatitho. The  kynge  hym

felfe,  gaue  the  cheefefl.  commendation  to  this. I  haue  eaten  none  of  thefe  frutes. For  of  a  great  number

which  they  browght  from  thenfe,  only  one  remayned  vncorrupted,  the  other  being  putrified  by  reafon  of  the

longe  vyage. All  fuche  as  haue  eaten  of  theym  newely  gathered  in  theyr  natyue  foyle,  doo  marueloufly  com-

mende  theyr  fwetenes  and  pleafaunt  tafle. They  dygge  alfo  owte  of  the  ground  certeyne  rootes  growynge  of

theim  felues,  whiche  they  caule  Botalas,  much  lyke  vnto  the  nauie  rootes  of  Mylayne,  or  the  greate  pufifes  or

mufheroms  of  the  earth. Howe  foo  euer  they  bee  dreffed,  eyther  fiyed  or  fodde,  they  gyue  place  to  noo  fuch

kynde  of  meate  in  pleafant  tendernes. The  Ikyn  is  fumwhat  towgher  then  eyther  of  nauies  or  muffheroms,  and

of  earthy  coloure :  But  the  inner  meate  therof,  is  verye  whyte. Thefe  are  nooryffhed  in  gardens,  as  we  fayde

of  lucca  in  the  fyrfle  Decade. They  are  alfo  eaten  rawe,  and  haue  the  tafl.e  of  rawe  cheflnuttes,  but  are

fumwhat  fweeter. Wee  haue  fpoken  fufficiently  of  trees,  herbes,  and  frutes. We  wyll  nowe  therefore  entreate

of  thynges  fencitiue. The  laundes  and  defolate  pafl,ures  of  thefe  regions,  are  inhabited  and  deuoured  of  wild

and  terrible  beafles,  as  Lions,  Tygers,  and  fuch  other  monfl.ers  as  we  nowe  knowe,  and  haue  byn  defcrybed  of

owlde  autoures  in  tyme  pafl.. But  there  is  efpecially  one  beafl,  engendered  here,  in  which  nature hath

endeuoured  to  fliewe  her  cunnyng. This  beafle  is  as  bygge  as  an  oxe,  armed  with  a  longe  fnoute  lyke  an

Elephant,  and  yet  no  Elephant. Of  the  colour  of  an  oxe  and  yet  noo  oxe. With  the  houfe  of  a  norfe,  and

yet  noo  horfe. With  eares  alfo  much  lyke  vnto  an  Elephant,  but  not  foo  open  nor  foo  nuich  hangyng  downe:

yet  much  wyder  then  the  eares  of  any  other  beafl.e. Of  the  beafl.  which  beareth  her  whelpes  about  Avith  her  in

her  feconde  belly  as  in  a  purfe  (beinge  knowen  to  none  of  the  owlde  wryters)  I  haue  fpoken  in  the  fyrfl.  Decade

which  I  double  not  to  haue  coome  to  the  handes  of  yowre  holynes. Let  vs  nowe  therfore  declare  what  refleth

of  the  fluddes  and  ryuers  of  Vraba. The  ryuer  of  Dariena  fauleth  into  the  goulfe  of Vraba  with  a  narowe

chanel,  fcarfly  able  to  beare  the  canoas  or  lyghters  of  that  prouince,  and  runneth  by  the  vyllage  where  they

chofe  theyr  dwellynge  place. But  the  ryuer  in  the  corner  of  the  goulfe  w^hich  we  fayde  that  Vafchus  pafTed  by,

they  found  to  bee.  xxiiii.  furlonges  in  bredth  (which  they  caule  a  league)  and  of  exceadynge  depthe,  as  of  twoo

hundreth  cubettes,  faulynge  in'^o  the  goulfe  by  dyuers  mouthes. They  fay  that  this  ryuer  fauleth  into  the  goulfe

of  Vraba,  lyke  as  the  ryuer  IJler  (otherwyfe  cauled  Daniibius,  and  Danowe)  fauleth  into  the  fea  Pontike,  and

Nilus  into  the  fea  of  Egypte :  wherfore  they  named  it  Grandis,  that  is  great :  whiche  alfo  they  aflirme  to  nooryfhe

many  and  great  Crocodyles,  as  the  owld  wryters  teflifie  of  Nihis,  and  efpecially  as  I  haue  lerned  by  experience,

hauinge  fayled  vp  and  downe  the  ryuer  of  Nihis  when  I  was  fent  ambafadoure  to  the  Soldane  of  Alca}T  at  the

commaundement  of  the  mofle  catholyke  Kynge. What  I  may  therfore  gather  owte  of  the  A\Tytynges  of  fo  many

lerned  autours  as  concerninge  the  ryuer  of  Nilus,  I  knowe  not. For  they  fay  that  nature  hath  gyuen  two

riuers  of  that  name  to  water  the  lande,  whether  they  wyll  them  to  fprynge  owte  of  the  mountaynes  of  the  moone

The  frutefulnes  of
Dariena-

Dyuers  holsomy
frutes  of  trees.

Guaiana,

Fine  trees.
Date  trees.

Guarauana

Mameis.

Cuananala.

Houos.

Mirobalani.

Hogges  fed  with
mirobalanes

Swynes  flesshe  of
better  tast  and
more  holsum  then
mutton.

82

Frutes  putrifyed
on  the  sea.

Batatas.

Lions  and  Tygers,
A  straunge  beast.

The  rjTiers  of

Vrabo.

The  ryuer  of

Darien  fauleth

into  the  goulfe  of

Vrabx

.A.  league  is  xxiiiL
furlonges

DohmUms.

Grandis  or  Rio
grandis.

A  crocodile  is
much  lyke  an
ente,  but  of
excedyng  bignes.

The  autoure  of
this  booke  was  in
Egipt

131

132

The  fccondc  Decade.

The  riuer  Nilus
in  Egj-pte
Monies  Liota.

The  Portiisrrxlcs
n.iuisncions.

The  ryuer  Senega,
another  channell
of  the  ryuer  of
Nilus.
Crocodiles.

The  thyrde  .and
fourth  Nilus.

Dflagat  /OS.

83

The  rj'uers
springe  owt  of  the
mountayncs.

Crocodiles
engendred  on
other  ryuers
besyde  Nilus  in
Egypte.
Byrdes  and  foules.

Popingayes.

A  philosophical
discourse  as
cuncerning
th[e]original  of
springes  and
ryuers.

The  breadth  of
the  Kinde  at
Vraba,  from  the
North  Ocean  to
the  South  sea.

A  ryuer  of
ra.aruelous
byggenes  loke  the
first  decade  the
ix.  boke.

The  great  ryuer
Maragnonus.  liber.
iv.  decade,  i.
Mariatambal.
Caniatnonis.
Paricora.

Paradice.
Loke.  vl,  boke
fyrst  decade.

The  sea.

The  land  enclosed
with  two  seas.

or  the  foonne,  or  owte  of  the  toppes  of  the  rowgh  mountaines  of  Ethiopia :  Afiirming  one  of  the  fame  to  faule

into  the  goulfe  of  Egypte  toward  the  Northe,  and  the  other  into  the  South  Ocean  fea. Wliat  fliall  wee  faye  in

this  place?  Of  that  Nilus'\\\  Egypte,  there  is  noo  doubte. Tlie  Portugales  alfo  whiche  fayle  by  the  coaftes  of

the  Ethiopians  canled  Nip-iiiv,  and  by  the  kyngcdome  oi  Mcliiuia  jiaffingc  vndcr  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  amonge

thcyr  maruelous  inuentions  haue  founde  an  other  towarde  the  South,  and  erncRly  affinne  the  fame  to  bee  alfo

deriucd  from  the  mountayncs  of  the  moone :  And  that  it  is  an  other  chanell  of  Ni/i/s,  bycaufe  it  bryngeth  foorth

Crocodyles,  whereas  it  liathe  not  byn  reade  before  tyme  that  any  other  r)ucr  nooryfflied  Crocodyles  fauinge

onely  Ni/i/s. This  ryuer,  the  Portugales  caule  Senega. It  runneth  throwgh  the  Region  of  the  Nigriias,  beinge

very  frutefuU  towarde  the  north  fliore-  but  on  the  fouthe  fyde  fandic  and  rowghe. Crocodiles  are  alfo  engendred

herein. What  fliall  wee  then  fay  of  this  thyrde :  ye  I  may  wel  fay  the  fourth. For  I  fuppofe  them  alfo  to  bee

Crocodiles  which  Co/onus  with  his  coompany  founde  armed  with  fcales  as  harde  as  flielles  in  the  ryuer  cauled

Delagartos  wherof  wee  haue  made  mention  before. Shall  wee  foy  tliat  thefe  ryuers  alfo  of  Daricn  and  Vraha,

haue  theyr  originall  frome  the  mountayncs  of  the  moone,  wheras  they  fprynge  owte  of  the  nexte  mountayncs,

and  can  by  noo  meanes  haue  the  fame  originall  with  Nilus  in  Egypte,  or  that  in  Nigrita,  or  els  that  in  the

kyngcdome  of  Meli/ida,  from  whenfe  foo  euer  they  are  deryued. Whereas  thefe  other  (as  we  haue  fayde)  fpringe

owt  of  the  ne.xt  mountaines  whiche  dcuyde  an  other  fouthe  fea  with  noo  greate  diflaunce  from  the  North  Ocean.

Wherfore  it  appeareth  by  experience  of  fuch  as  haue  trauayled  the  worlde  in  owre  time,  that  other  waters  befyde

the  ryuer  of  Nilus  in  Egypte,  maye  lykewyfe  brynge  foorth  Crocodiles. In  the  maryfflies  alfo  and  fennes  of  the

Regions  of  Daricna,  are  founde  greate  plentie  of  Phefauntes  and  peacockes,  {but  not  of  variable  coloures)  with

many  other  kyndes  of  byrdes  and  foules  vnlyke  vnto  owres,  as  well  apte  to  bee  eaten,  as  alfo  to  delite  the  cares

of  menne  with  pleafaunt  noyfe. But  owre  Spanyardes,  b}'caufe  they  are  ignorant  in  foulynge,  take  but  fewe.

Alfo  innumerable  popingayes  of  fundry  kindes  are  found  chattering  in  the  groues  of  thofe  fenny  places. Of

thefe  there  are  fume  equall  to  Capons  in  byggenes,  and  fume  as  lyttle  as  fparowes. But  of  the  diuerfitie  of

popingayes,  we  haue  fpoken  fufficientely  in  the  fyrfl  Decade. For  in  the  rafe  of  this  large  lande,  Colomis  hym

felfe  browght  and  fent  to  the  courte  a  greate  number  of  euery  kynde,  the  whicli  it  was  lawfull  for  all  the  people

to  beholde,  and  are  yet  dayly  browght  in  lyke  maner. There  remayneth  yet  one  thynge  mofle  woorthy  to  bee

put  in  hyflorye :  The  which  I  had  rather  to  haue  chaunced  into  the  handes  of  Cicero  or  Liuie,  then  into  myne.

For  the  thynge  is  foo  marueylous  in  my  efl.imation,  that  I  fynde  my  wytte  more  entangeled  in  the  defcription

hereof,  then  is  fayde  of  the  henne  when  fliee  feeth  her  younge  chekyn  inwrapped  in  towe  or  flaxe. The  breadth

of  that  lande  from  the  North  Ocean  to  the  fouth  fea  is  only  fyxe  dayes  iourney  by  relation  of  th[e]inhabitantes.

The  multitude  therfore  and  greatnes  of  the  ryuers  on  the  one  fide  and  on  the  other  fyde  the  narowenes  of  the

lande,  brynge  me  into  fuche  doubte  howe  it  can  coome  to  paffe,  that  in  foo  little  a  fpace  of  three  dayes  iourney,

meafurynge  from  the  hygh  toppes  of  thofe  mountaynes,  I  doo  not  vnderflande  howe  foo  many  and  foo  great  ryuers,

may  haue  recourfe  into  this  north  fea. For  it  is  to  bee  thought  that  as  many  doo  flowe  towarde  th[e]inhabitantes

of  the  fouthe. Thefe  ryuers  of  Vraba  are  but  fmaule,  in  comparifon  of  many  other  in  thofe  coafles. For  the

Spanyardes  fay,  that  in  the  tyme  of  Colonus,  they  founde  and  paffed  by  an  other  ryuer  after  this,  whofe  goulfe

faulynge  into  the  fea,  they  affirme  to  bee  lyttle  leffe  then  a  hundreth  myles  in  the  fyrfle  coafles  of  Faria,  as  wee

haue  fayde  elfewhere. For  they  faye  that  it  fauleth  from  the  toppes  of  hyghe  mountaynes  with  foo  fwyfte  and

furious  a  courfe,  that  by  the  violence  and  greatnes  therof,  it  dryueth  backe  the  fea  althowgh  it  bee  rowghe  and

enforced  with  a  contrary  wynde. They  all  affirme  lyke^vyfe,  that  in  all  the  large  tracte  therof,  they  felt  noo

fower  or  falte  water,  but  that  all  the  water  was  frefflie,  fweete,  and  apte  to  bee  dronke. Th[e]inhabitantes  caule

this  ryuer  Maragnonitm: And  the  regions  adiacent  to  the  fame,  Mariatambal,  Camamoriis,  and  Paricora.

Befyde  thofe  ryuers  whiche  I  haue  named  before,  as  Darien,  Grandis,  Dabaiba,  Beragua,  SanBi  Mathei,  Boius

gatti, Delagartos,  and Gaira,  they which of  late haue fearched  thofe  coafles,  haue  founde  many  other.

Deliberatinge  therefore  with  my  felfe,  from  whenfe  thefe  mountaynes  beinge  foo  narowe  and  nere  vnto  the  fea  on

bothe  fydes,  haue  fuch  great  holowe  caues  or  dennes  of  fuche  capacitie,  and  from  whenfe  they  are  fylled  to  call

foorth  fuch  abundance  of  water,  hereof  alfo  afkynge  them  the  opinions  of  the  inhabitantes,  they  affirme  them  to

bee  of  dyuers  iudgementes  herein :  Alleagynge  fyrft  the  greatnes  of  the  mountaynes  to  bee  the  caufe,  whiche

they  fay  to  bee  very  hygh,  which  thynge  alfo  Colomis  the  firfl  fynder  therof  affirmeth  to  bee  trewe :  Adding  there

vnto  that  the  Paradife  of  pleafure  is  in  the  toppes  of  thofe  mountaines  whiche  appeare  from  the  goulfe  of  Faria

and Os  Draconis,  as  he  is  fully  perfuaded. They  agree  therfore  that  there  is  greate  caues  within  thefe

mountaynes :  but  it  refteth  to  confyder  from  whenfe  they  are  fylled. If  therefore  all  the  ryuers  of  freffhe  waters

by  th[e]oppinion  of  manye,  do  foo  flowe  owte  of  the  fea  as  dryuen  and  compelled  throwghe  the  paffages  or  pores

of  the  earth  by  the  ponderous  weyght  of  the  fea  it  felfe,  as  wee  fee  them  breake  furth  of  the  fprynges  and  dirccte

their  courfe  to  the  fea  ageyne,  then  the  thynge  is  leffe  to  bee  marueyled  at  here  then  in  other  places. For  wee

haue  not  redde  that  in  any  other  place  twoo  fuch  feas  haue  enuironed  any  lande  with  foo  narowe  lymittes.

For  it  hath  on  the  right  fyde,  the  great  Ocean  where  the  fonne  goeth  downe  on  the  lefte  hande:  And  an  other

'32

The  feconde  Decade.

^33

on  the  other  fyde  where  the  fonne  ryfeth,  nothynge  inferioure  to  the  fyrfl  in  greatenes,  for  they  fuppofe  it  to  bee
myxte  and  ioyned  as  all  one  with  the  fea  of  Eafl  India.

This  lande  therefore  being  burdened  with  fo  great  a  weight  on  the  one  fyde  and  on  the  other  (yf  this
opinion  bee  of  anye  value)  is  enforced  to  fwalowe  vp  fuch  deuoured  waters,  and  ageyne  to  cafl  foorth  the  fame
in  open  fpringes  and  flreames.  But  if  wee  fliall  denye  that  the  earth  draweth  humours  of  the  fea,  and  agree
that  all  fountaynes  or  fprynges  are  engendered  of  the  conuerfion  or  tumynge  of  ayer  into  water  diflilling  within
the  holowe  places  of  the  montaynes  (as  the  mofl  part  thinke)  we  wyli  gyue  place  rather  to  th[e]autoritie  of
them  whiche  flycke  to  thofe  reafons,  then  that  owre  fenfe  is  fatiffyed  of  the  full  truth  therof.  Yet  doo  I  not
repugne  that  in  fume  caues  of  mountaynes,  water  is  turned  into  ayer.  For  I  my  felfe  haue  feene,  howe  in  the
caues  of  manye  mountaynes  in  Spayne,  in  maner  fhowers  of  rayne  doo  faule  continually:  And  that  'he  water
gathered  by  this  meanes,  doth  fend  furth  certeyne  ryuers  by  the  fydes  of  the  mountaynes,  wherwith  al  fuche
trees  as  are  planted  on  the  fliepe  or  foote  of  the  mountaynes,  as  vines,  Oliue  trees,  and  fuche  other,  are  watered.
And  this  efpecially  in  one  place :  As  the  ryght  honorable  Lodouike  the  Cardinall  of  Aragonie  mofle  obfequious
to  yowre  holynes,  and  twoo  other  byfhoppes  of  Italy,  wherof  the  one  is  Siluius  Fandomis,  and  the  other  an
Archebyffhop  (whofe  name  and  tytle  I  doo  not  remember)  can  beare  me  ^vytnes.  For  when  wee  were  togyther
at  Granata,  lately  delyuered  from  the  dominion  of  the  Moores,  and  walked  for  owTe  padyme  to  certeine
pleafaunte  hylles  (by  the  whiche  there  ranne  a  fayre  ryuer)  Whyle  Cardinall  Lodouike  occupied  hym  felfe  in
fhutynge  at  byrdes  whiche  were  in  the  bufhes  nere  vnto  the  ryuer,  I  and  the  other  tAvoo  byffliops  determined  to
clime  the  mountaynes  to  fearche  th[e]originall  and  fpringe  of  the  ryuer :  for  wee  were  not  farre  from  the  toppes
thereof  Folowynge  therefore  the  courfe  of  the  ryuer,  wee  founde  a  greate  caue  in  which  was  a  continuall  faule
of  water  as  it  had  byn  a  flioure  of  rayne :  the  water  wherof,  faulyng  into  a  trenche  made  with  mans  hand,
encreafeth  to  a  ryuer,  and  runneth  downe  by  the  fydes  of  the  mountaynes.  The  lyke  is  alfo  feene  in  this
famous  towne  of  Valladoleto  (where  we  nowe  fuiorne)  in  a  certeyne  greene  clofe,  not  pafl  a  furlonge  diftant  from
the  waules  of  the  towne.  I  graunte  therfore  that  in  certeyne  places  by  conuerfion  of  the  ayrie  dewe  into  water
within  the  caues  of  fuche  mountaynes,  many  fprynges  and  ryuers  are  engendred.  But  I  fuppofe  that  nature  was
not  follicitate  to  brynge  furthe  fuche  greate  fluds  by  this  fo  fmaule  indullry.  Twoo  reafons  therfore,  do  found
befle  to  my  iudgement :  whereof  the  one  is,  the  often  faule  of  rayne :  The  other,  the  continuall  autumne  or
fprynge  tyme  which  is  in  thofe  regions  beinge  foo  nere  vnto  the  Equinoctial  that  the  common  people  can
perceaue  no  difference  betwene  the  length  of  the  day  and  the  night  throwgh  owt  al  the  yeare  whereas  thefe  two
feafons  are  more  apte  to  engender  abundance  of  rayne  then  eyther  extreme  -wynter  or  feruent  fummer  An
other  reafon  in  effect  much  lyke  vnto  the  fyrfl,  is  this :  If  the  fea  bee  full  of  pores,  and  that  by  the  pores  therof
beinge  opened  by  the  Southe  windes,  wee  fhal  confent  that  vapours  are  lyfted  vp  wherof  the  watery  cloudes  are
engendred,  this  lande  mull  needes  bee  moyfled  with  moo  fhoures  then  anye  other,  yf  it  bee  as  narowe  as  they
faye,  and  enuironed  with  twoo  mayne  feas  collaterally  beatinge  on  the  fame.  Howe  fo  euer  it  be :  I  can  not
but  gyue  credit  to  the  report  of  fuch  worthy  men  as  haue  recourfe  to  thofe  regions :  And  can  noo  leffe  then
declare  the  fame  albeit  it  may  feeme  incredible  to  fume  ignorant  perfons  not  knowynge  the  poure  of  nature  to
whome  Plinie  was  perfuaded  that  nothynge  was  impoffible.  Wee  haue  therfore  thought  it  good  to  make  this
difcourfe  by  the  way  of  argument,  leafl  on  the  one  fyde,  men  of  good  lernyng  and  iudgement,  and  on  the  other
fyde,  fuche  as  are  fludious  to  fynde  occafions  of  quarelynge  in  other  mens  wrytynges,  fhulde  iudge  vs  to  bee  fo
vndefcreete  lyghtly  to  gyue  creditte  to  euery  tale  not  beinge  confonant  to  reafon.  But  of  the  force  and  greate
violence  of  thofe  freffhe  waters,  which  repulfinge  the  fea  make  fo  greate  a  goulfe  (as  wee  haue  fayde)  I  ihinke  the
caufe  therof  to  bee  the  greate  multitude  of  fluddes  and  ryuers,  whiche  beinge  gathered  togither,  make  fo  great  a
poole :  and  not  one  ryuer  as  they  fuppofe.  And  for  as  muche  as  the  mountaynes  are  excedynge  hyghe  and
lliepe,  I  thinke  the  violence  of  the  faule  of  the  waters  to  be  of  fuch  force,  that  this  conflicte  betwene  the  waters,
is  caufed  by  th[e]impulfion  of  the  poole  that  the  falte  water  can  not  enter  into  the  goulfe.  But  here  perhappes
fume  wyll  marueyle  at  me  why  I  fliulde  manieyle  foo  muche  hereat,  fpeakynge  vnto  me  fcornefully  after  this  maner.
Why  dothe  he  foo  marueyle  at  the  greate  ryuers  of  thefe  Regions  ?  Hathe  not  Italye  his  Eridanus,  named  the
kynge  of  ryuers  of  the  owlde  wryters  ?  Haue  not  other  regions  alfo  the  lyke  ?  as  wee  reede  of  Tanais,  Ganges,
and  Daniibius,  which  are  fayde  foo  to  ouercoome  the  fea,  that  frefhe  water  may  be  drawne  fortie  mylej  within
the  fame.  Thefe  menne  I  woclde  fatiffie  with  this  anfwere.  The  famous  ryuer  of  Padus,  in  Italye  (wliiche
they  nowe  caule  Po,  and  was  of  the  Greekes  cauled  Eridanus)  hath  the  greate  mountaynes  cauled  Alpcs
diuidinge  Fraunce,  Germanic,  and  Pannonie  from  Italye,  lyinge  at  the  backe  therof  as  it  were  bulwarges  full
of  moyflure :  And  with  a  longe  tracte  receauinge  Ticinum  with  innumerable  other  great  ryuers,  fauleth  into  the
fea  Adriatike.  The  lyke  is  alfo  to  bee  vnderflode  of  the  other.  But  thefe  ryuers  (as  owre  men  were  enformed
by  the  kynges)  faul  into  the  Ocean  fea  with  larger  and  fuller  chanels  nere  hand.  And  fume  there  are  which
affirme  this  lande  to  bee  very  large  in  other  places  althowgh  it  bee  but  narowe  here.  There  commeth  alfo  to
my  remembrance  an  other  caufe :  the  whiche  althowgh  it  bee  of  no  greate  force,  yet  doo  I  entende  to  wr)-te  it.

N  2  133

84

CoDu[ejrsioii  of
ayer  into  water  in
the  caues  of
mountaynes.

Showers  of  rayne
in  the  caues  of
montaynes

The  often  fal  of

ra>'ne  and

continuall  sprynge

time.

The  EquinoctialL

The  pores  of  the
sea  and  the  South
wynd.

Nothinge
impossible  to  the
poure  of  na[tjurc.

The  cause  of  the
greatnes  and  force
of  the  goulfe.

Hygh  and  stieue

hylles

85

The  fludde
Eridanus.

Tanais.

Ganges.

Danuiius.

Padus.

Ticinum.

The  sea  Adriatikp,
sume  caule  the
goulfe  of  Venes

An  other  reason

J  34

The  fcco)ide  Decade.

The  ryuer

Alpheus.

Longe  caues  in
the  mouutaynes.

The  length  and
forme  of  the  I  land
Cap.  S.  A  u^isti.
Eyght  tymes
bygger  then  Italy
besyde  that  part
whiche  the
portugales
possesse. Italy
is  in  length  a
thousand  and  two
hundreth  niyles,
and  in  breadth
foure  hundreth
and  ten.

Cardes  of  the  sea.

The  carde  of

Americus

Vesputius.

The  carde  of
Colonus.

The  carde  of
lohannes  de  la
Cossa.

86

The  carde  of
Andreas  moralis.

The  maner  of
measaring  the
cardes.

Loke  decade  i.
liber,  iii.

The  Hand  of
Cabouerde.

Maragnon  um
Os  Draconis

A  league.
Cuchibacoa.

Caramairi.

CartJiago.

The  Hand  Fortis.

Vraba.

Beragua.

Perhappes  therfore  the  length  of  the  lande  reachyng  far  from  the  Eafle  to  the  wefte,  if  it  bee  narowe,  may  bee
a  helpe  hereunto.  For  as  wee  reade  that  the  ryuer  Alpheus  paflethe  through  the  holowe  places  vnder  the  fea
from  the  citie  of  Elis  in  Fehpo/icfo,  and  brcaketh  foorth  at  the  fountayne  or  fprynge  Arethufa  in  the  Hand  of
Shi/u7,  fo  is  it  poflible  that  thefe  mountaynes  may  haue  fuche  longe  caues  perteynynge  vnto  thcim,  that  they
may  be  the  receptacles  of  the  water  pairing  through  the  landes  beinge  faire  diflante :  And  that  the  fame  waters
commynge  by  foo  longe  a  tracte,  may  in  the  way  bee  greately  encreafed  by  the  conuerfion  of  ayer  into  water,
as  wee  haue  fayde.  Thus  muche  haue  I  fpoken  freely,  permittinge  bothe  to  them  whiche  doo  frendely
enterprete  other  mens  doinges,  and  alfo  to  the  malicious  fcorners,  to  take  the  thynge  euen  as  them  lyfleth.
For  hetherto  I  can  make  no  further  declaration  hereof.  But  when  the  truth  flialbe  better  knowen,  I  wyl  do  my
diligence  to  commit  the  lame  to  wryting.  Nowe  therefore,  forafmuche  as  we  haue  fpoken  thus  muche  of  the
breadth  of  this  land,  we  entend  to  defcribe  the  length  and  forme  of  the  fame.

C  The  tenth  booke  of  the  seconde  Decade,

0/  tJie  fuppofed  Continent.

Hat  lande  reacheth  foorth  into  the  fea  euen  as  doth  Italy,  althowgh  not  like  the  legge  of  a  man
as  it  doth.  But  I  nowe  compare  a  Pigmean  or  a  dwarfe  to  a  giant.  For  that  part  therof
which  the  Spaniardes  haue  ouer  runne  from  the  fayde  Eafle  poynt  which  reacheth  towarde
the  fea  Atlantike  (the  ende  not  beinge  yet  founde  towarde  the  Wefle)  is  more  then  eyght
tymes  longer  then  Italye.  And  by  what  reafon  I  am  moued  to  fay  eyght  tymes,  yowre
holynes  fliall  vnderflande.  From  the  tyme  therefore  that  I  fyrfle  determined  to  obeye  their
requefles  who  wylled  me  fyrfle  in  yowre  name  to  wryte  thefe  thynges  in  the  laten  tonge,  I
dyd  my  endeuoure  that  all  thinges  myght  coome  foorth  with  dewe  tryall  and  experience.  Wherupon  I  repayred
to  the  byflioppe  of  Burges  beinge  the  chiefe  refuge  of  this  nauigation.  As  wee  were  therfore  fecretly  togyther  in
one  chamber,  we  had  many  inflrumentes  perteynynge  to  thefe  affayres  as  globes  and  manye  of  thofe  mappes
which  are  commonly  cauled  the  fliipmans  cardes,  or  cardes  of  the  fea.  Of  the  which,  one  was  drawen  by  the
Portugales,  wherunto  Americus  Vefputius  is  fayde  to  haue  put  to  his  hande,  beinge  a  man  mofle  experte  in  this
facultie  and  a  Florentyne  borne :  who  alfo  vnder  the  llipende  of  the  Portugales,  hadde  fayled  towarde  the  fouth
pole  many  degrees  beyond  the  Equinoctiall.  In  this  carde  we  founde  the  fyrfl  front  of  this  land  to  bee  brooder
then  the  kynges  of  Vraba  had  perfuaded  owre  men  of  theyr  mountaynes.  To  an  other,  Colonus  the  Admiral
whyle  he  yet  IjTied  and  fearched  thofe  places  had  gyuen  the  beginnynge  with  his  owne  handes :  Wherunto
Bartholomcus  Colonus  his  brother  and  Lieuetenaunt  had  addid  his  iudgement,  for  he  alfo,  had  fayled  aboute
thofe  coaRes.  Of  the  Spanyardes  lykewyfe,  as  many  as  thought  them  felues  to  haue  any  knowleage  what
perteyned  to  meafure  the  lande  and  the  fea,  drewe  certeyne  cardes  in  parchement  as  concernyng  thefe  nauiga-
tions.  Of  all  other,  they  mofl  efleeme  them  which  lohannes  de  la  Coffa  the  coompanion  of  Fogeda  (whom  wee
fayde  to  bee  flayne  of  the  people  of  Caramairi  in  the  hauen  Carthago^)  and  an  other  expert  pylot  cauled
Andreas  Moralis,  had  fet  foorth.  And  this  afwell  for  the  greate  experience  which  they  bothe  hadde  (to  whom
thefe  tractes  were  as  wel  knowen  as  the  chambers  of  theyr  owne  houfes)  as  alfo  that  they  were  thought  to  bee
cunninger  in  that  parte  of  Cofmographie  which  teacheth  the  defcription  and  meafuringe  of  the  fea.  Conferringe
therefore  all  thefe  cardes  togyther,  in  euery  of  the  whiche  was  drawen  a  lyne  expreffinge,  not  the  myles,  but
leagues  after  the  maner  of  the  Spanyardes,  we  tooke  owre  compafes  and  beganne  to  meafure  the  fea  coafles
after  this  order.  From  that  poynt  or  fronte  which  we  fayde  to  bee  included  within  the  lyne  perteynynge  to  the
Portugales  iurifdiction,  beinge  drawen  by  the  paralelles  of  the  Ilandes  of  Cabouerde,  but  a  hundreth  leagues
further  towarde  the  wefle  (which  they  haue  nowe  alfo  fearched  on  euery  fyde)  we  founde  three  hundreth  leagues
to  the  enterance  of  the  ryuer  Maragnonum:  And  from  thenfe  to  Os  Draconis,  feuen  hundreth  leagues:  but
fumwhat  leffe  in  the  defcription  of  fume :  For  they  doo  not  agree  in  al  poyntes  exquifitely.  The  Spanyardes
wyll  that  a  league  conteyne  foure  myles  by  fea  and  but  three  by  lande.  From  Os  Draconis,  to  the  cape  or
poynt  of  Cuchibacoa,  which  beinge  paffed,  there  is  a  goulfe  on  the  lefte  hande,  we  meafured  three  hundrethe
leagues  in  one  carde,  and  much  thereabout  in  an  other.  From  this  poynt  of  Cuchibacoa,  to  the  region  of
Caramairi  in  which  is  the  hauen  Carthago  (which  fum  caule  Carthagena)  we  found  about  a  hundreth  and
feuentie  leagues.  From  Caramairi  to  the  Hande  Fortis,  fiftie  leagues.  From  thenfe  to  the  goulfes  of  Vraba
amonge  the  which  is  the  vyllage  cauled  Sanfla  Maria  Antigua  where  the  Spanyardes  haye  apoynted  theyr
habitacion,  only,  xxxiii.  leagues. From  the  ryuer  of  Vraba  in  the  prouince  oi Daricua  to  the  ryuer  oi  Beragua

1^4

The  feconde  Decade.

135

where  Nicuefa  hadde  intended  to  haue  faflened  his  foote  if  god  hadde  not  otherwyfe  decreed,  we  naeafured  a
hundreth  and  thirtie  leagues.  Frome  Beragua  to  that  ryuer  whiche  wee  fayde  of  Colonus  to  bee  cauled  Sancli
Maithei,  in  the  which  alfo  Nicuefa  loofinge  his  carauell,  wandered  in  greate  calamities,  we  founde  in  owre  cardes,
onely  a  hundreth  and  fortie  leagues :  Yet  many  other  which  of  late  tyme  haue  coome  from  thefe  partes,  haue
defcrybed  many  moo  leagues  in  this  tracte  from  the  ryuer  of  Sancli  Maithei:  In  which  alfo,  they  place  dyuers
ryuers,  as  Aburenia  with  the  Ilande  cauled  Smtiun  Cateha  lyinge  before  it,  whofe  kynges  name  is  Fades  conibujla.
Lykewife  an  other  ryuer  cauled  Zobraba:  after  that,  Vrida:  and  then  Diiraba  in  the  which  gold  is  founde.
Furthermore,  many  goodly  hauens,  as  Ccraharo  and  Tliebra,  foo  cauled  of  th[e]inhabitantes.  And  thus  if  yowre
holynes  wyll  conferre  thefe  numbers  togyther,  yowe  Hiall  fynde  in  this  accompte,  a  thoufand  fiue  hundreth
twentie  and  fyue  leagues,  whiche  amounte  to  fyue  thoufande  and  feuen  hundreth  myles  from  the  poj-nt  of  Sancli
Maithei,  which  they  caule  Sinum  perditoriim :  that  is,  the  goulfe  of  the  lofle  men.  But  we  may  not  leaue  here.
For  after  this,  one  AJlur  Ouetenfes,  otherwyfe  named  Johannes  Dias  de  Solis,  borne  in  Nebriffa  (which  bringeth
foorth  many  lerned  men)  faylinge  frome  this  ryuer  towarde  the  wefle,  ouer  ranne  manye  coafles  and  leagues :
But  the  myddede  of  that  fliore,  bendcthe  towarde  the  North :  And  it  is  therfore  directly  placed  in  order  with
the  other.  Yet  may  we  gather  by  a  diameter  or  ryght  lyne,  about  three  hundreth  leagues.  Hereby  maye  yowe
gather  what  is  the  length  of  this  lande.  But  of  the  breadth,  perhappes  wee  fhall  hereafter  haue  further  know-
leage.  Let  vs  nowe  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  varietie  of  the  degrees  of  the  eleuation  of  the  pole  flarres.  This
lande  therfore,  althowgh  it  reache  foorth  from  the  Eafl  into  the  Wefle,  yet  is  it  crooked  and  hathe  the  poynt
bendynge  fo  toward  the  fouth,  that  it  lofeth  the  fight  of  the  North  pole,  and  is  extended  beyonde  the  Equi-
noctial lyne  feuen  degrees  towarde  the  South  pole.  But  the  poynt  herof,  perteyneth  to  the  iurifdiction  of  the
Portugales  as  we  haue  fayde.  Leauinge  this  poynt  and  faylinge  toward  Paria  the  north  flarre  is  feene  ageyne,
and  is  fo  much  the  more  lyfted  vp,  in  howe  much  the  region  enclyneth  more  towarde  the  Wefle.  The  Span-
yardes  therfore,  haue  dyuers  degrees  of  eleuations,  vntyl  they  come  to  Dariena  beinge  their  chieft  flation  and
dwellynge  place  in  thofe  landes.  For  they  haue  forfaken  Beragua,  where  they  found  the  North  pole  eleuate.
viii.  degrees  But  from  henfe  the  lande  doth  foo  muche  bende  towarde  the  North,  that  it  is  there  in  maner
equall  with  the  degrees  of  the  flrayghtes  of  Hercules  pyllers :  efpecially  yf  wee  meafure  certeyne  landes  founde
by  them  towarde  the  Northe  fyde  of  Hifpaniola.  Emonge  the  which,  there  is  an  Ilande,  about  three  hundreth
and.  XXV.  leagues  from  Hifpaniola,  as  they  fay  whiche  haue  fearched  the  fame,  named  Boiuca  or  Agnaneo,  in  the
which  is  a  continual  fprynge  of  runnynge  water  of  fuch  maruelous  vertue,  that  the  water  therof  beinge  dronk,
perhappes  with  fume  dyete,  maketh  owld  men  younge  ageyne.  And  here  mufl  I  make  proteflacion  to  yowre
holynes,  not  to  thynke  this  to  bee  fayde  lyghtly  or  rafhely.  For  they  haue  foo  fpredde  this  rumour  for  a  truth
throwghowt  all  the  courte,  that  not  onely  all  the  people,  but  alfo  many  of  them  whom  wifedome  or  fortune  hath
diuided  from  the  common  fort,  thinke  it  to  be  true.  But  if  yowe  fhal  afke  my  opinion  herein,  I  Avyl  anfwere
that  I  wyll  not  attribute  fo  greate  poure  to  nature :  but  that  god  hath  noo  leffe  referued  this  prerogatiue  to  hym
felfe,  then  to  fearche  the  hartes  of  men,  or  to  gyue  fubflance  to  priuation,  (that  is)  beinge  to  noo  beinge  :
Excepte  we  fhall  beleue  the  fable  of  Colchis  of  Efoji  renouate,  to  bee  as  trewe  as  the  wrytinges  of  Sibylla
Erythrea.  Albeit  perhappes  the  fcoles  of  phifitians  and  naturall  philofophers  wyll  not  muche  flycke  to  affirme
that  by  th[e]ufe  of  certeyne  fecreate  medecines  and  dyete,  the  accidentes  of  age  (as  they  caule  them)  may  be
longe  hydden  and  deferred,  which  they  wyll  to  bee  vnderfloode,  by  the  renouacion  of  age.  And  to  haue  fayde
thus  much  of  the  length  and  breadthe  of  thefe  Regions,  and  of  the  rowghe  and  hugious  mountaynes  with  theyT
watery  caues,  alfo  of  the  dyuers  degrees  of  that  lande,  I  thinke  it  fufficient.  But  I  thowght  it  not  good  to  let
paffe  what  chaunced  to  thefe  miferable  men  amonge  theyr  generall  calamities.  I  remember  that  when  I  was  a
chylde,  mee  thowght  my  bowelles  grated  and  that  my  fpirites  were  maruelouflye  troubeled  for  verj'e  pitie,  when
I  readde  in  the  poet  Virgyl  howe  Achemenides  was  lefte  of  Vlyffes  vpon  the  fea  bankes  amonge  the  giantes  cauled
Cyclopes  where  for  the  fpace  of  many  dayes  from  the  departinge  of  Vlyffes  vntyll  the  commynge  of  Eneas  he
eate  none  other  meate  but  only  berryes  and  hawes.  But  owre  vnfortunate  Spanyardes  whiche  folowed  Nicuefa
to  inhabite  Beragua,  woolde  haue  eflemed  hawes  and  berryes  for  greate  delicates.  What  fliulde  I  heare  fpeake
of  the  heade  of  an  affe  bowght  for  a  greate  price,  and  of  fuch  other  extremities  as  men  haue  fuffered  in  townes
befeaged  ?  After  that  Nicuefa  hadde  determyned  to  leaue  Beragua  for  the  ban-ennes  of  the  foyle,  he  at*-ompted
to  fearche  Portuin  Bellum,  and  then  the  coafles  of  the  poynt  cauled  Marmor,  if  he  niyght  there  fynde  a  place
more  fortunate  to  inhabite.  In  this  meane  tyme,  fo  greuous  famen  oppreffed  his  fouldiers,  that  they  neyther
abfleyned  from  eatinge  of  mangie  dogges  which  they  had  with  them  afwell  for  theyr  defence  as  for  huntynge
(for  in  the  warre  ageynfl  the  naked  people,  dogges  floode  them  in  greate  fleade)  nor  yet  fumtjTnes  from  the
flayne  inhabitantes.  For  they  founde  not  there  any  frutefull  trees  or  plentie  of  foules  as  in  Dariena,  but  a
barren  grounde  and  not  meete  to  bee  inhabited.  Here  certeyne  of  the  fouldiers  made  a  bargein  with  one  of
theyr  felowes  for  the  price  of  a  leane  dogge,  who  alfo  was  almofle  deade  for  hunger:  They  gaue  the  owner  of
the  dogge  many  of  thofe  pieces  of  golde  which  they  caule  Pefos  or  golden  Caflellans. Thus  agreinge  of  the

/?.  SoficH
MalUtci

R.  Abureina

Scutum  Cateba

R.  Zobroba.

Vrida.

Duraba.

Ceraiaro.

Hiebra.

Note.

R.  d  los.  ^erdidot

The  nauigation  of
lohannes  I>ias.

The  eleuation  of
the  pole.

The  iurisdictton
of  the  Portugales.

Paria.

Dariena.
Beragua.

Hercules  pyllers.

87

The  Ilande
Boiuca  or
Agnaneo.
A  water  of
maruelous  vertue.

The  renouation
of  age.

The  accidentes  of
age  may  bee
hydden.

Achemenides.

yiysses.
Eneas.
E.\treme  hunger.

This  was  at  the
siege  of
hierusalem.

Partus  Bellus
Marmor.

Mang>-  dogs  eatea

A  mangy  dog
dere  sold.

Hj

136

TJic  feconde  Decade.

Broth  of  a  mam-y
iKij;s  skyline.

Toades  eaten

A  deade  man
eaten.

Note.

Petras  Arias
whom  the
Sp.inyardes  cau!e
Pediarias.

price,  they  fleid  the  dogge  to  bee  eaten,  and  cade  his  mangie  Ikynne  with  the  bones  of  the  heade  hangynge
therto,  amonge  the  buflies.  The  day  folowynge,  a  certcyne  footeman  of  theyr  company,  chaunced  to  fynde  the
fkynne  beinge  nowe  full  of  maggottes  and  flynkynge.  He  lirought  it  home  with  hym,  fodde  it,  and  eate  it.
Many  reforted  to  hym  with  theyr  dyflhes  for  the  brothe  of  the  fodde  fl-:ynne,  profcringe  hym  for  euerye
dyflhefull  a  piece  of  golde.  An  other  foundc  twoo  toades  and  fodde  them  which  a  ficke  man  bought  of  hym
for  twoo  fyne  fliertcs  curioufly  wrought  of  lynen  intermyxt  with  golde.  Certcyn  other  wanderinge  abowte  to
feeke  for  vytayles,  founde  in  a  patheway  in  the  myddefl.  of  a  fyelde,  a  deade  man  of  th[e]inhabitantes  whiche
had  byn  flayne  of  his  owne  coompanye  and  was  nowe  rotten  and  flynkynge.  They  drewe  hym  a  fyde,
difmcmberde  hym  fecreatly,  rofled  hym  and  eate  hym,  therewith  affwagynge  theyr  hunger  as  yf  they  had  byn
fedde  with  pheafauntes.  One  alfo,  which  departinge  from  his  companions  in  the  nyght  feafon,  went  a  fyfliyng
amonge  the  reedes  of  the  maryfflies,  lyued  only  with  flyme  or  mudde  for  the  fpace  of  certeyne  dayes,  vntyll  at
the  lengthe  creepinge  and  almofte  deade,  he  founde  the  way  to  his  felowes.  And  thus  thefe  miferable  men  of
Beragua  vexed  with  thefe  and  fuche  other  a[f]flictions,  were  browgh[t]e  from  the  number  of feuen  hundreth
threfcore  and  ten  fouldiers,  fcarfely  to  fortie,  beinge  nowe  alfo  added  to  the  coompany  of  them  in  Dariena.
Fewe  were  flayne  of  th[e]inhabitantes.  But  the  refydewe  confumed  by  famen,  breathed  owt  theyr  wery
fowles,  openynge  a  waye  to  the  newe  landes  for  fuch  as  flial  coome  after  them,  appeafinge  the  fury  of  the
barbarous  nations,  with  the  price  of  theyr  bludde.  Confyderinge  therfore  after  thefe  flormes,  with  what  eafe
other  men  fliall  ouerrunne  and  inhabite  thefe  landes,  in  refpecte  to  the  calamities  that  thefe  men  haue  fuffered,
they  fhall  feeme  to  goo  to  bryde  feaRes  where  all  thynges  are  redy  prepared  ageynfl  their  commynge.  But
where  Petrns  Arias  arryued  with  the  kynges  nauie  and  newe  fupply  of  men,  to  this  houre  I  knowe  no
certentie.  AVhat  fliall  chaunce  herafter  I  wyll  make  diligente  inquifition  if  I  fliall  vnderfl.ande  this  to  bee
acceptable  to  yowre  holynes.  Thus  I  byd  yowe  hartely  farewell :  from  the  courte  of  the  moofle  Catholyke
kynge,  the  daye  beefore  the  nones  of  December,  in  the  yeare  o^Chrifle,  M.  D,  XIIII.

88

X16

137

C  THE FYRST  BOOKE OF  THE  THYRDE  DECADE,
TO  THE  BYSSHOPPE  OF  ROME  LEO  THE  TENTH.

Was  determjmed  (mofle  holye  father)  to  haue  clofed  vp  the  gates
to  this  newe  worlde,  fuppofinge  that  I  had  wandered  farre
enowgh  in  the  coafles  therof,  while  in  the  meane  time  newe
letters  were  brought  me  frome  thenfe,  which  caufed  me  ageyne
to  take  my  penne  in  hande.  For  I  receaued  letters  not  only
from  certeyne  of  myne  acquaintaunce  there,  but  alfo  frome
Vafchus  Nunnez  whome  we  fayde  by  the  confidence  of  his
owne  poure  with  his  confetherates,  to  haue  vfurped  the  gouer-
naunce  of  Dariena  after  the  reiecting  of  Nicuefa  and  Ancifiis,
Lieuetenantes.  By  his  letter  wrytten  after  his  warlyke  maner,
wee  vnderftand  that  he  hath  paffed  ouer  the  mountaynes,  diuid-
yng  the  Ocean  knowen  to  vs,  from  the  other  mayne  fea  on  the
fouth  fyde  of  this  lande  hetherto  vnknowen.  His  epiftell  is
greater  then  that  cauled  Capreenfis  de  Seiano.  But  wee  haue
gathered  out  of  that  and  other,  onely  suche  thynges  as  we  thowght
mofle  woorthy  to  bee  noted.  Vafchus  foo  behaued  hym  felfe
in  thefe  affayres,  that  he  dyd  not  onely  pacific  the  kynges
difpleafure  conceaued  ageynfl  hym,  but  alfo  made  hym  fo  fauorable  and  gracious  good  lorde  towarde  hym,  that
he  rewarded  him  and  his  coompanions  with  many  honorable  gyftes  and  priuileges  for  theyr  attemptes.  Wherfore
I  defyre  yowre  holynes  to  inclyne  yowre  attentiue  eares,  and  to  confyder  with  a  ioyfuU  mynde  what  they  haue
browght  to  paffe  in  thefe  great  enterpryfes.  For  this  valiante  nation  (the  Spanyardes  I  meane)  haue  not  onely
with  greate  paynes  and  innumerable  dangers  fubdued  to  the  Chriflian  empire,  infinite  hundredes  and  legions,
but  alfo  myriades  of  men.  Vafchus  Nwmez  therfore,  whether  it  were  that  he  was  impacient  of  Idlenes  (for  a
valiente  mynde  can  not  reft  in  one  place  or  bee  vnoccupyed)  or  leafle  any  other  fhulde  preuent  hym  in  foo  great
a  matter  (fufpecting  the  newe  gouernour  Petrus  Arias)  or  being  moued  by  both  thefe  caufes,  and  efpecially  for  that
the  kynge  had  taken  difpleafure  with  hym  for  fuch  thynges  as  he  had  doone  before,  toke  th[e]aduenture  \^pon
hym  with  a  fewe  men  to  brynge  that  to  paffe  which  the  fonne  of  kynge  Comogrus  thought  could  hardly  haue
byn  doone  with  the  ayde  of  a  thoufande  men,  \A\.Qxoi Petrus  Arias  was  appoynted  capitayne  for  the  fame  purpofe.
Affemblynge  therfore  certeyne  of  the  owlde  fouldiers  of  Dariena,  and  many  of  thofe  whiche  came  lately  from
Hifpaniola,  allured  by  the  fame  of  greater  plentie  of  golde,  he  gathered  an  armye  of  a  hundreth  fourefcore  and
tenne  men.  Thus  beinge  furnyfflied  and  redie  to  take  his  vyage  by  fea,  whyle  the  wynde  ferued  h}Tn,  he
departed  frome  Dariena  with  one  brygantine  and  tenne  of  theyr  boates  whiche  they  caule  Canoas  as  wee  haue
fayde.  Fyrfl  therfore  arryuynge  in  the  dominion  of  Careta  kynge  of  Coiba  and  frende  to  the  Chriflians,  and
leauynge  his  fhyppe  and  boates  there,  he  made  his  deuout  prayers  to  almyghtie  god,  and  therwith  went  fonvarde
on  his  iourney  by  lande  toward  the  mountaynes.  Here  he  fyrfl  entered  into  the  region  of  kynge  Poncha,  who
fledde  at  his  commyng  as  he  had  doone  before.  But  Vafchus  fent  meffengers  to  hym  by  the  conduct  of
certeyne  of  Careta  his  men,  promyfmge  hym  frendfliip  and  defence  ageynfl  his  enemies,  with  many  other
benefites.  Poncha  thus  entyfed  with  the  fayre  fpeache  and  frendely  profers  bothe  of  owre  men  and  of  the
Caretans,  came  to  owr  men  gladly  and  wyllyngely  makynge  a  league  of  frendfliippe  with  them.  Vafchus
enterteyned  hym  very  frendely,  and  perfuaded  him  neuer  therafter  to  flande  in  feare.  Thus  they  ioyned  handes,
embrafed,  and  gaue  greate  gyftes  the  one  to  the  other  to  knytte  vp  the  knotte  of  continuall  amitie.  Poncha
gaue  Vafchus  a  hundreth  and  ten  poundes  weyght  of  golde,  of  that  pounde  which  the  Spanyardes  caule  Ptfum.
He  had  no  greater  plentie  of  golde  at  this  tyme,  by  reafon  he  was  fpoyled  the  yeare  before  as  we  haue  fayde.
Vafchus  to  recompence  one  benefyte  with  an  other,  gaue  hym  certeyne  of  owre  thynges,  as  counterfet  r}-nges,
Chriflal  flones,  copper  cheynes  and  brafelettes,  haukes  belles,  lokynge  glaffes,  and  fuche  other  fyne  flufle.
Thefe  thynges  they  fet  much  by  and  greately  efleeme.  For  fuche  thynges  as  are  flraunge,  are  euery  where
counted  precious. He  gaue  alfo  to  Poncha  certeyne  axes  to  fell  trees :  which  he  accepted  as  a  princely  gyfte,

137

Vaschus  Nunnez,
gouemor  of
Dariena.

The  newe  south
Ocean.

Commendation  of
the  Spanyardes.

A  valient  mj-nd
can  not  bee  ydle.

A  desperate
aduenture

Vaschus  his  viage
toward  the  golden
mountajTies.

Careta  k>Tige  of
Coiba

Kyng  Poncha

89

A  hundreth  and  x.
poundes  weyght
of  golde.

Strange  thinges
are  counted
precious.

138

77/6'  tJiyyde  Decade.

Lackc  of  ircn

A  stone  in  the
stcede  of  Iren

Superfluities
liyuJer  libcrtic.

Carpenters.
Tiydges.

The  region  of
Qunreqiia.

Kinge  Quarequa
is  drj-uen  to
flyght.

Hargabusies.
Crossebowes

vi.  C  [six  hundred]
Barbarians  are
slaine
Vnnatural  lechery.

90

The  vse  of  dogges
in  the  warre
agenst  the  naked
Barbarians.

Naturaul  hatred
of  vnnatural  sinne.

Palatini.

1  wolde  all  men
were  of  this
opinion.

The  haruest  is
great  and  the
ivoorkemen  but
fewe.

Warrelyke  people.

The  hygher  the
coulder.

bycaufe  they  lacke  Iren  and  all  other  metals  except  golde :  by  reafon  wherof  they  are  enforced  with  greate
laboure  to  cut  theyr  trees  to  buylde  theyr  houfes,  and  efpecially  to  make  theyr  boates  holowe  withowte  inftni-
mentes  of  Iren,  with  certeyne  fliarpe  flones  whiche  they  fynde  in  the  ryuers. Thus Vafchus  leauynge  all
thynges  in  fofetie  behynde  hym,  marched  forwarde  with  his  armye  towarde  the  mountaynes,  by  the  conducte  of
certeyne  guydes  and  labourers  which  Poncha  had  gyuen  hym,  as  well  to  leade  hym  the  way,  as  alfo  to  cary  his
baggages  and  open  the  llraightes  through  the  defolate  places  and  craggy  rockes  full  of  the  dennes  of  wylde
beafles. For  there  is  feldoome  entercourfe  or  byinge  and  fellynge  betwene  thefe  naked  people,  bycaufe  they
lland  in  ncede  of  fewe  thynges  and  haue  not  the  vfe  of  money. But  yf  at  any  tyme  they  exercife  any  bartering
they  doo  it  but  nere  hande,  exchangynge  golde  for  houHiolde  fluffe  with  theyr  confines  whiche  fumewhat  eReeme
the  lame  for  ornamente  Avhen  it  is  wrought. Other  fuperfluities  they  vtterly  contemne,  as  hynderances  of  theyr
fweete libertie,  forafmuch  as  they  are  gyuen  only  to  play  and  Idelnes. And  for  this  caufe,  the  high  wayes
which  lye  betwene  theyr  regions  are  not  much  worne  with  many  iorneys. Yet  haue  theyr  fcoutes  certeyne
priuie  markes  whereby  they  knowe  the  waye  the  one  to  inuade  the  others  dominions,  and  fpoyle  and  infefle
them  felues  on  bothe  fydes  with  mutual  incurfions  priuiUe  in  the  nyght  feafon. By  the  hclpe  therfore  of  theyr
guydes  and  labourers,  with  owre  carpenters,  he  paffed  ouer  the  horrible  mountaynes  and  many  greate  ryuers
lyinge  in  the  way,  ouer  the  which  he  made  brydges  eyther  with  pyles  or  trunkes  of  trees. And  here  doo  I  let
pafle  manye  thynges  whiche  they  fuftered  for  lacke  of  neceflaries,  beinge  alfo  in  maner  ouercome  with  extreme
laboure,  leafle  I  fluilde  bee  tedious  in  reherfmge  thynges  of  fmaule  value. But  I  haue  thought  it  good  not  to
omitte  fuche  doinges  as  he  had  \\ith  the  kynges  by  the  waye. Therefore  or  euer  he  came  to  the  toppes  of  the
hygh  mountaynes,  he  entered  into  a  Region  cauled  Quarcqiia,  and  mette  with  the  kynge  thereof  cauled  by  the
fame  name,  with  a  greate  bande  of  men  armed  after  theyr  maner,  as  with  bowes  and  arrowes,  longe  and  brode
two  handed  fwordes  made  of  wodde,  longe  flaues  hardened  at  the  endes  with  fyer,  dartes  alfo  and  flynges. He
came  proudely  and  cruelly  ageynfl.  owrt  men,  and  fent  meffengers  to  them  to  byd  theym  flande  and  procede
no  further:  demaundynge  whyther  they  went  and  what  they  hadde  to  doo  there. Herewith  he  came  foorth
and  fliewed  hym  felfe  beinge  appareled  with  al  his  nobilitie :  but  the  other  were  all  naked. Then  approchinge
towarde  owre  men,  he  thretened  them  with  a  lions  countenance  to  depart  from  thenfe  except  they  woolde  bee
flayne  euery  mothers  fonne. When  owre  men  denyed  that  they  woolde  goo  backe,  he  affayled  them  fiercely.
But  the  battayle  was  fone  fynyfflied. For  as  foone  as  they  harde  the  noyfe  of  the  hargabufies,  they  beleued
that  o\\Te  menne  caryed  thunder  and  lyghtenynge  about  with  them. Many  alfo  beinge  flayne  and  fore
wounded  with  quarels  of  croffebowes,  they  turned  their  backes  and  fledde. Owre  men  folowynge  them  in  the
chafe,  hewed  them  in  piefes  as  the  butchers  doo  fleffhe  in  the  fliamwelles,  from  one  an  arme,  from  an  other  a
legge,  from  hym a  buttocke, from  an  other  a  fliulder, and  from  fume  the necke  from  the  bodye  at  one
flroke. Thus,  fyxe  hundreth  of  them  with  theyr  kynge,  were  flayne  lyke  brute  beafles. Vafchus  founde  the
houfe  of  this  kynge  infected  with  moft  abhominable  and  vnnaturall  lechery. For  he  founde  the  kynges  brother
and  many  other  younge  men  in  womens  apparell,  fmoth  and  effeminately  decked,  which  by  the  report  of  fuch
as  dwelte  abowte  hym,  he  abufed  with  prepoflerous  venus. Of  thefe  abowte  the  number  of  fortie,  he  com-
maunded  to  bee  gyuen  for  a  pray  to  his  dogges. For  (as  we  haue  fayd)  the  Spaniardes  vfe  [t]he  helpe  of
dogges  in  their  warres  ageynfl.  the  naked  people  whom  they  inuade  as  fiercely  and  rauenyngely  as  yf  they  were
A\7lde  boares  or  hartes. In  foo  muche  that  owre  Spanyardes  haue  founde  theyr  dogges  noo  leffe  faythful  to  them
in  aU  daungiours  and  enterpryfes,  then  dyd  the  Colophonians  or  Caflabalenfes  which  inflituted  hole  armies  of
dogges  foo  made  to  ferue  in  the  warres,  that  beinge  accuflomed  to  place  them  in  the  fore  froonte  of  the
battayles,  they  neuer  fhrunke  or  gaue  backe. When  the  people  had  harde  of  the  feuere  punyffliement  which
owr  men  had  executed  vppon  that  fylthy  kynde  of  men,  they  reforted  to  theim  as  it  had  byn  to  Hercules  for
refuge,  by  violence  bryngyng  with  them  al  fuch  as  they  knewe  to  bee  infected  with  that  peftilence,  fpettynge
in  theyr  faces  and  cryinge  owte  to  owre  men  to  take  reuenge  of  them  and  rydde  them  owte  of  the  worlde  from
amonge  men  as  contagious  beafl.es. This  flinkynge  abhomination  hadde  not  yet  entered  amonge  the  people,
but  was  exercifed  onely  by  the  noble  men  and  gentelmen. But  the  people  lyftinge  vp  theyr  handes  and  eyes
toward  heauen,  gaue  tokens  that  god  was  greuoufly  offended  with  fuch  vyle  deedes. Affirmynge  this  to  bee  the
caufe  of  theyr  foo  many  thunderinges,  lyghtnynge,  and  tempefles  wherwith  they  are  foo  often  troubeled :  And
of  the  ouerflowinge  of  waters  which  drowne  theyr  fets  and  frutes,  whereof  famenne  and  dyuers  difeafes  infue,
as  they  fimplye  and  faythfuUy  beleue,  althowgh  they  knowe  nv.»ne  other  god  then  the  foonne,  whom  onely  they
honoure,  thinkynge  that  it  dooth  bothe  gyue  and  take  awaye  as  it  is  pleafed  or  offended. Yet  are  they  very
docible,  and  eafye  to  bee  allured  to  owre  cuflomes  and  religion,  if  they  had  any  teachers. In  theyr  language
there  is  nothynge  vnpleafaunte  to  the  eare  or  harde  to  bee  pronounced,  but  that  all  theyr  woordes  may  bee
wrytten  with  latin  letters  as  wee  fayde  of  th[e]inhabitantes  of  Hifpaniola. It  is  a  warlyke  nation,  and  hath  byn
euer  hetherto  moleflous  to  theyr  bortherers. But  the  region  is  not  fortunate  with  frutful  ground  or  plentie  of
gold. Yet  is  it  full  of  greate  barren  mountaynes  beinge  fumewhat  colde  by  reafon  of  theyr  heyght. And
138

The  tliyrde  Decade.

139

therfore  the  noble  men  and  gentelmen  are  apparelled.  But  the  common  people  lyue  content  onely  with  the
benefytes  of  nature.  There  is  a  region  not  pad  two  dayes  ioumey  didant  from  Qiiarequa,  in  which  they  founde
only  blacke  Moores :  and  thofe  excedynge  fierce  and  cruell.  They  fuppofe  that  in  tyme  pafle  certeyne  blacke
mores  fayled  thether  owt  of  Aethiopia  to  robbe :  and  that  by  fliippewracke  or  fume  other  chaunce,  they  were
dryuen  to  thofe  mountaynes.  Th[e]inhabitantes  of  Quarcqua  lyue  in  continuall  warre  and  debate  with  thefe
blacke  men.  Here  Vafchus  leauinge  in  Quarcqua  many  of  his  fouldiers  (which  by  reafon  they  were  not  yet
accuflomed  to  fuch  trauayles  and  hunger,  fell  into  dyuers  difeafes)  tooke  with  hym  certeyne  guydes  of  the
Quarequatans  to  conduct  hym  to  the  toppes  of  the  mountaynes.  From  the  palaice  of  kynge  Foncha,  to  the
profpect  of  the  other  fouth  fea,  is  only  fyxe  dayes  iomey:  the  which  neuertheleffe  by  reafon  of  many  hynder-
ances  and  chaunces,  and  efpecially  for  lacke  of  vytayles,  he  coulde  accomplyflie  in  noo  leffe  then.  xxv.  dayes.
J3ut  at  the  length,  the  feuenth  daye  of  the  calendes  of  October,  he  behelde  with  woonderinge  eyes  the  toppes
of  the  hygh  mountaynes  fhewed  vnto  hym  by  the  guydes  of  Quarequa,  from  the  whiche  he  myght  fee  the  other
fea  foo  longe  looked  for,  and  neuer  feene  before  of  any  man  commynge  owte  of  o^vre  worlde.  Approchinge
therefore  to  the  toppes  of  the  mountaynes,  he  commaunded  his  armye  to  fley,  and  went  him  felfe  alone  to  the
toppe,  as  it  were  to  take  the  fyrfl  poffeffion  therof  Where,  faulynge  proflrate  vppon  the  grounde,  and  rayfinge
hym  felfe  ageyne  vpon  his  knees  as  is  the  maner  of  the  Chriflians  to  pray,  lyftynge  vppe  his  eyes  and  handes
towarde  heauen,  and  directinge  his  face  towarde  the  newe  founde  fouth  fea,  he  poored  foorth  his  humble  and
deuout  prayers  before  almyghtie  God  as  a  fpirituall  facrifice  with  thankes  gyuing,  that  it  had  pleafed  his  diuine
maieflie  to  referue  vnto  that  day  the  victorie  and  praife  of  fo  greate  a  thynge  vnto  hym,  beinge  a  man  but  of
fmaule  witte  and  knowleage,  of  lyttle  experience  and  bafe  parentage.  When  he  had  thus  made  his  prayers  after
his  warlike  maner  he  beckened  with  his  hande  to  his  coompanions  to  coome  to  hym,  fhewynge  them  the  greate
mayne  lea  heretofore  vnknowen  to  th[e]inhabitantes  of  Europe,  Aphrike,  and  Afia.  Here  ageyne  he  fell  to
his  prayers  as  before :  defyringe  almyghtie  God  and  the  bleffed  virgin  to  fauour  his  beginninges,  and  to  g)aie
hym  good  fucceffe  to  fubdue  thofe  landes  to  the  glorie  of  his  holy  name  and  encreafe  of  his  trewe  religion.  All
his  coompanions  dyd  lykewyfe,  and  prayfed  god  with  loude  voyces  for  ioye.  Then  Vafchus,  with  no  leffe  manlye
corage  then  Hanniball  of  Carthage  fliewed  his  fouldiers  Italye  and  the  promontories  of  the  Alpes,  exhorted  his
men  to  lyft  vp  their  hartes,  and  to  behoulde  the  lande  euen  nowe  vnder  theyr  feete,  and  the  fea  before  theyr
eyes,  whiche  fhulde  bee  vnto  them  a  full  and  iuft  rewarde  of  theyr  great  laboures  and  trauayles  nowe  ouerpaffed.
When  he  had  fayde  thefe  woordes,  he  commaunded  them  to  raife  certeine  heapes  of  flones  in  the  fleede  of  alters
for  a  token  of  poffeffion.  Then  defcendynge  from  the  toppes  of  the  mountaynes,  leafl  fuch  as  might  come  after
hym  fhulde  argue  hym  of  lyinge  or  falfhod,  he  wrote  the  kynge  of  Caflelles  name  here  and  there  on  the  barkes
of  the  trees  bothe  on  the  ryght  hande  and  on  the  lefte :  and  rayfed  heapes  of  flones  all  the  way  that  he  went,
vntyll  he  came  to  the  region  of  the  nexte  kynge  towarde  the  fouth  whofe  name  was  Chiapes.  This  kynge  came
foorthe  ageynfle  hym  with  a  greate  multitude  of  men :  threateninge  and  forbyddynge  him  not  onely  to  paffe
through  his  dominions,  but  alfo  to  goo  no  further.  Herevppon,  Vafchus  fet  his  battayle  in  array,  and  exhorted
his  men  (beinge  nowe  but  fewe)  fiercely  to  affayle  theyr  enemies,  and  to  efleeme  theym  noo  better  then  dogges
meate  as  they  fhulde  bee  fliortly.  Placeinge  therfore  the  hargabufiers  and  maflies  in  the  forefroonte,  they  faluted
kynge  Chiapes  and  his  men  with  fuch  a  larome,  that  when  they  hard  the  noyfe  of  the  gimnes,  fawe  the  flames  of
fyer,  and  fmelte  the  fauour  of  brymflone  (for  the  wynde  blewe  towarde  them)  they  droue.  them  felues  to  flyght
with  fuche  feare  leafle  thunderboultes  and  lyghtnynges  folowed  theim,  that  manye  fell  downe  to  the  grounde :
whom  owre  men  purfuinge,  fyrfl  keepinge  theyr  order,  and  after  breakyng  theyr  array,  flewe  but  fewe  and  tooke
many  captiue.  For  they  determined  to  vfe  no  extremitie,  but  to  pacific  thofe  Regions  as  qui-^tlye  as  they  myght.
Enteringe  therfore  into  the  palaice  of  kynge  Chiapes,  Vafchus  commaunded  many  of  the  captiues  to  bee  loofed :
wyllynge  them  to  fearch  owte  theyr  kynge,  and  to  exhorte  hym  to  coome  thyther :  And  that  in  foo  doinge,  he
woolde  bee  his  frende  and  prefer  hym  peace,  befyde  many  other  benefites.  But  if  he  refufed  to  coome,  it  fhulde
turne  to  the  deflruction  of  hym  and  his,  and  vtter  fubuerfion  of  his  contrey.  And  that  they  myght  the  more
affuredly  do  this  meffage  to  Chiapes  he  fent  with  them  certeyne  of  the  guydes  whiche  came  with  h}-m  from
Qiiarequa.

Thus  Chiapes  beinge  perfuaded  afwel  by  the  Quareqans  who  coulde  coniecture  to  what  ende  the  matter
woolde  coome  by  th[e]experience  whiche  they  had  feene  in  them  felues  and  theyr  kynge,  as  alfo  by  the  reafons
of  his  owne  men  to  whome  Vafchus  hadde  made  foo  frendely  promyfes  in  his  behalfe,  came  foorthe  of  the  caues
in  the  whiche  he  lurked,  and  fubmytted  hym  felfe  to  Vafchus,  who  accepted  hym  frendelye.  They  ioyned
handes,  embrafed  the  one  the  other,  made  a  perpetuall  league  of  frendefhippe,  and  gaue  greate  rewardes  on  bothe
fydes.  Chiapes  gaue  Vafchus  foure  hundreth  poundes  weyght  of  wrought  goulde  of  thofe  poundes  whiche  they
caule  Pefos:  And  Vafchus  recompenfed  hym  ageyne  with  certeyne  of  owre  thynges.  Thus  beinge  made
freendes,  they  remayned  togyther  a  fewe  dayes  vntyll  Vafchus  fouldiers  were  coome  which  he  lefte  behynde  hym
in  Quarequa. Then  caulinge  vnto  hym  the  guydes  and  labourers  which  came  with  hym  from  thenfe  he

139

A  region  of  black
moores

Diseases  of  change
of  ayer  and  dyec

The  south  sea.

Vaschus  is  coome
to  the  syght  of  the
'  newe  south  sea.

Prayer.

God  rayseth  the
poore  from  the
dungehyl

91

Hanniball  of
Carthage.

Vaschus  taketh
possession  of  the
mounta>Ties

Kynge  Chiapes.

A  battayle.

Chiapes  is  drjuen
to  flyght.

Vaschus  senr'eth
for  king  Chiapes.

Chiapes
submitteth
hymselfe  to
Vaschus.

iiii.  C  [four
hundred]  pounds
weyght  of  wrought
gold

140

The  tliynie  Decade.

Vaschus  addicteth
the  newe  land
and  sea,  to  the
dominion  of
Castile.

Kynge  Coquera
is  drj'uen  to  flyght.
Vaschus  vseth
both  gentelnes
and  rigour.

92

vi.  C.  [six
hundred]  and
1.  [fifty]  poundes
weyght  of  wrought
gold

A  goulfe  of
threescore  myles.

Saynt  Michaels
goulfe

rewarded  them  liberallye  and  difmifled  tlieym  with  thankes.  Shortly  after,  by  the  conduct  of  Chiapes  hym  felfe,
and  certeyne  of  his  men,  departinge  from  the  toppes  of  the  mountaynos,  he  came  in  the  fpace  of  foure  dayes  to
the  bankes  of  the  newe  fea :  where  affemblynge  al  his  men  togyther  with  the  kynges  fcribes  and  notaries,  they
addicted  al  that  maine  fea  with  all  the  landes  adiacent  there  vnto  to  the  dominion  and  Empire  of  Caftile.  Here
he  left  part  of  his  fouldiers  with  Chiapes  that  he  myght  th[e]efelier  fearche  thofe  coafles.  And  takyng  with  hym
nyne  of  theyr  lyghters  made  of  one  hole  tree  (which  they  caule  Culchas  as  th[e]inhabitantes  of  Hifpatiiola  caul
them  Canons)  and  alfo  a  bande  of  fourefcore  men  with  certeine  of  Chiapes  men,  he  paffed  ouer  a  greate  ryuer  and
came  to  the  region  of  a  certeyne  kynge  whofe  name  was  Coqitera.  He  attempted  to  refyfle  owre  men  as  dyd
the  other,  and  with  lyke  fucceffe :  for  he  was  ouercoome  and  put  to  flyght.  But  Vafchus  who  entended  to
ANynne  hym  with  gentelnes,  fente  certeyne  Chiapeans  to  him  to  declare  the  greate  poure  of  owre  menne :  howe
inuincible  they  were :  howe  mercifuU  to  fuch  as  fubmit  them  felues,  alfo  cruell  and  feuere  to  fuch  as  obflinatly
withflande  them.  Promyfinge  hym  furthermore,  that  by  the  frendfliippe  of  owre  men,  he  myght  bee  well  affured
by  th[e]exemple  of  other,  not  onely  to  lyue  in  peace  and  quietness  hym  felfe,  but  alfo  to  bee  reuenged  of
th[e]iniuries  of  his  enemies.  Wylling  hym  in  conclufion  foo  to  weigh  the  matter,  that  if  he  refufed  this  gentelnes
profered  vnto  hym  by  foo  greate  a  victourer,  he  fhulde  or  it  were  longe,  lerne  by  feelynge  to  repent  him  to  late
of  that  perel  which  he  myght  haue  auoyded  by  hearing.  Coquera  with  thefe  woordes  and  exemples,  fhaken
with  great  feare,  came  gladly  with  the  meffengers,  bryngyng  with  him  fyxe  hundreth  and.  1.  [fifty]  Pefos  of  wrought
gold,  which  he  gaue  vnto  owre  men.  Vafchus  rewarded  hym  lykewife  as  we  fayd  before  oiPoncha.  Coquera  beinge
thus  pacified,  they  returned  to  the  palaice  of  Chiapes.  Where,  vifitinge  theyr  companions,  and  reflynge  there  a
whyle,  Vafchus  determyned  to  fearch  the  nexte  greate  goulfe,  the  which,  from  the  furthefl  reachynge  therof  into
the  lande  of  theyr  countreys,  from  the  enteraunce  of  the  mayne  fea,  they  faye  to  bee  threefcore  myles.  This
they  named  faynt  Michaels  goulfe,  which  they  fay  to  bee  full  of  inhabited  Ilandes  and  hugious  rockes.  Enteringe
therefore  into  the  nyne  boates  or  Culchas  wherwith  he  paffed  ouer  the  ryuer  before,  hauinge  alfo  with  hym  the
fame  coompanye  of  fourefcore  hole  men,  he  wente  forwarde  on  his  purpofe,  although  he  were  greatly  diffuaded
by  Chiapes,  who  erneflly  defyred  hym  not  to  attempt  that  vyage  at  that  tyme,  affirming  the  goulfe  to  be  foo
tempeflious  and  flormy  three  moonethes  in  the  yeare,  that  the  fea  was  there  by  noo  meanes  nauigable :  And
that  he  had  feene  many  Culchas  deuoured  of  whirlepoles  euen  beefore  his  eyes.  But  inuincible  Vafchus,
impaciente  of  idlenes,  and  voyde  of  all  feare  in  goddes  caufe,  aunfwered  that  god  and  his  holy  fayntes
woolde  profper  his  enterpryfes  in  this  cafe,  forafmuche  as  the  matter  touched  God  and  the  defence  of  the
ChriO-ian  religion,  for  the  maynetenaunce  wherof  it  fhulde  bee  neceffarie  to  haue  great  abundance  of  ryches  and
treafure  as  the  fynewes  of  war  ageynfle  the  enemies  of  the  faythe.  Thus  vfinge  alfo  th[e]office  both  of  an
oratoure  and  preacher,  and  hauinge  perfuaded  his  coompanyons,  he  lanched  from  the  lande.  But  Chiapes,  leafl
Vafchus  fhulde  any  thynge  doubt  of  his  faythfulnes  towarde  hym,  profered  himfelfe  to  goo  with  hym  whither  foo
euer  he  went :  And  wolde  by  noo  meanes  affent  that  Vafchus  fhulde  depart  from  his  palaice,  but  that  he  woolde
brynge  hym  on  the  waye  and  take  part  of  his  fortune.  Therfore  as  foone  as  they  were  nowe  entered  into  the
maine  fea,  fuch  fourges  and  conflictes  of  water  arofe  ageynfl  them  that  they  were  at  theyr  wyttes  endes  whither
to  turne  them  or  where  to  refle.  Thus  beinge  toffed  and  amafed  with  feare,  the  one  loked  on  the  other  with
pale  and  vncherefuU  countenaunces.  But  efpecially  Chiapes  and  his  coompany,  who  had  before  tyme  with  theyr
eyes  feene  th[e]experience  of  thofe  ieoperdies,  were  greatly  difcomforted.  Yet  (as  god  woolde)  they  efcaped  all,
and  landed  at  the  nexte  Ilande :  Where  makynge  fafle  theyr  boates,  they  refled  there  that  nyght.  Here  the
water  foo  encreafed,  that  it  almofl  ouerfiowed  the  Hand.  They  fay  alfo  that  that  fouth  fea  doth  foo  in  maner
boyle  and  fwelle,  that  when  it  is  at  the  hyghefl.  it  doth  couer  many  greate  rockes,  which  at  the  faule  therof,  are
feene  farre  aboue  the  water.  But  on  the  contrary  parte,  all  fuche  as  inhabite  the  North  fea,  affirme  with  one
voyce,  that  hit  fcarfely  rifeth  at  any  tyme  a  cubet  aboue  the  bankes  as  they  alfo  confeffe  which  inhabite  the
Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  and  other  Ilandes  fituate  in  the  fame.  The  Ilande  therfore  beinge  nowe  drye  by  the  faule
of  the  water,  they  reforted  to  theyr  boates  which  they  founde  all  ouerwhelmed  and  full  of  fande,  and  fume  fore
brufed,  with  great  rj'ftes,  and  almofl  lofl  by  reafon  theyr  cables  were  broken.  Such  as  were  brufed,  they  tyed
fafl  with  theyr  gyrdels,  with  flippes  of  the  barkes  of  trees,  and  with  tough  and  longe  flalkes  of  certein  herbes  of
the  fea,  flopping  the  ryftes  or  chynkes  with  graffe  accordynge  to  the  prefente  neceffitie.  Thus  were  they  enforced
to  returne  backe  ageyne  lyke  vnto  men  that  came  frome  fliippewracke,  beinge  almofl  confumed  with  hunger,
bycaufe  theyr  vytayles  were  vtterly  deflroyed  by  tempefle.  Th[e]inhabitantes  declared  that  there  is  harde  all
the  yeare  horrible  rorynge  of  the  fea  amonge  thofe  Ilandes  as  often  as  it  ryfethe  or  fauleth.  But  this  mofl
efpecially  in  thofe  three  monethes  in  the  which  it  is  mofle  boyfl[r]ious  as  Chiapes  towlde  Vafchus  before:
Meanynge  (as  they  coulde  coniecture  by  his  woordes)  October,  Nouember,  and  December:  for  he  fignified  the
prefent  moone  and  the  twoo  moones  folowynge,  countynge  the  moonethes  by  the  moones,  whereas  it  was  nowe
October.  Here  therefore  refreffhynge  hym  felfe  and  his  fouldiers  a  whyle,  and  paffynge  by  one  vnprofitable
kynge,  he  came  to  an  other  whofe  name  was  Tumaccus,  after  the  name  of  the  region,  beinge  fituate  on  that  fyde

The  manly  corage
and  godly  zeale
of  Vaschus

Ryches  are  the
synewes  of  warre

The  faythfulnes  of
kynge  Chiapes.

A  tempest  on  the
sea.

The  increasing  of
the  South  sea.

The  Northe
Ocean.

Hard  shyft  in
necessitie.

The  Region
Tumacca.

93

140

The  thyrde  Decade,

141

of  the  goulfe.  This  Twnaccus  came  foorth  ageynfle  owre  men  as  dyd  the  other,  and  with  lyke  fortune.  For
he  was  ouercoome,  dryuen  to  flyght,  and  many  of  his  men  flayne.  He  hym  felfe  was  alfo  fore  wounded,  but
yet  efcaped.  Vafchus  fent  certeyne  meffengers  of  the  Chiapeans  to  hym  to  retume,  and  not  to  bee  afrayde.
But  he  could  be  nothyng  moued  nether  by  promyffes  nor  threateninges.  Yet  when  the  meffengers  were  inflant,
and  ceaffed  not  to  threaten  death  to  him  and  his  famely,  with  the  vtter  defolation  of  his  kyngedome  if  he
perfifled  in  that  obflinacie,  at  the  length,  he  fent  his  foonne  with  them :  wliom  Vafchus  honorably  enterteyninge,
apparelinge  hym  gorgioufly  and  gyuing  hym  many  gyftes,  fent  hym  to  his  father,  wyllynge  hym  to  perfuade
hym  of  the  puiffaunce,  munificence,  liberalitie,  humanitie,  and  clemencie  of  owtc  men.  Tmnaccus  beinge
mooued  by  this  gentelnes  declared  toward  his  fonne,  came  with  him  the  thyrde  day,  bryngynge  nothynge  with
hym  at  that  tyme.  But  after  that  he  knewe  that  owre  men  defyred  goukle  and  pearles,  he  fent  for  fyxe
hundreth  and.  xiiii.  Pefos  of  golde,  and  two  hundreth  and  fortie  of  the  liggefl  and  fayrefl  perles  befyde  a  great
number  of  the  fmaulefl  forte.  Owre  men  marueyled  at  the  byggenes  and  fayrenes  of  thefe  perles  although  they
were  not  perfectely  whyte  bycaufe  they  take  theym  not  owte  of  the  fea  mufculs  excepte  they  fyrfl  rofl  them,
that  they  may  th[e]efelyer  open  them  felfe,  and  alfo  that  the  fyffhe  maye  haue  the  better  tafte,  whiche  they
efleeme  for  a  delicate  and  princely  dyffhe,  and  fet  more  thereby  then  by  the  perles  them  felues.  Of  thefe
thynges  I  was  enformed  of  one  Arbolanthis  beinge  one  of  Vafchus  coompanions  whom  he  fent  to  the  kyng
with  manye  perles  and  certeyne  of  thofe  fea  mufculs.  But  when  Tumaccus  fawe  that  owre  men  foo  greatly
regarded  the  bewtie  of  the  perles,  he  commaunded  certeyne  of  his  men  to  prepare  them  felues  to  goo  a
fyffhynge  for  perles.  Who  departinge,  came  ageyne  within  foure  dayes,  bringynge  with  them  twelue  pounde
weight  of  orient  perles  after  eight  ounces  to  the  pounde.  Thus  reioyfmge  on  bothe  parties,  they  embrafed  and
made  a  league  of  continuall  frendefhippe.  Tumaccus  thought  him  felfe  happie  that  he  had  prefented  owTe  men
with  fuch  thankeful  gyftes  and  was  admitted  to  theyr  frendfliippe :  and  owre  men  thinkynge  them  ^elues  happie
and  bleffed  that  they  had  founde  fuche  tokens  of  great  ryches,  fwalowed  downe  theyr  fpettle  for  thyrfle.  At
all  thefe  doinges,  kynge  Chiapes  was  prefent  as  a  wytnes  and  coompanion.  He  alfo  reioyfed  not  a  lyttle,  afwell
that  by  his  conductinge  he  fawe  that  owre  men  fhulde  be  fatiffied  of  theyr  defyre,  as  alfo  that  by  this  meanes
he  had  declared  to  the  next  kynge  his  bortherer  and  enemie,  what  frendes  he  had  of  owre  men,  by  whofe  ayde
he  myght  lyue  in  quyetnes  and  bee  reuenged  of  his  aduerfarie  if  neede  fhulde  foo  requyre.  For  (as  wee  haue
fayde)  thefe  naked  kynges  infefle  theim  felues  with  greuous  warres  onely  for  ambition  and  def}Te  to  rule,
Vafchus  bofleth  in  his  epiflell,  that  he  lerned  certeyne  maruelous  fecreates  of  Tumaccus  hym  felfe  as  concemynge
the  greate  ryches  of  this  lande :  wherof  (as  he  fayth)  he  woold  vtter  nothyng  at  this  prefente,  for  afmuche  as
Tumaccus  toulde  it  him  in  his  eare.  But  he  was  enformed  of  bothe  the  kynges,  that  there  is  an  Ilande  in  that
goulfe,  greater  then  any  of  the  other,  hauing  in  it  but  onely  one  kynge,  and  hym  of  foo  great  poure,  that  at
fuche  tymes  of  the  yeare  as  the  fea  is  caulme,  he  inuadethe  theyr  dominions  with  a  greate  nauie  of  Culchas,
fpoyling  and  caryinge  a  way  for  a  praye,  all  that  he  meeteth.  This  Hand  is  diflant  from  thefe  coafles,  onely
twentie  myles :  Soo  that  the  promontories  or  poyntes  therof  rechyng  into  the  fea,  may  bee  feene  from  the  hylles
of  this  Continent.  In  the  fea  nere  about  this  Ilande,  fea  mufculs  are  engendred  of  fuch  quantitie,  that  many
of  them  are  as  brode  as  buckelers.  In  thefe  are  perles  founde  (beinge  the  hartes  of  thofe  fhell  fyffhes)  often
tymes  as  bygge  as  beanes,  fumtymes  bygger  then  olyues  and  fuch  as  fumptuous  Cleopatra  myght  haue  defyred.
Althoughe  this  Ilande  bee  foo  nere  to  the  fliore  of  this  firme  lande,  yet  is  the  begynnyng  therof  in  the  mayne
fea  without  the  mouth  of  the  goulfe.  Vafchus  beinge  ioyfuU  and  mery  with  this  rych  communication,  fantafinge
nowe  in  maner  nothing  but  princes  treafures,  beganne  to  fpeake  fierce  and  cruell  woordes  ageynfl  the  tyranne
of  that  Ilande,  meanyng  hereby  too  woonne  the  myndes  of  the  other  kynges,  and  bynde  iliem  to  h)Tn  with  a
nearer  bonde  of  frendefhip.  Yet  therfore  raylynge  further  on  hym  with  fpytefuU  and  opprobrious  woordes,  he
fwore  great  othes  that  he  woolde  furthwith  inuade  the  Ilande,  fpoylynge,  deflroyinge,  burnynge,  drowiiynge,
and  hangynge,  fparinge  neyther  fwoorde  nor  fyre,  vntyll  he  hadde  reuenged  theyr  iniuries:  And  therwith
commaunded  his  Culchas  to  bee  in  a  redynes.  But  the  twoo  kynges  Chiafes  and  Tumaccus,  exhorted  hym
frendly  to  deferre  this  enterprife  vntyll  a  more  quiete  feafon,  bycaufe  that  fea  was  not  nauigable  withowte
greate  daunger,  beinge  nowe  the  begynnynge  of  Nouember.  Wherin  the  kynges  feemed  to  faye  trewe  For
as  Vafchus  hym  felfe  wryteth,  great  roryng  of  the  fea  was  harde  amonge  the  Ilandes  of  the  goulfe  by  reafon  of
the  raginge  and  conflicte  of  the  water.  Great  ryuers  alfo  defcending  from  the  toppes  of  the  mountaj-nes  the
fame  time  of  the  yeare,  and  ouerflowyng  theyr  bankes,  dryuyng  downe  with  theyr  vyolence  greate  rockes  and
trees,  make  a  marueylous  noyfe.  Lykewife  the  fiirie  of  the  South  and  Northeafl  Avyndes,  affociate  with  thundei
and  lyghtnynge  at  the  fame  feafon,  dyd  greatly  molefle  them.  Whyle  the  wether  was  fayre  they  were  vexed
in  the  night  with  could:  and  in  the  day  time,  the  heate  of  the  fonne  troubled  them:  wherof  it  is  noo  maruaile,
forafmuche  as  they  were  neare  vnto  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  although  they  make  noo  mention  of  the  eleuation  of
the  pole.  For  in  fuch  regions,  in  the  nyght,  the  mone  and  other  coulde  pianettes :  but  in  the  daye,  the  foone
and  other  hotte  pianettes,  doo  chiefely  exercife  theyr  influence:  Althowghe  the  antiquitie  were  of  an  other

Kynge  Tumacctn
is  dnuen  to  flyglit

Golde  and  perles.

MuscuU  of  thes

Fysshyng  for
perles.

xii  pounde  weyghl
of  perles

The  thyrst  of
golde.

Ambition  amonge
naked  men.

This  Ilande  is
cauled  Margaritea
Diues,  or  Dites.
A  kjTige  of  greate
poure.

Bigge  perles.

Cleopatra,  queene
of  Eg>-pt  resolued
a  pearle  in  vineger
and  drunke  it,
price.  V.  thousande
pounde  of  owr
mony.

The  fiercenes  of
Vaschus.

94

Great  r>-uers
faulyng  from
mountaynes.

Thunder  and
lyghtnynge  in
Nouember.

Co'.de  in  the  nyghl
nere  the
ICquinociial.

141

142

The  thyyde  Decade.

H;ibitable  regions
vmler  the
Equinoctiall  lyne.

The  natiuitations
[?  iwuig-.itions]  of
the  Porting.iles
towarile  the  soiithe
pole.
Antipodes.

He  meaneth  S.
Augustine  and
Lactantius.

The  starros  al)oiite
the  southe  pole.

Lactea  via.

A  simylitude

declarytige

Antipodes.

The  mAner  of
fysshynge  for
perles.

Thre  kindes  of
perles.

95

Dyuers  questions
as  concemynge
perles

Petrus  arias

Wanton  and

superfluous

pleasures.

Cleopatra.

Asopus.

opinion,  fuppofinge  the  Equinoctiall  circle  to  bee  vnhabitable  and  defolate  by  reafon  of  the  heate  of  the  foonne
hauin"^e  his  courfe  perpendiculerly  or  directly  ouer  tlie  (lime :  except  a  fevve  of  the  contrary  opinion,  whofe
affertions  the  Portugales  haue  at  thefe  dayes  by  experience  proued  to  bee  trewe.  For  they  faile  yearely  to
thfelinhabitantes  of  the  fouth  pole,  being  in  maner  Antipodes  to  the  people  cauled  Hypcrborei  vnder  the  North
pole,  and  exercife  marchaundies  with  them.  And  here  haue  I  named  Antipodes,  forafmuch  as  I  am  not
i'Hiorant  that  there  hath  b)n  men  of  fingular  witte  and  great  lernyng,  wliich  haue  denyed  that  there  is  Antipodes:
that  is,  fuch  as  walke  feete  to  feete.  But  it  is  mofl  certeyne,  that  it  is  not  gyuen  to  anye  one  man  to  knowe  all
thynges.  For  euen  they  alfo  were  men:  whofe  propertie  is  to  erre  and  bee  deceaued  in  many  thynges.
NeuerthelelTe,  the  Portugales  of  owre  tyme  haue  fayled  to  the  fyue  and  fyftie  degree  of  the  fouth  pole:  Where,
coompafinge  abowte  the  poynt  thereof,  they  myght  fee  througliowte  al  the  heauen  about  the  lame,  certeyne
Ihynynge  whyte  cloudes  here  and  there  amonge  the  flarres,  lyke  vnto  theym  whiche  are  feene  in  the  tracte  of
heauen  cauled  Latlea  via,  that  is,  the  mylke  whyte  waye.  They  fay,  there  is  noo  notable  flarre  neare  about
that  pole  lyke  vnto  this  of  owres  which  the  comjnon  people  thynke  to  bee  the  pole  it  felfe  (cauled  of  the
Italians  Tramontana,  and  of  the  Spanyardes  Nories)  but  that  the  fame  fauleth  benethe  the  Ocean.  When  the
fonne  defcendeth  from  the  myddefle  of  the  exiltree  of  the  woorlde  frome  vs,  it  ryfethe  to  them,  as  a  payre  of
balances  whofe  weyght  inclynynge  from  tlie  equall  poyfe  in  the  myddeft  towarde  eyther  of  the  fydes,  caufeth
tlie  one  ende  to  ryfe  as  much  as  the  other  fauleth.  When  therefore  it  is  autumne  with  vs,  it  is  fprynge  tyme
with  them :  And  fummer  with  vs  when  it  is  wynter  with  them. But  it  fuffifeth  to  haue  fayde  thus  much  of

ftrange  matters.

Let  \'s  now  therfore  returne  to  the  hiflorie  and  to  owre  men.

C  The  seconde  booke  of  the  thyrde  Decade.

Afchus  by  th[e]aduice  of  kynge  Chiapes  and  Tiimaccus,  determyned  to  deferre  his  vyage  to  the
fayde  Ilande  vntyll  the  nexte  fprynge  or  fummer,  at  which  tyme  Chiapes  offered  hym  felfe  to
accoompany  owre  men  and  ayde  them  therin  all  that  he  myght.  In  this  meane  tyme  Vafchus
had  knowleage  that  thefe  kynges  had  nettes  and  fyffliynge  places  in  certeyne  llations  of  that
fea  nere  vnto  the  fhore,  where  they  were  accuflomed  to  fyfhe  for  fea  mufculs  in  the  which
perles  are  engendred:  And  that  for  this  purpofe  they  had  certeyne  dyuers  or  fyffhers
exercifed  frome  theyr  youthe  in  fwymmynge  vnder  the  water.  But  they  doo  this  onely  at
certeyne  tymes  when  the  fea  is  calme,  that  they  may  th[e]efelyer  coome  to  the  place  where  thefe  fhell  fyfhes
are  woonte  to  lye.  For  the  bygger  that  they  are,  foo  much  ly  they  the  deaper  and  nerer  to  the  bottome.  But
the  leffer,  as  it  were  dowghters  to  the  other,  are  nerer  the  bryme  of  the  water.  Lykewyfe  the  leafle  of  all,  as  it
were  their  niefes,  are  yet  nearer  to  the  fuperficiall  parte  therof.  Too  them  of  the  byggefle  forte  whiche  lye
lowefle,  the  fyffhers  defcende  the  depthe  of  three  mens  heyght,  and  fumtyme  foure.  But  to  the  doughters  or  niefes
as  their  fucceffion,  they  defcend  onelye  to  the  mydde  thygh.  Sumtymes  alfo,  after  that  the  fea  hathe  byn
difquyeted  with  vehemente  tempefles,  they  fynde  a  greate  multytude  of  thefe  fyffhes  on  the  fandes,  beyng  dryuen
to  the  fhore  by  the  vyolence  of  the  water.  The  perles  of  thefe  whiche  are  founde  on  the  fande,  are  but  lytle.
The  fiffhe  it  felfe,  is  more  pleafaunte  in  eatynge  then  are  owre  oyllers  as  owre  men  report.  But  perhappes
hunger  the  fweete  faufe  of  all  meates,  caufed  owre  men  foo  too  thynke.  Whether  perles  bee  the  hartes  of  fea
mufculs  (as  Ariflotell  fuppofed)  or  the  byrthe  or  fpaune  of  there  intrals  (as  Plinye  thought)  Or  whether  they
cleaue  contynually  to  the  rockes,  or  wander  by  coompanies  in  the  fea  by  the  guydinge  of  th[e]eldefle :  Whether
euerye  fyffhe  brynge  foorthe  one  perle  or  more,  at  one  byrthe  or  at  dyuers :  Alfo  whether  theye  bee  fyled  frome
the  rockes  wherunto  theye  cleaue,  or  maye  bee  eafylye  pulled  awaye,  or  otherwyfe  faule  of  by  them  felues  when
theye  are  coomme  to  there  full  grouth :  Lykewyfe  whether  perles  bee  harde  within  the  (helle  or  fofte,  owre  men
haue  as  yet  noo  certayne  experyence.  But  I  trufle  or  it  bee  longe,  too  knowe  the  truth  hereof.  For  owre  men
are  euen  nowe  in  hande  with  the  matter.  Alfo,  as  foone  as  I  fliall  bee  aduertyfed  of  the  arryuall  oi  Petrus  Arias
the  capytayne  of  owre  men,  I  wyll  defyre  hym  by  my  letteis  to  make  diligent  fearche  for  thefe  thynges,  and
certifye  me  therof  in  all  poyntes.  I  knowe  that  he  wyll  not  bee  flacke  or  omytte  any  thynge  herein.  For  he  is
my  verye  frende :  and  one  that  taketh  greate  pleafure  in  confyderynge  the  woorkes  of  nature.  And  furelye  it
feemeth  vnto  me  vndecente,  that  wee  fhoulde  with  fylence  ouerflyppe  fo  greate  a  thynge  whiche  afwell  in  the
owlde  tyme  as  in  owre  dayes,  hathe,  and  yet  doothe,  drawe  bothe  men  and  women  to  emmoderate  defyre  of
fuperfluous  pleafure.  Spayne  therefore  Ihalbe  able  hereafter  with  perles  to  fatiffie  the  gredye  appetite  of  fuche
as  in  wanton  pleafures  are  lyke  vnto  Cleopatra  and  Afopiis  So  that  frome  henfforth  we  fhal  neyther  enuye  nor
142

The  thyrde  Decade.

143

reuerence  the  nyfe  frutefulnes  of  Stoidum,  or  Taprobana,  or  the  redde  fea. But  lette  vs  nowe  retume  to  owtc
purpofe. Vafchus  therfore  determined  with  the  fyfdiers  of  Chiapes  to  proue  what  myght  bee  doone  in  his  fyflie
pooles  or  Rations  of  fea  mufcules. Chiapes  to  fliewe  hym  felfe  obediente  to  Vafchus  his  requefle,  although  the
fea  were  boyfl[r]yous,  coomniaunded  thirtye  of  his  fyfHiers  to  prepare  them  felfes  and  to  reforte  to  the  fyffhinge
places. Vafchus  fente  onelye  fyxe  of  his  men  with  them  to  beeholde  them  frome  the  fea  bankes,  but  not  to
coommitte  them  felues  to  the  daunger  of  the  fea. The  fyffliynge  place  was  diflante  frome  the  palayce  of  Chiapes
aboute  tenne  myles. They  durfle  not  aduenture  to  dyue  to  the  bcttomt  by  reafon  of  the  furye  of  the  fea. Yet
of  the  mufcules  whiche  lye  hyghefl,  and  of  fuche  as  were  dryuen  to  the  fliore  by  the  vyolence  of  the  water,  theye
broughte  fyxe  greate  farthels  in  the  fpace  of  a  fewe  dayes. The  perles  of  thefe  were  but  lyttle,  aboute  the  bygnes
of  fmaule  fytches :  yet  verye  fayre  and  bewtyfull,  by  reafon  theye  were  taken  newely  owte  of  the  fyffhe,  beinge
yet  rawe. And  that  they  fhulde  not  bee  reproued  of  lyinge  as  concerninge  the  bignes  of  thefe  fea  mufculs,  they
fente  many  of  them  into  Spayne  to  the  kynge  with  the  perles,  the  fyffhe  beynge  taken  owte. Wee  thinke  verily
that  there  maye  in  noo  place  bygger  bee  founde. Thefe  Ihelle  fyfOies  therfore  beynge  thus  founde  here  in  foo
manye  places  in  that  fea,  and  gold  in  maner  in  euery  houfe,  doo  argue  the  ryche  treafurye  of  nature  too  bee  hyd
in  thofe  coafles,  forafmuche  as  fuche  greate  ryches  haue  byn  founde  as  it  were  in  the  lytle  fynger  of  a  giantes
hande. What  then  maye  wee  thynke  of  the  hole  hande  of  the  gyante  (for  hetherto  theye  haue  onely  bynne  in
hande  with  the  confynes  of  Vraba)  when  theye  fhall  haue  thorowly  fearched  all  the  coafles  and  fecreates  of  the
inner  partes  of  all  that  large  lande. But  Vafchus  contented  with  thefe  fygnes  and  ioyfuU  of  his  good  fucceffe  in
thefe  enterprifes,  determined  by  an  other  waye  to  returne  to  his  felowes  in  Dariena,  where  alfo,  they  haue  golde
mynes  aboute  tenne  myles  from  the  village. He  gaue  therfore  kyng  Chiapes  leaue  to  depart,  and  to  folowe
hym  noo  further :  Confailyng  hym  to  continue  faythfuU  to  the  chriflian  kynge  his  lorde  and  maifler. Thus
embrafmge  the  one  the  other,  and  ioyninge  handes,  Chiapes  departed,  with  teares  declaring  the  good  mynde
which  he  bore  to  owre  men. Vafchus  leaning  his  ficke  men  with  Chiapes,  went  forward  on  his  ioumey  with  the
refydue,  hauinge  alfo  with  him  for  guydes  three  of  Chiapes  maryners. He  conueyghed  his  armye  ouer  a  greate
ryuer  into  the  dominion  of  a  certeine  kynge  cauled  Teaocha :  who  beinge  aduertifed  of  the  coommyng  of  owre
men,  of  whofe  famous  actes  he  had  harde  muche  before,  was  verye  gladde  therof  and  enterteyned  them
honorably :  So  that  for  a  token  of  his  frendely  affection  towarde  them,  he  gaue  Vafchus  twentie  poundes  weyght
of  wrought  golde  after  eyght  ounces  to  the  pounde :  Alfo  twoo  hundreth  bigge  perles :  but  not  fayre,  by  reafon
they  were  taken  owt  of  the  mufculs  after  they  had  byn  fodden. After  they  had  ioyned  handes,  Vafchus
recompenfed  hym  with  certeyne  of  owre  thynges. Lykewife  rewardynge  his  guydes  the  feruantes  of  Chiapes,  he
difmiffed  them  with  commendations  to  theyr  lord. Kyng  Teaocha  at  the  departure  of  owr  men  from  his  palaice,
dyd  not  onely  appoint  them  guydes  to  conduct  them  in  the  way,  but  alfo  gaue  them  certeyne  flaues  in  the
fleede  of  beafles  to  cary  theyr  vytayles,  bycaufe  they  fhulde  paffe  throwgh  many  defertes,  baren  and  ro\\-gh
mountaynes  and  terrible  wooddes  full  of  tygers  and  Lions. He  fent  alfo  one  of  his  fonnes  with  thefe  flaues,
ladynge  them  with  faked  and  dryed  fyflie,  and  breade  of  thofe  regions,  made  of  the  rootes  of  Maizium  and  lucca.
He  alfo  commaunded  his  fonne  not  to  depart  from  owr  men  vntyl  he  were  Ucenced  by  Vafchus. By  theyr
conductinge  therfore, Vafchus  came  to  the  dominion  of  an  other  kyng  whofe  name  was  Pacra,  a  cruell  tyranne,
fearefuU  to  the  other  kynges  his  bortherers,  and  of  greater  poure  then  any  of  them. This  tyran,  whether  it
were  that  his  giltie  confcience  for  his  mifcheuous  actes,  put  him  in  feare  that  owre  menne  woolde  reuenge  the
fame,  or  that  he  thought  hym  felfe  inferior  to  reflfl.  them,  fled  at  theyr  commynge. Vafchus  wryteth  that  in  thefe
regions  in  the  mooneth  of  Nouember  he  was  fore  afiiicted  with  greate  heate  and  intollerable  thirfl,  by  reafon
that  fyde  of  the  mountaynes  hath  lyttle  water :  In  foo  muche  that  they  were  in  daunger  to  haue  perifflied  but
that  certeyne  of  th[e]inhabitants  fliewed  them  of  a  fprynge  which  was  in  the  fecreate  place  of  a  woodde,  whither
Vafchus  with  all  fpeade  fent  twoo  quycke  and  fl.ronge  younge  men  of  his  coompanions  with  theyr  gourdes  and
fuche  water  veffelles  as  Teaocha  his  men  browghte  with  them. Of  th[e]inhabitantes,  there  durft  none  depart
from  there  coompany  bycaufe  the  wylde  beafles  doo  foone  inuade  naked  men. For  in  thofe  mountaynes,  and
efpecially  in  the  wooddes  neare  vnto  the  fpringe,  they  faye  that  they  are  fumtymes  taken  owte  of  there  houfes  in
the  nyght,  excepte  they  take  good  heede  that  the  doores  bee  well  fparde. It  fliall  not  bee  frome  my  purpofe
here  to  declare  a  particular  chaunce  before  I  enter  any  further  in  this  matter. Theye  faye  therfore  ihat  the
lafte  yeare  the  regyon  of  Darier.a  was  noo  leffe  infefled  and  trowbeled  with  a  fierfe  tyger,  then  was  Calidonia  in
tyme  pafte  with  a  wylde  bore,  and  Neviea  with  a  horrible  lyon. For  they  afiyrme  that  for  the  fpace  of  fyxe  hole
moonethes  there  paffed  not  one  nyghte  withowte  fumme  hurte  doone:  foo  that  it  kylled  nyghtlye  eyther  ?
buUocke,  a  mare,  a  dogge,  or  a  hogge,  fumtimes  euen  in  the  highe  wayes  of  the  village. For  owre  men  haue
nowe  greate  heardes  of  cattayle  in  thofe  regions. They  fay  alfo  that  when  this  tyger  had  whelpes,  noo  man
myght  fafelye  goo  furthe  of  his  doores,  bycaufe  fliee  fpared  not  men  if  ftiee  mette  fyrfte  with  them. But  at  the
lengeth,  neceffitye  enforced  them  to  inuente  a  poHcye  howe  they  myght  bee  reuenged  of  fuche  bludflied.
Searchynge  therfore  dilygently  her  footefleppes,  and  folowynge  the  pathe  wherbye  fliee  was  accuflomed  in  the

Stoidum.
Taprobana.

The  fysshing  place
of  king  Chiapes.

Golde  in  maner  in
euery  house.

The  ryche
treasurye  of
nature.

The  golde  mynes
of  Dariena.

96

Kynge  Teaocha
enterteyneth
Vaschus  frendelye.

Twentye  pounde
weight  of  wroughte
golde.

Desertes  full  of
wylde  beastes.

Dryed  fysshe

Kynge  Pacra
a  tyranne.

Greate  heate  in
the  monethe  uf
Nouember.

Hurte  by  wylde
beastes.

A  tyger.

Calydonia  is  a
foreste  in
Scotlande.

Nemea  is  a  wodde
in  Greece.

Tigers  whelpes.

Thus  the  Egiptians
take  Crocodiles.

Ul

144

The  thynie  Decade.

The  iloggc  tyger
taken.

The  rorynge  of
the  tyger.

Tigers  flesh  eaten.

97

The  bitche  tyger.
Tigers  whelpes.

A  straunge  thy  nge.

Kynge  Pacra

Naturall  hatred
of  vyce.

Foure  kinges
deuoured  of

dogges.

The  vse  of  dogges
in  warre  ageinst
naked  men.

The  Canybalesare
experte  archers.

Swoordes  of
woodde.

Fiftie  pounde
wcyght  of  golde.

98

nyght  feafon  to  wander  owte  of  her  denne  to  feeke  her  praye,  theye  made  a  greate  trendie  or  pytte  in  her  vvalke,
coucringe  the  lame  with  hurdels  whervppon  they  cafle  parte  of  the  earthe  and  difperfed  tlic  refydue.  The
dogge  tyger  chaunfed  fyrfle  into  this  pitfaul,  and  fel  vppon  the  poyntes  of  fliarpe  flakes  and  fuche  other  ingens
as  were  of  purpofe  fyxed  in  the  bottome  of  the  trendie.  Beynge  thus  wounded,  he  rored  foo  terrybly,  that  it
grated  the  bowels  of  fuche  as  harde  hym,  and  the  wooddes  and  montaynes  ncare  al)0utc,  rebounded  the  noyfe
of  the  horryble  crye.  AN'hen  they  perceaucd  that  he  was  layde  fafle,  they  reforted  to  the  trenflie  and  flewe  hym
with  flones,  dartes,  and  pykes.  With  his  teethe  and  clawes,  he  broke  the  dartes  into  a  thoufande  chyppes-
Beynge  yet  deade,  he  was  fearefull  to  all  fuche  as  behelde  hym:  what  then  thinke  you  he  woolde  haue  doone
beynge  alyue  and  loofe.  One  lohaiuies  Lcdifina  of  Ciuile,  a  nere  frynde  to  Vafchus  and  one  of  his  coompanyons
of  his  trauayles,  toulde  me  that  he  hym  felfe  dyd  eate  of  the  fleflie  of  that  tiger:  and  that  it  was  nothinge  inferyor
to  biefe  in  goodnes.  Beynge  demaunded  howe  they  knewe  hit  to  bee  a  tyger  forafmuche  as  none  of  them  had  euer
feene  a  tyger,  they  anfwered  that  they  knewe  hit  by  the  fpottes,  fiercenes,  agilitye,  and  fuche  other  markes  and
token  wherby  the  anciente  writers  haue  defcribed,  the  tiger.  For  funi  of  them,  had  before  tyme  feene  other
fpotted  wilde  beafles,  as  lybardes  and  panthers.  The  dogge  tiger  beynge  thus  kylled,  theye  folowynge  the
trafe  of  his  fleppes  towarde  the  mountaines,  came  to  the  denne  where  the  bytche  remayned  with  her  twoo
younge  fuckynge  whelpes.  But  fliee  was  not  in  the  denne  at  there  coommynge.  Theye  fyrfle  caryed  awaye
the  whelpes  with  them.  But  afterwarde  fearynge  leafle  they  Ihulde  dye  bycaufe  theye  were  very  younge,
entendynge  when  they  were  bygger  to  fende  them  into  Spayne,  they  put  cheynes  of  yren  aboute  there  neckes,
and  caryed  them  agayne  to  there  denne :  whither  returnynge  within  a  fewe  dayes  after,  they  founde  the  denne
emptye  and  the  cheynes  not  remoued  frome  there  place.  Theye  fuppofe  that  the  damme  in  her  furye  tore
them  in  pyeces  and  caryed  them  awaye,  lefle  anye  flnilde  haue  the  fruition  of  them.  For  theye  playnely
affirme  that  it  was  not  poffible  that  they  fluilde  bee  loofed  frome  the  chaynes  alyue.  The  Ikynne  of  the  deade
tyger  fluffed  with  drye  herbes  and  flrawe,  they  fente  to  Hlfpajiiola  to  the  admyrall  and  other  of  the  chiefe
rulers  frome  whome  the  newe  landes  receyue  there  lawes  and  fuccoure.  It  fhall  at  this  tyme  fuffyce  to  haue
Avritten  thus  much  of  the  tygers,  as  I  haue  lerned  by  the  reporte  of  them  whiche  bothe  fufleyned  domage  by
there  rauenynge,  and  alfo  handeled  the  flcynne  of  that  whiche  was  flayne.  Let  vs  nowe  therfore  returne  to
kynge  Pacra  frome  whome  wee  haue  digreffed.  When  Vafchus  had  entred  into  the  houfes  forfaken  of  Pacra,
he  fente  meffengiers  to  reconcyle  hym  as  he  had  doone  the  other  kinges.  At  the  firfl  he  refufed  to  coomme.
But  after  threatenynges,  he  came  with  three  other  kynges  in  his  coompanye.  Vafchus  writethe  that  he  neuer
fawe  a  more  monflrous  and  deformed  creature :  And  that  nature  hath  onely  gyuen  hym  humane  fhape,  and
otherAvyfe  to  bee  worfe  then  a  brute  beafle,  with  maners  accordynge  to  the  linyamentes  of  his  bodye.  He
abufed  with  mofle  abhominable  lechery  the  doughters  of  foure  kynges  his  bortherers  frome  whome  hee  had
taken  them  by  vyolence.  Of  the  fylthye  behauoure  of  Pacra,  of  his  crueltye  and  iniuryes  doone  by  hym,  many
of  the  other  kynges  made  greuous  coomplayntes  to  Vafchus  as  vnto  a  hygh  ludge  and  iufle  reuenger:  Mofle
humblye  befechyng  hym  to  fee  fuche  thynges  punyfQied,  forafmuche  as  theye  tooke  hym  for  a  man  fente  of  god
for  that  purpofe.  Herevppon  Vafchus  afwell  to  wynne  their  good  wylles,  as  alfo  too  fhewe  an  exemple  of
terroure  to  fuche  as  vfed  lyke  faffhions,  coommaunded  that  this  monflrous  beafte  with  the  other  three  kynges
whiche  were  fubiecte  to  hym  and  of  lyke  conditions,  fhulde  bee  geuen  for  a  praye  to  his  feyghtinge  dogges,  and
their  tome  carkefes  to  bee  burned.  Of  thefe  dogges  whiche  theye  vfe  in  the  warres,  theye  tell  maruelous  thynges.
For  theye  faye  that  theye  runne  vppon  th[e]inhabitantes  armed  after  there  maner,  with  noo  leffe  fiercenes  then
if  theye  were  hartes  or  wylde  bores,  if  the  Spaniardes  doo  but  onely  poynte  towarde  them  with  their  fyngers :
In  foo  muche  that  oftentymes  they  haue  had  no  neede  too  dryue  their  enemyes  too  flyght  with  fwoordes  or
arrowes :  But  haue  doone  the  fame  onely  with  dogges  placed  in  the  forefronte  of  their  battayle,  and  lettynge
them  flyppe  with  their  watche  woorde  and  priuye  token.  Wheruppon  the  barbaryans  flryken  with  feare  by
reafon  of  the  cruell  countenaunces  of  tlie  mallies,  with  their  defperate  bouldenes  and  vnaccuflomed  houlynge
and  barkynge,  haue  difparcled  at  the  fyrfle  onfette  and  broke  their  arraye.  Yet  it  chaunfeth  otherwyfe  when
theye  haue  anye  confiicte  agaynfl  the  Canibales  and  the  people  of  Caramairi.  For  thefe  are  fyerfer,  and  more
warrelyke  men:  Alfo  fo  experte  arche[r]s,  that  theye  can  mofle  certenlye  dyrect  their  venemous  arrowes  againfl
the  dogges  with  fuche  celeritye  as  if  theye  were  thunderboltes :  By  reafon  wherof,  they  fumtymes  kyl  many  of  them.
Th[e]inhabytantes  of  thefe  montaynes,  doo  not  keepe  warre  with  bowes  and  arrowes :  But  vfe  onelye  Machatiis,
that  is  certayne  longe  and  broude  fwordes  made  of  woodde :  Alfo  flynges,  longe  pykes  and  dartes  hardened  at  the
endes  with  fyere.  Whyle  kynge  Pacra  yet  lyued,  noo  man  coulde  knowe  of  hym  neyther  by  fayre  meanes  nor
by  foule,  where  he  had  the  golde  whiche  was  founde  in  his  houfe.  For  owre  men  founde  in  his  iewel  houfe  fyftye
poundes  weyght  of  golde.  Beynge  therfore  demaunded  where  he  had  it,  he  anfwered  that  they  whiche  gathered
the  fame  in  thofe  montaynes  in  his  fathers  dayes,  were  all  deade :  And  that  fenfe  he  was  a  chylde,  he  neuer
efleemed  golde  more  then  floones.  More  then  this,  theye  coulde  not  gette  of  hym.  By  this  feuere  punyfhment
executed  vppon  Pacra, Vafchus  concyled  vnto  hym  the  myndes  of  all  the  other  kynges  of  that  prouynce. And

144

The  thyrde  Decade.

145

by  this  meanes  it  came  too  paffe,  that  when  he  fente  for  the  fycke  men  whiche  he  lefte  behynde  hym  with  kynge
Chiapes,  an  other  kynge  whiche  was  in  the  mydde  waye  (whofe  name  was  Bonoiiiama)  enterteyned  them
gentellye,  and  gaue  them.  xx.  pounde  weyght  of  pure  wrought  golde,  befyd^  great  plentye  of  vyttayles. And
not  this  onely,  but  alfo  accoompanyed  them  hym  felfe  vntyll  he  had  brought  them  fafely  frome  his  palaice  into
the  domynyon  oiFacra:  Where  takynge  eche  of  them  by  the  ryghte  handes,  he  delyuered  them  to  Vafchus  hym
felfe,  as  a  faythefull  pledge  commytted  too  his  charge,  and  therewith  fpake  to  Vafchus  in  this  effecte. MooRe
myghtye  and  valyaunte  vyctourer,  beholde  I  here  delyuer  vnto  yowe,  yowre  coompanions  in  fuche  ph'ght  as  I
receaued  them :  wiffhynge  that  I  had  byn  afwell  able  to  gyue  them  healthe,  as  they  were  hertely  welcoome  to
fuche  pore  enterteynement  as  I  was  able  to  fhewe  them. For  the  fauoure  and  gentelneffe  whiche  I  haue  founde
bothe  in  yowe  and  them,  he  fliall  rcwarde  yowe  whiche  fendeth  thunderynge  and  lyghtelyng  to  the  deflruction
of  myfcheuous  men,  and  of  his  clemencye  giueth  vnto  good  men  plentie  of  lucca  and  Maiziiim  in  dewe  feafon.
As  he  fpake  thefe  woordes,  he  lyfted  vppe  his  handes  and  eyes  towarde  the  foonne  whome  they  honoure  for  god.
Then  he  fpake  further  to  Vafchus,  fayinge :  In  that  yowe  haue  deflroyed  and  flaine  owre  vyolent  and  proude
enemies,  yowe  haue  browght  peace  and  quyetneffe  to  vs  and  owre  famelyes,  and  bounde  vs  for  euer  to  loue  and
obeye  yowe. Yowe  haue  foo  ouercoome  and  tamed  wylde  monflers,  that  wee  thynke  yowe  to  bee  fente  from
heauen  for  the  punyfliement  of  euyll  men  and  defence  of  innocentes,  that  vnder  the  protection  of  yowre  myghtye
fwoorde,  wee  maye  hereafter  leade  owre  lyues  withowte  feare,  and  with  more  quietneffe  gyue  thankes  to  the
giuer  of  all  good  thinges  for  his  mercie  fliewed  vnto  vs  in  this  behalfe. When  th[e]interpretoure  had  toulde
Vafchus  that  kyng  Bononiavia  had  fayde  thefe  woordes,  and  fuche  lyke,  Vafchus  rendered  hym  lyke  thankes  for
his  humanitye  declared  towarde  owre  men,  and  rewarded  hym  as  he  had  doone  other  in  whome  he  founde  lyke
gentilneffe. Vafchus  wryteth  that  he  lerned  manye  thynges  of  this  kynge  as  concemynge  the  greate  r)'cheffe  of
thefe  regions :  But  that  he  woolde  at  this  prefent  fpeake  nothynge  therof :  And  reherfethe  the  fame  as  thynges
lyke to haue good fucceffe. What  this implicate  Hiperbole, or  aduauncement  meaneth,  I  doo  not  well
vnderftande. But  he  playnely  feemeth  hereby  to  promyffe  many  greate  thynges. And  furely  it  is  to  be  thought
that  accordynge  to  his  hope,  great  riches  maye  bee  looked  for. For  they  came  in  maner  into  none  of
th[e]inhabytauntes  houfes,  but  that  they  found  in  them,  eyther  brefleplates  or  curettes  of  golde,  or  elles  golden
ouches,  iewels,  or  garlandes  to  weare  aboute  there  heades,  neckes,  or  armes. I  coniecture  therfore  thus  by  a
fymilitude  of  owre  houfes :  If  amonge  vs  any  man  of  great  poure  were  moued  with  the  defyre  to  haue  great  plentye
of  Iron,  and  woolde  enter  into  Italye  with  a  mayne  force  as  dyd  the  Gothes  in  tyme  pafle,  what  abundaunce  of
Iron  (houlde  he  haue  in  their  houfes :  where  as  he  fliulde  fynde  in  one  place  a  friyngpan,  in  an  other  a  chauldron,
here  a  tryuet,  and  there  a  fpytte,  and  thefe  in  maner  in  euery  pore  mannes  houfe,  with  fuche  other  innumerable :
Whereby  any  man  maye  coniecture  that  Iren  is  plentifully  engendred  in  fuche  regions  where  they  haue  foo
greate  vfe  therof. Owre  men  alfo  perceaued  that  th[e]inhabytantes  of  thefe  regions  do  no  more  elleeme  golde
then  we  do  Iren :  nor  yet  foo  muche  after  they  fawe  to  what  vfe  Iren  ferued  vs. Thus  muche  haue  I  thoughte
good  to  write  too  yowre  holyneffe  of  fuche  thynges  as  I  haue  gathered  owte  of  the  letters  of  Vafchus  N'unnez,
and  learned  by  woorde  of  mouthe  of  fuch  as  were  his  companyons  in  thefe  affayres. As  wee  recejoie  them,  fo
wee  gyue  them  vnto  yowe. Tyme  which  reueleth  all  fecretes,  fhall  hereafter  mynyfler  larger  argument  of
wrytynge. Theye  coulde  at  this  tyme  doo  no  greate  thynge  in  fearchynge  the  golde  mynes,  forafmuche  as  of  a
hundreth  fourefcore  and  tenne  men  whiche  Vafchus  broughte  with  hym  from  Darieua,  there  remayned  onely
threefcore  and  ten,  or  at  the  mofl  fourefcore,  whofe  ayde  he  nowe  vfed  in  thefe  daungerous  aduentures,  leauynge
euer  the  crafed  men  behynd  hym  in  the  kynges  houfes  all  the  waye  that  he  went. But  they  moofle  efpecially  fell
into  fundrye  difeafes,  whiche  came  lately  from  Hfpaniola. For  they  were  not  able  to  abyde  fuche  calamities
as  to  lyue  onely  contented  with  the  breade  of  thofe  regions,  and  wylde  herbes  without  falte,  drinkinge  none
other  then  ryuer  water,  and  that  oftentimes  eyther  lackinge  or  vnwholfome,  where  as  before  their  flomakes  had
byn  vfed  to  good  meates. But  the  owlde  fouldiours  of  Dariena,  were  hardened  to  abyde  all  forowes,  and
exceadynge  toUerable  of  labour,  heate,  hunger,  and  watchynge :  In  fo  muche  that  merilye  they  make  their  boofle
that  they  haue  obferued  a  longer  and  fharper  lent  then  euer  yowre  holineffe  inioyned. For  they  faye  that  for  the
fpace  of  foure  hole  yeares,  they  eate  none  other  then  herbes  and  frutes,  excepte  nowe  and  then  perhappes  fyfhe,
and  verye  feldoome  flefhe :  yea,  and  that  fumtime  for  lacke  of  al  thefe,  they  haue  not  abhorred  fron-  mangye
dogges  and  fylthy  toades  as  wee  haue  fayde  before. The  owlde  fouldiers  of  Dariena,  I  caule  thofe  whiche
fyrfle  folowed  the  capytaynes  Nicuefa  and  Fogeda  to  inhabyte  the  lande,  of  the  whiche  nowe  fewe  were  Ijoiynge.
But  lette  vs  nowe  omytte  thefe  thynges,  and  retoume  to  Vafchus  the  victourer  of  the  montaynes.

Kynge
Bononiama,  frende
to  the  christians.

Wroughte  golde.

The  oration  of
kynge  Bononiama

The  sparke  of  the
lawe  of  nature,  is
the  lawe  written
in  the  hartes  of

HiperMe.

Great  plenty  of
golde.

A  symilitude  for
the  profe  of
plentye  of  golde.

Iren  more
estemed  then
golde.

99

Chaunge  of  dyet
is  daungerous.

Owlde  sojldlers.
A  longe  lent.

Eden.

O

M5

146

The  tJiyrde  Decade.

Contogrus.

Two  poore  kynges.

Desertes.

Kynge  Buchebuea
submytteth  him
selfe

Vessels  of  golde.

KjTige  Chiorisus
sendelh  Vaschus
XXX.  dysshes  of
pure  golde.

100

Axes  of  Iren  more
estemed  then  any
gold

Superfluous  and

effemynate

plesures

An  example  of  the
lyfe  of  owre  fyrst
parentes.

C  The  thyrde  booke  of  the  thyrde  Decade.

[Hen  Yafchiis  had  remained  thirtye  dayes  in  the  palayce  of  kynge  Paa-a,  concilynge  vnto  hyni
tlie  myndes  of  th[c]inhabitantes  and  prouidinge  thynges  neceffarye  for  his  coompanions,  he
departed  frome  thenfe  by  the  conducte  of  certayne  of  kynge  Tcaocha  his  men,  and  came  too
the  banke  of  the  ryuer  Comogrus,  wherof  the  region  and  king  therof,  are  named  by  the  fame
name.  He  founde  the  fydes  of  thefe  montaynes  fo  rude  and  baren,  that  there  was  nothinge
apte  to  bee  eaten,  but  wikle  rootes  and  certayne  vnplcafante  frutes  of  trees.  Two  kynges
beinge  neare  of  bkidde,  inlia.b)'ted  this  infortunate  region,  whiche  Vafchus  ouerpaffed  with  al
fpeede  for  feare  of  hunger.  One  of  thcfe  poore  kinges  was  named  Co/ochus,  and  the  other  Ciurlza.  He  tooke  them
bothe  with  hym  to  guyde  hym  in  the  waye,  and  difmyffed  Tcaocha  his  men  with  vytayles  and  rewardes.  Thus
for  the  fpace  of  three  dayes,  he  wandered  throughe  many  deferte  wooddes,  craggye  mountaynes,  and  muddy
maryflhes  full  of  fuche  quamyres  that  men  are  oftentymes  fwalowed  vp  in  them  if  they  looke  not  the  more  warelye
to  their  fiete.  Alfo  through  places  not  frequented  with  reforte  of  men,  and  fuche  as  nature  had  not  yet  opened
to  their  vfe,  forafmuche  as  th[e]inhalMtantes  haue  feldoome  entercourfe  betwene  them,  but  onely  by  fundrye
incurtions,  the  one  to  fpoyle  and  deflroye  the  other:  Beynge  otherwife  contented  to  lyue  onely  after  the  lawe  of
nature,  withowte  worldly  toyle  for  fuperfluous  pleafures.  Thus  enteringe  at  the  lengthe  into  the  territorye  of
another  kynge  whofe  name  was  Biic/icbuca,  they  founde  all  thynges  voyde  and  in  filence:  For  the  kynge  and  his
fubiectes,  were  all  fledde  to  the  wooddes.  ^^^^en  Vafc/uis  fente  meffengers  to  fetche  hym,  he  dyd  not  onely  at
the  f}Tn.e  fubmytte  hym  felfe,  but  alfo  promyffe  his  ayde  with  all  that  he  myghte  make :  Proteflynge  furthermore,
that  he  fledde  not  for  feare  that  owre  men  woolde  doo  hym  any  iniurie,  but  that  he  hyd  hym  felfe  for  verye  fhame
and  griefe  of  mynde,  for  that  he  was  not  able  to  receyue  them  honorablye  accordynge  vnto  their  dignitye,  bycaufe
his  ilore  of  vitayles  was  confumed.  Yet  in  a  token  of  obedience  and  frendefliyppe,  he  fent  owre  men  many
veffelles  of  golde,  defyring  them  to  accepte  them  as  the  gifte  of  a  frind  whofe  good  will  wanted  not  in  greater
thynges  if  his  abilytye  were  greater.  By  whiche  woordes  the  poore  man  feemed  to  infmuate  that  he  had  byn
robbed  and  otherwife  cruelly  handled  of  his  bortherers.  By  reafon  wherof,  owre  men  were  enforced  to  departe
from  thenfe  more  hungerly  then  theye  came.  As  theye  wente  forwarde  therfore,  they  efpyed  certeine  naked
men  coomminge  downe  from  a  hylle  towarde  them.  Vafchus  coommaunded  his  armye  to  flaye,  and  fente  his
interpretours  to  them  to  knowe  what  they  wold  haue.  Then  one  of  them  to  whom  the  other  feemed  to  gyue
reuerence,  fpake  in  this  effect.  Owre  lorde  and  kinge  Chiorifus,  greeteth  yowe  well :  Wyllynge  vs  to  declare
that  he  hath  harde  of  yowre  puiffaunce  and  vertue  wherby  yowe  haue  fubdued  euell  men  and  reuenged
the  wronges  doone  to  innocentes.  For  the  whiche  yowre  noble  factes  and  iuflyce,  as  he  doothe  honour
yowre  fame,  foo  woolde  he  thinke  him  felfe  mofle  happye  if  he  myght  receiue  yowe  into  his  palaice.
But,  forafmuche  as  his  fortune  hath  byn  fo  euell  (as  he  imputeth  it)  that  beynge  owte  of  yowre  waye,  yowe
haue  ouerpaffed  hym,  he  hath  fent  yowe  this  golde  in  token  of  his  good  wyll  and  fryndfhyppe  towarde
yowe.  And  with  thefe  woordes  he  dehuered  to  Vafchus  thirty  diffhes  of  pure  golde.  Addynge  here-
unto, that  when  fo  euer  it  fhulde  pleafe  him  to  take  the  paynes  to  coomme  to  their  kynge,  he  ihulde  receyue
greater  gyftes.  He  declared  further,  that  a  kynge  whyche  was  their  bortherer  and  mortall  enemye,  was  very
ryche  in  golde:  And  that  in  fubduynge  of  hym  they  fhulde  bothe  obteine  greate  rycheffe,  and  alfo  delyuerthem
from  daylye  vexations :  whiche  thinge  myght  eafilye  be  doone  by  their  helpe  bycaufe  they  knewe  the  countrey.
Vafchus  put  them  in  good  coomforte,  and  gaue  them  for  rewarde  certayne  Iren  axes  whiche  they  more
efleemed  then  greate  heapes  of  golde.  For  they  haue  lyttell  neede  of  golde,  hauynge  not  th[e]ufe  of  pelliferous
money.  But  he  that  maye  get  but  one  axe  or  hatchet,  thynketh  hym  felfe  rycher  then  euer  was  Craffus.  For
euen  thefe  naked  men  doo  perceyue  that  an  axe  is  neceffarye  for  a  thoufande  vfes :  And  confeffe  that  golde  is
defyred  onely  for  certayne  vaine  and  effeminate  pleafures,  as  a  thyng  whiche  the  lyfe  of  man  maye  lacke  \vith-
owte  any  inconuenience.  For  owre  glutteny  and  fuperfluous  fimptuoufneffe  hath  not  yet  corrupted  them:  By
reafon  wherof  they  take  it  for  noo  fhame  to  lacke  cobardes  of  plate,  where  as  the  pride  and  wantonnes  of  owre
tyme  dooeth  in  maner  impute  it  to  vs  for  ignominye  to  bee  withowte  that,  wherof  by  nature  we  haue  no  neede.
But  their  contentation  with  the  benefytes  of  nature  doothe  playnly  declare  that  men  may  leade  a  free  and  happy
life  withowt  tables,  table  clothes,  carpettes,  napkyns,  and  towels,  with  fuche  other  innumerable  wherof  they
haue  no  vfe,  excepte  perhappes  the  kynges  furniflie  their  tables  with  a  fewe  golden  veffels.  But  the  common
people  dryue  awaye  hunger  with  a  pyece  of  their  i)reade  in  the  one  hande,  and  a  piece  of  l)ro\l(le  fyflie  or
14G

The  thyrde  Decade.

147

fumme  kynde  of  fruite  in  the  other  hande.  For  they  eate  flefhe  but  feldome.  When  their  fingers  are  imbrued
with  any  ounctuous  meates,  they  wype  them  eyther  on  the  foules  of  their  feete,  or  on  their  thyghes,  ye  and
fumtymes  on  the  fkynnes  of  their  priuye  members  in  the  fleede  of  a  nappekynne.  And  for  this  caufe  doo  they
often  tymes  wafhe  them  feUies  in  the  ryuers.  Owre  men  therfore  wente  forwarde  laden  with  golde,  but  fore
afflicted  with  hunger.  Thus  they  came  at  the  length  to  the  dominion  of  kynge  Pocchorrofa  who  fledde  at  their
coommynge.  Here  for  the  fpace  of  thirtye  dayes  they  fylled  their  emp^ye  bellies  Avith  breade  of  the  rootes  of
Maizium.  In  the  meane  tyme  Vafchus  fente  for  PoccJwrrofa :  who  beyiige  allured  with  promiffes  and  fayre
woordes,  came  and  fubmytted  hym  felfe  brynginge  with  hym  for  a  prefent.  xv.  poundes  weighte  of  wrought
golde,  and  a  fewe  flaues.  Vafchus  rewarded  hym  as  he  had  doone  other  before.  When  he  was  mynded  to
depart,  he  was  aduertifed  that  he  fhulde  paffe  through  the  dominion  of  a  certayne  kynge  whofe  name  was
Timianama.  This  is  hee  whome  the  foonne  of  kynge  Comogncs  declared  to  bee  of  foo  great  poure  and  fearefull
to  all  his  bortherers,  and  with  whom  many  of  Comogrus  familyers  had  byn  captyue.  But  owre  men  nowe  per-
ceiued  that  they  meafured  his  poure  by  their  owne.  For  their  kinges  are  but  gnattes  compared  to  elephantes,
in  refpecte  to  the  poure  and  poUicye  of  o^vre  men.  Owre  men  were  alfo  enformed  by  fuche  as  dwelte  neare
aboute  Tiwianafna,  that  his  region  was  not  beyonde  the  montaynes  as  they  fuppofed :  Nor  yet  fo  ryche  in  golde
as  younge  Comogrus  had  declared.  Yet  confulted  they  of  his  fubduyng :  whiche  they  thoughte  they  myght
th[e]eaflyer  brynge  to  paffe  bycaufe  Pocchorrofa  was  his  mortall  enemye,  who  mofle  gladly  promyfed  them  his
aduice  and  ayde  herein.  Vafchus  therfore,  leauynge  his  fycke  men  in  the  vyllage  of  Pocchorrofa,  tooke  with
hym  threfcore  of  his  mofle  valiante  fouldiers,  and  declared  vnto  them  howe  kynge  Tumanama  had  oftentymes
fpoken  proude  and  threatnyng  woordes  ageynlle  them:  Lykewife  that  it  nowe  floode  them  in  hande  of
neceffitye  to  paffe  through  his  dominion :  And  that  he  thought  is  befle  to  fette  vppon  hym  vnwares.  The  fouldiers
confented  to  his  aduice,  and  exhorted  him  to  gyue  th[e]aduenture,  promifinge  that  they  wookH  folowe  hym
whether  fo  euer  he  wente.  They  determined  therfore  to  go  two  dayes  iorney  in  one  daye,  that  Tumanama  not
kno^vynge  of  their  fooden  commyng,  myght  haue  no  leafure  to  affemble  an  armye.  The  thynge  came  to  paffe
euen  as  they  had  deuyfed.  For  in  the  fyrfle  watche  of  the  nyght,  owre  men  with  the  Pocchorrofians,  inuaded
the  vyllage  and  palaice  of  Tumanama,  where  they  tooke  hym  prifoner  fufpectynge  nothinge  leffe.  He  had  mth
hym  two  younge  men  whiche  he  abufed  vnnaturally :  Alfo  fourfcore  women  which  he  had  taken  vyolently  from
dyuers  kynges.  Lykewife  a  greate  number  of  his  gentelmen  and  fubiectes  were  taken  flragelynge  in  other
vyllages  neare  aboute  his  palaice.  For  their  houfes  are  not  adherent  togither  as  owres  bee,  bycaufe  they  are
oftentimes  troubeled  with  vehement  whirlewyndes  by  reafon  of  the  fudden  chaunges  and  motions  of  the  ayTe
caufed  by  the  influence  of  the  planetes  in  the  equalitie  of  the  daye  and  nyght  beynge  there  in  maner  bothe  of
one  lengthe  throughowte  all  the  yeare,  forafmuche  as  they  are  neare  vnto  the  Equinoctiall  lyne  as  we  haue  fayde
before.  Their  houfes  are  made  of  trees,  couered  and  after  their  maner  thetched  with  the  flalkes  of  certayne
towghe  herbes.  To  the  palayce  of  Tumanama,  was  onely  one  houfe  adherent,  and  that  euen  as  bygge  as  the
palayce  it  felfe.  Eyther  of  thefe  houfes  were  in  length  a  hundreth  and  twentie  pafes,  and  in  bredth  fyftie  pafes
as  owre  men  meafured  them.  In  thefe  two  houfes  the  kynge  was  accuflomed  to  mufler  his  men  as  often  as  he
prepared  an  armye.  When  Tumanama  therfore,  was  thus  taken  captyue  with  all  his  Sardanapanicall  famelye,
the  Pocchorrofians  bragged  and  threatened  hym  beynge  nowe  bounde,  that  he  fluilde  fhortly  bee  hanged.  The
other  kynges  alfo  his  bortherers,  reioyfed  at  his  myffortune.  Wherby  owre  men  perceaued  that  Tumanama  was
no  leffe  troublefome  to  his  neighbours,  then  was  Pacra  to  the  kinges  of  the  fouthe  fyde  of  the  montaynes.
Vafchus  alfo  the  better  to  pleafe  them,  threatned  hym  greuoufly:  But  in  deede  entended  no  euell  toward  him.
He  fpake  therfore  fharpely  vnto  hym  with  thefe  woordes :  Thou  fhalte  nowe  fufifer  punyfliment  thou  cniell
tyranne,  for  thy  pryde  and  abhominations.  Thou  flialte  knowe  of  what  poure  the  chriflians  are  whom  thou  hafl.e
foo  contemned  and  threate[ne]d  to  drawe  by  the  heare  of  their  heades  to  the  nexte  ryuer  and  there  to  drowne  them
as  thou  hafle  often  tymes  made  thy  vaunte  emonge  thy  naked  flaues.  But  thou  thy  felfe  fhalte  fyrfte  feele  that
whiche  thou  hafle  prepared  for  other :  And  herewith  commaunded  hym  to  bee  taken  vppe.  NeuerthelefTe
gyuynge  a  priuye  tooken  of  pardon  to  them  whiche  layde  handes  on  him.  Thus  vnhappye  Tumanama,  fearj'nge
and  beleuynge  that  Vafchus  had  mente  in  ernefle  as  he  commaunded,  fell  proflrate  at  his  feete  and  with  teares
defyred  pardon :  Proteflynge  that  he  neuer  fpake  any  fuche  woordes.  But  that  perhappes  his  noble  men  in
their  droonkenneffe  had  fo  abuled  their  toonges  whiche  he  coulde  not  rule.  For  their  wynes  although  they  bee
not  made  of  grapes  yet  are  they  of  force  to  make  men  droonken.  He  declared  furthermore  that  the  other
kynges  his  bortherers  had  of  malice  furmyfed  fuche  lyes  of  hym  enuyinge  his  fortune  bycaufe  he  was  of  greater
poure  then  they.  Mofl.e  humbly  defyringe  Vafchus  that  as  he  tooke  hym  to  bee  a  iufl.e  vyctourer,  foo  to  g}'ue
no  credytte  vnto  their  vniufte  and  malycious  complaintes.  Addynge  herevnto  that  if  it  woolde  pleafe  h}Tn  to
pardon  hym  not  hauinge  offended,  he  woolde  bringe  him  great  plentie  of  gold.  Thus  layinge  his  ryght  hande
on  his  breafl,  he  fwore  by  the  fonne,  that  he  euer  loued  and  feared  the  chryflians  fence  he  fyrrt.e  harde  of  their
fame  and  vyctoryes:  Efpeciaily  when  he  harde  faye  that  they  had  Machanas,  that  is,  fwoordes  fliarper  then

Plentye  of  gold
and  scarcenesse
of  meate.

King  Pocchorrosa
submytteth
hymselfe.
XV.  pounde
weyghte  of
wroughte  golde.

Kyng  Tumanama
looke  decad.  iL
lib.  iiiL

A  good  policye.

101

Kynge  Tumanama
is  taken  pnsouer.

The  cause  of
vehemente  wyndes
nere  the
Equinoctial.

Kynge  Tumanama
his  palaice.

Vaschus  his
woordes  to  kynge
Tumanama.

Oderuni  guem
metvunt.

Kj-ng  Tumanama
his  woordes.

»47

148

The  thyrde  Decade.

Tumanama  is

pardoned.

jTxx  pounde
weyghte  of
wroughte  golde.
Ix.  poundes
weyght  of  golde.

102

They  abhorre
labour.

The  coloure  of  the
golden  earthe  and
a  tryall  of  the
same.

Tokens  of  great
plentie  of  golde.

Vaschus  fauleth
sickc

Feeblenes  of
hunger  and
watchinge.

Kyng-;  Comogrus
frendely  to  the
Christians.

The  large  and
fruteful  plain  of
Zauana.

The  ryuer
Comogrus.

103

thearfe,  and  fuch  as  cutte  in  pieces  ai  tiiynges  that  coomme  in  their  waye.  Then  directynge  his  eyes  towarde
VafcJius  who  had  his  fwoorde  in  his  hand,  he  fpake  thus.  Who  (excepte  he  were  owte  of  his  wytte)  dare  lyfte
vppe  his  hande  ageynfte  this  fwoorde  of  yowres  wherwith  yowe  are  able  with  one  flrooke  to  cleaue  o.  man  from
the  heade  to  the  nauell.  Lette  no  man  therfore  perfwade  yowe  (o  inofle  myghtye  victourer)  that  euer  fuche
woordes  proceded  owte  of  my  mouthe.  As  Tumanama  with  trembehng  fpake  thefe  woordes,  therwith  fwalow-
ynge  downe  the  knot  of  deathe,  Vafchus  feemed  by  his  teares  to  bee  moued  to  compaffion:  And  fpeakyng  to
hym  with  chearefuU  countenance  commaunded  hym  to  bee  loofed.  This  doone,  he  fente  immediatly  to  his
palaice  for.  x.\x.  poundes  weyght  of  pure  gold  artifycially  wrought  into  fundry  ouches  whiche  his  wyues
and  concubynes  vfed  to  weare.  Alfo  the  thyrde  daye  folowynge,  his  noble  men  and  gentylmen  fent
threfcore  poundes  weight  of  golde  for  their  fyne  and  raunfumme.  Tumanama  beyng  demaunded  wher
they  had  that  gold,  anfwered  that  it  was  not  gathered  in  his  dominions  But  that  it  was  brought  his
aunceflours  from  the  ryuer  Comogrus  toward  the  fouthe.  But  the  Pocchorrofians  and  other  his  enemies,  fayd
that  he  lyed :  Affirmynge  that  his  kingdome  was  ryche  in  golde.  Tumanama  on  the  contrary  part,  inflantly
protefted  that  he  neuer  knewe  any  golde  myne  in  all  his  dominions.  Yet  denyed  not  but  that  there  hath
fumtimes  byn  found  certaine  fmaule  graines  of  golde,  to  the  gatherynge  wherof,  he  neuer  had  any  regarde,
bycaufe  they  coulde  not  gette  it  without  great  and  longe  labour.  Whyle  thefe  thynges  were  dooinge,  the  fycke
men  whiche  Vafchus  had  lefte  in  the  village  of  Tocc/iorrofa,  came  to  hym  the.  viii.  day  of  the  Calendes  of
January  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifle.  M,  D.  XIII.  bringyng  with  them  certayne  labourers  from  the  kynges  of  the
fouthe  with  fundrye  inftrumentes  to  dygge  the  grounde  and  gather  golde.  Thus  paflynge  ouer  the  day  of  the
natiuitye  of  Chrifl  Avithout  bodely  labour,  vppon  fainte  Steuens  daye  he  brought  certeyne  myners  to  the  fyde  of
a  hyll  not  farre  dyflante  from  the  palaice  of  Tumanama,  where  (as  he  faith)  he  perceaued  by  the  coloure  of  the
earth  that  it  was  lykely  to  brynge  furthe  golde.  When  they  had  dygged  a  pytte  not  pafl  a  hand  breadth  and  a
halfe,  and  fyfted  the  earthe  therof,  they  founde  certayne  fmaule  graynes  of  golde  no  bygger  then  Hntell  feedes,
amountynge  to  the  weyght  of  twelue  graynes  as  they  prouyd  with  their  balances  of  affaye  before  a  notarie  and
wytneffe  that  the  better  credytte  myghte  bee  gyuen  therto.  Wherby  they  argued  that  the  rycheneffe  of  that  lande
was  agreable  to  the  report  of  the  bortherers,  although  Vafchus  coulde  by  noo  meanes  caufe  Tumanama  to
confeffe  the  fame.  They  fuppofe  that  he  nothynge  eReemed  fo  fmaule  a  portion.  But  other  faye  that  he
denyed  his  countrey  to  bee  frutefull  of  golde,  leafte  by  reafon  therof  the  defyre  of  golde,  myght  intyfe  owre  men
to  inhabyte  his  kyngdome,  as  in  deede  the  feely  kynge  was  a  prophet  in  foo  thinkynge.  For  they  chofe  that
and  the  region  of  Pocchorrofa  to  inhabyte,  and  determyned  to  buylde  townes  in  them  bothe,  if  it  fliulde  fo  pleafe
the  kynge  of  Caflyle :  Afwell  that  they  myght  bee  baytinge  places  and  vytailynge  houfes  for  fuche  as  fliulde
iorney  towarde  the  fouthe,  as  alfo  that  both  the  regions  were  frutfuU  and  of  good  grounde  to  beare  frutes  and
trees.  Intendynge  nowe  therfore  to  departe  from  thenfe,  he  tried  the  earth  by  chaunce  in  an  other  place,  where
the  colour  of  the  grounde  with  certayne  fhyninge  ftones,  feemed  to  bee  a  tooken  of  golde.  Where  caufynge  a
fmaule  pitte  to  bee  dygged  lyttell  beneath  th[e]upper  crufle  of  the  earthe,  he  founde  fo  muche  golde  as  weyghed
that  pyece  of  golde  whiche  the  Spaniardes  caule  Caftcllanum  aureum,  and  is  commonly  cauled  Pefus,  but  not  in
one  grayne.  Reioyfynge  at  thefe  tookens  in  hope  of  great  riches,  he  badde  Tumanama  to  be  of  good  coomforte,
promyfynge  hym  that  he  woolde  bee  his  frende  and  defender,  foo  that  he  troubeled  not  any  of  the  kynges  whiche
were  frendes  to  the  Chriflians.  He  alfo  perfwaded  hym  to  gather  plentye  of  golde.  Summe  faye  that  he  ledde
awaye  all  Tumanama  his  women,  and  fpoyled  him  leafle  he  fliuld  rebell.  Yet  he  delyuered  his  foonne  to
Vafchus  to  bee  broughte  vppe  with  owre  men,  to  learne  their  language  and  relygyon,  that  he  myght  therafter  the
better  vfe  his  helpe  afwell  in  all  thynges  that  he  fliulde  haue  to  doo  with  owre  men,  as  alfo  more  polytykely  rule,
and  obtayne  the  loue  of  his  owne  fubiectes.  Vafchus  at  this  tyme  fell  into  a  vehement  feuer  by  reafon  of  exceffe
of  labour,  immoderate  watchyng,  and  hunger:  In  fomuche  that  departynge  from  thenfe,  he  was  fayne  too  bee
borne  uppon  mennes  backes  in  fhietes  of  goffampyne  cotton.  Lykewyfe  alfo  many  of  his  fouldiers  whiche  were
foo  weake  that  they  coulde  nother  go  nor  flonde.  To  this  purpofe  they  vfed  the  helpe  of  th[e]inhabytantes,  who
fhewed  them  felues  in  al  thynges  Avyllynge  and  obedyente.  Alfo  fumme  of  them  whiche  were  fumwhat  feeble
and  not  able  to  trauayle,  although  not  greuoufly  fycke,  were  ledde  by  the  armes  vntyll  they  came  to  the
domynion  of  kynge  Conwiogrus  di  gxQSiie  frende  to  the  Chriflyans,  of  whom  wee  haue  largely  made  mention
before.  At  Vafchus  commynge  thether,  he  founde  that  the  owlde  kynge  was  deade,  and  his  foonne
(whome  we  fo  prayfed  for  his  wifedome)  to  raygne  in  his  Heade:  And  that  he  was  baptifed  by  the
name  of  Charles.  The  palayce  of  this  Comogrus,  is  fituate  at  the  foote  of  a  fliepe  hyll  well  cultured.
Hauynge  towarde  the  fouthe  a  playne  of  twelue  leages  in  breadth  and  veary  frutefull.  This  playne,  they
caule  Zaiiana.  Beyonde  this,  are  the  great  and  hyghe  montaynes  whiche  deuyde  the  two  feas  wherof  we
haue  fpoken  before.  Owte  of  the  flyepe  hylles,  fpryngeth  the  ryuer  Comogrus,  whiche  runneth  throwghe
the  fayde  playne  to  the  hyghe  montaynes,  receauynge  into  his  chanell  by  their  valleys,  all  the  other
ryuers,  and  fo  fauleth  into  the  fouth  fea.  It  is  diflante  from  Dariena,  aboute  threfcore  and  tcnne  leages
148

The  thyrde  Decade.

149

towarde  the  wefte.  As  owre  men  therfore  came  to  thefe  parties,  kynge  Comogrus  (othenvyfe  cauled  Charles  by
his  chriflian  name)  mette  them  ioyfully  and  entertayned  them  honorably,  gyuynge  them  their  fyll  of  pleafaunte
meates  and  drynkes.  He  gaiie  alfo  to  Vafchiis,  twenty  pounde  weyght  of  wrought  golde.  Vafchus  recom-
penfed  him  with  thinges  which  he  efleemed  muche  more :  As  axes  and  fundry  kyndes  of  carpenters  tooles.
Alfo  a  fouldiours  cloke,  and  a  faire  fherte  wrought  with  needle  woorke  By  thefe  gyftes,  Comogrus  thought  hym
felfe  to  bee  halfe  a  god  amonge  his  bortherers.  Vafchus  at  his  departynge  from  henfe,  emeflly  charged
Comogrus  and  the  other  kynges  to  remayne  faithfuU  and  obedient  to  the  chriflian  king  of  Caftile,  if  they  defyred
to  lyue  in  peace  and  quietneffe :  And  that  they  fhulde  hereafter  more  diligently  applye  them  felues  to  the
gatheringe  of  golde  to  bee  fente  to  the  great  chriflian  Tiba  (that  is)  kyng.  Declaryng  further,  that  by  this
meanes  they  fhuld  bothe  gette  them  and  their  poflerity  a  patrone  and  defender  ageind  their  enemyes,  and  alfo
obtayne  great  abundaunce  of  owre  thinges.  Thefe  affayres  thus  happely  achiued,  he  wente  forwarde  on  his
vyage  to  the  palaice  of  kyng  Poncha,  where  he  founde  foure  younge  men  whiche  were  come  from  Dariena  to
certify  hym  that  there  were  certayne  fliyppes  coomme  from  Hifpaniola  laden  wyth  vyttayles  and  other
neceffaries.  Wherfore  takyng  with  him  twentie  of  his  mofle  lufly  fouldiers,  he  made  hafle  to  Dariena  with
longe  iorneys :  leauinge  the  refydue  behynd  him  to  folow  at  their  leafure.  He  Avriteth  that  he  came  to  Dariena
the.  xiiii.  Cal.  of  Fe.  An.  15 14.  The  date  of  his  letter  is:  From  Dariena,  the.  iiii.  day  of  march.  He  writeth
in  the  fame  letter,  that  he  had  many  fore  conflictes,  and  that  he  was  yet  neyther  wounded,  or  lofle  any  of  his
men  in  the  battaile.  And  therfore  in  al  his  large  letter,  there  is  not  one  leafe  without  thankes  geuynge  to
almyghty  god  for  his  delyuery  and  preferuation  from  fo  many  imminent  perels.  He  attempted  no  enterprife  or
tooke  in  hande  any  viage  withowt  th[e]inuocation  of  god  and  his  holy  faintes.  Thus  was  Vafchus  Balboa  of  a
vyolente  Goliath,  tourned  into  Helifeus :  And  from  Aniens  too  Hercules  the  conquerour  of  monflers.  Beynge
therefore  thus  tourned  from  a  raffhe  royfler  to  a  polytyke  and  difcreate  capitayne,  he  was  iudged  woorthy  to
bee  aduaunced  to  greate  honoure.  By  reafon  whereof,  he  was  bothe  receaued  into  the  kynges  fauoar,  and  there-
vppon  created  the  generall  or  Lieuetenaunt  of  the  kj-nges  army  in  thofe  Regions.  Thus  much  haue  I  gathered
bothe  by  the  letters  of  certeyne  my  faythefuU  frendes  beinge  in  Dariena,  and  alfo  by  woorde  of  mouth  of  fuche
as  came  lately  frome  thenfe.  If  yowre  holynes  defyre  to  knowe  what  I  thynke  herein,  Suerly  as  by  fuche
thynges  as  I  haue  feene,  I  beleue  thefe  thynges  to  bee  trewe,  euen  fo  th[e]order  and  agreinge  of  Vafchus  and
his  coompanions  warrelyke  letters,  feeme  to  confirme  the  fame.  The  Spanyarde  therfore  fhall  not  neede
hereafter  with  vndermynynge  the  earth  with  intoUerable  laboure  to  breake  the  bones  of  owtc  mother,  and  enter
many  myles  into  her  bowels,  and  with  innumerable  daungers  cut  in  funder  hole  mountaynes  to  make  a  waye  to
the  courte  of  infernall  Pluto,  to  brynge  from  thenfe  wycked  golde  the  feede  of  innumerable  mifcheues,  withowte
the  whiche  notwithflandynge  we  may  nowe  fcarfely  leade  a  happy  lyfe  fithe  iniquitie  hath  fo  preuayled  and
made  vs  Haues  to  that  wherof  we  are  lords  by  nature :  The  Spanyarde  (I  fay)  fliall  not  neede  with  fuch
trauayles  and  difficultie  to  dygge  farre  into  the  earth  for  gold,  but  flial  fynde  it  plentifully  in  maner  in  the  vpper
crufl  of  the  earth,  or  in  the  fandes  of  ryuers  dryed  vppe  by  the  heate  of  fommer,  onely  waflhynge  the  earth
foftely  frome  the  fame :  And  fhall  with  lyke  facilite  gather  plentie  of  pearles.  Certenly  the  reuerent  antiquitie
(by  al  the  Cofmographers  affent)  obteyned  not  foo  greate  a  benefyte  of  nature,  nor  yet  afpired  to  the  knowleage
hereof,  bycaufe  there  came  neuer  man  before  owte  of  owre  knowen  worlde  to  thefe  vnknowen  nations :  At  the
leafle,  with  a  poure  of  men,  by  force  of  armes,  in  maner  of  conquefl :  wheras  otherwyfe  nothyng  can  be  gotten  here,
foiafmuch  as  thefe  nations  are  for  the  mofl  part  feuere  defenders  of  theyr  patrimonies,  and  cruell  to  flraungers,  in
no  condition  admittinge  them  otherwyfe  then  by  conquefl :  effpecially  the  fierce  Canibales  or  Caribes.  For  thefe
wylye  hunters  of  men,  gyue  them  felues  to  none  other  kynde  of  exercyfe  but  onely  to  manhuntynge  and  tyllage  after
their  maner.  At  the  commynge  therfore  of  owre  men  into  theyr  regions,  they  loke  as  fuerly  to  haue  them  faule  into
their  fnares  as  if  they  were  hartes  or  wylde  bores :  and  with  no  leffe  confydence  licke  their  lippes  fecreately  in
hope  of  their  praye.  If  they  gette  the  vpper  hande,  they  eate  them  greedely :  If  they  myflrufle  them  felues  to  bee
the  weaker  parte,  they  trufle  to  theyr  feete,  and  flye  fwyfter  then  the  wynde.  Ageyne,  yf  the  matter  bee  tr}'ed
on  the  water,  afwell  the  women  as  men  can  dyue  and  fwymme,  as  though  tney  had  byn  euer  brought  vp  and
fedde  in  the  water.  It  is  noo  maruayle  therefore  yf  the  large  tracte  of  thefe  regions  haue  byn  hytherto
vnknowen.  But  nowe  fithe  it  hath  pleafed  God  to  difcouer  the  fame  in  OA\Te  tyme,  it  fliall  becoome  vs  "-o  fliewe
owre  naturall  loue  to  mankynde  and  dewtie  to  God,  to  endeuoure  owre  felues  to  brynge  them  to  ciuilitie  and
trewe  religion,  to  th[e]increafe  of  Chrifles  flocke,  to  the  confufion  of  Infidels  and  the  Deuyll  theyr  father  who
delytethe  in  owre  deflruction  as  he  hathe  doone  frome  the  begynnynge.  By  the  good  fucceffe  of  thefe  fyrfl  frutes,
owre  hope  is,  that  the  Chriflian  religion  fliall  flreache  foorth  her  armes  very  farre.  Which  thyng  fhulde  tne
fooner  coome  to  paffe  yf  all  menne  to  theyr  poure  (efpecially  Chriflian  Princes  to  whom  it  chiefely  perteyneth)
wolde  put  theyr  handes  to  the  plowe  of  the  lordes  vine}arde.  The  haruefl  fuerly  is  greate,  but  the  woorkemen
are  but  fewe.  As  we  haue  fayde  at  the  begynnynge,  yowre  holynes  fliall  hereafter  noor}'flie  many  mjTiades  of
broodes  of  chekins  vnder  yowre  wynges. But  let  vs  nowe  returne  to  fpeake  of  Beragua  beinge  the  wefle  fyde

O  2  149

XX.  pounde  weyght
of  wrought  gold

Vaschus  retumeth
to  Dariena.

The  good  fortune
of  Vaschus.

Vaschus  was

turned  from
GoUatb  to  Eliseus.

O  flaterynge
fortune,  look  his
death  in  the  booke
of  the  I!ande[s]
lately  founde.

The  earthe  is  owre
general  mother.

The  courte  of
infernall  Pluto.

There  is  a  better
waye  then  this.

The  Spanyardes
conquestes.

Manhunters

104

The  fiersenesse  of
the  Canib  lies.

Owre  duty  to  god,
and  naturall  loue
to  niankvnde.

Threloffyce  of
Chr>-stian  prj-nces

The  haniest  is
great,  etc.

Beragua.

I50

The  thyrde  Decade.

KicMtsa.

The  fourth
nauigation  of
Colonus  the
Admirall.

From  Spaine  to
Hispaniola  a
thousande  and  two
hundreth  leagues

The  florysshing
Ilande  of
Guanassa.

Simple  people.

A  greate
marchaimt.

105

The  regj'on  of
Quiriquetana  or
Ciamba.

Gentle  people.

The  regyons  of
Taia  and  Maia.

Seuen  kyndes  of
date  trees.

Wylde  vines.

of  Vraba,  and  fyrfl.  founde  by  Colonus  the  Admirall,  then  vnfortunately  gouerned  by  Diego  Niaiefa,  and  nowe
lefte  in  maner  defolate :  with  the  other  large  regions  of  thofe  prouinces  brought  from  theyr  wylde  and  beaftly
ludenes  to  ciuilitie  and  trewe  religion.

C  The  fovrth  booke  of  the  thyrde  Decade.

Was  detemiyned  (mofle  holy  father)  to  haue  proccded  no  further  herein,  but  that  one  fierye
fparke  yet  remaynynge  in  my  mynde,  woolde  not  fuffer  me  to  ceafe.  Wheras  I  haue  therfore
declared  howe  Beragua  was  fyrfle  fownde  by  Co/onus,  my  thincke  I  fliulde  commytte  a
heynous  cryme  if  I  fliuld  defraude  the  man  of  the  due  commendations  of  his  trauayles,  of  his
cares  and  troubles,  and  fynally  of  the  daungeours  and  perels,  whiche  he  fufleyned  in  that
nauigation.  Therfore  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifle.  1502.  in  the.  vi.  daye  of  the  Ides  of  Maye,  he
hoyfcd  vppe  his  fayles  and  dei)arted  from  the  Ilandes  of  Gades  with.  iiii.  fhyppes  of  fyftie  or.
iii.  fcore  tunne  a  piece,  with  a  hundreth  threfcore  and  tenne  men,  and  came  with  profperous  wynde  to  the
Ilandes  of  Canarice  within  fiue  daies  folowinge,  from  thenfe  arryuinge  the.  xvi.  day  at  the  Ilande  of  Dominica
beinge  the  chiefe  habitation  of  the  Canibales,  he  fayled  from  Dominica  to  Hifpaniola  in  fyue  other  daies.  Thus
within  the  fpace  of  the.  xxvi.  daies,  with  profperous  wynde  and  by  the  fwyfte  faule  of  the  Ocean  from  the  Eafle
to  the  wefl,  he  fayled  from  Spaine  to  Hifpaniola :  Which  courfe  is  counted  of  the  mariners  to  bee  no  leffe  then
a  thoufande  and  twoo  hundrethe  leaques.  He  taryed  but  a  whyle  in  Hifpaniola^  whether  it  were  wyllingly,  or
that  he  were  fo  admonifflied  of  the  viceroye.  Directing  therfore  his  vyage  from  thenfe  towarde  the  wefle,
leauyng  the  Ilandes  of  Cuba  and  lamaica  on  his  ryght  hande  towarde  the  northe,  he  wryteth  that  he  chaunfed
vppon  an  Ilande  more  fouthewarde  then  lamaica,  whiche  th[e]inhabitantes  caule  Guanaffa,  fo  floryffhinge  and
frutefull  that  it  myghte  feeme  an  earthlye  Paradyfe.  Coaflynge  alonge  by  the  fliores  of  this  Ilande,  he  mette
two  of  the  Canoas  or  boates  of  thofe  prouinces,  whiche  were  drawne  with  two  naked  flaues  ageynfl  the  flreame.
In  thefe  boates,  was  caryed  a  ruler  of  the  Ilande  with  his  wyfe  and  chyldren,  all  naked.  The  flaues  feeynge
owre  men  a  lande,  made  fignes  to  them  with  proude  countenaunce  in  their  maift.ers  name,  to  fl.ande  owte  of  the
waye,  and  threatned  them  if  they  woolde  not  gyue  place.  Their  fympelnes  is  fuche  that  they  nother  feared  the
multitude  or  poure  of  owre  men,  or  the  greatnes  and  flraungenes  of  owre  fliippes.  They  thought  that  owre  men
woolde  haue  honoured  their  maifl.er  with  like  reuerence  as  they  did.  Owre  men  had  intelligence  at  the  length
that  this  ruler  was  a  greate  marchaunte  whiche  came  to  the  marte  from  other  coaftes  of  the  Ilande.  For  they
exceryfe  byinge  and  fellynge  by  exchaunge  with  their  confinies.  He  had  alfo  with  him  good  floore  of  fuche  ware
as  they  flande  in  neede  of  or  take  pleafure  in :  as  laton  belles,  rafers,  knyues,  and  hatchettes  made  of  a  certeyne
fharpe  yelowe  bryght  flone,  with  handles  of  a  ft.ronge  kynd  of  woodde.  Alfo  many  other  neceffary  inflrumentes
with  kychen  fluffe  and  veffelles  for  all  neceffary  vfes.  Lykewife  flieetes  of  goffampine  cotton  wrought  of  fundrye
colours.  0\\Te  men  tooke  hym  pryfoner  with  all  his  famely.  But  Colonus  commaunded  hym  to  bee  lofed  fhortely
after,  and  the  greatefl  parte  of  his  goodes  to  bee  reflored  to  wynne  his  fryndefhippe.  Beinge  here  inflructed  of
a  lande  lyinge  further  towarde  the  fouthe,  he  tooke  his  vyage  thether.  Therfore  lytle  more  then  tenne  myles
diftant  from  henfe,  he  founde  a  large  lande  whiche  th[e]inhabitantes  cauled  Quiriquetana :  But  he  named  it
Ciamba.  When  he  wente  a  lande  and  commaunded  his  chaplaine  to  faye  maffe  on  the  fea  bankes,  a  great
confluence  of  the  naked  inhabitantes  flocked  thither  fymplye  and  without  feare,  bringynge  with  them  plenty  of
meate  and  frefhe  water,  marueylynge  at  owre  men  as  they  had  byn  fumme  fl.raunge  miracle.  When  they  had
prefented  their  giftes,  they  went  fumwhat  backewarde  and  made  lowe  curtefy  after  their  maner  bowinge  their
heades  and  bodyes  reuerently.  He  recompenfed  their  gentylnes  rewardinge  them  with  other  of  owre  thynges,
as  counters,  braflettes  and  garlandes  of  glaffe  and  counterfecte  floones,  lookyng  glaffes,  nedelles,  and  pynnes,
with  fuche  other  trafhe,  whiche  feemed  vnto  them  precious  marchaundies.  In  this  great  tracte  there  are  two
regions  wherof  the  one  is  cauled  Taia  and  <-he  other  Maia.  He  writeth  that  all  that  lande  is  very  fayre  and
holfome  by  reafon  of  the  excellent  temperatneffe  of  the  ayer:  And  that  it  is  inferiour  to  no  lande  in  frutefull
ground  beinge  partely  full  of  montaines,  and  partely  large  playnes :  Alfo  replenyflied  with  many  goodly  trees,
holfome  herbes,  and  frutes,  continuynge  greene  and  floryfhynge  all  the  hole  yeare.  It  beareth  alfo  verye  many
holy  trees  and  pyne  aple  trees.  Alfo.  vii.  kyndes  of  date  trees  wherof  fumme  are  frutefull  and  fumme  baren.
It  bringeth  furth  lykewyfe  of  it  felfe  Pclgoras  and  wilde  vynes  laden  with  grapes  euen  in  the  wooddes  emonge
other  trees.  He  faythe  furthermore  that  there  is  fuche  abundaunce  of  other  pleafaunte  and  profitable  frutes
that  they  paffe  not  of  vynes.  Of  one  of  thofe  kyndes  of  date  trees,  tliey  make  certeyne  longe  and  brode
150

The  thyrde  Decade.

151

fvvoordes  and  dartes,  Thefe  regyons  beare  alfo  goffampyne  trees  here  and  there  commonly  in  the  wooddes.
Lykewife  Mirobalanes  of  fundry  kyndes,  as  thofe  which  the  phifitians  caule  Emblicos  and  Chebulos.  Maizium  alfo.
lucca,  Ages,  and  Baitatas,  lyke  vnto  thofe  whiche  we  haue  fayde  before  to  bee  founde  in  other  regions  in  thefe
coaftes.  The  fame  nooryffheth  alfo  lyons,  Tygers,  Hartes,  Roes,  Goates,  and  dyuers  other  beafles.  Lykewyfe
fundry  kyndes  of  byrdes  and  foules:  Emonge  the  whiche  they  keepe  onely  them  to  franke  and  feede,  whiche
are  in  colour,  bygnes,  and  tafle,  muche  lyke  vnto  owre  pehennes.  He  faith  that  th[e]inhabitantes  are  of  high
and  goodly  flature,  well  lymmed  and  proportioned  both  men  and  women :  Couerynge  their  priuye  partes  with
fyne  breeches  of  goffampine  cotton  wrought  with  dyuers  colours.  And  that  they  may  feeme  the  more  cumlye
and  bewtifuU  (as  they  take  it)  they  paynte  their  bodyes  redde  and  blacke  with  the  iuce  of  certeyne  apples  whiche
they  plante  in  their  gardens  for  the  fame  purpofe.  Summe  of  them  paynte  their  hole  bodies :  fumme  but  parte :
and  other  fumme  drawe  the  portitures,  of  herbes,  floures,  and  knottes,  euery  one  as  feemeth  befle  to  his  owne
phantafye.  Their  language  differeth  vtterlye  from  theirs  of  the  Ilandes  nere  aboute  them.  From  thefe  regions,
the  waters  of  the  fea  ranne  with  as  full  courfe  towarde  the  wefle,  as  if  it  had  byn  the  faule  of  a  fwyfte  riuer.
Neuertheleffe  he  determined  to  fearche  the  Eafle  partes  of  this  lande,  reuoluynge  in  his  mynde  that  the  regions
of  Paria  and  Os  Draconis  with  other  coafles  founde  before  toward  the  Eafle,  fhulde  bee  neare  theraboute  as  in
deede  they  were.  Departyng  therfore  from  the  large  region  of  Qiiiiriqueta7ia  the.  xiii.  daye  of  the  calendes  of
September,  when  he  had  failed  thirtie  leaques,  he  founde  a  ryuer,  without  the  mouth  wherof  he  drewe  frefhe
water  in  the  fea.  Where  alfo  the  fhoore  was  fo  cleane  withowte  rockes,  that  he  founde  grounde  euery
where,  where  he  myght  aptely  eafle  anker.  He  writeth  that  the  fwifte  courfe  of  the  Ocean  was  fo
vehement  and  contrarye,  that  in  the  fpace  of  fortye  dayes  he  coulde  fcarcelye  fayle  threfcore  and  tenne
leaques,  and  that  with  muche  dififycultie  with  many  fetches  and  coompafynges,  fyndyng  him  felfe  to  bee
fumtimes  repulfed  and  dryuen  farre  backe  by  the  vyolente  courfe  of  the  fea  when  he  woolde  haue  taken  lande
towarde  the  euenynge,  leafle  perhappes  wanderynge  in  vnknowen  coafles  in  the  darckeneffe  of  the  nyght,  he
myghte  bee  in  daunger  of  fhypwracke :  He  writeth  that  in  the  fpace  of  eyght  leaques,  he  found  three  great  and
fayre  ryuers  vppon  the  banckes  wherof,  there  grewe  reedes  bygger  then  a  mannes  thygh.  In  thefe  ryuers  was  alfo
greate  plentye  of  fyfhe  and  great  tortoyfes :  Lykewife  in  many  places,  multitudes  of  Crocodiles  lyinge  in  the  fande,
and  yanyng  to  take  the  heate  of  the  foonne :  Befyde  dyuers  other  kyndes  of  beafles  whervnto  he  gaue  no  names.
He  fayth  alfo  that  the  foyle  of  that  lande  is  very  diuers  and  variable :  beyng  fumwhere  flonye  and  full  of  rough
and  craggie  promontories  or  poyntes  reachynge  into  the  fea.  And  in  other  places  as  frutfull  as  maye  bee.
They  haue  alfo  diuers  kynges  and  rulers.  In  fumme  places  they  caule  a  kynge  Cacicus:  in  other  places  they
caule  hym  Quebi,  and  fumwhere  Tiba.  Suche  as  haue  behaued  them  felues  valiantly  in  the  warres  ageynRe
their  enemies,  and  haue  their  faces  full  of  fcarres,  they  caule  Cupras,  and  honour  them  as  the  antiquitie  dyd  the
goddes  whiche  they  cauled  Heroes,  fuppofed  to  bee  the  foules  of  fuche  men  as  in  their  lyfe  tyme  excelled  in  vertue
and  noble  actes.  The  common  people,  they  caule  Chiui:  and  a  man,  they  caule  Hoviem.  When  they  faye  in
their  language,  take  man,  they  fay  Hoppa  home.  After  this,  he  came  to  an  other  ryuer  apte  to  beare  great
fhypppes :  Before  the  mouthe  wherof,  leye  foure  fmaule  Ilandes  full  of  floriffhing  and  frutfull  trees.  Thefe
Ilandes  he  named  Qiiatiior  tempora.  From  henfe  faylynge  towarde  the  Eafle  for  the  fpace  of.  xiii.  leaques  flyll
ageinfle  the  vyolent  courfe  of  the  water,  he  founde  twelue  other  fmaule  Ilandes.  In  the  whiche  bycaufe  he
founde  a  newe  kynde  of  frutes  muche  like  vnto  owre  lemondes,  he  cauled  them  Lbnonares.  Wanderynge  yet
further  the  fame  waye  for  the  fpace  of  xii.  leaques,  he  founde  a  great  hauen  enteryng  into  the  land  after  the
maner  of  a  goulfe  the  fpace  of  three  leaques,  and  in  maner  as  brode,  into  the  whiche  fell  a  great  ryuer.  Here
was  Niciiefa  lofle  afterwarde  when  he  foughte  Beragiia:  By  reafon  wherof  they  cauled  it  Rio  de  los  perdidos:  that
is,  the  rj'uer  of  the  lofle  men.  Thus  Colonus  the  Admirall  yet  further  contynuynge  his  courfe  ageynfle  the  furye
of  the  fea,  founde  manye  hyghe  montaynes  and  horrible  valleys,  with  dyuers  ryuers  and  hauens,  from  all  the
whiche  (as  he  faythe)  proceaded  fweete  fauers  greatly  recreatynge  and  comfortynge  nature.  In  fo  muche  that
in  all  this  longe  tracte  there  was  not  one  of  his  men  defeafed  vntyll  he  came  to  a  region  whiche  th[e]inhabitantes
caule  Quicuri,  in  the  whiche  is  the  hauen  cauled  Cariai,  named  Mirobalanus  by  the  admyrall  bycaufe  the
Mirobala?ie  trees  are  natiue  in  the  region  therabout.  In  this  hauen  of  Cariai,  there  came  about  two  hundreth
of  th[e]inhabitantes  to  the  fea  fyde  with  euerye  of  them  three  or  foure  dartes  in  their  handes :  Yet  of  condition
gentell  enoughe,  and  not  refufyng  flraungers.  Their  commyng  was  for  none  other  purpofe  then  to  knowe  what
this  newe  nation  mente,  or  what  they  broughte  with  them.  When  owre  men  had  gyuen  them  fygnes  of  peace,
they  came  fwymmynge  to  the  fhyppes  and  defyred  to  barter  with  them  by  exchaunge.  The  admyrall  to  allure
them  to  frendfliippe,  gaue  them  many  of  owre  thinges :  But  they  refufed  them,  fufpectynge  fumme  difceate
thereby  bycaufe  he  woolde  not  receyue  theirs  They  wroughte  all  by  fygnes :  for  one  vnderfloode  not  a  woorde
of  the  others  language.  Suche  gyftes  as  were  fente  them,  they  lefte  on  the  fhore  and  woolde  take  no  part
therof.  They  are  of  fuche  ciuilitye  and  humanytie,  that  they  efleeme  it  more  honorable  to  gyue  then  to  take.
They  fente  owre  men  two  younge  women  beinge  vyrgines, of  commendable fauour and goodly  flature,

MirobalaJies
Byrdes  and  foules.

People  of  goodly
stature

They  paynt  theyr
bodyes

The  swyfte  course
of  the  sea  from  the
East  to  the  West.

Paria.

Fresshe  water  in
the  sea.

Fetches  and
compasinges

106

Faire  ryuers.
Great  reedes
Great  tortoyses.

Dyuers  languages.

Heroes.

Qiiatuor  tevipora.

Twelue  Ilandes
named  Limonares

Rio  de  los
perdidos.

The  region  of
Quicun.

The  hauen
of  Cariai  or
Mirobalanus

Ciuile  and
humane  people

IS»

152

The  thynie  Decade.

107

[Trees  grow  by
the  sea]  syde.

Trees  growynge
in  the  sea  after  a
straun  je  sort.

Plinie.

A  straunge  kynde
of  moonkeys.

A  moonkeye
feyghteth  with

A  conflict  betwene
a  monkey  and  a
wylde  bore.

The  bodyes  of
kynges  dryed  and
reserued

Cerabaro.

Aburema.

Cheynes  of  golde.

Plentie  of  golde.

Fiue  villages  rych
in  gold.

Crownes  of  beasts
claws

108

fygnifyinge  vnto  them  that  they  myghte  take  them  awaye  with  them  if  it  were  their  pleafure.  Thefe  women
after  the  maner  of  their  countrey,  were  couered  from  their  ancles  fumwhat  aboue  their  priuye  partes  with  a
certeyne  clothe  made  of  goflampine  cotton.  But  the  men  are  al  naked.  The  women  vfe  to  cutte  their  heare:
But  the  men  lette  it  growe  on  the  hynder  partes  of  their  heades,  and  culte  it  on  the  fore  parte.  Their  longe
heare,  they  binde  vppe  with  fyllettes,  and  winde  it  in  fundry  rowles  as  owre  maydes  are  accuflomed  to
do.  The  virgins  which  were  fente  to  the  Admirall  he  decked  in  fayre  apparell,  and  gaue  them  many
gyftes,  and  fente  theym  home  ageyne.  But  lykewife  all  thefe  rewardes  and  apparel  they  loft  vppon  the  fliore
bycaufe  owre  men  had  refufed  their  g}'ftes.  Yet  tooke  he  two  men  away  with  him  (and  thofe  very  wyllyngly)
that  by  lernyng  the  Spanyflie  tonge,  he  might  afterwarde  vfe  them  for  intcrpretours.  He  confidered  that
the  tractes  of  thefe  coafles  were  not  greately  troubeled  with  vehement  motions  or  ouerflowynges  of  the  fea,
forafmuche  as  trees  growe  in  the  fea  not  farre  frome  the  fliore,  euen  as  tlicy  doo  vppon  the  bankes  of  ryuers.
The  which  thynge  alfo  other  doo  affirme  whiche  haue  latelyer  fearcliod  thof  >  coafles,  declaring  that  the  fea
rifeth  and  fouleth  but  lyttle  there  aboute.  He  fayth  furthermore,  that  in  the  profpecte  of  this  lande,  there  are
trees  engendred  euen  in  the  fea,  which  after  that  they  are  growen  to  any  height,  bende  downe  the  toppes  of
theyr  branches  into  the  grounde:  which  embrafing  them  caufeth  other  branches  to  fprynge  owt  of  the  fame,  and
take  roote  in  the  earth,  bringj-nge  foorth  trees  in  theyr  kynde  fucceffiuely  as  dyd  the  fyrfl  roote  from  whenfe
they  had  theyr  originall,  as  do  alfo  the  fettes  of  vines  when  onely  bothe  the  endes  therof  are  put  into  the
grounde.  Plinie  in  the  twelfth  booke  of  his  natural  hidorie  maketh  mention  of  fuche  trees,  defcribynge  them
to  bee  on  the  lande,  but  not  in  the  fea.  The  Admirall  wryteth  alfo  that  the  lyke  beafles  are  engendered  in
the  coafles  of  Cariai,  as  in  other  prouinces  of  thefe  regions,  and  fuch  as  we  haue  fpoken  of  before.  Yet  that
there  is  one  founde  here  in  nature  much  difTeringe  from  the  other.  This  beafle  is  of  the  byggenes  of  a  greate
moonkeye,  but  with  a  tayle  muche  longer  and  bygger.  It  lyueth  in  the  wooddes,  and  remoueth  from  tree  to
tree  in  this  maner.  Hangynge  by  the  tayle  vppon  the  braunche  of  a  tree,  and  gatheryng  flrength  by  fvvayinge
her  bodye  twyfe  or  thryfe  too  and  fro,  the  cafleth  her  felfe  from  branche  to  branche  and  fo  from  tree  to  tree  as
though  fhe  fiewe.  An  archer  of  owres  hurt  one  of  them.  Who  perceauinge  her  felfe  to  be  wounded,  leapte
do^\^le  from  the  tree,  and  fiercely  fet  on  hym  which  gaue  her  the  wounde,  in  fo  muche  that  he  was  fayne  to
defende  hym  felfe  with  his  fwoorde.  And  thus  by  chaunce  cuttyng  of  one  of  her  armes,  he  tooke  her,  and  with
muche  a  doo  brought  her  to  the  fliips  where  within  a  whyle,  fhee  waxed  tame.  Whyle  fhee  was  thus  kepte
and  bownde  -svith  cheynes,  certeyne  other  of  owr  hunters  hadde  chafed  a  wylde  bore  owt  of  the  maryfhes  nere
vnto  the  fea  fyde.  For  hunger  and  defyre  of  fieflie,  caufed  them  to  take  double  pleafure  in  huntynge.  In
this  meane  tyme  other  which  remayned  in  the  fliippes,  goinge  a  lande  to  recreate  them  felues,  tooke  this
moonkey  with  them.  Who,  as  foone  as  fliee  had  efpied  the  bore,  fet  vp  her  bryflels  and  made  towarde  her.
The  bore  lykewyfe  fhooke  his  briflels  and  whette  his  teethe.  The  moonkey  furioufly  inuaded  the  bore,  wrap-
pynge  her  tayle  about  his  body,  and  with  her  arme  referued  of  her  victourer,  helde  hym  fo  fafl  aboute  the
throte,  that  he  was  fuffocate.  Thefe  people  of  Cariai,  vfe  to  drye  the  deade  bodyes  of  theyr  princes  vppon
hurdels,  and  fo  referue  them  inuohied  in  the  leaues  of  trees.  As  he  went  forwarde  about  twentie  leagues  from
Cariai,  he  founde  a  goulfe  of  fuch  largenes  that  it  conteyned.  xii.  leagues  in  compaffe.  In  the  mouth  of  this
goulfe  were  foure  lyttle  Ilandes  fo  nere  togyther,  that  they  made  a  fafe  hauen  to  enter  into  the  goulfe.  This
goulfe  is  the  hauen  which  we  fayde  before  to  be  cauled  Cerabaro  of  th[e]inhabitantes.  But  they  haue  nowe
lerned  that  only  the  lande  of  the  one  fyde  therof,  lyinge  on  the  ryght  hande  at  the  enterynge  of  the  goulfe,  is
cauled  by  that  name.  But  that  on  the  lefte  fyde,  is  cauled  Aburema.  He  faythe  that  all  this  goulfe  is  ful  of
fruteful  Ilandes  wel  replenyfflied  with  goodly  trees :  And  the  grounde  of  the  fea  to  bee  verye  cleane  withowt
rockes,  and  commodious  to  cafl  anker:  Lykewyfe  the  fea  of  the  goulfe  to  haue  greate  abundance  of  fyffhe:  and
the  lande  of  both  the  fydes  to  bee  inferior  to  none  in  frutfulnes.  At  his  fyrft  arryuynge,  he  efpyed  two  of
th[e]inhabitantes  hauynge  cheynes  about  theyr  neckes,  made  of  ouches  (which  they  caule  Guatiines,)  of  bafe
golde  artificially  wrought  in  the  formes  of  Eagles,  and  Hons,  with  dyuers  other  beafles  and  foules.  Of  the  two
Cariaians  whiche  he  brought  with  hym  from  Ca?-iai,  he  was  enformed  that  the  regions  of  Cerabaro  and  Aburema
were  rych  in  golde:  And  that  the  people  of  Cariai  haue  all  theyr  golde  frome  thenfe  for  exchaunge  of
other  of  theyr  thynges.  They  towlde  hym  alfo,  that  in  the  fame  regions  there  are  fyue  vyllages  not
farre  from  the  fea  fyde,  whofe  inhabitantes  apply  them  felues  onely  to  the  gathering  of  gold  The  names
of  thefe  vyllages  are  thefe:  Chirara,  Furen,  Chitaza,  lureche,  Atamea.  All  the  men  of  the  prouince  of
Cerabaro,  go  naked,  and  are  paynted  with  dyuers  coloures.  They  take  great  pleafure  in  wearynge  gar
landes  of  floures,  and  crownes  made  of  the  clawes  of  Lions  and  Tygers.  The  women  couer  onely  theyr
priuie  partes  with  a  fyllet  of  goffampine  cotton.  Departinge  from  henfe  and  coaflynge  flyll  by  the  fame  fhore
for  the  fpace  of.  xviii.  leagues,  he  came  to  another  ryuer,  where  he  efpyed  aboute  three  hundreth  naked  men  in
a  company.  When  they  fawe  the  (hippes  drawe  neare  the  lande,  they  cryed  owt  aloude,  with  cruell
countenaunces  fliakynge  theyr  woodden  fwoordes  and  hurlynge  dartes,  takynge  alfo  water  in  theyr  mouthes  and

152

The  thyrde  Decade.

153

fpoutyng  the  fame  ageynfl  our  men :  wherby  they  feemed  to  infinuate  that  they  woolde  receaue  no  condition  of
peace  or  haiie  ovvght  to  doo  with  them.  Here  he  commaunded  certeyne  pieces  of  ordinaunce  to  be  ftiot  of
toward  them :  Yet  fo  to  ouerfhute  them,  that  none  myght  be  hurt  therby.  For  he  euer  determyned  to  deale
quietly  and  peaceably  with  thefe  newe  nations.  At  the  noyfe  therfore  of  the  gunnes  and  fyght  of  the  fyer,  they
fell  downe  to  the  grounde,  and  defyred  peace.  Thus  enteringe  into  further  frendfliippe,  they  exchaunged  theyr
cheynes  and  ouches  of  golde  for  glaffes  and  haukes  belles  and  fuch  other  marchandies.  They  vfe  drummes  or
tymbrels  made  of  the  fhelles  of  certeyne  fea  fyffhes,  wherewith  they  encorage  theym  felues  in  the  wanes.  In
this  tract  are  thefe  feuen  ryuers,  Acatcba,  Quareba,  Zobroba,  Aiagtiitin,  Vrida,  Durriba,  Beragua,  in  all  the
whiche,  golde  is  founde.  They  defende  them  felues  ageynfle  rayne  and  heate  with  certeyne  great  leaues  of  trees
in  the  fleade  of  clokes.  Departinge  from  henfe,  he  fearched  the  coafles  oi  Ebdere  and  Embigar,  into  the  which
faule  the  goodly  ryuers  of  Zohorati  and  Cubigar :  And  here  ceafeth  the  plentie  and  frutefulnes  of  golde,  in  the
tracte  of  fiftie  leagues  or  there  about.  From  henfe  onely  three  leagues  diftant,  is  the  rocke  whiche  in  the
vnfortunate  difcourfe  of  Niciiefa  we  fayde  was  cauled  of  owre  men  Pignonem.  But  of  th[e]inhabitantes  the
Region  is  cauled  Vibba.  In  this  tracte  alfo  aboute  fyxe  leagues  frome  thenfe,  is  the  hauen  which  Colonus  cauled
Partus  Bellus  (wherof  we  haue  fpokenbefore)  in  the  region  whiche  th[e]inhabitantes  caule  Xaguaguara.  This
region  is  very  peopulous :  but  they  go  all  naked.  The  kyng  is  paynted  with  blacke  colours,  but  all  the  people
with  redde.  The  kynge  and  feuen  of  his  noble  men,  had  euery  of  them  a  lyttle  plate  of  golde  hang>'nge  at  theyr
nofethrilles  downe  vnto  theyr  lyppes.  And  this  they  take  for  a  cumly  ornamente.  The  menne  inclofe  theyr
priuie  members  in  a  fliell:  And  the  women  couer  theyrs  wath  a  fyllet  of  goffampine  cotton  tyed  about  theyr
loynes.  In  theyr  gardens  they  nooryffhe  a  frute  muche  lyke  the  nutte  of  a  pine  tree:  the  whiche  (as  we  haue
fayde  in  an  other  place)  groweth  on  a  flirubbe  muche  lyke  vnto  an  archichoke :  But  the  frute  is  muche  fofter,
and  meate  for  a  kynge.  Alfo  certeyne  trees  whiche  beare  gourdes,  wherof  we  haue  fpoken  before.  This  tree,
they  caule  Hibuero.  In  thefe  coafles  they  mette  fumtymes  with  Crocodiles  lyinge  on  the  fandes,  the  w^hiche
when  they  fled,  or  tooke  the  water,  they  lefte  a  very  fweete  fauour  behynde  them  fweeter  then  mufke  or  Caftoraun.
When  I  was  fente  ambaffadour  for  the  catholike  king  of  Caflile  to  the  Soltane  of  Babilon  or  Alcayer  in  Egipte,
th[e]inhabitantes  nere  vnto  the  ryuer  of  Nilus  toulde  me  the  like  of  their  female  Crocodiles.  Affyrmyng
furthermore  that  the  fatte  or  fewette  of  them  is  equall  in  fweetnes  with  the  pleafaunte  gummes  of  Arabic.  But
the  Admirall  was  nowe  at  the  length  enforced  of  neceffytie  to  departe  from  henfe,  afwell  for  that  he  was  no  longer
able  to  abyde  the  contrarye  and  vyolente  courfe  of  the  water,  as  alfo  that  his  thyppes  were  daily  more  and  more
putrified  and  eaten  throwgh  with  certeyne  wormes  whiche  are  engendred  of  the  warmenes  of  the  water  in  all
thofe  tractes  nere  vnto  the  Equinoctial  line.  The  Venetians  caule  thefe  woormes  Biffas.  The  fame  are  alfo
engendred  in  two  hauens  of  the  citie  of  Alexandria  in  Egipt,  and  deflroye  the  fhyppes  if  they  lye  longe  at
anker.  They  are  a  cubet  in  length,  and  fumwhat  more:  not  paffyng  the  quantitie  of  a  fynger  in  bygnefle.
The  Spanyflie  mariner  cauleth  this  peflilence  Broma.  Colomis  therfore  whom  before  the  great  monflers  of  the
fea  coulde  not  feare,  nowe  fearyng  this  Broma^  beynge  alfo  foore  vexed  with  the  contrary  faule  of  the  fea,  directed
his  courfe  with  the  Ocean  towarde  the  wefl,  and  came  firfl.  to  the  ryuer  Jliebra,  dillant  onely  two  leaques  from
the  ryuer  of  Beragua,  bycaufe  that  was  commodious  to  harborowe  great  fliippes.  This  region  is  named  after  the
riuer,  and  is  called  Beragua  the  leffe:  Bycaufe  bothe  the  ryuers  are  in  the  dominion  of  the  kyng  which  inhabiteth
the  region  of  Beragua.  But  what  chaunfed  vnto  hym  in  this  vyage  on  the  ryghte  hande  and  on  the  lefte,  lette
vs  nowe  declare.  Whyle  therfore  Colonus  the  Admirall  remayned  yet  in  the  ryuer  Hiebra,  he  fent  Bertho/ovieus
Colonus  his  brother  and  Lieuetenaunte  of  Hifpaniola,  with  the  fhyppe  boates  and  threfcore  and.  viii.
men  to  the  ryuer  of  Beragua,  where  the  king  of  the  region  beinge  naked  and  painted  after  the  maner  of  the
countre}',  came  towarde  them  with  a  great  multitude  of  men  waytynge  on  hym,  but  all  vnarmed  and  without
weapons,  gyuinge  alfo  fygnes  of  peace.  When  he  approched  nerer,  and  entered  communication  with  owre  men,
certeyne  of  his  gentelmen  nearefle  aboute  his  perfon,  rememberinge  the  maiellie  of  a  king,  and  that  it  floode
not  with  his  honour  to  bargen  flondynge,  tooke  a  greate  floone  owte  of  the  ryuer,  waffhynge  and  rubbynge  it
veary  decently,  and  fo  put  it  vnder  hym  with  humble  reuerence.  The  kyng  thus  fyttyng,  feemed  with  fygnes
and  tokens  to  infmuate  that  it  fluild  be  lawful  for  owre  men  to  fearche  and  viewe  al  the  ryuers  within  his
dominion.  Wherfore,  the  vi.  day  of  the  Ides  of  February,  leaning  his  boates  wdth  certe}Tie  of  his  coompany,
he  wente  by  lande  a  foote  from  the  bankes  of  Beragua  vntyl  he  came  to  the  ryuer  of  Duraba,  whiche  he
affirmeth  to  be  richer  in  gold  then  eyther  Hiebra  or  Beragua.  For  gold  is  engendred  in  al  the  riuers  of  that
land.  In  fo  muche  that  emonge  the  rootes  of  the  trees  growynge  by  the  bankes  of  the  ryuers,  and  amonge  the
flones  left  of  the  water,  and  alfo  where  fo  euer  they  dygged  a  hole  or  pyt  in  the  grounde  not  pafle  the  deapthe
of  a  handfull  and  a  halfe,  they  founde  the  earthe  taken  owte  therof,  myxte  with  golde :  ■\\Tiere  vppon  he  deter-
myned to  faflen  his  foote  there  and  to  inhabyte.  Whiche  thynge  the  people  of  the  countrey  perceaupige  and
fmellynge  what  inconuenyence  and  myfchiefe  myght  thereof  enfewe  to  their  countrey  if  they  fhulde  permitte
(Iraungers  to  plante  their  habitation  there,  affembled  a  great  army,  and  Avith  horrible  owte  crye  aflayled  owre

Spytefull  peop'e.

Guns  make  peace.

Seuen  golden
ryuers

Note,  where  the
plentie  of  goWe
endeth

Pigtumeiii.

Vibba.

Partus  BeUus.

Paynted  people.

A  strange  syght

A  shel  in  the
steede  of  a
codpiece.

Crocodiles  of
sweete  sauour.
Alcayr  or  Babilon
in  Egipt

Shipper  eaten
with  wormes.

Alexandria  in

Egypte.

Broma.

Hiebra.

Beragua.

109

How  the  king  of
Beragua
enterteyni  d  the
lyeuetenaunte.

Their  reuerence  to
the  kynge.

Golde  in  the  ryuer
Duraba.

Great  plenty  of
eolde.

153

154

The  thyrdc  Decade.

Slynges  ami
dartes.

Liberty  more
e-iteemed  then
ryches.

The  Spanyardes
are  dryuen  to
flight.

The  llande  of
lamaico.

A  myserable  za&t.

110

Necessytie  hath
no  lawe  howe
farre  lyfe  is  to  bee
esteemed.

A  daungerous
enterpryse.

Sanctus
Dominictis.

Landes  found  by
Colonus.

Temperate  regions
and  holsome  aier

Cerabaro.
Ifiebra.
Beragua.
Experte  myner>.

A  godly  nature  in
golde.

Golden  haruest

men  (who  had  nowe  begoonne  to  buylde  houfes)  foo  defperately  that  they  were  fcarcely  able  to  abyde  the

fyrfte  brunte. Thefe  naked  barbarians  at  their  fyrfl  approche,  vfed  onely  flynges  and  dartes ;  But  when  they

came  nearer  to  liande  flrookes,  they  foughte  with  tlieir  woodden  fwoordes  whiche  they  caule  Machatias,  as  wee

haue  fayd  before. A  man  woolde  not  thinke  what  great  mahce  and  wrath  was  kyndeled  in  their  hartes  ageinfl

owre  men :  And  with  what  defperate  myndes  they  fought  for  the  defenfe  of  tlieir  lybertie  whiche  they  more

eflecnie  then  lyfe  or  rychefle. For  they  were  nowe  fo  voyde  of  all  feare,  and  conteninynge  deathe,  that  they

neyther  feared  longe  bowes  or  croffebowes,  nor  yet  (whiche  is  moofle  to  be  marueyled)  were  any  thynge

difcouraged  at  the  terryble  noyfe  of  the  gunnes  fliotte  of  from  the  fliyppes. They  retyred  once. But  fhortly

after  encreafynge  their  noumber, they  returned  more  fiercely  then  at  the  fyrfle. They  woolde  haue  byn

contented  to  haue  receyued  owre  men  frendly  as  flraungers,  but  not  as  inhabitours. The  more  inflante  that

o^^Te  men  were  to  remaine,  fo  muche  the  greater  multitude  of  bortherers  flocked  togyther  dayly,  diflurbyng  them

both  nyght  and  daye  fumtymes  on  the  one  fyde  and  fumtymes  on  the  other. The  fliyps  lying  at  anker  neare

vnto  the  fliore,  warded  them  on  the  backe  halfe. But  at  the  length  they  were  fayne  to  forfake  this  lande,  and

retourne  backe  the  fame  way  by  the  which  they  came. Thus  with  much  diffyculty  and  danger,  they  came  to

the  Hand  of  Jamaica  lyenge  on  the  fouth  fyde  of  Hifpaniola  and  Ciiha^  with  their  fliyppes  as  full  of  holes  as

fieues,  and  fo  eaten  with  woormes,  as  though  they  had  byn  bored  through  with  wimbles. The  water  entered

fo  faft.e  at  the  ryftes  and  holes,  that  if  they  had  not  with  the  paynefuU  labour  of  their  handes  enipted  the  fame

as  faft.e,  they  were  lyke  to  haue  peryfflied. Where  as  yet  by  this  meanes  they  arryued  at  Jamaica,  althoughe

in  maner  halfe  deade. But  their  calamitie  ceafed  not  here. For  as  fafl  as  their  fliyppes  leaked,  their  ft.rengthe

dimynifflied  fo  that  they  were  no  longer  able  to  keepe  theym  from  fynkynge. By  reafon  wherof,  faulynge  into

the  handes  of  the  barbarians,  and  inclofed  withowte  hope  of  departure,  they  led  their  lyues  for  the  fpace  of

tenne  monthes  emong  the  naked  people  more  myferably  then  euer  dyd  Achetnenides  emonge  the  gyantes  cauled

Ciclopes:  rather  lyuing  then  beinge  eyther  contented  or  fatiffied  with  the  flrange  meates  of  that  Ilande :  and

that  onely  at  fuch  tymes  as  pleafed  the  barbarians  to  giue  them  part  of  theirs. The  deadly  enmity  and  malice

whiche  thefe  barbarous  kinges  beare  one  ageinfl  an  other,  made  greatly  with  owre  men. For  at  fuche  tymes

as  they  attempted  warre  ageinfl  their  bortherers  they  woold  fumtymes  gyue  owre  men  parte  of  theyr  breade  to

ayde  them. But  howe  myferable  and  wretched  a  thyng  it  is  to  lyue  onely  with  breade  gotten  by  beggynge,

yowre  holyneffe  maye  eafylye  coniecture:  Efpecially  where  all  other  accufl.omed  foode  is  lackynge,  as  wyne,

oyle,  flefflie,  butter,  chiefe,  and  milke,  wherwith  the  flomakes  of  owr  people  of  Europe  haue  euer  byn  noorifflied

euen  from  their  cradelles. Therfore  as  neceffyty  is  fubiecte  to  no  lawe,  fo  doothe  it  enforce  men  to  attempte

defperate  aduentures. And  thofe  the  foner,  which  by  a  certeyne  nobylytie  of  nature  do  no  further  efleeme

lyfe  then  it  is  ioyned  with  fumme  felicity. Bertholojnais  Colonus  therfore,  intendynge  rather  to  proue  what  god

woolde  do  with  hym  and  his  companyons  in  thefe  extremities,  then  any  longer  to  abide  the  fame,  commaunded

Diegus  MeJidez  his  fl,eward  with  two  guydes  of  that  Ilande  whome  he  had  hyred  with  promyffes  of  great  rewardes

at  their  retourne,  to  enter  into  one  of  their  canoas  and  take  their  viage  to  JJifpaniola. Beynge  thus  toffed  on

the  fea  two  and  fro  from  rocke  too  rocke  by  reafon  of  the  fliorteneffe  and  narownes  of  the  canoa,  they  arryued

at  the  length  at  the  lafle  corner  of  JJifpafiiola,  beynge  diftante  from  Jamaica  fortie  leagues. Here  his  guydes

departynge  from  hym,  returned  ageine  to Colonus  for  the  rewardes  which  he  had  promyfed  them. But  Diegus

Meiidez  wente  on  forward  a  foote  vntyll  he  came  to  the  citie  cauled  SanHus  Dominims  beynge  the  chiefe  and

heade  citye  of  the  Ilande. The  offycers  and  rulers  of  IJifpaiiioIa,  beinge  enformed  of  the  matter,  appoynted

hym  two  fliyppes  wherwith  he  retourned  to  his  maifl.er  and  coompanions. As  he  founde  them,  foo  came  they

to  JJifpa?iiola,  verye  feeble  and  in  maner  naked. What  chaunced  of  them  afterwarde,  I  knowe  not  as  yet.

Lette  vs  nowe  therfore  leaue  thefe  particulers,  and  fpeake  fumwhat  more  of  generals. In  al  thofe  trades  whiche

we  fayde  here  before  to  haue  bynne  found  by  Colonus  the  Admyrall,  bothe  he  hym  felfe  writeth,  and  all  his

coompanyons  of  that  vyage  confeffe,  that  the  trees,  herbes,  and  frutes,  are  floryfliing  and  greene  all  the  hole

yeare,  and  the  ayer  fo  temperate  and  holefome,  that  of  all  his  coompanye  there  neuer  fell  one  man  fycke,  nor

yet  were  vexed  eyther  with  extreme  coulde  or  heate  for  the  fpace  of  fyftie  leagues  from  the  great  hauen  of

Cerabaro  to  the  ryuers  of  JJiebra  and  Beragua. Th[e]inhabitantes  of  Cerabaro,  and  the  nations  whiche  are

betwyxte  that  and  the  fayde  ryuers,  applye  not  them  felues  to  the  gatherynge  of  golde  but  onely  at  certeyne

tymes  of  the  yeare :  And  are  very  experte  and  cunnyng  herein,  as  are  owre  myners  of  fyluer  and  Iren. They

knowe  by  longe  experience  in  what  places  golde  is  moofl.e  abundantly  engendred :  as  by  the  colour  of  the

water  of  the  ryuers,  and  fuche  as  faule  from  the  montaynes :  And  alfo  by  the  colour  of  the  earthe  and  ftones.

They  beleue  a  certeyne  godly  nature  to  be  in  golde,  forafmuche  as  they  neuer  gather  it  excepte  they  vfe

certeyne  relygious  expiations  or  pourgynge,  as  to  abfleyn  from  women,  and  all  kyndes  of  plefures  and  delycate

meates  and  drinkes,  during  all  the  tyme  that  their  golden  haruefl.  laflethe. They  fuppofe  that  men  do  naturally

lyue  and  dye  as  other  beafl.es  do,  and  therfore  honour  none  other  thynge  as  god. Yet  doo  they  praye  to  the

foonne,  and  honour  it  when  it  ryfetli. But  lette  vs  nowe  fpeake  of  the  montaines  and  fituation  of  thefe  landes

154

The  thyrde  Decade.

155

From  all  the  fea  bankes  of  thefe  regyons,  exceding  great  and  hyghe  mountaynes  are  feene  towarde  the  Southe,
yet  reachynge  by  a  continuall  tracte  from  the  Eafle  into  the  wefle.  By  reafon  wherof  I  fuppofe  that  the  two
greate  feas  (wherof  I  haue  fpoken  larg[e]Iy  before)  are  deuided  with  thefe  montaynes  as  it  were  with  bulwarkes,
leafle  they  fhoulde  ioyne  and  repugne,  as  Italye  deuideth  the  fea  cauled  Tirr/ietium,  from  the  fea  Adriat>'ke,
which  is  nowe  commonly  cauled  the  goulfe  of  Venes.

For  whiche  waye  foo  euer  they  fayled  from  the  poynt  cauled  Fromortoriiim,  S.  AuguJIini  (whiche  perteyneth
to  the  Portugales  and  profpecteth  ageynfle  the  fea  Atlantike)  euen  vnto  Vraba  and  the  hauen  Cerabaro,  and  to
the  furtheft  landes  found  hytherto  weflwarde,  they  had  euer  greate  mountaynes  in  fyghte  both  nere  hande  and
farre  of,  in  all  that  longe  rafe.  Thefe  mountaynes  were  in  fume  place,  fmooth,  pleafaunt  and  frutfull,  full  of
goodly  trees  and  herbes:  And  fumwhere,  hygh,  rowgh,  ful  of  rockes,  and  baren,  as  chaunfeth  in  the  famus
mountaynes  of  Taurus  in  Afia,  and  alfo  in  dyuers  coafles  of  our  mountaynes  of  Apennini,  and  fuche  other  of
lyke  byggeneffe.  The  rydgies  alfo  of  thefe  mountaynes  are  diuided  with  goodly  and  fayre  valleis.  That  part
of  the  mountaynes  which  includeth  the  lymettes  of  Beragua,  is  thought  to  be  hygher  then  the  clowdes,  in  fo
much  that  (as  they  faye)  the  tops  of  them  can  feldome  bee  feene  for  the  multitude  of  thicke  clowdes  which  are
beneath  the  fame.  Colonus  the  Admirall  the  fyrfle  fynder  of  thefe  regions,  affirmeth  that  the  toppes  of  the
montaynes  of  Beragua  are  more  then  fiftie  myles  in  heyghth.  He  fayth  furthermore  that  in  the  fame  region
at  the  rotes  of  the  montaynes  the  way  is  open  to  the  fouth  fea,  and  compareth  it  as  it  were  betwene  Venice  and
Genua,  or  lanua  as  the  Genues  wyll  haue  it  cauled,  whiche  fable  that  theyr  citie  was  buylded  of  lanus.  He
affirmeth  alfo  that  this  lande  reacheth  foorth  towarde  the  fouth :  And  that  from  henfe  it  taketh  the  begynnynge
of  breadth,  lyke  as  from  the  Alpes  owte  of  the  narowe  thygh  of  Italy,  we  fee  the  large  and  mayne  landes  of
Fraunce,  Germanye,  and  Pannonye,  to  the  Sarmatians  and  Scythyans,  euen  vnto  the  mountaynes  and  rockes  of
Riphea  and  the  frozen  fea,  and  embrafe  thenvith  as  with  a  continuall  bonde,  all  T[h]racia,  and  Grecia,  with  all  that
is  included  within  the  promontorie  or  poynt  of  Malea  and  Hellefpontus  fouthwarde,  and  the  fea  Euximis  and  the
maryfflies  of  Mceotis  in  Scythia  northwarde.  The  Admirall  fuppofethe,  that  on  the  lefte  hande  in  faylynge
towarde  the  wefle,  this  lande  is  ioyned  to  India  beyonde  the  ryuer  of  Ganges:  And  that  on  the  ryght  hande
towarde  the  North,  it  bee  extended  to  the  frofen  fea,  beyonde  the  Hyperboreans  and  the  North  pole :  So  that
both  the  feas  (that  is  to  meane  that  fouth  fea  which  we  fayde  to  bee  founde  by  Vafchus,  and  owre  Ocean)
fliulde  ioyne  and  meete  in  the  corners  of  that  lande :  And  that  the  waters  of  thefe  feas  doo  not  onely  inclofe
and  compaffe  the  fame  withowt  diuifion  as  Europe  is  inclofed  with  the  feas  of  Hellefpo7itus  and  Tanais,  with  the
frofen  Ocean  and  owre  fea  of  Tyrrhemcm  with  the  Spanyffhe  feas.  But  in  my  opinion,  the  vehement  courfe  of
the  Ocean  toward  the  welle,  doth  fignifie  and  lette  that  the  fayde  two  feas  fhulde  not  fo  ioyne  togither:  But
rather  that  that  land  is  adherent  to  the  firme  landes  towarde  the  Northe,  as  we  haue  fayde  before.  It  fhall
fuffice  to  haue  fayde  thus  muche  of  the  length  hereof.  Let  vs  nowe  therfore  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  breadth  of
the  fame.  We  haue  made  mention  before  howe  the  fouth  fea  is  diuided  by  narowe  lymittes  from  o\^Te  Ocean,  as
it  was  proued  by  th[e]experience  of  Vafchus  Nunnez  and  his  coompanions  which  fyrfl  made  open  the  way
thyther.  But  as  dyuerfly  as  the  mountaynes  of  owre  Alpes  in  Europe  are  fumwhere  narowe  and  in  fume  place
brode,  euen  fo  by  the  lyke  prouidence  of  nature,  this  lande  in  fume  parte  reacheth  farre  in  breadth,  and  is  in
other  places  coarcted  with  narowe  limettes  from  fea  to  fea,  with  valleys  alfo  in  fume  places,  wherby  men  maye
paffe  from  the  one  fyde  to  the  other.  Where  we  haue  defcrybed  the  regions  of  Vraba  and  Beragua  to  bee  fituate,
thefe  feas  are  diuided  by  fmaule  diftaunce.  Yet  owght  we  to  thynke  the  region  which  the  great  ryuer  of
Maragnonus  runneth  through,  to  bee  very  large  if  we  fhall  graunt  Maragnonum  to  bee  a  ryuer  and  no  fea,  as  the
frefhe  waters  of  the  fame  owght  to  perfuade  vs.  For  in  fuche  narowe  caues  of  the  earth,  there  can  bee  no
fwalowing  goulfes  of  fuch  bygneffe  as  to  receaue  or  nooryfhe  fo  great  abundance  of  water.  The  lyke  is  alfo  to
bee  fuppofed  of  the  great  ryuer  of  Dabaiba  which  we  fayde  to  bee  from  the  comer  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba  in
fume  place  of  fortie  fathomes  depth,  and  fumwhere  fiftie:  Alfo  three  myles  in  breadth,  and  fo  to  faule  into  the
fea.  We  muR  needes  graunt  that  the  earth  is  brode  there,  by  the  whiche  the  ryuer  paffeth  from  the  hyghe
mountaynes  of  Dabaiba  from  the  Eafle  and  not  from  the  wefl.  They  fay  that  this  ryuer  confifleth  and  taketh
his  encreafe  of  foure  other  ryuers  faulynge  from  the  mountaynes  oi  Dabaiba.  OwTe  men  caule  th!<  ryuer
Flumen.  S.  lohannis.  They  fay  alfo  that  from  henfe  it  fauleth  into  the  goulfe  of  Vraba  by  feuen  mouthes  as
doothe  the  ryuer  of  Nilus  into  tne  fea  of  Egypte.  Lykewyfe  that  in  the  fame  region  of  Vraba  there  are  in  fume
places  narowe  flreyghtes  not  paffynge  fyftene  leaques :  and  the  fame  to  bee  faluage  and  withowt  any  paflage  by
reafon  of  dyuers  maryfflies  and  defolate  wayes,  which  the  Latines  caule  Z^waj- :  But  the  Spanyardes  accordynge
to  their  varietie,  caule  them  Tremedaks,  Travipaks,  Cenegales,  Sujuideros,  and  ZaJiondaderos.  But  before  we
paffe  any  further,  it  fhall  not  bee  greatly  from  owr  purpofe  to  declare  from  whenfe  thefe  mountaynes  of  Dabaiba
haue  theyr  name  accordynge  vnto  th[e]antiquities  of  th[e]inhabitantes.  They  faye  therefore  that  Dabaiba  was
a  woman  of  greate  magnanimitie  and  wyfedome  emonge  theyr  prediceffours  in  owlde  tyme :  whom  in  her  lyfe,
all  th[e]inhabitantes  of  thofe  prouinces  did  greatly  reuerence,  and  beinge  deade  gaue  her  diuine  honour  and

I  Hyghe  and  greate
mountaynes.

Tyirhennum  is
nowe  cauled
Taiicane

Cap.  S.  A  ugustini.

Vraba.

Cerabaro.

Frutful
mountaynes.
Apennini  are
mountaynes
which  diuide
Italy  into.  iL
partes
Beragua
The  mounta^es
of  Beragua  higher
then  the  cloudes.
Montaynes  of
fiftie  miles  heyght

111

lanus  otherwyse
cauled  laphet,  the
son  of  Noe.

Italy  is  lyke  vnto
a  legge  in  the
sea,  and  the
mountaynes  of  the
alpes,  are  in  the
thyghe  thereof

Colonus  his
opinion  of  the
supposed
Continent.

By  this  coniecture,
the  way  shuld  be
open  to  Cathay  by
the  hiperboreans

Looke  the
nauigation  of
Cahote.  deca[de].
iii.  lib.  vL

The  breadth  of
the  lande

The  regions  of
Vraba  and
Beragua.

The  greate  riuer
Maragnonus.

The  greate  riuer
Dabaiba,  or  sancl>
lohannis.

The  rj-ers  haue
theyr  increase
from  the  sprjnges
of  the  montaynes.

The  rj-uer  of  Xilu;
in  Eg\-pte.

Marisshes  .ind
desolate  wayes.

A  superstitious
opinion  of
th[e]originall  of
montaines  of
Dabaiba.

156

The  tJiyyde  Decade.

112

Dragons  and
crocodiles  in  the
niarishes

The  hauou
Cerabara

Twentie  golden
ryuers.

Precious  stones.

A  precious
diemonde  of
excedynge  bygnes.

Topases.

The  Spanyardes
contemne
effeminate  plesures

Sweete  sauours.

A  similitude
prouing  great
plentie  of  golde
and  precious
stones.

The  hauen  of
Sancta  Marth-i.
Cariai.

The  heroical
factes  of  the
Spaniardes.

113

named  the  region  after  her  name,  beleuynge  that  fhee  fendeth  thunder  and  lyghtnynge  to  deflroy  the  frutes  of
the  earth  yf  Ihee  bee  angered,  and  to  fend  plentie  if  fliee  bee  well  pleafed.  This  fuperflition  hathe  byn
perfuaded  them  by  a  craftie  kynde  of  men  vnder  prctenfe  of  religion  to  th[e]intent  that  they  might  enioye  fuche
gyftes  and  ofteringes  as  were  brought  to  tlie  place  where  fliee  was  honoured.  This  is  fufficient  for  this  purpofe.
They  faye  furthermore  that  the  maryfflies  of  the  narowe  lande  wherof  we  haue  fpoken,  brynge  foorth  great
plentie  of  Crocodiles,  dragons,  battes,  and  gnattes  beinge  very  hurtfuU.  Therefore  when  fo  euer  they  take  any
iorney  towarde  the  fouthe,  they  go  owte  of  the  way  towarde  the  mountaynes,  and  efchewe  the  regions  neare  vnto
thofe  perelous  fennes  or  maryflies.  Same  thinke  that  there  is  a  valley  lyinge  that  way  that  the  ryuer  runneth
which  owre  men  caule  Rio  de  los penlidos,  that  is,  the  ryuer  of  the  loft  men  (fo  named  by  the  miffortune  whiche
there  befell  to  Nicuefa  and  his  coompany)  and  not  far  diftant  from  the  hauen  Ceraiaro  whiche  diuideth  thofe
mountaynes  towarde  the  fouth.  But  let  vs  nowe  fyniflie  this  booke  with  a  fewe  other  thynges  woorthy  to  bee
noted.  They  fay  therefore  that  on  the  ryght  hande  and  lefte  hande  frome  Daric/ta,  there  are  twentie  ryuers  in
all  the  whiche,  greate  plentie  of  golde  is  founde.  Being  demaunded  what  was  the  caufe  why  they  brought  no
greater  abundance  of  golde  from  thenfe,  they  anfwered  that  they  lacked  myners :  And  that  the  men  which  they
tooke  with  them  from  Spayne  thyther,  were  not  accuflomed  to  laboure,  but  for  the  mofte  parte  brought  vp
in  the  warres.  This  lande  feemeth  alfo  to  promeffe  many  precious  flones.  For  befyde  thofe  which  I  fayde
to  bee  founde  neare  vnto  Cariai  and  San^a  Martha,  one  Andreas  Moralis  a  pylot  (who  had  trauayled
thofe  coafles  with  lohanncs  de  la  Coffa  whyle  he  yet  lyued)  had  a  precious  diamonde  which  he  bought  of  a
naked  younge  man  in  the  region  of  Ciimana  in  the  prouince  of  Paria.  This  flone  was  as  longe  as  two
ioyntes  of  a  mans  middell  fynger,  and  as  bygge  as  the  fyrfl  ioynte  of  the  thumme :  beinge  alfo  paynted  on  euery
fyde,  confiflynge  of  eyght  fquares  perfectly  formed  by  nature.  They  fay  that  with  this  they  made  fcarres  in
anuilles  and  hammers,  and  brake  the  teethe  of  fyles,  the  flone  remaynyng  vnperyffhed.  The  younge
man  of  Cumana,  wore  this  flone  aboute  his  necke  emonge  other  ouches,  and  foulde  it  to  Andreas  Moralis
for  fyue  of  our  counterfect  flones  made  of  glaffe  of  dyuers  colours  wherwith  the  ignorant  younge  man  was  greatly
delyted.  They  founde  alfo  certeyne  topafes  on  the  fliore.  But  th[e]eflimation  of  golde  was  fo  farre  entered
into  the  heades  of  o^vTe  men,  that  they  had  no  regarde  to  flones.  Alfo  the  mod  part  of  the  Spanyardes,  do
lawgh  them  to  fcorne  which  vfe  to  weare  many  flones :  fpecially  fuch  as  are  common :  ludginge  it  to  bee  an
effeminate  thynge,  and  more  meete  for  women  then  men.  The  noble  men  onely  when  they  celebrate  folemne
mariages,  or  fet  forth  any  triumphes,  weare  cheynes  of  gold  byfet  with  precious  flones,  and  vfe  fayre  apparell  of
fylke  embrothered  with  golde  intermixt  with  pearles  and  precious  flones:  And  not  at  other  tymes.  They
thynke  it  no  leffe  effeminate  for  men  to  fmell  of  the  fweete  fauours  of  Arabic :  And  iudge  hym  to  bee  infected
with  fum  kynde  of  fylthy  lechery,  in  whom  they  fmell  the  fauour  of  mufke  or  CaJIoreu?n.  But  lyke  as  by  one
apple  taken  from  a  tree,  we  may  perce)^ue  the  tree  to  bee  frutfull,  and  by  one  fyfhe  taken  in  a  ryuer,  we  may
knowe  that  fyflie  is  ingendered  in  the  fame,  euen  fo,  by  a  lyttel  gold,  and  by  one  flone,  we  owght  to  confyder
that  this  lande  bringeth  forthe  great  plentie  of  golde  and  precious  flones.  What  they  haue  found  in  the  porte
of  SanHa  Martha  in  the  region  of  Cariai  when  the  hole  nauye  paffed  therby  vnder  the  gouernaunce  of  Petrus
Arias  and  his  coompany  with  certeine  other  of  the  kynges  ofifycers,  I  haue  fuffyciently  declared  in  his  place.
To  be  fliorte  therefore,  all  thynges  do  fo  fioryffhe,  growe,  encreafe,  and  profper,  that  the  lafle  are  euer  better
then  the  fyrfle.  And  furely  to  declare  my  opinion  herin,  what  fo  euer  hath  heretofore  byn  difcouered  by  the
famous  trauayles  of  Saturniis  and  Hercules,  with  fuch  other  whom  the  antiquitie  for  their  heroical  factes  honoured
as  goddes,  feemeth  but  lyttell  and  obfcure  if  it  be  compared  to  the  Spanyardes  victorious  laboures.  Thus  I  byd
yoAvre  holynes  fare  well,  defyringe  yowe  to  certifye  me  howe  yowe  lyke  thefe  fyrfle  frutes  of  the  Ocean,  that
beyng  encoraged  with  yowre  exhortations,  I  maye  the  gladlyer  and  with  leffe  tedioufneffe  write  fuche  thynges  as
fhal  chaunce  herafter.

The

FYFT BOOKE OF THE THIRDE DECADE.

L  fuche  lyuynge  creatures  as  vnder  the  cercle  of  the  moone  bringe  forthe  any  thynge,  are
accuflomed  by  th[e]inflincte  of  nature  as  foone  as  they  are  delyuered  of  their  byrthe,  eyther
to  clofe  vppe  the  matrice,  or  at  the  leafle  to  bee  quyete  for  a  fpace.  But  owre  moofle  frute-
full  Ocean  and  newe  woorlde,  engendereth  and  bringeth  furthe  dayly  newe  byrthes  wherby
men  of  great  wytte,  and  efpecially  fuche  as  are  fludyous  of  newe  and  meruelous  thinges,  may
haue  fumwhat  at  hand  wherwith  to  feede  their  myndes.  If  yowre  holyneffe  do  afke  to  what
purpofe  is  al  this,  ye  fhal  vnderfland,  that  I  had  fcarcely  fynyffhed  the  hiflorye  of  fuche  thynges
as  chaunfed  to  Vafchus  Nunnez  and  his  coompanye  in  their  vyage  to  the  fouthe  fea,  when  foodenly  there  came
is6

The  thyrde  Decade.

157

newe  letters  from  Petrus  Arias  the  newe  gouernour  whom  the  kyng  had  appoynted  the  yeare  before  with  an
army  of  men  and  a  nauye  of  fhippes  to  fayle  to  thefe  newe  landes.  He  fygnifyeth  by  his  letters,  that  he  with
his  nauye  and  coompany,  arryued  all  fafelye.  Furthermore,  lo/iamies  Cabedics  (whome  yowre  holynes  at  the
requefle  of  the  mofle  catholyke  kynge  had  created  byffhoppe  of  that  prouynce  of  Dariena)  and  three  other  of
the  chiefe  offycers  ioined  in  commiffion  to  be  his  affyflance,  as  Alfo7ifus  de  Ponte,  Diegiis  Marques,  and  Johannes
de  Taieira,  confyrraed  the  fame  letters  and  fubfcribed  them  with  the-'r  names.  The  nauygation  therfore  of
Petrus  Arias,  was  in  this  maner.  The  daye  before  the  Ides  of  Apryll,  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifle.  15 14.  he  hoyfed
vppe  his  fayles  in  the  towne  of  faincte  Lucar  de  Barrameda,  fytuate  in  the  mouthe  of  the  ryuer  Bcetis,  whiche
the  Spaniardes  nowe  caule  Guadalchehir.  The  feuen  Ilandes  of  Canaria  are  about  foure  hundreth  myles  diflant
from  the  place  where  this  riuer  fauleth  into  the  fea.  Summe  thinke  that  thefe  are  the  Ilandes  which  the  owlde
writers  did  caule  the  fortunate  Ilandes.  But  other  thynke  the  contrary.  The  name  ci  thefe  Ilandes,  are  thefe.
The  two  whiche  appere  fyrlle  in  fyght,  are  named  Lanzelota  and  Fortifuentura.  On  the  backehalfe  of  thefe,
lyeth  Magna  Canaria  or  Grancanaria.  Beyonde  that  is  Tenerife:  and  Gomcra  fumwhat  towarde  the  northe
frome  that.  Palnia  and  Ferrea,  lye  behynde  as  it  were  a  bulwarke  to  all  the  other.  Petrus  Arias  therfore,  arriued
at  Gomera  the  eyghte  daye  after  his  departure,  with  a  nauye  of  xvii.  fhippes  and  a.  M.  [thousand]  and  fyue
"hundreth  men,  althoughe  there  were  onely  a  thoufand  and  two  hundreth  affygned  hym  by  the  kjTiges  letters.
It  is  fayde  furthermore  that  he  lefte  behynd  hym  more  then  two  thoufande  verye  penfyue  and  fyghynge  that
they  alfo  myght  not  be  receaued,  proferynge  them  felues  to  go  at  their  owne  charges.  He  taried.  xvi.  dayes  in
Gomera  to  th[e]intente  to  make  prouyfyon  of  fuell  and  frefhe  water :  But  chiefely  to  repayre  his  fhyppes  bej-nge
fore  brofed  with  tempefles,  and  efpecially  the  gouernours  fhippe  whiche  had  lofle  the  rudder.  For  thefe
Ilandes  are  a  commodious  reflynge  place  for  all  fuche  as  intende  to  attempte  any  nauygations  in  that  mayne
fea.  Departynge  from  henfe  in  the  nones  of  Maye,  he  fawe  no  more  lande  vntyll  the  thirde  daye  of  lune,
at  the  whiche  he  arriued  at  Dominica  an  Ilande  of  the  Canibales,  being  diflant  from  Gomera  aboute  eyght
hundreth  leaques.  Here  he  remayned  foure  dayes,  makinge  newe  prouifion  of  frefhe  water  and  fuell,  durynge
whiche  tyme  he  fawe  no  man  nor  yet  any  fleppes  of  men :  But  founde  plentie  of  fea  crabbes  and  greate  lyfartes-
From  henfe  he  fayled  by  the  Ilandes  of  Matinina  (otherwyfe  cauled  Madanino)  Guadalupea,  and  Galaiita
(otherwyfe  cauled  Galana)  of  all  whiche,  we  haue  fpoken  in  the  fyrfle  decade.  He  paffed  alfo  throughe
the  fea  of  herbes  or  weedes,  continuyng  a  long  tracte.  Yet  nother  he,  nor  Colonns  the  Admyrall  (who
fyrfle  founde  thefe  Ilandes  and  fayled  through  this  fea  of  weedes)  haue  declared  anye  reafon  howe
thefe  weedes  fhoulde  coome.  Summe  thynke  the  fea  too  be  verye  muddye  there,  and  that  thefe  weedes
are  engendered  in  the  bottome  therof,  and  fo  beynge  loofed,  to  afcende  to  the  vppermoofle  parte  of  the
water,  as  wee  fee  oftentymes  chaunce  in  certeyne  flondynge  pooles,  and  fumtymes  alfo  in  greate  ryuers.
Other  fuppofe  that  they  are  not  engendered  there,  but  to  bee  beaten  from  certeyne  rockes  by  the
vyolence  of  the  water  in  tempefles.  And  thus  they  leaue  the  matter  in  dowte:  Neyther  haue  they  yet
any  certeyne  experyence  whether  they  flycke  fafle  and  gyue  place  to  the  fhyppes,  or  wander  loofe  vppon
the  water.  But  it  is  to  bee  thought  that  they  are  engendered  there.  For  otherwyfe  they  fhulde  bee  dryuen
togyther  on  heapes  by  th[e]ympulfyon  of  the  fhyppes  euen  as  a  beafome  gathereth  the  fwepynges  of  a  houfe,  and
fhulde  alfo  lette  the  courfe  of  the  fhyppes.  The  fourth  day  after  that  he  departed  frome  Dominica,  the  hyghe
mountaynes  couered  with  fnowe  (wherof  we  haue  fpoken  in  the  feconde  decade)  appered  vnto  hym.  They  faye
that  there  the  feas  runne  as  fwyftely  towarde  the  wefle,  as  it  were  a  ryiier  faulyng  from  the  toppes  of  hyghe
montaynes :  Although  they  fayled  not  directly  toward  the  wefl,  but  inchned  fumwhat  to  the  fouth.  From  thefe
montaynes  fauleth  the  ryuer  of  Gaira,  famous  by  the  flaughter  of  owre  men  at  fuch  tyme  as  Rodericus
Colmenares  pafled  by  thofe  coafles  as  we  haue  fayde  before.  Lykewyfe  many  other  fayre  ryuers  haue  their
originall  from  the  fame  montaynes.  This  prouynce  (in  the  whiche  is,  alfo  the  regyon  of  Caramairi)  hath  in  it
two  notable  hauens,  of  the  which  owre  men  named  the  one  Carthago  or  Carthagena,  and  the  other  Sancia
Martha,  the  region  wherof,  th[e]inhabitantes  caule  Saturma.  The  porte  of  SanHa  Martha,  is  nearer  to  the
montaines  couered  with  fnowe  cauled  Montes  Niuales :  for  it  is  at  the  rootes  of  the  fame  montaines.  But  the
hauen  of  Carthago,  is  more  weflewarde  aboute  fyftie  leaques.  He  writeth  marueylous  thynges  of  the  hauen  of
San6la  Martha,  whiche  they  alfo  confirme  that  came  lately  from  thenfe :  Of  the  which  younge  Vefputius  is  one
to  whom  Americus  Vefputius  his  vncle  (being  a  Florentine  borne)  left  the  exact  knowlege  of  the  mariners
facultie,  as  it  were  by  inheritance  after  his  death  for  he  was  a  very  expert  maifler  in  the  knowledge  of  his
carde,  his  compaffe,  and  the  eleuation  of  the  pole  flarre  with  all  that  perteineth  therto.  This  younge  Vefputius
was  affygned  by  the  kyng  to  bee  one  of  the  maiflers  of  the  gouernours  fhyppe,  bicaufe  he  was  cunninge  in
iudgyng  the  degrees  of  the  eleuation  of  the  pole  flarre  by  the  quadrante.  For  the  charge  of  gouemynge  the
rudder,  was  chiefely  coommytted  to  one  Johannes  Serranus  a  Spaniarde,  who  had  oftentymes  ouer  runne  thofe
coafles.  Vefputius  is  my  verye  familyar  frende,  and  a  wyttie  younge  man  in  whofe  coompany  I  take  gTeat
pleafure,  and  therefore  vfe  hym  oftentymes  for  my  gefle. He  hath  alfo  made  many  vy^iges  into  thefe  coafles,  and

The  bysshop  of
Dariena.

The  naui^ation  of
Petrus  Arias.

Saint  Lucar.

The  Hand  of
Canane-

Prouision  of
fresshe  water  and
fuelL

The  Hand  of
Dominica.

Guadalupea,
otherwyse  cauled
Carucueria,  or
Queraquiera.

The  sea  of  herbes.

1114

These  mountaynes
are  cauled  Montes
Niuales  or  Serra
Neuata,  decade  ii.
liber,  i.  and  ii.

The  swj'fte  course

of  the  sea  towarde

the  west.

The  ryuer  Caira.

Caramairi.

Carthago.

Saturma.

Mountaynes
couered  with
snowe.

A  inericus
V'csputiiis.

>S7

iS8

The  thynie  Decade.

I'he  stoulnes  of
the  Barbarians.

The  Canibales
feyght  in  the
water.

The  vsc  of  gunnes.

The  generacion  of
thunder  and
lyghtnynge.

Meteora.

Venenious  arrowes

115

Plentie  of  fysshe.

Cunnynge
fysshers.

Theyr  householde
stuffe.

Tap[e]strj'.

A  straunge
phantasy.

This  is  he  whom
Cardanus  praiseth.

Precious  stones

The  Smarpgde  is
the  trew  cnnrode
Another  kind  of
amber  is  founde
in  whales.

Gold  and  braslle.

Marchasites  are
flowers  of  metals,
by  the  colours
wherof,  the  kyndes
of  metals  are
knowen.

These  locustes
burne  the  come
with  toching  and
deuoure  the
residewe  they  are
in  India  of.  iiL
foote  length.

diligently  noted  fuche  thinges  as  he  hath  feene. Petrus  Arias  therfore  writeth,  and  he  confyrmeth  the  fame,

that  th[e]inhabitantes  of  thefe  regyons  tooke  their  originall  of  the  Caribes  or  Canibales,  as  appeared  by  the

defperate  fiercenes  and  crueltie  which  they  oftentymes  fhcwed  to  owre  men  when  they  pafled  by  their  coafles.

Suche  floutenes  and  fortitude  of  mynde  is  naturallye  engendered  in  thefe  naked  Barbarians,  that  they  feared  not

to  aflayle  owre  hole  nauy  and  to  forbyd  them  to  coome  a  land. They  feyght  with  venemous  arrowes  as  we  haue

fayde  before. Perceauynge  that  owre  men  contempned  their  threatnyngcs,  they  ranne  furioufly  into  the  fea,

euen  vppe  to  the  breafles,  nothynge  fearinge  eyther  the  liygnes  or  multitude  of  owre  fliyppes,  but  ceafed  not

continually  beinge  thus  in  the  water,  to  cafl  dartes  and  finite  their  venemous  arrowes  as  thicke  as  hayle :  In  fo

muche  that  owre  men  had  bynne  in  great daunger  if  they  had  not  byn  defended  by  the  cages  or  pauides

of  the  fliyppes  and  their  targettes. Yet  were  two  of  them  wounded  whiche  died  fliortely  after. But  this

conflycte  continued  fo  fliarpe,  that  at  the  length  owre  men  were  enforced  to  fliute  of  their  byggefl  pieces  of

ordinaunce  with  haylefliotte:  At  the  flaughter  and  terrible  noyfe  wherof  the  barbarians  beynge  fore  difcomfited

and  fliaken  with  feare,  thynkynge  the  fame  to  be  thunder  and  lyghtnynge,  tourned  their  backes  and  fledde

amayne. They  gi^eately  feare  thunder  bycaufe  thefe  regions  are  oftentymes  vexed  with  thunder  and  lyghtnynge

by  reafon  of  the  hyghe  montaynes  and  neareneffe  of  the  fame  to  the  region  of  the  ayer  wherin  fuch  fierie

tempedes  are  engendered  which  the  philofophers  caule  Meteora. And  all  be  it  that  owre  men  had  nowe  dryuen

their  enemyes  to  flyght,  and  fawe  them  difparcled  and  owte  of  order,  yet  dowted  they  and  were  of  dyuers

opinions  whether  they  fliulde  purfue  them  or  not  On  the  one  partie,  fliame  pricked  them  forwarde,  and  on  the

other  fyde  feare  caufed  them  to  cafle  many  perelles,  efpecially  confyderynge  the  venemous  arrowes  whiche  thefe

barbarians  canne  direct  fo  certeynely. To  departe  from  theym  with  a  drye  foote  (as  faithe  the  prouerbe)  with  fo

great  a  nauye  and  fuche  an  armye,  they  reputed  it  as  a  thynge  greately  foundynge  to  their  reproche  and  difhonour.

At  the  length  therfore  fliame  ouercommyng  feare,  they  purfued  them  and  came  to  land  with  their  fliippeboates.  The

gouernoure  of  the  nauie,  and  alfo  Vefputius  doo  \vryte,  that  the  hauen  is  no  leffe  then  three  leagues  in  compaffe,

beinge  alfo  fafe  withowt  rockes,  and  the  water  therof  fo  clere,  that  a  man  may  fee  pybble  Rones  in  the  bottome

twentie  cubettes  deape. They  faye  lykewyfe  that  there  fauleth  twoo  fayre  ryuers  of  frefthe  water  into  the

hauen :  but  the  fame  to  bee  meeter  to  beare  the  canoas  of  thefe  prouinces  then  anye  bygger  veffels. It  is  a

delectable  thynge  to  heare  what  they  tel  of  the  plentie  and  varietie,  and  alfo  of  the  pleafaunt  taft  of  the  fyffhes

afwel  of  thefe  riuers  as  of  the  fea  there  about. By  reafon  wherof  they  founde  here  many  fyffher  boates  and

nettes  woonderfully  wrought  of  the  flalkes  of  certeyne  herbes  or  weedes  dryed  and  tawed  and  wrethed  with

cordes  of  fpunne  goffampine  cotton. For  the  people  of  Caramairi,  Gaira,  and  Satiirma,  are  very  cunnynge  in

fyffhynge,  and  vfe  to  fell  fyffhe  to  theyr  bortherers  for  exchaunge  of  fuche  thynges  as  they  lacke. When  owre  men

had  thus  chafed  the  Barbaryans  from  the  fea  coafles,  and  hadde  nowe  entered  into  theyr  houfes,  they  affayled

them  with  newe  fkyrmuflies,  efpecially  when  they  fawe  them  faule  to  fackynge  and  fpoylyng,  and  theyr  wyues

and  chyldren  taken  captiue. Theyr  houfeholde  fLuffe  was  made  of  great  reedes  which  grovve  on  the  fea  bankes

and  the  {lalkes  of  certeyne  herbes  beaten  and  afterward  made  harde. The  floures  therof  were  flrewed  with

herbes  of  fundry  coloures;  And  the  waules  hanged  with  a  kynde  of  tap[e]flry  artificially  made  of  goflampine

cotton,  and  wrought  with  pictures  of  Lions,  Tygers,  and  Eagles. The  doores  of  theyr  houfes  and  chambers

were  full  of  dyuers  kyndes  of  fhelles  hangynge  loofe  by  fmaule  cordes,  that  beinge  fhaken  by  the  wynde  they

myght  make  a  certeyne  rattelynge  and  alfo  a  whyflelynge  noyfe  by  gatherynge  the  wynde  in  theyr  holowe

places. For  herein  they  haue  greate  delyte,  and  impute  this  for  a  goodly  ornamente. Dyuers  haue  fhewed  me

many  woonderfull  thynges  of  thefe  regions :  Efpecially  one Gonzalus  Fernandus  Ouiedus  beinge  one  of  the

maieflrates  appointed  in  that  office  which  the  Spanyardes  caule  Veedor,  who  hath  alfo  hetherto  entered  further

into  the  lande  then  any  other. He  affirmeth  that  he  chaunced  vppon  the  fragmente  of  a  faphire  bygger  then

the  egge  of  a  goofe. And  that  in  certeyne  hylles  where  he  trauayled  with  thirtie  men,  he  founde  many  of  the

precious  flones  cauled  Smaragdes,  calcidones,  and  lafpers,  befyde  great  pieces  of  amber  of  the  montaines. He

alfo  with  dyuers  other  do  affirme  that  in  the  houfes  of  fume  of  the  Canibales  of  thefe  regions,  they  founde  the

lyke  precious  flones  fet  in  golde  and  inclofed  in  the  tap[e]flry  or  arras  (if  it  may  foo  bee  cauled)  wherewith  they

hange  theyr  houfes. The  fame  lande  bryngeth  foorth  alfo  many  wooddes  of  brafile  trees  and  great  plentie  of

golde :  In  fo  much  that  in  maner  in  al  places  they  founde  on  the  fea  bankes  and  on  the  fhoores,  certeyne

marchafites  in  token  of  golde :  Fernandus  Ouiedus  declareth  furthermore  that  in  a  certeyne  region  cauled  Zenu,

lyinge  foure  fcore  and  tenne  myles  from  Dariena  Eaflwarde,  they  exercyfe  a  flraunge  kynde  of  marchaundies.

For  in  the  houfes  of  the  inhabitantes,  they  founde  greate  chefles  and  bafkets  made  of  the  twigges  and  leaues  of

certeyne  trees  apte  for  that  purpofe,  beinge  all  full  of  greffehoppers,  grylles,  crabbes,  or  crefyffhes:  fnayles  alfo,

and  locufles  whiche  deflrowe  the  fieldes  of  come,  all  well  dryed  and  failed. Beinge  demaunded  why  they

referued  fuch  a  multitude  of  thefe  beafles,  they  anfwered  that  they  kepte  them  to  bee  foulde  to  theyr  bortherers

which  dwell  further  within  the  lande :  And  that  for  the  exchange  of  thefe  precious  byrdes  and  falted  fyflhes,

they  receaued  of  them  certeyne  flrange  thynges  wherin  partely  they  take  pleafure,  and  partly  ^^e  them  for

15S

The  thyrde  Decade.

159

The  fayre  region
of  Carariiairi.

Fruteful
montaynes.

Gardens.

Insubres  are
nowe  cauled
Lumbardes,  and
!  hetrusci,  Tuscans

'1I6

I  Many  countreys

I  lefte  desolate  by

I  the  fiercenes  of

the  Canibales.

One  myriade  is
ten  thousande.

A  miserable
hcarjnge.

Breade  of  rootes.

theyr  neceffary  affayers.  Thefe  people  dwel  not  togyther,  but  fcattered  here  and  there.  Th[e]inhabitantes  of
Caramairi,  feeme  to  dwel  in  an  earthly  Paradife,  theyr  region  is  fo  fayre  and  frutefuU,  withowt  owtragious  heate
or  fharpe  coulde,  with  lyttle  difference  of  the  length  of  day  and  nyght  throwghowt  all  the  yeare.  After  that
owre  men  had  thus  dryuen  the  barbarians  to  flyght,  they  entered  into  a  valley  of  two  leagues  in  breadth  and
three  in  length,  extendynge  to  certeyne  frutful  mountaynes  ful  of  graffe,  herbes,  and  trees,  at  the  rootes  wherof,
lye  twoo  other  valleys  towarde  the  ryght  hande  and  the  left,  throwgh  eyther  of  the  which  runneth  a  fayre  ryuer,
whereof  the  ryuer  of  Gaira  is  one,  but  vnto  the  other  they  haue  yet  gyuen  noo  name.  In  thefe  valleys  they
founde  manye  fayre  gardeyns  and  pleafaunte  fyeldes  watered  with  trenfhes  diflrybuted  in  marueylous  order,
with  no  leffe  arte  then  OAvre  Infubrians  and  Hetrurians  vfe  to  water  theyr  fyeldes.  Theyr  common  meate,
is  Ages,  Iiicca,  Maizium,  Battata,  with  fuche  other  rootes  and  frutcs  of  trees,  and  alfo  fuche  fyffhe  as  they  vfe  in
the  Ilandes  and  other  regions  of  thefe  prouinces.  They  eate  mans  flefhe  but  feldome,  bycaufe  they  meete  not
oftentymes  with  flrangiers,  except  they  goo  foorth  of  theyr  owne  dominions  with  a  mayne  armye  of  purpofe  to
hunt  for  men,  when  theyr  rauenynge  appetite  pricketh  them  forwarde.  For  they  abfleyne  from  them  felues,  and
eate  none  but  fuche  as  they  take  in  the  warres  or  otherwyfe  by  chaunce.  But  fuerly  it  is  a  miferable  thynge  to
lieare  howe  many  myriades  of  men  thefe  fylthy  and  vnnaturall  deuourers  of  mans  fleffhe  haue  confumed,  and
lefte  thoufandes  of  mofle  fayre  and  frutfull  Ilandes  and  regions  defolate  withowte  menne :  By  reafon  wherof
owre  men  founde  fo  many  Ilandes  whiche  for  theyr  fayrenes  and  frutefulneffe  myght  feeme  to  bee  certeyne  earthly
Paradyfes,  and  yet  were  vtterly  voyde  of  men.  Hereby  yowre  holyneffe  may  confider  howe  pernitious  a  kynde
of  men  this  is.  We  haue  fayde  before  that  the  Ilande  named  SanHi  lohannis  (which  th[e]inhabitantes  caule
Burichend)  is  nexte  to  Hifpaniola.  It  is  fayde  that  onely  the  Canibales  which  dwell  in  the  other  Ilandes  nere
about  this,  as  in  the  Ilande  cauled  Hayhay  or  Sancta  Criicis,  and  in  Giiadalupea  (otherwife  cauled  Queraqtieiera,
or  Caruadera)  haue  in  owre  tyme  vyolentely  taken  owte  of  the  fayde  Ilande  of  SanHi  lohajinis,  mere  then  fyue
thoufande  men  to  bee  eaten.  But  let  it  fuffice  thus  much  to  haue  wandered  by  thefe  monflrous  bludfuckers.
We  wyll  nowe  therfore  fpeake  fumewhat  of  the  rootes  whereof  they  make  theyr  breade,  forafmuch  as  the  fame
fhall  hereafter  bee  foode  to  Chriflian  men  in  fleede  of  breade  made  of  wheate,  and  in  the  fleade  of  radyffhe  with
fuch  other  rootes  as  they  haue  byn  accuftomed  to  eate  in  Europe.  We  haue  oftentymes  fayde  before  that  lucca
is  a  roote  whereof  the  befle  and  mofle  dehcate  breade  is  made  bothe  in  the  firme  lande  of  thefe  regions,  and
alfo  in  the  Ilandes.  But  howe  it  is  tylled  or  hufbanded,  howe  it  groweth,  and  of  howe  dyuers  kyndes  it  is,  I
haue  not  yet  declared.  Therefore,  when  they  intende  to  plante  this  lucca,  they  make  a  hole  in  the  earth  knee
deape,  and  rayfe  a  heape  of  the  earth  taken  owte  of  the  fame,  fafhionynge  it  lyke  a  fquare  bedde  of  nyne  foote
breadth  on  euerye  fyde,  fettynge  twelue  trunkes  of  thefe  rootes  (beinge  about  a  foote  and  a  halfe  longe  a  piece)
in  euery  of  the  fayd  beddes  conteynynge  three  rootes  of  a  fyde,  fo  layde  a  flope,  that  the  endes  of  them  ioyne
in  maner  togyther  in  the  center  or  myddefl  of  the  bedde  within  the  grounde,  Owt  of  the  ioyntes  of  the  rootes
and  fpaces  betwene  the  fame,  fprynge  the  toppes  and  blades  of  newe  rootes,  which  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  encrea-
fynge,  growe  to  the  byggenes  and  length  of  a  mans  arme  in  the  brawne,  and  oftentymes  as  bygge  as  the  thygh :
So  that  by  the  tyme  of  thr>T  full  rypenes,  in  maner  all  the  earthe  of  the  heape,  is  conuerted  into  rootes.  But
they  fay  that  thefe  rootes  are  not  rype  in  leffe  tyme  then  a  yeare  and  a  halfe :  And  that  the  longer  they  are
fuffered  to  growe  euen  vntyll  twoo  yeares  complete,  they  are  fo  muche  the  better  and  more  perfecte  to  make
breade  therof.  When  they  are  taken  foorthe  of  the  earth,  they  fcrape  them  and  flyfe  them  with  certeyne  fharpe
Hones  feruynge  for  the  fame  purpofe :  And  thus  layinge  them  betwene  two  great  flones,  or  puttynge  them  in  a
facke  made  of  the  llalkes  of  certeyne  towgh  herbes  and  fmaule  reedes,  they  preffe  them  (as  we  do  cheefe  or
crabbes  to  drawe  owte  the  iufe  thereof)  and  fo  let  them  drye  a  daye  before  they  eate  them.  The  iufe  or
lyquoure,  they  cafl  away :  for  (as  we  haue  fayde)  it  is  deadly  poyfon  in  the  Ilandes.  Yet  is  the  iufe  of  fuche  as
growe  in  the  firme  lande,  holfome  it  it  bee  fodde,  as  is  the  whey  of  o^\Te  mylke.  They  faye  that  there  are  manye
kyndes  of  this  lucca,  wherof  fome  are  more  pleafaunte  and  delycate  then  the  other,  and  are  therefore  refenied
as  it  were  to  make  fine  manchet  for  the  kynges  owne  tables.  But  the  gentelmen  eate  of  the  meaner  forte,  and
the  common  people  of  the  bafefl.  The  fynefl  they  caule  Cazabhi,  which  they  make  rounde  lyke  cakes  in
certeyne  preffes  before  they  feeth  it  or  bake  it.  They  faye  furthermore  that  there  are  lykewyfe  dyuers  k-mdes
of  the  rootes  of  Ages  and  Battaia.  But  they  vfe  thefe  rather  as  frutes  and  dyffhes  of  feruice,  then  to  make
breade  therof,  as  we  vfe  rapes,  radyffhes,  mufflieronis,  nauies,  perfeneppes,  and  fuch  lyke.  In  this  cafe,  they
moofte  efpecially  efleeme  the  befl  kynde  of  Battatas,  which  in  pleafant  tafl  and  tendernes  farre  exceadeth  owre
mufheromes.  It  fhal  fuffice  to  haue  fayde  thus  muche  of  rootes.  We  wyll  nowe  fpeake  therfore  of  an  other
kynde  of  theyr  breade.  We  declared  before  that  they  haue  a  kynde  of  grayne  or  pulfe  muche  lyke  vnto
Panicum,  but  with  fumwhat  bygger  graines,  which  they  beate  into  meale  vppon  certeyne  greate  hoUowe  flones
with  the  labour  of  their  handes  when  they  lacke  lucca :  And  of  this  is  made  the  more  vulgar  or  common  breade.
It  is  fowen  thrife  a  yeare,  fo  that  the  frutfulneiTe  of  the  grounde  may  beare  it  by  reafon  of  the  equahtie  of  the
t}Tije,  whereof  wee  haue  fpoken  fuffyciently  before. In  thefe  reg}'ons  they  founde  alfo  the  graine  of  Maizium,

1  he  maner  of
plantinge  the
roote  lucca.

Earth  turned  into
rootes.

How  breade  is
made  of  rootes.

A  straungc
thynge.

Cazabbi.

Ases  and  Battata

Panicum  is  a
grayne  sumcxrlial
lyke  m;l The
Italians  caule  u
Melica.

117

>i<)

i6o

The  thyrde  Decade.

He  meanethe  the
equ.iU  length  of
day  and  night
which  is

continually  vnder
the  Equinoctial
lyne.
Maizium

Karth  of  dyuers
colours.

Golde  In  rj'uers.

1  lartes  and  bores.
Foules.

Holsome  aycr

Gossampine

cotton.

Fethers.

l?o\ves  and
arrowes.
Deade  bodies
reserued

Ouches  of  laton.

Gonzalus  Ouiedus,
sayth  that  they
gilt  maruelously
with  the  iuse  of  a
certeyne  herbe.
Whyte  marble.

The  great  ryuer
Maragnonus.
This  ioyneth  with
the  myghty  ryuer
cauled  Flumen
Amazonum,  found
of  late.

Clokes  of  fethers.

118

The  swyfte  course
of  the  water.

xl.  leaques  in  one
nyglit.

and  fundry  kyndes  of  frutes  of  trees  diligentely  planted  and  well  hufbanded.  The  waye  betvvene  the  regyons
of  Caramairi  and  Satur/na,  is  foyre,  brode,  and  ryghte  foorthe.  They  founde  here  alfo  fundrye  kyndes  of
waterpottes  made  of  earthe  of  dyuers  colours,  in  the  vvhiche  they  bothe  fetche  and  keepe  frefhe  water.  Lyke-
wife  fundry  kindes  of  iugges,  godderdes,  drynkyng  cuppes,  pottes,  pannes,  dyfflies,  and  platters  artifycially
made.  When  the  gouernour  had  gyuen  commaundemcnt  by  proclamation,  that  th[e]inhabitantes  fliulde  eyther
obey  the  Chriflian  kynge  and  embrafe  owre  relygion,  or  dies  to  depart  owte  of  their  countrey,  they  anfwered
with  venemous  anowcs.  In  this  Ikyrmylbe,  owre  men  tooko  fumme  of  theym:  whereof  clothynge  the  mode
parte  in  faire  apparell,  they  fente  them  ageyne  to  their  owne  coompany:  But  leadyng  the  refydue  to  the  fliyppes
to  th[e]intent  to  (hewe  them  the  poure  and  magnyfycence  of  the  chriflians  that  they  myght  declare  the  fame  to
their  coompanions,  therby  to  wynnc  their  fauour,  they  appareled  them  lykewyfe  and  fente  them  after  their
felowes.  There  aftyrme  that  in  all  the  ryuers  of  thefe  coafles,  theye  fawe  great  argumentes  and  tokens  of  golde.
They  founde  here  and  there  in  their  houfes  good  flore  of  hartes  fleflhe  and  bores  fleOie  wherwith  they  fedde
them  felues  dilycately.  They  alfo,  haue  greate ,  plentie  of  fundry  kyndes  of  byrdes  and  foules,  wherof  they
brynge  vppe  many  in  their  houfes,  fumme  for  neceffarye  foode,  and  other  for  daynty  dyffhes  as  we  do  hennes
and  partriches.  Owre  men  hereby  coniecture  that  the  ayer  of  thefe  regions  is  veary  holfome,  for  as  muche  as
fleapynge  all  nyghte  vnder  the  fyrmament  on  the  bankes  of  the  ryuers,  none  of  them  were  at  any  tyme  offended
with  reumes  or  heade  ache  by  reafon  of  any  noyfome  humoure  or  vapoure  proceadynge  from  the  earthe,  ayer,
or  water.  Owre  men  furthermore,  founde  there  many  great  bothomes  of  goffampyne  cotton  ready  fpunne,  and
fardelles  of  dyuers  kyndes  of  fethers  wherof  they  make  them  felues  crefl.es  and  plumes  after  the  maner  of  owre
men  of  amies :  alfo  certeine  clokes  whiche  they  efleeme  as  mofte  cumly  ornamentes.  They  founde  lykewyfe
an  innumerable  multitude  of  bowes  and  arrowes.  Th[e]inhabitantes  alfo  of  thefe  regions,  in  fumme  places  vfe
to  burne  the  carkefes  of  their  prynces  when  theye  are  deade,  and  to  referue  their  bones  buryed  with  fpyces  in
certeyne  hylles.  In  other  places,  they  onely  drye  theym  and  imbaume  them  with  fpyces  and  fweete  gummes,
and  foo  referue  them  in  fepulchers  in  their  owne  houfes.  Sumwhere  alfo,  they  drye  them,  fpyce  them,  adourne
them  Avith  precyous  iewells  and  ouches,  and  fo  reuerently  place  them  in  certeyne  tabernacles  made  for  the
fame  purpofe  in  their  owne  palayces.  When  owre  men  had  many  of  their  tabellets,  braflettes,  coUers,  and  fuche
other  ouches  (whiche  they  caule  Guajiines)  they  founde  them  rather  to  bee  made  of  laton  then  of  golde:
wherby  they  fuppofe  that  they  haue  vfed  to  exchaunge  their  ware  with  fumme  craftie  flraungers  whiche  broughte
them  thofe  counterfect  ouches  to  defraude  them  of  their  golde.  For  euen  owre  menne  perceaued  not  the
deceate  vntyll  they  came  to  the  meltynge.  Furthermore,  certayne  of  owre  buylders  wanderynge  a  lyttell  way
from  the  fea  coafl.es,  chaunced  to  fynde  certayne  pyeces  of  white  marble.  Wherby  they  thynke  that  in  tyme
pafl.e  fumme  fl.raungers  haue  coome  too  thofe  landes,  whiche  haue  dygged  marble  owte  of  the  mountaines,  and
lefte  thofe  fragmentes  on  the  plaine.  There  owre  men  learned  that  the  ryuer  Maragnonus  defcendeth  frome
the  montaynes  couered  with  fnowe  cauled  Monies  Niiiales  or  Serra  Neiiata:  And  the  fame  to  bee  encreafed  by
many  other  ryuers  whiche  faule  into  it  throughowte  all  the  lowe  and  wate[r]lye  regions  by  the  whiche  it  runneth
with  fo  longe  a  tracte  from  the  fayde  montaynes  into  the  fea :  And  this  to  bee  the  caufe  of  the  greatneffe  therof
Thefe  thynges  beyng  thus  brought  to  paffe,  the  gouernour  commaunded  the  trumpitour  to  blowe  a  retraite :
Whervppon  they  whiche  were  fente  to  lande  (beynge  fyue  hundreth  in  noumber)  makynge  a  great  fhoute  for
ioye  of  their  victory,  fette  them  felues  in  order  of  battayle,  and  fo  keping  their  array,  returned  to  the  fhippes
laden  with  fpoyle  of  thofe  prouinces,  and  fhynynge  in  fouldiers  clokes  of  fethers,  with  faire  plumes  and  crefl.es
of  variable  colours.  In  this  meane  tyme  hauynge  repaired  their  fhyppes  and  furnyffhed  the  fame  with  all
neceffaries,  they  loofed  anker  the.  xvi.  daye  of  the  Calendes  of  luly,  directynge  their  courfe  to  the  hauen  of
Carthagena,  in  the  whiche  viage  they  deflroyed  and  wafled  certayne  Ilandes  of  the  Canibales  lyinge  in  the  waye,
accord}Tige  as  they  were  commaunded  by  the  kynge.  But  the  fwifte  courfe  of  the  water  deceaued  bothe
lohamies  Serranus  the  chiefe  Pilot  of  the  gouemours  fhyppe,  and  all  the  other,  althoughe  they  made  their  bofl.e
that  they  perfectely  knewe  the  nature  therof.  For  they  afifyrme  that  in  one  night  they  were  caried  forty  leaques
beyonde  their  eflimation.

i6o

The  thyrde  Decade.

i6i

Th

E SYXTE BOOKE OF THE THIRDE

D

ECADE.

«i^5:^

Ere  inufle  wc  fumwhat  digreffe  from  cofmography,  and  make  a  philofophicall  difcours  to
fearche  the  fecreate  caufes  of  nature.  For  wheras  they  al  affyrme  \vith  one  confent,  that  the
fea  runneth  there  from  the  Eafle  to  the  wefle  as  fwyftly  as  it  were  a  ryuer  faulinge  from  hyghe
mountaynes,  I  thoughte  it  not  good  to  lette  fo  great  a  matter  flyppe  vntouched.  The  whiche
while  I  confyder,  I  am  drawen  into  no  fmaule  ambyguitie  and  doute,  whether  thofe  waters
haue  their  courfe  Avhiche  flowe  with  fo  contynuall  a  tracte  in  circuite  from  the  Eafle,  as
thowghe  they  fledde  to  the  wefl  neucr  to  retourne,  and  yet  neyther  the  wefle  therby  any
whitte  the  more  fylled,  nor  the  Eafte  emptied.  If  we  fliall  faye  that  they  faule  to  their  centre  (as  is  the  nature  of
heuye  thynges)  and  affigne  the  Equinoctiall  lyne  to  be  the  centre  (as  fumme  afifynne)  what  centre  fhall  we
appointe  to  bee  able  to  receaue  fo  great  aboundaunce  of  water?  Or  what  circumference  fhal  be  founde  weate?
They  whiche  haue  fearched  thofe  coafles,  haue  yet  founde  no  lykely  reafon  to  be  trewe.  Manye  thynke  that
there  fliulde  bee  certeyne  large  llraightes  or  enterances  in  the  comer  of  that  greate  lande  whiche  we  defcribed
to  bee  eyght  tymes  bygger  then  Italye,  and  the  comer  therof  to  be  full  of  goulfes,  wherby  they  fuppofe  that
fumme  flrayghtes  fhulde  paffe  through  the  fame  lyinge  on  the  wefle  fyde  of  the  Ilande  of  Cuba :  And  that  the
fayde  flraightes  fhuld  fwalowe  vp  thofe  waters,  and  fo  conuey  the  fame  into  the  wefle  and  from  thenfe  agejTi
into  owre  Eafle  Ocean,  or  north  feas  as  fumme  thynke.  Other  \vyll,  that  the  goulfe  of  that  great  lande  bee
clofed  vppe :  and  the  lande  to  reach  farre  towarde  the  northe  on  the  backe  fyde  of  Cuba :  fo  that  it  embrace
the  northe  landes  whiche  the  frofen  fea  encompafeth  vnder  the  northe  pole :  And  that  all  the  lande  of  thofe
coafles,  fhoulde  ioyne  togyther  as  one  firme  lande :  Wherby  they  coniecture  that  thofe  waters  fhulde  bee  turned
aboute  by  the  obiecte  or  refyflaunce  of  that  lande  fo  bendynge  towarde  the  north,  as  we  fee  the  waters  toumed
aboute  in  the  crooked  bankes  of  certeyne  ryuers.  But  this  agreeth  not  in  all  poyntes.  For  they  alfo  whiche
haue  fearched  the  frozen  fea,  and  fayled  from  thenfe  into  the  wefle,  do  lykewyfe  affyrme  that  thofe  northe  feas
flowe  contynually  towarde  the  wefle,  although  nothing  fo  fwiftely.  Thefe  northe  feas  haue  byn  fearched  by  one
Sebaflian  Cabot  a  Venetian  borne,  whom  beinge  yet  but  in  maner  an  infante,  his  parentes  caryed  with  them
into  Englande  hauyng  occafion  to  reforte  thether  for  trade  of  marchandies,  as  is  the  maner  of  the  Venetians  too
leaue  no  parte  of  the  worlde  vnfearched  to  obteyne  richeffe.  He  therfore  furnifflied  two  fliippes  in  England  at
his  owne  charges :  And  fyrfl  with  three  hundreth  men,  directed  his  courfe  fo  farre  toward  the  northe  pole,  that
euen  in  the  mooneth  of  luly  he  founde  monflrous  heapes  of  Ife  fwimming  on  the  fea,  and  in  maner  continuall
day  lyght.  Yet  fawe  he  the  lande  in  that  tracte,  free  from  Ife,  whiche  had  byn  molten  by  heate  of  the  funne.
Thus  feyng  fuche  heapes  of  Ife  before  hym  he  was  enforced  to  tourne  his  fayles  and  folowe  the  wefle,  fo
coaflynge  flyll  by  the  fhore,  that  he  was  thereby  broughte  fo  farre  into  the  fouthe  by  reafon  of  the  lande  bendynge
fo  muche  fouthward  that  it  was  there  almofle  equall  in  latitude  with  the  fea  cauled  Fretum  Uemileum,  hauynge
the  north  pole  eleuate  in  maner  in  the  fame  degree.  He  fayled  lykewife  in  this  tracte  fo  farre  towarde  the  welle,
that  he  had  the  Ilande  of  Cuba  [on]  his  lefte  hande  in  maner  in  the  fame  degree  of  longitude.  As  he  traueyled  by
the  coafles  of  this  greate  lande  (whiche  he  named  Baccallaos)  he  fayth  that  he  found  the  like  courfe  of  the  waters
toward  the  wefl,  but  the  fame  to  runne  more  foftely  and  gentelly  then  the  fwifte  waters  whiche  the  Spanyardes
found  in  their  nauigations  foutheward.

Wherefore,  it  is  not  onely  more  lyke  to  bee  trewe,  but  ought  alfo  of  neceffitie  to  bee  concluded,  that
betwene  both  the  landes  hetherto  vnknowen,  there  fhulde  bee  certeyne  great  open  places  wherby  the  waters
fhulde  thus  continually  paffe  from  the  Eafl  into  the  wefle :  which  waters  I  fuppofe  to  bee  dryuen  about  the
globe  of  the  earth  by  the  vnceffaunt  mouynge  and  impulfion  of  the  heauens :  and  not  to  bee  fwalowed  vp  and
cafl  owt  ageyne  by  the  breathynge  of  Demogorgon  as  fume  haue  imagined  bycaufe  they  fee  the  feas  by  increafe
and  decreafe,  to  flowe  and  refiowe.  Sebaflian  Cabot  him  felfe,  named  thofe  landes  Baccallaos^  bycaufe  that  in
the  feas  therabout  he  founde  fo  great  multitudes  of  certeyne  bigge  fyfflies  much  lyke  vnto  tunies  (which  th[e]in-
habitantes  caule  Baccallaos)  that  they  fumtymes  flayed  his  fliippes.  He  founde  alfo  the  people  of  thofe  region:
couered  with  beafles  fkynnes:  Yet  not  without  th[e]ufe  of  reafon.

He  faythe  alfo  that  there  is  greate  plentie  of  beares  in  thofe  regions,  whiche  vfe  to  eate  fyfibe.  For
plungeinge  theym  felues  into  the  water  where  they  perceue  a  multitude  of  thefe  fyffhes  to  lye,  they  faflen  theyr
clawes  in  theyr  fcales,  and  fo  drawe  them  to  lande  and  eate  them.  So  that  (as  he  faith)  the  beares  beinge  thus
fatiffied  with  fyffhe,  are  not  noyfom  to  men. He  declareth  further,  that  in  many  places  of  thefe  regions,  he

Sundry  opinions
why  the  sea
runneth  with  so
sw^'ft  course  from
the  East  into  the
west.

Th[e]equinoctiall
lyne.

AVhy  all  waters
moue  towarde
the  southe  or
Equinoctial,  reade
Cariianus  de
siiitiiii.  liber,  ii.
de  Elementis.
Strayghtes.

As  by  the  strayght
of  Magellanus.

The  north  landes.

The  frosen  sea.

Sebastian.  Cabot.
The  Venetians.

The  viage  of
Sebastian  Cabot
from  Englande  to
the  frosen  sea.

Frost  in  the
moneth  of  luly.

Fretum
Herculeuni,
diuideth  Spayne
and  the  Moores
and  is  nowe  cauled
the  strayghtes
of  Marrok.

Baccallacs,
or  Terra
BaccaUean.  it.

119

The  mouyng  of
heuen  causeth  the
se.!  to  moue.

Demogorgon  U
the  spirite  of  the
earth.

People  couered
with  beastes  skins

1  lowe  beares  tak<
and  eate  fysshes
of  the  sea.

Eden.

i6i

t62

TJie  tliyrde  Decade.

Perhappes  this

laton  is  copper

which  holJeth

cold. For  laton

hath  no  myne,  and

is  an  artiliciall

metal  and  not

naturaL

Calwt  cauled  ow  t

of  Knglande  into

Spaync.

The  Second  viage

of  Cabot

The  Ilandesof
the  Canybales.

The  llande  Fortis.

Salte

A  straungc  thjTige.

How  Petrus  Arias
with  the  kynges
nauy  arriucd  at
Daricna.

Howe  Vaschus
reccaued  the  new
gouernour.

Whye  these
regions  are  cauled
prouynces.

120

Barrelles  of  meale.

Habitable  regions
vnder  the
Equinoctiall  lyne.

Where  the  newe
gouernour  planteJ
his  habitation

The  viage  of
lohannes  Aiora

The  hauen  of
Como'iP'us

Sainte  Mychaeis
goulf*

The  hauen  Lof]
Pocchorrosa.

fawe  great  plentie  of  laton  amonge  th[e]inhabitantes.  Cabot  is  my  very  frende,  whom  I  vfe  famylierly,
and  delyte  to  haue  hym  fumtymes  keepe  mee  company  in  myne  owne  houfe.  For  beinge  cauled  owte  of
England  by  the  commaundement  of  the  cathol}ke  kynge  of  Caftile  after  the  deathe  of  Henry  kynge  of
Englande  the  feuenth  of  that  name,  he  was  made  one  of  owre  counfayle  and  aflyftance  as  touchynge  the
aflayres  of  the  newe  Indies,  lookyng  dayely  for  fliippes  to  bee  fiirnyfflied  for  hym  to  difcouer  this  hyd  fecreate
of  nature.  This  vyage  is  api)oynted  to  bee  begunne  in  March  in  the  yeare  next  folowynge,  beinge  the  yeare  of
Chryfl  M.  D.  XVI.  What  fliall  fucceade,  yowre  holyncs  flialbe  aduertifed  by  my  letters  if  god  graunte  me  lyfe.
Sume  of  the  Spanyardes  denye  that  Cabot  was  the  fyrfl  fynder  of  the  lande  of  Baccallaos :  And  afhrme  that  he
went  not  fo  farre  weflewarde.  But  it  fliall  fufhce  to  haue  fayde  thus  much  of  the  goulfes  and  flrayghtes,  and
of  Sebafl.ian  Cabot.  Let  vs  nowe  therefore  returne  to  the  Spanyardes.  At  this  tyme,  they  let  paffe  the  hauen
of  Carthago  vntouched,  with  all  the  Ilandes  of  the  Canibales  there  aboute,  whiche  they  named  Infidas  Saii^i
Bcniardi:  Leauynge  alfo  behynde  theyr  backes,  all  the  region  of  Cai-amairi.  Heare  by  reafon  of  a  fooden
tempefle,  they  were  caft.e  vppon  the  llande  Fortis^  beinge  about  fyftie  leagues  diflante  from  the  enteraunce  of
the  goulfe  of  Vraba.  In  this  llande,  they  founde  in  the  houfes  of  th[e]inhabitantes,  many  baflcets  made  of
certeyne  greate  fea  reedes,  ful  of  falte.  For  this  llande  hath  in  it  many  goodly  falte  bayes :  by  reafon  whereof
they  haue  greate  plentie  of  falte  which  they  fell  to  other  nations  for  fuch  thynges  as  they  flande  in  neede  of.
Not  farre  from  henfe,  a  great  curlewe  as  bygge  as  a  florke  came  flying  to  the  gouernours  fliippe,  and  fuffered
her  felfe  to  bee  eafely  taken :  which  beinge  caryed  about  amonge  all  the  fliippes  of  the  nauie,  dyed  fliortly  after.
They  fawe  alfo  a  great  multytude  of  the  fame  kynde  of  foules  on  the  fhore  a  farre  of

The  gouernour  his  fliyppe  whiche  we  fayde  to  haue  lofle  the  rudder  beinge  nowe  fore  broofed  and  in
nianer  vnprofytable,  they  Icfte  behynde  to  folowe  at  leafure.  The  nauie  arriued  at  Dariena  the  twelfth  day  of
the  Calendes  of  luly,  and  the  gouernour  his  fliippe  (beinge  voyde  of  men)  was  dryuen  a  lande  in  the  fame
coafles  within  foure  dayes  after.  The  Spanyardes  whiche  nowe  inhabited  Dariena,  with  theyr  Capitayne  and
Lieuetenant  VafcJms  Niimiez  Balboa  (of  whom  we  haue  largely  made  mention  before)  beinge  certified  of
th[e]arryual  of  Petrus  Arias  and  his  coompanye,  wente  foorthe  three  myles  to  meete  him,  and  receaued  him
honorably  and  religioufly  with  the  pfalme  Te  deum  Laudat/ms,  giuing  thankes  to  god  by  wliofe  fafe  conducte
they  were  brought  fo  profperoufly  thether  to  al  theyr  confortes.  They  receaued  them  gladly  into  theyr  houfes
builded  after  the  maner  of  thofe  prouinces.  I  may  well  caule  thefe  regions,  Prouinces,  a  Procul  victis,  (that  is)
fuch  as  are  ouercome  farre  of,  forafmuch  as  owre  men  doo  nowe  inhabite  the  fame  all  the  barbarous  kynges
and  Idolatours  beinge  eiected.  They  enterteyned  them  with  fuch  chere  as  they  were  able  to  make  them :  as
with  the  frutes  of  thofe  regions,  and  newe  breade  bothe  made  of  rootes  and  the  grayne  Maizium.  Other
delicates  to  make  vp  the  feafl,  were  of  theyr  owne  flore  whiche  they  brought  with  theym  in  theyr  fhyppes,  as
poudered  flefflie,  falted  fyfflie,  and  breade  made  of  wheate.  For  they  brought  with  them  many  barrelles  of  wheate
nieale  for  the  fame  purpofe.  Here  maye  yowre  holynes  not  withowt  iufle  caufe  of  admiracion  beholde  a  kynges
nauie  and  great  multitude  of  Chriflians,  inhabytinge  not  onely  the  regions  fituate  vnder  the  circle  of  heauen  cauled
Tropicus  Cancri,  but  alfo  in  maner  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  contrary  to  th[e]opinion  of  the  owlde  wryters,  a  fewe
excepted.  But  after  that  they  are  nowe  mette  togyther,  let  vs  further  declare  what  they  determyned  to  doo.
Therefore,  the  daye  after  that  the  nauie  arriued,  there  affembled  a  coompany  of  the  Spanyardes  th[e]inhabitoures
of  Dariena,  to  the  number  of  foure  hundreth  and  fyftie  men.  Petrus  Arias  the  gouernour  of  the  nauie  and  his
coompany,  conferred  with  them  bothe  priuilie  and  openlye  of  certeyne  articles  wherof  it  was  the  kynges  pleafure
he  fliulde  enquire:  And  mofl  efpecially  as  concemyng  fuch  thynges  wherof  Vafchus  the  fyrfle  fynder  and
Admirall  of  the  Southe  fea,  made  mention  in  his  large  letter  fent  from  Dariena  to  Spayn.  In  this  inquifition
they  founde  all  thynges  to  bee  trewe,  wherof  Vafchus  had  certifyed  the  kynge  by  his  letters :  And  therevppon
concluded  that  in  the  dominions  of  Comogra,  Pocchorrofa,  and  Tumanama,  at  th[e]affignement  of  Vafchus,
certeine  fortreffes  fhuld  bee  erected  foorth\vith  to  th[e]intente  there  to  plant  theyr  colonie  or  habitacion.  To
the  better  accomplyffliemente  hereof,  they  fent  immediatly  one  lohannes  Aiora  a  noble  younge  gentelman  of
Corduba  and  vnder  Lieuetenant,  with  foure  hundreth  men  and  foure  caraucUes  and  one  other  lyttle  fliippe.
Thus  departinge,  he  fayled  fyrfl  directly  to  the  hauen  of  Comogrus,  dyflant  from  Dariena  aboute  twentie  and
fyue  leagues,  as  they  wryte  in  theyr  lafl  letters.  Frome  henfe,  he  is  appoynted  to  fende  a  hundreth  and  fyftie
of  his  foure  hundreth,  towarde  the  South  by  a  newe  and  ryghter  way  founde  of  late,  by  the  which  (as  they  fay)
it  is  not  pafle.  xxvi.  leagues  from  the  palaice  of  kynge  Cotnogrus  to  the  enteraunce  of  the  goulfe  of  Saficti
Michaelis.  The  refldewe  of  the  foure  hundreth,  fliall  remayne  there  to  bee  an  ayde  and  fuccour  to  all  fuch  as
fliall  iorney  to  and  fro.  Thofe  hundreth  and  fiftie  which  are  affigned  to  go  fouthwarde,  take  with  them  for
interpretours  certeine  of  owre  men  which  had  lerned  the  footherne  language  of  the  bonde  men  which  were  gyuen
to  Vafchus  when  he  ouerranne  thofe  regions,  and  alfo  certeyne  of  the  bondemen  them  felues  which  had  nowe
lerned  the  Spanyfflie  tonge.  They  fay  that  the  hauen  of  Pocchorrofa,  is  onely  feuen  leaques  diflante  frome  the
hauen  of  Comogrus. In  Pocchorrofa,  he  is  affigned  to  leaue  fyftie  men  with  the  lyghtefl  fliyp  which  maye  bee  a

162

The  thyrde  Decade.

163

paffmger  betwene  them :  that  lyke  as  we  vfe  pofte  horfes  by  lande,  fo  may  they  by  this  currant  (hippe,  in  fhorte
fpace  certifie  the  Lieuetenaunt  and  th[e]inhabitours  of  Dariaia  of  fuche  thynges  as  Ihall  chaunce.  They
entende  alfo  to  buylde  houfes  in  the  region  of  Tiimatiama.  The  palaice  of  kynge  Titmanama,  is  didant  from
Pocchorrofa  about  twentie  leaques.  Of  thefe  foure  hundreth  men,  beinge  of  the  owlde  fouldiers  of  Dariena  and
men  of  good  experience,  fyftie  weare  appoynted  to  bee  as  it  were  Decurians  to  guide  and  conducte  the  newe
men  from  place  to  place  to  do  their  affaires.  AVhen  they  had  thus  fette  all  thynges  in  order,  they  thought  it
good  to  aduertife  the  king  hereof,  and  therwith  to  certifye  hym  that  in  thofe  prouinces  there  is  a  kynge  named
Dabaiba  whofe  dominion  is  very  riche  in  golde :  But  the  fame  to  be  yet  vntouched  by  reafon  of  his  great  power.
His  kingedome  ioyneth  to  the  feconde  greate  ryuer  named  Dabaiba  after  his  name,  whiche  fauleth  into  the  fea
owt  of  the  corner  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba  as  we  haue  largely  declared  before.  The  common  reporte  is,  that  all
the  lande  of  his  dominions  is  ryche  in  golde.  The  palayce  of  kynge  Dabaiba  is  fyfty  leaques  diflante  from
Dariena.  Th[e]inhabitantes  faye  that  from  the  palaice,  the  golde  mynes  reache  to  the  borthers  on  euery  fyde.
Albeit,  owre  men  haue  alfo  golde  mynes  not  to  bee  contempned,  euen  within  three  leaques  of  Dariena,  in  the
which  they  gather  golde  in  many  places  at  this  prefente :  Yet  doo  theye  affyrme  greater  plentie  to  bee  in  the
mynes  of  Dabaiba.  In  the  bookes  of  owre  fyrfle  frutes  wrytten  to  yowre  holyneffe,  we  made  mention  of  this
Dabaiba,  wherin  owre  men  were  deceaued  and  myflooke  the  matter.  For  where  they  founde  the  fyfflier
men  of  kyng  Dabaiba  in  the  maryffhes,  they  thought  his  region  had  byn  there  alfo.  They  determyned
therfore  to  fende  to  kynge  Dabaiba,  three  hundreth  choyfe  younge  men  to  be  chofen  owte  of  the  hole
army  as  mofle  apte  to  the  warres,  and  well  furnyffhed  with  all  kyndes  of  armoure  and  artillery,  to
th[e]intent  to  go  vnto  hym  and  wyl  hym,  eyther  frendly  and  peaceably  to  permytte  them  to  inhabyte
parte  of  his  kingdome  with  the  fruition  of  the  golde  mynes,  or  elles  to  bydde  him  battayle  and  dr}aie
hym  owte  of  his  countrey.  In  their  letters,  they  often  tymes  repete  this  for  an  argument  of  great  rycheffe
to  coome,  that  they  in  maner  dygged  the  grounde  in  noo  place,  but  founde  the  earthe  myxte  with  fparkes
and  fmaule  graynes  of  golde.  They  haue  alfo  aduertifed  the  kynge  that  it  fhalbe  commodious  to  place
inhabitours  in  the  hauen  of  San^la  Martha  in  the  region  of  Saturma,  that  it  maye  bee  a  place  of  refuge  for  them
that  fayle  from  the  Ilande  of  Dominica  from  the  whiche  (as  they  faye)  it  is  but  foure  or  fyue  dayes  faylyng  to
that  hauen  of  the  regyon  of  Saturma :  And  from  the  hauen,  but  thre  dayes  faylyng  to  Darietia.  But  this  is  to
bee  vnderftode  in  goynge  and  not  in  returnynge.  For  the  returnyng  from  thenfe  is  fo  laborious  and  difficulte  by
reafon  of  the  contrary  courfe  of  the  water,  that  they  feeme  as  it  were  to  afcende  hyghe  montaynes  and  flryue
ageynfle  the  poure  of  Neptunus.  This  fwyfte  courfe  of  the  fea  towarde  the  Wefle,  is  not  fo  violente  to  theym
whiche  retourne  to  Spayne  frome  the  Ilandes  of  Hifpaniola  and  Cuba :  Althoughe  they  alfo  do  laboure  ageynfle
the  faule  of  the  Ocean:  The  caufe  wherof  is,  that  the  fea  is  here  verye  large,  fo  the  waters  haue  their  full
fcoope.  But  in  the  tracte  of  Paria,  the  waters  are  conftrayned  together  by  the  bendynge  fydes  of  that  great
lande,  and  by  the  multytude  of  Ilandes  lyinge  ageynfle  it,  as  the  lyke  is  feene  in  the  flraightes  or  narowe  feas  of
Sicilie  where  the  violent  courfe  of  the  waters  caufe  the  daungerous  places  of  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  by  reafon  of
thofe  narowe  feas  whiche  conteine  Ionium,  Libicum,  and  Tirrhenum.  Colonus  the  fyrfl  fynder  of  thefe  reg}-ons,
hath  lefte  in  wrytynge,  that  faylynge  from  the  Ilande  of  Guatiaffa,  and  the  prouynces  of  laia,  Maia,  and
Cerabaro,  beyng  regyons  of  the  weft  marches  of  Beragua,  he  founde  the  courfe  of  the  water  fo  vehemente  and
furious  ageynfte  the  fore  parte  of  his  fhippe  whyle  he  failed  from  thofe  coafles  towarde  the  Eafle,  that  he  coulde
at  no  tyme  touche  the  grounde  with  his  foundynge  plummet,  but  that  the  contrary  vyolence  of  the  water  woolde
beare  it  vppe  from  the  bottome.  He  affyrmeth  alfo,  that  he  coulde  neuer  in  one  hole  daye  with  a  meately  good
wynde,  -wynne  one  myle  of  the  courfe  of  the  water.  And  this  is  the  caufe  why  they  are  oftentymes  enforced  to
fayle  fyrfle  by  the  Ilandes  of  Cuba  and  Hifpaniola,  and  fo  into  the  mayne  fea  toward  the  North  when  they
returne  to  Spaine,  that  the  Northe  wyndes  maye  further  their  vyage  whiche  they  can  not  brynge  to  paffe  by  a
directe  courfe.  But  of  the  motions  of  the  Ocean  fea  to  and  fro,  this  fhal  fuffyce.  Let  vs  now  therfore  reherfe
what  they  write  of  Dariena,  and  of  their  habitation  there,  which  they  caule  SanBa  Maria  Antiqua,  planted  on
the  fea  bankes  of  Dariena.  The  fituation  of  the  place,  hath  no  natural  munition  or  defenfe :  And  the  ayer  is
more  pefliferous  then  in  Sardus.  The  Spanyfhe  inhabitours,  are  all  pale  and  yelowe,  lyke  vnto  them  that  haue
the  yelowe  giaundyes.  Whiche  neuertheleffe  commeth  not  of  the  nature  of  the  region  as  it  is  fituate  vnder  the
heauen.  For  in  many  regyons  beyng  vnder  the  felfe  fame  degree  of  latitude,  hauyng  the  pole  of  the  fame
eleuation,  they  fynd  holfome  and  temperate  ayer,  in  fuch  places  where  as  the  earth  bryngeth  forth  fayre  fprynges
of  water,  or  where  holfome  ryuers  runne  by  bankes  of  pure  earthe  without  mudde :  but  mofle  efpecyally  where
they  inhabyte  the  fydes  of  the  hylles  and  not  the  valleyes.  But  that  habytation  whiche  is  on  the  bankes  of  the
ryuer  of  Darietia,  is  fytuate  in  a  deepe  valley,  and  enuironed  on  euery  fyde  with  hyghe  hylles :  By  reafon  wherof,
it  receaueth  the  foonne  beames  at  noonetyde  directly  perpenticular  ouer  their  heades,  and  are  therfore  fore
vexed  by  reflection  of  the  beames  bothe  before,  behynde,  and  from  the  fydes.  For  it  is  the  reflection  of  the
foonne  beames  whiche  caufeth  feruente  heate,  and  not  their  acceffe  or  nereneffe  to  the  earth. Forafmuche  as

A  passynger
shyppe.

Kyng  Tumanama

Decurians  are
officers  deuided
into  tennes.  eta

The  gold  mynes
K>Tig  Dabaiba.

The  pallaice  of
kynge  Dabaiba.

The  gold  mynes
of  Dariena.

An  erroure.

Expedition  ageinst
kynge  Dabaibx

121

Great  plentie  of
golde.

The  regyon  of
Saturma
The  Ilande  of
Dominica,
Dariena.

Difficulte  saylyng
ageynst  the  course
of  the  sea.

The  daungerous
straightes  of  Scylla
and  Charj-bdis.

Giianassa.

laia.

Maia.

Cerabaro.

Beragua.

The  vehement
course  of  the  sea
from  the  east  to
the  west.

The  northe  wynde.

Sancta  Maria
Antiqua,  the  fyrst
habitation  of  the
spaniardes  in  the
fyrme  lande.
Sardus  the  Ilande
of  Sardinia.
The  variety  of
regions  lyinge
vnder  one  paralel.

By  what  meanes
the  Sonne  beames
are  cause  of
fenient  heate.

163

1 64

The  tJiyydc  Decade.

The  pernicious
ayer  of  D.iriena.

122

Toades  and  flees
engendered  of
droppes  of  water.

Necessytic  hatli
no  law'C

A  house  sette  on
fyer  with
lyghtnynge.

A  dogge  deuoured

of  a  crocodyle,

Tangnam  canis

e  Nilo.

The  byting  of

battes.

Lyons  and  tygers.

Beastes  wex
bygger  in  their
kynde.

How  the
gouemour
enterteyned  kyng
Careta.

Note.

Broma  or  Bissa,
are  wormes  whiche
destroy  shippes.

123

A  venemous  tree.

Perhappes  theyr
venemous  arrows
are  made  of  this
woodde  or.  &c.

they  are  not  paffyble  in  them  felues  as  dothe  manyfeflly  appeare  by  the  fnowe  lyinge  contynually  vnmolten
vpon  certeyne  hygh  montaynes,  as  yowre  holyneffe  knoweth  ryghte  well. The  foonne  beames  therfore  faulyng
on  the  montaynes,  are  reflected  downewarde  into  the  valley  by  reafon  of  th[e]obiecte  of  the  declynynge  fydes
of  the  hylles,  as  it  were  the  faule  of  a  greate  rounde  floone  rowlde  frome  the  toppe  of  a  montayne. The
valley  therfore  receaueth,  both  thofe  beames  whiche  faule  directly  theron,  and  alfo  thofe  whiche  are  reflected
downwarde  from  euery  fyde  of  the  montaynes. Their  habitation  therfore  in  Dariena,  is  pernicious  and  vnhol-
fome  onely  of  the  particular  nature  of  the  place,  and  not  by  the  fytuation  of  the  regyon  as  it  is  placed  vnder  the
heauen  or  nere  to  the  foonne. The  place  is  alfo  contagious  by  the  nature  of  the  foyle,  by  reafon  it  is  coompafed
aboute  with  muddy  and  ftynkynge  maryfflies,  th[e]infection  wherof  is  not  a  lyttle  encreafed  by  the  heate. The
vyllage  it  felfe,  is  in  a  marj'flie,  and  in  maner  a  flandynge  puddle,  where,  of  the  droppes  faulyng  from  the  handes
of  the  bond  men  whyle  they  water  the  pauementes  of  their  houfes,  toades  are  engendered  immediately,  as  I  my
felfe  fawe  in  an  other  place  the  droppes  of  that  water  turne  into  flees  in  the  foomer  feafon. Furthermore,  where
fo  euer  they  dygge  the  grounde  the  deapthe  of  a  handefull  and  a  halfe,  there  fpringeth  owte  vnholfome  and
corrupte  water  of  the  nature  of  the  ryuer  which  runneth  through  the  deepe  and  muddy  chanel  of  the  valley,  and
fo  fauleth  into  the  fea. Now  therfore  they  confulte  of  remouyng  their  habytation. Neceffytie  caufed  them  fyrd
to  fallen  their  foote  heare,  bycaufe  that  they  whiche  fyrfl  arryued  in  thofe  landes,  were  oppreffed  with  fuche
vrgente  hunger,  that  they  had  no  refpecte  to  chaunge  the  place  althoughe  they  were  thus  vexed  by  the  contagion
of  the  foyle  and  heate  of  the '  foonne,  befyde  the  corrupte  water  and  infectious  ayer  by  reafon  of  venemous
vapours  and  exhalations  ryfynge  from  tlie  fame. An  other  greate  incommoditie  was,  that  the  place  was  deftitute
of  a  commodious  hauen,  beynge  three  leaques  diflante  from  the  mouthe  of  the  goulfe. The  waye  is  alfo  roughe
and  diffyculte  to  brynge  vyttayles  and  other  neceffaries  from  the  fea. But  lette  vs  nowe  fpeake  fumwhat  of  other
particular  thynges  whiche  chaunfed. Therfore  fliortly  after  that  they  weare  arryued,  there  happened  many
thynges  wherof  they  had  no  knowledge  before. A  certayne  well  learned  phifytion  of  Ciuile,  whome  partely
th[e]autorytie  of  the  byfflioppe  of  Dariciia,  and  partely  the  defyre  of  golde  had  allured  to  thofe  landes,  was  fo
fcarred  with  lyghtnynge  in  the  nyghte  feafon  lyinge  in  bedde  Avith  his  wyfe,  that  the  houfe  and  all  the  fluffe
therin  beynge  fette  on  fyer  and  burnte,  he  and  his  \vyie  bothe  foore  fcorched,  ranne  foorthe  cryinge  and  almofte
naked,  hardely  efcapynge  the  daunger  of  deathe. At  an  other  tyme,  as  certayne  of  them  floode  on  the  flioore,
a  great  Crocodyle  fodenly  caryed  awaye  a  mafly  of  a  yeare  and  a  halfe  owlde,  as  a  kyte  fliulde  haue  fnatched
vppe  a  chicken :  And  this  euen  in  the  prefence  of  theym  all,  where  the  myferable  dogge  cryed  in  vayne  for  the
helpe  of  his  mayfler. In  the  nighte  feafon  they  were  tormented  with  the  bytynge  of  battes  whiche  are  there  foo
noyfome  that  if  they  byte  any  man  in  his  fleape,  they  putte  hym  in  daunger  of  lyfe,  onely  with  drawynge  of
bludde:  In  fo  muche  that  fumme  haue  dyed  therof,  faulynge  as  it  were  into  a  confumption  through  the
malycioufneffe  of  the  venemous  wounde. If  thefe  battes  chaunce  to  fynde  a  cocke  or  a  henne  abrode  in  the
nyght  feafon,  they  byte  them  by  the  combes  and  fo  kyll  them. They  alfo  whiche  wente  lafle  into  thefe  regions,
do  WTyte,  that  the  lande  is  troubeled  with  Crocodyles,  Lyons,  and  Tigers:  But  that  they  haue  nowe  deuifed
artes  and  ingens  howe  to  take  them. Lykewyfe  that  in  the  houfes  of  their  felowes,  they  founde  the  hydes  and
cafes  of  fuche  Lyons  and  Tygers  as  they  had  kylled. They  wryte  furthermore,  that  by  reafon  of  the  rankeneffe
and  frutefulneffe  of  the  grounde,  kyne,  fwyne,  and  horfes,  doo  marueloufly  increafe  in  thefe  regions,  and  growe
to  a  muche  bygger  quantitie  then  they  whiche  weare  of  the  firfl  broode. Of  the  excedynge  hyghneffe  of  the
trees  with  their  fruites,  of  the  garden  herbes,  fruites,  plantes,  and  feedes  whiche  owre  men  broughte  from  Spayne
and  fowed  and  fet  the  fame  in  thefe  regyons,  lykewyfe  of  the  hertes  and  other  foure  footed  beafles  bothe  tame
and  wylde,  alfo  of  dyuers  kyndes  of  foules,  byrdes,  and  fyffhes,  they  write  euen  as  we  haue  declared  in  the  decades
before. Careta  the  kynge  of  the  regyon  of  Cioba,  was  with  them  for  the  fpace  of  three  dayes :  whome  when
they  had  frendly  enterteyned  and  fhewed  hym  the  fecreate  places  of  their  fliyppes,  their  horfes  alfo  with  their
trappars,  bardes,  and  other  furnimentes,  befyde  many  other  thinges  whiche  feemed  flraunge  to  hym,  and  had
further  delited  his  mynd  with  the  harmony  of  their  mufycall  inilrumentes,  and  gyuen  hym  many  rewardes,  they
dyfmyffed  hym  halfe  amafed  with  to  muche  admyration. He  fygnifyed  vnto  them,  that  their  trees  in  that
prouynce,  of  the  planckes  wherof,  if  fhyppes  were  made,  they  flioulde  bee  fafe  from  the  woormes  of  the
fea  whiche  they  caule  Broinas. Howe  thefe  woormes  knawe  and  corrode  the  fhyppes,  wee  haue  declared
before. Owre  fhyppes are greatly  tronbeled with this plage if  they  lye longe in the hauens of  thefe
regyons. But  they  afifyrme  that  the  woodde  of  this  tree  is  foo  bytter,  that  the  woormes  wyll  not  tafle  therof.
There  is  alfo  an  other  tree  peculyar  to  thefe  landes  :  whofe  leaues  if  they  onely  touche  the  bare  in  any  place  of
a  mannes  body,  they  caufe  greate  blyflers,  and  thofe  foo  malycious  that  excepte  the  fame  bee  foorthwith  healed
with  falte  water  or  faflynge  fpyttle,  they  doo  incontynently  engender  deadely  paynes. They  faye  lykewyfe,
that  the  fauour  of  the  woodde  is  prefente  poyfon :  And  that  it  can  noo  whither  bee  caryed  without  daunger  of
lyfe. When  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  had  oftentymes  attempted  to  fhake  of  the  yoke  of
feruytude,  and  coulde  neuer  brynge  the  fame  to  paffe  neyther  by  open  Avarre  nor  yet  by  priuye  confpiraces,
164

The  thyrde  Decade.

165

A  prcserualiue
ageynst  poyson.

The  Hands  of  the
south  sea.

The  ryche  Iland
caulcd  Dites.

they  were  determyned  in  the  nyghte  feafon  to  haue  kylled  owre  men  in  their  fleepe  with  the  fmoke  of  this
woodde.  But  when  the  Chriflian  men  had  knowledge  hereof,  they  compelled  the  poore  wretches  to  confeffe
their  intente,  and  punyfflied  the  chiefe  autours  of  the  deuyfe.  They  haue  alfo  a  certayne  herbe  with  the  fauour
wherof  they  are  preferued  from  the  hurte  of  this  venemous  woodde  fo  that  they  maye  beare  it  fafely.  Of  thefe
fmaule  thynges  it  fliall  fuffyce  too  haue  fayde  thus  muche.  They  looke  dayly  for  many  greater  thynges  to
certyfye  vs  of  from  the  Ilandes  of  the  fouth  fea.  For  at  fuche  tyme  as  the  meffenger  whiche  broughte  owre
letters  departed  from  thenfe,  Petrus  Arias  prepared  an  expedition  to  that  ryche  Ilande  whiche  lyeth  in  the
mouthe  of  the  goulfe  cauled  Sinus  S.  Michadis,  and  reacheth  into  the  fouthe  fea,  beyng  alfo  lefte  vntouched
of  Vafchus  by  reafon  that  the  fea  was  at  that  tyme  of  the  yeare  fore  troubeled  with  tempefles,  as  wee  haue
further  declared  in  Vafchus  his  vyage  to  the  fouthe.  Wee  looke  therfore  dayly  for  greater  thynges  then  are
hetherto  pafte.  For  they  haue  nowe  taken  in  hand  to  fubdue  manye  other  prouynces,  whiche  wee  fuppofe  too
bee  eyther  verye  ryche,  or  to  brynge  furthe  fumme  flraunge  woorkes  of  nature.  lohaimes  Diaz  Solijliis  of
Ncbrijfa  (of  whome  we  haue  made  mention  before)  is  fente  by  the  froonte  of  the  cape  or  poynte  of  SanHi
Augujlini  (whiche  reacheth  feuen  degrees  beyonde  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  and  perteyneth  to  the  dominion  of
the  Portugales)  to  th[e]intent  to  ouer  runne  the  fouthe  fyde  from  the  backe  halfe  oiParia,  Cumana,  Ctiquibacoa,
with  the  hauens  of  Carthago  and  San6la  Martha,  of  Daricna  alfo  and  Beragua,  that  more  perfecte  and  certeyne
knowledge  may  bee  had  of  thofe  tractes.  Furthermore,  one  Johannes  Poncius  was  fente  foorthe  with  three
fhyppes  to  deflroye  the  Canibales  bothe  in  the  lande  and  Ilandes  there  aboute :  afwell  that  the  nations  of  the
more  humane  and  innocente  people  maye  at  the  length  lyue  without  feare  of  that  pefliferous  generation,  as
alfo  the  better  and  more  fafely  to  fearche  the  fecreates  and  rycheffe  of  thofe  regions.  Many  other  lykewfe
were  fente  dyuers  and  fundry  wayes :  as  Gafper  Badaiocius  too  fearche  Wefl  partes :  Francifcus  Bezerra,  to
fayle  by  the  corner  of  the  goulfe:  And  Vaikius,  to  paffe  by  the  mouthe  or  enteraunce  therof  to  the  Eafte
coafles  of  the  goulfe  to  fearche  the  fecreates  of  that  lande,  in  the  whiche  Fogeda  with  his  coompanye  had  of
late  begunne  to  plante  their  habitation,  and  had  buylded  a  fortreffe  and  a  vyllage.  Badaiocius  departed  fyrfle
frome  Dariena  with  foure  fcore  fouldiours  well  appoynted :  Whome  Lodouicus  Mercado  folowed  with  fyftye :

To  Bezerra  were  alfo  fourefcore  affygned,  and  three  fcore  and  tenne  to  Valleius.  Whether  they  fliall
arryue  at  fafe  and  commodious  hauens,  or  faule  into  vnfortunate  flations,  he  onely  knoweth  whofe  prouydence
ruleth  all :  For  as  for  vs  men  wee  are  included  within  the  knowledge  of  thinges  after  they  haue  chaunced.
Lette  vs  nowe  therfore  coome  to  other  matters.

CT

HE SEVENTHE BOOKE OF THE THIRDE DECADE.

Etrus  Arias  the  gouernour  of  the  fuppofed  continente,  was  fcarfly  entred  into  the  mayne  fea
with  his  nauye  onwarde  on  his  vyage  to  Dariena.  But  I  was  aduertifed  that  one  Andreas
Moralis  a  pilot  who  had  oftentymes  ouer  runne  the  coafles  of  thefe  new  feas  and  the  Ilandes
of  the  fame,  was  coome  to  the  courte  to  fell  fuche  marchaundies  as  he  broughte  with  hym
frome  thenfe.  This  man  had  dyligently  fearched  the  tracte  of  the  fuppofed  continente,  and
efpecyally  th[e]inner  regyons  of  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  wherunto  he  was  appoynted  by
his  brother  Nicohius  Ouandus  (the  gouernour  of  the  Iland  and  chiefe  Commendatory  of  the
order  of  the  knyghtes  of  Alcantara)  bycaufe  he  was  a  wytty  man  and  more  apte  to  fearche  fuche  thynges  then
any  other:  So  that  with  his  owne  handes  he  drewe  faire  cardes  and  tables  of  fuche  regyons  as  hee  difcouered.
Wherin  as  he  hath  bynne  founde  faythfuU  of  fuche  as  haue  fenfe  had  better  tryall  hereof,  fo  is  he  in  niofl  credyt
emongefl  the  befl  forte.  He  therfore  reforted  to  me  as  all  they  are  accuflomed  to  doo,  whiche  retourne  from
the  Ocean.  What  I  learned  of  hym  and  dyuers  other  of  thinges  heretofore  vnknowen,  I  wyll  nowp  declare.
The  beginnynge  of  this  narration,  fhalbe  the  particular  defcription  of  the  Ilande  oi  Hifpaniola,  forafmuche  as  it
is  the  heade  and  as  it  weare  the  principall  marte  of  all  the  lyberality  of  the  Ocean,  and  hath  a  thoufande  and
againe  a  thoufande  fayre,  pleafaunt,  bewtifull,  and  ryche  Nereides  whiche  lye  aboute  it  on  euery  fyde,  adoumynge
this  their  ladye  and  moother,  as  it  were  an  other  Tethis  the  ^vyfe  of  Nepti/nus,  enuyronynge  her  aboute,  and
attendynge  vppon  her  as  their  queene  and  patroneffe.  But  of  thefe  Nerciades  (that  is  to  faye,  the  Ilandes  placed
aboute  her)  we  wyll  fpeake  more  hereafter.  Lette  vs  in  the  meane  tyme  declare  fumwhat  of  the  Ilande  whiche
owre  men  named  Margaritea  Diues  (whiche  the  Spanyardes  caule  De  las  perias)  beyng  wowq  well  knowen,  and
lyinge  in  the  fouthe  fea  in  the  goulfe  cauled  Sinus  San^i  Michaelis  (that  is)  fainte  INIichaels  goulfe.  This  Iland
hath  prefently  brought  to  o^^Te  knowledge  many  H.raunge  and  woonderfull  thynges  and  promyfleth  no  fmaule

P  3  x6s

Cap[e],  sancti
Augustini.

Of  the  euyll
successe  of  these
viages,  reade
decade  iii.
Liber,  ix.

An  expedition  to
destroy  the
Canibales.

Fogeda.

Looke.  decad.  iiL
Lib.  ix.

The  nauigations  ol
Andreas  ^Ioralis.

124

A  particular
description  of  the
Ilande  of
hispaniola

Nereides  are

nyniphes  of  the

sea,  he  meaneth

Ilandes.

Tethis  the  wyfe  oi

Neptunus  and

goddesse  of  the

sea.

The  Ilande  of

M.irgaritea  Diues.

Saincte  Michaels
goulfe

1 66

The  thyrde  Decade,

Great  perles

Hispaniola  lyke
vnto  the  earthly
paradyse.

The  fyrst
inhabitours  of
hispaniola

Dardanus.
Teucrus.
Troianunt.
Tirians,  Sidonians.

Eneas.
La  till  in.

Hierusalem

Media.

The  Ilandes  of
Canarie.

Betanchor,  a
frenchman.

125

The  fyrst  names
of  hispaniola.

Pan.

The  roughnesse
of  hispaniola.

The  maner  of
lemynge.

Ballets  and
rhymes.

hope  of  greater  thynges  in  tyme  to  coome.  In  this  is  founde  great  plentie  of  pearles  fo  fayre  and  great,  that
the  fumptuous  queene  Cleopatra  myght  haue  feemed  to  weare  them  in  her  crownes,  cheynes,  and  braflettes.
Of  the  flielfyflhes  wherin  thefe  are  engendered,  wee  wyll  fpeake  fumwhat  more  in  th[e]cnde  of  this  narration.
But  let  vs  nowe  returne  to  Hifpatiiola  mofle  lyke  vnto  the  earthly  paradyfe.  In  the  defcription  hereof,  we  wyll
begynne  of  the  impofytion  of  dyuerfe  names:  Then  of  the  forme  of  the  Ilande,  temperate  ayer  and  benefyciall
heauen:  And  fynally  of  the  deuifyon  of  the  regyons.  Therfore  for  the  ryghter  pronunfyation  of  the  names,
yowxt  holynefle  mude  vnderflande  that  they  are  pronounced  with  th[e]accent,  as  yowe  may  know  by  the  verge
fette  ouer  the  heddes  of  the  vowels,  as  in  the  name  of  the  Ilande  Matiiwib,  where  the  accente  is  in  the  lad
vowell,  and  the  lyke  to  be  vnderftoode  in  all  other  names.  They  faye  therfore,  that  the  fyrfle  inhabitours  of  the
Hand  were  tranfported  in  their  Ca/ioas  (that  is  boates  made  of  one  hole  pyece  of  woodde)  from  the  Ilande  of
Matinino,  beynge  lyke  banyfflied  men  dryuen  from  thenfe  by  reafon  of  certaine  contrary  factions  and  diuifyons
emonge  them  felues,  lyke  as  wee  reade  howe  Dardauiis  came  from  Coryt/io,  and  Taicrus  from  Cirta  into  Afia,
and  that  the  regyon  where  they  placed  their  habitacion,  was  afterwarde  cauled  Troianum.  The  lyke  wee  reade
howe  the  Tirians  and  Sidonians  arryued  with  their  nauye  in  Lybia  by  the  fabulous  conduction  of  Dido.  Thefe
Matininans  in  like  maner  beynge  banyfflied  from  their  owne  countrey,  planted  their  fyrfle  habytation  in  that
parte  of  the  Hand  of  Hifpaniola  whiche  they  caule  Cahonao,  vpon  the  banke  of  the  ryuer  named  Bahaboni:  As
is  redde  in  the  begynnynge  of  the  Romaynes  that  Eneas  of  Troye  aryued  in  the  region  of  Italy  cauled  Latium
vppon  the  bankes  of  the  ryuer  of  Tiber.  Within  the  mouthe  of  the  ryuer  of  Bahaboni,  lyeth  an  Ilande  where  it
is  fayde  that  th[e]inhabitauntes  buylded  their  fyrfle  howfe  whiche  they  named  Camotcia.  This  howfe  they
confecrated  fliortely  after,  and  honoured  the  fame  reuerently  with  continual  gyftes  and  monumentes,  euen
vntyl  the  commynge  of  owre  men,  lyke  as  the  Chrifl.ians  haue  euer  relygyoufly  honoured  lerufalem  the  fountayne
and  oryginall  of  owre  faythe:  As  alfo  the  Turkes  attribute  the  lyke  to  the  cytie  of  Media  in  Araby,  and
th[e]inhabytantes  of  the  fortunate  Ilandes  (cauled  the  Ilandes  of  Canarye)  to  Tyrma  buylded  vppon  a  hyghe
rocke  from  the  whiche  many  were  wounte  with  ioyfull  myndes  and  fonges  to  cafl.  them  felues  downe  headlonge,
beyng  perfuaded  by  their  priefles  that  the  foules  of  all  fuche  as  fo  dyd  for  the  loue  of  Tyrma,  fliulde  therby
enioye  eternall  felycity.  The  conquerours  of  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie,  founde  them  yet  remaynyng  in  that
fuperftition,  euen  vntyll  owre  tyme :  Nor  yet  is  the  memory  of  their  facrifyces  vtterly  worne  awaye  :
The  rocke  alfo  referueth  the  owlde  name  vnto  this  daye.  I  haue  alfo  learned  of  late,  that  there  yet
rema}Tieth  in  the  Ilande  fumme  of  the  faction  oi  Betanchor  the  Frenflie  man  and  fyrfle  that  broughte  the
Ilandes  to  good  culture  and  ciuilitie  beyng  therto  lycenced  by  the  kynge  of  Caflile  as  I  haue  fayde  before.
Thefe  doo  yet  (for  the  mofle  parte)  obferue  bothe  the  language  and  maners  of  the  Frenfhemen,  although  the
heres  and  fucceffours  of  Betanchor,  had  foulde  the  two  fubdued  Ilandes  to  certeyne  men  of  Caflile.  Yet
th[e]inhabitours  whiche  fucceded  Beta7ichor,  and  buylded  them  houfes  and  encreafed  their  families  there,  do
contynue  to  this  daye:  And  lyue  quietly  and  pleafauntly  with  the  Spanyardes,  not  greued  with  the  fliarpe  coulde
of  Fraunce.  But  lette  vs  nowe  returne  to  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  Matinino  and  Hifpaniola.  The  Ilande  of
Hifpaiiiola  was  fyrfle  named  by  the  fyrfle  inhabitours,  Quizqueia,  and  then  Haiti.  And  this  not  by  chaunce,
or  at  the  pleafure  of  fuche  as  diuifed  thefe  names,  but  of  credulitie  and  belefe  of  fumme  great  efifecte.  For
Quizqueia,  is  as  muche  to  faye  as  a  great  thinge :  And  that  fo  great  that  none  maye  bee  greater.  They  inter-
prete  alfo,  that  Quizqueia  fygnifyeth,  large,  vniuerfall,  or  al,  in  like  fignification  as  the  Greekes  named  their  god
cauled  Pan :  Bycaufe  that  for  the  greatnes  therof,  thefe  fymple  foules  fuppofed  it  to  bee  the  hole  worlde :  And
that  the  foonne  beames  gaue  lyghte  to  none  other  worlde  but  onely  to  this  Ilande  with  the  other  adiacente
aboute  the  fame :  And  thervppon  thoughte  it  mofl:  woorthy  to  bee  cauled  great,  as  the  greatefl  of  all  other
knowen  to  them.  Haiti  is  as  muche  to  faye  by  interpretation,  as  roughe,  fharpe,  or  craggie.  But  by  a
fyguratiue  fpeache  cauled  denomination  (wherby  the  hole  is  named  by  part)  they  named  the  hole  Hand  Haiti
(that  is)  roughe :  For  as  muche  as  in  many  places  the  face  of  this  Hand  is  rough  by  reafon  of  the  craggie  mon-
taynes,  horrible  thicke  vvooddes,  and  terrible  darke  and  diepe  valleys  enuyroned  with  great  and  highe
montaynes,  althoughe  it  bee  in  manye  other  places  exceadynge  bewtifull  and  fiioryffliynge.  Here  mufle  wee
fumwhat  digreffe  from  th[e]order  we  are  entered  into.  Perhappes  your  holyneffe  ■\vyll  maruell  by  what  meanes
thefe  fymple  men  flioulde  of  foo  longe  contynuance  beare  in  minde  fuche  principles,  where  as  they  haue  no
knowledge  of  letters.  So  it  is  therfore,  that  from  the  beginninge,  their  princes  haue  euer  byn  accuflomed  to
committe  their  children  to  the  gouernaunce  of  their  wife  men  whiche  they  caule  Boitios,  to  bee  inflructed  in
knowledge,  and  to  beare  in  memorie  fuche  thynges  as  they  lerne.  They  gyue  them  felues  chieflye  to  two
thynges:  As  generally  to  lerne  th[e]originall  and  fucceffe  of  thynges:  And  particularlye  to  reherfe  the  noble
factes  of  their  graundefathers  great  graundefathers  and  aunceflours  afwell  in  peace  as  in  warre.  Thefe  two
thynges  they  haue  of  owlde  tyme  compofed  in  certeyne  meters  and  ballettes  in  their  language.  Thefe  rhymes
or  ballettes,  they  caule  Areitos.  And  as  owre  mynflrelles  are  accufl:omed  too  fynge  to  the  harpe  or  lute,  fo  doo
they  in  lyke  maner  fynge  thefe  fonges  and  daunce  to  the  fame,  playinge  on  tymbrelles  made  of  fliels  of  certen

i66

The  thyrde  Decade.

167

fyflhes.  Thefe  tymbrels  they  caule  Maguei.  They  haue  alfo  fonges  and  ballettes  of  loue:  And  other  of
lamentations  and  moornyng :  Summe  alfo  to  encoragc  them  to  the  warres,  with  euery  of  them  their  tewnes
agreable  to  the  matter.  They  exercyfe  theym  felues  muche  in  daunceinge,  vvherin  they  are  verye  actyue  and
of  greater  agilitie  then  ovvre  men,  by  reafon  they  gyue  them  felues  to  nothyng  fo  muche,  and  are  not  hyndered
with  a])parell  whiche  is  alfo  the  caufe  of  their  fwifteneffe  of  foote.  In  their  ballettes  lefte  them  of  their
aunceftours,  they  haue  prophecies  of  the  comminge  of  owre  men  into  their  countrey.  Thefe  they  fynge  with
moornyng  and  as  it  were  with  gronyng,  bewayle  the  loffe  of  their  lybertie  and  fcruitude.  For  thefe  prophecies
make  mention  that  there  fhoulde  coome  into  the  Ilande  Maguacochios,  that  is,  men  clothed  in  apparell,  and
armed  with  fuche  fwoordes  as  fhulde  cutte  a  man  in  funder  at  one  flroke:  vnder  whofe  yoke  their  pofleritie
fhulde  bee  fubdued.  And  here  I  do  not  maruell  that  their  prediceffours  coulde  prophecye  of  the  feruitude  and
bondage  of  their  fucceffyon,  if  it  bee  trewe  that  is  fayd  of  the  familiaritie  they  haue  with  fpirites  whiche  appeare  to
them  in  the  night,  wherof  we  haue  largely  made  mention  in  the  nynth  booke  of  the  firfl  decade,  where  alfo  wee
haue  entreated  of  their  Zemes  (that  is)  their  Idoles  and  Images  of  diuelles  whiche  they  honoured.  But  they  faye
that  fence  thefe  Zemes  were  taken  awaye  by  the  Chriflians,  the  fpirites  haue  no  more  appeared.  Owre  men  afcribe
this  to  the  fygne  of  the  croffe  wherwith  they  defende  theym  felues  from  fuche  fpirites.  For  they  are  nowe  all  clenfed
and  fanctifyed  by  the  water  of  bapti[fjme  wherby  they  haue  renounced  the  deuel  and  are  confecrated  the  holy
members  of  Chrifl.  They  are  vniuerfally  fludyous  to  knowe  the  boundes  and  lymettes  of  their  regions  and  king-
domes  :  And  efpecially  their  Mitaini  (that  is)  noble  men.  So  that  euen  they  are  not  vtterlye  ignorante  in  the
furueyinge  of  their  landes.  The  common  people  haue  none  other  care  then  of  fettynge,  fo\v)'nge,  and
plantynge.  They  are  moofle  experte  fyffhers,  by  reafon  that  throughowte  the  hole  yeare,  they  are  accuftomed
daylye  to  plounge  them  felues  in  the  ryuers,  fo  that  in  maner  they  lyue  no  leffe  in  the  water  then  on  the  lande.
They  are  alfo  giuen  to  huntynge.  For  (as  I  haue  fayde  before)  they  haue  twoo  kyndes  of  foure  footed
beafles,  wherof  the  one  is  lyttle  cunnes  cauled  Vtias,  and  the  other  Serpentes  named  luamias,  muche  lyke
vnto  Crocodiles,  of  eyght  foote  length,  of  mofle  pleafaunte  tafle,  and  lyuynge  on  the  lande.  All  the  Ilandes
nooryfhe  innumerable  byrdes  and  foules :  As  flocke  doues,  duckes,  geefe,  hearons,  byfyde  no  leffe  number  of
popingiais  then  fparowes  with  vs.  Euery  kynge  hath  his  fubiectes  diuided  to  fundrye  affaires  :  As  fumme  to
huntynge,  other  to  fyffhynge,  and  other  fumme  to  hufbandrye.  But  let  vs  now  returne  to  fpeake  further  of  the
names.  We  haue  fayde  that  Qtiizqiieia  and  Haiti  were  the  oulde  names  of  this  Ilande.  The  hole  Ilande
was  alfo  cauled  Cipanga  of  the  region  of  the  montaynes  aboundynge  with  golde :  Lyke  as  owre  anciente
poetes  cauled  all  Italye  Latiiim  of  parte  therof.  Therfore  as  they  cauled  Aufonia  and  Hefperia,  Italie,  euen
foo  by  the  names  of  Qiiizqiieia,  Haiti,  and  Cipanga,  they  vnderflode  the  hole  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola.  Owre
men  dyd  fyrfle  name  it  Ifabella  of  queene  Helifabeth  whiche  in  the  Spanifhe  tongue  is  cauled  Ifabella  :  And  fo
named  it  of  the  fyrfl  Colonic  where  they  planted  their  habitation  vpon  the  banke  nere  vnto  the  fea  on  the
Northe  fyde  of  the  Ilande,  as  wee  haue  further  declared  in  the  fyrfle  decade.  But  of  the  names,  this  fhall
fuffyce.  Lette  vs  nowe  therfore  fpeake  of  the  forme  of  the  Ilande.  They  whiche  fyrfle  ouer  ranne  it,  defcribed
it  vnto  me  to  bee  lyke  the  leafe  of  a  cheRnutte  tree,  with  a  goulfe  towarde  the  wefl  fyde,  lyinge  open  ageynfl
the  Ilande  of  Cuba.  But  the  experte  fhyppe  mayfler  Andreas  Moralis  broughte  me  the  forme  therof  fumwhat
differ^nge  from  that.  For  from  bothe  the  corners,  as  from  the  Eafle  angle  and  the  Wefl,  he  defcribed  it  to  be
indented  and  eaten  with  many  great  goulfes,  and  the  corners  to  reache  foorthe  verye  farre :  and  placeth  manye
large  and  fafe  hauens  in  the  great  goulfe  on  the  Eafl  fyde.  But  I  trufl  fhortely  foo  to  trauayle  further  herein,
that  a  perfecte  carde  of  the  particular  defcription  of  Hifpaniola  maye  bee  fente  vnto  yowre  holyneffe.  For  they
haue  nowe  drawne  the  Geographicall  defcription  therof  in  cardes,  euen  as  yo^vre  holyneffe  hath  feene  the  forme
and  fytuation  of  Spayne  and  Italye  with  their  montaines,  valleyes,  ryuers,  cities,  and  colonies.  Lette  vs  therfore
without  fhamfaflneffe  compare  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  to  Italie,  fumtyme  the  heade  and  queene  of  the  hole
worlde.  For  if  wee  confyder  the  quantitie,  it  fhalbee  founde  lyttle  leffe,  and  muche  more  frutefull.  It  reacheth
from  the  Eafle  into  the  Wefl,  fyue  hundreth  and  fortye  myles  accordynge  to  the  computation  of  the  later
fearchers :  Althoughe  the  Admyrall  fumwhat  increafed  this  number  as  wee  haue  fayde  in  the  fyrfle  decade.  It
is  in  breadth  fumme  where,  almofle  three  hundreth  myles:  And  in  fumme  places  narower  where  the  confers  are
extended.  But  it  is  fuerlye  muche  more  bleffed  and  fortunate  then  Italie :  Beynge  for  the  moofle  parte  therof
fo  temperate  and  floryffhynge,  that  it  is  neyther  vexed  with  fliarppe  coulde,  nor  afllycted  with  immoderate  heate.
It  hath  bothe  the  fteyinges  and  conuerfyons  of  the  foonne  (cauled  Solflitia)  in  maner  equall  with  the  Equinoctiall,
with  lyttle  difference  betwene  the  length  of  the  daye  and  nyghte  throughout  all  the  yeare.  For  on  tlie  fouth  fyde,
the  day  afcendeth  fcarcely  an  houre  in  length  aboue  the  nyghte,  or  contrary  wyfe.  But  the  dyfference  is  more
on  the  northe  fyde.  Yet  are  there  fumme  regions  in  the  Ilande  in  the  whiche  the  coulde  is  of  fum  force.  But
yowre  holyneffe  mufle  vnderflonde  this  to  bee  incident  by  reafon  of  the  obiecte  or  nearneffe  of  the  mountaines,
as  wee  wyl  more  largely  declare  hereafter.  Yet  is  not  this  coulde  fo  pearcynge  and  fharpe,  that  th[e]inhabitantes
are  molefted  with  fnowe  or  bytynge  frofle. In  other  places,  the  Ilande  enioyeth  perpetuall  fpringe  tyme,  and

167

Singing  and
daunceing.

Soonges  of  loue
and  rnO"imyngc

Prophesies.
Note

Theyr  familiaritie
wi[thj  spintes

The  deuyl  is
dryuen  awaye
by  baptisme

126

Sumeyers.

They  l>'ue  as  much
in  the  water  as  on
the  lande

Serpentes

A  Crocodile  is
much  lyke  to  o»T
ewte  or  Lyserte
Byrdes  and  foules
Popingayes

Cipanga.

Italy  cauled
Latium

Isabella

The  forme  of  the
Ilande  of
hispaniola

A  particular  carde
of  hispaniola.

Hispaniola
compared  to  ItaUe.

The  temperature
of  Hispaniola.

The  equinoctiall.

Coulde  accidentall,
and  not  by  the
sytualion  of
the  region.

Perpctii.iU  springe
and  soomer.

127

1 68

Maruelous
frutfulnes

Beastes

Oxen  and  swyne
of  exceadyng
byg^esse.

Swyne  fed  with
Myrobalanes

Vines
Wheate

An  eare  of  wheate
as  byg  as  a  mans
arme  in  the  brawne

The  bread  of  the
Ilande.

Golde.

Great  plentie  of
cattayle.

Brasile.
Mastyx.
Gossampine
Electntm.

Incommodities  of
intemperat  regions

Holsome  ayer
and  water

Golde  euery  where

The  description
of  the  inner  partes
of  the  Ilande.

The  tJiyrde  Decade.

The  citie  of  s.
Dominicke

The  mountaynes
of  Haiti

The  mountaynes
of  Cibaua

128

The  Ilande  of

Cahini

Of  prouinccs

diuided  into

regions

Of  theyr
aipirutions

is  fortunate  with  contyniiall  foomer  and  haniefl. The  trees  floryflie  there  all  the  hole  yeare:  And  the  medowes

contynue  alway  greene. All  thynges  are  exceadynge  fortunate,  and  growe  to  great  perfection. How  wonderfully

all  garden  herbes  and  frutes  doo  encreafe,  foo  that  within  the  fpaoe  of  fyxtene  dayes  after  the  feede  is  sowne,al  herbes

of  fmaule  fleames,  as  letteffe,  borage,  radyflie,  and  fuche  other,  coome  to  their  full  rypeneffe :  And  alfo  howe  herbes

of  the  bygger  forte,  as  gourdes,  meloncs,  cucumers,  pompons,  citrons,  and  fuche  other,  coome  to  their  perfection

in  the  fpace  of  thirtie  dayes,  wee  haue  fufficiently  declared  cllcs  where. Of  the  beafles  tranfported  out  of  Spaine

thethcr,  wee  haue  fayde  howe  they  growe  too  a  muche  greater  kynde :  In  fo  muche  that  when  they  faule  into

communication  of  the  oxen  or  kyne,  they  compare  them  in  bigneffe  to  elephantes,  and  fwyne  to  mules  :  But  this

fumwhat  by  an  exceffyue  kynde  of  fpeache. We  haue  alfo  made  mention  how  their  fwynes  flefflie  is  more

fauourye  and  farre  better  and  more  pleafaunte  tafle  and  more  holfome  then  owres,  by  reafon  they  are  fedde  with

the  frutes  of  Myrobalane  trees,  and  other  pleafaunte  and  nuryffliynge  fruites  of  that  contrey,  whichc  growe  there  of

them  felues,  as  do  with  vs  beeches,  holly,  and  okes. Vynes  woolde  alfo  profper  there  with  marucUous  encreafe,

if  they  had  any  regard  to  the  plantinge  therof. The  lyke  encreafe  commeth  of  wheate  if  it  be  fowen  vppon  the

mountaynes  where  the  colde  is  of  fume  flrength:  but  not  in  the  playnes,  by  reafon  of  to  much  fatnes  and

rankenes  of  the  grownde. It  is  in  maner  incredible  to  heare,  that  an  eare  of  wheate  fliuld  bee  bygger  then  a

mans  arme  in  the  brawne,  and  more  then  a  fpanne  in  length,  bearynge  alfo  more  then  a  thoufande  graynes

as  they  all  confeffe  with  one  voyce,  and  erneflly  affirme  the  fame  with  othes. Yet  they  fay  the  bread  of  the  Ilande

(cauled)  Cazabbi  made  of  the  roote  oilucca,  to  bee  more  holfome,  becaufe  it  is  of  eafyer  digeftion,  and  is  cultured

with  leffe  labour  and  greater  increafe. The  refidue  of  the  tyme  which  they  fpende  not  in  fettynge  and  plantynge,

they  beflowe  in  gatheringe  of  golde. They  haue  nowe  fuche  plentie  of  foure  footed  beafls,  that  horfes  and  oxe

hydes  with  flieepe  flcynnes  and  goate  flcyns  and  fuch  other,  are  brought  from  thenfe  into  Spayne :  So  that  nowe

the  doughter  in  many  thynges  helpeth  and  fuccurreth  her  mother. Of  the  tree?  of  brafile,  fpices,  the  graine

which  coloureth  fcarlet  in  bright  fliinynge  redde,  maflix,  goffampine  cotton,  the  precious  metall  cauled  EleBrum,

and  fuch  other  commodities  of  this  Ilande,  we  haue  fpoken  fufficiently  before. What  therefore  can  chaunce

more  happy  vnto  man  vpon  the  earth,  then  there  to  lyue  where  he  neede  not  to  bee  dryuen  to  clofe  chaumbers

with  fliarpe  coulde  or  fayntynge  heate? Nor  yet  in  wynter  eyther  to  bee  laden  with  heauy  apparell,  or  to  burne

the  fliinnes  with  continual  fyttyng  at  the  fyer,  which  thynges  make  men  oulde  in  fhort  tyme  by  refoluinge  the

natural  heate,  Avherof  a  thoufande  difeafes  infue. They  alfo  affirme  the  ayer  to  bee  very  healthfuU :  and  the

waters  of  the  ryuers  to  bee  no  leffe  holfome,  as  they  whiche  haue  theyr  continuall  courfe  through  the  earth  of

the  golden  mynes. For  there  is  in  maner  no  ryuer,  no  mountaynes,  and  but  fewe  playnes  that  are  vtterly  without

golde. But  let  vs  nowe  at  the  length  coome  to  the  particular  defcription  of  the  inner  partes  of  this  bleffed

Ilande. We  haue  before  declared  howe  it  is  in  maner  equally  diuided  with  foure  greate  ryuers  defcendynge

frome  hygh  mountaynes :  wherof  that  which  runneth  towarde  the  Eafl,  is  cauled  Iwma,  as  that  towarde  the

Wefl  is  named  Attibimicus :  The  thyrde  is  Naiba  or  Haiba  which  runneth  Southwarde :  The  fourth  is  cauled

lache,  and  fauleth  towarde  the  North. But  this  fhippe  maifler,  hath  brought  an  other  defcription  obferued  of

th[e]inhabitantes  from  the  begynnynge. Let  vs  therfore  diuide  the  hole  Ilande  into  fiue  partes,  caulynge  the

regions  of  euery  prouince  by  theyr  owlde  names :  and  fynally  make  mention  of  fuche  thynges  as  are  woorthye

memory  in  euery  of  them. The  begynninge  of  the  Ilande  on  the  Eafl  fyde,  is  conteyned  in  the  prouince  named

Caizcimu :  fo  named  for  that  in  theyr  language  Ctmu,  fignifieth  the  front  or  begynnynge  of  any  thynge. After

this,  foloweth  the  prouince  of  Hiihabo,  and  then  Caihabo. The  fourth  is  Bainoa. Guaccaiarima  conteyneth  the

wefl  corner. But  the  lafl  faue  one,  Bainoa  is  of  larger  boundes  then  the  three  other. Caizcimu  reachethe

from  the  fyrft  fronte  of  the  Ilande  to  the  ryuer  Hozama,  whiche  runneth  by  the  citie  of  faynt  Dominicke. But

towarde  the  North  fyde,  it  is  ended  at  the  rough  mountaynes  of  Haiti. Hu/iabo,  is  included  within  the

mountaynes  Haiti  and  the  ryuer  laciga. Cai\}i\abo  the  thyrde  prouince, conteyneth  all  that  lyeth  betwene

Cuhabo  and  Dahatio,  euen  vnto  the  mouth  of  the  ryuer  of  laccha  or  lache  (one  of  the  foure  which  diuide

the  Ilande  equally)  and  afcendethe  to  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua.,  where the  greatefle  plentie of  golde

is  founde: Owte  of  the  which  alfo  the  ryuer  Demahus  fpringeth:  and  ioynynge  with  the  fpringes  of  the

ryuer  of  Naiba,  (being  an  other  of  the  foure  which  diuideth  the  Ilande  towarde  the  fouth  fea)  fauleth  to

an other banke of  the  ryuer of  faynt Dominicke. Bainoa, begynneth at the confines of  Caiabi, and

reacheth  euen  vnto  the  Ilande  of  Calwii  which  lieth  neare  vnto  the  fea  bankes  of  the  north  fyde  of  the

Ilande  where  wee  fayde  that  they  erected  the  fyrft  colonic  or  habitacion. The  prouince  of  Guaccaiarima,

occupieth  the  remanent  towarde  the  wefl. This  they  named  Guaccaiarima,  bycaufe  it  is  the  extreme  or  vtter-

mofl  parte  of  the  Ilande. For  laritna  in  theyr  language  fignifieth  the  tayle  or  ende  of  any  thynge :  And  Gua,

is  an  article  whiche  they  vfe  often  tymes  in  the  names  of  thynges :  And  efpecially  in  the  names  of  theyr  kynges :

as Guarioncxius,  and Guaccanarillus. In  the  prouince  of  Caizimu,  are  thefe  regions:  Higuci, Gtianama,

Reyre,  Xagua,  Arama?ta,  Arabo,  Hazoa,  Macorix,  Caiacoa,  Gjtaiagua,  Baguanimaho  and  the  rough  mountaynes

of  Haiti. Here  let  vs  fpeake  fume  what  of  theyr  afpirations  which  they  vfe  otherwyfe  then  the  Latins  doo,

168

\

The  thyrde  Decade.

169

It  is  to  bee  noted  that  there  is  no  afpiration  in  thcyr  vowels,  which  hath  not  th[e]effecte  of  a  confonant.  So
that  they  pronounce  theyr  afpirations  more  vehemently  then  wee  do  the  confonant.  f  Ye,  all  fuche  woordes
as  in  their  tonge  are  afpiratc,  are  pronounced  with  lyke  breath  and  fpirite  as  is.  f.  fauing  that  herein  the  neather
lyppe  is  not  moued  to  th[e]uppermofl  teethe.  With  open  mouthes  and  fhakynge  theyr  brefl.es,  they  breath
out  thefe  afpirations,  ha,  he,  hi,  ho,  hu,  as  the  Hebrewes  and  Arabians  are  accuflomed  to  pronounce  theyrs.  I
fynde  alfo  that  the  Spanyardes  vfe  the  lyke  vehemence  in  the  afpirations  of  thofe  woordes  whiche  they  haue
receaued  of  the  Moores  and  Arabians  which  poffeffcd  Spaine,  and  continued  there  many  yeares :  As  in  thefe
woordes:  Almohadda.  whiche  fignifieth  a  pyllowe  or  bolfler:  Alfo  Almohaza,  that  is,  a  horfe  combe:  with
dyuers  fuch  other  woordes  whiche  they  fpeake  in  maner  with  panting  breftes  and  vehement  fpirite.  I  haue
thought  it  good  to  reherfe  thefe  thynges,  bycaufe  amonge  the  Latines  it  often  tymes  foo  chaunceth  that  onely
the  accent  or  afpiration,  chaungeth  the  fignification  of  the  woorde :  as  hora,  for  an  houre,  and  ora  for  the  plurale
number  of  this  woorde  os,  which  fignifieth  the  mouth :  Alfo  ora,  which  fignifieth  regions  or  coafl.es.  The  lyke
alfo  chaunceth  in  thcdiuerfitie  of  the  accente,  di^occido  I  kyll,  and  occido  I  faule.  Euen  fo  in  the  language  of  thefe
fimple  men,  there  are  many  thynges  to  bee  obferued.  But  let  vs  nowe  returne  to  the  defcription.  In  the
prouince  of  Huhabo,  are  thefe  regions :  Xamana,  Canahacoa,  CuJiabo,  with  many  other,  the  names  wherof  I  haue
not  yet  learned.  The  prouince  of  Caihabo,  conteyneth  thefe  regions :  Magna,  and  Cacaciihana.  Th[e]inhabi-
tantes  of  this  region,  haue  a  peculyar  language  much  differinge  from  the  common  language  of  the  Hand,  and
are  cauled  Macoryxes.  There  is  alfo  an  other  region  cauled  Ctibana,  whofe  language  differeth  from  the  other.
Lykewyfe  the  region  of  Baiohaigtia,  hath  a  dyuers  toonge.  There  are  alfo  other  regions,  as  Dahabon,  Cybaho,
and  Mafiabaho.  Cotoy  is  in  the  myddle  of  the  Ilande.  By  this  runnethe  the  ryuer  Nizaus:  And  the  montaynes
cauled  Mahaiti?i,  Hazua,  and  ]Veibay?nao,  confine  with  the  fame.  In  the  prouince  of  Babioa,  are  the  regions  of
Maguana,  lagohaiucho,  Bauriico,  Dabiagua,  and  Attibimi,  fo  named  of  the  ryuer:  Alfo  Caiinoa,  Buiaici,
Dahabonici,  Maiaguariti,  Atiei,  Maccazifia,  Guahabba,  Annhiici,  Marten,  Guaricco,  Amaguei,  Xaragtia,  Yaguana,
Azzuei,  lacchi,  Honorucco,  Diagiio,  Camaie,  and  Neibaitnao.  In  Guaccaieriina  the  lafl.  prouince,  thefe  regions
are  conteyned :  Mauicarao,  Gtcahagiia,  Taquenazabo,  Nimaca,  Bainoa  the  leffe,  Cahaytni,  lamaizi,  Manabaxao,
Zauana,  Habacoa,  and  Ayqiieroa.  But  let  vs  entreate  fumwhat  of  the  particulars  of  the  regions.  In  the
prouince  of  Caizcimu,  within  the  great  goulfe  of  the  beginnynge,"  there  is  a  greate  caue  in  a  hoUowe  rocke
vnder  the  roote  of  a  hygh  mountayne,  about  twoo  farlonges  from  the  fea.  The  enterie  of  this  caue  is  not
much  vnlyke  the  doores  of  a  great  temple,  beinge  very  large  and  tumynge  many  wayes.  Andreas  Moralis  the
fhyp  mafl.er,  at  the  commaundement  of  the  gouernoure,  tempted  to  fearche  the  caue  with  the  fmaulefl.  veflels.
He  fayth  that  by  certeyne  priuie  wayes,  manye  ryuers  haue  concourfe  to  this  caue  as  it  were  to  a  finke  or
chanell.  After  th[e]experience  hereof,  they  ceafed  to  maruaile  whither  other  ryuers  ranne  whiche  commynge
fourefcore  and  tenne  myles,  were  fwalowed  vp,  fo  that  they  appeared  no  more,  nor  yet  fell  into  the  fea  by  any
knowen  wayes.  Nowe  therfore  they  fuppofe  that  ryuers  fwalowed  vp  by  the  holowe  places  of  that  flony  moun-
tayne, faule  into  this  caue.  As  the  fliipmafler  entered  into  the  caue  his  fhippe  was  almofl.  fwalowed.  For  he
faith  that  there  are  many  whyrlepooles  and  ryfinges  or  boylinges  of  the  water,  which  mg,ke  a  violent  conflicte  and
horrible  rorynge  one  encounteryng  the  other.  Alfo  many  huge  holes  and  holowe  places :  So  that  what  on  the
one  fyde  with  the  whirle  pooles,  and  on  the  other  fide  with  the  boyling  of  the  water,  his  fhyp  was  long  in  maner
toffed  vp  and  downe  lyke  a  baule.  It  greatly  repented  hym  that  he  had  entered,  yet  knewe  he  no  way  how  to
come  forth.  He  now  wandered  in  darkeneffe,  afwel  for  the  obfcureneflfe  of  the  caue  into  the  which  he  was  farre
entered,  as  alfo  that  in  it  were  thicke  cloudes  engendered  of  the  moifl.  vapours  proceading  of  the  conflicte  of  the
waters  whiche  continually  faule  with  great  violence  into  the  caue  on  euery  fyde.  He  compareth  the  noyfe  of
thefe  waters,  to  the  faule  of  the  famous  ryuer  of  Nilus  from  the  montaines  of  Ethyope.  They  were  al  fo  deafe,
that  one  could  not  here  what  an  other  faid.  But  at  the  length  with  great  daunger  and  feare,  he  came  foorth  of
the  caue  as  it  had  byn  owte  of  hel.  Aboute  three  fcore  miles  diflante  from  the  chiefe  citie  of  faincte  Dominicke,
there  are  certeyne  hyghe  montaynes  vppon  the  toppes  wherof  is  a  lake  or  fl.andynge  poole  inacceflible,  neuer
yet  feene  of  them  whiche  came  latelye  to  the  Ilande,  bothe  by  reafon  of  the  roughnefle  of  the  montaines,  and
alfo  for  that  there  is  noo  pathe  or  open  waye  to  the  toppes  of  the  fame.  But  at  the  length  the  fliyppe  maifler
beinge  conducted  thether  by  one  of  kynges,  afccnded  to  the  toppes  of  the  montaines  and  came  to  the  poole.
Hee  faith  that  the  coulde  is  there  of  fum  force.  And  in  token  of  wynter,  hee  founde  feme  and  bramble  buflhes,
whiche  two,  growe  onely  in  coulde  regions.  Thefe  montaynes,  they  caule  Ymizui  Hibahaino.  This  poole  is  of
frefhe  water  three  myles  in  compafle,  and  wel  replenyfflied  with  diuerfe  kindcf^  of  fyfflies.  Many  fmaule  riuers
or  brookes  faule  into  it.  It  hath  no  paflage  owte,  bycaufe  it  is  on  euery  fyde  enclofed  with  the  toppes  of
montaynes.  But  lette  vs  nowe  fpeake  of  an  other  poole  whiche  may  well  bee  cauled  a  fea  in  the  mydlande,
and  bee  coompared  to  the  Cafpian  or  Hircanian  fea  in  the  fyrme  lande  of  Afia :  with  certeyne  other  lakes  and
pooles  of  frefflie  water.

169

The  pronunciation
of  the  Hebrewes
and  Arabians

The  Moores  and
Arabians  possessed
Spaync

Howe  the
aspiration
chanseth  the
signification  of
wordes

Dyuers  languages
in  the  Ilande

A  greate  caue  in
the  rocke  of  a
mountayne.

A  daiingerus
enterprise

Riuers  deuoured
of  caues.

129

Whirlepooles
and  conflicte
of  waters.

Clowdes  in  the
caue.

The  Cataractes
of  Nilus

A  standjTige
poole  in  the  toppe
of  a  hygh
mounta>Tie.

Feme  and  bramble
busshes,  growe
only  in  coulde
regions.

The  Caspian  and
Hircanian  sea.

170

The  f/iyrdc  Decade.

C The  eyghte  booke  of  the  thirde  decade.

A  great  lake  of
soure  and  salte
water.

Swalowinge
goulfes.

Sea  fysshes  in
lakes  of  the
niidlande

The  deuourynge
fysshe  cauled
Tiburonus.

The  ryuers  that
faule  into  the  lake
Caspium.

CC.  [two  hundred]
sprynges  within
the  space  of  a
fiirlonge.

A  mvracle.

The  Tndian
language.

130

A  kyng  stricken
dumme  and  lame
by  a  myracle.

Such  as  are
drowned  in  the
lake  are  not  cast
vp  ageyne.

The  Ilande
Guarizacca  in
the  myddest  of
the  poole.
A  lake  of  salt
and  freshe  water.

A  lake  of  fresshe
water

A  lake  of  ten
myles  in  length

1  le  prouynce  of  Baiiwa  beynge  thrife  as  bygge  as  the  three  fyrfl,  that  is,  Caizcbnu,  V/iabo,
and  Calhaho,  indudeth  a  valley  named  Caiouani,  in  the  whiche  there  is  a  lake  of  falte,  foure,
and  bytter  water,  as  wee  reade  of  the  fea  cauled  Cafpinin,  lyinge  in  the  firme  lande  betwene
Sar//iatia  and  Hinania.  We  haiie  theifore  named  it  Cafpinin,  althoughe  it  not  bee  in  the
region  of  Hircanux.  It  hath  manye  fwalowinge  goulfes,  by  the  whiche,  bothe  the  water  of  the
fea  fpringeth  into  it,  and  alfo  fuche  as  faule  into  it  from  the  mountaines,  are  fwalowed  vppe.
They  thyncke  that  the  caues  therof,  are  fo  large  and  deepe,  that  great  fyfOies  of  the  fea  paffe
by  the  fame  into  the  lake.  Emonge  thefe  fyfOies,  there  is  one  cauled  Tibunmus  whiche  cutteth  a  man  in  funder
by  the  myddefl  at  one  fnappe  with  his  teethe,  and  deuoureth  hym.  In  the  ryuer  Jlozania,  runnynge  by  the
chiefe  citie  of  fayncte  Dominicke,  thefe  Tiburoni  do  fumtymes  coome  from  the  fea  and  deuoure  manye  of
th[e]inhabitauntes :  Efpecially  fuche  as  do  dayly  ploonge  them  felues  in  the  water  to  th[e]intent  to  keepe  their
bodyes  verye  cleane.  The  ryuers  whiche  faule  into  the  lake,  are  thefe.  From  the  Northe  fyde,  Gtianinicabon ;
From  the  Southe,  Xaccoei:  from  the  Eafle,  Guannabo:  And  from  the  Wefl,  Occoa.  They  faye  that  thefe  ryuers
are  great  and  continuall :  And  that  befyde  thefe,  there  are.  xx.  other  fmaule  ryuers  whiche  faule  into  this  Cafpiiwi.
Alfo  on  the  Northe  fyde  within  a  furlonge  of  the  lake,  there  are  aboue  twoo  hundreth  fpringes,  occupyinge
lykewife  aboute  a  furlonge  in  circuite,  the  water  wherof  is  coulde  in  foomer,  frefhe  alfo,  and  holfome  to  bee
droonke.  Thefe  fprynges  make  a  ryuer  that  can  not  bee  waded  ouer,  whiche  neare  at  hande  ioynynge  with  the
other,  fauleth  into  the  lake.  Here  mufle  wee  flaye  a  whyle.  The  kynge  of  this  regyon  founde  his  wyfe
praying  in  a  chapel  builded  by  the  Chriflians  within  the  precincte  of  his  dominion,  and  required  her
coompanie  to  fatiffye  his  flefliely  lufle.  His  wyfe  reproued  hym,  and  put  hym  in  remembraunce  to
haue  refpecte  to  the  holye  place.  The  woordes  whiche  fhee  fpake  to  hym,  were  thefe:  Teitoca,  Teitoca:
whiche  is  as  muche  to  faye,  as,  bee  quyet,  bee  quyet:  Techeta  cynato  gtiamechyna:  That  is,  god  wyl  bee
greatly  angerie.  Gtmmechyna,  fygnifyeth  god,  Techeta  greatly,  Cynato  angrie.  But  the  hufbande  halynge  her
by  the  arme,  fayde :  Giiaibba,  that  is,  go :  Cynato  7nacabicca  guamechyna :  That  is :  what  is  that  to  me  if  god  be
angerye?  And  with  thefe  w^oordes  as  he  profered  her  violence,  foodenlye  he  became  dumme  and  lame.  Yet
by  this  myracle  beynge  flriken  with  repentaunce,  he  euer  after  ledde  a  relygious  lyfe :  In  fo  muche  that  from
thenfe  foorthe  hee  woolde  neuer  fuffer  the  chappell  to  bee  fwepte  or  decked  with  any  other  mannes  hande.
By  the  fame  myracle,  manye  of  th[e]inhabitauntes  and  all  the  Chriflians  beyng  moued,  reforted  deuoutly  to  the
chappell.  They  take  it  in  good  parte  that  the  kynge  fufifered  the  reuenge  of  that  reproche.  Lette  vs  nowe
retourne  to  Cafpium.  That  falte  lake  is  toffed  with  flormes  and  tempefles :  And  oftentymes  drowneth  fmaule
fliyppes  or  fyffher  boates,  and  fwaloweth  them  vppe  with  the  maryners :  In  fo  muche  that  it  hath  not  byn  harde
of,  that  any  man  drowned  by  fhyppewracke,  euer  ploonged  vppe  ageyne,  or  was  cafle  on  the  fhore,  as  commonly
chaunceth  of  the  deade  bodyes  of  fuche  as  are  drowned  in  the  fea.  Thefe  tempefles,  are  the  deintie  banquetes
of  the  Tiburones.  This  Cafpium,  is  cauled  Hagueigabon.  In  the  myddefl  hereof,  lyeth  an  Ilande  named
Guarizacca,  to  the  whiche  they  reforte  when  they  go  a  fyffhynge :  But  it  is  not  cultured.  There  is  in  the  fame
playne,  an  other  lake  nexte  vnto  this,  whofe  water  is  myxte  of  falte  and  frefhe :  And  is  therfore  nother  apte  to
bee  droonke,  nor  yet  to  bee  refufed  in  vrgente  neceffytie.  This  conteineth  in  length,  xxv.  miles,  and  in  breadth
eight  myles :  In  fumme  places  alfo  nyne  or  ten.  It  receaueth  manye  ryuers  whiche  haue  no  paffage  owte  of
the  fame,  but  are  fwalowed  vppe  as  in  the  other.  Water  fpringeth  out  of  the  fea  into  this  alfo :  but  in  no  great
quantitie,  whiche  is  the  caufe  that  it  is  fo  commyxte.  In  the  fame  prouynce  towarde  the  Wefle  fyde,  there  is
an  other  lake  of  freflie  water,  not  farre  diflante  from  Cafpius.  This  th[e]inhabitauntes  caule  lainagua.  The
fame  falte  lake,  hath  on  the  North  fyde  therof,  an  other  named  Guaccaa.  This  is  but  lyttle:  as  not  pafl  three
or  foure  myles  in  breadth,  and  one  in  length.  The  water  of  this,  maye  well  bee  droonke.  On  the  fouthe  fyde
of  the  falte  lake,  there  lyeth  an  other  named  Babbareo,  of  three  myles  in  length  and  in  maner  rounde.  The
Waaler  of  this  is  frefhe  as  of  the  two  other.  This  lake  bycaufe  it  hath  no  paffage  owte  nor  yet  anye  fwalowynge
goulfes,  conueyeth  the  fuperfluous  waters  to  the  fea  if  it  be  encreafed  with  the  flreames  whiche  faule  fumtimes
more  abondantly  from  the  montaines.  This  is  in  the  region  of  Xa7nana  in  the  prouince  of  Bainoa.  There
is  an  other  cauled  Cuaniba,  lying  betwene  the  Eafl  and  the  South  nere  vnto  the  fyde  of  Cafpius.  This  is  ten
myles  in  length  and  almofle  rounde.  There  are  furthermore  many  other  fmaule  flandyng  pooles  or  lakes
difparfed  here  and  there  in  the  Hand,  whiche  I  wyll  lette  paffe  lefle  I  fliulde  bee  tedious  in  remainyng  to  longe
170

The  tliyrde  Decade.

171

in  one  thynge.  I  wyll  therfore  make  an  ende  with  this  addition,  that  in  all  thefe,  great  plentie  of  fyfhe  and
foule  is  nouryffhed.  All  thefe  lakes  lye  in  a  large  playne,  the  whiche  from  the  Eaft  reacheth  into  the  Weft  a
hundreth  and  twentie  myles :  beyng  of  breadth,  xviii.  rnyles  where  it  is  naroweft,  and.  xxv,  where  it  is  largeft.
Lookyng  toward  the  Weft,  it  hath  collaterally  on  the  lefte  hande  the  montaines  oi  Daigiiani:  And  on  the  ryght
hande,  the  montaines  of  Caigiia,  fo  cauled  of  the  name  of  the  vale  it  felfe.  At  the  rootes  of  the  montaines  of
Caigiia  toward  the  North  fyde,  there  lyeth  an  other  vale  much  longer  rnd  larger  then  that  before  named.  For
it  conteineth  in  length,  almofte  two  hundreth  myles :  And  in  bredth.  xxx.  wher  it  is  largeft,  and  about,  xx.  wher
it  is  naroweft  This  vale  in  fumme  parte  therof,  is  cauled  Maguana :  In  an  other  place,  Igiiafnii,  and  elles
where,  Hathathiei.  And  forafmuche  as  wee  haue  here  made  mention  of  this  parte  of  the  vale  named  Hathathiei,
wee  wyll  fumwhat  digreffe  from  the  difcourfe  of  this  defcription,  and  entreate  of  a  thinge  fo  ftraunge  and
maruelous,  that  the  lyke  hath  not  byn  hard  of.  So  it  is  therfore,  that  the  kyng  of  this  region  named  Carama-
texius,  taketh  great  pleafure  in  fyffliinge.  Into  his  nettes  chanced  a  younge  fyflie  of  the  kynde  of  thofe  huge
monfters  of  the  fea  whiche  th[e]inhabitours  caule  Manati,  not  founde  I  fuppofe  in  owre  feas  nor  knowen  to
owre  men  before  this  tyme.  This  fyftie  is  foure  footed,  and  in  fhape  lyke  vnto  a  tortoyfe  althoughe  ftiee  be  not
couered  with  a  ftiel,  but  with  fcales :  And  thofe  of  fuch  hardneffe  and  couched  in  fuche  order,  that  no  arrowe  can
hurte  her.  Her  fcales  are  byfet  and  defend  with  a  thoufand  knobbes.  Her  backe  is  playne,  and  her  heade  vtterly
lyke  the  heade  of  an  oxe.  She  lyueth  both  in  the  water  and  on  the  lande :  She  is  flowe  of  mouynge :  of  condition
meeke,  gentell,  affocyable  and  louingto  mankind  and  of  a  maruelous  fence  ormemorie  as  are  the  elephant  and  the
delphyn.  The  king  noriffhed  this  fyflie  certeine  daies  at  home  with  the  breade  of  the  countrey,  made  of  the  roote  of
lucca  and  Panycke  with  fuche  other  rootes  as  men  are  accuftomed  to  eate.  For  when  fhee  was  yet  but  younge,  he
caft  her  into  a  poole  or  lake  neare  vnto  his  palaice  there  to  bee  fedde  with  hande.  This  lake  alfo  receaueth
waters  and  cafteth  not  the  fame  foorth  ageine.  It  was  in  tyme  pafte  cauled  Guaurabo :  But  is  nowe  cauled  the  lake
of  Manati  after  the  name  of  this  fyflie  whiche  wandered  fafelye  in  the  fame  for  the  fpace  of.  xxv.  yeares,  and
grewe  excedyng  byg.  What  fo  euer  is  written  of  the  Delphines  of  Baian  or  Arion,  are  muche  inferior  to  the
dooinges  of  this  fyfh :  which  for  her  gentle  nature  they  named  Matiini,  that  is  gentle  or  noble.  Therefore  when
fo  euer  any  of  the  kynges  familyers,  efpecially  fuche  as  are  knowen  to  her,  reforte  to  the  bankes  of  the  lake  and
caule  Matum,  Matiim,  then  fhe  (as  myndefuU  of  fuche  benefites  as  flie  hath  receaued  of  men)  lyftethe  vp  her
heade  and  commeth  to  the  place  whither  fhe  is  cauled,  and  there  receaueth  meate  at  the  handes  of  fuche  as
feede  her.  If  any  defirous  to  paffe  ouer  the  lake,  make  fignes  and  tokens  of  theyr  intente,  fhe  boweth  her  felfe
to  them,  therewith  as  it  were  gentelly  inuitynge  them  to  amount  vppon  her,  and  conueyeth  them  fafely  ouer.
It  hath  byn  feene  that  this  monftrous  fyfftie  hath  at  one  tyme  fafely  caryed  ouer  tenne  men  finginge  and  playinge.
But  if  by  chaunce  when  flie  lyfteed  vp  her  heade  flie  efpyed  any  of  the  Chriftian  men,  fhe  woolde  immediatly
ploonge  downe  ageyne  into  the  water  and  refufe  to  obey,  bycaufe  flie  had  once  receaued  iniury  at  the  handes  of
a  certeyne  wanton  younge  man  amonge  the  Chriftians,  who  hadde  cafte  a  fharpe  darte  at  her,  although  fhe  were
not  hurte  by  reafon  of  the  hardenes  of  her  flcynne  beinge  roughe  and  ful  of  fkales  and  knobbes  as  we  haue
fayde.  Yet  dyd  fhe  beare  in  memorie  th[e]iniurie  flie  fufteyned,  with  fo  gentell  a  reuenge  requitynge
th[e]ingratitude  of  hym  which  had  delte  with  her  fo  vngentelly.  From  that  day  when  fo  euer  fhe  was  cauled  by
any  of  her  familiers,  fhe  woolde  fyrft  looke  circumfpectly  about  her,  leaft  any  were  prefent  appareled  after  the
nianer  of  the  Chriftians.  She  woolde  oftentymes  play  and  wreftle  vppon  the  banke  with  the  kynges  chamberlens ;
And  efpecially  with  a  younge  man  whom  the  kynge  fauoured  well,  beinge  alfo  accuftomed  to  feede  her.  Sliee
woolde  bee  fumetymes  as  pleafaunt  and  full  of  play  as  it  had  byn  a  moonkey  or  marmafet :  And  was  of  longe
tyme  a  great  comfort  and  folace  to  the  hole  Hande.  For  no  fniaule  confluence  afwell  of  the  Chriftians  as  of
th[e]inhabitantes,  had  dayly  concourfe  to  beholde  fo  ftraunge  a  myracle  of  nature,  the  contemplation  wherof  was
no  leffe  pleafaunt  then  woonderfull.  They  fay  that  the  meate  of  this  kynde  of  fyfflie,  is  of  good  tafte :  And  that
many  of  them  are  engendered  in  the  feas  therabout.  But  at  the  length,  this  pleafaunt  playfelowe  was  lofte,  and
caried  into  the  fea  by  the  great  ryuer  Attibimicus,  one  of  the  foure  which  diuide  the  Hande.  For  at  that  tyme
there  chaunced  fo  terrible  a  tempeft  of  wind,  and  rayne,  with  fuch  fluds  enfewing  that  the  like  hath  not  lightly
byn  hard  of  By  reafon  of  this  tempeft,  the  ryuer  Attibunicus  fo  ouerflowed  the  bankes,  that  it  fylled  tne  hole
vale  and  myxt  it  felfe  with  all  the  other  lakes.  At  which  tyme  alfo,  this  gentell  Matum  and  pleafaunte
companyon,  folowynge  the  vehemente  courfe  and  faule  of  the  fluddes,  was  therby  reftored  to  his  oulde  moother
and  natyue  waters,  and  fence  that  tyme  neuer  feene  ageyne.  Thus  hauynge  digreffed  fufficiently,  let  vs  nowe
coome  to  the  fituation  of  the  vale.  It  hathe  collaterally  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua  and  Caigiiam  which
brynge  it  to  the  South  fea.  There  is  an  other  vale  beyonde  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua  towarde  the  North.
This  is  cauled  the  vale  of  Guariofiexius,  bycaufe  that  before  the  memorie  of  man,  the  prediceffours  and
aunceftours  of  kyng  Guarionexius  to  whom  it  is  defcended  by  right  of  inheritaunce,  were  euer  the  lordes
of  the  hole  vale.  Of  this  kynge,  we  haue  fpoken  largely  in  the  fyrft  narration  of  the  Hande  in  the
fyrft  Decade. This  vale  is  of  length  from  the  Eaft  to  the  Weft,  a  hundreth  and  fourefcore  myles:  And  of

171

A  playne  of  a
hundreth  and
twentie  miles

A  playne  of  two
hundreth  myles  in
length.

The  maruelous
fysshe  ManatL

131

A  monster  of  the
sea  fedde  with
mans  hande.

Matum.

A  fyshe  caryeth
men  ouer  the  lake

A  maruelous
thynge.

The  ryuer
Attibunicus.

The  situation  cf
the  great  vale.

The  mountaynes
of  Cibaua  and
Caiguam.

The  greate  vale
of  Guarionexius.

172

The  thyrde  Decade.

132

Mountaynes.

Vales.

Hylles.

Playnes.

Ryuers.

Golde  in  all
mountaynes,  and
golde  and  fysshc
in  all  ryuers.

Salle  bayes.

Howe  the  Ilande
is  diuided  with
mountaynes.

Golde.

The  ryuers  haue
the>T  increase
from  the  caues  cf
the  mountaynes

No  hurtful  or
raueninge  beast
in  the  Ilande.

The  autours
e.xcuse.

breadth  from  the  South  to  the  North,  thirtie  myles  wher  it  is  naroweft,  and  fiftie  where  it  is  brodelle.  It
begynneth  from  the  region  Canabocoa  by  the  prouinces  of  Hiihabo  and  Caiabo :  And  endeth  in  the  prouince
of  Bainoa  and  the  region  of  Mariaia.  It  lyeth  in  the  myddefl  betwene  the  mountaynes  of  Cibaua,
and  the  mountaynes  of  Cahoiiai  and  Cazacubuna.  There  is  no  prouince  nor  any  region,  which  is  not  notable
by  the  maieflie  of  mountaynes,  frutefuhies  of  vales,  pleafauntncfle  of  hylles,  and  delectablenes  of  playnes,  with
abundaunce  of  fayre  ryuers  runnynge  through  the  liime.  There  are  no  fides  of  mountaynes  or  hylles,  no  ryuers,
which  abound  not  with  golde  and  delycate  fyfflies,  except  only  one  ryuer  which  from  th[e]originall  therof,  with
the  fprynges  of  the  fame  breakynge  foorth  of  the  mountaynes,  commeth  owt  falte  and  fo  contynueth  vntyll  it
perj'fhe.  This  ryuer  is  cauled  Bahimn :  and  runneth  through  the  myddle  of  the  region  Maguana  in  the  prouince
of  Bainoa.  They  fuppofe  that  this  ryuer  hathe  made  it  felfe  awaye  vnder  the  grounde  by  fume  paffages  of
playfler  or  falte  earthe.  For  there  are  in  the  Ilande  many  notable  falte  bayes,  wherof  we  wyl  fpeake  more
hereafter.  We  haue  declared  howe  the  Ilande  is  diuided  by  foure  ryuers  and  fyue  prouinces.  There  is  alfo  an
other  particion,  whiche  is  this.  The  hole  Ilande  confyfleth  of  the  tops  of  foure  mountaines  which  diuide  it  by
the  myddefl  from  the  Eaft  to  the  wefle.  In  all  thefe  is  abundance  of  nooryfliynge  moyflure  and  greate  plentie
of  golde :  of  the  caues  alfo  of  the  whiche,  the  waters  of  al  the  riuers  (into  the  which  the  caues  emptie  them
felues)  haue  theyr  originall  and  increafe.  There  are  lykewyfe  in  them  horryble  dennes,  obfcure  and  darke  vales,
and  myghtie  rockes  of  flone.  There  was  neuer  any  noyfome  beafle  founde  in  it :  Nor  yet  any  rauenynge  foure
footed  bealle.  No  lyon,  no  beare  no  fierce  tygers,  no  craftie  foxes,  nor  deuouring  woolfes.  All  thynges  are
bleffed  and  fortunate :  And  nowe  more  fortunate,  for  that  fo  many  thoufandes  of  men  are  receaued  to  bee  the
fheepe  of  Chrifles  flocke,  all  theyr  Zemes  and  Images  of  deuylles  being  reiected  and  vtterly  out  of  memorie.
If  I  chaunce  nowe  and  then  in  the  difcourfe  of  this  narration  to  repeate  one  thynge  dyuers  tymes  or  otherwife
to  make  digreffion,  I  mull  defyre  yowre  holynes  therwith  not  to  bee  offended.  For  whyle  I  fee,  heare,  and
^vryte  thefe  thinges,  mee  feemeth  that  I  am  herewith  fo  affected,  that  for  verye  ioy  I  feele  my  mynde  flirred  as
it  were  with  the  fpirite  of  Apollo  as  were  the  Sibylles,  whereby  I  am  enforced  to  repeate  the  fame  ageyne :
Efpecially  when  I  confyder  howe  farre  the  amplitude  of  owre  religion  fpreadeth  her  wynges.  Yet  amonge  thefe
fo  many  bleffed  and  fortunate  thynges,  this  one  greeueth  me  not  a  lyttle :  That  thefe  fimple  poore  men  neuer
brought  vp  in  labour,  do  dayly  peryfhe  with  intoUerable  trauayle  in  the  golde  mynes :  And  are  therby  brought
to  fuche  defperation,  that  many  of  them  kyll  them  felues,  hauynge  no  regarde  to  the  procreation  of  chyldren.
In  fo  much  that  women  with  chylde,  perceauynge  that  they  fhall  brynge  foorth  fuch  as  fhalbe  flaues  to  the
Chriflians,  vfe  medecines  to  deflroy  theyr  conception.  And  albeit  that  by  the  kynges  letters  patentes  it  was
decreed  that  they  fhulde  bee  fet  at  lybertie,  yet  are  they  conflrayned  to  ferue  more  then  feemeth  conuenient  for
free  men.  The  number  of  the  poore  wretches  is  woonderfuUy  extenuate.  They  were  once  rekened  to  bee
aboue  twelue  hundreth  thoufande  heades :  But  what  they  are  nowe,  I  abhorre  to  rehearfe.  We  wyll  therefore
let  this  paffe  :  and  returne  to  the  pleafures  of  Hifpaniola.  In  the  mountaynes  of  Cibatia,  which  are  in  maner
in  the  myddefl  of  the  Ilande  in  the  prouince  of  Caiabo  (where  we  fayd  to  bee  the  greatell  plentie  of  natyue
golde)  there  is  a  region  named  Cotohi,  fituate  in  the  clowdes,  enuironed  with  the  toppes  of  hyghe  mountaynes,
and  well  inhabited.  It  confifleth  of  a  playne  of.  xxv.  myles  in  length,  and.  xv.  in  breadth.  This  playne  is
hygher  then  the  toppes  of  other  mountaynes :  So  that  thefe  mountaynes,  maye  feeme  to  bee  the  chiefe  and
progenitours  of  the  other.  This  playne  fuffereth  alterations  of  the  foure  tymes  of  the  yeare :  as  the  Sprynge,
Soomer,  Autumne,  and  wynter.  Here  the  herbes  waxe  wythered,  the  trees  loofe  theyr  leaues,  and  the  medowes
become  hore :  The  whiche  thynges  (as  we  haue  fayde)  chaunce  not  in  other  places  of  the  Ilande,  where  they
haue  only  the  Spring  and  Autumne.  The  foyle  of  this  playne  bryngeth  foorth  feme  and  bramble  bufflies
bearynge  blacke  berries  or  wylde  rafpes,  which  two  are  tokens  of  coulde  regions.  Yet  is  it  a  fayre  region :  for
the  coulde  therof  is  not  very  fharpe :  neyther  dooth  it  aflicte  th[e]inhabitantes  with  frofle  or  fnowe.  They  argue
the  frutefulnes  of  the  region  by  the  feme,  whofe  flalkes  or  fleames  are  bygger  then  a  fpere  or  iauelen.  The
fydes  of  thofe  mountaynes  are  ryche  in  golde.  Yet  is  there  none  appoynted  to  dygge  for  the  fame,  bycaufe  it
fhalbe  needefull  to  haue  apparelled  myners,  and  fuch  as  are  vfed  to  labour.  For  th[e]inhabitantes  lyuynge
contented  A\ath  lyttle,  are  but  tender :  And  can  not  therfore  away  with  labour  or  abyde  any  coulde.  There  are
two  ryuers  which  runne  through  this  region,  and  faule  from  the  toppes  of  the  prefent  mountaynes.  One  of  thefe
is  named  Comoiayxa,  whofe  courfe  is  towarde  the  Wefl,  and  fauleth  into  the  chanell  of  Naiba.  The  other  is
cauled  Tirccotus :  which  runnynge  towarde  the  Eafl,  ioyneth  with  the  ryuer  of  Junna.  In  the  Ilande  of  Creta
(nowe  cauled  Candie)  as  I  paffed  by  in  my  legacie  to  the  Soldane  of  Alcayr  or  Babylon  in  Egypte,  the
Venetians  toulde  me  that  there  laye  fuche  a  region  in  the  toppes  of  the  mountaynes  oi  Ida,  whiche  they  affirme
to  bee  more  frutefull  of  wheate  corne  then  any  other  region  of  the  Hand.  But  forafniuch  as  once  the  Cretenfes
rebelled  agenfl  the  A'^enetians,  and  by  reafon  of  the  flreight  and  narowe  way  to  the  toppes  therof,  longe  defended
the  region  with  armes  againfl  th[e]auctoritie  of  the  Senate,  and  at  the  length  beinge  forweryed  with  warres,
rendered  the  fame,  the  Senate  commaunded  that  it  fliulde  bee  lefte  deferte,  and  the  flreightes  of  th[e]enter-

By  what  meanes
the  people  of  the
Hand  are  gretly
consumed.

The  plesures  of
Hispaniola.

The  region  of
Cotohi,  situate  in
the  Clowdes.

A  playne  in  the
toppes  of
mountaynes

The  hygher,  the
coulder.

Moderate  coulde
in  the  mountaynes.

Feme  of
maruelous  bignes

Golde.

133

Th[e]inhabitantes
of  Hispaniola  can
abyde  no  laboiu"
nor  coulde.

The  Hand  of
Creta  or  Candie,
vnder  the
dominion  of  ihe
Venetians.

172

The  thyrde  Decade.

173

aunces  to  bee  flopped,  lefle  any  fliulde  afcende  to  the  region  without  their  permiffyon.  Yet  in  the  yeare  of
Chrifte  M.  D.  ii.  lycence  was  graunted  to  the  hufband  men  to  tyll  and  manure  the  region,  on  fuche  condition
that  no  fuche  as  were  apte  to  the  warres,  myght  enter  into  the  fame.  There  is  alfo  an  other  region  in  Hifpaiiiola
n^med  Coiohy  after  the  fame  name.  This  diuideth  the  boundes  of  the  prouinces  of  Vhabo  and  Caiabo.  It
hath  mountaynes,  vales,  and  plaines.  But  bycaufe  it  is  baren,  it  is  not  muche  inhabited.  Yet  is  it  richefl  in
golde:  For  the  originall  of  the  abundaunce  of  gold,  beginneth  here:  In  fo  muche  that  it  is  not  gathered  in
fmaule  graines  and  fparkes  as  in  other  places ;  but  is  founde  hole,  maffie,  and  pure,  emonge  certaine  fofte
flones  and  in  the  vaines  of  rockes,  by  breakynge  the  flones  wherof,  they  folowe  the  vaynes  of  golde.  They
haue  founde  by  experience,  that  the  vayne  of  golde  is  a  lyuinge  tree :  And  that  the  fame  by  all  wayes  that  it
fpreadeth  and  fpringeth  from  the  roote  by  the  fofte  pores  and  paffages  of  the  yearth,  putteth  foorth  branches
euen  vnto  the  vppermofl  part  of  the  earth,  and  ceafeth  not  vntyl  it  difcouer  it  felfe  vnto  the  open  ayer:  At
whiche  time,  it  fheweth  foorth  certaine  bewtifull  colours  in  the  fleede  of  fioures,  rounde  flones  of  golden  earth
in  the  fleede  of  frutes,  and  thynne  plates  in  fleede  of  leaues.  Thefe  are  they  whiche  are  difparcled  throughout
the  hole  Ilande  by  the  courfe  of  the  ryuers,  eruptions  of  the  fpringes  owte  of  the  montaines,  and  violent  faules
of  the  fiuddes.  For  they  thincke  that  fuch  graines  are  not  engendered  where  they  are  gathered :  efpecially  on
the  dry  land :  but  othervvife  in  the  riuers.  They  fay  that  the  roote  of  the  golden  tree  extendeth  to  the  center
of  the  earth  and  there  taketh  norifliement  of  increafe.  For  the  deaper  that  they  dygge,  they  fynd  the  trunkes
therof  to  be  fo  muche  the  greater  as  farre  as  they  maye  folowe  it  for  abundaunce  of  water  fpringing  in  the
montaines.  Of  the  braunches  of  this  tree,  they  fynde  fumme  as  fmaule  as  a  threde,  and  other  as  bygge  as  a
mannes  fynger  accordynge  to  the  largeneffe  or  flraightneffe  of  the  ryftes  and  clyftes.  They  haue  fumetimes
chaunced  vpon  hole  caues  fufleyned  and  borne  vp  as  it  were  with  golden  pyllars :  And  this  in  the  wayes  by  the
whiche  the  branches  afcende :  The  whiche  beynge  fylled  with  the  fubflaunce  of  the  truncke  creapynge  from
beneath,  the  branche  maketh  it  felfe  waye  by  whiche  it  maye  paffe  owte.  It  is  oftentymes  diuided  by  encoun-
terynge  with  fum  kynde  of  harde  flone.  Yet  is  it  in  other  clyftes  nooriffhed  by  the  exhalations  and  vertue  of
the  roote.  But  now  perhappes  yowe  will  afke  me  what  plentie  of  golde  is  brought  from  thenfe.  Yowe  fhall
therfore  vnderllande  that  onely  owte  of  Hifpafiiola,  the  fum  of  foure  hundreth  and  fumtymes  fyue  hundreth
thoufande  ducates  of  gold  is  brought  yearely  into  Spayne :  as  may  be  gathered  by  the  fyfthe  portion  dewe  to
the  kynges  Excheker,  which  amounteth  to  the  fum  of  a  hundreth  and  fourfcore,  or  fourefcore  and  ten  thoufande
Caflellanes  of  golde,  and  fumtymes  more.  What  is  to  bee  thought  of  the  Ilande  of  Cuba  and  Sa?ifli  lohannis  (other-
wife  cauled  Burkhcna)  beyng  both  very  ryche  in  golde,  we  wyll  declare  further  hereafter.  To  haue  fayde  thus
muche  of  golde,  it  fhall  fuffyce.  Wewyll  nowe  therfore  fpeake  fumwhat  of  falte  wherwith  wee  may  feafon  and  referue
fuche  thynges  as  are  bought  with  golde.  In  a  region  of  the  prouince  oiBainoa,  in  the  montaynes  of  Daiagzio,
about  tv/elue  myles  diflant  from  the  falte  lake  cauled  Cafpitis,  there  are  falte  bayes  in  the  montaynes  in  a  maner  as
hard  as  floones,  alfo  clearer  and  whiter  then  criflall.  There  are  lykewyfe  fuche  falte  baies  whiche  growe  woon-
derfully  in  Laletaiiia  (now  cauled  Catalonia)  in  the  territorie  of  the  duke  of  Cadona  the  chiefe  ruler  in  that  region.
But  fuche  as  knowe  theym  bothe,  affyrme  that  thefe  of  Bainoa  are  mofle  notable.  They  faye  alfo  that  this  can  not
be  clefte  without  wedges  and  beatelles  of  Iron.  But  that  of  Laletana,  maye  eaflye  bee  broken  as  I  my  felfe  haue
proued.  They  therfore  compare  this  to  fuche  floones  as  may  eafely  bee  broken :  And  the  other  to  marble.  In  the
prouince  of  Caizimii^  in  the  regions  of  Iguanama,  Caiacoa,  and  Gnariagua,  there  are  fprynges  whofe  waters  are
of  maruelous  nature,  beynge  in  the  fuperfytial  or  vppermoofle  parte,  frefhe :  In  the  myddefl,  myxte  of  falte  and
frefhe :  And  in  the  lowefl  parte,  falte  and  fower.  They  thincke  that  the  falte  water  of  the  fea,  iffheweth  owte
foftely,  and  the  freflie,  to  fpringe  owte  of  the  mountaines.  The  one  fauleth  downe  and  the  other  rj^feth :  and  are
not  therfore  fo  vniuerfally  myxt  wherby  the  one  may  vtterly  corrupt  th[e]other.  If  any  man  laye  his  eare  to  the
grounde  neare  to  any  of  thefe  fpringes,  he  fhal  perceaue  the  ground  there  to  bee  fo  hollowe,  that  the  reboundyng
noyfe  of  a  horfeman  comminge  may  be  harde  for  the  fpace  of  three  myles,  and  a  foote  man  one  myle.  In  the
lafle  region  towarde  the  fouthe  named  Guaccaiarima,  in  the  lordfhyp  of  Zaiiana,  they  fay  there  are  certeyne
wyld  men  whiche  lyue  in  the  caues  and  dennes  of  the  montaynes,  contented  onely  with  wilde  fniites.  Thefe
men  neuer  vfed  the  companye  of  any  other:  nor  wyll  by  any  meanes  becoome  tame.  They  lyue  without  any
certaine  dwellynge  places,  and  with  owte  tyllage  or  culturynge  of  the  grounde,  as  wee  reade  of  them  whiche  in
oulde  tyme  lyued  in  the  golden  age.  They  fay  alfo  that  thefe  men  are  withowte  any  certaine  language.  They
are  fumtymes  feene.  But  owre  men  haue  yet  layde  handes  on  none  of  them.  If  at  any  tyme  they  coome  to
the  fyght  of  men,  and  perceyue  any  makynge  toward  them,  they  flye  fwifter  then  a  harte.  Ye  they  affyrme  them
to  bee  fwifter  then  grehowndes.  What  one  of  thefe  folytarie  wanderers  dyd,  it  is  worth  the  hearyng.  So  it  is
that  owr  men  hauyng  granges  adioyning  nere  vnto  the  thicke  wods,  certen  of  them  repaired  thither  in  the
mooneth  of  September  in  the  yeare.  M.  D.  xiiii.  In  the  meane  tyme,  one  of  thefe  wylde  men  came  leapynge
owte  of  the  woodde.  And  approchynge  fumwhat  toward  them  with  fmyling  countenaunce,  foodenly  fnatched
vppe  a  childe  of  therfe  beynge  the  foonne  of  the  owner  of  the  graunge,  whiche  he  begotte  of  a  woman  of  the

Pure  and  massie
golde  in  the
region  of  Cotoy.

The  vaine  of  go!de,
is  a  lyuynge  tree.

These  colers  or
floures  are  cauled
Marchasites,
Pyrites.

The  roote  of  the
golden  tree.

The  braunches  of
the  golden  tree.

Caues  susteyneJ
with  pyllers  of
golde.

The  stones  of  the
golde  mynes.

\Vhat  gold  is
brought  yereiy
from  Hispaniola
into  Sp.iyne.

Salte  of  the
mountaynes,  \ery
hard  and  cleare.

134

Salt  as  hard  as
stones.

Sprynges  of  salt,
fresshe  and  sower
water.

Holowe  caaes  in
the  grounde

Certeyne  wyld  mei
lyuing  in  caues
and  dennes

Men  without  a
certeyne  language

Men  as  swift  as
greihounds

A  wyld  man
runneth  aw.-iy
with  a  chy'.de

173

174

TJie  thyrde  Decade.

Pitche  of  llie
rocke.

Pitche  of  two
kyndes  of  trees.

The  pine  tree.
The  tree  Copeia.

The  leafe  of  a  tree
in  the  steede  of
paper.

They  beleiie  that
leaues  Uo  speake.
A  pretie  storie.

135

Ignorance  causeth
atimiration.

The  leafe  wherin
they  wryte.

A  stronge  colour
of  the  iuise  of  an
apple.

An  Herbe  whose
smoke  is  poyson.

llande.  He  ranne  awaye  with  the  childe,  and  made  fygnes  to  owre  men  to  folowe  hym.  Many  folowed  afwel
of  owre  men  as  of  the  naked  inhabytantes,  but  all  in  vayne.  Thus  when  the  pleafaunt  wanderer  perceaued  that
the  Chriflians  ceafed  to  purfue  hym,  he  lefte  the  childe  in  a  crolTe  waye  by  the  whiche  the  fwyneheardes  were
accuftomed  to  dryue  the  fwyne  to  their  paflure.  Shortly  after,  a  fwynehearde  founde  the  chyld  and  brought
hym  home  to  his  flither  yet  tormentynge  hym  felfe  for  forowe,  fuppofynge  that  wylde  man  to  haue  byn  one  of
tlio  kyiide  of  the  Canibales,  and  that  his  foonne  was  nowe  deuowred.  In  the  fame  llande  they  gather  pytche
whiche  fweateth  owte  of  the  rockes,  beynge  muche  harder  and  fourer  then  the  pitche  of  the  tree :  and  is  therfore
more  commodious  to  calke  or  defende  fliyppes  ageynfle  the  woormes  cauled  Bromas,  wherof  wee  haue  fpoken
largely  before.  This  llande  alfo  bryngeth  foorth  pitche  in  two  kyndes  of  trees,  as  in  the  Pyne  tree  and  an  other
named  Copeia.  I  neede  not  fpeake  of  the  pyne  tree,  bycaufe  it  is  engendered  and  knowen  in  maner  euery
where.  Lette  vs  therfore  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  other  tree  cauled  Copeia:  Pitche  is  lykewyfe  gathered  of  it  as
of  the  pyne  tree:  althoughe  fumme  faye  that  it  is  gathered  by  diflyllyng  or  droppyng  of  the  woode  when
it  is  burnt.  It  is  a  flraunge  thynge  to  here  of  thp  leafe  thereof:  and  how  neceffary  prouifion  of  nature  is
fliewed  in  the  fame.  It  is  to  be  thought  that  this  is  the  tree  in  the  leaues  wherof  the  Chaldeans  (beynge  the
fyrfle  fynders  of  letters)  exprefled  their  myndes  before  the  vfe  of  paper  was  knowen.  This  leafe  is  a  fpanne
in  breadth  and  almoil  round.  Owre  men  write  in  them  with  pynnes  or  ncdles  or  any  fuche  inflrumentes
made  of  metall  or  woodde,  in  maner  as  well  as  on  paper.  It  is  to  bee  lawghed  at  what  owre  men  haue
perfwaded  the  people  of  the  llande  as  towchynge  this  leafe.  The  fymple  foules  beleue  that  at  the  com-
mandement  of  owre  men,  leaues  do  fpeak  and  difclofe  fecreates.  They  were  brought  to  this  credulitie
by  this  meanes.  One  of  owre  men  dwellynge  in  the  citie  of  Dominica  the  chiefe  of  the  llande,  delyuered
to  his  feruaunte  (beyng  a  man  borne  in  the  llande)  certayne  rofled  connies,  (whiche  they  caule  Vtias
beynge  no  bygger  then  myfe)  wyllynge  hym  to  carie  the  fame  to  his  frende  whiche  dwelte  further  within  the
llande.  This  meffenger,  whether  it  were  that  he  was  therto  condrayned  through  hunger,  or  entyfed  by  appetite,
deuoured  three  of  the  counnies  by  the  waye.  He  to  whome  they  were  fente,  writ  to  his  frynde  in  a  leafe  howe
manye  he  receaued.  When  the  mayfler  had  looked  a  whyle  on  the  leafe  in  the  prefence  of  the  feruaunt,  he
fayde  thus  vnto  hym.  Ah  foonne,  where  is  thy  fay  the?  Coulde  thy  gredye  appetyte  preuayle  fo  muche
with  the  as  to  caufe  the  to  eate  the  connies  commytted  to  thy  fydelytie?  The  poore  wretche  trembelynge  and
greatlye  amafed,  confeffed  his  faute :  And  therwith  defyred  his  mayfler  to  tell  hym  howe  he  knewe  the  treweth
therof  This  leafe  (quod  he)  whiche  thou  browghtefl  me,  hath  toulde  me  all.  Then  hee  further  rehearfed  vnto
hym  the  houre  of  his  coommynge  to  his  frende,  and  lykewyfe  of  his  departynge  when  hee  retourned.  And  thus
they  meryly  deceaue  thefe  feely  foules  and  keepe  theym  vnder  obedyence :  In  fo  muche  that  they  take  owre  men
for  goddes,  at  whofe  coommaundement  leaues  doo  difclofe  fuche  thynges  as  they  thyncke  moofle  hyd  and
fecreate.  Bothe  the  fydes  of  the  leafe  receaueth  the  formes  of  letters  euen  as  dooeth  owre  paper.  It  is  thycker
then  double  parchement,  and  meruelous  toughe.  While  it  is  yet  floryffliynge  and  newe,  it  fheweth  the  letters
whyte  in  greene.  And  when  it  is  drye,  it  becommeth  whyte  and  harde  lyke  a  table  of  woodde :  but  the  letters
wexe  yelowe.  It  dooeth  not  corrupte  or  putrifye :  nor  yet  loofeth  the  letters  thoughe  it  bee  wette :  nor  by  any
other  meanes  excepte  it  bee  burnte.  There  is  an  other  tree  named  Xagua :  the  iuife  of  whofe  foure  apple
beynge  of  a  darke  redde  coloure,  flayneth  and  coloureth  what  foo  euer  is  touched  therwith :  And  that  foo
fyrmely,  that  noo  waffliynge  canne  take  it  awaye  for  the  fpace  of  twentie  dayes.  When  the  apple  is  full  ripe,  the
iuife  loofeth  that  flrength.  The  apple  is  eaten,  and  of  good  tafl.  There  is  alfo  an  herbe  whofe  fmoke  (as  we
haue  reherfed  the  hke  before  of  a  certen  woodde)  is  deadly  poifon.  On  a  tyme  when  the  kynges  affembled
together  and  confpired  the  deflruction  of  OAvre  men,  whereas  they  durfle  not  attempte  th[e]enterprife  by  open
warre,  theyr  diuife  was,  priuilye  to  lay  many  bundels  of  thofe  herbes  in  a  certeyne  houfe,  whiche  fliortly  after
they  intended  to  fet  on  fyer,  to  th[e]intent  that  owre  men  makynge  hafle  to  quenfhe  the  fame,  myght  take  theyr
death  with  the  fmoke  therof.  But  theyr  purpofed  practyfe  beinge  bewrayed,  th[e]autours  of  the  diuife  were
punyflhed  accordyngly.  Nowe  (mofle  holy  father)  for  as  much  as  yowre  holyneffe  wryteth  that  what  fo  euer  we
haue  written  of  the  newe  worlde,  dooth  pleafe  yowe  ryght  well,  wee  wyll  reherfe  certeyne  thynges  owte  of  order,
but  not  greatly  from  owre  purpofe.  Of  the  fettynge  the  rootes  of  Maiziimi,  Agis,  Iticca,  Baiiaias,  and  fuch  other
beinge  theyr  common  foode,  and  of  th[e]ufe  of  the  fame,  we  haue  fpoken  fufhciently  before.  But  by  what  meanes
they  were  fyrfle  applyed  to  the  commoditie  of  men,  we  haue  not  yet  declared.  We  nowe  therefore  entende  to
cnlreate  fumwhat  hereof

«74

The  thynie  Decade.

175

C  The  nynth  booke  of  the  thyrde  Decade.

HEY  faye  that  the  fyrRe  inhabitours  lyued  contented  with  the  rootes  of  dates,  and  Magueans,
which  is  an  herbe  muche  lyke  vnto  that  which  is  commonly  cauled  Sengrene  or  Orpin. Alfo
the  rootes  of  Guaiegans,  whiche  are  rounde  and  greate  muche  lyke  vnto  pufifes  of  the  earth  or
mufflieromes. They  did  lykewife  eate  Giiaieros,  lyke  vnto  perfeneppes :  Cibaios  lyke  nuttes,
Cabaioes  and  Macoanes,  lyke  vnto  onions,  with  dyuers  other  fuche  rootes. They  fay  that
after  many  yeares,  a  certeyne  Boition,  that  is,  a  wyfe  oulde  man,  fawe  vppon  the  bankes  fyde,
a  bufhe  lyke  vnto  fenel :  and  tranfplantyng  the  roote  therof,  brought  it  from  wyldenes  to  a
better  kynde,  by  nooryffhynge  it  in  gardens. This  was  the  begynnynge  of  Jucca,  which  at  the  fyrfte  was  deadely
poyfon  to  all  fuche  as  dyd  eate  therof  rawe. But  for  as  muche  as  they  perceaued  it  to  bee  of  pleafaunte  tafle,
they  determyned  many  wayes  to  proue  the  vfe  therof:  And  at  the  length  founde  by  experience  that  beinge  fodde
or  fryed,  it  was  leffe  hurtefuU:  by  whiche  meanes  alfo,  they  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  veneme  lyinge  hyd  in
the  iufe  of  the  roote. Thus  by  dryinge,  faltynge,  feafonynge,  and  otherwyfe  temperynge  it,  they  brought  it
to  theyr  fine  breade  which  they  caule  Cazabbi,  more  delectable  and  holfome  to  the  flomacke  of  manne  then
breade  made  of  wheate,  bycaufe  it  is  of  eafyer  digeflion. The  fame  is  to  bee  vnderfloode  of  other  rootes  and
the  grayne  of  Maizinm  whiche  they  haue  chofen  for  their  chiefe  meate  amonge  the  feedes  of  nature,  as  we  reade
howe  Ceres  the  doughter  of  SatiiniKs,  gathered  wheate  and  barley  (with  fuche  other  come  as  are  nowe  mofl  in
vfe  amonge  men)  in  Egypte  of  certeyne  graynes  taken  owt  of  the  mudde  dryuen  from  the  mountaynes  of
Ethiopia  by  th[e]increafe  of  the  ryuer  Nilus,  and  lefte  in  the  plaine  at  fuch  tyme  as  Nilus  reforted  ageyne  to
his  chanell. For  the  which  facte,  we  reade  that  the  antiquitie  gaue  diuine  honour  to  Ceres,  who  fyrfl  norifhed
and  increafed  fuch  chofen  feedes. There  are  innumerable  kyndes  of  Ages:  the  varietie  wherof,  is  knowen  by
theyr  leaues  and  floures. One  kynde  of  thefe,  is  cauled  Guatiaguax. This  is  whyte  boothe  within  and  without
An  other  named  Guaraguei  is  of  vyolet  colour  without  and  white  within. The  other  kyndes  of  Ages,  they  caul
Zazaueios. Thefe  are  redde  without  and  whyte  within. Squiuetes,  are  whyte  within  and  without. Tiinna,  is  all
together  of  vyolet  coloure. Hobos  is  yelowe  booth  of  fkynne  and  inner  fubftance. There  is  an  other  named
Atibwiieix :  The  fkynne  of  this  is  of  violet  colour,  and  the  fubftance  whyte. Aniguamar,  hath  his  fkynne  alfo  of
vyolet  coloure,  and  is  whyte  within. Guaccaracca,  hath  a  whyte  fkynne,  and  the  fubflance  of  vyolet  colour. There
are  many  other  which  are  not  yet  brought  to  vs. But  I  feare  me  leafl  in  the  rehearfall  of  thefe,  I  fhal  prouoke
the  fpurres  of  mahcious  perfons  ageynfl  me  which  wyll  fcome  thefe  owr  doinges  for  that  we  haue  wrytten  of
many  fuch  fmaule  thinges  to  a  prince  occupyed  in  fuche  weyghty  affayres,  as  vnto  yowre  holynes  vppon  whofe
fhulders  refleth  the  burthen  of  the  hole  Chriflian  worlde. But  I  wolde  afke  of  thefe  malycious  enuyers  of
other  mens  trauayles,  whether  Plinie  and  fuch  other  famous  wryters,  when  they  dyrected  and  dedicated  fuch
thinges  to  kynges  and  princes,  entended  only  to  profyte  them  to  whom  they  confecrated  the  frute  of  theyr
knowleage. They  fumtymes  intermyxte  famous  thynges  with  obfcure  thynges,  lyght  with  heauie,  and  greate  with
fmaule,  that  by  the  foortheraunce  of  princes,  theyr  vniuerfall  pofleritie  myght  enioye  the  fruition  of  the  know-
leage of  thynges. At  other  tymes  alfo,  beinge  intent  about  particular  thinges,  and  defyrous  of  newe  th}Tiges,
they  occupyed  them  felues  iu  the  fearchinge  of  particular  tractes  and  coafles,  with  fuche  thynges  as  nature
brought  foorth  in  the  fame,  by  this  meanes  to  coome  the  better  to  more  abfolute  and  vniuerfal  knowleage. Let
theym  therefore  contemne  owre  doinge :  And  wee  wyll  laugh  to  fcome,  not  theyr  ignoraunce  and  flothfulnes,
but  pernicious  curioufnes :  And  therewith  hauynge  pitie  of  theyr  frowarde  difpofitions,  wyll  commit  theim  to  the
venemous  ferpentes  of  whom  enuie  tooke  his  fyrfl  originall. It  fhall  in  the  meane  tyme  abundantly  contente
vs  that  thefe  thynges  do  pleafe  yowre  holynes :  And  that  yowe  doo  not  difpife  owre  fimple  veflures  vlier^vith
we  haue  only  weaued  togyther  and  not  adourned,  gathered  and  not  defcribed  fuch  maruelous  thynges  in  the
garnyfhynge  wherof,  nature  hath  fufficiently  fhewed  her  cunnynge. Owre  defyre  is  none  other  but  herein  for
yo^vre  fake  to  doo  owre  endeuoure  that  thefe  thynges  maye  not  peryfhe. Let  euery  man  take  hereof  what
lyketh  hym  befl. Of  the  fheepe  or  bullocke  foulde  in  the  market,  nothynge  remayneth  in  the  euenynge,  bycaufe
the  fhulder  pleafeth  one,  the  legge  an  other,  and  the  necke  an  other. Ye,  fume  haue  mofl  phantafie  to  the
bowels,  and  fume  to  the  feete. Thus  hauynge  enough  wandered,  lette  vs  returne  to  owre  purpofe  and  declare
with  what  woordes  they  falute  the  kynges  chyldren  when  they  are  fyrfl  borne :  or  howe  they  apply  tlie  beg)-n-
nyng  of  theyr  lyues  to  the  end :  And  why  their  kynges  are  cauled  by  many  names. Therfore  when  the  kynge
hath  a  fonne  borne,  fuch  as  dwel  neare  about  his  pallaice  or  vyllage,  repayre  to  the  queenes  chamber,  where

175

i  The  kyndes  of
frutes  wherwith

j  the[e]inhabitantes
lyued  fyrst

Necessilie  the
moother  of  ail
artes.

136

The  fine  breade
Cazabbi,  made  of
the  rootes  of
lucca.

Howe  Ceres  fyrst
founde  wheate  anc
barly  in  Eg^-pte.

The  rootes  of  ages

The  autours
excu-e.

riiuie.

176

The  thynie  Decade.

By  what  names
they  s-ilute  the
kyiiges  chyldren
when  they  are
borne.

The  name^(  and
tytles  of  the
Komanc
Emperours.

137

Howe  they  make
theyr  tcstamcntcs

So  dyd  grea[t]
Alexander

The  kynges  wyues
and  concubines
are  buryed  with
hyin.

They  burie  theyr
iewels  with  them.

A  dreame  of  an
other  lyfe  after
this.

\Vhere  it  rayneth
but  seldome.

AV'here  it  rayneth
much.

V^ariaUe  motioi.s
of  the  elementes.
The  colonies  and
vyllages  which  the
Spanyardes  haue
buylded

The  other  Ilandes
about  hispaniola.

The  Ilande
Arethusa.

A  sprynge
runnyng  vnder  the
sea  frome
hispaniola  to
Arethusa.

138

The  Hand  of
Sancti  lohannis.

The  Ilande  of
Cuba.

one  foluteth  the  newe  borne  chylde  with  one  name,  and  an  other  with  an  other  name.  God  faue  the
thowe  fliyninge  lampe  fayth  one:  An  other  cauleth  him  bryght  and  cleare.  Sunie  name  him  the
victourer  of  his  enemies:  and  other  fume,  the  puiflfaunt  conquerour  defcended  of  bludde  royall,  and
bryghter  then  gold,  with  dyuers  other  fiiche  vayne  names.  Therfore  lyke  as  euery  of  the  Romane  emperours
Avas  cauled  Adiahcnicus,  Forf/iiciis,  Armcniciis  Dacicus,  Gof/iicus,  and  Germanicus,  accordynge  to  the  titles
of  theyr  parentes  and  aunceflours,  euen  fo  by  th[e]impofition  of  names  inuented  by  other  kynges,  Beuchiciis
Atiaca\if\fhoa  the  lord  of  the  region  of  Xaragua  (of  wliome  and  of  the  wyfe  woman  Anachaona  his  fyfler,
we  haue  fpoken  largely  in  the  fyrRe  Decade)  was  cauled  by  all  thefe  names  folowynge:  Turcigua  Hohin:
whiche  is  as  muche  to  faye,  as,  a  kynge  fliynynge  as  bryght  as  laton.  Starci,  thai  is,  bryghte :  HuiJio^
hyghnefle:  Duihcynequcn,  a  ryche  fludde.  With  all  thefe  names  and  more  then  fortye  other  fuche,  dooeth
kynge  Bcuchius  magnifye  hym  felfe  as  often  as  he  commaundeth  any  thynge  to  bee  doone  or  caufeth  any
proclamation  to  bee  made  in  his  name.  If  the  cryer  by  ncglygence  leaue  owte  any  of  thefe  names,  the  king
thynketh  it  to  founde  greatly  to  his  contumely  and  reproche.  The  lyke  is  alfo  of  other.  Howe  fondely  they
vfe  them  felues  in  makynge  their  teftamentes,  we  wyll  nowe  declare.  They  leaue  th[e]inheritaunce  of  their
kyngedomes  to  th[e]elde(l  foonnes  of  their  elded  fyflers.  If  fliee  fayle,  to  th[e]eldefl  of  the  feconde  fyfler  and
fo  of  the  thirde  if  the  fecond  alfo  faile.  For  they  are  owte  of  doubte  that  thofe  children  coome  of  their  bludde.
But  the  children  of  their  owne  wyues,  they  counte  to  bee  not  legitimate.  If  there  remayne  none  of  their  fyflers
children,  they  leaue  th[e]inheritaunce  to  their  broothers.  And  if  they  faile,  it  defcendeth  to  their  owne  foonnes.
Lafle  of  all,  if  al  thefe  faile,  they  affygne  it  to  the  woorthiefl,  as  to  hym  that  is  of  greatefl  power  in  all  the  Ilande,
that  he  may  defende  their  fubiectes  from  their  auncient  enemyes.  They  take  as  many  wyues  as  them  lyfleth.
They  fuffer  the  befl  beloued  of  the  kynges  \vyues,  and  concubynes  to  bee  buryed  with  hym.  Anachaona  the
fyfler  of  Bcuchius  the  kyng  of  Xaragua,  being  a  woman  of  fuche  wifedome  and  cunnynge  that  in  makynge  of
rhymes  and  balettes  fhee  was  counted  a  prophetiffe  emonge  the  befle,  commaunded,  that  emonge  all  the  wyues
and  concubynes  of  the  kinge  her  brother,  the  fayrerefl  (whofe  name  was  Guanahattabcnechina)  fhulde  be  buried
alyue  with  him,  and  two  of  her  waytyng  maydes  with  her.  Shee  woolde  alfo  haue  appointed  dyuers  other  to
that  offyce,  if  fliee  had  not  byn  otherwife  perfwaded  by  the  prayers  of  certeyne  fryers  of  faincte  Fraunces  order
whiche  chaunced  then  to  bee  prefente.  They  faye  that  this  Guanahattabcnechina  had  none  in  all  the  Hand
comparable  to  her  in  bevvtie.  She  buried  with  her  all  her  iewelles  and  twentie  of  her  befl  ornamentes.  Their
cuflome  is,  to  place  befyde  euery  of  them  in  theif  fepultures,  a  cuppe  full  of  water  and  a  portion  of  the  fyne  breade
of  Cazabbi.  In  Xaragua,  the  regyon  of  this  kynge  Bcuchius,  and  in  Hazua,  parte  of  the  regyon  of  Caiabo,  alfo
in  the  fayre  vale  of  falte  and  freflie  lakes,  and  lykewife  in  the  region  of  Yaquino  in  the  prouynce  of  Bainoa,  it
rayneth  but  feldome.  In  al  thefe  regyons  are  foffes  or  trenches  made  of  oulde  tyme,  wherby  they  conueye  the
waters  in  order  to  water  their  fyeldes,  with  no  leffe  arte  then  doo  th[e]inhabitours  of  newe  Carthage,  and  of  the
kyngedome  of  Murcien  in  Spartaria  for  the  feldoome  faule  of  rayne.  The  region  of  Maguana,  deuydeth  the
prouynce  of  Bainoa  from  Caiabo,  and  Zaua?ia  from  Guaccaiarima.  In  the  deepe  vales,  they  are  troubled  with
raine  more  often  then  nedeth.  Alfo  the  confynes  of  the  chiefe  citie  named  faincte  Dominike  are  moifler  then
is  neceffary.  In  other  places,  it  rayneth  moderately.  There  are  therfore  in  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  dyuers
and  variable  motions  of  the  elementes,  as  we  reade  the  lyke  of  manye  other  regions.  Of  their  colonies  or
mantions  which  the  Spaniardes  haue  erected  in  this  Ilande  we  haue  fpoken  fuffycientelye  beefore.  They  haue
fence  that  tyme  buylded  thefe  vyllages :  Portus  Platce,  Portus  Regalis,  Lares,  Villanoua,  Azuam,  and  Saluaterra.
Hauynge  fayde  thus  muche  of  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  the  moother  and  ladye  of  the  other  Ilandes,  and  as  it
were  Tcthys  the  mofle  bewtifuU  wyfe  oi  Neptunus  the  god  of  the  fea,  let  vs  nowe  entreate  fumwhat  of  her  Nymphes
and  faire  Nereides  whiche  waite  vppon  her  and  adourne  her  on  euery  fyde.  Wee  wyll  therfore  begynne  at  the
nearefl  cauled  the  newe  Arethtcfa,  foo  named  of  the  fontayne  Arethufa  in  the  Ilande  of  Sicilie.  This  is  famous
by  reafon  of  a  fprynge:  but  othen'/yfe  vnprofytable.  Owre  men  named  it  of  late,  Duas  Arbores,  bycaufe  it  hath
onely  twoo  trees  groynge  in  it:  nere  vnto  the  whiche  is  a  fountaine  that  commeth  from  the  Ilande  oi Hifpatiiola
throughe  the  fecreate  paffages  of  the  earth  vnder  the  fea,  and  breaketh  foorth  in  this  Ilande,  as  the  ryuer
Alpheus  in  Achaia  runneth  vnder  the  fea  from  the  citie  of  Elide,  and  breaketh  foorth  in  the  Ilande  of  Sicilie  in
the  fountayne  Arethufa.  That  the  fountayne  of  this  newe  Arethufa  hath  his  original  from  the  Ilande  of
Hifpaniola,  it  is  manifefl  hereby,  that  the  water  iffliewynge  owte  of  the  fountayne,  bryngeth  with  it  the
leaues  of  many  trees  whiche  growe  in  Hifpaniola,  and  not  in  this  Ilande.  They  faye  that  the  fountayne
hath  his  originall  from  the  ryuer  Yiamiroa  in  the  region  of  Guaccaiarima  confynynge  with  the  land  of  Zauana
This  Ilande  is  not  pafle  a  myle  in  circuite,  and  commodious  for  fyfflier  men.  Directly  towarde  the  Eafle  (as  it
were  the  porter  kepynge  the  enteric  to  Tcthys)  lyeth  the  Ilande  of  SanHi  lohannis  (otherwyfe  cauled  Burichena)
wherof  wee  haue  fpoken  largely  before.  This  aboundeth  with  golde :  and  in  fruitefuU  foile,  is  equall  with  her
mother  Hifpaniola.  In  this  are  many  colonies  or  manfions  of  Spaniardes,  whiche  applye  them  felues  to
gatherynge  of  golde. Towarde  the  weft  on  the  Northe  fyde,  great  Cuba  (for  the  longeneffe  therof,  longe

lyo

The  thyrde  Decade.

^11

fuppofed  to  be  the  continent  or  fyrme  lande)  wardeth  owre  Tethys  on  the  backe  halfe.  This  is  muche  longer
then  Hifpaniola :  And  from  the  Eafle  to  the  Wefte,  is  diuyded  in  the  myddefl  with  the  circle  cauled  Tropicus
Cancri.  Hifpaniola  and  the  other  lyinge  on  the  South  fyde  of  this,  are  included  almofl.  in  the  mydde  fpace
betwene  the  fayde  Tropyke  and  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  whichc  many  of  the  oulde  \vriters  fuppofed  to  bee
vnhabitable  and  defert  by  reafon  of  the  feruent  heate  of  the  foonne  in  tliat  clyme  as  they  coniectured.  But
they  were  deceaued  in  their  opinion  They  affyrme  that  rytcher  golde  mynes  are  founde  in  Cuba  then  in
Hifpafiiola.  They  faye  alfo  that  euen  nowe  while  I  wryte  thefe  thynges,  there  is  golde  gathered  together  ready
to  the  meltyng,  amountynge  to  the  quantitie  of  a  hundreth  and  fourefcore  thoufande  Caflellans  of  gold,  an
argument  furely  of  great  rycheffe.  Jamaica  is  more  towarde  the  Southe  then  thefe :  And  is  a  pleafaunte  and
fruitefuU  Ilande,  of  foyle  apte  for  come,  graffes,  and  fettes,  it  confyfleth  of  onely  one  mountayne.  Th[e]inhabi-
tauntes  are  warrelyke  men  and  of  good  wytte.  Co/onus  compared  it  to  Sicilie  in  bygneffe.  They  whiche  of
late  fearched  it  more  exactely,  faye  that  it  is  fumwhat  leffe :  but  not  muche.  It  is  thought  to  be  without  gold
and  precious  floones,  as  the  like  was  fuppofed  of  Ciiba  at  the  begynnynge.  The  Ilande  of  Guadalupea  (fyrfle
named  Caraqueird)  lyinge  on  the  Southe  fyde  of  Hifpaiiiola,  is  foure  degrees  nearer  the  Equinoctiall.  It  is
eaten  and  indented  with  two  goulfes  (as  wee  reade  of  great  Britanye  nowe  cauled  Englande,  and  Caledonia
nowe  cauled  Scotlande)  beinge  in  maner  two  Ilandes.  It  hath  famous  portes.  In  this  they  founde  that  gumme
whiche  the  Apothecaries  caule  Aninuz  Alburn^  whofe  fume  is  holfome  ageynfl  reumes  and  heauyneffe  of  the
heade.  The  tree  whiche  engendereth  this  gumme,  beareth  a  fruite  muche  lyke  to  a  date,  beinge  a  fpanne  in
length.  When  it  is  opened,  it  feemeth  to  conteyne  a  certayne  fvveete  meale.  As  o^vre  hufbande  men  are
accuflomed  to  referue  cheflenuttes  and  fuche  other  harde  fruites  all  the  wynter,  foo  do  they  the  dates  of  this
tree,  beynge  muche  lyke  vnto  a  fygge  tree.  They  founde  alfo  in  this  Ilande,  Pyne  trees  of  the  befle  kynde,
and  fuche  other  deyntie  dyffhes  of  nature,  wherof  wee  haue  fpoken  largely  before.  Ye,  the/  thyncke  that
th[e]inhabitauntes  of  other  Ilandes,  had  their  feedes  of  foo  many  pleafaunt  frutes  from  henfe.  For  the  Cani-
bales  beinge  a  wylde  and  wanderynge  people,  and  ouer  runnynge  all  the  countreys  aboute  them  to  hunte  for
mannes  flelhe,  were  accuflomed  to  brynge  home  with  them  what  fo  euer  they  founde  flraunge  or  profytable  in
any  place.  They  are  intractable,  and  wyll  admytte  no  ftraungiers.  It  fhall  therfore  bee  needefuU  to  ouercoome
them  with  great  poure.  For  as  well  the  women  as  men,  are  experte  archiers,  and  vfe  to  inueneme  their
arrowes.  When  the  men  go  foorthe  of  the  lande  a  man  huntynge,  the  women  manfully  defende  their  coafles
ageynll  fuche  as  attempte  to  inuade  the  fame.  And  hereby  I  fuppofe  it  was  thought  that  there  were  Ilandes
in  the  Ocean,  inhabited  onely  with  women,  as  Colotius  the  admirall  hym  felfe  perfwaded  me,  as  I  haue  fayde  in
the  fyrfle  decade.  This  Ilande  hath  alfo  frutefuU  mountaynes  and  playnes,  and  notable  ryuers.  It  nouryffheth
honye  in  trees,  and  in  the  caues  of  rockes,  as  in  Palma  one  of  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie,  honye  is  gathered  emong
the  briers  and  bramble  buffhes.  Aboute.  xviii.  myles  Eafteward  from  this  Hand,  lieth  an  Hand  which  o^v^  men
named  Defiderata^  beynge.  xx.  myles  in  circuite  and  verye  fayre.  Alfo  aboute  ten  myles  from  Guadalupea
towarde  the  Southe,  lyeth  the  Ilande  of  Galanta,  beynge  thirtie  myles  in  circuite  and  playne.  It  was  fo  named
for  the  neateneffe  and  bewtifulnes  therof.  Nyne  myles  diftant  from  Guadalupea  toward  the  Eafl,  there  are  fyxe
fmaule  Ilandes  named  Todos  SanHos  or  Barbaia.  Thefe  are  full  of  rockes  and  barren :  Yet  neceffarye  to  bee
knowen  to  fuche  as  vfe  to  trauayle  the  feas  of  thefe  coafles.  Ageyne,  from  Guadalupea.  xxxv.  myles  towarde
the  Northe,  there  is  an  Ilande  named  Moiifjcrratus,  conteynynge  in  circuite  fortye  myles,  hauynge  alfo  in  it  a
mountayne  of  notable  heyght.  The  Ilande  named  Antiqua,  diflante  from  Guadalupea  thirtie  myles,  is  aboute
fortye  myles  in  circuite.  Diegus  Colonus  the  foonne  and  heyre  of  Chrijlopher  Colonus,  tould  me  that  his  \vyfe
(whome  he  lefte  in  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  at  his  comming  into  Spaine  to  the  courte)  did  write  vnto  hym,  that
of  late  emonge  the  Ilandes  of  the  Canibales,  there  is  one  founde  whiche  aboundeth  with  golde.  On  the  lefte
fyde  of  Hifpajiiola  towarde  the  Southe,  neare  vnto  the  hauen  Beata,  there  lyeth  an  Ilande  named  Fortus  Bcllus.
They  tell  maruelous  thynges  of  the  monflers  of  the  fea  aboute  this  Ilande,  and  efpecially  of  the  tortoyfes.  For
they  faye  that  they  are  bygger  then  greate  rounde  targettes.  At  fuche  tyme  as  the  heate  of  nature  moueth
theym  too  generation,  they  coome  foorthe  of  the  fea:  And  makynge  a  deepe  pytte  in  the  fande,  they  laye  three
or  foure  hundreth  egges  therin.  When  they  haue  thus  emptied  their  bagge  of  conception,  they  putte  a^  muche
of  the  fande  ageyne  into  the  pytte,  as  maye  fuffyce  to  couer  the  egges :  And  foo  reforte  ageyne  to  the  fea,
nothynge  carefuU  of  their  fucceffyon.  At  the  daye  appoynted  of  nature  to  the  procreation  of  thefe  bealles,
there  creapeth  owte  a  multitude  of  tortoyfes,  as  it  were  pyffemares  fwarmynge  owte  of  an  ante  hyll :  And  this
onely  by  the  heate  of  the  foonne  withowte  any  helpe  of  their  parentes.  They  faye  that  their  egges  are  in
maner  as  bygge  as  geefe  egges.  They  alfo  coompare  the  flefhe  of  thefe  tortoyfes,  to  be  equall  with  veale  in
tafle.  There  are  befyde  thefe,  innumerable  Ilandes  the  whiche  they  haue  not  yet  fearched :  nor  yet  is  it  greatly
neceffarye  to  fyfte  this  meale  fo  fynely.  It  maye  fuffyce  to  vnderflond  that  there  are  large  landes  and  many
regyons  whiche  fhal  hereafter  receaue  owre  nations,  tounges,  and  maners :  and  thenvith  embrafe  owre  relygion.
The  Troyans  dydde  not  foodenly  replenyflie  Afia,  the  Tyrians  Libia,  nor  the  Greekes  and  Phoenices  Spayne.

Habit,-ible  regions
vnder  the
EquinoctialL

The  ryche  golde
mynes  of  Cubx

The  Hand  of
lamaica.

The  Hand  of
Guadalupea.

England  and
Scotlande.
The  gumme
cauled  Anime
album.

Dates.

Pine  trees.

The  Canibales.

Whereby  it  was
thought  that  there
were  Ilandes  of

Hony  in  trees
and  rockes.

The  Ilande

desiderata.

The  Ilande
Galantx

The  Ilandes  of
Todos  Sanctos  or
Barbata.

The  Ilande

monsserratus.

139

The  Ilande
Antiqua.

The  Ilande
Portus  Bellus

Great  Tortoyses.
The  generation  of
Tortoyses.

The  egges  of
Tortoyses.

Innumerable
Ilandes.

Troians.
Tirians.
Greekes.
Phenitians

Eden.

177

178

The  thynie  Decade.

The  Norlh
Ilandes.

The  Ilandes  of
the  south  sea.

The  Hand  of
pearles.

Wylde  beasts
must  be  t.imed
with  the  rod.

As  touchynge  the  Ilandes  which  lye  on  the  north  fyde  of  Ilifpaniola,  I  haue  let  paffe  to  fpeake.  For
albeit  they  are  commodious  for  tyllage  and  fyffliynge,  yet  are  they  lefte  of  the  Spanyardes  as  poore  and  of
fmaule  value.  We  wyll  nowe  therefore  take  owre  leaue  of  this  owlde  Tethis  with  her  moyfl  and  watery
Nymphes :  And  receaue  to  owre  newe  acquaintance  the  bewetifull  ladye  of  the  South  fea  rychely  crowned  with
great  pearles,  the  Ilande  oi  Ditcs  beinge  ryche  both  in  name  and  in  treafure.  In  my  epiftell  booke  whiche  I
fente  vnto  yowre  holynes  this  lafl  yeare,  I  declared  howe  Vaf chits  Nunncz  Balboa  the  capitayne  of  them  whiche
paffed  ouer  the  daungerous  mountaynes  towarde  the  South  fea,  learned  by  report  that  in  the  profpect  of  thofe
coafles  there  laye  an  Ilande  aboundynge  with  pearles  of  the  greatefl  forte:  And  that  the  kynge  therof  was  ryche
and  of  great  power,  infeflynge  with  warres  the  other  kynges  his  bortherers,  and  efpecially  Chiapes  and
Tumacchus.  We  declared  further  howe  at  that  tyme  it  was  lefte  vntouched  by  reafon  of  the  ragynge  tempefles
whiche  troubled  that  South  fea  three  moonethes  in  the  yeare.  But  it  is  nowe  better  knowen  to  owre  men,  who
haue  nowe  alfo  brought  that  fierce  kynge  to  humanitie :  and  conuerted  hym  from  a  cruell  tyger  to  one  of  the
meeke  fheepe  of  Chrifles  flocke  fanctifyed  with  the  water  of  baptifme  with  all  his  famelie  and  kyngedome.  It
fhall  not  therefore  bee  from  owre  purpofe  to  declare  by  the  gouernaunce  of  what  capitaines  or  by  what  meanes
thefe  thynges  were  fo  happely  atchyued.

C  The  tenth  booke  of  the  thyrde  Decade.

An  expedition  to
the  Ilande  of
Dites  in  the  south

The  Hand  of
Margaritea.

Os  Draco-tis.
Paria.

140

A  conflict

The  kynge  of  the
Ilande  of  Dites
submitteth
himselfe.

The  kynges
pallaice.

A  hundreth  and
ten  pounde  weight
of  pearles.

T  the  arryuall  of  Petriis  Arias  the  newe  gouernour  of  Dariena,  he  gaue  commaundment  that
one  Gafpar  Moralis  (huld  take  in  hande  th[e]expedition  to  the  Ilande  of  Dites.  He  there-
fore tooke  his  vyage  fyrfl  to  Chiapes  and  Tumacchus  kynges  of  the  South,  whom  Vafchus
beefore  had  concyled  and  left  fryndes  to  the  Chriflians.  They  frendely  and  magnifycally
enterteyned  owr  men  who  prepared  them  a  nauie  of  the  kynges  boates  to  paffe  ouer  into  this
Ilande,  which  they  caule  Dites  and  not  Margarita  or  Margaritea^  although  it  abounde  with
pearles  which  in  the  latin  tonge  are  cauled  Margaritea.  For  the  fyrfl  cauled  an  other
by  this  name,  which  lyeth  next  to  the  mouth  of  Os  Draconis  in  the  region  of  Faria,  in  the  which  alfo
is  founde  greate  plentie  of  pearles.  Gafpar  brought  with  hym  onely  threefcore  armed  men  to  the  Ilande,
for  that  he  coulde  conuey  ouer  no  greater  number  by  reafon  of  the  fmaulenes  and  narownes  of  theyr  boates
or  barkes  which  they  caule  Culchas,  made  of  one  hole  piece  of  tymber  as  we  haue  fayde  before.  The
kynge  of  the  Ilande  came  foorth  ageinfl  them  fiercely  with  cruell  and  threatenynge  countenaunce,  and  with
a  great  bande  of  armed  men  cryinge  in  maner  of  a  larome  and  in  token  of  the  battayle,  Guazzauara,  Guazzauara,
which  is  as  much  to  faye  as,  battayle  ageynfl  the  enemie :  And  is  as  it  weare  a  watch  worde  to  giue  th[e]onfet,
wherwith  alfo  they  threwe  theyr  dartes.  For  they  haue  not  th[e]ufe  of  bowes.  They  were  fo  obflinate  and
defperate  that  they  affayled  owre  men  with  foure  Guazzauaras,  that  is,  battayles.  At  the  length  owre  men  with
certeyne  of  Chiapes  and  Tumacchus  men  (being  eoulde  enemies  to  this  kynge  of  the  Ilande)  gotte  the  vpper
hande  by  reafon  they  affayled  the  kynge  foodenly  and  vnwares.  Yet  was  he  determyned  to  affemble  a  greater
power,  and  once  ageyne  to  attempt  the  fortune  of  warre,  but  that  he  was  otherwyfe  perfuaded  by  the  kinges  his
bortherers  which  counfayled  him  to  gyue  ouer  and  fubmyt  hym  felfe :  fumtyme  by  th[e]exemple  of  them  felues
and  other  threatenynge  the  deflruction  of  his  flooryfliynge  kyngedome:  And  otherwhyles  declarynge  vnto  hym
the  humanitie  and  gentelnes  of  owre  men,  by  whofe  frendfhip  he  might  obteyne  honoure  and  quyetnes  to  hym
and  his :  wyllyng  hym  furthermore  to  confider  what  chaunced  vnto  them  which  the  yeare  before  refyfled  and
aduentured  the  hafarde  of  the  battayle  as  dyd  thefe  kynges,  Foticha,  Focchorrofa,  Quareqtia,  Chiapes,  and
Tumaccus  with  fuch  other.  By  thefe  perfuafions,  the  king  fubmytted  hym  felfe  and  came  freendely  to  owre  men
whom  he  conducted  to  his  palaice  which  they  fay  to  be  marueloufly  adourned  and  princelyke.  As  foone  as  they
entered  into  the  pallaice,  he  brought  foorth  a  bafket  of  curious  woorkemanfhyp  and  full  of  pearles  which  he
gaue  them.  The  fumme  of  thefe  pearles  amounted  to  the  weyght  of  a  hundreth  and  ten  poundes  after,  viii.
vnces  to  the  pounde.  Beinge  ageyne  rewarded  of  owre  men  ,vith  fuch  tryfles  as  they  brought  with  them  of
purpofe,  as  garlandes  of  Chriflall  and  glaffe  and  other  counterfet  flones  of  dyuers  colours,  with  lookyng  glafles
alfo  and  laton  belles,  and  efpecially  two  or  three  Iren  hatchets  (which  they  more  efleme  then  great  heapes  of
gold)  he  thought  hym  felfe  abundantly  recompenfed.  They  laughe  owre  men  to  fcorne  that  they  wyll  departe
with  fo  great  and  neceffarie  a  thyng  for  any  fumme  of  golde :  afifyrmynge  an  axe  or  hatchet  to  bee  profytable  for
manye  vfes  of  men :  and  that  golde  ferueth  onely  for  wanton  pleafures,  and  not  to  be  greatly  neceffary.  Beynge
therfore  ioyfull  and  gladde  of  the  frendefhyppe  of  OAvre  men,  he  tooke  the  capitaine  by  the  hand  and  brought
17a

The  thyrde  Decade,

179

him  with  certeine  of  his  famiUars  to  the  highefl  towre  of  his  palaice,  from  whenfe  they  myght  profpecte  the
mayne  fea.  Then  caflyng  his  eyes  about  hym  on  euery  fide,  and  lookynge  towarde  the  Eade,  he  fayde  vnto
them.  Beholde  here  lyeth  open  before  yowe  the  infynite  fea  extended  beyond  the  foonne  beames.  Then
tournyng  hym  toward  the  Southe  and  Wefle,  he  fygnyfied  vnto  them  that  the  lande  which  laye  before  their  eyes,  the
toppes  of  whofe  great  montaynes  they  myght  fee,  was  exceadynge  large.  Then  coommynge  fumwhat  nearer,  he
fayde :  Beholde  thefe  Ilandes  on  the  ryght  hande  and  on  the  lefte,  whiche  all  obeye  vnto  owre  empyre,  and  are
ryche,  happye,  and  bleffed,  if  yowe  caule  thofe  landes  bleffed  whiche  abounde  with  golde  and  perle[s].  Wee  haue
in  this  Ilande  lyttle  plentie  of  golde:  But  the  deepe  places  of  all  the  feas  aboute  thefe  Ilandes,  are  full  of  perles:
wherof  yowe  fliall  receaue  of  me  as  many  as  yow  wyll  requyre,  fo  that  ye  perfyfte  in  the  bonde  of  frendefhyppe
whiche  yowe  haue  begunne.  I  greatly  defyre  yowre  frendefliyppe,  and  woolde  gladlye  haue  the  fruition  of
yowre  thynges,  whiche  I  fette  muche  more  by  then  myllyons  of  perles.  Yowe  fhall  therfore  haue  no  caufe  to
doubte  of  any  vnfaythfulneffe  or  breache  of  frendefhyppe  on  my  behalfe.  Owre  men  gaue  hym  lyke  frendly
woordes:  and  encouraged  hym  with  many  fayre  promyffes  to  doo  as  he  had  fayde.  When  owre  men  were  nowe
in  a  redyneffe  to  departe,  they  couenaunted  with  hym  to  paye  yearely  to  the  greate  kynge  of  Caflyle  a  hundreth
pounde  weyghte  of  perles.  He  gladlye  agreed  to  their  requefl,  and  tooke  it  for  no  great  thyng :  nor  yet  thought
hym  felfe  any  whitte  the  more  to  becoome  tributarie.  With  this  kynge  they  founde  fuche  plentie  of  hartes  and
Connies,  that  owre  men  flondynge  in  their  houfes  myght  kyll  as  manye  as  them  lyfle  with  their  arrowes.  They
lyue  heare  verye  pleafauntly,  hauynge  greate  plentie  of  al  thynges  neceffary.  This  Ilande  is  fcarfely  fyxe
degrees  diflant  from  the  Equinoctiall  lyne.  They  haue  the  fame  maner  of  breade  made  of  rootes  and
the  graine  of  Maizhitn,  and  wyne  made  of  feedes  and  fruites,  euen  as  they  haue  in  the  region  of  Comogra  and
in  other  places  afwell  in  the  Ilandes  as  in  the  firme  lande.  This  kynge  is  nowe  baptifed  with  all  his  familye
and  fubiectes.  His  defyre  was  at  his  baptifme,  to  bee  named  Petriis  Arias  after  the  name  of  *he  gouernour.
When  owre  men  departed,  he  accompanied  them  to  the  fea  fyde  and  furnyfflied  them  with  boates  to  retourne
to  the  continent.  Owre  men  diuided  the  perles  emonge  them,  referuyng  the  fyfte  portion  to  be  delyuered  to
th[e]offycers  of  the  kynges  Excheker  in  thofe  partes.  They  faye  that  thefe  perles  were  maruelous  precious,
faire,  oriente,  and  exceadynge  bygge:  In  fo  muche  that  they  broughte  manye  \vith  theym  bygger  then  hafell
nuttes.  Of  what  price  and  value  they  myghte  bee,  I  confyder  by  one  perle  the  which  Pauliis  prediceffour  to
yowre  holines,  bowght  at  the  fecond  hand  of  a  marchant  of  Venece  for  foure  and  forty  thoufande  ducates.  Yet
emonge  thofe  whiche  were  brought  from  this  Ilande,  there  was  one  bought  euen  in  Dariena  for  a  thoufande  and
two  hundreth  Caflelans  of  golde.  This  was  almofl  as  bygge  as  a  meane  walnutte :  And  came  at  the  length  to
the  handes  of  Petrus  Arias  the  gouernoure,  who  gaue  it  to  that  noble  and  faithefuU  woman  his  \vyfe,  of  whofe
maner  of  departure  with  her  hufbande,  wee  haue  made  mention  before.  Wee  mufle  then  needes  thinke  that
this  was  verye  precious  which  was  bowght  fo  deare  emonge  fuche  a  multitude  of  perles  where  they  were  not
bought  by  one  at  once,  but  by  poundes  and  at  the  leafl  by  ounces.  It  is  alfo  to  be  thought  that  the  Venecian
marchaunte  boughte  his  for  no  great  fum  of  mony  in  the  Eafl  parts.  But  he  fould  it  the  dearer  for  that  he
chaunced  to  lyue  in  thofe  lafciuious  and  wanton  dayes  when  men  were  gyuen  to  fuche  nyfe  and  fuperfluous
pleafures,  and  mette  with  a  marchaunt  for  his  purpofe.  But  lette  vs  nowe  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  fhelfyffhes  in
the  whiche  perles  are  engendered.  It  is  not  vnknowen  to  yowre  holyneffe,  that  Ariflotell,  and  Plinie  his
folower,  were  of  dyuers  opinions  as  concernynge  the  generation  of  perles.  But  thefe  Indians  and  o\\Te  men,
refl  onely  in  one  affertion,  not  affentyng  to  them  in  any  other :  as  eyther  that  they  wander  in  the  fea,  or  that
they  moue  at  anye  tyme  after  they  are  borne.  They  wyll  therfore  that  there  bee  certayne  greene  places  as  it
were  medowes  in  the  bottome  of  the  fea,  bryngynge  foorthe  an  herbe  muche  lyke  vnto  thyme,  and  affjTme  that
they  haue  feene  the  fame :  And  that  they  are  engendered,  noryffhed,  and  growe  therin,  as  wee  fee  th[e]increafe
and  fucceffion  of  oyflers  to  growe  aboute  them  felues.  Alfo  that  thefe  fyffhes  delyteth  not  in  the  conuerfation
or  coompanye  of  the  fea  dogges :  Nor  yet  to  bee  contented  with  onely  one,  twoo,  or  three,  or  at  the  mofle
foure  pearles :  Affyrmyng  that  in  the  fyffhynge  places  of  the  kynge  of  this  Ilande,  there  was  founde  a  hundreth
pearles  in  one  fyfhe,  the  whiche  Gafpar  Moralis  the  capitayne  hym  felfe,  and  his  coompanions,  diligently
numbered.  For  it  pleafed  the  kynge  at  their  beynge  there  and  in  their  prefence,  to  commaund  his  diuers  to
go  a  fyffhynge  for  thofe  kynde  of  fyfflies.  They  compare  the  matrices  of  thefe  fyflhes,  to  the  places  of  concep-
tion in  hennes,  in  the  whiche  their  egges  are  engendered  in  great  multitudes  and  cluflers :  And  beleue  that
thefe  fyffhes  brynge  foorth  their  byrth  in  lyke  maner.  For  the  better  profe  wherof,  they  faye  that  they  founde
certaine  pearles  coommynge  foorthe  of  their  matreces,  as  beynge  nowe  coome  to  the  tyme  of  their  full  rypeneffe,
and  moued  by  nature  to  coome  owte  of  their  moothers  wombe  openynge  it  felfe  in  tyme  conuenient.  Lykewife
that  within  a  while  after,  they  fawe  other  fuccede  in  lyke  maner.  So  that  to  conclude,  they  sawe  fum  coom-
mynge foorthe,  and  other  fumme  yet  abydinge  the  tyme  of  their  perfection:  whiche  beyng  complete,  they
alfo  became  loofe  and  opened  the  matrice.  They  perceaued  the  pearles  to  bee  inclofed  in  the  myddefl  of
their  bellies,  there  to  be  noriffhed  and  increafe  as  an  infante  fuckynge  his  moothers  pappes  within  her  wombe.

The  kynges
woordes.

Ilandes  rych  in
golde  and  pearles.

C.  [hundred]
pounde  weyght  of
perles  yerely  for
a  tribute.
Plentie  of  hartes
and  cunnies.

141

Wyne  of  frutes
and  sedes

The  kynge  is
baptised.

The  fyft  part  of
perles  due  to  the
kynge.
Byg  perles.

A  perle  for  a  pope.

An  other  perle  of
great  price.

Nise  and

superfluous

pleasures.

Dyuers  opinions  of
the  generation  of
pearles.

Herbes  in  the
bottome  of  the  sea.

A  hundreth  perles
in  one  shell  fysshe.

The  matrice  of  the
perle  fysshe.

The  byrth  of
perles.

'79

iSo

TJie  tJiyrde  Decade.

142

Where  the
byggcst,  mesne,
and  least  pearlcs
are  engendred

Sea  crabbes

The  sen  muscles
wherein  perles  are
engendred.

The  regions  of  the
East  syde  of  the
goulfe  of  Vraba.

The  region  of
Caribana.

The  original  of
the  Canibales.

The  vylages  of
Caribana.

Manhunters.

143

Bookes.

Loke  in  the
begynnyng  of  the
booke  of  thelandes
lately  foucde.

before  hee  moue  to  coome  foorthe  of  her  priuye  places.  And  if  it  chaunce  any  of  thefe  flielfyfflies  to  be  founde
fcatered  in  the  fonde  of  the  fea  (as  I  my  felfe  haue  feene  oyflers  difparcled  on  the  fhores  in  diuers  places  of  the
Ocean)  they  aftyrme  that  they  haue  b)n  violently  dryuen  thither  from  the  bottome  of  the  fea  by  force  of
tempeftes,  and  not  to  haue  wandered  thither  of  them  felues.  But,  that  they  becoome  white  by  the  clearenefle
of  the  niornyngc  dewe,  or  waxc  yclo\\e  in  troubled  wether,  or  olhcrwyfe  that  they  feeme  to  reioyce  in  faire
wether  and  cleare  ayer,  or  contrary  wyfe  to  bee  as  it  were  allonifllied  and  dymme  in  thunder  and  tem-
peftes, with  fuche  other,  the  perfecte  knowledge  hereof  is  not  to  bee  looked  for  at  tlie  handes  of  thefe
vnlearned  men  whiche  handell  the  matter  but  groffely,  and  enquire  no  further  then  occafyon  ferueth.  Yet  do
they  aftyrme  by  th[e]e.\perience  and  induflrie  of  the  dyuers,  that  the  greateft  pearles  lye  in  the  deepefl  places,
they  of  the  meane  forte  hygher,  and  the  leail  hygheft  of  all  and  nearer  to  the  brymme  of  tlie  water.  And  faye
thorfore  that  tlie  greatofl  do  not  wander:  but  that  tlicy  are  created,  nouryfllied,  and  increafe  in  the  deeped
places  of  the  fea,  whether  fewe,  dyuers,  and  that  but  feeldome  dare  aduenture  to  diue  fo  deepe  to  gather  them,
afwel  for  feare  of  the  fea  crabbes  whiche  wander  emonge  thefe  perle  fyflies  to  feede  of  them,  and  for  feare  of
other  monflers  of  the  fea,  as  alfo  lefle  their  brethe  fliuld  fayle  them  into  long  remayninge  in  the  water.  And
this  they  faye  to  bee  the  caufe  why  the  owldefl  and  therfore  byggeft  fea  mufcles,  inhabyte  the  deepefl  places
from  whenfe  they  are  not  lyghtly  moued  by  tempefles.  Furthermore,  howe  muche  the  bygger  and  oulder  thefe
fyflies  are,  they  fay  that  in  their  larger  matrices,  the  greater  number  and  bygger  pearles  are  founde:  And  that
for  this  caufe,  there  are  fewer  founde  of  the  byggefl.  forte.  They  thyncke  alfo,  that  when  they  fyrfle  faule  from
their  fyflhes  in  the  deepe  places,  they  are  deuoured  of  other  fyfflies,  bycaufe  they  are  not  yet  harde.  Ageyne,
the  fmaulefl  differ  from  the  byggefl  in  a  certayne  fwellynge  or  impoflumation  whiche  the  Spaniardes  caule  a
tympane..  For  they  denye  that  to  be  a  pearle  which  in  oulde  mufcles  cleaueth  fafl  to  the  fliel:  But  that  it  is  a
warte,  whiche  beynge  rafed  from  the  fliell  with  a  fyle,  is  rounde  and  bryght  but  onely  of  one  fyde,  and  not
precious,  beynge  rather  of  the  nature  of  the  fyflie  it  felfe,  then  of  a  pearle.  They  confeffe  that  they  haue  feene
certayne  of  thefe  mufcles  cleauynge  on  rockes:  Yet  thefe  but  fewe,  and  nothynge  woorthe.  It  is  alfo  to  bee
thought  that  the  pearle  fyfflies  or  fea  mufcles  whiche  are  founde  in  India,  Arabic,  the  redde  fea,  or  Taprobana,
are  ruled  in  fuche  order  as  the  afore  named  famous  autours  haue  written.  For  their  opinion  herein  is  not  vtterly
to  bee  reiected,  forafmuche  as  they  were  learned  men  and  trauayled  longe  in  the  ferchynge  of  thefe  thynges.
But  wee  haue  nowe  fpoken  fuffyciently  of  thefe  fea  fyfflies  and  of  their  egges  which  the  fonde  nyfenes  and
wantonneffe  of  men  haue  made  dearer  then  the  egges  of  hennes  or  geefe.  Lette  vs  therfore  entreate  fumwhat
of  other  particular  thynges  whiche  are  coome  to  owre  knowledge  of  late.  We  haue  elles  where  largely  defcribed
the  mouthes  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba,  with  fundrye  and  variable  regions  diuided  with  the  manyfolde  goulfes  of
that  fea.  But  as  concernynge  the  Wefl  coafles  in  the  whiche  owre  men  haue  buylded  houfes  and  planted  their
habitations  on  the  bankes  of  Dariena,  I  haue  no  newe  matter  to  write.  Yet  as  touching  the  Eafl  partes  of  the
goulfe,  I  haue  learned  as  foloweth.  They  faye  that  the  vnyuerfal  lande  of  the  Eafl.  region  of  the  goulfe  from
the  corner  therof  farre  reachynge  into  the  fea,  and  from  the  extreame  or  vtter  mofle  mouthe  of  the  fame
receauynge  the  waters  of  the  fea  whiche  faule  into  it,  euen  vnto  Os  Draconis  and  Faria,  is  by  one  generall  name
cauled  Cariba?ia,  of  the  Caribes  or  Canibales  whiche  are  founde  in  euery  regyon  in  this  tracte.  But  from  whenfe
they  had  their  particular  originall,  and  howe  leauynge  their  natiue  foyle,  they  haue  fpredde  their  generation  fo
farre  lyke  a  pefliferous  contagion,  we  wyll  nowe  declare.  Therfore  from  the  fyrfl.e  fronte  reachynge  foorth  into
the  fea  (in  whofe  tracte  we  faid  that  Fogeda  fafl.ened  his  foote)  toward  the  corner,  about  nyne  myles  difl.ant,
there  lyeth  a  vyllage  of  Caribana  named  Futeraca.  Three  myles  diflant  from  this,  is  the  vyllage  of  Vraba,  of  the
whiche  it  is  thoughte  that  the  hole  goulfe  tooke  his  name,  bycaufe  this  vyllage  was  once  the  heade  of  the
kyngedome.  Aboute  fyxe  myles  from  this,  is  Feti.  Nyne  myles  from  Feti,  is  Zerema :  And  about  twelue  myles
from  this,  Sorache.  0\vre  men  founde  all  thefe  vyllages  full  of  people,  all  the  whiche  gyue  them  felues  onely  to
manhuntynge.  In  fo  muche  that  if  they  lacke  enemyes  ageynfl.  whom  they  maye  keepe  warre,  they  excerife
crueltie  ageynfl.  them  felues,  and  eyther  fleye  one  the  other,  or  elles  dryue  the  vanquyfflied  to  flyghte.  Whereby
it  is  apparante  that  by  thefe  their  continuall  warres,  and  dryuynge  the  one  the  other  owte  of  their  countreis,
this  infection  hath  gonne  fo  farre  not  onelye  on  the  fyrnie  lande,  but  alfo  into  the  Ilandes.  I  was  alfo  aduertifed
of  an  other  thynge  the  whiche  to  my  iudgement,  feemeth  woorthye  to  bee  putte  in  memorye.

One  Corrales  a  iudge  in  caufes  of  lawe  amonge  the  Spanyardes  of  Dariena,  fayth  that  on  a  tyme  walkyng
abrode  with  his  booke  in  his  hande,  he  met  by  the  waye  with  a  fugityue  which  had  fledde  from  the  great  landes
lyinge  farre  toward  the  wefle,  and  remayned  here  with  a  Kynge  wyth  whom  he  was  enterteyned.  When  this
man  perceaued  the  lawier  lookynge  on  his  booke,  marueylynge  thereat,  he  came  runninge  vnto  him,  and  by
interpretours  of  the  kynge  whom  he  ferued,  fpake  thus  vnto  him :  Haue  yowe  alfo  bookes  wherin  yowe  may
referue  thynges  in  perpetual  memorye?  And  letters  wherby  yowe  maye  declare  yowre  mynde  to  fuche  as  are
abfent?  And  herewith  defyred  that  the  booke  might  bee  opened  vnto  hym,  fuppofyng  that  he  fliulde  therein
haue  founde  the  letters  of  his  owne  countrey. But  when  he  fawe  theim  vnlyke,  he  fayde  further  that  in  his

i8o

The  tkyrde  Decade.

i8r

countrey  there  were  cities  fortified  with  waules  and  gouerned  by  lawes :  and  that  the  people  alfo  vfed  apparell.
But  of  what  rehgion  they  were,  I  dyd  not  learne.  Yet  had  owre  men  knovvleage  both  by  the  woordes  and
fignes  of  this  fugitiue,  that  they  were  circumcifed.  What  nowe  thinke  yowe  hereby  (mofl  holy  father)  Or
what  do  yowe  diuine  may  come  hereof  when  tyme  fhall  fubdue  al  thefe  vnder  yowTe  throne?  Let  vs  nowe
entcrmyngle  certeyne  fmaule  thynges  amonge  thefe  great  matters.  I  haiie  not  thought  good  to  pretermitte  that
which  chaunced  to  lohaimes  Solyfuis,  who,  to  fearche  the  South  fyde  of  the  fuppofed  continent,  departed  with
three  (hippes  from  porte  loppa  (not  farre  diflante  from  the  Ilandes  of  Gades  or  Cales  in  the  Ocean)  the  fourth
day  of  the  Ides  of  September  in  the  yeare.  M.  D.  xv.  Or  what  fucceffe  Johannes  Pontius  had,  whom  the  newe
gouemour  Petnis  Arias  appoynted  to  vanquifhe  and  deftroy  the  Caribes  or  Canibales,  deuourers  of  mans  flefhe.
Alfo  to  what  ende  the  vyages  of  the  other  capitaynes  came,  whiche  were  fent  foorth  dyuers  wayes  at  the  fame
tyme :  As  Gonzalus  Badaiocius,  Francifcus  Bezerra,  and  Valleiiis.  lohatines  Solicius  tooke  the  matter  in  hande  in
an  euyll  houre.  He  fayled  beyonde  the  poynt  of  faynt  Augufline,  (which  they  caule  Cabo.  S.  Augujli7u)  toward
the  South  fyde  of  the  fuppofed  continent  beyonde  the  Equinoctiall  lyne.  For  (as  we  haue  fayde  before)  that
poynt  reacheth  Southwarde  to  the  feuenth  degree  of  the  South  pole  cauled  the  Antartike.  He  proceaded  in
that  viage  fyxe  hundreth  leagues :  And  founde  the  lande  from  the  poynte  to  extende  fo  farre  towarde  the  South
beyonde  the  Equinoctiall,  that  he  came  to  the  thirtie  degree  of  the  South  pole.  As  he  fayled  thus  forwarde,
hauynge  nowe  on  his  backe  halfe  the  flarres  named  Caput  Draconis,  (that  is,  the  dragons  heade)  and  the  regions
of  Paria  lyinge  northwarde  frome  hym,  and  profpectynge  towarde  the  pole  Artyke,  he  chaunced  to  faule  into
the  handes  of  the  fylthye  Canibales.  For  thefe  craftie  foxes  feemed  to  make  fignes  of  peace,  when  in  theyr
mindes  they  conceaued  a  hope  of  a  daintie  banquet :  And  efpying  their  enemies  a  farre  of,  beganne  to  fwalowe
theyr  fpettle  as  their  mouthes  watered  for  greedines  of  theyr  pray.  As  vnhappye  Solyfius  defcended  with  as
many  of  his  coompanie  as  coulde  enter  into  the  boate  of  the  byggefl  fhippe,  foodenly  a  great  multytude  of
th[e]inhabitantes  burfle  foorth  vppon  them,  and  flew  them  euery  man  with  clubbes,  euen  in  the  fyght  of  theyr
felowes.  They  caried  away  the  boate,  and  in  a  moment  broke  it  al  to  fytters.  Not  one  man  efcaped.  Theyr
furye  not  thus  fatiffied,  they  cutte  the  flayne  men  in  pieces  euen  vppon  the  fliore  where  theyr  felowes  might
beholde  this  horrible  fpectacle  from  the  fea.  But  they  being  flryken  with  feare  through  this  exemple,  durfl  not
coome  foorth  of  theyr  fhyppes,  or  diuife  howe  to  reuenge  the  death  of  theyr  Capitaine  and  coompanyons.  They
departed  therefore  from  thefe  vnfortunate  coaftes :  And  by  the  waye  ladynge  theyr  fliippes  with  brafell  returned
home  ageyne  with  loffe  and  heauie  chere.  Of  thefe  thynges  I  was  aduertyfed  of  late  by  theyr  owne  letters.
What  they  haue  els  doone,  I  fhal  haue  more  particular  knowleage  hereafter.  Ioha7mes  Pontius  was  alfo  repulfed
by  the  Canibales  in  the  Ilande  of  Guadalupea  beinge  one  of  the  chiefe  Ilandes  of  theyr  habitacion.  For  when
they  fawe  owre  men  a  farre  of  on  the  fea,  they  ley  in  ambufhe  foodenly  to  inuade  them  when  they  fhulde
coome  alande.  Owre  men  fent  foorth  a  fewe  foote  men  and  with  them  theyr  laundreffes  to  waffhe  theyr
fhertes  and  fheetes.  For  from  the  Ilande  of  Ferrea  beinge  one  of  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie  (euen  vnto
this  Ilande,  for  the  fpace  of  foure  thoufande  and  twoo  hundreth  myles)  they  had  feene  no  lande  where
they  myght  fynde  any  freffhe  water :  for  as  muche  as  in  all  this  large  fpace,  the  Ocean  is  without  Ilandes.
At  theyr  commynge  therfore  to  lande,  the  Canibales  affayled  them,  caried  awaye  the  women,  and  put
the  men  to  fuche  diflreffe  that  fewe  of  them  efcaped.  By  reafon  wherof,  Pontius  being  greately  difcomfited,
durfle  not  inuade  the  Canibales,  fearynge  theyr  venemed  arrowes  which  thefe  naked  manhunters  can  direct  moll
certenly.  Thus  good  Pontius  faylyng  of  his  purpofe,  was  fayne  to  gyue  ouer  the  Canibales,  whome  (beinge  fafe
and  vnder  the  houfe  roufe)  he  threatened  to  vanquyfhe  and  deflroy.  Whether  he  went  from  thenfe,  or  what  newe
thynges  he  founde,  I  haue  as  yet  no  further  knowleage.  By  thefe  myffortunes,  Solyfius  loflt  his  lyfe,  and  Pontius
his  honour.  Let  vs  nowe  fpeake  of  an  other  whofe  enterpryfe  came  to  lyke  purpofe  the  fame  yeare.  Johannes
Aiora  borne  in  the  citie  of  Corduba,  a  man  of  noble  parentage,  fent  in  fleade  of  the  Lieuetenaunt  (as  we  haue
fayde)  more  couetous  of  golde  then  careful!  of  his  charge  or  defyrous  of  prayfe  for  well  deferuynge,  fought
occafions  of  querelynge  ageynft  the  kynges  and  fpoyled  many,  violently  extortynge  golde  of  them  ageynfl  ryght
and  equitie :  And  further  handeled  them  fo  extremely,  that  of  frendes  they  became  mofl.  cruel  enemies :  In  fo
much  that  they  ceafed  not  with  defperat  myndcs  by  all  meanes  they  coulde  to  fley  owre  men  openly  or  priuilye.
By  reafon  wherof  it  is  coome  to  paffe,  that  where  before  they  bartered  quyetly  exchanginge  ware  for  ware,  they
are  nowe  fayne  to  doo  all  thyngos  by  force  of  amies.  When  he  had  thus  exacted  a  great  quantitie  of  golde  of
them  (as  it  is  fayd)  he  fledde  priuilie  and  tooke  away  a  fhyppe  with  him  by  flelth  as  the  common  rumoure
goeth :  Nor  yet  hetherto  haue  we  hard  whyther  he  went  or  where  he  is  arryued.  Sum  fufpect  that  Petru^
Arias  the  gouernour  fhulde  confente  to  his  departure  bycaufe  this  lohanncs  Aiora  is  brother  to  Confalus  Aiora
the  kynges  hifloriographer,  a  man  booth  lerned,  and  expert  in  the  difcipline  of  warre:  and  fo  much  the
gouernours  frend,  that  thefe  two  amonge  a  fewe,  may  be  counted  exemples  of  rare  amitie.  I  my  felfe  alfo  am
greately  bounde  vnto  theym  bcthe  and  haue  longe  enioyed  theyr  frendefliippe.  Yet  (hal  I  defyre  them  bothe
to  pardone  me  in  declarvnge  mv  ohantafie  herein,  that  in  all  the  turmoyles  and  tragicall  affayres  of  the  Ocean,

y  2  i8i

Circumcised
people.

What  chaunced  to
the  Capitaines
whiche  the
gouemour  sent
dyuers  wayes.
Looke  decade  iiL
liber,  vi

ITie  vyage  of
lohannes  Solisius.

Cap.  S.  Angus  tint

lohn  Solysius  is
slaine  of  the
Canibales.
The  fiercenes  of
the  Canibales.

Brasell.

lohannes  Pontius
is  repulsed  by  the
Canibales.

144

The  vyage  of
lohannes  Aiora.

Looke  decaae  iii.
liber,  vi.

The  lewde
behauour  of lohr
Aiora.

1 82

The  thyrde  Decade,

The  variaole

fortune

of  Gonsalus

Badaiocius.

Cerabaro.  Decade.
iiL  li[b].  iiii

The  South  sea.

A  leaque
conteyneth  foure
myles  by  sea  and
but  three  by  lande.
The  golden  region
of  Coiba  Dytes.

Sande  my.xte  with
golde.

Howe  theyr
slaues  are  marked
in  the  face.

145

Golde.

A  fruteful  region
left  desolate  by
ciuile  discorde.

Kynge  Periquete.

S.  Michael.
Kynge  Totonoga.

Six  thousand
Castellans  of
golde.

Kyng  Taracuru.

viii.  thousand
pesos  of  gold
Kynge  Pananome

Kyng  Tabor.
Kynge  Cheiu.

iiii.  thousande
pesos  of  gold

Sake.

Kyng  Anata.
XV.  thousande
pesos  of  gold

Theyr  maner  of
warre.

nothynge  hath  fo  niuche  difpleafed  me  as  the  couetoufnes  of  this  man  who  hath  fo  diflurbed  the  pacified  myndes
of  the  kynges.  Nowe  emonge  thefe  troubeloiis  chaunces,  let  vs  rehearfe  the  variable  fortune  of  Gonfalus
Badaiocius  and  his  felowes,  whofe  profperous  begynnynges,  ended  with  vnfortunate  fiicceffe.  Gonfalus  therfore
in  the  moneth  of  May  in  the  yeare  of  Chrille  M.  D.  .\v.  departed  from  Dariena  with  fourefcore  armed  men,
directynge  his  vyage  towarde  the  Sonthe,  and  reflynge  in  no  place  vntyll  he  came  to  the  region  of  Ca-abaro
which  owre  men  named  Gratia  Dei,  diflant  from  Dariena  about  a  hundreth  and  fourefcore  myles :  for  they
caule  it  threefcore  leaques.  He  fpente  certeyne  dayes  here  in  Idelneffe:  for  he  coulde  neyther  by  fayre
meanes  nor  by  foule,  allure  the  kynge  of  the  regyon  to  coome  to  hym.  While  he  laye  thus  idelly,  there  came  to
hym  other  fyftie  men  fente  ixoxwt Dariena  vnderthe  gouernaunceof  capytayneZ(?rt'(?;//t-//j-  Mercado  who  departed  from
Dariena  in  the  calendes  of  Maye,  to  th[e]intent  to  fearch  th[e]inner  partes  of  thofe  regyons.  When  they  mette
together,  they  determyned  after  cojifultation,  to  paffe  ouer  the  montaynes  lyinge  towarde  the  Southe,  euen  vnto
the  Southe  fea  latelye  founde.  Beholde  nowe  a  wonderfuU  thynge :  That  in  a  lande  of  fuche  maruelous  longi-
tude in  other  places,  they  founde  it  here  to  bee  pnely  aboute  fyftie  myles  diflant  to  the  Southe  fea:  for  they
counte  it.  xvii.  leaques.  as  the  maner  of  the  Spanyardes  is  to  reken,  and  not  by  myles.  Yet  foye  they  that  a
leaque  confyfleth  of  three  myles  by  lande  and  foure  by  fea  as  wee  haue  noted  before.  In  the  toppes  of  the
mountaynes  and  turnynge  of  the  waters,  they  founde  a  kynge  named  luana,  whofe  kyngedome  is  alfo  named
Coiba  as  is  the  regyon  of  kynge  Carefa,  of  whome  we  haue  made  mention  elles  where.  But  for  as  muche  as
the  regyon  of  this  luana,  is  rycher  in  golde,  they  named  it  Coiba  Dites,  that  is,  Coiba  the  rych.  For,  wherfo-
euer  they  dygged  the  grounde,  whether  it  were  on  the  drye  lande  or  in  the  weate  chanelles  of  the  ryuers,  they
founde  the  lande  whiche  they  cade  foorthe,  myxte  with  golde.  luana  fledde  at  the  coommynge  of  owre  men,
and  coulde  neuer  bee  brought  ageyne.  They  fpoyled  all  the  countrey  neare  aboute  his  palayce.  Yet  had  they
but  lyttle  golde :  for  hee  had  caryed  all  his  fluffe  with  hym.  Here  they  founde  certeyne  flaues  marked  in  the
faces  after  a  flraunge  forte.  For  with  a  fliarpe  prycke  made  eyther  of  bone,  or  elles  with  a  thorne,  they  make
holes  in  their  faces :  and  foorthwith  fprinkelynge  a  pouder  theron,  they  moifle  the  pounced  place  with  a
certeyne  blacke  or  redde  iuife,  whofe  fubflaunce  is  of  fuche  tenacitie  and  clammineffe,  that  it  wyll  neuer  weare
awaye.  They  brought  thefe  flaues  away  with  them.  They  faye  that  this  iuife  is  of  fuch  fliarpneffe  and  putteth
them  to  fuche  payne,  that  for  extreeme  doloure  they  haue  no  flomacke  to  their  meate  certaine  dayes  after.  The
kynges  whiche  take  thefe  flaues  in  their  warres,  vfe  their  helpe  in  feekynge  for  golde  and  in  tyllage  of  the
grounde,  euen  as  do  owre  men.  From  the  pallaice  of  luana,  folowynge  the  courfe  of  the  water  aboute  tenne
myles  towarde  the  Southe,  they  entered  into  the  dominion  of  an  other  kynge,  whome  owre  men  named  the
oulde  man,  bycaufe  hee  was  oulde,  not  paffynge  of  his  other  name.  In  the  regyon  of  this  kynge  alfo,  they
founde  golde  in  all  places  bothe  on  the  lande  and  in  the  ryuers.  This  region  is  verye  fayre  and  frutefuU :  and
hath  in  it  many  famous  ryuers.  Departynge  from  henfe,  in  fyue  dayes  iorneye  they  came  to  a  lande  lefte
defolate.  They  fuppofe  that  this  was  defl.royed  by  ciuile  difcorde  for  as  muche  as  it  is  for  the  moofl.e  parte
fruiteful,  and  yet  not  inhabited.  The  fyfth  daye,  they  fawe  two  men  commynge  a  farre  of.  Thefe  were  laden
with  breade  of  Maiziwn,  whiche  they  caryed  on  their  fhulders  in  fackes.  Owre  men  tooke  them :  and  vnder-
floode  by  them  that  there  were  twoo  kynges  in  that  tracte :  The  one  was  named  Periquete,  whoe  dwelte  neare
vnto  the  fea.  The  others  name  was  Totonoga.  This  Totonoga,  was  blynde  and  dwelte  in  the  continent.  The
twoo  men  whiche  they  mette,  were  the  fyffliers  of  Totonoga,  whome  he  had  fente  with  certayne  fardelles  of
fyfhe  to  Periquete,  and  had  ageyne  receaued  breade  of  hym  for  exchaunge.  For  thus  do  they  communicate
their  commodities  one  with  an  other  by  exchaunge,  without  th[e]ufe  of  wycked  money.  By  the  conductinge  of
thefe  twoo  men,  they  came  to  kynge  Totonoga  dwellynge  on  the  Wefle  fyde  of  fayncte  Michaelles  goulfe  in  the
Southe  fea.  They  had  of  this  kynge,  the  fum  of  fyxe  thoufande  Cafl.ellans  of  golde  bothe  rude  and  artifycially
wrought.  Emonge  thofe  groumes  of  rude  or  natyue  golde,  there  was  one  founde  of  the  weyghte  of  two
Caflellans,  whiche  argued  the  plentifufl  rycheneffe  of  the  ground.  Folowing  the  fame  coafles  by  the  fea  fyde
toward  the  Wefl,  they  came  to  a  kynge  whofe  name  was  Taracuru,  of  whome  they  had  golde  amountynge  to
the  weyght  of  eight  thoufand  Pe/os.  Wee  haue  fayde  before  that  Pefus  is  the  weyghte  of  a  Caflelane  not
coyned.  From  henfe  they  wente  to  the  dominion  of  this  kynges  brother  named  Pananome,  who  fledde  at  their
commynge,  and  appered  no  more  afterwarde.  They  faye  that  his  kyngdome  is  ryche  in  golde.  They  fpoyled
his  paUaice  in  his  abfence.  Syxe  leaques  from  henfe,  they  came  to  an  other  kyng  named  Tabor.  From  thenfe
they  came  to  the  kyng  of  Cheru.  He  frendly  enterteyned  owit  men,  and  gaue  them  foure  thoufande  Pefos  of
golde.  He  hathe  in  his  dominion  many  goodly  falte  bayes :  the  region  alfo  aboundeth  with  golde.  About
tv/elue  myles  from  henfe,  they  came  to  another  kyng  cauled  Anata,  of  whome  they  had.  xv.  thoufande  Pefos  of
golde  whiche  he  had  gotten  of  the  kinges  his  bortherers  whom  he  had  vanquifflied  by  warre.  A  great  part  of
this  golde  was  in  rude  forme  bycaufe  it  was  molten  when  he  fet  the  kynges  houfes  on  fyer  whom  he  fpoyled.
For  they  robbe  and  fley  the  one  the  other,  fackynge  and  fyryng  their  villages,  and  waflinge  their  countreys.
They  keepe  warre  barbaroufly  and  to  vtter  deftruction,  executinge  extreeme  crueltie  ageinfl.  them  that  haue

:S2

The  thyrde  Decade.

183

the  ouerthrowe.  Gofifalus  Badaiocius  with  his  felowes,  wandered  at  lybertie  vntyll  they  came  to  this  kjnig:
And  had  gathered  great  heapes  of  gold  of  other  kinges.  For,  what  in  brafle^tes,  collers,  earinges,  brefle  plates,
helmettes,  and  certeine  barres  wherwith  women  beare  vppe  their  breftes,  they  had  gathered  together  in  gold
the  fum  of  fourefcore  thoufande  Caflellans,  whiche  they  had  obteyned  partly  by  exchaunge  for  owtc  thinges
where  they  founde  the  kinges  their  frendes,  and  other^vife  by  forceible  meanes  where  they  founde  the  contrary.
They  had  gotten  alfo  forty  flaues  whofe  helpe  they  vfed  both  for  cariage  of  their  vitailes  and  bagagies
in  the  fleade  of  moiles  or  other  beafles  of  burden,  and  alfo  to  relieue  fuche  as  were  fycke  and  forweried
by  reafon  of  their  longe  iorneys  and  hunger.  After  thefe  profperous  viages,  they  came  by  the  dominion
of  kynge  Scoria,  to  the  palaice  of  a  kynge  named  Pariza:  where  (fearyng  no  fuch  thing)  Pariza  enclofed
them  with  a  great  armye,  and  affayled  them  flraggelyng  and  vnwares,  in  fuche  forte  that  they  had  no
leafure  to  put  on  their  armure.  He  flewe  and  wounded  about  fyftie,  and  put  the  refydue  to  flyght.  They
made  fuche  hafl,  that  they  had  no  refpect  eyther  to  the  gold  they  had  gathered,  or  to  their  flaues :  but
lefte  all  behynde  them.  Thofe  fewe  that  efcaped,  came  to  Dariena.  The  opinion  of  all  wyfe  men  as
concernynge  the  varyable  and  inconft.ant  chaunces  of  fortune  in  humane  thinges,  were  falfe,  if  al  thinges
fhuld  haue  happened  vnto  them  profperoufly.  For  fuch  is  the  nature  of  this  blynde  goddeffe,  that  flie
oftentimes  delyteth  in  the  ouerthrowe  of  them  whom  fhe  hath  exalted :  and  taketh  plefure  in  confounding  hygh
thinges  with  lowe,  and  the  contrary.  Wee  fee  this  order  to  bee  impermutable,  that  who  foo  wyll  applye  hym
felfe  to  gather  rootes,  fliall  fumtymes  meete  with  fweete  lyquereffe,  and  other  whiles  with  foure  cockle.  Yet  wo
vnto  Pariza :  for  he  fhall  not  longe  fleape  in  refl..  The  gouernour  him  felfe  was  of  late  determined  with  three
hundreth  and  fyftie  choife  fouldiers  to  reuenge  the  death  of  owr  men :  But  where  as  he  by  chaunce  fell  fycke,
his  poure  went  forward  vnder  the  conducting  of  his  Lieuetenant  Gafpar  Spifiofa,  a  ludge  in  cafes  of  lawe  in
Dariena.  At  the  fame  time  other  were  fent  foorth  to  the  Ilande  oi  Dites  to  exacte  the  portion  of  pearles  lymited
to  the  king  for  his  tribute.  What  fhal  fuccede,  tyme  will  bring  to  owre  knowleage.  The  other  two,  attempted
th[e]inhabitantes  beyonde  the  goulfe,  Francifcus  Bezerra  paffyng  ouer  by  the  corner  of  the  goulfe  and  the
mouthes  of  the  ryuer  oi Dabaiba,  with  two  other  capitaines  and  a  hundreth  and  fyftie  fouldiers  well  appointed,
went  to  make  warre  vppon  the  Canibales  euen  in  Caribana  their  owne  chiefeft  dominion,  toward  the  vyllage  of
Turufy,  wherof  we  haue  made  mention  before  in  the  comming  of  Fogeda.  They  brought  alfo  with  them  diuers
engens  of  warre :  as  three  pieces  of  ordinaunce  whofe  fliot  were  bygger  then  egges :  Likewife  forty  archers,  and.
XXV.  hagbutters  to  th[e]intent  to  reache  the  Caniballes  a  farre  of,  and  to  preuent  their  venemed  arrowes.  But
what  became  of  hym  and  his  company,  or  where  they  arriued,  we  haue  yet  no  parfecte  knowleage.  Certaine
which  came  of  late  from  Dariena  to  Spaine,  reported  that  at  their  departure,  they  oi  Dariena  {lode  in  great  feare
leafl.  they  alfo  were  toffed  with  fum  miffortune.  The  other  capitaine  Valleius,  obteyned  the  fore  parte  of  the
goulfe.  But  he  paffed  ouer  by  an  other  waye  then  dyd  Bezerra.  For  he  tooke  the  beginning  of  Caribana,  and
Bezerra  the  ende.  Valleius  returned  ageine.  But  of  the  three  fcore  and  ten  men  whiche  he  conueighed  ouer
with  hym,  hee  lefte  fortye  and  eyght  flaine  emonge  the  Canibales.  Thefe  are  the  newes  whiche  they  brincre
that  came  lafte  from  Dariena.

There  came  to  me  the  day  before  the  Ides  of  October  in  this  yeare.  M.  D,  xvi.  Rodericus  Colmenares  (of
whom  we  haue  made  mention  before)  and  one  Fraiicifcus  De/apuenfe. This  Francifcus,  wrs  one  of  the  vnder
capitaines  of  this  bande,  whofe  chiefe  capitaine  was  Gonfahis  Badaiocius  who  hardly  efcaped  the  handes  of
kyng  Pariza. Thefe  twoo  capitaines  therfore,  Rodericus  and  Francifcus  who  departed  from  Dariena  immediatly
after  the  miffortune  whiche  befell  to  Badaiocitis  and  his  companye,  do  both  affirme,  the  one  that  he  hath  harde,
the  other  that  he  hath  feene,  that  in  the  Southe  fea  there  are  diuers  Ilandes  lying  wefl.warde  from  the  Hand  of
Dites  and  faincte  Michaels  goulfe,  in  many  of  the  which  are  trees  engendred  and  nourifflied  which  bring  foorth
the  fame  aromaticall  fruites,  as  doth  the  region  of  Collocutea. This  lande  of  CoUocuiea,  wirh  the  regions  of
Cochinus  and  Camefnorus,  are  the  chiefe  marte  places  from  whenfe  the  Portugales  haue  their  fpices. And  hereby
do  they  coniecture  that  the  land  where  the  frutfulneffe  of  fpyce  begynneth,  fhulde  not  be  farre  from  thenfe. In
fo  much  that  many  of  them  whiche  haue  ouerrunne  thofe  coafles,  do  onely  defyre  that  leaue  may  be  graunted
them  to  fearche  further,  and  that  they  wil  of  their  owne  charges  frame  and  furnifhe  fliippes  and  aduen^.ire  the
viage  to  fearche  thofe  Ilandes  and  regions. They  thinke  it  befl  that  thefe  fliippes  fliulde  bee  made  and  prepared,
euen  in  faincte  Michaels  goulfe :  And  not  to  attempte  this  vyage  by  fainte  Auguftines  point,  which  waye  were
both  longe  and  diffyculte,  and  ful  of  a  thoufande  daungers,  and  is  faide  to  reache  beyonde  the  fortv  decree  of
the  pole  Antartike. The  fame  Francifcus,  being  partener  of  the  trauailes  ?nd  daungiers  of  Gonfahis,  faithe
that  in  ouer  runninge  thofe  landes,  he  founde  great  heardes  of  hartes  and  wylde  bores :  and  that  he  toke  many
of  them  by  an  arte  which  th[e]inhabitauntes  taught  him:  whiche  was  to  make  pittes  or  trenches  in  their  walkes,
and  to  couer  the  fame  with  bouwes. By  this  meanes  alfo  they  deceaue  al  other  kindes  of  wild  and  foure  footed
beafles. But  they  take  foules  after  the  fame  maner  that  we  do :  As  flocke  doues  with  an  other  tame  flocke  doue
brought  vp  in  their  houfes. Thefe  they  tye  by  a  ftrynge,  and  fuffer  them  to  flye  a  lyttle  emong  the  trees. To

183

Fourescore
thotisand
Castellans  of
golde.

Kyng  Scoria.
Kyng  Pariza.

Gonsalus
Badaiocius  hath
the  ouerthrow  and
is  spoyled  of  great
rycnes  of  golde.

146

The  Inconstancie
of  fortune.

The  expedition  of
Fraunces  Bezarra
ageynst  the
Canibales.

Gunnes.

Valeius  repulsed
of  the  Canibales.

The  Ilandes  of  the
south  sea.
In  this  sea  lyfe]
the  Ilandes  of
Molucca,  ^■^st
frutefull  of  spices.
Collocutea.
Cochinus  and
Camemorus,  from
whense  the
Portugales  h.iue
theyr  spyces.

He  meaneth  by
the  straight  of
Magellanus.

Howe  they  take
h.irtes  and  wylde
bores.

Stocke  doues

1 84

The  thyrde  Decade.

147

Theyr  maner  of
foulynge.

Popingiayes  are
casely  taken.

A  straunge  kynde
of  foulynge.

Fysshes  and

wormes

engendered  of

slime

Foules.

Gourdes  of  the

tree.

Later  opinions  of
the  swift  course
of  the  Ocean
towarde  the  West.

The  continent  or
firme  land.

148

The  vyages  of
Diegus  Colonus.

The  vyage  from
the  new  landes  to
Spayne.

the  which  as  other  birdes  of  their  kind  refort,  they  kil  them  with  their  arrowes.  Otherwyfc  they  take  them  with
nettes  in  a  bare  place  pourged  from  trees  and  buflies :  and  fcateryng  certeyne  feedes  rounde  about  that  place,  in
the  myddefle  whereof  they  tye  a  tame  foiile  or  byrde  of  the  kynde  of  them  whiche  they  defyre  to  take.  In  lyke
maner  do  they  take  popingiayes  and  other  foules.  But  they  fay  that  popingiayes  are  fo  fimple,  that  a  great
multitude  of  them  wyll  flye  euen  into  the  tree  in  whofe  bouwes  the  fouler  fytteth :  and  fwarme  about  the  tame
chatterynge  popingiaye,  fuftor\'nge  them  felues  to  bee  eafely  taken.  For  they  are  fo  without  feare  of  the  fyght
of  the  fouler,  that  they  tary  wliyle  he  cafl.  the  fnare  about  theyr  neckes,  the  other  beinge  nothynge  feared  hereby,
thoughe  they  fee  hym  drawe  them  to  him  with  the  fnare,  and  put  them  in  the  bagge  which  he  hath  about  hym
for  the  fame  purpofe.  There  is  an  other  kynde  of  foulynge,  heretofore  neuer  harde  of,  and  pleafaunt  to  confyder.
We  haue  declared  before  howe  that  in  certeyne  of  the  Ilandes,  and  efpecially  in  Hifpaniola,  there  are  dyuers
lakes  or  flandynge  pooles.  In  fume  of  thefe  (beinge  no  deaper  then  men  may  wade  ouer  them)  are  feene  great
multytudes  of  water  foules :  as  wel  for  tliat  in  the  bottome  of  thefe  lakes,  there  growe  many  herbes  and  weedes,
as  alfo  that  by  reafon  of  the  heate  of  the  fonne  pearceinge  to  the  naturall  place  of  generation  and  corruption,  where
beinge  doubled  in  force  by  reflection  and  preferued  by  moyfler,  there  are  engendered  of  the  flymines  of  the
earth  and  water,  and  by  the  prouidence  of  the  vniuerfall  creator,  innumerable  lyttle  fyfflies,  with  a  thoufande
fundry  kyndes  of  frogges,  wormes,  knattes,  flyes  and  fuch  other.  The  foules  which  vfe  thefe  lakes,  are  of  dyuers
kyndes:  As  duckes,  geefe,  fwannes,  feemewes,  guiles,  and  fuch  other.  We  haue  fayde  alfo  that  in  theyi
orchardes  they  noryflie  a  tree  which  beareth  a  kynde  of  greate  gourdes.  Of  thefe  gourdes  therefore  well
flopped  leafle  any  water  {hulde  enter  in  at  theyr  ryftes  and  caufe  them  to  fmke,  they  cafl  many  in  the  fhalowe
pooles:  where,  by  theyr  continuall  wanderynge  and  wauerynge  with  the  motions  of  the  wynde  and  water,  they
put  the  foules  owte  of  fufpection  and  feare.  The  fouler  in  the  meane  tyme,  difguyfmge  hym  felfe  as  it  were  with
a  vifour,  putteth  a  great  gourde  on  his  head  much  lyke  to  a  helmet,  with  two  holes  neare  about  his  eyes,  his
face  and  hole  heade  befyde  beinge  couered  therwith.  And  thus  entereth  he  into  the  poole  euen  vnto  the  chynne.
For  beinge  from  theyr  infancie  excercifed  in  fwymmynge  and  accuflomed  to  the  waters,  they  refufe  not  to
continue  therein  a  longe  fpace.  The  foules  thynkynge  this  gourde  to  be  one  of  the  other  that  fwymme  vppon
the  water,  the  fouler  goeth  foftly  to  the  place  wher  he  feeth  the  greatefl  flocke  of  foules :  And  with  waggynge
his  heade,  counterfectinge  the  mouing  of  the  wauerynge  gourdes,  drawethe  nere  to  the  foules:  where  foftely
puttynge  foorth  his  ryght  hande,  he  foodenly  fnatcheth  one  by  the  legges  and  plungeth  her  into  the  water  where
he  putteth  her  into  a  bagge  whiche  he  hath  with  hym  of  purpofe  The  other  foules  fuppofmge  that  this  dyued
into  the  water  of  her  owne  motion  to  feke  for  foode  (as  is  their  maner)  are  nothyng  moued  hereby,  but  go
forwarde  on  their  waye  as  before,  vntyll  they  alfo  faule  into  the  fame  fnare.  I  haue  here  for  this  caufe  entered
into  the  declaration  of  theyr  maner  of  huntynge  and  foulynge,  that  by  thefe  more  pleafaunt  narrations  I  may
fumwhat  mytigate  and  affwage  the  horrour  conceaued  in  yowre  flomake  by  the  former  rehearfall  of  theyr  bluddy
actes  and  cruell  maners.  Lette  vs  nowe  therfore  fpeake  fumwhat  ageyne  of  the  newe  and  later  opinions  as
concernynge  the  fwyfte  courfe  of  the  fea  towarde  the  wefl  about  the  coafles  oi  Paria:  alfo  of  the  maner  of
gathering  of  golde  in  the  golde  myne  of  Dariena,  as  I  was  aduertifed  of  late.  And  with  thefe  two  quyet  and
peaceable  thynges,  we  wyl  make  an  ende  of  the  tragical  affayres  of  the  Ocean :  and  therwith  byd  yowre  holynes
fare  wel.  So  it  is  therfore,  that  Andreas  MoraHs  the  pylot,  and  Ouiedus  (of  whom  we  haue  made  mention
before)  repayred  to  me,  at  my  houfe  in  the  towne  of  Matrite,  As  we  met  thus  togyther,  there  arofe  a  contention
betwene  them  two,  as  concernynge  this  courfe  of  the  Ocean.  They  both  agree  that  thefe  landes  and  regions
perteynynge  to  the  dominion  of  Caflile,  doo  with  one  continuall  tract  and  perpetuall  bonde,  embrafe  as  one  hole
firme  lande  and  contment  al  the  mayne  lande  lyinge  on  the  north  fyde  of  Ctiba  and  the  other  Ilandes,  beinge  alfo
northwefl  both  from  Cuba  and  Hifpaniola.  Yet  as  touchynge  the  courfe  of  the  water,  they  varie  in  opinion.
For  Andreas,  wyll  that  this  vyolent  courfe  of  water  bee  receaued  in  the  lappe  of  the  fuppofed  continente
which  bendeth  fo  much  and  extendeth  fo  farre  towarde  the  North,  as  we  haue  faid :  And  that  by  the  obiect  or
refiflance  of  the  lande  fo  bendynge  and  crookynge,  the  water  fhulde  as  it  were  rebounde  in  coompaffe,  and  by
force  therof  be  dryuen  about  the  north  fyde  of  Cuba  and  the  other  Ilandes  excluded  without  the  circle  cauled
Tropiais  Cancri,  where  the  largenes  of  the  fea  maye  receaue  the  waters  faulynge  frome  the  narowe  ftreames,
and  therby  repreffe  that  inordinate  courfe,  by  reafon  that  the  fea  is  there  very  large  and  great.  I  can  compare
his  meanynge  to  nothynge  more  aptely  then  to  the  fwyfte  flreame  commyng  foorth  ot  a  mylle  and  faulyng  into
the  myl  poole.  For  in  al  fuche  places  where  waters  runne  with  a  vyolent  faule  through  narowe  chanels,  and
are  then  receaued  in  large  pooles,  they  are  foodenly  difparcled  and  theyr  violence  broken :  So  that  wheras  before
they  feemed  of  fuch  force  as  to  ouerthrowe  all  thynges  beinge  in  theyr  waye,  it  can  not  then  be  perceaued
which  way  they  runne.  The  Admiral  him  felfe  Diegus  Colonus,  fonne  and  heyre  to  ChriJlopJiorus  Colonus  the
fyrfl  fynder  of  thefe  landes  (who  had  nowe  in  commyng  and  goinge,  foure  tymes  paffed  throughe  thefe  feas)
beinge  demaunded  of  me  what  he  founde  or  perceaued  in  faylynge  too  and  fro,  anfwered  that  there  was  muche
difificultie  in  returnynge  the  fame  way  by  the  which  they  go.  But  wheras  they  fyrfl.  take  the  waye  by  the  mayne
184

The  thyrde  Decade.

1 8s

fea  tovvarde  the  North  before  they  directe  theyr  courfe  to  Spayne,  he  faythe  that  in  that  tract,  he  felt  the  fhippe
fumtymes  a  lyttle  dryuen  backe  by  the  contrary  courfe  of  the  water.  Yet  fuppofeth  that  this  chaunceth  onely
by  the  ordinarie  flowynge  and  reflowynge  of  the  fea :  And  the  fame  not  to  be  enforced  by  the  circumflection  or
courfe  of  the  water  reboundynge  in  compaffe  as  we  haue  fayde.  But  thinketh  rather,  that  this  mayne  lande  or
fuppofed  continent,  fliulde  fumwhere  bee  open :  And  that  the  fayde  open  place,  fhoulde  bee  as  it  were  a  gate,
enteric,  or  flreyght,  diuydyng  the  North  partes  of  that  lande  from  the  South :  by  the  which  alfo,  the  Ocean
nmnynge  towarde  the  Weft,  may  by  the  rotation  or  impulfion  of  the  heauens,  bee  dryuen  about  the  hole  earth.
Ouiedus  agreeth  withi  Andreas  Moralis  as  touchynge  the  continual!  adherence  and  clofenes  of  the  fayde  con-
tinente.  Yet  neyther  that  the  waters  fhulde  fo  beate  ageynft  the  bendynge  backe  of  the  Weft  lande,  or  bee  in
fuche  forte  repulfed  and  dryuen  into  the  mayne  fea.  But  faith  that  he  hath  diligently  confydered,  that  the
waters  runne  from  the  deepeft  and  myddeft  of  the  maine  fea,  towarde  the  Weft.  Alfo  that  faylinge  nere  vnto  the
fhore  with  fmaule  veffelles,  he  founde  the  fame  waters  to  returne  ageine  towarde  the  Eaft.  So  that  in  the  fame
place,  they  runne  together  with  contrary  courfe,  as  we  oftentimes  fee  the  lyke  to  chaunce  in  riuers  wher  by  the
obiecte  of  the  bankes,  diuers  whirlepooles  and  turnynges  aryfe  in  the  water.  By  reafon  wherof,  if  any  chaffe,
ftrawe,  woodde,  or  any  other  thyng  of  lyght  fubftance  be  cafte  in  any  fuche  places  in  ryuers,  it  foloweth  that  al
fuch  as  runne  with  the  water  in  the  myddeft  of  the  chanell,  procede  well  forwarde:  But  fuche  as  faule  into  the
bendynge  goulfes  and  indented  margentes  of  the  crooked  bankes,  are  caryed  ouerthwarte  the  chanell,  and  fo
wander  about  vntyll  they  meete  with  the  ful  and  directe  courfe  of  the  ryuer.  Thus  haue  we  made  yowe
partener  of  fuche  thinges  as  they  haue  gyuen  vs,  and  writen  their  dyuers  opinions.  We  wyll  then  g}aie  more
certeyne  reafon,  when  more  certeyne  truth  fhalbe  knowen.  We  muft  in  the  meane  tyme,  leane  to  opinions
vntil  the  day  coome  appointed  of  god  to  reueale  this  fecreate  of  nature,  with  the  perfecte  knowleage  of
the  pointe  of  the  pole  ftarre.  Hauyng  fayd  thus  muche  of  the  courfe  of  the  Ocean,  a  briefe  declaration  of
the  golde  mynes  oi  Dariena,  fhall  clofe  vppe  owre  Decades  and  make  an  ende  of  owre  trauayles.  Wee  haue
fayde,  that  nyne  myles  diftante  from  Dariena,  are  the  fydes  of  the  hylles  and  the  drye  playnes  in  the  whiche
golde  is  gathered  bothe  on  the  drye  lande,  and  alfo  on  the  bankes  and  in  the  chanelles  of  ryuers.  Therfore  to
al  fuch  as  are  wyllynge  to  gather  golde,  there  is  of  ordinarie  cuftome  appointed  to  euery  man  by  the  furuoiers  of
the  mynes,  a  fquare  plotte  of  grounde  conteyning  twelue  pafes,  at  the  arbitriment  of  the  choofer,  fo  that  it  bee
not  grounde  already  occupied,  or  lefte  of  other.  The  portion  of  grounde  beinge  thus  chofen  (as  it  were
affygned  of  the  augures  to  buylde  a  temple)  they  inclofe  their  flaues  within  the  fame,  whofe  helpe  the  Chriftians
vfe  in  tyllynge  of  their  grounde  and  gatherynge  of  golde,  as  we  haue  faide.  Thefe  places  appointed  vnto  them,
they  keepe  as  longe  as  them  lyfte.  And  if  they  perceaue  tookens  of  lyttle  golde,  they  requyre  an  other  plotte
of  ground  of  twelue  pafes  to  be  affigned  them,  leauyng  the  firft  in  commen.  And  this  is  th[e]order  which  the
Spaniardes  inhabitinge  Dariena  obferue  in  gatheryng  of  golde.  I  fuppofe  alfo  that  they  vfe  the  lyke  order  in
other  places :  How  be  it,  I  haue  not  yet  enquired  fo  farre.  It  hath  byn  proued  that  thefe  twelue  pafes  of
grounde,  haue  yelded  to  their  choofers,  the  fumme  of  fourefcore  Caftellans  of  gold.  And  thus  leade  they  thejT
lyues  in  fulfyllynge  the  holy  hunger  of  golde.  But  the  more  they  fyll  their  handes  with  fyndynge,  the  more
increafeth  their  couetous  defyre.  The  more  woodde  is  layde  to  the  fyer,  the  more  furioufly  rageth  the  flame.
Vnfaciable  couetoufneffe  is  no  more  diminifftied  with  increafe  of  rychefle,  then  is  the  drineffe  of  the  dropfye
fatiffyed  with  drinke.  I  lette  paffe  manye  thynges  wherof  I  intende  to  write  more  largely  in  tyme  conuenient,
if  I  fhall  in  the  meane  feafon  vnderftande  thefe  to  be  acceptable  vnto  yowre  holyneffe :  my  dewtie  and  obfer-
uaunce  to  whofe  autoritie,  hath  caufed  me  the  gladlier  to  take  this  labour  in  hande.  The  prouidence  of  the
eternall  creatour  of  all  thynges,  graunt  yowre  holyneffe  many  profperous  yeares.

The  contrary
course  of  waters.

The  poynt  of  the
pole  star.

The  golde  mynes
of  Dariena,  and
the  maner  of
gatherynge  golde.

149

Owre  inclosiers
woolde  leaue  no
such  commens.
A  uri  sacra  Fa>ms

The  dropsie  of
couetousnes.

'85

1 86

Loke  Oecittc  iii.
Liber,  x

Cities  fortifyed
with  waules.

The  Hand  of  Cuba
or  Femandina.

The  Spaniards  of
Cuba  attempt  new
vyages.

The  west  angle  of
Cuba.

Note.

The  Hand  of

lucatana.

A  great  citie  well

buylded.

Temples.

Humane  people.

150

Cunnyng
artifycers.

Appareled  people.

€  The  laste  booke  of  Peter  Martyr  of  Angleria,
OF  THE  LANDES  AND ILANDES  LATELY  FOUNDE:

AND  OF  THE  MANERS  OF  THE  INHABITAVNTES  OF  THE  SAME.

Haue  partli  declared  before  in  mi  decades  how  certeine  fugitiues
which  came  owt  of  the  large  Wefl  landes  arriued  in  the  confynes  of
Dariena:  And  howe  that  marueylinge  at  the  bookes  of  owre  men,
they  declared  that  they  fumtyme  dwelte  in  regions  whofe  inhabi-
tauntes  vfed  fuche  inllrumentes  and  were  ruled  by  politike  lawes.
Alfo  that  they  had  cities  fortified  with  waules,  and  faire  pallaces
with  flreates  well  paued,  and  common  places  whyther  mar-
chauntes  refort  as  to  the  burfe  or  flreate.  Thefe  landes,  owre  men
haue  nowe  founde.  Therfore  who  were  th[e]autours  hereof,  or
what  fucceffe  they  had  herein,  who  fo  defireth  to  know  with  the
conditions  of  flraunge  regions  and  the  maners  of  the  people,  let
hym  giue  diligent  attendance  to  fuch  thynges  as  folowe.  Of  the
Hand  of  Cuba  (nowe  cauled  Ferfiandtna,  lyynge  nexte  vnto  Ilif-
paniola  on  the  wefl  fyde,  and  yet  fumwhat  fo  bendynge  towarde
the  Northe  that  the  circle  cauled  Tropicus  Cancri  deuideth
it  in  the  myddefle,  wher  as  Hifpaniola  is  diflante  from
the  Tropike  and  declinyge  certen  degrees  toward  the  Equi-
noctial line)  we  haue  fpoken  fumwhat  before.  In  this  Hand  of  Femandina,  there  are  nowe  fyxe  townes
erected.  Wherof,  the  chiefe  is  named  Santiago  of  faynt  lames  the  patrone  of  the  Spanyardes.  In
this,  there  is  natiue  golde,  found  both  in  the  mountaynes  and  ryuers :  By  reafon  wherof  they  are
daylye  occupied  in  gathering  and  digging  the  fame.  But  fhortely  after  that  I  had  finifhed  my  fayde
bookes,  thre  Spanyardes  that  were  the  mofl  auncient  citizens  of  Cuba,  as  Francifcus  Fernandes  of  Corduba,
Lupus  Oc/io,  and  Chrijlophorus  Moranies,  determined  to  feeke  newe  landes,  as  the  myndes  of  the
Spanyardes  are  euer  vnquiet  and  geuen  to  attempte  great  enterprifes.  They  furnyfhed  at  their  owne  charges,
three  of  thofe  fliyppes  whiche  they  caule  Carauels.  And  hauynge  fyrfle  lycence  of  Dicgus  Velafquen  the
gouernour  of  the  Ilande,  they  departed  with  a  hundreth  and  ten  men  from  the  Wefl  angle  of  Cuba.  For  this
angle  is  mofle  commodious  to  relieue  fhyppes  and  to  make  prouifion  for  frefhe  water  and  fuell.  Thus  they
fayled  continually  fyxe  dayes  and  a  halfe,  betwene  the  Wefl  and  the  South,  contented  onely  with  the  fyght  of
the  heauen  and  the  water:  durynge  whiche  tyme,  they  fuppofe  that  they  fayled  not  pad  threefcore  and  fyxe
myles.  For  they  ley  at  anker  all  nyght  where  fo  euer  the  faulynge  of  the  foonne  tooke  the  day  light  from  them,
leafle  by  wanderynge  in  vnknowen  feas,  they  myght  chaunce  to  be  cafl  vppon  rockes  or  fandes.  But  at
the  length  they  chaunced  vppon  a  great  Ilande  named  lucatana,  whofe  beginnyng  th[e]inhabitauntes  caule
Eccaytipi.  Owre  men  went  to  the  citie  flondynge  on  the  fea  fyde,  the  whiche  for  the  bygnes  therof,
they  named  Cayrus  or  Alcair.  Th[e]inhabitauntes  enterteined  them  very  frendly.  When  they  were  entered
into  the  citie,  they  marueyled  to  behold  the  houfes  buylded  lyke  towres,  magnifycall  temples,  flreates
well  paued,  and  great  exercife  of  bying  and  fellyng  by  exchaunge  of  ware  for  ware.  Their  houfes  are
eyther  bylte  of  flone,  or  of  bricke  and  lyme,  and  artifycially  wrought.  To  the  fyrfle  porches  of  their  houfes
and  fyrfl  habitations,  they  afcend  by  ten  or  twelue  fleares.  They  are  couered  eyther  with  tyles,  llates,
reades,  or  flalkes  of  certeyne  herbes.  They  gratified  the  one  the  other  with  mutuall  gyftes.  The  bar-
barians gaue  owre  men  many  brooches  and  iewelles  of  golde,  verye  fayre  and  of  cunnyng  woorkmanfhyppe.
Owre  men  recompenfed  them  with  veflures  of  fylke  and  woolle,  counterfecte  flones,  of  coloured  glafife  and
chriflall,  haukes  belles  of  laton,  and  fuche  other  rewardes  whiche  they  greatly  efleemed  for  the  flraungenes  of
the  fame.  They  lette  nowght  by  lookynge  glaffes,  bycaufe  they  haue  certeyne  floones  muche  brighter.  This
nation  is  appareled  after  a  thoufande  faffhyons  with  veflures  made  of  goffampyne  cotten  or  bombage  of  dyuers
coloures.  The  women  are  couered  from  the  girdle  to  the  heele  hauynge  dyuers  faffhions  of  \ayles  aboute  their
heades  and  bredes,  with  great  cautele  leafl  any  parte  of  their  legges  or  feete  bee  feene. They  reforte  muche

i86

^\0f  the  Landes  and  Ilandes  lately  founde.'] The  thyrde  Decade.

187

to  their  temples :  vnto  the  which  the  chiefe  rulers  haue  the  wayes  paued  from  their  owne  houfes.  They  are
Idolatours  and  circumcifed.  They  occupie  their  maner  of  exchaunginge,  with  muche  fydelitie.  They  vfe  to
adourne  the  heares  of  their  heades.  Being  demanded  by  th[e]interpretours  of  whom  they  receaued  their  circum-
cifyon,  they  anfwered  that  there  once  paffed  an  exceadynge  fayre  man  by  their  cofl.es,  who  lefte  them  that  in
tooken  to  remember  hym.  Other  faye  that  a  manne  brighter  then  the  foone,  went  emonge  them  and  executed
that  offyce.  But  there  is  no  certentie  hereof  When  owtc  men  had  remayned  there  certeyne  dayes,  they
feemed  to  bee  molefl.ous  to  th[e]inhabitantes  accordynge  to  the  common  fayinge.  The  longer  a  gefle  tarieth,
the  woorfe  is  his  enterteynement.  The  whiche  thynge  owre  men  perceauyng,  they  made  the  more  hafl.  awaye.
Beynge  therfore  prouided  of  all  thynges  neceffary,  they  tooke  their  vyage  directly  towarde  the  wefl.  by  the
prouince  whiche  th[e]inhabitauntes  caule  Comi  and  Maiain.  They  ouer  paffed  thefe  regions  takyng  onely  frefhe
water  and  fuel  in  the  fame.  The  barbarians  both  men,  women,  and  children  flocked  to  the  fea  fyde,  aflonyfflied
greatly  to  behold  the  huge  bygneffe  of  the  fliyppes.  Owre  men  marueyled  in  maner  no  leffe  to  viewe  their
buyldynges  and  efpecially  their  temples  fytuate  neare  vnto  the  fea,  and  erected  after  the  maner  of  towers.  Thus
at  the  length  hauyng  fayled  about  a  hundreth  and  ten  myles,  they  thought  it  good  to  ley  anker  in  a  prouince
named  Campcchium,  whofe  chiefe  towne  confyfleth  of  three  thoufande  houfes.  Th[e]inhabitauntes  came
fwymmynge  to  the  fhyppes:  marueylyng  excedyngly  at  the  maner  of  faylinge,  and  at  the  fayles  and  other
tackelynges  But  when  they  hard  the  thunder  of  the  gunnes,  fawe  the  fmoke,  and  fmelte  the  fauour  of  brimft.one
and  fyer,  they  fuppofed  that  thimderboultes  and  lyghtnynges  had  byn  fente  from  god.  The  kynge  receaued  owre
men  honorably  and  broughte  them  into  his  pallayce :  where  he  feafl.ed  them  well  after  his  maner.  They  are
accufl-omed  to  eate  flefhe,  and  haue  great  plentie  of  beafles  and  foules :  as  peacockes,  and  other  whiche  they
francke  and  feede  in  their  houfes :  Alfo  dyuers  kyndes  of  wylde  foules  of  the  mountaines,  wooddes,  and  waters :
Likewife  partriches,  quailes,  turtle  dooues,  duckes,  and  geefe.  Of  beafles,  they  haue  connies,  wcolues,  lyons,
tigers,  foxes,  wylde  boores,  hartes,  and  hares.  After  this  banquet,  the  kyng  with  his  traine  and  famylie  brought
owre  men  into  a  brode  croffe  way  where  many  fl.reates  do  meete.  In  this,  they  fhewed  them  as  it  were  a  great
and  highe  aulter  buylded  foure  fquare  of  marble  compacte  together  partly  with  the  toughe  cleye  of  Babilon
cauled  Bitumen^  and  partly  with  fmaule  floones.  It  had  on  euery  fyde  foure  fleares.  Vppon  the  altare  was  an
Image  of  a  man  made  of  marble :  and  fafl  by  it  the  Images  of  two  beafles  of  vnknowen  fliape,  whiche  feemed
as  thoughe  they  wolde  with  yanynge  mouthes  haue  torne  in  funder  the  bealy  of  the  mannes  Image.  On  the
other  fyde  floode  a  great  ferpent  compacte  of  the  fayde  toughe  cleye  and  fmaule  floones.  This  ferpent  beynge
in  length,  xlvii.  foote,  and  of  the  bygneffe  of  a  large  oxe,  feemed  to  deuour  a  lyon  of  marble,  and  was  al  by
fparcled  with  frefhe  bludde.  Harde  by  the  altare,  were  thre  pofl.es  faflned  in  the  ground,  the  which  three  other
trauerfed  and  were  fufl.eined  with  fl.ones.  In  this  place  offenders  were  put  to  death :  In  token  wherof  they  fawe
innumerable  arrowes  fl.eined  with  bludde,  fum  fcatered,  fum  lyinge  on  heapes,  and  fum  broken :  Alfo  a  great
number  of  mennes  bones  lying  in  a  court  or  yarde  nere  vnto  this  funeflal  place.  Their  houfes  are  here
alfo  builded  of  lime  and  flone.  They  named  this  king,  Lazarus,  bicaufe  they  arriued  at  this  lande  on  faint
Lazarus  day.  Departing  from  henfe  and  directing  theyr  courfe  flyl  toward  the  Wefl.  for  the  fpace  of  xv.  myles,
they  came  to  a  prouince  named  Aqiumil,  whofe  chiefe  towne  is  cauled  Mofco,  and  the  kynge  thereof,  Cupoton.
He  behelde  owre  men  with  a  frowarde  countenaunce,  and  fought  occafion  to  doo  them  fume  priuie  mifchiefe
whyle  they  fought  for  freffhe  water.  For  he  made  fignes  vnto  them  that  on  the  further  fyde  of  the  nexte  hyll,
they  fliulde  fynde  fprynges  of  water,  intendyng  to  haue  affayled  them  in  that  narowe  paffage.  But  by  the
colouryng  of  theyr  forheades  (as  they  are  accuflomed  in  theyr  warres)  and  by  the  bearynge  of  theyr  bowes  and
other  weapons,  owTe  men  perceaued  theyr  wylynes,  and  refufed  to  go  any  further.  Yet  a  thoufande  of  the
Barbarians  affayled  theym  vnwares  and  vnprepared.  By  reafon  wherof,  they  were  put  to  flyght,  and  d>aiers  of
them  flayne  in  the  chafe.  Many  that  fledde  towarde  the  ftiippes,  were  entangeled  in  the  mudde  and  mar)-fhes
nere  vnto  the  fliore.  Twentie  and  two,  were  flayne  with  arrowes,  and  the  refydewe  for  the  mofl.  parte,  wounded.
Francifais  Fernandes  the  gouernour  of  the  nauie,  receaued  in  this  conflicte  three  and  thirtie  woundes.  And  in
maner  none  efcaped  without  hurt.  If  they  had  gonne  to  the  hylles  whiche  were  appoynted  them,  they  had
byn  flayne  euery  man.  They  therfore  that  efcaped,  returned  to  the  Ilande  of  Feriiandina  frome  whenfp  they
came,  where  they  were  receaued  of  theyr  felows  with  heauie  chere.  But  when  Diegus  Velafquen  the  gouernoure
of  the  Ilande,  had  intelligence  hereof,  he  immediatly  furnyfhed  a  newe  nauie  of  foure  Caraueles  with  three
hundreth  men,  Of  this  nauie  he  appoynted  lohn  Grifalua  his  neuie,  to  be  the  gouernour:  And  afllgned  for
vnder  capitaynes,  Alphons[o]  Auila,  Frances  Montegio,  and  Peter  Aluarado.  For  the  pylot  he  affigned  Antonie
Alamino  who  had  the  regiment  of  the  fyrft.  nauie.  They  attempted  the  fame  vyage  ageyne,  but  declyned
fumwhat  more  towprde  the  South  about  threfcore  and  tenne  myles.  Before  they  fawe  any  lande,  they  efpyed  a
towre  a  farre  of,  by  the  viewe  wherof,  they  came  to  an  Ilande  named  Cozumeila,  from  the  whiche  they  fmelte  fweete

[*  Eden  points  out  later  on  that  William  Powell,  the  printer,  had  wrongly  carried  the  headline,  The  thyrde  Dccrtde,  over  this,  a  perfectly  distinct  book.
~-(See  p.  342.) We  have  therefore  also  inserted  the  true  headline  within  brackets. — E.  .\  ]

Circumcised
Idolaters.

Comi.

Maiain.

Campechium.

A  towne  of  three
thousand  howses.

Plentie  of  beastes
and  foules.

The>T  Idoles  and
Idolatry.

Houses  of  lyme
and  stone.

151

The  prouince
Aquinall.

Mosco.

The  Spanyardes
are  put  to  flj  ."ht
and  many  slajne

An  other
e.\pedition.

The  TUnH  of
Cozumella.

i88

The  tJiyrde  Decade. [0/  the  Laudes  and  Ilandes  lately  fouude7\

Sweete  sauours.
A  frutefuU  Ilande.

Towres  and
temples.

Cozumella  named
Sancta  Crux.

I  doles  lyke  beares.
Idolatrj'-

Gentell  people.

lucatana  but  fyue
myles  from
Cozumella.

152

The  Barbarians
make  resistaunce.

A  conflicte.

The  length  of
lucatana.

The  region  ol
Cahiacam,  oi
Oloan.

The  ryuer
Grisalua.
Targets  and  brest
plates  of  golde.

fauours  proceadynge  with  the  wynde,  before  they  approched  to  the  lande  by  the  fpace  of  three  myles. They
founde  the  Ilande  to  be  fortie  and  fiue  myles  in  circuite. It  is  playne  and  of  maruelous  frutefull  foyle. There
is  alfo  golde  in  it,  but  it  is  not  engendered  there,  but  brought  thether  from  other  regions. It  aboundeth  with
hony,  fruites,  and  herbes ;  And  hath  alfo  great  plentie  of  foules  and  foure  footed  beafles. Theyr  order  and  maner
of  lyuyng,  is  in  al  thynges  1) kc  unto  the)rs  of  lucatana. Lykewyfe  theyr  howfes,  temples,  flreates,  and  apparell.
In  many  of  theyr  houfes,  are  great  pofl.es  of  marble  after  the  maner  of  owre  buyldynge. They  founde  there,
the  foundations  of  certeyne  owlde  towres  ruinate :  And  one  efpecially  with,  xviii.  ft.eares  afcendynge  to  it,  after
the  maner  of  folemne  temples. They  marueyled  greatly  at  owre  fliippes  and  maner  of  fiiylynge. At  the  fyrfl,
they  wolde  admyt  no  flraungers:  but  fliortly  after,  receaued  them  gentelly. Theyr  chiefe  ruler  (whom  owre  men
fuppofed  to  bee  a  preefle)  led  them  vp  to  the  toppe  of  the  towre,  where  they  erected  a  banner  and  addicted  the
Ilande  to  the  dominion  of  the  kynge  of  Caftyle,  namynge  it  Sa/iHa  Crux,  bycaufe  they  entered  into  the  fame  in
the  nones  of  Maye  beinge  then  the  feafl.e  of  the  holye  croffe. They  faye  that  it  was  cauled  Cozumella  of  kynge
Cozumdlaus,  whofe  aunceflours  were  the  fyrfl.  that  inhabited  the  Ilande. In  the  towre,  they  founde  many
chambers  furnyflied  with  Images,  made  bothe  of  earthe  and  marble  to  the  fimilytude  of  beares. Thefe  they
caule  vppon  with  a  houlynge  and  lamentable  fonge,  perfumyng  them  with  fweete  odours,  and  otherwyfe
honourynge  them  as  theyr  domefl.icall  goddes They  were  alfo  circumcifed. The  kynge  was  in  fayre  apparel
made  of  golTampine  cotton  curioufly  wrought. He  was  lame  on  the  one  foote  by  reafon  that  as  he  once  exercyfed
hym  felfe  in  fwymmynge,  a  deuourynge  fyflie  cauled  Tuberoti,  byt  of  al  the  toes,  of  one  of  his  feete. He
entreated  owre  men  very  frendly  and  made  them  great  chiere. After  they  had  byn  here  thre  dayes,  they
departed. And  faylynge  fl.yll  towarde  the  Wefle,  they  efpyed  great  mountaynes  a  farre  of. But  as  they
drewe  neare,  they  perceaued  it  to  bee  the  Ilande  of  lucatana  beinge  diflant  from Cozumella onely fyue
myles. Directynge  therfore  theyr  courfe  towarde  the  fouthe  fyde of  Iucata?ia, they  compafed  it  on  that
fyde  which  lyeth  nearefl.  to  the  fuppofed  continent: Yet  coulde  they  not  fayle  rounde  about  it  by  reafon
of  the multitude of  rockes, fhalowe places, and fhelfes of  fandes. Then Alaminus the pylot turned
his failes to the North fide  wherof  he  had  better  knowleage. Thus at the length, they  came  to the
towne  Campechium  and  kynge  Lazarus  with  whom  they  had  bin  that  attempted  the  fyrfl.  vyage  the  yeare
before. At the fyrfl., they were gentelly receaued, and  requyred  to refort to the  towne. But  fliortly
after,  they  repented  that  they  had  bydden  them :  and  there  vpon  wylled  them  to  fl.ay  about  a  flones  cafl.  from
the  towne,  and  to  proceade  no  further. When  owre  men  defyred  that  they  myght  make  prouifion  for  freflie
water  before  theyr  departure,  they  affigned  them  to  a  certeyne  well  which  they  had  lefte  behynde  them.
Declaringe  further,  that  it  ftiulde  be  lawfull  for  them  to  take  Avater  there  or  els  no  wheare. Owre  men  refl.ed
that  nyght  in  the  fyelde  adioynynge  to  the  well. The  which  thynge  the  Barbarians  fufpectinge,  affembled  an
army  of  three  thoufande  men,  and  encamped  not  farre  from  them. Bothe  partes  paffed  awaye  the  nyght
without  fleepe. They  fearynge  leafle  owre  menne  fliulde  breake  into  the  towne :  And  owre  men,  leafl.  the  Bar-
barians fhulde  inuade  them  foodenly,  on  the  one  parte  with  trumpettes,  and  on  the  other  fyde  with  the  noyfe  of
timbrels  kept  them  fl.yll  wakynge  that  were  difpofed  to  fleape. At  the  fprynge  of  the  day,  the  Barbarians
approched  to  owre  mens  campe  and  cauled  for  th[e]interpretours  of  Cuba,  whofe  language  is  much  agreable
vnto  theyrs. They  had  diuifed  to  lyghte  a  torche  of  frankenfence  and  to  place  the  fame  betwene  bothe
th[e]armies  to  th[e]intent  that  if  owre  men  dyd  not  depart  before  the  torche  were  confumed,  to  flande  to  theyr
perell. The  torch  was  wafl.ed  and  the  matter  came  to  hand  flrokes. They  flewe  onely  one  of  owre  men  with
an  arrowe  bycaufe  his  target  fayled  hym. But  many  were  wounded. After  this  conflicte,  owre  men  reforted
to  theyr  ordinaunce  which  they  had  planted  neare  vnto  the  well. When  they  had  difcharged  certeyne  peeces,
the  Barbarians  fledde  backe  into  the  towne. Owre  men  were  of  fierce  and  greedy  courage  to  haue  purfued
them,  but  that  Grifalua  the  gouernour  wolde  not  fuffer  them. From  thenfe  they  proceaded  to  the  lafl.  ende  of
lucatana,  which  they  founde  to  reache  more  then  two  hundreth  myles  frome  the  Eafl.  to  the  Wefl..  Here  they
founde  a  comodious  hauen  and  named  it  Partus  defideratus. From  henfe  they  fayled  to  other  landes,  and  came
to  the  region  nexte  to  lucatatta  Weflwarde,  whiche  they  doubte  whether  it  be  an  Ilande  or  parte  of  the  fimie
lande:  but  thinke  it  rather  to  be  annext  to  the  continent. In  this  there  is  a  goulfe  which  they  fuppofe  to  be
incoompafed  with  bothe  the  landes. But  of  this,  there  is  no  certentie. Th[e]inhabitantes  caule  this  region
Caluacam  or  otherwdfe  Oloan. They  founde  here  alfo  a  great  ryuer  whiche  by  his  violente  courfe  and  faule,
driueth  frefhe  water  two  myles  into  the  fea. This  they  cauled Grifalua  after  the  name  of  the  gouernoure.
The  barbarians  marueilyng  at  the  huge  greatneffe  and  mouynge  of  owre  fhyppes,  came  fwarmyng  the  bankes
on  bothe  fydes  the  ryuer,  to  the  number  of  fyxe  thoufande  men  armed  with  targettes  and  brefl.  plates  of  gold,
bowes  and  arrowes,  brode  fwoordes  of  heauy  woodde,  and  longe  iauelens  hardened  at  the  endes  with  fyer:
Thus  fl.ondynge  in  battayle  raye  to  defende  their  coofl.es,  and  with  proude  countenaunces  forbyddinge  owre
men  to  coome  alande. Bothe  parties  watched  al  that  nyght  in  armes. In  the  dawne  of  the  day,  owr  men
efpied  about  a  hundreth  Canoas  (whiche  we  haue  faide  to  be  their  boates)  full  of  armed  men. Here  alfo  the

i88

[Of  the  L ancles  and  Ilandes  lately  foitnde?^ The  thyrde  Decade.

189

language  of  th[e]interpretours  of  Cuba  agreed  well  enowghe  with  thers.  When  they  had  admitted  the  peace
profered  them  by  th[e]interpretours,  al  the  Canoas  flaied  excepte  one  whiche  approched  toward  the  fhippes.
A  certeyne  ruler  that  was  in  this  Canoa,  demaunded  of  owre  men  what  they  fought  in  other  mennes  landes.
They  anfwered,  gold.  And  that,  for  permutation  of  other  ware,  and  not  of  gift  or  vyolently.  The  Canoa
returned  and  the  ruler  certified  the  kyng  hereof,  who  came  gladlye  to  the  fhyppes.  "When  he  had  faluted  the
gouernour,  he  cauled  his  chamberlen  vnto  hym,  commaundynge  him  to  bringe  his  armure  and  other  ornamentes
of  golde  whervvith  he  armed  Grifalua  from  the  toppe  of  the  heade  to  the  foule  of  the  foote :  In  fo  muche  that,
what  fo  euer  any  man  of  armes  armed  at  all  partes,  is  emong  vs  accuflomed  to  weare  of  Iren  or  fleele  when  he
commeth  in  to  the  fielde,  all  fuche  kynde  of  furnitures  made  of  golde  and  wrought  with  woonderfuU  arte,  the
kyng  gaue  to  the  gouernour.  He  recompenfed  hym  with  veftures  of  fy[l]cke,  clothe,  lynen,  and  other  of  owre
thinges.  In  the  beginning  of  this  lucatana,  when  they  fayled  to  Cozumella,  they  chaunced  vppon  a  Ca7ioa
of  fyffher  men  to  the  number  of  nyne,  fyffhyng  with  hookes  of  golde.  They  tooke  them  all  prifoners.  One  of
them  was  knowen  to  this  kyng,  who  promyfed  the  daye  folowyng  to  fende  the  gouernour  as  muche  golde  for
his  raunfome  as  the  man  hym  felfe  waied.  But  the  gouernour  denyed  that  he  could  releafe  hym  w'ithowte  the
confent  of  his  felowes:  And  therfore  kept  hym  flyll  to  proue  what  he  could  further  knowe  of  hym.  Departing
from  henfe  and  faylynge  flyll  weflwarde,  they  founde  a  great  goulfe  in  the  which  three  fmaule  Ilandes  were
fytuate.  Of  thefe,  they  went  to  the  byggefl.  But  oh  abhominable  crueltie :  oh  mofl.  corrupted  myndes  of
men,  and  deuelyflie  impietie?  Let  euery  godly  man  clofe  the  mouth  of  his  flomake  left  he  be  defturbed.  They
offer  younge  children  of  bothe  kyndes  to  their  Idoles  of  marble  and  earth.  Emonge  their  Idoles  of  marble,
there  ftandeth  a  lyon  hauynge  a  hole  throwgh  the  necke,  into  the  whiche  they  poure  the  bludde  of  the  miferable
facrifyce,  that  it  maye  from  thenfe  runne  downe  into  a  fyncke  of  marble.  Lette  vs  nowe  declare  with  what
ceremonies  they  facryfyce  the  bludde  of  thefe  pore  wretches.  They  cutte  not  their  throtes,  but  cpen  the  very
breftes  of  thefe  felye  foules  and  take  owte  their  hartes  yet  pantynge,  with  the  hotte  bludde  wherof,  they  anoynte
the  lyppes  of  their  Idoles,  and  fuffer  the  refydue  to  faule  into  the  fynke.  This  doone,  they  burne  the  harte  and
bowels,  fuppofynge  the  fmoke  therof  to  be  acceptable  to  their  goddes.  Of  their  Idoles,  one  is  made  to  the
fhape  of  a  man,  bowynge  downe  his  heade  and  lookynge  toward  the  fynke  of  bludde,  as  it  were  acceptyng  the
ofiferinge  of  the  flayne  facrifyce.  They  eate  the  flefhe  of  the  armes,  thighes,  and  legges,  efpecially  when  they
facrifyce  an  enemy  taken  in  the  warres.  They  founde  a  ftreame  of  congeled  blud  as  thoughe  it  had  runne
from  a  bouchery.  For  this  myfcheuous  purpofe,  they  bringe  thefe  wretches  from  the  nexte  Ilandes.  They
fawe  alfo  innumerable  heades,  and  trunkes  of  bodies  thus  mangeled,  befyde  many  other  yet  remaining  hole  and
couered  with  certeine  mattes.  All  the  trades  of  thefe  regions  abounde  with  golde  and  precious  ftones.  One
of  owre  men  wanderynge  in  the  Ilande,  chaunced  to  fynde  two  water  pottes  of  alabafter  artifycially  wTOught
and  full  of  lyttle  ftones  of  dyuers  colours.  They  faye  alfo  that  they  founde  a  ftone  of  the  value  of  two
thoufand  Caftilans  of  gold,  whiche  they  fent  to  the  gouernour.  This  Ilande  they  named  the  Hand  of  facrifyce.
Th[e]inhabitauntes  are  circumcifed.  There  are  alfo  other  Ilandes  fytuate  about  this  Col\r\uacana  or  Ca/uacatn,
the  whiche  are  inhabited  onely  with  women  lyuing  without  the  coompanye  of  men  after  the  maner  of  the
Amazojies.  But  they  that  ponder  the  matter  more  wifely,  thinke  them  rather  to  be  certeyne  w'omen  w^hiche
haue  vowed  chaftitie  and  profeffed  a  folytarie  lyfe  as  the  nunnes  doo  with  vs,  or  as  the  virgins  cauled  Vejlales
or  BoncR  Dcce,  were  accuftomed  to  do  amonge  the  gentiles  in  oulde  tyme.  At  certeyne  tymes  of  the  yeare,
men  of  the  other  Ilandes  reforte  vnto  them.  But  not  for  th[e]intent  of  generation,  but  moued  with  pitie  to
helpe  ihem  to  dreffe  their  gardens  and  tyll  their  grounde.  The  reporte  goeth  lykewife  that  there  are  other
Ilandei  of  corrupte  women  to  whom  men  reforte  for  carnall  copulation :  And  that  they  cutte  of  one  of  the
pappes  of  their  women  children  leaft  it  ftiuld  hinder  their  ftiootyng.  Alfo  that  they  kepe  onely  the  women
children  and  fende  awaye  the  men  children.  Owr  men  therfore  drewe  nere  to  the  ftiore  of  CoUuacana  where
they  quyetly  exercifed  marchaundies  with  th[e]inhabitauntes.  The  kyng  gaue  them  a  great  potte  of  gold :
Alfo  braflettes,  chaynes,  brouches,  with  many  other  iewelles,  and  al  of  gold.  Owre  men  ageyne  on  the  other
parte  fatiffyed  him  with  fuch  ftufife  as  they  had  done  other  before.  Here  wolde  they  gladly  haue  planted  a
newe  colonic  or  habitation,  but  that  the  gouernour  wolde  not  permytte  them,  wherat  they  gruged  not  r-  lyttle.
The  houfes  and  other  edify es  of  this  prouynce,  are  buylded  like  vnto  towres.  It  hath  alfo.  xv.  great  townes  in
it.  Of  thefe  they  affirme  that  tney  haue  feene  fum  confifting  of  more  then.  xx.  thoufande  houfes,  not  ioyning
together,  but  defeuered  with  courtes  and  gardens.  They  haue  alfo  certeyne  large  market  places  encompafed
with  waules,  and  ftreates  well  paued.  Likewife  fornaces  and  ouens  made  of  lyme  and  bricke.  Furthermore
al  fortes  of  handy  craftes  men  and  very  cunning  artificers.  This  kinges  name  was  Potaiichafius:  and  the
region  is  cauled  Palmaria.  The  towne  where  the  king  kepeth  his  court,  conteineth.  xv.  thoufand  houfes.
When  they  receaue  any  ftraungiers  and  make  a  leage  of  frendfliyppe  with  them,  they  are  accuftomed  with  a
knife  made  of  a  fharpe  ftone,  to  let  them  felues  bludde  in  the  toonge,  hande,  arme,  or  fum  other  parte  of  the  body:
And  this  euen  in  the  fyght  of  them  whom  they  admitte  to  frendftiyp,  in  token  that  they  are  ready  to  fhedde

189

Armure  of  golde.

Experte  anilicers

Fysshe  hokes  of

golde.

153

The  Ilandes  of
Sacrifice.
Chyldren
sacrificed  to
Idoles.

Their  Idoles  of
marble.

Gold  and  precious
stones.

A  stone  of  great
price.

Ilandes  of  women.

Golde.

Houses  lyke

towres.

xv.  greate  townes

in  the  prouince  of

of  CoUuacana.

Townes  of  xx.

thousande  houses

The  region  of
Palmaria.

A  token  of
frendship.

190

TJic  tJiyyde  Decade. [Of  the  Lmides  and  Ilandcs  lately  foimde.']

Preestes

Chastitie.

154

The  punyshemcnt
of  adulterie.

Marriage  is
honoured.

Fastynge.

Kynge  Ouandus.

Idoles,  iewels,  and
ouches  of  gold.

Gold  in

mountaynes  and
ryuers

Theyr  maner  of
gatheryng  golde.

Sweete  sauours.

A  stone  of  great
price.

155

Other  viages  from
Cuba  or
Fernandina.

Many  Hands
betwene  Cuba  and
the  firme  lande.

tlieir  bludde  in  their  fryndes  caufes.  Their  priefles  profefle  a  vertuous  lyfe,  and  Hue  vnmaried.  What  it  is  to
haue  to  do  with  women,  no  man  knoweth  before  he  be  maried.  Fornication  and  adultery  (which  feldome
chaunce  emonge  them)  they  counte  abhomination.  The  women  are  of  maruelous  chaflitie.  Euery  noble  man
after  that  he  haue  had  one  wife,  may  haue  as  many  concubines  as  hym  lyflcth.  But  a  maried  woman  taken  in
adulterie,  is  foulde  of  her  hufbande.  But  this  oncly  to  the  prince:  at  whofe  handes  it  flial  be  lawfull  for  her
kynfefolkes  to  redeeme  her.  It  is  not  lawfull  for  fuchc  as  are  not  maried,  to  fytte  at  the  fame  table  with  them
that  are  maried,  or  to  eate  of  the  fame  dyflie  or  drinke  of  the  fame  cup.  In  the  moneth  of  Auguft  and
September,  they  abfleine.  xxxv.  dayes  not  onely  from  fleflie  wherof  they  haue  great  plentie,  but  alfo  from  fyflie
and  al  other  thinges  that  lyue  by  bludde :  And  durynge  thefe  dales,  lyue  onely  with  herbes  and  frutes.  They  reken
twentie  dayes  to  the  moneth,  and  twentie  monethes  to  the  yeare.  Owre  men  confumed  certeyne  dayes  here
^•erye  pleafauntly.  When  they  departed,  coaflynge  flyll  by  the  fame  fliore,  they  came  to  an  other  kyng  whom
they  named  Ouandus.  When  he  had  intellygence  that  owre  men  defired  golde,  he  brought  foorth  certeyne
plates  of  molten  gold.  But  when  the  gouernour  fignified  vnto  him  by  th[e]interpretors  that  he  defyred  great
plentie  of  that  metal,  the  day  folowing  he  brought  him  a  mannes  Image  of  golde  beinge  a  cubette  in  length:
Alfo  a  fanne  of  golde,  and  an  Idole  of  one  of  his  domeflicall  goddes  of  curious  woorkemanfliyppe.  Likewyfe
garlandes  of  flones  of  fundry  colours,  with  many  brefle  plattes,  brooches,  and  other  kyndes  of  ornamentes,  and
all  of  golde.  He  gaue  hym  furthermore  aboundaunce  of  delycate  meates  well  falted  and  poudred  with  fpices.
AVhen  he  had  required  owre  men  to  coome  alande,  he  commaunded  his  feruauntes  with  all  fpeede  to  prepare  a
great  multitude  of  branches  of  trees  and  to  waite  vppon  owre  men  to  his  pallayce.  As  they  went  thus  in  order,
fum  behynde  and  fum  before  on  bothe  fydes,  they  feemed  fo  to  fliadowe  owre  men  with  the  bouwes  as  thoughe
they  had  gonne  in  a  continuall  arbour.  The  kynge  hym  felfe  hauynge  a  fepter  in  his  hand,  dyd  fette  them  in
their  arraye,  and  fumtyme  {Irike  fuche  as  were  negligent  in  bearyng  their  bouwes.  They  fliewed  them  felues
obedient  in  all  thynges,  and  with  graue  countenaunce,  humbled  them  felues  to  receaue  his  flripes.  When  he
was  demaunded  where  he  had  fuche  plentie  of  golde,  he  pointed  with  his  fynger  to  the  next  mountaynes,  and  to
the  ryuers  defcendyng  from  the  fame.  They  are  fo  accuflomed  to  the  riuers  and  exercifed  in  fwymming,  that  it
is  al  one  to  them  to  Hue  in  the  water  and  on  the  lande.  When  they  defyre  to  gather  golde,  they  plunge  theym
felues  in  the  ryuers  and  brynge  from  the  bottome  therof,  bothe  their  handes  full  of  fande,  whiche  fyftynge  from
hande  to  hande,  they  gather  owte  the  graynes  of  golde.  And  by  this  meanes  in  the  fpace  of  twoo  houres,  they
fyll  a  reede  as  bygge  as  a  mannes  fynger.  Of  the  fweete  fauours  of  thefe  landes,  many  thinges  myght  be  fpoken,
the  whiche  bycaufe  they  make  rather  to  th[e]effeminatynge  of  the  myndes  of  men,  then  for  any  neceffarye
purpofe,  I  haue  thought  befl  to  omytte  them.  The  kynge  alfo  gaue  the  gouernour  a  younge  virgine  of  twelue
yeares  of  age,  adourned  with  ryche  and  fayre  iewelles.  Of  the  flones  whiche  he  had  of  this  kynge,  one  was
valued  at  twoo  thoufande  Caflellans  of  golde.  Thus  at  the  length  they  departed  from  this  kyng,  laden  with
golde  and  precious  floones.  Grifahia  the  gouernour,  fente  one  of  the  Carauelles  to  his  vncle  Diego  Velafquen
gouernour  of  the  Hande  of  Cuba,  with  meffengers  to  delyuer  hym  the  golde,  iewelles,  and  other  ornamentes.
The  refydue  in  the  meane  tyme  flyll  folowed  the  tracte  toward  the  Wefl.  One  of  them  in  the  whiche  Frauncis
INIontegius  the  vnder  gouernour  was  caryed,  fayled  harde  by  the  fhore:  and  the  other  twoo  kept  aloofe  within
profpecte  of  the  land.  Th[e]inhabitauntes  of  thefe  coafles  alfo,  no  leffe  marueylynge  at  the  fliyppes  then  dyd
the  other,  came  with  twelue  Canoas  to  Montegius,  defyringe  hym  by  th[e]interpretours  to  coome  alande,
promyfynge  in  the  name  of  their  kynge,  that  hee  fhoulde  be  honorably  enterteyned.  But  Montegious  anfwered
that  hee  coulde  not  affente  to  their  requefl  bycaufe  his  coompanions  were  fo  farre  from  hym.  Yet  dyd  he  gyue
them  certayne  of  owre  thynges  flraunge  vnto  them,  and  thankes  for  their  gentylneffe.  Shortly  after  efpyinge  a
great  towne  they  directed  their  courfe  thither.  Th[e]inhabitauntes  prohibyted  them  to  coome  alande,  and  came
foorthe  ageynfl.  them  with  bowes  and  quyuers  ful  of  arrowes,  brode  fwoordes  made  of  heauy  woode,  and
lauelens  hardned  at  the  ende  with  fier.  They  fhotte  at  owre  men  a  farre  of:  And  owre  men  difcharged
certeyne  pieces  of  ordinaunce  ageynft  them.  The  Barbarians  aflonyffhed  at  the  noyfe  of  the  gunnes,  fledde
amayne,  and  defyred  peace.  Here  owre  mens  vytayles  began  to  fayle  them,  and  theyr  fliyppes  were  broofed
with  longe  vyages.  Hauynge  therefore  founde  and  doone  thefe  thynges  whereof  we  haue  fpoken,  Grifahia
returned  to  the  Hande  of  Fernandina  well  contented,  but  fo  were  not  his  companions.  We  mufle  nowe  diuerte
fumwhat  from  this  matter,  and  fpeake  of  an  other  nauigation.  And  from  thenfe  wyll  we  returne  to  thefe  landes
which  owre  men  haue  founde.  So  it  is  therfore,  that  JJiegus  Velafquen  the  gouernour  of  the  Hand  of
Fertiandina,  about  the  fame  tyme  that  he  had  fent  foorth  this  nauie  of  foure  Caraueles,  he  prepared  an  other
nauigation  of  onely  one  Carauell  and  one  brygantine  with  fortie  and  fyue  men.  Thefe  exercifed  vyolent  handes
ageinft  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  thofe  regions  where  they  arryued,  thynkynge  that  they  myght  forceably  drawe  them
to  the  dyggynge  of  golde  bycaufe  they  were  Cafifranite  Idolaters  and  circumcifed.  There  are  at  the  fea  fyde  not
farre  from  the  fuppofed  continent,  many  lyttle  Handes  of  mofle  fortunate  and  frutefuU  foyle,  whereof  three  are
thus  named:  Guanapan,  Guatiguan,  and  Quitilla. Owte  of  one  of  thefe  (which  they  named  SanHa  Marina)  they

I  go

\0f  the  Landes  and  Ilaiides  lately  fotmde.~\ The  thyrde  Decade.

191

violentely  caried  away  three  hundreth  men  and  women  which  they  thrufl  into  the  Carauell  and  returned
immediatly  to  Fernatidi/ia,  leauynge  the  brigantine  with.  xxv.  of  theyr  felowes  to  th[e]intent  to  hunt  for  more  men.
The  hauen  where  the  Carauell  fyrfle  arryued,  is  cauled  Carenas,  beinge  diflante  from  the  angle  of  Cuba  and  the
chiefe  citie  of  Santiago,  two  hundreth  and  fyftie  myles.  For  this  Ilande  of  Cuba,  is  very  longe,  reachyng  in
length  from  the  Eafl.  to  the  Wefl,  and  fituate  directly  vnder  the  circle  cauled  Tropicus  Cancri  as  we  haue  fayde
before.  Now  fhall  you  heare  how  fortune  fought  the  reuenge  of  thefe  pee  wretches.  Therfore  as  theyr  kepers
went  aland  and  few  remained  in  the  Carauel,  they  perceuing  occafion  miniflred  wherby  they  myght  recouer  theyr
libertie,  foodeynely  fnatched  vp  owr  mens  weapons  and  flewe  fyxe  of  them  which  yet  remayned  in  the  Carauel,
whyle  the  refidue  lepte  into  the  fea.  And  by  this  meanes  the  Barbarians  poffeffed  the  Carauell  which  they  had
foone  learned  to  rule,  and  thus  returned  to  theyr  owne  countreys.  But  they  fayled  fyrfle  to  the  nexte  Ilande
where  they  burnte  the  Carauell  and  caried  away  the  weapons  with  them.  From  henfe  they  conueyed  them
felues  to  theyr  owne  countreys  with  the  Canoas  of  this  Ilande.  Heare  in  lyke  maner  they  pryuilie  affayled  them
that  were  lefte  with  the  brigantyne,  and  flewe  many  of  them  alfo.  The  refidue  that  efcaped,  fledde  to  the
brigantine  where  they  bewayled  theyr  felowes  deathes  and  counted  theyr  owne  efcape  a  victorie.  On  the  fhore
not  farre  from  the  place  where  they  fufifered  this  miffortune,  there  is  a  tree,  in  the  toppe  wherof  they  fet  vp  a
croffe,  and  graued  this  infcription  in  the  barke  of  the  tree :  Vannuis  Aldarieci.  There  is  a  ryuer  named  Darten,
on  the  banke  wherof  flandeth  the  chiefe  citie  of  the  fuppofed  continent.  The  gouemour  therfore  hauing
intelligence  herof,  fent  with  all  fpeede  two  fliippes  of  warre  well  furnyfhed,  to  the  ayde  of  them  that  were  lefte.
But  they  were  wyfe  to  late.  Yet  folowynge  the  viewe  of  the  croffe,  they  came  to  the  fhore  and  redde  the  letters
grauen  on  the  tree,  but  durfle  not  attempte  fortune.  Thus  with  all  theyr  hardie  fouldiers  departinge  from  henfe
with  defpayre,  they  fayled  to  the  nexte  Ilande,  out  of  the  which  they  caryed  away  by  violence  fyue  hundreth
men  and  women,  fuppofynge  lykewyfe  that  they  myght  lawfully  fo  doo  bycaufe  they  were  Idolaters  and
circumcifed.  But  the  like  chaunce  happened  vnto  them  when  they  landed  at  Feniafidina.  For  the  Barbarians
efpyinge  oportunitie,  fette  vppon  the  Spaniardes  in  one  of  the  fhippes  with  theyr  owne  weapons  and  flewe  theyr
keepers.  The  refidue  that  efcaped,  caflynge  them  felues  into  the  fea,  fwamme  to  the  nexte  carauell,  and  with
theyr  felowes  affayled  the  carauell  that  was  taken  from  them.  This  conflicte  was  fo  fharpe,  that  for  the  fpace
of  foure  houres,  it  was  doubtfull  whether  parte  fhulde  obteyne  the  victorie.  The  Barbarians  both  men  and
women  fought  verye  fiercely,  afwell  to  recouer  theyr  libertie,  as  alfo  to  holde  fafle  the  praye  whiche  they  had
gotten.  But  in  fine,  the  Spanyardes  had  the  vpper  hande  by  reafon  they  were  more  experte  in  handelynge  of
theyr  weapons  and  rulyng  of  theyr  Carauell.  The  Barbarians  beinge  thus  ouercoome,  lepte  into  the  fea :  but
the  Spanyardes  tooke  theym  ageyne  with  the  fliippe  boates.  About  a  hundreth  of  the  Barbarians  peryflied,
beinge  partely  drowned  and  partly  flayne  with  the  fwoorde:  And  but  fewe  of  the  Spanyardes.  Thefe  thynges
thus  pacified,  the  refydue  of  the  Barbarians  were  caryed  to  the  towne  of  Santiago  and  condemned  to  laboure
in  the  golde  mynes.  Shortly  after  they  made  owte  a  newe  vyage  to  an  other  of  the  Ilandes,  whiche  lye  there
about  fo  thicke,  that  they  commonly  caule  the  number  of  them  Archipelagus,  as  they  in  owre  fea  of  loniaim  are
cauled  Symplegades.  Here  owre  men  were  cruelly  handeled:  and  as  many  of  them  as  came  alande  eyther
flayne  or  wounded.  This  Ilande  they  named  Florida,  bycaufe  they  arryued  there  on  Eafter  day  whiche  the
Spanyardes  caule  the  floryfliynge  day  of  the  refurrection.  They  fay  alfo  that  in  this  tracte  they  fawe.  xxvi.
Ilandes  which  Colonus  had  ouerpaffed :  And  the  fame  fo  to  lye  aboute  Hifpaniola  and  Cuba,  as  though  they
warded  them  from  the  furie  of  the  Ocean.  In  many  of  thefe  they  founde  natiue  golde  of  lyke  goodnei  to  that
which  is  founde  in  Granatum.  Th[e]inhabitantes  alfo  weare  many  iewels,  and  haue  manv  Images  of  theyr
domeft-icall  goddes  made  both  of  golde  artificially  wrought  and  alfo  of  woodde  gylted.  Francis  Cheregatus
browght  one  of  theyr  Idoles  with  hym,  wherby  may  bee  confidered  of  what  wytte  and  aptenes  they  are.  It  is
a  maruelous  thynge  to  fee  what  maner  of  rafers  they  haue,  made  of  certeyne  yelowe  fl.ones  cleare  and
tranfparent  lyke  vnto  Cryfl.al.  With  thefe  they  fliaue  and  carue  as  though  they  were  made  of  fine  fleele.
When  the  edges  are  blunte  with  longe  exercife,  they  fliarpen  them  not  with  a  whetflone,  or  powder,  or  any  other
flone,  but  temper  them  onely  with  water.  They  haue  alfo  a  thoufande  kindes  of  inflrumentes  or  tooles  and
fuch  other  thynges  of  fyne  deuife,  which  were  to  longe  to  rehearfe.  Let  vs  therefore  returne  from  wherfe  we
haue  digreffed,  as  to  Cozumella,  lucatana,  Colluacana  or  Olloa,  beinge  al  landes  lately  founde,  and  fo  rich,
fruteful  and  pleafaunt,  that  they  may  in  maner  be  compared  to  the  earthly  Paradyfe.  Therfore,  after  that  it
was  knowen  to  owre  men  of  howe  greate  momente  thefe  tractes  were,  the  Spanyardes  which  inhabited  the
Ilande  of  Cuba  Anunctus  beinge  the  gouemour  of  the  Ilande  furnyflied  a  newe  nauie  of  ten  Carauelles  and  fyue
hundreth  menne,  with  twoo  fmaule  brigantines,  as  it  weare  in  the  fleade  of  lyght  horfemen  or  forenmners  whofe
ayde  they  myght  vfe  as  fcoutes  to  fearche  the  wayes  for  daunger  of  rockes  and  ftialow  fandes  or  fhelfes.  They
fliipte  alfo  certeyne  horfes,  as  fyue  fl-oned  horfes  and.  xvi.  mares  apte  for  the  warres.  For  their  generall
gouemour  and  Admiral  of  the  nauy,  they  elected  Fernando  Cortefius  who  at  that  tyme  was  the  chiefe  mler  of
the  citie  of  Santiago. For  vnder  capitaines,  they  appointed  Alfons  Portucarerius,  Francis  Montegius,  Alfons

Sanctiag;o  the
chiefe  citie  of
Cuba.

The  Barbarians
sleythe  Spaniarde
with  theyr  owne
weapons

The  chiefe  citie  of
the  supposed
continent

The  Spanyardes
are  slayne  ageyne
with  theyr  owne
wepons.

The  barbarians  are
slaine  and  put  to
flyght.

156

Another  vyage.

A  rchipelagvs.

A  multitude  of
Ilandes.

xxvi.  Ilandesabout
Hispaniola  and
Cuba.

Images  of  golde.

Rasers  of  stone.

Instnimentes  and
tooles.

Landes  lyke  \-nto
the  earthly
Paradyse.

An  other  %->-aj;e  of
X.  Carauels  and  v.
hundreth  men.

Horses  and  mare&

Fernando
Cortesius.

tgi

192

The  thyrdc  Decade. \0f  the  Landes  and  Ilandes  lately  foimde.\

The  Hand  of

CozumcUa.

Carpets  and
sheeces.
Innumerable
bokes.

Circumcised
Idolaters.

They  Sacrifice
Chyldren

157

The  Ilandes  of
Distam  and
Sestam.

Sacrifice  of  dogges.

They  are  soone
persuaded  to  owre
religion.

The  picture  of  the
blessed  Virgiue

An  other  vyage

Aquillaris,  vii.
yeares  captiue  in
the  Hand  of
lucatana.

Valdiuia.

The  shipwracke  of
Valdiuia.

Auila,  Aluerado  Spatenfe,  lohn  Velafquen  and  Diegiis  Ordajfus. They  flyll  folovved  the  fame  wynde  from  the

lafl.  angle  of  Cuba  toward  the  weft. As  foone  as Frauncis  Fernandes  of  Corduba,  and  then  lohn  Grifakia

came  within  profpccte  of  the  Ilande  of  Sacrifyces  (wherof  we  haue  made  mention  before)  foodenly  a  tempeft

of  contrary  wynde  prohibited  tlieyni  to  take  lande  and  droue  them  backewarde  to  Cozumclla  lyinge  on  the  Eaft

fyde  of  lucatana. Tins  IKantle  hath  onely  one  hauen  named  fointe  lohns  porte. And  hath  in  it,  onely  fyxe

townes. Alfo  none  otlier  water  then  in  welles  and  cefterns,  bycaufe  it  lacketh riuers  and  fpringes  by  reafon

it  is  plaine,  conteynynge  onely.  xlv.  myles  in  circuite. At  the  coommynge  of  owre  men,  th[e]inhabitauntes

tledde  to  the  thicke  woods,  and  forfoke  their  townes  for  feare. Owre  men  entered  into  their  houfes  where  they

founde  plentie  of  vyttayles  and  many  ornamentes  perteynynge  to  the  furnyfliynge  of  their  houfes,  as  hanginges

and  carpettes  of  dyuers  colours,  flieetes  alfo  of  goffampine  cotton  (whiche  they  caule  Amaccas)  and  muche

apparell. They  haue  furthermore  innumerable  bookes,  of  the  whiche  with  many  other  thinges  fente  to  owre

newe Emperour, we wyll fpeake  more  largely  hereafter. The  fouldiers  wandered  about  the Hand  and

viewe[d]  al  thynges  diligently,  kepyng  them  felqes  ftyll  in  battel!  raye  leaft  they  myght  be  fodenly  inuaded.

They  founde  but  a  fewe  of  th[e]inhabitauntes  and  onely one  woman  in  their  coompanie. By  th[e]inter-

pretours  of  Cuba  and  other  whiche  the  Spaniardes  tooke  fyrft  from  lucatana, they  perfwaded  the  woman

to  caule  the  kynges  that  were  abfente. They  came  gladly  and  made  a  leage  of  frendfliyp  with  owre  men,

wherby  they  were  reftored  to  their  houfes  and  a  great  parte  of  their  ftuffe. They  are  circumcifed  Idola-

tours,  and  facrifyce  children  of  bothe  kyndes  to  their  Zemes,  which  are  the Images  of  their  familiar  and

domefticall fpirites whiche they honour  as goddes. When I enquired of  Alaminus  the  pilote, alfo  of

Frances Montegius  and  Portucarcrius, from  whenfe  they  had  the  children  they  offered  in  facrifyce,  they

anfwered  that  they  bowght  them  in  the  Ilandes  thereaboute  by  exchaunge  for  golde  and  other  of  their  trafycke.

For  in  al  this  fo  large  a  fpace  of  land,  the  deuelyflie  anxietie  for  the  defyre  of  wicked  money,  hath  not  yet

oppreffed  th[e]inhabitantes. They  faye  the  fame  alfo  of  the  Ilandes  lately  founde,  wherof  two  are  named

DcJIain  and  SeJIam,  whofe  inhabitauntes  go  naked :  and  for  fcarceneffe  of  children,  facrifice  dogges  whiche  they

nourifhe,  afwell  for  that  purpofe  as  alfo  to  eate  as  wee  do  connies. Thefe  dogges  are  dumme  and  can  not  barke,

hauynge  fnowtes  lyke  vnto  foxes. Suche  as  they  deftinate  to  eate,  they  geld  while  they  are  whelpes,  wherby

they  waxe  very  fat  in  the  fpace  of  foure  monethes. They  referue  al  the  bytches  for  increafe,  and  but  fewe

dogges. Owre  men  difwaded  them  from  thefe  fuperftitions,  declarynge  how  they  were  abhonninable  and  detefted

of  god. They  were  foone  perfwaded  and  defyred  a  law  whiche  they  myght  folowe. Owre  men  therfore  declared

vnto  them  that  there  was  onely  one  god  which  made  heauen  and  earth,  the  geuer  of  al  good  thynges,  beyng  of

one  incomprehenfyble  fubflaunce  vnder  triplicitie  of  perfon. As  foone  as  they  harde  thefe  woordes,  they  broke

their  Zemes,  and  pared,  fcraped,  and  waflied  the  pauementes  and  waules  of  their  temples. Owre  men  gaue

them  a  painted  picture  of  the  bleffed  vyrgine  which  they  placed  reuerently  in  their  temple,  and  aboue  it  a  croffe

to  be  honored  in  the  remembraunce  of  god  and  man  and  the  faluation  of  mankynde. They  erected  alfo  an

other  great  croffe  of  woodde  in  the  toppe  of  the  temple,  whyther  they  oftentymes  reforte  togither  to  honour  the

Image  of  the  vyrgine. Th[e]inhabitantes  fignified  by  th[e]interpretours  that  in  the  Hand  of  lucatana  not  far

from  them,  there  were  feuen  Chriftians  captiues  which  in  tyme  paft  were  dryuen  thither  by  tempefte. The  Ilande

of  Cozumclla,  is  onely  fyue  miles  diftant  from  lucatana. The  gouernour  Cortefius  being  aduertifed  herof,

furnyfhed.  ii.  Carauels  with  fyftie  men,  Avyllyng  them  incontinent  to  direct  their  viage  thither  and  to  make  ferch

for  thefe  men. They  toke  with  them  thre  interpretours  of  Cozumclla  (whofe  language  agreeth  with  theirs)  with

letters  to  the  Chriftians  if  any  myght  be  found. He  further  declared  vnto  theym  howe  goodly  a  matter  they

fhulde  bringe  to  paffe  if  they  coulde  bringe  away  any  of  them. For  he  no  wayes  doubted  but  that  by  their

information,  he  fhuld  be  fully  certified  of  the  commodities  of  all  thofe  tractes,  and  the  maners  of  th[e]inhabi-

tauntes. Thus  they  departed  with  commaundement  to  retourne  within  the  fpace  of  fyxe  dayes. But  when  they

had  remayned  there  now.  viii.  days,  and  hard  no  woorde  of  their  Cozumellane  interpretours  whome  they  had

fent  alande  with  the  meffage  and  letters,  owre  men  returned  to  Cozumclla  without  them,  fufpectyng  that  they

were  other  flaine  or  deteyned. And  where  as  the  hole  nauye  was  now  determyned  to  depart  from  Cozumclla

but  that  they  were  hyndered  by  contrary  \vynde,  they  fodenly  efpied  towarde  the  wefte  a  Canoa  coommynge

from  lucatana,  and  in  it,  one  of  the  Chriftian  captiues  (named  Hieronitnus  Aquillaris)  who  had  lyued  feuen

yeares  in  that  Ilande. With  what  ioye  they  embrafed  the  one  the  other,  the  chance  may  declare. They  were

no  leffe  defyrous  to  heare,  then  he  to  tell  of  the  myffortune  whiche  befell  to  hym  and  his  coompanions. And  here

it  ftial  not  bee  greatly  from  my  purpofe  breefely  to  rehearfe  how  the  thynge  chaunced. In  my  Decades  I  haue

made  mention  of  a  certayne  noble  man  named  Valdiuia,  whome  the  Spanyardes  whiche  inhabited  Dariena  in

the  fuppofed  continente  of  the  goulf  of  Vraba,  fent  to  the  Hand  of  Hifpaniola  to  Colonus  the  Admiral  and  viceroy

with  the  refidue  of  the  Senate  and  counfel  there  (to  whom  perteyneth  the  redreffe  and  orderynge  of  all  thinges

in  thefe  newe  landes)  to  fygnifye  vnto  them  in  what  extreme  neceffitie  and  penurie  they  lyued. Vnhappy

Valdiuia  therfore,  takynge  this  matter  in  hand  in  an  euell  houre,  was  with  a  fudden  and  vyolent  whirlewinde

IQ2

{Of  the  Landes  and  Ilartdes  lately  fofCJide.'] The  thyrde  Decade.

193

dryuen  vppon  certayne  quickefandes  in  the  profpecte  of  the  Ilande  oi  Jamaica,  lyinge  in  the  Southe  fyde  of
IHfpa?iiola  and  Cuba.  Thefe  blind  and  fvvalowyng  fandes,  the  Spaniardes  caule  vypers:  And  that  by  good
reafon,  bycaufe  in  them  many  Hiyppes  are  entangled,  as  the  lycertes  are  implycate  in  the  tayles  of  the
vipers.  While  the  Carauell  thus  wrefleled  with  the  water,  it  was  fo  brufle  in  funder,  that  Valdiiiia  with
thirtie  of  his  felowes,  coulde  fcarfcly  with  muche  difficultie  defcende  into  the  fliyppe  boate:  where,  without
oers,  and  without  fayles,  they  were  caried  awaye  by  the  vyolence  of  the  water.  For  (as  we  haue  faid
before  in  owre  Decades)  the  feas  do  runne  there  continually  wiih  a  vyolent  courfe  towarde  the  Well.
They  wandered  thus.  xiii.  dayes  not  knowyng  whyther  they  went  nor  yet  fyndynge  any  thyng  to  eate.  Famen
confumed  feuen  of  them  whiche  were  cade  in  the  fea  to  feede  the  fyfhes.  The  refydue  lykewife  in  maner
confumed  by  famen  and  faulynge  from  one  calamitie  into  an  other,  were  driuen  to  lHcata7ia  and  fell  into  the
handes  of  a  cruell  kynge  who  flewe  Valdiuia  the  gouernour  with  certayne  of  his  felowes.  And  when  hee  had
fyrfl  facrifyced  them  to  his  Zemes,  Ihortely  after  he  eate  them  with  his  frindes  of  that  confpiracie.  For  they  eate
onely  their  enemyes  and  flraungiers :  And  doo  otherwife  ablleyne  from  mannes  fleflie.  In  this  meane  tynie,
while  Hieronvmis  Aquillaris  with  fyxe  of  his  felowes  were  referued  to  be  facrifyced  the  thirde  daye,  they
brooke  their  bandes,  efcaped  the  handes  of  that  cruell  tyranne,  and  fledde  to  an  other  kynge  beynge  his
enernye,  who  receaued  them,  yet  onely  as  bondemen.  It  is  a  flraunge  thinge  to  heare  of  the  moother  of  this
Aquillaris.  For  as  foone  as  fhe  harde  that  her  foonne  was  faulen  into  the  handes  of  the  nations  that  eate
mannes  flefhe,  fhee  fell  madde  incontinent:  So  that  when  fo  euei  after,  fhee  fawe  any  meate  roflyng  at  the
fyer,  or  onely  ready  fpytted  to  laye  to  the  fyer,  fhee  ceafed  not  to  crye  out  in  this  maner.  O  me  mofle
wretched  moother:  Behold  the  members  of  my  fon.  But  to  returne  to  owre  purpofe.  When  Aquillaris  had
now  receaued  the  gouernours  letter  fente  by  the  Cozumellane  meffengers,  hee  declared  to  the  kynge  his  mayfler
(whofe  name  was  Taxmarus)  what  was  their  erraunt  thither,  and  wherfore  they  were  fent :  vfyng  in  the  meane
tyme  many  large  difcourfes  in  expreffynge  the  great  poure  and  magnifycence  of  their  kynge  who  had  of  late
aniued  in  thofe  coafles.  Alfo  of  their  humanitie  and  gentilneffe  toward  their  frindes  and  fuche  as  fubmytted
them  felues  to  them,  and  againe  their  rygour  and  fierceneffe  ageynfl  fuche  as  floobernly  eyther  contemned  them
or  denyed  their  requefl.es.  With  thefe  woordes  he  broughte  Taxmarus  into  fuche  feare,  that  the  maifl.er  was
now  fayne  to  defyre  his  feruaunt  fo  to  handell  the  matter  that  they  myght  quyetly  enter  into  his  dominion  as
his  freendes  and  not  as  his  enemies.  Aquillaris  promifed  in  their  behalfe  that  they  fhuld  not  onely  coome  in
peace,  but  alfo  to  ayde  hym  ageynfl  his  enemyes  if  neede  fhulde  fo  require.  Whervppon  hee  difmifled
Aquillaris  and  with  hym  three  of  his  familiers  and  coompanions.  Thus  they  fayled  together  from  Cozumella  to
lucatana  to  the  ryuer  whiche  they  had  founde  before  in  the  fyrfl.e  vyage  thither  by  the  gouernance  of  Alaminus
the  pilot.  They  found  the  mouthe  of  the  ryuer  flopped  with  fande,  as  wee  reade  of  the  ryuer  of  Nilus  in
Egipte  when  the  wyndes  (cauled  Etejii)  blowe  in  fummer  and  efpecially  in  the  canicular  dayes.  Therfore
where  as  they  coulde  not  enter  into  the  ryuer  with  the  biggefl.e  veffelles  (although  it  bee  otherwife  apte  to
receaue  great  fliyppes)  the  gouernour  caufed  two  hundreth  men  to  be  fette  aland e  with  the  brigantynes  and
fhyppe  boates:  wyllynge  Aquillaris  to  offer  peace  to  th[e]inhabitauntes.  They  demaunded  what  owre  men
required.  Aquillaris  anfwered,  vyttayles.  There  was  a  longe  fpace  of  fande  by  the  fyde  of  the  towne,  whither
they  wylled  them  to  reforte,  promyfynge  to  brynge  them  vyttayles  thither  the  daye  folowynge.  0\\Te  men
wente  and  they  came  accordynge  to  their  promiffe  and  brought  with  them  eyght  of  their  hennes  beynge  as
bygge  as  peacockes,  of  brownyfhe  coloure,  and  not  inferiour  to  peacockes  in  pleafaunte  taft.  They  brought
alfo  as  muche  bread  made  of  Maizium  (whiche  is  a  graine  not  muche  vnlyke  vnto  panyke)  as  wolde  fcarceiy
ferae  tenne  hungry  men :  And  here  with  defyred  them  to  depart.  But  when  they  perceaued  that  owTe  men
made  no  haft  away,  immediately  there  came  a  great  coompanye  of  armed  men  towarde  theym  demaundyng
what  they  had  to  do  thus  to  wander  in  other  mennes  landes.  Owr  men  made  anfwere  by  Aquillaris,  that  they
defyred  peace,  vyttayles,  and  golde  for  exchaunge  of  other  thinges.  They  anfwered  ageyne,  that  they  wolde
nother  peace  nor  warre  with  them.  But  threatned  them  to  auoyde  the  lande  excepte  they  woolde  bee
difl-royed  euery  manne.  Owre  men  fayde  that  they  woulde  not  departe  withowte  fuffyciente  vyttayles  to
mayntayne  their  fouldyers.

They  appoynted  the  day  foloAvynge  to  brynge  them  more  vytayles:  but  they  brooke  prom^lTe.  Yet
perceauing  the  fecond  day  that  owre  men  were  encamped  on  the  fande  and  had  repofed  there  that  nyght,
they  brought  them  as  much  more  vytayles,  and  commaunded  them  in  the  name  of  theyr  kynge  to  departe
Owre  men  fayde  that  they  were  defyrous  to  fee  the  towne,  and  to  haue  yet  more  ilore  of  vytayles.  The  Bar-
barians denyed  theyr  requefl,  and  therwith  departed  whifperynge  and  mutterynge  amonge  them  felues.  In  the
meane  tyme  owre  men  were  flyll  fo  oppreffed  with  hunger  that  they  were  enforced  to  feeke  for  meate.  The
gouernouie  therefore  fent  his  vnder  capitaynes  to  lande  with  a  hundreth  and  fyftie  men.  As  they  went  difperfed
in  dyuers  companyes  about  the  v)11ages  of  the  countrey,  the  Barbarians  met  with  one  of  theyr  bandes,  and  put

But  when  theyr  felowes  bcinge  not  farre  from  them,  harde  the  noyfe  of  theyr  alarome,

them  to  great  diflreffe

Eden.

The  quickesandes
cauled  vyjitrv

The  course  of  the
sea  towarde  the
west.

158

Valdiuia  is
sacrificed  to
Idoles.

Howe  Aquillaris

escaped

Kynge  Taxmarus.

The  mouth  uf  a
r>uer  stopped  with
sandew

Turky  hcit

159

R

A  cumlicle.

«o.^

194

T/ic  tliyrdc  Decade. \0f  the  Laudes  and  Ilaudes  lately  J  ouHde.\

The  Barbarians
are  put  to  flyght.

The  great  towne  of

Potanchaiia  or

Victoria.

A  towne  of  xxv.

thousand  houses.

Gunnesand  horses.

The  man  and  the
horse,  thoueht  to
be  one  bea^t.
Centaurus.

Palaices  of
maruelous  bygnes
and  wel  buylded.

They  leceue  owre
rchgion.

160

A  towne  of  a
thousand  and  fyue
hundred  houses.

they  came  with  all  pollible  hade  to  theyr  refcuc.  The  gouernour  on  the  other  fyde,  placinge  hi.s  ordinance  in
the  brygantines  and  fliippe  boates,  approched  to  the  llioro  with  the  refidue  of  his  fouldiers.  The  Barbarians
lykewife,  beinge  redy  furnynicd  to  the  battayle,  came  runnynge  to  the  fea  fyde  to  diflurbe  theym  that  they
fliulde  not  coome  alande :  And  with  theyr  arrowes,  wounded  manye  a  farre  of  vnprepared.  The  gouernoure
difchargod  aboute.  xx.  pieces  of  ordinaunce  ageynlle  them :  With  the  flaughter  and  terrible  thunder  wherof,  and
with  the  flame  of  fyer  and  fmel  of  brimdcne,  they  were  fo  aftoniflied  and  put  to  fuch  feare,  that  they  fled  and
difparcled  lyke  w-ylde  beafl.es :  whom  owre  men  perfuinge,  entered  the  towne  which  th[e]inhabitantes  forfooke
in  maner  for  feare  of  theyr  owne  men  whom  they  fawe  fo  difmayde.  On  the  banke  of  this  ryuer  there  is  a
towne  of  fuch  portentous  byggenes  as  I  dare  not  fpeake.  But  Alamimis  the  pylot,  fayth  that  it  contcyncth  in
circuite  fyuc  hundreth  myles,  and  that  it  confilleth  of.  xxv.  thoufande  houfes.  Sume  make  it  fumwhat  leffe:
But  they  all  agree  that  it  is  exceadynge  great  and  notable.  The  houfes  are  diuided  with  gardens,  and  are
buylded  of  lyme  and  flone  verye  artificially  and  of  cunnynge  woorkemanfliippe.  To  theyr  haules,  chambers,
parlers,  or  other  places  of  habitation,  they  afcende  by  tenne  or  twelue  fleares:  And  haue  certeyne  fpaces  betwene
euery  houfe :  fo  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  any  to  lade  his  neighbours  waulcs  with  rafters  or  beames.  Theyr  houfes
are  feparate  one  from  an  other  by  the  fpace  of  three  houfes :  And  are  for  the  more  parte  couered  with  reede
and  thetche:  And  many  alfo  with  flate  or  other  flone.  The  barbarians  them  felucs  confeffcd  that  they  were
that  day  fortie  thoufande  men  at  the  battayle,  which  were  vanquiflied  of  a  fewe  by  reafon  of  the  newe  and
vnknowen  kynde  of  feyght  with  gunnes  and  horfes.  For  the  gouernour  had  vnbarked.  xvi.  horfes  which  were
alfo  at  the  battayle,  and  fo  fiercely  alTayled  the  Barbarians  on  the  backehalfe,  that  they  brake  theyr  array  and
fcattered  them  as  it  had  byn  flockes  of  flieepe,  ouerthrowing,  woundynge,  and  kyllynge  them  on  euery  fyde.
Whiche  thynge  the  feely  wretches  fo  imputed  to  a  miracle,  that  they  had  not  the  poure  to  occupie  theyr  wepons.
For  wheras  before  they  had  neuer  feene  any  horfes,  they  thought  that  the  man  on  horfebacke  and  the  horfe,
had  byn  all  one  beafl.e,  as  the  antiquitie  dyd  fable  of  the  monfler  Centaurus.  Owr  men  poffeffed  the  towne.
xxii.  dayes  where  they  made  good  chere  vnder  couert,  whyle  the  owners  of  the  houfes  lay  vnder  the  firmament
and  durfl  not  aflayle  owre  men  who  had  placed  them  felues  in  the  flrongefl.  parte  of  the  towne,  where  fume
kepte  continuall  watche  (leafl  the  Barbarians  fliulde  foodenly  inuade  theim)  whyle  other  gaue  them  felues  to
refl.e  and  fleepe.  Th[e]inhabitantes  caule  this  towne  Potanchana :  But  owre  men  for  the  victorie  which  they
obteyned  here,  named  it  Victoria.  It  is  a  maruelous  thynge  to  confider  the  greatenes,  magnificence  and  finenes
of  the  buyldinge  of  certeyne  palaices  they  haue  in  the  countrey  to  the  which  they  reforte  fumtymes  for  theyr
folace  and  pafl.yme.  Thefe  are  curioufly  buylded  with  many  pleafaunt  diuifes,  as  galeries,  folars,  turrettes,
portals,  gutters  with  chambers  boorded  after  the  maner  of  owre  waynfcotte  and  well  flowred.  Foure  of  owr
Spanyardes  went  into  one  of  them  of  fuch  greatnes,  that  they  wandered  in  the  fame  for  the  fpace  of  foure  houres
before  they  coulde  fynde  the  waye  owt.  At  the  length  by  th[e]interpretours  and  certeyne  captiues  owre  men
fent  for  the  kynge  and  fuche  rulers  as  were  nexte  vnder  hym  in  autoritie,  wyllyng  them  to  fubmyt  them  felues  and
to  coome  into  the  towne  vnarmed.  Gyuinge  the  meffengers  further  in  commaundement  to  certifie  them  that  in
their  fo  doinge,  they  wolde  commen  with  them  as  concernynge  conditions  of  peace,  and  reflore  them  theyr
towne.  They  came  gladly,  and  entered  euery  man  into  his  owne  houfe  vppon  condition  that  they  fhulde  euer
thereafter  abfleyne  from  fuch  cerimonies  and  horrible  facrifices  of  mans  flefhe  to  deuils  the  mortal  enemies  to
mankynd,  whofe  Images  they  honoured.  And  to  directe  the  eyes  of  theyr  myndes  to  Chrifl,e  owre  god  the  maker
of  heauen  and  earth,  who  was  borne  into  this  world  of  a  virgin,  and  fuffered  death  on  the  croffe  for  the
reflemption  of  mankynde.  And  fynally  to  profeffe  them  felues  fubiectes  to  the  great  Chriflian  kynge  of  Spayne.
They  promyfed  both,  and  were  inflructed  as  farre  as  the  fliortenes  of  tyme  wolde  permitte.  Beinge  thus
reflored,  they  recompenfed  owre  men  with  many  rewardes:  Suppofynge  fuche  men  to  be  fent  from  heauen,
which  being  fo  fewe  in  number,  durfl.  attempte  battayle  ageynfl.  fo  great  a  multitude.  They  gaue  owre  men
alfo  certeyne  golde  and  twentie  flaues.  Departing  therefore  from  henfe,  and  coaflynge  flyll  alonge  by  the
fame  fhore,  they  came  ageyne  to  the  goulfe  whiche  A/amifuis  the  pylot  founde  before  vnder  Grifalua.  This
they  named  Biaii  Sandi  lohannis,  that  is,  Saynt  lohns  goulfe :  For  Bia?i  in  the  Spanyfhe  tonge  lignifieth  a
goulfe.  Here  th[e]inhabitantes  reforted  to  them  peaceably.  Aboute  a  myle  frome  the  fliore,  was  a  towne  of
a  thoufande  and  fyue  hundreth  houfes  fituate  vppon  a  hyll.  They  profered  owre  men  halfe  the  towne  if  they
wolde  dwel  with  them  for  euer.  This  perhaps  they  dyd  the  rather  eyther  fearynge  th[e]exemple  of  th[e]in-
habitantes  of  Potanchana,  the  fame  wherof  myght  haue  coome  to  theyr  eares,  or  els  hopynge  that  vnder  the
fhadowe  of  fuche  valiant  menne,  they  myght  obteyne  ayde  and  fuccour  ageynfl  theyr  enemies  and  bortherers.
For  (as  I  haue  fayde  before)  they  dyflroye  one  an  other  with  continuall  warre  for  the  defyre  to  inlarge  theyr
dominions.  Owre  men  refufed  perpetuall  habitacion,  and  accepted  theyr  frendely  profer  for  a  tyme.  As  they
came  alande,  the  people  folowed  them  on  euery  fyde  with  bouwes  in  theyr  handes  which  they  helde  ouer  owre
mens  heades  to  defende  them  from  the  rayne  as  though  they  had  walked  in  a  continual  arbour.  Here  tney
encamped. And  leafl.  the  refidue  lefte  in  the  Ihippes,  fliulde  in  the  nieane  tyme  waxe  flothefuU  with  Idlencs,

\0f  the  Landes  and  Ilandes  lately  founde7\ The  thyrde  Decade.

195

the  gouernour  gaue  commaundement  to  Alaminus  the  pylot  and  Francis  Montegius  to  fearch  the  wefl  partes
of  that  lande,  whyle  he  reheued  the  weried  fouldiers  and  healed  fuche  as  were  wounded.  To  them  that  went
forward  on  this  vyage,  he  affigned  two  brigantines  with  fiftie  men.  Vnto  this  goulfe,  the  courfe  of  the  water
was  gentyl  enough  and  moderate.  But  when  they  had  fayled  a  lyttle  further  towarde  the  Wefle,  they  founde
the  fea  runnynge  with  fo  fwift  a  courfe  as  if  it  were  a  great  ryuer  faulynge  from  the  tops  of  hygh  mountaynes :
In  fo  much  that  in  a  (horte  fpace  of  tyme  it  caried  them  fiftie  myles  from  theyr  felowes.  When  they  were  now
entered  into  this  violent  flreame  of  the  water,  they  fawe  on  their  left  hand  a  large  playne  fea  which  mette  with
the  courfe  of  the  other  waters  faulynge  from  the  wefle.  And  lyke  as  two  great  ryuers  that  runne  contrary
wayes,  make  a  vehement  conflycte  where  they  meete,  fo  feemed  the  waters  commyng  from  the  Southe  to  refyfl
thefe  waters  as  enemyes  that  had  entered  into  the  ryght  or  poffeffyon  of  an  other.  On  the  contrary  parte,  they
fawe  the  lande  reachynge  farre  bothe  on  the  lefte  hande  and  on  the  ryght.  In  this  flrife  betwene  the  waters,
they  were  fo  toffed  on  bothe  fydes  and  entangled  with  whirlepooles,  that  they  longe  wreflled  with  owte  hope
of  lyfe.  At  the  length  with  muche  difficultie,  turnynge  the  flemmes  or  forpartes  of  their  fhyppes  ageynfl  the
flreame  from  whenfe  they  came,  and  labourynge  al  that  they  myght  with  their  oers  and  fayles,  they  coulde
fcarfely  ouercoome  the  rage  of  the  water :  In  fo  much  that  where  as  they  thought  that  they  had  in  one  nyght
fayled  twoo  myles,  they  founde  that  they  were  dryuen  backe  foure  myles.  Yet  at  the  length  with  goddes
helpe,  they  ouercame  this  daungerous  conflycte.  They  fpente.  xxii.  daies  in  this  lyttle  fpace  of  fea :  And  when
they  were  nowe  returned  to  their  felowes,  declared  vnto  them  that  that  ende  was  the  land  of  CoUuacana  whiche
they  adiudged  to  be  parte  of  the  fuppofed  continent.  The  lande  whiche  they  fawe  a  farre  of  before  their
fafe,  they  fuppofed  eyther  to  be  annexed  to  owre  continent,  or  to  bee  ioyned  to  the  large  North  regions
cauled  Baccalaos,  wherof  we  haue  made  mention  in  owr  Decades  in  the  vyage  of  Sebaflian  Cabote.
This  matter  is  yet  doubtefull.  But  wee  trufle  it  fhall  once  bee  better  knowen.  While  Alaminus  and
Montegius  fearched  thefe  fecreates,  the  kynge  of  the  prouince  (whofe  name  was  Multoxumajti)  fent  owre
men  by  one  of  his  chiefe  offycers  (beynge  alfo  his  Lieuetenaunt  of  the  fayde  towne)  many  rjxhe  and
goodly  prefentes  of  golde,  fyluer,  and  precious  floones,  fette  and  wroughte  after  a  marueylous  flraunge
deuyfe  and  with  no  leffe  cunnynge  woorkemanfhyp.  Here  they  determined  to  fende  meffengiers  to  owre
newe  Emperour  to  knowe  his  pleafure  that  they  myght  in  this  prouince  plant  a  nevve  colonie  or  habita-
tion. And  this  dyd  they  withowte  th[e]aduife  of  Diegus  Velafquen  the  gouernour  of  the  Hand  of  Cuba
Fernandina,  who  fyrde  fente  them  foorth  with  commaundement  to  returne  ageyne  after  they  had  fearched  thefe
regions  and  obteyned  plentie  of  golde.  While  they  confulted  hereof,  they  were  of  dyuers  opinions.  But  the
mofle  part  alleaged  that  in  this  cafe  it  was  not  requifyte  to  make  the  gouernour  of  their  counfaile.  Forafmuche
as  the  matter  fliulde  be  referred  to  a  higher  ludge,  as  to  the  kyng  of  Spaine  him  felfe.  When  they  were  thus
agreed,  they  receaued  vyttayles  of  the  gentle  kyng  of  the  prouince,  and  affigned  the  place  of  their  colonie  twelue
myles  from  the  fayde  towne,  in  a  fruteful  and  holfome  foyle.  For  their  generall  gouernour,  they  elected
Cortcfnis  the  gouernour  of  the  nauye,  againfl  his  wyll  as  fum  faye.  For  other  magiflrates  to  goueme  the  citie
which  they  intended  to  build  he  choofe  Portucarerius  and  Montegius  of  whome  we  haue  made  mention  before.
They  chofe  alfo  certeyne  meffengiers  to  fende  to  the  kyng  by  the  conduction  of  Alaminus  the  pylot.
Furthermore,  foure  of  the  princes  of  this  prouince  offered  them  felues  wyllyngly  to  go  with  owre  men  into
Spaine  to  th[e]intent  to  fee  owre  landes  and  that  kynge  whofe  poure  is  foo  great  and  whofe  auctoritie  reacheth
fo  farre.  They  brought  lykewife  two  women  with  them,  which  ferued  and  obeied  them  in  all  thinges  after  the
maner  of  theyr  countrey.  The  people  of  this  nation  is  of  broune  or  yelowyfhe  colour.  Bothe  the  nien  and  the
women  haue  pendauntes  of  gold  and  precious  ilones  hanginge  at  their  eares.  The  men  alfo,  boore  their  nether
lyppes  full  of  holes  from  the  vppermode  parte  of  the  lyppe  euen  vnto  the  nethermofle  parte  of  the  gumme.  At
thefe  they  hange  certeyne  rynges  and  plates  of  golde  and  fyluer  faflned  to  a  fmaule  and  thynne  plate  lyinge
within  betwene  the  lippe  and  the  gumme.  At  the  byggefl  hole  in  the  myddeft  of  the  lip,  there  hangeth  a
rounde  plate  of  fyluer  as  brode  as  the  coyne  cauled  a  Corolyne,  and  as  thicke  as  a  mannes  fynger.  I  do  not
remember  that  euer  I  fawe  any  thynge  that  feemed  more  fylthy  in  myne  eye.  Yet  do  they  thynke  that  there  is
nothing  more  cumly  vnder  the  circle  of  the  moone.  Wherby  we  may  fee  howe  vainely  mankynde  wandereth
in  his  owne  blyndneffe.  The  Ethiopian  thincketh  the  blacke  colour  to  be  fayrer  then  the  white :  And  the  white
man  thinketh  otherwife.  They  that  are  pouled,  thinke  that  more  decent  then  to  weare  a  bufli  and  they  that
weare  beardes,  iudge  it  a  deformitie  to  be  fhauen.  As  appetite  therfore  moueth,  and  not  as  reafon  perfwadeth,
men  nmne  after  vanities :  And  euery  prouynce  is  ruled  by  their  owne  fenfe,  as  writeth  faint  lerome.  From
whenfe  they  haue  their  golde,  we  haue  fpoken  fufficiently  before.  But  as  owre  men  marueyled  where  they  had
their  fyluer,  they  fliewed  them  certayne  highe  mountaynes  whiche  are  continually  couered  with  fnowe  fauynge
that  at  certeyne  tymes  of  the  yeare,  the  onely  toppes  are  feene  bare  bicaufe  the  fnow  is  there  molten  by  reafon
of  the  thicke  and  warme  cloudes.  The  playnes  therfore,  or  mylde,  fofte,  and  pleafaunt  mountaynes  feerne  to
brynge  foorthe  golde :  And  the  rough  craggye  mountaynes  with  their  coulde  valleyes,  are  the  places  where  fyluer

An  other  vyage  of
two  brygantines
and  Bflie  men.

Where  the  sea
runneth  swyftly
from  the  East  to
the  West.

A  conflict  betwene
the  waters
comming  from  the
west  and  from  the
south.

A  dangerous  and
peinefull  vyage.

The  land  of
CoUuacana.

The  land  of
Baccaleos  or
Baccalearum

Rych  presentes  of
golde  and  precious
stones.

161

A  newe  colonic.

This  Cortesius
hath  written  a
booke  of  these
thinges

They  weare  rynges

and  plates  at  ther
lyppes.

The  dyuers
phantasies  of  men.

Syluer

Note  where  gold
and  syluer  arc
engendered.

»9S

196

The  thyrdc  Decade. \0f  the  haudcs  and  Uaiuies  hitely  fouude7\

I  thinke  this  Irtton
to  be  sum  kynde
of  pure  copper,  or
els  copper  that
holdeth  golde.  For
laton  is  an  nrtifici.il
metal,  and  hath  no
naturall  myna

Theyr  bokes

162

Theyr  letters

What  is  conteyned
in  theyr  buokes.

Temples  rychly
adoumed.

Prayer.

They  sacrj'fice
chyldren  .and
captlues.

A  wronge  way  to
heauen

Bluddy  gods

Villa  Ricca.
Siuilla  Noua.

The  force  of  an
owlde  errour.

Theyr  priests  lyue
chast.

Faggots  of  bones.

is  engendered.  They  haue  alfo  laton,  wherof  they  make  fuch  maces  and  hammers  as  arc  vfed  in  the  warrcs.
Dvggynge  mattockes  alfo,  and  fpadcs:  for  they  haue  nother  Iren  nor  fleele.  But  lette  vs  nowe  fpcake  of  the
prefentes  fente  into  Spayne  to  the  kyng:  and  fyrfle  of  the  bokes.  Thefe  procuratours  thcrfore  of  the  newe
colonic  of  the  prouynce  of  Colluacana,  emong  other  their  prefentes,  brought  alfo  a  gi'cat  number  of  bookes,  the
Icaucs  wherof  are  made  of  the  inner  ryndes  or  barkes  of  trees,  thinner  then  eyther  that  of  the  elmc  or  of  the
falowe.  Thefe  they  fmcre  or  annoint  with  the  pytchc  of  molten  Bitumen,  and  while  they  be  fofte,  extend  them
to  what  forme  them  lyflcth.  When  they  be  coulde  and  harde,  they  rubbe  them  oucr  with  a  certeyne  playfter.
It  is  to  bee  thoughte  that  they  beate  the  playder  into  fine  floure,  and  fo  tcmperyngc  it  with  fum  byndynge
moiller,  to  make  a  crufle  therwith  vppon  the  leaues,  wheron  they  wryte  with  any  fliarpe  inflrument,  and  blotte
the  fame  againe  with  a  fpunge  or  fum  fuche  other  thynge,  as  marchaunt  men  and  noble  mens  flewardcs  are
accuftomed  to  do  with  their  wrytynge  tables  made  of  the  woodde  of  fygge  trees.  The  leaues  of  their  bokes
are  not  fet  in  order  after  the  maner  of  owres,  but  arc  extended  many  cubettes  in  length.  The  matters
whiche  they  wryte,  are  conteyned  in  fcjuare  tables:  Not  loofe,  but  fo  bounde  togither  with  the  toughe
and  flexible  cley  cauled  Bitininn,  that  they  feenie  lyke  woodden  tables  whiche  had  byn  vnder  the  handes
of  cunnyng  bokebyndcrs.  Which  way  fo  euer  the  booke  lyeth  open,  there  are  two  leaues  feene  and  two  fydes
written,  with  as  many  lyinge  hyd  vnder  them,  excepte  the  booke  be  vnfouldcd  in  length.  For  vnder  one  leafe
there  are  many  leaues  ioyned  togyther.  The  formes  of  their  letters  are  nothynge  lyke  vnto  owres.  But  are
muche  more  crooked  and  entangeled,  lyke  vnto  fyfliehookes,  knottcs,  fnares,  flarres,  dife,  fyles,  and  fuche  other
muche  lyke  vnto  the  Egiptian  letters,  and  written  in  lynes  lyke  vnto  owres.  Here  and  there  bctwene  the
lynes,  are  pictured  the  fliapes  of  men  and  dyucrs  beafles:  And  cfpecially  the  Images  of  kynges  and  other  noble
men.  Wherby  it  is  to  be  thought  that  in  fuche  bookes,  the  factes  of  their  kynges  are  conteyned  as  wee  fee  the
lyke  emonge  vs  howe  owre  printers  expreffe  the  fumme  of  hiflories  in  pictures,  that  men  may  therby  be  the
more  allured  to  bye  fuche  bookes.  The  couerynges  of  their  bookes  are  alfo  artifycially  wrought  and  paynted.
When  they  are  fluitte,  they  feeme  to  differre  nothynge  from  owres  in  forme.  In  thcfe  bookes  are  furthermore
comprehended  their  lawcs,  rytes  of  ceremonies  and  facrifyces,  annotations  of  Aftronomie,  accomptes,  compu-
tations of  tymes,  with  the  maner  of  grafifynge,  fowyng,  and  other  thynges  perteinyng  to  hufbandry.  They
begynne  the  yeare  from  the  goynge  downe  of  the  feuen  flarres  cauled  Vcrgilice  or  Pleiades:  And  counte  theyr
monethes  accordyng  to  the  moones.  They  name  a  moneth,  Tona,  of  the  moone.  For  in  theyr  language,  they
caule  the  moone  Tona,  they  reken  the  dayes  by  the  foonnes.  Thcrfore  as  many  daics  as  they  name,  they  fayc,
fo  many  foonnes.  The  foonne  in  their  tonge,  is  cauled  Tonatico.  They  deflribute  the  yeare  (without  any
reafon  why)  into  twentic  monethes:  And  the  moneth  into  as  many  dayes.  The  temples  whiche  they  frequent,
they  adoume  with  golden  hangynges  and  other  ornamentes  of  golde  and  fyluer  with  precious  flones  intermixte.
At  the  fpringe  of  the  daye,  they  perfume  their  temples  with  frankenfence  and  make  their  praiers  before  they
take  m  hande  any  other  bufyneffc.  But  oh  horrible  crueltie.  For  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  all  thefe  tractes  alfo,
doo  facrifyce  children  to  their  Idoles  in  lyke  maner  as  wee  haue  fayde  before.  At  fuche  tyme  as  the  feedes
lye  in  the  ground,  and  when  the  corne  begynneth  to  fliewc  foorth  the  care,  they  deflinctte  to  their  Zemes  fuche
bondmen  as  they  haue  bought,  or  fuche  captiues  as  they  haue  taken  in  the  warres,  which  they  facrifyce  after
that  they  haue  made  them  great  chicre  and  decked  them  in  precious  apparell.  Alfo  before  they  facrifyce  thefe
poore  wretches,  they  lead  them  about  the  towne  whyle  al  the  people  falute  them  humbly  and  reuercntly,
afifyrmyng  that  in  fliorte  fpace,  they  fhalbe  receaued  into  the  coompanye  of  the  goddes.  They  honour  their
Zemes  with  an  other  fliarp  kind  of  deuotion:  For  they  lette  them  felucs  bluddc,  eyther  in  the  tonge,  lyps,  cares,
legges,  thyghes,  or  brefl,  which  they  take  in  their  handes  and  hurlc  it  vppe  towarde  heauen,  foo  that  with  the
faulc  therof  the  pauement  of  the  temple  is  all  fparcled  with  bludde,  wherby  they  thincke  that  their  goddes  are
well  pleafed.  From  the  newe  colonic  (cauled  Villa  Ricca)  nync  myles  diflante,  there  is  a  towne  of.  xv.
thoufande  houfes,  whiche  th[e]inhabitauntes  caule  Cemobal,  but  owre  men  named  it  Sybilla.  The  kynge  of
this  towne  had  fyue  men  whiche  he  referued  to  be  facrifyced.  Whom  when  owre  men  wold  haue  dclyuered,
the  kynge  made  humble  rcquefl  to  them,  fayinge  that  if  they  tooke  awaye  fuche  men  as  he  had  confecrated  to
be  offered  to  the  goddes,  they  fhulde  brynge  vtter  deflruction  to  hym  and  all  his  kyngdomc.  For  if  owre
facrifyces  (fayd  he)  do  ceafe,  owre  Zemes  wyll  take  fuche  difpleafure  with  vs  that  they  wyll  fuffer  owre  come,
graffes,  and  frutes,  to  bee  confumed  of  woormes,  fcortched  with  drowth,  dcflroycd  with  fluddes,  or  blafled  with
lyghtnynge.  Owre  men  perceauynge  his  erneflneffe  herein,  thought  it  befle  to  chofe  the  leafl  euel,  perceauynge
that  it  was  yet  no  tyme  to  difquyet  their  myndes,  and  thcrfore  fufifered  them  to  excrcife  their  accuflomed
ceremonies.  And  althoughe  their  prieflcs  promyffe  theym  immortall  glorie,  eternall  felicytie,  and  perpetual!
conuerfation  with  the  goddes  after  the  flormyc  dayes  of  this  lyfc,  yet  do  they  with  heauy  countenaunces  giue
eare  to  their  promiffes,  and  had  rather  be  fette  at  lybertie.  Their  priefles  are  named  Quines  in  the  plurell
number,  and  Quin  in  the  fyngular.  They  leade  a  pure  and  chafle  lyfe :  And  are  honoured  of  the  people  with
feare  and  reuerence. They  make  fagots  of  the  bones  of  their  enemyes  which  they  haue  taken  in  the  warres,

zg6

\0f  tiie  jLandes  and  Ilandes  lately  founde7\ The  thyrde  Decade.

197

163

A  fygure  of
baptisme.

The  presentes  sent
into  Spayne  to  the
kynge.

Two  Images  of
gold  and  ^y.utr.

Two  cheines  of
gold  nianielously
byset  with  precious
stones  and  iewels.

and  hange  vppe  the  fame  at  the  feete  of  their  Zefjies,  as  tokens  of  the  victories  obteyned  by  their  fauour.  To
thefe  they  adde  certayne  titles  and  fuperfcriptions  as  teflimonies  of  the  fame.  This  is  flraunge  and  woorthy  to
be  noted,  that  when  their  children  are  a  yeare  oulde,  the  priefles  in  their  temples  with  deuoute  ceremonies  and
murmurynge  woordes,  poure  water  in  forme  of  a  croffe  vpon  their  heades  with  a  cruet,  wherby  they  feeme  to
baptife  them.  Neyther  do  they  as  the  lewes  and  Turkes,  thinke  their  temples  polluted  if  any  of  a  flraunge
relygion  bee  prefent  at  their  facrifyces  and  other  folemnities.  Wee  haue  nowe  fpoken  fuffycientely  of  their
bookes,  temples,  and  fuperflitions.  Lette  vs  nowe  therfore  coome  to  the  other  prefcntes  which  were  brought
to  the  kynge.  Emonge  thefe,  there  were  twoo  broode  and  rounde  plates  (whiche  fumme  haue  named  the
Images  of  the  foonne  and  moone)  the  one  of  filuer  and  the  other  of  gold  in  largeneffe  and  roundneffe  muche
lyke  to  the  flones  of  hand  mylles:  yet  but  thynne,  and  in  mancr  bothe  of  one  of  circumference,  that  is.  xxviil
fpannes  in  circuite.

That  of  golde  is  of  the  weyght  of  three  thoufande  and.  viii.  hundreth  Caflellans,  where  as  wee  haue  fayde
before  that  a  Caflellane  is  a  coyne  of  golde  which  weyeth  more  than  a  Ducate  by  a  trient,  that  is  the  thyrde
parte  of  a  pounde.  In  the  center  of  this,  was  the  Image  of  a  kynge  of  halfe  a  cubette  longe,  fyttinge  in  a
t[h]rone  and  appareled  to  the  knee,  lyke  vnto  a  maumette,  with  fuch  countenaunce  as  owre  paynters  are  wonte
to  paynte  fayries  or  fprites.  About  the  Image,  were  the  fhapes  of  trees  and  floures,  fo  that  it  feemed  to  fytte  as
though  it  had  byn  in  a  fielde.  The  other  of  fyluer,  was  made  to  the  fame  fimilitude,  beinge  alfo  in  maner  of
the  fame  weyght,  and  both  of  pure  metall.  They  brought  lykewyfe  certeyne  graynes  of  rude  golde  (that  is,
fuche  as  was  neuer  molten)  about  the  byggenes  of  fytches  or  the  pulfe  cauled  lintels  in  token  of  plentie  of  natiue
golde.  Alfo  two  cheynes  of  golde,  wherof  the  one  conteyned.  viii.  lynkes  in  the  whiche  were  fet  two  hundreth
threefcore  and  twoo  fayre  and  cleare  redde  flones,  and  yet  no  rubyes :  furthermore,  a  hundrethe  fourefcore  and
three  greene  flones,  and  yet  no  emerodes.  Neuertheleffe,  thefe  are  in  lyke  eflimation  with  them  as  the  other  are
with  vs.  At  the  edge  of  this  cheine,  there  hange.  xxvii.  golden  belles,  hauynge  betvvene  euery  of  them,  foure
iewels  of  precious  flones  inclofed  in  golde,  at  euery  of  the  which  in  lyke  maner  hange  certeyne  fpangels  of  golde.
The  other  cheyne  confifleth  onely  of  foure  golden  lynkes,  befet  rounde  about  with  a  hundreth  and  two  redde
flones,  and  a  hundreth  threefcore  and  twelue  greene  flones,  with.  xxvi.  golden  belles  curioufly  ^\T0ught  and
placed  in  comely  order.  In  the  verye  myddefl  of  the  cheyne,  are  ten  great  precious  flones  inclofed  in  golde,
at  the  whiche  alfo  hange  a  hundrethe  golden  pendauntes  of  cunnynge  woorkemanfhippe.  They  brought
furthermore  twelue  paire  of  lether  bufkynnes  of  diuers  colours,  fumme  imbrothered  with  gold  and  fumme  with
fyluer,  with  plates  and  iewelles  of  golde  and  precious  flones  inclofed,  and  at  euery  of  them  certayne  golden
belles.  Alfo  certeyne  myters  befette  with  precious  floones  of  dyuerfe  colours,  emonge  the  whiche  fume  are
blewe  like  vnto  faphires.  Of  crefles,  gerdles,  and  fannes  made  of  fethers,  I  wotte  not  what  I  fhulde  faye.  But
fuerly  if  euer  the  wyttes  and  inuentions  of  men  haue  deferued  honoure  or  commendacion  in  fuche  artes,  thefe
feeme  mofle  woorthy  to  bee  had  in  admiracion.  I  do  not  maruaile  at  golde  and  precious  flones.  But  am  in
maner  aflonyfhed  to  fee  the  Avoorkemanfhyppe  excell  the  fubflance.  For  I  haue  with  woonder}-nge  eyes
behelde  a  thoufande  formes  and  fimilitudes,  of  the  which  I  am  not  able  to  wryte.  And  in  my  iudgement,  I
neuer  fawe  any  thing  whofe  bewtie  myght  fo  allure  the  eyes  of  men.  As  they  marueyled  at  the  naturall  bewtie
of  the  fethers  of  owre  peacockes  and  pheafantes,  fo  dyd  we  no  lefTe  maruel  at  the  artifycial  bewtie  of  fuche
thinges  as  they  make  of  fethers  and  quilles  impaled  with  golde.  For  I  fawe  in  manye  of  their  woorkes,  all
maner  of  natiue  colours  euen  in  the  quilles  wherof  they  make  fuche  inflrumentes.  They  brought  alfo  tAvo
helmettes  gamyffhed  with  precious  flones  of  a  whitefhe  blewe  colour.  One  of  thefe  is  edged  with  belles  and
plates  of  golde,  and  vnder  euery  bell  two  knobbes  of  golde.  The  other,  befyde  the  flones  wherwith  it  is
couered,  is  lykewyfe  edged  with.  xxv.  golden  belles  and  knobbes :  and  hath  on  the  crefl,  a  greene  bird  with
the  feete,  bylle,  and  eyes,  of  golde.  Alfo  foure  fpeares  muche  lyke  vnto  troute  fpeares  or  yele  fpeares,  the
woodde  wherof  is  all  couered  with  quilles  of  diuers  colours  marueiloufly  wrethed  with  golden  wyers  and
plates  intermyxte.  Euery  of  thefe  fpeares  haue  three  pikes,  whofe  edges  or  teeth  are  all  of  precious  flones
made  fafle  with  wyers  of  golde.  Of  like  workmanfliip  they  brought  a  great  fcepter  byfet  with  precious  floones
and  belles  of  gold,  alfo  a  braflet  of  gold,  and  fliowes  made  Df  a  hartes  fkynne,  fowed  and  imbrothered  with
golden  wyers,  with  a  white  fole  beneth.  Furthermore  a  glaffe  of  a  bryght  blewe  flone,  and  an  other  of  white,
both  enclofed  in  golde.  Likewife  a  precious  flone  of  the  kynde  of  them  that  are  cauled  Sphinges,  inclofed  in
golde.  Furthermore  the  heade  of  a  great  lyfarde,  two  great  flielles,  two  duckes,  the  fliapes  of  diuers  other
byrdes,  foules,  and  fyfdies,  and  all  of  maffie  golde.  Furthermore,  xxiiii.  rounde  and  fquare  targettes,  fliieldes,
and  buckelers  of  golde,  and  fyue  of  fyluer.  Alfo  a  triple  crowne  of  plates  and  wyers  of  golde  marueylouOye
wreathed  with  quilles  and  fethers  of  diuers  colours,  hauing  on  the  fronte  a  plate  of  golde  on  the  whiche  is
grauen  the  Image  of  the  Idole  Zemes.  About  this  Image,  hange  foure  other  plates  like  croffes  of  gold  in  the
whiche  are  grauen  the  heades  of  diuers  beafles,  as  lyons,  tygers,  woulues,  and  fuch  other.  They  brought  alfo
the  fymilitudes  of  certeyne  beaRes  made  fumme  of  roddes  or  twygges,  and  fum  of  woodde  with  the  beafles  owne

R  2

Buskyns.

Myters.

How  can  we  then
caul  them  beastly
or  Barbarous.

If  they  had
changed  their
gold  for  owre  Ircn,
they  had  nut  so
soone  byn  subdued.

Quylles.
Hehnets.

A  byrde.
Speares.

A  scepter.
A  brasclet.
Shoocs.

164

Glasses.

Byrdes,  foules,  and

fysshes  of  gold.

Targets,  etc.  of

gold.

A  cxowne  of  golde

Crosses.

197

198

The  tJiyrdc  Decade. \0f  the  Landes  cuui  llandes  lately  foundcT^

Images  of  beastes.
Shietes.

Cloth  of  arras.
A  souldyers  clooke.

Regesters  of  the
th[e)affayres  of
India.

Thfelautontie  of
the  LicueCenatint.

The  Spanyardes
of  Darieno.

Snncta  Maria
Antigua.

Petrus  Arias
whom  the
Spanyardes  name
Pedrarias.
This  sea  the
spanyardes  caule
Mar  del  sur.

165

Contention
betwene  Vaschus
and  Petrus  Arias.

Petrus  Arias
commandeth  that
Vaschus  be  put
to  death.

Vaschus  is
accused.

Vaschus  is  put  to
death.

fkynnes  theron,  and  garnyfllieil  with  collers  of  laton  belles.  Lykewife  diners  fliietes  weaued  of  goffampyne
cotton  of  fundry  colours,  wherof  two  are  rychely  frynged  with  golde  and  precious  flones,  and  three  other  with
quilles  and  fethers  intermy.xte  with  golTampine  cotton  of  fundrye  colours  and  dickered  lyke  the  panes  of  a
chetle  borde.  Sum  are  on  the  one  fyde,  of  blacke,  white,  and  redde  colours :  and  on  the  other  fyde,  plaine
without  any  varietie.  Other  fum,  are  wrought  in  lyke  maner  with  variable  colours  with  a  wheele  or  circle  of
blacke  in  the  myddefl  intermy.xte  with  fl))'ning  fethers  and  fparkes  of  golde  lyke  flarres.  They  brought  alfo
cloth  of  Aras  or  •  Verdure  of  marueylous  workmanfliyppe.  Likewife  a  fouldiers  cloke  fuche  as  their  prynces
weare  in  the  warres,  with  certeyne  priuye  coates  of  fence,  and  fundrye  tirementes  perteynyng  to  their  heades,
with  alfo  many  fuche  other  thynges  more  bewtifull  to  the  eye  then  ryche  or  precious,  wherof  to  entreate  par-
ticularly, it  Iboulde  be  more  tedious  then  profytable.  I  lette  paffe  here  alfo  to  fpeake  of  many  particular
nauigations  and  of  the  trauailes  and  daungers  whiche  they  fuReyned  in  the  fame,  with  the  monflers  and
recreates  of  nature  they  fawe :  whiche  are  all  conteyned  in  the  regeflers  of  owre  Senate  of  th[e]affayres  of  India,
owte  of  the  whiche  I  haue  felected  thefe  fewe  annotations,  fuche  as  feemed  to  me  mofte  meete  to  bee  publifflied.
Notwithflandyng  thefe  ryche  and  goodly  prefentes,  yet  Avere  they  that  brought  them",  and  alfo  Cortcfius  the
gouernour  of  the  nauye  and  autour  of  erectinge  their  newe  colonic  in  thofe  remote  regions,  adiudged  by  the
Senate  to  haue  doen  ageinfl  ryght  and  ecjuitie,  in  that  they  attempted  the  fame  withowte  th[e]aduice  of  the
gouernour  of  the  Ilande  of  Cuba  who  fente  them  foorthe  by  the  kynges  auctoritie,  where  as  they  dyd  other
thinges  befyde  their  commyfTyon,  ye  althoughe  they  wente  to  the  kynge,  not  fyrfl  knowynge  his  pleafure  whom
the  kyng  had  fubflitute  his  Lieuetcnaunt  in  that  Ilande.  In  fo  muche  that  by  his  procuratour,  he  accufed
them  before  the  Senate  as  fugitiue  theeues  and  traytours.  They  on  the  other  parte  alleaged  that  they  had  dooen
the  kyng  better  feruyce  then  he:  And  that  they  had  fliewed  fuftycient  obedience  in  appealyng  to  the  kyng  as
the  hygher  ludge.  But  the  gouernour  required  by  the  vertue  of  his  commiffion  and  the  kinges  letters  pattentes
that  they  myght  be  headed  for  their  difobedience  ageinfl  hym  whom  they  knewe  to  be  autorifed  by  the
kynge.  They  ageine  replied  that  they  had  not  offended  the  kyng,  but  rather  deferued  rewarde  for  their  great
dangiers  and  trauails,  Bothe  the  rewarde  and  punifliment  were  deferred,  and  a  daye  appointed  when  bothe
parties  fhoulde  bee  harde.  Leete  vs  nowe  therfore  coome  to  the  Spaniardes  of  Dariena,  th[e]inhabitours  of  the
goulfe  of  Vra'^  in  the  fuppofed  Continent.  We  haue  fayde  before  that  Dariena  is  a  ryuer  runnynge  towarde
the  Wefle  fyde  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba.  On  the  banke  of  this  ryuer,  the  Spaniardes  planted  theyr  fyrfl.  colonic
or  habitation  after  they  had  vanquifflied  kynge  CJmnaccus.  This  colonic  they  named  SanBa  Maria  Antiqtia,
by  reafon  of  a  vowe  whiche  they  made  to  the  virgine  Marie  in  the  tyme  of  the  battaile  ageynfl.  Chemacciis.  To
thefe  (as  wee  haue  made  mention  in  the  ende  of  owre  decades)  was  Petrus  Arias  fente  with  a  thoufande  and  two
hundreth  men  at  the  requefl  of  Vafchus  Nunnez  Balboa,  who  was  then  the  gouernour  of  Dariena,  and  the
fyrfl  that  found  and  difcoured  the  large  South  fea  heretofore  vnknowen.  Wee  haue  alfo  declared  how  at  the  arriual
of  Peirus  Arias  the  newe  gouernour,  he  deuided  his  armye  into  Centurions,  that  is,  capitaines  ouer  hundrethes,
whom  hee  fent  foorth  dyuers  waies.  What  tragedies  folowed  hereof,  I  wyll  abfolue  in  fewe  woordes,  bycaufe  all  are
horrible  and  vnpleafaunte.  For  fence  we  fynyflied  owre  Decades,  there  hath  byn  none  other  then  kyllynge,
fleyinge,  murtherynge  and  accufinge.  The  kynge  made  Vafchus  gouernoure  but  durynge  his  pleafure.  His  courage
was  fuch,  and  his  factes  fo  notorious,  that  he  coulde  not  longe  abyde  the  hautynes  oi  Petrus  Arias.  To  bee  breefe,
thejT  faulynge  owte  and  difcord  confounded  al  thynges.  lohn  Cacedus  the  pulpitte  fryer  of  the  order  of  faynt
Frances,  dyd  his  vttermofle  endeuour  to  make  them  frendes,  promyfynge  vnto  Vafchus  the  dowghter  of  Petrus
Arias  to  wyfe.  But  no  meanes  coulde  be  founde  howe  thefe  two  which  bore  the  chiefe  rule,  myght  bee  brought
to  agreement.  At  the  length  the  matter  grewe  to  fuch  e.xtremitie,  that  Petrus  Arias  fyndynge  occafion  of
querelynge  ageynfle  Vafchus,  fent  proceffe  to  the  maieflrates  of  the  towne,  wherby  he  commaunded  them  to
flrangle  Vafchus,  and  fyue  other  which  were  chiefe.  capitaynes  vnder  hym:  Alleagynge  that  they  and  their
confetherates  confpired  to  rebel  in  the  South  fea:  And  that  Vafchus  hym  felfe  for  that  intente,  had  buylded  and
furnifhed  foure  fliippes  to  fearch  the  fouth  coaftes  of  the  fuppofed  continent:  Alfo  that  to  his  three  hundreth
fouldiers  and  companions  which  he  had  with  hym,  he  fhulde  fpeake  woordes  of  this  effecte  as  foloweth.  My
frendes,  and  felowes  of  my  longe  peynes  and  trauayles :  Howe  longe  fhall  we  be  fubiecte  to  the  commaunde-
ment  of  other,  fythe  wee  haue  bydden  the  brunt  and  ouercumme  th[e]enterprife  for  the  whiche  this  newe
gouernour  was  fent  with  fo  great  a  multitude?  Who  can  any  longer  abyde  his  pryde  and  infolencie?  Lette  vs
therefore  folowe  thefe  coafles  whyther  fo  euer  fortune  fhall  dryue  vs :  And  among  thefe  fo  many  pleafaunt  and
fruteful  prouinces  of  this  large  lande,  let  US  chofe  one  in  the  whiche  wee  maye  with  libertie  fpende  that  portion
of  owre  lyues  which  yet  remayneth.  Who  can  fynde  vs,  or  flialbe  able  to  profer  vs  vyolence?  When  thefe  or
the  l)ke  woordes  were  declared  to  Petrus  Arias,  he  fente  to  the  South e  partes  for  Vafchus,  wyllynge  hym  by
the  vertue  of  his  commiffion  to  repayre  to  him  foorthwith,  Vafchus  obeyed,  and  at  his  commynge  was  cafle  in
pryfon :  yet  conflantly  denyinge  that  euer  he  entended  any  fuche  thynge.  Wytneffes  were  brought  ageynfl  hym,
and  his  wordes  rehearfed  from  the  begynnynge  To  conclude,  he  was  iudged  woorthy  death,  and  was  put  to
198

1

\0f  the  Landes  and  Ilandes  lately  founded The  thyrde  Decade.

199

execution.  And  this  is  the  rewarde  whervvith  the  blynde  goddeffe  oftentymes  recompenfcth  fuch  as  haue
fufleyned  great  trauayles  and  daungiours  to  bee  hyghly  in  her  fauoure.  Fetrus  Arias  leauynge  his  wyfe  in
Darie/ia,  embarked  hym  felfe  in  the  fliippes  left  of  Vafchus,  to  th[e]intent  to  fearche  thofe  coafles.  But
whether  he  be  returned  or  not,  we  haue  yet  no  certeyne  knoweleage.  He  hath  alfo  his  fortune.  Yet  is  there
an  other  gouernour  affigned,  whofe  name  is  Ljipns  Sofa,  the  viceroye  of  the  Ilandes  of  Catiarie.  What  ftomake
Peiriis  Arias  may  haue  yf  he  returne,  let  good  men  iudge.  There  was  nothyng  doone  vnder  hym  woorthy
glorie.  Sume  thynke  that  he  was  at  the  begynnyng  fo  flacke  and  negligent  in  his  office,  and  not  feuere  in
correctynge  errours  and  miforders.  But  we  wyll  leaue  him  and  rehearfe  fumwhat  wherof  we  haue  byn  lately
informed  as  touchynge  the  great  and  diepe  ryuer  of  Dabaiba,  the  whiche  for  the  greatnes  and  largenes  therof,
owre  men  named  Gra/idis,  that  is,  great,  as  we  haue  noted  in  owre  Decades.  This  riuer  fauleth  into  the
furthefl  corner  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba  by  feuen  portes  or  mowthes  as  dooth  the  ryuer  o{ Nilus  into  the  Egyptian
fea,  whofe  large  defcription  yowe  may  alfo  reade  in  owre  Decades.  That  the  mountaynes  on  euery  fyde  about
this  ryuer,  are  rych  in  golde,  we  haue  learned  by  th[e]information  of  th[e]inhabitauntes,  of  whom  we  made
diligent  inquifition.  Vafchus,  and  befyde  hym  other  gouernoures  and  Lieuetenauntes,  haue  foure  tymes  entered
into  this  ryuer  with  theyr  armyes  in  battayle  array,  and  with  dyuers  kyndes  of  fhippes  fyrfle  for  the  fpace  of
fortie  myles,  then  fyftie,  and  at  the  lafl  fourefcore,  at  an  other  tyme  alfo  ouerthwarte  the  ryuer.  Oh  fliamefuU
chaunce  and  deteflable  couwardenes  of  owre  men.  A  naked  nation  encounterynge  with  them  that  had  apparell,  the
armed  ageynfle  the  vnarmed,  had  the  ouerthrowe  in  maner  in  all  conflictes,  and  were  other  all  flayne  or  wounded.
They  vfe  inuenemed  arrowes,  and  are  fuche  experte  archers,  that  if  they  efpye  any  place  of  theyr  enemie  bare  or
vnarmed,  they  wyll  not  lyghtly  fayle  to  flryke  him  there.  They  vfe  alfo  many  dartes,  which  in  the  tyme  of  the  batta}le
they  hurle  fo  thicke  a  farre  of,  that  they  take  the  lyght  of  the  fonne  from  theyr  enemies  as  itwerewith  a  clowde.  They
haue  lykewife  brode  and  longe  fwoordes  made  of  a  heauie  and  harde  kinde  of  woodde,  wherewith  they  feyght  fier-
cely neare  at  hande.  Vafchus  hym  felfe  receaued  many  woundes  in  encounterynge  with  them.  And  thus  by  reafon
of  the  fiercenes  of  thefe  barbarians,  the  ryuer  of  Dabaiba  is  yet  lefte  vnfearched.  We  wil  nowe  fpeake  fumwhat
more  of  the  Hand  of  Hifpaniola  (which  the  Spanyardes  caule  Spagniiola)  the  moother  and  chiefe  of  al  other  landes
or  Ilandes  wherof  we  entended  to  wryte.  In  it  the  Senate  is  now  reflored,  and  fyue  ludges  affigned  to  giue  lawes
to  all  the  inhabitauntes  of  thofe  tractes.  But  in  fliorte  tyme,  they  fliall  ceafe  gatherynge  of  golde  aUhough  there
bee  greate  plentie :  by  reafon  they  fliall  lacke  labourers  and  myners,  forafmuch  as  th[c]inhabitauntcs  whofe  helpe
they  vfed  herein,  are  brought  to  a  fmaule  number,  confumed  partly  by  warre,  and  m,any  more  by  famen
that  yeare  that  they  dygged  vp  the  rootes  wherof  they  made  theyr  befle  breade,  and  lefte  of  fowynge
theyr  grayne  of  Maiziiim  which  is  theyr  common  foode,  fuppofinge  hereby  to  haue  dryuen  owre  men  owte  of
the  Hande,  who  had  vytayles  fente  them  from  Spayne.  A  great  number  of  them  alfo,  dyed  of  newe  and
flraunge  difeafes  which  in  the  yeare  of  Chrifle  a  thoufande  fyue  hundreth  and.  xviii.  confumed  theyra  lyke
rotton  flieepe.

And  (to  faye  the  truth)  owre  mens  vnfaciable  defyre  of  gold,  fo  opprefled  thefe  poore  wretches  with
extreme  labour  and  toyle,  where  as  before  they  lyued  pleafauntly  and  at  lybertie,  gyuen  onely  to  playes  and
paflymes  as  daunfynge,  fyffhinge,  foulynge,  and  huntyng  of  lyttle  connies,  that  many  of  them  periffhed
euen  for  verye  anguyflie  of  mynde,  the  whiche  (with  their  vnaccuflomed  labour)  are  thynges  of  them  felues
fuffycient  to  engender  many  newe  difeafes.  But  the  kynge  and  the  Senate  haue  nowe  determyned  that  they  be
reduced  to  a  people,  and  to  gyue  them  felues  onely  to  increafe,  and  tyllage  of  the  ground :  And  that  onely  fuch
as  are  bought  or  taken  owte  of  other  regions,  bee  appointed  to  labour  in  the  golde  mynes.  But  it  fliall  fufiyce
to  haue  fayde  thus  muche  of  the  pefliferous  hunger  of  golde.  Therfore  to  fpeake  of  other  matters :  It  is  a
marueylous  thynge  to  confyder  howe  all  thynges  increafe  and  profper  in  this  Hande.  There  are  nowe.  xxviii.
fuger  preffes  wherwith  great  plentie  of  fuger  is  made.  The  canes  or  reedes  wherin  the  fuger  groweth,  are
bygger  and  hygher  then  in  any  other  place :  And  are  as  bygge  as  a  mans  arme  in  the  brawne,  and  higher  then
the  flature  of  a  man,  by  the  halfe.  This  is  more  woonderfull,  that  where  as  in  Valentia  in  Spaine  (where  a
great  quantitye  of  fuger  is  made  yearely)  where  fo  euer  they  applye  them  felues  to  the  great  increafe  therof,  yet
doth  euery  roote  bring  foorthe  not  pafle  fyue,  or  fyxe,  or  at  the  mode  feuen  of  thofe  reedes:  wheras  in  Hifpaniola
one  roote  beareth  twentie,  and  oftentymes  thirtie.  Foure  footed  beafles  and  cattayle,  are  mr.ueyloufly
increafed  in  this  Hande.  And  albeit  that  the  rauenynge  hunger  of  golde  hath  hitherto  greatly  hyndered  owre
men  from  tyllage  of  the  ground,  yet  is  there  great  plentye  of  wheate,  whiche  profpereth  fo  wel  that  it  yealdeth
fumtyme  a  hundreth  foulde:  And  this  efpecially  on  the  hylles  or  rydges  of  the  mountaynes  profpectynge  towarde
the  North.  Vines  do  alfo  increafe  here  with  no  leffe  frutefulneffe.  What  Ihuld  I  fpeake  of  the  trees  that  beare
Cafsia  fiflula,  brought  fird  into  this  Hand  from  the  other  Ilandes  neare  vnto  the  fuppofed  Continent,  as  we
haue  noted  in  owr  decades?  There  is  nowe  fuche  plentie  hereof,  that  after  a  fewe  yeares  we  fliall  haue  a  pounde
of  the  price  that  wee  paye  nowe  for  an  ounce.  Of  the  brefyle  and  mirobalane  trees,  with  other  innumerable
prerogatiues  and  benefites  whiche  nature  hath  plentifully  giuen  to  this  bleffed  Hand,  we  haue  fpoken  fufiyciently

Petrut  Arias.

Lu^us  Sosa.

The  great  ryuer  of
Dabaiba  or
Grandis

The  goulfe  of
Vraba.

The  ryche
mountaynes  of
Dabaiba.

Fierce  and  warlyke
people.

Dartes.

Swoordes  of
heauie  wood.

166

Hispaniola.

Ouiedus  wr>teth
that  ther  are  nowe.
V.  monasteries.

Newe  and  strange
diseases.

The  suger  of
Hispaniola.

Suger  of  Valentii

A  token  of

niaruelous
frutfulnes.

Cattayle.

Wheate.

ATnes.

Cassia  fistula.

Brasyle.
^lyrobalanes

199

200

The  tJiyrdc  Decade. \0f  the  Lai  ides  and  Ilivides  /afe/y  foiinde.']

in  owr  decades. Yet  haiie  I  thought  good  to  repeate  part  of  the  fame,  bycaufe  I  think  that  the  wittes  of  many

readers  haue  diuerted  from  the  weyght  of  great  affaires,  to  the  recordation  of  fuch  pleafaunt

tliynges. And  yet  do  not  fuche  thynges  as  are  fauery,  engender  tedy-

oufnelTc,  foe  that  a precious  matter  bee adourncd

with  a  precious  veflure.

iF5:N3is?.

:  de  of

^  ^Tter

201

167EXEMPLAR BVLLAE SEV
DONATIONIS,  AVTORITATE
CVIVS,  EPISCOPVS ROMANVS

Alexander  eius  nominis  fextus,  con-

cefsit  et  donauit  Caflellae  reglbus

et  fuis  fuccefforlbus, regiones

et Infulas noui o/  *

Oce  occidental: Hii-

pai. in  nauigatioiii-

!ji . -epertas.'.

LEXANDER  EPISCOPVS,  feruiis
feruorum  Dei,  Charifsimo  in  ChriRo
filio  Fe  dinando  Regi,  et  Charifsi-
moe  in  Chriflo  filise  Elizabeth  Re-
ginse  Caftellse,  Legionis,  Aragonum,
Siciliae,  ,:t  Granatae,  illuflribus,  falu-
teni  tc  Apoflolicam  benedictionem.

Inter  caetera  Diuince  maieflati  beneplacita  opera
et  cordis  noflri  defiderabilia,  illud  profecto  potifimum
exiflit  vt  fides  catho^'  et  Chrifliana  religio  noflris
prcefertim  temporibus  l  .Itetur  ac  vbilibet  amplietur
ac  dilatetur,  animarum  .e  falus  procuretur,  ac  barbaras
nationes  deprimantur  ^t  ad  fidem  ipfam  reducantur.
Vnde  cum  ad  hanc  faci::.m  Petri  fedem  Diuina  fauente
dementia  (mentis  licet  imparibus)  euocati  fueremus,
cognofcentes  vos  tanquam  veros  catholicos  reges  et
principes:  quales  femper  fuifle  nouimus,  et  a  vobis
praeclare  gefla,  toti  pene  orbi  notifsima  demonflrant,
nedum  id  exoptare,  fed  omni  conatu,  fludio,  et  dili-
gentia,  nuUis  laboribus,  nullis  impenfis,  nullifque  par-
cendo  periculis,  etiam  proprium  fanguinem  effundendo
efficere,  ac  omnem  animum  vellrum,  omnefque  conatus
ad  hoc  iam  dudum  dedicafse,  quemadmodum  recuper-
ate regni  Granatae  a  tyrannis  de  Sarracenorum  hodier-
nis  temporibus  per  vos,  cum  tanta  Diuini  nominis
gloria  fadla,  teflatur.  Digne  ducimur  non  immerito,
et  debemus  ilia  vobis  etiam  fponte,  ac  fauorabiliter
concedere,  per  quae  huiufmodi  fandlum  ac  laudabile
ab  immortali  deo  accept" -n  propofitum,  indies  feruen-
tiori  animo  ad  ipfiu^  ..  n^norem  et  Imperij  Chrif-
tiani  propagation'  rirofequi  valeatis.  Sane  accepi-
mus  Ti'^^'  -^nimum  propofueratis  aliquas

THE  COPPIE  OF  THE  BULL
OR DONATION, BY TH[E]AU-
TORITIE WHEROF, POPE

Alexander  the  fyxte  of  that  name,

gaue  and  graunted  to  the  kynges  of

Caflyle  and  theyr  fucceffours  the

Regions  and  Ilandes  founde  in

the Wefte Ocean fea by

the  nauigatlons  of  the

Spanyardes.

Lexander  byflioppe,  the  feruaunte  of
the  feruantes  of  God :  To  owre  mofle
deareb^'^oued  fonn'^  'axC  -'ft  Kynge
Ferdina.  ^.c,  An  auntes  \e  deare  be-
loued  dougr'  .any  nx  ,ie  Elyzabeth
Queenr  ' ''a»  ^  J/x^egion,  Aragon,
ti'.ta,  mofl  noble
■  ,c  al  ^  .-xediction.
.s  ■  "'  ,.  jle  to  the  diuine
^'•v  hartes  defyre,  this
tl  . .  !*Catholyke  fayth  and
/  j.jjthis  owre  tyme  may  in
^^^ o,  and  enlarged,  wherby

Sicilie
Princes,  Gretynge  and  J
Amonge  other  wo\^
maieflie  and  accordy^  y
certeinely  is  the  chirlo
Chriflian  religion,  *■•'
all  places  bee  ex;

f

try^

the  health  of  fouU~-  y mtie  of  ^red,  and  the  Barbarous
nations  fubdued  :  -  . .  '-i^iit  to  the  fayth.  And  there-
fore wheras  by  the  :'-..:  ve  of  gods  cler^encie  (although
not  with  equall  deferi;.:;s)  we  are  cauled  to  this  holy
feate  of  Peter,  and  vnderftandynge  you  to  bee  trewe
Catholyke  Princes  as  we  haue  euer  knowen  you,  and
as  youre  noble  and  woorthy  factes  haue  declared  in
maner  to  the  hole  worlde  in  that  with  all  your  fludie,
diligence,  and  induflrye,  you  haue  fpared  no  trauayles,
charges,  or  perels,  aduenturynge  euen  the  fhedynge  of
your  owne  bludde,  with  applyinge  yowre  hole  myndes
and  endeuours  here  vnto,  as  your  noble  expeditions
achyued  in  recoueryng  the  kyngdome  of  Granata  from
the  tyrannic  of  the  Sarracens  in  thefe  our  dayes,  doo
playnely  declare  your  factes  with  fo  great  glorj'e  of  the
diuine  name.  For  the  whiche  as  we  thinke  you  woor-
thy, fo  owght  we  of  owre  owne  free  wyl  fauorably  to
graunt  all  thynges  whereby  you  maye  dayely  with  more
feruent  myndes  to  the  honoure  of  god  and  enlargynge
the  Chrinian  empire,  profecute  your  deuoute  and  laud-

171

202

infulas  et  terras  finnas  rcmotas  ct  incognitas,  ac  per
alios  hatlenus  non  repertas,  quoerere  et  inuenire,  vt
illarum  incolas  et  habitatores  ad  colendum  redemp-
torem  noflrum  et  fidem  catholicam  profitendum  re-
duceretis,  hadlenus  in  expugnatione  et  recuperatione
ipfius  regni  Granatre  plurimum  occupati,  huiufmodi
faniflum  et  laudabile  propofitum  veflrum  ad  optatum
finem  perducere  nequiuiflis :  Sed  tanien  ficut  Domino
placuit,  regno  predicflo  recuperate,  volentes  defiderium
veflrum  adimplere,  dileclum  filium  Chriflophorum  Col-
168  onum  virum  vtique  dignuni  et  plurimum  commendatum
ac  tanto  negotio  aptum,  cum  nauigijs  et  hominibus  ad
fimilia  inflructis,  non  fine  maximis  laboribus,  ac  peri-
culis,  et  expenfis  deflinaflis  vt  terras  firmas  et  Infulas
remotas  et  incognitas,  huiufmodi  per  mare  vbi  ha(5lenus
nauigatum  non  fuerat,  diligenter  inquireret.  Qui  tandem
(Diuino  auxilio  fa6ta  extreraa  diligentia  in  mari  Oceano
nauigantes)  certas  infulas  remotifsimas  et  etiam  terras
firmas  quce  per  alios  hacflenus  repertae  non  fuerant,
inuenerunt.  In  quibus  plurimos  gentes  pacifice  viu-
entes,  et  (vt  afferitur)  nudi  incedentes,  nee  carnibus
vefcentes,  inhabitant:  Et  vt  prnsfati  nuncij  veflri  pof-
sunt  opinari,  gentes  ipfce  in  Infulis  et  terris  proedidlis
habitantes,  credunt  vnum  deum  creatorem  in  Coelis
efse,  ac  ad  fidem  catholicam  amplexandum  et  bonis
moribus  imbuendum,  fatis  apti  videntur:  Spefque
habetur,  quod  fi  erudirentur,  nomen  Saluatoris  Domini
noflri  lefu  Chrifli  in  terris  et  infulis  praedi6lis  facile
induceretur.  Ac  prefatus  Chriflophorus  in  vna  ex
principalibus  Infulis  pr^edidlis,  iani  vnam  turrim  fatis
munitam,  in  qua  certos  Chriflianos  qui  fecum  iuerant,
in  cuflodiam  et  vt  alias  Infulas  ac  terras  firmas  remotas
et  incognitas  inquirerent  ^'^i>nt,  conflrui  et  sedificari
fecit.  In  quibus  quidero'  ^  lis  et  terris  iam  repertis,
aurum,  aromata,  et  aliae  quamplurjimae  res  proeciofoe
diuerfi  generis  et  diuerfae  qualitalas  reperiuntur.  Vnde
omnibus  diligenter,  et  praefertim  fidei  catholicae  exal-
tatione  et  dilatatione  (prout  decet  Catholicos  Reges  et
Principes)  confideratis,  more  progenitorum  veflrorum.
clarse  memoriae  Regum,  terras  firmas  et  infulas  prae-
di6las,  illarumque  incolas  et  habitatores,  vobis  diuina
fauente  dementia  fubiicere  et  ad  fidem  Catholicam
reducere  propofuiflis.

Nos  itaque  huiufmodi  veflrum  fancflum  et  laudabile
propofitum  plurimum  in  domino  commendantes,  ac
cupientes  vt  illud  ad  debitum  finem  perducatur,  et
ipfum  nomen  faluatoris  noflri  in  partibus  illis  induca-
tur,  hortamur  vos  quamplurimum in  domino,  et  per

able  puri)ofe  mofl  acceptable  to  the  immortall  God.  We
are  credably  informed  that  wheras  of  late  you  were  de-
termyned  to  fecke  and  fynde  certeyne  Ilandes  and  firme
landos  farre  remote  and  vnknowen  (and  not  heretofore
found  by  any  other)  to  th[e]intent  to  bringe  th[e]inhabi-
tauntes  of  the  fame  to  honoure  owre  redemer  and  to
profeffe  the  catholyke  fayth,  you  haue  hetherto  byn
much  occupied  in  th[e]expugnation  and  recouerie  of
the  kyngedome  of  Granata,  by  reafon  whereof  yowe
coulde  not  brynge  yowre  fayde  laudable  purpofe  to
th[e]ende  defyred.  Neuertheleffe  as  it  hath  pleafcd
almyghty  god,  the  forefayde  kyngedome  beinge  reco-
uered,  wyllyng  t[o]accomplynie  your  fayde  defyre,  you
haue,  not  without  great  laboure,  perelles,  and  charges,
appoynted  owre  welbeloued  fonne  Chriflopher  Colonus
(a  man  certes  wel  commended  as  mofle  worthy  and
apte  for  fo  great  a  matter)  well  furnyflied  with  men  and
fliippes  and  other  neceffaries,  to  feeke  (by  the  fea
where  hetherto  no  manne  hath  fayled)  fuche  firme
landes  and  Ilandes  farre  remote  and  hitherto  vnknowen.
Who  (by  gods  helpe)  makynge  diligente  fearche  in  the
Ocean  fea,  haue  founde  certeyne  remote  Ilandes  and
firme  landes  whiche  were  not  heretofore  founde  by  any
other.  In  the  which  (as  is  fayde)  many  nations  inhabite
lyuinge  peaceably  and  goinge  naked,  not  accuflomed
to  eate  fleihe.  And  as  farre  as  yowre  meffengers  can
coniecture,  the  nations  inhabitynge  the  forefayde  landes
and  Ilandes,  beleue  that  there  is  one  god  creatoure  in
heauen :  and  feeme  apte  to  be  brought  to  th[ejimbraf-
inge  of  the  catholyke  faythe  and  to  be  imbued  with
good  maners :  by  reafon  whereof,  we  may  hope  that  if
they  well  be  inflructed,  they  may  eafely  bee  induced
to  receaue  the  name  of  owre  fauiour  lefu  Chrifl.  We
are  further  aduertifed  that  the  forenamed  Chriflopher
hathe  nowe  builded  and  erected  a  fortreffe  with  good
munition  in  one  of  the  forefayde  principall  Ilandes  in
the  which  he  hath  placed  a  garrifon  of  certeine  of  the
Chrifl-ian  men  that  wente  thyther  with  him :  afwell  to
th[e]intent  to  defende  the  fame,  as  alfo  to  fearche  other
Ilandes  and  firme  landes  farre  remote  and  yet  vnknowen.
We  alfo  vnderflande,  that  in  thefe  landes  and  Ilandes
lately  founde,  is  great  plentie  of  golde  and  fpices,  with
dyuers  and  many  other  precious  thynges  of  fundry
kyndes  and  qualities.  Therfore  al  thinges  diligently
confidered  (efpecially  th[e]amplifyinge  and  enlargyng
of  the  catholike  fayth,  as  it  behoueth  catholike  Princes
folowyng  th[e]exemples  of  yowre  noble  progenitours
of  famous  memorie)  wheras  yowe  are  determyned  by
the  fauour  of  almightie  god  to  fubdue  and  brynge  to  172
the  catholyke  fayth  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the  forefayde
landes  and  Ilandes.

Wee  greatly  commendynge  this  yowre  godly  and
laudable  purpofe  in  owr  lorde,  and  defirous  to  haue
the  fame  brought  to  a  dewe  ende,  and  the  name  of
owre  fauioure  to  be  knowen  in  thofe  partes,  doo
exhorte  yowe  in  owre  Lorde  and  by  the  receauynge
of  yowre  holy  baptifme  wherby  yowe  are  bounde  to

203

facri  lau;icri  fufceptionem,  qua  mandatis  Apoflolicis
obligati  eflis,  et  per  vifcera  mifericordiae  Domini  noflri
lefu  Clirifli  attente  requirimus,  vt  cum  expeditioncm
huiufmodi  omnino  profequi  et  affumere  prona  mente
orthodoxas  fidei  zelo  intendatis,  populos  in  huiufmodi
Infulis  et  terris  degentes,  ad  Chriilianam  religionem
fufcipiendum  inducere  velitis  et  debeatis,  nee  pericula
nee  labores  vllo  vnquam  tempore  vos  deterreant,  firma
fpe  fiduciaque  conceptis  quod  Deus  omnipotens  cona-
tus  veflros  foeliciter  profequetur.  Et  vt  tanti  negotij
prouintiam  Apoflolicse  gratiae  largitate  donati,  liberius
et  audacius  affumatis,  motu  proprio  non  ad  veflram  vel
169  alterius  pro  vobis  fuper  hoc  nobis  oblatse  petitionis
inRantiam,  fed  de  noflra  mera  HberaHtate,  et  ex  certa
fcientia,  ac  de  ApoRolicae  poteflatis  plenitudine,  omnes
Infulas  et  terras  firmas  inuentas  et  inueniendas,  de-
te6las  et  detegendas  verfus  Occidentem  et  Meridiem,
fabricando  et  conflruendo  vnam  Hneam  a  polo  Ardlico,
fcihcet  Septemtrione,  ad  polum  Antar6licum,  fcilicet
Meridiem,  fiue  terrse  firmae  et  infulae  inuentae  et  in-
ueniendas fmt  verfus  Indiam  aut  verfus  aUam  quam-
cunque  partem  quae  hnea  diflet  a  quaUbet  Infularum
quae  vulgariter  nuncupantur  de  los  Azores  et  Cabo
verde  centum  leucis  verfus  Occidentem  et  Meridiem.

Itaque  omnes  Infulae  et  terrae  firmae  repertag  et  re-
periendae,  detecflae  et  detegendae  a  praefata  Hnea  verfis
Occidentem  et  Meridiem,  quae  per  ahum  Regem  aut
Principem  Chriflianum  non  fuerint  a6luaHter  pofleffae
vfque  ad  diem  natiuitatis  Domini  noflri  lefu  ChrifLi
proxime  praeteritum,  a  quo  incipit  annus  praefens
Milleffimus  Quadringenteffimus  Nonogeffimus  tercius,
quando  fuerunt  per  nuncios  et  capitaneos  veflros  in-
uentae aliqu^  pr3edi6tarum  Infularum,  Autoritate  omni-
potentis  Dei  nobis  in  beato  Petro  concefsa,  ac  vicariatus
lefu  Chrifli  qua  fungimur  in  terris,  cum  omnibus  illatum
dominijs,  ciuitatibus,  caflris,  locis,  et  villis,  iuribufque
et  iurifdidlionibus  ac  partinentijs  vniuerfis,  vobis  here-
dibufque  et  fuccefforibus  veflris  (Caflellae  et  Legionis
regibus)  in  perpetuum  tenore  praefentium  donamus,
concedimus,  et  affignamus:  Vofque  et  haeredes  ac
fucceffores  praefatos  illarum  Dominos,  cum  plena,  libera,
et  omnimoda  poteflate,  autoritate,  et  iurifdicflione,
facimus,  conflituinius,  et  deputamus.  Decernentes  ni-
hilo  minus  per  huiufmodi  donationem,  concefsionem,  et
affignationem  noflram,  nuUo  Chrifliano  Principi  qui  acflu-
aliter  praefatas  Infulas  et  terras  firmas  poffederit  vfque
ad  praediclum  diem  natiuitatis  Domini  noflri  lefu  Chrifli
ius  quaelitum,  fublatum  intelligi  pofse  aut  auferri  debere.

Et  infuper  mandamus  vobis  in  virtutK  fan(flae  obedi-

Apoflolicall  obedience,  and  emeftely  require  yowe  by
the  bowel;;  of  mercy  of  owre  Lorde  lefu  Chrifl,  that
when  yowe  intende  for  the  zeaie  of  the  Catholyke
faythe  to  ])rofecute  the  fayde  expedition  to  reduce  the
people  of  the  forefayde  landes  and  Ilandes  to  the
Chridian  religion,  yowe  fhall  fpare  no  labours  at  any
tyme,  or  bee  deterred  with  any  perels,  conceauynge
firme  hope  and  confidence  that  the  omnipotent  godde
wyll  gyue  good  fucceffe  to  yowre  godly  attemptes.
And  that  beinge  autoryfed  by  the  priuilege  of  the
Apoflolycall  grace,  yowe  may  the  moie  freely  and
bouldly  take  vpon  yowe  th[e]enterpryfe  of  fo  greate  a
matter,  we  of  owre  owne  motion,  and  not  eyther  at
yowre  requefl  or  at  the  inflant  peticion  of  any  other
perfon,  but  of  owtc  owne  mere  liberalitie  and  certeyne
fcience,  and  by  the  fulneffe  of  Apoflolycall  power,  doo
gyue,  graunt,  and  affigne  to  yowe,  yowre  heyres  and
fucceffours,  al  the  firme  landes  and  Ilandes  found  or
to  be  found,  difcouered  or  to  be  difcouered  toward  the
Wefl  and  South,  dra\vyng  a  line  from  the  pole  Artike
to  the  pole  Antartike  (that  is)  from  the  north  to  the
Southe:  Conteynynge  in  this  donation,  what  fo  euer
firme  landes  or  Ilandes  are  founde  or  to  bee  founde
towarde  India,  or  towarde  any  other  parte  what  fo
euer  it  bee,  beinge  diflant  from,  or  without  the  fore-
fayd  lyne  drawen  a  hundreth  leaques  towarde  the
Wefle  and  South  from  any  of  the  Ilandes  which  are
commonly  cauled  De  los  Azores  and  Cabo  Verde.

All  the  Ilandes  therfore  and  firme  landes,  founde
and  to  be  founde,  difcouered  and  to  be  difcouered
from  the  fayde  lyne  towarde  the  Wefl.  and  South,  fuch
as  haue  not  actually  bin  heretofore  poffeffed  by  any
other  Chrillian  kynge  or  prynce  vntyll  the  daye  of  the
natiuitie  of  owre  Lorde  lefu  Chrj-fle  lafle  pafle,  from
the  which  begynneth  this  prefent  yeare  beinge  the
yeare  of  owre  Lorde.  M.  CCCC.  Ixxxxiii.  when  fo  euer
any  fuch  fhalbe  founde  by  your  meffingers  and  capy-
taines,  Wee  by  the  autoritie  of  almyghtie  God  graunted
vnto  vs  in  faynt  Peter,  and  by  the  office  which  we  beare
on  the  earth  in  the  fleede  of  lefu  Chrifle,  doo  for  euer
by  the  tenoure  of  thefe  prefentes,  gyue,  graunte,  affigne,
vnto  yowe,  yowre  heyres,  and  fiicceffoures  (the  kynges
of  Caflyle  and  Legion)  all  thofe  landes  and  Ilandes,
with  theyr  dominions,  territories,  cities,  caflels,  towres,
places,  and  vyllages,  with  all  the  ryght,  and  iurifdic-
tions  therunto  perteynynge :  confl-itutynge,  affignynge,
and  deputynge,  yowe,  yowre  heyres,  and  fuccefiburs
the  lordes  thereof,  with  full  and  free  poure,  autoritie,
and  iurifdiction.  Decreeinge  neuertheleffe  by  this
owre  donation,  graunt,  and  affignation,  that  from  no
Chriflian  Prince  whiche  actually  hath  poffefled  the
forefayde  Ilandes  and  firme  landes  vnto  the  day  o^
the  natiuitie  of  owre  lorde  beforefayde  theyr  ryght
obteyned  to  bee  vnderfloode  hereby  to  be  taken  away,
or  that  it  owght  to  be  taken  away.

Furthermore  wee  commaunde  yowe  in  the  vertue

203

204

enti;xi  (\t  ficut  poUicemini  et  non  dubitamus  pro  veflra
maxima  deuotione  etregia  magnanimitate  vos  efse  fa<flu-
ros)  ad  terras  firmas  et  Infulas  prjedidas,  viros  probos  et
Deum  timentes,  docflos,  peritos,  et  expertos  ad  inflru-
endum  incolas  et  habitatores  pra^fatos  in  fide  Catholica
et  bonis  moribus  imbuendum,  deflinare  debcatis,  om-
nem  debitam  diligentiam  in  pr^mifsis  adhibentes.

A  quibufcumque  perfonis,  cuiufcunque  dignitatis,
etiam  imperials  et  regalis  flatus,  gradus,  ordinis  vel
conditionis,  fub  excommunicationis  latce  fententine
pccna  quam  eo  ipfo  fi  contra  fecerint  incurrant,
170  dillritlius  inhibemus  ne  ad  Infulas  et  terras  firmas"
inuentas  et  inueniendas,  deteflas  et  detegendas  verfus
Occidentem  et  Meridiem,  fobricando  et  confl.ru-
endo  lineam  a  polo  Ar6tico  ad  polum  Antar6licum,
fiuoe  terrae  firmce  et  Infuloe  inuentce  et  inueniendce  fint
verfus  Indiam  aut  verfus  aliam  quamcunque  partem
quae  linea  diflet  a  qualibet  Infularum  quse  vulgariter
nuncupantur  de  los  Azores  et  Cabo  verde  centum  leucis
verfus  Occidentem  et  Meridiem  vt  prsefertur,  pro  merci-
bus  habendis  vel  quauis  alia  caufa  accedere  proefumat
abfque  vefl.ra  ac  haeredum  et  fuccefsorum  veflrorum
proedicflorum  licentia  fpeciali:  Non  obfl.antibus  con-
flitutionibus  et  ordinationibus  Apoftolicis,  CKterifque
quibufcunque,  in  illo  in  quo  imperia  et  dominationes
et  bona  cun6la  procedunt :  Confidentes  quod  dirigente
Domino  a6tus  veflros,  fi  huiufmodi  fan6lum  ac  laudabile
propofitum  profequamini,  breui  tempore  cum  foelicitate
et  gloria  totius  populi  Chrifl.iani,  vefl.ri  labores  et
conatus  exitum  foelicifsimum  confequentur,  Verum
quia  difficile  foret  prrefentes  literas  ad  fingula  quseque
loca  in  quibus  expediens  fuerit  deferri,  volumus  ac
motu  et  fcientia  fimilibus  decemimus,  quod  illarum
tranfTumptis  manu  publici  notarij  inderogati  fubfcriptis,
et  figillo  alicuius  perfon?e  in  ecclefiaflica  dignitate  con-
flitutje,  feu  curiae  ecclefiaflicae  munitis,  ea  prorfus
fides  in  iudicio  et  extra  ac  alias  vbilibet  adhibeatur,  quae
praefentibus  adhiberetur  fi  efsent  adhibitae  vel  oflenfae.

Nulli  ergo  omnino  hominum  liceat  hanc  paginam.
noflras  commendationis,  hortationis,  requifitionis,  dona-
tionis,  concefsionis,  afsignationis,  conflitutionis,  deputa-
tionis,  decreti,  mandati,  inhibitionis,  et  voluntatis  in-
fringere  vel  ei  aufu  temerario  contraire.  Si  quis  autem
hoc  attentare  praefumpferit,  indignationem  omnipotentis
Dei,  ac  beatorum  Petri  et  Pauli  Apoflolorum  eius,  fe
nouerit  incurfurum.*.

Datum  Romae  apud  fandlum  Petrum:  Anno  incar-
nationis  Dominicae.  1493.  quarto  nonas  Maij :  Ponti-
ficatus  nofl.ri  anno  primo.'.

of  holy  obedience  (as  yowe  haue  promyfed,  and  as  wee
doubte  not  you  wyll  doc  vppon  mere  deuotion  and
princely  magnanimitie)  to  fende  to  the  fayde  firme
latides  and  llandcs,  honefle,  vcrtuous,  and  Icrncd  men,
fuche  as  feare  God,  and  are  able  to  inflructe  th[c]in-
habitauntes  in  the  Catholyke  fayth  and  good  maners,
applyinge  all  theyr  poffible  diligence  in  the  premiffes.

We  furtliermore  Rrcightly  inhibite  all  maner  of
perfons,  of  what  flate,  degree,  order,  or  condition  fo
euer  they  bee,  although  of  Imperiall  and  regall  digni-
tie,  vnder  the  peyne  of  the  fentence  of  excommunica-
tion whiche  they  fliall  incurre  yf  they  doo  to  the
contrary,  that  they  in  no  cafe  prefume  without  fpeciali
lycence  of  yowe,  yowre  heyres,  and  fucceffours,  to
trauayle  for  marchaundies  or  for  any  other  caufe,  to
the  fayde  landes  or  Ilandes,  founde  or  to  bee  found,
difcouered,  or  to  bee  difcouered,  toward  the  wefl  and
fouth,  drawing  a  line  from  the  pole  Artyke  to  the  pole
Antartike,  whether  the  firme  lands  and  Ilandes  found
and  to  be  found,  be  fituate  toward  India  or  towarde
any  other  parte  beinge  diflant  from  the  lyne  drawen
a  hundreth  leagues  towarde  the  wefl  from  any  of  the
Ilandes  commonly  cauled  De  los  Azo7'es  and  Cabo
Verde:  NotwithRandynge  conflitutions,  decrees,  and
Apollolycall  ordinaunces  what  fo  euer  they  are  to  the
contrary:  In  him  from  whom  Empyres,  dominions,  and
all  good  thynges  doo  procede :  Truflynge  that  almyghtie
god  directynge  yowre  enterprifes,  yf  yowe  folowe  yowre  173
godly  and  laudable  attemptes,  yowre  laboures  and
trauayles  herein,  fhall  in  fhorte  tyme  obteyne  a  happy
ende  with  felicitie  and  glorie  of  all  Chriflian  people.
But  forafmuch  as  it  fliulde  bee  a  thynge  of  great  diffi-
cultie  thefe  letters  to  bee  caryed  to  all  fuche  places  as
fliuld  bee  expedient,  we  wyll,  and  of  lyke  motion  and
knowleage  doo  decree  that  whyther  fo  euer  the  fame
fhalbe  fent,  or  wher  fo  euer  they  fhalbe  receaued  with
the  fubfcription  of  a  common  notarie  therunto  requyred,
with  the  feale  of  any  perfon  conflitute  in  ecclefiaflicall
dignitie,  or  fuche  as  are  autoryfed  by  the  ecclefiaflicall
courte,  the  fame  fayth  and  credite  to  bee  gyuen  there-
unto in  iudgement  or  els  where,  as  fhulde  bee  exhibyted
to  thefe  prefentes.

It  fliall  therefore  bee  lawefull  for  no  man  to  infringe
or  rafliely  to  contrarie  this  letter  of  owre  commenda-
tion, exhortacion,  requefl.e,  donation,  graunt,  affigna-
tion,  conflitution,  deputation,  decree,  commaundement,
inhibition,  and  determination.  And  yf  any  fliall  pre-
fume to  attempte  the  fame,  he  owght  to  knowe  that  he
fhall  thereby  incurre  the  indignation  of  almyghtie  God
and  his  bolye  Apoflles  Peter  and  Paule.  (.•,)  (:)  (•.')

C  Gyuen  at  Rome  at  faynt  Peters :  In  the  yeare  of
th[e]incarnation  of  owre  Lord  M.  CCCC.  LXXXXIII.
The  fourth  day  of  the  nones  of  Maye,  the  fyrfle  yeare
of  owre  feate. ( ) ( ) ( )

204

205

[The  Third  Enghsh  book  on  America,

Which  is  also

The First English Collection of  Voyages,  Traffics, & Discoveries.

Z\u  lOrcatft^  ol  tite  uflue  toorXUe  01*  Sutst  SntricT,  etc.

SECTION II.

Gonzalo  Fernandez  de  Oviedo  y  Valdes.

The  Natural  History  of  the  West  Indies.

First  printed  in 1526.]

207

To THE READER.

Lthough  amonge  dyuers  which  haue  wrytten  of
the  Ocean  and  Wefte  Indies,  there  is  none  to
be  compared  to  Peter  Martyr  of  Angleria,  in
declarynge  by  philofophical  difcourfes  the  fecreate
caufes  of  naturall  affectes  bothe  as  touchynge  the
lande,  the  fea,  the  ftarres,  and  other  flraunge
woorkes  of  nature,  yet  forafmuche  as  of  later
dayes  thofe  countreys  haue  byn  better  knowen
and  fearched,  and  dyuers  fuche  particular  and
notable  thynges  founde  as  are  conteyned  in
the  hyftories  of  later  wryters,  emonge  the
number  of  whom  Gonzalus  Ferdinandus  Ouiedus,
(whom  lerned  Cardairus  compareth  to  the  ancient  writers)  is  doubtles  the  chiefe,  I  haue
therfore  thought  good  to  ioyne  to  the  Decades  of  Peter  Martyr  certeyne  notable
thynges  which  I  haue  gathered  owte  of  his  booke  intiteled  the  Summarie  or  abbrige-
ment  of  his  generall  hyftorie  of  the  Weft  Indies  wrytten  in  the  firme  lande  of  the  fame
in  the  citie  of  Sancta  Maria  Antiqua  in  Dariena  (where  he  dwelte  and  was  gouernoure
many  yeares)  And  dedicated  to  Th[e]emperou[r]s  maieftie,  as  maye  appeare  by  the
epyftell  folowynge.

•07

208

C  TO THE MOST HYGH AND MYGHTIE

PRINCE CHARLES THE FYFTE OF THAT NAME:

EMPEROUR  OE  ROME,  KYNGE  OF  SPAYNE,  AND  OE  THE  TWOO  SICILIES,
of  bothe  the  fydes  of  the  ftreyght  oiFaro,  Kynge  of  Hierufalem
and  Hungarie,  Duke  of  Burgonie  and  Earle  of  Flaunders,
Lord  and  inheritoure  of  the  firme  lande  and  Ilandes
of  the  Wefte  Ocean,  etc. Gouzalus  Ferdiuan-
dus  Oiiiedus  his  moft  humble  feruant
wyfheth health  and per-
petual felicitie.

174

He  thynges  whiche  principally  preferue  and  mayntayne
the  woorkes  of  nature  in  the  memories  of  men,  are
hyftories  and  bookes  compofed  of  the  fame.  Amonge
the  whiche  certes  thofe  are  efteemed  mofle  trewe  and
autentyke  which  haue  byn  wrytten  by  wyttie  and
expert  men  well  trauayled  in  the  worlde,  as  faythfull
wytneffes  of  fuche  thynges  as  they  haue  partely  feene
and  byn  partely  informed  by  credible  perfons.  Of
this  mynde  and  opinion  was  Plinie,  who  better  then
any  other  autoure  hathe  wrytten  in  xxxvii.  bookes  al
that  perteyneth  to  the  naturall  hiftorie,  conteyned  al
in  one  volume  dedicated  to  Vefpafian  Th[e]em-
perour.  Wherein,  as  a  prudente  hifloriographer,  he
declareth  fuche  thynges  as  he  had  harde  :  Attri-
butynge  the  feconde  autoritie  to  fuche  as  he  had
redde  in  autoures  that  wrote  before  hym  :  And  thyrdely  ioyned  to  the  fame  hyftorie,
fuch  thynges  as  he  hym  felfe  had  feene  as  mofte  certeyne  teftimonie.  Whofe  exemple
I  folowynge,  wyl  in  this  my  breefe  fummarie  reduce  and  reprefent  to  yowr  maiefties
memorie  fuche  thynges  as  I  haue  feene  in  yowre  Empyre  of  the  Weft  Indies  afwell  in
the  Ilandes  as  in  the  firme  lande  of  the  Ocean  fea,  where  I  haue  ferued  nowe  more  then
twelue  yeares  in  the  place  of  furuoyer  of  the  golde  mynes  by  the  commaundemente  of
the  Catholyke  kynge  Don  Fernando  the  fyfte  of  that  name  and  graundfather  vnto  yowre
maieflie,  to  whom  god  gaue  great  fame  and  glorie.  Senfe  whofe  death  alfo  I  haue  lyke-
wies  ferued  and  trufl  whyle  the  reft  of  my  lyfe  yet  remayneth,  to  feme  yowre  maieftie
as  fhall  pleafe  yowe  to  commaunde.  As  touchynge  which  thinges  and  fuch  other  lyke,
I  haue  more  largely  written  in  a  hyftorie  bcgunne  as  fone  as  my  age  was  rype  to  take
fuche  matters  in  hande.  Wherein  furthermore  I  haue  made  mention  of  fuche  thynges
208

The  Epijlle.

209

as  haue  chaunced  in  Spaine,  from  the  yeare.  1494.  vnto  this  tyme.  Addynge  alfo
thereunto  fuche  thynges  woorthy  memorie  as  I  haue  obferued  in  other  realmes  and  pro-
uinces  where  I  haue  trauayled.  And  haue  hkewife  particulerly  wrytten  the  lyues  and
woorthy  actes  of  the  catholyke  Princes  of  famous  memorie  Don  Ferdinando  and  lady
EHzabeth  his  wyfe  to  theyr  lafl  dayes.  After  whofe  fruition  of  heauenly  Paradyfe,  I
haue  noted  fuche  thynges  as  haue  chaunced  in  yowre  moft  fortunate  fucceffion.  Not
omittynge  particularly  to  wryte  a  large  booke  of  fuch  thynges  as  haue  feemed  mofte
woorthy  to  bee  noted  as  touchynge  yowre  maiefties  Indies.  But  for  afmuche  as  that
volume  remaineth  in  the  citie  of  Sa7i.  Dominico  in  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  where  I
dwell  and  am  placed  in  houfholde  with  wyfe,  chyldren,  and  famelie,  I  haue  brought  no
more  with  me  of  that  my  writynge  then  I  beare  in  memorie.  Determynynge  notwith-
flandynge  for  yowre  maiefties  recreation  to  make  a  breefe  rehearfall  of  certeyne  notable
thynges  wherof  I  haue  more  largely  entreated  in  my  fayde  general  hiftorie,  and  fuch  as
may  feeme  mofte  woorthy  to  bee  redde  of  yowre  maieftie.  Of  the  which,  although  a  great
parte  haue  byn  wrytten  by  other  who  haue  alfo  feene  the  fame,  yet  perhappes  they  are  not
fo  exactly  and  particularly  defcribed  as  of  me,  forafmuche  as  in  maner  all  that  trauayle
into  thefe  Indies  haue  greater  refpecte  to  luker  and  gaynes  then  diligently  to  fearche  the
woorkes  of  nature  wherunto  I  haue  byn  euer  naturally  inclyned,  and  haue  therfore  with
all  poffible  endeuour  applyed  myne  eyes  and  intelligence  to  fynde  the  fame.  And  this
prefente  Summarie  fhall  not  bee  contrary  or  dyuers  from  my  larger  hiftorie  wherein  (as  I
haue  fayde)  I  haue  more  amplye  declared  thefe  thynges  :  but  fhal  onely  more  breefely
expreffe  th[e]ffect  therof  vntyl  fuch  tyme  as  Godde  flial  reftore  me  to  myne  owne  houfe,
where  I  may  accomplyfhe  and  fynifhe  my  fayd  general  hyftorie.  Wherevnto  to  gyue  the
fyrft  principle,  I  fay  that  Don  Chriftopher  Colonus  (as  it  is  well  knowen)  beinge  the
fyrfte  Admyrall  of  this  India,  difcouered  the  fame  in  the  dayes  of  the  Catholyke  kynge
Don  Ferdinando  and  the  lady  Elyzabeth  his  wyfe,  graundfather  and  graundmother  vnto
yowre  maieftie :  In  the  yeare.  1 49  i.  And  came  to  Barzalona  in  the  yeare  1492.  with  the
fyrft  Indians  and  other  ftiewes  and  profes  of  the  great  ryches  and  notice  of  this  weft
Empire.  The  whiche  gyfte  and  benefyte  was  fuche,  that  it  is  vnto  this  daye,  one  of  the
greateft  that  euer  any  fubiect  or  feruant  hath  done  for  his  prince  or  countrey,  as  is  mani-
fefte  to  the  hole  worlde.  And  to  faye  the  trewth,  this  fhall  doubtleffe  bee  fo  commodious
and  profytable  vnto  the  hole  realme  of  Spayne,  that  I  repute  hym  no  good  Caftilian  or
Spanyarde  that  doothe  not  recognife  the  fame.  And  (as  I  haue  fayde  before)  foraf-
much  as  in  my  fayde  generall  hiftorie  I  haue  more  largely  intreated  of  thefe  thynges,  I
intend  at  this  prefent  only  briefely  to  rehearfe  certeyne  efpeciall  thynges,  the  whiche
fuerly  are  verye  fewe  in  refpecte  of  the  thoufandes  that  myght  bee  fayde  in  this  behalfe.
Fyrft  therfore  I  wyl  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  nauigatlon  into  thefe  parties.  Then  of  the
generation  of  the  nations  whiche  are  founde  in  the  fame,  with  their  rytes,  cuftomes,  and
cerimonies.  Alfo  of  beaftes,  foules,  byrdes,  woormes,  fyfflies,  feas,  ryuers,  fprynges,  trees,
plantes,  herbes,  and  dyuers  other  thynges  which  are  engendered  boothe  on  the  lande  and
in  the  water.  And  forafmuche  as  I  am  one  of  th[e]order  and  company  of  them  that  are
appointed  to  returne  into  thefe  regions  to  ferue  yowre  maieftie,  yf  therfore  the  thynges
conteyned  in  this  booke  fhall  not  bee  diftincte  in  fuch  order  as  I  promifed  to  performe  in  my
greater  woorke,  I  defyre  yowre  maieftie  to  haue  no  refpecte  herevnto,  but  rather  to
confyder  the  noueltie  of  fuche  ftraunge  thynges  as  I  haue  herein  declared,  whiche  is  the
chiefe  ende  that  moued  me  to  wryte.  Proteftyng  that  in  this  Summarie  I  haue  wrytten
the  trewth  of  fuche  thynges  as  coome  to  my  remembraunce  :  wherof  not  onely  I  my
felfe  can  teftifye,  but  alfo  diuers  other  woorthy  and  credible  men  which  haue  bin  in
thofe  regions,  and  are  nowe  prefente  in  yowre  maiefties  courte.  And  thus  it  flial  fuffyce
to  haue  faide  thus  much  vnto  yowre  maieftie  in  maner  of  a  proheme  vnto  this  prefent
worke  which  I  moft  humbly  defyre  yowre  maieftie  as  thankfully  t[o]accept,  as  I  haue
wrytten  it  faythfully.

175

Eden.

ao9

2IO

The  hyjiorie  of  the  vvejic  Indies.

^ Of  the  ordinary  nauygation  from  Spayne  to  the  JVefte  Indies,

176

^He  nauygation  vvhiche  is  commonly  made  from  Spayne  to  the
Wefle  India,  is  from  Siuile,  where  yowre  maieflie  haue  yowre
houfe  of  contractation  for  thofe  partes,  with  alfo  yowre  offycers
thervnto  perteynynge,  of  whom  the  capitaines  take  their  paffeporte
and  lycence.  Tlie  patrones  of  fuche  fliyppes  as  are  appoynted  to
thefe  vyages,  imbarke  theym  felues  at  San  Ltica  di  Barameda,
where  the  ryuer  Cuadalchiber  entereth  into  the  Ocean  fea.  And
from  henfe  they  folowe  their  courfe  toward  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie.
Of  thefe  feuen  Ilandes,  they  commonly  touche  two,  that  is,  eyther
Graiicanaria  or  Gomcra.  And  here  the  fliyppes  are  furnyfflied
with  freflie  water,  fuell,  cheefe,  biefe,  and  fuche  other  thynges
whiche  may  feeme  requifyte  to  be  added  to  fuche  as  they  brynge
with  them  owte  of  Spayne.  From  Spayne  to  thefe  Ilandes,  is
coommonly  eyght  dayes  faylinge,  or  lyttle  more  or  leffe.  And
when  they  are  arryued  there,  they  haue  fayled  two  hundereth  and
fyftie  leaques,  whiche  make  a  thoufande  myles,  accomptyng  foure
myles  to  a  leaque  as  is  their  maner  to  recken  by  fea.  Departynge
from  the  fayde  Ilandes  to  folowe  their  courfe,  the  fliippes  tary.  xxv.  dayes,  or  a  lyttle  more  or  leffe,  before  they
fee  the  fyrfle  lande  of  the  Ilandes  that  lye  before  that  whiche  they  caule  La  Spagnuola  or  Hifpaniola.  And  the
lande  that  is  commonly  fyrfle  feene,  is  one  of  thefe  Ilandes  whiche  they  caule  Ogni  fan^li  Marigalante  (or
Galanta)  La  Deffeada  (otherwife  cauled  Defyderata)  Mafani/w,  Dominica,  Guadahipe,  San.  ChriJIoual,  or  fumme
other  of  the  Ilandes  wherof  there  are  a  great  multitude  lyinge  aboute  thefe  aforefaide.  Yet  it  fumtymes  fo
chaunceth  that  the  fhippes  paffe  withowte  the  fyght  of  any  of  the  fayde  Ilandes,  or  any  other  that  are  within
that  courfe  vntyll  they  coome  to  the  Hand  of  SanHi  Lohannis  or  LLifpaniola,  or  Lamaica,  or  Cuba,  whiche  are
before  the  other.  It  may  alfo  chaunce  that  they  ouerpaffe  all  thefe  likewyfe,  vntyll  they  faule  vppon  the  coafles
of  the  fyrme  lande.  But  this  chaunceth  when  the  pylote  is  not  well  practifed  in  this  nauigation  or  not  perfecte
in  the  trewe  carde.  But  makynge  this  viage  with  experte  maryners  (wherof  there  is  nowe  great  plentie)  one  of
the  fayde  fyrfle  Ilandes  fhall  euer  bee  knowen.  And  from  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie  to  one  of  the  fyrfle  of  thefe,
the  diflaunce  is  nyne  hundreth  leaques  by  faylinge,  or  more.  And  from  henfe  to  the  citie  of  faynte  Dominike
which  is  in  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  is  a  hundreth  and  fyftie  leaques :  So  that  from  Spayne  hitherto,  is  a
thoufand  and  three  hundreth  leaques.  Yet  forafmuche  as  fumtimes  the  nauigation  procedeth  not  fo  directly,  but
that  it  chaunceth  to  wander  on  the  one  fyde  or  on  the  other,  wee  may  well  faye  that  they  haue  nowe  fayled  a
thoufande  and  fyue  hundreth  leaques  and  more.  And  if  the  nauigation  be  flowe  by  reafon  of  fumme
hynderaunce,  it  commonly  chaunceth  to  be  fynifflied  in.  xxxv.  or.  xl.  dayes.  And  this  happeneth  for  the  mofle
parte,  not  accomptynge  the  extremes :  that  is,  eyther  of  them  that  haue  flowe  paffage,  or  of  them  that  arryue
in  verye  fliorte  tyme.  For  wee  owghte  to  confyder  that  which  chaunceth  moft  commonly.  The  retume  from  thofe
partes  to  Spayne,  is  not  fynyfflied  without  longer  tyme,  as  in  the  fpace  of  1.  [fifty]  dayes,  or  a  lyttle  more  or  leffe.
Neuertheleffe  in  this  prefent  yeare  of.  1525.  there  came  foure  fliyps  from  the  Hand  of  San  Dominico  to  faint
Luca  in  Spaine,  in.  xxv.  dayes.  But  (as  I  haue  fayd)  we  ought  not  to  iudge  of  that  whiche  chaunceth  feldome,
but  of  that  which  happeneth  mofl,  ordinarily.  This  nauigation  is  very  fafe  and  much  vfed,  euen  vnto  the  fayd
Ilande.  And  from  this  to  the  firme  land,  the  fliyppes  trauerfe  diuers  wayes  for  the  fpace  of  fiue,  fyxe,  or  feuen
dayes  faylynge,  or  more,  accordyng  to  the  partes  or  coafles  whither  they  directe  their  vyages,  forafmuche  as  the
fayde  fyrme  lande  is  ^'erye  great  and  large,  and  many  nauigations  and  vyages  are  directed  to  dyuers  partes  of
the  fame.  Yet  to  the  fyrme  land  whiche  is  nearefl.  to  this  Hand,  and  lyeth  directly  ageynft.  San  Dominico,  the
paffage  is  fynifflied  in  the  tyme  aforefayde.  But  it  flialbe  muche  better  to  remytte  all  this  to  the  carde  of  thefe
nauigations  and  the  new  Cofmographie,  of  the  whiche  no  parte  was  knowen  to  Ptolomie  or  any  other  of  the
owlde  wrytters.

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

21  I

€  Of  twoo  notable  thynges  as  touchyng  the  Weft  Indies:  And  of  the  great

rycheffe  brought  from  thenfe  into  Spayne.

Fter  my  vniuerfall  defcription  of  the  hiflorie  of  the  Indies,  there  commeth  to  my  remem-
beraunce  two  thynges  chiefely  to  be  noted  as  touchynge  th[e]empire  of  this  Wefl  Indies
perteynynge  to  the  dominion  of  yowre  maieflye.  And  thefe  befyde  the  other  particulars
wherof  I  haue  fuffyciently  fpoken,  are  to  be  confydered  as  thinges  of  great  importaunce.
Wherof,  the  one  is  the  fhorteneffe  of  the  way  and  with  what  expedition  yowr  maieflies
fliyppes  maye  paffe  beyonde  the  mayne  fyrme  lande  of  thefe  Indies  into  the  newe  Southe
fea  cauled  Mare  del  Sur  lyynge  beyond  the  fame.  And  this  to  th[e]intent  to  coome  to  the
Ilandes  where  the  fpices  growe,  befyde  the  other  innumerable  rycheffe  of  the  kingedomes  and  figniories  whiche
confine  with  the  fayde  fea  where  are  fo  many  people  and  nations  of  dyuers  toonges  and  maners.  The  other
thinge,  is  to  confyder  howe  innumerable  treafures  are  entered  into  Spayne  by  thefe  Indies,  afwell  that  whiche
commeth  dayly  from  thenfe  as  alfo  that  is  continually  to  bee  looked  for,  bothe  of  golde  and  perle  and  other
marchaunties  which  are  firfl  brought  into  this  yowre  realme  of  Spaine  before  they  are  feene  of  other  nations  or
traded  into  other  realmes.  Wherby  not  onely  this  yowre  realme  is  greatly  inriched,  but  alfo  the  benefyte
therof  redoundeth  to  the  great  profyte  of  other  countreys  which  are  neare  thervnto.  A  teflimonye  of  this,  are
the  double  ducades  whiche  yowre  maieflie  haue  caufed  to  bee  coyned,  and  are  difparfed  throughowte  the  hole
worlde.  But  after  they  are  once  paffed  owt  of  this  yowre  realme,  they  neuer  returne  agein  bycaufe  they  are  the
beft.  curraunt  money  of  the  world.  And  therfore  if  after  they  haue  byn  in  the  handes  of  flraungers  they  chaunce
to  be  retourned  ageyne  into  Spaine,  they  coome  difguifed  in  an  other  habite,  and  are  diminiffhed  of  the  good-
neffe  of  their  golde,  with  the  flampe  of  yowre  maieflye  chaunged :  So  that  if  it  were  not  for  their  fuche
defacynges  in  other  realmes  for  the  caufe  aforefayde,  there  fhulde  not  bee  founde  fo  great  quantitie  of  fyne  golde
of  the  coyne  of  any  prynce  in  the  worlde  as  of  yowre  maieflies. And  the  caufe  of  all  this,  are  yowre  Indies.

C  Of  the  mynes  of  golde,  and  the  maner  of  woorkynge  in  theym.

His  particular  of  the  mynes  of  gold,  is  a  thing  greatly  to  bee  noted :  And  I  maye  muche  better
fpeake  hereof  then  any  other  man,  forafmuche  as  there  are  nowe  twelue  yeares  pafle  fenfe  I
ferued  in  the  place  of  the  furueier  of  the  meltynge  fhoppes  perteynynge  to  the  golde  mynes
of  the  firme  lande,  and  was  the  gouernour  of  the  mynes  of  the  Catholyke  kyng  Dofi
Fe/'dinando,  after  whofe  departure  from  this  lyfe,  I  ferued  longe  in  the  fame  roome  in  the
name  of  yowr  maieflie:  By  reafon  wherof,  I  haue  had  great  occafion  to  knowe  howe
golde  is  founde  and  wrought  owte  of  the  mynes:  And  do  knowe  ryght  well  that  this
lande  is  exceadynge  ryche :  hauynge  by  my  accompte  and  by  the  labour  of  my  Indians  and  flaues,  gathered
and  fyned  a  great  portion  of  the  fame:  and  may  therfore  the  better  affyrme  this  by  teflimonie  of  fyght.
For  I  am  well  affured  that  in  no  part  of  Cajlilia  del  oro,  that  is,  golden  Caflile  (otherwife  cauled
Beragtm)  no  man  coulde  afke  me  of  the  mynes  of  golde,  but  that  I  durfle  haue  bounde  my  felfe  to
haue  difcouered  them  in  the  fpace  of  ten  leagues  of  the  countrey  where  it  fliulde  haue  byn  demaunded
me,  and  the  fame  to  bee  verye  ryche.  For  I  was  alowed  all  maner  of  charges  to  make  fearche  for  the  fame.
And  although  golde  be  founde  in  maner  euery  where  in  thefe  regions  of  golden  Caflile,  yet  owght  wee  not  in
euery  place  to  beflowe  the  trauell,  and  charge  to  get  it  owte,  bycaufe  it  is  of  leffe  quantitie  and  goodneff-  in  fum
place  then  in  fum.  And  the  myne  or  veyne  whiche  owghte  to  be  folowed,  ought  to  bee  in  a  place  whiche  may
llande  to  faue  muche  of  the  charges  of  the  labourers,  and  for  the  adminiflration  of  other  neceffary  thinges  that
the  charges  may  bee  recompenfed  with  gaynes.  For  there  is  no  doubte  but  that  golde  fhalbe  founde  more  or
leffe  in  euery  place.  And  the  golde  whiche  is  founde  in  golden  Caflile,  is  verye  good,  and  of  xxii.  caractes  or
better  in  fyneffe.  Furthermore,  befyde  this  great  quantitie  of  golde  whiche  I  haue  fayde  to  be  founde  in  the
mynes,  there  is  alfo  from  day  to  day  found  or  otherwife  gotten,  great  treafure  of  fuche  \vrought  gold  as  hath  byn
in  the  cuftodie  of  the  fubdued  Indians  and  their  kynges,  afwell  of  fuche  as  they  haue  gyuen  for  their  fyne  and
raunfome,  or  otherwife  as  frendes  to  the  ChriHians,  befyde  that  whiche  hath  byn  vyolently  taken  from  the
rebelles. But  the  greatefl  parte  of  the  wrought  gold  whiche  the  Indians  haue,  is  bafe  and  holdeth  fumwhat  of

177

212

The  Jiyjforie  of  the  wejlc  Ifidies.

copper.  Of  this  they  make  braflettes  and  chaines  and  in  the  fame  they  clofe  their  iewels  vvhiche  their  women
are  accuflomed  to  weare  and  olleenie  more  then  all  the  richeffe  of  the  worlde.  The  maner  howe  golde  is
gathered,  is  this,  eyther  of  fuche  as  is  founde  in  Zauana,  that  is  to  faye  in  the  plaines  and  riuers  of  the  champian
countrey  being  withowt  trees,  whether  the  earth  be  with  grafie  or  without.  Or  of  fuche  as  is  fumtymes  founde
on  the  land  without  the  riuers  in  places  where  trees  growe,  fo  that  to  coome  by  the  fame,  it  flialbe  recjuifite  to
cutte  downe  many  and  great  trees.  But  after  whiche  fo  euer  of  thefe  two  manors  it  be  founde,  eyther  in  the
riuers  or  ruptures  or  breaches  of  water,  or  elles  in  the  earth,  I  wyll  fliewe  howe  it  is  founde  in  bothe  thefe  places,
and  howe  it  is  feperate  and  pourged.  Therfore  when  the  myne  or  veine  is  difcouered,  this  chaunceth  by  ferchyng
and  prouyng  in  fuche  places  as  by  certeyne  fygnes  and  tooken  do  appeare  to  fl<ylfull  men  apte  for  the  generation
of  golde  and  to  holde  golde.  And  when  they  haue  founde  it,  they  folowe  the  myne  and  labour  it,  whether  it
be  in  the  ryuer  or  in  the  plaine  as  I  haue  fayde.  And' if  it  bee  founde  on  the  plaine,  fyrfl  they  make  the  place
verye  cleane  where  they  intende  to  dygge.  Then  they  dygge  eyght  or  ten  foote  in  length  and  as  muche  in
breadth:  but  they  goo  no  deeper  then  a  fpanne  or  two,  or  more  as  fliall  feeme  bed  to  the  maifler  of  the  myne,
dyggynge  equally.  Then  they  waflie  all  the  earthe  whiche  they  haue  taken  owte  of  the  fayde  place.  And  if
herein  they  fynde  any  golde,  they  folowe  it.  And  if  not,  they  dygge  a  fpanne  deeper,  and  waflie  the  earth  as
they  dyd  before.  And  if  then  alfo,  they  fynde  nothynge,  they  continue  in  dyggyng  and  waffhyng  the  earth  as  before
vntil  they  come  to  the  hard  rocke  or  flone.  And  if  in  fyne  they  fynd  no  golde  there,  they  folowe  no  further  to
feeke  golde  in  that  place,  but  go  to  an  other  parte.  And  it  is  to  be  vnderflode,  that  when  they  haue  founde  the
myne,  they  folowe  it  in  digginge  in  the  fame  meafure  in  leuell  and  deapth  vntill  they  haue  made  an  ende  of  al
the  myne  which  that  place  conteyneth,  if  it  appere  to  be  riche.  This  myne  ought  to  confyfl  of  certen  feete  or
pafes  in  length  or  breadth  accordynge  to  certeyne  orders  determined.  And  within  that  compaffe  of  earth,  it  is
not  lawfuU  for  any  other  to  dygge  for  golde.  And  where  as  endeth  the  myne  of  hym  that  fyrfle  founde  the  gold,
immediatly  it  is  lawfuU  for  any  other  man  that  wyl,  with  a  flafife  to  affygne  hym  felfe  a  place  by  the  fyde  of  the
fame,  inclofynge  it  with  flakes  or  pales  as  his  owne.  Thefe  mynes  of  Zaiiana  (that  is  fuch  as  are  found  in  the
playne)  owght  euer  to  bee  foughte  nere  to  fum  ryuer  or  brooke  or  fpringe  of  water,  or  dyke,  or  flandyng  poole,
to  th[e]ende  that  the  golde  maye  be  waffhed,  for  the  whiche  purpofe  they  vfe  the  laboure  of  certeyne  Indians
as  they  doo  other  in  dygginge  of  the  myne.  And  when  they  haue  dygged  owte  the  myne,  they  fyl  certeine
traies  \vith  that  earth,  whiche  other  Indians  haue  the  charge  immediatly  to  receaue  at  their  handes,  and
to  carye  thofe  treyes  of  earth  to  the  water  where  it  maye  bee  waffhed.  Yet  do  not  they  that  brynge  it,
178  waflie  it,  but  delyuer  it  to  other,  puttynge  it  owte  of  their  owne  trayes  into  theirs  which  they  haue  ready  in  their
handes  to  receaue  it.  Thefe  waffliers  for  the  mofle  parte,  are  the  Indian  women,  bycaufe  this  woorke  is  of
lelTe  paine  and  trauayle  then  any  other.  Thefe  women  when  they  waflie,  are  accuftomed  to  fytte  by  the  waters
fyde,  with  their  legges  in  the  water  euen  vppe  to  the  knees  or  leffe  as  the  place  ferueth  their  purpofe.  And
thus  holdynge  the  trays  with  earth  in  their  handes  by  the  handles  therof,  and  puttynge  the  fame  into  the  water,
they  moue  them  rownde  aboute  after  the  maner  of  fyftynge,  with  a  certeyne  apteneffe  in  fuche  forte  that  there
entreth  no  more  water  into  the  trais  then  ferueth  their  turne :  And  with  the  felfe  fame  apte  mouynge  of  their
trais  in  the  water,  they  euer  auoyd  the  foule  water  with  the  earth  owte  of  the  one  fyde  of  the  veffell,  and
receaue  in  cleane  water  on  the  other  fide  therof.  So  that  by  this  meanes  by  little  and  lyttle,  the  water  waffheth
the  earth  as  the  lyghter  fubflaunce  owte  of  the  trais,  and  the  golde  as  the  heauier  matter  refl.eth  in  the  bottome
of  the  fame,  beyng  rounde  and  holowe  in  the  myddefl.  lyke  vnto  a  barbars  bafen.  And  when  all  the  earth  is
auoyded,  and  the  golde  gathered  togither  in  the  bottome  of  the  traye,  they  putte  it  aparte,  and  returne  to  take
more  earth,  whiche  they  waflie  continually  as  before.  And  thus  they  that  laboure  in  this  woorke,  do  gather
dayly  fuche  portion  of  golde  as  flial  pleafe  god  to  graunt  to  the  patrones  of  thefe  Indians  and  fuche  other  as
trauaile  in  the  fame.  Furthermore,  it  is  to  bee  noted  that  for  euery  two  Indians  that  waflie,  it  is  requiflte  that
two  other  ferue  them  to  brynge  earthe  from  the  myne,  and  other  twoo  to  breake  the  fame  fmaule  and  fylle  their
trais  ther\vith.  Alfo  befyde  thefe  labourers,  it  is  neceffarye  that  there  bee  other  people  in  the  place  where  they
woorke  and  refle  in  the  nyghte.  Thefe  are  fuche  as  make  their  breade,  and  prouyde  for  vyttayles  and  other
neceffaryes. So  that  to  conclude,  there  are  in  all,  fyue  perfons  ordinarily  affigned  to  euery  traye  of  waffliers.

There  is  an  other  maner  of  woorkyng  the  mynes  in  riuers  or  brookes  of  runnynge  waters.  And  this  is,
that  in  auoydynge  the  water  of  his  courfe,  after  that  the  beddes  of  the  ryuers  are  drye  and  vtterlye  emptied,
they  fynde  golde  enionge  the  breaches,  cliftes,  and  ryftes  of  flones,  and  among  all  that  is  in  the  bottome  of  the
chanell,  and  where  naturally  the  riuer  runneth  of  greatefl  force.  So  that  it  chaunceth  fum  tynie,  that  when  the
bedde  of  the  ryuer  is  good  and  ryche,  they  fynde  in  it  great  quantitie  of  golde.  And  therfore  yowr  maieflie
ought  to  vnderflande  for  a  generail  rule,  as  it  appereth  in  facte,  that  all  golde  is  engendered  in  the  toppes  and
hyghefl.  places  of  the  montaines :  And  in  continuance  of  time  is  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  browght  downe  to  the  vales
and  plaines  by  fliowres  of  rayne,  and  the  faules  of  fprynges,  ryuers,  and  brookes  hauynge  their  originall  in  the
mountaynes  and  defcendynge  from  the  fame,  not\vithfl:andynge  it  bee  oftentymes  founde  in  the  plaines  farre

I

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

213

179

from  the  mountaynes.  But  when  it  chaunceth  to  be  founde  in  great  quantitie,  it  is  for  the  mofle  parte  amonge
the  mountaynes  and  in  the  riuers,  or  their  branches,  more  then  in  any  other  parte  of  the  plaine.  And  in  thefe
two  maners  is  it  commonly  founde  mofle  abundauntly.  And  for  the  better  profe  that  golde  is  engendered  on
hyghe,  and  is  brought  downe  into  the  lowe  places,  I  haue  one  great  tooken  therof  whiche  caufeth  me  to  beleue
it  for  certeine.  And  this  is  to  confyder  that  coles  neuer  putrifie  nor  corrupt  vnder  the  ground,  if  they  be  made
of  flronge  woodde.  Wherby  it  chaunceth  that  diggyng  the  earth  by  the  fouldes  or  indented  places  of  the
mountaynes,  or  on  the  fydes,  and  breakynge  a  myne  in  the  earthe  where  it  had  not  byn  broken  before,  and
hauyng  nowe  dygged  one  or  two  or  three  poles  in  meafure,  the  myners  founde  certeyne  coles  of  wood  vnder  the
fame  leuel  where  they  found  gold.  And  this  I  faye  in  the  earth  whiche  was  taken  for  a  vyrgine :  that  is  to  faye,
fuch  as  had  not  before  byn  opened  for  any  myne.  The  which  coles  coulde  not  naturally  bee  engendred  there,
or  enter  in  by  any  meanes.  But  when  the  fuperficial  part  of  the  earth  was  equal  with  the  leuel  where  the  coles
were  founde,  it  is  lyke  that  the  coles  were  left  there  by  fum  occafion  of  fyre,  and  that  they  faflned  there  in
tyme,  and  that  afterwarde  in  longe  continuance  of  tyme,  they  were  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  couered  with  the  earth
which  the  often  fhowers  of  rayne  wafhed  from  the  mountaynes,  fo  that  by  the  courfe  of  yeares  the  earth  ouer-
grewe  the  coles  vnto  the  fayde  leuell  and  meafure  whiche  had  before  tyme  byn  the  fuperficiall  parte  of  the
earthe  where  the  coles  and  golde  were  founde  togyther:  whereby  it  maye  appeare  that  the  golde  was  no  more
engendered  there  then  were  the  coles,  but  brought  thyther  from  the  mountaynes  by  the  faules  of  waters  as  we
haue  fayde :  forafmuche  as  the  mountaynes  are  the  matrices  and  bowels  of  all  ryche  metals.  Further  and
befyde  this,  I  fay  that  in  how  much  more  the  gold  is  gonne  farre  from  the  naturall  place  of  his  generation  to
the  place  where  it  is  founde,  it  is  fo  muche  the  more  puryfied  and  fyned  and  of  a  better  carracte.  And  the
nearer  that  it  is  founde  to  his  proper  myne  or  vaine  where  it  is  engendered,  it  is  fo  muche  the  bafer,  fouler,  and
more  crude,  and  of  a  bafer  alay  and  caracte,  and  dothe  wafl  fo  much  the  more  in  meltynge,  and  remayneth
more  brickie.  Sumetyme  there  are  founde  graynes  of  golde  of  greate  quantitie  and  of  greate  weyght  aboue  the
earth  and  fumtymes  alfo  vnder  the  earth.  And  the  greatefle  of  all  other  that  was  founde  to  this  daye  in  the
Indies,  was  that  which  was  lofle  in  the  fea  aboute  the  Ilande  Beata,  whiche  weyed  three  thoufande  and  twoo
hundreth  Caftellans  of  golde,  which  are  in  value  foure  thoufand  a  hundreth,  thirtie  and  eyght  ducades  of  golde,
which  waye  one  Arroua  and  feuen  pounde,  or.  xxxii.  pounde.  after,  xii.  ounces  to  the  pounde,  whiche  make
threefcore  and  foure  markes  of  golde.  And  I  fawe  in  the  yeare.  15 15.  in  the  handes  of  Mychel  Paffamonte
treafurer  to  yowre  maieflie,  two  graines  of  the  which  one  wayde  feuen  poundes,  which  are.  xiiii.  markes,  and
are  in  value  aboute  threefcore  and  fyue  ducades  of  golde  euery  marke.  The  other  was  of.  x.  markes,  which  are
fyue  poundes  of  lyke  value,  and  of  very  good  golde  of.  xxii.  caractes  and  better.  There  are  alfo  founde  many
other  greate  graynes,  although  not  equall  vnto  thefe  in  byggenes.  And  forafmuche  as  I  haue  fpoken  of  golde,
I  haue  thought  good  to  declare  fumewhat  howe  the  Indians  can  very  excellently  gylte  fuche  veffelles  of  copper
and  bafe  golde  as  they  make.  For  they  can  gyue  them  fo  fayre  and  floryfhynge  a  coloure,  that  all  the  maffe
whiche  they  gylte,  appearethe  as  though  it  were  golde  of.  xxii.  caractes  and  better.  This  colour  they  gyue  with
a  certeyne  herbe  as  thoughe  it  were  wrought  by  the  arte  of  any  goldefmyth  of  Spayne  or  Italic,  and  wold  of
them  bee  efleemed  as  a  thynge  of  greate  ryches,  and  a  fecreate  maner  of  gyldynge.  And  for  as  muche  as  I
haue  fpoken  fufficiently  of  the  myne  of  golde,  I  wyll  nowe  fpeake  fumwhat  of  copper  bycaufe  I  haue  made
mention  thereof.  This  metall  is  founde  in  many  of  the  Ilandes  of  the  Indies  and  alfo  in  the  firme  lande :  And
is  founde  dayely  in  greate  quantitie  holdynge  fumwhat  of  golde.  But  for  the  defyre  that  owre  men  haue  to
golde,  they  nothynge  efleeme  the  copper,  although  there  myght  great  commoditie  and  profitte  be  had  therby,
and  alfo  by  other  metals  whiche  they  nothynge  regarde  excepte  fyluer  whiche  is  founde  abundantly  in  that  parte
of  the  firme  lande  which  is  cauled  newe  Spayne.  But  of  this  it  fliall  fuffice  to  haue  fayde  thus  muche,  bycaufe
I  haue  more  particularly  entreated  of  thefe  thynges  in  my  generall  hyRorie  of  India.

C  Of  the  maner  of  fyfJtynge  for  perles.

He  Indians  exercife  this  kynde  of  fyffliynge  for  the  mofle  parte  in  the  coafles  of  the  North  in
Cubagua  and  Ctimana.  And  manye  of  theym  which  dwell  in  the  houfes  of  certeyne  parti-
cular lordes  in  the  Ilandes  of  Sati  Doviiiiico  and  Sanfti  Io/ian?ns,  refort  to  the  Ilande  of
Cubagua  for  this  purpofe.  Theyr  cuflome  is  to  go  fyue,  fyxe,  or  feuen,  or  more  in  one  of
theyr  Canoas  or  barkes  erly  in  the  mornynge  to  fume  place  in  the  fea  there  about  where  it
appeareth  vnto  them  that  there  fhulde  bee  greate  plentie  of  thofe  fhell  fyilies  (which  fume
caule  mufcles  and  fume  oyflers)  wherin  perles  are  engendered. And  there  they  plonge

A  marke,  is  a
pounde  of  vili.
ounces :  summa.
xlii.  li.  [forty- two
pounds]  weyght
viiL  ounces,  after
xii.  ounces  to  the
IL  [pound].

S  2

211

214

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

them  felues  vnder  the  water,  euen  vnto  the  bottome,  fauynge  one  that  remaynethe  in  the  Canoa  or  boate  which
he  keepcth  ftyll  in  one  place  as  neare  as  he  can,  lookynge  for  theyr  roturne  owtc  of  the  water.  And  when  one
of  tliem  hath  byn  a  good  whyle  vnder  the  water,  he  ryfeth  vp  and  commeth  fwymniynge  to  the  boate,  enterynge
into  the  fame,  and  leauynge  there  all  the  oyfters  \\hiche  he  hath  taken  and  brought  with  hym.  For  in  thefe,
are  the  perles  founde.  And  when  he  hathe  there  refled  hym  felfe  a  whyle,  and  eaten  parte  of  the  oyflers,  he
returneth  ageyne  to  the  water,  where  he  remaynethe  as  longe  as  he  can  endure,  and  then  ryfeth  ageyne,  and
fwimmeth  to  the  boate  with  his  pray,  where  he  reflethe  hym  as  before,  and  thus  continueth  courfe  by  courfe,  as

180  doo  all  the  other  in  lyke  maner,  being  all  mofle  experte  fwymmers  and  dyuers.  And  when  the  nyght  draweth
neare,  they  returne  to  the  llande  to  theyr  houfes,  and  prefente  all  the  oyflers  to  the  mafler  or  flewarde  of  the  houfe
of  theyr  lorde  who  hath  the  charge  of  the  fayde  Indians.  And  when  he  hath  gyuen  them  fumwhat  to  eate,  he
layeth  \^  the  oyflers  in  fafe  cuflodie  vntyll  he  haue  a  great  quantitie  therof.  Then  hee  caufeth  the  fame  fyffher
men  to  open  them.  And  they  fynde  in  euery  of  theym  pearles  other  great  or  fmaul,  two  or  three  or  foure,  and
fumtymes  fiue  and  fyxe,  and  many  fmaule  graines  accordyng  to  the  lyberalitie  of  nature.  They  faue  the  pearles
bothe  fmaule  and  great  whiche  they  haue  founde :  And  eyther  eate  the  oyfters  if  they  wyl,  or  cafte  them  away,
hauynge  fo  great  quantitie  therof  that  they  in  maner  abhorre  them.  Thefe  oyfters  are  of  hard  flefhe,  and  not  fo
plefaunt  in  eatyng  as  are  owres  of  Spayne.  This  llande  of  Cubagua  where  this  maner  of  fyffliing  is  exercifed,
is  in  the  Northe  coafte,  and  is  no  bygger  then  the  Hand  of  Zelande.  Oftentymes  the  fea  encreafeth  greatly,  and
muche  more  then  the  fyfliers  for  pearles  wold,  bycaufe  where  as  the  place  is  very  depe,  a  man  can  not  naturally
reft  at  the  bottome  by  reafon  of  the  aboundaunce  of  aery  fubftaunce  whiche  is  in  hym,  as  I  haue  oftentymes
proued.  For  althoughe  he  may  by  vyolence  and  force  defcende  to  the  bottome,  yet  are  his  feete  lyfted  vp  ageyne
fo  that  he  can  continue  no  tyme  there.  And  therfore  where  the  fea  is  verye  deepe,  thefe  Indian  fyfdiers  vfe  to
tye  two  great  ftoones  aboute  them  with  a  corde,  on  euery  fyde  one,  by  the  weyght  wherof  they  defcend  to  the
bottome  and  remayne  there  vntyl  them  lyfteth  to  ryfe  ageine :  At  which  tyme  they  vnlofe  the  ftones,  and  ryfe
vppe  at  their  pleafure.  But  this  their  apteneffe  and  agilitie  in  fwimming,  is  not  the  thynge  that  caufeth  men
mofte  to  marauile :  But  rather  to  confyder  how  many  of  them  can  ftande  in  the  bottome  of  the  water  for  the
fpace  of  one  hole  houre,  and  fumme  more  or  leffe,  accordynge  as  one  is  more  apte  hereunto  then  an  other.
An  other  thynge  there  is  whiche  feemeth  to  me  vcy  ftraunge.  And  this  is,  that  where  as  I  haue  oftentymes
demaunded  of  fumme  of  thefe  lordes  of  the  Indians,  if  the  place  where  they  accuftomed  to  fyfhe  for  pearles
beynge  but  lyttle  and  narrowe,  wyll  not  in  fhorte  tyme  bee  vtterly  withovvt  oyfters  if  they  confume  them  fo  fafte,
they  al  anfwered  me,  that  althoughe  they  bee  confumed  in  one  parte,  yet  if  they  go  a  fyffhynge  in  an  other  parte
or  an  other  coafte  of  the  llande,  or  at  an  other  contrary  wynd,  and  continue  fyffliing  there  alfo  vntyll  the  oyfters
be  lykewyfe  confumed,  and  then  returne  ageyne  to  the  fyrfte  place,  or  any  other  place  where  they  fyffhed  before
and  emptied  the  fame  in  lyke  maner,  they  find  them  ageine  as  ful  of  oyfters  as  though  they  had  neuer  bin
fyffhed.  Wherby  we  may  iudge  that  thefe  oyfters  eyther  remoue  from  one  place  to  an  other  as  do  other  fyfflies,  or
elles  that  they  are  engendered  and  encreafe  in  certeyne  ordinarie  places.  This  Hand  of  Cumana  and  Cubagua
where  they  fyfhe  for  thefe  perles,  is  in  the  twelfe  degree  of  the  part  of  the  faid  coafte  which  inclineth  toward  the
North.  Lykemfe  pearles  are  founde  and  gathered  in  the  South  fea  cauled  Mare  del  Sur.  And  the  pearles  of
this  fea  are  verye  bygge.  Yet  not  fo  bigge  as  they  of  the  llande  of  pearles  cauled  de  las  perlas,  or  Margaritca,
whiche  the  Indians  caule  Teraregtii,  lying  in  the  goulfe  of  faincte  Michael,  where  greatter  pearles  are  founde  and
of  greater  price  then  in  any  other  coafte  of  the  Northe  fea,  in  Cuma?ia,  or  any  other  parte.  I  fpeake  this  as  a
trewe  teftimonie  of  fyght,  hauyng  byn  longe  in  that  South  fea,  and  makynge  curious  inquifition  to  bee  certenly
informed  of  al  that  perteyneth  to  the  fyffhynge  of  pearles.  From  this  llande  of  Tararcqtn,  there  was  brought
a  pearle  of  the  faffhyon  of  a  peare,  wayinge.  xxxi.  carattes,  whiche  Petrus  Arias  had  amonge  a  thoufande  and
foo  many  poundes  weight  of  other  pearles  whiche  hee  had  when  capitayne  Gafpar  Morales  (before  Petrus  Arias)
paffed  to  the  faide  llande  in  the  yeare.  i  5  1 5.  whiche  pearle  was  of  great  prife.  From  the  faide  llande  alfo,
came  a  great  and  verye  rounde  pearle,  whiche  I  brought  owte  of  the  fea.  This  was  as  bygge  as  a  fmaule  pellet
of  a  ftone  bowe,  and  of  the  weight  of.  xxvi.  carattes.  I  boughte  it  in  the  citie  oi  Panama  in  the  fea  oi  Sur:
And  paide  for  it  fyxe  hundreth  and  fyftie  tymes  the  weyght  therof  of  good  gold,  and  had  it  thre  yeares
in  my  cuftodie :  and  after  my  returne  into  Spaine,  foulde  it  to  th[e]erle  of  Nanfao,  Marqueffe  of  Zenete,  great
chamberleyne  to  yowre  maieftie,  who  gaue  it  to  the  Marqueffe  his  wyfe,  the  ladye  Madia  oi Mcndozza.  I  thyncke
verely  that  this  pearle  was  the  greateft,  fayreft,  and  roundeft  that  hath  byn  feene  in  thofe  partes. For  yowre

181  maieftie  owght  to  vnderftande  that  in  the  coafte  of  the  fea  of  Sur,  there  are  founde  a  hundreth  great  pearles
rounde  after  the  faffhyon  of  a  peare,  to  one  that  is  perfectely  rounde  and  greate.  This  llande  of  Terarequi,
which  the  Chriftians  caule  the  llande  of  pearles,  and  other  caule  it  the  llande  of  fioures,  is  founde  in  the  eyght
degree  on  the  fouthe  fyde  of  the  firme  lande  in  the  prouynce  of  golden  Caftyle  or  Bcragua.  And  thefe  are  the
coaftes  of  the  firme  lande  where  pearles  are  founde  euen  vnto  this  day.  I  vnderftande  alfo  that  there  are  perles
founde  in  the  prouynce  and  Ilandes  of  Cartagenia. And  fence  yowr  maieftie  appoynted  me  a  gouernour  and

Of  this  reade  more
largely  in  the
decades.

By  the

computation  of
Venice,  iiii.  graines
make  a  carette.

214

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

21K

capytayne,  I  haue  made  further  fearche,  and  am  aduertifed  that  pearles  are  foimde  in  dyuers  other  places  as
about  the  Hand  of  Codego  which  lyeth  ageynfl  the  mouth  of  that  porte  of  the  Ilande  of  Cartagetiia  which  the
Indians  caul  Coro.  The  which  Hand  and  porte,  are  on  the  North  fyde  in  the  tenthe  degree  of  the  coafl.es  of
the  firme  lande.

C  Of  the  familiar  it  ie  which  certeyne  of  the  Indians  haue  with  the  deny  II,
and  how e  they  receatte  anfwere  of  hym  of  thynges  to  coome.

Hen  the  Indians  begynne  theyr  battayle,  or  go  to  any  combat  or  attempte  any  other  greate
matter,  they  haue  certeyne  electe  menne  whom  they  reuerendely  eft.eme  and  caule  them
Tequinas,  whiche  in  theyr  tonge  is  as  muche  to  faye  as  mafters.  Notwithft.andynge  that  they
caule  euery  man  that  is  cunnynge  in  any  fcience,  by  the  fame  name,  as  fyffhers,  foulers
hunters,  or  makers  of  nettes.  Thefe  Teqiimas  therfore,  they  caule  the  maflers  of  theyr
aunfweres  bycaufe  they  fpeake  with  Tuyra,  that  is  the  deuyll,  and  brynge  them  aunfwere
what  he  faythe,  eyther  as  touchynge  fuche  thynges  as  they  haue  to  doo  or  fhall  chaunce
to  them  the  day  folowynge,  or  many  dayes  to  coome.  For  the  deuyll  beinge  fo  auncient  an  Aflronomer,
knowethe  the  tymes  of  thynges  and  feeth  howe  they  are  naturally  directed  and  inclined.  And  makethe  theym
beleue  that  they  come  fo  to  paffe  by  his  ordynaunce,  as  though  he  were  the  lorde  and  mouer  of  all  that  is  and
fhalbe :  And  that  he  gyueth  the  day  lyght  and  rayne :  caufeth  tempefl  and  ruleth  the  flations  of  tymes,  gyuyng
lyfe  or  takynge  awaye  lyfe  at  his  pleafure.  By  reafon  wherof,  the  Indians  being  deceaued  of  hym,  and  feing  alfo
fuch  effectes  to  coome  certeynely  to  paffe  as  he  hath  tolde  them  before,  beleue  hym  in  all  other  thynges  and
honoure  hym  in  many  places  with  facrifyces  of  the  bludde  and  Hues  of  men  and  odoriferous  fpices.  And  when
god  difpofeth  the  contrary  to  that  whiche  the  deuell  hath  fpoken  in  oracle  wherby  he  is  proued  a  Iyer,  he  caufeth
the  Tequinas  to  perfwade  the  people  that  he  hath  chaunged  his  mynde  and  fentence  for  fumme  of  their  fynnes,
or  deuifeth  fumme  fuche  lye  as  lyketh  hym  befle,  beynge  a  fkylfuU  maifl.er  in  fuche  fubtile  and  craftie  deuifes  to
deceyue  the  fymple  and  ignorant  people  whiche  hath  fmaule  defence  againfl  fo  mighty  and  craftie  an  aduerfarie.
And  as  they  caule  the  deuell  Tuyra,  fo  doo  they  in  many  places  caule  the  Chriflians  by  the  fame  name,
thynkyng  that  they  greatly  honoure  them  therby,  as  in  deede  it  is  a  name  very  feete  and  agreable  to  many
of  them,  hauynge  layde  aparte  all  honefl,ie  and  vertue,  lyuynge  more  lyke  dragons  then  men  amonge  thefe
fymple  people.

Before  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  had  receaued  the  Chriflian  faithe  there  was  amonge
them  a  fecte  of  men  whiche  lined  folytarily  in  the  defertes  and  wooddes  and  ledde  their  lyfe  in  fylence  and
abftinence  more  fl.raightly  then  euer  dyd  the  phylofophers  of  Pythagoras  fecte,  abfl,einyng  in  lyke  maner  from
the  eatyng  of  al  thynges  that  liue  by  bludde  contented  onely  with  fuche  fruites,  herbes,  and  rootes  as  the  defertes
and  wooddes  myniflred  vnto  them  to  eate.  The  profeffours  of  this  fecte  were  cauled  Places.  They  gaue  them
felues  to  the  knowleage  of  naturall  thynges,  and  vfed  certeine  fecreate  magicall  operations  and  fuperflitions
wherby  they  had  familiaritie  with  fpirites  whiche  they  allured  into  theyr  owne  bodyes  at  fuche  tymes  as  they
wolde  take  vppon  them  to  tell  of  thynges  to  coome,  whiche  they  dyd  in  maner  as  foloweth.  When  any  of  the
kynges  had  occafyon  to  caule  any  of  them  owte  of  the  defertes  for  this  purpofe,  their  cuflome  was  to  fende  them
a  portion  of  their  fyne  breade  of  Cazabbi  or  Maizium,  and  with  humble  requefle  and  fute  to  defyre  them  to  tell
them  of  fuche  thynges  as  they  woulde  demaunde.  After  the  requefl.  graunted  and  the  place  and  daye  appoynted,
the  Places  coometh  with  twoo  of  his  difciples  waytynge  on  hym,  wherof  the  one  bryngeth  with  hym  a  vefTell  of
a  fecreate  water,  and  the  other  a  lyttle  fyluer  bell.  When  he  coommeth  to  the  place,  he  fytteth  do\\Tie  on  a
rounde  feate  made  for  hym  of  purpofe.  Where  hauynge  his  difciples  the  one  flandynge  on  the  one  harde  and
the  other  on  the  other  euen  in  the  prefence  of  the  kyng  and  certeyne  of  his  nobles  (for  the  common  people  are
not  admytted  to  thefe  mifleries)  and  turnynge  his  face  toward  the  deferte,  he  beg}'nneth  his  inchauntment  and
cauleth  the  fpirit  with  loude  voyce  by  certeyne  names  which  no  man  vnderfi.andeth  but  he  and  his  difciples.
After  he  hath  dooen  thus  a  while,  if  the  fpirite  yet  deferre  his  coommyng,  he  drinketh  of  the  fayde  water,  and
therwith  waxeth  hotte  and  furious,  and  inuerteth  and  turneth  his  inchauntement,  and  letteth  hym  felfe  bludde
with  a  thorne,  manieiloufly  turmoylyng  hym  felfe  as  wee  reade  of  the  furious  Sybilles  not  ceafynge  vntyl  the
fpirite  bee  coome :  who  at  his  coommyng  entereth  into  hym  and  ouerthroweth  hym  as  it  weare  a  grehounde
(hulde  ouertume  a  fquerell.  Then  for  a  fpace,  he  feemeth  to  lye  as  thoughe  he  were  in  great  payne  or  in  a
rapte,  wonderfully  tormentynge  hym  felfe,  durj^nge  whiche  agonie,  the  other  difciple  fliaketh  the  fyluer  bell

215

182

2l6

The  Jiyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

183

contynually.  Thus  when  the  agonie  is  parte  and  he  lyeth  quietly  (yet  withowte  any  fence  or  feelyng)  the  kynge
or  fumme  other  in  his  (leade,  deniaundeth  of  hym  what  he  defyreth  to  knowe,  and  the  fpirite  anfvvereth  by  the
mouth  of  the  rapte  Places  with  a  directe  and  perfecte  anfwere  to  all  poyntes.  In  fo  muche  that  on  a  tyme
certeyne  Sixinyardes  beynge  prefente  at  thefe  myfleiies  with  one  of  the  kingcs,  and  in  the  Spanyflie  tounge
demaundynge  the  Piaccs  of  their  fliyppes  whiche  they  looked  for  owte  of  Spayne,  the  fpirite  anfwered  in  the
Indian  toonge,  and  toulde  thcni  what  daye  and  houre  the  fliyppes  departed  from  Spayne,  how  many  they  were,
and  what  they  brought  withowt  faylynge  in  any  poynte.  If  he  be  alfo  demaunded  of  the  eclypfe  of  the  foonne
or  moone  (which  they  greatly  feare  and  abhorre)  he  geueth  a  perfecte  anfwere,  and  the  lyke  of  tempeftes,
famen,  plentie,  warre  or  peace,  and  fuche  other  thinges.  When  all  the  demaundes  are  fynyfflied,  his  difciples
caule  hym  aloude,  rynging  the  fyluer  bell  at  his  eare  and  blowynge  a  certeyne  pouder  into  his  nofethrilles
wherby  he  is  rayfed  as  it  weare  from  a  deade  fleape  beinge  yet  fumewhat  heauy  headed  and  faynt  a  good  whyle
after.  Thus  beinge  ageyne  rewarded  of  the  kynge  with  more  breade,  he  departeth  ageyne  to  the  defertes  with
his  difciples.  But  fence  the  Chriflian  fayth  hath  «byn  difparfed  throwghe  owte  the  Ilande,  thefe  deuyllyfhe
practifes  haue  ceafed,  and  they  of  the  members  of  the  deuyll,  are  made  the  members  of  Chryfte  by  baptifme
forfakynge  the  deuyll  and  his  workes,  with  the  vaine  curiofitie  of  defyre  of  knowleage  of  thynges  to  coome,
wherof  for  the  mofl.  part  it  is  better  to  be  ignorant  then  with  vexation  to  knowe  that  which  can  not  be  auoyded.

Furthermore,  in  many  places  of  the  firme  lande,  when  any  of  the  kynges  dye,  all  his  houfliolde  feruauntes,
afwell  women  as  men  which  haue  continually  ferued  hym,  kyl  them  felues,  beleauynge  as  they  are  taught  by  the
deuyl  Tuyra,  that  they  which  kyll  them  felues  when  the  kynge  dyeth,  go  with  hym  to  heauen  and  ferue  hym  in
the  fame  place  and  office  as  they  dyd  before  on  the  earth  whyle  he  lyued.  And  that  all  that  refufe  fo  to  doo,
when  after  they  dye  by  theyr  naturall  death  or  otherwyfe,  theyr  foules  to  dye  with  theyr  bodyes  and  to  bee
difiblued  into  ayer  and  become  nothynge  as  do  the  foules  of  hogges,  byrdes,  or  fyffhes  or  other  brute  beaftes.
And  that  only  the  other  may  enioy  the  priuileage  of  immortalitie  for  euer  to  ferue  the  kynge  in  heauen.  And
of  this  falfe  opinion  commeth  it  that  they  which  fowe  corne  or  fet  rootes  for  the  kynges  breade,  and  gather  the
fame,  are  accuflomed  to  kyll  them  felues  that  they  may  enioy  this  priuileage  in  heauen.  And  for  the  fame
purpofe,  caufe  a  portion  of  the  graine  of  Maizium  and  a  bundle  of  Iiicca  (wherof  theyr  breade  is  made)  to  bee
buryed  with  them  in  theyr  graues  that  the  fame  maye  ferue  them  in  heauen  if  perhappes  there  fhuld  lacke
feedes  to  fowe.  And  therfore  they  take  this  with  them  to  begyn  with  all,  vntyl  Tuyra  (who  maketh  them  all
thefe  fayre  promiffes)  prouyde  them  of  greater  quantitie.  This  haue  I  my  felfe  fene  in  the  toppe  of  the
mountaynes  of  Guatiiro,  where  hauynge  in  pryfon  the  kynge  of  that  prouince  (who  rebelled  from  th[e]obedience
of  yowre  maieflie)  and  demaundynge  of  hym  to  whom  perteyned  thofe  fepultures  or  graues  whiche  I  fawe  in
his  houfe,  he  anfwered  that  they  were  of  certeyne  Indians  whiche  flewe  them  felues  at  the  death  of  his  father.
And  bycaufe  they  are  oftentymes  accuflomed  to  burye  greate  quantities  of  wrought  golde  with  them,  I  caufed
twoo  graues  to  bee  opened,  wherein  was  nothynge  founde  but  a  veffell  full  of  the  grayne  of  Maizium,  and  a
bundell  of  lucca  as  I  haue  fayde.  And  demaunding  the  caufe  hereof  of  the  kinge  and  the  other  Indians,  they
aunfwered  that  they  that  were  buryed  there,  were  the  labourers  of  the  grounde,  and  men  fkylful  in  fowynge  of
feedes  and  makynge  of  breade,  and  feruauntes  to  the  kynges  father.  And  to  th[e]ende  that  theyr  foules  fhoulde
not  dye  with  theyr  bodyes,  they  flewe  them  felues  at  the  deathe  of  the  kynge  theyr  mafler  to  lyue  with  hym  in
heauen.  And  to  th[e]intent  that  they  myght  ferue  him  there  in  the  fame  office  they  referued  that  Maizium  and
lucca  to  fowe  it  in  heauen.  Whereunto  I  aunfwered  them  in  this  maner.  Beholde  howe  your  Tuyra  deceaueth
yowe?  And  howe  all  that  he  teacheth  yow  is  falfe?  Yowe  fee  how  in  fo  long  a  tyme  fence  they  are  deade,
they  haue  not  yet  taken  awaye  this  Maizium  and  lucca  which  is  nowe  putrified  and  woorth  nothynge,  and  not
lyke  to  bee  fowen  in  heauen.  To  this  the  kynge  replyed,  fayinge.  In  that  they  haue  not  yet  taken  it  away
nor  fowen  it  in  heauen,  the  caufe  is  that  they  chauiiced  to  fynde  enowgh  there,  by  reafon  wherof  they  had  no
neade  of  this.  To  this  erroure  manye  thynges  were  fayde  which  feemed  of  lyttle  force  to  remoue  hym  from  his
falfe  opinion,  and  efpecially  any  fuch  as  at  that  age  are  occupy ed  of  the  deuyll,  whom  they  paynt  of  the  felfe
fame  forme  and  coloure  as  he  appereth  vnto  theym  in  dyuers  fhapes  and  formes.  They  make  alfo  Images  ot
golde,  copper,  and  woodde,  to  the  fame  fimilitudes  in  terrible  fhapes  and  fo  variable  as  the  paynters  are
accuflomed  to  paynt  them  at  the  feete  of  faynte  Mychaell  th[e]archangell  or  in  anye  other  place  where  they
paynt  them  of  mofl  horrible  port[r]iture.  Lykewyfe  when  the  deuyll  greatly  intendeth  to  feare  theym,  he
threteneth  to  fende  them  great  tempefles  which  they  caule  jiuracanas  or  Haurachanas,  and  are  fo  vehement
that  they  ouerthrowe  many  howfes  and  great  trees.  And  I  haue  feene  in  montaynes  full  of  many  and  greate
trees,  that  for  the  fpace  of  three  quarters  of  a  league  the  mountayne  hathe  byn  fubuerted  and  the  trees
ouerthrowen  and  plucked  owte  of  the  earthe  with  the  rootes :  a  thynge  doubteleffe  fo  fearefuU  and  terrible  to
behold,  that  it  may  verely  appere  to  be  doen  by  the  hand  of  the  deuell.  And  in  this  cafe  the  Chriflian  men
ought  to  confider  with  good  reafon,  that  in  al  places  where  the  holy  facrament  is  referued,  the  fayd  tempefles
are  no  more  fo  owtragious,  or  so  perelous  as  they  were  wonte  to  bee.

216

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

217

C  Of  the  temperature  of  the  regions  vnder  or  neare  to  the  burnt  lyne  cauled
Torrida  zona  or  the  Equinoctiall :  and  of  the  dyuers  feafons

of  the  yeare.

He  landes  and  regions  that  are  neare  about  the  clymes  of  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  are  naturally
hotte,  althowghe  they  bee  otherwyfe  temperate  by  the  diuine  prouidence.  And  therfore
fuche  fleffhe  or  fyfhe  as  is  taken  and  kylled  in  thefe  regions,  can  not  bee  preferued  from
putrefaction  except  it  be  rofted,  fodden,  or  perboylde,  the  fame  daye  that  it  is  kylde.  And
wheras  I  haue  fayde  that  fuch  regions  are  naturally  hot,  and  yet  temperate  by  the  prouidence
of  god,  it  is  fo  in  deede.  And  therfore  not  without  caufe  the  auncient  autours  were  of  opinion
that  the  bumte  lyne  or  Torrida  zona  where  paffeth  the  lyne  of  the  Equinoctiall,  fhulde  be
vnhabitable  by  reafon  the  foonne  hath  greater  dominion  in  that  place  then  in  any  other  of  the  fphere,
remaynynge  continually  betwene  the  two  tropykes  of  Cancer  and  Capricome.  For  when  in  thefe  regions  the
earth  is  opened  or  dygged  from  the  fuperficial  parte  therof  to  the  depth  of  a  mans  heyght,  it  is  founde
temperate.  And  within  this  fpace,  the  trees  and  plantes  fallen  and  fpreade  their  rootes,  and  no  dieper.
Extendynge  the  fame  as  farre  in  breadth  in  the  ground  as  do  their  braunches  in  the  ayer:  And  enter  no  dieper
into  the  grounde  then  I  haue  fayde,  bycaufe  that  beneth  the  depth  of  the  faid  fpace  of  a  mans  hevght,  the  earth
is  verye  hotte,  the  vpper  parte  beinge  temperate  and  verye  moylle  afwell  by  reafon  of  th[e]aboundaunce  of  water
whiche  fauleth  from  heauen  vppon  that  earth  at  certeyne  ordinarie  feafons  of  the  yeare,  as  alfo  for  the  multitude
of  great  ryuers,  brokes,  fprynges  and  maryffhes,  wherby  the  myghtie  and  fupreme  lorde  which  made  thefe  landes,
hath  mofle  prudently  prouyded  for  the  perferuation  of  the  fame.

R.  E.  As  touchynge  this  poynt  whiche  was  vnknowen  to  the  owlde  wryters,  and  without  confideration  wherof  reafon  can  not
perfectly  conceaue  howe  temperate  regions  fliulde  be  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  I  haue  thought  good  for  the  better  manifeflynge
of  this  fecreate  woorke  of  nature,  to  note  owte  of  Cardanus  his  booke  de  Elementis,  howe  all  waters  haue  theyr  courfe  toward  the
South  as  to  the  lowed  part  of  the  earth.  He  wryteth  therefore  as  foloweth.  The  water  was  made  of  leffe  quantitie  then  the  earth
and  only  in  maner  in  the  fuperficiall  parte  therof,  that  place  might  bee  lefte  for  the  habitation  of  beaftes,  and  that  water  by  his  could-
nefle  myght  temperate  and  not  deftroy  the  lyfe  of  beaftes.  And  bicaufe  this  generation  of  lyuynge  creatures,  was  only  neceflary  on
the  fuperficiall  partes  of  the  earth  in  comparifon  to  the  hole,  therfore  was  the  water  made  to  occupie  onely  the  fuperficiall  parte,  in
the  which,  metals,  plantes,  beaftes,  and  fyffhes  ftiulde  bee  nuryfhed.  And  bycaufe  there  was  great  perell  leaft  it  fhulde  be  to  much
confumed  by  the  ayer  and  heate  of  the  foonne,  continuall  mouinge  was  ioyned  to  it,  wherby  it  gathereth  couldnes  and  is  preferued
from  fodeyne  refolution.  For  fuche  waters  as  do  not  moue,  doo  foone  putrifie,  and  are  eafely  refolued  into  ayer.  By  reafon  wherof
nature  prouyded  for  the  generation  of  water  in  coulde  places,  as  vnder  the  poles  and  mountaynes.  And  whereas  the  earth  vnder  the
Equinoctiall  (hulde  otherwife  for  lacke  of  moyfter  haue  bin  to  much  burned  and  fcorched,  nature  alfo  prouyded  that  that  parte  of  the
earth  Ihulde  bee  loweft,  by  reafon  whereof  all  waters  haue  theyr  courfe  towarde  the  South  to  mitigate  with  moyfter  th[e]extremitie  of
heate  which  otherwife  ftiulde  haue  byn  intollerable  in  that  clyme.  And  by  this  reafon,  the  famous  ryuer  of  Nilus  in  Egypte.  albeit  it
haue  his  originall  and  fprynge,  owt  of  the  mountaynes  of  the  mone  cauled  Montes  Lunae  nere  vnto  the  cyrcle  of  Capricome,  yet  run-
nynge  with  all  his  braunches  vnder  and  beyonde  the  Equinoctiall  cyrcle,  it  difparfeth  throwgh  owt  the  burnt  line  of  Torrida  zona,  and
by  the  fame  vyolent  courfe  fauleth  into  owre  fea  nere  vnto  the  citie  of  Alexandria.  It  was  neceflary  therfore  that  the  greateft  parte  of
the  coulde  and  moyft  element  fliulde  haue  recourfe  thyther  and  confyft  there,  whereas  was  the  greateft  neceflitie  therof  to  temper  the
heate  of  the  foonne  by  moyftynge  and  coolynge  the  earthe  and  the  ayer,  as  vnder  the  Equinoctiall.  And  herewith  alfo  hath  moft
prudent  nature  prouyded  for  the  fecuritie  and  preferuation  of  the  places  lyinge  betwene  botlie  th[e]extremities  of  heate  and  colde,  as
betwene  the  poles  and  the  Equinoctiall.  For  the  waters  flowynge  euer  one  wayes  and  kep>nge  one  courfe,  no  regions  can  be  drowned
by  fluddes  :  which  thynge  they  well  obferue  that  delyuer  fieldes  from  inundations  or  ouerflowynges,  and  that  take  in  hande  to  drye
vp  maryfflies.  If  therfore  waters  had  not  theyr  courfe  and  faul  towarde  places  lowe  or  declynynge,  the  hole  earth  fliulde  bee  ouer-
flowne  as  a  marryfflie.  And  that  the  moft  declynynge  parte  ftiulde  bee  towarde  the  South,  and  fumwhat  hygher  about  the  poles,  the
caufe  is  afwell  the  confumynge  heate  of  the  foonne  in  the  Southe  partes,  as  the  preferuynge  coulde  of  the  hygh  mountaynes  nere  to
the  poles.  For  we  haue  els  where  proued  that  heate  confumeth  and  wafteth  as  coulde  gathereth  and  preferueth.  And  for  this  caufe
that  parte  of  the  earthe  that  is  neareft  the  poles,  is,  was,  and  euer  flialbe  higheft,  and  likewife  loweft  in  the  middeft  furtheft  from
the  poles.  And  therfore  it  was  not  conuenient  that  the  fonne  ftiuld  haue  his  courfe  on  euery  fyde,  neither  to  the  poles.  For  if  it  weare
caryed  alyke  to  euery  parte  throughowt  the  worlde,  it  is  necefary  that  the  earth  bee  equall :  and  by  that  reafon  fliulde  it  euer  bee
altogether  dryed,  or  elles  all  ouerflowed  with  water.  But  where  as  this  coulde  not  fuflyce  to  the  free  courfe  of  ryuers  for  the  often
intercourfe  of  higher  places  lyinge  in  the  waye,  whereby  ouerflowynges  and  ftayes  of  waters  and  their  corruption  myght  enfue,
moofte  prouydent  nature  hath  gyuen  this  priuileage  to  water  that  it  maye  fo  muche  afcende  as  it  hath  difcended  :  that  by  this  meanes
paflynge  ouer  mountaynes  and  hylles,  it  maye  at  the  length  bee  caryed  into  the  fea.  etc.  Hytherto  Cardanus,  lette  vs  nowe  retume
to  the  hiftorie.

There  are  alfo  many  roughe  and  hyghe  mountaynes  with  temperate  ayer  and  pleafaunt,  cleare  and
moderate  nightes. Of  the  whiche  particularitie  the  auncient  writers  hauyng  no  certeyne  knowleage,  affyrmed

317

184

2l8

The  hyjiorie  of  tJic  weft  Indies.

the  faid  burnte  lyne  or  Torrida  zona,  or  Equinoctial  to  be  naturally  vnhabitable.  As  touching  which  thing  I
ani  able  to  witneffe  the  contrary  by  teflimonie  of  fyght  and  feelyng  as  by  mofl  certeine  fenfes,  hauyng  liued
many  yeares  in  thefe  regions,  by  reafon  wherof  better  credit  ought  to  be  giuen  to  me  then  to  fuche  as  haue
grounded  their  opinion  onely  vpon  coniectures.  And  to  fpeake  further  of  the  fytuation  of  thefe  regyons,  yowe
Ihall  vnderftande  that  the  coadc  of  the  Northe  fea,  beynge  in  the  goulfo  of  Vraba  and  in  the  porte  of  Dariaia,
where  the  fliyppes  arryue  whiche  coome  owte  of  Spayne,  is  in  the  fyxte  degree  and  a  halfe,  and  in  the  feuenth,
and  from  fyxe  and  a  halfe  vnto  eyght,  excepte  a  fmaule  pointe  which  entereth  into  the  fea  toward  the  North.
That  pointe  which  of  this  land  and  new  parte  of  the  worlde  lieth  mofte  towarde  the  Eafl,  is  the  cape  of  faincte
Augufline  which  is  in  the  eight  degree.  So  that  the  faid  goulfe  of  Vraba  is  diflant  from  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,
from  a  hundreth  and  twentie  to  a  hundreth  and  thirtie  leaques  and  three  quarters  of  a  leaque  after  th[e]accompte
of  xvii.  leaques  and  a  halfe  for  euerye  degree  from  pole  to  pole.  And  thus  for  a  lyttle  more  or  leffe,  goeth  all
the  coafle.  By  reafon  wherof,  in  the  citie  of  SatiHa  Maria  Antiqua  in  Daricna,  and  in  all  that  courfe  of  the
forfayde  goulfe  of  Vraba,  at  all  tymes  of  the  yeare  the  dayes  and  nyghtes  are  in  maner  of  equall  length.  And
185  if  there  bee  any  dyfference  betwene  theym  by  reafon  of  this  fmaule  diflance  from  the  Equinoctial,  it  is  fo  lyttle,
that  in.  xxiiii.  houres  makynge  a  naturall  daye,  it  canne  not  bee  perceaued  but  by  the  iudgement  of  fpeculatiue
men  and  fuche  as  vnderflande  the  fphere.  From  henfe  the  North  flarre  is  feene  very  lowe  And  when  the
{larres  which  are  cauled  the  wardens  of  the  north  flarre,  are  vnder  the  chariotte,  it  can  not  bee  feene,  bycaufe
it  is  vnder  the  horifontal.  And  whereas  I  haue  fayde  beefore  that  it  rayneth  in  thefe  regions  at  certeyne
ordinarie  tymes,  it  is  fo  in  deede.  For  it  is  wynter  and  fummer  there  at  contrary  tymes  to  that  whiche  is  in
Spayne,  where  the  greatefle  coulde  of  frofle  and  rayne  is  in  December  and  January :  And  the  greatefl  heate  of
fommer  aboute  faynt  Johannes  daye  at  mydfommer  or  in  the  moneth  of  luly.  But  in  golden  Caflile  or
Beragiea,  it  is  contrary.  For  the  fommer  and  tyme  of  greatefl  drowght  and  withowt  rayne,  is  at  Chryflmas  and
a  moneth  before  and  a  moneth  after.  And  the  tyme  when  it  rayneth  moft,  is  about  midfommer  and  a  moneth
before  and  a  moneth  after.  And  this  feafon  whiche  they  caule  wynter,  is  not  for  that  it  is  any  coulder  then,
then  at  any  other  tyme  of  the  yeare,  or  hotter  at  Chriflmas  then  at  other  feafons,  the  tyme  in  thefe  regions
being  euer  after  one  maner,  but  for  that  that  in  this  tyme  which  they  caule  wynter,  the  foonne  is  hyd  from  theyr
fyghtes  by  reafon  of  cloudes  and  rayne  more  then  at  other  tymes.  Yet  forafmuch  as  for  the  mofle  parte  of  the
yeare  they  lyue  in  a  cleare,  open,  and  temperate  ayer,  they  fumwhat  flirynke  and  feele  a  lyttle  coulde  durynge
the  tyme  of  the  faid  moid  and  cloudy  ayer,  althowgh  it  bee  not  coulde  in  deede,  or  at  the  leafl  fuche  coulde
as  hath  any  fenfible  fharpenes.

C  Of  dyiiers  particular  thynges,  as  woormes,  ferpentes,  beaftes,

foules,  trees,  etc.

Any  other  thynges  myght  be  fayde,  and  much  differyng  from  thefe  wherof  I  haue  fpoken.
But  to  lette  paffe  the  multitude  of  thynges  whiche  are  as  variable  as  the  power  of  nature  is
infinite,  and  to  fpeake  of  fuche  thynges  as  coome  chiefely  to  my  rememberaunce  as  moofle
woorthy  to  be  noted,  I  wyll  fyrfle  fpeake  of  certe)me  lyttle  and  troubelous  beafles  whiche
maye  feeme  to  bee  engendered  of  nature  to  molefl  and  vexe  menne,  to  fhewe  them  and
gyue  them  to  vnderfland  howe  fmaule  and  vyle  a  thynge  may  ofifende  and  difquiete  them,
to  th[e]ende  that  they  maye  remember  the  pryncipall  ende  for  the  whiche  they  were  created,
that  is,  to  knowe  theyr  maker  and  procurer  of  theyr  faluation  by  the  waye  whiche  is  open  to  all  Chriflian  men
and  all  other  whiche  wyll  open  the  eyes  of  theyr  vnderflandynge.  And  although  the  thynges  whereof  wee
entende  nowe  to  fpeake  may  feeme  vyle  and  lyttle  to  bee  efleemed,  yet  are  they  woorthy  to  bee  noted  and
confydered  to  vnderfland  the  difference  and  variable  woorkes  of  nature.  So  it  is  therfore,  that  whereas  in
many  partes  of  the  firme  lande  by  the  which  afwell  the  Chriftians  as  Indians  doo  trauel,  there  are  fuch  maryffhes
and  waters  in  the  way  that  they  are  fayne  to  go  withowt  breeches  amonge  the  herbes  and  weedes,  by  reafon
wherof,  certeyne  fmaule  beafles  or  woormes  (which  they  caule  Garapatcs)  much  lyke  vnto  tykes,  cleaue  fafl  to
theyr  legges.  Thefe  wormes  are  as  little  as  the  pouder  of  beaten  fait :  And  cleaue  fo  fafl  that  they  can  by  no
meanes  be  taken  away  except  the  place  bee  noynted  with  oyle.  And  after  that  the  legges  bee  noynted  awhyle
with  oyle,  or  the  other  partes  where  thefe  lyttle  tykes  are  faflened,  they  fcrape  the  place  with  a  knyfe  and  fo
take  them  away.  But  the  Indians  whiche  haue  no  oyle,  fmoke  them  and  burne  them  with  fyer,  and  abyde
great  peynes  in  takynge  them  awaye  by  this  meanes. Of  other  lyttle  beafles  which  trouble  men  and  are

3lS

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

219

engende[red]  in  theyr  heades  or  other  partes  of  theyr  bodies,  I  faye  that  the  Chriftian  men  which  trauell  into
thefe  partes,  haue  them  but  feldome  tynies,  and  that  not  part,  one  or  two,  and  this  alfo  very  feldome.  For
paffynge  by  the  lyne  of  the  Diameter  where  the  compaffe  makethe  difference  of  faylynge  by  the  wynde  cauled
Greco,  (that  is  North  Eafl)  and  MagiJIral,  (that  is  fouth  wefl)  which  is  in  the  courfe  of  the  Ilandes  of  Azori,
they  fayle  but  a  lyttle  way  folowing  owre  vyage  by  the  wefl,  but  that  all  the  lyfe  which  the  ChriRians  cary  with
them,  or  are  engendered  in  theyr  heades  or  other  places  of  theyr  bodier,  dye  and  vtterlye  confume  by  lyttle  and
lyttle,  and  are  not  engendered  in  India  excepte  in  the  heades  of  lyttle  chyldren  in  thofe  partes  afwel  amonge
the  chyldren  of  the  Chriflians  which  are  borne  there,  as  alfo  amonge  the  natural  Indians  who  haue  theym  186
commonly  in  theyr  heades  and  fumetymes  in  other  partes  of  theyr  bodyes,  and  efpecially  they  of  the  prouince
of  Cueua,  which  is  a  region  conteynynge  more  then  a  hundreth  leaques  in  length,  and  embrafeth  the  one  and
the  other  coafl  of  the  North  fea  and  of  the  Eail.  When  thefe  Indians  are  infected  with  this  fylthyneffe,  they
dreffe  and  clenfe  one  an  other.  And  they  that  exercife  this,  are  for  the  mofle  parte  women  who  eate  all  that
they  take :  And  haue  herein  fuch  dexteritie  by  reafon  of  theyr  exercife,  that  owre  men  can  not  lyghtly  atteyne
therunto.  There  is  alfo  another  thynge  greatly  to  bee  confydered.  And  this  is  how  the  Chriflian  men  beinge
there  cleane  frome  this  fylthynes  of  India,  afwell  in  theyr  heades  as  the  refle  of  theyr  bodyes,  yet  when  they
retume  to  coomme  ageyne  into  Europe  and  begyn  to  arryue  in  that  place  of  the  Ocean  fea  where  wee  fayde
before  that  the  lyfe  dyed  and  forfoke  them,  fuddenly  in  theyr  repaffynge  by  the  fame  clyme  (as  thoughe  the  lyfe
had  taryed  for  them  in  that  place)  they  can  by  no  meanes  auoyde  theym  for  the  fpace  of  certeyne  dayes
although  they  change  theyr  fhertes  two  or  three  tymes  in  a  day.  Thefe  lyfe  are  at  the  fyrfle  as  lyttle  as  nyttes,
and  growe  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  vntyl  they  bee  of  the  byggeneffe  that  they  are  in  Spayne.  This  haue  I  often
tymes  proued,  hauynge  nowe  foure  tymes  paffed  the  Ocean  fea  by  this  vyage.

Befyde  thefe  woormes  and  vermyn  wherof  we  haue  fpoken,  there  is  another  lyttle  mifchtuous  woorme,
whiche  we  may  number  amonge  the  kyndes  of  fleas. This  peftilence  the  Indians  caule  Nigua:  And  is  much Nigua.
leffe  then  a  flea. It  perfeth  the  flefhe  of  a  man,  and  fo  launfeth  or  cutteth  the  fame  (while  in  the  meane  tyme
it  can  nother  bee  feene  nor  taken)  that  from  fume  it  hath  cutte  of  theyr  handes,  and  from  other  theyr  fiete
vntyll  the  remedy  was  founde  to  annoynte  the  place  with  oyle  and  fcrape  it  with  a  rafoure.

In  the  firme  lande  in  golden  Caflyle  or  Beragtia,  there  are  many  vypers  lyke  vnto  them  of  Spayne.  They  Vypers.
that  are  bytten  of  them,  dye  in  fhort  fpace.  For  fewe  lyue  to  the  fourthe  daye  except  prefent  remedy.  Of
thefe,  fume  are  of  a  leffe  kind  then  other:  And  haue  theyr  tayle  fumwhat  rounde,  and  leape  in  the  ayer  to
affayle  men.  And  for  this  caufe,  fume  caule  this  kynde  of  vypers  Tyro.  Theyr  bytyng  is  mofl  venemous,  and
for  the  mofle  parte  incurable.  One  of  theym  chaunced  to  byte  an  Indian  mayde  whiche  ferued  me  in  my
houfe,  to  whome  I  caufed  the  furgians  to  m)'nifler  theyr  ordinarye  cure,  but  they  coulde  doo  her  no  good,  nor
yet  get  one  droppe  of  bludde  owt  of  her,  but  only  a  yelowe  water,  fo  that  fhee  died  the  thyrd  day  for  lacke  of
remedy  as  the  like  hath  chaunced  to  dyuers  other.  This  mayde  was  of  th[e]age  of.  xiiii.  yeares  and  fpoke  the
Spanyffhe  toonge  as  yf  fhee  had  byn  borne  in  Caflyle.  Shee  fayde  that  the  vyper  whiche  bytte  her  on  the
foote,  was  two  fpannes  longe  or  lyttle  leffe.  And  that  to  byte  her  fhee  lepte  in  the  ayer  for  the  fpace  of  more
then  fyxe  fpaces,  as  I  haue  harde  the  lyke  of  other  credible  perfons.

I  haue  alfo  feene  in  the  firme  lande,  a  kynde  of  adders  very  fmaule  and  of  feuen  or  eyght  foote  longe.
Thefe  are  fo  redde  that  in  the  nyght  they  appeare  lyke  burnynge  cooles,  and  in  the  day  feeme  as  redde  as
bludde.  Thefe  are  alfo  venemous,  but  not  fo  much  as  the  vypers.  There  are  other  much  leffe  and  fhorter  and
blacker.  Thefe  coome  owt  of  the  ryuers  and  wander  fumtymes  farre  on  the  lande,  and  are  lykwyfe  venemous.
There  are  alfo  other  adders  of  a  ruffet  coloure.  Thefe  are  fumwhat  bygger  then  the  vypers,  and  are  hurtful  and
venemous.  There  are  lykewyfe  an  other  forte  of  manye  coloures  and  very  longe.  Of  thefe  I  fawe  one  in  the
yeare  of  Chrift  i  5  i  5.  in  the  Hand  of  Hifpaniola  nere  vnto  the  fea  cofles  at  the  foote  of  the  mountaynes  cauled
Pedernales.  When  this  adder  was  flayne,  I  meafured  her  and  founde  her  to  be  more  then.  xx.  foote  longe,  and
fumwhat  more  then  a  mans  fyfl  in  byggenes.  And  al thoughe  fhe  hadde  three  or  foure  deadely  woundes  with  a
fwoorde,  yet  dyed  fhee  not  nor  floonke  the  fame  daye,  in  fo  much  that  her  bludde  continued  warme  all  that
tyme.  There  are  alfo  in  the  maryffhes  and  defertes  of  the  firme  lande  many  other  kyndes  of  lyfertes,  dragons.  Dragons,
and  other  dyuers  kyndes  of  ferpentes  wherof  I  entende  not  here  to  fpeake  much,  bycaufe  I  haue  more
particulerly  entreated  of  thefe  thynges  in  my  generall  hiRorie  of  the  Wefle  Indyes.

There  are  alfo  fpiders  of  marueylous  bygneffe.  And  I  haue  feene  fumme  \\dth  the  body  and  legges,  bygger  Spyders.
then  a  mannes  hande  extended  euery  waye.  And  I  ones  fawe  one  of  fuche  bygneffe,  that  onely  her  bodye  was  as
bygge  as  a  fparowe,  and  full  of  that  laune  wherof  they  make  their  webbes.  This  was  of  a  darke  ruffette  coloure,  187
with  eyes  greater  then  the  eies  of  a  fparow.  They  are  venemous  and  of  terrible  fhape  to  beholde.  There  are  alfo
fcorpions  and  dyuers  other  fuche  venemous  wormes.  Wherby  we  maye  fee,  that  where  as  natural  caufes  and  influ-
ence of  the  pianettes  are  of  flrongefl.  actiuitie,  they  ceafe  not  to  engender  and  brynge  foorthe  bothe  good  and  badde
accordynge  to  the  difpofytion  of  the  matter,  whiche  they  alfo  doo  partely  difpofe  as  the  phylofophers  affyrme.

Adders.

:iO

220

The  hyjiorie  of  the  vvcjle  Indies.

Crabbci

Furthermore  in  the  fyrme  lande,  there  are  manye  toades  beyng  very  noyous  and  hurteful  by  reafon  of
their  great  multitude.  They  are  not  venemous.  They  are  fecne  in  greatc  aboundance  in  Daricna  where  they
are  fo  bygge  that  when  they  dye  in  the  time  of  drouth,  the  bones  of  fum  of  them  (and  efpecially  the  rybbes)
are  of  fuche  greatnefle  that  they  appere  too  bee  the  bones  of  cattes  or  of  fumme  other  beafles  of  the  fame
byggenefle.  But  as  the  waters  dyminiflie  and  the  moyfture  confumeth  in  the  tyme  of  drouth  (as  I  haue  fayde)
they  alfo  confume  therwith  vntyll  the  yeare  nexte  folowing  when  the  rayne  and  moyfture  increafe,  at  whiche
tyme  they  are  feene  ageyne.  Neuertheleffe,  at  this  prefent,  there  is  no  fuch  quantitie  of  them  as  was  wonte  to
bee,  by  reafon  that  as  the  land  is  better  cultured  by  the  Chriftians,  as  well  by  the  fellynge  of  wooddes  and
fhrubbes  as  alfo  by  the  pafture  of  kine,  horfes,  and  other  beaftes,  fo  is  it  apparent  that  this  poyfon  diminifheth
dayly,  wherby  that  regyon  becometh  more  holfome  and  pleafaunt.  Thefe  toades  fynge  after  three  or  foure
fortes.  For  fumme  of  them  fynge  pleafauntly :  other,  lyke  owres  of  Spayne.  Summe  alfo  whiftle :  and  other
fumme  make  an  other  maner  of  noyfe.  They  are  lykewyfe  of  dyuers  colours :  as  fumme  greene,  fumme
ruflette  or  grey,  and  fumme  almoft  blacke.  But  of  all  fortes,  they  are  great,  and  fylthye,  and  noyous  by  reafon
of  their  great  multitude :  yet  are  they  not  venemous  as  I  haue  fayde.

There  are  alfo  a  ftraunge  kynde  of  crabbes,  whiche  coome  foorthe  of  certeyne  holes  of  the  earth  that  they
them  felues  make.  The  head  and  bodye  of  thefe,  make  one  rounde  thing  muche  lyke  vnto  the  hoode  of  a
fawkon :  hauynge  foure  feete  commyng  owt  of  the  one  fyde  and  as  many  owt  of  the  other.  They  haue  alfo
two  mouthes  like  vnto  a  paire  of  fmaule  pinfers,  the  one  bygger  then  the  other,  wherwith  they  byte,  but  do  no
great  hurte  bycaufe  they  are  not  venemous.  Their  (kyn  and  bodye  is  fmoothe  and  thynne  as  is  the  fkynne  of
a  man,  fauynge  that  it  is  fumwhat  harder.  Their  colour  is  ruflette  or  white,  or  blewe,  and  walke  fydelonge.
They  are  very  good  to  bee  eaten :  In  fo  muche  that  the  Chriftians  trauayling  by  the  fyrme  lande,  haue  byn
greatly  nuryffhed  by  them  bycaufe  they  are  founde  in  maner  euery  where.  In  ftiape  and  forme,  they  are
muche  lyke  vnto  the  crabbe  which  we  paynte  for  the  fygne  Cancer,  and  like  vnto  thofe  which  are  found  in
Spaine  in  Andabifia  in  the  ryuer  Guadalchiber  where  it  entereth  into  the  fea,  and  in  the  fea  coaftes  therabout,
fauynge  that  thefe  are  of  the  water  and  the  other  of  the  lande.  They  are  fumtymes  hurtefull,  fo  that  they  that
eate  of  them  dye.  But  this  chaunceth  onely  when  they  haue  eaten  any  venemous  thyng,  or  of  the  venemous
apples  wherwith  the  Canibale  archers  poyfon  their  arrowes  wherof  I  wyll  fpeake  hereafter.  And  for  this  caufe
the  Chriftians  take  hede  howe  they  eate  of  thefe  crabbes  if  they  fynde  them  neare  vnto  the  fayd  apple  trees.

Furthermore  in  thefe  Indies,  afwell  in  the  fyrme  lande  as  in  the  Ilandes,  there  is  founde  a  kynde  of
ferpentes,  which  they  caule.  Y.  V.  anas,  which  fumme  caule  Iiiatinas.  Thefe  are  terrible  and  fearefull  to  fyght,
and  yet  not  hurtefull.  They  are  very  delicate  to  bee  eaten,  and  it  is  not  yet  knowen  whether  they  be  beaftes
of  the  lande  or  fyfhes,  bycaufe  they  lyue  in  the  water,  and  wander  in  the  woddes  and  on  the  lande.  They  haue
foure  feete,  and  are  commonly  bigger  then  connies  and  in  fumme  places  bygger  then  otters,  with  tayles  lyke
lifartes  or  eutes.  Their  fkynne  is  fpotted,  and  of  the  fame  kynd  of  fmothneffe  or  bareneffe,  although  of  dyuers
colours.  Vpon  the  ridge  of  their  backes,  they  haue  many  long  prickes.  Theyr  teethe  are  very  ftiarpe,  and
efpecially  theyr  fanges  or  dogge  teeth.  Their  throtes  are  longe  and  large,  reachynge  from  their  beardes  to
their  breaftes,  of  the  lyke  (kynne  to  the  refydewe  of  their  bodyes.  They  are  durame,  and  haue  no  voyce  or
make  any  noyfe  or  crye  although  they  bee  kept  tyde  to  the  foote  of  a  chefte  or  any  other  thynge  for  the  fpace
of  XX.  or.  XXV.  dayes  withowt  any  thyng  to  eate  or  drynke,  excepte  they  gyue  them  nowe  and  then  a  lyttle  of
the  breade  of  Cazabbi,  or  fumme  fuch  other  thyng.  They  haue  foure  feete,  and  their  fore  feete  as  longe  as  a
mans  fynger  with  clawes  lyke  the  clawes  of  a  byrde,  but  weaker,  and  fuche  as  can  not  grafple  or  take  holde  of
any  thynge.  They  are  muche  better  to  bee  eaten  then  to  beholde.  For  fewe  that  fee  them,  wyll  haue  defyre
to  eate  of  them,  by  reafon  of  their  horrible  fhape  excepte  fuche  as  haue  byn  accuftomed  to  the  beaftes  of  thefe
regyons,  whiche  are  more  horrible  and  fearefull,  as  this  is  not  but  onely  in  apparence.  Their  flefhe  is  of  much
better  tafte  then  the  flefhe  of  connyes  and  more  holfome.  For  it  hurteth  none  but  onely  fuch  as  haue  had  the
frenfhe  poxe.  In  fo  much  that  if  they  haue  onely  byn  touched  of  that  infyrmitie,  although  they  haue  byn  hole
of  longe  tyme,  neuertheleffe  they  feele  hurte  and  complayne  of  the  eatynge  of  thefe  luannas,  as  hath  byn  often
tymes  proued  by  experience.

There  are  founde  in  the  fyrme  lande  certeyne  byrdes  fo  lyttle  that  the  hole  body  of  one  of  theym  is  no
bygger  then  the  toppe  of  the  byggeft  fynger  of  a  mans  hande :  and  yet  is  the  bare  body  withowt  the  fethers  not
pafte  halfe  fo  bygge.  This  byrde,  befyde  her  lyttlenes,  is  of  fuch  velocitie  and  fwyftnes  in  flying  that  who  fo
feeth  her  fleing  in  the  ayer,  can  not  fe  her  flap  or  beate  her  winges  after  any  other  fort  t^en  do  the  dorres  or
humble  bees  or  betels :  fo  that  there  is  no  man  that  feeth  her  flie,  that  wold  think  her  to  be  any  other  then  a
dorre.  They  make  their  neftes  accordyng  to  the  proportion  of  their  bignes.  And  I  haue  feene  that  one  of
thefe  byrdes  with  her  neft  put  in  a  paire  of  gold  weights,  altogether  hath  waid  no  more  then.  ii.  Tomini,
which  are  in  poife.  24.  grains,  with  the  fethers  with  out  the  which  fhe  fliulde  haue  wayed  fumwhat  leffe.  And
doubt  leffe  when  I  confider  the  fyneneffe  of  the  clawes  and  feete  of  thefe  birdes,  I  knowe  not  whervnto  I  may

Serpentes  caiiled
luannL

188

B>Tdes.

A  very  lyttle
byrde.

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

221

better  liken  them  then  to  the  lyttle  byrdes  whiche  the  lymmers  of  bookes  are  accuflomed  to  paynte  on  the  mar-
gentes  of  churche  bookes  and  other  bookes  of  dcuinc  fcruice.  Their  fethers  are  of  many  faire  colours  as  golden
yelowe  and  greene  befide  other  variable  colours.  Their  beake  is  verye  longe  for  the  proportion  of  theyr  bodies:
and  as  fyne  and  fubtile  as  a  fowyng  nedle.  They  are  very  hardye :  fo  that  when  they  fee  a  man  clyme  the
tree  where  they  haue  theyr  nefles,  they  flye  at  hys  face  and  flryke  hym  in  the  eyes,  commyng,  goynge,  and
retournynge  with  fuch  fwyftnes,  that  no  man  wolde  lightly  beleue  it  th^t  hath  not  feene  it.  And  certenly  thefe
byrdes  are  fo  lyttle,  that  I  durfl  not  haue  made  mention  hereof  if  it  were  not  that  diuers  other  which  haue
feene  them  as  wel  as  I,  can  beare  witnes  of  my  faying.  They  make  their  nefles  of  flockes  and  heare  of  cotten
wherof  there  is  great  plentie  in  thefe  regions,  and  ferueth  wel  for  theyr  purpofe.  But  as  touchyng  the  byrdes,
foules,  and  beafles  of  thefe  Indies,  bycaufe  they  are  innumerable  bothe  lyttle  and  greate,  I  intende  not  to
fpeake  muche  heare,  bycaufe  I  haue  fpoken  more  largely  hereof  in  my  generall  hyflorye  of  the  Indyes.

There  is  an  other  kynde  of  beafles  feene  in  the  firme  land  which  feemed  very  flraunge  and  marueilous  to
the  Chryflian  men  to  beholde,  and  muche  differynge  from  all  other  beafles  which  haue  b}Ti  feene  in  other
partes  of  the  worlde.  Thefe  beafles  are  cauled  Bardati:  And  are  foure  footed,  hauing  their  taile  and  al  the
refl  of  theyr  bodies  couered  onely  with  a  fkyn  lyke  the  coperture  of  a  barbed  horfe  or  the  chekered  fkj-nne  of
a  lyfarte  or  Crocodyle,  of  coloure  betwene  whyte  and  ruffet,  inclynynge  fumwhat  more  to  whyte.  This  beafl,
is  of  forme  and  fhape  much  lyke  to  a  barbed  horfe  with  his  barbes  and  flankettes  in  all  poyntes.  And  from
vnder  that  which  is  the  barbe  and  coperture,  the  tayle  commeth  foorth,  and  the  feete  in  theyr  place,  the  necke
alfo  and  the  eares  in  theyr  partes,  and  in  fyne  all  thynges  in  lyke  forte  as  in  a  barbed  courfer.  They  are  of
the  bygnes  of  one  of  thefe  common  dogges.  They  are  not  hurtfull.  They  are  fylthy,  and  haue  theyr  habita-
tion in  certen  hillockes  of  earthe  where  digginge  with  there  feete  they  make  their  dens  very  deepe  and  the  holes
therof  in  like  maner  as  do  connyes.  They  are  verye  excellent  to  be  eaten,  and  are  taken  with  nettes  and  fum
alfo  killed  with  crofbowes.  They  are  lykewife  taken  often  tymes  when  the  hufband  men  bume  the  flubble  in
fowyng  time,  or  to  renewe  the  herbage  for  kyne  and  other  beafles.  I  haue  often  times  eaten  of  their  fiefhe
which  femeth  to  me  of  better  tafl  then  kyddes  fiefhe,  and  holfome  to  be  eaten.  And  if  thefe  beafles  had  euer
byn  feene  in  thefe  partes  of  the  woorlde  where  the  firfl  barbed  horfes  had  their  original,  no  man  wold  iudge
but  that  the  forme  and  faffhion  of  the  coperture  of  horfes  furnifhed  for  the  warres  was  fyrfle  deuyfed  by  the
fyght  of  thefe  beafles.

There  is  alfo  in  the  firme  lande  an  other  beafle  cauled  07-fo  Formigaro,  that  is,  the  Ante  beare.  This  beafte
in  heare  and  coloure,  is  much  lyke  to  the  beare  of  Spayne,  and  in  maner  of  the  fame  makynge  faue  that  he  hath
a  much  longer  fnowt  and  is  of  euyll  fyght.  They  are  often  tymes  taken  only  with  flaues  without  any  other
weapon,  and  are  not  hurtful.  They  are  alfo  taken  with  dogges  bycaufe  they  are  not  naturally  armed  althowgh
they  byte  fumwhat.  They  are  founde  for  the  mofle  parte  about  and  neare  to  the  hyllockes  where  are  great
abundaunce  of  antes.  For  in  thefe  regions  is  engendered  a  certeyne  kynde  of  antes  very  lyttle  and  blacke,  in
the  fyeldes  and  playnes  where  as  growe  no  trees,  where  by  th[e]inflinct  of  nature  thefe  antes  feparate  them
felues  to  engender  far  from  the  wooddes  for  feare  of  thefe  beares:  The  whiche  bycaufe  they  are  fearefull,  vyle,
and  vnarmed  (as  I  haue  fayde)  they  keepe  euei  in  places  full  of  trees  vntyll  very  famen  and  neceffitie,  or  the
great  defire  that  they  haue  to  fiede  of  thefe  antes,  caufe  them  to  coomme  owt  of  the  wooddes  to  hunte  for  them.
Thefe  antes  make  a  hyllocke  of  earth  to  the  heyght  of  a  man,  or  fumwhat  more  or  leffe,  and  as  bygge  as  a  great
chefl,  and  fumtymes  as  bygge  as  a  butte  or  a  hogges  head,  and  as  hard  as  a  flone:  So  that  the>  feeme  as
thoughe  they  were  flones  fet  vp  to  lymytte  th[e]endes  and  confines  of  certeyne  landes.  Within  thefe  hyllockes
made  of  mofl  harde  earth,  are  innumerable  and  infinite  lyttle  antes,  the  which  may  bee  gathered  by  bufhelles
when  the  hyllocke  is  broken.  The  which  when  it  is  fumtymes  moyfled  by  rayne  and  then  dryed  ageyne  by  the
heate  of  the  foonne,  it  breaketh  and  hath  certeyne  fmaul  ryftes  as  lyttle  and  fubtyle  as  the  edge  of  a  knyfe.
And  it  femeth  that  nature  hath  gyuen  fenfe  to  thefe  Antes  to  fynde  fuch  a  matter  of  earth  wherwith  they  may
make  the  fayde  hillocke  of  fuche  hardenes  that  it  may  feeme  a  flronge  pauement  made  of  lyme  and  flone.  And
wheras  I  haue  proued  and  caufed  fum  of  them  to  bee  broken,  I  haue  founde  theim  of  fuche  hardenes  as  if  I  had
not  feene  I  coulde  not  haue  beleaued :  In  fo  muche  that  they  coulde  fcarcely  bee  broken  with  pykes  oZ  Iren :
So  flronge  fortreffes  doo  thefe  lyttle  beafles  make  for  theyr  fauegarde  ageynfl  theyr  aduerfarie  the  beare,  who  is
chiefely  nuryffhed  by  them,  and  gyuen  them  as  an  enemie,  accordynge  to  the  common  prouerbe  which  fayth,
Non  e  alaina  perfona  fi  libera,  a  chimanchi  il  ftio  Bargello-.  That  is,  there  is  no  man  fo  free  that  hath  not  his
perfecutour  or  pryuie  enemie.  And  here  when  I  confyder  the  maruelous  prouidence  which  nature  hath  gyuen
to  thefe  lyttle  boddies,  I  caule  to  remembraunce  the  wittie  fentence  of  Plinie,  where  fpeakyng  of  fuch  lyttle
beafles,  he  fayth  thus.  Why  doo  we  maruayle  at  the  towrebearynge  fhoulders  of  Elephantes,  and  not  rather
where  nature  hathe  placed  fo  many  fences  and  fuche  induflry  in  fuche  lyttle  boddies?  where  is  hearynge,
fmellynge,  feeinge,  and  feelynge,  ye,  where  are  the  vaynes  and  arteries  (without  which  no  beafle  can  lyue  or
moue)  in  thefe  fo  lyttle  boddies  whereof  fume  are  fo  fmaule  that  theyr  hole  boddies  can  fcarfely  be  fene  of  owr

Beastes

Bzrdati

189

Beares.

Antes.

222

The  /lyjion'c  of  the  vvejlc  Indies.

190

A  straunge  bfiast
whicho  seemeth  a
kjTid  of
Chameicon.

eyes,  what  fliall  we  then  faye  of  the  partes  of  the  fame?  Yet  euen  amonge  thefe  are  there  many  of  fuch  fagacitie
and  indullrye  as  the  lyke  is  not  feene  in  beafles  of  greater  quantitie,  no  nor  yet  in  man,  etc.  But  to  returne  to
the  hyllorie.  This  enemie  which  nature  hath  gyuen  to  thefe  lyttle  beafles,  vfeth  this  maner  to  affayle  them.
When  he  refortethe  to  the  hyllocke  where  the  antes  lye  hid  as  in  theyr  fortrefle,  he  putteth  his  toonge  to  one  of
the  ryftes  wherof  we  haue  fpoken  being  as  fubtyle  as  the  edge  of  a  fwoorde,  and  there  with  continuall  lyckynge,
maketh  the  place  moyfl,  the  fome  and  froth  of  his  mouth  beinge  of  fuch  propertie  that  by  continual  lycking  the
place,  it  enlargeth  the  ryfte  in  fuch  fort  by  lyttle  and  lyttle,  that  at  the  length  he  eafely  putteth  in  his  toonge
whiche  he  hath  very  longe  and  thynne,  and  much  difproportionate  to  his  bodye.  And  when  he  hath  thus  made
free  pallage  for  his  toonge  into  the  hyllocke  to  put  it  eafely  in  and  owt  at  his  pleafure,  then  he  thrufleth  it  into
the  hole  as  farre  as  he  can  reache,  and  fo  letteth  it  refle  a  good  fpace  vntyl  a  great  quantitie  of  the  antes  (whofe
nature  reioyfeth  in  heate  and  moyfler)  haue  laden  his  tonge  and  as  many  as  he  can  conteyne  in  the  holowneffe
thereof:  at  which  t>Tne  he  fuddeynly  draweth  it  into  his  mouth  and  eateth  them,  and  returneth  ageyne  to  the  fame
practife  immediatly  vntyl  he  haue  eaten  as  manye  as  hym  lyfleth,  or  as  longe  as  he  can  reache  any  with  his
tonge.  The  flefflie  of  this  beafle,  is  fylthy  and  vnfauery.  But  by  reafon  of  th[e]extreme  fliyftes  and  neceffitie
that  the  Chriftian  men  were  put  to  at  theyr  fyrfl  commynge  into  thefe  partes,  they  were  inforced  to  proue  al
thynges  and  fo  fel  to  th[e]eatyng  of  thefe  beafles.  But  when  they  had  founde  more  delycate  meates,  they  fell
into  hatred  with  this.  Thefe  antes  liaue  th[e]apperaunce  of  the  place  of  their  enteraunce  into  the  hyllocke,
\nder  the  grounde.  And  this  at  fo  lyttle  a  hole  that  it  could  hardely  be  founde  yf  certeyne  of  them  were  not
feene  to  paffe  in  and  owt.  But  by  this  way  the  beares  coulde  haue  no  fuch  poure  to  hurte  them  as  aboue  at
the  fayde  ryftes  as  I  haue  fayde.  There  is  an  other  flrange  beafle  whiche  by  a  name  of  contrary  effecte,  the
Spanyardes  caule  Cagnuolo  kggiero,  that  is  the  lyght  dogge,  wheras  it  is  one  of  the  llowefte  beafles  in  the  worlde,
and  fo  heauy  and  dull  in  mouynge  that  it  canne  fcarfely  go  fyftie  pafes  in  a  hole  day.  Thefe  beaftes  are  in  the
firme  lande,  and  are  very  flraunge  to  beholde  for  the  difproportion  that  they  haue  to  all  other  beafles.  They
are  abowte  two  fpannes  in  length  when  they  are  growne  to  theyr  full  byggeneffe.  But  when  they  are  very
younge,  they  are  fumewhat  more  groffe  then  longe.  They  haue  foure  fubtyle  fiete,  and  in  euery  of  them  foure
clawes  lyke  vnto  byrdes,  and  ioyned  togyther.  Yet  are  nother  theyr  clawes  or  theyr  fiete  able  to  fufleyne  theyr
bodyes  from  the  grounde.  By  reafon  wherof  and  by  the  heauyneffe  of  theyr  boddies,  they  drawe  theyr  bellyes
on  the  grounde.  Theyr  neckes  are  hygh  and  flreyght  and  all  equall  lyke  the  peflle  of  a  morter,  which  is
altogyther  equall  euen  vnto  the  toppe  withowt  makynge  any  proportion  or  fmiilitude  of  a  headde,  or  any
dyfiference  excepte  in  the  noddle.  And  in  the  toppes  of  theyr  neckes,  they  haue  verye  rounde  faces  much  lyke
vnto  owles :  And  haue  a  marke  of  theyr  owne  heare  after  the  maner  of  a  cyrcle  whiche  makethe  theyr  faces
feeme  fumwhat  more  longe  then  large.  They  haue  fmaule  eyes  and  rounde :  And  noflrylles  lyke  vnto  munkeys.
They  haue  lyttle  mouthes,  and  moue  theyr  neckes  frome  one  fyde  to  an  other  as  thoughe  they  were  aflonyffhed.
Theyr  chiefe  defyxe  and  delyte  is  to  cleaue  and  flycke  fafle  vnto  trees  or  fume  other  thynge  whereby  they  may
clyme  alofte.  And  therfore  for  the  mofle  parte,  thefe  beaftes  are  founde  vppon  trees  whervnto  cleauynge  faft,
they  mounte  vp  by  lyttle  and  lyttle,  fleyinge  them  felues  by  theyr  longe  clawes.  The  coloure  of  theyr  heare,
is  betwene  ruffet  and  whyte,  and  of  the  proper  coloure  of  the  heare  of  a  wefell.  They  haue  no  tayles,  and
theyr  voyce  is  much  dyfferynge  frome  other  beaftes :  for  they  fynge  onely  in  the  nyght :  And  that  continually
frome  tyme  to  tyme  fyngynge  euer  fyxe  notes  one  hygher  then  an  other,  fo  faulynge  with  the  fame  that  the
fyrfte  note  is  the  hygheft  and  the  other  in  a  bafer  tewne  as  yf  a  man  ftiuld  fay  La,  fol,fa,  mi,  re,  vt.  So  this
beaft  fayth,  Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha.  And  doubteleffe,  it  feemeth  vnto  me,  that  as  I  haue  fayde  in  the  chapiter
of  the  beafte  cauled  Bardati,  that  thofe  beaftes  might  bee  th[e]originall  and  document  to  imbarbe  horfes,  euen
fo  the  fyrfte  inuenture  of  mufycke  myght  feeme  by  the  hearynge  of  this  beaft  to  haue  the  fyrft  principles  of  that
fcyence  rather  then  by  any  other  thynge  in  the  worlde.  But  nowe  to  returne  to  the  hyftorie :  I  fay  that  in  a
fhorte  fpace  after  this  beafte  hath  foonge  and  hath  paufed  a  whyle,  flie  returneth  ageyne  to  the  felfe  fame  fonge,
and  doth  this  only  in  the  nyght  and  not  in  the  day.  By  reafon  wherof  and  alfo  bycaufe  of  her  euyll  fyght,  I
thynke  her  to  bee  a  nyght  beafte  and  the  frende  of  darkeneffe.  Sumtymes  the  Chriftian  menne  fynde  thefe
beaftes  and  brynge  theym  home  to  theyr  houfes,  where  alfo  they  creepe  all  abowte  with  theyr  naturall  lloweneffe,
in  fo  much  that  nother  for  threatenynge  or  pryckynge  they  wyll  moue  any  fafter  then  theyr  natural  and
accuftomed  pafe.  And  yf  they  fynde  any  trees,  they  creepe  thyther  immediatly,  and  mounte  to  the  toppe  ot
the  hygheft  braunche  thereof,  where  they  remayne  continually  for  the  fpace  of  eyght,  or  tenne,  or  twentie  dayes
v.ithout  eatynge  of  any  thinge  as  farre  as  any  man  can  iudge.  And  wheras  I  my  felfe  haue  kepte  theym  in  my
houfe,  I  coulde  neuer  perceaue  other  but  that  they  lyue  onely  of  ayer.  And  of  the  fame  opinion  are  in  maner
all  men  of  thofe  regions,  bycaufe  they  haue  neuer  feene  them  eate  any  thynge,  but  euer  turne  theyr  heades  and
mouthes  towarde  that  parte  where  the  wynde  bloweth  moft :  whereby  may  bee  confydered  that  they  take  mofte
pleafure  in  the  ayer.  They  byte  not,  nor  yet  can  byte,  hauyng  very  lyttle  mouthes.  They  are  not  venemous
or  noyous  any  way :  but  altogyther  brutiflie  and  vtterly  vnprofytable  and  without  commoditie  yet  knowen  to

The  hyftorie  of  the  vvejie  Indies.

223

men,  fauynge  onely  to  moue  theyr  myndes  to  contemplate  th[e]infinite  poure  of  god,  who  delyteth  in  the
varietie  of  creatures,  wherby  appeareth  the  poure  of  his  incomprehenfible  wifedome  and  maieflie  fo  farre  to
excede  the  capacitie  of  mans  vnderftandynge.

In  thefe  regions  there  are  hkewife  found  certeyne  foules  or  byrdes  which  the  Indians  caule  Akatraz.
Thefe  are  much  bygger  then  geefe.  The  greated  parte  of  theyr  fethers  are  of  ruffet  coloure,  and  in  fume  partes
yelowe.  Theyr  bylles  or  beakes  are  of  two  fpannes  in  length  and  verye  large  neare  to  the  heade,  and  growynge
fmaule  towarde  the  poynte.  They  haue  greate  and  large  throtes :  And  are  much  lyke  to  a  foule  which  I  fawe
in  Flaunders  in  Bruffelles  in  yowre  maieflies  pallaice  which  the  Flemynges  caule  Haina.  And  I  remember
that  when  yowr  maieflie  dyned  one  day  in  yowre  great  haule  there  was  brought  to  yowre  maieflies  prefence  a
chauderne  of  water  with  certeyne  fyffhes  alyue,  which  the  fayde  foule  did  eate  vp  hole.  And  I  thynke  verely
that  that  foule  was  a  foule  of  the  fea  bycaufe  fliee  had  fiete  lyke  foules  of  the  water  as  haue  alfo  thefe  Akairazi,
which  are  likewyfe  foules  of  the  fea :  and  of  fuch  greatneffe  that  I  haue  feene  a  hole  cote  of  a  man  put  into  the
throates  of  one  of  theym  in  Panama  in  the  yeare  1521,  And  forafmuch  as  in  that  coafle  oi  Fanajna,  there
paffeth  and  flyeth  a  greate  multitude  of  thefe  Akatrazi  beinge  a  thynge  very  notable,  I  wyll  declare  the  maner
hereof  as  not  onely  I,  but  alfo  dyuers  other  nowe  prefente  in  yowre  maieflies  courte  haue  often  tjTnes  feene.
Yowre  maieflie  fliall  therfore  vnderflande  that  in  this  place  (as  I  haue  fayde  before)  the  fea  of  Siir  ryfeth  and
fauleth  two  leagues  and  more  from  fyxe  houres  to  fyxe  hourcs :  fo  that  when  it  increafeth,  the  water  of  the  fea
arryueth  fo  neare  to  the  houfes  of  Panama  as  doth  owre  fea  (cauled  Ma7-e  Mcditeraneimi)  in  Barzalona  or  in
Naples.  And  when  the  fayd  increafyng  of  the  fea  commeth,  there  commeth  alfo  therwith  fuch  a  multitude  of
the  fmaule  fyfflies  cauled  fardynes,  that  it  is  fo  mameylous  a  thynge  to  beholde,  that  no  man  wolde  beleue  it
that  hath  not  feene  it.  In  fo  much  that  the  Cacique,  (that  is)  the  kynge  of  that  land  at  fuch  tyme  as  I  dwelt
there,  was  bounde  dayly  as  he  was  commaunded  by  yowre  maieflies  gouemour,  to  brynge  ordynaryly  three
canoas  or  barkes  full  of  the  fayde  fardynes  and  to  vnlade  the  fame  in  the  markette  place,  whiche  were  after-
warde  by  the  ruler  of  the  citie  diuyded  amonge  the  Chriflian  men  without  any  cofle  or  charge  to  any  of  them.
In  fo  much  that  yf  the  people  had  bin  a  much  greater  multitude  then  they  were,  and  as  many  as  are  at  this
prefente  in  Tokdo  or  more,  and  had  none  other  thynge  to  lyue  by,  they  myght  haue  byn  fufhciently  fufleyned
by  thefe  fardynes,  byfyde  th[e]ouerplus  which  fhulde  haue  remayned.  But  to  retume  to  the  foules  wherof  we
haue  fpoken.  As  the  fea  commeth,  and  the  fardynes  with  the  fame,  euen  fo  lykewyfe  coome  the  fayde
Akatrazzi  therwith :  and  flye  continually  ouer  it  in  fuche  a  multytude,  that  they  appeare  to  couer  th[e]upper
parte  or  iloure  of  the  water.  And  thus  continue  in  mountynge  and  faulynge  from  the  ayer  to  the  water,  and
from  the  water  to  the  ayer  durynge  all  the  tyme  of  theyr  fyffhynge.  And  as  foone  as  they  haue  taken  any  of
thefe  fardynes,  they  flye  aboue  the  water  and  eate  them  incontinently,  and  fuddeynly  retume  agej^ne  to  the
water  for  more,  continuing  thus  courfe  by  courfe  withowt  ceafynge.  In  lyke  maner  when  the  fea  fauleth,  they
folowe  there  fyffhynge  as  I  haue  fayde.  There  goethe  alfo  in  the  company  of  thefe  foules,  an  other  kynde  of
foules  cauled  Coda  itiforcata,  (that  is)  the  forked  tayle,  whereof  I  haue  made  mention  before.  And  as  foone  as
the  Akatraz  mounteth  from  the  water  with  her  pray  of  the  fardynes,  fuddeynly  this  Coda  inforcaia  gyueth  her
fo  many  flrokes,  and  fo  perfecuteth  her,  that  fhee  caufeth  her  to  let  faule  the  fardynes  which  fhee  hath  in  her
mouth.  The  which  as  foone  as  they  are  faulne,  and  before  they  yet  touch  the  water,  the  Coda  inforcaia
catcheth  them  euen  in  the  faule,  in  fuche  forte  that  it  is  a  great  pleafure  to  beholde  the  combatte  betwene  them
all  the  daye  longe.  The  number  of  thefe  Akatrazzi  is  fuch,  that  the  Chryflian  menne  are  accullomed  to  fend
to  certeyne  Ilandes  and  rockes  which  are  neare  abowte  Panaina,  with  theyr  boates  or  barkes  to  take  thefe
Akatrazzi  whyle  they  are  yet  younge  and  can  not  flye :  and  kyll  as  many  of  them  with  flaues  as  they  \\7ll,
vntyll  they  haue  therwith  laden  theyr  barkes  or  canoas.  Thefe  younge  ones  are  fo  fatte  and  wel  fedde  that
they  can  not  bee  eaten.  And  are  taken  for  none  other  intent  but  only  to  make  greafe  for  candels  to  burne  in
the  nyght,  for  the  whiche  purpofe  it  ferueth  very  well :  and  gyueth  a  cleare  lyght,  and  burneth  eafely.  After
this  maner  and  for  this  purpofe,  innumerable  of  them  are  kylde.  And  yet  it  feemeth  that  the  number  of  them
that  fyffhe  for  fardynes  doo  dayly  increafe

There  are  other  foules  cauled  Paffcrefciiipie:  that  is,  fimple  fparowes.  Thefe  are  fumwhat  leffe  then  femewes:
and  haue  theyr  fiete  lyke  vnto  great  malardes:  And  flande  in  the  water  fumtymes.  And  when  the  fliyppes  fayle
fyftie  or  a  hundreth  leaques  abowte  the  Ilandes,  thefe  foules  beholdynge  the  fhyppes  commyng  towarde  them,
breake  theyr  flyght  and  faule  downe  vpon  the  fayle  yardes,  mafles,  and  cables  therof  And  are  fo  fimple  and
folyfhe  that  they  tary  vntyll  they  maye  eafely  be  taken  with  mens  handes,  and  were  therefore  cauled  of  the
maryners  fimple  fparowes.  They  are  blacke,  and  vppon  their  blacke,  haue  theyr  heade  and  fhoulders  of  fethers
of  a  darke  ruffet  coloure.  They  are  not  good  to  bee  eaten,  althowgh  the  mariners  haue  fumtimes  bin  enforced
to  eate  them.

There  is  an  other  kynde  of  byrdes  in  the  fyrme  lande,  which  the  Chriflians  caule  Picuti,  bycaufe  they  haue
very  great  beakes  in  refpecte  of  the  lyttleneffe  of  theyr  boddies :  For  theyr  beakes  are  very  heauy  and  waye

191

Foules,  and  byrdes
Akatraz.

Panama.

Pttssere  sempie,
192

PicuH.

333

224

The  Jiyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

Folysslie
sparowes.

1S3

Gi'.zzuoh.

Pintadelli

more  then  theyr  hole  boddyes  byfyde.  Thefe  byrdes  are  no  bygger  then  quayles,  but  haue  a  much  greater
bulhement  of  fethers,  in  fo  much  that  theyr  fethcrs  are  more  then  theyr  boddies.  Theyr  fethers  are  very  fayre
and  of  many  variable  colourcs.  Theyr  beakes  are  a  quarter  of  a  yarde  in  length  or  more,  and  bendynge  downe
towarde  the  earthe,  and  three  fyngers  brode  neare  vnto  the  heade.  Theyr  tonges  are  very  quilles,  wherwith  they
make  a  great  hyffynge.  They  make  holes  in  trees  with  theyr  beakes,  in  the  which  they  make  theyr  neftes.
And  furely  thefe  byrdes  are  maruelous  to  beholde  for  the  great  difference  whiche  they  haue  from  all  other  byrdes
thac  I  haue  feene,  afwel  for  theyr  toonges  (which  are  quyllos  as  I  haue  fayde)  as  alfo  for  the  flrangeneffe  of  theyr
fyght  and  difproportion  of  their  greate  beakes  in  refpcct  of  the  refl  of  theyr  boddies.  There  are  no  byrdes
founde  that  prouyde  better  for  the  fafegarde  of  theyr  younge  in  the  tyme  of  theyr  breedynge  to  bee  withowte
daunger  of  wylde  cattes  that  they  enter  not  into  theyr  nefles  to  deflroye  theyr  egges  or  younge.  And  this  afwell
by  the  flraunge  maner  of  buyldyng  theyr  nelles,  as  alfo  by  theyr  owne  defence.  And  therfore  when  they
perceaue  that  the  cattes  approche  towarde  them,  they  enter  into  theyr  nefles:  and  holdynge  theyr  beakes
towarde  th[e]cnteraunce  of  the  fame,  (lande  at  theyr  defence,  and  fo  vexe  the  cattes  that  they  caufe  them  to
leaue  theyr  enterpryfe.

There  are  alfo  other  byrdes  or  fparowes,  whiche  the  Chrillians  by  contrary  effect  caule  Matti,  that  is  fooles.
Wheras  neuertheleffe  there  is  no  byrde  that  flieweth  more  wyt  and  crafte  in  defendynge  her  younge  from  perell.
Thefe  byrdes  are  lyttle  and  in  maner  blacke,  and  fumewhat  bygger  then  owre  thruffhes.  They  haue  certeyne
whyte  fethers  in  theyr  neckes,  and  the  lyke  fagacitie  or  fliarpenes  of  fenfe  as  haue  the  byrdes  or  pyes  cauled
Gazzuole.  Tliey  feldome  tymes  light  vppon  the  earth.  They  make  theyr  nefles  in  trees  feparated  from  other,
bycaufe  the  wylde  cattes  (cauled  Mammoni)  are  accuflomed  to  leape  frome  tree  to  tree,  not  defcendynge  to  the
grounde  for  feare  of  other  beafles,  excepte  when  they  are  enforced  by  thyrfte  to  coome  downe  to  drynke  at
fuche  tymes  as  they  are  fure  not  to  bee  molefled.  And  for  this  caufe  doo  not  thefe  byrdes  make  theyr  nefles
but  in  trees  farre  diuyded  from  other.  They  make  them  of  a  cubette  in  length  or  more,  after  the  maner  of
bagges  or  lyttle  fackes,  large  at  the  bottome,  and  growynge  narower  and  narower  towarde  the  mouth  whereby
they  are  faflened :  hauynge  the  hole  whereat  they  enter  into  the  facke,  of  fuch  byggenes  as  may  onely  fuffice  to
receaue  them.  And  to  th[e]ende  that  the  cattes  maye  not  deuoure  theyr  younge  yf  they  chaunce  to  mounte
vppon  the  trees  where  they  haue  theyr  nefles,  they  vfe  an  other  crafte,  which  is,  to  make  theyr  nefles  in  thycke
braunches  of  trees,  and  to  defende  the  fame  with  fliaipe  and  flronge  thorns  implycate  and  fet  in  fuch  order  that
no  man  is  able  to  make  the  lyke.  So  that  the  cattes  can  by  no  meanes  put  theyr  legges  into  the  hole  of  the
nefle  to  take  owte  younge  byrdes,  afwel  for  the  fliarpenes  of  the  thorn  es  as  alfo  for  the  depth  of  the  nefles,  in
the  bottome  wherof,  the  younge  birdes  refl  withowt  daunger  of  theyr  enemie.  For  fum  of  theyr  nefles  beynge
three  or  foure  fpannes  in  lengthe,  the  legge  of  the  catte  can  not  reache  to  the  bottome  therof.  They  vfe  alfo
an  other  pollicie :  which  is,  to  make  many  of  theyr  nefles  in  one  tree  The  which  they  doo  for  one  of  thefe  two
caufes :  that  is,  that  eyther  of  theyr  owne  naturall  difpofition  they  are  accuflomed  to  go  in  great  multitudes,  and
reioyfe  in  the  company  of  theyr  owne  generation  as  do  the  byrdes  which  we  caule  flares,  or  elles  to  th[e]intent
that  yf  it  fhoulde  fo  chaunce  that  the  cattes  fhulde  clyme  the  trees  where  they  make  theyr  nefles,  they  might
bee  a  greater  company  to  refyfle  and  molefl  the  cattes,  at  whofe  approch  they  make  a  feareful  and  terrible  cry,
wherby  the  cattes  are  put  to  tlyght.

Furthermore,  in  the  firme  land,  and  in  the  Ilandes,  there  are  certeyne  byrdes  cauled  Fiche  or  Gazzuole,
fumewhat  lyke  vnto  thofe  which  we  caule  woodwaules,  or  woodpeckes,  beinge  leffe  then  OAvrs  of  Spayne.
Thefe  are  altogither  blacke,  and  go  hoppynge  and  leapyng.  Theyr  beakes  are  alfo  blacke  and  of  the  fame
faffhyon  as  are  the  popingiays  beakes. They  haue  longe  tayles,  and  are  fumwhat  bygger  then  flares.

There  are  other  byrdes  cauled  FinfadelH,  whiche  are  lyke  vnto  certeyne  greene  byrdes  whiche  the  Italyans
caule  Fringuelli:  and  are  of  feuen  coloures.  Thefe  byrdes  for  feare  of  the  cattes,  are  euer  woonte  to  make
theyr  nefles  ouer  the  bankes  of  ryuers  or  the  fea,  where  the  braunches  of  trees  fo  reache  ouer  the  water  that
with  a  lyttle  weyght  they  maye  bowe  downe  to  the  water.  Theyr  nefles  are  made  fo  neai-e  the  toppes  of  the
braunches  that  when  the  cattes  coome  theron,  the  braunches  bende  towarde  the  water,  and  the  cattes  tume
backe  ageyne  for  feare  of  faulynge.  For  althoughe  no  beafle  in  the  worlde  bee  more  malicious  then  this,  yet
whereas  the  mofle  parte  of  beafles  are  naturally  inclyned  to  fwymme,  this  catte  hath  no  maner  of  apteneffe
thereunto,  and  is  therefore  foone  drowned  or  flrangeled  in  the  water,  and  by  a  pryuie  fenfe  of  nature  feareth  the
daunger  which  he  can  not  efcape.  Thefe  byrdes  make  theyr  nefles  in  fuche  forte,  that  althowgh  they  bee  weete
and  fylled  with  water,  yet  doo  they  fo  fuddenly  ryfe  vp  ageyne,  that  the  younge  byrdes  are  not  thereby  hurte  or
drowned.

There  are  alfo  many  nyghtyngales  and  other  byrdes  whiche  fynge  marueloufly  with  great  melodic  and
dyfference  in  fyngynge. Thefe  byrdes  are  of  maruelous  dyuers  coloures  the  one  from  the  other. Sum  are
altogither  yelowe,  and  fum  other  of  fo  excellente,  delectable,  and  hyghe  a  coloure  as  it  weare  a  rubye. Other
j are  alfo  of  dyuers  and  variable  coloures  :  fum  of  fewe  coloures,  and  other  fume  all  of  one  coloure  :  beinge  all  fo

224

The  hyftorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

225

fayre  and  bewtifull,  that  in  bryghtneffe  and  fhynynge  they  excell  all  that  are  feene  in  Spayne,  or  Italy  or  other
prouinces  of  Europe. Many  of  thefe  are  taken  with  nettes,  lyme  twyggcs,  and  fprynges  of  dyuers  fortes.

Dyuers  other  fortes  of  greate  foules  lyke  vnto  Eagles,  and  fuche  other  as  lyue  of  pray,  are  founde  in  the
firme  lande  of  fuche  diuerfitie,  that  it  is  in  maner  impoffible  to  defcrybe  them  all  particularly.  And  forafmuche
as  I  haue  more  largely  intreated  hereof  in  my  generall  hyflorie  of  the  Indies,  I  thynke  it  not  requyfite  to  make
any  further  mention  of  the  fame.

C  Of  trees,  fruit  es,  and  plant es.

Here  is  bothe  in  the  firme  lande  and  the  Ilandes  a  certeyne  tree  cauled  Cocus,  beinge  a  kynd
of  date  trees  and  hauynge  theyr  leaues  of  the  felf  fame  greatneffe  as  haue  the  date  trees
which  beare  dates,  but  dyffer  much  in  their  growynge.  For  the  leaues  of  this  Cociis  grow
owte  of  the  trunkes  of  the  tree  as  doo  the  fyngers  owt  of  the  hande,  wreathynge  them  felues
one  within  an  other  and  fo  fpreadynge  abrode.  Thefe  trees  are  hygh:  and  are  founde  in
great  plentie  in  the  coafle  of  the  fea  of  Sur,  in  the  prouince  of  Cacique  CJiiman.  Thefe
date  trees  brynge  furth  a  frute  after  this  forte.  Beinge  altogyther  vnite  as  it  groweth  on  the
tree,  it  is  of  greater  circumference  then  the  heade  of  a  man.  And  from  the  fuperficiall  parte  to  the  myddefl
which  is  the  frute,  it  is  inuolued  and  couered  with  many  webbes  much  lyke  vnto  thofe  hyrdes  of  towe  whiche
they  vfe  in  Andalufia.  Of  this  towe  or  webbe,  the  Eafl  Indians  make  a  certeyne  kynde  of  clothe  of  three  or
foure  fortes,  and  cordes  for  the  fayles  of  fliyppes.  But  in  thefe  Indies  of  yowr  maieflie,  they  paffe  not  for  thefe
cordes  or  this  clothe  that  may  be  made  of  the  frute  of  Corns,  by  reafon  of  the  great  plentie  that  they  haue  of  the
bombage  or  cotton  of  the  goffampine  trees.  The  frute  which  is  in  the  myddefl  of  the  fayde  towe,  is  (as  I  haue
fayde)  as  bygge  as  a  mans  fyfte,  and  fumtymes  twyfe  as  bygge  and  more.  It  is  in  forme,  lyke  vnto  a
walnutte,  or  fum  other  rounde  thynge  fumwhat  more  longe  then  large,  and  very  harde.  The  rjaide  or
barke  herof,  is  as  thycke  as  the  cyrcle  of  letters  of  a  riale  of  plate.  And  -within,  there  cleaueth  fafle
to  the  rynde  of  the  nutte  a  carnofitie  or  fubflaunce  of  coornel,  of  the  thyckeneffe  of  halfe  a  fynger  or
of  the  leafl  fynger  of  the  hande :  And  is  verye  whyte,  lyke  vnto  a  fayre  Almonde,  and  of  better  tafle
and  more  pleafaunt.  When  this  fruite  is  chewed,  there  remayne  certeyne  crummes  as  do  the  lyke  of  almondes.
Yet  if  it  bee  fwalowed  downe,  it  is  not  vnpleafaunt.  For  althowgh  that  after  the  iewfe  or  moyflure  bee  gonne
downe  the  throte  before  the  fayde  crummes  bee  fwalowed,  the  refle  whiche  is  eaten  feeme  fumwhat  fliarpe  or
fower,  yet  doth  it  not  fo  greatly  offende  the  tafle  fo  as  to  bee  cafle  away.  Whyle  this  Coats  is  yet  freflie  and
newly  taken  from  the  tree,  they  vfe  not  to  eate  of  the  fayde  carnofitie  and  frute :  But  fyrfle  beatynge  it  very  much,
and  then  flraynynge  it,  they  drawe  a  mylke  thereof,  much  better  and  fweeter  then  is  the  mylke  of  beafles,  and
of  much  fubflaunce :  The  which  the  Chriflian  men  of  thofe  regions  put  in  the  tortes  or  cakes  which  they  make
of  the  grayne  of  Maizium  wherof  they  make  theyr  breade,  or  in  other  breade  as  we  put  breade  in  porrage :  So
that  by  reafon  of  the  fayde  mylke  of  Coais,  the  tortes  are  more  excellent  to  be  eaten  withowt  offence  to  the
flomake.  They  are  fo  pleafaunte  to  the  tafle,  and  leaue  it  afwell  fatiffyed  as  thowghe  it  had  byn  delyted  with
many  delycate  dyffhes.  But  to  proceade  further,  yowre  maieflie  fliall  vnderfland,  that  in  the  place  of  the  flone
or  coornell,  there  is  in  the  myddefl  of  the  fayde  carnofitie,  a  voyde  place,  which  neuertheleffe  is  full  of  a  mofle
cleare  and  excellent  water,  in  fuch  quantitie  as  maye  fyll  a  greate  egge  fhell,  or  more  or  leffe  accordynge  to  the
byggeneffe  of  the  Coais.  The  which  water  fuerly,  is  the  mofle  fubflantial,  excellent  and  precious  to  be  droonke,
that  maye  bee  founde  in  the  worlde.  In  fo  much  that  in  the  momente  when  it  paffeth  the  palate  of  the  mouth
and  begynneth  to  goo  downe  the  throte  it  feemeth  that  frome  the  fole  of  the  foote  to  the  crowne  of  the  headde,
there  is  no  parte  of  the  boddye  but  that  feelethe  great  comfort  therby:  as  it  is  doutleffe  one  of  the  moft.  excellent
thynges  that  may  be  tailed  vppon  the  earth,  and  fuche  as  I  am  not  able  by  wrytynge  or  toonge  to  exprefle.
And  to  proceade  yet  further,  I  fay  that  when  the  meate  of  this  frute  is  taken  from  the  veffell  therof,  the  /efTell
remayneth  as  fayre  and  nette  as  though  it  were  puUyflied :  and  is  without,  of  colour  inclynynge  towarde  blacke,
and  fhyneth  or  glyflereth  very  fayre.  And  is  within  of  no  leffe  dilicateneffe.  Suche  as  haue  accuflomed  to
drynke  in  thefe  veffelles,  and  haue  bynne  trowbeled  with  the  difeafe  cauled  the  fretinge  of  the  guttes,  fay
that  they  haue  by  experience  founde  it  a  maruelous  remedie  ageynfl  that  difeafe :  And  that  it  breakethe  the  flone
and  prouoketh  vrine.  This  frute  was  cauled  Coacs  for  this  caufe,  that  when  it  is  taken  from  the  place  where  it
cleaueth  fafle  to  the  tree,  there  are  feene  two  holes,  and  aboue  them  two  other  naturall  holes,  which  altogyther,
doo  reprefente  the  gieflure  and  fygure  of  the  cattes  cauled  Mammone,  that  is,  munkeys,  when  they  cr}'e :  whiche
crye  the  Indians  caule  Coca :  But  in  very  deede,  this  tree  is  a  kynd  of  date  trees :  and  hath  the  fame  efiecte  to
heale  fretynge  of  the  guttes,  that  Plinie  defcrybeth  all  kyndes  of  date  trees  to  haue.

Great  foules.

Cocus.

Eden.

194

I  haue  scene  one
of  these  fruitti
opened,  the
whiche  when  it
was  hole,  yf  it
were  shaken  the
water  was  harde
shogge  therein  as
it  were  in  a  bottle ;
but  in  tj'me  it
consumed  and  was
partly  congeled
mto  a  salte
substaunce.

825

226

The  hyjforie  of  the  vvcjle  Indies.

Great  trees.

195

A  maruelous  tree.

Kyndlynge  of  fyre
withowt  fyre.

There  are  furthermore  in  the  firme  lande,  trees  of  fuche  byggeneffe  that  I  dare  not  fpeake  therof  but  in
place  where  I  haue  fo  many  wytnefles  which  haue  fcene  the  fame  as  wel  as  I.  I  fay  therfore,  that  a  leaque
from  Dariena  or  the  citie  of  Sanfla  Maria  A/itujua,  there  paffeth  a  ryuer  very  large  and  diepe,  which  is  cauled
Cuti:  ouer  the  which  the  Indians  had  layde  a  grcate  tree  fo  trauerfinge  the  fame  that  it  was  in  the  fleade  of  a
brydge,  the  which  I  my  felfe  with  dyuers  other  that  are  at  this  prefent  in  yowre  maieflies  courte,  haue  often
tymcs  palled  ouer.  And  forafmuch  as  the  foyde  tree  had  lyne  longe  there,  and  by  the  great  weight  therof  was  fo
flironke  downcwarde  and  partely  couered  with  water  that  none  could  paffe  ouer  it  but  were  weete  to  the  knee,
I  being  then  in  the  yeare  1522.  th[e]official  of  luflice  in  that  citie  at  yowre  maiefties  appoyntemente,  caufed  an
other  greate  tree  to  bee  layde  in  that  place  whiche  in  lyke  maner  trauerfed  the  ryuer  and  reached  more  then
fyftie  foote  ouer  the  further  fyde.  This  tree  was  exceadynge  greate,  and  refled  aboue  the  water  more  then  twoo
cubytes.  In  the  foule,  it  cad  downe  all  fuche  other  trees  as  were  within  the  reache  therof:  And  difcouered
certeyne  vynes  whiche  were  fo  laden  with  blacke  grapes  of  pleafaunte  tafte,  that  they  fatiffyed  more  then  fyftie
perfons  whiche  eate  theyr  fylle  therof  This  tree  in  the  thyckefl  parte  therof,  was  more  then  fyxtene  fpannes
thicke :  And  was  neuertheleffe  but  lyttle  in  refpect  of  many  other  trees  which  are  founde  in  this  prouince.  For
the  Indians  of  the  coafle  and  prouince  of  Cartagenia,  make  barkes  or  boates  therof  (which  they  caule  Canoas,)  of
fuch  byggeneffe,  beinge  all  of  one  hole  tree,  that  fume  conteyne  a  hundreth  men,  fume  a  hundreth  and  thirtie,
and  fume  more,  hauynge  neuertheleffe  fuche  voyde  fpace  within  the  fame,  that  there  is  lefte  fufficiente  roome
to  paffe  to  and  fro  through  owte  all  the  Canoa,  Sum  of  thefe  are  fo  large  byfyde  the  length,  that  they  conteyne
more  then  tenne  or  twelue  fpannes  in  breadth,  and  fayle  with  twoo  fayles  as  with  the  mafler  fayle  and  the
trinkette  which  they  make  of  verye  good  cotton.  The  greatefl  trees  that  I  haue  feene  in  thefe  partes  or  in
anye  other  regions,  was  in  the  prouince  of  Guaturo,  the  kynge  wherof  rebellynge  from  th[e]obedience  of  yowre
maieftie,  was  perfued  by  me  and  taken  pryfoner:  At  whiche  tyme  I  with  my  company,  paffed  ouer  a  very  hygh
mountayne  ful  of  great  trees,  in  the  toppe  wherof  we  founde  one  tree  whiche  had  three  rootes  or  rather
diuifions  of  the  roote  aboue  the  earth  in  forme  of  a  tryangle  or  triuette :  fo  that  betwene  euery  foote  of  this
triangle  or  three  feete,  there  was  a  fpace  of  twentie  foote  betwene  euery  foote.  And  this  of  fuch  heyght  aboue
the  earthe,  that  a  laden  carte  of  thofe  wherewith  they  are  accullomed  to  brynge  home  corne  in  the  tyme  of
haruefl  in  the  kyngedome  of  Toledo  in  Spayne,  myght  eafely  haue  paffed  throwgh  euery  of  thofe  particions  or
wyndowes  whiche  were  betwene  the  three  feete  of  the  fayd  tree.  From  the  earth  vpwarde  to  the  trunke  of  the
tree,  the  open  places  of  the  dyuifions  betwene  thefe  three  feete,  were  of  fuche  heyght  from  the  grounde,  that  a
footeman  with  a  iauelyn  was  not  able  to  reache  to  the  place  where  the  fayde  feete  ioyned  togyther  in  the  trunke
or  body  of  the  tree  which  grewe  of  great  height  in  one  piece  and  one  hole  body,  or  euer  it  fpredde  in  braunches,
which  it  did  not  before  it  exceaded  in  heyght  the  towre  of  faynt  Romane  in  the  citie  of  Toledo :  from  whiche
heyght  and  vpwarde,  it  fpreade  very  greate  and  flronge  braunches.  Amonge  certeyne  Spanyardes  which
clymed  this  tree,  I  my  felfe  was  one.  And  when  I  was  afcended  to  the  place  where  it  begunne  to  fpreade  the
branches,  it  was  a  maruelous  thing  to  beholde  a  greate  countrey  of  fuche  trees  towarde  the  prouince  of
Abrayme.  This  tree  was  eafy  to  clyme,  by  reafon  of  certeyne  Befuchi  (wherof  I  haue  fpoken  before)  which
grewe  wreathed  aboute  the  tree  in  fuche  forte  that  they  feemed  to  make  a  fcalynge  ladder.  Euery  of  the
forefayde  three  feete  which  bore  the  boddie  of  the  tree,  was  twentie  fpannes  in  thyckeneffe.  And  where  they
ioyned  al  togyther  aboue  in  the  trunke  or  boddye  of  the  tree,  the  principall  trunke  was  more  then  fortie  and
fyue  fpannes  in  circuite.  I  named  the  mountayne  where  thefe  trees  grow,  the  mountayne  of  three  footed  trees.
And  this  which  I  haue  now  declared,  was  feene  of  all  the  companye  that  was  there  with  me  when  (as  I  haue
fayde  before)  I  tooke  kynge  Guaturo  pryfoner  in  the  yeare  1522.  Many  thynges  more  myght  here  bee  fpoken
as  touchynge  this  matter,  as  alfo  howe  there  are  many  other  excellent  trees  founde  of  dyuers  fortes  and  dyfference,
as  fweete  Ceder  trees,  blacke  date  trees,  and  many  other :  of  the  which  fum  are  fo  heauy  that  they  can  not  flote
aboue  the  water  but  fynke  immediatly  to  the  bottome.  And  other  ageyne  as  light  as  a  corke.  As  touchynge
all  whiche  thynges  I  haue  wrytten  more  largely  in  my  generall  hyflorie  of  the  Indies.

And  forafmuch  as  at  this  prefent  I  haue  entered  to  intreate  of  trees,  before  I  paffe  any  further  to  other
thynges,  I  wyl  declare  the  maner  howe  the  Indians  kyndle  fyre,  only  with  woodde,  and  without  fyre,  the  maner
wherof  is  this.  They  take  a  piece  of  woodde  of  two  fpannes  in  lengthe,  as  bygge  as  the  leafle  fynger  of  a  mans
hande,  or  as  an  arrowe  well  pullyffhed,  and  of  a  flronge  kynde  of  woodde  whiche  they  keepe  onely  for  this
purpofe.  And  where  they  intende  to  kyndle  any  fyre,  they  take  two  other  pieces  of  woodde  of  the  dryefl  and
lyghtefl  that  they  can  fynde,  and  bynde  them  fafl  togyther  one  with  an  other  as  clofe  as  two  fyngers  ioyned.
In  the  myddefl.  or  betwene  thefe,  they  put  the  poynt  of  the  fyrfle  lyttle  flaffe  made  of  harde  and  flronge  wood
which  they  hold  in  theyr  handes  by  the  toppe  thereof,  and  turne  or  rubbe  it  rounde  aboute  continually  in  one
place  betwene  the  two  pieces  of  woodde  which  lye  bounde  togyther  vppon  the  earthe,  which  by  that  vnceffant
rubbynge  and  chafynge,  are  in  fliort  fpace  kyndeled  and  take  fyer.

I  haue  alfo  thought  good  here  to  fpeake  fumwhat  of  fuch  thynges  as  coomme  to  my  rememberaunce  of

236

The  hyftorie  of  the  vvefte  Indies.

227

certeyne  trees  which  are  founde  in  this  lande,  and  fumetyme  alfo  the  lyke  haue  bynne  feene  in  Spayne,  Thefe
are  certeyne  putrifyed  troonkes  which  haue  lyne  fo  longe  rottyng  on  the  earth  that  they  are  verye  whyte  and
fliyne  in  the  nyght  lyke  burnynge  fyre  brandes.  And  when  the  Spanyardes  fynde  any  of  this  woodde,  and
intende  priuily  in  the  nyght  to  make  warre  and  inuade  any  prouince  when  cafe  fo  requyreth  that  it  flialbe
neceffary  to  go  in  the  nyght  in  fuche  places  where  they  knowe  not  the  way,  the  formofl  Chriflian  man  whiche
guydethe  the  waye,  affociate  with  an  Indian  to  directe  hym  therein,  take*^h  a  lyttle  flarre  of  the  fayde  woodde,
which  he  putteth  in  his  cappe  hangynge  behynde  on  his  fhoulders,  by  the  lyght  wherof  he  that  foloweth  nexte
to  him,  directeth  his  iourney,  who  alfo  in  lyke  maner  beareth  an  other  flarre  behynde  hym,  by  the  fliynynge
whereof  the  thyrde  foloweth  the  fame  waye,  and  in  lyke  maner  do  al  the  refl,  fo  that  by  this  meanes  none  are
lofle  or  flragle  owte  of  the  way.  And  forafmuche  as  this  lyght  is  not  feene  very  farre,  it  is  the  better  poUicie
for  the  Chryftians  bycaufe  they  are  not  thereby  difclofed  before  they  inuade  theyr  enemies.

Furthermore  as  touchynge  the  natures  of  trees,  one  particular  thynge  feemeth  woorthy  to  bee  noted,
wherof  Plinie  maketh  mention  in  his  natural  hyflorye  where  he  faythe  that  there  are  certeyne  trees  which
contynewe  euer  greene  and  neuer  lofe  theyr  leaues,  as  the  baye  tree,  the  Ceder,  the  orange  tree,  and  the  olyue
tree  with  fuch  other,  of  the  whiche  in  all  togyther  he  nameth  not  pafle  fyue  or  fyxe.  To  this  purpofe,  I  faye,
that  in  the  Ilandes  of  thefe  Indies,  and  alfo  in  the  firme  lande,  it  is  a  thynge  of  muche  difficultie  to  fynde  twoo
trees  that  lofe  or  cafl  theyr  leaues  at  any  tyme.  For  althowgh  I  haue  diligentely  fearched  to  knowe  the
trewthe  hereof,  yet  haue  I  not  feene  any  that  lofe  theyr  leaues,  eyther  of  theym  which  we  haue  browght  owt  of
Spayne  into  thefe  regions,  as  Orange  trees,  Limons,  Ceders,  Palmes,  or  date  trees  and  Pomegranate  trees,  or  of
any  other  in  thefe  regions  excepte  onely  Caffia,  which  lofeth  his  leaues  and  hath  a  greater  thynge  appropriate
to  it  felfe  onely:  which  is,  that  whereas  all  other  trees  and  plantes  of  India  fpreade  theyr  rootes  no  dieper  in
the  earthe  then  the  depth  of  a  mans  heyght  or  fumewhat  more,  not  defcendyng  any  further  into  the  ground  by
reafon  of  the  greate  heate  which  is  found  beneth  that  depth,  yet  dooth  Caffia  pearce  further  into  the  grounde
vntyl  it  fynd  water :  whiche  by  the  Phylofophers  opinion  fhoulde  be  the  caufe  of  a  thynne  and  watery  radycall
moyfler  to  fuche  th)Tiges  as  drawe  theyr  nuryfliement  therof,  as  fat  and  vnctuous  groundes  with  temperate
heate,  yelde  a  fall  and  firme  moyflure  to  fuche  thynges  as  growe  in  them,  whiche  is  the  caufe  that  fuche  trees
lofe  not  theyr  leaues,  as  the  fayde  thynne  and  wateryffhe  moyflure  is  caufe  of  the  contrarie,  as  appearethe  by
the  fayde  effecte  which  is  feene  onely  in  Caffia,  and  none  other  tree  or  plante  in  all  thefe  parties.

C  Of  Reedes  or  Canes.

Haue  not  thought  it  conuenient  in  the  chapiture  before  to  fpeake  of  that  whereof  I  intende
nowe  to  entreate  of,  reedes  or  canes,  to  th[e]intente  that  I  woolde  not  mengle  theym  with
plantes  or  trees,  beinge  thynges  of  them  felues  woorthy  to  bee  particularly  obferued.  So  it
is  therfore,  that  in  the  firme  land  there  are  many  fortes  of  reedes,  fo  that  in  many  places  they
make  theyr  howfes  therof,  couerynge  them  with  the  toppes  of  the  fame,  and  makynge  their
waules  of  them  in  lyke  maner,  as  I  haue  fayde  before.  And  amonge  thefe  kyndes  of  reedes,
there  is  one  fo  greate,  that  the  canes  therof  are  as  bygge  as  a  mans  legge  in  the  knee,
and  three  fpannes  in  length  frome  ioynt  to  ioynt  or  more :  in  fo  much  that  euery  of  them  is  of  capacitie  to
conteyne  a  lyttle  bucket  of  water.  In  this  kynde,  there  are  founde  fum  greater  and  fum  lefle,  of  the  which  fum
they  vfe  to  make  quyuers  for  arrowes.  There  is  founde  an  other  kynde  which  fuerly  is  marueylous,  beynge
lyttle  bygger  then  a  lauelen,  the  canes  whereof  are  longer  then  twoo  fpannes,  Thefe  reedes  growe  one  farre
from  an  other,  as  fum  tymes  twentie  or  thirtie  pafes,  and  fumetymes  alfo  twoo  or  three  leaques.  They  growe
in  maner  in  all  prouynces  in  the  Indies :  And  growe  nere  to  very  hygh  trees  wherunto  they  leane,  and  creepe
vp  to  the  toppes  of  theyr  braunches,  which  they  imbrafe  and  defcende  ageyne  downe  to  the  earth.  Theyr
canes  are  full  of  mofle  cleare  water  without  any  maner  of  tafl  or  fauoure  eyther  of  the  canes  or  of  any  other
thynge :  And  fuche  as  yf  it  were  taken  owte  of  the  freffltefte  fprynge  in  the  worlde.  Nor  yet  is  it  knowen  that
euer  it  hurte  any  that  droonke  therof.  For  it  hath  oftentymes  fo  chaunced  that  as  the  Chryflen  men  haue
trauayled  in  thefe  regions  in  defolate  wayes  where  for  lacke  of  water  they  haue  byn  in  great  daunger  to  dye
for  thyrfle,  they  haue  efcaped  that  perell  by  reafon  that  they  founde  the  fayde  reedes,  of  the  water  of  whofe
canes  they  haue  droonke  a  great  quantitie  withowt  any  hurte  thereof  enfewynge.  Therefore  when  they  fynde
thefe  in  any  place,  they  make  water  veffelles  of  the  canes  therof,  and  cary  as  many  of  them  ful  of  water  as  may
fuffice  for  one  dayes  iornay.  And  fumtyme  they  cary  fo  many,  that  they  take  for  euery  man  two  or  three
quartes  of  water  which  may  feme  them  for  many  dayes  bycaufe  it  doth  not  corrupte,  but  remaynelhe  flyll  freffhe
and  good.

827

Putrified  woodde
shynyng  in  the
nyght

196

Plinie.

Trees  which
continue  euer
greene.

Cassia.

A  secreate  thynge

Radycall
moysture.

197

228

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejie  Indies.

Flaiitni.

Figgcs.

Tunas.

198

Bihaoi.

Hauas.

Dying  of  cotton.

There  are  alfo  certeine  plantes  which  the  Chriftians  caul  Platani.  Thefe  are  as  hygh  as  trees,  and  become
as  bygge  in  the  trunke  as  the  knee  of  a  man  or  more.  Frome  the  foote  to  the  toppe,  they  beare  certeyne  longe
and  large  leaues,  beinge  more  then  three  fpannes  in  largenes,  and  about  ten  or  twelue  in  length :  The  whiche
when  they  are  broken  of  the  vvynde,  the  (lalke  remayneth  hole  in  the  myddefl.  In  the  myddefle  of  this  plant  in
the  hyghefl  parte  thereof,  there  groweth  a  clufler  with  fortie  or  fyftie  Platans  abowt  it,  euery  of  them  beinge  a
fpanne  and  a  halfe  in  length,  and  as  bygge  as  a  mans  arme  in  the  fmaule,  or  more  or  leffe  accordynge  to  the
goodnelVe  of  the  foyle  whore  they  growe.  They  haue  a  rynde  not  very  thycke,  and  eafy  to  bee  broken :  being
within  altogither  full  of  a  fubftaunce  lyke  vnto  the  marye  of  the  bone  of  an  oxe  as  it  appeareth  when  the  rynde
or  barke  is  taken  frome  the  fame.  This  clufler  owght  to  bee  taken  from  the  plant,  when  any  one  of  the  Platans
bcgynne  to  appere  yelowe.  At  which  tyme  they  take  it  and  hange  it  in  theyr  houfcs  where  all  the  clufler  waxeth
rype  with  his  Platans.  This  clufler  is  a  very  good  frute :  And  when  it  is  opened  and  the  rynde  taken  of,  there
are  founde  within  it  many  good  drye  fygges  which  beynge  roRcd  or  flewcd  in  an  ouen  in  a  clofe  pot  or  fum
fuche  other  thynge,  are  of  plealaunte  tafle  muchedyke  the  conferue  of  hony.  They  putrifie  not  on  the  fea  fo
foone  as  fume  other  frutes  do:  but  continue  fyfteene  dayes  and  more  yf  they  bee  gathered  fumwhat  greene.
They  feeme  more  delycate  on  the  fea  then  on  the  lande,  not  for  that  they  any  thinge  increafe  in  goodneffe  on
the  fea,  but  bycaufe  that  whereas  on  the  fea  oUier  thynges  are  lackyng  wherof  is  plentie  on  the  land,  thofe
meates  feeme  of  befle  tafle  which  fatiffie  prefente  neceffitie.  This  troonke  or  fprygge  whiche  bryngeth  foorth
the  fayde  clufler  is  a  hole  yeare  in  growyng  and  brynging  foorth  frute.  In  whiche  tyme  it  hath  put  foorth
rounde  abowte  it  tenne  or  twelue  fprygges  as  bygge  as  the  fyrfl  or  principall,  and  multiplieth  no  leffe  then  the
pryncipall  in  bryngynge  foorthe  of  cluflers  with  frutes  lykewyfe  at  theyr  tyme,  and  alfo  in  bryngynge  foorth  other
and  many  fprygges  as  is  fayde  beefore.  From  the  which  fprygges  or  trunkes,  as  foone  as  the  clufler  of  the  frute
is  taken  away,  the  plante  begynneth  to  drye  and  wyther,  which  then  they  take  owt  of  the  grounde  bycaufe  it
doth  none  other  then  occupie  it  in  vayne  and  without  profyt.  They  are  fo  many  and  doo  fo  marueloufly  increafe
and  multiplie,  that  it  is  a  thynge  in  maner  incredible.  They  are  exceadynge  moyfle.  In  fo  much  that  when
they  are  plucked  vp  from  the  place  wher  they  grow,  there  iffheweth  forth  a  great  quantitie  of  water  as  well  owte
of  the  plante  as  owte  of  the  place  where  it  grewe :  In  fuch  forte  that  all  the  moyRure  of  the  earth  farre  abowte,
niyght  feeme  to  bee  gathered  togyther  abowte  the  trunke  or  blocke  of  the  fayde  plante :  with  the  frutes  whereof,
the  antes  are  fo  farre  in  loue,  that  they  are  feene  in  great  multitudes  in  the  branches  of  the  plantes.  So  that  for
the  multitude  thereof  it  fumetyme  fo  chaunceth  that  men  are  inforced  to  take  away  the  Platans  frome  theyr
poffeffion. Thefe  frutes  are  founde  at  all  tymes  of  the  yeare.

There  is  alfo  an  other  kynd  of  wyld  plantes  that  groweth  in  the  fyeldes :  which  I  haue  not  feene  but  in  the
Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  althowgh  they  be  founde  in  other  Ilandes  of  the  Indies.  Thefe  they  caule  Tunas.  They
growe  of  a  thiflle  full  of  thornes,  and  brynge  foorth  a  frute  muche  lyke  vnto  great  fygges,  which  haue  a  crowne
lyke  medlers,  and  are  within  of  a  hyghe  coloure,  with  graynes  and  the  rynde  lyke  vnto  a  fygge.  They  are  of
good  tafle :  And  growe  abundantly  in  the  fyeldes  in  many  places.  They  woorke  a  flraunge  efifecte  in  fuche  as
eate  them.  For  if  a  manne  eate  two  or  three  or  more,  they  caufe  his  vrine  to  bee  of  the  verye  coloure  of
bludde,  which  thynge  chaunced  once  to  my  felfe.  At  whiche  tyme  as  I  made  water  and  fawe  the  colour  of  my
vrine,  I  entered  into  a  great  fufpition  of  my  lyfe,  beinge  fo  aflonyfflied  for  feare,  that  I  thought  the  fame  had
chaunced  to  me  vpon  fum  other  caufe.  In  fo  muche  that  furely  my  imagination  myght  haue  doone  me  hurte,
but  that  they  whiche  were  with  me  dyd  comforte  me  immediatly,  declarynge  the  caufe  therof  as  they  knewe  by
experience  beinge  auncient  inhabitours  in  thofe  regions.

There  groweth  alfo  an  other  plante  whiche  the  people  of  the  countrey  caule  Bihaos.  This  putteth  forth
certeyne  flreight  braunches  and  very  brode  leaues  which  the  Indians  vfe  for  dyuers  purpofes.  For  in  fum  places
they  couer  theyr  houfes  with  the  leaues  therof  cowched  and  layde  after  the  maner  of  thetche,  wherunto  it  ferueth
very  well.  Sumtymes  alfo  when  it  rayneth,  they  cafl  thefe  ouer  theyr  heades  to  defende  theim  from  the  water.  They
make  alfo  certeyne  chefles  whiche  they  caule  Hauas.,  weaued  after  a  flraunge  forte  and  intermixt  with  the  leaues
of  this  Bihaos.  Thefe  chefles  are  wrought  in  fuch  fort,  that  although  it  rayne  vpon  them,  or  they  chaunce  to
faule  into  the  water,  yet  are  not  fuch  thynges  wette  as  are  within  them.  They  are  made  of  the  braunches  of  the
fayde  Bihaos  with  the  leaues  weaued  togyther  therwith.  In  thefe  they  keepe  falte  and  other  fubtyle  thynges.
They  vfe  theym  alfo  for  an  other  purpofe,  which  is  this :  That  findyng  them  in  the  fieldes  at  fuch  tyme  as  they
haue  fcarfeneffe  of  vyttayles,  they  dygge  vp  the  rootes  of  thefe  plantes  whyle  they  are  yet  younge,  or  eate  the
plante  it  felfe  in  that  parte  where  it  is  mofle  tender,  which  is  from  a  foote  vnder  the  grounde,  where  it  is  as
tender  and  whyte  as  a  reede  or  bulruffhe.

And  forafmuch  as  wee  are  nowe  coomme  to  th[e]end  of  this  narration,  it  commeth  to  my  rememberaunce  to
make  mention  of  an  other  thynge  which  is  not  farre  from  my  purpofe.  And  this  is  howe  the  Indians  do  ftayne
or  dye  cloth  of  bombage  cotton,  or  any  other  thynge  which  they  intende  to  dye  of  dyuers  coloures :  as  blacke,
tawny,  greene,  blewe,  yelowe,  and  redde,  whiche  they  doo  with  the  barkes  or  ryndes,  and  leaues  of  certeyne  trees,

328

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejie  Indies.

229

whiche  they  knowe  by  experience  to  bee  good  for  this  practife.  And  by  this  arte  they  make  colours  in  fuch
perfection  and  excellencie  that  no  better  can  bee  diuyfcd.  But  this  feemeth  a  flraunge  thynge,  that  they  doo
all  this  in  one  felfe  fame  veffell:  So  that  when  they  haue  caufed  the  fayde  ryndes  and  leaues  to  boyle  togyther,
they  make  in  the  fame  veffell  without  any  chaunge  (as  I  haue  fayde)  as  many  colours  as  them  lyfleth.  Whiche
thynge  I  fuppofe  to  coomme  to  paffe  by  the  difpofition  of  the  coloure  whiche  they  haue  fyrfle  gyuen  to  the
thynge  that  they  intende  to  drye  or  colour,  whether  it  bee  threede,  we^be,  or  clothe,  or  any  thynge  that  they
intende  to  coloure.

C  0/  venemous  apples  wherwith  they  poyfon  theyr  arrowes.

He  apples  wherewith  the  Indian  Canibales  inueneme  theyr  arrowes,  growe  on  certeyne  trees
couered  with  many  braunches  and  leaues  beinge  very  greene  and  growyng  thicke.  They  are
laden  with  abundaunce  of  thefe  euyll  frutes,  and  haue  theyr  leaues  lyke  the  leaues  of  a  peare
tree,  but  that  they  are  leffe  and  rounder.  The  frute  is  much  lyke  the  mufcadell  peares  of
the  Ilande  of  Sicilie  or  Naples  in  forme  and  byggeneffe:  And  are  in  fum  partes  fleyned  with
redde  fpottes,  and  of  very  fweete  fauoure.  Thefe  trees  for  the  mofle  parte,  growe  euer  by
the  fea  coafles  and  neare  vnto  the  water:  And  are  fo  fayre  and  of  pleafaunte  fauour,  that
there  is  no  man  that  feethe  theym  but  wyll  defyre  to  eate  therof

In  fo  much  that  if  it  may  bee  fpoken  of  any  frute  yet  growynge  on  the  earth,  I  wolde  faye  that  this  was
the  vnhappy  frute  wherof  owre  fyrfle  parentes  Adam  and  Eue  tafled,  wherby  they  both  lofl  theyr  felicitie  and
procured  death  to  them  and  theyr  pofleritie.  Of  thefe  frutes,  and  of  the  greate  antes  whofe  bytynge  caufeth
fwellynge  (whereof  I  haue  fpoken  els  where)  and  of  the  eutes  or  lyfartes,  and  vypers,  and  fuch  other  venemous
thynges,  the  Canibales  which  are  the  chyefe  archers  amonge  the  Indians,  are  accuflomed  to  poyfon  theyr  arrowes
wherAvith  they  kyll  all  that  they  wounde.

Thefe  venemes  they  mengle  togyther  and  make  thereof  a  blacke  maffe  or  compofition  which  appeareth  lyke
vnto  very  blacke  pytche.  Of  this  poyfon  I  caufed  a  great  quantitie  to  be  burnt  in  SanHa  Maria  Antiqua  in  a
place  two  leaques  and  more  within  the  lande,  with  a  greate  multitude  of  theyr  inuenemed  arrowes  and  other
munition,  with  alfo  the  houfe  wherein  they  were  referued.  This  was  in  the  yeare.  1 5  1 4.  at  fuche  tyme  as
th[e]army  arriued  there  with  capitayne  Pedrarias  da  villa  at  the  commaundemente  of  the  Catholyke  kynge
Doti  Ferdinando.  But  to  returne  to  the  hyflory.  Thefe  apples  (as  I  haue  faid)  growe  neare  vnto  the  fea.  And
wheras  the  Chriflians  which  ferue  yowr  maieilie  in  thefe  parties,  fuppofe  that  there  is  no  remedy  fo  profytable
for  fuche  as  are  wounded  with  thefe  arrowes,  as  is  the  water  of  the  fea  if  the  wounde  be  much  waffhed  thenvith,
by  which  means  fum  haue  efcaped  although  but  fewe,  yet  to  faye  the  trewthe,  albeit  the  water  of  the  fea  haue  a
certeyne  caullike  qualitie  ageynfl  poyfon,  it  is  not  a  fufficient  remedy  in  this  cafe :  nor  yet  to  this  day  haue  the
Chriflians  perceaued  that  of  fiftie  that  haue  byn  wounded,  three  haue  recouered.  But  that  yowr  maieilie  may
the  better  confyder  the  force  of  the  veneme  of  thefe  trees,  yowe  fhall  further  vnderflande  that  yf  a  man  doo  but
repofe  hym  felfe  to  fleepe  a  lyttle  whyle  vnder  the  fhadow  of  the  fame,  he  hatli  his  head  and  eyes  fo  fwolne
when  he  ryfeth,  that  the  eye  lyddes  are  ioyned  with  the  chekes.  And  if  it  chaunce  one  droppe  or  more  of  the
dewe  of  the  fayde  tree  to  faule  into  the  eye,  it  vtterly  deflroyeth  the  fyght.  The  peftilent  r.ature  of  this  tree  is
fuch  that  it  can  not  bee  declared  in  fewe  woordes.  Of  thefe  there  groweth  greate  plentie  in  the  goulfe  of  Vraba
towarde  the  North  coafl  on  the  Welle  and  Eafle  fyde.  The  wood  of  thefe  trees  when  it  bumeth,  maketh  fo
greate  a  flynke  that  noo  man  is  able  to  abyde  it,  by  reafon  it  caufeth  fo  great  a  peyne  in  the  headde.

Amonge  other  trees  which  are  in  thefe  Indies  as  well  in  the  Ilandes  as  in  the  firme  lande,  there  is  an  other
kynde  Avhich  they  caule  Xagua,  wherof  there  is  great  plentie.  They  are  very  hygh  and  flreyght,  and  fayre  to
beholde.  Of  thefe  they  vfe  to  make  pykes  and  iauelyns  of  dyuers  lengthes  and  byggeneffe.  They  are  of  a  fayre
colour  betwene  ruffette  and  whyte.  This  tree  bryngeth  foorth  a  greate  frute  as  bygge  as  Papauer  or  poppie  and
much  lyke  therunto.  It  is  very  good  to  be  eaten  when  it  is  rype.  Owte  of  this  they  gette  a  very  cleare  water
wherwith  they  wafflie  theyr  legges  and  fumetymes  all  theyr  boddyes  when  they  feele  theyr  fleffhe  werye,  faynt,
or  loofe.  The  which  water,  byfyde  that  it  hath  a  byndynge  qualitie,  it  hath  alfo  this  propertie,  that  what  fo
euer  it  toucheth,  it  fleyneth  it  blacke  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  vntyll  it  bee  as  blacke  as  giette,  which  coloure  can  not
be  taken  away  in  leffe  fpace  then  tenne  or  twelue  dayes.  And  if  the  nayle  bee  but  touched  thenvith,  it  is  fo
fleined  that  it  can  by  no  meanes  bee  taken  away  vntyll  it  eyther  faule  of,  or  growe  owte  and  bee  clypped  away
by  lyttle  and  lyttle,  as  I  my  felfe  haue  oftentymes  feene  by  experience.

There  is  another  kynde  of  trees  which  they  call  Hobi.  Thefe  are  very  great  and  fayre,  and  caufe  holfome
ayer  where  they  growe  and  a  pleafaunt  fhadow,  and  are  founde  in  great  abundaunce. Theyr  frute  is  very  good,

T  2  239

A  straunge  thynge.

Note.

Canibales  archiers.

Wherwith  they
inuenym  the[i]r

199

Fetrus  Arias.

The  water  of  the
sex

The  goulf  of
Vraba.

Xagua.

HobL

Sum  thyukc  t\ie<e

to  be  mirobaluncs.

230

The  hyftorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

Date  trees.

Th[e]inhabitantes
of  the  sea  of  Sur.

200

An  herb  th.it
bearethe  cordcs.

Cabuia  and
Heneguen.

A  straung[e]
tltinge.

Leaues.

A  leafe  of  gp"eat
vertue.

and  of  good  tafl  and  fauoure,  and  much  lykc  vnto  certcyne  damfons  or  prunes  beinge  lyttle  and  yelowe.  But
theyr  flone  is  very  great :  by  reafon  wlierof  they  haue  but  lyttle  mcate.  Theyr  barke  or  rynde  boylcd  in  water,
maketh  a  hollbme  bathe  for  the  legges,  bycaufe  it  bindeth  and  fleyeth  the  loofeneffe  of  the  flefflie  fo  fencibly
that  it  is  a  marueyle  to  confyder.  It  is  fuerly  a  holfome  and  excellent  bathe  agcynfl  fuch  fayntneffe  :  And  is
the  befle  tree  that  may  bee  founde  in  thofe  parties  to  fleepe  vnder.  For  it  caufeth  no  heauinefle  of  the  headde
as  doo  dyuers  other  trees.  Whiche  thynge  I  fpeake  bycaufe  the  ChriRians  are  muche  accuflomed  in  thofe
regions  to  lye  in  the  fyeldes.  It  is  therfore  a  common  practife  amonge  them,  that  where  fo  euer  they  fynd
thefe  trees,  there  they  fpreade  theyr  mattreffes  and  beddes  wherin  they  fleepe.

There  are  alfo  a  kynde  of  hyghe  date  trees  and  full  of  thornes.  The  woodde  of  thefe  is  mofte  excellent :
beinge  very  blacke,  and  fliynynge,  and  fo  heauy  that  no  parte  thereof  can  fwymme  aboue  the  water,  but  fynketh
immediatly  to  the  bottome.  Of  this  woodde  they  make  theyr  arrowes  and  dartes  :  Alfo  iauelyns,  fpeares,  and
pykes.  And  I  faye  pykes,  bycaufe  that  in  the  coafles  of  the  fea  of  Sur,  beyonde  Efqucgua  and  Vfacha,  the
Indians  vfe  great  and  longe  pykes  made  of  the  woodde  of  thefe  date  trees.  Of  the  fame  lykewyfe  they  make
clubbes  and  fwoordes  and  dyuers  other  weapons.  Alfo  veffelles  and  houfliolde  fluffe  of  dyuers  fortes  very  fayre
and  commodious.  Furthermore  of  this  woodde  the  Chriftians  vfe  to  make  dyuers  muficall  inflrumentes,  as
clariflmbals,  lutes,  gyterns,  and  fuche  other,  the  whiche  byfyde  theyr  fayre  fliynynge  coloure  lyke  vnto  giete,  are
alfo  of  a  good  founde  and  very  durable  by  reafon  of  the  hardneffe  of  the  woodde.

After  that  I  haue  fayde  thus  much  of  trees  and  plantes,  I  haue  thought  good  alfo  to  fpeake  fumwhat  of
herbes.  You  fliall  therefore  vnderftande  that  in  thefe  Indies  there  is  an  herbe  much  lyke  vnto  a  yelowe  lyllie,
abowte  whofe  leaues  there  growe  and  creepe  certeyne  cordes  or  laces,  as  the  lyke  is  partly  feene  in  the  herbe
which  we  caule  lafed  fauery.  But  thefe  of  the  Indies  are  muche  bygger,  and  longer:  and  fo  flronge  that  they
tye  theyr  hangynge  beddes  thereby  whiche  they  caule  Hamacas  wherof  we  haue  fpoken  elfwhere.  Thefe
cordes,  they  caule  Cabuia  and  Hencqueji,  which  are  al  one  thing  fauynge  that  Heneqiien  is  leffe  and  of  a  fyner
fubftaunce  as  it  were  line :  And  the  other  is  groffer  lyke  the  wycke  or  twyfle  of  hempe,  and  is  imperfecte  in
comparifon  to  the  other.  They  are  of  coloure  betwene  whyte  and  yelowe  lyke  vnto  abarne,  and  fum  alfo
whyte.  With  Henequen  whiche  is  the  mofle  fubtyle  and  fyne  threede,  the  Indians  fawe  in  funder  fetters,
cheynes,  or  barres  of  Iren  in  this  maner.  They  moue  the  threede  of  Henequen  vppon  the  iren  which  they
intende  to  faw  or  cutte,  drawynge  the  one  hande  after  the  other  as  doo  they  that  fawe,  puttynge  euer  nowe  and
then  a  portion  of  fyne  fande  vppon  the  threede,  or  on  the  place  or  parte  of  the  Iren  where  they  continue
rubbynge  the  fayde  threede.  So  that  yf  the  threede  be  wome,  they  take  an  other,  and  continewe  in  theyr
woorke  as  before  vntyl  they  haue  cutte  in  funder  the  iren  although  it  bee  neuer  fo  bygge ;  and  cut  it  as  yf  it
were  a  tender  thynge  and  eafye  to  bee  fawne.

And  for  afmuch  as  the  leaues  of  trees  may  bee  counted  amonge  herbes,  I  wyll  here  fpeake  fumewhat  of
the  qualitie  of  the  leaues  of  certeyne  trees  which  are  founde  in  the  Hand  of  Hifpaniola.  Thefe  trees  are  fo  full
of  thornes,  that  there  is  no  tree  or  plante  that  feemeth  more  wylde  and  deformed :  fo  that  I  can  not  well
determyne  whether  they  bee  trees  or  plantes.  They  haue  certeyne  braunches  full  of  large  and  deformed
leaues,  which  braunches  were  fyrfle  leaues  lyke  vnto  the  other.  As  the  braunches  made  of  thefe  leaues  growe
foorthe  in  length,  there  commeth  other  leaues  of  them.  So  that  in  fine  it  is  a  dyfficult  thyng  to  defcrybe  the
forme  of  thefe  trees  except  the  fame  fhulde  bee  doone  by  a  paynter  wherby  the  eye  myght  conceaue  that
wherein  the  toonge  fayleth  in  this  behalfe.  The  leaues  of  this  tree  are  of  fuch  vertue,  that  beyng  well  beaten
and  fpreadde  vppon  a  cloth  after  the  maner  of  a  playfler,  and  fo  layde  to  a  legge  or  arme  that  is  broken  in
many  pieces,  it  healeth  it  in  fyftene  dayes,  and  maketh  it  as  hole  as  though  it  had  neuer  byn  broken.  Durynge
the  tyme  of  this  operation,  it  cleaueth  fo  fafl.  to  the  flefflie  that  it  can  not  without  much  difiicultie  bee  taken
away.  But  as  foone  as  it  hath  healed  the  fore  and  wrought  his  operation,  it  loofeth  it  felfe  from  the  place  where
it  was  layde,  as  I  my  felfe  and  dyuers  other  which  haue  proued  it,  knowe  by  experience.

C  OffyfJJies  and  of  the  maner  offyf/hynge.

N  the  fea  coafles  of  the  firme  lande,  there  are  dyuers  and  fundry  kyndes  of  fyfflies  muche
differynge  in  fliape  and  forme.  And  althoughe  it  be  impoffible  to  fpeake  of  all,  yet  wyll  I
make  mention  of  fum.  And  fyrfl  to  begynne  at  fardynes,  yowe  fliall  vnderflande  that  there
is  founde  a  kynde  of  thefe  fyfflies  very  large  and  with  redde  tayles,  beinge  a  very  delicate
fyfflie.  The  befle  kyndes  of  other  fyfflies  are  thefe:  Moxarre,  Diahace,  Brettes,  Dahaos,
Thonibackes,  and  Salmons.  All  thefe  and  dyuers  other  which  I  do  not  now  remember,  are
taken  in  great  quantitie  in  ryuers. There  are  lykewyfe  taken  very  good  creuyfflies. There

230

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

231

are  alfo  founde  in  the  fea,  certeyne  other  fyffhes :  as  foles,  mackerelles,  turbuttes,  Falamite,  Lizze,  Folpi,  Chteppe
Xaibas,  Locuftes,  Oyflers,  exceadynge  great  Tortoyfes,  and  Tiburoni  of  maruelous  byggenefle:  Alfo  Manates,
and  Murene,  and  manye  other  fyffhes  which  haue  no  names  in  oure  language.  And  thefe  of  fuch  diuerfitie
and  quantitie  as  can  not  bee  expreffed  without  large  wrytynge  and  longe  tyme.  But  to  let  paffe  to  intreate
particulerly  of  the  multitude  of  fyffhes,  I  intende  to  fpeake  chiefely  and  fumwhat  largely  of  three  fortes  of  mofle
notable  fyffhes :  wherof  the  fyrR  is,  the  great  Tortoyfes,  the  feconde  is  cauled  Tiburon,  and  the  thyrde  Manate.
And  to  begynne  at  the  fyrfle,  I  faye  that  in  the  Ilande  of  Cuba,  are  founde  great  Tortoyfes  (which  are  certeyne
fhell  fyffhes)  of  fuch  byggeneffe  that  tenne  or  fyfteene  men  are  fcarfely  able  to  lyfte  one  of  them  owt  of  the
water,  as  I  haue  byn  informed  of  credible  perfons  dwellynge  in  the  fame  Ilande.  But  of  that  which  I  my  felfe
haue  feene,  I  can  teflifie  that  in  the  firme  lande  in  the  vyllage  of  Ada  there  are  of  this  forte  fum  taken  and
kylled  of  fuche  byggenes  that  fixe  men  with  much  difficultie  coulde  fcarfely  drawe  them  owt  of  the  water.  And
commonly  the  lead  fort  of  them  are  as  much  as  two  men  may  cary  at  a  burden.  That  which  I  fawe  lifted  vp
by  fyxe  men,  had  her  fhell  a  yarde  and  a  quarter  in  length,  and  in  breadth  more  then  fyue  yardes.  The  maner
of  takynge  them,  is  this.  It  fumtymes  chaunceth  that  in  the3Tr  greate  nettes  (whiche  they  caule  fhoote  nettes)
there  are  founde  certeyne  Tortoyfes  of  the  common  forte  in  great  quantities.  And  when  they  coome  owt  of  the
fea  and  bringe  foorth  theyr  egges  and  go  togyther  by  coompanies  from  the  fea  to  feade  on  the  lande,  the
Chriflians  or  Indians  folowe  theyr  fleppes  whiche  they  fynde  in  the  fande,  and  foone  ouertake  them  bycaufe
they  are  very  heauy  and  flowe  in  goynge,  although  they  make  all  the  hafle  they  can  to  returne  lo  the  fea  as
foone  as  they  efpie  any  boddie.  When  they  that  purfewe  them  haue  ouertaken  them,  they  put  a  flake  or  flaffe
vnder  theyr  legges  and  ouerturne  them  on  theyr  backes  as  they  are  yet  runnynge,  fo  that  they  can  go  no  further
nor  yet  ryfe  ageyne  or  turne.  And  thus  they  fuffer  them  to  lye  flyll  whyle  they  folowe  after  the  refle  which
they  ouerturne  in  lyke  maner :  And  by  this  meanes  take  very  manye  at  fuche  tymes  as  they  coome  furth  of  the
fea  as  I  haue  fayde.  This  fyfflie  is  very  excellent  and  holfome  to  be  eaten,  and  of  good  tafle.  The  feconde  of
the  three  fyfflies  wherof  I  haue  fpoken,  is  the  Tiburon.  This  is  a  very  greate  fyfflie  and  very  quicke  and
fwifte  in  the  water,  and  a  cruell  deuourer.  Thefe  are  often  tymes  taken,  afwe'.l  when  the  fhippes  are  vnder
fayle  in  the  Ocean,  as  alfo  when  they  lye  at  anker,  or  at  any  other  time,  and  efpecially  the  leafle  kynd  of  thefe
fiffhes.  When  the  fhippes  are  vnder  fayle,  the  biggefl  forte  are  taken  after  this  maner.  When  the  Tiburon
feeth  the  fhippe  failinge  he  foloweth  it  fwymmynge  behynde.  The  which  thinge  the  mariners  feeinge,  cafle
furthe  all  the  fylthe  of  the  fhippe  into  the  fea  for  the  fyffhe  to  eate,  who  neuertheleffe  foloweth  them  with  equal
pafe  although  they  make  neuer  fuch  hafle  wyth  full  wynd  and  failes,  and  waloweth  on  euery  fyde  and  about  the
fhyppe  :  And  thus  foloweth  it  fumetyme  for  the  fpace  of  a  hundreth  and  fyftie  leaques  and  more.  And  when
the  mariners  are  difpofed  to  take  them,  they  cafl  downe  by  the  flerne  of  the  fhippe,  a  hoke  of  yren  as  bigge  as
the  biggefl  finger  of  a  mans  hande  of  three  fpannes  in  lengthe  and  crooked  like  a  fyffhehooke  with  beardes
accordinge  to  the  bigneffe  thereof,  and  faflened  to  an  iren  chayne  of  fyue  or  fyxe  linkes  neare  vnto  th[e]ende,
and  from  thenfe  tyed  with  a  greate  rope,  faflening  alfo  on  the  hooke  for  a  bayte,  a  piece  of  fum  fiffhe,  or  hogges
fieffh,  or  fum  other  fleffhe,  or  the  bouwelles  and  intralles  of  an  other  Tiburon  whiche  they  haue  taken  before,
whiche  may  eafely  bee  doone,  for  I  haue  feene  nyne  taken  in  one  day.  And  if  they  wolde  haue  taken  more,
they  myght  alfo.  Thus  when  the  Tiburon  hath  pleafauntly  folowed  the  fhip  a  longe  viage,  at  the  lengthe  he
fwaloweth  the  baite  with  the  hooke.  And  afwell  by  his  flryuinge  to  fiye  or  efcape,  as  alfo  by  the  fwifte  paffage
of  the  fhyppe,  the  hooke  ouerthwarteth  and  catcheth  hold  of  his  chappes.  The  which  fiffhe  when  it  is  taken,  it
is  of  fuche  huge  biggeneffe  that  twelue  or  fyfeteene  men  are  fcarcely  able  to  drawe  it  owt  of  the  water  and  lifte
it  into  the  fhyppe  :  Where  one  of  the  mariners  gyueth  it  many  knockes  on  the  headde  with  a  clubbe  or  beetle
vntil  he  haue  llaine  it.  They  are  fumtymes  founde  of  tenne  or  twelue  foote  long,  and  of  fyue,  fyxe,  or  feuen
fpannes  in  breadth  where  they  are  brodefl.  They  haue  very  greate  and  wyde  mouthes  to  the  proportion  of  the
refle  of  theyr  boddies,  and  haue  two  rowes  of  teethe  the  one  fumewhat  feparate  from  the  other,  of  cruell  fhape
and  {landing  very  thicke.  When  they  haue  flayne  this  fyfflie,  they  cutte  the  boddy  therof  in  fmaule  piefes,  and
put  it  to  drye,  hangynge  it  three  or  four  dayes  at  the  cordes  of  the  fayle  clothes  to  drye  in  the  wynde,  and  then .
eate  it.  It  is  doubtleffe  a  good  fyffhe  and  of  great  commoditie  to  ferue  the  fhippes  for  vitalles  for  many  dayes.
The  leafle  of  thefe  fyffhes  are  mofle  holfome  and  tender.  It  hath  a  fkinne  much  like  to  the  flcynne  of  a  fole,
whervnto  the  fayde  Tuberon  is  lyke  in  fhape.  Which  I  faye  bycaufe  Plinie  hath  made  mention  of  none  of  thefe
three  fifflies  among  the  number  of  them  whereof  he  wryteth  in  his  natural  hyflorie.  Thefe  Tiburons  coomme
furth  of  the  fea  and  enter  into  the  ryuers,  where  they  are  no  leffe  perelous  then  greate  lifartes  or  Crocodiles  wherof  I
haue  fpoken  largely  before.  For  they  deuoure  men,  kine,  and  horfes,  euen  as  doo  the  Crocodiles.  They  are  very  daun-
gerous  in  certeyne  waffhynge  places  or  pooles  by  the  ryuers  fydes,  and  where  they  haue  deuoured  at  other  tymes.
Dyuers  other  fyfflies  both  greate  and  fmaule,  of  fundry  fortes  and  kyndes  are  accuflomed  to  folowe  the  fhyppes
goynge  vnder  fayle,  of  the  which  I  wyl  fpeake  fumwhat  when  I  haue  wrytten  of  INIanate  which  is  the  thyrde  of
the  three  whereof  I  haue  promyfed  to  entreate. Manate  therefore,  is  a  tyffhe  of  the  fea,  of  the  byggefl.  forte,

Tiburons.
Manates

Great  Tortoyses.

201

Tiburons.

Plinie.

Crocodyles.

202

ACanates.

231

TJic  Jiyjforie  of  the  vvcjfc  Indies.

The  fysshe
Manate.

A  remedy  ageynst
the  stone.

The  swoorde
fysshe.

Tunnye.

Turbiit.

203

Note.

Flyinge  fysshes.

and  muche  greater  then  theTiburon  in  length  and  breadth:  And  is  very  brutyfflie  and  vyle,  fo  that  it  appeareth
in  forme  lyke  vnto  one  of  tliofe  great  veflelles  made  of  goates  flcynnes  whcrin  tliey  vfe  to  cary  nevve  wyne  in
Medina  de  Campo  or  in  Arcualo.  The  headde  of  this  beafl  is  lyke  the  head  of  an  oxe,  with  alfo  lyke  eyes.
And  hath  in  the  place  of  armes,  two  great  flumpes  wherwith  he  fwymmcth.  It  is  a  very  gentle  and  tame
beafle :  And  commeth  oftentymes  owt  of  the  water  to  the  next  fliore :  where  if  he  find  [a]ny  herbes  or  grafle,  he
feedeth  therof.  Owre  men  are  accuflomed  to  kyl  many  of  thefe  and  dyuers  other  good  fyfflies  with  theyr
croflebowes,  purfuinge  them  in  barkos  or  Canoas,  bycaufe  they  fwymme  in  maner  abouc  the  water.  The
whiche  thynge  when  they  fee,  they  drawe  them  with  a  hooke  tyde  at  a  fmaule  corde,  but  fumwliat  flrongc.  As
the  f)ffl\e  flyeth  away.,  the  archer  letteth  go  and  prolongoth  the  corde  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  vntyll  he  haue  lette
it  go  many  fiithams.  At  the  ende  of  the  corde,  there  is  tyde  a  corke  or  a  piece  of  lyght  woodde.  And  when
the  fyfflie  is  goone  a  lyttle  way,  and  hathe  coloured  the  water  with  his  bludde,  and  feeleth  hym  felfe  to  faynt
and  drawe  towarde  th[e]ende  of  his  lyfe,  he  refortethe  to  the  fliore,  and  the  archer  folowetli  gatherynge  vp  his
corde :  wherof  whyle  there  yet  remaine  fixe  or  eyglVt  fathams  or  fum  what  more  or  leffe,  he  draweth  it  towarde
the  lande,  and  draweth  the  fyfflie  therwith  by  little  and  lyttle  as  the  wanes  of  the  fea  helpe  hym  to  doo  it  the
more  eafely.  Then  with  the  helpe  of  the  reft.e  of  his  companie  he  lyftethe  this  greate  beafl.  owt  of  the  water
to  the  lande,  beinge  of  fuch  bygneffe  that  to  conuey  it  from  thenfe  to  the  citie,  it  flialbe  requifite  to  haue  a  carte
with  a  good  yoke  of  oxen,  and  fumtynies  more,  accordyng  as  thefe  fyfflies  are  of  byggeneffe,  fum  being  much
greater  then  other  fum  in  the  fame  kynde  as  is  feene  of  other  beafl.es.  Sumtymes  they  lyft  thefe  fyfflies  into
the  Canoa  or  barke,  withowt  drawynge  them  to  the  lande  as  before.  For  as  foone  as  they  are  flayne,  they
flote  aboue  the  water.  And  I  beleue  verely  that  this  fyfflie  is  one  of  the  befl.  in  the  world  to  the  tafle,  and  the
lykefl.  vnto  flefflie.  Efpecially  fo  lyke  vnto  biefe,  that  who  fo  hath  not  feene  it  hole,  can  iudge  it  to  bee  none
other  when  he  feethe  it  in  pieces  then  verye  biefe  or  veale.  And  is  certeynly  fo  lyke  vnto  fleflie,  that  all  the
men  in  the  worlde  may  lierin  bee  deceaued.  The  tafle  lykewyfe,  is  lyke  vnto  the  tafl.  of  very  good  veale,  and
lafleth  longe  yf  it  bee  poudered.  So  that  in  fine,  the  bafe  of  thefe  parties,  is  by  no  nieanes  lyke  vnto  this.
This  Manate,  hath  a  certeine  fl,one  or  rather  bone  in  his  headde  within  the  brayne,  which  is  of  qualitie  greatly
appropriate  ageynfle  the  difeafe  of  the  flone,  if  it  bee  burnte  and  grounde  into  fmaule  pouder,  and  taken
fafl.ynge  in  the  mornynge  when  the  payne  is  felte,  in  fuch  quantitie  as  maye  lye  vppon  a  penye  with  a  drawght
of  good  whyte  wywt.  For  beynge  thus  taken  three  or  foure  mornynges,  it  acquieteth  the  grefe  as  dyuers  haue
toulde  me  whiche  haue  proued  it  trewe.  And  I  my  felfe  by  teflimonie  of  fight,  doo  wytneffe  that  I  haue  feene
this  fl-one  fought  of  dyuers  for  this  effecte.

There  are  alfo  dyuers  other  fyfflies  as  bygge  as  this  Manate :  Emonge  the  which  there  is  one  cauled
Vihiiella.  This  fyflie  beareth  in  the  toppe  of  his  headde,  a  fwoorde  beinge  on  euery  fyde  full  of  many  fliarpe
teeth.  This  fwoorde  is  naturally  very  harde  and  flronge,  of  foure  or  fyue  fpannes  in  length  and  of  proportion
accordynge  to  the  fame  byggenes.  And  for  this  caufe  is  this  fyflie  cauled  Spada :  that  is  the  fwoord  fyflie.  Of
this  kynde  fum  are  found  as  lyttle  as  fardines :  and  other  fo  greate,  that  two  yokes  of  oxen  are  fcarfely  able  to
drawe  them  on  a  carte.  But  whereas  before,  I  haue  promyfed  to  fpeake  of  other  fyfflies  which  are  taken  in
thefe  feas  whyle  the  fliyppes  are  vnder  fayle,  I  wyl  not  forget  to  fpeake  of  the  Tunnye  which  is  a  great  and  good
fyfflie,  and  is  oftentymes  taken  and  kylde  with  troute  fpeares  and  hookes  cafle  in  the  water  when  they  play
and  fwymme  aboute  the  fliyppes.  In  lyke  maner  alfo  are  taken  many  turbuts  which  are  very  good  fyfflies  as
are  lyghtly  in  all  the  fea.

And  here  is  to  bee  noted,  that  in  the  greate  Ocean  fea,  there  is  a  flraunge  thynge  to  bee  confidered,
whiche  all  that  haue  byn  in  the  Indies  affirme  to  bee  trewe.  And  this  is,  that  lyke  as  on  the  lande  there  are
fum  prouinces  fertile  and  frutfuU,  and  fum  barren,  euen  fo  dooth  the  lyke  chaunce  in  the  fea :  So  that  at  fum
wyndes  the  fliyppes  fayle  fiftie  or  a  hundreth,  or  two  hundreth  leaques  and  more,  withowt  takyng  or  feinge  of
one  fyfflie.  And  ageyne  in  the  felfe  fame  Ocean,  in  fum  places,  all  the  water  is  feene  tremble  by  the  mouynge
of  the  fyffhes,  where  they  are  taken  abundauntly.

It  commeth  further  to  my  rememberaunce  to  fpeak  fumwhat  of  the  flyinge  of  fyfflies,  which  is  doubtleffe  a
fl.raunge  thynge  to  beholde,  and  is  after  this  maner.  When  the  fliyppes  fayle  by  the  greate  Ocean  folowynge
theyr  vyage,  there  ryfeth  fumtymes  on  the  one  fyde  or  on  the  other,  many  coompanies  of  certeyne  lyttle  fyfflies,
of  the  which  the  byggefl.  is  no  greater  then  a  fardyne :  and  foo  diminifflie  leffe  and  leffe  from  that  quantitie  that
fum  of  them  are  very  lyttle.  Thefe  are  cauled  Volatori :  that  is,  flyinge  fyfflies.  They  ryfe  by  great  coompanies
and  flockes  in  fuch  multitudes  that  it  is  an  afl.onyffliement  to  beholde  them.  Sumtymes  they  ryfe  but  lyttle
from  the  water:  and  (as  it  chaunceth)  continew  one  flyght  for  the  fpace  of  a  hundreth  pafes  and  fumtynies  more
or  leffe  before  they  faule  ageyne  into  the  fea.  Sumtymes  alfo  they  faule  into  the  fliyppes.  And  I  remember
that  on  an  euenyng  when  all  the  company  in  the  fliippe  were  on  theyr  knees  fyngynge  Sa/tie  regiiia  in  the
highefl.  parte  of  the  Caflel  of  the  poope,  and  fayled  with  a  full  wynde,  there  paffed  by  vs  a  flocke  of  thefe  flyinge
fyfflies :  and  came  fo  neare  vs  that  many  of  them  fell  into  the  fliyppe,  amonge  the  which,  two  or  three  fell  hard

232

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

233

by  me  which  I  tooke  alyue  in  my  hande :  fo  that  I  myght  well  perceaue  that  they  were  as  bigge  as  fardynes
and  of  the  fame  quantitie,  hauynge  two  Avynges  or  quylles  growyng  owt  of  theyr  fynnes,  lyke  vnto  thofe
whenvith  all  the  fyfflies  fwymme  in  ryuers.  Thefe  wynges  are  as  longe  as  the  fyffhes  theym  felues.  As  longe
as  theyr  wynges  are  moyde,  they  beare  them  vp  in  the  ayer.  But  as  foone  as  they  are  drye,  they  can  continewe
theyr  flyght  no  further  then  as  I  haue  fayde  before,  but  faule  immediatly  into  the  fea,  and  fo  ryfe  ageyne,  and
flye  as  before  from  place  to  place.

In  the  yeare.  A  thoufand  fyue  hundreth  fiftene.  when  I  came  fyrfl  to  informe  your  maieflye  of  the  flate  of
the  thynges  in  Indya,  and  was  the  yeare  folowynge  in  Flanders  in  the  tyme  of  youre  mofle  fortunate  fucceffe  in
thefe  youre  kyngedomes  of  Aragonie  and  Caflyle,  wheras  at  that  vyage  I  fayled  aboue  the  Hand  Bermuda
otherwyfe  cauled  Garza,  beynge  the  furthefle  of  all  the  Ilandes  that  are  founde  at  thys  daye  in  the  worlde,  and
arryuynge  there  at  the  deapthe  of  eight  yeardes  of  water,  and  dyflant  from  the  land  as  farre  as  the  fhotte  of  a
piece  of  ordynaunce,  I  determined  to  fende  fume  of  the  fhyppe  to  lande  as  well  to  make  fearche  of  fuche
thynges  as  were  there,  as  alfo  to  leaue  in  the  Ilande  certayne  hogges  for  increafe.  But  the  tyme  not  feruyng
my  purpofe  by  reafon  of  contrarye  wynde,  I  could  bryng  my  fhyppes  no  nearer  the  Ilande  beinge  twelue
leaques  in  lengthe  and  fyxe  in  breadth  and  about  thyrty  in  circuite,  lying  in  the  thjTtie  and  thre  degre  of  the
northe  fyde.  Whyle  I  remayned  here,  I  fawe  a  llryfe  and  combatte  betwene  thefe  flyinge  fyfhes  and  the  fyfhes
named  gylte  heades,  and  the  foules  cauled  feamewes  and  cormorauntes,  whych  fuerlye  feemed  vnto  me  a  thynge
of  as  greate  pleafure  and  folace  as  coulde  bee  deuyfed,  whyle  the  gylte  heades  fwamme  on  the  brymme  of  the
water  and  fumtymes  lyfted  theyr  fhulders  aboue  the  fame  to  rayfe  the  fwymmynge  fyffhes  owt  of  the  water  to
dryue  them  to  flyght,  and  folowe  them  fwymming  to  the  place  where  they  faule  to  take  and  eate  them  fodaynlye.
Agayne  on  the  other  fyde,  the  feamewes  and  cormorantes,  take  manye  of  thefe  flying  fyffhes :  fo  that  by  thys
meanes  theye  are  nother  fafe  in  the  ayre  nor  in  the  water.  In  the  felfe  fame  perrell  and  daunger  doo  men  lyue
in  thys  mortall  lyfe  wherin  is  no  certayne  fecurytye  nether  in  hygh  eftate  nor  in  lowe.  Which  thynge  fuerlye
ought  to  put  vs  in  rememberaunce  of  that  bleffed  and  fafe  reflynge  place  whych  god  hath  prepared  for  fuch  as
loue  hyra,  who  fhall  acquyete  and  fynyfhe  the  trauayles  of  thys  troubelous  worlde  wherin  are  fo  manye
daungyours,  and  brynge  them  to  that  eternall  lyfe  where  they  fhall  fynde  eternall  fecurytye  and  reft.e.  But  to
returne  to  the  hyflorye :  thefe  byrdes  and  foules  whych  I  fawe,  were  of  the  Ilande  of  Bermuda  nere  vnto  the
whych  I  fawe  thefe  flyinge  fyffhes.  For  they  coulde  bee  of  no  other  lande,  forafmuche  as  they  are  not
accufl.omed  to  wander  farre  frome  the  coafles  where  they  are  bredde.

C  Of  th\e\increafe  and  deer eafe,  {that  is)  ryfynge  and  faullynge  of  our
Ocean  fea  and  Sottthe  fea  caulled  the  fea  of^Mx.

Wyll  nowe  fpeake  of  certeayne  thynges  whiche  are  feene  in  the  Prouynce,  or  at  the  lealle  in
the  citie  of  golden  Cafl.yle  otherwyfe  cauled  Beragua,  and  in  the  coafles  of  the  North  fea
and  of  the  South  fea  caulled  the  fea  of  Siir.  Not  omittyng  to  note  one  fynguler  and  mer-
uelous  thynge  which  I  haue  confydered  of  the  Ocean  fea,  wherof  hytherto  no  cofmographer,
pylote  or  maryner  or  any  other  haue  fatiffyed  me.

I  fay  therfore  as  it  is  well  knowen  to  your  maieflye  and  all  fuch  as  haue  knowlege  of
the  Ocean  fea,  that  this  greate  Ocean  cafleth  from  it  felfe  the  fea  Mediterranaim  by  the
mouthe  of  the  flrayght  of  Gibilterra :  in  the  which  the  water  from  th[e]end  and  furthefle  parte  of  that  fea,  euen
vnto  the  mouth  of  the  fayde  flraight,  eyther  in  the  Eafl  towarde  the  coafle  commonlye  cauled  Leuante,  or  in
any  other  parte  of  the  fayde  fea  Afediferraneum,  the  fea  doothe  not  fo  faule  nor  increafe  as  reafon  wolde  iudge
for  fo  greate  a  fea.  But  increfethe  verye  lyttle  and  a  fmaule  fpace.  Neuertheleffe,  withoute  the  mouthe  of
the  flraight  in  the  mayne  Ocean,  it  increafeth  and  fauleth  verye  muche  and  a  great  fpace  of  grounde  from  fyxe
houres  to  fyxe  houres,  as  in  all  the  coafles  of  Spayne,  Britannye,  Flanders,  Germanye,  and  England.  The
felfe  fame  Ocean  fea  in  the  fyrme  lande  newly  founde,  in  the  coafles  of  the  fame  lyynge  towarde  the  Northe,
dothe  neyther  ryfe  nor  faule,  nor  lykewife  in  the  Ilandes  of  Hifpauiola  and  Cuba  and  all  the  other  Ilandes  of
the  fame  fea  lyinge  towarde  the  northe,  for  the  fpace  of  thre  thoufande  leaques,  but  onelye  in  lyke  maner  as
doothe  the  fea  Mcditerratieum  in  Italye :  whiche  is  in  maner  nothynge  in  refpecte  to  that  increafe  and  decreafe
whiche  the  fayde  Ocean  hath  in  the  coafles  of  Spayne  and  Flaunders.  But  this  is  yet  a  greater  thynge,  that
alfo  the  felfe  fame  Ocean  in  the  coafles  of  the  fayde  fyrme  lande  lyinge  towarde  the  Southe  in  the  citie  of
Panama,  and  alfo  in  the  coafle  of  that  lande  whiche  lyethe  towarde  the  Eafle  and  Wefle  frome  that  citie,  as  in
the  Ilande  of  pearles  or  Margaritea  whiche  the  Indians  caule  Tarrarequi,  and  alfo  in Tahoga  and  Otoque,  and

233

The  Hand  of
Bermudx

Not  to  hie  for  the

pye,  nor  to  lowe
for  the  Crowe.

204

Seras

The  west  Ocean.

The  sea
Mediteraneuni.

HispanioJa.
Cuba.

234

The  Jiyjfoyic  of  the  vvejie  Indies.

The  South  sea.

The  power  and
wisilome  of  god  is
sene  in  his
creatures.

205

Esquecua  and
Vrrace.

Noincn  Dei.
Panama.

The  ryuer  of
Chagre.

in  all  other  Ilandes  of  the  fouthe  fea  of  Stir,  the  water  ryfeth  and  fauleth fo  much,  that  when  it  faulcth  it
go[e]th  in  maner  owt  of  fyghte,  which  thynge  I  my  felfe  haue  feene  oftentymes.

And  here  youre  maieflie  may  note  an  other  thynge,  that  from  the  northe  fea  to  the  fouthe  fea  beynge  of
fuche  d)ffcrence  the  one  from  the  other  in  ryfynge  and  faulynge,  yet  is  the  lande  that  deuydeth  theym  not
pafle  eyghteene  or  twentye  leaques  in  breadthe  frome  coafle  to  coafle.  So  that  bothe  the  fayde  feas  beynge
all  one  Ocean  this  flraunge  effecte  is  a  thynge  worthy  greately  to  bee  confidcred  of  al  fuche  as  haue  inclination
and  defyre  to  knowe  the  fecreate  woorkes  of  nature  wherin  the  infinite  povvre  and  wyfedome  of  god  is  feene  to
bee  fuch  as  may  allure  all  good  natures  to  reuerence  and  loue  fo  diuine  a  maieflie.  And  wheras  by  the
demonftrations  of  lerned  men  I  am  not  fotiffyed  of  the  natural  caufe  hereof,  I  content  my  felfe  to  knowe  and
beleue  that  he  which  hathe  made  thefe  thynges,  dooth  knowe  this  and  many  other  whiche  he  hath  not  granted
to  the  reafon  of  man  to  comprehend,  much  leffe  to  fo  bafe  a  wyt  as  myne  is.  They  therefore  that  are  of
greater  vnderflandynge,  fliall  fearche  the  caufe  hereof,  for  them  and  for  me,  forafmuch  as  I  haue  onely  put  the
matter  in  queRion  as  a  wytnefle  that  haue  feene  th[e]experience  of  the  thynge.

C  Of  the  Jlrayght  or  narowe  paffage  of  the  lande  lyinge  betwene  the  North

and  SontJi  fea,  by  the  whiche  fpyces  may  7mtch  fooner  and  eaflyer

be  brought  from  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca  into  Spayne  by

the  Weft  Ocean  then  by  that  way  wherby  the

Portugales  fayle  into  Eaft  India,

T  hath  byn  an  opinion  amonge  the  Cofmographers  and  Pylottes  of  late  tyme,  and  other  which
haue  had  practife  in  thynges  touchynge  the  fea,  that  there  fhulde  bee  a  flrayght  of  water
paffynge  from  the  North  fea  of  the  firme,  into  the  South  fea  of  Sur,  whiche  neuertheleffe
hath  not  byn  feene  nor  founde  to  this  daye.  And  fuerlye  yf  there  be  any  fuche  flrayght,
we  that  inhabite  thofe  partes  do  thynke  the  fame  fhulde  bee  rather  of  lande  then  of  water.
For  the  fyrme  lande  in  fum  partes  therof  is  fo  flrayght  and  narrowe  that  the  Indyans  faye
that  frome  the  mountaynes  of  the  prouynce  of  Efqtiegua  or  Vrraca,  (whych  are  betwene  the
one  fea  and  the  other)  If  a  man  affend  to  the  toppe  of  the  mountaynes  and  looke  towarde  the  Northe,  he  maye
fee  the  water  of  the  North  fea  of  the  Prouynce  of  Beragtia.  And  ageyne  lookynge  the  contrarye  waye,  may  on
the  other  fyde  towarde  the  Southe,  fee  the  fea  of  Sur  and  the  prouynces  whyche  confyne  with  it,  as  doo  the
territoryes  of  the  twoo  Lordes  or  kynges  of  the  fayde  prouinces  of  Vrraca  and  Efqjiegua.  And  I  beleue  that  if
it  bee  as  the  Indyans  faye,  of  al  that  is  hetherto  knowen,  this  is  the  narrowefl  flrayght  of  the  fyrme  lande,  whiche
fume  affyrme  to  bee  full  of  rough  mountaynes.  Yet  doo  I  not  take  it  for  a  better  waye,  or  fo  fhorte  as  is  that
whyche  is  made  from  the  porte  cauled  Nomen  del  (whiche  is  in  the  Northe  fea)  vnto  the  newe  citye  of  Panama
beynge  in  the  coafle  and  on  the  banke  of  the  fea  of  Sur.  Whiche  waye  is  likewyfe  very  rough  ful  of  thicke
wods,  mountaines,  r}'Uers,  valleys,  and  verye  diffyculte  to  paffe  through,  and  can  not  bee  doone  withowt  greate
laboure  and  trauayle.  Sum  meafure  this  waye  in  this  part,  to  bee  from  fea  to  fea.  xviii.  leaques,  whych  I  fup-
pofe  to  bee  rather,  xx.  not  for  that  it  is  any  more  by  meafure,  but  bicaufe  it  is  rough  and  dyffyculte  as  I  haue
fayde,  and  as  I  haue  founde  it  by  experyence  hauynge  nowe  twyfe  paffed  that  way  by  foote  :  countyng  from  the
porte  and  vyllage  of  Noinen  Dei  vnto  the  dominion  of  the  Cacique  of  luanaga  otherwyfe  cauled  Capira.  viil
leaques  :  And  frome  thenfe  to  the  ryuer  of  Chagre.,  other,  viii.  leaques.  So  that  at  this  ryuer  beinge.  xvi.  leaques
from  the  fayde  porte,  endeth  the  roughnefle  of  the  way.  Then  from  henfe  to  the  maruelous  brydge  are  two
leaques  :  And  beyonde  that,  other  twoo  vnto  the  port  of  Panama  :  So  that  all  togyther  in  my  iudgmente,  make
XX.  leaques.  And  if  therfore  this  nauigation  may  bee  founde  in  the  South  fea  for  the  trade  of  fpices  (as  we  truft.
in  God)  to  bee  brought  from  thenfe  to  the  fayde  porte  of  Parama  (as  is  poffible  enough)  they  may  afterwarde
eafly  paffe  to  the  Northe  fea  notwithflandynge  the  difficultie  of  the  waye  of  the.  xx.  leaques  aforefayde.  Whiche
thynge  I  affirme  as  a  man  well  trauayled  in  thefe  regions,  hauynge  twyfe  on  my  feate  paffed  ouer  this  flrayght
in  the  yeare.  152 1.  as  I  haue  fayde.  It  is  furthermore  to  bee  vnderflode,  that  it  is  a  maruelous  facilitie  to  bryng
fpices  by  this  way  which  I  wil  now  declare.  From  Panama  to  the  ryuer  of  Chagre,  are  foure  leaques  of  good
and  fayre  way  by  the  which  cartes  may  paffe  at  pleafure  by  reafon  that  the  mountaynes  are  but  fewe  and  lyttle,
and  that  the  greatefle  parte  of  thefe  foure  leaques  is  a  playne  grounde  voyde  of  trees.  And  when  the  cartes  are
coomme  to  the  fayde  ryuer,  the  fpices  may  be  caryed  in  barkes  and  pinneffes. For  this  ryuer  entereth  into  the

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvefte  Indies.

235

North  fea  fyue  or.  vi  leaques  lower  then  the  port  of  Nomen  dei,  and  emptieth  it  felfe  in  the  fea  nere  vnto  an
Ilande  cauled  Bajlimoito,  where  is  a  very  good  and  fafe  port.  Yowr  maieflie  may  now  therfore  confydcr  howe
great  a  thynge  and  what  commoditie  it  may  bee  to  conuey  fpices  this  way,  forafmuch  as  the  ryuer  of  Chagre
hauyng  his  originall  only  two  leaques  from  the  South  fea,  contineweth  his  courfe  and  emptieth  it  felfe  into  the
other  North  fea.  This  ryuer  runneth  fafl  and  is  very  greate,  and  fo  commodious  for  this  purpofe  as  may  be
thowght  or  defyred.  The  marueilous  bridge  made  by  the  worke  of  natire,  being  t^vo  leaques  beyonde  the  fayd
ryuer,  and  other  twoo  leaques  on  this  fyde  the  porte  of  Panatna,  fo  lyinge  in  the  mydde  way  betwene  them
both,  is  framed  naturally  in  fuch  fort  that  none  which  paffe  by  this  viage  fee  any  fuch  bridge  or  thynke  that
there  is  any  fuch  buyldyng  in  that  place  vntyll  they  bee  in  the  toppe  therof  in  the  way  toward  Panaina.  But  as
foone  as  they  are  on  the  brydge,  lookynge  towarde  the  ryght  hande,  they  fee  a  lyttle  ryuer  vnder  them
which  hath  his  chanell  diflante  from  the  feete  of  them  that  walke  ouer  it,  the  fpace  of  twoo  fpeares  length  or
The  water  of  this  ryuer  is  very  fhalowe,  not  paffyng  the  depth  of  a  mans  legge  to  the  knee  :  and  is  in

more.

breadth  betwene  thyrtie  and  fortie  pafes  :  and  faulethe  into  the  ryuer  of  Chagre.  Towarde  the  ryght  hand
flandyng  on  this  brydge,  there  is  nothyng  feene  but  great  trees.  The  largeneffe  of  the  brydge,  conteyneth.  xv.
pafes  :  and  the  length  thereof  about  threefcore  or  fourefcore  pafes.  The  arche  is  fo  made  of  mofle  harde  flone,
that  no  man  can  beholde  it  without  admiration,  beinge  made  by  the  hyghe  and  omnipotent  creatour  of  all
thynges.  But  to  returne  to  fpeake  fumwhat  more  of  the  conueying  of  fpices,  I  fay  that  when  it  fhal  pleafe
almyghty  god  that  this  nauigation  aforefayde  fhal  bee  founde  by  the  good  fortune  of  yowre  maieflie,  and  that
the  fpices  of  the  Ilandes  of  the  South  fea  (which  may  alfo  bee  otherwyfe  cauled  the  Ocean  of  the  Eafl  India
in  the  whiche  are  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca)  fhalbe  browght  to  the  fayd  coafle  and  the  porte  of  Panama,  and  bee
conueyed  from  thenfe  (as  we  haue  fayde)  by  the  firme  lande  \vith  cartes  vnto  the  ryuer  of  Chagre,  and  from
thenfe  into  this  owr  other  fea  of  the  North,  from  whenfe  they  may  afterward  bee  browght  into  Spayne,  I  fay
that  by  this  meanes  the  vyage  fhall  bee  fhortened  more  then  feuen  thoufande  leaques,  with  muche  leffe
daunger  then  is  by  the  viage  nowe  vfed  by  the  way  of  Commendator  of  Ayfa  capitayne  vnder  yowre  maieflie,
who  this  prefent  yeare  attempted  a  vyage  to  the  place  of  the  fayde  fpyces.  And  not  only  the  way  is  thus
much  fhortened,  but  alfo  a  thyrde  parte  of  the  tyme  is  abbreuiate.  To  conclude  therfore,  if  any  had  hetherto
attempted  this  vyage  by  the  fea  of  Sur,  to  feeke  the  Ilandes  of  fpyces,  I  am  of  firme  opinion  that  they  fhuld
haue  byn  founde  longe  fence,  as  doubteleffe  they  maye  bee  by  the  reafons  of  Cofmographie.

C  Howe  thynges  that  are  of  one  kynde,  dyffer  in  forme  and  qua  lit  ie,  accor-

dynge  to  the  nature  of  the  place  where  they  are  engendred  or

growe. And  of  the  beafies  cauled  Tygers.

N  the  firme  lande  are  fownde  many  terryble  beafies  which  fum  thinke  to  be  Tigers,  ^^^lich
thynge  neuertheleffe,  I  dare  not  affirme,  confyderynge  what  auctoures  doo  wryte  of  the
lyghtnes  and  agilitie  of  the  Tyger,  whereas  this  beafl  beynge  other  wyfe  in  fliape  very  like
vnto  a  Tyger,  is  notwithflandynge  very  flowe.  Yet  trewe  it  is,  that  accordynge  to  the
maruayles  of  the  worlde  and  differences  which  naturall  thynges  haue  in  dyuers  regions
vnder  heauen  and  dyuers  conflellations  of  the  fame  vnder  the  whiche  they  are  created,  wee
fee  that  fum  fuche  plantes  and  herbes  as  are  hurtfull  in  one  countrey,  are  harmelefle  and
holfome  in  other  regions.  And  byrdes  which  in  one  prouince  are  of  good  tafle,  are  in  other  fo  vnfauery  that
they  may  not  bee  eaten.  Men  likewyfe  which  in  fum  countreys  are  blacke,  are  in  other  places  whyte :  and  yet
are  both  thefe  and  they  men.

Euen  fo  may  it  bee  that  Tygers  are  lyght  in  fum  region  as  they  wryte,  and  maye  neuertheleffe  bee  flowe
and  heauy  in  thefe  Indies  of  yowr  maieflie  wherof  we  fpeake.  The  fheepe  of  Arabic  drawe  theyr  tayles  longe
and  bigge  on  the  ground,  and  the  bulles  of  Egypt  haue  theyr  heare  growynge  towarde  theyr  headdes :  yet  are
thofe  fheepe  and  thefe  bulles.  Men  in  fum  countreys  are  hardy  and  of  good  courage,  and  in  other  naturally
fearefuU  and  brutyfhe.  All  thefe  thynges  and  many  more  which  may  bee  fayde  to  this  purpofe,  are  eafy  to  bee
proued  and  woorthy  to  bee  beleued  of  fuche  as  haue  redde  of  the  lyke  in  autours  or  trauayled  the  worlde,
whereby  theyr  owne  fyght  may  teache  theym  th[e]experience  of  thefe  thynges  wherof  I  fpeake.  It  is  alfo
manifefl,  that  Iiicca  wherof  they  make  theyr  breade  in  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  is  deadely  poyfon  yf  it  bee
eaten  greene  with  the  iufe :  And  yet  hathe  it  no  fuche  propertie  in  the  firme  land  where  I  haue  eaten  it  many
times  and  foind  it  to  bee  a  good  frute. The  bats  of  Spayne  although  they  bite,  yet  are  they  not  venemous.

"35

The  Ilande
BastimoKo.

The  manielous

bridge.

206

The  Ilandes  of

Molucca.

The  commoditie
of  this  \-ia2e.

Tigers.

Plantes  and
herbes.
Birdes.
Men.

Sheepe.
Bulles.

lucca.

Battes.

236

The  Jiyjforie  of  the  vvcfte  Indies.

Plinie.

The  Tiger.

207

The  huntyng  of
tigers.

A  reward  for
kyllinge  of  tigers.

But  in  the  firme  lande  many  dye  that  are  bytten  of  them.  And  in  this  fourme  may  fo  many  thynges  bee  fayde
that  tyme  Ihall  not  fuffice  to  wryte,  wheras  my  intent  is  only  to  proue  that  this  bead  may  be  a  Tiger  or  of  the
kind  of  Tigers  although  it  be  not  of  fuch  lyglitnefle  and  fwiftnes  as  are  they  wherof  Plinie  and  other  autours
fpeake,  difcrybynge  it  to  bee  one  of  the  fwyftefte  beafles  of  the  lande,  and  that  the  ryuer  of  Tigris  for  the  fwift
courfe  therof  was  cauled  by  that  name.  The  firfl  Spaniardes  which  fawe  this  Tyger  in  the  firme  lande,  dyd
fo  name  it.  Of  the  kynde  of  thefe  was  that  which  Don  Diego  Columbo  the  Admirall  fent  yowre  maieflie  owte
of  newe  Spayne  to  Toledo.  Theyr  heades  are  lyke  to  the  heades  of  Lyons  or  Lionefles,  but  greater.  The
refle  of  all  theyr  boddies  and  theyr  legges,  are  full  of  blacke  fpottes  one  nere  vnto  an  other  and  diuided  with  a
circumference  or  frynge  of  redde  colour  flicwinge  as  it  were  a  fayre  woorke  and  correfpondent  picture.  Abowt
theyr  croopes  or  hynder  partes,  they  haue  thefe  fpots  byggefl. :  and  leffe  and  leffe  towarde  theyr  bellies,  legges,
and  headdes.  That  which  was  brought  to  Toledo,  was  younge  and  but  lyttle,  and  by  my  eflimation,  of  th[e]age
of  three  yeares.  But  in  the  firme  lande  there  are  many  founde  of  greater  quantitie.  For  I  haue  feene  fum  of
three  fpannes  in  heyght,  and  more  then  fyue  in  length.  They  are  bealles  of  greate  force,  with  flronge  legges,
and  well  armed  with  nayles  and  fangcs  which  we  caule  dogge  teeth.  They  are  fo  fierce  that  in  my  iudgement
no  reall  lyon  of  the  byggeil  forte  is  fo  flronge  or  fierce.  Of  thefe,  there  are  many  founde  in  the  firme  land
whiche  deuour  many  of  the  Indians  and  do  much  hur»-e  otherwyfe.  But  fyns  the  comming  of  the  Chriflians,
many  haue  byn  kyld  with  CrofTebowes  after  this  maner.  As  foone  as  the  archer  hath  knowlege  of  the  haunt  of
any  of  thefe  Tygers,  he  goeth  fearchynge  theyr  trafe  with  his  croffebowe  and  with  a  lyttle  hounde  or  bewgle  and
not  with  a  greehounde,  bycaufe  this  beafl  wolde  foone  kyll  any  dogge  that  wolde  venter  on  hym.  When  the
hounde  hath  founde  the  Tyger,  he  runneth  about  hym  bayinge  continually,  and  approcheth  fo  neare  hym  fnappynge
and  grynnynge  with  fo  quicke  flyinge  and  returnyng,  that  he  hereby  fo  molefleth  this  fierce  beafle  that  he
dryuethe  hym  to  take  the  next  tree,  at  the  foote  whereof  he  remayneth  flyl  baying  and  the  Tyger  grynnyng  and
fhewyng  his  teeth,  whyle  in  the  meane  tyme  the  archer  commeth  neare,  and.  xii.  or.  xiiii.  pafes  of,  flryketh  hym
with  the  querel  of  his  croffebowe  in  the  brefle,  and  flyeth  incontinent,  leauynge  the  Tyger  in  his  trauayle  for
lyfe  and  death,  bytynge  the  tree  and  eatynge  earth  for  fierceneffe.  Then  within  the  fpace  of  twoo  or  three  houres
or  the  day  folowynge,  the  archer  returneth  thyther,  and  with  his  dogge  fyndeth  the  place  where  he  lyethe  deade.

In  the  yeare.  1522.  I  with  the  other  rulers  and  niagiflrates  of  the  citie  of  San6la  Maria  Antiqua  in  Dariena^
toke  order  in  o\vr  counfayle,  A  rewarde  of  foure  or  fyue  pieces  of  golde  to  bee  giuen  to  euery  man  that  kylde
any  of  thefe  Tygers :  by  reafon  wherof  many  were  kylde  in  fliorte  fpace  both  with  croffebowes  and  alfo  with
dyuers  fnares  and  ingens.  But  to  conclude,  I  Nvyll  not  obflynately  fland  in  opinyon  whether  thefe  beafles  bee
Tygers  or  Panthers,  or  of  the  number  of  any  other  fuch  beafles  of  fpotted  heare,  or  alfo  peraduenture  fum  other
newe  beafle  vnknowen  to  the  owlde  wryters  as  were  many  other  wherof  I  haue  fpoken  in  this  booke.  Of  which
thynge,  I  doo  not  greately  meruayle.  For  afmuche  as  vnto  owre  tyme  thys  greate  parte  of  the  worlde  was
vnknowen  to  the  antiquitie:  In  fo  muche  that  none  of  the  wryters  of  that  age,  nor  yet  Ptolomie  in  his
Cofmographie,  or  any  other  fence  hym,  haue  made  any  mention  herof,  vntill  the  fyrfl  Admyrall  Don
Chryflopher  Colonus  difcouered  the  fame.  A  thynge  douteleffe  without  comparyfon  muche  greater  then  that
whyche  is  fayd  of  Hercules,  that  he  fyrfte  gaue  th[e]enterance  of  the  fea  Mediterraneum  into  the  Ocean,  whiche
the  Grekes  coulde  neuer  doo  before  hym.  And  herof  ryfethe  the  fable  that  the  mountaynes  of  Calpe  and  Abila
(which  are  directly  one  agaynfl  an  other  in  the  flrayght  of  Gibilterra,  the  one  beyng  in  Spayne  and  the  other  in
Affryke)  were  ioyned  togither  before  they  were  opened  by  Hercules,  who  erected  thofe  hys  pyllers  whiche  your
maieflye  gyue  in  token  of  prehemynence  and  lyke  enterpryfes  with  lykewyfe  thefe  hys  wordes  plvs  vltra:
wordes  douteleffe  worthy  for  fo  greate  an[d]  vnyuerfall  an  Emperoure,  and  not  conuenyent  for  any  other  Prynce.
Forafrnuche  as  your  holy  Catholyke  Maieflye  haue  fpredde  them  in  fo  flraunge  and  remote  regyons,  fo  manye
thoufande  leaques  further  then  euer  dyd  Hercules.  And  certeynlye  fyr.  If  there  had  byn  an  Image  of  golde
made  in  the  prayfe  and  fame  of  Colonus,  He  had  as  well  deferued  it  as  any  of  thofe  men  to  whom  for  theyr
noble  enterpryfe  the  antiquytie  gaue  deuyne  honoure,  if  he  had  byn  in  their  tyme.  But  to  returne  to  ihe  matter
whereof  I  began  to  fpeake :  I  neede  fay  no  more  of  the  forme  of  thys  beafle,  for  as  muche  as  your  Maieflye  haue
feene  that  whych  is  yet  alyue  in  ToUedo.  And  fuerly  the  keper  of  your  Maieflies  lyons,  who  hath  taken  vppon
hym  the  charge  to  tame  this  beafle,  myght  better  haue  beflowed  his  paynes  in  an  other  thynge  that  myght  haue
bynne  more  profitable  for  the  fafegarde  of  his  lyfe  bycaufe  this  Tyger  beinge  yet  but  younge,  wyl  dayly  bee
flronger  and  fiercer  and  increafe  in  malice.  The  Indians  (and  efpecially  they  of  the  firme  lande  in  the  prouince
whiche  the  Catholyke  Kynge  Don  Ferdinando  commaunded  to  bee  cauled  golden  Caflyle)  caule  this  beafle
Ochi.  This  thinge  is  flraunge  that  chaunced  of  late :  that  wheras  the  Tiger  wherof  we  haue  made  mention
before,  wolde  haue  kylde  his  keeper  that  then  kept  hym  in  a  cage,  was  in  fewe  dayes  after  made  fo  tame  that
he  ledde  her  tyed  only  with  a  fmaule  corde  and  playde  with  her  fo  familyarly  that  I  maruayled  greatly  to  fee  it,  yet
not  without  certeyne  belefe  that  this  frendfhyp  wyll  not  lafle  longe without  daunger  of  lyfe  to  the  keeper,  forafmuch
as  fuerly  thefe  beafles  are  not  meete  to  bee  amonge  men  for  theyr  fiercenes  and  cruell  nature  that  can  not  bee  tamed.
236

Colonus  compared
to  Hercules.

The  pillers  of
Hercules.

The  straightes  of
Gibilterra.

Note.

PLVS  VLTRA.

Howe  farre
Th[e]emperours
maiestie  excelleth
Hercules.

A  tiger  made  tame.

208

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

237

^"T^  Of  the  maiters  mid  cufionies  of  the  Indians  of  the  firme  tande,

and  of  theyr  women.

He  maners  and  cuflomes  of  thefe  Indians,  are  dyuers  in  diuers  prouinces.  Sum  of  them  take
as  many  wyues  as  them  lyfte,  and  other  lyue  with  one  wyfe  whome  they  forfake  not  without
confent  of  both  parties,  which  chauncethe  efpecially  when  they  haue  no  chyldren.  The
nobiUtie  afwel  men  as  women,  repute  it  infamous  to  ioyne  with  any  of  bafe  parentage  or
Grangers,  except  Chridians,  whom  they  count  noble  men  by  reafon  of  theyr  vahentnes,
although  they  put  a  difference  betwene  the  common  forte  and  the  other  to  whom  they
fliewe  obedience,  countynge  it  for  a  great  matter  and  an  honorable  thyng  yf  they  bee
beloued  of  any  of  them.  In  fo  much  that  yf  they  knowe  any  Chriflian  man  carnally,  they  keepe  theyr  fayth
to  hym,  fo  that  he  bee  not  longe  abfent  farre  from  them.  For  theyr  intent  is  not  to  bee  widowes  or  to  lyue
chafl  lyke  religious  women.  Many  of  theym  haue  this  cuflome,  that  when  they  perceaue  that  they  are  with
chylde,  they  take  an  herbe  wherwith  they  deflroy  that  is  conceaued.  For  they  fay  that  only  wel  aged  women
fhulde  beare  chyldren,  and  that  they  wyl  not  forbeare  theyr  pleafures  and  deforme  theyr  boddies  with  bearynge
of  chyldren,  wherby  theyr  teates  becoome  loofe  and  hangynge  which  thynge  they  greatly  difprayfe.  When
they  are  delyuered  of  theyr  chyldren  they  go  to  the  ryuer  and  wafhe  them.  Whiche  doone,  theyr  bludde  and
purgation  ceafeth  immediatly.  And  when  after  this  they  haue  a  few  days  abfleyned  from  the  company  of  men,
they  becomme  fo  flrayght  as  they  fay  which  haue  had  carnall  familiaritie  with  them,  that  fuch  as  vfe  them,  can
not  without  much  difificultie  fatiffie  theyr  appetite.  They  alfo  whiche  neuer  had  chyldren,  are  euer  as  vjTgins.
In  fum  partes  they  weare  certeyne  lyttle  apernes  rounde  about  them  before  and  behynde  as  lowe  as  to  theyr
knees  and  hammes,  wherwith  they  couer  theyr  priuie  partes,  and  are  naked  all  theyr  boddie  byfyde.  The
principal  men  beare  theyr  priuities  in  a  holowe  pype  of  golde :  but  the  common  forte  haue  theym  inclofed  in
the  fhelles  of  certeyne  great  welkes,  and  are  byfyde  vtterly  naked.  For  they  thynke  it  no  more  fhame  to  haue
theyr  coddes  feene  then  any  other  parte  of  theyr  boddies.  And  in  many  prouinces  bothe  the  men  and  women
go  vtterly  naked  without  any  fuch  couerture  at  al.  In  the  prouince  of  Cueua  they  caul  a  man  C/iuy,  and  a
woman  Ira :  which  name  is  not  greately  difagreeable  to  many  both  of  theyr  women  and  of  owres.

Thefe  Indians  gyue  great  honour  and  reuerence  to  theyr  Cacique  (that  is)  theyr  kynges  and  rulers.  The
principall  Cacique,  hath  twelue  of  his  mofl  flronge  Indians  appoynted  to  beare  hym  when  he  remoueth  to  any
place,  or  gothe  abrod  for  his  pleafure.  Two  of  them  cary  hym  fyttyng  vppon  a  longe  piece  of  woodde  which
is  naturally  as  lyght  as  they  can  fynd  The  other  tenne  folowe  nexte  vnto  hym  as  foote  men.  They  keepe
continually  a  trottynge  pafe  with  hym  on  theyr  fhulders.  When  the  twoo  that  cary  hym  are  wery,  other  twoo
coomme  in  theyr  places  without  any  diflurbance  or  fley.  And  thus  if  the  way  bee  playne,  they  cary  hym  in
this  maner  for  the  fpace  of  xv.  or.  xx.  leaques  in  one  day.  The  Indians  that  are  affigned  to  this  office,  are
for  the  mofle  parte  flaues  or  Naboriti,  that  is,  fuch  as  are  bounde  to  continuall  feruice.

I  haue  alfo  noted  that  when  the  Indians  perceaue  them  felues  to  bee  troubled  with  to  much  bludde,  they
lette  theym  felues  blud  in  the  calfes  of  theyr  leggcs  and  brawnes  of  theyr  armes.  This  doo  they  with  a  very
fliarpe  flone,  and  fumtymes  with  the  fmaule  toothe  of  a  vyper,  or  with  a  fharpe  reede  or  thorne.

All  the  Indians  are  commonly  without  beardes :  In  fo  much  that  it  is  in  maner  a  maruayle  to  fee  any  of
them  eyther  men  or  women  to  haue  any  downe  or  heare  on  theyr  faces  or  other  partes  of  theyr  boddies.
Albeit,  I  fawe  the  Cacique  of  the  prouince  of  Catarapa  who  had  heare  on  his  face  and  other  partes  of  his
boddie,  as  had  alfo  his  wyfe  in  fuche  places  as  women  are  accuflomed  to  haue.  This  Cacique  had  a  great  part
of  his  body  paynted  with  a  blacke  colour  which  neuer  fadeth :  And  is  much  lyke  vnto  that  wherwith  the  Mores
paynt  them  felues  in  Barberie  in  token  of  nobilitie.  But  the  Moores  are  paynted  fpecially  on  theyr  vyfai^e  and
throte  and  certeyne  other  partes.  Likewyfe  the  principall  Indians  vfe  thefe  payntynges  on  theyr  armes  and
brefl.es,  but  not  on  theyr  vyfages,  bycaufe  amonge  them  the  flaues  are  fo  marked.  When  the  Indians  of  certeyne
prouinces  go  to  the  battayle  (efpecially  the  CanibaU  archers)  they  cary  certeyne  flielles  of  greate  welkes  of  the  fea
which  they  blowe  and  make  therwith  great  founde  muche  lyke  the  noyfe  of  homes.  They  carye  alfo  certeyne
tymbrels  which  they  vfe  in  the  fl.eade  of  drummes.  Alfo  very  fayre  plumes  of  fethers,  and  certeyne  armure  of
golde :  efpecially  great  and  rounde  pieces  on  theyr  brefles,  and  fplintes  on  there  armes.  Lykewyfe  other  pieces
whiche  they  put  on  theyr  heades  and  other  partes  of  theyr  bodyes.  For  they  efleeme  nothynge  fo  much  as  to
appeare  galante  in  the  war[re]s,  and  to  go  in  moft  coomely  order  that  they  can  deuyfe,  glyflerynge  with  precious
fl^ones,  iewelles,  golde,  and  fethers. Of  the  leafle  of  thefe  welkes  or  perewincles,  they  make  certeyne  lyttle

237

The  Indian
women.

The  men  of  India.

The  kynge  is
borne  on  mens
backes.

Lcttinge  of
bludde.

They  haue  i.o
beardes.

Theypaynte  the5-r
bodies.

209

The  Caiiib.ates.
Armure  of  golde.

Their  galantnes  in
the  \rarres.

238

The  Jiyftorie  of  the  weft  Indies.

Their  Uiells

Howe  the  women
beare  vp  their
teates,  wyih  barres
of  golde.

The  stature  and
coloure  of  the
Indians.

The  Indians
cauled  Coronati.

'The  Ilande  of
giantes.

htcatos.

The  sculles  of  the
Indians  heades.

210

New  Spaine.

ITie  houses  of  the
Christians  in  India

Dariena.

Gardens.

beades  of  diners  fortes  and  colours.  They  make  alfo  little  braflelets  whiche  they  mengle  with  gaudies  of  golde.
Thefe  they  rowle  about  there  amies  frome  the  elbowe  to  the  wrefle  of  the  hande.  The  lyke  alfo  doo  they  on
theyr  legges  from  the  knee  to  the  foles  of  theyr  feete  in  token  of  nobilitie.  Efpecially  theyr  noble  women  in
dyuers  prouinces  are  accuflomed  to  weare  fuch  lewelles,  and  haue  theyr  neckes  in  maner  laden  therwith.
Thefe  beades  and  Jewels  and  fuch  other  trynkettes,  they  caule  Caqiiiras.  Bifyde  thefe  alfo,  they  weare  certeyne
rynges  of  golde  at  theyr  eares  and  nollrelles  which  they  bore  ful  of  holes  on  both  fides,  fo  that  the  ringes  hange
vppon  theyr  lyppes.  Sum  of  thefe  Indians,  are  poulde  and  rounded.  Albeit,  commonly  both  the  men  and
women  take  it  for  a  decent  thynge  to  weare  longe  heare,  which  the  women  weare  to  the  myddefl.  of  theyr
fliulders  and  cut  it  equally,  efpecially  aboue  theyr  browes.  This  doo  they  with  certeyne  harde  flones  which  they
keepe  for  the  fame  purpofe.  The  principall  women  when  theyr  teates  faule  or  becoome  loofe,  beare  them  vp
with  barres  of  golde  of  the  length  of  a  fpanne  and  a  halfe,  wel  wrought,  and  of  fuch  byggeneffe  tliat  fum  of  them
way  more  then  two  hundreth  Caflilians  or  ducades  of  golde.  Thefe  barres  haue  holes  at  both  th[e]endes,
whereat  they  tye  two  fmaul  cordes  made  of  cotton  at'euery  ende  of  the  barres.  One  of  thefe  cordes  go[e]th  ouer
the  fhulder,  and  the  other  vnder  the  arme  holes  where  they  tye  togyther,  fo  that  by  this  meanes  the  barre
beareth  vp  theyr  teates.  Sum  of  thefe  chiefe  women  go  to  tlie  battayle  with  theyr  hufbandes,  or  when  they
them  felues  are  regentes  in  any  prouinces,  in  the  which  they  haue  all  thynges  at  commaundement  and  execute
th[e]office  of  generall  capitaynes,  and  caufe  them  felues  to  bee  caryed  on  mens  backes  in  lyke  maner  as  doo
the  Caciques  of  whom  I  haue  fpokcn  before.

Thefe  Indians  of  the  firme  lande  are  muche  of  the  fame  Rature  and  coloure  as  are  they  of  the  Ilandes.
They  are  for  the  mofl  part  of  the  colour  of  an  olyue.  If  there  bee  any  other  difference,  it  is  more  in  byggeneffe
then  othervvyfe.  And  efpecially  they  that  are  cauled  Coronati,  are  flronger  and  bygger  then  any  other  that  I
haue  feene  in  thefe  parties,  except  thofe  of  the  Ilande  of  giantes  whiche  are  on  the  fouth  fyde  of  the  Ilande  of
Hifpaniola  nere  vnto  the  coafles  of  the  firme  lande :  And  lykewyfe  certeyne  other  which  they  caule  Yucatos
which  are  on  the  north  fyde.  All  which  chiefely,  although  they  bee  no  giantes,  yet  are  they  doubteleffe  the
byggefle  of  the  Indyans  that  are  knowen  to  this  day,  and  commonly  bygger  then  the  Flemynges :  and  efpecially
many  of  them  afwell  women  as  men,  are  of  very  hyghe  flature,  and  are  all  archiers  bothe  men  and  women.
Thefe  Corotiati  inhabite  thirtie  leaques  in  length  by  thefe  coafles  from  the  poynt  of  Ca7ioa  to  the  greate  ryuer
which  they  caule  Guadalchibir  nere  vnto  San^a  Maria  de  gratia.  As  I  trauerfed  by  thofe  coafles,  I  fylled  a
butte  of  freflie  water  of  that  ryuer  fyxe  leaques  in  the  fea  frome  the  mouthe  therof  where  it  fauleth  into  the  fea.
They  are  cauled  Coronati  (that  is  crowned)  bycaufe  theyr  heare  is  cutte  round  by  theyr  eares,  and  poulde  lower
a  great  compafe  abowte  the  crowne  much  lyke  the  fryers  of  faynt  Auguflines  order.  And  bycaufe  I  haue  fpoken
of  theyr  maner  of  wearynge  theyr  heare,  here  commeth  to  my  rememberaunce  a  thynge  which  I  haue  oftentymes
noted  in  thefe  Indians.  And  this  is,  that  they  haue  the  bones  of  the  fculles  of  theyr  heades  foure  tymes  thycker  i
and  much  flronger  then  owres.  So  that  in  commyng  to  hand  flrokes  with  them,  it  fhalbe  requifite  not  to
flrike  them  on  the  heades  with  fwoordes.  For  fo  haue  many  fwoordes  bynne  broken  on  theyr  heades  with  lyttle
hurt  doone.  And  to  haue  fayde  thus  much  of  theyr  cuflomes  and  maners,  it  fhal  fuffice  for  this  tyme,  bycaufe
I  haue  more  largely  intreated  herof  in  my  generall  hyflorie  of  the  Indies.  Yet  haue  I  nother  there  nor  here
fpoken  much  of  that  parte  of  the  firme  lande  whiche  is  cauled  Nona  Hifpania  (that  is,  newe  Spayne  wherof  the
Ilande  of  lucatana  is  part)  forafmuche  as  Ferdinando  Cortefe  hath  wrytten  a  large  booke  thereof.

Of  the  houfes  of  thefe  Indians,  I  haue  fpoken  fufficiently  elswhere.  Yet  haue  I  thought  good  to  informe
yowr  maieftie  of  the  buyldynge  and  houfes  which  the  Chriftians  haue  made  in  dyuers  places  in  the  firme  lande.
They  buylde  them  nowe  therfore  with  two  folars  or  loftes,  and  with  loopes  and  wyndowes  to  open  and  fhutte.
Alfo  with  flronge  tymber  and  very  fayre  bordes.  In  fuche  forte  that  any  noble  man  maye  wel  and  pleafauntly
bee  lodged  in  fum  of  them.  And  amonge  other,  I  my  felfe  caufed  one  to  bee  builded  in  the  citie  of  San^a
Maria  Antigua  in  Dariena  whiche  cofle  me  more  then  a  thoufande  and  fyue  hundreth  Caflelians :  being  of
fuch  fort  that  I  may  well  interteyne  and  commodioufly  lodge  any  Lorde  or  noble  man,  referuynge  alfo  a  parte
for  my  felfe  and  my  famelie.  For  in  this  may  many  houfeholdes  bee  kepte  both  aboue  and  benethe.  It  hath  alfo
a  fayre  garden  with  many  orange  trees  bothe  fweete  and  fowre  :  Ceders  alfo,  and  Lemondes,  of  the  which  there
is  nowe  great  plentie  in  the  houfes  of  the  Chryflians.  On  one  fyde  of  the  gardeyne,  there  runneth  a  fayre  ryuer.
The  fituation  is  very  pleafaunte,  with  a  good  and  holfome  ayer,  and  a  fayre  profpecte  abowte  the  ryuer.  In  fine,
owre  trufle  is  that  in  fewe  yeares  al  thynges  in  thefe  regions  fhall  growe  to  a  better  flate  accordynge  to  the  holy
intention  of  yowre  maieftie.

238

The  hyftorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

239

Of  the  chief e  Ilandes  Hifpaniola  and  Cuba.

He  Indians  which  at  this  prefent  inhabite  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  are  but  fewe  in  number,
and  the  Chryflyans  not  fo  many  as  they  ought  to  bee  forafmuche  as  many  of  them  that  were
in  this  Ilande,  are  gonne  to  other  Ilandes  and  to  the  fyrme  lande.  For  beynge  for  the
mofle  parte  younge  men  vnmaried,  and  defirous  dayly  to  fee  newe  thyngs  wherin  mans
nature  deliteth,  they  were  not  willinge  to  continewe  longe  in  on[e]  place  :  efpecially  feeing
dailie  other  newe  landes  difcouered  where  they  thowght  theye  might  fooner  fylle  there
purfes  by  beinge  prefent  at  the  firfle  fpoyle.  Wherin  neuertheleffe  their  hope  deceaued  many
of  them,  and  efpecially  fuche  as  had  houfes  and  habitations  in  thys  Ilande.  For  I  certeynly  beleue,  confyrm-
ynge  my  felfe  herein  with  the  ludgement  of  many  other,  that  if  any  one  Prynce  had  no  more  figniores  then  only
this  Ilande,  it  fhuld  in  fhorte  tyme  bee  fuche  as  not  to  giue  place  eyther  to  Sicilie  or  Englande  :  whereas  euen
at  this  prefent  there  is  nothynge  wherefore  it  fhulde  malice  their  profperitie  not  beinge  inferioure  to  them  in  any
fiHcite  that  in  maner  the  heauens  can  graunte  to  any  lande  :  beinge  furthermore  fuche  as  maye  inriche  many
prouinces  and  kyngedomes  by  reafon  of  manye  riche  golde  mynes  that  are  in  it  of  the  befle  golde  that  is  founde
to  this  day  in  the  worlde,  and  in  greatefl  quantitie.  In  this  Ilande,  nature  of  her  felfe  bringeth  furthe  fuche
aboundance  of  cotton  that  if  it  were  wrought  and  maynteyned  there  fhuld  be  more  and  better  then  in  any
parte  of  the  world.  There  is  fo  greate  plentie  of  excellent  Caffia  that  a  greate  quantitie  is  brought  from  thenfe
into  Spayne  :  from  whenfe  it  is  caried  to  dyuers  partes  of  the  wcrlde.  It  increafeth  fo  muche  that  it  is  a  mer-
uelous  thynge  to  confider.  In  this  are  many  ryche  fhoppes  wher  fuger  is  wrought :  and  that  of  fuch  perfectenes
and  goodnes,  and  in  fuche  quantitie  that  fhippes  come  laden  therwith  yearly  into  Spayne.  All  fuche  fedes,
fettes,  or  plantes,  as  are  brought  out  of  Spayne  and  planted  in  this  Ilande,  becoomme  muche  better,  bygger,  and
of  greater  increafe  then  they  are  in  any  parte  of  owre  Europe.  And  if  it  chaunce  otherwyfe  that  fumetymes
they  profper  not  fo  well,  the  caufe  is  that  they  whiche  fhulde  tyll  and  hufband  the  grounde,  and  fowe  and  plant
in  dewe  feafons,  haue  no  refpect  hereunto,  being  impacient  whyle  the  wheate  and  vynes  waxe  rype,  being  gyuen
to  wanderynge  and  other  afifayres  of  prefent  gaynes  (as  I  haue  fayde)  as  fearchynge  the  gold  mines,  fyffhynge
for  pearles,  and  occupyinge  marchaundies,  with  fuch  other  trades,  for  the  greedy  folowyng  wherof,  they  neglecte
and  contempne  both  fowynge  and  plantynge.  Suche  frutes  as  are  brought  owt  of  Spayne,  into  this  Ilande,
profper  marueloufly  and  waxe  rype  all  tymes  of  the  yeare :  as  herbes  of  all  fortes  very  good  and  pleafaunt  to
bee  eaten.  Alfo  many  pomegranates  of  the  befl  kynde,  and  oranges  bothe  fweete  and  fower.  Lyke\\7fe  many
fayre  Lymones  and  ceders :  and  a  great  quantitie  of  all  fuch  as  are  of  fharpe,  fowre,  and  bytter  tafle.  There
are  alfo  many  fygge  trees  whiche  brynge  furth  theyr  frute  all  the  hole  yeare.  Lykewyfe  thofe  kynd  of  date
trees  that  beare  dates :  and  dyuers  other  trees  and  plantes  which  were  brought  owt  of  Spayne  thyther.

Beafles  doo  alfo  increafe  in  lyke  abundaunce :  and  efpecially  the  heardes  of  kyne  are  fo  augmented  both
in  quantitie  and  number,  that  there  are  nowe  many  patrones  of  cattayle  that  haue  more  then  two  thoufand
heades  of  neate :  and  fura  three  or  foure  thoufande,  and  fum  more.  Byfyde  thefe,  there  are  very  many  that
haue  heardes  of  foure  or  fyue  hundrethe.  And  trewth  it  is,  that  this  Hand  hath  better  paflure  for  fuch  cattayle
then  any  other  countrey  in  the  worlde :  alfo  holfome  and  cleare  water  and  temperate  ayer,  by  reafon  whereof
the  heardes  of  fuch  beafles  are  much  bygger,  fatter,  and  alfo  of  better  tafle  then  owres  in  Spayne  bycaufe  of
the  ranke  paflure  whofe  moyflure  is  better  digefled  in  the  herbe  or  graffe  by  the  continuall  and  temperate
heate  of  the  foonne,  wherby  being  made  more  fatte  and  vnctuous,  it  is  of  better  and  more  fledfafl  nuryfliement.
For  continuall  and  temperate  heate,  dooth  not  only  drawe  muche  moyflure  owt  of  the  earth  to  the  nuryfhement
of  fuch  thynges  as  growe  and  are  engendered  in  that  clyme,  but  dooth  alfo  by  moderation  preferue  the  fame
from  refolution  and  putrefaction,  digeflynge  alfo  and  condenfatynge  or  thyckenynge  the  fayde  moyfle  nur\-flie-
mente  into  a  gummie  and  vnctuous  fubflaunce  as  is  feene  in  all  fuche  thinges  as  growe  in  thofe  regions.  And
this  is  the  only  naturall  caufe  afwell  that  certeyne  great  beaft.es  and  of  longe  lyfe  (as  the  Elephante  and
Rhinoceros  \vith  fuch  other)  are  engendered  only  in  regions  nere  vnto  the  Equinoctiall,  as  alfo  that  the  leaues
of  fuch  trees  as  growe  there,  do  not  wyther  or  faule,  vntyll  they  bee  thrufte  owt  by  other,  accordynge  to  the
verfe  of  the  poete  which  fayth:  Et  nata  pira  piris,  et  fictis  inficubus  extant.  That  is  in  effecte:  peares  gro-\\ynge
vppon  peares,  and  fygges  vppon  fygges.  Plinie  alfo  wryteth,  that  fuche  trees  are  neuer  infected  with  the
difeafe  of  trees  that  the  Latines  caule  Caries,  which  we  may  caule  the  worme  or  canker,  being  but  a  certeyne
putrifaction  by  reafon  of  a  wateryftie  nuryfhement  not  well  confolidate.  The  fame  thynge  hath  bjune  the
caufe  that  certeyne  Phylofophers  confiderynge  afwell  that  man  is  the  hotteft.  and  moyft-efl  beafl  that  is  (which
is  the  beft  complexion)  as  alfo  that  men  lyue  longefte  in  certeyne  partes  of  India  nere  the  Equinoctiall  (where

239

[^

Men  are  desirous
of  newe  thinges.

The  commodities
of  Hispaniola

Englande  and
Sicilie.

Golde  mines.
Cotton.

Cassia.

Suger.

Plantes  and  herbes

Greate  thynges
hindered  by
respecte  of
presente  gaynes.

211

Orangies.
Pomegranates.
Figges  al  the
yeare.
Dates.

Beastes.

Greate  heardes
of  cattail.

Good  pasture.

The  effecte  of
continual  and
moderate  heate

The  cause  of  fatte
nurisshemente.

Beastes  of  longe
lyfe  in  regions
abowte  the
Equinoctiall  line

Trees  whos  leaues
doo  not  wither

The  cancar  of  the
tree

240

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

Longe  lyuide  men
in  India.

Paradise  neare  the
equinoctial  line

Shepe  and  hogges

Dogges  and  cattes
becom[e]  %vylde

The  situation  of
Hispaniola.

The  citie  of
san  Domenico

212

I'he  riuer  Ozama

The  hauen

A  cathedrall
church  e  and
monasteris  in
Hispaniola.

An  hospitale.

The  people

yet  to  this  daye  fumme  liue  to  th[e]age  of  a  hundreth  and  fiftie  yeares)  were  of  opinion  that  yf  mankynde  had
any  begynnynge  on  the  earthe,  that  place  owght  by  good  reafon  to  be  vnder  or  not  farre  from  the  Equinoctiall
lyne  for  the  caufes  aforefayde.  Sum  of  the  diuines  alfo  vppon  lyke  confideration  haue  thought  it  agrcable  that
theyr  Paradyfe  fliulde  bee  about  the  fome  within  the  precincte  of  tliofe  ryuers  which  are  named  in  the  booke  of
Genefis. But  to  lette  pafle  thefe  thynges  and  to  returne  to  the  hyflorie.

In  this  Ilande  furthermore,  are  many  flieepe  and  a  great  number  of  hogges :  of  the  which  (as  alfo  of  the
kyne)  manye  are  becoome  wyld :  And  lykewyfe  many  dogges  and  cattes  of  thofe  which  were  brought  owt  of
Spayne.  Thefe  (and  efpecially  the  dogges)  doo  much  hurte  amonge  the  cattayle  by  reafon  of  the  negligence
of  the  hearde  men.

There  are  alfo  many  horfes,  mares,  and  mules,  and  fuche  other  beaftes  as  ferue  th[e]ufe  of  men  in  Spayne,
and  are  much  greater  then  they  of  the  fyrfle  brode  brought  thether  owt  of  Spayne.  Sum  places  of  the  Ilande
are  inhabyted,  although  not  fo  many  as  were  requifite :  Of  the  whiche  I  wyll  faye  no  more  but  that  all  the
regions  of  the  Ilande  are  fo  well  fituate  that  in  the  courfe  of  tyme  all  thynges  fliall  coomme  to  greater  perfection
by  reafon  of  the  rychnelVe  and  pleafauntncffe  of  the  countrey  and  fcrtilitie  of  the  foile.

But  nowe  to  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  principall  and  chicfe  place  of  the  Ilande,  which  is  the  citie  of  San
Dommico:  I  faye  that  as  touchynge  the  buildynges,  there  is  no  citie  in  Spaine  fo  muche  for  fo  muche  (no  not
Barfalona  whiche  I  haue  oftentymes  feene)  that  is  to  bee  preferred  before  this  generallye.  For  the  houfes  of
San  Domenico,  are  for  the  mode  parte  of  flone  as  are  they  of  Barfalona:  or  of  fo  flronge  and  well  wrought
earth  that  it  maketh  a  fmguler  and  flronge  byndyng.  The  fituation  is  muche  better  then  that  of  Barfalona  by
reafon  that  the  flreates  are  much  larger  and  playner,  and  without  comparyfon  more  directe  and  flreyght  furth.
For  beinge  buylded  nowe  in  owr  tyme,  byfyde  the  commoditie  of  the  place  of  the  foundation,  the  flreates  were
alfo  directed  mth  corde,  compafe  and  meafure,  wherin  it  excelleth  al  the  cities  that  I  haue  fene.  It  hath  the
fea  fo  nere,  that  of  one  fyde  -there  is  no  more  fpace  betwen  the  fea  and  the  citie  then  the  waules.  And  this  is
about  fyftie  pafes  where  it  is  furthefl  of.  On  this  fyde,  the  waters  of  the  fea  beate  vppon  the  naturall  flones
and  fayre  coafle.  On  the  other  parte,  harde  by  the  fyde  and  at  the  foote  of  the  houfes,  paffeth  the  ryuer  Ozama
whiche  is  a  marueylous  porte  wherin  laden  fliyppes  ryfe  very  nere  to  the  lande  and  in  maner  vnder  the  houfe
w)'ndowes,  and  no  further  from  the  mouth  of  the  ryuer  where  it  entereth  into  the  fea,  then  is  frome  the  foote  of
the  hyll  of  Monyuye  to  the  monaflery  of  faynt  Frances  or  to  the  lodge  of  Barfalona.  In  the  myddefl  of  this
fpace  in  the  citie,  is  the  fortreffe  and  caflle,  vnder  the  which  and  twentie  pafes  diflant  from  the  fame,  paffe  the
fhippes  to  aryfe  fumwhat  further  in  the  fame  ryuer.  From  the  enteraunce  of  the  fliyppes  vntyll  they  cafl  anker,
they  fayle  no  further  from  the  houfes  of  the  citie  then  thyrtie  or  fortie  pafes,  bicaufe  of  this  fyde  of  the  citie  the
habitacion  is  nere  to  the  ryuer.  The  port  or  hauen  alfo,  is  fo  fayre  and  commodious  to  defraight  or  vnlade
fliyppes,  as  the  lyke  is  founde  but  in  fewe  places  of  the  worlde.  The  chymineis  that  are  in  this  citie,  are  abowt
fyxe  hundreth  in  number,  and  fuch  houfes  as  I  haue  fpoken  of  before :  Of  the  which  fum  are  fo  fayre  and  large
that  they  niaye  well  receaue  and  lodge  any  lorde  or  noble  manne  of  Spayne  with  his  trayne  and  famelie.  And
efpecially  that  which  Don  Diego  Colon  viceroy  vnder  your  maieflie  hath  in  this  citie,  is  fuche  that  I  knowe  no
man  in  Spayne  that  hath  the  lyke  by  a  quarter  in  goodneffe  confyderynge  all  the  commodities  of  the  fame.
Lykewyfe  the  fituation  thereof,  as  beinge  aboue  the  fayde  porte  and  altogyther  of  fl.one  and  hauynge  many  faire
and  large  roomes  with  as  goodly  a  profpect  of  the  lande  and  fea  as  may  be  deuyfed,  feemeth  vnto  me  fo
magnificall  and  princelyke  that  yowr  maiefl.ie  maye  bee  as  well  lodged  therin  as  in  any  of  the  moofl.e  exquifite
builded  houfes  of  Spayne.  There  is  alfo  a  Cathedrall  churche  buylded  of  late  where  afwell  the  byfliop
accordyng  to  his  dignitie,  as  alfo  the  canones  are  wel  indued.  This  church  is  wel  buylded  of  fl.one  and  lyme,
and  of  good  woorkemanfliyppe.  There  are  furthermore  three  monafl.eries  bearyng  the  name  of  faynt  Dominike,
faynt  Frances,  and  faynt  Marie  of  Mercedes :  The  whiche  are  all  well  buylded  althoughe  not  fo  curiouflye  as
they  of  Spayne.  But  fpeakynge  without  preiudice  of  any  other  religious  monaflerie,  yowre  maieflie  may  bee
Vv-ell  affured  that  in  thefe  three  monafl.eries,  god  is  as  well  ferued  as  in  any  other  religious  houfe  with  men  of
holy  lyuynge  and  vertuous  exemple.  There  is  alfo  a  very  good  hofpitall  for  the  ayde  and  fuccour  of  pore  people,
whiche  was  founde  by  Michaell  Paffament  threafurer  to  yowr  maieflie.  To  conclude,  this  citie  from  day  to  day
increafeth  in  welth  and  good  order,  afwel  for  that  the  fayde  Adrayrall  and  viceroy  with  the  lorde  Chaunceloure
and  counfayle  appoynted  there  by  yowr  maiefl.ie,  haue  theyr  continuall  abydynge  here,  as  alfo  that  the  rycheft
men  of  the  Ilande  refort  hyther  for  theyr  mofle  commodious  habitation  and  trade  of  fuch  marchaundies  as  are
eyther  brought  owt  of  Spayne  or  fent  thyther  from  this  Hand  which  nowe  fo  abundeth  in  many  thynges  that  it
ferueth  Spayne  with  many  commodities,  as  it  were  with  vfury  requityng  fuch  benefites  as  it  fyrfl.  receaued  from
thenfe.

The  people  of  this  Ilande  are  commonlye  of  fumewhat  leffe  flature  then  are  the  Spanyardes,  and  of  a
fliynynge  or  cleare  browne  coloure.  They  haue  wyues  of  theyr  owne,  and  abfleyne  from  theyr  dowghters,
fyflers,  and  mothers. They  haue  large  forheades,  longe  blacke  heare,  and  no  beardes  or  heare  in  any  other

240

The  hyjlorie  of  the  vvejle  Indies.

241

parts  of  theyr  bodies  afwel  men  as  women,  excepte  very  fewe  as  perhaps  fcarfely  one  amonge  a  thoufand.
They  go  as  naked  as  they  were  borne,  excepte  that  on  the  partes  which  may  not  with  honedie  bee  feene,  they
weare  a  certeyne  leafe  as  brode  as  a  mans  hande,  which  neuertheleffe  is  not  kepte  clofe  with  fuche  dihgence  but
that  fumtymes  a  man  may  fee  that  they  thynke  fufficiently  hydde.

In  this  Hand  are  certeyne  glo  woormes  that  (hyne  in  the  nyght  as  doo  owres.  But  are  muche  bygger  and
gyiie  a  greater  lyght:  In  fo  much  that  when  the  men  of  the  Ilande  goo  any  iomeys  in  the  nyght,  they  beare
fumme  of  thefe  woormes  made  fafl  abowt  theyr  fiete  and  beade,  in  fuche  forte  that  he  that  fhulde  fee  them  a  farre
and  ignorant  of  the  thinge,  wolde  bee  greatly  adonyfhed  therat.  By  the  lyght  of  thefe  alfo,  the  women  woorke
in  theyr  houfes  in  the  night.  Thefe  woormes  they  caule  Cictias.  Theyr  lyght  lafleth  for  the  fpace  of  three
dayes,  and  diminiffheth  as  they  begynne  to  drye  vp.

There  is  alfo  a  kynd  of  crowes  wbof'=!  breath  flynketh  in  the  momynge  and  is  fweete  at  after  noone.  The
excremente  which  they  auoyde,  is  a  lyuynge  worme.

As  touchynge  other  thynges  of  this  Ilande  whereof  Peter  Martyr  hath  more  largely
intreated  in  his  Decades,  I  haue  thought  it  fuperfluous  to  repeate  the  fame  ageyne  owte
of  this  hyflorie  of  Gonzaliis  FerdinandtLs  :  but  haue  here  gathered  only  fuche  thynges  as
eyther  are  not  touched  of  Peter  Martyr  or  not  fo  largely  declared  :  as  I  haue  doone  the
lyke  in  all  other  notable  thynges  which  I  haue  collected  owt  of  this  Summarie  of  Gonzahcs.

C  Of  the  Ilande  of  Cuba  and  other.

F  the  Ilande  of  Cuba  and  the  other,  as  the  Ilandes  of  SanHl  lohannis  and  lamaica,  the  fame
maye  be  fayde  in  maner  in  all  thynges  as  before  of  Hifpaniola  although  not  fo  largely.
Yet  in  leffe  quantitie  doo  they  brynge  foorth  the  lyke  thynges :  as  gold,  copper,  cattayle,
trees,  plantes,  fyffhes,  and  fuch  other  of  the  which  wee  haue  fpoken  there.

In  Cuba,  is  a  certeyne  kynde  of  Partyches  beinge  verye  litde,  with  theyr  fathers  much
of  the  colour  of  turtle  dooues:  but  are  of  muche  better  tafle  to  bee  eaten.  They  are  taken
in  great  number.  And  beinge  brought  wylde  into  the  houfes,  they  becoome  as  tame  mthin
the  fpace  of  three  or  foure  dayes  as  though  they  had  byn  hatched  there.  They  becoomme  exceadynge  fatte  in
fhort  fpace,  and  are  doubteleffe  the  mofl  delicate  and  pleafaunt  meate  that  euer  I  haue  eaten.  But  to  let
paffe  many  other  thynges  that  myght  here  bee  fayde,  and  to  fpeake  of  two  maruelous  thynges  which  are  in  this
Hand  of  Cuba :  wherof  the  one  is,  that  a  valley  conteynynge  twoo  or  three  leaques  in  length  betwene  tAvo
mountaynes,  is  full  of  a  kynde  of  very  harde  flones  of  fuche  perfecte  roundenelfe  and  lyke  vnto  pellettes  of
gunnes  that  no  arte  can  make  better  or  more  exactly  polyfflied.  Of  thefe,  fum  are  as  fmaule  as  pellettes  for
handegunnes:  and  other  fo  increafynge  bygger  and  bygger  from  that  quantitie,  that  they  may  feme  tor  all  fortes
of  artyllerie  althoughe  they  bee  of  byggeneffe  to  receaue  one  or  two  or  more  quintales  of  pouder,  euery  quintale
conteynynge  one  hundreth  weyght :  or  of  what  other  quantitie  fo  euer  they  bee.  Thefe  pelletes  are  founde
through  owte  al  the  valley  within  the  earth  as  in  a  myne,  which  they  digge  and  take  owte  fuch  as  they
neede  of  all  fortes.

The  other  marueylous  thinge  of  this  Hand  is  this:  That  farre  from  the  fea,  there  iffheweth  owt  of  a
mountayne  a  certeyne  lycour  much  lyke  the  cley  of  Babilon  cauled  Bitumen  or  lyke  vnto  pytche  in  ^Teat
quantitie  and  fuch  as  is  very  commodious  for  the  calkynge  of  fhyppes.  This  fauleth  continually  from  the  rocke
and  runneth  into  the  fea  in  fuche  abundaunce  that  it  is  feene  flotynge  aboue  the  water  on  euery  fide  of  tlae  fea
there  abowt  as  it  is  dryuen  frome  place  to  place  by  the  wynde  or  courfe  of  the  water.

Qiiinttis  Curfncs  wryteth  in  his  hyflorie,  that  great  Alexander  came  to  the  citie  of  Mani  where  is  a  great
caue  or  denne  in  the  which  is  a  fprynge  or  fountayne  that  continually  auoydethe  a  great  quantitie  of  Bitumen
in  fuch  fort  that  it  is  an  eafy  thing  to  beleue  that  the  flones  of  the  walles  of  Babilon  myght  bee  layde  then\-ith
accordynge  as  the  fayde  auctoure  ^^Tyteth.  I  haue  feene  this  myne  of  Bitumen,  not  only  in  the  Hand  of  Cuba,
but  alfo  fucli  an  other  in  newe  Spayne,  which  was  found  of  late  in  the  proumce  of  Panuco  where  it  is  much
better  then  the  other  of  Cuba,  as  I  haue  feene  by  experience  in  calkynge  of  fhyppes.

01 J  wonnes

213

Crowes  stynkynge
and  sweele.

Snynt  lohr.  his
Iiande.

latnaicn.

Partriches.

Pellettes  f.,r
gunnes  wrought
by  nature.

A  fountajTie  of  the
pytche  of  Uitmueo.

Quinlus  Cursiui

Bitumen  of
Uubilon.

rmiuca.

F.DSM.

u

r+i

242

The  Jiyftoric  of  the  vvcjle  Indies.

Baccttltos.

Indiana

214

Ryche  furres  and
syluer.

Idolaters.

C  Of  tJie  hiiide  ^Bacoalcos  caii led  Tcvr:\.  Baccalcarum,y^///<3;/^  on  the

Noyth  fyde  of  tJie  firnie  lande,

Hortly  after  that  yoMT  Maieflie  came  to  the  citie  of  Toledo,  there  arryued  in  the  moncth  of
Nouembor,  Stcuen  Gomes  the  pylot  who  the  yeare  before  of  1524.  by  the  commaundemcnt
of  yowre  maiellie  faylcd  to  the  Northe  partes  and  founde  a  greate  parte  of  lande  contuiuate
from  that  which  is  cauled  Baccaleos  difcourfynge  towarde  the  Wefl  to  the.  xl.  and.  xli.  degree,
from  whenfe  he  brought  certeyne  Indians  (for  fo  caule  wee  all  the  nations  of  the  new  founde
landes)  of  the  whiche  he  brought  fum  with  hym  from  thcnfe  who  are  yet  in  Toledo  at  this
prefent,  and  of  greater  flature  then  other  of  the  firme  lande  as  they  are  commonlye.  Theyr
colour  is  much  lyke  th[e]other  of  the  firme  lande.  They  are  great  archers,  and  go  couered  with  the  fkinnes  of
dyuers  beafles  both  wylde  and  tame.  In  this  lande  are  many  excellent  furres,  as  marterns,  fables,  and  fuch
other  rych  furres  of  the  which  the  fayde  pilote  brought  fumme  with  hym  into  Spayne.  They  haue  fyluer  and
copper,  and  certeyne  other  metallcs.  They  are  Idolaters  and  honoure  the  foonne  and  moone,  and  are  feduced
witli  fuche  fuperllitions  and  errours  as  are  they  of  the  firme.

And  to  haue  wrytten  thus  muche,  it  maye  fuffice  of  fuche  thinges  as  haue  femed
to  me  moft  woorthy  to  be  noted  in  the  Summarie  of  Gonzahis  Fej^diiiandtis  wrytten  to
Th[e]emperours  maieftie

343

243

[The  Third  English  book  on  America,

Which  is  also

The First English Collection of Voyages, Traffics, & Discoveries.

Z\it  lOecaUfss  Qi  tin  neltje  Itjoiitfe  or  lutst  Sntrid,  tit.

SECTION III.

Antonio  Pigafetta.

The  Jirst Circumnavigation  of  the  Globe,  by  Fernam  de
Magalhaens's  Expedition,  in  1519-22.

First  printed  in  1526.]

245

€ OF OTHER NOTABLE THYNGES

GATHERED OWTE OF DYUERS AUTOURS:

AND  FYRSTE  OF  THE  VNIVERSAL  CARDE  AND  NEWE  WORLDE.

He  hole  globe  or  compafe  of  the  earth  was  dyuyded
by  the  auncient  wryters  into  three  partes,  as  Europa,
Affrica,  and  A/ia  :  whiche  partes  conteyne  in  longi-
tude. 1 80.  degrees,  begynnynge  the  fyrft  degree  at  the
I  landes  of  Canarie.  And  conteyne  in  latitude  towarde
the  North.  6;^.  degrees,  begynnynge  the  fyrfte
degree  frome  the  Equinoctiall :  And.  10.  degrees
towarde  the  South.  All  the  refte  of  the  longitude
which  conteyneth  other.  180.  degrees,  is  difcouered
of  late  tyme,  as  the  Weft  India  cauled  the  newe
worlde,  bycaufe  none  of  the  owlde  autoures  had  any
knowelege  or  made  any  mention  therof.  All  that
therfore  is  cauled  newe  which  is  Weflwarde  from  the  I  landes  of  Canarie.  And  thus
accomptynge  thefe.  180.  degrees  towarde  the  Eaft  difcouered  in  owlde  tyme,  with
the  other.  180.  degrees  difcouered  of  late  dayes,  they  make,  360.  degrees,  which  is  al
the  circle  of  the  Equinoctiall  in  the  fphere.  Alfo  the  part  aboue  the.  63.  degrees
of  the  North  latitude,  was  founde  by  men  of  late  tyme,  as  Norway  and  Grutlande
with  many  other  prouinces.  Lykewife  the  part  more  fouth  then.  10.  degrees  of  latitude,
was  difcouered  of  late  dayes,  althoughe  Ariane  and  Plinie  fay  that  it  was  knowen  in
owlde  tyme :  whiche  yf  it  were,  yet  had  they  no  fuche  particular  defcription  thereof  as
we  haue  in  thefe  dayes.

West  India  the
newe  worlde.

The  circumference
of  the  Fquinoctiah
l>Tie.

The  Xorth
regions.

The  South
regions.

Eden.

U  2

«4S

246

\TJie  vyagc  rouudc  about  the  vvorlde.'].

Don  Peter  Martyr.

RoDie  sacked

A  day  lost  in  three
yeares  and  one
monctb.

215

Anionic  Pigafetta.

lacobus  Faher.

CA DISCOVRSE OF THE  WAGE
MADE BY THE SPANYARDES

ROVNDE ABOWTE THE WORLDE.

He  vyage  made  by  the  Spanyardes  rownde  abowt  the
worlde  is  one  of  the  greateft  and  mode  marueylous
thynges  that  hath  bynne  knowen  to  owre  tyme.  And
akhoughe  in  many  thynges  we  excell  owre  aunciente
prediceffours,  in  this  efpeciallye  wee  fo  farre  exceade
all  theyr  inuentions,  that  the  lyke  hath  not  heretofore
byn  knowen  to  this  day.  This  viage  was  written  par-
ticularly by  Don  Peter  Martyr  of  Arigleria  being  one
of  the  counfayle  of  Th[e]emperours  Indies,  to  whom
alfo  was  commytted  the  wrytyng  of  the  hyftorie  and
examination  of  al  fuche  as  returned  from  thenfe  into
Spayne  to  the  citie  of  Siuile,  in  the  yeare.  M.  D.xxii.
But  fendynge  it  to  Rome  to  bee  pryntedinthatmifer-
able  tyme  when  the  citie  was  facked  it  was  lofle  and  not  founde  to  this  day  or  any  memory
remaynynge  therof,  fauynge  fuche  as  fum  that  redde  the  fame  haue  borne  in  mynde.  And
amonge  other  notable  thynges  by  hym  wrytten  as  touchynge  that  vyage,  this  is  one,  that
the  Spanyardes  hauynge  fayled  abowt  three  yeares  and  one  moneth,  and  the  moft  of  them
notynge  the  dayes,  day  by  day  (as  is  the  maner  of  all  them  that  fayle  by  the  Ocean)  they
founde  when  they  were  returned  to  Spayne,  that  they  had  lofte  one  daye :  So  that  at
theyr  arryuall  at  the  porte  of  Siuile  beinge  the  feuenth  day  of  September,  was  by  theyr
accompt  but  the  fixth  day.  And  where  as  Don  Peter  Martyr  declared  the  ftrange
effecte  of  this  thynge  to  a  certeyne  excellente  man  who  for  his  fmguler  lernynge  was
greately  aduaunced  to  honoure  in  his  common  welthe  and  made  Th[e]emperours  ambaf-
fadoure,  this  woorthy  gentelman  who  was  alfo  a  greate  Philofopher  and  Aflronomer,
anfwered  that  it  coulde  not  otherwyfe  chaunce  vnto  them  hauynge  fayled  three  yeares
continually,  euer  folowynge  the  foonne  towarde  the  Wefl,  And  fayde  furthermore  that
they  of  owlde  tyme  obferued  that  all  fuche  as  fayled  behinde  the  foonne  towarde  the
West,  dyd  greatly  lengthen  the  day.  And  albeit  that  the  fayde  booke  of  Peter  Martyr  is
peryffhed,  yet  hath  not  fortune  permitted  that  the  memorie  of  fo  woorthy  and  marueylous
an  enterpryfe  fhulde  vtterly  bee  extincte :  forafmuch  as  a  certeyne  noble  gentleman  of  the
cytie  of  Vincenza  in  Italic,  cauled  mafter  Antonie  Pigafetta  (who  beinge  one  of  the
coompanie  of  that  vyage  and  after  his  returne  into  Spayne  in  the  fhyppe  Victoria,  was
made  knyght  of  the  Rhodes)  wrote  a  particular  and  large  booke  therof  which  he  gaue  to
Th[e]emperours  Maieftie,  and  fente  a  coppie  of  the  fame  into  Fraunce  to  the  lady
Regente  moother  vnto  the  frenche  kynge,  who  committed  it  to  an  excellent  philofopher
cauled  mafler  lacobus  Fabcr,  hauyng  longe  ftudyed  in  Italy,  wyllynge  him  to  tranflate  it

246

The  vyage  rotmde  about  ihe  worlde.

247

C  THE  EPISTLE  OF  MAXIMILIAN  TRANSILVANE,

SECRETARIE TO THE EMPEROVRS MAIESTIE:

wrytten to the ryght honorable and reuerende  lorde,

the lorde  Cardinall  of  Salfepurge,  of  the  maruey-

lous  and  woonderfull  nauigation  made  by  the

Spanyardes rounde abowt the  worlde  in

the  yeare  of  Chrift. M.  D.  xix.

N  thefe  dales  my  moft  honorable  and  reuerend  lorde,
returned  one  of  thofe  fiue  fhippes  which  the  yeare
before  Th[e]emperours  belnge  at  Saragofa  in  Spayne,
were  at  his  maieflies  commaundement  fent  to  the
newe  worlde  heretofore  vnknowen  vnto  vs,  to  feeke
the  Ilandes  of  fpices.  For  albeit  the  Portugales
brynge  vs  great  quantitie  of  fpyces  from  that  parte
of  Eafte  India  whiche  in  owlde  tyme  was  cauled
Atirea  C herfo7ieftis  (where  is  no  we  thought  to  bee
the  greate  and  ryche  citie  oi  Malaccha)  yet  in  Eafte
India  growe  none  of  thofe  fpices  excepte  pepper.
For  other  fpices,  as  Sinamome,  clones,  nutmegges,
and  mafe,  (whiche  is  the  huflve  that  couereth  the
lliell  of  the  nutte)  are  brought  frome  other  farre  con-
treys  and  from  Ilandes  fcarfely  knowen  by  theyr  names.  From  the  whiche  Ilandes  they
are  brought  in  fhyps  or  barkes  made  withowt  any  iren  tooles,  and  tyed  togyther  with

iiMi»niiB|g

'^M

^l/^^^ii  I

l^niiln^^i^^  1

1 P^^^^^

B

Sn  (C  ^  J^^^Va

|BS3

^H

1^1

Maximilian
TransUuane

into  the  Frenche  toonge.  This  booke  therefore  was  printed  fyrft  in  the  frenche  toonge
and  then  in  the  Italien,  with  alfo  an  epiftle  to  the  Cardinall  of  Salfepurge  as  touchynge
the  fame  viage,  written  by  Maximiliane  Tranfiluane  fecretarie  to  Th[e]emperours
Maieftie,  in  the  yeare.  1522.  And  doubteleffe  amonge  al  the  cities  of  Italie,  the  citie  of
Vicenza  may  herein  much  glorie,  that  befide  the  anci^^nt  nobilitie  and  many  excellent
and  rare  wyttes  whiche  it  hath  browght  furth  afwell  in  learnynge  as  difcipline  of  warre,
it  hath  alfo  had  fo  woorthy  and  valiaunt  a  gentleman  as  was  the  fayde  mafter  Antonie
Pigafetta,  who  hauing  compafed  abowte  the  ball  or  globe  of  the  worlde,  hath  lykewyfe
defcribed  that  vyage  particularly.  For  the  whiche  his  fo  noble  and  woonderfull  an
enterprife  fo  happily  atchiued,  if  the  fame  had  byn  doone  in  the  owlde  tyme  when  th[e]-
empyre  of  the  Grekes  and  Romans  floryffhed,  he  fhulde  doubteleffe  haue  byn  rewarded
with  an  Image  of  marble  or  golde  erected  in  a  place  of  honoure  in  perpetuall  memorie
and  for  a  fnigular  exemple  of  his  vertue  to  the  pofteritie.  In  fine,  this  may  we  bouldly
affirme,  that  the  antiquitie  had  neuer  fuch  knowlege  of  the  worlde  whiche  the  foonne
coompafeth  abowte  in.  xxiiii.  houres,  as  we  haue  at  this  prefente  by  th[e]induftrye  of
men  of  this  owre  age.  But  before  I  fpeake  any  thynge  of  the  viage,  I  haue  thought  it
good  fyrft  to  adde  hereunto,  the  Epiftle  of  Maximilian  Tranfiluane  which  he  wrote  to
the  Cardinall  of  Salfepurge  as  a  preface  to  his  fayde  booke.

The  rewarde  of
noUle  enterprj'ses.

The  antiquitie  had
no  suche  knowlege
of  the  worlde  as
we  haue.

The  Ilandis  of
Molucca.

A  urea
Cliersonestis.

Malaccha,

Spyces.

247

248

The  vyage  romide  about  the  vvortde.

The  Ilandes  of
Spyces  vnUnowen
in  owlde  t>-me.

216

HfTufdotus.
Sinamome.
The  Phenyx.

Plinie

The  nnuigntifins  of
greate  Alexander.
Ethiope.

TrogloditL

The  nauigation
abowce  tiie  worlde.

The  owlde
autours  reproued.

Monsters.

The  vyages  of  the
Spanyardes  and
Portugales.

Sinus  Magnus.

cordes  of  date  trees :  with  rounde  fayles  lykewlfe  made  of  the  fmaiile  twigges  of  the
branches  of  date  trees  weaued  togyther.  Thefe  barkes  they  caule  GmncJie:  with  the
whiche  barkes  and  fayles  they  make  theyr  vyages  with  onely  one  wynde  in  the  ftearne
or  contrarywyfe.

Neyther  yet  is  it  a  thynge  greatly  to  bee  marueyled  at  that  thefe  Ilandes  where  the
fpyces  growe  haue  byn  vnknowen  fo  many  worldes  pafl  vnto  owre  tyme,  forafmuch  as  all
fuch  thynges  as  vnto  this  day  haue  byn  wrytten  of  owld  autours  of  the  places  where  fpices
growe,  are  all  fabulous  and  falfe :  In  fo  muche  that  the  countreys  where  they  affirme  theym
to  growe,  are  nowe  certeynely  founde  to  bee  further  frome  the  place  where  they  growe  in
deede,  then  we  are  from  them.  For  lettynge  paffe  many  other  thynges  that  are  wrytten,
I  wyll  fpeake  only  of  this  which  Herodotus  (otherwife  a  famous  auctour)  affirmeth  that
Sinamome,  is  founde  in  the  toppes  of  the  nefles  of  certeyne  byrdes  and  foules  that  brynge
it  frome  farre  countreys,  and  efpecially  the  Phenyx,  the  which  I  knowe  no  man  that  euer
hath  feene.  But  Plinie  who  myght  more  certeynely  affirme  thynges  by  reafon  that  before
his  tyme  many  thynges  were  knowen  and  difcouered  by  the  nauigations  of  great  Alex-
ander and  other,  fayth  that  Sinamome  groweth  in  that  parte  of  Ethiope  whiche  the  people
inhabite  cauled  T^'ogloditi.  Neuertheleffe  it  is  nowe  founde  that  Sinamome  groweth  very
farre  from  all  Ethiope  and  muche  further  frome  the  Trogtoditi  whiche  dwell  in  caues  vnder
the  grounde.  But  to  owre  men  which  are  nowe  returned  from  thofe  partes  and  the  Ilandes
of  fpices,  hauynge  alfo  good  knowlege  of  Ethiope,  it  was  neceffarie  to  paffe  farre  beyonde
Ethiope  beefore  they  coome  to  thefe  Ilandes,  and  to  coompaffe  abowte  the  whole  worlde,
and  many  tymes  vnder  the  greateft  circumference  of  heauen.  The  which  nauigation  made
by  them,  being  the  moft  marueylous  thynge  that  euer  was  doone  by  man  vppon  the  earth
fence  the  fyrft  creation  of  the  worlde,  and  neuer  founde  before,  or  knowen,  or  attempted
by  any  other,  I  haue  deliberated  faythfully  to  wryte  to  yowre  honorable  lordfhippe  and  to
declare  the  hole  fucceffe  therof.  As  touchynge  which  matter,  I  haue  with  all  diligence
made  inquifition  to  knowe  the  trewth  afwell  by  relation  of  the  Capitayne  of  that  fliyppe  as
alfo  by  conference  with  euery  of  the  maryners  that  returned  with  hym.  All  which,  gaue
the  felf  fame  information  both  to  Th[e]emperours  maieftie  and  dyuers  other :  And  this  with
fuch  faythfulneffe  and  fmceritie,  that  not  only  they  are  iudged  of  all  men  to  haue  declared
the  trewth  in  all  thynges,  but  haue  thereby  alfo  gyuen  vs  certeyne  knowlege  that  all  that
hath  hytherto  byn  fayde  or  written  of  owlde  autours  as  touchynge  thefe  thynges,  are  falfe
and  fabulous.  For  who  wyll  beleue  that  men  are  found  with  only  one  legge.  Or  with
fuch  fiete  whofe  fhadowe  couereth  theyr  bodyes  ?  Or  men  of  a  cubite  heyght,  and  other
fuch  lyke,  beinge  rather  monfters  then  men  ?  Of  the  which,  neyther  the  Spanyardes  who
in  owre  tyme  faylyng  by  the  Ocean  fea,  haue  difcouered  al  the  coaftes  of  the  lande  toward
the  Weft  both  vnder  and  aboue  the  Equinoctiall,  nor  the  Portugales  who  compaffynge
abowt  al  Affryke  haue  paffed  by  all  the  Eafle  and  lykewyfe  difcouered  all  thofe  coafles
vnto  the  great  goulfe  cauled  Simis  Magmis,  nor  yet  the  Spanyardes  in  this  theyr
lafte  nauigation,  in  the  which  they  compafed  abowt  the  hole  earth,  dyd  neuer  in  any
of  their  vyages  wryte  of  fuch  monfters  :  which  doubteleffe  they  wold  not  haue
omytted  if  they  myght  haue  had  certeyne  knowelege  therof.  But  nowe  intendynge  to
fpeake  of  the  whole  world,  I  wyll  not  bee  longe  in  my  preface,  but  begynne  my  narration
as  foloweth.

048

The  vyage  roiinde  about  the  vvorlde.

249

v#K  A  BRIEFE  DECLARATION  OF  THE  VYAGE

OR  NAVIGATION  MADE  ABOWTE  THE  WORLDE.

GATHERED  OWT  OF  A  LARGE  BOOKE  WRYTTEN  HEREOF  BY

MASTER ANTONIE PYGAFETTA VINCENTINE, KNYGHT OF THE RHODES

and  one  of  the  coompanye  of  that  vyage  in  the  which,

Ferdinando  Magalianes  a  Portugal  e  (whom

fum  caule  Magellanus)  was  generall

Capitayne  of  the  nauie.

^Lthowgh  Sebaftian  Munfter  in  his  vnluerfall  Cofmo-
graphie  in  the  fyfthe  booke  of  the  landes  of  the
greater  Afia  (which  I  tranflated  into  Englyfhe
abowte  two  yeares  fence)  hath  wrytten  of  the  vyage
oi  Magellanus,  declarynge  therein  howe  the  Span-
yardes  by  the  Weft,  and  the  Portugales  by  the  Eafle,
faylyng  to  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca,  compafed  the
hole  globe  of  the  worlde  betwene  them,  yet  haue  I
here  thought  it  good  to  make  a  breefe  repeticion
of  thys  vyage,  addynge  hereunto  dyuers  notable
thynges  which  were  not  touched  of  Munfler,  as  I
haue  gathered  them  owt  of  the  bookes  of  Antonie
Pigafetta  and  Tranfiluanus  wrytten  of  the  fame
vyage.  For  albeit  in  deede  it  was  a  ftraunge
and  woonderful  thynge  that  the  Spanyardes  and  Portugales  compafed  the  hole
circumference  of  the  worlde  betwene  them,  yet  is  it  more  marueylous  that  the
fame  was  doone  with  one  ihippe  and  one  coompanie  of  men  as  dyd  the  Span-
yardes in  this  vyage,  who  keepynge  theyr  continuall  courfe  by  the  Wefte,
returned  into  Spayne  by  the  Eafte.  A  thynge  doubtleffe  fo  miich  more  woonder-
full  and  ftrange  then  yf  they  had  returned  from  the  halfe  circumference  by  the  fame  way
they  went.  In  howe  muche  they  were  ignorante  in  the  vyage  neuer  attempted  beefore,
befyde  the  thoufande  daungiours  and  perylles  whiche  they  were  daylye  lyke  to  faule  into,
afwell  by  wanderynge  in  vnknowen  coaftes  as  alfo  by  faulynge  into  the  handes  of  the
Portugales  by  whofe  dominions  in  the  Eafte,  they  fliulde  needes  paffe  of  neceffitie,  not
truftynge  to  theyr  gentelneffe  for  the  controuerfie  which  had  byn  longe  betwene  them
for  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca.  I  wyll  therefore  (as  I  haue  fayde)  make  a  briefe  rehearfall
of  thys  vyage  from  the  begynnynge  to  the  endynge  :  Omyttynge  neuertheleffe  many
notable  thynges  whiche  are  more  largely  defcribed  in  the  bookes  of  Maximilianus  Tra7i-
fdua^ius  and  Antonius  Pigafetta.

Sebastian  Munster.

The  Ilandes  of
Molucca.

217

Controuersie
betwene  the
Spanyardes  and
Portugales.

249

250

The  vyagc  ronudc  about  tJic  vvorlde.

Ferviinando

The  Cnpe  of  sci>iit
Vincent

The  Ilandes  of
Canarie.

Water  engendered
of  a  clowde.

The  Hand  of  saynt
Thomas.

Cape  verde.

Guinea  in

Ethyope.

Serraliona.

Fysshes  and
monsters  of  the

The  fyers  of  saints
Helene  and  S.
Nicolas.

A  tempest.

The  naturall  cause
of  such  fiers  as
faule  in  the  shyps.

Caretanus.

Two  kyndes  of
fyers  engendered
of  exhalations.

Trewe  fyer  and
false  fyer.

218

Castor  and  Pollux
The  lyghtes  of
saynt  Peter  and
saynte  Nycolas.

They  lost  the

syglit  of  the  North

Starr  e.

The  lande  of

Bresile.

The  South  pole.

Sugai.

The  tenthe  day  of  Augufl,  in  the  yeare  of  owre  lorde  M.  D.  xix.  Fcrdinando  Magalianes  departed  from  the
porte  of  Siuile  in  Spaync  with  a  nauie  of  fyue  fliyppes  and  two  hundreth  thirtie  and  fcuen  men,  wcl  furnyfflied
with  all  thynges  necellarie.  And  Hiylynge  fyrfle  downe  by  the  ryuer  of  Guadakhibcr  which  runneth  from  the
fayde  porte  into  the  fea,  they  came  fyrfte  to  a  place  named  Giouan  Dulfaraz  where  are  manye  vyllages  of  the
Moores  :  And  from  thenfe  arryued  at  a  cartel  of  the  Duke  of  Mcdi?ia  Sidovia,  where  is  the  porte  from  whiche
they  enter  into  the  fea  and  to  the  cape  foynte  Vincent  beingc  diflant  from  the  Equinoctiall.  xxxvii.  degrees,  and
frome  the  i;\yde  port.  x.  leaques,  and  is  from  thenfe  to  Siuile  betwene  xvii.  and.  xx.  leaques.  Here  they  rcmayned
certeyne  daycs  to  make  newe  prouifion  of  fuch  thynges  as  they  lacked.

Departynge  from  henfe  the.  xx.  daye  of  September,  they  arryued  the.  xxvi.  day  of  the  fame  moneth  at  one
of  the  Ilandes  Canarie  cauled  Terierife,  beinge.  xxv.  degrees  aboue  the  Equinoctiall.  In  one  of  thefe  Ilandes  is
none  other  water  but  that  is  continually  engendered  of  a  clowde  which  appeareth  dayly  at  noone  tyde  as  though
it  defcended  from  heauen  and  compafeth  abowt  a  certeyne  great  tree  from  whofe  branches  diftilleth  greate
abundaunce  of  water,  and  faulethe  in  (Ireames  from  "the  roote  of  the  fame  into  certeine  trenches  and  ceflarnes
made  and  placed  to  receaue  it.  This  water  ferueth  fufhciently  all  th[e]inhabitauntes  and  cattayle  of  the  Ilande.
The  lyke  thynge  is  alfo  feene  in  the  Hand  of  faynt  Thomas,  lyinge  directly  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  lyne.

The  thyrde  day  of  October  abowt  mydnyght,  the  capytayne  commaunded  theym  to  lyght  fyrebrandes  and  to
hoyfe  vp  the}T  foyles  directynge  theyr  courfe  towarde  the  South,  faylynge  betwene  CaJ>o  Verde  of  Affryke  and
the  Ilandes  lyinge  abowt  the  fame,  beinge  from  the  Equinoctiall.  xiiii.  degrees  and  a  halfe.  They  fayled  thus,
manye  dayes  in  the  fyght  of  the  coafle  of  Guinea,  of  Ethiope,  where  is  the  mountayne  cauled  Serra  Liona  beinge.
viii.  degrees  aboue  the  Equinoctiall.  In  this  coafl.  they  had  no  maner  of  contrary  wynds  but  a  great  calme  and
fajTC  wether  for  the  fpace  of  threefcore  and  tenne  dayes,  in  the  which  they  came  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  lyne.
In  thys  vyage  they  fawe  many  flraunge  fyffhes  and  monflers  of  the  fea  befyde  an  other  flraunge  thynge  whiche
appeared  \Tito  them.  For  there  appeared  in  theyr  fhyppes  certeyne  flames  of  fyre  burnynge  verye  cleare,  which
they  caul  fa}Tit  Helen  and  faynt  Nicolas.  Thefe  appeared  as  thoughe  they  had  byn  vppon  the  mafl  of  the
(hyppes,  in  fuch  clearnefle  that  they  tooke  away  theyr  fyght  for  the  fpace  of  a  quarter  of  an  houre  :  by  reafon
wherof,  they  fo  wandered  owte  of  theyr  courfe  and  were  difparfed  in  funder,  that  they  in  maner  difpayred  to
meete  ageyne.  But  as  God  wolde,  the  fea  and  tempefl  beinge  quieted,  they  came  fafely  to  theyr  determyned  courfe.

And  before  I  fpeake  any  further  of  the  vyage,  I  haue  here  thought  good  to  faye
fumewhat  of  thefe  flraunge  fyers,  which  fum  ignorant  folkes  thynke  to  bee  fpirites  or  fuche
other  phantafies  wheras  they  are  but  natural  thynges  proceadynge  of  natural  caufes  and
engendered  of  certeyne  exhalations.  Of  thefe  therefore,  the  greate  Philofopher  of  owre
tyme  Hieronimus  Cardanus  in  his  feconde  booke  de  Subtilitate,  wryteth  in  this  maner.

There  are  two  maner  of  fyers  engendered  of  exhalations  wherof  the  one  is  hurtfull  and  the  other  without
hurte.  That  which  is  hurtful,  is  fyer  in  deede,  engendered  of  malicious  and  venemous  vapours  which  in  fucceffe
of  time  take  fyer  as  apt  matters  to  be  kyndeled.  The  other  kynd,  is  no  trew  fyer,  but  lyke  the  matter  that  is  in
fuch  owld  putrified  wod  as  giueth  the  fhynynge  of  fyer  without  the  fubflaunce  or  qualitie  therof.  Of  the  kynde
of  trewe  fyer,  is  the  fyer  baule  or  flarre  commonly  cauled  faynt  Helen  which  is  fumtyme  feene  abowt  the  mafles
of  (hyppes,  beinge  of  fuche  fyery  nature  that  it  fumetyme  melteth  brafen  veffelles,  and  is  a  token  of  drownyng,
forafmuch  as  this  chaunceth  only  in  great  tempefles.  For  the  vapoure  or  exhalation  whereof  this  fyre  is
engendered,  can  not  bee  dryuen  togyther  or  compacte  in  forme  of  fyre,  but  of  a  grofe  vapoure  and  by  a  great
poure  of  wynde,  and  is  therfore  a  token  of  imminent  perell :  As  on  the  contrary  parte,  the  lyke  fyers  cauled  in
owlde  tyme  Caflor  and  Pollux  and  nowe  named  the  two  lyghtes  of  faynt  Peter  and  faynt  Nycolas  whiche  for
the  mofl  parte  faule  on  the  cables  of  the  fhyppes,  leapynge  from  one  to  an  other  with  a  certeyne  flutterynge
noyfe  lyke  byrdes,  are  a  token  of  fecuritie  and  of  the  tempefle  ouerpaffed.  For  they  are  but  vapoures  cleauynge
to  the  cables :  which  in  fucceffe  of  tyme,  the  fyer  paffynge  from  one  to  an  other,  appere  in  the  fimilitude  of  a
lyght  candell.  They  are  a  token  of  fecuritie  bycaufe  they  are  lyttle,  nor  flowe  or  groffe,  wherby  they  myght
haue  ioyned  altogyther  in  one,  and  byn  thereby  more  malicious  and  lafled  longer,  wheras  beinge  many  and  but
lyttle,  they  are  the  fooner  confumed.

Hetherto  Cardanus. But  let  vs  nowe  returne  to  the  vyage.

When  they  had  fayled  pafle  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  they  loft  the  fyght  of  the  north  flarre,  and  fayled  by
fouthwefle  vntyll  they  came  to  a  lande  named  the  lande  of  Breffd  whiche  fum  caule  Brafuia,  beinge.  xxii.
degrees  and  a  halfe  toward  the  fouth  pole  or  pole  Antartyke.  This  lande  is  continuate  and  one  firme  lande
with  the  cape  of  faynte  Augufline  whiche  is.  viii.  degrees  from  the  Equinoctiall.  In  this  lande  they  were
refreffhed  with  many  good  frutes  of  innumerable  kindes,  and  founde  here  alfo  very  good  fugar  canes  and  diuers
kyndes  of  beafles  and  other  thynges  which  I  omitte  for  breuitie. They  entered  into  this  hauen  on  faynt  Lucies

250

The  vyage  rounde  about  the  vvorlde.

251

day :  where  the  fonne  beinge  there  Zenith  (that  is  the  poynt  of  heauen  directly  ouer  theyr  heades)  they  felte
greater  heate  that  daye  then  when  they  were  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  line.  This  lande  of  Brafile  is  very  large
and  great :  and  bygger  then  all  Spayne,  Portugale,  Fraunce,  and  Italie :  and  is  mofle  abundaunte  in  all  thynges.
The  people  of  this  countrey  praye  to  noo  maner  of  thinge :  but  Hue  by  th[e]inRincte  of  nature,  and  to  th[e]age
of  C.  XX.  [one  hundred  and  twenty]  and.  C.  xl.  [one  hundred  and  forty]  yeares.  Bothe  the  men  and  women  go
naked,  and  dwell  in  certeyne  longe  houfes. They  are  very  docible,  and  foone  allured  to  the  Chryflian  fayth.

Therteene  dayes  after  that  they  arryued  at  the  fayd  port,  they  departed  from  this  lande  and  fayled  to  the.
xxxiiii,  degree  and  a  halfe  toward  the  pole  Antartike  where  they  found  a  great  ryuer  of  freffhe  water  and
certeyne  Canibales.  Of  thefe  they  fawe  one  owt  of  theyr  fhyppes,  of  flature  as  bigge  as  a  giante,  hauynge  a
voyce  lyke  a  bul.  Owre  men  purfued  them,  but  they  were  fo  fwyfte  of  foote  that  they  coulde  not  ouertake
them.  Abowt  the  mouth  of  this  ryuer,  are  feuen  Ilandes,  in  the  byggeft.  wherof,  they  founde  certeyne  precious
flones,  and  cauled  it  the  cape  of  faynt  Marie.  The  Spanyardes  thought  that  by  this  ryuer  they  might  haue
paffed  into  the  fouth  fea.  But  they  were  deceaued  in  theyr  opinion.  For  there  was  none  other  paffage  then
by  the  ryuer  which  is.  xvii.  leaques  large  in  the  mouth.

Thus  folowynge  this  coafle  by  the  tracte  of  the  lande  towarde  the  pole  Antartyke,  they  came  to  a  place
where  were  two  Ilandes  replenyfflied  with  giefe  and  woolues  of  the  fea  which  fum  thynke  to  bee  thofe  fyffhes
that  wee  caule  pikes.  Thefe  were  in  fuch  number  that  in  an  houre  all  the  fyue  fhippes  myght  haue  hyxx  lade
with  giefe  beinge  all  of  blacke  coloure,  and  fuch  as  can  not  flye.  They  lyue  of  fyffhe  and  are  fo  fatte  that  they
coulde  fcarfely  fle  theym.  They  haue  noo  fethers  but  a  certeyne  downe :  and  theyr  byls  like  rauens  byls.
Thefe  woolues  of  the  fea  are  of  dyuers  coloures,  and  of  the  byggeneffe  of  calues,  with  theyr  heades  of  golden
coloure.  Here  were  they  in  great  daungiour  by  tempefl.  But  as  foone  as  the  three  fyers  cauled  faynte  Helen,
faynte  Nycolas,  and  faynt  Clare,  appered  vppon  the  cabels  of  the  fhyppes,  fuddeynely  the  tempefle  and  furye
of  the  wyndes  ceafed.

Departynge  frome  henfe,  they  fayled  to  the.  49.  degree  and  a  halfe  vnder  the  pole  Antartyke :  where  beinge
wyntered,  they  were  inforced  to  remayne  there  for  the  fpace  of  two  monethes,  all  which  tyme  they  fawe  no  man
except  that  one  daye  by  chaunce  they  efpyed  a  man  of  the  flature  of  a  giante,  who  came  to  the  hauen  daunfyng
and  fyngynge,  and  fhortly  after  feemed  to  cafl  dull  ouer  his  heade.  The  capitayne  fente  one  of  his  men  to  the
fhore  with  the  fhyppe  boate,  who  made  the  lyke  figne  of  peace.  The  which  thynge  the  giante  feinge,  was  o^vt
offeare  and  came  with  the  capitaynes  feruaunte  to  his  prefence  into  a  lyttle  Ilande.  When  he  fawe  the
capitayne  with  certeyne  of  his  coompany  abowte  hym,  he  was  greatly  amafed  and  made  fignes  holdynge  vppe
his  hande  to  heauen,  fignifyinge  therby  that  owre  men  came  from  thenfe.  This  giante  was  fo  bygge,  that  the
heade  of  one  of  owr  men  of  a  meane  flature,  came  but  to  his  wafle.  He  was  of  good  corporature  and  well  made
in  all  the  partes  of  his  bodie,  with  a  large  vyfage  paynted  with  dyuers  coloures,  but  for  the  mofl  parte  yelowe.
Vppon  his  cheekes  were  paynted  two  hartes,  and  redde  circles  abowt  his  eyes.  The  heare  of  his  headde  was
coloured  whyte,  and  his  apparell  was  the  fkynne  of  a  beafle  fowde  togyther.  This  beafle  (as  feemed  vnto  them)
had  a  large  heade  and  great  eares  lyke  vnto  a  mule,  with  the  body  of  a  camel  and  tayle  of  a  horfe.  The  feete
of  the  giant  were  foulded  in  the  fkynne  after  the  maner  of  fhoos.  He  had  in  his  hande,  a  bygge  and  Ihorte
bowe,  the  flrynge  whereof  was  made  of  a  fynewe  of  that  beafle.  He  had  alfo  a  bundell  of  longe  arrowes  made  of
reedes  fethered  after  the  maner  of  owrs,  typte  with  fharpe  flones  in  the  fleade  of  iren  heades.  The  CapitajTie
caufed  him  to  eate  and  drynke,  and  gaue  him  many  thynges,  and  amonge  other  a  greate  lookynge  glaffe :  In
the  which  as  foone  as  he  fawe  his  owne  likeneffe,  was  fuddeynely  afrayde  and  darted  backe  with  fuch  violence
that  he  ouerthrewe  two  that  (loode  nearefl  abowte  hym.  When  the  Capitayne  had  thus  gyuen  hym  certeyne
haukes  belles  and  other  great  belles,  with  alfo  a  lookynge  glaffe,  a  combe,  and  a  payre  of  beades  of  glaffe,  he
fente  hym  to  lande  with  foure  of  his  owne  men  well  armed.

Shortely  after,  they  fawe  an  other  giaunte  of  fumewhat  greater  flature,  with  his  bowe  and  arrowes  in  his
hande.  As  he  drewe  neare  vnto  owre  menne,  he  layde  his  hande  on  his  heade  and  poynted  vp  towarde  heauen,
and  owr  men  dyd  the  lyke.  The  Capitayne  fente  his  fhyppe  boate  to  brynge  him  to  a  lyttle  Ilande  beinge  in
the  hauen.  This  giante  was  verye  tractable  and  pleafaunt.  He  foonge  and  daunfed :  and  in  his  daunf}Tige
lefte  the  printe  of  his  feete  op  the  grownde.  He  remayned  longe  with  owTe  men  who  named  hym  lohan.  He
coulde  wel  fpeake  and  playnely  pronounce  thefe  wordes:  lefus:  Aiie  Maria,  lo/iannes,  euen  as  we  doo,  but  with
a  bygger  voyce.  The  capitayne  gaue  hym  a  fhert  of  lynnen  clothe,  and  a  coate  of  whyte  woollen  clothe :  Al.'b
a  cappe,  a  combe,  a  lookynge  glaffe,  with  dyuers  fuche  other  thynges,  and  fo  fente  hym  to  his  coompany.  The
day  folowyng,  he  reforted  ageyne  to  the  fhyppes,  and  brought  with  hym  one  of  thofe  greate  beafles,  which  he
gaue  the  capitayne.  But  after  that  daye  they  neuer  fawe  hym  more,  fuppofynge  hym  to  bee  flayne  of  his  owne
coompany  for  the  conuerfation  he  had  with  owre  men.

After  other,  xv.  dayes  were  pafle,  there  came  foure  other  giantes  without  any  weapons,  but  had  hydde
theyr  bowes  and  arrowes  in  certeyne  buffnes. The  capitayne  reteyned  two  of  thefe  whiche  were  youngeft.  and

The  greatenessc  of
the  land  of  BrasUe.

Canibales.
Giantes.

Insula
gemmarum.

Caple]  S.  Marie.

The  pole

An[t]artike.

Geese.

Sea  wuolues

The.  xlix.  degree
of  the  south  pole.

Giantes

219

The  bygnes  of  the
giants.

An  other  giante.

Foure  other
giantes.

25 1

252

The  vya!:^e  roinidc  about  tJie  vvorlde.

Two  giantes  are
taken  by  a  pollicie.

The  deuyll
Sctebos.

Peuyls  appere  to
the  gyantes  when
they  dye.

PatagtmL

220

The  grj-antes
feedynge.

They  conspire
ageynst  theyr
Capitayne.

Confession.

The  straight  of
Magellanus.

The  South  sea.

Ma  re  pacificum.

The  giantes  died
for  heat.

Capo  Desiderata

Short  nighte  in  the
moneth  of  October.

Flying  fyshes

The  gyantes
language.

The  gyant  is
baptised.

Three  monethes
saylyng  without
the  syght  of  lande

Extreme  famen.

befte  made.  He  tookc  them  by  a  deceyte  in  this  maner,  that  gyuyngc  them  knyues,  fliearcs,  lookynge  glafles,
belles,  beades  of  cryllall,  and  fuche  other  tryfels,  he  fo  fylled  theyr  handcs  that  they  coulde  hold  no  more.
Then  caufed  two  payre  of  lliackels  of  iren  to  bee  put  on  theyr  legges,  makynge  fignes  that  he  wold  alfo  gyue
them  thofe  chaynes:  which  they  lyked  very  wel  by  caufe  they  were  made  of  bryght  and  fliynynge  metal.  And
wheras  they  could  not  cary  them  bycaufe  theyr  handes  were  full,  the  other  gyantes  wolde  haue  caryed  them:
but  the  Capitayne  wolde  not  fuffer  them.  When  they  felte  the  fliakels  fafle  abowte  theyr  legges,  they  begunne
to  doubte:  but  the  Capitayne  dyd  put  them  in  comforte  and  badde  them  Rande  Ayll.  In  fine  when  they  fawe
how  they  were  deceaued  they  rored  lyke  buUes  and  cryed  vppon  theyr  greate  deuyll  Sckbos  to  heli)e  them.
Being  thus  taken,  they  were  immediatly  feperate  and  put  in  fundry  fliyppes.  They  coulde  neuer  bynde  the
handes  of  the  other  two.  Yet  was  one  of  them  with  much  difficulte  ouerthrowne  by  nyne  of  owre  men,  and  his
handes  bownde :  but  he  fuddeynely  loofed  hym  felfe  and  fledde,  as  dyd  alfo  the  other  that  came  with  them.
In  theyr  flying,  they  fhot  of  theyr  arrowes  and  flewe  one  of  owre  men.  They  fay  that  when  any  of  them  dye,
there  appere.  x.  or.  xii.  deuyls  leapynge  and  daunfynge  about  the  bodye  of  the  deade,  and  feeme  to  haue  theyr
boddyes  paynted  with  dyuers  colours.  And  that  amonge  other,  there  is  one  feene  bygger  then  the  refidue,  who
maketh  great  mirth  and  reioyfynge.  This  greate  deuyll  they  caule  Sctebos,  and  caule  the  leffe  Chelcule.  One
of  thefe  giantes  which  they  toke,  declared  by  fignes  that  he  had  feene  deuyls  with  two  homes  aboue  theyr  heades,
with  longe  heare  downe  to  theyr  fecte :  And  that  they  call  furth  fyre  at  theyr  throtes  both  before  and  behynde.
The  Capitayne  named  thefe  people  Patagoni.  The  mofl.  part  of  them  weare  the  fkynnes  of  fuche  beafles
wherof  I  haue  fpoken  before :  And  haue  no  houfes  of  continuaunce,  but  maketh  certeyne  cotages  whiche  they
couer  with  the  fayde  fkynnes,  and  cary  them  from  place  to  place.  They  lyue  of  raw  flefflie  and  a  certeyne
fweete  roote  whiche  they  caule  Capar.  One  of  thefe  which  they  had  in  theyr  fliippes,  dyd  eate  at  one  meale  a
bafket  of  byfkette,  and  drunke  a  bowle  of  water  at  a  draughte.

They  remayned  fyue  monethes  in  this  porte  of  faint  lulian,  where  certeyne  of  the  vnder  capitaynes  con-
fpir}-nge  the  death  of  theyr  general,  were  hanged  and  quartered  :  Amonge  whom  the  treafurer  Luigo  of
Mendozza  was  one. Certeyne  of  the  other  confpiratours,  he  left  in  the  fayd  land  of  Patogoni

Departyng  from  henfe  to  the.  52.  degree  toward  the  pole  Antartike  lackynge  a  thyrde  parte,  where  they
founde  a  ryuer  of  freffhe  water  and  good  fyfQie.  Theyr  fhyppes  were  here  in  great  daungiour.  They  remayned
twoo  monethes  in  this  porte  where  they  made  newe  prouifion  of  frefflie  water,  fuell,  and  fyffhe.  Here  the
Capitayne  caufed  all  his  men  to  bee  confeffed.

ApprochjTige  to  the.  52.  degrees,  they  founde  the  flraight  nowe  cauled  the  flraight  of  Magellanus,  beinge  in
fum  place.  C.  x.  [one  hundred  and  ten]  leaques  in  length :  and  in  breadth  fumwhere  very  large  and  in  other  places
lyttle  more  then  halfe  a  leaque  in  bredth.  On  both  the  fydes  of  this  flrayght,  are  great  and  hygh  mountaynes
couered  with  fnowe,  beyonde  the  whiche  is  the  enteraunce  into  the  fea  of  Sur.  This  enteraunce  the  Capitayne
named  Mare  Pacificum.  Here  one  of  the  fliyppes  flole  away  priuilie  and  returned  into  Spaine.  In  this
was  one  of  the  giantes  who  dyed  as  foone  as  he  felt  the  heate  that  is  abowte  the  Equinoctiall  lyne.

When  the  Capitayne  Maga/ianes  was  pafl  the  flraight  and  fawe  the  way  open  to  the  other  mayne  fea,  he
was  fo  gladde  therof  that  for  ioy  the  teares  fell  from  his  eyes,  and  named  the  poynt  of  the  lande  from  whenfe
he  fyrfl  fawe  that  fea.  Capo  Defiderato.

Suppofing  that  the  fhyp  which  flole  away  had  byn  lofle,  they  erected  a  croffe  vppon  the  top  of  a  hyghe
hyll  to  directe  their  courfe  in  the  flraight  yf  it  were  theyr  chaunce  to  coome  that  way.  They  founde  that  in
this  flrayght  in  the  moneth  of  October  the  nyght  was  not  pafl  foure  houres  longe.  They  found  in  this  flrayght
at  euery  three  myles,  a  fafe  hauen  and  excellent  water  to  drynke:  woodde  alfo  and  fyffhe,  and  greate  plentie
of  good  herbes.  They  thynke  that  there  is  not  a  fayrer  flrayght  in  the  worlde.  Here  alfo  they  fawe  certeyne
flyinge  fyffhes.

The  other  giante  which  rema5Tied  with  them  in  the  fhyp,  named  breade  Capar:  water,  Oli:  redde  clothe,
Cherecai :  red  colour,  Cheiche :  blacke  colour,  Amel :  And  fpoke  al  his  wordes  in  the  throte.  On  a  tyme,  as
one  made  a  croffe  before  him  and  kyffed  it,  fhewynge  it  vnto  hym,  he  fuddeynely  cryed  Setcbos,  and  declared
by  fignes  that  if  they  made  any  more  croffes,  Setebos  wold  enter  into  his  body  and  make  him  brufl.  But  when
in  fine  he  fawe  no  hurte  coome  thereof,  he  tooke  the  croffe  and  imbrafed  and  kyffed  it  oftentymes,  defyringe
that  he  myght  bee  a  Chryflian  before  his  death. He  was  therfore  baptyfed  and  named  Paule.

Departynge  owt  of  this  flrayght  into  the  fea  cauled  Mare  Pacifiaim  the.  xxviii.  day  of  Nouember  in  the
yeare.  1520.  they  fayled  three  moonethes  and.  xx.  dayes  before  they  fawe  any  lande.  And  hauynge  in  this
tyme  confumed  all  theyr  byfket  and  other  vyttayles,  they  fell  into  fuche  neceffitie  that  they  were  inforced  to
eate  the  pouder  that  remayned  therof  beinge  nowe  full  of  woormes  and  flynkynge  lyke  pyffe  by  reafon  of  the
falte  water.  Theyr  freffhe  water  was  alfo  putrifyed  and  become  yelowe.  They  dyd  eate  fkynnes  and  pieces  of
lether  which  were  foulded  abowt  certeyne  great  ropes  of  the  fhyps.  But  thefe  fkynnes  beinge  made  verye
harde  by  reafon  of  the  foonne,  rayne  and,  wynde,  they  hunge  them  by  a  corde  in  the  fea  for  the  fpace  of  foure

252

The  vyage  roiindc  about  the  vvorhie.

253

or  fiue  dayes  to  moUifie  them,  and  fodde  them  and  eate  them.  By  reafon  of  this  famen  and  vnclene  feedynge,
fumme  of  theyr  gummes  grewe  fo  ouer  theyr  teethe,  that  they  dyed  miferably  for  hunger.  And  by  this  occafion
dyed.  xix.  men,  and  alfo  the  giante  with  an  Indian  of  the  lande  of  Brafile  otherwyfe  cauled  Terra  de papagaUi,
that  is,  the  lande  of  popingiayes.  Befyde  thefe  that  dyed.  xxv.  or.  xxx.  were  fo  ficke  that  they  were  not  able  to
doo  any  feruice  with  theyr  handes  or  armes  for  feebleneffe:  So  that  there  was  in  maner  none  without  fum
difeafe.  In  thefe  three  monethes  and.  xx.  dayes,  they  fayled  foure  thoufande  leaques  in  one  goulfe  by  the  fayde
fea  cauled  Pacificum  (that  is)  peaceable,  whiche  may  well  bee  fo  cauled  forafmuch  as  in  all  this  tyme  hauyng  no
fyght  of  any  lande,  they  had  no  miffortune  of  wynde  or  any  other  tempefl.  Durynge  this  tyme  alfo,  they
difcouered  only  two  little  Ilandes  vnhabited,  where  they  fawe  nothing  but  birdes  and  trees,  and  therefore
named  theym  infortunate  Ilandes,  beinge  one  from  the  other  abowte  two  hundreth  leaques  diilante.  The
firfle  of  thefe  Ilandes  is  from  the  Equinoctial  toward  the  pole  Antartike.  xv.  degrees,  and  the  other  fyue.  Theyr
failinge  was  in  fuche  forte  that  they  failed  daily  betweene.  1.  [fifty]  Ix.  [fixty]  to.  Ixx.  [feuenty]  leaques.  So  that
in  fine,  if  god  of  his  mercy  had  not  gyuen  them  good  wether,  it  was  neceffary  that  in  this  foo  greate  a  fea  they
fliuld  all  haue  dyed  for  hunger.  Whiche  neuertheleffe  they  efcaped  foo  hardely,  that  it  may  bee  doubted
whether  euer  the  like  viage  may  be  attempted  with  fo  good  fucceffe.

They  confydered  in  this  nauigation  that  the  pole  Antartike  hath  no  notable  flarre  after  the  forte  of  the
pole  Artike.  But  they  fawe  many  flarres  gathered  togyther,  whyche  are  like  two  clowdes  one  feparate  a  little
from  an  other,  and  fum  what  darke  in  the  myddefl.  Betweene  thefe,  are  two  flarres  not  very  bigge,  nor  muche
fliynninge,  whiche  moue  a  little :  And  thefe  two  are  the  pole  Antartike.  The  needell  of  theyr  compaffe  var}'ed
fumwhat,  and  turned  euer  towarde  the  pole  Artike.  Neuertheleffe,  had  no  fuche  force  as  when  it  is  in  thefe
partes  of  the  pole  Artike.  In  fo  muche  that  it  was  neceffarie  to  helpe  the  needle  with  the  lode  flone  (com-
monly cauled  the  adamant)  before  they  could  faile  therwith,  bycaufe  it  moued  not  as  it  doothe  when  it  is  in
thefe  owre  partes.  When  they  were  in  the  myddefl  of  the  goulfe,  they  fawe  a  croffe  of  fiue  cleare  flarres
directly  toward  the  Wefle,  and  of  equall  diflance  the  one  from  the  other,  jj^ \^K  G^

In  thefe  dayes  they  fayled  be-

^rK  The  order  of  the  Jiarres  abowt  the  pole

Antartike,  /limine  haue  figured

in  this  maner.

^

-5^

A

$f  tiit  pole  mmiht* ^*  ^^^^  ^^^^^^

twene  the  Wefl  and  South  fo
farre  that  they  approched  to  the
Equinoctiall  line,  and  were  in
longitude  from  the  place  from
whenfe  they  fyrfl  departed,  a
hundreth  and  twentie  degrees.
In  this  courfe  they  fayled  by  two
Ilandes  of  exceadynge  height,
wherof  the  one  named  Cipanghu^
is.  XX.  degrees  from  the  pole  An-
tartike: And  the  other  named
Sumbdit.  XV.  degrees.  When
they  were  pafl  the  Equinoctiall
line,  they  fayled  betwene  the
Wefl  and  Southwefl  at  the  quar-
ter of  the  Wefl  towarde  the
Southwefl  more  then  a  hundreth
leaques,  changinge  thejT  fayles
to  the  quarter  of  the  Southwefl
vntyll  they  came  to  the.  xiii.
degrees  aboue  the  Equinoctial
towarde  the  pole  Artyke,  intend-
yng  as  much  as  were  puiTible,  to
approche  to  the  cape  cauled  of
the  OAvlde wryters  Cattigara:  The
whiche  is  not  foundeas  the  owlde
Cofmographers  haue  defcribed
it,  but  is  towarde  the  north
abowt.  xii.  degrees  as  they  after-
warde  vnderflode.

When  they  had  thus  fayled.
Ixx.  [feuenty] leaques of  this
253

DIsea<>es  of  famen.

221

Vnfortunate
Ilandes.

WTiat  they  sayled
Jayly

The  starres  abo^vt
the  south  pole.

The  needle  of  the
coompase.

The  lode  stone.

222

The  Equinoctial
line.

The  Ilandes  of
Cipanghu  and
Sumbdit

254

The  vyage  roimde  about  tJic  vvor/de.

Insula  LatrOHum

People  with  longe
heare

They  coloure
theyr  teethe.

The  Ilande  of
ZamalL

Wyne  of  date
trees.

The  maruelous
fnite  Cocus.

223

The  Hand  of
Zuluan.

The  sea  cauled
Archipelago  di  san
Lazaro.

Gentyles.

and forty-fix] degrees

vyage  in  the.  .\ii.  degree  abouc  the  Equinoctial,  and.  C.xlvi.  [one  hundred
of  longitude  (as  I  haue  foyde)  the  fyxte  day  of  March  they  difcoucrcd  a  lyttle  Ilando  towarde  the  north-
wefte,  and  two  other  towarde  the  fouthwcfle:  but  the  one  was  hyghor  and  b3gger  then  the  two  other.  In  the
byggell  of  thefe,  the  generall  capitayne  wolde  haue  refled  hym  felfe  a  whyle:  but  he  coulde  not  by  reafon  the
people  of  thefe  Hands  reforted  continually  to  the  fliippes  with  theyr  canoas,  and  flole  nowe  one  thynge  and
nowe  an  other,  in  fuch  forte  that  owr  men  could  take  no  rede,  and  therfore  demaunded  of  the  capitayne  that
they  myght  llryke  theyr  fayles  to  brynge  the  fliyppcs  to  land.  But  the  Capitayne  bcingc  prouoked  to  anger,
wente  alande  with  fortie  armed  men,  and  burnte  about  fiflie  of  theyr  houfes  with  many  of  theyr  Canoas:  And
flewe  alfo  abowt  feuen  men,  and  recouered  a  fliyppe  boate  whiche  the  Barbarians  had  flolne,  and  fo  departed
folowynge  his  vyage.  The  Capitayne  named  thefe  Hands  Infulce  Latronum,  that  is,  the  Hands  of  theeues.
When  owr  men  had  fo  wounded  fumme  of  theym  with  arrowes  that  they  were  flryken  throughe  bothe  fydes,  they
pulled  furth  the  arrowes  not  ceafyng  to  marue)le at  them  tyll  they  fell  downe  deade :  And  yet  coulde  not  the  other
fo  depart,  but  flyll  folowed  the  fliyppes  with  more  t'lien  two  hundrcth  of  theyr  boates,  approchynge  as  nere  to
the  fliyppes  as  they  coulde,  and  proferynge  owre  men  certeyne  fyfflies.  As  the  fliyppes  pafled  with  full  fayle  in
the  myddefl.e  of  theyr  boates,  they  fawe  in  fum  of  them  certeyne  women  lamenting  and  tearynge  theyr  heare,
which  owTC  men  thought  they  did  for  the  death  of  theyr  hufbandes.  As  farre  as  they  could  perceaue,  thefe
people  lyue  at  theyr  owne  libertie  without  anye  ruler  or  gouernour.  They  go  naked  and  haue  blacke  beardes
and  blacke  heare  on  theyr  heades  whiche  they  weare  longe  downe  to  theyr  wafLes.  They  are  of  the  fame  fl.ature
that  we  are,  and  well  made,  of  coloure  lyke  vnto  an  olyue.  Theyr  women  are  well  fauored  with  blacke  and
thicke  heare  on  theyr  heades  reachynge  to  the  grownde.  The  menne  coloure  theyr  teeth  redde  and  blacke,
which  they  efteeme  a  coomely  thynge.  They  annoynt  theyr  bodies  and  heare  with  the  oyle  of  Cocus.  Theyr
boates  are  fum  all  blacke,  fum  whyte,  and  fum  redde,  and  haue  fayles  made  of  the  broade  leaues  of  date  trees
fowd  togyther.  In  the  fteade  of  a  rudder,  they  vfe  a  certeyne  brode  boorde  with  a  fl.afte  in  the  toppe,  and
maye  when  they  wyll,  make  the  fterne  the  forecaRell,  or  the  forecaftell  the  flerne.  They  fayle  fo  fwyftely  that
they  feeme  a  farre  of,  lyke  Delphyns  fwymmynge  aboue  the  water.

The  tenth  day  of  March,  in  the  yeare.  i  5  2  i.  they  wente  alande  vppon  a  lyttle  Ilande  named  Zamol.  xxx.
leaques  dyRant  from  the  Ilande  of  theeues.  Bycaufe  this  Ilande  was  not  inhabyted,  they  refled  here  a  whyle,
where  the  capitayne  caufed  a  pauilion  to  bee  pytched  for  the  ficke  and  crafed  men,  and  a  hogge  to  bee  kylde.

The.  xviii.  day  of  Marche,  they  fawe  a  boate  with  nyne  men  commynge  towarde  them  fhewynge  theim
felues  ioyfull  and  reioyfynge  of  theyr  commynge.  They  brought  many  prefentes  with  them,  and  feemed  to  bee
people  of  much  humanitie.  They  gaue  the  capitayne  a  great  fyflie,  and  a  great  veffel  of  the  wyne  of  thofe  date
trees  whiche  beare  the  frute  Cocus.  They  made  alfo  fignes  that  within  the  fpace  of  foure  dayes,  they  wolde
bryng  ryfle  and  dyuers  foules  and  beafls  as  they  dyd  in  deede.

This  Cocus  is  a  frute  of  certeyne  date  trees  whereof  they  make  breade,  wyne,  oyle,  and  vineger.  They
make  wyne  in  this  maner.  They  cutte  a  bygge  braunche  of  the  tree,  and  hange  therat  a  reede  as  bigge  as  a
mans  legge,  into  the  which  droppeth  a  fweete  licour  from  the  tree  lyke  vnto  newe  whyte  wine  fumwhat  tart,  and
let  the  reede  continewe  there  from  mornynge  tyll  euenynge,  and  from  euenynge  to  mornynge.  The  frute  of
this  tree  cauled  Cocus,  is  as  bygge  as  the  head  of  a  man  or  more.  The  fyrfte  rynde  of  this,  is  greene  and  of
the  thyckeneffe  of  two  fyngers,  hauynge  in  it  certeyne  threedes  wherof  they  make  cordes  with  the  which  they
tye  theyr  boates.  Vnder  this  rynde,  there  is  a  thicke  flieil  whiche  they  burne  and  make  pouder  therof  and  vfe
it  as  a  remedie  for  certeyne  difeafes.  Vnder  this  fliell,  is  a  whyte  fubflaunce  lyke  the  carnell  of  a  nutte  being
a  fynger  in  thickeneffe,  which  they  eate  with  flefflie  and  fyfflie  as  wee  doo  breade.  It  hath  the  tafle  of  an
almonde,  and  is  vfed  in  the  fleade  of  breade  when  it  is  dryed.  In  the  myddefl.  of  this  carnell,  is  a  cleare  and
fweete  water,  beinge  very  holfome  and  cordiale.  This  water  fumtyme  congeleth  and  lyeth  within  the  fhell  lyke
an  egge.  When  they  intende  to  make  oyle  hereof,  they  ley  it  to  putrifie  in  water,  and  boyle  it  vntyll  it  bee
lyke  oyle  or  liquide  butter.  When  they  intende  to  make  vineger,  they  fuffer  only  the  water  to  putrifie  and
then  fet  it  to  the  foonne  where  it  becommeth  vineger  lyke  vnto  that  which  is  made  of  whyte  wyne.  And  when
they  mengle  the  carnell  with  the  water  which  is  in  the  myddefl  of  the  frute,  and  flrayne  it  thorowe  a  cloth,
they  make  a  mylke  therof  lyke  vnto  goates  mylke.  Thefe  date  trees  are  lyke  vnto  them  that  beare  dates,  but
are  not  fo  full  of  knottes.  W^ith  the  iuife  of  two  of  thefe  date  trees,  a  hole  famelie  of  tenne  perfons  may  bee
maynteyned  with  wyne  vfynge  one.  viii.  dayes,  and  the  other,  other,  viii.  dayes:  for  they  fhulde  els  bee  dryed
and  wythered.  Thefe  trees  continue  for  the  fpace  of  a  hundreth  yeares.  This  Ilande  where  they  founde  this
humane  and  gentell  people,  is  cauled  Zuluan,  and  is  not  verye  bygge.  Abowt  this  Ilande  they  founde  manye
other  Ilandes,  and  therefore  named  this  fea  ArcJiipdago  di  San  Lazaro,  that  is,  the  great  fea  of  faynte  Lazarus,
beinge  tenne  degrees  aboue  the  Equinoctiall  towarde  owre  pole,  and.  C.  Ixi.  [one  hundred  and  fixty-one]  frome
the  place  from  whenfe  they  departed.  The  people  of  this  Ilande  are  Caphranita  that  is  gentyles.  They  go
naked  fauynge  that  they  couer  theyr  priuie  partes  with  a  clothe  made  of  the  rynde  of  a  certeyne  tree. The

554

The  vyage  rounde  about  tJie  vvorlde.

255

chiefcd  men,  haue  abowte  theyr  heades  a  fylken  cloth  of  needle  woorke.  They  are  groffe  and  brode  fet  and
of  the  coloure  of  an  oliue.  They  annoynte  theyr  bodies  with  the  oyle  of  Cocus  to  defend  them  ageynft,  the
heate  of  the  foonne  and  dryneffe  of  the  wynde.  The.  xxv.  day  of  Marche,  they  departed  from  henfe  and
directed  theyr  courfe  betwene  the  Wefle  and  fouthwefl,  and  fayled  betwene  foure  Ilandes  named  Cenalo,
Huinan^han,  Hibuffon,  and  Aharien.  etc.

The.  xxviii.  daye  of  Marche,  they  came  to  the  Ilande  of  Biithuan  where  they  were  honorably  interteyned
of  the  Kynge  and  the  Prince  his  foonne  who  gaue  theim  muche  golde  and  fpices.  The  capitayne  gaue  the
kynge  a  veflure  of  red  clothe  and  an  other  of  yelowe  made  after  the  Turkyfflie  faffhyon,  and  alfo  a  red  cappe.
And  gaue  likewife  to  other  that  came  with  hym,  certeyne  knyues,  glaffes,  and  beades  of  criflalle :  After  that,
the  capitayne  had  fhewed  the  Kynge  the  fecreates  of  his  fliippe  and  fuche  marchaundies  as  he  had  therin,  he
caufed  a  piece  of  ordinaunce  fuddenly  to  bee  fliote  of,  whereat  the  kyng  was  greately  amafed  vntil  the  capitayne
comforted  hym.  Then  the  Capitaine  commaunded  one  of  his  men  to  be  armed  from  the  heade  to  the  foote,
and  caufed  three  other  to  flrike  hym  with  theyr  fwoordes,  whereat  the  Kynge  maruayled  greately,  and  fayde  to
th[e]interpretoure  (who  was  a  flaue  borne  in  Malacha)  that  one  of  thofe  armed  men  was  able  to  encounter
with  a  hundreth  of  his  men.  But  he  maruayled  muche  more  when  the  capitaine  tould  hym  by  th[e]interpre-
toure  howe  he  founde  the  flraight  by  the  compaffe  and  lode  flone,  and  howe  many  dayes  they  were  without
fight  of  any  lande.  Then  afkynge  licence  to  departe,  the  capitayne  fente  two  of  his  men  with  him,  of  the
whiche  Antonie  Pigafetta  was  one.  When  the  kynge  fawe  Antonie  Pigafetta  write  the  names  of  many  thinges,
and  afterwarde  rehearfe  them  ageyne,  he  maruayled  yet  more,  makynge  fygnes  that  fuche  men  descended  from
heauen.  The  Kynge  brought  them  firfle  to  his  pallaice  where  he  interteyned  them  honorably  and  gaue  them
manye  gyftes,  as  dyd  alfo  the  Prince  in  his  pallaice  beynge  in  an  other  Ilande  named  Caleghan.

As  they  fyfted  a  certeyne  myne  of  earthe  in  the  Kynges  Ilande,  they  founde  pieces  of  golde,  fum  as  bigge
as  nuttes  and  other  as  bigge  as  egges.  All  the  kynges  veffelles  were  of  golde,  and  his  houfe  well  furnyffhed.
In  all  the  hole  nation  there  was  no  man  of  coomlier  perfonage  then  the  kinge.  He  had  his  heare  long  downe
to  his  fhulders,  and  very  blake,  with  a  vaile  of  filke  rowled  abowte  his  head,  and  two  greate  ringes  of  golde
hanginge  at  his  eares.  He  had  abowte  hys  myddle,  a  clothe  wroughte  of  cotton  and  filke  impaled  wyth  golde,
and  reacheinge  downe  to  his  knees.  On  his  one  fyde,  he  had  a  long  dager  with  a  hafte  of  golde,  and  the
fliethe  of  a  fayre  kynde  of  carued  woodde.  He  had  on  euery  finger,  three  ringes  of  golde,  and  had  his  bodie
annoynted  with  oyle  of  florax  and  Beniamin.  The  natural  coloure  of  his  face  was  like  vnto  the  coloure  of  an
oliue:  And  all  his  bodye  byfyde  paynted  with  diuers  colours.  The  kynges  name  was  Raia  Colambu,  and  the
Prince  was  cauled  Raia  Siagu.

The  lafle  day  of  Marche  neare  vnto  Eafler,  the  capitaine  caufed  his  preefle  to  fay  maffe,  and  fente  to  the
kinge  by  th[e]interpretoure,  that  his  commyng  a  lande  at  that  tyme  was  not  to  dyne  with  hym,  but  only  to  heare
maffe.  The  Capitayne  came  alande  with  fyftie  of  his  men  in  theyr  befl  apparel  withowte  weapons  or  harnefle,
and  all  the  refydue  well  armed.  Before  the  boates  came  to  lande,  he  caufed  fixe  pieces  of  ordinaunce  to  be
fhotte  of  in  token  of  peace,  and  fo  came  aland,  where  the  two  kinges  embrafed  hym.,  and  accompanyed  hym
to  the  place  appoynted  for  maffe  to  be  fayde  not  farre  frome  the  fea  fyde.  Sumwhat  before  the  beginnynge  of
maffe,  the  Capitayne  fprinkeled  the  Kynges  with  damafl<;e  water.  When  the  preefle  was  at  mid  maffe  at  the
offitorie,  the  kings  profered  them  felues  to  go  to  kyffe  the  croffe  with  the  capytayne,  but  offered  nothynge.  At
the  tyme  of  facringe  when  the  preefl.e  lifted  vppe  the  bodie  of  Chrifl,  and  the  Chriflians  kneeled  downe  and
helde  vppe  their  handes  ioyned  togither,  the  kynges  dyd  the  like  alfo  wyth  greate  reuerence.  In  the  meane
tyme,  whyle  certeyne  of  the  Chriflians  were  at  the  communion,  a  handegunne  w^as  fhotte  of  to  fignifie  vnto  theym
that  were  in  the  fhyppes,  to  difcharge  all  theyr  ordinaunce.  When  maffe  was  fynyfflied,  the  Capitaine  oiufed
certeyne  of  his  men  to  put  on  theyr  harneffe  and  to  make  a  combat  with  theyr  naked  fwoordes,  wherat  the
kynges  tooke  great  pleafure.  This  doone,  the  Capitaine  caufed  a  croffe  to  be  brought  furth,  with  nayles  and  a
crowne  of  thomes,  gyuynge  commaundement  to  all  his  men  to  gyue  reuerence  therunto,  and  fignifyinge  to  the
kynges  by  th[e]interpretour  that  that  banner  was  gyuen  hym  by  Th[e]emperoure  his  lorde  and  mafler,  with
commaundement  to  leaue  the  fame  in  al  places  where  he  came  to  the  great  commoditie  and  profite  of  all  fuch
as  wolde  reuerendly  receaue  it  as  an  afiiired  token  of  frendfliip :  And  that  he  wold  therfore  leaue  it  there  afwel
to  accomplyflie  his  lords  commaundement,  as  alfo  that  if  at  any  tyme  any  fliyppes  of  Chriflians  fhulde  chaunce
to  coome  that  way,  fhulde  by  feing  that  croffe  perceaue  that  owre  men  had  byn  well  enterteyned  there,  and
wolde  therfore  not  onely  abfleyne  from  doing  them  any  hurte  or  difpleafure,  but  alfo  helpe  to  ayde  them
ageynRe  theyr  enemies.  And  that  therfore  it  fhulde  bee  requifite  to  erecte  that  crofle  vppon  the  toppe  of  the
hyghefle  mountayne  that  myght  bee  feene  from  the  fea  on  euery  fyde.  Alfo  to  pray  vnto  it  reuerently.  And
that  in  fo  doinge,  they  fliulde  not  bee  hurte  with  thunder,  lyghtnynge,  or  tempefles.  \\Tien  the  kynges  harde
thefe  woordes,  they  gaue  the  Capitayne  great  thankes,  promyfinge  gladly  to  obferue  and  fulfyll  all  fuche  thynges
as  he  required. Then  the  Capitayne  demaunded  whether  they  were  Moores  or  gentyles. They  anfwered  that

Foure  Hands

I  The  Hand  of
Buthuan.

The  Hand  of
Caleghan.

Plentie  of  gclde

224

The  kj-nge  of
Buthuan.

Masse.

A  combatte.

The  Crosse  and
crowne  of  thomes

MooTcs  and

255

2^6

The  vyagc  yoit)idc  about  the  vvortde.

Many  Hands

The  Hand  of
Mcssaiio.

Battes  as  bygge  as
Eagles.
Fowles  with
homes.

225

Egges  hatched  in
sand.

The  Ibnde  of
Zubut.

The  kynge  of
Zubut.

A  shyp  laden  with
guld  and  slaues.

Calicut.
Malacha.

they  had  none  other  kynde  of  religion,  but  that  lyftynge  vppe  theyr  handes  ioyned  togyther  and  theyr  faces
toward  heauen,  they  cauled  vppon  theyr  goil  Al>l>a,  wliiche  anfwere  lyked  the  Capitayne  very  well,  bycaufe  the
gentries  are  fooner  perfuaded  to  owre  fixyth  then  the  Moores.  etc.

Departynge  from  henfe,  they  came  to  the  Ilandes  of  Zcilon,  Ziihuth,  Meffana,  and  Calag/iaii,  by  the
conducte  of  certeyne  pylottes  of  the  fayde  kynges.  Of  thefe,  Zubuth  is  the  befle,  and  hath  the  trade  of  befle
trafique.  In  the  Ilande  of  Mcffana,  they  founde  dogges,  cattes,  hogges,  hcnnes,  goates,  ryfe,  ginger,  Cocus,
mylle,  panyke,  barlye,  fygges,  oranges,  waxe, and  golde  in  greate  quantitie.  This  Ilande  is  aboiie  the  Equinoctiall
towarde  owre  pole.  ix.  degrees  twoo  thynle  partes:  and.  162.  degrees  frome  the  place  frome  whenfe  they
departed.  They  remayned  in  this  Hand  for  the  fpace  of  viii.  dayes,  and  then  directed  theyr  vyage  towarde
the  northwell,  and  palTed  betwene  thefe  fyue  Ilandes,  Zei/on,  Bohol,  Canghu,  Barbai,  and  Catighan.  In  this
Ilande  of  Catighan,  are  certeyne  great  battes  as  bygge  as  Eagles,  of  the  which  they  toke  one.  They  are
good  to  bee  eaten,  and  of  tafle  muche  lyke  a  henne.  There  are  alfo  flocke  dooues,  turtle  dooues,  poping-
iayes,  and  certeyne  foules  as  bygge  as  hennes.  '  Thefe  foules  haue  lyttle  homes,  and  lay  great  egges,
which  they  couer  a  cubet  depthe  in  the  fande,  by  the  heate  whereof  and  vertue  of  the  foonne,  they  are  hatched,
and  the  younge  byrdes  creepe  owte  of  the  fande  by  them  felues.  From  the  Ilande  of  Mcffana  to  Catighan  are.
XX.  leaques  foylynge  towarde  the  Weft.  And  bycaufe  the  kynge  of  Meffana  coulde  not  folowe  the  fliyppcs,  they
taryed  for  him  about  the  Ilandes  of  Polo,  Ticobon,  and  Pozon,  where  the  Capitayne  tooke  hym  into  his  fliippe
with  certeyne  of  his  principall  men,  and  fo  folowed  theyr  vyage  towarde  the  Ilande  of  Zubut,  whiche  is  abowte
fiftie  leaques  diftante  from  Catighan.

The.  vii.  day  of  Apryll  abowte  noone,  they  entered  into  the  porte  of  Zubut:  And  paffynge  by  many
vyllages  and  habifacions  in  trees,  they  came  to  the  citie,  where  the  Capitayne  gaue  commaundement  to  the
maryners  to  ftryke  theyr  fayles  and  to  fet  them  felues  in  order  in  maner  of  battayle  ray,  caufing  all  the  ordi-
naunce  to  bee  fliotte  of,  wherewith  all  the  people  were  put  in  greate  feare.  After  this,  the  Capitayne  fent  an
ambaffadoure  with  th[e]interpretoure  to  the  kynge  of  Zubut.  When  they  approched  nere  to  the  citie,  they
founde  the  kyng  wuth  a  great  company  of  men  fore  aftonyflied  at  the  noyle  of  the  gunnes.  But  th[e]interpre-
tour  aduertifed  them  that  it  was  the  cuftome  of  owre  men  in  al  fuche  places  where  they  coome,  to  difcharge
theyr  ordinaunce  in  token  of  frendefhyppe  and  to  honour  the  lorde  of  the  citie.  With  which  woordes  the  kyng
and  his  coompany  were  well  quieted.  After  this,  th[e]interpretour  declared  that  his  mafter  was  the  Capitayne
of  the  fliips  of  the  greateft  Prince  in  the  worlde,  and  that  they  wente  to  difcouer  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca:  And
further,  that  hearyng  of  his  good  name  and  fame  by  the  reporte  of  the  kyng  of  Meffana,  they  determyned  to
vifite  h)Tn  and  to  haue  \7ttayles  for  exchaunge  of  theyr  marchaundies.  The  kynge  anfwered  that  he  was  well
contented  therwith,  and  that  they  were  hartely  welcoome.  Neuertheleffe,  that  it  was  a  cuftome  in  that  place,
that  al!  fuch  fliyppes  as  entered  into  that  hauen,  fhuld  pay  tribute :  And  that  there  were  not  many  dayes  pafte,
fence  a  fliyppe  laden  with  golde  and  flaues  dyd  fo  paye.  In  token  wherof,  he  caufed  to  coome  before  hym
certeyne  marchauntes  of  that  coompany  whiche  yet  remayned  with  hym.  To  this  th[e]interpretour  anfwered,
that  foraimuch  as  his  lorde  was  the  Capitayne  of  fo  myghtie  a  Prince,  he  neuer  payde  tribute  to  any  kynge  in
the  worlde,  and  wolde  not  nowe  begynne.  Wyllynge  hym  to  take  this  for  a  refolute  anfwere,  that  if  he  wolde
accepte  the  peace  that  was  profered  hym,  he  fhulde  enioy  it.  And  if  he  rather  defyred  warre,  he  flioulde  haue
his  handes  full.  When  th[e]interpretour  had  fayde  thefe  woordes,  one  of  the  fayde  marchauntes  (who  was  a
Moore)  fpake  to  the  kynge  in  this  maner.  CATACAI A  Chita :  that  is.  Take  hede  fyr.  For  thefe  men  are
they  that  haue  conquered  Calicut,  Malaca,  and  all  the  greater  India :  and  are  of  fuche  poure  that  yf  yowe
intreate  them  otherwyfe  then  well,  yowe  may  to  late  knowe  what  they  are  able  to  doo  more  then  they  haue
doone  at  Calicut  and  Malaca.  When  th[e]interpretoure  harde  thefe  woordes,  he  fayde  that  the  kynge  his
lorde  was  of  much  greater  puiffaunce  and  more  dominions,  and  lorde  of  more  fhyppes  then  was  the  kynge  of
Portugale:  declarj^nge  further  that  he  was  kynge  of  Spayne  and  Emperour  of  all  Chriftendome  Addynge
hereunto  that  yf  he  wolde  not  bee  his  frende,  he  wolde  hereafter  fende  thyther  fuche  a  poure  of  armed  men  as
fhulde  deftroy  his  contrey.  The  Moore  conferred  all  thefe  woordes  with  the  kynge,  who  fayde  that  he  wolde
further  deliberate  with  his  counfayle,  and  gyue  theym  a  full  anfwere  the  daye  folowynge.  In  the  meane  tyme
he  fente  theym  certeyne  vyttayles  and  wyne.  When  all  thefe  thynges  were  declared  to  the  kynge  of  Meffana
who  was  the  chiefeft  there  abowt  nexte  vnto  hym,  and  lorde  of  many  Ilandes,  he  wente  alande  and  repayred
to  the  kynge  of  Zubut  and  declared  vnto  hym  the  great  humanitie  and  curtefie  of  the  generall  Capitayne.
Shortely  after,  the  Capitayne  fente  certeyne  of  his  men  with  th[e]interpretour  to  the  kynge  of  Zubut  to  knowe
his  pleafure  and  what  aunfwere  he  wolde  make  them.  As  they  wente  towarde  the  courte,  they  mette  the
kynge  commyng  in  the  ftreete  accompanied  with  many  of  his  chiefe  men.  He  caufed  owr  men  to  fit  downe
by  him,  and  demaunded  of  them  if  there  were  any  more  then  one  Capitayne  in  theyr  coompanie :  And  whether
it  were  theyr  requefte  that  he  ftiulde  pay  tribute  to  Th[e]emperour.  They  anfwered  that  they  defyred  none
other  thynge  but  that  they  myght  exercife  marchaundies  with  them,  and  to  barter  ware  for  ware.  The  k}Tige
256

The  vyage  roimde  about  the  vvorlde.

257

made  anfwere  that  he  was  well  content  therwith :  wyllynge  the  Capitayne  in  token  of  frendfhippe  to  fende  him
a  little  of  the  bind  of  his  ryght  arme,  affirmyng  that  he  wold  do  the  lyke.  etc.

After  this  the  kynge  of  Meffana  with  the  kynge  of  Zubiit  his  neuie  (who  was  the  prince)  and  certeyne  other
of  his  gentylmen,  came  to  the  fhyppes  and  brought  the  Capitayne  many  goodly  prefentes.  They  entered  into
greate  amitie,  and  had  large  communication  of  many  thynges.  The  Capitayne  perfuaded  them  to  the
Chriflian  fayth,  which  they  gladly  embrafed,  and  tooke  fuche  pleafure  in  hearynge  the  articles  of  owre  beliefe,
that  the  teares  fell  from  theyr  eyes  for  ioye.  They  were  baptifed,  and  fhortely  after  all  the  people  of  the
llande. They  efteeme  nothyng  more  precious  then  drynkyng  glaffes  of  Venice  woorke.

When  they  came  to  the  citie,  they  founde  the  kyng  in  his  pallaice  fittynge  vppon  a  floure  or  fluoric  made
of  the  leaues  of  date  trees  wrought  after  a  curious  diuife  lyke  a  certeyne  kynde  of  mattes.  He  had  vppon  his
body,  none  other  apparell  but  only  a  cloth  of  bombafme  cotton  hangyng  before  his  priuie  partes.  On  his
heade,  he  had  a  vayle  of  needle  worke :  and  abowte  his  necke  a  chaine  of  greate  price.  At  his  eares,  hunge
two  rynges  of  golde  wherein  were  inclofed  many  precious  ftones.  He  was  but  of  fmaule  ftature,  but  fumewhat
groffe,  and  had  the  refidue  of  his  body  paynted  with  dyuers  coloures  wherof  fum  were  lyke  vnto  flamynge  fyre.
Before  hym,  he  had  two  veffelles  made  of  the  fine  earth  cauled  Forcellana,  with  fodden  egges.  Alfo  four
veffels  of  Forcellana  full  of  wyne  made  of  date  trees,  and  couered  with  many  odoriferous  herbes.  The  prince
brought  them  to  his  houfe,  where  he  had  foure  doughters  verye  well  fauoured  and  whyte  lyke  owtcs.  He
caufed  them  to  daunce  all  naked,  and  thenvith  to  fynge,  and  play  on  certeyne  tymbrelles  made  of  metall.

At  this  tyme  it  fo  chaunced  that  one  of  the  Spanyardes  dyed  in  one  of  the  fhyppes.  And  when  certeyne
of  theyr  coompanye  defyred  the  kynge  to  gyue  them  leaue  to  burie  hym  on  the  land,  he  anfwered  that  foraf-
much  as  he  and  all  his,  were  at  the  commaundement  of  theyr  kynge  and  mafler,  how  much  more  ought  the
grounde  fo  to  be.

They  greatly  marueyled  at  the  cerimonies  perteynyng  to  the  maner  of  owre  funeralles,  and  honoured  the
croffes  whiche  were  fet  at  bothe  th[e]endes  [of]  the  graue.

They  lyue  with  iuflice,  and  vfe  waightes  and  meafures.  Theyr  houfes  are  made  of  Timber  and  fawne
boordes :  and  are  fo  buylded  aboue  the  grownde  vppon  proppes  and  pyles,  that  they  afcende  to  the  fame  by
certeyne  flayers. Vnder  theyr  houfes,  they  keepe  theyr  hogges  and  hennes.

When  they  came  to  barterynge,  they  gaue  golde,  ryffe,  hogges,  hennes,  and  dyuers  other  thynges  for  fume
of  owre  tryfels  of  fmaule  value.  They  gaue  tenne  Fefos  of  golde  for.  xvi.  poundes  weyght  of  iren.  One  pefus
is  in  value  a  ducate  and  a  halfe.  The  funday  folowynge,  the  kynge  was  baptyfed  with  great  folemnitie.  At
which  tyme,  the  Capitayne  admonyfflied  him  before  not  to  bee  afrayde  at  the  fhootyng  of  of  the  ordinaunce,
bycaufe  it  was  theyr  cuflome  fo  to  doo  at  fuch  folemne  fealles.  After  this,  the  Capitayne  caufed  theym  to
breake  all  theyr  Idoles,  and  to  fet  vppe  the  croffe  in  dyuers  places,  prayinge  to  the  fame  bothe  mornynge  and
euenynge  kneelynge  on  theyr  knees  and  holdynge  vp  theyr  handes  ioyned  togyther.  The  kinge  in  his  baptifme,
was  named  Charles  after  the  Emperours  name,  and  the  Prince,  Ferdinando  after  the  name  of  his  maieflies
brother.  The  kynge  of  Meffana  was  named  lohn,  and  the  Moore  Chriflopher.  To  all  other  they  gaue  fuch
names  as  are  commonly  vfed  in  Chriflendome.  And  thus  beefore  maffe  was  begunne,  were  fiue  hundreth  men
baptifed.  When  maffe  was  fynyffhed,  the  Capitayne  inuited  the  kynge  to  dyne  with  >^im  in  his  Ihyppe,  and  at
his  commynge,  caufed  the  ordinaunce  to  bee  difcharged.

The  queene  was  alfo  baptifed  with  fortie  of  her  gentlewomen,  and  her  doughter  the  Princes  wife.  The
queene  was  very  younge  and  fayre,  hauynge  her  body  couered  with  a  white  cloth.  Her  lyppes  were  redde,
and  fhe  had  on  her  head  a  hat,  on  the  toppe  wherof  was  a  triple  crowne  much  lyke  the  popes  This  crowne
and  the  hat,  were  made  of  the  leues  of  dates  trees.

Within  the  fpace  of.  viii.  dayes,  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the  llande  were  baptifed  excepte  one  vyllage  of
Idolaters  who  wolde  not  herein  obey  the  kynges  commaundement.  Whervppon  the  Capitayne  fent  certeyne
of  his  menne  thyther,  who  burnt  the  towne  and  erected  a  croffe  in  that  place  bycaufe  the  people  of  the  vyllage
were  gentyles  (that  is)  Idolaters.  But  if  they  had  byn  Moores  (that  is  Machumetiftes)  they  wold  haue  erected
a  pyller  of  flone,  bycaufe  the  Moores  are  more  flooberne  and  harder  to  bee  conuerted  then  are  the  gentyles.

When  the  queene  came  to  the  place  where  Ihee  fhuld  heare  maffe,  fliee  came  furth  with  great  pompe  and
folemnitie,  hauynge  goinge  before  her  three  younge  damofelles  and  three  men  with  theyr  cappes  in  theyr  handes,
whom  fhee  folowed  apparelled  in  whyte  and  blacke,  with  a  great  vayle  of  fylke  vppon  her  heade  fringed  abowte
with  golde,  whiche  couered  her  hatte  and  hunge  downe  to  her  fhoulders.  Shee  had  alfo  a  great  trayne  of
women  folowynge  her,  beinge  all  barefooted  and  naked,  excepte  that  vppon  theyr  heades  and  priuie  partes,  they
wore  certeyne  vayles  of  filke,  and  hadde  theyr  heare  fpredde.

Before  the  kynge  of  Zubut  was  baptifed,  he  was  named  Raia  Humabuon.  When  the  Capitayne  demaunded
of  hym  why  all  the  Idoles  in  the  llande  were  not  burnt  accordynge  to  his  promeffe,  he  anfwered  that  they
efleemed  them  no  more  as  goddes,  but  only  made  facrifice  to  theym  for  the  Princes  brother  who  was  very  fycke,

Eden.  X  957

Sheadyng  of
bludde  is  a  token
of  frendih)  ppe

226

The  kynge  of
Zubut  is  baptised

The  kynge  of
Zubut  his  apparell

Well  fauoured
women.

Barterynge
Pesus  what.

They  breake  theyi
Idoles  and  erecte
the  crosse.

Fyue  hundreth
men  baptised.

The  queene  of
Zubut

227

The  queenes
apparelL

258

TJie  vyage  rounde  about  the  vvoylde.

A  miracle.

The  Hand  of
Mathan.

The  capitnine
Magellanus  is
slavne.

The  Hand  of

Bohol.

They  bumleone  C'f

theyr  shj-ppes.

Blacke  men.

The  Hand  of
Chippiu

The  Hand  of
Caghaian.

The  Hand  of
Pulaoan.

228

The  Hand  of
Bumei  or  Porne.

A  great  citie.
Elephantes

The  Hand  of
Cimbulon.

Leaues  of  trees
which  seeme  to
hue.

and  as  noble  and  wyttie  a  man  as  was  in  the  Ilande.  The  Capitayne  anfwered  that  if  he  wolde  burne  al  his
Idolos  and  beleue  ta)thfully  in  Chrill,  and  bee  baptifed,  he  Ihulde  be  immediatly  rellored  to  health,  and  that  he
wolde  els  gyue  them  leaue  to  ftryke  of  his  heade.  By  thefe  woordes  and  perfuafions  of  the  Ca])itayne,  he
conceaued  fuch  hope  of  health,  that  after  he  was  baptifed  he  felt  no  more  greefe  of  his  difeafe.  And  this  was  a
manifell  myracle  Avrought  in  owre  tyme  wherby  dyuers  infidels  were  conuerted  to  owr  fayth,  and  theyr  Idoles
dellroyed,  and  alfo  theyr  altares  ouerthrowcn  on  the  whiche  they  were  accuflomcd  to  eate  the  facrifyced  fleffhe.
The  people  of  the  Ilande  pay  the  kynge  a  portion  of  vittayles  for  theyr  tribute  by  all  theyr  cities  and  vyllages.

Not  forre  from  this  Ilande  oi  Zuhut,  is  the  Hand  oi Mathan,  whofe  inhabitauntes  vfe  maruelous  cerimoiiies
in  theyr  facrifices  to  the  foonne  and  burying  the  deade.  They  were  rynges  of  golde  abowt  theyr  priuie  members.
The  Ilande  is  gouerned  by  two  Princes  wherof  the  one  is  named  Zula,  and  the  other  Cilapulapti.  And  wheras
this  Cilapulapu  refufed  to  pay  tribute  to  the  kynge  of  Spayne,  the  Capitayne  went  ageynft  hym  in  his  owne
perfon  with.  Ix.  of  his  menne  armed  with  coates  of  mayle  and  helmettes.  Cilapulapu  diuided  his  army  into
three  battayles,  hauynge  in  euery  battaile  two  thdufond  and  fiftie  men  armed  with  bowes,  arrowes,  dartes  and
iauelins  hardened  at  the  poyntes  with  fyer.  This  continued  longe  and  fliarpe.  But  the  Capitayne  beinge  a
valient  man  and  prefynge  hym  felfe  in  the  brunte  of  the  battayle,  was  fore  wounded  and  flayne,  forafmuch  as
the  mofle  of  the  Barbarians  directed  all  theyr  force  ageynfl  hym.  Befyde  the  Capitayne,  were  flayne  of  owre
men  abowt.  viii.  or.  ix.  Of  the  Barbarians,  were.  xv.  flayne  and  many  fore  wounded.  After  the  death  of  the
Capitayne,  they  chofe  two  other  in  his  place,  of  the  which  one  was  Odoardo  Barbeffa  a  Portugale,  and  the  other
lohn  Serrano  who  was  fhortely  after  betrayde  by  th[e]intcrpretour  and  taken  prifoner  with  dyuers  other.

Certeyne  dayes  before  the  Capitaynes  death,  they  hadde  knowleage  of  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca  whiche  they
chiefely  fought.  Departynge  therfore  from  the  Ilande  of  Mathan,  they  fayled  farre  and  came  to  the  cape  of  an
other  Hand  named  Bohol.  In  the  myddeft  of  this  mayne  fea  (whiche  they  named  Archipelagus)  they  confulted
to  burne  the  fliyppe  named  Conception,  bycaufe  they  were  nowe  fewe  in  number,  and  to  furnyfhe  the  other  two
fliyppes  with  th[e]artillerie  therof.  Thus  directynge  theyr  courfe  towarde  Southewefl,  they  came  to  an  other
Ilande  named  Fauilog/ion,  where  they  founde  blacke  men  lyke  vnto  the  Sarafms.  Shortly  after,  they  arriued  at
an  other  great  Hand,  whofe  kyng  named  Raia  Calauar,  intreated  them  very  frendely  in  all  thynges  as  dyd  the
kyng  of  Meflfana.  This  Ilande  is  ryche  in  golde,  and  hath  plentie  of  ryffe,  gynger,  hogges,  goates,  hennes,  and
dyuers  other  thynges.  It  is  named  C/iippit,  and  is.  viii.  degrees  aboue  the  Equinoctiall  line  towarde  owr  pole :
And  in  longitude  from  the  place  from  whenfe  they  firfl  departed.  170.  degrees:  And  abowt.  50.  leaques  from
Ziibiit.

Departinge  frome  henfe  they  came  to  an  other  Hand  named  Caghaian  being.  40.  leaques  from  Chippit  as
they  fayled  betwene  the  wefle  and  Southe  wefle.  This  Ilande  is  very  greate,  and  in  maner  vnhabited.  The
people  are  moores,  and  were  banyfffhed  owt  of  the  Ilande  of  Biirnei  whiche  fum  caule  Fortie.

Frome  this  Ilande  aboute.  xxv.  leaques  betwene  the  wefl  and  northewefle,  they  founde  a  maruelous  frute-
full  Ilande  named  Pulaoan,  beinge  towarde  owr  pole  aboue  the  Equinoctiall.  ix.  degrees  and  a  thirde  parte :  And
C.lxxix.  [one  hundred  and  feventy-nine]  degrees  and  a  third  parte  in  longitude  frome  the  place  of  theyr  departing.

Frome  this  Ilande.  x.  leaques  towarde  the  South  wefle,  they  fawe  an  other  Ilande  whiche  feemed  to  them
fumtymes  to  mounte  as  they  fayled  by  the  coafles  therof.  As  they  were  enteringe  into  the  porte,  there  arofe  a
boyflious  and  darke  tempefle  which  ceafed  as  foone  as  the  fiers  of  the  three  fayntes  (wherof  we  haue  fpoken
before)  appeared  vppon  the  cabells.  Frome  the  beginninge  of  this  Ilande  to  the  porte,  are  fyue  leaques.  This
Ilande  is  greate  and  riche :  and  the  chiefe  citie  therof  conteyneth.  xxv.  thoufande  houfes.  The  kynge  interteyned
o^vre  men  very  frendlye,  and  fent  them  byfyde  many  other  prefentes,  two  elephantes  trapped  with  filke  to  bring
them  to  his  pallaice  that  brought  the  prefentes  which  the  Capytaynes  fent  hym.  He  hath  a  magnyfycalle
courte  and  a  greate  garde.  Alfo  a  multitude  of  concubynes.  He  is  a  moore,  and  is  named  Raia  Siripada.
He  is  a  kynge  of  greate  poure,  and  hath  vnder  hym  many  other  kynges,  Ilandes,  and  cities.  This  Ilande  of
Bumei  is  aboue  the  Equinoctiall  towarde  owre  pole  fyue  degrees  and  a  quarter.  And  in  longitude  frome  the
place  of  theyr  departyng.  C.  Ixxvi.  [one  hundred  and  feventy-fix]  degrees  and  two  thirde  partes.

Departinge  frome  Bumei,  they  came  to  an  Ilande  cauled  Cimbubon,  beinge.  viii.  degrees  aboue  the
Equinoctiall  lyne  Here  they  remayned.  xl.  days  to  calke  theyr  Ihyppes  and  furnyffhe  them  with  freffhe  water
and  fuell  whiche  was  to  them  great  payne  and  trauayle  becaufe  they  were  in  maner  all  bare  footed,  theyr  fliooes
and  in  maner  theyr  other  apparell  being  worne  by  reafon  of  the  longe  vyage.  In  the  wooddes  of  this  Ilande,
they  founde  a  tree  whofe  leaues  as  foone  as  they  faule  on  the  grounde,  doo  flurre  and  remoue  frome  place  to
place  as  though  they  were  alyue.  They  are  muche  lyke  the  leaues  of  a  mulbery  tree :  And  haue  on  euery  fyde
as  it  were  two  fhort  and  blunt  fiete.  When  they  are  cut  or  broken,  there  is  no  bludde  feene  come  furth  of
them.  Yet  when  any  of  them  are  touched,  they  fuddeynely  rnoue  and  flarte  away.  Antonie  Pigafetta  kepte
one  of  them  in  a  platter  for  the  fpace  of  viii.  dayes.  And  euer  when  he  touched  it,  it  ranne  rounde  abowt  the
platter. He  fuppofeth  that  they  Hue  only  by  ayer.

The  vyage  rounde  about  the  vvorlde.

259

A  sea  full  of
wreediri.

Perles.

Men  ouergrowen
with  heare.

The  Ibndcs  of
Molucca.

The  Portugalcs
are  reproued.

Tidore  one  of  the
Ilandes  cf
Molucca.

A  vision  in  the
pianettes

Departynge  from  henfe,  they  directed  theyr  courfe  by  the  Wefle  quarter  towarde  the  Southeafte,  to  fynde
the  Ilandes  of  Mohicca,  and  fayled  not  farre  from  certeyne  mountayne.s  where  they  founde  the  fea  full  of  great
vveedes  and  herbes.

From  henfe,  they  came  to  the  Ilandes  of  Zolo  and  Tas;hifna,  in  the  which  are  founde  perles  of  exceadyng
biggeneffe.

Folowyng  theyr  courfe  toward  the  north  Eafl,  they  came  to  a  great  citie  named  Majigdando,  lyinge  aboue
the  Ilandes  of  Bnthiian  and  Calaghan,  where  they  tooke  a  canoa  of  certeyne  of  th[e]inhabitaunts :  by  whome
being  informed  of  the  Ilandes  of  Mohicca,  they  lefte  theyr  courfe  towarde  the  north  Eafle,  and  folowed  the
South  eaRe  nere  vnto  a  cape  of  the  Hand  of  Buthi/an,  they  were  aduertifed  for  certentie  that  on  the  bankes  of
a  certeyne  ryuer,  there  dwelte  men  ouergrowen  with  heare,  and  of  high  flature.

Folowyng  flill  theyr  courfe  by  the  fouth  eafle,  and  paffyng  by  many  fmaule  Ilandes,  they  came  to  the
Ilandes  of  Molucca  the  fyxte  daye  of  Nouember  and  the.  xxvii.  monethe  after  theyr  departure  owt  of  Spayne.
Beinge  therfore  ioyfuU  and  gyuyng  thankes  vnto  god,  they  difcharged  all  theyr  ordynaunce.  In  the  coafle  of
all  thefe  Ilandes,  euen  vnto  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca,  foundyng  with  theyr  plummet,  they  founde  the  deapthe  of
the  fea  to  bee  no  leffe  then  a  hundreth  and  two  yardes,  which  is  contrary  to  the  faying  of  the  Portugales  who
affyrme  that  no  fliyppe  can  paffe  that  way  without  great  daungioure  by  reafon  of  the  flialownes  and  rockes  or
fhelues :  and  for  the  darkeneffe  which  the  clowdes  caufe  in  the  heauen.  All  which  thyngs  they  fayned  to
th[e]intent  that  none  other  fliulde  haue  knoweleage  of  theyr  vyagies.

The.  viii.  day  of  Nouember  in  the  yeare.  152  i.  before  the  ryfinge  of  the  foonne,  they  entered  into  the
porte  of  the  Ilande  of  Tidore,  being  one  of  the  chiefe  Ilandes  of  Molucca,  where  they  were  honorably  inter-
teyned  of  the  kynge  who  declared  that  he  had  longe  before  feene  a  fygne  in  heauen  that  certeyne  fhyppes
fhuld  comme  from  a  farre  contrey  to  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca:  And  that  wheras  for  the  better  c:;rtificat  therof
he  confydered  the  flations  of  the  moone,  he  fawe  therin  the  commyng  of  owre  fliyppes,  and  that  we  were  the
men  whome  he  feemed  to  fee  in  the  fame.  Wherupon  he  profered  hym  felfe  to  enter  into  leaque  of  frend-
fhyppe  with  the  kynge  of  Spayne,  and  to  accepte  owre  men  as  his  brotherne  and  chyldren :  wyllyng  them  to
come  alande  as  into  theyr  owne  houfes.  Alfo  that  for  theyr  commyng,  that  Ilande  fhulde  no  more  bee  cauled
Tidore,  but  Caflile  for  the  greate  loue  whiche  he  bore  to  theyr  kynge  whom  he  reputed  as  his  lorde  and  mafler.
This  kynge  is  a  Moore,  and  is  named  Raia  Sultan  Mauzor.

The  Ilandes  of  Molucca  are  fiue  in  number,  and  are  thus  named :  Tarenaie,  Tidore,  Mutir,  Macchian,  and
Bacchian. Of  thefe,  Tarenate  is  the  chiefeft,

Directly  ageynfle  the  Ilande  of  Tidore,  there  is  an  other  great  Ilande  named  Gilolo,  inhabited  of  Moores
and  Gentyles.  The  Moores  haue  two  kynges,  of  the  which  one  hath  fyxe  hundreth  chyldren,  and  the  other
fixe  hundreth  and  fiftie.  The  Gentyles  kepe  not  fo  many  women  as  doo  the  Moores  nor  yet  lyue  in  fuche
fuperflitions.  They  praye  to  the  fyrfle  thynge  that  they  meete  in  the  mornynge  when  they  go  furth  of  theyr
houfes,  and  honoure  that  as  theyr  god  for  that  day.  The  kynge  of  the  gentyles  is  very  ryche  in  golde.  In
the  fayde  Ilande  of  Gilolo,  are  reedes  as  bygge  as  a  mans  legge,  and  full  of  cleare  water  holfome  to  bee  drunke.

The.  xii.  daye  of  Nouember,  the  kynge  of  Tidore  appoynted  owre  men  a  ware  houfe  in  the  citie  where
they  might  fell  theyr  marchaundies.  Theyr  maner  of  exchange  was  in  this  fort.  For  tenne  yardes  of  good
redde  cloth,  they  had  one  Bahar  of  clones,  whiche  amounteth  to  foure  Cantari  and  fyxe  pounde  weight:
And  one  Can  tar  is  a  hundreth  pounde  weight.  For.  xv.  yardes  of  cloth  fumwhat  woorfe  then  the  other,  they
receaued  in  Cambie,  one  Bahar.  For.  xxxv.  drynkynge  cuppes  of  glaffe,  they  had  one  Bahar.  For.  xvii.
Cathyls  of  quicke  fyluer,  one  Bahar.  They  came  dayly  to  the  fliyppes  with  many  of  theyr  barkes  full  of  goates,
hennes,  fygges  of  a  fpanne  longe,  alfo  the  frute  cauled  Cocus,  with  dyuers  other  kyndes  of  vyttayles  in  fuch
quantitie  that  it  was  a  marueylous  thynge  to  beholde.  They  fumyfflied  alfo  theyr  fliyppes  with  freflhe  water
which  is  hotte  as  it  ifflieweth  owt  of  the  fprynge,  but  is  very  coulde  when  it  hath  fl.oode  a  while  in  an  other
place.  It  fpryngeth  from  the  mountaynes  on  the  which  the  clone  trees  growe.  They  fawe  a  cloude  ryfe  in
maner  dayly,  which  compafeth  about  the  fayde  mountaynes.

The  kynge  of  the  Ilande  of  Bacchian,  fente  the  kynge  of  Spayne  two  deade  byrdes  of  flraung^  forme.
They  were  of  the  byggenes  of  turtle  dooues,  wth  lyttle  heades  and  longe  bylles :  alfo  longe  and  fmaule  legges
and  no  wynges,  but  in  the  fl.eade  therof  certeyne  longe  fethers  of  diuers  colours,  and  tayles  lyke  turtle  dooues.
All  the  other  fethers  are  of  one  coloure  much  lyke  vnto  tawny,  except  thofe  of  the  wynges.  They  flye  not  but
when  the  wynde  bloweth.  Thefe  Moores  are  of  opinion  that  thefe  byrdes  comme  from  the  heauenlye  Paradyie,
and  therfore  caule  them  Manuccodiata,  that  is  the  byrdes  of  god.

When  they  were  determyned  to  depart  from  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca,  certeyne  kynges  of  the  Ilande.s
accompanied  them  with  theyr  canoas,  and  conducted  them  to  an  Ilande  cauled  Mare  where  they  refrefflied
theyr  fliyppes  with  freflie  water  and  fuell.  The  kynges  fent  Tli[e]emperours  maieflie  many  prefentes :  and
embrafynge  owre  menne,  departed  with  the  teares  in  theyr  eyes;  And  owTe  men  for  theyr  lafl.e  farewell,  fliotte

229

The  fyue  Ilandes
of  molucca.
Tarenate.

The  Hand  of

Gilolo.
Moores  and
gentyles.

Golde.

Water  in  reedes.

Theyr  maner  of
barteringe.

Water  of  a
straunge  qualitie

BjT-des  of  1
straunge  fcrme

259

26o

The  vyagc  romiiic  about  the  vvorlde.

1

They  le.iiic  one
theyr  shyppes
behynil  them.

The  Ilandes  of
Molucca.
Hony  of  flyes.

Popingiayes.

ITie  Hand  of
Tidore.

Terfnait.

Mutir.

Macchian.

230

Bacchiiin.
Many  Hands

The  Hand  of
Mallua.

Pepper.

I.yttle  men  with
longe  e.ves.

The  Hand  of
Timor.

Whyte  Sanders
and  ginger.

The  deuyll
appeareth.

Saynt  lob  his
disease.

Cinamome
The  Handes  of
Giaua.
Malaccha.

The  greate  goulfe
of  China.

The  cape  of
Malaccha.

The  names  of
many  regions.

Reubarbe.

The  greate  kynge
of  Chiox

of  all  theyr  ordinaunce.  When  in  the  Ilande  of  Mare,  they  perceaued  that  one  of  theyr  fliyppes  leaked  and
toke  water  very  fore :  wherby  they  were  inforced  to  tary  there  three  dayes.  But  feinge  that  they  coulde  fynde
no  remedie  for  the  fame  but  in  longe  tyme,  they  determined  to  leaue  it,  gyuynge  order  that  if  afterwarde  it
coulde  bee  repayred,  they  Ihuid  returne  into  Spayne  as  well  as  they  coulde.

In  all  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca  is  founde  cloues,  ginger,  breade  of  the  roote  of  Sagu,  ryfe,  goates,  fheepe,
hennes,  fygges,  almondes,  fweete  pomegranates  and  fowre,  oranges,  lemondes,  and  hony  which  is  made  of
certeyne  flyes  leffe  then  antes :  Alfo  canes  of  fuger,  oyle  of  Cocus,  mellons,  gourdes,  and  a  marueilous  coulde
frute  which  they  name  Camulicai  and  dyuers  other  frutes.  Furthermore  whyte  and  redde  popingiayes,  and
other  of  variable  coloures.  It  is  not  pafte  fiftie  yeares  fence  the  moores  fyrfle  inhabited  anye  of  thefe  Hands,
which  were  before  inhabited  only  wnth  gentyles.

The  Ilande  of  Tidore,  is  aboue  the  Equinoctiall  line  towarde  owre  pole,  abowt.  27.  minutes:  And  in
longitude  from  the  place  from  whenfe  they  departed.  171.  degrees.  And  from  the  Anhipelagus  m  the  which
is  the  Hand  of  Z?/;/(r/ which  our  men  named  the  Hand  of  theeues.  ix.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  runneth  to  the
quarter  of  fouth  fouthweft,  and  north  northeafl.  Tircnate,  is  vnder  the  Equinoctial  line  foure  minutes  vnder
the  pole  Antartike.  Mutir,  is  directly  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  line.  Macchian  is.  xv.  minutes  toward  the  pole
Antartike,  and  Bacchian  one  degree.  Thefe  Ilandes  are  lyke  foure  fliarpe  mountaynes,  except  Macchian  which
is  not  fliarpe. The  bj'ggefl.  of  all  thefe,  is  Bacchian.

Departynge  from  the  Hand  of  Mare  and  directyng  their  courfe  towarde  the  fouthweft,  with  onely.  xlvi.  men
in  theyr  fliyppe  and.  xiii.  Indians,  they  pafled  by  the  Ilandes  of  Chacouan,  Lagoma,  Sico,  Gioghi,  Caphi,  Sulacho,
Lumatola,  Tenetum,  Buru,  Ambon,  Budia,  Celaruri,  Benaia,  Ambalao,  Bandan,  Zorobua,  Zolot,  Noceuamor,
Galian,  and  Mallua,  with  dyuers  other  Ilandes  both  great  and  fmaule,  of  Moores,  Gentyles,  and  Canibales.
Owre  men  remayned  xv.  dayes  in  the  Ilande  of  Mallua  to  repayre  theyr  fhyppe  in  certeyne  places  where  it
tooke  water.  All  the  fieldes  of  this  Ilande  is  full  of  longe  and  rounde  pepper,  and  is  fltuate  towarde  the  pole
Antartike  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  line.  viii.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  is  in  the  longitude  of.  169.  degrees  and.  40.
minutes.

The  pilote  which  owre  men  brought  owt  of  the  Handes  of  Molucca,  toulde  them  that  not  farre  from  thenfe,
was  an  Hand  named  Arucetto  in  the  which  are  men  and  women  not  paft  a  cubite  in  height,  hauynge  eares  of
fuch  byggeneffe  that  they  lye  vppon  one  and  couer  them  with  the  other.  But  owr  men  wolde  not  fayle  thyther,
bothe  bycaufe  the  wynde  and  courfe  of  the  fea  was  ageynfte  theym,  and  alfo  for  that  they  gaue  no  credite  to  his
reporte.

The.  XXV.  day  of  lanuary  in  the  yeare.  1522.  they  departed  from  Mallua,  and  the  day  folowyng,  arryued  at
a  greate  Hand  named  Timor,  beinge  flue  leaques  diftante  from  Mallua  betwene  the  fouth  and  fouthweft.  In
this  Ilande  is  founde  the  woodde  of  whyte  fanders  and  ginger,  and  dyuers  kindes  of  frutes.  Alfo  fundry  kyndes
of  beaftes,  and  plentie  of  vyttayle  and  golde.  They  of  the  Ilandes  of  Giaua,  Molucca,  and  Lozon,  refort  to  this
Ilande  for  fanders.  Th[e]inhabitauntes  are  gentyles.  They  fay  that  when  they  go  to  cut  the  woodde  of  faunders,
the  deuyll  appeareth  to  them  in  dyuers  formes  and  aflceth  theym  what  they  haue  neede  of:  And  that  after  this
vifion,  many  of  them  are  longe  ficke.  In  al  the  Handes  of  this  Archipelagus,  rayneth  the  difeafe  of  faynt  lob
(whiche  wee  caule  the  frenche  poxe)  more  then  in  any  other  place  in  the  worlde.

Farre  from  this  Ilande  betwene  the  weft  and  northw^eft  they  came  to  an  Ilande  named  Etide,  in  the  whiche
growethe  great  plentie  of  Sinamome.  In  this  tracte  are  founde  manye  Ilandes  lying  in  order  as  it  were  one
directly  behynde  an  other,  euen  vnto  the  Ilande  of  the  greater  Giaua,  named  Giaua  maior,  and  vnto  the  cape
of  Malaccha,  beinge  in  Eaft  India.  Giaua  the  lefle,  is  as  bygge  as  the  Ilande  of  Madera,  and  is  but  halfe  a
leaque  diftante  from  Giaua  maior.  Here  they  were  informed  that  aboue  Giajia  maior  toward  the  north,  is  a
great  goulfe  cauled  the  goulfe  of  China,  in  the  which  are  trees  of  exceadyng  byggeneffe,  inhabyted  with  foules
of  fuche  greatenes  that  they  cary  great  beaftes  in  the  ayer. The  frutes  of  thefe  trees  are  as  bygge  as  cucummers.

The  cape  of  Malaccha  is  one  degree  and  a  halfe  aboue  the  Equinoctiall  line  towarde  the  pole  Artike.  On
the  Eaft  fide  of  this  cape,  runneth  a  very  longe  coafte  in  the  which  are  many  regions  and  cities  wherof  fum  are
cauled  by  thefe  names,  Cingaporla  which  is  the  cape.  Alfo  Faha?i,  Calantan,  Patani,  Braalin,  Bcntu,  Longon,
and  Odia  wherin  is  the  citie  in  the  which  dwelleth  the  kynge  of  Sian  named  Zacabedera.  Theyr  cities  are
builded  as  owres  are,  and  fubiecte  to  the  kynge  of  Sian.  After  the  realme  of  Sia7i,  are  the  regions  of  lafngoma
and  Campaa  where  Reubarbe  groweth,  of  the  which  are  dyuers  opinions,  fume  fuppofynge  it  to  bee  a  roote,  and
other  a  putrifyed  tree,  afiirmyng  that  yf  it  were  not  putrified,  it  fliulde  not  haue  fo  great  a  fauour.  They  caule
it  Calama.  Next  vnto  this,  is  found  the  great  China,  whofe  kyng  is  thought  to  bee  the  greateft  prince  in  the
worlde,  and  is  named  Santoa  Raia.  Furthermore,  al  that  is  written  hereafter  of  this  kyng  and  thefe  regions,
they  lerned  by  th[e]information  of  a  Moore  that  was  in  the  Ilande  of  Timor.  He  affirmed  that  the  fayde  kynge
hathe  threefcore  and  tenne  crowned  kynges  vnder  his  empyre,  and  hathe  a  porte  in  the  fea  named  Canthan :
And  two  principal  cities  named  Nauchin  and  Connulaha  where  he  remayneth  hym  felfe,  and  hath  euer  foure  of
260

The  vyage  rounde  about  the  vvorlde.

261

his  chiefe  princes  lying  abowt  his  pallaice  on  euery  fyde,  towarde  the  Eafte,  Wefle,  Northe,  and  South  giuinge
dylygente  attendaunce  what  is  doone  in  euerye  of  theyr  quarters.  All  the  prynces  of  the  greater  India  (cauled
Iftdia  Maior,)  and  of  that  wherof  I  haue  fpoken  before,  are  obedient  to  this  kynge.  And  in  token  that  they
are  trewe  fabiectes,  they  keepe  in  theyr  pallaices  which  are  in  the  middefl  of  theyr  cities,  the  befle  cauled  Lim:,
being  fayrer  then  a  lyon.  And  is  the  great  kynges  fignette,  whiche  all  fuche  as  intende  to  go  to  China,  beare
with  them  fealed  in  waxe  or  on  a  piece  of  luerye  for  theyr  fafe  conducte,  withovvt  the  which  they  may  not  enter
into  the  hauen.

When  any  of  his  kyngs  rebell  or  are  difobedient,  he  caufeth  them  to  be  flene,  and  falted  and  dryed  at  the
foone :  Then  to  bee  fluffed  with  chaffe,  and  fette  vppe  on  fum  hygh  thyng  in  the  myddefl  of  the  chiefe  flreate
of  the  citie  where  al  the  people  may  fee  it.  He  neuer  fuffereth  his  owne  perfon  to  bee  openly  feene  to  any
man.  But  when  his  noble  men  of  the  courte  are  defyrous  to  fee  hym,  he  commeth  downe  frome  hys  pallaice
into  a  ryche  pauylyon  accompanyed  with  fyxe  of  hys  principall  concubynes  appareyled  with  lyke  veflures  as  is
he  hym  felfe.  All  thys  way  he  is  not  feene  by  reafon  of  the  pauylyon.  When  he  hath  paffed  through  the
pauylyon,  he  entereth  into  a  ferpent  named  Nagha,  being  the  mofl  marueylous  and  ryche  woorke  of  the  worlde,
and  placed  in  the  greatefl  courte  of  the  pallaice.  When  the  kynge  entereth  into  this  with  the  women,  to
th[e]intent  that  he  may  not  be  knowen  among  them,  he  caufeth  the  fayd  noble  men  only  to  looke  in  at  a
glaffe  which  is  in  the  brefle  of  the  ferpente,  where  they  fee  the  kynge  amonge  the  women,  but  can  not  dicerne
which  is  he.  He  ioyneth  in  mariage  with  hys  fyfter  that  the  blud  royall  bee  not  myxt  with  any  other.  His
pallaice  is  enuironed  with  feuen  large  walles,  the  one  being  farre  dyflante  from  the  other.  And  hath  in  euery
fuch  circuite  tenne  thowfande  men  for  the  garryfon  of  hys  pallaice,  who  haue  theyr  waytinge  dayes  appoynted
them  courfe  by  courfe  with  freffhe  men  in  theyr  places,  and  thus  keepe  theyr  watch  continually  both  daye  and
nyght.  In  this  pallaice  are  Ixxix.  haules,  in  the  which  is  an  infinite  number  of  women  that  feme  the  kynge
hauyng  euer  lyght  torches  in  theyr  handes  for  the  greater  magnyfycence.  He  that  wolde  fee  all  the  pallaice,
fhulde  fpend  a  hole  day  therin.  Amonge  other,  there  are  foure  principal  haules  where  fumtymes  the  kynge
gyueth  audience  to  hys  noble  men.  Of  thefe,  one  is  couered  both  aboue  and  beneth  with  metall,  an  other  all
ouer  with  fyluer,  the  thyrde  with  gold,  and  the  fourth  with  pearles  and  precious  flones.  Thefe  people  of  China^
are  whyte  menne,  appareled  as  we  are,  and  eate  theyr  meate  on  tables  as  wee  doo.  They  haue  the  croffe  in
fum  eflimation,  but  knowe  not  the  caufe  whye.  Beyonde  the  coafte  of  China,  are  dyuers  other  nations  and
people  as  Chenchii  where  pearles  and  cynamon  are  founde.  Alfo  the  people  named  Lichii,  where  reyneth  the
great  kynge  of  Mien,  hauyng  vnder  hym.  xxii.  kynges,  and  is  fubiecte  to  the  kyng  of  China.  Here  is  alfo
founde  the  great  citie  of  CATHAY  in  the  Eafl,  and  dyuers  other  nations  in  the  fayd  firme  land,  of  the
which  fum  are  brutyffhe  and  befliall  which  vfe  to  kyll  and  eate  theyr  parentes  when  they  are  owld,  thinking
therby  that  they  fhall  reuyue  in  them. All  thefe  people  are  gentyles.

The.  xi.  day  of  February  in  the  yeare.  1522.  they  departed  from  the  Hand  of  Ti7nor  and  were  ingulfed  by
chance  in  the  great  fea  cauled  La?iichidol,  and  tooke  theyr  courfe  betwene  the  wefle  and  fouth  wefle,  leauynge
the  northe  coafles  on  theyr  ryght  hand,  fearyng  leafl  if  they  fhuld  fayle  toward  the  firm  land,  they  myght  bee
feene  of  the  portugales  who  are  of  great  power  in  Malaccha :  and  therfore  dyrected  theyr  cours  withowt  the
Hand  of  Sumatra  cauled  in  owld  tyme  Taprobana :  Leauyng  alfo  on  theyr  ryght  hand  vpon  the  fjTm  land,  the
prouinces  and  regions  of  Pegu,  Betiga/a,  Calicut,  Catw?ior,  Goa,  Cambaia,  the  goulfe  of  the  Ilande  of  Ormus,
and  all  the  coafles  of  the  greater  India.  And  more  fafely  to  paffe  the  cape  of  Buona  Speranza  being  aboue
Affrike,  they  fayled  about,  xlii.  degrees  toward  the  pole  Antartike,  and  remayned  feuen  weekes  abowte  that
cape  with  many  fetches  compaffyng  the  wynd  with  theyr  fayles  contynually  alofte,  becaufe  they  had  a  wefl  and
north  wefle  wynd  in  the  proos  of  theyr  fhyppe  which  wolde  not  fuffer  them  to  paffe.  The  cape  of  Buona
»S)>^a«2;a,  is  toward  the  pole  Antartik  beneth  the  EquinoctiallHne.  xxxiiii.  degrees  and  ahalfe:  and.  1600.
leaques  from  the  cape  of  Malaccha :  And  is  the  greatefle  and  mofle  daungyerous  cape  that  is  founde  at  thys
day  in  al  the  worlde.

When  they  had  by  thefe  perels  ouerpaffed  thys  cape,  certeyne  of  them  afwell  for  lacke  of  vytayles  as  alfo
by  reafon  of  fyckeneffe,  were  mynded  to  fayle  to  a  hauen  of  the  Portugales  named  Mouzatnbique  aboue  Affryke.
But  the  other  anfwered  that  they  wold  rather  dye  then  go  to  any  other  place  then  directly  to  Spayne.  They
folowed  theyr  courfe  therfore  faylynge  towarde  the  Southwell  two  monethes  continually  without  touchynge  at
any  porte :  In  whiche  tj^me  there  dyed  abowte.  xxi.  of  theyr  coompany,  whom  they  cafl  into  the  fea.  And
fuerly  if  god  of  his  infinite  mercie  had  not  preferued  the  refidue  in  tyme,  they  hadde  all  dyed  of  famen.

In  fine,  beinge  inforced  of  neceffitie,  and  halfe  of  theyr  companye  deade,  they  fayled  to  one  of  the
Handes  of  Capo  verde  cauled  Infula  SanHi  lacobi,  that  is,  faynte  lames  Ilande,  parteyning  to  the  kj-ng  of
Portugale.  Where,  as  foone  as  they  arryued,  they  fent  certeyne  alande  in  the  fliippe  boate  for  vyttayles,
declarynge  to  the  Portugales  with  all  loue  and  fauour  what  neceffitie  they  were  dryuen  to  and  what  miferies
and  trauayles  they  had  fufteyned,  informynge  them  further  of  the)T  marueylous  viage  and  fuche  thynges  as  they

The  greater  India

231

The  beast  cauled
linx.

The  punUhement
of  rebelles.

X  2

The  kynge  is  net
seene  but  at  a
glasse.

A  thyng  of  strangt
worlunanshyppe.

The  kynge
raaryeth  his  systei

His  pallaice.
A  marueilous
garde.

Women  seme  the
kynge.

Foure  maruelous
haules

The  people  of
China.

The  Croise.

The  greate  kyng
of  mien

CATHAY.

The  sea  of
Lantchidol.

Malaccha.

The  Hand  of

Sumetra.

Pegu.

Bengala.

Calicut.

Canonor.

Goa.

Cambaia.

Ormus.

East  India.

Ca/M  de  Buona

Sperauza.

The  port  of
Mouzambique.

232

Famen.

Cafo  Verde.
S.  lames  Ilande.

261

262

The  vyagc  roiinde  about  fJie  vvorldc.

The  inKrati[t]ude
of  the  Portugales.

The  port  of  saynt
Lucur  nere  %'nto
Siuile.

^V^lat  became  of
the  other  shyppe.

Dariena

The  cape  of
Cattigara.

Ptoloine.

The  vyage  hardly
performed.

They  bye  slaues
for  lacke  of  helpe

Maryners  woorthy
immortal  fame.

A  rgonauti.

The  viage  of  lason

to  wyn  the  golden

fleese.

The  shj-ppe  more

woorthy  fame  then

owlde  Argo  of

Grecia.

The  vyage

hadde  feene  in  both  the  Eaft  and  Weft  India,  with  fuch  other  gentel  woordes  wherby  they  obteyned  certeyne
meafures  of  rife.  But  when  afterAvarde.  xiii.  of  theym  returned  for  more  ryfe,  they  were  deteyned :  Where-
uppon  the  refte  whiche  remayned  in  the  fliippe,  fearynge  the  lyke  chaunce,  departed  with  full  fayles,  and  the.
vii.  day  of  September  with  the  helpe  of  god  entered  into  the  hauen  of  San  Lucar  nere  vnto  Siuile,  where
difchargynge  all  theyr  oidinaunce  for  ioy,  they  wente  immediatly  to  the  greate  churche  in  theyr  fliertes  and
barefooted  with  a  torche  before  them  to  gyue  thankes  to  almyghtie  god  who  had  brought  them  (life  to  theyr
owne  countrey,  and  reftored  them  to  theyr  wyues  and  chyldren.

As  touchynge  th[e]ende  of  this  viage,  Tranfiluanus  wryteth  fumwhat  more  largely
as  foloweth.

The  other  fhyppe  which  they  lefte  behynde  them  to  bee  repayred,  returned  afterwarde  by  the  Archip6lagus
aforelayde  and  by  the  great  fea  to  the  coaftes  of  the  firme  of  the  weft  India,  and  arryued  at  a  region  of  the
fame  being  ageynft  Dariena,  where  the  South  fea  of  Stir  is  feparate  but  by  a  lyttle  fpace  of  lande  from  the
Wefte  Ocean  in  the  which  are  the  Ilandes  of  Hifpaniola  and  Cuba,  and  other  Ilandes  of  the  Spanyardes.  The
other  fliyppe  which  returned  into  Spayne  by  compafmg  abowt  the  whole  bowle  of  the  worlde  by  the  coaftes  of
Eaft  India  and  Aft'rike,  departynge  from  the  Hand  of  Tidorc,  and  faylynge  euer  on  this  fyde  the  Equinoctiall,
dyd  not  fynde  the  cape  of  Cattigara  beinge  aboue  Afia,  and  (by  the  defcription  of  Ptolome)  rechynge  many
degrees  beyonde  the  Equinoctial.  But  hauynge  fayled  many  dayes  by  the  mayne  fea,  they  came  to  the  cape
of  Biiona  Speranza  and  frome  thenfe  to  the  Ilandes  of  Capo  vcrde,  where  their  fliyppe  beinge  foore  broofed  by
reafon  of  the  longe  viage,  leaked  and  tooke  water,  in  fuche  forte  that  the  mariners  being  nowe  but  fewe  in
number,  and  thofe  alfo  weake  and  feeble  by  reafon  of  longe  fickeneffe  and  hunger,  were  not  able  both  to  drye
the  poompe  continually  and  otherwyfe  gouerne  the  fliippe :  and  were  therfore  of  neceffitie  inforced  to  goo
alande  at  the  Ilande  of  faynte  lames  to  bye  theym  certeyne  flaues  to  helpe  theim.  But  beinge  deftitute  of
mony,  according  to  the  cuftome  of  the  mariners,  they  profered  them  cloues  for  theyr  flaues.  The  which
thyng  when  it  came  to  the  eares  of  the  Portugale  that  was  Capitayne  of  that  Ilande,  he  eaft.  xiii.  of  them  in
prifon.  Wherby  the  refidue  that  remayned  in  the  fliippe  (beinge  nowe  but.  xviii.  in  number)  were  put  in  fuch
feare  that  they  departed  immediatly  without  rel'cuing  theyr  felowes,  and  fayled  continually  both  by  daye  and
by  nyght  by  the  coaftes  of  Afifrike,  and  came  in  fine  to  Spayne  the.  vi.  day  of  September  in  the  yeare.  1522.
and  arryued  at  the  porte  nere  vnto  Siuile  the.  xvi.  nioneth  after  they  departed  from  the  Ilande  of  Tidore.
Mariners  doubtlefle  more  woorthy  to  bee  celebrate  with  eternal  memorie  then  they  whiche  in  owlde  tyme  were
cauled  Argonauti  that  fayled  with  lafon  to  win  the  golden  fleefe  in  the  region  of  Cholchis  and  the  riuer  of
Phafis  in  the  greate  fea  of  Pontus.  And  the  fliyppe  it  felfe,  more  woorthye  to  bee  placed  amonge  the  ftarres
then  that  owlde  Argo  which  departynge  owt  of  Grecia,  fayled  to  th[e]ende  of  that  great  fea.  For  this  owre
marueylous  fli>T)pe,  takynge  her  vyage  from  the  ftraightes  of  Gibilterra  and  faylynge  by  the  greate  Ocean
towarde  the  South  and  pole  Antartike,  and  turnynge  from  thenfe  to  the  Wefte,  folowed  that  courfe  fo  farre  that
paffynge  vnder  the  great  circumference  of  the  worlde,  fliee  came  into  the  Eafte,  and  frome  thenfe  ageyne  into
the  Wefte,  not  by  retumynge  backewarde,  but  ftyll  faylynge  forwarde,  fo  compafynge  abowt  the  baule  of  the
world  vnder  the  hole  circumference  of  heauen  vntyll  fliee  were  myraculoufly  reftored  to  her  natiue  region  of
Spayne  and  houfe  of  Siuile.

262

[The  prices  of  precious  Jlones  and  fpices?^

263

C  OF  THE  PRICES  OF  PRECIOVS  STONES  AND  SPICES,

WITH THEYR WEIGHTES AND MEASVRES

as  they  are  accuftomed to  bee  foulde  bothe  of  the

Moores  and  the  gentyles:  And  of  the

places  where  they  growe.

Orafmuch  as  in  dyuers  places  of  this  hiftorie,  men-
tion is  made  of  precious  flones,  I  haue  thought
good  to  declare  fumewhat  afwell  of  theyr  prices
as  of  the  places  of  theyr  generation,  that  wee  may
not  vtterly  bee  ignorant  of  the  thinges  which  we
fo  grately  efteeme  and  bye  fo  deare.

Of  the  Rtibie.

He  Rubies  growe  in  India :  and  are  founde
for  the  mofl  parte  in  a  ryuer  named  Pegu.
Thefe  are  of  the  befle  kind  and  finede,
whiche  they  of  the  lande  of  Malabor  caule
Nunpuclo,  and  are  well  foulde  if  they  bee

^_^ fayre and cleane without fpottes. The

gagggggBgaBasaigaiBag'aigag'BlBga  IHWnmwwmMggj  jj^^ians  to  knowe  theyr  fineneffe,  put  them
vppon  theyr  toonges,  coumptynge  that  to  bee  befl  that  is  couldell  and  mofl  harde.  And  to  fee  theyr  fineneffe,
they  take  them  vp  with  a  piece  of  waxe  by  the  fharpeft  poynt :  and  lookynge  ageynfl  the  lyght,  efpie  in  theim
euery  fmaule  fpot  or  flake.  They  are  alfo  founde  in  certeyne  diepe  foffes  or  pittes  which  are  made  in  moun-
taynes  that  are  beyonde  the  faid  ryuer.  They  are  fcoured  and  made  cleane  in  the  countrey  of  Pegu.  Yet  can
they  not  fquare  and  polyfhe  them.  But  for  this  purpofe  fende  them  to  dyuers  other  contreys,  and  efpecially  to
Paleacate,  Narfinga,  Calicut,  and  the  region  of  Malabar,  where  are  many  cunnynge  Lapidaries.

And  to  gyue  yow  intelligence  of  the  value  of  thefe  flones,  ye  fhall  vnderflande  that  this  woorde  Fanan,
fignifiethe  a  weight  fumwhat  more  then  two  of  owre  carattes :  And.  xi.  Fanans  and  a  quarter,  is  one  Mitigal :
And.  vi.  Mitigales  and  a  halfe,  make  one  vnce.  This  Fanan,  is  alfo  a  kynde  of  money  which  is  in  value,  one
ryale  of  fyluer. And  therefore  after  this  accompte  I  fay  that

233

Eight  fine  rubies  of  the  weyght  of  one
Fanan  (which  are  in  all,  abowt  two

carattes)  are  in  value. Fanan  *x.

Foure  Rubies  that  wey  one  fanan,  are

worth Fanan  xx.

Two  that  wey  one  fanan Fanan  xl.

One  thatweyth  three  quarters  of  one  fanan  Fanan  xxx.

One  that  weyth  one  fanan Fanan  1.

One  that  weyth  one  fanan  and  a  quarter.  Fanan  Ixv.

One  that  weyth  one  fanan  and  a  halfe Fanan  C.

One  that  weyth  one fanan and three

quarters Fanan  C 1.

One  that  weyth  two  fanans. Fanan  CC.

One  that  weyth  two  fanans  and  a  quarter  Fanan  CC  1.

One  that  weyth  two  fanans  and  a  halfe Fanan. ccc.

One  that  weyth  two  fanans  and

thre  quarters  Fanan  cccl.

Of  three  fanans  Fanan  cccc.

Of  three  and  a  quarter  Fanan  D.

Of  three  and  a  halfe  Fanan  D 1.

Of  three  and  three  quarters  Fanan  D  c.

Of  three  and  three  quarters  and  a  halfe  Fanan  D  cxxx.

Of  foure  fanans

Of  foure  and  a  quarter

Of  foure  and  a  halfe

Of  fyue  fanans

Of  fyue  and  a  halfe

Of  fyxe  fanans,  which  are  about,  xii.

carattes.  Fanan  M  D.  which  make.

150.  crownes  of  golde.

Fanan  D  clx.
Fanan  D  cc.
Fanan  Dcccc.
Fanan  M.

Fanan j\I  cc.

And  thefe  are  commonly  the  prices  of  perfecte  Rubies.  But  fuche  as  are  not  perfecte,  and  haue  any
fpottes  in  them,  or  are  not  of  good  coloure,  are  of  lefTe  prife  accordynge  to  the  arbitriment  and  eflimation
of  the  byer.

One  caratte  is  iiii
grain  es

(*^Vhich  is  one
(crown  of  golde

»63

264

The  prices  of  precious  Jlo)ies  and  fpices.

234

•Which  nre  iii. >
crow[njesofgoldei

C  Of  the  Rubies  ivJiich  growe  in  the  Ilaude  of  Zeilam.

N  the  Ilande  of  Zeilam,  beinge  in  the  feconde  India,  are  foiinde  many  Rubies  which  the
Indians  name  Manccas,  the  greatefl  parte  wherof  do  not  arriue  to  the  perfection  of  the
other  aforefayde  in  coloiu-e,  bycaiife  they  are  redde  as  though  they  were  wafflied,  and
of  a  flefliye  colour.  Yet  are  they  very  coulde  and  harde.  The  perfectefle  of  theym
are  greatly  efteemed  amonge  the  people  of  the  Ilande,  and  referued  only  for  the  kynge
hym  felfe  if  they  bee  of  any  great  quantitie.  When  his  iewelers  fynde  any  bygge  piece
of  this  rocke  of  the  befte  kynde,  they  put  it  in  fycr  for  the  fpace  of  certeyne  houres.  Which
if  it  coomme  owt  of  the  fyer  vncorrupte,  it  becommeth  of  the  coloure  of  a  burnynge  cole,  and  was  therfore
cauled  of  the  Greekes,  Anthrax,  which  fignifieth  a  burnyng  cole.  The  fame  that  the  Greekes  caule  Anthrax,
the  Latines  caule  Carbuncuhis.  Thefe  they  greatly  efleeme.  When  the  kyng  of  Narfmga  can  get  any  of  theym,
he  caufeth  a  fine  hole  to  bee  boored  in  the  vndermofl  part  of  them  to  the  myddeft:  And  fuffereth  none  of
them  to  pafle  owt  of  his  realme :  efpecially  if  they  haue  byn  tryed  by  the  fayde  profe.  Thefe  are  of  greater
value  then  the  other  of  Pegu,  if  they  bee  in  theyr  naturall  perfection  and  cleaneneffe.

>p  f^J

Of  thefe,  one  that  weith  a

carratte

Of  fixe  carattes  and  a  halfe

Fanan

Dlx.

(whiche  is  halfe  a  fanan)  is

woorthe

Of  feuen  carattes

Fanan

D  cxxx.

in  Calecut.

Fanan

*xxx.

Of  feuen  carattes  and  a  halfe

Fanan

Dclx.

One  of  two  carattes

Fanan

Ixv.

One  of.  viii.  carattes  that  hath

bynne

Of  three  carattes.

Fanan

cl.

wel  proued  in  the  fier,  is  woorthe

Fanan

Dccc.

Of  three  carattes  and  a  halfe

Fanan

cc.

Of  viiii.  carattes  and  a  halfe

Fanan

Dcccc.

Of  foure  carattes

Fanan

ccc.

One  fuch  of  tenne  carattes

Fanan

Mccc.

Of  foure  carattes  and  a  halfe

Fanan

cccl.

One  of  x.  carattes  and  a  halfe

Fanan

MDc

Of  fyue  carattes

Fanan

cccc.

Of.  xii.  carattes

Fanan

MM

Of  f)iie  carattes  and  a  halfe

Fanan

ccccl.

Of  xiiii.  carattes

Fanan

MMM

Of  fyxe  carattes

Fanan

Dxxx.

Of.  xvi.  carattes

Fanan

6000.

C  Of  the  kynde  of  Rubies  cauled  Spinelle.

Here  is  alfo  founde  an  other  kynde  of  Rubies  which  wee  caule  Spinelle  and  the  Indians,
Caropus.  They  growe  in  the  felfe  fame  countrey  of  Pegu  where  as  are  the  fine  Rubies :
And  are  found  in  the  mountaynes  in  the  vpper  crufl  or  floure  of  the  earth.  Thefe  are  not
fo  fine  nor  of  fo  good  colour  as  are  the  trewe  Rubies :  But  haue  fumwhat  the  colour  of  a
granate  which  we  commonly  caule  a  garnet.  Yet  of  thefe  fuche  as  are  parfecte  in  theyr
coloure,  are  of  value  halfe  leffe  then  trewe  Rubies.

C  Of  the  Rubies  cauled  Balaffi.

Alaffi,  are  of  the  kyndes  of  Rubies,  but  are  not  fo  harde.  Theyr  colour  is  fumwhat  lyke  a  rofe,
and  fum  are  in  maner  whyte.  They  growe  in  Balaffia,  whiche  is  a  region  within  the  firme
lande  aboue  Pegu  and  Bengala:  And  are  browght  from  thenfe  by  marchauntes  of  the
Moores  to  Calecut  where  they  are  wrought  and  polyffhed :  And  are  fould  of  the  fame  price
that  are  Spinelle.

C  Of  the  Diamundes  of  the  owlde  inyne.

ijHefe  Diamundes  are  founde  in  the  fyrfte  India  in  a  kyngdome  of  the  Moores  named  Decan,
from  whenfe  they  are  brought  to  other  regions.  There  are  alfo  founde  other  Diamundes
whiche  are  not  fo  good,  but  fumewhat  whyte,  and  are  cauled  Diamundes  of  the  newe  myne
which  is  in  the  kyngedome  of  Narfinga.  They  of  the  owlde  myne,  are  not  polyfhed  in
India,  but  in  other  places.  There  are  made  lykewyfe  in  India,  other  falfe  Diamundes  of
Rubies,  Topafes,  and  whyte  Saphires,  whiche  appere  to  bee  fine :  and  are  alfo  founde  in
the  Ilande  of  Zeilam. Thefe  flones  difi'er  in  none  other,  fauynge  that  they  haue  lofle  theyr

264

The  prices  of  precious  Jlones  and  f pices.

265

naturall  colour.  Of  thefe,  fumme  are  founde  that  haue  halfe  the  coloure  of  Rubies,  and  other  of  Saphires :
other  alfo  of  the  coloure  of  a  Topafe.  Other  haue  all  thefe  coloures  mengled  togyther.  They  bore  a  fine  hole
in  thefe  throughe  the  myddeft,  wherby  they  appere  lyke  the  eyes  of  a  catte.  Of  the  whytefl,  they  make  many
fmaule  diamundes  whiche  can  not  bee  knowen  from  the  trewe,  fauynge  by  touchinge  of  fuch  as  are  fkylfull  in
that  practife.  They  are  foulde  by  a  poyfe  or  weight  which  they  caule  Mangiar,  which  wayeth  two  Tarre,  and
two  thyrdes,  which  amount  to  two  thyrdes  or  thirde  partes  of  one  caratte.  For  foure  Tarres,  wey  one  fanan
whiche  is  abowt  two  carattes.

Viii.  Diamundes  that  wey  one  mangiar

(which  is  two  third  partes  of  a  caratte)

are  in  value.  Fanan xxx.

which  are  three  crownes  of  golde.
235  vi.  Diamundes  that  wey  one  mangiar
Foure  that  wey  one  mangiar
Two  that  wey  one  mangiar
One  that  weith  one  mangiar
One  of  one  mangiar  and  a  quarter
One  of  one  mangiar  and  a  halfe
Of  one  mangiar  and  three  quarters
Of  two  mangiars

Fanan

xl.

Fanan

Ix.

Fanan

Ixxx.

Fanan

C.

Fanan

clxv.

Fanan

clxxx.

Fanan

ccxx.

Fanan

cccxx.

Of  two  mangiars  and  a  quarter  Fanan  ccclx.

Of  two  mangiars  and  a  halfe  Fanan  ccclxxx
Of  two  mangiars  and  three  quarters

ful  perfect  Fanan  420

Of  three  mangiars  of  lyke  perfection  Fanan  ccccl.

Of  three  mangiars  and  a  halfe  Fanan  cccclxxx.

Of  foure  mangiars  Fanan  D 1.

Of  fyue  mangiars  Fanan  Dccl.

Of  fyxe  mangiars  Fanan  Dccc.

Of  feuen  mangiars.  Fanan  Mcc.

Of  eyght  mangiars  Fanan  Mcccc.

And  thus  they  proceade,  increafynge  the  price  as  they  increafe  in  weight.

Of  fyxe  carattes
Of  feuen  carattes
Of  eyght  carattes
Of  nine  carattes
Of  tenne  carattes
Of  xi.  carattes
Of.  xii.  carattes

C  Of  Saphires.

N  the  Ilande  of  Zeilam  are  founde  the  befle  and  mofle  trewe  Saphires,  beinge  very  harde  and
fine,  and  of  the  coloure  of  azure. They  are  of  price  as  foloweth.
One  that  weith  one  caratte  is  of  value  Fanan  ii.  which  are  abowt  two  marcels  of  fyluer.
One  of  the  weight  of  two  carattes
Of  three  carattes
Of  foure  carattes
Of  fyue  carattes

Fanan
Fanan
Fanan
Fanan

V.
X.

XV.

xviii.

Fanan
Fanan
Fanan
Fanan
Fanan
Fanan
Fanan

xxvui.

XXXV.

1.

Ixv.

I.

Ixv.

Of  xiiii.  carattes

Of  XV.  carattes

Of  xvi.  carattes  •

Of.  xviii.  carattes

One  that  weith  a  mitigal,  which  is.  vi.

fanans  and  a  quarter  that  is  abowt

xxiii.  carattes

Fanan
Fanan
Fanan
Fanan

Clx.

Clxxx.

CC.

CCl.

Fanan CCCl.

Ixxv.
Of  xiii.  carattes  in  all  perfection  of  coloure  Fanan  Cxv.
Lykewyfe  in  the  Ilande  of  Zeilam,  is  founde  an  other  forte  of  Saphires  which  they  caule  Qiiinigelinam.  Thefe
are  not  fo  flronge,  of  darker  colour  and  of  much  leffe  value  then  are  the  other  of  the  bell  kynde,  wherof  one  is
woorth.  xiii.  of  thefe  of  cquall  poife.  Alfo  in  the  kyngedome  of  Narfmga,  in  a  mounta>  ne  aboue  Bacanor  and
Mangalor,  is  founde  an  other  fort  of  Saphires  more  tender  and  of  woorfe  colour,  whiche  they  caule  Cingano-
1am.  Thefe  are  fumwhat  whyte  and  of  fmaule  value :  So  that  the  mofl  perfect  of  this  kynde,  weyinge.  xx.
carattes,  is  not  woorth  one  ducate.  Theyr  colour  is  inclynynge  fumwhat  to  yelowe.  There  is  lykewyfe  found
an  other  kynde  of  Saphires  vppon  the  fea  coafles  of  the  kyngedome  of  Calicut,  in  a  place  named  Capucar.
Thefe  the  Indians  caule  Carahatonilam.  They  are  of  a  darke  afure  coloure  not  fliynynge  but  in  the  cleare
ayer.  They  are  alfo  tender  and  brickie,  and  of  fmaule  eflimation  amonge  the  Indians.  They  feeme  on  the
one  fyde  lyke  glaffe.

C  Of  Topafies.

He  natural  Topafies,  growe  in  the  Ilande  of  Zeilam,  and  are  named  of  the  Indians  Funeragiia.
It  is  a  harde  and  fine  ftone :  and  of  equall  eftimation  with  the  Ruble  and  the  Saphire,
bycaufe  all  thefe  three  are  of  one  kynd.  The  perfecte  colour  of  this,  is  yelowe  lyke  vnto
fine  beaten  golde.  And  if  it  bee  perfect  and  cleane,  whether  it  bee  greate  or  lyttle,  it  is
woorth  in  Calicut  as  much  fine  gold  as  it  weyeth.  But  if  it  bee  not  perfect,  it  is  woorth  the
weight  of  gold  the  fanan,  which  is  leffe  by  the  halfe.  And  if  it  bee  in  maner  whyte,  it  is
woorth  much  leffe. And  of  thefe,  are  fmaule  diamundes  counterfecte.

265

A  marcell,  is  a
syluer  coine  of
Venice,  of  xL
vnces.  iii.  d.  with
fine,  wherof  ten
make  an  vn[c]e

266

The  py ices  of  precious  Jloiies  and  f pices.

C  Of  Turqneffes.

Vrquefles  are  founde  in  Exer  a  place  of  Siech  Ifmael. Theyr  mine  is  a  drye  earth  that  is
236 RSSnTinSH founde  vpon  a  black  flone,  which  the  Moores  take  of  in  fmaule  pieces,  and  carye  them  to

the  Hand  of  Ormus,  from  whenfe  they  are  brought  to  dyuers  partes  of  the  worlde  by  fea

and  by  lande. The  Indians  caule  them  Perofe. They  are  foft  flones,  of  fmaule  weight  and

not  much  coulde. And  to  knowe  that  they  are  good  and  trewe,  in  the  day  they  fliall  appere

of  the  verye  colour  of  the  Turquefie:  and  in  the  nyght  by  the  lyght,  they  fliall  appere

greene. They  that  are  not  fo  perfect,  do  not  fo  change  their  colour  to  the  fight. If  thefe

flones  bee  cleane  and  of  fine  colour,  they  haue  vnderneth  in  the  bottome,  a  blacke  (lone,  vppon  the  which

they  growe. And  if  any  lyttle  vayne  ryfe  vppon  the  fayde  fl.one,  it  flialbe  the  better. And  to  knowe  more

certeynely  that  they  are  trewe  Turquefles,  they  put  on  the  toppes  of  them  a  lyttle  quicke  lime  tempered  with

water  after  the  maner  of  an  oyntment. So  that  if  the  quicke  lime  appere  coloured,  they  are  iudged  perfecte,

and  are  of  value  as  foloweth.

One  that  weith  one  caratte,  is  worth  in

Malabar.
One  of  two  carattes
Of  foure  carattes
Of.  vi.  carattes

Fanan.

XV.

Fanan

xl.

Fanan

xc.

Fanan

CI.

Of.  viii.  carattes
Of  X.  carattes
Of.  xii.  carattes
Of.  xiiii.  carattes

Fanan  CC.
Fanan  CCC.
Fanan  CCCCl.
Fanan  Dl.

Of  greater  then  thefe  they  make  none  accompte  bycaufe  they  are  lyghter  pieces  and  of  greater  circuite.
of  the  byggefl  forte  the  Moores  carie  into  the  kyngedome  of  Guzerath.

Thef'^

C  Of  lacinthes.

Acinthes  growe  in  the  Ilande  of  Zeilam.  They  are  tender  flones  and  yelowe.  They  are  befl
that  are  of  diepefte  colour.  The  greatefl  part  of  thefe,  haue  in  them  certeine  pimples  or
burbuls,  whiche  diminifhe  theyr  fayreneffe.  And  they  that  are  in  theyr  perfection  cleane
from  this  deformitie,  are  neuertheleffe  of  fmaule  value.  For  in  Calicut  where  they  are
polyffhed,  they  that  wey  one  fanan  are  woorth  no  more  then  halfe  a  fanan.  And  they  of.
xviii.  fanans,  are  not  worth,  xvi.  fanans.

There  are  alfo  founde  other  flones  lyke  vnto  cattes  eyes,  as  Chrifolites,  and  Amethifles,
whiche  they  doo  not  muche  efleeme  bycaufe  they  are  of  fmaule  value,  as  alfo  the  flones  cauled  Giagonze.

C  Of  Smaragdes  or  Emeraldes.

[Maragdes  growe  in  the  countrey  of  Babilon,  where  the  Indians  caule  the  fea  Diegimn.  They
grow  alfo  in  other  partes  of  India.  They  are  flones  of  fayre  greene  colour,  and  are  lyght  and
tender.  Of  thefe  flones,  many  are  conterfecte.  But  lookyng  on  them  curioufly  towarde  the
lyght,  the  conterfectes  fhewe  certeyne  burbuls,  as  dooth  glaffe.  But  in  the  trewe,  there  is  no
fuch  feene.  But  rather  there  appeareth  to  the  eye  a  certeyne  verdour  fhynynge  lyke  the
beames  of  the  foonne.  And  beinge  rubbed  vppon  the  touche  flone,  they  leaue  the  coloure
of  copper.  And  the  Smaragde  of  this  forte  is  the  befl  and  mofl  trewe :  And  is  in  value  in
Calicut,  as  muche  as  a  diamunde  and  fumwhat  more :  And  this  not  by  weyght,  but  by  greateneffe,  bycaufe  the
diamunde  quantitie  for  quantitie,  is  of  greater  weyght  then  the  Smaragde.  Ther  is  lykewyfe  founde  an  other
kynde  of  Smaragdes,  whiche  are  greene  flones,  but  not  fo  much  efleemed.  Neuertheleffe,  the  Indians  referue
thefe  to  fet  them  foorth  with  other  precious  flones. They  leaue  not  any  greene  coloure  vppon  the  touche.

2^6

The  prices  of  precious  Jl  ones  and  f pices.

267

ff  Of  dyvers  kyndes  of  Spices,  where  they  grow,

WHAT THEY ARE WOORTH IN CaLICUT, AND WHITHER
THEY ARE CARIED FROM THENSE.

C  Of  Pepper.

Yrfle  in  all  the  kyngedome  of  Malabor  and  Calicut  pepper  groweth :  and  is  fould  in  Calicut  by
euery.  CC.  [two  hundred]  Bahars,  fine,  for.  CCxxx.  [two  hundred  and  thirty]  fanans,  euery
fanan  (as  I  haue  fayde)  beinge  in  value,  one  ryall  of  plate  of  Spayne :  which  is  as  muche  as
one  marcell  of  fyluer  in  Venice.  Bahar,  weith  foure  cantares  of  the  owld  weight  of  Portu-
gale,  by  the  whiche  they  fell  all  fpices  in  Lifbona.  Cantar,  is  in  Venece.  Cxii.  [one
hundred  and  twelue]  pounde  weyght  of  the  grofe  pounde  (beinge.  xviii.  vnces)  and  of  the
fubtyle  pounde.  C.  Ixxviii.  [one  hundred  and  feuenty-eight]  So  that  the  fayde.  712.  poundes
of  Venece  fubtile,  wyl  cofl  abowt.  xx.  frenche  crownes  of  golde  :  which  amount  to  abowt  two  Marchetti  (whiche
make  one  peny)  the  pounde.  They  pay  alfo  to  the  kyng  of  Calicut  for  cuflome.  xii.  fanans  euery  Bahar  by  the
lode.  They  that  bye  them,  are  accuflomed  to  brynge  them  to  Cambaia,  Perfia,  Aden,  and  Mecha,  and  from
thenfe  to  Alcayre  and  Alexandria.  Nowe  they  pay  cuflome  to  the  kynge  of  Portugale  after  the  rate  of.  6562.
Maruedies  the  Bahar,  vhich  are.  193.  fanans.  Maruedies  are  Spanyfhe  coynes  wherof.  vi.  go  to  a  peny.  This
doo  they  partly  bycaufe  there  arryueth  no  more  fo  greate  diuerfitie  of  marchantes  to  bye  them,  and  partly  by
the  agreement  which  the  fayde  kynge  of  Portugale  made  with  thofe  kynges,  and  the  Moores,  and  marchauntes
of  the  countrey  of  Malabar.

Much  pepper  groweth  lykewyfe  in  the  Ilande  of  Sumatra  nere  vnto  Malaca,  which  is  fayrer  and  bygger  then
that  of  Malabar,  but  not  fo  good  and  flronge.  This  is  brought  from  Bengala  to  China,  and  fumme  parte  to
Mecha,  priuilie  and  by  ilelth,  vnwares  to  the  Portugales  which  wolde  not  otherwyfe  fuffer  them  to  pafTe.  It  is
woorth  in  Sumatra,  from.  iiii.  C.  [four  hundred]  vnto.  vii.  C.  [feuen  hundred]  marauedis  the  cantar  of  Portugale,
of  the  newe  weight.  And  frome  the  newe  to  the  owlde  weight  in  Portugale,  the  difference  is,  twoo  vnces  in  the
pounde  weight. For  the  owlde  pounde  confifleth  of.  xiiii.  vnces,  and  the  newe  pounde  of.  xvi.  vnces.

237

C  Of  Clones.

Loues  growe  in  the  Ilandes  of  Molucca,  from  whenfe  they  are  brought  to  Malacha,  and  then
to  Calicut  and  the  countrey  of  Malabar.  They  are  woorth  in  Calicut  euery  bahar  (which  is.
712.  poundes  of  the  fubtyle  pound  of  Venece)  from.  500.  to.  600.  fanans  (which  are  abowte
fyftie  frenche  crownes,)  which  are  in  value  abowte.  xii.  marchetti  the  pounde  weight.  And
beinge  cleane  from  flalkes  and  hufkes  are  in  value  700  fanans.  To  cary  theym  frome  thenfe
into  other  regions,  they  paye  for  pafporte.  xviii.  fanans  the  bahar,  which  is  woorth  in
Malacca  from.  x.  to.  xiiii.  ducades  accordynge  to  the  rate  and  cuflome  of  the  marchauntes.

C  Of  Cinamome.

Inamome  of  the  bell  fort,  groweth  in  the  Ilande  of  Zeilam :  and  in  the  countrey  of  Malabar,
growethe  the  woorfl.  That  of  the  befle  kynde,  is  of  fmaule  price  in  Zeilam.  But  in  Calicut
(if  it  bee  choife  and  frefhe),  it  is  woorth  CCC.  [three  hundred]  fanans  the  bahar,  whiche  are
abowte  fiue  marchetti  the  pounde.

•67

268

The  prices  of  precious  Jlones  and  f pices.

C  Of  Ginger  entiled  Beledi.

Inger  Beledi,  groweth  on  euery  fyde  abowte  Calicut  from  fyxe  to  nine  myles  :  And  is  woorth
the  bahar.  xl.  fanans,  and  fumtymes  fiftio,  whiche  is  leffe  then  one  niarchetto  the  pounde.

They  brynge  it  from  the  mountaynes  and  owt  of  the  contrey  to  the  citie,  where  they  fell
it  by  retaylc  to  the  Indian  marchauntcs,  who  gather  it  togither  in  greate  quantitie  and  kepe
it  to  fuch  tyme  as  the  Moores  fliyppes  arryue  there,  to  vvhom  they  fell  it,  by  the  price  of.
xc.  [ninety]  fanans,  to  Cx.  [one  hundred  and  ten]  whiche  is  leffe  then  two  marchetti  the
pound,  bycaufe  the  weight  is  greater.

239

^  Of  Ginger  Mechino.

Inger  Mechino  groweth,  begynnynge  from  the  mountayne  of  Deli,  vnto  Canonor.  It  is  fmaule,
and  not  fo  whyte  nor  fo  good  as  the  other.  It  is  woorthe  the  bahar  in  Cananor,  abowt.  Ix.
fanans  whiche  is  abowte  one  marchetto  the  pounde.  They  pay  for  the  bahar  fyxe  fanans
in  money  for  the  cuflome. It  is  fould  vnclenfed  or  vnpurged.

C  Of  greene  Ginger  in  conferues.

N  Bengala  is  founde  greate  plentie  of  Ginger  Beledi,  of  the  whiche  they  make  muche  Ginger  in
conferues  with  fuger,  and  carie  it  in  flone  pots  from  Martabani  to  bee  fould  in  the  countrey
of  Malabar.  And  is  woorth  the  farazuola  (which  is.  xxii.  poundes  and  fyxe  vnces)  after  the
rate  of  xiiii.  xv.  or.  xvi.  fanans.

That  that  is  frefhe  and  made  in  conferues,  is  woorth  in  CaHcut.  xxv.  fanans  the  farazuola,
bycaufe  fuger  is  dere  there.  Greene  ginger  to  put  in  conferues,  is  woorth  in  Calicut  three
quarters  of  one  fanan  the  farazuola,  which  is  abowte  twoo  poundes  for  one  marchetto.

C  Of  the  Apothecaries  dnigges'.  A 7id  of  what  price
they  are  hi  Calicut  and  Malabar.

Acca  of  Martabani,  if  it  bee  of  the  befle,  is  woorth  the  farazuola,  which  is.  xxii.  pounde  weyght
and  fyxe  vnces  of  Portugale  after,  xvi.  vnces  the  pounde  (whiche  is  abowte.  xl.  pounde
weyght  of  the  fubtyle  pounde  of  Venece)  And  is  in  value,  xviii.  fanans  :  whiche  are.  xviii.
marcels  of  filuer.  For  one  fanan,  is  in  value  abowte  one  marcell  of  fyluer.
Lacca  of  the  contrey,  is  woorth  the  farazuola
Borace  that  is  good  and  in  great  pieces  is  woorthe  the  farazuola.
Camphire  that  is  groffe  in  cakes,  is  woorth  the  farazuola

Camphire  to  annoynt  Idoles,

Camphire  for  theyr  chyldren  to  eate,  is  woorth  the  mytigal.

Aguila  is  woorth  the  farazuola

Lignum  aloe,  blacke,  heauy,  and  fine,  is  woorth

Mufke  of  the  befl  is  woorth  the  vnce

Beniamin  of  the  befle,  is  woorth  the  farazuola

Tamarind!  being  newe,  are  woorth  the  farazuola

Calamus  aromaticus,  the  farazuola

Endego  to  dye  filke,  trewe  and  good,  the  farazuola

Mirre,  the  farazuola.

Frankenfence  good  and  in  graynes,  is  woorth  the  farazuola

Frankenfence  in  pafle  of  the  bafeft  forte,  the  faraz[uola].

Ambracan  or  amber  greefe  that  is  good,  is  woorthe  the  metical
268

Fanan

Xll.

Fanan.

XXX.  to.  xl.  and  1.

Fanan.

Ixx.  to.  Ixxx

*

# *

Fanan

iii.

Fanan.

ccc.  to.  cccc.

Fanan.

M.

Fanan

xxxvi.

Fanan

Ixv.

Fanan.

iiii.

Fanan

xii.

Fanan.

XXX

Fanan

xviii.  to.  XX.

Fanan

XV.

Fanan.

ni.

Fanan

ii.  to.  iii.

The  prices  of  precious  Jlones  and  f pices.

269

Mirabolanes  in  conferue  of  fuger,  the  faraz[uola].

Caffia,  freflie  and  good,  the  farazuola.

Redde  Sanders,  the  farazuola

Whyte  Sanders  and  citrine,  whiche  growe  in  the  Ilande  of  Timor,  the  farazuola

Spikenarde,  freflie  and  good,  the  faraz[uola].

Nutte  megges,  whiche  coome  frome  the  Ilande  of  Bandan  where  the  bc^har  is  woorth

from.  viii.  to.  x.  fanans,  (which  importe.  vi.  poundes  weight  to  the  marchetto)

are  woorthe  in  Calicut,  the  faraz[uola].
Mace  which  is  brought  from  the  Ilande  of  Bandan  where  the  Bahar  is  woorth  fiftie

fanans  (which  import  abowt  one  marchetto  the  pounde)  are  woorth  in  Calicut

the  farazuola.
Turbithes,  are  woorth  the  farazuola

Woorme  feede  of  the  befl  kynde,  cauled  Scinciizina,  is  woorthe  the  farazuola.
Zerumba,  the  farazuola
Zedoaria,  the  farazuola
Gumme  Serapine,  the  farazuola
Aloe  cicotrine,  the  farazuola
Cardamome  in  graynes,  the  farazuola
Reubarbe  groweth  abundantly  in  the  councrey  of  Malabar:  And  that  which  commeth

from  China  by  Malacha,  is  worth  the  farazuola
Mirabolani  emblici,  the  farazuola
Mirabolani  belirici,  the  farazuola

Mirabolani  citrini  and  chebuli,  which  are  al  of  one  fort.
Mirabolani  Indi,  which  are  of  the  fame  citrine  trees
Tutia,  the  farazuola
Cububes  which  growe  in  the  Ilande  of  laua  or  Giaua,  are  there  of  fmaule  price,  and

fould  by  meafure  withowt  weight.
Opium  which  is  browght  from  the  citie  of  Aden  where  it  is  made,  is  woorth  in

Calicut  the  faraz[uola].
Opium  of  an  other  fort  which  is  made  in  Cambaia  is  woorth  the  farazuola,

Fanan.

xvi.  to.  XXV

Fanan

one  and  a  halfe

Fanan.

V.  to.  vi.

Fanan.

xl.  to.  Ix

Fanan.

XXX.  to.  xl.

I-'anan

X.  to.  xii.

Fanan

XXV. to.  XXX.

Fanan

xiii.

Fanan

XV.

Seedes  that  kyll

Fanan

ii.

lyse.

Fanan

i.

Fanan

XX,

Fanan

xviii

Fanan

XX.

Fanan

xl.  to.  1.

Fanan

ii.

Fanan

one  and  a  halfe.

Fa[nan'

ii.

Fa[nan"

iii.

Fanan

XXX.

Fanan.  cclxxx.  to.  cccxx
Fanan  cc.  to.  ccl.

C  Of  the  weyghtes  of  Porhigale  and  India :  And  howe  they  agree.

He  pound  of  the  owld  weight,  conteyneth.  xiiii.  vnces.  The  pound  of  the  newe  weight  con-
teyneth.  xvi.  vnces.  viii.  cantares  of  the  owlde  weyght,  make.  vii.  of  the  newe.  And  euer)^
newe  cantare,  is  of.  C.  xxviii.  [one  hundred  and  twenty-eight]  poundes  after,  xvi.  vnces  to
the  pounde

Euery  owlde  cantare,  conteyneth  three  quarters  and  a  halfe  of  the  newe  cantar  :  And  is
of  C.  xxviii.  [one  hundred  and  twenty-eight]  poundes,  after,  xiiii.  vnces  the  pounde.

One  farazuola,  is.  xxii.  poundes  of.  xiiii.  vnces,  and  vi.  vnces  more,  with  two  fifte  partes.
Twentie  farazuoles,  are  one  Bahar.

One  bahar  is.  iiii.  cantares  of  the  owld  weight  of  Portugale.  All  the  Spices  and  drugges,  and  all  fuche
other  thinges  as  coome  from  India,  are  fould  in  Portugale  by  the  owld  weight  and  all  the  refle  by  the  newe
weyght.

C  Hereby  may  we  well  confider  that  as  we  owght  to  reioyfe  and  gyue  god  thankes
for  the  abundaunce  of  al  thefe  thynges  which  he  caufeth  the  earth  fo  plentifully  to  brynge
foorth  to  owre  vfe,  lb  may  we  lament  th[e]abufe  of  men  whofe  couetoufneffe  caufeth
great  dearth  and  fcarfeneffe  in  the  myddefl  of  abundance  :  herein  no  leffe  offendyng  the
lawe  of  nature  then  doo  fuch  as  by  wychcrafte  intermingle  poyfon  with  thynges  created
for  the  health  of  man,  or  by  inchauntment  corrupt  the  feedes  in  the  ground  :  ye  rather  as
the  unnatural  mother  who  deflroyeth  the  chylde  whom  flie  hath  longe  nuryfhed.

269

238

270

[Two  Notes  added  by  Eden,  apparently  to  fill  up  the  Leaf.]

^^  Of  the  Dooites  of  the  Ilande  of  Madera,

Adamiiftus  wryteth,  that  before  the  Portugales  came  to  this  Ilande,  it  was  ouergrowen
with  trees  and  vnhabited.  Yet  were  there  many  beafles,  and  great  plentie  of  dooues  which
were  vtterly  without  feare  of  men  bycaufe  they  had  neucr  feene  any  men  before,  nor  yet
were  accuflomed  to  bee  put  in  feare.  In  fo  much  that  they  flode  flyl  whyle  fnares  were
put  abowte  theyr  neckes  with  longe  rods  and  poles.  The  which  thynge  he  fayth  he  hath
alfo  feene  in  other  Ilandes.  There  are  many  ryche  men  in  this  Ilande,  and  great  abun-
daunce  of  fleflie,  bycaufe  the  hole  Ilande  is  in  maner  one  gardeyne.

C  Of  the  Ilande  of  faynt  Thomas  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  line

He  chiefeft  occupacion  and  liuynge  of  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  this  Ilande,  is  the  makynge  of
fuger,  which  they  fell  yearely  to  the  fhyppes  that  coomme  for  it  owt  of  Spayne  and  Portu-
gale  laden  with  buttes  of  meale  and  floure,  alfo  wyne,  oyle,  cheefe,  lether,  fwoordes,  cuppes
of  glaffe,  beades,  certeyne  fcaruels  of  the  fine  whyte  earthe  cauled  Porcellana,  of  the  which
are  made  the  earthen  dyffhes  of  the  woorke  of  Maiolica.  And  if  it  were  not  that  fuch
vyttayles  and  prouifions  were  brought  them  owt  of  Spaine  and  Portugale,  the  whyte  mar-
chauntes  which  dwell  in  that  Ilande  (perteynynge  to  the  dominion  of  the  kinge  of  Portugale)
ihulde  not  bee  able  to  lyue  there,  forafmuch  as  they  are  not  accuflomed  to  eftte  fuch  meates  as  doo  the  Ethi-
opians or  NeoTOS.  And  therfore  the  Portugales  whiche  inhabite  this  Ilande,  haue  certeyne  blacke  flaues  of
Guinea,  Benin,  and  Manicongo,  which  they  fet  to  tyll  and  laboure  the  grounde  and  make  fuger.  Amonge  thefe
whyte  inhabitauntes,  there  are  many  ryche  men  which  haue.  150.  or.  200.  and  fum.  300.  blacke  flaues  of  men
and  women  to  tyll  the  grounde  and  doo  other  laborious  woorkes.  This  Ilande  was  difcouered  foure  fcore  yeares
fence  by  the  nauigations  of  the  Portugales  and  was  vnknowen  to  the  owlde  wryters.  It  lyeth  in  the  greate
goulfe  of  Afirike  in  the.  30.  degree  of  longitude  from  the  Weft  to  the  Eaft,  and  is  in  maner  rounde.  It  is  of
larf^enefTe  from  fide  to  fyde.  Ix.  Italian  myles,  (that  is  to  fay)  one  degree.  The  horizontal  line  of  the  Hand,
paffeth  by  the  two  poles,  Artike  and  Antartyke :  and  hath  euer  the  day  equall  with  the  nyght  without  any  fenfi-
ble  difference,  whether  the  fon  bee  in  Cancer  or  in  Capricorne.  The  ftarre  of  the  pole  Artike,  is  there  inuifible  :
But  the  wardens  are  feene  fumwhat  to  moue  about :  And  the  ftarres  cauled  the  .Croffe,  are  feene  very  hyghe.
Of  this  Ilande  with  the  other  landes  and  Ilandes  lyinge  betwene  Portugale  and  the  fame,  a  certeyne  pylotte  of
Portugale  hath  wrytten  a  goodly  vyage  to  Conte  Rimondo.

»70

{Contencion  for  the  trade  of  fpicesP}^

271

C THE DEBATE AND STRYFE

BETWENE  THE  SPANYARDES  AND  PORTUGALES,

for  the  diuifioii  of  the  Indies  and  the  trade  of  Spices',  and

alfo  for  the  Hands  of  Molucca,  which  fum  cattle

Malucas. IVrytten  in  the  Spanyfhe  toonge  by

Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara.

He[e]mperours  maieflie  was  verye  gladde  that  the  Malucas  and
Ilands  of  the  fpicery  were  difcouered  :  and  that  he  myght  paffe
vnto  them  through  his  ovvne  countreys  withowt  any  preiudice  or
hurte  to  the  Portugales :  And  bycaufe  alfo  that  Almanzor,  Luztu,
and  Corala  which  were  the  lordes  of  the  fpicerie,  fhewed  them
felues  to  bee  his  frendes  and  became  tributaries  to  hym.  He
alfo  gaue  certeyne  gyftes  and  rewardes  to  lohn  Sebaflian  for  his
great  paynes  and  good  feruice,  forafmuch  as  he  craued  a  rewarde
for  the  good  newes  that  the  Ilandes  of  the  Malucas  and  other
Ilandes  rycher  and  greater  then  they,  were  found  to  bee  in
his  part  of  thofe  countreys  which  perteyned  vnto  hym  accord-
ynge  to  the  popes  bull.  And  hereby  it  came  to  paffe  that
there  was  great  contention  and  flrife  betwene  the  Spanyardes
and  the  Portugales  abowte  the  fpicerie  and  the  diuifion  of  the
Indies  by  reafon  of  the  retume  of  lohn  Sebaflian  and  th[e]in-
formation  whiche  he  gaue  therof.  Who  alfo  affirmed  that
the  Portugales  had  neuer  any  enteraunce  before  that  tyme
into  thofe  Ilandes.  Here  vppon,  the  counfayle  for  the  Indies,  aduertifed  Th[e]emperoure  to  maynteine  his
fleete  for  thofe  partes,  and  to  take  the  trade  of  fpices  into  his  owne  hand,  forafmuch  as  it  was  his  owne  of
dewtie,  afwell  for  that  thofe  Ilandes  fell  on  his  parte,  as  alfo  that  he  had  nowe  founde  paffage  and  waye  through
his  weft  Indies  into  thofe  regions.  And  finally  to  confyder  that  he  fhulde  thereby  obteyne  and  gette  to  him
felfe  greate  reuenues  befyde  th[e]inrychynge  of  his  fubiectes  and  realmes,  and  that  with  fmaule  coafte  and
charge.  The[e]emperoure  beinge  thus  aduertifed  of  the  truth,  tooke  it  for  good  counfayle,  and  commaunded
all  thynges  hereunto  apperteynynge  to  bee  furnyffhed  accordyngely.  In  this  meane  tyme,  when  kynge  lohn  of
Portugale  had  knowleage  what  th[e]emperour  determyned  to  doo,  and  the  fpeedy  haft  his  counfayle  made  for
the  performance  herof,  and  of  the  commynge  home  of  lohn  Sebaftian  of  Cane,  with  th[e] information  he  made,
what  of  ftoutneffe  of  mynde  and  what  for  greefe,  was  puffed  vp  with  anger  as  were  alfo  the  refte  of  the  Portu-
gales, ftormynge  as  thowgh  they  wolde  haue  plucked  downe  the  flcye  with  their  handes,  not  a  lyttle  fear}'nge
leafte  they  (hulde  lofe  the  trade  of  fpices,  if  the  Spanyardes  fhulde  once  put  in  theyr  foote.  Whervppon  the
kynge  immediatly  made  fupplication  to  Th[e]emperoure,  not  to  fet  forwarde  any  fliyppes  vntyll  it  were  deter-
myned to  whether  of  theym  thofe  Ilandes  fhulde  belonge :  And  that  he  wolde  not  fo  muche  endomage  hym  as  to
caufe  him  to  liefe  the  trade  of  fpices  which  was  fo  commodious  and  profitable  to  hym.  And  finally  to  auoyde
th[e]occafion  of  murther  and  bludflied  whiche  were  lyke  to  enfue  thereof,  yf  the  Spanyardes  and  Portugales
(hyppes  ftiulde  meete  togyther.  Th[e]emperoure  althowghe  he  knewe  that  all  this  was  but  to  make  delays  and
prolongynge  of  tyme,  yet  was  he  gladde  to  haue  it  tryed  by  iuftice  for  the  better  iuftification  of  his  caufe  and
ryght.  .  In  fine,  both  parties  were  agreed  to  appoynt  lerned  men,  Cofmographers  and  Pylots  which  fhulde
determine  the  controuerfie  betwene  them:  promyfynge  on  bothe  parties  to  abyde  and  ftande  to  the  fentence
and  determination  made  by  thofe  perfons  appoynted  and  fworne  to  iudge  indififerentely.

240

lohn  Sebastian.

The  cause  of
contencion.

The  trade  of  spice
perteyneth  to
Th[e]emperoure.

lohn  kjTir  of
Portugale.

The  trade  of
Spices,

The  controuersie
determined  by
Cosmographers
and  Pylots.

272

Contencion  for  the  trade  of  f pices.

The  arbytrers  on
the  Emp[e)rours
sydc

241

Sebastian  Cabote.

Instniments  of
Cosmographie
The  Ilandes  of
Maluca.

The  arbitrers  on
the  Portugales
syde.

The  place  where
they  mette.

Th[e]order  of
theyr  proces.

The  Portugales.
Contention  for
drawynge  the  line
of  the  dmision.

Howe  the
Portugales  were
deceaued.

The  Spanyardes

allegations.

Samatra.

Malacha.

China.

Magallanes.

Buena  Vista.

The  Ilandes  of
Cabo  Verde.

242

C  The  rcparticion  and  diuifwn  of  the  Indies  and  newe  worlde  betwene

the  Spanyardes  a) id  the  Portugales.

His  matter  concernyng  the  trade  of  fpices  and  the  newe  worlde  of  the  Indies,  by  reafon  of  the
greate  ryches  therof  was  of  greate  importaunce  and  very  difficultie  to  bee  limittcd  and
and  drawen  foorth  by  Hnes.  By  reafon  wherof,  it  was  neceffarie  and  conuenient  to  feeke
wyfe  and  woorfliypful  men  expert  in  nauigations,  in  Cofmographie,  and  the  mathematical!
fciences.  Th[e]emp[e]roure  for  his  fyde,  chofe  and  named  for  iudges  of  the  poffeffion,  the
licentiate  Acuna,  one  of  the  kynges  confayle.  Alfo  the  licentiate  Barrientos  of  the  counfayle
of  the  orders :  The  licentiate  Petro  Manuel  auditoiir  of  the  courte  of  the  Chauncerie  in
Valladolith.  For  iudges  of  the  propertie,  he  chofe  Don  Fernando  Colono  the  foonne  of  Chriflopher  Colonus:
Alfo  doctor  Sancho  Salaya,  Peter  Ruiz  of  Villegas,  fryre  Thomas  Duran,  Simon  of  Alcazaua,  and  lohn
Sebadian  of  Cano.  His  aduocate  and  atturney,  he  made  the  licentiate  lohn  Rodriguez  of  Pifa:  and  for  his
fyfcal  doctor  Ribera,  and  his  fecretarie,  Barthalome  Ruiz  of  Caftaneda.  He  alfo  apoynted  that  Sebadian
Cabote,  Steuen  Gomes,  Nunnio  Garcia,  Diego  Riuero,  being  al  expert  pilots  and  cunning  in  making  cardes
for  the  fea,  fliuld  be  prefent,  and  brynge  foorth  theyr  globes  and  mappes  with  other  inflrumentes  neceffarie  to
declare  the  fituation  of  the  Ilandes  of  the  Malucas  abowt  the  which  was  al  the  contention  and  flryfe.  But
order  was  taken  that  they  fliulde  fhewe  theyr  myndes  on  neyther  fyde,  nor  enter  into  the  coompany  of  the  other
but  when  they  were  cauled.  Al  thefe  and  diuers  other,  wente  togyther  to  a  towne  cauled  Badaioz :  and  as  many
Portugales  came  to  Elbes,  or  rather  more.  For  they  browght  with  them  two  fifcals  and  two  aduocates.  The
principal!  of  theym,  was  the  licentiate  Antonie  de  Affeuedo,  Diego  Lopes  of  Sequeyra  the  clarke  of  the  weightes
and  receptes,  who  had  before  byn  gouernour  in  India.  Alfo  Peralfonfo  of  Melo,  clerke :  Simon  of  Tauira,  with
dyuers  other  whofe  names  I  knowe  not.  Before  they  mette  togyther,  the  one  parte  remaynynge  at  Badaioz  and
the  other  in  Elbes,  there  was  much  a  doo  amonge  them  beefore  they  coulde  agree  vppon  the  place  where  they
fhulde  mete  and  who  fhuld  fpeke  fyrfte.  For  the  Portugales  doo  greatly  weighe  fuche  circumflances.  At  the
lafl,  they  concluded  to  meete  togyther  at  Caya  a  lyttle  ryuer  which  diuideth  Caflile  from  Portugale,  flandynge
in  the  mydde  way  betwene  Badaioz  and  Elbes.  And  when  they  were  affembled  togyther  one  day  at  Badaioz
and  an  other  daye  at  Elbes  and  faluted  the  one  the  other,  bothe  parties  were  fworne  that  they  fliulde  proceade
and  fpeake  accordynge  to  truth,  iuflice,  and  equitie.  The  Portugales  refufed  Simon  de  Alcazaua  becaufe  he
was  a  Portugale :  and  fryer  Thomas  Duran  bycaufe  he  had  fumetyme  byn  preacher  to  theyr  kynge:  So  that
Simon  was  by  confent  put  owte  of  the  coompany,  in  whofe  roome  was  placed  mafler  Antonie  of  Alcaraz.  Yet
fell  they  not  to  reafonynge  the  matter  vntyll  the  fryer  was  put  owt.  They  were  manye  dayes  in  beholdynge
globes,  mappes,  and  cardes  of  the  fea,  and  hearynge  what  myght  bee  fayde,  both  fydes  alleagynge  for  the  right
which  they  pretended.  But  the  Portugales  flandynge  in  vayne  contention,  fayde  very  angerly  the  Ilandes  of
Maluca  whereuppon  theyr  meetynge  and  refonynge  was  at  that  prefente,  fell  of  theyr  parte  and  was  of  theyr
conquefl.  And  that  they  both  had  byn  there,  and  had  them  in  theyr  poffeffion  before  lohn  Sebaflian  had  euer
feene  them.  Lykewyfe  that  the  line  fhulde  bee  drawen  from  the  Ilande  of  Bonauida,  or  the  Hand  cauled  de
la  Sal,  which  are  the  mod  Eaderly  Ilandes  from  Cabouerde,  and  not  from  the  Ilande  of  Santanton  or  faynt
Antonie,  which  lyeth  towarde  the  Wed,  and  are.  Ixxxx.  leaques  the  one  from  the  other.  Al  this  was  no  more
but  to  contend :  and  the  other  of  the  Malucas,  is  vntrewe.  But  they  that  haue  a  nawghtie  matter  mud  fet  it
foorth  mth  woordes  and  brabelynge.  Here  they  founde  howe  greatly  they  were  deceaued  in  that  they
demaunded  that  the  line  fhulde  bee  drawen  three  hundreth.  Ixx.  leaques  more  to  the  Wed  from  the  Ilandes  of
Cabouerde  (as  appeareth  hereafter)  and  not  one  hundreth  accordyng  to  th[e]afrignement  of  the  popes  bul.  The
Spanyardes  on  the  contrary  parte  affirmed  and  made  demondration,  that  not  only  the  Ilandes  of  Burney,
Gilolo,  Zubut,  and  Tidore,  with  the  other  Ilandes  of  the  Malucas.  But  afwell  Samatra,  Malacha,  and  a  great
parte  of  China,  fhuld  belonge  to  the  Cadilians :  and  that  thofe  countreys  fell  on  theyr  fyde  and  on  the  parte  of
theyr  conqued :  Alfo  that  Magallanes  and  lohn  Sebadian  were  the  fyrde  Chridian  men  that  founde  them  and
obteyned  them  for  Th[e]emperour,  as  the  letters  and  prefentes  of  Almanzor  doo  tedifie.  And  although  the
Portugales  had  byn  there  fyrde,  yet  wente  they  thyther  after  the  donation  of  the  pope :  neyther  got  they  any
ryght  or  iude  tytle  thereby.  For  althowgh  they  fliulde  drawe  the  line  by  Buena  Vida,  what  inconuenience
fliulde  folowe  thereof,  fith  afwell  by  the  one  way  as  the  other,  the  Ilandes  of  the  Malucas  mud  perteyne  to  the
Cadilians:  yea  and  moreouer,  the  Ilandes  of  Cabo  verde  fhulde  alfo  perteine  to  the  Cadilians,  forfomuch  as
drawynge  the  line  by  Buena  Vida,  the  Ilandes  of  the  Malucas  doo  remayne  within  the  line  on  the  Emperours
fyde.  They  continued  in  thefe  controuerfies  for  the  fpace  of  two  moonethes  without  anye  refolution  or  ende
272

Confencion  for  the  trade  of  f pices.

273

made.  For  the  Portugales  prolonged  and  put  of  the  matter,  flying  from  the  fentence  with  cauillations  and  could
reaibns  to  th[e]ende  that  they  myght  diffolue  that  affemble  without  any  conclufion  or  determination  :  for  fo  it
floodc  them  vppon.  The  Caflilians  which  were  the  Judges  of  the  propertie,  drewe  a  line  in  the  great  globe  three
hundreth  and.  Ixx.  [feuenty]  leaques  from  faynt  Antonies  Ilande,  lyinge  by  Wcfle  Cabo  Verde  accordynge  to  the
intreatie  and  determination  whiche  was  agreed  vppon  betwene  the  Catholike  princes  and  the  kynge  of  Portugale.
Thefe  iudges  gaue  fentence  vppon  this  matter,  caulynge  the  contrary  parte  before  them  vpon  the  bridge  cf
Caya  in  the  yeare.  1524.  The  Portugales  coulde  neyther  diflurbe  or  deferre  the  fentence,  nor  yet  wolde  they
alowe  it  to  bee  iufl  and  accordynge  to  ryght:  Sayinge  that  there  was  not  fufficient  proceffe  made  that  they
fhulde  paffe  to  the  gyuynge  of  fentence.  And  fo  departed  threatcnyng  to  fley  the  Caflilians  as  many  as  they
fliulde  fynde  in  the  Ilandes  of  the  Malucas.  For  they  knewe  ryght  well  that  heyr  contreymen  the  Poitugales  had
alredy  taken  the  fhyppe  cauled  the  Trinitie.and  had  alfo  taken  the  Caflilians  in  Tidore.  Then  alfo  departed
cwre  men,  takynge  theyr  iorney  to  the  courte  gyuynge  vp  to  Th[e]emperour  all  theyr  wr)'tynges  and  declaration
what  they  had  doone.  And  accordynge  to  this  declaration  muft.  bee  figned  and  marked  all  globes  and  mappes
which  good  Cofmographers  and  maflers  doo  make.  The  line  alfo  of  the  reparticion  and  lart.  diuifion  of  the
newe  world  of  the  Indies,  ought  to  paffe  (lyttle  more  or  leffe)  by  the  poyntes  of  Humos  and  Buen  Abrigo,  as  I
haue  fayde  in  an  other  place.  And  thus  fliall  it  appeare  euidently  that  the  Ilandes  of  Spices,  and  alfo  the  greate
Ilande  of  Zamotra,  do  perteyne  to  Caflile.  But  the  lande  of  Brafile  perteyneth  to  the  kynge  of  Portugale  where
the  cape  of  faynt  Augufline  is,  beinge.  viii.  degrees  beneth  the  Equinoctiall.  This  lande  reacheth  from  the
poynte  of  Humos  to  the  poynte  of  Buen  Abrigo :  and  is  in  lengthe  North  and  South,  viii.  hundreth  leaques.
Beinge  alfo  fum  way  two  hundreth  leaques  Eafl  and  Wefl.

And  hereafter  thefe  ferious  matters,  wee  wyll  rehearfe  one  mery  thynge,  which  was  this.  It  fo  chaunced
that  as  Frances  de  Melo,  Diego  Lopes  of  Sequeyra,  and  other  of  thofe  Portugales  of  this  affemble,  walked  by
the  ryuer  fyde  of  Guadiana,  a  lyttle  boy  who  floode  keepynge  his  mothers  clothes  which  fhe  had  wafhed,
demaunded  of  theym  whether  they  were  thofe  men  that  parted  the  world  with  Th[e]emperour  And  as  they
anfwered,  yea:  he  tooke  vp  his  fhert  and  fhewed  them  his  bare  arfe,  fayinge:  Coomme  and  drawe  yo^wTe  line
here  throughe  the  myddell.  Which  fayinge  was  afterwarde  in  euery  mans  mouth  and  laughed  at  in  the  towne
of  Badaioz :  yea  euen  amonge  the  commiffioners  them  felues,  of  whom  fum  were  angry,  and  fumme  maruayled
at  the  fayinge  of  the  chylde.

C  The  caufe  and  ait  fori  fie  wherby  they  diuidcd  fhe  Indies,

]He  Caflilians  and  Portugales  had  longe  debated  and  reafoned  abowt  the  goldemyne  of  Guinea
which  was  found  in  the  yeare  of  owre  lorde  147 1,  in  the  tyme  of  the  reigne  of  Don  Alonfo
Kynge  of  Portugale  the  firfle  of  that  name.  This  was  a  matter  of  greate  importaunce.  For
the  negros  or  blacke  Moores,  for  thynges  of  no  value,  gaue  golde  by  hole  handefuls  Avhyche
was  at  that  tyme  when  the  fayde  Kynge  of  Portugale  pretended  title  and  clayme  to  the
kingedome  of  Caflile  in  the  right  of  his  wyfe  Queene  lohn  (cauled  the  excellent)  ageynRe
the  Catholike  princes  Ifabel  and  Don  Fernando  whofe  it  was  in  deede.  But  that  flryfe  was
ended  as  fone  as  Don  Fernando  had  vanquiffhed  Don  Alonfo  at  a  place  cauled  Temulos  not  farre  trom  Toro,
which  place*  Don  Fernando  chofe  rather  to  make  warre  ageinfl  the  Moores  of  Granada.,  then  to  bye  and  fell
with  the  blacke  Moores  of  Guinea.  And  thus  the  Portugales  remained  with  the  conquefl  of  Afilryke  from  the
flreightes  forwarde  :  whiche  began  where  the  infante  of  Portugale  Don  Henrique  (fonne  to  kynge  lohn  the
baflarde  and  mafter  of  Auis)  dyd  begynne  to  enlarge  it.  When  pope  Alexander  the.  vi.  (beinge  a  valentinian
borne)  had  knowleage  hereof,  he  mynded  to  gyue  the  Indies  to  the  kinges  of  Caftile  withowt  any  preiudice  to
the  Portugales  who  had  conquered  the  fea  coaftes  of  Affryke.  Thefe  Indies,  the  pope  gaue  of  his  owne  mynde
withowte  the  motion  of  anye  other,  with  this  burden  and  charge  that  they  fluilde  conuert  the  Idolatours  to  the
faythe  of  Chryfle :  And  commaunded  a  line  or  meridian  to  bee  drawen  Northe  and  fouth  from  one  hundreth
leaques  Weftwarde  beyond  one  of  the  Ilandes  of  Cabo  Verde  towarde  the  Wefte,  bycaufe  the  Spanyardes  Hiulde
not  meddle  in  Affryke  perteynynge  to  the  conqueft  of  the  Portugales,  to  th[e]auoydynge  of  all  ftr)-fe  betwene
them.  Kynge  lohn  of  Portugale,  the  feconde  of  that  name,  was  greatly  offended  when  he  redde  the  bull  and
donation  of  the  pope,  althowgh  his  owne  ambaffadours  had  made  the  felfe  fame  requeft  vnto  his  holyneffe.  He
alfo  found  hym  felfe  agreeued  with  the  Catholyke  princes  Ifabell  and  Fernando,  that  they  had  lliortened  the
courfe  of  the  landes  he  had  difcouered,  depriuynge  hym  of  the  rycheffe  which  belonged  to  hym.  And  therfore
refufed  to  flande  to  the  popes  bull  in  this  cafe :  defyrynge  the  Catholyke  princes  Ifabell  and  Fernando  to  graunt
him  three  hundreth  leaques  more  to  the  WeRe,  befyde  the  one  hundreth  which  they  had  graunted  before  :  and
therwith  fent  his  fhyppes  to  kepe  the  coaRes  of  Affryke. The  princes  Catholyke  were  content  to  fatiffie  his

Eden.  *  There  is  a  hiatus  here.  — E.  A.  Y  873

The  Portugales
cauillatioiu.

The  line  of
diuisiun.

The  sentence.

The  Portugilts
threaten  death  to
the  Ca^tilians.

The  line  of  the
last  diuision.

The  great  Hand
j  of  Samotra.

The  lande  of
I  Brasile,  perte'neth

to  the  Portugaiua.

A  mery  tale.

The  golJe  raj-ne
of  Guinea.
Alonso  kjTige  of
Portugale.

Gold  for  thynges
of  smaul  value.

Contention  for  the
kyngdorae  of
Castile.

Warre  agenst  the
Moores  of
Granada.

The  concjuestes  of
the  Portugales  in
Affrike.

Pope  Ale.\ander.

243

The  Pope  makcth
the  diuisiou.

The  k-,-nge  of
Portugale  retuseth
to  stand  to  the
Popes  buU.

-74

CoitfcficioN  for  the  trade  of /pices.

lit*  »Crt«in«nt  of

Wherein  the
fvMtus.Oei  were
«lecv<ku«\l.

SeSa&4win  Cabote.

TWelempercmr
and  the  k.>ll4;T^  of
IVrtujjale  ioyued
>n  «liauve  by
BUtrui^e.

The  Ptvtugalc*

robbe  •h<

T^e  cMonation  of

Th^e.Vuiperour.

244

The  jpgeing  of  the
Maluca-s.

myiule  aiul  to  pleafe  hym  accorv!\ngo  to  theyr  gentle  naturt^  and  for  the  aluince  that  was  betwene  theym:  And  in
tine,  with  the  content  and  agreement  ot'  the  pope.  gniunte<.l  twoo  hundreth.  Ixx.  [leuenty]  leagues  more  then  the
IniU  made  mention  of:  At  TorvleliUas  the.  vii.  day  ot"  lune.  in  the  yeare  ot\nvr  lorvl  1404.  Atul  whenis  owr  kvnges
thought  that  they  Ihulde  haue  loll  groiuule  in  ;:rauntyt\ge  to  many  leaques  that  way.  they  woonne  by  that  meanes
the  llandes  of  the  Mahieas  with  n\any  other  ryehe  llandes.  'I'he  kynge  of  Fortugale  aUb,  herein  deceaued  him  felfe
or  was  deceauet.1  of  his  whonx  he  put  in  trull,  hauynge  no  certeyne  knowleage  of  the  fituation  of  the  llandes  of  the
riohe  Spieery  in  demaundyng  that  which  the  kynge  dyd  denuunde.  For  it  hadde  byn  better  tor  hym  to  haue
requelltxl  the  three  hundreth  and.  l\.\.  leaques  rather  Kallwarvle  from  the  llandes  of  Cabo  Verde  then  towaale
the  wel\.  And  yet  for  all  that.  I  doubte  whether  the  Malueas  Ihulde  haue  faulen  w  ithin  his  eonquell  accoulynge
to  the  orvlinarie  ae<.\nunpte  and  dimei\fion  which  the  pylotes  and  Cofmographei-s  doo  make.  And  after  this
maner  they  diuidevl  the  Indies  betwene  them  by  th[e]autoritie  of  the  pope  for  the  auoydynge  of  further  ftryfe
anvl  contention.

^ IloTce  (IN J  by  icltat  occafton  Th\e'\emperoure  layde  the  llandes  of
the  Malueas  to  pledge  to  the  kynge  of  Fortugale.

Hen  the  kynge  of  Portugale  Don  luan  the  thynle  of  that  name,  had  knowleage  that  the  Cofmo-
graphers  and  pylottes  of  Callile  hadde  drawen  the  line  from  the  place  before  nameil,  and  that
he  could  not  denye  the  truth,  fearing  alio  therby  to  liefe  the  trade  of  Spices,  made  fute  and
requeil  to  Th[e]empeunire  that  he  ihulde  not  fend  furth  I.oaifi  nor  Seballian  Cabote  to  the
Mahicas,  and  that  the  Cartilians  Ihulde  not  attempte  the  trade  of  fpices  nor  fee  fuch  euyls
anvl  miferies  as  his  capitaynes  had  Ihewed  in  thofe  llandes  to  them  that  aduenture<.l  that
viage  with  Magalanes.  Which  thynge  he  greatly  couered,  although  he  payde  all  the  charges
of  thole  two  tleetes,  and  made  other  great  bargens.  In  the  meane  tyme,  'rh[e]emperoure  maryed  the  1-ady
Ifabell  lyller  to  kynge  lohn:  and  kynge  lohn  maryed  the  lady  Catharine  fyller  to 'rh[e]emperour :  whereby  this
matter  wa.\e<.l  coulde  althoughe  the  kynge  ceafev.1  not  to  fpeake  hereof,  euer  mouynge  the  particion.  Th[e]em-
perour  by  the  meanes  of  a  certeine  Bilcaine  that  was  with  Magallanes  in  the  gouernours  (hyppe,  had  knowleage
what  the  Tortugales  had  doone  to  the  Callilians  in  the  Hand  of  Tidore,  wherof  he  took  great  difpleafure,  and
brought  the  layde  maryner  face  to  face  before  th[e]amt\it"ladours  of  Fortugale,  who  denyed  all  that  he  fayde,  one
of  them  beinge  the  chiefe  capitayne  antl  gouernour  of  India  when  the  Fortugales  tooke  the  Callilians  in  Tidore
and  robbet.1  them  of  theyr  Clones  and  Cinamome  and  fuch  other  thynges  as  they  had  in  the  (hyppe  namei.1  the
Trinitie.  But  as  the  kynge  of  Fortugales  trade  was  greate,  and  owre  neceflltie  greater,  in  the  meane  tyme  Th[e]-
emperoure  (who  was  nowe  goinge  into  Italie  to  bee  crowned  in  the  yeare.  1529)  gagied  the  Mahicas  and  the
fpicerie  to  the  kynge  of  Fortugale  for  three  hundreth  and  fiftie  thoulande  ducades  withowt  any  tyme  determyneti
otherwyfe  then  the  controuerfie  was  detinetl  vppon  the  brydge  of  the  r\ucr  of  Cava  :  for  the  which  thynge,  kynge
lohn  punylheil  the  licentiate  Azeuedo  bycaufe  he  payde  the  money  withowt  declaration  of  the  time.  The  couenaunt
of  the  pledge  was  blyndely  made  and  greatly  ageynft  the  miyndes  of  the  Callilians,  as  men  that  wel  vnderftode  the
profite,  commoditie,  and  rychelTe  of  that  trade :  Affirmynge  that  the  trade  of  fpices  myght  haue  byn  rentetl  for  one
yeare  or  for  two,  for  fyxe  tymes  as  much  as  the  kinge  gaue  for  it.  Peter  Ruiz  of  Villegas  who  was  twyfe  cauled
to  the  bargeyne,  as  once  at  Granada  antl  an  other  tyme  at  Madrid,  foyde  that  it  had  byn  muche  better  to  haue
pledged  Kllremadura  or  Serena,  or  other  greater  landes  and  cities,  rather  then  the  Malueas,  Zamatra,  or  Malaca»
or  other  riche  landes  and  ryuers  in  the  Eafte  not  yet  well  knowen :  forafmuche  as  it  maye  fo  chaunce,
that  eyther  by  continuaunce  of  tyme,  or  aliance,  the  pletlge  myght  bee  forgotten  as  thowgh  it  perteyned
to  the  ryght  of  Fortugale.  In  fine.  Th[e]emperour  confidereil  not  the  iewel  that  he  pkxlge\.l,  nor  the  kyng
what  he  receaued.  Th[e]emperour  was  often  tymes  counfayled  to  releale  the  pledge  of  thofe  llandes  in
conlkleration  of  the  great  vantage  he  myght  haue  therby  in  fewe  yeares.  Furthermore,  in  the  yeare.  1548.
the  procuratoures  of  Cortes  being  in  Yalladolid,  made  peticion  to  'rh[e]emperour  to  furrender  the  fpicerie
to  the  kyngedoome  of  Caftile  for.  vi.  yeares,  and  that  they  wold  repay  to  the  kyng  of  Portugale  his.  350.  thou-
fand  crownes,  and  after  thofe  yeares,  reftore  the  trade  to  the  trowne,  that  his  maieftie  myght  inioye  the  fame  as
was  agreed  at  the  begynnyiige.  But  'rh[e]emperour  beinge  then  in  Flaunders,  lente  woorvle  to  the  counlayle
that  they  Ihulde  not  alTent  to  Cortes  his  requell,  nor  fpeake  any  more  hereof.  Wherat,  fum  marueylevl.  other
were  fory,  and  all  held  theyr  peace.

»7*

275

[Amerigo  A^espucci,

and

Andreas de Corsali.

Of  the  Pole  Antarctic,  and  the  stars

abojit  the  same  A

277

ai  OF THE POLE ANTARTIKE AND THE

STARRES  ABOWT  THE  SAME  AND  OF  THE

QUALITIE OF THE REGIONS AND DISPOSITION OF

the  Elementes  abowt  the  Equinoctiall  line.

Alfo certeyne fecreates touchyng

the  arte  of  faylynge.

j^Mericus  Vefputius  in  the  Summarie  of  his  vyages,

wryteth  in  this  maner  as  foloweth.

Departynge  from  Lifbona  (commonlye  cauled  Lufheburne)
the.  viii.  day  of  May,  in  the  yeare.  1501.  we  fayled  fyrfl  to  the
Ilandes  of  Canarie  and  from  thenfe  to  Capouerde  which  the
Ethiopians  or  blacke  Moores  caule  Bifineghe,  beinge.  xiiii.
degrees  on  this  fyde  the  Equinoctiall  line.  From  whenfe
directynge  owre  courfe  towarde  the  South  pole  by  the  South-
weft,  we  fawe  no  more  land  for  the  fpace  of  three  moonethes
and  three  dayes.  Of  whiche  tyme  durynge.  xl.  [forty]  dayes,
we  had  cruell  fortune  :  In  fo  muche  that  for  that  fpace,  the
heauen  in  maner  neuer  ceafed  thunderyng,  rorynge,  and
lyghtenynge  with  terrible  noyfe,  and  fearefull  fyghtes  of  fyery
exhalations  flyinge  abowt  in  the  ayer,  and  in  maner  continuall
fliowers  of  rayne  with  darke  clowdes  couerynge  the  heauen  in  fuch
forte  that  afvvell  in  the  day  as  in  the  nyght  we  coulde  fee  none
otherwyfe  but  as  when  the  moone  giueth  no  lyght  by  reafon  of  thicke  and  darke  clowds  The  fea  was  in  lyke  cafe
vnquieted  with  furgies  and  monfters.  After  thefe  greuous  and  cruel  days,  it  plefed  god  to  haue  compaffion  on
owr  Hues.  For  wee  fuddenly  efpied  land  wherby  we  recouered  owr  fpirites  and  ftrength.  This  land  which  wee
founde,  is  from  Capo  Verde.  700.  leaques,  although  I  fuppofe  that  we  fayled  more  then.  800.  by  reafon  of  the
cruel  tempeft  and  ignoraunce  of  the  Pylottes  and  mariners  whereby  wee  were  lyke  to  haue  byn  caft  away.  For
wee  were  in  fuche  daungerous  places  wanderynge  in  vnknowen  coaftes,  that  if  1  had  not  byn  fkylfull  in  the
fcience  of  Cofmographie  we  had  fuerly  peryflied,  forafmuch  as  there  was  not  one  pylot  that  knewe  where  wee
were  by  the  fpace  of  fiftie  leaques.  In  fo  much  that  if  I  had  not  in  tyme  prouyded  for  the  fafegarde  of  myne
owne  lyfe  and  them  that  were  with  me,  with  my  quadrant  and  Aftrolabie  inftrumentes  of  Aftronomie,  wee  had
flyl  wandered  lyke  blynde  men.  But  when  in  fine  I  had  perfuaded  the  pylots  by  demonftrations  perteynynge
to  that  arte,  they  gaue  me  great  honour  and  confeffed  that  the  ordinarie  pilottes  and  mariners  ignorant  in
Cofmographi,  are  not  to  bee  compared  to  men  of  fpeculatiue  knowleage.  etc.

Wee  fayled  by  the  coafte  of  the  fayde  lande.  600.  leaques  And  went  oftentymes  alande  where  W3e  were
frendely  and  honorably  interteyned  of  th[e]inhabitauntes  :  In  fo  much  that  confiderynge  the}T  innocent  nature,
we  fumtymes  remayned  with  them.  xv.  or.  xx.  dayes.  This  firme  lande  begynneth  beyonde  the  Equinoctiall
line.  viii.  degrees  towarde  the  pole  Antartike.  Wee  fayled  fo  farre  by  the  fayde  coafle  that  wee  paffed  the
wynter  Tropyke  towarde  the  pole  Antartike  by  xvii.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  where  we  had  the  Horizontal  line
eleuate  fiftie  degrees.  Such  thynges  as  I  fawe  there,  are  not  yet  knowen  to  men  of  owre  tyme  :  as  the  people,
theyr  cuftomes  and  maners,  the  fertilitie  of  the  lande,  the  goodnes  of  the  ayer,  the  fauourable  influence  of
heauen  and  the  pianettes,  and  efpecially  the  order  of  the  ftarres  of  the  eyght  fphere  in  the  inferioure  hemifpherie
or  lower  halfe  circle  of  heauen  towarde  and  abowt  the  South  pole,  wherof  neyther  the  owlde  or  newe  wryters
haue  made  any  mention  to  this  daye.

Cabouerde.
Besettegha.

A  tempest.

Y  2

«77

The  ignorance  of
Pylots  and
mariners.
The  ^  se  of
Cosmographie.

The  vse  of  the
quadmnt  and
Astrolabie.

245

The  pole
Antartike.

The  starres  abowt
the  south  pole.

278

Of  the  pole  Antartike.

Most  pleasant  and
frutful  regions.

The  earthlye
Paradyse.
Continual
tciiiperatnesse

Moyst  dewes

Starres  vnknowen
to  vs

The  vse  of
Geonietri.

Notable  stars  in
the  inferiour
hemispherie.

Most  bright  and
shyi.ynge  starres.

Lac  tea  via.

246

The  inferiour
hemispherie.

The  raynebowe.

Aristotle  his
opinion  of  the
raynebowe.

A  strange  opinion.

To  wryte  particularly  of  the  commodities  and  felicities  of  thefe  regions,  it  wolde  rcquyrc  rather  a  hole
volume  then  a  booke  :  And  that  fuch,  as  if  Plinie  had  had  knowleage  of  thefe  thynges,  he  myght  greatly  haue
increafed  his  bookes  of  naturall  hillories.  The  trees  gj-ue  from  them  continually  fuch  fweete  fauours  as  can
fcarfely  bee  imagined  :  And  on  euery  part  put  furth  fuch  gummes,  liquours,  and  iufes,  that  yf  we  knewe  theyr
vertues,  I  fuppofe  we  myght  fynde  in  them  marueylous  medicins  ageinft.  difeafes  and  to  mainteyne  health.  And
fuerly  in  my  opinion,  yf  there  bee  any  earthely  Paradyfe  in  the  worlde,  it  can  not  bee  farre  from  thefe  regions
of  the  fouth,  where  the  heauen  is  fo  beneficiall  and  the  elcmentes  fo  temperate  that  they  are  neyther  bytten
with  coulde  in  wynter,  nor  molefled  with  heate  in  fummer.  The  ayer  alfo  and  the  heauen  is  feldome  darkened
with  clowdes,  fo  that  the  dayes  and  nyghtes  are  euer  cleare.  Yet  haue  they  fumtymes  moyfl  dewes  in  the
mornynge  and  euenyng  for  the  fpace  of  three  houres,  whereby  the  grounde  is  marueyloufly  refrefflied.  Lyke
wyfe  the  firmament  is  marueyloufly  adourned  with  certeyne  flarres  which  are  not  knowen  to  vs,  wherof  I  noted
abowt.  XX.  to  bee  of  fuche  clearenefle  as  are  the  flarres  of  Venus  and  lupiter  when  they  are  nere  vnto  vs.  And
wheras  hauynge  the  knowleage  of  Geometric,  I  confidered  thejT  circuite  and  dyuers  motions,  and  alfo  meafured
theyr  circumference  and  diameter,  I  am  well  aflured  that  they  are  much  greater  then  men  thynke  them  to  bee.
Amonge  other,  I  fawe  three  flarres  cauled  Canopi,  wherof  two  were  exceadynge  cleare,  and  the  thyrde  fumwhat
darke.  The  pole  Antartike  hath  nother  the  greate  beare  nor  the  lyttle  as  is  feene  abowte  owre  pole.  But  hath
foure  flarres  whiche  compaffe  it  abowt  in  forme  of  a  quadrangle.

f[  \Vhen  thefe  are  hydden,  there  is  feene  on  the  lefte  fyde  a  bryght  Canopus  of  three  flarres  of  notable
greatnefTe,  whiche  beinge  in  the  myddefl.  of  heauen,  reprefenteth  this  figure.

#  *

After  thefe,  fucceade  three  other  fliynynge  flarres,  whereof  that  which  is  in  the  myddefl,  is  of  meafure.  xii.
degrees  and  a  halfe  in  circumference.  And  in  the  myddefl  of  thefe,  is  feene  an  other  bryght  Canopus.  After
this,  folowe.  vi.  other  fhynynge  flarres  which  in  bryghtneffe  paffe  al  other  that  are  in  the  eyght  fphere.  Of  thefe,
that  that  is  in  the  middefl  in  the  fuperficiall  part  of  the  fayde  fphere,  hath  the  meafure  of  his  circumference,
xxxii.  degrees.  After  thefe  foloweth  an  other  great  Canopus,  but  fumwhat  darke.  All  thefe  are  feene  in  the
parte  of  heauen  cauled  Via  LaHea,  that  is  the  mylke  waye :  And  beinge  ioyned  to  the  meridiane  line,  fhewe
this  fygure  here  folowynge.  > .

*  *  #  *

fawe  alfo  there  manye  other  flarres,  the  dyuers  motions  wherof  diligently  obferued,  I  made  a
particular  boke  of  the  fame,  wherin  I  made  mention  of  al  fuch  notable  thyngs  as  I  fawe  and
had  knoweleage  of,  in  this  nauigation.  The  whiche  booke  I  deliuered  to  the  kynges  maieflie,
truflynge  that  he  wyll  fliortly  reflore  it  me  ageyne.  In  this  hemifpherie  or  halfe  coompaffe
of  the  heauen,  I  diligently  confidered  many  thinges  which  are  contrarie  to  th[e]oppinions  of
philofophers.  And  amonge  other  thynges,  I  fawe  a  whyte  raynebowe  abowt  mydnyght,
wheras  other  afftrme  that  it  hath  foure  colours  of  the  foure  elementes,  as  redde  of  the  fyer,
greene  of  the  earth,  whyte  of  the  ayer,  and  blewe  of  the  water.  But  Ariflotle  in  his  booke  intiteled  Meteora,
is  of  an  other  opinion  For  he  fayth  that  the  raynebowe  is  a  reflection  of  the  beames  of  the  foonne  in  the
vapoure  of  a  clowde  directly  ageynfle  the  foonne,  as  the  fhynyng  of  the  fame  on  the  water,  is  reflected  on  a
waule :  And  that  the  fayde  clowde  or  vapoure  tempereth  the  heate  of  the  foonne :  and  beinge  refolued  into
rayne,  maketh  the  grounde  fertyle,  and  pourgeth  the  ayer.  Alfo  that  is  a  token  of  abundaunt  moyflure.  By
reafon  wherof,  fum  are  of  opinion  that  it  fhall  not  appeare.  xl.  [forty]  yeares  before  th[e]ende  of  the  worlde,  which
fhalbe  a  token  of  the  dryneffe  of  the  elementes  approchynge  to  the  tyme  of  theyr  conflagration  or  confumyng
by  fyer.  It  is  a  pledge  of  peace  betwene  god  and  men,  and  is  euer  directly  ouer  ageynfl  the  foonne.  It  is
therfore  neuer  feene  in  the  South,  bycaufe  the  foonne  is  neuer  [feene?]  in  the  North.  Neuertheleffe,  Plinie  fayth,
278

Of  the  pole  Antartike.

279

that  after  the  Equinoctial  in  Autumne,  it  is  fcene  at  al  houres.  And  thus  much  haue  I  gathered  owte  of  the
commentaries  of  Landinus  vppon  the  fourth  boke  of  Virgyl  his  Eneades,  bycaufc  I  wold  defraude  no  man  of
his  trauayle.  I  fawe  the  fayd  raynebowc  twoo  or  three  tymes.  And  not  I  onely,  but  alfo  many  other  which
were  in  my  coompany.  Lykewyfe  wee  fawe  the  newe  moone  the  felfe  fame  day  that  fhee  ioyned  with  the
foonne.  Wee  fawe  furthermore  vapours  and  burnynge  flames  flyinge  abowt  heauen  euery  nyght  A  lyttle
before,  I  cauled  this  countrey  by  the  name  of  Hemifpherium  (that  is)  the  halfe  fphere.  Which  neuertheleffe
can  not  bee  fo  named  but  by  fpekynge  improperlie  in  comparyfon  of  owres.  Yet  forafmuche  as  it  feemetli  to
reprefent  fuche  a  forme,  I  haue  improperlye  fo  named  it.

Departynge  therfore  from  Lifbona  (as  I  haue  fayde)  beinge  from  the  Equinoctiall  line  towarde  the  North
abowt.  xl.  [forty]  degrees,  wee  fayled  to  this  countrey  whiche  is  beyonde  the  Equinoctiall.  1.  [fifty]  degrees :  All
which  fumme,  maketh  the  number  of.  Ixxxx.  [ninety]  beinge  the  fourth  part  of  the  greatefl  circle  accordynge
to  the  trewe  reafon  of  the  number  tawght  by  the  owlde  autours.  And  by  this  demonflration  it  is  manifefl
that  wee  meafured  the  fourth  parte  of  the

worlde:  Forafmuch  as  we  that  dwell  in  Lif-  ^  yjj  ^'EK/TSJ

ona  on  this  fyde  the  Equinoctial  line  abowt.
xl.  [forty]  degrees  towarde  the  Northe,  fayled
from  thenfe.  Ixxxx.  [ninety]  degrees  in  lengthe
meridionale  angularly  by  an  ouerthwart  line,
to  th[e]inhabitantes.  1.  [fifty]  degrees  beyond
the  Equinoctiall.  And  that  the  thynge  may
bee  more  playnely  vnderflode,  imagine  a
parpendicular  line  to  faule  from  the  poyntes
of  heauen  which  are  Zenith  (that  is  the
pricke  ouer  the  head)  to  vs  both  flandynge
vpryght  in  the  places  of  owre  owne  habita-
cions :  and  another  ryght  line  to  bee  drawne
frome  owre  Zenith  to  theyrs :  Then  graunt-
ynge  vs  to  bee  in  the  ryght  line  in  com-
paryfon to  them,  it  mufl  of  neceffitie  folowe
that  they  are  in  the  ouerthwart  line  as  halfe
Antipodes  in  comparyfon  to  vs:  In  fuche
forte  that  the  figure  of  the  fayde  lines  make
a  triangle  which  is  the  quarter  or  fourth
parte  of  the  hole  circle,  as  appeareth  more
playnely  by  the  fygure  here  folowynge.

S  touchyng  the  ftarres  and  reafons  of  Cofmographie,  I  haue  gathered  thus
much  owt  of  the  vyage  of  Americus  Vefputius.  And  haue  thought  good
to  ioyne  hereunto  that  whiche  Andreas  de  Corfali  writeth  in  his  vyage
to  Eaft  India  as  concern ynge  the  fame  matter.

After  that  we  departed  from  Lifbona,  wee  fayled  euer  with  profperous  wynde,  not
paffynge  owt  of  the  SoutheaR  and  Southweft.  And  paffyng  beyonde  the  Equinoctial  line,
we  were  in  the  heyght  of.  37.  degrees  of  the  other  halfe  circle  of  the  earth.  And  trauerfynge  the  cape  of  Bona
Speranza  a  coulde  and  wyndy  clime  bycaufe  at  that  tyme  the  foonne  was  in  the  north  fignes,  wee  founde  the
nyght  of.  xiiii.  houres.  Here  we  fawe  a  marueylous  order  of  ftarres,  fo  that  in  the  parte  of  heauen  contrary
to  owre  northe  pole,  to  knowe  in  what  place  and  degree  the  fouth  pole  was,  we  tooke  the  day  with  the  foonne,
and  obferued  the  nyght  with  the  Aflrolabie,  and  fawe  manifeRly  twoo  clowdes  of  reafonable  bygnefle  mou-
ynge  abowt  the  place  of  the  pole  continually  nowe  ryfynge  and  nowe  faulynge,  fo  keepynge  theyr  continuall
courfe  in  circular  mouynge,  with  a  Rarre  euer  in  the  myddeft  which  is  turned  abowt  ^\^th  them  abowte.  xi.
degrees  frome  the  pole.  Aboue  thefe  appeareth  a  marueylous  croffe  in  the  myddeft  of  fyue  notable  ftarres
which  compaffe  it  abowt  (as  doth  charles  wayne  the  northe  pole)  with  other  ftarres  whiche  moue  with  them
abowt.  XXX.  [thirty]  degrees  diftant  from  the  pole,  and  make  their  courfe  in.  xxiiii.  [twenty-four]  houres.
This  croffe  is  fo  fayre  and  bewtiful,  that  none  other  heuenly  gne  may  be  compared  to  it  as  may  appeare  by
this  fygure.

279

The  newe  mone.
Fyery  exhalations.
Hemispherium.

Lisbona.

The  fowrth  part  of
the  worlds.

247

Zenith,

The  vyage  of

Andrcis  Je
Corsali.

The  Equinoctial
line.

Cap.  de  Speranza,

The  starres  of  the
vnder  hemispheric.

Cloudes  abowt  the
souUi  pole.

A  Crosse  of  f jTie
starres.

28o

Of  tJic  pole  Autartikc.

248

H.

'K

WW*

^^#?^  ^

\

%,  %\t  pole  Snjactmr* J5*2;!l«  iC!;6^ip<,

The  coastes  of
Ethiope.

Golde  in  Elluope.

The  vyage  of

Aloisius

Cadamustus.

The  chariote  of
the  south  pole.

F  the  lyke  matters,  and  of  the  ftraunge  ryfynge  of  the  foonne  In  the
mornynge,  and  of  the  dyiiers  feafons  of  the  yeare  and  motions  of  the
Elementes  In  the  coafte  of  Ethiope  abowt  the  ryuer  of  Senega,  and  the
riche  region  of  Gambra  where  plentie  of  golde  Is  founde,  fumewhat
beyonde  Capo  Verde,  Alolfms  Cadamuftus  wryteth  In  this  effecte.

Durynge  the  tyme  thai  wee  remayned  vppon  the  mouth  of  the  ryuer,  we  fawe  the
north  flarre  but  once:  which  appered  very  lowe  aboue  the  fea  the  height  of  a  iauelen.
We  faw  alfo  fyxe  cleare,  bryght,  and  great  flarres  verye  lowe  aboue  the  fea.  And  confiderynge  theyr  flations
with  owre  coompaffe.  we  founde  them  to  flande  ryght  fouth,  fygured  in  this  maner.

#

*

*

%

*

The  wynter  abowt
the  Equinoctiall.
Kaine  and  clowdes.

Thunder  and
lyghtnynge.

Hot  showres  of

rayne.

The  day,  and

rysynge  of  iJie

soonne.

j|E  iudged  them  to  bee  the  chariotte  or  wayne  of  the  fouth :  But  we  fawe  not  the  principall
flarre,  as  we  coulde  not  by  good  reafon,  except  we  fhuld  firfl  lofe  the  fyght  of  the  north  pole.
In  this  place  wee  founde  the  nyght  of  the  length  of  a.  xi.  houres  and  a  halfe:  And  the  day
of.  xii.  houres  and  a  halfe  at  the  begynnynge  of  luly.  This  countrey  is  euer  hotte  al  times
of  the  yeare.  Yet  is  there  a  certeyne  varietie  which  they  caule  wynter.  For  from  the
moneth  of  luly  to  October,  it  rayneth  continually  in  maner  dayly  abowt  none  after  this  forte.
There  ryfe  continually  certeyne  clowdes  aboue  the  lande  betwene  the  northeafl  and  the
fouth  eafl,  or  from  the  eaft  and  foutheafl  with  greate  thunderynge  and  lyghtnynge  and  excead-
ynge  great  fliowers  of  raine  At  this  tyme  the  Ethiopians  begynne  to  fowe  theyr  feedes.  They  lyue  commonly
with  hony,  herbes,  rootes,  flefflie,  and  mylke.  I  had  alfo  intelligence  that  in  this  region  by  reafon  of  the  great
heate  of  the  ayer,  the  water  that  raineth  is  hotte :  And  that  the  foonne  ryfynge  in  the  mornynge,  makethe  no
cleare  daylyght  as  it  dooth  with  vs:  But  that  halfe  an  houre  after  the  ryfynge,  it  appeareth  troubeled,  dymme
and  fmoky. The  whiche  thynge,  I  knowe  not  to  proceade  of  any  other  caufe  then  of  the  loweneffe  of  the

groundc  in  this  contrey  beinge  without  mountaynes.

280

28l

[The  Third  EngHsh  book  on  America,

Which  is  also

The First English Collection of Voyages, Traffics, & Discoveries.

Cftr  liecfftre^  of  tfte  nrtoe  tuoiltre  or  tuest  Sntriat,  etc.

SECTION IV.

Of  Moscovy, Cathay,  and
the  North  Regions.

1500-1555.]

283

CA DISCOVRSE OF DYVERS

WAGES AND  WAVES BY THE  WHICHE

SPICES,  PRECIOUS  STONES,  AND  GOLDE  WERE  BROUGHT  IN  OWLDE

tyme  from  India  into  Europe  and  other  partes  of  the  world.

ALSO OF THE  WAGE TO CATHAY AND EAST INDIA

by  the  north  fea :  And  of  certeyne  fecreates  touchynge  the  fame  vyage,

declared  by  the  duke  of  Mofcouie  his  ambaffadoure  to  an  excellent

lerned gentelman of Italie, named Galeatius Butrigarius.

Lykewyfe of the vyages of that woorthy owlde man

Sebaftian  Cabote,  yet  liuynge  in  Englande,  and  at  this

prefent  the  gouernour  of  the  coompany  of  the

marchantes  of  Cathay  in  the  citie  of  London.

T  is  doubtleffe  a  marueylous  thynge  to  confyder  what  chaunges  and
alterations  were  caufed  in  all  the  Romane  Empire  by  the  com-
mynge  of  the  Gothes  and  Vandales,  and  other  Barbarians  into
Italy.  For  by  theyr  inuafions  were  extinguylhed  all  artes  and
fciences,  and  all  trades  of  Marchaundies  that  were  vfed  in  dyuers
partes  of  the  worlde.  The  defolation  and  ignoraunce  which
infued  hereof,  continued  as  it  were  a  clowde  of  perpetuall  darke-
neffe  amonge  men  for  the  fpace  of  foure  hundreth  yeares  and  more,
in  fo  much  that  none  durfl  aduenture  to  go  any  whyther  owt  of
theyr  owne  natiue  countreys:  whereas  before  th[e]incurfions  of
the  fayde  Barbarians  when  the  Romane  Empire  florj'ffhed,  they
might  fafly  paffe  the  feas  to  al  partes  of  Eafl  India  which  was
at  that  time  as  wel  knowen  and  frequented  as  it  is  nowe  by  the
nauigations  of  the  Portugales.  And  that  this  is  trewe,  it  is  mani-
fefl  by  that  which  Strabo  wryteth,  who  was  in  the  tyme  of
Auguflus  and  Tiberius.  For  fpeakynge  of  the  greatneffe  and
ryches  of  the  citie  of  Alexandria  in  Egypte  (gouerned  then  as  a
prouince  of  the  Romanes)  he  wryteth  thus.  This  only  place  of  Egypte,  is  apte  to  receaue  all  thynjes  that
coome  by  fea,  by  reafon  of  the  commoditie  of  the  hauen :  And  lykewyfe  all  fuch  thynges  as  are  brought  by  lande,
by  reafon  of  the  ryuer  of  Nilus  wherby  they  may  bee  eafely  conueyde  to  Alexandria,  beinge  by  thefe  commodi-
ties the  rycheft.  citie  of  marchauntes  that  is  in  the  worlde.

The  reuenues  of  Egypt  are  fo  great,  that  Marcus  Tullius  fayth  in  one  of  his  orations,  that  kynge  Tolomeus
furnarned  Auleta,  the  father  of  queene  Cleopatra,  had  of  reuenues  twelue  thoufande  and  fyue  hundreth  talentes,
which  are  feuen  millions  and  a  halfe  in  golde.  If  therfore  this  kyng  had  fo  great  reuenues  when  Eg}'pt  was
gouerned  of  fo  fewe  and  fo  negligently,  what  myght  it  then  bee  woorth  to  the  Romanes  by  whom  it  was  gouerned
with  great  diligence,  and  theyr  trade  of  marchandies  greatly  increafed  by  the  traffike  of  Trogloditica  and  India  ?
wheras  in  tyme  pafte  there  could  hardly  bee  founde.  xx.  fhyppes  togyther  that  durfle  enter  into  the  goulfe  of

283

249

The  romaice
emp>Te.

iiii.  hundreth
yeares  of
ignoraunce.

Easte  India  well
knowen  in  owld
time.

Strabo.

The  great  rj'chesse

of  Egipte.

The  citie  of
Alexandria.

Marueylous
rychesse.

The  gouemaunce
and  reuenues  of
the  Romans.

Trogloditica
and  India.

284

Of  M of  conic  and  Cathay

The  poulfe  of
Arable.

Ethiope.

Rich  customs

The  rychesse
which  were
brought  ill  owlde
tyine  from  India,
and  the  red  sea.
The  commission  of
The[e]mperours
Marcus  and
Commodus.

250

The  great  riches
the  kynges  of
Egipte  had  by
customes.

The  noble
enterprises  of  the
kinges  of  Egj-pte.
Arsinoe.
Damiatx
Pelusio.

Nilus.
Copto.
Berenice.

A  nauigable
trensh  made  from
Egypte  to  the  red
sea

Lacus  Amaru

Kynge  Sesostre

Kynge
Psammiticus.

Kyng  Darius

Kynge  Ptolomeu:
The  citie  Heroum.

What  Plj-nye
writeth  of  the
nauigable  trenche

The  larcenesse
and  lengthe  of  the
trenche.

251

Arable,  or  (liewe  tho}  r  proos  withowt  the  mouth  of  the  flimc.  But  at  this  prefent,  great  nauies  fayle  tog>'ther  in
to  India  and  to  the  furthefl  partes  of  Ethiope  from  whenfe  are  brought  many  rych  and  precious  marchandies
into  Egipt  and  are  caryed  from  thenfe  into  other  countreys.  And  by  this  meanes  are  the  cuRomes  redoubeled
afwell  by  fuche  thynges  as  are  brought  thyther,  as  alfo  by  fuche  as  are  caryed  frome  thenfe,  forafmuche  as  greate
cuflomes  arryfe  of  thynges  of  great  value.  And  that  by  this  vyage,  infinite  and  precious  marchaundies  were
brought  from  the  redde  fea  and  India,  and  thofe  of  dyuers  other  fortes  then  are  knowen  in  owre  tyme,  it
appeareth  by  the  fourthe  vohmie  of  the  ciuile  lawe  wherin  is  defcribed  the  commiffion  of  Th[e]emperours  Marcus
and  Commodus,  with  the  rehearHxU  of  all  fuche  flufte  and  marchandies  wherof  cudome  fliuld  bee  payde  in  the
redde  fea  by  fuch  as  had  the  fame  in  fee  ferme,  as  were  payde  the  cuflomes  of  all  other  prouinces  perteynynge
to  the  Romane  Empyre :  and  they  are  thefe  folo\v)'nge.

Cinamome.

Longe  pepper.

Whyte  pepper.

Cloues.

Coflus.

Cancamo.

Spikenarde.

Caffia.

Sweete  perfumes

Xilocaffia.

Mir.

Amome.

Ginger,

Malabatrum.

Ammoniac.

Galbane.

Lafler.

Agarike.

Gumme  of  Arabic.

Cardamome.

Xilocinamome.  lewels  of  Sardonica. Dyed  cloth  and  fylke

Carpefio.  Ceraunia.  Carbafei.

Sylkes  of  dyuers  fortes.  Calamus  Aromaticus.  Sylke  threede.

Cloth  of  Sarmatia.
The fylke cauled

Metaxa.
Veftures  of  fylke.

Gelded  men,

Popingiayes.

Eions  of  India.

Leopardes.

Panthers.

Purple.

Linnen  cloth.  Berille.

Skynnes  and  furres  of  Cilindro.
Parthia  and  Babilon.  Slaues.

luery,

Wodde  of  Heben.

Precious  flones.

Perles.

Alfo  that  iuife  or  liquour  which  is  gathered  of  wolle  and  of  the  heare  of  the  Indians.
By  thefe  woordes  it  dooth  appeare  that  in  owld  tyme  the  fayde  nauigation  by  the  way  of  the  redde  fea,  was
wel  knowen  and  muche  frequented,  and  perhappes  more  then  it  is  at  this  prefent.  In  fo  much  that  the  auncient
kynges  of  Egypt  confideryng  the  great  profyte  of  the  cuflomes  they  had  by  the  viages  of  the  red  fea,  and  wyllyng
to  make  the  fame  more  eafy  and  commodious,  attempted  to  make  a  foffe  or  chanel  which  fhulde  begynne  in  the
lafle  parte  of  the  fayde  fea,  where  was  a  citie  named  Arfinoe  (which  perhappes  is  that  that  is  nowe  cauled  Sues)
and  fliulde  haue  reached  to  a  branche  of  the  ryuer  of  Nilus  named  Pelufio,  which  emptieth  it  felfe  in  owre  fea
towarde  the  Eafl  abowt  the  citie  of  Damiata,  They  determyned  alfo  to  make  three  caufeis  or  hyghe  wayes  by
lande,  which  fliulde  paffe  from  the  fayde  braunche  to  the  citie  of  Arfmoe :  but  they  founde  this  to  difficulte  to
brynge  to  paffe.  In  fine,  kynge  Tolomeus  furnamed  Philadelphus,  ordeyned  an  other  way :  as  to  fayle  vppon
Nilus  ageynfl.  the  courfe  of  the  ryuer  vnto  the  citie  of  Copto,  and  from  thenfe  to  paffe  by  a  deferte  countrey
vntyll  they  coome  aboue  the  redde  fea  to  a  citie  named  Berenice  or  Mioformo,  where  they  imbarked  all  theyr
marchaundies  and  wares  for  India,  Ethiope,  and  Arabic,  as  appeareth  by  the  wrytynge  fyrfl  of  Strabo  (who
wryteth  that  he  was  in  Egypte)  and  then  by  Plinie  who  was  in  the  tyme  of  Domitian,  Strabo  alfo  fpeaking  of
the  fayd  foffe  or  trench  which  was  made  toward  the  red  fea,  wryteth  thus.

There  is  a  trenche  that  goth  towarde  the  red  fea  and  the  goulfe  of  Arabic,  and  to  the  citie  of  Arfinoe,  which
fum  caul  Cleopatrida :  and  paffeth  by  the  lakes  named  Amari  (that  is)  bitter,  bicaufe  in  deede  they  were  fyrfl
bytter.  But  after  that  this  trenche  was  made  and  the  ryuer  entered  in,  they  became  fweete,  and  are  at  this
prefent  full  of  foules  of  the  water  by  reafon  of  theyr  pleafauntneffe.  This  trenche  was  fyrfl.  begun  by  kynge
Sefoflre,  before  the  battayle  of  Troy.  Sum  faye  that  it  was  begunne  by  kynge  Pfammiticus  whyle  he  was  a  chylde :
And  that  by  reafon  of  his  death,  it  was  lefte  imperfect :  Alfo  that  afterwarde,  kynge  Darius  fucceded  in  the
fame  enterpryfe,  who  wold  haue  finiffhed  it,  but  yet  brought  it  not  to  th[e]ende  bycaufe  he  was  informed  that
the  redde  fea  was  hygher  then  Egypt :  And  that  if  this  lande  diuydynge  bothe  the  feas,  were  opened,  all  Egypte
fhulde  bee  drowned  thereby.  Kynge  Tolomeus  wold  in  deede  haue  finyfhed  it:  but  yet  left  it  fhut  at  the  hed
that  he  myght  when  he  wolde,  fayle  to  the  other  fea  and  returne  withowt  perell.  Here  is  the  citie  of  Arfinoe :
And  nere  vnto  that,  the  citie  cauled  Heroum  in  the  vttermofl.  part  of  the  goulfe  of  Arabic  toward  Egipt  with
many  portes  and  habitacions.  Plinie  likewyfe  fpeakynge  of  this  trench,  fayth.  In  the  furthefl  part  of  the  goulfe
of  Arabic,  is  a  porte  cauled  Daneo,  from  whenfe  they  determyned  to  brynge  a  nauigable  trench  vnto  the  ryuer  of
Nilus,  where  as  is  the  fyrfl  Delta.  Betwene  the  fayde  fea  and  Nilus,  there  is  a  flreight  of  lande  of  the  length  of.  Ixii.
[fixty-two]  myles.  The  firfl  that  attempted  tnis  thynge,  was  Sefoflre  kynge  of  Egypte :  and  after  hym  Darius  kynge  of
the  Perfians,  whome  Tolomeus  folowed,  who  made  a  trenche  a  hundreth  foote  large,  and.  xxx.  [thirty]  foote  diepe,
beinge  three  hundreth  myles  in  lengthe  vnto  the  lakes  named  Amari,  and  durfle  proceade  no  further  for  feare  of
inundation,  hauynge  knoweleage  that  the  redde  fea  was  hygher  by  three  cubites  then  al  the  countrey
of  Eg}'pt.  Other  fay  that  this  was  not  the  caufe  :  but  that  he  doubted  that  yf  he  fhulde  haue  let  the  fea
coome  any  further,  all  the  water  of  Nilus  fliulde  haue  byn  therby  corrupted,  which  onely  mynyflreth  drynke  to
all  Egypte.  But  notwithflandynge  all  thefe  thynges  aforefayde,  all  this  vyage  is  frequented  by  lande
from  Egypte  to  the  redde  fea,  in  which  paffage  are  three  caufeis  or  hyghe  wayes.  The  fyrfl.  begynneth  at  the
284

Of  Mofcoiiie  and  Cathay.

2S5

mouth  of  Nilus  named  Pclufio.  All  which  way  is  by  the  fandes:  In  fo  much  that  if  there  were  not  certeyne
hyghe  reedes  fyxt  in  the  earth  to  fliewe  the  ryght  way,  the  caufci  coulde  not  be  founde  by  reafon  the  wynde
euer  couereth  it  with  fande.  The  fecond  caufci  is  two  myles  from  the  mountayne  Caffius.  And  this  alfo  in  th[e]-
ende  of.  Ix.  [fixtyj  myles,  commeth  vppon  the  way  or  caufey  of  Pelufius,  inhabited  with  certeyne  Arabians  cauled
Antei.  The  thyrde  begynneth  at  Gerro,  named  Adipfon :  and  paffeth  by  the  fame  Arabians,  for  the  fpace  of  Ix.
[fixty]  myles  fumwhat  fliorter,  but  full  of  rowgh  mountaynes  and  great  fca-feneffe  of  water.  All  thefe  caufeis,  leade
the  way  to  the  citie  of  Arfinoe,  buylded  by  Tolomeus  Philadelphus  in  the  goulfe  Carandra  by  the  red  fea.  This
Ptolomeus  was  the  fyrfl  that  fearched  al  that  parte  of  the  red  fea  which  is  cauled  Trogloditica.  Of  this  trenche
defcribed  of  Strabo  and  Plinie,  there  are  feene  certeyne  tokens  remaynynge  at  this  prefent  as  they  affirme  which
haue  byn  at  Sues  beyonde  the  citie  of  Alcayr  otherwyfe  cauled  Babylon  in  Egypte.  But  the  marchauntes  that
of  later  dayes  trauayle  this  viage  by  lande,  ryde  through  the  dry  and  baren  defertes  on  camels  both  by  day  and
by  nyght:  directynge  theyr  way  by  the  flarres  and  compafe  as  do  maryners  on  the  fea,  and  caryinge  with  them
water  fufficient  for  many  dayes  iorneys.  The  places  of  Arabic  and  India  named  of  Strabo  and  Plinie,  are  the
felfe  fame  where  the  Portugales  practife  theyr  trade  at  this  daye,  as  the  maners  and  cuflomes  of  the  Indians  doo
yet  declare.  For  euen  at  this  prefente  theyr  women  vfe  to  burne  theym  felues  alyue  with  the  deade  bodies  of
theyr  hufbandes.  Which  thynge  (as  wryteth  Strabo  in  his.  xv.  booke)  they  dyd  in  owlde  tyme  by  a  law^e,  for
this  confideration  that  fumtyme  being  in  loue  with  other  they  forfooke  or  poyfoned  theyr  hufbandes.  And
forafmuch  as  accordynge  to  this  cuflome,  the  owlde  poete  Propertius  (who  lyued  abowt  a  hundreth  yeares  before
th[e]incamation  of  Chryil)  hath  in  his  boke  made  mention  of  the  contention  that  was  amonge  the  Indian
women  which  of  them  fhuld  bee  burned  aliue  with  theyr  hufbandes,  I  haue  thought  good  to  fubfcribe  his
verfes,  which  are  thefe.

Fcelix  Fois  lex  ftineris  vna  mar  it  is,

Qiws  aurora  fuis  rubra  colorat  equis.

Mamque  vbi  mortifrro  ia6la  rjl  fax  vltima  IcBo,
Vxorum  fuis  Jtat  pia  turba  comis,

Et  certamen  habent  let  hi,  quce  viua  J  equatur
Coniugium,  pudor  efl  non  licuifsc  mori.

Ardent  vitlrices,  et  fiammx  pcHora  prcsbent,
Iwponuntquefuis  ora  perufla  viris.

As  touchynge  thefe  vyages  both  by  fea  and  by  lande  to  Eaft  India  and  Cathay,  many
thynges  are  wrytten  very  largely  by  dyuers  autours  which  I  omytte  bycaufe  they
perteyne  not  fo  much  vnto  vs  as  doth  the  viage  attempted  to  CATHAY  by  the  north
feas  and  the  coaftes  of  Mofcouia  difcouered  in  owre  tyme  by  the  viage  of  that  excellent
yonge  man  Rychard  Chaunceler  no  leffe  lerned  in  all  mathematicall  fciences  then  an
expert  pylotte,  in  the  yeare  of  owre  lorde.  1554.

As  concernynge  this  vyage,  I  haue  thought  good  to  declare  the  communication  which  w^as  betwene  the
fayde  learned  man  Galeatius  Butrigarius,  and  that  great  philofopher  and  noble  gentelman  of  Italic  naihed
Hieronimus  Fracaflor  as  I  fynde  wrytten  in  the  Italian  hyftories  of  nauigations.  As  they  were  therfore  con-
ferrynge  in  matters  of  learnynge,  and  reafonynge  of  the  fcience  of  Cofmographi,  the  fayde  lerned  man  hauynge
in  his  hande  an  inflrument  of  Aflronomie,  declared  with  a  large  oration  howe  muche  the  worlde  was  bounde
to  the  kynges  of  Portugale,  rehearfynge  the  noble  factes  doone  by  them  in  India,  and  what  landes  and  Ilandes
they  had  difcouered,  and  how  by  theyr  nauigations  they  made  the  whole  worlde  hange  in  the  ayer.  He  further
declared  what  parts  of  the  haul  of  the  earth  remained  yet  vndifcouered.  And  fayde  that  of  the  landes  of  the
inferior  hemifpherie  or  halfe  compafe  of  the  baule  towarde  the  pole  Antartike,  there  was  nothynge  knowen  but
that  lyttle  of  the  coafle  of  Brafdia  vnto  the  flreight  of  Magellanus.  Alfo  a  part  of  Peru :  And  a  lyttle  aboue
Affrike  towarde  the  cape  of  Bona  Speranza.  Alfo  that  he  marueyled  withowte  meafure  that  this  thynge  was  no
better  confidered  of  Chriflian  Princes  to  whom  god  had  deputed  this  charge,  hauyng  euer  on  the}T  oounfail
men  of  great  lernynge  which  may  informe  them  of  this  thing  beinge  fo  marueylous  and  noble  whereby  they
maye  obteyne  glorie  and  fame  by  vertue,  and  bee  imputed  amonge  men  as  goddes,  by  better  demerites  then
euer  were  Hercules  and  great  Alexander  who  trauayled  only  into  India :  and  that  by  makynge  the  men  of  this
owre  hemifpherie  knowen  to  theym  of  the  other  halfe  compafe  of  the  baule  beneth  vs,  they  might  by  the  tytle
of  this  enterpryfe,  withowt  comparyfon  farre  excell  all  the  noble  factes  that  euer'  were  doone  by  lulius  Cefar  or
any  other  of  the  Romane  Emperours.  Which  thynge  they  myght  eafely  brynge  to  paffe  by  afiignynge  colonies
to  inhabite  dyuers  places  of  that  hemifpherie,  in  lyke  maner  as  dyd  the  Romanes  in  prouinces  newely  fubdued.
Whereby  they  myght  not  only  obteyne  great  ryches,  but  alfo  inlarge  the  Chriflian  fayth  and  Empire  to  the
glory  of  god  and  confufion  of  infidels. After  this,  he  fpake  of  the  Ilande  of  faynt  Laurence,  cauled  in  owlde

The  viage  bi  lande
from  Egypte  to
the  red  sex

What  kynge

Ptolomeus
discouered.

Alcayre.
The  viage  to
Easte  Indya
frequented  in
owlde  tyme.
The  customes  and
maners  of  the
Indyans.

The  vyage  to
Cathay.

Rycharde
Chaunceler.

A  lemed  discourse
of  dyuers  vyages

The  vigages  of  the
Portugales.

The  worlde
hangynge  on  the
ayer.

W'hat  is  knowen
of  the  lower
hemispheric.

The  lande  of

Brasile.

Peru.

The  charge  and
dcwtie  of  Christian
princes.
Note.

252

Hercules  and
Alexander.

The  colonies  of
the  Romans  in
regions  subdued.

The  great  Hand
of  saynt  Laurence
or  Mad.-igasc;.r.

286

Of  M of  conic  and  Cathay.

The  Ilandes  of
Taprobana  or
Giaua.

Plinie.

The  hystorie  of
Cornelius  Nepos.

Shyps  of  India
driuen  into  the  sea
of  Germanie.

An  enterprise
wherby  Princes
may  obteyne  trewe
fame  and  glory.
Cathay  discouered
bi  Marcus  Paulus.

The  citie  of
Lubvke.

The  kyng  of
Polonie.

The  duke  of
Moscouia.

An  ambassadour
from  the  duke  of
Moscouia.

253

The  woordes  of
th[e]ambassadour
of  Moscouia.

The  way  from
Moscouia  to  the
north  Ocean  and
Cathay.

Volochda.

Vstiug.

Succana,

Duina.

Colmogor.

The  north  Ocean.
Create  wooddes.

Gothlande.

The  Moscouites
haue  knowleage  of
the  greate  cane
Cathay.

Permia.
Plescora.
Catena  mundi.

tyme  Mailagnfcar,  which  is  greater  then  the  reahne  of  Caflile  and  Portugale,  and  reachcthe  from  the.  xii.  degree
towarde  the  pole  Antartike,  vnto  the.  xwi.  degree  and  a  hahe,  lyinge  Northeafle  frome  the  cape  of  Bona
Speranza  and  partly  \nder  the  line  of  Tropicus  Capricorni :  beinge  well  inhabited  and  of  temperate  ayer,  witli
abundaunce  of  all  thynges  necefllirie  for  the  lyfe  of  man,  and  one  of  the  mod  excellent  Ilandes  that  is  founde
this  daye  in  the  worlde  :  And  that  neuertheleffe  there  is  nothynge  knowen  therof,  except  only  a  fewe  fmaule
hauens  by  the  fea  fide,  as  the  lyke  ignorance  remayneth  of  the  greatefl  part  of  the  Ilandes  of  Taprobana,  Giaua
the  more  and  the  lelTe,  and  infinite  other. Then  begynninge  to  fpeake  of  the  partes  of  owre  pole,  he  caufed
the  bookes  of  plinie  to  bee  brought  him  where  diligentely  ponderynge  the.  Ixvii.  chapiture  of  the  feconde  booke,
he  founde  where  he  reherfeth  the  hiflorie  of  Cornelius Nepos,  by  thefc  woordes  : That  in  his  tyme,  one
Eudoxus  efcapynge  the  handes  of  kynge  Lathyro,  departed  from  the  goulfe  of  Arabie  and  came  by  fea  to  the
Ilande  of  Calefe. Declarynge  further,  that  whereas  this  narration  was  many  yeares  reputed  for  a  fable,  was
nowe in  owre  tyme  by  the  vertue  of  the  Portugales,  knowen  to  bee  trewe  : And  that  lykewyfe  the  fame
Cornelius  Nepos  recitethe  that  at  the  tyme  when  -Quintus  Metellus  Celer  was  proconful  or  lieuetenant  for  the
Romans  in  Fraunce,  the  kynge  of  Sueuia  gaue  hym  certeyne  Indians  which  faylinge  owt  of  India  for  marchan-
dies,  were  by  temped  dryuen  to  the  coades  of  Germanie. When  he  had  redde  thefe  woordes,  he  proceaded,
fayinge  that  the  fame  thynge  myght  bee  verified  nowe  in  owr  tyme  if  the  princes  which  confine  vppon  that  fea
wolde  endeuoure  theyr  indudry  and  diligence  to  brynge  it  to  paffe. And  that  there  coulde  not  any  nauigation
bee  imagined  fo  commodious  and  profitable  to  all  Chridendoome  as  this  myght  bee  yf  by  this  way  the  vyage
diulde  bee  founde  open  to  India  to  come  to  the  rych  contrey  of  CATHAY  which  was  difcouered  now  two
hundreth  yeares  fence  by  Marcus  Paulas. Then  taking  the  globe  in  his  hande,  he  made  demondration  that
this  vyage  fliulde  bee  very  fliorte  in  refpect  of  that  which  the  Portugales  nowe  folowe,  and  alfo  of  that  which
the  Spanyardes  may  attempte  to  the  Ilandes  of  Moluca. He  declared  furthermore  that  the  citie  of  Lubyke
beinge  rych  and  of  great  poure,  and  fituate  vppon  the  fea  of  Germanie,  and  alfo  accudomed  with  continuall
nauigations  to  trauayle  the  fea  of  Norwaye  and  Gothlande,  and  lykewyfe  the  ryght  noble  kynge  of  Polonie
whofe  dominions  with  his  realme  of  Lituania,  extende  to  the  fayde  fea,  fliulde  be  apte  to  difcouer  this  fecreate :
But  that  aboue  all  other,  the  duke  of  Mofcouia,  fliulde  performe  the  fame  with  greater  commoditie  and  more
facilitie  then  any  other  Prince. And  here  deyinge  a  whyle,  he  began  to  fpeake  ageyne  and  fayde. Nowe
forafmuch  as  we  are  coome  to  this  paffe,  mee  thynke  it  fhulde  feeme  a  great  difcurtefie  if  I  fliuld  not  fliewe
yowe  all  that  I  knowe  as  touchynge  this  vyage,  wherof  I  greatly  mufed  with  my  felfe  many  yeares  by  occafion
of  the  woordes  of  Plinie. Whereas  therefore  beinge  a  younge  man,  I  was  in  Germanie  in  the  citie  of  Auguda,
it  fo  chaunfed  that  in  thofe  dayes  there  came  thyther  an  ambafadour  of  the  duke  of  Mofcouia,  a  man  fingularly
learned  both  in  the  Greeke  toonge  and  the  Latine,  and  of  good  experience  in  worldely  thynges,  hauying  byn
fent  to  dyuers  places  by  the  fayde  Prince,  and  one  of  his  counfayle. Of  whofe  leamyng  beinge  aduertifed,  I
fought  his  acquayntaunce. And  talkynge  with  hym  one  day  of  thefe  Indians  dryuen  by  fortune  to  the  coades  of
Germanie,  and  of  the  vyage  that  myght  bee  difcouered  by  the  North  fea  to  the  Ilandes  of  fpices,  I  perceaued
that  at  the  fyrde  he  marueyled  exceadyngely.  as  at  a  thynge  that  he  coulde  neuer  haue  imagined. But  redynge  a
whyle  in  maner  adonyfllied  in  his  fecreate  phantafie,  he  toke  great  pleafure  therin,  and  fayde. Forafmuch  as
the  Portugales  haue  nowe  compafed  abowt  all  the  fouth  partes  fuppofed  in  owlde  tyme  to  bee  inacceffable  by
reafon  of  great  heate,  why  fhulde  wee  not  certeinely  thynke  that  the  lyke  maye  bee  done  abowt  this  parte  of  the
north  withowt  feare  of  coulde,  efpecially  to  men  borne  and  brought  vp  in  that  clime  ? Yet  procedyng  further,
he  faid,  that  if  his  Prince  and  mader,  had  men  that  wolde  animate  hym  to  difcouer  this  vyage,  there  was  no
Prince  in  Chridendome  that  myght  do  it  with  more  facilitie. Then  caulynge  for  a  mappe  in  which  was  the
defcription  of  Mofcouia  and  the  prouinces  fubiecte  to  the  fame,  he  declared  that  from  the  citie  of  Mofcouia  or
Mofca  going  towarde  the  northead  for  the  fpace  of.  Ix.  [fixty]  myleS;  they  come  to  the  ryuer  of  Volochda  and  after-
warde  by  that,  and  folowyng  the  courfe  therof,  to  the  citie  of  Vdiug,  fo  cauled  bycaufe  the  ryuer  of  lug  fauleth
into  the  ryuer  of  Succana,  where  they  lofe  theyr  owne  names  and  make  the  great  ryuer  Duina  :  And  by  that,
Icauyng  on  the  ryght  hande  the  citie  of  Colmogor,  they  fayle  vnto  the  north  Ocean. The  which  waye,  althoughe
it  bee  a  longe  tracte,  as  more  then.  800.  myles,  neuertheleffe  he  fayde  that  in  fommer  it  myght  commodioufly
bee  fayled :  And  that  wheras  it  fauleth  into  the  fea,  there  are  infinite  woods  of  goodly  trees  apte  to  make  fliyppes.
And  the  place  fo  conuenient  for  this  purpofe,  that  fliipwryghtes  and  other  flcylful  workemen  for  all  thynges
hereunto  apperteynynge,  may  eafely  coome  owt  of  Germanie. Alfo  that  the  men  which  are  vfed  to  trauayle  the
fea  of  Germanie  abowte  the  coades  of  Gothlande,  fliulde  bee  bed  and  mod  apte  to  attempte  this  enterpryfe,
bycaufe  they  are  indurate  to  abyde  coulde,  hunger,  and  laboure. He  fayde  furthermore,  that  in  the  court  of  his
Prince,  they  haue  much  knowleage  of  the  great  cane  of  Cathay,  by  reafon  of  the  continuall  warres  they  haue
with  the  Tartars,  of  whom  the  greated  part  gyue  obedience  to  the  faid  great  Cane  as  to  theyr  chiefe  Emperoure.
He  made  alfo  demondration  in  the  fayde  carde  by  the  northeade,  that  beinge  pade  the  prouince  of  Permia  and
the  rj'uer  Pefcora  (whiche  fauleth  into  the  north  fea)  and  certeyne  mountaynes  named  Catena  Miindi,  there  is
286

I

Of  Mofcoiiie  and  Cathay.

287

th[e]enteraiince  into  the  prouince  of  obdora,  whereas  is  Vecchiadoro  and  the  ryuer  Obo,  whiche  alfo  fauleth
into  the  fayd  fca,  and  is  the  furthefl  borther  of  Th[e]empire  of  the  Prince  of  Mofcouia.  l"he  fayde  r>'uer  hath
his  originall  in  a  great  lake  cauled  Chethai,  which  is  the  fyrfle  habitacion  of  the  Tartars  that  paye  tribute  to  the
greate  Cane.  And  from  this  lake  for  the  fpace  of  two  monethes  vyage  (as  they  were  credably  informed  by
certeine  Tartares  taken  in  the  warres)  is  the  mofl  noble  citie  of  Cambalu,  beinge  one  of  the  chiefefl.  in  the  do-
minion of  the  greate  Cane,  whom  fum  caule  the  great  Cham.  He  alfc  affirmed,  that  if  fhippes  fhulde  bee  made
n  the  coafles  of  the  fayde  fea,  and  fayle  on  the  backe  halfe  of  the  coafl  therof  (which  he  knewe  by  many
relations  made  to  his  Prince,  to  reach  infinitely  toward  the  northeafl)  they  fhulde  doubteleffe  in  folowynge  the
fame,  eafely  difcouer  that  countrey.  Vnto  thefe  woordes  he  added,  that  although  there  were  greate  difficultie
in  Mofcouia,  by  reafon  that  the  waye  to  the  fayde  fea  is  full  of  thicke  wooddes  and  waters  which  in  the  fommer
make  great  maryfflies  and  impoffible  to  bee  trauayled,  afwell  for  lacke  of  vyttayles  whiche  can  not  there  bee
founde,  not  for  certeyne  dayes,  but  for  the  fpace  of  certeyne  monethes,  the  place  beinge  defolate  withowt
inhabitauntes,  neuertheleffe  he  fayde  that  yf  there  were  with  his  Prince,  only  two  Spanyardes  01  Portugales  to
whome  the  charge  of  this  vyage  fhulde  bee  commytted,  he  no  wayes  doubted  but  that  they  wolde  folowe  it  and
lynde  it,  forafmuch  as  with  great  ingenioufneffe  and  ineflimable  pacience,  thefe  nations  haue  ouercome  much
greater  difhculties  then  are  thefe  which  are  but  lyttle  in  comparifon  to  thofe  that  they  haue  ouerpaffed  and  doo
ouerpaffe  in  all  theyr  viages  to  India.  He  proceaded  declarynge  that  not  many  yeares  fence,  there  came  to  the
courte  of  his  Prince,  an  ambaffadour  frome  pope  Leo,  named  mafler  Paulo  Centurione  a  Genuefe  vnder  dyuers
pretenfes.  But  the  principall  occafion  of  his  commynge,  was,  bycaufe  he  hadde  conceaued  greate  indignation
and  hatred  ageynfl  the  Portugales :  And  therfore  intended  to  proue  yf  he  coulde  open  anye  vyage  by  lande
whereby  fpices  myght  bee  brought  from  India  by  the  lande  of  Tartaria,  or  by  the  fea  Cafpium  (othervv}^fe  cauled
Hircanum)  to  Mofcouia:  And  from  thenfe  to  bee  brought  in  fliippes  by  the  ryuer  Riga,  whiche  runnynge  by
the  countrey  of  Liuonia,  fauleth  into  the  fea  of  Germanic.  And  that  his  Prince  gaue  eare  vnto  hym:  and  caufed
the  fayde  viage  to  bee  attempted  by  certeine  noble  men  of  Lordo,  of  the  Tartars  confininge  nexte  vnto  hym.
But  the  warres  whiche  were  then  betwene  them,  and  the  greate  defertes  which  they  fhulde  of  neceffitie  ouerpaffe,'
made  them  leaue  of  theyr  enterpryfe :  which  if  it  had  bin  purpofed  by  the  coafles  of  this  owre  north  fea,  it  myght
haue  byn  eafely  fynyflied.  The  fayde  Ambaffadour  continued  his  narration,  fayinge  that  no  man  ought  to
doubte  of  that  fea  but  that  it  may  bee  fayled  fyxe  monethes  in  the  yeare,  forafmuch  as  the  days  are  then  very
longe  in  that  clime,  and  hot  by  reafon  of  contynuall  reuerberation  of  the  beanies  of  the  foonne  and  fhorte
nyghtes.  And  that  this  thynge  were  as  well  woorthy  to  bee  proued,  as  any  other  nauigation  wherby  many
partes  of  the  worlde  heretofore  vnknowen,  haue  byn  difcouered  g.nd  brought  to  ciuilitie.  And  here  makynge  an
ende  of  this  talke,  he  faid:  Let  vs  nowe  omytte  this  parte  of  Mofcouia  with  his  coulde,  and  fpeake  fumwhat  of  that
parte  of  the  newe  worlde  in  whiche  is  the  lande  of  Brytons  cauled  Terra Britomwi,  and  Baccaleos  or  Terra  Bacca-
learu7n,  where  in  the  yeare.  1534.  and.  1535.  laques  Cartiar  in  two  vyages  made  with  three  great  French  gallies,
founde  the  great  and  large  countreys  named  Canada,  Ochelaga,  and  Sanguenai:  which  reach  from  the.  xlv.  [forty-fifth]
to  the.  li.  [fifty-fird]  degree,  beinge  well  inhabited  and  pleafaunte  countreys,  and  named  by  hymNouaFrancia.  And
here  fleyinge  a  while  and  lyftynge  vppe  his  handes,  he  fayde:  Oh  what  doo  the  Chrillian  Princes  meane  that
in  fuch  landes  difcouered  they  do  not  affigne  certeine  colonies  to  inhabite  the  fame  to  bringe  thofe  people
(whom  god  hath  fo  bleffed  with  natural  gyftes)  to  better  ciuilitie  and  to  embrafe  owre  religion,  then  the  whiche,
nothynge  can  bee  more  acceptable  to  god  ?  The  fayd  regions  alfo,  beinge  fo  fayre  and  fmtefull,  with  plentie  of
all  fortes  of  corne,  herbes,  frutes,  woodde,  fyffhes,  beafles,  metals,  and  ryuers  of  fuche  greatneffe  that  fliyppes
maye  fayle  more  then.  180.  myles  vppon  one  of  theym,  beinge  on  bothe  fydes  infinitely  inhabited:  And  to  caufe
the  gouernoures  of  the  fayde  colonies  to  fearche  whether  that  lande  toward  the  northe  named  Terra  de Laborador,
doo  ioyne  as  one  firme  lande  with  Norwaye:  Or  whether  there  bee  any  flreight  or  open  place  of  fea  as  is  mofle
Ijke  there  fliulde  bee,  forafmuch  as  it  is  to  bee  thought  that  the  fayde  Indians  dryuen  by  fortune  abowte  the
coafles  of  Norway,  came  by  that  flreyght  or  fea,  to  the  coafles  of  Germanic:  And  by  the  fayde  flreight  to  faile
northwefl  to  difcouer  the  landes  and  countreys  of  CATHAY,  and  from  thenfe  to  fayle  to  the  Ilandes  of
Molucca.  And  thefe  furely  fhulde  be  enterprifes  able  to  make  men  immortal.  The  whiche  thynge,  that  ryght
woorthy  gentleman  mafler  Antony  di  Mendoza  confiderynge  by  the  fingular  vertue  and  magnanimitie  that  is  in
hym,  attempted  to  put  this  thynge  in  practife.  For  beinge  viceroy  of  the  countrey  of  Mexico  (fo  named  of  the
great  citie  Mexico  otherwife  cauled  Temiflitan,  nowe  cauled  neweSpayne,  being  in  the.xx.  [twentieth]  degree  aboue
ihe  Equinoctiall,  and  parte  of  the  fayde  firme  lande),  he  fent  certeyne  of  his  capitaynes  by  lande,  and  alfo  a  nauie
of  fhyppes  by  fea,  to  fearch  this  fecreate.  And  I  remember  that  when  I  was  in  Flaunders  in  Th[e]emperours
courte,  I  fawe  his  letter  wrytten  in  the  yeare,  1541.  and  dated  from  Mexico:  wherin  was  declared  howe  towarde
the  northwefl,  he  had  fbwnd  the  kyngedome  of  Sette  Ciiia  (that  is)  Seuen  Cities,  whereas  is  that  cauled  Ciuola
by  the  reuerend  father  Marco  da  Niza:  and  howe  beyonde  the  fayde  kyngedome  yet  further  towarde  the  North-
wefl, Capitayne  Francefco  Vafques  of  Coronado,  hauynge  ouerpaffed  great  defertes,  came  to  the  fea  fyde  where

Obdora.

Vechiadoro.

Obo.

The  lake  Chethay.

The  Tartars.

The  citie  of
Cambalu.

Note  this  secreate.

r>ifficult
trauaylynge  in
Moscouia.

Commendation  of
the  Spaniardes
and  Portugales.

The  hystorie  of
Paulus  Centurio.
Of  this  reade  more
at  large  in  the
jooke  of  Paulus
louius.

Malice  may  do
more  with  sum
then  vertue.

The  Caspian  sea.

Riga.

Liuonia.

254

The  Tartars  of

Lordo.

Desertes.

The  viage  by  the
north  sea.

The  woorthynesse
of  this  vyage.

The  viages  of  the
Frenchmen  to  the
land  of  Baccalaos.

Ple?-saunt
countreys.

New  Fraunce.

Apostrophe  to  the
Christian  princes.

Great  ryuers.

A  ihyng  woorthy
to  be  searched.

The  way  to
Cathay  and  the
liandes  of  M.iluca
by  the  northwest

A  notable
cnterpryse.

The  noble
enterprise  of
AntonidiMendcza,
Viceroy  of  Mexico.

The  discouerj-nge
of  the  northwest
partes.

887

288

Of  Mofcouic  and  Cat  hay.

Rhyps  saylynge
trom  Cathay  by
the  north
hyperborean  sea
to  the  coastes  of
the  northwest
part  of  the  lande
of  Baccaleos.
Cathay.

The  sea  from  new
Fraunce  or  Terra
Britonum  to
Cathay.

A  notable  bo<  ke.
255

A  great  and
glorious  enterprise.

Sebastian  Cabote
the  grand  pylot  of
the  west  Indies.

Commendation  of
Sebastian  Cabote.

Sebastian  Cabote
tould  me  that  he
was  borne  in
Brystowe,  .and  that
at.  iiii.  yeare  owld
he  was  caried
with  his  father  to
Venice  and  so
returned  ageyne
into  England  with
his  father  after
certe>Tie  yeares :
wherby  he  was
thought  to  haue
bin  bom  in  Venice.

The  fyrst  vj-age  of
Sebastian  Cabote.

The  lande  of
Florida.

The  seconde  vyage
of  Cabote  to  the
land  of  Brasi'e,
and  Rio  della
Plata.

Cabote  tould  me
that  in  a  region
within  this  ryuer
he  sowed  1.  [fifty]
graynes  of  weate  in
September,  and
gathered
therof  I.  256

[fifty]  thousand  in
December  as
v/ryteth  also
Francisco  Lopes.

he  found  certeyne  fliyppes  which  foyled  by  that  fea  with  marcliaundics,  and  had  in  thcyr  baner  vppon  the
proos  of  theyr  fliyppes,  certeyne  foules  made  of  golde  and  fyUicr  which  they  of  Mexico  caiile  Alcatrazzi :  And  that
theyr  mariners  fliewed  by  fignes  that  they  were,  -x.x.x.  [thirty]  dayes  faylynge  in  commynge  to  tliat  hauen :  wherby
he  vnderflode  that  thefe  fliippes  could  bee  of  none  other  countrey  then  of  Cathay,  forafmuch  as  it  is  fituatc  on
the  contrary  parte  of  the  fayde  lande  difcouered.  The  fayde  mafler  Antonie  wrote  furthermore,  that  by  the
opinion  of  men  well  practifed,  there  was  difcouered  fo  greate  a  fpace  of  that  countrey  vnto  the  fayd  fea,
that  it  pafled.  950.  leaques,  which  make.  2850.  myles.  And  doubtlcfle  yf  the  Frenche  men  in  this  theyr
newe  Fraunce,  wolde  haue  pafled  by  lande  towarde  the  fayd  northwefl  and  by  north,  they  fluild  alfo  haue  founde
the  fea  wl>erby  tliey  myght  haue  Hxyled  to  Cathay.  But  aboue  all  thynges,  this  feemed  vnto  me  mofle  woorthy
of  commendation,  that  the  fayde  mafler  Antonie  wrote  in  his  letter  that  he  had  made  a  booke  of  al  the  natural
and  marueylous  thynges  whiche  they  founde  in  fearchynge  thofe  countreys,  with  alfo  the  meafures  of  landes  and
altytudcs  of  degrees :  A  worke  doubtlefle  which  flieweth  a  princely  and  magnificall  mynde,  wherby  wee  may
conceaue  that  yf  god  had  gyuen  hym  the  charge  of  the  other  heinifi)herie,  he  wolde  or  nowe  haue  made  it  better
knowen  to  vs.  The  which  thynge,  I  fuppofe  no  man  doth  greatly  efleeme  at  this  time:  beinge  neuertheleffe
the  greatefl  and  mofl.  glorious  enterprife  that  may  bee  imagined.

And  here  makynge  a  certeyne  paufe,  and  turnynge  hym  felfe  towarde  vs,  he  fayde:  Doo  yow  not  vnder-
flande  to  this  purpofe  howe  to  paffe  to  India  toward  the  northwefl.  wind,  as  dyd  of  late  a  citizen  of  Venefe,  fo
valiente  a  man,  and  fo  well  jiractyfed  in  all  thynges  perteynynge  to  nauigations  and  the  fcience  of  Cofmographie,
that  at  this  prefent  he  hath  not  his  lyke  in  Spayne,  in  fo  much  that  for  his  vertues  he  is  preferred  aboue  all
other  pylottes  that  fayle  to  the  wefl  Indies,  who  may  not  paffe  thyther  withowt  his  licence,  and  is  therfore
cauled  Piloto  Maggiore  (that  is)  the  graunde  pylote.  And  when  wee  fayde  that  wee  knewe  him  not,  he  pro-
ceaded,  fayinge,  that  beinge  certeyne  yeares  in  the  citie  of  Siuile,  and  defyrous  to  haue  fum  knowleage  of  the
nauigations  of  the  Spanyardes,  it  was  toulde  hym  that  there  was  in  the  citie  a  valient  man,  a  Vcnecian  borne,
named  Sebaflian  Cabote,  who  had  the  charge  of  thofe  thynges,  being  an  expert  man  in  that  fcience,  and  one
that  coulde  make  cardes  for  the  fea  with  his  owne  hande.  And  that  by  this  reporte,  feekynge  his  acquaintaunce,
he  founde  hym  a  very  gentell  perfon,  who  enterteyned  hym  frendly  and  fliewed  him  many  thynges,  and  amonge
other  a  large  mappe  of  the  worlde  with  certeine  particular  nauigations  afwell  of  the  Portugales  as  of  the  Span-
yardes. And  that  he  fpake  further  vnto  hym,  in  this  effecte.  When  my  father  departed  from  Venefe  many
yeares  fence  to  dwell  in  Englande  to  folowe  the  trade  of  marchaundics,  he  tooke  me  with  him  to  the  citie  of
London  whyle  I  was  very  yonge,  yet  hauynge  neuertheleffe  fum  knowleage  of  letters  of  humanitie  and  of  the
fphere.  And  when  my  father  dyed  in  that  tyme  when  newes  were  browght  that  Don  Chrin.opher  Colonus
Genuefe,  had  difcouered  the  coafles  of  India,  whereof  was  great  talke  in  all  the  courte  of  kynge  Henry  the
feuenth  who  then  reigned:  In  fo  much  that  all  men  with  great  admiration  affirmed  it  to  bee  a  thynge  more
diuine  then  humane,  to  fayle  by  the  Wefle  into  the  Eafl.  where  fpices  growe,  by  a  way  that  was  neuer  knowen
before.  By  which  fame  and  reporte,  there  increafed  in  my  harte  a  greate  flame  of  defyre  to  attempte  fum
notable  thynge.  And  vnderflandyng  by  reafon  of  the  fphere,  that  if  I  fliulde  fayle  by  the  way  of  the  northwefl.
wynde,  I  fliulde  by  a  fliorter  tracte  coomme  to  India,  I  thereuppon  caufed  the  kynge  to  bee  aduertifed  of  my
diuife,  wlio  immediatly  commaunded  two  carauels  to  bee  furnyfflied  with  all  thynges  apperteynynge  to  the
vyage,  which  was  as  farre  as  I  remember,  in  the  yeare.  1496.  in  the  begynnynge  of  fommer.  Begynnyng  ther-
fore to  faile  towarde  Northwefl:,  not  thynkyng  to  fynde  any  other  lande  then  that  of  CATHAY,  and  from
thenfe  to  turne  towarde  India.  But  after  certeine  dayes,  I  founde  that  the  lande  ranne  towarde  the  Northe,
which  was  to  me  a  great  difpleafure.  Neuertheleffe,  fayling  alonge  by  the  coafl.  to  fee  if  I  could  fynde  any
goulfe  that  turned,  I  founde  the  lande  flyll  continent  to  the.  56.  degree  vnder  owre  pole.  And  feinge  that
there  the  coafl.  turned  toward  the  Eafl,,  difpayringe  to  fynd  the  paffage,  I  turned  backe  ageyne,  and  fayled
downe  by  the  coafl.  of  that  lande  towarde  the  Equinoctiall  (euer  with  intent  to  fynde  the  fayde  paffage  to
India)  and  came  to  that  parte  of  this  firme  lande  whiche  is  nowe  cauled  FLORIDA,  Where,  my  vyttayles
fayling,  I  departed  from  thenfe  and  returned  into  England,  where  I  founde  great  tumultes  amonge  the  people,
and  preparaunce  for  warres  in  Scotlande:  by  reafon  whereof,  there  was  no  more  confideration  had  to  this  vyage
Wheruppon  I  wente  into  Spayne  to  the  Catholyke  kynge,  and  queene  Elizabeth:  who  beinge  aduertifed  what  I  had
doone,  interteyned  me,  and  at  theyr  charges  furnyflhed  certeyne  fliyppes  wherwith  they  caufed  me  to  fayle  to
difcouer  the  coafles  of  Braflle,  where  I  founde  an  exceadynge  great  and  large  ryuer,  named  at  this  prefent  Rio
della  Plata  (that  is)  the  ryuer  of  fyluer,  into  the  which  I  fayled,  and  folowed  it  into  the  firme  lande  more  then  fyxe
hundrethe  leaques,  fyndynge  it  euery  where  verye  fayre  and  inhabited  with  infinite  people,  which  with  admyration
came  runnynge  dayly  to  owre  fliyppes.  Into  this  ryuer,  runne  fo  many  other  riuers,  that  it  is  in  maner  incredible.
After  this,  I  made  many  other  vyages,  which  I  now  pretcriiiitte.  And  we.xynge  owlde,  I  gyue  my  felfe  to  refl.  from,
fuch  trauayles  bycaufe  there  are  nowe  many  younge  and  lufly  pylotes  and  mariners  of  good  experience,  by  whofe
forwardeneffe  I  doo  reioyfe  in  the  frutes  of  my  labours,  and  reft  with  the  charge  of  this  office  as  yowe  fee.

2S8

Of  Mofcouie  and  Cathay.

289

And  this  is  as  much  as  I  haue  vnderftoode  of  mafter  Sebaflian  Cabote,  as  I haue
gathered  owte  of  dyuers  nauigations  wrytten  in  the  Itahan  toonge.

And  whereas  I  haue  before  made  mention  howe  Mofcouia  was  in  owr  tyme  dif-
couered  by  Richard  Chanceler  in  his  viage  toward  Cathai  by  the  direction  and  informa-
tion of  the  fayde  mafter  Sebaftian  who  longe  before  h^d  this  fecreate  in  his  mynde,  I
fhall  not  neede  here  to  defcribe  that  viage,  forafmuche  as  the  fame  is  largely  and  fayth-
fully  written  in  the  Laten  tonge  by  that  lerned  young  man  Clement  Adams  fcole  mayfter
to  the  Queens  henfhemen,  as  he  receaued  it  at  the  mouthe  of  the  fayde  Richard  Chan-
celer. Neuertheleffe  I  haue  thought  good  here  to  fpeake  fumwhat  of  Mofcouia  as  I
haue  redde  in  the  booke  of  lohn  Faber  written  in  the  Latin  toonge  to  the  ryght  noble
Pry  nee  Ferdinando  Archeduke  of  Auftria  and  Infant  of  Spaine,  of  the  maners  and
religion  of  the  Mofcouites,  as  he  was  partely  inftructed  by  the  ambafadours  of  the
duke  of  Mofcouie  fent  into  Spayne  to  Th[e]emperours  maieftie  in  the  yeare.  M.D.XX.V.
He  wryteth  therfore  as  foloweth.

I  thynke  it  fyrfle  conueniente  to  fpeake  fumewhat  of  the  name  of  this  region  wherby  it  is  cauled  at  this
day,  and  how  it  was  cauled  in  owlde  tyme.  Conferrynge  therfore  the  mofle  ancient  of  the  Greeke  and  latine
monumentes  with  the  hiflories  of  later  tyme,  I  perceaue  it  to  bee  a  thynge  which  requireth  no  fmaule  iudgement
of  wytte  and  lemynge.  For  we  fee  in  howe  fliorte  tyme  the  names  of  thynges  are  chaunged,  as  are  alfo  the
maners  of  men.  I  fynde  therfore  that  thofe  people  whom  at  this  day  wee  commonly  caule  Mofcouites,  were
in  tyme  pafl  (as  wytneffeth  Plinie)  cauled  Roxolani,  whom  neuertheleffe  by  chaung}'nge  one  letter,  Ptolomie  in
his  eyght  table  of  Europe,  cauleth  Rofolanosz.?,  dooth  alfo  Strabo.  They  were  alfo  many  yeares  cauled  Ruthnii:
And  are  that  people  which  fumtyme  fought  manfully  ageynfl  the  Capitaynes  of  Methridates  as  Strabo  wryteth.
They  were  cauled  Mofcouites  of  the  chiefe  citie  of  al  the  prouince  named  Mofcouia  or  Mofca:  or  (as  Volaterane
faith)  of  the  riuer  Mofco.  They  were  fumtyme  gouemed  by  duke  lohan,  whofe  wyfe  was  Helena  of  the  lynage
of  Th[e]emperours  of  Conflanflinople  of  the  noble  famelie  of  the  Paleologi.  Beyonde  thefe  Roxolanos,  Strabo
fayth  there  is  no  lande  inhabited.  Thefe  Ruthenians  therfore  or  Mofcouites,  are  people  of  the  northeafle  parte
of  the  worlde  from  vs:  And  are  determined  with  the  limettes  of  the  great  ryuer  Boriflhenes  of  Scithia,  on  the
one  fyde  with  the  Lituanians  and  Polonians,  and  on  the  other  fyde  with  the  Tartars  who  ceafe  not  to  vexe
them  with  continuall  warres  and  incurfions.  Efpecially  the  great  Emperour  Cham  of  Cathay  the  chiefe  Prince
of  the  Tartars,  refidente  by  the  fea  fyde  in  Taurico  Cherfonefo,  molefleth  theini  with  fore  warres.  They  are
towarde  the  north  fyde  inclofed  with  the  frofen  fea,  the  lande  of  whofe  coafles  beinge  verye  large,  perteyneth
in  maner  all  to  the  dominion  of  the  duke  of  Mofcouie.  This  fea  is  it  which  the  owlde  wryters  caule  Lacus
Cronicus,  fo  named  of  the  Greeke  word  Cronos,  which  the  Latines  caule  Saturnus  whom  they  fayne  to  bee  an
owlde  man,  of  complexion  coulde  and  flowe,  and  thereby  name  all  fuch  thynges  as  are  coulde  and  flowe,
Cro?iica,  as  by  lyke  reafon  they  dyd  this  northe  fea  which  beinge  in  maner  euer  frofen,  is  flowe  and  coulde  and
in  maner  immouable.  And  for  lyke  confideration  (as  faythe  Plinie)  Hethens  nameth  it  in  the  Scythian  toonge,
Amaltheum,  whiche  woorde  fignifieth  as  muche  as  congeled  or  frofen.  But  that  I  wander  not  farre  frome  my
purpofe  :  Th[e]empire  and  dominion  of  the  duke  of  Mofcouie  recheth  fo  farre  that  it  comprehendeth  certeyne
partes  of  Afia  and  alfo  of  Europe.  The  citie  of  Mofcouia  or  Mofca,  is  counted  twyiQ  as  bygge  as  Colonia
Agrippina  as  they  faythfully  reporte  which  knowe  bothe.  Vnto  this  they  haue  alfo  an  other  not  vnequall  in
byggeneffe  cauled  Fladimer.  Alfo  Blefcouia,  Nouogradia,  Smolne,  and  Otifer,  al  which,  theyr  ambaffadours
affirme  to  bee  of  princely  and  magnificall  buyldynges,  and  flrongely  defended  with  waules  bothe  of  brycke
and  fquare  flone.  Of  thefe,  Blefcouia  is  llrongeft  and  enuironed  with  three  waules.  Other  which  they  haue
innumerable  are  not  fo  famous  as  are  thefe  wherof  this  duke  of  Mofcouie  and  Emperoure  of  Ruffia  taketh
th[e]infcription  of  his  title.  For  euen  at  this  prefent,  when  fo  euer  eyther  by  his  ambaffadours  or  his  letters,
he  dooth  fignifie  hym  felfe  to  bee  Emperoure  of  Mofcouie,  he  is  accuflomed  to  vfe  this  title.  Bafilius  by  the
grace  of  God  Emperoure  of  all  Ruffia  and  greate  Duke  of  Fladamer,  Mofcouie,  Nouigrade,  Blefcouia,  Smolne,
and  Otifer.  etc.  And  this  is  the  tytle  whereby  the  fayde  ambaffadours  faluted  yowre  maieflie  in  the  name  of
great  Bafilius  when  they  began  theyr  oration.  This  prince  of  Mofcouie  hath  vnder  hym  princes  of  many
prouinces  and  thofe  of  great  poure:  Of  the  which,  that  owlde  whyte  bearded  man  whom  this  Emperour  of  the
Ruthians  fente  for  his  ambaffadoure  to  Th[e]emperours  maieRie  into  Spayne,  is  not  one  of  the  leafl.  For  euen
he  when  neceffitie  of  warre  requyreth,  is  accuflomed  to  make  for  his  Emperour  a  bande  of.  xxx.  [thirty]  thoufande
horfemen.  But  this  is  to  theyr  fingular  commendation  that  they  are  fo  obedient  to  theyr  prince  in  al  thynges,
that  beinge  fommoned  by  hym  by  neuer  fo  meane  an  hearald,  they  obey  incontinent  as  if  it  were  to  god,

The  vyage  to
Moscouia.

The  hystorye  of
Moscouia.

The  dyuers  names
of  Moscouia.

RoxolnnL
RosolanL
Rutheni.

The  rj'uer  Mosca

The  rjnier
Boristhenes.

Th[e]emperour  of
Cathay.

The  frosen  sea.
Lacus  Cronicus.
Saturnus.

Amaltheum.
The  dominion  of
the  duke  of
Moscouia.

The  citie  of
Moscouia.

The  chiefe  cities  of
Moscouia.

257

The  duke  of
Mofcouia  and
Emperour  of
Russia.
The  duke  of
Moscouia  his  tytle.

Duke  Basilius.

Their  poure.

Theyr  obedience
to  theyr  prince.

The\T  wars  and
conqueste:>.

Eden

c8o

290

Of  Mof conic  and  CafJiay.

Gunnes.

Only  the
moscoiiites  h.iue
nol  felt  the
commodities  of
peace.
Theyr  language.

Dalmatla.
Pannoni.i.
Hungarie.
Theyr  original.
The  Sclauon
toonge  reacheth
farre.

Great  woods
white  beares  .-»nd
blacke  woolues.

Abundance  of
hony  and  waxe.

Rych  furres.

Theyr  maner  of
bargenyng

Rude  and  wylde

people.

Tartares.

258

Ciuile  people  in
cities.

Theyr  money

fhey  embrase  the
Christian  fayth
whiche  thei
receaued  of  the
Apostles.

The  counsaile  of
Nicene.

6a.silius  M.agnus.
Chrisostomus

Theyr  constancie
in  theyr  religion.

The  bysshoppes
define

controuersies  in
religion.

Theyr  byssl.ops.

The
Archebysshoppe.

The  patriarke  of
Constantinople.

A  notable  exemple
of  a  Christian
pryjice.

th)nkynge  nolliyng  more  glorious  then  to  dye  in  the  quarcll  of  theyr  prince.  By  reafon  of  which  obedience,
they  are  able  in  lliort  tyme,  to  alVenible  an  army  of  two  or  three  hundreth  thoufande  men  ageynfl  theyr  enemies
eyther  the  Tartars  or  the  greate  Cham :  And  haue  hereby  obteyned  great  victories  and  triumphes  afwell  ageynfl
the  Turkes  as  the  Tartars  by  the  exceadyng  multitude  of  theyr  horfemen  and  continual  experience  in  warres.
At  fuch  time  as  Th[e]eniperour  Maximilian  made  a  league  with  them,  they  kept  warre  ageynfl  the  kynge  of
Polonie.  They  vfe  not  only  bowes  and  dartes  after  the  maner  of  the  Parthians,  but  haue  alfo  the  vfe  of  gunnes
as  we  haue.  And  to  bee  briefe,  onely  the  Mofcouites  maye  feeme  that  nation  whiche  hath  not  felte  the  com-
modities of  peace :  In  fo  muche  that  yf  theyr  region  were  not  flrongely  defended  by  the  nature  of  the  place
beinge  impreignable,  it  had  or  nowe  byn  often  tymes  conquered.  Theyr  language  agreeth  much  with  the  toonge
of  the  Bohemians,  Croatians,  and  Sclauons:  fo  that  the  Sclauon  dooth  playnly  vnderflande  the  Mofcouite,
although  the  Mofcouian  toonge  be  a  more  rude  and  harde  phrafe  of  fpeach.  The  hifloriographers  wryte  that
the  Sclauons  toonge  the  name  of  the  confufion  whiche  was  in  Babell  in  the  tyme  of  that  flowt  hunter  Nemroth
of  whome  mention  is  made  in  the  Genefis.  But.  I  can  not  enowgh  marueyle  at  this  thing,  that  wheras  betwene
Dalmatia  (now  cauled  Sclauonia)  and  Mofcouia,  both  the  Pannonies  are  fituate,  yet  this  notwithflandynge,  the
Hungarians  toonge  nothynge  agreeth  with  the  Mofcouites.  Wherby  wee  may  coniecture  that  thefe  nations  were
fumtymes  diuided  by  legions,  and  that  they  came  owt  of  Dalmatia  thyther:  whiche  thynge  alfo  Volateranus
affirmeth,  fayinge  that  the  language  of  the  Ruthenians  (whiche  are  the  Mofcouites)  is  Scmidalmaiica  (that  is)
halfe  Sclauone.  Howe  fo  euer  it  bee,  this  is  certeyne  that  the  Bohemians,  Croatians,  Sclauons,  and  Mofcouites,
agree  in  language  as  wee  perceaued  by  th[e]interpretours  which  yowre  maieflie  had  then  in  yowre  courte.  For
whereas  the  fayde  interpretours  were  borne  amonge  the  Croatians  and  Sclauons  and  none  of  them  had  euer  byn
in  Mofcouia,  or  beefore  that  tyme  had  any  conuerfation  with  them,  yet  dyd  they  well  vnderflande  the
ambaffadours  woordes.

There  are  in  Mofcouia,  wooddes  of  exceadynge  byggeneffe,  in  the  which  blacke  woolues  and  whyte  beares
are  hunted.  The  caufe  wherof  may  bee  th[e]extreme  could  of  the  north,  which  dooth  greatly  alter  the  com-
plexions of  beafles,  and  is  the  mother  of  whyteneffe  as  the  Philofophers  affirme.  They  haue  alfo  great  plentie
of  bees,  wherby  they  haue  fuch  abundaunce  of  hony  and  waxe  that  it  is  with  them  of  fmaul  price.  When  the
commoditie  of  theyr  coun  trey  is  neglected  by  reafon  of  longe  warres,  theyr  chiefe  aduauntage  whereby  they  haue  all
thynges  neceffarie  towarde  theyr  lyuynge,  is  the  gaines  which  they  haue  by  theyr  rych  furres,  as  Sables,  Marternes,
Luzernes,  mofl  whyte  armyns,  and  fuch  other  which  they  fell  to  marchauntes  of  dyuers  countreys.  They  bye  and
fell  with  fimple  fay  the  of  woordes  exchaungynge  ware  for  ware  withowt  any  curious  bondes  or  cautels.  And  albeit
they  haue  the  vfe  of  both  golde  and  fyluer  monyes,  yet  doo  they  for  the  mofl  part  exchaunge  theyr  furres  for  frutes
and  other  thynges  neceffarie  to  mainteine  theyr  lyfe.  There  are  alfo  fum  people  vnder  the  dominion  of  this  Em-
perour,  which  haue  neither  wyne  nor  wheate,  but  lyue  only  by  flefflie  and  mylke  as  doo  the  wylde  Tartars  theyr
bortherers  which  dwel  in  wods  by  the  coafles  of  the  frofen  fea.  Thefe  people  are  brutyfflie,  and  lyue  in  maner  lyke
wylde  beafles.  But  they  of  the  citie  of  Mofca  and  Nouigrade,  and  other  cities,  are  ciuile  people:  and  agree  with
vs  in  eatynge  of  fyffhe  and  fleffhe  althowgh  theyr  maner  of  coquerie  is  in  manye  thynges  dififerynge  frome  owres.
Volaterane  wryteth  that  the  Ruthenians  vfe  money  vncoyned.  And  inquirynge  further,  I  was  informed  that  the
money  of  Hungary  is  much  currant  with  them.  But  this  is  chiefely  to  bee  confydered,  that  they  imbrafe  the
Chriflian  fayth  which  they  afhrme  to  haue  byn  preached  to  them  fyrfle  by  faynt  Andrewe  th[e]apoflle  and  broother
to  Simon  Peter.  Such  doctrine  alfo  as  vnder  Conflanfline  the  greate,  in  the  yeare.  CCC.  xviii.  [three  hundred  and
eighteen]  was  concluded  in  the  fyrfl  generall  counfayle  holden  in  the  citie  of  Nicene  in  Bithynia,  and  there  deter-
myned  by.  CCC.  xviii.  [three  hundred  and  eighteen]  byfflioppes,  and  alfo  fuch  as  hath  byn  wrytten  and  tawght
by  the  Greeke  doctoures  Bafilius  Magnus  and  Chrifoflomus,  they  beleue  to  bee  fo  holy,  firme  and  fyncere,  that
they  thinke  it  no  more  lawfuU  one  heare  to  tranfgreffe  or  go  backe  from  the  fame,  then  from  the  gofpell  of  Chrifl.
For  theyr  conflancie  and  modeOie  is  fuch,  that  no  man  dare  caule  thofe  thynges  into  queflion  which  haue  once
byn  decifed  by  holy  fathers  in  theyr  general  counfailes.  They  doo  therfore  with  a  more  conflante  mynde  perfeuer
in  the>T  fyrfl  fayth  which  they  receaued  of  faynt  Andrewe  th[e]appoflle  and  his  fucceffours  and  holy  fathers,
than  doo  manye  of  vs  beinge  diuided  into  fcifmes  and  fectes  whiche  thynge  neuer  chaunceth  amonge  them.  But
if  any  difficultie  chaunce  to  rife  as  touchynge  the  fayth  or  cuflome  of  religion,  all  is  referred  to  the  archbyfhoppe
and  other  byfhoppes  as  to  bee  defined  by  theyr  fpirite:  not  permyttinge  any  iudgemente  to  the  inconflant
and  ignorant  people.  Theyr  archebyfhoppe  is  refidente  in  the  citie  of  Mofca,  where  alfo  Th[e]emperoure
keepethe  his  courte.  They  haue  lykewyfe  dyuers  other  byfhops:  as  one  in  Nouigradia,  where  alfo  Ifodorus  was
byfHiop  vnder  pope  Eugenius.  They  haue  an  other  in  Rofciuia,  an  other  in  Suflali,  an  other  in  Otiferi :  alfo  in
Smolne,  in  Refan,  in  Colmum,  and  in  Volut,  all  which  haue  theyr  dioces.  They  acknowleage  theyr  Archebyfliop
as  the  chiefe.  Before  the  patriarche  of  Conflantinople  was  oppreffed  by  the  Tiranni  of  the  Turkes,  this
Archebyfflioppe  recognifed  hym  as  his  fuperioure.  In  fo  much  that  this  duke  of  Mofcouia  and  Emperour  of
Ruffia,  not  vnmyndefuU  hereof  but  a  diligente  obferuer  of  his  accuflomed  religion,  dooth  at  this  daye  yearely

zgo

Of  Mofcoiiie  and  Cathay.

291

fende  a  certeyne  flypende  in  maner  of  almes  to  the  patriarche  of  Conflantinople,  that  he  may  with  more  quiete
mynd  looke  for  th[e]ende  of  this  his  Egiptian  fcruitude  vntyll  it  fl:al  pleaft  almyghty  god  to  reflore  hym  to  his
former  churche  and  autoritie.  For  he  iudgeth  it  much  impietie,  if  he  flnilde  nowe  forfake  hym  whofe  predi-
ceffoures  haue  ruled  and  gouerned  fo  many  churches,  and  of  whom  the  fayth  and  rehgion  of  fo  many  regions
and  prouinces  haue  depended.

But  to  fpeake  briefely  of  theyr  rehgion,  they  agree  in  many  thyng^s  with  vs,  and  in  fum  thynges  folow  the
Greekes.  They  haue  munkes  and  rehgious  men.  Not  farre  from  the  citie  of  Mofca,  they  haue  a  great  monaflerie
in  the  whiche  are  three  hundreth  munkes  lyuynge  vnder  the  rule  of  Bafilius  Magnus  in  the  which  is  alfo  the
fepulcher  of  S.  Sergius  the  abbot.  They  obferue  theyr  vowe  of  chaflitie  which  none  may  breake  that  haue  once
profeffed.  Yet  fuch  as  haue  maried  virgins  of  good  fame,  may  bee  admitted  to  th[e]order  of  preflhod,  but  may
neuer  bee  a  munke.  The  prefles  and  byffhops  whiche  are  admitted  to  orders  vnmaried,  may  neuer  after  bee
maried :  nor  yet  fuch  as  haue  wiues,  mary  ageine  when  they  are  dead,  but  hue  in  perpetual  chaflitie.  Such  as
committe  adulterie  or  fornication,  are  greeuoufly  punyfHied  by  the  byffhoppes  and  depriued  of  the  benefices.
They  celebrate  maffe  after  the  maner  of  the  Greekes  which  differeth  from  owres  in  dyuers  thinges,  as  in
fermented  breade  after  the  maner  of  the  Greekes.  They  put  in  the  chaleffe  as  much  water  as  redde  wine,  which
water  they  vfe  to  heate,  bycaufe  (not  withowt  a  great  myflerie)  there  iffhewed  furth  of  the  fyde  of  owre  lorde,
both  blud  and  water,  which  wee  ought  by  good  reafon  to  thynke  was  not  withowt  heate :  for  els  fhulde  it
fcarfely  haue  byn  iudged  for  a  miracle.  In  fine,  they  affirme  that  all  theyr  cuflomes  and  rytes  are  accordynge
to  th[e]inflitutions  of  the  primatyue  church  and  the  doctrine  of  Bafilius  Magnus,  and  Chrifoflomus.  In  this
thynge  they  dyfifer  greately  from  vs,  that  they  minifler  the  communion  to  younge  children  of  three  yeares
of  age,  which  they  doo  with  fermented  breade  dipte  in  a  fponefuU  of  wyne,  and  gyue  it  them  for  the  bodye  and
bludde  of  Chryfle.

C A  brief e  defcriptioii  of  Mofcoitia  after  the  later  wryters,  as  Sebaftian

Munfler  and  lacobns  Gaftaldus.

He  prouince  of  Mofcouia,  is  fo  named  by  the  ryuer  Mofco  which  paffeth  by  the  metrapolitane
citie  of  Mofcouia  cauled  Mofca  by  the  name  of  the  ryuer  Mofco.  This  prouince  was  cauled
of  the  owlde  wryters,  Sarmatia  Afiatica.  The  bortherers  or  confines  to  the  Mofcouians  on
the  one  fyde  towarde  the  Eafl,  are  the  Tartars  cauled  Nogai,  and  the  Scianbanians,  with  the
Zagatians.  Towarde  the  Weft.,  the  prouinces  of  Liuonia  and  Lituania.  Towarde  the  South,
the  ryuer  of  Tanais  and  the  people  confinyng  with  the  ryuer  Volga,  cauled  of  the  owld
writers  Rha.  And  towarde  the  North,  the  Ocean  fea  cauled  the  Scythian  fea,  and  the
region  of  Lapponia.  Mofcouia  is  in  maner  all  playne  and  full  of  maryfflies,  wooddes,  and  many  very  great
ryuers  wherof  the  ryuer  of  Volga  is  the  principal.  Sum  caul  this  Ledyl,  as  the  owld  autours  named  it  Rha.
It  beginneth  at  the  great  lake  cauled  Lacus  Albus  (that  is)  the  white  lake  and  runneth  into  the  fea  of  Bachau,
named  of  the  aunciente  wryters,  the  fea  Cafpium  or  Hircanum.  Vnder  the  dominion  of  Mofcouia,  are  certeyne
regions  and  dukedoomes :  as  Alba  RufUa  (that  is)  whyte  Ruffia.  Alfo  Colmogora,  Plefcouia,  Bafrida,  Nouo-
gardia,  with  alfo  manye  places  of  the  Tartars  which  are  fubiecte  to  the  duke  of  Mofcouia.  The  chiefe  cities  of
Mofcouia,  are  Mofca,  Plefcouia,  Nouogardia,  Colmogora,  Otogeria.  Viatra,  Smolenfer,  Percaflauia,  Cologna,
Volodemaria,  Roftauia,  and  Caffam.  The  people  of  Mofcouia  are  Chriftians,  and  haue  greate  abundaunce  of
hony  and  waxe:  alfo  ryche  furres,  as  Sabels,  Marternes,  Foynes,  Calaber,  and  dyuers  other.  All  the  Tartars
which  inhabite  towarde  the  Eafl  beyonde  the  ryuer  of  Volga,  haue  no  dwellynge  places,  nor  yet  cities  or  cartels.
But  cary  abowt  with  theym  certeyne  cartes  or  wagens  couered  with  beaftes  hydes,  vnder  the  whiche  they  refte,
as  wee  do  in  owre  houfes.

They  remoue  togyther  in  great  companies  whiche  they  caule  Hordas.  They  are  w^arlike  people  and  good
horfemen,  and  are  all  Macometiftes.

Sebaftian  Munfter  in  his  booke  of  Vniuerfall  Cofmographie,  wryteth  that  the  citie  of  Mofca
or  Mofcouia  conteineth  in  circuite.  xiiii.  [fourteen]  myles,  and  that  it  is  twyfe  as  bygge  as  the  citie  of  Praga  in  Bohe-
mie.  Of  the  countrey  of  Mofcouia,  bifyde  other  prouinces  fubiecte  to  the  fame,  he  wryteth  thus.  It  extendeth
in  largeneffe  foure  hundreth  myles,  and  is  rich  in  fyluer.  It  is  lawfull  for  no  man  to  go  owt  of  the  realme  or  coome
in  withowt  the  dukes  letters.  It  is  playne  without  mountaynes,  and  ful  of  wooddes  and  mar}'fnies.  The  beaftes
there  by  reafon  of  the  coulde,  are  lefle  then  in  other  countreis  more  fouthwarde. In  the  myddeft  of  the  citie

291

Theyr  religion.

A  monasterie  of.
ccc.  [three
hundred]  monkes

Preestes.

Masse.

A  mysterie.

The  primatiue
church.

A  straungc
custome.

259

Sarmatia  asiatica.

The  Scythian
Ocean.

The  r^-uer  of
Volga.

Lacus  albus.
The  Caspian  sea.

Theyr  chiefe  cities

The  wylde  Tartars

Hordas.

The  bygnes  of  the
citie  ol  Moscouia.

Syluer.

The  region  of

Moscouia.

Bcastes.

292

Of  Mof conic  and  CafJiay.

A  (;iyre  and
stronge  castct  in
the  cilie  of  Mosca.

The  dukes
p.illaice.

Theyr  do'nke-

They  arc  g>'uen  to
dninkennesse.

Come  and  grayne.

Stoues.

The  famous  ryuer
of  Tanais.

260

The  marysshes  of

Meotis.

Volga.

Ocha.

The  sea  Euxinum.

The  forest  of

hircania.

Vri.

Alces.

They  trauayl  in
wynteron  sleades.

Causeys  of  tymber.
Trees  and  frutes.
Come  and  grayne.

Hony  in  wode  and
trees.

Lakes  or  pooles  of
hony.

A  man  almost
drowned  in  hony.

A  marueilous
chaunce.

Beares  feede  of
hony  and  bees.

Beares  inuade
bulles.

I'he  beares  byrlh.

of  Mofca  beinge  fituate  in  a  playne,  there  is  a  caflell  with.  xvii.  towres  and  three  bulwarkes  fo  Rronge  and  fayre,
that  the  lyke  are  fcarfely  feene  in  any  other  place.  There  are  alfo  in  the  caflell  xvi.  churches,  and  three  very
large  courtes  in  the  which  the  noble  men  of  the  courte  haue  theyr  lodgynges.  The  dukes  pallaice  is  buylded
after  the  maner  of  the  Italian  buyldyng,  and  very  Hiyre,  but  not  great.  Theyr  drynke  is  mede  and  beere  as  is
the  maner  of  the  mofle  parte  of  the  people  that  inhabite  the  North  partes  of  the  woorlde.  They  are  excead-
yngely  gyuen  to  droonkenneffe.  Yet  (as  fume  faye)  the  princes  of  the  lande  are  prohibite  in  peine  of  death  to
abileine  from  fuch  flronge  drinkesas  are  of  force  to  inebriate,  except  at  certeyne  tymes  when  licence  is  graunted
theym,  as  twyfe  or  thryfe  in  the  yeare.  They  plowe  the  grownde  with  horfes  and  plowes  of  woodde.  Theyr
come  and  other  grayne  by  reafon  of  longe  coulde,  doo  feldome  waxe  rype  on  tlie  ground  by  reafon  wherof  they
are  fumtimes  inforced  to  rype  and  dry  them  in  theyr  ftooues  and  hottes  houfes,  and  then  grynd  them.  They
lacke  wyne  and  oyle.  Mofcouia  is  extended  vnto  lurham  and  Corelia  which  are  in  Scythia.  The  famous
ryuer  of  Tanais,  the  Mofcouites  caule  Don,  hauyng  his  fprynges  and  originall  in  Mofcouia  in  the  dukedome  of
Rezenfe.  It  ryfeth  owt  of  a  grownde  that  is  'playne,  baren,  muddy,  full  of  maryflhes  and  wooddcs.  And
where  it  proceadeth  toward  the  Eafl  to  the  mountaynes  of  Scithia  and  Tartaric,  it  bendeth  to  the  fouth:  and
commyng  to  the  maryflhes  of  Meotis  it  fauleth  into  them.  The  ryuer  of  Volga  (fumetyme  cauled  Rha,  and
nowe  cauled  of  the  Tartars  Edel)  runneth  toward  the  north  certeyne  myles,  to  whom  is  ioyned  the  ryuer  Occa
or  Ocha,  flowynge  owt  of  Mofcouia,  and  then  bendyng  into  the  South  and  increafed  with  many  other  ryuers,
fauleth  into  the  fea  Euxinum,  which  diuideth  Europe  and  Afia.  The  woodde  or  forefl  cauled  Hircania  fylua,
occupieth  a  fmal  portion  of  Mofcouia.  Yet  is  it  fumwhere  inhabited,  and  by  the  longe  labour  of  men  made
thinner  and  barer  of  trees.  In  that  })arte  that  lyeth  towarde  Pruffia,  is  a  kynde  of  greate  and  fierce  bulles
cauled  Vri  or  Bifomes,  as  wryteth  Paulus  louius.  There  are  alfo  Alces  muche  lyke  vnto  hartes,  with  longe
fnoutes  of  flefflie  and  longe  legges  withowt  any  bowinge  of  theyr  houx  or  paRernes.  Thefe  beafles,  the
Mofcouites  caule  Lozzi,  and  the  Almaynes  Helenes.  The  iornaye  that  is  betwene  Vina  of  Lituania  by  Smolenfe
to  Mofca,  is  trauayled  in  wynter  on  fleades  by  the  fnowe  congeled  by  longe  frofle,  and  made  very  flypperye
and  compacte  lyke  Ife  by  reafon  of  much  wearynge  and  treadynge,  by  meanes  wherof  this  vyage  is  performed
with  incredible  celeritie.  But  in  the  fommer,  the  playne  countreys  can  not  bee  ouercome  withowt  difficulte
labour.  For  when  the  fnowe  begynneth  to  bee  diffolued  by  continuall  heate,  it  caufeth  maryfflies  and
quamyres  inextricable  and  daungerous  both  for  horfe  and  man,  were  it  not  for  certeyne  caufeyes  made  of
tymber  with  in  maner  infinite  labour.  The  region  of  Mofcouia  (as  I  haue  faid)  beareth  neyther  vynes  nor
olyue  trees,  nor  yet  any  other  trees  that  bere  any  apples  or  frutes  of  very  plefant  or  fwete  fauour  or  tafle  except
chery  trees,  for  as  much  as  al  tender  frutes  and  trees  are  burnte  of  the  coulde  blafles  of  the  North  wynde.  Yet
doo  the  fieldes  beare  all  kyndes  of  come,  as  wheate  and  the  grayne  cauled  Siligo,  wherof  the  fynefl  kynde  of
breade  is  made:  alfo  mylle  and  panyke,  whiche  the  Italians  caule  Melica:  Likewyfe  all  kyndes  of  pulfe,  as
beanes,  peafon,  tares,  and  fuche  other.  But  theyr  chife  haruefl  confifleth  of  hony  and  waxe,  forafmuch  as  the
hole  region  is  replenyfflied  with  frutefuU  bees  which  make  moR  fweete  hony,  not  in  the  hufbande  mens  hyues,
but  euen  in  holowe  trees.  And  hereby  commeth  it  to  paffe  that  both  in  the  wooddes  and  fhalowed  launes,
are  feene  many  fwarmes  of  bees  hangynge  on  the  bowes  of  trees,  fo  that  it  fhall  not  bee  neceffarie  to  caule  them
togj'ther  or  charme  theym  with  the  founde  of  bafens.  There  are  oftentymes  founde  greate  maffes  of  honj'
combes,  conferued  in  trees  of  the  owlde  hony  forfaken  of  bees,  forafinuch  as  the  hufband  men  can  not  feeke
euery  tree  in  fo  great  and  large  wooddes :  In  fo  much  that  in  the  Rockes  or  bodies  of  exceadynge  great  and
holowe  trees,  are  fumtymes  founde  great  pooles  or  lakes  of  hony.  Demetrius  th[eJambaffadour  of  the  duke  of
Mofcouia  whom  he  fent  to  the  byffliop  of  Rome  not  many  yeares  fence,  made  relation  that  a  hufbande  man  of
the  contrey  not  farre  from  the  place  where  he  remayned,  feekynge  in  the  wooddes  for  hony,  defcended  into  a
greate  holowe  tree  full  of  hony  into  the  which  he  flypte  vp  to  the  breR,  and  lyued  there  only  with  hony  for  the
fpace  of  two  dayes,  caulynge  in  vayne  for  helpe  in  that  deferte  of  wooddes.  And  that  in  fine  difpayrynge  of
helpe,  he  efcaped  by  a  marueilous  chaunce,  beinge  drawen  owt  by  a  great  beare  that  defcended  into  the  tree,
with  her  loynes  downewarde  after  the  maner  of  men.  For  when  the  man  (as  prefent  neceffitie  and  oportunitie
ferued)  perceaued  the  beare  to  bee  within  his  reache,  he  fuddeinly  clafped  her  abowt  the  loynes  with  his  amies,
and  with  a  terrible  crye  prouoked  the  beaR  to  inforce  her  Rrength  to  leape  owt  of  the  tree,  and  therwith  to
drawe  hym  owt,  as  it  chaunced  in  deede.

Thefe  regions  abounde  with  beares  whiche  euery  where  feeke  both  hony  and  bees,  not  only  herewith  to
fyl  theyr  bellies,  but  alfo  to  helpe  theyr  fyght.  For  theyr  eyes  are  oftentymes  dulled,  and  theyr  mouthes
wounded  of  the  bees :  both  which  greefes  are  eafed  by  eatynge  of  hony.  They  haue  weakeR  heades,  as  lions
haue  RrongeR.  In  fo  muche  that  when  (beinge  therto  inforced)  .they  caRe  theim  felues  dovvne  headelonge
from  any  rockes,  they  couer  theyr  heades  with  theyr  fiete,  and  lye  for  a  tyme  aRoonyfflied  and  halfe  deade  with
knockes.  They  walke  fumtyme  on  two  fiete,  and  fpoyle  trees  backewarde.  Sumtyme  alfo  they  inuade  bulles,
and  fo  hange  on  them  with  al  theyr  fiete,  that  they  wery  them  with  weight. The  beare  (as  fayth  Plinie)

292

1

Of  Mofcoitie  and  Cathay.

293

bryngeth  furth  her  byrth  the.  xxx.  [thirtieth]  day  and  oftentymes  two.  Theyr  byrth  is  a  certeyne  whyte  niaffe  of
flefflie  withowt  forme  and  Httle  bigger  then  a  moufe  withowt  eyes,  and  withowt  heare,  with  onely  the  nayles
or  clawes  commynge  foorthe.  But  the  damme  with  continuall  lyckynge,  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  figurethe  the  informe
byrthe.  When  fhee  entereth  into  the  denne  whiche  fhee  hath  chofen,  fhee  creepeth  thyther  with  her  belly
vpwarde  lefle  the  place  fhulde  bee  founde  by  the  fleppes  of  her  fiete.  And  being  there  deliuered  of  her  byrthe,
lemaynethe  in  the  fame  place  for  the  fpace  of  xiiii.  dayes  immo  \eable  as  wryteth  Arifloteles.  They  lyue
withowt  meate  fortie  dayes,  and  for  that  tyme  fufleyne  them  felues  only  by  lyckynge  and  fuckyng  theyr  r>'ght
foote.  At  the  lengthe  chaunfynge  to  fynde  meate,  they  fyll  theym  felues  fo  full,  that  they  remedy  that  furfecte
by  vomyte  whiche  they  prouoke  by  eatynge  of  antes.  Theyr  byrthe  is  oppreffed  with  fo  heauy  a  fleape  for  the
fpace  of.  xiiii.  dayes,  that  it  can  not  bee  rayfed  eyther  with  prickinge  or  woundes,  and  in  the  meane  tyme  growe
exceadynge  fat.  After,  xiiii.  dayes  they  wake  from  fleepe,  and  begyn  to  licke  and  fucke  the  foles  of  theyr  fore
fiete  and  lyue  thereby  for  a  fpace:  Nor  yet  is  it  apparent  that  they  hue  by  any  other  meate  vntyll  the  fprynge
tyme  of  the  yeare.  At  whiche  tyme  begynnynge  to  runne  abrode,  they  feede  of  the  tender  buds  and  younge
fprigges  or  braunches  of  trees,  and  other  herbes  correfpondent  to  theyr  lyppes.

Before  fiue  hundreth  yeares,  the  Mofcouites  honoured  the  goddes  of  the  gentyles :  And  then  fyrfle  receaued
the  Chriflian  faith  when  the  byffhoppes  of  Grecia  began  to  difcent  from  the  churche  of  the  Latines :  and  therfore
receaued  the  rites  of  the  Greekes.  They  minifler  the  facrament  with  fermented  breade  vnder  both  kyndes :
And  thinke  that  the  foules  of  deade  menne  are  not  helped  with  the  fuffragies  of  preefles,  nor  yet  by  the  deuotion
of  theyr  frendes  or  kinffolkes :  Alfo  that  the  place  of  Purgatorie  is  a  fable.  In  the  tyme  of  the  diuine  feruice,
the  hyflorie  of  the  miracles  of  Chrifle  and  the  Epiflels  of  faynt  Paule  are  rehearfed  owt  of  the  pulpitte.  Beyonde
Mofcouia,  are  manye  people  whiche  they  caule  Scythians,  and  are  partely  fubiecte  to  the  Prince  of  Mofcouia.
Thefe  are  they  which  duke  luan  fubdued,  as  are  the  people  of  Perm,  Bafkird,  Czriremiffa,  luhra,  Corela,  and
Permfka.  Thefe  people  were  Idolatours  before  the  duke  compelled  theym  to  baptifme,  and  appoynted  a  byffliop
ouer  them  named  Steuen,  whom  the  Barbarians  after  the  departure  of  the  duke,  fleyde  alyue  and  llewe.  But
the  duke  returnyng  fliortly  after,  afflicted  them  fore  and  affigncd  them  a  newe  byffhoppe.

It  is  here  alfo  to  bee  noted  that  the  owlde  Cofmographers  fayned  that  in  thefe  regions  towarde  the  Northe
pole,  there  fhuld  bee  certeyne  great  mountaynes  which  they  cauled  Ripheos  and  Hyperboreos,  which  neuer-
thelefle  are  not  founde  in  nature.  It  is  alfo  a  fable  that  the  ryuers  of  Tanais  and  Volham  doo  fprj'nge  owt  of
hygh  mountaynes,  wheras  it  is  apparent  that  both  thefe  ryuers  and  many  other,  haue  theyr  original!  in  the
playnes.

Nexte  to  Mofcouia,  is  the  fmtefull  region  of  Colmogora  throwgh  the  whiche  runneth  the  ryuer  of  Diuidna
beinge  the  greatefl  that  is  knowen  in  the  north  partes  of  the  world.  This  ryuer  increafeth  at  certeyne  tymes  of
the  yeare  as  dooth  the  ryuer  of  Nilus  in  Egypte,  ouerfloweth  the  fyeldes  round  abowt,  and  with  abundaunce  of
fatte  moyflure,  refifleth  the  couldeneffe  of  the  ayer.  Wheate  fowne  in  the  grounde,  groweth  abundauntly
withowt  plowynge :  and  fearynge  the  newe  iniurie  of  the  proude  ryuer,  fpryngeth,  groweth,  and  rypeth  with
woonderfuU  celeritie  of  haftynge  nature.

Into  the  ryuer  of  Diuidna  runnethe  the  ryuer  of  luga:  And  in  the  very  angle  or  comer  where  they  meete,
is  a  famous  marte  towne  named  Vlliuga,  beinge  a  hundreth  and  fyftie  myles  diflant  from  the  chiefe  citie  of  Mofca.
To  this  mart  towne  from  the  hygher  countreys,  are  fent  the  precious  furres  of  martemes,  fables,  woolues  and
fuch  other  whiche  are  exchaunged  for  dyuers  other  kyndes  of  wares  and  marchaundies.

Hytherto  Munfterus.

And  forafmuche  as  many  doo  maruaile  that  fuche  plentie  of  hony  fliiild  bee  in  fo
coole  a  contrey,  I  haue  thought  good  to  declare  the  reafon  and  naturall  caufe  hereof.
It  is  therefore  to  be  confidered  that  lyke  as  fpices,  gums,  and  odoriferous  frutes  are  engendered  in  hot  regions  by
continuall  heate  duryng  al  the  hole  yeare  withowt  impreffion  of  the  mortifying  qualitie  of  could  wherby  al  thynges  are
conflrayned  as  they  are  dilated  by  heate,  euen  fo  in  could  and  moyd  regions  (whofe  moyflure  is  thinner  and  more
wateryfflie  then  in  hot  regions)are  flowres  engendered  more  abundantly  as  caufed  by  impreffion  of  lelfe  and  faynter
heate  woorkynge  in  thynne  matter  of  wateryfflie  moifl.ure  leffe  concocte  then  the  matter  of  gummes  and  fpices  and
other  vnctuous  frutes  and  tree3  growing  in  hotte  regions.  For  althoughe  (as  Munfter  faithe  here  before)  the  region
of  Mofcouia  beareth  nother  vines  or  oliues,  or  any  other  frutes  of  fweete  fauoure  by  reafon  of  the  couldenefle  therof,
neuertheleffe  forafmuch  as  floures  (wherof  hony  is  chiefely  gathered)  may  in  fommer  feafon  growe  abundantly  in  the
playnes,  maryfflies,  and  wooddes,  not  onely  on  the  grownde  but  alfo  on  trees  in  coulde  regions,  it  is  agreeable  to  good
reafon  that  great  plentie  of  honye  fliulde  bee  in  fuche  regions  as  abounde  with  floures,  which  are  brought  furthe
with  the  fyrfl.  degree  of  heate  and  fyrft  approch  of  the  fonne,  as  appeareth  in  the  fprynge  tyme  not  onely  by  the
fpringinge  of  floures  in  fyeldes  and  gardeynes,  but  alfo  of  bloffomes  of  trees  fpryngynge  before  the  leaues  or
frute,  as  the  lyghter  and  thynner  matter  fyrRe  drawne  owte  with  the  lowefte  and  leafl.e  degree  of  heate,  as  the

z  2

261

The  beares  denne.

Beares  lyue
withowt  meate.  xL
[forty]  dayes.

The  sleape  of
beares.

The  religion  of  the
Moscouites.

The  Scythians
subiecte  to  the
duke  of  Moscouia.

It  was  then  an
opinion  that  al
ruers  spronge
owte  of  montaines

The  fruteful
region  of
Coimogora.
The  great  riuer
Diuidna.

Wbeate  withowt
plowing

The  r>-uer  of  luga.

\'stiuga.

Furres.

The  natur.ll!  ciuse
of  much  hony  in
cojid  reg  ons.
Gummes  and
spices  in  hot
countreys.

Floures  in  cc.jlde
regions

262

Floures  of  trees.

Blossoomes  of
trees.

aS3

294

Of  Mofcouie  mid  Cathay.

An  exemple  of  the
degrees  of  heate.

The  generation  of
floures  by
moderate  heate.

I.onge  dayes  and
shorte  nyghtes.

Branible  and
feme.

Spices.

The  saiioure  of
fluures.

\Vhat  Plinie
wryteth  of  hony.

Serius  is

otherwyse  cauled
Cmlcula,  this  is
the  dogge,  of
whom  the
canicular  dayes
haue  theyr  name.

\\"nat  is  hony

Howe  hony  is
corrupted.

Hony  of  great
quaniitie  in  North
regions

263

Hot  nyghtes  in
coulde  regions.

A  similitude-

Natural  heat
dooth  subtyle  and
digest  all  thynges.

Subtyle  vapours
digested  by  heate.

Could  regions
Ziglerus.

lyke  is  feene  in  the  arte  of  flyllyngc  wherby  all  tliinnc  and  lyght  moyflure.s  are  lyftcd  vp  by  the  fyrfle  degree  of
the  fyre:  and  the  heuyeil  and  thickefl  moyllures  are  drawne  owt  with  more  vehement  fyre.  As  we  may  therfore
in  this  cafe  compare  the  generation  of  floures  to  the  heate  of  May,  the  generation  of  gummes  to  the  heate  of
lune  and  fpices  to  the  heate  of  Inly.  Euen  fo  in  fuche  coulde  regions  whofe  foommer  agreeth  rather  with  the
temperate  heate  and  moyflure  of  ^May  then  with  th[e]extreeme  heate  of  the  other  monethes,  that  heate  is  more
apt  to  brynge  foorth  abundance  of  floures  as  thynges  caufed  by  moderate  heate,  as  playnely  appeareth  by  theyr
tall  and  lauoure  in  which  is  no  fliarpe  qualitie  of  heate  eyther  bytynge  the  toonge  or  offendyng  the  head  as  is
in  fpices,  gummes,  and  frutes  of  hotte  regions.  And  as  in  could  and  playne  regions,  moderate  heate  with
abundance  of  moifl-ure,  are  caufes  of  the  generation  of  floures  (as  I  haue  fayde)  fo  lykewyfe  the  length  of  the
dayes  and  fliortnefl*e  and  warmenefle  of  the  nyghtes  in  fommer  feafon  in  fuche  coulde  regions,  is  a  greate  helpe
herunto.  Cardanus  wrj'teth  in  his  booke  De  F/antis,  that  bramble  and  fearne  growe  not  but  in  could  regions,
as  dooth  wheate  in  temperate  regions.  And  that  fpices  and  hotte  feedes,  can  not  growe  in  coulde  regions,
forafmuch  as  beinge  of  thinne  fubflaunce,  they  fliulde  foone  be  mortified  and  extinct  by  exceflme  could.  For
(as  he  fayth)  nothing  can  concocte,  rype,  and  attenuate  the  fubflance  ot  frutes  withowt  the  helpe  of  ayer
agreable  to  the  natures  of  fuch  thynges  as  are  brought  foorth  in  the  fame,  althowgh  it  may  doo  this  in  rootes.
But  in  maner  all  floures  are  of  fweete  fauour,  forafmuch  as  the  moyflure  that  is  in  them,  being  thinne  and  but
lyttle,  is  by  meane  heate  foone  and  eafely  concocte  or  made  ryj^e.  Such  alfo  as  are  foone  rype,  are  foone
rotten  according  to  the  prouerbe.

Plinie,  althowgh  in  the.  xi.  booke  of  his  naturall  hyfl,orie,  Cap.  viii.  he  wryteth  that  hony  is  gathered  of
the  floures  of  all  trees  and  fets  of  plantes,  except  forell  and  the  herbe  cauled  Chenopode  (which  fume  caule
goofe  foote)  yet  he  aflirmeth  that  it  defcendeth  from  the  ayer:  for  in  the.  xii.  chapyture  of  the  fame  booke,  he
wryteth  thus.

This  coommeth  from  the  ayer  at  the  ryfynge  of  certeyne  flarres,  and  efpecially  at  the  ryfynge  of  Sirius,  and
not  before  the  ryfyng  of  Vergilice  (which  are  the  feuen  flarres  cauled  Pleiades)  in  the  fprynge  of  the  day.  For
then  at  the  mornynge  fprynge,  the  leaues  of  trees  are  founde  moifl  with  a  fat  dewe:  In  fo  much  that  fuch  as
haue  bynne  abrode  vnder  the  firmamente  at  that  tyme,  haue  theyr  apparell  annoynted  with  lyquoure  and  the
heare  of  theyr  headde  clammy.  And  whether  this  bee  the  fwette  of  heauen,  or  as  it  were  a  certeyne  fpettyl  of  the
flarres,  eyther  the  iuife  of  the  ayer  pourgynge  it  felfe,  I  wolde  it  were  pure,  liquide,  and  fimple  of  his  owne  nature
as  it  fyrfle  fauleth  from  aboue.  But  nowe  defcendyng  fo  far,  and  infected  not  only  with  fuch  vncleane  vapoures
and  exhalations,  as  it  meteth  with  by  the  way,  but  afterward  alfo  corrupted  by  the  leaues  of  trees,  herbes,  and
floures  of  fundrye  tafles  and  qualities,  and  lykewyfe  afwel  in  flomackes  of  the  bees  (for  they  vomite  it  at  theyr
mouthes)  as  alfo  by  longe  referuynge  the  fame  in  hiues,  it  neuertheleffe  reteyneth  a  great  parte  of  the  heauenly
nature.  &c.  Ageyne  in  the.  xiiii.  chapiture  of  the  fame  booke,  he  wrytethe  that  in  certeyne  regions  toward  the
north,  as  in  fum  places  of  Germanic,  hony  is  found  in  fuch  quantitie  that  there  haue  bynne  feene  hony  combes  of
eyght  foote  longe,  and  blacke  in  the  holowe  parte.  By  the  whiche  woordes  of  Plinie,  and  by  the  principles  of  natu-
rall philofophie,  it  dooth  appere  that  abundaunce  of  hony  fhulde  chiefely  bee  engendered  in  fuch  regions  where  the
heate  of  foommer  is  temperate  and  continuall  afwell  by  nyght  as  by  day  as  it  is  not  in  hotte  regions  where  the  nyghtes
be  longe  and  coulde  as  is  declared  in  the  Decades.  For  lyke  as  fuche  thynges  as  are  fyned  by  continuall  heate,
mouynge,  and  circulation,  are  hyndered  by  refrigeration  or  coulde  (as  appereth  in  the  art  of  flyllynge  and
hatchynge  of  egges)  euen  fo  by  the  action  of  temperate  and  continuall  heate  withowt  interpofition  of  contrarie
and  mortifyinge  qualitie,  crude  thynges  are  in  fliorte  tyme  made  rype,  fower  made  fweete,  thicke  made  thinne.
heauie  made  Ij'ght,  groffe  made  fubtyle,  harde  made  fofte,  deade  made  lyuynge,  and  in  fine  bodies  made  fpirites,
as  manifeflly  appeareth  in  the  marueylous  woorke  of  dygeflion  of  lyuyng  beafles,  wherby  the  finefl  part  of  theyr
nuriffliement  is  turned  into  bludde,  and  the  finefl  of  that  bludde  conuerted  into  fpirites,  as  the  like  is  alfo  feene
in  the  nuryffhement  of  trees,  plantes,  and  herbes,  and  all  other  thynges  that  growe  on  the  grounde,  all  whiche
are  moued,  digefled,  fubtiliate,  attenuate,  ryped,  and  made  fweete  by  the  action  of  this  continuall  heate  wherof
I  haue  fpoken.  To  conclude  therfore,  if  hony  bee  eyther  the  fwette  of  the  flarres,  or  the  iuife  of  the  ayer
pourginge  it  felfe  (as  plinie  writeth)  or  other  wyfe  engendered  of  fubtyle  and  fine  vapoures  ryfinge  frome  the
earth,  and  concocte  or  digefled  in  the  ayer  by  the  fayd  continuall  and  moderate  heate,  it  may  feeme  by  good
reafon  that  the  fame  fhulde  bee  engendered  in  foommer  feafon  more  abundantly  in  coulde  regions  then  in  hot,
for  the  caufes  aforefayde.  And  that  it  may  by  autoritie  and  reafon  more  manifefllye  appeare  bothe  that  the
heate  of  foommer  in  could  regions  is  continual  (as  I  haue  fayd)  and  alfo  that  the  coulde  in  wynter  is  not  there
fo  intoUerable  to  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  thofe  regions  as  other  doo  thynke,  I  haue  thought  good  for  the  better
declaration  hereof  to  adde  hereunto  what  I  haue  gathered  owt  of  the  booke  of  Ziglerus  wrytten  of  the  north
regions.

394

295

C  OF THE NORTH REGIONS

AND  OF  THE  MODERATE  AND  CONTINVALL  HEATE

in  collide  regions  alwell in  the  nyght  as  in  the day  in

foommer feafon : Alfo  howe  thofe regions  are

habitable to  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the

fame,  contrary  to  th[e]oppinion

of  the  owlde  wryters.

F  this  matter,  Ziglerus  in  his  booke  of  the  Northe
regions  in  the  defcription  of  Scondia  wryteth  as
foloweth.

Wee  vvyll  intreate  of  this  matter,  not  as  puttynge  the  fame
in  queflion  as  dyd  the  owld  wryters,  nor  gatherynge  iudgement
deducted  of  reafons  in  way  of  argument,  forafmuch  as  wee
are  alredy  more  certeyne  by  hyflorie  that  thefe  coulde  regions
are  inhabited.  Wee  wyll  fyrfl  therfore  fhewe  by  naturall  reafon
and  by  confideration  of  the  fphere,  declare  how  by  the  helpe
of  man  and  arte,  coulde  regions  are  inhabited  withowt  domage
or  deflruction  of  lyuynge  beafles  :  And  wyll  fyrfle  fpeake  of
the  qualitie  of  fommer,  declarynge  howe  it  is  there  augmented.
Yet  intende  I  not  to  comprehende  all  that  maye  bee  fayde  in
this  matter,  but  only  rehearfe  fuch  reafons  and  hmilitudes  as
are  mofl  apparent  and  eafy  to  bee  vnderfloode.

In  fuch  regions  therfore,  as  are  extended  from  the  burnte
line  or  Equinoctiall  towarde  the  north,  as  much  as  the  fonne  ryfethe  hygher  ouer  theim,  fo  muche  are  they  the
more  burnte  with  heate,  as  Affrica,  bycaufe  it  ryfeth  hyghefl  ouer  them  as  they  are  nearefl  to  the  Equinoctiall:
and  taryinge  with  theim  fo  mnch  the  fliorter  time  caufeth  fhorter  days,  with  longer  and  coulder  nyghtes  to
reflore  the  domage  of  the  day  pafl  by  reafon  of  the  moiflure  confumed  by  vapour.  But  in  fuch  regions  ouer
the  which  the  fonne  ryfeth  lower  (as  in  Sarmatia)  it  remayneth  there  the  longer  in  the  day,  and  caufeth  fo  much
the  fliorter  and  warmer  nyghtes,  as  reteynynge  warme  vapoures  of  the  day  pafl,  which  vapours  helpe  the
woorke  of  the  day.  I  fpeake  as  I  haue  founde  by  experience,  faythe  Vpfalienfis.  For"  I  haue  felt  the  fommer
nyghtes  fcarfely  tollerable  for  heate  in  Gothlande,  wheras  I  felte  them  coulde  in  Rorrie.  This  benefite  of  th[e]-
increafe  of  the  day,  doth  augment  fo  much  the  more  in  coulde  regions  as  they  are  nearer  the  poles:  and
ceaceth  not  vntyll  it  coome  directly  ouer  the  center  or  poynte  of  the  axes  or  axceltree  of  the  worlde,  where  the
fonne  beinge  at  the  hyghefl  in  fommer,  is  eleuate  abovvt.  xxiiii.  degrees:  In  which  regions,  one  continual  day
confifteth  of.  vi.  monethes  from  the  fprynge  tyme  by  the  flandynge  of  the  foonne  (cauled  SoUlitium)  in  the
figne  of  Cancer  to  Autumne.  The  foonne  therfore,  withowt  any  offence  of  the  night,  gyueth  his  influence
vppon  thofe  landes  with  heate  that  neuer  ceafethe  durynge  that  tyme  which  maketh  to  the  great  increafe  of
foommer  by  reafon  of  continuance.  We  haue  now  therfore  thought  good  to  gather  by  a  certeyne  coniecture
howe  greately  wee  thinke  the  foommer  to  bee  increafed  hereby.

Wee  haue  before  declared  howe  hyghe  the  foonne  is  eleuate  ouer  the  regions  that  are  vnder  the  poles  at
the  flaye  of  the  foonne:  And  fo  manyc  partes  is  it  eleuate  in  Rome  at  the  flay  of  the  foonne  in  wynter  (that  is)
at  the  fliortert.  day  in  the  yeare.  But  here,  in  the  mydde  wynter,  the  foonne  at  noone  tyde  is  beneficiall,  and
bryngeth  foorth  floures,  rofes,  and  ielefloures.  I  haue  gathered  fum  in  wynter  in  the  moneth  of  December,
not  procured  at  home  by  humane  arte,  but  growinge  in  open  gardenes  in  maner  in  euery  bedde  vnder  the  bare
heauen,  browght  foorth  only  by  the  foonne. But  this  benignitie  of  the  foonne,  continucth  not  paft  fine  houres

ass

Ziglerus.

1"hc  qualitie  of
soomer  in  could
regions.

The  course  of  the
Sonne.

Vapours.

Short  and  Warme
nyghtes.

Gothlande

264

One  day  of.  vi
monethes.

Howe  the  somnier
is  increased  in
could  regions.

RomCi

296

Of  tJic  north  regions.

Could  nights  in
hot  regions.

The  Romane
vvnter.

One  nyght  of  vL
monethes

Obiectiuas.

The  twylyghtes.

The  lyght  of  the
mone.

The  nyght  vnder
the  pole.

A  demonstration.

265

The  Moone.

Remedies  of
nature  and  art.

The  owlde  wryters
persuaded  by
coniecture.

A  brasen  pot
broken  with  frost

in  the  naturall  day,  forafmuch  as  th[e]operation  therof  is  extinct  by  the  couUlenefle  of  the  nyght  Iblowynge.
But  if  this  benefite  mvght  bee  roceaued  withowt  hindcraunce  of  the  nyght,  as  it  is  vnder  the  poles,  and  fo
continue  many  monethes  in  hot  regions  vnto  wynter,  it  fliulde  fuerlye  brynge  foorthe  manye  woonderfuU
thynges,  if  moyflure  fayled  not.  And  by  this  condition  thus  propounded,  wee  may  well  conceaue  that  the
Romane  winter,  althowgh  it  be  not  hotte,  yet  to  be  equal  in  heate  to  the  full  fprynge  tyme  in  the  fame  citie
durynge  the  tyme  of  the  fayde  fine  houres.  And  thus  by  a  fimilitude  of  the  height  of  the  foonne  vnder  bothe
places,  and  of  the  knowen  ciualitie  of  the  Romane  heaucn,  and  by  th[e]acceffe  of  the  foonne  to  fuch  places
where  the  longed  day  continueth  certeyne  monethes,  wee  maye  gather  that  foommer  in  places  vnder  the  pole,
is  lyke  vnto  and  equall  with  the  full  Romane  fprynge.

But  the  more  difficulte  queftion,  is  of  the  tyme  of  the.  vi.  moonethes  in  the  whiche  the  foonne  leaueth
thofe  regions,  and  go[e]th  by  the  contrarye  or  ouerthwarte  circle  towarde  the  fouth  in  wynter.  For  they  lay  that
at  that  tyme,  thofe  regions  are  deformed  with  horrible  darkenefle  and  nyghtes  not  increafed,  which  may  bee  the
caufe  that  beafles  can  not  feke  theyr  foode.  And  that  alfo  the  coulde  fliulde  then  bee  intollerable :  by  which
double  euyls  all  thynges  conflrayned  flnilde  dye,  fo  that  no  beafle  were  able  to  abyde  th[e]iniuries  of  wynter  •
and  famen  infuinge  therof:  but  that  all  beafles  fliulde  peryfflie  before  the  fommer  folowynge,  when  they  fliulde
bringe  furth  theyr  broode  or  fucceffion  :  And  that  for  thefe  caufes,  the  fayde  coulde  cUme  fliulde  bee  perpetu-
ally defolate  and  vnhabitable. To  al  which  obiections,  we  anfwere  in  this  maner

As  touchynge  the  nyghtes  not  increafed,  I  faye,  that  it  was  not  conuenient  to  affume  that  for  any  reafon.
For  not  as  the  foonne  fauleth,  fo  fuddeynly  commeth  the  darke  night  but  that  the  euenynge  dooth  fubfl.itute
and  prolonge  the  day  longe  after,  as  alfo  the  day  fprynge  or  dawnynge  of  the  daye  gyueth  a  certeyne  lyght
before  the  ryfmge  of  the  foonne:  After  the  whiche,  the  refidue  of  the  nyght  that  receaueth  no  light  by  the  fayde
euenynge  and  mornynge  twilightes,  is  accomplyfflied  by  the  lyght  of  the  moone,  fo  that  the  nyghtes  are  feldome
vnaugmented.  Let  this  bee  an  exemple  proued  by  owre  temperate  regions,  wherby  we  may  vnderflande  the
condition  of  the  nyght  vnder  the  pole.  Therfore  euen  there  alfo  the  twilightes  helpe  the  nyght  a  longe  tyme,
as  we  wyl  more  prefently  demonflrate.  It  is  approued  by  the  Aflronomers,  that  the  foonne  defcendynge  from
the  highell  halfe  fphere  by.  xviii.  paralels  of  the  vnder  horizon,  makethe  an  ende  of  the  twylight,  fo  that  at  the
lengthe  the  darke  nyght  fuccedeth :  And  that  the  foonne  approchynge,  and  ryfynge  aboue  the  the  hyghed  halfe
fphere  by  as  many  paralels,  dooth  diminyfflie  the  nyght  and  increafe  the  twylyght.  Ageyne,  by  the  pofition  or
placeinge  of  the  fphere  vnder  the  pole,  the  fame  is  the  horizontall  that  is  the  Equinoctiall.  Thofe  paralelles
therefore  that  are  paralels  to  the  horizontal  line,  are  alfo  paralels  to  the  Equinoctiall.  So  that  the  foonne
defcend}Tige  there  vnder  the  horizon,  dooth  not  brynge  darke  nyghtes  to  thofe  regions  vntyll  it  coomme  to  the
paralele  difl.ant.  xviii.  partes  from  the  Equinoctiall.

Other  demonftrations  hereof  are  made  by  certeyne  fygures  of  Aftronomie,  whiche  I  wolde  haue  added  hereunto  but  that  I
coulde  not  gette  the  fame  grauen  or  cutte.

Durynge  the  tyme  of  thefe  fayde  fyxe  moonethes  of  darkeneffe  vnder  the  pole,  the  nyght  is  defl-itute  of  the
benefite  of  the  foonne  and  the  fayde  twylyghtes,  onely  for  the  fpace  of  three  moonethes,  in  the  whiche  the
foonne  goeth  and  retumeth  by  the  portion  of  the  ouerthwart  circle.  But  yet  neyther  this  tyme  of  three
moonethes  is  withowt  remedy  frome  heauen.  For  the  moone  with  her  full  globe  increafed  in  lyghte,  hath
acceffe  at  that  tyme,  and  illuminateth  the  moonethes  lackynge  lyght,  euery  one  by  them  felues,  halfe  the  courfe
of  the  moonethe :  by  whofe  benefite  it  coommeth  to  paffe  that  the  night,  named  as  vnaugmented,  poffeffeth
thofe  regions  no  longer  then  one  mooneth  and  a  halfe,  neyther  that  continually  or  al  at  one  tyme:  but  this  alfo
diuided  into  three  forts  of  fliorter  nyghtes,  of  the  whiche  euery  one  endureth  for  the  fpace  of  twoo  weekes,  and
are  illuminate  of  the  moone  accordyngly.  And  this  is  the  reafon  conceaued  of  the  poure  of  the  fphere  wherby
we  tefl-ifie  that  the  fommers  and  nyghtes  vnder  the  pole,  are  tollerable  to  lyuynge  beafl.es.

But  wee  wyll  nowe  declare  by  other  remedies  of  nature  and  arte,  that  this  coulde  fo  greatly  feared,  is  more
remiffe  and  tollerable  then  owre  opinion:  fo  that  compared  to  the  nature  of  fuch  beafles  as  Hue  there,  it  may
bee  abydden.  And  there  is  no  doubt  but  there  are  autours  of  more  antiquitie  then  that  age  in  the  which  any
thynge  was  exactly  knowen  or  difcouered  of  the  north  regions.  The  owlde  wryters  therfore  perfuaded  onely
by  naked  coniecture,  dydde  gather  what  they  myght  determine  of  thofe  places:  Or  rather  by  the  eflimation  of
heauen,  the  which,  bycaufe  they  felte  it  to  bee  hardely  tollerable  to  them  felues,  and  leffe  to  men  borne  in  the
clyme  of  Egypte  and  Grecia,  tooke  therby  an  argument  of  the  hole  habitable  earth.  The  hydorie  of  Strabo  is
knowen,  that  a  potte  of  braffe  which  was  broken  in  funder  with  frofen  water,  was  brought  from  Pontus  and  fliewed
in  Delphis  in  token  of  a  greuous  wynter.  Here  therfore,  they  that  fo  greatly  feared  the  winter  (fuch  as  chaunceth
to  the  earth  vnder  the.  xlviii.  [forty-eighth]  paralele)  and  therefore  confecrated  that  broken  pot  to  the  temple  of
Apollo,  what  coulde  fuch  men  trewly  define  vppon  regions  fo  farre  withowt  that  paralele,  whether  they  were
inhabited  or  not  ?  But  fuch  as  folowed  thefe,  being  contented  with  th[e]inuentions  of  the  owlde  autours,
i.96

Of  the  north  regions.

297

and  borne  in  maner  vnder  the  fome  qualitie  of  hcauen,  perfifled  wyllyngly  in  the  fame  opinion,  with  more
confidence  then  confideration  of  the  thynges  whereof  wee  nowe  intreate:  fo  lyghtly  was  that  opinion  receaued
as  touching  the  vnhabitable  cHme  vnder  the  poles.  But  we  with  better  confidence  and  faithe  (forafmuch  as  we
are  not  inflructed  with  coniectures)  intend  to  flande  ageynfl.  the  fentence  of  the  owld  autours;  Afifirming  the
north  regions  within  the  coulde  cHme  to  bee  inhabyted  with  hearynges,  coddes,  haddockes,  and  brettes,
tunnyes,  and  other  great  fyfflies,  with  th[e]infinite  number  wherof,  tables  are  furnyfrtied  through  a  great  parte
of  Europe :  Al  whiche  are  taken  in  the  north  fea  extended  beyonde  out  knoweleage.  This  fea  at  certeyne
tymes  of  the  yeare,  poureth  furth  his  plentifulneffe,  or  rather  dryueth  furth  his  increafe  to  feke  newe  manfions,
and  are  here  taken  in  theyr  paffage.  Furthermore  alfo,  euen  the  mouthes  of  the  riuer  of  Tyber  receaue  a  fyffhe
as  a  newe  geft.  fent  from  the  north  fea.  This  fwamme  twyfe  through  Fraunce  and  twife  throughe  Spayne :
Ouerpaffed  the  Ligurian  and  Tufcan  fea  to  communicate  her  felfe  to  the  citie  of  Rome.  The  lakes  alfo  and
ryuers  of  thofe  regions  are  replenyfflied  with  fyffhe :  In  fo  much  that  no  poure  of  coulde  is  able  to  extinguyffhe
th[e]increafe  of  the  yeare  folowinge,  and  the  fucceffion  reparable  fo  many  hundreth  yeares.  And  I  playnely
thinke,  that  yf  it  fliulde  of  neceffitie  folowe,  that  one  of  thefe  two  elementes,  the  earthe  and  the  water,  fliulde
be  deflructiue  to  lyuynge  creatures,  the  water  fhulde  chiefely  haue  wrought  this  effecte.  But  this  is  founde  fo
tractable,  that  in  the  diepe  wynter,  both  that  increafe  is  brought  furth,  and  fyffhynge  is  alfo  exercifed.  The
lande  is  lykewife  inhabited  with  lyke  plentifulneffe.  But  that  we  wander  not  to  farre :  Let  the  fayth  hereof  reft.
in  th[e]expofition  folowynge,  wherin  we  intend  to  declare  howe  by  the  poure  of  nature  and  induftry  of  man,
this  commoditie  may  coomme  to  paffe.  Therfore  as  touchynge  nature,  wee  fuppofe  that  the  diuine  prouidence
hath  made  nothynge  vnconimunicable,  but  to  haue  gyuen  fuch  order  to  all  thynges  wherby  euery  thynge  maye
bee  toUerable  to  the  nexte.  The  extremeties  of  the  elementes  confent  with  theyr  next.  The  ayer  is  groffe
abowt  the  earth  and  water:  But  thinne  and  hotte  abowt  the  fyre.  By  this  prouidence  of  naturt,  the  vttermoft.
fea  is  very  falte.  And  falte  (as  wytneffeth  Plinie)  yeldeth  the  fatneffe  of  oyle.  But  oyle,  by  a  certe}'ne  natiue
heate,  is  of  propertie  agreable  to  fyre.  The  fea  then,  beinge  all  of  fuch  qualitie,  poureth  furth  it  felfe  far  vppon
th[e]extreme  landes,  whereby  by  reafon  of  the  falteneffe  therof,  it  moueth  and  ftereth  vp  generatiue  heate,  as  by
fatneffe  it  noryffheth  the  fecunditie  of  thynges  generate.  It  gyueth  this  frutfuines  to  the  earth  at  certeyne  fluds,
although  the  earth  alfo  it  felfe,  haue  in  his  inner  bowels  the  fame  liuely  and  nuryffhynge  heate,  wherby  not  only
the  dennes,  caues  and  holowe  places,  but  alfo  fprynges  of  water  are  made  warme :  And  this  fo  much  the  more,
in  howe  muche  the  wynter  is  more  vehement.  This  thyng  dooth  more  appere  by  this  exemple,  that  the
mountaynes  of  Norway  and  Suethlande  are  fruteful  of  metals,  in  the  which,  fyluer  and  copper  are  concocte  and
molten  into  veynes,  which  can  fcarfely  bee  doonne  in  fornaces.  By  this  reafon  alfo,  the  vapours  and  hotte
exhalations  perceinge  the  earthe  and  the  waters,  and  throwghe  both  thofe  natures  breathynge  furth  into  the
ayer,  tempereth  the  qualitie  of  heauen  and  maketh  it  toUerable  to  beaftes,  as  wytneffeth  the  huge  byggeneffe  of
the  whales  in  thofe  feas,  with  the  ft.rength  of  bodye  and  longe  lyfe  of  fuche  beaftes  as  Hue  on  the  lande :  whiche
thynge  coulde  not  bee,  excepte  all  thynges  were  there  commodioufly  nuryffhed  by  the  benefite  of  the  heauen
and  the  ayer.  For  nothyng  that  in  the  tyme  of  increafe  is  hyndered  by  any  iniurie,  or  that  is  euyll  fedde  all
the  tyme  it  lyueth,  can  profper  well.  Neyther  are  fuch  thynges  as  lyue  there,  offended  with  theyr  naturall
wynter  as  thowgh  an  Egiptian  or  Ethiopian  were  fuddeynly  conueyed  into  thofe  coulde  regions.  For  they
were  in  longe  tyme  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  browght  fyrft  acquaynted  with  the  nature  of  that  heauen,  as  may  be
proued  both  by  the  lyfe  of  man  and  by  the  hiftorie  of  holy  fcripture.  They  that  were  led  from  Mefopotania,
and  that  famous  towre  of  Babilon  towarde  the  north  partes  of  the  worlde  in  the  fyrft  difpertion  of  nations,  dyd
not  immediatly  paffe  to  th[e]extreme  boundes,  but  planted  theyr  habitations  fyrft  vnder  a  myddle  heauen
betwene  both,  as  in  Thracia  and  Pontus,  where  theyr  pofteritie  was  accuftomed  the  better  to  fufteyne  the
rygoure  of  Scythia  and  Tanais,  as  he  that  commeth  from  winter  to  foommer,  maye  the  better  after  abyde  Ife
and  fnowe  beinge  fyrft  hardened  therto  by  the  froftes  of  Autumne.  In  lyke  maner  mortall  men,  accuftomed  to
beare  the  hardeneffe  of  places  nexte  vnto  theym,  were  therby  at  the  length  more  confirmed  to  fufteyne  the
extremes.  And  here  alfo,  if  any  fharpeneffe  remayne  that  maye  feeme  intolerable,  nature  hathe  prouyded  for
the  fame  with  other  remedies.  For  the  lande  and  fea,  hathe  gyuen  vnto  beaftes,  diepe  and  large  caues,  dennes,
and  other  holowe  places  and  fecreate  corners  in  mountaynes  and  rockes,  bothe  on  the  lande  and  by  the  fea
bankes,  in  the  which  are  euer  conteyned  warme  vapoures  fo  much  the  more  intent  and  vehement,  in  howe
much  they  are  the  more  conftrayned  by  extreme  could  Nature  hath  alfo  gyuen  valleys  diuerted  and  defended
frome  the  north  wyndes.  Shee  hath  lykewife  couered  beaftes  with  heare  fo  much  the  thicker  in  howe  mucne
the  vehemencie  of  could  is  greater:  by  reafon  wherof  the  beft  and  rj^cheft  funes  are  bro\%-ght  from  thofe
regions,  as  Sables  whofe  price  is  growne  to  great  exceffe  nexte  vnto  gold  and  precious  ftones,  and  are  eftemed
princely  ornamentes.  The  beaftes  that  beare  thefe  furres,  are  hunted  chiefely  in  wynter  (which  thynge  is  more
ftraunge)  bycaufe  theyr  heare  is  thenne  thicker  and  cleaueth  fafter  to  the  flcyn.  Howe  greauous  then  fliall  we
thinke  the  winter  to  bee  there  where  this  lyttle  beaft  lyueth  fo  well,  and  where  the  hunters  may  fearch

297

Fysshes  of  the
North  seas.

The  North  sea.

The  qtialitie  of

water.

The  lande

The  diuine
prouidence  in
moderatynge  the
elements

266

The  nature  of  the
sea.
Salte.
Generatiue  haate.

Owtwarde  could  is
cause  of  inwarde
heate.

Metals.

Vapours  and
exhalations.

Whales.

Beastes.

Hereby  maye  bee
considered  the
cause  of  the
deathe  of  o»t  men
that  sayle  directly
to  Guinea,

No  passage  from
one  e-xtreniitie  to
another  but  by  a
meane.

Caues  and  dennes.

Valleys.

The  best  furres.
Sables.

298

Of  the  north  regions.

Beastes  that  lye
hyd  in  wynter.

All  beastes  haue
the  nature  of  the
place  where  they
are  engeuUered.

267

What  exercise
may  doo.

Vse  maketh
masteries.

Scondia.

Scone,  is  fayre  in
the  duch  toonge.

The  fertilitie  of
Scondia.

He  meaneth
Diodorus  Siculus.

Th[e]inuasions  of
the  Gothes

Transiluania

268

the  dennes  and  hauntcs  of  fuch  beafles  throwghe  the  wooddes  and  fnowe?  But  fuche  beafles  the
condition  of  whofe  bodies  is  fo  tender  that  they  are  not  able  to  abyde  th[e]iniiirie  of  coiilde,  eyther
lye  hydde  in  wynter,  or  chaunge  theyr  habitation,  as  do  certeyne  beafles  alfo  in  owre  chme.  Nature
hath  furthermore  gyuen  remedie  to  man  bothe  by  arte  and  induflry  to  dcfcnde  him  felfe  both  abrode
and  at  home.  Abrode,  with  a  thicke  veflure,  and  the  fame  well  dowbeled.  At  home,  with  large  fycrs
on  harthes,  chymyneys,  and  in  flooues  for  the  day,  with  clofe  chambers,  and  couches,  fofte  and  warme  beddes
for  the  nyght :  by  whiche  remedies  they  mitigate  the  winters  which  feeme  rigorous  to  flraungers,  althowghe  they
are  to  th[e]inhabitauntes  more  toUerable  then  owre  opinion,  as  in  deede  by  the  fyrfl  natural  mixture  or
compofition  of  theyr  bodies,  fuch  thinges  are  agreable  to  them  as  feeme  very  harde  to  other.  The  lion  in  Afifrike
and  the  beare  in  Sarmatia,  are  fierce  as  in  theyr  prefente  flrength  and  vigoure:  but  tranflated  into  a  contrary
heauen,  are  of  leffe  flrength  and  courage.  The  foule  cauled  Ciamia  (which  fum  thinke  to  bee  the  florke)
dooth  not  tary  the  Avinter:  yet  doo  the  cranes  coomme  at  that  tyme.  The  Scythian  wyll  accufe  the  Romane
heauen  as  induceinge  feuers,  wheras  neuertheleffe  there  is  none  more  holfoome.  Such  as  haue  byn  tenderly
browght  vp,  if  they  coomme  fuddeynly  in  to  the  campe,  can  not  away  with  hunger,  watchynge,  heate,  paffages
throwgh  ryuers,  battayles,  fieges,  and  aflaultes.  But  the  owld  fouldier  exercifed  in  the  warres,  vfeth  thefe  as
meditations  of  the  fielde,  as  hardened  therto  by  longe  experience.  He  that  hath  byn  accuflomed  to  the
fliadowe  of  the  citie,  and  wyll  attemple  the  fayinge  of  the  poet  Virgil,  Niidus  ara,  fore  ?iudus,  that  is,  naked  and
bare  withowt  houfe  and  home,  fliall  to  his  perell  make  an  ende  of  the  verfe,  Habchls  frigora  fobrcm  (that  is)
he  fliall  haue  the  coulde  ague.  Suche  thynges  therfore  as  feeme  harde  vnto  vs,  beinge  accuflomed  by  lyttle  and
lyttle,  becomme  more  toUerable :  In  fo  much  that  this  exercife  of  fufiferaunce  by  fuch  degrees,  dooth  oftentymes
grow  to  prodigious  efifectes  farre  beyonde  owre  expectation.  And  thus  wee  feeme  to  haue  made  fufficient
demonflration,  by  heauen,  nature,  and  arte,  wherby  it  may  appere  that  no  part  of  the  lande  or  fea  is  denyed  to
lyuynge  creatures.  The  reader  may  alfo  perceaue  how  large  matter  of  reafons  and  exemples  may  bee  opened
for  the  declarynge  of  owre  opinion  wherein  wee  refl..  Let  therfore  th[e]autoritie  of  the  ancient  autours  gyue
place,  and  the  confent  of  the  newe  wryters  agree  to  this  hyflory,  not  as  nowe  at  the  length  comprehended
(whereas  before  many  hundreth  yeares  Germanic  and  Scondia  had  entercourfe  of  marchaundies  not  feuered  by
the  large  goulfe  of  Gothia)  but  as  nowe  by  owr  commentaries  brought  to  light.  And  hauyng  fayde  thus  much
in  maner  of  a  preface,  we  wyll  nowe  precede  to  wryte  of  the  north  regions.

•I SCHONDIA.

Chondia,  Schondania,  or  Schondenmarchia,  is  as  much  to  fay  as  fayre  Dania  or  fayre  Denmarke.
Plinie  in  one  place,  nameth  it  Scandia,  and  in  an  other,  Scandinauia  if  there  bee  no  faute  in
th[e]exemplers.  It  was  named  Schondia,  by  reafon  of  the  fayreneffe  and  frutfulneffe  therof.
And  this  afwell  for  that  in  beneficiall  heauen,  fertilitie  of  grounde,  commoditie  of  hauens  and
marte  townes,  abundaunce  of  ryuers  of  fyfflie,  plentie  of  beafles,  great  quantitie  of  metall,  as
golde,  fyluer,  copper,  and  leade,  diligent  culturynge  the  grounde,  with  townes  and  cities  wel
inhabited  and  gouerned  by  ciuile  lawes,  it  gyuethe  place  to  none  other  fortunate  region.
This  was  in  maner  vnknowen  to  the  owlde  Greekes  and  Latins  as  may  appeare  by  this  argumente  that  with  one
confente  they  affirmed  that  in  thefe  north  regions  the  could  zone  or  clime,  was  condemned  to  perpetuall  fnowe
intollerable  to  all  lyuynge  creatures.  For  few  of  them  haue  made  mention  hereof  as  to  be  inhabited.  Amonge
whom  Plinie  as  one  of  the  chiefe,  fayth  in  his  fourth  booke,  that  Schondania  is  of  vnknowen  byggeneffe:  and
only  that  portion  therof  to  be  knowen  which  is  inhabited  with  the  nation  of  the  Hilleuiones  in  fiftie  vyllages.
Neyther  yet  is  Eningia  leffe  in  opinion.  Other  more  auncient  then  Plinie,  haue  placed  mofl  fortunate  regions,
with  men  of  longe  lyfe  (whiche  the  Greekes  caule  Macrobios)  and  of  mofle  innocente  behauour  vnder  the  tracte
of  thofe  landes :  and  that  there  came  from  thence  to  Delphos,  certeyne  religious  virginnes  with  vowes  and  gyftes
confecrated  to  Apollo :  And  furthermore  that  that  nation  obferued  this  inftitution  vntyll  the  fayde  virgins  were
violated  of  them  of  whome  they  were  receaued  as  flraungers.  Thefe  are  mofl.  cleare  tefl-imonies  of  Antiquitie,
both  of  the  greatneffe  of  Schondia,  and  the  people  that  inhabite  the  fame,  althowgh  they  were  fence  vnknowen,
as  lykewyfe  the  Gothes  departynge  from  thefe  north  landes  althowghe  they  obteyned  Th[e]empire  of  the  regions
abowte  the  mariffhes  of  Meotis  and  the  coafles  of  the  fea  Euxinus,  with  the  realme  of  Denmarke  (wherof  that
is  thought  to  bee  a  portion  which  is  nowe  cauled  Tranflluania)  and  the  bankes  of  the  ryuer  of  Danubius,  and
in  fine  inuaded  the  Romane  Empire,  yet  were  not  the  regions  wel  knowen  from  whenfe  they  tooke  theyr
originall.  Therefore  lyke  as  parte  of  the  owlde  wryters  are  vnfufficient  wytneffes  to  teflifie  of  owre  narrations
as  touchynge  thefe  landes  vnknowen  to  them,  Euen  fo  the  other  parte  which  excluded  the  fame  as  vnhabitable,
are  to  bee  conuinced  leafle  theyr  autoritie  beinge  admitted,  fhuld  engender  opinions  not  agreeable  or  conuenient
to  the  nature  of  places. Sigifmundus  Liberus,  in  his  commentaries  of  Mofcouia,  wryteth  thus, Scandia  or

2q8

Of  the  north  regions.

299

Scondia,  is  no  Hand  (as  fume  haue  thought)  but  parte  of  the  continente  or  firme  lande  of  Suetia,  which  by  a
longe  tracte  reacheth  to  Gothlande :  And  that  nowe  the  kynge  of  Denmarke  poffeffeth  a  great  parte  therof  But
wheras  the  wryters  of  thefe  thinges  haue  made  Scondia  greater  then  Suetia,  and  that  the  Gothes  and  Lumbardes
came  frome  thenfe,  they  feeme  in  my  opinion  to  comprehende  thefe  three  kyngedomes  as  it  were  in  one  body,
only  vnder  the  name  of  Scondia,  forafmuch  as  then,  that  parte  of  lande  that  lyeth  betwene  the  fea  Baltheum
(whiche  floweth  by  the  coaRes  of  Finlandia)  and  the  frofen  fea,  was  vnknowen :  And  that  by  reafon  of  fo  many
mariffhes,  innumerable  ryuers,  and  intemperatneffe  of  heauen,  it  is  yet  rude  vncultured,  and  lyttle  knowen.
Which  thynge  hath  byn  the  caufe  that  fumme  iudged  all  that  was  cauled  by  the  name  of  Scondia,  to  bee  one
great  I  lande.

C  Gronlande.

Ronlande  is  interpreted  greene  lande:  fo  cauled  for  the  great  increafe  and  frutefulneffe  of
padure.  By  reafon  wherof,  what  great  plentie  of  cattayle  there  is,  it  may  hereby  appere  that
at  fuch  tyme  as  fhyppes  may  paffe  thyther  they  fet  furth  great  heapes  of  cheefe  and  butter  to
bee  fould,  wherby  wee  coniecture  that  the  lande  is  not  rowgh  with  barren  mountaynes.  It
hath  two  Cathedrall  Churches  vnder  th[eJordination  of  Nidrofia.  To  one  of  thefe,  was  of
late  yeares  a  byffliop  appoynted  onely  by  the  tytle  of  a  fuffragane  in  confideration  that  while
the  metropolitane  dooth  neglect  the  direction  of  religion  for  the  diflance  of  the  place  and
difficult  nauigation,  the  people  is  in  maner  faulne  to  gentilitie,  beinge  of  them  felfe  of  mouable  wyttes  and  gyuen
to  magical  artes.  For  it  is  fayde  that  they  (as  alfo  the  people  of  Laponia)  doo  rayfe  tempefles  on  the  fea  mth
magical  inchauntmentes,  and  brynge  fuch  fhippes  into  daungeour  as  they  intende  to  fpoile.  They  vfe  lyttle
fhyppes  made  of  lether,  and  fafe  ageynfte  the  brufynge  of  the  fea  and  rockes,  and  with  them  affayle  other
fhippes.  Peter  Martyr  of  Angleria,  writeth  in  his  Decades  of  the  SpaniflTie  nauigations,  that  Sebaflian  Cabote
fayling  from  Englande  continually  towarde  the  north,  folowed  that  courfe  fo  farre  that  he  chaunfed  vppon
greate  flakes  of  Ife  in  the  mooneth  of  luly :  and  that  diuertynge  from  thenfe,  he  folowed  the  coafle  by  the  fhore
bendynge  towarde  the  South  vntyl  he  came  to  the  clime  of  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola  aboue  Cuba,  an  Hand  of
the  Canibales.  Which  narration  hath  giuen  me  occafion  to  extende  Gronlande  beyonde  the  promontory  or  cape  of
Huitfarch  to  the  continente  or  firme  lande  of  Lapponia  aboue  the  caflell  of  Wardhus:  which  thynge  I  did  the
rather  for  that  the  reuerende  Archebyffhoppe  of  Nidrofia,  conflantely  affirmed  that  the  fea  bendethe  there  into
the  forme  of  a  crooked  elbowe.  It  agreeth  herewith  alfo,  that  the  Lapones  confent  with  them  in  the  lyke  magi-
cal practifes  and  doo  neyther  imbrafe  the  Chriflian  religion  nor  refufe  it:  wherby  I  haue  thowght  this  lykeneffe
of  cuflomes  to  bee  betwene  them  bycaufe  they  ioyne  togyther  in  one  continent.  The  diflance  lykewyfe,  feemeth
not  to  difagree.  For  betwene  both  thefe  people,  the  diflance  is  not  full  twoo  hundreth  Schoeni,  euery  one  being
a  fpace  of  grounde  conteinyng.  Ix.  [sixty]  furlonges,  which  make.  vii.  [seven]  myles  and  a  halfe.  It  furthermore
agreeth  with  this  coniecture  that  Cabote  chaunfed  into  fuch  Ife.  And  albeit  as  touchynge  the  mooneth  of  luly,
I  wyll  contend  it  is  not  well  reherfed,  no  althowghe  he  had  fayled  vnder  the  pole,  for  fuch  reafons  as  wee  haue
declared  before  to  the  contrary,  neuertheleffe,  that  at  fum  tyme  he  fayled  by  Ife,  this  teflifieth  in  that  he  fayled
not  by  the  mayne  fea,  but  in  places  nere  vnto  the  lande  comprehendyng  and  imbrafyng  the  fea  in  fonne  o.  a
goulfe,  wheras  for  the  fame  caufe,  the  goulfe  of  Gpthland  is  frofen  bycaufe  it  is  flreyght  and  narow,  in  the  whiche
alfo  the  lyttle  quantitie  of  fait  water  is  ouercoorpe  by  the  abundance  of  freffhe  water  of  many  and  greate  ryuers
that  faule  into  the  goulfe.  But  betwene  Nonvaye  and  Iflande,  the  fea  is  not  frofen  for  the  contrary  caufe,
forafmuch  as  the  poure  of  freffhe  water  is  there  ouercomme  of  th[e]abundance  of  the  fake  water.  There  is  a
fame  (but  of  vncerteyne  autoritie)  that  the  Spanyardes  fayle  at  this  prefente  to  Gronlande,  and  to  an  other  lande
which  they  caule  Terra  viridis,  that  is,  the  greene  lande,  bringynge  from  thenfe  fuche  wares  as  are  founde  in
Gronlande.  Towarde  the  north,  it  reacheth  to  the  vnknowen  lande  vnder  the  pole,  from  whenfe  alfo  the
theues  and  robbers  of  the  Pigmei  coomme  into  this  lande.  Whiche  is  an  argument  that  the  regions  vnder  the
pole  are  inhabited  and  almofi:  enuironed  with  the  fea,  as  are  they  whiche  the  Cofmographers  caule  Cherfonnefi
or  Peninfulae  (that  is)  almofl.  Ilandes  :

^^ 77ie  defcription  of  Gronlande.
^ The  defer iptioji  of  the  Eafl  fyde  whiche  lyeth  towarde  Norway.

*Wardhus  caftell.
Towarde  the  North.

Longitude.]

54  [degrees]  [0''
53- 30'

[Latitude.]

70.  30'

71.  30'.

The  fyrfl.  extention.

40. [0^

71. 40'

[Longitude.]

28. [o']

2  2.
5-

*356.

[o'J
[o'J

[Latitude.]
72

67
61,

60.

The  feconde  extention.

Huitfarch.  promont.

The  extention.
It  is  continued  from  thenfe  by  the  coafles  of  the  lande  of  Baccallaos.
Towarde  the  wgfl  and  north,  it  is  termined  with  an  vnknowen  ende  of  landes  and  feas

[*  Wardoehuus  is  the  chief  village  of  Wardoe,  an  island  on  the  N.E.  coast  of  Norway,  beyond  the  North  Cape  and  near  Waranger  Fiord.  Its  true  N.  Lat.
is  70°  23',  and  E.  Long.  31°  7'.  Therefore  Ziegler's  meridian  in  all  the  following  dates  (being  54  degrees  west  of  Wardoehuus)  is  really  23  degrees  W.  Long.,
and  that  therefore  he  places  Baccallos  4  degrees  still  further  west— fixes  it  in  27°  W.  Long.,  which  is,  in  high  latitudes,  the  longitude  of  a  part  of  Greenland.— E.  A.]

299

[o'l
[o']
45'
[o']

The  Gothes  and
Lumbardes.

Frutefull  pasture.

Religion
neglected.

Inchaunters

The  vyage  of
Sebastian  Cabote
to  the  frosen  sea.

Gronlande.
Wardhus.

Lapponia  and
Gronlande.

SchoenL

Cabote  tould  me
that  this  Ise  is  of
fresshe  water,  and
not  of  the  sea.

A  commixtion  of
salt  water  and
fresshe.

The  sea  betwene
Norway  and
Islande.
Terra  ViridU.

269

PigmeL

BaccaIao%

300

Of

the  north  regions.

Island  caiilcd
Thyle.
Schoeni  is  Ix.
[sixty]  furlongcs.

Miracles  of  nature
in  Islande.

Three  maruelous
mouiUayncs.

Helgite.
Hecla.

Straunge  visions.

Ise.

Purgatory.

A  straunge  thyrge.

Four  springs  of
contrary  nature.

Abundaunce  of
brimstone.

Dryed  fysshe.
Scarsenes  of  come.

270

Haukes.
White  rauens.

Houses  of  whales
bones.

The  nauigation  to
Island.

WTiales.

One  thynge
seruyng  for
contrary  vses.

A  shipmans
quadrant.

Islande.

Slande  is  interpreted  the  land  of  Ife,  and  is  cauled  of  the  owlde  wryters  Thyle.  It  is  extended
betwene  the  fouth  and  the  north  almofl  two  hundreth  fchoenes  in  longitude.  It  is  for  the
niofl  part  full  of  mountayncs  and  vnculturcd.  But  in  the  playnes  it  hath  fuche  frutefuU
ixilluros,  that  they  are  fayne  fumctymes  to  dryue  the  beafles  from  their  feedynge  leafl  they
Ihulde  bee  fuffocate  with  to  much  fatnes.  This  Hand  is  famous  by  the  flrange  miracles  of
nature,  of  the  which  Saxo  Grammaticus  in  his  hyflorie  of  Denmarke,  and  Olanus  Gothus  in
his  defcription  of  the  north  landes,  doo  make  mention.  There  are  in  it  three  mountaynes  of
marueylous  height,  the  toppes  whereof  are  couered  with  perpetuall  fnowe.  But  the  nether  partes  of  them,  are
of  lyke  nature  to  the  mountayne  Etna  in  the  Ilande  of  Sicilie  boyling  with  continuall  flames  of  fyre  and
caflynge  furth  brymflone.  One  of  thefe  is  named  Helga,  and  the  other  Mens  Crucis  (that  is)  the  mounte  of
the  croffe.  The  thyrde  is  named  Hecla:  whofe  flames  neyther  confume  flaxe  or  towe,  matters  moft.e  apte  to
take  fyre,  nor  yet  are  quenched  with  water.  And  with  lyke  force  as  the  fliotte  of  great  artillerie  is  driuen  furth
by  violence  of  fyre,  euen  fo  by  the  commixtion  and  repugnaunce  of  fyre,  coulde,  and  brymflome,  greate  flones
are  here  throwne  into  the  ayer.  Nere  vnto  thefe  mountaynes  are  three  chynkes  or  open  places  in  the  earthe
of  houge  byggeneffe  and  fuche  depth  (efpecially  at  the  mounte  Hecla)  that  no  fyght  can  attayne  therto.  But  to
fuch  as  looke  into  them,  there  fyrfl  appeare  men  as  thowgh  they  were  drowned  and  yet  breathyng  furth  theyr
fowles :  who  beinge  exhorted  by  theyr  frendes  to  reforte  to  theyr  owne,  they  aunfwere  with  moornynge  voyce
and  greuous  fyghes,  that  they  mufl  departe  frome  thenfe  to  the  mount  Hecla,  and  therwith  fuddeynly  vanyffhe
owte  of  fyght.  Ife  floweth  abovvt  the  Ilande  for  the  fpace  of  feuen  or  eyght  moonethes,  makynge  by  runnynge
togyther  a  certeyne  miferable  waylinge  and  gronynge  noyfe  not  vnlyke  the  voyce  of  man.  Th[e]inhabi-
tauntes  thynke,  that  in  this  Ife  and  the  mounte  Hecla,  are  the  places  where  the  euyll  foules  of  theyr  people
are  tormented.  If  any  man  take  a  greate  portion  of  this  Ife,  and  kepe  it  as  diligently  as  may  bee  in  a  clofe
veffell  or  cofer,  the  fame  dooth  fo  vanyffhe  at  the  tyme  when  the  other  Ife  abowt  the  Ilande  diffolueth,  that  not
fo  much  as  one  droppe  of  water  or  Ife  can  therof  bee  founde.

Not  farre  from  thefe  mountaynes  reachynge  toward  the  fea  coafl.es,  are  foure  fprynges  of  water  of  mofle
diuers  and  contrary  nature.  The  fyrfl.e,  by  reafon  of  his  perpetuall  and  feruente  heate,  fuddeynely  turneth  all
bodies  that  are  cafle  therin,  into  flones,  referuynge  neuertheleffe  theyr  fyrfl.  forme  and  fliape.  The  feconde,  is
of  intollerable  couldeneffe.  The  thyrde  is  fweeter  then  hony,  and  mofl.  pleafaunte  to  quenche  thyrfl..  The
fourth  is  playne  poyfon,  peflilent,  and  deadely.  There  is  furthermore  in  thefe  fprynges  fuche  abundaunce  of
brj'inflone,  that  a  thoufande  pounde  weight  therof  is  bought  for  lyttle,  as  for  the  tenth  parte  of  a  ducate.
Theyr  chiefe  wares,  are  dryed  fyffhe,  as  foles,  maydens,  playces,  falpas,  fl.ockefyfflies,  and  fuch  other  which  they
exchange  for  wheat  and  fuch  other  thynges  as  are  browght  thyther  from  Lubeck,  Hamborowe,  and  Amfl.erdam.
For  they  haue  oftentymes  fuch  fcarfeneffe  of  come,  that  they  vfe  dryed  fyffhe  in  the  fleade  of  breade,  althowgh
in  foommer  the  Ilande  fo  floryfflieth  with  greene  and  frutefull  medowes,  that  they  are  fayne  fumtimes  to  dryue
theyr  beafles  from  paflure  leafle  they  fliulde  fuffocate  for  to  much  fatteneffe,  as  I  haue  fayde  before.  They
make  very  good  butter,  and  apte  to  bee  vfed  in  matters  of  phificke.  There  are  founde  dyuers  kindes  of  good
haukes,  as  faulcons,  gerfalcons,  lanners,  and  fperhaukes.  Alfo  rauens,  crowes,  beares,  hares,  and  foxes,  both
whyte  and  blacke.  I'hey  haue  mofl.  fwyfte  horfes :  and  fuch  as  runne.  xxx.  [thirty]  myles  continually  withowt  reft  or
bayte.  They  haue  many  churches :  and  houfes  buylded  of  the  bones  of  whales  and  other  greate  fyfflies.  The
nauigation  is  not  open  to  this  Ilande  but  in  fommer  feafon:  and  that  only  for  the  fpace  of  foure  moonethes,  by
reafon  of  the  coulde  and  Ife  whereby  the  paffage  is  ftopped.  If  any  ftryfe  or  debate  aryfe  on  the  fea  amonge
the  mariners  for  the  commoditie  of  the  hauen,  the  gouemour  of  the  place  althowgh  he  haue  knowleage  therof,
yet  dooth  he  not  punyffhe  them,  forafmuch  as  it  apperteyneth  not  to  his  office  to  decerne  fuch  thynges  as  are
doonne  on  the  fea,  but  only  on  the  lande.  Shippes  are  there  often  tymes  in  great  perell  by  reafon  of  whales
and  fuch  other  monfters  of  the  fea,  excepte  the  mariners  take  good  heede  and  keepe  them  farre  frome  the
fliyppes  with  the  noyfe  of  droommes,  and  emptie  barrels  caft  into  the  fea.  There  are  many  mynflrels  and
other  that  play  on  inflrumentes,  with  the  fweete  noyfe  whereof,  they  vfe  to  allure  foules  and  fifflies  to  theyr
nettes  and  fnares.  Many  alfo,  lye  lurkynge  in  caues  and  dennes  to  auoyde  the  fliarpeneffe  of  coulde,  as  the
Atfricanes  doo  the  lyke  to  defend  them  felues  from  the  heate.  On  the  toppe  of  a  certeyne  mountayne  cauled
Weyfzarch,  (lyinge  betwene  Iflande  and  Gruntland  or  Gronlande)  is  erected  a  fliypmans  quadrant  of  marueilous
byggeneffe,  made  by  two  pirates  named  Pinnigt  and  Pothorft  in  fauour  of  fuch  as  fayle  by  thofe  coaftes  that
they  may  therby  auoyde  the  daungerous  places  lyinge  towarde  Gronland.

The  myddeft  of  the  Ilande. 7 o'  [Long.] 65 30.'  [Lat.] The  citie Harfol.  etc. 7 40'  [Long.] 60 42'  [Lat.]
300

Of  the  north  regions.

301

Laponia.

He  region  of  Laponia,  was  fo  named  of  the  people  that  inhabite  it.  For  the  Germayns,  caule
all  fuche  Lapones,  as  are  fimple  or  vnapte  to  thynges.  This  people  is  of  fmaule  flature,  and
of  fuch  agilitie  of  bodie,  that  hauynge  theyr  quyuers  of  arrowes  gerte  to  them  and  theyr
bowes  in  theyr  handes,  they  can  with  a  leape,  caRe  theym  felues  throwgh  a  circle  or  hope  of
the  diameter  of  a  cubite.  They  feyght  on  foote,  armed  with  bowes  and  arrowes  after  the
maner  of  the  Tartars.  They  are  exercifed  in  hurlynge  the  darte  and  fliootynge  from  theyr
youth :  in  fo  muche  that  they  giue  theyr  chyldren  no  meate  vntyll  they  hit  the  marke  they
(hoote  at,  as  dyd  in  owlde  tyme  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the  Ilandes  cauled  Baleares.  They  vfe  to  make  theyr
apparell  flreight  and  clofe  to  theyr  boddies  that  it  hynder  not  theyr  woorke.  Theyr  winter  veRures  are  made
of  the  hole  fkinnes  of  feales  or  beares  artificially  wrought  and  made  fupple.  Thefe  they  tye  with  a  knotte
aboue  theyr  heades,  leauynge  onely  two  holes  open  to  looke  through,  and  haue  all  the  refidue  of  theyr  bodies
couered  as  thoughe  they  were  fowed  in  fackes,  but  that  this  beinge  adapted  to  all  partes  of  theyr  bodies,  is  fo
made  for  commoditie  and  not  for  a  puniffhement  as  the  Romans  were  accullomed  to  fowe  paricides  in  fackes
of  lether  with  a  cocke,  an  ape,  and  a  ferpent,  and  fo  to  hurle  them  alyue  all  togither  into  ihe  ryner  of  Tyber.
And  hereby  I  thinke  it  came  to  paffe  that  in  owlde  tyme  it  was  raffhely  beleued  that  in  thefe  regions
there  were  men  with  rowgh  and  hery  bodies,  wilde  beafles,  as  parte  made  relation  throwghe  ignoraunce,
parte  alfo  takynge  pleafure  in  rehearfall  of  fuche  thynges  as  are  flraunge  to  the  hearers.  The  Lapones
c'efended  by  this  arte  and  induRry,  go  abrode  and  withRande  the  fliarpenes  of  wynter  and  the  north
wyndes,  with  all  the  iniuries  of  heauen.  They  haue  no  houfes,  but  certeyne  tabernacles  like  tentes  or  hales
wjierwith  they  paffe  from  place  to  place  and  change  theyr  manfions.  Sum  of  them  liue  after  the  maner  of  the
people  of  Sarmatia  cauled  in  owlde  tyme  Amaxobii,  which  vfed  waynes  in  the  Reade  of  houfes.  They  are  much
gyuen  to  huntynge:  and  haue  fuch  plentie  of  wylde  beaRes  that  they  kyll  them  in  maner  in  eueiy  place.
It  is  not  lawfuU  for  a  woman  to  go  furth  of  the  tente  at  that  doore  by  the  whiche  her  hufbande  wente
owte  on  huntynge  the  fame  daye :  nor  yet  to  touche  with  her  hande  any  parte  of  the  beaRe  that  is  taken
vntyll  her  hufbande  reache  her  on  the  fpitte  fuche  a  portion  of  fleffhe  as  he  thinketh  good.  They  tyll  not  the
grounde.  The  region  nuryffheth  no  kynde  of  ferpentes:  yet  are  there  greate  and  noyfoome  gnattes.  They
take  fyfflie  in  greate  plentie  :  by  the  commoditie  wherof,  they  lyue  after  the  maner  of  the  Ethiopians  cauled
Ichthiophagi.  For  as  thefe  drie  theyr  fifflie  with  feruent  heate,  fo  doo  they  drye  them  with  coulde,  and  grynde
or  Rampe  them  to  pouder  as  fmaule  as  meale  or  floure.  They  haue  fuch  abundaunce  of  thefe  fyfflies,  that
they  hourd  great  plentie  therof  in  certeyne  Rore  houfes  to  cary  them  vnto  other  landes  nere  abowt  them,  as
Northbothnia  and  Whyte  Ruffia.  Theyr  fliyppes  are  not  made  with  nayles,  but  are  tide  togyther  and  made
faR  with  cordes  and  wyththes.  With  thefe  they  fayle  by  the  fwyft  ryuers  betwene  the  mountaines  of  Laponia,
beinge  naked  in  fommer  that  they  may  the  better  fwymme  in  the  tyme  of  perell,  and  gather  together  fuch  wares
as  are  in  daunger  to  bee  loR  by  fliipwracke.  Part  of  them  exercife  handie  craftes,  as  imbrotherynge  and
weauynge  of  cloth  interlaced  with  golde  and  fyluer.  Suche  as  haue  diuifed  any  neceffary  arte,  or  doo  increafe
and  amende  th[e]inuentions  of  other,  are  openlye  honoured,  and  rewarded  with  a  veRure,  in  the  which  is
imbrothered  an  argument  or  token  of  the  thynge  they  deuifed.  And  this  remayneth  to  the  poReritie  of  the}T
famelie  in  token  of  theyr  defertes.  They  frame  fhippes,  buylde  houfes,  and  make  diuers  fortes  of  houfliolde
Ruffe  artificially,  and  tranfporte  them  to  other  places  neare  abowte.  They  bye  and  fell  bothe  for  exchaunge  of
wares  and  for  money.  -  And  this  only  by  confent  of  both  parties  withowt  communicacion :  yet  not  for  lacke  of
wytte  or  for  rudeneffe  of  maners,  but  bycaufe  they  haue  a  peculiar  language  vnknowen  to  theyr  bortherers.  It
is  a  valiant  nation,  and  lyued  longe  free,  and  fuReyned  the  warres  of  Norwaye  and  Suecia  vntyll  at  the  length
they  fubmitted  them  felues,  and  payde  ryche  furres  for  theyr  tribute.  They  chofe  them  felues  a  gouernour
whom  they  caule  a  kynge :  But  the  kyng  of  Suetia  gyueth  hym  autoritie  and  adminiRration.  Neuertheleffe,  the
people  in  theyr  futes  and  doubtful!  caufes,  reforte  to  Suecia  to  haue  theyr  matters  decifed.

In  theyr  iorneys,  they  go  not  to  any  Inne,  nor  yet  enter  into  any  houfe,  but  lye  all  nyght  vnder  the  firma-
ment. They  haue  no  horfes :  but  in  the  Reade  of  them,  they  tame  certeyne  \\7ld  beaRes  which  they  caule  Reen,
beinge  of  the  iuRe  byggeneffe  of  a  mule,  with  rowgh  heare  lyke  an  Affe,  clouen  feete,  and  braunched  homes  lyke
a  harte,  but  lower  and  with  fewer  antlettes.  They  wyll  not  abyde  to  bee  rj'dden.  But  when  theyr  peitrels  or  draw-
ynge  coUers  are  put  on  them,  and  they  fo  ioyned  to  the  chariotte  or  Reade,  they  runne  in  the  fpace  of.  xxiiii.  [twenty-
four]  houres,  a  hundreth  and  fiftie  myles,  or.  xxx.  [thirty]  fchoenos  :  The  whiche  fpace  they  affirme  to  chaunge
the  horizon  thryfe  :  that  is  thryfe  to  coome  to  the  furtheR  figne  or  marke  that  they  fee  a  farre  of  Which
doubtleffe  is  a  token  both  of  the  marueylous  fwiftneffe  and  great  Rrength  of  thefe  beaRes  beinge  able  to  con-

301

People  of  great
agilitie.

A  straunge
apparelL

The  cause  of  aa
owlde  erroure.

So  doo  the
Tartars.

Plentie  of  wyld
lieastes.

271

No  serpents.
Great  gnats.

Abundaunce  of
fysshe.

Ships  withowt
nayles.

Science  honoured

BargeinjTige
withowt  woordes.

No  horses.

A  be.ost  of
marueylous
strength  and
swyftnesse.

What  Schoenus  is,
Loke  in  Gronland.

The  change  of  the
horizon.

302

Of  the  north  rcgicns.

The  owld  autour.s
cauled  all  the
north  people
Scythyans.

Erasmus  lamenteth
this  in  his  fyrste
booke  de  ratine
concionandi,
where  he  speaketh
of  the  peop  e.
cauled  pilapii

272

Idolatrie.

A  misterie  of
mariage  in  fyre
and  flint.

Experte
inchaunters.

Magical  dartes.

The  canker.

One  nyght  of
three  moonethes.

Rich  ftirres.

Plentie  of  sea
fysshe.

Waidhus,

tinewe  runnynge  for  fo  great  a  fpace,  in  the  meane  whyle  alfo  fpendynge  fumtyme  in  feedynge.  I  fuppofe
that  this  thynge  was  fumowhat  knowen  to  the  owlde  wryters,  although  receaued  in  manner  by  an  obfcure
and  doubtful  fame. For  they  alfo  wryte  that  certeyne  Scythians  doo  ryde  on  hartes.

They  ncythcr  folowe  the  Chriflian  religion,  nor  yet  refufe  it  or  are  offended  therwith  as  are  the  luwes :  but
do  fumtymes  receaue  it  fliuorably  to  gratifie  the  princes  to  whonie  they  obey.  And  that  no  more  of  theym
imbrafe  the  Chriftian  fayth,  the  faute  is  fumwhat  to  bee  imputed  to  the  byfflioppes  and  prelates  that  haue
eyther  reiected  this  cure  and  charge  of  inflructynge  the  nation,  or  fuffered  the  faith  of  Chrifl  to  be  fuffocate
euen  in  the  fyrfl  fprynge.  For  vnder  the  pretenfe  of  religion,  they  woulde  haue  aduaunced  theyr  owne  reuenues
and  ouerburthened  the  people  by  an  intoUerable  exemple,  none  otherwyfe  here  then  in  all  Chriflendome,
which  thynge  is  doubtlefle  the  caufe  of  mofle  greuous  defections.  I  harde  lohn  a  byfflioppe  of  Gothlande  fay
thus :  We  that  gouerne  the  churche  of  Vpfalia,  and  haue  vnder  owre  diocefle  a  great  parte  of  that  nation,  lyke
as  it  is  not  conueniente  to  declare  many  thynges  of  owre  vigilance  and  attendaunce  ouer  the  flocke  committed
to  owre  charge,  euen  fo  abfleynynge  frome  myfcheuous  couetoufncffe  wherby  religion  is  abufed  for  luker,  we
doo  in  all  places  owre  diligent  endeuour  that  we  minifler  none  occafion  whereby  this  nation  as  offended  by  owre
fmnes,  maye  bee  the  lefle  wyllynge  to  embrafe  the  Chriflian  fayth.  This  is  the  flate  of  the  religion  amonge  the
Lapones :  Althowgh  of  theyr  owne  inflitution  and  cuflome  receaued  of  theyr  prediceflburs,  they  are  Idolatours,
honourynge  that  lyuynge  thynge  that  they  meete  fyrfl  in  the  mornynge,  for  the  god  of  that  daye,  and  diuinynge
thereby  theyr  good  lucke  or  euyll.  They  alfo  erecte  images  of  flones  vpon  the  mountaines  which  they  efleeme
as  goddes,  attributing  to  them  diuine  honour.  They  folemne  marriages,  and  begynne  the  fame  with  fyre  and
flynte,  as  with  a  myflerie  fo  aptely  applyed  to  the  image  of  flone  as  if  it  had  byn  receaued  frome  the  myddefle
of  Grecia.  For  in  that  they  adhibite  a  myflerie  to  fyre,  as  they  doo  not  this  alone  (forafmuche  as  the  Romanes
obferued  the  fame  cuflome)  euen  fo  are  they  herein  partly  to  be  commended  in  that  they  vfe  the  ceremonies  of  fo
noble  a  people.  The  myflerie  of  the  flinte  is  no  leffe  to  bee  prayfed,  both  forafmuche  as  this  is  domeflicall  philofophie,
and  hath  alfo  a  nere  affinitie  and  fignification  to  thefe  folemnities.  For  as  the  flynt  hath  in  it  fyre  lyinge  hydde
whiche  appeareth  not  but  by  mouynge  and  force,  fo  is  there  a  fecreate  lyfe  in  both  kyndes  of  man  and  woman
whiche  by  mutuall  coniunction  coommethe  furth  to  a  lyuynge  byrth.  They  are  furthermore  experte  inchaunters.
They  tye  three  knottes  on  a  flrynge  hangynge  at  a  whyppe.  When  they  lofe  one  of  thefe,  they  rayfe  toUerable
wyndes,  When  they  lofe  an  other,  the  wynde  is  more  vehement.  But  by  lofyng  the  thyrde,  they  rayfe  playne
tempefles  as  in  owlde  tyme  they  were  accuflomed  to  rayfe  thunder  and  lyghtnynge.  This  arte  doo  they  vfe
ageinfl  fuch  as  fayle  by  theyr  coafles,  and  flaye  or  moue  the  ryuers  and  feas  more  or  leffe  as  they  lyft.  to  fhewe
fauoure  or  difpleafure.  They  make  alfo  of  leade  certeyne  fhorte  magicall  dartes  of  the  quantitie  and  length  of  a
fynger.  Thefe  they  throwe  ageynfle  fuche  of  whome  they  defyre  to  bee  reuenged,  to  places  neuer  fo  farre
diflant.  They  are  fumtimes  fo  vexed  with  the  canker  on  their  armes  or  legges  that  in  the  fpace  of  three  dayes
they  dye  throwgh  the  vehemencie  of  the  payne.  The  fonne  fauleth  very  lowe  in  thefe  regions :  and  prolongeth
one  continuall  nyghte  for  the  fpace  of  thre  moonethes  in  wynter,  durynge  whiche  tyme  they  haue  none  other
lyght  but  lyke  vnto  the  twylyght  of  euenynges  and  mornynges.  This  is  very  cleare,  but  continueth  but  fewe
houres,  and  is  lyke  the  br}'ght  fhynynge  of  the  moone.  Therfore  that  day  that  the  fonne  returneth  to  the
hemifpherie,  they  keepe  holy  day  and  make'great  myrth  with  folemne  fefliuitie.  And  thefe  are  the  maners  of
this  nation,  not  fo  brutyflbe  or  faluage  as  woorthy  therfore  to  bee  cauled  Lapones  for  theyr  vnaptneffe  or
fimplicitie  as  when  they  lyued  vnder  theyr  owne  Empire  and  vfed  no  familiaritie  or  entercourfe  with  other
nations  and  knewe  not  the  commoditie  of  theyr  owne  thynges,  neyther  the  pryce  and  eflimation  of  theyr  furres
in  owre  regions,  by  reafon  whereof  they  foulde  great  plentie  of  them  for  fum  of  owre  wares  of  fmaule  value.

The  boundes  or  limittes  of  Laponia  (beinge  th[e]extreme  lande  of  Scondia  knowen  towarde  the  north  pole)
are  extended  towarde  this  parte  of  the  North,  to  the  worlde  yet  vnknowen  to  vs :  And  furthermore  towarde  the
fame  parte  of  the  vttermod  fea,  accordynge  to  this  defcription,  [Longitude.]  [Latitude.]

The  fyrfl.  coafle,  70 [o']  72. [o^

The  coafl:e  folo^vynge,  80 [o']  7. [o']

That  that  yet  foloweth,  90 [o']  70. [o']

Frome  the  fyffhynge  places  and  flore  houfes  of  this  fea,  they  cary  foorth  to  Nordbothnia  and  whyte  Ruffia,
landes  confinynge  to  them,  great  plentie  of  fyffhe,  Wherby  we  may  coniecture  that  this  fea  is  extended  on
euery  fyde  toward  the  North.  Towarde  the  wefle,  it  is  limitted  with  the  mofle  inwarde  goulfe  of  at  the  Cafl.ell
of  Wardhus  at  the  degree.  54 [o']  [Long.] 70 30.'  [Lat]

Towarde  the  Southe,it  is  lymitted  by  a  line  drawen  from  thenfe  vnto  the  degree.  90  [o'  Long.] 69.  [o'  Lat.]

^oa

Of  the  north  regions.

303

No

RWEGIA OR

No

RWAY.

Ordway,  is  as  muche  to  fay  as  the  Northwaye.  This  was  fumtyme  a  floryffhynge  kyngedome,
whofe  dominion  comprehended  Denmarke,  Frifelande  and  the  Ilandes  farre  abowt,  vntyll
the  domeflical  Empire  was  gouerned  by  the  fucceffion  of  inheritaunce.  In  the  meane  tyme
while  this  gouernaunce  ceafed  for  lacke  of  dewe  iffue,  it  was  inflituted  by  confent  of  the
nobihtie  that  the  kynges  fliuld  be  admitted  by  election :  fuppofmge  that  they  wolde  with  more
equitie  execute  that  office  forafmuche  as  they  were  placed  in  the  fame  by  fuch  auton'tie,  and
not  by  obteynynge  the  kyngedome  by  fortune  and  newe  aduauncement.  But  it  came  fo  to
paffe,  that  as  euery  of  them  excelled  in  richeffe,  ambition  and  fauour  by  confanginitie,  fo  were  they  in  greater
hope  to  obteyne  the  kyngedome:  And  were  by  this  meanes  diuided  into  factions,  attemtyng  alfo  occafions
t[o]inuade  foraigne  realmes  wherby  they  might  flrengthen  theyr  parties.  It  is  therefore  at  this  prefent  vnder
the  dominion  of  the  Danes :  who  doo  not  only  exact  intoUerable  tributes,  but  alfo  brynge  all  theyr  ryches  and
commodities  into  Denmarke,  conflitutynge  the  continuance  of  theyr  gouernaunce  in  th[e]infirmitie  and  pouertie  of
the  fubiectes :  which  exemple,  fum  other  princes  doo  folowe  at  this  day  in  the  Chriflian  Empire.  For  after  that  the
princes  had  forfaken  fuche  vertues  as  fhulde  haue  fhyned  in  them,  as  to  bee  Patres  patrice  (that  is)  the  fathers
of  theyr  countreys,  and  that  in  the  place  hereof,  onely  the  proud  countenaunce  of  dominion  remayned,  which
opened  licentioufneffe  to  th[e]iniurie  of  the  fubiectes,  this  folowed  therof,  that  wheras  the  Danes  by  this  occafion
had  no  further  trufl  or  ayde  in  the  loue  of  the  people,  they  prouided  for  th[e]indempnitie  of  theyr  owne  eflate
by  forcible  extenuatinge  the  gooddes  and  poure  of  them  whom  they  defired  to  kepe  in  fubiection.  This  is  the
fortune  of  Norway,  whofe  edefi[c]es,  townes,  and  cities  can  not  defende  theyr  auncient  amplitude  and  dignitie:
neyther  is  there  any  hope  of  repayrynge  theyr  flate.  For  there  are  no  confultations  admitted  for  the  redreffe  of
the  commonwelth :  No  man  dare  fhewe  his  aduice  or  attempte  any  thing,  vncerteyne  of  the  myndes  and
confent  of  other.  To  this  difficultie,  is  added  the  qualitie  of  the  place.  For  the  Danes  haue  in  theyr  poure  all
the  nauigations  of  Norway,  whereby  it  may  exercife  no  trade  by  fea,  neyther  cary  furthe  wares  to  other  places.
So  that  in  fine  it  may  feeme  mofl  vnfortunate,  as  lackynge  the  fauoure  of  heauen,  the  fea,  and  the  lande.  From
henfe  is  brought  into  all  Europe  a  fyffhe  of  the  kindes  of  them  whiche  we  caule  haddockes  or  hakes  indurate
and  dryed  with  coulde,  and  beaten  with  clubbes  or  flockes,  by  realon  whereof  the  Germayns  caule  them
flockefyffhe.  The  takinge  of  thefe,  is  mofl  commended  in  lanuarie  that  they  may  bee  fufficiently  dryed  and
hardened  with  coulde.  For  fuch  as  are  taken  in  the  more  temperate  monethes,  doo  corrupte  and  putrifie :  And
are  not  meete  to  be  caried  furth.

The  defcription  of  the  weft  coafle,  with  the  parte  thereof  lyinge  moft.  towarde  the  north.

[Longitude.]  [Latitude.]

Wardhus  (that  is)  the  watche  houfe,  or  watche  towre,  54 [oQ 70 30.'

It  is  a  flronge  caflell  or  fortreffe  appoynted  to  the  Lapones.

The  coafte  folowynge,  48 50' 70. [o']

Matthkur.  etc.

All  the  coafl  from  henfe,  and  the  places  neare  abowt  vnto  the  degree,  45 [o'] 69. [o'J

being  fumtyme  lefte  defolate  by  the  feditions  and  deflruction  of  Norway,  the  Lapones  chofe  for  theyr  habitations,
as  commynge  to  a  more  beneficiall  heauen.

From  the  Caflel  of  Wardhus,  vnto  the  degree,  40  30'  [Long.] 64  10'  [Lat.]

all  the  coafle  in  the  fprynge  tyme  is  daungerous  to  paffe,  by  reafon  of  whales  of  fuch  huge  byggeneffe  that  fum
of  theym  growe  to  a  hundreth  cubites.  For  thefe  fyfflies  at  that  tyme  of  the  yeare  refort  togyther  for  generation.
Such  fhyppes  as  chaunce  to  faule  eyther  vppon  theyr  bodies,  or  into  fuche  whyrlepooles  as  they  make  by  theyr
vehement  motions,  are  in  great  perell.  The  remedie  to  auoyde  this  daungiour,  is  to  poure  into  the  fea  Cafloreura
(that  is)  oyle  made  of  the  flones  of  the  beatle  cauled  the  Beuer,  mengeled  with  water.  For  with  this,  the  hole
hearde  of  whales  vanyffheth  fuddeynely  to  the  bottome  of  the  fea:  They  make  a  terrible  rorynge:  and  haue  two
breathynge  places  in  the  hyghefl.  parte  of  theyr  forheades,  flandynge  furth  right  a  cubite  in  length,  and  are  as
brode  at  the  endes,  beinge  couered  with  a  fkynne,  throughe  the  which  they  blow  waters  lyke  fhowers  or  flomips
of  raine.  The  prickes  of  theyr  backes,  are  founde  conteynynge  three  els  in  circuite,  and  euery  knotte  betwene
theym,  of  one  elle:  They  are  at  the  lead  of  Ix.  [fixtyj  cubites  in  length:  And  are  falted  and  kept  in  flore  houfes.
The  greatefl  are  vnprofitable  to  bee  eaten  by  reafon  of  theyr  ranke  and  vnfauer)-^  tafle  which  can  not  bee  qualified.

Nidrofia  (landing  vpon  the  fouth  fyde  of  the  fea  banke,  was  the  chiefe  and  metropolitane  churche  throwgh
owt  all  Norway,  Ifelande,  Gronlande,  and  the  Ilandes  thereabowt.  This  citie  was  noble  at  the  fyrfl  vnder  the
floryffhing  Empire  of  Norway,  conteinynge  in  circuite.  xxiiii.  paryffhes,  but  it  is  nowe  browght  in  maner  to  a

273

Kyngdomes
destroyd  by
factions.

ITie  Danes.

The  defaut  of
princes.

An  exemple  of
tyrannL

The  myserable
state  of  Norway

Stockfyss[h]e.

The  Lapones

Shippes  in
daungiour  by
reason  of  whales.

Castoreum.

The  rorynge  of
whales.

Whales  salted  and
reserucU.

The  citie  of
Nidrosia.

274

303

304

Of  the  north  ycgiotis.

chuj  che.

No^-some  beastes
of  vnknowen
gener.itiuD.

Wardhus.
The  vnknowen
lande  of  the
Lapones.
A  serpent  of
houge  biggenesse.

God  wameth  vs
by  signes  of
thynges  to  coome.

The  streightes  or
boyling  sea.

Dangerous
places  in  the  sea.

Frutfull  Ilandes
about  Norway.

villac^e  and  is  cauled  in  the  Germayne  toonge  Trutham,  as  the  houfeof  the  Dryides.  There  remayneth  at  this  daye
a  Cathcdrall  churche  in  token  of  the  ancient  fehcitie,  beinge  fiiche  that  in  byggcneffe  and  workemandiip  of
wrought  ftone,  the  lyke  is  not  in  all  Chriaendome.  The  greefes  or  compafle  abowt  the  altare,  was  deftroyde
by  fire,  and  was  repared  at  the  fame  tyme  that  wee  write  this  liiflorie.  The  charge  of  the  reparafion,  was
efleemed  to  bee  feuen  thoufande  crownes :  by  which  fmaule  portion,  an  eflimate  maye  bee  made  of  the
excellencie  of  the  hole  Churche.

The  tracte  of  all  the  fea  coafl.es  Norwaye,  is  very  quyete  and  meeke.  The  fea  is  not  frofen.  The  fnowes
indure  not  longe.  This  lande  hath  alfo  a  peculiar  peflilence  which  they  caule  Leem  or  Lemmer.  This  is  a
l)-ttle  foure  footed  beaRe  abowte  the  byggenefle  of  a  ratte  with  a  fpotted  flcynne.  Thefe  faule  vppon  the
grounde  at  certeyne  tenipcfl.es  and  fuddeyne  fliowers,  not  yet  knowen  from  whenfe  they  comme,  as  whyther
they  are  browght  by  the  wyndes  from  remote  Ilandes,  or  otherwife  engendered  of  thicke  and  feculent  clowdes.
But  this  is  well  knowen,  that  as  foone  as  they  faule  downe,  greene  graffe  and  herbes  are  founde  in  theyr  bowels
not  yet  digefl.ed.  They  confume  all  greene  thynges  as  doo  locufl.es :  And  fuch  as  they  only  byte,  wyther  and
dye.  This  pefl.ilence  lyueth  as  longe  as  it  dooth  not  tafl.e  of  the  graffe  newelye  fproonge.  They  coome
togyther  by  flockes  as  do  fwalowes:  And  at  an  ordinarie  tyme,  eyther  dye  by  heapes  with  great  infection  of  the
lande  (as  by  whofe  corruption  the  ayer  is  made  pefliferous  and  molefleth  the  Noruegians  with  fwymmynge
in  the  headde  and  the  iaundies)  or  are  confumed  of  other  beafles  named  Lefrat.  Towarde  the  Eafl.,  it  is
included  within  the  line  that  is  drawen  by  the  mountaynes  whofe  endes  or  vttermofl,  boundes  they  are  that  lye
towarde  the  fouth  aboue  the  mouthes  of  the  ryuer  Trolhetta.  But  that  parte  that  lyeth  towarde  the  north,
pafleth  by  the  caflel  of  Wardhus,  and  is  extended  to  the  vnknowen  lande  of  the  Lapones. [Longitude.] [Latitude.]

The  lake  cauled  Mos,  and  the  Ilande  of  Hoffuen  in  the  myddefl.  therof,  is  in  the  degree.  45 30' 61. [o']

In  this  lake  appeareth  a  flraunge  monfl.er :  which  is,  a  ferpent  of  houge  byggeneffe.  And  as  to  all  other
places  of  the  worlde,  blafynge  fl.arres  doo  portende  th[e]alteration  and  chaunge  of  thynges,  fo  dooth  this  to
Norway.  It  was  feene  of  late  (in  the  yeare  of  Chrifl..  M.  D.  xxii.)  apperynge  farre  aboue  the  water  rowlynge  lyke
a  greate  pyller:  And  was  by  coniecture  farre  of,  efl.eemed  to  bee  of  fiftie  cubites  in  length.  Shortely  after
folowed  the  reiectynge  of  Chrifl.iernus  kynge  of  Denmarke.  Suche  other  monflrous  thynges  are  fayde  to  bee
feene  in  dyuers  places  of  the  worlde.  And  doubtleffe  e.xcepte  wee  fliulde  thinke  that  the  diuine  prouidence
hauynge  mercie  vpon  mortall  men,  and  hereby  warnynge  them  of  their  offences,  dooth  fende  fuche  flraunge  thynges
(as  alfo  blafmg  flarres  and  armies  feyghtynge  in  the  ayer,  with  fuche  other  portentous  monfl.ers  wherof  no  caufes
can  bee  founde  by  naturall  thynges)  we  might  els  fufpecte  that  fuch  fyghtes  were  but  imaginations  of  the  fence
of  man  deceaued.

On  the  Eafl.  flde,  are  exceading  rowgh  montaynes  which  admit  no  paffage  to  Suecia.  The  fea  betwene
NorAvay  and  the  Ilandes,  is  cauled  Tialleflund,  Euripus,  or  the  fl.reightes.  [Longitude.] [Latitude.]

The  Ilande  of  Lofoth.  w^hofe  myddefl,.  42 [o'] 67 10'.

Langanas,  whofe  myddefl.,  41 [o'] 67 [o']

Vafl.ral,  whofe  myddeft.  41 34'  67 30'.

The  fea  betwene  thefe  three  Ilandes,  is  cauled  Mufcofl.rom  (that  is)  boylynge.  At  the  flowynge  of  the  fea,
it  is  fwalowed  into  the  caues,  and  is  blowne  owt  ageyne  at  the  reflowynge,  with  no  leffe  violence  then  the
fl.reames  of  rj-uers  faule  from  mountaynes.  This  fea  is  nauigable  vntyll  it  bee  lower  then  the  mouthes  of  the
rockes.  Such  as  chaunce  into  it  owt  of  dewe  tyme,  are  caried  headlonge  into  whyrlepooles  The  fragmentes
of  the  lofl.  fliips,  are  feldome  eafl.  vp  ageyne.  But  when  they  are  cafle  vp,  they  are  fo  brufed  and  freted
ageynfle  the  rockes,  that  they  feeme  to  bee  ouergrowne  with  hore.  This  is  the  poure  of  nature,  paflyng  the
fabulous  Simplegades  and  the  fearefull  Malea,  with  the  daungerous  places  of  Silla  and  Caribdis,  and  all  other
miracles  that  nature  hath  wrought  in  any  other  fea  hytherto  knowen  to  man.

The  Ilandes  abowt  Norway,  are  of  fuch  frutfull  paflure,  that  they  brynge  not  theyr  beafles  into  the  flables
before  the  moneth  of  Nouember :  And  do  many  places  winter  them  abrode.

304

Of  the  north  regions.

301

SvECIA, OR SvETHLANDE.

Vecia,  is  a  kyngedome  ryche  in  golde,  fyluer,  copper,  leade,  Iren,  fruyte,  cattayle,  and
exceadynge  increafe  of  fyffhe  of  the  ryuers,  lakes,  and  the  fea.  And  hath  no  leffe  plentie  of
fuche  wylde  beafles  as  are  taken  with  huntinge.  Towarde  the  Wcfl,  it  is  ended  with  the
mountaynes  of  Norway  from  the  Caflel  of  Wardhus  vnto  th[e]end,  51  [o'  Long.]  63  40'  [Lat.]
Towarde  the  South,  with  the  line  from  this  ende  vnto  the  degrees.  53.  30'.  61.  [o']

And  from  thenfe  vnto  the  degrees.  61.  [o']  60.  30'.  Aboue  the  goulfe  of  Suecia,
toward  the  north,  with  the  fouth  ende  of  Lapponia  from  the  Caflel  of  Wardhus  vnto
th[e]ende.  62.  [o']  70.  [o']  Towarde  the  Eafle,  it  is  ended  with  the  line  frome  this  ende  vnto  the  degree.
63.  [o']  69.  [o']  etc.  Stockholme  the  chiefe  citie.  64.  [o']  61.  [o']  This  is  the  chiefe  mart  towne  of  Suecia,  and
is  flrongely  defended  by  arte  and  nature.  It  is  fituate  in  mariffhes  after  the  maner  of  Venece :  and  was  there-
fore cauled  Stokholme,  forafmuche  as  beinge  placed  in  the  water,  the  fundation  is  fortified  with  flockes  or  piles.
The  fea  entereth  into  it  with  two  armes  or  branches  of  fuch  largenes  and  depth  that  fhips  of  great  burden  and
Avith  mayne  fayles  may  enter  by  the  fame  with  theyr  full  fraight.  This  fuffered  of  late  yeares  greuous  fpoyle
and  deflruction  to  the  fingular  exemple  of  cruel  hoflilitie :  And  fuch,  as  the  like  hath  not  bin  lightly  fhewed  to
any  other  citie  receaued  by  league  and  compofition.

In  al  the  tract  from  Stokholme  to  the  lake  aboue  the  riuer  of  Dalekarle,  which  is  in  the  degree.  56.  30.'
6;^.  50.'  are  mountaines  frutful  of  good  filuer,  copper,  and  leade.  They  gette  great  ryches  by  the  falmons
and  plentie  of  other  fyffhes  whiche  they  take  in  certeyne  greate  lakes.

The  dukedom  e  of  Agermannia,  occupieth  the  north  fyde  to  the  confines  of  Laponia.  This  tract  is  ful  of
wods  in  the  whiche  they  hunt  the  beafles  cauled  Vros  or  Bifontes,  which  in  theyr  toonge  they  caule  Elg,  (that
is)  wilde  affes.  Thefe  are  of  fuch  height,  that  the  highefl  part  of  their  backes  are  equal  with  the  meafure  of  a
man  holdynge  vp  his  armes  as  hyghe  as  he  may  reach,  etc.  Vpfalia  the  chiefe  citie.  62.  63'.  30.  [o']  here  is
buried  the  body  of  faynt  Hericus  kynge  and  martyr.

Copperdalla  (that  is)  the  copper  valley,  is  a  dukedome  fouthwarde  from  the  dukedome  of  lemptia,  Vnder
this,  is  the  valient  nation  of  the  people  cauled  Dalekarly.

Oplandia,  is  a  dukedome  and  the  nauil  or  middefl  of  Scondia.

The  citie  of  Pircho,  on  the  north  fyde  of  the  lake  of  Meier,  was  once  a  great  citie  and  able  to  arme.  xiiii,
thoufande  men  to  the  warres :  but  is  nowe  browght  to  a  vyllage.

All  the  tracte  of  Oplandia,  hath  mynes  of  fyluer,  copper,  and  fleele.

Of  the  Ilandes  and  rockes  that  lye  abowte  Suecia,  the  myddefl  is.  67  30'  [Long.] 61 30'.  [Lat.]

Thefe  were  cauled  of  the  owlde  wryters  Oone,  the  reafon  of  which  name  remayneth  to  this  day.  For  there  are
in  thefe  innumerable  multitudes  of  byrdes:  In  fo  muche  that  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the  nexte  coafle,  fayle
thyther  in  the  mooneth  of  May  whyle  the  byrdes  fyt  on  theyr  egges :  which  they  fleale  and  referue  them  in
fake  for  a  longe  tyme.

Bothnia.

jOthnia  is  fo  named  of  the  precious  furres  of  all  fortes  that  are  caried  from  thenfe  into  foraigne
regions.  For  by  thefe  and  theyr  fyffhynge,  they  haue  greate  commoditie.  Salmors  of  the
befl  fort  are  taken  in  thefe  feas  and  are  great  ryches  amonge  thefe  nations.  Bothnia  is  diuided
into  twoo  partes,  as  Nordbothnia,  and  South  Bothnia,  cauled  Oflrobothnia.  Nordbothnia,
is  termined  with  the  fouth  ende  of  the  Lapones  vnto  the  ende.  78  30'  [Long.]  69.  [o']  [Lat.)
Towarde  the  Eafl,  it  is  termined  with  this  end  and  vnto  the  degree.  78  30'  68 20'.

Towarde  the  Weft,  with  the  hne  terminynge  the  Eafl  fyde  of  Suecia :  And  towarde  the

Southe,  with  the  refidue  of  the  goulfe  of  Suecia  from  th[e]ende  that  hath  degrees.  63  [o']  69. [o']

Oflrobothnia,  towarde  the  Eafl  is  termined  from  the  faid  ende  of  the  mofl  EaR  coafle. And  towarde  the

South,  with  a  line  extended  by  the  mountaynes  frome  this  ende  vnto  the  degree. 71 [o']  66 [o']

275

Golde  and  sj-lucr.
Wardhus  costelL

The  goulfe  of
Suecia.

The  citie  of
Stockholme.

Gold  in  could

regions.

Fysshe.

The  beaste  cauled
Vros  or  Elg.

Vpsalia.

Copperdalla.

Oplandia.

Byrdts.

Egges  reserued  io
salte.

Towarde  the  north  and  wefle,  with  part  of  the  goulfe  of  Suecia.  etc.

EoBN.  2  A

Precious  furies,
Fysshe.

303

3o6

Of  the  north  regio)is.

276

Th[elinu.isions  of
the  Goches.

The  warres  of  the
gothes  ageynst
the  Romans.

The  boiindes  of
Gothland.

The  citie  of  Visb.^

Danes  and
Moscouites.

A  librarie  of  two
thousand  bookes.
The  Gothes
inuaded  Europe
and  destroyd
Rome.

Pannonia  falsely
taken  for  Finnonia.

Eningia.

Spanysshe  wynes.

GOTHIA OR GOTHLANDE.

OTHIA,  is  by  intcrpretacion  good.  For  the  holye  name  of  God,  is  in  the  Germayne  toonge
Goth  (that  is)  Good.  At  what  tyme  the  Gothes  vppon  a  general  confent,  fent  furth  theyr
offpryng  or  fucceffion  to  feeke  newe  feates  or  countreys  to  inhabite,  and  when  they  poffeffed
the  coafl.es  of  Meotis  and  Afia,  none  of  the  owlde  wryters  haue  made  mention  as  farfe  as  1
knowe.  But  they  haue  byn  knowen  fence  tlie  tyme  that  the  Romanes  dilated  theyr  Empyre
by  Illirium  (nowe  cauled  Slauonie)  vnto  the  ryuer  of  Danubius.  And  were  alfo  famous
from  the  tyme  of  Celar  Dictator  and  Octauianus  Auguflus  by  reafon  of  theyr  greate  warres  at
Danubius  beinge  th[e]vttermofl.  bounde  of  Th[e]ompire.  Ncuertheleffe,  in  that  renoume,  what  Gothia  was,
vnder  what  parte  of  heauen  it  was  fituate,  or  of  whom  the  Gothes  toke  theyr  original,  it  hath  byn  vnknowen
almofl.  to  this  age.  This  is  termined  towarde  the  north,  with  the  fouth  ende  of  Suecia :  And  towarde  the  wefl.e,
with  the  other  mountaynes  of  Norway,  which  contlnewe  from  the  boundos  of  Suecia  to  the  mouthes  of  the
ryuers  of  Trolheta.  etc.

It  hath  many  goodly  townes,  cities,  caflels,  mines,  etc.  The  citie  of  Vifba,  being  in  the  degree.  6i  30'
54  15.'  was  an  ancient  and  famous  marte  towne  as  is  Genua  in  Italie  at  this  day.  But  afterwarde  beinge
afflicted  by  th[e]incurfions  of  the  pirates  of  the  Danes  and  Mufcouites,  it  was  left  defolate.  There  remayne  to
this  day  certeyne  mines  whiche  tefl.ifie  the  ancient  nobilitie.  In  this  place  were  the  fyrfle  fl,acions  of  the
Gothes  that  poffeffed  Meotis.  It  is  at  this  daye  of  frutfuU  foyle,  and  famous  by  many  goodly  and  fl.ronge
cartels  and  monafl.eries.  There  is  amonge  other,  a  monaflerie  of  th[e]order  of  faynt  Benedicte,  in  the  which  is
a  librarie  of  abowt  two  thoufande  bookes  of  owlde  autours.

Abowt  the  yeare  of  Chrifl.  fourfcore  and.  viii.  the  Gothes,  vnto  whom  reforted  a  great  multitude  of  other
people  of  thefe  northe  partes  of  the  worlde,  as  from  Liuonia,  Prufia,  Ruffia  and  Tartaria  with  diuers  other
contreys,  makynge  them  dyuers  Kynges  and  capitaynes,  dyd  depopulate  and  brynge  in  fubiection  the  more
parte  of  Europe,  inuaded  Italie,  defl,royd  Rome,  inhabited  that  part  of  Italia  now  cauled  Lumbardie,  and
lykewyfe  fubdued  the  roialmes  of  Cafl-ile  and  Aragonie.  Theyr  warres  contynewed  aboue  three  hundreth
yeares.

Q[  Finland, and Eningia.

Inlandia,  is  as  much  to  fay  as  a  fayre  lande  or  fine  land,  fo  named  for  the  fertilitie  of  the
grownde.  Plinie  femeth  to  caule  it  Finnonia.  For  he  faith  that  abowte  the  coafles  of
Finlande,  are  many  Ilandes  withowt  names.  Of  the  which  there  lyeth  one  before  Scithia
cauled  Pannonia.  The  goulfe  cauled  Simis  Finnonicus,  is  fo  named  at  this  day  of  the
lande  of  Finnonia.  Finnonia  confineth  with  Scithia,  and  runneth  withowt  all  Tanais  (that
is  to  fay)  withowte  the  limetes  of  Europe  to  the  confines  or  Afia.  But  that  the  name  of
Finlande  feemeth  not  to  agree  hereunto,  the  caufe  is  that  this  place  of  Plinie  is  corrupted  as
are  many  other  in  this  autour:  So  that  from  the  name  of  Finnonia,  or  Phinnonia,  it  was  a  likely  erroure  to
caule  it  Pannonia  forafmuch  as  thefe  woordes  doo  not  greately  differ  in  wrytynge  and  founde :  fo  that  the
counterfecte  name  was  foone  put  in  the  place  of  the  trew  name  by  hym  that  knewe  Pannonia  and  redde  that
name  before,  beinge  alfo  ignorant  of  Phinnonia.

Eningia  had  in  owlde  tyme  the  tytle  of  a  kingedome,  it  is  of  fuch  largeneffe.  But  hath  nowe  only  the
tytle  of  an  inferiour  gouernoure,  beinge  vnder  the  dominion  of  the  Slauons  and  vfyng  the  fame  tonge.  In
religion,  it  obferued  the  rites  of  the  Greekes  of  late  yeares,  when  it  was  vnder  the  gouernaunce  of  the  Mof-
couites.  But  it  is  at  this  prefent  vnder  the  kynge  of  Suecia  and  obferueth  th[e]infl.itucions  of  the  Occidentall
church.  SpanyfOie  wynes  are  browght  thyther  in  great  plentie  which  the  people  vfe  merely  and  cherefully.  It
is  termined  on  the  north  fyde,  by  the  fouthe  line  of  Oflobothnia,  and  is  extended  by  the  mountaynes.
Towarde  the  wefl,  it  is  termined  with  the  fea  of  Finnonia  accordyng  to  this  defcription :  and  hath  degrees.
71.  [o' Long.] 66.  [o' Lat.]  etc.

306

307

C  OF  THE DIFFERENCE  OF REGIONS AND

CAVSES  OF  CREATE  CITIES,  AFTER  THE  DESCRIP-
TION OF HIERONIMUS CARDANUS,
LIBER.  XI.  de  Siibtilitate.

Here  is  an  other  difference  of  regions  caufed  of  coulde  and
heate.  For  fuche  as  are  neare  vnto  the  poles,  are  vexed
with  to  much  coulde :  And  fuch  as  are  vnder  the  line  where
the  foonne  is  of  greatefle  force,  are  oppreffed  with  heate.
Such  as  are  in  the  myddeft  betwene  both,  are  nearefl  vnto
temperatneffe.  Vnder  the  pole,  it  is  impoliible  that  there
fhulde  bee  populous  cities  bycaufe  the  lande  is  baren,  and
the  cariage  or  conueyaunce  of  frutes,  vyttayles,  and  other
neceffaries,  is  incommodious.  By  reafon  wherof,  it  is  neceffarie
that  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  fuche  regions  lyue  euer  in  continuall
wanderynge  from  place  to  place,  or  els  in  fmaule  vyllages.  Suche
as  inhabite  temperate  regions,  haue  meane  cities,  afwell  for  that
they  haue  more  commodious  conueyaunce  for  neceffaries,  as
alfo  that  they  may  dwell  better  and  more  fafely  togyther  then
in  vyllages  by  reafon  of  fortifying  theyr  townes  with  walles,  and
exercifynge  of  artes  and  occupations  whereby  the  one  maye  the
better  helpe  the  other.  Yet  that  owlde  Rome  (beinge  in  a  tem-
perate region)  was  of  fuch  incredible  byggeneffe,  the  caufe  was  that  it  obteyned  Th[e]empire  of  the  w^orlde,  by
reafon  wherof,  all  nations  had  confluence  thyther,  and  not  the  greatneffe  of  the  walles.  But  it  is  neceflarie
that  the  greatefl  cities  bee  in  hotte  regions :  fyrfle,  for  that  in  fuch  regions,  parte  of  the  foile  is  eyther  barren
yf  it  lacke  water,  or  els  mofl  frutefuU  if  it  abounde  with  water.  And  for  this  inequalitie,  when  they  fynde  any
place  meete  to  fufleyne  a  multitude,  it  foloweth  of  neceffitie  that  greate  cities  bee  buylded  in  fuch  places  by
reafon  of  great  concourfe  of  people  refortynge  to  the  fame.  An  other  greate  caufe  is,  that  wheras  in  such
regions,  marchauntes  come  very  farre  to  fuch  commodious  places,  they  paffe  through  many  deferte  and  perelous
regions :  So  that  it  fhalbe  neceffary  for  theyr  better  fecuritie,  to  coome  in  great  companies  as  it  were  great
armies.  And  therfore  whereas  fuch  a  focietie  is  once  knytte  togyther  in  a  commodious  place,  it  fliulde  bee  great
hinderance  afwell  to  th[e]inhabitantes  as  to  marchauntes  if  they  fliulde  wander  in  incommodious  places.  And
by  this  confluence,  both  of  fuche  as  dwell  neare  to  fuche  places,  and  alfo  of  flraungers  and  fuch  as  dwell  farre  of,
it  is  neceffarie  that  in  continuance  of  tyme,  fmaule  townes  becoome  great  cities,  as  are  thefe :  Quinfai,  Singui,
Cambalu,  Memphis,  Cairus,  or  Alcair,  otherwife  cauled  Babilon  in  Egipte.  But  if  here  any  wyll  obiecte
Conflantinople  (in  owlde  tyme  cauled  Bizantium)  being  in  a  temperate  region,  althowgh  it  bee  not  to  bee
compared  to  fuch  cities  as  are  more  then.  Ix.  [fixty]  myles  in  circuite,  yet  doo  we  aunfwere  hereunto,  that  the
Turkes  Empire  is  the  caufe  of  the  greatneffe  hereof,  as  wee  fayde  before  of  Rome.

277

307

3o8

Demetrius  the
ambass.-idour  of
Moscouia.

Paulus  Centurio.

Spices  browght
from  India  to
Moscouia.
The  rj-uer  Indus.

278

Oxus  or  Horina  a
ryuer  of  Asia
runneth  through
the  desertes  of
Sythia.

The  sea  Hircanum,
is  now  cauled
mare  Abacuk  or
mare  de  Sala.
Citrachan  or
Astracan.
Sarmatia  is  that
greate  countrey
wherein  is
conteyned  Russia
Liuonia  and
Tartaria,  and  the
north  and  East
part  of  Polonia.
Ageynst  the
Portagales.

ft  THE  HISTORIE  WRITTEN IN  THE  LATIN

TOONGE  BY  PAVLVS  lOVIVS  BYSSHOPPE  OF  NVCERIA

IN ITALIE, OF THE LEGATION OR  AMBASSADE OF GREATE

Bafilius  Prince  of  Mofcouia,  to  pope  Clement  the.  vii.  of

that  name: In  which  is  conteyned  the  defcription

of  Mofcouia  with  the  regions  confininge  abowte

the  fame  euen  vnto  the  great  and  ryche

Empire  of  Cathay.

Intende  fyrfle  briefely  to  defcribe  the  fituation  of  the  region
which  we  plainely  fee  to  haue  bin  little  knovven  to  Strabo  and
Ptolome,  and  then  to  precede  in  rehearfinge  the  maners,
cuflomes  and  religion  of  the  people.  And  this  in  maner  in  the
lyke  fimple  flyle  and  phrafe  of  fpeache  as  the  same  was  declared
vnto  vs  by  Demetrius  the  ambaffadoure,  a  man  not  ignoraunt  in
the  Latin  toonge,  as  from  his  youth  browght  vp  in  Liuonia,  where
he  learned  the  fyrfl  rudimentes  of  letters.  And  beinge  growne
to  mans  age,  executed  th[e]office  of  an  ambaffadour  into  dyuers
Chriflian  prouinces.  For  wheras  by  reafon  of  his  approued
faithfulneffe  and  induflrie,  he  had  before  byn  fent  as  oratoure
to  the  kynges  of  Suecia  and  Denmarke,  and  the  great
niafler  of  Pruffia,  he  was  at  the  laft.  fente  to  Th[e]emperoure
Maximilian,  in  whofe  courte  (beinge  replenyffhed  with
all  fortes  of  menne)  whyle  he  was  conuerfant,  yf  any
thyng  of  barbarous  maners  yet  remayned  in  fo  docible
and  quiet  a  nature,  the  fame  was  put  away  by  framynge
hym  felfe  to  better  ciuilitie.  The  caufe  of  his  legacie  or  ambaffade,  was  gyuen  by  Paulus  Centurio  a  Genuefe,
who  when  he  had  receaued  letters  commendatori  of  pope  Leo  the  tenth,  and  came  to  Mofcouia  for  the  trade  of
marchaundies,  of  his  owne  mynde  conferred  with  the  familiers  of  Duke  Bafilius  as  touchynge  the  conformation
of  the  rites  of  both  churches.  He  furthermore  of  great  magnanimitie  and  in  maner  owtragious  defire,  fowght
howe  by  a  newe  and  incredible  viage,  fpices  myght  bee  browght  from  India.  For  whyle  before  he  had  exercifed
the  trade  of  marchaundies  in  Syria,  Egypte,  and  Pontus,  he  knewe  by  fame  that  fpices  myght  bee  conueighed
from  the  further  India  vp  the  riuer  Indus  ageynfl  the  courfe  of  the  fame,  and  from  thence  by  a  fmal  vyage  by
lande  paffmge  ouer  the  mountaynes  of  Paropanifus,  to  bee  caried  to  the  riuer  Oxus  in  Bactria,  which  hauing  his
original  almofl  from  the  fame  mountaynes  frome  whenfe  Indus  docth  fpringe,  and  violently  caryinge  with  it
manye  other  ryuers,  fauleth  into  the  fea  Hircanum  or  Cafpium  at  the  porte  cauled  Straua.  And  he  erneflly
affirmed  that  frome  Straua,  is  an  eafy  and  fafe  nauigation  vnto  the  marte  towne  of  Citrachan  or  Aflrachan  and
the  mouth  of  the  ryuer  Volga  and  from  thenfe  euer  ageynfl  the  courfe  of  the  ryuers,  as  Volga,  Occha,  and
Mofcho,  vnto  the  citie  Mofcha,  and  frome  thence  by  lande  to  Riga  and  into  the  fea  of  Sarmatia  and  all  the
weft,  regions.  For  he  was  vehemently  and  more  then  of  equitie  accenfed  and  prouoked  by  the  iniuries  of  the
Portugales,  who  hauynge  by  force  of  armes  fubdued  a  great  parte  of  India,  and  poffeffed  all  the  marte  townes,
takynge  holy  into  theyr  handes  all  the  trade  of  fpices  to  brynge  the  fame  into  Spayne,  and  neuertheleffe  to  fell
them  at  a  more  greuous  and  intollerable  price  to  the  people  of  Europe  then  euer  was  hard  of  before:  And
furthermore  kepte  the  coaft.es  of  the  Indian  fea  fo  ftraightly  with  continuall  nauies,  that  thofe  trades  are  thereby
lefte  of,  which  were  before  exercifed  by  the  goulfe  of  Perfia  and  towarde  the  ryuer  of  Euphrates,  and  alfo  by  the
308

Mofcoiiia  and  Cathay.

309

flreightes  of  the  fea  of  Arabia  and  the  ryiier  Nilus,  and  in  fine  by  owre  fea :  by  which  trade  all  Afia  and  Europe
was  abundantly  fatiffied  and  better  cheape  then  hathe  byn  fence  the  Portugales  had  the  trade  in  thejT  handes
with  fo  manye  incommodities  of  fuch  longe  viages  wherby  the  fpices  are  fo  corrupted  by  th[e]infection  of  the
poompe  and  other  fylthyneffe  of  the  fhippes,  that  theyr  naturall  fauour,  talle,  and  qualitie  afwell  hereby  as  by
theyr  longe  referu}-ng  in  the  fhoppes,  fellers,  and  warehoufes  in  Luffhebume,  vanyffheth  and  refolueth,  fo  that
referu)-nge  euer  the  freffhert.  and  newefle,  they  fel  only  the  woorft  and  mod  corrupted.  But  Paulus,  although  in
all  places  he  emeflly  and  vehemently  argued  of  thefe  thinges,  and  flyrred  great  malice  and  hatred  ageynfl  the
Portugales,  affirmynge  that  not  only  therby  the  cuflomes  and  reuenewes  of  princes  fliulde  bee  much  greater  if
that  vyage  might  bee  difcouered,  but  alfo  that  fpices  myght  bee  better  cheepe  bowght  at  the  handes  of  the
Mofcouites,  yet  coulde  he  nothinge  auayle  in  this  fute,  forafmuche  as  Duke  Bafilius  thowght  i«:  not  good  to
make  open  or  difclofe  vnto  a  flraunger  and  vnknowne  man,  thofe  regions  which  giue  enterance  to  the  fea  Cafpium
and  the  k)-ngedomes  of  Perfia.  Paulus  therfore  excludynge  all  hope  of  further  trauayle,  and  become  nowe  of  a
marchaunte  an  Ambaffadoure,  browght  Bafilius  letters  (pope  Leo  beinge  nowe  departed)  to  Adriane  his
fucceffoure,  in  the  whiche  he  declared  with  honorable  and  reuerende  woordes  his  good  wyll  and  fauorable  m}-nde
towarde  the  b}'flhop  of  Rome.  For  a  fewe  years  before,  BafiHus  (then  keepynge  warres  agejTifle  the  Polones  at
fuche  t)-me  as  the  generall  counfayle  was  celebrate  at  Laterane)  requjTed  by  lohn,  k>-nge  of  Denmarke  (the
father  of  Chriflieme  who  was  of  late  expulfed  from  his  k)-ngedome)  that  fafe  paffage  myght  bee  graunted  to
th[e]ambafladours  of  Mofcouia  to  go  to  Rome.  But  wheras  it  fo  chaunced,  that  kynge  lohn  and  pope  lulius
dyed  both  in  one  day,  wherby  he  lacked  a  conuenient  fequefler  or  folicitoure,  he  omitted  his  confultation  as
touch}Tige  that  legacie.  After  this,  the  warre  waxed  hot  beti>\-ene  him  and  Sigifmunde  the  kynge  of  Polonie :
who  obtein\-nge  the  \-ictorie  ageind  the  Mofcouites  at  Boriflhene,  fuppUcations  were  decreed  in  Rome  for  the
ouerthrowe  and  vanqu}-ff}-nge  the  enemies  of  the  Chridian  faithe,  whiche  thinge  greatly  aUenated  both  k}-nge
Bafilius  him  felfe  and  all  that  nation  from  the  b)-f[hop  of  Rome.  But  when  Adriane  the.  \-i.  departed  from  this
Ij'fe,  and  lefte  Paulus  nowe  redie  to  his  feconde  vyage,  his  fucceflbur  Clemente  the.  vii.  perceauj-nge  that  Paulus
ftyll  furioufly  reuolued  and  tofled  in  his  vTiquiet  mj-nde  that  vyage  towarde  the  Eade,  fente  h)-m  ageyne  w^th
letters  to  Mofcouia,  by  the  which  wth  propenfe  and  fi-endly  perfuafions,  he  exhorted  Bafilius  to  acknowleage
the  maiedie  of  the  Romane  churche,  and  to  make  a  perpetuall  leage  and  agreement  in  matters  of  religion,
which  th)-nge  fliuld  be  not  only  for  the  health  of  his  foule,  but  alfo  greatly  to  th[e]increafe  of  his  honour:
And  further  promyfed,  that  by  the  holy  autoritie  ol  his  ofiice  he  wolde  make  h)-m  a  k}Tige  and  g}-ue  h}-m  kj-ngely
omamentes,  if  reiect\-ng  the  doctrine  of  the  Greekes,  he  wolde  conforme  h}-m  felfe  to  th[e]autoritie  of  the  Romane
churche.  For  Bafilius  defyred  the  name  and  t}'tle  of  a  kynge  by  th[e]affignation  of  the  byffhoppe  of  Rome,  foraf-
much  as  he  iudged  that  to  apperteyne  to  the  cathoh  ke  right  and  the  b^-ffhoppes  maiedie,  of  whorae  (as  he
knewe  r\-ght  well)  euen  Th[e]emperours  them  felues  by  an  auncient  cudome  haue  receaued  there  infignes  of
honoure  with  the  Diademe  and  fcepter  of  the  Romane  Empire :  althowghe  it  is  fayde  that  he  required  the  fame
of  Th[e]emperour  Maximiliane  by  many  ambaflades.  Paulus  therfore  who  with  more  profperous  iomeys  then
great  vantage,  had  from  his  youth  trauayled  a  greate  parte  of  the  world,  althowgh  he  were  nowe  aged  and  fore
vexed  with  the  drangurie,  came  with  a  profperous  and  fpedy  iomay  to  Mofcouia,  where  he  was  gentely
receaued  of  Bafilius,  and  remaj-ned  in  his  courte  for  the  fpace  of  twoo  monethes.  But  in  fine,  midrudynge  his
o\^-ne  drength,  and  deterred  by  the  difticultie  of  fo  greate  a  iomeye,  when  he  had  vtterly  put  away  all  his
imaginations  and  hope  of  this  trade  to  India,  returned  to  Rome  with  Demetrius  th[e]ambafi'adoar  of  Bafilius,
before  we  yet  thowght  that  he  had  byn  in  Mofcouia.  The  byffhoppe  commaunded  that  Demetrius  fhuld  bee
lodged  in  the  mod  magnificent  and  princely  part  of  the  houfes  of  Vaticane,  the  roufies  of  whofe  edifi[c]es  are
g}-lted  and  embowed,  and  the  chambers  rychly  furnyffhed  with  fylken  beddes  and  cloth  of  Arrefle.  Wyllynge
furthermore  that  he  fhuld  bee  honorably  receaued  and  vedured  with  filke.  He  alfo  affigned  Franciscus
Cheregatus  the  b\-ffhoppe  of  Aprutium  (a  man  that  had  often  tymes  byn  ambafladoure  to  diuers  reg)-ons)  to
accompanie  h}Tn  and  fhewe  h\Ta  th[e]order  and  rites  of  owre  religion  with  the  monumentes  and  maners  of  the
citie.  Furthermore,  when  Demetrius  had  certeyne  dayes  reded  and  recreate  him  felfe,  wafdiyng  away  the
fylth  he  had  gathered  by  reafon  of  the  longe  \yage,  then  apparelled  with  a  fa)Te  vedure  after  the  maner  of  his
countrey,  he  was  browght  to  the  byflboppes  prefence,  whom  he  honoured  kneelynge  with  great  humilitie  and
reuerence  (as  is  the  maner)  and  therwith  prefented  vnto  his  holynes  certeyne  furres  of  Sables  in  his  owne  name
and  in  the  name  of  his  prince,  and  alfo  delyuered  the  letters  of  Bafilius,  which  they  before,  and  then
the  IlI}Tian  or  Slauon  interpretoure  Xicolaus  Siccenfis  trandated  into  the  Latine  toonge  in  this  efiecte  as
foloweth.

To  pope  Clemente  fheparde  and  teacher  of  the  Romane  churche,  greate  Bafilius  by  the  grace  of  God,
lorde,  Emperour  and  dominatour  of  al  Ruffia,  and  great  duke  of  Volodemaria,  Mofcouia,  Nouogrodia,  Plefcouia,
Smolenia,  Ifieria,  lugoria,  Permnia,  Vetcha,  Bolgaria.  etc.  Dominator  and  great  prince  of  Nouogrodia  in  the
lower  contrei : Alfo  of  Cemigouia, Razauia,  Volotchia, Rezenia, Belchia, Rodouia, larodauia, Belozeria,

The  trade  of
'  spices  in  owld
I  tymc.

Spices  corrupted.

The  Caspian  sea.

Bafilius  wrot  to
Pope  Adriane.

Warre  betwene
the  Polones  and
Moscouices.

The  seconde  viage
of  Paulus  to
Moscouia-
The  Pcpe
persuadeth
Basilius  to
acknowledge  the
Romane  churche.

279

The  Emperoures
receaue  there
diademe  of  the
bysshoppes  of
Rome.

Demetrius
interteynement  at
Rome.

Demetrins  is
brought  to  the
popes  presence.

Basilius  letters  to
Pope  Clement.

2 A 2

309

3IO

Mo/coiiia  and  Cathay.

280

Cardinall
Campegius.

The  ruines  of
Rome.

The  description
of  Mo^couia.

The  altares  of
great  aiexander.

Marisshes  in
soinmer.

The  forest  of
Hcrcynia.

Wyld  beastes

The  Scythian
Ocean.

The  beastes
cauled  Vri  or
Bisontes.

Helenas.

Of  the  .Scythians
and  Tartars.

Aniaxouii.

Horda,

The  large
dominion  of  the
Tartars.
Cathay.

The  Tartars  of
Europe.

Vdoria,  Obdoria,  and  Condiiiia.  etc.  Yow  fent  vnto  vs  Paulus  Centurio  a  citizen  of  Genua  with  letters  wherby
yowe  do  e.xhorte  vs  to  ioine  in  poure  and  counfayle  with  yowe  and  other  Princes  of  Chriflendome  ageynfl  the
enemies  of  the  chriflian  foith :  and  that  a  free  paflage  and  redy  way  may  bee  opened  for  bothe  yowre  ambalfa-
dours  and  owres  to  coome  and  go  to  and  fro,  whereby  by  mutiiall  dewtie  and  indeuoure  on  both  parties,  we
may  haue  knowleage  of  the  Rate  of  thinges  perteynynge  to  the  welth  of  vs  both.  Wee  certes  as  we  haue
hetherto  happely  by  the  ayde  and  helpe  of  almyghty  god  conftantly  and  erneflly  refifled  the  cruell  and  wycked
enemies  of  the  Chriflian  faithe,  fo  are  we  determined  to  doo  hereafter.  And  are  hkewife  redy  to  confcnte  with
other  Chriflian  Princes,  and  to  graunt  free  paffage  into  owre  dominions.  In  confideration  wherof,  we  haue
fente  vnto  yowe  owtc  faithful!  feruaunt  Demetrius  Erafmus  with  thefe  owre  letters  :  and  with  hym  haue
remitted  Paulus  Centurio  :  defyringe  yowe  alfo  fhortly  to  difmiffe  Demetrius  with  fafegarde  and  indemnitie  vnto
the  borthers  of  owre  dominions.  And  we  wyl  likewyfe  doo  the  fame  if  yowe  fende  yowre  ambaffadoure  with
Demetrius,  wherby  both  by  communication  and  letters,  wee  may  bee  better  certified  of  th[e]or(lcr  and  admini-
flration  of  fuch  thynges  as  yowe  require :  fo  that  beinge  aduertifed  of  the  mindes  and  intent  of  al  other
Chriflian  princes,  we  may  alfo  confult  what  is  bed  to  be  done  herein.  Thus  fare  ye  wel.  Giuen  in  owr
dominion  in  owr  citie  of  Mofcouia,  in  the  yeare  from  the  creation  of  the  worlde,  feuen  thoufande  and  three
hundreth,  the  thyrde  day  of  Aprell.

But  Demetrius,  as  he  is  e.xperte  in  diuine  and  humane  thynges,  and  efpecially  of  holy  fcripture,  feemed  to
haue  fecreate  commaundement  of  greater  matters  whiche  we  thinke  he  wyll  fliortly  declare  to  the  fenate  in
priuate  confultations.  For  he  is  nowe  deliucred  of  the  feuer  into  the  whiche  he  fell  by  chaunge  of  ayer,  and
hath  fo  recouered  his  flrengthe  and  natiue  colour,  that  beinge  a  man  of  threefcore  yeares  of  age,  he  was  not
only  prefente  at  the  popes  made  celebrated  with  great  folemnitie  in  the  honour  of  faynt  Cofmus  and  Damian
but  came  alfo  into  the  Senate  at  fuch  tyme  as  Cardinal  Campegius  commynge  fyrfl.  from  the  legacie  of
Pannonia,  was  receaued  of  the  pope  and  all  the  nobilitie  of  the  courte :  And  furthermore  alfo  vewed  the
temples  of  the  holye  citie  with  the  ruines  of  the  Romane  magnificence,  and  with  woonderynge  eyes  behelde  the
lamentable  decay  of  the  auncient  buildinges  So  that  we  thinke  that  fhortly  after  he  hath  declared  his  meffage,
he  fhall  returne  to  Mofcouia  with  the  byffhop  of  Scarenfe  the  popes  legate,  not  vnrecompenfed  with  iufl
rewards  at  the  handes  of  his  holyneffe.

The  name  of  the  Mofcouites  is  nowe  newe,  althowgh  the  poete  Lucane  maketh  mention  of  the  Mofchos
confinynge  with  the  Sarmatians,  and  Plinie  alfo  placeth  the  Mofchos  at  the  fprynges  of  the  great  r}'uer  of  Phafis
in  the  region  of  Colchos  aboue  the  fea  Euxinus  towarde  the  Eafl.  Theyr  region  hath  very  large  boundes,  and
is  extended  from  the  altars  of  great  Alexander  abowt  the  fpringes  of  Tanais,  to  the  extreme  landes  and  north
Ocean  in  maner  vnder  the  Northe  flarres  cauled  charles  wayne  or  the  greate  beare,  beinge  for  the  mofl  parte
playne  and  of  frutfuU  paflure,  but  in  fommer  in  many  places  full  of  marifflies.  For  whereas  all  that  lande  is
replenyfflied  with  many  and  great  r}mers  which  are  greatly  increafed  by  the  winter  fnow  and  ife  refolued  by  the
heate  of  the  foonne,  the  playnes  and  fyeldes  are  therby  ouerflowen  with  mariffhes,  and  all  iorneys  incumbered
with  continuall  Avaters  and  myrie  flabbyneffe  vntyl  by  the  benefite  of  the  new  wynter  the  ryuers  and  marifflies
bee  frofen  ageyne,  and  giue  fafe  paffage  to  the  fleades  that  are  accuflomed  to  iorney  by  the  fame.  The  woodde
or  forefl  of  Hercynia  (and  not  Hyrcania  as  is  redde  in  fum  falfe  copies)  occupieth  a  great  parte  of  Mofcouia,
and  is  here  and  there  inhabited,  with  houfes  buylded  therein  and  fo  made  thinner  by  the  longe  laboure  of  men
that  it  dooth  not  nowe  fhewe  that  horrour  of  thicke  and  impenetrable  woods  and  laundes  as  many  thinke  it  to
haue.  But  beinge  replenyfflied  with  many  wylde  beafles,  is  fo  farre  extended  through  Mofcouia  with  a  con-
tinual tracte  betwene  the  Eafl  and  the  North  towarde  the  Scythian  Ocean,  that  by  the  infinite  greatneffe  therof
it  hath  deluded  the  hope  of  fuch  as  haue  curioufly  fearched  th[e]ende  of  the  fame.  In  that  parte  that  reacheth
towarde  Pruffia,  are  founde  the  greate  and  fierce  beafles  cauled  Vri,  or  Bifontes,  of  the  kynde  of  bulles  :  Alfo
Alces  lyke  vnto  hartes,  whiche  the  Mofcouites  caule  Lozzi,  and  are  cauled  of  the  Germaynes  Helenes.  On
the  Eafl.  fyde  of  Mofcouia,  are  the  Scythyans  which  are  at  this  day  cauled  Tartars,  a  wanderinge  nation,  and  at
all  ages  famous  in  warres.  In  the  fl.ede  of  houfes  they  vfe  wagons  couered  with  beafles  hydes,  wherby  they
were  in  owlde  tyme  cauled  Amaxouii.  For  cities  and  townes,  they  vfe  greate  tentes  and  pauilions,  not  defended
with  trenches  or  waules  of  tyniber  or  flone,  but  inclofed  with  an  innumerable  multitude  of  archers  on  horfe-
backe.  The  Tartares  are  diuided  by  companies  which  they  caule  Hordas,  which  word  in  theyr  toonge  fignifieth
a  confentynge  companye  of  people  gathered  togyther  in  forme  of  a  citie.  Euery  Horda  is  gouerned  by  an
Emperour  whom  eyther  his  parentage  or  warlyke  prowes  hath  promoted  to  that  dignitie.  For  they  oftentimes
keepe  warre  with  theyr  bortherers  and  contende  ambicioufly  and  fiercely  for  dominion.  It  dooth  hereby
appeare  that  they  confifle  of  innumerable  Hordas,  in  that  the  Tartars  poffeffe  the  mofl.  large  defertes  euen  vnto
the  famous  citie  of  Cathay  in  the  furthefl.  Ocean  in  the  Eafl.  They  alfo  that  are  nearefle  to  the  Mofcouites,
are  knowen  by  theyr  trade  of  marchaundies  and  often  incuriions.  In  Europe  nere  vnto  the  place  cauled
Dromon  Achillis  in  Taurica  Cherfonefo,  are  the  Tartars  cauled  Precopites,  the  dowghter  of  whofe  prince,

3JO

Mofcoiiia  and  Cathay.

311

Selymus  Th[e]empcrour  of  the  Turkes  tooke  to  wyfe.  Thcfe  are  mod  infed  to  the  Polones,  and  wafl  the
regions  on  euery  fyde  betwene  the  ryuers  of  Boriflhenes  and  Tanais.  They  that  in  the  fame  Taurica  poffefle
Caffam  a  colonic  of  the  Ligurians  (cauled  in  owlde  tyme  Theodofia)  doo  bothe  in  religion  and  al  other  thynges
agree  with  the  Turkes.  But  the  Tartars  that  inhabite  regions  of  Afia  betwene  Tanais  and  Volga,  are  fubiecte
to  Bafilius  the  kynge  of  the  Mofcouites,  and  chufe  them  a  gouernour  at  his  affignement.  Amonge  thefe,  the
Cremii  afflicted  with  ciuile  feditions,  where  as  heretofore  they  were  riche  and  of  great  poure,  haue  of  late  yeares
lofle  theyr  dominion  and  dignitie.  The  Tartars  that  are  beyonde  the  ryuer  of  Volga,  do  religioufly  obferue  the
frendfhip  of  the  Mofcouites  and  profefle  them  felues  to  be  their  fubiectes.  Beyond  the  Caffanites  towarde  the
Northe,  are  the  Sciambani,  rich  in  heardes  of  cattaille  and  confidyng  of  a  great  multitude  of  men.  After  thefe,
are  Nogai,  whiche  obteyne  at  this  daye  the  chiefe  fame  of  ryches  and  warly  affayres.  Theyr  Horda,  althowgh
it  bee  mofl  ample,  yet  hath  it  no  emperoure,  but  is  gouerned  by  the  wyfdome  and  vertue  of  the  mofl  ancient
and  valient  men  after  the  maner  of  the  common  wealthe  of  Venece.  Beyonde  the  Nogais  fumwhat  towarde
the  fouth  and  the  Cafpian  fea,  the  nobelefl  nation  of  the  Tartars  cauled  Zagathai,  inhabite  townes  buylded  of
flone,  and  haue  an  exceadynge  greate  and  fayre  citie  cauled  Samarcanda,  which  laxartes  the  greate  ryuer  of
Sogdiana  runneth  through,  and  paffmge  from  thenfe  about  a  hundreth  myles,  fauleth  into  the  Cafpian  fea.
With  thefe  people  in  owre  dayes,  Ifmael  the  Sophi  and  kynge  of  Perfia  hathe  often  tymes  kepte  war  with
doubtful!  fucceffe  :  In  fo  muche  that  fearyng  the  greateneffe  of  theyr  poure  which  he  refyfled  with  all  that  he
myght,  he  lefte  Armenia  and  Taurifium  the  chiefe  citie  of  the  kyngedome,  for  a  pray  to  Selimus  the  vyctourer
of  one  wynge  of  the  battayle.  From  the  citie  of  Samarcanda,  defcended  Tamburlanes  the  myghty  Emperoure  of  the
Tartars  whome  fum  caule  Tanberlanis.  But  Demetrius  fayth  he  fhulde  bee  cauled  Themircuthlu.  Thys  is  he  that
abowte  the  yeare  of  Chryfle.  M.  CCC.  Ixxxxviiii.  [1398,  a.d.]  fubdued  almofl  all  the  Eafle  partes  of  the  worlde:
And  laflly  with  an  innumerable  multytude  of  men  inuaded  the  Turkes  dominions,  with  whom  Baiafetes  Otto-
manus  their  kynge,  (and  father  to  the  greate  grandefather  of  this  Solyman  that  nowe  lyueth)  metinge  at  Ancyra
in  the  confines  or  marches  of  Galatia  and  Bythinia,  gaue  hym  a  fore  battaile,  in  the  wliiche  felle  on  the
Turkes  parte.  20000.  men,  and  Baiafetes  hym  felfe  was  taken  prifoner,  whom  Tamburlanes  caufed  to  bee
locked  in  an  iren  cage  and  fo  caried  hym  abowte  with  hym  throwgh  all  Afia  which  he  alfo  conquered  with  a
terrible  army.  He  conquered  al  the  landes  betwene  Tanais  and  Nilus,  and  in  fine  vanquifdied  in  battayle  the
great  Soltane  of  Egypte,  whom  he  chafed  beyonde  Nilus,  and  tooke  alfo  the  citie  of  Damafcus.

Frome  the  region  of  thefe  Tartars  cauled  Zagathei,  is  browght  great  plentie  of  filken  apparel  to  the
Mofcouites.  But  the  Tartars  that  inhabite  the  midland  or  inner  regions,  bringe  none  other  wares  then  truckes
or  droues  of  fwyfte  runnynge  horfes  and  clokes  made  of  whyte  feltes  :  alfo  hales  or  tentes  to  withflonde  th[e]
iniuries  of  coulde  and  rayne.  Thefe  they  make  very  artificially  and  apte  for  the  purpofe.  They  receaue  agayne
of  the  Mofcouites,  coates  of  cloth,  and  fyluer  monye,  conteynynge  all  other  bodely  ornamentes,  and  the
furnyture  of  fuperfluous  houfolde  flufife.  For  beynge  defended  ageynfl  the  violence  of  wether  and  tempefles
only  with  fuche  apparell  and  couerture  whereof  wee  haue  fpoken,  they  trull  only  to  theyr  arrowes  which  they
flioote  afwell  backwarde  flyinge  as  when  they  affayle  theyr  enemies  face  to  face  :  Albeit,  when  they  determined
to  inuad  Europ,  theyr  princes  and  capitaynes  had  helmetts,  coates  of  fenfe,  and  hooked  fwoordes  which  they
bought  of  the  Perfians.  Towarde  the  fouthe,  the  boundes  of  Mofcouia  are  termined  by  the  fame  Tartars
which  poffeffe  the  playn  regyons  nere  vnto  the  Cafpian  fea  aboue  the  maryffhes  of  Meotis  in  Afia,  and  aboute
the  ryuers  of  Boryflhenes  and  Tanais  in  parte  of  Europe.  The  people  cauled  Roxolani,  Gete,  and  Badarne,
inhabited  thefe  regions  in  oulde  tyme,  of  whom  I  thynke  the  name  of  Ruffia  tooke  originall.  For  they  caule
parte  of  Lituania,  Ivuffia  the  lower,  wheras  Mofcouia  it  felfe,  is  cauled  whyte  Ruffia.  Lituania  therfore,  lyeth
on  the  Northweft.  fyde  of  Mofcouia.  But  towarde  the  full  weft  the  mayne  landes  of  Pruffia  and  Liuonia  are
ioyned  to  the  confines  or  marches  of  Mofcouia,  where  the  Sarmatian  fea  breakynge  furth  of  the  ftreightes  of
Cimbrica  Cherfonefus  (nowe  cauled  Denmarke)  is  bended  with  a  crooked  goulfe  towarde  the  northe.  But  in
the  furtheft  bankes  of  that  Ocean  where  the  large  kyngedomes  of  Noi'waye  and  Suecia  are  ioyned  to  the
continent  and  almofte  enuironed  with  the  fea,  are  the  people  cauled  Lapones,  A  nation  exceadynge  rude,
fufpicyous,  and  fearefuU,  flyinge  and  aftonyffhed  at  the  fyght  of  al  ftraungiers  and  fhyppes.  They  knowe
neyther  frutes  nor  apples,  nor  yet  any  benignitie  eyther  of  heauen  or  earth.  They  prouyde  them  meate  onely
with  {hootynge,  and  are  appareled  with  the  fkynnes  of  wild  beaftes.  They  dwell  in  caues  fylled  with  drye
leaues,  and  in  holow  trees  confumed  within  eyther  by  fyre  or  rotten  for  age  Suche  as  dwell  neare  the  fea  fyde,
fyffhe  more  luckyly  then  cunnyngly,  and  in  the  ftead  of  frutes,  referue  in  ftore  fyfflies  drj'ded  with  fmoke.
They  are  of  fmaule  ftature  of  body,  with  flatte  vifagies,  pale  and  wannye  colcure,  and  very  fwyfte  of  foote.
Their  wittes  or  difpofitions,  are  not  knowen  to  the  Mofcouites  theyr  bortherers,  who  thynke  it  therfore  a  mad-
neffe  to  aflayle  them  with  a  fmaule  poure,  and  iudge  it  neyther  profitable  nor  glorious,  with  greate  amiies  to
inuade  a  poore  and  beggerly  nation.  They  exchaunge  the  moft  whyte  furres  which  wee  caule  Armelines  for
other  wares  of  dyuers  fortes :  Yet  fo,  that  they  flie  the  fyght  and  coompanie  of  all  marchauntes. For  com-

The  Tartars  of
Asia  are  subiecte
to  the  iJukc  of
Moscouia.

281

The  Tartars
beyonde  the  ryuer
of  Volga.

NogaL
Sigismundus
cauleth  them
Nagaysri.
The  nobelest
nation  of  the
Tartars.
The  ryuer  of
laxartes.

Ismael  the  Sophi,
kynge  of  Pers  a.

The  citie  of

Samarcanda.

Tamburlanes,

the  myghtie

Emperour  of  the

Tartars.

The  conquestes  of

Tamburlanes.

Baiasetes.

This  apparel  they
haue  of  the
Persians.

The  Tartars
traflicke  with  the
Moscouites.

The  tartars  of  the
South  syde  of
Moscouia.

GeteandRoxolanL

Russia.

Moscouia  cauled
white  Russia.

Lituania.

Prussia.

Liuonia.

Denmarke.

Norway.

Suecix

The  people  of

Laponia.

282

Armeline  furres.

3"

312

Mofcoitia  and  Cathay,

Bargcninge
withowt  wordes.
The  darke  region
by  this  darke
region  and  the
Pigniei,  is  the  way
to  Cathay  by  the
Northe  sea.

The  scythian
Ocean.

The  region  of
colmogora.

The  ryuer  of
diuidnx

The  ryuer  of  luga
or  lug.

Vstiuga.

The  ryuer  of
Diuidna  or  Dvvina.

The  ryuer
Suchana.

The  frosen  sea.

283

Dwina  and
Suchana.

Gronland  or
Engronland.

Vnderstand  myles
of  Germany,  that
is  leaques.

Rych  furres.
Lupi  Ceruarii.

Sables.

parynge  and  laylnge  theyr  wares  together,  and  leauynge  tlicyr  furres  in  a  mydde  place,  they  bargeyne  with
fimple  fayth,  with  abfente  and  vnknowen  men.  Sum  men  of  great  credite  and  autoritie,  doo  teflifie  that  in  a
region  beyond  the  Lajipones,  betwene  the  wefl  and  the  north  ojipreffed  with  perpetuall  darkenes,  is  the  nation
of  the  people  cauled  Tigmei,  who  beinge  growen  to  theyr  ful  grought,  doo  fcarfely  e.xcede  the  flature  of  owre
chyldren  often  yeares  of  age.  It  is  a  fearefull  kynde  of  menne,  and  expreffe  theyr  wordes  in  fuch  chatteryng
fort  that  they  feeme  to  be  fo  much  the  more  lyke  vnto  apes,  in  howe  muche  they  dyffer  in  fence  and  flature
from  men  of  iufl  heyght.

Towarde  the  North,  innumerable  people  are  fubiecte  to  th[e]empire  of  the  Mofcouites.  Theyr  regions
e.xtende  to  the  Scythian  Ocean  for  the  fpace  of  almofle  three  moonethes  ioiney.

Next  vnto  Mofcouia,  is  the  region  of  Colmogora,  aboundyng  with  frutes.  Through  this  runneth  the  ryuer
of  Diuidna  beinge  one  of  the  greatefle  that  is  knowen  in  the  Northe  partes,  and  gaue  the  name  to  an  other
lelTe  ryuer  which  breaketh  furthe  into  the  fea  Baltheum.  This  increafynge  at  certeyne  tymes  of  the  yeare  as
dooth  the  ryuer  Nilus,  ouerfloweth  the  fyeldes  a'nd  playnes,  and  with  his  fat  and  nurifliinge  moyflure,  dooth
marueloufly  refifl  the  iniuries  of  heauen  and  the  fliari)e  blalles  of  the  North  wynde.  When  it  ryfeth  by  reafon
of  molten  fnowe  and  greate  (houres  of  rayne,  it  fauleth  into  the  Ocean  by  vnknowen  nations,  and  with  fo  large
a  trenche  lyke  vnto  a  greate  fea,  that  it  can  not  bee  fayled  ouer  in  one  day  with  a  profperous  wynde.  But
when  the  waters  are  faulen,  they  leaue  here  and  there  large  and  frutful  Ilandes.  For  corne  there  cafl  on  the
grounde,  groweth  without  any  helpe  of  the  plowe,  and  with  maruelous  celeritie  of  liaflynge  nature  fearynge  the
newe  iniurie  of  the  proude  ryuer,  dooth  both  fprynge  and  rype  in  fliort  fpace.

Into  the  ryuer  Diuidna,  runneth  the  ryuer  luga :  And  in  the  corner  where  they  ioyne  togyther,  is  the
famous  marte  towne  cauled  VRiuga  diflant  from  the  chiefe  citie  Mofca.  vi.  hundreth  myles.

Note  that  wheras  Paulus  loiiius  wryteth  here  that  tlie  ryuer  of  Diuidna,  otherwyse  cauled  Dwina,  runneth  throughe  the  region
of  Cohnogor,  it  is  to  bee  vnderflode  that  there  are  twoo  ryuers  of  that  name,  the  one  on  the  Northeafl  fyde  of  Mofcouia  towarde  the
frofen  fea,  and  the  other  on  the  fouthwefl.  fyde  faulyng  into  the  fea  Bahheum,  or  the  goulfe  of  Finnonia  by  the  citie  of  Riga  in
Liuonia.  And  forafmuch  as  the  trewe  knowleage  of  thefe  and  certeine  other  is  very  neceffary  for  all  fuch  as  (hall  trade  into  Mofcouia
or  other  regions  in  thofe  coafles  by  the  northe  fea,  I  haue  thought  good  to  make  further  declaration  hereof  as  I  haue  founde  in  the
hyflorie  of  Mofcouia,  mofl  faythfully  and  largely  wrytten  by  Sigifmundus  Liberus  who  was  twyfe  fent  ambaffadour  into  Mofcouia,  as
fyrfl  by  Maximilian  Th[e]eniperour,  and  then  ageyne  by  Ferdinando  kyng  of  Hungary  and  Boheme.  This  haue  I  doone  the  rather,
for  that  in  all  the  mappes  that  I  haue  feene  of  Mofcouia,  there  is  no  mention  made  of  the  ryuer  of  Dwina  that  runneth  through  the
region  of  Colmogor  and  by  the  citie  of  the  fame  name,  although  the  prouynce  of  Dwina  bee  in  all  cardes  placed  Northewarde  frome
the  ryuer  of  Vfliug  or  Succana,  whiche  is  the  fame  Dwina  whereof  we  nowe  fpeake,  and  wherof  Paulus  louius  wryteth,  although  it
bee  not  fo  named  but  from  the  angle  or  corner  where  ioynynge  with  the  ryuer  of  lug  and  .Suchana,  it  runneth  Northewarde  towarde
the  citie  of  Colmogor,  and  from  thence  fauleth  into  the  north  or  frofen  fea,  as  fhall  hereafter  more  playnly  appeare  by  the  woordes  of
Sigifmundus,  that  the  one  of  thefe  bee  not  taken  for  the  other  being  fo  farre  diflant  that  great  errour  myght  enfue  by  miflakynge  the
fame,  eipecially  bicaufe  this  wherof  Paulus  louius  wryteth  is  uot  by  name  expreffed  in  the  cardes,  but  only  the  other,  wherby  the
errour  myght  bee  the  greater.  Of  that  therfore  that  runneth  by  the  confiaes  of  Liuonia  and  the  citie  of  Riga,  Sigifmundus  wryteth
in  this  maner.

The  lake  of  Dwina,  is  diflante  from  the  fprynges  of  Boriflhenes,  almoft  tenne  myles,  and  as  many  from  the  maryfflie  of  Fronowo-
From  it,  a  ryuer  of  the  fame  name  towarde  the  wefl,  diflante  from  Vuilna.  xx.  [twenty]  myles,  runneth  from  thence  towarde  the
Northe,  where  by  Riga  the  chiefe  citie  of  Liuonia,  it  faulethe  into  tlie  Germayne  fea  which  the  Mofcouites  caule  Vuareczkote  morie.
It  runneth  by  Vuitepfko,  Polotzko,  and  Dunenburg,  and  not  by  Plefcouia  as  one  hath  wrytten.  This  ryuer  beinge  for  the  mofle
part  nauigable,  the  Lyuons  caule  Duna.

Of  the  other  Dwina  wherof  Paulus  louius  fpeaketh,  he  wryteth  as  foloweth.

The  prouince  of  Dwina  and  the  ryuer  of  the  fame  name,  is  fo  named  from  the  place  where  the  ryuers  of  Suchana  and  lug
meatynge  togyther,  make  one  lyuer  fo  cauled.  For  Dwina  in  the  Mofcouites  tounge,  fignifieth  two.  This  ryuer  by  the  courfe  of  a
hundred  myles,  entereth  into  the  North  Ocean  on  that  part  where  the  fayde  fea  runneth  by  the  coafles  of  Swecia  and  Norwaye,  and
diuidethe  Engronlande  from  the  vnknowen  lande.  This  prouince  fituate  in  the  ful  north,  perteined  in  tyme  pall  to  the  fegniorie  of
Nouogorode.  From  Mofcouia  to  the  mouthes  of  Dwina,  are  numbered.  CCC.  [three  hundred]  myles :  Albeit  as  I  haue  fayde,  in  the
regions  that  are  beyond  Volga,  the  accompte  of  the  iomey  can  not  bee  well  obferued  by  reafon  of  many  maryfflies,  ryuers,  and  veiy
greate  wooddes  that  lye  in  the  way.  Yet  are  we  led  by  coniecture  to  thinke  it  to  bee  fcarfely  twoo  hundreth  myles :  forafmuch  as
from  Mofcouia  to  Vuolochda,  from  Vuolochda  to  Vflyug  fumwhat  into  the  Eafte  :  and  lafle  of  all  frome  Vflyug  by  the  ryuer  Dwina,
is  the  ryght  paffage  to  the  northe  fea.  This  region,  befyde  the  caflel  of  Colmogor  and  citie  of  Dwina,  fituate  almoft  in  the  mydde
way  betwene  the  fpryngs  and  mouthes  of  the  ryuer,  and  the  caflell  of  Pienega  flandynge  in  the  very  mouthes  of  Dwina,  is  vtterly
withowt  townes  and  caflels :  yet  hath  it  many  vyllages  whiche  are  farre  in  funder  by  reafon  of  the  barenneffe  of  the  foyle.  etc.

In  an  other  place  he  wryteth,  that  Suchana  and  lug,  after  they  are  ioyned  togyther  in  one,  loofe  theyr  fyrfle  names  and  make
the  ryuer  Dwina.  etc. But  lette  vs  nowe  returne  to  the  hyflorie  of  Paulus  iouius.

Vnto  Vfi-iuga,  from  the  Permians,  Pecerrians,  Inugrians,  Vgolicans,  and  Pinnegians,  people  inhabytynge
the  north  and  northeafl  prouinces,  are  brought  the  precious  furres  of  Marterns  and  Sables :  Alfo  the  cafes  of
woulfes  and  foxes  both  whyte  and  blacke :  And  lykewyfe  the  fkynnes  of  the  beaRes  cauled  Ceruarii  Lupi  (that
is)  harte  woolfes,  beinge  engendered  eyther  of  a  woolfe  and  a  hynde,  or  a  harte  and  a  bytch  woolfe.  Thefe
furres  and  fkyns,  they  exchange  for  dyuers  other  wares,  The  befl  kynde  of  fables  and  of  the  finefl  heare
wherwith  nowe  the  veflures  of  princes  are  lyned,  and  the  tender  neckes  of  delicate  dames  are  couered  with  the
312

Mofcoiiia  and  Cathay.

313

expreffe  fimilitude  of  the  lyuynge  beade,  are  brought  by  the  Permians  and  Pecerrians,  whiche  they  them  felues
alfo  receaue  at  the  handes  of  other  that  inhabite  the  regions  neare  vnto  the  north  Ocean.  The  Permians  and
Pecerrians,  a  lyttle  before  owre  tyme,  dyd  facrifice  to  Idols  after  the  maner  of  the  Gentyles  :  but  doo  nowe
acknowleage  Chryfle  theyr  God.  The  paffage  to  the  Inugrians,  and  Vgohcans,  is  by  certeyne  rowgh  moun-
taynes,  which  perhappes  are  they  that  in  owlde  tyme  were  cauled  Hyperborei.  In  the  toppes  of  thefe,  are
founde  the  befle  kyndes  of  Falcons  :  whereof  one  kynde  (cauled  Herodium)  is  whyte  with  fpotted  fethers.
There  are  alfo  ierfalcons,  fakers,  and  peregrines,  whiche  were  vnknowen  to  the  ancient  princes  in  theyr
exceffiue  and  nife  pleafures.

Beyonde  thofe  people  whom  I  lafl  named  (beinge  all  tributaries  to  the  kinges  of  Mofcouia)  are  other
nations  the  lafl  of  men,  not  knowen  by  any  viages  of  the  Mofcouites,  forafmuche  as  none  of  theym  haue  paffed
to  the  Ocean,  and  are  therefore  knowen  onely  by  the  fabulous  narrations  of  marchauntes.  Yet  is  it  apparente
that  the  ryuer  of  Diuidna  or  Dwina,  drawynge  with  it  innumerable  other  ryuers,  runneth  with  a  vehement
courfe  towarde  the  northe :  and  that  the  fea  is  there  exceadyng  large:  fo  that  faylyng  by  the  coaft  of  the  rj'ght
hande,  fhippes  may  haue  paffage  from  thenfe  to  Cathay  as  is  thought  by  mofl  lykely  coniecture,  excepte  there
lye  fum  lande  in  the  waye.  For  the  region  of  Cathay  perteyneth  to  th[e]extreme  and  furthefle  partes  of  the
Eafle,  fituate  almofl  in  the  paralell  of  Thracia,  and  knowen  to  the  Portugales  in  India  when  they  fayled  neare
thereunto  by  the  regions  of  Sinara  and  Malacha  to  Aurea  Cherfonefus,  and  brought  from  thenfe  certeyne  veflures
made  of  Sables  fkynnes,  by  which  only  argument  it  is  apparente  that  the  citie  of  Cathay  is  not  farre  from  the
coafles  of  Scythia.

But  when  Demetrius  was  demaunded  whether  eyther  by  the  monumentes  of  letters  or  by  fame  lefte  theym
of  theyr  prediceffours,  they  hadde  any  knowleage  of  the  gothes  who  nowe  more  then  a  thoufrnd  yeares  fence
fubuerted  Th[e]empire  of  the  Romane  Emperours,  and  defaced  the  citie  of  Rome,  he  anfwered,  that  both  the
nation  of  the  Gothes  of  the  name  of  kynge  Totilas  theyr  chiefe  capitayne,  was  of  famous  memorie  amonge
them  :  And  that  dyuers  nations  of  the  north  regions  confpired  to  that  expedition,  and  efpeciallye  the  Mofcouites :
Alfo  that  that  armie  increafed  of  the  confluence  of  the  Barbarous  Liuons  and  wanderynge  Tartars  :  But
that  they  were  all  cauled  Gothes  forafmuch  as  the  Gothes  that  inhabited  Scondania  and  Ifelande,  were  the
auctoures  of  that  inuafion.

And  with  thefe  boundes  are  the  Mofcouites  inclofed  on  euery  fide,  whom  we  thinke  to  be  thofe  people
that  Ptolome  cauled  Modocas  :  but  haue  doubteleffe  at  this  day  their  name  of  the  riuer  Mofco  whiche  runneth
tlirough  the  chiefe  citie  Mofca  named  alfo  after  the  fame.  This  is  the  mofl.  famous  citie  in  Mofcouia,  afwell
for  the  fituation  thereof  beinge  in  maner  in  the  myddefl  of  the  region,  as  alfo  for  the  commodious  oportunitie
of  ryuers,  multitude  of  houfes,  and  flronge  fenfe  of  fo  fayre  and  goodly  a  caflell.  For  the  citie  is  extended
with  a  longe  tracte  of  buyldynges  by  the  bankes  of  the  ryuer  for  the  fpace  of  fyue  myles.  The  houfes  are
made  all  of  tymber,  and  are  diuided  into  parlers,  chambers,  and  kichins  of  large  roomes  :  yet  neyther  of
vnfeemely  height  or  to  lowe,  but  of  decent  meafure  and  proportion.  For  they  haue  greate  trees  apte  for  the
purpofe  browght  from  the  forefle  of  Hercinia  ?  of  the  which,  made  perfectly  rounde  like  the  mafles  of  fhippes,
and  fo  layde  one  vppon  an  other  that  they  ioyne  at  the  endes  in  right  angles,  where  being  made  very  faHe  and
fure,  they  frame  theyr  houfes  thereof  of  maruelous  flrength  with  fmaule  charges  and  in  verye  fhort  tyme.  In
maner  all  the  houfes  haue  priuate  gardens  afwell  for  pleafure  as  commoditie  of  herbes,  wherby  the  circuite  of
the  difperfed  citie  appeareth  very  greate.  All  the  wardes  or  quarters  of  the  citie,  haue  theire  peculiar  chappels.
But  in  the  chiefefl.  and  highefl.  place  therof,  is  the  Church  of  owre  ladi  of  ample  and  goodly  workemanfliyppe,
whiche  Ariftoteles  of  Bononie,  a  man  of  fmgular  knowleadge  and  experience  in  architecture,buylded  more  then.
Ix.  [fixty]  yeares  fence.  At  the  very  head  of  the  citie,  a  little  ryuer  cauled  Neglina  which  drj'ueth  many  come
mylles,  entereth  into  the  ryuer  Mofcus,  and  maketh  almofl  an  Hand,  in  whofe  end  is"  the  cafl.ell  with  many
flrong  towrs  and  buUwarkes,  buylded  very  fayre  by  the  diuife  of  Italien  architecturs  that  are  the  maflers  of  the
kinges  workes.  In  the  fieldes  abowt  the  citie,  is  an  incredible  multitud  of  hares  and  roe  buckes,  the  which  it
is  lawefull  for  no  man  to  chafe  or  perfue  with  dogges  or  nettes  excepte  only  certeyne  of  the  kinges  familiars  and
flraunge  ambaffadours  to  whom  he  giueth  licence  by  fpeciall  commaundement.  Almofl  three  partes  of  the
citie  is  inuironed  with  two  ryi^ers,  and  the  refydue  with  a  large  mote  that  receaueth  plentie  of  water  frome  the
fayde  ryuers.  The  citie  is  alfo  defended  on  the  other  fyde  with  an  other  ryuer  named  laufa,  whiche  fauleth
alfo  into  Mofcus  a  little  beneath  the  citie.  Furthermore  Mofcus  runnyng  towarde  the  South,  fauleth  into  tlie
ryuer  Ocha  or  Occa  muche  greater  then  it  felfe  at  the  towne  Columna,  and  not  very  farre  from
thenfe  Ocha  it  felfe  increafed  with  other  riuers,  vnladeth  his  flreames  in  the  famous  riuer  Volgo,
wher  at  the  place  where  they  ioyne,  is  fituate  the  citie  of  Nouogrodia  the  lefTe,  fo  named  in  refpecte
of  the  greater  citie  of  that  name  from  whenfe  was  browght  the  firfle  colonic  of  the  lelfe  citie.  Volga
cauled  in  owlde  tyme  Rha,  hath  his  originall  of  the  greate  maryfflies  named  the  white  lakes.  Thefe  are  aboue
Mofcouia  betwene  the  Northe  and  the  Wefl,  and  fende  furthe  from  them  almofl  all  the  ryuers  that  are  difperfed

3"3

The  mountaines
cauled  Hiperborei
Haukes  of  diuers
kyndes.

The  passage  from
Moscouia  to
cathay.

Cathay.

Master  Eliot
cauleth  Cathay
the  region  of
sinanuu-

The  Gothes
subuerted  the
Romane  Empire.

The  north  regions
conspired  ageinst
the  Romans.

Moscouia

284

The  citie  of
Mosca.

Richard

chauiiceler  toulde
me  that  the.se
mastes  are
sumwhat  holowe
on  the  one  syde,
and  that  the  hole
syde  of  the  ne.vt
entereth  into  the
same  wherby  they
lye  very  close.

The  cast<.l  of
Mosca.

%\Tiite  hares  and
roe  buckes.

The  rjTjer  Ocha.

Volga.
Nouogrodia.

Rh.x

The  whyte  fakes.

314

Alofcouia  iDid  CatJiay.

The  R\-phean  and

hyperborean

niountayiies.

Tanais  and
Boristhenes.

The  sea  Euxinus.

The  Caspian  sea.

Astrachan.

Medix

Armenia.

Persia.

Casan.

285

Surx
Surcium.

into  dyuers  regions  on  euery  fyde,  as  wee  fee  of  the  Alpes  from  whofe  toppes  and  fprynges  defcend  the  waters
of  whofe  concourfc  the  ryuers  of  Rhcne,  Po,  and  Rodanum,  liaue  theyr  increafe.  For  thefe  maryfflies  in  the
fleade  of  niountaynes  fill  of  fprynges,  minifler  abundant  moyRure,  forafniuch  as  no  mountaynes  are  yet  founde
in  that  region  by  tlie  longe  trauayles  of  men,  in  fo  much  that  manye  that  haue  byn  fludioiis  of  the  owlde
Cofmographie,  fuppofe  the  Ryphean  and  Hyperborean  mountaynes  fo  often  mentioned  of  the  ancient  writers,
to  bee  fabulous.  From  thefe  maryfOies  therfore,  the  ryuers  of  Dwina,  Ocha,  Mofchus,  Volga,  Tanais,  and
Boryflhenes,  haue  theyr  originall.  The  Tartars  caule  Volga  Fdel :  Tanais  they  caule  Don  :  And  Boryflhenes
is  at  this  day  cauled  Neper.  This,  a  lyttle  beneathe  Taurica,  runneth  into  the  fea  Fuxinus.  Tanais  is
receaued  of  the  maryfflies  of  Meotis  at  the  noble  marte  towne  Azoum.  But  Volga  leauynge  the  citie  of  Mofcha
towarde  the  fouth,  and  runnynge  with  a  large  circuite  and  greate  wyndynges  and  creekes  firfl  towarde  the
Fade,  then  to  the  Weft,  and  laftly  to  the  fouth,  fauleth  with  a  full  flreame  into  the  Cafpian  or  Hyrcan  fea.
Aboue  the  mouth  of  this,  is  a  citie  of  the  Tartars  cauled  Cytrachan,  which  fum  caule  Aflrachan,  where  martes
are  kepte  by  the  marchauntes  of  Media,  Armenia,  and  Perfia.  On  the  further  banke  of  Volga,  there  is  a  towne
of  the  Tartars  cauled  Cafan,  of  the  which  the  Horda  of  the  Cafanite  Tartars  tooke  theyr  name.  It  is  diftante
from  the  mouth  of  Volga  and  the  Cafpian  fea  fyue  hundreth  myles.  Aboue  Cafan.  C  1.  [one  hundred  and
fifty]  myles  at  the  enteraunce  of  the  ryuer  Sura,  Bafilius  that  now  reigneth,  buylded  a  towne  cauled  Surcium,  to
th[e]intente  that  in  thofe  defertes,  the  marchauntes  and  trauailers  which  certifie  the  gouernours  of  the  marches
of  the  doinges  of  the  Tartars  and  the  maners  of  that  vnquiet  nation,  may  have  a  fate  manfion  amonge  theyr
cuflomers.

Th[e]emperours  of  Mofcouia  at  dyuers  tymes,  eyther  moued  therto  by  occafion  of  thynges  prefente,  or  for
the  defyre  they  had  to  nobilitate  newe  and  obfcure  places,  haue  kepte  the  feate  of  theyr  courte  and  Empire  in
dyuers  cities.  For  Nouogrodia  whiche  lyeth  towarde  the  Wefte  and  the  Lyuon  fea,  not  many  yeares  pafte,  was
the  headde  citie  of  Mofcouia,  and  obteyned  euer  the  chiefe  dignitie  by  reafon  of  the  incredible  number  of  houfes
and  edifi[c]es,  with  the  oportunitie  of  the  large  lake  replenyfllied  with  fyfflie,  and  alfo  for  the  fame  of  the  mofte
auncient  and  venerable  temple  whiche  more  then  foure  hundreth  yeres  fence  was  dedicated  to  Sancta  Sophia
Chryfte  the  foonne  of  God,  accordynge  to  the  cuftome  of  the  Emprours  of  Bizantium  nowe  cauled  Conftantinople.
Nouogrodia  is  oppreffed  in  maner  with  continuall  wynter  and  darkeneffe  of  longe  nyghtes.  For  it  hath  the  pole
Artike  eleuate  aboue  the  Horizon  threefcore  and  foure  degrees:  and  is  further  from  the  Equinoctiall  then
Mofcouia  by  almofte.  vi.  degrees.  By  whiche  dyfference  of  heauen,  it  is  fayde  that  at  the  fommer  fteye  of  the
foonne,  it  is  burnte  with  continuall  heate  by  reafon  of  the  fliorte  nyghtes.

The  citie  alfo  of  Volodemaria,  beinge  more  then  twoo  hundreth  myles  diftant  from  Mofca  towarde  the
Eafle,  had  the  name  of  the  chiefe  citie  and  kynges  towne,  whyther  the  feate  of  Th[e]empire  was  tranflated  by
the  valiant  Emperours  for  neceffarie  confiderations,  that  fuch  ayde,  furniture,  and  requifites  as  apperteyne  to  the
warres  myght  bee  neare  at  hande  at  fuche  tyme  as  they  kepte  continuall  warre  ageynfte  the  Tartars  theyr
bortherers.  For  it  is  fituate  withowt  Volga,  on  the  bankes  of  the  ryuer  Clefma,  whiche  fauleth  into  Volga.  But
Mofcha,  afwell  for  thofe  gyftes  and  commodities  whereof  we  haue  fpoken,  as  alfo  that  it  is  fituate  in  the  myddeft
of  the  moft  frequented  place  of  all  the  region  and  Empire,  and  defended  with  the  rj^uer  and  Caftel,  hath  in
comparyfon  to  other  cities  byn  thowght  mofte  woorthy  to  bee  efteemed  for  the  chiefe.  Mofcha  is  diftant  from
Nouogrodia  fine  hundreth  myles:  and  almoft  in  the  mydde  way  is  the  citie  of  Ottoferia  (otherwyfe  cauled  Otwer
or  Tuwer)  vppon  the  ryuer  of  Volga.  This  ryuer  neare  vnto  the  fountaynes  and  fpringes  of  the  fame,  not  yet
increafed  by  receauyng  fo  many  other  ryuers,  runneth  but  flowely  and  gentelly:  And  paffeth  from  thenfe  to
Nouogrodia  through  many  wooddes  and  defolate  playnes.  Furthermore  frome  Nouogrodia  to  Riga  the  nexte
1  o:te  of  the  Sarmatian  fea,  is  the  iornay  of  a  thoufand  myles  lyttle  more  or  leffe.  This  tracte  is  thought  to  bee
more  commodious  then  the  other,  bycaufe  it  hath  manye  townes  and  the  citie  of  Plefcouia  in  the  waye,  beinge
imbrafed  with  two  ryuers.  From  P.iga  (perteynynge  to  the  dominion  of  the  greate  mafter  of  the  warres  of  the
Liuons)  to  the  citie  of  Lubecke  a  porte  of  Germanie  in  the  goulfe  of  Cymbrica  Cherfonefus  (nowe  cauled
Denmarke)  are  numbered  aboute  a  thoufande  myles  of  daungerous  faylynge.

From  Rome  to  the  citie  of  Mofcha,  the  diftance  is  knowen  to  bee  two  thoufande  and  fyxe  hundreth  miles
by  the  neareft  way  paffynge  by  Rauenna,  Taruifium,  the  Alpes  of  Carnica:  Alfo  Villacum,  Noricum,  and  Vienna
of  Pannonie:  and  from  thenfe  (paffynge  ouer  the  ryuer  of  Danubius)  to  Olmutium  of  the  Marouians  and
to  Cracouia  the  chiefe  citie  of  Polonie,  are  coumpted.  xi.  hundreth  myles.  From  Cracouia  to  Vilna  the
headde  citie  of  Lithuania,  are  coumpted  fine  hundreth  myles :  and  as  many  from  that  citie  to  Smolenzko  fituate
beyonde  Boryfthenes,  from  whenfe  to  Mofcha  are  coumpted  fyxe  hundreth  myles.  The  iorney  frome  Vilna  by
Smolenzko  to  Mofcha,  is  trauayled  in  wynter  with  expedite  fleades  and  incredible  celeritie  vppon  the  fnowes
hardened  with  longe  frofte  and  compacte  lyke  Ife  by  reafon  of  muche  wearynge.  But  in  foommer,  the  playnes
can  not  bee  ouerpaffed  but  by  difficulte  and  laborious  trauayle.  For  when  the  fnowes  by  the  continuall  heate
of  the  foonne  begyn  to  melte  and  diffolue,  they  caufe  great  maryfflies  and  quamyres  able  to  intangle  bothe  horfe
314

Nouogrodia.

The  temple  of
Sancti  Sophia.

The  eleuation  of
the  pole  at
Nouogrodia  and
Moscouia.
Heate  by  reason
of  short  nyghtes.

The  citie  of
Volodemarix

The  citie  of
Moscha.

Ottoferia.
Volga.

Riga.

The  citie  of
Piescouia.

The  citie  of
Lubeke.

From  Rome  to
Moscouia.

Wynter  trauayle
by  ise  and  snowe.

Marysshes  in
somrr.er.

Mofcoiiia  and  Cathay,

315

and  man,  were  it  not  that  wayes  are  made  throwgh  the  fame  with  brydges  and  caufeys  of  wood,  and  almod
infinite  laboure.

In  all  the  region  of  Mofcouia,  there  is  no  vayne  or  mine  of  golde  or  fyluer,  or  any  other  common  metall
excepte  iren:  neyther  yet  is  there  any  token  of  precious  flones.  And  therefore  they  bye  all  thofe  thynges  of
flraungers.  Neuertheleffe,  this  iniurie  of  nature  is  recompenfed  with  abundaunce  of  rich  furres,  whofe  price  by
the  wanton  niceneffe  of  men  is  growne  to  fuch  exceffe  that  the  furres  perteynynge  to  one  forte  of  apparell,  are
nowe  foulde  for  a  thoufande  crownes.  But  the  tyme  hath  byn  that  thefe  haue  byn  bought  better  chepe  when
the  furthefl  nations  of  the  north  beinge  ignorant  of  owr  nyfe  fineneffe  and  breathyng  defyre  toward  effeminate
and  fuperfluous  pleafures,  exchanged  the  fame  with  muche  fimplicitie  often  tymes  for  trj^es  and  thynges  of
fmaule  value:  In  fo  muche  that  commonly  the  Permians  and  Pecerrians,  were  accuflomed  to  gyue  fo  many
fkynnes  of  Sables  for  an  Iren  axe  or  hatchet  as  beinge  tyed  harde  togyther,  the  marchauntes  of  Mofcouia  coulde
drawe  through  the  hole  where  the  hafte  or  handyll  entereth  into  the  fame.  Bi  t  the  Mofcouites  fende  into  all
partes  of  Europe  the  befl  kynde  of  flaxe  to  make  lynnen  clothe,  and  hempe  for  ropes :  Alfo  many  oxe  hydes,
and  exceadynge  great  maffes  of  waxe.

They  proudely  denye  that  the  Romane  churche  obteyneth  the  principate  and  preeminent  autoritie  of  all
other.

They  fo  abhorre  the  nation  of  the  lewes,  that  they  deteft.  the  memorie  of  them,  and  wyll  in  no  condition
admitte  them  to  dwell  within  theyr  dominions:  efleemyng  them  as  wycked  and  mifcheuous  people  that  haue  of
late  tawght  the  Turkes  to  make  gunnes.  Befyde  the  bookes  that  they  haue  of  the  ancient  Greeke  doctours,
they  haue  alfo  the  commentaries  and  homelies  of  faynt  Ambrofe,  Augufline,  Jerome,  and  Gregorie,  tranflated
into  the  Illirian  or  Slauon  tounge  which  agreeth  with  theyrs.  For  they  vfe  bothe  the  Slauon  to'mge  and  letters,
as  doo  alfo  the  Sclauons,  Dalmates,  Bohemes,  PoUones,  and  Lithuanes.  This  tounge  is  fpredde  further  then
any  other  at  this  day.  For  it  is  familyar  at  Conflantinople  in  the  courte  of  the  Emperours  of  the  Turkes:  and
was  of  late  harde  in  Egypte  amonge  the  Mamalukes  in  the  courte  of  the  Soltane  of  Alcayre  othenvyfe  cauled
Memphis  or  Babilon  in  Egipte.  A  greate  number  of  bookes  of  holy  fcripture  are  tranflated  into  this  tounge  by
th[e]induflrie  of  faynte  lerome  and  Cyrillus.  Furthermore,  befyde  the  hyflories  of  theyr  o.me  countreys,  they
haue  alfo  bookes  conteynyng  the  factes  of  great  Alexander  and  the  Romane  Emperours,  and  lykewyfe  of  Marcus
Antonius  and  Cleopatra.  They  haue  no  maner  of  knowleage  of  philofophie,  Aflronomie,  or  fpeculatiue  phificke
with  other  liberall  fciences :  But  fuch  are  taken  for  phifitians  as  profeffe  that  they  haue  often  times  obferued  the
vertue  and  qualitie  of  fum  vnknowen  herbe.

They  number  the  yeares,  not  from  the  byrth  of  Chryfle,  but  from  the  begynnynge  of  the  worlde.  And  this
they  begin  to  accoumpte,  not  frome  the  monethe  of  lannary,  but  from  September.

They  haue  fewe  and  fimple  lawes  throwghe  owte  all  the  kyngedome,  made  by  the  equite  and  confcience  of
theyr  princes,  and  approued  by  the  confent  of  wyfe  and  good  men:  and  are  therfore  greatly  for  the  welthe  and
quyetneffe  of  the  people  forafmuch  as  it  is  not  lawfuU  to  peruerte  them  with  any  interpretations  or  cauillations
of  lawyers  or  atturneys.  They  punyfhe  theues,  rouers,  priuie  pyckers,  and  murtherers.  When  they  examine
malefactours,  they  poure  a  great  quantitie  of  coulde  water  vppon  fuche  as  they  fufpecte,  whiche  they  fay  to  bee
an  intollerable  kynde  of  tormente.  But  fumtymes  they  manacle  fuche  as  are  floborne,  and  wyll  not  confeffe
apparent  crymes.

Theyr  youth  is  exercifed  in  dyuers  kyndes  of  games  and  plays  refembelyng  the  warres,  wherby  they  both
practife  pollicie  and  increafe  theyr  flrength.  They  vfe  runnynge  both  on  horfebacke  and  afoote.  Alfo  runnynge
at  the  tylte,  wreftelynge,  and  efpecially  Ihootynge. For  they  gyue  rewardes  to  fuche  as  excell  therin.

The  Mofcouites  are  vniuerfally  of  meane  flature,  yet  very  fquare  fet  and  myghtyly  brawned.  They  haue
al  grey  eyes,  longe  beardes,  fhorte  legges,  and  bygge  bellyes.  They  ryde  very  fhorte,  and  fhoote  backewarde
very  cunnyngely  euen  as  they  flye.  At  home  in  theyr  houfes,  theyr  fare  is  rather  plentifull  then  deyntie.  For
theyr  tables  are  furnyffhed  for  a  fmaule  price  with  all  fuche  kyndes  of  meates  as  may  bee  defyred  of  fuch  as  are
gyuen  to  mofl  exceffiue  gluttony.  Hennes  and  duckes  are  bought  for  lytde  fyluer  penfe  the  piece.  There  is
incredible  plentie  of  beafles  and  cattayle  bothe  greate  and  fmaule.  The  fleffhe  of  biefe  that  is  kylled  in  the
myydefl  of  \vynter,  is  fo  cong'^led  and  frofen,  that  it  putrifiethe  not  for  the  fpace  of  two  moonethes.  Theyr
befle  and  mofle  delicate  dyfilies,  are  gotten  by  huntynge  and  haukynge  as  with  vs.  For  they  take  all  fortes  of
wylde  beafles  with  houndes  and  dyuers  kyndes  of  nettes.  And  with  falcons  and  erens  or  eagles  of  a  marueylous
kynde  whiche  the  region  of  Pecerra  bryngeth  furth  vnto  them,  they  take  not  onely  fefantes  and  wylde  duckes,
but  alfo  cranes  and  wylde  fwannes.  They  take  alfo  a  foule  of  darke  coloure  abowte  the  byggenes  of  a  goofe
with  redde  ouerbrowes,  whofe  flefflie  in  tafle  paffeth  the  pleafauntneffe  of  Pheafauntes.  Thefe  in  the  MofcDuites
tounge  are  cauled  Tcirao,  whiche  I  fuppofe  to  bee  the  fame  that  Plinie  cauleth  Eryfhraiao,  knowen  to  the
people  of  the  Alpes,  and  efpecially  to  the  Rhetians  whiche  inhabite  the  laundes  abowte  the  fprynges  of  the  ryntx
Abdua. The  ryuer  of  Volga  miniflreth  vnto  them  great  fyffhes  and  of  pleafaunte  tafle :  efpecially  (lurgions  or

315

Other  wryters
deny  this.

286

Riche  furres.
The  price  of  furres.

How  many  sables
skynnes  for  an  axe.

Flax.

Oxe  hydes.
Waxe.

Thei  abhorre  the
lewes.

Their  bokes  and
religion.

The  Sclauon
tounge  spred
further  then  any
other.

Saynte  lerome
was  borne  in
Dalmatia  nowe
cauled  Sclauonia.

Howe  they
number  the
yeares.

Fewe  and  simple
lawes

The  exercise  of
youth.

Shootynge.

The  corporature
of  the  ^loscouites.

Theyr  fare.

287

Flesshe  preserued
longe  by  reason  of
coulde.
Haukyng  and
huntynge.

Plentie  of  fysshe.

3i6

Mofconia  ami  CatJiay.

Fysshe  longe
rcserucd  iu  Ise.

Wyne.

Maluasie.

All  the  north
parte  of  the  firme
lande  was  caiilej
Scytliia  and  the
people  Scythyans,

Dr>-nke  cooled
with  Ise.

Wyne  of  cherryes.

Their  women.

Thomas
Paleologus.
The  conquest  of
the  turkes  in
Grecia.

How  the  princes
chuse  theyr  wyues.

288

Duke  Basilius.

War  betwene  the
Polones  and
Moschouites.

War  betwen  the
Moschouites  and
Tartars.

The  Moscouites
army.

Their  bajiner.

Their  horses  and
hor:>[c]inea.

rather  a  kjTide  of  fyfHie  lyke  vnto  flurgions :  whiche  in  the  wynter  feafon  beinge  inclofed  in  Ifc,  are  longe
relerucd  froflhe  and  ^•ncorrupte.  Of  otlier  kindes  of  fyflhes,  they  take  in  mancr  an  incredible  multitude  in  the
whyte  hikes  whereof  wee  haue  fpoken  before.  And  wheras  they  vtterly  lacke  natiue  wynes,  they  vfe  fuche  as
are  browght  from  other  places.  And  this  only  in  certeine  feafles  and  holy  mifleries.  Efpecially  the  pleafaunte
Maluafies  of  the  Hand  of  Creta  nowe  cauled  Candy,  are  had  in  mofle  honoure:  and  vfed  eyther  as  medicens  or
for  a  fliewe  of  excefluie  aboundaunce,  forafmuche  as  it  is  in  maner  a  miracle  that  wynes  browght  frome  Candy
by  the  Orcyghtes  of  Hercules  pillers  and  the  Ilandes  of  Cades,  and  toffed  with  fuch  fluddes  of  the  inclofed
Ocean,  Ihulde  be  droonke  amonge  the  Scythyan  fnowes  in  theyr  natiue  puritie  and  pleafauntneffe.

The  common  people  drinke  mede  made  of  hony  and  hoppes  fodden  together,  whiche  they  keepe  longe  in
pytched  barrels  where  the  goodnes  increafeth  with  age.  They  vfe  alfo  beere  and  ale  as  doo  the  Germanes  and
Polones.  They  are  accuflomed  for  delycatenes  in  fommer  to  coole  theyr  beere  and  mede  with  puttynge  Ife
therin,  whiche  the  noble  men  referue  in  theyr  fellars  in  great  quantitie  for  the  fame  purpofe.  Sunime  there  are
that  delyte  greately  in  the  iufe  that  is  preffed  owte 'of  cherries  before  they  bee  full  rype:  whiche  they  affyrme  to
haue  the  coloure  of  cleare  and  ruddy  wyne  with  a  verye  pleafaunte  tafle.

Theyr  wyues  and  women,  are  not  with  them  in  fuche  honoure  as  they  are  in  other  nations.  For  they  vfe
them  in  maner  in  the  place  of  feruantes.  The  noble  men  and  gcntelmen,  doo  diligently  obferue  theyr  walkes
and  haue  an  eye  to  their  chaflitie.  They  are  feldom  bydden  furth  to  any  feafles :  nether  are  permytted  to
reforte  to  churches  fiirre  of,  or  to  walke  abrode  withowt  fum  greate  confyderation.  But  the  common  forte  of
women,  are  eafely  and  for  a  fmaule  price  allured  to  lecherye  euen  of  flraungers ;  by  reafon  wherof,  the  gentelmen
doo  lyttle  or  nothynge  efleme  them.

John  the  father  of  kynge  Bafilius  dyed  more  then.  xx.  [twenty]  yeares  fence.  He  maryed  Sophia  the
doughter  of  Thomas  Paleologus  who  reigned  farre  in  Peloponnefus  (now  cauled  Morea)  and  was  brother  to
Th[e]emperoure  of  conflantinople.  Shee  was  then  at  Rome  when  Thomas  her  father  was  dryuen  owte  of  Grecia
by  the  Turckes.  Of  her  were  fyue  chyldren  borne,  as  Bafilius  hym  felfe,  George,  Demetrius,  Symeon,  and
Andreas.  Bafilius  tooke  to  wyfe  Salomonia  the  doughter  of  George  Soborouius  a  man  of  fynguler  fidelitie  and
wyfdome  and  one  of  hys  counfayle. The  excellent  vertues  of  which  woman,  only  barenneffe  obfcured.

When  the  prynces  of  INIofcouia  delyberat  to  marie,  theyr  cuflome  is  to  haue  choyfe  of  all  the  vyrgynes  in
the  realme,  and  to  caufe  fuche  as  are  of  mofl  fayre  and  bewtyfuU  vyfage  and  perfonage  with  maners  and  vertues
accordyng,  to  bee  browght  before  them.  Which  afterwarde  they  committe  to  certayne  faythful  men  and  graue
matrones  to  bee  furder  vewed,  in  fo  muche  that  they  leaue  no  parte  of  them  vnferched.  Of  thefe,  fhee  whome
the  prynce  mofl  lyketh,  is  pronounced  woorthy  to  bee  hys  wyfe,  not  withowt  greate  and  carefuU  expectation  of
theyr  parentes,  lyuynge  for  that  tyme  betwene  hope  and  feare.  The  other  vyrgyns  alfo  which  floode  in  election  and
contended  in  bewty  and  integritie  of  maners,  are  often  times  the  fame  day  to  gratyfye  the  prynce,  maryed  to
hys  noble  men,  gentellmen,  and  capytaynes:  wherby  it  fumtymes  commeth  to  paffe  that  whyle  the  princes
contemne  the  lynage  of  roiall  defcente,  fuche  as  are  borne  of  humble  parentage,  are  exalted  to  the  degree  of
princely  eflate.  In  lyke  maner  as  Th[e]emperours  of  the  turckes  were  accuflomed  to  bee  chofen  by  cumlyneffe
of  perfonage  and  warly  prowes.

Bafilius  was  vnder  th[e]age  of  forty  and  feuen  yeares,  of  cumly  perfonage,  finguler  vertue,  and  princely
qualities,  by  all  meanes  fludyous  for  the  profperitie  and  commodities  of  hys  fubiectes.  Furthermore  in  beneuo-
lence,  lyberalytie  and  good  fucceffe  in  hys  doynges,  to  bee  preferred  before  his  progenitours.  For  when  he
hadde.  vi.  yeares  kepte  wane  with  the  Lyuons  that  moued.  Ixxii.  [feuenty-two]  confetherate  cities  to  the  caufe
of  that  warre,  he  obteyned  the  victorie  and  departed  with  fewe  conditions  of  peace  rather  gyuen  then  accepted.
Alfo  at  the  begynnynge  of  his  reigne,  he  put  the  Polones  to  flight  and  took  prifoner  Conflantine  the  capitayne
of  the  Ruthens  whom  he  brought  to  Mofcouia  tyed  in  chaynes.  But  fliortly  after  at  the  ryuer  Boriflhenes  aboue
the  citie  of  Orfa,  he  hym  felfe  was  ouercomne  in  a  great  battayle  by  the  fame  Conflantine  whom  he  hadde  dif-
miffed  :  Yet  fo,  that  the  towne  of  Smolenzko  whiche  the  Mofcouites  poffeffed  before  and  was  now  woonne  by
the  Polons,  fliulde  flyll  perteyne  to  the  dominions  of  Bafilius.  But  ageynfle  the  Tartars,  and  efpecially  the
Tartars  of  Europe  cauled  the  Precopites,  the  Mofcouites  haue  often  tymes  kepte  warre  with  good  fucceffe,  in
reuenge  of  th[e]iniuries  doone  to  them  by  theyr  incurfions.

Bafilius  is  accuflomed  to  brynge  to  the  fielde  more  then  a  hundreth  and  fiftie  thoufande  horfemen  deuided
into  three  bandes  and  folowynge  the  banners  or  enfeignes  of  theyr  capitaynes  in  order  of  battayle.  On  the
banner  of  the  kynges  wynge,  is  figured  the  image  of  lofue  the  capitaine  of  the  Hebrewes  at  whofe  prayer  the
foone  prolonged  the  daye  and  fleyde  his  courfe  as  wytneffe  the  hyflories  of  holye  fcripture.  Armies  of  foote-
men  are  in  maner  to  no  vfe  in  thofe  great  wylderneffes,  afwel  for  theyr  apparel  beinge  loofe  and  longe,  as  alfo
for  the  cuflome  of  theyr  enemies,  who  in  theyr  warres  trufle  rather  to  the  fvvyfteneffe  of  theyr  lyght  horfes  then
to  trye  the  matter  in  a  pyght  fyelde.

Theyr  horfes  are  of  leffe  then  meane  Rature  :  but  verye  flronge  and  fwyfte. Theyr  horfemen  are  armed
316

Mofcouia  and  Cathay.

317

with  pykes,  ryuettes,  mafes  of  Iren  and  arrowes.  Fewe  haue  hooked  fwoordes.  Theyr  bodies  are  defended
with  rounde  Targets  after  the  maner  of  the  Turkes  of  Afia :  or  with  bendyng  and  comarde  targettes  after  the
maner  of  the  Greekes  :  Alfo  with  coates  of  mayle,  brygantynes,  and  fharpe  helmettes.  BafiHus  dyd  further-
more inflytutc  a  band  of  hargabufiers  on  horfbacke  :  and  caufed  many  greate  brafen  pieces  to  bee  made  by  the
woorkemanfhype  of  certeyne  Italyans  :  and  the  fame  with  theyr  flockes  and  wheeles  to  bee  placed  in  the  cafl.ell
of  Mofca.

The  kynge  hym  felfe  with  pryncely  magnyfycence  and  fmguler  familiaritie  (wherwith  neuertheleffe  no  parte
of  the  maieflie  of  a  kyng  is  vyolate)  is  accuflomed  to  dyne  openly  with  hys  noble  men  and  flraunge  ambafla-
dours  in  hys  owne  chamber  of  prefence  where  is  feene  A  meruelous  quantitye  of  fyluer  and  gylte  plate  flandj-nge
vppon  two  great  and  high  cubbardes  in  the  fame  chamber.  He  hath  not  abowte  hym  any  other  garde  for  the
cuflody  of  hys  perfon  fauynge  only  hys  accuflomed  famylye.  For  watche  and  warde  is  dylygently  kepte  of  the
faythfull  multytude  of  the  citifens :  In  fo  muche  that  euery  warde  or  quarter  of  the  citie  is  inclofed  with  gates
rayles,  and  barres  :  neyther  is  it  lawfull  for  any  man  raffhely  to  walke  in  the  citie  in  the  nyght,  or  withowt  lyght.
All  the  courte  confyfleth  of  noble  men,  gentelmen,  and  choyfe  fouldyers  which  are  cauled  owte  of  euery  regyon
by  theyre  tovvnes  and  vyllagies,  and  commaunded  to  wayte  courfe  by  courfe  at  certeyne  moonethes  appoynted.
Furthermore  when  warre  is  proclaymed,  all  the  armye  is  collected  bothe  of  the  ovvlde  fouldiers  and  by  mufler-
ynge  of  newe  in  all  prouynces.  For  the  lieuetenauntes  and  capytaynes  of  the  armye,  are  accuftomed  in  all
cities  to  mufler  the  youth,  and  to  admytte  to  th[e]order  of  fouldyers  fuch  as  they  thynke  able  to  feme  the  tume.
Theyre  wages  is  payde  them  of  the  common  treafurye  of  euery  prouynce  which  is  gathered  and  partely  payde
alfo  in  the  tyme  of  peace  although  it  bee  but  lyttle.  But  fuch  as  are  affigned  to  the  warres,  are  free  frome  all
tributes,  and  inioye  certein  other  priuilegies  wherby  they  may  the  more  gladly  and  cherfully  ferae  theyr  kynge
and  defend  theyr  contrey.  For  in  the  tyme  of  warre,  occacyon  is  mynyflred  to  fhewe  trewe  vertue  and  man-
hodde,  where  in  fo  greate  and  neceffarie  an  inflitution,  euery  man  accordynge  to  hys  approued  actiuitie  and
ingenyous  forwardneffe,  may  obteyne  the  fortune  eyther  of  perpetuall  honoure  or  ignominie.

Vix  olirn  vUa  fides  referentibus  Jiorrida  regna

Mofchorufn,  et  Fonti,  res  glacialis  erat.
Nunc  louio  auiore,  ilia  oculis  lujlramus,  et  vrbet.

Et  nemora,  et  monies  cernifmis  etfluiiios.
Mofchouiam,  monumenta  loui,  tua  culta  ?'euoluens.

Ccepi  alios  niimdos  credere  Democriti.

Theire  armnre.

Hargabusiers.
Glumes.

The  Prince  dyneth
openly.

Sieismundus  sayth
that  much  of  this
is  ({olde.

The  custodie  of
the  citie.

The  dukes  courte.

Souldyers  wages
of  the  common
treasury.

289

3'7

3i8

«  OTHER NOTABLE THYNGES

AS CONCERNYNGE MOSCOVIA: GATHERED OWT OF

THE BOOKES OF SIGISMVNDVS LIBERVS.
Note  that  when  hefayth  myles,  he  meatieth  Icaques.

Rusda.

The  browTie  colour
of  the  Kusses.

Rosseia.

The  Slauon  tounge
spreadeth  faire.

Vandales.

The  Princes  of
Russia.

The  dulce  of
Moscouia.

agggBJgngQigQiiJ'aig^ig^tgBi>ggJIBJgi»!a

^ggggJgMgggagflg^aMBgBgggg^glJg^Rom  whenfe  Ruffia  had  the  name,  there  are  dyuers  opinions.

Sume  thynke  that  it  was  fo  named  of  one  Ruffus  the  foonne  or
neuie  of  Lech  the  kynge  of  the  Polons.  Other  affirme  that  it
was  fo  cauled  of  a  certeyne  owlde  towne  named  Ruffus  not
farre  frome  Nouogoroda  or  Nouogardia  the  more.  Sum  alfo
thynke  that  it  was  fo  cauled  of  the  browne  coloure  of  the  nation.
But  theMofcouians  confute  al  thefe  opinions  as  vntrewe :  Affirm-
ynge  that  this  nation  was  in  owld  tyme  cauled  Rofleia  as  a  nation
difperfed,  as  the  name  it  felfe  dooth  declare.  For  Roffeia  in
the  Ruthens  tounge,  doothe  fignifie  difperfed  or  fcattered.  The
which  thynge  to  be  trew,  dyuers  other  people  commyxt  with
th[e]inhabitauntes,  and  dyuers  prouinces  lyinge  here  and  there
betwene  dyuers  partes  of  Ruffia  doo  playnely  declare.  But
whenfe  fo  euer  they  tooke  theyr  name,  doubtleffe  all  the  people
that  vfe  the  Slauon  tounge,  and  profeffe  the  fayth  of  Chryfl  after
the  maner  of  the  Greekes,  (cauled  in  theyr  common  language
Ruffi,  and  in  the  Latin  tounge  Rutheni)  are  increafed  to  fuche
a  multytude  that  they  haue  eyther  expulfed  all  the  nations  that  lye  betwene  them,  or  drawne  them  to  theyr
maner  of  lyuynge,  infomuche  that  they  are  nowe  cauled  all  Rutheni  by  one  common  name.

Furthermore  the  Slauon  tounge  (whiche  at  this  daye  is  fumwhat  corruptly  cauled  Sclauon)  runneth  excead-
yng  far,  as  vfed  of  the  Dalmates,  Boffuenfer,  Croatians,  Iflrians,  and  by  a  longe  tracte  of  the  fea  Adriatike  vnto
Forum  lulii :  Of  the  Caruians  alfo  whome  the  Venetians  caule  Charfos  :  and  lykewyfe  of  the  Carniolans  and
Carinthians  vnto  the  ryuer  Drauus  :  Furthermore  of  the  Stirians  within  Gretzium  and  by  Muera  vnto  Danu-
bius  and  from  thenfe  of  the  Myfians,  Seruians,  Bulgarians,  and  other  inhabitynge  euen  vnto  Conflantinople :
Furthermore  of  the  Bohemians,  Lufacians,  Silefians,  Morauians,  and  th[e]inhabitauntes  neare  vnto  the  ryuer
Vagus  in  the  kyngedome  of  Hungarie  :  The  Polons  alfo  and  the  Ruthenians  whofe  Empire  reacheth  very
farre :  lykewyfe  the  Circafians  and  Quinquemontanians  vnto  Pontus  :  and  is  from  thenfe  vfed  in  the  north
partes  of  Germanie  amonge  the  remanent  of  the  Vandales  inhabityng  here  and  there.  All  whiche  nations
althowgh  they  acknowleage  them  felues  to  bee  Sclauons,  yet  the  Germayns  taking  the  denomination  only  of  the
Vandales,  caule  al  them  that  vfe  the  Slauon  tounge,  Vuenden,  Vuinden,  or  Vuindyfh.

Of  the  Princes  that  nowe  reigne  in  Ruffia,  the  chiefe  is  the  great  Duke  of  Mofcouia  who  pofleffeth  the
greatefl  part  therof.  The  feconde  is  the  great  duke  of  Lithuania  :  and  the  thyrde  the  kynge  of  Polonie,  who
nowe  obteyneth  the  dominion  of  Polonie  and  Lithuania.

In  autoritie  and  dominion  ouer  his  fubiectes,  the  prince  of  Mofcouie  paffeth  all  the  monarkes  of  the
worlde.  For  he  depriueth  all  his  noble  men  and  gentelmen  of  al  theyr  holdes  and  munitions  at  his  pleafure.
He  trufleth  not  his  owne  brotherne,  but  oppreffeth  all  with  lyke  feruitude.  In  fo  muche  that  whome  fo  euer  he
commaundeth  eyther  to  remayne  with  hym  in  the  courte,  or  to  goo  to  the  warres,  or  fendeth  on  an  ambaffage,
they  are  compelled  to  bee  at  theyr  owne  charges,  excepte  the  younge  gentelmen  the  foonnes  of  the  Boiarons,
that  is,  the  noble  men  of  the  lowefl.  degree.  He  vfurpeth  this  autoritie  afwell  ouer  the  fpiritualtie  as  the  tempo-
raltie  :  conflitutynge  what  him  lyfleth  of  the  goods  and  lyfe  of  al  men.  Of  his  counfilers  there  is  not  one  that
dare  diffente  from  hym  in  any  thynge.  They  openly  confeffe  that  the  wyl  of  the  prince  is  the  wyll  of  god  :  and
therfore  caule  hym  the  key  bearer  and  chamberlen  of  god,  and  beleue  him  to  bee  the  executor  of  gods  wylL
318

f

Mofcouia  and  Cathay.

319

290

Why  the  duke  of
Moscouia  was
cauled  an
Emperour

ITie  greate  Turke

The  whyte  kynge.

The  duke  of
Moscouia  his  tytle.

By  reafon  wherof,  the  prince  hym  felfe  when  any  peticion  is  made  to  hym  for  the  deliuerie  of  any  captiue,  is
acculTomed  to  aunfwere  :  When  god  commaundeth  he  fhalbe  dcUuered.  Lykewyfe  when  any  afketh  a  queflion
of  an  vncerteyne  or  doubtefull  thynge,  theyr  cuflome  is  to  anfwere  thus  :  God  knoweth  and  the  greate  prince.
It  is  vncerteyne  whether  the  crueltie  and  fiercenes  of  the  nation  doo  requyre  fo  tyrannous  a  prince,  or  whether
by  the  tyranny  of  the  prince,  the  nation  is  made  fo  fierce  and  cruell.

BafiUus  the  foonne  of  lohn,  was  the  fyrfl  that  tooke  vppon  hym  tl-e  name  and  title  of  a  kynge  in  this  maner:
The  great  lorde  Bafilius,  by  the  grace  of  god  kynge  and  lorde  of  all  Ruffia  and  the  greate  duke  of  Vuolodimaria,
Mofcouia,  Nouogardia,  etc.

Furthermore,  wheras  nowe  this  prince  is  cauled  an  Emperour,  I  haue  thought  good  to  fhewe  the  tytle  and
caufe  of  this  errour.  Note  therfore  that  Czar  in  the  Ruthens  tounge  fignifieth  a  kynge,  wheras  in  the  language
of  the  Slauons,  Pollons,  Bohemes,  and  other,  the  fame  woorde  Czar,  fignifieth  Cefar  by  whiche  name  Th[e]em-
perours  haue  byn  commonly  cauled.  For  bothe  they  and  the  Slauons  that  are  vnder  the  kyngdome  of
Hungarie,  caule  a  kynge  by  an  other  name  :  as  fum  Crall,  other  Kyrall,  and  fum  KoroU  :  but  thinke  that  only
an  Emperoure  is  cauled  Czar.  Whereby  it  came  to  paffe  that  the  Ruthene  or  Mofcouite  interpretours  hearynge
theyr  prince  to  bee  fo  cauled  of  flraunge  nations,  began  them  felues  alfo  to  name  hym  an  Emperour,  and
thinke  the  name  of  Czar  to  bee  more  worthy  then  the  name  of  a  kynge,  althowgh  they  fignifie  all  one  thynge.
But  who  fo  wyl  reade  all  theyr  hyflories  and  bookes  of  holy  fcripture,  fhall  fynde  that  a  kynge  is  cauled  Czar,  and
an  Emperour  Keffar.  By  the  lyke  erroure  Th[e]emperour  of  the  Turkes  is  cauled  Czar,  who  neuertheleffe  of
antiquitie  vfed  no  hygher  tytle  then  the  name  of  a  kynge,  expreffed  by  this  woorde  Czar.  And  hereof  the
Turkes  of  Europe  that  vfe  the  Slauon  tounge,  caule  the  citie  of  Conftantinople  Czargrad,  (that  is)  the  kynges
citie.

Sum  caule  the  prince  of  Mofcouie  the  whyte  kynge,  Avhiche  I  thinke  to  proceade  of  the  whyte  cappes,  or
other  tyrementes  they  weare  on  theyr  heades,  lyke  as  they  caule  the  kynge  of  Percia  Kifilpaffa  (that  is)  redde
headde.  He  vfeth  the  tytle  of  a  kynge  when  he  writeth  or  fendeth  to  Rome,  the  Emperour,  the  pope,  the
kynge  of  Suetia  and  Denmarke,  the  greate  mafler  of  Pruffia  and  Liuonia,  and  alfo  to  the  greate  Turke  as  I
haue  byn  credably  informed  :  but  he  is  not  cauled  kynge  of  any  of  them,  excepte  perhappes  of  the  Liuons.
Yet  by  reafon  of  his  later  conquefles,  fum  haue  thought  hym  worthy  the  name  of  a  kynge  or  rather  of  an
Emperour  bycaufe  he  hath  kynges  vnder  his  Empire.

To  the  kynge  of  Polone  he  vfeth  this  tytle  :  The  great  lorde  Bafilius  by  the  grace  of  god,  lorde  of  all  Ruffia,
and  greate  duke  of  Vuolodimeria,  Mofcouia,  Nouogardia.  etc.  leauynge  owt  the  tytle  of  a  kyng.  For  none  of
them  vouchefafeth  to  receaue  the  letters  of  the  other  augmented  with  any  newe  tytle,  as  I  knewe  by  experience
at  my  being  in  Mofcouia,  at  which  tyme  Sigifmundus  the  kynge  of  Polone  fente  hym  his  letters  augmented  with
the  tytle  of  the  Duke  of  Mafouia,  wherwith  he  was  not  a  lyttle  offended.

They  glorie  in  theyr  hyflories  that  before  Vuolodimeria  and  Olha,  the  lande  of  Ruffia  was  baptifed  and
bleffed  of  faynt  Andrewe  th[e]apoflle  of  Chryfl,  affirmynge  that  he  came  from  Grecia  to  the  mouthes  of  the  ryuer
Boryfl-henes  :  and  that  he  fayled  vppe  the  ryuer  to  the  mountaynes  where  as  is  nowe  Chiouia :  and  that  there
he  bleffed  all  the  lande  and  placed  his  croffe,  prophefyinge  alfo  that  the  grace  of  god  fliulde  bee  greate  there,
and  that  there  fhulde  bee  many  churches  of  Chryflian  men  :  Lykewyfe  that  he  afterwarde  came  to  the  fprynges
of  Boryflhenes  vnto  the  great  lake  Vuolok,  and  by  the  ryuer  Louat  defcended  into  the  lake  Ilmer  :  from  whenfe
by  the  riuer  Vuolcon  whiche  runneth  owte  of  the  fame  lake,  he  came  to  Nouogardia  :  and  pafled  frome  thenfe
by  the  fame  ryuer  to  the  lake  Ladoga  and  the  ryuer  Heua,  and  fo  vnto  the  fea  whiche  they  caule  Vuaretzkoia,
beinge  the  fame  that  we  caule  the  Germayne  fea,  betwene  Vuinlandia  or  Finlandia  and  Liuonia,  by  the  whiche
he  fayled  to  Rome,  and  was  at  the  lafle  crucified  for  Chryfle  his  gofpell  in  Peloponnefus  by  the  tyranny  of  Agus
Antipater,  as  theyr  crownacles  make  mention.

The  prynce  euery  feconde  or  thyrde  yeare,  caufeth  a  mufler  to  bee  taken  of  the  foonnes  of  the  Boiarons,
and  takethe  an  accoumpte  bothe  of  theyr  number  and  howe  many  horfes  and  men  euery  of  them  is  able  to
make  :  and  then  appoynteth  a  certeyne  flypende  to  fuche  as  are  able  further  to  beare  theyr  owne  charges  in  the
warres.  They  haue  feldome  any  reft  or  quyetneffe.  For  they  eyther  keepe  warre  with  the  Lithuanians,  I  iuonians,
Suetians,  or  Tartars  of  Cafan.  Or  yf  it  fo  chaunce  that  the  prynce  keepe  no  warre,  yet  dooth  he  yearely
appoynte  garryfons  of  xx.  [twenty]  thoufande  menne  in  places  abowt  Tanais  and  Occa  to  reprefie  the  incurfions
and  robberyes  of  the  European  Tartars  cauled  Precopites.

As  in  other  matters,  euen  fo  in  th[e]order  of  warrefare  ther  is  great  diuerfitie  amonge  men.  For  the  Mof-
couian  as  foone  as  he  begynneth  to  flye,  thinketh  of  none  other  fuccoure  but  putteth  all  his  confidence  therein.
Beinge  purfued  or  taken  of  his  enemie,  he  neyther  defendeth  himfelfe  nor  defirethe  perdon.

The  Tartar  caft.  of  from  his  horfe,  fpoyled  of  al  his  armure  and  weapons,  and  alfo  fore  wounded,  defendeth
hym  felfe  with  handes,  feete,  and  teethe,  and  by  all  meanes  he  may,  vntyll  his  flrength  and  fpirite  fayle  hym.

The  Turke,  when  he  feeth  hym  felfe  deflitute  of  all  helpe  and  hope  to  efcape,  doth  humbly  defyre  pardon,

Russia  baptysed
by  sajTite
Andrewe  the
Apostle.

The  Moscouites
warres

291

Dyiiers  maneis  of
dyuers  people  in
the  wars.

3»9

320

Alofcoiiia  and  Cathay,

The  Moscouytes
army.

Howe  he
maynteyneth  his
army.

calling  away  his  weapons  and  armure,  and  rcching  furth  to  the  victourer  his  hands  ioyned  together  to  be  bounde,
hopynge  by  captiuitie  to  faue  his  lyfe.

The  Mofcouites  in  placeinge  theyr  armye  chufe  them  a  large  playne  where  the  bed  of  them  pytch  theyr
tentes  and  the  other  make  them  certen  arbours  of  bouwes  fyxt  in  the  grounde,  bendyng  together  the  toppes
therof,  whiche  they  coiier  with  theyr  clokes  to  defende  thcmfelues,  theyr  bowes,  arrowes,  faddyles,  and  other
theyr  necefliiries  from  rayne.  They  put  furth  theyr  horfes  to  pafture,  and  for  that  caufe  haue  theyr  tentes  fo
farre  in  funder,  which  they  fortifye  neyther  with  cartes  or  trenches  or  any  other  impedyment,  excepte  perhappes
the  place  bee  defended  by  nature  as  with  wooddes,  ryuers  and  maryfilies.

It  may  perhappes  feeme  flraunge  howe  he  maynteyneth  hym  and  hys  fo  longe  with  fo  fmaule  an  army  as  I
haue  fayde.  I  \\y\\  nowe  therfore  brefely  declare  thcyre  fparynge  and  frugalitie.  He  that  hath  fyxe  or  fum-
tymes  more  horfes,  vfeth  one  of  them  as  A  packe  horfe  to  beare  all  theyr  neceffaryes.  He  hath  alfo  in  a  bagge
of  two  or  three  fpanes  longe,  the  floure  or  meale  of  the  grayne  cauled  mylle  :  and.  viii.  or  x.  poundes  weyghte
of  fwynes  fleffhe  poudered.  He  hathe  lykewyfe  4-  bagge  of  falte,  myxte  with  pepper  if  he  bee  ryche.  Further-
more euery  man  caryeth  with  hym  A  hatchet,  A  fyre  boxe,  and  a  brafen  potte  :  fo  that  if  they  chaunce  to
coomme  to  any  place  where  they  can  fynde  no  frutes,  garlyke,  onyons  or  flefflie,  they  kyndle  a  fyre  and  fylle
theyr  pottes  with  water  wherunto  they  put  a  fpoonefuU  of  meale  with  a  quantitie  of  falte,  and  make  pottage
therof,  wherwith  the  mafler  and  all  hys  feruauntes  lyue  contented.  But  if  the  mafler  bee  very  hungary  he
eateth  all  alone,  and  the  feruantes  are  fumtymes  inforfed  to  fafle  for  the  fpace  of  two  or  three  dayes.  And  yf
the  mafler  intende  to  fare  fumwhat  more  del)'cately,  then  he  addeth  therto  a  lyttle  portion  of  fwynes  fleffhe.  I
fpeake  not  thys  of  the  bell  of  them,  but  of  fuche  as  are  of  the  meane  forte.  The  gouernours  and  capytaynes  of
th[e]armye,  doo  fum  tymes  bydde  the  poorer  forte  to  theyre  tables  :  where  theye  feede  them  felues  fo  wel,  that
they  fafle  two  or  three  dayes  after.  When  they  haue  frutes,  garlyke,  and  onyons,  theye  can  well  forbeare  all
other  meates.  Procedynge  forwarde  to  the  battayle,  they  put  more  confydence  in  theyr  multitude,  and  with
what  great  armyes  they  affayle  theyr  enemyes,  then  eyther  in  the  flrengthe  and  valyanteneffe  of  theyr  fouldyers,
or  in  well  inflructynge  theyr  armye  :  and  fyght  better  afarre  of,  then  at  hande  :  and  therfore  fludy  howe  to
circumuent  or  inclofe  theyr  enemyes  and  to  alTayle  them  on  the  backe  halfe.

They  haue  many  trumpiters :  The  which  whyle  they  blow  all  at  once  after  theyr  maner,  make  A  meruelous
flraunge  noyfe.  They  haue  alfo  an  other  kynde  of  inflrumentes  which  they  caule  Szurna.  Thefe  they  blowe
withowte  feafynge  for  the  fpace  of  an  houre  togither,  fo  temperyng  the  fame  and  holdyng  in  the  wynd  whyle
they  drawe  more,  that  the  noyfe  feemeth  continuall  withoute  intermyffion.

They  vfe  all  one  maner  of  appareyle  :  as  longe  coates  withowte  ple3'ghtes  and  with  narrowe  fleaues  after
the  maner  of  the  Hungaryans.  Thefe  the  Chrillians  vfe  to  butten  on  the  right  fyde  :  and  the  Tartars  (vfmge
the  lyke)  butten  them  on  the  lefte  fyde.  They  weare  redde  and  Ihorte  bufkyns  that  reache  not  to  theyr  knees :
and  haue  the  foules  therof  defended  with  plates  of  Iren.  In  maner  all  theyr  (hyrtes  are  wroughte  with  dyuers
colours  aboute  the  necke  :  and  haue  the  collars  and  ruffes  byfette  with  lyttle  rounde  baules  lyke  beades,  of
fyluer  or  gylted  copper,  and  fumtyme  perles  alfo.  They  gyrde  them  felues  beneth  the  bellye  euen  as  lowe  as
theyr  priuy  members,  that  they  may  feme  more  boorely  which  they  greately  elleme,  as  doo  at  thys  day  the
Spanyardes,  Italyans,  and  Almaynes.

The  prouince  of  Mofcouia  is  neyther  very  large  nor  frutfull,  forafmuche  as  the  fertylytye  is  hyndered  with
fandye  grounde  which  eyther  with  to  muche  dryneffe  or  moyfler  kylleth  the  corne.  Furthermore  the  immoderate
and  fharpe  vntemperateneffe  of  the  ayre  while  the  coulde  of  the  wynter  ouercommethe  the  heate  of  the  foonne,  ^
fumtymes  dothe  not  fufifer  the  corne  to  rype.  For  the  coulde  is  there  fumtyme  fo  extreame,  that  lyke  as  with  vs
in  fommer  by  reafon  of  heate,  euen  fo  there  by  extreame  coulde  the  yearth  hath  many  great  chynkes  or  breaches.
Water  alfo  cafl  into  the  ayre,  and  fpettle  faulyng  from  on[e]s  mouthe,  are  frofen  before  they  louche  the  grounde.
I  my  felfe,  when  I  came  thether  in  the  yeare  1526.  fawe  the  braunches  of  frutefuU  trees  wythyred  by  the  coulde
of  the  wynter  before,  which  was  fo  extreame  that  many  of  theyr  wagoners  or  caries  (whom  they  caule  Gonecz)
were  founde  frofen  to  deathe  in  theyr  fleades.  There  were  fum  that  at  the  fame  tyme  leadyng  and  dryuyng
theyr  cattayle  from  the  nexte  villagies  to  Mofcouia,  dyed  by  the  way  with  theyr  beafles  through  th[e]extremytic
of  the  coulde.  Furthermore,  the  fame  yeare  many  players  that  were  accuflomed  to  wander  aboute  the  contiey
with  daunfyng  beares,  were  founde  dead  in  the  high  wayes.  Wylde  beares  alfo  inforced  thereto  by  famyn,  lefte
the  wooddes  and  ranne  here  and  there  into  dyuers  villagies  a.id  houfes  :  At  whofe  commyng  while  the  men  of
the  countrcy  forfooke  theyr  houfes  and  fledd  into  the  fieldes,  manye  of  them  peryffhed  throughe  the  vehemencie
of  the  coulde.  Agayne,  it  fumtymes  fo  chaunceth  that  in  fommer  the  heate  is  as  extreame  :  as  in  the  yeare.
1525-  ii^  the  which  almoll  all  kynds  of  pulfe  and  grayne  were  fcorched  and  burnte  :  and  fuch  a  derth  of  corne
folowed  that  drought,  that  that  which  before  was  bowght  for  three  dengas,  was  afterwarde  foulde  for.  xx.
[twenty]  or.  xxx.  [thirty.]  Furthermore  alfo,  manye  villagies,  wooddes,  and  flackes  of  come,  were  fette  on  fyre
by  th[e]extreame  heate  :  The  fmoke  wherof  fo  fylled  the  regyon,  that  the  eyes  of  many  were  fore  hurte  therby.

Instruments  of
warre.

The  Moscouites
and  Tartars
apparelL

292

The  prouince  of
Moscouia.

Extreme  coulde.

Extreme  heatt  in
cold  regions.

320

Mofcoiiia  and  CatJiay.

321

There  arofe  alfo  as  it  were  a  darke  and  thycke  myfl  without  fmoke  which  lb  molefled  the  ey[e]s,  that  many  lode
theyr  fight  therby.

They  fowe  and  naryfOie  the  feades  of  melons  with  greate  diligence  in  certeyne  rayfed  beddes  myxte  with
doonge  :  wherby  they  fynde  a  remedy  both  ageynfl,  extreame  could  and  heat.  For  if  the  heate  exceade,  they
make  certeyne  ryftes  in  the  beddes  as  it  were  breathyng  places  lead  the  feades  fhulde  be  fuffocate  with  to  muche
heate. And  if  the  coulde  bee  extreme  it  is  tempered  with  the  heate  of  the  mucke  or  dunge.

Theyr  beafles  are  muche  leffe  then  owres :  yet  not  all  withowt  homes  as  one  hath  written.  For  I  haue
there  fene  oxen,  kyne,  goates,  and  rammes  all  with  homes.

Not  farre  from  the  citie  of  Mofcha,  are  certeyne  monafleries  which  a  farre  of,  feeme  lyke  vnto  a  citie.
They  faye  that  in  thys  citie  is  an  incredible  number  of  houfes  :  And  that  the  fyxte  yeare  before  my  commynge
thyther,  the  prince  caufed  them  to  bee  numbered,  and  founde  them  to  bee  more  then  one  and  fortye  thoufande
and  fyue  hundreth  houfes.  The  citie  is  very  large  and  wyde  :  and  alfo  very  flabby  and  myrie.  By  reafon
wherof  it  hath  many  brydges  and  caufeys.

The  ayre  of  the  regyon  is  fo  holfome,  that  beyond  the  fprynges  of  Tanais,  efpecially  towarde  the  north
and  a  great  parte  alfo  towarde  the  Eade,  the  peRylence  hath  not  byne  harde  of  fence  the  memorye  of  man.
Yet  haue  they  fumtimes  a  difeafe  in  theyr  bowells  and  headdes  not  much  vnlyke  the  peflylence.  This  difeafe
they  caule  a  heate  :  wherwith  fuche  as  are  taken,  dye  within  fewe  dayes.

Sum  wryte  that  lohn  the  duke  of  Mofcouia  and  fonne  of  Bafilius,  vnder  the  pretence  of  religion  facked
and  fpoyled,  the  citie  of  Nouogardia  :  and  caried  with  hym  from  thenfe  to  Mofcouia  three  hundreth  fleades  laden
with  golde,  fyluer,  and  precious  llones  of  the  gooddes  of  the  Archebyffhoppe,  the  marchauntes,  citifms,  and
flraungiers.

Solowki  is  an  Ilande  fituate  in  the  north  fea.  viii.  leaques  from  the  continent  betwene  Dwina  and  the  pro-
uince  of  Corela.  Howe  farre  it  is  dydant  from  Mofcouia,  can  not  bee  well  knowne  by  reafon  of  manye  fennes,
maryffhes,  wooddes,  and  defolate  places  lyinge  in  the  way.  Albeit,  fum  fay  that  it  is  not  three  hundreth  leaques
from  Mofcouia,  and  two  hundreth  frome  Bieloiefero.  In  thys  Ilande  is  made  greate  plenty  of  falte  :  and  it
hath  in  it  a  monaflerie  into  the  which  it  is  not  lawfull  for  any  woman  or  virgyn  to  enter.  There  is  alfo  great
fyffhyng  for  hearyng.  They  fay  that  here  the  foonne  at  the  fommer  Equinoctiall.  fliyneth  continually  excepte
two  houres.

Demetriowe,  is  a  citie  with  a  caflel,  diflante  from  Mofcouia  xii.  leaques  declining  from  the  wed  fum-
what  toward  the  north.  By  this  runneth  the  ryuer  Lachroma  that  runneth  in  to  the  ryuer  of  Sed.  Sed  alfo
receaueth  the  ryuer  Dubna  whiche  vnladeth  it  felfe  in  Volga.  And  by  the  commoditie  of  thus  many  ryuers,
many  riche  marchaundies  are  browght  without  great  laboure  or  difficultie  from  the  cafpian  fea  by  the  ryuer
Volga  to  Mofcouia  and  dyuers  other  prouynces  and  cities  abowte  the  fame.

Bieloiefero,  a  citie  with  a  cadell,  is  fituat  at  a  lake  of  the  fame  name.  For  Bieloiefero  in  the  Mofcouites
toung,  fignifieth  a  white  lake.  The  citie  dandeth  not  in  the  lake  as  fum  haue  fayd.  Yet  is  it  fo  enuironed  with
maryfflies  that  it  may  feeme  to  bee  inexpugnable  :  In  confideration  wherof,  the  princes  of  Mofcouia  are  accuf-
tomed  to  keepe  theyr  treafure  there.  Bieloiefero  is  from  Mofcouia,  a  hundreth  leaques,  and  as  muche  from
Nouogardia  the  great.  The  lake  it  felfe,  is.  xii.  leaques  in  length  and  as  much  in  breadth  :  aud  hath  (as  they
fay)  three  hundreth  ryuers  faulynge  into  it.  Th[e]inhabitauntes  of  this  place,  haue  a  peculyar  language,
although  nowe  in  maner  all  fpeake  the  Mofcouites  tounge.  The  longed  day  here  in  the  foommer  Equinoctial,
is  fayde  to  confyde  of  xix.  [nineteen]  houres.  A  man  of  greate  name  and  credite  toulde  me,  that  at  the  begyn-
nyng  of  the  fprynge  when  the  trees  began  nowe  to  bee  greene,  he  went  in  pode  from  Mofcouia  to  Bieloiefero :
And  paffynge  ouer  the  ryuer  Volga,  founde  the  region  there  fo  couered  with  Ife  and  fnow,  that  he  was  fayne  to
difpatch  the  refidue  of  his  iorney  on  fleades.  And  although  the  wynter  bee  longer  there,  yet  doo  the  frutes
waxe  rype  and  are  gathered  euen  at  the  fame  tyme  that  they  are  in  Mofcouia.  Within  an  arrowe  fliotte  of  the
lake,  there  is  an  other  lake  that  bryngeth  furth  brymdone :  which  a  certen  ryuer  runnyng  owt  of  the  fame,
caryeth  with  it  in  great  quantitie  flotyng  aboue  the  water  lyke  a  fcoomme.  Yet  through  the  ignorance  of  the
people,  they  haue  no  commoditie  therby.

The  people  that  inhabite  the  regions  lyinge  farre  northe  and  ead  from  Mofcouia,  exchaunge  theyr  furres
for  apparel,  knyues,  needles,  fpoones,  hatchets,  and  fuche  other  neceflar)^e  wares.  For  they  haue  not  the  vfe  of
golde  and  fyluer.

Lyttle  beastes.

The  citie  of
Moscouia  or
Mosca.

Holsome  ayer.

A  ryche  siKjyIe.

The  Hand  of

Solowki,

293

Bieloiesero.

The  lengthe  of
the  day.

The  trade  from
Moscouia  to  the
Caspian  sea.

Bieloiesero  or  the
whyte  lakes.

Diuersitie  of
temperament  in
smaul  dystance.

A  lake  of
brymstone.

Exchange  of
furres  for  other
ware.

Eden.

2  B

322

Mofcouia  and  CaiJiay.

C  The  dcfcriptioii  of  the  regions,  people,  and  ry iters,  lyinge  North  and  Eajle

from  Mofcouia  :  As  the  way  from  Mofcouia  to  the  ryuer  Petzora,

and  the  prouince  of  In  gar  ia,  or  luhra:  And  fronie  thenfe

to  the  ryuer  Obi. Lykewyfe  the  difcription  of

other  countreys  and  regions,  euen  vnto

Th[e]empire of  the great e

Cham  of  Cathay.

The  dominion  of
the  duke  of
Moscouia.

Vuolochda.

Werste.

Vstiug.

294

Suchana.
lug.

Colmogor.
Dwina.

Pietega.

Nicolau
Kuluio.

The  regions  by
the  North  sea.

Pieza.
Plescoia.

Rubicho.

Czircho.

Czilma.
Petzora.

Pustoosero.

Vssa.

Cingulus  n.unJi.

He  dominion  of  the  Prince  of  Mofcouia  reacheth  farre  towarde  the  Eafle  and  north  vnto  the
places  which  we  wyll  nowe  defcrybe.  As  concernynge  whiche  thynge,  I  tranflated  a  booke
that  was  prefented  vnto  me  in  the  Mofcouites  tounge,  and  haue  heare  made  a  bryefe  re-
hearfall  of  the  fame.  I  wyll  fyrfl  therfore  defcribe  the  iorney  from  Mofcouia  to  Petzora,  and
fo  to  lugaria  and  Obi.

From  Mofcouia  to  the  citie  of  Vuolochda,  are  numbered  fyftie  Werfles,  one  Werfl  con-
teynynge  almofle  the  fpace  of  an  Italyan  myle.  From  Vuolochda  to  Vfliug  towarde  the  right
hande  defcendinge  with  the  courfe  of  the  ryuer  of  Vuolochda  and  Suchana  with  whom  it  ioyneth,  are  coumpted
fyue  hundreth  Werfles :  where  within  two  WerRes  of  the  towne  cauled  Strelze  and  hard  by  the  citie  of  Vfliug
Suchana  ioyneth.  lug  which  runneth  from  the  fouth :  from  whofe  mouth  vnto  the  fprynges  of  the  fame,  are
numbered  fyue  hundrethe  Werfles.

Note  that  wheras  here  before  the  autour  numbereth  but  fyftie  werfles  from  Mofcouia  to  Vuolochda,  it  femeth  that  the  place  is
corrupted  by  the  Printers  myflakynge  one  worde  for  an  other,  as  Quinquaginta,  which  is  fyftie,  for  Quingenta,  whiche  is  fyue
hundreth.  For  the  diflance  is  no  leffe  from  Mofcouia  to  Vuolochda,  then  is  from  Vuolochda  to  Vfliug,  which  is  fyue  hundreth
werfles.

But  Suchana  and  lug  after  they  ioyne  togyther,  lofe  theyr  fyrfl  names  and  make  bothe  one  ryuer  named
Dwina,  by  the  whiche  the  paffage  to  the  citie  of  Colmogor  conteyneth  fyue  hundreth  Werfles  :  from  whenfe  in
the  fpace  of  fyxe  dayes  iorney,  Dwina  entereth  into  the  north  Ocean  at.  vi.  mouthes.  And  the  greatefle  parte  of
this  iorney  confyfleth  by  nauigation.  For  by  lande,  from  Vuolochda  vnto  Colmogor,  paffing  ouer  the  ryuer
Vuaga,  are  a  thoufande  Werfles.  Not  farre  from  Colmogor,  the  ryuer  Pienega  runnynge  frome  the  Eafle  on  the
ryght  hande  for  the  fpace  of  feuen  hundreth  Werfles  fauleth  into  Dwina.  From  Dwina  by  the  ryuer  Pienega  by
the  fpace  of  two  hundreth  Werfles,  they  coome  to  a  place  cauled  Nicolai :  from  whenfe  within  halfe  a  werfl,
fliyppes  haue  paffage  into  the  ryuer  Kuluio,  which  hath  his  original  from  a  lake  of  the  fame  name  towarde  the
north,  from  whofe  fpringes  is.  viii.  dayes  vyage  to  the  mouth  of  the  fame  where  it  entereth  into  the  Ocean.

Saylynge  by  the  coafles  of  the  ryght  hande  the  fea,  they  paffe  by  the  regions  of  Stanuwifche,  Calunczfcho,
and  Apnu.  And  faylynge  abowt  the  promontorie  or  cape  of  Chorogofki  Nofz,  Stanuwifche,  Camenckh,  and
Tolflickh,  they  come  at  the  length  into  the  ryuer  Mezen,  and  frome  thenfe  in  the  fpace  of  fyxe  dayes  to  a
vyllage  of  the  fame  name,  flandyng  in  the  mouth  of  the  ryuer  Pieza  :  by  the  which  ageine  afcendyng  towarde
the  lefte  hande  and  foommer  Eafl,  they  come  to  the  ryuer  Piefcoya.  From  whenfe  faylynge  for  the  fpace  of
fyue  Werfles,  they  coomme  into  two  lakes  in  the  whiche  are  feene  two  wayes :  wherof  one  on  the  r)'ght  fyde,
goeth  to  the  ryuer  Rubicho,  by  the  whiche  they  paffe  to  the  ryuer  Czircho.  Other  by  an  other  and  fhorter
way,  brynge  theyr  fnyppes  frome  the  lake  directly  into  Czircho :  From  whenfe,  except  they  be  hyndered  by
tempefl,  they  coomme  in  the  fpace  of  three  weekes  to  the  ryuer  and  mouth  of  Czilma,  flowynge  into  the  great
ryuer  Petzora,  which  in  that  place  is  two  Werfles  in  breadthe.  Saylyng  from  henfe,  they  coomme  in  the  fpace
of  fyxe  dayes  to  the  towne  and  caflell  of  Pufloofero,  neare  vnto  the  which,  Petzora  entereth  into  the  north
Ocean  at  fyxe  mouthes.  The  inhabitauntes  of  this  place,  are  men  of  fimple  wytte.  They  receaued  the  fayth
of  Chryfle,  and  were  baptifed  in  the  yeare  M.  D.  xviii.

From  the  mouth  of  Czilma  vnto  the  mouthe  of  the  ryuer  Vffa,  goinge  by  Petzora,  is  one  monethes  vyage,
Vffa  hath  his  fprynges  in  the  mountayne  Poyas  Semnoi,  being  on  the  lefte  hande  towarde  the  foommer  Eafl,
and  fpringeth  owte  of  a  greate  flone  of  the  fame  mountayne,  cauled  Camen  Bolfchoi.  From  the  fprynges  of
Vffa  to  the  mouthes  of  the  fame,  are  numbered  more  then  a  thoufande  Werfles.  Furthermore  Petzora  runneth
from  this  fouth  wynter  oarte.  from  whenfe  afcendynge  from  the  mouthes  of  Vffa  vnto  the  mouthes  of  the  ryuer

i

Mofcoiiia  and  Cathay.

*j

23

Stzuchogora,  is  three  weekes  vyage.  They  that  defcribed  this  vyage,  fayde  that  they  refled  betwene  the
mouthes  of  the  lyuers  of  Stzuchogora  and  Potzfcheriema  :  and  lefte  theyr  vyttayles  there  whiche  they  browght
with  theym  from  Ruffia.  Beyonde  the  ryuers  of  Petzora  and  Stzuchogora  towarde  the  niountayne  Camenipoias
and  the  fea  with  the  Ilandes  there  abowte  and  the  caflell  of  PuRoofero,  are  dyuers  and  innumerable  nations
whiche  by  one  common  name  are  cauled  Samoged  (that  is)  fuch  as  eate  them  felues.  They  haue  great  increafe
of  foules,  byrdes,  and  dyuers  kyndes  of  beafles  :  as  Sables,  Martemes,  Beuers,  Otters,  Hermelines,  Squyrels :
and  in  the  Ocean  the  beafle  cauled  Mors  :  Alfo  Vefs,  whyte  beares,  woolfes,  hares,  Equiwoduani,  great  whales,
and  a  fyfflie  cauled  Semfi,  with  dyuers  other.  The  people  of  thefe  nations,  come  not  to  Mofcouia.  For  they
are  wylde,  and  flye  the  company  and  focietie  of  other  men.

From  the  mouthes  of  Stzuchogora  faylynge  vp  the  ryuer  vnto  Poiaffa,  Artawifche,  Cameni,  and  Poiaffa  the
greater,  is  three  weekes  vyage.  Furthermore  the  afcendynge  to  the  mounte  Camen,  is  three  dayes  iomey :
from  the  whiche,  defcendyng,  they  come  to  the  ryuer  Artawifcha,  and  from  thenfe  to  the  ryuer  Sibut,  from
whenfe  they  paffe  to  the  caflell  of  Lepin,  and  from  Lepin  to  the  ryuer  Soffa.  The  people  that  inhabite  the
region  by  this  ryuer,  are  cauled  Vuogolici.  I.eauynge  Soffa  on  the  ryght  hande,  they  come  to  the  greate  ryuer
Oby,  that  fpryngeth  owt  of  the  lake  Kitaifko,  the  whiche  with  all  the  hafle  they  coulde  make,  they  coulde
fcarfely  paffe  ouer  in  one  day,  the  ryuer  beinge  of  fuch  breadth  that  it  reacheth  fourefcore  Werfles.  The  people
alfo  that  dwell  abowt  this  ryuer,  are  cauled  Vuogolici  and  Vgritzfchi.  From  the  caflell  of  Obea  afcendynge  by
the  ryuer  of  Oby,  vnto  the  ryiier  Irtifche  into  the  which  Soffa  entereth,  is  three  moonethes  iomey.  In  thefe
places  are  two  caRels  named  lerom  and  Tumen,  kepte  by  certeyne  lordes  cauled  Knefi  luhorflvi.  beinge  tribu-
taries to  the  greate  duke  of  Mofcouia  as  they  fay. Here  are  dyuers  kyndes  of  beafles  and  furres.

Frome  the  mouth  of  the  ryuer  Irtifche  to  the  Caflell  of  Gruflina,  is  two  monethes  iomey :  from  whenfe  to
the  lake  Kitai  by  the  ryuer  Oby  (whiche  I  fayde  to  haue  his  fprynges  in  this  lake)  is  more  then  three  monethes
iorney.  From  this  lake  come  many  blacke  men,  lackynge  th[e]ufe  of  common  fpech.  They  brynge  with  them
dyuers  wares,  and  efpecially  pearles  and  precious  flones,  whiche  they  fell  to  the  people  cauled  Gruflintzi  and
Serponowtzi.  Thefe  haue  theyr  name  of  the  caflell  Serponow,  fituate  in  the  mountaynes  of  Lucomorya  beyonde
the  ryuer  Obi.  They  fay  that  to  the  men  of  Lucomorya,  chaunceth  a  marueylous  thynge  and  incredible.  For
they  affirme,  that  they  dye  yearely  at  the.  xxvii.  [twenty-feuenth]  daye  of  Nouember,  beinge  the  feafl.  of  faynt
George  amonge  the  Mofcouytes  :  and  that  at  the  nexte  fprynge  abowte  the.  xxiiii.  [twenty-fourth]  daye  of  Apryll,
theye  reuyue  ageyne  as  doo  frogges.

With  thefe  alfo,  the  people  of  Gruflintzi  and  Serponowtzi,  exercife  a  newe  and  flraunge  kynde  of  trade.
For  when  the  accuflomed  tyme  of  theyr  dyinge,  or  rather  of  fleapynge,  aprocheth,  they  leaue  theyr  wares  in
certeyne  places  appoynted,  which  the  Gruflintzi  and  Serponowtzi  carye  away  leauynge  other  wares  of  equall
valewe  in  theyr  places  :  whiche  if  the  deade  men  at  the  tyme  of  theyr  reuyuyn[gje  perceaue  to  bee  of  vnequall
pryce,  they  requyre  the}T:  owne  ageyne  :  by  reafon  wherof  muche  flryfe  and  fighting  is  betwene  them.

From  the  ryuer  of  Obi  defcending  toward  the  left  hand,  are  the  people  cauled  Calami,  which  came  thether
from  Obiowa  and  Pogofa.  Beneth  Obi,  abowte  Aurea  Anus  (that  is  the  golden  owlde  wyi'ie)  are  the  ryuers
Soffa,  Beres,  Vua,  and  Danadim,  al  which  fprynge  owt  of  the  montayne  Camen,  Bolfchega,  Potafla,  and  the
rockes  ioynynge  to  the  fame.  All  the  nations  that  inhabite  from  thefe  ryuers  to  Aurea  Anus,  are  fubiecte  to
the  prynce  of  Mofcouia.

Aurea  Anus  cauled  in  the  Mofcouites  toonge  Slata  Baba,  is  an  Idole  at  the  mouthes  of  Obi  in  the  prouince
of  Obdora,  flandynge  on  the  furthefl  banke  towarde  the  fea.  Alonge  by  the  bankes  of  Obi  and  the  r}-uers
neare  there  about,  are  here  and  there  many  caflells  and  fortreffes,  all  the  lordes  wherof  are  fubiecte  to  the
prince  of  Mofcouia,  as  they  fay.  They  fay  alfo,  or  rather  fable,  that  the  Idole  cauled  Aurea  Anus,  is  an  Image
lyke  vnto  an  owlde  wyfe  hauyng  a  chyld  in  her  lappe  :  and  that  there  is  nowe  feene  an  other  infante  which
they  fay  to  bee  her  neuie :  Alfo  that  there  are  certeyne  inflrumentes  that  make  a  continuall  founde  lyke  the
noyfe  of  trumpettes.  The  which  if  it  fo  bee,  I  thynke  it  to  bee  by  reafon  of  the  wynde  blowynge  continually
into  the  holowe  places  of  thofe  inflrumentes.

The  ryuer  Coffin,  fauleth  owt  of  the  mountaynes  into  Lucomoria.  In  the  mouth  of  thys,  is  a  caflell.
Whyther  from  the  fprynges  of  the  great  ryuer  Coffin,  is  two  moonethes  vyage.  Furthermore  from  the  fprynges
of  the  fame  ryuer,  the  ryuer  Caffima  hath  hys  original :  which  runnynge  throwgh  Lucomoria,  fauleth  into  the
great  ryuer  Tachnin,  beyonde  the  which  (as  is  fayde)  dwell  men  ot  prodigious  fliape,  of  whom  fum  are  ouer-
growne  with  heare  lyke  wylde  beafles  :  other  haue  heades  lyke  dogges,  aud  other  theyr  faces  in  theyr  brefles
withowt  neckes,  and  with  longe  handes  alfo  and  withowte  feete.  There  is  lykewyfe  in  the  ryuer  Tachnin,  a
certeyne  fyffhe  with  headde,  eys,  nofe,  mouthe,  handes,  fiete,  and  other  members  vtterly  of  humane  fliape,  and
yet  withowt  any  voyce,  and  pleafante  to  bee  eaten  as  are  other  fyfflies.

All  that  I  haue  hetherto  rehearfed,  I  haue  tranflated  out  of  the  fayde  iorney  whiche  was  delyuered  me  in
In  the  which  perhappes  fum  thynges  maye  feerae  fabulous  and  in  maner  incredible,  as

Stzuchogora.

Pot/scheriema.

Camenipoias.

Samoged.
Foules  and
beastes.

Wyld  people.

Poiassa.

Camen.

Artawischa.

Sibut.

Lepin.

Sossa.

ObL

Kitaisko.

Vuogolici

295

Irtische.

leron.

Tumem.

Gnistinx

KitaL

Blacke  men
withowt  spe:»che.

Serpenowe.

Lucomoria.

Men  that  yearely
dye  and  reuyue.

A  straunge  trade
of  Diarchaundies.

Obi.
CalnmL
i  Kyuers.

Aurea  Anus,
Obdora.

the  Mofcouites  tounge,

Cossiu.

Cassim.n.
Tachnin.
People  of
monstrous  shape

A  fysshe  lyke  a

man

Plinie  wryteth  0/

the  lyke  ly:>s.ie.

3*3

24

Mofcouia  and  CatJiay.

296

Mountaynes.

The  greate  Chan
of  Cathay.

Lucomoria.

Tumen.

Pelzorx
Papin.

Hygh  mountaynes,
supposed  to  bee
Hyperborei,  and
Rhiphei.

Engronland.

Stolp.

Cathay.

The  frutfull
prouince  of  Rezan.
laroslaw.

Honny.

Donco.

Asoph.
Capha.
Constantinople.

297

Tanais  diuideth
Europe  from  Asia.

of  the  doomnie  men  and  the  deade  rouyuynge,  the  Aurea  Anus  alfo,  and  the  monflrous  fhapcs  of  men,  with  the
tyfflie  of  human  forme  :  wherof  althowgh  I  haue  made  dylygent  in(]uificion,  yet  could  1  knowe  nothynge  cer-
teyne  of  any  that  had  fcene  the  fame  with  theyr  eys,  ncucrthcleffe  to  gyue  further  occafion  to  other  to
fearche  the  truth  of  thefe  thynges,  I  haue  thowght  good  to  make  mention  hereof.

Noff  in  the  Mofcouites  tounge  fignifieth  a  nofe  :  and  therfore  they  caule  all  capes  or  poyntes  of  lande  that
reache  into  the  fea,  by  the  fame  name.

The  mountaynes  about  the  r)'uer  of  Petzora,  are  cauled  Scmnoi  Poyas,  or  Cingulus  mundi :  (that  is)  the
gyrdle  of  the  worlde,  or  of  the  yearth.

Kithay,  is  a  lake  of  whome  the  greate  Chan  of  CATHAY  whom  the  Mofcouians  caule  Czar  Kythaiflci,
hath  hys  name. For  Chan  in  the  Tartars  language  fignifieth  a  kyng.

The  places  of  Lucomorya  nere  vnto  the  fea,  are  faluage,  full  of  wooddes,  and  inhabited  withowt  any  houfes.
Anil  albeit  that  the  autour  of  thys  iorney,  fayd  that  many  nations  of  Lucomorya  are  fubiecte  to  the  prynce  of
Mofcouia,  yet  forafmuch  as  the  kyngdome  of  Tumeai  is  neare  therunto,  whofe  prince  is  a  Tartar  and  named  in
theyr  toung  Tumenflvi  Czar  (that  is)  a  kynge  in  Tumen,  and  hath  of  late  doorie  great  domage  to  the  prynce  of
Mofcouia,  it  is  mofte  lyke  that  thefe  nations  fliulde  rather  bee  fubiecte  vnto  hym.

Neare  vnto  the  ryuer  Petzora,  (wherof  mention  is  made  in  thys  iorney)  is  the  citie  and  caflell  of  Papin  or
Papinowgorod,  whofe  inhabytauntes  are  named  Papini,  and  haue  a  priuate  language  differyng  from  the  Mofco-
uites. Beyond  thys  r)uer,  are  exceadynge  hygh  mountaynes,  reachyng  cuen  vnto  the  bankes  :  whofe  ridgies  or
toppes  by  reafon  of  continuall  wyndes,  are  in  maner  vtterly  barrayne  without  graff  or  frutes.  And  although  in
dyuers  places  they  haue  dyuers  names,  yet  are  they  commonly  cauled  Cingulus  Mundi,  that  is  the  gerdle  of
the  worlde,  otherwyfe  cauled  Catena  Mundi,  (that  is),  the  chayne  of  the  worlde.  In  thefe  mountaynes  doo
ierfalcons  breede,  wherof  I  haue  fpoken  before.  There  grow  alfo  Cedar  trees,  amonge  the  which  are  founde
the  befl  and  blackefl  kynde  of  fables.  And  only  thefe  mountaynes  are  feene  in  all  the  domynyons  of  the
prynce  of  Mofcouia,  which  perhappes  are  the  fame  that  the  owlde  writers  caule  Rhipheos  or  Hyperboreos,  fo
named  of  the  Greeke  worde  Hiper,  (that  is)  vnder :  and  Boreas  (that  is)  the  north.  For  by  reafon  they  are
couered  with  continuall  fnow  and  frofle,  they  can  not  withowt  great  difificultie  bee  trauayled :  and  reache  fo
farre  into  the  north,  that  they  make  the  vnknowne  land  of  Engroneland.  The  duke  of  Mofcouia  Bafilius  the
foonne  of  lohn,  fent  on  a  tyme  two  of  hys  capitaynes  named  Simeon  Pheodorowicz  Kurbfki,  and  Knes  Peter
Vfchatoi,  to  fearch  the  places  beyonde  thefe  mountaynes  and  to  fubdewe  the  nations  therabowte.  Kurbflci  was
yet  alyue  at  my  being  in  Mofcouia  :  and  declared  vnto  me  that  he  fpent.  xvii.  [feuenteen]  days  in  afcendyng
the  mountayn,  and  yet  coulde  not  coome  to  the  toppe  therof,  which  in  theyr  tounge  is  cauled  Stolp  (that  is)  a
pyller.  Thys  mountayne  is  extended  into  the  Ocean  vnto  the  mouthes  of  the  ryuers  of  Dwina  and  Petzora.
But  nowe  hauyng  fpoken  thus  muche  of  the  fayde  iorney,  I  wyll  returne  to  the  domynyons  of  Mofcouia,  with
other  regyons  lyinge  eaftwarde  and  fouthe  frome  the  fame  towarde  the  myghtye  Empyre  of  CATHAY.  But
I  wyll  fyrfl  fpeake  fumwhat  brefely  of  the  prouynce  of  Rezan  and  the  famous  ryuer  of  Tanais.

The  prouynce  of  Rezan  fituate  betwene  the  ryuers  of  Occa  and  Tanais,  hath  a  citie  buylded  of  woodd  not
farre  from  the  banke  of  Occa.  There  was  in  it  a  caflell  named  laroflaw,  wherof  there  now  remayneth  nothynge
but  tokens  of  the  owld  ruine.  Not  farre  from  that  citie,  the  ryuer  Occa  maketh  an  Ilande  named  Strub  :  which
was  fumtym  a  great  dukedome,  whofe  prince  was  fubiect  to  none  other.  Thys  prouince  of  Rezan  is  more  frut-
full then  any  other  of  the  prouynces  of  Mofcouia :  In  fo  muche  that  in  thys  (as  they  faye)  euery  grayne  of
wheate  bryngethe  furthe  two  and  fumtymes  more  eares  :  whofe  flalkes  or  flrawes  growe  fo  thycke  that  horfes
can  fcarfely  go  throwgh  them,  or  quayles  flye  owt  of  them.  There  is  greate  plenty  of  honnye,  fyfflies,  foules,
byrdes,  and  wylde  beafles.  The  frutes  alfo  do  farre  exceade  the  frutes  of  Mofcouia.  The  people  are  bould
and  warlyk  men.

C  Of  the  famous  ryuer  of  Tanais,

Rome  Mofcouia  vnto  the  caflell  of  laroflaw,  and  beyonde  for  the  fpace  of  ahnofle.  xxiiii.
[twenty -four]  leaques,  runneth  the  ryuer  of  lanais,  at  a  place  called  Donco,  where  the  mar-
chauntes  that  trade  to  Afoph,  Capha,  and  Confl.antynople,  fraight  theyr  fliyppes  :  and  thys
for  the  mofte  parte  in  autumne  beynge  a  rayney  tyme  of  the  yeare.  For  Tanais  here  at
other  tymes  of  the  yeare  doth  not  fo  abounde  with  water  as  to  beare  fliyppes  of  any  burden.
Thys  famous  ryuer  of  Tanais,  dyuydeth  Europe  from  Afia :  and  hath  hys  orygynal  or
fpringes  almoft.  viii.  leaques  from  the  citie  of  Tulla  toward  the  fouth  inclynyng  fumwhat
towarde  the  Eafte  :  and  not  owt  of  the  Riphean  mountaynes  as  fome  haue  wrytten  :  But  owte  of  a  great  lake
324

Mofcouia  and  Cathay.

25

named  Iwanowofero  (that  is)  the  lake  of  John  :  being  in  length  and  breadth  abowt.  1500.  WerRes  in  a  wood
whiche  fum  caule  Okonitzkilies,  and  other  name  it  lepiphanowlies  And  o\vt  of  this  lake,  fprynge  the  tvvoo  greate
ryuers  of  Schat  and  Tanais.  Schat  towarde  the  Wefle  receauynge  into  it  the  ryuer  of  Vppa,  runneth  into  the
ryuer  of  Occa  betwene  the  Weft  and  the  north.  But  Tanais  at  the  fyrfte  runneth  directly  Eaft  :  and  continueth
his  courfe  betwene  the  kyngdomes  of  Cafan  and  Aftrachan  within  fyxe  or  feuen  leaques  of  Volga  :  And  frome
thenfe  bendynge  towarde  the  fouth,  maketh  the  fennes  or  maryffhes  of  Meotis.  Furthermore,  nexte  vnto  his
fprynges,  is  the  citie  of  Tulla :  and  vppon  the  banke  of  the  ryuer  almofte  three  leaques  aboue  the  mouthes  of
the  fame,  is  the  citie  of  Afoph,  which  was  fyrfte  cauled  Tanas.  Foure  dayes  iorney  aboue  this,  is  a  towne
cauled  Achas,  fituate  harde  by  the  fame  ryuer :  whiche  the  Mofcouites  caule  Don.  I  can  not  fufficiently  prayfe
this  ryuer  for  the  exceadynge  abundaunce  of  good  fyffhes,  and  faireneffe  of  the  regions  on  boche  fydes  the
bankes,  with  plentie  of  holfoome  herbes  and  fweete  rootes,  befyde  dyuers  and  many  frutefull  trees  growynge  in
fuche  coomly  order  as  though  they  had  byn  fet  of  purpofe  in  gardens  01  archardes.  There  is  alfo  in  maner
euery  where  fuche  plentie  of  wylde  beaftes,  that  they  may  eafely  be  flaine  with  arrowes  :  In  fo  much  that  fuche
as  trauayle  by  thofe  regions,  fhal  ftand  in  neede  of  none  other  thynge  to  mayntayne  theyr  lyfe  but  only
fyre  and  falte.  In  thefe  partes,  is  no  obferuation  of  myles,  but  of  dayes  iomeys.  But  as  farre  as  I  coulde  con-
iecture,  from  the  fountaynes  or  fprynges  of  Tanais  vnto  the  mouthes  of  the  fame  iomeyinge  by  lande,  are  almoft
fourefcore  leaques.  And  faylynge  from  Donco  (from  whenfe  I  layde  that  Tanais  was  fyrfte  nauigable)  in
fcarfely.  xx.  [twenty]  dayes  vyage,  they  come  to  the  citie  of  Afoph  tributarie  to  the  Turkes :  which  is  (as  they
fay)  fyue  dayes  iorney  frome  the  ftreight  of  Taurica,  otherwyfe  cauled  Precop.  In  this  citie  is  a  famous  mart
towne  vnto  the  which  refort  many  marchauntes  of  dyuers  nations,  and  from  dyuers  partes  of  the  worlde.  For,
that  all  nations  may  the  gladlyer  haue  recourfe  thyther,  free  lybertie  of  bying  and  fellynge  is  gr?unted  vnto  all :
and  that  withowt  the  citie  euery  man  may  freely  vfe  his  owne  and  accuftomed  maner  of  lyuynge  withowt
punyffliement.

Of  the  altares  of  great  Alexander  and  lulius  Cefar  whiche  many  wryters  make  mention  of  in  this  place,  or
of  theyr  mines,  I  coulde  haue  no  certeyne  knowleage  of  th[e]inhabitauntes  or  any  other  that  had  oftentymes
trauayled  thefe  places.  Furthermore  the  fouldyers  whiche  the  prince  of  Mofcouia  maynteyneth  there  yearely
to  oppreffe  th[e]incurfions  of  the  Tartars,  beinge  of  me  demaunded  hereof,  anfvvered  that  they  neuer  fawe  or
harde  of  any  fuch  thynge.  Neuertheleffe,  they  fayde  that  abowt  the  mouthes  of  Tanais  the  leffe,  foure  dayes
iorney  from  Afoph  nere  vnto  a  place  cauled  Scwerfki,  by  the  holy  mountaynes,  they  fawe  certeyne  images  o^
ftone  and  marble.  Tanais  the  leffe,  hath  his  fprynges  in  the  dukedome  of  Scwerfki :  whereof  it  is  cauled
Donetz  Scwerfki :  and  fauleth  into  Tanais  three  dayes  iorney  aboue  Afoph.  But  fuche  as  iorney  from  Mof-
couia to  Afoph  by  lande,  they,  paffynge  ouer  Tanais  abowt  the  owlde  and  ruinate  towne  of  Donco,  doo  fum-
what  turne  from  the  fouth  to  the  Eafte  :  In  the  which  place,  if  a  ryght  line  bee  drawen  from  the  mouthes  of
Tanais  to  the  fpringes  of  the  fame,  Mofcouia  ftialbe  found  to  bee  in  Afia  and  not  in  Europe.

^r  More  directly  from  Mofcouia  to  Cathay.

He  great  and  large  prouince  of  Permia,  is  dyftante  from  Mofcouia  two  hundreth  and  fyftie  or
(as  fum  fay)  three  hundreth  leaques  directly  betwene  the  Eaft  and  North :  And  hath  a  citie
of  the  fame  name  by  the  ryuer  Vifchora  which  runneth,  x,  leaques  beneth  Kamam.  The
iorney  by  lande  can  fcarfely  bee  trauayled  thyther  but  in  wynter  by  reafon  of  many  ryuers,
maryfOies,  and  fennes.  But  in  fommer,  this  iorney  is  difpatched  with  more  facilitie  in  boates
or  fmaule  fhippes  by  Vuolochda,  Vftiug,  and  the  ryuer  Vitzechda  which  runneth  into  Dwina.
xii.  leaques  from  Vftiug.  But  they  that  go  from  Permia  to  Vftiug,  mufte  fayle  vp  the  ryuer
Vifchora  ageinft  the  courfe  of  the  ftreame :  and  paffmg  ouer  certeyne  ryuers,  fumtymes  alfo  conueyinge  the>T
boates  into  other  ryuers  by  lande,  they  come  at  the  length  to  Vftiug  three  hundreth  leaques  diftant  frome  the
citie  of  Permia.  There  is  fmaule  vfe  of  breade  in  this  prouince.  For  theyr  yearely  tribute,  they  pay  to  the
prynce  furres  and  horfes.  They  haue  a  priuate  language,  and  letters  of  theyr  owne,  whiche  one  Steueii  a
byffliop  (who  confirmed  them  yet  waueryng  in  the  fayth)  dyd  inuente.  For  before  beinge  yet  infantes  in  the
fayth  of  Chryfte,  they  flewe  and  fleyde  an  other  byfftiop  that  was  appoynted  to  inftructe  them.  This  Steuen
afterwarde  when  Demetrius  the  fonne  of  lohn  reigned,  was  taken  for  a  faynte  amonge  the  Ruthens.  Of  thefe
people  there  yet  remayne  many  Idolatours  here  and  there  in  the  woods,  whom  the  moonkes  and  heremites  that
go  thyther,  doo  not  ceafe  to  conuert  from  theyr  vayne  errour.  In  the  \\yn\.Qx  they  iorney  in  Artach  as  they  doo
in  many  places  of  Ruffia. Artach,  are  certeyne  longe  patentes  of  woodde  of  almoft  fyxe  handfuls  in  length,

2  B  2 _  323

ITie  springes  of
I'anais.

A  great  lake.

The  rjuer  Schat

Casan.

Astrachan.

Meotis.

Tulla.

Achas.

F.-utefulI  regions
abowt  Tanais.

Plentie  of  wylde
beasies.

Fire  and  salt.

Where  Tanais  is
fjTite  nauygable.

Asoph.

The  marte  of
Asoph.

Libertie  allureth
strangers

The  altars  of
Alexander  and
Cesar.

The  holy
mountaynes.

Tanais  the  lesse.

From  Moscouia  to
Asoph.

Moscouia  in  As'a
and  not  in  Kurope.

The  prouince  of
Permia.

Marv'sshes  in
sommer.

298

Dwina.
Vstiug.

Tribute.

Furres  and  horses.

Monkes  .ind
heremites.

P.itentes.

326

Mofcouia  and  Cathay.

Marcus  Pauliis
wryteth  that  these
do.Ljgcs  are  ahiiost
as  l)>'g  as  Asses  :
and  that  they  vse
syxe  to  one  sleade.

Iiigaria.

Hungaria.

Paiinonia.

Attila.

The  hycrher  or
superyor
Hungarye,  is
cauled  Austria.

Polonie.
Buda.

Furres.
Pearles  and
precious  stones.

Sibier.

Aspreolos,  I
thynk  to  be
marterns :  yet
sum  think  them
to  be  squerels
Gesnerus  wryteth
that  the  kyngs  of
the  Tartars  h.aue
theyre  tentes
couered  withowt
wyth  the  skylines
of lyons :  and
within,  with  the
skynnes  of  sables
and  Ermynes.

299

Czeremisse.

Habitacion
without  houses.

Sake.

whiche  they  make  fafle  to  theyr  fiete  with  latchettes,  and  therwith  performe  theyr  iorneys  with  great  celeritie.
They  vfe  for  this  purpofe  greate  dogges  in  the  fleade  of  other  beaflcs,  with  the  which  they  cary  theyr  farthels
on  fleades,  as  other  doo  with  hartes  in  other  places,  as  we  wyll  further  declare  hereafter.  They  fay  that  that
prouince  toward  the  Eafl  confineth  with  the  prouince  cauled  Tunien,  perteynynge  to  the  Tartars.

The  fituation  of  the  prouince  of  lugaria,  is  apparente  by  that  which  we  haue  fayde  before.  The  Mofco-
uites  caule  it  luhra  with  an  afpiration  :  and  caule  the  people  luhrici.  This  is  that  lugaria  from  whenfe  the
Hungarians  came  in  tyme  parte,  poffefled  Pannonia,  and  vnder  the  conduct  of  Attila,  fubdued  many  prouinces
of  Europe :  wherin  the  Mofcouites  doo  greatly  glory,  that  a  nation  fubiecte  to  them,  inuaded  and  wafled  a
great  parte  of  Europe.  Georgius  Paruus  a  greeke  borne,  and  a  man  of  reputation  with  the  Prince  of  Mofcouia,
wyllynge  to  afcribe  to  the  ryght  of  his  prince  the  great  dukedome  of  Lithuania,  and  the  kyngedome  of  Polonie
with  certeyne  other  dominions,  toulde  me  that  the  luharici  or  luhgary,  beinge  fubiectes  to  the  great  duke  of
Mofcouia,  came  furth  of  theyr  owne  coimtrey,  and  fyrfle  inhabited  the  regions  abowt  the  fennes  of  Meotis,  and
then  Pannonie  which  was  afterwarde  cauled  Hungarie,  by  the  ryuer  of  Danubius  :  Alfo  that  in  fine  they  pof-
feffed  the  region  of  Morauia  fo  named  of  the  ryuer :  and  lykewyfe  PoUonie,  fo  cauled  of  Polle,  which  fignifieth
a  playne.  Furthermore  that  Buda  was  fo  cauled  after  the  name  of  the  brother  of  Attila.  They  fay  alfo  that
the  luhgari  vfe  the  fame  tounge  that  doo  the  Hungarians.  The  which  whether  it  be  trew  or  not,  I  do  not
knowe.  For  althowgh  I  haue  made  diligent  inquifition  to  knowe  the  truth  hereof,  yet  coulde  I  fynde  no  man
of  that  region  with  whom  my  feruaunt  beinge  expert  in  the  Hungarian  tounge  rr3^ght  fpeake.  They  alfo  pay
furres  for  theyr  tributes  to  the  prince  of  Mofcouia.  And  albeit  that  pearles  and  precious  flones  are  brought
frome  thenfe  to  Mofcouia,  yet  are  they  not  gathered  in  theyr  Ocean,  but  in  other  places  :  efpecially  about  the
coafl  of  the  Ocean  nere  vnto  the  mouthes  of  Dwina.

The  prouince  of  Sibier,  confineth  with  Permia  and  Vuiathka :  The  whiche,  whether  it  haue  any  cartels  or
cities,  I  doo  not  yet  certeynly  knowe.  In  this  the  ryuer  laick  hathe  his  originall,  and  fauleth  into  the  Cafpian
fea.  They  faye  that  this  region  is  deferte  bycaufe  it  lyeth  fo  neare  the  Tartars  :  Or  that  yf  it  bee  in  any  parte
inhabited,  the  fame  to  be  poffefled  of  the  Tartar  Schichmamai.  Th[e]inhabitantes  haue  a  peculiar  language :
and  haue  theyr  chiefe  gaynes  by  the  furres  of  marterns,  which  in  fayrenes  and  greatnes,  excell  all  the  furres  of
that  kynde  that  are  founde  in  any  other  prouinces.  Yet  coulde  I  haue  no  great  plentie  of  them  in  Mofcouia
at  my  beinge  there.

Note  that  longe  after  the  writyng  of  this  hyftorie,  at  Rycharde  Chaunceler  his  fyrft  being  in  Mofcouia,  Duke  lohn  Vafilivich
that  nowe  raygneth,  fubdued  all  the  Tartars  with  theyr  regions  and  prouinces  euen  vnto  the  great  citie  and  mart  towne  of  Aftrachan
and  the  Cafpian  fea.  At  the  fame  tyme  alfo,  there  was  in  the  dukes  court  an  ambaffadour  that  came  frome  this  prouince  of  Sibier  :
who  declared  that  his  father  had  byn  fent  ambaffadour  to  the  great  Chan  of  Cathay.  And  that  the  great  citie  of  Cambalu  where  the
great  Chan  kepeth  his  courte  in  winter,  was  in  maner  deflroyed  by  Necromancie  and  magicall  artes  wherin  the  Cathaynes  are  very
expert  as  wryteth  Marcus  Paulus  Venetus.  Ther  was  alfo  at  the  fame  tyme  th[e]amban"adour  of  the  kynge  of  Perfia  cauled  the  great
Sophie.  This  ambaffadour  was  appareled  all  in  fcarlet,  and  fpake  much  to  the  duke  in  the  behalfe  of  owre  men,  of  whofe  kyngdome
and  trade  he  was  not  ignorant.

The  people  cauled  Czeremiffe,  dwell  in  the  wooddes  beneth  Nouogardia  the  lower.  They  haue  a  peculiar
language  and  are  of  the  fecte  of  Machumet  They  were  fumtyme  fubiecte  to  the  kynge  of  Cafan  :  but  the
greater  part  of  them  are  nowe  fubiecte  to  the  prince  of  Mofcouia.  Many  of  them  at  my  beinge  there,  were
brought  to  Mofcouia,  as  fufpected  of  rebellion.  This  nation  doth  inhabite  a  large  region  withowt  houfes  from
Vuiathka  and  Vuolochda,  to  the  ryuer  of  Kama  All  the  nation  afwell  women  as  men,  are  very  fwyft  of  foote,
and  expert  archers  :  wherein  they  fo  delite,  that  theyr  bowes  are  in  maner  neuer  owt  of  theyr  handes  :  and  gyue
theyr  children  no  meate  vntyl  they  hyt  the  marke  they  rtioote  at.

Two  leaques  dirtante  from  Nouogardia  the  lower,  were  many  houfes  to  the  fimilitude  of  a  citie  or  towne
where  they  were  accuftomed  to  make  falte.  Thefe  a  fewe  yeares  fence  beinge  burnt  of  the  Tartars,  were
rertored  by  the  commaundement  of  the  prince.

Mordwa,  are  people  inhabytynge  by  the  ryuer  of  Volga  on  the  fouth  banke  beneth  Nouogardia  the  lower :
And  are  in  al  thynges  like  vnto  the  Czeremiffes  but  that  they  haue  more  houfes.  And  here  endeth  Th[e]mpire
of  the  Mofcouites.

Note  here  that  Matthias  of  Michou,  in  his  booke  of  Sarmatia  Afiatica,  writeth  that  the  dominion  of  the  duke  of  Mofcouia
recheth  from  the  northwefl  to  the  foutheafl  fyue  hundreth  myles  of  Germanic,  which  are  more  then  leaques.  For  they  affirme  that  a
Germane  myle  is  more  then  three  Englyfflie  mylcs.

326

Mofcoina  and  Cathay.

327

C  Of  t lie  Tartars.

Ee  wyll  nowe  adde  hereunto  fumwhat  of  the  people  confinynge  with  the  Mofcouites  towarde
the  Eaft  :  of  the  which  the  Tartars  of  Cafan  are  the  firfl.  But  before  wee  fpeake  of  them
particularly,  wee  vvyl  fyrfl  reherfe  fumwhat  of  theyr  maners  and  cuftomes  in  generall.

The  Tartars  are  diuided  into  companies  which  they  caul  Hordas,  of  the  which  the
Horda  of  the  Sawolhenfes  is  the  chiefe  in  fame  and  multitude.  For  it  is  fayde  that  the
other  ^lordas  had  theyr  offprynge  and  original  of  this.  And  albeit  that  euery  Horda  hath
his  peculiar  name,  as  the  Sawolhenfes,  Precropenfes,  and  Nahays  with  dyuers  other  being  all
Machumetans,  yet  doo  they  take  it  euyll  and  count  it  reproch  to  bee  cauled  Turkes  :  but  wyll  them  felues  to
bee  cauled  Befermani,  by  the  which  name  alfo  the  Turkes  defyre  to  bee  cauled.

And  as  the  Tartars  inhabyte  many  prouynces  reachynge  far  on  euery  fyde,  euen  fo  in  maners  and  order  of
lyuynge  doo  they  not  agree  in  all  thynges.  They  are  men  of  meane  flature,  with  broade  and  fat  faces,  holowe
eyde,  with  roughe  and  thyck  beardes,  and  poulde  heades.  Onely  the  noble  men  haue  longe  heare,  and  that
exceadyng  black,  which  they  wreath  on  both  fydes  theyr  eares.  They  are  flronge  of  body  and  ftoute  of  mynde  :
prone  to  leacherye,  and  that  vnnaturall.  They  eate  the  fleaffhe  of  horfes,  camells,  and  otl  er  beafles  excepte
hogges,  from  which  they  abfleyne  by  a  lawe.  They  can  fo  abyde  fafling  and  hunger,  that  they  fumtime  for-
beare  meate  and  fleepe  for  the  fpace  of  foure  dayes,  occupyed  neuertheleffe  aboute  theyr  neceffary  affayres.
Ageyne  when  they  gette  any  thyng  to  deuoure,  they  ingorge  them  felues  beyond  meafure  :  and  with  that  furfecte
in  maner  recompenfe  theyr  former  abllynence.  And  beynge  thus  oppreffed  with  laboure  and  meate,  they  fleepe
contynually  for  the  fpace  of  three  or  foure  days  without  doyng  any  maner  of  worke  or  labour  :  durynge  which
tyme  the  Lyuons  and  Mofcouites  into  whofe  domynyons  they  are  accuflomed  to  make  theyr  incurfions,  affayle
them  vnwares  thus  oppreffed  with  meate  and  fleepe,  lynge  fcatered  here  and  there  owt  of  order  withowte
watch  or  warde.  Alfo  if  when  they  ryde,  they  bee  molefled  with  hunger  and  thyrfle,  they  vfe  to  lette  theyr
horfes  blud,  and  with  drynkyng  the  fame,  fatyffye  theyr  prefent  neceffytie,  and  afifyrme  theyr  horfes  to  bee  the
better  therby.  And  bicaufe  they  all  wander  in  vnknowen  places,  they  vfe  to  dyrect  theyr  iorneys  by  th[e]-
afpecte  of  the  ft.arres,  and  efpecyally  of  the  pole  flarre,  which  in  theyr  tounge  they  caule  Selefnikoll,  (that  is)  an
iren  nayle.  They  greatly  delyte  in  mares  mylke,  and  beleue  that  it  maketh  men  flrong  and  fatte.  They  eate
herbes  very  much  :  and  efpecially  fuch  as  growe  abowt  Tanais.  Fewe  of  them  vfe  falte.  When  theyr  kynges
dyflrybute  any  vytayles  among  them,  they  are  accuflomed  to  gyue  one  horfe  or  cowe  to  fortye  men.  Of  the
flayne  beafl.e,  the  bowells  and  trypes  are  referued  for  the  chiefe  men  and  cap^'.aynes.  Thefe  they  heate  at  the
fyre  vntyll  they  may  fliake  owt  the  doonge,  and  then  deuoure  them  gredely.  They  fucke  and  lycke,  not  only
theyr  fyngers  imbrued  with  fatte,  but  alfo  theyr  knyues  and  flyckes  wherwith  they  fcrape  the  doong  from  the
guttes.  The  heades  of  horfes  are  counted  delycate  diffhes  with  them  as  are  bores  heades  with  vs  :  and  are
referued  only  for  the  chyefe  men.  Theyr  horfes  (wherof  they  haue  great  aboundaunce)  are  but  fmaule,  and
with  fliort  neckes :  but  very  flrong  and  fuch  as  can  wel  away  with  labour  and  hunger.  Thefe  they  fede  with
the  branches  and  barkes  or  ryndes  of  trees  and  the  rotes  of  hearbes  and  weedes,  wherby  they  accuflome  them
to  hard  feedynge,  and  exercyfe  them  to  contynuall  laboure :  by  reafon  wherof  (as  fay  the  Mofcouytes)  theyr
horfes  are  fwyfcer  and  more  durable  then  any  other.  Thefe  kynde  of  horfes,  they  caule  Pachmat.  They  haue
none  other  faddells  and  fleroppes  then  of  woodd,  except  fuche  as  they  eyther  bye  of  the  Chryflians,  or  take
from  them  by  vyolence.  Leafl.  theyr  horfe  backes  fliulde  bee  hurte  with  theyr  faddells,  they  vnderlaye  them
with  grafle  and  leaues  of  trees.  They  alfo  paffe  ouer  ryuers  on  horfback.  But  if  when  they  flye,  they  feare  the
purfuynge  of  theyr  enemyes,  then  caflynge  away  theyr  faddells,  apparelle,  and  all  other  impedymentes,  referuyng
only  theyr  armoure  and  weapons  they  flye  amayne  and  with  greate  celeritie.

Theyr  women  vfe  the  fame  kynde  of  apparell  that  doo  the  men  withowt  any  dyfference  except  that  they
couer  theyr  heades  with  lynnen  vayles,  and  vfe  lynnen  hofe  muche  lyke  vnto  maryners  floppes.  When  theyr
queenes  coome  abrod,  they  are  accuflomed  to  couer  theyr  faces.  The  other  multytude  of  the  common  forte
that  lyueth  here  and  ther  in  the  feeldes,  haue  theyr  apparell  made  of  flieepes  fkynnes,  which  they  chaung[e]  uot
vntyll  they  bee  worne  and  tome  to  fytters.  They  tarye  not  longe  in  one  place,  iudgyng  it  a  great  myfery  fo  to
doo  :  In  fo  muche  that  when  they  are  angrie  with  theyr  chyldren,  the  greatefl  curfe  that  they  can  gyue  them,  is
that  they  maye  remayne  perpetually  in  one  place,  and  drawe  the  fl.ynflie  of  theyr  owne  fylthynefle  as  doo  the
Chryflyans.  When  they  haue  confumed  the  paflure  in  one  place,  they  go  to  an  other  with  theyr  droues  of
cattayle  and  theyr  wyues  and  chyldren  whom  they  euer  cary  about  with  them  in  Wagons  :  albeit  the  Tartars
that  dwell  in  cities  and  townes,  vfe  an  other  order  of  lyuynge. If  they  be  inclofed  with  any  daungerous  warre,

337

The  Tartars  of
Casan,

Horda.

BesennanL

The  stature  of
the  Tartars.

They  absteine

from  hogges

flesshe.

Abstinence.

Voracitie.

So  doo  the  Turkes

lomej-ing  by  the
pole  star.

Mares  mylke

Horse  flesshe
eaten.

Clenly.

300

Hors[e]  heades,
deintie  meate

The  Tartars
horses.

Saddells  and
styrrops  of  wodde.

The  Tartars
women.

The  Tartars  curse.

328

Mofcoitia  and  CafJiay.

No  iustice  amongc
the  Tartars.

The  Tartars  are
theeucs  ami  poorc.

They  reioyce  in
spoylynge

The  feelde
Tartars.

A  mery  tale.

Casan.

301

The  kynge  of
Casan.
Archers.
Maryners.

The  towne
Tartars.

Moscou'a  inuaded
by  the  Tartars.

The  prince  of

Moscouia  tributary
to  the  Tartars.

Duke  Basilius
army  ageynst  the
Tartars.

The  Vyng  of  Casan
suliMiittcth  hyni
selfe.

they  place  theyr  wyues,  chyldren,  and  owld  folkes,  in  the  fixuefl  i)laces.  Tlicre  is  no  iudice  amonge  tlicm.  For
if  any  man  (lande  in  neade  of  any  thynge,  he  may  withowt  punnynhcmcnte  take  it  awaye  from  an  other.  If  any
complayne  to  the  ludge  of  the  vyolence  and  wronge  doonne  vnto  hym,  the  offender  denyeth  not  the  cryme,
but  foyth  that  he  coulde  not  lacke  that  thyng.  Then  the  ludge  is  wonte  to  gyue  thys  fentence  :  If  thowe  alfo
flialte  haue  neede  of  any  thynge  doo  the  lyke  to  other.  Sum  foy  they  do  not  fleale  :  But  whether  they  fleale
or  not,  lette  other  iudge.  They  are  furely  a  theeuyfilie  kynd  of  men  and  very  poore,  lyuynge  only  by  robbyng
of  other,  and  flealyng  away  other  mens  cattayle,  and  vyolently  alfo  caryynge  awaye  the  men  them  felues  whom
eyther  they  felle  to  the  Turkes  or  proffer  them  to  bee  redemed  by  ranfome,  referuynge  only  the  younge  wenches.
They  feldome  aflluilte  cities  or  caftells,  but  burne  and  wafle  townes  and  vyllagyes  :  In  fo  muche  that  they  fo
pleafe  them  felues  herin,  that  they  thynke  they  haue  fo  muche  the  more  inlarged  their  empire,  in  howe  muche
they  haue  wafted  and  made  defolate  manye  prouynces.  And  althowgh  they  bee  mofle  impacyent  of  refte  and
quyetneffe,  yet  doo  they  not  kyll  or  deftroye  one  an  other,  excepte  theyr  kynges  bee  at  deffention  betweene
them  felues.  If  any  man  bee  flaine  in  any  fraye  or  quarel,  and  the  autours  of  the  myfchefe  bee  taken,  only
theyr  horffe,  harneffe,  weapons,  and  apparell,  are  taken  from  them,  and  they  difmiffed.  So  that  the  murtherer
by  the  loffe  of  a  vyle  horfe  or  a  bowe,  is  dyfcharged  of  the  ludge  with  thefe  woordes  :  gette  the  henfe  and  goo
abowte  thy  bufyneffe.  They  haue  no  vfe  of  golde  and  fyluer,  excepte  only  a  fewe  marchauntes  :  But  exerfyfe
exchaunge  of  ware  for  ware.  And  if  it  fo  chaunce  that  by  fellyng  of  fuch  thynges  as  they  haue  ftolne,  they
gette  any  monye  of  theyr  bortherers,  they  bye  therwith  certeyne  apparel  and  other  neceffaryes  of  the  Mofcouites.
The  reg}'ons  of  theyr  habytations  (the  feelde  Tartars  I  meane)  are  not  lymytted  with  any  boundes  or  borthers.
There  was  on  a  tyme  a  certeyne  fatte  Tartar  taken  pryfoner  of  the  Mofcouites  :  to  whom  when  the  prynce  fayd,
How  art  thow  fo  fatte  thowe  dogge,  fythe  thowe  hafte  not  to  eate,  the  Tartar  anfwered.  Why  fhulde  not  I  haue
to  eate  fythe  I  poffeffe  fo  large  a  land  from  the  Eaft  to  the  weft,  wherby  I  may  bee  abundauntely  nuryffhed  ?
But  thowe  mayfte  rather  feeme  to  lacke,  fyth  thowe  inhabyteft  fo  fmaule  a  portion  of  the  worlde,  and  dufte
daylye  ftryue  for  the  fame.

Cafan,  is  a  kyngedome,  alfo  a  citie,  and  a  caftell  of  the  fame  name,  fituate  by  the  ryuer  Volga  on  the
further  banke,  almoft  threfcore  and  tenne  leaques  beneath  Nouogardia  the  lower.  Alonge  by  the  courfe  of
Volga  towarde  the  Eaft  and  South,  it  is  termined  with  deferte  fyeldes.  Towarde  the  fommer  Eaft,  it  confineth
with  the  Tartars  cauled  Schibanlki,  and  Kofatzki.  The  kynge  of  this  prouince,  is  able  to  make  an  army  of.
XXX.  [thirty]  thoufande  men,  efpecially  foote  men,  of  the  which  the  Czeremiffe  and  Czubafchi  are  moft  expert
archers.  The  Czubafchi  are  alfo  cunnynge  maryners.  The  citie  of  Cafan,  is  threfcore  leaques  diftant  from  the
principal  caftel  Vuiathka.  Furthermore,  Cafan  in  the  Tartars  language,  fignifieth  a  brafen  potte  boylynge.
Thefe  Tartars  are  more  ciuile  then  the  other.  For  they  dwell  in  houfes,  tyll  the  grownde,  and  exercife  the
trade  of  marchaundies.  They  were  of  late  fubdued  by  Bafilius  the  greate  duke  of  Mofcouia,  and  had  theyr
kynge  affigned  them  at  his  arbitriment.  But  thortely  after,  they  rebelled  ageine :  and  affociate  with  other
Tartars,  inuaded  the  region  of  Mofcouia,  fpoyled  and  wafted  many  cities  and  townes,  and  ledde  away  innumer-
able captiues,  euen  from  the  citie  Mofcouia  which  they  poffeffed  for  a  tyme,  and  had  vtterly  deftroyed  the  fame
if  it  had  not  byn  for  the  valyantneffe  of  the  Almayne  gunners  which  kept  the  caftell  with  great  ordinaunce.
They  alfo  putte  duke  Bafilius  to  flyght,  and  caufed  him  to  make  a  letter  of  his  owne  hande  to  Machmetgirei
theyr  kynge  to  acknowleage  hym  felfe  for  a  perpetuall  tributarie  to  them,  wheruppon  they  diffolued  the  fiege,
and  gaue  the  Mofcouites  free  libertie  to  redeeme  theyr  captiues  and  gooddes,  and  fo  departed.  But  Bafilius
not  longe  able  to  abyde  this  contumelie  and  diftionour,  after  that  he  had  putte  to  death  fuche  as  by  flyinge  at
the  fyrft  encounterynge  were  the  caufe  of  this  ouerthrowe,  affembled  an  armye  of  a  hundreth  and  fourefcore
thoufande  men  fhortely  after  in  the  yeare.  1523.  And  fent  forwarde  his  army  vnder  the  conducte  of  his  Lieue-
tenaunte  :  and  therewith  an  heralde  at  armes  to  bydde  battayle  to  Machmetgirei  the  kynge  of  Cafan,  with
woordes  in  this  effecte  :  The  laft  yeare  lyke  a  theefe  and  robber  withowt  bydding  of  battayle,  thou  dyddefte
pryuilie  oppreffe  me.  Wherefore  I  nowe  chalenge  the,  once  ageyne  to  proue  the  fortune  of  warre  if  thou
myftrufte  not  thyne  owne  poure.  To  this  the  kynge  anfwered,  that  there  were  manye  wayes  open  for  hym  to
inuade  Mofcouia :  And  that  the  warres  haue  no  leffe  refpect  to  the  commoditie  of  tyme  and  place  then  of
armure  or  ftrength  :  And  that  he  wold  take  th[e]aduantage  therof  when  and  where  it  fhulde  feeme  beft  to  him
and  not  to  other.  With  which  woordes  Bafilius  beinge  greatly  accenfed  and  burnyng  with  defyre  of  reuenge,
inuaded  the  kyngdome  of  Cafan  :  whofe  kynge  beinge  ftryken  with  fuddeyne  feare  at  th[e]approche  of  fo
terrible  an  army,  affigned  the  gouernance  of  his  kyngdome  to  the  younge  kynge  of  Taurica  his  neuie,  whyle  he
hym  felfe  went  to  requyre  ayde  of  the  Emperour  of  the  Turkes.  But  in  fine  the  kynge  of  Cafan  fubmytted  hym
felfe  vppon  certeyne  conditions  of  peace  whiche  the  Mofcouites  dyd  the  gladlyer  excepte  for  that  time  becaufe
theyr  vittayles  fayled  them  to  maynteyne  fo  great  a  multitude.  But  wheras  duke  Bafilius  hym  felfe  was  not
prefent  at  this  laft  expedition,  he  greatly  fufpected  Palitzki  the  Lieuetenaunte  of  th[e]army  to  bee  corrupted
with  brybes  to  proceade  no  further.  In  this  meane  tyme,  the  kynge  of  Cafan  fent  ambaffodours  to  Bafilius  to
328

Mofcoiila  and  Cathay.

329

intreate  of  peace  :  whome  I  fawe  in  the  dukes  courte  at  my  beynge  there  :  but  I  coulde  perceaue  no  hope  of
peace  to  bee  betwene  them.  For  euen  then,  BafiUus  to  endomage  the  Cafans,  tranflated  the  marte  to  Nouo-
gardia,  which  before  was  accuflomed  to  bee  kepte  in  the  Ilande  of  marchauntes  nere  vnto  the  citie  of  Cafan  :
Commaundyng  alfo  vnder  peyne  of  greuous  punyffhemente  that  none  of  his  fubiectes  fhulde  reforte  to  the
Ilande  of  marchauntes  :  thynkynge  that  this  tranflation  of  the  marte  Piulde  greately  haue  endomaged  the  Cafans  :
and  that  only  by  takyng  away  their  trade  of  falte  (which  they  were  accuflomed  to  bye  of  the  Mofcouites  at  that
marte)  they  fliulde  haue  byn  compelled  to  fubmyffion.  But  the  Mofcouites  them  felues  felte  no  leffe  incon-
uenience  hereby  then  dyd  the  Cafans,  by  reafon  of  the  dearth  and  fcarfeneffe  that  folowed  hereof  of  al  fuch
thynges  as  the  Tartars  were  accuflomed  to  brynge  thyther  by  the  ryuer  of  Volga  from  the  Cafpian  fea,  the
kyngedomes  of  Perfia  and  Armenia,  and  the  marte  towne  of  Aflrachan  :  efpecially  the  great  number  of  mofl
excellent  fyffhes  that  are  taken  in  Volga  both  on  the  hyther  and  further  fyde  of  Cafan.

But  hauynge  fayde  thus  much  of  the  warres  betwene  the  Prince  of  Mofcouia  and  the  Tartars  of  Cafan,  we
wyll  now  procede  to  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  other  Tartars  inhabytyng  the  regions  towarde  the  foutheafl  and  the
Cafpian  fea.

Next  beyonde  the  Tartars  of  Cafan,  are  the  Tartars  cauled  Nagai  or  Nogai,  which  inhabite  the  regions
beyond  Volga  abowt  the  Cafpian  fea  at  the  ryuer  laick,  runnyng  owt  of  the  prouince  of  Sibier.  Thefe  haue  no
kynges  but  dukes.  In  owre  tyme,  three  bretherne  diuydynge  the  prouinces  equally  betwene  them,  poffeffed
thofe  dukedomes.  The  fyrft  of  them  named  Schidack,  poffeffeth  the  citie  of  Scharaitzick,  beyond  the  ryuer  of
Rha  or  Volga  towarde  the  Eafle,  with  the  region  confinynge  with  the  ryuer  laick.  The  feconde  cauled  Coffum,
enioyeth  all  the  lande  that  lyethe  betwene  the  ryuers  of  Kaman  laick  and  Volga.  The  thyrde  brother  named
Schichmamai,  poffeffeth  parte  of  the  prouince  of  Sibier  and  all  the  region  abowt  the  fame.  Scliichmamai,  is  as
much  to  fay  by  interpretacion,  as  holy  or  myghty.  And  in  maner  al  thefe  regions  are  full  of  wooddes,  excepte
that  that  lyeth  towarde  Scharaitz,  which  confyfleth  of  playnes  and  fyeldes.

Betwene  the  ryuers  of  Volga  and  laick,  abowt  the  Cafpian  fea,  there  fumtymes  inhabyted  the  kj-nges
cauled  Sawolhenfes.  Demetrius  Danielis  (a  man  among  thefe  barbarians,  of  fmguler  fayth  and  grauitie)  toulde
vs  of  a  maruelous  and  in  maner  incredible  thyng  that  is  fene  among  thefe  Tartars.  And  that  his  father  beinge
fente  by  the  prynce  of  Mofcouia  to  the  kynge  of  Sawolhenfe,  fawe  whyle  he  was  in  that  legacie,  a  certeyne  feede
in  that  Ilande  fumwhat  leffe  and  rounder  then  the  feedes  of  Melones  :  Of  the  whiche  beinge  hydde  in  the
grounde,  there  groweth  a  frute  or  plante  very  lyke  a  lambe,  of  the  heyght  of  fyue  fpannes  :  And  is  theifore
cauled  in  theyr  tounge  Boranetz,  which  fignifyeth  a  lyttle  lamb.  For  it  hath  the  headde,  eyes,  eares,  and  all
other  partes  like  vnto  a  lambe  newly  eyned  :  with  alfo  a  very  thynne  fkynne  wherwith  dyuers  of  th[e]inhabi-
tauntes  of  thofe  regions  are  accuflomed  to  line  theyr  cappes  and  hattes  and  other  tyrements  for  theyr  heades.
Many  alfo  confirmed  in  owre  prefence  that  they  had  feene  thefe  fkynnes.  He  fayde  furthermore  that  that
plant  (if  it  may  bee  cauled  a  plant)  hath  bludde,  and  no  fleffhe  :  but  hath  in  the  fleade  of  fieffhe  a  certeyne
fubflance  like  vnto  the  fiefflie  of  creuyffhes.  The  hoofes  alfo  are  not  of  home  as  are  the  lambes,  but  couered
with  heare  in  the  fame  forme.  The  roote  cleaueth  to  the  nauell  or  myddefl  of  the  belly.  The  plante  or  fruite
lyueth  vntyll  all  the  graffe  and  herbes  growynge  abowte  it  beinge  eaten,  the  roote  wythereth  for  lacke  of
nuryffhement.  They  fay  that  it  is  very  fweete  to  bee  eaten,  and  is  therefore  greately  defyred  and  fought  for  of
the  woolues  and  other  rauenynge  beafles.  And  albeit  I  exfleme  all  that  is  fayde  of  this  plant  to  be  fabulous,
yet  forafmuch  as  it  hath  byn  toulde  me  of  credible  perfons,  I  haue  thought  good  to  make  mention  hereof.

Of  this  flraunge  frute,  Mandeuell  maketh  mention,  where  in  the.  Ixxxiiii.  [eighty-fourth]  chapiture  of  his  booke  he  wrj-teth  thus :
Nowe  fliall  I  fay  of  fum  landes,  countreys,  and  lies  that  are  beyonde  the  lande  of  Cathay.  Therfore  who  fo  goeth  from  Cathay  to
India  the  hygh  and  the  lowe,  he  fhall  go  through  a  kyngedome  that  men  caule  Cadiffen,  and  is  a  great  lande.  There  groweth  a
maner  of  frute  as  it  were  gourdes.  And  when  it  is  rype,  men  cut  it  a  funder :  and  fynd  therein  a  beaft  as  it  were  of  fleffhe,  bone,  and
bludde,  as  it  were  a  lyttle  lambe  withowt  wolle.  And  men  eate  that  beaft  and  the  frute  alfo,  which  is  a  great  maruayle.  Neuerthe-
leflfe,  I  fayde  vnto  them  that  I  helde  that  for  no  maruayle.  For  I  fayde  that  in  my  countrey  are  tres  that  beare  frute  that  become
byrdes  flying  which  are  good  to  bee  eaten.  And  that  that  fauleth  into  the  water  lyueth :  And  that  that  fauleth  on  the  earth  dyeth.
And  they  had  greate  maruayle  of  this.  etc.

From  the  prince  of  Schidack,  proceadyng.  xx.  [twenty]  dayes  iorney  towarde  the  Eafl.  are  the  people  which
the  Mofcouites  caule  lurgenci,  whofe  prince  is  Barack  Soltan,  brother  to  the  greate  Chan  of  Cathay.  In  tenne
dayes  iorney  from  Barack  Soltan,  they  coomme  to  Bebeid  Chan. And  this  is  that  great  Chan  of  Cathay.

Names  of  dignities  amonge  the  Tartars,  are  thefe,  Chan,  fignifieth  a  kynge,  Soltan,  the  foonne  of  a  kynge.
Bii,  a  Duke.  Murfa,  the  foonne  of  a  duke.  Olboud,  a  noble  man  or  counfiler.  Olboadulu,  the  foonne  of  a
noble  man. Seid,  the  hygh  prefle. Kfi,  a  priuate  perfon.

The  names  of  offices  are  thefe  :  Vlan,  the  feconde  dignitie  to  the  kynge.  For  the  kynges  of  the  Tartars
haue  foure  principall  men  whofe  counfayle  they  vfe  in  al  theyr  weyghty  affayres.  Of  thefe  the  fyrfle  is  cauled
Schimi :  the  feconde  Barni :  the  thyrde,  Gargni :  The  fourth,  Tziptzan.  And  to  haue  fayde  thus  muche  of  the
Tartars,  it  fhall  fuffice.

The  Iland  cf
nLirchauates

The  Caspian  sea.
Persia.

Armenia.
Astrachan.

302

The  Tartars  neare
to  the  Caspian  sea.
NogaL

The  possession  of
three  brytheme.

The  k^Tiges  cauled
Sawolheu^ies.

A  marueTous  frute
lyke  a  lambe.

MandeuelL

Barnacles  of  the
Orkeneys.

Barack  Soltan.
Cathay.

Names  of  dignities
amonge  the
Tartars.

Names  of  offices.

3«>

330

Mofcouia  and  Cathay.

303

Chan  CublaL

Marcus  Pauliis  wrytctli  that  the  grcate  Chan,  is  cauled  Chan  Ciiblai  that  is,  the  great  kynge  of  kynges  :  as  the  grcatc  tiircke
wryteth  hym  fclfc  in  lykc  manor,  as  I  fawe  in  a  letter  wrytten  by  liyni  of  late  lo  the  citie  of  Ragufa,  in  the  which  he  vfeth  this  fub-
fcription:  Soltan  Soliman  de  felim  Cham  Signore  de  Sigiiori  in  fempiterno.  As  concernynge  Mofcouia  and  Cathay,  I  was  mynded
to  haue  added  hereunto  dyuers  other  thynges,  but  that  for  certeyne  confiderations  I  was  perfuaded  to  proceade  no  further.  Vnto
whofe  requefle,  herein  fatiffyinge  rather  other  then  my  felfe,  wyllynge  otherwyfe  to  haue  accomplyflhed  this  booke  to  further  perfec-
tion, I  was  content  to  agree  for  two  caufes  efpecially  mouynge  me:  wherof  the  one  is,  that  as  touchynge  thefe  trades  and  vyages,  as
in  maner  in  all  other  fciences,  there  are  certeyne  fccrcates  not  to  bee  publyfflied  and  made  common  to  all  men.  The  other  caufe  is,
that  the  parteners  at  whofe  charge  this  booke  is  prynted,  although  the  coppy  wherof  they  haue  wrought  a  longe  fpace  haue  cofl  them
nought  doo  not  neuertheleffe  ceafe  dayly  to  caule  vppon  me  to  make  an  end  and  proceade  no  further  :  affirmynge  that  the  booke  wyll
bee  of  to  great  a  pryce  and  not  euery  mans  money:  fcaryng  rather  theyr  ownc  loffe  and  hynderaunce,  then  carefuU  to  bee  beneficiall
to  other,  as  is  nowe  in  maner  the  trade  of  all  men,  winch  ordinarie  refpecte  of  priuate  couimoditie  hath  at  this  tyme  fo  lyttle  moued
me,  I  take  god  to  wytneffe,  that  for  my  paynes  and  trauayles  taken  herein  fuch  as  they  bee,  I  may  vppon  iuft  cccafion  thynke  my
felfe  a  loofer  manye  wayes,  except  fuch  men  of  good  inclination  as  fliall  take  pleafure  and  feele  fum  commoditie  in  the  knowleage  of
thefe  thynges,  fliall  thynke  me  woorthy  theyr  good  woorde,  wherwith  I  flial  repute  my  felfe  and  my  trauayles  fo  abundantly  fatiffyed,
that  I  (hall  repute  other  mens  gaynes  a  recompenfe  for  my  lofles,  as  they  may  bee  in  deede,  yf  men  bee  not  vnthankefull,  which  only
vice  of  ingratitude  hath  hyndered  the  worlde  of  many  benefites.

0°  The  naiLigation  by  tJic  frofcji  fca.

Nouogardia.

Suecia  vnder  the
kynge  of
Denmarke.

Dwina.
Potiwlo.

Hygh  mountaynes
neare  the  north
Ocean.

Finlappia.

The  wylde
Lappians.
The  region  of
Nortpoden

The  cape  cauled
the  holy  nose.

A  whyrlpoole  or
swalowing  goulfe.

304

Such  whyrlepooles
are  cauled  vipers

The  stone  cauled
Semes.

Superstition,

T  my  beinge  in  Mofcouia  when  I  was  fent  thyther  by  kynge  Ferdinando  my  lorde  and  mafter,
it  fo  chaunfed  that  Georgius  Ifloma  the  duke  of  Mofcouia  his  interpretour,  a  man  of  great
experience  who  hadde  before  lerned  the  latin  tounge  in  the  court  of  lohn  kynge  of  Den-
marke,  was  there  prefent  at  the  fame  tyme.  He  in  the  yeare  of  Chryfl.  1496.  beinge  fente
of  his  prince  with  mafler  Dan  id  a  fcotte  borne  and  then  ambaffadour  for  the  kynge  of  Den-
marke,  (whom  alfo  I  knewe  there  at  my  fyrfl  legacie)  made  me  a  breefe  information  of  all
th[e]order  of  his  iorney.  The  which,  forafmuch  as  it  may  feeme  difficult  and  laborious  afwel
for  the  diflaunce  as  daungerous  places,  I  haue  thought  good  to  defcribe  the  fame  as  I  receaued  it  at  his
mouth.

Fyrfl  he  fayde  that  beinge  fent  of  his  prince  with  the  fayd  Dauid,  they  came  fyrfl  to  Nouogardia  the  great.
And  wher  as  at  that  tyme  the  kyngedome  of  Suecia  reuolted  frome  the  kynge  of  Denmarke,  and  alfo  the  duke
of  Mofcouia  was  at  difcention  with  the  Suetians,  by  reafon  wherof  they  coulde  not  paffe  by  the  mofl  accuflomed
way  for  the  tumultes  of  war  they  attempted  theyr  iorney  by  an  other  way  longer  but  fafer  And  came  fyrfl  from
Nouogardia  to  the  mouthes  of  the  ryuer  of  Dwina  and  Potiwlo,  by  a  very  difficult  and  paynefull  iorney.  For
he  fayd  that  this  iorney  which  can  not  bee  to  muche  detefled  for  fuche  laboures  and  trauayles,  continueth  for
the  fpace  of  three  hundreth  leaques.  In  fine,  takyng  foure  fmaul  fhyppes  or  barkes  at  the  mouthes  of  Dwina,
they  fayled  by  the  coalle  on  the  ryght  hande  of  the  Ocean,  where  they  fawe  certeyne  hyghe  and  rowgh  moun-
taynes :  and  at  the  lengthe  faylynge.  xvi.  [fixteen]  leaques,  and  paffynge  a  great  goulfe,  folowed  the  coafle  on
the  lefte  hande :  And  leauyng  on  the  ryght  hand  the  large  fea  which  the  name  of  the  ryuer  Petzora  (as  haue
alfo  the  mountaynes  adiacent  to  the  fame)  they  came  to  the  people  of  Finlappia :  who,  although  they  dwell
here  and  there  in  lowe  coitagies  by  the  fea  fyde,  and  leade  in  maner  a  beaflly  lyfe,  yet  are  they  more  meeke
and  tractable  then  the  wylde  Lappians.  He  fayde  that  thefe  alfo  are  tributaries  to  the  prince  of  Mofcouia.
Then  leauynge  the  lande  of  the  Lappians,  and  faylynge  fourefcore  leaques,  they  came  to  the  region  of  Nort-
poden vnder  the  dominion  of  the  kynge  of  Suecia.  .  This  the  Mofcouites  caule  Kaienfka  Semla,  and  the  people
Kayeni.  Departynge  from  henfe,  and  faylynge  alonge  by  the  coafle  of  a  wyndynge  and  bendynge  fliore  reach-
yng  towarde  the  ryght  hand,  they  came  to  a  promontorie  or  cape  cauled  the  Holy  nofe,  beinge  a  greate  flone
reachynge  farre  into  the  fea  to  the  fimilitude  of  a  nofe  :  vnder  the  whiche  is  feene  a  caue  with  a  whyrlepoole
which  fwaIow[e]th  the  fea  euery  fyxe  houres :  and  caflynge  furth  the  fame  ageyne  with  terryble  rorynge  and
violence,  caufeth  the  fayde  whyrlepoole.  Sum  caule  this  the  nauell  of  the  fea  :  and  other  name  it  Charybdis.
He  affirmeth  that  the  violence  of  this  fwalowynge  goulfe  is  fuch,  that  it  draweth  into  it,  inuolu/th,  and  fwalow-
eth  vp  fliyppes  and  al  other  thynges  that  comme  neare  it :  and  that  they  were  neuer  in  greater  d.^  ingioure.  For
the  whyrlepoole  fo  fuddeynly  and  violentely  drewe  vnto  it  the  fliyppe  or  barke  wherin  they  were  caryed,  that
with  the  helpe  of  ores  and  great  labour  they  hardly  efcaped.  When  they  had  thus  ouerpaffed  the  holy  nofe,
they  came  to  a  certeyne  flonye  mountayne  which  they  fhulde  needes  compaffe  abowte.  But  beinge  there  flayed
with  contrary  wyndes  for  the  fpace  of  certeyne  dayes,  the  pylotte  of  the  fhippe  fpake  vnto  them  in  this  effecte :
This  flone  (iayth  he)  that  yovve  fee,  is  cauled  Semes  :  The  which  excepte  we  pleafe  with  fumme  gyfte.  wee
fliall  not  paffe  by  withowt  great  daungiour.  But  the  pylot  beinge  reproued  of  Ifloma  for  his  vayne  fuperfl-itionj
helde  his  peace.  And  when  they  had  byn  deteined  ther  by  temped  for  the  fpace  of  foure  days,  at  the  length
330

Mofcouia  and  Cathay.

331

Sacrifice  to  the
stone  Seines

The  cape  Motka.

The  castel  of
VVardhus.

The  region  of  the
wylde  Lappones.

Dront.

lomeyinge  on
sleades.

Howe  the  hartes
drawe  sleades.

the  tcmpefl  ceafed  and  they  went  forwarde  on  theyr  vyage  with  a  profperous  wynd.  Then  the  pilotte  fpake
vnto  them  ageyne,  fayinge :  You  defpifed  my  admonicion  of  pleafynge  the  Semes,  and  fcomed  the  fame  as
vayne  and  fuperftitious.  But  if  I  had  not  priuilie  in  the  nyght  afcended  a  rocke  and  pleafed  the  Semes,  wee
ftiulde  furely  haue  had  no  paffage.  Beinge  demaunded  what  he  offered  to  the  Semes,  he  fayde  that  he  poured
butter  myxt  with  otemele  vpon  the  flone  which  wee  fawe  reache  furth  into  the  fea.  As  they  fayled  further,  they
came  to  an  other  cape  named  Motka,  which  was  almofl  enuironed  with  the  fea  lyke  an  Ilande  :  in  whofe
extreme  poynte,  is  fituate  the  caflell  of  Barthus,  which  fum  caule  Wardhus,  (that  is)  a  houfe  of  defence  or  for-
treffe.  For  the  kynges  of  Norway  haue  there  a  garryfon  of  men  to  defende  theyr  marches.  He  fayde  further-
more that  that  cape  reacheth  fo  farre  into  the  fea,  that  they  coulde  fcarfely  compaffe  it  in  eyght  dayes.  By
which  tarying  leafle  they  fhulde  bee  hyndered,  they  caryed  on  theyr  fliulders  with  greate  laboure,  theyr  barkes
and  fardelles  ouer  a  (Ireyght  of  lande  conteynyng  halfe  a  leaque  in  breadth.  From  henfe  they  fayled  to  the
region  of  the  wyld  Lappones,  cauled  Dikilappones  to  a  place  named  Dront,  beinge.  CC.  [two  hundred]  leaques
diftant  from  Dwina  towarde  the  North.  And  thus  farre  as  he  fayth,  doth  the  prince  of  Mofcouia  exacte  tribute.
Furthermore  leauyng  theyr  barkes  here,  they  fynyffhed  the  refidue  of  theyr  iorney  on  fleades.  He  further
declared  that  there  were  heardes  of  hartes  as  are  with  vs  of  oxen,  whiche  in  the  Noruegians  tounge  are  cauled
Rhen,  beinge  fumwhat  bygger  then  owre  hartes.  Thefe  the  Lappones  vfe  in  this  maner.  They  ioyne  them  to
fleades  made  lyke  fyffher  botes,  as  wee  put  horfes  to  the  carte.  The  man  in  the  fleade,  is  tyed  fafl  by  the  feete
leafl.  he  fall  owte  by  the  fwyfte  courfe  of  the  hartes.  In  his  lefte  hande,  he  holdeth  a  collar  or  rayne  whenvith
he  moderateth  the  courfe  of  the  hartes  :  and  in  the  ryght  hand,  a  pyked  flaffe  whenvith  he  may  fufleine  the
fleade  from  faulyng  if  it  chaunce  to  decline  to  much  on  any  part.  And  he  toulde  me  that  by  this  meanes  he
trauayled  twentie  leaques  in  one  daye,  and  then  difmyffed  the  harte,  who  by  hym  felfe  returned  to  his  owne
mafl.er  and  accuflomed  flable.  This  iorney  thus  fynyffhed,  they  came  to  Berges  a  citie  of  Norduegia  or  Norway,
fituate  directly  towarde  the  northe  betwene  the  mountaynes  :  and  wente  from  thenfe  to  Denmarke  on  horfe-
backe.  At  Dront  and  Berges,  the  day  is  fayde  to  bee.  xxii.  [twenty-two]  houres  longe  in  the  fommer  Equi-
noctiall.  Blafius  an  other  of  the  prynce  of  Mofcouia  his  interpretours,  who  a  fewe  yeares  before,  was  fent  of
his  prince  into  Spayne  to  Th[ejemperour,  declared  vnto  vs  an  other  and  fhorter  way  of  his  iorney.  For  he
fayde  that  when  he  was  fent  from  Mofcouia  to  lohn  the  kyng  of  Denmarke,  he  came  fyrfle  on  foote  vnto
Roflowe  :  And  takynge  fhyppe  there,  came  to  Pereaflaw  :  and  from  Pereaflaw  by  the  ryuer  Volga  to  Caflromow:
and  that  frome  thenfe  goynge  feuen  Werfles  by  lande,  he  came  to  a  lyttle  ryuer :  faylynge  by  the  which,  when
fyrfl  he  came  to  Vuolochda,  then  to  Suchana,  and  Dwina,  and  in  fine  to  the  citie  of  Berges  in  Norway,  ouer-
paffynge  in  this  vyage  all  the  perelles  and  laboures  that  Iftoma  rehearfed  before,  he  came  at  the  length  to
Hafnia  the  chiefe  citie  of  Denmarke,  whiche  the  Germaynes  caule  Koppenhagen.  But  in  theyr  returnyTige
home,  they  both  confeffe  that  they  came  to  Mofcouia  by  Liuonia  :  and  that  they  were  a  yeare  in  this  vyage  :
Albeit  Georgius  Ifloma,  fayde  that  halfe  the  parte  of  that  tyme,  he  was  hyndered  by  tempefles,  and  inforced  to
tary  longe  in  many  places  by  the  waye.  Yet  they  both  lykewyfe  conflantely  afifirme  that  in  this  iorney  eyther
of  them  trauayled  a  thoufand  threefcore  and  ten  Werfles  (that  is)  three  hundreth  and  fortie  leaques.  Further-
more alfo  Demetrius  who  of  late  was  fent  ambaffadour  from  the  prynce  of  Mofcouia  to  the  byfflioppe  of  Rome,
(by  whofe  relation  alfo  Paulus  louius  wrote  his  defcription  of  Mofcouia)  confirmed  all  thefe  thynges  to  bee
trewe.  All  they  being  demaunded  of  me  of  the  congeled  or  frofen  fea,  made  none  other  anfwere  but  that  in
places  nere  vnto  that  fea,  they  faw  many  and  great  riuers  by  whofe  vehemente  courfe  and  abundaunt  flowynge,
the  feas  are  dryuen  farre  from  the  fhore  :  and  that  the  fayde  water  of  the  ryuers  is  frofen  with  the  fea  a  good
fpace  from  the  lande,  as  in  Liuonia  and  other  partes  of  Suecia.  For  althowgh  by  the  vehemencie  of  the
wyndes,  the  Ife  is  broken  in  the  fea,  yet  dooth  this  chaunce  feldome  or  neuer  in  ryuers,  excepte  by  fum  inun-
dation or  flud  the  Ife  gathered  togyther  bee  lyfted  vp  and  broken.  For  the  flakes  or  piefes  of  Ife  caryed  into  the
fea  by  force  of  the  ryuers,  doo  flote  aboue  the  water  in  maner  all  the  hole  yeare,  and  are  ageyne  fo  vehemently  frofen
togyther,  that  a  man  maye  there  fumtymes  fee  great  heapes  of  the  Ife  of  manye  yeares,  as  dooth  appere  by  fuch
piefes  as  are  dryuen  to  the  fhore  by  the  wynde.  I  haue  alfo  byn  credebly  informed  by  faythfuU  men  that  the
fea  Baltheum  (otherwyfe  cauled  the  goulfe  of  Liuonia)  is  often  tymes  frofen  in  many  places.  They  fay  further-
more, that  in  that  region  whiche  is  inhabyted  of  the  wylde  Lappones,  the  foonne  in  the  fommer  Equinoctiall
dooth  not  faule  for  the  fpace  of  xl.  [forty]  dayes  :  yet  that  that  the  body  therof  is  fo  hydden  with  a  darke  myfle
or  cloude  three  houres,  that  the  beames  doo  not  appere  :  Neuertheleffe  to  gyue  fuch  lyght  durynge  that  tyms,
that  the  darkeneffe  hyndereth  not  theyr  woorke.  The  Mofcouites  make  theyr  bofle  that  thefe  wylde  Lappones
are  tributaries  to  theyr  prynce.  Wherat  I  do  not  greatly  maruayle,  forafmuch  as  they  haue  none  other  neare
vnto  them,  that  may  demaunde  tribute  of  them.  Theyr  trybute  is  onely  furres  and  fyffhe,  hauynge  in  maner
none  other  thynge  greately  commodious.  And  albeit  they  lacke  breade,  falte,  and  other  intyfements  of  glutteny,
and  lyue  onely  ^vith  fyffhe  and  wylde  beafles,  yet  are  they  exceadyng  prone  to  lechery.  They  are  fuch  expert
archers,  that  if  in  theyr  huntynge  they  efpye  any  beafles  whofe  fkynnes  they  defyre  to  faue  vnperyffhed,  they

XX.  [twenty]
leaques  in  one  day

The  citie  of
Berges  in  Norway

A  shorter  iorney.

Rostow.

Pereaslaw.

Castromow.

Vuolochda.

Suchana.

Dwina.

Hafnia.

Koppenhagen

Liuonia.

Werste,  is  almost
an  Italian  myle.

305

Paulus  louius.

R\-uers  faulyng
into  the  frosen  sea.

Wynde.
Ise.

Ise  of  many
yeares.

The  sea  Baltheum

\\Tiere  the  sim
fauleth  not  in.  xl.
[forty]  days

The  wylde
L,ippones  are
tributaries  to  the
Moscouites

Furres  and  fysshe
Experte  archers

33i

332

Mofcouia  and  Cathay.

Good  felowshyp.

Necessary  warres.

No  vse  of  money.
Theyr  cotages.

Mountaynes

continually

burnyng.

Purgatory.

The  rjtier
Petzora.

306

The  beaste  cauled
Mors.

The  prouidence
of  nature.

The  frosen  sea.

EngTOnland  or
Groneland

wyll  not  lyglitly  myfle  to  hytte  them  in  the  nofethrylles.  When  they  go  furth  on  huntynge,  they  are  accuflomed  to
leaue  at  home  with  theyr  wyues  fuche  marchauntes  or  flraungers  as  they  haue  receaued  into  theyr  houfes.  So  that
if  at  theyr  returne,  they  perceaue  theyr  wyues  throwgh  the  company  of  the  flrangers  to  be  myrier  and  more  iocunde
then  they  were  wonte  to  bee,  they  gyue  the  flraungers  fum  prefcnt.  But  yf  they  fynd  it  otherwyfe,  they  thrufl  them
furth  of  the  doores  with  woordes  of  reproche.  But  nowe  by  the  company  they  haue  with  flraungers  that  reforte
thyther  for  gaynes,  they  begyn  to  leaue  theyr  natiue  barbaroufnefle.  They  gladly  admitte  marchauntes,  bycaufe
they  br}^nge  them  apparel  of  grofe  cloth  :  alfo  hatchettes,  needels,  fpones,  knyues,  drynkynge  cuppes,  earthen
and  brafen  pottes,  with  fuch  other  necefHirie  wares  :  So  that  they  vfe  now  to  eate  fodden  and  rofled  meate,
and  doo  embrafe  more  ciuile  maners.  Theyr  owne  apparel  is  made  of  the  flvynnes  of  dyuers  beafles  fowed
togyther.  And  in  this  apparell  they  fumtymes  comme  to  Mofcouia.  Yet  fewe  of  them  haue  cappes  or  hofen,
which  they  vfe  to  make  of  hartes  fkynnes.  They  haue  not  the  vfe  of  golde  or  fyluer  money :  but  vfe  only
barteryng  of  ware  for  ware.  And  beinge  ignorant  of  other  languages  befyde  theyr  owne,  they  feeme  amonge
flraungers  to  bee  in  maner  domme.  Theyr  cotages  are  couered  onely  with  the  barkes  of  trees.  They  haue  no
certeyne  reflynge  habitacion.  But  when  they  haue  confumed  the  fyffhe  and  wylde  beafles  in  one  place,  they
remoue  to  an  other.  Furthemiore  alfo  the  fayde  ambaffadours  of  the  prince  of  Mofcouia,  declared  that  in  the
fame  partes  they  fawe  certeyne  hygh  mountaynes  contmually  caflynge  furth  flames  of  fyre  as  doth  the  moun-
tayne  of  Etna  in  the  Ilande  of  Sicilia :  and  that  euen  in  Norway,  many  mountaynes  are  faulen  downe  and
burnte  in  maner  to  affiles  with  fuch  continuall  flames.  Which  thynge  fum  confyderyng,  fayne  the  fyre  of  Purga-
torie  to  bee  there.  And  as  concernynge  thefe  mountaynes  of  Norway,  when  I  was  fent  ambaffadour  to
Chriflierne  kynge  of  Denmarke,  I  was  informed  the  lyke  by  the  gouernours  of  Norwaye  who  chaunced  at  that
tyme  to  bee  prefent  there.

Abowt  the  mouthes  of  the  ryuer  Petzora  that  are  toward  the  ryght  hande  from  the  mouthes  of  Dwina,  are
fayd  to  bee  dyuers  and  great  beafles  in  the  Ocean  :  and  amonge  other,  a  certeyne  great  beafl  as  bygge  as  an
oxe,  which  th[e]inhabitauntes  caule  Mors.  This  beafl  hath  fiiorte  feete  lyke  a  beuer  or  an  Otter,  with  a  brefl
fumwhat  hygh  and  brode  for  the  proportion  of  the  refidue  of  his  body  :  and  two  longe  and  greate  teeth  grow-
ynge  owte  of  the  vpper  iawe.  Thefe  beafles  for  refl  and  increafe,  doo  fumtymes  leaue  the  Ocean,  and  by  great
heardes  afcende  the  mountaynes  :  where  before  they  gyue  themfelues  to  profounde  fleepe  (wherunto  they  are
naturally  inclined)  they  appoynt  one  of  theyr  number  as  it  were  a  watcheman  as  doo  cranes  for  the  fecuritie  of
the  refle.  Whiche  if  he  chaunce  to  fleepe,  or  to  bee  flayne  of  the  hunters,  the  refidue  may  eafely  bee  taken.
But  if  the  watchman  gyue  warnynge  with  rorynge  (as  the  maner  is)  immediately  the  hole  hearde  awakened
thereby,  fuddeynly  put  theyr  hynder  feete  to  theyr  teeth :  And  fo  faulynge  from  the  mountayne  with  great
celeritie  as  it  were  on  a  fleade,  they  cafl  them  felues  headlong  into  the  Ocean  :  where  alfo  they  refl  and  fleepe
for  a  whyle  vppon  the  heapes  of  Ife.  The  hunters  purfue  thefe  beafles  only  for  theyr  teethe  :  Of  the  which
the  Mofcouites,  Tartars,  and  efpecially  the  Turkes,  make  haftes  for  fvvoordes  and  dagge[r]s  very  artificially :
And  vfe  thefe  rather  for  ornamente,  then  to  gyue  the  greater  flroke  for  the  weyght  or  heauineffe  thereof  as  fumme
fable.  Alfo  amonge  the  Turkes,  Mofcouites,  and  Tartars,  thefe  teethe  are  foulde  by  weight,  and  are  cauled  the
teethe  of  fyfflies.

The  frofen  fea  reacheth  farre  and  wyde  beyonde  Dwina  to  Petzcora  and  vnto  the  mouthes  of  the  great
riuer  Obi :  beyonde  the  which  they  fay  to  bee  the  region  of  Engroneland,  vnknowen  and  feperate  from  the
trade  and  conuerfation  of  owre  men,  by  reafon  of  hygh  mountaynes  couered  and  coulde  with  perpetuall  fnowe,
and  the  fea  no  leffe  incumbered  with  contynually  Ife  whiche  hyndereth  nauigations  and  maketh  them  daun-
gerous,  as  they  faye.

i3»

333

EXEMPLAR  EPISTOLAE  SEV

LITERARVM MISSIVARVM

QVAS  ILLVSTRISSIMVS  PRINCEPS

Edvvardus  eius  nominis  Sextus,  An-

glise,  Franciae,  et  Hiberniae  Rex,

mifit  ad  Princlpes  Septemtrion-

alem ac Orientalem mundi

plagam  inhabitantes  iuxta

mare  glaciale,  nee  non  In-

diam  Orientalem.  Anno

Domini.  1553. Regni

fui  Anno  feptimo

et  vltimo.

Dvvardus  fextus,  Angliae,  Franciae,  and
Hiberniae  Rex.  etc.  Omnibus,
Regibus  et  Principibus  ac  Dominis,
et  cunftis  ludicibus  terrae,  et  Duci-
bus  eius  quibufcunque  eft  ex-
cellens  aliqua  dignitas  in  ea
cun6lis  in  locis  quae  funt  fub  vniuerfo  coelo :  Pax,
tranquillitas,  et  honor  vobis,  terris,  et  regionibus  veflris
quae  imperio  veflro  fubiacent,  cuique  veflrum  quemad-
modum  conuenit  ei.  Propterea  quod  indidit  Deus
Opt.  Max.  hominibus  pree  cunflis  alijs  viuentibus  cor
et  defiderium  tale,  vt  appetat  quifque  cum  alijs  focie-
tatem  mire,  amare,  et  vicifsim  amari,  beneficijs  atficere,
et  mutua  accipere  beneficia  fludeat,  ideo  cuique  pro
307facultate  fua  hoc  defiderium  in  omnibus  quidem
hominibus  beneficijs  fouere  et  conferuare  conuenit,  in
illis  autem  maxime,  qui  hoc  defiderio  adducti,  a  re-
motis  etiam  regionibus  ad  eos  veniunt.  Quo  enim
longius  iter,  eius  rei  gratia  ingrefsi  fimt,  eo  ardentius
in  eis  hoc  defiderium  fuifle  declararunt.  Infijper  etiam
ad  hoc,  nos  patrum  maiorumque  noflrorum  exempla
inuitant,  qui  femper  humanifsime  fiifceperunt  et  benig-
nilsime  tradlauerunt  illos  qui  turn  a  locis  propinquis
turn  a  remotis,  eos  amice  adibant,  eorum  fe  protedlioni
commendantes.  Quod  fi  omnibus  id  praeflare  aequum
efl,  certe  mercatoribus  imprimis  praeflari  debet,  qui
per  vniuerfum  orbem  difcurrunt,  mare  circurnluRrantes
et  aridam,  vt  res  bonas  et  vtiles  qute  Dei  beneficio  in

THE  COPYOF  THE  LETTERS

MISSIVE WHICH THE RIGHT

NOBLE  PRINCE  EDWARDE  THE.  VI.

fent  to  the  Kynges,  Princes,  and  other

potentates  inhabytynge  the  Northeaft

partes  of  the  worlde  towarde  the

myghtyeEmpire  of  Cathay,  at  fuche

tyme  as  fyr  Hugh  Willobyknyght

and  Rychard Chaunceler  with

theyr  company  attempted  theyr

vyage  thyther  in  the  yeare  of

Chryft.  1553.  and  the.  vii.  and

lafte  yeare  of  his  reigne.

Dwarde  the  fyxte  by  the  grace  of  God,
kynge  of  Englande,  Fraunce,  and
lerlande.  etc.  To  all  Kynges,
Princes,  Rulers,  fudges,  and  gouer-
nours  of  the  earthe,  and  all  other
hauynge  any  excellent  dignitie  on
the  fame  in  all  places  vnder  the
vniuerfall  heauen  :  Peace,  tranqui-
litie,  and  honoure,  bee  vnto  yowe,  and  your  landes
and  regions  which  are  vnder  yowr  dominions,  and  to
euery  of  yowe  as  is  conuenient.

Forafmuche  as  the  greate  and  almyghty  god  hath
gyuen  vnto  mankynd  aboue  al  other  liuing  creatours,
fuch  a  hart  and  defyre,  that  euery  man  defyreth  to
ioyne  frendefhyppe  with  other,  to  loue  and  bee  loued,
alfo  to  gyue  and  receaue  mutuall  benefites,  it  is  ther-
fore  the  dewtie  of  all  men,  accordyng  to  theyr  poure
to  maintayne  and  increafe  this  defyre  in  euery^  man
with  well  deferuynge  to  all  men,  and  efpecially  to
fhewe  this  good  aftection  to  fuch  as  beinge  moued  with
this  defire,  coome  vnto  them  from  farre  countreys.
For  in  howe  much  the  longer  viage  they  haue  attempted
for  this  intent,  fo  much  the  more  doo  they  therby  de-
clare that  this  defyre  hath  byn  ardent  in  them.  Fur-
thermore alfo  th[e]exemples  of  owre  fatliers  rad  predi-
ceffours  doo  inuite  vs  hereunto,  forafmuch  as  they  haue
euer  gentelly  and  louyngly  intreated  fuch  as  of  frendely
mynde  came  to  them  afwel  from  countreis  nere  hand
as  farre  remote,  commendynge  them  felues  to  theyr  [.ro-
tection.  And  if  it  bee  ryght  and  equitie  to  fliewe  fuch
humanitie  toward  all  men,  doubtleffe  the  fame  owght
chiefely  to  bee  fliewed  to  marchauntes,  who  wander-
ynge  abowt  the  worlde,  fearche  both  the  lande  and  fea
to  cary  fuch  good  and  profitable  thinges  as  are  founde
in  theyr  countreys,  to  remote  regions  and  kyngedomes:
and  ageyne  to  brynge  from  the  fame,  fuche  thynges  as

333

334

The  kyugcs  letter.

303

rcgione  eorum  inueniuntur,  ad  remotifsimas  regiones  et
regna  adferant,  atque  inde  viuifsim  referant  quod  fuae
region!  vtile  ibi  repererint :  vt  et  populi  ad  quos  eunt,
non  deftituantur  commodis  qure  non  profert  illis  terra
eorum,  et  ipfi  fint  participes  rerum  quibus  illi  abun-
dant. Nam  Deus  call  et  terrse,  humano  generi  maxi-
me  confulens,  noluit  vt  omnia  in  quauis  regione  inueni-
rentur,  quo  regio  ope  alterius  regionis  indigeret,  et
gens  ab  alia  gente  commodum  aliquod  expe6laret,  ac
ita  flabiliretur  amicitia  inter  omnes,  fmgulique  omni-
bus benefacere  quaererent,  Hoc  itaque  ineundae  ac
flabiliendoe  amicitioe  defiderio  moti  viri  quidam  regni
noflri,  iter  in  remotas  maritimas  regiones  inftituerunt,
vt  inter  noflros  et  illos  populos  viam  mercibus  inferen-
dis  et  eferendis  aperirent :  Nofque  rogauerunt  vt  id
illis  concederemus.  Qui  peticioni  illorum  annuentes,
conceffimus  viro  honorabili  et  forti  Hugoni  Wilibeo  et
alijs  qui  cum  eo  funt  feruis  noflris  fidis  et  charis,  vt
pro  fua  voluntate,  in  regiones  eis  prius  incognitas  eant,
qu?efituri  ea  quibus  nos  caremus,  et  adducant  illis  ex
noflris  terris,  id  quo  illi  carent.  Atque  ita  illis  et  nobis
commodum  inde  accedat,  fitque  amicitia  perpetua  et
foedus  indifsolubile  inter  illos  et  nos,  dum  permittent
illi  nos  accipere  de  rebus  quibus  fuperabundant  in
regnis  fuis,  et  nos  concedemus  illis  ex  regnis  noflris
res,  quibus  deflituuntur.  Rogamus  itaque  vos  Reges
et  Principes  et  omnes  quibus  aliqua  efl  poteflas  in
terra,  vt  viris  iflis  noflris  tranfitum  permittatis  per  regi-
ones veflras.  Non  enim  tangent  quicquam  ex  rebus
veflris  inuitis  vobis.  Cogitate  quod  homines  et  ipfi  funt.
Et  fi  quare  caruerint,  oramus  pro  veflra  beneficentia,
earn  vos  illis  tribuatis,  accipientes  vicifsim  ab  eis  quod
poterunt  rependere  vobis.  Ita  vos  gerite  erga  eos
quemadmodum  cuperetis  vt  nos  et  fubditi  noflri  nos
gereremus  erga  feruos  veflros  fi  quando  tranfierint  per
regiones  noflras.  Atque  promitlimus  vobis  per  Deum
omnium  quse  coelo,  terra  et  marl  continentur,  perque
vitam  noflram  et  tranquillitatem  regnorum  noflrorum,
nos  pari  benignitate  feruos  veflros  accepturos  fi  ad
regna  noflra  aliquando  venerint.  Atque  a  nobis  et
fubditis  noflris,  ac  fi  nati  fuiffent  in  regnis  noflris,  ita
benigne  tractabuntur  vt  rependamus  vobis  benigni-
tatem  quam  noflris  exhibueritis.  PoRquam  vos  Reges,
Principes,  etc.  rogauimus  vt  humanitate  et  benefi-
centia omni  profequamini  feruos  noflros  nobis  charos,
oramus  omnipotentem  Deum  noflrum,  vt  vobis  diu-
turnam  vitam  largiatur,  et  pacem  quae  nullam  habeat
finem.  Scriptum  Londini,  quae  ciuitas  efl.  regni  nofl.ri.
Anno.  5515.  a  creato  mundo,  menfe  liar,  xiiii.  die
menfis,  anno  feptimo  regni  noflri.

they  fjnde  there  commodious  for  tlieyr  own  countreys:
Bothe,  afwell  that  the  people  to  whom  they  go,  may
not  bee  deflitute  of  fuch  commodities  as  theyr  countreys
brynge  not  furth  to  them,  as  that  alfo  they  may  bee
partetakers  of  fuche  thynges  whcrof  they  abounde.
For  god  of  hoauen  and  earth,  greatly  prouydynge  for
mankynde,  wolde  not  that  al  thinges  fliulde  bee  founde
in  one  region,  to  th[e]ende  that  one  fliuld  haue  neede
of  an  other,  that  by  this  meanes  frendfliippe  myght  bee
eflablyffhed  amonge  all  men,  and  euery  one  feeke  to
gratifie  all.  For  th[e]efl.ablyffhynge  and  furtherance  of
which  vniuerfall  amitie,  certeyne  men  of  owre  realme
moued  hereunto  by  the  fayde  defyre,  haue  inflitute  and  309
taken  vppon  theym  a  vyage  by  fea  into  farre  countreys
to  th[e]intent  that  betwene  owre  people  and  them,  a
way  bee  opened  to  brynge  in  and  cary  owt  marchaun-
dies,  defyryng  vs  to  further  theyr  enterpryfe.  Who
affentynge  to  theyr  peticion,  haue  licenced  the  ryght
valiante  and  woorthy  fyr  Hughe  Wylloby  knyght,  and
other  owre  trufly  and  faithful  feruauntes  which  are
with  hym  according  to  theyr  defyre  to  go  to  countreys
to  them  heretofore  vnknowen,  afwell  to  feeke  fuche
thynges  as  we  lacke,  as  alfo  to  cary  vnto  them
from  owre  regions,  fuche  thynges  as  they  lacke.
So  that  hereby  not  only  commoditie  may  enfewe
both  to  them  and  to  vs,  but  alfo  an  indiffoluble
and  perpetuall  league  of  frendfliippe  be  eflab-
lyfflied  betwene  vs  bothe,  whyle  they  permitte  vs
to  take  of  theyr  thynges  fuche  whereof  they  haue
abundaunce  in  theyr  regions,  and  we  ageine  graunt
them  fuche  thynges  of  owrs  wherof  they  are  deflitute.
Wee  therfore  defyre  yow  kynges  and  princes,  and  all
other  to  whom  there  is  any  poure  on  the  earth,  to
permitte  vnto  thefe  owr  feruantes,  free  paffage  by
yowr  regions  and  dominions.  For  they  fhall  not
touche  any  thynge  of  yowres  vnwyllyng  vnto  yow.
Confyder  yow  that  they  alfo  are  men.  If  therfore
they  flial  Rand  in  neede  of  any  thynge,  we  defyre
yowe  of  all  humanitie,  and  for  the  nobilitie  whiche  is
in  yowe,  to  ayde  and  helpe  theym  with  fuch  thynges
as  they  lacke,  receauynge  ageyne  of  them  fuch  thynges
as  they  fhalbe  able  to  gyue  yowe  in  recompenfe.
Shewe  yowre  felues  fo  towarde  theym,  as  yowe  wolde
that  wee  and  owr  fubiectes  fhulde  fhewe  owr  felues
toward  yowr  feruauntes,  if  at  any  tyme  they  fhall  paffe
by  owre  regions.  Thus  doinge,  wee  promeffe  yowe
by  the  God  of  all  thynges  that  are  conteyned  in  heauen,
earth,  and  the  fea,  and  by  the  lyfe  andtranquilitie  of  owre
kyngedomes,  that  we  wyl  with  lyke  humanitie  accepte
yowre  feruauntes  if  at  any  tyme  they  fhal  coomme  to
owre  kyngdomes,  where  they  fhall  as  frendly  and  gen-
telly  bee  interteyned  as  if  they  were  borne  in  owr
dominions,  that  we  may  hereby  recompenfe  the  fauour
and  benignitie  which  yow  haue  fhevved  to  owr  men.
Thus  after  we  haue  defyred  yow  kynges  and  princes,
etc.  With  all  humanitie  and  fauour  to  interteyne  owr
welbeloued  feruantes,  wee  pray  owre  almyghty  god  to
graunt  yowe  longe  lyfe  and  peace  which  neuer  fliall
haue  ende.  Wrytten  in  London  whiche  is  the  chiefe
citie  of  owre  kyngedome :  In  the  yeare  frome  the
creation  of  the  worlde.  5515.  in  the  moneth  of  liar,
the.  xiiii.  day  of  the  moneth,  and  feuenth  yeare  of
owre  reign e.

C  This  letter  ts.<as  7C't'yttc?i  alfo  in  Grccke  and  dyucrs  other  languages.

334

335

[The  Third  English  book  on  America,

Which  is  also

The First English Collection of  Voyages,  Traffics, & Discoveries.

Zixt  lOrcaUe^  of  tite  nrlue  iuorXtre  01*  toc^t  l^xCainy  etc.

section  v.

Other  notable  things  as  touching  the  Indies,

out  o{  the  Writings  and  Maps  of

Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara,

and

Sebastian  Cabot.

'552-1555-]

337

t OTHER NOTABLE THYNGES
AS TOVCHYNGE THE INDIES:

AND FYRST OF THE FOREKNOWLEAGE THAT THE POET SENECA HAD

of  the  fyndynge  this  newe  worlde  and  other  regions  not  then  knowen.

Francisco Lopes.

O  fpeke  of  thynges  that  flialbe,  longe  before  they  are,  is  a  kynde
of  diuination  if  the  truth  thereof  folowe  effectually.  Neuer-
theleffe  althowgh  fuch  thynges  as  are  fpoken  eyther  by  con-
iecture,  or  by  th[e]inflincte  of  nature,  or  by  naturall  reafon,  doo
oftentymes  take  place  and  fuccede  accordyngely,  yet  are  not
fuch  coniectures  to  bee  accoumpted  as  certeyne  as  prophefies
reueled  by  the  fpirite  of  god,  which  wee  ought  entierly  to  be-
leue  :  but  not  fo  the  other  gathered  only  by  certeine  apparences,
fimilitudes,  reafons,  and  demonflrations  :  althowghe  it  bee  greatly
to  bee  maruailed  to  confyder  howe  they  hytte  the  truthe  fum-
tyme  :  which  perhappes  they  doo  accordyng  to  the  prouerbe
that  fayth  :  He  that  fpeaketh  much  fhall  fumtimes  flumble  on
the  truth.  All  this  I  fpeake  confyderynge  the  fayinge  of  the
poet  Seneca  in  his  tragedie  of  Medea,  where  his  woordes
feeme  in  all  poyntes  to  agree  with  the  difcouerynge  of  the  Indies
founde  of  late  by  Chriftofer  Colon  and  the  Spanyardes.  The
woordes  of  Seneca,  are  thefe,

Venient  a?tnis
Sceadaferis,  quibus  Oceanus

Vincula  rerum  laxet,  et  ingens
Pateat  telliis,  Tiphifqiie  nouos
Detegat  orbes,
Nee  fit  terris  vltima  Thyle.

That  is  to  faye  :  There  (hall  coomme  worldes  in  late  yeares,  in  the  whiche  the  Ocean  fhall  vnlofe  the
bondes  of  thynges,  and  a  great  lande  (hall  appeare.  Alfo  Typhis  (that  is  nauigation)  (hall  difcouer  newe
worldes  :  and  Thyle  fhall  not  bee  the  furthefl.  lande.

C  Of  the  great  Ilande  which  Plato  cauled  Atlaiitica  or  Atlaittide.

He  Philofopher  Plato  wrytethe  in  his  Dialoges  of  Timeus  and  Cricia,  that  in  the  owlde  time
there  was  in  the  fea  Atlantike  ouer  agenfl  Affrica,  an  Ilande  cauled  Atlantide  greater  then
Affrica  and  Afia  :  affirmynge  that  thofe  landes  are  from  thenfe  continent  and  greate  :  And
that  the  kynges  of  that  Ilande  gouerned  a  greate  parte  of  Affrica  and  Europe.  But  that  in
a  certeyne  greate  earthequake  and  tempefl  of  rayne,  this  Ilande  foonke  and  the  people  were
drowned  :  Alfo  that  there  remaynedfomuchmudde  of  thedrownynge  or  fynkynge  of  that  Ilande,
that  that  fea  Atlantike  coulde  not  bee  fayled. Sum  take  this  for  a  fable  :  and  many  for  a  trewe

Eden.

2  C

Diuination.

Coniecture.

Propbesie.

So  do  the
Egiptians.

The  wordes  of
Seneca.

Islande  vas  in
owlde  time  cauled
Thyle  as  summe
thinke.

310

Plato  sayth  that

these  kynges  were

the  sonnes  of

Neptunus.

An  earthquake.

337

333

Other  notable  thyuges  as  toncJiyngc  the  Indies.

Marcilius  Ficinus.
Proclus.

Mexico  or  new

Spaine.

Hesperidcs.

Capo  Verde

Ophir.

Tharsis.

Gorgonas.

Solinus.

Lands  found  by  the

Curthaginenses.

Aristotell.

Theophrast

lonas  fledde  to
Tharsis.

The  nauigations
of  Salomon.

Bermeio  is  the
Arabian  sea.

hyflorie,  as  doothe  Marcilius  Ficinus  inducinge  Proclus  alleagynge  certeyne  hyflories  of  the  Ethiopians  wrytten
by  one  Marcellus,  who  confirmeth  the  fame  to  bee  trcwe.  But  there  is  nowe  no  caufe  why  wee  fliulde  any
longer  doubte  or  difpute  of  the  Hand  Atlantide,  forafmuch  as  the  difcouerynge  and  conqueft.  of  the  weft  Indies
do  plainly  declare  what  Plato  hath  wrytten  of  the  fayde  landes.  In  Mexico  alfo  at  this  day  they  caul  that  water
Atl.  by  the  halfe  name  of  Atlant,  as  by  a  woorde  remaynynge  of  the  name  of  the  Ilande  that  is  not.  Wee  may
lykewyfe  fay  that  the  Indies  are  eyther  the  Ilande  and  firme  lande  of  Plato  or  the  remanent  of  the  fame :  and
not  the  Ilandes  of  Hefperides  or  Ophir,  or  Tharfis,  as  funi  haue  thought  of  late  dayes.  For  the  Hefperides,
are  the  Ilandes  of  Cabo  Verde  and  the  Gorgonas  from  whenfe  Hanon  browght  apes :  Albeit  in  conferrynge  it
with  Solinus,  there  is  fum  doubte  by  reafon  of  the  nauigation  of  fortie  dayes  wherof  he  fpeaketh.  Afwell  maye
it  bee,  that  Cuba  or  Hayti,  or  any  other  Ilande  of  the  Indies,  fliulde  bee  thofe  which  the  Carthaginenfes  founde
and  forbodde  theyr  citifens  to  make  any  vyages  thyther  or  to  inhabite  the  fame  as  Ariftotle  and  Theophrafte
doo  rehearfe  where  they  wryte  of  the  marueylous  and  vnknowen  workes  of  nature.  As  concernynge  Ophir  and
Tharfis,  it  is  not  knowen  what  or  where  they  bee,  althowgh  many  lerned  men  as  faynt  Auguftine  and  other
haue  fearched  what  citie  or  lande  Tharfis  myght  bee.  Saynt  lerome  who  was  experte  in  the  Hebrewe  tounge,
fayth  in  many  places  vppon  the  prophetes  that  Tharfis  is  as  much  to  fay  as  the  fea :  and  that  whereas  it  is
wrytten  that  lonas  fledde  to  Tharfis,  he  wente  to  the  fea  by  a  longe  iorney.  Furthermore  as  concernynge  the
nauigations  of  Salomon,  it  is  not  to  bee  thowght  that  his  nauies  fayled  to  the  weft  Indies,  forafmuch  as  to  pafte
thyther,  it  was  requifite  for  them  to  fayle  Weftwarde  departynge  frome  the  fea  of  Bermeio  :  and  not  Eaftward
as  they  fayled.  Ageine,  the  weft  Indies  haue  no  vnicornes,  elephantes,  dianiondes,  and  fuch  other  thynges  as
they  browght  in  the  trade  of  their  nauigations.

C  Of  the  colony  of  the  Indians.

How  colours  dyffer
by  degrees.

The  coloure  of  the
west  Indians.

Dyue[r]s  sortes  of
whyte  and  blacke.

311

*r.  ,e

proce.t .1  the
varietie  of  colours.

Gods  wysedome
and  poure  is  scene
in  his  workes.

Curld  heare  and
baldnes.

Ne  of  the  marueylous  thynges  that  god  vfeth  in  the  compofition  of  man,  is  coloure :  whiche
doubtleffe  can  not  bee  confydered  withowte  great  admiration  in  beholding  one  to  be  white
and  an  other  blacke,  beinge  coloures  vtterlye  contrary.  Sum  lykewyfe  to  be  yelowe  whiche
is  betwene  blacke  and  white  :  and  other  of  other  colours  as  it  were  of  dyuers  liueres.  And
as  thefe  colours  are  to  be  marueyled  at,  euen  fo  is  it  to  be  confidered  howe  they  dyffer  one
from  an  other  as  it  were  by  degrees,  forafmuche  as  fum  men  are  whyte  after  dyuers  fortes  of
whyteneffe  :  yelowe  after  dyuers  maners  of  yelowe  ;  and  blacke  after  dyuers  fortes  of  blacke-
neffe :  and  howe  from  whyte  they  go  to  yelowe  by  difcolourynge  to  browne  and  redde  :  and  to  blacke  by  affhe
colour,  and  murrey  lumwhat  lyghter  then  blacke  :  and  tawnye  lyke  vnto  the  weft  Indians  which  are  all  togyther
in  general  eyther  purple,  or  tawny  lyke  vnto  fodde  quynfes,  or  of  the  colour  of  cheftnuttes  or  olyues :  which
colour  is  to  them  natural  and  not  by  theyr  goynge  naked  as  many  haue  thought :  albeit  theyr  nakedneffe  haue
fumwhat  helped  therunto.  Therfore  in  lyke  maner  and  with  fuche  diuerfitie  as  men  are  commonly  whyte  in
Europe  and  blacke  in  Affrike,  euen  with  like  varietie  are  they  tawny  in  thefe  Indies,  with  dyuers  degrees
diuerfly  inclynynge  more  or  leffe  to  blacke  or  whyte.  No  leffe  maruayle  is  it  to  confyder  that  men  are  whyte
in  Siuile  and  blacke  at  the  cape  of  Buena  Speranza,  and  of  cheftnutte  colour  at  the  ryuer  of  Plata,  beinge  all  in
equall  degrees  frome  the  Equinoctiall  line.  Lykewyfe  that  the  men  of  Affryke  and  Afia  fhat  lyue  vnder  the
burnte  line  (cauled  Zona  Torridd)  are  blacke  :  and  not  they  that  lyue  beneathe  or  on  this  fyde  the  fame  line  as
in  Mexico,  Yucatan,  Quauhtema,  Lian,  Nicaragua,  Panama,  Santo  Domingo,  Paria,  Cape  faynt  Auguftine,
Lima,  Quito,  and  other  landes  of  Peru  which  touch  in  the  fame  Equinoctiall.  For  in  al  the  tracte  of  thefe
coaftes  certeyne  blacke  men  were  found  only  in  Quarequa  when  Vafchus  Nunnez  of  Balboa  difcouered
the  fea  of  Sur.  By  reafon  wherof  it  may  feeme  that  fuche  varietie  of  colours  proceadeth  of  man,  and  not  of  the
earth  :  whiche  maye  well  bee  althowgh  wee  bee  all  borne  of  Adam  and  Eue,  and  knowe  not  the  caufe  why  god
hath  fo  ordeyned  it,  otherwyfe  then  to  confyder  that  his  diuine  maieftie  hath  doonne  this  as  infinite  other  to
declare  his  omnipotencie  and  wifedome  in  fuch  diuerfities  of  colours  as  appere  not  only  in  the  nature  of  man,
but  the  lyke  alfo  in  beaftes,  byrdes,  and  floures,  where  dyuers  and  contrary  colours  are  feene  in  one  lytde  fether,
or  the  leaues  growynge  owt  of  one  lyttle  ftalke.  An  other  thyng  is  alfo  greatly  to  bee  noted  as  touchynge  thefe
Indians.  And  this  is,  that  theyr  heare  is  not  curlde  as  is  the  Moores  and  Ethiopians  that  inhabite  the  fame
clime  :  neyther  are  they  balde  excepte  very  feldome,  and  that  but  lyttle.  All  whiche  thynges  may  giue  further
occafion  to  phylofophers  to  fearch  the  fecreates  of  nature  and  complexions  of  men  with  the  nouelties  of  the  newe
worlde.

338

other  notable  ttiyitges  as  toiichynge  the  Indies.

339

C  Why  they  were  canted  Indians.

JVm  thynke  that  the  people  of  the  newe  world  were  cauled  Indians  bycaufe  they  are  of  the
colour  of  the  Eafle  Indians.  And  althowghe  (as  it  femeth  to  me)  they  dyffer  much  in  colour
and  faffhions,  yet  is  it  trewe  that  of  India  they  were  cauled  Indians.

India  is  properlie  cauled  that  great  prouince  of  Afia  in  the  which  great  Alexander  kepte
his  warres  :  and  was  fo  named  of  the  ryuer  Indus :  and  is  diuyded  into  many  kyngedomes
confynynge  with  the  fame.  From  this  gi-eate  India  (cauled  the  Eafl  India)  came  great  com-
panyes  of  men  as  wryteth  Herodotus  :  and  inhabited  that  parte  of  Ethiopia  that  lyeth  betvvene
the  fea  Bermeia  (othervvyfe  cauled  the  redde  fea  or  the  goulfe  of  Arabia)  and  the  ryuer  of  Nilus  :  al  which
regions  that  great  Chriftian  prince  Prefler  lohn  dooth  now  poffeffe.  The  fayde  Indians  preuayled  fo  much,  that
they  vtterly  changed  the  cuflomes  and  name  of  that  lande,  and  cauled  it  India  :  by  reafon  wherof,  Ethiopia  alfo
hath  of  longe  tyme  byn  cauled  India.  And  hereuppon  came  it  that  Aryflotell,  Seneca,  and  certeyne  other
oulde  autours  fayd  that  India  was  not  farre  from  Spayne.  After  this  alfo,  of  later  dayes  o\\Te  Weft  India  was
fo  cauled  of  the  fayde  India  of  Prefler  lohn  where  the  Portugales  had  theyr  trade.  For  the  pylot  of  the  caruell
that  was  fyrfle  dryuen  by  forcyble  wynde  to  an  vnknowen  lande  in  the  Wefle  Ocean,  cauled  the  fame  India  by-
caufe the  Portugales  fo  cauled  fuch  landes  as  they  had  lately  difcouered  Eaftwarde.  Chryflopher  Colon  alfo
after  the  fayde  pylot,  cauled  the  well  landes  by  the  fame  name.  Albeit,  fum  that  take  Colonus  for  an  expert
Cofmographer,  thynke  that  he  fo  named  them  of  the  Eafl.  India,  as  to  be  the  furthefl.  and  vnknowen  ende  therof
reachynge  into  the  Wefl.e  vnder  the  other  hemifpherie  or  halfe  globe  of  the  earthe  beneathe  vs  :  affirmynge  that
when  he  fyrfl  attempted  to  difcouer  the  Indies,  he  went  chiefely  to  feeke  the  ryche  Hand  of  Cipango,  which
fauleth  on  the  parte  of  great  China  or  Cathay  as  wryteth  Marcus  Paulus  Venetus  and  other :  And  that  he
fhulde  fooner  come  thyther  by  folowyng  the  courfe  of  the  foonne  Wefl.warde  then  ageynfl.  the  fame :  Albeit
manye  thynke  that  there  is  no  fuche  Ilande,  or  at  the  leafl.e  not  yet  knowen  by  that  name:  wheras  alfo  Marcus
Paulus  obferued  no  exacte  defcription  of  the  place  eyther  of  this  Ilande  or  of  Cathay.

The  fyrjle  difcouerynge  of  the  Wejle  Indies.

Certe)Tie  caruell  faylynge  in  the  wefl.e  Ocean  abowt  the  coafl.es  of  Spayne,  had  a  forcyble  and
continuall  wynde  from  the  Eafl.  wherby  it  was  dryuen  to  a  land  vnknowen  and  not  defcr>'bed
in  any  mappe  or  carde  of  the  fea  :  and  was  dryuen  flyl  alonge  by  the  coafl,e  of  the  fame  for
the  fpace  of  many  dayes  vntyll  it  came  to  a  hauen  :  where  in  a  fliorte  tyme  the  mofl.  parte  of
the  maryners  beinge  longe  before  verye  weake  and  feeble  by  reafon  of  hunger  and  trauayle,
dyed  :  So  that  only  the  pylot  with  thre  or  foure  other  remayned  alyut.  And  not  only  they
that  dyed  dyd  not  inioy  the  Indies  which  they  fyrfl.  difcouered  to  theyr  myffortune,  but  the
refydue  alfo  that  lyued  had  in  maner  as  lyttle  fruition  of  the  fame  :  not  leauynge  or  at  the  leafl.  not  openly  pub-
lyfhynge  any  memorie  therof,  neyther  of  the  place,  or  what  it  was  cauled,  or  in  what  yeare  it  was  founde.
Albeit,  the  faute  was  not  theyrs,  but  rather  the  malice  of  other,  or  the  enuie  of  that  which  wee  caule  fortune.  I
doo  not  therefore  marueyle  that  the  auncient  hyfl.ories  affirme  that  great  thynges  proceade  and  increafe  of  fmaul
and  obfcure  begynnynges,  fyth  wee  haue  feene  the  fame  verefyed  in  this  fyndyng  of  the  Indies  being  fo
notable  and  newe  a  thynge.  Wee  neede  not  bee  curious  to  feeke  the  name  of  the  pylot  fyth  death  made
a  fliorte  ende  of  his  doinges.  Sum  wyl  that  he  came  from  Andaluzia,  and  traded  to  the  Hands  of  Canaria  and
the  Ilande  of  Madera  when  this  large  and  mortal  nauigation  chaunced  vnto  hym.  Other  fay  that  he  was  a
Bifcayne,  and  traded  into  Englande  and  Fraunce.  Other  alfo,  that  he  was  a  Portugale  :  and  that  eyther  he
wente  or  came  from  Mina  or  India :  which  agreeth  well  with  the  name  of  thefe  newe  landes  as  I  haue  fayde
before.  Ageyne,  fum  there  bee  that  fay  that  he  browght  the  carauel  to  Portugale  :  or  to  the  Ilande  of  Madera,
or  to  fum  other  of  the  Ilandes  cauled  de  los  Azores.  Yet  doo  none  of  them  affirme  any  thynge,  althowgh  they
all  affirme  that  the  pylotte  dyed  in  the  houfe  of  Chryflopher  Colon,  with  whome  remayned  al  fiich  wr}-tynges
and  annctacions  as  he  hadde  made  of  his  vyage  in  the  fayde  carauell,  afwell  of  fuch  thynges  as  he  obferued  both
by  lande  and  fea,  as  alfo  of  the  eleuation  of  the  pole  in  thofe  landes  whiche  he  had  difcouered.

3-9

TTie  colour  of  the
East  Indiana

East  India.

Prester  lohn  came
owt  of  India  to
Ethiope.

Ethiopia  cauled
Indu.

India  not  far
from  Spayne

Prester  lohn

knowen  to  the
Portugales.

At  the  furthest
Easte,  begynneth
the  west.

The  Hand  ot
Cipango.
China.
Cathay.

To  the  East  by
the  wesL

Marcus  Paulus
Veuetus.

A  harde
begj'nnyng.

312

Great  thinges
proce.idyng  of
smaule  and
obscure
begynnynges.

The  pylofe  that
fyrst  tounde  the
Indies.

Mina.

340

Other  notable  tJiyuges  as  toiicJiyuge  fJie  Indies,

C  IVhat  maner  of  man  Chryjlophcr  Colon  was : and  Jiowe  he  Came

fyyft  to  the  knowleage  of  the  Indies.

Thus  also  began

Rychard

chaunceler.

Colon  was  not
much  lerned.

The  Ilande
Atlantide.
The  lande
found  by  the
Carthaginenses.

313

Colon  conferred
with  lerned  men.

Chaunce  and  arta

A  Christian
opinion.

The  camel
compared  to  the
ship  of  Noye.

Hridopher  Colon  was  borne  in  Cugureo,  or  (as  fum  fay)  in  Nerui,  a  vyllage  in  the  territorie  of
Genua  in  Italie.  He  defcended  as  fum  thynke,  of  the  houfe  of  the  Peleflreles  of  Placentia
in  Lumbardie.  He  beganne  of  a  chylde  to  bee  a  maryner  :  of  whofe  arte  they  haue  great
exercife  on  the  rj-uer  of  Genua.  He  traded  many  yeares  into  Suria  and  other  partes  of  the
Eaft.  After  this,  he  became  a  maRer  in  makynge  cardes  for  the  fea,  whereby  he  had  great
vantage.  He  came  to  Portugale  to  knowe  the  reafon  and  defcription  of  the  foudi  coafles  of
Affrica  and  the  nauigations  of  the  Portugales,  thereby  to  make  his  cardes  more  perfecte  to  bee
folde.  He  maryed  in  Portugale  as  fum  fay :  or  as  many  fay,  in  the  Ilande  of  Madera,  where  he  dwelt  at  fuche
tyme  as  the  fayde  caruell  arryued  there,  whofe  pylot  fuiorned  in  his  houfe,  and  dyed  alfo  there,  bequethynge
to  Colon  his  carde  of  the  defcription  of  fuche  newe  landes  as  he  hadde  founde,  wherby  Colon  had  the  fyrfl
knowleage  of  the  Indyes.  Sum  haue  thowght  that  Colon  was  well  lerned  in  the  Latine  tounge  and  the  fcience
of  Cofmographie  :  and  that  he  was  therby  fyrfl  moued  to  feeke  the  landes  of  the  Antipodes  and  the  ryche  Ilande
of  Cipango  whereof  Marcus  Paulus  wryteth.  Alfo  that  he  had  redde  what  Plato  in  his  dialoges  of  Timeus  and
Cricias,  wryteth  of  the  greate  Ilande  Atlantide,  and  of  a  great  lande  in  the  Weft  Ocean  vndifcouered  beinge
bygger  then  Afia  and  Affrica.  Furthermore  that  he  had  knowleage  what  Ariftotell  and  Theophraftus  faye  in
theyr  bookes  of  maruayles,  where  they  wryte  that  certeyne  marchauntes  of  Carthage  faylyng  from  the  ftreyghtes
of  Gibraltar  towarde  the  weft  and  fouth,  founde  after  many  dayes  a  greate  Ilande  not  inhabited  :  yet  replen-
yfhed  with  al  thynges  requifite,  and  hauynge  many  nauigable  ryuers.  In  deede  Colon  was  not  greately  lerned :
yet  of  good  vnderftandynge.  And  when  he  had  knowleage  of  the  fayde  newe  landes  by  the  information
of  the  dead  pylot,  made  relation  thereof  to  certeyne  lerned  men  with  whom  he  conferred  as  touchynge  the
lyke  thynges  mentioned  of  owlde  autours.  He  communicated  this  fecreate  and  conferred  chiefely  with  a
fryer,  named  lohn  Perez  of  Marchena  that  dwelt  in  the  monaftery  of  Rabida.  So  that  I  verely  beleue,  that  in
maner  all  that  he  declared,  and  many  thynges  more  that  he  lefte  vnfpoken,  were  wrytten  by  the  fayde  Simnyftie
pylot  that  dyed  in  his  houfe.  For  I  am  perfuaded,  that  if  Colon  by  fcience  atteyned  to  the  knowleage  of  the
Indies,  he  wolde  longe  before  haue  communicate  this  fecreate  to  his  owne  contrey  men  the  Genuefes,  that
trauayle  all  the  worlde  for  gaynes,  and  not  haue  comme  into  Spayne  for  this  purpofe.  But  doubteleffe  he
neuer  thought  of  any  fuch  thyng  before  he  chaunced  to  bee  acquainted  with  the  fayd  pylot  who  founde  thofe
landes  by  fortune,  accord)Tige  to  the  fayinge  of  Plinie :  Quod  ars  docere  non  potidt,  cafus  inuenit.  That  is :
That  arte  coulde  not  teache,  chaunce  founde.  Albeit,  the  more  Chryftian  opinion  is,  to  thinke  that  god  of  his
fifiguler  prouidence  and  infinite  goodneffe,  at  the  length  with  eyes  ofcompaffion  as  it  were  lookynge  downe
from  heauen  vpon  the  fonnes  of  Adam  fo  longe  kepte  vnder  Sathans  captiuitie,  intended  euen  then  (for  caufes
to  hym  only  knowen)  to  rayfe  thofe  wyndes  of  mercy  whereby  that  caruell  (herein  moft  lyke  vnto  the  fhyppe  of
Noe  whereby  the  remanent  of  the  hole  world  was  faued  as  by  this  camel  this  newe  worlde  receaued  the  fyrft
hope  of  theyr  faluation)  was  dryuen  to  thefe  landes.  But  wee  wyll  nowe  declare  what  great  thynges  folowed  of
this  fmaule  begynnynge,  and  how  Colon  folowed  this  matter  reueled  vnto  hym  not  withowte  goddes  prouidence.

C  What  labour  and  trauayle  Colon  tooke  in  attemptyjtg  hisfyrst  vyage

to  the  Indies.

The  kynge  of
Portugale.
The  kyng  of
Castile.

Kynge  Henry
th;  seuenth.

jjFter  the  death  of  the  pilot  and  mariners  of  the  Spanyfhe  caruell  that  difcouered  the  Indies,
Chryftopher  Colon  puipofed  to  feke  the  fame.  But  in  howe  muche  more  he  defyred  this,
the  leffe  was  his  poure  to  accompliftie  his  aefire.  For,  befyde  that  of  him  felfe  he  was  not
able  to  furnyfflie  one  fliyppe,  he  lacked  alfo  the  fauour  of  a  kynge  vnder  whofe  protection
he  might  fo  enioy  the  riches  he  hoped  to  fynde,  that  none  other  myght  take  the  fame  from
hym  or  defeate  hym  therof.  And  feinge  the  kynge  of  Portugale  occupied  in  the  conqueft
of  Africa  and  the  nauigations  of  the  Eaft  which  were  then  fyrft  attempted,  the  kynge  of
Caftyle  lykewyfe  no  leffe  bufyed  in  the  warres  of  Granada,  he  fent  to  his  brother  Bartholomewe  Colon  (who
was  alfo  priuie  to  this  fecreate)  to  practife  with  the  kynge  of  Englande  Henry  the  feuenth  bein<;e  very  ryche

340

other  notable  thynges  as  touchynge  the  Indies.

341

and  withowt  warres :  promyfynge  to  brynge  hym  great  ryches  in  fliort  time  if  he  wolde  fhew  him  fauour  and
furnyffhe  hym  with  fliippes  to  difcouer  the  newe  Indies  wherof  he  had  certeyne  knowleage.  But  neyther  here
beinge  able  to  brynge  his  fute  to  paffe,  he  caufed  the  matter  to  bee  moued  to  the  kynge  of  Portugale  Don
Alonfo  the  fyfte  of  that  name :  at  whofe  handes  he  founde  neither  fauour  nor  money,  forafmuch  as  the  Hcen-
ciate  Calzadilla  the  byfliop  of  Vifeo,  and  one  mafler  Rodrigo  men  of  credit  in  the  fcience  of  Cofmographie,
withfloode  him  and  contended  that  there  neither  was  nor  coulde  any  golde  or  other  ryches  bee  founde  in  the
weft  as  Colon  affirmed.  By  reafon  whereof  he  was  very  fadde  and  penfiue :  but  yet  was  not  difcouraged  or
defpaired  of  the  hope  of  his  good  aduenture  which  he  after^vard  found  This  done,  he  tooke  fhippinge  at
Lifbunie,  and  came  to  Palos  of  Moguer  where  he  communed  with  Martin  Alonfo  Pinzon  an  expert  pylot,  who
offered  hym  felfe  vnto  hym.  After  this  difclofynge  the  hole  fecreates  of  his  mynde  to  lohn  Perez  of  Marchena
(a  fryer  of  th[e]order  of  faynt  Frances  in  Rabida,  and  wel  lemed  in  Cofmographie)  and  declar^-ng  vnto  hym
how  by  folowyng  the  courfe  of  the  fon  by  a  temperate  vyage,  rich  and  great  landes  myght  be  founde,  the  fryer
greatly  commended  his  enterpryfe,  and  gaue  him  counfayle  to  breake  the  matter  to  the  duke  of  Medina  Sidonia
Don  Eurique  of  Guzman  a  great  lorde  and  very  ryche :  And  alfo  to  Don  Luys  of  Cerda  the  duke  of  Medina
Celi,  who  at  that  tyme  had  great  prouifion  of  fhippes  well  furnyfhed  in  his  hauen  of  Santa  Maria.  But  wheras
both  thefe  dukes  tooke  the  matter  for  a  dreame  and  as  a  thynge  diuifed  of  an  Italian  deceauer  who  (as  they
thought)  had  before  with  lyke  pretence  deluded  the  kynges  of  Englande  and  Portugale,  the  fryer  gaue  hym
courage  to  go  to  the  courte  of  the  Catholyke  princes  Don  Ferdinando  and  lady  Ifabell  princes  of  Caftile  :
affirmynge  that  they  wolde  bee  ioyfuU  of  fuch  newes.  And  for  his  better  furtherance  herin,  wrote  letters  by
hym  to  fryer  Ferdinando  of  Talauera  the  queenes  confeffor.  Chryftopher  Colon  therfore,  repayred  to  the
court  of  the  Catholike  princes,  in  the  yeare.  M.  CCCC.  Ixxxvi.  [i486  a.d.]  and  delyuered  vnto  theyr  handes  the
peticion  of  his  requeft  as  concerninge  the  difcouerynge  of  the  newe  Indies.  But  they  beinge  more  carefull,
and  applyinge  all  theyr  mynde  howe  they  myght  dryue  the  Moores  owt  of  the  kyngdome  of  Granade,  which
great  enterpryfe  they  had  alredy  taken  in  hande,  dyd  lyttle  or  nothynge  efteme  the  matter.  But  Colon  not
thus  difcouraged,  found  the  meanes  to  declare  his  fute  to  fuch  as  had  fumtymes  priuate  communication  with
the  kynge.  Yet  bicaufe  he  was  a  ftranger  and  went  but  in  fnnple  apparell,  nor  otherwyfe  credited  then  by  the
letter  of  a  gray  fryer,  they  beleued  hym  not,  neyther  gaue  eare  to  his  woordes :  wherby  he  was  greatly  tor-
mented in  his  imagination.  Only  Alonfo  of  Quintanilia  the  kynges  chiefe  auditour  gaue  hym  meate  and
drynke  at  his  owne  charges,  and  hard  gladly  fuch  thynges  as  he  declared  of  the  landes  not  then  founde:
defyrynge  hym  in  the  meane  tyme  to  bee  contente  with  that  poore  enterteynemente,  and  not  to  defpayre  of  his
enterpryfe :  puttynge  hym  alfo  in  good  conforte  that  he  fhulde  at  one  tyme  or  other,  coome  to  the  fpeache  of
the  Catholyke  princes.  And  thus  fhortly  after  by  the  meanes  of  Alonfo  of  Quintanilia,  Colon  was  browght  to
the  prefence  and  audience  of  the  Cardinall  Don  Pero  Gonzales  of  Mendoza,  archbyffhop  of  Toledo,  a  man  of
great  reuenues  and  autoritie  with  the  kynge  and  queene,  who  brought  hym  before  them  after  that  he  well  per-
ceaued  and  examyned  his  intent.  And  by  this  meanes  was  his  fute  harde  of  the  Catholyke  princes,  who  alfo
redde  the  booke  of  his  memorials  which  he  prefented  vnto  them.  And  although  at  the  fyrft  they  tooke  it  for
vayne  and  falfe  that  he  promyfed,  neuertheleffe  they  put  hym  in  good  hope  that  he  fhulde  bee  well  difpatched
when  they  had  fynyfhed  the  warres  of  Granada  which  they  had  now  in  hand.  With  which  anfwere.  Colon
beganne  to  reuyue  his  fpirites,  with  hope  to  bee  better  eftemed  and  more  fauourably  to  bee  h[e]ard  amonge  the
gentelmen  and  noble  men  of  the  court,  who  before  tooke  hym  only  for  a  craftie  felowe  and  deceauer:  and  was
nothynge  difmayde  or  difcouraged  when  fo  euer  he  debated  the  matter  with  them,  althovvghe  many  iudged  hym
phantafticall,  as  is  the  maner  of  ignorant  menne  to  caule  all  fuch  as  attempte  any  thynge  beyonde  theyr  reach
and  the  compafle  of  theyr  knowleage :  thinkyng  the  worlde  to  bee  no  bigger  then  the  cagies  wherin  they  are
brought  vp  and  lyue.  But  to  returne  to  Colon  :  So  hotte  and  vrgente  was  the  fiege  of  Granada,  that  they
prefentely  graunted  hym  his  demaunde  to  feeke  the  newe  landes,  and  to  brynge  from  thenfe  golde,  fyluer,
perles,  precious  Rones,  fpices,  and  fuche  other  rych  thynges.  They  gaue  hym  alfo  the  tenth  parte  of  all  the
reuenues  and  cuftomes  dewe  vnto  the  kynge  of  al  fuch  landes  as  he  fliulde  difcouer,  not  doynge  preiudice
in  any  thynge  to  the  kynge  of  Portugale.  The  particulars  of  this  agrement  were  made  in  the  tomie  cauled
Sancta  Fe  :  and  the  priuilege  of  the  rewarde,  in  Granada  the.  xxx.  [thirtieth]  daye  of  Aprell  the  fame  yeare
that  the  citie  was  woonne.  And  wheras  the  fayde  Catholyke  princes  had  not  mony  prefently  to  difpatch
Colon,  Luys  of  S.  Angell  the  kynges  fecretary  of  accomptes,  lente  theym  fyxe  quentes  of  marauedes,  whlche
in  a  groffe  fumme  make.  xvi.  [sixteen]  thoufande  ducades.  Two  thynges  are  herein  chiefely  to  be  noted :
wherof  the  one  is,  that  for  fo  fmaule  charges  they  haue  increafed  the  reuenues  of  the  crowne  of  Caftyle  as  much
as  the  Indies  are  in  value.  The  other  is,  that  endynge  the  conqueft  of  the  Moores  who  poflelfed  the
kyngedome  of  Granada  eyght  hundreth  yeares,  they  immediatly  beganne  the  conqueft  of  the  Indies,  as  though
the  nation  of  the  Spanyardes  were  euer  appoynted  to  feyght  ageynft  infidels  and  enemies  of  the  iayth  of  lefu
Chryft.

Bamarde  Icnewe
not  all  thynges.

The  duke  of
Medina  Sidonia.

The  duke  of
Medina  Celi.

314

The  conquest
of  Granada.

What  men  IcTiowe

not  they  count
fantasticalL

Colon  his
interteicmente.

The  archbysshop
of  Toledo.
Colon  is  brought
to  the  kynges
presence

TTie  iudgement  of
ignorant  folkes.

Colon  is
dispatched.

Colon  his  rewarde

One  qnent  is.  x
[ten]  hundreth
thousande.

2 C 2

14«

342

Other  notable  tliyiiges  as  toucJiyuge  the  Indies.

315

The  citie  of
Mexico  or
Temix  titan.

Golde  and  syluer.

Sylke.

Cotton.

Alam.

Woade.

Sugar.

Shelles  for  money.

Come.

Beastes.

Haukyng  and
huntyiige.

Paintynge.

Women

sumptuously

appareled.

A  warlike  nation

Captiues  sacrificed
to  Idoles.

By  this  tramyle  of  Colomis  in  fo  noble  an  cntcrpryfe  and  fo  liaixle  fucccffe,  dooth  the  f;\yinge  of  Plinie  nppere  to  be  mofl  trew,
whcr  in  the  preface  of  his  natural  hyflory  wrytten  to  th[e]emprour  Vcfpafian  he  writcth  in  this  maner.  Kcs  ardua  vetujlis  noui-
tatcin  dare;  Nouis,  aulcltoritatern:  alyfolctis,  niiorem  ;  ohfcuris,  lucem:  fajliditis,  §ratiam:  dubiis,  fidem:  omnibus  vero  natttram,  et
luxiara  fua  omnia.  Ilaqiie  etiam  non  afflruHs,  voluiffe  abunde ptilchrum  atcpie  magnijicnm  ejl.  That  is  to  fay  :  It  is  a  dyflicidte  thynge
to  g:)'ue  newenes  to  owlde  thyngcs,  autoritie  to  newe  thynges  :  bewtie  to  thynges  ovvt  of  vfe  :  fame  to  the  obfcurc :  fauoure  to  the
hatefull :  credite  to  the  doubtefull :  nature  to  all,  and  all  to  nature.  To  fuch  neuerthelcfle  as  can  not  attayne  to  all  thefc,  it  is
greately  commendable  and  magnificall  to  haue  attempted  the  fame.

In  the  fcu[t]chen  of  amies  gyuen  to  Colon  by  Don  Ferdinando  and  queene  Elizabeth  Catholike  princes  (fo
cauled  for  theyr  wanes  ageynfl.  the  infidels)  thefe  verfes  were  wrytten.

For  Cajlilla  y  por  Leon,
Nueuo  miindo  hallo  Colon.

That  is :  For  Caflile  and  for  Leon,

The  newe  worlde  founde  Colon.

C  Of  newe  Spayne  c aided  Nona  Hifpania,  or  Mexico.

Ewe  Spayne  is  that  parte  of  the  continent  or  firme  lande  that  lyeth  Wefl.  and  South  frome  the
lande  of  Floryda.  This  was  fubdued  to  th[e]empire  of  Caflile  by  the  ryght  noble  gentel-
man  Ferdinando  Cortefe  the  marqueffe  of  the  vale  of  Quaxaca.  In  this  lande  are  many
prouinces  conteynyng  in  them  in  maner  innumerable  cities,  amonge  which  that  is  the  chiefe
A\hich  the  Indians  caule  Mexico  or  Temixtitan,  confyflyng  of  more  then  fiue  hundreth
thoufand  inhabitauntes.  It  flandeth  in  the  myddefl  of  a  lake  of  falte  water  as  doth  Venece
in  the  fea.  The  lake  conteyneth  fortie  Perfian  myles  cauled  Parafange,  euery  one  confyflynge
of  XXX.  [thirty]  furlon[g]s,  and  more  as  fum  fay.  In  thefe  regions  is  founde  great  plentie  of  golde,  fyluer,  and
precious  flones,  with  innumerable  other  thynges  both  neceffary  for  the  lyfe  of  man  and  pleafaunt:  as  fylke,
bombafine  cotton,  alame,  Safiferne,  Woade,  with  dyuers  other  thynges  wherwith  clothe  and  fylke  is  dyed.
There  is  alfo  fuch  abundaunce  of  fuger,  that  certeyne  SpanyfOie  fliippes  are  yearely  fraighted  therwith  and
brynge  the  fame  into  Siuile  from  whenfe  it  is  caryed'  in  maner  to  all  partes  of  Chryflendome.  Th[e]inhabi-
tauntes  of  Mexico  are  fubtyle  people,  and  vfe  much  craft  in  theyr  bargening.  They  haue  not  the  vfe  of  golde
and  fyluer  monye  :  but  vfe  in  the  fleade  therof  the  halfe  flielles  of  almonds,  whiche  kynde  of  Barbarous  money
they  caule  Cacao  or  Cacanguate.  In  maner  al  kyndes  of  corne  are  there  very  good  [and]  cheape :  efpecially  barly
and  wheate.  They  haue  great  plentie  of  hartes,  wylde  bores,  Lyons,  Leopardes,  and  Tygers,  which  beafles
wander  in  maner  in  euery  place.  The  region  is  mofle  commodious  for  haukynge  and  huntynge  for  the  great
abundaunce  it  hath  of  beafles  and  foules.  But  the  people  exercife  all  theyr  cunnynge  in  makynge  the  images
of  theyr  Idolatry,  and  in  paintyng.  The)'r  woman  are  valiant :  and  fumptuous  in  theyr  apparell  and  other
tyrementes.  For  they  fo  rychely  frynge  and  byfet  the  fame  with  perles,  precious  flones,  and  golde,  that
nothynge  can  be  more  excellent.  They  haue  a  kynde  of  paper  greatly  difteryng  from  owrs.  In  this  they
expreffe  theyr  mindes  by  certeyn  figures.  For  they  haue  not  otherwife  th[e]ufe  of  letters.  The  nation  is
defyrous  of  warre :  and  dooth  not  longe  keepe  the  condicions  of  peace  vnuiolated :  But  delyteth  rather  in  ciuile
and  mofl  cruell  battayle  amonge  them  felues  then  to  lyue  in  peace  and  quietneffe.  Suche  as  in  the  warres
faule  by  any  meanes  into  the  handes  of  theyr  enemies,  eyther  by  fubmiffion  or  otherwyfe,  are  partely  facrificed
to  the  Idoles,  and  the  refydue  gyuen  to  the  fouldiers  to  bee  eaten,  in  lyke  maner  as  wee  rewarde  dogges  and
haukes  with  parte  of  theyr  pray.  They  haue  innumerable  Idoles  which  euery  one  maketh  for  his  particular  god
after  the  phantafie  of  his  own  brayne,  and  gyueth  therto  diuine  honour.  Albeit  at  this  day  they  doo  by  lyttle
and  lyttle  leaue  of  theyr  barbarous  fierceneffe:  and  with  owre  religion  embrafe  better  maners.  For  they
nowe  profeffe  the  fayth  of  Chryft,  and  in  his  name  pray  vnto  God  the  father.

Vnderflande  here  that  as  touchynge  thefe  regions  cauled  new  Spayne,  yow  may  reade  at  large  in  the  booke  here  before  entiteled
of  the  landes  and  Ilandes  lately  founde.  This  booke  foloweth  immediatly  after  the  Decades,  althowgh  the  printer  haue  alfo  wrytten
the  thyrde  decade*  ouer  the  head  of  that  booke  which  intreateth  principally  of  the  regions  nowe  cauled  newe  Spayne.  Of  the
conquefl  of  this  Mexico,  Fiancifco  Lopez  hath  written  a  large  booke  in  the  Spanyfflie  tounge.

•Seep.  1S7.— E.  A.

34»

other  notable  thynges  as  touchy nge  the  Indies.

343

C  Of  Peru.

He  prouince  cauled  Peni,  was  alfo  named  noua  CaO-ilia  by  them  that  fyrRe  founde  it.  This
region  is  the  well  parte  of  America:  and  is  fituate  in  the  longitude  of.  290.  degrees,  pro-
ceadynge  from  the  Weft  to  the  Eaft.  And  fouthvvarde  begynneth  fine  degrees  beyonde  the
Equinoctial  line,  and  is  extended  very  farre  into  the  fouth.  This  is  taken  to  bee  the
rycheft  lande  in  golde,  fyluer,  perles,  precious  ftones,  and  fpyces,  that  euer  was  founde  yet
to  this  day.  For  golde  is  there  in  fuch  plentie  that  they  make  pyfpots  therof,  and  other
veffels  applyed  to  fylthy  vfes.  But  this  is  more  to  bee  marueyled  at,  that  in  a  citie  cauled
Collao  was  founde  a  houfe  all  couered  with  maffie  plates  of  golde.  In  theyr  warres  alfo  theyr  harneffe  was  of
golde  and  fyluer.  Theyr  weapons  are  bowes,  arrowes,  flynges,  dartes,  and  pikes.  Th[e]inhabitantes  are
warlyke  people  and  of  great  agilitie.  They  haue  cities  defended  with  lawes  and  armes.  The  region  is
exceadyng  frutefull,  and  yeldeth  come  twyfe  in  the  yeare.  It  is  fo  floryffhynge  with  many  fa}Te  wooddes,
mountaynes,  ryuers,  and  other  both  pleafaunt  and  neceffary  commodities,  that  it  feemeth  in  maner  an  earthly
Paradyfe.  It  hath  dyuers  kyndes  of  beaftes,  and  yet  none  hurtfull  or  of  rauenynge  kynde.  There  are  fheepe
of  fuch  heyght  that  they  vfe  them  in  the  fteade  of  horfes.  Sume  write  that  they  are  as  bygge  as  the  younge
foles  of  camels :  and  that  theyr  woolle  is  very  fofte  and  fine.  Alfo  that  the  ewes  brynge  furth  lambes  twyfe  a
yeare.  The  people  are  wytty  and  of  gentyl  behauoure.  Cunnynge  alfo  in  artes,  faythful  of  promes,  and  of
maners  not  greatly  to  bee  difcommended,  faue  that  they  are  ignorant  of  Chryft:  who  neuerlheleffe  is  nowe
knowen  vnto  them  in  many  places,  as  our  hope  is  he  fhalbe  dayly  more  and  more  if  all  princes  wyll  herein
putte  theyr  helpynge  handes  to  the  plowe  of  owre  lorde,  and  fende  labourers  into  his  vyneyarde.

tl  Of  the  great  ryner  cauled  Rio  de  la  Plata  (that  is)  the  ryiter  of  fyluer.

His  ryuer  reacheth  very  farre  in  length  and  bredth :  and  is  cauled  Vruai  in  the  Indian  tounge.
Into  this  fauleth  an  other  ryuer  named  Paraue.  I'he  fyrfte  that  fayled  into  the  rj'uer  of
Plata,  was  lohn  Dias  Solis,  whom  the  ryght  noble  kynge  of  Spayne  Ferdinandus  made
Admyral  of  thefe  feas.  In  the  ryuer  lyeth  an  Ilande  whiche  lohn  Dias  named  Martinus
Gratias  bycaufe  a  pylot  of  his  fo  cauled,  was  buryed  there.  This  Ilande  is  fituate  in  the
myddeft  of  the  ryuer:  and  is  dyftant  from  the  mouth  of  the  fame  abowt  fortie  leaques.  As
the  fayde  Admirall  attempted  to  expugne  the  Hand,  he  was  fuddeynly  oppreffed  and  flayne
of  the  Indians  that  priuilie  affayled  hym.  Wherwith  neuertheleffe  theyr  barbarous  crueltie  was  not  fatiffyed
vntyll  they  had  torne  him  in  piefes  and  deuoured  hym.  But  many  yeares  after,  Th[e]emperoures  maieftie  and
kynge  of  Spayne  Charles  the  fyfte,  fente  foorth  Sebaftian  Cabot  (a  man  of  great  courage  and  fkylfuU  in  Cofmo-
graphie,  and  of  no  leffe  experience  as  concernynge  the  ftarres  and  the  fea)  with  commaundement  to  difcouer
and  fubdue  the  Ilandes  of  Tharfis,  Ophir,  Cipango,  and  Coi  Cathay.  Receauynge  therfore  his  commiflion  and
proceadynge  forwarde  on  his  vyage,  he  arryued  by  chaunce  at  this  Ilande:  The  caufc  wherof  was  that  the
principall  veffell  was  loft  by  fliipwracke,  and  the  men  that  faued  theyr  lyues  by  fwymmynge  were  receaued  into
other  fliyppes.  Perceauynge  therfore  that  by  reafon  of  this  chaunce  he  could  by  no  meanes  performe  his
vyage  attempted,  he  intended  to  expugne  the  fayde  Ilande,  and  thervppon  to  conueygh  his  vyttayles  to  land,
to  prepare  his  foldiers  to  th[e]inuafion,  to  plant  colonyes,  and  to  erect  fortreffes  by  the  ryuers  fyde  wherby  the
Spanyardes  myght  bee  defended  from  the  violence  of  the  barbarians.  But  before  he  attempted  this,  he  was
aduertifed  that  the  Ilande  was  riche  in  golde  and  fyluer.  Which  thynge  dyd  fo  encorage  him,  that  withowt
refpect  of  perel  he  thought  beft  to  expugne  it  by  one  meanes  or  other,  wherein  his  bouldenes  tooke  good
effecte  as  often  tymes  chaunceth  in  great  affayres.  Furthermore  as  touchynge  the  ryuer,  Sebaftian  Cabote
made  relation  that  he  neuer  fawe  any  comparable  vnto  this  in  bredth  and  depth.  For  whereas  it  fauleth  into
the  fea,  it  conteyneth.  xxv.  [twenty-five]  leaques  in  breadth.  From  the  mouth  of  the  ryuer,  Cabot  fayled  \p
the  fame  into  the  lande  for  the  fpace  of  three  hundreth  and  fiftie  leaques  as  he  wryteth  in  his  owne  carde.
That  it  is  of  great  depth,  may  hereby  bee  confydered  that  manye  greate  ryuers  faule  into  it :  fo  that  the
chanell  can  not  bee  flialowe  that  conteyneth  fuch  abundance  of  water,  and  fuche  plentie  of  good  and  great
fyffhes.  For  there  is  in  maner  no  fyfflie  in  the  fea,  that  is  not  founde  in  this  ryuer.  As  foone  as  the  Span-
yards  were  fet  alande,  they  made  a  proofe  if  the  foyle  were  frutfull  to  beare  corne.  Takynge  therefore  fiftie
graynes  of  wheate  and  commyttynge  the  fame  to  the  earth  in  the  moneth  of  September,  they'  gathered  tlierof

343

316

Peru  is  the
rychest  lande
that  is  knowen.

A  house  couered
with  gold.
Hames  of  golde.
A  frutful  region.

Great  sheepe.

The  dewtie  of
Chrystian  princei

Paraue.

lohn  Dias  Solis.

The  Ilande
Martinus  Gratias.

The  viage  of
Sebastian  Cabote
to  the  ryuer  of
Plata.

Tharsis.
Ophir.
CipangOk
Cathay.

The  ryuer  of  Plata.

317

344

Other  notable  tJiyiiges  as  touehyuge  the  Indies.

Manielous
frutfulnes.

Mountaynes
conteynynge  golde
and  syluer.

Great  sheepc

Theyr  colour.

Men  with
deformed  legs.

Malacha.

Tachola.

The  Ilandes  of
Malucha.

The  Hand  of
Samotra.

Spyces.

CalocuL
Ceilam.
Cathay.
China.

Precious  stones.
Sylke.

Cautan.

The  way  to  the

Ilandes  of  Maluca
by  the  north  sea.

The  Spanyardes.

Gasper
Cortesreales.

318

Insula
Cortesreales.

Snowe  and  Ise.

Furres.

two  thoufande  and  fiftie  at  December  nexte  folowynge:  wherin  fume  beinge  deceaued  and  miflakynge  the
thynge,  haue  wrytten  in  the  (leade  of  twoo  thoufande  and  fiftie,  fyftie  thoufonde  and  two.  The  Hkc  fertihtie  is
there  of  all  other  grayne  and  pulfe.  Furthermore  th[e]inhabitauntes  declared  that  not  farre  from  that  place,
ther  are  great  and  hygh  mountaynes  in  the  which  is  founde  great  plentie  of  golde.  And  no  great  diflance
from  the  fame,  to  bee  other  mountaynes  no  leffe  frutefuU  of  fyluer,  and  many  other  thynges  longe  to  rehearfe.
Th[e]inhabitauntes  are  paynefuU  men,  and  tyll  the  grounde  diligently,  wherin  they  take  great  pleafure :  and
haue  therfore  great  plentie  of  breade  of  Maizium.  There  are  flieepe  of  fuche  byggeneffe  that  they  comjjare
them  to  younge  camels  or  afles  as  fum  fay.  Theyr  wooUe  is  very  fine:  and  nearefl  vnto  the  fyneneffe  of  fylke.
There  are  alfo  beafles  of  dyuers  kyndes.  Amonge  men  there  is  this  dyfference,  that  fuch  as  lyue  in  the
mountaynes,  are  whyte,  and  for  the  mod  parte  lyke  vnto  the  men  of  owre  regions.  But  they  that  dwell  abowt
the  ryuer  (as  though  they  tooke  theyr  coloure  therof)  are  blackyfflie  or  purple  of  the  coloure  of  fine  Iren  or
fteele.  This  alfo  chaunceth  to  many  of  them,  that  theyr  fiete  and  legges  are  lyke  the  legs  and  fiete  of  the
foule  cauled  the  oyflreche.

C  Of  the  hygher  Eaft  India  canted  India  Tercera  or  Terciera.

N  this  India  whiche  the  Portugales  caule  Tercera,  are  very  great  kyngedomes:  as  the  kyng-
domes  of  Bengala,  Pegu,  Berma,  Erancangui,  Daufian,  Capelam,  and  the  greate  kyngdome
of  Malacha,  cauled  of  the  owlde  wryters  Aurea  Cherfonefus:  whofe  chiefe  citie  is  alfo  cauled
Malacha,  and  was  in  owlde  tyme  named  Tachola.  Vnder  this  kyngedome  are  infinite  Ilandes
cauled  Maluche,  whereof  the  principall  are  thefe:  laua  the  greater,  laua  the  leffe,  Polagua,
Mendana,  Cubu,  Cailon,  Huban,  Bur,  Tenado,  Anbon,  and  Gilolo,  with  infinite  other.  On
the  Southwell  parte  from  Malacha,  is  the  great  Ilande  of  Samotra  cauled  in  owlde  tyme
Taprobana,  in  the  which  are  the  kyngedomes  of  Pedir,  Biraen,  Pazer,  Ardagni,  and  Ham.  This  Hand  and  al
the  other  cauled  Maluche,  brynge  furth  great  quantitie  of  cloues,  cinamome,  nuttemegges,  maces,  and  all  other
kyndes  of  fpyces  excepte  pepper,  which  groweth  in  the  prouince  of  Calecut  and  the  Ilande  of  Ceilam.  All
thefe  fortes  of  fpices  are  caryed  to  Malacha  to  bee  foulde.  But  the  greatefl  parte  of  them  is  caryed  to  Cathay
and  China :  and  from  thenfe  to  the  north  partes  of  Tartaric.  This  kyngdome  of  China,  is  very  great :  and  was
in  owlde  tyme  cauled  Sina.  Here  is  founde  great  plentie  of  precious  flones.  The  people  are  very  fubtyle  and
ryche.  They  are  all  appareled  eyther  in  fylke  or  cloth,  or  veflures  of  other  woorkemanfliippe :  and  are  of
good  ciuilitie.  They  do  not  gladly  permitte  the  Portugales  or  other  flraungers  to  trafike  in  theyr  kyngedome:
whofe  mofle  famous  place  vppon  the  fea  fyde,  is  named  Cautan,  and  the  fea  Machiam,  cauled  of  the  owL-le
wr}ters  the  fea  of  Sina.

C  0/  the  landes  of  Lahorador  and  Baccataos,  lyinge  weft  and  northwefl
from  Englaitde^  and  beinge  parte  of  the  firnie  lande  of  the

Weft  Indies,

Any  haue  trauayled  to  fearch  the  coafl  of  the  lande  of  Laborador,  afwell  to  th[e]intente  to
knowe  howe  farre  or  whyther  it  reachethe,  as  alfo  whether  there  bee  any  paffage  by  fea
through  the  fame  into  the  fea  of  Sur  and  the  Ilandes  of  Maluca  which  are  vnder  the
Equinoctiall  line:  thinkynge  that  the  waye  thyther  fhulde  greatly  bee  fhortened  by  this
vyage.  The  Spanyardes  as  to  whofe  ryght  the  fayde  Ilandes  of  fpices  perteyne,  dyd  fyrfl
feeke  to  fynde  the  fame  by  this  way.  The  Portugales  alfo  hauynge  the  trade  of  fpices  in
theyr  handes,  dyd  trauayle  to  fynde  the  fame:  although  hetherto  neyther  anye  fuch  paffage
is  founde  or  the  ende  of  that  lande.  In  the  yeare  a  thoufande  and  fine  hundreth,  Gafper  Cortefreales,  made
a  vyage  thyther  with  two  carauelles :  but  founde  not  the  flreyght  or  paffage  he  fought.  At  his  beinge  there,  he
named  the  Ilandes  that  lye  in  the  mouth  of  the  goulfe  Quadrado,  after  his  name  Cortefreales,  lyinge  in  the.  L.
[fifty]  degrees  and  more :  and  browght  from  that  lande  abowt  three  fcore  men  for  flaues.  He  greatly  maruayled
to  beholde  the  houge  quantitie  of  fnowe  and  Ife.  For  the  fea  is  there  frofen  excedyngly.  Th[e]inhabitauntes
are  men  of  good  corporature,  although  tawny  lyke  the  Indies,  and  laborious.  They  paynte  theyr  bodyes,  and
weare  brafelettes  and  hoopes  of  fyluer  and  copper. Theyr  apparel  is  made  of  the  fkynnes  of  marternes  and

"44

other  notable  thynges  as  totichynge  the  Indies.

345

dyuers  other  beafles,  whiche  they  weare  with  the  heare  inwarde  in  wynter,  and  owtwarde  in  foommer.  This
apparell  they  gyrde  to  theyr  bodyes  with  gyrdels  made  of  cotton  or  the  fynewes  of  fyffhes  and  beafles.  They
eate  fyffhe  more  then  any  other  thynge,  and  efpecially  falmons,  althoughe  they  haue  foules  and  frute.  They
make  theyr  houfes  of  timber  wherof  they  haue  great  plentie :  and  in  the  fleade  of  tyles,  couer  them  with  the
fkynnes  of  fyffhes  and  beafles.  It  is  fayde  alfo  that  there  are  grifes  in  this  lande:  and  that  the  beares  and
many  other  beafles  and  foules  are  white.  To  this  and  the  Ilandes  abowt  the  fame,  the  Britons  are  accuftomed
to  reforte :  as  men  of  nature  agreable  vnto  them  and  borne  vnder  the  fame  altitude  and  temperature.  The
Norwayes  alfo  fayled  thyther  with  the  pylot  cauled  lohn  Scoluo :  And  the  Englyffhe  men  with  Sebaflian
Cabot.

The  coafle  of  the  lande  of  Baccalaos,  is  a  greate  tracte :  and  the  greatefl  altitude  therof,  is.  xlviii.  [forty-
eight]  degrees  and  a  halfe.  Sebaflian  Cabot  was  the  fyrfl  that  browght  any  knowleage  of  this  lande.  For  beinge
in  Englande  in  the  dayes  of  kyng  Henry  the  feuenth,  he  furnyffhed  twoo  fhippes  at  his  owne  charges  or  (as
fum  fay)  at  the  kynges,  whome  he  perfuaded  that  a  pafTage  might  bee  founde  to  Cathay  by  the  north  feas,  and
that  fpices  myght  bee  brought  from  thenfe  foner  by  that  way,  then  by  the  vyage  the  Portugales  vfe  by  the  fea
of  Sur.  He  went  alfo  to  knowe  what  maner  of  landes  thofe  Indies  were  to  inhabite.  He  had  with  hym  three
hundreth  men,  and  directed  his  courfe  by  the  tracte  of  Iflande  vppon  the  cape  of  Laborador  at.  Iviii.  [fifty-
eight]  degrees :  affirmynge  that  in  the  monethe  of  luly  there  was  fuch  could  and  heapes  of  Ife  that  he  durft.
paffe  no  further:  alfo  that  the  dayes  were  very  longe  and  in  maner  withowt  nyght,  and  the  nyghtes  very  cleare,
Certeyne  it  is,  that  at  the.  Ix.  [fixty]  degrees,  the  longell  day  is  of  xviii.  [eighteen]  houres.  But  confyder)-nge
the  coulde  and  the  flraungenes  of  the  vnknowen  lande,  he  turned  his  courfe  from  thenfe  to  the  Wefl,  folowynge
the  coaft,  of  the  lande  of  Baccalaos  vnto  the.  xxxviii.  [thirty-eight]  degrees,  from  whenfe  he  returned  to
Englande.  To  conclude,  the  Brytons  and  Danes  haue  fayled  to  the  Baccalaos :  and  laques  Cartier  a  frenche
man  was  there  twyfe  with  three  galeons :  as  one  in  the  yeare.  xxxiiii.  [thirty-four]  and  the  other  in  the.  xxxv.
[thirty-five]  and  chofe  the  lande  to  inhabite  frome  the.  xlv.  [forty-fifth]  degrees  to  the.  li.  [fifty-firfl]  beinge  as
good  a  lande  as  Fraunce,  and  al  thynges  therein  commune  to  fuch  as  fyrfl  poffelTe  the  fame.

Of  thefe  lands,  lacobus  Gaflaldus  wryteth  thus :  The  newe  lande  of  Baccalaos,  is  a  coulde  region,  whofe
inhabytauntes  are  Idolatours  and  praye  to  the  foonne  and  moone  and  dyuers  Idoles.  They  are  whyte  people
and  very  ruflical.  For  they  eate  fleffhe  and  fyffhe  and  all  other  thynges  rawe.  Sumtymes  alfo  they  eate  mans
fleffhe  priuilye  fo  that  theyr  Caciqui  haue  no  knowleage  therof  The  apparell  of  both  the  men  and  woman,  is
made  of  beares  fkynnes,  althowgh  they  haue  fables  and  marternes,  not  greatly  eflemed  bycaufe  they  are  lyttle.
Sum  of  them  go  naked  in  foommer,  and  weare  apparell  only  in  wynter.  The  Brytons  and  Frenche  men  are
accuflomed  to  take  fyffhe  in  the  coafle  of  thefe  landes  where  is  founde  great  plentie  of  Tunnyes  which  th[e]in-
habitauntes  caul  Baccalaos  wherof  the  lande  was  fo  named.  Northwarde  from  the  region  of  Baccalaos,  is  the
lande  of  Laborador,  all  full  of  mountaynes  and  great  wooddes  in  whiche  are  manye  beares  and  wylde  bores.
Th[e]inhabitauntes  are  Idolatoures  and  warlike  people,  appareled  as  are  they  of  Baccallaos.  In  all  this  newe
lande,  is  neyther  citie  or  caflell :  but  they  lyue  in  companies  lyke  heardes  of  beafles.

C  TJie  difcoiterynge  of  the  lande  of  Floryda.

He  gouernour  of  the  Ilande  of  Boriquena  lohn  Ponce  of  Leon  beinge  difcharged  of  his  office
and  very  ryche,  furnyffhed  and  fente  foorth  two  camels  to  feeke  the  Ilandes  of  Boyuca  in  the
which  the  Indians  affirmed  to  be  afontayne  or  fpringe  whofe  water  is  of  vertue  to  make  owlde
men  younge.  Whyle  he  trauayled  fyxe  monethes  with  owtragious  defyre  amonge  many
Ilandes  to  fynde  that  he  fought,  and  coulde  fynde  no  token  of  any  fuch  fountayne,  he
entered  into  Bimini  and  difcouered  the  lande  of  Florida  in  the  yeare.  1512.  on  Eafler  day
which  the  Spanyardes  caule  the  fioryffliyng  day  of  Pafcha,  wherby  they  named  that  lande
Florida.  And  fuppofyng  that  great  ryches  myght  be  browght  from  thenfe,  he  returned  into  Spayne  and  coue-
naunted  with  kynge  Ferdinando  as  touchynge  the  trade:  and  by  the  interceffion  of  Nicolas  de  Quando  and
Peter  Nunez  de  Gufman,  the  kynge  dyd  not  onely  make  hym  gouernoure  of  Bemini  and  Florida,  but  alfo  fente
furthe  with  hym  three  fhippes  from  Siuile  toward  his  fecond  vyage  in  the  yeare.  15 15.  He  touched  in  the
Ilande  of  Guacana  otherwyfe  cauled  Guadalupe,  and  fent  to  lande  certeyne  of  his  men  with  the  landrefTes  of
the  fhyppes :  whom  the  Canibales  lyinge  in  ambuffhe,  alVayled  with  theyr  inuenemed  arrowes :  and  flaying  the
mofl  parte,  caryed  away  the  women.  With  this  euyll  begynnynge,  lohn  Ponce  departed  frome  henfe  to
Boriquen  and  from  thenfe  to  Florida  wher  he  went  alande  with  his  fouldyers  to  efpie  a  place  mofle  commodious
to  inhabite  and  plant  a  colonie. But  the  Indians  commynge  furth  ageynft.  hym  to  defende  the  enterance,

345

Fysshe.

Gryfes.
Beares.
The  britons.

Sebastian  Cabot.

The  land  of
Baccallaos.
The  vyage  of
Cabot  in  the  dayes
of  kyng  Henry
the  seuenth.

Ise  in  luly.

Baccallaos.
Brytons.
Danes,
lacques  Cartyer.

The  people  of
Bacc^aos

Fysshyng  for

tunnyes.

Laborador.

lohn  Ponce.

Water  of  great
vertue,  of  this
reade  in  the
Decades.

319

BemminL

Guacana.
The  Canibales.

Boriquena.

346

OtJicr  notable  thyuges  as  toitcJiynge  the  Indies.

The  denth  of
lohn  Pouce.

The  land  of
Floryda.

Ferdinando  de
Soto.

The  valient

myndes  of  the
Spany.irdes.

The  thyrde
attempte  of  the
conqu-'ste  of
Florida.

Certeine  fr^'ers
attempte  the
conquest  onely
with  woordes,
but  with  euyll
successe.

The  fryers  are
slayne  and  eaten.

A  new  kynde  of
disgrading

aflayled  the  Spanyardes  fierecely  and  flewe  and  wounded  many  of  them.  At  which  conflicte  alfo  he  hym  felfe
beinge  wounded  with  an  arrowe,  dyed  fliortely  after  in  the  llande  of  Cuba:  and  fo  endyngc  his  lyfe,  confumed
a  great  parte  of  the  rychelTe  he  had  before  begotten  at  faynt  lohannes  of  Boricjuen.  This  lohn  Ponce  had
before  fayled  with  ChryRopher  Colon  to  the  llande  of  Hifpaniolain  the  yeare.  1493.  He  was  a  gentel  fouldier
in  the  warres  of  this  llande,  and  capitayne  of  the  prouince  of  Higuel  for  Nycolas  de  Ouando  that  conquefled
the  fame.  The  region  of  Floryda  is  a  poynt  or  cape  of  lande  reachynge  into  the  fea  lyke  vnto  a  tounge:
beinge  a  famous  and  notorious  place  amonge  the  Indians  by  reafon  of  many  Spanyardes  that  haue  bin  flayne
there.  But  wheras  by  fiime  this  Floryda  was  eflemed  a  ryche  lande,  many  valient  and  noble  men  defyred  the
conquefl  therof,  amonge  whom  Ferdinando  de  Soto  (who  had  before  byn  a  capitayne  in  Peru  and  greatly
inryched  by  th[e]iniprifonment  of  kynge  Atahaliba)  attempted  a  vyage  thyther  with  a  good  bande  of  men,  and
fpente  fyue  yeare  in  feekynge  of  golde  mynes,  fuppofynge  that  this  lande  hadde  byn  lyke  vnto  Peru.

In  fine,  he  dyed  there  and  was  the  deflruction  and  vndoinge  of  all  that  went  with  hym  withowt  inhabitynge
that  lande,  in  the  which  the  conqueflours  had  hytherto  neuer  good  fucceffe,  forafmuche  as  thefe  Indians  are
valiante  archers  and  flronge  and  hardy  men.  But  the  valiant  myndes  of  the  Spanyardes  not  difcouraged  by
thefe  myfaduentures,  after  the  death  of  Ferdinando  Soto,  many  woorthy  gentelmen  defyred  this  conquefl  in  the
yeare.  1544.  amonge  whom  was  lulyan  Samano,  and  Peter  de  Ahumada  beinge  brotherne  and  men  of  fuffi-
cient  abilitie  for  fuch  an  enterprife.  But  neyther  th[e]emprour  beinge  then  in  Germanie,  neyther  the  prince
Don  Phylippe  his  fonne  who  gouerned  all  the  kyngedomes  of  Caflile  and  Aragonie,  neyther  yet  the  counfayle
of  the  Indies  wolde  in  any  cafe  agree  to  the  conquefle.  Neuertheleffe  not  vtterly  contemnynge  the  matter
which  they  were  partly  perfuaded  myght  otherwyfe  bee  browght  to  paffe,  they  fent  thyther  fryer  Luys  Cancell
of  Baluaflro  with  other  fryers  of  the  order  of  faynt  Dominike  who  offered  them  felues  to  conuerte  the  nations
of  that  lande  from  theyr  gentilitie  to  the  fayth  ofChryd  and  obedience  to  Th[e]emperoure,  onely  with  woordes.
The  fryer  therfore  goinge  forwarde  on  his  vyage  at  the  kynges  charges  in  the  yeare.  1549.  went  aland  with  foure
other  fryers  which  he  tooke  with  hym  and  certeyne  maryners  withowt  harneffe  or  weapons :  vnto  whom  as  he
began  his  preachynge,  many  of  the  Indians  of  the  fayd  Florida  reforted  to  the  fea  fyde,  where  withowt  gyuynge
audience  to  his  woordes,  they  caryed  hym  away  with  three  other  of  his  companyons  and  dyd  eate  them,
whereby  they  fuffered  martyrdome  for  the  fayth  of  Chryfl.  The  refydue  that  efcaped,  made  haft  to  the  fhyppe
and  kept  them  felues  for  confeffours  as  fum  fay.  Many  that  fauoure  th[e]intente  of  the  fryers,  doo  nowe
confyder  that  by  that  meanes  the  Indians  coulde  not  be  brought  to  owre  frendefliippe  and  religion.  Neuer-
theleffe, that  if  it  coulde  fo  haue  byn  browght  to  paffe,  it  had  byn  better.  There  came  of  late  from  that  fliippe,
one  that  had  byn  the  page  of  Ferdinando  de  Soto,  who  declared  that  the  Indians  hanged  vp  the  fliynnes  with
the  heades  and  crownes  of  the  fayd  fryers  in  one  of  theyr  temples.

320

C  An  opinion  that  Enropa,  Africa,  ajid  Afia,  are  Ilandes :  and  of

certeyne  nanigations  abowt  the  fajne.

Noe  gaiie  names
to  Africa,  Asia,
and  Europa.

Asia.
Europe.

The  hole  earthe
is  an  llande.

The  Caspian  sea.

Caliz  is  a  ryuer.

Nauigationi  from
the  red  sea  to
East  India.

He  anciente  wryters  diuided  this  owre  worlde  into  Afia,  Africa,  and  Europa,  by  the  ryuer
Tanais  as  Ifocrates  declareth  in  his  Panegyrico.  Afterwarde  they  diuided  Afia  and  Africa
by  the  turnynges  and  courfe  of  the  ryuer  Nilus,  thowghe  the  fame  had  byn  better  by  the
fea  Bermeio  (that  is)  the  redde  fea,  which  almofte  trauerfeth  and  paffeth  throwgh  the  lande
from  the  Ocean  to  the  fea  Mediterraneum  which  diuideth  Europa  and  Afia.  But  Berofus
the  Caldean,  fayth  that  Noe  gaue  names  to  Africa,  Afia,  and  Europa:  and  gaue  them  to  his
fonnes,  Cham,  Sem,  and  lafet :  alfo  that  he  fayled  by  the  fea  Mediterraneum  ten  yeres.  In
fine  we  nowe  conclude  that  the  three  fayde  prouinces  occupy  this  mydlande  of  the  worlde.  All  in  generall
fay  that  Afia  is  greater  then  any  of  the  other,  and  in  maner  as  bygge  as  they  both.  Albeit  Herodotus  in  his
Melpomeme,  fcorneth  them  that  make  Europe  and  Afia  equall :  affirmynge  that  Europe  in  longitude  is  equal  to
Afia  and  Afrike :  and  that  it  paffeth  them  in  latitude,  wherin  he  fpeaketh  not  greatly  owt  of  fquare.  But  to
fpeake  more  of  this  elfwhere,  not  perteyn>nge  to  the  matter  wee  haue  in  hande,  I  fay  that  Homerus  one  o:"  the
moft  ancient  wryters,  fayth  that  the  world  which  is  diuided  into  Afia,  Africa,  and  Europa,  is  an  llande  as
reherfeth  Pomponius  Mela  in  his  thyrde  booke.  Strabo  in  the  fyrft  boke  of  his  Geographie,  fayth  that  the
earth  which  is  inhabited,  is  an  llande  enuironed  with  the  Ocean.  Higinius  alfo,  and  Solinus,  confirme  this
fentence,  Althowghe  Solinus  doo  erre  in  miftakingethe  names  of  the  feas,  fuppofynge  that  the  Cafpian  fea  was
parte  of  the  Ocean,  beinge  rather  lyke  vnto  the  fea  Mediterraneum  fo  named  bycaufe  it  is  in  the  mydlande  as
is  the  Cafpian  fea  withowt  participacion  of  the  great  Ocean.  Strabo  wryteth  that  in  the  tyme  of  Tolomeus
Euergetes,  one  Eudoxus  fayled  three  or  foure  tymes  from  Caliz  to  India :  And  that  the  guides  of  the  redde
146

other  notable  thynges  as  touchynge  the  Indies.

347

fea  (cauled  the  goulfe  of  Arabic  or  Bermeio)  prefented  to  the  fame  kynge  Tolomeus,  an  Indian  whome  he
brought  frome  thenfe.  Kynge  luba  alfo  prooued  this  nauigation  from  CaHz  to  India  as  wryteth  SoHnus.
Whereby  it  appeareth  that  the  nauigation  to  India  by  the  Ocean  was  then  wel  knowen  and  frequented,
althowgh  not  fo  much  as  at  this  prefent,  the  fame  beinge  neyther  then  or  nowe  a  thynge  of  great  difficultie  or
trauayle  by  the  coafles  of  hotte  regions.  But  to  fayle  from  India  to  CaHz  by  the  other  parte  of  the  north  by  a
clyme  and  regions  of  extreme  coulde,  (hulde  bee  doubtleffe  a  difficult  and  daungerous  thynge,  wherof  is  no
memory  amonge  the  owlde  autours  fauynge  onely  of  one  fhyppe  as  PHnie  and  Mela  doo  wTyte,  reherfynge  the
teflimony  of  Cornelius  Nepos  who  affirmed  that  the  kynge  of  Sueuia  prefented  to  Quintus  Metellus  Celer
Lieuetenaunt  of  Fraunce,  certeyne  Indians  dryuen  by  tempefl  into  the  fea  of  Germanie:  if  the  fame  were  not
of  the  lande  of  Laborador  or  Bacallaos,  and  they  deceaued  in  theyr  coloure.  For  fum  fay  that  lykewyfe  in  the
dayes  of  the  Emperoure  Fredericus  Barbaroffa,  certeyne  Indians  were  brovvght  in  a  Canoa  from  the  citie  of
Lubec  in  Germanie.  Furthermore  pope  Eneas  Syluius  wryteth  that  the  Sarmation  fea,  is  as  certeyne  as  the
Scythian,  Germanian,  or  Indian  fea.  Nowe  alfo  there  is  great  knowleage  and  experience  how  the  nauigations
and  paffage  may  be  attempted  by  Norwaye  and  other  north  regions  vnder  the  fame  north,  and  to  folow  that
coafle  to  the  fouth  fea  of  Sur  and  keepe  that  courfe  by  the  tracte  of  China.  Olanus  Gothus  the  archbyffhop  of
Upfalia  and  borne  in  Gothlande,  hath  wrytten  muche  of  thefe  north  regions  and  nauigations  by  the  north  fea.
In  the  tract  of  this  vyage  by  the  north  fea,  are  the  Ilandes  of  Iflande  and  Gruntlande,  althowgh  there  is  doubte
whether  Gruntlande  be  an  Ilande  or  parte  of  the  firme  lande.  It  is.  xl.  [forty]  leaques,  from  Lapponia,  and
fumvvhat  more  frome  Finmarchia  a  lande  of  Scandinauia  in  Europe.  The  people  of  Gruntland  are  flronge  men
and  of  coomly  flature.  They  fayle  with  fmaul  ffiippes  or  barkes  couered  clofe  aboue  with  lether  or  beafles
hydes  for  feare  of  the  coulde  and  fyffhes.  Gruntlande  as  fum  fay,  is  fyftie  leaques  from  the  north  parte  of  the
firme  lande  of  the  Wefl  Indies  by  the  lande  of  Laborador.  But  it  is  not  yet  knowen  whether  this  land  be
continent  or  adherent  with  Grundande,  or  if  there  bee  any  flreyght  of  fea  betwene  them.  If  all  bee  one  firme
lande  adioynynge  by  any  parte,  then  the  two  great  partes  of  the  world  feeme  to  ioyne  togyther  abowt  the  north
pole  or  vnder  it,  or  beneth  it,  forafmuch  as  it  is  not  pafl  fortie  or  fiftie  leaques  from  Finmarche  to  Gruntland:
wherby  it  may  appere  that  althowgh  there  be  any  fuch  flraight  diuidynge  them,  yet  are  they  neyghbours  and
not  farre  in  funder.  Furthermore  from  the  land  of  Laborador  by  th[e]accompt  of  the  pilottes,  is  abowte  foure
hundreth  leaques  to  Faial,  one  of  the  Ilandes  of  Azores,  otherwyfe  cauled  the  Ilandes  of  Soria  lyinge  in  the  Wefl
Ocean  ouer  ageynfL  Spayne.  Alfo  by  their  accompte  the  lande  of  Laborador  is  abowte  fiue  hundreth  leaques
from  Irland,  and  fixe  hundreth  from  Spayne.

TJiat  the  Spu::yardes  hane  fayled  to  the  Antipodes  {that  is)  fuche  as  go

fiete  to  fiete  ageynft  vs,  and  inhabite  the  inferioiir  hemifpherie

or  halfe  globe  of  the  earthe,  contrarie  to  th\e'\oppinion

of  the  owlde  writers.

?L  the  ancient  philofophers  of  the  gentiles  do  deny  that  there  may  be  any  paffage  from  o^^Te
hemifphere  or  halfe  compaffe  of  the  earth  to  the  Antipodes  by  reafon  of  the  burnt  line
(cauled  Zona  Torridd)  and  the  Ocean  fea  lyinge  in  the  mydde  way,  wherby  this  vyage  fliulde
be  hyndered  and  impoffible,  as  Macrobius  wryteth  at  large  in  his  commentaries  vpon  the
dreame  of  Scipio.  Of  the  ChryRyan  phylofophers,  Clemente  wryteth  that  it  is  not  poffible
for  any  man  to  paffe  the  Ocean:  and  other  wryters  of  later  tyme,  feeme  to  confirme  the
fame.  In  deede  I  verely  beleue  that  this  way  was  neuer  knowen  to  them,  afwell  for  that
euer  prefuppofynge  the  thynge  to  bee  impoffible  they  neuer  attempted  it,  as  alfo  that  the  Indians  (whom  we
caule  Antipodes)  haue  no  fhippes  fufficient  for  fo  longe  and  difficulte  a  nauigation  to  brynge  them  knowleage
herof,  as  haue  the  Spaniardes  to  paffe  the  Ocean  vnto  them :  In  fo  much  that  at  this  prefent  this  vyage  is  by
dayly  experience  fo  well  knowen  vnto  the  Spanyardes  and  Portugales,  that  they  can  in  maner  go  thyther  blyna-
fielde,  contrarye  to  th[e]oppinion  of  thofe  phylofophers.  I  wyll  here  omytte  to  fpeuke  of  many  fliippes  that
haue  fayled  ordynaryly  frome  Spayne  to  India,  and  fpeake  onely  of  the  fhyppe  Victoria  which  compafled  abowt
the  hole  globe  of  the  worlde  and  touched  in  the  landes  of  two  or  three  Antipodes,  and  in  fine  returned  to
Spayne  by  a  contrary  way,  wherby  is  declared  the  ignorance  of  the  fage  antiquitie.  In  this  nauigation,  they
founde  many  fecreates,  amonge  the  which  this  is  flrange  and  woorthy  memorie,  that  al  fuch  deade  Chriflians
as  were  cafl  into  the  fea,  lay  on  theyr  backes  and  turned  theyr  faces  vpwarde:  but  the  gentyles  lay  all  groouelyn

347

The  vyage  to
India  by  the  north
sea&

The  hystorye  of
Cornelius  Nepos.

Note  this.

Indians  in  Lubec

The  Sarmatian
sea.

Islands.

Giuntlande.

Lapponia.

Finmarchia.

Gruntlande.

The  distance
from  Gruntlande
to  the  lande  of
Laborador.

321

[Narrowness}
of  the  streight  if
it  be.

The  Ilandes  of
Soria,  or  Azores.
From  laborador
to  Irland.

Macrobius.
Clement.

The  Indians  are
Antipodes.

The  shjrppe
Victoria.

A  stiaunge  tl  Inge.

348

Shadowes
towarde  the  south.

The  Sonne  rysynge
oiitheryghthande.

The  vyage  of
Magellauus.

Antipodes.

Guinea.

The  north  starre.

The  needle  and
compasse.

322

Septentriones,  are
the  vii.  starres.
that  are  sene  by
Charles  wayne  or
the  great  beare.
Argo  of  lason.

Vlysses.

lohn  Sebastian.

OtJicr  notable  thyiigcs  as  totichynge  the  Indies.

-■--  ■  ■-■■■■--■

on  theyr  bellyes.  They  alfo  perceaued  the  foonne  and  moone  to  keepe  a  contrary  courfe  from  that  they  doo
here,  and  euer  to  cafl  the  fhadowes  of  all  thynges  towarde  the  fouth :  whiche  thynge  alfo  was  knowen  to  fum
of  the  owlde  wryters.  For  this  is  manifefte  that  the  fonne  ryfeth  on  the  ryght  hande  to  theym  that  lyue  in  the
thyrtie  degrees  on  th[e]other  fyde  the  Equinoctiall :  fo  that  lookynge  towarde  the  fonne,  they  turne  theyr  faces
to  the  north :  wherby  it  appeareth  to  bee  trew  that  they  affirme.  They  confumed  three  yeares  lackynge.  xiiii.
[fourteen]  dayes  in  goynge  and  commynge,  and  lofle  a  daye  in  theyr  accompte,  whereby  they  dyd  eate  flefflie
on  frydayes,  and  celebrated  the  feafte  of  Eafter  on  Mundayes:  fo  that  they  ouerleapcd  a  day  (not  faylynge  in
the  calender)  and  kept  no  iull  rekenynge  of  the  bifextile.  The  caufe  wherof  whyle  fome  haue  fearched  by
phylofophie,  they  haue  erred  more  then  the  maryners.  They  fayled.  x.  [ten]  thoufande  leaques  and.  xiiii.
[fourteen]  myles  by  theyr  accompte,  albeit  they  fliulde  haue  gonne  lefle,  if  theyr  way  hadde  line  ryght  forth.
But  as  they  were  enforced  partely  of  neceffitie,  and  partely  to  fynde  that  they  fowght,  they  made  many
A\yndynges  and  turnynges.  They  trauerfed  the  Equinoctiall  line  fyxe  tymes  withowt  burnynge,  contrary  to
th[e]oppinion  of  the  owlde  autours.  They  remayned  fyue  monethes  in  the  Hand  of  Tidore,  whofe  inhabi-
tauntes  are  Antipodes  to  theym  of  Guinea,  wherby  it  is  apparente  that  wee  maye  communicate  with  them.  And
althowgh  they  loft  the  fyght  of  the  northe  ftarre,  yet  dyd  they  euer  dyrecte  theyr  courfe  therby.  For  beinge
in  the.  xl.  [forty]  degrees  of  the  fouth,  they  fawe  the  ncdle  of  the  compaffe  ftande  as  directly  towarde  the  north
as  it  dooth  in  the  fea  Mediterraneum :  althowgh  fum  fay  that  it  loofeth  his  force  fumwhat.  Abowt  the  poynt
of  the  Southe  or  pole  Antartike,  they  fawe  a  lyttle  whyte  cloude  and  foure  ftarres  lyke  vnto  a  croffe  with  three
other  ioynynge  therunto,  which  refemble  owre  Septentrion,  and  are  iudged  to  bee  the  fignes  or  tokens  of  the
fouth  exeltre  of  heauen.  Great  was  the  nauigation  of  the  fleete  of  Salamon,  but  greater  was  this  of  Th[e]em-
prours  maieftie  Don  Charles  kynge  of  Spayne.  The  Argos  of  lafon  whiche  the  antiquitie  placed  amonge  the
ftarres,  fayled  but  a  lyttle  way  and  a  fliorte  vyage  in  comparafon  of  the  fliippe  Victoria  whiche  owght  woorthely
to  bee  kepte  in  the  Arfenall  of  Siuile  in  perpetuall  memory  of  fo  famous  an  enterpryfe.  The  daungiours,
pa}Ties,  trauayles  and  laboures  of  Vlyffes  were  nothynge  in  refpecte  of  fuche  as  lohn  Sebaftian  fufteyned :
whereby  in  the  fcu[t]chion  of  his  amies  in  the  ftead  of  a  monftrous  or  inuincible  beaft,  he  woorthely  gaue  the
woorlde  with  this  circumfcription :  PRIMVS  CIRCVMDEDISTI  ME.  (that  is)  Thou  art  the  fyrft  that
hath  compaffed  me  abowt.

As  touchynge  the  needle  of  the  compaffe,  I  haue  redde  in  the  Portugales  nauigations  that  faylynge  as  farre  fouth  as  Cap.  de
Bona  Speranza,  the  poynt  of  the  needle  flyll  refpected  the  northe  as  it  dyd  on  this  fyde  the  Equinoctiall,  fauynge  that  it  fumwhat
trembeled  and  declyned  a  lyttle,  wherby  the  force  feemed  fumwhat  to  be  diminiflhed,  fo  that  they  were  fayne  to  helpe  it  with  the
lode  flone.

C  Who  fyrjl  foiinde  the  needle  of  the  compaffe,  and  the  vfe  t her  of.

The  chiefest  partes
of  the  shyppe.

Magnes.

The  Spanyardes
and  Portugales.

Why  the  needle
turneth  to  the
north.

The  Hand  of
Tercera.

The  Hand  of
Magncte.

Peakynge  much  of  nauigations.  it  myght  feme  a  thynge  vndecent  to  omyt  to  fay  fumwhat  of  the
needle  of  the  compaffe:  withowt  the  which  as  all  nauigations  are  but  blynde  and  wanderynge
coniectures,  euen  fo  fhulde  the  Indies  neuer  haue  bynne  founde  but  by  helpe  of  the  fame,
forafmuche  as  the  (hippes  fhulde  haue  byn  loft  in  the  Ocean,  were  it  not  that  theyr  courfes
were  directed  by  the  needle  and  compaffe,  which  owght  therfore  to  be  compted  the  chiefe
p:.rtes  of  the  fhyppe  and  principall  inftrumentes  of  faylynge.  The  fyrft  that  founde  the  needle
and  the  vfe  therof  (as  Blondus  and  Mapheus  Girardus  doo  wryte)  was  one  Flauius  of  Malpha
a  citie  in  the  kyngdome  of  Naples,  of  whome  the  Neopolitans  glory  to  this  day:  and  that  by  good  reafon,  for-
afmuch  as  a  citifen  and  neyghboures  chylde  of  theyrs,  was  the  fyrft  fynder  of  fo  commodious  and  profytable  a
thynge,  to  the  fecreate  wherof  fo  many  excellente  wyttes  as  were  before  hym  coulde  not  attayne,  althowgh  they
hadde  both  iren  and  the  lode  ftone  (cauled  Magiies)  whiche  are  the  materials  of  the  needle.  Next  vnto
Flauius,  the  chiefe  commendation  is  dew  to  the  Spanyardes  and  Portugales  by  whofe  daylye  experience,  the
fame  is  browght  to  further  perfection,  and  the  vfe  therof  better  knowen :  althowghe  hytherto  no  man  knoweth
the  caufe  why  the  iren  touched  with  the  lode  ftone,  turneth  euer  towarde  the  north  ftarre,  as  playnely  appeareth
in  euery  common  dyall.  In  maner  all  wryters  attribute  this  *-o  a  fecreate  and  hyd  propertie,  fum  of  the  north,
and  other  of  the  mixture  or  naturall  temperature  of  elementes  that  is  betwene  iren  and  the  fayde  ftone.  If  it
bee  the  propertie  of  the  north  or  north  ftarre,  then  (as  the  pylots  make  theyr  rekenynge)  neyther  fhulde  the
needle  make  anye  chaunge  or  dyffer  in  northeftinge,  (as  in  faylynge  northeafte  withowt  the  Ilande  of  Tercera
beinge  one  of  the  Ilandes  of  Azores  or  Soria  and  two  hundreth  leaques  from  Spayne  towarde  the  Weft  Eafl-
weft)  neyther  yet  ftiulde  it  lofe  his  ofifice  (as  fayth  Olanus)  in  paffynge  from  the  Ilande  of  Magnete,  that  is,  the
Hand  of  the  lode  ftone,  which  is  vnder  or  neare  abowte  the  northe  pole.  But  howe  fo  euer  it  bee,  or  what  fo
euer  bee  the  caufe,  trewth  it  is  that  the  nedle  turneth  euer  to  the  north  although  wee  fayle  abowt  the  fo'Jth,
348

other  notable  thynges  as  toiichynge  the  Indies.

349

We  owght  therefore  to  vnderflande  that  the  lode  Hone  (whiche  wee  falfely  caule  the  adamant)  hath  heade,  fiete,
and  alfo  armes  as  fum  fay.  The  iren  that  is  rubbed  with  the  heade,  neuer  ceafeth  to  turne  dyrectly  towarde
the  north;  as  is  to  fee  in  the  dyals  that  are  made  to  the  foonne.  The  rubbynge  of  the  fiete  feruethe  for  the
fouth :  as  doo  lykewyfe  the  other  partes,  for  other  quarters  and  poyntes  of  heauen.

Note  here  that  yf  a  piece  of  this  (lone,  of  the  byggeneffe  of  an  egge  or  a  valnutte,  or  more  or  lelTe,  bee  broken  into  manye
Imaule  pieces  as  bygge  as  dyce  or  leffe,  yet  euery  of  thofe  fmaule  piefes,  hath  headde,  foote,  and  armes,  as  is  fayde  here  before.

C  The  Sitnacion  and  byggenes  of  the  earth.

[T  may  to  fume  feeme  a  vaine  thyng  to  feke  the  fituacion  and  byggenes  of  the  earth,
although  it  bee  eafy  to  knowe,  forafmuche  as  it  is  fituate  in  the  myddefle  of  the
worlde  as  the  center  of  the  fame,  beinge  enuironed  and  as  it  were  borne  vp  of  the  fea
which  compaffeth  it  abowt.  Mela  fayth  that  the  pyllers  that  fufleyne  it,  are  Eafle,
Wefl,  North,  and  South:  which  fayinge  Dauyd  confirmeth  in  the  C.  vi.  [io6th]  pfalme.
Thefe  foure  are  the  moll  notable  pyllers  or  fuflentacions  that  the  earth  hath  in  heauen,
accordynge  to  the  motions  wherof,  all  vyages  are  ruled  on  the  earthe,  frome  whenfe  they
haue  theyr  originall,  as  engendered  of  the  dyuers  qualities  of  vapoures  and  exhalations  rayfed  by  the  fonne
and  otherwyfe.  Eratoflhenes  put  none  other  fuflentacions  then  the  north  and  fouth  poles,  and  parteth  the
earth  by  the  courfe  of  the  foonne  :  which  particion  Marcus  Varro  dooth  greatly  commende  as  agreable  to  reafon.
The  poles  are  firme  and  immouable  as  an  exeltre  abowt  the  which  the  heauen  moueth  and  is  therby  fufleyned.
They  furthermore  declare  vnto  vs  vnder  what  parte  of  heauen  wee  bee,  howe  farre,  and  which  way  wee  go,
with  alfo  the  largenes  of  heauen  and  commenfuration  of  the  earth.  As  for  exemple  :  the  flreyght  of  Gibraltar,
(accomptynge  from  Spayne)  is  from  the  north,  or  to  fpeake  more  playnely  from  the  poynte  of  the  earthe  that  is
or  may  be  directly  vnder  the  north  pole,  abowt.  liiii.  [fifty-four]  degrees  which  make.  ix.  hundreth  and.  Ixxx.
[980]  leaques  according  to  the  common  computacion  of  the  Cofmographers  and  Aflronomers  :  And  is  from  the
Equinoctiall  line,  xxxvi.  [thirty-fix]  degrees  :  which  added  to  the  other,  liiii.  [fifty-four]  make.  [lx]xxx.  [ninety]
degrees,  beinge  the  hole  diflance  from  the  north  poynte  to  tlie  Equinoctiall  line  diuydynge  the  earthe  by  the
myddefle,  and  the  quarter  or  fourthe  parte  of  the  hole  circumference  of  the  earth  :  the  whiche  how  great  it  is
in  compaffe  and  how  many  leaques  or  myles  it  conteynethe,  is  eafy  to  perceaue  accomptynge  euery  degree.  Ix.
[fixty]  myles.  But  that  yowe  may  the  better  perceaue  what  degrees  are,  I  haue  thowght  good  to  fpeake  fumwhat
more  hereof.

C  What  degrees  are.

N  the  owlde  tyme  theyr  maner  was  to  meafure  the  earth  and  the  woorlde  by  furlonges,  pafes,
and  fiete,  as  is  to  reade  in  Plinie,  Strabo,  and  other  wr)ters.  But  after  that  Ptolome  founde
degrees  a  hundreth  and  fiftie  yeares  after  the  death  of  Chry^fl,  that  maner  of  accompte  was
receaued  as  the  befl.  Ptolomie  diuided  all  the  hole  body  and  face  of  the  land  and  fea  into
three  hundreth  and  fixtie  degrees  of  length  or  longitude  :  and  other  as  many  degrees  of  bredth
or  latitude  :  fo  that  the  hole  globe  of  the  baule  beinge  rounde,  conteyneth  as  much  in  latitude
as  longitude.  He  affigned  lykewyfe  to  euery  degree  three  fcore  myles,  whiche  make.  xvii.
[feuenteen]  Spanyffhe  leaques  and  a  halfe  :  In  fuch  forte  that  the  globe  or  baule  of  the  earth  meafured  directly
by  any  of  the  foure  partes  of  the  fame,  conteyneth  in  circuite  fyxe  thoufand  and  two  hundreth  leaques.  This
computacion  and  meafurynge,  is  fo  certeyne,  that  as  it  is  approued  of  all  men  and  founde  trewe  by  experience,
fo  much  the  more  is  it  to  bee  commended  and  had  in  admiration  for  that  th[e]inuention  hereof  was  iudged  fo
dyflicult  by  lob  and  the  preacher,  that  no  man  had  founde  the  meafure  of  limites  of  the  fame.  They  name
thofe  degrees  of  longitude,  thrt  they  accompte  from  foonne  to  foonne  by  the  Equinoctiall  line  which  reacheth
from  the  Eafl  to  the  Wefle  by  the  myddle  of  the  globe  or  baule  of  the  earth.  Thefe  can  not  well  be  obferued,
forafmuch  as  in  this  tract  of  heauen,  there  is  no  fyxt  or  permanent  figne  whereunto  the  pylots  maye  directe
theyr  eyes  or  inllrumentes.  For  the  foonne,  althowghe  it  be  a  mofle  cleare  figne,  yet  doothe  it  dayely  chaunge
the  place  of  ryfynge  and  faulynge,  and  keepethe  not  the  fame  courfe  the  day  folo-wynge  as  the  Aflronomers
affirme.  And  althowgh  there  is  no  number  of  them  that  in  trauaylyng  ftrange  landes  and  feas  haue  fpent  theyr
gooddes  and  almofle  theyr  wyttes  to  fynde  the  degrees  of  longitude  without  errour  as  are  found  the  degrees  of
latitude  and  heyght,  yet  is  there  none  that  hytherto  hath  any  trewe  knowleage  therof.  The  degrees  of  latitude
or  altitude,  are  they  that  are  accompted  from  the  north  pointe  to  the  fouth,  the  commenfuration  or  meafuring

Vt9

Note  the  quarter!
of  the  Icxle  stone.

323

The  sea.
The  wyndes

The  poles.

The  measnrynge
the  circumference
of  the  earth

Ptolome  founde
degrees.

Longitude  and
Latitude.

A  degree.

Degrees  of
Longitude.

The  degrees  of
Longitude  are  not
knoweu.

The  degrees  of
latitude.

350

Othcy  notable  tJiyugcs  as  tottcJiyuge  tJie  Indies.

324

The  north  starre.

The  circuite  of
the  earth.

The  inferior
hemispherie.

HyperboreL
Hypernocii.

wherby,  is  mod  certeine  by  reafon  that  the  north  Aarre  is  permane[nt]  and  remayneth  flyll  in  one  place,  or  at
leafl  moueth  abowt  the  pole  which  is  theyr  firme  and  ftedfliil  figne  wherby  they  accompte  theyr  degrees  and
directe  theyr  vyages.  By  the  degrees  therfore  accompted  by  thefe  mofl  certeine  fignes,  is  vnfaylably  meafured
the  hole  circumference  of  the  lande  and  fca,  diuydynge  the  lame  into  foure  equall  partes  in  this  maner.  From
the  north  poynte  to  the  Equinoctiall,  are.  Ixxxx.  [ninety]  degrees  :  and  from  the  Equinoctiall  to  the  fouth
poynt,  other.  Ixxxx.  [ninety.]  Ageyne  on  the  contrary  fide,  from  the  fouth  poynt  to  the  Equinoctiall,  are  other.
Ixxxx.  [ninety]  degrees :  and  from  the  Equinoctial  ageyne  to  the  north  poynte,  are  as  many.  This  may  we
coniecture  by  good  reafon  afwell  of  th[e]inferioure  hemifphery  wherof  a  great  parte  is  knowen  vnto  vs  by  the
nauigations  of  fuch  as  haue  pafled  the  (Ireyghets  of  Magellanus  and  the  cape  of  Bona  Speranza,  althowgh  we
haue  noo  fuch  cleare  and  manifefl.  relation  as  we  ought  to  haue  of  the  lande  vnder  the  fouthe  pole  beinge  the
other  exeltree  of  the  worlde  whofe  fyght  we  lacke.  For  (as  Herodotus  fayth)  yf  there  bee  any  lande  of  the
Hyperboreans  (that  is  fuche  as  are  vnder  the  north)  ther  is  alfo  of  the  hypernotios,  that  is  fuch  as  are  vnder
the  fouth  :  which  perhappes  are  they  that  lyue  in'  the  lande  of  the  flreyghtes  of  Magellanus  as  nere  vnto  the
other  pole.  But  what  thefe  landes  are,  or  of  what  greatnes  we  can  haue  no  certeyne  knowleage  vntyl  fum  man
fhal  haue  compaffed  abowt  the  lands  vnder  the  fouth  pole  as  did  lohn  Sebaflian  the  circumference  of  the  Equi-
noctiall line.

Thefe  laft  annotaclons  of  the  Indies,  haue  I  tranflated  owt  of  the  bookes  of  Francifcus
Lopes,  wrytten  in  the  Spanyffhe  tounge  to  Th[e]emperours  maieftie:  and  partly  alfo  owt
of  the  carde  made  by  Sebaftian  Cabot.

C  A  denionjlratioii  of  the  rotmde7teJfe  of  the  Earth.

The  eye  is
deceaued.

Arynge.
A  circle.

Any  ignorant  men  thynke  that  the  earthe  is  not  rounde  onely  by  iudge-
mente  of  the  eye  which  is  deceaued  in  manye  thynges  not  only  of  the
woorkes  of  nature,  but  alfo  of  fuche  as  are  doonne  by  the  flight  and  arte
of  man.  For  they  fay  :  Howe  can  it  bee  rounde  forafmuche  as  thowgh
a  man  trauayle  neuer  fo  farre  eyther  by  land  or  fea,  he  feemeth  euer  to
paffe  as  it  were  by  a  ryght  line  without  any  fuch  circuite  or  compaffynge,
afcendynge  or  difcendynge,  as  perteyneth  to  all  the  partes  of  a  rounde  forme.  The
which  obiection,  as  it  is  grofe  and  fimple,  proceadyng  of  the  narowneffe  of  the  vnder-
ftandyng  of  fuch  as  can  not  conceaue  the  large  circumference  of  the  lande  and  fea,  euen  fo
may  it  be  anfwered  with  this  fimple  demonftration.  In  a  rynge  that  ferueth  for  the  fynger
of  a  mans  hande,  the  fpace  of  halfe  an  ynche  or  lyttle  more,  is  halfe  a  cyrcle.  But  in  a
rynge  or  cyrcle  of  bygger  circumference,  as  in  the  hoope  of  a  tubbe,  halfe  an  ynche
appeareth  in  maner  a  ryght  line,  althowghe  it  bee  not  fo  in  deede,  forafmuch  as  it  is  not
poffible  for  any  parte  of  a  circle  to  confifl  of  a  ryght  line,  neyther  any  parte  of  a  line  to
confyfl  of  a  cyrcle,  fithe  the  partes  muft  needes  bee  conformable  to  the  hole,  confyftynge
of  fuch  vniforme  partes  as  are  in  mathematical.  But  not  to  wander  to  farre  in  thefe
fubtylties,  the  greater  that  yow  can  imagen  the  circle  to  bee,  fo  fhall  a  greater  parte
therof  feeme  a  ryght  line  or  playne  forme :  As  for  exemple,  imaginynge  a  circle  whofe
diameter  (that  is  meafure  from  fyde  to  fyde)  confyfleth  of  a  myle  :  in  this  circle  a  pole
length  or  more,  may  feeme  a  ryght  line,  as  yowe  may  otherwyfe  multiply  of  the  like
infinitely  :  wherby  it  flial  appere  that  the  large  circumference  of  the  earth  well  confydered,
a  muche  greater  parte  of  the  circle  therof  then  the  eye  of  man  conceaueth,  may  feeme  to
bee  a  ryght  line,  and  he  contynually  to  walke  vppon  a  playne  forme  forafmuch  as  euery
part  of  a  circle  is  lyke  vnto  other  as  I  haue  fayde.  This  may  fuffice  for  a  fimple  and
briefe  demonftration  and  induction  for  fuche  as  are  defyrous  to  feeke  furth  to  knowe  the

truth  herof.

350

i

other  notable  thynges  as  tonchynge  the  Indies.

351

C  JVhat  credit  owght  to  bee  gyuen  to  wryters  as  touchynge  the  woorkes

of  nature.

He  mofte  aunclent  wryter  Diodorus,  Siculus,  in  the  fourth  booke  of  his  Biblio-
theca,  wryteth  in  this  maner.  If  any  man  for  the  maruelous  flraungenes  and  noueltie  of
fuche  thinges  as  are  defcrybed  in  owre  bookes,  wyl  not  perhappes  gyue  credyt  to  owre  hyflorie,
let  hym  with  ryght  iudgement  confider  the  difference  that  is  betwene  the  ayer  of  the  Scythians
and  the  Troglodytes  compared  to  owres,  and  he  fhall  the  eafelyer  perceaue  the  woorkes  of  nature
and  approue  owre  wrytynges.  For  owre  ayer  dyffereth  fo  much  from  theyrs,  that  it  myght
feeme  incredible  if  experience  were  not  more  certeyne  then  doubtful!  reafon.  In  fume  regions
the  coulde  is  fo  extreme  that  greate  ryuers  are  fo  frofen,  that  laden  cartes  and  armies  of  men  paffe  ouer  the
immouable  ife.  Wine  alfo  and  other  moifl  thynges  are  fo  conieled  that  they  may  bee  cutte  with  knyues.  But
this  is  more  marueylous,  that  th[e]extreeme  partes  of  fuche  apparell  as  menne  weare,  are  fo  bytten  with  coulde
that  they  faule  of  Mens  eyes  are  alfo  dymmed  :  the  fyre  gyueth  not  his  natural  bryghtneffe :  and  brafen
veffelles  and  images  are  broken.  Sumtime  by  reafon  of  thicke  cloudes,  thunders  and  lyghtnynges  are  neyther
feene  or  harde  in  fuch  regions.  Many  other  thynges  more  marueylous  then  thefe  hath  nature  wrought,  which
may  feeme  incredible  to  the  ignorant :  but  eafy  to  fuch  as  haue  experience.  In  the  furtheft  partes  of  Egypt  and
Trogloditica,  the  heate  of  the  foonne  is  fo  extreme  abowt  noone,  that  noo  man  can  fe  hym  that  flandeth  by  hym,
by  reafon  of  the  thicke  ayer  caufed  by  the  vapoures  and  exhalations  rayfed  by  the  heate.  None  can  go  withowt
flioos  but  haue  theyr  fiete  fuddeynly  blyflered  and  exulcerate.  Such  as  are  a  thyrfl,  dye  immediatly  except
they  haue  drynke  at  hande,  the  heate  fo  fafle  confumeth  the  moyflure  of  theyr  bodyes.  Meate  put  in  brafen
veffelles,  is  fodde  in  fliort  fpace  by  the  heate  of  the  foonne  withowt  other  fyre.  Yet  they  that  are  borne  and
browght  vp  in  fuch  regions,  had  rather  wyllyngely  fufleyne  thefe  incommodities  then  bee  inforced  to  Hue  other-
wyfe  :  fuch  a  loue  of  theyr  natiue  countrey  hath  nature  gyuen  to  all  men :  cuflome  of  continuance  from  younge
yeares  being  alfo  of  force  to  ouercomme  the  malicioufneffe  of  the  ayer.  Neuertheleffe,  thefe  places  of  fuch  con-
trary natures  wherby  fuche  flrange  effectes  are  caufed,  are  not  farre  in  funder  or  diuided  by  any  great  diflance.
For,  from  the  maryffhes  of  Meotis  or  Meotides  where  certeyne  Scythians  dwell  in  extreme  coulde,  many  haue
fayled  with  fhyps  of  burden  to  Rodes  in  the  fpace  of  ten  dayes  :  and  from  thenfe  to  Alexandria  in  foure  dayes.
From  whenfe  paffynge  throwgh  Egypte  by  the  ryuer  of  Nilus,  they  haue  arryued  in  Ethiopia  in  other  tenne  dayes  •
So  that  the  nauigation  from  the  couldefl  partes  of  the  worlde  to  the  hottefl  regions,  is  no  more  then,  xxiiii.
[twenty-four]  continual!  dayes.  Where  as  therefore  the  varietie  of  the  ayer  is  fuch  in  places  of  fo  fmaule  diflance,
it  is  no  marueyle  that  the  cullomes  and  maners  of  lyuynge  of  the  people  of  thofe  regions,  with  the  complexions
of  theyr  bodyes  and  fuch  thynges  as  are  engendered  there,  do  greatly  dyffer  from  owres.

325

The  diuersitie  of
ayer  in  dyuers
regions-

Extreme  colde.

Extreme  heate-

The  force  of
educatico.

Extreme  heate
and  colde  in  A
smale  distance.

From  Scythia
to  Ethiopia.

351

I

353

[The  Third  EngHsh  book  on  America,

Which  is  alio

The First English Collection of Voyages, Traffics, & Discoveries.

Cfte  IBecatr^^  of  tite  \\t\m  itjoiiue  ov  iutst  ^\\ti\7i>,  etc.

SECTION VI,

Vannuccio Biring:uccio.

Pyrotechnia.

First  printed  in  1540.]

Edkn  a  D

The  preface.

355

C  The preface to the booke of Metals.

0  this  booke  of  the  Indies  and  nauigations  I  haue  thowght  good
to  adde  the  booke  of  metals,  for  three  caufes  efpecially  me
mouynge  :  whereof  the  fyrft  is,  that  it  feemeth  to  me  a  thynge
vndecent  to  reade  fo  much  of  golde  and  fyluer,  and  to  knowe
lyttle  or  nothynge  of  the  naturall  generation  thereof,  beinge
neuertheieffe  thynges  not  onely  mofl  defyred,  but  alfo  fuch  with-
owt  the  which  at  this  age  the  lyfe  of  man  can  not  bee  paffed  ouer
without  many  aduerfities,  forafmuch  as  pouertie  is  hateful!  to  all
men,andvertue  no  further  efleemedthenit  isfupported  byryches,
fyth  nowe  that  lady  that  reigned  inSaturns  dayes,  is  becommethe
flaue  to  hym  that  was  then  her  bondeman  in  that  golden  worlde,
fo  named,  not  for  the  defyre  that  men  had  to  golde,  but  for
th[e]innocencie  of  lyuynge  in  thofe  dayes,  when  Mars  was  of  no
poure,and  men  thought  itcrueltie  bybreakynge  thebones  of  owre
mothertheearth.toopenawaytothe  courte  of  infernal  Plutofrom
thencetoget  golde  and  fyluer  the  feedes  of  almifchiefes  and  angels
of  fuch  a  god,  whom  the  antiquitie  (not  without  good  confydera-
tion)  paynted  blynde,  affirmynge  alfo  that  of  hym  golde  and  fyluer  haue  receaued  the  propertie  to  blynde  the
eyes  of  men. But  fyth  it  is  nowe  fo  that  we  fhalbe  inforced  to  feke  ayde  by  that  which  was  fumtymes  a  myf-
chefe,  it  refleth  to  vfe  the  matter  as  doo  cunnynge  phifitians  that  can  mynifler  poyfon  in  proportion  with  other
thynges  in  fuch  forte  qualyfyinge  the  malicioufneffe  therof,  that  none  fhall  therby  bee  intoxicate. Forafmuch
therfore  as  golde  and  fyluer  haue  obteyned  this  prerogatiue  that  they  are  fuche  neceffarie  euyls  which  the  lyfe
of  man  can  not  lacke  withowt  detriment,  not  only  they  but  other  metals  alfo  perhappes  more  neceffarie  althowgh
not  fo  precious,  are  thynges  woorthy  to  bee  better  knowen  then  only  by  name,  fyth  they  are  th[e]inn.rumentes
of  all  artes,  the  prices  of  all  thynges,  the  ornamentes  of  al  dignities,  and  not  the  lead  portion  of  nature,  wherby
the  contemplation  of  them  is  no  leffe  pleafaunte  then  neceffary. But  forafmuch  as  it  is  not  here  my  intent  to
intreate  much  of  metals,  I  wyll  fpeake  of  the  feconde  caufe  :  which  is,  that  if  in  traunylyng  {lrang[e]  and
vnknowen  countreys  any  mans  chaunce  fhalbe  to  aiTyue  in  fuch  regions  where  he  may  knowe  by  th[e]information
of  th[e]inhabitauntes  or  otherwyfe,  that  iliche  regions  are  frutefull  of  riche  metals,  he  may  not  bee  without  fum
iudgement  to  make  further  fearche  for  the  fame. The  thyrde  caufe  is,  that  althowgh  this  owTe  realme  of  Eng-
lande  be  ful  of  metals  not  to  bee  contemned  and  much  rycher  then  men  fuppofe,  yet  is  there  fewe  or  none  in
Englande  that  haue  any  greate  fkyll  thereof,  or  any  thynge  wrytten  in  owr  tounge,  whereby  men  maye  bee  well
inflructed  of  the  generation  and  fyndyng  of  the  fame :  as  the  lyke  ignorance  hath  byn  amonge  vs  as  touchynge
Cofmographie  and  nauigations  vntyll  I  attempted  accordinge  to  the  portion  of  my  talent  and  fmiple  leniynge  to
open  the  fyrfl  dore  to  the  enteraunce  of  this  knoweleage  into  owre  language,  wherin  I  wolde  wyflie  that  other
of  greater  lernynge  wolde  take  fume  peynes  to  accomplyfflie  and  bringe  to  further  perfection  that  I  haue  rudely
begunne,  not  as  an  autour  but  a  tranflatoure,  leade  I  bee  iniurious  to  any  man  in  afcr}'byng  to  my  felfe  the
trauayles  of  other. And  wheras  as  concemynge  the  knowleage  of  metals,  I  was  once  mynded  to  haue  tranflated
into  Englyflie  the  hole  woorke  of  Pyrotechnia  wherof  I  fynyfflied.  xxii.  [twenty-two]  chapitures  nowe  more  then
three  yeares  fence,  and  lefte  the  copie  therof  in  the  h:mdes  of  one  of  whome  I  coulde  neuer  get  it  ageyne
(omyttynge  to  fpeake  of  other  ingratitudes)  I  was  therby  difcouraged  to  proceade  any  further  in  that  woorke.
Neuertheieffe,  fythe  this  hyflory  of  the  Indies  hath  miniflred  occafion  to  intreate  fumwhat  of  metals,  I  haue
ageyne  tranflated  three  of  the  fyrfl  chapitures  of  that  booke,  which  feeme  mofl  neceffary  to  bee  knowen  in  this
cafe. And  hereof  to  haue  fayde  thus  much  in  maner  of  a  preface  it  may  fufBce.

.'155

326

356

The  mineral  tren.

The  mynes  doo
growe.

Marchasites.

Signes  of  metals.

327

Signes  and  tokens
ut  inelais.

OF  THE  GENERATION OF METALLES  AND

THEIR  MYNES  WITH  THE  MAKER  OF  FYNDINGE  THE  SAME:

WRITTEN IN THE ITALIEN TOVNGE BY VaNNVCCIVS BiRINGVCZIVS

IN HIS BOOKE CAVLED P  YROTECHNIA.

To  his  louynge  frende  Mafter  Bernardino  Moncellefe,  greeting.

Hereas  I  promyfed  yow  to  wrytte  of  the  natures  of  metal! es  in
particular,  I  am  nowe  inforced  to  declare  euery  thinge  in  generale,
and  efpecially  of  the  places  of  their  generation  and  their  order,
with  the  forme  and  maner  of  woorkynge  in  the  fame,  and  the
inflrumentes  therto  perteyninge.  Yowe  fliall  therefore  vnder-
flande,  that  myncs  of  metalles  are  founde  in  the  mode  partes
of  the  worlde,  more  or  leffe  according  to  the  diligence  of  witti
fearchers:  and  fhew  them  felues  flandinge  in  the  grounde  in
maner  in  fuche  forte  as  the  veynes  of  bludde  are  difparfed  in
the  bodies  of  lyuing  beaftes,  or  like  vnto  the  braunches  of  trees
fpredde  foorth  diuers  wayes.  Wherfor,  the  diligent  fearchers  of
mines,  willing  by  a  certeyne  fimilitude  declare  howe  the  mynes
are  placed  in  the  mountaynes,  haue  figured  a  greate  tree  full  of
branches  planted  in  the  myddefle  of  the  bafe  of  a  mountayne,
frome  the  whyche  are  diriued  dyuers  and  many  bouwes  and
branches,  fum  greate  and  fum  fmaule,  muche  like  vnto  verye
trees  that  are  in  owlde  woddes.  They  will  alfo  that  in  growynge,
they  euer  ingrofe  them  felues  and  reache  towarde  the  heauen,  conuertynge  into  theyr  nature  the  mofle  difpofed
and  neare  matter,  vntil  the  toppes  of  theyr  braunches  extend  to  the  highefl  parte  of  the  mountayne,  and  there
fhewe  furthe  theyr  felues  with  manifefle  apperaunce,  puttinge  furthe  in  the  fleade  of  bouwes  and  floures,
certeyne  fumofites  of  blewe  or  greene  coloure,  or  marchafites  with  fmaule  veynes  of  ponderous  matter,  or  fuche
other  compofitions  of  tinctures.  And  when  by  this. means  they  fhewe  them  felues  vnto  us,  we  may  make  firme
coniecture  that  fuche  mountaynes  are  minerall,  and  that  accordinge  to  the  demonflrations  they  fliewe  more  or
leffe,  they  are  richer  or  porer  of  myne.  Therefore  the  fearchers,  according  to  th[e]apperaunces  which  they
fynde,  take  good  courage  vnto  them :  and  with  hope  and  fecuritie  of  profecte,  apply  al  their  poffible  diligence
with  witte  and  expenfes  to  digge  or  gette  owte  fuche  thynges  as  the  fignes  and  owtewarde  apperaunces  declare
vnto  them.  And  by  this  maner  of  fyndinge  of  mynes,  it  hath  often  tymes  chaunced  that  many  haue  byn
exalted  to  the  highefl.  degree  of  riches.  Wheras  therfore  by  this  meanes  men  enter  into  the  mountaynes  with
the  ey[e]s  of  confideration  and  right  ludgemente,  and  fee  the  places  where  the  mineralles  are  ingendered  and
comprehende  in  maner  theire  quantitie,  they  adapte  theyr  caues  or  foffes  accordynge  therevnto,  wheras  they
fliulde  otherwyfe  wander  by  chaunce,  becaufe  no  man  can  by  any  other  meanes  knovve  where  the  mines  are  in
the  mountaynes,  although  he  were  of  neuer  fo  good  iudgement,  and  fhulde  make  fearche  for  the  fame  neuer  fo
curyoufly  by  litle  and  litle.  It  flial  therfore  in  this  cafe  be  neceffary  to  folow  the  certificat  and  aperaunces  of
fignes,  and  to  encounter  the  fame  as  nere  as  may  be,  with  ey[e]s  and  eares  euer  attentiue  where  they  maye  hope  to
fynde  any  tokens  of  metalles,  efpecially  by  enquyringe  of  fliepardes  and  other  anciente  inhabitauntes  of  fuch
regions  in  the  which  mineralls  are  engendered. And  this  I  fpeake  the  rather  for  that  I  am  perfwaded  that  at

Of  the  generation  of  metals.

357

the  firfl  fight  of  a  mountaine,  by  reafon  of  the  greate  barrennefle  and roughnes  therof,  and  alfo  by  reafon  of
the  great  aboundance  of  waters  that  are  engendered  in  the  fame,  a  right  good  iudgemente  fhall  not  fuffice  to
coomme  to  certayne  knoweleage  that  metall  is  contayned  in  fuch  mountaynes,  vntill  the  fearchers  haue  with
charges  and  trauail  caufed  miners  in  fundry  places  to  difcouer  the  fame. And  therfore  I  alfo  beleue  that  one
man  althowgh  be  bee  neuer  fo  flronge,  wyttie,  and  farre  caflinge,  fhall  not  be  able  in  a  newe  and  (Iraunge
contreye,  to  fearche  by  fmaule  portions  not  onlye  all  the  mountaynes  of  one  or  moo  prouinces  which  may
bringe  furth minerals,  but fhall with  muche difficultie  fcarfely  fuffice to  fearche the  fecreates  of  only  one
mountayne:  In  fo  muche  that  fum  confyderinge  the  difficultie  hereof,  are  of  opinion  that  in  this  effecte,  it  fhuld
be  requyfite  to  worke  by  the  arte  of  Negromancie,  which  I  thynke  to  be  a  fable  withowt  further  knoweleage.
But  I  wolde  that  thefe  necromancers fhulde tell  me  why  this theire  arte  helpeth  theym  no  further  in  the
woorke  after  that  they  haue  once  founde  the  myne,  if  it  be  trewe  that  they  fay. Why  (I  fay)  doth  it  not  helpe
them  furthe  as  at  the  begynnynge  to  fynde  the  myne,  fo  confequently  in  the  myddefl.  and  the  ende  to  brynge
the  fame  to  further  perfection,  as  to  gette  it  owte,  to  brynge  it  to  fufion  or  meltynge,  and  to  purifie  or  pourge
it  from  droffe,  which  doubtleffe  it  fhulde  haue  poure  to  doo  if  it  may  bee  beleaued  that  it  can  doo  the  other.
But  forafmuch  as  fuch  effectes  are  fo  fearefull  and  terrible,  that  they  owght  not  or  can  not  be  practifed  of  al
men,  and  alfo  perhappes  bycaufe  fuch  maner  of  woorkynge  is  not  knowen,  I  thinke  it  not  good  to  be  vfed :  but
thinke  rather  by  good  reafon  that  this  arte  is  fo  much  the  more  to  be  omytted  and  contemned,  in  howe  much
we  are  accuflomed  in  the begynnynge  of  dyggynge  of  mynes,  efpecially  to  caule  for  the  grace  of  god  that  it
may  pleafe  hym  to  be  prefente  with  his  ayde  to  owre  doubtfuU  and  traualious  woorke. Lettynge  paffe  therefore
this  deuylyfflie  diuife  of  fuch  beaflly  and  fearefull  men,  I  exhorte  yowe  to  folowe  the  practife  by  the  forefayde
fignes  minyflred  vnto  yowe  by  the  benignitie  of  nature,  bothe  grounded  vppon  the  foundation  of  truth  and
approued  by  th[e]experience  of  many  practicionars,  not  confyflynge  in  woordes  or  promyffes  of  thynges  vayne
and  incomprehenfible. With  thefe  fignes  therfore  fhall  yow  fearche  the  bankes  and  fides  of  the  valleys,  with
the  clyfifes  and  ryftes  of  the  flones,  and  the  backes,  toppes,  or  ridges  of  the  Montaynes :  Alfo  the  beddes,
chanels,  and  courfes  of  ryuers,  lookynge  diligently  amonge  the)Tr  fandes,  and  the  ruines  of  theyr  foffes,  amonge
the  whiche  yow  fhall  often  tymes  efpie  marchafites  or  fmaule  fparkes  of  mynes,  or  other  dyuers  tinctures  of
metals,  whereby  yow  may  be  certified  that  certeyne  mynes  are  in  fuch  places,  which  yowe  fliall  exactly  fynd  by
diligent  and  curious  fearchyng  the  clyffes  of  theyr  ryftes  and  dry  places. After  thefe  aduertifementes,  take  this
for  a  generall  figne,  that  all  fuche  places  and mountaynes  are  mineral,  owt  of  the  which  many  fpringes  and
great  abundaunce  of  crude  water  dooth  iffhewe,  hauyng  with  theyr  clearenes  a  certeyne  minerall  tafle,  and  fuch
as  at  variable  feafons  of  the  yeare  chaunge  theyr  qualitie,  beinge  warme  in  the  fprynge  tyme  and  coulde  in
fommer. And  this  thynge  owght  yow  to  beleue  the  more  when  yow  fhall  fee  the  afpecte  of  fuch  mountaynes
to  be  rough,  fliarpe,  and  faluage  withowt  earth  or  trees. Or  fo  that  yf  there  bee  a  lyttle  earth  found  vpon  the
fame  with  a  fmaule  veyiie  of  herbes  or  graffe  yowe  fhall  perceaue  the  grenenes  therof  to  be  faynt  and  in  maner
wythered  and  dryed. And  albeit  that  fumtymes  alfo,  mines  are  founde  in  mountaynes  hauynge  earth  and
frutefuU  trees  in  the  toppes  therof,  yet  are  they  for  the  mofl  part  found  in  fuch  wherof  we  haue  fpoken. Of
thefe  other,  .there  maye  fewe  fignes  be  gyuen,  except  to  go  by  lyttle  and  lyttle  to  feke  the  bankes  of  theyr  fydes.
But  amonge  all  thefe,  the  befl  and  mofl  certeyne  figne  that  may  bee  gyuen,  is  wheras  on  the  fuperficiall  parte
of  the  earth  eyther  on  hyghe  or  belowe,  the  myne  dooth  fhewe  it  felfe  apparente  to  fyght. Sum  there  are  that
for  a  good  figne  do  greately  commende  the  refidences  which  certeyne  waters  make  wher  they  haue  refled  for  a
time  and  beinge  dryed  vp  of  the  heate  of  the  fonne,  do  often  times  fhewe  in  certeyne  partes  of  theyr  refidencies
dyuers  tinctures  of  mynerall  fubflaunce. Summe  other  are  accuflomed  to  take  fuch  waters,  and  in  a  veffell  of
earth  or  glaffe  or  other  matter,  caufe  them  to  boyle  and  vapoure  away  vntyll  the  dregs  or  refidence  remayne  in
the  bottome  well  dryed  in  the  likenes  of  a  grofe  earth,  of  the  which  they  make  an  affaye  eyther  by  the  ordi-
narie  tryall  of  fyer,  or  after  fume  other  maner  as  lyketh  them  befl. And  by  this  meanes  (althowgh  they
attayne  not  to  th[e]exacte  knowleage  of  the  truth)  yet  do  they  approche  to  a  certeyne  knowleage  of  the  thyng
wherby  they  haue  fum  intelligence  of  what  fufficiencie  and  goodneffe  the  myne  is  which  they  feeke,  before  they
be  at  any  great  charges  in  folowynge the  fame:  Prouydynge  alway  that  with  all  diligent  aduertifement  the
places  neare  vnto  the  rootes  ot  the  confine  mountaynes  be  curioufly  fearched,  with  alfo  the  bankes  and  fydes
of  the  felfe  fame  mountayne,  and  all  fuch  fuperficiall  partes  therof,  where  any  flones  are  founde  difcouered
eyther  of  theyr  owne  proper  nature  or  by  the  courfe  of  water:  prefuppofynge  euer  that  it  is  in  maner  impoffible
but  that  yf  fuche  mountaynes contayne  any  mynes,  they  mufle  needes  fliewe  furth  fum  floures,  tinctures,  or
colours  of  theyr  exhalations. Yet  yf  it  fhulde  fo  chaunce  that  they  do  not  this,  the  goodnes  of  the  mine  may
be  the  caufe  hereof  forafmuche  as  eyther  it  is  not  of  vaporable  nature,  or  to  be  of  fmaule  quantitie,  or  els
perhappes  bycaufe  the  mountayne  is  greate  and  the  myne  very  low  or  fo  farre  with  in,  that  it  is  not  fufficient  to
put  furth  any  fignes  of  fumofities. The  caufe  alfo  hereof  maye  bee  that  fum  flone  lyke  vnto  that  cauled
Albafajio  (which  I  thynke  to  be  of  that  kynde  which  we  caule  the  greete  flone)  or  blacke  and  whyte  marble  of

2 D 2  557

Mountaynes  in
the  which  metals
are  cngencitrcd.

Ageynst  seekynge
metals  with  the
rod  which  they
caule  Virgula
diuina.
Negromancie.

The  maner  of
searchynge  for
mynes.

A  generall  signc

Rowgh  and  barren
mountaynes.

328

The  lest  signe.

The  residence
of  waters.

Marchasites  are
the  tinctures
of  myneral
e-xhalalions.

3

58

Of  tJie  gencnition  of  metals.

Metals  in  frutful
mounlaynef.

Howe  the  signes
are  to  bee
consydered.

The  assay  of  the
mines.

329

The  richer  myne
further  within  the
montayne.

Consyderacions
how  the  caue
ought  to  bee  made.

The  bodie  of  the
myne.

Howses  of  office
for  the  myntrs.

Baptisinge  and
dedication  of  the
caue.

The  makinge  of
the  caue.

thycke  and  refyftynge  nature,  may  be  found  to  lye  betwene  and  fo  to  floppe  the  pafTages,  that  the  fayde
funiofities  may  therby  be  hyndered  to  arryue  to  the  vj^permofle  parte  of  the  earth :  by  reafon  wherof,  it  is
poffible  that  fuche  mountaynes  may  brynge  furth  trees  and  herbes  forafniuclio  as  tlic  earth  therof  dooth  reteyne
his  vertue  and  may  nurylhe  theyr  rootes  not  beinge  incinerate  or  burnte  with  hotte  and  venemous  vapours  of
the  mynes :  fo  that  the  flioures  of  rayne  or  fluds  with  their  courfes  can  not  cary  away  the  earth  as  in  fuch  places
wher  the  fame  is  found  fore  dryed.  And  therfore  vppon  fuch  mountaynes  I  haue  feene  great  wooddes  of
chefTnutte  trees,  beeches  alfo  aud  okes,  with  well  cultured  and  frutfuU  fieldes.  So  that  to  conclude,  by  the
fignes  of  the  rowghnefle  or  barennefle  of  the  mountayne,  is  not  taken  away  but  that  other  places  may  alfo
haue  plentie  of  mines  whiche  ought  to  be  fearched  and  folowed.  But  forafmuch  as  thefe  figncs  are  of  the
natures  of  minerals,  I  wyll  fpeake  more  determinately  of  theym  in  the  places  where  I  entreate  of  theyr  proper
mynes :  Not  intendynge  here  to  faye  muche  of  thefe  thynges  in  generall,  but  only  to  induce  yow  to  fum  clear-
neffe  of  the  fyrfl  lyght.  And  therfore  that  yow  may  gyue  the  more  diligent  aduertifment,  I  faye  vnto  yowe  that
all  the  mynes  which  yow  fliall  fynde  by  fuch  fignes,  by  what  meanes  fo  euer  they  Hiall  coome  to  yowre  handes,
whether  they  be  found  in  flones,  earthe,  or  fande,  after  that  at  the  fyrlle  fyght  they  haue  fhewed  them  felues  to
bee  mynes  of  metals,  yow  owght  to  confyder  of  what  ponderofitie  of  weyght  they  are:  The  which  the  greater
that  it  is,  fo  much  the  more  dooth  it  fliewe  both  the  perfection  and  goodneffe  of  the  fubflaunce,  and  alfo  the
more  quantitie  of  the  mine.  And  thus  prefuppofyng  that  by  the  fignes  or  other  meanes  yow  haue  founde  the
mine,  not  yet  fully  perceauynge  of  what  kynde  of  metall  it  myght  be,  to  certifie  yowe  hereof  and  alfo  of  what
quantitie  it  is,  or  howe  it  is  accompanyed  or  myxt  with  other,  or  lykewyfe  of  what  puritie  it  is  of  it  felfe,  or  of
what  euyll  difpofition  or  malice  it  is  founde  to  bee,  it  fliall  herein  be  necefdiry  before  yow  be  at  any  farther
charges  therwith,  to  proue  the  fame  by  twoo  or  three  afiayes  or  mo,  as  I  wyll  further  declare  in  the  particular
place  of  afiayes.  Beinge  therfore  certifyed  of  the  myne,  and  of  what  metall  it  is,  and  alfo  what  quantitie  it
conteyneth,  fyndynge  it  by  accompte  to  bee  fo  profitable  as  to  beare  the  charges,  I  exhorte  yowe  bouldely  to
gyue  the  fyrfle  attempte  to  faule  to  mynynge,  and  with  all  poffible  diligence  to  folowe  yowr  enterpryfe :  affur-
ynge  yowre  felfe,  that  of  what  fo  euer  mynerall  matter  yow  fliall  take  affay  accordyng  to  the  proportion  of  that
pi[e]ce  which  yow  tooke  of  the  vppennofi.  or  owtmofl.  parte  of  the  mine  for  that  purpofe,  yow  fhall  fynde  that  to
bee  muche  better  and  rycher  whiche  is  further  within  the  mountayne.  And  thus  being  certified  by  the  affay  of
what  quantitie  the  thynge  is  that  appered  by  the  fignes,  and  of  all  other  reafonable  confyderations  apperteynyng
to  the  worke,  yow  fliall  with  all  celeritie  difpofe  yowr  felfe  to  faule  to  dyggynge,  to  th[e]intent  that  yowe  may
fliortely  eyther  here  enioye  the  frute  of  yowre  trauell,  or  els  where  with  better  fucceffe  proue  yowre  good  fortune.
But  in  th[e]attempte  of  this  enterpryfe,  yow  owght  principally  to  haue  refpecte  to  the  fituation  of  the  place
where  yowe  intende  to  make  the  begynnynge  of  yowr  caue  or  foffe :  Takynge  good  aduertifement  that  it  be
commodious  for  the  labourers  that  flial  worke  therein :  prouydynge  aboue  all  thynges  that  it  haue  an  eafye
enteraunce  into  the  mountayne,  with  lefle  charges  and  in  fliorter  tyme  to  arryue  vnder  the  fignes  which  yowe
haue  taken :  encounterynge  the  fame  as  muche  as  is  poffible  as  it  were  by  a  ryght  line,  fyrfl.  with  iudgemente
and  then  with  workemanfliyppe,  vntyll  yow  flryke  on  the  grofe  niaffe  or  bodye  of  the  myne,  breakynge  in  the
courfe  of  the  caue  al  matters  of  hard  compofitions,  as  quarreys  and  flones  ouerthwartynge  the  fame :  hauynge
euer  refpecte  to  the  owtwarde  fignes  whiche  yow  folowe,  forecaflynge  in  yowre  mynde  how  yowe  may  directly-
arryue  to  the  fame,  euen  as  the  maryners  directe  theyr  courfe  by  theyr  compaffe  and  fyght  of  the  north  flarre.
Alfo  byfyde  that  place  where  yow  haue  determined  to  make  the  enteraunce  and  begynnynge  of  the  caue,  yow
mufle  take  choyfe  of  an  other  place,  eyther  on  the  front  of  the  mountayne  or  on  the  fyde  that  it  may  bee  neare
and  commodious  to  make  one  or  two  or  mo  cotages  for  the  commoditie  and  neceffitie  of  the  woorkemen.  One
of  thefe  mufl.  bee  appoynted  for  theyr  dormitorie  where  fum  may  refl.  and  fleepe  whyle  other  woorke,  and  that
yow  may  the  more  commodioufly  be  prefent  and  affyflaunte  to  theyr  doynges,  diligently  to  beholde  all  thynges
and  to  conforte  theim  in  theyr  laboures :  alfo  to  difpence  and  beflowe  theyr  vyttayles  as  fhall  bee  nedef ull,  and
to  referue  the  fame  in  fafe  cuflodie,  with  dayly  prouifion  of  al  thynges  apperteynynge.  The  other  mufl.  bee  as
it  were  a  fiiiythes  forge  wherin  theyr  worne  and  broken  tooles  mufl,  bee  renewed,  and  other  newe  made,  to  tli[e]-
intent  that  the  woorke  be  not  hyndered  for  lacke  of  flore  of  neceffarie  inflrumentes.  When  thefe  thynges  are
thus  fynyfflied,  with  good  prouifion  of  vyttayles  and  a  fufticient  number  of  expert  myners,  then  in  the  name  of
God  and  good  aduenture,  caufynge  a  prefle  to  bleffe  the  mountayne  with  all  the  flioppes,  and  to  baptife  the
caue,  dedicatynge  it  (as  the  maner  is)  to  the  holy  Trinitie  or  to  owr  Lady  or  to  the  name  of  fum  other  faynt
which  yowe  haue  in  deuotion,  with  inuocation  to  theym  to  profper  yowre  attemptes,  yow  fliall  with  good
courage  and  hope  begynne  to  dygge  the  caue,  with  intente  to  folowe  the  fame  withowte  ceafynge  as  farre  as
yowre  abilitie  fliall  reache,  or  vntyll  yowe  haue  paffed  ouer  the  lymettes  fignified  by  the  fignes  before  named :
Takynge  euer  diligent  heade  that  yowe  begyn  yowre  caue  as  lowe  as  yow  may  at  the  foote  of  the  mountayne,
in  fuch  order  that  yowr  myners  fo  continue  and  folow  tlie  fame  by  a  right  line,  that  they  encounter  the  veyne  of
the  myne  by  the  fliortefl.  and  fafefl.  way  that  may  bee  deuifed.  For  it  often  times  chaunceth,  that  althowgh
358

Of  the  generation  of  metals.

359

the  caue  haue  byn  wel  begiinne,  yet  hath  it  not  byn  well  folowed,  for  that  the  myners  beinge  withdrawen  from
the  ryght  courfe  by  the  hope  of  fuche  braunches  of  mynes  as  haue  appered  vnto  them  in  the  waye,  doo  often
times  decline  from  theyr  attempted  courfe,  and  from  the  fignes  which  they  owght  to  haue  folowed.  And
byfyde  other  preceptes,  fee  that  yow  beare  in  memory  to  procure  that  in  dyggynge,  yow  efchewe  as  muche  as
yowe  maye,  the  cuttynge  of  folte  or  brykell  flones,  afwell  for  that  it  may  bee  daungerous  for  ruine  of  the  caue,
as  alfo  that  it  feldome  chaunceth  that  any  mynes  are  founde  in  fuch  flones.  But  yf  yow  fhal  chaunce  fo  to
fynde  them  that  yow  can  by  no  meanes  auoyde  them,  I  confort  yow  that  where  fuche  caufe  of  feare  (heweth  it
felfe,  both  that  yow  lofe  not  the  charges  of  the  caue  and  for  the  better  fafegarde  of  yowre  woorkemen,  it  fhalbe
neceffary  that  yowe  vfe  all  poffible  diligence  in  well  vpholdynge  and  fortyfyinge  the  caue  with  arches  of  waules
trauerfed  with  (Ironge  pofles  of  tymber  after  the  maner  of  framed  beames,  fudeyned  with  grofe  and  flronge
pyles  made  of  goode  and  flronge  tymber  of  oke  or  other  great  trees.  And  in  this  maner  owght  yow  to  proceade
in  dyggyng  yowre  myne  that  yow  may  with  more  fecuritie  enioy  the  frute  of  yowr  trauayle.  But  in  the  owlde
tyme  they  that  dygged  mynes  (as  is  yet  to  fee  in  the  caues  lefte  of  them)  folowed  an  other  maner :  fo  that  in
the  fleade  of  begynnynge  the  caue  belowe  at  the  foote  of  the  mountayne  (as  doo  the  later  myners)  they  begunne
to  dygge  theyr  caue  in  the  vpper  or  hyghed  parte  where  the  daye  difcouered  the  myne,  dyggynge  downewarde
after  the  maner  of  a  pytte  or  a  well,  folowynge  the  fame  fumtyme  on  the  one  fyde,  and  fumtyme  on  the  other
euen  vnto  the  depth,  as  the  veyne  fhewed  it  felfe  to  theyr  fyght:  whereof  I  haue  thought  good  to  make
mention,  for  that  in  th[e]oppinion  of  many  men,  this  way  dooth  feeme  much  better  and  of  more  fecuritie  to
fynde  that  they  feeke,  then  to  dygge  by  the  fydes :  bycaufe  that  by  this  meanes  they  haue  euer  the  mine  before
theyr  eyes  eyther  more  or  leffe  as  a  line  to  leade  them  to  the  groffe  maffe.  Yet  who  fo  confydereth  the  thynge
well,  (hall  vnderRande  that  die  later  myners  haue  better  conceaued  the  reafon  of  this  woorke,  ia  refpecte  (as  is
to  fee)  of  many  more  commodities  and  fecurities  which  infue  rather  of  this  maner  of  woorkynge  then  of  the
other :  as  the  difficultie  to  defcende  and  afcende  the  caue,  and  the  daungiour  left  it  bee  ftopped  vp  by  many
ruines,  byfyde  the  trauaylous  labour  to  draw  owt  the  mine  with  the  rockes  and  fragmentes  of  ftones  :  And
aboue  al  thynges,  that  they  flial  not  bee  able  to  drawe  owt  the  waters  whiche  are  often  tymes  fo  abundaunt  that
they  greatly  increafe  the  charges  and  trauayles  of  the  patrones  of  the  mynes  by  reafon  of  the  greate  ayde  and
helpe  which  fhalbe  requifite  to  haue  in  that  cafe  and  alfo  for  the  makynge  of  wheeles,  troughes,  pypes,  and
pumpes,  with  fuch  other  inftrumentes  feruynge  for  the  purpofe  to  drawe  owt  the  waters.  And  yet  with  all  this,
it  often  tymes  chaunceth  that  although  they  labour  hereat  continually,  yet  Ihal  they  be  inforced  to  forfake  their
profitable  and  laudable  enterpryfe  So  that  to  conclude,  I  faye  (as  yowe  maye  well  vnder  ftand)  that  it  is  a
much  better  way  and  of  more  fecuritie  to  begynne  the  diggyng  of  the  caue  rather  at  the  roote  or  fote  of  the
mountayne  and  to  enter  into  the  fame  by  litle  and  lytle  a  flope  vpwarde,  then  to  begynne  at  the  toppe  or  the
higheft  backe  therof  And  this  both  for  the  more  commodious  paffinge  furthe  of  the  water,  and  alfo  for  the
eafier  trauaile  of  the  labourers.  Obferuynge  euer  diligently  the  chaunge  of  the  fignes  whiche  appere  vnto  yow
owtwardly,  vfynge  the  rudder  and  compaffe  as  do  they  that  fayle  on  the  fea.  For  hereby  the  myners  fhalbe
inftructed  euer  to  folowe  the  right  way  in  the  caue  vntill  by  the  conductinge  of  wytte  and  arte,  they  bee  browght
to  the  place  of  the  grofe  maffe  or  bodie  of  the  tree,  whyche  is  the  caufe,  fontayne,  and  original  from  whenfe  the
fayd  tinctures,  fumofites,  and  mineral  fignes,  are  diriued  and  fente  furth  to  the  fuperficiall  partes.  And  as  con-
cernynge  this  purpofe,  I  thincke  it  good  to  declare  vnto  yow  howe  in  the  Dukedome  of  AuJIria,  betweene
J{>i\fpruc  and  Alia  where  I  contynued  manye  yeares,  I  fawe  a  large  vale  enuironed  with  a  greale  number  of
mountaynes,  by  the  myddeft  wherof  a  ryuer  paffed  through  of  greate  aboundaunce  of  water  :  and  in  maner  in
all  the  montaynes  that  are  there  abowt,  is  digged  great  plentie  of  mine,  wherof  the  mofte  parte  are  of  copper  or
leade,  althoughe  alfo  in  maner  euery  of  them  is  founde  to  holde  fum  portion  of  filuer.  Amonge  thefe  moun-
taynes, I  fawe  one  in  the  whyche  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the  countrey  dwellyng  there  abowt  allured  by  the  fight
of  many  fignes,  beganne  to  digge  a  caue  after  the  maner  wherof  we  haue  fpoken :  In  fo  muche  that  (as  it
appered  vnto  me)  from  the  place  where  they  begane  the  caue,  they  had  digged  little  leffe  then  two  myles  before
they  fawe  any  fparke  or  fliadowe  of  any  myne  And  beinge  arryued  with  the  caue  in  maner  perpendicularly
vnder  the  fignes  they  folowed,  they  were  encountered  with  a  veyne  of  the  harde  ftone  cauled  A/bazano,  of  a
yarde  and  a  halfe  thicke,  which  they  paffed  through  with  greate  trauayle  and  longe  tyme,  and  with  the  helpe  of
commodious  inftrumentes  of  iren  hardened  to  woorke  in  fuche  ftones.  And  when  they  had  thus  palTed  through
this  quarrey  of  ftone,  they  chaunced  vppon  a  verye  great  veyne  of  the  myne  of  copper  of  fuch  forte  that  when
I  was  there,  lookinge  betweene  the  one  and  the  other,  I  fawe  on  euery  fyde  as  it  were  a  waule  of  the  hard  ftone
of  Albazano,  and  therin  a  voyde  place  of  fuche  largenes  from  the  one  fyde  to  the  other  that  more  then  two
hundreth  men  al  at  one  time,  had  fufliiciente  roome  to  ftande  labouringe  frome  the  hyghefte  parte  to  the  loweft,
hauynge  non  other  lyght  then  of  candells,  and  makinge  certeyne  markes  in  euery  place  where  they  faw  the  vre
or  myne  fliewe  it  felfe  :  and  thus  ceafed  not  to  woorke  continually  both  day  and  nyght,  courfe  by  courfe,  a
thynge  fuerly  maruelous  to  be  holde. Without  the  mouth  of  the  caue,  I  fawe  great  abundaunce  of  mine  partely

359

Causes  of
hinderauncc.

Soft  stones.

330

The  fortefiing  of
the  caue

Howe  the  caues
were  made  in
olde  tyme.

Abundaiincfe]  of
water  in  the
mynes.

The  baste  maner
of  makinge  the
caue.

The  change  of
the  signes.

The  rudder  and
compasse.

Austria,

Mjiies  of  copper
and  leadi  hold.ng
syluer.

A  caue  of  two
rayles.

A  large  caue  of
the  myne  oi
copper  holdmge
siluer.

331

Cmdle  light

360

Of  the  generation  of  metals.

A  greate  masse
of  pure  luyne.

Abundaunce  of
water  in  the
mynes.

Water  is  the

nearest  principle
of  minerales.

A  general  rule.

Great  riches
obtayned  by
searchinge  of
mynes.

M.ignanimitie
and  pacience.

The  mountaynes
are  the  matrices
of  riches.

The  grace  of  god
is  receaved  by
owre  endeuoure.

Monye  begetteth
rjches.

332

Necessarie
aduertismentes.

Plentye  of  woode.

Cotages  and

edifi[c]es.

The  situacion  of
the  place.

The  vse  of  water.

mi.xt  with  the  flone  of  the  vre,  and  partely  chofen  and  feperated.  Amonge  thefe  pieces,  there  was  one  con-
fillynge  of  a  hole  made  of  pure  mine  of  fiich  biggnes  and  weyght,  that  two  good  horfes  with  a  Hght  carre  coulde
fcarfely  drawe  it  away.  This  myne  was  of  copper  as  I  haue  fayde.  But  to  magnifie  it  they  caulcd  it  fyluer,
bycaufe  it  helde  fuche  plentie  tliereof  that  it  furmountcd  the  charges,  whereas  they  had  alfo  the  copper  for
aduantage.  Yowe  fliall  further  vnderflond  that  in  the  myddefl  of  the  caue,  there  was  a  chanell  or  gutter  whyche
gathered  togyther  the  waters  that  fell  into  it  continually  on  euery  fyde  from  the  ruptures  or  broken  places  and
cliftes.  Thefe  waters  ranne  through  the  chanel  with  fo  vehemente  a  (Ireme,  that  I  fuerly  beleue  that  it  might
well  fuffice  to  dryue  any  greate  mylle.  In  fo  muche  that  in  goynge  in  and  comming  owt  of  the  caue,  I  remem-
ber that  by  the  contynual  foule  and  fprinkeling  of  the  waters  from  aboue  and  beneth,  I  was  as  wet  as  though
I  had  palled  through  a  greate  flioure  of  rayne,  Wherat  I  maruel  the  leffe  when  I  confyder  that  water  is  the
fyrfl.  and  nearefl  principle  of  the  whiche  the  fubllaunce  of  minerals  is  engendered.  By  reafon  wherof,  fuch  men
of  vnderflandynge  as  haue  fearched  the  natures  of  thefe  thynges,  argue  hereby  and  take  it  for  a  generall  rule,
tliat  all  thofe  mountaynes  owt  of  the  whiche  fpryngeth  great  abundaunce  of  water,  doo  alfo  abounde  with  myne.
The  which  thynge  well  confyderynge,  and  weyinge  the  greatnes  hereof,  I  faule  into  this  accompte  with  my  felfe,
that  if  to  the  patrones  of  the  fayde  caue,  the  charges  of  the  fame  hadde  byn  a  hynderaunce  or  greefe,  eyther  for
the  length  therof,  or  for  defpayre  that  they  fliuld  not  haue  found  that  they  fought,  they  wolde  furely  haue  for-
faken  it.  And  beinge  nowe  comme  to  this  harde  flone  after  they  had  fufteyned  fo  great  charges  byfyde  the
trauayle  both  of  mynde  and  body,  if  they  fliulde  then  haue  lefte  of  theyr  enterpryfe,  they  fliulde  not  haue  come
to  fuch  ryches  whereby  they  haue  obteyned  many  commodities  afwell  profitable  for  them  felues  as  alfo  for  theyr
lordes  and  princes,  theyr  countrey,  theyr  kinffolkes  and  famelie.  Neyther  yet  fliulde  they  haue  byn  fo  wel  able
to  helpe  theyr  poore  neyghbours  as  they  haue  doone  by  the  meanes  of  the  valientneffe  of  theyr  conflant  myndes
and  perfiftynge  in  fo  good  and  commendable  an  enterprife.  Wherfore  to  conclude,  yow  that  wyll  begynne  to
attempt  any  fuch  thynge,  mufl  be  of  good  courage  and  much  pacience  to  folowe  that  yow  haue  begunne,  at  the
leafl  vntill  yow  knowe  by  the  fignes  what  the  thynge  is  :  hopinge  euer  that  in  goynge  forwarde,  the  day  folow-
ynge  (as  it  is  poffible)  flial  difcouer  the  thynge  that  yowe  feeke  and  content  your  defyre  :  Wherof  yow  may  bee
the  better  affured,  if  yow  well  confyder  that  the  moothers  and  matrices  of  niofl.  eflemed  ryches,  and  the  myntes
of  al  treafures,  are  the  mountaynes  :  To  the  whiche  (with  the  helpe  of  fortune  and  yowr  ingenious  indeuoure)
yow  fliall  open  the  way,  not  only  to  fynde  the  myne  and  arryue  to  the  belly  of  the  mountaynes  where  fuche
thynges  lye  hyd,  but  fliall  alfo  bee  exalted  by  ryches  to  hyghe  honoure  and  dignitie  as  they  of  whome  we  haue
made  mention  before  :  forafmuch  as  mofl.  beningne  and  liberall  nature,  doothe  open  her  lappe  and  promeffe
_^ood  fuccefle  to  fuche  as  feeke  ryches  by  fuch  honefl.  meanes.  The  whiche  way  furely  is  muche  rather  to  be
folowed,  then  eyther  the  warre  full  of  trowbles  and  miferie,  or  the  carefuU  trade  of  marchaundies  with  wander-
ynge  abowt  the  worlde,  or  fuche  other  faflidious  cares  perhappes  vnlawfull  for  a  good  man.  And  albeit  (as
fume  men  vfe  to  fpeake)  the  fyndynge  of  mynes  bee  an  efpecial  grace  of  God,  neuertheleffe,  forafmuch  as  we
are  borne  to  laboure,  it  flialbe  neceffar)'  that  we  feeke  the  fame  in  fuche  places  where  they  are  brought  furth  by
the  woorke  of  nature,  and  by  fearchynge  to  fynde  them,  and  beinge  founde  to  dygge  for  them,  and  by  this
meanes  to  receaue  the  grace  of  God  with  applyinge  owre  owne  diligence  therto,  with  helpe  of  the  difpofition  of
fortune  and  naturall  iudgemente.  And  yet  flial  not  this  only  fuffice  withowt  fufficiencie  of  money  able  to
fufleyne  the  charges  and  continue  the  woorke :  to  th[e]cnde  that  if  yow  can  not  fynyfflie  it  with  yowr  owne
expenfes,  yow  niaye  fupplye  the  fame  by  the  ayde  of  other,  eyther  patrones  or  parteners.  But  let  vs  nowe
ceafe  to  reafon  any  further  of  thefe  thinges.  Prefuppofyng  therfore  that  yow  haue  alredy  paffed  the  charges,
and  haue  not  only  founde  the  myne  yow  fought,  but  alfo  haue  brought  furth  to  lyght  a  great  quantitie  therof,  it
flial  then  bee  needeful  (as  a  thyng  chiefely  to  be  confydered  before  yow  begin  to  dygge)  wel  to  ponder  and
examen  both  the  commodities  of  fuch  thynges  as  fliall  occurre,  and  alfo  of  fuch  wherof  yow  fliall  haue  neede :
as  tymber  and  woodde  of  all  fortes,  with  water  and  vyttayles :  of  all  the  whiche,  yow  mufle  haue  great  plentie :
and  efpecially  of  woodde,  whereof  yowe  mufle  haue  great  quantitie,  afwell  to  ferue  to  the  proportion  of  the  myne,
as  alfo  to  make  coles  to  the  vfe  of  meltynge,  fynynge,  dryinge,  garboylyng,  and  fuch  other  broylynges,  byfyde
that  which  mufl.  ferue  to  fortifie  the  caue  and  to  buyld  flioppes  and  cotages  with  fuch  other  edifi[c]es.  Diligent
confideration  mufl  lykewyfe  be  had  to  the  fituacion  of  the  place  where  the  buyldynges  fhalbe  erected  :  as  that
the  plotte  therof  bee  commodious  with  abundaunce  of  water  hauynge  a  good  faule.  Alfo  not  onely  of  plentie
of  woodde  and  cole  nere  vnto  the  myne,  but  of  fuch  as  may  ferue  the  turne.  And  of  all  odier  incommodities,
yowe  mufle  chiefely  auoyde  the  lacke  of  water,  as  a  thynge  of  greatefl.  importaunce  and  mofl.  neceffarie  in  this
effecte.  For  by  the  force  and  weyght  of  the  courfe  herof,  wheeles  and  dyuers  other  ingenious  inflrumentes  are
adapted  with  eafe  to  lyfte  vppe  greate  bellowes  to  make  fyers  of  great  poure,  to  beat  with  hammers  of  great
weyght,  and  to  turne  myghtie  and  flronge  engens,  by  the  force  whereof  the  trauayles  of  men  are  fo  much
furthered,  that  withowt  fuch  helpe,  it  were  in  maner  impoffible  to  ouercome  fuche  tedious  trauayles  or  to  arryue
to  the  ende  of  the  woorke,  forafmuch  as  the  force  of  one  wheele  may  lyfte  more,  and  that  more  fafely  then  the
360

Of  the  generation  of  metals.

361

paynefuU  labour  of  a  hundretli  men.  It  flial  therfore  be  needefiill  to  haue  great  confyderation  hereof,  not  only
to  make  thefe  edifi[c]es  or  houfes  of  office,  but  alfo  to  make  them  commodious  for  the  purpofe,  as  for  the  cariage
of  myne  and  cole  with  other  neceffaries.  For  if  any  of  thefe  effectes  fliulde  be  vvantynge,  the  cofle,  tyme  and
trauayle,  fliulde  bee  cafl  away :  forafmuch  as  thefe  thynges  doo  fo  much  the  more  relieue  the  one  the  other  as
they  are  ioyned  togyther,  and  hinder  the  woorke  not  a  lyttle  yf  any  be  feparate.  But  bycaufe  thefe  commodities
can  not  euer  be  hadde  all  togyther,  yowe  owght  to  wey  with  yowr  felfe  which  of  the  twoo  ferueth  for  mo  necef-
farie  vfes,  as  eyther  to  haue  the  cole  or  the  mine  mofl  commodious  to  the  houfes,  and  accordinge  there  vnto  to
place  the  houfes  nere  vnto  the  fame  if  the  commoditie  of  water  wyll  fo  permytte.  Albeit,  if  it  were  poffible,  it
fliulde  be  much  better  if  al  thefe  neceffarie  commodities  were  ioyned  togyther,  whereas  otherwyfe  yowe  mufle
contente  yowre  felfe  as  occafion  ferueth.

Nowe  therefore  to  conclude,  byfyde  that  whiche  I  haue  declared  vnto  yow  of  the  findinge  of  the  myne  and
the  digging  thereof  with  other  confiderations,  I  exhorte  yowe  further  to  faule  to  practyfe  with  fum  myne  of  your
owne,  that  yow  may  therby  take  occafion  to  ryfe  to  the  degree  of  ryches  whyche  yow  defire.  And  therfore  I
aduertife  yow  that  after  yow  haue  founde  the  mountyane  and  begun  to  digge,  yow  flial  euer  go  forwarde  with  a
boulde  mynde  and  floute  corage,  woorkyng  Avith  witte  and  Judgement,  forafmuche  as  in  this  effecte  the  one
ferueth  the  other  in  the  fleede  of  ey[e]s  to  enter  where  they  can  not.  Gyue  no  credit  to  that  whiche  many
ignorante  folkes  doo  fay  and  beleue,  affirminge  that  in  digging  for  metals,  they  are  founde  rather  by  chaunce
then  by  arte.  The  which  although  it  were  trewe,  yet  owght  we  to  trufl  more  to  art  and  practyfe  then  to  chaunce.
And  when  yow  are  nowe  entered  into  the  mountayne,  beare  well  in  memory  that  yow  haue  prefently  with  yow
the  tallie  or  ruler  of  the  caue,  wherby  yowe  may  trauerfe  the  veyne  of  the  myne  when  yow  are  coomme  to  it.
For  if  yow  fliulde  folowe  it  by  the  courfe  as  it  lyeth,  it  is  poffible  that  yowe  might  folowe  it  a  greate  way  not
pafl.e  the  biggneffe  of  a  mans  finger  and  perhappes  leffe  :  By  reafon  wherof,  it  might  happen  that  yow  fliuld  lofe
it  and  neuer  find  it  ageyne.  The  like  fhuld  chaunce  vnto  yow  if  after  that  yow  haue  begun  to  digge  a  caue,  it
fliulde  repent  yow  of  the  charges,  and  that  for  the  bafnes  therof  yowe  fliulde  forfake  it,  as  many  haue  doone  who
bycaufe  they  coulde  not  fynde  the  mine  at  the  firfl  flroke,  defpayringe  that  they  fliulde  neuer  fynde  it,  haue
forfaken  it  as  a  thyng  vnprofitable,  thynking  that  they  haue  woonne  enough  in  that  they  were  not  at  further
charges  with  that  which  they  accompt  loffe  and  domage  :  And  thus  furioufly  leaue  of  their  enterprife,  not
regardinge  that  they  may  leaue  the  frute  of  theyr  expenfes  and  trauaile  to  an  other  that  may  folowe  their
begynninges,  and  perhappes  fynde  the  myne  within  the  diflance  of  a  cubet,  a  fpanne,  or  a  finger.  We  may  fay
therfore  that  fuche  men  doo  willinglye  forfake  their  good  fortune  as  many  haue  doone.  He  therfore  that  hath
begune  to  digge  a  caue,  let  hym  determine  to  folowe  it,  puttinge  away  th[e]eflimation  of  the  bafenes  therof,  and
not  to  feare  the  flreyghtneffe  of  the  way,  but  rather  to  applye  all  his  poffible  diligence  withowt  remorfe,  hopynge
thereby  no  leffe  to  obteyne  honour  and  ryches,  then  to  auoyde  fhame  and  infamie  for  omyttynge  fo  profitable  an
enterprife.  And  that  yow  may  the  more  circumfpectly  behaue  yowr  felfe  in  all  thynges,  befyde  the  former
inflructions,  I  further  aduertife  yowe  to  fet  euer  freffhe  men  a  woorke  by  courfe  in  fucli  order,  that  in  euerv  fixte
or  eyght  houres  (accordynge  to  the  number  of  the  myners)  yow  appoynt  fuch  to  the  woorke  as  haue  repofed  or
taken  theyr  refl,  that  yow  may  by  this  nieanes  the  fooner  come  to  th[e]ende  yow  defyre,  whereunto  (after  yowe
haue  layde  fo  fure  a  fundation)  I  exhorte  yow  to  runne  withowt  a  brydle.  And  wheras  to  thefe  effectes  it  fhalbe
neceffarie  to  haue  many  inflrumentes  adapted  for  the  purpofe,  I  can  none  otherwyfe  fpeake  of  them  then  in
generall,  confyderynge  that  according  to  the  nature  of  the  place  and  the  myne,  it  fhalbe  necelTary  to  vfe  infl.ru-
mentes  and  iren  tooles  of  dyuers  formes,  as  there  ought  to  be  difference  in  fuch  wlier>vith  yow  fliall  dygge  in
mynes  engendered  in  marble,  greete  flone,  and  harde  freefe  flone,  or  fuch  other.  For  the  dyggynge  of  fuch  as
are  found  in  deade  and  tender  flones,  as  Alabafler  and  marie,  it  is  requifite  to  haue  apte  and  flronge  inflru-
mentes, as  great  beetels,  mattockes  and  fpades  of  iren,  alfo  great  and  longe  crowes  of  iren  to  lyfte  great
burdens  :  lykewyfe  greate  and  fmaule  picke  axes  fum  of  iren  and  fum  of  fleele  :  furthermore  greate  maules  with
handels  and  withowt  handels,  and  fuch  other  bothe  of  iren  and  fine  fleele  hardened,  if  the  hardenes  of  flone
fhall  fo  requyre.  But  as  for  fuch  as  fhall  ferue  to  dygge  the  mynes  which  are  engendered  in  tender  and  fofte
(lones,  I  neede  make  no  mention  of  them,  forafmuch  as  the  tooles  of  the  common  forte  may  fuffice,  and  necef-
fitie  fhall  dayly  furthe[r]  inflructe  yow  to  diuife  fuch  as  flial  ferue  for  yowre  purpofe.  Albeit,  for  the  mofle  parte,
they  are  beetels,  maules,  mattockes,  pikes,  fliouels,  fpades,  and  fuch  lyke.  But  as  well  for  the  fofte  flones  as  for
the  harde,  it  fhalbe  neceffarye  to  haue  great  plentie  of  al  fortes,  to  th[e]ende  that  the  myners  may  lofe  no  tyme,  and
that  the  woorke  may  go  the  better  forwarde  to  the  comfort  of  the  patrones  of  the  mine.  Byfyde  thefe  before
named,  it  fliall  alfo  be  requifite  to  haue  plentie  of  greate  bafkettes,  fpades,  fhouels,  fleades,  and  handbarrowes,
bothe  with  wheeles  and  without  wheeles  :  alfo  fackes  made  of  raw  or  vntande  hydes  to  carye  the  fragmentes  owt
of  the  caue.  It  fhall  furthermore  be  requifite  to  haue  greate  quantitie  of  vnctuous  liquours  to  maintayne  fire  :
as  are  the  oiles  of  oliues,  of  nuttes,  of  line  feede  and  hempe  feede  :  Lykewife  the  roots  of  putrified  trees,  or
talowe  of  beafles,  or  fatte  and  oyles  of  fyfflies. For  withowt  the  lyght  of  fyre,  it  is  not  poffible  for  the  labourers

361

Necessarye
consideratioo^

A  false  opi.nion

The  trauersinge
of  the  veyne.

Continuaunce  in
the  wurke.

333

Fresshe  men.

Instrumentes.

Fyre  in  the  cau&

362

Of  tJic  genera  fioi  of  met  ah.

The  conueyance
of  eyer.

The  e.Tcellencie
of  golde.

The  originall  and
substaunce  of
golde,

334

Mineral  heate.

The  temperature
and  purenesse  of
golde.
Golde  is
incorruptible.

The  bewtie  of
golde.

Golde  is
medicinable.
Golde  is
confortable.

The  attractiue
qualitie  of  golde.

to  woorkc  :  Nor  yet  can  any  f3Te  be  mayntayned  in  the  caue  except  it  receaue  the  ayer  by  fum  rcfpiracle  or
breathynge  place  by  the  meanes  of  a  fundi  or  trunke  of  woodde  or  fuch  other  open  inRrument  wherby  the  ayer
maye  be  conueyed  into  the  caue.

c

Of  the  myne  of  golde  and  the  qualitie  therof  in  particnlay.

Orafmuche  as  golde  is  a  conipounde  myncrall  which  of  the  phylofophers  and  all  men  of
vnderflandynge,  is  founde  to  be  of  greatefl  perfection  amonge  all  other  myxt  minerals,  it  is
iudged  by  the  vniuerfal  opinion  of  fuch  men,  that  for  the  bewtie  and  excellent  quali'ie
thereof,  it  fliulde  be  of  exceffiue'vertue  to  helpe  and  confort  men.  And  therfore  amonge  all
thynges  that  are  in  this  worlde  (excepte  lyuynge  creatures)  it  is  chiefely  efleemed.  By
reafon  wherof,  I  alfo  the  more  to  honour  it,  wyll  fyrfl  fpeake  of  this  before  I  entreate  of  any
other  metall,  and  declare  in  particular  the  conception  with  the  mofl  apparent  qualities  therof.
The  which  although  it  be  a  metal  mod  knowen,  defyred  alfo  and  fought  for  of  all  kyndes  of  men,  yet  are  t  ere
not  many  that  do  care  to  knowe  of  what  fubflaunce  or  natural  mixtion  it  confifleth.  But  that  yow  fliulde  not  be
one  of  theim  that  knowe  it  onely  by  name  or  fuperficiall  app[e]arence,  I  certifie  yow  that  the  originall  and  proper
matter  therof,  is  none  other  then  elementall  fubflaunces  with  equall  quantitie  and  qualitie  proportionate  the  one
with  the  other,  mofl  perfectly  purified  by  the  fubtyle  woorke  of  nature.  For  of  thefe  beinge  thus  ioyned  togy  her
(and  of  equall  force)  is  engendered  an  amiable  and  mofl  perfect  mixtion  by  the  helpe  of  fermentacion  and
decoction  of  the  minerall  heate,  wherby  is  caufed  fuch  a  permanent  vnion  betwene  the  fayde  elementes,  that
they  are  in  maner  infeperable  :  So  that  by  the  vertue  of  heauenly  influence  or  of  tyme,  or  by  th[e]order  01  n.ofl
prudent  nature,  or  by  all  thefe  caufes  concurrant,  fuch  fubflaunce  is  conuerted  into  this  metalline  body  that  we
caule  golde.  The  which  (as  I  haue  fayd)  by  his  much  temperatenes,  purenes,  and  perfect  mixtion,  is  cond en-
fate  and  made  thicke,  in  fuch  forte  that  the  elementes  therof  can  not  be  vnbounde  or  loofed,  fo  that  it  remayn  'th
in  maner  incorruptible  :  The  caufe  wherof  is,  that  it  eyther  conteyneth  in  it  no  maner  of  fuperfluitie,  or  the  fame
to  be  but  very  lytle.  And  hereof  commeth  it,  that  althoughe  it  lye  many  yeares  in  the  earth  or  in  the  water,  it  is
not  infected  with  rufl  or  canker  for  that  neyther  of  them  are  able  to  corrupte  it,  nor  yet  the  fyer  whofe  for  e
dooth  incinerate  or  brynge  to  affhes  and  refolue  in  maner  all  creatures :  And  yet  is  the  poure  hereof  fo  farre
vnable  to  deflroy  or  corrupte  this  metall,  that  it  is  thereby  the  more  purified  and  made  better.  Lykewyfe  the
fayde  perfecte  vnion  or  mixtion,  caufeth  it  to  be  a  body  withowt  fleame,  and  withowt  vnctuous  or  fat  fuperfluitie:
which  is  the  caufe  that  it  euer  remayneth  in  the  natiue  bryghtnes  and  fayrenes  of  coloure,  in  fo  much  that  when
it  is  rubbed  vppon  any  thynge,  it  leaueth  not  behynde  it  the  tincture  of  any  blacke  or  yelowe  colour,  as  doo  in
maner  all  other  metals  :  Nor  yet  hath  it  any  tafle  or  fauour  that  may  be  perceaued  to  the  fence.  Furthermore,
if  it  be  eaten  eyther  wyllyngly  or  by  chaunce,  it  is  not  venemous  to  the  lyfe  of  man,  as  are  fum  of  the  oth  r
metals  :  but  is  rather  a  medicine  curynge  dyuers  difeafes.  In  fo  much  that  nature  hath  gyuen  vnto  it  of  peculi  ar
propertie,  a  vertue  and  priuileage  to  conforte  the  weakenes  of  the  harte,  and  to  gyue  ioyfulnes  and  myrth  to  tl  le
fpirites,  difpofynge  thereby  the  mynde  to  magnanimitie  and  attemptes  of  great  enterpryfes.  Which  fingular
qualities,  fum  wyfe  men  affirme  that  it  hath  receaued  by  th[e]influence  of  the  fonne,  and  that  it  is  therfore  of
fuch  grace  and  poure  to  helpe  men  :  efpecially  fuch  as  haue  many  great  bagges  and  chefles  full  therof.  To  con-
clude therfore,  this  metall  is  a  body  tractable  and  bryght,  of  coloure  lyke  vnto  the  foonne :  And  hath  in  it
inwardely  fuch  a  naturall  attractiue  or  allurynge  vertue,  that  beinge  feene,  it  greatly  difpofeth  the  myndes  of  men
to  defyre  it  and  efleme  it  as  a  thyrg  mofl  precious  :  although  many  there  are  whiche  crye  owt  ageynfl  it  and
accufe  it  as  the  roote  and  fede  of  mofl.  pefliferous  and  monflrous  couetoufneffe,  and  the  caufe  of  many  other
myfcheues.  But  whether  it  bee  the  caufe  of  more  good  or  euyll,  we  entende  to  lette  paffe  this  difputation  as  a
thynge  vnprofitable.  To  proceade  therfore  as  I  haue  begun  I  fay  (as  before)  that  the  woorthyneffe  which  is
founde  in  it,  hath  caufed  me  to  intreate  of  it  before  any  other  metall.  And  this  the  rather  for  that  th[e]orde  of
this  prefente  worke  [feejmeth  fo  to  requyre,  that  I  may  the  better  defcende  to  the  degrees  of  other  metals,  to
th[e]ende  that  in  thefe  owre  partes  of  Italy,  yow  may  haue  fum  inflruction  of  practife,  whiche  may  redounde
from  yow  to  other,  whereby  the  myndes  of  all  men  may  receaue  fum  lyght :  beinge  well  affured  that  newe
informations,  wilbe  the  feedes  of  other  newe  wittie  diuifes  in  the  vnderflandynges  of  fuche  men  as  with  thefe
keys  fhall  open  theyr  wyttes  to  arryue  to  fuche  places  whyther  they  can  not  els  coomme  or  by  any  meanes
approche.  And  nowe  therfore,  byfyde  that  which  I  haue  fayde  vnto  yowe  in  generall,  I  wyl  further  in  particular
declare  the  nature  hereof  and  the  generation  of  the  fame,  with  alfo  the  fignes  whiche  it  flieweth  furth,  that  I
do  not  om)  tte  any  thynge.  Lafl  of  all,  I  wyll  fhewe  yowe  howe  it  owght  to  bee  pourged  from  fuperfluou
362

Of  the  generation  of  metals.

363

earthynes  of  the  mine,  after  that  I  flial  haue  expreffed  the  maner  howe  it  is  founde.  But  forafmuch  as  I  haue
not  with  mine  eyes  feene  the  mountaines  which  conteyne  the  mynes  of  golde,  or  the  places  where  this  thynge
is  put  in  practife,  I  wyll  only  fhewe  yow  (hauynge  made  diligente  inquifition  for  the  fame)  what  hathe  byn
toulde  me  of  credible  perfons,  or  what  I  haue  gathered  in  readynge  of  dyuers  autoures,  by  whom  I  am  certified
for  a  truth  that  the  greatefl  plentie  of  this  metall,  is  founde  in  Scit/iia,  in  thofe  prouinces  which  we  commonly
caule  the  Eafl  partes,  where  the  foonne  extendeth  his  chiefe  force  and  vigour.  Of  thefe  places  India  is  thought
to  be  the  chiefe,  and  efpecially  thofe  Ilandes  which  the  fhips  of  Th[e]emperours  maieflie  and  the  kynge  of
Portugale  haue  founde  of  late  :  as  the  Ilandes  about  Peru  and  Faria  with  the  firme  lande  of  the  fame  which
extendeth  it  felues  very  farre  on  both  fydes  the  Equinoctiall.  In  Europe  alfo,  golde  is  founde  in  many
places :  as  in  AJlefia,  and  in  many  places  in  Boheme.  Alfo  in  Hungarie,  in  Rhene,  and  in  Apfa.  Plinie  fayth
that  it  is  lykewyfe  founde  in  Aujlria  and  in  Portugale  :  and  that  the  Romans  had  from  thenfe  yearely.  xxiiii.
[twenty-four]  pounds  weyght.  And  thus  fpeakynge  of  this  precious  metall,  I  beleue  certeynly,  that  it  is  and  may
be  engendered  in  all  fuche  places  wher  the  influence  of  the  heuens  difpofeth  the  elementall  caufes  to  br}'nge  furth
an  apte  fubflaunce  for  this  purpofe.  But  nowe  intendynge  more  particularly  to  fpeake  of  the  places  of  the  con-
ception hereof,  yowe  fhall  vnderflande  that  it  is  engendered  in  dyuers  kyndes  of  flones  in  great  and  rowgh
mountaynes,  and  fuche  as  are  vtterly  bare  of  earth,  trees,  graffe,  or  herbes.  And  amonge  all  the  flones  of  this
myne,  that  is  befl  which  is  of  a  blewe  or  afurine  coloure  lyke  vnto  a  faphire,  and  is  commonly  cauled  Lapis
Lazuli.  But  it  is  not  bryght  and  harde  as  is  the  faphire.  It  is  alfo  founde  in  orpemente  cauled  Auripigtnentiim  :
but  more  often  in  the  mynes  of  other  metals.  It  is  lykewyfe  founde  in  many  prouinces  in  the  fandes  of  rj-uers.
That  which  is  founde  in  the  mountaines  lyeth  in  order  of  veynes  betwene  quarrey  and  quarrey  ioyned  with  the
fayde  Azurine  llone  and  myxte  therwith.  They  faye  that  this  myne  is  fo  much  the  better  ir  howe  much  it  is
the  heuyer  and  of  hyghe  colour,  fhewyng  in  it  many  fparkes  of  gold.  They  fay  furthermore  that  it  is  engendered
in  an  other  ftone  lyke  vnto  falte  marble  :  but  it  is  of  a  deade  colour.  And  alfo  in  an  other  whofe  colour  is
yelowe  with  certeyne  redde  fpots  within  it.  They  affirme  lykewyfe  that  it  is  founde  in  certeine  blacke  flones,
whofe  veynes  fprede  dyuers  wayes  much  like  the  courfes  of  ryuers.  They  further  declare  that  it  is  founde  in  a
certeyne  bituminous  earth,  of  coloure  lyke  vnto  cley  and  very  heauy,  hauynge  in  it  a  great  fauour  of  brymflone  :
And  that  the  golde  which  is  founde  in  this,  is  very  good,  and  in  maner  all  togyther  fyne,  yet  very  harde  to  bee
gotten  owte,  bycaufe  it  confyfleth  of  fo  fmaule  fparkes  lyke  vnto  inuifible  atomes  of  fuch  lytelneffe  that  they  can
hardely  bee  perceaued  with  the  eye.  And  herein  may  yow  not  do  as  in  Lapis  Lazuli,  or  other  flones,  or  as  the
maner  is  to  do  with  that  which  is  found  in  the  fands  of  ryuers  :  the  which  the  more  it  is  wafflied,  the  more  it
fauleth  to  the  bottome  :  and  in  meltynge  with  the  mother  of  his  earthines,  doth  incorporat  it  felfe  therwith  in  a
brickie  fubflance.  But  in  fine,  with  much  pacience  and  by  one  meanes  or  an  other,  or  by  the  helpe  of  quicke-
fyluer,  it  is  drawen  owt.  Ageyne  (as  I  haue  fayde  before)  it  is  found  in  the  fandes  of  dyuers  ryuers,  as  in  Spayne
in  the  ryuer  Togo  :  in  Trada,  in  £dro  :  In  A/ia,  in  Patolo  and  Ganges.  In  Hungarie  and  Boheme,  it  is  founde
in  Lafiefia  in  dyuers  ryuers :  And  in  Italic,  in  the  fands  of  Tefino,  Adda,  and  Fo.  But  not  euery  where  in  the
beddes  of  theyr  chanels,  but  in  certeyne  particular  places  where  in  certeyne  cloddes  the  fande  is  difcouered  in
the  tyme  of  the  ouerflowynge  of  the  ryuers  when  the  water  leaueth  behynde  it  a  fine  fande  wherwith  the  fayde
golde  is  myxte  in  the  forme  of  certeyne  fmaule  fcales,  and  fhynynge  graynes.  Then  in  the  fommer  feafon,  with
pacience  and  ingenious  practife,  the  fearchers  to  pourge  it  from  the  grofe  earthineffe  of  the  myne,  and  waffhe  it
diligently :  preparynge  for  that  effecte,  certeyne  tables  made  eyther  of  the  tymber  of  plane  trees,  or  elme,  or
whyte  nuttes,  or  fuch  other  woodde  apte  to  be  fawen,  hauing  theyr  playnes  made  ful  of  hackes,  and  notches,  with
the  helpe  of  the  fawe  or  fuch  other  inflrumentes  of  iren.  Vpon  thefe  tables  flandynge  fumwhat  a  flope  or
declynynge,  with  a  holowe  Ihouel  they  cafl  a  great  quantitie  of  water  myxt  with  the  fayde  fande,  which  they  cafl
fo,  that  the  water  runne  downe  directly  alonge  with  the  tables.  And  by  this  meanes  the  gold,  as  a  matter  moft.
heuy,  fauleth  to  the  bottome  of  the  fawne  hackes,  and  there  reflynge  and  cleauynge  fafl,  is  fo  diuided  from  the
fande.  When  therfore  they  perceaue  a  fufticient  quantitie  of  golde  thus  remaynynge  on  the  tables,  they  gather
it  with  diligence  and  put  it  in  a  trey  or  great  fhallowe  dyffhe  of  wod  lyke  vnto  thofe  which  the  golde  finers  vfe  :
And  in  thefe  they  wafflie  it  more  exactly  ageyne  and  ageyne  from  al  fylth  or  vnclenlynefTe.  This  doone,  they
beate  or  mixte  (or  amalgam-^  it  as  they  caule  it)  with  Mercurie  or  quickfyluer,  whiche  afterward  they  feperate
ageyne  from  the  fame  eyther  by  flraynyng  and  preffynge  it  through  a  bagge  of  lether,  or  by  flyllynge  or
euaporatynge  the  quickefyluer  from  it  in  a  flyllatory  of  glaffe  and  fo  fynde  they  the  golde  remaynynge  in  the
bottome  of  the  veffell  in  the  lykenes  of  fine  fande,  which  they  brynge  into  a  metalline  body  by  meltynge  it  with
a  lyttle  borage,  or  fait  petre  or  blacke  fope,  and  fo  cafl  it  eyther  in  the  forme  of  a  wedge  or  a  rodde,  or  other-
wyfe  as  lyketh  them  befl.  And  this  is  the  exacte  maner  of  drawynge  golde  owt  of  the  fandes  of  riuers,  which
many  haue  vfed  to  theyr  great  commoditie  :  And  that  the  rather  bycaufe  that  in  folowyng  this  order  of  woorke
in  the  pourgynge  and  diuydynge  of  golde,  it  fhall  not  bee  requifite  as  in  other  maner  of  practifes,  to  bee  at  greate
charges  byreafon  of  many  men  which  fhall  be  needefull,  with  manye  murals,  fornaces,  fiers,  and  d)aiers  artificers:

36J

Where  mcste
plentie  of  golde  is
found.
Cathay.

335

Golde  in  the
Ilande[s]  of  the
weste  indies.

Golde  in  Europe.

The  influenc[e]  of
heauen.

Ihe  mountaynes
and  stones  in  the
whiche  golde  is
engendered.

Lapis  Lazuli.

Orpemente.

Golde  in  other
metals.

Golde  in  the
sandes  of  r>"uers.

Gold  in  earth.

Golden  diiste.

R>Tiers  in  the
which  gold  is
founde.

The  wasshing
and  pourgeinge
of  golde.

Howe  golde  is
deuided  frome
sande.

The  Spanyardes

make  these

disshes  with

handels.

The  draweinge

out  of  golde  with

quicke  siluer.

336

64

Of  the  gcncyation  of  metals.

From  whense

golde  is  liciiueJ
into  the  sondes
of  ry  uers.

That  golde  is  not
engendered  in  the
sondes  of  hucrs.

This  mater  is
apparent  in  the
golde  founde  in
the  ryuers  in  the
Indies.

The  faule  of
waters  from
montaynes.

337

Springes  of  water
in  moimtaynes.

Vegetable  golde
growinge  owt  of
the  earthe.
Of  this,  reatie
A  lexander  nb
Alexantiro.  lib.
4  Genialiunt
(iierutn.  Cap.  9.

Golde  founde  in
A  deade  mans
heade.

wheras  in  woorkyng  after  this  forte,  one  man  may  fuffice  witli  one  table  and  one  holowe  flioouell,  with  a  lyttle
quickefyluer  and  fufficient  abundaunce  of  water.  But  lettyng  paiTe  to  fpeake  any  further  of  thefe  thynges :
perhappes  fumme  man  woldc  here  demaunde  from  whenfe  this  golde  is  deryued  into  the  fandes  of  the  fayde
ryuers,  and  wlicther  it  be  browght  thyther  by  the  water,  or  engendered  there.  As  touchynge  which  queflion,  I
haue  often  tymes  deliberated  with  my  felfe  not  withowt  great  marueyle :  and  efpecially  of  that  which  is  founde
in  the  fandes  of  the  ryuers  of  Tcfino,  Adda.,  and  Po,  bicaufe  (wheras  I  haue  fayde  before  that  it  is  browght
thyther  by  the  courfe  of  the  water)  I  can  not  perceaue  from  whenfe  it  fliuld  be  browght,  forafmuch  aj.  there  is
no  myne  of  golde,  or  of  any  other  metal  that  is  knowen,  nere  to  any  of  thofe  places.  By  reafon  wherof,  my
iudgemente  is  in  maner  confounded,  feinge  alfo  that  it  is  th[e]oppinion  of  certeyne  wryters,  that  it  is  engendered
euen  where  it  is  founde  :  The  which,  if  it  fo  be,  it  is  not  trewe  that  it  is  browght  thyther  by  the  water.  Ageyne,
if  it  be  engendered  there,  it  feemeth  to  me  a  dyflicult  thyng  to  comprehend  whether  it  be  brought  furthe  there
by  the  vertue  of  the  water  or  the  earth,  or  the  heauen.  If  furthermore  any  of  thefe  fhuld  be  the  caufe  of  the
generation  hereof,  it  feemethe  agreable  to  reafon  that  it  fliulde  bee  both  founde  and  engendered  throughowt  all
the  beddes  of  fuch  riuers,  and  at  al  tymes.  And  if  the  influence  of  heauen  be  the  mofl  prepotent  caufe  of
this  effecte,  then  it  feemeth  to  me  that  it  fliuld  woorke  immediatly,  bicaufe  it  can  not  otherwyfe  obferue
th[e]order  whiche  nature  vfeth  in  the  generation  of  metals  :  fyrfl  brynginge  it  furth  to  the  open  fhewe,  in  the
place  where  aboundeth  the  continuall  iffliewe  of  water,  which  owght  alfo  to  be  of  fuch  force  as  to  remoue  tht»
earthy  fubflaunce  thereof  from  place  to  place,  and  not  to  intermixte  fuch  great  inequalitie  of  couldeneffe  and
moiflnes.  And  albeit  that  this  compofition  begunne  in  this  order,  fliuld  not  be  diffeuered  or  broken  by  the
waters  of  the  ryuers,  yet  it  appeareth  to  me  that  the  fliowers  of  rayne  and  increafe  of  fluddes,  fliulde  be  of
fufficient  poure  to  diflemper,  breake,  and  vtterly  deflroy  all  fuch  compofitions  as  fliulde  be  engendered  in  fuch
places,  forafmuch  al  thynges  are  conceaued  by  refl  and  quietnefle  after  the  commixtion  of  the  fyrfle  elementes.
And  therfore  if  this  golde  of  the  ryuers,  bee  there  engendered  where  it  is  founde,  I  wolde  it  were  declared  vnto
me  why  it  is  engendered  only  in  thefe  places  and  not  in  other :  and  why  in  lyke  maner,  fyluer,  copper,  leade,  or
any  other  metals  are  not  alfo  engendered  there  as  well  as  golde,  beinge  matters  of  an  eafyer  compofition  of
nature  then  it  is,  by  reafon  of  the  perfecte  vnitie  and  concordaunce  with  puritie  of  fubft.aunce  and  perfecte
concoction  which  is  in  golde  aboue  ail  other  metals  :  whereas  alfo  in  many  places  in  the  territories  of  Rome,
there  are  founde  many  fparkes  of  the  mine  of  iren  of  blacke  colour  amonge  the  fandes  <)f  certeyne  fmaule  ryuers  :
And  yet  thefe  only  in  certeyne  particular  places  of  the  fayde  riuers  :  wherby  it  appeareth  that  thefe  alfo,  fliulde
not  bee  engendered  where  they  are  founde.  By  all  which  reafons  and  apparent  effectes,  it  feemeth  mofl.  agre-
able to  truth  that  the  golde  which  is  found  in  fuch  fandes,  is  rather  brought  thyther  by  the  water,  then  engen-
dered there.  And  therefore  to  declare  my  mynde  more  playnely  herein,  I  fuppofe  that  this  chaunceth  only  in
great  ryuers  which  receaue  abundaunce  of  waters  of  dyuers  fpringes,  foffes,  and  other  ryuers,  engendered  partly
of  the  meltynge  of  fnowe  and  partly  of  great  fliowers  of  rayne,  whiche  faulyng  in  certeyne  chanels  from  the
toppes  and  fydes  of  [the]  minerall  mountaynes,  wafflie  away  parte  of  the  earth  of  theyr  bankes  and  the  ouer-
hanginge  and  holowe  rockes  which  may  conteyne  the  fubflaunce  of  golde  :  Or  otherwyfe,  that  in  fuch  places,  there
are  ordinarie  mines  in  the  hyghe  mountaynes  or  other  fuperficiall  owt  places,  perhappes  inceffable  and  eyther  fuch
whyther  men  can  not  come  for  extreme  heate  or  cold  or  other  hynderaunces,  or  els  fuch  as  they  haue  contemned
to  fearche  :  And  yet  the  fame  to  bee  fo  confumed  by  the  force  of  water  as  we  haue  fayde,  and  by  the  courfe
therof  to  bee  caried  into  the  ryuers.  It  may  alfo  chaunce  that  fuche  mynerall  earthes  bee  farre  within  the
mountaynes  neare  vnto  fuch  ryuers  :  And  that  in  the  fpace  of  many  yeares,  the  fprynges  iffliewynge  owt  of  the
fame,  may  eyther  bee  dryed  vp  (whiche  thyng  hath  byn  feene)  or  els  turne  theyr  courfe  an  other  way  So  that
it  is  no  maruayle  if  in  fuch  a  multitude  of  yeres,  the  trewe  originall  of  thefe  thynges  bee  vnknowen  euen  vnto
them  that  dwell  nere  fuch  places.  But  in  fine,  howe  fo  euer  it  bee,  trewe  it  is  that  golde  is  founde  in  the  fandes
of  many  riuers  :  And  particularly  (as  I  haue  noted)  in  the  forenamed  ryuers.  And  if  therefore  I  haue  niar-
uayled  at  this  thynge,  I  owght  worthely  to  bee  excufed,  forafmuch  as  where  iudgement  can  not  bee  certified  by
reafon  or  effectuall  app[e]arence,  there  arife  many  doubtfull  coniectures  and  newe  caufes  of  admiration.  But
yet  do  I  niaruel  much  more  of  an  other  thyng  the  which  I  am  informed  to  bee  mofl.  trewe  by  the  report  of
many  credible  perfons  :  That  is,  that  in  fum  places  of  Hungarie  at  certeyne  tymes  of  the  yeare,  pure  golde
fpryngeth  owte  of  the  earthe  in  the  lykeneffe  of  fmaule  herbes,  wrethed  and  twyned  lyke  fmaule  flalkes  of
hoppes,  about  the  byggeneffe  of  a  pack  threade,  and  foure  fyngeis  in  length  or  fume  a  handfuU.  As  concern-
ynge  which  thynge,  Plinie  alfo  in  the.  xxxiii.  [thirty-third]  boke  of  his  naturall  hyflorie,  wryteth  the  lyke  to  haue
chaunced  in  Dalmatia  in  his  tyme.  The  which  (if  it  bee  trewe)  fuerly  the  hufbande  men  of  thefe  fieldes  fliall
reape  heauenly  and  not  earthly  frutes,  fent  them  of  god  from  heauen,  and  browght  furth  of  nature  withowt  theyr
trauayle  or  arte.  A  grace  doubtleffe  mofl.  efpecial,  fyth  that  in  fo  great  a  quantitie  of  earth  graunted  to  the
poffeffion  of  men,  in  maner  onely  this  is  thought  woorthy  fo  hygh  a  priuileage.  But  what  fliall  I  fay  of  that
wherof  Albertus  Magnus  wryteth  in  his  booke  of  minerals,  affirmynge  that  he  hath  feene  golde  engendered  in  a
364

Of  the  generation  of  metals.

Z^S

deade  mans  heade  : And  that  the  fame  beinge  founde  by  chaunce  in  dyggynge,  and  perceaued  by  the  weyght

and  coloure  to  conteyne  fum  minerall  fubftaunce,  was  proued  by  experience  to  holde  a  portion  of  fine  golde

mixte  witli  fmaule  fande. And  in  deede  his  woordes  feeme  to  found  to  none  other  fence  but  only  that  this

precious  metall  was  engender[e]d  there  by  the  great  difpofition  of  the  place  and  flronge  influence  of  heauen  :

The  which  fuerlie  is  a  thynge  hardely  to  be  beleued. Yet  confyd^rynge  th[e]autoritie  of  fo  greate  a  clerke,

with  the  force  of  the  fuperiour  caufes  and  the  maruelous  poure  of  nature,  I  had  rather  gyue  fayth  hereto  then

raffliely  to  contemne  the  iudgement  of  fo  greate  a  clarke. And  forafmuche  as  I  haue  begun  to  tell  yow  of  thefe

effectes,  I  wyll  not  omytte  to  fliewe  yowe  of  a  flraunge  thynge  which  chaunced  alfo  in  a  part  of  Hungarie,  where

a  myne  of  gold  was  fo  found  by  chaunce  and  vnfought  for,  that  it  may  neuertheleffe  be  an  aduertifement  to

other  to  fearche  diligently. So  it  is  therefore,  that  a  woman  of  the  contrey  beinge  accuflomed  to  reforte  with

her  bucke  of  clothes  to  wafflie  them  in  a  certeyne  foffe  or  dike  where  ranne  a  lyttle  water,  and  vfynge  to  beate

and  rubbe  them  vppon  a  flone  which  feemed  commodious  for  her  purpofe,  chaunced  at  the  length  by  her  good

fortune  to  efpie  on  the  flone,  a  veyne  of  golde  trauerfyng  or  ouertwhartinge  the  fame  abowte  the  byggeneffe  of

a  grofe  packe  threede,  fhewynge  fayre  and  bright  by  reafon  of  her  much  rubbynge. Wherat  marueylynge  dayly

more  and  more,  at  the  length  opened  the  matter  to  her  familiers  :  who  conferrynge  with  fuch  as  hadde  better

fkyll  of  the  thynge,  founde  it  in  fine  to  bee  a  veyne  of  pure  golde  :  And  that  the  quarrie  of  that  flone,  trauerfed

the  courfe  of  the  water  of  the  foffe. Remouynge  therfore  the  water,  and  turning  the  courfe  thereof  an  other

waye,  they  beganne  to  dygge  and  folow  the  mine  which  hath  now  continued  certeine.  C.  [hundred]  yeares  fence

it  was  fyrfl  found  :  And  hath  not  only  greatly  enriched  that  contrey,  But  alfo  all  Chriflendome  hath  had  great

commoditie  by  the  fame. This  haue  I  rehearfed  vnto  yow  the  rather  that  yow  fliulde  not  bee  negligent  in  any

poynt  or  omitte  any  figne  or  token  wherebye  yowe  may  bee  certified  of  greate  thynges  :  not  contemnynge  the

fliadowe  of  any  fmaule  tokens  :  but  afwel  to  gyue  attentyue  eare  and  eye  vnto  them,  as  to  feare  and  forefee  all

fuch  thynges  as  may  hynder. For  (as  yow  may  hereby  well  perceaue)  if  credit  had  not  fyrfl  byn  gyuen  to  the

woordes  of  the  fimple  wooman,  and  the  thynge  afterwarde  well  folowed,  perhappes  they  fhulde  neyther  nor  euer

hereafter  haue  enioyed  the  frute  of  fo  great  a  commoditie. Men  therfore  of  good  courage  folowynge  fuche

ryche  fignes,  dyd  nother  feare  the  fmauleneffe  of  the  veyne  or  hardneffe  of  the  flone  :  prefuppofynge  by  good

reafon  that  golde  and  fyluer  can  not  lyghtly  bee  founde  in  fo  fmaule  quantitie,  but  that  the  fame  fhal  be  able  to

furmounte  the  charges. And  this  the  more,  in  howe  much  the  further  yowe  fliall  enter  into  the  flone,  as

chaunceth  commonly  in  all  other  mynes. Albeit,  the  practifed  fearchers,  faye  that  the  myne  of  golde  is  not

founde  in  fuch  great  quantitie  as  are  the  mines  of  other  metals. Wherin  although  perhappes  they  fay  trewly,

yet  dooth  it  not  folowe  but  that  golde  also  maye  be  ^  founde  in  greate  quantitie. And  fuerly  it  feemeth  to  me, that

the  benignitie  of  nature  hath  graunted  large  quantities  thereof  to  the  worlde,  and  that  much  hath  euer  byn  and

is  founde  amonge  men,  confyderynge  in  how  many  places  it  is  dayly  gathered  afwel  in mountaynes as  in

fandes  of  ryuers,  byfyde  that  whiche  is  founde  accompanied  and  ioyned  with  other  metals. A  further  profe

hereof  may  that  bee,  which  is  confumed  and  hydde  by  the  dyuers  inuentions  of  men  :  As  that  whiche  the

paynters  beflowe  in  adournynge  theyr  woorkes  :  And  goldefmythes  both  in  gyltynge  other  metals  and  alfo  in

makynge  dyuers  woorkes  of  maffie  golde  :  byfyde  that  which  the  woorker  of  clothe  of  golde  and  arras  doo

confume  :  with  fuch  as  imbrotherers  and  fylke  woomen  fpende  abowt  the  vanities  of  men  and  womens  apparell

and  tyrementes. Alfo  fuch  as  is  confumed  vppon  trappers  and  furnimentes  for  horfes,  with  gylted  harneffe  and

fuch  other  fumptuoufneffe  as  perteyneth  to  the  warres  and  magnifical  buyldinges  of  noble  mens  houfes  and

temples :  Byfyde  that  alfo  whiche  the  couetoufneffe of  men  hath  hydde  in  flronge  waules,  and  buryed  in  the

grounde,  inclofed  in  chayned  cofers  locked  with  triple  keyes  :  And  that  which  ferueth  to  the  dayly  vfes  of  men

and  wandereth  about  the  worlde  through  the  handes  of  marchauntes. The  whiche  thynges  well  confydered,

who  fo  thinketh  that  nature  bringeth  furth  but  lyttle  golde,  fhall  perceaue  that  there  is  greate  quantitie  therof  in

the  worlde,  although  there  bee  but  fewe  that  haue  fo  much  as  may  fatiffie  the  thirfl  of  theyr  couetoufneffe. And

to  fpeake  particularly  of  Italic,  althoughe  there  bee  no  myne  of  golde  knowen  in  it,  yet  by  the  vertue  and

diligence  of  good  wyttes,  it  hath  euer  and  at  all  ages  byn  more  ryche  then  many  other  prouinces  :  Xotwith-

flandynge  it  hath  often  tymes  byn  fpoyled  and  ouerrunne  of  dyuers  nations,  as  nowe  of  late  in  owre  tyme  by  the

cruell  handes  of  the  Barbarians  which  entered  into  it  abowt.  xl.  [forty]  yeares  pafle. But  who  knoweth  (as  hath

chaunced  in  the  dayes  of  owre  vaHent  prediceffors)  whether  Godde  wyll  ageyne  gyue  vs  occafion  to  chaflife  them

and  fo  to  inuade  theyr  regions  that  wee  maye  woonne  owre  owne  ageyne  with  increafe  of  dowble  vfurie. Or  if

he  wyll  not  permitte  this,  perhappes  he  wyll  graunte  vs  to  fynde  fum  ryche  myne  of  golde. For,  confyderynge

and  feynge  that  this  owre  region  of  Italic  is  replenyffhed  with  as  many  excellent  thynges  as  in  maner  heauen

can  gyue  to  any  habitable  place,  it  is  not  to  bee  thought  that  this  benefite  of  golde  fliulde  bee  wantynge,  wheras

it  bryngeth  furth  fuch  plentie  of  al  other  mines  except  this  of  golde  and  tynne. And  yet  doo  I  verely  beleue

that  it  is  not  withowt  the  mynes  of  thefe  alfo,  although  they  be  not  yet  difcouered  to  the  knowleage  of  men  :

As  I  am  perfuaded  bothe  by  the  golde  that  is  founde  in  the  fayd  ryuers,  and  alfo  by  the  dyuers  and  fundry

365

A  myne  of  golde
founde  by  chaunce

A  vayne  of  golde
in  a  stone.

No  signes  to  be
omitted.

338

Golde  is  not
founde  in  like
quantitie  as  are
other  metals.
Argumentes  of
plentye  of  golde.

Howe  diners
wayes  golde  is
consumed.

Many  haue  to
muche,  but  fewe
haue  enowgh.
Italie  wasted  by
the  barbarians.

Commendacion
of  Italie

Golde  and  tynne
Meane  minetais.

366

Of  tJic  generation  of  met  ah.

The  golde  of
Italic.

Golde  contayned
in  other  metals.

The  maner  of
pourginge  of  golde.

339

Lapis  lazuli.

Asure.

Howe  golde  is
drawen  frome
Lapis  lazuli  with
quickesyluer.

The  baine  or
test  of  leade.

The  maner  of
pourginge  golde
with  leade.

Whether  syluer
haue  A  mine  by
hit  selfe  or  no.

GeorgiusAgricola.

A  table  of  mineral
syluer.

The  workes  of
nature.

Mixte  raetales.

meane  minerals  which  are  founde  in  many  places  and  adiudged  of  the  practicionars  to  bee  certeyne  cleare
tokens  of  thcyr  proper  and  natural  agentes.  But  for  that  they  are  not  found,  felte,  or  feene,  we  ovvght  not
therby  to  affirme  that  they  are  not.  To  conclude  therfore,  I  tliinke  that  in  owr  partes  of  Italie,  pure  golde  is
none  other  wayes  founde  (exccpte  that  which  is  currant  amonge  the  marchauntes)  then  after  twoo  fortes,  wherof
the  one  is  that  which  is  founde  in  the  fandes  of  ryuers :  And  the  other,  that  whiche  is  gotten  by  the  induflrious
and  fubtyle  art  of  partyng  gold  from  new  fyluer,  or  from  giltyng  fyluer,  or  other  metals  which  hold  gold,  as  there
are  in  maner  but  fewe  which  hold  not  fum  fmaul  portion  therof,  more  or  lefle  according  to  the  mixtion  and
permanencie  of  theyr  fubflances,  or  accordynge  to  the  qualitie  and  force  of  the  pianettes  which  exprefle  theyr
influence  in  the  generation  of  them.  And  in  fine,  this  is  the  golde  that  which  is  founde  in  owre  partes  of  Italie.
Nowe  therfore  to  returne  to  the  matter  whereof  is  owre  chiefe  intente  to  intreate,  hauynge  before  fpoken  fufifici-
ently  of  the  generation  and  inuention  of  the  myne  of  golde,  I  wyll  further  declare  vnto  yowe  howe  it  owght  to
be  pourged  from  earthly  fuperfluitie,  and  efpecially  that  whiche  is  founde  lyinge  in  the  forme  of  veynes,  and
although  I  haue  not  feene  the  edifi[c]es  and  engens  wherwith  the  myncrs  are  accuflomed  to  get  it  owt,  yet  wyll
I  fhewe  yow  howe  by  other  practifes  I  haue  learned  to  pourge  it,  that  yow  may  not  bee  without  fum  knowleage
yf  your  fortune  flialbe  fo  good  as  to  fynde  any  in  Italy.  When  yow  haue  therfore  dygged  owt  the  myne  and
placed  it  in  order,  yow  owght  to  confider  in  what  kynde  of  Rone  it  is  engendered.  And  if  it  bee  in  that  which
is  cauled  Lapis  Lazuli,  then  mufle  yow  fo  drawe  owte  the  golde  that  yowe  alfo  faue  the  flone,  bycaufe  perfecte
Afure  is  made  therof,  and  fuch  as  the  paynters  caule  Azurro  Oliramarino,  that  is,  Afure  of  beyonde  the  fea,
which  they  greatly  efleme  and  bye  it  deare.  And  to  do  this,  it  is  neceffary  that  yowe  fyrfl  beate  it  into  fine
pouder,  and  then  put  it  in  a  trey  or  brode  treene  dyffhe,  and  wafflie  it  fayre  and  cleane  with  water.  This
done  amalgame  or  rubbe  it  well  with  quickefyluer  vntyll  it  haue  lycked  vppe  and  drawne  al  the  golde  into  it
and  left  the  flone  pure  of  it  felfe.  Then  flrayne  the  quickefyluer  from  the  golde  through  a  bagge  of  lether,  or
vapour  it  away  in  a  flyllatorie  of  glaffe  :  And  thus  flial  yowe  fynde  the  golde  in  the  bottome  of  the  veffell  in
maner  pure  without  quickefyluer,  as  I  haue  fayde  before.  And  if  yow  haue  no  refpecte  to  faue  the  flone,  it
fliall  fufiice  to  vfe  the  common  experience,  meltynge  it  in  a  fornace  in  a  bayne  or  tefle  of  lea-de.  But  in  my
opinion,  the  beft  maner  to  brynge  it  to  pureneffe,  is  fyrfl  to  burne  the  mine  with  a  gentell  fyre  in  an  open
fornace,  and  to  fuffer  it  to  euaporate  well  if  it  bee  not  in  fuch  flone  as  yowe  defyre  to  faue.  Then  grynde  it  in
a  mylle  or  beate  it  with  pefleres  adapted  with  a  wheele  vntyll  it  be  browght  to  fine  pouder.  And  when  yow
haue  wel  wafHied  it  and  fo  much  wafled  the  fuperfluous  earthyneffe  therof,  then  put  it  in  a  tefle  made
accordynge  to  the  quantitie  of  the  fame,  and  melt  it  therin  with  leade  whiche  yowe  fhall  confiime  partely  by
vapoure  and  partely  with  drawynge  it  owt  by  the  fyde  of  the  tefle  (as  is  the  maner)  vntyll  yowe  come  to  the
pure  golde  whiche  yowe  fliall  in  fine  brynge  to  perfecte  pureneffe  in  vtterly  confumynge  the  remanent  of  the
leade  with  vehement  fire  increafed  by  the  helpe  of  flronge  bellowes.  And  this  is  the  vniuerfal  maner  which
yow  may  vfe  not  only  in  pourgynge  the  myne  of  golde,  but  alfo  the  mynes  of  all  other  metals.

^W  Of  the  myne  offiluer  and  the  qualitie  therof

Here  are  (as  I  vnderdande)  diuers  opinions  emonge  the  practitionars  of  the  mynes,  whether
fyluer  haue  a  proper  myne  by  it  felfe  or  no.  The  reafons  of  fuche  as  writte  of  the  natures  of
mineralles,  and  th[e]autoritie  of  the  moft.,  perfuade  me  to  affent  to  the  affirmatiue  :  Not  only
to  fee  the  naturall  matter  diflincte,  as  is  to  perceaue  in  the  mynes  of  golde,  copper,  leade  and
other  metals  whiche  in  theyr  mynes  are  found  pure  by  them  felues  without  mixtion,  but  alfo
that  I  vnderfland  that  there  hath  bin  found  likewyfe  certeyne  pieces  afwell  of  this  mettall  of
filuer,  as  of  gold  and  copper,  browght  to  his  lafle  fyneffe  by  th[e]only  worke  of  nature.  And
this  dooth  Georgius  Agricola  a  lerned  man  of  Germany  confirme  in  his  booke  of  minerals  where  he  writteth
that  in  Saxonie  there  was  found  in  a  caue  a  piece  of  mineral  filuer  of  fuch  bignes,  that  the  duke  the  prince  and
patrone  of  that  place,  caufed  a  chayre  and  fquare  dyninge  table  after  the  maner  of  Almanye  to  be  made  therof
withowte  any  further  woorke  of  mans  hande  :  Gloryinge  often  tymes  that  in  this  thynge  he  furmounted  the
greatneffe  and  magnificence  of  thie  Emperoure.  But  in  deede  (excepte  copper)  I  haue  feene  no  metall  taken
owte  of  the  caue  pure  withowt  his  vre.  Yet  doo  I  beleeue  it  a  thynge  poffible,  confyderinge  the  greate  force  and
poure  of  nature,  th[e]ende  of  whofe  woorkynge  euer  intendeth  to  bringe  all  thynges  to  perfection  as  farre  as  it  is  not
otherwyfe  hyndered.  Yet  (as  I  haue  fayde)  of  the  mofle  parte  of  thofe  mynes  whiche  I  haue  feene,  none  of
theym  haue  byn  withowt  mixture,  not  only  of  the  earthe  of  their  owne  proper  myne,  but  haue  byn  alfo  myxte
with  other  metals  :  And  efpecially  this  of  fyluer  more  then  any  other,  excepte  onlye  that  which  was  digged  in
Schio,  in  Viceniina.  And  therefore  not  withowt  fum  fhadow  of  apparent  reafon,  haue  fuche  doubles  rifin
366

Of  the  generation  of  metals.

367

amonge  the  practitionars  of  the  mynes. And  yet  (as  I  haue  fayd)  I  beleue  that  filuer  may  haue  and  hath  his

proper  mine,  forafmuche  as  euery  fubflaunce  that  maye  be  conuerted  into  metall,  may  afwell  Rande  by  it  felfe

pure  in  his  owne  kynde,  as  eyther  feperate  or  mixte  with  other,  as  is  often  times  feene  in  one  maffe  in  the

whiche  diuers  metals  are  conteyned  and  engendered  by  nature. And  by  this  meanes  it  often  chaunceth  that

he  that  fpeaketh  of  the  mine  of  filuer,  may  with  the  fame  brethe  and  withowt  diflinction,  fpeake  alfo  of  all  other

metales,  forafmuche  as  there  are  but  fewe  mynes  which  are  not  mixte  with  other. But  bycaufe  the  mofle

noble  and  ryche  metals  haue  obteyned  the  prerogatiue  to  be  eflemed  aboue  other,  therfore  the  name  of  the

myne  is  gyuen  to  them  wher  they  are  mixte  with  other :  as  the  mynes  which  holde  copper,  leade,  or  iren,

(as  doo  the  mofle  parte)  yet  if  they  holde  alfo  golde  or  fyluer,  they  are  cauled  gold  mynes  or  fyluer  mynes,

according  vnto  that  which  is  founde  in  them  to  bee  of  mofl  value. But  to  lette  paffe  this  matter,  yowe

fhall further  vnderflande  that  when  fuche  mynes  are  mixte  of  dyuers metals, they fhew  furth fo much

the  more  diuers  and  variable  fumofites  of  tinctures  and  marchafites,  as  fignes  where  they  bee  and  of  what

pureneffe :  forafmuch  as  euery  of  them  according  to  theyr  natures,  exalte  theyr  colours  which  they  fhewe  furthe

to  the  eye,  fum  in  the  fimilitude  of  afurine  or  blewe  flones,  fum  greene,  fum  yelowe,  and  fum  of  vndiflinct

colours  accordynge  to  the  compofitions  and  mixtures  of  the  fyrfl  matters  of  metals,  which  is  alfo  the  caufe  that

they  are  founde  more  or  leffe  in  quantitie. Nowe  to  fpeake  more  particularly  of  this  metall  of  fyluer,  the

philofophers  fpeculatours  of  naturall  thynges,  faye  that it is engendered of  fubflaunce more  water}'  then

fyerie,  of  complexion  feminine  and  flegmatike  in  comparifon  to  gold  :  receauynge  more  of  th[e]influence  of  the

moone  then  of  the  fon,  and  therfore  engendered  more  in  coulde  regions  nerer  vnto  the  moone,  then  in  hotte

regions  vnder  the  foonne  :  confiding  alfo  of  pure  elementes,  although  fumwhat  crude  and  vndygefled  in  refpecte

of  the  elementes  of  golde  as  may  bee  plainely  perceaued  by  theyr  colours,  weyght,  and  fixation. The  practi-

cionars  afhrme  that  it  is  engendered  in  a  flone  lyke  vnto  Albazano,  and  alfo  in  an  other  flone  of  a  ruffet,  deade,

and  darke  colour :  And  is  often  tymes  founde  in  an  other  flone  lyke  vnto  Treuertino  or  in  Treuertino  it  felfe.

The  myne  hereof,  is  very  ponderous,  and  hathe  in  it  often  tymes  certeyne  fhynynge  graynes  :  The  which  howe

much  the  leffe  they  are  like  to  the  poynte  of  a  needle  fo  muche  is  the  myne  founde  to  bee  the  perfecter,

bycaufe  this  is  a  token  of  pureneffe  and  fixion. And  when  it  is  founde  in  a  whyte  flone,  or  leade  flone,  it  is  fo

muche  the  better,  bycaufe  it  maye  be  the  eafyer  pourged  from  the  flone  and  earthyneffe. When  alfo  it  is

founde  lyinge  as  it  were  loofe  amonge  certeine  fcales  or  cloddes  of  earth,  they  faye  that  it  is  perfecte,  although

it  haue  not  to  the  eye  fuche  refplendence  as  other  are  wonte  to  haue. They  fay  alfo  that  it  is  engendered  in  an

earth  of  darke  ruffet  colour :  And  that  when  it  is  founde  in  this,  it  is  of  great  quantitie  and  perfection,  and  that

there  is  great  plcntie  therof  within  the  mountayne  :  This  alfo  to  be  fo  much  the  better  in  howe  much  more  it  is

fliynynge  of  the  coloure  of  iren  or  redde. And  that  yowe  may  the  better  comprehend  the  fignes  of  the  myne  of

the  forefayde  metall,  yowe  fhall  vnderfland  that  euen  togyther  with  the  myne,  eyther  where  it  is  fyrfle  founde,

or  nere  vnto  the  fame,  yowe  fhall  fee  certeyne  marchafites  of  yelowe  coloure  lyke  vnto  golde. The  which,  the

more  they  holde  of  fuche  hyghe  colour,  fo  much  the  more  do  they  fhewe  adufl  or  burnt  matter  and  heate,  as

thynges  contrary  to  the  nature  of  theyr  metals. And  therfore  accordynge  to  the  degrees  of  fuche  colours,

yow  may  in  maner  iudge  of  what  fatnes  or  leaneneffe  the  myne  is  lyke  to  bee. Such  marchafites  therfore

as  fhewe  the  befl  fignes  of  the  goodneffe  of  theyr  mynes,  owght  in  coloure  to  approche  to  whyteneffe  as

much  as  may  bee,  and  to  confyfl  of  fmaule  graynes,  and  not  in  greate  quantitie. And  this  is  a  generall  rule  of

all  marchafites,  that  howe  much  the  narower  and  leffe  they  are,  the  more  do  they  fhewe  the  goodneffe  of  theyr

myne. This  myne  of  fyluer  is  alfo  often  times  founde  in  a  veyne  of  great  quantitie,  and  yet  fo  leane  in

qualitie  that  it  wyll  not  beare  the  charge  of  the  dyggyng,  bicaufe  it  is  founde  in  a  harde  flone  lyke  vnto

Albazano,  beinge  verye  harde  to  bee  dygged  or  broken. Sum  tymes  alfo,  it  is  found  in  the  company  of

copper  or  leade  : The  which  lykewyfe  if  it  do  not  furmount  the  value  of  the  charges,  it  is  not  to  bee

folowed. Otherwhyles  alfo,  it  fo  chaunceth  that  thefe  thre  metals  are  founde  accompanyed  togyther  in  one

myne  :  In  whiche  cafe  it  fhalbe  neceffarie  to  vfe  aduertifement  of  arte. And  prefuppofynge  that  yowe  defyre

to  feparate  the  fyluer  frome  the  other  metall,  it  is  neceffarie  that  yowe  increafe  the  leade. But  if  yow  paffe

not  to  faue  neyther  the  fyluer  nor  the  leade,  but  only  the  copper,  it  fhalbe  requifite  to  proceade  with  longe

and  great  fyers  vntyl  the  weakefl  matters  bee  confumed. But  this  owght  to  be  doone  efpecially  in  fuch  mines

as  hold  iren. Yet  neyther  for  this  or  thofe,  can  there  any  general  rule  be  gj-uen,  but  that  accordynge  vnto

theyr  qualitie  and  nature,  fo  owght  they  to  be  diuided  : And  this  fo  much  the  more  in  that  they  are  often

tymes  mixte  with  fum  drye  earthe,  or  with  a  quantitie  of  antimonie  or  arfenike,  which  are  matters  altogyther

euaporable  and  bumte,  or  of  harde  fubflaunce  to  bee  reduced  to  fufion  or  meltynge : In  fo  much  that  the

artificers  fumtymes  beinge  ouercumme  of  them,  leaue  them  as  thynges  vnprofitable. \Mierof  there  can  none

other  caufe  often  times  be  gyuen,  then  theyr  owne  ignoraunce  by  reafon  of  extraordinarie  and  longe  fyers  whiche

they  gyue  them. And  therefore  they  woorke  inordinately  in  fuch  kynd  of  mynes,  except  they  accompanie  them

in  the  fufion  or  meltynge  with  fuch  thinges  as  may  defende  them  from  the  fyer. For  wheras  is  fuche  abun-

\67

340

Diuers  metals  in
one  masse.

In  the  Indies
golde  founde  in
greate  quantitie,
pure  and  vnmixte.

The  coulours  of
mineral  fumos^ites.

The  generacion
and  qualitie  of
siluer.

The  influences
of  the  mone.

Stones  in  the
which  syluer  is
engendered.

The  myne  of
syluer.

The  mountayne.

Marchasites  of
syluer.

What  marchasites
are  the  beste
signes.

Syluer  m^-nfels
in  harde  stones.

Syluer  with
copper  or  leade.

The  deuyding  of
siluer  from  other
metals.

341

Iren.

Metals  mixte  with
Ajitimonie  or
.4rsnike

Howe  metals  are
preserued  m
fusion.

368

Of  tlie  generation  of  met  ah.

Sulphur  and
iiiercurye.

Grinding  and
wasshinge  of
mynes.

The  amalgamynge
of  mines  with
Mercury.

Mines  holdynge
the  fourthe  part
of  siluer.

Copper  holdinge
syluer.

Thre  vnces  vi.  of
siluer  in  euery
hundreth  of  mine
War  betwene
Maximilian
Th[e]emperour
and  the  Venecians.

The  mynes  of
Almanye.

The  marchasite
mixte  with  the
myne.

342

daunce  eyther  of  burnte  matter,  or  of  fuperfliious  waterynefTe,  wherof  the  one  is  cauled  Sulphur  or  brymflone,
and  the  other  Mercurie  or  quickfyhier  not  fixed,  or  arfcnike,  it  is  necelTarie  that  the  one  burne  the  fyhier,  and
the  other  cary  it  a  way,  fo  that  of  the  myne  there  refleth  none  other  tlien  an  earthye  fubflaunce  infufible  and
not  able  to  bee  molten. To  faue  the  fayde  myne  therefore  it  flialbe  reciuifite  to  vfe  difcretion  with  much
pacience  and  conueniente  meanes,  fyrfle  after  the  common  maner  of  woorkynge  to  euaporate  the  myne  (as  wee
haue  fayde)  or  withowt  euaporation  to  grinde  it  fmaule  :  then  to  wafflie  it  often,  and  in  fine,  if  not  by  great
fyers,  at  the  leafte  by  great  baynes  or  tefles  of  leade  to  pourge  it. And  to  brynge  this  effect  the  more  eafely  to
pafle  as  much  as  may  be,  after  that  it  is  grounde  yow  owght  to  proue  in  the  fame  grindynge  or  in  an  other,
if  it  may  be  amalgamed  with  Mercurie  which  is  the  beft  maner  of  profe,  if  the  myne  bee  of  a  drye  nature  :  And
I  knowe  that  it  hath  bynne  vfed  of  many  to  theyr  greate  profyte  : And  efpecially  in  thofe  forte  of  mynes  which
I  fayde  before  to  bee  dygged  in  Vigcntina  in  Scliio,  beinge  very  ryche  and  good. Proue  it  therfore. For  all
kyndes  of  mines  do  not  receaue  it. And  of  this  wherof  I  haue  fpoken,  I  haue  intelligence  that  there  hath  bynne
pieces  founde  holdynge  a  fourth  part  of  fyluer,  and  fum  more  then  halfe. And  this  was  founde  lyinge  in  maner
in  the  fuperficiall  parte  of  the  earth  :  and  fum  tymes  in  pathes  and  high  wayes. It  hath  alfo  bin  founde  vnder
the  rootes  of  fuche  trees  as  haue  byn  ouerthrowen  by  tempeae  :  and  this  very  perfecte. So  that  emonge  all  the
mynes  whiche  I  haue  feene  in  the  dominions  of  Venice,  as  in  Carnia  and  in  many  other  places,  I  can  not  faye
that  I  haue  feene  any  better : Although  there  bee  many  caues  wherof  the  moa  parte  are  of  copper  holdinge
fyluer :  and  emonge  other,  that  in  the  mountayne  of  Auanzo,  where  I  in  the  company  of  certeyne  other  gentle-
men caufed  a  caue  to  bee  digged. And  bycaufe  the  hole  charge  was  committed  to  mee,  I  wente  by  occafion
twyfe  into  high  Almanye  to  fee  the  mynes  of  that  countrey,  wherby  I  might  haue  the  better  experience  to  faule
to  practyfe  at  my  returne. In  fo  much  that  I  founde  the  mine  which  we  had  taken  in  hande  to  folowe,  to  bee
very  good  and  ryche  :  holdynge  more  then  three  vnces  and  a  halfe  of  fyluer  in  euery  hundreth  of  the  myne.
And  doubtleffe  we  fhuld  haue  obteyned  great  commoditie  hereby  if  fortune  at  that  tyme  had  not  rayfed  warre
betwene  Maximilian  Th[e]enaperoure  and  the  fignorie  of  Venece  :  which  was  the  caufe  that  thofe  places  of  Frioli
and  Carnia,  coulde  not  be  quietly  inhabited  :  whereby  we  were  enforced  to  forfake  owre  enterpryfe,  and  to  rafe
and  deflroy  th[e]order  which  we  had  begunne. And  by  reafon  that  the  warres  continued  longe,  we  were  con-
flrayned  to  diuide  owr  company,  where  I  alfo  departed  an  other  way,  hauyng  euer  in  mynde  to  folowe  owre
attempted  enterpryfe  when  better  oportunitie  fliulde  ferue. In  the  meane  tyme  returnyng  ageine  into  hyghe
Almanie,  I  made  more  diligent  fearche  to  knowe  the  mynes  then  before  :  and  went  to  Sbozzo,  Plaipcr,  I\n\
fpruch,  Alia,  and  Arotiinbergh  :  frome  whenfe  I  wente  into  dyuers  places  of  Italy. So  that  to  conclude,
the  mofl  and  befl  mynes  whiche  I  haue  fene  to  holde  mofl  of  fyluer,  are  thofe  that  are  founde  in
Vicentma  in  certeyne  flones  of  a  dark  grey,  or  ruffet  colour,  as  I  haue  fayde  before. And  nowe
for  a  generall  aduertifement,  I  wyll  not  omyt  to  tell  yow,  that  when  yow  haue  attempted  to
dygge  any  mynes,  and  haue  founde  the  marchafite  and  the  myne  myxt  togyther,  yowe
fhall  leaue  of  yowre  woorke,  bycaufe  it  fignifieth  that  the  myne  is  neare  to  the  fuper-
ficiall part  of  the  earth,  and  that  it  is  of  but  lytde  quantitie. And  thus  as
touchyng  this  myne  of  fyluer,  I  can  fay  no  more  fauynge  that  I  haue  not
yet  fhewed  yowe  the  maner  of  pourgynge  it  from  earthely  grofenes
and  to  brynge  it  to  perfect  metall. But  bycaufe  I  haue  deter-
myned  to  fpeake  largely  hereof  in  the  proper  place  of  the
fufion  or  meltynge  of  all  metals,  I  haue  thowght
good  to  fpeake  no  further  of  this  matter  at
this  prefente.

^68

Of  the  generation  of  metals.

369

THE MANER OF WORKYNGE IN GOLDE

MYNES IN EGIPTE IN OWED TYME, AFTER THE

DESCRIPTION  OF  DIODORVS  SICVLVS,  WHO  WROTTE  HIS  HISTORIE

cauled  Bibliotheca,  fumwhat  before  the  dayes  of  th[e]emperoure

Octauianus Auguftus, and before th[e]incarnation of

Chrift  abowt.  xl. [forty]  yeares.

He  wryteth  therefore  in  his  fourthe  booke  as  foloweth.

E  haue  not  thowght  good  to  pretermit  howe  golde  is  founde,  digged,  and  wrought  amonge  the
Egiptians.  In  the  confines  therefore  of  Egipte  where  it  borthereth  with  Ethiopia  and  Arabia,
there  are  certeyne  places  frutefuU  of  metalles,  owt  of  the  whiche,  golde  is  digged  with  great
laboure  and  expenfes.  For  a  blacke  earthe  of  minerale  nature,  hath  certeyne  vaynes  of  mofle
white  marble  exceadinge  bright  and  fhyninge.  The  furueyours  of  this  woorke,  haue  affigned
them  a  great  company  of  men  to  woorke  and  coyne  golde.  For  the  kinges  of  Egipte  are
accuflonied  to  appoynte  to  thefe  paynefull  trauailes,  all  fuche  as  haue  byn  conuicte  for  cer-
teyne crimes  and  condemned  by  lawes,  or  taken  prifoners  in  the  warres,  or  fuche  as  haue  byn  committed  to
prifon  through  the  indignation  of  princes  who  by  this  meanes  haue  bothe  great  vantage  by  theyr  laboure,  and
punyfhe  them  fufficiently  for  theyr  offenfes.  For  barbarous  and  flrange  fouldiers  of  diuers  languagies,  bare  rule
ouer  them  and  keepe  them  to  theyr  worke,  in  fuche  forte  that  th[e]ufe  of  fpeache  beinge  taken  from  theym,  they
can  not  bee  corrupted  by  loue  or  intreatie.  They  drawe  golde  owt  of  the  hardefl  earth  decocte  with  much  fyer.
The  foftefl  flone  which  is  broken  with  meane  labour,  is  digged  with  inflrumentes  of  iren  by  the  trauayle  of  many
thoufands  of  men.  The  fcrier  which  decerneth  the  veines  of  the  myne,  go[e]th  before  the  workemen,  appoynt-
ing  them  the  places  where  they  fhall  digge.  The  marble  flone  whiche  he  fheweth  theim,  they  breake  and
cleaue  with  wedgies  of  iren  by  the  mere  flrength  of  theyr  bodies  withowte  arte.  They  make  theyr  fofle  or  caue,
not  right  furthe,  but  as  the  bright  nature  of  the  golden  marble  leadeth  them,  beinge  otherwyfe  darke  and  obfcure
by  reafon  of  theyr  fundry  turnes  and  bendinges  diuers  wayes.  The  labourers  caryinge  lyght  before  theyr  for[e]-
heades,  digge  great  flones  owt  of  the  myne,  whyche  they  let  faule  on  the  ground.  From  this  labour  they  neuer
tell,  inforced  to  contynual  woorke  with  flrokes  and  contumelious  woordes.  Children  of  th[e]age  of.  xii.  [twelue]
or.  xiii.  [thirteen]  yeares  or  vppewarde,  are  diuided  into  two  companyes,  whereof  the  one  breake  the  flones  into
fmaule  pieces,  and  the  other  cary  furth  that  which  is  broken.  They  that  are  pafl  th[e]age  of.  xxx.  [thirty]
yeares,  receaue  the  fayd  broken  flones  at  theyr  hands  and  beate  them  in  veffels  of  flone  with  maules  of  iren,  to
the  quantitie  of  tares  or  fytches  :  which  afterward  they  caft.  into  many  milles,  whereby  the  laboure  of  two  or
three  women  or  owlde  men  to  euery  mylle,  they  are  grounde  as  fmaule  as  meale.  The  fylthineffe  of  the  bodies
of  thefe  labourers,  is  apparent  to  all  men.  For  not  fo  muche  as  their  priuie  members  are  couered  with  any
thinge  :  And  theyr  bodies  byfyde  fo  fylthy,  that  no  man  can  beholde  them  withowt  compaffion  of  theyr  miferie.
But  no  pitie,  no  refle,  no  remiffion  is  graunted  them,  whether  they  bee  men  or  women,  }  (umge  or  owlde,  fycke
or  feeble  :  But  are  all  with  flrokes  inforced  to  continuall  labour  vntyl  the  poore  wretches  faynt  and  often  tymes
dye  for  extreme  debilitie  :  In  fo  much  that  many  of  them  for  feare  of  theyr  lyfe  to  coomme  (which  they  thynke
woorfe  then  the  prefent  payne)  preferre  death  before  lyfe.  When  they  haue  thus  grounde  the  flones  very
fmaule,  they  caft.  that  fubftaunce  vppon  brode  tables  inclynynge  fumwhat  fliepe  or  ftandynge  a  flope,  and  caft
water  thereon,  flerynge  continually  the  fayde  pouder  of  marble  :  by  the  meanes  wherof  the  earth  and  vre  of  the
myne  is  wafQied  away,  and  the  golde  as  the  heauier  matter  remayneth  on  the  tables.  When  they  haue  doone
thus  often  tymes,  they  ouerturne  the  golde  continually  with  theyr  handes  and  rub  it  with  thynne  fpoonges,  owt
of  the  which  they  preffe  a  fofte  earth,  and  thus  continewe  vntyll  the  pure  metall  remayne  lyke  vnto  golden  fande.
After  that  this  preparation  is  fynyffhed,  other  woorkemen  receauynge  it  at  theyr  handes  by  meafure  and  weyght,
caft.  it  into  earthen  pottes,  puttynge  thereto  a  certeyne  portion  of  leade,  with  branne  of  barjy,  and  weedes  of
the  fea  cauled  reites  or  oufe.  Thefe  thynges  proportioned  accordingly,  tney  clofe  the  pottes  diligently  with
cley,  and  fo  let  them  fland  in  a  furneffe  with  fyer  for  the  fpace  of  fyue  continuall  dayes  and  nyghtes.  In  which
fpace,  al  other  thinges  of  contrary  mixture  beinge  confumed,  only  the  golde  is  found  in  the  veflels,  fumwhat
diminyffhed  of  the  fyrft.  weyght.  And  by  this  labour  and  diligence  is  golde  poffeffed  in  the  furtheft  parte  of
Egypt.  Wherby,  euen  nature  her  felfe  teacheth  vs  howe  laborious  it  is  in  fyndynge,  tedious  m  purfuinge,  daun-
gerous  in  keepynge,  and  in  vfe  conftitute  betwene  pleafure  and  forowe.

Eden.  2  E  369

Gold  in  a  black
earthe,  and  white
marble

Then  damned  to
the  metales  as
nowe  to  the
gallies.

The  scrier  of  the
va>'ne.

Golden  marble.

The  woorke  of
chyldren.

Mylles.

The  misery  of
the  miners

The  pourginge  of
the  metall  Irome
the  vre.

The  melting  of
golde.

343

Alga:.

371

[The  Third  EngHsh  book  on  America,

Which  is  also

The First English Collection of Voyages, Traffics, & Discoveries.

Cfte  lipcatrrjS  sil  i\\t  \\t\xst  toorltre  01*  \xst^t  iiiUiit,  etc.

section VII.

The  Jirst  two  Voyages  out  of
England  into  Guinea.

1553-1554A.D.]

373

CTFIE  DISCRIPTION  OF  THE  TWO  VIAGES

MADE  OWT  OF  ENGLAND  INTO  GVINEA  IN  AFFRIKE

AT  THE  CHARGES  OF  CERTEYNE  MARCHAVNTES  ADVENTVRERS

of  the  citie  of  London,  in  the  yeare  of  owre  Lorde.

M.  D.  LIII.

Hat  thefe  vyages  to  Guinea  are  placed  after  thebooke  of  Metals  as
feparate  frome  other  vyages,  the  caufe  hereof  is,  that  after  I  had
delyuered  the  fayde  booke  of  metalles  to  the  handes  of  the
printers,  I  was  defyred  by  certeyne  my  frendes  to  make  fumme
mention  of  thefe  viages,  that  fum  memorie  myght  thereof  remayne
toovvrpofleritie  if  eyther  iniquitie  of  tymeconfumyngeall  thinges,
or  ignoraunce  creepynge  in  by  barbaroufneffe  and  contempte  of
kno\veleage,fliulde  hereafter  buryinobliuionfowoorthyattemptes,
fo  much  the  greatlyer  to  bee  eflemed  as  before  neuer  enterpryfed
by  Englyfflie  men,  or  at  the  leafle  fo  frequented  as  at  this  prefent
they  are  and  may  bee  to  the  greate  commoditie  of  owre  mar-
chauntes,  if  the  fame  be  not  hyndered  by  th[e]ambifion  of  fuch
as  for  the  conqueflynge  of  fortie  or  fyftie  myles  here  and  there,
and  erectynge  of  certeyne  fortreffes  or  rather  blockhoufes  amonge
naked  people,  thinke  them  felues  woorthy  to  bee  lordes  of
ha  fe  the  worlde,enuying  that  other  fliulde  enioy  the  commodities
which  they  them  felues  can  not  holy  poffeffe.  And  although  fuch
as  haue  byn  at  charges  in  the  difcouerynge  and  conqueflynge  of  fuch  landes,  owght  by  good  reafon  to
haue  certeyne  priuilegies,  preeminencies,  and  tributes  for  the  fame,  yet  (to  fpeake  vnder  correction)  it  may
feeme  furnwhat  rigorous  and  ageynfl  good  reafon  and  confcience,  or  rather  ageynfl.  the  charitie  that  owght
to  bee  amonge  Chryflen  men,  that  fuch  as  violentely  inuade  the  dominions  of  other,  fhuld  not  permit  other
frendely  to  vfe  the  trade  of  marchandies  in  places  neuer  or  feldome  frequented  of  them,  wherby  theyr  trade  is
not  hindered  in  fuch  places  where  they  them  felues  haue  at  theyr  owne  election  appoynted  the  martes  of  theyr
trafike.  But  forafmuche  as  at  this  prefente  it  is  not  my  intent  to  accufe  or  defend,  approue  or  improue,  I  wil
ceafe  to  fpeake  any  further  hereof,  and  proceade  to  the  defcription  of  the  fyrR  viage  as  briefely  and  faythfully  as
I  was  aduertifed  of  the  fame  by  th[e]information  of  fuch  credible  perfons  as  made  diligent  inquifition  to  knowe
the  truth  hereof  as  much  as  flialbe  requifite,  omyttynge  to  fpeake  of  many  particular  thynges  not  greatly  necef-
farie  to  be  knowen :  whiche  neuertheleffe  with  alfo  th[e]exact  courfe  of  the  nauigation,  flial  be  more  fully
declared  in  the  fecond  vyage.  And  if  herein  fauoure  or  frendfliyppe  fhall  perhappes  caufe  fum  to  thinke  that
fum  haue  byn  fliarpely  touched,  let  them  laye  a  parte  fauoure  and  frendfliippe  and  gyue  place  to  truth,  that  honefl
men  may  receaue  prayfe  for  well  doinge,  and  lewde  perfons  reproche  as  the  iuR  flipende  of  the)T  euyll  defertes,
whereby  other  may  bee  deteried  to  do  the  lyke,  and  vertuous  men  encouraged  to  proceade  in  honell  attemptes.
But  that  thefe  vyages  may  bee  more  playnely  vnderflode  of  al  men,  I  haue  thowght  good  for  this  purpofe
before  I  intreate  hereof,  to  make  a  breefe  defcription  of  Affrica  beinge  that  greate  parte  of  the  worlde,  on  whofe
Wefle  fyde  begynneth  the  coafl  of  Guinea  at  Cabo  Verde  abowt  the.  xii.  [twelve]  degrees  in  latitude  on  this
fyde  the  Equinoctiall  line,  and  two  degrees  in  longitude  from  the  meafur}'nge  line,  fo  nmnynge  from  the  north
to  the  fouth  and  by  eafl  in  fum  places  within  v.  iiii.  and.  iii.  degrees  and  a  halfe  within  the  Equinoctiall,
and  fo  furth  in  maner  directly  eafl  and  by  north  for  the  fpace  of.  xxxvi.  [thirty-six]  degrees  or  there  abowt  in
longitude  from  the  Well  to  the  Eafl,  as  fhall  more  playnely  appere  in  the  defcryption  of  the  feconde  vyage.

2 E  2  573

Ambition.

Africa.

The  coa5t  of
Guinea.

374

TJie  vyage  to  Gttuica.

344

A BREEFE DESCRITTION OF AfFRIKE.

Tunnes.
Bugia.
Tripoli.
Kumidia.

Ilnndes  of  Tunnes.

Malta.

The  disertes  of
Libia.

Barbaric

Mauritania.

The  kingdoms  of

Fes  and  nianock.

Tremesin.

Oram.

Nassaquiber

Salla.

Azamor.

The  Ilandes  of
Canarie.

Guinea.

Ethiopians.

Marrocko.
Fes.

Tremesin.
Guinea.

Africa  the  great.

Affrike  the  lesse.

Carthage.

Prester  lohn.

Cape  de  Buona
Speranza.

The  sea  of  sande.
Alcair.

345

From  wliense  the
queene  of  Saba
came.

ManicongnL

The  earthly

Paradyse.

The  trees  of  the

soonnc  and

moone.

1

"iN  Aflrica  the  leffe  are  thefe  kyngedomes  :  The  kyngedome  of  Tunes,  and  Conflantina  which  is
at  this  day  vnder  Tunes,  and  alfo  the  region  of  Bugia,  TripoH,  and  Ezzab.  This  part  of
Afrike  is  very  baren  by  reafon  of  the  greate  dcfertes,  as  the  defertes  of  Numidia  and  Barcha.
The  principall  portes  of  the  kyngedome  of  Tunes  are  thefe :  Goletta,  Bizerta,  Portofarnia,
Boua,  and  Stora.  The  chiefe  cities  of  Tunes,  are  Conflantia  and  Bona  with  dyuers  other.
Vnder  this  kyngedome  are  many  Ilandes,  as  Zerbi,  Lampadola,  Pantalarea,  Limofo,  Beit,
Gamelaro,  and  Alalta  where  at  this  prefente  is  the  greate  mafler  of  the  Rodes.  Vnder  the
fouthe  of  this  kyngedome,  are  the  great  defertes  of  Libia.  Al  the  nations  [of]  this  Africa  the
less,  are  of  the  fecte  of  Machomet  and  a  ruflicall  people  lyuynge  fcattered  in  vyllages.  The  befle  of  this  parte
of  Afrike,  is  Barbaria  lyinge  on  the  coafle  of  the  fea  Mediterraneum.

Mauritania  (nowe  caulcd  Barbaria)  is  diuided  in  two  partes,  as  Mauritania  Tingitania,  and  Cefarienfis,
Mauritania  Tingitania,  is  nowe  cauled  the  kyngdome  of  Fes  and  the  kyngedome  of  Marrocko.  The  principall
citie  of  Fes,  is  cauled  Feffa  :  and  the  chiefe  citie  of  Marrocko,  is  named  Marrocko.  Mauritania  Cefarienfis  is
at  this  day  cauled  the  kyngedome  of  Tremifen,  with  alfo  the  citie  cauled  Temifen  or  Trelenfm.  This  region
is  full  of  defertes,  and  reacheth  to  the  fea  Mediterraneum  to  the  citie  of  Oram  with  the  porte  of  Maflaquiber.
The  kyngedome  of  Fes  reachethe  vnto  the  Ocean  fea  from  the  Wefl  to  the  citie  of  Argilla :  and  the  porte  of
the  fayde  kyngedome  is  cauled  Salla.

The  kyngedome  of  Marrocko  is  alfo  extended  aboue  the  Ocean  fea  vnto  the  citie  of  Azamor  and  Azafi
whiche  are  aboue  the  Ocean  fea  towarde  the  Wefl  of  the  fayde  kyngdome.  In  Mauritania  Tingitanea  (that  is
to  fay  in  the  two  kyngedomes  of  Fes  and  Marrocko)  are  in  the  fea,  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie  cauled  in  owlde  time
the  fortunate  Ilandes.  Toward  the  fouth  of  this  region,  is  the  kyngedome  of  Guinea,  with  Senega,  laiofo,
Gambra,  and  manye  other  regions  of  the  blacke  Moores  cauled  Ethiopians  or  Negros,  all  whiche  are  watered
with  the  ryuer  Negro  cauled  in  owlde  tyme  Niger.  In  the  fayde  regions  are  no  cities  :  but  only  certeyne  lowe
cotages  made  of  bouwes  of  trees  plaflered  with  chauke  and  couered  with  flrawe  :  In  thefe  regions  are  alfo  very
great  defertes.

The  kyngedome  of  Marrocko  hath  vnder  it  thefe  feuen  kyngedomes  :  Hea,  Sus,  Guzula,  the  territorie  of
Marrocko,  Duchala,  Hazchora,  and  Telde.  The  kyngedome  of  Fes  hath  as  many  :  as  Fes,  Temefne,  Azgar,
Elabath,  Errifi,  Caret,  and  Elcauz.  The  kyngedome  of  Tremifen  hath  thefe  regions  :  Tremifen,  Tenez,  and
Elgazaet,  all  which  are  Machometifles.  But  all  the  regions  of  Guinea  are  pure  Gentyles  and  Idolatours  withowt
profeffion  of  any  religion  or  other  knowleage  of  god  then  by  the  lawe  of  nature.

Africa  the  great,  is  one  of  the  three  partes  of  the  worlde  knowen  in  owlde  tyme  and  feuered  from  Afia,  on
the  Eafl  by  the  ryuer  Nilus  :  On  the  Wefl,  from  Europe  by  the  pillers  of  Hercules.  The  hyther  part  is  nowe
cauled  Barbaric,  and  the  people  Moores.  The  inner  parte  is  cauled  Libia  and  Ethiopia.  Afrike  the  leffe  is  in
this  wyfe  bounded :  On  the  wefl  it  hath  Numidia :  On  the  eafl  Cyrenaica :  On  the  north,  the  fea  cauled  Medi-
terraneum. In  this  countrey  was  the  noble  citie  of  Carthage.

In  the  Eafl  fyde  of  Afrike  beneth  the  redde  fea,  dwelleth  the  greate  and  myghtye  Emperour  and  Chryflian
kynge  Prefler  lohan,  well  knowen  to  the  Portugales  in  theyr  vyages  to  Calicut.  His  dominions  reache  very
farre  on  euery  fyde  :  and  hath  vnder  hym  many  other  kynges  both  Chryflian  and  hethen  that  pay  hym  trybute.
This  myghty  prynce  is  cauled  Dauid  Th[e]emperour  of  Ethiopia.  Sum  wryte  that  the  kynge  of  Portugale
fendeth  hym  yearely.  viii.  [eight]  fhyppes  laden  with  marchaundies.  His  kyngedome  confineth  with  the  redde
fea,  and  reacheth  farre  into  Afrike  towarde  Egypte  and  Barbaric.  Southwarde  it  confineth  with  the  fea  towarde
the  cape  de  Buo7ia  Speranzo :  and  on  the  other  fyde  with  the  fea  of  fande  cauled  Mare  de  Sabione,  a  very
daungerous  fea,  lyinge  betwene  the  great  citie  of  Alcaer  or  Cairo  in  Egypte  and  the  countrey  of  Ethiopia  :  In
the  whiche  way  are  many  vnha[bita]ble  defertes  continuinge  for  the  fpace  of  fyue  dayes  iorney.  And  they  affirme
that  if  the  fayde  Chryflian  Emperour  were  not  hyndered  by  thofe  defertes  (in  the  which  is  great  lacke  of  vittayles
and  efpecially  of  water)  he  wolde  or  nowe  haue  inuaded  the  kyngedome  of  Egypte  and  the  citie  of  Alcayer.
The  chiefe  citie  of  Ethiope  where  this  great  Emperour  is  refydent,  is  cauled  Amacaiz  beinge  a  fayre  citie,  whofe
inhabitauntes  are  of  the  coloure  of  an  olyue.  There  are  alfo  many  other  cities,  as  the  citie  of  Sana  vppon  the
ryuer  of  Nilus  where  Th[e]emperoure  is  accuflomed  to  remayne  in  the  foommer  feafon.  There  is  lykewyfe
a  great  citie  named  Barbaregaf:  And  Afcon  from  whenfe  it  is  fayde  that  the  queene  of  Saba  came  to
lerufalem  to  heare  the  wyfdome  of  Salomon.  This  citie  is  but  lyttle,  yet  very  fayre  and  one  of  the  chiefe
cities  in  Ethiope.  In  the  fayde  kyngdome  is  a  prouince  cauled  Manicongni,  whofe  kynge  is  a  Moore
and  tributarie  to  Th[e]emperour  of  Ethiope.  In  this  prouince  are  many  excedynge  hyghe  mountaynes  vppon
the  which  is  fayde  to  be  the  earthly  Paradyfe  :  And  fum  fay  that  there  are  the  trees  of  the  foonne  and  moone
whereof  the  antiquitie  maketh  mention  :  yet  that  none  can  paffe  thyther  by  reafon  of  greate  defertes  of  a
hundreth  dayes  iorney.  Alfo  beyonde  thefe  mountaynes,  is  the  cape  of  Buona  Speranza.  And  to  haue  fayde
thus  much  of  Afrike  it  may  fuftice.

374

The  fyrjl  vyage  to  Guinea.

375

C  THE  FYRST  VYAGE  TO  GVINEA.

|N  the  yeare  of  owre  Lorde.  M.  D.  LIII.  the.  xii.  [twelfth]  day  of
Augull,  fayled  from  Porchemouth  two  goodly  fliyppes,  the  Prim-
rofe  and  the  Lion,  with  a  pynneffe  cauled  the  moone  ;  beinge  all
well  fumyffhed  afwell  with  men  of  the  lufliell  forte  to  the  number
of  feuen  fcore,  as  alfo  with  ordinaunce  and  vyttayles  requifite  to
fuch  a  vyage  :  Hauynge  alfo  two  capitaynes,  the  one  a  flraunger
cauled  Antoniades  Pinteado  a  Portugale,  borne  in  a  towme  named
the  porte  of  Portugale,  a  wyfe,  difcrete,  and  fober  man,  who  for
his  cunnynge  in  faylynge  beinge  afwell  an  expert  pylot  as  poly-
tyke  capitayne,  was  fumtyme  in  greate.  fauoure  with  the  kynge  of
Portugale,  and  to  whom  the  coafles  of  Brafile  and  Guinea  were
commytted  to  bee  kepte  from  the  Frenchemen  to  whom  he  was
a  terroure  on  the  fea  in  thofe  partes  :  and  was  furthermore  a
gentleman  of  the  kinge  his  maflers  houfe.  But  as  fortune  in
maner  neuer  fauoureth  but  flattereth,  neuer  promifeth  but
deceaueth,  neuer  rayfeth  but  cafleth  downe  ageyne,  and  as  great
wealth  and  fauour  hath  alwayes  companions  emulation  and  enuie,
he  was  after  many  aduerfites  and  quarels  made  ageynfl  hym,  inforced  to  come  into  Englande  :  where  in  this
golden  vyage  he  was  euyll  matched  with  an  vnequall  coompanion  and  vnlyke  matche  of  moil  fundry  qualities
and  conditions  with  vertues  few  or  none  adourned,  with  vices  dyuers  and  many  fowly  fpotted,  knowen  of  many
without  profyte,  and  defyred  of  fewe  or  none  for  his  wyckednes  :  whofe  fmaule  acquayntaunce  was  profitable  to
all  men,  and  his  familiar  conuerfation  an  vndoinge,  that  happye  was  the  man  or  woman  that  knewe  hjon  not,  he
for  his  gooddes  and  flie  for  her  name.  In  fine,  vnfortunate  was  the  coompany  that  had  owght  to  doo  with  hym :
in  fo  much  that  it  was  no  maruayle  that  fo  goodly  an  enterpryfe  with  fo  noble  a  furniture  of  men,  fhyppes,  and
ordinaunce  of  all  fortes,  with  all  kynde  of  vyttayles  and  that  of  fo  great  abundaunce,  had  fo  fmaul  fuccefle :
which  could  be  none  otherwyfe  wher  fo  foule  a  fpotte  dyd  blemyffhe,  ye  rather  deface  the  reft  Thus  departed
thefe  noble  fhyppes  vnder  fayle  on  theyr  vyage.  But  firfl  this  capitayne  Wyndam,  puttyng  furth  of  his  fhyp  at
Porchmouth,  a  kynfeman  of  one  of  the  headde  marchauntes,  and  fhewynge  herein  a  muRer  of  the  tragical  partes
he  had  conceaued  in  his  brayne,  and  with  fuch  fmaule  begynninges  nuryffhed  fo  monflrous  a  byrth,  that  more
happy,  yea  and  bleffed  was  that  younge  man  beinge  lefte  behynde  then  if  he  had  byn  taken  with  them,  as  fum
doo  wyffhe  he  had  doonne  the  lyke  by  theyrs.  Thus  fayled  they  on  theyr  vyage  vntyl  they  came  to  the  Ilandes
of  Madera  where  they  toke  in  certeyne  wynes  for  the  flore  of  theyr  fhyppes,  and  payde  for  them  as  they  agreed
of  the  price.  At  thefe  Ilandes  they  met  with  a  great  gallon  of  the  kynge  of  Portugale  full  of  men  and  ordi-
naunce :  yet  fuche  as  coulde  not  haue  preuayled  if  it  had  attempted  to  withflande  or  refyfl  owre  fhyppes,  for
the  which  caufe  it  was  fet  furth,  not  only  to  lette  and  interrupte  thefe  owre  fhyppes  of  the)T  purpofed  vyage,
but  all  other  that  fhulde  attempte  the  lyke  :  Yet  chiefely  to  fruflrate  owre  vyage.  For  the  kyng  of  Portugale
was  finiflerly  informed  that  owre  fliyppes  were  armed  to  his  caflel  of  Mina  in  thefe  parties,  wheras  nothing  lefle
was  ment.

After  that  owr  fhyppes  departed  from  the  Ilandes  of  Madera  forwarde  on  theyr  vyage,  began  this  woorthy
capitaine  Pinteados  forowe  as  a  man  tormented  with  the  company  of  a  terrible  hydra  who  hytherto  flattered  with
hym  and  made  hym  a  fayre  countenance  and  fhewe  of  loue.  Then  dyd  he  take  vppon  hym  to  commaunde  all
alone,  fettynge  nowght  bothe  by  capitayne  Pinteado  with  the  refle  of  the  marchaunte  factours  :  fumtymes  with
opprobrious  woordes  and  fumtymes  with  threatenynges  mofl  fhamefuUy  abufynge  them,  takinge  from  Pinteado
the  feruice  of  the  boys  and  certeyne  mariners  that  were  affigned  hym  by  th[e]order  and  direction  of  the  woor-
fhypfuU  marchauntes,  and  leauynge  hym  as  a  common  maryner,  which  is  the  greatefl.  defpite  and  greefe  that
can  be  to  a  Portugale  or  Spanyarde  to  be  diminyfOite  theyr  honoure  which  they  efleemc  aboue  all  rj-cheffe.
Thus  faylyng  forward  on  theyr  vyage,  they  came  to  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie,  continuynge  theyr  courfe  from  thenfe
vntyll  they  arryued  at  the  Ilande  of  faynt  Nicolas  where  they  vj'ttayled  them  felues  with  freflhe  meate  of  the

375

The  Prynsrose

The  Lyon.
The  Moone

Plnteada

Brasile.
Guinea.

The  flatter>'ng  of
fortune.

The  euel
conditions  of
Wyndam.

The  Ilandes  of
Madera.

A  galeon  of
the  kin^e  of
Portugale,

The  castel  of
Mina.

346

Howe  WvTidam
abused  Pinteada

The  Ilandes  of
Canarie.

The  Ilande  oC
S.  Nicolas.

376

The  fyrjl  vyage  to  Gtiiiica.

Guinea.

Tlie  ryuer  of
Sesto.

Graynes.

Tliethristofgolde.

The  castel  of
mena.

The  quantit[i]e  of
golde.

Benin.

Pepper.

Furie  admitteth
no  counsayle.

The  Rossia.
Rottinge  heate.
Scorchinge  heate.
Benin.

Francisco.
Nicolas  Lambert.
The  kyng  of
Benin  his  court.

347

Reuerence
towardethe  Icynge.

The

communication
betwene  the  kynge
of  Benin  and  owr
meiL

Pepper.

The  kyngcs
gentlencsse
towarde  owr  men.

flefflie  ofwylde  goates  whereof  is  great  plentie  in  that  Ilande  and  in  maner  of  nothyng  elfe.  From  heiife  folowynge
on  tlieyr  courfe,  and  taryinge  here  and  there  at  the  deferte  Ilandes  in  the  waye,  bycaufe  they  wolde  not  coome
to  tymely  to  the  countrey  of  Guinea  for  the  heate,  and  taryinge  fumwhat  to  longe  (for  what  can  bee  wel
mynyflred  in  a  common  weaUh  where  inequahtic  with  tyrannic  wyll  rule  alone)  they  came  at  the  length  to  the
fyrfl  lande  of  the  countrey  of  Guinea  where  they  fell  with  the  great  ryuer  of  Seflo  where  they  myght  for  theyr
marchaundies  haue  laden  theyr  fliyppes  with  the  graynes  of  that  countrey,  which  is  a  very  hotte  frute,  and  much
lyke  vnto  a  fygge  as  it  groweth  on  the  tree.  For  as  the  fygges  are  full  of  fmaule  feedes,  fo  is  the  fayde  frute  ful  of
graynes  which  are  lofe  within  the  codde,  hauynge  in  the  myddeft  thereof  a  hole  on  euery  fyde.  This  kynde  of
fpice  is  much  vfed  in  coulde  countreys,  and  may  there  be  folde  for  great  aduantage  for  th[e]exchaunge  of  other
But  owr  men  by  the  perfuafion  or  rather  inforcement  of  this  tragicall  capitayne,  not  regardynge  and

wares.

fettyng  lyght  by  that  commoditie  in  comparafon  to  the  fine  gold  they  thrifled,  fayled  an  hundreth  leaques  further
vntyl  they  came  to  the  golden  lande :  where  not  attemptinge  to  come  nere  the  caflell  perteynynge  to  the  kynge
of  Portugale,  whiche  was  within  the  ryuer  of  Mina,  made  fale  of  theyr  ware  onely  on  this  fyde  and  beyonde  it
for  the  golde  of  that  countrey  to  the  quantitie  of  an  hundreth  and  fiftie  poundes  weyght,  there  beinge  in  cafe
that  they  myght  haue  difpatched  al  theyr  ware  for  golde,  if  the  vntame  brayne  of  Wyndam  had  or  could  haue
gyuen  eare  to  the  counfayle  and  experience  of  Pinteado.  For  when  that  Wyndam  not  fatiffied  with  the  golde
whiche  he  had  (and  more  myght  haue  had  if  he  had  taryed  abowt  the  Mina)  commaundynge  the  fayde  Pinteado
(for  fo  he  toke  vppon  hym)  to  leade  the  fliyppes  to  Benin  beinge  vnder  the  Equinoctial  line  and  a  hundreth  and
fiftie  leaques  beyonde  the  Mina  where  he  loked  to  haue  theyr  fliyppes  laden  with  pepper :  And  beinge  coun-
fayled  of  the  fayde  Pinteado  confyderynge  the  late  tyme  of  the  yere  for  that  tyme  to  go  no  further  but  to  make
fale  of  theyr  wares  fuch  as  they  had  for  golde  wherby  they  myght  haue  byn  great  gayners.  But  Wyndam  not
affentynge  hereunto,  fell  into  a  fuddeyne  rage,  reuilynge  the  fayde  Pinteado,  caulynge  hym  lewe  with  other
opprobrious  woordes,  fayinge.  This  horfon  lewe  hath  promifed  to  brynge  vs  to  fuch  places  as  are  not,  or  as
he  can  not  bring  vs  vnto.  But  if  he  doo  not,  I  wyl  cut  of  his  eares  and  naile  them  to  the  mafl.  Pinteado  gaue
the  forfayde  counfayle  to  goo  no  further  for  the  fafeguard  of  the  men  and  theyr  lyues,  which  they  fhulde  put  in
daungioure  if  they  came  to  late  for  the  roffia  which  is  theyr  wynter,  not  for  coulde  but  for  fmotherynge  heate
with  clofe  and  cloudy  ayer  and  florminge  wether  of  fuche  putrifyinge  qualitie  that  it  rotted  the  cotes  of  theyr
backes  :  Or  els  for  coommynge  to  foonne  for  the  fcorchynge  heate  of  the  fonne  which  caufed  them  to  lynger  in
the  way.  But  of  force  and  not  of  wyll,  browght  he  the  fliyppes  before  the  ryuer  of  Benin  :  where  rydynge  at  an
anker,  fente  theyr  pinneffe  vp  into  the  ryuer  fiftie  or  threfcore  leaques,  from  wlienfe  certeyne  of  the  marchauntes
with  capitayne  Pinteado,  Francifco  a  Portugale,  Nicolas  Lambert  gentleman,  and  other  marchauntes  were  con-
ducted to  the  courte  where  the  kyng  remayned.  x.  [ten]  leaques  from  the  ryuer  fyde :  whyther  when  they  came,
they  were  browght  with  a  greate  company  to  the  prffence  of  the  kynge  who  beinge  a  blacke  moore  (althoughe  not
fo  blacke  as  the  reft)  fat  in  a  great  houge  haule  longe  and  wyde,  the  walles  made  of  earthe  withowte  wyndowes,
the  roofe  of  thynne  boordes  open  in  fundry  places  lyke  vnto  louers  to  lette  in  the  ayer.

And  here  to  fpeke  of  the  great  reuerence  they  gyue  to  their  kynge,  beinge  fuch  that  if  wee  wolde  gyue  as
much  to  owr  fauiour  Chryfl,  we  fliuld  remoue  from  owr  heades  many  plages  which  wee  dayly  deferue  for  owre
contempte  and  impietie.

So  it  is  therfore,  that  when  his  noble  men  are  in  his  prefence,  they  neuer  looke  hym  in  the  face,  but  fyt
courynge,  as  wee  vppon  owre  knees  fo  they  vppon  theyr  buttockes  with  theyr  elbowes  vppon  theyr  knees  and
theyr  handes  beefore  theyr  faces,  not  lookynge  vppe  vntyll  the  kynge  commaunde  them.  And  when  they  are
commynge  towarde  the  kynge  as  farre  as  they  do  fee  hym,  do  they  fhewe  fuch  reuerence  fytting  on  the  grounde
with  theyr  faces  couered  as  before.  Lykewife  when  they  depart  from  hym  they  turne  not  theyr  backes  towarde
hym,  but  go  creepynge  backewarde  with  lyke  reuerence.

And  nowe  to  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  communication  that  was  betwene  the  kynge  and  owre  men,  yowe  fhall
fyrfl  vnderftande  that  he  hym  felfe  coulde  fpeake  the  Portugale  tounge  which  he  had  lerned  of  a  chylde.
Therfore  after  that  he  had  commaunded  owre  men  to  flande  vp,  and  demaunded  of  them  the  caufe  of  theyr  com-
mynge into  that  countrey,  they  anfwered  by  Pinteado  that  they  were  marchauntes  trauaylynge  into  thofe  parties
for  the  commodities  of  his  countrey  for  exchaunge  of  wares  which  they  had  browght  from  theyr  countreys,  beinge
fuch  as  fliulde  bee  no  leffe  commodious  for  him  and  his  people.  The  kynge  then  hauynge  of  owlde  lyinge  in
a  certeyne  fl.ore  houfe  thirtie  or  fortie  kyntals  of  pepper  (euery  kyntall  beinge  an  hundreth  weyght)  wyllynge
them  to  looke  vppon  the  fame,  and  ageyne  to  brynge  hym  a  fyght  of  fuche  marchaundies  as  they  had  browght
with  them.  And  thervppon  fent  with  the  capitayne  and  the  marchauntes  certeyne  of  his  men  to  conducte  them
to  the  waters  fyde,  with  other  to  brynge  the  ware  from  the  pinneffe  to  the  courte.  Who  when  they  were  returned
and  the  wares  feene,  the  kynge  grewe  to  this  ende  with  the  marchauntes,  to  prouyde  in  thirtie  dayes  the  ladynge
of  all  theyr  fliyppes  with  pepper.  And  in  cafe  theyr  marchaundies  wolde  not  extende  to  the  value  of  fo  muche
pepper,  he  proniyfed  to  credite  them  to  theyr  nexte  returne  :  and  therevppon  fente  the  countrey  rounde  abowt
376

The  fyrjl  vyage  to  Gumea.

Zll

to  gather  pepper,  caufynge  the  fame  to  be  browght  to  the  courte  :  So  that  within  the  fpace  of.  xxx.  [thirty]  days
they  had  gathered  foure  fcore  toonne  of  pepper.

In  the  meane  feafon  owre  men  partly  hauynge  no  rule  of  them  felues,  but  eatyng  withowt  meafure  of  the
frutes  of  the  countrey,  and  drynkyng  the  wyne  of  the  palme  trees  that  droppeth  in  the  nyght  from  the  cutte
branches  of  the  fame,  and  in  fuch  extreeme  heate  runnynge  continually  into  the  water,  not  vfed  before  to  fuch
fuddeyne  and  vehement  alterations  (then  the  which  nothynge  is  more  daungerous)  were  therby  browght  into
fwellynges  and  agues.  In  fo  much  that  the  later  tyme  of  the  }'eare  commyng  on,  caufed  them  to  dye  fumtymes.
iii.  [three]  and  fumtymes.  iiii.  [four]  or.  v.  [five]  in  a  day.  Then  Wyndam  perceauyng  the  tyme  of  the.  xxx.
[thirty]  dayes  to  be  expyred,  and  his  men  dying  fo  fad,  fente  to  the  courte  in  pofle  to  capitayne  Pinteado  and
the  reft  to  come  away  and  to  tary  no  longer.  But  Pinteado  with  the  refl,  wrote  backe  to  hym  ageyne,  certifynge
hym  of  the  greate  quantitie  of  pepper  they  had  alredy  gathered  and  loked  dayly  for  much  more  :  Defyrj^nge
furthermore  to  remember  the  great  prayfe  and  name  they  fhulde  wynne  if  they  came  home  profperoufly,  and
what  fliame  of  the  contrary.  With  which  anfwere  Wyndam  not  fatiffied,  and  many  of  theyr  men  dyinge  dayly,
wylled  and  commaunded  them  ageine  eyther  to  coomme  away  furthwith,  or  els  thretened  to  leaue  them  behynde.
When  Pinteado  harde  this  anfwere,  thynkynge  to  perfuade  hym  with  reafon,  tooke  his  way  from  the  court  towarde
the  fhyppes  beinge  conducted  thyther  with  men  by  the  kynges  commaundement.

In  the  meane  feafon  Windam  all  rageinge,  brake  vppe  Pinteados  Caben,  broke  open  his  chefles,  fpoyled  fuche
prouifyon  of  coulde  flilled  waters  and  fuckettes  as  he  hade  prouided  for  his  health,  and  lefte  hym  nothynge  neyther
of  his  inflmmentes  to  fayle  by,  nor  yet  of  his  apparell.  And  in  the  meane  tyme  faulinge  fycke  hym  felfe,  dyed  alfo.
Whofe  death  Pinteado  comming  aborde,  lamented  as  muche  as  if  he  had  byn  the  derefl  frend  he  had  in  the  Avorlde.
But  certeyne  of  the  maryners  and  other  officers  dyd  fpette  in  his  face,  fum  caulynge  hym  lewe,  faying  that  he  had
browght  them  thether  to  kylle  them  :  And  fum  drawynge  theyr  fwordes  at  hym  makynge  A  fhewe  to  fley  hym.
Then  he  perceauinge  that  they  wolde  nedes  away,  defyred  them  to  tary  that  he  might  fetch  the  refle  of  the  mar-
chauntes  that  were  lefte  at  the  court.  But  they  wolde  not  graunte  his  requefl.  Then  defyred  he  them  to  gyue  hym
the  fliippe  boate  with  as  muche  of  an  owlde  fayle  as  myght  feme  for  the  fame,  promifynge  them  therewith  to  bringe
Nicolas  Lamberte  and  the  refl  into  England  :  But  all  was  in  vayne.  Then  wrotte  he  a  letter  to  the  courte  to  the
marchauntes  informynge  them  of  all  the  matter,  and  promyfynge  them  if  god  wolde  lende  hym  life  to  returne  with
al  hafl[e]  to  fetche  them.  And  thus  was  Pinteado  kepte  a  bordefhippe  ageynfle  his  wyll,  thrufl  amonge  the
boyes  of  the  fhippe,  not  vfed  like  a  man,  nor  yet  like  an  honefl  boy :  But  glad  to  find  fauoure  at  the  cokes
hande.  Then  departed  they,  leaning  one  of  theyr  fhippes  behynde  them,  whiche  they  foonke  for  lake  of  men
to  cary  her.  After  this  within  fixe  or  feuen  days  faylinge,  dyed  alfo  Pinteado  for  very  penfiueneffe  and  thowght
that  flrooke  hym  to  the  harte  :  A  man  worthy  to  ferue  any  prince  and  mofl  vilely  vfed.  And  of  feuen  fcore
men  came  home  to  Plymmuowth  fcarfely  fortye,  and  of  them  many  dyed.  And  that  no  man  fliulde  fufpecte
thefe  wordes  which  I  haue  fayd  in  commendation  of  Pinteado,  to  be  fpoken  vpon  fauour  othervvyfe  then  truth,
I  haue  thought  good  to  adde  herevnto  the  coppie  of  the  letters  which  the  kyng  of  Portugale  and  the  infant  his
brother  wrote  vnto  hym  to  reconcyle  hym  at  fuche  tyme  as  vppon  the  kynge  his  maflers  difpleafure  (and  not
for  any  other  cryme  or  offence  as  may  appere  by  the  fayde  letters)  he  was  onely  for  pouertie  inforced  to  coomme
into  Englande  where  he  fyrfl  perfuaded  owre  marchauntes  to  attempte  the  fayde  vyages  to  Guinea.  But  as  the
kynge  of  Portugale  to  late  repented  hym  that  he  had  fo  punyffhed  Pinteado  vppon  malicious  informations  of  fuch
as  enuied  the  mans  good  fortune,  euen  fo  may  it  hereby  appere,  that  in  fum  cafes,  euen  Lyons  them  felues,  may
eyther  bee  hyndered  by  the  contempt  or  ayded  by  the  helpe  of  the  pore  myfe  accordynge  vnto  the  fable  of  Efope.

C  The  coppie  of  Antonianes  Pinteado  his  letters  patentes  wherby  the  kynge  of  Portugale

made  hym  knyght  of  his  hotife  after  all  his  troubles  and  impj'ifonment,  whicJi

by  wronge  information  made  to  the  kynge,  he  hadfufieyned  of  longe  tyme^

beinge  at  the  lafie  deli[  7i^fred,  his  caufe  knowen  and  manifcjled

to  the  kynge  by  a  grey  fyer  the  kynges  confcfoui'e.

The  kynge  do  gyue  yow  to  vnderftande  lorde  Francis  DefTeofa  one  of  my  counfayle  and  ouer-
feer  of  my  houfe,  that  in  confideration  of  the  good  feruice  which  Antonie  Anes  Pinteado,  the
fonne  of  lohn  Anes,  dwellynge  in  the  towne  cauled  the  porte,  hath  doone  vnto  me,  my  wyll
and  pleafure  is,  to  make  hym  knyght  of  my  houfe,  alowynge  to  hym  in  penfion  feuen  hundreth
reys  monethly,  and  euery  daye  one  alcayr  of  barly  as  longe  as  he  kepeth  a  horfe,  and  to  bee
payde  accordynge  to  the  ordinaunce  of  my  houfe.  Prouydynge  alwayes  that  he  fhal  receaue
but  one  mariage  gyfte  :  And  this  alfo  in  fuch  condition  that  the  tyme  which  is  excepted  in  owre

177

The  disorder  and
death  of  owre  men.

The  fiirie  of
Wyndam.

The  death  of
Wyndam.

Pinteado  euil  vsed
of  the  maryners.

348

TTie  death  of
Pinteada

Seuen  hundreth
reys  are.  x.  s.  [ten
shillings].

Alcayr,  is  halfe
a  bushel.

378

The  fyrjl  vycige  to  Guinea.

ordinaunce  forbyddynge  fuch  men  to  mary  for  gettynge  fuch  chyldren  as  myght  fucceade  them  in  this  alowance,
which  is  fyxe  yeares  after  the  makynge  of  this  patente,  flialbe  fyrfle  expired  before  he  do  mary.  I  therfore
commaunde  yowe  to  caufe  this  to  bee  entered  in  the  booke  cauled  the  Matricola  of  owre  houfliolde  vnder  the
tytle  of  knyghtes.  And  when  it  is  fo  entered,  let  the  clerke  of  the  Matricola  for  the  certentie  therof,  wryte  on
the  backe  fyde  of  this  Aluala  or  patente,  the  number  of  the  leafe  wherein  this  owre  graunt  is  entered.  Which
doone,  let  hym  returne  this  wrytynge  vnto  the  fayd  Antonie  Anes  Pinteado  for  his  warrant.

I  Diego  Henriques  haue  wrytten  this  in  Almarin  the  xxii.  [twenty-fecond]  day  of  September,  in  the  year?
of  owTe  lorde.  1551. And  this  beneuolence  the  kynge  gaue  vnto  Antonie  Anes  Pinteado  the.  xxv.  [twenty-filth]

day  of  luly  this  prefent  yeare.

■  ■

Rcy,  .

349

C  TJie  fecretaries  declaration  wrytten  vnder  the  kynges  graunt.

Owre  maieftie  hath  vouchfafed  in  refpect  and  confyderation  of  the  good  feruice  of  Antonie
Anes  Pinteado  dwellynge  in  the  porte,  and  foonne  of  lohn  Anes  to  make  hym  knyght  of
yowre  houfe  with  ordinarie  alowance  of  feuen  hundreth  reys  penfion  byt  he  moneth  and  one
Alcayr  of  barley  by  the  day  as  longe  as  he  "keepeth  a  horfe  :  And  to  bee  payde  accordyng
to  the  ordinaunce  of  yowr  houfe  with  condition  that  he  fhall  haue  but  one  mariage  gyfte  :
And  that  not  within  the  fpace  of.  vi.  [fix]  yeares  after  the  makynge  of  thefe  letters  patentes.
The  fecretaries  note. Entered  in  the  booke  of  the  Matricola. Fol.  683.

Franclfco  de  Siqiiera.

C  The  coppie  of  the  letter  of  Don  Lewes  th[e'\i7tfant  and  brother  to  the  kynge
of  Portitgale'.  fent  into  Englande  to  Antonianes  Pinteado.

Ntonie  Anes  Pinteado,  I  the  infant  brother  to  the  kynge,  haue  me  hartely  commended  vnto
yow.  Peter  Gonfalues  is  gone  to  feeke  yow,  defyrynge  to  brynge  yowe  home  ageyne  into
yowr  countrey.  And  for  that  purpofe,  hath  with  hym  a  fafe  conduct  for  yow,  graunted  by
the  kynge,  that  thereby  yowe  may  freely  and  withowt  all  feare  come  home.  And  although
the  wether  be  foule  and  flormy,  yet  fayle  not  to  come.  For  in  the  tyme  that  his  maieftie
hath  gyuen  yow,  yow  maye  doo  many  thynges  to  yowre  contentacion  and  gratifying  the  kynge,
wherof  I  wolde  bee  ryght  gladde  :  and  to  brynge  the  fame  to  paffe  wyll  doo  all  that  lyeth  in
me  for  yowre  profyte.  But  forafmuch  as  Peter  Gonfalues  wyll  make  further  declaration  hereof  vnto  yow,  I  fay
no  more  at  this  prefent. Wrytten  in  Luxbume  the.  viii.  [eighth]  day  of  December. Anno.  M.  D.  LII.

C  The  Jnfa?it  don  Zew[6js.

L  thefe  forfayd  wrytynges  I  fawe  vnder  fe[a]Ie  in  the  houfe  of  my  frende  Nicolas  Lyefe  with
whom  Pinteado  left  them  at  his  vnfortunate  departynge  to  Guinea.  But  notwithftanding  all
thefe  frendly  letters  and  fayre  promyfes,  Pinteado  durfte  not  attempte  to  go  home,  neyther
to  keepe  company  with  the  Portugales  Hs  countrey  men  withowt  the  prefence  of  other,  foraf-
much as  he  had  fecreate  admonition  that  they  intended  to  fley  hym,  if  tyme  and  place  niyght
haue  ferued  theyr  wycked  intent

nB

The  feconde  vyage  to  Guinea.

379

C^  THE  SECONDE  VYAGE  TO  GVINEA.

S  in  the  fyrft  vyage  I  haue  declared  rather  the  order
of  the  hyftory  then  the  courfe  of  the  nauigation,
whereof  at  that  tyme  I  coulde  haue  no  perfecte  in-
formation, fo  in  the  difcription  of  this  feconde  vyage
my  chiefe  intent  hath  byn  to  fhew  the  courfe  of  the
fame  accordynge  to  the  obferuation  and  ordinarie
cuftome  of  the  maryners,  and  as  I  receaued  it  at  the
handes  of  an  experte  pylot  beinge  one  of  the  chiefe
in  this  viage,  who  alfo  with  his  owne  handes  wrote
a  briefe  declaration  of  the  fame  as  he  founde  and
tryed  all  thynges  not  by  coniecture,  but  by  the  arte
of  faylynge  and  inftrumentes  perteynynge  to  the
mariners  facultie.  Not  therfore  affuminge  to  my
felfe  the  commendations  dewe  to  other,  neyther  fo
boulde  as  in  anye  parte  to  chaunge  or  otherwife
difpofe  the  order  of  this  vyage  fo  wel  obferued  by  arte  and  experience,  I  haue  thowght
good  to  fet  furth  the  fame  in  fuch  forte  and  phrafe  of  fpeache  as  is  commonly  vfed  amonge
them,  and  as  I  receaued  it  of  the  faid  pylot  as  I  haue  fayde. Take  it  therfore  as  foloweth.

In  the  yeare  of  owre  lorde.  M.  D.  LIIII.  the.  xi.  [eleuenth]  day  of  October,  wee  departed  the  ryuer  of
Temmes  with  three  goodly  fliyppes,  th[e]one  cauled  the  Trinitie,  a  fhyppe  of  the  burden  of  feuen  fcore  toonne  :
Th[e]other  cauled  the  Barthelmewe  a  fhyppe  of  the  burden  of.  Ixxxx.  [ninety  tons].  The  thyrde  was  the  lohn
Euangelill  a  Ihyppe  of  feuen  fcore  toonne.  With  the  fayde  fhyppes  and  two  pynneffes  (wherof  the  one  was
drowned  in  the  coafl.  of  Englande)  we  went  forward  on  owr  vyage,  and  fleyde  at  Douer.  xiiii.  [fourteen]  dayes.
We  fleyde  alfo  at  Rye  three  or  foure  dayes. More  ouer  lafl  of  all  we  touched  at  Darthmouth.

The  fyrfl  day  of  Nouember  at.  ix.  [nine]  of  the  clocke  at  nyght  departynge  from  the  coafle  of  Englande,
we  fette  of  the  flert  bearynge  fouthwefl  all  that  nyght  in  the  fea,  and  the  nexte  day  all  day,  and  the  next  nyght
after  vntyll  the  thyrde  daye  of  the  fayde  mooneth  abowt  noone,  makynge  owr  way  good,  dyd  runne.  60.  leaques.

Item  from.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the  thyrde  daye  tyll.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the.  iiii.  [fourth]  day  of
the  fayde  mooneth,  makynge  owr  way  good  foutheall,  dyd  runne  euery  three  houres  twoo  leaques,  which
amounteth  to.  xvi.  [fixteen]  leaques  the  hole.

Item  from.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the.  iiii.  [fourth]  day  to.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the.  v.  [fifth]  day,
runnynge  fouthwefl  in  the  fea,  dydde  runne.  xii.  [twelve]  leaques.

Item  runnynge  from.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the.  v.  [fifth]  day  vntyll.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the.  vi.
[fixth]  day  runnyng  foutheafl,  dyd  runne.  xviii.  [eighteen]  leaques.

And  fo  from.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the  vi.  [fixth]  daye  vntyll.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the.  vii.  [feventh]
day,  runnynge  fouthfouthwefl,  dyd  runne  euery  houre.  ii.  [two]  leaques  which  amount  to.  xlviii.  [forty-eight]
leaques  the  hole.

Item  from.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the.  vii.  [feventh]  day  tyl.  iii.  [three]  of  the  clocke  the.  viii.  [eighth]
day,  fouthfouthwefl,  runnyng  in  the  fea,  dyd  runne.  xxx.  [thirty]  leaques.

Item  from  three  of  the  clocke  the.  viii.  [eighth]  day,  vntyll.  iii.  of  the  clocke  the.  ix.  [ninth]  day,  runnyng  fouth-
fouthwefl, dyd  runne.  xxx.  [thirty]  leaques.

Item  from.  iii.  [three]  of  the  clocke  the.  ix.  [ninth]  day  tyll.  iii.  [three]  of  the  clocke  the.  x.  [tenth]  day,  dyd
fouthfoutheafl  in  runnynge  in  the  fea  the  fum  of.  xxiiii.  [twenty-four]  leaques.

Alfo  from.  iii.  [three]  of  the  clocke  the.  x.  [tenth]  day  vntyl.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the.  xi.  [eleventh]  day,

J79

350

38o

TJic  fccoude  vyage  to  Guinea.

The  He  of
Madera.

The  He  of  palmes.

Teneriffa.

The  Canaries.

Frome  madera  to
the  He  of  Palmes.

Grancanaria.

Fortes  Ventura.

The  Hand  of
Gomera.

351

Teneriffa.
Snowe.

The  coast  of
Barbarye.
Cape  blanke.

The  ryuer  of
de  Oro.

The  crosiers  or
crosse  starres.

Rio  Grande

dyd  run  fouthfouthwefl  the  fum  of.  xii.  [twelve]  leaqucs,  and  from.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  tyll.  vi.  [fix]  of  the
fayde  day,  dyd  run.  vi.  [fix]  leaques.

Runnynge  fouth  and  by  weft  in  the  fea  from.  vi.  [fix]  of  the  clocke  the.  xi.  [eleuenthl  day  tylL  vi.  [fix]  of
the  clocke  the.  xii.  [twelfth]  day,  dyd  run.  xxxvi.  [thirty-fix]  leaqucs.

From.  vi.  [fix]  of  the  clocke  at  after  none  the.  xii.  [twelfth]  daye  tyll.  vi.  [fix]  of  the  clocke  the  xiii.  [thirteenth^
day  at  after  none,  dyd  nmne.  xiii.  [thirteen]  leaques.

Item  from.  vi.  [fix]  of  the  clocke  the.  xiii.  [tliirteenth]  day,  tyl.  vi.  [fix]  of  the  clocke  the.  xiiii.  [fourteenth]  day  at
after  none  that  we  were  becalmed  that  weecoulde  lye  fouthweft  with  a  fayle.  And  the.  xv.  [fifteenth]  daye  in  the  morn-
ynge,  the  wynde  came  to  the  Eaft  and  eafte  northeaft.  The.  xvii.  [feventeenth]  day  in  the  mornynge,  we  had  fyght
of  the  He  of  Madera  which  doth  ryfe  to  hym  that  commeth  in  the  north  northeaft  parte  vpryght  lande  in  the  weft
part  of  it,  and  very  hyghe  :  and  to  the  fouth  foutheafte  a  lowe  longe  lande  and  a  longe  poynt  with  a  faddle  throwgh
the  myddefte  of  it,  ftandeth  in  the  xxxii.  [thirty-t\yo]  degrees  :  and  in  the  wefte  parte,  many  fpringes  of  water
runnynge  downe  from  the  mountayne,and  many  whyte  fyeldes  lykevnto  corne  fieldes,andfumwhyte  houfes  to  the
foutheaft  parte  of  it :  and  the  toppe  of  the  mountayne  flieweth  very  ragged  if  yow  may  fe  it,  and  in  the  north-
eaft parte  there  is  a  byght  or  bay  as  thowgh  it  were  a  harborowe.  Alfo  in  the  fayde  part,  there  is  a  rocke  a
lyttle  diftance  from  the  fhore :  and  ouer  the  fayde  byght,  yow  fliall  fe  a  great  gappe  in  the  mountayne.

The.  xix.  [nineteenth]  day  at.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke,  we  had  fyght  of  the  He  of  Palmes  and  Teneriffa  and
the  Canaries.  The  He  of  Palme  ryfeth  rounde  and  lyeth  foutheafte  and  northwefte,  and  the  northweft  parte  is
loweft. In  the  fouth,  is  a  rounde  hyll  ouer  the  hedde  lande,  and  an  other  rounde  hyll  aboue  that  in  the  lande.

There  is  betwene  the  foutheaft  parte  of  the  He  of  Madera  and  the  northweft  parte  of  the  He  of  Palme.  Ivii.
[fifty-feven]  leaques.  This  He  of  Palme  lyeth  in  the.  xxix.  [twenty-nine]  degrees.  And  owre  courfe  from  Madera  to
the  He  of  Palme  was  fouth  and  fouth  and  by  weft,  fo  that  we  had  fyght  of  Teneriffa  and  of  the  Canaries.  The
foutheaft  parte  of  the  He  of  Palme,  and  the  north  northeaft  of  Tenerifta,  lyeth  foutheaft  and  northwefte.  And
betwene  them  is.  xx.  [twenty]  leaques.  Teneriffa  and  the  greate  Canarie  cauled  Grancanaria^  and  the  weft  part
of  Fortifuentura  ftandeth  in.  xxvii.  [twenty-feven]  degrees  and  a  halfe.  Gomera  is  a  fayre  Ilande  and  very
ra^^o-ed  and  lyeth  weft  fouthweft  of  Teneriffa.  And  who  fo  euer  wyll  come  betwene  theym  twoo  Ilandes,  muft
come  fouth  and  by  eaft,  and  in  the  fouth  parte  of  Gomera,  is  a  towne  and  a  good  rode  in  the  fayde  parte  of  the
Ilande  :  and  it  ftandeth  in.  xxvii.  [twenty-feven]  degrees  and  three  terces.  Teneriffa  is  a  hygh  lande  and  a  greate
hyghe  picke  lyke  a  fuger  lofe.  And  vppon  the  fayde  picke  is  fnowe  throughowt  all  the  hole  yeare.  And  by
reafon  of  that  picke,  it  maye  bee  knowen  aboue  all  other  Ilandes,  and  there  we  were  becalmed  the.  xx  [twentieth]
day  of  Nouember  from.  vi.  [fix]  of  the  clocke  in  the  mornynge  vntyll  foure  of  the  clocke  at  after  none.

C  Behvene  Gomera  and  Capo  de  las  Barbas.

He.  xxii.  [twenty-fecond]  day  of  Nouember  vnder  the  Tropike  of  Cancer,  the  foonne  goeth
downe  weft  and  by  fouth.

Vpon  the  coaft  of  Barberie.  xxv.  [twenty-five]  leaques  by  north  cape  blanke  at.  iii.  [three]
leaques  of  the  mayne,  there  is.  xv.  [fifteen]  fadome  and  good  ftielly  grounde  and  fande
amonge,  and  no  ftremes,  and  two  fmaule  Ilandes  ftandyng  in  the.  xxii.  [twenty-two]  degrees
and  a  terce.

From  Gomera  to  cape  de  las  Barbas  is  a  hundreth  leaques  and  o\vr  courfe  was  fouth
and  by  eaft.  The  fayde  cape  ftandeth  in.  xxii.  [twenty-two]  and  a  halfe  :  and  all  that  coaft  is  flatte.  xvi.
[fixteen]  or.  xvii.  [feventeen]  fadome  deepe,  vli.  [feven]  or.  viii.  [eight]  leaques  of  frome  the  ryuer  de  Oro  to
cape  de  las  Barbas,  there  vfe  many  Spanyardes  and  Portugales  to  trade  for  fyffiiynge  durynge  the  mooneth  of
Nouember  :  and  all  that  coaft  is  verye  lowe  landes.  Alfo  wee  went  from  cape  de  las  Barbas  fouthfouthweft  and
fouthweft  and  by  fouth  :  tyll  we  brought  owre  felues  in.  xx.  [twenty]  degrees  and  a  halfe,  rekenynge  owr  felues
\'ii.  [feven]  leaques  of:  and  that  was  the  leaft  ftioles  of  cape  Blanke.

Then  we  went  fouth  vntyll  we  browght  owre  felues  in.  xiii.  [thirteen]  degrees,  rekenynge  owre  felues.  xxv.
[twenty -five]  leaques  of.  And  in.  xv.  [fifteen]  degrees,  we  dyde  reere  the  croffiers :  and  we  myght  haue  rered
them  fooner  if  we  had  loked  for  theym.  They  are  not  ryghte  a  croffe  in  the  moonethe  of  Nouember  by  reafon
the  nyghtes  are  ftiorte  there.  Neuertheleffe  we  had  the  fyght  of  them  the.  xxix.  [twenty-ninth]  day  of  the  fayde
mooneth  at  nyght.

The  fyrft  of  December  owte.  xiii.  [thirteen]  degrees,  we  fette  owre  courfe  fouth  and  by  Eaft  vntyll  the  fourth
daye  of  December  at.  xii.  [twelve]  of  the  clocke  the  fame  day. Then  we  were  in.  ix.  [nine]  degrees  and  a  terce,
rekenynge  owr  felues.  xxx.  [thirty]  leaques  of  the  (holes  of  the  ryuer  cauled  Rio  Grande  beinge  weft  fouthwefte
of  them  :  The  which  flioles  be.  xxx.  [thirty]  leaques  longe.
38a

TJie  feconde  vyage  to  Guinea.

381

The  fourth  of  December,  we  beganne  to  fette  owr  courfe  foutheafle,  we  beinge  in.  vi.  [fix]  degrees  and  a  halfe.

The  ninth  day  of  December  we  fet  owr  courfe  eafl  foutheafl.

The.  xiiii.  [fourteenth]  day  of  the  fayde  mooneth,  we  fette  owre  courfe  eaft,  we  beinge  in.  v.  [five]  degrees
and  a  halfe,  rekenynge  owre  felues.  xxxvi.  [thirty-fix]  leaques  from  the  coafl  of  Guinea.

The.  xix.  [nineteenth]  day  of  the  fayde  mooneth,  we  fette  owre  co  'rfe  eafl  and  by  north,  rekenynge  owt  felues.
xvii.  [feventeen]  leaques  diflant  from  cape  Menfurado,  the  fayde  cape  beinge  eafl  northeafl  of  vs,  and  the  r>'uer
of  Seflo  beinge  eafl.

The.  xxi.  [twenty-firfl]  day  of  the  fayde  mooneth  we  fel  with  cape  Me[n]furado  to  the  foutheafl  abowt  two
leaques  of.  This  cape  may  be  eafely  knowen,  by  reafon  the  ryfynge  of  it  is  lyke  a  porpofe  hedde.  Alfo  towarde
the  foutheafl  there  are  three  trees,  wherof  the  eaflermofl  tree  is  the  hygheft,  and  the  myddlemofl.  is  lyke  a  heye
Hacke,  and  the  fouthermofl  lyke  vnto  a  iebet :  and  vppon  the  mayne,  are  foure  or  fyue  hygh  hylles  ryfynge  one
after  an  other  lyke  round  hoommockes  or  hyllockes.  And  the  foutheafl  of  the  three  trees,  is  thre  trees  lyke  a
brandierwyfe :  and  all  the  coafle  alonge  is  whyte  fande.  The  fayde  cape  flandeth  within  a  lyttle  in.  vi.  [fix]
degrees.

The.  xxii.  [twenty-fecond]  of  December,  we  came  to  the  ryuer  of  Seflo,  and  remayned  there  vntyll  the.  xxix.
[twenty-ninth]  day  of  the  fayde  moneth  Here  we  thought  it  befl  to  fende  before  vs  the  pynneffe  to  the  ryuer  of
Dulce  cauled  Rio  Dulce,  that  they  myght  haue  the  begynnynge  of  the  market  before  the  commynge  of  the  lohn.

At  the  ryuer  of  Seflo,  we  had  a  toonne  of  graynes.  This  ryuer  flandeth  in.  vi.  [six]  degrees  lackynge  a  terce.
From  the  ryuer  of  Seflo  to  Rio  Dulce,  is.  xxv.  [twenty-five]  leaques.  Rio  Dulce  flandeth  in.  v.  [five]  degrees
and  a  halfe.  The  ryuer  of  Seflo  is  eafy  to  bee  knowen  by  reafon  there  is  a  ledge  of  rockes  on  the  foutheafl
parte  of  the  rode.  And  at  the  enterynge  into  the  hauen,  are  fyue  or  fyxe  trees  that  beare  no  leaues.  This  is
a  good  harborowe  :  but  very  narrowe  at  the  enteraunce  into  the  ryuer.  There  is  alfo  a  rocke  in  the  hauen  mouth
right  as  yow  enter.  And  all  that  coafl  betwene  cape  de  Monte  and  cape  de  las  Palmas,  lyeth  foutheafl  and  by
eall,  northwefl  and  by  wefle,  beinge  three  leaques  of  the  fhore.  And  yow  fhall  haue  in  fum  places  rockes  two
leaques  of :  and  that  betwene  the  ryuer  of  Seflo  and  cape  de  las  Palmas.

Betwene  the  ryuer  of  Seflo  and  the  riuer  Dulce,  is.  xxv.  [twenty-five]  leaques.  And  the  hygh  lande  that  is
betwene  them  bothe,  is  cauled  Cakeado,  beinge.  viii.  [eight]  leaques  from  the  ryuer  of  Seflo.  And  to  the  foutheafl-
warde  of  hym,  is  a  place  cauled  Shawgro  and  an  other  cauled  Shyawe  or  Shauo,  where  yow  may  get  freffhe  water.
Of  this  Shyawe,  lyeth  a  ledge  of  rockes  :  and  to  the  Southeaflwarde,  lyeth  a  hed  lande  cauled  Croke.  Betwene
Cakeado  and  Croke,  is.  ix.  [nine]  or.  x.  [ten]  leaques.  To  the  Southeaflwarde  of,  is  a  harborowe  cauled  faynte
Vincent.  Ryght  ouer  ageynft  faynt  Vincent,  is  a  rocke  vnder  the  water,  two  leaques  and  a  halfe  of  the  fhore.
To  the  foutheaflwarde  of  that  rocke,  yow  fhall  fee  an  Ilande  abowt  three  or  foure  leaques  of.  This  Ilande  is  not
pafle  a  leaque  of  the  fhore.  To  the  eafl  foutheaft  of  the  Ilande,  is  a  rocke  that  lyeth  aboue  the  water  :  and  by
that  rocke  goeth  in  the  ryuer  of  Dulce,  which  yow  fhall  knowe  by  the  fayde  ryuer  and  rocke.  The  northwefl
fyde  of  the  hauen,  is  flat  fande  :  and  the  foutheafl  fyde  therof,  is  lyke  an  Ilande  and  a  bare  plotte  without  any
trees,  and  fo  is  it  not  in  any  other  place.

In  the  rode,  yow  fhall  ryde  in.  xiii,  [thirteen]  or.  xiiii.  [fourteen]  fadomes,  good  ewes  and  fande,  beinge
the  markes  of  the  rode  to  bring  the  Ilande  and  the  northwefl  lande  togyther.  And  here  wee  ankered  the  lafl  of
December.

The  thyrde  day  of  lanuary,  we  came  from  the  ryuer  of  Dulce.

Note  that  cape  de  las  Palmas  is  a  fayre  high  land.  But  fumme  lowe  places  therof  by  the  water  fyde,  looke
like  redde  cliffes  with  white  llrakes  like  wayes  a  cable  length  a  piece.  And  this  is  to  the  Eafl  parte  of  the  cape.
This  cape  is  the  fouthermofl  lande  in  all  the  coafl  of  Guinea :  And  flandeth  in  foure  degrees  and  a  terce.

The  coafl  from  cape  de  las  Palmas  to  cape  Trepoyntes  or  de  tres  Puntas,  is  fayre  and  cleare  without  rocke
or  other  daungiour.

xxv.  [twenty-five]  leaques  from  cape  de  las  Palmas,  the  lande  is  higher  then  in  any  place  vntyll  we  came  to
cape  Trepoyntes.  And  abowt.  x.  [ten]  leaques  before  yow  comme  to  cape  Trepointes,  the  lande  ryfeth  0/11  hygher
and  hygher  vntyll  yow  come  to  cape  Trepoyntes.  Alfo  before  yowe  coomme  to  the  fayde  cape  after  other  fiue
leaques  to  the  northwefl  parte  of  it,  there  is  certeyne  broken  grounde  with  twoo  greate  rockes  :  and  within  them
in  the  byght  of  a  bay,  is  a  caflel  cauled  Arra,  perteyning  to  the  kynge  of  Portugale.  Yow  fhall  knowe  it  by  the
fayde  rockes  that  lye  of  it :  For  there  is  none  fuch  from  cape  de  las  Palmas  to  cape  Trepoyntes.  This  coafle
lyeth  eafte  and  by  north,  weft  and  by  fouth.  From  cape  de  las  Palmas  to  the  fayde  caftell,  is  foure  fcore  and.
XV.  [fifteen]  leaques.  And  the  coafte  lyeth  from  the  fayde  caftell  to  the  Weftermoft  poynte  of  the  Trepoyntes,
foutheaft  and  by  fouth,  northweft  and  by  north.  Alfo  the  Weftermoft  poyntes  of  the  Trepointes,  is  a  lowe  lande
lyinge  halfe  a  myle  owt  in  the  fea :  and  vppon  the  innermofte  necke  to  the  landewarde,  is  a  tufte  of  trees,  and
there  we  arryued  the.  xi.  [eleventh]  day  of  lanuary.

The.  xii  [twelfth]  day  of  lanuary,  we  came  to  a  towne  cauled  Samma  or  Samua,  beinge.  viii.  [eight]  leaques

381

Cape  Mensurada
The  riuer  of  Sesto.

The  riuer  of  SestOb
Rio  Dulce.

Cape  de  Monte.

Cape  de  las
Palmas.

352

The  lande  of
Cakeado.
Shauo.
Croke.

Saint  Vincentes
harboroue.

The  riuer  Dulce.

Cape  de  las
Palmas.

The  coast  of
Guinea.

Cape  de
tres  puntas.

The  castell  of
Arra.

The  towne  of
Samma.

382

The  fcconde  vyage  to  Gtiiiiea.

The  ple[dlge  was
sir  lohn  Yorke
his  nevie.

Cape  Cores.

The  castel  of  mina
perteyninge  to
the  kynge  of
Portugale.

Perecowe.
Perecowe  grande.
Monte  Rodonda

353

The  ciirrants

Frome  mina
homewarde.

Rio  de  los  Potos.
Iverye.

Cape  de  las
Pal  mas.

Currantes

The  He  de  Flore.

The  lie  of  Corvo.

Where  they  lost
the  sight  of  the
northe  starre.
Howe  the
compasse  dooth
varie.

The  prymrose.

from  cape  Trepoyntes  toward  eaft  northeafl.  Betwene  cape  Trepointes  and  the  towne  of  Samua,  is  a  great  ledge
of  rockes  a  oreat  way  owt  in  the  fea.  Wee  continued  foure  dayes  at  that  towne  :  and  tlie  capitayne  therof  wolde
needes  haiie  a  pledge  a  fliore.  But  when  they  receaued  the  pledge,  they  kepte  hyni  ftyl  and  wolde  traffike  no
more,  but  fliot  of  theyr  ordinaunce  at  vs. They  haue  two  or  three  pieces  of  ordinaunce  and  no  more.

The.  xvi.  [fixteenth]  day  of  the  fayde  mooneth,  we  made  rekenynge  to  come  to  a  place  cauled  cape  Corea
where  capitayne  Don  lohn  dwelleth,  whofe  men  interteyned  vs  frendly.  This  cape  Corea  is  foure  leaques  eafl-
warde  of  the  caflell  of  Mina,  otherwyfe  cauled  La  Mina,  or  Cajlcllo  dc  Mina,  where  we  arriued  the.  xviii.
[eighteenth]  day  of  the  mooneth. Here  we  made  fale  of  al  owr  cloth  fauynge  two  or  three  packes.

The.  xxvi.  [twenty-fixth]  day  of  the  fame  mooneth,  we  weyd  anker  and  departed  from  thenfe  to  the  Trinitie
which  was.  vii.  [feven]  leaques  eaflwarde  of  vs  where  flie  folde  her  wares.  Then  they  of  the  Trinitie  wylled  vs
to  go  eaflwarde  of  that.  viii.  [eight]  or.  ix.  [nine]  leaques  to  fel  part  of  their  wares  in  a  place  caled  Perecow,  and
an  other  named  Perecowe  grande,  beinge  the  eaflejmofl  place  of  both  thefe,  which  yow  Hial  knowe  by  a  great
rounde  hyl  nere  vnto  it  named  Monte  Rodondo  lynge  weflwarde  from  it.  And  by  the  water  fyde  are  many
hyghe  palme  trees.  From  henfe  dyd  we  fet  furth  homewarde  the.  xiii.  [thirteenth]  day  of  February  and  plyed
vppe  alongefl.  tyll  we  came  within,  vii.  [feven]  or.  viii.  [eight]  leaques  to  cape  Trepointes.  Abowt.  viii.  [eight]
of  the  clocke  the.  xv.  [fifteenth]  day  at  after  noone,  we  dyd  cad  abowt  to  feawarde.  And  beware  of  the  currantes,
for  they  wyll  deceaue  yow  fore.

Who  fo  euer  fliall  coomme  from  the  coafl  of  Mina  homewarde,  let  hym  be  fuer  to  make  his  way  good  weft
vntyll  he  reken  hym  felfe  as  farre  as  cape  de  las  Palmas  where  the  currant  fetteth  alwayes  to  the  eaftwarde.
And  within,  xx.  [twenty]  leaques  eaflwarde  of  cape  de  las  Palmas,  is  a  ryuer  cauled  Rio  de  los  Potos  where  yow
may  haue  frefflie  water  and  balaffe  enowgh,  and  plentie  of  luery  or  Elephantes  teethe.  This  ryuer  flandeth  in
foure  degrees  and  almofl  two  terces.

And  when  yow  reken  yoAvre  felfe  as  farre  fhotte  as  cape  de  las  Palmas,  beinge  in  a  degree  or  a  degree  and
a  halfe,  yow  may  go  wefl  or  wefl  and  by  north  vntyll  yowe  comme  in  three  degrees  :  and  then  yowe  maye  go
wefle  northwefl,  and  northwefl  and  by  wefl  vntyll  yow  comme  in  fiue  degrees  and  then  northwefl.  And  in  the.
vi.  [fix]  degrees,  wee  mette  northerly  wyndes  and  greate  rooflynge  of  tydes.  And  as  wee  coulde  iudge,  the
currantes  went  to  the  north  northweft.  Furthermore  betwene  cape  de  Monte  and  cape  Verde,  go  great  currantes
which  deceaue  many  men.

The.  xxii.  [twenty-fecond]  daye  of  Apryll,  wee  were  in.  viii.  [eight]  degrees  and  two  terces  :  and  fo  we  ranne  to
the  northwefl,  hauynge  the  wynde  at  northeafl  and  eaflnortheafl,  and  fumtymes  at  eafle  untyll  we  were  at.  xviii.
[eighteen]  degrees  and  a  terce,  which  was  on  May  day.  And  fo  from,  xviii.  [eighteen]  and  two  terces,  we  hadde
the  wynde  at  eafl  and  eafl  northeafl,  and  fumtymes  at  eafl  foutheafl :  and  then  wee  rekoned  the  Ilandes  of  cape
Verde  eafle  foutheafl  of  vs,  wee  iudgynge  owre  felues  to  be.  xlviii.  [forty-eight]  leaques  of.  And  in.  xx.  [twenty]
and.  xxi.  [twenty-one]  degrees,  wee  had  the  wynde  more  eaflerly  to  the  fouthwarde  then  before.  And  fo  we  ran
to  the  northwefl  and  northnorthwefl,  and  fumetymes  north  and  by  wefl  and  north  vntyll  wee  came  into.  xxxi.  [thirty-
one]  degrees,  where  we  rekened  owre  felues  a  hundreth  and  foure  fcore  leaques  fouthwefl  and  by  fouth  of  the  Ilande
de  Flore  or  de  los  Flores. And  there  we  met  with  the  wynde  at  fouthfoutheafl,  and  fet  owre  courfe  northeafl.

In.  xxxiii.  [thirty-three]  degrees,  we  had  the  wynde  at  the  fouth  and  fouthwefl :  and  then  we  fet  owr  courfe
north  northeafl,  and  fo  we  ranne  to  xl.  [forty]  degrees  :  and  then  we  fet  our  courfe  northeafl  the  wynde  beinge
at  the  fouthwefl  and  hauynge  the  He  de  Flore  eafl  of  vs,  and.  xvii.  [seventeen]  leaques  of.

In.  xli.  [forty-one]  degrees,  we  met  with  the  wynd  at  northeafl,  and  fo  we  ranne  northweflwarde.  Then
we  met  with  the  wynde  at  the  weft  northweft  and  at  the  weft  within,  vi,  [fix]  leaques  runnynge  towarde  the
northweft :  And  then  wee  caft  abowt  and  ley  northeaft  vntyll  we  came  in.  xlii.  [forty-two]  degrees,  where  we
fette  owr  courfe  eaft  northeaft,  iudgynge  the  He  of  Coruo  fouth  and  by  weft  of  vs  and.  xxxvi.  [thirty-fix]  leaques
diftant  from  vs.

A  rememberaunce  that  the.  xxi.  [twenty-firft]  day  of  Maye,  we  communed  with  lohn  Rafe,  and  he  thought
it  beft  to  go  northeafte,  and  iudged  hym  feUe.  xxv.  [twenty-fiue]  leaques  eaftwarde  to  the  He  de  Flore,  and  in.
xxxix.  [thirty-nine]  degrees  and  a  halfe.

Note  that  in  the  fourth  day  of  September  [December?]  vnder  nine  degrees,  we  loft  the  fyght  of  the  north  ftarre.

Note  alfo,  that  in  the.  xlv.  [forty-five]  degrees  the  compaffe  is  varyed.  viii.  [eight]  degrees  to  the  weft.

Item,  in.  xl.  [forty]  degrees,  the  compaffe  dyd  vary.  xv.  [fifteen]  degrees  in  the  hole.

Item,  in  xxx.  [thirty]  degrees  and  a  halfe,  the  compaffe  is  varyed.  v.  [fiue]  degrees  to  the  weft.

Be  it  alfo  in  memorie,  that  two  or  three  dayes  before  we  came  to  cape  Trepointes,  the  pynnefTe  went
alongeft  the  fhore  thinkynge  to  fell  fum  of  owr  wares.  And  fo  we  came  to  anker  three  or  foure  leaques  weft
and  by  fouth  of  the  cape  Trepoyntes  where  we  lefte  the  Trinitie.

Then  owre  pynneffe  came  a  boorde  with  all  owr  men.  The  pynneffe  alfo  tooke  in  more  wares.  They
toulde  me  more  ouer  that  they  wolde  go  to  a  place  where  the  Primrofe  was  and  had  receaued  much  golde  at
382

The  feconde  vyage  to  Guinea.

3S3

the  fyrfle  vyage  to  thefe  parties.  And  tolde  me  furthermore  that  it  was  a  good  place.  But  I  fearynge  a  brigan-
tine  that  was  then  vppon  the  coaft,  dydde  wey  and  folowe  theym,  and  lefte  the  Trinitie  abowte  foure  leaques  of
from  vs.  And  there  we  rode  ageynfle  that  towne  foure  dayes  :  fo  that  Martine  by  his  owne  defyre  and  affente
of  fum  of  the  commiffioners  that  were  in  the  pinneffe,  wente  a  fhore  to  the  towne.  And  there  lohn  Beryn  went
to  trafike  from  vs  beinge  three  myles  of  trafekynge  at  an  other  towne.  The  towne  is  cauled  Samma  or  Samua,
For  Samma  and  Sammaterra,  are  the  names  of  the  two  fyrfte  townes  where  wee  did  trafficke  for  gold,  to  the
northeafl  of  cape  Trepoints  :

Hetherto  continueth  the  courfe  of  the  vyage  as  it  was  defcrlbed  by  the  fayde  pylot.
Nowe  therfore  to  fpeake  fumwhat  of  the  contrey  and  people,  and  of  fuche  thynges  as  are
browght  from  thenfe.

They  browght  from  thenfe  at  the  lafl  vyage,  foure  hundreth  pounde  weyght  and  odde  of  golde  of  xxii.
[twenty-two]  carrattes  and  one  grayne  in  fineneffe.  Alfo.  xxxvi.  [thirty-fix]  buttes  of  graynes  :  and  abowt  two
hundreth  and  fiftie  elephantes  teethe  of  all  quantities.  Of  thefe,  I  fawe  and  meafured  fum  of  ix.  [nine]  fpannes
in  length  as  they  were  croked  Sum  of  them  were  as  bygge  as  a  mans  thygh  aboue  the  knee :  and  weyed
abowte  foure  fcore  and  ten  pounde  weyght  a  piece.  They  fay  that  fum  one  hath  byn  feene  of  a  hundreth  and.
XXV.  [twenty-five]  pounde  weyght.  Other  there  were  which  they  caule  the  teeth  of  calues  of  one  or  two  or  three
yeares,  wherof  fum  were  a  foote  and  a  halfe,  fumme  two  foote,  and  fum  three  or  more  accordynge  to  th[e]age
of  the  beafle.  Thefe  great  teeth  or  tufkes,  grovve  in  the  vpper  iaw  downewarde,  and  not  in  the  nether  iawe
vpwarde,  wherein  the  paynters  and  arras  woorkers  are  deceaued.  At  this  lade  vyage  was  browght  from  Guinea
the  headde  of  an  elephante  of  fuch  huge  byggeneffe,  that  only  the  bones  or  crauewe  therof  befyde  the  nether
iawe  and  greate  tufkes,  wayed  abowte  two  hundreth  weyght,  and  was  as  muche  as  I  coulde  well  lyfte  from  the
grounde.  In  fo  muche  that  confiderynge  alfo  herewith  the  weyght  of  ii.  [two]  fuch  great  teeth,  the  nether  iawes  with
the  lefle  teethe,  the  tounge,  the  greate  hangynge  eares,  the  bygge  and  longe  fnowte  or  troonke,  with  all  the
fleffhe,  braynes,  and  fkynne,  Avith  all  other  partes  belongynge  to  the  hole  headde,  in  my  iudgemente  it  coulde
wey  lyttle  leffe  then  fyue  hundreth  weyght.  This  headde  dyuers  haue  fene  in  the  houfe  of  the  woorthy  mar-
chaunt  fyr  Andrewe  ludde,  where  alfo  I  fawe  it,  and  behelde  it  not  onely  with  my  bodely  eyes,  but  much  more
with  the  eyes  of  my  mynde  and  fpirite  confydered  by  the  woorke,  the  cunnynge  and  wyfedome  of  the  woorke
mafler :  withowt  which  confyderation,  the  fyght  of  fuch  llraunge  and  woonderfuU  thynges  may  rather  feeme
curiofities  then  profitable  contemplations.

The  elephante  (which  fum  caule  an  oliphant)  is  the  biggefl  of  all  foure  footed  beafles.  His  forelegges  are
longer  then  his  hynder.  He  hath  ankles  in  the  lower  parte  of  his  hynder  legges,  and  fyue  toes  on  his  fiete
vndiuided.  His  fnowte  or  troonke  is  fo  longe  and  in  fuch  forme  that  it  is  to  hym  in  the  fleede  of  a  hande.
For  he  neyther  eateth  nor  drinketh  but  by  bryngynge  his  troonke  to  his  mouth.  Therwith  he  helpeth  vp  his
mafler  or  keeper  :  therwith  he  ouerthroweth  trees.  Byfyde  his  two  greate  tufkes,  he  hath  on  euery  fyde  of  his
mouth  foure  teeth  wherwith  he  eateth  and  gryndeth  his  meate.  Eyther  of  thefe  teeth,  are  almofl  a  fpan  in
length  as  they  growe  alonge  in  the  iawe  :  and  are  abowte  two  inches  in  height  and  almofl  as  much  in  thicke-
neffe.  The  tufkes  of  the  male  are  greater  then  of  the  female.  His  tounge  is  verye  lyttle,  and  fo  farre  in  his
mouth  that  it  can  not  bee  feene.  Of  all  beafles  they  are  mofle  gentyll  and  tractable.  For  by  many  fundry
ways  they  are  taught  and  do  vnderfland  :  In  fo  much  that  they  learne  to  do  due  honour  to  a  king,  and  are  of
quicke  fence  and  fliarpenes  of  wyt.  When  the  male  hath  once  feafoned  the  female,  he  neuer  after  toucheth
her.  The  male  Elephante  lyueth  two  hundreth  yeares,  or  at  the  leafle  one  hundreth  and  twentie.  The  female
almofl  as  longe  :  but  the  floure  of  theyr  age,  is  but.  Ix.  [fixty]  yeares  as  fum  wryte.  They  can  not  fuffer  wynter
or  coulde.  They  loue  ryuers  and  wyll  often  go  into  them  vp  to  the  fnowte  wherwith  they  blowe  and  fnuffe,
and  play  in  the  water  :  but  fwymme  they  canne  not  for  the  weyght  of  theyr  bodyes.  Plinie  and  Soline  wr)-te
that  they  vfe  none  adulterie.  If  they  happen  to  meete  with  a  manne  in  wyldernefle  beinge  owt  of  the  way,
gentylly  they  wyl  go  before  hym  and  brynge  hym  into  the  playne  waye.  loyned  in  battayle,  they  haue  no
fmaule  refpecte  vnto  them  that  be  wounded.  For  they  brynge  them  that  are  hurt  or  wery  into  the  middle  of
the  army  to  be  defended.  They  are  made  tame  by  dr3'nkynge  the  iiife  of  barley.  They  haue  continuall  warre
ageynfl  dragons  which  defyre  theyr  bludde  bycaufe  it  is  very  coulde.  And  therfore  the  dragon  lyinge  awayte
as  the  Elephant  paffeth  by,  wyndeth  his  tayle  (beinge  of  exceadynge  length)  abowt  the  h}-nder  legges  of  the
elephant :  and  fo  fleying  hym,  thrufleth  his  heade  into  his  tronke  and  exhaufleth  his  breth,  or  els  byteth  hym
in  the  eare  wherunto  he  can  not  reach  with  his  troonke.  And  when  the  elephant  waxeth  faynt,  he  fauleth
downe  on  the  ferpente  beinge  nowe  full  of  bludde  :  and  with  the  poyfe  of  his  body  breaketh  hym  :  fo  that  his
owne  bludde  with  the  bludde  of  the  elephant,  runneth  owt  of  hym  mengeled  togyther :  whiche  beinge  coulde,
is  congeled  into  that  fubflaunce  which  the  apothecaries  caule  Sanguis  Draconis,  (that  is)  dragons  blud,  other-

383

The  towne  of
Samma.

354

Uolde.

Golde  foure
hundreth  weyght

Graynes.
luery.
Elephantes  teetha

The  head  of
an  Elephant.

The

contemplations
of  gods  workers

The  description
and  properties  of
the  Elephante.

Debate  betwene
the  Elephant  and
the  dragon.

355

Sanguis  DraconU.

384

TJie  fccoude  vyagc  to  Guinea.

Cinnalaris.

Thre  kyndes  of
elephontes.

Workes  of  luery.

The  people  of
Africa.

Libia  Interior.

Getulia.

Ethiopes.

Nigrite.

The  ryuer  Nigritis
or  Senega.

356

A  strange  thynge.

Garamantes.
People  of  Lybia.

Prester  Fohn.

Regnum  Orguane.
Gambra.

wyfe  cauled  Cififiabaris,  although  there  be  an  other  kynde  of  Cinnabaris,  commonly  cauled  cinoper  or  vermilion
which  the  paynters  vfe  in  certeyne  coloures.

They  are  alfo  of  three  kyndes,  as  of  the  maryfflics,  the  playnes,  and  the  mountaynes,  no  lefle  dififerynge  in
condicions.  Philoflratus  wryteth,  that  as  much  as  the  elephant  of  Lybia  in  byggeneffe  paffeth  the  horfe  of
Nyfea,  fo  much  doth  the  elephantes  of  India  excede  them  of  Lybia.  For  of  the  elephantes  of  India,  fum  haue
byn  feene  of  the  heyght  of.  ix.  [nine]  cubites.  The  other  do  fo  greatly  feare  thefe  that  they  dare  not  abyde  the
fyght  of  them.  Of  the  Indian  elephantes,  only  the  males  haue  tufkes.  But  of  them  of  Ethiopia  and  Lybia,
both  kyndes  are  tuflvcd.  They  are  of  dyuers  heyghtes,  as  of  xii.  [twelue]  xiii.  [thirteen]  and.  xiiii.  [fourteen]
dodrantes,  euery  dodrant  beinge  a  meafure  of  ix.  [nine]  ynches.  Sum  wryte  that  an  elephant  is  bygger  then
three  wylde  oxen  or  buffes.  They  of  India  are  blacke  or  of  the  colour  of  a  moufe.  But  they  of  FAhiope  or
Guinea,  are  browne.  The  hyde  or  (kynne  of  them  all,  is  very  harde  and  withowte  heare  or  bryilels.  Theyr
eares  are  two  dodrantes  brode,  and  theyr  eyes  very  lyttle.  Owr  men  fawe  one  drynkyng  at  a  lyuer  in  Guinea
as  they  fayled  into  the  lande.

Of  other  properties  and  conditions  of  the  elephant,  as  of  theyr  maruelous  docilitie,  of  theyr  feight  and  vfe
in  the  warres,  of  theyr  generation  and  chaflitie,  when  they  were  fyrfle  feene  in  the  theatres  and  tryumphes  of
the  Romans,  howe  they  are  taken  and  tamed,  and  when  they  cafl  theyr  tufkes,  with  th[e]ufe  of  the  fame  in
medicine,  who  fo  defyreth  to  know,  let  hym  rede  Plinie  in  the.  viii.  [eighth]  booke  of  his  natural  hyRorie.  He
alfo  wryteth  in  his.  xii.  [twelfth]  booke,  that  in  owlde  tyme  they  made  many  goodly  woorkes  of  luery  or
elephantes  teeth  :  as  tables,  treffels,  pofles  of  houfes,  rayles,  latteffes  for  wyndowes.  Images  of  theyr  goddes,
and  dyuers  other  thynges  of  luery  both  coloured  and  vncoloured  and  intermyxte  with  fundry  kyndes  of  precious
wooddes,  as  at  this  day  are  made  certeyne  chayres,  lutes,  and  virginalles.

They  had  fuch  plentie  therof  in  owlde  tyme,  that  (as  farre  as  I  remember)  lofephus  wryteth  that  one  of
the  gates  of  Hierufalem  was  cauled  Porta  Eburnea,  (that  is)  the  luery  gate.  The  whytenefle  thereof  was  fo
muche  efleemed  that  it  was  thought  to  reprefent  the  naturall  fayreneffe  of  mans  (kynne  :  In  fo  much  that  fuch
as  went  abowt  to  fet  furth  (or  rather  corrupte)  naturall  bewtie  with  colours  and  payntynge,  were  reproued  by
this  prouerbe :  Ebur  atramento  candefacere.  That  is  :  To  make  luery  whyte  with  ynke.  The  poettes  alfo
defcribynge  the  fayre  neckes  of  bewtifuU  virgins,  caule  them  Eburnea  colla  : That  is  : luery  neckes.

And  to  haue  fayde  thus  much  of  elephantes  and  luery,  it  may  fuffice.
Nowe  therfore  to  fpeke  fumwhat of  the  people  and  their  maners  and  maner  of
lyuynge,  with  alfo  an  other  briefe  defcription  of  Africa.

It  is  to  vnderflande  that  the  people  whiche  nowe  inhabite  the  regions  of  the  coafl.  of  Guinea  and  the
mydde  partes  of  Affrica,  as  Lybia  the  inner,  and  Nubia  with  dyuers  other  great  and  large  regions  abowt  the
fame,  were  in  oulde  tyme  cauled  Ethiopes  and  Nigrite,  which  we  nowe  caule  Moores,  Moorens,  or  Negros,  a
people  of  beaflly  lyuynge,  without  a  god,  lawe,  religion,  or  common  welth,  and  fo  fcorched  and  vexed  with  the
heatt  of  the  foonne,  that  in  many  places  they  curfe  it  when  it  ryfeth.  Of  the  regions  and  people  abowt  the
inner  Libia  (cauled  Libia  Interior)  Gemma  Phryfius  wryteth  thus.

Lybia  Interior,  is  very  large  and  defolate,  in  the  whiche  are  many  horrible  wylderneffes  and  mountaynes
repleniffhed  with  dyuers  kyndes  of  wylde  and  monflrous  beafles  aud  ferpentes.  Fyrfl  from  Mauritania  or
Barberie  toward  the  fouth  is  Getulia,  a  rowgh  and  faluage  region  whofe  inhabitantes  are  wylde  and  wanderynge
people.  After  thefe  folowe  the  people  cauled  Melanogetuli  and  Pharufii  whiche  wander  in  the  wyldemeffe
caryinge  with  them  greate  gourdes  of  water.  The  Ethiopians  cauled  Nigrite,  occupie  a  great  parte  of  Aphrica,
and  are  extended  to  the  Wefl  Ocean.  Southwarde  alfo  they  reache  to  the  ryuer  Nigritis  whofe  nature  agreeth
with  the  ryuer  of  Nilus  forafmuch  as  it  is  increafed  and  diminyffhed  at  the  fame  tyme,  and  bryngeth  furth  the
like  beafles  as  the  Crocodile.  By  reafon  wherof,  I  thinke  this  to  be  the  fame  ryuer  which  the  Portugales  caule
Senega.  For  this  ryuer  is  alfo  of  the  fame  nature.  It  is  furthermore  maruelous  and  very  flrange  that  is  fayde
of  this  ryuer.  And  this  is,  that  on  the  one  fyde  therof,  th[e]inhabitauntes  are  of  hyghe  ftature  and  blacke  :  and  on
the  other  fide  of  browne  or  tawny  colour  and  lowe  flature,  which  thynge  alfo  owre  men  confirme  to  be  trewe.

There  are  alfo  other  people  of  Lybia  cauled  Garamantes,  whofe  women  are  common.  For  they  contracte
no  matrimonie,  neyther  haue  refpect  to  chaflitie.  After  thefe  are  the  nations  of  the  people  cauled  Pyrei,
Sathiodaphnite,  Odrangi,  Mimaces,  Lynxamate,  Dolopes,  Agangine,  Leuce  Ethiopes,  Xilicei  Ethiopes,  Calcei
Ethiopes,  and  Nubi.  Thefe  haue  the  fame  fituation  in  Ptolomie  that  they  nowe  giue  to  the  kyngdome  of  Nubia.
Here  are  certeyne  ChriRians  vnder  the  dominion  of  the  greate  Emperoure  of  Ethiope  cauled  Prefler  lohn.
From  thefe  towarde  the  wefl,  is  a  great  nation  of  people  cauled  Aphricerones  :  whofe  region  (as  farre  as  maye
bee  gathered  by  coniecture)  is  the  fame  that  is  nowe  cauled  Regnum  Orguene,  confinynge  vppon  the  eafl  partes
of  Guinea.  From  henfe  weflwarde  and  fumwhat  towarde  the  north,  are  the  kyngedomes  of  Gambra  and  Budomel
not  farre  from  the  ryuer  of  Senega. And  from  henfe  towarde  the  inlande  regions  and  alonge  by  the  fea  coafl,

33+

The  feconde  vyage  to  Guinea.

385

are  the  regions  of  Ginoia  or  Guinea  which  wee  commonly  caule  Gynne.  On  the  wefl  fide  of  thefe  regions  to-
warde  the  Ocean,  is  the  cape  or  poynt  caiiled  Cabotierde  or  Caput  viride  (that  is)  the  grecne  cape,  to  the  whiche
the  Portugales  fyrfl  directe  theyr  courfe  when  they  fayle  to  America  or  the  lande  of  Brafile.  Then  departynge
frome  henfe,  they  turne  to  the  ryght  hande  towarde  the  quarter  of  the  wynde  cauled  Garbino  which  is  betwene
the  wefl  and  the  fouth.  But  to  fpeake  fumwhat  more  of  Ethiopia.  Alihowgh  there  are  many  nations  of  people
fo  named,  yet  is  Ethiopia  chiefely  diuyded  into  two  partes  :  wherof  the  one  is  cauled  Ethiopia  vnder  Egypte,  a
great  and  ryche  region.  To  this  perteyneth  the  Ilande  of  Meroe,  imbrafed  rounde  abowte  with  the  (Iremes  of
the  ryuer  Nilus.  In  this  Ilande  women  reygned  in  oulde  tyme.  lofephus  wr^'teth  that  it  was  fumtyme  cauled
Sabea  :  and  that  the  queene  of  Saba  came  from  thenfe  to  Hierufalem  to  heare  the  wyfedome  of  Salomon.  From
hcnfe  towarde  the  Eafl,  reigneth  the  fayde  Chrflian  Emperoure  Prefler  lohn  whom  fum  caule  Papa  lohannes,
and  other  fay  that  he  is  cauled  Pean  luan  (that  is)  greate  lohn,  whofe  empyre  reacheth  farre  beyonde  Nilus,
and  is  extended  to  the  coafles  of  the  redde  fea  and  Indian  fea.  The  myddle  of  the  region  is  almofl  in  the.  66.
degrees  of  longitude,  and.  xii.  [twelue]  degrees  of  latitude.  Abowte  this  region  inhabite  the  people  cauled
Clodii,  Rifophagi,  Babilonii,  Axiunite,  Mofyli,  and  Molybe.  After  thefe  is  the  region  cauled  Trogloditica,
whofe  inhabitauntes  dwell  in  caues  and  dennes.  For  thefe  are  theyr  houfes,  and  the  fleffhe  of  ferpentes  theyr
meate,  as  wryteth  Plinie  and  Diodorus  Siculus.  They  haue  no  fpeache,  but  rather  a  grynnynge  and  chatter)-nge.
There  are  alfo  people  without  heades  cauled  Blemines,  hauynge  theyr  eyes  and  mouth  in  theyr  brefle.  Lyke-
wyfe  Strucophagi  and  naked  Ganphafantes.  Satyrs  alfo  which  haue  nothynge  of  men  but  only  fhape.  More
ouer  Oripei  great  hunters.  Mennones  alfo,  and  the  region  of  Smyrnophora  which  bryngeth  furth  myrre.  After
thefe  is  the  region  of  Azania  in  the  whiche  manye  elephantes  are  founde.  A  great  parte  of  the  other  regions  of
Afrike  that  are  beyonde  the  Equinoctiall  line,  are  nowe  afcrybed  to  the  kingedome  of  Melinde,  whofe  inhabi-
tauntes are  accuflomed  to  trafifike  with  the  nations  of  Arabie,  and  theyr  kynge  is  ioyned  in  frendfhip  with  the
kyng  of  Portugale,  and  payeth  tribute  to  Prefler  John.

The  other  Ethiope  cauled  Ethiopia  Interior  (that  is)  the  inner  Ethiope,  is  not  yet  knowen  for  the  greatnefle
therof  but  only  by  the  fea  coafl.es.  Yet  is  it  defcribed  in  this  maner.  Fyrfl.e  from  the  Equinoctiall  towarde  the
fouth,  is  a  greate  region  of  Ethiopians  which  bryngeth  furth  whyte  elephantes,  tygers,  and  the  beafl.es  cauled
Rhinocerontes.  Alfo  a  region  that  bryngeth  furth  plentie  of  Cinamome,  lyinge  betwene  the  braunches  of  Nilus.
Alfo  the  kingdome  of  Habech  or  Habaffia,  a  region  of  Chnfl.ien  men,  lying  both  on  this  fyde  and  beyonde
Nilus.  Here  are  alfo  the  Ethiopians  cauled  Ichthiophagi  (that  is)  fuch  as  lyue  only  by  fifflie  :  and  were  fum-
time  fubdued  by  the  warres  of  great  Alexander.  Furthermore  the  Ethiopians  cauled  Rhapfii,  and  Anthropo-
phagi that  are  accuflomed  to  eate  mans  fleffhe,  inhabite  the  regions  nere  vnto  the  mountaynes  cauled  Moiites
LwicB,  (that  is)  the  mountaynes  of  the  moone.  Gazatia,  is  vnder  the  tropike  of  Capricorne.  After  this,  folow-
eth  the  fronte  of  affrike,  the  cape  of  Buena  Speranza  or  Caput  Boruz  Spei,  (that  is)  the  cape  of  good  hope,  by
the  which  they  paffe  that  fayle  from  Spayne  to  Calicut.  But  by  what  names  the  capes  and  goulfes  are  cauled,
forafmuche  as  the  fame  are  in  euery  globe  and  carde,  it  were  here  fuperfluous  to  rehearfe  them.

Sum  wryte  that  Aphrica  was  fo  named  by  the  Grecians  bycaufe  it  is  withowt  coulde.  For  the  Grfieke
letter  Alpha  or,  A,  fignifyeth  pryuation,  voyde,  or  withowt :  and  phrice,  fignifieth  coulde.  For  in  deede  althowgh
in  the  fl.eede  of  wynter  they  haue  a  cloudye  and  tempeflious  feafon,  yet  is  it  not  coulde,  but  rather  fmoothering
hot  with  alfo  hot  fhoures  of  raine  and  fumwhere  fuche  fcorchynge  wyndes,  that  what  by  one  meanes  and  other
they  feeme  at  certeyne  tymes  to  Hue  as  it  were  in  fornaces,  and  in  maner  alredy  halfe  way  in  Purgatorie  or  hel.
Gemma  Phrifius  writeth  that  in  certeyne  partes  of  Aphrica,  (as  in  Atlas  the  greater)  the  dyer  in  the  night  feafon
is  feene  fliyninge  with  many  flraunge  fyers  and  flames  ryfmge  in  maner  as  high  as  the  moone  :  And  that  in  the
element  are  fumtime  harde  as  it  were  the  founde  of  pipes,  trumpettes,  and  droommes.  Whiche  noyfes  may
perhappes  be  caufed  by  the  vehemente  and  fundry  motions  of  fuch  fyery  exhalations  in  the  ayer,  as  we  fe  the
lyke  in  many  experiences  wrought  by  fyrc,  ayer,  and  wynd.  The  holowneffe  alfo  and  diuers  reflexions  and
breaking  of  the  cloudes  may  be  greate  caufes  hereof,  byfyde  the  vehement  cold  of  the  myddle  region  of  the
ayer  wherby  the  fayd  fyery  exhalations  afcending  thether  are  fuddenly  flryken  backe  with  greate  force.  For
euen  common  and  dayly  experience  teacheth  vs  by  the  whyffinge  of  a  burninge  forge  what  noyfe  fyer  maketh  in
the  ayer,  and  much  more  where  it  fl.riueth  when  it  is  inclofed  with  ayer  as  apereth  in  gonns,  and  as  the  lyke  is
fene  in  only  ayer  inclofed,  as  in  orgen  pipes  and  fuch  other  infliiimentes  that  go  by  winde.  For  wynde  as  fay
the  philofophers  is  none  other  then  ayer  vehemently  moued,  as  we  fee  in  a  payer  of  belowes  and  fuche  othei.

Sum  of  owre  men  of  good  credit  that  were  in  this  lafl.  vyage  to  Guinea,  aflirme  ernefl.ly  that  in  the  nyght
feafon  they  felt  a  fenfible  heate  to  coomme  from  the  beames  of  the  moone.  The  which  thynge  althowghe  it  be
flraunge  and  infenfible  to  vs  that  inhabite  coulde  regions,  yet  doothe  it  flande  with  good  reafon  that  it  may  fO
be,  forafmuch  as  the  nature  of  the  flarres  and  planets  (as  wryteth  Plinie)  confyfl.eth  of  fyre,  and  conteyneth  in  it
a  fpirite  of  lyfe,  whiche  can  not  be  without  heate.

And  that  the  moone  gyueth  heate  vpon  the  earth,  the  prophete  Dauyd  fcemeth  to  confirme  in  his.  Cxx.

Eden.  2 F  385

Guinea  or  Cinoi:*.
Cap.  Verde.

The  Portugales
n7.uigatiuiu  tu
Bra&ile.

Ethiopia.

The  Ilande  of
Meroe.

The  queene  of
Saba.

Prester  loha
em{>erour  of
Ethiopia.

People  of  the  east
syis  of  Africa.

Ophic(phagi

People  without

heades.

M>Tre.
Azania.
Regnum  Melinde.

Ethiopia  Interior

Whyte  elephantes

Habassia.

Ichthiophagi
Anthropophagi
Montes  Luna.
Gazatia.

357

Ca/.  Bona  S/>ei.

Ap'hi'ica  withowt

coulde.

The  winter  of

Africa.

Flames  of  fiie
and  noyse  in  th?
ayer.

The  myddell
region  of  the
alyjer  ii^coul.lu.

The  strife  of
clemejites.

Wynde.

The  heate  of
the  moone.

The  nature  if
the  stars.

386

The  fccotidc  vyagc  to  Guinea.

Spoutes  of  water
fauling  out  of
the  ayer.

Cataracts  of
heauen.

Vehement  motio  i-
of  the  sea.

A  straunge
thyiige.

The  poure  of
nature.

358

They  rase  their
skinnes.

Fine  iewells.
A  bra.slet.

Shackelles.

Ringes.

Dogs  chains  of
golde.

A  niusl^^t.

Their  houses
Their  feding
Fleing  fishes

A  straunge  thyng

[i2oth]  Piiilme,  where  fpeakynge  of  fuch  men  as  are  defended  from  euyls  by  goddcs  protection,  he  fayth  thus:
Per  diem  fol  tion  exurd  te,  nee  luna  per  fiociei/i.  That  is  to  fay.  In  the  day  the  foonne  fliall  not  burnc  the  nor
tlie  moone  by  nyght.

They  foy  furthermore  tliat  in  certeyne  places  of  the  fea,  they  fawe  certeyne  (Ircmes  of  water  which  they
caule  fpoutes  faulynge  owt  of  the  ayer  into  the  fea  :  And  that  fum  of  thefe  are  as  bygge  as  the  greate  pyllers  of
churches  :  In  fo  muche  that  fumtymes  they  faule  into  fliyppes  and  put  them  in  greate  daungiour  of  drownynge.
Sum  phantafie  that  thefe  fhulde  bee  the  cat[a]ractes  of  heauen  whiche  were  all  opened  at  Noes  fludde.  But  1
thynke  them  rather  to  be  fuche  flu.xions  and  eruptions  as  Arillotle  in  his  boke  de  Mundo,  faith  to  chaunfc  in
the  fea.  For  fpeakynge  of  fuche  thynges  as  are  feene  often  tymcs  in  the  fea,  he  wryteth  thus  :  Often  tymes
alfo  euen  in  the  fea  are  feene  euaporations  of  fyre,  and  fuche  eruptions  and  breakyng  furth  of  fprynges,  that  the
mouthes  of  ryuers  are  opened,  whyrlepooles,  and  fluxions  are  caufed  of  fuch  other  vehement  motions  not  only
in  the  middefl  of  the  fea,  but  alfo  in  creekes  and  flreyghtes.  At  certeyne  tymes  alfo,  a  great  quantitie  of  water
is  fuddeynly  lyfted  vp  and  caryed  abowt  with  the  moone.  etc.  By  which  woordes  of  Aryflotle  it  dooth  appere
that  fuch  waters  maye  bee  lyfted  vp  in  one  place  at  one  tyme,  and  fuddeynly  faule  downe  in  an  other  place  at
an  other  tyme.  And  hereunto  perhappes  perteyneth  it  that  Rycharde  Chaunceler  toulde  me  that  he  harde
Sebaflian  Cabot  reporte,  that  (as  farre  as  I  remember)  eyther  abowt  the  coafles  of  Brafile  or  Rio  de  Plata,  his
fliyppe  or  pinnes  was  fuddeinly  lyfted  from  the  fea  and  carl  vpon  the  lande  I  wotte  not  howe  farre.  The  which
thynge  and  fuche  other  lyke  woonderfull  and  flraunge  woorkes  of  nature  whyle  I  confyder  and  caule  to  remem-
beraunce  the  narownes  of  mans  vnderflandynge  and  knowleage  in  comparyfon  of  her  mighty  poure,  I  can  but
ceafe  to  maruayle  and  confeffe  with  Plinie  that  nothynge  is  to  her  impoffible,  the  leafle  parte  of  whofe  poure  is
not  yet  knowen  to  men.

Many  thynges  more  owre  men  fawe  and  confydered  in  this  vyage  worthy  to  bee
noted,  wherof  I  haue  thought  good  to  put  fum  in  memory  that  the  reader  maye  afwell
take  pleafure  in  the  varietie  of  thynges  as  knowleage  of  the  hyftorye.

Amonge  other  thynges  therefore  touchynge  the  maners  and  nature  of  the  people,  this  may  feeme  flraunge
that  theyr  princes  and  noble  men  vfe  to  pounfe  and  rafe  theyr  flcynnes  with  prety  knottes  in  diuers  formes  as
it  were  branched  damaflve,  thynkynge  that  to  be  a  decent  ornament.  And  albeit  they  go  in  maner  all  naked,
yet  are  many  of  them  and  efpecially  their  women  in  maner  laden  with  collars,  braflettes,  hoopes,  and  chaynes
eyther  of  golde,  copper,  or  luery.  I  my  felfe  haue  one  of  theyr  brafelettes  of  luery  wayinge  twoo  pounde  and
vi.  [fix]  ounces  of  I'roye  weyght,  whiche  make,  xxxviii.  [thirty-eight]  ounces.  This,  one  of  theyr  women  dyd
weare  vppon  her  arme.  It  is  made  of  one  hole  piece  of  the  byggefl  parte  of  the  toothe  turned  and  fumwhat
carued,  with  a  hole  in  the  myddeft,  wherin  they  put  theyr  handes  to  weare  it  on  theyr  arme.  Sum  haue  of  euery
arme  one  and  as  many  on  theyr  legges,  wherewith  fum  of  theym  are  fo  galded  that  althoughe  they  are  in  maner
made  lame  therby,  yet  wyll  they  by  no  meanes  leaue  them  of  Sum  weare  alfo  on  theyr  legges  great  fhackels
of  bryght  copper  which  they  thynke  to  bee  no  leffe  cumly.  They  weare  alfo  collars,  braflets,  garlandes  and
gyrdels  of  certeyne  blewe  flones  lyke  beades.  Lykewyfe  fum  of  theyr  women  weare  on  theyr  bare  armes  cer-
teyne forefleeues  made  of  the  plates  of  beaten  golde.  On  theyr  fyngers  alfo  they  weare  rynges  made  of  golden
wyres  with  a  knotte  or  wrethe  lyke  vnto  that  whiche  chyldren  make  in  a  rynge  of  a  ruflTie.  Amonge  other
thinges  of  golde  that  owr  men  bowght  of  them  for  exchaunge  of  theyr  wares,  were  certeyne  dogges  chaynes  and
coUers.

They  are  very  ware  people  in  the)T  bargenynge,  and  wyl  not  lofe  one  fparke  of  golde  of  any  value.  They
vfe  weyghtes  and  meafures,  and  are  very  circumfpecte  in  occupyinge  the  fame.  They  that  fliall  haue  to  do
with  them  mufl  vfe  them  gentelly  ?  for  they  wyl  not  trafike  or  brynge  in  any  wares  if  they  be  euyll  vfed.  At
the  fyrfl  viage  that  owr  men  had  into  thefe  parties,  it  fo  chaunfed  that  at  theyr  departure  from  the  fyrfle  place
where  they  dyd  trafike,  one  of  them  eyther  flole  a  mufke  catte  or  tooke  her  a  way  by  force,  not  myflruflynge
that  that  fhulde  haue  hyndered  theyr  bargenynge  in  an  other  place  whyther  they  intended  to  go.  But  for  al
the  hafl  they  could  make  with  full  fayles,  the  fame  of  theyr  myfufage  fo  preuented  them  that  the  people  of  that
place  alfo  offended  therby,  wold  bring  in  no  wares  :  In  fo  muche  that  they  were  inforced  eyther  to  reflore  the
catte  or  pay  for  her  at  theyr  price  before  they  could  trafike  there.

Theyr  houfes  are  made  of  foure  pofles  or  trees,  and  couered  with  bouwes.

Theyr  common  feedynge  is  of  rootes  and  fuch  fyfflies  as  they  take,  wherof  they  haue  great  plentie.  There
are  alfo  fuch  flyinge  fyffhes  as  are  feene  in  the  fea  of  the  Wefle  Indies.  Owre  men  falted  of  theyr  fyfflies  hopynge
to  prouyde  flore  therof.  But  they  wolde  take  no  falte :  And  mufl.e  therefore  be  eaten  furthwith  as  fum  fay.
Howe  be  it,  other  affirme  that  if  they  be  falted  immediately  after  they  be  taken,  they  wyl  lafl.  vncorrupted.  x.
[ten]  or.  xii.  [twelue]  dayes.  But  this  is  more  flraunge,  that  parte  of  fuch  flefflie  as  they  caryed  with  them  owte
of  Englande  and  putrifyed  there,  became  fweete  ageyne  at  theyr  returne  to  the  clime  of  temperate  regions.
3S6

The  feconde  vyage  to  Guinea.

387

They  vfe  alfo  a  flraunge  makynge  of  breade  in  this  maner.  They  grj'nde  betwene  hvo  (lones  with  theyr
handes  as  much  come  as  they  thynke  maye  fuffice  theyr  famehe.  And  when  they  haue  thus  brought  it  to
floure,  they  put  thereto  a  certeyne  quantitie  of  water  and  make  therof  very  thin  dowgh  which  they  flycke  vppon
fum  pofl  of  theyr  houfes,  where  it  is  baked  by  the  heate  of  the  fonne  :  So  that  when  the  mafler  of  the  houfe  or
any  of  his  famely  wyll  eate  thereof,  they  take  it  downe  and  eate  it

They  haue  very  fayre  wheate,  the  ere  whereof  is  tvvoo  handfulles  in  length  and  as  bygge  as  a  great  bulruffhe,
and  almofl  foure  ynches  abowt  where  it  is  byggefl.  The  fleme  or  flrawe,  femeth  to  be  aimofl  as  bygge  as
the  lyttle  fynger  of  a  mans  hande,  or  lyttle  leffe.  The  graynes  of  this  wheate  are  as  bygge  as  owr  peafon  :
rounde  alfo,  and  verye  whyte  and  fumwhat  Hiynynge  lyke  perles  that  haue  lofl  theyr  colour.  Almofl  all  the
fubflaunce  of  theym  turneth  into  floure,  and  maketh  lyttle  branne  or  none.  I  toulde  in  one  ere  twoo  hundreth
and  three  fcore  graynes.  The  ere  is  inclofed  in  thre  blades  longer  then  it  felfe,  and  of  two  inches  brode  a
piece.  And  by  this  frutefulneffe  the  foonne  feemeth  partly  to  recompence  fuch  greefes  and  moleflations  as
they  otherwyfe  receaue  by  the  feruent  heate  thereof  It  is  doubtleffe  a  woorthy  contemplation  to  confider  the
contrary  effectes  of  the  foonne  :  or  rather  the  contrary  paffions  of  fuche  thynges  as  receaue  th[e]influence  of  his
beames  eyther  to  theyr  hurte  or  benefite.

Theyr  drynke  is  eyther  water  or  the  iufe  that  droppeth  from  the  cut  braunches  of  the  barren  date
trees  cauled  Palmites.  For  eyther  they  hange  greate  gourdes  at  the  fayde  branches  euery  euenynge  and
let  them  fo  hange  all  nyght,  or  els  they  fet  them  on  the  ground  vnder  the  trees  that  the  droppes  may
faule  therin.  They  fay  that  this  kynde  of  drynke  is  in  taft  much  lyke  vnto  whey,  but  fumwhat  fweeter
and  more  pleafaunt.  They  cutte  the  branches  euery  euenynge  bycaufe  they  are  fered  vp  in  the  day  by
the  heate  of  the  foonne.  They  haue  alfo  great  beanes  as  bygge  as  cheflenuttes,  and  verye  harde  with  a  fheil
in  the  flede  of  a  hufke.

Many  thynges  more  myght  be  fayd  of  the  maners  of  the  people  and  of  the  woonders
and  monftrous  thynges  that  are  engendered  in  Afrike.  But  it  fliall  fufhce  to  haue
fayde  thus  muche  of  fuch  thynges  as  owre  men  partely  fawe  and  pariely  browght  with
them.

And  wheras  before  fpeakynge  of  the  frute  of  graynes,  I  defcrybed  the  fame  to  haue  holes  by  the  fyde  (as
in  deede  it  is  as  it  is  browght  hether)  yet  was  I  afterwarde  informed  that  thofe  holes  were  made  to  put  flrynges
or  twygges  throughe  the  frute  therby  to  hange  them  vp  to  drye  at  the  fonne.  They  growe  not  pafle  a  foote  and
a  halfe  or  tvvoo  foote  frome  the  grownde  :  and  are  as  red  as  bludde  when  they  are  gathered.  The  graynes
them  felues,  are  cauled  of  the  phyfitians,  Grana  Paradyfi.

At  theyr  comminge  home,  the  keles  of  theyr  fhyppes  were  marueloufly  ouergrowen  with  certen  fhels  of  ii.
[two]  ynches  length  and  more  as  thycke  as  they  coulde  flande,  and  of  fuch  byggenes  that  a  man  may  put  his
thorn  in  the  mouthes  of  them.  They  certeynly  aftirme  that  in  thefe  there  groweth  a  certeyne  flymy  fubflaunce
which  at  the  length  flypping  owt  of  the  fliel  and  fauling  in  the  fea,  becometh  thofe  foules  which  we  cal  barnacles
The  lyke  fhelles  haue  byn  feene  in  fhyppes  returning  from  Iflande.  But  thefe  fhelles  were  not  pafl  halfe  an
inch  in  length.  Of  the  other  that  came  from  Guinea,  I  fawe  the  Prymrofe  lyinge  in  the  docke,  and  in  maner  _
couered  with  the  fayd  fhelles,  which  in  my  iudgemente  fliulde  greately  hynder  her  fa}'l)Tige.  Theyr  fhyppes
were  alfo  in  many  places  eaten  with  the  woormes  cauled  Bromas  or  Biffas  whereof  mention  is  made  in  the
Decades. Thefe  creepe  betwene  the  plankes  whiche  they  eate  throwgh  in  many  places.

Amonge  other  thynges  that  chaunced  to  them  in  this  vyage,  this  is  woorthy  to  be  noted,  that  whereas  they
fayled  thether  in  feuen  weekes,  they  coulde  returne  in  no  leffe  fpace  then.  xx.  [twenty]  weekes.  The  caufe
wherof  they  fay  to  be  this  :  That  abowt  the  coafl  of  Cabo  Verde,  the  wynde  is  euer  at  the  Eafl  by  reafon  whereof
they  were  inforced  to  fayle  farre  owte  of  theyr  courfe  into  the  mayne  Ocean  to  fynde  the  wynde  at  the
wefl  to  brynge  them  home.  There  dyed  of  owre  men  at  this  lad  vyage  abowt.  xxiiii.  [twenty-four]  whereof
many  dyed  at  theyr  returne  into  the  clime  of  the  coulde  regions,  as  betwene  the  Ilandes  of  Soria  and  Englande.
They  browght  with  them  certeyne  blacke  flaues,  wherof  fum  were  taule  and  Itronge  men,  and  coulde  well  agree
with  OWT  meates  and  drynkes.  The  coulde  and  moyfl  ayer  dooth  fumwhat  offende  them.  Yet  doubtleffe  men
that  are  borne  in  hotte  regions  may  better  abyde  coulde,  then  men  that  are  borne  in  coulde  regions  may  abyde
heate,  forafmuch  as  vehement  heate  refolueth  the  radicall  moiflure  of  mens  bodies,  as  could  conflreyneth  and
oreferueth  the  fame

This  is  alfo  to  bee  confydered  as  a  fecreate  woorke  of  nature,  that  throughout  all  Afryke  vnder  the  Equi-
noctiall  line  and  neare  abowt  the  fame  on  bothe  fydes,  the  regions  are  extreme  hotte  and  the  people  very  blacke.
WTiereas  contraryly  fuch  regions  of  the  Wefl  Indies  as  are  vnder  the  fame  line,  are  very  temperate  and  the
people  neyther  blacke  nor  with  curlde  and  fliort  wooUe  on  theyr  headcs  as  haue  they  of  Afryke,  but  of  the

3S7

Their  bread.

Their  wheate.

359

The  soonne.

Their  drinke.

Graynes.

Shelles  that  cleaue
to  shyppes.

Barnacles.

Bromas.

A  secreate.

The  death  of
owr  men.

Could  may  be
better  abiden
ihtn  hcite.

ITie  West  Indies.

388

The  fccoude  vyage  to  Guinea.

360

coloure  of  an  olyue  with  longe  and  blacke  heare  on  theyr  Iicades  :  the  caufe  of  which  varictie  is  declared  in
dyuers  places  in  the  Decades.

It  is  alfo  woorthy  to  bee  noted  that  fumme  of  them  tliat  were  at  this  vyage  toulde  me.  That  is,
that  they  ouertooke  the  courfe  of  the  foonne,  fo  that  they  had  it  north  from  them  at  noone  the.  xiiii.  [four-
teenth] day  of  Marche.

And  to  haue  faycle  thus  much  of  thefe  vyages  it  may  fufficc.  For  (as  I  haue  fayd
before)  Wheras  the  parteners  at  whofe  charges  this  booke  is  prynted,  wolde  longe  fence
haue  me  proceaded  no  further,  I  had  not  thought  to  haue  wrytten  any  thynge  of  thefe
vyages  but  that  the  hberahtie  of  maftcr  Toy  encoraged  me  to  attempt  the  fame.
Whiche  I  fpeake  not  to  the  reproche  of  other  in  whome  I  thynke  there  lacked  no  good
wyll,  but  that  they  thought  the  booke  wolde  be  to  chargeable.

388

389

c  THE  MANER  OF  FYNDYNGE  THE  LOXGITVDE  OF

REGIONS  BY  DYVERS  WAVES  AFTER  THE  DESCRIPTION  OF

Gemma  Phrysivs.

Erceaiiynge  what  contention  Is  and  longe  hath  byn
not  only  amonge  the  pylottes  that  by  trauaylynge
the  fea  haue  obferued  the  ftarres,  but  alfo  amonge
fum  men  that  are  fkylfull  in  mathematical!  fciense,
wherof  many  affirme  that  the  longitude  (that  is  to
meane,  the  courfe  from  the  Eaft  to  the  Wefte)  can
not  be  perfectely  knowen,  I  haue  thowght  good  for
the  better  fatiffying  of  fuch  as  defire  to  haue  fum
knowleage  hereof,  to  interprete  fuch  demonftrations
as  I  haue  redde  of  the  declarynge  of  the  fame  in
Gemma  Phryfms,  who  as  touchynge  this  matter
hath  added  th[e]inuentions  of  other,  a  more  cer-
teyne  way  of  his  own  diuife  wherby  (as  he  fayth)
he  can  fynde  the  longitude  of  regions  although  he

were  dryuen  owt  of  the  way  a  thoufande  myles  into  places  vnto  hym  vtterlye  vnknowen

and  of  vnknowen  diftance. He  wryteth  therfore  as  foloweth.

When  yow  haue  founde  the  place  of  the  mone,  yow  ought  to  confyder  the  houre  when  fhe  occupyed  that
place.  Then  eyther  by  the  Ephimerides  or  by  the  tables  of  Alphonfus  yowe  owght  to  knowe  in  what  houre  the
moone  entereth  into  the  fame  figne  of  the  Zodiake  in  an  other  region  or  towne  whofe  longitude  is  well  knowen.
Then  reducynge  the  houres  to.  xxiiii.  [twenty-four]  the  leffe  number  of  houres  is  to  be  deducted  out  of  the
greater  number.  Then  the  remanent  of  the  houres  and  mynutes  is  to  be  brought  to  degrees  in  this  maner.
Multiplie  the  hours  by.  xv.  [fifteen]  and  diuide  the  minutes  of  the  houres  by  foure  :  fo  Hiall  appere  the  degrees
of  the  Equinoctial  conteyned  betwene  two  meridians.  And  if  after  this  diuifion  there  remayne  any  minutes,
multiplie  them  alfo  by.  xv.  [fifteen]  and  therby  fhalbe  knowen  the  minutes  of  degrees.  Adde  this  difference  of
longitude  founde  to  the  longitude  of  the  region  knowen  if  the  houres  of  that  place  bee  more  in  number  :  or  take
awaye  from  the  fame  longitude  if  they  be  leffe  :  So  fliall  yowe  in  fine  gather  the  longitude  of  the  place  vnknowen
from  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie.  But  the  fame  is  more  eafely  and  redely  found  geometrically  by  the  globes  by  this
meanes.  Set  directly  vnder  the  meridian,  the  place  whofe  longitude  is  knowen  in  the  globe.  Then  directe  the
poynte  or  flyle  that  moueth  abowt  the  pole,  to  the  houre  in  the  whiche  the  moone  occupyeth  the  place  affigned
in  that  region.  Then  turne  the  globe  vntyll  the  flyle  that  flieweth  the  houre,  be  coomme  to  the  houre  in  the
whiche  yowe  fowght  the  vnknowen  place  of  the  moone.  And  fo  fliall  the  degrees  of  the  Equinoctiall  diflaunte
or  diuyded  frome  the  moueable  meridian,  declare  the  longitude  of  the  region  which  yow  feeke.  NeuertheleiTe,
the  more  certeine  way  wherby  the  differences  of  longitudes  may  bee  founde,  is  by  fum  one  thynge  that  in  one
moment  appeareth  in  all  regions,  as  by  the  eclj-pfes  of  the  moone.  For  the  d)aiers  houres  beinge  knowen  in
the  whiche  the  fayd  eclypfes  chaunce  in  dyuers  regions,  tlie  longitude  maye  thus  afwell  be  knowen  by  geometrie
and  arithmetike,  as  it  is  founde  by  the  rule  here  before.  But  forafmuch  as  this  doth  neyther  appere  at  al  tymes
nor  to  all  men,  and  the  other  way  is  fumwhat  difficult,  neyther  at  al  t3-mes  redy  by  reafon  of  the  coniunctions
or  the  mone  and  furthermore  alfo  fumtymes  vncerteyne  and  var)ing  fumwhat  from  the  truth  for  the  dyuers

By  the  mone.

The  Ilandes  of
Canarie.
Howe  to  fynd
the  longitude  by
the  globe

2 F  2

3S9

The  Eclipses  of
the  moone.

390

TJic  luaiicr  of  fynydngc  the  hvigitiidcs  of  regions.

afpectes  and  latitudes  of  the  mone,  it  fo  chaunceth  hereby  that  wee  haue  eyther  no  longitudes  or  the  fame  very
vncerteyne  of  many  regions,  and  efpecially  of  tliofe  whicli  the  Spnnyardcs  haue  of  late  difcouered.  For  no
certentie  doubtlelTe  can  be  knowen  by  fuch  commenfurations  as  are  made  in  the  wanderynge  turnynges  and
wyndynges  of  fuch  vyages,  as  Ptolome  affirmeth  in  the  firfl  bookc  of  his  Cofmographie.  I  wyll  therfore  adde
herevnto  fum  thynge  of  myne  owne  inuention  whereby  by  an  eafy  way  and  at  all  tymes  the  longitudes  of  regions
may  bee  founde  in  all  vyages  and  nauigations.

361

Litle  clockes

By  the  Astrolabie
and  globe.
Horoscopus  or
the  Ascendent.

The  latitude-

C  A  newe  mancr  of  fyndynge  the  Longitudes  of  regions.

Ee  fee  that  in  thefe  owre  dayes  certeyne  lyttle  clockes  are  very  artificially  made  the  whiche  for
theyr  fmaule  quantitie  are  not  comberous  to  be  caryed  abowt  in  all  vyages. Thefe  often
tymes  moue  continually  for  the  fpace.  of.  xxiiii  [twenty-four]  houres  :  and  may  with  helpe
continewe  theyr  mouynge  in  maner  perpetually. By  the  helpe  therfore  of  thefe  the  longi-
tude may  bee  founde  after  this  maner. Before  wee  enter  into  any  vyage,  wee  mufle  fyrfle
forefee  that  the  fayde  clocke  exactly  obferue  the  houres  of  the  place  from  whenfe  we  departe :
And  ageyne  that  in  the  way  it  neuer  ceafe. Accomplyffliynge  therefore,  xv.  [fifteen]  or.  xx.
[twenty]  myles  of  the  vyage,  if  wee  defyre  to  knowe  howe  much  in  longitude  we  are  dyflant  frome  the  place  of
owre  departure,  we  mufl  tary  vntyll  the  poynt  oi  flyle  of  the  clocke  do  exactly  come  to  the  poynt  of
fum  houre  :  and  at  the  fame  moment  by  owr  Aflrolabie  or  globe,  owght  wee  to  feeke  the
houre  of  the  place  where  we  bee  : The  which  yf  it  agree  in  minute  with  the  houres
which  the  Horofcopium  or  afcendent  dooth  fliewe,  then  is  it  certeyne
that  wee  are  yet  vnder  the  fame  Meridian  or  the  fame  Longi-
tude :  and  that  owre  courfe  hath  byn  towarde  the
fouth  or  north. But  if  it  dyffer  one  hour  or
any  mynute, then  are the fame
to bee  reduced  to  de-
grees or  minutes  as  we haue tought in the  chapiture here before.
And  fo  fliall  the  longitude  bee  founde. And  by  this  arte  can
I  fynde  the  longitude  of  regions  althowgh  I  were  a
thoufand  myles  owt  of  my  attempted  courfe
and  in  an  vnknowen  diflance,  but
the  latitude  mufl  fyrfle  bee
perfectely  knowen.

dfCNJf  s.

VIO

391

C  A  bryefe  reherfal  of  the  content es  of  the  bookes  ofthefyrfl  Decade,  and  fa
folowynge  of  all  the  otlier  Decades, Folio,  i.  [/.  65.]

N  the  fyrfl  booke  is  declared  howe  Chriftophorus
Colonus  otherwyfe  cauled  Columbus,  perfuaded
Fernando  and  Elizabeth,  prynces  of  Spayne,  to
foorther  his  attempte  in  fearching  newe  and  vn-
knowen  landes  in  the  Weft  Ocean.  Alio  of  the,
vii.  Ilandes  of  Canarie,  by  whom  they  were  founde
and  conquered.

Howe  Colonus  founde  the  Ilandes  of  Ilifpaniola,
and  Cuba:  And  of  the  fierce  people  cauled Cani-
bales  or  Caribes,  which  are  accuftomed  to  eate  mans  fleffhe.

Of  the  rootes  cauled  Ages,  lucca,  and  the  grayne  Maizium,  wherof  the
people  of  the  Ilandes  make  theyr  breade.

Of  the  golde  found  in  the  fandes  of  ryiiers,  and  of  the  ferpentes  which
are  without  hurte. Alfo  of  turtle  doues,  duckes,  and  popyngiayes.

Of  Maftix,  and  Aloe,  with  dyuers  frutes  and  trees  vnknowen  to  vs :  and
of  the  frutefulnes  of  the  Hand  of  Hifpaniola  which  the  Spanyardes  caule
Spagnuola.

Of  the  feconde  vyage  of  Colonus  into  thefe  regions,  and  howe  he  was
furnyfthed  with.  xvii.  fhyppes  and  a  thoufande  and  two  hundreth  fouldyers,
with  all  kynde  of  artiliarye,  artificers,  and  grayne  to  fowe.  And  of  the
tree  frome  the  which  water  droppeth  continually  into  a  trenche  made  by
mans  hande.

The  contentes  of  the  feconai  hooke. Fol.  4  [/.  68.]

C  Howe  Colonus  departynge  from  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie,  fayled.viii.
hundreth  and.  xx.  leaques  in.  xxi.  dayes,  and  came  to  Dominica  an  Hande
of  the  Canibales:  And  oi  the  fragrant  fauour  of  fpices  which  proceded
from  the  Ilandes.

Of  the  Ilandes  of  Galanta  or  Galana  and  Guadalupea,  and  of  the  trees
which  beare  that  kynde  01  cotton  whiche  the  Italians  caule  Bombafine,  and
the  Spanyardes  Algadon.

Of  dyuers  kyndes  of  popingiayes :  And  of  the  Hand  of  Matinino  or
Madinino,  being  inhabited  only  with  women :  Alfo  of  dyuers  other  frute-
full  Ilandes  :  And  of  a  conflicte  which  the  Spanyardes  had  with  the  Cani-
bales.

Of  certeyne  Ilandes  in  the  which  are  feene  the  mj'nes  of  metals  and
precious  flones:  and  of  the  frutefull  and  peopulous  Hande  cauled  Buri-
chena  or  Boriquen.  or  Infula  S.  lohannis.

Howe  all  the  Admirals  men  whiche  at  his  fyrfl  vyage  he  lefte  in  Hif-
paniola, were  flayne  in  his  abfence  by  the  rebellion  of  Guaccanarillus,
kynge  of  the  Region  of  Xamana  :  and  of  the  free  kynde  of  lyfe  which  they
leade  that  haue  not  the  vfe  of  money.

Of  the.  vii.  maydens  which  fwamme.  iii.  myles  in  the  lea  :  And  of  the
maner  of  gatheryng  of  gold  in  the  lands  of  riuers.

C  The  Contentes  oj  the  thyrde  booke. Fol.  10.  [/.  73.]

C  A  particular  defcription  of  the  Hande  of  Hifpaniola,  whiche  Colonus
tliynketh  to  be  Ophir,  from  whenfe  kynge  Salomon  had  his  great  ryches
of  golde.

Of  the  maruelous  frutefulnes  of  Hifpaniola,  and  of  the  fuger  canes
growynge  there.

Of  the  golden  regions  of  Cipanga  or  Cibaua,  and  of  the  ryuers  in  whofe
fandes  is  founde  great  plentie  of  golde.

Of  certeyne  graines  of  gold  of  exceadyng  great  quantitie.

Of  wylde  vines  of  pleafaunt  tafle,  and  of  graffe  which  in  foure  dayes
groweth  as  hygh  as  wheate.

Of  the  Hande  of  lohanna  or  Cuba,  beinge  the  ende  of  the  Eafl  and  the
W  efl :  And  of  the  frutefull  and  peopulous  Hande  of  lamaica.

Howe  the  Admirall  thought  that  he  had  fayled  abowte  the  loweflhemi-
fpherie  or  halfe  circle  of  the  earth,  and  of  a  fecreate  of  Aflronoraie
touchynge  the  fame  matter.

Howe  the  Admirall  gaue  names  to.  vii.  hundreth  Ilandes,  and  palled  by
three  thoufande  vnnamed.

Of  certeyne  ferpentes  lyke  vnto  Crocodiles  of.  viii.  foote  longe,  whofe
fleffhe  is  delicate  to  be  eaten  :  and  of  certejTie  trees  which  beare  gourdes.

Of  the  ryuer  whofe  water  is  very  hotte  :  and  of  the  huntynge  fy-f(he
which  taketh  other  fyffhes.

Of  great  abundaunce  of  Tortoyfes  as  bygge  as  targets,  and  of  a  frutefull
mountayne  well  inhabited.

Of  dogges  of  deformed  Ihape  and  dum  :  And  of  whyte  and  thicke  water.

Of  wooddes  of  date  trees  and  pynepaple  trees,  and  of  certeyne  people
appareled  like  white  friers.

Of  certeyne  trees  whiche  beare  fpices,  and  of  cranes  ot  exceadj-nge
bignes.

Of  llocke  doues  of  more  pleafaunte  tafle  then  partriches.

An  oration  of  a  barbarous  gouemoure  as  touchinge  the  immortalitie  of
the  fowle  :  Alfo  of  the  rewarde  of  vertue  and  punyfflimente  of  vice.

A  fimilitude  oi  the  golden  worlde,  and  of  prouifion  withowte  care.

Howe  the  admirall  tell  ficke  by  reafon  of  to  much  watchynge  :  And  of
a  fedition  which  rofe  among  the  Spaniardes  in  the  Hande  of  Hifpaniola.

C  The  Conienta  of  the  fourth  booke. Fol.  18.  [/.  79.]

Howe  the  Kynges  of  the  Hande  of  Hifpaniola,  were  by  the  Spaniardes
myf  behauoure  prouoked  to  Rebellion  :  And  howe  the  admirall  fent  for
them.

Howe  kinge  Caunaboa  the  Lorde  of  the  houfe  of  golde,  that  is,  of  the
mountaynes  of  Cibaua,  conipired  the  Admirals  death,  and  how  he  with
his  familie  were  taken  prifoners.

Of  a  greate  famine  that  chaunced  in  the  Hand  of  Hifpaniola  :  and  howe
the  Admiral  builded  certeyne  fortredes.

Of  a  piece  of  rude  golde  waighinge.  xx.  vnces  :  and  of  the  myne  of  the
riche  metall  cauled  Electrum.

Ot  the  mountayne  in  the  whyche  is  founoe  greate  plentye  of  Amber  and
orpemente  :  And  of  the  wojddes  ofbrafile  trees.

Howe  th[e]inhabitauntes  are  put  to  theyre  tribute  :  And  howe  the
nature  of  the  Region  difpofethe  the  maners  of  the  people.

Howe  the  brother  of  kinge  Caunaboa  came  age/nfle  the  Admiral  with
an  army  of  fine  thow  fand  naked  men  :  and  how  lie  was  taken  and  his
army  put  to  flyght.

Of  the  frutfull  vale  Magona,  in  the  fandes  of  whofe  rjniers  is  founde
great  plentie  ol  golde  :  and  of  certeyne  whirlewyndcs  and  tempeftes.

Howe  the  Admirall  fente  foorthe  his  brother  Bartholomeus  Colonus
with  an  army  of  men  to  fearch  the  gold  mines  and  of  tie  foffes  wh'ch  he
found  to  haue  bin  digged  in  old  tyme

391

392

The  contcufcs  of  tJie  decades.

C  Tlu  Contentes  of  the.  v.  booke. Fol.  22.  [/.  %2.'^^

Howe  the  Lieuetenaunt  buikled  a  fortrefle  in  the  golde  mynes :  And
prepared  inflrumentes  for  the  pourginge  and  fyninge  of  the  golde.

Howe  certeyne  fliyppcs  laden  with  vyttayles,  came  frome  Spayne  :  And
howe  the  Lieuetenaunt  fent  the  kynges  which  rebelled,  with  three  hund-
reth  captiues  into  Spayne.

Howe  the  Liefetenaunte  remoued  his  habytacion :  And  buylded  a
fortrefle  which  he  cauled  faynt  Dominickes  towre  Alfo  howe  he  palTed
ouer  the  ryuer  Naiba,  and  entered  into  the  wooddes  of  brafyle  trees.

Howe  the  great  kynge  Beuchius  Anacauchoa,  frendely  enterteyned  the
Lieuetenaunt,  and  browght  hym  to  his  pallayce,  where  the  kynges  wyues
and  concubines  receaued  him  honorably  with  pompes  and  triumphes.

Of  the  fortreffes  which  were  erected  in  Hifpaniola :  And  howe  the
Lieuetenaunt  exacted  tribute  of  the  kynges  whiche  rebelled  ageyne.

Howe  the  Lieuetenaunt  fette  vppon  the  kynges  vnwares  in  the  nyght
feafon,  and  tooke.  xiiii.  of  them  pryfoners.

Howe  kynge  Guarionexius,  capitayne  of  the  confpiracie  was  pardoned,
and  howe  he  perfuaded  the  people  to  obedience.

Howe  kynge  Beuchius  Anacauchoa,  fente  meffingers  to  the  Lieuetenaunt
to  repayre  to  his  pallayce  where  he  founde  xxxii.  kinges  redy  with  theyr
tributes :  And  howe  the  queene  Anacaona  gntyfed  hym  to  eate  of  the
ferpentes  fleffhe.

Howe  the  ferpentes  flefflie  is  prepared  to  bfi  paten  :  And  how  delicate
meate  theyr  egges  are  yf  they  be  fodden.

Howe  queene  Anacaona,  fyfler  to  kynge  Beuchius  Anacauchoa,  enter-
teyned the  Liefetenaunt,  and  gaue  hym  muche  houfliolde  (luffe  and  many
veflels  of  Hebene  woodde  artificially  wrought  and  earned.

Howe  kynge  Anacauchoa  and  the  queene  his  fyfter  went  aboorde  the
Liefetenaunt  his  (hyppe,  and  howe  greately  they  were  ajnafed  to  beholde
the  furniture  therof.

Howe  Roldanus  Xeminus  a  Spaniarde,  rebelled  in  the  Lieuetenauntes
abfence  :  by  whofe  myfdemeanour  alfo  kinge  Guarionexius  was  prouoked
to  a  newe  confpiracie,  and  with  hym  Maiobanexius  the  kynge  of  the
mountaynes.

The  contentes  of  the  fyxte  hoke. Foli.  28.  [/.  87]

C  The  thyrde  vyage  of  Colonus,  and  hoj^'e  he  diuerted  from  his  accuf-
tomed  rafe  by  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie  to  the  Ilande  of  Madera  for  feare  oi
certayne  frenche  pirates  and  rouers.

Of  the.  xiii.  Ilandes  which  in  olde  tyme  were  cauled  Hefperides,  and  are
nowe  cauled  the  Ilandes  ot  Caput  Viride  or  Cabouerde.  Alfo  of  the
Tortoyfes  of  the  Ilande  of  Bonauifta,  wheryv'ith  the  leaper  is  healed.

Howe  the  Admirall  founde  contagious  ayre  and  extreme  heate  nere  the
Equinoctial  where  the  north  pole  was  eleuate  onely  fyue  degrees  :  And
how  failyng  from  thence  weftward,  he  founde  the  flarres  placed  in  other
order,  and  the  fea  ryfynge  as  it  were  the  backg  ol  a  mountayne.

Howe  the  Admyrall  faylynge  weflwarde,  and  neuer  palTyng  owte  of  the
clyme  or  paraleles  of  Ethiope,  founde  a  temperate  Region  and  people  of
goodly  corporature  :  And  what  difference  is  betwejie  the  patures  of  Regions
beyng  vnder  one  paralele  and  one  eleuatipn  pf  the  pole.

Of  the  Ilandes  of  Puta  and  Margarita  :  and  of  the  fvvift  courfe  or  faule
of  the  Ocean  from  the  Eafl  to  the  wefle.

Of  the  goulfes  cauled  Os  Draconis  :  And  of  the  condicte  betyene  the
freflie  water  and  the  falie.

Of  a  fea  of  freflie  water :  And  a  mountayne  inhabited  onely  with  monkeys
and  marmafettes.

Of  the  fayre,  riche,  and  large  region  ot  Paria  :  And  howe  frendly
th[e]inhabitantes  entreated  the  Admyrall  and  his  men.  Alfo  of  pleafaunte
wyne  made  of  dyuerfe  fruites  :  And  of  greate  abundaunce  of  perles  and
golde.

Of  the  regions  of  Cumana,  Manacapana,  and  Curiana,  beynge  regions
of  the  large  prouynce  of  Paria  :  And  of  the  fea  of  herbes  or  weedes.

A  certeyn  fecreate  as  touchynge  the  pole  flarre  and  the  eleuation  of  the
fame : Alfo  of  the  roundneffe  of  the  earthe.

•392

Of  the  mountaynes  of  Paria  in  the  toppes  wherof  Colonus  cmedly
aflinncth  the  earthly  Paradife  to  be  fituate :  And  whether  Paria  be  part
of  the  firme  land  or  continent  of  India.

C  The  cotitaites  of  the.  vii.  booke. Fol.  33.  [/.  90.]

C  Ilowe  Roldanus  Xeminus  with  his  confctherates,  accufed  the  Admi-
rall to  the  kynge  :  And  howe  he  pourged  hym  fclfe  and  accufed  them

Howe  kynge  Guarionexius  rebelled  ageyne  :  And  with  him  kyng  Maio-
banexius :  Alfo  howe  they  with  other  kinges  came  ageynft  the  Lieueten-
aunte  with  an  armye  of.  viii.  thoufande  naked  and  paynted  Ciguauians.
Alfo  twoo  rare  exemples  of  frendfliyppe  and  faythfulnes  in  barbarous
puinces.

Howe  Colonus  the  Admirall  and  the  Lieaetenauntc  hys  brother,  were
fent  bounde  into  Spayne  :  And  newe  officers  appoynted  in  theyr  places.

The  contentes  of  the.  viii.  booke. Fol.  37.  [/.  94.]

C  The  nauigation  of  Pctrus  Alphonfus  frome  Spayne  to  Paria,  where  in
the  region  of  Curiana,  he  had  in  fliorte  fpace.  xv.  vnces  of  pearles  and
greate  plenty  of  vytailes  for  haukes  bellees,  pynnes,  lokinge  glaffes,  and
fuche  other  tryfelles.

Of  certeyn  coniectures  wherby  Paria  is  thought  to  bee  parte  of  the  firme
lande  :  And  ot  the  golden  region  of  Cauchieta,  where  in  the  moneth  of
Nouember  the  ayre  is  temperate  and  not  coulde.

Howe  Alphonfus  had  a  conllicte  with  the  Canibals  :  and  howe  they
are  acuflomed  to  inuade  other  contreys.

Of  greate  abundaunce  of  falte  in  the  region  of  Harala  :  and  howe  the
dead  bodyes  of  theyr  prynces  are  dryed,  referued,  and  relygioufly  honoured.

Howe  Alphonfus  at  his  returne  to  Spayne  frome  Curiana,  brought  with
hym  threefcore  and.  xvi.  pounde  weight  of  pearles  which  he  bought  for
owre  tryfells  amountinge  only  to  the  value  of  fiue  fliillyngs.

The  contentes  of  the.  ix.  booke. Fol.  40,  [/.  96.]

C  The  Nauigation  of  Vincentius  Pinzonus  and  Aries  Pinzonus,  and
howe  they  fayled  beyonde  the  Equinoctiall  lyne,  lofle  the  fyght  of  the
northe  ftarre,  and  founde  the  flarres  in  other  order.

Howe  Vincentius  paffynge  the  equinoctiall  towarde  the  fouthe  pole,
founde  fierce  and  warlike  people  of  great  flature  :  And  of  the  fea  of  frefhe
water.

Howe  Vincentius  directing  his  courfe  towarde  the  north  wefle  from  the
equinoctiall,  recouered  the  fyght  of  the  northe  pole,  and  by  the  regions  of
Mariatamball,  Camomorus,  and  Pericora,  came  to  the  fayre  and  ryche
prouince  of  Paria,  and  to  the  regyons  of  Os  Draconis,  Cumana,  Mana-
capana, Curiana.  &c.

A  coniecture  that  Paria  (wherby  is  ment  that  mayne  land  now  cauled
America)  fhulde  be  parte  of  the  fyrme  lande  or  continent  of  India,  beyonde
the  ryuer  of  Ganges  and  no  ilande  :  And  of  the  excedynge  great  riuer
Maragnonus  replenifhed  with  Ilandes.

Of  Borioftomea  and  Spirioftomea,  the  mouthes  of  the  famous  ryuer  of
Danubius,  cauled  in  olde  tyme  Ifler:  And  of  the  commodities  of  the  regions
and  Ilandes  about  Paria. Alfo  of  the  woodes  of  brafile  trees.

Of  many  trutfuU  Ilandes  waded  and  lefte  defolate  by  refon  of  the  Cani-
balles  crueltie  :  And  pf  the  trees  of  Caffia  Fiftula.  Alfo  of  other  trees  of
excedyng  bygnefl-:.

The  defcription  of  a  certayne  monflruous  beafle,  And  how  Vincentius
lofte  two  of  his  fhyppes  by  tempefles.

Howe  Vincentius  at  his  returne  to  Spayne,  brought  with  hym  cinamome,
gynger,  and  certayne  precious  ftoones  cauled  Topafes.  And  of  the  naui-
gations  of  certayne  other  inhabitantes  of  the  towne  ot  Palos.

Of  the  precious  medicine  cauled  Anime  Album.  And  of  the  diuerfe
fuperflitions  of  the  inhabitauntes  of  Hilpaniola.  Alfo  of  their  Idolatry,
and  howe  they  honour  the  ymages  of  deuylles,  whiche  they  caule  Zcmes.

The  cont elites  of  the  decades.

393

C  Tlie  Co/iicntes  of  the.  x.  booke. Fol.  48.  [/.  103.]

Of  great  plentie  of  golde,  perles,  and  frankenfcnce  found  in  the  regions
ot  Paria. And  of  innumerable  beafles  in  Hiape  dyfferynge  from  owres.

Howe  the  Spaniardes  profercd  them  feUies  to  conquere  the  newe  founde
landes,  beynge  in  largenefTe  thryfe  as  great  as  Europe  befyde  the  fouthe
landes  parteynynge  to  the  Portugales.  And  howe  the  nature  of  the  place
altereth  the  formes  and  qualities  of  thynges.

Of  the  Ilande  of  Cuba,  and  of  the  golde  mynes  of  the  Hand  of  Sancti

Ichannis,  otherwife  cauled  Burichena,  or  Buchena.  Alfo  of  the  ryche
golde  mynes  of  Ilifpaniola,  and  of  the  order  of  workynge  in  the  fame.

Of  the  two  chiefe  golde  mynes  of  Hifpaniola.  And  of  a  pece  of  golde
weyinge  thre  thoufande  thre  hundreth  and  tenne  pounde  weyght.

Howe  the  golde  is  fyned  and  diftrybuted  :  And  howe  that  only  in  the
meltynge  Ihops  of  the  two  golden  mynes  of  Hifpaniola,  is  molten  yearely
aboue  three  hundreth  thoufande  pounde  weyght  of  golde,

Howe  th[e]enterpryfes  of  the  Spanyardes  are  not  inferior  to  th[e]actes  of
Saturnus  or  Hercules  :  And  howe  the  Admyrall  difcouered  the  lande  ouer
ageynfl  the  weft  comer  of  Cuba  and  the  Ilande  of  GuanalTa.

C  The  Content es  of  the  bookes  of  the  feconde  Decade.

C  Tlie  contentes  of  the  fyrjl  booke. Fol.  51.  [/.  106.]

C  Howe  after  the  death  of  Colonus  the  Admirall,  the  kynge  gaue  free
lycence  to  all  fuche  as  wolde  attempte  any  vyages  :  And  of  the  nauigations
of  Diego  Nicuefa,  and  Alphonfus  Fogeda

Of  the  Ilande  Codego  and  the  region  of  Caramairi :  And  of  certeyne
fweete  apples  whiche  turne  into  woormes  when  they  are  eaten,  whofe  trees
are  alfo  contagious.

Howe  Alfonfus  Fogeda,  the  Lieuetenaunt  of  Vraba,  encounterynge  with
the  barbarians  had  the  ouerthrowe.  And  howe  in  this  conflicte,  fyftie  of
his  men  were  flayne  with  lohannes  de  la  Coffa  theyr  capytayne.

Howe  Fogeda,  and  Nicuefa  the  Lieuetenaunte  of  Beragua,  reuenged  the
death  of  theyr  coompanyons  :  And  howe  Fogeda  came  to  the  Ilande
Fortis  and  the  region  of  Caribana  where  he  was  repulfed  from  the  golde
mynes  by  the  fiercenefle  of  the  barbarians  vfyng  arrowes  infected  with
poyfon.

Howe  Fogeda  was  wounded  in  the  thygh  with  a  venemous  arrowe,  and
his  men  almoft  confumed  with  famyn.

Howe  a  brigantine  was  drowned  with  the  (Iroke  of  a  fyfflie  :  And  of  the
nauigation  of  Ancifus  from  Hifpaniola  to  Vraba.

Of  the  Lamentable  fhyppewracke  of  Ancifus  :  And  of  the  date  trees  and
wylde  bores  which  he  founde.

Of  the  frutes  or  apples  of  the  trees  cauled  Ceders  of  Libane  which  beare
owkle  frutes  and  newe  all  the  yeare.

Howe  onely  three  of  the  Canibales  with  theyr  bowes  and  inuenemed
arrowes  aflayled  Ancifus  with  a  hundreth  of  his  men  :  In  which  conflicte
they  wounded  and  flewe  many. Alfo  of  theyr  fwyftneffe  of  foote.

Of  the  great  ryuer  of  Dariena  :  And  how  Ancifus  encountered  with  fyue
hundreth  of  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba  and  put  them  to
flyght.  Alfo  howe  he  founde  greate  plentie  of  wrought  golde  and  houf-
holde  ftuffe  in  a  thycket  of  reedes.

C  The  cojiientes  of  the  feconde  booke. Fol.  58.  [/.  iii.]

C  Howe  Nicuefa  lofte  his  felowes  in  the  darke  nyght  and  went  pafl  the
mouth  of  the  ryuer  Beragua  which  he  fought :  And  howe  the  capitaynes
of  the  other  fliyppes  confulted  how  to  fynde  hym.  Alfo  of  the  ryuer
Lagartos  in  the  which  great  Lyfartes  are  founde  much  lyke  vnto  the
Crocodiles  of  Nilus.

Howe  the  capitaynes  forfooke  theyr  fhyppes  that  the  fouldyers  myght
bee  without  hope  of  departure  :  And  of  the  miferable  chaunce  of  Petms
de  Vmbria  and  his  felowes.

By  what  chaunce  Nicuefa  was  founde,  and  of  the  calamities  which  he
and  his  coompany  fufleyned.  Alfo  of  the  region  of  Gracia  Dei  or  Cera-
baro,  and  of  the  ryuer  of  Sancti  Matthci.

Howe  Nicuefa  caufed  them  to  remoue  theyr  habitacion  from  Beragua  to
poynte  Marmor  where  he  bylded  a  fortreffe  And  howe  his  men  by  warre
and  famyn,  were  confumed  from  feuen  hundreth  and  odde,  to  fcarfely  one
hundreth.

Howe  one  Vafchus  Nunnez  vfurped  th[e]autoritie  of  the  Lieue-
tenauntefhyppe  of  Vraba  in  th[e]abfence  of  Fogeda:  And  of  the  naui-
gation of  Rodericus  Colmenaris  from  Hifpaniola  to  Vraba.

Of  the  ryuer  Gaira  defcendynge  from  the  toppe  of  a  hygh  mountayne
couered  with  fnowe  :  And  howe  Rodericus  Colmenaris  in  a  conflicte
ageynft  the  barbarians,  lofle.  xlvii.  of  his  men  by  reafon  of  theyr  inuenemed
arrowes.

Of  the  force  of  the  poyfon  wherewith  the  barbarians  infecte  theyr
arrowes,  and  a  remedie  for  the  fame.  Alfo  howe  Colmenaris  by  gunnefhot
and  kyndelynge  fyers  on  the  hyghe  toppes  of  the  rockes,  came  to  the
Spanyardes  lefte  defolate  in  Dariena.

C  The  contentes  of  thcihyrde  booke. Fol.  61.  [/.  114.]

C  Howe  Nicuefa  was  fought  foorth  to  acquiete  the  contentions  of
Vraba  :  And  howe  he  was  ageyne  reiected.

Howe  Vafchus  Nunnez  inuaded,  tooke  pryfoners,  and  fpoyled  the  kynges
bortherynge  abowt  the  region  of  Vraba  :  And  howe  Ancifus  Lieuetenaunt
for  Fogeda  was  cafl  in  pryfon,  and  afterwarde  fet  at  libertie.

Howe  Ancifus  tooke  his  vyage  from  Vraba  to  Spayne  to  accufe  Vafchus :
who  alfo  at  the  fame  tyme  fent  Valdiuia  afwell  to  fpeake  in  his  defence,  as
alfo  to  certifie  the  kynge  of  >heyr  doynges.

Howe  kynge  Careta  confpired  with  the  Spanyardes  age}-nft  k)Tige
Poncha  whom  they  put  to  flyght  and  fpoyled  his  vyllage.

Howe  kynge  Comogrus  frendely  enterte}'ned  the  Spanyardes  and  brought
them  to  his  pallaice  where  he  fhewed  them  the  dr}-ed  Carkafes  of  his
aunceflours  referaed  and  fumptuoufly  apparelled  :  And  howe  the  k}'nges
elder  fonne  gaue  Vafchus  and  Colmenaris  foure  thoufand  \'nces  of  wrought
gold  and  fiftie  flaues.  Alfo  a  \vyttie  oration  which  he  made  to  the  Spany-
ardes, wherein  he  certifyed  theym  ot  a  c-^untrey  exceadynge  ryche  in
golde,  (Sec.

C  The  contentes  of  the  fourth  booke. Fol.  66.  [/.  iiS.]

C  Of  horryble  thunder  and  lyghtnyngc  in  the  mooneth  of  Nouember,
and  of  grayne  which  waxeth  rype  thrjfe  a  yeare  Alfo  how  digeflion  is
flrengthened  by  owtsvarde  coulde.

Howe  Valdiuia  is  fent  ageyne  into  Hifpaniola  to  moue  the  gouemour
and  counfayle  there  to  fende  into  Spayne  to  the  k)Tige  for  a  fupplie  of  a
thoufand  fouldyers  to  make  way  to  the  golden  mountaynes :  And  howe

393

)94

TJie  confcnfcs  of  the  decades.

he  caryed  with  hym  the  kynges  portion,  (that  is)  the  fyfte  parte  of  golde
and  other  thynges.

Howe  Vafchus  inuaded  the  kynges  inhabytynge  tlie  regions  about  the
goulfe  of  Vraba,  and  howe  he  put  kyng  Dabaiba  to  ilyght,  in  whofe
vyllage  he  founde  wrought  golde  amouutynge  to  the  weyght  ol  feuen
thoufande  Caflellans.

Ot  battes  as  bygge  as  turtle  dooues  which  fumlyme  byte  men  in  the
nyght  in  their  fleepe,  whofe  bytynge  is  alfo  venemous  :  but  is  healed  with
water  of  the  fea  or  by  cauterization  as  are  alfo  the  woundes  ol  venemous
arrowes.

Of  the  Ilande  of  Cannafiftula,  and  a  towne  of  fyue  hundreth  houfes,
whofe  kynge  Abenamachei  was  taken  and  his  arme  cutte  of  in  the
fyght.

Of  trees  of  exceadynge  bygnefle  and  heyght  :  And  howe  kynge  Abibeiba
had  his  pallaice  in  the  toppe  ol  a  tree  frome  the  which  he  was  inforced  to
defcende  and  entreate  of  peace.

C  The  contcntes  of  the  fyfth  booke. Fol.  69.  [/.  120.]

C  Howe  kynge  Abraiba  flewe  a  capitayne  of  the  Spanyards  and
caufed  the  kynges  to  rebell.  Alfo  howe  they  were  put  to  flyght  and  many
of  theyr  men  flayne.

Of  fyue  kinges  which  attempted  a  newe  confpiracie  with  a  hundreth
great  Canoas  and  fiue  thoufand  men  :  And  howe  theyr  intent  was  bewrayed
by  a  woman,  and  preuented.  Alfo  howe  Rodericus  Colmenaris  facked
the  vyllage  of  Tichiri  and  honge  the  kynge  therof  with  foure  of  his  chiefe
mlers,  and  commaunded  them  to  be  fliotte  through  with  arrowes.

C  The  co7itentes  of  the  fyxte  booke. Fol.  72.  \p.  122.]

C  Howe  Vafchus  with  his  confetherates,  fente  lohannes  Quicedus
and  Colmenaris  from  Dariena  to  Hifpaniola  and  from  thenfe  to  Spayne  to
the  kyng  for  a  thoufand  men  to  paffe  ouer  the  mountaynes  to  the  golden
regions  :  And  what  miferies  they  fufteyned  in  that  vyage.  Alfo  of  the
death  of  Val[di]uia,  Zamudius,  and  Fogeda.

Of  the  profperous  vyage  of  Ancifus.  And  howe  godde  wrought  miracles
by  the  fimple  fayth  of  a  mariner.  Alfo  how  god  refpecteth  th[e]infancie
of  fayth  for  zeles  fake  :  And  howe  one  religion  turned  into  another,  holdeth
flyll  many  thinges  of  the  fyrfte.

Howe  many  of  the  barbarians  were  baptifed  by  reafon  of-  the  miracles  :
And  howe  they  rewarded  the  prefles  by  whome  they  were  baptifed.

Howe  Ancifus  fliortly  after  his  arryuall  in  Spayne,  reforted  to  the  courte
and  made  his  complaynt  to  the  kinge  of  th[e]infolencie  of  Vafchus,  wher-
uppon  the  kynge  gaue  fentence  ageynft  hym  :  And  howe  apte  the  barbar-
ous nations  are  to  embrafe  the  Chriflian  fayth.

C  The  coiitejites  of  the  feiienth  booke. Fol.  79.  [/.  126.]

C  Howe  Quicedus  and  Colmenaris  the  procuratours  of  Dariena,  were
honorably  enterteyned  at  the  courte  and  brought  to  the  kynges  prefence  :
And  howe  theyr  complexion  was  chaunged  by  alteration  of  the  ayer.

Howe  Petrus  Arias  a  noble  man,  was  elected  gouernour  and  Lieuetenaunt
of  Dariena :  And  howe  other  of  the  court  laboured  for  the  fame  office.
Alfo  howe  the  byffhop  of  Burges  fpake  to  the  kynge  in  his  behalfe.

Howe  Petrus  Arias  had  a  thoufande  and  two  hundrethe  fouldyers
appoynted  hym  at  the  kynges  charges  :  And  of  the  kynges  cuftome  houfe
in  the  citie  of  Ciuile,  cauled  the  houfe  of  the  contractes  of  India.

Howe  a  great  number  of  Spanyardes  profered  themfelues  to  go  at  theyr
owne  charges  :  And  of  a  reflraint  made  that  no  flraunger  myght  paffe
without  the  kynges  licence.  Alfo  howe  the  autour  reproueth  Aloifius
Cadamuftus  a  wryter  of  the  Portugales  vyages.

Howe  Petrus  Arias  fhortely  after  his  departure  frome  Ciuile,  lofl  two  of
his  fliyppes  and  was  dryuen  backe  ageyne  by  tempeft :  And  howe  beinge
newly  furnyfflied,  hee  paffed  the  Ocean  with  more  profperous  wyndes.

The  thyrde  vyage  of  Vincentius  Pinzonus,  and  howe  he  came  to  the

394

regions  of  Paria  where  cncountcryngc  with  th[e]inhabitauntes  he  put  them
fyrfl  to  Ilyght :  but  after  faulyng  to  cntreatie  of  peace,  they  g?ue  hym
greate  plentie  of  golde  and  abundaunce  of  mafculine  frankenfence  with
dyuers  other  princely  prcfcntes.

Of  the  greate  multitude  of  popingiayes  which  are  in  the  region  of  Paria,
and  howe  th[e]inhabitours  are  apparelled.  Alfo  of  the  fyue  kynges  that
made  a  league  of  frcndefliyppe  with  Vincentius.

Howe  Vincentius  faylcd  Eaflwarde  by  the  tracte  of  the  regions  of  Paria
vntyll  he  came  to  the  poynte  \Cap.  S.  Aits^u^ini]  of  that  longe  lande  which
the  autour  fuppofeth  to  be  the  greate  Ilande  Atlantike  wherof  the  owlde
wrytcrs  make  mention.

C  77ie  coiitentes  of  the.  viii.  booke. Fol.  80.  [/.  129]

C  A  contention  betwene  the  Caflilians  and  Portugales  as  concernynge
the  diuifion  of  the  newe  founde  landes :  And  howe  the  controuerfie  was
fynyfflied  by  the  byfliop  of  Rome.

Howe  Don  Chryflopher  the  gouernoure  of  the  Ilande  of  Sancti  lohannis,
was  flayne  by  the  Canibales  and  the  byffliop  put  to  flyght.  Alfo  of  the
other  byffliops  of  the  Ilandes.

Howe  the  Canibales  of  the  Hand  of  Sancta  Crux,  flew  and  eate  a  kynge
with  certeyne  of  his  men  beinge  frendes  to  the  Chryftians  and  made  fag-
gottes  of  theyr  bones  :  And  how  querelynge  with  owre  men,  they  put  them
to  filence.

C  The  contentes  of  the.  ix.  booke. Fol.  81.  [/.  130.]

C  Of  the  maruelous  frutefulnes  of  the  regions  of  Beragua,  Vraba,  and
Dariena :  And  of  the  dyuers  kyndes  of  trees  and  frutes.  Alfo  of  the  plea-
faunt  tafle  of  fvvynes  flefflie  beinge  fedde  with  the  frutes  of  Mirobalane  trees.

Of  Lions  and  Tygers  and  other  wylde  beaftes  :  And  of  a  beafle  of
flraunge  forme.

Of  the  ryuers  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba,  as  the  ryuer  of  Dariena  and  Rio
Grandis  :  And  howe  the  great  ferpentes  cauled  Crocodiles,  are  founde  in
other  ryuers  byfyde  Nilus  in  Egypte.  Alfo  howe  th[e]autour  of  this  booke
was  fent  Ambaffadour  to  the  Soldane  of  Alcayr  in  Egipte.

Of  the  Portugales  nauigations,  and  of  the  ryuer  Senega  founde  by  them
to  bee  a  chanel  of  Nilus.  Alfo  of  the  multitude  of  byrdes  and  foules  beinge
in  the  maryfflies  of  Dariena.

A  phylofophicall  difcourfe  of  th[e]originall  and  generation  of  fprynges
and  ryuers  :  And  of  the  breadth  of  the  lande  diuydynge  the  north  and
fouth  Ocean.

Of  the  great  ryuer  Maragnonus  and  of  the  earthly  Paradyfe  :  And  howe
fprynges  are  engendered  by  conuercion  of  ayer  into  water.

Of  the  often  faule  of  rayne  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  line,  and  of  the  pores
of  the  fea  opened  by  the  South  wyndes.

Of  the  great  ryuers  of  Tanais,  Ganges,  Danubius,  and  Eridanus,  famous
to  the  owlde  wryters  :  And  howe  certeine  ryuers  runnynge  throughe  the
caues  of  the  earthe,  breake  furth  into  fprynges  afarre  of.

C  The  contentes  of  the.  x.  booke. Fol.  ^d.  [/>.  134.I

C  Howe  the  newe  founde  landes  difcouered  by  the  Spanyardes  in  the
Wed  Ocean,  are  eyght  tymes  bygger  then  Italie  befyde  that  which  the
Portugales  poffeffe  :  And  of  the  cardes  of  the  fea  drawen  by  Colonus  and
Americus  Vefputius.

The  order  of  .neafurynge  the  lande :  And  howe  a  league  conteyneth
foure  myles  by  fea  and  but  three  by  lande.

The  Nauigation  of  lohannes  Dias,  and  of  the  fundiye  eleuations  of  the
pole  ftarre.

Of  the  Ilande  of  Boiuca  or  Agnaneo,  and  of  the  fpringe  whofe  water
being  dronke,  caufeth  owld  men  to  loke  yonge.

Howe  Nicuefa  and  his  fouldiers  were  fo  oppreffed  with  famin,  that  they
were  dryuen  to  eate  mangie  dogges,  toades,  and  deade  men  :  And  howe  a
brothe  made  of  a  dogges  flcinne,  was  foulde  for  many  pieces  of  golde.

The  conf elites  of  tJie  decades.

395

C  The  contentes  of  the  bookes  of  the  thyrde  Decade.

C  The  contcnies  of  the  fyrjl  booke. Fol.  88.  [/.  137.]

C  Of  the  defperate  aduenture  and  good  fortune  of  Vafchus  :  And  how
with  a  hundreth  fourfcore  and  ten  men,  he  brought  that  to  paffe  for  the  which
Petrus  Arias  was  fente  with  a  thoufande  and  two  hundieth  freffhe  fouldyers.

Howe  iren  ferueth  for  more  neceffary  vfes  then  gold,  and  howe  fuper-
fluities  hynder  libertie.

Howe  Vafchus  in  one  conflicte,  flewe  fyxe  hundreth  barbaryans  with
theyr  kynges  :  And  howe  he  founde  the  houfe  of  kyng  Quarequa  infected
with  vnnatural  lechery,  commaundynge  that  the  kynge  and  fortie  fuche  as
he  kepte  for  that  purpofe,  fhulde  be  gyuen  for  a  pray  to  his  dogges  whiche
he  vfed  to  ferae  in  the  warres  ageynft,  thefe  naked  people.

Of  a  region  of  blacke  Moores  :  And  howe  Vafchus  came  to  the  toppes
of  the  mountaynes,  where  geuynge  thankes  to  god,  he  behelde  the  newe
fouth  Ocean  neuer  before  fene  nor  knowen  to  men  of  owre  worlde.

Howe  Vafchus  put  kynge  Chiapes  to  flyght,  and  after  made  a  league  of
frendefhyppe  with  hym  :  And  howe  the  king  gaue  hym.  iiii.  hundreth
poundes  weyght  of  wrought  golde.

Howe  kynge  Coquera  was  putte  to  flyght,  who  alfo  beinge  receaued  to
frendefliyppe,  gaue  Vafchus  fyxe  hundreth  and  fiftie  poundes  weyght  of
wrought  golde.

Of  the  goulfe  cauled  Sinus.  S.  Michaelis  beinge  full  of  inhabited  Ilandes :
And  of  the  manly  corage  and  godly  zeale  of  Vafchus.  Alfo  of  the  ryfynge
and  faulyng  of  the  fouth  fea.

Howe  kynge  Tumaccus  beinge  dryuen  to  flyght  and  afterwarde  recon-
ciled, gaue  Vafchus.  vi.  hundreth  and.  xiiii.  pefos  of  golde,  and  two  hun-
dreth and  fortie  of  the  greatefl  and  fayreft  pearles  :  And  howe  the  kynge
caufed  his  men  to  fyflie  for  pearles.

Of  the  Ilande  cauled  Margaritea  Diues :  And  of  the  abundaunce  of  fayre
and  great  pearles  founde  therin.

Of  habitable  regions  vnder  the  Equinoctiall  line :  And  of  the  Portugales
nauigations  to  the  Antipodes  inhabytynge  the  fyue  and  fiftie  degree  of  the
fouth  pole.  Alfo  a  declaration  of  Antipodes,  and  of  the  flarres  about  the
fouth  pole.

C  The  contentes  of  the  feconde  hooke. Fol.  95.  [/.  142]

C  Of  the  maner  of  fyffliynge  for  pearles  and  of  the  three  kyndes  therof.
Alfo  dyuers  other  queflions  concemynge  perles.

Of  the  multitude  of  the  fliell  fyffhes  wherin  perles  are  engendered  and
founde  in  maner  in  all  places  in  the  fouth  fea ;  And  of  abundaunce  of
golde  founde  almofle  in  eueiy  houfe.  Alfo  howe  the  treafurie  of  nature  is
in  thofe  coafles :  And  of  the  golde  mynes  of  Dariena.

Howe  kynge  Teaocha  gaue  Vafchus.  xx.  poundes  weight  of  wrought
golde  and  two  hundreth  perles.  Alfo  of  defertes  full  of  wylde  beaftes,  and
howe  Vafchus  was  troubled  with  greate  heate  in  the  moneth  of  Nouember.

Howe  a  dogge  Tyger  was  taken,  and  his  whelpes  tyed  in  cheynes  and
torne  in  pieces  :  Alfo  howe  Vafchus  gaue.  iiii  kynges  to  his  dogges  to  be
deuoured.

Of  the  vfe  of  dogges  in  theyr  warres,  and  of  the  fierceneffe  of  the  Canibales.

Howe  kynge  Bononiana  fauoured  the  Chryflians  and  gaue  Vafchus.  xx.
pounde  weyght  of  wrought  golde. Alfo  his  oration  to  Vafchus.

A  fimilitude  prouynge  greate  plentie  of  golde  in  the  regions  of  the  fouth
fea,  and  of  the  trauayles  which  owlde  fouldyers  are  able  to  fuflejTie.

C  The  contentes  of  the  thyrde  booke. Fol.  99.  [/.  146.]

C  Howe  kynge  Buchibuea  fubmytted  hym  felfe  to  Vafchus,  and  fent
hym  certeyne  veffelles  of  golde.  Alfo  howe  kynge  Chiorifus  fente  hym.  xxx.
dyfflies  of  pure  golde.

Howe  iren  ferueth  for  more  neceffary  vfes  then  gold.  Alfo  an  exemple
of  the  lyfe  of  owr  fyrfle  parentes.

Howe  kynge  Pocchorrofa  fubmytted  hym  felfe,  and  gaue  Vafchus.  xv.
pounde  weyght  of  wrought  golde.  Alfo  howe  Tumanama  the  great  kynge
of  the  golden  regions  towarde  the  fouth  fea,  is  taken  prifoner.  Lykewyfe
howe  he  gaue  Vafchus.  xxx.  pounde  weyght  of  pure  and  wrought  golde,
and  his  noble  men.  Ix.  poundes  weyght  of  golde.

Of  the  caufe  of  vehement  wyndes  nere  vnto  the  Equinoctiall  line,  and  of
the  coloure  of  the  earth  of  the  golden  mines.

Of  the  large  and  fratefuU  playne  of  Zauana,  and  of  the  ryuer  Comognis.
Alfo  howe  kynge  Comogrus  baptifed  by  the  name  of  Charles,  gaue  Vafchus.
XX.  pounde  weyght  of  wrought  golde.

Of  the  good  fortune  of  Vafchus,  and  howe  he  was  turned  from  Goliath
to  Elifeus,  and  from  Anteus  to  Hercules  :  And  with  what  facilitie  the
Spanyardes  fliall  hereafter  obteyre  greate  plentie  of  golde  and  pearles.

Of  the  Spanyardes  conqueftes,  and  fierceneffe  of  the  Canibales.  Alfo  an
exhortacion  to  Chryftian  princes  to  fette  forwarde  Chryfles  religion.

C  The  contentes  of  the  fourth  booke. Fol.  104.  [/.  150.]

C  The  fourth  vyage  of  Colonus  the  Admirall  frome  Spayne  to  Hif-
paniola,  and  to  the  other  Ilandes  and  coaftes  of  the  firme  lande  :  Alfo  of
the  floryffhynge  Ilande  Guanaffa.

Of  feuen  kyndes  of  date  trees,  wylde  vynes,  and  Myrobalanes  :  Alfo  of
byrdes  and  foules.

Of  people  of  goodly  ftature  which  vfe  to  paynt  theyr  bodyes  :  And  of  the
fwyfte  courfe  of  the  fea  from  the  eaft  to  the  wefl.  Alfo  of  freffhe  water  in
the  fea.

Of  the  large  regions  of  Paria,  Os  Draconis,  and  Quiriquetana :  And  of
greate  Toi^toyfes  and  reedes.  Aifo  of  the  foure  fratefuU  Ilandes  cauled
Quatuor  Tempora,  and.  xii.  Ilandes  cauled  Limon.iios.

Of  fweete  fauours  and  holfome  ayer  :  And  of  the  region  Quicuri,  and  the
hauen  Cariai  or  Myrobalanus  :  Alfo  of  certeyne  ciuyle  people.

Of  trees  groynge  in  the  fea  after  a  flraunge  forte,  and  of  a  ftraunge  kynde
of  Moonkeys  which  inuade  men  and  feight  with  wylde  bores.

Of  the  greate  goulfe  of  Cerabaro  repleniffhed  with  many  fratefuU  Ilandes,
and  of  the  people  which  weare  cheynes  of  golde  made  of  ouches  wrought
to  the  fimilitude  of  dyuers  wylde  beafles  and  foules.

395

39^

The  contcntcs  of  tJie  decades.

Of  fyue  vyllages  wliofe  inhabitauntcs  gyue  Uicm  felucs  oiicly  to  gathcr-
ynge  of  golde,  and  are  payntcd,  vfyiigc  to  weare  gailandcs  of  Lyons  and
Tygers  clawes.  Alfo  of  fcuen  ryuers  in  all  the  which  is  founde  greatc
plentie  of  golde  :  And  where  the  plentic  of  golde  ccafeth.

Of  certeyne  people  which  payiit  thcyr  bodyes,  and  coucr  thcyr  priuie
members  with  flielles,  hauynge  alfo  plates  of  golde  hangynge  at  theyr  nofe-
thrylles.

Of  certeyne  woormes  which  beinge  engendered  in  the  feas  nerc  abowt
the  Equinoctiall,  eate  holes  in  fliyppes :  And  how  the  Admirals  fliyppes
were  deflroyde  by  them.

Howe  the  kyngc  of  Beragna  enterteyned  the  Lieuetenant  and  of  the
great  plentie  of  gold  in  the  ryuer  of  Duraba  and  in  al  the  regions  there
aboute  :  Alfo  in  rootes  of  trees  and  flones  and  in  maner  in  all  the  ryuers.

Howe  the  Lieuetcnaunt  and  his  coompany  wold  haue  erected  a  colonic
befyde  the  r}'uer  of  Beragua,  and  was  repulfed  by  th[e]inhabitauntes.

Howe  the  Admirall  fel  into  the  handes  of  the  barbarians  of  the  Ilande
of  Jamaica  where  he  lyued  miferably  the  fpace  of  tenne  mooncthes  :  And
by  what  chaunce  he  was  faued  and  came  to  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola.

Of  holfome  regions,  temperate  ayer,  and  continual  fpring  al  the  hole
j'eare  :  Alfo  of  certeyne  people  which  honour  golde  religioufly  durynge
theyr  golden  haruefl.

Of  the  mountaynes  of  Beragua  beinge  fiftie  myles  in  heyght  and  hygher
then  the  clowdes  :  Alfo  the  difcripcion  of  other  mountaynes  and  regions
there  about,  comparynge  the  fame  to  Italy.

Colonus  his  opinion  as  touchynge  the  fuppofed  contincnte,  and  ioynynge
of  the  north  and  fouth  Ocean.  Alfo  of  the  breadth  of  the  f;\yde  contincnte
or  firme  lande.

Of  the  regions  of  Vraba  and  Beragua  and  the  great  ryiier  Maragnonus
and  the  ryuer  of  Dabaiba  or  Sancti  lohannis  Alfo  of  certeyne  maryfflies
and  defolate  wayes,  and  of  dragons  and  Crocodiles  engendered  in  the  fame.

Of.  XX.  golden  ryuers  abowt  Dariena  and  of  certeyne  precious  ftones,
efpecially  a  diamunde  of  marueilous  byggenelTe  bought  in  the  prouince  of
Paria.

Of  the  heroical  factes  of  the  Spanyardes  and  howe  they  contemne  effemi-
nate pleafures.  Alfo  a  fimilitude  prouynge  greate  plentie  of  golde  and
precious  flones.

C

The  coiitaites  of  the  fyfth  hoohe. Fol.  113.  [/.  156.]

C  The  nauigation  of  Petrus  Arias  from  Spayne  to  Hifpaniola  and
Dariena,  and  of  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie.  Alfo  of  the  Ilandes  of  Madanino,
Guadalupea,  and  Galanta.

Of  the  fea  of  herbes  and  mountaynes  couered  with  fnow  :  Alfo  of  the
fvvyfte  courfe  of  the  fea  towarde  the  weft.

Of  the  ryuer  Gaira,  the  region  Caramairi,  and  the  porte  Carthago
and  Sancta  Martha  :  Alfo  of  Americus  Vefputius  and  his  expert  cunnynge
in  the  knowledge  of  the  carde,  compafle  and  quadrant.

Howe  the  Canibales  affayled  Petrus  Arias  with  his  hole  nauie,  and  fhot
of  theyr  venemous  arrowes  euen  in  the  fea.  Alfo .  of  theyr  houfes  and
houfholde  ftuffe.

Howe  Gonzalus  Ouiedus  founde  a  faphire  bygger  then  a  goofe  egge  :
Alfo  emerodes,  calcidonies,  iafpers,  and  amber  of  the  mountaynes.

Of  woddes  of  brafile  trees,  plentie  of  golde,  and  marchafites  of  metals
founde  in  the  regions  of  Caramairi,  Gaira,  and  Saturma.  Alfo  of  a  flraunge
kynde  of  marchaundies  exercifed  amonge  the  people  of  Zunu.

That  the  region  of  Caramairi  is  lyke  to  an  earthly  Paradife  :  And  of
the  frutefull  mountaynes,  and  pleafaunte  gardeynes  of  the  fame.

Of  many  goodly  countreys  made  defolate  by  the  fiercenes  of  the  Cani-
bales, and  of  dyuers  kyndcs  of  breade  made  of  rootes.  Alfo  of  the  maner
of  plantynge  the  roote  of  lucca,  whofe  iuife  is  deadely  poyfon  in  the  Ilandes,
and  without  hurte  in  the  continent  or  firme  lande.

Of  certeyne  golden  ryuers,  hartes,  wylde  bores,  foules,  godampine,
whyte  marble,  and  holfome  ayer.  Alfo  of  the  greate  ryuer  Maragnonus
defcendynge  from  the  mountaines  couered  with  fnowe,  cauled  Serra
Neuata.

356

Howe  Petrus  Arias  waflcd  certeyne  Ilandes  of  the  Canibales  :  And
howe  by  the  fwyfte  courfe  of  the  fea,  his  fliyppes  were  caried  in  one  nyght
fortie  leagues  beyond  th[e]cftimation  of  the  bcfte  pylottes.

C  The  coiiteiites  of  the  fyxte  hooke. Fol.  118.  [/.  161]

C  Of  fundry  opinions  why  the  fea  runneth  with  fo  fwyft  a  courfe  from
the  Eafle  to  the  weft  :  and  of  th.e  greate  goulfe  of  the  north  parte  of  the
firme  lande.

The  vyage  of  Sebaftian  Cabote  from  Englande  to  the  frofen  fea,  and
howe  being  repulfed  with  Ife  in  the  moonethc  of  luly,  he  fayled  farre  weft-
warde.

Of  people  apparelled  with  beaftes  fliynnes :  And  howe  beares  take  fyfthes
in  the  fea  and  eate  them.

Howe  Sebaftian  Cabote  after  that  he  had  difcouered  the  lande  of  Baccal-
laos  or  Baccallearum,  was  cauled  out  of  Englande  into  Spayne,  where  he
was  made  one  of  th[e]affiftaunce  of  the  counfayle  of  th[e]affayres  of  India,
and  of  his  fecond  viage

Of  the  Ilande  Fortis  :  And  howe  a  great  foule  as  bygge  as  a  ftorke
lyghted  in  the  gouernours  fliyppe.  Alfo  howe  he  arryued  at  Dariena  with
the  kynges  nauie.

Howe  Vafchus  reccaued  the  newe  gouemour  :  And  of  habitable  regions
vnder  the  Equinoctial.

Howe  Petrus  Aries  the  newe  gouemour  diftributed  his  army  to  conquere
the  fouth  regions  ryche  in  golde,  and  to  erecte  newe  colonies  in  the  fame.

Of  the  ryche  golde  mynes  of  Dabaiba,  and  of  th[e]expedition  ageynft  the
kynge  of  that  region.

Of  the  Violent  courfe  of  the  fea  from  the  eaft  to  the  weft :  And  of  the
difficulte  faylynge  ageynft  the  fame.

Of  the  peftiferous  and  vnwholfome  ayer  of  Sancta  Maria  Antigua  in
Dariena :  and  howe  the  Spanyardes  were  of  neceffitie  inforced  to  plant
theyr  fyrft  colonic  and  habitation  there.

The  caufe  of  the  varietie  of  regions  lyinge  all  vnder  one  degree  or  paral-
elle,  and  by  what  meanes  the  fonne  beames  are  caufe  of  feruent  heate.

Of  toades  and  flees  engendered  of  droppes  of  water,  and  of  a  houfe  fet
on  fyre  with  lyghtnynge.

Of  a  dogge  deuoured  of  a  Crocodyle  [  Tanquam  canis  e  Nilo\  and  of  the
venemus  bytynge  of  great  battes.  Alfo  of  Lions  and  Tygers  and  other
wylde  beaftes.

Howe  in  thefe  regions  all  foure  footed  beaftes  growe  to  a  bygger  quantitie
then  they  whiche  were  of  the  fyrfte  broode.  Alfo  of  certeyne  trees  of  whofe
planckes  if  fhips  be  made,  they  are  fafe  frome  the  woormes  cauled  Broma
or  Byffas.

Of  a  tre  whofe  wod  is  prefent  poyfon  yf  it  be  only  borne  about :  And  of
an  herbe  that  is  a  preferuatiue  ageinft  the  fame.

Of  the  ryche  Ilandes  of  the  fouth  fea,  and  of  certeyne  expeditions  ageynft
the  Canibales.

C  Tlie  conientes  of  the.  vii.  booke. Fol.  124.  [/.  165.]-

C  The  particular  defcription  of  the  Ilande  of  Hifpaniola,  and  of  the
ryche  Ilande  cauled  Margaritea  Diues  lyinge  in  the  South  fea.  Alfo  of
the  greate  abundaunce  of  bigge  pearles  founde  in  the  fame.

Howe  the  autoure  compareth  Hifpaniola  to  the  earthely  Paradyfe  :  And
howe  it  farre  exce'leth  Italy  in  fertilitie  and  temperate  ayre.

Of  the  fyrfte  inhabitours  of  Hifpaniola  and  of  the  Ilandes  of  Canarie.

Howe  the  inhabitauntes  of  Hifpaniola  in  theyr  fonges  and  rhymes  had
certeyne  prophefies  that  appareled  men  fhulde  coome  to  theyr  contrey  and
brynge  them  into  feruitude  :  And  of  theyr  familiaritie  with  fpirites.  Alfo
howe  thofe  fpirites  haue  no  more  appered  to  them  fence  they  were
baptifed.

Of  theyr  experteneffe  in  fwymmynge  :  And  of  tiieyr  delycate  ferpentes,
byrdes,  foules,  and  popingiais.

1

The  content es  of  the  decades.

397

Of  the  forme  and  fituation  of  Ilifpaniola  nere  the  Equinoctiall  :  And
howe  collide  is  in  fum  place  thereof  accidentall  and  not  by  the  fituation  of
the  region.

Of  oxen  and  fwyne  of  exccadinge  bygncffe  :  And  of  eares  of  wheate  as
bygge  as  a  mans  arme  in  the  braun.  Alfo  howe  the  fwyne  are  fedde  with
myrobalanes.  &c.

Of  plenty  of  golde,  brafyle,  maflix,  gofTampyne,  Electrum  &c. :  And  of
th[e]incommodities  of  intemperate  regions.

Ofdyuers  languages  in  the  llande:  And  howe  the  prouynces  are  dc-
uided  into  regions.

Howe  Andreas  Moralis  fayled  into  a  daungerous  and  darke  cane  within
the  rocke  of  a  mountayne  :  And  of  hole  ryuers  deuoured  of  fuch  caues.
Alfo  of  the  conflycte  of  the  waters.

Of  a  flandynge  pole  in  the  tope  of  an  hygh  mountayne :  And  howe
feme  and  bramble  buffhes  growe  only  in  coulde  regyons.

C  The  coiitcntcs  of  the.  viii.  boole. Fol.  130.  [/.  170.]

C  Of  a  greate  lake  or  flandyng  poole  of  fowre  and  falte  water,  and  of  the
fea  fyfflies  in  the  fame  in  the  myddelande  of  the  llande.  Alfo  of  deuour-
ynge  fyffhes  cauled  Tiburoni.

Of  the  ryuers  fauling  into  the  lakes,  and  of.  CC.  [200]  fpringes  in  the  fpace
of  a  furlonge.

A  meruelous  hyflory  of  a  kynge  (Iryken  dumme  and  lame  by  a  miracle  :
And  of  the  Indian  language.

Howe  fuche  as  are  drowned  in  the  lake,  are  neuer  cafte  vp  ageyne  :
And  of  the  llande  Guarizacca  in  the  myddefle  of  the  flandynge  lake.  Alfo
of  a  lake  of  frefthe  vater,  and  an  other  of  falte  and  freffhe  water.

Of  a  large  pla  vne  of  two  hundreth  myles  in  length  :  And  an  other  of  a
hundrethe  and  twentie.

Of  the  meruelous  fyfrtie  or  monfter  of  the  fea,  cauled  Maniti  or  Matum,
fedde  with  mans  hande  :  and  howe  Ihe  caryeth  men  ouer  the  lake.

Of  the  mountaynes,  vales,  hylles,  playnes,  and  ryuers  of  Hifpaniola  :
And  howe  golde  is  founde  in  all  mountaines  and  golde  and  fyfdies  in  all
ryuers.

Of  falte  bayes,  and  howe  the  ryuers  haue  theyr  increafe  from  the  caues
of  the  mountaynes. Alfo  howe  there  is  no  hurtefulle  beafte  in  the  llande.

Of  the  pleafures  of  Hilpaniola  :  And  of  the  region  of  Cotohi  well
inhabyted  and  fituate  in  a  playne  in  the  toppes  of  mountaynes  reachynge
to  the  clowdes.

Of  moderate  coulde  in  the  mountaynes,  and  of  feme  of  merueylous
bygnefle.

Howe  pure  and  maffie  golde  is  founde  in  the  region  of  Cotoy  or  Cotohy :
And  that  the  veyne  of  golde  is  a  lyuynge  tree.  Alfo  of  the  rootes,
braunches,  and  floures  of  the  fame,  and  howe  certeyne  caues  are  fufteyned
with  pyllers  of  golde.

What  golde  is  broughte  yearely  from  Hifpaniola  into  Spayne  :  And  of
the  falte  of  the  mountaynes,  beinge  as  hard  as  ftones  and  cleare  as  cryflall.
Alfo  fprynges  of  falte,  frefh  and  fower  water.

Of  certeyne  wylde  men  lyuynge  in  caues  and  dennes  without  any  certeyne
language :  And  of  theyr  meruylous  fwiftnefie  a  foote.

Of  pytche  of  the  rocke  and  twoo  kyndes  of  trees  :  And  of  the  leafe  of  a
tree  vfed  in  the  (leede  of  paper.  Alfo  howe  th[e]inhabitantes  tliinke
that  the  Chriftians  can  make  thofe  leaues  fpeake  and  difclofe  all  fecreates.

Of  a  flronge  coloure  made  of  the  iufe  of  a  certeyn  apple :  And  of  the
herbe  whofe  fmoke  is  poyfon.

The  co7itentes  of  the.  ix.  booke. Fol.  136.  [/.  175.]

Of  the  kyndes  of  frutes  wherwith  th[e]inhabitauntes  of  Hifpaniola  lyued
fyrfle,  and  howe  they  came  to  the  knowelege  of  lucca.  Alfo  howe  Ceres
fyi-fl  found  wheate  and  barley  in  Egypte.

\\  1  y  theyr  kinges  are  cauled  by  dyuers  names,  and  by  what  names  they
fahite  the  kynges  cliyldren  when  they  are  bome.

Howe  they  make  theyr  teftamente?,  and  howe  certeyne  of  the  kynges
wyues  and  concubines  are  buryed  with  them.

Of  the  variable  motions  of  the  elementes  m  Hifpaniola  :  And  where  it
rayneth  but  lyttle,  and  where  much.

Of  the  colonies  and  vyllages  that  the  Spanyardes  haue  buylded  in
Hifpaniola  :  and  of  the  other  Hands  about  the  fame

Of  a  fprynge  which  rannyng  vnder  the  fea  from  Hifpaniola,  breaketh
furth  in  the  Hand  of  Arethufa  :  Alfo  of  habitable  regions  vnder  the  Equi-
noctial, and  of  the  ryche  golde  mynes  of  the  llande  of  Cuba.

Of  the  gumme  cauled  AnimcB  Album  :  And  of  the  Canibale[s].  Alfo
whereby  it  was  thought  that  there  were  Ilandes  of  women.

Of  hony  founde  in  trees  and  rockes :  And  of  the  generation  of  greate
Tortoyfes  and  of  theyr  egges.

C  The  contefiies  of  the.  x.  booke. Fol.  140.  [/.  178.]

C  Of  the  expedition  ageynfle  the  kyngc  of  the  llande  Dites  in  the  fouth
fea  :  And  howe  after  foure  conflictes,  fubmyttynge  hym  felfe,  he  gaue  our
men  a  hundreth  and  ten  pounde  weyght  of  greate  pearles.  Alfo  howe
he  agreed  to  pay  yearely  a  hundreth  pounde  weyght  of  pearles  for  a
tribute.

Howe  axes  and  hatchettes  are  more  efleemed  then  golde,  or  perles:
And  of  greate  plentie  of  hartes  and  cunnyes.  Alfo  howe  the  kynge  of
Dites  and  his  famelie  were  baptifed.

Of  perles  of  great  pryce  :  And  howe  Paule  the  byflhop  of  Rome  bowght
a  perle  for  four  and  fortie  thoufand  ducades.

Dyuers  opinions  of  the  generation  of  perles  :  And  of  a  hundreth  pearles
founde  in  one  fhel  fyfflie. Alfo  of  the  byrth  of  pearles.

Of  the  regions  of  the  Eafte  fyde  of  the  goulfe  of  Vraba  :  And  of  the
originall  of  the  Canibales.

Of  certeyne  circumcifed  people  which  haue  the  knowledge  of  letters  and
vfe  bookes:  And  what  chaunced  of  the  capitaynes  which  Petrus  Arias
fente  furth  dyuers  wayes.  Alfo  howe  John  Solyfius  was  flayne  of  the
Canibales,  and  of  theyr  fierceneffe.

Howe  lohn  Pontius  was  repulfcd  of  the  Canibales,  and  of  the  lewde
behauour  of  lohn  Aiora.

Of  the  variable  fortune  of  Gonfalus  Badaiocius  :  And  howe  after  he
hadde  gathered  greate  ryches  of  golde,  he  had  the  ouerthrowe,  and  was
fpoyled  of  all.  Of  the  golden  region  of  Coiba  Dites :  And  howe  theyr
flaues  are  marked  in  the  fac  e.

Of  the  Ilandes  of  the  fouth  fea  :  And  of  the  regions  frome  whenfe  the
Portugales  fetche  their  fpices.

Of  a  ftraunge  kynde  of  fowlynge  :  and  of  the  trees  that  beare  gourdes.

Of  the  later  opinions  as  touchynge  the  fwyfte  courfe  of  the  Ocean
towarde  the  wefte  :  and  of  the  continente  or  firme  lande.  Alfo  of  the
vyage  from  the  newe  landes  to  Spayne.

Of  the  golde  mynes  of  Dariena :  and  the  maner  of  gatherjTige  of  golde  in
the  fame:  Alfo  of  the  dropfie  of  couetoufnes  which  is  not  fatiffyed  with  ryches.

C  For  the  content  es  of  the  booke  of  the  Hands  lately  found  reade  the  niargente

notes  of  the  fame.

iTitXX^.

*n

.o

9S  [  TIic  End  of  t lie  Original  Edition.]

C T  n  []i\  I  N  T  E  R  P  R  E  T  O  V  R  S E  X  C  V  S  E.

I  haue  not  in  wrytynge  byn  very  curious
To  auoyde  the  fcornes  of  Rhinoceros  nofe,
Or  the  fyled  iudgement  of  feuere  Ariflarchiis
Not  fearynge  thereby  any  tliynge  to  lofe,
But  haue  thought  it  futhcient  to  be  open  and  playne
Not  lookynge  for  other  commoditie  or  gayne.

I  am  not  eloquent  I  knowe  it  ryght  well.
If  I  be  not  barbarous  I  defyre  no  more,
I  haue  not  for  euery  woorde  aflced  counfell
Of  eloquent  Eliot  or  fyr  Thomas  Moore.
Take  it  therfore  as  I  haue  intended,
The  fautes  with  fauour  may  foone  be  amended.

The  poet  Homere  for  all  his  eloquence,
Lacked  not  Zoilus  to  be  his  fo[e]  :
Wherfore  I  conclude  this  for  a  trewe  fentence.
That  no  man  lacketh  fuo  bargello  :
For  as  no  beafle  lyueth  without  woorme  or  flye,
So  no  man  lacketh  his  priuie  enemie.

Rumpatur  Zoilus.

C  Fautes  efcaped  in  tJie  pryntynge. F.  the  leafe. L.  the  line. B.  the  hacke  fyde  of  the  leafc.

[Thefe  corrections  have  all  been  embodied  in  the  Text.]

C  JJmprnntrtJ  at  HontJon  in  ^^nulC0  Cfjurrl)-

|)nilie  nt  tlje  sitjiie  of  \\)t  iJiiftlc

^P  iKpfJartie  ^^U0.

[In  other  copies.]

partjc  at  tijc  sitine  of  tfje  Bell  I)»
Hoijcrte  Con.

Anno. Domini. M. D. LV.

I

398

Abarien

Index.

Atiei

399

Ind

e  X

of

Personal  nzmcs,,  and  names  of  places,  chiefly  outside  Europe.

':  The  Contents  Pages  at  vii.-x.,  i  2,  45,  and  391-398  have  not  been  indexed.

Abarien  island,  255

Abdua  river,  315

Abenamachie,  King,  1 19, I20,  121

Abibeiba,  King,  120,  121

Abila  mountaynes,  236

Abraham,  51,  52

Abraiba,  120,  121

Abrayme  Prouince,  226

Aburema  river,  135,  152

Acatan,  34

Acateba,  153

Achaia,  176

Achas  town,  325

Achemenides,  135,  154

Achilles,  5

Achor,  Vale  of,  50

Ada  village,  231

Acuna,  The  Licentate,  272

Adam,  229,  338,  340

A.dams,  Clement,  xxxviii.,  289

Adda  river,  363,  364

Aden,  13,  24,  267,  269

Aden,  King  of,  13

Adialbenicus,  Emperor,  176

Adipson,  285

Adriane,  Pope,  309

Adriatike  sea, 133,  155,  318

y^Eneas  Siluius,  8,  41,  50,  347

Africa,  xix.,  xxi.,  xxix  ,  9,  13,  35,
52,  56,  126,  129,  139,  236,  245,
248,  250,  261,  262,  273,  285,
295, 298, 337, 338, 340, 346,

373. 384, 385. 387-
Africa,  Gulf  of,  270,  374.
Afrijken,  xxxi.
Agathyrsi,  91

Agermannia,  Dukedome  of,  305
Agisimba,  Region  of,  41
Agnaneo  island,  135
Agnes,  Vincentius,  105,  128,  129
Agricola,  Georgius, xli., xliv., 7,

366
Agrippa,  Cornelius,  xliv.
Agus,  Anti  pater,  319
Ahumada,  Peter  de,  346
Aiaguitin  river,  153
Ajora,  Gonsalus,  181
Ajora,  Johannes,  162,  l8l
Alamino  Antonie,  187,  188
Alaminus,  192,  193,  194,  195
Alba  Russia,  291

Albertus,  Magnus,  7,  9,  10,  41,  364
Alcala,  63

Alcantara,  165
Alcaraz,  Antonie  of,  272
Alcayr  \Cairo\  City  of,  13,  14,  63,
131.  153.  172,  186,267,285,  3J7,

315.  374

Alcazaua,  Simon  of,  272

Alday,  James,  xix.,  xx.

Alexander,  xxix.,  xxxiii.,  xliv.,  5,
32,  50,  74,  129,  176,  201,  241,
248,  273,  274,  285,  310,  315,  325,

339,  385
Alexandria,  City  of,  no, 153,  217,

267,  283,  351
Alexandryne,  Patriarch  of,  xxx.
Alfonsus  de  Ponte,  157
Alia,  359,  368
Allago,  xxviii.
Allen,  Richard,  xiii.
Almanzor,  271,  272
Alinayne  \Germany\, Emperour  of

xxx.
Almaynes, 56, 97, 1 16, 292, 320,

328
Alonso,  341
Alonso,  Don,  273,  341
Alonsus,  Petrus,  36
Alpha,  Poynt,  75,  76
Alpheus  river,  134, 176
Alphonsus,  40,  389
Alphonsus,  Petrus,  94,  96
Alvarado,  Peter,  187
Alverado,  Spatense,  192
Amacaiz,  City  of,  374
Amaiauna,  Cave  of,  99
Amaltheum  sea,  289
Amaquei,  Region  of,  169
Amari,  Lake  of,  284
Amaxobii,  301
Ambalao  island,  260
Ambon  island,  260
America, xi., xiii., xviii., xxi.,

xxiii.,  XXV., xxvi., xxviii., xxx.,

xxxii., xxxiv. , xl., 3,  8, 32,  35,

43, 61, 205, 243,  281,  335,  343,

353.  371,  385
Americus,  xxi.
Amerigo  Vespucci,  xxv.,  37,  38,  39,

127,  134,  157,  275,  277,  279
Anacaona,  Queen,  85,  176
Anacauchoa, Beuchius, 83,  84,  85,

86,  176
Anata,  King,  182,  183
Anbon  island,  344

Ancisus,  loS,  109,  IIO,  1 13,  1 14,
115,  116,  118,  119,  123,  124,
125,  126,  137

Ancyra,  31 1

Andalusia, xiii., 1 30, 220, 225,

339
Andalusia,  Noua,  130
Andreas,  Moralis,  131.
Andrewe,  Lawrence,  xxvi.
Andronicus,  xlviii.
Anes,  John,  377,  378
Angleria, 43, 63, 65, lS5, 207,

246,  299
Anghiera,  xxxvii.
Annez,  Vincentius, 126, 12S, 129,

Anniuici,  Region  of,  169

Antei,  285

Anteus,  149

Anthiochyen,  xxxi.

Anthiocus,  8

Anthropophagi, 23, 29, 41, 65,

38s
Antiglia  island,  38
Antilia  island,  66
Antiqua,  Island  of,  177
Antonie,  Master,  28S
Antony  di  Mendoza,  2S7
Anunctus,  191
Apianus,  10

Apollo,  10,  102,  172,  295,  29S
Apnu,  Region  of,  322
Apsa,  363

Aprutium,  Bishop  of,  309
Aquanil,  Province  of,  187
Aquillaris,  Hieronimus,  192,  193
Arabia, xxviii.,  xxxi.,  8,  9,  13,  14,

20, 56, 129, 153,  156,  161,  180,

235,  284,  2S5,  286,  309,  385
Arabia,  Gulf  of,  2S4,  286,  11%  347
Arabia,  Sea  of,  309
Arabo,  168

Aragon,  King  of,  xxx.  51
Aragonie, Cardinal  of,  64, 73,  79.

82,  87,  90,  04,  96,  103,  133
Aramana,  Region  of,  l6S
Arambec,  xiv.
Arbolantius,  141
Archimedes,  xlvii.,  xlviii.
Arcimboldus,  127
Ardagni,  Kingdom  of,  3^4
.A.rethusa,  134,  176
Arenalis,  88

.\reuado,  232

Argilla,  City  of,  374

Ariane,  245

Arias,  Helizabetha  Boadilla,  1 27

Arias, Petrus,  61, 126, 127, i^j,

137, 142, 156, 157, 158, 162,

165, 178, 179, 181, 198, 19;,

214
Arimathia,  Joseph  of,  56
Arion,  171
Aristarchus,  398
Aristocleon,  41
Aristotle, xliii., xliv., 9, 10, 67,

142, 179, 278, 293, 313, 33i,

339,  340,  386
Arkey,  Laurence,  xii.
Armenes,  xxx.
.\rmeneten,  xxxi.
Armenia,  xxvii.,  xxviii., xxx.,  xxxii.,

xxxiv.,  176,  311,  314,  329
Armenicus,  Emperour,  176
Armennyten,  xxxi.
Arnold,  R.,  xxv.,  xxvi.
Arnheim,  xxv.
Arottinbergh,  368
Arra,  Castle,  381
Arsina,  xxix.

Arsinoe,  City  of,  284,  285
Artawischa  river,  323
Artawische,  323
Artemisia,  49,  128
Arucetto  island,  260
Arzina  Ford,  xxxix.
Asasi,  XX.
Ascanius,  63,  64
As  :anius  Sphorcia  [;'.<?.,  Sfor7.a],  65,

68, 103,  127
Ascham,  Rog'  r,  xl.
Ascon  City,  37  +
Asia,  the  less,  7
Asoph,  324,  325
Asopus,  142

Asseuedo,  Antonie  de,  272
Assyryen,  xxxi.
Astesia,  363

Astrachan,  308,  314.  325,  326,  329
Astur,  Oiietenses,  135
Asturia,  54,  116
Asyen,  xxx.
Atahaliba,  King,  346
Atamea  village,  152
Ath,  xliii.
Ariel,  Region  of,  169

400

Atlantike

Index,

Campechium

Atlantike  island,  129,  337,  338,  340

Atlas  mountains,  129

Atlas,  the  greater,  385

Attabeira,  99

Attibuni,  Region  of,  169

Attibunicus  river,  73,  16S,  171

Attila,  326

Auanzo  mountains,  36S

Augusta,  City  of,  2S6

Augustinus  de  Ceratta,  54

Augustus,  Emperour,  8, 283, 306,369

Auila  Alphons[o],  187,  192

Auis,  273

Auleta,  King,  2S3

Aurea  Anus,  323,  324

Aurea  Chersonesus,  32,  40,  75,  247,

313.  344

Ausonia,  167

Austria,  Archduke  of,  289

Auxendia,  xxviii.

Auxerre,  xliv.

Ay  Ay  islands,  69,  130

Ayqueroa,  Region  of,  169

Azamor,  City  of,  374

Azania,  Region  of,  3S5

Azafi,  374

Azeuedo,  274

Azgar,  374

Azion  Gaber,  7

Azores, Islands  of, 203, 204, 219,

339,  347,  348
Azotus,  57
Azoum  river,  314
Azuam  village,  176
Azzuei,  Region  of,  169

Babbareo  lake,  170
Babel,  Tower  of,  xxxii.

Babell,  290

Babilon, 14,  56,  57,  63,  172,  187,
241,  266,  284,  285,  297,  307,  315

Babilon,  Soltane  of,  153,  172

Babilonii,  The,  385

Babilonyon,  xxxii.

Bacanor,  265

Baccallaos, Land  of,  xix.,  55,  i^',
162,  195,  242,  287,  288,  299,  344,

345,  347
Bacchian  island,  259,  260
Baccia,  126
Bachau  sea,  291
Bacon,  Lord,  xxii.
Bacon,  Roger,  xliv.,  xlvii.,  xlviii.
Bactria,  308
Badaiocius,  Gasper,  165
Badaiocius,  Gonzalus,  181,  182,  183
Badaioz,  272,  273
Badajos,  xiii.
Bafrida,  291

Baguanimaho,  Region  of,  168
Bahaboni,  166
Bahuan  river,  172
Baian,  17 1
Baia  Natiuitatis,  129
Bainoa,  168,  169,  170,  172,  173,  176
Baiohaigua,  Region  of,  169
Bajasetes,  Oltomanus,  6,  311
Balassia,  Region  of,  264
Balboa, Vaschus, 149, 162, 178,

338
Baieares  islands,  301
Ballard,  William,  xiii.
Baltheum  sea,  299,  312,  331
Baluastro,  346
Banda  island,  22
Bandan,  xxix. ,  260,  269
Banderana,  xxix.
Bangalla,  King,  21
Bangella,  City  of,  21
Baptiste,  Elisius,  85,  99
Bapliste,  Master,  xliii.

Barack,  Soltan,  329

Barbai  island,  256

Barbaregaf,  City  of,  374

Barbarossa,  Emperour,  347

Barbata  island,  177

Barbary, xix.,  xx  ,  xxviii.,  xxxviii.,

237.  374,  380,  384
Barbessa,  Adoardo,  258
Barcha,  374
Barnarde  of  Mesa,  130
Marramedabas,  87
Barrientos,  272
Barthema [i.e., J''arthema], Ludi

vico,  xlviii.
Bartholomeus  Colonus,  31,  82,  134,

153,  154,  340
Barthus  castle,  33 1
Barutti,  xii.
Basilides,  41

Basilius,  289,  308,  309,  311,  314,
316,  317,  319,  321,  324,  328,  329

Basilius, -Andreas,  316

Basilius,  Demetrius,  316

Basilius,  George,  316

Basilius,  John,  316,  319

Basilius,  Magnus,  290,  291

Basilius,  Symeon,  316

Basing,  xxxix.

Baskird,  293

Basle,  xxxvii.

Bastard,  Count  L.  de,  xliv.

Bastarne,  31 1

Bastimento  island,  235

Bath,  Earl  of,  xix.

Bauruco,  Region  of,  169

Bazantium,  Emperours  of,  314

Beata  port,  107,  I13,  177,  213

Beaton,  Cardinal,  xxxviii.

Bebeid,  Chan,  329

Beda  island,  35

Beit  island,  374

Belchia,  309

Belozeria,  309

Benaia  island,  260

Beneu  island,  260

Bengala,  Province  of,  261,  264,  267,
268,  344

Benin,  270,  376

Beragua,  Region  of,  107,  108,  HI,
112,  113,  114,  115,  128,  130,132,

134,  135,  136,  149,  150,  151,153.

154,  155,  163,  165,  211,  214,218,
219,  233,  234

Berenice,  City  of,  284

Beres  river,  323

Berges,  City  of,  331

Beringocius,  Vannucius,  xlvi.

Berma,  344

Bermeio,  Sea  of,  338,  339,  346,  347

Bermuda  island,  233

Berosus,  xlviii.,  346

Beryn,  John,  383

Beselchel,  49

Besermani,  The,  327

Besson,  xlvii.

Betanchor,  65,  166

Betis  river,  127, 157

Beuchius  Anacauchoa,  King,  83,  84,

85,  86,  176
Beyrout,  xii.

Bezerra,  Franciscus,  165,  181,  183
Bian,  Sancti,  Johannis  gulf,  194
Biddle,  Mr,  xv.
Bieloiefero,  321
Bimini,  345
Binthaitel,  100
Bion,  41
Biraen,  344
Biringuccio  Vann  iccio,  xxxvii,  353,

.356
Biion,  ^Llster,  xviii.

Biscaine,  274

Bisinagar,  City  of,  15

Bisineghe,  277

Bithynia,  290,  31 1

Bitsagitsch,  xxviii.

Bizantium,  307

Bizantium,  Emperour  of,  314

Bizerta  port,  374

Blasius,  331

Blemines, The,  385

Blesconia,  City  of,  289

Blondus,  348

Boadilla,  Governour  of,  105,  127

Bo.adilla,  Helisabetha,  127

Bodenham,  Roger,  xviii.

Boheme,  King  of,  xxx.,  312

Bohol  island,  256,  258

Boilus,  79

Boiuca  island,  135

Boium,  gatti  river,  109,  132

Bolgaria,  309

Bolschega  mountains,  323

Boml)assa,  xxviii.

Bonauentura,  105

Bonauista  island,  87,  272

Bonanum,  City  of,  84

Boneface,  56

Bonham,  W.,  xxxvii.

Bononiama,  King,  145

Bononie,  .'Vristotles  of,  313

Bononie, Galealius Butrigarius of,

106,  127,  283,  285
Boriostomea  river,  98
Boriquena  island,  45,  345,  346
Boristhene river, 289, 309, 31 1,

312,  314,  316,  319
Bornei  islands,  22,  23
Bosphorus,  The,  59
Bona  port,  374
Boubige,  xlv.

Bourne,  Mr  H.  R.  Fox,  xvi,
Bowyer,  Sir  William,  xiii.
Boyuca  island,  345
Braalin  island,  260
Brabant,  xliii.
Brasil, xv., xvi., xvii., 250, 251,

253, 273, 285, 288, 375, 38s,

386
Brewer,  Rev.  J.  S.,  M.A.,  xiii.
Bridger,  Mr  C,  xlviii.
Brocardus,  xlvi.
Brooke,  John,  xviii.
Bryaces,  49
Buchebuea,  King,  146
Buchema  island,  30
Buda,  326
Budia  island,  260
Budomel,  384
Buen  Abrigo  Point,  273
Buena  Vista,  272
Bugia,  Region  of,  374
Buiaici,  Region  of,  169
Bullen,  9
Buona Speranza, 261, 262, 338,

374,  385
Bur  island,  344

Burges,  Bishop  of,  126,  127,  134
Burgonie,  Duke  of,  208
Burichena  island,  45,  70,  104,  130,

159,  173,  176
Burleigh,  Lord,  xxxvii.
Burnei  island,  258
Burney  island,  272
Burrough,  Stephen,  xxxviii.
Buru  island,  260
Buthuan  island,  255,  259
Buthuan,  King,  255
Butler,  John,  xlv.
Butricarius Galealius, 106, 127,

283,  285 _
Buls,  Sir  William,  xviii.,  xix.

Butts,  Thomas,  xviii.,  xix.
Byzantium,  xi.

Cabedus,  Johannes,  130,  157

Cabot,  Loaisa,  274

Cabot,  Sebastian,  xiii.,  xv.,  xix.,
xxxviii.,  xxxix,  xl.,  xlvi.,  xlvii.,
6,  55,  61,  i6i,  162,  195,  272,
274,  283,  288,  289,  299,  335,
343,  345,  348,  350,  386

Cabouerde  [i.e.,  Ca/'e- Verde],  74,
87,  97,  129,  134,  272,  277,  385

Cacacubana,  Region  of,  169

Cacausu,  City  of,  24

(-acedus,  John,  198

Caccieus,  72,  89,  128,  223

Caccicus  Caunaboa,' 72,  79,  80,  81,

Cacique  Chiman,  225

Cadamustus,  Aloisius,  127,  270,  280

Cades,  86

Cadissen,  329

Cadona,  Duke  of,  173

Caghaian  island,  258

Cahaymi,  Region  of,  169

Cahini  island,  168

Cahonas  island,  166,  172

Caiabi, Province  of,  168, 172,  173,

176
Caiacoa,  Province  of,  168,  173
Caiguam  mountain,  171
Caigui,  City  of,  26,  171
Caihabo,  Province  of,  168,  169,  170
Cailon  island,  344
Caiouana,  Valley  of,  170
Cairo,  374
Cairus,  307
Caizcimu, Province of, 168, 169,

170,  173
Cakeado,  381

Calaghan  island,  255,  256,  259
Calantan,  260

Calauera,  Barnardino  de,  108
Cales,  86,  87,  93,  94,  97,  i8i
Calese  island,  286
Calicium,  38
Calicut,  7,  8,  13,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,

21, 24, 32, 39, 256, 261,  263,

264,  265,  266,  267,  268,  269,  344,

374,  385
Cahcut,  King  of,  14,  17,  18,  19,  21
Calidonia,  143,  177
Caliz,  346,  347
Callienten,  xxix.
Calligula,  59
Calpe  mountains,  236
Cals,  68,  73

Caluacam,  Region  of,  188,  1S9
Calunezfcho,  Region  of,  322
Calzadilla,  341
Camaie,  Region  of,  169
Cambaia,  8, 13, 14, 20,  261,  267,

269
Cambaia,  King  of,  40
Cambalu  [i.e.,  FeHtt],  City  of,  24,

25.  287,  307,  326
Cambie,  259

Camemorus,  Region  of,  183
Camen  mountains,  323
Camen Bolschoi mountains, 322,

323
Camenckh,  322
Cameni,  323

Camenipoias  mountains,  323
Camigna,  Don  Christopher  of,  130
Camomorus,  Region  of,  98,  132
Camoteia  island,  166
Campaa,  Region  of,  260
Campbell,  Dr  M.  F.  A.  G.,  xxv.,

xxvi.
Campechium,  Province  of,  187,  188

Campegius

Index.

Corus

401

Campegius,  Cardinal,  310
Campion,  Gasper,  xvii.,  xviii.
Camul,  Province  of,  27
Canabocoa,  Region  of,  169,  172
Canada,  287

Canary  islands,  xiii.,  xxviii.,  28,
30,  32,  36,  38,  40,  41,  65,  66,
68,  87,  97,  150,  157,  166,  177,
181, 199, 210, 245, 250, 277,

339,  374,  3.75,  380,  3^9

Cananor,  xxviii.

Cananor,  King  of,  15

Cancell,  Luys,  346

Canchietans,  The,  95

Canchietes,  Region  of,  36,  95

Cane,  271

Canghu  island,  256

Canglu,  City  of,  24

Canibals,  Islands  of  the,  30,  66,  68,
78,  160,  162,  177,  180

Cannafistula  island,  119

Cano,  272

Canonor,  Kingdom  of, 14, 15,  20,
261,  268

Canthan,  City  of,  260

Cape  Blanke,  380

Cape  Bona  Speranza,  129,  279,  285,

286,  348,  350
Cape  Breton,  xiv.,  xviii.
Cape  Cattigara,  253
Cape  Corea,  382
Cape  de  Bas,  xiv.
Cape  de  Buona  Speranzo,  374
Cape  de  Monte,  381
Cape  de  las  Palmas,  381,  382
Cape  de  tres  Puntas,  381
Cape  de  Sper,  xiv.
Cape  Trepoyntes,  381,  382,  383
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  129,  385
Capelan,  City  of,  21,  344
Capha,  324
Caphi  island,  260
Capira,  Region  of,  234
Capling,  William,  xii.
Capo  Desiderate,  252
Capo  Verde  Islands,  32,  35,  36,  65,
74,  87,  129,  203,  204,  250,  261,
262, 272, 273, 274, 277, 280,

338,  373,  382,  385.  387
Capronus,  86,  91,  92
Capucar,  265

Caput  BonjE  Sperantioe,  129,  385
Caput  Sancti  Augustini, 129, 134,

181,  183
Caput  Veride  islands, 32,  35^ 36,

74,  87,  129,  385
Caracaracoles,  100
Caramairi, Region of, 106, 107,

109, 134, 144, 157, 158, 159,

160,  162
Caramatexius,  King,  171
Carandra,  Gulf  of,  285
Caraqueira  island,  177
Carcham,  Province  of,  26
Cardano, Girolamo, xxxviii., 158,

161,207,  217,  250,  294,  307
Carenas,  191,
Careta, 108, 115, 116, 117, 121,

137,  164,  182
Caria,  King  of,  49,  128
Caria,  Queen  of,  49,  128
Cariai,  Region  of,  151,  152,  156
Caribana,  107,  119,  180,  183
Caribdis,  304
Caribes  islands,  68
Carles,  Captain,  xlviii.
Carnica,  314,  368
Caromoram,  25
Carter,  Master,  xviii.
Carthage,  176,  340,  374
Carthage,  Ilanniball  of,  139

Carthagena, 134, 157, 160, 214,

215,  226
Carthaginis  Portus,  106
Carthago, 106,  107, 108,  109,  1 13,

134,  157,  162,  165
Cartier,  Jaqucs,  287,  345
Carucueria,  69,  157,  159
Casa  Francisus,  xlvii.
Casan,King  of,  326,  328
Caspia,  8,  169,  170,  173
Caspian sea, 170, 287, 291, 308,

309, 311, 314, 321, 326, 329,

346
Cassam,  City  of,  291,311,  314,  319,

325,  326,  327,  328,  329
Cassima  river,  323
Cassius  mountain,  285
Castaglione,  Baltassar,  9
Castaneda,  272
Castella,  Aurea,  130
Castella  de  Mina.  382
Castella  Vetus,  68
Castile,  King  of,  xxx.,  37,  201,  203,

340
Castile,  Queen  of,  201
Castile,  Isabel  of,  273.  274,  341
Castile, Ferdinando  of,  51, 52,  65,
73,  127,  131,  201,  208,  209,  211,
229, 236, 273, 341, 342, 343,

345

Castlen,  Edward,  xli.

Castor,  250

Castoreum  sea,  303

Castromow,  331

Catalonia,  173

Catarapa,  237

Catena  Mundi  mountains,  286,  324

Cathay  \i.e.,  Chi)id],  xiii.,  xxxviii.,
xxxix.,  xl.,  xli.,  8,  22,  24,  25,  26,
59,  98,  261,  283,  284,  285,  286,
287,  288,  289,  290,  291,  292,
293,  294,  308,  310,  312,  313,
321,  322,  324,  325,  326,  327,
328, 329, 330, 331, 333, 339,

344,  345,  363

Cathay  Cham  [^i.c,  Khav],  of,  xxi.,
21,  24,  25,  26,  27,  60,  286,  287,
289,  322,  324,  326,  329,  330

Cathay,  Emperour  of,  25,  60

Catighan  island,  256

Catherine,  Queen,  51,  71,  274

Catherine,  Saint,  84

Cato,  122

Cattigara,  262

Cattigara,  Cape,  253

Caucasus  mountains,  18

Cauchieta,  95,  98

Caunaboa, Cacicus,  72,  79,  80,  81,

85
Caunana,  99
Caunoa,  Region  of,  169
Cauta,  99

Cautan,  City  of,  344
Caya  river,  272,  273,  274
Caya  bridge,  273,  274
Cayrus  [i.e.,  Cairo\  City  of,  14,  186
Cazacubuna  mountains,  172
Cazibaxagua,  99

Cecil,  Sir  W.,  xxii.,  xxxviii.,  xliii.
Ceden,  xxx.
Ceilam  island,  344
Celaruri  island,  260
Celer,  Quintus  Metellus,  347
Cemaccus, King, no, 119, 121,

122,  198
Cemobal,  196
Cenalo  island,  255.
Cenegalcs,  155
Central  America,  xi.
Centurione,  Paulo,  287, 308,  309,

142,

110

Cerabaro,  Region  of,  112,  135,152,
154,  155,  156,  163,  182

Ceratta [i.e., ZaraUe] Augustinus
fie,  54

Cerda,  341

Ceres,  175

Ceri.lgonia,  309

Cesar,  59.  305

Cesariensis,  374

Chabot,  C,  xiv.

Chacouam  island,  260

Chagre  river,  234,  235

Cham,  346

Chamailaba,  Prince,  129

Chan  Cublai,  330

Charles  V.,  xiii.,  xiv.

Charles,  King,  63

Charles  IX.,  xiv.,  xlvii.

Charybdis,  163,  330

Chaucer,  xxxvii.

Chaunceler,  Richard,  xvii.,  xxxviii.,
xxxix.,  xl.,  59,  285,  289,  326,
333,  386
Chedsey,  Dr,  xxxix.
Cheke,  Sir  John,  xliii.,  xliv.
Cheregatus,  Francis,  191,  309
Chethai  lake,  287
Cheru,  King,  182
Chiacones,  King,  128
Chiapes,  King, 139,  140,  141,

143,  145,  178
Chiauaccha,  Prince,  129
Chiman,  Cacique,  225
China,  20,  260,  261,  267,  269,  272,

339,  344,  347
China,  Gulf  of,  260
Chionsus,  King,  146
Chiouia  mountain,  319
Chirara,  152
Chippit  island,  258
Chitaza,  152
Chorogoski  Nosz,  322
Chrisostomus,  290,  291
Christiernus,  304,  309
Christophori  Sancti,  105
Ciamba,  130,  150
Cibana, Region  of,  73,  74,  79,  80,

81,  82,  S3,  84,  85,  105,  16S,  171,

172
Cicero, Marcus  Tullus, xliv., 49,

132,  283,  284
Ciclopes,  154
Cicylian,  King,  xxx.
Ciguaios,  86,  91
C  iguana,  91

Cilapulapu,  Prince,  285
Cilicia,  7,  8

Cimbrica  Chersonesus,  311,  314
Cimbulon,  King,  258
Cinchital,  27
Cingaporla,  260
Cingulus  Mundi  mountain,  324
Ciniana,  Region  of,  36
Cipanga,  Region  of,  73,  80,  Si,  82,

.167,  253,  339,  340,  343
Citrachan,  30S,  314
Ciuola,  287
Claudius,  54
Clement VI., Pope, 308,

347
Cleodii,  The,  385
Cleopatra,  141,  142,  166,  283
Cleopatrida,  City  of,  284
Clesma  river,  314
Cloelia,  71

Cochin,  King  of,  xxix.
Cochinus,  183
Cockeram,  Martin,  xvii.
Codego  island,  106,  215
Coi  Cathay  island,  343
Coiba  Ditcs,  182

Coiba,  Gulf  of, 108, 115, 116,  164,

182
Coiba,  King  of,  loS,  115,  116,  117,

121,  137,  164,  182
Colchis,  Region  of, 51, 135, 262,

310
Cole,  Master,  xix.
Colen,  xxix.
Coligny,  Admiral,  xiv.
Collao,  City  of,  343
Collocutea,  Region  of,  183
Colluacana island, 189, 191, 195,

196
Colmenaris, Rodericus, 113, 114,
115,  116,  119,  120,  122,123,  126,
157,  183
Colmogora,  Region  of,  291.  293.  312
Colmogor,  City  of,  286,  322.
Colmum,  City  of,  290
Cologna,  291

Colonia  Agrippina,  City  of,  289
I  Colum,  xxix
Columbus  (or  Colonus), Bartholo-

meus,  31,  82,  134,  153.  154.  340
Columbus (or Colonus), Christo-
phorus,  28,  29,  35,  38,  41,  65,  66,
67,  69.  79.  80,  87,  94,  96,  98,  99,
103,  105,  106,  108,  III,  112,  113,
115,  118,  127,  128,  129,132,  134,
135,  150,  151,  153,  154,155,  157,
163,  177,  184,  191,  192,  202,  209,
236,  272,  288,  337,  339,  340,  341,
342,  346
Columbus (or Colonus), Diegus,
115,  118,  122,  127,  177,  184,  240
Columbus  (or  Colonus), Fernando,

272
Columna,  313

Commendator,  King,  123,  124,  125
Comi,  187

Comogra,  116,  162,  179
Comogrus, King, 116, 117, 118,
120,  122,  137,  146,  147,  148,  162
Com  modus,  Emperour,  284
Comoiayxa,  172
Compostele,  100
Conception, Tower  of,  80,  82,  84,

86,  92,  93,  105,  130
Conde,  Prince  de,  xliv.,  x!v.
Condiuia,  310
Conigangui,  26
Connulaha,  City  of,  260
Consiantina,  374
Constantine,  290,  316
Conotantinople,  Bishop  of,  xxxi.
Constantinople,  Emperour  of,  316
Constantinople,  Patriarche  of,  .\xx.,
290,  291

270

309,

!I5

Conte  Rimondo

Cooper,  xxxvii.

Coperdalia,  305

Copto,  284

Coquera,  King,  140

Corala,  271

Corales,  iSo

Corduba 162,  181,  1S6,  192

Corea,  382

Corelia,  292,  321

Corichotum,  102

Corimucol,  20

Corinthus,  City  of,  80,  100]

Coro  island,  215

Coronado,  2S7

Coronati,  238

Cortes,  xiii.,  xl.,  xiv.,  xlvi.,  274

Cortesreales,  Gasper,  344

Cortesreales  islands,  344

Cortesius  Fernando, 191,  192,  195,

198,  238,  342
Corsali,  Andreas  de,  275,  279
Corus,  382

2  G

402

Corytho

Index.

Frobisher

Corytho,  1 66

Cossa, Johannes De  la, 126, 134,

156 "

Cossa,  107

Cossin  river,  323

Cossum,  329

Cotam,  26

Cotochiis,  King,  146.

Cotohi,  172,  173

Cotoy,  169

Cozumella  island,  40,  187,  18S,  189,
191,  192,  193

Cozumellaus,  King,  iSS

Cracouia,  314

Crayford,  7

Creta,  166,  172,  316

Cretenses,  xlviii.,  172

Cresus,  42,  146

Croke,  38 1

Crystente,  xxxiv.

Cuadalchiber,  210.

Cuba  island,  6,  31,  40,  66,  73,  74,
75.  76,  77,  79>  90,  104,  105,  123,
125,  128,  130,  150,  154,  161,  163,
167,  173,  176,  177,  184,  186,  188,
189,  190,  191,  192,  193,  195,  198,
210,  231,  233.  239,  241,  262,  299,

338,  344,  346
Cuba,  Governour  of,  191
Cubagua  island,  213,  214
Cubana,  169
Cubigar  river,  153
Cuchibachoa, Region of, 98, 108,

113,  128,  134
Cuella  de  Segovia,  xv.
Cueua,  219,  237
Cuguibacoa,  165
Cugureo,  340
Cuhabo,  168,  169
Cuiriza,  146
Culchas,  141

Culata  point,  119,  I2I,  122
Cumana,  89,  94, 96, 98, 128, 156,

165,  213,  214
Cupoton  King,  187
Curiana,  89,  94,  95,  96,  98,  128
Cursius  Quintus,  241
Curtana,  36,  95
Cuti  river,  226
Cuzibet  island,  23
Cybaho,  169
Cyrenaua,  374
Cyrrha,  100
Czar  Kythaiski,  324
Czilma  river,  322
Czircho  river,  322
Czriremissa,  293

Dabaiba, King, 1 19, 121, 122,

163
Dabaiba  river,  132,  155,  183,  199
Dabiague,  169
Dacicus,  176
Dahabon,  169
Dahabonici,  Region  of,  169
Dahatio,  168
Daiaguo  mountains,  173
Daiguani  mountains,  171
Dalekarle  river,  305
Dalion,  41

Dalmacyen  King,  xxx.
Dalmatia,  290,  364
Damascus,  56,  311
Damian,  310
Daniianus  a  Goes,  5',  5^
Damiata,  City  of,  284
Danadim  river,  323
Danowe  river,  131
Danaus,  xlviii.
Daneo  port,  284
Dardanus,  166

Dariena,  114, nS, "6, 118, 119,
121,  123,  125,  126,  130,  131,  134,
135,  >36,  137,  '43,  145,  148,  149,
156,  157,  158,  162,  163,  164,  165,
178,  179,  J8o,  182,  183,  184,  185,
186,  192,  198,  199,  207,  218,220,
226,  236,  23S,  262
Darien  river,  no,  132,  191
Darius,  King,  59,  284
Darnasseri,  20
Darthmouth,  379
Daubeny,  Oliver,  xviii.
Dauid,  xlvii.,  51,  349,  3S5
Dauid,  Master,  330
Dausian,  344
Davis,  xlvi.
Decan,  264
Dechan,  14
Dedalus,  55
Deerfeorth,  Cornelius,  xxxviii.

De  las  Perlas  island,  54

De  la  Sal  island,  272

De  la  Flore  island,  382

Delagartos  river,  132

Delapuente,  Franciscus,  183

Deli  mountains,  268

De  los  Azores,  203,  204,  339

Delphis,  296,  298

Demahus  river,  168

Demetriowe,  City  of,  321

Demetrius,  59,  292, 308, 309,  310,

3",  313,  325,  329,  331
Demogorgon,  xlvi.,  161

Denham,  Henry,  xiii

Denmark,  King  of,  xxx.,  299,  304,

308,  309,  3 1 9,. 33 1,  332
Deptford,  xxxviii.
Desborch,  John  of,  xxv.,  xxvi.
Desiderata  island,  177,  210
Desideratus,  Portus,  188.
Destam  island,  192
Desseosa,  Francis,  377
Deza,  130

Diaguo,  Region  of,  169
Diaz,  Johannas,  105,  135,  165
Didacus,  75,  77,  78,  79
Dido,  166

Diego,  Henriques,  378
Diego,  Nicuesa,  106,  107,  108,  109,
III,  112,  113,  114,  115,  116,  126,

128,135,137,145,150,151,153,156

Dieguan  sea,  266
Diegus  Marques,  157
Diegus  Mendez,  154
Diegus  Ordassus,  192
Diegus  Valasquen,  186
Dikilappones,  Region  of,  331
Diodorus,  xlviii.,  351
Diodorus  Sicitlus,  55,  3^9
Dites,  165,  178,  183
Dium,  City  of,  13
Doesborch  or  Doesburg,  xxv.
Doesburgh,  Jan  Van,  xxv.,  xxvi.

Dolateranus,  10

Dominica  island,  30, 68,  70, 105,
130,  150,  157,  163,  174,  210

Dominikes,  Tower,  Seynt,  82,  84

Domitian,  284

Don  Alonso,  341

Don  Eurique,  341

Don,  John  Captain,  382

Don,  John,  of  Austria,  xii.

Don  Lewes,  378

Don  Luys,  341

Don  Pascval  de  Gayangos,  xiv.

Don  Phylippe,  346

Donco,  324,  325

Donetz  Scwerski,  325

Doria,  Juanette,  xvii.

Doria,  Pedro,  xvii.

Dorpe,  Roeland  van  der,  xxv.,  xxvi

Douer,  379

Dragonis,  Os,  88,  95  96,  98,  loS

Dranus  river,  318

Drauer,  Master,  xviii.

Dromon,  .\chillis,  310

Dront,  331

Dryades,  83,  lOi

Duas  Arbores,  176

Dubna  River,  321

Duchala,  374

Dudley,  John,  xxxix.

Duna  River,  312

Dunenburg,  312

Duraba,  135,  153

Dwran,  Thomas,  272

Durriba,  153

Dyonisius,  King,  xliv.

East  India,  xii.,  8,  9,  32,  79,  103,
133.  234,  235,  247,  262,  279,  283,

285,  339,  344

East  Indian  Sea,  8

Easte  Sea,  8,  9,  24,  i6l

Ebro  river,  363

Ebetere,  153

Eccampi  island,  186

Edel  river,  292,  314

Eden,  Alban,  xlviii.

Eden,  Richard,  xii.,  xiii.,  xiv.,  xv.,
XX.,  xxii.,  xxxvii.,  xxxviii.,  xxxix.,
xl.,  xii.,  xiii.,  xliii.,  xliv.,  xiv.,
xlvi.,  xlvii.,  xlviii.,  I,  3,  6,  7,  13,

43,  49,  270

Edward  VI.,  xii.,xix.,  xxxviii,  1,333

Egypt,  xi.,  XXX.,  xlviii.,  8,  41,  51,
75,  no,  131,  132,  141,  153,  155,
172,  175,  193,  217,  283,  284,  293,
296,  307,  308,  315,  351,  369,  374

Egj'pt,  King  of,  284

Egypt,  Pyramides  of,  49

Egypt,  Soltane  of,  31 1,  369

Egyptian  sea,  199

Elabath,  374

Elbes,  272

Elcauz,  374

Elder.  John,  xxxix.

Elgazaet,  Region  of,  374

Elias,  xlvii.

Elide,  City  of,  176

Eliot,  398

Eliot,  Hugh,  xvi. ,  xxi.

Eliot,  Master,  xiv.

Elis,  City  of,  134

Elizabeth, Queen, xii., xvii., xl.,
xliv.,  xiv.,  xlvi.,  65,  201,  209,288,

342
Elzaba,  8
Emanuel,  King,  xxiii.,  xxvi.,  xxvii.,

37,  39,  40
Embigar,  153
Eneas,  135,  166
England,  King  of,  xxx.,  xxxvi.
Engronlande,  Region  of,  312,  324,

332.

Eningia,  298,  306

Ephesyn,  xxxi.

Epileguanita,  102

Erancanqui,  344

Erasmus,  57,  58

Eratosthenes,  41,  349

Eridanus,  133

Errifi,  374

Eiythra,  King,  xlviii.

Esaras,  49

Eson,  Colchis  of,  135

Esope,  377

Esquegua,  23c,  234

Estremadura,  274

Ethiopia,  xxx.,  8,  13,  14,  39,41,  51,
88,  132,  139,  169,  175,  248,  250,
284,  339,  351,  369,  374,  384,  385

Ethiopia,  King  of,  374

Eiiangelista  island,  77

Eude  island,  260

Eudoxus,  286,  346

Eue,  229,  338

Euergetcs,  Tomoleus,  346

Eugenius,  Pope,  290

Euphrates  river,  41,  51,  308

Eurique,  Don,  341

Euripus  sea,  304

Eusebius,  xlviii.

Euxinus sea, 155,  292,  298,  310,

314
Exer,  266
Ezzab,  374

Faber,  Jacobus,  246

Faber,  John,  289

Facics,  Combusta  King,  135

Faial  island,  347

Faro,  Strait  of,  208

Fartalio,  xlvi.

h'aubourg,  xiv.

Feminie  the  Great,  xxxiii.

Ferdinando  Cortese,  238,  342

Ferdinando  de  Soto,  346

Fernandina  islands,  186,  187, 190,

191,  195
Fernando  de  Vega,  96
Fernandes  Francicus,  186,  187,  192
Fernandus,  Gonzalus,  50,  158,  160,

184,  185,  207,  208,  241
Fernelius,  Johannes,  xlvii.
Ferraria,  xlvi.

Ferrea  island,  65,  66,  68,  157,  l8l
Ferrieres,  Francois  de,  xliv.
Ferrieres,  Jean  de,  xliv.
Ferrum  island,  41
Fes,  374

Fessa,  City  of,  374
Feti,  180
Ficinus,  Marcilius,  xiii.,  338

Fin,  Jean  de  la,  xiv.

Finland,  229,  306,  312,  319

Finlappia,  330

Finmarchia,  8,  347

Fiorauanti,  Leonardo,  xlviii.

Fladimer,  City  of,  289

Flauius,  348

Flaunders,  Earl  of,  208

Fletcher^  John,  xix.

Florida,  32,  55,  191,  288,  342,  345,

346

Floures  \i.e.,  Flores\  island,  214

Flumen  Amazonum,  160

Flumen,  S.  Johannis,  155

Fogeda,  Alphonsus,  106,  107,  108,
109,  no,  ni,  n3,  n4,  n5,  123,
126,  128,  134,  145,  165,  180,  183

Fonseca,  Johannes,  126

Forrest,  George,  xvii.

Fortis  island,  107, 108,  109, 134,  162

Fortisuentura,  xx.,  65,  157,  380

Fortunate  islands,  28,  37,  40,  166,

374
Forum  Julii,  318
Foxe,  John,  xxxix.
Fracta  laucea  island,  41
France,  King  of,  xxx.,  xxxii.,  xxxvL
France,  Lieutenaunt  of,  347
Francis,  St.,  130
Francisco,  376
Francisco  de  Siquera,  378
Francisco,  Lopez  de  Gomara,  xxxviii

271,  337
Frederike,  King,  73,  102,  103
Fretum  Herculeum  sea,  161
Fretum  trium  fratrum,  9
Friseland,  303
Friole,  368
Frobisher,  Sir  Martin,  xiii.

Fronowo

Index.

Ipsicratea

403

Fronowo,  312

Gothland,  Bishop  of,  302

Guzman,  Peter  Nunez  de,  345

Hircanian  sea,  169,  170,  287,  291,

Fryer,  Ferdinando,  341

Gothus  Olanus,  347

Guzula,  374

308,  310,  314

Fugiii,  26

Graesse,  xliii.

Hispana  island,  6,  28, 29,  30,  31,

Fuluia,  122

Grafton,  xii.

Habacoa,  169

35.  36,  40

Furatado,  Captain,  121

Grafton,  Richard,  xiii.

Ilabacucke,  57

Hispaniola island,  xv.,  6,  35,  40,

Futeraca,  180

Granada,  36,  52,  63,  67,  73, 103,

Ilabi'sia,  Region  of,  385

45,  54,  66,  67,  68,  69,  70,  73.  74,

no,  133,  191,  201,  202,  273,  274,

I  labech.  Region  of,  385

75,  78,  79,  80,  82,  84,  85,  87,  89,

Cades  islands,  28,  30,  34,  65,  68,  73,

340,  341

Hafnia,  City  of,  331

90, 96. 98, 99, 100, 104, 105,

75i  94.  97.  150,  181,  316

Grancanaria  islands  [the  Canariesi,

Hagueigabon  sea,  170

106,  107,  108,  113,  114,  115,  116,

Gaira  river,  113,  132,  157,  158,  159

41,  65,  157,  210,  380

Haiba  river,  168

118,  119,  122,  123,  125,  126,  127,

Galana  island,  68,  157

Grandis  river,  131,  132,  199

Haina,  223

128,  130,  131,  135,  137.  138.  140.

Galanta  island,  68,  157,  177,  210

Gratia  Dei,  1 1 2,  182

Haitho,  24,  60

144,  145,  149,  150,  153,  154,  159,

Galeatius,  Butrigarius,  106,  127,285

Gray,  Richard,  xvii.

Haiti  island,  166,  167,  168,  338

163,  164,  165,  106,  167,  172,  173,

Galian  island,  260

Great  John,  385

Ilakluyt, Richard, xii., xiii.,  xiv..

176,  177,  178,  184,  186,  191,  192,

Galitia,  10,  96,  311

Great  Khan,  xv.

XV.,  xvi.,  xvii., xviii., xix., xx.,

193.  199.  209,  210,  215,  219,  228,

Gambra,  280,  374,  384

Great  Sophie,  326

xxxviii.,  xl.,  xlviii.

230,  233,  235,  238,  239,  241,  262,

Ganielaro  island,  374

Grecia,  54,  56,  155,  262, 296,  302,

Ilalicarnassea,  128

299.  346

Ganges  river,  9,  32,  75,  98,  133,  155,

319

Halle,  R.,  xii.,  xiii.

Hojedus,  72,  79,  81

363 .

Greenland,  299

Ham,  Kingdom  of,  344

Holstrocke,  William,  xvii.

Gangeticus,  Gulf  of,  39

Gregorie,  112

Hamadriades,  74,  loi

Holtrop,  Mr,  xxv.

Ganphasantes,  385

Gregorye  L,  56

Hamburg,  300

Holy  Nose,  330

Garcia  Nunnio,  272

Gresham,  John,  xiii.

Hannibal, 139

Homer,  5,  41,  346,  398

Gardiner,  Bishop,  xL,  xlv.

Gresham,  William,  xii.

Hanon,  338

Honorucco,  169

Garet,  374

Gretzium,  318

Haraia,  Region  of,  96

Horace,  58

Garsia  de  Padilla,  130

Grisalva,  John,  187,  188,  189,  190,

Hardie,  Master,  xviii.

Hore,  Master,  xviii.

Gasper,  Cortesreales,  344

192,  194

Harsol,  City  of,  300

Hossuen  island,  304

Gastaldus,  Jacobus,  291,  345

Gronland,  299,  300,  303

Hathathiei,  171

Hozama,  168,  170

Gates,  Sir  T.,  xxxix.

(Jrosapha,  King  of,  40

Hawkins, Sir John, xvi., xvii..

Huban  island,  344

Gaza,  57

Groueland,  8

xlviii.

Hungary,  King  of,  208,  312

Gazatia,  385

Grounzwyk,  xxxii.

Hawkins,  William,  xvi.,  xvii.

Huhabo,  168,  169,  172

Gedion,  51

Grubes,  Master,  xiv.

Hayhay  island,  159

Huinaghan  island,  255

Gelders,  Land  of,  xxvi.

Grustina,  Castle  of,  323

Hazchora,  374

Huitsarch,  299

Geniinus,  Thomas,  xxxvii. ,  xxxviii.,

Grustintzi,  323

Hazlitt,  W.  C,  xxvi.

Humos  point,  273

xl.

Grutland,  245,  300,  347

Hazoa,  Region  of,  168

Humphrey,  Laurence,  xl.

Gemma  Phr)'sius,  55,  384,  385,  389

Guacana  island,  345

Hazua  mountains,  169,  176

Hyperborean  sea,  288

Geneen,  xxviii.

Guacarapita,  99

Hea,  Kingdom  of,  374

Hyperboreos  mountains, xli., 293,

Genua,  City  of, 28, 6$, 155,  206,

Guaccaa  lake,  170

Heben,  284

313,  314,  324

310,  340

Guaccaiarima,  168,  169,  173,  176

Hebrewes,  Captain  of  the,  316

Hyperbories,  142,  155,  350

Genoa,  xvii.,  xxx.

Guaccanarillus,  King,  66,  70,  71,72,

Helga  mountain,  300

Hyram,  49

Georgianes,  xxx.,  xxxi.

168

Helisabeth,  73,  127,  129,  167

Germanicus,  Emperour,  176

Guadalupea  island,  68,  69,  157,  159,

Helisabeth  a  Boadilla,  127

Iberia,  53,  54

Ger[r]ard,  Sir  William,  xix.,  xl.,  xli.

177,  181,  210,  345

Heliseus,  149

Icthiophagi,  301,  385

Gesnerus,  326

Guadalqueuir  river,  127, 157, 210,

Hellespontus  sea,  xlviii.,  59,  155

Ida  mountains,  172

Getulia,  384

220,  238,  250

Hely,  John,  xii.

Iguamu,  171

Giaua  island,  23,  260,  269,  2S6

Guadiana  river,  273

Henrique,  Don,  273

I  guanama,  173

Giauntes  island,  38

Guahabba,  169

Henriques,  Diego,  378

Ulirium,  306

Gibeth  island,  34

Guahague,  Region  of,  169

Henry,  King,  127,  162,  340,  345

Ilmer  Lake,  319

Gibilterra,  233,  236,  262

Guaiagua,  Region  of,  168

Henry  IV.,  xxxix.

Inacus,  Jopez  Mendocius,  103

Gilolo  island,  259,  272,  344

Guamaonocon,  99

Henry  V.,  xxxix.

India,  xxi.,  xxix., xxx.,  xxxii.,  9,

Gilona  island,  34

Guamaretus,  King,  102

Henry  VH.,  xxi.,  288

10,  13,  14,  15,  16,  18,  19,  24,  25,

Ginera  island,  41

Guanabba  island,  85

Henry  VHL,  xii.,  xiii  ,  xiv.,  xvi  ,

26,  27,  28,  29,  32,  40,  50,  52,  65,

Cines  Navarro,  xv.

Guanahaini  island,  75

xvii.,  xviii.,  xix.,xx.,  xxi.,  xxxvii.,

67.  75.  79.  90,  98.  103,  120,  127,

Gioghi  island,  260

Guanahattabenechina,  176

xlv.,  6

155,  i8o,  198,  203,  204,  209,  216,

Giouan  Dulsaraz,  250

Guanama,  Region  of,  168

Henry,  King  of  France,  xlvii.

219,  227,  233,  239,  261,  263,  264,

Girardus  Mapheus,  348

Guanapan  island,  190

Herbert,  W.,  xxxvii.,  xxxix.

266,  269,  272,  2S3,  284,  2S5,  286,

Giunti,  L.  A.,  xiv.

Guanassa  island,  105,  150,  163

Hercinia,  313

287,  288,  308,  309,  313,  329,  339,

Goa,  City  of,  40,  261

Guanguan  island,  190

Hercules, 50, 105, 138, 149, 156,

346,  347,  363,  384

Godfrey,  John,  xvii.

Guaniba,  Region  of,  170

236,  285

India,  Governour  of,  274

Golden  Castile,  211,  214,  218,  219,

Guaninicabo  river,  170

Hercules  Pillars,  86,  135,  236,  316,

India niajor, xxi., .xxviii., xxxi..

233.  236

Guannabo,  Region  of,  170

374

xxxii.,  261

Golelta,  Port,  374

Guariagua,  Region  of,  173

Hercyiua,  310

India  minor,  xxi.

Goliath,  xlvii.,  149

Guaricco,  Region  of,  169

Herodotus,  248,  339,  346,  350

Indian  sea,  9,  39,  308,  347,  385

Gomera,  Francisco  Lopez  de,  xxxvii.

Guarionexius,  King,  79,  80,  82,  84,

Heroum,  City  of,  284

Indies, 52,  53,  54, 162, 213,  220,

xxxix.,  271,  335...337.  342,  350

86, 87, 91, 92, 93, 102, 168,

Hesiod,  xxxviii.,  xli.

221,  225,  226,  227,  228,  229,  230,

Gomera  island,  xiii.,  65,  66, 157,

171

Hesperides  islands,  32, 74,  87,  97,

232,  235,  238,  246,  271,  272,  273,

210,  380

Guarionexius,  Vale  of,  171

167,  338

274.  ij7.  338.  340,  341.  345.  348,

Gomes,  Steuen,  242,  272

Guarizacca  island,  170

Heua  river,  319

350.  355

Gonsalues,  Peter,  378

Guaturo,  216,  226

Hibusson  island,  255

Indus  river,  13.  30S,  309

Gonson,  Richard,  xvii.

Guaturo,  King,  226

Hiebra,  135,  153,  154

Infortunate  islands,  28, 33,  37,  41,

Gonson,  William,  xvii.

Guaurabo,  Lake,  171

Hieron,  King,  xlvii.

253.

Gonzales,  Don  Pero,  341

Guinea,  xii.,  xvi., xix.,  xxviii.,  xxxix.

Hieronimus  Aquillaris,  192,  193

Innocientus,  Pope,  xxxi.

Gonzalo  Fernandez  de  Oviedo  y  Val-

xl.,  250,  270,  273,  297,  348,371,

Hieronimus  Caidanus,  307

Inspruck,  359,  368

des,  xiv.,  XV.,  158,  205,  241,  242

373.  374,  375.  376,  377,  378,  379,

Hieronimus  Fracastor,  285

Insula  crusis,  30,  69

Gonzalus  Badaiocius,  181,  182,  183

380,  381,  382,383.384,385.3^6,

Hierusalem,  7,  8,  49,  51,  56,  57,  82,

Insula,  S.  Johannis,  70

Gorecius,  Leonhardus,  xxxix.

387,  388

100, 384, 385

Insulin  Latronum,  254

Gorgodes,  Meducias  island,  97

Guise,  Duke  of,  xliii.,  xlv.

Hierusalem,  King  of,  82,  208

Insulx  verides,  39

Gorgonas  island,  338

Gunson,  William,  xii.

Hierusalem,  Temple  of,  xlvii.

Insulas  Sancti  Barnardi,  162

Goriialanus,  72

Guserath,  266

Higinius,  346

Inuagana  island,  34

Gothia,  298,  306

Gutschyn,  King  cf,  xxix.

Higuei,  168

lonicum  sea,  191

Gothicus,  Emperour,  176

Guzerat,  Gulf  of,  14

Higuel,  346

Ionium,  163

Gothland,  9,  286,  295,  299,  306,  347

Guzman,  Enrique  of,  341

Hircania  Sylua,  292

Ipsicratea,  12S

404

Irtische

I)ldcx.

Margarita

Irtische  river,  323

Irus,  42

Isabella,  City  of,  74,  79,  So,  S2,  84,

85,  86
Isabella  islaml,  73,  167
Isabella,  Lady,  341
Isaias,  52,  56,  57
Ismael  the  Sophi,  311
Isocrates,  346
Isodorus,  Bishop,  290
Isopes,  53
Israeli,  51,  52,  56
Israeli,  King  of,  xxxiv.
Isseria,  309
Ister  river,  98,  131
Istoma  Georgius,  330,  331
Ity  island,  38

Jaccha,  168

Jacchi,  Region  of,  169

Jache  river,  168

Jachem  river,  73

Jaciga  river,  168

Jacob,  XXX.

Jacobi,  Sancti,  97

Jacobus  Gastaldus,  345

Jafet,  346

Jagohaiucho,  Region  of,  169

Jaia,  100,  163

Jaick  river,  326,  329

Jainagua,  Lake,  170

Jaioso,  Region  of,  374

Jamaica  island,  31,  75,  78,  150,  154,
177.. 193,  210,  241

Jamaizi,  Region  of,  169

James,  St.,  Lsland  of,  97

James,  St. ,  Tower  of,  84

James  the  elder,  10

Jamgoma,  Region  of,  260

Janua,  155

Janus,  155

Japhet,  155

Jaques  Cartier,  345

Jaroslavia,  309

Jaroslaw,  Castle  of,  324

Jason,  51,  262

Jausa  river,  313

Java  island,  23,  269,  344

Jaxartes  river,  311

Jean  de  Ferrieres,  xliv.

Jemptia,  305

Jenkenson,  Anthony,  xviii.

Jenkynson,  Master,  xliii.

Jenuen,  xxx.

Jerieho,  Priests  of,  xlvii.

Jerom,  Castle  of,  323

Jerusalem, xxi.,  xxxi.,  7,  8,  49,  51,

56-7,  82,  100,  166,  374,  384-5
Jerusalem,  Patriarche  of,  xxxv.
Job,  U,  349

Jog^>  14

Johan,  Duke,  289,  293

Johanna  island, 28,  29,  66,  70,  74,

75,  104,  241
Johannes,  Cursius,  106
Johannes,  Diaz,  105
John,  King,  65,  129,  273,  274
John,  Lake  of,  325
John  of  Desborough,  xxv.,  xxxvi.
John, Pope, xxiii., xxvi., xxvii.,

xxx.,  xxxii.,  xxxvi.
John,  Queen,  273
John  the  Evangelist,  10
Jonas,  XXV.,  338
Joppa,  I  Si

Joseph  of  Arimathea,  56
Josejihus,  xlviii.,  S,  384,  385
Josuah,  316
Jouanaboina,  100
Joubert,  Francoise,  xlv.
Jovius,  Paulus,  292,  331

Joy,  Master,  xviii,

Juan,  182

Juanaga,  Region  of,  234

Juba,  'King,  347

Jucatana  island  [/.<•.,  the peiiitisula  of

yiicataii\,  40,  186,  1 88,  189,  191,

192,  193.  238
Juda,  Princes  of,  56
Judde,  Sir  Andrew,  383
Judea,  7,  18,  57
Jug  river,  286,  312.  322
Juga  river,  293,  312
Jugaria,  322,  326
Jugge,  John,  xlvi,
Jugge,  Richard,  xxxix.,  xlvi.,  398
Jugoria,  309
Juharici,  326
Juhgary,  The,  326
Juhra,  293,  322,  326
Julius,  Pope,  309
Julyan  Samano,  346
Junna  river,  73,  168,  172
Jura,  116
Jureche,  152
Jurham,  292
Jwanowosero,  Lake  of,  325

Kaienska  Senila,  Region  of,  330

Kama,  Region  of,  326

Kaman  river,  325,  329

Katharine,  Queen,  65

Kele  river,  xxxvii.

Kerry,  John,  xix.

Khan,  Great,  xv,

Kingsley,  Rev.  Canon,  xvi.

Kitai,  Lake,  323

Kitaisko,  Lake,  323

Kithay,  Lake,  324

Kohl,  Mr  J.  G.,  xv.

Kuliuo  river,  322

Kurbski,  Simeon  Pheodorowice,  324

Kyui,  20

La  Desseada  island,  210

La  Ferte,  xlv.

La  Mina,  382

La  Spagnuola,  210

Labrador, xiii.,  xv.,  287,  344,  345,

347
Lachroma  river,  321
Lacossa,  Johannes  de,  107
Lactantius,  10,  11,  142
Lacus,  Albus,  291
Lacus,  Cronicus,  289
Ladoga,  Lake,  319
Lagartos  river,  1 1 1
Lagoma  island,  260
Laletania,  173
Lamas,  155

Lambert,  Francis,  xviii.,  xix.
Lambert,  Nicolas,  376,  377
Lamer,  xlv.
Lampaloda  island,  374
Lancelotus  island,  65,  157
Lancerota,  xx.
Landinus,  279
Landman,  Daud,  xix.
Langanas,  304
Lantchidol  sea,  261
Laon,  xliv.
Lapponia, Region  of, 8, 291,  299,

301,  302,  305,  347
Lares,  176
Lasiesia,  363
Latcrane,  309
Latium,  66,  166,  167
Lathyro  King,  286
Laurence,  xlvii,,  xlviii.
Lazaro,  Archipelago  di  San,  251
r>azarus.  King,  187,  i88
Lech,  King  of  the  Polons,  318

Ledisma,  Johannes,  144

Ledyl  river,  291

Legion,  201

Legion,  King  of,  203

Leigh,  Doctor,  xvi.

Lemures,  85

Leo,  Bishoji  of  Rome,  64,  106,  137,

287,  308,  309
Leochares,  49
Leon,  342

Leon,  John  Ponce  of,  345,  346
Leonhardus  Gorccius,  xxxix.
Lepanto,  xii.
Lepin  Castle,  323
Lesbos,  69
Levante,  The,  xii.,  xiii.,  xvii.,  xviii.,

xix.,  233
Leviathan  sea,  50
I  ewes,  Don,  378
Libane,  1 10
Liberus, Sigisnnindus, 298, 312,

318
Libia,  8,  54,  56,  70,  81, 166, 177,

374,  384
Libicum,  163
Libra,  xiii.
Ligurian  sea,  297
Lima,  338

Limonares  island,  15 1
Limoso  island,  374
Lincoln,  Bishop  of,  xl.,  xlv.
Lisbon, City  of, 16, 39, 267, 277,

.279,. 341
Lithunia,  Duke  of,  318
Lituania,  Realme  of,  286,  291,  292,

311,  314,  318,  326
Liuie,  132

Liuonia, 287, 291, 306, 30S,  311,

312,  319,  331
Lock,  Sir  William,  xiii.
Locke,  Michael,  xix.
Lodge,  Thomas,  xl.

Lodovike, 73, 79, 82,  90,  94,  96,

103,  133
Longon,  260
I-op,  City  of,  26
Lopes,  Diego,  272,  273
Lopez Francisco, 288, 335, 342,

350
Lordo,  287

Losoth  island,  304

Louat  river,  319

Lozon  island,  260

Lucane,  310

Lucomorya  mountains,  323,  324

Ludovico Barthema (i.e.,  Vartheina],

xlviii.
Luft,  Hans,  xxv.
Lugo,  Alphonsus,  66
Luigo,  252
Lumatola  island,  260
Lumbardie,  306,  340
Lupus  Sosa,  199
Lusheburne [i.e., Lisbon], xxvii.,

xxviii.,  xxix.,  277,  309
Luther,  xxvi.
I^uttrel,  Sir  John,  xix.
Luxanus,  74
Luys  of  S.  Angell,  341
Luys,  Cancell,  3/6
Luys,  Don,  341
Luztu,  271
Lybicn,  xxxi.
Lyese  Nicolas,  378
Lyuon  sea,  314

^Laccazina,  Region  of,  169
Macchian  island,  259,  260
Macedonia,  xxxiii  ,  14
Machiam  sea,  344
Machinnech,  King,  100

M.achmetgirei,  King,  328

Machochacl,  99

Macorix,  Region  of,  168

Macrobius,  41,  298,  347

Madagascar,  7,  23,  285,  286

Madanino,  69,  157

Madera  islands,  35,  40,  41,  87,  260,

270,  339,  340,  375,  380
Magellanus  Ferdinando  [i.e., Fcr-

nam  de  Afagelliaens], 9, 32, 33,

34, 35, 243, 249,  250,  252,  25S,

272,  274
Magellanus, Straits of, 8, 33, 35,

161,  183,  252,  285,  350
Magna  Canaria,  157
Magna  fors  island,  41
Magnete  island,  348
Magnus, Albertus, 7, 9, 10, 41,

364
Magona,  81
Magua,  Region  of,  169
Maguacochios,  167
RLiguana,  Region  of,  169,  171,  172,

176
Mahaitin  mountain,  169
Mahumet, 14, 23, 25, 27,  40,  57,

326,  374
Maia,  Region  of,  150,  163
Maiaguariti,  Region  of,  169
Maiam,  187
Maiobanexius, King, 86, 91, 92,

93

Maiolica,  270

Malabar,  263,  266,  267,  268,  269

Malacca,  21,  32,  34,  40,  75,  247,
255,  256,  260,  261,  267,  269,
271,  274,  313,  344

Malea, 155,  304

Maligny,  Seigneur  de,  xliv.

Mallua  island,  260  •'

Malpha,  Flauius  of,  348

Manibrone,  xxx.

Manabaho,  Region  of,  169

Manabaxao,  Region  of,  169

Manacapana,  Region  of,  89,  94,
96,  98,  128

Manache,  Sibill,  xx.

Manati,  Lake,  171

Mandeuell,  329

Mangalor,  265

Mangdando,  City  of,  259

Mangi,  25,  26

Manicautixius,  King,  82

Manicheus,  10

Manicongo,  270,  374

Manilius,  Marcus,  xliv.

Mans,  xliv.  ■

Mansus,  Alfonsus,  130

Manuel,  Petro,  272

Maragnonum river, 98, 132, 134,

155,  160
Marburg,  xxv.
Marchauntes  island,  329
Marchena,  340,  341
Marcilius  P'icinus,  338
Marco  da  Niza,  287
Marcus  Antonius,  315
Marcus,  Emperour,  284
Marcus  Paulus,  55,  286
Marcus Paulus Venetus, 25, 27,

326,  330,  339,  340
Mare  island,  35,  259,  260
Mare  Congelatum,  8
Mare  de  Sabione,  374
Mare  del  ?>\\x\i.e., the  Pacific  Ocean],
54,  211,  214,  223,  225,"  230,  233,
234, 235, 252, 262, 338, 344,

345,  347
Mare  Pacificum,  252,  253
Margarita  island, 54, 88, 96,  141,

165,  178,  214,  233

Margarita

Index.

Oxford

405

Margarita,  Peter,  79

Mesopotania,  297

Moscovites,  289,  290,  291,  292,  293,

Nimaca,  169

Mariatanibal, Region of, 98,

Meta  Incognita,  xiii.

306,  309,  310,  3(1,  3'2,  3'3,  3'5.

Nizaus,  169

132

Metellus  Celer,  9

316,318,  319,320,321,322,323,

Noah,  xlviii.,  51,  155,  340,  346,  386

Maricn,  Region  of,  169,  172

Methymna  Campi, City  of,  68,  70,

324,325,326,327,328,329,  331,

Noceuamor  island,  260

Mary,  Virgin,  xxvi.,  69, 124, 192,

72,  80

332

Nogais,  3«i,  329

198

Methyna,  Duke  of,  96

Mos^s,  xxi.,  xivii., 11,  49,  50,  51,

Nomen  Dei,  113,  234,  235

Marmarica,  8

Mexico,  Viceroy  of,  287

57,  iio

Norduegia,  331

Marnior,  1 12,  1 14,  IJ5

Mexico,  City  of,  xiii., 55,  61, 287,

Mosyli,  The,  385

Noricum,  314

Marolui,  100

288,  338,  342

Motka,  Cape,  331

Northumberland,  Duke  of,  xxxviii.,

Marocco,  xix.,  xx.

Mezen  river,  322

Mouy,  Count  de,  xlv.

xxxix.,  5

Marques,  Diegus,  1 57

Mezentium,  66

Moxica,  Michael  of,  65

Nortpoden,  330

Marris,  122

Michael  Passamonte,  213

Moxus  river,  313,  314

Norumbega,  xiv.

Marrocko,  374

Midnall,  Thomas,  xiii.

Mozambique,  261

Norway,  Governours  of,  332

Marrok,  161

Mien,  24,  261

Muera,  318

Norway,  King  of,  331

Martabani,  268

Milan, City  of, 63,  67, 103, 131,

Midler,  Mr  Frederick,  xxv.,  xxvi.

Norwegia,  King  of,  xxx.

Marline,  383

141

Multoxuman,  King,  195

Nova  Castilia,  343

Martinus  Gratias  island,  343

Milenoes,  65

Mumu,  112

Nova  Hispania, 55,  213,  238,  24I,

Martire, Pietro, or Martyr,  Peter,

Mina,  339,  375,  382

Miinster, Sebastian,  3,  13,  42,  249,

287,  342

xiii.,  xxxvii.,  43,  61,  63, 64, 65,

Mina,  Castle  of,  382

291,  293

Novcgradia[i.e.,  Nffv^oro({\,  City  of,

102,  186,  207,  241,  246,  299

Mina  river,  376

Murcien,  176

289,  290,  291,  309,  312,  313,  314,

Mary,  Queen,  xii.,  xxxviii.,  xxxix.,

Minera,  xlviii.

Muscostrom  sea,  304

318,  319,  321,  326,  328,  329,  330

xlv.,  I.

Minos,  xlviii.

Muthil  island,  34

Nova  .Scotia,  xv.

Mary  of  Nemegen,  xxvi.

Mioformo,  City  of,  284

Mutir  island,  259,  260

Nubia,  384

Massana  island,  34

Mirobalanus,  Region  of,  151

Mysians,  xlviii.,  318

Nuceria,  Paul  us  Jouius, Bishop  of.

Massaquiber  port,  374

Mitaini,  167

308,  312,  331

Mathan  island,  258

Mithridates,  128,  129

Naeldwyck,  Jan  van,  xxvi.

Numidia,  374

Mathien  island,  35

Moguer,  341

Nagai,  329

Nunnez,  Alphonsus,  123

Mathinino  island,  100

Mogunce,  Bishop  of,  56

Nagaria,  xxix.

Nunnez  de  Gusman,  Peter,  345

Matinino  island,  30,  69, 157, 166,

Molucca  islands, 8,  9,  20,  32, 33,

Naiba,  83

Nycolas,  Saynt,  75,  78

210

34, 35, 54, 183, 234,  235,  247,

Naiba  river,  73,  83,  168,  172

Nysa,  100

Matritis,  123,  184

249,  256,  258,  259,  260,  271,  272,

Nansao,  Earl  of,  214

Nysea,  384

Matthkur,  303

273,  274,  286,  287,  344

Naples,  King  of,  xxx.

Mauicarao,  169

Molybe,  385

Narmaria,  xxix.

0  [?>.,  (9w<-a]  point,  75,  76

Maurevert,  xlv.

Momsabith,  xxviii.

Narsinga,  14,  15,  20,  263,  264,  265

Obdoria,  287,  310,  323

Mauritania,  8,  374,  384

Moncellese,  Master  Bernardino,  356

Narsinga,  King  of,  14,  40,  264

Obea,  Castle  of,  323

Mauritania  Cesariensis,  374

Monoch  island,  22

Nativitatis,  Baia,  129

Obi  river,  xli.,  287,  322,  323,  332

Mauritania  Tingitania,  374

Mons  Crucis,  300

Nauaryen,  King  of,  xxx.,  xlviii.

Obiowa,  323.

Mausolus,  King,  49,  128

Mons  Farratus  island,  30

Nauchin,  City  of,  260

Occoa  river,  170,  292

Maximilian, Emperour, 290, 308,

Mons  Serratus  island,  69,  177

Navarre,  King  of,  xxx.,  xlviii.

Ocha  river,  292,  308,  313,  314,  319,

309,  312,  368

Monte  Rodondo,  382

Nebrissa,  135,  165

324.  325

Mecca,  166,  267

Montegio  Francis, 187, 190, 191,

Neglina  river,  313

Ochelaga,  287

Medecis,  Catherine  de,  xlv.

192,  195

Negro  river,  374

Ocho  Lupus,  186

Media,  314

Montes  Luna,  41,  132,  217,  385

Nehemiah,  56

Odia,  260

Medina  Cell,  Duke  of,  341

Monies  Niuales,  157,  160

Neibaymao,  Region  of,  169

Odoardo  Barbessa,  258

Medina Sidonia, Duke of, 250,

Monyuye,  240

Neibaymas  mountain,  169

Ogni  Sancti  Marigalante  island,  210

341

Moore,  Sir  Thomas,  398

Nemea,  143

Olanus,  Gothus,  300,  347,  348

Medina  de  Campo,  xxxix.,  232

Morales, Andreas, 134, 156, 165,

Nemroth,  53,  290

Olanus,  Lupus,  iii,  112

Medon,  xxxi.

167,  169,  184,  185

Neper  river,  314

Olha,  319

Meersch,  P.  C.  van  der,  xxv.

Morales,  Gasper,  178,  179,  214

Nepos,  Cornelius,  9,  286,  347

Olmutium,  314

Megha,  xxviii.

Morantes,  Christophorus,  186

Neptunus,  xlviii.,  55,  163,  165,  176

Oloan,  188,  191

Mela,  Pomponius,  346,  347

Morauia,  Region  of,  326

Nereiades,  74,  loi,  127,  165,  176

Ooliab,  49

Melaqua,  City  of,  xxix.,  21

Morea,  The,  316

Nero,  41

Gone,  305

Melcha  island,  39

Moren,  xxxi.

Nerui,  340

Ophir,  7,  51,  66,  73,  82,  338,  343

Melchoir,  71,  72

Morgan,  Sylvanus,  xlvi.

Nestorius,  xxx.,  27

Oplandia.  305

Meier,  Lake,  305

Morley,  Professor  H.,  xxxviii.

New  Andalusia.  130

Oram,  City  of,  374

Melinda,  xxviii.,  132,  385

Moronites,  xxx.,  xxxi.

New  Fraunce,  287,  288

Ordassus,  Diegus,  192

Melo,  Frances  de,  273

Morrorabes,  xxx,,  xxxi.

New  India,  3,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,

Oripei,  The,  3S5

Meluza,  20

Mos,  Lake,  304

19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27,

Ormuz  island,  13,  20,  261,  266

Memi,  City  of,  241

Moscow,  187,  286,  289,  290.  291,

28,  29,  30,  31,  32,  11,  34,  35,  36,

Oro  river,  380

Memphis,  City  of,  307,  315

292,  293,  308,  312,  313,  314,  317,

37,  38,  39,  40,  41

Orsa,  316

Mendala,  344

321

New  Spayne,  236,  238,  241,  287,  342

Oryenten,  xxx.,  xxxi.

Mendez,  Diegus,  154

Moscovia, xxxix., 285, 286, 287,

New  World,  68,  127,  137,  156,  174,

Os  Dragonis,  Straits  of,  ?&,  95,  96,
98, 108,  12S,  132,  134,  151,  178
180

Mendocius,  Inacus  Jopez,  10^

289,  290,  291,  292,  293,  294,  298,

245,  247,  272,  273,  337,  338,  339,

Mendoza,  Anthony  di,  287

308,  309,  310,  3".  312,  313,  314,

342

Mendoza,  Cardinal!  Pero  Gonzales

315,  316,  318,  319,  320,  321,  322,

Newfoundland,  xiii.,  xiv.,  xv.,  xviii.

Ostrich,  Henry,  xix.

of,  341

323,  324,  325,  326,  327,  328,  329,

xxi.

Ostrobi  thnia,  305,  306

Mendoza,  Luigo  of,  252

330,  331,  332

Nicaragua,  338

Osep,  Gregorevitch  Napea,  xl.

Mendoza,  Mentia  of,  214

Moscovia,  Andreas  of,  316

Nicene,  290

Otho.  9

Mennones,  385

Moscovia,  George  of,  316

Nicolai,  322

Otifer,  289,  290

Mense,  56

Moscovia,  Helena  of,  289

Nicuesa,  Diego,  106,  107,  108,  109,

Otogeria,  City  of,  291

Mensurado,  Cape,  381

Moscovia,  John  of,  289, 316, 319,

III,  112,  113,  114,  115,  116,  126,

Otoque  island,  233

Meotis, 155, 292, 298, 306, 311,

321,  324,  325,  326

128,  135,  137,  145,  150,  151,  153,

Otto  Brumfelsius,  xliii.

314,  325.  326,  351

Moscovia,  Sophia  of,  326

156

Ottomanus,  Bajasetes,  60,  311

Mercado,  Lodouicus,  165,  182

Moscovia,  Simeon  of,  316

Nidrosia,  299,  303

Ottoseria,  City  of,  314.

Mercedis,  Saynte  Mary  of,  77

Moscovia,  Demetrius  Ambassadour

Nidrosia,  Archbishop  of,  299

Otwer,  City  of,  314

Mericke,  William,  xli.

of,  292,  308,  309,  310,  311, 313,

Nignus,  94,  126

Ouandus,  King,  190

Meroe  island,  8,  385

316,  325,  329,  331

Nigritis,  132,  384

Ouandus,  Nicolaus,  165

Merose,  41

Moscovia,  Dukes  of,  283,  286,  287,

Nile  river,  8,  41, 1 10,  1 11,  131,  132,

Ouetenses,  Astur,  135

Mesa,  Barnarde  of,  130

289,  290,  291,  292,  293,  314,  318,

153,  155,  169,  175,  193,  199,217,

Ouiedus, Gonzalus Fernandus 50

158, 160. 184, 185,  207,  208,'24l',

Oxford,  Larl  of,  xxvvii.

Messana  island,  xvii.,  256

322,  323,  324.  325.  326,  328,  329,

283,  2S4,  285,  293,  309,  311,  312,

Messana,  King  of,  256,  257,  258

330.  331.  332

339.  346,  351.  374,  384,  385

4o6

Oxus

Judex.

Rome

Oxus  river,  308
Ozama,  240

Pacnt, King, 143, 144, 145, 146,

147
Padilla,  Garsia  tie,  130
Padus,  133
Pahan,  260
Paleacate,  263
Paleologiis,  Sophia,  316
Paleologus,  Thomas,  316
Palitzki,  Lieuetenaiinte,  32S
Pahna  island,  41,  66,  157,  177,  380
Palmaria,  Region  of,  189
Palmas,  Cape  de  las,  381,  382
Palmer.  Sir  T.,  xxxix,
Palos,  96,  97,  99,  341
Pan,  166
Panama, City of, 214, 223, 233,

234,  23s,  338
Panchi,  City  of,  26
Panes,  loi
Pannonie,  133,  155,  290,  306, 310,

314
Panonome,  King,  1S2
Pantalarea  island,  374
Panuco,  241
Papa,  Johannes,  385
Papin,  City  of,  324
Papinowgorod,  City  of,  324
Paracelsus,  xlvi.
Paraue  river,  343
Paria,  36,  38, 89, 90, 94, 95, 96,

98,  99, 103, 105,  113,  128,  129,

130,  132,  135.  151.  156,  165,  178,

180,  181,  184,  338,  363
Paria,  Gulf  of,  130
Paricora,  98,  132
Pariza,  1S3

Paropanisus  mountain,  308
Parthenopea,  Queen,  103
Parthia,  284

Parthicus,  Emperour,  176
Paruaim,  7

Paruus,  Georgius,  326
Passamonte,  Mychel,  213,  240
Patani,  260
Patagoni,  252
Patalo  river,  363
Pauiloghon  island,  258
Paul,  51,  58
Paulus,  179,  309
Paulas,  Jovius,  60,  287,  308,  312
Pazer,  344
Pean,  John,  385
Pecerra,  Region  of,  315
Pedernales  mountains,  219
Pedir,  344

Pedrarias  da  Villa,  229
Pedro  Doria,  xvii.
Pegu,  20,  21,  261,  263,  264,  344
Peim,  26

Pellegrine  de  Maricourt,  xliii.
Peloponeso,  134,  316,  319
Pelusio  river,  284,  285
Pelusius,  285
Penguin  island,  xviii.
Peralfonso  of  Melo,  272
Peraria,  F.,  65
Percaslavia,  City  of,  291,  331
Perecow,  382
Perez,  John,  340,  341
Perillus,  49
Periquete,  King,  1 82
Perm,  293

Permia,  286,  309,  325,  326
Permska,  293

Persia,  xxviii.,  15,  26,  267,  309,  314
Persia,  Gulf  of,  82,  308
Persia,  King  of,  284,  311,  319,  326
Persides,  75

Pert,  Sir  Thomas,  xiii.,  6

Peru,  xiii.,  xxxix.,  6,  54,  130,  2S5,

338,  343.  346,  363
Pescora  River,  286
Peter,  125
Petit,  F.,  xxxviii.
Petrus  Alphonsus,  94,  96
Petrus  Arias,  126,  127,  142,  214,  229
Pettislego,  xl.
Petzora  River,  322,  323,  324,  330,

332
Phaeton,  73
Pharis  River,  262,  310
I^heniccn,  xxxi.
Phidias,  74

Philadelphus,  King,  284,  285
Philip,  King,  xvii.,  xxxviii.,  xxxix.,

xlv.,  52.
Philistines,  xlvii.,  51
Philo,  xliv.
Philostratus,  384
Phoenicia,  xi.
Phrysius,  Gemma,  384
Phylippe.  the  Apostle,  57
Pichet,  John,  xvii.
Piedmont,  xliv.
Pienega,  312,  322
Piescoya  River,  322
Pieza  River,  322
Pigafetta,  Antonio, 243, 246, 247,

249,  255,  258
Pignonem,  153
Pinnigt,  300
Pinsteado, Antoniades, 375, 376,

.377
Pinsteado,  Antonie  Anes,  378
Pinsteado,  John  Anes,  377,  378
Pintiguanus,  Chiaconus,  129
Pinzon,  Martin  Alonso,  341
Pinzonus,  Aries,  96,  98
Pinzonus,  Vincentius  Annez,  36,  96,

98,  105,  126,  128,  129,  130
Pircho,  City  of,  305
Pisa,  John  Rodriguez  of,  272
Pius  Secundus,  8,  9,  41
Pizarro,  Prancisco,  xiii.,  108,  no
Placentia,  340
Plata  river,  338,  343
Plato,  xl.,  xiii.,  xliii.,  xliv.,  10,  337

338,  340
Plaiper,  368

Plescouia,  291,  309,  312,  314
Pliny,  xliii.,  xlviii.,  8,  9,  10,  14,  16,

18,  41,  53.  (^1.  75.  120,  133,  142,

152,  175.  179,  208,  221,  225,  227,

231,236,  245,  248,  278,  2S4.28S,

286,  289,  292,  294,  297,  298,  306,

330,  315,  340,  342,  347,  349,  363,

364,  383,  384,  385,  386
Plummer,  Thomas,  xvii.
Pluto,  xlvi.,  149,  355
Po  river,  133,  314,  363,  364
Pocchorrosa, King, 147, 148,  162,

163,  178
Pocchorosa,  Region  of,  162,  163
Pogosa,  323
Poiassa  river,  323
Polagua  island,  344
Polen,  King  of,  xxx.,  318
Politianus, Angelus, xliv., xlvii.,

xlviii.
Polo  island,  256
Polomus  Chiacomus,  129
Polonie,  314,  318,  326
Polonie,  King,  2S6,  290,  318,  319
Polonie,  Russus  of,  318
Polonie,  Sigismunde  of,  309,  319
Polotzko,  312
Polybius,  41

Pomponius  Mela,  346,  347,  349
Ponce,  John,  165,  181,  345, '346

Poncha,  King,  115, 116, 121, 137,

138,  139,  140,  149,  178
I'oncius  Johannes, 165, iSl, 345,

346

Ponet,  John,  xxxvii.

Ponte,  Alfonsus  de,  157

Pontike  sea,  131,  262,  296

Pontus,  297,  308,  318

Porcena,  71

Porne,  King  of,  34

Pome  island,  22,  34,  258

Porte  Joppa,  i8l

Portofarnia,  374

Porto  Rigo,  XV.

Portiicarerius  Alsons,  191,  192,  195

Portugal,  Alonzo  of,  273,  341

Portugal, Emanuel  of, 16, 37,  39,
40

Portugal,  Henrique  of,  273

Portugal,  Johan  of,  129,  271,  273,
274^

Portugal,  l>ewes  of,  378

Portugal,  Kings  of,  xvi.,  xxiii.,  xxv.,
xxvi  ,  xxvii.,  xxix., xxx., 13,  40,
41, 54, 74, 129, 256, 261,  267,
270,  271,  273,  274,  340,  341,  363.
374.  375.  376,377.  378,381.382,
385
Portus  Bellus,  112,  135,  153,  177
Portus  Cathnginis,  106
Portus  Desideratus,  188
Portus  Plata?,  176
Portus  Regalis,  71,  105,  176
Polanchanus,  King,  189,  194
Potassa,  323
Potiwlo,  330
Pothorst,  300
^otto,  Chiaconus,  129
Potzcheriema  river,  323
Powell,  William,  xxxix.,  43
Poyas  Semnoi  mountains,  322,  323
Poynings,  Sir  Adrian,  xlv.
Pozon  island,  256
Praga,  City  of,  291
Prato,  Albertus  de,  xiv.
Preciosus,  Johannis,  51
Precop,  325
Prester,  John, xxi., xxxii.,  xxxiii.,

XXXV.,  51,  339,  374,  384,  3S5
Proclus,  338
Prometheus,  57
Propertius,  285
Prussia,  Master  of,  308,  319
Psammiticus,  King,  284
Ptolomeus, 8, 41, 210, 236,  262,
284,  285,  289,  308,  313,  349,  384,
390
Pulaoan  island,  258
Pulisachnites  river,  25
Purchas,  Samuel,  xii.,  xiv.
Puren,  152
Pustoofero,  322,  323
Puta,  88

Pyconye  river,  xxxiii.
Pyne,  H. ,  xv.
Pynson,  Richard,  xxv.
Pyrinei  mountain,  53
Pythagoras,  xlvii.,  215
Pythis,  49

Quadrado  Gulf,  344

Quando,  Nicolas  de,  345,  346

Quareba,  153

Quarequa,  King,  138,  178

Quarequa,  Region  of,  138,  139,  338

Quatour  Tempora  island,  151

Quauhtema,  338

Quaxaca,  342

r)uenquinasu,  City  of,  24,  25

Queraquiera  island,  69,  157,  159

Quicedus,  John,  123,  126

Quicuri  Region  of,  151
Quinsai,  26,  55,  307
Quiola,  xxviii.
Quintanilia,  341
Quintilian,  xlviii.
Quiriipictana,  150,  151
Quitilla  island,  190
Quito,  338
Quizqueia  island,  166,  167

Rabida,  340,  341

Ragusa,  City  of,  330

Raja,  Calauar,  King,  258

Raja,  Capitayne,  120

Raja  Colambu,  King,  255

Raja  Ilumabuon,  King,  257

Raja  Santoa,  King,  260

Raja  Siagu,  Prince,  255

Raja  Siripada,  King,  258

Raja  Sultan  Manzor,  259

Ramonus,  99

Ramusio,  J.  B.,  xiv.,  xv.,  xxx\iii

Rase,  John,  382

Rastall,  John,  xx.

Rastall,  Master,  xviii.,  xix.

Rastall  Sarieant,  xviii.

Ratcliff,  xxxviii.

Ravenna,  314

Razauia,  309

Red  sea,  xxix.,  xlviii.,  7,  13,  51
143.  i8o,  284,  285,  339,  346,  374
385

Regio  Baccalearum,  32,  55

Regnum  Orguene,  384

Resan,  City  of,  290

Reyre,  Region  of,  i68

Rezan,  324

Rezense,  292,  309

Rha  river,  291,  292,  313,  329

Rhapsii,  385

Rhene  river,  56,  314,  363

Rhodes,  xii.

Ribera,  Doctor,  272

Richard  I.,  King,  xxvi.

Richard  II.,  King,  xxxix.

Rico  Porto,  XV.

Ridley,  Master,  xviii.

Riga  river,  287,  308,  312,  314

Rio  Dulce  river,  381

Rio  Grande  river,  380

Rio  de  Chicora  river,  xv.

Rio  de  los  Perdidos  river,  1 51,  156

Kio  de  la  Plata  river, xxxix., 54,

288,  338,  343,  386
Rio  de  los  Potos  river,  382
Riphea,  155

Ripheos  mountains,  293,  324
Risophagi,  The,  385
Riuo  Nigro,  120,  121
Riuum  Nigrum,  191
Rivero  Diego,  272
Robbyn  Hood,  53
Rocumdulfe,  Earl  of,  xlvii.
Rodanum,  314
Rodericus Colmenaris, 113, 114,

115,  116,  119,  120,  122,  123
Rodes,  351

Rodes,  Grand  Master  of  the,  374
Rod  rigo,  341
Rodriguez,  John,  272
Rogers,  John,  xxxix.
Roldanus,  Ximenus,  86,  87,  90
Rome,  Adrian,  Pope  of,  309
Rome,  Pope  Alexander  VJ.  of,  37,

74,  129,  201,  273,  274,  315
Rome, Pope Clement VII., 308,

309.  347
Rome,  Cloelia  of,  71
Rome,  Consul  of,  xliv.
Rome,  Emperour  of,  xxxii.
Rome,  Gregory,  Bishop  of,  56

Rome

Index.

Taquenazabo

407

Rome,  Julius  of,  309
Rome,  Leo  X.  of,  64,  106,  109,  in,
113,  114,  123,  125,  126,  127,  130,

131.  133.  134,  135.  136,  137.
145,  149,  150,  154,  156,  157,  159,
162,  163,  164,  166,  167,  170,  172,
174,  175,  178,  181,  184,  185,  287,

308,  309

Rome,  I'aul  III.  of,  51,  58,  179

Rome,  Pius  II.  of,  8,  9,  41

Rosciuia,  City  of,  290,  291,  309

Rosolanos,  289

Rostowe,  331

Rotunda,  Sancta  Maria,  69

Rubicho  river,  322

Ruiz,  Barthalome,  272

Ruiz,  Peter,  272,  274

Rumnie,  James,  xvii.

Russia,  Basilius  of,  289,  290, 308,

309,  311,  314,316,317,319,  321,
324,  328,  329

Russia,  Emperour  of,  290
Russus,  Town  of,  318
Rut,  John,  xiv.,  xv.,  xvi.
Ruthens ; Constantine,  Captain  of

the,  316
Ruthens,  Czar  of  the,  319

Saba,  8,  385

Saba,  Queen  of,  8,  374,  385

Sabea,  129,  385

Sachion,  City  of,  27

Sacrificios;  Sacrifice,  Island  of,  189,

192
Safale,  xxviii.,  36
St  Ambrose,  10,  315
St  Andrew,  290,  319
St  Angell,  Luys  of,  341
St  Antonie  islands,  272,  273
St  Aubin,  Sieurde,  xliv.
St  Augustine,  10,  142, 165,  218,  238,

315,  318,  338
St  Augustine,  Cape  of,  129, 155, 165,

181,  183,  218,  250,  273,  338
St  Benedict,  306
St  Bernardi  islands,  161
St  Catharine,  Castle  of,  84
St  Christopher,  Gold  mine  of,  105
St  Christoval,  Island  of,  210
St  Clare  \electrical  fire  on  tnas/s],

251

St  Cosmus,  310

St  Cruz  islands,  30,  130,  159,  188

St  Cyrillus,  315

St  Domingo,  xv.,  45, 82,  84, 130,

154,  168,  169,  170,  176,  209,  210,
213,  240,  338,  346

St  Dunstan's  parish,  xlviii.

St  Francis,  130,  176,  198,  240,  341

St  George,  xxxi.,  39,  323

St  Germain,  Town  of,  xlv.

St  Germain,  Bay  of,  xv.

St  Gregory,  315

St  Helen  [electrical fire  on  viasls\,

251
St  Hericus,  305
St  James,  xxviii.,  10,  186
St James  island,  xxviii.,  97, 186,

261,  262
St  James,  Castle  of,  36,  84
St  Jerome,  195,  338
St  John,  Gulf  of,  194
St  John,  Port,  192
St  John's  island,  xv.,  45,  104,  130,

155.  159,  173.  176,  210,  213,
241

St  John's  harbour, xiii., xiv.,  xv.,

192
St  John  of  Jerusalem,  Knights  of,

xii.
St  Julian,  Port,  252

St  Lazaro,  Archepelago  di,  254

St  Lazarus,  187

St  Laurence  [i.e.,  Madagascar^,  Is-
land of,  285

St  Leger,  xlv.

St  Luca,  or  Lucar.  de  Barrameda,
157,  210,  262

St  Lucas  Guild  at  Antwerp,  xxv.

St  Maria  Antigua,  Island  of,  30,
69,  no,  134,  163,  198,  207,  218,
226,  229,  236,  238

St  Maria  Rotund,  Island  of,  30,  69

St  Maria  de  Gratia,  Island  of,  238

St  Marina,  190

St  Martha,  156,  157

St  Martinus,  Island  of,  30,  69

St  Marye  of  Mercedis,  77,  240

St Matthei, Region  of, 112, 132,

135

St Michael's Gulf, 54, 140, 162,

165,  182,  183,  214
St  Nicolas  {tied rical fire  on  masls],

250
St  Nicolas  island,  375,  376
St  Nicolas,  Port  of,  75,  78
St  Paul,  7,  n,  55,  56,  204,  293
St  Peter,  130,  203,  204,  250,  290
St  Romayne,  Tower  of,  226
St  Sergius,  291
St  Sophia,  314
St  Steven,  148
St  Thomas, xxix, xxx.,  xxxiv.-vi.,

74,  79,  80,  250
St  Thomas,  Island  of,  250,  270
St  Thomas  Tower,  31,  74,  79,  80
St  Vincent,  Cape,  250
St  Vincent,  Harbour  of,  381
Salaye,  Dr  Sancho,  272
Saleno,  Monsieur  de,  xlvii.
Salla,  Port,  374

Salsburg,  Cardinal  of,  24,  247,  248
Salvaterra,  176
Samano,  Julyan,  346
Samarcandia,  311
Samson,  xlvii.
Samma,  Town  of,  381,  383
Sammaterra,  Town  of,  383
Samogeds,  The,  323
Samotor,  20
Samotra  [I.e.,  Sumatra],  7,  21,  22,

32,  344
Samua,  Town  of,  381,  383
Sananton  island,  272
Sancta  Cruce,  xiii.,  xx.,  30,  40,  130,

188
Sancta  Fee,  341
Sanders,  Blaise,  xli.
Sanguenai,  297
San  Juan  island,  xv.
Saragossa,  xxxviii.-ix.,  247
Sardinia,  56
Sardonica,  284
Sardus,  163
Sarmatia,  170,  284,  291, 295, 298,

308,  3n,  314,  326,  347
Sarmatians,  155,  301,  310
Saturma,  Region  of,  157,  158,  160,

163
Saunders,  Laurence,  xxxix.
Sava,  City  of,  374
Savoy,  The  Master  of  the,  xliii.
Sawolhenses,  The,  327,  329
Saxogrammaticus,  300
Saxony,  Duke  of,  366
Sbozzo,  368
Scandia,  298
Scandinavia,  298,  347
Scarense,  Bishop  of,  310
Scharutzick,  City  of,  329
Scharaitz,  329
Schat  river,  325

Schavo,  381

.Schichmamai,  329

Schidack,  329

Schio,  366,  368

Schondania,  Region  of,  298

Schondenmarchia,  Region,  298

.Sclavonia,  290,  306

Sclavons,  290,  306,  S^S.  3i8,  319

Scolus,  John,  345

.Scombria  Islands,  106,  107

Scondia,  Region  of,  29J,  298, 299,

302,  305,  313
Scopa,  51
Scoria,  King,  183
Scutum  Cateba  island,  135
Scwerski,  325
Scythia, 155, 289, 291, 292, 297,

306,  310,  312,  313,  316,  347,  363
Sea,  Admiral  of  the  great  Ocean,  29,

35,  67,  79,  94
Sebastian,  John,  271,  272
Segovia,  126,  127
Seina,  Capreansis  de,  137
Seiani  Island,  34
Seleucus  Nicanor,  8,  61
Selle,  xiv.

Selymus,  Prince,  311
Sem,  346

Semnoi  Poyas  mountains,  324
Seneca,  48,  67,  337,  339
Senega  river,  280
Senegal  river,  132,  374,  384
Sequeryra, Dieogo  Lopez  of, 272,

273
Serrannus,  Johannes,  34,  157,  160
Serena,  274
Seres,  67
Serponowtzi,  323

Serra  Nevata  mountains,  108,  160
Serranus,  Johannes,  34,  157,  160,258
Serrationa  [Sierra  Leoue],  39,  250
Sesostris,  284
Sesostris,  King,  284
Sesponow  castle,  323
Sest  river,  321
Sestau  island,  192
Sesto  river,  xvi.,  376,  381
Setebos,  252

Sette  Citta,  Kingdom,  287
Seville,  xiv.,  xvi.,  xl., 50,  62, 210,

246,  250,  262,  288,  338,  342,  345,

348
Sforza  Ascanius,  65,  68,  103,  127
Shava,  381
Shawgro,  381
Shyawe,  381

Sian,  Zacabedera  King  of,  260
Sianfu,  City  of,  26
Sibier,  Prouince  of,  326,  329
Sibut  river,  323
Sibylla  Erythyrea,  135
Siccensis,  Nicolaus,  309
Sico  island,  260
Siech,  Ismael,  266
Sigismundus  Liberius,  298,  312,  318
Siguera,  Francisco  de,  378
Siloli  island,  34
Silver  of  Rever,  288,  343
Sllvius  Pandonus,  133
Simonides,  41

Sina,  Kindgom  of,  32,  313,  344
Sinum  Perditorum,  Point,  155
Sinus  Arabicus,  13
Sinus  Finnonicus,  306
Sinus  Magnus,  248
Sinus  Persicus,  20,  32,  41,  82
Smith,  Sir  T.,  xxxvii.,  xiii.,  xlv.
Smolense,  290,  291
Smyrnophora,  385
Soborovius,  George,  316
Sofa,  Lupus,  199

Solinus  Julius,  16,  56,  338,  346,  347,

383

Solo  island,  34

Solowki  island,  321

Solysius,  Johannes,  18 1

Sorachi  village,  180

Soria  islands,  347,  348,  387

Sossa  river,  323

Soto,  Ferdinando  de,  346

Spacheford,  Thomas,  xiii.

Spaengian,  39

Spagnuola  island,  199,  210

Spain,  Emperor  Charles  V.,  32,  47,
63,  208-14,  216,  223, 225,  226, 229,
233-6,  238,  240,  246-8,  255,  257,
259, 271-4, 278, 287, 343,  343,

350,  363
Spain, Emperor Phillip, 54, 59,

346
Spartaria,  176
Spatense  Alverado,  192
Sperantia  castle,  84
Spiriostomea,  98
Spice  islands,  235, 247, 271, 273,

274,  286,  344
Spinosa,  Gasper,  183
Stanmoische,  Region  of,  322
Steven,  Bysshop,  293,  325
Stoidum,  143
Stora,  374
Strabo,  10,  56,  283, 284,  2S5,  289,

296,  308,  346,  349
Strava,  308
Strelze,  322
Strub  island,  324
Strucophagi,  385
Stzuchogora  river,  323
Subuth,  King  of,  34
Succana  river,  286,  312,  322,  331
Suchana  river,  322
Suchur,  Province,  27
Suetia,  299,  301, 3C4-6, ^11,  312,

319,  330,  331
Suevia,  King  of,  9, 286,  301,  306,

308,  347
Suez,  13,  284,  2S5
Sulacho  island,  260
Sumatra,  7,  12,  20,  21,  22,  32,  261,

267,  272-4,  344
Sumatra,  Kings  of,  22
Sumbit  island,  253
Sumideros,  155
Sura  river,  314
Surcium  river,  314
Sus,  374

Sussex,  Earl  of,  xxxix.
Sustali,  290
Sutton,  Edward,  42

Taboga  island,  233

Tabor,  King,  182

Tacarequi  Margarita  island,  56,  233

Tachola,  344

Tachola,  City  of,  344

Tachnin  ryver,  323

Tadinfi. ,  City  of,  24

Taghima  island,  259

Taia,  Region  of,  150

Tainsu,  Kingdom  of,  25

Taismor,  John,  xliii. -vi.

Talvera,  Ferdinand  of,  341

Tamburlane,  31 1

Tanagora,  xxix.

Tanais, 133,  155,  291-3,  297,  306,

310,  3n,3i4,  319,321,3^4,325.

327,  346
Tangut,  Region  of,  12,  26,  27
Tapia,  Francisco  de,  xv.
Tapobana  [Cej/on], 12,  21,  22,  32,

41,  143,  180,  261,  286,  344
Taquenazabo,  Region  of,  169,

4o8

Taracuru

Lliicx.

ZulsLti

Taracuru,  King,  182

Tripoli,  374

Valasquen,  John,  192

Whally,  Thomas,  xliv.

Tararequi,  214,  233

Trolhetta  river,  304,  306

\'endomc,  Francois  de,  xliv.

\\'hilcome,  Roger,  xii.

Tarchontan,  King,  66

Trutham  village,  304

Venetus, Marcus Paulus, 25, 27,

Wiiite  Russia,  301,  302,  31 1

Tarenate  island,  259,  260

Tucke,  Master,  xviii.

326,  330,  339,  340

Wickes,  Master,  xviii.

Tarnasserie,  12,  20,  21,  22

Tuckfield,  Master,  xviii.

Vera,  Petrus  dc,  65

Willes,  Richartl,  xii.,  xlviii.

Tartaiy, 12, 24,  26, 39,  286,  287,

Tulla,  City  of,  324

Verazzano,  xv.

Williamson,  John,  xvii.

289,  290,  292,  306,  344,  3S7

Tumaccus,  King  of,  140-2,  178

Vere,  Edward,  xxxvii.

Willoughby, Sir Hugh, xxxviii.,

Tartar}', Maciimetgirei, King of,

Tumaccus,  Region  of,  140

Vesalius,  A.,  xxxvii.

xxxix.,  59,  333,  334

328

Tumanama, King of, 117, 147,

\'espasian,  Emperour,  208,  342

Winchester, Bishop  of,  xxxvii.,  xl.,

Taurisium,  City  of,  31 1,  314

14S,  162,  163

Vespucci,  Amerigo,  xxv.,  37,  ^ii,  39,

xiv.

Tartars,  286,  287, 2S9,  290  2, 301,

Tumanama,  Region  of,  162,  163

127,  134,  157,  158,  275,  277

Winter,  Sir  W.,  xlvi.,  xlviii.

310-14, 316, 319, 320, 3249,

Tumen,  Castle  of,  323,  324,  326

Vespucius,  Johannes,  127,  157

Wolsey,  Cardinal,  xiv.

332

Tumenski,  King  of  Tumen,  324

Vetcha,  309

Wright,  Master,  xviii.

Tauira,  Johannes  de,  157

Tumum,  King,  66

Viatra,  City  of,  291

Wroth,  Sir  Thomas,  xix.

Tauira,  Simon  de,  272

Turni,  King.  119

Vibba,  153

Wyndam, Captain, xix,, xxxviii..

Taxmarus,  King,  193

Turufy  village,  183

Vicenza,  247

375,  376,  377

Teaocha,  King,  143,  146

Tuver,  City  of,  314

Victoria,  Town  of,  194

Wynterton  Ness,  xii.

Telde,  374

Tyima,  166

Vidame de  Chartres,  xliv.,  xiv.,  xlvi.

Temesne,  374

xlviii.

Xaccoei  river,  170

Tenado  island,  344

Udall,  Nicholas,  xxxviii.

Vigentina,  368

Xagua,  Region  of,  168

Tendilla,  Count  of,  103

Udoria,  310

Vilna,  City  of,  314

Xaguaguara,  Region  of,  153

Teneriffe  islands,  41,  66, 157,  250,

Uhabo,  170,  173

Villanoua,  176

Xamana,  Region  of,  70,  169,  170

280

Ulna,  292

Villa  Ricca,  196

Xaragua,  Region  of,  83,  84,  85,  86,

Tenerissa,  xiii.,  41,  380

Ulysses,  135,  348

Villegas,  Peter  Ruiz  of,  272,  274

169,  176

Tenetum  island,  260

Umbria,  Petrus  de,  ill,  112

Vincentina  river,  366,  388

Xericium,  City  of,  65

Tenez,  374

Unefride,  56

Vincentius,  36, 96,98,  105,  126,  128,

Xerses,  59

Tenixtetan,  City  of,  57,  287,  342

Ungerien,  King  of,  xxx.

129,  130

Ximenus  Roldanus,  86,  87,  90

Temulos,  273

United  States,  xv.

Vincentius,  Agnes,  105,  128,  129

Xuarez,  Petrus,  130

Tequinas,  215

Uppa  river,  325

Vincentius,  Annez, 126, 128,  129,

Terasequi  island,  214

Upsala,  Archbishop  of,  300,  347

130

Yaguana,  Region  of,  169

Terceira,  344,  348

Upsoliensis,  295

Vincenza,  City  of,  246

Yaguino,  Region  of,  176

Terra  Baccalearum,  242.  287

Uraba,  107,  108,  109,  no,  ill,  113,

Virgil,  II,  50,  91,  135,  279,  298

Yiamiroa  river,  176

Terra  Britonum,  287,  288

114,  118,  119,  123,  128,  130,  131,

Visba,  City  of,  306

'S  mizui  Hibahaino  mountain,  169

Terra  de  Laborador,  287

132,  134,  143,  150,  155,  162,  163,

Vischora  river,  325

Vorke,  Sir  John,  xix.,  382

Terra  Viridis,  299

180,  192,  198,  199,  218,  229

Visco,  Bishop  of,  341

Yucatan,  61,  338

Terra  Florida,  32,  55,  57

Uracha,  230,  234

Vitry,  xiv.

Vucatos,  238

Terra  de  Papagalli,  253

Urse,  M.  de,  xliv.

Vitzechda  river,  325

Tesino  river,  363,  364

Uschatio,  Peter  Knes,  324

Volaterane,  289,  290

Zacabedera,  260

Tharant  island,  35

Ussa  river,  322

Volga river, 291, 292, 293, 308,

Zagathei,  311

Themiscuthlu,  311

Usting,  City  of,  286,  312,  322,  325

311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 321,

Zahondaderos,  155

Theodori  island,  35

Ustiuga,  Town  of,  293,  312

325,  326,  32S,  329,  331

Zamal  island,  254,  260.

Theodosia,  Colony  of,  311

Ustyug,  312

Volham  river,  293

Zamara  island,  32

Theophrastus,  8,  338,  340

Utterson,  Mr,  xxvi.

Volochda  river,  286

Zamatra,  274

Thomas,  J.,  xix.

Volodemaria, City of, 291, 309,

Zamotra  island,  273

Thorne,  iv.,  xiii.,  xiv.,  xxi.

Vadianus,  56

314

Zamudius,  1 15,  116,  122,  126

Thome,  R.,  xvi.

Vagoniona,  99,  ico

Volotchia,  309

Zanzibar  island,  23

Thorns,  Mr,  xxvi.

Vagus  river,  318

Volut,  City  of,  290

Zanzibar,  King  of,  23

Thyle,  Land  of,  300,  337

Valdes, Gonzalo Fernandez de

Vrida  river,  135,  153

Zarate,  Augustin  de,  xxxix.

Tialleslund  sea,  304

Oviedo,  xxxvii.

Vua  river,  323

Zasia,  xx.

Tiba,  King,  149,  151

Valdiuia,  115,  116, I18, 1x9, 122,

Vuaga  river,  322

Zauana,  Region  of, 148, 169, 173,

Tichin  village,  122

123,  192,  193

Vuarectzkoai  sea,  319

176,  212

Ticobon  island,  256

Valentia,  199

Vuareczkote  Morie  sea,  312

Zaylon  island,  20

Tidore  islands,  259,  260,  262,  272-4,

Vallacum,  314

Vuiathka,  326,  328

Zebedus,  10

348

Valladoleto,  xiv.,  125,  127,  133,  274

Vuilna,  312

Zeilam  island,  264,  265,  266,  267

Tierra  frome,  xv.

Valleius,  165,  181,  183

Vuinlandia,  319

Zeilon  island,  256

Tighe,  xlvi.

Vannuccio,  Biringuccio,  xxxvii. , xlvi.

Vuitepsko,  312

Zelande  island,  214

Timor  island,  260,  261,  269

353>  356

Vuolochda, 312, 322, 325, 326,

Zenete,  Marquesse  of,  214

Tingin,  City  of,  24

Varro,  Marcus,  349

331

Zenu,  Region  of,  158

Tirecotus  river,  172

Vascho  Nunnez  de  Balboa,  61,  113,

Vuolocon  river,  319

Zerbi  island,  374

Tiiusi  village,  107

114,  115,  119,  120,  121,  122,  125,

Vuolodimaria,  319

Zerema,  180

Tison,  Thomas,  xiii.

131,  137,  138,  139,  140,  141,  142,

Vuolok,  Lake,  319

Ziglerus,  294,  295,  299

Todos  Sanctos  islands,  177

143,  144,  145,  146,  147,  148,  149,

Zobroba  river,  135

Tolstickh,  322

155,  156,  162,  165,  178,  198,  199,

Wade,  Armigil,  xviii.

Zobraba,  153

Toro,  273

338

Wade,  William,  xviii.

Zohoran  river,  153

Totonogo,  King,  182

Vasilivich,  John  Duke  of,  326

Waranger  fiord,  299

Zolo  island,  259

Totilas,  King,  313

Vasques,  Captain  Francesco,  287

Wardhus, Castle  of,  299,  302,  303,

Zolot  island,  260

Toy,  R.,  xii., xxxvii.,  xxxix.,  388,

Vassy,  xliii.

304,  305,  331

Zorobua  island,  260

398

Vastral,  304

Wardoe,  299

Zubut  island,  256,  257,  258,  272

Transylvanus,  Maximilian,  247,  249,

Vaticane,  The,  loo,  309

Wardoehuus,  299

Zubut,  King  of,  256,  257

262

Vecchiadoro,  287

Warwick,  Earl  of,  xxxviii.

Zula,  Prince,  258

Trelensin,  City  of,  374

Vega,  Fernando  de,  96

Watson,  Thomas,  xL,  xiv.

Zulan  island,  254

Tremisen,  374

Velasquen, Diegus, 186, 187,  190,

Weyszarch  mountain,  300

Trepojentes  Cape,  381-3

195

Whalley,  Richard,  xliv.

Printed  by TiirnbiiU  ^  Spears,  Edinburgh,

U

i

t

1

f.-l

w

i.

-V»vV

^*-

''^\

rv-r

t(

.«>*

\>

^\  -o

.%

*  \  *.

i> "

^;

4  w^c^

"S *J  it^\  "* '^>.

.^,<^.

^4 ^

\

■5,iVi\t.A  '«^

^ *

<  \#»-

^  l%«-

^ ^V .* \x

-^-.  ^^^-^^^^

■*^¥-:!'^V*^\^^ ^^^^t'^^  ^^r.^

W&r  .'■■

:-^*^?

^$

^^:r

^^

n^.

S'.-:

•!i«ww:acsfc._'> ;

^«  '*<fA«5f  >

h>. s * '^V t^

^»s^s^:^.
