TRANSLATIONS


ALEXAKDEB  PETOFI.


TRANSLATIONS

FROM

ALEXANDER  PETOFI,

THE  MAGYAE  POET.


SIE  JOHN  BOWEING,  LL.D.,  F.E.S.,

CORRESPONDENT  OP  THE  HUNGARIAN  ACADEMY,  ETC.,  ETC.

LONDON:

TRUBNER  &  CO.,  60, PATERNOSTER  ROW.

1866.


f%>


HERTFORD :

PRINTED BY  STEPHEN ATJSTIN.


CONTENTS.


PAGE

BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE -  ...  1

INTRODUCTION ... ,.. 15

ISTOK,  THE  FOOL 17

JANOS,  THE  HERO 53

PERPLEXITY Ill

DREAMING 112

BRIGHT  EYES 112

NIGHT 113

TO  MY  HORSE ...  114

THE  TIRED  STEED 115

WINE  AND  SONG 116

FAITHFULNESS 117

NOON-DAY 118

THE  BETYAR 119

TO  AN  UNJUST  JUDGE ...  120

DRINK! 122

ERLAU  ECHOES 123


VI  CONTENTS.

PAGE

AFTER  A  REVEL 120

TIPPLING 127

MUSINGS 128

MASTER  PAUL 130

THE  GOOD  TEACHER 132

CYPRESS  LEAVES 135

MORE  LOVE 139

MAY-NIGHT 140

IGNORANCE  OF  LOVE 141

A  VOW 142

SORROW  AND  JOY 143

FRIENDSHIP 143

THE  GRAVE 144

INDIFFERENCE 144

THE  WORLD'S  SLAVERY 145

SPRING 145

HUNGARIAN  PLAINS 146

THE  WOODS 149

THE  CLOUDS 150

THE  STORK 152

THE  PUSZTA  IN  WINTER 158


CONTENTS.  Vll

PAGE

WINTER  WORLD 161

THE  SPRING  OF  1849 165

PLANT  FLOWERS  UPON  MY  GRAVE ... 167

POWER  OF  LOVE 169

HOPE 170

BLISS 173

HEART  FLOWERS 174

MARRIAGE  DAY 175

ERDOD 177

UNDYING  CERTAINTIES 178

A  LONGING 180

DOUBLE  FEELINGS 182

THE  MANIAC 184

ONE  ONLY  THOUGHT • 188

HOMER  AND  OSSIAN 190

SERENE  HAPPINESS 192

WIFE  AND  SWORD " 196

NIGHTINGALES  AND  LARKS • 198

ANTICIPATION 201

EVENING  AT  HOME 202

SOLITUDE 205


Vlll  CONTENTS.

PAGE

TO  A  FRIEND 206

TO  BE,  OR  NOT  TO  BE 207

WINTER-NIGHT 209

MY  PRAYER 211

TO  MY  FATHER 213

I  AND  THE  SUN 215

EVERY  FLOWER 216

CHRISTMAS 217

THE  IMPATIENT  MOON 219

MOTTO 222

ANOTHER  YEAR 222

THE  NOBLEMAN 224

TO  MANY  HUNGARIAN  ABSENTEES 225

OUR  COUNTRY ... ., 227

HISTORY  OF  THREE  HEARTS 229

THE  HUNGARIAN  NATION 233

THE  KINGDOM  OF  LOVE 235

WORLD'S  HISTORY 239


ALEXANDER  PETOFI,

Whose  Hungarian  name  was  Petrovich  Sandor,  was  born  at
Little  Koros,  in  the  county  of  Pesth,  at  the  midnight  hour
which  ushered  in  the  year  1823.  His  father  was  a  butcher
and  small  landowner,  who  changed  his  abode  more  than
once,  in  Little  Rumania,  but  fixed  himself  at  Szabadssallas,
to  which  the  poet  frequently  refers  as  the  home  of  his
childhood.  The  boy,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  teachings
of  an  evangelical  school,  gave  himself  up  to  music  and
drawing,  but  is  not  reported  to  have  shown  any  evidence
of  precocious  talent.  In  1838,  the  overflowing  of  the  Danube
destroyed  the  little  property  possessed  by  his  family,  and
reduced  them  all  to  poverty.  He  was  sent  to  the  Lyceum
of  the  mountain  town  of  Schemnitz.  There  he  began  to
write  verses,  neglected  his  studies,  was  visited  by  severe
paternal  reproof,  and  having  been  captivated  by  a  theatri-
cal exhibition,  joined  a  German  band  of  travelling  actors,
in  which  he  held  the  lowest  offices  alike  on  the  stage  and  in
the  streets. His  father  found  him  out,  brought  him  home,

1


2  ALEXANDER PETOFI.

and  committed  him  to  the  care  of  a  relation  in  Stuhlweiss-
enburg,  who  soon  transferred  him  to  another  relative,  from
whom  a  promise  was  obtained  that  he  would  provide  for
the  youth's  education.  The  youth,  however,  was  more  re-
marked for  his  devotion  to  Horace  than  to  any  other  sub-
ject, and  having  lost  the  confidence  of  his  protector,  was
sent  as  a  boarder  to  (Edenburg,  whence  he  fled  from  the
Museum  to  the  barracks,  and  enlisted  as  a  common  soldier.
He  covered  the  walls  with  the  records,  and  filled  the  room
with  the  recitals,  of  his  poetry.  He  had  hoped  that  the
destination  of  his  regiment  would  be  the  Tyrol,  and  pro-
jected a  flight  from  thence  into  Switzerland,  his  reading  of
ancient  history  having  created  in  his  mind  an  earnest  love  of
republican  institutions.  But  Croatia  was  the  field  of  service,
where  he  remained  for  nearly  two  years, — so  sad  and
spiritless  that  a  friendly  physician  obtained  his  discharge
as  invalided.  He  went  to  Papa,  intending  to  perfect  his
education,  but  was  more  distinguished  by  his  poetical  re-
citations among  the  young  students  than  by  any  progress
in  his  own  studies.  Again  the  passion  for  the  stage  pos-
sessed him,  and  in  1842  he  joined  another  troop  of  come-
dians. His  stage  attempts  were  utter  failures,  and  he
was  reduced  to  so  ragged  a  condition  that  he  scarcely
ventured  to  show  himself  in  the  public  streets.  He
made  his  way  to  Presburg,  and  sought  the  means  of
existence  as  a  reporter — the  Diet  being  then  sitting — and
found  a  friend  who  gave  him  some  literary  recommendf
tions  to  Pesth. He  obtained  some  small  remuneration  fo^


ALEXANDER PETOFI.  O

translations  from  English  and  French,  but  again  his
romantic  love  for  the  theatre  took  him  to  Debreczin,  where
he  was  even  less  successful  than  before,  and  is  said  to  have
been  put  to  open  shame  upon  the  boards ;  but  he  joined  a
more  humble  strolling  band,  who  played  in  the  surround-
ing villages.  Returning  to  Debreczin  he  met  with  a  former
schoolfellow,  Pakh,  known  as  one  of  Kossuth's  friends,
who  found  for  him  a  domicile  in  the  cottage  of  a  widow
outside  the  town.  He  there  received  an  invitation  to  be
a  contributor  to  a  Pesth  newspaper.  He  welcomed  the
event.  Pakh  shared  with  him  the  whole  of  his  fortune —
it  was  two  florins.  With  these  he  started  for  the  capital,  a
distance  of  nearly  two  hundred  miles.  He  was  twenty  years
old.  He  had  hidden  a  volume  of  manuscript  poetry  between
his  shirt  and  his  breast ;  he  wore  shoes  padded  with  straw,
and,  carrying  a  staff  in  his  hand,  started  for  the  capital,
full  of  dreams  for  the  future.

Up  to  this  time  he  had  borne  the  family  name  of
Petrovich.  When  an  actor  he  took  the  ambitious  title
of  Borostyan  (Laurel).  He  had  published  his  first  poem
under  the  anonyme  of  "  Paul  Kis  of  Penoge  ;"  he  now
adopted  the  name  of  Petofi,  which  his  family  accepted,  and
it  is  a  name  not  likely  to  die.

It  was  in  the  spring  of  1844  that  he  reached  Pesth,  com-
pelled by  the  overflowing  of  the  Theiss  and  the  desolation
'of  the  Puszta  plains  to  go  round  by  way  of  Erlau. On  his
rrival  he  found  a  home  in  the  house  of  a  tailor,  and  he  in-
troduced himself  to  Vorosmarty,  the  then  most  renowned


4  ALEXANDER PETOFI.

of  Magyar  poets.  He  was  at  first  coldly  received,  and  pro-
bably deemed  a  rude,  intrusive  lad ;  but  having  consented
Unwillingly  to  listen  to  some  of  his  poetry,  Yorosmarty's
admiration  burst  out  in  the  exclamation,  "  Hungary  never
had  such  lyrics;  you  must  be  cared  for!"  From  that
moment  his  literary  fortune  was  established — his  merits
recognized.  He  became  the  son  of  his  patron's  adoption, —
was  received  into  the  literary  national  circle  (Nemzeti  Kor) ;
carried  off  the  prizes  of  poetry  ;  and  the  Society  paid  the
expense  of  publishing  his  "Versek"  (Ofen,  1844).  Volume
succeeded  volume  from  his  unwearied  pen.  He  hankered
still  for  an  actor's  reputation,  determined  to  make  another
appeal  to  the  public  on  the  National  Theatre,  —  that
appeal  was  final  and  fatal  ;  and  so  abandoning  the  stage
he  delivered  himself  over  to  song.

His  position  in  Hungary  resembled  that  of  Robert  Burns
in  Scotland.  As  the  kirk  called  the  Ayrshire  bard  "profane,"
the  dilletanti  of  Pesth  insisted  that  Petofi  was  "vulgar."
The  popular  voice,  awarded  him  however,  more  renown
than  dainty  critics*  were  able  sensibly  to  diminish.  "He
never  went  to  bed  at  night,  he  never  arose  in  the  morning,"
says  a  contemporary,  "  without  hearing  his  songs  from  the
multitudinous  passengers  in  the  public  streets."  In  the  very
theatre  where  his  mimic  powers  had  been  put  to  shame,
the  whole  audience  afterwards  rose  at  his  entrance,  and

*  "At  last  criticism  began  to  notice  me,"  he  says  in  one  of  his
private  letters,  "as  a  fat  ox  with  his  nose  in  the  grass,  looks
amazed  on  a  lark,  which  trips  about  and  twitters  near  him."


ALEXANDER PETOFI.  O

the  Eljen  (Hail!)  was  repeatedly  reiterated  until  he  took
his  seat.  Once  in  an  obscure  village  in  Transylvania,  his
presence  was  suddenly  announced  to  a  regiment  of  peasant
soldiers.  "  Is  it  the  poet  ?"  was  the  inquiry,  and  to  the
affirmative  reply  every  voice  re-echoed  "All  hail ! "

The  political  storm  which  burst  out  in  Central  Europe
in  1848  roused  the  Magyar  spirit,  and  Petofi  was  one  of
its  most  influential  and  most  eloquent  representatives.
Many  an  harangue  he  delivered  at  public  assemblies,  and
launched  the  first  newspaper  which  was  emancipated  from
the  censorship.  In  October  of  that  year  he  joined  the
patriot  army,  and  was  made  a  captain  in  the  Honved  bat-
talion. In  the  beginning  of  1849  he  joined  Bern,  whose  ad-
jutant he  became,  and  whose  correspondence  he  conducted.
He  was  present  at  the  fearful  slaughter  in  Segesvar,  on  the
following  31st  of  July.  What  part  he  took,  if  any,  in  that
disastrous  day,  is  not  certain,  but  it  is  believed  he  was
trampled  to  death  in  the  flight  and  confusion  which  fol-
lowed the  retreat  of  the  Magyar  army.  The  body  was
never  discovered,  but  was  thrown  undistinguished,  and,  pro-
bably, undistinguishable,  into  an  enormous  trench,  which
received  the  corpses  of  many  hundreds  of  men  who  thus
perished.  More  than  one  false  Petofi  presented  himself
to  the  Hungarians,  and  much  spurious  poetry  was  pub-
lished under  his  name.  As  the  Portuguese  believe  that
King  Sebastian  will  re-appear,  and  lead  them  forth  to
victory,  so  Petofi  is  said  by  his  countrymen,  to  be  "not
dead,  but  sleeping."


b  ALEXANDER PETOFI.

He  left  a  widow — the  translator  of  Andersen's  tales —
since  married  to  Professor  Arpad  Horvath,  a  son,  and
a  brother  (Stephen),  who  has  shown  some  talent  as  a
popular  poet.  Remenyi,  well  known  to  the  English  court,
has  collected  ten  thousand  florins  for  the  erection  of
a  monument  to  Petofi's  memory,  and  the  house  in  which
he  was  born,  having  been  discovered  in  Little  Koros,  has
been  purchased,  and  will  be  kejjt  sacred  to  his  name.

The  longest  of  his  many  poetical  narratives  is  "  Janos,
the  Hero."  "  Istok,  the  Fool,"  is  more  natural,  but,  per-
haps, less  inventive.  "  The  Curse  of  Love,"  and  "  The
Dream  of  Enchantment,"  are  full  of  youthful  passion.
The  earliest  of  his  productions  was  "  The  Village
Hammer,"  which  appeared  in  1843  ;  the  last  in  1849,  a
fragment — "The  Assessor  of  the  Judgment  Seat."  One
of  them,  "The  Apostle,"  was  suppressed  by  Austrian
authority.

The  titles  of  his  two  dramas  are,  "  Tiger  and  Hyena,"
historical;  "The  Robber  Zold  Marczi,"  a  popular  play.

His  lyrics  are  "Cypress  Leaves  on  Etelka's  Grave"
(40) ;  "  Pearls  of  Love  "  (35)  ;  "  Starless  Nights  ; "
"  Clouds "  (60  aphorisms).  A  first  collection,  with  his
portrait,  consists  of  458  poems ;  a  second  collection  of
630  poems.  Altogether  they  make  ten  volumes,  with
1,775  separate  poems.

He  published  a  prose  romance  entitled  "The  Hangman's
Rope;"  three  volumes  of  rural  tales,  "The  Departed,"
"The  Grandpapa,"  and  "The  Pale  Youth  and  the  Blushing


ALEXANDER PETOFI.  7

Maiden  ;"  two  volumes  of  travels,  "Journey  Notes,"  and
"Travelling  Letters  to  Kerenyi;"  "Leaves  from  my  Day
Book;"  a  collection  of  critical  notices,  of  which  that  on
Shakespeare  is  most  remarkable  ;  correspondence  with
several  of  his  contemporaries  from  1843  to  1848.  Prose
fragments,  are  "  Conversations  with  Bern,"  and  "  Bio-
graphy of  my  son,  aged  seven  months."

From  German  he  translated  Matthison's  "Elegy,"  and
Schiller's  "Ideal;"  from  French,  Dumas'  "Masked  Ball,"
Bernard's  "Lovely  Woman,"  Paul  de  Koch's  "Jenny,"  and
several  of  Beranger's  Chansons.  From  the  English,  James'
"Robin  Hood;"  "Fugitives,"  from  Shelley;  Ossian's
"Oithona;"  "Coriolanus  "  and  a  portion  of  "Romeo  and
Juliet,"  from  Shakspeare ;  and  Seneca's  Third  Letter,
from  the  Latin.

The  list  is  a  marvellous  one,  representing  the  literary
labours  of  less  than  six  years.

Boswell's  devotion  to,  and  prostration  before,  Dr.  John-
son, led  to  the  production  of  the  most  amusing  and  the
most  instructive  of  biographies.  To  the  promotion  of  the
fame  by  the  circulation  of  the  writings  of  Petofi  an
Hungarian  friend  and  admirer  has  dedicated  his  life.
With  the  name  of  Petofi,  that  of  Kertbeny  is  associated  in
an  ever-during  alliance.  He  had  heard  some  strains  from
the  "Versek,"  and  became  a  worshipper  in  the  temple
where  Petofi  had  found  a  shrine.  Of  his  past  intercourse
with  Petofi  he  gives  a  lively  picture.  The  poet  had  not
been  previously  personally  known  to  his  admirer,  who  de-


8  ALEXANDER PETOFI.

fended  him  from  his  own  self-accusations  and  criticisms.
Three  years  afterwards  they  met  again,  when  Petofi  had
become  a  central  orb,  with  many  a  satellite  around.  They
formed  the  League  of  the  Decemvirs,  representing  young
Hungary,  who  recognized  Petofi  as  their  chief,  and  had
for  their  organ  the  most  popular  of  the  Magyar  news-
papers, the  Pesti  Hirlap.  It  was  established  by  Kossuth,
and  is  now  the  receptacle  of  the  contributions  of  some  of
the  most  distinguished  of  living  Hungarians.  Kertbeny
gives  many  details  of  Petofi's  mode  of  life  and  conversa-
tion. Of  Gothe  he  said  that  "  his  style  was  cold,  marble-
like, not  pictorial."  Petofi's  habits  remind  one  of  the
wilder  freaks  of  John  Wilson.  Many  ambrosian  nights —
sleepless,  discursive,  eloquent,  impassioned,  the  youthful
spirits  of  Hungary  passed  together.  In  the  calm  days  when
well-established  freedom  has  subsided  into  a  stiff  reality,
we  do  not  easily  realise  such  a  whirlwind  enthusiasm  ;
as  when  among  the  Jacobins  in  France,  the  Comuneros
in  Spain,  the  Carbonari  in  Italy,  the  long  suppressed  spirit
of  liberty  broke  out  in  its  wild  outpourings.

Of  himself  Petofi  said — "  I  am  but  in  good  and  evil  an
essence  of  the  national  character.  For  a  drop  of  otto  of
roses  a  thousand  flowers  are  crushed, — precious  it  is  and
fragrant ;  but  it  would  be  far  more  so,  if  you  could  concen-
trate the  odour  and  the  beauty  of  every  scattered  leaf,
such  as  you  may  pluck  when  fresh  and  fair,  and  fling
about  to  the  wind."  He  said  of  his  mother — "  She  was
full  of  poetry. I  drank  it  in  the  milk  of  her  bosom  ; I


ALEXANDER PETOFI,  V

learnt  it  from  her  smiles  and  her  tears."  It  is  noteworthy
that  although  Petb'fi  passed  many  years  of  his  life  as  a
wandering  vagabond,  no  impurity  ever  soiled  his  songs,  and
in  his  more  than  three  thousand  poetical  compositions —
unrestrained  and  passionate  as  many  of  them  are — there
is  not  a  scandal-giving  line,  not  an  expression  which  would
cause  a  blush  to  the  modesty  of  a  woman,  and  which  might
not  be  entrusted  to  the  innocence  of  a  child.  When  Kert-
beny  was  projecting  a  visit  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  Deak,
the  leading  man  of  Hungary,  recommended  him  to  stay  at
home,  telling  him  that  to  popularise  a  single  song  of
Petofi,  was  to  render  a  better  service  to  his  country
than  to  trace  the  origin  of  his  countrymen  to  the  noblest
oriental  stem.

The  work  of  translation  has  been  everywhere  done,
everywhere  well  done,  except  in  England.  Dux  took  the
lead  in  Germany  in  1845.  Henry  Heine  wrote  rapturously
about  the  Magyar  poet,  "whose  rustic  song  was  sweeter
than  that  of  the  nightingale  ;"  and  Bettina  von  Arnim  pro-
claimed him  "  the  most  original  of  lyric  poets  in  the  whole
world's  literature.  With  him  will  I  talk  and  revel,
admiring  his  loving  wisdom,  his  philanthropy,  his  affection
for  his  home,  for  his  father  and  his  mother,  and,  above  all,
for  his  patient  pride  in  poverty."  In  the  German  album  of
"A  Hundred  Hungarian  Poets,"  Petofi  occupies  the  highest
place.  Bodenstedt  wrote  a  laudatory  preface  to  Kert-
beny's  version  of  his  writings  ;  and  Alexander  Humboldt
expressed  his  admiration,  that  "after  many  wanderings  he


10  ALEXANDER PETOFI.

had  discovered  in  his  own  neighbourhood,  a  flower  so  rich
in  beauty,  so  enduring,  so  certain  to  be  valued."

"He,"  says  Varnhagen  vou  Ense,  "is  the  noblest  ex-
emplification of  Gothe's  fine  thought,  'Youth  is  drunken-
ness without  wine ;'"  and  Uhland  avowed  that  old  age  alone
had  prevented  his  study  of  the  Magyar  language,  for  the
sole  purpose  of  enjoying  Petofi  in  his  native  dress.  Grimm
declares  that  "Petofi  will  rank  among  the  very  greatest
poets  of  all  times  and  tongues."  "He  first  taught  what  it
was  really  to  feel  the  mingling  of  love  and  admiration,"
writes  Freiligrath.  "His  political  power  is  as  marvellous
as  his  personal  history,"  to  use  the  words  of  Taillandier  ;
and  again,  "  So  natural  is  he,  that  if  every  Hungarian
were  a  poet  he  would  sing  as  Petofi  sings,  —  but  none
with  so  wild  and  fiery  an  enthusiasm."  Bernard  in-
troduced him  into  the  field  of  French  literature,  and
Beranger  expressed  a  delight  that  his  name  should  be
associated  with  a  name  so  great  as  that  of  Petofi.  Of  the
Berlin  edition  of  "  Lyrics "  6000  copies  were  sold,  and
were  welcomed  by  laudatory  criticisms  from  some  of  the
most  trustworthy  of  German  writers.  The  articles  in  the
Revue  des  deux  mondes,  on  the  Hungarian  poetry  of  the  19th
century,  in  which  Petofi  is  the  salient  figure,  were  col-
lected in  a  volume.  Hiel  published  translations  in  Flemish ;
Dmochowski,  Sabowski,  and  Madme  Prussakawa  in  Polish  ;
Andersen  in  Danish  ;  Palluci  in  Italian  ;  while,  in  Brus-
sels, Chassin  edited  a  volume,  entitled  "  Petofi,  the  Poet
of  the  Hungarian  Revolution." A  collection  of  sixteen


ALEXANDER PETOFI.  11

of  the  most  remarkable  of  his  narrative  poems  has  lately
appeared  in  Prague,  dedicated  to  the  present  writer.  An
edition  of  ten  thousand  copies  is  now  announced  of  his
works  by  the  press  of  Germany  and  the  United  States.
Bern,  dying  in  Aleppo,  requested  that  his  poems  should  be
read  to  him  ere  he  departed  ;  and  the  exiles  in  Hungary
write  from  almost  all  parts  of  the  civilized  world  that
they  have  everywhere  found,  or  everywhere  founded,  the
fame  of  their  illustrious  countrymen.

He spoke  prophetically  when  he  thus addressed  his
Lyre  :—

Lyre  !  let  passion  shake  thy  strings  !
For  the  songs  thy  minstrel  sings

Are  his  last — repeat  them  !
That  the  eternal  mountain's  height, —
That  the  ages  in  their  flight, —

Never  may  forget  them.


13


PET  OFT.


The  splendid  sun  awaking  from  the  east,
And  to  the  west  descending  in  its  fall ;

From  its  benignant  rising  to  its  rest,

Looks  down  with  equal  light  and  love  on  all.

So  genius  glory-circled  at  its  birth,

And  gliding  like  a  lamp  of  heaven  on  high,

Bathes  with  celestial  radiance  all  the  earth,
Which  mirrors  back  that  radiance  to  the  sky.

Is  not  the  sun  a  mind — the  mind  a  sun —

Whose  course  no  arm  can  stay,  no  fetters  bind  ?

Do  not  high  thoughts  like  fiery  lightnings  run,

Brighten  and  blaze  and  beam  from  mind  to  mind  ?


14


PET0FI.


So  when  thy  Magyar-star,  o'er  Magyar-land.

Petofi !  rose  to  its  supernal  throne,
As  from  a  fire-cross  lifted  by  God's  hand,

The  rays  shone  forth  and  shine  as  first  they  shone.

It  was  no  meteor,  for  a  meteor  writes

No  golden  lines  of  glory — read  from  far —

But  an  eternal  light  amidst  heaven's  lights,
And  grouped  with  central  stars  a  central  star.


Claremont,  J.  B.

Exeter.


If  the  world  were  a  hat,  my  Hungaria  should  be
The  wreath  that  surrounds  and  adorns  it  for  me.


PETOFI.


15


INTRODUCTION.

Oft  my  wandering  thoughts,  without  a  mark  or  vestige,

Ramble  through  the  world,  a  mystery  and  a  dream,

Though  they  seem  enchained  by  home  and  country's

prestige,

'Tis  an  idle  thought — they  are  not — they  but  seem.

No  my songs are nought but  rays of moonlight

streaming
Through  a  world  of  mist,  in  melancholy's  dreaming.

Better  'twere  to  dwell,  instead  of  dreams,  in  sorrow,
That  is  something  real, — something  worth  a  thought ;

Why  perplex  the  soul  with  visions  for  to-morrow,
When  to-day  its  councils  and  its  cares  has  brought  ?

No  !  the  songs  my  spirit,  overwrought,  is  uttering,

Seem  like  butterflies  among  the  flowerets  fluttering.

Would  a  maiden  wreathe  for  me  a  loving  garland,
I  would  fling  my  woes  into  a  deep  abyss,

Find  a  beam  of  radiance  in  the  starry  far  land,
From  that  maiden's  heart  extract  a  dawn  of  bliss.

And  the  songs  I  sing,  should  be  like  buds  which  June
time,

Opens  to  the  sun  in  nature's  light  and  tune  time.


A


16  INTRODUCTION.

Have  I  then  her  love  ? 0  pour  the  wine,  0  pour  it !

Fill  it  to  the  brim  ! 0  fill  it  to  the  brim  !
Let  the  sparkles  dance  in  gay  rejoicing  o'er  it ;

Gladness  light  the  eyes  and  music  tune  the  hymn  !
For  the  song  I  sing  shall  all  earth's  circle  brighten,
As  the  rainbow's  beams  the  arch  of  heaven  enlighten.

Oh  !  but  while  I  drink,  I  hear  the  chains  of  slavery ;

Hear  the  plaints  of  slaves — and  the  unemptied  glass
Dash  upon  the  ground — but  this  is  idle  bravery  ;

These  are  worthless  wailings — wasted  words. Alas !
All  the  songs  I  sing — are  but  the  utterings  clouded,
Of  a  sorrowing  soul  in  darkest  darkness  shrouded.

So  they  suffer — millions !  million  slaves !  they  suffer —

And  they  bear  the  chain — the  intolerable  chain —
Has  not  heaven  a  hope — a  dream  of  hope  to  offer  ?
Shall  they  pray  and  plead,  and  pray  and  plead  in
vain, —
No! my  songs  shall  wake,  while  nations  shout  and

wonder,
Liberty  and  light,  in  storms  of  living  thunder.


17


ISTOK,  THE  FOOL.

One  of  the  great  charms  of  Petofi's  poetry  is  his  truthful  and
vivid  picturing  of  the  peculiarities  of  Hungarian  life.  The  wide,
wild  Pusztas,  in  the  hands  of  most  of  those  who  have  de-
scribed them,  have  been  associated  with  gloomy,  dreary  thoughts
of  solitude  and  weariness  —vast,  interminable  wastes, — over  which
here  and  there  are  scattered  a  few  wretched,  ruined  hovels,  in-
habited by  a  gloomy,  ill-clad  peasantry ;  while  the  Puszta,  as  by
him  delineated,  becomes  a  living,  breathing,  beautiful,  and  varied
object,  connected  with  colourings  of  grandeur,  immensity  and
freedom.  As  the  Arabs  careering  in  the  desert,  to  whom
the  streets  of  a  city  look  like  prison  walls,  he  revelled  in  the
free  air  and  the  rude  liberty  of  the  Puszta,  which  was  to  him  the
ideal  of  his  emancipated  country,  and  furnished  him  some  of
the  richest  materials  to  feed  the  imaginings  and  strugglings  of  his
spirit  for  an  anticipated  liberty.  His  "  Istok,  the  Fool,"  is  a
remarkable  exhibition  of  his  passion  and  his  power,  which
gathered  its  elements  out  of  the  Puszta  life  ;  and  in  the  dreaminess
of  a  pretended  folly,  displaying  all  the  heavings  of  patriotic
emotion.

He  comes  !  lie  comes  !  he  hurries  through

In  most  bewildered  fashion ;
And  how  he  storms  !  who  ever  knew

A  man  in  such  a  passion  ?

He  whips  his  courser  fiercely,  wild  ;

He  drives  his  spur-points  bloody ;
He  pulls  the  reins — he  sweeps  the  field, —

His  cheeks  with  fury  ruddy.


18  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

Heyda  !  nought  stops  him  in  his  way,
No  hindrance  can  restrain  him ;

No  barrier  there,  no  toll  to  pay, —
Hell's  gate  would  not  detain  him.

"  Across,  across  the  Puszta  wide, —
None  its  expanse  can  measure, —
There's  liberty  on  every  side,
To  right,  to  left,  at  pleasure.

"  I'll  toss  my  shako  in  the  air,
As  on  my  courser  dashes ;
Out  of  the  way !  beware !  beware  !
Of  mud  and  mire  and  splashes."

And  while  he  spoke,  the  rattling  rain
Came  down  in  cataract-currents,

And  drenched  him, — while  he  curs'd  again,
With  its  o'erwhelming  torrents.

What  did  the  youngster  there,  but  stand

As  to  the  spot  close  fettered ;
Like  Csesar,  when  in  Brutus'  hand,

He  saw  the  glaive  that  glittered.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  19

Like  Csesar  in  his  mantle  clad,

Which  proudly  he  wrapped  round  him :

But  fate  for  our  poor  pelted  lad,
No  covering  mantle  found  him.

,  While  he  who  has  a  thick,  warm  fur,

And  is  well  wrapped  within  it,
May  scorn  the  storm, — he  need  not  stir,

But  patient  wait — a  minute.

"  And  thou !  who  lingerest  thus,  I  would
The  thunderbolt  should  smite  thee !
Fool,  as  thou  art,  begone  !  no  good
Is  waiting  to  invite  thee.

"  But  I, — I  am  a  privileged  man,
Baptized  in  Christian  font,  I
Demand  a  thousand  honours,  can —
A  thousand  prizes  count  I.

"  I  have  been  drenched  enough  in  rain
To  whiten  any  Moorman  ;
Yet  was  I  born,  and  must  remain,
A  very,  very  poor  man.


20  ISTOK. THE FOOL.

"  Let  that  rain  drench  my  garments  thro'
Torn  by  the  storm  I'll  wear  them  :
Yet  this,  Philosophy  will  do —

'  Twill  teach  me  how  to  bear  them.

"  My  vest  an  honest  tailor  made,
In  his  serene  enjoyment ;
But  though  the  bill  was  never  paid,
The  work  gave  him  employment."

And  here  the  lad  laughed  out  aloud,
In  laughter  queer  and  curious  :

Down  fell  the  waters  from  the  cloud,
More  furious  and  more  furious.

And  calm  and  patient  was  the  lad,

Not  angry  nor  offended ;
It  makes  the  saddest  mood  more  sad

To  mourn  what  can't  be  mended.

And  soon  the  storm-clouds  disappeared,
The  floods  away  were  driven  ;

And  a  bright  vision  Istok  cheered, —
A  rainbow  in  the  heaven.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  21

"  Thou  lovely  bond  !  " the  wanderer  cried,
"  Life's  many  hues  displaying  :
A  peacock  stalking  in  his  pride,
A  promised  dawn  surveying.

"  An  arch  triumphal,  mirroring  back
The  sun's  victorious  glances,
Scattering  the  storm-clouds  in  his  track,
With  glorious  golden  lances.

"  But  thou  art  far,— tho'  farther  yet
My  home — and  I  am  weary  ;
And  soon  in  night  the  sun  will  set,
And  earth  be  damp  and  dreary.

"  I  am  no  prophet — yet  I  dare
Foretell  that  pretty  maidens
Will  hardly  give  a  listening  ear
This  day  to  my  upbraidings.

"  They  bear  with  me,  for  such  a  lad

Would  neither  harm  nor  wrong  them  ;
I  wish  that  I  a  stork's  wings  had
To  carry  me  among  them.


22  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

"  What  can  I  do  ? How  shall  I  fare  ?
And  who  shall  me  deliver,
When  the  dark  night  shall  leave  me  here,
In  damp  and  cold  to  shiver  ?

"  They  call  me  fool — no  fool  am  I,
If,  in  my  helter-skelter,
I  see  a  cottage  where  to  fly,
And  in  it  find  a  shelter.

"If  it  should  prove  a  robber's  nest,
Which  welcome  kind  afforded,
It  need  not  break  a  miser's  rest,
Whose  gold  is  safely  hoarded.

"  The  chimney  smokes — the  hearth  looks  bright  ;
Smoke — light — there  must  be  fire  then,
And  I  shall  warm  me — 0  delight !
Find  food — what  more  desire  then !

"  And  this  is  logic — sound  and  good —

Which  mine  own  wits  have  brought  me ;
And  if  they  bring  me  fire  and  food,
How  well  my  school  has  taught  me."


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  23

The  Tanya,  then,  the  youngster  found,

And  bent  his  footsteps  tow'rd  it ;
'Tis  in  the  Puszta's  farthest  ground,

And  shade  and  silence  guard  it.

The  walls,  the  windows  tottering  stood,

A  tale  of  ruin  telling —
Is  it  a  grave  mound's  solitude  ?

Or  a  deserted  dwelling  ?

As  orphan-children  by  the  tomb,

Of  their  dead  mother  weeping,
There  stood  some  scathed  trees  in  the  gloom,

Their  mournful  vigils  keeping.

Nought  showed  that  dwelling  wild  and  wide

Of  master-mason's  doings ;
But  time's  hard  foot  on  every  side

Had  trampled  on  the  ruins.

The  mortar  with  the  rubbish  lay,

The  windows  all  were  broken,
The  shutters  swung  and  creaked — the  play

Of  rain  and  storm  a  token.


24  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

Before  the  door,  upon  the  ground,
A  lazy  hound  was  growling,

And  friend  or  foe,  the  ugly  hound
Saluted  with  his  howling.

There  stood  an  old  man  by  the  sill
Of  the  remoter  dwelling,

Who,  moving  slow  or  standing  still,
Was  equally  repelling.

'Twas  all  so  damp,  so  dark  and  dull,
So  dreary,  dismal,  dying,

As  if  a  ban  of  curses  full
Upon  the  place  were  lying.

And  Istok,  as  he  looked  around,
Uttered  an  exclamation  :
"  There  must  the  Tartars  still  be  found
Amidst  the  desolation.

This  is  the  seat  of  Tamerlane,

Of  the  vile  Tartar  races,
And  here  I  see  of  Genghis  Khan,

The  indisputable  traces."


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  25

So,  spite  of  all  the  dangers,  he

Advancing  as  a  Koman
Bold, — and  his  foremost  enemy

Was  an  old  ugly  woman.

She  held  a  poker  in  her  hand,

The  dying  ashes  moving ;
He  gently  spoke  as  if  he  plann'd

To  win  her  heart  by  loving.

"Good  evening,  worthy  Dame! — round  you

The  light  of  morning  gathers —
A  rose  of  spring-time,  wet  with  dew  ; —

We  had  the  same  forefathers."

But  soon  the  beldam  stopped  the  talk,

So  rash  and  so  provoking —
'  Begone  !  the  sooner  off  you  walk

The  better — with  your  joking.

"  No  doubt  you  think  a  welcome  here

Would  be  extremely  pleasant —
You'd  like  good  wine  and  costly  cheer,

And  honeycomb  and  pheasant !  "


26  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

"  Yes  !  better  than  a  cabbage-mess,
If  to  such  fare  invited :
You  had  not  seen  me  here,  I  guess,
Had  I  not  been  benighted.

"  But  as  'tis  night,  I  would  implore  " —
And  then  he  stopped — forbidden
To  pass  the  witch-protected  door,
And  enter  such  an  Eden,

Yet  asked— "  Where  is  the  landlord,  Ma'am,
For  if  the  landlord  knew  me,

And  I  could  tell  him  who  I  am,
Perhaps  he'd  listen  to  me."

"  I  am  the  landlord,"  said  a  voice,
As  if  a  growling  motion
Had  brought  from  ocean's  deep  a  noise
To  move  that  troubled  ocean.

An  ancient  man,  with  snowy  beard,
Ploughed  forehead,  stately  statute,

And  solemn,  heavy  gait  appeared —
But  gaunt  in  form  and  feature.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  27

He  stood  as  stands  a  grave-cross  stark —

Unbending  and  unchanging,
When  whitening  snow,  or  cloud- storms  dark

Are  wildly,  fiercely  ranging.

He  looked — as  looks  a  church-yard — dull,

With  ghouls  and  spirits  flurried  ;
Where  tombs  are  thick,  and  graves  are  full,

In  which  all  joys  are  buried.

Up  rose  the  youngster's  spirit,  moved

By  one  so  stern  and  surly  ;
And  thus  courageously  reproved

The  landlord  bluff  and  burly.

Be  calm  !  be  calm  !  my  worthy  host,

And  hold  thy  bursting  ire  in  ;
I  am  not  suffering  from  the  frost,

Nor  from  the  heat  perspiring.

But  truly  to  the  skin  am  wet,
And  drenched  my  garments  rather  ;

So  in  thy  tender  mercy  let

Me  dry  my  clothes,  good  father !


28  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

"  And  if  there  be  a  plank  where  I
Can  fling  a  weary  man  down,
There  will  I  as  contented  lie
As  on  the  softest  swan-down."

"  Well !"  said  the  host — it  was  enough,
Though  growled  in  seeming  rudeness  ;
The  youngster  thanked  the  old  man  rough,
"  I'm  grateful  for  your  goodness."

He  sat  the  chimney -hearth  within,

And  soon  he  fell  a-dozing,
More  happy  than  was  Ermelin

Upon  his  throne  reposing.

"  What  want  I  more  ? — The  world  is  mine,

I  heed  not  saint  or  sinner  ;
Except  that  I  should  like  to  dine,

If  I  could  find  a  dinner."

Such  were  his  dreams  ;  and  in  such  strait,

If  seeking  an  adviser,
Altho'  a  fool,  you  long  might  wait

Before  you  found  a  wiser.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  29

What  was  and  is,  and  could  not  be —

What  might  or  might  not  happen,
Had  he  but  worn  a  night-cap  he

Had  crowded  his  night-cap  in.

And  crowded  were  his  brains  by  this,

And  other  such  reflections ;
The  old  people  heard  his  reveries,

His  sighs,  his  interjections  !

Three  wagons  could  not  carry  all

The  burdens  of  his  spirit ;
And  while  they  heard  him  cry  and  call,

They  only  laughed  to  hear  it.

Their  tongues  were  silent  as  a  key

Within  a  lock  that's  rusted ;
But  hunger  comes,  do  what  you  may,

And  chance  cannot  be  trusted.

At  last — at  last  the  old  man  cried —

For  hunger  got  the  upper
Hand,  as  the  fool  had  prophesied —
-  We  must  sit  down  to  supper."


30  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

He  listened  anxiously  to  them,
And  heard  the  grey -beard  tell  her,

The  wife  of  old  .Methusalem —
Of  plundered  safe  and  cellar.

"  We'll  get  a  royal  supper  then  !  "

He  to  himself  suggested  ?
"And  who  shall  be  the  serving  men?

Even  I,  were  I  requested.

"  0  sweet ! most  sweet !  my  reverend  sir,
Will  be  the  supper's  flavour  ;
There's  only  one  thing  wanting  here —
A  little  salt  for  savour.

"  Not  common  salt — that  is  not  it — ■
That's  every  where  abundant,
We  want  the  attic  salt  of  wit,
With  quips  and  jokes  redundant.

"  Why  even  the  fish,  in  silence  bred,
Despise  our  solemn  silence,
And  wish  that  they  themselves  were  led
To  exile  many  a  mile  hence.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  31

"  Silence  no  better  is  than  death,
And  more  than  death  I  dread  it ;
0  lend  to  me  your  stock  of  breath,
More  value  I  than  bread,  it.

"  Science,  and  art,  and  history,
Political  economy,
Are  all  familiarised  to  me,

As  earth's  and  heaven's  astronomy.

"  I've  lived  in  north,  south,  east,  and  west,
In  cottage  and  in  palace,
Will  talk  of  what  may  please  you  best,
Without  a  word  of  malice.

"  But  speak,  good  man  !  and  I'll  reply  " —

A  touching  melancholy
Gave  forth  an  answer  from  his  eye —

"  To  me  'tis  all,  all  folly."

"No,  that  is  but  a  calumny,

Reproachful  to  high  heaven ;
The  world  cannot  all  evil  be,
There's  good  in  evil  even."


ISTOK, THE FOOL.

"  Good!  good!  where's  good  ?"  The  old  man  shook

His  head  in  grave  dejection ;
"  I  know  not  where  to  find,  or  look,

For  favor  or  affection.

"  I  bear  the  weight  of  sixty  years,
With  all  their  bitternesses,
For  time  has  turned  all  smiles  to  tears,
And  curses  follow  kisses.

"  The  tree  of  life  has  lost  its  fruits,
The  winds  its  branches  flinging,
Wasted  its  trunk,  and  torn  its  roots,
Its  birds  have  ceased  their  sino-ino;.

"  The  very  hopes  that  linger  last
Are  faded  and  departed  :
And  nought  is  left  of  all  the  past
But  memories,  broken-hearted.

"  My  very  youth  was  sour  and  sad,
And  winter- wrapt  and  weary  :
How  can  old  age  be  gay  or  glad
When  youth  was  dark  and  dreary  ?


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  33

I  loved  an  angel,  heavenly  born,

Pure  as  the  snow  I  thought  her ;
But  she  became  a  thing  of  scorn

And  shame — pollution's  daughter.

So  my  spring  flower  was  scathed,  I  cursed

'  My  destiny  ill-fated  ;
I  waited  for  the  summer's  burst,
For  autumn  fruits  I  waited.

They  came,  they  passed,  they  fled,  they  brought

Of  better  days  no  token ;
Brought  nought  but  woes  and  wailings,  nought

But  wrecks  and  ruins  broken.

:  Short  gleam  of  day, — long  darkness  gloomed,

I  lost  two  lovely  children ;
One  lives, — to  foul  dishonour  doomed,

0  misery  bewildering !

'  Ten  years  have  past, — I  stand  bereft

Of  all,  a  vile  weed,  rotten,
Down-trodden — one  sole  longing  left,
To  die,  and  be  forgotten.

3


34  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

"  This  sad  account  I  fain  would  close,
This  bitter,  bitter  being ;
Mandate  of  death !  come !  from  his  woes
The  wretched  prisoner  freeing.

"  0  what  a  bliss  it  were  to  sleep
Beyond  the  reach  of  sorrow  ;
When  eye-balls  doomed  to-day  to  weep
Shall  drop  no  tears  to-morrow."

Such  was  the  old  man's  evidence,
Which  sad  experience  taught  him  ;

Where  Istok  found  both  truth  and  sense,
And  suddenly  bethought  him  :

«  Why  was  I  wanton  with  his  woe  ?
An  old  man's  woes  count  double :
Father !  I  would  not  wound  thee  !  No  !
Nor  trifle  with  thy  trouble.

"  Yes,  father  !  T  have  sinned,  and  bear
The  burthen  of  confession ;
Yet  you  transgress, — Old  Man  !  despair —
Despair  is  your  transgression.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  35

"  But  of  all  sins,  the  very  worst
Is  stubborn  Pessimismus !
And  of  all  crimes  the  most  accursed
Is  stupid  Atheismus !

"  Despair  is  but  hell's  fearful  cry,
Proclaiming  in  its  madness,
That  heaven  is  godless  vacancy,
And  earth  a  void  of  sadness.

"  And  they  who  doubt  the  grace  of  God,
The  great,  the  good  preceptor,
Shall  feel  the  smitings  of  His  rod,
When  they  renounce  His  sceptre.

"  For  all  One  Father  have — for  all
That  Father  cares,  out-pouring
The  sun-beams  glance,  the  rain  drops  fall
On  th'  heedless  as  th'  adoring.

"  But  patience !  since  for  all  his  sons
That  Father  spreads  a  table
With  bounties,  blisses,  benisons,
And  gifts  incalculable.


36  IST0K, THE FOOL.

';  In  patience  wait !  as  sun  and  star

Break  though  heaven's  azure  curtain ;
So  constant  all  His  mercies  are,
But  still  more  bright  and  certain.

'•'  Yes  !  even  in  this  world's  midnight,  He
Some  streaks  of  light  hath  given  ;
And  midst  our  dark  mortality,
Hung  up  a  star  in  heaven.

"  And  from  that  star  a  ray  falls  down,
As  radiance  fell  on  Eden,
Bright,  all  the  hills  with  light  to  crown  ;
Sweet,  ocean's  depths  to  sweeten."

So  spake  the  youth,  the  old  man  prest
His  hand,  and  when  he  stopt  there,

Sweet  as  the  milk  from  mother's  breast,
Those  gracious  words  had  dropt  there.

The  old  man's  heart  at  nature's  touch
Was  melted — "  I  implore  thee

Tell  me  where  thou  hast  learnt  so  much  ?
What  land, — what  mother  bore  thee  ?"


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  37

That  land,  that  mother's  honoured  name,

Flittered  like  ghosts  before  him  ;
And  many  thoughts  of  sadness  came

In  gloomy  vision  o'er  him.

Yet  spake  he  calmly,  as  in  glee  :
"  I  heard  the  owlets  screeching,
Out  of  the  gloomy  ivy -tree,
And  listened  to  their  teaching.

"  A  no- where  born,  unowned  am  I,
The  cloud-land  my  dominion  ;
My  ancestors  were  nobody,
My  soul  a  petrel's  pinion.

"  I  wander  forth,  my  pilgrim's  staff
A  fit  companion  makes  me  ;
I  doff  or  don  my  hat, — I  laugh
Or  weep, — as  fancy  takes  me.

"  I  care  for  hunger  not,  nor  cold,
To  me  even  pain  is  pleasant ;
The  dawning  future  makes  me  bold,
Because  I  hate  the  present.


38  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

'•'You  ask  my  birth-place,  and  my  school,
My  history,  name,  and  nation, —
Enough — Istok,  Istok,  the  Fool : —
That  is  my  appellation."

And  the  next  morning,  firm  and  tight
His  knapsack  having  fastened,

To  the  old  man,  at  morning's  light,
The  grateful  Istok  hastened;

And  gave  a  kind  farewell,  and  said —
"If  luck  should  come, — a  prophet

Once  visited  this  humble  shed,
And  parting,  told  thee  of  it."

The  old  man  grasps  the  youngster's  hand,
He  trembles  as  he  hails  him  ;

Tears  starting  in  his  eye-balls  stand,
His  power  of  utterance  fails  him.

At  last,  words,  broken  words,  and  weak,
Broke  from  his  lips, — "  God  guide  thee,

I  would — I  would — I  cannot  sj)eak  ;
But  let  all  good  betide  thee.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  39

"  God  guide  thee  !  No  !  that  cannot  be—
The  word,  Farewell !  I  never
Can  utter  a  farewell  to  thee,
So  stay  with  me  for  ever.

"I'm  poor,  I'm  old,  but  here,  yes,  here,
You  shall  find  more  of  loving,
Of  kindness,  peace,  than  other  where, —
0  dream  not  then  of  moving.

"  Speak, — speak  as  you  spoke  yesterday,
It  was  so  wisely  spoken ;
It  brought  such  healing  that  it  may
Even  heal  a  heart  that's  broken.

"  And  wilt  thou  not,  dear  friend,  remain !"
The  young  man  answered,  "  Even,
Even  as  you  will ;  the  parting's  pain
Be  spared  to  both  by  heaven.

"  If  babbling  such  as  mine  can  give
An  old  man  peace  or  pleasure,
In  pleasure  and  in  peace  we'll  live,
And  babble  without  measure.


40  ISTOK. THE FOOL.

"  But  there's  a  rumbling  noise  at  hand,
I  hear  men's  voices  humming  ;
A  waggon  on  the  Puszta  sand.
And  company  is  coming."

"  They  must  not  enter  here,"  cried  he ;

"  Here  is  there  room  for  no  man."
"  What !  not  my  grandfather  to  see  ?  "
Answered  a  sweet-voiced  woman.

The  door  flung  ope,  which  stood  ajar,
In  leaped  a  smiling  maiden ;

She  was  as  lovely  as  a  star,
With  light  and  love  o'erladen.

She  clung  her  to  the  old  man's  breast,
With  smiles,  and  tears,  and  kisses  ;

0  never  was  a  mortal  blest,
With  such  excess  of  blisses.

"  Thy  grandchild,  I,  to  thee  I  cling,
0  welcome  and  protect  me  ;

1  comfort  ask,  and  comfort  bring,

And  thou  will  not  reject  me.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  41

"  And  I  am  lost,  unless  in  thee
I  find  a  sire's  protection ;
My  father  has  abandoned  me, —
I  trust  to  thine  affection.

"  For  he  insists  that  I  shall  wed
(And  for  the  gift  be  grateful)
A  man  whose  home,  and  heart,  and  head,
Are  most  intensely  hateful.

"  He  stood,  a  cold  stone  petrified,
I  wept, — I  raved, — I  pleaded ;
0  turn  not  thou,  as  he,  aside,
But  give  the  shelter  needed.

"I  see  in  thy  reproachful  eye,
A  menace  to  exile  me  ;
0  give  me  not  to  infamy,

To  doom  that  would  defile  me  !

"  Long,  long  I  dreamed  that  thou — that  thou, —
And  yet  I  dared  not  try  thee  ;
0  hear  me,  help  me,  save  me  now,
Compel  me  not  to  fly  thee.


42  ISTOK, THE FOOL,

"  Do  what  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  not  be
So  steely,  stony -breasted ;
No  !  thou  wilt  not  surrender  me,
To  wed  with  the  detested."

What  could  he  say  ? — the  poor  old  man —
When  hearts  are  flowing  over, .

No  fettering  power  of  language  can
Thought's  hidden  depths  discover.

But  sighs  and  sobs  and  tears, — instead
Of  words — unchecked,  out-breaking ;

The  tender  look,  the  bending  head,
Were  eloquently  speaking.

The  present  and  the  past  were  blent

In  one  confused  emotion,
As  mingling  rivers,  when  intent

On  flowing  towards  the  ocean.

That  ocean  whelmed  him  in  th'  abyss
Of  storm-tossed  waves  confusing —

Life,  death,  weal,  woe,  light,  darkness,  bliss,
In  wild  bewildered  musing.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  43

After  long  silence — as  the  rocks,

Heaven-smitten,  pour  their  streaming,—

"  A  friend  ? — and  do  my  snowy  locks
Grow  dark,  or  am  I  dreaming  ?

"A  dream  ! — What  dream  ? Can  this  be  she,

And  was  it  I  who  taught  her
To  dance,  sweet  child  !  upon  my  knee —

Young  man,  'tis  my  grand-daughter.

Stretch  out  thy  hand — come  near  to  me,

All — all  shall  be  forgiven,
For  o'er  our  dark  mortality,

There  shines  a  star  in  heaven.

So  come  to  me,  and  stay  and  trust,

With  me  thou  shalt  abide,  dear !
I  will  thy  guardian  be — thou  must

Be  ever  at  my  side,  dear !  "

And  many  a  loving  word  he  said,

More  than  I  can  repeat  now,
In  gentleness  engendered,

All  sleek  and  soft  and  sweet,  now  !


44  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

But  hark  !  without — a  thundering  voice —
A  father  claims  his  daughter ;
"  Begone  ! Begone  !  "  the  old  man  cries,
"  What  misery  hast  thou  brought  her  ?

"  Cross  not  my  threshold — but  begone  !
Thou  vainly  hast  pursued  her,
Or  I  will  be  the  banished  one,
And  God  shall  curse  the  intruder.

"  Thy  child  ? 0  mention  not  the  name !
Thou  wert  the  vile  invader,
Who  to  disgrace,  and  sin,  and  shame,
Wretch ! did'st  conspire  to  lead  her.

"  Yes  ! thro'  thy  child,  just  heaven  shall  mete
What  thou  to  me  hast  meted,
And  my  dark  history's  curse  repeat,
In  thine  more  dark  repeated.

"  Again  begone  ! No  more  intrude,
Off — need  I  further  press  thee  ?
I  would  not  curse  thee  if  I  could,
And  yet  I  cannot  bless  thee."


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  45

The  old  man  spoke — more  sad  than  stern,

His  darkened  glance  alighted
Upon  his  son — he  saw  him  turn,

And  flee  away  affrighted.

The  old  man  stood — a  statue  grand —

Cold — silent — without  motion ;
Standing,  as  broken  icebergs  stand

Upon  a  frozen  ocean.

But  when  the  graceless  son  had  fled,

The  old  man's  eyes  o'er- swelling,
A  shower  of  heavy  tear-drops  shed,

And  then  he  sought  his  dwelling.

And  there  sat  down,  depressed  and  dumb,
Unnerved — unmoved — while,  coldly,

He  saw  the  young  man  towards  him  come,
Who  thus  addressed  him  boldly.

;'  I  am  no  longer  wanted  here,
For  thou  hast  found  a  treasure,
Beyond  all  other  treasures  dear,

Whose  worth  no  words  can  measure.


46


TSTOK. THE FOOL.


"  Give  me  thy  blessing,  I  am  gone  ;
My  destiny  is  pressing  ;
Thou  honored  sire  ! Thou  smiling  one  !
Give — give  me  both  your  blessing."

And  then  he  moved,  as  if  to  go  ;

The  old  man's  eye-balls  glistened —
He  uttered  a  pathetic  "  No  !  "

And  while  the  young  man  listened,

He  said — "  I  order  thee  to  stay,

No  difficulty  make  now,
And  as  my  griefs  are  past  away,

My  joys  thou  shalt  partake  now."

"  Well !  I  remain  ! — So  be  it  then  ;
Instal  me  the  protector,
Proclaim  me  both  of  beast  and  men,
The  ruler  and  director.

"  You  have  a  trusty  maiden  now,
For  all  the  household's  guiding  ;
O'er  all  above  and  all  below,
Becomingly  presiding.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  47

'  And  I,  a  world-experienced  man,

Called  by  the  doom  of  fate  here,
Out  of  these  ancient  bear-holes  can
A  noble  house  create  here."

Great  was  the  change;  he  gathered  round

The  servants,  fast  and  faster  :
And  soon  the  very  meanest  found

The  influence  of  the  master.

And  soap  and  sand  and  brush  and  broom,

And  three  days'  thorough  labour,
Had  metamorphosed  roof  and  room,

So  that  no  passing  neighbour

Had  known  the  place,  from  dirt  and  dust,

Clean  as  a  soldier's  jacket ;
Keys,  locks,  bolts,  handles  free  from  rust,

All  brightening  in  the  racket

By  Istok  made — the  fool — who  can

Make  wiser  mortals  follow  ;
There  was  a  spirit  in  the  man,

Not  a  mere  tinkling  hollow.


48  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

He  could  command,  and  was  obeyed,

A  firm,  but  gentle  power  ;
He  knew  the  value  of  the  maid,

The  influence  of  a  flower.

He  rises  with  the  rising  mom,

And  to  the  Puszta  going,
Paces  the  furrows,  binds  the  corn,

Or  watches  o'er  the  sowing.

And  when  the  maiden,  busied  still,
With  household  care  is  toiling,

She  sees  him  o'er  the  window  sill,
And  cheers  him  with  her  smiling.

And  here, — there, — everywhere  he  moved,

With  labour's  riches  laden  ;
His  industry  the  old  man  loved,

His  heart  the  youthful  maiden.

And  so  hours  fled,  and  so  fled  days,

Such  are  too  swiftly  fleeing,
While  those  who  saw  their  happy  ways,

Felt  happier  in  the  seeing.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  49

How  was  the  wonder  brought  about  ?

It  seemed  a  marvellous  history,
And  many  a  guess  and  many  a  doubt

Were  mingled  in  the  mystery.

But  day  to  day  improvement  brought,

Some  ever  new  invention  ;
Strange  is  the  magic  power  of  thought,

When  led  by  good  intention !

When  all  was  ordered — ordered  well,
He  strapped  his  pack  for  starting ;

He  sought  the  old  man.  sought  the  belle,
To  say, "lam  departing."

But  no  ! The  words  he  never  spoke,

For  misery  to  his  eye  lent
The  tears  that  drowned  his  tongue,  and  broke

His  heart,  and  he  was  silent.

The  old  man  guessed — the  maiden  felt

The  meanings  yet  unuttered ;
Upon  his  trembling  lips  they  dwelt,

Which  broken  accents  stuttered.


50  ISTOK, THE FOOL.

Then  all  fell  weeping — maid  and  man
And  youth — their  hot  cheeks  glitter

With  the  thick  stream  of  tears  that  ran,
So  bursting  and  so  bitter.

And  so  they  sobbed  and  wept — each  breast
With  varied  passions  throbbing  ;

The  old  man  left  his  seat  of  rest,
His  weeping  and  his  sobbing —

Rushed  on  the  youth,  and  soon  untied
The  straps  the  pack  enfolding ;
. The  maiden  swiftly  cast  aside
The  staff  that  he  was  holding.

And  sack  and  staff  are  there  anon,

Upon  a  peg  suspended ;
Istok,  the  Fool,  has  never  gone

From  thence,  as  he  intended.

Was  he  a  fool  ? Perchance  there's  less

Of  folly  than  is  seeming,
When  for  substantial  happiness

We  give  up  idle  dreaming.


ISTOK, THE FOOL.  51

What  flowers  were  on  the  Puszta  seen,

What  music  and  what  dances  !
A  happy  wedding  is,  I  ween,

The  best  of  life's  romances.

And  when  they  left  the  altar,  blest

With  pastoral  benediction,
Tears  fell  upon  the  old  man's  breast,

Of  joy,  and  not  affliction.

"  My  children  ! From  my  inmost  heart
I  bring  congratulation,
And  now  I  may  in  peace  depart,
For  I  have  seen — salvation."

"Depart !  0  not  till  thou  hast  seen —
(We  know  What  comes  of  courting)
Thy  great  grandchildren  on  the  green,
And  blessed  them  in  their  sporting."

Years  pass,  and  children  in  their  play,

Bound  happy  parents  gather ;
The  only  question  is,  who  may

Most  please  that  dear  grandfather.


52  ISTOK, THE FOOL,

And  now  the  wild  winds  drive  the  clouds,
'Tis  winter's  sharpest  weather,

The  cold  mists  wrap  the  earth  in  shrouds,
The  white  snows  drape  the  heather.

Yet  thro'  the  darkness  of  the  night,
When  all  around  seems  mourning,

There  burns  in  one  sweet  cot  a  light,
That  is  for  ever  burning.

Where  by  the  chimney  sit — a  clan,
Their  evening  beverage  quaffing —

A  husband,  wife  and  ancient  man,
And  children  round  them  laughing.

The  storms  to  them  no  terrors  bring,
No  fears  to  them  are  coming —

Go  !  listen  to  the  songs  they  sing,
And  hear  the  spindle  humming.


NOTES.

Istok — Pronounced Ishtok,  the Magyar  name  for  Stephen,  or
Steeny.

Puszta— The  waste,  the  heath,  the  wide  expanse of land — as
the  Pampas  of  South  America.

Tanya — The  cottage,  often  the  Inn  or  pot-house  of  the  Pusztas.


JANOS,  THE  HERO.


"Janos,  the  Hero,"  is  one  of  the  most  popular  of  Petofi's
Poems.  Janos  is  a  peasant  of  the  Plains,  who,  heing  separated
from  his  love,  Iluska,  passes  through  a  series  of  marvellous
adventures,  returns  to  his  native  village  to  learn  that  the  object
of  his  affections,  who  had  been  faithful  to  him  through  much
suffering,  was  numbered  with  the  dead.  From  her  grave,  which
he  visits,  he  plucks  a  rose  that  is  his  companion  through  scenes
and  struggles  more  terrible  than  any  of  his  early  encounters,
and  at  last  penetrates  into  Fairyland,  where  —  contrasting  his
own  loneliness  and  misery  with  the  felicity  that  surrounds  him —
he  flings  his  rose  into  an  adjacent  lake,  intending  to  follow  it,
when  suddenly  his  Iluska  rises  radiant  from  the  waters,— they
were  the  waters  of  immortality,  —  and  flings  herself  into .  his
arms.  They  become  the  King  and  Queen  of  Fairyland,  where
they  still  are  supposed  to  reign.


The  poem  consists  of  27  parts,  every  one  of  which
is  characterized  by  originality,  variety,  and  power.
"  The  Hero,"  a  Magyar  shepherd,  is  introduced  near
one  of  the  rude  huts  (Juhassbojtar)  which  are  found
on the wild, wide plains  of Hungary. Hot and


54:  JANOS, THE HEKO.

weary,  the  burning  rays  of  the  mid-day  sun  fall
like  streams  of  fire  upon  him — added  to  which —

In  his  youthful  heart  the  flames  of  love  were  blazing,
And  he  watched  the  herd  amidst  the  heather '  grazing ;
Where  they  grazed  he  lay  upon  the  broom2  reclining,
While  the  fervid  sun  was  on  his  Shuba3  shining  :
Bound  him  fields  of  flowers  waved,  like  the  waves  of

ocean ;
Beautiful  they  were, — but  wakened  no  emotion,
For  his  eyes  were  fixed,  as  with  a  charmed  persistance,
On  a  crystal  stream,  about  a  stone-throw's  distance ;
Not  the  ripples  gay  that  musically  danced,
But  a  maiden  fair  the  shepherd's  soul  entranced, —
Standing  in the stream  —  a  bright-eyed  beauteous

creature,
Long  tressed — breasts  of  snow — of  perfect  form  and

feature —
Naked  to  the  knees — love's  very  loveliest  daughter —
Bathed  her  rosy  face  in  the  refreshing  water.

The  maiden  was  Iluska — his  pearl  casket — his  soul's
fascination.  He  addresses  her  in  the  most  passionate
language,  implores  her  to  leave  the  stream,  and  to

1  Puszta. 2  Ginestra. 3  Outer  garment  of  sheep-skin.


JANOS, THE HERO.  55

listen  to  him.  She  answers  that  she  must  be  gone —
she  is  summoned  by  her  cruel  step-mother.  He  flies
towards  her ; —

Then  with  honied  words  he  threw  his  cloak  around

her,
And  in  passionate  love  he  to  his  bosom  bound  her —
Kissed  and  kissed  again,  a  hundred  times,  if  any ;
He  who  all  things  knows,  he  only  knows  how  many.

The  second  part  begins —

ii.

Swiftly  flew  the  hours,  as  hours  are  ever  flying ;
On  the  flowing  stream  the  eve's  red  tints  were  lying.

The  step -mother  inquires  why  Iluska  has  not  re-
turned, and  determines  to  seek  her.  She  finds  her
—sees  the  youth  depart — and  breaks  out  into  the
most  bitter  and  calumnious  vituperations.  The  youth
comes  forward — denounces  her  slanders — menaces
her  with  fearful  visitations  if  she  wrong  the  orphan
girl — from  whom  he  says  he  will  exact  an  account
of  what  may  happen.  He  takes  up  his  Shuba —
thinks  of  the  flock  of  sheep  that  he  had  neglected, —


56  JANOS, THE HERO,

and  when  he  reaches  the  place,  finds  they  are  dis-
persed;  and  the  next  part  thus  commences —

in.

When  the  morning  sun  above  the  earth  had  mounted,

And  the  shepherd  youth  his  scattered  sheep  had
counted ;

Half  were  wanting  there — what  fate  has  them  befallen?

Have  they  been  by  wolves — or  else  by  robbers  stolen  ?

Wolf,  or  thief, — why  ask?  Enough  that  half  are
wanting, —

Sore  perplexed  swain,  with  shame  and  sorrow  pant-
ing;

What  to  do — what  say  ?  How  useless  all  complaining !

Silent  he  drove  home  the  sheep  that  were  remaining.

Full  of  trepidation  he  reaches  the  house  of  his  master,
whom  he  finds  at  the  door,  and  who  begins,  as  he
was  wont,  to  count  over  the  sheep.  Janos  tells  him
that  many  are  missing ;  that  it  is  no  use  for  him  to
deny  it  by  a  lie.  His  master  seizes  him  by  the  mous-
tache, tells  him  he  can  tolerate  none  of  his  jokes,
curses  him,  and  grasping  an  iron-pronged  fork,
threatens  to "  save  him  from  the  gallows," by  dis-


JANOS, THE HERO,  57

posing  of  him  then  and  there.  It  ended  by  a  "  Be
off!"  Janos  is  sorely  perplexed;  feels  he  has
wronged  his  master,  is  not  willing  to  abandon  the
old  man,  by  whom  he  had  been  brought  up ;  he  flies
— he  hesitates — he  returns  —  his  brain  utterly  be-
wildered. The  fourth  act  opens —

IV.

Many  thousand  stars  were  glittering  on  the  surface
of  the  water,  and  Janos  stood,  he  scarcely  knew
how,  close  to  Iluska's  garden.  He  was  singing  a
most  melancholy  song ;  and  as  the  dew  fell  upon
the  trees  and  upon  the  grass,  he  asked  "  Are  these
the  tears  of  the  pitying  stars  ?  "  Iluska  was  asleep,
but  the  well-known  voice  awakened  her.  She  came
to  welcome  him,  but  struck  with  his  wild  and  wan
appearance,  exclaims —

Tell  me  why  so  sad  ?  dear  love  !  ah,  thou  appearest,
Pale  as  is  the  moon — and  why?  thou  fondest,  dearest!

He  answers,  he  may  well  be  sad  and  pale,  as  he  sees
her  for  the  last  time.  She  replies,  that  if  his  looks
alarmed  her,  his  words  alarm  her  more.  And  he
responds —


58  JANOS, THE HERO.

Spring-tide  of  my  spirit ! — thee  I  quit  for  ever,
Never  wilt  thou  hear  my  voice  again — 0  never ;
Yet  once  more  I  bless  thee — yet  once  more  I  kiss  thee,
Then,  0  wretched  doom,  then  evermore  to  miss  thee.
Scarcely  could  he  speak  for  weeping  and  for  sobbing,
And  his  throbbing  bosom  prest  her  bosom  throbbing,
Bent  himself  to  earth,  to  hide  the  tear-floods  stealing
Down  his  white,  wet  cheeks,  his  agony  revealing ; —

He  bids  his  "  sweet  rose  "  remember  him,  the  wan-
derer, when  she  sees  the  dry  leaves  scattered  by  the
storm. She  answers —

Go  !  if  go  thou  must,  and  may  God's  holy  blessing
Smile  on  every  sod  thy  weary  feet  are  pressing ;
Gather  every  flower — and  its  fair  leaves,  while  fading,
Shall  remind  thee  oft  of  thy  dear  absent  maiden.

So  they  parted  like  riven  branches — both  hearts,  wintry
wastes.  Once  more  their  tears  mingled — he  wiped
them  with  his  shirt-sleeve.

And  he  went — he  saw  not,  and  he  cared  not  whither ;
Darkness  came — what  recked  he,  wandering  hither,
thither?

The  peasant  children  laughed  at  him  as  he  passed —
the  oxen  lowed : he  noticed  neither. The  village


JANOS, THE HERO.  59

lay  behind  him — lie  saw  not  the  hearth  fires;  but
the  church-steeple  seemed  to  look  upon  him  mourn-
fully. Any  one  near  might  have  heard  his  sighs  ;
but  no  one  was  there.  A  flock  of  herons  flew  by,
but  they  noticed  nothing.  He  wandered  thro'  the
night — no  sound  except  the  rustling  of  his  Shuba —
it  was  heavy — he  flung  it  down ;  but  the  heaviness
he  could  not  get  rid  of  was  the  greater  heaviness
of  his  heart.


Chased  away  by  the  sun  the  full  moon  departed ;
the  Puszta  surrounded  him,  boundless1  as  the  ocean.
From  its  east  the  sun  rose,  to  its  west  the  sun  de-
scended ;  but  from  its  rising  to  its  setting  saw  neither
flower  nor  tree,  nor  shrub ;  some  dew-drops  hung
upon  the  short  grass.  To  the  left  of  the  sun  red
vapours  rose  from  a  lake  which  was  surrounded  by
lentils  green  as  emeralds : —

Midst  the  lentil  plants  there  stood — the  lake  shore

near  on,
Seeking  for  his  food — a  solitary  heron  :
Fluttering  o'er  the  lake,  ascending  and  decending,
Flocks  of  water-birds  their  wayward course were

wending;.


60  JANOS, THE HERO.

Janos,  surrounded  by  dark  shadows,  and  filled  with
darker  thoughts,  again —

Saw  upon  the  Puszta  the  sun's  radiance  sparkling,
While  within  his  heart  a  night  of  nights  was  darkling.

Hunger  came  with  the  coming  day  ;  he  found  a  scrap
of  bacon  in  his  pocket ;  looking  around  him  he  saw
the  blue  heaven,  the  bright  sun,  and  beneath,  the
shifting  many-coloured  Delibab.1  Then  came  thirst ;
he  dipped  his  hat  in  the  lake,  and  drank  the  water
from  its  brim.  He  sank  down,  wearied,  and  made
a  mole-hill  his  pillow  while  he  slept.  He  dreamt
that  Iluska  was  in  his  arms,  and  when  about  to  kiss
her  was  wakened  by  a  thunder  clap.  There  was  a
frightful  storm  —  black  and  gloomy  as  his  own
destiny :

All  the  earth  was  clad  in  darkest  robes  funereal,
Whirlwinds' -voices  spoke  in  menaces  imperial ;
Every  cloud  above  had  all  its  sluices  riven,
While  the  lakes  below  flung  cataracts  up  to  heaven.

Janos seized  his staff — covered his  face  with his


1  The  Fata  Morgana  (Mirage),  the  deceitful,  many-hued  picture,
commonly  seen  in  the  hot  summer  in  the  Magyar  plains,  exists  in
the  Asiatic  and  African  deserts,  and  less  frequently  in  the  Crimea
and  in  Sicily.


JANOS, THE HEKO.  61

hat — turned  his  Shuba  inside  out,  and  facing  the
storm,  again  bestrode  the  plain.  The  sky  began
to  brighten — the  winds  dispersed  the  clouds — a  rain-
bow appeared  in  the  east.  The  rain  had  refreshed
him ;  he  sturdily  pursued  his  way  till  the  sun  sank
in  its  bed.  He  had  then  reached  a  thick  forest,
and  heard  the  croak  of  a  raven  breaking  the  silence
of  death.

Still  he  forward  prest,  for  Janos  was  no  craven — ■
Feared  not  dismal  forest — feared  not  croaking  raven ;
Half  in  twilight,  half  in  darkness,  on  he  sped  him,
And  the  moon  burst  forth,  and  like  a  herald  led  him.


VI.

At  last  he  sees  a  solitary  light  thro'  the  thickest  part
of  the  forest;  he  fancies  it  must  be  from  a  hut
(Csarcla),  which  might  give  him  shelter — it  was  no
Csarda,  but  the  gathering  place  of  a  dozen  banditti.
"  Midnight  and  robbers,  battle  axes  and  pistols,"  are
not  pleasant  objects  to  look  at ;  but  Janos  musters  up
courage,  advances  and  accosts  them  boldly.  The
leader  asks  him  how  he  dared  intrude :  unhappy  man !
hast  thou  parents  or  wife,  and  hast  thou  bidden  them
farewell  ? He  answers —


62  JANoS, THE HERO.

"  He  who  nothing  has — he  is  to  fear  a  stranger  ;
Rich  men,  not  the  poor,  may  shrink  from  threatened

danger ;
Life  is  nought  to  me — to  hold  it,  or  to  lose  it —
Give  me  shelter  then — or  if  you  will,  refuse  it ;

I  am  in  your  hands — to  live  or  die  — I  care  not ;
Shelter  me,  your  friend, — strike  me,  your  foe,  and

spare  not."

The  chief  admires  his  courageous  bravery — tells  him
he  is  fit  to  be  invested  with  a  bandit's  privileges : —

II  He  who  laughs  at  death,  and  looks  on  life  as  zero,
He  was  born  for  us,  and  born  to  be  a  hero."

So  he  is  invited  to  join  the  bandit  band,  who  sport
with  robbery,  sacrilege,  and  murder — drink  out  of
silver  cups,  and  decorate  themselves  with  jewels  of
gold.  He  gives  his  hand,  and  avers  it  is  the  happiest
moment  of  his  life ;  they  sit  down  to  revel  over
wine  stolen  from  the  cellars  of  the  priests.  The
robbers  drink  to  excess,  and  lie  intoxicated  on  the
floor.  Janos  preserves  his  senses,  and  determines  to
"  put  out  the  lights  of  those  who  had  delivered  over
so  many  to  darkness."  He  will  fill  his  pocket  with
the  spoils— seek  his  Huska — marry  her — build  a
beautiful  house : —


JANOS, THE HERO.  b6

Live  a  blessed  life,  with,  that  beloved  maiden,
Happier,  happier  far  than  Adam  was  in  Eden.

But  he  hesitates ;  he  must  not  enrich  himself  with
the  fruits  of  robbery.  The  gold  would  be  spotted
with  blood — it  would  bring  an  entail  of  misery — his
conscience  must  not  be  seared  to  the  sense  of  wrong.
But  he  seizes  a  light — sets  the  hovel  on  fire — sees
the  red  tongues  of  the  flames  reporting  his  deeds  to
heaven.  A  mantle  of  darkness  enwraps"  the  blue  sky,
and  the  moon  looks  out  enquiringly  on  the  distur-
bance :

Janos  smiled,  and  saw  the  owls  with  fluttered  feather,
Saw  the  frightened  bats,  which  flapped  their  wings  of

leather,
Heard  the  crashing  beams,  and  watched  the  sudden


Watched  the  sinking  roof,  piled  up  on  heaps  of  ashes.
And  when  the  sun  rose  it  looked  upon  nothing  but


rums.

VII.


Janos  travelled  through  seven  kingdoms,  and  one
day,  in  the  distance,  bright  weapons  were  glancing
in  the  sun-shine. It  was  a  corps  of  Hussars  :


G4  JANOS, THE HERO.

Many  a  noble  steed  was  neighing,  foaming,  prancing,
Tossing  his  proud  head,  and  haughtily  advancing.

His  heart  beat  high,  and  he  said  a  soldier's  life  must
be  a  proud  one ;  and  as  he  looked  on  the  troop,  the
Captain  exclaimed,  "Who  is  that  miserable  fellow?"
and  Janos  answered,  "A  wanderer  on  the  earth — a
night-walker ;  but  your  grace  may  bring  sunshine."
"  Join  us  if  you  will ;  but  we  are  bent  on  murderous
work.  The  Turks  have  fallen  on  the  Franks — we
go  with  the  Franks."  "  Be  it  so  !  I  am  a  good  horse-
man, and  am  ready  for  the  fight.  True  I  have  had
charge  of  asses,  and  kept  sheep  ;  but  I  am  a  Magyar.
God  created  us  on  horseback,  Centaurs.  He  created
us  for  warlike  weapons,  and  for  war."  His  eye
spoke  more  than  his  tongue — he  is  enlisted :

Great  was  his  delight — in  tactics  well  instructed,
When  into  the  line,  with  scarlet  vest  inducted  ;
In  the  sun-beam's  glance  he  drew  his  polished  sabre,
Shining  bright,  as  shone  the  weapon  of  his  neighbour.

His  horse  was  proud  of  his  rider,  planted  upon  him
as  firm  as  a  post — an  earthquake  would  not  have
shaken  him  in  his  seat.  His  companions  admired  his
agility  and  his  grace :


JANOS, THE HEKO.  65

When the corps turned out, to seek for other

quarters,
All the maidens came and wept like weeping

martyrs ;
Many  maidens  they,  and  their  attractions  many,
His  Iluska's  charms  were  not  approached  by  any ;
Wandering  through  the world, its good  and evil

sharing,
Much  he  saw — but  nought  with  hers  to  bear  comparing.

VIII.

Step  by  step  they  went  forward  till  they  reached
the  Tartar  land,  where  many  perils  awaited  them
from  the  dog-headed  races,  and  their  chief  thus
greeted  the  Magyars  : —

Wherefore come ye  here, to meet death's direst

dangers  ?
We  eat  human  flesh — preferring  that  of  strangers.

The  few  Magyars  were  perplexed,  when  looking  on
the  many  Tartars.  But  there  was  a  Moorish  king,
who  had  formerly  travelled  in  Hungary,  where  he
had  received  much  hospitality,  which  he  gratefully
remembered,  and  he  interceded  with  the  Tartar  chief,
assuring  him  that  the Magyars  were  a  good,  kind.


60  JANOS, THE HERO.

people,  well  known  to  him,  and  that  he  might  safely
allow  them  to  pass  through  the  country.  "  Grant
this,"  said  he,  "  out  of  thy  princely  favour,  for  the
love  of  me:"

"  For  the  love  of  thee,  is  thy  petition  granted; "
Nothing  more they  asked, for  nothing more they

wanted ;
So  they  travelled  safe,  thanks  to  the  Moor's  affection,
All  the  Tartar  tribes  afforded  them  protection.

But  spite  of  all  they  rejoiced  when  they  had  crossed
the  Tartar  frontier  : —

And  they  reached  a  land,  all  desolate  and  lonely —
All  its  fruits  were  figs,  its  food  was  bear's  flesh  only.

IX.

Having  passed  the  Tartar  vales  and  hills,  which
looked  like  a  boundary  wall  behind  them,  they  made
their  way  to  the  dark  shadows  of  the  Italian  rose-
mary forests  ;  but  they  had  terrible  struggles

with  the  Alpine  cold  so  trying,
Snow  beneath  them  lay  ;  ice  was  about  them  lying ;


JANOS, THE HERO.  67

Tho'  the  cold  was  strong,  the  Magyar  heart  is  stronger,
Bears  its  burthens  calmer — holds  its  patience  longer :
When  their  horses  failed  exhausted  in  their  forces,
On  their  rider's  backs  they  carried  off  the  horses.


x.


They  go  to  Poland,  to  India — the  frontier  moun-
tains reach  to  the  clouds  ;  the  heat  is  intolerable —
the  sun  not  a  mile  off  :

Nothing  but  the  clouds  for sustenance  they  found

there,
Clouds  they  were,  so  thick,  they  cut  in  slices  round

there ;
Other  clouds  there  were,  which,  after  long  exploring,
Gave  them  streams  to  drink,  their  fountain-depths

outpouring ;
But  the  heat  became  insufferably  horrid,
Only  in  the  night  they  scaled  the  mountain's  forehead :
Many  were  the  plagues  impeding  their  advancing,
While  among  the  stars  their  frisky  steeds  were  pranc-
ing;
But  the  stars  to  Janos  brought  some  dreams  delightful,
For  of  fairy  fancies  is  a  starry  night  full :


68  JANOS, THE HERO.

"  I  have  heard  to  stars,  when  looking  down  from

heaven,
A  celestial  influence  marvellously  is  given.
If  'tis  so,  Iluska !  I  for  thee  the  brightest
Will  select :  I  know  belov'd  one  !  thou  delightest
In  the  smiles  of  night,  and  0  sweet  maid !  I'll  fling

thee
Heaven's  divinest  star,  all  blessedness  to  bring  thee."

After  much  toil  they  descend  from  the  mountains ;
the  heat  moderates,  and  they  reach  the  land  of  the
Franks.

XI.

0  that  land  !  that  land  !  it  is  a  lovely  Eden  !
Canaan's  fairer  self  I  but,  oh,  that  land  was  bleeding
From  the  Turkish  hordes,  whose  terrible  invasion
Covered  all  the  land  with  waste  and  desolation.

Pitilessly  they  had  robbed  the  churches,  emptied  the
wine  cellars,  set  fire  to  the  cities.  The  king  had
taken  flight,  separated  from  his  only  child,  a  lovely
daughter.  The  Magyars  sought  him — found  him, — -
and  even  the  stern  soldiers  wept  over  his  misery  :

"  Misery  sad  is  mine  !  my  riches  were  unbounded  :

1  am  beggared  now,  by  woe  and  want  surrounded."


JANOS, THE HERO.  69

He  is  told  not  to  despair — redemption  is  at  hand :

Ease  thy  heavy  heart — dispel  thy  gloomy  sorrow,
Here  thy  saviours  are — thou  shall  be  saved  to-morrow.
"Who  shall  save  my  child; 0  tell  me who shall

save  her?
He  who  saves  my  child,  he  shall  in  dowry  have  her."

The  prize  was  inviting ;  it  moved  every  heart  with
courageous  longings.  Janos  listened;  but  said  to
himself —

"  I  that  maid  will  rescue  ; but  Iluska !  never
Shall  that  rescue  thee  from  my  true  heart  dissever."

XII.

The  sun  rose  as  he  is  wont  to  rise;  but  seldom
rises  to  see  and  to  hear  what  he  saw  and  heard  on
that  eventful  day.  Loud  blasts  of  trumpets — an
army  kneeling  in  prayer — the  sharpening  of  sabres —
the  prancing  of  horses.  The  king  appeared  anxious
to  take  part  in  the  coming  fight,  but  the  Hussar  chief
respectfully  requested  "His  Majesty"  to  abstain.
"  Courage  of  heart  is  not  wanting  to  thee,  but
strength  of  arm ;  leave  us  to  do  the  work.  Before
nightfall  thy  foes  shall  be  scattered  and  thy  king-


70  JANOS, THE HERO.

dom  be  restored."  The  Hungarians  sprang  upon
their  steeds,  sent  a  herald  announcing  war,  and  on
his  return,  with  tremendous  shouts,  and  clashing  of
swords,  they  rushed  on  the  enemy  ;  the  hoofs  of  the
spurred  horses  shook  the  earth's  centre,  whose  sur-
face re-echoed  the  shock.  Seven  horse-tails  bore
the  heathen  Pacha,  who  had  a  seven-bottle  paunch ;
his  nose  was  red  with  wine  ;  his  ugly  cheeks  looked
like  ripe  calabashes.  The  resistance  was  fierce — the
battle  terrible :

All  the  emerald  plain  with  lakes  of  gore  was  ruddy,
And  the  flowery  fields  became  an  ocean  bloody ;
Soon  the  heathen  host  were  from  the  combat  driven,
Save  the  slaughtered,  piled  in  mountains  up  to  heaven.

The  fat-paunched  Yizier  encountered  Janos,  who
lifted  his  heavy  sword,  and  exclaimed —

" Plague  of  Christian  men;  I'll  tell  thee  what  I'll

do,  sir!
Thou'rt  too  big  for  one,  I'll  cut  thee  into  two,  sir  !  "

And  so  he  did —

Eight  and  left  the  body  fell,  it  fell,  divided : —
And  so  died  the  Turk,  who  Christians  had  derided.


JANOS, THE HEKO.  71

The  fragments  of  the  Ottomans  fled,  and  would  have
been  flying  to  this  moment  had  the  Magyars  pursued
them —

But  it  little  mattered —
Those  who  could,  escaped,  shattered  and  scared  and
scattered.

The  battle-field  was  like  a  scarlet  poppy  bed.  Janos
saw  something  white  in  the  arms  of  a  flying  Turk  :
it  was  the  Pasha's  son,  and  he  was  bearing  away  the
young  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Franks,  who  had
fainted  and  was  senseless.  Janos  followed  him,  "with
hurried  hoofs,"  and  called  out —

"Stop  !  or  else  I'll  make  in  thy  vile  corpse  a  passage;
Speed  thy  soul  to  hell,  to  bear  thy  master's  message."

But  he  stops  his  horse,  kneels,  implores  pardon  on
account  of  his  youth.  He  is  pardoned;  ordered  to
take  the  message  home  to  the  pagan  lands,  and
inform  the  infidels  of  the  fate  of  their  bandit-
brethren. Janos  descends,

The  frightened  maiden  nearing,
Sees  her  weeping  eyes  so  blue,  so  beauty-wearing.


72  JANOS, THE HEKO.

She  speaks,  "I  ask  not  who  is  rny  deliverer;  I  am
his,  if  he  will  accept  this  offering  of  my  gratitude."
For  a  moment  he  felt  as  if  his  blood  had  turned  to
water.  A  terrible  struggle  agitated  his  soul;  but
Iluska  was  there,  and  he  answered  courteously — ■

"  Rather,
Rose  of  sweetness  !  I'll  conduct  thee  to  thy  father,
There  we'll  talk ;  " — but  mount, and  on the  horse

that  bore  him,
Deftly  did  she  spring,  and  smiling  sat  before  him.

XIII.

Janos  lingered  with  the  princess  for  some  time  in  the
shadow  of  the  linden-trees,  with  sad  eyes,  contem-
plating the  battle-field  :

'Twas  a  mass  of  blood — courageous  ones  and  cravens  ;
Hovering  o'er  them  all  were  groups  of  hungry  ravens :
Sad  it  was  to  see  the  limbs,  the  garments  shattered —
Arms  and  hair  and  hides,  with  grime  and  gore  be-
spattered ;
Near  it  was  a  lake,  it  had  been  clear  as  crystal,
There  the  Magyar  troop  had  washed  their  hands  and

wrists  all,
And  its  colour  now,  from  such  unholy  uses,
Was  as  red  as  wine  from  the  grape's  purple  juices.


JANOS. THE HERO.


73


They  leave  the  melancholy  sight,  and  hasten  to  the
place  where

The  king  had  found  a  shelter :
0  what  crowds  were  there,  assembled  helter-skelter  :
Janos  led  the  maid — what  shouts !  what  songs  !  what

screaming —
She  looked  like  a  rainbow  from  the  heaven-clouds

beaming.

They  reach  the  king — he  sinks  speechless  on  the
bosom  of  his  child;  but  is  revived  by  the  burning
kisses  she  impresses  on  his  lips.  Kejoicings  and
festivities  are  proclaimed.  The  fat  calf,  the  flowing
wine;  the  tables  are  spread — the  Magyars  around —
the  king  in  the  midst.  No  wonder  that  brave  and
hungry  men  enjoyed  the  repast.  The  king  asks  for
silence,  he  has  something  of  importance  to  say  :

"  Hero  of  the  heroes  I  dearest  of  the  dearest !

Let me know the  name,  the  honoured  name  thou

bearest : "
" KuTcoricza  Jancsi  1  is  my  name  unsightly,
Ne'er  dishonoured  yet  by  any  deed  unknightly."

1  The  Hungarian  for  Jack,  the  Maize-boy.  It  is  not  uncommon
for  the  peasants  to  attach  nicknames  to  their  companions.  The
meaning  here  is  that  the  boy  was  found  in  a  field  where  Indian  corn


74  JANoS, THE HERO.

The  king  interrupted  him,  exclaiming —

"  Henceforth  shall  he  bear  a  name  more  proud  and

knightly,
John,  the  hero  !  he,  and  he  will  bear  it  rightly :
John,  the  hero !  list ! "  the  startled  youth  addressing ;
"  He  who  saved  a  child  should  have  a  father's  blessing,
And  the  child  once  saved  by  thy  courageous  bearing,
Offers  thee  a  crown  to  honor  with  thy  wearing ;
She  shall  be  thy  bride,  and  when  thou  dost  accept  her,
For  her  dowry  she  shall  bring  a  throne  and  sceptre  ;
Kingly  toils  and  cares  have  bent  my  old  age  double,
Let  thy  youth  and  hers  relieve  me  of  my  trouble ;
Well  thy  noble  brow  a  monarch's  crown  is  fitting.
Bright  will  shine  its  gems  upon  thy  forehead  sitting  ;
I  shall  cease  to  drink  of  sorrow's  bitter  chalice,
Grant  me  but  a  room  within  thy  honoured  palace."

The  Magyars  listened  with  delight  and  wonder  to  the
king's  speech.  Janos,  addressing  the  monarch,  reve*
rently  refused  the  tempting  offer.  He  was  unworthy
of  so  great  a  gift ;  but  he  implored  permission  to  tell
his  own  history,  which  might  explain  the  reasons  for
his  refusal.  The  king  promises  him  a  patient  hear-
ing, but  doubts  whether  he  will  find  a  becoming
justification.


JANOS, THE HERO.


XIV.


Janos  began  by  relating  how  the  name  of  Kukoricza
was  given  him.  He  was  found  when  a  babe,  hidden
under  a  heap  of  maize  (Kukuruz).  A  good  woman,  a
farmer's  wife,  who  went  into  the  field  in  search  of
straw,  saw  a  something  moving  amidst  the  corn  :

Heard  an  infant  cry,  and  pitying  its  crying,
Took  me  from  the  corn-heap,  where  I  had  been  lying,
Where  a  heartless  mother  cruelly  had  dropt  me,
Brought  me  to  her  home,  and  promised  to  adopt  me  ;
She  was  childless — but  she  had  a  husband  brutal —
When  she  urged  her  suit,  he  negatived  her  suit-all ;
On  my  head  he  hurl'd  a  heavy  imprecation,
Spoke  of  her  with  scorn  and  rage  and  indignation.

But  at  last  he  is  soothed  by  her  gentle  remonstrances.
"How  could  I  leave  the  babe  to  perish ;  would  not  God
abandon  me,  for  my  hard-heartedness,  in  the  hour  of
death  had  I  abandoned  the  baby ;

"  He  will  help  your  work,  will  please  you  with  his

prattle ;
You  are  growing  old,  have  horses,  sheep,  and  cattle  ;
He  was  sent  by  heaven,  to  comfort,  to  assist  you,
As  his  patron  now,  dear  man !  I  would  enlist  you."


76  JANOS, THE HERO.

But  tho'  he  tolerated  me,  he  did  not  love  me.  He
went  sullenly  to  his  work,  and  often  looked  on  me
with  reproachful  and  malignant  eye ;

Made  me  labour  hard,  and  punished  me  severely,
Frown' d  upon  me  oft,  and  smiled  upon  me  rarely  ;
Yet  one  joy  I  had — a  joy  of  joys,  the  greatest,
Of  all  maidens  sweet,  I  loved  the  very  sweetest :
'Twas  an  orphan  girl —

Her  mother  was  dead ;  her  father  mnrried  a  second
wife,  and  dying  himself  left  the  girl  to  the  care
of  a  cruel  step-mother.  She  was  the  object  of  all  my
thoughts.  She  was  the  rose  of  my  thorny  life.  0  how
I  loved  her !  She  and  I  were  called  the  village  orphans.
To  see  her,  to  talk  to  her,  was  the  bliss  of  my  boyhood.
In  her  looks  I  revelled  as  in  the  sunshine ;  and  to
play  with  her  on  Sabbath  days  was  my  delight  and
my  devotion.  My  very  being  was  transformed  in
her  presence  :

And  when  blu  shingly,  a  sweet,  sweet  kiss  she  granted,
'  Twas  a  wildering  bliss,  and  nothing  more  I  wanted.

But  the  step-mother  was  the  torment  of  her  life.
May  God  never  forgive  the  evil -hearted  woman !  I
checked  some  of  her  malevolence  :  still  my  beloved
one  had  but  a  wretched  existence :


JANOS, THE HERO.  77

I  had  sorrows  too,  the  kind,  the  loving  mother,
Who  had  found  me,  died — I  never  found  another  ;
Though  my  heart  is  hard,  how  oft  my  hot  tears  steep-
ing
On  her  tomb  the  grass,  have  wearied  me  with  weep-
ing ;
Could  those  tears  have  told  the  depth  of  my  emotion,
0  they  would  have  filled  the  immeasurable  ocean  !

The  beautiful  Iluska  also  wept — but  not  despond-
ingly.  She  thought  time  would  bring  about  our
union :

Often  did  she  say : "  Bear  up  with  hopeful  spirit !  "
Disappointment  comes,  but  bravely  learn  to  bear  it ;
Disappointment's  reign  will  speedily  be  ended,
When  sweet  patience  waits,  by  smiling  hope  attended."

And  so  we  waited  patiently  and  hopefully —

And  her  soothing  words  dispersed  my  melancholy —
Every  word  of  hers  seemed  truth-inspired  and  holy.

But  days  and  days  passed,  and  the  fountain  of  hope
failed  to  freshen  the  languishings  of  love.  Then  it
was  that  I  neglected  the  flock  of  sheep  that  was  con-
fided to  my  keeping,  and  I  was  driven  forth  by  the
master  whose  business  I  had  too  little  cared  for :


78  JANOS, THE HERO.

From  Iluska  torn  so  mournfully  asunder,

Crushed  the  heavy  weight  of  woes  and  wailings  under ;

Wandering  through  the  world,  o'er  good and  evil

pondering,
Where  shall  I  find  rest  from  all  this  weary  wandering?
For  I  asked  no  pledge — when  from  Iluska  parted —
Asked  no  vow  from  her,  from  her  the  faithful-hearted  ;
What  were  words  to  those,  whose  echoing  thoughts

responded,
When  the  deepest  depths  of  silent  souls  were  sounded.
Maid  of  royal  race !  if  faithlessness  be  hateful,
Blame  me  not  I  pray,  and  deem  me  not  ungrateful ;
For  Iluska  I  have  stamped  my  oath  in  heaven,
"  Could  I  treacherous  be,  and  hope  to  be  forgiven  ?"

xv.

There  was  a  general  outbreak  of  approval  when  Janos
had  ended  his  narrative.  Tears  of  disappointment
and  sorrow  filled  the  eyes  of  the  princess.  But  the
king  said  he  would  not  enforce  the  marriage,  but
would  offer  a  gift,  not  to  be  refused  ;  so  he  beckoned
to  one  of  the  attendants,  who  delivered  to  Janos  a
large  sack  full  of  gold —

Being
Such  a  heap  as  he  had  never  dreamt  of  seeing.


JANOS, THE HERO.  7\)

And  he  said,  "  This  is  for  the  saviour  of  my  child" —

Take  it,  then,  my  son — to  thine  Iluska  take  it,
For  thy  faithful  love,  a  worthy  offering  make  it ;
I  would  keep  thee  here,  but  know  that  thou  art  sighing
For  that  mourning  one,  who  for  thy  love  is  dying.
Go  ! — where'er  thou  art,  may  every  blessing  find  thee  ;
Leave  us  here,  as  guests,  thy  Magyar  troop  behind  thee."

And  so  it  was,  and  Janos  took  his  departure  for
Iluska's  home ;  and  the  princess  greeted  him  with  a
tender  farewell,  while  he,  with  overflowing  heart,
entered  a  galley,  provided  with  every  comfort,  to
which  the  king  and  the  hussars  escorted  him;  and
till  the  galley  was  lost  in  the  distant  mists  he  saw
their  friendly  gestures,  and  heard  their  voices  bid-
ding him  God- speed!

XVI.

Prosperous  winds  filled  the  sails  of  the  galley,  and
drove  them  swiftly  over  the  water ;  but  swifter  was
the  succession  of  thoughts  that  passed  through  his
mind.  "How  little  does  my  soul's  angel  dream  of
the  bliss  that  awaits  her ;  not  only  do  I  return  to  her,
but  return  to  her  loaded  with  treasures  :


80


JANOS, THE HERO.


Richer  none  than  I  among  Hungarian  agnates,
Prouder  none  than  I  of  all  the  Magyar  magnates."

For  a  moment  he  thinks  of  the  delight  of  being  re-
venged on  those  who  had  wronged  him ;  but  why  ?
Their  unkindness  had  been  the  cause  of  his  good
fortune — better  forgive  them  ! — better  be  grateful  to
them.  Such  reflections,  and  many  more,  occurred
to  him.  They  were  still  very  far  from  the  beautiful
Magyar-orszag— the  Hungarian  land  :

Janos  walked  the  deck — it  was  the  fall  of  even,
Gathering  darkness  spread  its  mantle  over  heaven ;
Janos  heard  a  voice — 'twas  from  the  galley's  master —
"  We  are  sailing  fast,  but  storms  are  coming  faster."
Janos  turned  away — he  turned  as  if  not  hearing,
When  he  saw  above  a  flight  of  storks  careering ;
They  were  hastening  south,  for  ere  the  wintry  season
Storks  will  seek  a  home,  with  most  instinctive  reason.

They  were  flying  away  from  the  storm — it  was  a
gloomy  prognostic.  He,  too,  thought  of  Iluska — of
home. Should  he,  like  the  storks,  ever  find  a  home  ?

XVII.

The  sky  fulfilled  its  own  prophecy — the  sea  that  was
yesterday  smooth  and  calm  was  violently  agitated.


JANOS, THE HERO.  81

The  waves  responded  to  the  howling  of  the  winds.
Terror  seized  the  crew,  who  betook  themselves  to
boats  ;  discipline  was  lost,  and  with  it  all  confidence
and  courage :

Clouds  with  darker  clouds  seemed  like  black  troops

embattled,
To  the  rattling  thunders  louder  thunders  rattled  ;
To  the  lightning  flash  yet  fiercer  lightnings  flashing,
'Gainst the helpless  ship  o'erpowering  waves  were

dashing :
There  she  lay,  a  wreck,  and  round  the  wreck  was

floating

Many  a  surge-driven  corpse,  for  useless  was  the  boat-
ing-
How  was  Janos  saved  ?  for  in  that  tempest  no  man

Help  or  safety  found,  from  either  friend  or  foeman.

Strange,  the  arm  of  heaven  was  stretched  out  to  help
the  hero :

For  a  mighty  wave  up  to  the  heavens  had  flung  him,
And  he  seized  a  cloud,  and  on  its  mantle  hung  him ;
Firmly  did  he  hold,  both  of  his  hands  applying,
So  was  Janos  saved,  and  lived  instead  of  dying.

6


82  JANOS, THE HERO.

Clouds  rolled  past  the  sea  and  travelled  towards  the

high  land,
Janos  loos'd  his  hold,  and  landed  on  the  dry  land.
Besting  on  the  sand,  he  pour'd  his  adoration
To  that  God,  whose  strength  had  wrought  his  strange

salvation :
Seeking  not  his  gold,  he  cared  not  for  his  crosses,
Having  saved  his  life,  he  thought  not  of  his  losses.
Janos  wandered  round — he  scarcely  had  a  rag  on —
Till  he  pounced  upon  the  nest  of  a  fierce  dragon  ;
Feeding  his  young  brood,  the  dragon  was  so  busy,
That a thought occurred — it almost made him

dizzy —
"  Shall  I  slay  the  brood?" He  crept  into  the  nest,  he
On  the  dragon  sprung,  and  as  he  did  his  best,  he
Spurred  the  monstrous  beast, and  said,  "  You  shall

not  tarry,
But  o'er  hills  and  plains  your  master  safely  carry."
How  the  charm  was  wrought  I  know  not :  he  obeyed

him,
And  o'er  many  a  region  rapidly  conveyed  him  ;
Hero,  all  command,  and  dragon  all  obedience,
Bowed  his  head  and  neck  in  reverent  allegiance  :
Janos  looked  beneath  on  many  a  king's  dominions,
Till  he  bade  the  dragon  moderate  his  pinions ;


JANOS, THE HERO.  83

"  For  I  see,"  he  said,  "  mine  own  beloved  people,
Perch  thee,  dragon,  now  !  upon  the  village  steeple,"
0  what  joy  was  his  to  feel,  as  they  descended,
All  his  hopes  renewed,  and  all  his  sorrows  ended ;
He  dismissed  his  steed,  and  calmly  said,  "  Return  ye
Many  and  many  thanks,  for  this  successful  journey."

But  what  shall  he  say  to  Iluska ?  "I  bring  no  gold,
no  treasures,  no  wonders  from  foreign  lands  ;  but  I
do  bring  thee  a  pure  heart ;  and  wilt  thou  receive
that  heart  as  worthy  of  thee  ?  "

Then,  and  thinking  thus,  he  reached  the  well-known

village —
Met  the  herds  and  hinds  proceeding  to  the  tillage —
Heard  the  rustic  songs  from  the  far-east  and  far- west,
'Twas  the  vintage  time,  it  was  the  time  of  harvest.
None  observed  him — none — nor  passenger  nor  peasant,
Not  a  soul  there  dreamt  of  such  a  hero  present ;
But  he  wandered  forward  to  the  village  centre,
Saw  Iluska's  cot,  and  dared  he,  dared  he  enter  ?
When  his  doubting  hand  was  on  the  latch  it  trembled :
0  !  the  hero  there,  a  hero  ill  resembled :
Entering  at  last,  he  met  unwonted  noises —
Saw  that  all  was  changed — heard  nought  but  strangers'

voices.


84  JANOS, THE HEEO.

"I  am  mistaken — mistaken,"  he  said,  and  was  lifting
the  latch,  when  a  pretty  and  graceful  girl  asked  very
courteously,  "  Whom  is  your  honour  seeking  ? "
"  Iluska !  "  "  Heart  of  mine  !  so  changed— so  sun-
burnt— I  hardly  knew  you'; "  and  she  laughed  with  joy ;

"Come,  come  in ;  with  thee  let  heaven's  best  blessings

come  now —
I  have  much  to  tell — so  welcome,  welcome  home  now."

She  leads  him  into  the  house — places  him  in  a  chair,
and  asks —

'•'  What !  not  know  me,  John  ?  Thine  early  recollections,
Are  they  swept  away,  and  all  thine  old  affections
Dost  forget  the  child,  oft  by  Iluska  seated  ?  "
''Where? 0  where's  Iluska? Tell  me,"  he  repeated.
Asked again — again — his anxious  heart  was  throb-
bing—
Saw  the  maiden  weep,  he  heard  the  maiden  sobbing.
"Must  I  answer?  why?  Alas  1  but  thou  hast  bidden;
Poor,  poor  Janos !  She  in  the  dark  grave  is  hidden."
Had  he  not  been  seated,  he  had  fallen  lifeless —
Dreadful,  dreadful  doom — the  widowed  and  the  wife-
less !
Would  his  heart  not  burst,  with  all  the  woes  within  it?
Then  he  hung  his  head — was  silent  for  a  minute, —


JANOS, THE HERO.  85

Spoke,  as  if  from  some  bewildered  dream  emerging,
"  Tell  me,  tell  me  this — and  did  she  die  a  virgin  ?
Did  she  wed  ? Perhaps,  my  child,  thou  didst  deceive

me."
"  No !  alas !  0  no  !  And  wilt  thou  not  believe  me  ?  "
Then  he  saw  her  face,  and  said  in  accents  broken,
"Too  true,  too  true,  poor  girl!  the  sad  words  thou

hast  spoken."

xviii.

He  threw  himself  on  the  table ;  his  tears,  his  sighs,
his  groans,  made  him  for  a  long  time  speechless ;  at
last  his  grief  found  words  :

"  Why  was  I  not  slaughtered  in  that  fearful  slaughter?
Why  not  overwhelm'd  in  that  o'erwhelming  water  ?
Why  have  I  been  spared  from miseries dark and

many  ?
Why  preserved  for  this,  most  terrible  of  any  ?  "

As  the  violence  of  his  grief  became  somewhat  soothed,
he  desired  that  all  particulars  of  Iluska's  fate  should  be
given  to  him  :

"  0  her  fate  was  sad — her  step -mother,  so  cruel,
Fed  the  fire  of  grief  with  fuel  upon  fuel ;


86  JANoS, THE HERO.

But  to  misery  brought  decrepit,  aged,  hoary,

On  a  beggar's  crutch  she  told  her  doleful  story :

Dear  Iluska  oft,  her  secret  love  confessing,

Asked  from  heaven  for  thee,  the best  of  heavenly

blessing ;
Prayed  that,  as  on  earth  from  thee  she  had  been  riven,
She  might  claim  thy  love,  and  live  with  thee  in  heaven.
Thus  she  said  farewell !  to  happier  regions  flying.
Near  us  is  the  grave  where  she  is  calmly  lying ;
Hadst  thou  seen  the  crowds  that  to  her  funeral  moved,
Then  thou  wouldst  have  felt  how  much  she  was  be-
loved ! "
So  the  maiden  Janos  to  the  green  grave  leading,
Left  him  to  his  grief — his  wounded  heart  was  bleeding :
Loudly  called  he  on  Iluska ;  wildly  threw  him
On  her  grave,  as  if  she  heard  and  saw  and  knew  him.
Then  recalled  the  scenes,  the  tender  recollection —
Youth's most early  dreams,  and  gushings  of  affec-
tion ;
Smiles  from  cheeks  now  cold,  and  light  from  eyes

now  faded
Life and love from her,  now  in death's darkness
shaded.

There  he  remained  till  the  last  red  ray  of  the  sun  had
disappeared,  and  till  the  pale  moon  shone  mournfully


JANOS, THE HETtO.  87

through  the  mists.  The  melancholy  moon  sympa-
thised with  his  melancholy  thoughts,  and  under  her
influence  he  walked  away  from  the  grave —

Only  to  return  there  :  where  his  love  reposes
Friendly  hands  had  planted  tributary  roses  ;
One  was  blooming  still,  and  from  its  stem  he  tore  it,
And  his  soul  broke  forth  in  mournful  musings  o'er  it :
"From  her  dust  up -sprung,  thou  feeble,  fragrant  flower,
Ever  be  with  me,  my  dear  delight,  my  dower,
I  till  death  will  hold  thee,  thee  surrender  never,
And  when  death  shall  come,  sleep  on  my  breast  for
ever !  "


XIX.


Two  companions  never,  never  Janos  quitted —

One  was  the  deep  grief,  with  all  his  feelings  knitted ;

And  his  sword  the  other,  in  the  scabbard  rusted

With  the  blood  of  Turks,  of  conquered  Turks  en-
crusted,—

Ready,  tho'  in  rust,  while  Janos  wandered  over

Many  a  dreary  desert,  solitary  rover !

Waxing,  waning  moons,  as  silver  pale,  shone  o'er
him,

And  another  spring  its  offerings  spread  before  him.


88  JANOS, THE HERO.

Moons  and  springs  they  brought  not  peace,  but  per-
turbation,

All  was  darkness  still — darkness  and  desolation.

"  0  would  death  but  come  !  but  death  had  other
doings —

Nothing  for  it  left,  midst  wastes  and  wrecks  and
ruins  :

Here  its  work  is  done,  so  otherwhere  I'll  wend  me —

Come  with  me  my  woe,  my  wretchedness  attend  me  !

Can  I  be  unwelcome,  when  with  my  afflictions

I  shall  help  to  fill  the  cup  of  maledictions."

But  sharp  sorrow  wears  itself  out;  or  it  goes,  and
comes  and  goes  ;  and  when  its  bitterness  is  moderated,
unrest  and  vacancy  take  possession  of  the  mind.  The
fount  of  tears  is  not  inexhaustible — the  eye  may  be
saddened,  but  will  not  be  constantly  wet :

So  with  heart  less  sore  than  when  its  grief  was  sorest,
Janos  wandered  thro'  a  melancholy  forest ;
There  in  the  deep  mud  he  saw  a  peasant's  waggon,
Which  nor  horse  nor  helper  thro'  the slough  could

drag  on :
'  Twas  a  potter's  waggon,  sunk  beneath  the  middle
Of  th'  arrested  wheels — to  move  it  was  a  riddle  ;


JANOS, THE HERO.  89

Much  the  potter  whipped,  but  whipped  in  vain,  the

horses,
Then  he  crossed  his  arms — exhausted  his  resources.
^  Good  day  !  honest  man  !"  said  Janos  to  the  potter ;
If  his  rage  was  hot,  the  greeting  made  him  hotter.
"  Good  day!  honest  man!  "  he  said,  the  words  repeat-
ing;
"  Bad  day!  stupid  fool !  the  devil  take  your  greeting,"
"  That  is  scarcely  courteous  !  "  said  the  hero  smiling  ;
"Friendly  words  to  meet,  with  rancour  and  reviling!"
"  Don't  you  see  the  waggon  in  the  quagmire  sinking ;
Can  you  think  that  I  of  courteous  words  am  think-
ing ?
"  Those  alone  we  aid,  who're  willing  to  be  aided — ■
Only  tell  me  now,  where  leads  that  pathway  shaded."
And  he  pointed  out  an  opening,  where  the  paces,
Few  and  far  between,  had  left  some  feeble  traces.
"Ah!  you  ask  me  there  a  secret  well  worth  knowing,
If  my  words  prevent  your  up  that  pathway  going ;
For  that  pathway  leads  to  strong-holds  of  the  giants — •
Better  not  go  there,  for  they  are  ugly  clients."
'-You  may  trust  me  man!" and  waxing  bold  and

bolder ;
'Gainst  the  mud-stuck  waggon  pressed  his  vigorous
shoulder :


90  JANOS, THE HERO.

On  the  firm,  fast  road  the  rescued  prize  he  grounded,
While  the  potter  stared,  all  silent,  but  astounded.
Opening  wide  his  eyes,  no  wonderful  behaviour,
When  such  feat  he  saw,  he  bowed  before  his  saviour ;
Muttered  out  his  thanks,  while  Janos,  little  caring
Whether  thanked  or  not,  was  wholly  out  of  hearing.

And  Janos  boldly  pressed  forward,  being  very  anxious
to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  giant  land,  and
he  reached  the  border-stream ;  it  was  called  a  brook,
but  it  was  as  wide  as  a  river  :

By  the  river  stood  a  sentinel  gigantic,

Never  saw  romance  a  monster  more  romantic  ;

Janos  stretched  his  neck,  he  stretched  with  all  his

power,
Looking  on  the  man  as  on  a  lofty  tower :
And  the  sentinel  asked  in  growling  voice  of  thunder,
"  Do  I  hear  a  step?  And  who  comes  here  I  wonder  ?
Who's  that  little  creature  creeping  thro'  the  rushes  ?
Better  he  take  care  of  crossings  and  of  crushes."
Janos  drew  his  sword,  and  o'er  his  head  he  held  it,
Giant  stamped  his  foot,  and  Janos  deftly  fell'd  it :
How he shrieked aloud  —  "  Invasion  ! Treachery  !

Slaughter !  "
Bleeding,  helpless,  lame,  he  fell  into  the  water.


JANOS, THE HERO.  91

"  Well,"  said  Janos,  "  now  I  think  I  may  make  pro-
gress,
I've  dispatched  the  ogre,  let  me  see  the  ogress  :  "
On  the  corpse  he  trod,  it  served  him  for  a  bridge  there,
Happy  augury  was  such  a  privilege  there.
But  he  was  not  dead,  the  death  was  only  seeming,
Up  the  giant  rose,  as  waking  from  a  dreaming ;
Janos  raised  his  sword,  and  of  his  life  bereft  him,
Saw  him  breathe  his  last,  and  on  the  ground  he  left  him.

There  was  no  longer  a  sentinel  to  guard  the  frontier
— no  longer  a  watchman  to  denounce  the  intruder.  A
stream  of  blood  from  his  body  reddened  the  river,
while  Janos  thro'  the  frontier  forest  advanced  into  the
interior.

xx.

Deep  and  deeper  Janos,  in  the  forest  mazes,
Entering  sees  more  marvels,  as  he  wandering  gazes ;
Where  the  giants  rule,  and  keep  their  subjects  under,
All  appears  like  witchery,  miracle  and  wonder  :
There  were  trees  so  tall,  that  any  mortal  eyesight
Could  not  reach  the  boundary  of  that  clouded  high

sight ;
They  bore leaves so  large that, without  seams  or

stitches,
One  would  make  a  cloak,  or  line  a  pair  of  breeches ;


92  JAN  OS, THE HERO.

Gnats  there  were  so  big,  so  very  noisy  growing,
That  they  seemed  like  herds  of  ugly  oxen  lowing.
Jan 6s  hewed  his  way,  it  was  a  heavy  labour,
By  the  vigorous  use  of  his  beloved  sabre.
And  a  crow — a  crow  was  than  a  vulture  bigger  :
One  upon  a  tree,  was  such  a  monstrous  figure,
Janos  looked  and  said, "A  cloud  must  there  be  sit-
ting !  "
Till  he  heard  "  Caw  !  Caw  !  "  and  saw  the  crow  was
flitting.

One  monstrous  object  after  another  met  his  view,
till  he  perceived  in  the  distance  a  black  walled  city,
in  which  was  the  fortified  palace  of  the  giants  :

Janos  thither  walked,  the  mighty  mass  beholding,
Saw  gigantic  gates,  the  gates  were  double-folding ;
If  you  deem  that  giants  build  as  common  men,  sir !
Open  your  blind  eyes,  and  look,  and  look  again,  sir !
Janos  looked  again,  upon  the  walls  infernal,
"  As  I've  seen  the  shell,  I  vow  I'll  see  the  kernel."
So  he  onward  prest,  courageously  he  ventured,
Forced  the  palace  gates,  into  the  palace  entered  ;
Strange  the  sight  he  saw,  his  wonder  was  unbounded,
There  the  giant  king  was  by  his  sons  surrounded  ;


JANOS, THE HEEO.  93

They  were  all  at  meal,  it  was  the  dinner  meeting,
Eating  what  ?  By  Jove ! of  sliced-rocks  they  were

eating  I  -
'  Sit,  sit  down,  young  man  I  no  ceremony  make  here,
Of  a  slice  of  rock  we  beg  yon  to  partake  here."
Janos  said  not  Yes  !  and  it  is  not  surprising ;
He  was  not  inclined  for  such  strange  gourmandising  ;
"  If  you  are  our  guest,  'tis  surely  reasonable
That  you  should  partake  of  what  you  find  at  table.
Won't  you  eat  with  us?  why  then  you  must  be  eaten !
And your blood will serve our stone  -  repast to

sweeten."
Janos  thought  and  felt  that  this  was  serious  joking —
Such  an  "  Eat  with  us  !  " — not  appetite  provoking  ;
And  he  then  replied,  with  exquisite  good  breeding,
"  Sir !  I'm  quite  unused  to  such  delicious  feeding  !
But  if  it  must  be,  then  gracious  sir !  so  be  it !
I'll  partake  your  meal — and  grateful— only  free  it
From  one  strange  dislike  that  I've  acquired  in  travel,
Let  your  rocks,  kind  sir  !  be  pounded  into  gravel."
"  Pound  five  pounds  of  stone,"  the  giant  then  com-
manded,
And  five  pounds  of  stone  he  to  the  pounder  handed  :
On  his  palm  he  made  a  reasonable  figure —
"  Pound  them  of  this  size,  not  smaller  and  not  bigger."


94:  JANOS, THE HEKO.

One  the  king  took  up,  and  shouted  out,  delighted,
"  This  is  rather  hard,  I  doubt  if  you  can  bite  it."
Janos  grasped  it  fast,  and  held  it  as  if  weighing  ;
Not  a  word  he  said,  nor  thought  a  word  of  saying  :
Suddenly  his  hand,  all  powerful  and  pliant,
Hmi'd  the stone  —  it  cracked the  forehead  of  the
giant.

"  Ha !  "  laughed  Janos,  "  Ha !  This  is  a  just  atoning,
He  who  lives  on  stones,  he  can't  complain  of  stoning."
All  the  giants  looked  bewildered  and  affrighted —
All  their  plans  perplexed,  and  all  their  thoughts  be-
nighted ;
One  said  this,  one  that, — there  was  a  dreadful  quarrel,
And  they  dropped  big  tears,  one  tear  would  fill  a

barrel.
Then  a  giant  old,  repairing  the  disaster,
Said, "  We  hail  thee  king ! We  hail  thee  king  and

master !
Surely  thou  hast  been  by  heaven  itself  appointed —
We'll  obey  thy  rule,  and  serve  the  Lord's  anointed."
Then  loud  cries  arose, "Live,  live  good  king, for

ever !
0  forgive  the  past,  we  will  desert  thee  never  !
Never !  never !  never ! Listen  while  we  swear  it ;  "
And  the  walls  all  shook  in  ecstasy  to  hear  it.


JANOS, THE HEKO.  95

"  Thank  you,  thank  you  all !  " he  said,  "I  know  how

hateful
Is  ingratitude — I'm  really  not  ungrateful :
I  have  other  cares,  yet  to  your  wish  obedient,
As  I  cannot  rule,  I  will  appoint  a  regent."

But  before  parting  he  would  impose  one  condition —
that  if  they  were  visited  by  any  perplexities,  there
should  be  a  public  meeting,  and  they  would  apply  to
him  for  assistance,  which  he  would  be  prompt  in
giving.  And  they,  in  return,  said,  "If  ever  you  want
help,  we  will  all  fly  to  you  at  your  call,"  and  they
presented  to  him  a  fife,  which  he  was  to  sound  when-
ever he  desired  their  presence.  He  accepted  the  fife,
and  never  looked  at  but  it  brought  back  the  re-
membrance of  this  triumphant  portion  of  his  history ;
so  with  mutual  good  wishes,  and  affectionate  saluta-
tions, Janos  left  the  giant-land.

XXI.

Nowhere  are  we  told  where  Janos  roved  or  rested ;
But  we  know  with  grief  and  cares  and  woes  molested,
Thro'  the  world  he  roamed ;  in  solitude  we  found  him,
Darkness  gathering  o'er  him,  'neath  him  and  around
him.


96  JANOS, THE HERO.

"Is  it  night?"  he  asked;  "Or  am  I  blind — no  moon-
light—
Starlight  is  not  here — nor  glimmering  of  the  sunlight ;
Sure  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  earth  I've  ventured.''
Yes !  he  had  the  realms  of  outer  darkness  entered.
Neither  star  nor  moon  nor  sun  was  ever  known  there,
Blasts  and clouds and storms and  terrors reijmed

alone  there  ;
Dreadful  screams  he  heard,  and  most  unnatural  noises,
All  discordant  sounds,  and  melancholy  voices :
Eiding  on  their  brooms,  the  witches  flitted  o'er  him,
Imps  the  darkness  shook,  and  flapped  the  wind  before

him:
All  was  shrouded  in  a  black  and  braky  curtain —
"  'Tis  the  land,"  he  said, "of  Erebus,  I'm  certain  !  "
Soon  he  heard  a  trumpet  making  proclamation —
"  Come,  ye  witches  all !  come  all  to  convocation  !  "
'  Twas  the  session  time,  there  was  a  great  debate  there,
They  were  settling  all  the  business  of  the  state  there.
In  a  cavern  deep  and  dark  they  were  assembled,
Neath  a  cauldron  foul  a  flickering  fire-flame  trembled.
Janos  slily  entered — he  was  strangely  curious,
"  Witches  talk  will  be  exciting,  fast  and  furious  !  "
Janos  held  his  breath,  with  a  persistent  tether —
Saw  the  witches  gathered  in  a  heap  together ;


JANOS, THE HEKO.  97

Bound  the  cauldron  standing,  where  the  ugly  witches
Threw  the  filthy  skins  of  mangy  cats  and  bitches ;
Heads  of  rats  and  tails  of  snakes,  and  muddy  mallows,
Gathered  at  the  foot  of  thieves'  and  murderers'  gallows,
Bones  of  men,  and  skins  of  toads  and  evvets  stinking :
Janos  was  perplexed,  was  much  perplexed  in  thinking
What  the  mess  could  mean,  for  what  was  it  intended  ?
Could  he  mend  the  matter  ?  Was  it  to  be  mended  ?
Thought  upon  his  fife,  and  asked  his  conscience  whether
He  should  wake  its  sound,  and  call  his  friends  together  ?
So  he  stretched  his  hand,  to  draw  it  from  his  pocket,
Something  stopped  him  there,  as  suddenly  to  block  it;
'  Twas  a  heap  of  brooms,  which  the  infernal  witches
Flung  upon  the  ground,  all  bound  with  impish  stitches.
Yet  he  reached  his  fife,  and  whistled — soon  the  giants
Came  in  crowds,  all  armed,  confirming  their  alliance ;
Cordially  he  welcomed,  cordially  he  thanked  them,
And  in  war's  array  with  strategy  he  ranked  them :
Terrible  the  fright,  the  wildered  witches  scattered,
Were by their own brooms entangled, captured,

fettered ;
Had  no  wings  to  fly,  if  they  had  dreamt  of  flying,
So  they  fell  to  earth,  all  desolate  and  dying  ;
And  the  giants  seized  the  besoms  of  the  witches,
Swept  them  into  holes,  and  cavities  and  ditches ;

7


98  JANOS, THE HERO.

On  their  festering  bones  shall  ruin  and  decay  light :
Then  the  realms  of  darkness  saw  the  dawn  of  day-
light.
Yet  one  witch  there  was,  the  ugliest  of  the  ugly,
For  a  moment  she  had  hid  herself  so  snugly  ;
But  at  last  found  out,  she  was,  she  was  no  other
Than  Iluska's  wicked,  insolent  step -mother.
"Ah !  "  did  Janos  shout,  "  And  I  at  last  have  caught

thee,
To  this  wretched  doom  thy  wickedness  has  brought

thee ! "
Off  she  scampered  then,  but  by  her  terrors  hampered,
'  Twas  not  very  far  the  evil  woman  scampered,
For  a  giant  seized  her,  and  to  stop  compelled  her,
Seized  her  by  the  throat,  and  violently  held  her.
Janos  spoke — "  Thou  wretch !  I  turn  thee  to  a  raven,
But  before  thou  reachest  thine  infernal  haven,
Hie  thee  to  our  village,  tell  them  all  the  story
Of  thy  sin  and  shame,  and  Kukoriczi's  glory."

Gaily  rose  the  sun  upon  those  realms  benighted,
Clouds  and  darkness  fled,  and  then  the  heroes  lighted
A  grand  bonfire  there,  from  mid-day's  brightest  flashes,
Where  they  burnt  the  witches'  besoms  all  to  ashes.
Then  the  giant-friends  with  courtesy  dismissing,
There  was  much  saluting,  blessing  and  hand  kissing ;


JAN  OS, THE HERO.  99

Janos  he  felt  proud  of  subjects  so  obedient,
And  he  sent  a  friendly  message  to  the  regent.

XXII.

Driven  forth  again  to  wander  in  his  sadness,
From  Iluska's  rose  he  caught  a  gleam  of  gladness ;
Yet  that  rose  so  dear  brought  recollections  gloomy  ;
It  recalled  the  hour,  when  from  Iluska's  tomb  he
That  sweet  flower  had  plucked,  and  when  his  eye  was

fixed
On  its  leaves,  as  oft — how  many  thoughts  were  mixed
In  bewilderings  strange.

One  day  it  happened,  while  he  lingered  long,  looking
at  the  setting  sun,  that  the  darkness  came  on  and
reminded  him  it  was  time  to  rest ;  he  walked  till
the  moon  arose — walked  till  it  had  disappeared  ;  but
at  last,  absolutely  overwhelmed  with  weariness,
he  sank  down  and  fell  asleep:

Little  recked  he  then,  exhausted,  and  so  very
Worn — his  resting  place  was  an  old  cemetery ;
Kuined  were  the  tombs — coarse  grass  the  grave  heaps

covered —
O'er  the  accursed  spot  destroying  angels  hovered.


100  JANOS, THE HEKO.

Graves  gave  up  their  dead,  and  spectres  left  their

cerements,
Pale,  pale  ghosts  came  forth,  they  came  in  snowy

garments, —
Formed  a  ring, they  sang,  they  danced, — the  earth

beneath  them
Shook  ; they  kissed ; they  held  up  cypress  wreaths

to  wreathe  them.
Janos  slept  so  sound,  in  slumber's  arms  entranced,
Heard  not  that  they  sang,  and  saw  not  that  they

danced.
Soon  a  wandering  ghost  the  sleeping  man  had  noted  :
"What!  intruders  here ! "  she  cried,  and  swiftly  floated
To  her  sister  ghosts,  and  told  them  of  the  intrusion,
In  the  ghostly  choir  there  was  a  sad  confusion ;
Bound  the  sleeper  gathered,  gathered  without  number,
When  one  ghost  screamed  out, "Awake  him  from

his  slumber."
Then  a  loud  cock-crow!  and  ghosts  and  spirits  flying;
Janos  lay  asleep,  where  Janos  had  been  lying :
But  the  cock's  loud  crow  aroused  him,  he  awakened,
Then  he  hurried  forth,  nor  once  his  foot-pace  slackened  ;
Frost  wind  swept  the  grass,  the  storm  winds  roughed

the  ocean,
Janos  thought  it  best  to  put  his  limbs  in  motion.


JANOS,  THE  HERO.  101


XXIII.


Janos  to  a  mountain's  highest  summit  mounted,

One  by  one  the  dawn's  developed  charms  he  counted,

Till  their  numbers passed  the  growing  powers of

numbers,
Wondering  there  he  stood,  as  one  in  dreams  who

slumbers :
Sweet  it  was  to  see  the  star  of  morning  paling,
Lamp  on  lamp  extinguished  with  the  sun's  prevailing ;
And  when  he  appeared,  so  grandly,  proudly  towering,
Riding high and higher, all heaven's host over-
powering ;
As  he  rose  with  slow,  and  scarcely  noticed  motion,
Showers  of  brightness  bathed  plain,  hill  and  vale  and

ocean —
Showers  whose  golden  drops  scattered  on  fields  and

flowers,
Hung  like  jewelled  offerings  falling  from  the  showers.
Not  a  wave  was  seen  on  Ocean's  face  so  even,
While  it  mirrored  back  the  canopy  of  heaven ;
And the singing rills and streams and  cataracts

dancing,
Flung  around  them  gems,  like  pearls  and  diamonds

glancing.


102  JANOS, THE HERO.

By  the  lake  there  stood  a  man  of  humble  order,
An  old  fisherman,  who  drew  towards  the  border
Nets  that  he  had  laid — his  beard  was  long  and  hoary —
Garb  and  looks  all  told  a  melancholy  story.
Janos  kindly  asked  him, "Would  you  be  so  good,

man,
O'er  the  lake  to  row  me,  for  I  wish  you  would,  man?
Money  I  have  none ;  no,  not  a  single  penny,
Having  none  to  give,  I  will  not  offer  any."
"  Money  I  desire  not,  and  as  I  desire  not,
For  my  friendly  service  money  I  require  not.
"Wishes  I  have  few,  but  every  honest  wishing
Heaven  has  well  fulfilled  out  of  my  daily  fishing."

The  old  fisherman  is  desirous  to  know  what  misfor-
tune brought  Janos  to  the  spot.  Does  he  know  that
it  is  the  Operenzer  Lake  he  seeks  to  cross — a  lake
without  beginning  and  without  end.  The  fisherman
declines  to  help  him  across.

"  Operenzer  Lake  ?"  and  Janos  was  delighted
When  he  heard  the  name — "Now  all  will  soon  be

righted  ; "
Sought  his  fife  within  his  pocket,  and  he  found  it,
Put  it  to  his  lips,  and  shrillingly  it  soimded ;


JANOS, THE HERO.  103

Hardly  was  it  heard,  when  lo  !  a  giant's  pacing
Echoed  from  the  stones, — he  came  and  swiftly  placing
On  his  breast  his  hand,  he  bowed — "  Hope  no  mis-
take, sir ! "
"No!  I  wanted  you  to  bear  me  o'er  the  lake,  sir ! "
"  Bear  yon  o'er  the  lake  ? 'Tis  well,  sir !  I  am  ready !
Jump  upon  my  shoulders,  and  be  still  and  steady ;
Hold  me  by  the  hair,  at  nothing  be  affrighted  :  "
Very  long  it  was  before  the  land  they  sighted.

XXIV.

'Twas  no  wonder,  though  the  seven-leagued  booted
giant

Had  his  lungs  of  steel, — his  limbs  and  legs  were  pliant,
Every  step  seven  leagues,  and  yet  three  weeks  had

ended
Ere  they  neared  the  shore  to  which  the  giant  wended ;
In  the  distant  blue  they  saw  a  bird  that  fluttered —
"Land! a  vulture ! land!" the  words that Janos

uttered —
"  There's  the  shore ;  I'm  sure  I  see  the  clearing  high-
land."
*  No,"  the  giant  said,  "  You  only  see  an  island."
"What's  the  island's  name,"  asked  Janos,  somewhat

weary.
"  'Tis  the  happy  kingdom,  kingdom  of  the  fairy ;


104  JAN  OS, THE HERO.

There  you  reach  the  world's  end;  can  no  farther  enter;
We  had  better  stop  and  risk  no  more  adventure."
"  Dearest  of  iny  subjects  !  Bear  me  on  I  pray  thee  ;
Say  not,  Stop  !  good  friend !  for  I  cannot  obey  thee."
"  Well  then,  be  it  so  !  but  know  that  every  stranger
Visiting  that  land  will  find  it  full  of  danger;
And  I  give  you  warning,  ere  we  part  asunder,
Every  house  you  enter  shows  some  dreadful  wonder !"
"  What  reck  I  of  wonders  ?  Place  me  midst  the  direst."
"If  it  must  be  so  ;  I'll  do  as  thou  desirest !  "
So  it  was  ;  the  giant  had  been  tutored  duly
To  obey  his  lord,  and  he  obeyed  him  truly ;
Asked  to  be  dismissed,  and  after  long  farewelling,
Crossed  the  lake  alone,  returning  to  his  dwelling.


XXV.


At  the  nearest  gate — half  waking  and  half  sleeping —
Three  tremendous bears their  wonted  watch were

keeping  ;
Janos  drew  his  sword,  and  mercilessly  slew  them,
Forced  the  yielding  doors,  and  quietly  passed  thro'

them.
"  This  is  one  day's  work,  enough  for  one  day's  bother,
And  a  little  rest  will  help  me  for  another ;


JANOS, THE HEK0.  105

I  have  forced  the  first,  and  now  must  force  the  second,"
Thus  our  Hercules  his  seven-fold  labours  reckoned.
On  a  bank  he  threw  him,  and  refreshed  in  vigour,
Wakened  with  the  sun,  a  renovated  figure  ;
Never  harder  task  was  entered  on  by  mortal,
For  three  lions  fierce  guarded  the  second  portal  ;
Loudly  though  they  roared,  he  cared  not  for  their

roaring,
At  his  feet  they  lay,  all  drenched  and  drown'd  their

gore  in ;
For  the  trusty  sword  that  bade  the  bears  defiance,
Summarily  served  the  subjugated  lions.
Thus  encouraged,  Janos,  valiantly  advancing,
Found  for  dangers  new  his  courage  old  enhancing.
When  the  third  day  dawned,  the  third  gate,  which

looked  stronger,
Threatened  to  detain  the  venturous  hero  longer ;
Help  us,  gracious  heavens  !  a  griffin  stood  before  him,
'T would  not  have  been  strange  had  shudderings  come

o'er  him ;
Grim  the  griffin's  claws,  his  bowlings  loud,  though

hollow,
And  he  could,  at  once,  a  herd  of  oxen  swallow.
Silent  Janos  stood,  in  undefined  intention,
Yet  among  his  wants,  he  wanted  not  invention ;


106  JANOS, THE HEKO.

Looking on  his  sword-blade,  which  he  prest  with

kisses,
"  Canst  thou  help  me  now  in  such  a  work  as  this  is."
Janos  looked  into  his  open  cavern  maw  there,
Saw  the  sharpened  fangs  that  garrisoned  his  jaw  there ;
Then  without  delay,  no  how-ing  and  no  if-ing,
Sprang  into  the  throat  of  the  astonished  griffin ;
Safe  beyond  the  fangs,  he  shouted  as  he  entered,
"I  must  find  the  place  where  thy  foul  heart  is  centred ;"
And  he  carved  his  way  with  his good sword  and

found  it,
Tore  it  from  its  throne,  and  laughing  danced  around

it;
And  he  cut  a  passage  thro'  the  dragon's  side  then,
All  his  work  was  done,  his  wishes  satisfied  then ;
Looking  round  he  saw,  and  joyfully  said,  "  There  is
Bidding  me  come  in  !  the  lovely  land  of  fairies  ! "

XXVI.

Winter  comes  not  there, the fruits and  flowerets

blasting ;
But  there  reigns  a  spring  of  beauty  everlasting  :
There  no  suns  are  seen  ascending  and  descending,
But  a  gentle  light — a  dawn-time  never  ending ;


JANOS, THE HERO.


107


There  they  fly  about  on  never  wearied  pinions,
Death  was  never  known  in  those  divine  dominions ;
There  no  thoughts  are  found  of  idle  earthly  blisses,
But  they  live  a  life  of  loves  and  joys  and  kisses  ;
Grief  has  there  no  tears,  if  tears  are  ever  falling,
They  are  only  tears,  hope,  happiness  recalling ;
And  when  tears  are  dropped,  in  marvellous  trans-
formations,
All  the  tears  are  turned  to  diamond  constellations  ;
And  the  fairy  children,  midst  their  songs  and  dances,
Heavenly  rainbows  spin  of  the  gay  light  that  glances
From  those radiant  eyes, and warp  them  in  the

fringes
Of  the  evening  clouds,  like  those  which  sunset  tinges.
There  are  beds  of  flowers — sweet  violets,  scarlet  roses —
Where  they  lay  them  down, and  when  the  eyelid

closes,
Odorous  zephyrs  fan  the  senses,  and  romances
Other  than  their  own  awake  their  playful  fancies  ;
Ours  are  dreams — all  dreams  from  fairy  land  ideal,
Shadowing  things,  at  best,  all  worthless,  all  unreal ;
But  the  love  that  binds  the  virtuous  and  the  youthful,
That  indeed  is  bliss,  the  truest  of  the  truthful.


108  JANOS, THE HERO,


XXVII.

Emerald  fields  were  spread,  which,  from  the  mom  to
even,

Washed  by  fragrant  dews,  refreshing  dews  from
heaven,

Never  lost  their  leaves  and  never  dropped  their
flowers,

Withered  not  by  cold,  nor  crushed  by  tropic  showers.

When  the  stranger  came,  how  did  the  fairies  meet
him?

0  with  smiles  of  love  they  hurried  forth  to  greet  him ;

Stretched  their  friendly  hands,  they  smoothed  his
locks,  and  bore  him

To  the  lovely  isle  they  pointed  out  before  him  :

One  enchanting  scene,  to  scenes  still  more  enchanting

Led  him  ;  he  was  sad — one  blessedness  was  wanting ;

"What  was  all  to  him  ? Iluska !  that  dear  being

Absent — all  he  saw  was  scarcely  worth  the  seeing.

"In  these  realms  of  love,  where  all  is  sweet  com-
munion ;

"Why  am  I  alone  ? The  only  hallowed  union

Which  my  soul  desires  is  broken  and  is  blasted —

Why  is  all  this  bliss  with  my  sad  woe  contrasted  ?  "


JANOS, THE HERO.  109

Then  in  his  despair  he  sought  a  neighbouring  river —

"  Here  will  I  inter  my  misery  for  ever."

From  his  breast  he  tore  the  rose  that  he  had  taken

From  Iluska's  grave,  and  cried,  with  agony  shaken,

"  Thou  my  only  treasure,  nourished  from  the  ashes

Of  Iluska,  go  !  " Into  the  stream  he  dashes

That  dear  flower — "  I  follow  " — when,  0  wond'rous

wonder !
Up  there  rose  a  form,  where  Janos'  rose  sunk  under ;
'  Twas  Iluska !  yes  !  it  was  Iluska, — never
Had  she  seemed  so  lovely. Plunging  in  the  river
Janos  seized  his  love — 0  heavenly  visitation !
Heart  sufficing  bliss — 0  more  than  soul's  salvation  !
Soon  he  found  the  stream, — the  stream  was  the  reality
Poets dreamed of once  —  its name was "Immor-
tality,"
Whence  Iluska's  dust,  which  in  the  rose  was  blended,
To  immortal  life,  out  of  her  tomb  ascended.

Many  a  tale  I've  told,  and  yet  should  fail  in  telling
Such  a  tale  as  this,  all  other  tales  excelling  :
How  he  grasped  the  maid,  and  passionately  prest  her
To  his  beating  heart,  and  smiled  and  kissed  and  blest

her!
Even  the  fairies  felt,  and  recognized  her  beauty,
To  admire  and  love  was  a  delighted  duty ;


110  JANOS, THE HERO.

And  they  hailed  her  Queen  of  all  the  fairy  regions,
And  made  Janos  king,  and  swore  them  both  allegiance.
There  they  reigned,  and  there  they  reign,  in  bliss

supernal,
Love's  eternal  power  brings  happiness  eternal ;
Would you fully learn love's mighty, marvellous

mystery,
Go  to  fairyland  and  study  Janos'  history.


Ill


PEEPLEXITY.

A  virdgnah  megtiltani  nem  leliet.

What  modest  flower  will  hesitate  to  bloom,

When  the  Spring's  sweet  voiced  welcoming  bids  it

"Come!"
Woman  is  Spring,  and  when  she  speaks,  "  0  list!"
Can  love  that's  bedded  in  man's  heart  resist?

Heaven-blue  campanula !  within  thy  bell
I  felt  as  if  my  spirit  loved  to  dwell ;
Danced  gaily  with  thy  dancing  gaily,  while
My  smile  was  magic-mirrored  in  thy  smile.

Solve  thou  the  question  that  perplexes  me —
Am  I  the  loved  one  ? Is  another  he  ?
As  in  the  autumn,  sun  and  storm  contest
For  victory,  doubts  are  struggling  in  my  breast.

O  tell  me  !  tell  me !  for  my  bane  or  bliss,
Whom  wilt  thou  rapture  with  thy  rose-lip  kiss  ?
Will  thy  soft  cheek,  a  cheek  more  favoured  press,
While  I  seek  death  in  the  wild  wilderness?


112  BRIGHT EYES.

0  star  of  beauty !  Bless  me  with  thy  light,
Condemn  me  not  to  hopeless,  rayless  night !
Pearl  of  my  heart !  accept  that  heart  of  mine,
And  blessings,  boundless  blessings,  shall  be  thine.


DREAMING.

Almodom-e  ?

Is  it  a  dream  that  shows  me
Yonder  vision  airy  ?

Is  she  a  mortal  maiden  ?
Is  she  a  spirit  fairy  ?

Whether  maiden  or  fairy,
Little  indeed  I  care,

"Would  she  only  love  me,
Smiling  sweetly  there.


BRIGHT  EYES.

Nem  nezek  en,  mineh  neznek  az  egref

I  look  not  upwards  to  the  azure  skies,
Eaint  is  their  blue  contrasted  with  thine  eyes ;
Thine  eyes  shall  be  my  heaven — the  heavens  above
Are  far  less  lovely  than  thine  eyes  of  love.


NIGHT.  113

The  world  would  not  be  worth  or  hopes  or  sighs,
Were  it  not  brightened  by  thy  deep  blue  eyes  ;
Without  those  eyes,  all  darkness,  all  despair,
A  world  of  dying  joy  and  cankering  care  !

Seek  not  my  image  in  those  starry  eyes,
For  there  that  image  undiscovered  lies ;
I  hide  my  treasures  in  my  grief,  and  thence
Flow  forth  some  rays  of  hope  and  confidence.


NIGHT.
Boldog  ejjel.


0  holy  night !

1  wander  with  my  love
Thro'  garden  and  thro'  grove,
In  love's  delight.

Around,  all  still,

But  sharp  and  shrill

The  bells  are  heard  from  far ;

On  heaven's  blue  floor,

Are  shining  o'er,

One  moon  and  many  a  star.


114:  TO MY HOKSE.

'Tis  not  my  lot

To  be  a  star  in  heaven,  nor  would  I  be

Removed  from  thee,

For  life  would  not  be  life  where  thou  wert  not.

The  light  of  Eden,

Thou  absent,  maiden !

"Would  soon  in  darkness  close  ;

And  I  should  fly,

Down  from  the  sky,

To  dwell  with  thee,  sweet  mundane  rose.


TO  MY  HORSE.

Gyere  lovam,  liadd  tegyem  rdd  nyergem.

Come,  and  be  saddled,  steed !  I  must  be  hieing
To  my  sweet  love,  for  whom  my  soul  is  sighing ;
My  foot  is  stirruped, — all  thy  strength  is  needed
To  o'ertake  my  soul,  which  hath  my  steps  preceded.

Lo !  that  wild  bird,  whose  rapid  flight  is  winging
Towards  his  dear  mate,  that  waits  him,  sweetly  singing ;
On,  on  my  steed !  outstrip  that  bird,  swift-moving, —
His  loving  is  no  stronger  than  my  loving.


115

THE  TIKED  STEED.

Bovidre  fogtam  a  kantdrszdrat.

Tighter  the  reins  of  my  poor  steed  I  drew,

For  he  was  weary,  and  I  weary  too ;

His  mouth  was  white  with  foam,  his  sides  with  blood

Were  red — and  I  was  breathless  as  I  rode.

One  thought  possessed  my  spirit,  only  one —
"And  is  my  dovelet  mine  and  mine  alone?"
It  haunted  me  like  piercing  thorns,  when  prest
By  unseen  influence  on  the  songster's  breast.

Tired  must  thy  limbs  be,  and  thy  paces  slow,
If  sympathising  with  such  thoughts  of  woe  ;
Well  may  the  blood  run  down  thy  sides,  if  torn
With  such  a  sharp  and  agonizing  thorn.

Time  was  I  revelled  in  bright  purple  eyes,

They  scorned  me,  inaccessible  the  prize  ;

Black  eyes  have  now  entranced  me — Gracious  heaven  !

0  let  me  not  to  black  despair  be  driven !


116


WTNE  AND  SONG.
Semmi  vdgyam,  semmi  Tcedvem.

No  laurel  garlands  would  I  claim,
Oak-crowns  of  wisdom,  bays  of  fame ;
But  let  some  dear  Hungarian  maid,
For  me  a  purple  grape-bunch  braid !
I  for  the  poet  and  the  grape,
A  sweet  similitude  can  shape, —
Each  to  the  world  benignant  gives
The  spirit  that  within  it  lives  :
The  grape  its  generous,  joyous  wine,
The  poet  songs  and  hymns  divine ;
Each  pouring  a  spontaneous  flood
Of  light  and  love,  of  grace  and  good  ;
Each  the  deep  wounds  of  sorrow  healing,
Each  some  unbudded  joy  revealing,
Each  to  heaven's  treasury  belongs,
And  blesses  earth  with  sweets  and  songs.


117


FAITHFULNESS.


BozsaboTcor  a  domb  oldalon.

There  on  the  mountain  a  rose-blossom  blows,
Bend  o'er  my  bosom  thy  forehead  which  glows ;
Whisper,  0  whisper  sweet  words  in  mine  ear,
Say  that  thou  lovest  me, — what  rapture  to  hear  !

Down  on  the  Danube  the  evening  sun  sinks,
Gilding  the  wavelets  that  dance  on  its  brinks  ;
As  the  sweet  river  has  cradled  the  sun,
Cradled  I  rest  upon  thee,  lovely  one !

I  have  been  slandered,  the  slanderers  declare —
Let  God  forgive  them, — I  utter  no  prayer  ;
Now  let  them  listen,  while  prayerful  I  pour
All  my  heart's  offerings  on  her  I  adore.


118


NOON  DAY.
Meleg  del  van  itt  hinn  a  mezijben.

Fiercely  pours  the  noon-day  sun  its  streams
Unexhausted,  while  its  burning  beams
Drive  to  shadowy  grounds  the  birds  for  air,
And  the  wearied  hounds  lie  panting  there.

Two  tired  girls  turn  o'er  the  hay-falls  sweet,
Two  tired  swains  are  binding  sheaves  of  wheat, —
Listless  all, — for  on  a  day  like  this
Toil  the  heaviest  of  oppressions  is.

Here  a  king  may  rest  on  sofas  nappy,
There  the  Gulya's  peasant  youth  be  happy  :
Golden  thrones  may  give  to  princes  rest,
Let  the  swain  sleep  on  his  maiden's  breast !


119


THE  BETYAR.

A  csapldrne  a  betydrt  szerette.

The  landlady  smiled  on  the  Betyar — but  he
No  charm  in  the  landlady's  smiling  could  see,
For  the  landlady's  pretty  young  daughter  had  given
A  smile  that  was  sweeter,  a  sunbeam  of  heaven.

The  landlady  riled  with  this  scorn  of  her  love,
From  her  threshold  the  maid,  in  her  jealousy,  drove ;
In  a  cold  biting  winter  compelled  her  to  roam,
And  wandering  she  found  neither  shelter  nor  home.

She  wandered,  thro'  storm  and  thro'  snow,  on  the  heath,
And,  wearied  and  wasted,  was  frozen  to  death  ;
The  Betyar  he  found  her  cold  corpse,  and  he  flew
To  the  inn,  in  his  wrath,  and  the  landlady  slew.

He  heard  from  the  judge  the  death-dealing  sentence, —
No  word  of  regret,  no  thought  of  repentance ;
He  had  lost  all  he  cared  for,  and  listened  unmoved
To  the  mandate  which  sent  him  to  her  he  had  loved.


120


TO  AN  UNJUST  JUDGE.
Biro,  hiro,  Jiisatalod.


Gibes  and  jests  are  little  meet
For  the  solemn  judgment  seat !
He  should  speak  with  bated  breath,
Who  deals  out  the  doom  of  death.


Hush !  he  heareth. Break  the  plate
Into  potsherds — death  his  fate ;
Lead  the  youth  to  meet  his  doom —
To  the  headsman — to  the  tomb.


At  the  uprising  of  the  sun
Falls  the  head  to  earth — 'tis  done-
And  a  purple  stream  of  gore
Spouts  upon  th'  ensanguined  floor.


TO AN UNJUST JUDGE.  121

Moonlight  came — the  victim  stood
Stately  in  the  solitude —
He,  who  'neath  the  gallows  tree
Was  that  morning  buried — he  !

And  the  head — his  right-hand  there
Held  by  the  entangled  hair ;
In  the  darkness,  through  the  street,
Stalked — the  unjust  judge  to  meet,

"  Instrument  of  perjury  !
Guiltless  thou  did'st  sentence  me  !  "
So  in  shrieks  the  spectre  spoke,
And  the  unjust  judge  awoke.

Conscience — never  felt  before —
Drove  him  trembling  to  the  door ;
There  the  ghastly  spectre  stood,
Holding  up  the  head  of  blood.

All  bewildered,  back  he  fled,
Hid  him  in  his  restless  bed ;
But  the  voice  he  nightly  hears,
And  the  bloody  head  appears.


122


DKINK.
A  Idnek  nines  szeretoje.

Hast  thou  no  fair  maiden  ? Drink  !
Soon  thy  raptured  soul  will  think
All  fair  maidens — all  their  charms
Are  encircled  in  thine  arms.

Art  thou  penniless  ? Then  drink  !
Thy  delighted  soul  will  think
Piles  of  riches  fill  thy  door,
Thou  wilt  be  no  longer  poor.

Do  dull  cares  corrode  thee  ? Drink !
Soon  thy  buoyant  heart  shall  think
Thousand  sprites  are  come  to  bear
All  thy  sorrows  otherwhere.

Maiden  !  money !  I  have  none,
Mine  is  misery  alone  ;
And  for  these  three  griefs  of  mine,
I  must  thank  thee — dangerous  wine !


123


EBLAU-ECHOES.

Foldon  ho,  fellio  az  egen.

On  earth  the  snow,  the  clouds  on  heaven,

And  what  upon  the  ice  ?
What  to  expect  when  winter  enters,

But  what  is  winterwise  ?
I  looked  within — of  winter's  presence

I  well  may  doubt ;
But  doubt  not  if  beyond  the  window

I  look  without.


Here,  warm  and  cosy,  I  am  sitting,

Where  laughing  friends  abound,
And  the  red  wine  from  Erlau's  mountain

Is  passing  gaily  round  :
Good  wine,  good  friends,  when  met  together,

Bring  peace  and  joy,
And  in  the  bosom's  warmth  enkindled

Bliss  rises  high.


124  EELAU ECHOES.

And  could  that  bliss  its  seeds  be  bearing,

I'd  sow  them  on  the  snow,
And,  blossoming  there,  a  grove  of  roses

Amidst  the  ice  would  grow ;
And  if  my  glowing  heart  in  transport

To  heaven  were  hurled,
Instead  of  the  uncertain  sunshine,

'Twould  warm  the  world.

These  are  the  rocks  where  Dobo  printed

His  name  in  Moslem  gore,
On  pages  where  his  courage  graven

Shall  perish  never  more.
He  was  a  man  of  men,  unequalled

The  fame  shall  be,
Till  in  its  course  the  Danube  hurries

Back  from  the  sea.

The  early  deeds  of  Magyar  glory

Are  faded,  and  our  home
Is  palsied,  and  the  Magyar  people

Weak,  stupefied,  and  dumb.
Will  then  spring-dawn  return  awakened

Some  future  day ;
And  our  dark  hearths  again  be  brightened,

Oh !  who  can  say  ?


ERLAU ECHOES.  125

But  for  a  day  be  all  forgotten —

Forgotten  till  to-morrow —
The  passing  hour  we  will  not  darken

With  such  a  dismal  sorrow.
And  shall  our  plaints  reflect  for  ever

A  bootless  smart  ?
The  breaking  lyre's  last  death- vibration

May  break  man's  heart.

Away  then  all  this  anguish  wasted !

Flung  far  from  you  and  me,
Let  emptied  glasses  be  the  coffins

For  burying  memory !
Another  glass,  and  yet  another —

Another  glass —
Fill — drink — re-fill — and  drink,  and  empty

The  earlier  mass !

Well !  now  a  dream  my  soul  possesses,

Each  glass  a  century  be,
The  present  gone,  the  future  beaming,

Beaming  with  liberty.

0  joy  1  0  joy  !  the  land's  redemption

Is  now  at  hand ;

1  see  arrayed  in  freedom's  glory

The  Fatherland.


126


AFTER A REVEL.

Ez  volt  aztdn  az  ejszaha.

That  was  indeed  a  glorious  night,

When  all  inspired  with  Magyar  wine,

We  saw  the  hallowed  past  return —
That  was,  indeed,  a  night  divine  !

There  was  a  second  Mohac's  fight —

The  sabre- wielding  Turks  were  there  ;

We  saw  them  in  the  wine-cup's  light-^-
And  we  the  brave  Hungarians  were  !

'  Tis  true  as  truth — as  valiant  men

We  fought — not  one,  nor  two,  but  all ;

And  dropping  from  his  saddle  then,

We  saw  the  wounded  monarch  fall.

And  every  heavy  blow  that  fell

From  every  lifted  Magyar  hand,

Appeared  prophetic  to  foretell

Salvation  for  the  Magyar  land.


127


TIPPLING.

Komor,  mogorva  serfin.

Like  a  chafed  bear,  grim  and  growling,

Mister  Dozey !
Oft  you  curse  the  mulberry  pimples

On  your  nosey  !
But  your  cursings,  your  complainings,

Mister  Dozey !
Won't  uproot  the  mulberry  pimples

On  your  nosey !
Sir !  the  fault  is  yours  entirely,

Mister  Dozey !
If  the  mulberry  pimples  thicken

On  your  nosey  I
For  if  you  will  tipple,  tipple,

Mister  Dozey !
Mulberry  pimples  can't  but  thicken

On  your  nosey !


128


MUSINGS.

Xem  ugy  van,  a  mint  volt. A  foldon.

Things  are  not  as  they  were — one  year  another's
History  obscures  ;  my  present  and  my  past,

Tho'  linked  in  my  life's  annals  like  twin  brothers,
In  separate  moulds  by  destiny  were  cast.

With  a  free  hand,  in  ardent  friendship  glowing,
I  gave  my  open  heart,  'twas  full  and  free ;

I  gave  it  willingly — not  caring,  knowing
How  very  little  it  was  prized  to  be.

And  now  they  ask  my  heart — I  don't  retain  it,
I  can't  bestow  it ; answer  I  have  none !

And  if  I  might,  I  would  not  now  regain  it ;
I  have  no  heart,  intruder !  so  be  gone.

No  more  my  spirit  can  with  love  be  laden,
Heartless,  I  can  no  longer  dream  of  love,

Now  every  sweet  and  fascinating  maiden
Is  a  pure  angel  smiling  from  above.


MUSINGS.  129

That  was  my  thought,  but  now  a  new  impression
Has  taught  me  there  are  angels,  not  of  light ;

And  losing  one,  I  can  obtain  possession
Of  other  angels  as  attractive  quite.

A  homely  love  was  once  the  sun  which  lighted
My  inmost  soul ;  and  now  I  but  behold

A  dull  blank  moon  that  leaves  me  half  benighted,
And  glimmers  coldly  on  my  forehead  cold.

Once  on  the  grave  I  looked,  and  calmly  sighing,
After  life's  labours,  welcomed  its  repose  ;

Now  will  I  dare  my  doom,  and  death  defying,
Be  careless  of  life's  cradle,  course,  or  close.

I  was  as  moulder's  clay,  smooth,  soft  and  plastic,
But  now  am  marble  ;  and  repelling  all,

As  a  hard  wall  repels,  with  bound,  elastic,

The  ball  flung  violently  'gainst  the  wall.

Time  was  when  a  sweet  maid,  and  white  wine  sim-
mering,
And  the  bright  blaze  of  noon-tide  suns  were  mine,
Now  but  the  dregs — a  reckless  wife — no  glimmering
Of  light,  for  me  no  single  star  shall  shine !

9


130


MASTEE  PAUL.

Pal  mester  illyformdn  okoslcodott.

Master  Paul  was  angry, — in  his  ire

Threw  his  hat,
Like  a  log,  into  the  blazing  fire, —

What  of  that  ?
Talked  about  his  wife  till  he  was  hoarse :
"  Curse  her — I'll  apply  for  a  divorce !
No  !  I'll  chase  her  out  of  doors  instead  " —
And  he  did  exactly  what  he  said.

Master  Paul  got  cooler  after  that —

Very  cool !
"  What  a  fool  to  throw  away  my  hat —

What  a  fool !
What  a  fool  to  drive  her  from  the  door,
Now  I  shall  be  poorer  than  before  ;
For  she  kept  the  house,  and  earned  her  bread,"
And  it  was  exactly  as  he  said.


MASTER PAUL.  131

Master  Paul  got  angrier,  angrier  yet, —

Took  his  hat —
Flung  it  from  him  in  his  passionate  pet —

What  of  that?
"  Toil  and  trouble  is  man's  wretched  lot,
And  one  more  misfortune  matters  not —
Let  it  go — unsheltered  be  my  head  " —
And  he  did  exactly  as  he  said.

Freed  from  all  this  world's  anxieties —

Master  Paul
Pulled  his  hat  indignant  o'er  his  eyes —

"All,  yes!  all:
All  is  gone,  my  partner  and  my  pelf,
Nought  is  left  me  but  to  hang  myself,
So  of  all  my  troubling  cares  get  rid  " —
And  exactly  as  he  said  he  did.


132


THE GOOD TEACHEK.

Van  hi%  ott  a  sole  rosz  Icozott.

Amidst  the  preachings  of  our  many  preachers,

Only  a  very  few
Are  worthy  of  our  self-created  teachers,

As  good  or  true.

But  once  I  learnt  in  youth,  what  yet  abideth

On  memory's  page ;
It  was  an  old  man's  lesson,  and  it  glideth

From  youth  to  age.

Bald  was  his  head  and  grey,  and  bore  serenely

The  weight  of  years ;
Youth's  spring  flowers  he  had  gathered,  nor  felt  keenly,

Time's  lost  arrears.

There  was  one  flower  immortal,  for  it  ever

Bloomed  on  its  bed —
That  bed,  the  old  man's  nose,  where  faded  never —

The  poppy  red.


THE GOOD TEACHER.  J

And  every  day  it  glowed  more  brightly,  when

The  fostering  wine
Nourished  its  roots,  and  bade  the  flower  again

Bichly  to  shine.

It  was  a  marvellous  plant,  that  night  and  morning

More  brilliant  grew, —
Not  needing  dews  of  heaven,  and  even  scorning

The  cellar  dew.

Under  the  nose  roof,  a  moustachio  hairy-
Looked  gravely  round ;

One  end  was  pointed  upward,  light  and  airy,
One  to  the  ground.

'Neath  the  moustachio  was  an  open  mouth,

Where  a  pipe  hung,
The  mouth  was  like  a  cavern's  depth,  uncouth,

Which  caged  a  tongue.

He  wore  a  coat  called  Zrinyi,  made  of  yore,

'Neath  Arpads  race,
Of  the  old  colours  it  no  colour  bore —

No  !  not  a  trace.


134


THE  GOOD  TEACHER.


The  buttons  on  the  coat  that  covered  those  limbs

Were  ancient  jobs,
That  had  been  used  for  shooting  at  the  Moslems,

Old,  rough,  round  knobs.

There  were  such  zig-zag  laces,  bobs  and  tags,

In  strange  array,
That  midst  them  even  the  lightning's  wild  zig-zags

Soon  lost  their  way.

With  him,  for  many  a  month  and  year,  I  had

Much  intercourse ;
A  noble  fellow  was  the  ancient  lad,

Worth  just — his  horse.

He  taught  me  much,  experience  much  he  brought  me

'Tis  useful  yet —
And  all  the  cunning  lessons  that  he  taught  me

I'll  not  forget.


And  I  was  grateful  then,  and  I  repaid  him

In  grateful  glee ;
Treasured  his  precious  counsels,  and  obeyed  him

Most  reverently.


CYPRESS LEAVES.  135

I  gave  him  sausages  and  ham  and  bacon,

All  of  the  best  ;
Which  from  mine  host's  own  knapsack  I  had  taken —

I  was  his  guest.


CYPEESS LEAVES.
Ldttam  Mt  hosszu  nap !

Two  long  days  thy  body
On  its  bier  reposed,

And  thy  lips  were  speechless,
And  thine  eyelids  closed.

And  T  kissed  thy  forehead —
Tablet  of  my  bliss —

Then  I  felt  the  anguish

Of  the  unwelcomed  kiss.

O  thou  broken  altar !

Kissing  thy  cold  brow,
In  that  kiss  my  spirit

Froze  to  chilling  snow.


136  CYPRESS LEAVES.

Then  I  kissed  the  cerements,
Then  I  kissed  the  bier,

Heard  the  knell  of  exile,
Dropt  the  farewell  tear,

Saw  the  torches  naming
O'er  the  coffin  there,

Heard  the  chant  funereal,
My  response — despair  !

There  I  stood — mute  statue  !

On  the  senseless  sod —
Heard  upon  the  coffin

Fall  the  earthly  clod.

Heard  it,  yet  perceived  not
All  the  weight  of  woe  :

Dreamed — and  yet  believed  not
Such  an  overthrow.

To  the  world  I  turned  me,

From  its  wild  confusion —

Asked  for  my  lost  treasure,
In  my  soul's  delusion.


CYPRESS LEAVES.  137

Idly,  vainly  sought  it,

Then  I  hastened  home,
And  shall  mourn  for  ever

O'er  my  hopeless  doom.


Ha  elteben  nem  szerettem  volna.

Had  I  not  loved  that  blonde-haired,  beauteous  child,
Moving  on  earth,  and  breathing  living  breath,

I  should  have  worshipped  it  upon  my  knees,
When  sleeping  it  was  sanctified  by  death.

How  blest,  how  beautiful  that  sleep  !  I  saw

A  white  swan  rising  thro'  the  red-dawn  eaves  ;

While  the  pure  snow,  among  the  winter  roses,

Dissolved  by  death  was  melted  on  their  leaves.


Jdtszik  or  eg  foldiinh —

How  the  ancient  earth

The  young  sun,  her  brother,
Welcomes, — in  their  mirth,

Kissing  one  another.


138


CYPKESS LEAVES.

See  !  the  sunny  beams

Temple,  steeple,  shrine,
Mountains,  valleys,  streams,
Kissing  as  they  shine.

Calmly  wakes  the  sun,

Calmly  wends  him  home-
Has  the  careless  one

Seen  Etelka's  tomb  ?


Mi  bilrdsbdjos  hang.

0  with  what  fascinating  bursts  and  swells
Breaks  out  the  music  of  the  village  bells,
Upon  the  ear  of  the  roused  peasant  falling,
And  to  the  church  devotions  gently  calling  !
What  sweet  remembrances  that  music  brings
Of  early  thoughts,  and  half- forgotten  things  ;
Things  half  forgotten,  yet  on  these  past  dreams
Distinct,  as  living  life,  one  figure  beams
In  brightness  and  in  youthful  beauty — she
Sleeps  her  long  sleep  beneath  the  willow  tree ;
There  I  my  never- wearied  vigils  keep,
And  there  I  weep,  and  cannot  cease  to  weep.


139

MORE  LOVE.

Szeretnek  mar  szeretni  ujolag.

I  long  for  more  of  love — without  the  flower
Of  what  avail  the  garden  ?  what,  in  truth,

Without  youth's  fairest  rose — life's  sweetest  dower-
Love,  holy  love,  0  what  were  life  or  youth  ?

I  loved,  but  sadness  came  with  love,  and  stilled
My  spirit  into  silence  ;  yet  I  deemed

That  silent  sadness  which  my  spirit  filled

The  sweetest  dream  that  fancy  ever  dreamed.

0  heaven !  if  sad  and  silent  love  like  this,
Had  in  it  such  delight,  such  extasy  ?

What  must  the  brightness  be,  and  what  the  bliss
Of  love,  from  silence  and  from  sadness  free  ?

My  heart  is  like  a  bird,  that  here  and  there

Homelessly  wandering,  fain  would  build  a  nest

0  could  I  find  some  maiden's  bosom,  where

My  wandering  spirit  might  find  love  and  rest !


140  MAY-NIGHT.

Were  this  niy  blessed,  blessed  destiny,

Should  I  forget  the  dear  departed — No  !

Flowers  opening  at  the  mountain's  foot  may  lie,

Whose  head  is  covered  with  th'  unmelted  snow !


MAY-NIGHT.

Ej  van,  csend  es  nyugalomnah  eje.

Night  of  May !  thou  night  of  peace  and  silence,
When  the  moonlight  silvers  the  starr'd  vault ;

Tell  me  then  blonde-maiden  !  blue-eyed  floweret,

Shining  pearl !  what  thoughts  thy  heart  assault.

Mine  are  misty  dreamings,  passing  shadows ;

But  they  keep  me  sleepless — crowning  me
Like  the  monarch  of  a  mighty  kingdom,

And  the  crown  is  held,  dear  maid !  is  held  by  thee.

What  a  theft  it  were,  and  what  a  contrast

With  the  trashy  purse  that  thieves  purloin,

Could  I  steal  these  dreams,  and  then  convert  them
Into  solid  and  substantial  coin.


141


IGNOKANCE OF LOVE.

Sohasem  volt  az  szerelmes,  a  hi.

Little  knows  he  of  love's  sweet  fascinations,
Who  calls  them  fetters,  fit  for  slavery  ;

For  love  gives  wings  to  soar,  not  chains  to  humble,
And  on  his  pinions  to  the  stars  I  fly.

No  eagle,  tho'  above  the  clouds  ascending,

Has  pinions  half  so  strong  as  those  of  love—

They  take  me  where  the  earth  is  but  an  atom,

Seen  from  the  infinite  heights  of  heaven  above.


They  open  to  me  those  celestial  gardens

Where  bloom  the  odorous  flowers  that  know  no
death ;
They  wreathe  the  stars  into  immortal  garlands,

And  my  proud  brow  encircle  with  the  wreath.


142  a  vow.

Bright  glances  of  the  noon,  then  midnight  darkness,.

In  wild  succession  swiftly  come  and  go  ;
The  sudden  shif tings  of  creative  fancies —

Deities,  devils — blessedness  and  woe  !

I  fly  thro'  hell,  I  fly  thro'  heaven, — the  tortures

That  hell  is  cursed  with, — all,  yes,  all  are  mine  ;

Then  in  an  instant  is  my  soul  enraptured

With  all  that  heaven  can  hold  of  joy  divine.


A  VOW.

Fa  Jeszeh,  lia  fancik  vagy  virdga.

I'll  be  a  tree,  if  thou  wilt  be  its  blossom  ;

I'll  be  a  flower,  if  thou  wilt  be  its  dew :
I'll  be  the  dew,  if  thou  wilt  be  the  sunbeam ;

Where'er  thou  art,  let  me  be  near  thee  too.
Wert  thou  the  heaven  of  blue — beloved  maiden, —

I  a  fixed  star  in  that  blue  heaven  would  be  :
And  wert  thou  doomed  to  hell  itself,  dear  woman,

I'd  seek  perdition  to  be  near  to  thee.


143


STAKLESS NIGHTS.

SORROW  AND JOY.

A  bdnat  ?  egy  nagy  oczedn.

And  what  is.  sorrow  ?  'Tis  a  boundless  sea.

And  what  is  joy  ? —

A  little  pearl  in  that  deep  ocean's  bed ;

I  sought  it — found  it — held  it  o'er  my  head,

And,  to  my  soul's  annoy,

It  fell  into  the  ocean's  depth  again,

And  now  I  look  and  long  for  it  in  vain.


FRIENDSHIP.

Derek  fiulc,  mont  hagyogatnalc  el !

Friends  came — false  friends — and  left  me  as  they  came,

As  they  came,  let  them  go,  in  God's  own  name  !

As  leaves  they  fell  from  the  abandoned  tree,

That  leafless  tree,  my  heart — so  let  it  be !

But  though  the  cold  winds  blow  those  leaves  away,

A  future  spring  will  herald  a  bright  day  ;

And  heaven  be  gladdened  when  the  earth  is  glad  ;

But,  when  the  old  branches  with  new  leaves  are  clad,

Of  the  fallen  leaves — ye false  ones !  be  it  known —

None  shall  grow  green  again,  not  even  one.


144  STARLESS  NIGHTS.

THE  GEAVE.

Ha  a  sirban  megszdradt.

If  from  the  abysses  of  the  grave,

We  could  tear  up  the  hearts  there  mouldering.
And  kindle  them  in  a  gigantic  fire,

Then  watch  them  burning,  blazing,  smouldering,
0  who  could  name
The  many  colours  of  the  flame,
Which  would  burst  forth  from  the  funereal  pyre  ?


INDIFFERENCE.

Viseld  egyformdn  jo  s  bal  sorsodat !

'  With  calm  indifference  good  and  evil  bear  :  "
So  saith  the  sage,  and  so  the  world  replies ;
But  not  too  wisely — 'tis  not  my  device  ;
Pleasures  and  pains, — my  comfort  and  my  care-
Must  leave  their  impress,  both  of  ill  and  good  ;
My  soul  is  not  a  flood,

Equally  moved,  when  a  sweet  infant  throws
O'er  me  a  scattered  rose,
As  when  the  whirlwind  brings
Down  from  the  forest  a  torn  trunk,  and  flings
It  furiously  upon  my  wanderings.


STARLESS NIGHTS.  145

TIIE WORLD'S SLAVERY.

Millyen  vig  a  vildg !  folyvdst  mikent  vigad  I

What  gaieties,  what  sports,  what  pleasures  throng

The  world,  so  full  of  music  and  of  song !

But  ask  the  noisiest  in  the  deadening  noise,

"  Are  these  substantial  joys  ?  "

I  doubt,  I  doubt  : in  the  confusion  there,

I  hear  the  loud  explosions  of  despair ;

"While  the  chains  clank,  the  half-demented  spirit

Seeks  in  the  turbulent  clamour  not  to  hear  it ;

The  world  is  but  a  jailer — holds  our  whole

Body  and  limbs  in  fetters  ;  would  retain

Our  very  soul  in  slavery's  cursed  chain  ;

But  that — we  have  no  soul  I


SPRING.

Mi  ~kek  az  eg  I

How  blue  the  heaven  serene  !
The  blooming  earth  how  green !
O'er  emerald  fields,  the  heavenly  concave  blue,
The  sweet  tones  of  the  lark  are  pouring  through ;
The  sun  seems  looking  down,  and  listens  with  delight,
Midst  scenes  so  sweet  and  strains  so  exquisite.

10


146  HUNGARIAN PLAINS.

How  blue  the  heaven  serene  !

The  blossoming  earth  how  green  !

Green  is  the  earth  and  blue  the  heaven  :  the  spring

Is  come,  and  I,  to  my  lone  chamber  bound,

Look  not  on  heaven  above,  nor  earth  around,

But  sing  my  gloomy  songs — wearied,  my  songs  I  sing.


HUNGAEIAN  PLAINS.

Mit  nekem  te  zordon  Jcdiydtohialc.

Whence  the  influence  strange,  0  ye  Carpathian  moun-
tains,

Wild  romantic  forests,  where  the  fir  trees,  moving,
Bring  to  me  the  sense  of  beauty  and  of  grandeur,

But  no  thoughts  nor  dreams  of  longing  or  of  loving  ?

But  the  broad,  flat  plains,  extended  in  the  distance,
Wide  in  their  expanse,  and  level  as  the  ocean ;

When  on  these  I  look,  like  an  enfranchised  eagle,
All  my  soul  is  moved  with  magical  emotion.


HUNGARIAN PLAINS.  147

Bear  me  upwards  then — high,  high  above  earth's  bosom,
To  the  realms  where  roll  the  clouds  in  their  careering,

Let  me  at  my  feet  behold  the  mighty  Danube,

Towards  the  laughing  Theiss  with  steps  majestic
steering.

'  Neath  the  Delibab,1  see  the  outstretched  Rumania,
Covered  with  its  herds  under  the  roof  of  heaven  ;

How  they  track  their  course  onward  in  steady  silence,
Towards  the  running  stream  to  slack  their  thirsts
at  even.

Now  I  hear  the  rush,  the  galloping  of  the  horses  ;

Battling  of  the  hoofs  I  hear,  and  nostrils  snorting ;
Cracking  of  the  whips,  and  shouting  of  the  Csikos ;

Laughs  and  merry  song,  and  echoes  of  the  sporting.

In  the  cottage  meadows,  rocked  by  gentle  zephyrs,
Eoll  the  golden  corn- waves  o'er  their  crests  ascend-
ing ;

Forests  tower  aloft,  while  hang  on  trees  prolific
Fruits like rubies  red, with leaves of emerald


blending.


»  Mir;


148  HUNGARIAN PLAINS.

Hither  come  the  flocks  of  wild  geese  from  the  marshes,
When  the  dying  light  portends  the  evening's  gloam-
ing;
Midst  the  reeds  they  hear  the  startled  breezes  rustling,
And,  alarmed,  take  flight  towards  the  high  heaven
roaming.

On  the  Puszta's  waste,  close  to  a  ruined  cottage,
With  fallen  chimney,  stands  the Csarda — lonely
dwelling.
There  the  Betyars  meet,  from  many  markets  gathered,
There  their  songs  are  singing,  there  their  tales  are
telling.

In  the  Linden  wood,  adjacent  to  the  Csarda,
Built  upon  the  sands  of  melon  tinge,  is  nested

The  tower-falcon,  screaming  shrill,  but  never
In  his  deep  recess  by  truant  lads  molested.

Orphan-maiden-hair  in  those  retreats  is  growing,
And  the  thistles  blue  their  spiky  heads  are  waving,

Sheltered  at  whose  foot  repose  the  scattered  acorns,
Which  the  dews  of  morn  and  dews  of  night  are
laving.


THE WOODS.  149

Far  away  where  heaven  the  fettered  earth  has  girded,
Fruit  trees,  with  their  wealth,  the  distant  landscape
cover ;

While  we  dimly  trace  a  pale  and  misty  column —
'  Tis  the  village  spire  the  green  fields  towering  over.

All  is  charming — all — at  least,  to  me  'tis  charming ;

On  the  flat  land  born  and  bred — I  well  may  love  it ;
'Neath  its  sod  let  me  repose  in  peace  and  silence,

When  my  corpse  is  wrapt  in  funeral  shroud  above  it.


THE WOODS

Sotetzold  sdtoros.


Bound  the  dark-green  circle  of  the  woods  I  wander,
Looking  on  the  flowers  the  high  oaks  blooming  under;
Birds  among  the  branches,  bees  among  the  flowers,
Music  all  around  us  bursting  from  the  bowers ;
Flowers  and  trees  are  still,  yet  seem  alive  and  wary,
Listening  to  the  hymns  of  nature's  sanctuary.
Is  all  sleeping  here  ?  the  forest,  flowers,  and  furrows,
Let  me  stand  and  muse  forgetful  of  my  sorrows.


150  THE CLOUDS.

Careless,  senseless  rolls  the  river  on  the  pebbles —
What  has  thought  to  do  with  these  impetuous  rip-
ples !
See !  the  stream  outruns  the  flying  cloudy  shadows,
As  they  darkly  pass  over  the  mirroring  meadows  ;
0  they  image  well  my  fancy's  foolish  doing,
When  youth's  giddy  dreams  of  happiness  pursuing ;
Memory  fades — 'tis  well  it  fades — there's  no  regretting,
Wherefore  came  I  here  ? 'Twas  only  for  forgetting.


THE CLOUDS

Ha  maddr  vohiek.


Were  I  a  bird  my  throne  I'd  build
Among  the  clouds  supernal,

And  all  those  flying  shadows  gild
With  beams  of  light  eternal.

Should  we  not  love  the  heavenly  host
That  grandly  rolls  above  us  ?

They  pass,  and  each  in  each  is  lost,
Yet  lingeringly  love  us.


THE CLOUDS.  151

On  me  at  least  they  seem  to  shine,

Their  tender  glances  bringing ;
These  wanderers  thro'  the  light  divine,

They  listen  to  my  singing.

I've  listened  to  the  harmonies

Of  those  serene  evangels,
Whose  sounds  of  music  filled  the  skies

Like  anthems  of  the  angels,

Or  children's  voices — children  bound
To  heaven — in  clouds  I  saw  them ;

Shadows  of  life  and  death  around,
And  earth  far,  far  below  them.

And  then  I  watched  the  pale  moon's  face,

Whose  melancholy  beauty,
Soft  clouds — the  ministers  of  grace,

Watched  in  attendant  duty.

And  every  fashion,  every  form

Was  graceful  and  attractive,
And  seemed  my  inmost  soul  to  warm

With  inspirations  active.


152  THE STORK.

With  sympathies,  which  echoing  fill
That  soul  with  their  own  blisses,

And  new  emotions  throb  and  thrill
Thro'  all  its  deep  abysses.

0  how  those  clouds  resemble  well

Life's  darkening  and  life's  brightening,

To  me  of  gushing  tears  they  tell,

They  tell  of  passion's  lightning.


THE  STOEK.

Sokfele  a  maddr,  s  egyek  azt,  mdsik  azt.

Many  birds  there  are  ;  their  manifold  admirers

Can't  agree  together —
Some  preferred  for  fascinating  song,  and  others

For  resplendent  feather.

I  will  choose  a  bird  that  has  no  voice  for  music,

Wears  no  garment  bright ;
Simple  like  myself,  and  clothed  in  simple  vestments,

Only  black  and  white.


THE STORK*  153

Yes !  of  all  the  birds  the  stork  is  my  beloved,

He,  the  son  of  home ;
From  his  mother-country,  from  his  favourite  flat-land,

Seldom  will  he  roam.

He  and  I  are  trained  in  sympathy  together ;

Oft  he  hovered  nigh,
When  I  was  a  child,  and  crying  in  my  cradle,

Heard  my  childish  cry.

And  with  him  I  passed  the  early  years  of  childhood,

Smilingly  they  fled ;
Well  do  I  remember  when  my  young  companions

Home  the  oxen  led !

Eecollection  sweet  of  those  dear  days  departed,

Faithful  memory  brings,
When  I  saw  the  storklets  on  the  chimneys,  fanning

Their  unfeathered  wings.

Many  thoughts  disturbed  me,  many  wayward  fancies

Flitted  strangely  by ;
Why  did  heaven  to  man,  with  all  his  upward  longings,

Give  no  wings  to  fly  ?


154  THE STORK.

Why  were  mortal  footsteps  to  earth's  limits  bounded  ?

To  heaven  upward  never ;
But  these  earthly  limits  cannot  hold  my  spirit,

Soaring  upwards  ever.

Yes  !  I  must  soar  heavenward,  passionately  longing

For  the  sunny  land  ;
O'er  earth's  highest  heights, on  which  the golden
temples,

Midst  the  sunbeams  stand.

But  the  sun  goes  down,  I  see  the  evening  shadow

Bring  the  veil  of  night ;
Saddened  with  the  thought — how  frail,  how  transitory

All  that  lives  in  light.

Then  I  long  for  autumn,  like  a  tender  mother,

Bringing  baskets  piled
With  the  sweetest  fruits,  to  pour  into  the  apron

Of  her  smiling  child.

Fruits  for  me  it  brings  not — autumn  after  autumn

Bipens  nought  for  me ;
Leaves  me  lost  and  lonely,  and  my  stork  hath  sped  him

O'er  the  distant  sea.


THE STORK.  155

Many  grieved  hearts  saw  I  when  the  storks  departed

On  their  exile -flight ;
'Twas  like  youth's  sad  passing,  and  I  followed  grieving

Till  my  wearied  sight


Lost  their  trace  :  I  sorrowing  sought,  upon  the  house-
tops,

Their  abandoned  nest,
Scattered — mournful  augury  of  the  mournful  future —

For  my  thoughts  opprest.


And  when  winter's  hand  shall  fling  the  snowy  mantle

O'er  the  face  of  earth —
Whitening  the  green  meadows,  veiling  flowers  and
forests

For  another  birth,


I  will  clothe  my  soul  in  purity's  own  garment,

Waiting  thy  return ;
Homebound  stork !  I'll  scour  the  fields,  the  plains  to
meet  thee,

Leaping  beck  and  bourne.


156  THE STORK.

From  the  sparks  the  flame  ascends,  and  so  the  infant

Grows  up  to  the  child,
While  the  heather  burns  beneath,  my  good  steed  bears
me  f

Over  the  waste  wild.


Loosen  then  the  bridle,  press  the  spur, — on !  onward


Leaving  all  behind ;


Even  the  rushing  wind  tries  vainly  to  o'ertake  me,
Fleeter  than  the  wind.

0  I  love  that  wild,  for  there  I  live  in  freedom,

As  no  otherwhere ;
There  my  eyes  embrace  a  limitless  horizon —
Not  imprisoned  there.

No  dark  mountains  bound  creation's  grand  arena ;

Dancing  o'er  the  plains
There  no streams  run  down,  whose  ringing  might
remind  me

Of  the  tyrant's  chains.

Beautiful  the  Puszta,  with  her  fascinations

Manifest — concealed —
Like  a  modest  maiden,  rich  in  charms  unnumbered,

Yet  so  sweetly  veiled.


THE STORK.  157

But  that  veil  is  lifted  for  the  dear,  the  loved  one,

By  her  graceful  hands  ;
And  in  all  the  glory  of  her  bright-eyed  beauty

There  the  charmer  stands.

Beautiful  the  Puszta  !  on  my  neighing  courser

How  I  sweep  the  heath,
Where  no  track  of  gold  attracts  the  thirsty  worldling ;

But  a  calm  like  death

To  much  musing  calls  me,  bids  me  hear  the  voices

Breaking  from  the  breeze  ;
And  mine  own  dear  stork,  above  the  lake  rejoicing,

My  blest  vision  sees.

Welcome,  dear  companion  !  we'll  explore  together
Wastes,  and  heaths,  and  hedges ;

I  will  watch  the  winds  that  play  upon  the  waters, —
Thou  amidst  the  sedges.

So  it  was  of  old — I  loved  thee  in  my  childhood !

Why — I  scarcely  knew  ;
For  thou  hast  no  song,  and  wear'st  no  gaudy  plumage,

Yet  my  love  was  true.


158  THE  PUSZTA  IN  WINTER.


And  I  love  thee  still,  when  thought  and  time  find
reason

For  the  love ;  it  seems
Like  a  ray  of  truth,  which  midst  the  dark  oblivion

Of  past  memories  beams.

Thou  wilt  not  forget  the  time  of  thy  returning —

Hither  wilt  thou  wend  ;
And  when  autumn  comes,  I'll  bless  xhee  at  departing,

As  niy  oldest  friend.


THE  PUSZTA  IN  WINTER.

ffejh,  mostan  puszta  dm  igdzdn  a  puszta.

O'er the  widening  Puszta's plains, in  plains still
widening  lost,

See  autumn's  heralds  round — a  melancholy  host !
The  flowers  that  spring  unfolded,
The  fruits  that  simmer  moulded —

All — all  the  thriftless  autumn  flings  away,

And  leaves  to  winter  darkness  and  decay.


THE PTJSZTA IN WINTER.  159

No  longer  heard  from  far  the  sheep-bells  tinkling

sound,
No  longer  shepherds'  pipes  fling  their  sweet  music
round ;

No  more  the  birds  are  filling,
With  their  melodious  thrilling,
Heaven's  arch  ! Still'd  is  the  genet's  whispering,
And  even  the  grasshopper  has  ceased  to  sing.

The  outstretched  wilderness  is  like  a  frozen  sea,
And  as  a  weary  bird  the  sun  sinks  wearily  ;

Perhaps  some  hoary  clown

May  watch  his  going  down,
And  silently  salute  the  setting  sun —
But  the  world  heeds  not  that  his  race  is  run.

Empty  the  fisher's  hut — no  voice,  no  living  sign,
And  from  the  village  stalls  no  lowing  of  the  kine ;

And  if  the  steeds  are  driven,

Before  day  dawns  in  heaven,
To  the  filled  water-troughs — the  careless  steers
Look  listless  on,  and  shake  their  shaggy  ears.

The  herdsman  gathers  up  the  green  tobacco  leaves,
Then  piles  them  in  a  heap,  then binds  them into
sheaves  :


160  THE  PUSZTA  IN  WINTER.

And  from  his  boots  he  takes
The  pipe — the  ashes  shakes ;
Fills  it — enkindles  it — and,  half  asleep,
Looks  on  the  lazy  oxen  and  the  sheep.


All — all  is  silent — all  within  the  Csarda  door,
There  the  good  host  and  hostess  sleep  and  snore  ;

What  tho'  the  cellar's  key

Be  careless  thrown  away :
Is  the  good  wine  in  any  danger  ? — No  !
No  man  can  find  his  way  across  the  snow.

The  north  wind  and  the  east  in  rage  contesting  blow,
This  storms  the  heavens  above,  that  shakes  the  earth
below ;

Scatters  the  snowy  flakes,

As  when  the  bellows  makes
The  sparks  mount  upward  from  the  glowing  fire —
Tempests  of  hail  and  rain  rave  in  discordant  choir.

At  last  they  rest  exhausted, — o'er  the  Puszta's  bed,
Like  a  grey  coverlet,  a  misty  shroud  is  spread  ;

And  like  a  shapeless  mass

I  see  the  Betjar  pass  ;
And  hear  his  horse  dull-neighing  in  the  wind, —
The  raven  o'er  him,  and  the  wolf  behind.


WINTER-WORLD.  161

And  as  a  monarch  rules  a  subjugated  land,
Wearing  a  golden  crown,  waving  a  sceptral  wand  ;

So  the  uprisen  sun,

A  more  majestic  one,
Surveys  his  sovereignty,  and  then  sinks  down
To  his  night's  rest,  wearing  the  golden  crown.


WINTER-WORLD.

Hovd  lett  a  tarha  szivdrvany  az  egr'ol  f

How  came  from  heaven  the  prismy  rainbow  hither  ?
Whither  are  fled  the  lovely  field-flowers,  whither  ?
Where  the  streams  music,  where  the  birds'  sweet
singing  ?
Where  are  the  spring  and  summer's  glance  and
glory?
All — all  departed, — but  their  memory  ringing
Like  a  funereal  bell — records  their  story  :
Shades  of  the  tomb — the  snows — the  clouds  are  left,
Winter  has  beggared  earth — the  earth  of  all  bereft.

11


102


WINTER-WORLD.


Yes  !  earth  is  but  a  beggar — a  white  garment

Half  covering  its  frame — a  mortal  cerement !

With  icicles  down-hanging,  but  so  jagged,

That  through  the  crevices  the  corpse  is  peeping,
With  chattering  teeth — Ihnbs  frozen — girdle  ragged,
A  shivering  coldness  o'er  the  body  creeping :
Why  should  man  midst  the  desolation  roam,
If  he  find  warmth  and  welcome  in  his  home  ?

Blessed  be  God  then  !  blessed  be  kind  Heaven !
Who  a  bright  fire — a  family  hearth  has  given ;
A  family  hearth,  to  warm  in  winter's  chilling,

And  many  friends  around ;  and  wood  not  wanting
To  feed  the  fire — 'tis  like  a  palace  thrilling
With  joy  and  music — fairy -like,  enchanting;
Where  all  the  friendly  words  outspoken  enter
The  opening  hearts,  and  make  those  hearts  their  centre.

Sweetest  of  all  at  eve — then  most  rejoices
The  listening  soul  to  hear  affection's  voices ;
At  the  large  table  head,  the  father  hoary

Presides — the  pipes  are  smoking — from  the  cellar
The  best  old  wine  goes  round,  and  many  a  story
Is  told,  while  loud  laughs  hail  the  story-teller  :
New  tales,  new  laughter,  greet  the  circling  cup
Filled  up  and  emptied  and  again  filled  up.


WINTER-  WORLD.  163

And  the  good  housewife  everywhere  is  busy,

Somewhat  o'ercumbered,  and  a  little  dizzy  ;

Fearful  of  this  or  that  to  be  forgetful ;

Somewhat  too  anxious  for  her  house's  honour ;
Yet  all  her  fidgets  will  not  make  her  fretful;
Tho'  a  neglect  might  bring  a  shame  upon  her.
For  every  guest  she  has  a  smile — a  greeting —
And  a  kind  word  of  welcome  to  the  meeting.

Then comes the  news  —  more laughter,  and  more

joking ;
Cleansing  the  pipes,  or  stopping  them,  or  smoking ;
And  as  the  smoke  in  cloudy  wreaths  is  mounting,

Memory  brings  back  the  tales  of  days  departed  ;
And  while  the  old  stories  of  their  youth  recounting,
Youth dawns again, and buoyant and  light-
hearted  ;
Spring  seems  renewed  in  all  its  early  truth,
For  age  rejoices  in  the  thoughts  of  youth.

Look  at  that  youth  and  maiden  on  the  settle,
All  the  old  babblings  interest  them  little ;
Little  care  they  for  all  the  tales  and  tattle,

Life  is  before  them — with  its  dear  illusions  ;
Sweeter  their  whisperings  than  the  rout  and  rattle,
Why  should  misgivings  come  with  their  intrusions  ?


164  WINTER-WORLD.

Let  them  be  blest — enjoy  their  stolen  kisses ;
Love  has  its  blisses — and  these  are  love's  blisses.

There  round  the  stove  the  little  ones  are  humming,
Leaping  and  laughing,  whistling,  shouting,  drumming ;
Small  children  and  great  children  there  are  piling
Or  blowing  down  card  houses — far  from  sorrow  ;
Like  butterflies  they  hail  the  present  smiling,
For  yesterday  they  care  not,  nor  to-morrow.
How  so  much  room  can  such  small  space  allow,
The  Future  and  the  Past,  how  crowd  into  a  Now  ?


'Tis  baking-day  to-morrow,  the  maiden  singing  brightly,
The yielding dough she kneads, so gaily  and so
lightly  ;
Within  the  yard  the  bucket  chain  above  the  Avell  is
grating,
The  horses  gathered  round  the  trough  the  spark-
ling water  drinking ;
The  gypsies,  offering  dance  and  song,  are  for  the
answer  waiting —
While  from  the  distance  feebly-heard  the  sheep-
fold  bells  are  clinking ;
But  every  sound  and  every  sight  ascending  or  descend-
ing,
From  earth  to  heaven,  or  heaven  to  earth,  in  harmony
is  blending.


THE SPRING OF 1849.  165

The  snow  is  falling  fast,  the  earth  is  mantled  over,
Mists  darken— and  'tis  hard  the  house-path  to  discover :
There's  work  to  do — -there's  hardly  time  for  greet-
ings and  farewellings, —
Away ! away ! for long ere  now  the  homely
lamps  are  lighted, — •
We  must  be  gone — 'tis  late,  'tis  late — how  shall  we
find  our  dwellings  ?
The  lamps  are  all  gone  out,  the  guests  are  all
benighted,
And  still  they  counsel,  still  they  talk,  their  purpose

scarcely  knowing,
And  many  ask,  "Who's  going?" — none  will  answer,
"  I  am  going."


THE SPEING OF  1849.

Ifju  lanya  a  ven  telneh.

Youthful  spring — thou  ancient  winter's
Beautiful  and  hopeful  son !

Wherefore  tarry  ?  come  !  establish

O'er  the  earth  thy  rightful  throne.


166  THE SPRING OF 1849.

Come  !  0  come  !  thy  friends  await  thee,
Looking  for  thine  advent  round  ;

Come  and  gird  the  azure  heaven.

Come  and  deck  the  emerald  ground.

Strengthen  thou  the  feeble  twilight,
Lead  it  forth  to  meet  the  day,

For  it  sits  upon  the  mountains,

Languishing  and  pale  and  gray.

O'er  the  meadows  scatter  blessings,
Flowers  of  scarlet,  gold  and  blue,

Water  them  with  tears  of  heaven —
Joyful  tears — in  drops  of  dew.

Call  the  larks,  and  they  shall  teach  me
How  to  welcome  thee  with  song,

Such  as  when  I  think  of  childhood,
On  my  wakened  memory  throng.

Need  I  ask  for  wreaths  and  garlands —
These  thou  spreadest  o'er  the  land  ;

These  are  but  thy  wonted  offering,

These  thou  bring'st  in  either  hand.


PLANT  FLOWERS  UPON  MY  GRAVE. 167

Yet  one  thought  of  melancholy

Even  thou  wilt  bring  with  thee  ;

When  I  see  within  the  churchyard
The  death-gatherings  of  the  free.

Free  at  last !  0  let  them  slumber,

O'er  them  spread  a  funeral  pall,
Pile  thy  flowers  upon  their  grave-heaps,

Cover  them  with  garlands  all.


PLANT  FLOWEES  UPON  MY  GEAVE.
Ki  a  mszore  hallagoh.

Oft,  oft  I  wander  o'er  the  meadows,

Where,  midst  the  grass,  the  wild  flowers  blow
Ye  sweet  wild  flowers  I  love  to  linger

Amidst  your  many-coloured  glow.
You  bring  dear  thoughts  of  my  beloved,

And  move  my  heart  and  swell  my  breast ;
Let 'flowers  be  culled  when  I  am  dying,

And  scattered  on  my  place  of  rest.


168 PLANT  FLOWERS  UPON  MY  GRAVE.

I  bend  me  o'er  the  flowers — sweet  converse

I  hold  with  them — soft,  silent,  true  ;
Tell  them  I  love  them — love  them  dearty,

And  ask  them  if  they  love  me  too  ?
They  answer  not,  but  in  their  smiling

A  gentle  answer  is  exprest ;
Let  flowers  be  culled  when  I  am  dying,

And  scattered  on  my  place  of  rest.

Sweet  flowers  !  sweet  flowers  !  your  very  fragrance

Is  eloquent, — the  spirit's  ear —
In  your  vibrations, — heavenly  music

Falling  like  sunny  dews  may  hear.
But,  in  the  world's  tumultuous  uproar,

The  voice  is  still,  of  all  most  blest ;
0  cull  me  flowers  when  I  am  dying,

And  fling  them  on  my  place  of  rest.

Yes  !  breath  is  language,  and  the  breathing

Of  wakened  flowers  is  sacred  song ;
The  mysteries  of  life  surround  me,

Bound  me  death's  revelations  throng.
0  strains  of  harmony — 0  incense,

The  sweetest  and  the  holiest !
Then  gather  flowers  when  I  am  dying,

And  fling  them  on  my  place  of  rest.


POWER OF LOVE.  169

Yes !  breath,  of  flowers,  your  soft  outpourings

Shall  be  nay  lingering  lullaby,
And  with  a  heavenly  hymn  support  me,

When  on  my  dying  bed  I  lie.
The  flower-awakening  spring  shall  find  me

A  slumberer  on  my  mother's  breast ;
So  gather  flowers  when  I  am  dying,

And  fling  them  on  my  place  of  rest.


POWEE  OF  LOYE.

Az  en  Icepzeletem  nem  a  por  magzatja.

Think  not  that  my  fancy  comes  from  stubble  under,
No  ! 'twas born in lightning — no ! 'tis heard in

thunder  ;
When  a  babe  I  drank  the  hot  milk  of  the  dragon,
When  a  youth  the  blood  of  lions  filled  my  flagon.

Wild  and  high  its  flight — that  flight  there's  no  re-
straining,
Conquering  land  and  land,  and  revelling  and  reigning;
Now  upon  the  sea  in  wildest  exultation,
Now  twixt  earth  and  heaven  in  comet-like  vibration.


170  HOPE.

With  a  whirlwind's  speed,  the  wilderness  embracing
Glancing  thro'  the  fields,  among  the  forests  racing ;
Rattling round the oak trees, pouring out the

fountains,
Raising  up  the  valleys,  bringing  down  the  mountains.

Where  is  the  wild  horse  so  frenziedly  that  bore  me  ?
See,  there  stands  a  flower,  a  smiling  flower  before  me  ;
Like  the  exhausted  gale,  with  evening's  odour  laden,
So  I  stand  subdued  before  that  smiling  maiden.


HOPE.

Nem  csoda  lia  ujra  eleh.


Wonder  not  that  I  am  happy,
I  again  have  seen  her  face,

And  my  wildered,  wandering  spirit
Flutters  round  a  resting  place.

Hope  and  anguish  are  enkindling
Torches  in  my  burning  breast,

And  the  struggle  fiercely  rages
Between  restlessness  and  rest.


HOPE.  171

Would  some  friendly  spirit  tell  me,

"Was  the  smiling  meant  for  me  :
Was  it  chance,  or  was  it  purpose  ?

Solve,  0  solve  the  mystery  !

For  the  maiden  is  a  riddle,

Thoughts  half  veiled  and  half  exprest  ;
Sharp  as  is  my  eye  I  see  not

If  'tis  truth  or  but  a  jest.

Yes  !  thou  art  a  riddle,  maiden  I

Who  its  hidden  sense  shall  tell —

If  a  curse,  or  if  a  blessing  ?
One  it  is,  I  know  too  well.

Which?  The  riddle,  like  a  fetter,

Pitilessly  binds  me  round,
Every  struggle  for  my  freedom,

Makes  me  feel  more  tightly  bound.

Doff  the  veil  that  shades  thy  forehead,
And  thy  spirit's  movement  hides  ;

Never  can  I  leave  thee,  maiden !
While  that  veil  by  thee  abides.


172  HOPE.

Tlio'  it  break  my  heart,  I  tear  me
From  this  dark  uncertainty  ;

Not  a  subject,  but  a  master
Is  our  mortal  destiny.

Be  it  so,  but  not  for  ever,

When  the  spring's  soft  breezes  sigh,
And  its  flowers  thy  brow  encircle —

Who  shall  be  thy  poet— I  ?

He  will  be  the  earliest  swallow
Hastening  to  thy  window-sill ;

Ever  circling  round  thy  portals,

Hailing  thee  with  welcomes  shrill.

In  the  gardens,  in  the  meadows,
Shall  we  not  together  walk  ;

See  the  young  earth  smiling,  blushing,
Hear  the  streamlet's  babbling  talk.

See  the  flowers  their  petals  open
To  the  dew-drops  from  above ;

So  do  thou  thy  heart,  dear  maiden,
Open  to  the  dews  of  love.


173

BLISS.

Szerctsz  telidt,  Tcedves  szep  angyalom  f

Thou  lovest  me  angel !  bright  as  heaven's  own  beam ;
Thou  lovest  me  angel !  and  I  do  not  dream  !

0  tell  me  why  thy  lovely  countenance
Veiled  my  blest  fate  until  the  parting  glance  ?

Why  did  that  glance  so  eloquently  tell
Of  a  bright  welcome  and  a  sad  farewell  ?

1  felt  as  one,  who  a  bright  temple  planned,

And  built  and  beautified,  and  then — 'twas  banned  !

Thee  can  I  not  in  these  fond  arms  entwine,
And  press  thee  to  my  heart  and  call  thee  mine  ;
Thy  fragrant  lips  deny  a  rosy  kiss —
I  bear  away  no  flowery  wreath  of  bliss.

My  life  will  be  a  misery,  far  from  thee,
And  yet  one  thought  of  joy  shall  comfort  me ;
I  shall  return  to  bathe  in  that  deep  sea,
Eich  in  the  white  pearls  of  felicity.


174


HE  ABT-FLOWEKS.

Busuhidk  a  virdgoh.

When  the  flowers  are  mourning
Autumn's  misty  weather,

Whose  cold  blasts  returning,

Sweeps  them  o'er  the  heather.

As  the  hair  is  riven,

When  old  age  is  sorest ;

As  the  leaves  are  driven

From  the  unmantled  forest.

Everywhere  existence

Seems  by  darkness  shaded  ;
Clouds  invade  the  distance —

All  by  clouds  invaded.

Yet,  my  living  spirit

Has  from  love's  own  far-land
Gathered — and  I  wear  it —

An  undying  garland.


MARKIAGE-DAY.  175


What  care  I  for  sorrow,

It  shall  perish  never-
Careless  of  the  morrow,
It  is  green  for  ever.


MAE  EI  AGE-DAY.

Itt  a  gyusu,  lit  a  gyiisil.

On  thy  finger,  on  thy  finger

I  have  placed  the  wedding  ring :

Now,  my  wife  !  thy  kisses  bring  me —
Floods  of  hallowed  kisses  bring !

Kisses  warm  as  are  the  sunbeams,
Heaven  has  sanctified  the  kiss  !

Earth  among  its  many  blisses —

Bliss  has  none  so  sweet  as  this.

Our's  be  heartful,  joyful  dalliance  ;

Press  thy  rosy  lips  to  mine !
What  care  we  for  world,  or  worldlings  ?

Mine  thou  art,  and  I  am  thine  !


176  MARRIAGE-DAY.

I  will  kiss  thy  lips,  thy  forehead, —
Red  as  light,  and  white  as  snow !

Shadowing  kisses  shall  protect  thee,
As  the  mists  the  moimtain  brow.

But  I  faint,  dear  maid  !  support  me
In  those  circling  arms  of  thine ;

Has  the  kiss  o'erwhelmed  my  reason,
Like  intoxicating  wine  ?

"Pis  a  wine  intoxicating,

Like  the  nectar  of  the  gods ;

I  have  drunk  it,  love  hath  brought  it
Down  from  heaven  to  man's  abodes.

Yes  !  my  head  with  bliss  is  drunken  !

Wondrous  drunkenness  is  this,
For  from  earth  I  am  transported

Into  heaven's  own  paradise.

O'er  the  clouds,  amidst  the  planets  ;

Star  to  star,  and  as  I  sail
Everywhere  sweet  voices  hail  me,

Sweet  as  songs  of  nightingale.


ERDOD.  17"

But  with  a  diviner  singing  ;

Never  such  blest  sounds  I  heard  :
Lightning  circles,  seas  of  glory,

My  celestial  pathway  gird.

And  my  heart — 0  how  it  flutters

On  that  gently -heaving  breast ;
Let  it  not  with  joy  be  bursting

In  an  extasy  so  blest !


EEDOD.

Elpusztulo  hert  ott  a  var  alatt.

Under  that  city  lies  a  garden  waste,

Over  that  garden  mourns  a  widow' d  city  ;

Both  by  the  grey  mists  of  the  autumn  braced,

On  both  sad  memory  pours  her  plaints  of  pity.

And  both  remind  me  what  the  fatherland

Was  in  old  time — the  beautiful,  the  brave  ;

Yet  still  the  garden  cradles  beauty's  band,

And  still  the  city  holds  the  heroes'  grave.

12


178  UNDYING CERTAINTIES.

In  this  old  garden  I  have  kissed  my  love,

Locked  her  within  my  arms — 0  memory  sore  !

Then  the  proud  eagle  held  his  throne  above,

Where  now  the  bayonets  flash,  the  cannons  roar.


Yet  welcome  garden  !  tho'  beneath  thy  trees

No  lovers  smile,  or  sweep  thy  sacred  sward ;

Welcome  old  city  walls,  whose  memories

Now  waken  neither  reverence  nor  regard  !


UNDYING  CERTAINTIES.
Szep  napkeletrek.

In  the  oriental  fields

Spring's  ajDproach  my  spirit  gilds

With  the  brightness  of  the  day ;
Gladness  waking  all  around,
My  full  heart  a  garden  ground,

Where  midst  flowers  soft  breezes  play.


UNDYING CERTAINTIES.  17D

Yet  I  know  that  heart  is  panting
For  an  unknown  something  wanting,

Not  to  be  by  earth  supplied :
Something  which  must 'find  its  root
In  thy  love, — and  blossoming  shoot

From  that  love — mhie  own  dear  bride  !

Worldlings  in  their  pride  and  folly
Miss  the  blessing,  miss  it  wholly —

Vainly  in  its  search  they  rove ;
While  from  thee  as  naturally,
As  from  lily  of  the  valley,

Breathes  the  fragrant  breath  of  love.

Fragrant  breath  of  glowing  light !
It  can  cheer  the  darkest  night,

Even  of  death,  thro'  whose  dim  portal
It  bursts  forth,  as  if  foretelling,
From  my  future,  final  dwelling,

A  far  brighter  light  immortal.

Why  should  death  an  image  bring
Mouldering  and  perishing  ?

Death,  which  is  the  charioteer,
Our  freed  spirits  to  convey
Over  an  ascending  way,

To  the  heavens  all  bright  and  clear.


180  A LONGING.

When  I  look  upon  the  sky,
In  its  blue  immensity,

Fancy  fashions  out  a  road,
Fading  in  the  distance  far,
Where,  from  smiling  star  to  star,

We  are  welcomed  up  to  God.

Give  thy  hand !  On  soaring  wing,
The  sweet  birds  of  midnight  sing,

"  Higher !  higher !  "  join  their  flight,
Till  we  reach  that  ocean's  brim,
Where  the  swans  of  Eden  swim

In  the  Paradise  of  light.


A  LONGING.

Meg  mjihiak  a  volyyben  a  Tcerti  virugok.

The  lindens  are  scattering  their  fragrance  like  clover,
While  the  gay  flowers  bloom  in  the  garden  below ;

A  fawn-coloured  mist  spreads  its  canopy  over

The  earth,  and  the  mountains  are  covered  with  snow.

On  the  bosom  of  youth  summer's  brightness  is  glowing,
And  the  buds  and  the  blossoms  abundantly  spread ;

But  the  dews  and  the  darkness  my  path  are  o'erflowing,
And  the  dead  leaves  of  autumn  are  dropt  on  my  head.


A LONGING.  181

For  so  our  lives  fade,  like  the  bud  and  the  blossom  ;

But  come  to  me  sweet  one !  in  gentleness  come !
And  lay  thy  dear  head  on  my  welcoming  bosom,

That  head  which  to-morrow  may  bend  o'er  my  tomb.

Dost  answer  ?  "  Not  so !  be  my  fate  to  precede  thee,
Come  thou  to  my  cerements  and  bathe  them  with
tears ;

But  let  not  some  young  laughing  maiden  mislead  thee,
And  say  that  my  love  was  less  tender  than  hers."

The  veil  of  the  widow — 0  take  it  and  bind  it,

A  banner  of  victory,  over  the  cross
On  my  breast — I  shall  rise  from  the  death-world  and

find  it,
A  kerchief  to  dry  up  the  tears  which  my  loss

Has  drawn  from  my  eyelids — but  never !  0  never
One  thought  of  oblivion  my  spirit  shall  grieve ;

My  love  will  be  with  thee  for  ever  and  ever,
And  live  while  eternity's  cycles  shall  live.


182


DOUBLE FEELINGS.

Nem  ert  engem  a  ml  ay.

Little  am  I  understood

By  the  world  and  worldlings  in  it ;
If,  in  ever-varying  mood,

I  can  vibrate  in  a  minute
From  the  dirge  which  moves  the  heart

Into  passion,  pain,  or  pity —
To  the  laughing  songs  which  start

Fancies  strange,  enigmas  witty.

What  am  I  ? — a  man  midst  men —

All  their  faults  and  frailties  sharing  ;
What  am  I  ? — a  citizen,

All  my  country's  sorrows  bearing.
For  my  love,  joy -tears  to  shed

When  my  visions  glance  upon  her —
Grief-tears,  on  my  country's  head,

To  pour  out  for  her  dishonour.


DOUBLE FEELINGS.  183

Love  for  me  a  garland  bright,

Of  the  sweetest  flowers  has  braided ;
Home,  with  thorns  and  aconite,

Has  my  forehead  sadly  shaded  ;
When  I  touch  my  lyre  I  see

Shadowy  hands  the  gore- drops  flinging
On  the  strings,  while  from  the  tree

Falling  leaves  disturb  my  singing.

RHAPSODIES.

I  cannot  chain  my  fancy,

'  Tis  stronger  than  my  will,
'  Twould  wreath  my  brow  with  star-light,

Struggling  and  soaring  still.
Could  it  but  reach  the  limits

Which  bind  this  earthly  sphere,
'  Twould  launch  a  new  creation

Of  suns  and  planets  there.


184


THE MANIAC.

Mit  hdborgattoh  f

What  wilt  tliou  now — why  trouble  me  ?

Away !  away  !  away  with  thee  ;

I'm  busy  !  I'm  busy !  so  leave  me  alone —

I'm  twisting  a  whip — a  fire -whip  of  my  own —

I'm  twisting  it  out  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,

And  will  scourge  all  the  world  when  my  labour  is  done ;

It  will  howl — I  shall  laugh — ha !  ha !  hear  ! — ha  !

ha !  hear !
It  laughed,  when  I  howl'd  :  "  The  avenger  is  near ;  "
I  know  what  it  means — this  world's  screaming  and

scowling —
'  Tis  howling  and  laughter — 'tis  laughter  and  howling ;
And  then  comes  death's  messenger,  whispering  "  Be

still  !  "
Did  I  not  die  ?  Am  I  not  dead  ?
Death — was  it  death — or  death's  phantom  instead  ?
They  drenched  my  wine  with  poison,  then
Forced  me  to  drink  that  wine  again  ;
Death's  angels  shrieking  round  with  voices  shrill.


THE MANIAC.  185

My  murderers ! Tell  me  what  they  did  to  hide

Their  foul — foul  crime  ?

They  poured  their  death-shrieks  out  on  every  side,

Looked  pale  and  wept  aloud —

I  could  have  started  from  my  cerement  shroud,

Bitten  the  nose  from  each  false  face  to  show

The  fraudful  mark — but  no  !

I  bide  my  time.

Let  them  preserve  their  noses  and  their  smell,

And  in  their  nostrils  stinking  let  me  dwell

Till  I  am  buried — buried  where  ? Ha !  ha !

In  Africa !

In  Africa  !  there  would  I  rest,  for  there

Shall  a  hyena  shield  me  in  his  lair  ;

And  be  my  benefactor — he  will  say —

"I  will  devour  thee." — "Well!  you  may — you  may,"

I'll  answer,  and  my  heart  I'll  fling  him  ;  he

Shall  spring  upon  it — 'twill  so  bitter  be,

That  he  shall,  poisoned,  die  in  agony.

Look ! — ha !  ha !  ha ! — this  is  the  fit  reward,

For  those  who  serve  mankind,  serve  men ;  and  what


are  men


9


A  something  rooted  in  the  dusty  sward,

With  branches  towering  upwards — No  I  no  1  no

It  is  not  so —


I  answer  No  !  again.


186  THE MANIAC.

'  Tis  true,  man  is  a  tree,  whose  deep,  deep  root

Ascends  from  hell :

I  heard  a  learned  sage  his  history  tell, —

He  was  a  fool,  and  yet  without  dispute

His  tale  was  true, — the  sage  was  naked,  poor —

Why  did  he  not  break  thro'  some  rich  man's  door

And  steal — and  steal  ? — the  fool !  and  am  not  I

As  great  a  fool  to  be  inquiring  why  ?

No  !  better  far  to  weep — unsolaced — sad —

The  world  it  is  so  bad  ;

But  heaven  has  wept  enough  from  weeping  clouds.

That  such  a  world  God  for  its  maker  had,

Who  His  regrets  in  dark  repentance  shrouds ;

And  what  avail  heaven's  tears  for  grace  or  good  ?

They  fall  on  earth,  man  tramples  them  to  mud —

To  mud — ha  !  ha ! — to  mud.

0  heaven  !  0  heaven  !  thy  soldier,  he  has  done

His  duty,  for  a  victor- wreath  the  sun,

For  vestments  the  bright  clouds  were  promised — he

Hath  won  his  victory.

And  now,  and  now,  the  exhausted  soldier  wears

The  brass  cross  which  his  ragged  waistcoat  bears ;

And  is  this  all  ? Come  hither,  ye  who  draw

Lessons  of  wisdom — ask  the  solemn  daw

What  it  all  means — he  answers,  "Caw !  caw !  caw !  "


THE MANIAC.  187

Cry — measure  woman  !  fly  her  fatal  ban,
Woman  that  draws  that  master-subject — man,
Like  the  lost  river  in  the  absorbing  sea,
Sucked  in  both  spirit  and  shape — a  mystery —
Creation's  greatest  mystery  is  she  ;
A  blooming  garden,  both  in  body  and  soul
How  lovely — but  a  lecherous,  leprous  whole ;
In  her  fair  hand  she  holds  a  golden  cup —
'  Tis  poison — drink  it  up  !

0  love  !  0  extasy  of  love  !  I  drank
The  poison,  in  delight,  delirium  sank  ;
One  drop  is  sweeter,  dearer,  more  divine
Than  deepest  oceans  filled  with  honied  wine ;
And  yet  one  drop  more  fatal,  poisonous,  more
Than  seas  impregnated  with  hellebore ;

1  saw  those  seas  the  wild  tornadoes  move,
Wrecked  ships,  drowned  sailors'  corpses,  float  above ;
Death  and  destruction, — play-things, — ha !  ha !  ha !
The  ripe  fruit  falls,  and  thou,  thou  perishing  world
Art  ripe  to  rottenness,  and  shalt  be  hurled

To  ruin,  with  a  dread  anathema  !
The  curse  is  on  thee — Perish !  shall  I  wait
Until  to-morrow  wakes ;  but  if  to-morrow
Write  not  the  last  page  of  my  shame  and  sorrow,
I'll  bury  me  within  thine  entrails  straight ;


188  ONE ONLY THOUGHT.

And  to  thy  fires  bring  pyramids  of  powder,
And  there  explode  in  thunderbolts,  but  louder  ;
Flung  up  to  heaven  midst  planet,  star,  and  sun —
You  hear  me — ha  !  ha  !  ha! — the  work  is  done.


ONE ONLY THOUGHT.

Egy  gondolat  bant  engemet.

One  thought  torments  me  sorely — 'tis  that  Ir

Pillowed  on  a  soft  bed  of  down,  may  die —

Fade  slowly,  like  a  flower,  and  pass  away

Under  the  gentle  pressure  of  decay.

Paling  as  pales  a  fading,  flickering  light

In  the  dark,  lonesome  solitude  of  night.

0  God  !  let  not  my  Magyar  name

Be  linked  with  such  a  death  of  shame  ;

No  !  rather  let  it  be

A  lightning- struck,  uprooted  tree — ■

A  rock,  which  torn  from  mountain-brow,

Comes  rattling,  thundering  down  below.

Where  every  fettered  race  tired  with  their  chains,

Muster  their  ranks  and  seek  the  battle  plains ;


ONE ONLY THOUGHT.  189

And  with,  red  flushes  the  red  flag  unfold,

The  sacred  signal  there  inscribed  in  gold —

"  For  the  world's  liberty  !  "

And,  far  and  wide,  the  summons  to  be  free

Fills  east  and  west, — and  to  the  glorious  fight

Heroes  press  forward,  battling  for  the  right :

There  will  I  die  !

There,  drowned  in  mine  own  heart' s-blood,  lie, —

Poured  out  so  willingly ;  th'  expiring  voice,

Even  in  its  own  extinction  shall  rejoice.

"While  the  sword's  clashing,  and  the  trumpet's  sound,

And  rifles  and  artillery  thunder  round ;

Then  may  the  trampling  horse

Gallop  upon  my  corse,

When  o'er  the  battle-field  the  warriors  fly.

There  let  me  rest  till  glorious  victory

Shall  crown  the  right — my  bones  upgathered  be

At  the  sublime  interment  of  the  free  !

When  million  voices  shout  their  elegy

Under  the  unfurled  banners  waving  high ;

On  the  gigantic  grave  which  covers  all

The  heroes,  who  for  freedom  fall,

And  welcome  death  because  they  die  for  thee —

All  holy  !  world-delivering  liberty !


190


HOMER  AXD  OSSIAX.
Hoi  vannalc  a  liellenek,  es  liol  a  czeltdk?

Where  are  the  Greeks  ?  and  where  the  Celtic  race

Gone  ! They  have  left  no  trace  :

Where  are  the  ancient  cities  which  the  floods

Have  turned  to  solitudes  ?

Two  pillars  tower  aloft — but  to  declare

What  glorious  things  there  were !

Two  grand  memorials  of  the  antique  man —

Homer  and  Ossian !

One  was  a  beggar,  one  of  royal  blood —

In  contrast  strange  they  stood ;

Yet  common  links  their  varied  histories  bind,

For  both  were  blind  !

And  did  their  fiery  spirits  steal  their  sight

To  fill  their  brains  with  light ;

Or  was  that  light  absorbed  in  the  bright  flame

Of  their  eternal  fame  ?

They  were  grand  soids,  with  magic  hand

They  smote  the  lute,  and  filled  the  listening  land

As  with  new  messages  from  God ;  their  arm

Of  power  was  a  resistless  witchery's  charm ;


HOMER AND OSSllN.  191

Their  wonder- waking  influences  raised  up  trains

Of  wonderers  waking  at  th'  impassioned  strains —

Hear  Homer !  hear !

His  music  agitates  the  heavenly  sphere  ;

His  brightness  from  the  east  is  bursting,  brought

Westward  in  currents  of  harmonious  thought,

As  the  day's  dawning  and  the  sunbeam's  light,

Like  molten  steel  in  streams  and  cataracts  bright

They  move  the  iEgean  ocean  in  their  flow —

With  greenness  gild  the  Archipelago  ;

Bring  men  and  gods  together,  and  above,

Both  gods  and  men  spread  canopies  of  love.

And  there  is  Ossian !

He  sits  among  the  mists — the  shadowy  man !

O'er  the  north-ocean — and  his  harmonies

Blend  with  the  wild  winds  and  the  raging  seas

Under  the  clouded,  the  mysterious  moon,

Which  rises,  and  usurps  the  sun's  abandoned  throne  ;

A  visible  darkness  o'er  the  wide,  wide  waste

Stretches  its  covering — and  the  night  birds,  chased

By  the  fierce  tempest,  fly — while  hero-ghosts

Stalk  o'er  the  field  where  erst  the  battle  hosts

Clashed  and  were scattered — all that's grand and

glowing,
All  that  is  bright,  and  beautiful,  and  flowing,


192  SERENE HAPPINESS.

White-headed  beggar,  Homer  !  all  is  thine  !

The  grey,  the  dark,  the  strange,  the  misty  throng

Of  shadows,  are  the  enchantments  of  thy  song,

Ossian  !  of  kingly  line !

Then  sing,  still  sing — mount  higher,  upwards,  higher,

Smite  the  lute  loudly — smite  the  golden  lyre  ;

Homer  and  Ossian  !

Listening  to  you  centuries  on  centuries  ran,

And  centuries  still  shall  run,

Long  as  the  morning's  waking  sees  the  sun,

Long  as  the  earth  shall  hail  its  waking  ;  time

Has  stamped  its  sanction,  sacred  and  sublime,

Upon  your  sovereignty, —

High  above  death — above  mortality

Ye  raise  your  noble  foreheads  glory-crowned,

And  countless  ages  worship  all  around.


SEKENE HAPPINESS

Csendes  tenger  ronasdgdn.

On  the  tranquil  breast  of  ocean,
Cradled  is  my  bark, — as  spring,
Cradles  with  a  gentle  motion,
The  young  rosebud  blossoming.


SERENE HAPPINESS.  193

When  the  experienced  thoughtful  word

Utterance  finds,  it  should  be  heard ;

I  was  launched  upon  a  sea,

On  whose  shores  was  destiny ;

Dangers  and  delays  before  me,

Lightnings  bursting  round  me,  o'er  me  ;

Reefs  and  rocks  which  wild  waves  cover,

Eddy- whirlpools  rushing  over  ;

When  the  fierce  whirl  rules  the  rudder,

Well  my  trembling  heart  may  shudder.

What  can  save  my  bark  from  wreck  ?

Is  there  in  the  heavens  a  speck,

Whence  a  single  ray  of  light

Dawns  upon  my  darkening  sight  ?

Have  I  not  in  prayerful  pride

Courage  sought  on  every  side  ?

And  my  recompense  is  this,

That  upon  the  ocean's  breast

I  have  found  a  place  of  rest,

And  a  paradise  of  bliss.

I  have  laid  my  rudder  down,

And  my  bark  can  speed  alone,

For  the  winds  that  fill  my  sails

Are  the  Zephyr's  vernal  gales ;

Heaven's  own  azure  flowers  are  bound

13


194  SERENE HAPPINESS.

Garlanding  my  forehead  round  :
Flowers  so  beautiful,  so  blue,
Mirroring  back  heaven's  brightest  hue.
On  the  cradling  waves  I  lie,
Lulled  by  their  sweet  lullaby,
Free  from  care,  from  sorrow  free,
On  that  gently  rocking  sea,
In  my  maiden's  dear  embrace —
O  what  smiles  illume  her  face  !
O  what  beams  of  living  light
Shine  from  eyes  as  black  as  night —
Light,  whose  dazzling  flash  will  dim
Flames  from  eyes  of  seraphini.
Then  I  seize  my  lyre — in  play
Midst  the  strings  my  fingers  stray  ;
And  the  strains  of  music  flow —
How,  or  why,  I  scarcely  know  ;
For  those  fingers  often  will
Stray  among  her  moving  tresses,
As  they  vibrate  to  the  breezes,
And  with  bliss  my  pulse  is  still ;
Then  such  power  of  song  is  given
To  my  lyre — such  strains  divine
That  the  stars  descend  from  heaven,
Listening  to  those  strains  of  mine :


SERENE HAPPINESS.  195

Circling  round  my  head  they  dance,

And  as  waking  from  a  trance,

From  the  sea  the  enchanted  moon

Rises  and  resounds  the  tune.

Still  I  sing  and  still  I  float

O'er  the  waters  in  my  boat,

Like  a  Dolphin  on  his  throne,

Like  another  Arion.

Then  I  hear  a  demon  calling,

With  a  thunder-voice  appalling —

'  Storms  and  dangers  are  at  hand

Menacing  the  fatherland  !  "

And  I  fain  would  shelter  me

In  the  sea's  immensity  ;

Hide  me  where  the  wind  and  wave

In  discordant  conflict  rave.

Yes  I  the  petrel's  screams  foretell

Wrecks  and  tempests  terrible,

When  heaven's  concave  thro'  and  thro',

Wears  the  o'er-mantling  robe  of  blue.


196


WIFE AND SWOKD.

Galamb  van  a  hdzon.

A  dove  upon  the  house-roof,
Above  in  heaven  a  star ;

Thou,  on  my  bosom  sleeping —

How  sweet  thy  breathings  are  !

Soft  as  the  morning  dew-drops
Upon  the  rose-leaves  fall,

Thou  in  my  arras  reposest,

My  love,  my  wife,  my  all !

"Why  should  I  not  embrace  thee,
With  kisses  manifold  ?

My  lips  are  rich  with  kisses —
So  gushing — so  untold.

We  talk,  we  toy,  we  trifle,
We  revel  in  love's  bliss,

And  snatch  at  every  breathing —
A  kiss — another  kiss.


WIFE AND SWOED.  197

But  who  that  bliss  can  measure,

Sparkling  in  every  glance  ?
It  crests  thy  lips  with  beauty,

It  lights  thy  countenance.

I  look  upon  my  sabre,

'  Tis  idly  hung  above  ;
And  does  it  not  reproach  me  ? —

"  Why  so  absorbed  in  love  ?  "

Thou  old — thou  young  companion !

So  wildly  looking  down  ;
I  hear  thy  voice  of  anger,

I  see  thy  threatening  frown.

:  Shame — shame  on  thee,  deserter !

Thus  trifling  with  a  wife  ;
Awake  I  thy  country  calls  thee

For  liberty,  for  life."

And  I — "  She  is  so  lovely,

So  witching,  so  divine —
The  gift  of  heavenly  beauty,

This  angel-love  of  mine !


198  NIGHTINGALES AND LARKS.

"  0  recognize  the  mission,

Entrusted  from  the  sky,
To  this  celestial  envoy,

And  hail  her  embassy."

She  heard  the  word ;  she  echoed

That  word—"  <  The  Fatherland  I

I  buckle  on  the  sabre,

With  mine  own  plighted  hand.

"  I  charge  thee — save  thy  country,

'  Tis  mine,  'tis  thine — for  both.
Off  to  the  field  of  victory,

And  there  redeem  thy  troth."


NIGHTINGALES  AND  LARKS.

TJgyan  meg  meddig  zengitelc.

How  long  hast  thou  poured  out  thy  nightly  tune,
Worshipper  of  the  moon  !

From  the  old  time,  whose  clouds  have  borne  away
The  memories  of  thy  lay  ?


NIGHTINGALES AND LARKS.  199

Well  hast  thou  left  thy  nest,

Built  midst  the  trees  which  crest

Our  ancient  cities'  ruins— hurrying  far

From  the  dark  haunts,  where  owls  and  ravens  are  ;

Thy  soul  is  by  sweet  witchery  inspired —

Thrilling,  but  never  tired ;

It  flashes  in  the  eye,  it  wakes  the  lyre

With  transports'  fever' d  fire ;

With  tears  hot-burning,  the  sad  heart  it  sears —

False  are  the  transports,  cowardly  the  tears ;

Transports  and  tears  in  days  like  these —

That  only  tell  of  our  degeneracies  !

Nay !  we  will  have  no  song,  no  chant,  no  chime,

But  those  which  echo  the  departed  time  :

And  what  are  ye  but  plunderers  of  the  dead,

Stealers  of  corpses  from  their  slumbering  bed  ?

Thou  bring'  st  them  from  the  lonely  night

Into  the  morning  light,

The  long  departed  centuries  ;

And  thou  wouldst  garland  these

With  laurels, — I  will  take  no  share

In  such  a  ministration, — 'tis  a  curse —

A  profanation — murder- stained,  and  worse  ;

Here  mortals  pine  in  gloom  and  grief  and  gall,

The  world  is  but  a  general  hospital ;


200  NIGHTINGALES AND LARKS.

Contagion  spreading  here  and  there,

Through  the  doomed  kingdom,  festering  everywhere  !

Our  country  on  the  altar's  footstep  lies,

A  worthless  sacrifice.

For  who  that  history's  dreary  page  has  read,

Saw  e'er  a  nation  wakened  from  the  dead —

Here  or  elsewhere — ask — and  be  answered  never —

If  nations,  doomed  to  sleep,  must  sleep  for  ever  ?

Ask,  in  thy  misery,  restless,  anxious,  fretful,

Will  heaven  of  its  own  children  be  forgetful  ?

Ask  if  there  be  a  sickness,  whose  condition

Is  far  beyond  the  reach  of  the  physician  ?

Ask  if  there  be  a  curse,  whose  cure  demands

The  heaven's  damnation,  or  earth's  hangman's  hands :

Are  these  thy  songs — are  these  thy  melodies —

The  music  of  thy  lute  strings — these  ?

I  ask — and  in  my  misery,  floods  of  tears

Burst  from  my  eyes,  and  thro'  these  showers  appears

A  dream — a  shadowy  dream — of  future  years.

And  thou,  sweet  tarrying  singer  of  the  night,

Be  silent  quite !

Thou  hast  no  song  of  gaiety  or  gladness,

Cease  thou  thy  notes  of  sadness  ;

They  bring  no  healing  to  the  suffering  soul,

They  will  not  make  the  heart  that's  broken  whole.


ANTICIPATION.  201

The  nightingale  belongs  to  night. But  lo  !
Midnight  is  passing,  and  its  curtains  dark
Day  draws  aside,  and  now  the  morning  glow
Brightens  the  fields — fly  nightingale — and  hark  I
I  hear  the  singing  of  the  morning  lark.


ANTICIPATION.
Egesz  uton  Jiaza  fele.

"What  wildering  thoughts  my  mind  engage,
When  wending  on  my  homeward  way  !

(I  had  not  seen  her  for  an  age)

"What  shall  I  to  my  mother  say  ?

What  honied  words  of  love  and  joy,

When  I  shall  clasp  her  to  my  breast,

And  the  same  arms  that  hugged  the  boy
Around  the  rugged  man  be  prest  ?

A  thousand,  thousand  thoughts  oppress,
Of  what  is — will  be — and  hath  been  ;

All  mingling  in  a  happiness,
That  is  as  sacred  as  serene.


202


EVENING AT HOME.


To  the  old  cottage  door  I  come,

My  mother  springs  to  welcome  me  !

I  hang  upon  her  lips — but  dumb
As  is  the  fruit  upon  the  tree.


EVENING AT HOME.

Borozgatdnk  apdmmal.

Bed  wine  drank  I  with  my  father.

Which  the  old  man  poured  like  rain

Full  of  kindness,  full  of  loving,

Once  I  blessed  him — and  again.

Long,  too  long  had  I  been  absent,
Years  since  I  my  sire  had  seen  ;

Age  the  old  man's  brow  had  furrowed,
And  we  talked  of  what  had  been.

Talked  of  all  my  strange  adventures —
Weather-beatings,  wanderings —

Theatres  and  men  and  music,

And  a  thousand  different  things.


EVENING AT HOME.


203


Then  he  sets  my  "  work  "  before  me,

"  Chop  the  logs !  "  good  man !  the  past

Was  so  blended  with  the  present —
Earliest  habits  linger  last.

"  Well !  it  was  a  vile  existence,

You  were  shamefully  misused  " —
So  I  sit  and  hear  in  silence
My  poor  theatre  abused.

"  You  were  ragged — you  were  hungry —
Ah !  I  see  it  on  your  brow  ;
Tell  me — tell  me  how  you  bore  it,

So  much  suffering — tell  me  how."

Then  I  laughed  and  joked — my  language
Hiding  half  my  thoughts  the  while,

Smiled  upon  his  inexperience —
He  did  not  return  the  smile.

Then  I  sang  a  jolly  ditty,

Sang  a  ditty  of  mine  own,
And  he  set  my  heart  a- dancing

When  he  cried,  "Well  done!  well  done!"


204  EVENING AT HOME.

Then  I  said,  "And  will  you  listen,

Verse  of  mine  while  I  rehearse  !  "
But  the  old  man  shrugged  his  shoulders-
"  I  don't  know  the  use  of  verse."

Should  I  wonder  ?  his  the  training
To  toil  on  from  day  to  day ;

'  Twas  not  learning,  but  hard  labour
That  had  made  his  tresses  grey.

When  the  flask  of  wine  was  emptied,
I  snatched  up  a  pen  to  keep

Record  of  a  passing  fancy,

And  the  old  man — fell  asleep.

Then  my  mother  entered,  asking

Hundred,  thousand  questions  then  ;

"  This  and  that  and  t'other  tell  me —
Fling  away  that  dirty  pen."

And  I  listened  to  my  mother's

Hundred,  thousand  questionings,

Asking,  answering  one  another's

Talk  of  women,  men,  and  things.


SOLITUDE.  205

And  I  thought — the  thought  was  dearer
Than  the  loudest  sounds  of  mirth ;

Oh  !  I  have  the  dearest  mother —
Dearest  mother  on  the  earth  I


SOLITUDE.

Messze,  messze  a  vildg  zajdtul —

From  the  world,  and  all  the  world's  bewilderings,

Solitude  I  sought  ;
There  to  live  in  happiness  and  silence,

And  be — nought.

Happiness  !  I  never  knew  its  presence,

Wildly,  blindly  driven
Thro'  the  noisy  street,  the  crowded  chamber —

Earth  or  heaven !

Ever  haunted  by  some  lynx-eyed  monster

Thro'  the  night  and  day,
To  molest  me,  haunt  me,  circumvent  me,

As  his  prey.


206


TO A FRIEND.


So  I  seized  my  staff  and  bound  my  girdle,

And  I  took  my  flight,
Hither,  where  the  golden  sunbeams  met  me,

Smiling  bright.

Holy  solitude  !  now  look  upon  me,
Freed  from  every  fetter  ;

Let  me  never  hear  the  voices  calling,
"  You're  my  debtor !  "


TO A  FEIEND.

Kalmdridohet  eluiik  mostandban.

We  live  in  vile  and  venal  days,  and  know  it ;

The  world  is  but  a  coin  of  golden  dust,
And  on  it  the  impression  of  the  poet

Is  but  a  transitory  bit  of  rust.
0  no  !  he  is  the  image  of  the  king,

On  the  world's  currency — he,  the  truest  test
Of  the  pure  ore  that  makes  the  metal  ring,

Of  all  the  minting  he  the  worthiest.
Art  thou  a  poet  ?  ring  the  music  loud —
And  of  thy  great  inheritance  be  proud.


207


TO BE, OE  NOT TO BE.

Legy  dikozott,  te  dtkos  pillanal.

Accursed  was  the  hour — brim-full  of  curses,

Which  summoned  me  "  to  be  " —
And  told  my  mother  in  her  hour  of  anguish,

"A  son  is  born  to  thee."

0  poetry !  thou  spider  !

That,  in  thy  treacherous  web,  entanglest  men,

And  stabbing  their  hearts'  centre,
Look'st  pitiless  upon  their  writhing  pain.

Yes !  thou  hast  drunk  insatiate  of  my  blood,

Thou  poison-spitting  spider !
Is  thy  web  tearable  ? — then  I  will  tear  it :

Why — why  should  I  abide  here  ?

Strongly  tho'  T  am  held,
And  thou  with  fetters  all  my  limbs  art  clasping,

1  feel  my  growing  strength,

And  it  shall  free  my  chained  heart  from  thy  grasping.


208  TO BE, OK NOT TO BE.


I  will  not  feed  the  spider  with  my  blood,

As  I  have  done  till  now,
While  tears  of  shame  were  running  down  my  cheeks,

And  sorrow  stamped  my  brow.

What  shall  I  seek — fame  ? Nay  !
Fame  is  a  nothingness — an  idle  name ;

I  will  not  waste  my  powers
To  find — what  found  were  less  than  nothing — fame  !

I  with  the  vulgar  herd  down  life's  dull  river

Will  unconcernedly  swim ;
The  fates  that  keep  the  fool  from  rocks  and  dangers

May  care  for  me  as  him.

I  said — for  fame  be  careless —
Seek  in  tranquillity's  repose  thy  bliss,

And  if  thou  chance  to  find  it,
'  Tis  the  best  blessing  of  a  world  like  this. .

Shall  I  be  silent  ever, — my  existence

A  voiceless  instrument,  to  hang
Upon  the  wall  where  never  more  shall  vibrate

Its  melancholy  clang  ?

Silent  in  weal  or  woe,
Smitten  with  helplessness  !  0  no  !  the  wave,

When  by  the  whirlwind  shaken,
Cannot  be  still  and  voiceless  as  the  grave.


WINTER-NIGHT.  209

Spirit  of  poetry  !  I  cannot  smite  thee,

I  cannot  smite  thee  dumb ;
Spite  of  myself  my  inner  heart  is  speaking,

Its  passionate  bursts  will  come  ;

They  will  come  thundering,  whether
Heard  or  not  heard,  in  accents  loud  and  rude,

For  I  must  speak,  must  sing,
While  breath  inspires  my  life,  or  passion  warms  my
blood.


WINTEK-NIGHT.

Vad  teli  ej. Siiru  Jiopelyheh  esnek.

Wild  winter  night !  the  falling  flakes  of  snow
Are  by  the  storm-wind  driven. Snow  flakes — no  !
These  are  the  fancies  of  bewildered  thought,
The scattered fragments my soul's dreams have
wrought.

The  midnight  comes  in  robes  of  darkness  clouded.
I  see  three  spirits  in  its  mantling  shrouded ;
Lost  here  below,  they  winged  their  flight  above,
I  see  their  unveiled  features — Faith !  Hope !  Love !

14


210  WINTER-NIGHT.

They  live  not  upon  earth,  they  murdered  me ;
And  now  they  quit  their  grave  of  mystery
At  midnight,  and  with  melancholy  sigh,
Eemind  me  of  the  happier  days  gone  by.

The  storms  break  through  the  clouds ;  on  the  pale  rays,
Which  march  with  heaven's  bright  armaments,  I  gaze ;
But  in  the  distance,  thro'  the  misty  flood,
The  scattered  stars  appear  like  drops  of  blood.

And  who  shall  say  they  are  not  blood  records

Of  murderous  man's  ferocious  deeds  and  words  ?

Upon  the  field  still  Abel's  blood  remains,

And  men  in  sportive  mood  have  called  them  Cains ! J

Burst,  tempests !  in  your  wrath — your  curses  bring —
Shatter  the  clouds — upon  my  forehead  fling
Your  bolts  —uprooting  my  dishevelled  hair,
And  crush  my  heart  that's  wiithing  in  desj)air.

How  that  heart  beats — a  heavy  fragment  rolled
Down  a  steep  mountain,  from  some  ruin  old ;
An  icicle  that  drops  upon  a  pall,
And  makes  the  mourner  shudder  at  its  fall.
1  The  Dog-star.


MY PRAYER.  211

Thou  art  the  pall,  my  bosom  !  and  there  dwells

In  thee  a  heart,  as  cold  as  icicles  ;

Thou  art  a  living  grave,  upon  whose  bed

Lie  wrecked  and  ruined  hopes,  and  memories  dead.

The  storm  is  passed,  the  tranquil  moonbeams  gild.
With  glittering  smiles,  the  forest  and  the  field  ;
I  wend  my  homeward  way — alas  !  to  me
The  moonbeams  tell  of  nought  but  misery.


MY PKAYEK.
ElkdrJiozdstol  felt  szegeny  any  dm.

My  poor  old  mother  talks  of  my  perdition,

And  has  she  not  some  reason  for  her  care  ?

I  know  her  meaning,  and  my  conscience  tells  me

'  Tis  long  since  I  have  poured  to  heaven  a  prayer.

But  I  will  pray — pray  with  my  hands  enfolded —
Pray  with  the  passion  of  a  soul  sincere  :

"  0  father  hear  me — pitying  father !  hear  me !
Father  in  heaven !  benignant  father,  hear !


212  MY PRAYER.

Grant — grant,  Almighty  Euler  of  the  nations —

Grant  to  my  country, — but  my  country's  throes

Thrill  thro'  me,  for  which  woe  shall  I  implore  thy
Mercy,  in  such  a  wilderness  of  woes !

One  only  prayer ! Look  down  !  behold  Hungaria  !

Is  it  not  piteous  ? Any  change  were  dear ;
Save  her  from  perishing — awake — renew  her ;

Father  in  heaven !  benignant  father,  hear !

For  me  ? — the  sweet  smiles  of  a  loving  maiden.
And  a  swift-footed,  well-appointed  steed,

On  which,  conveying  coronals  of  laurels,

To  the  sweet  smiling  maiden  I  might  speed.

I  want  them,  not  for  garlanding  my  forehead,
Whatever  fail,  the  laurels  shall  be  there ;

Father  in  heaven  I  I  thank  thee  thou  hast  heard  me —
Benignant  Father !  thou  hast  heard  my  prayer  !  "


213


TO  MY  FATHEB.

Itt,  a  honnan  messze  Icell  utazni  mig  az.

Here  where  you  must  travel  far,  before  the  mountains

Eise  above  the  boundaries  of  the  Netherland,
Here  I  love  to  look  on  Nature's  quiet  beauty,

Freedom  and  repose  surround  me  where  I  stand :
Near  the  little  hut  in  which  I  find  my  dwelling,

When  the  songs  of  mirth  their  joyous  echoes
spread,
Here  an  ancient  man  is  master  of  the  household —

Blessings,  blessings  fall  upon  his  hoary  head  !

Where  my  dwelling  is,  my  meat  and  drink  provided,

To  complain  of  either  were  a  shame,  a  crime  ;
While  I  wait  on  none,  on  me  they  all  are  waiting ;

No  complaint,  even  when  I  enter  after  time.
But  one  thing  annoys  me — when  a  word  reproachful

To  the  good  old  hostess  by  the  host  is  said ;
Yet  'tis  scarcely  uttered  ere  he  asks  forgiveness —

Blessings,  blessings  fall  upon  his  hoary  head !


214  TO MY FATHER.

Often  do  we  talk  of  days  and  years  departed,

Why  should  happy  years  so  hurriedly  depart  ?
Then  he  had  a  house,  a  garden,  field  and  cellar,

Many  an  ox  and  horse,  and  harvest-bearing  cart.
Thieves  despoiled  his  household,  and  the  o'er-flowing
Danube

Swept  his  house  away — and  there,  impoverished,
Stood  the  ancient  man  amidst  the  desolation —

Blessings,  blessings  fall  upon  his  hoary  head !

Now  Ins  sun  of  life  in  darkness  has  descended,

And  the  old  man  asks  for  silence  and  repose ;
Who  can  tell  the  weight  of  sorrow  on  his  shoulders  ?

Who  can  tell  the  number  of  his  wants  and  woes?
He  no  day  of  rest — no  sabbath-day  can  welcome,

Early,  late,  he  labours,  for  his  daily  bread ;
Oh  1  I  mourn  the  lot  of  that  old  man — so  weary —

Blessings,  blessings  fall  upon  his  hoary  head !

Wlien  I  smiling  say — "  a  better  fate  awaits  thee ;  "
He  just  shakes  his  head — the  comfort  comes  too
late  :
"  Let  me  journey  on,  my  pilgrimage  is  ending,

Peace  will  welcome  me  within  the  churchyard
gate."


I AND THE SUN.  215

Then  I  press  him  tight  against  my  panting  bosom —
0  what  pangs  are  felt,  what  burning  tears  are
shed !

Is  "not  that  old  man  mine  own  beloved  father  ?
Blessings,  blessings  fall  upon  his  hoary  head !


I AND THE SUN.
Bdmulja  sok  oily  epedoleg  a  Jioldat.

Some  have  imagined  that  human  regrets

Mount  to  the  moon  and  are  petrified  there  ;

Some  that  the  dew-drop,  the  flower-bud  that  wets,
Is  the  rendering  to  earth  of  a  heaven-dropping  tear.

But  my  heart-soarings  are  not  to  the  moon,
They  to  the  sun  in  its  glory  aspire ;

Thence  are  the  songs  which  their  music  attune,

Thence  come  love's  gushes,  thence  extasy's  fire.

I  and  the  sun  are  betrothed, — his  bright  beam
Kindles  a  beam  in  my  spirit  as  bright  ;

All  my  heart's  joys  I  contemplate  in  him,

While  my  heart's  mirror  reflects  back  his  light.


216  EVERY FLOWER.

Yet  one  sad  thought  for  the  future  I  have,

When  I  repose  where  my  fathers  reposed  -;

Tho'  he  may  rise  and  may  sit  on  my  grave,
Rising  or  sitting  my  eyes  will  be  closed.


Yet  men  have  said  that  the  ghosts  have  a  right,

For  a  fugitive  hour  from  their  prisons  to  stray  :

0  let  my  prison  be  closed  thro'  the  night,

And  let  me  come  forth  in  the  brightness  of  day  !


EYEEY FLOWEE.
Minden  virctgndk,  minden  his  fuszdlnak.

Every  flower  and  grass-blade,  every  one
Claims,  at  least,  one  bright  smile  from  the  sun  !
Love  ! — the  sunshine  of  the  soul — that  art,
Hast  thou  not  one  sunbeam  for  my  heart  ?
Hast  thou  not  one  maid  to  love  me  well  ?
Hast  thou  not  one  maid  to  hear  me  tell
Of  the  coldness  of  the  world,  and  bring
Light  and  heat  in  her  sweet  ministering  ?


CHRISTMAS.  217

Is  there  not  a  maid  to  say  "  Come  near  !
Thou  art  weary — lay  thy  tired  head  here  !  "
Is  there  not  a  maid  to  kiss  away
Blood-drops  from  my  brow,  that  many  a  day
Cruel  men  have  stoned  ? Alone  I  stand
Like  a  withered  vine  upon  the  land ;
On  its  branches  not  a  bird  to  enchant  me,
Save  the  ravens  black  that  ever,  ever  haunt  me.


CHKISTMAS.

'En  liozzam  is  benezett  a  kardcson.

Old  Christmas  turned  towards  me — was  it  only
To  see  a  visage  blank  and  pale  and  lonely,

And  the  sad  tears  that  trembled  in  my  eye  ?

Go  farther,  Christmas  ! — all  thy  bounties  bringing
To  some  bright  circle,  where  sweet  voices  ringing
Shall  welcome  thee — go  ! pass  the  anchorite  by  !

Some  chilling  thoughts  my  wakening  heart  appal,
And,  like  the  icicles  upon  the  wall,

Hang  stiffly  on  that  heart — it  was  not  so,


218  CHRISTMAS.

In  older,  happier  days,  when  Christmas  came.
And  every  eye  shone  brighter  at  the  name —
Parents  and  brothers  all — a  joyous  row.

0  many  saw  us  then — all,  all  delighted ;
All,  all  in  daily  blessedness  united —

All,  all  so  happy — all  so  kind,  so  good  !

We  loved  our  brethren  all — God  honoured,  all,
And  when  the  beggar  called,  we  hailed  his  call,
We  gave  him  comfort  and  we  gave  him  food.

And  our  reward  ? Short  were  our  days  of  bliss-
Launched  on  a  wide,  wide  sea  of  miseries,

Our  destined  harbour  was  despair  and  death.

And  yet  I  dreamed  that  the  old  family  tree
Might  stand  unshattered  midst  the  misery —
Sunshine  above  it,  sheltering  beneath.

It  was  not  so — there  came  a  whirlwind  forth,
And  flung  its  branches  to  the  south  and  north —
One  of  its  roots,  my  mother — left  alone.


THE IMPATIENT MOON.  219

0  my  soul's  ancestry — 0  brothers  dear  I
0  loved  companions,  scattered  here  and  there,
Shall  we  not  meet  again,  again  be  one  ?

Hope  ! thou  has  often  kissed  me,  tho'  thy  kiss
Was  treacherous — yet  is  thine  a  tempting  bliss ;
In  trusting  thee  once  more — betray  not,  then,

Thy  suppliant — let  me  dream  of  happy  things —
Of  family  meetings,  family  ministerings —
Past  days  of  blessedness  to  dawn  again.

I  am  no  sun,  which  earth  and  moon  roll  round,
I  am  a  comet  lost  in  heaven's  vast  bound,

And  thro'  the  storm  winds  bear  my  melancholy
train.


THE  IMPATIENT  MOON.

Mert  vagyoh  en  a  hold  f  isten,  mil  vetettem.

And  what  am  I,  the  moon  ? Tell  me  thou  great  all-
seeing  !
Why  was  I  born  to  be  a  miserable  being  ?
I'd  rather  be  a  slave,  by  earthly  tyrants  driven,
Than  be  a  midnight  king,  and  sit  enthroned  in  heaven.


220


THE IMPATIENT MOON.


A  beggar  ratlier  be,  in  rags  and  tatters  roving,

Than  thro'  these  fields  of  blue,  in  silver  vestments
moving.

I'd  rather  eat  the  bread  of  poverty,  tho'  bitter,

Than  drink  the  fragrant  dews  of  all  the  stars  that
glitter.

Wilt  thou  not  hear  my  prayer  ?  0  thou  that  hear'st
the  growling

Of  many  an  angry  bard — of  many  a  dog  that's  howl-
ing ;

Bards  !  bards  !  What  bards  ?  They  pour  their  cata-
racts of  verses

Heartless — they  have  no  heart — I  hear,  with  silent
curses ;

They  speak,  they  spout  to  me,  in  folly's  inebriety,

As  if  I  were  not  tired — how  tired,  of  such  society  !

True  I  am  pale  and  wan,  I  sicken  in  the  sadness,

Of  all  these  maddened  sounds,  0  would  it  were  mute
madness  !

I'd  rather  hear  the  screams  of  discord's  many  daugh-
ters,

Or  cries  of  slaughtered  swine  rebelling  'gainst  their
slaughters.

But  now  and  then  amidst  these  horrors  dark  and  horrid,

I  see  a  spark  of  light  burst  from  a  minstrel's  fore-
head ;


THE IMPATIENT MOON.  221

A  poet  true  who  comes,  his  genial  music  proffering,
And  then  my  face  shines  bright  and  brighter  at  the

offering ;
I  listen  to  the  strains  complacent  and  enjoying,
Which  make  the  dissonance  but  tenfold  more  annoy-
ing;
O  those  vile sounds — they  spread — they  propagate

like  rabbits,
Are  there  no  laws  to  check  their  procreative  habits  ?
Fm  left  no  night  in  peace,  I  hear  the  eternal  tune,  0  !
And  these  impostors  cry,  "  We're  singing  to  the  moon,

0!"
But  see,  another  comes,  the  monster  dares  to  face  me,
Stretches  his  apish  arms,  and  says  he  would  embrace

me :
The  zany  looks  to  heaven,  and  fancies  I  will  hear  him,
When  not  a  fool  on  earth  is  fool  enough  to  bear  him ;
And  then  he  sighs  and  sighs,  half  terrified,  half  tipsy,
And  in  my  presence  stands,  like  a  convicted  gipsy ;
Asks  me — asks  me,  the  moon  ! — to  help  him  to  discover
What  is  the  reason  he  is  a  rejected  lover  ?
I'll  tell  him  once  for  all — he  shall  not  be  mistaken,
"  You  had  the  grill  in  charge,  you  know,  and  spoilt

the  bacon  !
Did  you  not  give  a  hot  potato  to  the  woman,


222  ANOTHER  YEAR.


With  which  she  burnt  her  mouth — and  was  it  not

inhuman  ?
Now  go,  and  wail  and  weep,  in  moody  melancholy —
Sit  in  the  stocks  of  shame,  repenting  of  your  folly  ;
List  to  the  oracle,  thou  dunce  !  if  I  can  make  thee
Hear  my  last  word — 'tis  this,  'tis  this — The  devil  take

thee !  "


MOTTO.

All  other  things  above
Are  liberty  and  love ;
Life  would  I  gladly  tender
For  love  :  yet  joyfully
Would  love  itself  surrender
For  liberty.


ANOTHER YEAR.

Egij  esztend'6  a  mdsik  sirjdt  dssa.

One  year  entombs  another  year,  as  men

Deliver  fellow-men  to  death's  dominion  ;

And  now  a  year  is  sepulchred  again,

Smitten  by  hurrying  time's  destructive  pinion.


i


ANOTHER  YEAR.  223

0  be  extinguished,  dying  year  ! Efface

All  footprints  of  thy  presence,  buried  year !
Amidst  the  records  to  rny  memory  dear,

Of  thy  past  history  I  would  find  no  trace.

Thou  busyedst  me  with  many  smiling  schemes,

Thou  scatteredst  broadcast  many  hopeful  seeds,
Filledst  my  soul  with  flattering,  flowery  dreams,

With  words  of  promise,  plans  of  prosperous  deeds ;
Thy  gleams  of  sunshine  brightened  on  my  face,

Thy  fame-proclaiming  voices  filled  mine  ear ;

Yet  midst  the  records  to  my  memory  dear,
Of  thy  past  history  I  would  find  no  trace.

My  heart  was  but  the  football  of  hard  fate,

And  bore  the  brand  of  suffering; at  thy  smile,

That  heart,  relieved,  felt  less  disconsolate,

And  its  fierce  burnings  were  extinguished,  while

The  crater  of  its  fires  had  yet  a  place

Within  me — still  tormenting,  troubling  there,
And  midst  my  memory's  records,  parting  year  !

Of  thy  past  history  I  would  find  no  trace.

0  dying  year !  upon  thy  grave  is  rocked
My  fragile  cradle,  by  a  gentle  hand,

And  by  hope's  sweet  embraces  kindly  locked
In  visions,  I  on  Eden's  borders  stand.


224


THE NOBLEMAN.


Should  they  deceive  me,  should  the  future  chase
Such  dreamings — I  will  drop  no  bitter  tear ;
But  midst  my  memory's  records,  dying  year  !

Of  thy  past  history  thou  shalt  leave  no  trace.

But  then,  but  then,  Hungaria's  curse  shall  fall
Upon  them,  bringing  hate  and  wail  and  woe,

If  to  her  liberty-arousing  call —

If  thou  shouldst  answer  with  a  thund'ring — No  !

Tear  up  her  garlands,  let  her  hide  her  face
In  shame  and  sorrow,  let  her  disappear
In  darkness — dying,  but  deceitful  year  !

Of  thy  past  histoiy  I  will  find  no  trace.


THE NOBLEMAN.

Berezsre  liuzzak  a  gazemhert.

Tde  Halunk  is  brought  to  the  Derezs's  side,
And  is  paid  for  his  songs  by  your  blows  ;

He  cheated,  he  pilfered,  he  plundered,  he  lied-
What  more  ? Only  Beelzebub  knows.


TO MANY HUNGARIAN ABSENTEES.  225

He  cries  while  you  smite  him,  "  Beware  what  you

do!
When  the  rights  of  a  noble  you  scorn,
You  despise  all  the  laws  of  Hungaria,  when  you

Lay  stripes  on  a  nobleman  born."

A  nobleman — true  !  I  have  made  a  mistake
In  my  manner  of  dealing  with  thee,

I  well  might  have  spared  thee  the  stick  or  the  stake,
For  the  richly  deserved  gallows  tree.


TO  MANY  HUNGAKIAN  ABSENTEES.
Ti  fehelyeh  a  hazdnah  testen.

Ye  ulcers  on  the  body  of  the  state !

Deserting  brotherhood ;
Would  I  were  fiery  caustic  to  abate

Such  evil  blood !

I  am  not  fiery  caustic — cannot  ban

The  traitor — but  can  pour,
The  haughty  forehead  of  the  miching  man,

My  curses  o'er.

15


226  TO MANY HUNGARIAN ABSENTEES.

Is  our  poor  fatherland  so  rich  in  store

That  it  needs  not  your  purse  ?
Is  our  poor  fatherland  so  very  poor —

Could  not  be  worse  ?

Eobbers  !  who  what  your  country's  weal  demands,

Dug  from  her  own  rich  mines,
Waste  on  the  idol-gods  of  other  lands,

And  foreign  shrines.

Ye  saw  your  country  struggling  in  the  dust,

Did  it  not  move  you  then  ?
Did  not  your  eyes  weep  blood-tears — as  they  must —

If  ye  were  men  ?

Come  back  !  Come  back  !  when  struck  with  poverty,

The  pilgrim  staff  in  hand ;
Come  back !  and  supplicating  beggars  be

For  fatherland !

Self-exiled  ! By  the  lash  of  infamy,

Be  homeward,  homeward  driven  !

Bend  on  your  country's  grave  the  suppliant  knee,
To  be  forgiven.


227


OUE  COUNTEY.

Lement  a  nap. JDe  csillagoh —

The  sun  went  down,  but  not  a  starlet

Appeared  in  heaven — all  dark  above —

No  light  around,  except  the  taper

Dim  glimmering,  and  my  homely  love.

That  homely  love's  a  star  in  heaven

That  shines  around  both  near  and  far,

A  home  of  sadness — sad  Hungaria  !

Where  wilt  thou  find  that  lovely  star  ?

And  now  my  taper  flickers  faintly,

And  midnight  comes,  but  in  the  gleam,

Faint  as  it  is,  I  see  a  shadow

Which  half  reveals  a  future  dream.

It  brightens  as  the  day-break  brightens,

Each  flame  brings  forth  a  mightier  flame

There  stand  two  figures  in  the  nimbus —
Old  Magyar  honour — Magyar  fame.


228  OUR COUNTRY.

0  Magyars  !  look  not  on  your  fathers,

But  bid  them  hide  their  brows  in  night ;

Your  eyes  are  weak,  those  suns  are  dazzling,
Ye  cannot  bear  that  blasting  light.

Time  was  those  ancient,  honoured  fathers,

Could  speak  the  threatening,  thundering  word  '

'Twas  like  the  bursting  of  the  storm-wind,
And  Europe,  all  responsive,  heard  I

Great  was  the  Magyar  then — his  country

Honoured — his  name  a  history
Of  glory — now  a  star  extinguished —

A  fallen  star  in  Magyar  sea.

'Twas  long  ago — the  laurel  garland

Was  round  the  Magyar  forehead  bound  ;

Shall  fancy — eagle -pinioned — ever

See  Magyar  hero-brow  recrowned  ?

That  laurel  crown  so  long  has  faded —

So  long  thy  light  has  ceased  to  gleam ;

Thy  greatness  seems  a  myth,  thy  storj^
A  fable  of  the  past — a  dream  !


HISTORY OP THREE HEARTS.  229

Long  have  mine  eyes  been  dry  and  tearless,

But  now  I  weep,  and  can  it  be
That  these  are  dews  of  spring — the  dawning

Of  brighter  days  for  Hungary  ?

And  can  it — can  it  be — a  meteor,

That  for  a  moment  burst  and  blazed —

Lighted  with  brightness  all  the  heavens,
And  sunk  in  darkness  while  we  gazed.

No  !  'tis  a  comet,  whose  returning

Is  sure  as  is  the  march  of  doom  ;
Hungary  shall  hail  it,  blazing,  burning,

It  cannot,  will  not  fail  to  come.


HISTOEY OF  THREE HEARTS.

Volt  egy  lovag,  Mnek  nem  volt  hazdja.
i.
There  was  a  knight,  of  fatherland  bereft, .
That  land  wrecked,  ruined — not  a  vestige  left, ■
Which  waste  and  war,  and  desolation's  flame
Had  spared — it  stood,  the  shadow  of  a  name ;


230  HISTORY OF THKEE HEARTS.


The  knight  looked  on  the  frightful  devastation,

His  blood  was  boiling,  and  his  reddened  brow

Bespoke  a  fierce,  but  silent  indignation,

As  if  the  blood-fount  were  exhausted  now  ;

And  every  drop  outpoured  so  willingly,

Poured  out  in  vain — the  Fatherland  is  dead, —

Dishonoured — doomed. The  branch  is  from  the  tree

Wrenched  rudely  by  the  storm-wind — scattered

The  leaves  through  the  wide  world, — he  saw  the  cloud

That  darkened  all  the  heaven — and  on  the  spot,

Which  was  his  home,  in  agony  he  bowed,

But  even  one  word  of  anguish  uttered  not ;

The  tears  dropped  thickly  on  the  absorbing  grass —

The  grass  upon  his  country's  grave  that  grew  ;

His  tears  were  all  he  had  to  give — alas  !

And  he  would  fain  be  melted  with  the  dew

That  lay  there — then  he  rose — and  looked  around —

Stalked  like  a  ghostly  shadow  o'er  the  ground,

And  flung  a  curse  upon  the  solitude  ;

Then  came  a  thought  to  that  bewildered  mood —

Might  not  a  wandering,  weary  spirit  roam

In  search  of  home,  to  find  at  last  a  home  ?

But  better  than  a  foreign  home  it  were

To  sink  into  enduring  death,  sleep  there

Where  snowy  flowers  might  lie  upon  the  grave —


HISTORY OF THREE HEARTS.  231

What  more  than  rest  would  the  tired  pilgrim  have  ?

So  in  the  silent  woods  he  lingered,  asking

A  pillow  for  his  weariness. The  spot  ,

Was  brightened  by  a  lovely  maiden,  basking

In  sunshine, — in  his  gloom  he  saw  her  not —

Saw  nothing — but  the  wrecked  and  ruined  cot —

Knew  not  how  often,  through  the  forest  shade,

The  starry  lamps  were  looked  on  by  the  maid  ;

How  oft  her  eyes  caught  radiance  from  their  glance  ;

He  knew  not  that  love's  terrors  often  paled

Like  snowy  lilies  that  sad  countenance,

That  what  she  felt  she  uttered  not,  but  quailed,

Under  a  silence-forcing  influence.

O  how  could  she,  mistress  of  house  and  land,

And  name  and  fortune — dream  of  one  who  stood

A  poor  knight  by  the  world's  opinion  banned,

And  tainted  with  the  stains  of  common  blood  ?

For  in  that  spot  the  youth  had  dwelt  of  old —

A  peasant — a  field  labourer — of  the  poor

The  poorest — struggling  both  with  want  and  cold,

He  then  had  seen  the  maiden,  but  no  more

Dared  look  upon  her  face,  than  look  upon

The  blasting  lightning  or  the  mid- day  sun  ;

Yet  wheresoe'er  he  went,  a  ray  that  came

From  that  bright  vision,  filled  his  soul  with  flame —


L6L  HISTORY OF THREE HEARTS.

The  flame  of  love,  whose  ever  fostered  fire
Blazed  brighter  in  the  darkness  of  desire
And  dread,  lest  she,  the  lofty,  might  discover
The  hidden  passion  of  the  lowly  lover  :
So  daringly  presumptuous — yet  perhaps
Heroic  deeds  and  laurel  wreaths  might  bring,
When  many  a  weary,  weary  year  should  lapse,
For  love's  high  altar  a  fit  offering ;
Meanwhile  might  he  not  hope  to  catch — from  far
A  glance — a  glory  from  that  heavenly  star  ?


ii.

And  he  went  forth  again — again  to  strive,

But  not  the  fierce  encounter  to  survive  ;

The  tyrants  hurled  their  thunder  at  his  head —

But  tyrant's  thunder  cannot  wake  the  dead  ;

And  there  he  sleeps  the  eternal  sleep — no  stone

To  mark  his  resting  place — the  coarse  grass  grown*

Upon  a  little  hillock,  shows  the  spot —

What  could  a  stone  say  more  ? Alas  !  Is  not

His  maiden's  heart  to  stone  all  petrified  ?

And  will  "not  his  dear  memory  more  abide

In  grateful  souls,  with  living  thoughts  enshrined  ;

She  had  no  more  concern  with  earth — she  died —

The  loved  one — and  she  slumbers  at  his  side.


THE HUNGARIAN NATION.  233

III.

They  left  a  servant — only  one — behind,
Who  came  heart-broken  ;  but  the  griefs,  the  care,
"Were  all  too  heavy — all  too  hard  to  bear,
And  he  sought  death  to  soothe  his  troubled  mind.
At  midnight,  when  the  tomb-gates  open  wide,
A  wanderer  sought  the  spot,  where  lay  interred
His  love,  and  looking  round  on  every  side,
Asked  for  the  idol  of  his  soul — nought  stirred  ;
She  was  not  there — she,  too,  at  midnight  toll,
Had  sought  the  vanished  idol  of  her  soul ;
'  Twas  a  vain  seeking — like  a  wandering  bird
He,  too,  had  fled — and  from  a  foreign  strand —
Asks — Do  the  chains  still  hold  my  Fatherland  ?


THE  HUNGABIAN  NATION.
Van-e  egy  mar  oh  fold  a  magyar  Jiazdban.

Is  there  in  Magyar  land  a  single  spot

Unsanctined  by  hero  Magyar  blood  ?
Has  not  that  blood  which  warmed  our  sires  im
bued

Our  country's  soil, — Alas  !  the  scathing  blot
Of  shame  is  on  their  sons'  ingratitude.


234  THE HUNGARIAN NATION.

Has  falsehood  superseded  ancient  truth  ?

Have  the  old  lions  given  birth  to  hares  ?

0  fathers,  rich  in  glory  !  thro'  your  tears
Can  ye  forgive  the  now  degenerate  youth

That  your  proud  name,  but  not  your  glory  bears.

Has  not  this  race  of  their  forefathers  heard  ?

Can  the  old  blood  run  purely  through  their  veins?

0  if  a  drop  of  that  old  blood  remains,
By  some  redeeming  deed — some  wakening  word —

'  Twill  usher  Freedom  in  and  break  our  chains.


Why  should  we  tarry  ? Are  we  humbled  down
To  very  beasts  of  burden — satisfied
To  eat  the  bread,  by  despot  hands  supplied —

Blanked  in  the  records  of  the  world's  renown —
Than  so  to  live,  'twere  better  to  have  died.


Shame  on  thee,  outraged  nation ! Shame  on  thee.
Who  once  didst  fill,  in  the  heroic  age
Of  history's  pages,  a  transcendant  page,

And  now  thou  kneelest  in  thine  infamy,

A  poor  slave  victim  on  the  vulgar  stage.


THE KINGDOM OF LOVE.  235

And  woe,  and  woe  is  mine  !  who  felt  compelled

To  lift  my  hand  to  scourge  my  own  dear  mother ;
0  sadly  fated  son  !  and  could  no  other

Inflict  those  bleeding  wounds — my  heart  rebelled
. While  my  hand  smote — I  had  no  sire — no  brother

To  help  me. Shall  I  then  be  silent  ? No !

Whate'er  be  mine,  of  suffering,  sorrow,  shame,
In  spite  of  heaven  itself,  my  country's  name,
Until  redeemed,  I'll  doom  to  waste  and  woe-
Till  her  soul  rises,  or  mine  sinks  below.


THE  KINGDOM  OF  LOYE.

AN ALLEGORICAL DREAM.

I  dreamt  a  wondrous  dream,

I  know  not  if  in  sleeping  or  awaking ;

But  that  I  dreamt  I  know,  since  no  mistaking

Of  things  that  are  for  things  that  only  seem

Could  fill  the  soul  with  such  a  burning  glow,

Or  make  my  hand  write  tremblingly — as  now.

I  lingered  on  a  long  and  lonesome  way ;
But  no  !  it  was  not  lingering,  for  I  sped
Hurriedly  forward,  tho'  I  seemed  to  stay —


236


THE KINGDOM OF LOVE.


'  Twas  wearying — from  the  dullness  and  delay,

And  the  monotony  around  me  spread.

And  those  who  passed  or  dwelt  there  seemed  imbued

With  the  inaction  of  the  solitude  ;

Passionless — satisfied — 0  how  I  strove

To  leave  that  land  behind  me — to  escape

From  that  oppressive  power  whose  every  shape

Was  clad  in  doubt  and  gloom,  but  none  in  love.

At  last  I  reached  the  boundary  of  the  sands,
And  there  a  diarnantine  portal  stands,
With  rainbow  letters  fringed  with  gold  above —
"  Kingdom  of  Love  ! "

There  was  a  "  Welcome  !  "  waiting  on  the  watch  ;
Raptured,  I  seized  the  latch —
Opened  the  door,  and  boldly  rushed  within —
And  saw — 0  heavenly  vision  !  all  around —
A  more  enchanting,  more  enrapturing  scene
Than  poet  or  than  painter  ever  found
When  they  in  earth  have  pictured  heavenly  gods,
And  a  blest  Paradise  for  their  abodes.

A  wide  and  fertile  vale,  a  fancy's  dream,
With  myriad  flowers,  and  rose  trees  towering  high,
As  oaks  towards  the  sky  :
And  by  soft  song  accompanied,  a  stream
Gliding,  but  lingering,  oft  turned  back  to  kiss


THE KINGDOM OF LOVE.  237

The  banks  it  left,  as  if  some  thought  of  bliss —

Some  memory  sweet  were  there — and  everywhere

Enchantments  all -mysterious  filled  the  air  ;

Odours  and  many  coloured  beams  of  light,

Columns  of  crystal,  gems  reflecting  bright,

The  grand  romantic  statues  girding  round

That  amphitheatre,  and  every  height

With  clouds  of  pure  translucent  gold  was  crowned.

Entranced,  I  looked  around  me — and  forgot

To  close  the  open  door — wildered  I  stood,

Gazing  upon  that  clear  melodious  flood,

Whose  magic  magnet  influence  I  could  not

Eesist,  and  nearer  to  its  banks  I  drew —

An  emerald  field,  flower  decked,  I  wandered  thro' ;

I  saw  young  groups  bending  their  heads  toward

Something  attractive  in  the  tangled  sward,

And  picked  up  what  to  my  eyes  seemed  either

A  needle  or  a  feather.

"  What  seek  ye  here ?  "  I  asked.  "A  poisonous  weed ! "

One  answered,  and  again  inclined  his  head ;

"  And  when  discovered,  tell  me  for  what  use?"

"  To  press  the  foliage,  and  to  sip  its  juice."

I  hastened  back  ;  the  disenchantment  gave

Strong  impulse  to  my  footsteps — tired  I  found

A  resting  place  on  the  rose-covered  ground ;

Beneath  a  tree  I  sat — to  weariness  a  slave —


238  THE KINGDOM OF LOVE.

To  disappointment — to  disgust — strange  fear —

A  wild  perplexity  had  mastered  me

When  I  look'd  upward,  and  saw  hanging  there,

A  youth  upon  the  tree.

Startled,  I  looked  around — one,  two,  three,  four —

And  each  its  own  suspended  victim  bore,

Swinging  aloft ; — towards  the  stream  I  fled,

Driven  thitherward  by  dread,

And  sought  wherewith  to  ford  it. Then  I  cried,

"Love's  holy  kingdom's  on  the  farther  side,"

And  sprang  into  a  boat ;  I  seized  the  rudder,

And  midst  the  rushes  floating — with  a  shudder

Saw  many  corpses — youths  and  maidens — seem

Like  frightened  ghosts  that  leaped  into  the  stream.

I  reached  the  distant  bank — pale,  trembling,  weary,
And  images  of  terror  dark  and  dreary —
And  poison-cups — and  sorcery-cauldrons  rose —
There  was  no  resting  place  and  no  repose.
There  spouted  from  the  mountain-tops  a  flood
Of  brains  and  blood  ;
And  on  that  blooming  border
Were  death  and  discord,  darkness  and  disorder.
I  ran  about  in  wild  despair,
I  ran  about,  lost  and  bewildered  there  ;
One  black,  black  canopy  o'ershadowed  all —


world's  history.  239

Self-nmrder — hopeless  misery — fall  on  fall !

But  the  meadows  laughed  out  serene,
And  beautiful  flowers  shone  thro'  the  green  ;
The  musical  stream,  and  the  azure  sky,
They  laughed  out  with  a  sparkling  joy  :
Blossoming  here,  and  blossoming  there —
Peace  and  blessedness  everywhere  !


WORLD'S  HISTORY.
VildgtorUnet  I


0  thou  world's  history  !  0  thou  book  of  wonders  !
Each  reads  thy  pages  with  a  different  breath ;
Musical  blessings  here,  there  cursing  thunders  :
Now  smiles  of  life,  and  then  the  frowns  of  death.
Thou  bearest  in  one  hand  a  flashing  sword,
"  Go  forth  and  conquer  "  is  thy  sovereign  word,
"  For  help  is  wanted — to  the  rescue — Go  1 "
And  to  another — ■"  Sheathe  the  sword,  and  know
Thou  draw'st  it  forth  in  vain,  in  vain  thou  strivest,
Against  inexorable  fate  thou  drivest ;
The  world  was  doomed  to  slavery — and  shall  be —
Thou  canst  not  change  nor  check  its  destiny."


STEPHEX AVSTIX, ritlNTEK. HEHTFOEJ).


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide
Treatment  Date:  June  2007

PreservationTechnologies

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION

t11  Thomson  Park  Drive
Cranberry  Township,  PA  1 6066
(724)779-2111


ihH5.5L.?f  congress


0  019  373  111  9
