Methods and Aims in Archaeology (Petrie, 1904)
==============================================
W. M. Flinders Petrie — Methods and Aims in Archaeology (London, 1904), public domain. The first scientific excavation manual. Scan via Internet Archive (in.ernet.dli.2015.536229). Raw OCR, not proofread.




METHODS AND AIMS 


archaeology 


METHODS & AIMS 

IN 

ARCHAEOLOGY 


BY 


W. M. FLINDERS PETRIE 

HON, D.C.I,,, LL.D., LIT. D, , PH.D. : If.R.S. ; HON. T.S.A.(SCOT. ) : 


Member of the Imperial German Archaeological Institute ; 
Member of the Society of Northern Antiquaries ; 
Member of the Roman Society of Anthropology ; 
Edwards Professor of Egyptology, University College, London. 


WITH 66 illustrations 


JLontun 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited 

NEW YORK : THE MACMILT^AN COMPANY 

1904 


^ ll rights rtssrved 


TO MY FRIENDS 

F. LL. GRIFFITH, 

E. A. GARDNER, 

F. J. BLISS, 

H. CARTER, 

B, P. GRENFELL, 

J. E. QUIBELL, 

J. DUNCAN, 

H. F. PETRIE, 

N. 0E O. DAVIES, 

' A. C. MACE, 

D. RANDALL-MACIVER, 

B. ORME, 

A. E. WEIGALL, 

M. A. MURRAY, 

L. ECKENSTEIN, 

H. STANNUS, 

C. T. CURRELLY, 

E. R. AYRTON, 

WHO HAVE JOINED IN VARIOUS PORTIONS OP THE WORK HERE 
DESCRIBED, I884-I903. 


central \EOl.OG!GAlb 

Aoc. 2^&(Lf .. 

..<.7. 6 - SS 

OWiKo. .. 


PREFACE 


Archaeology is the latest born of the sciences. 
It has but scarcely struggled into freedom, out of 
the swaddling clothes Of dilettante speculations. It 
it still attracted by pretty things, rather than by real 
knowledge. It has to find shelter with the Fine 
Arts or with History, and not a single home has yet 
been provided for its real growth. 

All other sciences deal with the things around us ; 
with subjects which may, or may not, affect us. 
Even medical sciences are.’ concerned with the 
mechanical structure of the body, rather than with 
the nature and abilities of the mind. But the science 
which enquires 'into ’all the products and works of 
our own species, which shows what man has been 
doing in all ages and under all conditions, which 
i-eveals his mind, his thoughts, his tastes, his feelings, 
— such a science touches us more closely than any 
other. 

By this science, of which History forms a part, 
we trace the nature of man, age after age,' — his 


viii 


PREFACE 


capacities, his abilities ; we learn where he suc- 
ceeds, where he fails, and what his possibilities 
may be. 

From another point of view the subject should be 
considered ; it gives a more truly “ liberal education ” 
than any other subject, as at present taught. A 
complete archaeological training would I'equire a full 
knowledge of history and art, a fair use of languages, 
and a working familiarity with many sciences. The 
one-sided growth of modern training, which produces 
a B.A. who knows nothing of natural science, or else 
a B.Sc. who knows nothing of human nature, is 
assuredly not the ideal for a reasonable man. 
Archaeology, — the knowledge of how man has 
acquired his present position and powers — is one of 
the widest studies, best fitted to open the mind, and 
to produce that type of wide interests and toleration 
which is the highest result of education. 

Though this volume is a book of reference for 
those engaged in actual work, yet it will also serve 
to give the public a view of the way in which this 
work is done, the mode in which results are obtained, 
the ends which are pursued, and the .important 
questions which must be considered. We have 
nothing here to do with the details of the facts 
discovered ; but deal only with the methods and aims, 
which have been slowly learned in a quarter of a 
century. Yet every year there are fresh methods to 
add, and more clear views of the aims ; and far more 


PREFACE 


ix 


might easily have been said about each of the 
subjects here discussed. 

If in this outline there is much more reference to 
Egypt than to other countries, it is for the reason 
that most of ray own work has lain there ; and there 
is the more need to deal with that land, as more 
exploration is going on ’there than elsewhere. 

I have to thank my friends for six of the 
photographs here used. 

W. M. FLINDERS PETRIE. 


University College, London. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER I 

The Excavator 

PAGE 

Purpose, 1 ; Character, 2 ; Experience, 3 ; Organiza- 
tion, 5 j Acquirements, 5 ; Demands of the 
work, 6 ....... . 1-8 


CHAPTER II 

Discrimination 

Temples, g ; Towns, 10; Cemeteries, 11 ; Indications, 

12; Productions, 14; Pottery, 16; Style, 17; 

Visual memory, 19 . . • . • • 9~i9 


CHAPTER III 

The Labourers 

Quality, 20 ; Education, 21 ; Control, 22 ; Substitution, 

23 ; Overseers, 24 ; Direct system, 26 ; Day .pay, 

27 ; Piecework, 29 ; Day and piece work, 30 ; 
Rewards, 33 ; Accounts, 35 ; Native ways, 37 . 20-40 

xi 


CONTENTS 


xii 


CHAPTER IV 

' Arrangement ok Work 

PAGE 

Clearances, 41 ; Turning over, 43; Raising earth, 44; 

Tracing walls, 46 , . . . . .41-47 


CHAPTER V 

Recording in the Field 

Need of record, 48 ; Value of record, 50 ; Resulting 
view, so; Marking, 51; Nature of notes, 52; 
Planning, 53; Plotting, 55 4S-59 


CHAPTER VI 

Copying 

Paper squeezes, 60; Dry squeezes, 61 ; Casting, 64 ; 
Drawing, 68 ; Restored forms, 7 1 ; Copying 
inscriptions, 72 ... . . , . 60-72 


CHAPTER VII 

, Photographing 

The Camera, 73 ; Preparing objects, 76 ; Lighting, 77 ; 
Arrangement of objects, 79; Stereographs, 8l ; 
Developing, 82 , 

CHAPTER VIII 
PRE.SERVAT10N OF Objects 
S tone, 86 ; Pottery, 88 ; Textiles, 89 ; Wood, 89 ; 
Ivoiy, 91 ; Papyri, 93 ; Beadwork, 95 ; Stucco,' 

96 i Gold, 98 ; Silver, 98 ; Copper, 99 ; Bronze, 
100; Lead, 102 ; Iron, 102; Sorting, 102 , 8 


CONTENTS 


xiii 


CHAPTER IX 

Packing 

PAGE 

Blocks, 105 ; Long objects, io6 ; Heavy stones, 107 ; 

Pottery, 108; Softening, 109; Cases, no; 
Unpacking, iii 1 05-1 13 


CHAPTER X 

Publication 

Arrangement, 114; Plates, 115 ; Processes, 117; 

Editions, 1 19; Text, 120; Publishing, 120 . 1 14-121 


CHAPTER XI 

Systematic Archaeology 

Systems of work, 122 ; Need of a corpus, 133 ; Ex- 
ample of corpus, 124; Utility, 125 ; Successive 
ages, 126; Sequences, 127; Sequence dates, 

129; Conservation, 130; Buildings, 130; 

Lighting, 13 1 ; Grouping, 132; National Re- 
pository, 133 ....... 122-135 


CHAPTER XII 

Archaeological Evidence 

Nature of proof, 136; Legal evidence, 136; Wit- 
nesses, 138; Material facts, 138; Exhaustion, 
139; Probabilities, 139; Legal proof, 140; 
Egypt and Europe, 141 ; In XXVlth Dynasty, 
143; XVIIIth Dynasty paintings, 144; Burnt 
groups, 145 ; Rubbish mounds, 147 ; Houses, 


f ' CONTENTS 

PAGE 

148; Scarabs, 149; Tombs in Egypt, 150; 

Tombs in Greece, 152 ; Variation with date, 153 ; 

Style, 154 ; Recapitulation, 155 ; Xllth Dynasty, 

Kahun, 156; Xllth Dynasty in Crete, 158; 
Pan-graves, 159 ; Vlth to Illrd Dynasties, 162 ; 

1 st Dynasty Aegean, 164; 1 st Dynasty Cretan, 

166; Prehistoric, 167 ..... 136-168 


CHAPTER XIII 

** Ethics of Archaeology 

Individual rights, 169; Destruction, 170; Restora- 
tion, 172; Sacrifices, 173; Responsibility, 174; 

Rights of the future, 175 ; Rights of the past, 

176; Duties, 178; Future of museums, 180; 
Publications, 1S2; State claims, 183; State 
rights, 184; Excavating laws, 187 . . . 169-18S 

CHAPTER XIV 

The Fascination of History .... 189-193 


INDEX 


. 195-208 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIGURE I’AGE 


I. 

Chain of boys clearing the Osireion 

. . Frofti. 

2 ^ 

Going up the desert . 

I 

4- 

Tent-life ..... 

. 6 

S- 

Hut-life ..... 

6 

6. 

Temple at El Hibeh 

9 

7- 

Temple at Tanis .... 

. 9 

8. 

Mound at Defeneh 

. . . 10 

9 - 

Cemetery of Zuweleyn . 

. . . 10 

10. 

Copper and bronze adzes 

. 14 

1 1. 

Cutting-out knives 

. 15 

12. 

Typical forms of pottery 

16 

13- 

Lad and girl at Tanis . 

. . . 20 

14. 

Three little Muhameds . 

. 20 

IS. 

Girls and boys at Tanis 

. 24 

16. 

Girls sorting durra 

. 24 

17- 

Line of carrier boys, Abydos . 

• 30 

18. 

Heaps thrown out, Abydos . 

. 30 

19 - 

Lifting and carrying, Abydos . 

■ 32 

20. 

Carrying at Royal Tombs 

• 32 

21. 

Account card for wages 

. 38 


XV 


XVI 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIGURE 

22 , Carrier boys throwing, Abydos 

PAGE 

. 41 

33. Town site, turned over, Kahun 

. 41 

24. Cutting down top of work 

. 42 

■ 25. Cemetery, Tell el Yelutdiyeh . 

• 43 

26. Clearing a tomb, Abydos 

. 43 

27. Chain at tomb of Usertesen II 

■ 44 

28. Chains of men at tomb of Den 

■ 44 

29. Plan measured from two lines 

■ 54 

30. Method of plotting survey 

. 56 

31, Copy drawn on paper squeeze 

. 62 

32, System of numbering sheets . 

. 63 

33. Paper squeeze .... 

. 64 

34. Plaster cast from paper . 

. 64 

35. Inventory sheet .... 

, 70 

36. Frame for drawing vases 

. 71 

37. Weathered stone, sanded 

. 71 

38. Throwing sand ; drop-shutter view . 

• 75 

39, Girls resting ; diagonal mirror view 

• 75 

40. Tablet, with black and white filling 

. 76 

41. Hypocephalus, with white filling 

. 76 

42. Wooden floor of Azab . 

• 77 

43. Prehistoric grave, Naqada 

. 77 

44. Ebony negress .... 

. 78 

45. In tomb of Sem-nefer . 

. 78 

46. Foundation deposit, Aahmes II 

. 80 

47. Bracelet of King Zer . 

80 

48. Pavement, Tell el Amarna 

. 88 

49. Fresco of princesses. Tell el Amarna 

. 88 

So. Box with diagonal bars . 

■ . . 106 

51. Tray for heavy stones . 

. 107 

52. Box with three-way grain 

. . . no 


LIST OF illustrations 


xvii 


FIGURE 

53. Box end, nailed diagonally . , . - . 

PAGE 

. Ill 


54. Nile boat ....... 

. II 2 

f" ' 

fl- 55. Camels, starting and returning 

' . II 2 


56. Naukratite warrior ..... 

• 144 


57. Graeco-Egyptian figures .... 

■ 144 

■'l ’ ’ 

58. Aegean vase, Tahutmes III . 

. 152 


59. False-necked vases ..... 

• IS 4 

t? ' 

60. Celtic and pan-grave pottery .... 

. 160 


61. Black incised pottery ..... 

. 161 

' ' 

63. Buttons, Vllth Dynasty .... 

. 162 

‘y. 

63. Aegean pottery. Royal Tombs 

. 16S 


64. Black pottery, Cretan ..... 

. i66 

t 

65. Khufu, builder of the great pyramid 

■ 17.8 

|s-, 

66. Mer-en-ptah, Pharaoh of the Exodus 

. 178 


i 


CHAPTER I 

THE EXCAVATOR 

In few kinds of work are the results so directly 
dependent on the personality of the worker as they 
are in excavating. The old saying that 
a man finds what he looks for in a 
subject, is too true ; or if he has not enough insight 
to ensure finding what he looks for, it is at least 
sadly true that he does not find anything that he 
does not look for. Whether it be inscriptions, 
carvings, papyri, or mummies that excavators have 
been seeking, they have seldom preserved or cared 
for anything but their own limited object. 

Of late years the notion of digging merely for 
profitable spoil, or to yield a new excitement to the 
jaded, has spread unpleasantly — at least in Egypt. 
A concession to dig is sought much like a grant of 
a monastery at the Dissolution : the man who has 
influence or push, a title or a trade connection, claims 
to try his luck at the spoils of the land. Gold 
digging has at least no moral responsibility, beyond 
the ruin of the speculator ; but spoiling the past has 
an acute moral wrong in it, which those who do it 

B 


2 


THE EXCAVATOR 


' may be charitably supposed to be too ignorant or 
unintelligent to see or realise. 

And some systematic outline of archaeological 
methods and aims is needed, not only for those 
whose moral sense is so untrained that they may 
ruin a site, and say " I have done no wi'ong ” ; but 
it may even profit those who take up the name of 
archaeology when they mean solely art, or inscriptions, 
or some single branch of the subject. The most 
familiar teaching entitled archaeological is that of 
Classical Archaeology, which in the ways* of most 
teachers means Greek sculpture and vase paintings. 
In spite of all the professorships and schools of that 
subject, we are still so profoundly ignorant of the 
archaeology of Greece and Italy that there is scarcely 
a single class of common objects of which any one 
knows the history and transformations. Certainly 
we know far less of the archaeology of classical lands 
than we do of that of Egypt. 

If, then, the character of the excavator thus 
determines his results, our first step is to consider 
ouaraoter. character, and to give some outline 

of the aptitudes and acquirements — the 
wit and the cunning, as our forefathers well distin- 
guished them — which are wanted in order to avoid 
doing more harm than good. 

^ Firstly in every subject there is the essential 
division between those who work to live, and those 
who live to work — the commercial, and the scientific 
or artistic aim ; — those who merely do what will best 
provide them a living, and those whose work is their 
honour and the end of their being. These two 
halves of mankind are by no means to be found 


CHARACTER AND EXPERIENCE 


3 


ready labelled by their professions. The R.A. who 
drops his aspirations because portraits pay best, the 
scientific scholar who patents every invention he can, 
are of the true commercial spirit, and verily they 
have their reward. Rather let us honour the pro- 
fessed dealer who will sooner sell a group to a 
museum than make a larger profit by playing to the 
wealthy dilettante and scattering things. Let us be 
quit, in archaeology at least, of the brandy-and-soda 
young man who manipulates his “ expenses,” of the 
adventurous speculator, of those who think that a title 
or a long purse glorifies any vanity or selfishness. 

Without the ideal of solid continuous work, certain, 
accurate, and permanent, — archaeology is as futile 
as any other pursuit. Money alone will not do the 
work ; brains are the first requisite. A hundred 
pounds intelligently spent will do more good and 
far lesff harm than ten thousand squandered in doing 
damage. Mere money gives no moral right to upset 
things according to the whim of one pei'son. Even 
scholarship is by no means all that is wanted ; the 
engineering training of mind and senses which Prof. 
Perry advocates will really fit an archaeologist better 
for excavating than book-work can alone. Best of 
all is the combination of the scholar and the engineer, 
the man of languages and the man of physics and 
mathematics, when such can be found. So much 
for the wit, and now of the cunning that is wanted. 

The most needful of all acquisitions is archaeo- 
logical experience. Without knowing' well all the 
objects that are usually met with in an 
ancient civilisation, there is no possible 
insight or understanding, the meaning of what is met 


4 


THE EXCAVATOR 


with cannot be grasped, and the most curious 
mistakes are made. A cloud is “ very like a whale,” 
the pre-Christian cross is found everywhere, an arrow- 
straightener is called a ceremonial staff, an oil-press 
becomes a sacred trilithon, half a jackal is called a 
locust, and lathe chucks become “ coal money.” Of 
course the needed experience has to be gradually 
built up, and those who first explore a civilisation 
must work through many mistakes. When I first 
came to Egypt Dr. Birch begged me to pack and 
send to him a box of pottery fragments from each 
great town, on the chance that from the known 
history of the sites some guess could be made as to 
the age of the object^ so complete was the ignorance 
of the archaeology a quarter of a century ago. But 
when such knowledge has been once accumulated, it 
is the first duty of any excavator to make himself 
well acquainted with it before he attempts to dis- 
cover more. At present the archaeological experience 
that should be acquired before doing any responsible 
work in any country ought to cover the history ,jof 
the pottery century by century, the history of beads, 
of tools and weapons, of the styles of arc, of the 
styles of inscriptions, of the burial furniture, and of 
the many small objects which are now well known 
and dated, better’in Egypt than perhaps in any other 
country, 

Next to tins is needed & ^ood knowledge of tlie 
history. Not only every dynasty, but every king of 
whom anything is known, should be familiar. The 
general course of the civilisation, the foi'eign influences 
which affected the country, and the conditions at 
different periods, should be clearly in mind. With- 


ORGANIZATION AND ACQUIREMENTS 5 

out such ideas the value and meaning of discoveries 
cannot be grasped, and important clues and fresh 
knowledge may be passed by. 

Organization, both of the plan of work, and of ' 
the labourers, is very necessary. Scheming how to 

extract all that is possible from a sfiven 
. r,,,., j. Organization, 

site, how to make use of all the condi- 
tions, how to avoid difficulties ; and training labourers, 
keeping them all firmly in hand, making them all 
friends without allowing familiarity, getting their full 
confidence and their goodwill ; — these requirements 
certainly rank high in an excavator’s outfit. 

The power of conserving material and informa- 
tion ; of observing all that ean be gleaned ; of 

noticing trifling details which may imply 

° ° , - . . ^ , Acquirements. 

a great deal else ; of acquiring and 
building up a mental picture ; of fitting everything 
into place, and not losing or missing any possible 
clues )' — all this is the soul of the work, and without 
it excavating is mere dumb plodding. 

-.Of more external subjects, such as may be deputed 
to other helpers, drawing is mainly wanted ; more in 
mechanical exactitude of facsimile-copying than in 
freehand or purely artistic work. Surveying and 
practical mathematics, with plan drawing, are almost 
always involved- in dealing with any site. Photo- 
graphy is incessantly in use, both during the course 
of the working and for preparing publications. The 
outlines of chemistry and physics and a good know- 
ledge of materials are necessary to avoid blunders 
in handling objects and in describing them. The 
ancient language of a country, all important as it is 
in the study of remains, is yet in its cifitical aspects 


6 


THE EXCAVATOR 


, not so essential during field-work. But the excavator 
should at least be able to take the sense of all written 
material which he finds ; and in Egypt that should 
include hieroglyphic, hieratic, demotic, Greek, and 
^ Coptic writing. The spoken language of the country 
should be fluently acquired for simple purposes, so 
as to be able to direct workmen, make bargains, and 
follow what is going on. To be dependent on a 
cook, a dragoman, or a donkey boy, is very unsafe, 
and prevents that close study of the workmen which 
is needed for making the best use of them. And a 
general eye to the safety and condition of everything, 
both of work, antiquities, and stores, is incessantly 
wanted if a camp is to be successful and prosperous. 

Many of these requirements can well be under- 
taken by different people j in fact, not a single living 
person combines all of the requisite qualities for 
complete archaeological work. But all of these 
requirements must be fulfilled by different members 
in a party, if they are to command success as well as 
deserve it. In all points, imagination and insight, 
the sense of all the possibilities of a case, is to be 
the medium of thought both in theoretical and in 
practical affairs. 

In the externals of the work an excavator should 
be always his own best workman. If he be the 
Domanasoftha ■‘’frongest on the place, so much the 
better; but at all events he should be 
the most able in all matters of skill and ability. 
Where anything is found it should be the hands of 
the master that clear it from the soil ; the pick and 
the knife should be in his hands every day, and his 
readiness should be shown by the shortness of his 


DEMANDS OF THE WORK 


7 


finger-nails and the toughness of his skin. After a 
week of work in the soil, feeling for delicate things 
in a way that no tools can do, the skin almost wears 
through, and the nails break down. But a week or 
two more at it, and the excavator grows his gloves, 
and is in a fit state for business, with the skin well 
thickened, and ready to finger through tons of 
grit and sand. Nothing can be a substitute for 
finger-work in extracting objects, and clearing ground 
delicately ; and one might as well try to play the 
violin in a pair of gloves as profess to excavate with 
clean fingers and a pretty skin. It need hardly be 
said that clothing must correspond to the work ; and 
there must never be a thought about clothes when 
one kneels in wet mud, scrapes through narrow 
passages, or sits waist deep in dust. To attempt 
serious work in pretty suits, shiny leggings, or 
starched collars, would be like mountaineering in 
evening dress, or remind one of the old prints of 
cricketers batting in chimney-pot hats. The man 
who cannot enjoy his work without regard to appear- 
ances, who will not strip and go into the water, or 
slither on slimy mud through unknown passages, 
had better not profess to excavate. Alongside of 
his men he must live, in work hours and out ; every 
workman should come to him at all times for help 
and advice. His courtyard must be the pay office 
and the court of appeal for every one ; and continual 
attention should be freely given to the many little 
troubles of those who are to be kept properly in 
hand. To suppose that work can be controlled 
from a distant hotel, where the master lives in state 
and luxury completely out of touch with his men, is 


THE EXCAVATOR 


a fallacy, like playing at farming or at stockbroking : 
it may be amusing, but it is not business. And 
whatever is not businesslike in archaeology is a waste 
of the scanty material which should be left for those 
who know how to use it. An excavator must make 
up his mind to do his work thoroughly and truly, 
or else to leave it alone for others who will take the 
trouble which it deserves and requires. 


TUHI'i.E KUINS. 

Kig. 7- Tallis, witli obelisk 


Kig. 6 El Hilieli, 


CHAPTER II 


DISCRIMINATION 

The observing of resemblances and differences, and 
the memory of physical appearances required for 
this, are absolute requisites for carrying on the duties 
of excavating. Here we deal with the appearances 
in a land of sun-dried brickwork, where the accumula- 
tions are great, as in Egypt, Syria, and Mesopotamia. 
In a rocky land, such as Greece, there is not the 
same sheltering mud, and the appearances are there- 
fore very different. 

The nature of a site can be guessed pretty closely 

from its aspect. A wide open space with mounds 

around it is almost certainly a temple 
. , . Temples. 

Site ; and if there are stone chips strewn 

over it, no doubt remains as to its nature (Figs. 6, 7). 
The temples being of stone from the Xllth Dynasty 
onwards, they were ruined by the removal of the , 
material in each age of disruption ; but the houses 
of the towns, being always of mud brick, continually 
crumbled and decayed, and so filled up the ground 
with rubbish. In Egypt mud-brick towns accumu- 
late at about 20 inches in a century ; or in the 
rainy Syrian climate at about 50 inches. Herodotus 
describes walking on the roofs of the houses and 


9 


10 


DISCRIMINATION 


seeing down into the temple precincts ; and in every 
great site in Egypt, such as Tanis, Buto, Bubastis, 
Memphis, or Koptos, the plain of temple ruins had 
the house mounds far above it on all sides. The 
temples were ruined both for building-stone and for 
lime-burning. It is rare to get any portions of a 
limestone building left ; sandstone is often found, 
and all the great temples which remain are of sand- 
stone ; granite generally has lasted, except where it 
has been split up in Roman times for millstones. 
The search for limestone has led to whole buildings 
being upset in order to extract the limestone founda- 
tions. The basalt pavement of Khufu, the granite 
pylon of Crocodilopolis, and probably the granite 
temple of Iseum, have been overthrown thus. 
Especially in the Delta, where no limestone hills are 
accessible, this destructive search for lime has been 
unrelenting in all ages ; and it is seldom that 
ancient limestone is now met with. Hence all that 
can generally be seen of a temple site is a plain of 
dust with a few tumbled blocks of granite, the ex- 
posed tops of which are entirely weathered as 
rounded masses. Five or ten feet down there may 
be a rich harvest of carvings and inscriptions. 

A town site is always recognised (Fig. 8) by its 
mounds of crumbling mud brick, strewn with pot- 

Towna sherds if in Upper Egypt, or with burnt 
red bricks on the later mounds of the 
Delta. Whenever a native begins to describe a site 
in Lower Egypt, one inquires if there is red brick, 
and if so there is no need to listen further. Generally 
it is possible to date the latest age of a town by the 
potsherds lying on the surface ; and to allow a rate 


Fig. 8. Moviiids of fori, Dtfeiieli. | Fig. 9. Sarcophagi al Ziiwelcyn. 


TOWNS AND CEMETERIES 


1 1 

of growth of 20 inches a century down to the visible 
level ; if that gives a long period we may further 
carry down the certainly artificial level by 4 inches 
in a century for the Nile deposits when in the 
cultivated ground. For instance, there are mounds 
in the Delta about 40 feet high, ending about 
500 A.D. ; this gives about 40 feet of rise, equal to 
about 2400 years, or say 2000 B.C., for the age at 
the present ground level. But the visible base was 
about S feet lower at 500 A.D. ; and the human 
deposit rising at 20 inches a century has been over- 
laid at the rate of 4 inches a century by the Nile 
deposit. Hence the age may be reckoned by a 
depth of 45 feet accumulated at 16 inches a century 
before 500 A.D. or about 2900 B.c. No exact 
conclusion could be based on this ; but it is a 
valuable clue to the age to v'hich the yet unseen 
foundation of a town may most likely belong. 
Town mounds and ruins of buildings have generally 
symmetrical forms, weathered away uniformly on all 
sides. But around towns are often heaps of rubbish 
thrown out, the best-known example of this being 
the immense heaps behind Cairo ; and such ac- 
cumulations usually show their nature by the two 
slopes, the gi'adual walk-up slope, and the steep 
thrown-down slope. 

The cemetery sites on the desert have always 
been more or less plundered anciently. A pre- 
historic site may have no external 
trace, as the blown sand may cover it 
so evenly that there is no suspicion of anything 
lying beneath. But on a gravel surface there are 
generally some indications left of the hollows of the 


12 


DISCRIMINATION 


graves, and scraps of broken pottery left about by 
the plunderers (Fig. 9). The historic cemeteries 
are generally easier to see, as they are in rising 
ground, and the holes of .the tomb pits show on the 
surface. The difficulty is not to find the site of a 
cemetery, but to find a grave in it which still 
contains anything. As a rule, any tomb pit which 
appears still undisturbed has been left either because 
it belongs to an unfinished tomb with nothing in it, 
or because the tomb has already been reached from 
elsewhere. At Medum an untouched walling up of 
a chamber had been left, because the plunderers had 
tunnelled under the mass of the tomb and broken 
through the floor of the chamber. At Dendereh 
the floor of the chamber was entire, with the lid of 
the sarcophagus sunk in it, yet untouched ; it had 
been left so because the plunderers had mined 
through from the outside under the floor to the 
sarcophagus, and broken through the side of it with- 
out touching the chamber. Some untouched tombs 
were left because the burials in them were known to 
be so poor that they were not worth opening. All 
this points to the plundering being mostly done 
during the lifetime of those who saw the burial. 
Usually only one tomb in ten contains anything 
noticeable ; and it is only one in a hundred that 
repays the digging of the other ninety-nine. 

In general, on looking over a site every indication 
must be observed. Sometimes there may be a slight 
Indications, ^^^f^^nce in vegetation, showing the 
positions of walls or of pits. In colder 
climates differences are shown by the melting of hoar 
frost or snow; as in the square of S. Domenico at 


INDICATIONS 


13 


Bologna, where some large patches — probably of 
ashes — show through the cobble paving during a 
thaw. A shower of rain will show much in drying ; 
and, after a rare storm in Egypt, there are two or 
three precious hours when the buried walls show 
clearly on the ground, and should be hurriedly scored 
down before the hot sun removes the traces. A 
driving wind will bare the ground so that the harder 
walls show through the sand ; or even a crowd of 
people passing will tramp into the softer filling and 
show the constructions. At sunrise or sunset ground 
should be carefully looked over to pick out the varia- 
tions of level and slope, which will often show then, 
though quite invisible in full light. Prehistoric camp 
sites are noticed by the difference of tone of the 
ground in walking over them ; the ashes holding so 
much air that the reverberation to the foot-step is 
quite different from that on ordinary desert. The 
appearance of the surface of disturbed desert differs 
much from the undisturbed : there may be slight 
hollows filled with sand, which are the traces of deep 
pits ; there may be pebbles from deep beds thrown 
up, or fragments of limestone ; or — best of all — chips 
of worked stone or of hard rocks may tell the tale of 
a building whose ruins lie beneath. The mastabas 
of the Xllth Dynasty at Dahshur left scarcely any 
surface trace, as the stone walls had been removed, 
and the gravel filling had spread out and denuded 
down to a level surface. The great wall of the camp 
at Daphnae 40 feet thick, had been ploughed by de- 
nudation until it was even lower than the desert on 
either side of it, and the lines of it were only visible 
by the absence of potsherds upon the site of the wall. 


14 


DISCRIMINATION 


Besides the discrimination of sites there is a vast 
subject in the discrimination of objects and of styles. 

The first requisite acquirement of a 

Produotlons, . , ... 

digger — his archaeological experience — 
consists in discriminating and distinguishing the 
differences between products of various dates. An 
Egyptian copper adze (Fig. lo). of the ages of middle 
prehistoric, late prehistoric, early dynastic, Illrd, 


Vlth, Xllth, orXVIIIth Dynasties can be told at a 
glance, and we only need more dated examples to be 
able to separate them still more finely. A cutting-out 
knife (Fig. 1 1), a pair of tweezers, a comb, can be 
dated almost as certainly. But it is when we can look 
not only to differences of form, but also to variations 
of colour and texture, that we have the widest scope 
for discrimination. The great variety of beads in 
each country, the hundreds of details of form, 
materials, and colour in Egypt alone, give them an 
importance archaeologically above most other things. 
In the prehistoric age there are a dozen materials. 


PRODUCTIONS I S 

and many different forms, not one of which can 
be confounded with later products. In the Old 
Kingdom new and distinctive styles are met with, 
and a profusion of small amulets on necklaces. In 
the Xlth and Xllth Dynasties magnificent beads of 
amethyst, green felspar, and carnelian outshine those 
of every other age. In the XVIIIth Dynasty the 


Fig II. — Development of cuttlng-out knives. Xllth-XIXth Dynasties. 
A-A and 13-B cutting edges. 


immense variety of glass and glazed beads defy 
enumeration, and yet are sharply characteristic of 
different reigns of that age. The later times of 
degradation also produce new and distinctive forms 
and colours ; and when we reach the Roman period 
a flood of glass work imitates the fashionable beryl, 
amethyst, rock crystal, and other stones, with the 
mimicry of a forger. 

Pottery is, however, the greatest resource of the 


DISCRIMINATION 


i6 


archaeologist. For variety of form and texture, for 
decoration, for rapid change, for its quick 
fall into oblivion, and for its incomparable 
abundance, it is in eveiy respect the most important 
material for study (Fig. 12), and it constitutes the 


XVIll 


RO* 


Fm. 12,— One typical form of pottery gf each period. 


essential alphabet of archaeology in every land. 
Think for a moment how few people know the 
appearance of a common jug a century old, how the 
crocks of Georgian times have all vanished, and new 
forms are made. Even of decorated china not one 
piece in a thousand in England is before the last 
century, and not one in a million is three centuries 


POTTERY AND STYLE 


17 


old ; so rapidly does breakable ware perish, and 
become unknown. This not only prevents its being 
handed on from earlier times, as ornaments or weapons 
may descend, but it prevents the copying of older 
forms, and gives a free scope to rapid variation. No 
doubt some standard forms may continue to be 
made, because they are so simple, and so adapted to 
common wants, that the same causes continue to 
produce them. But it is only the simplest and least 
characteristic types which thus continue ; the more 
detailed and specialised the form, the more rapidly it 
changes, and gives way to new styles. In the 
prehistoric age of Egypt alone there are about a 
thousand different forms of pottery ; and when the 
historic times shall be as fully recorded, probably two 
or three times as many will demand notice. In Italy 
and Greece there is apparently as great a variety, 
though — apart from painted vases — it is very far 
from being fully placed on paper. And when we 
come to know the archaeology of other lands, their 
pottery will doubtless prove as varied and distinctive 
in its styles. It is then in a thorough knowledge of 
pottery that any sound archaeology must be based ; 
and there is no wider or more important field for dis- 
crimination. With the brief view of Palestinian pottery 
gained in a few weeks, on one site at Tell Hesy (Lach- 
ish), I found it possible to ride over mounds of ruins 
and see the age of them without even dismounting, ■ 
Beside the discrimination of broad physical differ- 
ences there is the more subtle observation of .style. 
This cannot be discussed, or even shown 
to exist, without a very wide collection of 
examples ; yet in a trained observer a long series of 

C 


DISCRIMINATION 


experience should result in an unexpressed — almost 
intangible and incommunicable — sense of the style of 
each country and each age, such that a piece of work 
can at once be referred to its proper place, though 
not a single exact comparison can be quoted for it. 
Special motives, outlines, curves, tastes, belong to 
various sources so certainly and characteristically 
that they show their origin at a glance. A good 
example of this is seen in the bronzes of Minusinsk in 
Central Asia ; this site is almost equidistant from the 
North Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the China Sea, and 
the style seems to recall by its details almost equally 
the taste of Northmen, Persians, and Chinese. A 
good practice for such discrimination is the analysis 
of common ornament around us : a rug or a wall 
pattern may be analysed into its sources — here a bit 
from Assyria, there from Egypt, here from Japan, 
there from Norwa)'-, all hashed together by the modern 
designer. And until the common and obviously 
distinctive patterns of each country can be named at 
sight, and separated into their various sources, the 
observer cannot hope to gain that far more essential 
sense of the national taste of each people, and the 
sympathetic feeling of the relationship of any form 
or curve that may chance to be seen, — that conviction 
of the family and source of each object, which is the 
illumination of an archaeologist, the guide to fresh 
suggestions and researches, the mental framework 
which holds all memories in place. 

But beside this sublimated use of the permanent 
memory and discrimination, there is another very 
crude and transient discrimination which is also needed 
in actual work. A visual memory of the site and 


VISUAL MEMORY 19 

excavations should be constantly in mind ; the 

master should be able to go over the 
, , . , . Visual Memory, 

whole site, and every man at work on it, 

entirely from memory ; he should be able to realise 
at once, on seeing the place next day, exactly how 
every one of fifty different holes looked the day 
before ; and know at once where the work stood, and 
what has been done since, so as to measure it up 
without depending on any statements by the work- 
men. If a boy comes with a message that Ibrahim 
or Mutwali needs direction, the master should be able 
to visualise the place, inquire what has been done, 
and how each part now stands, and then give 
sufficient temporary direction entirely from memory 
of the site, and memory of what he expected to do, 
or to prove, or to find, from that particular hole. 
The extent of this visual memory is never realised 
until one meets with some who are so unlucky as 
not to possess such an apparatus, and who are there- 
fore unable to know what has been done, and have 
to begin each day’s work as if they were strangers to 
the place. Of all inherent mental qualifications there 
is perhaps none more essential to a digger than this 
permanent picture of a site in the mind. And the 
transient memory from day to day should include the 
appearance of every hole on all sides, the meaning 
of it and the purpose for which it is being dug. 


CHAPTER III 


THE LABOURERS 

In starting an excavation one of the first consider- 
ations is the supply of labourers, and the selection of 
them. In some places it is difficult to 
Quauty. pgj-gygjjg Qjjg jq wotk ut fifst ; either 
from distrust, or from being unaccustomed to regular 
employment. At Naukratis only a few men could 
be persuaded to try the work in the first week or 
two ; but so soon as the villagers found that genuine 
gold coin was to be had, they swarmed up, and some 
five hundred demanded to be taken. The Egyptian 
is good at steady work, but the Syrian is very 
different, and it took some weeks at Tell Hesy to 
educate men into continuous regular digging. They 
would jump out of their holes every few minutes, 
and squat on the edge for a talk with the next 
man ; and only a steady weeding out of about a third 
of them eveiy week, gradually brought up the best 
of them into tolerable efficiency. In Greece such 
difficulties are even greater, and rational regular hard 
work cannot be reckoned upon, as in Egypt. 

The best age for diggers is about 15 to 20 years. 
After that many turn stupid, and only a small pro- 


ao 


Fif^S. 13, I.|. WoUKl'.Ks AT TaNIS. 


QUALITY AND EDUCATION 


21 


portion are worth having between 20 and 40. After 
40 very few are of any use, though some robust men 
will continue to about 50. The Egyptian ages 
early ; and men of 45 would be supposed to be 65 
in England. The boys are of use for carrying from 
about 10 years old ; and they generally look mere 
boys till over 20. The ornamental man with a good 
beard is quite useless and lazy ; and the best workers 
are the scraggy under-sized youths, with wizened wiry 
faces, though sometimes a well-favoured lad with 
pleasing face will turn out very good (Fig. 1 3). In 
choosing boys the broad face and square chin are 
necessary tokens of stamina ; and the narrow feminine 
faces are seldom worth much. 

Beside the mere physical strength of the fellow, 
the face has to be studied for the character. The 
only safe guide in selecting workers is the expression ; 
and no influence of recommendations or connections 
should weigh in the least against the judgment of 
the appearance. The qualities to be considered are, 
first, the honesty, shown mostly by the eyes, and by 
a frank and open bearing ; next, the sense and 
ability ; and lastly, the sturdiness, and freedom from 
nervous weakness and hysterical tendency to squabble. 

When once selected, the education of the workers 
begins. Often some oafs who will not understand 
any directions, and have no sense to 
work unless encouraged by watching, may 
yet be brought up in a few months to be good 
workers if associated with a skilful man. And almost 
every boy and man will greatly improve by steady 
work and control. The effect of selection and train- 
ing is astonishingly seen on comparing some old 


22 


THE LABOURERS 


hands, who have had five or ten years at the business, 
side by side with new lads. There is as much differ- 
ence between their capacities as there is between the 
fellah and an educated Englishman. A gang of 
well-trained men need hardly any direction, especially 
in cemetery work ; and their obsei'vations and know- 
ledge should always be listened to, and will often 
determine matters. The freshman from England is 
their inferior in everything except in recording ; and 
at least a season’s experience is needed before any 
one can afford to disregard the judgment of a well- 
ti'ained digger. The better class of these workers are 
one’s personal friends, and are regarded much as old 
servants are in a good household. Their feelings and 
self-respect must be thought of, as among our own 
equals, and they will not put up with any rudeness 
or contempt. A man with landed property and cattle, 
and an ancestry of a couple of centuries, can afford 
to look down on most Englishmen who would bully 
him. Such workers are of course entirely above 
going into the usual Government or French work, 
where the lash is used ; and their good service and 
skill is only given for friendly treatment. 

Yet there is a danger in letting control slip away. 
It is always needful to be firm, and to insist on 

Control obedience to orders ; and constant keep- 
ing in hand is required, not only for the 
rank and file but even for the best men. An 
Egyptian cannot withstand temptations if often 
repeated ; and the fault of a collapse of character, 
which befalls even the best, is mainly due to not 
keeping sufficient hold and influence, and not taking 
sufficient trouble to ensure control. The first rule 


CONTROL AND SUBSTITUTIONS 23 

in managing the better class of men is not to let 
any man get a habit or prerogative of doing any 
kind of work for oneself ; never let the same man 
repeatedly go for purchases, or for money, or carry 
things, or walk with the master, or explain phrases, 
or boss anybody or anything. All such services 
should be carefully spread over several men ; and if 
there be two parties — as from opposite sides of the 
Nile — always keep them well balanced in your con- 
sideration, Each will then keep a sharp lookout on 
the opposition. 

Beside men and boys, girls (Fig. 15) will work 
very well in the Delta and in Syria, though not in 
Upper Egypt. They do well at carrying ; and as 
they never ask for pick work they are, when well 
grown, worth more than the boys. Not only will 
they come from the village day by day, but they 
will also camp out with their fathers and brothers in 
camps at a distance from home. No difficulty or 
unpleasantness has arisen in such mixed camps in 
my work. 

A frequent trouble is from substitution of workers. 
The fact of being chosen is worth something ; and 

the worker will try to sell his place to a 

1 i j • • Substitutions, 

substitute, and then get in again soon 

after on the plea of being an old hand. So long 
as a substitute comes only for a day or so, he may 
be tolerated. But if there arises a frequent plea of 
" So-and-So is ill to-day, and wants me to work for 
him,” it is needful to stamp on it by refusing all 
substitutes, and replying, “ If he is ill, I will take him 
back when he is better.” One common cause is 
that they wish to push in younger and younger 


24 


THE LABOURERS 


boys (Fig. l6), so that the fellow who was 14 or 
16 at first, dwindles imperceptibly until he can 
hardly carry a basket. An opposite cause is that 
only boys are taken on in some places because the 
men cannot be trusted ; and then the supreme 
object of the villains of the place is to get in as 
substitutes for boys, so that they may learn what is 
found and where to plunder at night. Most usually 
when a substitute is refused the original boy turns 
up as well as ever. I have known the village guards 
come and call a lad out on a trumped-up charge, 
with a friend of the guard following close by, quite 
ready just to work for the accused. 

Turning now to the organization, there are two 
great choices to be made, with or without Overseers, 

Orersoers E^ch 

system may be best under particular 

conditions, and the suitability of each we will note 
first, before entering on detail. 

Overseers are almost always employed. They 
remove much of the friction ; they profess to drive 
the men on, and be responsible for their regular 
working ; and they seem indispensable parts of the 
business. The less a master knows of the men and 
of their language the more essential an overseer 
seems to be. 

Yet all this usefulness is the best reason for 
avoiding them. The more friction they save, the 
less the master knows of his men, and the less 
influence he has. The more they profess to drive 
the men, the more hollow the fraud is, until the 
overseer merely serves to give notice when the 
master is coming. The more indispensable they 


OVERSEERS 


25 


seem, the less desirable is it to have so to trust a 
native. And the less a master knows of the men 
and the language, the more dangerous it is to have 
some one always acting in everything that goes on. 
Moreover, there is nothing so demoralising to a 
native as wandering about, without hard work, stick 
in hand, to bully men who are quite as good as 
himself. Even good men soon lose their character 
in such conditions, and it is needful to have some 
definite allotted manual work for even a leading 
man. 

The results of having overseers, or reises, are 
instructive. In one case the reis took a third of all 
the money given as rewards for things, threatening 
to get any man dismissed who would not give this 
up to him. In another case the overseers levied a 
sixth of all the wages from the men, making ten 
times their own pay by this extortion. Mariette’s 
overseers used to go to a village with a Government 
order for so many men, and demand the best men 
they could venture on claiming. These bought 
themselves off, each at a few shillings a month, and 
lower men were taken, until most of the villagers 
were paying heavy tribute. Reises will also bargain 
with a shopkeeper to put on a third on the price of 
all goods supplied, and compel any messenger sent 
shopping to go to that shop. In another case a 
museum reis was seen bowing down to the ground 
and kissing the hand of the principal aw/ff/^a-dealer 
of the place; doubtless for good consideration re- 
ceived. In short, the dangers, losses, and troubles 
that come from reises are so great that it is far 
better to do without them. 


26 


THE LABOURERS 


The system which works best is to have a careful 
distribution of the best men ; and, in fact, work with 
two or three dozen reises, all of whom 
Diieot system. pick-work themselves. Each well- 

trained man can have half-a-dozen new hands placed 
near him, and he can be ordered to see that they 
follow instructions. By such a wide distribution of 
the authority it does not deteriorate the men, as 
there are too many rivals ; and being each paid for 
actual digging, they do not spoil with idleness. 
Thus every man is directly under the master, all 
instructions are given at first hand, and every one 
is in close touch, and not fenced off by intermediate 
intriguers. Doubtless, two or three men will come 
to the front by their ability and character ; but 
though full use should be made of them, yet they 
should always be kept nominally on the same terms 
and work as eveiy one else. Their reward consists 
in being given all the more promising places, where 
things are likely to be found, so that they may 
reap much more profit than others. 

In some different conditions of work ‘overseers 
may be a necessary evil. In Greece the large 
distances of sites from each other in the Aegean and 
political conditions are a bar to employing a regular 
gang of men, although the Egyptian will readily 
travel three or four hundred miles to his season’s 
work, as far as Constantinople from Athens, and is 
quite ready to do his work in spite of the scowls of 
a bad neighbourhood. Fresh workers are engaged 
at each place in Greece, and for their needful train- 
ing overseers are considered necessary. Also at 
present, owing to the continual shifting of European 


DIRECT SYSTEM AND DAY PAY 27 


superintendence by changes of students, and less 
frequent changes of Directors, permanent overseers 
who will carry on the traditions of the modes of 
working are i-equisite. But it is questionable whether 
these needs would not be more safely met by carry- 
ing about ten or a dozen picked workmen, who 
would train local hands, and at the same time work 
themselves, The Greek does not seem nearly as 
capable of continuous hard work as is the Egyptian, 
and moves much less earth in the day, and that at 
about double the wages, while he is said to entirely 
refuse piecework. But this difficulty would be re- 
duced if a small picked body of hai'd workers, 
stimulated by good piece pay, were used as a nucleus 
to set the tone of steady work at each place. The 
Greek needs educating to regular work, which is 
foreign to his nature. 

In England about as much work may be done 
per man as in Egypt, but at about five or six times 
the cost. Plence the number employed is not so 
large, twenty or thirty being a large gang, instead 
of 150 or 200 as in Egypt. As they can follow 
directions tolerably, an overseer or foreman is not 
needed, the best of the workers usually taking the 
lead. 

The question between Day pay and Piece pay is 
an open one. In cases where minute valuables may 
be scattered anywhere in the soil, day 
pay is needful to prevent undue hurry, 

Or where the work is very iri'egular, and time needs 
to be spent on moving stones, or heavy extras, day 
pay must be given. But where the work is uniform, 
and the objects expected are large or in known 


28 


THE LABOURERS 


positions, then piecework is far more suitable. 
Though measuring up the cubic metres of work 
done may take perhaps a quarter of the master’s 
time, yet that is better than having to give the whole 
time to spurring on the dawdling pace of day workers. 

When working by the day it is needful to give 
the signals for beginning and stopping work, and to 
insist on regular and continuous digging. It is 
impossible to be known to be away, as then no work 
will go on effectively. An air of vigilant surprises 
has to be kept up. A sunk approach to the work 
behind higher ground is essential ; and, if possible, 
an access to a commanding view without being seen 
going to and fro. A telescope is very useful to 
watch if distant work is regular. At Tanis the 

girls in a big pit were kept by the men walking up 
and tipping baskets at the top ; but the telescope 
showed that the baskets were all the time empty. 
The immediate dismissal of fourteen people was the 
result. A telescope will also show if a boy is put 
up to watch for the master’s coming. Various 
approaches should be arranged from different direc- 
tions, and the course of work so planned that no 
men can give notice to others. In this way a 
pleasing group of musicians and dancers may be 
found in the excavations, where picks and baskets 
are lying idle ; and the arrangement is closed by 
requesting the boys to dance on their own resources, 
and the transfer of your pay to other pockets. The 
need of thus acting as mainspring, without which 
the work goes on at an official pace, is wearing and 
time-wasting ; and it leaves no chance of doing 
writing, drawing, etc., during work hours. 


PIECEWORK 


29 


Working by the piece saves all this trouble, and 
if the men are well trained, and the work is simple, 
it goes on automatically and takes the 
smallest possible amount of attention. 

In detached small sites men may even be left un- 
visited for two or three days, merely reporting each 
evening how far they have worked. In one case 
some lads were left to work at a great sarcophagus 
for weeks unwatched, and came some miles to report 
progress, and say when further attention was wanted. 
The pay for that was given by contract, to cut and 
lift a stone lid under water, for so many pounds. 

In piecework it is always best to keep a record of 
how long each piece has taken, as the time is one 
element in pricing the work done.^ The ground 
varies in hardness, the depth of throwing up con- 
tinually changes, or the presence of large stones 
hinders the work ; therefore any exact value by a 
hard and fast rule is impossible. Each piece of 
work done has to be judged, taking the most likely 
scale of payment, and then tempering the result by 
the amount of time occupied. The general rate of 
pay in Egypt is ^ piastre a cubic metre for loose 
surface sand, |- for shallow work in harder earth, f 
for work as deep as a man, and i piastre for deep 
pits. At this scale a poor worker will barely earn 
day pay and a fine worker will make from to 2 
times day pay. The day pay in Upper Egypt is 2-| 
to 3 piastres (6d. to yd.) a man, and to 2 (s^d. 
to Sd.) for a boy, of fit and proper quality. 

^ A useful notation is to use the letter of the week day, with an 
hour-spot by it; thus .F is 7 a.m. Friday, M' is 2 p.m. Monday, W 
is noon, Wednesday, and this st^otled letter is noted in the accounts, for 
the time of beginning any piece of work. 


30 


THE LABOURERS 


To take a practical case. A hole is, say, 2^ 
metres wide, 5^ long and 2 deep, say 18 cubic 
metres. The rate will be at f , making i S-J piastres 
or 2s. pd. Large stones met with, or pillars or 
buttresses of earth left to support objects in situ, are 
counted as work done, as the trouble and incon- 
venience of leaving them in the hole is quite equal 
to the removal of so much earth. If the pit above- 
named had taken a four-gang (two men and two 
boys) less than a day, it might be cut to 1 2 piastres 
or 2s. 6d. ; or if much over a day, it might be raised 
to 16 or 3s. 3d.; reckoning that a rate much 
quicker or slower than the regular rate, shows that 
the ground or conditions were better or worse than 
usual. It is needful to measure with distinct and 
visible care, as the men are very watchful to see that 
they get fair measurement ; and their confidence 
should be gained by taking trouble to be fair and 
punctilious in every detail, though never taking 
notice of any wheedling or attempt to influence the 
account. 

Where the earth has to be moved to any distance 
beyond a few yards, then more carriers are needed 

Day and than One to each digger. The happiest 
Hooework. combination then is to go on paying 
exactly the same rate by the metre, as if the men 
were working a plain pit, but to supply them with 
as many boys paid by the day as may be needful to 
shift the earth away (Fig. 17). Sometimes two men 
and two boys will have six more boys to run off the 
earth to fifty yards away. Any common village 
boys will do for this gang, and they may be enlisted 
by the hundred, and distributed over the work. But 


DAY AND PIECEWORK 


31 


it is needful to allot these “ locals ” (as they are 
called) specifically to known men, so that each pick- 
man can answer for the time and the doings of each 
of his own boys. Thus there is no smudge of irre- 
sponsibility ; but each boy belongs to a man, who 
has for his own interest to get the work out of him. 
The local boys should all give the names of their 
villages on enlistment, and be kept in lists according 
to villages, so as to group them for payment in gold. 
In case of any serious theft or trouble due to boys 
from one village, all the rest from that village can be 
dismissed as a warning. To keep them up to time 
in arriving, it is best to dismiss for the day the two 
or three who come latest, if they are not well up to 
time. This soon enforces regularity. Any attempt 
to leave before the sunset signal, is met by dismissing 
altogether any boy who leaves too soon. It is best 
not to allow any substitution on the plea of ^illness, 
as if that is once allowed, it soon becomes a loop- 
hole for all the selected boys to gradually sell their 
places to less desirable fellows. A favourite plan of 
the piecework men is to turn all their own basket- 
boys into pick-boys, and then want more locals to 
carry the stuff. Of course this has to be met by 
deducting from the rate of pay, as the regular rates 
are for cutting and throwing, and not for cutting 
alone. The proportion of pay if the boys are set to 
do pick-work, on a gang of two men and two boys, 
goes as follows ; — 


[Table 


32 


THE LABOURERS 


pick 3 

pick 3 

pick 

3 

basket 2 

pick 3 

pick 

3 

pick 3 

pick 3 

pick 

3 

basket 2 

basket 2 

pick 

3 

A 10 

D II 

C 

12 


2 baskets | 

4 baskets 


due j ^ 

due 


15 


20 


Then if in a normal four-gang, A, one boy takes a 
pick they become as in B, and only have of the 
piece pay, as the master has to supply the other two 
baskets for the normal gang of equal numbers of picks 
and baskets. Similarly if both boys take picks, as in 
C, the pay is of course •§■ of what it would normally 
be ; the other being spent in supplying locals. 
The one absolute rule, however, is that if there are 
enough old trained hands to do the cutting, no local 
shall be allowed to do pick-work, as his intelligence, 
knowledge, and honesty are not to be trusted with- 
out training. The combination of piece pay for 
cutting and day pay for carrying is a happy one ; as 
the piecework keeps the men moving, and they stir 
up the boys on day pay (Fig. 19). 

In European countries this use of boys is scarcely 
possible owing to the national education. In Greece 
as in England the boys are required to go to school, 
and their holidays there are not at a time suitable 
for excavating, while in England the holidays are 
occupied by the harvest. Hence all work has to be 
done by men, at a higher rate of pay ; and so 


Figs. 10, 20. I’lI.I.INC .\NI) CARKYINi;, .-YT AbYDOS. 


REWARDS 


33 

mechanical aids to moving earth would be more 
profitable than they are in Egypt. 

It may be mentioned that the workers are always 
expected to provide their own picks and baskets in 
Egypt ; while ropes, crowbars, and other tools only 
occasionally wanted are found by the master. If the 
daily tools were also provided, they would soon be 
spoiled, and need constant attention ; it is bad 
enough to have to check and take care of ropes and 
special tools. The baskets brought up need to be 
looked at for size, especially those of local boys. 
When choosing boys, a fair size of basket should be 
insisted on as a condition of employment ; and if 
small or broken baskets are brought up afterwards, 
the boy should be turned ofif, in order to bring a 
proper basket next day. 

The two objects of excavations are (i) to obtain 
plans and topographical information, and (2) to 
obtain portable antiquities. For the 

r • ..... . . Kewards. 

purpose of securing antiquities it is 
necessary to guard against the ignorance, the care- 
lessness, and the dishonesty of the men employed. 
The best way to protect the interests of the work is 
to give rewards for all the things that are found, 
commonly called “ the bakhshish .system.” If only 
half-a-dozen men are employed, and the master will 
take care to see that they never touch the work except 
while he is watching them, it may be practicable to 
do without bakhshish. But in the ordinary course of 
having one or two hundred men and boys at work 
over a large area, it is essential to pay partly by results, 
at least in the East ; in Greece, owing to the large 
claims of the Government, this is scarcely practicable. 

D 


34 


THE LABOURERS 


The actual amount given should be as much as a 
travelling dealer would pay to the peasant, were he 
buying the object. For small and very saleable 
things a high rate should be given ; for larger blocks, 
difficult to move, a lesser rate ; and for larger things 
of some hundredweights a nominal present may be 
given without any relation to the market value. On 
the whole the bakhshish is usually 5 to lo per cent 
of the wages ; and as it is only about is. in the 
pound on the European values it is well worth while 
to secure better work by giving it. Moreover, it is 
not by any means overlooked in the estimate of the 
worth of the woi'k, but — like the prizes of gold 
digging — it is more than discounted in the prospects 
which induce desirable men to come. The tenth of 
a chance of getting ten pounds is more attractive 
than the certainty of getting one pound in wages ; 
so the extra payments secure willing workers, even 
better than the same amount spread in regular pay, 
It is by no means only as a safeguard to honesty. 
The observation of things, and the care required to 
avoid breakages, are two very necessary habits for 
good workmen. Many a small thing would be over- 
looked and lost if it were no benefit to the finder. 
And digging carefully so as to avoid breakages, 
makes a great difference to the returns obtained. 
When giving bakhshish on a broken thing, it is well 
to say how much more would have been given had 
it been perfect. And if fragments are missing, a 
large deduction should be made, and the balance 
promised if the pieces can be found. A fine flint 
knife, anciently broken, was produced with several 
chips missing ; I gave 4s. for it, but offered 1 6s. 


ACCOUNTS 


35 


more for the chips, which induced the men to sit 
down and turn over twenty tons of earth by hand, 
fingering every grain ; nearly eveiy scrap was found, 
the men got the whole 20s., and I got the whole of 
the largest flint knife known. In another case I 
kept a lad sifting earth for three weeks, to find a 
minute head which he had lost. Nothing can ensure 
care better than paying for it ; while any bad care- 
lessness or disobedience to orders is met by degrad- 
ing a man to unprofitable work or dismissing him. 
The principle that the holder gets the bakhshish 
must even be extended to cases where one man has 
taken things from another man’s hole ; the man who 
has lost the things is merely told that he should have 
taken better care of his work. 

The account keeping is a serious matter, especially 
when the men are working far from home, as then 

they wish to be paid irregularly. There 
. J. . , r • 11 Aooounts. 

IS first the account of earnings, by day or 

by piecework; second, the account of bakhshish; 
third, the banking account of how much each man 
has due to him, or, if he has just drawn gold, perhaps 
a small balance against him ; and fourth, the 
advances for market and for drawing to send home. 
The simplest way of paying is Schliemann’s, giving 
a day’s pay to every man every night ; but it re- 
quires great quantities of change and a long time of 
delay to the workers and the master. Weekly pay- 
ments are better, on the night before market day or 
on market morning. The account is read through 
to a man, his assent obtained to it ; he is asked if he 
wants to draw gold, and if not, the total is booked 
to him, added to his previous balance. Then for 


36 


THE LABOURERS 


marketing, it is best to join the men in groups of 
six or eight together, and give the chief man of each 
group a sovereign to divide as they want it. After 
market he states how much each has had, and it is 
deducted from the balance of each man, while any 
unspent cash is returned. 

Thus the amounts which should balance in weekly 
accounts are, for instance : — 


Rkceived. 


Ft. 

Si’ENT. 

£ 

Pt. 

Total to 1 7th Feb. 

168 

77 

Total to 1 7 til Feb. 

182 

34 

on 19th „ 

10 


Wages to 24th ,, 

34 

16 

on 32nd „ 

S 


Locals to 24th „ 

9 

83 

on 24tli „ 

20 

80 

House 


39 


— 

Materials 


64 

Total received 

204 

59| 

Personal drawings 

S 


Due to men 

27 

79 


Balancing total 

232 

41 


232 

41 


This, of course, being the paymaster account, as 
apart from the accounts in chief, and from which the 
accounts in chief are made up by the head of a party. 

It is necessary to take trouble to gain the con- 
fidence of the men ; they must be convinced of the 
master’s good faith and precision. Whenever there 
is reasonable doubt on a point, they must always be 
given the benefit of it ; and plenty of patience is 
needed to hear their complaints, and to understand 
what is the real state of an objection. Some men 
are so puzzle-headed that they cannot remember 
their account clearly ; and if so, it is best to make 
them name some friend with whom all their accounts 
are settled. If any man wants to go far back in 
accounts — and sometimes they will raise a question 


NATIVE WAYS 


37 


of four or five weeks before — then it is well to have 
a friend as witness, who will see that it is right, and 
close the matter, silencing any puzzled grumbling. 
Egyptians will often dispute accounts against their 
own interest, and remind the payer of amounts which 
they have received that may have been overlooked. 
But it is needful to show care and interest about the 
smallest amounts, so as to maintain a sense of exact- 
ness and precision with the men. 

Some masters avoid going over accounts by giving 
each man a card, and entering his account on it in 
figures ; but as the man cannot check it without 
asking a reader, this hardly meets the case. Another 
form of accounts is, however, undei'stood and desired 
by the men, in the form of a tally which every one 
can check, and from which they can automatically 
balance accounts at once. A piece of sheet zinc is 
ruled in columns (Fig. 21), each of 20 squares for 
the 20 piastres in each dollar ; and every fifth column 
is lined heavier, as marking a pound. All amounts 
earned are marked by spots in the columns, and 
amounts paid are scored through. Thus in this 
example the earnings were 12, 2, 5, 9, 30, and 15 
piastres ; the drawings were 17, 14, ii, 4, 2, i-g, 6^ 
piastres ; and the balance still due between the last 
score and the last spot is 17 piastres, which any 
man can count for himself. Such a tally will hold 
five pounds of accounts, or ten if ruled on both sides. 

It hardly needs saying that a small amount of 

doctoring is continually wanted. Damages to hands 

and limbs in moving heavy stones, bruises 

1 , . , . , Native ways, 

and strains, sore eyes, malarial fever, 

rheumatic headaches, indigestion, swellings and 


38 


THE LABOURERS 


gatherings, old sores, and many other small ailments 
are of daily occurrence. A stock of medicines, and 
some care in applying them, are necessary in any 
excavations. But it is necessary to refuse to give 
medicine to any one outside of the workmen : first. 


because a gratis doctor would never have time to 
do other work ; second, on account of infection ; and 
third, because patients are an excuse for spies. 

Having now noticed the men who are required, 
something may be said of those who are not required. 
The dealer and the spy are a constant plague. No 
man must be allowed to loaf about the work, or to 


NATIVE WAYS 


39 


lie watching it from a look-out point. And any 
troublesome men are best dealt with by taking shoes 
or head-shawl from them, and offering to send the 
clothes to the man’s sheikh to be returned to him. 
To get them he must give his name, and the name 
of his sheikh ; and that no man will do, as he can 
then be dropped on by the police in future. Not a 
single loafer will ever give his name and sheikh, and 
so they are well kept at bay by confiscating clothing 
or tools. Once I took the donkey of a troublesome 
man, who had fled from me ; and gave it up to his 
sheikh, who came to intercede next day. Doubtless 
it had to be redeemed by some blackmail to the 
sheikh, and the needful lesson was taught. Dealers 
are incessantly trying to get at the men, daily at 
wells or as tobacco-sellers, and weekly in the market ; 
and so any unexplained persons who are seen about 
should be moved on and kept at a distance. 

It is supposed by some that there is a solidarity 
in the family of an Egyptian, which ensures that a 
man’s relatives know about his actions, and are 
aware if he goes wrong. But various events have 
shown that a man’s own relatives may be quite in 
the dark about his doings, and that a chance out- 
sider may see, know, and tell things about a man 
which are secret from his relatives living with him. 
Hence the guarantee of a relative is worth practically 
nothing, and every man must be taken on his own 
merits. It must always be remembered that ex- 
cavation is for the sake of archaeology, and is not 
undertaken in the interest of the workman. Hence 
any doubt about a man’s character is sufficient reason 
for not employing him. There is neither reason nor 


40 


THE LABOURERS 


use in making accusations, which after all it might 
be impossible to prove. But an unostentatious weed- 
ing out of men during the fluctuations of the work 
is the best means of avoiding those who seem less 
likely to be trustworthy. 

A reason for not taking any man's recommenda- 
tions is that the introduction to the work is sure to 
be paid for ; and if Ibrahim begs you to employ 
Aly, and succeeds, Aly will have to give him a lump 
sum or a share of the wages. Advice for a man 
should therefore never be taken ; though advice 
against a man may be disinterested and useful. 


Iluys tlirowiiijj I ImK- 23. Tomi-site turmidj over, 
uicls.. Aln-dos. | showinfj outer wall. Kaliun. 


CHAPTER IV 

THE ARRANGEMENT OF WORK 

A LARGE site, such as that of a temple or a town, 
may be attacked in several ways. The most cursory 
method is by trial pits in various spots; oiearanoeB 
pits which, if they hit anything of im- 
portance, are likely to injure it, and certain to 
destroy its connection with other things. Fi'ench 
explorers have a love for faire guelgiies sondages, a 
proceeding which often ruins a site for systematic 
work, and which never shows the meaning of the 
positions or the nature of the plan. If it is quite 
uncertain whether there be remains in the ground, 
the best examination is by parallel trenches, as such 
give a good view of the soil, while the stuff can be 
turned back and the trench filled behind if not 
wanted. In case of tracing a building, trenches cut 
along the lines of the walls are a good beginning ; 
and then if more is wanted, the plan is clear and 
the rooms can be emptied with foresight. 

A favourite method with the older explorers was 
to clear out a whole area (Fig. 1 8 ) and throw the 
stuff all round the site. This may be needful in 
case of superimposed buildings, which must be 
41 


42 THE ARRANGEMENT OF WORK 

studied one by one, as only two or three periods 
can be planned at once, and the upper have to be 
removed before the lower can be cleared. But such 
a method is a clumsy waste in dealing with a simple 
group of buildings. The great difficulty of it is to 
know where to place the stuff removed, so as not 
to block future work. Before beginning any large 
excavation, the amount to be shifted should be 
gauged, and the position of the stuff settled before- 
hand. The great clearance on the side of the 
Medum pyramid, to expose the temple, was planned 
out with the position and size of each waste heap 
in the mind’s eye, and the system of paths by which 
the stuff could be shifted with least fatigue. It is 
needful to continually adjust the moving, so as to 
avoid lifting the stuff more than really needed ; 
and any long run down of material, either towards 
the digger or away from the thrower, should be 
prevented, as it all has to be lifted again in some 
shape. Working at the foot of a long run of stuff 
is entirely wrong ; such ground should be shifted in 
successive levels, each level being discharged without 
needing to raise the earth up again. Excavations 
at the Sphinx were carried on by the Government 
with two men filling baskets with sand, which ran 
down 20 feet from the surface to the bottom of a 
pit ; and the baskets were then carried up by a 
long train of children very slowly climbing up out 
of the pit on a sand slope at the angle of running 
sand. Thus nearly the whole labour was wasted by 
not filling the baskets at the surface and carrying 
them directly away. Whenever a large pit is needed 
it should be begun of full size, and lowered equally 


TyRNING OVER 43 

all over, so that nothing runs down during the 
work. 

For moving earth to a distance there is no way 
so simple and adaptable as a line of carrier boys 
(Fig. 22). Over flat ground this is the best way 
up to distances of 50 or 1 00 yards ; for longer dis- 
charges it may be better to lay down a light railway 
and use trucks. The line of boys is the only 
practicable way if the stuff has to be carried up a 
slope to discharge, or taken over irregular paths out 
of the work, as is often the case. The railway 
needs much time for rearranging different points of 
collection and discharge ; and must be in duplicate, 
or else the work will be at a stand-still during re- 
arrangement. A boy will carry 20 to 30 lbs. in a 
load, about 20 journeys an hour for 100 yards 
discharge, thus moving about 2 tons a day. So 
the cost is about a piastre a cubic metre for shifting 
100 yards. 

But far the more economical and rapid work is 

that of turning over whenever practicable. If a site 

has not been often rebuilt upon, the way 
. 1 Tuming over, 

IS to start by a long clearance at one 

edge ; and then a line of men steadily cut from one 

side of the trench and throw back on the other (Fig. 

24), so that the trench moves across the whole site, 

and every pound of earth is turned over. Each 

man needs a frontage of between 4 and 6 

metres in width ; and the trench, if open along, 

should have a clear bottom of at least 2 metres, 

from back to front of the work. More usually it is 

worked in compartments, each man clearing about 

4 metres square, and throwing into his previous 


44 the arrangement OF WORK 

hole ; each hole is then gauged when empty and 
the pay assessed. If a town is cleared (Fig. 23), 
then it is done chamber by chamber, each being 
emptied over the wall into the previous chamber. 
The corners of the chambers can just be left visible 
for making a plan afterwards. A great advantage 
of this way is that the ground is finally left covered, 
so there is no great waste heap, and the walls are 
all covered over again to save them from future 
destruction. 

Where a deep hollow has to be cleared out it is 
a wasteful plan to let the boys walk out with the 

basket of earth, as they have to raise the 

Raising earth. , , 

body, which is about four times the 
weight of their load. So soon as the rise is as steep 
as one in four, it is best to form a fixed chain of boys 
(Fig. 27), each standing in a permanent place, and 
handing the baskets up from one to another. About 
5 feet apart horizontally is as far as is useful ; or 
in case of steep work (as out of pits) the vertical 
lift may be 3 or 4 feet (Fig. i). A sufficient number 
of collectors at the bottom and throwers at the 
top are of course needed to keep the chain in full 
work (Fig. 28). A well-proportioned gang should 
not have any accumulations along it, and must be 
quietly watched from time to time to see that all 
parts work equally. If the baskets of earth lag at 
any point and accumulate, the boys before the point 
must be thinned, and those beyond it increased. A 
favourite plan of the boys is to let a basket lie un- 
shifted and then stand upon it, as a full basket of 
earth gives a pleasant footing, and there is one less 
to keep moving. In this way most of the baskets 


* 


RAISING EARTH 


45 


can be quietly suppressed, and yet every one remains 
as busy as they can be with the short stock of baskets 
that remain. All such misuse of baskets must be 
stopped at once ; but old burst baskets may be used 
thus with advantage. 

This system of lifting is also used in a surprising 
way for vertical tomb pits. An Egyptian man will 
stand all day with his feet on opposite sides of a pit 
in foot-holes, and stoop down to take a full basket 
from a man below at the level of his feet ; then raise 
himself, and lift the basket up at arms’ length above 
his head, thus lifting it 6 or 7 feet. Three men 
will thus empty out a pit to 20 feet deep ; but 
such men are usually old tomb-robbers, and must be 
employed with circumspection. More usually ropes 
are used, one tied to each handle of a basket, and 
pulled up by a pair of men. The earth is best left 
in the carrying basket, which is laid in the roped 
basket at the bottom, and taken out of it at the 
surface. If the pit is rotten and wide at the top, the 
basket has to be swung across the top two or three 
times, until on letting the ropes loose it flies out 10 
or 20 feet to the side of the pit, where it is caught 
by the emptying boy. Clever rope-men will let a 
basket fly so as to catch on the top of the dump heap 
and turn over, so that it only needs clearing loose to 
let it go back again. The ropes need careful watch- 
ing ; the men love to tie knots in them, to grip by, 
whereby they wear through at the knots and drop to 
pieces ; also the ropes are di'agged on the edge of the 
pit, so as to serve as a friction-clutch when changing 
hands, thus wearing the rope out in two days instead 
of two months ; the sides of the pit should be looked 


46 THE ARRANGEMENT OF WORK 

at to see if there is any sawing by the rope, and if 
so, the men must be stopped. They also cut off 
, pieces if the ropes are long ; and it' is best to have 
all ropes in standard lengths of 8 metres, these when 
doubled thrice over down to i metre length are 
quickly tested for length, and then hanked in the 
middle to put by. Lastly, if not regularly delivered 
into store every night, the ropes are not returned 
when a pit is finished ; and then they vanish, and a 
fresh pair is asked for when the next pit goes deep. 

Another favourite misu.se of ropes is to lash them 
round blocks of stone which have to be dragged, and 
thus cut the rope into scraps by wearing on the 
ground. Ropes can generally be put round the sides 
of a stone, and kept in place by some old scraps 
passing beneath. 

One of the most careful kinds of work, to which 
only good men can be trained, is that of tracing out 
Traoin walls brick walls buried in rubbish. 

The surrounding earth is derived from 
the crumbling and washing down of the earthen wall, 
and therefore it is indistinguishable from the average 
of the bricks themselves. Hence, if the bricks are 
uniform in colour, and the mud mortar is like them, 
the building and its d6bris are all alike. The best 
way to examine brickwork is by scraping a face of 
the wall, and then peeling it quite clean with a 
dinner-knife ; such a clean smooth surface seen in 
shadow will show whatever can possibly be made out 
of the differences of colour and texture. Vertical 
joints are worth far more than horizontal, as often 
fallen bricks may lie as if built together. If possible 
the joints should be observed by differences of colour, 


TRACING WALLS 


47 


and the bricks measured for comparison with others ; 
as the sizes vary from 7 inches to 2 feet in length, 
and but seldom range over half an inch in any one 
building period, the size will go a long way in show- 
ing a connection of age. If the bricks cannot be 
distinguished even after leaving the face to dry for 
some days, the earth should be searched by peck- 
ing with a trowel or knife to see if there is dirt 
in it ; only in late times are pottery chips found 
usually in bricks, and charcoal scraps are very rare, 
hence pottery and charcoal almost prove the earth to 
be mere wash and rubbish. The clearing back of 
dirty earth to a vertical face of clean clay is a satis- 
factory evidence of a wall. But sometimes the filling 
is so clean that there is no difference between it and 
the wall. Then the relative hardness will often serve 
to distinguish one from the other ; and this is a main 
means of discrimination by the workmen, who will 
often tell a wall entirely by the touch under the pick. 
Failing all these tests, and the strata of dirt beds, 
the film of stucco on the wall face will sometimes 
show up, but may leave a doubt as to which side is 
the wall. In the last resource the stuff should be 
searched with a magnifier to see the hollows left by 
decomposed straw dust : in kneaded brick these 
hollows lie in every direction ; in blown dust and 
wash they lie nearly all horizontal. It is often need- 
ful to spend half-an-hour testing and tracing out the 
line of a wall, fixing the face and the top and base 
of it ; and such work may give the only evidence of 
a temple or important building. 


CHAPTER V 


RECORDING IN THE FIELD 

After finding things the first consideration is to 
record and preserve all the information about them. 
„ ^ ^ The most ignorant dealer or plunderer 

may be a very successful digger, but he 
will not care for the value of a record. Recording 
is the absolute dividing line between plundering and 
scientific work, between a dealer and a scholar. The 
most blue-blooded dilettante collector who digs to 
possess fine things, but records no facts about them, 
is below the level of the dealer who will publish an 
illustrated priced catalogue, and state what was 
found together, and the details of the discovery. 
The unpardonable crime in archaeology is destroying 
evidence which can never be recovered ; and every 
discovery does destroy evidence unless it is in- 
telligently recorded. Our museums are ghastly 
charnel-houses of murdered evidence ; the dry bones 
of objects are there, bare of all the facts of grouping, 
locality, and dating which would give them historical 
life and value. And it is only the self-evident facts 
of age that we already know, which can be observed 
in such a useless condition. So ignorant are 


NEED OF RECORD 


49 


curators that they will even divide up a tomb-group 
of objects, which are the keys to knowledge, and 
foolishly scatter them up * and down the galleries 
merely as second-rate specimens of what is already 
there, without any date or history. This is actually 
the case in the three largest national museums. It 
is therefore imperative not only to record, but also 
to publish, the facts observed ; so that when in 
future the elements of scientific management may 
come to be understood, a fit curator may succeed in 
reuniting the long-severed information, as is being 
to some extent happily done at Dublin. 

In recording, the first difficulty is to know what 
to record. To state every fact about everything 
found would be useless, as no one could wade 
through the mass of statements. It would be like a 
detective who would photograph and measure every 
man on London Bridge to search for a criminal : the 
complication would entirely defeat the object. It is 
absolutely necessary to know how much is already 
known before setting about recording more. In 
some periods, such as the XVIIIth Dynasty, so much 
is ascertained that it is seldom that new facts can be 
brought to light ; and only fine or unusual discoveries 
are worth full publication. On the other hand, in 
such an age as the early dynasties our only resource 
lies in complete records of the levels or collocations 
of hundreds of pots, whole or broken ; and most 
important historical conclusions may hang on a 
single potsherd. 

It is plain thei'efore that the accuracy and certainty 
of the record is necessary. At the moment that a 
fact is before the eye, — a fact which may never 

E 


so RECORDING IN THE FIELD 

be seen again, and perhaps never paralleled, — it is 
needful for the observer to make certain 
Value of record. details, to verify every point 

which is of fresh value, and to record all that is new 
with certainty and exactitude. Statements with a 
query, or a doubt about them, are worth nothing in 
themselves, and can only serve to add to the range 
of similar facts that may be safely recorded from 
elsewhere. Everything seen should be mentally 
grasped, and its meaning and bearings comprehended 
at the moment of discovery, so clearly that a* 
definitive statement can be made, which shall be as 
certain and as absolute as anything can be which 
depends on human senses. The observer should at 
least feel no possible doubts or qualms about his 
recorded facts ; and what uncertainties there are 
should only be those which lie beyond his percep- 
tions. It is well to work slowly over all the petty 
details of an important discovery, perhaps for half 
an hour, while considering all the facts and their 
meaning, before finally and irrevocably removing the 
main evidences of position. All this needs practice, 
and a full knowledge of what is important and what 
is trivial. 

And not only should such a record be made at 
the time, but the record should be presented finally 

in an intelligible form. To empty the 

Resulting vle-w. 

contents of note- books on a readers 
head is not publishing. A mass of statements which 
have no point, and do not appear to lead to any 
conclusion or generalisation, cannot be regarded as 
an efficient publication. The meaning of each fact 
should be made apparent, and the relative importance 


RESULTING VIEW AND MARKING 51 


of the details should be kept in view, so as to 
present the conclusions as a picture, in which each 
touch is in its proper place, and where each point 
adds to the whole without being disproportionately 
treated. Thus the final result is a statement much 
like what might have been written by a contemporary 
of the times in question ; proved and enforced at 
each point by the various facts discovered. 

In many cases our materials are not enough to 
give such a picture ; and then, either the blanks 
must be noted and the limits of uncertainty stated, 
or else, at the worst, the facts must be grouped, and 
their results stated, leaving the question with two or 
more solutions open to future settlement. 

Thus the final result to be aimed at is a picture 
full of detail and accuracy ; and, where material is 
insufficient, with the limits of doubt clearly laid 
down, so that fresh material can at once be in- 
corporated, and its value seen and grasped, so soon 
as it may be discovered. 

A very needful part of the recording is the 
marking of the objects with their source. Generally 
each part of a site is distinguished by a 
letter, and each group of objects found 
in that part by a number ; thus a cemetery may be 
E, another adjoining it on different ground F, yet 
another G, a temple site T, and so on, sometimes 
using up the whole alphabet on a varied district. 
Then E 17, F 8, G 65, will be different tombs in 
those cemeteries, as denoted in the note-book and on 
the objects. Every bone of a skeleton should be 
marked, and always on one fixed position for each 
bone. It is best to trust to writing the reference 


53 


RECORDING IN THE FIELD 


with China ink on the base or back of most objects ; 
for pottery and coarse things Brunswick black 
thinned with turpentine is best^ for dark stones 
scratching the number is safest, and also for wet 
pottery at the time it is found. Jewellers’ tag-labels 
with strings are useful for small objects. It is very 
unsafe to trust labelling only to the wrapping papers, 
which may be all thrown away ; separate labels 
should be wrapped with the things if they cannot be 
marked otherwise. 

The nature of the notes must vary with each 
kind of material and each period ; but we may here 

give some examples of the nature of 
Nature of notes. , , 

such records. 

Town Plan . — Survey of every wall of each 
house ; thickness of each wall (easily neglected) ; 
reveals of doorways ; doorsills if of stone ; sizes of 
bricks ; levels of top and base of each wall if any 
rebuilt or superimposed ; contents of each chamber, 
note if on floor or in filling ; objects buried in floors ; 
special note of position of exactly dated objects ; 
copies of any frescoes or decoration. 

Tomb .' — Position relative to other tombs. Size of 
pit, direction, depth. Position of chamber. Filling 
intact, or estimate of time that it has stood open 
anciently by the weathering of the sides. Objects 
found loose in filling. Chamber plan. Primary or 
secondary burial. Position of body, head direction, 
face direction, attitude of body and limbs. Position 
of beads and small objects on body. Note if beads 
follow any pattern or order; record order of as long 
groups of beads as possible for rethreading ; wrappings, 
amount and nature. Coffin or cartonnage ; inscrip- 


NATURE OF NOTES AND PLANNING 53 


tion and figures, if any, often need copying or photo- 
graphing before removal, as they may fall to pieces. 
Skull and jaw to be removed for measurement ; or, 
if in rarer periods, whole skeleton to be preserved. 
Position and nature of all offerings and objects 
placed in the tomb. Copies of any inscriptions or 
paintings on the walls of the tomb. 

To such outlines of the usual character of records 
are added any special details which are but rarely 
found ; but the above will serve to remind an ex- 
cavator of what must always be looked for. 

In making a plan of any large area, such as a 
town, it is best to start with a rough key-plan divided 
into a few dozen squares, each row of 

Planning. 

squares lettered, each column of squares 
numbered, so that every square is designated, as 
B Si etc. (Fig. 32). Then the detailed plan of each 
square is to be made on one opening of a note-book 
of squared paper, the openings running A i, A 2, 
A3; Bi,B2, B3, etc. Thus any connection from 
one page to another can be found at once by looking 
for the next letter or number : the whole plan is 
in the pocket, and can be added to, chamber by 
chamber, as the clearing progresses. It need hardly 
be said that every plan or detail should be 
drawn north upwards in the note-book., Main lines 
are of course to be connected together by long lines 
of measurement. 

As a general principle it is best to measure 
positions of as many points as possible along one 
single line of measurement, rather than take many 
piece-meal short distances and add them together. 
Thus (Fig. 29) a series of walls should be stated as. 


54 


RECORDING IN THE FIELD 


66, 76, 201, 220, 2S7, 269, 330, 353, ,434, 446 
inches, rather than as lengths of 66, 10, 25 , 19, 37, 
12, 61, 23, 81, and 12 inches ; for the total is more 
accurate when measured all in one, the positions are 
plotted quicker, and the comparison with any sym- 
metric lengths of the building are easier made on 
the spot, so as to detect errors. 

In the direct measurement of groups of walls, etc., 


Kic. zg.— Example of a plan measured entirely from two bounding- lines. 


it is the quicker and more accurate method to adopt 
two outside sighting lines, say one along the north, 
the other along the east, of the ground, marked out 
by high walls or large stones always visible, and then 
measure every point out to the two sighting lines at 
right angles. Spaces of over 100 feet across can be 
divided into separate groups. 

The general use of instruments cannot be entered 
upon here. But amongst the means of work the 
divided rod is indispensable, and it is all that is 


PLANNING AND PLOTTING SS 

wanted for most small buildings that are met with. 
The tape is the most practical for distances of lo to 
50 feet ; and the steel tape for accurate measuring 
of base lines, or long distances. The box-sextant is 
for very broken ground, and isolated details, or if 
working alone ; and the theodolite for accurate work 
anywhere between the accuracy of, say, i inch on 
500 feet and the refinement of a of an inch 
on a mile. The plane table may be convenient for 
approximate plans, and is simple and rapid to use. 
The prismatic compass is of use for the directions of 
single blocks or fragments of wall, and is handy for 
rough topography (generally with paced distances), 
or for underground passages. 

In considering the accuracy required, if dimensions 
in figures are to be given, then minute measurement 
is wanted, somewhat more accurate than the original 
workmanship. But where only a plan is to be pro- 
duced, it is seldom practicable to show more accuracy 
than i-^th inch on a book page 10 inches high, or 
TtAjc)'^^ of the whole, and therefore it is of no use to 
measure closer than i inch on a space of 200 feet 
or so across. 

It need hardly be said that the barbarous irre- 
gular fractions, such as •§ of an inch to a foot or to 
a mile, should never be used for plotting. 

Simple decimal scales should alone be 
used, and generally x^^h is the most suitable and 
easy for all plans of ordinary buildings, towns, etc. ; 
this is further reduced by photolithography to what- 
ever scale will best fit the size of publication. 

Though the ordinary methods of survey need not 
be stated here, the box-sextant is so seldom seen that 


S6 RECORDING IN THE FIELD 


some account should be given of its use. The 
objection to its use on short distances, that parallax 
between the direct and reflected ray causes errors, 
can be avoided by overlapping the images about f 
inch, the usual amount of the parallax. The main 
use of the sextant is for three-point survey. Over 
broken ground where many isolated points have to 


Fig. 30.— Method of plotting a thrce^point survey, «, w, s, the three fixed points. 
A the point to be found. B, C, centres of stnick circles. 

be fixed, within a few inches on a few hundred feet, 
there is no method so quick and useful as the nautical 
three-point method, when improved by rigid plotting. 
At any three points which shall be visible from the 
whole of the ground, and within its general plane, 
three signals are placed, best lettered by the quarter 
of the horizon nearest to each, say n, s, w. The three 
points must be so placed that the one circle passing 
through them all shall not pass through points 


PLOTTING 


57 


needed in the survey ; - otherwise they may be in any 
position, though best as a triangle of about equal 
sides. The three angles and one side are to be 
measured, thus defining the whole triangle. Then at 
any point to be fixed, A, the two angles between 
n to J and w to s are measured with the sextant, 
and these suffice to fix the position. For plotting 
(Fig. 30), lay down the triangle of the three fixed 
points, say to scale triangle with shaded 

corners «, s, w), and the perpendiculars to each side 
of it ; this is most accurately done by a large pro- 
tractor with vernier, setting out the radii and perpen- 
diculars of the triangle from its centre. Then 
tabulate the half of each base x cotan. angles ob- 
served on that base, e.g. 

logs. n.n. logs. n.n. logs. n.n. 

J bases n ‘27314 s ‘36621 w ‘29223 it 

X cotan. I" I ‘43223 2 ‘ 70 S ‘26272 i‘83i 

angles at I 2 ‘56671 3 ‘687 ‘48214 3 ‘035 

places I, 2, 3 t 3 ‘4199s 2‘630 ‘67709 4‘7S4 

Here the log. half base « to j is ‘27314 ; this added 
to fog. cotan. of angle subtended hy n — s from station 
I is log. ‘43223, giving a value 2‘705 inches. From 
station I the angle s — w was observed ; and from 
stations 2 and 3 the angle w — n was observed. All 
this calculation can be rapidly done in this form, placing 
the sheet upon the log. book, with the written log. 
half base next below the printed log. cotan. angle, 
and writing down the sum of the two against the 
number of the station. Then on the plan, plot these 
base X cotan.) on the perpendiculars of their 
respective bases as at B and C, marking the station 
number to each. Then with compasses sweep an arc 


S8 RECORDING IN THE FIELD 


from one centre B, with radius Bj- equal to the distance 
from the centre to its two points of the triangle. 
The same from the other centre C that has the same 
number of station. The intersection of the arcs is 
the point A of that station on the plan. 

Of course the prolonged perpendiculars (broken 
lines) are used as often as the direct perpendiculars; 
the aspect of the angle from the station, whether n — s 
or s~n showing on which half of the perpendicular 
we should lay off the centre. For angles over 90° 
the complement of the angle should be used in cal- 
culation, the centre then laid off on the wrong half 
of the perpendicular, and the arc swept across the 
right half. This mode of plotting gives the fullest 
accuracy, such as is never possible with the use of 
station-pointers, or trial and error devices which are 
used in nautical survey. A field of 40 stations can 
be easily calculated in an hour, and plotted in a 
couple of hours more. If it is needful to work any 
point with pure calculation instead of plotting, it can 
be accurately done by the principle that the line 
joining the two centres of arcs, B and C, forms with 
their common point s an equal and opposite triangle 
to that which they form with the survey point A. 
It will be seen on looking at the diagram that w — s, 
the angle by which B is plotted, is equal to the angle 
w-~s from A; and similarly the angle of the half 
base n — s from C, is equal to n — s from A. Hence 
the points n, s, w subtend from A, the observed 
angles, and A is the point from which they must 
have been observed. 

For levelling, the handiest instrument is a short 
rigid pendulum, with mirror attached, to hang truly 


PLOTTING 


59 


vertical. The reflection of the eye back to itself is 
then a truly horizontal line, and can be sighted on to 
any distance. The pendulum is best made about S 
inches long, with tetrahedral net of suspension thread, 
to avoid twisting, passing through two eyes on the 
mirror and two eyes on the holder, and a covering 
tube to shield it from wind. With this, readings can 
easily be taken to an inch on lOO feet, and this is 
sufficient accuracy for most archaeological work. 


CHAPTER VI 
COPYING- 

A very needful branch of recording is the taking 
impressions of inscriptions and flat reliefs. The 

usual method is by wet squeezingf of 
Papor squeazea. , . , , , ° 

paper, which may be made up of any 

thickness, from a true mould to a slight surface 
impression. If a mould is wanted for future casting, 
a tough rag paper without much size should be 
used ; but good newspaper will do. The tougher the 
paper is when wet, the better. The stone must be 
thoroughly cleaned and soaked. The paper is cut 
to the size, and, if less than the stone, in two or 
more sheets. A sheet is then put in a basin of 
water, rolled about to soak, and then gathered into a 
ball and rolled between the hands to break the grain, 
just short of pulping the surface ; next shaken out 
like a wet handkerchief, and then laid on the stone 
with enough slack to go into all the hollows. It is 
then gently beaten with a spoke -brush until it is 
pushed into the hollows (Fig. 33). If they are deep 
it is needful to use strips of paper soaked and pulped, 
and laid by finger in the hollows, so as to nearly 
fill them. Finally, a severe beating is given to the 
60 


PAPER SQUEEZES AND DRY SQUEEZES 6i 

whole, as violent as can be done without tearing the 
paper. The paper should be pulped on the stone, 
and driven into every crack and porosity ; using a 
second, and even a third, sheet to bind it together. 
The pulp in the hollows should be kneaded in with 
the sharp edge of the brush- back, using the whole 
weight of the body to force it home. About 50 
square feet of such work is as much as can be done 
in a day. The precautions are : avoid bubbles of 
water or air below the paper, beat quite straight 
without dragging, and see that there is no creeping 
of the paper or shifting on the stone. When quite 
dry and hard the cast may be carefully peeled off. 
After heating and waxing, plaster casts may be taken 
from it, with a slight oiling between each using. 

A slighter working is enough on shallow inscrip- 
tions ; but such squeezes generally need to be taken 
off while wet, and allowed to dry alone, or else the 
paper drags flat out of the hollows when contracting 
in drying. This is specially the case on polished 
granite, where there is no grip on the surface. 

Surface impressions of incised carving may be 
taken with a single sheet of paper beaten just enough 
to catch the edges of the cutting ; and such make 
excellent bases for inking over to produce a facsimile 
drawing (Fig. 31). The impression is so much better 
on the inner side, that the inking is done on that, 
and the figures are thus reversed in the plate. 

But on all coloured work, and many kinds of 
tender stones, wet squeezing is a crime, as it 
destroys the original. Fatuous tourists 
and brazen students have wrecked 
innumerable monuments by wet squeezing, and it 


62 


COPYING 


is now necessarily prohibited in Egypt unless special 
permission is obtained to do some object which 
cannot be injured by it. Another system, that of 
dry squeezing, I therefore introduced when doing 
the Medum tombs, A sheet of thin paper is held 


i 


e 


mmmnsm 


ms 


im 


1.3*' — 


Fig. 31.— Copy made by inking a paper squeeze, i :8, A part of thejlsrael stele, 
with the name Israel in the last line but one. 


over the stone, and it is pressed over each edge of 
the cutting so as to leave a bend in the surface. 
Then, laid on a drawing-board, with an oblique 
lighting, the bends are all drawn on with pencil, 
checking by comparison with the stone. Sometimes 
it is best to draw by lamplight, and check with the 


DRY SQUEEZES 


63 

stone afterwards. The drawing should always begin 
at the bottom light hand, so as not to press out the 
impression by the hand ; and the sheets must not 
be rolled before being pencilled. For small lines, a 
piece of indiarubber should be used to press the 
paper into the hollows. For the outlines of reliefs 
the thumb nail must be used. This system is 
quicker and more accurate than any reduced-scale 
hand drawing. Over large wall surfaces the sheets 
should be placed in regular rows, lettered A, B, C 


A 1 

Aa 

A3 

A4- 

AS 

A6 

A7 

AS 

B 1 

Ba 

B3 

B4- 

BS 

B 6 

B7 

B8 

Cl 

c 2 

C3> 

C4 

C 5 

C 6 

C7 

C 8 

D 1 

Di 

D3 

D4 

D5 

D 6 

D7 

D8 

E 1 

El 

E3 

E4 

E 5 

E 6 

E 7 

E a 

F 1 

FI 

F3 

F4 

FS 

F 6 

F 7 

FS 


Fig. 33.— System of numbering sheets of connected drawings. 


(Fig. 32), and each sheet numbered in the row, so 
that A 3, B 3, C 3, come one below the other. The 
register of positions is kept by marking a minute 
cross with pencil on the wall, so that the corners of 
four sheets will fall between the four arms of the 
cross. Thus each fresh sheet is placed exactly 
to fit the sheets which have preceded it, in the 
row and in the column. Any large blanks or 
injuries should have their corresponding sheets duly 
lettered (even if nothing is on them), and put with 
the drawings, so that there shall be no hitch in 
placing them all in one great sheet afterwards. 


COPYING 


64 

It may be convenient to join up the sheets, 
and then redivide the drawings at suitable spaces 
between the subjects for convenience of packing. 
To join the sheets they must be laid together in 
position, a slight cut then made with a knife to 
mark two sheets across the joint ; then turned back- 
up, adjusted by the cut, and a strip of adhesive 
paper put on the joint, dabbed down and not rubbed 
along. Thus large sculptured walls can be copied 
sheet by sheet, joined up, inked in, and then photo- 
lithographed for plates. It is needful to remember 
that the Postal Union will take rolls up to 60 centi- 
metres length and 21 cm. diameter, as ordinary 
parcels up to S kilograms ; or 75 cm. length if 
not over 10 cm. diameter and 2 kilograms of weight, 
by book post, open at ends. 

Beside the direct material for 23ublishing in lolates, 
it is often desirable to take casts and impressions, 
both for future reference and also as a 
step toward a photograph (Fig. 34). 
The making of paper impressions or squeezes has 
already been noted. Casting with plaster of Paris 
is the principal mode of reproduction, and is such a 
detailed business in itself that only a few notes can 
be given here, such as might possibly be wanted in 
field work. The fine work for museum purposes is 
outside of our aim here. The main point in handling 
wet plaster is rapidity ; and for that everything must 
be ready, and the exact plan of work and amount of 
plaster settled beforehand. A basin should be used 
with water equal to about two-thirds of the volume 
of plaster required. Into this shake or sift dry 
plaster rapidly, until the water is just filled up with 


C'AS’l ING. 


33- PiipLT squeeze. XII Dyn. 
(lOddess Xekheh. 


l-’iS- 34- 


I’lasK- 

I’hilisl 


CASTING 


65 


it, and no free water left on the top ; it is then well 
proportioned, and should be violently stirred with a 
large flat spoon or slip of wood and poured out in 
an even stream, beginning with the middle if a flat 
mould, and flattening it out to the edges. It is best 
to have rather too little than too much ; as a fresh 
lot can be mixed, with the hardened pieces of the 
first lot, to serve for a backing ; the first lot being, 
of course, spread over the whole face to begin with. 
Strings, or strips of butter- muslin, should be put 
through the mass, if it is large, so as to prevent it 
falling to pieces if broken later on. Excellent casts 
are made with a thin skin of plaster on a backing of 
muslin put on a frame ; but this requires more skill 
than plain work. About 10 minutes after casting 
the back should be scraped down level, or planed 
with a wide -mouthed hand plane, which is a very 
useful tool in finishing casts. No cast of any large 
size should be left without even support for some 
hours after casting, as it will settle out of shape if 
strained. Small quantities of plaster are best mixed 
with a pocket knife in the palm of the hand. 

Moulds for casting are usually of clay for a large 
scale, but that is not likely to be used in the field- 
work. The division of the clay is best done by 
bedding threads along the face of the object at the 
lines required, and then pulling them up to cut the 
clay. The face of the object requires French chalk 
(steatite powder) on it to' prevent cohesion ; oiling or 
greasing spoils the face of the original. For field- 
work paper moulds are best, and the preparation of 
these as wet squeezes has been already described. 
To fit the squeeze for use as a mould, it should be 

F 


66 


COPYING 


heated and brushed with melted beeswax on the 
face, without necessarily soaking it through. Any 
places that are shiny when cold should be warmed 
and rubbed with cotton wool, so that the face is the 
true paper cast. Then slightly oil between each 
plaster casting, or else the warmth of the setting 
plaster will make the wax stick to it. Several 
casts can be taken from one paper, if it is carefully 
handled in peeling it from the plaster each time. 
Paper impressions of cylinders are best made with 
blotting-paper, unrolled wet, and left to dry. To 
remove the cockling of drying, spread a thin coat of 
stiff paste on card, and press the paper squeeze 
lightly on it. 

Guttapercha moulds are best if many copies are 
required. To get a sharp impression in this tough 
material a preliminaiy mould should be made, of the 
right shape, but not sharp on the face. This should 
be thoroughly cooled in water for an hour or more, 
and then a small quantity of guttapercha from boil- 
ing water should be laid in the hard mould and the 
object pressed in very rapidly and with maximum 
pressure. Thus the hot material is forced firmly 
against every part and takes a brilliant impression. 
Such moulds are used for electrot3'ping as well as 
for plaster work. To produce a smooth face to a 
lump of hot guttapercha, it should be pulled out- 
wards from the middle to all sides by thumbs and 
fingers, so as to produce a fresh torn face over the 
whole upper surface. 

Sealing-wax is one of the handiest materials, and 
is used professionally for all the’ coin reproductions 
that are published. Only the best wax is of any 


CASTING 


67 


use for impressions. It should never be allowed to 
burn or blaze, nor even to boil, but should be gently- 
heated until a large mass will fall quite readily. 
The object should be wetted moderately just before 
impressing. So soon as the wax is tough the object 
should be lifted slightly to make certain that it has 
not stuck, and then pressed down again till cold. If 
it has stuck it must be pulled away at once, and the 
wax picked off while tough. Sealing-wax casts must 
be oiled before plaster is put to them ; and oil does 
not soften or deteriorate sealing-wax if left on for 
years. Beeswax, or, better, the mixture called 
“ dentist’s wax,” makes good impressions, and may 
be used for moulds. 

Tin -foil is most useful for rapid impressions, 
especially from a fragile or delicate object. The 
thinnest should be used, such as is wrapped round 
chocolate. To preserve the form of tin-foil it may 
be squeezed into place with a back of beeswax, and 
so form a facing to a wax mould for casting a 
plaster positive. Or it may be pressed alone (forc- 
ing it on with soft indiarubber or cotton wool), and 
then floated, back up, on water, while blazing sealing- 
wax is dropped into it to form a backing. This 
mode is very handy for coin impressions, which will 
travel safely in this form and look well. For round 
objects, such as cylinders, a tin-foil impression should 
be made, beating the foil in with a soft tooth-brush ; 
then the foil is to be uncoiled by rolling it upon 
wax so that the curve is removed without flattening 
the impression ; it is then ready for a plaster casting, 
giving a flat cast of the round cylinder. In all cases 
thin gold-foil would be far better than tin-foil ; and 


68 


COPYING 


such an impression might even be preferred to the 
original object by some Oriental officials. 

Drawing is still the main resource for illustration, 
although photographic processes occupy so important 
a place. Hand-work is essential for 

Drawing, Ig more useful method for 

inscriptions, and it is the more convenient method 
for most small objects. There is generally some in- 
terpretation needed, to show details which could not 
possibly all be visible in one uniform lighting, as in 
a photograph ; and this can only be done by drawing 
all that can be seen in varying lights and aspects. 
Another superiority of outline drawings is that they 
are far more easily looked over and referred to than 
a much less distinct photograph. And lastly, they 
cost a third or a quarter of the amount for publica- 
tion. The proper scope of photographs is stated in 
the next section. 

As drawing is almost always to be reproduced by 
photolithography, or by zinc block, it is essential to 
have it entirely in full black and white without any 
grey or half tones. Hence the contrast should be 
kept as strong as possible ; and only China ink of 
full blackness should be used for fine lines. In 
wide, coarse work, as full-sized inscriptions from 
walls, a common writing-ink evaporated to denser 
quality may be used. Ebony stain, which some use, 
has the disadvantage of spreading badly if it chances 
to be wetted. A smooth, glazy-faced paper is good 
for fine lines, and does not rag up under the pen. 
Cardboard is pleasant to use, but is awkward to send 
by post ; whereas paper drawings roll up safely in a 
tube. 


DRAWING 


69 


A cardinal rule in drawing is that the finest line 
should come out to inch when the subject is re- 
duced to the plate size. Thus a drawing to be 
reduced to by photolithography should have its 
finest lines inch thick. This line of inch 
is the finest which is safe not to break up in i-epro- 
ducing ; and of course it spreads a little in the 
printing. For very slight shade lines rather thinner 
lines may be used, as it is no disadvantage if they 
should break. 

It is very desirable to have similar objects all re- 
duced to the same scale. For pottery is a con- 
venient reduction ; for stones vases ; for metal tools 
and small objects The drawings of pottery and 
stone vases are easiest to do on scales ^ and as the 
measured diameters have to be laid off as radii from 
the axis, needing halving throughout. The further 
reduction is done when photographing for the litho- 
graphs ; and it is always best to have such a reduction 
to f, if not to of the size of the drawing, in order to 
make it come out more delicate than the hand-work. 
A very useful system for recording groups of small 
objects, especially such as are found together, is to 
lay them out on a sheet (say double the plate size), 
as arranged for the plate, and then run a pencil 
round the outlines, and add as much detail as may 
be needful to explain the objects ; thus a pictorial 
inventory is made quickly, and is far more useful and 
easier for i-eference than any written inventory (Fig. 
35). The pencil should have the wood split off one 
side of the lead, and be sharpened by cutting to a 
chisel-edge on the opposite side. Thus the point is 
vertically under the guiding side; and when held 


70 


COPYING 


carefully upright, outlines can well be run from 
surfaces half an inch or even an inch above the paper. 
The size of the sheet will, of course, depend on the 
amount of reduction intended. For numbering the 
figures printed nurpbers can be gummed on to the 
drawing. 

For vases, block tints are more satisfactory than 


outlines. So the drawing can be filled up with a 
wash of ink. Or if section lines are wanted it is 
best to draw the section line, and block out the 
ground outside of the vase, leaving the vase white on 
a black ground ; then have this reversed, black for 
white, in the photolithographing. The vases may be 
printed in any colour which is suitable. 

The method for drawing a completed form of a 


RESTORED FORMS 7x 

vase from fra’gments is to place the brim and the 

base (the curves of which can be accur- 

, . . - Restored forms, 

ately measured against a senes of con- 
centric circles) into their true positions, to a vertical 
axis ; and then, if there is no complete connection, to 
adjust their height on their axis so that their 
curvatures (including other pieces which join them) 
fall into one line. It is easier to do' this with the 
mouth downwards. A frame is made (Fig. 36), with 
a vertical rod sliding up and down over the middle ; 
a card with concentric circles on it is placed on the 
floor of the frame, and centred under the rod. 
Taking a piece of a brim, it is rocked to and fro 
until it touches the card all along the edge, and a 
leg of wax is stuck on so as to keep it at that angle. 
It is then slid about till the curve fits between the 
concentric circles. A piece of base has its curvature 
measured, by fitting a sheet of celluloid ruled with 
concentric circles to the curve of it. It is then fixed 
on the lower end of the vertical rod with some wax, 
so that the rod is in its axis. Then the rod is slid 
down in its grooves until the curves of the piece of 
base and of the piece of brim fall into one line. 
For drawing the form the radius of the brim and of 
the base are already measured ; the height is taken 
as it stands in the frame, also the greatest radius at 
the shoulder, the angle of the side with the base, and 
sometimes the height from the brim to the curve at 
several different radii, read off by sliding a graduated 
square on the concentric circles to touch the curve. 
After plotting all these dimensions the curve is drawn 
in by freehand, looking carefully at the fragments in 
position. 


72 


COPYING 


For hand copying inscriptions of a small size, a 
good method is to fold over the paper at each line 
Copying is done, and draw the signs one by 

insoriptions. one on to the fresh edge of paper held side 
by side on the stone ; thus there is no strain or loss 
of time by looking to and fro and finding the place, 
no chance of omissions, and the facsimile is as 
accurate as possible. This is especially for copying 
ink writing and graffiti. When making a reduced 
copy by hand it is best to have a sheet of card under 
the paper ruled in squares (of or up to 2 inches), 
with thick lines. These show through the paper, 
and a frame of strings or threads is put over the 
stone, of a larger size, agreeing to the scale of re- 
duction intended ; e.g, for reducing a wall to have 
card ruled in i inch squares, and a frame of strings 
5 inches apart over the wall. For lines or columns 
of inscription it does to rule the column lines and 
only have a long scale on a strip of wood put along- 
side of the column which is being copied, so as to 
tally with the lines seen through the paper. 


CHAPTER VII 


PHOTOGRAPHING 

PhoTOGRAPPIS are essential for all objects of artistic 
interest, and for expressing rounded forms for which 
elaborate shading would otherwise be 
needed. Views of the excavations and 
buildings are also wanted. And it is desirable to 
publish photographs as well as drawings of very im- 
portant carvings, in order to guarantee the accuracy 
of the drawing, which is the more useful edition for 
most purposes. 

Though the ordinary knowledge of photography 
must be taken for granted here, there are many 
details and preferences which are special to this kind 
of work. The bane of practical photography is the 
rich amateur, who insists on useless luxury of ap- 
paratus, and has set a fashion in fittings which is 
absurdly complex. It is undesirable to have a 
specially compact camera, as steadiness and con- 
venience in use are sacrificed for lightness and slight- 
ness, which are no object in a fixed camp. An 
old-fashioned bulky camera is better for stationary 
work. I have long used a tin-plate camera with 
plain draw -body in two pieces ; the benefit when 
73 


74 


PHOTOGRAPHING 


enlarged photographs are needed is found by taking 
it apart, and inserting a card tube, made up when 
wanted to any length required for the enlargement. 
Some very simple, adaptable camera is best, with a 
large plate- magazine attached to it, so that some 
dozens can be carried at once. For ordinary views 
and small-scale objects a simple hand camera is 
best. A pattern should be adopted which may be 
the least liable to get out of order in a very dusty 
and gritty climate ; of the simplest mechanism, with 
a plain thrown-down pattern, to carry a dozen flat 
films. As to the size of camera, the plate is by 
far the most useful, being right for lantern slides 
and large enough for most objects. Enlargements 
can be made to double size (or whole plate) quite as 
good as collotype or net will reproduce them. The 
time and work of using a whole-plate size are scarcely 
ever repaid by the results for practical archaeology. 

The fashion of wide-angle lenses is useless for 
everything excepting architecture at close quarters. 
And for most objects it is very detrimental to have 
so short a focus, as it distorts and spoils the per- 
spective. It is best to use too long a focus in order 
to get truer views of objects, at least 6 inches focus 
for a ^ plate. There does not seem to be any 
appreciable gain in the newer patterns of lenses over 
the older “ rapid rectilinear ” or “ symmetrical ; and 
the positive disadvantages of some recent lenses are 
seen in the smaller aperture and lack of light for 
focussing, and the distortion at extreme edges. The 
iris diaphragm is a disadvantage, as it brings in 
another variable, while the time of exposure can be 
varied to any extent needed. It is best to stick to 


& 


CAMERA 


75 


one small stop, say //lOO, and learn exposures 
entirely on that basis ; then in case of poor light 
a larger stop, as //2S or //8, can be used proportion- 
ately to shorten the time. Small stops can be made 
out of a strip of tin plate or blackened card ; and 
the hand camera can be stopped down with a pin- 
hole stop stuck in front of the lens so as to work 
at almost any nearness and scale with exposures of 
■g- or I minute in full sunshine. 

The instantaneous shutter is a useless article for 
all fixed objects. It is far better to work with a 
small stop which gives plenty of depth of focus, and 
expose for 2 to 20 seconds, which is long enough 
for f/ioo on slow plates in Egypt. For direct en- 
largement of objects a stop of fj 200 is excellent, 
and only needs 30 seconds exposure. If a shutter 
is wanted a simple drop can easily be extemporised 
(Fig. 38) fitting on to the front of the lens, and 
such will give fine results. A diagonal mirror front 
can be made out of any decent scrap of looking- 
glass, without showing any double image (Fig. 39). 

Rapid films arc another fashion better avoided, 
as for fixed objects there is no great hurry. The 
slowest films made have never caused any practical 
inconvenience in my work, and they are far safer 
to keep and to develop. The skew-back is never 
needed except for architecture ; and in the few cases 
where it is necessary, the effect can always be as 
well obtained by taking the plate square, and then 
copying it skewed in a skew -back camera. The 
sliding and rising front is about the only complica- 
tion that is useful in serious work ; and if a long 
focus lens is used a large amount of slide can be 


76 


PHOTOGRAPHING 


obtained; but a camera with a free- swinging lens 
turning to any angle would be the best form. 

The preparation of the object is a very important 
point. Any sunk carving or inscription of small size 
Preparing should generally be filled in with whiting 
objects. (Fig. 41) or charcoal dust, according as 
the material is dark or light, so as to give a strong 
contrast (Fig. 40). In case of worn inscriptions on 
impervious stone, such as rock crystal, the lines may 
be marked with China ink, dried on, and then gently 
wiped with damp fingers until only the faint hollows 
retain the ink. What is hardly visible to the eye 
can thus be brought up clearly. If hollows are slight 
and smooth, so that they will not hold a powder, 
brush over with stiff paste, wipe the face clean on 
a damp handkerchief, and then press in the powder. 
Only rather coarse powders should be used, in order 
to avoid staining the object. In field-work objects 
should al.so be carefully dressed. Reliefs upon 
weathered stones (Fig. 37) should be dusted over 
with sand, and then lightly wiped until just the 
wrought relief is cleared, and the ground is left 
smoothed with sand. Stones in building should be 
brushed or scraped clean, so as to contrast with 
the earth. Joints in walls should be picked out or 
brushed so as to show clearly. Sometimes, as in a 
flooring of wood (Fig. 42), the whole should be 
entirely brushed clean, and then the joints packed 
with the lightest-coloured sand so as to contrast well. 
A grave needs hand-picking, and then every bone 
brushing clean, and the ground between packing 
with dark earth to give contrast. All pottery and 
objects should be entirely cleaned around, and lifted 


Kig. 40. Ivory tablet of Zer ; j big. .|l. Bron/.e hypoeephalus, 
light half with black, XXX Dyn. ; 

(lark half «nh white. ; tilled in with white. 


PREPARING OBJECTS AND LIGHTING 77 

slightly so as to show a clear outline. The proper 
dressing of a grave (Fig. 43^ will easily occupy two 
hours of work. Nothing which adds to the contrast 
and clearness of an object should be neglected. 
Sometimes for dark objects it is well to dust them 
with very fine white powder, as with a puff-ball, so 
as to give some light on the darker sides. And for 
objects of mottled colour, such as carved porphyry, 
a coat of flake-white water-colour is best, so as to 
show the relief only and not the colour. For coins 
and gems there is no method to compare with photo- 
graphing from plaster casts, which are always used 
in serious work. 

The lighting is the most important element in 
photographing. No other requirement is so essential, 
for with bad lighting nothing can be 
done. The rule of the light coming ^ 
from the top left hand should always be followed 
where no special direction is needed. Generally a 
diagonal light is best for inscriptions, as most lines 
ai'e vertical or horizontal. An object should first be 
held with a moderately oblique light on the face of 
it, then quickly revolved in the plane of its face, so 
as to see the changing effect of light from different 
directions, observing what lines disappear in various 
positions, and selecting the most effective direction. 
On setting it up, with the sun (or other light) in the 
best direction, the obliquity of the light should then 
be tried, tilting the object more or less, until the 
details are sufficiently shown without too heavy 
shadows. In case of a human face the light should 
be nearly vertical, and the obliquity of it sufficient 
to bring out the cheek curves to the best. Of course. 


78 


PHOTOGRAPHING 


the position of the object naust be regulated entirely 
by the direction of the light, and a figure may need 
to be tilted in any position. A conical or cylindrical 
object must be placed with its axis pointing a little 
behind or below the light, so as to lighten the whole 
side. For fixed objects, such as buildings, a time- 
table of the best hours for each part should be 
drawn up and followed. 

Beside direct lighting, subsidiary lighting is very 
useful. Any dark shadows should be lighted with 
reflectors of white paper or card, or actual mirror. 
Or during an exposure of several seconds, or more, 
a transient mirror reflection can be played about the 
shadow, so as not to show an edge to the light. 
When looking at the image on the ground glass 
each part should be searched to see if any detail is 
lost by shadow, or if an outline is lost against an 
equally dark background ; if so, some difference of 
lighting must be made. Various slips of card may 
be fixed around the object, so as to cast shadows 
which will make some part of a brightness differing 
from its background, and other slips to cast lights 
on any dead part. For photographing an ebony 
statuette (Fig. 44) I searched in the camera for each 
dead uniform surface, and then fixed a slip of card 
so as to break the deadness with a reflection ; half 
a dozen such slips, at a foot or two distance, left the 
figure without a single curve not brought out and 
intelligible. 

Reflectors are also very useful for lighting dark 
subjects. Three or four sheets of tin plate should 
have the edges turned up to stiffen them, and be of 
slightly different sizes so as to nest together for 


I.KiIIIlN(. Ii\ Ul'.I'I.l 
Kig. 4-). Ebony iiogreS!.. XV'III 1)_mi. | I'lg. . 


79 


ARRANGEMENT OF OBJECTS 

carrying. One planted in the sunshine outside a 
tomb will send a beam in, which may be reflected 
again by another. With three successive reflections, 
round two right angles, I have lighted an entirely 
dark chamber (Fig. 45) enough to photograph with 
five minutes exposure and full aperture. The 
successive reflections so neutralise each other’s varia- 
tions that a very uniform lighting results. 

If a flat surface with different colour is the object, 
then a light exactly from behind the camera is best, 
so as to avoid any shadows. A faint ink-writing on 
rough pottery will appear with a back light when it 
seems quite hopeless in a side light. For papyri two 
equal electric arc lights are placed, one on each side 
of the camera, so that there can be no shadows and 
no reflections. 

Backgrounds should be considered. For most 
objects there is nothing so good as black velvet, as 
a long exposure can be taken so as to Arrangement 
bring out the shadows on the object, orosjeots. 
without any glare from the background. The 
ground should extend far beyond the object, as any 
bright surface near the object may make internal 
reflections in the camera. In short, no bright 
surface should be visible within 60° of the axis of 
the lens. For dark objects of which the outline 
alone is important a light ground might be used ; 
though even here probably a black ground and long 
exposure would be better. A glass background with 
light or dark surface some distance behind it is used 
sometimes, so as to avoid all shadows from objects. 
But in many cases a shadow is positively useful, 
and adds to the intelligibility of the view. 


80 


PHOTOGRAPHING 


The direction of the camera is too often hori- 
zontal, For portable objects a vertical position is 
generally better, and for groups it is essential 
(Fig. 46). The background on which the objects 
are laid can be tilted so as to get oblique light from 
sun or window, and the camera tilted equally from 
the vertical by shifting the legs. Scraps of wax 
can be stuck on below objects, so as to keep them 
in any exact position required for lighting or view- 
ing, or scraps of charcoal used as wedges which do 
not show on the black backing. There is no need 
to trouble about depth of focus, as the insertion of a 
small stop, as fj 100, is enough to bring up every 
part sharp. I have taken a bracelet (Fig. 47) with 
the sides at 7 and 9 inches from the lens both in 
perfectly sharp focus. In fact, a subject may be 
contracted into the plate by putting it out of focus, 
and then focussed by the stop. For all cases of 
large-scale photographs or enlargements it is best 
to focus by shifting the distance from object to lens, 
and not from lens to plate. 

In setting up the camera everything should be 
done as far as possible before looking into it, — the 
di.stance measured for the scale required, the camera 
set square with the plane of the object in both 
directions, and set so as to have the object upright 
on the plate. All of this can be far better dealt 
with from outside. The actual focussing and slight 
adjustments can then be done when viewing the 
ground glass. For skew positions it is best to hold 
the camera in the hand where it ought to be, keeping 
the legs turned up from the ground ; and then drop 
the legs one after another, so as to touch the ground 


ARRANGEMENT, STEREOGRAPHS 8 1 


or some object ; thus the camera will be left stand- 
ing in the required position. The stand should not 
have the legs packed by folding sideways ; but they 
should be capable of being shortened to the single 
length while fixed to the camera, as it is often need- 
ful to support it only a foot from the ground. A 
stand should be so made as to give the greatest 
range of height. A common fault of beginners is 
not covering the plate, but letting the image be 
smaller than necessary. Unless working to some 
uniform scale, an object should be shown as large as 
the plate allows ; always remembering that a lantern 
slide will seldom take more than 3 inches diameter, 
and hardly a full 3 inches square. It is convenient 
to fill a ^ plate with a group, of which the least 
important objects are at the sides, and so can be 
omitted in a lantern-slide print. A most trouble- 
some matter is taking a series of wall scenes so that 
they will fit exactly together at the edges. Prob- 
ably it pays best to do them approximately in the 
field, and then enlarge in a copying camera on to a 
ruled ground, and so remove all irregularities of 
scale and of skewness. For working to a uniform 
scale it is best to fix it by keeping the focal length 
unchanged and measuring the distance of the camera 
from the object, and not to refer to the size on the 
glass. 

StcreograiDhic views are most useful for confused 
masses of objects, such as a field of ruins. And if 
there are no moving parts there is no 
need to take them simultaneously. By 
shifting the camera to one side, and taking a second 
plate, a perfect stereograph is obtained ; and where- 

G 


82 


PHOTOGRAPHING 


ever the chance is not to be repeated, and two plates 
are taken to ensure success, a shift should be made 
so that both may be used together. The amount of 
shift varies with the distance ; for near objects the 
distance between the eyes, 2|- or 3 inches, may 
suffice ; for a general view a foot or 2 feet is 
better, so as to give more solidity than is naturally 
seen. Small objects must not be shifted by rotating 
the object if there are sharp shadows, as such are 
falsified by the turning; otherwise a slight twist of 
the object does for the second view. 

It is undesirable to leave developing till long 
afterwards. In general all negatives should be 

developed the evening after they are 

Developing. .n r ^ 

exposed ; thus the future exposures can 
be regulated, any defective plates can be repeated, 
and deterioration and risks due to keeping are 
avoided. In the variety of developers the old 
pyrogalHc acid remains still one of the most reliable. 
The fanciful instructions about proportions are ex- 
ploded at once by a glance at the table compiled by 
Captain Abney. By adopting the mean proportions 
of all the makers, which is i soda carbonate, i soda 
sulphite, and 20 water, as a stock solution, and 
adding about 3 grains per I- plate of pyrogallic when 
using, very uniformly good results are obtained with 
short exposures. Of course long exposures require 
bromide ; but that is very seldom needful. Extra 
local developing by tilting the dish, or painting with 
a brush, is useful in case of shadows. Tabloid 
developers are best avoided, as they cause delay in 
dissolving ; and made-up solutions are cumbrous 
and expensive. The quantities needed can always 


DEVELOPING 


83 


be put out by guess, taking ^ of an 8-ounce bottle 
at a time of soda salts, and weighing pyrogallic for 
once to know the look of it For hyposulphite of 
soda fill the bottle full of crystals, and fill 
up with water. If a less strong and more graded 
picture is needed then glycin seems preferable to 
pyrogallic acid. 

No dark room is needed ; developing can alwa}''s 
be done in the evening. A red paper envelope 
split at the bottom and put round the chimney of 
an ordinary lamp, will best screen the light. The 
diffused light of a room will not hurt slow plates in 
developing, and a sheet of brown paper over each 
tray makes all safe. A first soak in weak pyrogallic 
solution, to flatten the films, is best before developing. 
For washing where water may be scarce it suffices 
to have a row of six soup plates of water, and to 
pass each film through each plate for five minutes, 
so completing the washing of each in half an hour. 
A zinc box with 6 or 8 divisions, shifting the nega- 
tives forward through each division, will also work 
well. For drying it is best to have a row of pins 
along the edge of a shelf, and then to punch out a 
small hole in a comer of the film and hang it up, 
with the gelatine face under the shelf to keep dust 
from it. A dusty evening in Egypt will leave each 
film like a piece of sandpaper ; and in case of this 
the films can be afterwards rapidly wa.shed under a 
stream of water, wiping with a lump of cotton-wool. 
This will be enough without resoaking the film. 
Owing to the dryness of the air in Egypt films 
generally curl up in drying, and if forcibly flattened 
they are liable to strip. They are best packed in 


84 


PHOTOGRAPHING 


lots of about 50, coiled up together as a cylinder, 
and wrapped in a turn of paper. When in England 
they can be flattened out by being left near an open 
window in damp weather, or dipped in water and 
left to dry. For quick drying, films may with care 
be stood inside a fender before a fire, and finished 
over a lamp chimney. I have thus dried them in 
about twenty minutes. 


CHAPTER VIII 


PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

The preservation of the objects that are found is a 
necessary duty of the finder. To disclose things 
only to destroy them, when a more skilful or patient 
worker might have added them to the world’s 
treasures, is a hideous fault. And the excavator 
must be ready for all emergencies, for all classes of 
objects in all stages of decay, and deal with each 
without delays, and often with scanty and unsuitable 
means at hand for their treatment. Some familiarity 
with chemistry and physics and properties of materials, 
is one of the first requisites for an excavator. All 
this applies in a lesser degree to the difficulties of 
transport, which is also part of the preservation of 
the antiquities. 

As conditions so infinitely vary it is useless to 
lay down any fixed rules for treatment. Such rules 
would hinder the use of common sense, which is 
essential to success. But examples of how different 
materials are affected, and how difficulties have been 
met, will lead to the excavator thinking out a fit 
treatment for. each case as it arises. In all this we 
are stating field practice only, and not dealing with 
85 


86 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

museum methods, which differ by having far more 
command of resources, and by not having to deal 
with any of the troublesome cases which do not 
survive to reach a museum. 

The great enemy of stonework is salt. In 
Egypt this permeates the soil so that nothing is free 
^ from it; and any object near the surface 
has much salt accumulated in it by 
evaporation. The effect of salt is to disintegrate 
the stone, and make it flake or fall away in powder. 
If there is the faintest taste of salt on a stone slab 
it should be laid to dry, face down, on the ground ; 
for I have seen a fine block of sculpture entirely 
destroyed by being left for a single day face upward. 
When the stone is once dry it is safe in Egypt, but 
in a damp country it may begin a course of slow 
destruction by continual recrystallization of salt. 
Sculptures have been entirely wrecked by being 
cemented into the wall of a museum ; the wet of 
the cement brought all the salt to the face and 
ruined it. The only treatment for salt in stone or 
any other material is long soaking in water. If a 
canal is at hand, stones may be sunk in it for some- 
weeks, face down. Or barrels or zinc trays may be 
used, and the water changed every two or three 
days, for five or six time.s. After such soaking the 
stone must be left to dry face down, so that all the 
remaining salt will come out on the back. Where 
there is not much salt it would be best to lay the 
stone back upwards to dry, brush off any salt which 
comes out, and then wet the ground below, so that 
more water may be drawn up to evaporate on the 
back. If this was continued until no salt appeared 


STONE 


87 


the stone would be cleaned, and the face could not 
be injured. Sometimes a face is already flaking, 
and then the stone must be kept quite flat in soaking 
and drying, so that each flake will be left in place, 
and can be stuck down afterwards. Granite is often 
entirely disintegrated into separate crystals, if it has 
lain near the surface. It is then even impossible to 
turn the block over to copy it, as there is no cohesion 
left in the mass. The only salvation possible for 
such a block would be to make a thick plaster or 
cement coat to the exposed parts, under cut, and 
turn the whole over with a board beneath it, and 
then saturate it hot with paraffin wax. 

The face of limestone is often in tender condition, 
and will not bear wet brushing to clean it. Dry 
picking and brushing is then the only resource. If 
long exposed to damp, limestone dissolves through- 
out the body of it, so that it becomes spongy, and 
like putty with the contained water. A large sarco- 
phagus lid in this state at Denderah was brought 
up to the house, then covered with 3 or 4 inches 
of sand, and left to dry slowly for some weeks ; 
otherwise it would have cracked to chips by con- 
traction on the face. When quite dry it was very 
porous, but in safe state for copying and transport. 
I have seen a slab of limestone in perfect condition, 
reduced to a shapeless paste by a few minutes of 
sharp rain. 

The original stucco facing often remains on lime- 
stone, and also the colour. If the carving has been 
fine it is best to remove the stucco, which is gener- 
ally much less detailed. But if the stucco is an 
improvement on the carving, and especially if there 


88 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

is colour, it must be preserved. This is best done 
by fixing it with thin tapioca water, just so thick 
that it will soak into the stone without leaving any 
glair when dry. This treatment also does for lime- 
stone with a rotten face. 

The same tapioca water may be used for fixing 
colours on stucco, as I did on the Tell el Amarna 
pavement (Fig. 48) ; and the thickness must be 
graduated to the porosity, so that it will just soak 
entirely into the material. Any film left on the 
face will peel away. 

Pottery has not much to fear except salt, and 
that should be soaked out as from stone. Glazed 
pottery with salt in it is more difficult 
to clear, as it takes so long to get any 
change in and out of it. But a persistent soaking 
will clear it in the course of some weeks ; and, if 
necessary, partly drying it in intervals, will bring 
the salt out of the cracks, whence it can be dusted 
off. The commonest failing of glazes is decomposi- 
tion. The green turn brown, by the decomposition 
of the iron from green silicate to brown oxide ; and 
this may take place from the porous interior without 
breaking the external face. The blue glazes go 
white ; and thi^ can be partly remedied by warming 
and soaking with paraffin wax, which fills the fine 
cracks and displays the remaining colour again. 
Sometimes the outer coat of clear glaze over faience 
inlay is decomposed, without spoiling the faience 
below. In this case it is like a picture of which the 
varnish is gone brown, — it only needs cleaning. 
The decomposed glaze can be scraped off, or rubbed 
with fine emery paper, until the faience is clean, and 


POTTERY, TEXTILES, AND WOOD 89 

then a coat of paraffin wax clears the colour and 
preserves it from decomposition. When glazed 
ware, especially of the earliest times, is first found, 
it is very tender and soft. It then needs the most 
careful handling, and must not be brushed or cleaned 
until it is quite dry and hardened. 

Textiles are also often saturated with salt, especi- 
ally the Coptic garments which are in graves near 
the surface. They may be safely soaked 
to remove tl.e salt and the organic 
matter, and then dried by pressing in a towel and 
laying between sheets of paper. The most tender 
examples might perhaps be best treated by placing 
with half a dozen sheets of blotting-paper over and 
under, and keeping wet below while evaporating on 
the top ; this would carr}'' the salt out to the top of 
the blotting paper. In any long soaking of organic 
stuffs a little carbolic acid is desirable, to prevent 
souring and putrefaction of the material. In every 
case the threads of textiles are liable to crumble, 
and any great amount of washing will tend to reduce 
a good deal to powder. Ironing is always desirable 
to consolidate the stuff. 

Wood does not suffer so much from salt as from 
rot and white ants. Any salt may be soaked out ; 
or, if the wood is tender and will not 
bear that, a very stiff jelly should be 
made, so that it will just melt at boiling : the wood 
dropped in when the jelly liquefies, and left in the 
jelly cold for a week or two. Then the salt will 
dialyse out into the jelly, without any free water 
softening the wood. On remelting the jelly the 
wood can be removed, and the salt will be left in 


90 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

the jelly. The gelatine will strengthen and improve 
the wood. This process can be used excellently for 
ivories or bones, which would be ruined by soaking 
in water. Whole skeletons can be set in stiif size, 
and taken out weeks after, freed from salt, as was 
done to those from Medum, now in the College of 
Surgeons. 

Rotted wood is very tender to handle ; and from 
its continued contraction when exposed to the air 
it will fall to pieces. If nearly dry, but rotted, the 
best safeguard is to coat it with beeswax or paraffin 
wax ; if it can be lifted threads can be slipped round 
it, and the whole dipped in hot wax until soaked. 
Or it may have a rapid coat of wax chilled upon it, 
which protects it and binds it together for travelling, 
and which can be soaked into it by piecemeal heat- 
ing afterwards. If the wood will not bear lifting, it 
may be coated by dashing on superheated paraffin 
wax almost at boiling-point. This will soak deep 
into the wood like hot water, and consolidate it so 
that it can be moved quite safely. The same pro- 
cesses apply also to stuccoed wood, which needs 
such safeguards, as otherwise the stucco all falls off 
by the continued shrinkage of the wood. The 
great stuccoed sarcophagus at Hawara was preserved 
by heating the surface with a wire dish of charcoal 
burning about six inches above it, and flooding the 
surface with melted wax so soon as it was enough 
heated to absorb it. Perhaps superheated paraffin 
wax would have carried enough heat with it to soak 
in without the charcoal fire. For all heating of 
wax it is best to use a cast-iron saucepan, as soldered 
tins may give way before the wax boils. Another 


IVORY 


91 

treatment, especially suited for large objects, is paint- 
ing with several coats of wax dissolved in benzol. 

Wood which is very wet is more difficult to 
manage. It may be kept for long under water, like 
the wood from the Glastonbury lake village. And 
it may be consolidated with silicate solution, as has 
been well done in examples from Silchester. Or it 
may be removed from water and laid in glycerine 
with the top exposed ; thus the water will evaporate 
and diffuse, and glycerine take its place. 

Ivory is mainly liable to flaking, especially if in 
wet soil. When any ivory is seen not in a firm 
condition, the earth should be carefully 

Ivory. 

worked round so as to find the limits of 
the ivory, be it a single piece or a collection together. 
Then the mass should be under-cut down to a firm 
stratum, and lifted out in a whole block of earth. 
This should be left to dry slowly ; and after a week 
or two the earth should be gently brushed away with 
a camel-hair brush, aided by picking with a stout pin. 
As each piece of ivory is seen it should be carefully 
followed, and if quite dry it may probably be re- 
moved entire. If still liable to flake, it can then be 
soaked in melted paraffin wax. If the ivory is too 
rotted to be detached from the earth, then the whole 
mass would have to be baked to rather over blood 
heat, and saturated with paraffin wax. After that it 
could be safely dissected by careful picking. In 
case of finding large groups of ivories in the ground, 
too extensive to take out in a block to dry, probably 
it would do to isolate them, then lay a few inches of 
sand on the top, and light a fire over them : after 
slow burning for a few days the ground would be 


92 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

baked dry below, and could be saturated with wax 
before lifting the mass. 

It sometimes happens that ivories in wet soil get 
concreted crystalline carbonate of lime ujDon them, 
which is much harder than the ivory. This being 
crystalline is not saturated with wax when the ivory 
is so treated. Hence after waxing the ivory the 
surface should be cleaned with benzol or ether on 
cotton -wool, and then painted with nitric acid to 
dissolve the crystalline lime. Even strong nitric acid 
will only dull the surface of waxed ivory, and not 
remove any perceptible amount, while it dissolves 
the concretion rapidly. Probably the darkening of the 
ivory caused by soaking in wax can be mainly re- 
moved by heating fuller’s earth to over boiling-point, 
and then rapidly packing the ivory in the earth and 
pressing it : the heat would melt the wax on the 
surface, it will be absorbed by the earth, and the face 
of the ivory will be left dry of wax. The ivories 
from Nineveh were solidified with gelatine ; but that 
would probably break up very tender ivories by the 
amount of water. In case however of much salt in 
ivory the best way to treat it is to drop it in stiff 
hot gelatine, cool it, and let it lie in the consolidated 
mass for a week or two, for the salt to dialyse out. 
Another way, if the mass is not much cut into 
hollows, is to lash the ivory closely with thread or fine 
twine, and then soak it in water to remove the salt ; 
the twine prevents it falling to pieces, and it can be 
dipped in wax when dry, and the twine removed. 

Papyri require most careful treatment at every 
stage. They are often found in a very fragile state, 
and if the roll has to be carried without special pack- 


PAPYRI 


93 

ing in wool it is best to wrap it in a damp handker- 
chief at once. For unrolling rolls, or 
flattening out crushed papyri, damping is 
needful. There is no need to steam them, as has 
been done in museums. By dipping a towel or 
handkerchief in water, and wringing it as dry as 
possible, there is enough moisture to penetrate to a 
papyrus closely wrapped in it. If there were many 
turns then carbolised water would be best, so as to 
avoid any decomposing during a long penetration of 
the damp. Usually a single night is enough for 
damping through half a dozen folds or turns, enough 
to render the papyrus quite pliable. It can then be 
unrolled, or uncreased with the fingers ; and as each 
inch of it is laid flat it should be secured by turning 
down newspaper or blotting-paper over it and sliding 
a board or book over the flattened part. After leav- 
ing it between a dozen leaves of paper to absorb 
the moisture for some days under pressure it is dry 
and firm. Small pieces can well be carried in books, 
and larger sheets in piles of paper between boards. 
When the papyrus is too rotted to be damped, as 
the crossed layers of it would part, then it can only 
be cut to pieces with a sharp penknife at every fold 
and turn ; and each piece fastened down on a sheet 
at once in place. This was the only possible way 
to open the great Ptolemaic revenue papyrus over 
40 feet long ; even a single turn of the roll needed 
to be cut into dozens of pieces. 

For fastening down papyrus it is fatal to gum or 
paste it on to a sheet of card, as the gradual con- 
traction of the gum will break up the layers of the 
papyrus. The safest way of all for very rotted 


94 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

papyri is to rub a sheet of glass with beeswax, lay 
the papyrus on it, and press with a warm hand until 
it sticks to the wax ; then cover with another sheet 
of glass. For ordinary firm papyri minute spots of 
paste, as small as possible, should be put at every 
inch or two round the edges, and farther apart in the 
middle ; then a sheet of thin soft paper should be 
pressed on it, to serve as a backing. Thus there is 
no wide space pasted which can contract in future ; 
and even if the papyrus has to be remounted the 
paper can be torn to pieces behind it. The sheet 
of mounting paper should be fixed under glass. But 
it is a mistake to attach card to glass round the 
edges, as it bags away by damp and warping, and 
leaves a large air space, which is very detrimental. 
It is best to place the mounting paper between two 
sheets of glass ; or, for the sake of lightness and 
safety, the back may be of thin picture-back-board, 
well baked dr}'’, and free from cracks and knots. For 
fastening the edges thin leather or linen may be 
glued around. 

Dealing with carbonised papyri is an art in itself. 
So far as field work goes the main work is to remove 
the earth entirely from the top of the papyrus, so as 
to leave no weight upon it : then under-cut, and take 
out the whole lump, with a block of earth under it. 
The papyi'i must then, in the house, be carefully 
separated, one document from another, by splitting 
apart and lifting with an ivory paper knife or blunt 
table knife, the lighter the better, so as to feel the 
way with it. Each separate roll should then be 
wrapped in soft paper (never cotton-wool) and packed 
a few together, in small tin boxes. Thus they will 


BEAD-WORK 


95 


travel safely and without loss. The museum work is 
outside of our scope ; but broadly the Neapolitan plan 
of holding the pieces in place with adhesive paper on 
the back is not so good as separate treatment of 
each piece, laying it down in position on a sheet of 
glass with small touches of paste, or perhaps pressing 
it on to waxed glass like the rotted papyri. Burnt 
papyri are read by the difference of reflection of the 
surface, and hence must be viewed with light from 
behind the eye, or light reflected by a mirror placed 
almost between the eye and the papyrus. 

■ Bead-work is often found in a state in which it 
cannot be moved owing to rotting of the threads. 

Elaborate decoration with the winged 

... . . . Beal-worjc. 

scarab, four genii, inscriptions, etc., is 

found on mummies of about the XXVth Dynasty. 
But, if the threads are decayed, the beads are merely 
lying in position, and will fall away if the mummy 
be tilted or shaken. In such a case I have opened 
the wooden coffin very gently, cutting out the pegs 
by which it was fastened. Having melted a pot of 
wax on a stove in the tomb, I then dashed spoonfuls 
of it over the beads ; it needs to be thrown sharply, 
so as to splash out, or it runs off all in one line. 
The wax must be only just barely liquid, or it will 
penetrate to below the beads. When a sheet of wax 
is thus put over all the beads, the sheet may be lifted 
up, and the pattern is seen in a clean condition, 
reversed on the under side. The sheet can then be 
fixed with more wax into a tray of wood, so as to 
keep it safely. If any of the beads are not firm they 
can be heated and pressed farther into the wax. 
Strings of beads are seldom found with the thread 


96 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

strong enough to hold together. The earth should 
be loosened with a penknife, and blown away, so as to 
disclose as long a line as possible, then the order of 
the beads should be noted for restringing them, in 
the original pattei'n. The tracing out and noting of 
a string of beads in a grave may often occupy an 
hour or two hours, keeping the face close to the 
ground so as to blew the dust away exactly, without 
disturbing the beads. 

Stucco on wood we have already noticed, under 
the preservation of wood. However firm the stucco 

may seem at first, the gradual contraction 

stucco. , , r <1 

of the wood will make it fall away ; but 

when once saturated with paraffin wax, this move- 
ment is stopped, and the stucco is held on to the 
basis. 

Stucco on mud bricks is a difficult material to 
preserve. Three instances may be given of dealing 
with it, Where the coat was a mere whitewash on 
mud plastering, as at Tell el Amarna (Fig. 49), I 
removed the bricks behind it by cutting them gently 
to pieces with a chisel ; thus the coat of mud plaster 
was left standing up a foot or more in air, although 
it was entirely friable owing to white ants having 
eaten out the straw from it Then placing a box lid 
covered with sheets of paper against the face, it was 
firmly grasped behind, and turned over with the lid 
to support it, face down. Lying on the box lid it 
was taken to the house ; a frame of parallel bars of 
wood was made, each an inch wide and an inch 
apart ; each bar was coated with raud-and-sand ' 
mortar, and then the frame was pressed gently on 
the back of the fresco, and puddled in with mortar 


STUCCO 


97 


between the bars. On then reversing the frame and 
box lid, the fresco was left resting on the frame, with 
a bedding which was perfectly true, and incapable 
of warping or contraction. To pack this a sheet of 
cotton wool was placed on the face, a thin board cut 
to size placed over this, and string lashed tightly 
round the face board and notches in the ends of the 
frame bars. In this state it travelled quite safely, 
although the material was so tender that a finger 
would push through it anywhere ; this was illustrated 
by a museum attendant at Cairo, when ordered to 
carry one of the frames of fresco. 

Where the stucco is thicker, about ^ inch, but 
wholly shattered into minute chips, none over ^ inch 
across, a different treatment was necessary, as at 
Medum, The mass of plaster and stucco was laid 
face down, the mud cut away behind it till about a 
square inch of shattered plaster was bared at the 
back ; this was covered with a thin coat of fresh 
plaster (mixed in the palm of the hand) ; then 
another square inch was bared and coated, and so on, 
until the whole of the mud was removed and the old 
stucco all lay smeared with a thin coat of fresh 
plaster on the back. A large slate was then cut to 
size ; a pudding of liquid plaster was poured on to 
the stucco and pressed out as thin as could be with 
the slate. When it was set, the old painted stucco 
was thus securely cemented on to the slate ; light, 
tough, and portable, it travelled to America in perfect 
state. 

The third method is where the surfaces are curved. 
By cutting away the^ back as thin as is safe, and 
setting in a firm backing of cement, even this 

H 


98 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

difficult subject may be dealt with, and removed 
safely. 

Metals do not require much treatment in the 
field ; but it is needful to understand the condition 
of them in order to know how they can 
be safely treated. Gold should be 
cleaned as little as possible, as the old red surface 
is the best appearance of it ; a little brushing with 
camel-hair brush and plain water to remove the dust 
is generally enough. Where there is much silver in 
it, as in electrum, the surface is dark with chloride of 
silver ; this may be removed with strong ammonia 
or cyanide of potassium. Gold-foil often requires 
straightening out into its former shape, but it must not 
be burnished in so doing, as that expands the form. 

Silver is one of the most troublesome metals, as 
it is so very readily attacked by chlorine and sulphur; 

silver undergoes a colloidal 

rearrangement by which it breaks readily 
into irregular curved grains, and it is in this state as 
rotten as rotten brass. If deeply corroded nothing 
can well he done to it ; the lumpy crust shows more 
of the original form than the metal would show if 
bared, When the corrosion is but slight it may be 
removed, either by solution in strong ammonia or 
cyanide of potassium, or by reduction. To bring 
the chloride into the state of porous metal, it is only 
needful to place it with zinc or iron in a solution of 
salt or weak vinegar or lemon juice, and in a few 
hours the whole of the chlorine has gone over to the 
fresh metal. The powdery silver left can be mainly 
brushed away in water, and a little picking with a 
bone point will loosen it entirely. Of course, the 


SILVER AND COPPER 


99 


whole of the silver removed has come out of the 
body of the metal, which is left porous and tender, 
although the face may be unbroken. It will not 
bear, therefore, the same cleaning as new and strong 
metal. In the case of silver coins in fine condition, 
each coin should be reduced separately, and the 
whole of the old silver weighed with it before clean- 
ing it away, so as to recover the original weight. 
Silver must never be put bare in a tin box, as the 
chlorine forms chloride of tin, which deliquesces, and 
then attacks the iron and stains the silver with brown 
rust. Often there is both chloride and lime on the 
surface, and alternations of ammonia and weak acid 
are required for cleaning. 

Copper objects are distinguished from bronze by 
retaining usually their pliability. This renders them 
much easier to clean, as they are seldom 
deeply corroded, and the red oxide upon 
them will generally flake off clean by blows, and 
leave the original face in perfect condition. A very 
light hammer should be used, and sharp scaling 
blows be given, so as to flake off even half-an-inch 
breadth of scale at once, without ever touching the 
old face. In hollows which cannot so easily be 
struck, an iron nail may be used as a punch, and 
struck so as to crush the red oxide little by little. 
A copper object which scales freely is a treat to 
clean, as the old face can be entirely bared, and 
appears of a beautiful red-brown colour with all the 
detail quite perfect. Very thin copper may, however, 
have entirely passed into green carbonate, if buried 
in a damp soil ; and in this case nothing can be 
done except washing off the earth and dirt. 


100 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 

Bronze and brass need much more care than 
copper, as they contain a mixture of alloys of very 
different oxidability; hence much of the 

Bronze. • , , , , m, , 

material all through the mass will have 

moved up to the surface and been corroded there, 
while the form and size of the original may at 
present contain only half the metal in a very porous 
and brittle condition. In some cases bronzes may 
be scaled by blows like copper, and they then 
appear in their best condition. But more often they 
are too brittle, or the corrosion adheres too tightly, 
for it to be thus removed. For cleaning off small 
quantities of green carbonate, vinegar left to stand 
for some days does well. But the proper solvent of 
botli carbonate and oxide is dilute hydrochloric acid, 
about I to 10 or 20 of water, as this will not attack 
the metal, but only the corroded parts. The 
objection to this solvent is that it leaves a thick mud 
of white oxy-chloride of copper, which is difficult to 
brush off, and which stains the skin green in hand- 
ling. The treatment is to brush off as much as can 
be easily removed, and then pickle in hyposulphite 
of soda, which dissolves the white coat ; if used hot 
and strong this will clean the metal to a bright 
metallic condition. After all these solutions, a long 
washing in many waters for two or three days is 
needed to remove all trace of salts which might 
afterwards make further corrosion. Minute traces of 
chlorides are specially dangerous, as they decompose 
with carbonic acid in the air, forming carbonate, and 
liberating the chlorine to attack more metal ; thus a 
trace of chloride will eat through any amount of 
copper. The extent to which bronzes should be 


BRONZE 


lOI 


cleaned, should be ruled by the fullest display of 
original workmanship : so long as more detail can 
be shown more crust should be removed. But, if 
possible, some of the coat of red oxide should be left 
on plain parts as a guarantee of the age of the work, 
To bare bronzes entirely, and then oil and smoke 
them, is barbarous treatment, to be seen in some 
museums. If something is desired over the bare 
metal, the bronze may be left in a shallow pan of 
water, soaking for some weeks, by which it will gain 
a tinge of red oxide over it which is suitable and 
pleasing. Another mode of scaling is to heat the 
bronze over a fire or in melted lead, and then plunge 
in cold water, which loosens the scale from it, It 
often happens that a bronze has the original face 
broken up by corrosion, and then no cleaning is of 
any use, the mass of green carbonate shows more 
than any other surface would do. This last and 
worst state is indicated by cracks in the outer coat, 
due to further expansion of the inner body. A 
cracked bronze is best left alone. 

A frequent disease of bronzes is the formation of 
small granules of translucent bright green rust. 
This is attributed to an organic growth, which is 
infectious, and may spread through a collection. 
One of the worst instances I dipped in carbolic acid, 
and this absolutely stopped the attack, proving that 
it is not due to action of chlorine. But we must not 
take this as a certain proof of the organic nature 
of the mischief, in view of the inhibitory effect of 
anesthetics, etc., in stopping electric and chemical 
action. 

Lead is usually coated with white carbonate, the 


102 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 


outer face of which shows more than the metallic 
surface beneath. It should therefore be 
let alone ; but if it shows signs of further 
changes, due to salts in it acting with damp, then 
soaking in several waters will probably make it safe. 
If carbonate continued to be formed, I should try 
saturating with paraffin wax. 

Ii'on can seldom be cleaned ; but if it has only a 
little superficial rust, this may be removed by placing 
it in the strongest nitric acid, which dis- 
solves the oxide but renders the iron 
passive. For ordinarily rusted iron all that can be 
done is to arrest further changes. A long soaking 
in water to remove all salts, and then baking dry 
and saturating with wax, is a safe treatment and 
always available. 

Sorting and joining fragments is sometimes very 
essential. In the royal tombs of the 1st Dynasty 

Sorting collected thousands of pieces of stone 
bowls and vases. Only a very small 
number out of such cartloads of fragments were of 
value as they lay ; but so far as they could be re- 
constructed they gave an important series of forms. 
To extract any result it was needful to place together 
all the pieces that belonged to each separate vase ; 
and the same work frequently had to be done on 
a lesser scale in dealing with groups of broken 
stone and pottery. Taking the whole of the frag- 
ments which can be supposed by their position to 
belong together, they are first sorted over for quality, 
making as many divisions as are quite safe to be 
distinguished one from the other, so that there shall 
be no chance of parts of one bowl being classed in 


SORTING 


103 


two different divisions. All the pieces of one 
division, sometimes as many as 500 of one quality, 
are then to be laid out on tables, — the pieces of 
brim placed at the top of the tables, and classed 
according to form and curvature ; the pieces of 
middle of the vase along the middle of the table, all 
carefully laid with the axis vertical ; the pieces of 
base at the nearer edge of the table, classed accord- 
ing to diameter. Taking then the first piece of 
brim, it is held at each end of each other piece to 
which it can possibly belong ; every possible fit is 
thus found. Each piece of brim is to be thus tried 
with all that follow it, those before it having been 
already tried with it. When all the possible junctions 
of brim have been made, then a row of joined brim 
pieces are to be laid on a board, and the angle which 
each broken edge makes with the vertical is to be 
looked for among all the broken sides of the middle 
pieces, looking for such slope at both upper and 
lower sides if the tops are not distinguishable from 
the bottoms of the pieces. Thus, say the first 
broken edge of brim slopes at O 20°, every 
piece broken at 20° O or must be com- 
pared to see if it will fit. At least twenty 
different directions of fracture can be mentally dis- 
tinguished, and the slight curve and irregularities 
increase this to at least fifty varieties, so that each 
piece of brim only needs actual touching with about 
2 per cent of the pieces of middle. When every 
possible fit of brim to middle pieces is made, then 
the bases can be similarly compared, having first 
fitted them by sorting the curvatures. A load of 
500 pieces will take several hours of this sorting, at 


104 PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS 


the end of which every possible fit will have been 
made. Not more than half-an-hour or one hour 
at a time can be usefully given to such sorting, as 
the eye and attention become too much fatigued to 
observe the fits. When finished, all the fragments 
belonging to one bowl are to be wrapped together, 
and a number given to the parcel ; and the odd 
pieces can be thrown away unless worth having 
singly. The method for drawing the completed 
forms has been described in the chapter on drawing. 


CHAPTER IX 


PACKING 

Before packing carved blocks it is generally best to 
saw off the backs, so as to lighten the quantity. A 
face should always be sawn from each 
end . up to the middle, leaving it about 
twice as thick in the middle as at the ends, so 
as to bear the strain of travelling. If a block is 
so wide on the face that it is liable to be broken in 
transit, the best course is to saw it in pieces, cutting 
from the back through to ^ or i inch from the face, 
and then snapping it, so that the face can be re- 
joined perfectly. Limestone is sawn with a large 
rip saw or stonemason’s saw, using a hammer and 
chisel if any flinty portions are met with, and also 
using some hammer dressing. Soft Silsileh sand- 
stone may be cut with pieces of tin plate, such as 
petroleum tins or biscuit tins ; or else with a thin 
strip of wood set with wire nails to serve as teeth 
of a saw. The harder stones must be moved as 
found, for the cost of reducing the weight would be 
more than that of carrying it. 

In all questions of packing long objects, it must 
be remembered that the best points of support for 
los 


roo 


PACKING 


equality of strains are at 21 per cent (say - 1 ) frona 
each end. Any long stone must therefore be held 

Longoyeots. “ thicker pads 

or hay at ^ from each end. It is 
impossible to reckon on a case being so rigid, and 
so perfectly fitting, that it will give uniform support 
all along, with a much smaller elasticity than that of 
the stone. The utmost any case can do for stone 
is to deaden blows and shocks, and to hold the stone 


Fig. 50. — Box for fiat slab of stone, lid of diagonal bars. 


so that it is equally likely to break in the middle 
or at the supports ; and this is gained by the grip 
at from each end. A good packing for small 
slabs that are not liable to break, is a shallow box 
(Fig. so), with the stone face down on dried fodder 
or straw, and two cross bars parallel and diagonal 
on the top, to hold the stone in. Such a box is 
easily lifted by the bars, saves all Customs examina- 
tion, and will not tempt thieves. In all instances 
remember that it is useless to put general softening 
round stones in a box. The best points to take 
the pressure .should be considered, and then thick 


LONG OBJECTS AND HEAVY STONES 107 

pads nailed on the box to catch those best points 
of contact. 

The largest stones cannot usefully have any case ; 
as a case which would not be cracked up by the 
weight in moving, would be so thick and 

° ^ Heavy atones. 

heavy that it would make the stone 

far less moveable. If the stone is strong it only 

needs three or four thicknesses of old clothes and 


the holes. 


sacking tightly roped on, in order to travel safely. 
If it has a tender face, a skin of board may be put 
over that with some cotton-wool padding under the 
sacking cover. It is best for blocks of i to 4 
cwt to make a tray (Fig. gi) with poles projecting 
a foot at each corner to serve as handles, and then 
lash the block firmly on the tray. This encourages 
porters to lift it rather than throw it over. Such 
things as granite columns or colossi need no cover, 
but only softening of wood or pads, put under bear- 
ing points during moving. On shipboard they 


io8 


PACKING 


travel best laid at the bottom of a cargo of beans in 
bulk or bales of cotton, which wedge them tight. 

Pottery is the most troublesome stuff to pack. 
The difficulty lies in keeping the packing material 

Pottery right places, and preventing it 

lumping together and so letting the 
contacts become bare. All the larger hollows must 
be filled with small pottery, or very light boxes, or 
empty tins, so that the packing cannot shift together. 
For large jars it is best to I'oll up straw in cloth to 
form cushions i to 2 inches thick, and nail these 
on the box at the points of contact ; always observ- 
ing if the jar can get loose by skewing into the 
diagonal. It is often needful to tie cotton stuff 
over the mouths of jars to prevent the packing 
working loose into the jar. For flat open forms, 
such as dishes and wide bowls, a stack should be 
made with the flattest below, so that each dish rests 
solely on its centre, and all the edges are free. A 
very little softening between them, and a firm block 
(such as a round tin loot) in the top one to take the 
pressure, will make them all travel with a solid 
contact right through the centres, so that each brim 
only carries its own weight. Even thin glass dishes 
can be packed safely in stacks in this way. 

Glazed pottery is sometimes very fragile and full 
of cracks. To save it from falling apart it should 
be wound with string crossing diagonally in every 
direction, as tightly as it can be pulled. This firmly 
binds the jar so that it cannot fall apart. A couple 
of inches of tightly rammed softening all round it, 
will make it then travel quite safely. 

The material for packing, or softening, varies with 


SOFTENING AND CASES 


109 

the country and the season. In England there is 
nothing so good as the fine shavings 
known as wood-wool. In Egypt the 
best stuff is helbeJi, a dried green crop which is very 
clinging, and holds in any position in which it is 
thrust. Tibriy or chopped straw, is also useful for 
ramming tight in small spaces. Firm cushions on 
fixed bearing points are made by rolling up straw 
in old cloth, and nailing the edges on the box, so 
that the pressure can never reach the nails. Rough 
country cotton can be had, but it is dear ; and two 
or three pounds of prepared cotton wool in sheets 
should be taken for packing delicate things. Plenty 
of whitey-brown kitchen paper should be taken for 
wrapping ; and some cartridge paper or brown 
paper for parcels. Stocks of nested parcel -post 
boxes are very useful ; but sliding lids fall out loose 
by contraction, and glued joints crack to pieces, 
The domestic stock of biscuit boxes and food tins 
of course all come in for varied use. 

The making of cases is little understood, and 
least by professional case-makers. Cases arc often 
supplied in London with the grain 

• 1 • 11 -I 1 • OasoB. 

entirely running round them, and nothing 
to prevent their splitting around and dropping in 
two parts. The most perfect construction is that 
with the grain running in all three directions (Fig. 
52), but such boxes have the disadvantage that the 
lid cannot be entirely removed. The most practical 
form is with internal corner-posts, and the sides 
nailed to these with all the grain running around. 
First the end boards are nailed on to the corner strips, 
and then the side boards nailed on. All the nails 


no 


PACKING 


should be driven diagonally (Fig. 5 3), alternately one 
way and the other, so that no board can be drawn 
off without splitting the wood. And the end nails 
should always be close to the edge, and rake deep 
down into the corner strip, to avoid splitting the 
end ; thus the edge of the board cannot part off 


Fig. S2. — Box without cross bar.s, the grain running in all three diniCMisions, 


with all the lid or bottom nailed to it. For as the 
whole weight comes on the last inch of the sides 
on to which the bottom is nailed, unless that is well 
held on it often parts from the rest of the side. Tlie 
lid is of course nailed on with upright nails so as to 
draw off; and a large number of short nails, pro- 
jecting only f inch, is the best for this, as if large 
nails are used the lid splits during opening and 
leaves the nail in the side. 

If a case is long, it is best to have some other 


CASES AND UNPACKING 


in 


upright strips down the sides. Partitions bearing 
against these strips are good to keep weight from 
riding down when the box is dropped on one end. 
If objects vary much in density it is convenient to 
pack a heavy compartment in the middle and a 
light one at each end of a case. Any bars or 
boards used to hold down heavy pieces from shifting 


Fig. 53. — End of a box in course of making, to show tlm diagonal driving 
uf the nails. 


should not be nailed through the sides, as damage 
is often done by the violence needed to loosen them 
in unpacking. Such bars should be held in place by 
side strips, or other solid articles in the packing. Tin 
pots are very convenient to protect small and delicate 
things, and to hold heavy objects from shifting about. 

The packer must always remember that the un- 
packer will not know the contents of a case, nor 
any precautions that are needful. The 

V T. i. u- u OnpaoWog, 

best arrangements, which may seem 
infallible, may be entirely upset by the unpacker 


I 12 


PACKING 


opening the case at the bottom ; hence no papers 
of directions in a case should be relied upon. Also 
the unpacking is generally left in museums to be 
done by rough labourers, who may entirely over- 
look needful precautions or even throw away most 
valuable things in the boxes. It is dangerous, 
therefore, to pack small objects in straw ; nothing 
under loo cubic inches should be put separately 
in the packing, anything less being put together in 
paper parcels. It must always be remembered that 
a careless unpacker may unwrap everything, and 
throw away the papers ; hence no labelling or 
directions should be solely put on the wrappers. 
Even labels with objects are not safe ; as in several 
museums the labels have been thrown away, or else 
stacked in a pile together. Labels should have 
printed on the back in big red letters, “ To be kept 
with the object." Marking upon each object is 
necessary, whenever possible. Tlic best way to 
learn the difficulties and fallacies of packing is to 
carefully study the causes of any disasters found in 
the unpacking. 


APPENDIX 

LIST OF TOOLS, ETC., TO BE PROVIDED FOR WORK 

For Excavating. — Crowbars,' ropes,^ large hammers, 
cold-chisels, stone-saw, saw-files, sieves (fine wire), native 
sieves.^ 

For Cleaning Objects, etc. — Dusting-brush, nail-brush, 
tooth-brushes, paraffin wax. 

r These can bo obtained in any Egyptian town. 


LIST OF TOOLS 


113 


For Packing . — Paper bags, jewellers’ tag labels, reams 
of kitchen paper, nests of boxes, brush to mark boxes, 
hammers, saws, chisels, brace and bits, pincers, stout pliers, 
files, awls, spokeshave, screw-'drivers, screws, wire nails, ^ 
square, hone-stone. 

For House. — Locks, hinges, bell. 

For Copying and Planning. — Cartridge paper, thin 
journal paper,^ rag paper for squeezes, spoke brush, paint 
brushes for outlines, colours for colour copying, drawing 
boards (several cheap ones, various sizes), tapes, 2-metre 
rods for gauging work and planning, prismatic compass, 
box sextant, vertical mirror level. 

’ These can be obtained in any Egyptian town. 


CHAPTER X 


PUBLICATION 

The final shape of the publication of the record has 
to be borne in mind in all the pi-ogress of it. The 
arrangement of the plates must precede 

Arrangament. , , , 

the writing of the details of the work. In 
past generations the ideal was to define in words the 
conclusions and speculations of an author, and, where 
unavoidably necessary, to illustrate them by some 
costly engravings. How inefficient such publication 
may be, is seen at once in Grecnweli's British 
Barrows, a work full of important detail, which has 
to be painfully understood from hundreds of pages 
of text, where plans — and little else — are needed. 
Indeed the only means of using the information is to 
reconstruct plans from the intricate text. As form 
can now be almost as cheaply expressed as words, 
the ideal is widely changed. The reader is to be 
put first of all in possession of all the facts and 
materials, and the author’s conclusions are only a 
co-ordination, presented to enable the reader to 
grasp the material, and to feel clearly the effect of it 
on his sum of ideas, or organised sense of the nature 
of things. Hence nowadays the main structure of 

1 14 


ARRANGEMENT, PLATES iij 

a book on any descriptive science is its plates, and 
the text is to show the meaning and relation of the 
facts already expressed by form. The plates, there- 
fore, are the first thing to prepare ; and when they 
are complete it is time to put in words the con- 
clusions which have been reached. 

The orderly arrangement of the material in plates 
is the first duty. The drawings are each to be made 
with the final scale in view, so that 
the lines may be of proper thickness, 
neither faint nor coarse. The material must be 
classified according to its nature, — ^views, plans, in- 
scriptions, sculpture, small objects, pottery, etc. In 
each class, the historical order must be followed, 
objects that are to be compared placed together, and 
the material arranged in an orderly shape, so that it 
gives a clear impression, and can be easily found 
again from memory. The details of the squareness 
and alignment of the various drawings on a plate 
are much more serious than might be supposed ; 
needless irregularity confuses and disappoints the 
eye and starves the memory, distinctly detracting 
from the use and value of the work. Obviously 
every object on a plate must have a nujnber for 
reference ; and in a long series it is best for the 
numbers to run through several plates ; so that 
“sealing IS/” or “mark 642” is a complete refer- 
ence and definition. A uniform scale should be 
used throughout a plate, or a series of the same class, 
and it should be stated in the heading of the plate. 
Every plate should have stated in its heading the 
source, nature, age, and scale of the objects ; for 
these render reference far easier, and also give a value 


PUBLICATION 


X i6 

to loose plates apart from the volume. The use of 
double-page plates is often desirable, in order to show 
the whole of a large class at one view ; the only 
drawback to them is that objects are more difficult to 
find in turning over the leaves. At every point it 
must be remembered that nearly all foreign students, 
and most English ones, will know the plates but not 
the text ; that the plates will be the material prac- 
tically used for comparison, and building up a view 
of the subject ; and therefore that they should be as 
far as possible self-contained and self-explanatory, 
with full lettering upom them, and should comprise 
the main results of the work in diagram. To help 
reference to the text, the list of plates should have 
the page references to each plate stated, to show 
where it is described and dealt with in the text. 
The facility of using, remembering, and referring to 
the plates should be the first consideration. It is 
even well to remember to make the right-hand edge, 
or outer edge, of each plate the strongest part, with 
the most striking objects and best arrangement, and 
let the other edge be a residual, as this ensures the 
best eye-grasp in turning over the leaves. 

The amount of plates must depend upon the 
subject ; but it is none too much if the area of plates 
is double that of the text, or twice as many plates 
as there are pages. Folding-out plates should be 
avoided where possible ; a double page on a deep 
guard, so as to lie flat when the book is opened, is 
the largest that should be ordinarily used. The 
most absurdly inconvenient shape is to have wide 
margins to a plate, and a fold at side and another at 
base, to make it fit the book. It is best to remedy 


PROCESSES 


ir; 


such folly by taking the plates out, cutting them to 
book size if margins allow, and resetting without 
folds. The wild freaks of recent books in Egypt- 
ology are incomprehensible. We see some with plates 
which might be bound with text, yet printed with 
gigantic margins and issued in an entirely different 
size, so that they cannot be bound, or even stand on 
the same shelf with the text ; some plates put on 
guards of tissue paper, so that they tear out of the 
book in turning over ; one serial in parts with the 
plates starting fresh numbers with every separate 
paper, thus one part has half a dozen “ Plate i ” in 
it, making printed references to the work quite im- 
possible ; other publications with the plates all 
renumbered and rearranged after printing, and 
double references throughout; others with scattered 
numbers of the plates issued, and intermediate 
numbers to appear later, after many years or never ; 
some with plates without any numbers to the 
objects, and stray references in the text showing that 
they are hsually counted by the author from the base 
upward, and from right to left. Every absurdity 
which want of design, forethought, and common 
sense could perpetrate, seems to be found in these 
monumental works. 

The processes used for plates vary greatly in cost 
and quality. The cheapest is photo-lithography from 

line drawings ; but only black and 

, . , . , Prooesses. 

white can be given thus, without any 

half-tones, and the illustrations must be all together 
on a plate, and cannot be placed in the text. Yet 
as it can be done at less than 2d. a square inch for 250, 
or 6d. for 2000, it enables a much larger quantity of 


Ii8 


PUBLICATION 


illustration to be given than would be possible other- 
wise. Relief process from line drawings costs 4d. a 
square inch for the blocks alone, without printing on 
paper ; but as it can be placed with the text and 
printed together, it has a great advantage, especially 
for small subjects. 

Collotype is next in cost, being 6d. a square inch 
for 250, or 2S. for 2000, but less than this cost in 
Germany. It has the same disadvantage in being 
restricted to whole plates, and not mixable with text, 
but it gives the half-tones well from photographs, 
and in fine examples is almost as good as a silver 
print. The finest I have seen were from Berlin. It 
is best to supply glass positives to the collotyper, 
and leave him to make such negatives as may suit 
him. If negatives are sent they are often destroyed. 
Net process gives half-tones, though with too coarse 
a grain for very delicate details. The cost is about 
double that of relief blocks, but as it reproduces 
photographs which can be mixed with the text it has 
an enormous use now, from cheap newspapers up to 
art publications. A disadvantage is that it requires 
a highly glazed paper to print upon, such as is un- 
pleasant to read, heavy to hold, and liable to decay. 
Its duration therefore is distinctly ephemeral. 

For special subjects the more costly processes are 
requisite. Chromo-lithography may be expected to 
cost about half as much again as photo-lithography 
for each colour used. As seldom less than four 
colours are efficient it costs at least six times as 
much as the line plates ; thus the cheapest colour 
plate begins at the cost of the best net process ; and 
it may easily come to three or four times that 


EDITIONS 


1 19 


amount. But probably the three-colour photography 
will soon abolish chromo-lithography, and work much 
cheaper, perhaps at three or four times the price of 
collotype. 

The autotype, platinotype, heliogravure. Swan 
electric engraving, and other processes all have their 
place for special subjects, but seldom come into the 
general run of archaeological illustration. 

A very successful policy for costly works of 
research is to issue a magnificent edition for libraries, 
book - collectors, and rich amateurs : 

' . EditiOUB. 

and then to have a much larger edition, 
deficient in a few of the most costly and least 
necessary plates, sold at a cheap rate for students 
and the general public. Thus one great work of 
coloured folio plates costs £20 or 3s. a plate for the 
complete edition ; whereas with a few plates deficient 
it is only £6 or is. a plate. Thus the cost of pro- 
duction is borne by those who demand magnificence, 
and the results are yet within reach of students. 

Another useful arrangement is to issue a public 
edition for general reading, and an appendix of extra 
plates for students, which would overweight a general 
edition. Thus a 2000 edition of the popular half 
of the plates may cost ;^4O0, and a 250 edition of 
the students’ half of the plates may cost ;^ioo, so 
saving ;^300, which would be uselessly spent on 1750 
copies that are not wanted, and which would only be 
a dead-weight to the main work. 

In arrangement of the text the main necessity is 
ready reference, and a form which can be remembered. 
The way to this is by classifying the material, dividing 
into chapters and paragraphs, each with a title. 


.120 


PUBLICATION 


and above all making a good index, which ought 

Text about a tenth of the length of the 

work. A list of plates should have 
page references for each plate. Remember that 
all smaller type, footnotes, and tables are far more 
expensive than straightforward printing. 

The general nature of the record of results has 
been already dealt with, under the i-ecording ; and 
the need of giving an organic handling of the whole 
has been pointed out. 

As to publication, if any publisher will under- 
take to issue a work of research at his own risk, well 
and good. If the author gets a gradually 

PubUshlDg. . ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

increasing royalty after the first lOO 
copies, that is as much as can be expected from- this 
class of literature. But in no case have any profit- 
sharing agreement. Usually such a work will have 
to be issued at the author’s risk, and a few of the 
pitfalls of such arrangements may be noted. Let 
the manuscript really be in final condition, down to 
every stop, before it goes to the printer ; consider 
the details of headlines, paragraphing, insertion of 
illustrations, arrangements of any tables or lists, 
(counting the letters), and in short leave nothing 
undefined. Have an agreement with the printer for 
terms, including an average of, say, two author’s 
alterations in every page, none to alter the length of 
any page : this allows for inevitable small improve- 
ments, without leaving an entire uncertainty in the 
charges. Correct the proofs in red for the author’s 
alterations, in black for the printer’s errors. If 
alterations exceed the allowance, reckon on paying 
for the resetting of the worst pages, so as to bring 


TEXT AND PUBLISHING 


I2I 


the average to the allowance on the rest. Beside 
the contract for printing and binding, have a con- 
tract with the lithographer, another with the collo- 
typer, and another with the bookseller, for his terms 
of commission on sales. Thus the author knows 
exactly where he is, and no unpleasantness can arise 
from unexpected charges. 

After publication, the binder and plate -printer 
should be asked for any blocks used ; and to send 
up any “ overs ” or spoilt plates ; as such are often 
valuable afterwards to cut up for special uses, 
and may save spoiling copies of the book. All 
photographs and drawings supplied to the plate- or 
block-maker should also be asked for if not returned 
at once. 


CHAPTER XI 

SYSTEMATIC ARCHAEOLOGY 

A SCIENCE can hardly be said to exist until it has 

a developed system of work, and its possibilities of 

value for teaching purposes depend en- 
SystemsotWork. , • r -i ^ i.u j 

tirely on the organization oi its methods. 

Geology was a chaos before the generalisation of the 
successive order of the strata, and the method of 
the determination of a stratum by its fossils, gave the 
subject a working system. Astronomy was a maze 
until the Newtonian laws produced methods of 
analysis. Chemistry could not be said to have any 
methods until the use of the balance and the theory 
of atomic combination made possible the last century 
of development. So far, archaeology cannot be said 
to have systematised any working methods except 
those of artistic comparison and of epigraphy, and 
these can only cover a small part of the space and 
time which need to be studied. 

Two general modes of work, however, have been 
begun, beside that of artistic comparison ; and it only 
needs that they should be fully carried out in order 
to produce a thoroughly systematic archaeology. 
These methods are (i) the complete definition of 


132 


SYSTEMS, NEED OF A CORPUS 123 

facts by means of a corpus of all known varieties of 
objects, in terms of which every object can be 
defined ; and (2) the arrangement of material in its 
order of development by statistical methods and 
comparison, which bring out the original sequence 
of construction. These two methods of work may 
prove to be, for archaeology, what the balance and 
atomic theory have been for chemistry, — the neces- 
sary foundation for systematic knowledge and exact 
theory. 

The collection of known objects in a corpus was 
well done by the early systematisers, especially 
Montfaucon ; and though his work is Need or a 
nearly two centuries old, it has not yet corpus, 
been superseded by better productions in every 
department. Since that appeared, the mass of new 
material which has been collected, especially in the 
last fifty years, cannot be mastered by one man, if 
he is ever to find time for original work ; and the 
whole subject is near coming to a standstill owing to 
the dead weight of preparations which arfe required 
before going further. Until a generation of system- 
atisers shall arise, archaeology can scarcely progress 
without continual waste of material and loss by 
duplication of work. Moreover, there is no general 
reference work, and no notation efficient for^ record- 
ing new discoveries. 

What is now urgently needed is for some scholars 
to each take one branch of work, to collect all that 
is known, especially of dated material ; and then to 
publish all type examples, showing how the subject 
varied from century to century, and to attach a 
system of letters and numbers to every variety, so 


124 SYSTEMATIC ARCHAEOLOGY 


that any specimen can be denoted merely by its 
corpus number. This should be done at least for 
all implements of stone and of metal, all pottery, all 
stone and metal vases, all beads and personal orna- 
ments, jewellery, clothing, domestic utensils, and all 
motives of design and ornamentation. 

With such a definite notation once laid down, it 
would be possible to record discoveries, and especially 
groups of objects, rapidly and in a small compass. 
It would also be possible to compile results of excava- 
tions and the contents of museums in simple indices. 
In order to work systematically in archaeology we 
ought to be able to look in an index and find at 
once where, and of what epoch, is every instance of 
a particular object; say, of a key, type M 27, or of 
a vase, type D 64. Such indices should be con- 
tinued by supplements issued every ten or twenty 
years. At present, if one would ascertain the 
parallels to a particular form, it is necessary to 
search through hundreds of volumes and to visit 
all the museums — a matter of months of work. 
Progress in archaeology, as an exact science, is 
practically impossible ; it should be easy and rapid, 
were all the known material always to be found at 
once in a corpus and indices. 

Only one corpus has yet been formed, and that 
is restricted to only one country, one period, and 
Example of one material — the prehistoric pottery 
Borpus. of Egypt (see Nagada and Diospolis 
Parvd). An outline of the system there followed 
will serve to show the actual working of a corpus, 
though for each different subject the details will 
need separate consideration. The whole of this 


EXAMPLE OF CORPUS UTILITY 125 


pottery comprises about a thousand varieties. Each 
class of pottery is denoted by its initial letter ; P for 
polished, B for black-topped, etc. Each form in a 
class is numbered, from i to 99, and each sub- 
variety is lettered. Thus R 63 c means rough 
pottery, type 63, variety c; and this completely 
defines the example. The numbers are not always 
continuous, but gaps in the series are left where 
there is much difference between the forms. In 
this manner it is possible to add new forms without 
upsetting the system, and new sub-varieties can be 
brought in by using small letters. The forms are 
best classified by beginning with the most open and 
flat dishes, and proceeding to the most closed forms, 
with narrow necks ending. The point of reaching 
verticality in the sides is a well-defined middle point. 

The practical utility of such a corpus is found at 
once when excavating. Formerly it was needful to 
keep dozens of broken specimens, which 

r I Jr 4 .V, r 4. f 

were of no value except for the fact of 
being found along with other vases. Now the 
excavator merely needs to look over the corpus of 
plates, and writes down on the plan of the tomb, 
say, B 23,P3S b, C 15, F 72, thus the whole record 
is made, and not a single piece need be kept unless 
it is a good specimen. How essential such a record 
is for future progress we shall see below. 

The most obvious step now would be to corporate 
all the pottery of Italy, A corpus from Pompeii 
would be the best starting-point, as being all of one 
period and well dated ; then a corpus of Constantinian 
forms, a corpus of Republican forms, and a corpus of 
each of the prehistoric periods. The early history 


126 SYSTEMATIC ARCHAEOLOGY 


of the Forum at Rome hangs now upon the safety 
of little groups of potsherds lying in a shed, yet 
unclassed and .unstudied, and certain to be swept 
away some day by some one who does not value 
them. Instead of this we ought to have a corpus 
for reference, and then the contents of each of the 
archaic wells could be at once denoted and published 
by the numbers of the types ; the historic material 
would be safe, and could be studied at any future 
time irrespective of the conservation of the heaps of 
sherds. Carry this out in Greece, and, instead of 
piles of pottery lying in the fields or on the terraces 
of a classical site from the prehistoric town levels, 
each piece could be noted by its number, and all 
could be published to make the history of the site 
accessible. Without a corpus such discoveries are 
but a pathetic destruction of material ; with corpus 
notation they would form the basis of a thorough 
history of the site and of all its changes. 

All that is needed to pi-oduce a corpus from a 
collection is a month or two of work by a draughts- 
man, who has an accurate eye for form, working to 
a uniform scale, and systematising the material 
conveniently for future reference. Some subjects 
would require collecting from many sources, but 
generally all the pottery of one period can be found 
together in one museum. 

We now turn to the second method for archaeo- 
logical research. This is the synthetical arrangement 
„ ^ of the material in the original order. 

Ihe most obvious arrangement is that 
by contemporary dating, as by years named in a 
chronicle or on coins, or by successive reigns of 


SUCCESSIVE AGES AND SEQUENCES 127 

kings. But outside of this method there yet lies 
the greater part of human history, which can only 
be reconstructed by some internal evidence of suc- 
cessive periods. 

A couple of generations ago there were laid 
down the main divisions of successive ages of stone, 
bronze, and iron ; and then the division of the stone 
age into palaeolithic and neolithic. After that fol- 
lowed the separation of palaeolithic into four main 
periods in France, more or less applicable to other 
lands. Further definition was yet found to be 
necessary, and the neolithic and bronze ages were 
marked off into many classes, which had to be 
distinguished by the names of places where they 
were first found ; and thus we reach a multitude of 
names, such as Mycenaean, Hallstattian, the period 
of La T^ne, etc. Such a piecemeal plan is well 
enough for a beginning ; but it is not capable of 
exact definition, it is cumbersome, and it does not 
express the relation of one period to another. 

Before we can think of subdividing a period into 

a continuous notation, the first requisite is to be 

able to place the material into its original 

^ ° Seauenoes. 

order or sequence. Let us suppose some 
old country mansion, where it has been the habit to 
close permanently any room in which an owner had 
died, and leave everything in it undisturbed. If we 
went through such a series of rooms we could not 
doubt their order of date if we looked at their 
contents. The William IV room could not be put 
to the middle of George Ill’s reign ; the George II 
room could not be supposed to go between those of 
James II and Anne. Each room full of furniture 


128 SYSTEMATIC ARCHAEOLOGY 


would have some links of style with that of the 
generation before, and of the generation after it, 
and no real doubt could exist as to the sequence of 
the whole series. What is true of a room full of 
furniture is equally true of a grave full of pottery. 
If we compare together a series of groups of pottery 
which are not separated by any long time, there 
will always be found some relationship between the 
forms in different groups ; one group will be seen to 
fall between two others if it contains forms to be 
found in each of the other groups, though these 
others may have nothing in common together. A 
fragment of the alphabet, K L M N O P, must fall 
between H I J K L and O P Q R, and proves their 
connection. 

Thus if each form lasted in use for a uniform 
length of time the problem would be fairly simple. 
But it is complicated by the plainer forms lasting 
far longer in use than the complex or highly 
decorated forms ; some may go on being made for 
a thousand years, others may not have been made 
for even ten years. Hence it is needful to resort to 
various statistical modes of sorting, which differ in 
each case. A complete instance of the process is 
given in Diospolis Parva, pp. 4-8. 

On the other hand, the sorting of material is 
greatly helped by any clear series of forms derived 
one from the other ; especially a series of degrada- 
tion, and reduction of useful elements to mere 
ornament. It is well, however, to have a check on 
one end of a series, by connecting it to known times, 
so as to prove which way it proceeds. 

What notation should be used to express a series 


SEQUENCE DATES 129 

of sequences must vary with conditions. Where we 

can deal with a larger number — many 
,11 r 1 1 . . SeaueiioB dates, 

hundreds — of good graves, each contain- 
ing plenty of material, then a scale of equal numbers 
of graves is perhaps the fairest that can be taken. 
Thus for a scale of sequence dates, for the pottery 
named above, I adopted 50 numbers, each repre- 
senting 20 graves. 

The final result is to express the time-range of 
each type of pottery and of other objects in the 
graves in terms of the scale of sequence of the 
tombs. Thus the date of certain forms may be 
stated as 33-42 sequence date; 37-70 sequence 
date; 45-48 sequence date, etc. And when this is 
once established it is easy to date all further graves 
by arranging the dates of each object found in a 
grave, for instance in actual cases : — 


Sequence dates. 

30-36 

33-68 

30- 42 

31- 34 


Sequence dates. 
35-68 
60-69 
68-78 
68-78 


Limits 32-34 


68 


The larger the group the more closely it is dated, 
by reason of the various forms having a very small 
common ground of dating. 

This system enables us to deal with material 
which is entirely undated otherwise ; and the larger 
the quantity of it the more accurate are the results. 
There is no reason now why prehistoric ages, from 
which there are groups of remains, should not be 

K 


130 SYSTEMATIC ARCHAEOLOGY 

dealt with as surely and clearly as the historic ages 
with recorded dates. 

Yet another all-important matter for the sys- 
tematic archaeology of the future must be here 
mentioned, especially as it greatly affects 
Conservation. future schemes of field-work. The 

first requirement for systematic work of study is 
material sufficient to work on. And to provide this 
there must be both discovery and conservation. 
During the last century there has been a gradual 
growth of archaeological perception ; and in place 
of only caring for beautiful and striking objects 
there has arisen some interest in whatever can throw 
light on the past civilisations. But unhappily the 
ideas of conservation have not kept pace with the 
work of discovery. The present system of museums 
is the most serious bar to the progress of archaeology. 
The building, which is the mere modern shell, of no 
interest, and often of no beauty, is the master of the 
collection, which is i-esti-ained and crippled by such 
conditions that its use is impaired and its growth is 
stopped. The past is vanishing before our modern 
changes yearly and daily. There is ever less and 
less to preserve. And everything possible must be 
garnered before it has entirely vanished. The 
present has its most serious duty to history in 
saving the past for the benefit of the future. 

In a museum the collection is the essential ; the 

building is the mere accident of the surroundings of 

the collection, and it should completely 
Buildings. . , ,, , . ^ 

conform to all the requirements. Yet 
can it be believed that, even in the last year or 
two, enormous national museums — as at Cairo and 


BUILDING AND LIGHTING 


131 

Brussels — have been built without the smallest regard 
to the collection, or the opinions of the curators? 
The result at Cairo is the most deplorable sacrifice 
of the art and history of a great country to the 
follies and childish vanity of an incompetent and 
unsympathetic architect We will not stay to detail 
the entire unsuitability of that building in style, 
form, size, and lighting ; the constructive questions 
of what is needed for a proper museum are our 
subject 

After the common purpose of all buildings — ' 
security from man and nature — the first require- 
ments in a museum are lighting and 
grouping. Whatever interferes with 
these is a detriment which should be avoided or 
removed. Lighting must be (i) direct, not from 
reflection by walls ; (2) full, but not dazzling ; (3) 
in exactly the right direction. Of all the precious 
statues of antiquity there is not one that has had a 
tenth of its value spent on the best lighting possible. 
Most are in hopelessly bad positions, as the 
Aphrodite of Melos in a weak, diffused, sidelight ; 
and none have the simplest blinds to change the 
direction of the light, so as to study the surface in 
varying lighting. To know what a figure requii-es, 
only take a fine statuette in the hand, and try what 
can be made of it by the variation of direction, 
obliquity, and amount of lighting. Then see how 
hopeless it is to know a statue in one fixed lighting, 
even if that be suitable. The only person competent 
to arrange the lighting of objects, and especially 
statuary, is a successful photographer who has well 
practised the lighting of portable figures. An 


132 SYSTEMATIC ARCHAEOLOGY 


almost vertical light is essential for all human 
figures in the round or flat ; but it needs most 
delicate adjustment to bring out the more important 
modelling, and many different directions of light to 
shew all that there is in the work. What is true of 
statuary is true in a lesser degree of every other 
object. No other qualities can possibly atone for 
defects of lighting in a museum. No building with 
a had light can be called properly a museum ; it 
may be an architect’s triumph, a civic ornament, a 
costly patchwork, a marvel of folly, but a museum 
it is not, if it is unfit for the first requirements of a 
collection. 

The second great requirement, that of grouping, 
includes the intelligent display of objects so as to 
shew their relation to each other in 
development, their connection as found 
together, the preservation of the whole of the 
material that should be preserved, and its comparison 
by means of casts. 

The relation of objects in development requires 
free space in a museum, and the absence of any 
pinching consideration of how to utilise every square 
foot. Their connection as found together in tombs 
and groups also requires free space, more than is yet 
to be had in any English museum. The preserva- 
tion of the whole of the needful material is still 
more uttei'ly beyond the limits of any of the present 
museums. Every year a great deal of entirely 
irreplaceable material is thrown away, or neglected 
on the spot, because there is no hope whatever of 
preserving it. In the British Museum space costs 
several pounds a square foot, and only objects of 


GROUPING, NATIONAL REPOSITORY 133 


great value can be reasonably preserved there. We 
are driven, then, to the conclusion that the progress 
of archaeology and the preservation of the past, as it 
comes into our hands year by year, is essentially a 
question of free space. And that is practically 
entirely a question of cheap space. To refuse to 
preserve anything that is not worth some pounds per 
square foot, is the death of archaeology ; and yet such 
are the necessary conditions in our present museums, 
however much we may expand them in their costly 
conditions. If we once think of what the condition 
of affairs will be fifty years hence, when many 
periods and places will be exhausted, and yet 
nothing but showy objects are preserved, we see 
that the future knowledge of archaeology is help- 
lessly bound up in the question of our immediate 
expansion of conservation. 

We see then how absolutely necessary for archae- 
ology and ethnology it is to have a National 
Repository, where the cost of space shall National 
never be detrimental to the collection. Repository. 

I need not enter on the details of how such a 
repository could be carried out, as I have fully 
discussed them at the British Association, and the 
Society of Arts (see Jour. S. A. No. 2, 478, price 6d.) ; 
but an outline of the conditions and cost will shew 
the practicability of the proposal. All objects of 
value to a thief should be kept in the strong custody 
of city museums ; but the great majority of speci- 
mens that should be preserved are too bulky or too 
unsaleable to be stolen, beside casts which no one 
would steal, and such do not, therefore, need more 
than general supervision. A square mile of land, 


134 SYSTEMATIC ARCHAEOLOGY 


within an hour’s journey from London, should be 
secured ; and built over with uniform plain brickwork 
and cement galleries, at the rate of 20,000 square feet 
a year, so providing 8 miles of galleries S 0 feet wide 
in a century, with room yet for several centuries of 
expansion at the same rate. A staff of about 30 
persons would suffice to arrange the new material at 
this rate ; and having abundant space, no time would 
be wasted by frequent shifting of old material. 
Everything should be photographically registered as 
it came in. Glass should be placed over all objects 
which can deteriorate ; but the amount of dirt would 
be a minimum in the country, and with the air-supply 
filtered from dust. 

The total cost of land, building, materials, and 
staff would be covered by a budget of ;£’l0,000 a 
year. And this is the normal increase of the British 
Museum budget every four years. Hence if the 
British Museum were to find room by clearing out 
objects which are not liable to be stolen, for a few 
years, and placing them in the Repository, the cost 
of the Repository would be paid for to all time. A 
mere retardation of growth of the British Museum 
for five or ten years would entirely make up for the 
cost of the Repository twenty times its size. That 
this provision is perfectly practicable is not denied ; 
that it would be far cheaper than continued expan- 
sion in highly expensive conditions is certain ; and 
that it is essential for the growth of archaeology and 
ethnology is sadly obvious. Let us hope that if we 
are too hide- bound in England to grasp the new 
conditions of research, that at least in America some 
one will provide such a storehouse for all time ; 


NATIONAL REPOSITORY 135 

where some day the history of the world may be 
studied, when we have hopelessly lost the chance of 
preserving what might at present be had for the 
asking. If we are to make up our minds to ignore 
and lose what is now being lost and destroyed every 
year owing to our ignorance and blindness, we must 
look to the New World to rescue from our misuse 
the material we now throw away, and so preserve 
the history of mankind. 


CHAPTER XII 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 

The nature of proof is more complex than it seems 
to be at first sight True enough, all proof is merely 
, ^ a matter of common sense ; it does not 

aureotpioof. different faculty. And 

though a proof may follow as simply as possible 
from the facts, yet it cannot be understood by one 
who is not familiar with the facts to begin with. 
Trigonometry is the most obvious common sense to 
any one familiar with the formulae ; and the formulae 
themselves are only common sense to any one who 
takes the trouble to argue them through. Yet, for 
all that, trigonometry is not obvious to the ignorant. 
In the same way the evidences about the past of 
man are simple and clear when the facts and methods 
from which they are deduced are already known. 
Yet it requires a good familiarity with the material be- 
fore the conclusions can be felt to be self-evident results. 

To follow clearly what evidence and proof means, 
it is best to refer to a class of evidence which is 

^ most familiar to the reader. What is 

Legal evidence. ,, , , 

commonly called legal evzdence is the 

best-known example, as it is met every day in law 
136 


LEGAL EVIDENCE 


137 


cases and police reports. Evidence is based on the 
same principles, in whatever subject it may be ; 
there is not one logic for the present, and a different 
logic for the past. But the kind of evidence, the 
exactitude, the certainty, which is considered enough 
to determine a property or a life, is rightly looked 
on as conclusive for all reasonable purposes. The 
laws of such evidence have been threshed over for 
generations past ; and it is well known what kind of 
proofs may be i-elied upon, and what are dubious. If 
we then compare this class of evidence with that which 
we accept in studying the past history of man, we shall 
see more clearly what kinds of proof are admissible, 
and how far it is reasonable to depend upon our results. 

In examining legal evidence we see that it all 
falls under one of four heads — (i) witnesses, (2) 
material objects, (3) exhaustion, and (4) probabilities. 
These four kinds of evidence are of very different 
values ; any one of them may be stronger than the 
others in a given case, and each kind has its own 
special weakness. 

1. Witnesses provide the most clear and con- 
nected proof, and the least liable to misunderstand- 
ing ; but yet a proof which is entirely dependent on 
veracity, on intelligence, on absence of prejudice, and 
on clear memory, and is hence the least dependable 
kind of evidence in some cases. 

2. Material facts, which may be very conclusive ; 
such as A’s footprint in B’s garden, or A’s chisel 
left in B’s house, at a burglary. If the fact is certain, 
the conclusion is proved ; but the danger lies in 
misunderstanding the fact. 

3. Exhaustion, which may prove A guilty because 


138 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 


no one else could have done the deed ; as when A 
and B are seen in a railway carriage at one station, 
and at the next stoppage B is found murdered and 
A leaves the carriage. There may be not a trace of 
■ other evidence, but this is enough. 

4. Probability, as when A is last seen with B, and 
B proceeds to deal with the property of murdered A. 
This kind of evidence is enough to hang a man, solely 
from presumption. 

Now let us look at these kinds of evidence about 
the past of man. 

1. Witnesses, the documents, which give a clear 
and connected statement. They may be either 

witnesses ^ stone inscription or an 

autograph letter ; or secondary, as com- 
piled histories or subsequent copies. No other kind 
of evidence is so easy to follow ; yet this is a proof 
in which we are entirely at the mercy of the pre- 
judices, the ill-will, the frauds, and the blunders of 
others, and it is hence the least dependable kind of 
evidence in some cases. The speeches of Thucydides, 
the bias of Suetonius, the wonders of Livy, the 
romances of William of Malmesbury, and the forgery 
called Richard of Cirencester, each plunge us deeper 
and deeper into the doubtfulness of written docu- 
ments ; to say nothing of the casket letters or Ossian. 

2. Material facts, when rightly understood, are 
the most conclusive evidence. They may be in a 

Material facts. "" palaeolithic flint re- 

chipped over and over in later ages ; or 
a foreign ornament used on an object of dated style, 
as a Maori tatued head in a daguerreotype would 
prove the tatuing to be known between 1840 and 


EXHAUSTION AND PROBABILITIES 139 

i860; or a restruck coin with one type over another, 
as Barchocheb over Hadrian ; or an added inscrip- 
tion, so familiar on' Egyptian statues. Or the 
evidence may consist in a collocation of objects, 
such as a group of things found together in a tomb ; 
or the superposition of strata of ruins in a town. 
In the case of a single object there are few possi- 
bilities of misunderstanding the evidence; but in 
strata or tomb-groups there is a chance of older 
things being reused. Such chances of error are, how- 
ever, extinguished by the recurrence of instances ; 
and the finding of certain things together in several 
cases under different circumstances is one of the 
strongest kinds of evidence, such, for instance, as 
the name of Amenhotep III often found with the 
Mykenaean pottery, both in -Greece and in Egypt. 

3. Exhaustion may prove a point ; as, for instance, 
the Iconoclasts in Greece or Reformers and Puritans 
in England were the only destroyers of 

images and pictures, or Akhenaten was 
the only man who erased the name of Amen. Such 
destructions therefore are evidence of the age and 
the man. 

4. Probabilities, as, for instance, the fact that the 

Saxons erased the llomano-Britons, makes ^ ^ 

... . ^.. . . ProbaWUWes. 

it probable that Silchester, Unconium, 

and other late Roman towns which were burnt, were 
destroyed by the Saxons. 

We see thus that each kind of proof which is 
accepted legally is also used archaeologically, and is 
subject to much the same failings. Legal evidence 
may fail by mistaking the nature of the facts, such 
as that some rabbit’s blood on a knife is human 


140 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 

blood ; so may archaeology mistake by ignorance, as 
when the Mykenaean treasure was called Byzantine. 

Or legal evidence may fail by wrong inferences 
from facts, such as that some human blood on a 
knife is due to a murder, while it has come from the 
owner’s finger. So archaeology erred from a wrong 
inference in calling the treasure of Troy “ the treasure 
of Priam.” 

Or legal evidence may fail owing to mere pre- 
judice, thus ignoring the truth. So archaeology has 
suffered from the prejudice that nothing in Greece 
can be older than the Vlllth centui'y B.C. 

It is supposed sometimes, by those unfamiliar 
with the subject, that archaeological evidence is so 
doubtful or so slight that it cannot be 

Legal proof, j • . . i j 

relied upon, and is not to be compared 
with the certainties of legal proof. Let us see then 
what legal proof is in important cases. In one case 
a will was lost, and the mere memory of its contents, 
stated by a survivor who had assisted in writing it, 
was accepted as sufficient proof of what had been in 
it, and the property was distributed accordingly. 
In another case property was left by A to B, or 
failing B to C ; B also made a will leaving it to D. 
A and B were killed together in an accident, and 
the slightest observation of which moved last, deter- 
mined whether C or D had the property. Again, 
there are innumerable cases of setting a will aside 
because of the testator not being of a sound mind 
for disposing of property ; and various assertions of 
irrelevant facts by various interested parties are held 
to reveal the true mental capacity of a person to a 
judge and jury. In a murder trial the question of 


LEGAL PROOF, EGYPT AND EUROPE 141 

whether one or both of the assailants were guilty 
was held proved by the deceased having been tied 
by two different forms of knots. In another trial 
the mere presumption due to concealing a body and 
dealing with the property of a murdered person was 
enough to hang a man. Such are some of the 
evidences which are held good in law to settle 
questions of life and property. 

Happily archaeology is relieved from the terrible 
dilemma of being bound to come to a conclusion at 
once, as the law has to do. Questions can be left 
pending, and it is not peremptorily needful to act 
one way or another. An open mind can be kept on 
difficult and obscure points ; and a matter can be 
discussed in fresh lights, without keeping a prisoner 
standing in the dock the whole time. Legal con- 
clusions are often wrong ; though, as the law can do 
no wrong, a free pardon is all the sufferer gets when 
his innocence is proved. But if legal proofs, argu- 
ments, and conclusions were kept freely open to 
revision for years ; if they were printed in every text- 
book for beginners ; if all students were encouraged 
to find fre.sh evidence, and to upset what was laid 
down, and if the high-road to position lay in re- 
versing the decisions of past authorities, it seems only 
too likely that there would be a greater wreckage of 
bad cases and bad law than there now is of bad 
archaeology. 

For an example of the nature of archaeological 
evidence it will be best to study the connections of 
Egypt with early Europe. This subject Egypt and 
is not only a fascinating one historically, Europe, 
but it includes a great variety of different kinds of 


142 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 


evidence, — from paintings, from groups found in 
tombs, from remains of palaces, from objects exactly- 
dated by royal names, from objects dated by their 
nature and style ; and evidence which is of various 
degrees of certainty. Moreover this evidence has 
been more actively and continually attacked than 
any other class of discoveries of late years, and hence 
the most that can be argued against it is well known. 

Until 1883 nothing was known of the Greeks in 
Egypt before the Ptolemaic age ; the accounts of 
inxxYitu Herodotus about the Greek mercenaries, 
Dynasty, and their connection with the XXVIth 
Dynasty, stood solely as a literary statement, without 
a scrap of tangible evidence. At the close of that 
year I bought an archaic Greek statuette in Cairo 
(Fig. 56) ; and on enquiring about the source of it, 
I heard of Nebireh, and hunted out the site in the 
Western Delta. There I found the ground covered 
with archaic Greek pottery dating throughout the 
XXVIth Dynasty, and it was evident that a great 
Greek city had existed there. Next year, at the 
close of 1884, I began exploring it, and found on 
the first day there, a decree of the people of Nau- 
kratis. Plere then the evidence of Greek occupation 
depended upon the presence of thousands of pieces 
of Greek pottery and sculpture ; and to imagine that 
these had all been imported by Egyptians was 
beyond any possible supposition. A town containing 
almost entirely Greek remains, and with only clumsy 
imitations of Egyptian subjects, was certainly occu- 
pied by Greeks. And as there is no instance or 
probability of Greeks having imported great quantities 
of vases made in earlier times, this place contained 


IN XXVITH DYNASTY 


143 


good evidence for Greeks having lived there from the 
Vllth century B.c. As such it was generally accepted; 
but the dedication by the Naukratites was withheld 
from the public for six months by over-cautious 
authorities, for fear that something else might con- 
tradict it. This is a case where what was un- 
doubtedly good evidence should rather have been 
stated at once, with a reservation that it was very 
improbable that the stone had been brought from 
another site, or dedicated anywhere except in Nau- 
kratis. The evidence of the pottery shewed that 
Naukratis dated from the middle of the Vllth 
century ; and this agrees with the statement by 
Athenaeus that a statue was dedicated there in the 
23rd Olympiad, 688 B.c. 

In the next season, the spring of 1886, I went 
down to Defeneh, and there found a great mass of 
Greek pottery of the same period as that of Naukratis. 
Here again, then, the Greeks had inhabited the 
site ; and the evidence was clear that this was a 
great camp of Greek mercenaries. The modern 
name Defeneh so closely agrees to the ancient 
Daphnae that no one hesitated to accept their 
equivalence. Here the identification rests, then, not 
on a contemporary inscription, but on a modern 
Arabic name. 

Important evidence about the manufactures of 
these places is given by the pottery. Although the 
two sites were occupied at the same period by 
Ionian Greeks, yet the bulk of the pottery on one 
site differs from that on the other. The conclusion 
is that probably it was made locally by Greek 
potters, and not brought by traders from Greek 


144 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 


towns, as trade would probably have imported from 
the same sources to both sites. The evidence here 
is from the difference of classes. 

Another conclusion is drawn from the few varieties 
of painted pottery which are found in common at 
both sites. From the levels at which they were 
found at Naukratis these varieties were dated at 
various years between 6 1 o and 550 B.C. ; and such 
varieties were found together in a chamber at Defeneh 
with jar sealings bearing royal names of Psamtek II 
and Aahmes, and therefore dated between 595 and 
565 B.C., as the Greeks were removed from the 
camp in the latter year. The evidence here is from 
the collocation of objects ; those dated by the levels 
at which other things were found at Naukratis 
agreeing with those dated by mixture with Egyptian 
sealings at Defeneh. 

We now turn to the great group of dating of 
the XVIIIth-XXth Dynasties; and as the nature of 
XTOitn Dynasty evidence is our present considera- 
paintings. (;ion we shall classify it according to the 
kind of source of the evidence. The most certain 
dating is that of offerings painted on the walls of 
tombs, as it is always agreed that such represent 
objects which were in current use when the tomb 
was decorated ; they therefore are not older than 
the tomb, nor can the paintings have been added 
later. Of this class are the paintings of vases in 
the tomb of Rekhmara, under Tahutmes III in 
the XVIIIth Dynasty ; these vases are shewn as 
being brought in by the Kefti foreigners, and 
strongly resemble the vases found in Cyprus, 
Mykenae, and other Greek sites. Here the con- 


BURNT GROUPS 


I4S 

nection of Egypt in the XVIIIth Dynasty with people 
who made such vases is certain ; but the vases might 
be older than the scene, or such vases might continue 
to be made to a later time, hence the connection 
with any given epoch on Greek soil is only a strong 
probability but not absolute. Another dated paint- 
ing is that of stirrup vases (to use a more convenient 
word than “pseud-amphorae,” "false-necked vages,” 
or " bilgel kanne ”) among the offerings in the paint- 
ings on the tomb of Ramessu III of the XXth 
Dynasty. That such forms were familiar at that 
date is absolute ; but they might be older vases 
preserved in the Royal Treasury, or might be 
imitations by Egyptians of older foreign forms, like 
English repetition of Chinese patterns. 

The next class of evidence is that of objects 

which have been placed in such conditions that they 

cannot have been disturbed after a given 

° Burnt groups. 

date. This evidence is given by several 
deposits of groups of vases, clothing, etc., which 
were burnt in pits sunk in the floors of houses, and 
then earthed over. Such groups cannot possibly 
have been disturbed later on to insert objects, as the 
charcoal and ashes are undisturbed, and the foreign 
objects are likewise burnt. Hence the evidence of 
the Egyptian objects if clearly dated must carry the 
foreign objects to the same date. Several such 
groups have been found at Gurob. In one were 
many Egyptian objects all agreeing well to the date 
of Amenhotep III, as fixed by a glazed pottery 
kohl tube ; in another a group agreeing with the 
date of Tutankhamen, which was shewn by some 
fragile pendants which could not have long survived 

L 


146 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 


in use ; another group agrees to the age of Ramessu 
II, who is named on a pendant of glazed ware ; and 
a fourth group agrees to the rougher style of Sety 
II, which is dated by a dish with his name. The 
character of the Egyptian objects thus points to 
each of these dated objects being contemporary 
with the rest of their group, and therefore truly 
dating the group. Now in these groups were first, 
five well-made globular stirrup vases (see Fig. S9); 
second, pieces of several stirrup vases of a later 
form ; third, the neck of a later and coarser 
stirrup vase ; and fourth, two much later coarse 
and unpainted stirrup vases. Here the changes in 
the character of the vases agree with the relative 
dates given by the Egyptian objects. The stiri'up 
vases might be all older than the Egyptian dates, 
but that is very improbable by the regular degrada- 
tion of them according with the dates ; and the groups 
cannot be later than the dated objects as they agree 
well with the date of such Egyptian things fixed 
in other cases. It is then extremely improbable 
that the stirrup vases should not belong to the 
periods of the Egyptian kings whose names are 
found with them. Variation in either direction is 
prohibited by these limitations. 

We may add that there are two other burnt groups 
without kings’ names, and the connection of stirrup 
vases with Egyptian objects in these agrees well 
with the connection shewn by the other groups. 
Another such grouping was in a burial in open 
ground at Abydos ; there several examples of 
Graeco-Egyptian ware (Fig. $7), two figures and a 
ring vase with pomegranates and lotus flowers, were 


? 


RUBBISH MOUNDS .147 

found with Egyptian pottery and beads of the 
XVII Ith Dynasty. 

A somewhat similar grouping is afforded by the 
rubbish mounds of the palace of Akhenaten at Tell 

el Amarna. There the palace was 

. , , , , . r 1 ■ Bu1)blBli mojinds. 

entirely deserted after the reign 01 his 

successor, about 1360 B.C., and the town ruined 
finally by Horemheb, 1330 B.c. It seems then 
impossible to suppose anything later being mixed 
up with the rubbish heaps, which contained nearly a 
hundred dated objects, none later than 1360 B.C. 
The supposition has even been suggested that some 
unknown people, who left no other traces, have at 
some later time come laden with hundreds of pot- 
sherds, and dug over the rubbish mounds to mix 
them together. Such are the wild fancies which 
must be resorted to if the evidence is to be upset. 
The rubbish mounds consist of some thousands of 
tons of potsherds and dust; and among these, 
entirely mixed with them, were found nearly a 
hundred rings and objects of Akhenaten and his 
successor, and over 1300 pieces of Aegean pottery, 
representing probably 800 vases. The palace, 
which was deserted after 1360 B.C., also contained 
several pieces of the same pottery. Here the 
great quantity of the material of all kinds pre- 
cludes all the suppositions that might be made 
about isolated specimens. The mounds are too 
large for later material to be mixed with them ; 
the dated objects are too many to be accidental, 
or to have been older than the mounds ; and the 
Aegean vases are too many to have been pre- 
served from earlier times. The whole conditions 


148 ARCHAEOI^OGICAL EVIDENCE 


prove that all the objects were in common use 
contemporaneously. 

A somewhat less certain dating is given by 
remains found in houses. At the palace of 

Houses Akhenaten the definite date of its ruin 
fairly shews the Aegean pottery in it to 
be contemporary with his generation. In a house 
at Gurob, Aegean pottery was found with wood- 
carving of the XIXth Dynasty and a ring of the 
late XVIIIth Dynasty, and also under the walls of 
a house which was built at the close of the XVIIIth 
Dynasty. These are not precise datings, and are 
open to claims that the houses were later than the 
evidence shews ; but such connections give a strong 
presumption. 

Similar, but converse, evidence is given from the 
Greek side. At Mykenae was found a figure of a 
monkey in violet glaze (No. 4573 Athens); this is 
of Egyptian work and bears the name of Amenhotep 
II. A piece of glaze found in a building by the 
lion gate has the name of Amenhotep III. A 
scarab of Thyi, his queen, was found in the palace 
of Mykenae. And three large jars of drab-coloured 
Egyptian pottery (4569 Athens), such as is quite 
unknown from Greek sources, were also found at 
Mykenae. Now these examples prove the import 
of Egyptian things of the XVIIIth and XIXth 
Dynasties before the fall of Mykenae ; they do 
not give an exact dating as their time-connection 
on the Greek side is unstated, and they might 
belong to any part of the history of the town. 
But their agreement in age gives a strong pre- 
sumption that the latter half of the XVIIIth 


HOUSES AND SCARABS 


149 

Dynasty was contemporary with some part of the 
flourishing period of foreign trade at Mykenae. 

At this point we should notice an assertion often 
made, that Egyptian objects, especially scarabs, often 
bore the names of kings who were earlier 

° 8oaral38. 

than the date of the manufacture. This 
is sometimes the case, and on this ground it has 
been attempted to discredit all evidence about 
scarabs. Now an exactly similar case occurs in 
Roman coinage, where at eight different periods 
restorations of coins of earlier emperors took place, 
no less than twenty emperors being thus com- 
memorated. Yet no one has impugned the evidence 
of Roman coins in dating an excavation, on the 
ground that as some were restored therefore none 
are of certain value. Similarly seven kings restored 
the scarabs of earlier times, twelve different kings 
being thus commemorated ; but that is no reason 
for discrediting the age of the remaining ninety-nine 
scarabs out of every hundred. The restorations, 
say of the Xllth Dynasty kings by Tahutmes 
III, are as obvious as the restorations of earlier 
emperors by Gallienus. No doubt to a person 
ignorant of coins the subject would seem uncertain and 
confused ; but then scientific evidence is not expected 
to appeal to those who are ignorant of the subject, 
whether it be coins or scarabs. We must then 
credit the evidence of scarabs for dating, although 
there are some restored in a different style, and 
although some case might be found where a scarab 
had been reused at a much later date than that of 
its manufacture. Such exceptions are certainly not 
one per cent of the whole, and cannot therefore 


ISO ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 


be invoked to explain away the whole of the 
instances. 

The largest class of evidence is that from collo- 
cation in tombs. The weak points of this are (i) 

Tombs In reuse of tombs so -that primary and 

Egypt' secondary interments may be mixed ; 
this should be obvious in any properly conducted ex- 
cavation, and cannot be brought in as an hypothesis 
unless some mixture of date can be otherwise 
proved : (2) the tomb contents being older than 
the dated object, and so brought to too low a 
date, which is very unlikely, as a whole group of 
things would not be preserved for long together : 
(3) the dated object being older than the tomb, 
which is practically the only danger. A few rare 
examples have been seen of older objects being 
reburied, but so rarely that only a very small pro- 
portion of cases could be thus explained. The great 
majority of things in hand at any one time belong 
to within a generation or two. In our own time, 
although we treasure older things more than did the 
people of any past age, yet not one per cent of what 
we have is over a hundred years old. In late Roman 
coinage the waste was such that in a hundred years 
only an eighth survived in use, and in half a 
century more only a twenty-fifth remained. It is 
very rarely that beads or pendants of very differ- 
ent ages are mixed in ancient necklaces, or that 
scarabs of reigns far apart are buried together. I 
do not remember a mixture of more than two con- 
tiguous reigns in any group of scarabs that I have 
found.> Hence this possibility of an older object 
being reused may occur rarely, but cannot be called 


I 


f 

TOMBS IN EGYPT 151 

upon in the whole of the cases, or even for any 
perceptible proportion of them. In certainly nine 
cases out of ten we must expect that a dated object 
was buried within less than two or three generations 
from its original period. 

The tomb groups containing Aegean pottery are, 
it so happens, not so well dated as the burnt groups ; 
and are therefore inferior to the burnt groups, both 
on this account, as well as by the greater possibility 
of mixture. The Maket tomb at Kahun is the 
principal example. The dated objects in that are of 
Tahutmes II and III; and though at first I supposed 
it to be of later age on the strength of some beads 
not then known before the XIXth or XXth Dynasty, 
yet as such beads were afterwards found in a deposit 
of Tahutmes III at Koptos, there is no reason for 
questioning that the whole is of his age. Also the 
experience of the past dozen years has shewn that 
such a date agrees well to all the other objects in 
the tomb. The absence of blue painted pottery does 
not imply a date after the disuse of it in the XXth 
Dynasty, but before that style came into use in the 
middle of the XVIIIth Dynasty. In this tomb was 
a fine Aegean vase (Fig. 5 8) with ivy-spray pattern, 
which is thus dated to about 1500 B.C. The burials 
were quite undisturbed and therefore the vase cannot 
belong to a later date, but might possibly be earlier. 

Other examples have not this precise dating. 
At Kahun a burial in the open ground, and undis- 
turbed, had scarabs and objects of the style of the 
middle or end of the XVIIIth Dynasty, with a stirrup 
vase from the Aegean {Kahun, p. 32). The undis- 
turbed tomb at Gurob containing the beautiful wooden 


1S2 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 

statuette of Res, certainly of the XVII Ith Dynasty, 
had in an opposite chamber a stirrup vase, which 
must have been buried at the same period. Another 
burial at Gurob had a piece of a stirrup vase with 
beads exactly like those of Ramessu 11 . And at 
Naqada a tomb which by the style of the painting, 
must have belonged to the beginning or middle of 
the^XVIIIth Dynasty, had been so entirely plundered 
that the only object left was a fine globular stirrup 
vase. In these cases 
there is no exact dating, 
but a consensus of style 
in each case of the 
XVIIIth or early XIXth 
Dynasty ; and the con- 
nection of the Aegean 
pottery with it is in some 
cases absolute and in 
The argument for date 
of the pottery rests then in these cases on the 
uniformity of the period connected with it, and the 
absence of any discrepant dating. 

Now this argument is greatly reinforced if we can 
shew that the same connection of period exists on 
Tombs In the Other side. At lalysos in Rhodes a 
Greooe. tomb with Aegean pottery contained a 
scarab of Amenhotep III, At Mykenae, grave No. 
49 contained also glazed ware of Amenhotep III. 
At Enkomi in Cyprus in grave 93 a scarab of Queen 
Thyi was found with Aegean pottery. And from 
the same cemetery comes a metal ring of her son 
Amenhotep IV. These cases therefore connect one 
period of the Aegean remains with the Egyptian 


Fig. 58. — Aegticin vase of Tahutnies 111 . 
Maket tomb. 1:3. 


others only presumptive. 


VARIATION WITH DATE 


IS3 

reigns from 1414 to 1365 B.C. If on one hand it 
might be supposed that the single Greek objects in 
Egyptian tombs were older than the time of their 
burial, here on the other hand the possibility is 
reversed, and the single Egyptian objects in Greece 
could only be older and not later than the group 
with which they were buried. As on both sides the 
dating is the same — the latter part of the XVIIIth 
Dynasty — it shows that in both countries the groups 
contained objects of contemporary date. If we were 
to further refine on the question, and enquire whether 
the differences of date of the reigns in Egypt corre- 
spond to equal differences in Greece, we are met by 
the lack of all relative dating yet assignable to the 
Greek tombs ; on that side we have only a vague 
statement of “ Mykenaean period,” or some such 
generality ; and it is therefore only that period in 
general that we can assign to the XVIIIth-XIXth 
Dynasty in Egypt. 

We may, however, see a little further into detail 
on the Egyptian side by observing how the stirrup 
vases vary in form and work. At Naqada, variation 
probably under Tahutmes III, was a withflate. 
globular form, with simple broad bands, and dull 
face. At Gurob under Amenhotep III the vases 
have more broad bands and a polished face (Fig. 59). 
Under Tutankhamen there were fine lines appearing 
between the bands. Under Ramessu II the form is 
coarser. And under Sety II is only a coarse un- 
painted imitation. Lastly, under Ramessu VI at 
Tell el Yehudiyeh were some rude debased copies. 
Here the relative style of the vases agrees with the 
vaiying date of the objects found with each ; and 


154 archaeological EVIDENCE 


hence we are justified in not only placing one general 
period in Greece as contemporary with another period 
in Egypt, but also in connecting the varied forms 
with the reigns which are named with them. The 
evidence which we gain from the mere general ad- 
mixture, without any proof of the objects originating 


XVIIIth Dyn. 
Amenhotep III. 
Tutankhamen. 


XXth Dyn. 
Hamessu 111. 
Ramessu VI. 


Tutankhamen. Sety II. Ramessu VI. 

Fig, 59 . — False-necked vases from Egypt. 

in the generation by which they were buried, is here 
further carried on into evidence for the exact age 
of each type by the sequence of style agreeing to 
the sequence of the dated objects. 

We now turn to a question of style alone. In 
grave 93 at Enkomi was found a gold collar of 
Egyptian work with nine different patterns 
in it ; of these, eight are well known as 
designs of the time of Amenhotep IV, and the ninth 


STYLE AND RECAPITULATION 155 

is a variant of such. As these designs are not 
known in such forms at a century later or earlier, 
this collar cannot have been made far from 1 400 B.c. ; 
and as it is of slight and tender fabric it cannot have 
long been in use. Hence the date of its burial and 
of the tomb must be in the fourteenth century B.c. 
Of other examples of style, which may be quoted as 
important, is a great group of blue glazed ware of 
the same form, colour, and designs, as the vases of 
Ramessu II, but found in grave 66 at Enkomi ; a 
gold pin, with a hole in the middle, of the XVII Ith- 
XlXth Dynasty found at Gurob, like one from grave 
66 at Enkomi ; a group of bronze vases with lotus 
handles found in the Idaean cave in Crete, exactly 
of the fabric of those of the XVIIIth-XIXth Dynasty; 
a figure of a swimming girl holding a dish, carved 
in bone, from the Idaean cave, a favourite design in 
the XVII Ith Dynasty ; and some other instances of 
similar style, ornament, and processes, which need 
hardly reinforce the general argument. 

To recapitulate the evidences of the XVIIIth- 
XXth Dynasty : — 

— 1 r Reoapltulatlon. 

hvidmce oj paintings. Tombs of 
Rekhmara and Ramessu III. 

Result. Aegean objects possibly older than 
the paintings. 

Evidence of burnt groups. Four, from Amenhotep 
III to Sety II. 

Result. Aegean pottery possibly older than 
the groups. 

Evidence of rubbish heaps. Tell el Amarna. 

Result. Aegean pottery certainly contemporary 
with Amenhotep IV. 


( 

IS6 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 

Evidence of houses. Tell el Amarna, Gurob, 
Mykenae, 

Result. Aegean pottery probably of XVIIIth 
Dynasty, Greek houses probably of XVIIIth 
Dynasty. 

Evidence of tombs. Maket tomb ; tombs at 
Gurob, Mykenae, and Enkomi. 

Result. Aegean pottery possibly older than 
Tahutmes III ; probably of XVIIIth-XIXth 
Dynasty or possibly older ; Greek tombs of 
XVIIIth Dynasty, or possibly latei'. 

Evidence of style. Gold collar. Idaean vases and 
carving. 

Result. Importations to Greece of XVIIIth 
Dynasty, and perhaps XIXth ; copy of 
XVIIIth Dynasty design, possibly later. 

The possible deviations from the probable results 
are thus seen to balance one another, some leaving 
the limit only open to earlier times and some only 
to later times, so that change cannot be accepted in 
either direction. 

We now go back to an earlier stage in the 
history, that of the Xllth Dynasty. Some ten years 
Xiith Dynasty, ago the stage which we have already 

Kainin. discussed was the “ fighting frontier ” of 
the subject ; five years ago the Xllth Dynasty was 
the fighting frontier ; now this is almost pacified, and 
the struggle against prepossessions is carried back to 
the still earlier periods. 

The view back to the Xllth Dynasty was first 
opened out in excavating the rubbish mounds of the 
town of Kahun. This town was entirely built at 
one time for the workmen employed on the pyramid 


157 


XIlTH DYNASTY, KAHUN 

of Usertesen II, this then is the starting date. While 
the houses were fully occupied a large rubbish 
mound was accumulated outside of the walls. When 
the official work of building ceased at the finishing 
of the pyramid, we may conclude that the town 
began to dwindle, as I found many of the houses 
and streets had been used as rubbish holes for waste 
of the Xllth Dynasty. Therefore the less con- 
venient and accessible rubbish heap outside of the 
walls is probably entirely of the reign of Usertesen II, 
As it does not contain any Egyptian material that 
could be dated later than that, the evidence of the 
shrinkage of the town should be accepted as giving 
a probable limit to the age of the outer heaps. 

In these heaps the great bulk was of regular 
Egyptian pottery of the Xllth Dynasty, filling up a 
depth of 6 or 8 feet in parts, and therefore very 
unlikely to become mixed with later objects dropped 
by accident. Now with this pottery thus certified 
as to its age, were found pieces of several kinds 
hitherto entirely unknown. Black ware decorated 
with white spiral lines, and with yellow and red lines 
and circles of dots, red potteiy with white returning 
spirals, and with painting in red, white, and green. 
The style was obviously of the Aegean family, so 
much so that even the best authorities asserted that 
these were pieces of Naukratite pottery of the 
XXVIth Dynasty and shut their eyes to the great 
difference of fabric and material. For some years 
I protested that the evidence of finding was absolute 
for the Xllth Dynasty date, and that no such pottery 
was known at a later date to which this could be 
compared. But some general resemblance to the 


f 


158 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 

style of the XXVIth Dynasty was allowed to calm 
the archaeological conscience of my friends into 
ignoring all the positive evidence. No such pottery 
was known on Greek soil at an early date ; therefore 
none existed ; therefore this could not be of that 
date. This argument is still in full favour for other 
and earlier periods. But a .shock of surprise came 
when delicate black pottery with white painting and 
red was found at Kamares in Crete, and published 
by Mr. Myres in 1895 ; and later the same style 
of pottery was so largely found that Messrs. Hogarth 
and Welch write in 1901 that “so far from that 
ware being a rarity, it is to be looked for in Crete 
wherever any strata of remains underlie the Myken- 
aean. It occurred in our digging at Knossos at all 
points at which the early town was probed to the 
rock” (/,//. 5 . xxi. 7 8). The pre-Mykenaean period 
is now before us and is found to agree entirely 
with the dating already reached on unimpeachable 
grounds at Kahun. That we may recognise con- 
nections between Greece and Egypt in the Xllth 
Dynasty is now orthodox, and we may proceed to 
see what further evidence appears for this dating. 

At Knossos was found a portion of an Egyptian 
seated figure in diorite bearing an inscription of 
xnth Dynasty, Ab-nub-mes-uazet-usei', which from the 

Crete. style is probably of the Xllth Dynasty. 

At Praesos were found several globular beads of 
carnelian and of amethyst such as are well known 
in the Xllth Dynasty, and the latter material is 
not found dated to a later period in Egypt. 

At Knossos was found a globular alabaster vase 
of the regular type of the Xllth Dynasty ; and also 


3 


PAN GRAVES 159 

the alabaster vase lid of King Khyan, whose date is 
unfortunately not fixed on the Egyptian side, but 
who is probably of the XVIth Dynasty, though 
perhaps of the Xlth. 

The long period now known in Greece before 
the civilization which is dated to the XVIIIth 
Dynasty compels such a presumption of connection 
with far earlier periods, and the connection is so 
well shewn by the Kamares ware, that the evidence 
for the Xllth Dynasty relationship scarcely needs 
further support. It depends on identity of style of 
highly decorated pottery, and of beads ; and the 
transport of two pieces of Egyptian work. 

Another connection of this age is shewn by the 
“pan-grave” pottery found in Egypt. This class of 
shallow circular graves is dated to the ^ 

° . Paa Kraves. 

close of the Xllth Dynasty by several 
discoveries of worn and damaged objects of the 
Xllth Dynasty in the graves, without anything that 
could be fixed to a later date. In these graves is a 
large class of non -Egyptian pottery; some of it 
black and red, highly polished ; others, rude thick 
pottery with incised patterns. The similarity of the 
black and red to the style of the prehistoric pottery 
of Egypt is obvious ; it is a later branch of the 
same fabric. And when we consider from what 
other land that may have come into Egypt, we 
naturally look to the similar forms found in the 
Celtic pottery of Southern Spain by Bonsor (Fig, 
60), as indicating that it belongs to the western 
Libyan culture. Again, the rough incised pottery is 
of tire same Celtic family found in Spain, showing a 
western source. The suggestion lately put forward 


i6o ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 


that these may have come into Egypt from the East 
is wholly baseless; It is in Spain and the allied 
Celtic pottery of Europe that we find the types 
which were brought into Egypt by the rude invaders 
at the close of the Xllth Dynasty. So that a con- 
nection of the western barbaric culture of the bronze 
age with the close of the Xllth Dynasty must be 
concluded, from the evidence of similar pottery in- 


'Central Europe. 
Yorkshire. 

(/. Anih. lust. 


South Spain. 
i^Rev, A'l'Ch, 

XXXV. 121-2.) 


xxxii., p], xxvii.) 

Fig. 6o. — Celtic and pan-gr.ave pottery and ornament, 


Diospolis, Egypt. 
{Dios^oliSi 
xxxvih., xl.) 


truded into Egypt, and associated in graves with the 
objects of that age. 

It is probably then to the same invaders that we 
should look for the source of the black incised ware 
(Fig. 6i) with patterns filled with white, and of 
characteristically western — Italic or Greek — forms, 
which is found in Kahun in the Xllth Dynasty, and 
in burials at Khataaneh of the Xlllth Dynasty. It 
is the latest stage of a class of imported pottery 
which recurs at intervals from the early prehistoric 
age onwards. A piece of this pottery was found in 
one of the "pan graves,” thus linking it with the 


QBiEciiaaaa 

Fig. 6i.— Black incised pottery, with white filling. 


M 


i62 archaeological EVIDENCE 

other foreign pottery brought in at that period. It 
has been found af Hissarlik in , the lowest levels, in 
Bosnia at Butmir, and of prehistoric to Xlllth 
Dynasty age in Egypt. 

On going back another stage to the Old Kingdom, 
of the IVth to Vlth Dynasties, we still find links 
vithtoiiird between Egypt and the West. In the 
Dynasties. Vlth dynasty is found a class of non- 
Egyptian buttons (Fig. 62) with devices, which in 


Fig. 62. — Buttons of ivory, camelian, glazed steatite, etc. Vllth Dyn. 
The upper row with misapplied Egyptian designs. 

The lower row with entirely un-Egyptian designs. 2 ; 3. 


some cases may have been used as seals ; more_ 
than a hundred of these are now known, and in no 
case are they of Egyptian fabric, as when an 
Egyptian subject was copied it was always in a 
mistaken manner. Now a close parallel to many of 
the designs is found on Cretan engraved stones, and 
it is therefore to that civilisation that we must look 
for the source of a considerable foreign importation, 
which probably accompanied a movement of popula- 
tion at the overthrow of the civilisation of the Old 


I 

VlTH TO IIIRD DYNASTIES 163 

Kingdom, The actual incomers may have passed 
by sea from the islands, or by land along Africa. 

On turning to Crete we see in the noble lamp 
with lotus capital found at Knossos, a type which 
cannot have been derived from anything that we 
know of the Xllth Dynasty in Egypt. The free 
buds around the band had long since become lost 
at that time ; and even in the Vth Dynasty on the 
Abusir capital they are less distinct. A form 
belonging to the Vth Dynasty is the only one that 
is at all likely to have been the origin of this fine 
Cretan capital. Again a vase with two handles from 
Knossos is certainly an exact copy in local stone, 
of the regular Egyptian type of the Old Kingdom, 
which was quite unknown later. And two pieces of 
the brims of bowls, one of Egyptian diorite, the 
other of h'parite, are of exactly the type made in 
the close of the Illrd Dynasty at Medum, and in 
the early IVth Dynasty at Gizeh ; this might perhaps 
last until the Vth Dynasty, but we could not suppose 
it to come later, as it would have been quite out of the 
run of later forms. The copying of motives and 
forms which passed entirely out of use, is a strong 
form of evidence ; a single object might survive to 
later times, but for a form to be copied it must be 
the familiar and usual form at the time when the 
copy is made. Hence we cannot place the familiarity 
with these Egyptian types in Crete later than the 
Vth or perhaps IVth Dynasty, 

Still earlier, the Western influence on Egypt is 
seen by the black incised bowls, of which one piece 
was found inside a mastaba of the time of Sneferu 
(end of Illrd Dynasty), and another piece between 


I 


164 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 

two raastabas of about the same age at Dendereh, 
where it must have been buried in sand at the 
period of the building. Another piece of such 
black incised pottery was found in the tomb of 
King Zer of the 1 st Dynasty ; see Fig. 61. 

This brings us back to a surprising series of 
pieces of painted pottery from the Royal Tombs of 
iBt Dynasty, the 1 st Dynasty (Fig. 63). The forms 

Aegean. are Aegean ; the material, the facing, the 
colouring, the varieties of pattern, all belong dis- 
tinctively to the Aegean. The opinion of Professors 
Furtwangler and Wolters is that these belong to the 
earliest type of Island pottery. Certainly there is 
nothing like them found in Egypt, except the 
confessedly Aegean pottery of later times. One 
prehistoric Egyptian vase has been compared with 
them, but it has no resemblance in form, material, 
facing, or colouring, and only an approximation to 
one of the patterns. They stand unquestionably in 
line with other Aegean ware. These pieces are 
found scattered in several of the Royal Tombs ; and 
those from the earlier tombs are of an earlier style. 
Thus there is no absolute proof, but only a strong 
presumption, that these belong to the age of the 
tombs of the 1 st Dynasty. 

Further evidence is, however, given by a portion 
of the original tomb offerings of King Zer, which 
were left untouched by all the plunderers and 
destroyers. In one corner- chamber of his tomb 
were an alabaster vase of regular 1 st Dynasty type, 
four pottery jars of the same age, and nine jars of 
foreign ware, different in forms, in material, and in 
facing, from any Egyptian pottery of that age, but 


1 ST DYNASTY, AEGEAN 165 

agreeing in all these characteristics with Aegean 
pottery, and including a vase of the same nature as 
the painted pottery, but without decoration. The 
whole group was cemented together by the burning 
of the unguents which had been buried in the jars. 
Here is then a case like that of the Kamares 


Fig. 63. — Pottery of earliest Aegean style. From Royal Tombs of the 
1st Dynasty, Egypt. 

pottery at Kahun. The evidence is clear, there is 
no visible loophole for avoiding the archaeological 
conclusion. And the only argument against it is 
that no such pottery has been found in Greece, but 
only more advanced styles of such fabric under 
later conditions. Now that the Knossos finds 
have led all those who see their value to grant a 
connection in the Illrd or IVth Dynasty, we may 


i66 Archaeological evidence 


soon see the fighting frontier pushed over to include 
this , great and distinctive group of the early 1st 
Dynasty. 

Nor does this stand alone. This year another 
class of foreign pottery has been found in the ruins 
lat Dynasty, of temple of Abydos, of the 1 st 
Cretan. Dynasty, and perhaps somewhat before 
it (Fig. 64), The material is unlike any in Egypt, 
a dense black pottery ; the facing of it 
is usually highly burnished, unlike Egyp- 
tian of that age ; the forms are wholly 
un- Egyptian, the long pointed amphora 
with curved neck, and the hollow feet 
to vases, being unmistakably of the 
Greek family. Exactly similar pottery 
in material and finish, is found in frag- 
ments of the later Neolithic period at 
Knossos ; a piece from Egypt and one 
from Knossos when seen side by side 
seem as if they had been broken from 
the same jar. The forms of the Cretan 
examples are not yet re-established, 
but some at least are the same as the 
Egyptian examples. As most of the 
’^Uacli^otfiry ol- ‘^^ps of this type at Abydos had con- 
Trapteof lliyi tained a brilliant red haematite paint, it 
dos. Dyn. I. jg lijfely that the pottery came 

over as vehicles for trade products. 

Yet again in the 1 st Dynasty deposit of ivory 
and glazed objects in the temple of Abydos, was a 
cast copper figure of foreign style which is of the 
same family as the copper figures found in the 
Diktaean cave. 


PREHISTORIC 


167 


And all this leads us back to the Egyptian pre- 
historic age. There we see commonly painted on 
the pottery, and on walls of a tomb, the ^ ^ 

large ships then in use. Some had as 
many as 60 oars, yet we see the greatest of the 
Venetian fighting galleys had only 24 on a side. 
A rowing ship is useless on the Nile, except for 
sometimes getting down stream, as no rowing would 
suffice to take a large vessel continuously up against 
the current. But the rowing galley has been the 
vessel of the Mediterranean, from the French navy 
back to the Phoenician, and no one knows how long 
before. These great vessels, which bore various 
ensigns showing the ports from which they started, 
must have been concerned in important business ; 
probably trading the oil and skins and wood one 
way, and the dates and corn of Egypt in return. 
Among their imports were probably the foreign 
bowls of black incised ware, filled in with white, 
which are found even as far back as near the 
beginning of the prehistoric civilisation. They 
clearly belong to that foreign class which is found 
as far apart as Spain, Bosnia, and Troy ; and the 
original home of this pottery has yet to be found, 
in that Mediterranean region about which we are just 
beginning to discover our own ignorance. 

If at present our evidence of connection between 
Egypt and the West, before the Xllth Dynasty, rests 
upon the identity of styles and fabrics, we must 
remember how that same class of evidence in later 
periods has been amply reinforced by dated objects 
with inscriptions, found in most unequivocal positions. 
And we may then at last reach the conception that 


f 

1 68 ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 

after all, civilisation started at much the same time 
all round the Mediterranean, but advanced rather 
sooner in Egypt than on the northern shores. 

In this study of the facts which link 'together 
the early history of Europe with that of Egypt, we 
have now seen the varied sources and values of the 
different kinds of archaeological evidence ; and the 
modes by which the accumulation of different evi- 
dences may reinforce the conclusions, and render 
them more exact. 


CHAPTER XIII 

THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 

At first sight, ethics might not seem to have more 
to do with archaeology than with chemistry or 
astronomy. Yet even in those subjects 
an entire monopoly of some useful rtstts. 
material, or the destruction of the only records of 
irreplaceable observations, would bring in serious 
questions of individual right. It is notorious what 
a large element of conduct is involved in biology, 
where species are being destroyed every year, where 
the rabbit and the thistle have been wantonly made 
the curse of a continent, and where a mixture is taking 
place which will efface the results of ages of segrega- 
tion. In archaeology there is perhaps a greater 
range of ethical questions, of the individual versus 
the community, than in any other science. And 
the results of action are the more serious as the 
material is very limited, and perhaps no other chance 
of observation may ever occur. In most sciences 
the opportunity of experiment and observation is 
unlimited. If an alloy is spoiled it can be remade 
at once, if a star is not examined to-night it may 
be next night, if a plant is not grown this year it 
169 


i;o THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 

may be next year. But Theodoric’s gold armour 
once melted, we shall never know what it was like ; 
the heads of the Parthenon statues once burnt to 
lime, are gone for ever; or the Turin papyrus once 
broken up, we can hardly hope ever to recover all 
the history it contained. 

The destruction that has gone on, and is now 
going on continuously, seems as if it could leave 

scarcely anything for the information of 
DeBtniotlon. . , 

future ages. Every year sees wiped out 

the remains which have lasted for thousands of years 
past. Now, in our own day, the antiquities of South 
Africa and of Central and South America have been 
destroyed as rapidly as they can be found. Else- 
where, engineers of every nation use up buildings as 
quarries or wreck them for the sake of temporary 
profit, or for more legitimate purposes as in the 
submersion of Philae'and Nubia. Speculators, native 
and European, tear to pieces every tomb they can 
find in the East, and sell the few showy proceeds 
that have thus lost their meaning and their history. 
Governments set commissioners to look after things, 
who leave the antiquities to be plundered while they 
are living in useless ease. And the casual discoveries 
that are made perish in a ghastly manner. The 
Saxon regalia of Harold, the treasures of Thomas 
^ Becket’s shrine, the burial of Alfred, the burial of 
Theodoric, and the summer palace of Pekin, have 
within modern memory all gone the same way as 
the wonders that perished in the French sack of 
Rome or the Greek sack of Persia. However we 
may deplore this, our present consideration is destruc- 
tion by archaeologists, and what their responsibilities 


DESTRUCTION 


171 


are in difficult situations. In all ages there has 
been destruction for gold and valuables, and in the 
Renascence a ruthless seizure of marbles and stone 
work. To that succeeded destruction for the sake 
of art, excavations in which everything was wrecked 
for the chance of finding a beautiful statue. Then 
in the last generation or two, inscriptions became 
valued, and temple sites in Greece and in Egypt, 
and palaces in Babylonia, have been turned over, 
and nothing saved except a stone or a tablet which 
was inscribed. At last a few people are beginning 
to see that history is far wider than any one of these 
former aims, and that, if ever we are to understand 
the past, every fragment from it must be studied and 
made to tell all it can. 

But still there continues the plundering of sites 
in the interest of show museums, where display is 
thought of before knowledge, as is unhappily the 
case in many national collections. To secure an 
attractive specimen, a tomb will be wrecked, a wall 
destroyed, a temple dragged to pieces and its history 
lost, a cemetery cleared out with no record of its 
burials. And when carefully authenticated and re- 
corded specimens reach museums, their fate is not 
yet a safe one, especially in local museums. Stones 
will be built into walls, and ruined by the damp 
bringing salt out ; objects are left to drop to pieces 
from lack of chemical knowledge, or from the official 
dread of the responsibility of doing right instead of 
allowing wrong. Information is deliberately de- 
stroyed ; labels are thrown away or heaped together 
out of the way in a glass case where the objects are 
artistically displayed, with no more history than if 


172 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 


# 


they had come from a dealer. Groups of things, 
whose whole value consists in their collocation as 
they were found, are scattered up and down a 
museum as if they had no meaning. Or priceless 
antiquities will be left out for years of exposure 
to weather, as certain sculptures were in London, 
until at last they received worthy safeguarding 
in defiance of the Treasury. Unhappily far too 
many of those who are responsible for keep- 
ing the things which have at last reached a 
haven, need educating in the elements of their 
profession. 

This leads to another difficult question, that of 
restoration. The horrible destruction which has 
Reatoration under that terra is now some- 

what recognised, after much, or most, of 
the original buildings of our ancestors have dis- 
appeared beneath scraping and recutting, so that we 
only possess a copy of what has been. And in 
museums till within the last few years, statues were 
so elaborately built up out of what was — or was not 
— to be had, that it is often a difficult preliminary 
study to set aside the shams. In the Louvre there 
is the honesty of stating how much has been added 
to the original ; and the list is sometimes so long 
that it is hard to make out what gave the first 
idea to the restorer for building up his work. Yet 
in many cases some mere supports are needful, and 
the best museums now make such helps as distinct 
as possible from the original. The only full solution 
of the matter is the great extension of the use of 
casts ; and the ideal museum of sculpture would 
have the originals untouched on one side of a gallery, 


I 


RESTORATION AND SACRIFICES 173 

and the full restoration of casts of the same things 
on the other side. 

When we stand face to face with a problem like 
that of the Forum at Rome there rise a multitude 
of questions which have intricate and 
far-reaching solutions. The removal of 
the latest of the pavements of the Forum has been 
bitterly resented. The Sacred Way is gone, and 
what is there for sentiment to dwell on I Yet who 
would reasonably prefer the Lower Empire to the 
Twelve Caesars ? And then is not the Republic 
still more interesting and less known? And then 
the Kings hold a prerogative of glamour to every 
schoolboy ; and what was Rome before the Kings ? 
We see the inevitable result of such a crowd of 
interests, in the honeycomb of pits and planks and 
tunnels and iron girders which now bewilder the 
visitor, where formerly he walked down the Sacred 
Way and blessed his soul in romantic peace. 

Now this elaborate treatment is most desirable, 
but is scarcely attainable unless there is a strong 
public interest, and a government willing to carry 
out proper conservation. Let us turn to a different 
set of conditions, as at the temple of Osiris at 
Abydos. There were more than a dozen different 
levels of building ; all the lower ones only of mud 
brick ; the whole of the lower levels under the high 
Nile, and certain to be a mud swamp so soon as the 
Nile rose next summer. To treat such a place like 
the Forum would have involved enormous iron 
substructure layer under layer, and a wide drying 
area for hundreds of yards around, at a cost of cer- 
tainly five figures. No one would be likely to give 


f 


i;4 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 

a hundredth of the cost to attain that end. If any 
part were left without clearing to the bottom, the 
next high Nile would make entire pudding of it. 
And so the permanent preservation of such a site 
was impossible. All that could be done whenever 
it was begun, was to dig it in as dry a season as 
possible, when the water was at its lowest ; to clear 
it entirely to water level ; and to make plans, 
levelling, and records, of every wall and every detail, 
removing everything that stood in the way of going 
lower. Henceforward that temple site, instead of 
existing in unseen layers of solid earth, exists only 
on paper. 

Now here is a great responsibility. Whatever 
is not done in such an excavation can never be done. 

, The site is gone for ever ; and who knows 

BespoMltlUty. , , 

what further interests and new points 
of research may be thought of in future, vvhich ought 
to have received attention. Are we justified morally 
in thus destroying a temple site, a cemetery, a town, 
while we may feel certain that others would see 
more in it in future ? If a site would continue un- 
touched, and always equally open to research, it 
would be wrong to exhaust such places. But what 
are the conditions ? In Egypt sites are continually 
passing under cultivation, and once cultivated no one 
would ever know more about them. They are being 
continually dug away for earth to spread on the 
fields, and all that lies in them is scattered and lost. 
The stonework is continually the prey of engineers 
and lime-burners. The Nile is always rising, so 
that every few centuries makes ground inaccessible 
that was previously out of water, And the probable 


I 


RIGHTS OF THE FUTURE i;s 

movement of invention and appliances will most 
likely bring under cultivation in future most of the 
cemetery sites which are now bare desert. In the 
last few years most of the cemetery and temple sites 
of Nubia have been blotted out by the new lake for 
irrigation. Further, on any site of cemetery, temple, 
or town which is known to contain anything, the 
native will dig by night if he cannot do so by day, 
and will leave nothing but a wreck behind. It is 
sadly unlikely that there will be anything left to 
excavate in Egypt a century hence ; all the known 
sites will be exhausted in twenty years more at the 
present rate. A thousand years hence — a trifle in 
the history of Egypt — people will look back on these 
present generations as the golden days when dis- 
coveries came thickly year by year, and when there 
was always something to be found. And therefore 
the best thing that can be done under all these con- 
ditions is to work with the fullest care and detail in 
recording, to publish everything fully, and to then 
trust the history of Egypt to a few hundred copies 
of books instead of to solid walls and hidden ceme- 
teries. The destruction which is needful to attain 
knowledge is justified if the fullest knowledge is 
obtained by it, and if that is so safely recorded that 
it will not again be lost. The only test of right is 
the procuring the greatest amount of knowledge now 
and in future. 

Here we are landed in a question on which very 
different positions are taken. What are the rights 
of the future? Why should we limit Kightsofthe 
our action, or our immediate benefit or 
interest, for the sake of the future? If ever this 


176 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 


question comes into practical dealings, it does so in 
historical work. Any one who is above the im- 
mediate consideration of food and starvation, does 
consider the future. Our public buildings are pre- 
served for the use of coming generations ; our libraries 
and museums are largely for the benefit of those yet 
unborn. Was not the future of England the great 
charge, the inspiring aim of Alfred, of Edward I, of 
William III ? Do we not even now spend ungrudg- 
ingly for the great future of our colonies ? In every 
direction we unquestioningly assume that the future 
has its rights ; that distant generations of our own 
flesh and blood are far more to us than present 
millions of other races ; that the knowledge, the 
possessions, the aims, that we have inherited are but 
a trust to be passed on to the nation yet to be. 

And to those who live not only in the present but 
also in past ages by insight and association, the 
transitory stewardship of things becomes the only 
view possible. In this generation I possess a gem, 
a scarab, a carving : it is almost indestructible, it 
may be lost for a time but will reappear again a 
thousand, five thousand, twenty thousand years hence 
in some one else’s hands, and be again a delight and 
a revelation of past thought, as it is to-day. We 
have no right to destroy or suppress what happens 
just for the present to be in our power. To do so is to 
take the position of a Vandal in the sack of Rome. 

The past also has its rights, though statues may 
be misappropriated and churches be “restored.” 

Rights of tha work that has cost days, weeks, or 
years of toil has a right to existence. 
To murder a man a week before his time we call a 


RIGHTS OF THE PAST 


$ 


crime ; what are we to call the murder of years of 
his labour ? Or, without touching life, what dilference 
is there between putting a man in prison for a year 
so that he cannot work, and destroying a year’s work 
when it is done? If anything, the balance is in 
favour of preventing rather than destroying his 
work. Every monument we see has been lovingly 
intended, carefully carved, piously erected, in hopes 
that it would last. And who are we to defeat all 
that thought and labour ? Every tablet, every little 
scarab, is a portion of life solidified ; — so much will, 
so much labour, so much living reality. When we 
look closely into the work we seem almost to watch 
the hand that did it ; this stone is a day, a week, of 
the life of some living man. I know his mind, his 
feeling, by what he has thought and done oh this 
stone. I live with him in looking into his work, and 
admiring, and valuing it. Shall I then turn on him 
like a wild beast and kill so much of his life? 
Surely if we would draw back from wiping out a few 
years of the life of some man with whom we have no 
sympathies, far more should we shrink from even 
hurting the beautiful and cherished result of the life 
of a man whose mind we admire and honour in his 
work. I give my life to do so much work in it, and 
if I were to know that every night the work of the 
day would be annihilated, I had rather be relieved of 
the trouble of living. In all worth, in all realness, 
the life of past men preserved to us has rights as 
veritably as the life of present men. 

The work of the archaeologist is to save lives ; 
to go to some senseless mound of earth, some hidden 
cemetery, and thence bring into the comradeship of 

N 


178 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 


man some portions of the lives of this sculptor, of 
that artist, of the other scribe ; to make their labour 
familiar to us as a friend ; to resuscitate them again, 
and make them to live in the thoughts, the imagina- 
tions, the longing, of living men and women ; to 
place so much of their living personality current side 
by side with our own labours and our own thoughts. 
And has not the past its rights, as well as the present 
and the future ? 

What care then, what conscience, must be put 
into the work of preserving as much as possible of 
the past lives which those about us are wishing to 
know and to share in. The mummy of Rameses 
or of Thothmes, the portrait of the builder of the 
great pyramid (Fig. 65 ), or of the Pharaoh of the 
Exodus (Fig. 66) is a permanent mental possession 
of all cultivated mankind, as long as our literature 
shall last. The knowledge of the growth of the 
great civilisation of Egypt, from the days of men 
clad in goat-skins to the height of its power, has all 
been reconstructed in the past ten years, and will be 
part of the common stock of our knowledge of man, 
so long as civilisation continues. 

With the responsibilities before us of saving and 
caring for this past life of mankind, what must be 

our ethical view of the rights and duties 

Duties. ° 

of an archaeologist ? Conservation must 

be his first duty, and where needful even destruction 
of the less important in order to conserve the more 
important. To uncover a monument, and leave it 
to perish by exposure or by plundering, to destroy 
thus what has lasted for thousands of years and 
might last for thousands to come, is a crime. Yet 


t 


DUTIES 179 

it is the incessant failing of the thoughtless amateur, 
who knows nothing of the business ; and far too 
often also the inexcusable malpractice of those who 
know better. To wantonly destroy a monument by 
cutting pieces out, whether to put them in a museum 
or to hide them in a pile of curiosities, is unjustifi- 
able if the whole can be preserved entire. In the 
case of only fragments remaining, a selection often 
must be chosen ; yet even then copies of the whole 
of the material should be made and published all 
together. To unearth whole tombs or chambers filll 
of objects, whether in an Egyptian cemetery or a 
Roman camp, and neglect to record and publish the 
facts of the position or groups of the objects, should 
debar the inefficient explorer from ever touching 
such places again. . To remove things without ascer- 
taining all that is possible about their age, meaning, 
and connections, is as inexcusable as it is easy, To. 
undertake excavating, and so take the responsibilities 
for preserving a multitude of delicate and valuable 
things, unless one is prepared to deal with them 
efficiently, both mechanically and chemically, is like 
undertaking a surgical operation in ignorance of 
anatomy. To turn over a site without making any 
plans, or recording the positions and relations of 
things, may be plundering, but it is not archaeology. 
To remove and preserve only the pretty and interest- 
ing pieces, and leave the rest behind unnoticed, and 
separated from what gave them a value and a 
meaning, proves the spirit of a dealer and not that 
of a scholar. To leave a site merely plundered, 
without any attempt to work out its history, to see 
the meaning of the remains found, or to publish 


1 80 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 


what may serve future students of the place or the 
subject, is to throw away the opportunities which 
have been snatched from those who might have used 
them properly. 

To suppose that excavating — one of the affairs 
which needs the widest knowledge — can be taken up 
by persons who are ignorant of most or all of the 
technical requirements, is a fatuity which has led, 
and still leads, to the most miserable catastrophes. 
Far better let things lie a few centuries longer under 
the ground, if they can be let alone, than repeat the 
vandalisms of past ages without the excuse of being 
a barbarian. 

We must always have regard to what may be the 
condition of sites and of knowledge five hundred or 

Future of five thousand years hence. For if you 

Museuma. deal with thousands of years you 

must take thousands of years into account. If a 
site is certain to be destroyed by natural causes, or 
the cupidity of man, then an imperfect examination 
and a defective record of it is better than none. 
But to ensure the fullest knowledge, and the most 
complete preservation of things, in the long run, 
should be the real aim. To raid the whole of past 
ages, and put all that we think effective into museums, 
is only to ensure that such things will perish in 
course of time. A museum is only a temporary 
place. There is not one storehouse in the world 
that has lasted a couple of thousand years. Only 
two or three bronze statues have come down to us 
from classical times preserved by each generation. 
A few pieces of gold work have been treasured for 
a little over a thousand years, but only in North 


I future' of museums I8r 

I 

I Italy. And the whole of our present active clearance 

i of things, that have hitherto lasted safe underground 

' for six thousand years or more, practically ensures 

; that they shall not last one thousand longer. The 

i gold work will be the first thing to disappear, as 

I it is even now disappearing every few years from 

i museums into the melting-pot And it is a serious 

i question whether we are morally justified in thus 

I ensuring its destruction by exposure. As a counsel 

j of perfection I should like to see twenty electrotypes 

! made of every bit of ancient gold and silver work, 

! and these dispersed over all countries. It might 

; then be considered whether it would not be a noble 

; act to bury the whole of the gold where it would 

' cost a national undertaking to recover it, say in a 

I hundred fathoms of water, and so preserve it for 

future ages, when only a few wrecks of the electro- 
types would have survived. The future of the rest 
of museum treasures cannot so certainly be antici- 
pated. Bronze is sure to disappear in warfare sooner 
or later, especially as metals grow scarcer owing to 
exhaustion of mines. Ivories will probably vanish, 

1 like most fragile things, by mechanical damage. 

Pottery and vases will go the same way as the 
museum of Kertch, which was bashed to pieces by 
a disappointed European soldiery. Stone carving 
has a promise of longer life, especially if it is reused 
in buildings, and so saved from exposure and wear ; 
for instance, whenever the Baptistry of Pisa may fall 
to pieces, a mine of Latin inscriptions will come to 
light. But, broadly speaking, there is no likelihood 
that the majority of things now in museums will yet 
be preserved anything like as long as they have 


1 82 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 


already lasted. The hordes of anarchy and of Asia 
have never left Europe alone for more than a few 
centuries. 

It is then to the written record, and the published 
illustrations, that the future will have mainly to look. 

Our books will probably not last more 
PubUoations. ^ hundred years ; and it will 

be reprints of the most valued, and summaries of the 
others that will be the sources of knowledge in the 
future thousands. The wide spread of publications 
in different countries, which are never likely to all 
undergo eclipses simultaneously, is the best guarantee 
for the permanence of knowledge. But by the time 
the First Dynasty has doubled its age, we cannot 
expect that the greater part of our record of it will 
still be known. Certainly the inefficient and incon- 
clusive books will vanish first ; and the more compact 
and generally used a work is, the longer are its 
chances of life. We must always remember therefore 
that in archaeological work we are removing what 
would be as solid proof to future ages as it is now to 
us ; and we are trusting all future knowledge of the 
facts to inflammable paper, and the goodwill of 
successive generations, many of whom may have 
very different interests. Had any past age of civil- 
isation dug up and removed every trace of the earlier 
times, and committed all the results to their literature, 
we should not be able to learn anything but some 
brief summary, nor glean but a few trifling fragments, 
which would have lost their meaning and connection. 

And here we come against another large ethical 
question of the rights of the individual against the 
community, in the claim made by the state to 


PUBLICATIONS AND STATE CLAIMS 183 

interfere with property in antiquities, in ways in 
which it does not interfere with any 

- Stat6 Olalms, 

other property. J^rom past ages the 
English law has claimed for the Crown all treasure 
accidentally discovered. Such a law is the best way 
to ensure that no such discoveries are made known, 
and to dri-ve the finder to put all such treasures in 
the melting pot. The actual gain to the Crown is 
ignorably trivial, certainly not an average of a thou- 
sand pounds a year ; yet, in order to grab this trifle, 
the law drove all such treasures to destruction. At 
last an improvement was made by the Crown only 
demanding specimens needed for the national collec- 
tion, and paying intrinsic value for them. Even 
some old candlesticks, the proceeds of an XVIIIth 
century burglary, were claimed when accidentally 
found. 

And when the state does not claim, the landlord 
or tenant makes a claim, which is just as bad, as such 
claims lead workmen always to conceal and sell 
surreptitiously the antiquities which are continually 
found in all working in old towns. The only law 
which could act for the full preservation of antiquities 
would be the grant of the entire rights to the finder 
if he proclaims his find, but no rights in what he 
does not proclaim. The actual average gains of 
an average landlord per annum by discoveries of 
antiquities are at present incalculably small, probably 
not a farthing in the pound on the rental or anything 
near that. Hence there would be no perceptible 
loss by granting finds to the finder ; and everything 
would be saved and preserved as it was found. At 
least a beginning could be made by landlords and 


1 84 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 

public bodies offering full intrinsic value for any gold 
and silver found on their premises ; they could not 
lose by that, and they might gain large profits in 
the archaeological value of things. To suppose that 
(without great precautions) they can get the whole 
value of finds by simply claiming them, is fatuous. 

This same fatuous idea pervades many govern- 
ments. It is thought that by simply making a law, 
digging can be prevented, or antiquities can be kept 
in a country. Such laws merely enforce an extensive 
illicit system, through which valuable and important 
things can readily be removed in defiance of law, 
whenever they are found. There is not a country 
from which any antiquity could not be removed by 
sufficient care in smuggling. Every national museum 
has its underground feeders, knows how to defeat the 
laws of other countries, and incessantly grows in 
spite of laws. To seize property without paying 
its real value is seldom a profitable proceeding in the 
long run, and that is what every government tries 
to do with antiquities. The Italian government has 
confiscated a large part of the values of private 
collections, by forbidding the exportation of any im- 
portant picture or statue. And yet such things can 
and do leave Italy. The Greek government, as well 
as the Turkish, forbid the exportation of any and 
every kind of antiquity ; yet fine things from both 
lands continually come over to the West. 

These confiscatory laws, these claims on private 
property on behalf of the state, are more or less 

illogical nibblings on a wide claim which 

state EigMs. J i-tr 14. 

no state has ventured yet to formulate, 
— namely, that all objects of past generations are 


STATE RIGHTS 


i8s 

public property. This means, if fully carried out, 
that no person can own any object of antiquity as 
private property. No private collections would be 
possible in such a condition, all would belong to the 
state. Of course there is a huge amount of material 
which is duplicate, and not needed in a national 
collection ; but the state claims would be maintained 
if all collections must be placed in a public building, 
(such as a local museum) where they could be seen. 
The energy of collectors, the transfer of specimens 
from one to another, would not be stopped, only the 
objects would be compulsorily visible in a public 
place. And everything wanted for a national 
collection would be transferred. This condition of 
things is slowly being reached by the state buying 
important objects continually, when they are sold on 
changing hands. But the logical outcome of the 
present laws and present tendency would be this 
nationalisation of all antiquities. Whether such a 
result would be satisfactory at all points may be 
doubted ; but it is clearly a position to which all 
changes at present tend. If fully and honourably 
carried out by the state paying the finder full value 
for all it took, and giving up confiscation of all sorts, 
the result would probably be the best that could 
happen for archaeology. 

One great result of defining the position thus, 
would be to prevent any ancient buildings being 
destroyed or altered without state consent. If every 
structure, say, over five hundred years old, needed 
three months’ notice to an inspector before it could 
be pulled down or dealt with, there would be a great 
check on the present changes. Every cathedral and 


1 86 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 


church, every castle and manor-house, would need 
special licence for changes in all parts older than the 
prescribed limit. A notice of one week might be 
required for the destruction of structures as yet not 
known, which were unearthed in course of digging. 
Such a protection of monuments would not affect 
vested interests or property values nearly as much 
as an ordinary railway bill that passes through 
Parliament without a protest ; and it seems not too 
much to hope that such a protection of all monu- 
ments of historic interest might be carried out. 
The legal position might take the form of pro- 
nouncing all ancient buildings, stone circles, and 
earthworks the ultimate property of the Crown, 
with the existing owners having full powers as 
trustees for the Crown to preserve, use, and enjoy 
such property, and to sell or devise such trustee- 
ship in every way as if the property was not 
beyond the age limit of private property. Only 
the right of destruction and alteration would be 
reserved. 

A state register of works of art is desired by 
Professor Ernest Gardner, who proposes that (i) the 
ownership of works of ancient art and sculptures 
and pictures by great masters should be entered on 
a register in charge of a public registrar ; (2) the 
registrar should have a right to see to the safety of 
such objects ; (3) any fairly qualified scholar may 
apply to be entered on a register of students kept 
by the registrar ; (4) owners of registered works 
must fix times for exhibition to students or to the 
public, or else a registered student must be allowed 
to see any work within a reasonable period ; (S) the 


I 

EXCAVATING LAWS 187 

owner, if absent, must appoint some one to preserve 
and exhibit such works ; (6) in case of sale of a 
work to a foreign country, the government shall 
have the option of retaining it at the price fixed for 
the sale. 

The attitude of foreign governments regarding 
scientific excavating has not been happy. Too 
often the prohibitions have been used ExoaTatmg 
not in the interests of archaeology, but 
for promoting plundering. Because it is easy to 
drop on an open excavation, all regular excava- 
tions have been fenced with severe difficulties 
and costs ; while in Greece and Turkey none of 
the proceeds have been allowed to the finder. On 
the other hand, it is difficult to always drop on 
a surreptitious native, and the sympathy of the 
courts — in Egypt at least — is openly on the side 
of the plundering native, who is seldom punished 
for anything. Hence the curious situation is that 
the whole values of the property have been solely 
created by the labours and study of the archaeologist; 
yet he is almost debarred from using the material 
which an ignorant peasant may dig and destroy as 
he pleases. 

The form of law which is wanted is (i) the 
punishment of all destruction or removal of an- 
tiquities, by a special court, independent of local 
sympathies or favouring of the plunderer ; (2) the 
rigid requirement of technical knowledge and ability 
in those who excavate, with the condition that 
everything is published promptly, and that nothing 
found can be sold or pass except into a public 
museum ; (3) the right of the government of each 


f' 

1 88 THE ETHICS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 

country to such objects as are necessary to the 
national collection, on reimbursing whatever may 
have been given as bakhshish to the finder, and 
some proportion of the costs according to the 
case. 


CHAPTER XIV 


THE FASCINATION OF HISTORY 

The love of past times, the craving for that which 
is gone, is one of the more obscure instincts which 
appears to be brought forward by the wider growth 
of interests of the mind. It takes many forms ; it 
appeals to the intellect, to the curiosity, to the 
affections ; yet it is really a single instinct, and one 
which, from its strength, must spring from a primal 
cause. 

The sense of loss touches us at eveiy sunset, 
and in anticipation tinges all the afternoon with the 
sense of lengthening shadows. Even the things 
that seem most common, least worthy, when in use, 
all gain some being as time passes. Each little 
thing, that carelessly we value not at first, grows 
rich with store of years. As Antony says — 

You all do know this mantle : I remember 
The first time ever Caesar put it on ; 

'Twas on a summer’s evening in his tent. 

That day he overcame the Nervii. 

Still more do places gain their hold upon us, 
unheeded at the time. A store of memories of 
days spent amid strong associations, that stirred 
189 


r 

190 THE FASCINATION OF HISTORY 

and built the mind, are the truest riches in all after- 
life. We dwell upon those portions of the past, 
those days at Athens, or Florence, or in the Forum, 
as on a treasure ; they are a portion of our life 
crystallised into the structure of our thoughts — a 
haven of the imagination. 

And how much deeper still is the sense of the 
past when“we turn to friends, — or even closer yet. 
One whom perhaps we hardly heeded in our daily 
life, is dignified at once by the irrevocable. But all 
this is merely our personal regret : the direct, selfish, 
individual interest. 

But the tender grace of a day that is dead 
Will never come back to me. 

Let US step from this out into the past beyond 
our personal touch. See now a churchyard, tall in 
grass, with the dial on its stand, which each genera- 
tion has passed by — how full of memories of gone 
years it is, how the eye clings to its weathered disc 
and minds that so it was on the day of Trafalgar 
or the Boyne ; while by its side is the old carved 
sarcophagus tomb of some Turkey merchant, silently 
showing his virtues to each changing time, and 
calming the mind with quiet age. We love such 
for the sake of the past, which draws us to its 
bosom to make one more link in the long chain. 

And pass inside the church, where Tudor and 
Edwardian, and Norman and Saxon, have each 
poured out their souls ; in which every stone seems 
saturated with their longings ; where pleadings and 
rejoicings seem to mutely fill the dead air ; where 
the walls have echoed every bride and every infant 


« 

THE FASCINATION OF HISTORY 191 

and every mourner through all the changing genera- 
tions ; where Feeder ure has yielded to pater noster 
before even our familiar supplications were ever 
heard. This indeed holds us as if it were a place 
where we can actually live with the past selves that 
have made us, and be at one with those who would 
have craved to see us in the ages beyond them. 

And if past loves and hopes seem thus to give 
their life to the lasting walls, how fearful is the 
breath of terror that clings round every stone of the 
Colosseum. One single mangled death there made 
ten thousand fiends of men who sat on those benches ; 
and every year had its thousands of such agonies, 
through all the centuries. The mass of horror 
beyond all thought that dwells in that arena, is only 
exceeded by the thousandfold fire of cruelty that 
has burnt on those seats around. The place is hell 
petrified. 

And, within a stone’s throw of that, how the 
whole past, from which our present ages have sprung, 
lives before us in the Forum. The triumphs where 
the beauty of Greek art served but to make the clumsy 
westerner gape ; where the noblest blood of other 
lands, — Perseus, Caractacus, Zenobia, — has stood 
abased ; where the barbaric Goth has fiercely joyed 
in splendid pillage of its wondrous wealth ; where 
Theodoric and Karl had each hoped to restore the 
shattered decay, with the rough material of their own 
kin, which needed yet a thousand years of hewing ; 
a space of greater hopes and dreads, greater successes 
and failures, than any other acre that we know. 

And yet, before all this, there passed age after 
age of men, who built up civilisations which we 


192 THE FASCINATION OF HISTORY 


just begin to perceive. The golden splendour 
of Mykenae, the earlier magnificence of Minoan 
Knossos, the delicate wares of still older Crete, all 
live with the same life as ourselves, all are precious 
to us as if we had made them, all make us fellow 
minds with those who thought and fashioned and 
treasured such things in like manner to ourselves. 

Turn now to our own land, and on a wide western 
moor stand within a ring of grey stones, which our 
own flesh and blood there placed in faith and trust, 
for something greater than the cares of daily life ; 
so far from us in generations, so far from us in 
thoughts, that we can hardly grasp the pulse of the 
same life with them, and feel what they felt. Yet it 
draws us like those sounds which were the first 
music to man, the sough of the wind in the wood, 
and the lap of the wave on the shore, ever the 
sweetest yet to ourselves. And the grey stones still 
touch us and bind our thoughts and our love of all 
our forefathers to themselves in elemental memories. 

What underlies all this fascination of the past? 
What is it that thus moves men 

In thinking- of the days that are no more ? 

It is the same great attraction, whether it be a 
personal memory, or the being of our forefathers, or a 
page strong with past life in some history, or the 
handling of the drinking bowls of the oldest kings of 
the earth as they come from the dust of Egypt. It is 
but one sense in varied forms. It is the love of life. 

In primal seas first sprang that love of life, — of 
preservation, of continuity of life. Even long before 
man it led to the moral growth of self-sacrifice, of 


« 

THE FASCINATION OF HISTORY 193 


affection, of social union. In man it led the Stoic on 
to the brotherhood of all men, and the responsibility 
of man for man. It has led the modern forward to 
the brotherhood of all existing life, the responsibility 
for the animal as well as the mao. It now leads us 
on to clinging to the life of our ancestors, their 
being, and their natures ; and beyond that to the 
fascination of all history, as being the continuity of 
life, the ever-shifting changes of the one great chain 
which we see around us at its present stage, and of 
which we form part. The man who knows and dwells 
in history adds a new dimension to his existence ; 
he no longer lives in the one plane of present ways 
and thoughts, he lives in the whole space of life, past, 
present, and dimly future. He sees the present 
narrow line of existence, momentarily fluctuating, as 
one stage, like innumerable other stages that have 
each been the all-important present to the short- 
sighted people of their own day. He values the 
present as the most complete age of history for study, 
as explaining the past. He values the past as the 
long continuity that has brought about the result of 
the present, in which he happens to breathe. He 
lives in all time ; the ages are his, all live alike to 
him ; the present is not more real than the past, any 
more than the room in which he sits is more real 
than the rest of the world. Cleaving to that one 
stream of life which branch by branch has flowed 
through so many channels in all the ages, and still 
runs on into the future, he can give account of the 
Fascination of History. 


0 


INDEX 


Ab-nub-mes-uazet-user statuette 158 
Abusir lotus capital 163 
Abydos, Osireion, chain clearing, 

frontispiece 

,, temple, black pottery 166 
,, ,, copper figure 166 

,, ,, excavation of 173 

Account keeping 35-37 
Accumulations of town, rate of 9, ii 
Accuracy in ievelling 59 
,, ,, observing 50 

,, ,, recording 49-50 

Accusations against workmen 40 
Adjustment of stuff in moving 4a 

,, ,, vase-fragments 70-71 

Advances of money 35 
Adzes, dating of 14 
Aegean pottery 145-170 
Age of objects in plate-heading 115 
,, ,, towns II 

Akhenaten {Amenhotep IV) 147, 148, 
iSa, 154, iss 
Alignment of drawings 115 
Amateur digging i, 3, 48, 179, 180 
Amenhotep IT 148 

,, in 139, 145, 148. 153. 

IS 3 - 1 S 5 

, , IV (Akhenaten) 147, 148, 

152, 154, 155 

America, possible saving of history 

by, 134 

Amphora, Cretan 166 
Ancient civilisations 191-192 
Angles, calculation of 57, 58 

,, of vases measured 71, 103 


Antiquities, exportation of 184 
,, exposure of 173 

,. nationalisation of 185 

,, preservation of 85-104 
,, sale of 187 

,, securing of 33 

,, smuggling of 184 

,, thrown away 132 

Approaches to site of work 28 
Arabic, necessity for 6 
Archaeological duties 177-178 
,, evidence 136-168 

,, experience 3, 4, 14 

,, responsibilities 170 

178 

Archaeology, classical s 

,, conditions of progress 

130 

hindered by present 
museums 130 

,, mistakes in 139-140 

, , narrow definition of 2 

,, progress depends on 

space 133 
systematic 122-135 
Architecture, photographing 0174, 75, 
78 

Arrangement of objects 79 

,, ,, plates 114-117 

,, ,, text 119-120 

,, ,, work 4 i -47 

,, with publishers 120 

Athenacus confirmed 143 
Author's alterations 120-131 
Autotypes iig 

196 


INDEX 


196 
Awls 1 13 

Azab, wooden floor of 77 

Backgrounds for photogi'aphy, 79 
Backing of frescoes 96-98 
Bakhshish 33-35, 188 
,, accounts 35 
Banking accounts of men 35 
Barrels for soaking stones 86 
Bases of vases drawn 70-71 
,1 ,, I, sorted 103 

Basket-boys, and picks 31-32 
Baskets 33, 44-45 
Beads 14, 15 

,, pattern of 52, 95, 96 
,, position of 52, 95 
,, seldom of mixed ages 150 
Bead-work 95 

Beeswax 66, 67, 71, 80, go, 95, 102 
Bell 113 
Benzol 92 

„ wax in 91 

Black incised ware i6o-i6a, 163-164, 
167 

1 1 velvet for backgrounds 79 
Blank sheets in spacing drawings 63 
Block-tints for vases 70 
Blocks returned after use 121 
,, zinc 68 
Blotting-paper 8g 
Boats, prehistoric 167 
Bone point 98 
Bones, cleaning of 76 

,, marking 51 

, , preserving 90 

Bonsor, discoveries in Spain 159-160 
Book-post for drawings 64 
,, seller 121 

Bosnia, black incised ware 161, 162, 
167, 

Boxes, grain of wood in no 
,, making of log-in 

,, nailing of no 

,, nests of log, 113 

,, with bars 106 

Box-sextant 55-56, 113 
Boys, ages of 20-21 
,, chain of 44, front. 

,, collecting 44 
,, in work 24 
,, throwing 44 


Boys, use of 32 
Brace and bits 113 
Bracelet of Zer 80 
Brass, treatment of 100 
Brick, burnt 10 
,, mounds 10 
,, walls, tracing of 46-47 
,, -work 9 
Bricks, age of 47 
, , colour of 46 

,, size of 47, 52 

Brims of vases drawn 70-71 

,, ,, ,, sorted 103 

British Museum, growth of 134 
Bronze, destruction of 181 
,, hypocephalus 76 
,, statues, preservation of 180 
,, treatment of loo-ioi 
,, vases, Idaean cave 153 
Brunswick black, marking with 52 
Brushes 91, 98, na, 113 
Brushing 86, 87, 89, 98, 100 
Bilgelkanne, see False-necked vases 
Builder of Great Pyramid 178 
Buildings, destruction of 185-186 
,, photographing 75, 78 

,, planning 52-55 

,, restoration of 172, 185 

Burials, primary and secondary 52 
,, undisturbed 12 
Burnt groups 145-146 
,, papyri 95 

Buttons of VI-VII Dyn. 162 
Buttresses left in digging 30 

Cairo museum a failure 131 
.. rubbish-mounds 11 
Calculation of angles 57 
Camel-hair brush 91, 98 
,, transport 112 
Camera 73-75 

,, copying- 81 

. , direction of So 

,, hand- 74, 75 
., -legs 81 
,, pattern of 73-74 
setting up of 80 
, , size of 74 
,. -stand 81 
Camp requirements 6 , 

[ Carbolic acid 89, loi 


f 


INDEX 


Carbonised papyri 94 
Card blackened for small stops 75 
, , -board for drawing 68 
,, slips 78 
,1 tube 74 

.1 with concentric circles 71 
Carefulness, means of securing 34 
Carrier-boys 30, 41, 43 
Carrying 30, 32 
Cartonnage 52 
Cartridge-paper 109, 113 
Cases, grain of wood in no 
,, making of 109-nx 
>, nailing of no 

,, with bars 106 

Casting 64-66 

,, backs of frescoes 97-98 
Casts of statues 172-173 
,, plaster 64-66 

,, ,, photographing from 77 

Celluloid 71 

Celtic pottery like pan-grave rgg-ido 
Cementing disintegrated granite 87 
, , sculptures in wails 86, 171 
Cemetery site, nature of n, 12 
Chain of boys frontisfiece, 44 
Chambers, contents of 32 
, , emptying of 44 
Charcoal 47, 80, 90 
,, dust 76 

Chemical knowledge, need of 85, 171 
Chromo-lithography 118 
China ink, drawing with 68 
,, ,, marking with £2, 76 

Choice of facts in recording 49 
,, ,, workmen 21 

Claims of landlord 183 
,, ,, State 183-184 

Classification of material 113, ng-120 
Clay moulds 63 
Cleaning of bones 76 

,, ,, bronzes loo-ioi 

,, ,, gold 98 

,, I, iron 102 

, , , , pottery 76 

,, ,, silver g8, gg 

Clearance at edge 43 

, , from bottom 42 
,, of sites 41-43, 174, 181 
Clues in digging 3 
Coffin 52 


197 

Coinage, wastage of 130 
Coin impressions 66, 67, 77 
, , restorations 149 
Coins, casting 77 
,, cleaning 99 
Cold chisel 1 12, 1 13 
Collectors 48, 183 
Collotype 74, 118 
Colossi, transport of 107 
Colour on slabs 87 

,, preservation of 87-88 
, . -printing for vases 70 
Columns, packing of 107 
Commerce, prehistoric 167 
Commission on sales 121 
Commissioners, utility of 170 
Compass, prismatic 33, 113 
Compasses 57 

Complex forms fade soon 128 
Conservation 5, 130-133 
Contracts 121 
Copper figures 166 
, , treatment of 99 
Copying graffiti 72 

,, inscriptions 61-63, 7® 

,, walls 61-63, 7* 

Corner-posts to boxes 109 
Corpus of pottery 124 
,, system 123-126 
Cost of publication of drawings 68, 
iry 

11 11 II ,, photographs 

118 

■ I II II text 120 

Cotton log 

,, wool 66, 97, 107, 109 
, , , , not with papyri 94 

Cretan connections, XVXII Dyn. 155 

.1 I. Xn „ 138 

II II VI I6a 

II I. IV ,. 163 

II II I I, 166 

Cross-bars in packing io6 
„ partitions in packing in 
Crowbars 33, 112 
Crown property 183, 186 
Crystal, inscriptions on 76 
Cultivation of sites 174 
Curators of museums 49, 172 
Cutting down from edge of work 
I 42 


INDEX 


198 

Cutting-out knives, dating of 15 
Cylinders, impressions of 66, 67 

Damping of papyri 93 
Daphnae 10, 13, 143-144 
Dark room 83 
Dated objects 4, 14-15, 

Dating of adzes 14 

,, ,, beads 14 

,, ,, cutting-out knives IS 

, , , , mounds 17 

,, ,, objects in general 4, 14-17 

Day and piece work combined 30, 32 
,, -pay 24, 27-31 

Dealers in antiquities 3, 25, 38-39, 48 
Decomposition of glazes 88 
Decoration in bead-work 95 
Defeneb 10, 13, 143-144 
Den, tomb of 44 
Dentist’s wax 67 
Deposits, foundation 80 
Desert views i 

Destruction by wet-squeezing 61 

,, of antiquities 170- 171, 

172 

,, ,, buildings 10, 185-186 

, , , , evidence 48 

,, ,, information 171 

,, ,, monuments 179 

,, ,, sculptures 86, 172 

,, ,, site 174 

Detail, verification of 50 
Developers 82-83 

,1 proportions in 82 
Developing 82-84 
Development of tools 14 
Diagonal bars for box-lids 106 
,, driving of nails no, in 

,, lighting 77 

,, mirror in pbotographing 75 

Digging by amateurs i, 3, 48, 179, 
180 

, , purpose of i 

,, regularity of 28 

Diktaean copper figures 166 
Dilettante work 1, 3, 48 
Diorite bowl, Crete 163 
,, statue, Crete 158 
Diospolis Parva, pottery from 160 
Direction of lighting 77 
Discoveries, age of 17s 


Discoveries, casual 170 
Discrimination of sites 9 

,, ,, style 14, 17-18 

,, ,, walls 46-47 

Disintegration of granite 87 

, , , , stone by salt 86 

Disobedience to orders 35 
Distance from lens 80 
Distinguishing brick-walls 46-47 
Distortion in photography 74 
Divided rod 54-55, 113 
Doctoring of natives 38 

,, ,, workmen 37-38 

Door-sills 52 
,, ways 52 
Double-plates 116 
Drab pottery at Mykenae 148 
Draughtsman wanted for corpus 126 
Drawing boards 113 

,, by lamp-light 62 

,, facsimile 5, 68 

, , from squeezes 62-63 

,, interpretation in 68 

,, plan 5, 68 

,, thickness of lines in 69, 115 
,, vases from fragments 70-71 

Drawings, cutting up 63 
,, packing of 63-64 

,, posting of 64 

, , reduction of 69 

,, reproduction of 68, 115 
,, returned after use 12 1 

,, scales of 69 

Dressing of graves 76-77 
,, ,, objects 76 

Driving of nails 110, iii 
Drop-shutter view 75 
Dry squeezes 61-63 

Ebony stain 68 
, , statuette 78 
Editions, varieties ot 119 
Egypt and Europe 141-168 
see Europe 
Electro-types 181 
Electrum g8 
El Hibeh 9 

Engineers, wrecking by 170, 174 
Engraving, Swan electric 119 
Enkomi, tombs at 152, 154, 155, 156 
Enlarged photographs 74, 75, 80, 81 


f 

INDEX 199 


Ether 93 

Ethics of archaeology 169-188 
Europe and Egypt, 

XXVI Dyn. 143-144 

XVni ,, 144-156 

XII ,, 156-161 

VI ,, 162, 167 

IV ,, 163, 165, 167 

I ,, 164-166, 167 

prehistoric 167-168 
Evidence, by collocation 139, 150 
, , by scarabs and coins 149 

,, failures of 139-X40 

,, from burnt groups 145-146 

,, ,, copied fonns 163 

,, ,, houses 148 

,, ,, paintings 144-145 

,, ,, rubbish mounds 147, 

156-157 

,, ,, tombs 150-153 

,, in a single object 138 

, , nature of 136-140 

Excavation, hindrance to 187 
, , purpose of i 

,, recording resuits of 124 

Excavator, qualifications of 1-7, 19, 
36. 85 

,, responsibilities of i, 8, 
174 

Exhaustion, evidence by 137, 139 
,, of metals 18 1 

,, ,, sites 174-175 

Exodus, Phai-aoh of 178 
Experience, archaeological 3-4 
Exposure in photography 75, 78, 79, 
82 

,, of sites 178 
Extortion by overseers 25 
Extra plates for students 119 

Faces, flaking of 87 
,, of limestone 87, 88 
Facts, stating of 50 
False-necked vases 145, 146, 153-154 
, , , , , , variation with age 

153-154 

Families of workmen 39 
Fascination of history 189-193 
Files 1 13 
Filling 13, 47, 52 
, , and carrying 32 


Films, curling of 83 
,, packing of 83-84 

, , rapidity of 73 

Finest lines in drawing 69 
Finger-work in excavatmg 6-7 
Flake-white, use of 77 
Flaking of faces 87 
Flint knife obtained whole 34-35 
Flooring, wooden 76, 77 
Focus 74-75, So, 81 
Foil, gold 67-68 
I, tin 67 
Foot-notes 120 
Foreigners’ use of plates 116 
Forms of pottery 16-17 

duration of 128-129 

Fort-mounds, Defeneh 10 
Forum, excavation of 173 
,, interest of 191 

,, pottery at 126 

Foundation deposit 80 
Fragments, means of securing 34 
, , method of drawing 70-71 

,, Sorting and joining 102- 

104 

Frame for drawing vase -fragments 
70-71 

,, ,, supporting fresco 96-97 

,, of strings for scale-drawing 

72 

,, with backing of muslin 65 
Free-swinging lens 80 
French chalk 65 
Frescoes 52, 88, 96-97 
Fuller's earth 92 
Furniture, successive ages of 127 
Future ages, rights of 175-176 
,, condition of museums 133 
,, destruction of museums 180- 
182 

Gang, proportions of 44 
Gangs- of workmen 26, 27. 32 
Gauging of stuff to be removed 42 
Gelatine for extracting salt 89-90, 92 
Gems, photographing 77 
Girls as workers 23, 24, 75 
Gizeh, tomb of Sem-nefer 78 
Glass background 79 

,, waxed for papyri 94, 95 
Glaze, decomposition of 88 


INDEX 


Glycerine 91 
Glyciu 83 

Gold collar from Enkomi 154 
,, foil 67-681 98 
,, pin. Cypriote iss 
,, preservation of 180-181 
, , treatment of 98 
,, value offered for 184 
Governments, attitude of 183, 187 
Graeco-Egyptian vases 144 
Graffiti, copying 72 
Grave, age of, by sequence-dates 129 
, , dressing of 76-77 
Greece, see Etirope 

,, conditions of work in 26, 32, 
33 

Greek pottery 17 
, , workmen 26-27 
Greeks in Egypt 142-144, 146 
Grouping in museums 132 

,1 of objects as evidence 139 
Groups in museums 17a 

,, numbering of 51 

„ of ivories 91 

„ of objects 48-49, SI. 69. IIS. 

172, 179 

,, photographing of So, 81 
Guards to plates 116, 117 
Gum, contraction of 93 
Gurob 14s, 148. 151. 152. IS3. IS® 
Gutta-percha moulds 66 

Haematite paint 166 
Hammer dressing 105 
,. light 99 
,, sledge II 2 
Headings of plates 115 
Head-lines of text 120 
Head-shawls, seizure of 39 
Helbeh 109 
Heliogravure 119 
Hinges 113 

History, fascination of 189-193 

,, importance of 4-3, 171, I93 

,, knowledge of 4-5 

Hibeh, El 9 

Hissarlik, black incised ware 161, 167 
Holes, excavated 43 
, , in bricks 47 
Hollow feet to vases 166 
Hollows in ground n, 12, 13, 44 


Hollows in inscriptions 76 
,, ,, packing 108 

Hone-stone 113 

Honesty in workmen 22, 34, 37 
Horemheb 147 

Horizontal position, photographing 80 
Huts, mud, of excavators 6 
Hypocephalus, bronze 76 

lalysos, tomb at 152 
Idaean cave, bronze vases 155 
, , ,, carved dish 155 

Idleness, remedies for 21, 28 
Illness among workmen 31, 37-38 
Impressions of cylinders 66 
Indestructibility of small antiquities 
176 

Index to books 120 
India-rubber for dry-squeezing 63 
Indications after rain 13 

, , of nature of site 12, 13 
Indices of types required 124 
Infectious illness 38 
Inking in of drawings 61, 63, 68 
,, ,, ,, squeezes 61 

Inks for drawing 52, 68 
Ink-writing copied 72 
, , , , photographed 79 

Inscriptions, columns and lines 72 
,, copying 60-63, 73 

,1 ,, before removal 

S3 

, , made legible 76 

, , on stone 76 

,, sanded 76 

Insight in excavating 4-6 
Inspectorship of antiquities 185 
Instantaneous shutter 75 
Instruments, use of 54-55 
Inventory-sheets for small objects 69- 
70 

Iron, treatment of 102 
Ironing textiles 89 
Irregularities in plates 115 
Israel stele 62 
Ivory, destniotion of 181 
, , preservation of 90-92 
, , tablet of Zer 76 

Jaw, removal for measurement 53 
Jelly for extracting salt S9-90 


INDEX 


« 

201 


Jewellers' tag-labels 52, 113 
Joining fragments 103-104 
,, sheets of drawings 63 

Jointing of brick-work 46, 76 
,, ,, flooring 76 

Kahun, black incised pottery 160 
,, burials at 151 

, , rubbish mound at 156-158 

,, town site turned over 41 

Kamares pottery 158-159 
Kefti bring vases 144 
Key-plans 53 

Khataaneh, black incised ware 160 
Khufu, portrait of 178 
Khyan vase lid 159 
Kitchen-paper 109, 113 
Knife, cutting-out, development of 15 
I, dinner-, uses of 46-47, 94 
,, pen 65, 93 
Knossos, carving 163 

, , Egyptian figure from 158 

,, pottery 158, 166 

,, vase lid of Khyan 159 

,, vases from 158, 163 

Knowledge in recording 49 

,, requisite for excavating 
187 

,, systematic 123 

Koptos 151 

Labelling objects 52, 112 
Labels in museums 112, 171 
,, ,, packing 112 

Labom-ers, control of 5, 7, 22-23 
,, qualities of 21 

,1 selection of 20 

,, training of 5, 21-22 

Lachish, pottery at 17 
Lamp, Cretan 163 

Languages, knowledge of, required 
S-6 

Lantern-slides 74, 81 
Laws, present, concerning archaeology 
182-184 

,, requisite, concerning archae- 
ology 185-188 

Laying out for photographing 80 
Lead, treatment of 102 
Legal evidences 136-138 
,, proof accepted 140-141 


Legal uncertainties 140-141 
Length of brides 47 
,, ,, ropes 46 

Lens, distance from 80 
,, free-swinging 76 
,, wide-angle 74 
Lettering of plates n6 
Letters used for distinguishing sites 51 
Levelling-mirror 58-59, 113 
Levels of buildings 173 

,, ,, pottery for dating 144 

,, ,, walls 53 

Libyan influence 159 
Lids of boxes no 
Lifting in removing 43, 44, 4S 
Lighting by reflection 78 

,, in photography 77-79 

,, of museums 131-133 

Lime-burners, destruction by 10,174 
Linen, glued 94 

Lines, thickness of, in drawing 69 
Liparitc bowl, Crete 163 
List of plates n6, lao 
Lithography, chromo- 118 

„ photo- 55, 68-70, 117 
Locals according to villages 31 
,, for carrying 30-38 
Locks 1 13 
Logarithms 57 
Lotus capital 163 

Magnifier, use in work 47 
Miiket tomb 151-152, 156 
Manuscript, readiness for printing lao 
Margins to plates 116, 117 
Market money 35-36 
Marking of bones 51 

,, ,, objects 51-52, 112 

Material facts, evidence of 137, 138 
Materials, presentment of 50-51 
, , properties of 85 
Measurement, accuracy of 55 

,, in planning 53-55 

,, in photography 80 

, . of vase-fragments 71 

„ ,, walls 54 

,, ,, work 28, 30 

Mechanical contrivances 33, 43, 71 , 72 
Medicines 38 

Mediterranean civilisation 141-168 
Medum tombs 62-63 


202 


INDEX 


Memory, in excavating 18-19 
Mer-en-ptah, portrait of, 178 
Metals, treatment of 98-102 
Method of plotting 3-point survey 56 
Metre rod 54-55, 113 
Mill-stones, Roman 10 
Mirror 78, 95 
, , .diagonal 75 
,, levelling 58-59, 113 
Mistakes in naming objects 3-4 
,, ,, publication 117 

Misuse of ropes 45-46 
Mixture of objects of various ages 150 
Monkey, violet glazed 148 
Montfaucon 123 
Moulds for casting 60, 65-68 
Mounds of fort, Defeneh 10 
,, ,, town 10, II 

I, position of 42 

,, throwing on 41 

Mounting papyri 94 
Moving of earth 30, 43 
Mud-briok mounds 10 
,, ,, sun-dried 9 

, , , , walls, tracing of 46 

Museums, buildings unsuitable 130- 

131 

,, curators of 49, 172 

,, future of 180-182 

,, grouping in 132-1 33 

,, groups of objects in 172 

I, growth of 184 

,, lighting of 131 

,, methods in 86, 95, 101 

,, plundering for 17 1 

,, present, hinder archae- 
ology 130 

I, preservation in 180-182 

,, requirements of 131-135 
,, sculptures in 86, 172-173 
,, space needed in 132-135 
,, nnpacking in 112 
, , use of 176 
Muslin 65 

Mykenae, objects from 140, 148, 152, 
156 

Mykenaean period 127, 153 
Nails, 1 13 

,, diagonal driving of no, III 
,, use of 99 


Naqada, dressing of tomb 77 
National Repository needed 133-135 
Nationalisation of antiquities 185 
Native digging 173, 187 
Nauliratis 142-144 
Nebireh 142 
Negatives S2-84, 118 
Negress, ebony 78 
Neldieb, goddess 64 
Neolithic vase at Knossos 166 
Net process 118 
Nile boats 112 
,, rise of 174 
Nitric acid 92 

Notation of successive ages 127 
,, ,, time in work 29 

Note-talcing in excavations 52 
Nubian shore, submersion of 170, 173 
Numbering of groups 31 

,, ,, objects on plates 113 

,, ,, plates 1 17 

,, ,, sheets of drawings 63- 

64 

Numbers, printed 70 

,, scratched on 52 

Obelisks at Tanis 9 
Objects, groups of 48-49, 51, 69, 115, 
172, 179 

,, inventory of 69 
,, numbering of 51 
, , outlining of 69-70 

,, position of 30, 32, 179 

,, preparing 76 

,, scale of drawing 69 
Oblique lighting 77 
Observation 9 
Oiling of moulds 61, 66 
Organization of work, 3 

,, ,, workmen 5, 24, 31 

Order, historical, in plates 113 
Outlining of small objects 69-70 
Overseer or reis 24-26 
Overlapping images 36 
Overs 121 

Packer in 
Packing frescoes 97 
,, glass 108 
,, materials log 

,, pottery 108-109 


INDEX 


303 


Packing stones 105-108 
Pads in packing 106, 107 
Page-references to plates 116, 120 
Paint-brushes 113 
, , red, in cups 166 
Paintings on tombs as evidence 144- 

14s 

Palestinian pottery 17 
Pan-graves 159-160 
Paper bags 113 

for drawing 68, irs 
,, packing 109, 113 
,, printing 118 
,, squeezing 60, 113 
moulds 6o-6r 
squeezes 60-61, 64 
Papyri, photographing of 79 
,, treatment of 93-9S 
Paraffin wax 87, 89, go, 91, 96, 102, 
112 

Parcel-post boxes log, 113 
,, ,, for drawings 64 

Partitions in boxes iii 
Passages, underground 55 
Past quickly vanishing 130 
,, love of 189-193 
,, rights of 176-178 
Pasting of papyri 93, 94 
Patterns of gold collar 1S4-1SS 
Payment by results 33 

deductions for locals 31 
proportions in 31-32 
rate of 29 
weekly 35 
Pencil-cutting for outlining 69-70 
Pondulum-tnirror 58 
Periods, of bronze and stone 127 
,, successive 127-130 
Pharaoh of Exodus 178 
Philae, submersion of 170 
Philistine 64 

Photographic apparatus 73 

developers 82-83 
developing 82-84 
drying 83 

enlarging 74, 80, 81 
films 75 
reflectors 78 
register of objects 134 
washing 83 
Photographing and drawing 73 


Photographing of buildings 73 
,, excavations 73 
,, papyri 79 
,1 views 74, 8r 
,, wall-scenes 81 
Photography 73-84 

back-grounds in 79 
dark room for 83 
diagonal mirror in 75 
drop-shutter in 75 
lighting in 77 
scale in 80-81 
shadows in 79 
skew-back 75 
stereographic 8i-8a 
Photo-lithography 117 

,, ,, colours reversetl in 

70 

, , , , for drawings 68 

>1 1, .. plans 55 

, , , , reduction for 69 


Physics 85 

Pickling of bronzes 100 
Picks and baskets 31-33 
Piece and day work combined 30, 32 
Piece pay 27 
, , work 24, 29-31 
Pillars left in digging 30 
Pincers 113 
Pins 83, 91 

Pit, excavation of 4a, 45, 52 
Placing of stuff removed 4a 
Plan 33 


,, accuracy of 55 
,, drawing 5, 53 
, , measurement of 53-55 
,, of chambers 44, 52, 53 
,, ,, towns 52, S3 
Plane 65 
,, -table 55 
Platinotypes 119 
Plaster, casts 61, 64-66 
,, coats of 87, 97 

, , handling of 64 

Plates, book 114-119 

,, ,, double r 16 

,, ,, loose 115-116 

,, ,, spoilt 121 

, , magazine for 74 
,, photographing from 77 
,, rapidity of 75 


204 


INDEX 


Plates, size of image 81 
Pliers 1 13 
Plotting SS-S9 

, , vase dimensions 71 

Plunderers 12, 48 

Plundering of sites ii, 171, 178-179 
Points of support in packing 105-106 
Pompeii, corpis of pottery needed 125 
Position of objects 50, 52, 53 
,, in photographing 78 

Positives iiS 
Postage of drawings 64 
Potsherds 10, 12 
Pottery, Aegean 145-170 

,, black incised 160-162, 163- 

164, 167 
,, chips 47 

,, corpis 124-126 

,, destruction of 181 

,, duration of forms 128 

,, Greek 142, 147, 148 

, , of prehistoric age 17, 167 

,, ,, IDyn. 164 

,, ,, XII ., 157, 159 

,, ,, XVIII ,, 148, 153-154 

,, packing of 108-109 

,, painted, from Kahun 157- 

158 

,, preservation of 8S-S9 

,, salt in 88-89 

, , scale for drawing 69 

,, typical forms 16 

,, value for dating 15-17, 128- 

129 

Praesos beads of XII Dyn. 158 
Prehistoric ages 167-168 
, , camp site 13 

, , cemetery site 1 1 

,, sequences X29 
,, shipping 167 

,, tomb dressed 77 

Preparing objects for photographing 
76 

Presentment of material 50-51 
Preservation in museums i8o-i8x 

,, of antiquities 85-104, 
176-188 

,, ,, bones 90 

,, ,, colour 87-88 

,, ,, gold-work iSi 

,, ,, information 5, 48 I 


Preservation of ivories 90-92 
,, ,, papyri 92-95 

,, ,, pottery 88-S9 

,, sarcophagi 87, go 
,, stone 86-87, tSi 
,, ,, stucco 87-88, go 

,, ,, wood 89-91 

Princesses in fresco 88 
Printed numbers for plates 70 
Printer’s agreement 120-121 
„ errors 120 
Printing, colour-, for vases 70 
Prismatic compass 55, 113 
Probability, evidence from 138, 139 
Processes for plates 117-119 
Prohibition of wet squeezing 62 
Proof, nature of X36 
Properties of materials 85 
Proportions in mixing developers 82 
Protractor 57 

Pseud - amphorae, see False-necked 
vases 

Publication 1 14-121 
, , detailed 175 

,, mistakes in 117 

,, necessity of 182 

,, past methods of 114 

,, permanence of 182 

Publishers, agreements with 120 
Pyramid, great. Builder of 178 

Railway, light 43 

Ramessu II 146, 152, 153, 154, 155 
,, III 14s, 154, ISS 

,, VI 153. 154 

Rate of payment 29-30 
Recommendations of workmen 40 
Reconstruction of stone vases 102-104 
Record by corpus system 125 
,, importance of 48, 175 

, , in piece-work 29 

,, publication of 114 

Recrystallisation of salt 86 
Red paint 166 

Reference-numbers on plates 115 
,, to plates 115-116 

,, to text 1 19-120 

Reflections in lighting 78 
Reflectors. 73 
Register of sheets 63-64 

,, ,, works of art 186-187 


INDEX 


20S 


Reis or overseer 24-26 
Rekhmara, tomb of 144, 153 
Relief-process 118 
Reliefs, copying of 60 
Repository needed 133-133 
Res, statuette of 132 
Responsibilities, in excavating i, 8, 
174-I7S 

, , of archaeologists 

170, 18a 

Restorations 17a, 176 

, , of scarabs 149 

,, of stone vases 70-71, 

102-104 

Results, presentment of 30-31 
Rethreading of beads 96 
Re-use of tombs 130 
Rights of the future 173 
,, ,, ,, past 176-178 

Rise of Nile 174 
Rolls of drawings by post 64, 68 
,, ,, papyri 92-94 

Ropes 33, 43, iia 
, , length of 46 
, , preservation of 43-46 
Rotted beadwork 93 
,, ivory 91-92 
,, papyrus 93 
.,, silver 98 
,, wood 90-91 
Royalties on books 120 
Rubbish-mounds 11 
Rust in bronze loi 
,, ,, iron 102 

Sacking for packing 107 
Salt in metals 100, 102 
,, ,, pottery 88-8g 
,, ,1 stones 86 
, , , , textiles 89 
,, ,, wood 89 
Sand, throwing 73 
Sanding of tender stones 87 

,, ,, weathered stones 71, 76 

Sarcophagi at Abydos 43 
,, ,, Zuweleyn 10 

, , preservation of 87, 90 

Sauce-pan, cast-iron 90 
Saw-flies 112 
Sawing 103 
Saws 103, 112, 113 


Scale-drawing, frame for 72 
,, mentioned on plate-beading 113 
,, of drawing for plates 69, 113 
,, ,, ,, ,, tools 69 

,, ,, ,, , ,, vases 69 

„ ,, payment 29 
,, „ plotting S3 
Scaling of bronze 101 
,, ,, copper 99 

Scarabs, few posthumous 149 
,, restorations of 149 

,, seldom long in use 130 

Screw-driver 113 
Screws 113 

Sculpture, casts of 172 

,, cemented in walls 86 

,, lighting of 131-132 

,, museum of 172 

Sealing-wax moulds 66-67 
Search for fragments 34-33, 102-104 
Section-lines for stone vases 70 
Selection of facts in recording 49 
Separation of objects in museums 49 
Sequence dates 129 
Sequences in a mansion 127 
Serials published 117 
Series of forms of stone vases loz 
Sety 11 146, 133, 135 
Sextant, box- 33-36, 113 
Shade-lines in drawing 69 
Slieet of card ruled 72 
Slieets of inventories 69-70 
Shifting of stuff 42 
Shutter, drop- 73 
-Sieve, native H2 
, , wire 112 
Sifting earth 33 
Sighting-lines 34 
Signals for work 28 
,, survey 36-57 
Silicate solution 91 
Silver coins 99 

, , treatment of 98-99 
Site of cemetery 11-12 
,, ,, temple 9-10 
,, ,, town lo-ii 
Size of bricks 47, 52 
,, ,, sheets for reduction 70 
Skeletons, maiking of 51 

preservation of S3, go 
Skew-hack camera 73 


206 


INDEX 


Skull, removal for measurement 52 
Slate backing to frescoes 97 
Sliding of earth 42 
Slopes of rubbish-mounds 11 
Smuggling of antiquities 184 
Sneferu, black incised ware 163 
Soaking of bronzes loi 
, , . , iron 102 

,, ,, lead 102 

,, ,1 pottery 83 

,, ,, stones 86 

,, ,, textiles 89 

Softening in packing 106, 108-109 
Sorting fragments 102-104 
Spain, pottery from 139-160, 167 
Speculators, destruction by 170 
Spies 38-39 

Spoke-brush, use of 60-61, 113 
,, shave 113 
Square 113 

Squareness on plates 113 
Squares of plans 33 
Squeezes, dry 61-63 
,, wet 60-61 
Stain, ebony 68 
State claims 182-184 
,, register of works of art 186-187 
,, rights 184-187 
Stations, surveying 37-58 
Statistical sorting of pottery 128 
Statuary, oasts of 172 

,, lighting of 131-132 
,, preservation of 180 
,, restoration of 17a 
Statuette, ebony 78 
Stirrup vases 143, 146, 154 

,, ,, variation with age 133- 

IS4 

Stone chips 9, 13 
, , of buiidings 76 
, , vases, block-tints for 70 

, , , , drawing from fragments 

71 

,, ,, sorting fragments 102- 

104 

Stones, large 30 
,, moving of 27 
, , salt in 86 

, , scale of drawing 69 
Stops in manuscripts 120 
,, ,, photographing 74-73 


Storing of antiquities 6 
,, ,, ropes 46 

Straw for packing loS, log, 112 
Strings of bends 95-96 
Stucco, coloured 88 
,, facing 87 

,, on bricks 96 

, , on walls 47 

,, on wood 96 

Students' plates 119 
Style, discrimination of 14, 17-18 
Successive ages, classed 126 
Super-heated wax for preserving 90 
Superimposed buildings 41-42 
Support, points of, in packing 105- 
106 

Survey, three-point 36 
Surveying 5, 53-59 
,, of walls 32 
Survival of museums 180-181 

,, ,, things in use 128, 150 

Systematic archaeology 122-133 
,, work in excavating 2 
Systematizers needed 123 

Tables, printing of 120 
Tablet, ivory 76 
Tahutmes 11 131 

,, III 131, 132, 133 
Tally for accounts 37-38 
Tanis, with obelisks 9 
,, workers at 20 
Tape-measure 33, 113 
,, steel- S3 
Tapioca- water 88 
Telescope used in work 28 
Tell el Amarna, frescoes at 88 
,, ,, I, vases at 147, 148, 
iSS. 156 

,. ,, Vehudiyeh, cemetery mounds 
43 

Temple, causes of ruin 10 
,, evidence of 47 
,, site, clearance of 41-47 

,, ,, nature of g-10 

Tenting in desert 6 
Textiles 89 
Theodolite 33 

Thickness of hues in drawing 69 
Threads 65, go, 92, 95 
Three-colour photography 119 


f 


INDEX 20*7 


Three-point survey 56 
Throwing 30, 41 
„ sand 75 
Thyi, Queen 14S, 152 
Tibn 109 

Tilting in photography 80 
Tin-foil moulds 67 
, , plate for reflectors 78-79 
,, ,, ,, sawing 103 

, , , , , , small stops 75 

,, pots 108, III 
, , saucepans 90 
Tints, block, for vases 70 
Tomb groups 48-49, 51 
,, ,, scattered 49 

, , of Sem-nefer 78 

,, -robbers 43 
Tombs, evidence from 150-153 
mixture of contents 130 
numbering of 31 
position of 32 
proportion of important 12 
re-use of 130 
unplundered 12 
wrecking of 171 
Tools necessaiy to work 33, iia-113 
,, provision of 33 
Tooth-brush, uses for 67, iia 
Topography 33 
Town, planning of 52 . 

site, clearance of 41, 44 
,, nature of 10 
,, rateofaccumulationio-^i 
,, turned over 41 
Tracing out walls 13, 41, 46-47 
Transport of antiquities 85, 97, 107- 
108, 112 

Tray with poles 107 
,, wooden 93 
Treasure trove 183 
Trenching ground 41, 43 
Trial-pits 41 

Troy, black incised ware i6j, 167 
Trucks 43 
Turning back 41 
,, over 41, 43 
Tut-ankh-amen 143, 153. 154 


Uncertainties, legal 140-141 
Underground passages 53 
Undisturbed tombs la 


Unifoi-mity of scale 113 
Unpacker 111-112 
Unpacking of boxes ui-ii2 
Unplundered tombs 12 
Unpunctuality, remedies for 31 
Unrolling of papyri 93-94 
Unsanded stones 71, 76 
Usertesen 11 44, 157 

Valuables, finding of 27 
Variation of vases with age 153-134 
Vases, block tints for 70 

, , drawn from fragments 70-71 
,, measurement of angles 71 
,, scale of drawing 69 
Vertical lighting 77 

,, mirror level 38-39, 113 

,, position of camera 80 

Wages in Egypt 29 
,, ,, England 27 

„ Greece 27 
Wall-scenes, photographing of 81 
Walls, copying 61-63, 7® 

,, face of 47 
, , surveying of 52 

,, thickness of 32 

,, tracing of 13, 41, 46-47 
,, visible after rain 13 
Warrior in alabaster 144 
Washing of negatives 83 

,, out salt 86, 88, 89, 100 
Wastage of coinage 130 
Water-colours 77, 113 
Wax, bees- 66, 67, 71, 80, 90, 93, 
102 

,, dentist's 67 

,, paraffin 87. 89, 90, gi, 96, 
102, 112 

Waxed glass for papyri 94 
Weathered stones, sanding of 71, 76 
Weeding-out of workmen 40 
Weights carried by boy 43 
Western, see Europe 
Wet squeezes 60-61 
White ants 89, 96 

,, filling of black ware 161 
,, flake-, use of 77 
-wash on walls 96 

v.”"'- ■■ ■ 76 


208 


INDEX 


Wills, contradictory 140 
Witnesses, evidence of 137, 138 
,, veracity of 138 
Wood flooring 76, 77 
,, rotted go-91 
I, salt in 89 
,, tray 95 
,, wet 91 
, , white ants in 89 
,, -wool 109 
Work, irregular 27 
Workmen at Tanis 20 
, , chains of 44 

,, control of 3, 7, 22-23 

, , distribution of 26 

,, English 27, 32 

,, Greek 26-27, 32 

, , management of 36 

,, organization of 24, 26, 

29. 31 

,, qualities of 21 


Workmen selection of 20-21 
,, substitution of 23, 31 

,, training of 3, 26, 34 

Wrapping-paper log 
Wrappings 32 

Wrecking by engineers 170, 174 
,, ,, lime-burners 174 

,, ,, natives 173 

,, of tombs 171 

Yorkshire, pottery from 160 

Zer, Aegean pottery of 164-163 
,, black incised ware 164 
,, bracelet of 80 
I, ivory tablet of 76 
Zinc, box for washing 83 
,1 blocks 68, 118 
,, tally for accounts 37-3S 

,, trays for soaking stones 86 

Zuweleyn, sarcophagi at 10 


THE El^D 


Printed by R. & R. ClakK) Limited, Edinburgh. 


WORKS BY W. M. FLINDERS PETRI^ 

THE PYEAMIDS & TEMPLES OF OIZEH. (Out of print). 
TANIS 1. 19 plates, SSs. QumUch. 

TANIS II. Nebesheh and Defenneh. 64 plates, 26s. 

Kegm Pcml md Oo. 

iNAXTEEATIS 1. 46 plates, 26s. Quaritch, 

HIEEOaLYPHIC PAPYEUS FEOM TANIS. (Out of print). 

A SEASON IN EGYPT, 1887. 32 plates, 12s. (Out of print). 
EACIAL FOETEAITS. 190 Photographs from Egyptian Monu- 
ments, 46a Murray, 37 Dartmouth Park Hill, N.W. 
HISTOEIOAL SOAEABS. (Out of print). 

HAWAEA, BIAHMU, AND AESINOE. (Out of print), 
KAHUN, GUEOB, AND HAWAEA. (Out of print). 

ILLAHUN, KAHUN, AND GUEOB. 33 plates, IBs. 

(Out of print). 

TELL EL HESY (Lachish), 10 plates, 10s. 6d. Alexander Watt 
MEDUM. 36 plates, 24s. (Out of print). 

TEN YEAES DIGGING IN EGYPT, 1881-1891. 6a. E.T.8 

TELL EL AMAENA. (Out of print). 

KOPTOS. 28 plates, lOs. Quaritch. 

A STUDENT’S HISTOEY OP EGYPT, Part I, down to the 
XVIth Dynasty. 5th ed. 1903, Part 11, XVIIth and 
XVIIIth Dynasties. 6a. each. Metlmen. 

TEANSLATIONS OF EGYPTIAN TALES, with illustrations 
hy Tristram Ellis. 2 vola., 3s. 6d. Methuen. 

DEOOEATIVE AET IN EGYPT. 3s. 6d. Methuen. 

NAQADA AND DALLAS. 86 plates, 26s. Quaritch. 

SIX TEMPLES AT THEBES. 26 plates, lOs. Quaritch. 
DESHASHEH. 37 plates, 26s. Quaritch. 

EEIiIGION AND OONSOIENOE IN EGYPT. 2a. ed. M^hum. 
SYEIA AND EGYPT. 2s. ed. MeOmn. 

DENDEEEH. 38 plates, 26s . ; 40 additional plates, lOs. Quaritch, 
EOYAL TOMBS OF FIEST DYNASTY. 68 plates, 26s. QmrUch. 
DIOSPOLIS PAEVA. 48 plates, 268. Quaritch. 

EOYAL TOMBS OF EAELIEBT DYNASTIES. 63 plates, 
25 s. j 36 additional plates, lOs. Quaritch. 

ABYDOS, Part I. 81 plates, 268. Quaritch. 

ABYDOS, Part n. 64 plates, 26s. Quaritch. 

Of works out of print, a few copies can be had on application to the 
Author, University Collie. 


1 


HANDBOOKS OF 

Archaeology and Antiquities 

Edited by Professoi- Pbroy Garbitbr, IAU.D. of the University 
of Oxford, and Professor F. W. Kelsey of Am Arbor 
University, Michigan, 

Each volume will be tlie work of a thoroughly competent Author, and will 
deal with some special Department of Ancient Life or Art in a manner suited 
to the needs both of the scholar and of the educated general reader. 

The Series will be characterised by the following features : — 

(1) The size of the volumes will bo Extra Crown Octavo ; each volume 

to contain not less than 200 pages. 

(2) The illustrations, taken from works of ancient art, will be made 
as complete and satisfactory as possible. 

(3) Each volume will contain a concise bibliography, together with 
complete indexes of Greek and Latin words and quotations, and of 
subjects. 

(4) , Thus the volumes will together form a handy encyolopBedin of 

Arohseology and Antiquities for the fields covered. 

(6) The different treatises will not be uniform in respect to length or 
price. 

The following volumes have already been published, and others are in 
preparation : — 

THE EOMAN FESTIVALS OP THE PERIOD OP THE 
REFUBLIO. An Introduction to the Study of Roman 
Religion. By . W. Wabdb Fowler, Lincoln College, 
Oxford. 6s. [Ready. 

/SPi5O2l4r0J2.— “ Tills work la tntondeil as an introducLion to the study of tlie religion 
of the Eamaiis, and a very faithM and accurate piece of work it is^ as Indeed might be 


Uioughtful reader." 


GREEK SCULPTURE. By Prof. Ernest A. Gardner, M.A., 
University College, London. Part I. 6s, Part 11. 6s. 

Or in one volume. 10s. [Ready. 


aa Prof. Oardner's." 

“Mr. Gardner's hook may he confidently recommended aa the heat and 
most trustworthy sketch of Greek sculpture hitherto published in the English language," 


2 


f 


HANDBOOKS OP ARCffiBOLOatr AND AHTlQ0ITl8S~C?«i«»f4i« 


A HANDBOOK OP GREEK CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORT, 

By A. H. J. Greenidqe, M.A, Hertford College, Oxford. 

. [Beady. 


i0b &mlUra 
Thflbook 

i-8tlv« kiirto 


CUIIUIWUU lU 


A HANDBOOK OP GREEK AND ROMAN COINS. By 

Geoege F. Hill, M.A., British Museum. 9s. [Beady. 

< . i - ' ^ 1 d ^ 

uumjjass. 

Iz/rijizXJ'C/BS,— ''Mr. Hill has aaooeeded very deftiy • • 

Information, of which the student so often stands In neea, ' * * e . 

conspectus of the monetary history of Greece and Borne in less luan ow paries. 


THE DESTRUCTION OP ANCIENT ROME: A History of the 
Monuments. By Rodolfo Lanoiani, University of l^me. 
6s. [Beady. 

0!7AB0X4W.--'‘ We ere gl(i4 to leern ftom the prefeoe to Uil> volume that the professor 
lae in oontemplatlonan extensive work on the latter part of this suhleot, the ' Histoty of 
the Excnvatloiis,' and meanwhile the iirosent iiietalment will be woloomod by all who have 
felt the fisclnatlon of the sloi y of the survival or destrimklon of the anolonr. inonumciiw." 

WEX’VMTSeTKU EUWKV.- “ A most enllghttmlriK little work, which gives ii real 
insight Into the flOlKilarly aii<l aclcntiflc mothoil on widen modern excavation proo<i«ds.‘’ 


ROMAN PUBLIC LIPE. By A. H. J. Gebbnidgb, M.A., 
Hertford College, Oxford. lOs, 6d [Beady. 

SFEOTATOB.—" Both logical In arrangemont and luold in esmosltlon. And its sohjeot 
is moat wisely ohoaan, because it Is the public Ufe of the Eomans which has been an 
example to all time." 

FlLOT.—" The style of the book Is throughout clear and IntoresUiig, and at the sama 
lime Tri'iny minute und dcbiilahln points are carefully discussed, and aruiost every state- 
ment i.n supiKirced by rerorcucee to rrlgitial autiioriliiw, or hotter still, by quoUUoiis from 
' them. Tt Is ahoal thy sign that Bnglieli scholarship is nowablo to produce such books as tills." 


CHRISTIAN ART AND ABOHffiOLOGY. A Handbook to 
the Moaumenta of the Early Church. By WALfiBB 
Loweib, M.A., Late Fellow of the -Atnerioan School of 
Classical Studies at Rome. 10s. 6d. [Beady. 

Plior,— "Amostnseftil and Judicious epitome of a difflcult sulpect. . . . Thevotnmo 
Is nicely to take its place among the most successful of the excellent series to wWch 

A : . -i.V.'.V. ■ " Mr. . r er .1 Is jt> ivi i ".i frr a ntmt ;cfl::".y l.u.k, in which h ■ 

h isc ■ ■ ■■ ■ ! a -rv, :-.ar v.ss.-.:-.;! !;■ a v.iyrK.ivv ..r.v 

. . ^. 1 ... , I ! •.'■ . !■.■!>. l: s-. isrv.'.jr, a-.i-./. a s ■.'.(■(W. a: ilwkso.-i a wtie 

Ili-A !'.!)! AS. ■■■; !;>i 'eet handbook to the artlstio mcammente of tie tost six ceotBriee 
of the OhttetUn Ohurdh which has appeared in English, perhaps in sny language." 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON. 


3 


W6RKS ON ARGH/EOLOGY AND ANTIQUITIES 

ANOIENT ATHENS. By Eeitbst Abthub Gabdnue, Yates Pro- 
fessor of Arclifflology in University College, London; formerly 
Director of the British School at Athens. With numerous Illus- 
trations, Plans, and Maps. 8vo. Gilt top. 21s. net. 

LIFE IN ANCIENT EGYPT. By A. Ebman. Translated by H. 

M. Tibaed. Illustrated. Super royal 8vo. 21s. net. 
POMPEII : ITS LIFE AND ART. By Auguste Mau. Trans- 
lated hy Pbanois W. Kelsey. New and cheaper edition. Illus- 
trated. Extra crown 8vo. lOs. 6d. net. 

SCULPTURED TOMBS OF HELLAS. By Professor Pbeoy 
Gabdubb, Litt.D. With 30 Plates and 87 Engravings in the 
text. Super royal 8vo. 26s. net. 

SAMOS AND SAMIAN COINS: AN ESSAY. By the same 
Author. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 

DR. SOHLIEMANN'S EXCAVATIONS AT TROY, TIRYNS. 
MYCENJE, OECHOMENOS, ITHACA, IN THE LIGHT OF RECENT 
KNOWLEDGE. By Dr. G. Sohuohhabdt. TfaMated by 
EugbNib Sbllbes. With a Preface by Waltbe Lbab, LittD. 
Illustrated. 8vo. 18a. net. 

BYZANTINE ARCHITECTURE IN GREECE. THE MONAS- 
TERY OF SAINT LUKE OF STIEIS IN PHOCIS, AND THE DE- 
PENDENT MONASTERY OF SAINT NICOLAS IN THE FIELDS, 
NEAR SKRIPOU IN BIEOTIA. By Robbet Wbib Sohultz and 
SiDNBY Howaed Baenblby. Imperial 4to. Three guineas net. 

THE ANNUAL OF THE BRITISH SCHOOL AT ATHENS. 

Crown 4to. No. I. Session 1894-1895. 3s. 6d. net. No. 11. 

Session 1895-1896. 10s. Od. not. No. III. Session 1896- 

1897. 10s. 6d. net. No. IV. Session 1897-1898. 7s. 6d. 

net. No. V. 1898-1899. 7s. 6d. net. No. VI. 1899-1900. 

10s. 6d. net. No. VII. 1900-1901. 123. 6d. net. No. VIII. 

1901-1902. 17s. net. 

MACMILLAN’S GUIDES. Neatly and Strongly Bound in Limp 
Red Cloth, with Rounded Corners. Globe 8vo. 

ITALY. Third Edition. With 61 Maps and Plans. Price 10s. 
net. 

THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN [Including Sicily]. With 
21 Maps and Plans. Price 9s, net. 

THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN [Including Greece and 
the Greek Islands.] With 27 Maps and Plans. Price 9s. net. 

LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited. 


I 

j Ceotpftl Archaeological Library, j 

NEW DELHI. 
^ 

Call No, S 1\ 6 / j 

I Author- I 


