THE PYRAMIDS AND TEMPLES OF GIZEH
by W. M. Flinders Petrie
London: Field & Tuer, 1883

[Transcribed from the scan held by Cornell University Library via the Petrie Project (petrieproject.com). Plate pages omitted; OCR not proofread.]

THE
PYRAMIDS AND TEMPLES
OF GIZEH.
UJ
N
O
W 3
_ o
< IUJ
uJ
X
THE
PYRAMIDS AND TEMPLES
OF GIZEH.
BY
W. M. FLINDERS ^ETRIE,
Author ef "InJuctive Metrology," " Stonehengt" b-c.
r
LONDON :
FIELD & TUER, Ye Leadeshallb Presse ; SIMPKIN, MARSHALL & CO., Stationers'
Hall Court; HAMILTON, ADAMS & CO., Paternoster Row,
NEW VORK : SCRIBNER & WELFORD, 743. Broadway.
UNIVERSITY!,
V LIBRARY.^
%mm:>r
FIELD ft TUER,
VK LEiDENHALLB fRESSEt E.C
T 3,224,
vr
V'/;:<!t/( \'^-V'
PUBLISHED WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF A VOTE OF
ONE HUNDRED POUNDS
FROM THE GOVERNMENT-GRANT COMMITTEE
OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
1883.
CONTENTS.
SscnoK.
Introduction.
1 Methods employed
2 Scope of the present work
3 Use of expressions
Chap. I.— Objects and Means.
4 Need of fresh measurements ...
5 Outline of work demanded
6 Stay at Gizeh
7 Assistance obtained
Chap. II.— Instruments.
8 List of instruments
9 Details of lineal instruments
lo Details of angular instruments ...
Pace
XIU
xiv
XV
lo
II
»5
Chap, III.— Methods of Measurement.
■ I Lineal measures ..
12 Angular measures
Chap. IV.— Excavations.
13 Inside Great Pyramid
14 Casing, &c., of Great Pyramid ...
15 .Second Pyramid, casing, &c ...
16 Third Pyramid, casing, &c.
17 Workmen
Section. Paci
Chap. V.— Co-ordinates.
18 Station marks 34
19 Table of co-ordinates 34
Chap. VI. — Outside of Great Pyramid.
20 Relation of sockets to casing 37
21 Length of sides of casing 39
22 Levels and positions of sockets ... 40
23 Levels up the Pyramid ... .;. ... 41
24 Angle of the Pyramid 42
25 Form of top of the Pyramid 43
26 Casing of the Pyramid 43
27 Pavement of the Pyramid 44
28 Basalt pavement 46
29 Rock trenches 4.
30 Trial passages jq
31 Connection of inside and outside ... 51
32 Original position of entrance 51
33 MoAths of air-channels 52
.14 Blocks above entrance 53
Chap VII.— Inside of Great Pyramid,
35 Entrance passage, length
36 » » azimuth and angle...
37 Subterranean chamber, &c
38 Ascending passage, length
39 » n azimuth and angle..
40 Passage to Queen's Chamber ...
41 Queen's Chamber, plan
42 >i » height
43 !• M niche
44 „ „ channels
Vlil
CONTENTS.
Suction.
45 Gallery, length and angles
46 „ roof and walls ...
47 Antechamber and passages
ti
dimensions
»
details of walls
»
granite leaf
51 King's
Chamber, walls ...
52 ..
»
plan ...
S3 »
»
roof ...
54 »
»
floor ...
55 »
M
working
56 „
»
channels
57 Coffer, character
58 „ position
59 „ offsets to surfaces
60 „ calipering ,
61 „ volumes
62 Chambers of construction
63 „ „ details
64 Summary of interior positions ...
Pacb
• 71
• 72
• 75
• 76
• 77
■ 78
■ 79
. 80
. 81
. 82
, 82
, 83
■ 84
Chap. VIII.— Outside of Second Pyramid.
65 Relation of rock to casing 96
66 Length of sides of casing 97
67 Angle of Pyramid, and height 97
68 Courses of the P}rramid 98
69 Pavement 99
70 Levelled site 99
71 Peribolus walls 100
72 Barracks of workmen loi
(yj (Jhap. IX.-
iNsiDE OF Second Pyramid.
73 Entrance passage
74 Horizontal passage
75 Great chamber
76 Coffer, character
77 „ dimensions
78 Lower chamber, and passage
Chap. X— Outside of Third Pyilamid.
79 Nature of the casing
80 Length of the sides
no
III
Sectioh Page
81 Angle and height of Pyramid 112
82 Courses 112
83 Peribolus walls and temple 114
Chap. XL— Inside of Third Pyramid, i^
84 Entrance passage 117
85 First chamber 117
86 Second chamber 118
87 Granite chamber 118
88 Loculus chamber I19
89 Original entrance passage 120
Chap. XII.— Lesser Pyramids of Gizeh.
90 Northern small Pyramid
91 Middle small Pyramid ..
Chap. XII I. —Positions and Orientation
OF the Pyramids.
92 Relative positions of Pyramids ... 125
93 Orientation of large Pyramids 125
94 Change of earth's axis 126
Chap. XIV.— The Granite Temple, &c
95 Position of Granite Temple ... ^.. 128
96 Description of Temple 129
97 Workmanship of Temple 132
98 Original appearance of Temple ... 133
99 Date of Temple '33
100 Constructions near Great Pyramid ... 134
loi Basalt and diorite casings I35
102 Diorite at Giieh 136
Chap. XV.— Tombs of Gizeh.
103 Angles of Mastabas 138
104 Campbell's tomb 138
Chap. XVI.— Notes on other Pyramids.
105 Abu Roash, Pyramid of Men ra ... 140
106 Sakkara, Pyramid of Pcpi 142
i
CONTENTS.
fat
SacTiOM. Pacs
107 Dahshur, Great Pyramid 144
108 Dahshur, South Pyramid 144
109 Dahshur „ „ door 145
1 10 Mastaba-Pyramids, Sakkara & Medum 146
Chap. XVI I,— Historical Notes.
111 Climate of early times 149
112 Men raofAbuRoash 151
113 Khufu and Khnumu-Khofii 152
114 Ratatef 152
115 Khafra 153
116 Menkaura, and the Third Pyramid ... 153
' 117 Brick Pyramids 155
118 Petukhanu's tablet of Khufu 156
119 Destruction of buildings 157
J 120 Accuracy of Greek historians 159
Chap. XVI 1 1. —Architectural Ideas of
THE Pyramid Builders.
121 Angles of the Pyramids 162
•^22 The Accretion Theory of building ... 163
123 Application of it to the large Pyramids 165
-124 Inapplicability of the theory
. 125 Plugging of the Pyramid passages
126 Doors of the Pyramids
127 Relative workmanship of Pyramids
128 Use of Plaster
16s
Chap; XIX.— Mechanical Methods or
THE Pyramid Builders.
129 Nature oftools employed on hard stone 173
130 Examples of sawing 174
131 Examples of tubular drilling 175
132 Examples of turning 176
133 Rate of working 177
134 Tools not actually found 177
• 13s References on other details 177
Chap. XX.— Values or the Cubit and
Digit.
136 The cubit in the Great Pyramid ... 178
137 The cubit in otho- buildings 179
SccnoK.
138 Divisions of lists in the tombs...
139 Decimal division of cubit ...
140 Values of the digit
141 Comparison with pievious results
Paob
. 179
. 180
. 180
. 181
Chap. XXL— Theories compared wtih
Facts.
142 The comparisons based on the facts ... 182
143 The Great Pyramid base 182
144 „ „ height ... ... 183
14s » t> angle 184
146 „ » courses 184
147 Rock trenches by Great Pyramid ... 185
148 Positions of the chambers 186
149 Lengths of the passages 187
150 Dimensions of the passages 189
151 Angles of the passages 190
152 Subterranean Chamber 191
153 Queen's Chamber 191
154 Antechamber 193
155 King's Chamber 194
156 Coffer 19s
157 Synopsis of Great Pyramid theories ... 198
158 The Tombic theory 200
159 Second Pyramid, outside 201
160 „ „ inside 202
161 „ „ coffer 203
162 Third Pyramid 204
163 Comparison of previous surveys ... 205
Chap. XXIL— History of the Great
Pyramid, and its Design.
164 Nature of the site 208
165 Source of the stone 209
166 Organization of the labour 210
167 Preparation of the site 211
168 Planning of the courses 212
169 Raising the stones 212
170 Tools and chips 212
171 Deterioration of the work 213
172 Plans altered 214
173 Closing of the Pyramid 215
174 A second coffer ... 316
175 Violation of the Pyramid ... ...217
176 Inscriptions on the Pyramid 217^
177 Destruction of the Pyramid ... ..,319
178 Summary of probable theories ,., 33^^
CONTENTS.
StcnoM. Pack
Appendices.
I. — On the Akrangement of a TrianguLATION.
179 Nature of survey of short distances ... 223
180 Distribution of the observations ... 223
181 Order of observations 224
II. — ^The Rejection of Discordant
Observations.
182 Continual and occasional errors ... 226
183 Discrimination of occasional errors ... 227
184 Weighting observations by their divergence 228
185 Application of the law of distribution 228
186 Practical elimination of occasional
errors 230
SicrioH. Pao«
187 Probable error, a factor, not a term ... 231
188 Plus and minus errors always possible 232
189 Secondary probable errors 233
190 Applicability of approximate formulae 235
191 Testing the normal distribution ... 236
III,— Graphic Reduction of TriangoLATION.
192 The need of a graphic method ... 238
193 Old and new methods of graphic reduction 239
194 The practice of graphic reduction ... 239
195 Delineation of the traces 241
196 Accuracy in the present survey ... 241
197 Applicability of graphic reduction ... 243
Index ... «•• • >45
UST OF PLATES. «'
LIST OF PLATES.
Frontispiece-THE NINE PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH, FROM THE SOUTH.
I. PLAN OF TRIANGULATION OF THE PYRAMIDS, ETC.
n. BASALT PAVEMENT AND TRENCHES, ON EAST OF GREAT PYRAMID.
III. ENDS OF THE ROCK TRENCHES ; SECTION OF TRIAL PASSAGES.
IV. WALLS AND BARRACKS AROUND THE SECOND PYRAMID.
V. WALLS AROUND THE THIRD PYRAMID.
VI. PLAN OF THE GRANITE TEMPLE.
VII. SECTIONS OF THE, GREAT AND SECOND PYRAMIDS, AND MASTABAPYRAMIDS.
VIII. COURSES OF THE GREAT PYRAMID MASONRY.
IX. PASSAGES OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
X. SOCKETS AND CASING OF GREAT PYRAMID.
XI. MOUTHS OF PASSAGES AND CHANNELS; AND CASING OF GREAT PYRAMID.
XII. CASING OF PYRAMIDS; BOSSES: DECORATION, ETC.
Xni. WALLS OF THE KING'S CHAMBER.
XIV. SPECIMENS OF SAWING, DRILLING, AND TURNING ; FROM GIZEH, ETC
XV. INSTRUMENTS EMPLOYED, OF NEW TYPES.
XVI. TRACES OF THE OBSERVATIONS, AROUND THE GREAT PYRAMOX
EARLY EGYPTIAN STONE CUTTING.
XIV.
^.-^■grasi^yjiay
A. .4i<«/'a«Ur. B.Sn«aJ< D.iXon/i-. dOrnniii!. L.L:ii:fsicr.*.
XV.
SECTION OF
STANDARD MEASURE.
ittel Scale.
SPRING TENSION HANDLE
FOR (F^ CHAIN.
SCALE ^Jj -k
SCALE -tCALLIPERS.
r«K euACINIi COFFER SIDCS.
JCAlEi^
nn
Tkt ^ iTuni
t»i At calck
art omiiltd
At anTral itmt,
for Hrrmal ptll.
fer cLunui.
SLIT CAPS FOR OBJECT GLASS.
fttssii
open
SCALE 7
E'
PLUMB BOB.
TRIPOD SURVEY-SIGNAL.
ADJUSTED BY ^i
UNKS OF CHAIN.
SCALE i
MEASURING RODS
WITH SLIP JOINTS.
SCALE-*-
4.
iJ
AA^'
)^'^A
Hinilt GONIOMETER FOR AIR-CHANNELS.
— ' ^
SCALd ii
WWhLtmd ii>ytL U ^<ui ^M.
n '^
unrpu^.tii^.
X«ll£ Soa.Phc«oiiik.
/N
M
K
TRACES OF THE ACTUAL OBSERVATIONS
ON THE TKIANOULATION ST ATION S A ROUND THE OREAT PYRAMID .
Trctets Actual Size, i-e- sheuitij the o-ctual linea.1
iiff&r&nces of the obser-vations from Bie mea.n
stations found hj graphic adjast merit.
Distance* of stations avart , Scale I U 1800.
flnjular differences therefore -i' here to /"in field.
Circles around stations '"■proha.hle e.rrot of
•pXacts of stations, iu traces as here SKeun.
Fall Lines « Direct Observations.
Dotted Lines m Be flex b se.rva.tions.
TRACES OF THE ACTUAL OBSERVATIONS
ON THE TRIANeULATION ST ATI ON S AROUND THE QRE»T PVdAMIO .
Tracts Attual Size , ie- shtuiyi^ the CLctual lineal
diffe rences oP the obierycttLons From me mean
stations found hj graphic a.dj list merit.
Diilance$ of stations a-jiarh , Scale I U 1800.
AnqulcLr differences therefore ir'here ta /"in field.
Circles around stalions ^p rahahle e.rrot oF
plcuces of slaiionSfiy tracts as here sheun.
Full Lines '^ Dir&ct ObservaHona.
DolUd. Lines m Reflex Oh strvalions.
Half Trat*i
iiitk]trmla.hlt-trr»r uidtha.
W
Ha.lf Tract) uiSioicl ]>nHitMe.-trrttt,
i-t- at tXeun in jeniral.
'Measured Base of Swritttf.
iftUlh ./• hrmLnAlm-f,ti,la.lle errTTU "*\
Tratii iraun falljf
uilh prolnHt-emr uiitkt.
u
J J *
<
Ibiaiu Xdl & Soa. Fhoulith.
WMFf
ttitni^tHUL
ERRATA.
Page 30 ... line J for oonader
I, 38 ... „ I „ case
It 41 — >i 2 „ othe thets
•> 41 - » 43 » +•
» 42- ... •> 33 II 0-9
» 43 ... 11 13 II measmemeDt .
I, so ... „ 28 II -24'
t. 65 •.. •> 34 i> ±3.
II «S7 .. 11 12 » doren
,1 *I2 ... „ I ,1 twev*
II 318 ... II 10 ,1 Ibr ... I, ion
Plate xiv,, fig. 7, the litbographei has drawn the
whereas they really form a tme spiral, as described p.
Anthropological Journal,
read consider.
„ core.
II theothcB.
.1 +•!
II "09
SI re-mcssDiiuucnt>
•> 24'
II ±-3
II doiens.
II twelve.
Ibn.
lines wavy,
p. 174, and in
INTRODUCTION.
I. The nature of the present work is such that perhaps few students will
find interest in each part of it alike. The ends and the means appeal to
separate classes : the antiquarian, whose are the ends, will look askance at the
means, involving co-ordinates, probable errors, and arguments based on purely
mechanical considerations ; the surveyor and geodetist, whose are the means,
will scarcely care for their application to such remote times ; the practical man
who may follow the instrumental details, may consider the discussion of
historical problems to be outside his province ; while only those familiar with
mechanical work will fuUy realize the questions of workmanship and tools here
explained.
An investigation thus based on such different subjects is not only at a
disadvantage in its reception, but also in its production. And if in one part or
another, specialists may object to some result or suggestion, the plea must be
the difficulty of making certain how much is known, and what is believed, on
subjects so far apart and so much debated.
The combination of two apparently distinct subjects, is often most fertile
in results ; and the mathematical and mechanical study of antiquities promises
a full measure of success. It is sometimes said, or supposed, that it must be
useless to apply accuracy to remains which are inaccurate ; that fallacies are
sure to result, and that tie products of such a method rather originate with the
modem investigator than express the design of the ancient constructor. But
when we look to other branches of historical inquiry, we see how the most
refined methods of research are eagerly followed : how philology does not
confine itself to the philological ideas of the ancient writers, but analyzes their
speech so as to see facts of which they were wholly unconscious ; how chemistry
does not study the chemical ideas, but the chemical processes and products of
the ancients ; how anthropology examines the bodies and customs of men to
whom such inquiries were completely foreign. Hence there is nothing
unprecedented, and nothing impracticable, in applying mathematical methods
in the study of mechanical remains of ancient times, since the object is to get
behind the workers, and to see not only their work, but their mistakes, their
XIV INTRODUCTION.
amounts of error, the limits of their ideas ; in fine, to skirt the borders of their
knowledge and abilities, so as to find their range by means of using more
comprehensive methods. Modem inquiry should never rest content with saying
that anything was " exact ;" but always show what error in fact or in work was
tolerated by the ancient worker, and was considered by him as his allowable
error.
2. The materials of the present volume have been selected from the results
of two winters' work in Egypt. Many of the points that were examined, and
some questions that occupied a considerable share of the time, have not been
touched on here, as this account is limited to the buildings of the fourth dynasty
at Gizeh, with such examples of later remains as were necessary for the
discussion of the subject All the inscriptions copied were sent over to Dr.
Birch, who has published some in full, and extracted what seemed of interest in
others ; Dr. Weidemann has also had some of them ; and they do not need,
therefore, further attention on my part. Papers on other subjects, including the
Domestic Remains, Brickwork, Pottery, and travellers' graffiti, each of which
were examined with special reference to their periods, are in course of publication
by the Royal Archaeological Institute. The mechanical methods and tools
employed by the Egyptians were discussed at the Anthropological Institute,
and are more summarily noticed here. A large mass of accurate measurements
of remains of various ages were collected; and these, when examined, will
probably yield many examples of the cubits employed by the constructors. Of
photographs, over five hundred were taken, on \ size dry plates, mainly of
architectural points, and to show typical features. Volumes of prints of these
may be examined on application to me, and copies can be ordered from a
London photographer. The lesser subjects being thus disposed of, this volume
only treats of one place, and that only during one period, which was the main
object of research. The mass of the actual numerical observations and
reductions would be too bulky to publish, and also unnecessary ; the details of
the processes are, in fact, only given so far as may prove useful for comparison
with the results obtained by other observers.
Though, in describing various features, reference has often been made to the
publications of Colonel Howard Vyse* (for whom Mr. Perring, C.E., acted as
superintendent), and of Professor C. Piazzi Smyth,-f- yet it must not be supposed
that this account professes at all to cover the same ground, and to give all the
details that are to be found in those works. They are only referred to where
necessary to connect or to explain particular points ; and those volumes must
be consulted by any one wishing to fully comprehend all that is known of the
Pyramids. This work is, in fact, only supplementary to the previous descriptions,
• « Operations at the Pyramids," 3 vols, 1840.
t " Life and Work at the Great Pyramid," 3 vols. 1867.
INTRODUCTION. xv
as giving fuller and more accurate information about the principal parts of the
Pyramids, with just as much general account as may be necessary to make it
intelligible, and to enable the reader to judge of the discussions and conclusions
arrived at on the subject, without needing to refer to other works. Colonel
Vyse's volumes are most required for an account of the arrangements of the
Second and smaller Pyramids, of the chambers in the Great Pyramid over the
King's Chamber, of the negative results of excavations in the masonry, and of
various mechanical details. Professor Smyth's vol. ii. is required for the
measurements<#tid description of the interior of the Great Pyramid. While the
scope of the present account includes the more exact measurement of the whole
of the Great Pyramid, of the outsides and chambers of the Second and
Third Pyramids, of the Granite Temple, and of various lesser works ; also the
comparison of the details of some of the later Pyramids with those at Gizeh,
and various conclusions, mainly based on mechanical grounds.
The reader's knowledge of the general popular information on the subject,
has been taken for granted ; as that the Pyramids of Gizeh belong to the first
three kings of the fourth dynasty, called Khufu, Khafra, and Menkaura, by
themselves, and Cheops, Chephren, and Mycerinus, by Greek-loving Englishmen ;
that their epoch is variously stated by chronologers as being in the third, fourth,
or fifth millennium B.C. ; that the buildings are in their bulk composed of blocks
of limestone, such as is found in the neighbouring districts ; that the granite
used in parts of the insides and outsides was brought from Syene, now Assouan ;
and that the buildings were erected near the edge of the limestone desert,
bordering the west side of the Nile valley, about 1 50 feet above the inundated
plain, and about 8 miles from the modern Cairo.
3. One or two technical usages should be defined here. All measures
stated in this volume are in Imperial British inches, unless expressed otherwise ;
and it has not been thought necessary to repeat this every time an amount is
stated ; so that in all such cases inches must be understood as the medium of
description. Azimuths, wherever stated, are written + or — , referring to
positive or negative rotation, i.e., to E. or to W., from the North point as zero.
Thus, azimuth —5', which often occurs, means $' west of north. Where the
deviation of a line running Ccist and west is stated to be only a few minutes +
or — , it, of course, refers to its normal or perpendicular, as being that amount
from true north.
The probable error of all important measurements is stated with the sign
db prefixed to it as usual. A full description of this will be found in any modern
treatise on probabilities ; and a brief account of it was given in " Inductive
Metrology," pp. 24-30. Some technical details about it will be found here in
the Appendix on " The Rejection of Erroneous Observations " ; and I will only
add a short definition of it as follows ; — The probable error is an amount on
xvi INTRODUCTION.
each side of the stated mean, within the limits of which there is as much chance
of the truth lying, as beyond it ; x>., it is l in 2 that the true result is not further
from the stated mean than the amount of the probable error. Or, if any one
prefers to regard the limits beyond which it is practically impossible for the true
result to be, it is 22 to l against the truth being 3 times the amount of the
probable error from the mean, 144 to l against its being 4 times, or 1,380 to I
against its being as far as 5 times the amount of the probable error from the
mean result stated. Thus, any extent of improbability that any one may choose
to regard as practical impossibility, they may select ; and remember that 4 or 5
times the probable error will mean to them the limit of possibility. Practically,
it is best to state it as it always is stated, as the amount of variation which there
is an equal chance of the truth exceeding or not ; and any one can then consider
what improbability there is in any Ccise on hand, of the truth differing from the
statement to any given extent.
It should be mentioned that the plans are all photolithographed from my
drawings, in order to avoid inaccuracy or errors of copying ; and thence comes
any lack of technical style observable in the lettering.
As to the results of the whole investigation, perhaps many theorists will
agree with an American, who was a warm believer in Pyrainid theories when he
came to Gizeh. I had the pleasure of his company there for a couple of days,
and at our last meal together he said to me in a saddened tone, — " Well, sir ! I
feel as if I had been to a funeral." By all means let the old theories have a
decent burial ; though we should take care that in our haste none of the wounded
ones are buried alive.
THE
PYRAMIDS AND TEMPLES OF GIZEH.
CHAPTER I.
OBJECTS AND MEANS.
4. The small piece of desert plateau opposite the village of Gizeh, though
less than a mile across, may well claim to be the most remarkable piece of
ground in the world. There may be seen the very beginning of architecture, the
most enormous piles of building ever raised, the most accurate constructions
known, the finest masonry, and the employment of the most ing enious tools ;
whilst among all the sculpture that we know, the largest figure-^JheSghiiaSand also the finest example of technical skill with artistic expression — tEe Statue
of Khafra — both belong to Gizeh. We shall look in vain for a more wonderful
assemblage than the vast masses of the Pyramids, the ruddy walls and pillars of
the granite temple, the titanic head of the Sphinx, the hundreds of tombs, and
the shattered outlines of causeways, pavements, and walls, that cover this earliest
field of man's labours.
But these remains have an additional, though passing, interest in the
present day, owing to the many attempts that have been made to theorise on
the motives of their origin and construction. The Great Pyramid has lent its
name as a sort of by-word for paradoxes ; and, as moths to a candle, so are
theorisers attracted to it. The very fact that the subject was so generally
familiar, and yet so little was accurately known about it, made it the more
enticing; there were plenty of descriptions from which to choose, and yet most
of them were so hazy that their support could be claimed for many varying
theories.
Here, then, was a field which called for the resources of the present time for
B
OBJECTS AND MEANS. {Ckafi. L
its due investigatioa ; a field in which measurement and research were greatly
needed, and have now been largely rewarded by the disclosures of the skill of the
ancients, and the mistakes of the modems. The labours of the French Expedition, of Colonel Howard Vyse, of the Prussian Expedition, and of Professor
Smyth, in this field are so well known that it is unnecessary to refer to them,
except to explain how it happens that any further work was still needed.
Though the French were active explorers, they were far from realising the
accuracy of andent work ; and they had no idea of testing the errors of the
ancients by outdoing them in precision. Hence they rather explored than
investigated. CoL Vyse's work, carried on by Mr, Perring, was of the same
nature, and no accurate measurement or triangulation was attempted by these
energetic blasters and borers ; their discoveries were most valuable, but their
researches were always of a rough-and-ready character. The Prussian Expedition
sought with ardour for inscriptions, but did not advance our knowledge of
technical skill, worfc, or accuracy, though we owe to it the best topographical
map of Gizeh. When Professor Sm}^ went to Gizeh he introduced different
and scientific methods of inquiry in his extensive measurements, afterwards
receiving the gold medal of the Roj^ Society of Edinburgh in recognition of his
labours. But he did not attempt the heaviest work of accurate triangulation.
Mr. Waynman Dixon, CK, followed in his steps, in taking further measurements
of the inside of the Great Pyramid- Mr. Gill — ^now Astronomer Royal at the
Cape — ^when engaged in Egypt in the Transit Expedition of 1 874, made the next
step, by beginning a survey of the Great P3Tamid base, in true geodetic style.
This far surpassed all previous work in its accuracy, and was a noble result of the
three days' labour that he and Professor Watson were able to spare for it When
I was engaged in reducing this triangulation for Mr. Gill in 1 879, he impressed on
me the need of completing it if I could, by continuing it round the whole
pyramid, as two of the comers were only just reached by it without any check.
When, after preparations extending over some years, I settled at Gizeh
during 1880-2, I took with me, therefore, instruments of the fullest accuracy
needed for the work ; probably as fine as any private instruments of the kind.
The triangulation was with these performed quite independently of previous
work ; it was of a larger extent, including the whole hill ; and it comprised an
abundance of checks. The necessary excavations were carried out to discover
the fiducial points of the buildings, unseen for thousands of years. The measurements previously taken were nearly all checked, by repeating them with greater
accuracy, and, in most cases, more frequency ; and fresh and more refined
methods of measurement were adopted. The tombs around the pyramids were
all measured, where they had any regularity and were accessible. The methods
of workmanship were investigated, and materials were found illustrating the
tools employed and the modes of using them.
Seel. S.]
OUTUNE OF WORK DEMANDED.
5. For a detailed statement of what was urgently wanted on these subjects,
I cannot do better than quote from a paper by Professor Smyth,* entitled, " Of
the Practical Work still necessary for the Recovery of the Great Pyramid's
ancient, from its modem, dimensions " ; and add marginal notes of what has
now been accomolished.
"As my measures referred chiefly to the interior of the
structure, and as there the original surfaces have not been much
broken, the virtual restoration of that part has been -by no means
unsuccessful ; and requires merely in certain places — places which
can only be recognised from time to time as the theory of the
building shall advance — still more minutely exact measures than
any which I was able to make, but which will be comparatively
easy to a scientific man going there in future with that one special
object formally in view."
" The exterior, however, of the Great building, is exceedingly
dilapidated, and I have few or no measures of my own to set forth
for its elucidation. That subject is, therefore, still " to let " ; and
as it is too vast for any private individual to undertake at his own
cost, I may as well explain here the state of the case, so that either
Societies or Governments may see the propriety of their taking up
the grand architectural and historical problem, and prosecuting it
earnestly until a successful solution of all its parts shall have been
arrived at"
" Size and Shape, then, of the ancient exterior of the Great
Pyramid, are the first desiderata to be determined."
(A statement of the various measurements of the base here
follows.)
"As preparatory, then, to an efficient remcasurement of the
length of the Base-sides of the Great Pyramid, itself jm essential preliminary to almost all other Pyramidological researches, I Deg
to submit the following local particulars."
" (i.) The outer corners of four shallow sockets, cut in the
levelled surface of the earth-fast rock outside the present dilapidated
comers of the built Great Pyramid, cu-e supposed to be the points
to be measured between horizontally in order to obtain the original
length of each external, finished, ' casing-stone ' base-side."
" (2.) Previous to any such measurement being commenced,
the present outer corners of those sockets must be reduced to their
ancient comers, as the sockets have suffered, it is feared, "much
dilapidation and injury, even since 1865 ; owing to having been
then imperfectly covered over, on leaving them, by the parties who
at that time opened them."
" (3.) The said sockets must hs proved to have been the sockets
originally holding the corner stones of the casing ; or showing how
far they overlapped, and therefore and thereby not defining the
ancient beise of the Great Pyramid to the amount so overlapped.
'Edinburgh Astronomical Obsen>alions, voL xiii., p. 3.
Notes of work,
1883-2.
The whole interior now
re-examined
and much
remeasured,
more accurately.
Total cost of
present work
Sockets are
not corners
of base-side.
Sockets are
apparently
quite uninjured.
By form of
core, and by
casing lines
lying within
the sockets,
noothers arc
possible.
OBJECTS AND MEANS.
\Chap. i.
. Motes of work
1880-3.
Casing now
found on all
sides, and
completely
fixed.
Measures having been
taken by triangulation,
no extensive
cuttings
were needed.
Casing -stones
are not
broken up,
and the cutting is not
necessary.
Sides now
found by
pits, and fixed by ttiangulation.
Pavement
traced on
each side.
Cuts, if wanta/, might be
made for a
tenth of this
torn.
Inscribed casing found,
Greek.
. . . . the ground should be cleared far and wide about each
corner to see if there are any other sockets in the neighbourhood."
" (4.) Whether any more rival sockets claiming to be the true
comer sockets of the ancient base are, or are not, then and in that
manner, found, — the usually known or selected ones should further
be tested, by being compared with any other remaining indications
of where the line of each base-side stood in former days. Some
particular and most positive indications of this kind we know were
found by Col. Howard Vyse in the middle of the Northern side ;
and there is no reason why as good markings should not be discovered, if properly looked for, along the other three sides ; and
they are so vitally important to a due understanding of the case,
that their ascertainment should precede any expense being incurred
on the measurement of lengths from socket to socket."
"($•) Col. H. Vyse found those invaluable markings of the
line of the North base-side, or part of the very base-side itself, by
accomplishing the heavy work of digging down by a cross cut,
through the middle of the heap of rubbish, near 50 feet high, on
that side. But he has published no records of how those markings,
or that actual portion of the base-side, agree, either in level or in
azimuth with the sockets. Indeed, he left the ground in such a
state of hillock and hole, that no measures can, or ever will, be
taken with creditable accuracy until a longitudinal cut through the
rubbish heap shall be driven from East to West and all along
between the two N.E. and N.W. sockets."
" (6.) The making of such a long and laborious cut, and then
the ' lining ' and ' levelling ' of the bases of the Colonel's casing
stones in situ (or their remains, for they are said to have been
mischievously bi-oken up since then), and their comparison with the
sockets or their joining lines by appropriate and powerful surveying
instruments, should be the first operation of the new measurers, to
whom, it is fervently to be hoped, an intelligent Government
will grant the due means for effecting it satisfactorily."
" (7.) A similar longitudinal cut, and similar comparisons are
to be made in the other base-side hills of rubbish, together with a
wider clearing away of the rubbish outside, in order to determine
the form and proportion of the ' pavement ' which is believed to
have anciently surrounded the Pyramid ; but of which the only
positive information which we have, is based on the little bit of it
which Col. H. Vyse cut dcwn to near the middle of the North side."
"This work might cost from ;^i 2,000 to ;^i4,ooo; for the
material to be cut through is not only extensive but so hard and
concreted that it turns and bends the hoes or picks employed in
Nile cultivation, and which are the only tools the Arabs know of.
But besides the theoretical value of such an operation for distinguishing and identifying the base to be measured, it would
certainly yield practically abundant fragments of casing stones,
and perhaps settle the oft-mooted questions of ancient inscriptions
on the outer surface of the Pyramid."
p.
5
Sect. 5.)
OUTLINE OF WORK DEMANDED.
" (8.) When the four sides of the base, and the corresponding
sides of the pavement are exposed to view,— a new fixation of the
exact original places of the precise outer corners of the now
dilapidated and rather expanded corner sockets may be required ;
and then, from and between such newly fixed points, there must be
•A. Linear measures of distance taken with first-rate
accuracy.
B. Levellings.
C. Horizontal angles, to test the squareness of the base.
D. Astronomical measures to test the orientation of each of
the base sides.
E. Angular and linear measures combined to obtain both
the vertical slope of the ancient Pyramid flanks, and
the distance of certain of the present joints of the
entrance passage from the ancient external surface
of the Pyramid in the direction of that passage produced—a matter which is at present very doubtful,
but a new and good determination of which is essential
to utilize fully the numerous internal observations contained in this and other books."
" (9.) When all the above works shall have been carefully
accomplished, the men who have performed them will doubtless
have become the most competent advisers as to what should be
undertaken next ; whether in search of the fourth chamber, concerning whose existence there is a growing feeling amongst those
who have studied certain laws of area and cubic contents which
prevail among the presently known chambers and passages ; or
for the more exact measurement of certain portions of the building
which shall then be recognised by the theory as of fiducial
character and importance."
"(10.) Should the next remeasurement unfortunately not be
under sufficiently favourable auspices or. powerful patronage
enough to attempt all that has been sketched out above — I would
suggest to those employed upon it the importance of endeavouring
to operate in that manner on at least the north side of the Great
Pyramid alone, where much of the work has been already performed, and where traces of the old base-side are known to exist,
or did certainly exist 34 years ago."
"(11.) The levels as well as temperatures of water in the wells
of the plain close to the Pyramid, and in the Nile in the distance,
should also be measured through a full twelvemonth interval. A
meteorological journal should likewise be kept for the same period
at the base of the Pyramid, and the corrections ascertained to
reduce it either to the summit or King's chamber levels above,
or to the plain level below ; while no efforts should be spared
to re-open the ventilating channels of the King's chamber and to
prevent the Arabs from filling them up again."
" (12.) An examination should be made of the apparent Pyramid
in the desert almost west of the Great Pyramid ; likewise of the
Notes of work,
1880-2.
Done.
Done.
Done.
Done.
Doue.
Done.
Much of the
interior now
remeasured,
with hightr
exactitude.
All results obtained without patronage.
Channels filled by wind,
not by
Arabs.
Done
OBJECTS AND MEANS. [Chap, i
Notesofwork, northern coasts of E^pt, where they are cut by the Great
' °"* ' Pyramid's several meridian and diagonal lines produced ; also
N.W.diagonal of the fourth dynasty remains in the Sinaitic Peninsula ; and of
done. any monuments whatever, whether in Egypt or the neighbouring
ne part jr. countries for which any older date than that of the Great Pyramid
Done. can reasonably be assigned ; including also a fuller account than
any yet published of King Shafre's Tomb and its bearings with,
or upon, the origin, education, labours and life of the first of the
Pyramid builders."
6. To carry out, therefore, the work sketched in the above outline, and to
investigate several collateral points, I settled at Gizeh in December, 1880, and
lived there till the end of May, 1881 ; I returned thither in the middle of October
that year, and (excepting two months up the Nile, and a fortnight elsewhere),
lived on there till the end of April, 1882; thus spending nine months at Gizeh.
Excellent accommodation was to be had in a rock-hewn tomb, or rather three
tombs joined together, formerly used by Mr. Waynman Dixon, C.E. ; his door
and shutters I strengthened ; and fitting up shelves and a hammock bedstead, I
found the place as convenient as anj^ing that could be wished. The tombs
were sheltered from the strong and hot south-west winds, and preserved an
admirably uniform temperature ; not varying beyond 58" to 6^" F. during the
winter, and only reaching 80° during three days of hot wind, which was at gS'
to 100° outside.
I was happy in having Ali Gabri,* the faithful servant of Prof. Smyth, Mr.
Dixon, and Mr. Gill ; his knowledge of all that has been done at Gizeh during
his lifetime is invaluable ; and his recollections begin with working at four years
old, as a tiny basket carrier, for Howard Vyse in 1837. He was a greater help
in measuring than many a European would have been ; and the unmechanical
Arab mind had, by intelligence and training, been raised in his case far above
that of his neighbours. In out-door work where I needed two pair of hands, he
helped me very effectually ; but the domestic cares of my narrow home rested
on my own shoulders. The usual course of a day's work was much as follows :
— Lighting my petroleum stove, the kettle boiled up while I had my bath ; then
breakfast time was a reception hour, and as I sat with the tomb door open, men
and children used to look in as they passed ; often a friend would stop for
a chat, while I hastily brewed some extra cups of coffee in his honour, on the
little stove behind the door ; Ali also generally came up, and sat doubled up in
the doorway, as only an Arab can fold together. After this, starting out about
nine o'clock, with Ali carrying part of the instruments, I went to work on the
triangulation or measurements ; if triangulating, it was All's business to hold an
• Called Ali Dobrce by Prot Smyth. G is universally pronounced hard by Egyptians,
soft by Arabs ; thus either Gabri or Jabri, Gizeh or Jiieh, General or Jeneral, Gaz or Jaz
(petrolenm).
p.
7
Sea. 7.) ASSISTANCE OBTAINED. 7
umbrella so as to shade the theodolite from the sun all day — the observer took his
chance ; if measuring, I generally did not require assistance, and worked alone,
and I always had to get on as well as I could during Ali's dinner hour. At dusk
I collected the things and packed up ; often the taking in of the triangulation
signals was finished by moonlight, or in the dark. Then, when all was safely
housed in my tomb, Ali was dismissed to his home, and about six or seven
o'clock I lit my stove, and sat down to reduce observations. Dinner then began
when the kettle boiled, and was spun out over an hour or two, cooking and
feeding going on together. Brown ship-biscuit, tinned soups, tomatoes (excellent
in Egypt), tapioca, and chocolate, were found to be practically the most convenient and sustaining articles ; after ten hours' work without food or drink,
heavy food is not suitable ; and the great interruption of moving instruments,
and breaking up work for a midday meal was not admissible. Then, after
washing up the dishes (for Arab ideas of cleanliness cannot be trusted), I sat
down again to reducing observations, writing, &c, till about midnight. Ali's
slave, Muhammed the negro, and his nephew, little Muhammed, used to come up
about nine o'clock, and settle in the next tomb to sleep as guards, safely locked
in. Having a supply of candle provided for them, they solaced themselves with
indescribable tunes on reed pipes ; often joining in duets with Abdallah, the
village guard, who used to come up for a musical evening before beginning his
rounds. Very often the course of work was different ; sometimes all out-door
work was impossible, owing to densely sand-laden winds, which blew the grit
into everything — eyes, nose, ears, mouth, pockets, and watches. During the
excavations I turned out earlier — about sunrise ; and after setting out the men's
worl^ returned for breakfast later on in the morning. On other occasions, when
working inside the Great Pyramid, I always began in the evening, after the
travellers were clean away, and then went on till midnight, with Ali nodding, or
even till eight o'clock next morning ; thus occasionally working twenty-four
hours at a stretch, when particular opportunities presented themselves. The
tomb I left furnished, as I inhabited it, in charge of Ali Gabri, and not having
been looted in the late revolt, it will, I hope, be useful to any one wishing
to carry on researches there, and applying to Dr. Grant Bey for permission to
use the furniture.
7. My best thanks are due to M. Maspero, the Director of Antiquities, for
the facilities he accorded to me in all the excavations I required, kindly permitting me to work under his firman ; and also for information on many points.
It is much to be hoped that the liberal and European policy he has introduced
may flourish, and that it may overcome the old Oriental traditions and ways
that clogged the Department of Antiquities. Excepting Arab help, I worked
almost entirely single-handed ; but I had for a time the pleasure of the society
of two artists : Mr. Arthur Melville, staying with me for a week in May, 1881, and
OBJECTS AND MEANS. \Ckap. i.
kindly helping in a preliminary measure of my survey base, and in an accurate
levelling up to the Great Pyramid entrance ; and Mr. Tristram Ellis, staying
with me for a fortnight in March and April, 1882, and giving me most valuable
help in points where accuracy was needed, laying aside the brush to recall his
former skill with theodolite and measure. Thus working together, we measured
the base of survey (reading to y^th inch) five times, in early dawn, to avoid the
sunshine ; we levelled up the Great Pyramid, and down again (reading to ^oTrth
inch) ; took the dip of the entrance passage to the bottom of it, and gauged its
straightness throughout ; took the azimuth of the ascending passages round
Mamun's hole ; callipered the sides of the coffer all over, at every 6 inches, and
raised the coffer (weighing about 3 tons), by means of a couple of crowbars, to
8 inches above the floor, in order to measure the bottom of it. For the instrumental readings, in these cases, Mr. Ellis preferred, however, that I should be
responsibly excepting where simultaneous readings were needed, as for the base
length, and in Mamun's hole. To Mr. Ellis I am also indebted for the novel
view of the Pyramids, showing the nine at once, which forms the frontispiece of
this work.
To Dr. Grant Bey I owe much, both for occasional help at the Pyramid,
in visiting the chambers of construction, the well, &c. ; and also for his unvarying kindness both in health and sickness, realizing the conventional Arab
phrase, " My house is thy house." Further, I should mention the kind interest
and advice of General Stone Pasha, who gave me many hints from his intimate
knowledge of the country ; and also the very friendly assistance of our ViceConsul, Mr. Raph. Borg, both in procuring an order for my residence and
protection at Gizeh, and in prosecuting an inquiry into a serious robbery and
assault on me, committed by the unruly soldiery in October, 1881 ; unhappily,
this inquiry was a fruitless task apparently, as the military influence was too
strong in the examination.
And now I must not forget my old friend Shekh Omar, of the Pyramid
village, shrewd, sharp, and handsome ; nor how anxious he was to impress on
me that though some people of base and grovelling notions worked for money,
and not for their " good name," Ite wished to work for fame alone ; and as he
had no doubt I should make a big book, he hoped that I should contract with
him for excavations, and give him a good name. I gratified him with one
contract, but finding that it cost many times as much as hiring labourers
directly, and was not sufficiently under control, the arrangement was not
repeated ; but I will say that I found him the most respectable man to deal
with on the Pyramid hill, excepting, of course, my servant Ali Gabri, who was
equally anxious about his good name, though too true a gentleman to talk
much about it. The venerable Abu Talib and the loquacious Ibrahim, shekhs
of the Pyramid guides, also conducted themselves properly, and Ibrahim seemed
p.
9
Sfct.7.\ ASSISTANCE OBTAINED. 9
honestly genial and right-minded in his words and acts, and knew what so few
Arabs do know — how not to obtrude. The rank and file of the guides — so
familiar, with their little stocks of antikas in the corners of old red handkerchiefs — reckoned that I was free of the place, having AH for my servant ; they
never g^ve me the least trouble, or even whispered the omnipresent word
bakhshish, but were as friendly as possible on all occasions, many claiming a
hand-shaking and a hearty greeting. My impression of a year's sojourn with
Arabs is favourable to them ; only it is necessary to keep the upper hand, to
resist imposition with unwearied patience, to be fair, and occasionally liberal
in dealings, and to put aside Western reserve, and treat them with the same
familiarity to which they are accustomed between different classes. With such
intercourse I have found them a cheerful, warm-hearted, and confiding people.
INSTRUMENTS.
\Chap. a.
CHAPTER II.
INSTRUMENTS.
8. The list of instruments employed was as follows :
A* Standard scale, steel
B» Steel tape
C Steel chain
D Pine poles, a pair i inch diameter
E* Pine rods, a pair 1x2 inches
F* Pine rods, 10 of J x i „
(Jointing together into two lengths of 250
G* Pine rods ) f 3 of J x 2 inches 60
for levelling jt2„|xi „ 60
100 inches long, divided to
1,200 „
1.000 „
140 „
100 „
60 „
each.)
H* Pine rods.
Box on mahogany rods, 2 of i x i
1-25 X -13
it)7X-04
J
K Boxwood scale,
L Steel scale,
M* Ivory scales,
N*- Boxwood scJe,
O* Gun metal scale,
P* Ivory scale.
ixi
2 „ i X I ,,40 and 20
I
Q
R
S
a
2 of ri8x'08
ri8x 08
■i-o6x-09
IX) X08
(The divisions of those marked *
Double calipers, 72 inches long.
Supports for catenary measurement by tape and chain.
10 thermometers for scale temperatures.
I
SO
I
I
I
I
I
TT
Tff
tV
I
I
Iff
TTTff
men.
are all known to within -ntW inch).
Theodolite
by Gambay
Theodolite
by King
Theodolite
by Troughton "
10 inch circle, divisions 5', vernier 3 '
7 inch drcle, „ 10', „ 10"
5 inch circle, „ 30', „ l'
S semicircle, „ 30', „ l'
4 inch circle, „ 30', „ l'
4 semicircle, „ 30', „ i'
■ telescope X 35.
• telescope x 6.
■ telescope x 8.
by TroSton { ''^4 inch radius, division 30'. vernier i'.
e Hand level in brass case.
/ Gun metal protractor, by Troughton, 5-9 diam., divisions 30'.
g Mahogany goniometer, 1 1 and 9 inch limbs.
h Queen's chamber air channel goniometer.
J Sheet steel square, 35 and 45 inches in the sides.
k Folding wooden tripod stand, old pattern. .
Stel. 9.] DETAILS OF LINEAL INSTRUMENTS. n
/ Rigid tripod stand, 30 inches high, octahedral.
m Rigid tripod stand, 16 „ „
« Rigid iron tripod, 12 „ „
o 12 signals, with plumb bobs.
The above were all used, most of them continually ; a few other instruments
were also taken out, but were not needed.
9. Several of these instruments were of new or unusual patterns, which — as
well as various fittings adapted to them — require some e.'cplanation. The
dimensions are all in inches.
A. The steel standard and straight-edge was on a new principle, employing
the stiffness of a tube to maintain the straightness of a strip. It was skilfully
executed by Mr. Munroe, of King's Cross. A steel tube, 102 inches long,
2'0 diam., and 06 thick (see Fig. i, PI. xv.) was supported at the two neulral
points, 20'8 per cent, from the ends, resting on two feet at one point and one at
the other. This tube carried a series of 15 flat beds, all dressed exactly to a
straight line when the tube rested on its supports. These beds supported the
actual standard, which was formed of three independent strips of steel, each
34 inches long, 20 wide, and u thick, butting end to end. These strips bore on
the upper face, along the front edge, very fine graduations, the lines being about
1^ wide. To ascertain the mean temperature throughout the whole length of
the standard, a rod of zinc was screwed tightly to one end of the standard, and
bore a scale divided to a io^hs at the other end ; the scale rising through a slot in
the standard. The value of the divisions for various temperatures was carefully
ascertained. As this standard was also a straight-edge, the edges of the three
strips were all true straight lines, with a mean error of -^ aVoth inch ; and the
edges were brought into one continuous straight line by adjusting screws set in
the supporting beds, at the ends of the back edge of each strip. The object of
having three separate strips was that they could be dismounted for independent
use in measuring or drawing, and for testing each other's straightness; that
unequal heating of one edge should not cause as much distortion, in length or
straightness, as if it were in one continuous piece ; and that the weight should not
be too great for the rigidity, in handling" it when detached from the supports. Ihe
principle of separating the stiff part from the actual scale was adopted in order
to use the regular drawn weldlcss steel tube, which is the stiffesf thing for its weight
that can be had, and also to prevent any unequal heating warping the straightness,
as the tube was bo.xed in by a thin wooden sheath, and so was sheltered far more
than the scale could be. The minor details were that strips were held down
by screws with countersunk heads, bearing on steel spring washers ; and they
were pressed home against each other's ends, and also against the back adjusting
screws, by diagonally acting springs. Along the front of the tube were projecting
screws, nutted on and adjusted to form a right angle with the face of the strip ;
so that the standard could be applied to any surface exactly at right angles.
II INSTRUMENTS. [Chap. it.
The value of the divisions was ascertained by comparison with a brass
standard scale. This scale was tested by Capt. Kater in 1820, 1824, 1830, and
1831 ; and by the Standards Department in 1875 (see a report on it in the
Report of the Warden of the Standards, 1875, Appendix x,, pp. 36-41) : as the
steel standard was sufficient for comparisons, this scale was not taken to Egypt
for fear of injury. The form of this brass standard is a bar, 42-14 long,
1-58 wide, '17 thick ; bearing a scale of 41 inches in length, divided to -i inch,
with a vernier of ^oi— ths, and also bearing a metre divided to milh'metrcs.
The steel standard was ascertained, by means of this brass standard, to be exact
at I9'6° cent ; and the mean error of graduation and reading combined was
•0302, the greatest error being -0005. By the intermediary of a steel tape, the
steel standard was further compared with the public Trafalgar Square standard ;
and according to that it was i in 60,000 longer, or true length at I7"8*' cent, or
a difference of '021 on the length of the public standard, after allowing for the
published error of "019 inch. This is a guarantee that the length of the tape,
which was used to transfer from the steel standard to the public standard, has
no greater error than this ; and, on the whole, I should place as much, or rather
more, confidence in the series of comparisons between the Imperial, the brass,
the steel standard, and the steel tape, made under the best circumstances indoors, rather than in comparisons between the steel tape, the Trafalgar Square
standard, and certain steel rod measures, made in the open air, with wind and
varying temperature. The difference in any case is immaterial, in regard to any
of the points measured, in the present inquiry.
B. The steel tape was over 100 feet long, '37 inch wide, and "ooS thick, and
weighed just over a pound. It was coiled on an unusually large drum (4*2 diam.),
to avoid any chance of permanent distortion. Etched divisions, in the ordinary
style, being too ill-defined, I had an unmarked length of tape, and divided it
by fine cut lines at every 50 inches ; the position of each line was shown by
heating the steel to brown oxidation, and marking the number out of the brown
by acid. It was found on trial that such lines did not weaken a piece of tape,
even when it was violently twisted and wrenched ; and that the steel, being hard
drawn and not tempered, nothing under red heat softened it The cuts were
not put on with any special care, as their exact value was to be ascertained ; but
the worst error throughout was '0098, the mean error "0039 inch, and the total
length true at I9'8'* cent This comparison was made when the tape was lying
unstretched, on a flat surface, as ascertained by measuring successive 100-inch
lengths on the steel standard. It stretched -0127 per lb. on the whole length of
1,200 inches.
C The steel chain of 1,000 inches I made on an entirely new pattern ; and
it proved, both in Egypt, and, some years before, at Stonehenge, to be very handy
in use. The links are each 20 inches long, made of wire 092 diam., this being
Stcl. 9. DETAILS OF LINEAL INSTRUMENTS. U
as thin as can be used with fair care. The eyes (see Fig. 3, PI. xv.) are wide
enough to fold up one in the other, without any intermediate rings. They are
rhomboidal, so that they cannot hitch one on the other, but will always slip down
when pulled ; and the internal curvature of the end of the eye is only just greater
than that of the section of the wire, so that the linkage is sure when in use to
come to its maximum length.* The junction of the eye is made with a long
lapping piece, cut one-third away, and tinned to the stem. The whole was tested
with 100 lbs. pull, to bring it to its bearings, before marking the divisions. The
exact length of the links is unimportant, as, after the chain was made and
stretched, a narrow collar of sheet copper was soldered about the middle of each
link, the collars being adjusted to exactly 20 inches apart. Besides this, each
link bore its own number, marked by a broad collar of copper for each lOO, and
a narrow collar for each 20 inches or link ; thus, at 340 inches there were three
broad and two narrow collars by the side of the central dividing mark on thi
link. These collars were put towards one end of the link, apart from the dividing
mark, and counted from each end up to the middle, as usual. The central eye
of the chain was not tinned up, but was held by a slip clutch ; thus the chain
could be separated into two 500-inch lengths if needed, each complete in itself,
as for base lines for offsets. The handles were kept separately, hooking into
any link at which accurate readings under tension might be needed. They were'
of the same wire as the chain, with wooden cross-bars. One of them included an
inverted spring (see Fig. 2, PI. xv.), so that the pull compressed the spring.
' When the pull reached 10 lbs., a small catch (not shown in the Figure) sprang
out from the stem, and caught the coils. This left only a very small amount of
play ; and hence, when using it, the regulation of the tension did not require to
be looked at, but was felt by the finger when at 10 lbs. pull.
The advantages of this pattern are: (i) Great lightness and compactness of
the chain, as it only weighs 2 J lbs., and forms a sheaf i J inch diam. ; (2) consequent small error by catenary curves, and ease of carrying it clear of the
ground by its two ends ; (3) accuracy of the divisions ; (4) freedom from errors
in the linkage ; (5) that no counting of the links is required, each being numbered ;
and (6) that standard tension can be maintained by touch, while the eyes are
used on reading the chain length. The worst error of division was •03, the
average error -oi, and the total length, with 10 lbs. tension, t'rueat 15-8° cent. ;
the stretching -oi per lb, on the 1,000-inch total length.
D. The pine poles were only used for common purposes, being correct to
about '02.
E. F. G. H. All these rods were divided from the standard scale. I made
• This is preferable to the type of the standard chain of the Standards Department, as that
has such a flat curve at the end of the eye that It is not certain to pull to the maximum length ;
and in a light thin chain such a form would be liable to bend.
U INSTRUMENTS. iOiap.ii.
aright-angled triangle of sheet steel and stout brass tube, to slide along the edge
of the standard. It was 13- in its bearing length, with a straight edge 4'3 long
at right angles, for ruling by. It carried a fine line on inlaid German silver, by
which it was adjusted (with a magnifier) to successive inches of the standard, for
the successive cuts to be made. Altogether I divided 80 feet of rods into i-inch
spaces by this, with an average error of X)OiS inch.
The jointing rods were connected by a slip joint (see Fig. 4, PI. xv.) ; a
screw on each rod slipping through a hole in the other, and then sliding in a slot
until the rod butted against the stop, S. Both the butt and rod ends were made
by a screw in the end, sunk up to its head, the screw being screwed in until only
slightly in excess, and then ground down to a true length, with a radius equal to
the length of the rod. The levelling rods I made with similar jointing and
fitdngs. A base-rod of 60 inches stood on the ground, having a flange against
which the upper rods could be slid up or down by hand. It had also a block on
the side, carrying a circular level, by which its verticality could be observed.
The mode of work was for the staff-holder to hold the base-rod vertical, and slide
the upper rods up or down, till a finely-divided scale at the top was in the field
of the telescope ; then setting the rods, so that one of the inch cuts on them
should agree with the zero line on the base-rod, the fractions of an inch were
read by the level telescope, and the whole inches reported by the staff-holder.
This method enables a larger scale to be used for reading on than if there were
similar divisions all down the rods; and yet it takes but little time for adjustment, as that is only done to the nearest whole inch or two, and it does not
sacrifice any accuracy.
The other scales do not need any remark.
Q. The calipers (see Fig. $, PI. xv.) were made for gauging the thickness
of the coffer sides ; the arms were of equal length, so that variations were read on
the scale of their actual value at the other end. The scale was the gun-metal
scale, O, screwed temporarily on to the projection at the top, and read by a line
on a brass plate, underlapping it, on the opposite limb. The zero of the scale
was repeatedly read, during the series of measurements, by putting an iron bar
of known length (±-0002 inch) and parallel ends, between the steel points at the
bottom, in place of the side of the coffer. ThcMimbs I made of pine, 71 X 4X i'
lightened by holes cut through them. The hinge was of steel plates, with copper
foil washers between them to prevent friction, and closely fitting on a stout iron
pin. The readings of the scale value corresponding to the gauge-piece were
four times 577, and once 576, showing that there was no appreciable shake or
flexure in the instrument as used.
R. As the steel tape and chain were often used, suspended in catenary
curves, two terminal supports were made to hold the ends six inches from
the ground. One support was simply a wedge-shaped stand with a hook on it;
Stct. lo.] DETAILS OF ANGULAR INSTRUMENTS. IJ
the other support carried a lever arm, weighted so that it balanced with
lO lbs. horizontal pull from the point where the tape was attached ; hence
the stand was drawn back until the arm swung freely, and then there was
lO lbs. tension on the tape. But transferring apparatus was needed, to transfer
down from the marks on the tape to the station mark ; and to be able to read
as instantaneously as if the tape lay on the station mark, for simultaneous
readings at each end. After several experiments I adopted a horizontal
mirror, levelled in the direction of the tape length, and supported at half the
height of the tape. The edge of this mirror being placed just beneath the tape,
the reflection of the tape marks could be seen side by side with the station
mark ; both marks being at the same virtual distance from the eye, and therefore both in focus together. Motion of the eye does not affect the coincidence,
except when the mirror is not level, or not at half the height of the tape ; and
even then only if large variations occur together. The mirror, its stand, and
level, I arranged to pack inside the wedge-shaped terminal support.
S. The thermometers were common mercurial and spirit tubes. I
graduated them by freezing point, and a hot bath with a fine chemical
thermometer in it. Divisions are most easily and visibly marked on the
tubes by coating one side with whiting and a trace of gum, then scratching
the lines through that with a point ; and then fixing, by dipping the tube
in thick varnish. The tubes were mounted with the divisions placed behind,
and thus much spread out from side to side, as seen through the tube. The
wooden frames were thick enough to protect the whole bulb and tube sunk
in them ; and the numbering could be safely trusted to the frame, though
the accuracy of the divisions was secured on the tube. This plan of seeing
the scale through the tube, might be improved on by instrument makers
flashing a thin coat of opaque white glass down the back of the tube, and
then etching out the divisions through it.
lO. a. The principal angular instrument was a splendid theodolite by
Gambay, said to have been used by the French in their share of the AngloFrench triangulation. It was of a very unusual form, the support of the
upper parts and altitude circle being a pillar formed of the cone axis of the
lower or azimuth circle; and the ic-inch or altitude circle being set on a
horizontal axis parallel to the plane of it, so that it could be turned over
horizontal, as an azimuth circle, with its centre over the axis of the fixed or
7-inch horizontal circle. This was a bold device for making available the full
accuracy of the finest of the circles for either altitudes or azimuths, and it
was quite successful, as I could never detect the least shake in the converting
axis, even though this was taken apart every time the instrument was packed
The total weight was so small— being only 37 lbs.— that I could freely carry
it, as set up for work, from station to station ; but to avoid straining it in
'6 INSTRUMENTS. \Cktp. it.
travelling, and to carry it easier over rough ground, it was usually packed
in three boxes : one for the 7-inch circle and feet, one for the lo-inch circle,
and one for the telescope, levels, and counterpoise. Its original case was
ludicrously clumsy, heavy, and dangerous— a sort of thing to need two stout
sappers to haul it about, and to take care that it never was turned over.
The lo-inch circle was very finely graduated on silver to 5', the lines
being so close as to show diffraction spectra. It was read by four very long
verniers of 100 divisions each, one division equal to 3". The magnifying
power originally provided was quite inefficient,* being but single lenses of
l\ inch focus. One of these I retained for index reading, and then fitted four
microscopes of J-inch equivalent focus (or magnifying 20 diams. on s-inch
standard, or 40 diams., as opticians are pleased to magnify it) : with these
the reading was excellent, the average error of a single reading and graduation
being only '4" ; or, combined with errors of parallax, by the planes of the
circles being about ^oo '"ch different, it was 7". The circle errors were
determined by repeating the quadrants of the verniers around it many times,
and then going round the circle by steppifig the length of each vernier ; thus
each quadrant was divided up by the mean stepping of four vernier lengths
of 8J° each. These four values were mapped in curves, and a mean curve
was drawn through them ; this mean curve was ever after used (along with
corrections for level, &c.) in correcting all the observations of each vernier
independently, so as to detect any extraordinary error or reading. The
instrumental errors were all small : the eccentricity of the circles was in the
IO-inch=4'8", in the 7-inch=i5*5" ; the difference of axes of inner and outer
cones of repeating motion = 5'2"; the difference between the two ends of the
transit level-bearing and the steel pivots sunk in them =6'6"; the difference of
the diameters of the pivots, and their errors of circularity, inappreciable. The
runs of the four verniers were "42", '92", '25, and '12" on 5' or 300". Of course,
in field work, the errors of pointing, of vibration of the instrument, and personal
errors due to wind, sand, heat, glare, and constrained positions, increased the
mean error of reading ; and, on the average, it is ri" for a single observation.
The 7-inch circle was scarcely ever used ; the long cone of it was so finely
ground that, on being set on an ordinary table (soon after I had thoroughly
cleaned it), the whole of the upper pait of the instrument (about 18 lbs. weight)
was seen to be slowly revolving in azimuth, without any apparent cause. On
• Instrument makers seem to ignore the fact that there is a definite law for the power of
reading microscopes ; the angular width to the eye of a minute as seen in the telescope should
equal the width of a minute as seen in the microscopes, else there must be a waste of accuracy
somewhere. The formula is— focal length of object-glass : radius of circle "focal distance of
eye-piece : focal distance of microscope. Of course, in compound eyepieces and microscopes
the equivaient focal distance must be employed, inversely to that deceptive term "magnifying
power."
p.
17
Sect. 10.] DETAILS OF ANGULAR INSTRUMENTS. 17
examining it, it was found that, not being quite level, and the counterpoise of
5 lbs. not being put on it, its centre of gravity was not at the lowest point
attainable ; hence the rotation. The telescope was equal in character to the
rest of the instrument, the object-glass being i"66 diam., and i6\ inches focal
length, and the eye-piece of high power and large field ; thus it magnified 35
diameters. The form of the slow motions was far superior to that of English
instruments ; all the tangent screws had a steel ball on the shank, which
worked between two circular holes, in plates which were clamped together by
a fixed screw ; the nuts were also spherical, cut into two separate halves, and
also clamped between circular holes. Thus there was practically perfect
absence of shake, and great working smoothness, even when stiffly clamped.
Another excellent device was tlie use of spring steel washers to all screws
whose tension was in question ; the screws were all made to run dead home on
a seat, and to produce pressure through a curved washer, which they flattened,
either for fixed tension, or for rotation of an axis. Thus a slight loosening of a
screw made no difference or shako, and no delicate tightening up was needed ; if
the pressure had to be altered, the washer was taken out and bent accordingly.
The three levels of the theodolite were suitably delicate, the value of one
division being 2*47" (altitude), 4-92" (transit), and 12-8" (cross level). For
these and every other level used, I adopted a distinctive system of numbering.
Every level had a different number for the mean position of the bubble end,
and the divisions were numbered uniformly in one direction, and not simply on
each side of the mean. Thus the ranges were respectively from 5 to 15, 16 to
24, 28 to 32, 40 to 60, &c., on the levels called No. 10, No. 20, No. 30, No. 50,
&c. ; and when once a number was recorded (the mean of the two ends was
always taken mentally), it showed which level was read, and in which direction,
with any doubt, or further note.
Other adjuncts that I provided for this, and also for the other theodolites,
were slit caps (see Figs. 6, 7, 8, PI. xv.). It is manifest that objects seen through
a fine hole are always in equally good focus, no matter what maybe the distance;
hence, if an object-glass is limited to a small hole, it does not need focussing.
But definition is commonly required in only one direction at once, either
vertically or horizontally ; hence a slit — which admits more light — will be as
effective as a hole. When a line is quite invisible, by being out of focus, placing
a slit cap over the object-glass, parallel with the line, will make it clear ; and
it will be well defined in proportion to the fineness of the slit Each of the
theodolites were therefore fitted with two movable slit caps, fine and wide, to
cover the object-glasses. As focussing is always liable to introduce small errors,
by shake of the tubes in each other, these slit caps were adopted to avoid the
need of changing focus continually from near to distant objects; they also serve
to bring near points in view, at only a foot or two from the glass. To be able to
u
i8 INSTRUMENTS. \Chap. ii.
place the slit-cap on the end of the telescope, without shaking it, was essential.
This I did by making the slit of thin steel spring ; soldered to brass clutches, so
as to grip the telescope by three points ; provided also with a projecting tongue
above, and another below it, whereby to bend it open for clipping it on (see
Figs. 6, 7, 8, PL XV.). The smaller theodolites were also fitted with diagonal
mirrors clipping on to the object-glass ; these enabled tlie instruments to be
very accurately centred without a plumb-line.
b. The S-inch theodolite, by King, was an old one, and was obtained for
rough work ; but it had never been adjusted, so I had to take it in hand ; and
on finding its errors, after correction, to be even less than those of the 4-inch
Troughton, I generally used it for all small work. I corrected it in the
rectangularity of cones to the circles, of transit axis to the cones, and of cradle
axis to transit axis ; also in adjustment of verniers for run. The telescope was
of long focussing-range when I got it, and I increased the range from infinite
down to 5i feet focus, which made it very useful in near levelling, as in
buildings ; also I did away with the mere fit of sliding tubes for focussing ; and
made the inner tube run on four points, slightly punched up in the outer tube,
and pressed in contact with them by a spring on the opposite side of it. The
old level I replaced by a good one of Baker's, running 415" to "I inch.
Microscopes of ^-inch equivalent focus were fitted to two arms, which were
slipped together when required for use, and rode round on the compass-box ;
with these the average error of reading on the i' verniers was 7".
The spider lines in this, and the next theodolite, were somewhat different to
the usual pattern. When either a single vertical line, or a diagonal cross, is
used, it blocks out any very small signal ; and I have e\-en heard of an engineer
hunting in vain for his signal, because the line exactly hid it To ensure greater
accuracy, I therefore put in two parallel lines, crossed by one horizontal (needed
for levelling) ; the lines being about -^ inch apart ; if closer they may cling
together if vibrated, and it is awkward to separate them while in the field.
Thus the interval of the vertical lines was about i', and signals could be very
accurately centred between them.*
c. The 4-inch theodolite by Troughton was not often used, except where
lightness was important; I fitted it with two microscopes, similarly to the
5-inch ; and its mean error of reading was about 8" on the i' vernier.
Though neither of these were transit theodolites, j-et in practice I used
them as such for all accurate work. By reversing the telescope, end for end,
and upside down, and turning the circle 180', all the errors are compensated as
• Spider line from webs is useless, as it is covered with sticky globules to catch small flies ;
the path-threads of the spider are dean, but thick ; so that the best way of all is to catch a very
small spider, and make it spin to reach the ground, winding up the thread as fast as it spins it
out, dangling in mid-air.
p.
19
Sect. 10.] DETAILS OF ANGULAR INSTJiUAfENTS. 19
in a transiting instrument ; Ihe only extra source of error is irregularity in the
form of the rings, which can be tested by revolving the telescope in its cradle,
h. For ascertaining the angles of the Queen's Chamber air channels I necdeil
to measure as long a length of slope as possible, at about 8 feet inside a
passage, which was only 8 inches square. For this I pivoted an arm on the
end of a long rod (see Fig. 9, PI. xv.), and passed it into the passage in the
dotted position at A ; on reaching the slope it turned itself up to the angle by
pressure, the main rod touching the passage roof. The arm carried an index,
which touched a scale attached to the main rod. This scale was divided by
actual trial, by applying a protractor to the limbs and marking the scale. To
read it, a candle was carried on an arm, which shaded the direct light from the
eye ; and the scale was inspected by a short-focus telescope. Thus the readings
were made without needing to withdraw the goniometer from the narrow
channel, and hence the arm of it could be much longer than would be otherwise
possible.
J. A large square, 35 and 45 inches in the sides, of sheet steel strips, 2 inches
wide, and tinned together, I made for testing angles ; it was not exactly
adjusted to squareness, but its angles were very carefully fixed, by triangulating
a system of fine punched dots on the face of it ; and the edges were
adjusted straight within about -003 throughout their length. It could be used
for the absolute value of slopes of about 51" So' and 26" 20', by means of a
rider level placed on one edge of it, and reading by means of a divided head
screw at one end. To render the square stiff enough sideways, it was screwed
down (with round projecting screw heads, not countersunk) to a frame of
wooden bars, 2x1 inch in section. I generally found, however, that it was best
to measure a slope by theodolite and offsets.
k. I. m. n. These stands were used for the theodolites. Generally the lo-inch
theodolite could be placed directly on the rock, or on a stone ; but when a
stand was needed I used one about 30 inches high, that I made of 1 x i pine rod ;
the top was stouter and about 12 inches triangle, and the feet about 30 inches
apart, connected by cross bars. Thus it was of the octahedral pattern, a triangular face at the top, another at the base, and six faces around ; this being the
only form absolutely free from racking. The screw feet of the theodolite rested
on leaden trays on the top of the stand, which allowed free sliding for adjusting
its centring. A similar octahedral stand about 16 high, was made of ^ x I inch
pine, for the 5-inch theodolite ; in order to stand it in chambers or on stones.
The instrument was clamped on to the stand by a screw from beneath, passing
through a plate under the triangular top of the stand, and screwing into the base
plate of the theodolite, which rested upon the top of the stand. Thus it could
be slid about on the stand, to adjust its centring, and then clamped tight afterwards. The iron stand was of just the same pattern, but made of \ inch iron
to INSTRUMENTS. Chap. ii.
rod ; the rods were bent parallel where joined, and passed into sections of iron
tub^ the whole filled up with tinning. These small stands would stand on the
top of the large one when required.
o. For signals in the triangulation, to show the places of the station marks,
I made a number of short wooden cylinders, i J diam., painted white, and standing
on three legs of wire (see Fig. lO, PI. xv). In order to enable these to be centred over the station marks by a plumb-bob, the cylinder was cut in two across
the middle ; a diaphragm of thin card was then put in it, with a hole truly
centred by adjusting a circle on the card to the outline of the cylinder ; and the
two halves of the cylinder were pegged together again. Then, having a plumbbob hanging by a silk thread through the hole, at whatever angle the cylinder
could stand the bob would be always beneath its centre. The bob was fixed to
hang at the right height, according to the irregularities of the rock, by drawing
the thread through the hole, and pressing it down on a dab of wax on the top of
the cylinder.
The plumb-bobs are all of a new pattern (see Fig. ii, PI. xv). The point
of suspension is generally too near to the centre of gravity, so that a slight shift
in it would move the position of the lower end a good deal more. Hence the
suspension and the end of the bob are here made equidistant from the middle.
To avoid the complication of screw plugs to each bob, there was a large horizontal hole through the neck, to hold the knot ; and a smaller vertical hole in
the axis of the bob for the thread to pass.
The finest white silk fishing line was found to be the best thread for plumblines, or for stretching for offset measures ; it does not tend to untwist, or to
spin the bob ; it is only -fo inch diam., well defined and clean, and very visible.
Wax is invaluable for hjinging plumb-lines in any position ; and a piece of wood
an inch square, well waxed, if pressed against a stone warmed by a candle, will
hold up several pounds weight
For station marks on rocks or stones, I entirely discarded the bronze and lead
forms. They may be very good in a law-abiding country, but I found that half
of those put down by Mr. Gill, in 1874, were stolen or damaged in 1880. The
neat triangular stones in which they were sunk also attracted attention. I therefore uniformly used holes drilled in the rock, and filled up with blue-tinted plaster ;
they are easily seen when looked for, but are not attractive. To further protect
them, I made the real station mark a small hole -15 diam. ; and, to find it easier,
and yet draw attention from it if seen, I put two J-inch holes, one on each side
of it ; usually 5 inches from it, N.E. and S.W. Thus, if an Arab picked out the
plaster (which would not be easy, as the holes are i to i J inches deep) he would
be sure to attack a large hole, which is unimportant. Where special definition
was wanted, as in the main points round the Great Pyramid, a pencil lead was set
in the middle of the plaster. This cannot be pulled out, like a bit of wire, but
Sect 10.1 DETAILS OF ANGULAR INSTRUMENTS. 31
crumbles away if broken ; and yet it is imperishable by weathering. To clean the
surface of the marks, if they become indistinct, a thin shaving can be ' -ken off the
rock, plaster, and central graphite altogether. Where I had to place a stone for a
station mark, I sunk it in the ground ; and for the base terminals I took large
pieces of basalt, and sunk them beneath the surface ; thus a couple of inches of
sand usually covers them, and they cannot be found without directions.
On reading this description of the in'struments, it might be asked what need
there could be for doing so much in adjustment, alteration, and manufacture,
with my own hands. But no one who has experienced the delays, mistakes,
expense, and general trouble of getting any new work done for them, will
wonder at such a course. Beside this, it often happens that a fitting has to be
practically experimented on, and trials made of it, before its form can be settled.
And, further, for the instinctive knowledge of instruments that grows from
handling, cleaning, and altering them, and for the sense of their capabilities and
defects, the more an observer has to do with his own instruments the better for
him and for them.
a» METHODS OF MEASUREMENT. \Chap. Hi.
CHAPTER III.
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT.
II. For the general questions of the principles of the arrangement of a
triangulation, and of the reduction of the observations, we must refer to the two
appendices on these subjects. They are so purely technical, and uninteresting
to any but a specialist, that they are therefore omitted from the general course
of this account. We begin here with lineal measure, and then proceed to
angular measure, including theodolite work in general
For lineal dimensions, I always used the system of a pair of rods butting
end to end, and laid down alternately, instead of making marks at each rod
length. In testing measures, the value of the sum of two rods can also be
obtained more accurately than the exact butt length of either of them alone.
But for the more important points, the direct measurement of a space by a rod
has been often abandoned for the more accurate method of referring all parts to
horizontal and vertical planes of known position. This is a necessary refinement
when precision is needed, and it specifies a form in every element of size, angle,
and place. In the passages, where the use of horizontal planes was impracticable, a plane at a given angle was adopted, and the roof and floor were referred
to that.
In the Great Pyramid, the King's Chamber was measured by hanging a
plumb-line from the roof in each corner of the room ; and measuring the offsets
from the lines to the top and bottom of each course on each side of the corner.
Then the distances of the plumb-lines apart were measured by the steel tape on
the floor. The heights of the courses were read on a rod placed in each corner.
For the levels, the S-inch theodolite was placed just about the level of the first
course ; then at 24 points round the side a rod was rested on the floor, and the
level and the first course read on the rod.
The coffer was measured by means of a frame of wood, slightly larger than
the top, resting upon it ; with threads stretched just beyond the edges of the
wood, around the four sides. The threads gave true straight lines, whose
distances and diagonals were measured. Then offiscts were taken to the coffer
Sect. 12.] ANGULAR MEASURES. 33
sides from a plumb-line hung at intervals over the edge of the wood ; its distance
from the straight stretched thread, being added to the offsets, thus gave the
distances of the coffer sides from true vertical planes of known relation to each
other, at various points all over the sides. Similarly, the inside was measured
by a frame, slightly smaller inside it than the coffer. The bottom was measured
by raising the coffer 8 or 9 inches ; the theodolite was placed to sight under it,
and offsets were thus read off to the outside bottom from a level plane, also
reading the height of the plane of sight on a vertical rod ; then the theodolite
was raised so as to sight over the top of the coffer, the height of its plane on the
same fixed rod was read off to give its change of level, and then long offsets
were taken to points on the inside bottom of the coffer. Thus the thickness of
the bottom is determined by the differences of level of the theodolite, minus the
two offsets. Besides this, a check on the sides was taken by a direct measurement of their thickness with the pair of calipers already described.
The antechamber was measured in the common way ; but the granite leaf
in it had a bar placed across the top of it, with a plumb-line at each end of the
bar, i£., N. and S. of the leaf. The distances of the lines apart were taken below
the leaf, and offsets were taken all up the leaf on each side ; this was done at
each end and in the middle of the leaf.
In the Queen's Chamber two plumb-lines were hung from the ends of the
roof-ridge, their distance apart observed, and offsets taken to the side walls and
to the ends. Offsets were also taken to the niche, which was, beside this, gauged
with rods between its surfaces all over. The heights of the courses were also
measured in each corner. The angles of the air channels were read by the
goniometer already described.
The subterranean chamber was measured in the common way, with rods
along the sides, but the irregularity of the floor, and the encumbrance of stones
left by Perring made it very difficult to measure.
12. Turning next to measurements made with the theodolite, these generally
included some determination of angular as well as lineal quantities. The
straightness of the sloping passages was uniformly observed by clamping a
theodolite in azimuth, pointing along the passage, and having a scale held as
an offset against the wall at marked intervals ; thus variations in azimuth of the
passage were read. On reaching the end, the assistant holding the scale
stopped, the theodolite was clamped in altitude instead of in azimuth, and
the assistant returned, holding the offset scale to the floor or roof; thus
variations in slope of the passage were read. The whole length of the entrance
passage, and the ascending passage and gallery in one length, were thus
measured. For the air channels on the outer face, where the floor is unbroken,
a slip of board carrying a perpendicular mirror was let down the channel by a
string, in lengths of 10 feet at a time ; and the dip to the reflection in the
»4 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT. {Chap. Hi.
mirror was noted by a theodolite at the mouth. It is then a matter of mere
reduction to obtain the variations from a straight mean axis.
The horizontal measurements outside the Pyramid were entirely performed
by triangulation ; and this included in a single system the bases of the
three larger Pyramids, the pavement of the Great Pyramid, the trenches and
basalt pavement on the E. side of the Great Pyramid, and the walls around the
Second and Third Pyramids. The Great Pyramid was comprised in a single
triangle. This triangulation by means of the lo-inch theodolite occupied some
months in all ; some angles being read 14 times, and the fixed stations being
about 50 in number, besides about as many points fixed without permanent marks.
The first-class points were fixed with an average probable error of "06 inch ; and
the least accurate points, such as those on the rough stone walls, were fixed
within I or 2 inches. For fixing the points uncovered by excavation, a rod
was placed across the top of the hole, and a plumb-line dropped from it to
the point to be fixed. A theodolite was then placed near it, and was fixed in
the triangulation by reference to known stations ; the distance of the plumb-line
from the theodolite, was then measured by the angle subtended by divisions
on the horizontal rod which supported it
For connecting together the inside and outside measurements of the Great
Pyramid, a station of the external triangulation was fixed on the end of the
entrance passage floor, thus fixing the position of the passage on the side of the
Pyramid. From this station the azimuth down the passage was observed ;
thus fixing the direction of the passage. And levelling was also carried up
from the pavement and casing stones of the N. face to this station ; thus
fixing the level of the passage, and hence that of all the interior of the Pyramid.
The positions of the passages of the Second and Third Pyramids, on their faces,
were also fixed in the triangulation.
The base of the survey was thrice measured, with a probable error of
± "OS inch (or ,, 0*000 of the whole) by the steel tape. To avoid the need of
a truly levelled base line, a series of blocks of stone was put between the
terminals of the base, which are 659 feet apart ; a stone was placed at each
tape length (1,200 inches), and at each chain length (1,000 inches); and a
sufllicient number of stones were placed also between these, as to support the
chain or tape in catenary curves throughout, with the usual 10 lbs. tension.
The stones thus varied from 140 to 393 inches apart Then, the distances and
levels of the stones being known, the reduction to be applied to the tape as it
lay on them to ascertain its horizontal length, were easily applied. No attempt
was made to place a mark at exactly each tape length on the stones ; but
a scale of i^ths of an inch was fixed temporarily on each stone at which the
tape lengtlis joined ; then the two ends of the tape were read simultaneously on
the scales several times over, slightly shifting the tape each time in order to
Sect. 12.] ANGULAR MEASURES. ^
equalize the friction of its support : thus the distances of the zeros of the scales
placed all along the base were ascertained, and hence the total length of the base.
For the height of the Great Pyramid a line of levelling was run up the
S.W. corner, across the top, and down the N.E. comer, stepping 15 to 20 feet
at each shift. Separate lines of level were twice run round the Pyramid,
(including the basalt pavement. &c), and the differences were under i inch,
both between them and from the levels of Mr. Inglis, excepting his S.E. socket
Thus a complete chain, from N.E. to S.E., to S.W., to top, across top, and
to N.E. was made ; and the difference was only \ inch on the return, the
total run being 3,000 feet distance, and 900 feet height Besides this, an
independent measurement by rods had been carried up each of the four corners
of the Pyramid to the top ; generally two, and sometimes three or four, steps
were taken in one length, and levelled to the nearest, tV inch, from the upright
rod to the upper step, by a reversible horizontal rod with level attached.
The intermediate courses in each length were also measured off. This gives
all the course heights, and is r^ulated at every 10 or 20 courses by the
accurate levelling on the N.E. and S.W, The same point was always used on
each step, both in the measuring and the levelling, so as to avoid errors of
levelling and dressing in the steps ; and each tenth course has a cross scored on
the stone, at the point used in the levelling. The Third Pyramid was only
measured by rods up the courses.
The angles of the ascending passages were not retaken, as Professor Smyth
had already done that work fully ; but the angle to the bottom of the entrance
was observed by the lo-inch theodolite, placed on a shelf across the mouth of
the passage. The levels of the horizontal passages were taken with the s-inch
theodolite, placed in the middle, and reading on both ends. The level from the
entrance passage to the ascending passage was read off on a single vertical
rod placed in Maraun's Hole ; a theodolite being put first in the lower and then
in the uppsr passage to read on it
As a general prindple, in observing down a passage with a theodolite, no
dependence was placed on measuring the position of the theodolite, which was
usually outside the passage in question ; but in all cases a signal was fixed in
the passage near the theodolite, as well as one at the farthest point to te
observed, and the azimuths of both were noted ; the distances being roughly
known, the minute corrections to be applied to the azimuth of the further signal
could be readily determined. The azimuth observations of Polaris always
included a greatest elongation. For the dip of the entrance passage the lo-inch
theodolite was clamped in altitude, at closely the true angle ; an offset was
taken to the roof at the bottom, and the theodolite was reversed and re-read as
usual to get the dip, reading level at the same time. Offsets were then read to
points all up the roof, keeping the telescope clamped in its second position ; thus
E
36 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT. \Chap. Hi.
it was not necessary to know the exact height of the plane of the roof above the
theodolite. The azimuth of the entrance j>assage was determined down to
Mamun's Hole, by connection with the triangulation, whose azimuth is otherwise
known ; and it was also determined down to the bottom by Polaris' observations. The azimuths of the horizontal subterranean passages ^exe read by the
5-inch theodolite, placed at the bottom of the entrance passage, and reading on a
signal at the top, and on candles placed in the passages ;* the S. end of the S.
passage being invisible from the theodolite, its candle was sighted on in line with
its N. end candle, and the line measured off in the chamber. The azimuth of
the ascending passages was measured by three theodolites used together ; all
of the telescopes were set to infinite focus, so as to see each other's cross wires
plainly when a candle was held behind the telescope observed on. The lo-inch
was put in the entrance passage, reading on a signal at top, and on the 5-inch ; the
latter was placed on the rubbish in Mamun's Hole, reading on the lo-inch and
4-inch ; and this last was placed just above the granite plug blocks, reading on
the 5-inch and on a signal at the top of the ascending passage. Thus a chain of
angles was formed from signal to signal, quite free from any errors of centring
the theodolites or station marks. For the angle of the Great Pyramid casing
stones in situ, the loinch theodolite was placed on the steps above ; the dip was
read to points on the top of the casing stones, and on the pavement in front of
them ; and then offsets were measured from these points to the face of the stone.
The Second and Third Pyramid casing was measured by goniometer and
protractor.
Thus it will be seen that several fresh methods of observation have been
introduced, in order to obtain greater accuracy and more information : in particular the methods of plumb-lines and optical theodolite-planes, with offsets from
these, have yielded good results. A fresh feature in the discussion of observations is the introduction of " concentrated errors ; " on the principle of showing
all the divergences from regularity on their natural scale, while reducing the
distances of the parts so that they may readily be compared together. This
is the essential basis of the method of graphic reduction, described in the
Appendix (shown in Traces of Observations, PI. xvi) ; and it renders possible the
use of graphic methods in work of any delicacy ; it is also exemplified in the
diagrams of the King's Chamber walls (PI. xiii), and of the relation of the casing
and pavement (PL x).
• Naked candles are good objects for observing on, where there is no wind ; the spot of
flame, the white candle, or the thin wick, serving at difTerent distances ; offset measurements
can also be taken accurately to the wick. Lanterns were only used for outside work.
Stcf.i3.J INSIDE GREAT PYRAAflD. a;
CHAPTER IV.
EXCAVATIONS.
13. In Egypt all excavations are forbidden, and a special permission is
required for any such researches, the law of treasure-trove being the same as in
England. Having in 1 880-1 done all the triangulation of my station marks, it
was requisite in 1881-2 to connect them with the ancient points of construction.
For this, therefore, I needed permission to excavate, and applied to M. Maspero,
the courteous and friendly director of the Department for the Conservation of
Antiquities ; Dr. Birch kindly favouring my request. In order to save delay and
needless formalities, M. Maspero at once said that he would permit me to work
under his firman, on all the points that I had indicated to him in writing ; the
Bulak Museum being formally represented by a reis, who would observe if anything of portable value should accidentally be discovered, though such was very
unlikely and unsought for. Under this arrangement, then, I carried on
excavations for about six weeks, having during most of the time about 20 men
and boys engaged. The total expense was only about £ii,OT ;£'22 including
the reis of the Museum. He was a son of old Reis Atweh, who worked for
Prof. Smyth ; a very polite man, who quite understood that his presence was a
formality.*
The first work that needed to be done (and that quickly, before the
travellers' season set in) was to open the entrance passage of the Gre-at Pyramid
again to the lower chamber. The rubbish that had accumulated from out of
Mamun's Hole was carried out of the Pyramid by a chain of five or six men in
the passage. In all the work I left the men to use their familiar tools, baskets
and hoes, as much as they liked, merely providing a couple of shovels, of picks,
and of crow-bars for any who liked to use them. I much doubt whether more
work could be done for the same expense and time, by trying to force them into
using Western tools without a good training. Crowbars were general favourites,
the chisel ends wedging up and loosening the compact rubbish very easily ; but
a shovel and pickaxe need a much wider hole to work them in than a basket
• A notice of these excavations appeared at the time in the Academy of 17th December,
1881.
a8 EXCAVATIONS. [Ckap.iv.
and hoe require ; hence the picks were fitted with short handles, and the shovels
were only used for loose sand. In the passage we soon came down on the bi^j
granite stone which stopped Prof. Smyth when he was trying to clear the
passage, and also sundry blocks of limestone appeared. The limestone was
easily smashed then and there, and carried out piecemeal ; and as it had no
worked surfaces it was of no consequence. But the granite was not only tough,
but interesting, and I would not let the skilful hammer-man cleave it up slice by
slice as he longed to do ; it was therefore blocked up in its place, with a stout
board across the passage, to prevent it being started into a downward rush. It
was a slab 20"6 thick, worked on both faces, and one end, but rough broken
around the other three sides ; and as it lay flat on the floor, it left us 27 inches
of height to pass down the passage over it. Where it came from is a complete
puzzle ; no granite is known in the Pyramid, except the King's Chamber, the
Antechamber, and the plug blocks in the ascending passage. Of these sites the
Antechamber seems to be the only place whence it could have come ; and Maillet
mentions having seen a large block (6 feet by 4) lying in the Antechamber,
which is not to be found there now. This slab is 32 inches wide to the broken
sides, 45 long to a broken end, and 206 thick ; and, strangely, on one side edge
is part of a drill hole, which ran through the 206 thickness, and the side of which
is 27*3 from the worked end. This might be said to be a modern hole, made for
smashing it up, wherever it was in situ ; but it is such a hole as none but an
ancient Egyptian would have made, drilled out with a jewelled tubular drill in
the regular style of the 4th dynasty ; and to attribute it to any mere smashers
and looters of any period is inadmissible. What if it came out of the grooves in
the Antechamber, and was placed like the granite leaf across that chamber ?
The grooves are an inch wider, it is true ; but then the groove of the leaf is an
inch wider than the leaf. If it was then in this least unlikely place, what could be
the use of a 4-inch hole right through the slab .> It shows that something has
been destroyed, of which we have, at present, no idea.
Soon after passing this granite, we got into the lower part of the entrance
passage, which was clear nearly to the bottom. Here a quantity of mud had
been washed in by the rains, from the decayed limestone of the outside of the
Pyramid, thus filling the last 30 feet of the slope. This was dug out and spread
on the passage floor, to save having to carry it out up the long 300 feet of the
narrow passage ; no truck arrangement could be easily worked, owing to the
granite block lying in the passage. Work down at the bottom, with two
lanterns and six men, in the narrow airless passage, was not pleasant ; and my
visits were only twice a day, until they cut through to the chamber. Here I
had the rest of the earth piled up, clear of the walls, and also of the well, and
so re-established access to these lower pjuts.
In the well leading from the gallery to the subterranean passages, there is
Sect. 14.] CASING, ETC., OF GREAT PYRAAflD. J9
a part (often called the "Grotto") cased round with small hewn stones. These
were built in to keep back the loose gravel that fills a fissure in the rock,
through which the passage passes. These stones had been broken through,
and much of the gravel removed ; on one side, however, there was a part of the
rock which, it was suggested, might belong to a passage. I therefore had some
of the gravel taken from under it, and heaped up elsewhere, and it was then
plainly seen to be only a natural part of the water-worn fissure. This well is
not at all difficult to visit ; but the dust should be stirred as little as possible.
One may even go up and down with both hands full, by using elbows and
toes against the sides and the slight foot-holes.
14. The next business was to find the casing and pavement of the Great
Pyramid, in other parts beside that on the N. face discovered by Vyse : the
latter part had been uncovered, just when I required it, in i88i,by a contractor,
who took the chips of casing from the heaps on the N. face to mend the road.
Thus the tourists to the Pyramid actually drive over the smashed-up casing
on their way. On the three other sides the Arabs had some years ago cut
away a large part of the heaps of casing chips, in search of pieces which would
do for village building. Thus the heaps were reduced from about 35 to only
20 feet in depth, over the middle of the base sides of the Pyramid ; though
they were not touched at their highest parts, about 40 or 50 feet up the sloping
side of the Pyramid.
The shafts for finding the casing were then sunk first of all about 100 feet
from the corners of the Pyramid ; and then, finding nothing there but rock
(and that below the pavement level), places further along the sides were tried ;
until at last the highest parts, in the very middle of the sides, were opened.
There the casing and pavement were found on every side, never seen since the
rest of the casing was destroyed a thousand years ago. Thus for the North
casing four shafts were tried ; but no casing was found, except where known
by Vyse. On the East side four shafts were sunk, finding casing in the middle
one. On the South four shafts were sunk, finding badly preserved casing in
one, and good casing in another, entirely eaten away, however, just at the
base (see PI. xii.). On the West side five shafts were tried, finding casing
in one of them, and pavement within the casing line at the N.W. The East
and South casing was seriously weathered away ; on the East it was only
defined by the pavement being worn away outside its ancient edge; and on
the South it was found to be even hollowed out (PI. xii.), probably by the
action of sand whirled up against the base, and scooping it out like sea-worn
caves. The shafts were cut as small as possible, to avoid crumbling of the
sides ; and they were steined with the larger blocks where the rubbish was
loose : ledges were left at each six feet down, for the men to stand on for
handing up the baskets and larger stones. The Arabs never would clear away
EXCA VA TIONS. \Chap. iv.
the loose stuff from around the shafts, without having special directions ; and
often there was a long slope of 15 feet high of rubbish, just at the angle of
rest, over one side of a shaft : this needed to be cut away and walled back.
Both the excavators and myself had narrow escapes from tons of stuff suddenly
slipping in, sometimes just after I or they had been at the bottom of the
shaft: the deep Southern shaft no one but Negroes would work in at the
last As I did not uncover the casing on the North side, I did not consider
it incumbent on me to cover it over again ; and the casing down the shafts
is safe from damage, as it is too troublesome and dangerous for the Arabs
to try to break it or carry it off: it would be far easier for them to work out
more loose pieces from the rubbish.
Besides these shafts, many pits and trenches were dug to imcover the
outer edge of the pavement For the basalt pavement the edge of the
rock bed of it was traced on N.E. and S. ; but no edge could be found on
the West It was cleared at the centre, where the trenches converge, and was
there found to be all torn up and lying in confusion, along with many wrought
blocks of red granite. Further out from the Pyramid it was perfect in some
parts, as when first laid. The trenches were cleared at tlie ends, where
necessary ; the North trench was dug into as far as nine feet below the sand
at present filling it, or about eighteen feet below the rock around it, but
nothing but sand was found ; the E.N.E. trench was cleared by cuttings
across and along it, so as to find the bottom of each p2irt, and make certain
that no passage led out of it; the N.N.E. trench was cleared by pits along
it, and traced right up to the basalt pavement The trench near the N.E.
comer of the Pyramid was cleared in most parts, and the rock cuttings around it
were also cleared, but re-filled, as the carriage road runs over them. Thus
altogether 85 shafts, pits, or trenches were excavated around the Great
Pyramid.
15. At the Second Pyramid it was not so necessary to find actual casing,
as it was arranged differently : the bottom course of casing had an upright
foot 10 or 12 inches high, at the bottom of its slope, not ending in a sharp
edge, like the Great Pyramid casing, which was very liable to injury. The
end of the slope being thus raised up already some way, the pavement was
built against the upright face, and to get depth enough for the paving blocks,
the rock outside the casing was cut away. Thus the casing actually stood
on a raised square of rock, some few inches above the rock outside it (see
PI. xii.), and the edge of this raised square was further signalized by having
holes along it (5 to 10 inches long and about half as wide), to receive the
ends of the levers by which the blocks were moved. This arrangement is
very clearly shown near the W. end of the S. side, where a block of casing
remains, but slightly shifted ; and therefore, where this raised edge was
p.
31
Sect. i6.] THIRD PYRAMID, CASING, ETC. 31
found in other parts, it was accepted as being equivalent in position to
the foot of the casing slope, without needing to find actual casing in each
place.
At the N.E. corner the raised edge was found, scarcely covered over. On
the E. side two pits were sunk, and the edge was found in one at the S. end.
The edge was cleared at the S.E. corner. On the S. side the edge was found
at the E. end, and the casing in situ cleared at the W. end. The S.W. corner of
the edge was cleared. On the W. side the edge was found at the N. end. The
N.W. corner was cleared, but no edge was found there. On the N. side the
edge was found at the W. end. Thus the raised edge was found and fixed at
eleven points around the PjTamid. The Joints of the platform of huge blocks on
the E. of it were partly cleaned to show the sizes of the stones. Three pits
were tried on the N.W. of the Pyramid, and the edge of the rock bed of the
pavement was found in two of them. Two trenches were made to examine the
edge of the great rock cutting on the N. side of the Pyramid.
Twenty-three trenches and sixty-seven pits were dug to uncover parts of
the great peribolus walls of this Pyramid. Thus it was found that all the heaps
and ridges, hitherto called "lines of stone rubbish," were built walls of unhewn
stone, mud plastered, with ends of squared stone, like atitce. The great
barracks, consisting of a mile and a half length of galleries, was thus opened.
Many fragments of early statues in diorite, alabaster, and quartzite, were found,
as well as early pottery, in the galleries ; though not a five-hundredth of their
whole extent was uncovered. The great hewnstone wall, built of enormous
blocks, on the N. side of the Pyramid, was examined by pits ; and quarry marks
were found on the S. sides of the blocks. Two retaining walls of unhewn stone,
like those of the galleries, were found in the large heap of chips, which is banked
against the great N. wall These retaining walls contained waste pieces of
granite and basalt The great platform of chips, tipped out by the builders
beyond the S. peribolus wall, was cut into in two places. Some early pottery
was found ; and it was evident, from the regular stratification, that it had been
undisturbed since it was shot there in the time of Khafra. Altogether, 108 pits
and trenches were opened around the Second Pyramid.
16. At the Third Pyramid it was necessary to clear the casing at the base
level; and this was a more troublesome place to work on than any other.
Howard Vyse reports that he abandoned his work here on account of the great
difficulty and danger of it The material to be removed consists entirely of
large blocks of granite weighing a ton and upwards, which lie embedded in
loose sand ; hence, whenever the sand was removed in digging a hole, it ran
down from the sides, and so let one of the large blocks drop into the hole. The
most successful way of getting through it was to bring up other stones and
place them so as to form a ring of blocks wedged together around the hole, and
EXCA VA TIONS. \Chap. iv.
dms supporting one another. As there is no clear setting for the casing here
as there is in the Second Pyramid, and as the substratum had been removed at
the eastern corners, it was necessary to find the casing foot near each end of
the SL6.C&, and not to trust to the comers. There was no difficulty in finding
easily stones, as the casing still remains above the rubbish heaps on every side ;
the woric was to get down to the foot of it This was done at the E. end of the
N. ade, at both ends of the E. side, at both ends of the S. side, and at the S.
end of the W. side. The N. W. comer was very deeply buried, and several trials
«ae made to get down, but without finding any place sufficiently clear of the
great granite blocks ; here, therefore, I had to be content with fixing the edge of
the fifth course of casing, which stood above ground, and projecting this down
at the observed angle by calculation. Seven points in all were thus fixed, of
the intended finished surface of the original casing at the bottom course.
Beadesthis, eighty-four pits were made along the peribolus walls of this Pyramid;
these holes showed that the walls were all built like those of the Second
Pyramid, but less carefully. Ninety-one pits in all were made around the Third
Pyramid. This makes a total of 284 shafts, pits, or trenches, sunk in the hill of
Gnefa ; and in almost every case the objects sought were found.
17. Some few details may be useful to future explorers. The tools used were
tibe ordinary native forms, with a few English tools for special purposes, as have
been described. Of supervision the Arabs require a good deal to prevent their
loonging, and Ali Gabri looked well after them, proving zealous and careful in
the work : I, also, went out with them every morning, allotting their work for the
day; then visiting them generally just before noon; and again before thty left
ofl^ in the afternoon. Going thus round to six or eight places some way apart,
and often stopping to direct and help the men, occupied most of the day. It is
particularly necessary never to put more men on a spot than are absolutely needed
to wtjrk together ; generally each isolated party was only a man and one or two
boys ; thus there was no shirking of the individual responsibility of each man to
get through his work. Every man was told what his party had to dp, and
if they were lazy, they were separated and allotted with good workers,
where they would be closely watched. The men were allowed to choose their
«t>rk somewhat, according to their strength and capabilities ; and if any man
gnunbled he was changed to different work, or dismissed. A very friendly
^Hiit, with a good deal of zeal to get through tough jobs, was kept up all the
time by personal attention to each man, and without any extra stimulus of
bakhshish, either during or after the work. The wages I offered, and freely
obtained labour for, were rather above what excavators are required to work for
by the Museum ; but were far less than what had been paid there before by
Enropeans. For ordinary work the rate was lod. a day, and 6d. for boys ; for
wt>rfc inside the Pyramid, is. a daj', and 7jd. for boj's. The men were paid
p.
33
Stct. 17.] WORKMEN. 33
weekly, and no attempts were made to impose, as I kept a daily register of the
number employed, Ali received what I always paid him while I was living
there, £1 a week, and 4s. for his slave and nephew sleeping in the next tomb as
guards ; for this he was always at my disposal for work (though I did not
occupy half of his time), and he made all purchases and arrangements with the
neighbours, besides keeping me quite free from molestation or black-mailing by
the other Arabs.
p.
34
34 CO-ORDINATES OF STATION MARKS AT THE PYRAMIDS. [Chap. v.
CHAPTER V.
CO-ORDINATES OF STATION MARKS AT THE PYRAMIDS.
1 8. The station marks of the triangulation consist of holes drilled in the
rock or stone, and filled with blue-tinted plaster, as already described
(sec. lo). Where great accuracy was needed a graphite pencil lead was put
vertically into the plaster. Thus the mark may be scraped clean, if bruised or
defaced, without destroying the mark. To enable the station-mark holes of
about |-inch diameter to be readily found, and at the same time to draw off
attention from them, two J-inch holes, similarly filled, are drilled, in most cases
one on each side of each station mark, at 5 inches from it, to the N.E. and S.W.
I also utilized some few of Mr. Gill's bronze station marks, that had escaped the
attention of the Arabs. The less important stations, of the rock trenches,
are merely marked by a single J-inch hole, filled with blue plaster. The
general position of the station marks are shown in the plan of the triangulation
on PI. i.
19. The co-ordinates of the station marks, &c., are reckoned from a line
beyond the N. side of the whole area, and from a line beyond the E, side of the
area : thus there are no minus quantities. The azimuth of true North on the
system of co-ordinates is East of the approximate North of the system, or the
azimuth of its Eastern boundary, by
+ 1° 12' 22"±6"
and the value of the unit of co-ordinates in British inches is
•ooso82S9±-ooooooo3 log. 706085 3 ±-00000 17
or the number of units in the inch
l967So±'OOi log. -2939 147 ±-00000 1 7
Stcl. 19.}
TABLE OF CO-ORDINATES.
3S
Table of Co-ordinates of Marked Stations.
Place.
S.W. corner of the 9th Pyramid
N. side of and Pyramid Temple
N. side of 3rd Pyramid Temple
Top block of Sth Pyramid
N. side of 3rd Pyramid
Rock of hill, W. of ist Pyramid
Tomb, No. 17, Lepsius
Hillock S.E. of 3rd Pyramid
Top of large building E. of 3rd Pyramid
Pile of slabs N.E. of ist Pyramid
Slab in ground N. of entrance of ist Pyramid (Gill)
Tomb N.W. of N.W. corner „
Tomb W. of „ „ „
N.W. socket of „
Edge of floor of passage of „
N.E. socket of „
Staff on top of „
W. side of 7th Pyramid
E. side rubbish heap of ist Pyramid
S.E. socket of „ „
S. side on masonry of „
S.W. socket of „ „
W. side rubbish heap of „ „
Tomb, No. 44, Lepsius „ „
E. end of base line, on block of basalt
W
Masonry above, and W. of, door, 2nd Pyramid
N.W.cornerofrock cutting round „
N.W. corner „
N.E. corner „
S.E. corner (on masonry) „
S.W. comer „
W. side of rock cutting round „
Wall W. of 3rd Pyramid .
N. side of 4th Pyramid
N.W. corner of masonry of 3rd Pyramid
^'l;* i» II » »
S-E. „ „ ^ „
NE. „ „ „ „
Masonry below door, ist Pyramid
N. end of North Trench
S. end of .... ...
Letter
(Gill)
(Gill)
(Gill)
(Gill)
(Gill)
(Gill)
(Gill)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
a
I
I
I
K
X
V
w
p
c
From North. From East.
3 987 140
S 393 798
8 382 2SS
9 143 054
8 072 225
4 246 813
3 000 000
ID 092 621
828 554
300 292
908 159
483 587
848 869
844 679
993 386
880 871
7S6 484
007 571
706 202
672 Si8
523 071
634 188
745 956
926 171
415 043
306 415
732 762
146 945
592 901
632 817
251 313
6 262 182
S 9So'i48
7 563 291
9 054 182
8 035 816
8 761 57S
8 786 405
8 038 069
1 935 512
2 082 608
2 514 650?
935 234
3 411 980
5 839 239
6 836 560
6 840 249
8 132 966
6 cxx> cxx)
571 047
491 863
425 399
242 158
431 388
136 068
173 572
221 893
381 354
298 662
915 729
I 477 899
1 417 048
2 369 777
206 895
073 389
863 947
704 140
255 538
900 971
5 968 245
5 758 968
4 092 173
4 157 284
5 785 021
6 000 994
8 109 839
7 586 701
7 200 134
7 230 130
6 488 386
6 485 183
2 249 041
I 180 207
I 17s 360?
CO-ORDINATES OF STATION MARKS AT THE PYRAMIDS. [Chap. v.
Table of Co-ordinates of Marked Stations.
PUce.
Letter
From North.
From East.
N. end of South Trench
S. end of „ „
W. end of E.N.E. „
E. end of „ ,
S. end of Trial passages
N. end of „ „
r
V
I
(If
3 051 826
3 463 988
2 678 581
2 648 862
2 549 708
2 350 481
I 184 632
I 180 826
881 16S
568 721
721 984
718 038
Resulting Co-ordinates of Points of Ancient Construction.
Casing edge on N. side of ist Pyramid
p
fi n *-*' » it ft
C
l» » "■ » » M
W
If n ""If If sf
N.E. comer of casing of „ „
O..C#» II n » fi
5>-"" >i » If u
W.W. M » If fi
Centre of
N.E. corner
o.£« II
S.W. „
N.W. .1
Centre of
N.E. comer
S.W. „
N.W. „
Centre of
of casing of 2nd Pyramid
of casing of 3rd Pyramid
n
»
II '
II
866 612
671 090
646 300
664 836
632 521
848 772
758 515
630 771
297 958
265 598
598 359
448 171
998 215
'8 814 325
8 793 987
7 976 980
8 395 877
281 355
401 430
51S 643
185 923
385 77^
421 276
205 19s
169 668
295 478
089 656
121 664
5 789 181
5 756 193
4 939 173
6 437 758
6 457 924
7 275 727
7 255 560?
6 856 742
p.
37
SecLio. RELATION OF SOCKETS TO CASING. 37
CHAPTER VI.
OUTSIDE OF GREAT PYRAMID.
20. The materials available for a discussion of the original size of the base
of the Great Pyramid are : — (i) the casing in situ upon the pavement, in the
middle of each face ; (2) the rock-cut sockets at each corner ; (3) the levels of
the pavement and sockets ; and (4) the mean planes of the present core
masonry.
Since the time of the first discovery of some of the sockets in 1801, it has
always been supposed that they defined the original extent of the Pyramid, and
various observers have measured from comer to corner of them, and thereby
obtained a dimension which was — without further inquiry — put down as the
length of the base of the Pyramid. But, inasmuch as the sockets are on different
levels, it was assumed that the faces of the stones placed in tliem rose up
vertically from the edge of the bottom, until they reached the pavement (whatever level that might be) from whicli the sloping face started upwards. Hence
it was concluded that the distances of the socket corners were equal to the
lengths of the Pyramid sides upon the pavement.
Therefore, when reducing my ober\-ations, after the first wnter. I found that
the casing on the North side (the only site of it then known) lay about 30 inches
inside the line joining the sockets, I searched again and again for any flaw in
the calculations. But there were certain check measures, beside the regular
checked triangulation, which agreed in the same story ; another clue, however,
explained it, as we shall see.
The form of the present rough core masonry of the Pyramid is capable of
being very closely estimated. By looking across a face of the Pyramid, either
up an edge, across the middle of the face, or even along near the base, the mean
optical plane which would touch the most prominent points of all the stones,
may be found with an average variation at different times of only I'o inch. I
therefore carefully fixed, by nine observations at each comer of each face,
where the mean plane of each face would fall on the socket floors ; using
a straight rod as a guide to the eye in estimating. On reducing these observations to give the mean form of the core planes at the pavement level, it
came out thus : —
OUTSIDE OF GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vi.
Case Plane
Sides.
Azimuths.
1 Socket Sides.
Azimnths.
N.
E.
S.
W.
90023
8999-4
9001-7
9002-5
-4' 35"
-5' 26"
-5'23"
-5' 39"
9129-8
9130-8
9123-9
9119-2
-3'^cy
-5' 21"
+ i'iS"
-7-33"
Mean
Mean )
DifTerence J
9OOI-S
- 5' 16"
20"
9125-9
4-4
-3' 45"
2'4«"
Here, then, was another apparently unaccountable fact, namely, that the
core masonry was far more accurate in its form than the socket square. It is,
in fact, four times as accurate in length, and eight times as accurate in angle.
This forced me to the conclusion that the socket lines cannot show the finished
base of the Pyramid.
The due which explains all these difficulties is — that the socket corners
vary from a true square in proportion to their depth below the pavement, the
sockets nearer the centre being higher.
This means that the sockets were cut to receive the foot of the sloping face,
which was continued right down to their floors, beneath the pavement. (See
PI. xL)
Hence the sockets only show the size of the Pyramid, where it was started
from varying levels, which were all under the pavement ; and its true base upon
the pavement is therefore 20 or 30 inches inside the lines of the sockets.
This exactly explains the position of the casing found on the N. side, as it
was found to be inside the line of the sockets.
The test, then, of this explanation, was to find the casing on the other sides,
fix its position, and see if it was likewise within the lines of the sockets. The
shafts were accordingly sunk through the rubbish, two or three feet inside the
socket lines ; and the casing was found on each side, just in the expected alignment- Without this clue, the narrow shafts might easily have missed the casing
altogether, by being sunk too far out from the Pyramid.
Now having found the casing foot on each side of the Pyramid, it is settled
that the faces must have passed through these fixed points, and when the casing
was duly projected down at its angle of slope to the socket floors, it was found
to fall on an average 4 inches inside the edges of the socket comers. This is
what might be expected, as the socket sides are neither straight nor square ; so
that this margin would be much less at a minimum than it is at their corners ;
and it would be natural to allow some free space, in which to adjust the
stone.
Sect. 31.]
LENGTH OF SIDES OF CASING.
yi
21. Having, then, four lines passing through the middles of the sides, what
is to define the junctions of those lines at the corners ? Or, in other words,
what defines their azimuth? Was each side made equidistant (i) from its
socket's sides ? or, (2) from the core side at each of its ends ? Or was a corner
made equidistant (3) from the sides of its socket corner ? or, (4) from the sides
of its core comer ? The core may be put out of the question ; for if the sides
followed it exactly in any way, they would run outside of the sockets in some
parts: Which, then, is most likely : that the sockets were placed with an equal
amount of mai^^ aUowed on the two ends of one side, or with an equal margin
allowed at both sides of one comer ? The latter, certainly, is most likely ; it
would be too strange to allow, say, 6 inches margin on one side of a socket, and
only 2 inches on its adjacent side. It seems, then, that we are shut up to the
idea that the socket corners lie in the diagonals of the Pyramid casing.
But there is another test of this arrangement, which it ought to satisfy.
Given four diagonals, as defined by the socket corners ; and given four points
near the middles of the sides of the Pyramid, as defined by the existing casing : if
we start from one diagonal, say N.E. ; draw a line through the E. casing to
S.E. diagonal ; from that through the S. casing, to the S.W. diagonal ; and so
on, round to the N.E diagonal again ; there is no necessity that the line should
on its return fall on the same point as that from which we started : it might as
easily, apart from special design, fall by chance anywhere else. The chances
are greatly against its exactly completing its circuit thus, unless it was so
planned before by the diagonals of the socket corners being identical with those
of the squcire of the casing.
On applying this test to the diagonals of the sockets, we find that the
circuit unites, on being carried round through these points, to within 'l inch ;
far closer, in fact, than the diagonals of the sockets and the line of the casing
can be estimated.
This is, then, a conclusive test ; and we only need to compute a square that
shall pass throu^ the points of the casing found on each side, and having also
its comers lying on the diagonals of the sockets.
This square of the original base of the Great Pyramid casing on the
platform, is of these dimensions : —
Length.
Difference
from Mean.
Azimuth.
Difference
from Mean.
N. . .
E.. .
S. . .
W.. .
9069.4
90677
9069-5
90686
+ -6
- i-i
+ 7
- -2
- 3' 20"
- 3' 57';
-3' 41'
-3' 54"
+ 23"
Mean.
9068-8
•65
-3' 43"
12"
OUTSIDE OF GREAT PYRAMID.
Chap. vi.
Thus the finished base of the Pyramid had only two-thirds of the
irregularity of the core masonry, the mean difference of which was i*o inch
and 20" ; this is what would be expected from a final adjustment of the work,
after the rougher part was finished.
But it must always be remembered that this very small mean error of
•65 inch and 12" is that of the sockets, and not that of the casing stones ; these
latter we can hardly doubt would be adjusted more carefully than the cutting
of the sockets with their free margin.
Also it must be remembered that this result includes the errors of survey.
Now the probable errors of fixing the plumb-lines in the triangulation were
about '2 on E. side, "2 on S. side, T on W. side, and the casing 'i on N. side;
the probable errors of the triangulation of the points of reference is in general
much less than this ; we may then say ±'3 for the absolute places of the plumblines. The exact amount of this is not of so much consequence, because the
errors of estimating the original points of construction are larger. They are, on
the N., ±'04 ; on the E., ±'2 ; but another less satisfactory estimate differed v\ ;
on the S., ±*2 ; on the W., ±"5, taking the mean of two points that differed ri
inches. Besides this, the estimation of the socket diagonals cannot be put
under ±'S by the bad definition of the edges and want of straightness and
orientation of the sides. If we then allow that the probable errors from all
sources of our knowledge, of each of the original sides of the Pyramid amount
to ±'6, we shall not over-estimate them. Hence it is scarcely to be expected
that our determinations of the sides should agree closer than '65 inch, as they do
on an average.
So we must say that the mean errors of the base of the Great Pyramid were
somewhat less than "6 inch, and 12" of angle.
22. In computing the above quantities, I have used my final determination
of the socket levels below the pavement; these, with the first approximate
results, and Inglis's figures, stand thus : —
N.E.
S.E,
S.W.
N.W.
Accurate in 1882.
-28s
-39'9
-230
-328
Approximate in 1881.
-287
-399
-229
-32-6
Inglis in 1865.
-28-6
— 42'2
-230
-32-8
the level of the pavement being zero. The approximation was very roughly
done, and it is strange that it should agree as well with the accurate determination as it does. From Inglis's measures I have subtracted 286, in order to
reckon them from the pavement level ; by the exact agreement of my two
p.
41
Secf.33] LEVELS UP THE PYRAMID. 41
levellings at the S.E. (which was taken second in the series each time, and hence
is checked by othe thers), I conclude that Inglis is there in error by a couple of
inches ; and his other work, in measuring the steps, conta'ns much larger
errors than this.
The relations, then, of the core masonry, the base of the casing on the pavement, the edge of the casing in the sockets, and the socket edges, are shown in
PI. X., to a scale of its. The position of the station marks is also entered. The
inclinations of the various sides of sockets and casing are stated ; and it is
noticeable that the core masonry has a twist in the same direction on each side,
showing that the orientation of the Pyramid was slightly altered between fixing
the sockets and the core. The mean skew of the core to the base is i' 33", and
its mean azimuth - 5' 16" to true North. The diagram also shows graphically how
much deformed is the square of the socket lines ; and how the highest socket
(S.W.) is nearest to the centre of the Pyramid ; and the lowest socket (S.E.) is
furthest out from the centre of the socket diagonals, and also from the mean
planes of the core.
23. For ascertaining the height of the Pyramid, we have accurate levels of
the courses up the N.E. and S.W. comers ; and also hand measurements up all
four comers. The levels were all read to riu inch, to avoid cumulative errors ;
but in stating them in PI. viii., I have not entered more than tenths of an inch,
having due regard to the irregularities of the surfaces.* The discrepancy of '2
inch in the chain of levels (carried from the N.E. to S.E., to S.W., on the ground,
thence to the top, across top, and down to N.E. again), I have put all together
at the junction of levelling at the 2nd course of the S.W., as I considered that
the least certain point. It may very likely, however, be distributed throughout
the whole chain, as it only amounts to i'8" on the whole run.
These levels, though important for the heights of particular courses, have
scarcely any bearing on the question of the total height of the original peak of
the casing of the pyramid ; because we have no certain knowledge of the thickness of the casing on the upper parts.
The zero of levels that I have adopted, is a considerable flat-dressed surface
of rock at the N.E. comer, which is evidently intended to be at the level of the
pavement ; it has the advantage of being always accessible,, and almost indestructible. From this the levels around the Pyramid stand thus : —
N,E. E. S.E. S, S.W. W. W.N.W. N.W. N.
2nd Course -H077 „, -t- 105.5 ••• +111*2 -f 1 066 -<- 107-4
ist „ -f- 586 -I- 576 + 580+ 589
Levelled / o E.N.E.
rock \- •I5N,N.E.
Pavement -(yf ... -55? ... -fri?-r2? ... ^■■
Socket - 285 ,.. - 39-9 ,,, - 230 - 32-8 ...
• Owing to mistaking (in a photograph) the rock bed of the pavement for the pavement
G
4' OUTSIDE OF GREA T P YRAMID. \Ckap. vi.
The pavement levels, excepting that on the N. side below the entrance, are not
of the same accuracy as the other quantities ; they were taken without an assistant, merely for the purpose of showing that it really was the pavement on which
the casing was found to rest on each side. The differences of the 1st course
levels, probably show most truly the real errors of level of the base of the
Pyramid.
24. To obtain the original height of the Pyramid, we must depend on the
observations of its angle. For this there are several data, as follows ; the
method by which the passage and air channels determine it being explained in
detail further on, when the internal parts are discussed : —
Weight.
Casing stones, in situ, N. side, by theodolite . . 51° 46' 45" ± 2' 7" 7
(To three points on top and three on base.)
„ „ „ „ by goniometer and level 51° 49' i' 2
„ „ „ „ by steel square and level 51° 44' 11 23" o
„ „ 5 overthrown by goniometer ... 51° 52' 2' o
„ „ 18 fragments, all sides, „ • • • Si° S3' 4' o
(All above 2 inches in shortest length.)
N. face, by entrance passage mouth .... 51° 53' 20" 1' 10
N. face, by air channel mouth 51" 51' 30" 20" 5
N. face, weighted mean 51** 50' 40" l' 5"
S. face, by air channel mouth Si" 57' 3o" 20"
In assigning the weights to these different data, the reason that no weight
is given to the angles of shifted casing stones is that there is no proof that the
courses did not dip inwards somewhat ; on the contrary, I continually observed
that the courses of the core had dips of as much as \° to 1°; so that it is not at
all certain that the courses of the casing were truly level to s' or 10', and
occasional specimens showed angles up to 54**. The angle by means of the
large steel square was vitiated by the concretion on the faces of the stones being
thicker below than above, • i inch of difference making an error of 6'. The
small goniometer was applied to the clear patches of the stone, selected in nine
different parts. These three casing stones in situ have not as much weight
assigned to them as they would otherwise have, owing to their irregularities.
One of them is 0*9 in front of the other at the top, though flush at the base — a
difference of 4'. The datum from the air channel, though far more accurate
than that by the pjissage mouth (being on a longer length), is not so certainly
Intentional, and is therefore not worth as much. (See sections 32 and 33 for
itself ProC Smyth has entered all the levels in his works (both of his own measures and
those of others) from a datum 20 inches below the true pavement level. This has led him to
reckon the first course as two ; hence all his course numbers must have one subtracted, and all
his levels about 30 inches subtracted, to reduce them to a true start from the pavement suriace.
Sea. 26.]
CASIXG OF THE PYRAMID.
details.) From all these considerations the above weighting was adopted. It
is clear that the South face should not be included with the North, in taking
the mean, as we have no guarantee that the Pyramid was equiangular, and
vertical in its axis.
25. The staff which was set up by the Transit of Venus party in 1874
on the top of the Pyramid, was included in my triangulation ; and its place is
known within ± J inch. From this staff, the distances to the mean planes of
the core masonry of the Pyramid sides, were determined by sighting over their
prominent edges, just as the positions of the mean planes were fixed at the
lower comers of the faces. Hence we know the relation of the present top of
the core masonry to the base of the Pyramid. The top is, rather strangely, not
square, although it is so near to the original apex. This was verified carefully
by an entire measurement as follows : —
-
Mean of fonr
reading 1881.
Mean of three
readings, liiSa.
Mean of all.
/N.side .
E. side .
S. side .
W.side .
2260 ± "5
214-4 -4
215-0 '6
2164 -5
2237 ± -2
213-8 -6
2150 -4
2187 -5
2245 ± 7
214-1 '3
2IS-0 -4
217-6 1.0
Centre of Pyramid base
horizontally to the
Now, at the level of these measurements, 5407-9 at N.E., or 5409-2 at S.W.,
above the base, the edges of the casing (by the angles of the N. and S. side
found above) will be 285-3 * 27 on the North, and 30r6 on the South side,
from the vertical axis of the centre. Thus there would remain for the casing
thickness 6o-8 ± 3 on the N., and 86-6 on the S. ; with jyS for the mean of E.
and W. Or, if the angle on the S. side were the same as on the N., the casing
thickness would be 69-2 on the S. This, therefore, seems to make it more likely
that the South side had about the same angle as the North.
On the whole, we probably caimot do better than take 5 1" 52' ±2' as the
nearest approximation to the mean angle of the Pyramid, allowing some weight
to the South side.
The mean base being 9068-8 ± "5 inches, this yields a height of 5776-0 ± 7*0
inches.
26. With regard to the ca^g, at the top it must — by the above data —
average about 71 ± 5 inches in thickness from the back to the top edge of each
stone. Now the remaining casing stones on the N. base are of an unusual
height, and therefore we may expect that their thickness on the top would be
rather less, and on the bottom rather more, than the mean of all. Their top
thickness averages 62 ± 8 (the bottom being 108 ± 8), and it thus agrees very
fairly with 71 ± 5 inches. At the comers, however, the casing was thinner,
averaging but 337 (difference of core plane and casing on pavement) ; and this
is explained by the faces of the core masonry being very distinctly hollowed.
OUTSIDE OF GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vi.
This hollowing is a striking feature ; and beside the general curve of the face,
each side has a sort of groove spedaily down the middle of the face, showing
that there must have been a sudden increase of the casing thickness down the
mid-line. The whole of the hollowing was estimated at 37 on the N. face ; and
adding this to the casing thickness at the comers, we have 70'7, which just
agrees with the result from the top (71 ± 5), and the remaining stones (62 ± 8).
The object of such an extra thickness down the mid-line of each face might be
to put a specially fine line of casing, carefully adjusted to the required angle on
each side ; and then afterwards setting all the remainder by reference to that
line and the base.
Several measures were taken of the thickness of the joints of the casing
stones. The eastern joint of the northern casing stones is on the top "020,
■002, "045 wide ; and on the face "012, '022, X)i3, and '040 wide. The next joint
is on the face "Oi i and "014 wide: Hence the mean thickness of the joints there
is "020 ; and, therefore, the mean variation of the cutting of the stone from a
straight line and from a true square, is but "Oi on length of 75 inches up the
face, an amount of accuracy equal to most modem opticians' straight-edges of
such a length. These joints, with an area of some 35 square feet each, were not
only worked as finely as this, but cemented throughout Though the stones
were brought as close as bot inch, or, in fact, into contact, and the mean opening
of the joint was but A inch, yet the builders managed to fill the joint with cement,
despite the great area of it, and the weight of the stone to be moved — some 16
tons. To merely place such stones in exact contact at the sides would be
careful work ; but to do so with cement in the joint seems almost impossible
The casing is remarkably well levelled at the base ; the readings on the
stones of the North side, and the pavement by them being thus : —
Casing I
Core
Pavement
Front. .
Back ..
W. End.
+ 58-83
+ 58-84
[--56]
Middle.
+ 5884
[-•30]
E. End.
+ 58-90
+ 58-85
[-•OS]
Pavement by
Casing.
— •01
-•03
+ •02
Core 40 ft. E.
of Casing.
+ 58-87
The pavement levels in brackets are on decidedly worn parts, and hence below
the normal level, as shown in the fourth column. The average variation of
the casing from a level plane of + 58"85 is but •02 ; and the difference to the core
level, at the farthest part accessible in that excavation, does not exceed this.
The difiference of pavement le\-el out to the rock at the N.E. corner is but
*I7 on a distance of 4,200 inches, or 8" of angle.
27. The works around the P>Tamid, that are connected with it, are : — (i) The
limestone pavement surrounding it ; (2) the basalt pavement on the E. side ;
and (3) the rock trenches and cuttings on the E. side, and at the N.E. corner.
p.
45
Sect. 27-] PAVEMENT OF THE PYRAMID. 45
The limestone pavement was found on the N. side first by Howard Vyse,
having a maximum remaining width of 402 inches ; but the edge of this part is
broken and irregular, and there is mortar on the rock beyond it, showing that
it has extended further. On examination I found the edge of the rock-cut bed
in which it was laid, and was able to trace it in many parts. At no part has
the paving been found complete up to the edge of its bed or socket, and it
is not certain, therefore, how closely it fitted into it ; perhaps there was a
margin, as around the casing stones in the corner sockets. The distances of
the edge of this rock-cut bed, from the edge of the finished casing on the
pavement (square of 9068-8) were fixed by triangulation as follows : —
N.N.W. 6169 near the corner ; comer itself not found, nor any W.N.W.
side.
615-9 ^t S70 E. of probable N.W. corner of pavement
6187 at 670 „ „ „ „
6162 at 890 „ „ „ „
N. side < ^Qr^ 1^ very rough and irregular, opposite entrance.
N.N.E. 5290 at N.E. corner, N. side of it.
E.N.E. 5388 „ „ „ E. side of it.
5339 at 586 from N.E. corner.
No cutting found at S.E. corner.
536-5 at 846 from S.W. corner.
533"0 at 520
534-6 at 206
S.S.W. 529-6 at S.W. corner, S. side of it.
W.S.W. 536X) „ „ W. side of it.
627-9 at 751 from S.W. corner.
From these measures it appears that there is no regularity in the width of the
cutting ; the distance from the casing varying 99 inches, and altering rapidly
even on a single side. The fine paving may possibly have been regular, with a
filling of rougher stone beyond it in parts ; but if so, it cannot have exceeded
529 in width.
The levels of the various works around the Pyramid are as follow, taken
from the pavement as zero : —
Flat rock-bed of pavement W. of N.W. socket
» „ „ beside N.W. „ ...
N. of N.W
N.E. of N.W. „ ...
n » n before entrance
» I) ,, inner end of E.N.E. trench
Basalt pavement, E. side of it
II „ W. side, in excavation
.
- 237
.
— 21-6
.
— 17-0
.
- 15-9
,
- 27-1
— 26-9
•
+ 2-0
•
+ 2-0
p.
46
46 OUTSIDE OF GREAT PYRAMID. [Chap, H.
The Pjrramid pavement must then have varied from 17 to 27 inches in thickness ;
it was measured as 21 inches where found by Vyse.
28. The basalt pavement is a magnificent work, which covered more
than a third of an acre. The blocks of basalt are all sawn and fitted
together; they are laid upon a bed of limestone, which is of such a fine
quality that the Arabs lately destroyed a large part of the work to extract
the limestone for burning. I was assured that the limestone invariably
occurs under every block, even though in only a thin layer. Only about a
quarter of this pavement remains in situ, and none of it around the edges ;
the position of it can therefore only be settled by the edge of the rock-cut
bed of it This bed was traced by excavating around its N., E., and S. sides ;
but on the inner side, next to the Pyramid, no edge could be found ; and
considering how near it approached to the normal edge of the limestone
pavement, and that it is within two inches of the same level as that, it seems
most probable that it joined it, and hence the lack of any termination of its bed.
Referring, then, to the E. side of the Pyramid, and a central line at right
angles to that (see Fl. ii.), the dimensions of the rock bed of the basalt
paving are thus : —
North to South.
— _ ., ,. c-a —'J f 1046-0 to N.E. 10610 to N.W'
From mid-lme of Pyramid . . . •[ ,^7.7 to S.E. 1062-8 to S.W.
Total length . . . 2123-7 E. side. 2124-7 W. side.
S. comer of opening on E. side . . 321*0 to mid. 756-7 to S.E.
N. „ „ „ . . 693-3 „ 352-7 to N.E.
East to West.
Width traced 1006 6 + «.
E. side, from Pyramid base •. {2I48-0 S.'lnd*
S. comer of opening on E. side to base .... 2169-0
N. „ „ „ „ 21600
Next, referring this pavement to the trench lines: —
North to South.
N. trench, inner end from basalt S'S'i
S. trench, inner end from basalt 3^7*9
East to West,
(N.E. comer to N. trench axis 1073*2
(.N. trench axis tlure, to Pyramid 1079-8
rS.E. comer to S. trench axis 1022-6
jS. trench axis //^^r^, to Pyramid 1 125-8
f S.E. comer to N. trench axis, continued 1075-0
^N. trench axis tJure, to Pyramid 10730
Sict 39.
ROCK TRENCHES.
Hence the plan of the basalt pavement seems to be two adjacent squares of
about 1,060 inches in the side ; the N. trench axis being the boundary of
them, and there being a similar distance between that and the Pyramid.
The outer side of the paving was laid off tolerably parallel to the Pyramid
base ; but the angles are bad, running i S inches skew.*
29. Next, referring to the rock-hewn trenches alone, the dimensions of
the three deep ones are as follow : —
North to South.
N. trench, outer end, to central line
„ „ axial length
„ „ inner end, to central line
S. trench, „ „ „
„ „ axial length
„ „ outer end, to central line
E.N.E. trench, outer end of axis N. of central line
„ „ axis cuts N. trench axis N. of central line
East to West.
N. trench axis, outer end to base
„ „ ,1 inner „ „ , _ , .
S. trench axis, inner end to base .
» » » outer „
„ „ „ E. of N. trench axis, at centre
E.N.E. trench, outer end of axis to base
„ „ axial length from N. trench axis
„ „ „ „ from actual bed of basal
•■ » ,, from straight edge
The slighter trenches are three in number : —
North to South.
N.N.E. trench axis cuts N. trench axis N. of central line
Trench by N.E, socket, end of axis from N. side of casing
„ „ on the axis, from N. side of casing
Trench by trial passages, ends of axis N. of central line
East to West.
N.N.E. trench, axis cuts pavement, from N.E. corner .
Trench by N.E. socket, end of axis from E. side of casing
„ „ on the axis, from E. side of casing
Trench by trial passages, ends of axis E. of Pyramid base
35 IO-2
2130-2
13800
13907
20937
34304
68s
1085-5
1 0806
1 125-4
1 122-9
42132
323 1 I
21 12-6
2124-7
1 16-0
1630-8
c
I563'3
274-4
647-2
203-2
434-1
r 3161-6
•13167-6
• The broken blocks of basalt, which border a track down the hill side E. of the
Pyramid, are aknost certainly from this pavement ; they are of exactly the same stone, and
have many worked faces remaining like those of the pavement. Their placing is quite
rude, and looks as if done by some barbarian destroyers.
OUTSIDE OF GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vi.
The subterranean passages are in one group : —
North to South.
Trial passages axis, N. of central line, at the station marks
East to West.
Trial passages axis, E. of central line, at the station marks
/ 223315
• \ I220-8
E. Face of Pyramid.
To true North.
+ / 53"
+ 3' 56"
+ 4' 9"
+ 12,
+ 76" 2' 26 '
+ 75° 58' 23'
+ 24" 25' 34'
+ 24" 21' 37"
+ 13° 9' 38"
+ 13" 5' 41"
- 1' II'
- I" 15'
+ 18' 40"
+ 14' 43"
/ 34467
■ I 3441-2
Hence it seems that the axial length of the E.N.E. trench outside the basalt
paving is intended to be the same as the axial length of the North and
South trenches.
The angles of the axes of these trenches are as follow : —
N. trench
S. trench
E.N.E. trench
N.N.E. trench
Trench by N.E. socket
Trench by trial passages
Trial passages
Thus the angles between the trenches are: S. trench to E.N.E. trench,
I04» I' 43" (or 2 X 52' o' 52") ; and E.N.E. to N.N.E. trench, 51" 36' 52.'
With regard to the details of these rock cuttings, the forms of the ends
of the N. and S. trenches were plotted from accurate offsets (see PI. iii.) ; and
there is little of exact detail in the cutting to be stated. The axes at the
ends were estimated by means of the plans here given, but on double this
scale ; and the rock is so roughly cut in most parts that nothing nearer than
an inch need be considered. The position of the inner end of the N. trench
is not very exactly fixed, an omission in measurement affecting it, mainly
from N. to S. In this trench I excavated to no below the present surface
of the sand, or about 220 below the rock surface, without finding any bottom.
The S. trench is more regular than the N. trench ; at the outer end its width
is 205 to 206, and at the inner end 1 34*2 : it has a curious ledge around the
inner end at 25 below the top surface. At the outer end the rock is cut,
clearly to receive stones, and some plaster remains there ; also some stones
remain fitted in the rock on the W. side of this trench. Built stones also
occur in the N., E.N.E., and N.N.E. trenches. From the inner end of the
S. trench, a narrow groove is cut in the rock, leading into the rock-cut bed
of the basalt pavement ; this groove was filled for a short way near the end
of the trench by stone mortared in. It was evidently in process of being
cut, as the hollows in the sides of it were the regular course of rock-cutting.
The rock beside the trenches is dressed flat, particularly on the E. of the
p.
49
Sect. 29.] ROCK TRESXHES. 49
N. trench, and the W. of the S. trench, where the built stones occur. There
is a short sort of trench, on the E. side of the S. trench (not in plan) ; it is
about 25 wide, 70 long, and 50 deep, with a rounded bottom ; the length
E. and W.
The E.N.E. trench is very different to the others ; it has a broad ledge
at the outer end, and this ledge runs along the sides of the trench, dipping
downwards until it reaches the bottom towards the inner end : the bottom
sloping upwards to the surface at the inner end. There are stones let into
this ledge, and mortared in place, and marks of many other stones with
mortared beds, all intended apparently to make good the ledge as a smooth
bed for some construction to lie upon. The bottom of this trench I traced
all over, by excavations across and along it ; looking from the outer end, there
first came two ledges — the lower one merely a remainder of uncut rock, with
grooves left for quarrying it — then the bottom was found about 200 inches below
ground level ; from this it sloped down at about 20* for about 200 inches ; then
ran flat for 300 or 400 ; and then sloped up for 300 or 400 ; then rose vertically,
for some way; and then, from about 120 below ground level, it went up a
uniform slope to near the surface, where it was lost at the inner end under
high heaps of chips. At the outer end the width near the top is IS2'8, and
at 25 down 148-2 ; the lower space between the sides of the ledge widens
rapidly to the middle, from the end where it is 43'0 wide above and 350
below. Towards the inner end the rock is very well cut ; it has a row of
very rough holes, about 6 diam., in the dressed rock along the N. edge of
the trench, near the inner end. This dressed side of the trench ends sharply,
turning to N. at 1603-6 from outer end of the trench axis ; the width here
is 170M, or 172-3 at a small step back in S. side, a little E. of this point. The
trench had not been clear for a long time, as many rudely-buried common
mummies were cut through in clearing it; they were lying only just beneath
the sand and rubbish in the bottom.
The N.N.E. trench was traced by excavations along the whole length of
2,840 inches, up to where it is covered by the enclosure wall of the kiosk. It
is fairly straight, varying from the mean axis 2-1, on an average of five points
fixed along it. The depth varies from 14 to 20 inches bdlow the general
surface. It is 38, 40, 39*2, and 36 in width, from the outer end up to a
point 740 along it from the basalt pavement ; here it contracts roughly and
irregularly, and reaches a narrow part i8-2 wide at 644 from the pavement.
The sides are built about here, and deeply covered with broken stones. Hence
it runs on, till, close to the edge of the basalt pavement, it branches in two, and
narrows yet more ; one line runs W., and another turning nearly due S.,
emerges on the pavement edge at 6298 to 633-4 from the N.E. corner of
the pavement, being there only 3-6 wide. From this remarkable forking, it
II
OUTSIDE OF GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vL
is evident that the trench cannot have been made with any ideas of sighting
along it, or of its marking out a direction or azimuth; and, starting as it
does, from the basalt pavement (or from any building which stood there),
and running with a steady fall to the nearest point of the cliff edge, it seems
exactly as if intended for a drain; the more so as there is plainly a good
deal of water-wearing at a point where it falls sharply, at its enlargement. The
forking of the inner end is not cut in the rock, but in a large block of
limestone.
The trench by the N.E. socket is just like the N.N.E. trench in its
cutting and size ; and it also narrows at the inner end, though only for about
20 inches length. It has a steady fall like the N.N.E. trench ; falling from
the S. end 5-5 at 50, S'S at 100, 14-3 at 190, 2i-o at 300, and 27*0 at 400 inches.
The inner end is turned parallel to the Pyramid, the sides curving slightly
to fit it.
The rock cuttings by it are evidently the half-finished remains of a general
dressing down of the rock ; the hollows are from 3 to 6 inches deep, and so very
irregular that they do not need any description beside the plan (PL ii.).
The trench beside tlie trial passages is slight, being but 6 deep at N. and
17 at S. ; it is 29*0 wide at N., 26'S in middle, and 279 at S. Its length is 289,
with square ends. The sides are vertical at the N., narrowing 35 to bottom
at S. ; ends shortening 3-0 to bottom. The bottom dips slightly to the S., the
levels from the N. running o, — 17, — 2'2, — 3"2, and — 58.
30. The trial passages (see PI. iii.) are a wholly different class of works to
the preceding, being a model of the Great Pyramid passages, shortened in
length, but of full size in width and height Their mean dimensions — and mean
differences from those dimensions — as against the similar parts of the Great
Pyramid, are : —
Pyramid passage angle 26°2f mean diff. '4'
„ „ widths 41-53 „ „ -07
„ „ heights 47-24 „ „ -OS
„ ramp heights 2386 „ „ -32
„ gallery widths 82-42 „ „ '44
„ well widths 28-2 „ „ -3
The details of the measurements of each part are all entered on the section
(PI. iii.). The vertical shaft here is only analogous in size, and not in position, to
the well in the Pyramid gallery ; and it is the only feature which is not an exact
copy of the Great Pyramid passages, as far as we know tkem. The resemblance
in all other respects is striking, even around the beginning of the Queen's
Chamber passage, and at the contraction to hold the plug-blocks in the
ascending passage of the Pyramid (see section 38). The upper part of the vertical
shaft is filled \vith hardened stone chips ; but on clearing the ground over it, I
26'>33'
mean
difference -24'
41-46
II
X)9
47-37
II
•13
23-60
•08
81-2
.. •e
2S-63
II
•54
p.
51
Sect. 3 J.) CONNECTION OF INSIDE AND OUTSIDE. 51
found the square mouth on the surface. The whole of these passages are very
smoothly and truly cut, the mean differences in the dimensions being but little
more than in the finely finished Pyramid masonry. The part similar to the
gallery is the worst executed part ; and in no place are the corners worked quite
sharp, generally being left with radius about "15. The N. end is cut in steps for
fitting masonry on to it ; and I was told that it was as recently as 1877 that the
built part of it was broken away by Arabs, and it appeared to have been
recently disturbed ; in Vyse's section, however, the roof is of the present length,
so the removal must have been from the floor. By theodolite observations the
plane of the passage is straight and vertical within 5' or less.
31. Having thus finished the statement of the outside of the Pyramid and
the works surrounding it, the next subject is the connection of the outside and
inside of the building.
To determine the exact place of the passages and chambers in relation to
the whole Pyramid, a station of the triangulation was fixed in a hollow just on
the end of the entrance passage floor ; and this was thoroughly connected with
three main stations. Levelling was also carried up from the casing and pavement below, to this station, and to the courses near it. Thus the inside, as far as
Mamun's Hole, is completely connected with the outside; and in the ascending
passages beyond that, there is only 2' of azimuth in doubt.
32. The original length of the entrance passage has not hitherto been
known, except by a rough allowance for the lost casing. But after seeing the
entrances of the Third Pyramid, tlie South Pyramid of Dahshur, and the
Pyramid of Mcdum, all of which retain their casing, there seemed scarcely a
question but that the rule was for the doorway of a Pyramid to occupy the
height of exactly one or two courses on the outside. That the casing courses
were on the same levels as the present core courses, is not to be doubted, as they
are so in the other Pyramids which retain their casing, and at the foot of the
Great Pyramid.* The next step is to see if tliere is a course equal to the
vertical height of the doorway ; and, if so, where such a course occurs. Now
the vertical height of the doorway on the sloping face of the Pyramid (or
difference of level of its top and base) would be 37"9i if the passage mouth was
the same height as the present end, or 3778 if the passage was exactly the same
as the very carefully wrought courses of the King's Chamber, with which it is
• The awkward res'oration of the ca>ing that Prof, Smyth adopted (Life and Work, iii., PI. 3) was
tweed on him by his mistaken assumption of the pavement level 20 inches under the truth (L. and \V. ii, 137);
hence by Vyse's casing stone measures he made the casing break joint with the core, in defiance of Vyse's
explicit drawing U its position ; and was obliged to reduce the pavement to 5 or 10 inches, in place of the
21 inches recorded by Vyic, The drawing of " backing stones," at the foot of PI. i., vol. iii., L. and W.,
it equally at fault; Ihc casing stones which remain in the middle of the side, ending directly against the
core masonry ; aiid the core at the corners only leaving 34 inches for the casing thickness. No backing
stones exist behind the casing of the Third Pyramid or the cased Dahshur Pyramid.
5 J OUTSIDE OF GREAT PYRAMID. [Chap.vi.
clearly intended to be identical. On looking to the diagram of courses (PI. viii.)
it is seen that at the 19th course is a sudden increase of thickness, none being so
large for 1 1 courses before it and 14 after it. And this specially enlarged course
is of exactly the required height of the doorway, its measures running thus : —
By levelling at entrance 3767, by measuring •) mean. ) Anr,x^y,i,yr
courses 37-8; by N.E. 381. S.E. ir^X 3794 ^J|| hSt
N.W; 37-s, S.VV. 39-I. J ±-i7 ^^ ^ J nci^ht.
Here the agreement is so exact that it is far within the small uncertainties of
the two dimensions. Hence, if the passage emerged at the 19th course it would
exactly occupy its height (see PI. xi.).* Besides this, it will be observed that there
are two unusually small courses next over this, being the smallest that occur till
reaching the 77th course. The explanation of these is clear, if the doorway came
out in the 19th course ; an unusually thick lintel course was needed, so two
thinner courses were put in, that they might be united for obtaining extra thickness, as is done over the King's Chamber doorway. These two courses are also
occasionally united in the core masonry.
The crucial test then is, supposing the passage prolonged outwards till it
intersects this course, how will its end, and the face of the casing, stand to the
casing stones at the foot of the Pyramid ? The answer has been already given
in the list of determinations of the casing angle. It requires an angle of slope
of 51° S3' 20" ± i'; and this is .so close to the angle shown by other remains
that it conclusively clenches the result to which we are led by the exact equality
of the abnormal course height with the doorway height
The data for calculating the result are: (1) levels of the 19th course by
entrance 668"30 and 70S'97 ; (2) floor of passage at station mark, level 6ii*2 ;
(3) which is inside the edge of the base of the casing horizontally, 6z^4\
(4) entrance passage angle at mouth 26° 29' ±i'; (S) entrance passage
height 47"26.
33. By a similar method the air channels give a determination of the
angle of the faces. It is true that the channels did not occupy a whole course
like the entrance ; but as they are uniformly cut out as an inverted trough in
the under side of a block which is laid on a broad bed, it is almost certain that
they similarly continued to the outside, through the one— or perhaps twfo—
stones now stripped off ; and also that their floors thus started at a course level
(see PI. xi.).t If this, then, were the case (as the N. channel cannot by its posi-
• It should be explained that this is called the 20th course by Prof. Smv-th, owing to his
error about the ist course and pavement level. His measure of it is 38 inches, and the two
French measures give it as 37 and 38 inches.
+ In the section of the S. air channel mouth published by Prof. Smjth, certainly " the
joints are not put in from any measure," nor is any other feature of it. The passage, its bed,
and top, are all about half of their true size, and the form of it is unlike anything that has
been there, at least since Vyse's time.
p.
53
Sect. 34. BLOCK'S ABOl^E ENTKAXCE. 53
tion have come out in any but the 103rd course on the face, and tlie S. channel
in any but the 104th), they would show that the casing rose on the N. face at
51" sr 30", and on the S. face at 51° 57' 30", as before stated. The various data
are entered on the diagram of the channel mouths. The levels were fixed by
measuring several courses above and below the present mouths, and thus
connecting them to the course levelling at the corners of the Pyramid. With
regard to the main part of these air channels, the details are given further on
in the measures of the King's Chamber (section 56) ; and it is disappointing that
they vary so much in azimuth and altitude, that they are useless for connecting
the measures of the inside and outside of the Pyramid.
34. The sloping blocks over the entrance to the Pyramid, and the space
below them, were examined (partly by means of a ladder), and measured ; but
the details are not worth producing here, as the work of them is so rough. The
large blocks are as follows, in general size : —
E. upper. W. upper. E. lower. W. lower.
Length on top . . [185] [194] 151 +•« 1677
Length below . . 117I 121 84 + ^ 107-6
Breadth . . 8o-oto9i| 88-3 826 8r6
Height of mid-line . . . [114] 91
Lean of face . . 20' to 2" in 2° 20' in 20' to 30' out 25' to 30' in
Angle on top . 35° 40' to 39° 50' mean 40° 38° 45' to 50' 39° 30'
„ on base . . 38=' 45' to 50' 39° 30' 39" 20' to 50' 39° 30' to 55'
„ on butment 49° 50' to 50° 10' 50'' 40' hidden 50^ 30'
The measures in brackets are deduced from the angles and other measures.
These blocks are much like a slice of the side of a casing stone in their angle ;
but their breadth and length are about half as large again as any of the casing
stones. Their mean angle from 12 measures is 50° 28' ± 5'. The thickness of
these blocks is only 33 inches, and there are no others exactly behind them, as I
could see the horizontal joints of the stones running on behind them for some
inches. On the faces of these blocks are many traces of the mortaring which
joined to the sloping blocks next in front of them. These were placed some
70 inches lower at the top, and were not so deep vertically. By the fragment
left on the E. side, the faces of these blocks were vertical. In front of these
came the third pair, similar, but leaning some j{° or 8=* inwards on the face,
judging by a remaining fragment. Probably a fourth and fifth pair were also
placed here (see PI. ix.) ; and the abutment of the fifth pair shows an angle of
70\° or 73° in place of 50°. The successive lowering of the tops, leaning the
faces in, and flattening the angle of slope of the stones as they approach the
outside, being apparently to prevent their coming too close to the casing.
These sloping blocks were probably not all stripped away, as at present, until
recently, as there is a graffito, dated 1476 (half destroyed by the mock-antique
Prussian inscription) on the face of the remaining block where it is now
p.
54
54 OUTSIDE OF CREA T P YRAMID. [Chap. vi.
inaccessible, but just above where the next pair of blocks were placed. The
sloping blocks are of remarkably soft fine-grained limestone, about the best
that I have seen, much like that of the roofing of the chamber in Pepi's
Pyramid ; and it is peculiar for weathering very quickly to the brown tint, proper
to the fine Mokattam Imestone, darkening completely in about twenty years, to
judge by the modern-dated graffiti.
Seel. 35.]
ENTRANCE PASSAGE, LENGTH.
S5
CHAPTER VII.
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
35. Having, then, fixed the original position of the doonvay of the
Pyramid, we may state that it was at 6682 ± -i above the pavement of the
Pyramid ; 524-1 ±-3 horizontally inside (or S. of) the N. edge of the Pyramid
casing ; and its middle 2870 ± -8 E. of the centre* of the Pyramid ; or 37236
from E. side, and 4297-6 from W. side, at its level ; the probable error being
that of fixing the length of the sides. Thus we have the following positions in
the entrance passage, reducing all to the true beginning of the floor :—
Doorway, original . . .
End of " basement sheet"
Station mark
I
o C
Scored line
W. Floor.
o±-3
124-2
127-90
178-75
226-46
285-29
34056
406-04
465-46
531-67
584-15
W.Wall W.Wall
Base. Top
o±-3
27663
331-79
414-21
474-02
481-59
51626
551-66
W. Roof. E. Roof.
E. Wall
Top.
34810
606-87
m,Jf!rf^'^v*°'''^''" '' «'"<="t'ed as E. of the centre of the Pyramid, it is uniformly
meant that it is that amount E. of a vertical plane, parallel to the mean of the Pyramid's E. and
w. «aes, and which passes through the centre of the Pyramid. Similarly of similar descriptions
$6
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vii.
lO
II
lO
II
I
IS
i6
^4
»5
i6
i8
W. Floor.
700-28
73628
77639
82716
87858
91509
i
96301 I
1003691
1028 59 ;
W.Wall
Base.
6; 1-91
68698
19 1063-8:
18 ,
Floor Ascending Passage ^ 1 1 1 064
20 11127-71
21 1 174-2:
763-70
806-14
865-32
891-79
926-69
967-14
996-27
1056-78
JII06-I3
113606
1 177-14
W. Wall
Top.
W. Roof. E. Roof.
1 177-7
1232-1
13185
Rock.
11881
340.1
Rock.
1 192-4
J2437
1 296- 1
13507
Rock.
E. Wall
Top.
1 163.6
1207-1
1262-3
I347-S
Rock.
The above measures were taken by rods from 124-2 to 28529 (the rods
jointing together with butt ends), by steel tape from 27663 to 117714. and by
rods from 1 163-6 to the rock ; all duly corrected for temperature. On comparing them with Professor Smyth's measures, it will be found that his measures
make the passage length about an inch shorter on an average ; this is fairly
accounted for (i) by his being all piece-meal measures added together, (2) by
the rude method of making scratches with a .screw-driver to mark the lengths of
Stcl. 35.]
ENTRANCE PASSAGE, LENGTH.
rod on the stone (L. and W. ii., 46), and (3) by there being " always a certain
amount of risk as to the measuring rod slipping on the inclined floor" (L. and
W. ii., 35). All these errors would make the reading of the length shorter than
it should be ; and all were avoided by the use of a steel tape lying on the side
of the floor. Nevertheless, I tested again, by rod measure, some of the points
where the difference of Professor Smyth's measures were greatest from the steel
tape, and they come out thus : —
Between Joints. By Steel Tape. Again by Rods. By Prof. Smyth.
5 to 6 on Floor . . .
7 on Wall to 8 on Floor
14 » IS
14 » »6
15 .. 16
59-45
59-2
22-2
10-9
37-6
3-47
59-42
36-92
3-53
These will practically show what errors may creep in, by not using a continuous measure like a steel tape. The object of measuring the joints, as well
as the total length, by steel tape, is sufficiently illustrated by this comparison.
One source of error may arise from following the coarsely-scratched
prolongations of the anciently drawn lines, and of the ascending passage floor
and roof. These have been made by modern measurers ; and they were always
rejected, and a more accurate method employed.
The measures from the steel tape onwards, by rods, down to the end of the
built passage, where it rests on the rock, are not of the same accuracy as the
others ; the broken parts of the passage sides, and the awkwardness of
measuring over the large block of granite, without any flat surface even to hold
the rods against, prevented my taking more care over a point where accuracy
is probably not of importance.
For the total length of the entrance passage, down to the subterranean
rock-cut p.irt, only a rough measurement by the 140-inch poles was made,
owing to the encumbered condition of it. The poles were laid on the rubbish
over the floor, and where any great difference of position was required, the ends
were plumbed one over the other, and the result is probably only true within
two or three inches. The points noted down the course of the passage,
reckoning from the original entrance {i.e., the beginning of .the rock on the E.
side of the roof being 13507), are the following :—
E. W.
Beginning of inserted stones, filling a fissure . . . 1,569 1,555
Joint in these stones 1,595 None.
End of these inserted stones 1,629 '.595
Sides of passage much scaled, i or 2 inches off", beyond here 2,750
Fissure in rock i 3,o86 f 3,066
I to 3,1 16 (.3.095
Mouth of passage to gallery . ..... I 3.^25
End of sloping roof (4,137 Vyse, corrected for casing)
I
4.143
1103,856
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vii.
36. The azimuth and straightness of the passage were carefully measured.
The azimuth down the built part was taken by reference to the triangulation,
which in its turn was fixed by six observations of Polaris at elongation, from a
favourable station (G). The azimuth to the bottom of the rock-cut passage was
observed independently, by five observations of Polaris at elongation. The
observations of the straightness throughout gives a check by combining these
two methods, and they are thus found to agree within 19", or just the sum of
their probable errors, equal to only "09 inch lineally on the azimuth of the built
part. The results are : —
Azimuth. Altitude.
Mean axis of whole length . —3' 44" ± 10" 26* 31' 23" ± 5"?
Mean axis of built part alone . —5' 49"=*= 7"
Same, by oifiTsets from 3' 44" axis — 5' 28" ± 1 2" 26° 26' 42" ± 20" ?
(Same by Prof. Smyth, two days . —4' 27" and - 5' 34" 2&> 26' 43" ± 60" )
The observations of the straightness of the walls, floor, and roof of the
passage, when all reduced to offsets from its mean axis of the whole length
stand thus : —
. Distance from
From -V 44"
azim.
From 26° 31' 23"
'alt.
original entrance.
W,
Mid.
E.
Roof.
Mid.
Floor.
2ri
•3W.
20-5
-•4
-24-1
20-9
•2W.
20-6
23-4
. --2
-239
20-8
+ •4
-233
1,110
...
...
...
...
...
-23-4
1,291
211?
•I E.
21-3
...
...
...
I.SOS
20s
•2E.
2ro
...
...
1.741
20-4
•4E.
— •I
-23-9
2,069
20-8
•2E.
2I-I
23-4
-•4
-24-2
2,481
21-6
•3W.
...
...
2.971
2ro
2ro
...
...
...
3.7"
21-3
•4W.
20s
-24-3
4.113?
•4W.
-•6?
-249?
4,140
...
• •
...
...
Mean error . . '23 "30
(Floor at 1,110 interpolated from clinometer curve.)
But the passage in the built part, and indeed for some 40 feet below that, is far
straighter in azimuth than the lower part ; taking this upper ^ths of it alone, it
has a mean axis of —5' 49" ± 7" in azimuth, and varies thus : —
w.
Mid.
E.
At 460
20-86
■06 w.
•01 E.
20-80
1,291
21*23
21-22
1.S05
207s
207s
1,741
•01 W.
Mean Error
, ,
•02
Seel. 37.]
SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBER, ETC.
These offsets only being read to ^^5 inch (the j-ooths merely resulting from computation) it is remarkable that the errors of the mid-line of the passage are so
minute ; and it shows that in this particular we have not yet gone within the
builder's accuracy; readings to ^-^th inch or to i" on the longer distances, are
now required.
The absolute position, then, of the middle of the S. end of the entrance
passage floor will be, in level, 668'2 — (4140 x sin. 26° 31' 23") - "S difference of
floor offsets, = - u8i ± i ? ; in distance from N. base of pyramid 524-1 +
3704-3 = 4228 d= 2 .' or 306 N. from mid-plane ; and in distance E. from the
mid-plane 287-0— [sin. (3' SS"- 3' 44") X 3704] - -4 difference of offsets =286-4
± i-o.
37. The Subterranean chambers and passages are all cut roughly in the
rock. The entrance passage has a flat end, square with its axis (within at least
i"), and out of this end a smaller horizontal passage proceeds, leaving a margin
of the flat end along the top and two sides. This margin is 4-5 wide at E., 3-2
at W., and 5-4 to 60 from E. to W. along the top. The dimensions and
distances are as follow, from the S. end of the floor of the entrance passage (as
deduced from the roof, which is better preserved) ; and the axial positions and
levels are by theodolite observations : —
BagiDoiDg of Horizontal')
Passaf>e ... >
Fissure
Id Passage
N. Door of Side Chamber .
SN. Door of Large Cliamber
S» ■» If ,,
la S. Fusage
End ...
blstance from »!».-«
Plane of
Pyramid.
306 N.
End of E. P.
Floor.
O
76 W. 91 E.
346*
II80
88 N.
15 N.
40 S.
366 s.
I0I2 S.
Width E.
10 W.
Top, Base.
40-8
32-9
32-3 32'4
31-6 32-7
31 '9 33-0
32-0 33-3
29-5 29-5
29-6 27-3
26-7 26-7
28-1 29-0
30-1 30-0
26-0
Mid.
from
Entrance
Axis,
continued.
•4 W.
i-ow.
-5w.
I -9 w.
9-7 w.
Height.
Mid.
E.from'
Mid. J
Line oil
Py.?- E,
mid.
286-448-S
285-8
w.
286-3
284-9
277-1
3S'S 36-0
31+^t
26-3 26-0
28-6 27-0
29-5 29-3
Large chamber, E. waU 325-9 ; at 100 from W. wall 319-6 r : N. wall 553-5 ; S. wall 554 -i
Side chamber W. waU 69I to joj ; N. wall 70-3 ; S. waU 72-3
Level above
End of E. P.
floor.
Top-f- 3S-3
Top-f 38-9
Top- 6-6
Level below
Pyramid
Pavemeot.
-1 181 floor
- 1 143 roof
- 1142 roof
-1188 roof
-1184 roof
1056 roof
I 137 roof
Top- 2-6
Top-f-i2S-3t
Top -t- 40
, to -J- 48
The large chamber walls are therefore distant from the Pyramid central
axis, 302-9 E. at N. wall ; 299-6 E. at S. wall ; 250-6 W, at N. wall ; 254-5 W. at
S. wall ; 40 S. and 366 S. The central axis thus not passing through the
chamber, but 40 inches inside the rock of the N, side.
• E, side of door-sill is at 35 1, and W. side 347, the wall not being fully dressed down there.
T This doorway rounds off at the top, rising ij inches in the 10 inches.
. . ^ T''* '.°P '^ + "4-3 at N. doorway, 125-4 to 127-6 at S. doorway ; the roof being cut away
higher,just in the comer.
6o THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. \Chap. vii.
The side chamber is an enlargement of the passage, westward and upward,
as are all the chambers of the Pyramid ; it is very rough and uneven, and
encumbered now with large blocks of stone. The large chamber is most clearly
unfinished, both in the dressing of the walls, and more especially in the
excavation for the floor. The walls have an average irregularity estimated at
±'7i and projecting lumps of rock are left untouched in some parts. The roof
is more irregular, estimated average variation ± 3. The floor is most irregular,
at the W. end it rises at the highest to only 10 inches from the roof ; and over
all the western half of the chamber it is irregularly trenched with the
cuttings made by workmen to dislodge blocks of the rock. It is, in fact, an
interesting specimen of quarrying, but unfortunately now completely choked up,
by Perring having stowed away there all the pieces of limestone taken out of his
shaft in the floor. After dislodging several blocks, I crawled in over the knobs
and ridges of rock, until jammed tight from chest to back in one place ; and
thence I pushed about one 140-inch rod, by means of the other, so as to measure
the length up to the Western end. To measure along the W. side is impossible,
without clearing away a large quantity of stones ; and as there is no place to
stack them safely without their going down the shaft, I could only measure the
width at 100 from the W. end, perhaps somewhat askew. The lower — eastern —
part of the floor, 140 below the roof, which is cotnparatively flat, is, nevertheless,
very irregular and roughly trenched, quite unfinished. The best worked floor
surface is just around the square shaft, 198 below the roof, and about 40 below
the main part of the floor, which is 1 5 1; below roof on a knob of rock beside the
shaft The square shaft is not parallel to the chamber, but is placed nearly
diagonally.* Its distances to the walls are, N.W. corner 135 to N. wall ; N.E.
corner 60 to E. wall ; S.E. corner 90 to S. wall. Its sides are, N.E. 68 to 75 ?
S.E, Z2}i ; S.W, 80 ; N.W. 70 above, 79 below (the N. comer being rounded
above) ; N. to S. diagonal 100. The S.E. and S.W. sides stop at 6j deep, or
265 below roof, or 1,321 under pavement ; leaving a ledge about 20 inches widej
a second or deeper part of the shaft goes downwards, the N.E. and N.W. sides
being continuous with those of the upper part ; it is, in fact, a smaller shaft
descending out of the N. corner of the larger. The sides of the smaller shaft
are, N.E. 57? S.E. 53 } S.W. 60, N.W, 56. The original depth of the smaller
shaft I could not see, it was apparently about 40 inches according to Vyse,
when Perring sunk his round shaft down in the bottom of the ancient square
shaft This hole in the dimly-lighted chamber, about 30 feet deep (with water
in it after heavy rains have rushed down the entrance passage), and with a very
irregular and wide opening, makes measurement about here somewhat unpleasant
I avoided filling the shaft with the earth removed from the passage, or with the
stones which Perring excavated from it, in case anyone should afterwards wish
• Like the shaft of the tomb chamber of Ti at Sakkara ; an unusual plan.
p.
61
Sect. 38.] ASCENDING PASSAGE, LENGTH. 61
to excavate farther at the bottom. The southern passage is very rough,
apparently merely a first drift-way, only just large enough to work in, intended
to be afterwards enlarged, and smoothed ; its sides wind 6 or 8 inches in
and ouL
38. The Ascending passage from the entrance passage is somewhat
troublesome to measure, owing to the large plugs of granite that fill some 15
feet of its lower part ; and also to the irregular way in which much of its floor
is broken up.
For connecting it with the entrance passage, we must first settle the most
probable value of its angle, in order to carry on the projection of its floor ; and
to complete it over the plugging and breakage, which prevent direct measurement The angle of the whole passage will be discussed further on ; it will
suffice to say here that the mean angle is 26° 2' 30" ; and there is therefore a
presumption that the plugged part is about the same angle, and not the 26^° of
the entrance passage. This is confirmed by direct plumb-line measure of the
angle of the plug-blocks at their lower end, giving 26° 7' (db 2' ?) ; and noting
that the end is square with the portion of passage beyond it to within 5'. Also
the actual angle of the plug-blocks may be computed from Prof. Smyth's sloping
measures, combined with my levelling between the floors of the passages, and
plumbing up to the lower end of the plugs.* This gives 26° 12 J' for the angle of
the lower 300 inches of the passage ; and 5' of variation would require a difi'erence of -4 inch vertical on -9 sloping. Hence the other data confirm this so
far, that it had better be adopted as the angle through the plugged part ;
until some one shall improve on Prof. Smyth's sloping measure, or on my
levelling.
The junction of the passages was not projected over the broken part uncertainly, as had been done before ; but a plumb-line was hung from the W. side
of the Ascending passage roof, in front of the plug-blocks ; and measures vertical, perpendicular, and sloping, were taken to the plugs, the fragments of the
ascending, and the top and bottom of the entrance passage. Thus the whole
was knit together to a true vertical line, the place of which was fixed on the
entrance floor. From the mean of these measures, and 26° 12 J' as the ascending
angle, with 26° 21' as the descending angle at that spot "(by Prof. Smyth), the
Ascending passage roof starts vertically over 1 1 10-90 on the sloping floor of the
•The elements in question are (i) Prof. Smyth's plumb-line 48-5 on slope below his zero in
Ascending passage ; and (2) 180-5 on slope of entrance passage, below beginning of Ascending
root (3) My level in A.P., 71-3 on slope above C.P.S.'s zero in A.P. (4) My level in E.P,
loisx. on slope below C.P.S.'s E.P. zero. (5) Difference of ray A. P. and E.P. level marks
156-2 vertically. (6) My plumb-line on E.P. floor 1027-3 on slope below C.P.S.'s E.P. zero.
(7)^Height on my plumb to floor of A.P. 37-0. (8) height of plug-blocks 47-3, and angle of end
26' 7'. (9) Angle of E.P. at junction 26° 21'. From these measures we get 125-1 tan.
+142-9 sin. 6=124-7 ; .-. = 26' I2i'.
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Ckap. vii.
entrance, reckoning from the casing face ; and the floor cuts the entrance floor
at iiiO'64. from the same, both probably ±-i.
Further, the lower end of the plug-block is 74*19 from the intersection of
the floors ; and the upper end 5076 from the intersection of the roofs. Having
thus fixed the beginning of the Ascending passage, by the point where its floor
produced onwards intersects the floor of the entrance passage, we can proceed
up the Ascending passage from this as a starting point The distance past the
plug-blocks being determined as above described, and that from the plug-blocks
to the S. end of the passage, by steel tape measure on the E. side of the floor ;
then, the tape being corrected for temperature and tension, the results are thus,
on the sloping floor :-
Floor, E. side.
Base of E. wan.
Junction of passage
floors
Beginning of actual floor
••• 59-8
...
Base of plug-blocks
...
Top of plug-blocks.
present
...
» » »
ancient
277?
...
Joint numbeis.
Smyth's.
Dixon's.
I
(Petrie's levelling mark
324-0)
• ••
about 333-6
333^
••>
...
374-9
496-6
496-6
• •>
"s
• • ■
6o4"4
• «.
...
• ■»
637-9
...
• ••
716-1
II
749-0
• ■ •
799-1
...
■ •■
'.'..
>••
84S-1
854-2
»•■
IS
922-2
95S-0
II
...
1006-9
'7
• ■•
looS-o
...
• /•
...
1044-9
• ••
1080-3
...
• ••
10950 .
1 1 300
1129-9
ii6rs
1161-5
• ••
1202-4
■ ••
1255-4
1214*2
p.
63
Stct, 38.] ASCENDING PASSAGE, LENGTH. 63
Joint numbers.
Smyth's.
Dixon's.
Floor, E. side.
Base of E. wall.
12732
1337-9
1337-9
13686
...
...
...
1377-7
..•
I427-I
• ••
...
14887
...
• t ■
■ ■•
1515-5
Gallery, plumb from wall over
door
IS46-S
29 Floor joint
1546-8
• .>
Wall joint |
And edge over door J ' - 'S47-0
On comparing these measures with Prof. Smyth's, it will be seen that he
makes the passage about 3 inches shorter ; and that this difference mainly
occurs in the lower part, where the floor is much broken. Several lengths were
therefore measured as tests, just as in the entrance passage, and the results are : —
1st measure 2nd measure Piof. Smyth
bj tape. by tape. by one rod.'
Mark (i) to mark (2) 500 50* i
Mark fi) to 22 (Dixon) 563 S6"3
22 Dixon to 21 Dixon A°'9\e-,.j 4i-o)
21 Dixon to 8 Smyth ir2j5^' irijS^-i 497
8 Smyth to 20 Dixon 33*3 33*5
20 Dixon to mark (3) 83 8-2
by rods.
11 Smyth to 12 Smyth 50* i 50-2 50-2
12 Smyth to 16 Dixon 130 1 13-3")
16 Dixon to 14 Dixon 36'oVS5"i 361 >-SS"i 55-3
14 Dixon to 13 Smyth 61 j 57 J
13 Smyth to 15 Smyth 682 68-4 Qn-j
The close agreement of these two series of measures, particularly in those
parts twice measured by tape, will show (as in the entrance passage) that the
error is certainly in the rod measures, and due to the same causes as the error
in the entrance passage, i.e., slipping, irregular placing on broken floor, and the
marking off of each length.
The result therefore is that from the intersections of entrance and ascending
passage floors, to the floor joint at the E. side of the grand gallery doorway,
is 1 546-8 on the slope.*
The granite plugs are kept back from slipping down by the narrowing of
the lower end of the passage, to which contraction they fit. Thus at the lower
or N. end, the plug is but 38-2 wide in place of 41-6 at the upper end : the
height, however, is unaltered, being at lower end 47-30 E., 47-15 mid, 47-26 W. •
and at upper, or S. end 47-3. In the trial passages the breadth is contracted
* On the W. side this joint is 1-2 N. of the side joint of doorway.
p.
64
64 THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. \Chap. vii.
§
from 4r6 to 38-0 and 375 like this, but the height is also contracted there from
47'3 to 42"3. These plug-blocks are cut out of boulder stones of red granite, and
have not the faces cut sufficiently to remove the rounded outer surfaces at the
comers : also the faces next each other are never very flat, being wavy about
±•3. These particulars I was able to see, by putting my head in between the
rounded edges of the 2nd and 3rd blocks from the top, which are not in contact;
the and having jammed tight 4 inches above the 3rd. The present top one is
not the original end ; it is roughly broken, and there is a bit of granite still
cemented to the floor some way farther South of it. From appearances there I
estimated that originally the plug was 24 inches beyond its present end.
It has been a favourite idea with some, that two horizontal joints in the
passage roof just south of the plugs, were the beginning of a concealed passage:
I therefore carefully examined them. They are 6o'5 (or 601 second measure)
apart vertically, and therefore quite different to the passages of the Pyramid,
which are 47 perpendicularly or 52 vertically. Further, there is no possibility of
the blocking up of a passage existing there, as the stone of the roof is continuous, all in one with the sides ; the three roof-blocks between the two
horizontal joints are all girdle-blocks, either wholly round the passage, or
partially so; and the block N, of these is a long one, over 125 inches from
E. to W., and continuous into both walls. These vertical girdle-blocks are a
most curious feature of this passage (first observed and measured by Mr.
Waynman Dixon, C.E.), and occur at intervals of 10 cubits (2063 to 2089
inches) in the passage measuring along the slope. All the stones that can be
examined round the plugs are partial girdle-blocks, evidently to prevent the
plugs forcing the masonry apart, by being wedged into the contracted passage.
Many of the stones about the blocks in Mamun's Hole are over 10 or 11 feet
long ; the ends are invisible, but probably they are about 1 5 feet over all.
39. For the angle of the passage, and its straightness, it will be well to
consider it all in one with the gallery floor, as they were gauged together all in
one length. The angle of slope I did not observe, as I considered that that had
been settled by Prof Smyth ; but the azimuth was observed, by a chain of three
theodolites, round from the entrance passage. The straightness was observed
by offsets to floor and side all along it, read from a telescope at the upper end of
the plug-blocks. When I came to plot Ihe results, I found that there were
no measures taken at the point where Prof. Smyth's theodolite was set up. The
sloping floor is nowhere, having been entirely cut away at the beginning, of the
gallery ; and the top of the ramp (to which the theodolite had been referred)
was not offsetted by me, nor was its slope measured by Prof Smyth's clinometer
for 300 inches from the place. Hence we cannot say exactly what direct
relation the theodolite bore to the passage ; but we can obtain the angle of slope
very satisfactorily, by taking the angles observed to signal at bottom of ascend-
Stct. 40.]
PASSAGE TO QUEEN'S CHAMBER.
ing passage, and to signal at top of gallery, and then (knowing the distances of
these signals) calculate the angle of slope from signal to signal. This, when
corrected for lower signal being "3 too high, gives 26" 12' 50" for mean angle of
both passage and gallery together. Hence, from my offsets to the places of
these signals, the absolute angle, and the variations from it, can be obtained for
either part independently. Thus we have the form and direction of the ascending
passage, reckoning from the beginning of its floor on the entrance passage floor,
with its variations, as follows : —
From
From
-4' ±3'
azimuth
beginning
W.
mid.
E.
...
...
...
20-8
...
21-6
...
20'9
...
...
1,04s
...
1,220
...
21-9
•.365
...
21-2
1,540
2ro
21-1
From 26° 2' 30" altitude.
roof.
23-6
mid.
■•5
o
+ 1
E. floor.
24- 1
23-5
23"3
24-1
23-6
The surfaces are so much decayed and exfoliated, that it is only just at the
ends that two original faces can be found opposite to one another ; hence the
width and height cannot be measured, and the offsets can only be stated to one
surface.
From this altitude, the sloping length of the passage being 1546-8, the
horizontal length will be I389'5, and the vertical height 6797, both being
corrected for difference in the offsets of the ends. The determination of the
azimuth has, unhappily, a large probable error, ± 3' (owing to bad foundation for
the theodolite in Mamun's Hole) ; and its direction, — 4', is so close to that of
the Pyramid side, that it may be assumed parallel to that ± 3'. This, on the
passage length, =V2 inches for the probable error of the place of the upper end
of the passage, in E. to W. direction in the Pyramid.
These, added to previous amounts, give for the absolute place of the floor
end at the latitude of the E. wall of the gallery (i72'9+67$7)=8S2-6±3. level
above pavement; (i5i7'8-|-i389'S)=2907*3ib'6 horizontally from N. edge of
Pyramid, or i626"8±'8 northwards from centre; and 287±i'5 for middle of
passage eastward from centre of Pyramid.
40. The horizontal passage leading to the Queen's Chamber is the next
part to be considered. This was measured with steel tape all along, and the
levels of It taken with theodolite. The results for its length and levels are
thus, reckoning from the mean door of the gallery at I546'8 from beginning of
ascending passage : —
Distance
Northward from
.-. Roof
from door.
Pyramid centre.
Floor level.
level.
O
i626-8±8
852-6ifc-3
...
157s
858-4
...
3I2-0
1314-8
>
857-4 >
1003-8
a
856-1 -
902-3
870-2
756-6
n
- S
• ••
^
856-2 S
902-4
11777
449-1
p
n
... •!
...
13070
319-8
H-
f 854-6 2.
1 834-9 0^
1523-9
102-9
...
...
1524-8
...
...
1527-0
99-8
...
...
1620-7
6-1
834-4
...
66 THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. {Chap. vii.
Mean doonvay on floor ...
On flat floor
Floor joint, No. 8, Smyth
„ No. 16, „
„ „ No. 21, „
On floor ,
Floor joint, No. 25, Smyth
Step in floor
Chamber f top of door ...
N. wall \ side of door . . .
Floor joint. No. 30, Smyth
Niche, N. side
Niche, first lapping ... . ... ... ... 901*3
Chamber, E. apex ... 1626-5 "3 ,.. loSo-i
The azimuth of this passage was not measured, but the beginning of it is
287±i-5 E. of the middle of the Pyramid ; then for the axis of it at the end we
may say the same, or 287±3, since the gallery above it only differs about two
inches from that quantity. In the above measures of length there is a steadily
accumulating difference of about i in 300 between Prof. Smyth's measures and
these, for which it seems difficult to account ; but as in the other passages, I
have always found on retesting the measures, that such differences are due to
errors in the cumulative single rod measures, and not in my steel tape (which
was always verified at the starting point after measuring), it seems unlikely that
the steel tape should be in error here. Hence I should adopt these measures
\nthout alteration.
41. In the Queen's Chamber it seems, from the foregoing statement, that
the ridge of the roof is exactly in the mid-place of the Pyramid, equidistant
from N. and S. sides ; it only varies from this plane by a less amount than the
probable error of the determination.
The size of the chamber (after allowing suitably in each part for the incrustation of salt) is on an average 205 85 wide, and 226*47 long, 184*47 high on N.
and S. walls, and 245*1 high to the top of the roof ridge on E. and W. walls.
The variations of the horizontcd quantities in detail are as follows, from the
mean dimensions.
J«/.42.]
QUEEN'S CHAMBER, HEIGHT.
6/
From below Apex, E. Wall.
From below Apex, W. Wall.
Below Ridge of Roof.
Above
Floor.
To N.
WaU.
(Sum.) yy^o"
To S.
Wall.
(Sum.)
ToN.
Wall.
W,
; Wall.
to
E. WaU.
Mean
of all)
1 02^92
205-68
102*76
102-67
20602
103-35
226-47
...
• ••
.*■
...
--46
225.51
-SO
• •■
• ■•
...
...
...
-•31
225^79
-■^7
+ •16
205-67
-•17
-•14
broken
...
-•24
226-12
—•II
+ •06
205-60
-•14
...
...
...
...
...
...
+ •10
205-72
-•06
-16
206-15
+ •29
22637
—•10
+ •02
20579
+ 09
...
...
...
...
• «•
• •«
• ■•
-•09
205-68
-•25
+ •24
...
...
-•32
205-63
+■-27
...
...
...
+ •27
226-91
+ 17
+•37
206-29
-06
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
+•45
227-47
+•55
For example, to take the first entries, at 180 inches over the floor, on the
E. wall, the N. wall is (102-92 +-i6) = i03^o8 from a vertical line below the
apex of the roof; and the S. wall is (102-76- '17) = 102^59 from the same apex
line : the sum of these quantities, or the total width, being 205-67. Thus the
mean distances of the N. and S. walls from the apex on the E. and W. walls is
given at the top of each column ; and beneath that the small variations from
those mean vertical wall faces. In the last division are given the distances of
the E. and W. walls apart, below their apices ; both the mean dimension, the
variations from it, and the total at each point. It will be observed that the E.
and W. walls have both a uniform tilt inwards ; if we allow 14' for this as
an average, the mean from a straight line inclined that amount is -057 on E.
and 025 on W. ; a remarkably small amount of error, comparable to the
extremely fine work and close joints of the stones themselves. Also the ridge
of the roof is not exactly over the middle of the chamber at either end. Beside
the above resulting length of the middle of the chamber on the floor, separate
measures were taken on the two walls ; these give N. 2 27*4 1, middle (from
above) 227-47, S. 227-61 ; mean of all 22750 for floor length.-
42. In tlie matter of height, the courses vary a good deal ; and far more
care was spent on the closeness, than on the regularity of the joints. For a
starting point in measurement, the general floor is hopelessly irregular, consisting
plainly of" rough core masonry ; and furthermore, it has been built over with
similar rough masonry, which was afterwards stripped down to insert the chamber
walls. This is proved by there being no fewer than eight edges of sunken spaces
upon it, made (according to the universal habit of pyramid builders) to let in
the inequalities of the upper course into the surface of the course below it.
These sunken edges are well seen in other parts of the core masonry, and their
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vii.
meaning here is unequivocal. But all round the chamber, and the lower part of
the passage leading to it, is a footing of fine stone, at the rough floor level ; this
projects I to 4 inches from the base of the walls, apparently as if intended as a
support for flooring blocks, which have never been introduced. It is to this
footing, or ledge that we must refer as the starting point ; though what floor
was ever intended to have been inserted (like the floor of the King's Chamber,
which is inserted between its walls) we cannot now say. Certainly, a floor at
the level of the higher part of the passage, would not reconcile everything ; as
that higher floor is also not a finished surface, but has sundry large round holes
in it, like those in the chamber floor and elsewhere ; intended, apparently, for
use in process of building. Starting, however, from this footing at the base of
the walls, the mean elevation of each course above the floor is as follows, with the
variation + or - from the mean scale, at eleven points around the chamber : —
Mean of
N.W. Corner.
N.E. Comer.
E. Side,
Niche
S.E. Comer.
S. W. Comer.
W. Side.
Corners.
W. N.
N. E.
Mid.
E. S.
S. W.
Mid.
jN.+ i-o
Is.- -I
(S.--5
IN.- -6
245-1
• •• • • »
...
214-35
• •• • ■ •
+ 2-OS
...
-2-05
184-47
-•37
-•18
- -47
-•47
— •01
+ 55
- 67
17909
■\-e7 ...
'•• --73
...
...
--39 -
... +-45
• ••
156-07
+-23 --OS
^■•67 --09
+ -33
+ •29
+•01 --35
-•49 -01
- -17
127-13
-•23 —-11
— 03 +-I2
+ -17
+ •28
+ •50 +'3i
—•41 —-20
- '33
99-13
-h-oi — -17
-13 +-OS
- -03
+•05
+ -32 —-11
-09 +-o8
- -'3
67-44
+-28 +06
—•23
+ -09
—•12
+•06 —-22
-05 +09
- -05
34-13
+ •01 —-24
door
+ -17
—•01
+ •22 +-02
+ 308 + 3-38 - -19
--18
+ •20
— -2
+ •42
encum
jered
- -26
The mean course thicknesses, and their mean diff-erences being — from the base
upwards — thus:— 34-13 m.d. -19, 33-31 m.d. -18, 31-69 m.d. -14, 28-00 m.d. '2\,
28-94 m.d. '27, 28-40 m.d. -48 to top of N. and S. walls. In the first column
above, 245-1 is the apex of the E. and W. walls, where the sloping roof stones
end at their junction ; and the diff-erences entered here, N. and S., are due to the
N. and S. slabs not ending at the same level, one having fallen a little below
the other in building ; the highest shows, therefore, probably the intended point,
and this is 1080- 1 above the pavement. 214-35, '" the first column, refers to the
topmost joint on the E. and W. walls. 184-47 is the top of the N. and S. walls,
and a joint on the E. and W. walls. 17909 is a joint that occurs at each
side of the E. and W. walls, but which does not run far, being soon
shifted upward to the 184 level. 15607, 127-13, 99-13, are all joint levels
around the chamber. 67-44 is a joint level, signalized by the top of the doorway
and of the channel mouths in N. and S. walls. 34-13 is a course around the
p.
69
Sect. 43.] QUEEN'S CHAMBER, NICHE. 69
chamber. And o is the fine stone footing of the walls, which is about the level
of the variable and rough floor of the chamber. It must be remembered that
the above figures only give differences from a mean scale, and do not profess
to be levels ; the columns, in fact, being only rigidly connected at the two sides
of any one corner, which hence have no dividing line between them in the table.
Assuming, however, that the above series of heights of E. and W. walls are
pretty closely adjusted to the heights in the corners next to each, we have
for the sloping roof block, the following figures, calculating from the above
quantities : —
E. end, N. side. W. end, N, side. E. end, S. side. W. end, S. side.
Sloping length 120-00 i\gg6 11912 ii8"S9
Angle 30-48' 30°i4' 30°33' 30°io
These roof blocks are seen — where Howard Vyse excavated beneath one at the
N.W. corner — to go back 1 2 r6 on slope, behind the wall face ; this, coupled
with the thickness of these blocks (which is certain, by similar examples
elsewhere, to be considerable) throws the centre of gravity of each of the slabs
well behind the wall face,* so that they could be placed in position without
pressing one on another. Hence there is never any arch thrust so long as the
blocks are intact ; they act solely as cantilevers, with the capability of yielding
arched support in case they should be broken.
The projection on the western side of the doorway, mentioned by Professor
Smyth, is really a surplus left on both sides of the corner ; in order to protect
the stone in transit and in course of building. This undressed part in the
chamber, is cut away down to the true surface at the top and at the middle
joint, in order to show the workman exactly to where it needed to be dressed in
finishing it off. The excess in the chamber begins v>, below joint at top of
doorway, and thence projects VA„ with a width of 5*5 ; it is dressed away for
I 'OS at the middle joint, and then continues sloping away rather thinner down
to the floor. The projection into the passage is I'S maximum at base,
usually "8 ; and it is S"S maximum width, or usually 4'S.
43. The niche in the eastern wall of this chamber, from its supposed
connection with a standard of measure, was very closely examined. Its original
depth back was certainly only 41 inches at every part from the bottom upwards.
The surface that might be supposed to belong to the side of a deeper part, is only
that of a joint of masonry, one stone of which has been broken up and removed ;
this is evident as there is mortar sticking to it, and as it is pick-dressed, quite
different to the fine surfaces of the niche sides ; beside this, it is not flush with
the side, or any of the overlappings of the niche ; and moreover, all down the
niche sides are the traces of the edge of the back, at 41 from the front, where
it has been broken away.
*As at Sakkara, in the Pyramid of Fepi.
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vii.
The general form of the niche was a recess 41 inches (2 cubits) deep back ;
62 inches (3 cubits) wide at base, and diminishing its width by four successive
overla.ppings of the sides (at each wall course), each of \ cubit wide, until at 1 56
high it was only 20 (i cubit) wide, and was finally roofed across at 184 high.
Thus, of the 3 cubits width of the base, one cubit was absorbed on each side by
the overlappings, leaving one cubit width at the top. This cubit is the regular
cubit of 206 inches, and there is no evidence of a cubit of 25 inches here. The
exact dimensions of every part are as follow, giving the mean dimensions, and
the variations of each part, + or — , from the mean. All corrected for the salt
exudation on the two lower laps, as estimated at each point ; there is no salt on
the upper three laps : —
Levd
above
Floor.
Mean
of All.
Height
Fro
N.
of Lai
nt.
s.
sofSi
Bi
N.
des.
ick.
s.
From
to
N. side.
plumb-l!n(
apex of ro
to
Mid.
below
of,
to
S. side.
Mean
Width
FronL Mid.
1 2!P*
1 from
1 hack to
BadL front.
Exceniricity
from
sides of
chamber.
183-80
iro-
156-10
142-
27-70
-:-02
--10
+ •02
+ -10
--22
15-205.
25-08
34-958.
20-30
--55 --02 +-23 40-72
--29 +-II +-33
-17 + 15 +-2f,
25-32
28-94
+ •08
-•06
+ •16
IO-21S.
25-21
40-22S.
30-43
-•42' --08 -•-23 41-06
-•25--I1 +^25
-•02 +'o6|+^35
127-16
113-
28-23
3>79
mid
-•01
+ -01
-•01
+ •02'
4-sss.
25-28
4602S,
-•36 -•13 +107 4120
— •20 +-05 +-19
-•10 +-17 +•31
25-44
98-93
83-
67-14
-•08
+•24
mid
-•04
-•14
•88N.
25-16
51028.'
5*74
-•66--04'+-i9 41105
-•46 +•!© +"34
-•l2j+^23]*-36
25-20
67-14
--22
+ •23
S-4IN.
56.03S,
61-74
-•3o-^io
-•28
-•32+19
-■30+-04
+•21 41-10 j
+•26 1
+•31 41-32 i
+ •26141107 1
!j 1
25-10
Means
•08
•«3
•06
•12
i
25-19
41-41
25-29
44, The channels leading from this chamber were measured by the goniometer already described (//, section 10) ; they are exactly like the air channels in
the King's Chamber in their appearance, but were covered over the mouth by a
plate of stone, left not cut through in the chamber wall ; no outer end has yet
been found for either of them, though searched for by Mr. Waynman Dixon,
C,E,, who first discovered them, and also by myself on the N. face of the
Pyramid.
The N. channel is 8-6 high, and about 8 wide in the chamber wall, running
horizontally for 76 inches, and then turning upwards. The S. channel is 8-8
high, and runs 8o-o to its turn upwards. The mean angles, measured between
the horizontal part and the ascending slope of the channels, arc thus ^—
S.C1
liannet.
w.
Mid.
E. Mean.
38° 28'
38° 20'
38° 35' 38° 28'
Sect. 4$.] GALLERY, LENGTH AND ANGLES. 71
N. Channel.
W. Mid. E. Mean.
37° 33' 37° 25' 37° 25' 37° 28'
each statement being the mean of two observations, which never differed more
than 6'.
Hence, if these channels were continued to the outside of the Pyramid, their
floors would end on the Pyramid faces at 2641 '3 above the base, and 24608 from
the centre of the Pyramid on the N. face ; and at 2679" i above the base, and
243i'2 from the centre on the S. face. I observed something like the mouth of
a hole in the 85 th course on the S. face, scanning it with a telescope from below ;
but I was hindered from examining it closely.
45. Returning now to the gallery from which we diverged to the Queen's
Chamber, the length of the gallery was measured like the other passages, with
the steel tape, but not many joints were measured, and those were on the E.
ramp, on which the tape was laid at 6 inches from the edge. The offsets to the
floor and E. ramp were also read, in continuation of the series of the ascending
passage, as explained before (section 39). The results are as follow, starting from
the N. wall of the gallery, at I546'8 from beginning of ascending passage.
Variations from Mean Axis of Variations from Mean
Distance on + l' 20" azimutli. Axis of 26° 16' 40" altitude.
Slope. W. Mid, E. Ramp Top. Floor.
N. wall ... o ... ... ... \i'6 223]
At 30 20-9 •! E. 21-2
First joint, vertical . 446
At 150 207 •2W. 2o*3
Joint at "cut off" vertical 223-2
Face of "cut off" . 2237
Second " cut off " . 263-8
Joint . . . 264*1 20-9 o 20-9 2-0 22*9
At 400 2ro -2 E. 21*4 2*3 23-1
At 700 208 -4 E. 21-6 2-6 23-6
Joint . . . 912-4
At 1,000 2V\ o 2ro 1-5 23*4
Joint, broken to next 10870
Joint . . . 1186-5 ••• •'•
At 1,300 21-5 •3W, 20-8 2'3 23-3
Joint . . . 1454-6
At 1,600 2i'2 "I E. 21*4 2-1 22-2
Ramp End . . i8i5"S 21-3 o 2r2 i'8 22T
S. wall, in same line 1883-6
In the variations in altitude, the height of the axis above the ramp top is
stated, as well as its height over the floor. The axis, though different in azimuth
and altitude from that of the ascending passage, is reckoned to start from the
end of it ; hence the offsets are a continuous series, though measured from a line
7» THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. [Chap. vii.
which is bent on passing from the passage to the gallery. The first-stated floor
oflfset here (in brackets) is not what the continuation of the floor of the ascending
passage actually is at the point ; but it is the virtual floor of the gallery, i.e.,
where it would come if the trend of the rest of the gallery was continued, and
also (judging by the altitude observations of Prof. Smyth) where it would come
if continued parallel to the ramp top.
By successive rod measures. Prof. Smyth made the gallery "8 shorter than
it appears by this continuous measure ; but the continuous measure is certainly
better in principle and also in practice, as we have seen in the other passages.
The steel tape of 1,200 inches required to be shifted in order to measure from
one end to the other of the gallery, and three points were common to both tape
lengths ; the distances between these points were 305 '5 by first, 305 6 by second
measure, and 480*2 by both first and second measures, showing the same
accuracy in this as in the taping of the other passages. The difference between
Prof. Smyth's measures and the taping occurs almost entirely from the N. wall
to the cut out in the floor, and is probably due to want of straightness and
squareness in one or other of those surfaces.
Hence the floor of the gallery intersects the S. wall at 1689*0 ± '5 above
the pavement ; at 61*7 ± '8 S. of the Pyramid centre ; and its middle is 284*4 =fc
2*8 E. of the Pyramid centre ; reckoning the measures of length and angle
continuously through from the plug-blocks upwards, so as to avoid all uncertainties of connection at the beginning of the gallery, and duly correcting for
difference in offsets,
46. The holes cut in the ramps or benches, along the sides of the gallery
(see section of them in PI. ix.), the blocks inserted in the wall over each, and the
rough chopping out of a groove across each block — ^all these features are as yet
inexplicable. One remarkable point is that the holes are alternately long and
short, on both sides of the gallery ; the mean of the long holes is 23*32, with an
average variation of *73, and the mean of the short holes is 20*51, with average
variation '40. Thus the horizontal length of a long hole is equal to the sloping
length of a short hole, both being one cubit This relation is true within less
than half their average variations.
The roof of the gallery and its walls are not well known, owing to the
difficulty of reaching them. By means of ladders, that I made jointing together,
I was able to thoroughly examine both ends and parts of the sides of the
gallery. The roof stones are set each at a steeper slope than the passage, in
order that the lower edge of each stone should hitch like a paul into a ratchetcut in the top of the walls; hence no stone can press on the one below it, so as
to cause a cumulative pressure all down the roof ; and each stone is separately
upheld by the side walls across which it lies. The depth of two of these ratchetcuts, at the S. end, I measured as 1*0 and 1*9 to 2X) ; and the angles of the two
Sect. 46.]
GALLERY, LENGTH AND ANGLES.
n
slabs there 28" o' to 28° 18', and 27° 56' to 28° 30', mean 28° il'; which on a mean
slab 52-2 from N. to S., would differ 174 inches from the passage slope. The
edge of the southernmost slab is 14-5 from the S. wall ; the next slab is 47-4
from N. to S.
The verticality of the ends, of the gallery was measured from a plumb-line ;
and the horizontal distances of the top and bottom of each of the laps of stone
from the ends of the roof are thus : —
Laps.
ftop
I base
ftop
(base
ftop
(.base
ftop
Ibase
ftop
Ibase
ftop
Ibase
ftop
Ibase
N. End.
o(?)
h
6-2
s
8s
h
11-9
I2'I
h
15-1
ISO
s
19-5
I9'6
19*2
Lean out.
+•2
+•6
— •2
+ r
+-r
+ 1-2
S. End.
O
2-9
2-82
Lean in. Iligh on S. End. ^PjH^^
-•08
I"
5-80
9-00
f 1508
I1518
f i8-io
1 18SS
-^217 1:25
(21-25 +33
+ 10
+ 10
+•45
33-0
34«
33-8
side.
2-3
3-0
The letters h and s in the column of the N. end show the under edge of the
lap of stone to be either horizontal or sloping ; on the "S. end it is always
horizontal. The width of the top of the gallery is 40*9 at N., and 4i"3 at S. end.
The remarkable groove in the lower part of the third lap, along the whole length
of the sides, was measured thus, perpendicularly : —
N.W. N.E. S.W.
Groove upwards r "'7 "'^ "'^
from lap edgej ^ ^.^ ^.^ ^.^
At the S.W. it is cut to a depth of -8 inch, at the S.E. to -6 (?) ; the upper
edge of it is often ill-defined and sloping. According to Prof. Sm}'th the mean
I.
S.E.
mean.
iro
"4
-61
p.
74
74 THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. \Ckap.vii.
height of this lap above the gallery floor is i66-2 ± '8 vertically ; hence the
groove is at 172*1 to 179-0 vertically over the floor, and its lower edge is therefore at half the height of the gallery, that varying from 167 to 172. The
pickmarks in the groove on the S. end of the W, side are horizontal, and not
along the groove, showing that it was cut out after the walls were built, which
agrees with its rough appearance: It belongs to the same curious class of rough
alterations as the blocks inserted in the sides of the gallery and the rude grooves
cut away across them.
At the top of the N. end is a large forced hole, cut by Vyse in 1837, and
still quite fresh-looking. The whole of the top lap of stone is so entirely cut
away there that I could not decide to where it had come, and only suppose it to
project 3 inches, like the others.
From this the length of the roof of the gallery is 1688-9- 40*45 = 1648-4
horizontal, or 1838-6 sloping.
By plumb-line measure at the S. end, the roof on the E. side is inside the
floor edge (or overhangs) 20-50, and on the W. side 20-40. On the S. end
(eliminating the lean) the projection is 209, and on N. 20-4; mean of all, 2055,
for the sum of the seven projections of the laps, or one cubit, the laps being
then one palm each in breadth. Thus the laps overhang the ramps along the
gallery sides, and the space between the ramps (2 cubits), is equal to the space
between the walls at the top.
The remarkable shaft, or " well," that leads away from the lower end of the
gallery down to the subterranean passage, was fully measured about its mouth ;
but it appears to be so rough and so evidently utilitarian (for the exit of workmen) that it is not worth while to publish more complete measures than those
of Prof. Smyth. As, howe\'er, the position of its mouth has been supposed to
have a meaning, it should be stated that the opening is from 218 to 49-0
horizontally from N. wjdl of gallery on floor, 2r8 to 48-7 near its top, and 219
to 48-9 by the sloping distance reduced. Thus the middle of it is at 3540
35-25, or 35'37by different methods. The part of the shaft that passes through
a rock fissure filled with gravel (often called the " grotto ") has been steined with
10 courses of small stones, varying from 7i to 8 inches in height
At the upper end of the gallery, we have already stated the S. wall to be
61-7 ±-8 S. of the Pyramid centre; and hence the face of the great step at
the head of the gallery (which descends behind both floor and ramps) is
(6i-7-6r3)=-4± "8 S. of the Pyramid centre. It may, therefore, be taken as
intended that the face of this step, and the transition from sloping to horizontal
surfaces, signalizes the transit from the Northern to the Southern half of the
Pyramid, This same mid-plane of the Pyramid being also signalized by the
mid-plane of the Queen's Chamber, which is measured as -3 ± 8 N. of the
Pyramid centre.
Sect. 47.]
ANTECHAMBER AND PASSAGES.
?S
The ramps along the sides, where they join this great step, are very
irregular. Their top surfaces slope away downwards toward the side walls ;
thus the E. ramp top varies from I3"20 to 1218 below the step from E. to W.,
and the W. ramp top from 1282 to 12*2 (?) from W. to E. At present, moreover, the ends of the ramps are parted away from the face of the step by
"30 on E. and '44 on VV., an amount which has been duly subtracted from my
length measures of the gallery. Beside this, the top of the step itself, though,
straight, is far from level, the W. side being about ro higher than the E. side.
And the sloping floor seems to be also out of level by an equal amount in the
opposite direction ; since on the half width of the step {i.e., between the ramps)
the height of the step face is 3492 or 35-0 on E., and 3S"8o or 3585 on W.
The length of the step from N. to S. is : on E. side 610, and on VV. 61-5. All
these measurements are very carefully taken with elimination of wear, fractures,
and shifting of the stones at the joints. Hence, at the line along which I
measured, 6 inches from the edge of the ramp, the step will be 6ri long ; and
this at the angle 26° 12' 50" (by which the end of the gallery was calculated from
the plug-blocks) will be 30"08 vertically, for the virtual * above the actual floor
end. Then the top of the step will (by above measures) be here 34"88 above
actual floor end, and the step dips about '64 to the S. wall at this part ; so the
top of the step at the S. wall is 34-88 — -64— 30.08=4-16 (say±-2) above the
virtual floor end at the line of taping. And as the virtual floor end is at
leSgoi'S, the step surface at the E. side of the S. doorway is 1693-2^-6 over
the pavement.
47. The Antechamber and its passages were measured both by steel tape
and rods, in one length, from the step to the King's Chamber ; and the joints
and floor levels are as follow : —
Face of step
S. wall of gallery
N. end of Antechamber
Joint, granite begins .
Granite of wall begins
Edge of wall groove .
Joint of floor
Edge of wall groove .
• The virtual floor end is where the general floor slope, if carried on through the step,
would intersect the plane of the S. wall
Southward
Along Floor
on £. side.
fromcenire
Level over virtual
Level over pavement.
of Pyramid
end of gallery ± '2.
±•6.
±■9
— 61-32
•4
4-7 E. 5-6 W.
1693-7 to 1694-6
61-7
4-2 E.
1693-2
52-02
"37
,
64-90
126-6
(3-6
13-9
1692-6
1692-9
75-26
■
91-79
153-5
112-15
173-8
.'37
(3-2
1692-7
1692-2
113-48
175-2
119-26
181-0
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap, vii.
Along Floor
on £. side.
Sruthword
from centre
of Pyramid
± -9.
Level over virtual
end of gallery ± -a.
Level over
±
pavement.
134-17
168-10
195-9
229-8
198-41
260-1
f2-9
12-8
1691-9
1691-8
268-9
269-04
269-17
330-6
330-7
330-9
- -5
3-8
1688-5
16920
1692-8
Joint of wall
S. end of Antechamber
Joint of floor
Base of King's Ch. wall
End of passage floor
Raised floor, King's Ch.
These mecisures vary somewhat from those of Professor Smyth in 1865 ;
and, comparing the greatest difi-erences, they stand thus : —
Steel tape, Rods, 1880. Rods,
1882. 1865.
N. end Antechamber to joint S. of it 12-88 12-88 13-6
Next joint to S. end Antechamber . 55-95 5573 and 55*80 55"5
So here, as elsewhere, the measures in 1880-2 by steel tape and rods, entirely
independent of each other, agree fairly together, and suggest that the 1865
rod measures were somewhat in error. This is due generally to the latter
starting from diff"erent points on different occasions, and to their different series
being insufficiently locked together. Hence I adopt the steel tape measures as
the most satisfactory,
48. Taking the Antechamber alone, we may say that its dimensions above
the granite wainscot of the sides, are as follow : —
Length,
N. to S.
Breadth, E. to W.
Height
above floor.
a from W.
Middle.
12 from E.
E. side.
2 from N.
40 from N.
76fromN.
2 from S.
1 16-85
ll6-22
1 1605
115-65
64-80
64-48
117-00
116-18
116-03
115-37
64-98
65-26
65-25
117-00
II6-1I
115-73
114-07
65-48
65-21
116-55
115-91
116-58
115-93
115-91
116-12
Diagonals N.W. to S.E.
{;"■■'
33-07
at 2 from ceiling
over wainscot
'33"i4}N.E.toS.W.
132-98)
The height was measured as follows
Near N. wall.
14 from N.
59 from N.
61 from N.
S. wall.
At E. side
Middle .
At W. side .
149-47
149-53
149-32
149-09
149-01
14917
149-10
149-62
149-64
149-65
149-63
149-64
149-57
Mean
Above gallery end .
149-44
15304
149-05
152-95
'49-13
152-83
149-64
152-84
149-61
152-61
p.
77
Sect. 49.] ANTECHAMBER, DIMENSIONS. 77
The mean length is thus 1 16-30 (by the two series from top to base), breadth
6S"00, and height I49'3S ; or the ceiling over the virtual end of tlie gallery floor,
1S2"8S ± '2, and i84r8 ± -6 over the pavement
49. Coming now to details of the walls, the rough and coarse workmanship
is astonishing, in comparison with the exquisite masonry of the casing and
entrance of the Pyramid ; and the main object in giving the following details is
to show how badly pyramid masons could work. The great variation in the
foregoing measures illustrates this.
The N. wall is all rough picked work, with '2 variation commonly ; there is
a great irregular flaw, and a piece broken out of the stone about the level of the
top of the leaf, as much as i inch deep. The E. wall has the granite by the
side of the leaf wavy and winding, and bulbous at the base, projecting v^ On
the wainscot block at the S. end of this wall, which is all in one with the S. end
of the chamber, are two conjoined deep scores or scrapes nearly vertical, much
like the beginning of a regular groove ; their distance from the S. wall is y6 to
7"2 at 90, and 2"6 to 6' 4. at 52 from floor, where they end ; they are •48 deep at
maximum. The S. wall has all up the E. side of it, over the wainscot, a
projection, just equal in width to the wainscot, and varying in thickness from
'31 at top to 17 half-way down, and thence fading off down to the top of the
wainscot. On the W. side of the S. wall the granite has been daubed over for
2 to 6 inches in breadth, with a thin coat of cement ; this, at i inch from the
side is "35 thick ; also at 13 from the W. side is a slight sinking of the granite,
from "34 to '60 in depth, all quite ill-defined. The W. wall has the top of the
granite wainscot uneven, rising toward the front, and there sinking suddenly '35
at I "4 from the front edge. The southern of the three semicircular hollows on the
top of this wainscot (see PI. xii.)* has the granite defective at the back of it, and is
backed with rough limestone there. The southernmost stone over the wainscot
is dressed very flat and true, but rough, + or — '03. The next block has a
raised edge to it on the S. side (figured by Prof. Smyth), and along the base of
it, which consists of granite left rough, not dressed away in finishing ; about
4 inches wide, and "4 projection along the lower edge of the block ; and 2 wide
and V2 maximum projection at the side. The other edges of this block were
marked out by saw-cuts in the granite, about "2 deep, to guide the workmen in
dressing the face.
The various courses and stones of the chamber were measured, but the only
points of interest are the following.
The south wall has four vertical grooves all up it, which have been hitherto
supposed to have extended down to the top of the passage to the King's
Chamber. This was not the case, however ; for, though much broken away, it is
still clear that they became shallower as they neared the bottom, and probably
* The forms of the curves are plotted from offsets taken at every inch along them.
p.
78
78 THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. {Chap. vii.
■■- ■■■■■ I — I ., ..,,..■1 IIM II^^^^^.IIM H ■ ■
ended leaving an unbroken flat surface over the doorway. Their depths (as
well as the forms of their sides) show this, as follows : —
Height above door. E. groove. and 3rd W. groove,
at 10 2-8 Much Slight 28 at 8
at 7 2'5 broken. curve. 25 at 7
at 5 1.75 20 at 5 J
50. The granite leaf which stretches across the chamber, resting in grooves
cut in the granite wainscots, must be somewhat less in width than the breadth
between the grooves, i.e., 4846 to 4876. Its other dimensions were carefully
ascertained, as much theoretic importance had been attached to them ; though
to anyone looking at the object itself, the roughness and irregularity of it would
put any accuracy of workmanship out of the question. The thickness of the two
stones that form it was gauged by means of plumb-lines at 33 points ; it varies
from 1516 to i6'20, but the details are scarcely worth printing. This leaf is not
simply a flat slab of granite, but on both its upper and lower parts it has a
projection on its N. side, about i inch thick, where it is included in the side
grooves. The edge of this projection do^vn the W. side has been marked out by
a saw cut ; and the whole of the granite on the inner side of this cut has been
dressed away all over the face of the leaf, leaving only one patch or boss of the
original surface of the block.
This boss, of which so much has been made by theorists, is merely a very
rough projection, like innumerable others that may be seen ; left originally for
the purpose of lifting the blocks. WTien a building was finished these bosses
were knocked away (I picked up a loose one among waste heaps at Gizeh)
and the part was dressed dowTi smd polished like the rest of the stone. It is
only in unimportant parts that they are left entire. This boss on the leaf is
veiy ill-defined, being anything between 47 and 5-2 wide, and between 3*3 and
3*5 high on its outer face ; at its junction with the block it is still less defined,
and might be reckoned anything between 7-2 and 8-2 wide, and 5"6 to 66 high. It
projects "94 to I'lO from the block, according to the irregularities of the rough
hammer-dressing. Anything more absurdly unsuited for a standard of measure
it would be difficult to conceive. I write these remarks with a sharp plaster
cast of it before me that I took in 1881. Traces of another boss remain
on the W. wall of the Antechamber, above the wainscot ; here there has been
a boss 12 inches wide and 9 high, which has been knocked away, and the surface
rough dressed, though the rest of the face of the stone is g^round down elsewhere.
The block has been turned in building, so that the flat under-edge of the boss is
toward the N. Remains of another boss may be seen on a block in the passage
to the King's Chamber ; remains of 15 or 16 others in the King's Chamber ;
5 others complete in the spaces above that ; and many on the casing of the
Third Pyramid and elsewhere (see PL xiL). The E. to W. breadth of the leaf
p.
79
Sect. 51.] KINGS CHAMBER. 79
between its side ledges in the grooves, varies from 406 to 4r2 at different
heights up the middles of the ledges ; but furthermore, the edges are not
square, and we may say that 40 to 42 will about represent its irregularity.
Yetthis was another so-called " standard of measure " of the theorists. The top
of the upper block of the leaf is a mere natural surface of the granite boulder
out of which it was cut, utterly rough and irregular ; and not materially broken
away as it dips down deeply into the grooves, and is there plastered over. It
varies from 5 1 24 to 590, and perhaps more, below the ceiling. Yet the cubic
volume of this block was eagerly worked out by the theorists.
51. The King's Chamber was more completely measured than any other
part of the Pyramid ; the distances of the walls apart, their verticality in each
corner, the course heights, and the levels were completely observed ; and the
results are given in Plate xiii., in which all variations from the mean amounts
are shown on their actual size. The principle of concentrated errors enables the
eye to grasp at once the character of the variations in workmanship, in a way
that no table of figures could show it.
For example, the N. wall is on an average 41 2*59 inches long (see bottom of
PL xiii.) ; but the "face of West end" (see left hand of plate) is at the top -18
outside the mean vertical line, and the " face of East end " is -42 inside the mean
vertical ; hence at the top the length is actually (-42 - -18) shorter than the mean,
i.e., it is 41 2*35 . The line of the ceiling on the W. edge of the N. wall will be
seen to be 'iS over the mean level of the course, marked "5 " at each side of the
sheet; and the ceiling line at the E. edge is as much as 100 over the same
mean level ; hence the ceiling slopes '82 on its length along the N. side.
Referring now to the floor or to the ist course, where the mean levels are
marked by continuous straight lines all across the diagram, it will be seen how
far the variable lines of the " Actual First course " or "Actual Floor " fluctuate up
and down, in relation to their mean level ; the first course, beginning at the
N.W., is at "23 over its mean level (marked i at the edge), and runs upward
until it is ro3 over its mean level at the N.E., then down to below mean level at
the S.E., then still further down along the S. wall, turning a little up to the
S.W. corner, and then rapidly rising to above its mean level again at the N.W.
comer, whence we started. Only the first course and floor were directly levelled
all round; the upper courses were connected by vertical measures in each
corner, hence their fluctuations along the sides were not measured, and they are
only marked by broken lines. On looking down, say, the " Face of West-end,"
from joint $ to 4, it is seen that the line bends out, showing the stpne to be
slightly hollowed ;* but on the average it is about square with the course line ;
and any error seen in squareness of angle in the diagram, represents only 5; of
• The middle of the course was only thus offsetted on the top course ; the other courses
were read on at the top and base of each, to give their errors of cutting and of placing.
8o
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap. vii.
the actual angular error, or 5° equals 6'. Then, below that, it is seen that the line
from joint 4 to 3 begins very slightly outside the line from joint 5 to 4 ; showing
that the stone of the 4th course is set back by that amount, owing to error in
placing It. Similarly the squareness of faces, and truth of setting of the stones,
is shown for all the other courses in each comer. In fact, a paper model,
showing all the errors on the actual scale, might be made by cutting out four
sides, following the outlines of the faces of the walls as here marked, and
bending each side to make it fit to the irregular edge of its adjacent side.
This diagram will represent with quite sufficient accuracy, without numerical
tables, the small errors of this chamber ; especially as it must be remembered
that this shows its actual state, and not precisely its original form. On every side
the joints of the stones have separated, and the whole chamber is shaken larger.
By examining the joints all round the 2nd course, the sum of the estimated
openings is, 3 joints opened on N. side, total = 19; i joint on E. ='14; 5 joints
on S. ='4i ; 2 joints on W. ="38. And these quantities must be deducted from
the measures, in order to get the true original lengths of the chamber. I also
observed, in measuring the top near the W., that the width from N. to S. is
lengthened '3 by a crack at the S. side.
These openings or cracks are but the milder signs of the great injury that
the whole chcimber has sustained, probably by an earthquake, when every roof
beam was broken across near the South side ; and since which the whole of the
granite ceiling (weighing some 400 tons), is upheld solely by sticking and
thrusting. Not only has this wreck overtaken the chamber itself, but in every
one of the spaces above it are the massive roof-beams either cracked across or
torn out of the wall, more or less, at the South side ; and the great Eastern and
Western walls of limestone, between, and independent of which, the whole of
these construction chambers are built, have sunk bodily. All these motions are
yet but small — only a matter of an inch or two — but enough to wreck the
theoretical strength and stabihty of these chambers, and to make their downfall
a mere question of time and earthquakes.
52. Applying, then, these corrections of the opened joints to the lengths of
the lower course — and also, as being the most likely correction, to the upper
parts as well — we have the following values for the original lengths of the
chamber, and for the error of squareness of the present corner angles.
Top
Mean
Base
N.
412-14
412-40
412-78
N.E.
S.E.
s.w.
w.
+ 4" 206-30 '- 3S"4"'88
-2' 57"j206-29 +2' 20"]4I2-II
-4 S4 206-43 +4' 40"i4i2-53
+ 1' 35"|2o6o4
- 1' 2"|205-97 . - ^^
-4' S"|2o6-i6 +4' 19"
N.W.
-I' 4"
+ 1' 39"
Now it will be observed that though the lengths can be corrected by the
sum of the openings, the angles cannot be so corrected, as we do not know
Stct. S3.]
KINGS CHAMBER, ROOF.
8i
which angle the change 6f length has affected. Hence the present angles are
entered above, with the reservation that the sides having altered about i in 1,000
of their length, the original angles may have easily been 3' or 4' different ; and,
therefore, all that we can say about the angles is, that the builders were probably
not S' in error, and very possibly less than that ; also that the errors change
sign from base to top, so that each course must be a true right angle at some
level up it.
Probably the base of the chamber was the part most carefully adjusted and
set out ; and hence the original value of the cubit used can be most accurately
recovered from that part. The four sides there yield a mean value of 20'632±
•004, and this is certainly the best determination of the cubit that we can hope
for from the Great Pyramid.
The top course of both the E. and W. walls consists of a single stone ; on
the N. and S. walls the joints of it were measured thus : — N. wall, E. end o,
joints 62* I, 248'8 ; S. wall, E. end o, joint \%g-2.
The average variation of the thickness of the courses from their mean is
■051, the mean being 47045 between similar joints, or including the top course,
which was necessarily measured in a different way, 47*040 ± '013.
53. The roof of the chamber is formed of nine granite beams, of the
following breadths, the two side beams partly resting on the ends of the
chamber : —
W.
Along I
\. Side.
Along
S. Side.
Skew.
Difference
Stones.
Total.
Stones.
Total.
of End
.Widths.
- *
- *
22'4 + X
17-8 +«
22-4
17-8
-4-6
4S-S
45 -8
+ -3
-43
52-5
S3-0
+ -s
120:4
II6-6
-3-8
49-1
Si-0
+ 19
169s
167-6
-.1-9
53-9
55-4
+ 1-5
223-0
- 4
44-8
45-8
+ ro
268-2
268-8
+ -6
S8-I
59-3
+ 1-2
326-3
328-1
+ 1-8
-1-9
389-0
388-9
- -I
233 + *
412-3 + a;
23-4 + *
412-3+*
M
•a ^ THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. \Ckap. vii.
The column of " skew " shows the difference in the position of the joints on
the opposite sides of the chamber ; and the " difference of end widths " the
variation between the two ends of the same beam. From this table it seems
probable that the roofing in of the chamber was begun at the W. end, as the
skew of the beams increases up to the E. end ; and also as the largest beams,
which would be most likely to be first used, are at the W. end. The numbering
of the slabs in the top space above the King's Chamber also begins at the W,
end. Vyse, however, states that these " chambers of construction " were begun
at the E. end.
These roofing-beams are not of "polished granite," as they have been
described ; on the contrary, they have rough-dressed surfaces, very fair and true
so far as they go, but without any pretence to polish. Round the S.E. corner,
for about five feet on each side, the joint is all daubed up with cement laid on
by fingers. The crack across the Eastern roof-beam has been also daubed with
cement, looking, therefore, as if it had cracked before the chamber was finished.
At the S.W. corner, plaster is freely spread over the granite, covering about a
square foot altogether.
54- The floor of the chamber, as is well known, is quite disconnected from
the walls, and stands somewhat above the base of the lowest course. It is very
irregular in its level, not only absolutely, but even in relation to the courses ; its
depth below the first course joint varying 2"29, from 4294 to 40'6s. This
variation has been attributed to the sinking caused by excavation beneath it,
but this is not the case ; it has been only undermined at the W. end beneath the
coffer,* and yet the floor over this undermined part is i \ inches higher in relation
to the first course, than it is at the S.E. corner ; and along the S. side where it
has not been mined it varies \\ inches in relation to the first course. In these
cases I refer to the first course line, as that was the builder's conception of level
in the chamber, to which they would certainly refer ; but if we refer instead to
absolute level, the anomalies are as great and the argument is unaffected.
It appears, then, that the floor never was plane or regular ; and that, in
this respect, it shared the character of the very variable floor of the passage that
led to the chamber, no two stones of which are on the same level. The passage
floor, even out to the great step in the gallery, is also inserted between the walls,
like the floor of the chamber.
55. Among peculiarities of work still remaining, are the traces of 15 bosses
or lugs on the faces of the granite blocks, all on the lower course. Those best
seen are two on the fourth block of the N. wall, counting from the door ; they
have been about 12 inches wide and the same high, 14 inches apart, and their
flat bottom edges 3 inches from the base of the block (see PI. xii.). They may
be veiy plainly seen by holding a candle close to the wall below them ; this
* I know the hole well, having been down into it more than once.
S*et. 56.]
KING'S CHAMBER, CHANNELS.
«J
shows up the grinding around them, and the slight projection and very much
less perfect grinding of the sites of the bosses. There is a remarkable diagonal
drafted line across the immense block of granite over the doorway ; it appears
not to run quite to the lower corner on the E. side ; but this is doubtless due to
the amount by which the block is built into the E. wall, thus cutting off the end
of the diagonal line. This sunken band across the stone appears to have been
a true drafted straight line cut in process of working, in order to avoid any
twist or wind in the dressing of the face ; this method being needful as the block
was too large to test by the true planes otherwise used (see section 135).
The position of the King's Chamber in the Pyramid is defined thus : N.
wall at base 3306 ± "8 S. of centre of Pyramid ; S. wall 537"0± '8 from centre;
E. wall (284-4 ± 207) = 305-1 it 3-0 E. of centre ; W. wall 107-7 ± 3'0 W. of
centre. Base of walls 1686-3 to 1688-5 ± '6 above pavement ; actual floor 1691-4
to 1693-7 ± '6 above pavement; ceiling 19216 to 1923-7 ± "6 above
pavement.
56. The air channels leading from this chamber have been already mentioned (see section 24) and reference has been made to PI. xi. for the positions of
their outer ends. The angles of them had not yet been accurately measured,
and therefore I carefully observed them by a sliding signal and a theodolite.
The angles on the floors of them at different distances from the theodolite
station at the present outer ends are thus : —
N. Channel.
s.
Channel.
At 84 to 180
32 4' 45"
At to 1 20
45° 25' 6"
180 to 300
31 37 15"
120 to 240
45° 30' 7"
300 to 372
30° 43' IS"
240 to 360
45° 25' 57"
Mean
/
360 to 480
45° 25' 14"
31 33
480 to 600
45° 15' 19"
600 to 720
45° 7' 42"
720 to 840
44° 26' 18"
Mean 45° 13' 40"
For example, on the floor of the N. channel, the angle on the part from 180 to
300 inches from the mouth averages 31° 3/ 15" ; this is, of course, quite apart
from whatever the dip may be from the passage mouth to those points ; and it is
reduced from the actually observed quantities. The above list of angles are just
equivalent to observations by a clinometer, sliding to different parts of the
passage. It is striking that the slope of both passages continuously increases
up to the outside (except just at the mouth of the S. channel) ; hence these
quantities, which only extend over a part of either passage, cannot give the true
mean slope ; probably on the whole length the means would not be greater
angles than 31° and 44^° respectively.
The N. channel has been forced open as a working passage for some way
U THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. {Chap. vU.
inwards, only leaving the floor and W. side perfect. The channel is now blocked,
just below the end of the enlarged part, and on working a rod 4J feet into the
sand, it ran against limestone. The sand in the hole has blown in during gales,
which sweep up sand like mist. The remains of the original channel show it to
have varied from 8-9 to 92 (mean 90) in width, and to have been 872 and 874
in height.
The S. channel is blocked by sand at l6 feet down. It is not straight in
the clear length, curving more than its own width to the east ; and the sides
often shift a few tenths of an inch in passing from one stone to another. These
details were seen by examining it with a telescope on Feb. 8, and by photographing it on Nov. 2, 1881 ; these being the days on which the sun shines
down it at noon. Its width at the top is 835 and 865, and its height 87 to 89.
57. The coffer in the King's Chamber is of the usual form of the earliest
Egyptian sarcophagi, an approximately flat-sided box of red granite. It has
the usual under-cut groove to hold the edge of a lid along the inside of the N., E.,
and S. sides ; the W. side being cut away as low as the groove for the lid to
slide over it ; and ha^-ing three pin-holes cut in it for the pins to fall into out of
similar holes in the lid, when the lid was put on. It is not finely wrought, and
cannot in this respect rival the coffer in the Second Pyramid. On the outer
sides the lines of sawing may be plainly seen : horizontal on the N., a small patch
horizontal on the E., vertical on the S., and nearly horizontal on the W. ;
showing that the masons did not hesitate at cutting a slice of granite 90 inches
long, and that the jewelled bronze saw must have been probably about 9 feet
long. On the N. end is a place, near the W. side, where the saw was run too
deep into the granite and was backed out iagain by the masons ; but this fresh
start they made was still too deep, and two inches lower they backed out a
second time, having altogether cut out more than A-inch deeper than they
intended. On the E. inside is a portion of a tube drill hole remaining, where
they tilted the drill over into the side by not working it vertically. They tried
hard to polish away all that part, and took off about A-inch thickness all round
it; but still they had to leave the side of the hole iV deep, 3 long, and 1-3 wide ;
the bottom of it is 8 or 9 below the original top of the coffer. They made a
similar error on the N. inside, but of a much less extent There are traces of
horizontal grinding lines on the W. inside. Reference should be made to
section 129 for the subject of stone-working in general.
58. The coffer was very thoroughly measured, offsets being taken to 388
points on the outside, to 281 points inside, or (i6g in all; besides taking 281
caliper measures.
Before raising it from the floor to measure the bottom, its place as it stood
on the chamber floor, tilted up at the S. end by a large pebble under it, was
observed thus : —
S*<l. 59.] COFFER, OFFSETS TO SURFACES. «S
N.E.toN. WaU. N.W.toN. K.W. toW. S.W. to W, S.W. to S. S.E.toS.
Top ... 4770 48-90 53-34 56-50 67-92 [68-60]
Base ... 48-35 50-06 53-32 56-54 67-62 68x)6
S.E. to S. wall in brackets, was taken at lo below top, owing to breakage
above that
On raising the coffer no trace of lines was to be found to mark its place on
the floor, nor any lines on the floor or bottom of the cofler.
The flint pebble that had been put under the coffer is important If any
person wished at present to prop the cofler up, there are multitudes of stone
chips in the Pyramid ready to hand. Therefore fetching a pebble from the
outside seems to show that the coffer ^vas first lifted at a time when no breakages
had been made in the Pyramid, and there were no chips lying about This
suggests that there was some means of access to the upper chambers, which was
always available by removing loose blocks without any forcing. If the stones at
the top of the shaft leading from the subterranean part to the gallery had been
cemented in place, they must have been smashed to break through them, or if
there were granite portcullises in the Antechamber, they must also have been
destroyed ; and it is not likely that any person would take the trouble to fetch
a large flint pebble into the innermost part of the Pyramid, if there were stone
chips lying in his path.
59. The measurements of the coflfer surfaces by means of offsets from
arbitrary lines, have all been reduced in both tilt and skew, and are stated as
offsets or variation^ + and — {i.e., in excess or deficiency of stone) from a set of
mean planes. These mean planes, then, are supposed to lie half in and half out
of the stone, being in the mean position and direction of the face. The mean
planes adopted for the E. and W. sides, both in and out, are all parallel ; hence
variations from these planes represent errors of flatness of the surfaces, and also
errors of parallelism of the quasi-parallel surfaces. The mean planes adopted
for the N. and S. ends, both in and out, are similarly all parallel The mean
planes adopted for the bottom, both in and out, and the top, are also parallel
These mean planes of the E. and W. sides, and of the N. and S. ends, are all
square with the planes adopted for the bottom and top. There is no exception
from parallelism in the system of comparison planes ; and but one exception
from squareness, in that the N. and S. planes are not adopted square with the
E. and W. planes. There was such difference from squareness in the work, that
to make the planes square with each other, would have altered the offsets so
much as to disguise the small curvatures of the faces ; and adopting the planes
slightly out of square, makes no difference in taking out quantities of length,
surface, or bulk, from the tables of offsets. '
The mean planes to which the coffer surfaces are referred here, and from
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap, vii.
which the actual surfaces differ by an equal amount + and — , yield the following
dimensions : —
N. end thick
Inside length
S. end thick
5-67
78-06
5-89
E. side thick
Inside width
W. side thick
5-87
5-82
Outside length 89-62 Outside width 38-50
Inner depth
Base thick
Outer height
Ledge depth
34*42
The vertical planes all square with the horizontal ; but N. and S. planes cut
E. and W. planes at 89° 47' at N.E. and S.W. comers, and at 90° 13' at N.W. and
S.E. comers.
For convenience of reference the whole coffer was divided by imaginary lines
or planes, 6 inches apart in each direction, and represented by rows of chalk
spots during the actual measurements. Thus at the S. end the first vertical
plane across the coffer from E. to W. is A, through the midst of that end ; the
second plane is B, which passes 3 inches clear of the end ; then C ; and so on to
O, which is 3 inches clear of the N. end ; and P the last line, through the midst
of the N. end. Then at the W. side the first plane is a, the second /3, an inch
dear of the side, then 7, S, e, Z„ an inch clear of the R side, and r\ through the E,
side. Then vertically the plane b is 4 inches above the inside bottom, and
*■» ^t '. ft «"^ ^^ six-inch intervals ; occasionally, in the most perfect parts,
another line, g, could be measured on the outside, just at the top. The inside
plane, a, was taken at only 3 inches below b, or i inch over the bottom ; but the
outside plane, a, was taken the full six inches below b, />., 4 or 5 inches above
the outside bottom. In taking means in the inside the offsets to a are only
allowed half weight, as they belong to a much shorter space than the others ;
they ought, theoretically, to have even less weight, but as the inner planes
gather in rapidly, just at the bottom below a, this half weight probably gives
the truest results.
Having, then, adopted the above mean planes for the sides, and divided
them for reference at every six inches, we can state all the variations of the
actual surfaces as being either + ('•'•> an excess of stone beyond the plane)
or — (/>., a deficiency of stone), either inside or outside the coffer.
These variations are as follow, stated in hundredths of an inch : —
South end. North end.
Top.
West
outside.
Base.
ABC DEFG HJ K LM N OP
s
+2 — I - 3
J
+10 +8 + 8+4+3-4+J + I 0-1-3-1 o+i-i
e
+ 12 + 7 -f 14 +5 +1 -I - S - 6 - 8 -10 -13 - 8 - 5 + 3 + s
d
+14 + 8 +12 +9 +1 -7 -13 -14 -16 -14 -IS -12 - 8 + I + I
c
+ 17 +10 -l-io +9 +6—2 — 8 —II -13 —13 —13 -10 — 6 + 3
b
+20 +10 + 9+9+2—4-9 —10 —14 —12 —II - 7 + 8 +12
a
+21 +10 + 9 0-6-8-9-8-6-2 + 2 +10 +17 +26 +31
Stct. 59.]
COFFER, OFFSETS TO SURFACES.
«7
South end.
Top.
East
outside.
Base.
B
C D
H
K
M
North end.
NOP
much. +5 +8 +9 +9 •■•
broken ... -7 -5 -4 -3 o +1 +2 +4 +7 +7 +7 +9
away -8 —6 -5 -3-2 o o +2 +2 +5 +5 +4 +7
-13 -II -7 -5 -4 -3 o +1 +1 +3 +2 +5 +5 +5 +8
f|-i2 -II -8 -7 -5 -3 -2 +1 4-1 +2 +2 +6 +6 +5 +8
-12 -12 -8 -7 -4 -4 -I 4-1 +1 +2 +3 +7 +7 +7 +8
-9-9-7-4 o +1 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +8 +8 +5 +6
>op.
North outside.
Base.
West side.
East side
a
$
y
*
f
:
»»
g
...
+39
+3'!
...
..*
+21
...
/
+.7?
+31
+29
+21
+21
+20
+ 18
e
+ 16
+ 9
+ 3
— 2
+ I
+ 7
+«3
d
+ 1.^
— 2
-14
—21
-IS
- 6
+ 2
c
+ S
+ 2
— 10
-17
- 9
— 2
+ 3
b
— 3
— 3
- 3
- 9
- 8
- 4
+ 2
a
I— 6
—12
—20
-36
-27
- 4
+ 13
Top.
South outside.
Base.
West side.
e
d
e
\ a
East side.
t r,
• ••
...
■ ■■
.
...
••■
— 12
- 7
+ I
+ 2
+7
+24
+34
— 12
— 12
~ 5
- 4
+3
+22
+34
— 21
-24
-16
— II
—2
+22
+37
-2?
-27
—21
-15
+ 1
+22
+43
-27
-30
— 20
-'4
-4
+26
+47
—22
-32
-16
-«3
—2
+29
+S4
South end.
A
West
Bottom
outside.
East
B
G H J
M
North end.
NOP
... +15 +15 +17 +13 +12 4-16 4-11 + 5+»-7 + 9 + 4
... +20 +15 +16 + 9 +'4 + 4 + 6-1 -II -3 + 4-1
... 4-22 4-22 +19 + 8 + 8-24-1—4 — 9 -18 - 4 - 8
4-10 4-17 +21 4-17 + 3 — 3 — 4 — 6 —II —16 -15 — 9 —12
+ 9 +'7 +>2 + 9 + I — 8 — I —II —13 —25 —12 —10 —IS
+ 13 + 7 +12 + 4 — 2 — 6 — 7 —12 — 8 —17 —12 —20 ...
-8 + 8 + S + 4-7-S-8-13-12 -10 -14 -IS ...
South end.
Top.
West
inside.
Base.
( /
t
d
c
b
B
H
K
M
North end
N O
+ 3
+ 5
+ 1
+ 5
+10
+11
+ 12
+ «4
+ 16
+1";
+13
+ 12
+ «2
— I
+ 1
-3
+ 3
+ 4
+ 4
+ 3
+ S
+ 10
+12
+10
+ 9
+ 8
+ I
— I
+ I
+ 3
- S
- 5
— I
+ 8
— I
+ 10
+ 12
— I
— 2
—2
— I
— II
-17
-16
— 12
— 2
- 4
+ 10
+ 7
+ 4
— I
-3
— 2
— II
— 22
-28
-27
-18
- 7
- 7
— 10
+ 4
+19
+ 14
+8
- S
-19
-27
-33
-34
-24
- 7
- 8
+ 7
+ 6
THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[Chap, vii.
South end.
North end.
Top.
East
inside.
Base.
B C
D
E
F G
H
J
K
L
M
N
O
/
-5+1
+ 2
+ 7
+ 7+7
+ 4
+ 2
+ 2
+ 3
— 12
— I
+ »
e
-5+1
+ 2
+ 4
+ 6+7
+ 2
+ 4
+ 4
+ 4
+ 2
— 1
— I
d
-4+2
+ 4
+ 4
+ 3-1
- 6
- 5
- 4
+ I
O
o
— 2
c
-6+1
+ 3
+ 3
+ 5 + I
- 7
— II
— II
- 3
- 3
— I
O
b
-6+1
+ I
+ 2
+ 6 +IO
— 2
— 12
-i6
- <)
- i;
— 2
— I
a
o +3
+ 2
+ I
+ 5 +'o
— 2
— lO
- 8
+ 3
+ 6
+ 5
+ 4
. w
est si
de.
East side.
/
/5
y
I
t r.
Top.
o
- 7
+ I
+ 2+4
«
o
- 8
— 3
- 6 - 8
North
d
o
— 2
o
- I - s
inside.
c
- 3
- 3
— I
+ I - i
b
+ «:
+ I
— I
-1+2
Base.
^ <>■
+20
+i6
+i8
+ IO o
Top.
South
inside.
Base.
Vest
side.
East side.
^ Y
«
• ?
'/
+ 3 o
— I
— 2 — lO
e
- 5 - 5
- 4
- 5 - 9
d
- 4 - 3
— I
- I - 5
c
+ I o
+ 2
+ 2-4
b
-5+1
+ 4
+ 4+2
^ a
+11 +13
+24
+23 +17
West
Bottom
inside.
East
uthe
nd.
North end.
B C D E F
G H J
K L M
N O
{^
-1-3 + 5 o - 4
+ I + 8 + s
+ I +IO + 9
+ 11 + 4
- 8 - 5 - 3 -i8 - S
O — 2 + I
- S -2 + 5
+ I o
-5-6-4 -1+2
+ 2+2 O
— 2 O + I
-2+7
t
+ 12 -9 + 9 -6 + 6
-13 - 2 - I
— 2+1 O
-IS -12
i'
+ 2 + 5 + 3+2 + 5
+ 19? + 2 + I
+ 11?- 4 + I
- S o
South end.
A B
H
K
M N
North end.
O P
West.
a
J
e
iTop.
East.
n
[o] [+1] [+4] [+2] [+4] [+S] [+4] [+7] [+6] [+6] [+5] [+8] [+8]
2]..
(Offsets in brackets are from points on the cut out ledge, raised 1*70
inches, which is the mean level of the ledge below adjacent points
of the remaining top ; thus restoring the top as nearly as may be...
from the ledge. The actual top only remains at six points)
••• [-4][-4][-l] [o][+4]
actual top ... —4 —4 o
[-1] 2
[o] -a
.. [0I «
- [-3] -I
[o] [-8]
+ 1 -3
If, for example, the length of the E. side of the coffer is wanted, from the
foregoing tables, at the level of d, half way up ; on referring to " North outside "
and " South outside " it will be seen that at d on East side the coffer is in
excess of the mean length by 4-'02 on N. and +-37 on S. ; adding these to the
mean length (89-62+-02+-37)=90-oi is the result for the E. outside of the
coffer half way up. Similarly at 8 inches under the top on the same side, at
/ it is (89'624-'i8+-34)=90i4 in length ; or at 4 inches above the bottom
(which is about the lowest point uninjured) it is at a (89-62 -|-*i3+*54)=90'29 in
length. Or if the inside width is wanted, half way up the N, end, at d; referring
to " West inside " and " East inside," at North end, d level, it is seen to be the
mean inner width, 2681, --12 on W., +-02 on £.=2671 ; the signs being, of
course, reversed in adding internal ofistis] tcget/ur. Similarly at the middle of
the length of the coffer (H, d) the internal width is 26-81 + -06 + -05 = 26'92
Sect. 6a)
COFFER, CALIPERING.
«9
If the thickness of the middle of the bottom is wanted, referring to " Bottom
outside" and "Bottom inside," at H, S, it is seen that the mean thickness, 6*89
Is changed by — XJ4 and +"02, and it is therefore 6-ij thick at that point Or
if the thickness of the middle of the N. end is wanted at d and S, referring to
" North outside " and " North inside," it is seen to be (567 - "21 + o) = 5'46 ;
or the middle of the N. end at the top is (5-67 + -21 + 'Oi) =5'89- Thus
the dimensions internal or external, or the thickness of any part, can be easily
extracted from the tables by merely adding the corresponding offsets to the
mean dimension.
60. The thicknesses of the sides, however, are involved in the measurement
of the cubic bulk of the coffer, and therefore need to be very accurately known,
in order to test the theories on the subject. And by the above method the
thickness is dependent on the combination of many separate measures, and
is, therefore, subject to an accumulation of small errors. To avoid this
uncertainty, the sides were independently calipered ; observing at every six
inches, on the same spots on which the offsets were read. And it is to these
caliperings which follow that I would mainly trust for determining the solid
bulk of the coffer. The thickness is stated in hundredths of an inch.
Top.
Thickness of
West
side.
Base.
South end.
f
e
d
c
b
a
North end.
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
"jpg
S93
1)97
SQZ
';97
<i^
'579
S86
5«5
59>
■IQi
S78
5?J
S^
S89
Wa
boo
6.3
Means
598 S9S 591 586 579 572 564 570 573 581 59©
South end.
B
E
H
J
K
M
595 598
North end.
N O
Top.
Thickness of
East
side.
Base.
Means
e
d
c
b
a
•*■
• ■•
• a«
•«•
5«7
59b
59'
t>02
bn
575 585 588 590 594 593 59° 589 589 593 592 596 597
st sid&
East side.
/S
y
t
t X.
f
589 595
e
560 571
d
552 559
c
55<
560 567
b
S6l
563 572
a
561 570
Means
574 563 561 564 573
West side.
/3
East side.
Top. //
Thickness of
South
end.
Base.
...
■ >•
...
...
Means
574 581 584 594 609
N
By Offsets.
Difference.
5-87
-•03
5-89
+ 01
5-82
—•02
s
E
Z
5-46
5-51
5-56
5'49
5-52
5-S9
S-49
5-59
5-64
5-51
5-60
5-67
90 TJ/E INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. {Chap. vii.
From these caliperings the mean thickness of each of the sides, as compared
with the results of the offsets, are thus : —
By Calipers.
(N. 5-67
Thickness of -jl- S;90
(w. 584
Hence there appears to be a constant error of — "Oi on an average, making
the result of the thickness by the offsets to be less than the truth. This may be
due to a tendency to read the offsets too large, or else possibly to a slight
skewing of the calipers, as 3° skew would make this difference on 6 inches.
To compare in detail the results by calipers and offsets, over a small space,
let us take the thickness of the N. end, along the lines c and d, which are near
the mid height : —
^ Y
A*d /by offsets . 5-65 5-51
\ by calipers. 569 5-48
At e i ^y ofis^ts . S'66 5-54
X by calipers . 564 5-53
Thus the mean difference between the thicknesses as ascertained by the two
methods is '022, with a constant difference in one direction of "012 on an
average. The spots observed on in the two methods were not always exactly
identical ; and so some difference may be due to waves of short length in the
surface of the stone.
In stating the offsets on the top, the mean plane adopted is not the simple
mean of all the offsets, but the mean of diagonally opposite pairs of offsets, so
far as they can be taken. This is necessary in order to obtain a true result, as
otherwise (the top being broken away all at one corner) any great tilt that it
may have had, in relation to the base planes, would vitiate the result
61. From the foregoing data the cubic quantities may be calculated of a
simple rectilineal box, omitting all notice of the attachments for the lid,
employing the mean planes : —
Contents=72,030 ; solid bulk=70,5oo ; volume over all, 142,530 cubic inches.
Or by the caliper results, instead of the mean planes, the bulk is 45, more, and
the contents probably about -^ less ; hence the quantities would be —
Contents =7 1, 960; solid bulk =70,630 ; volume over all, 142,590.
These quantities have a probable error of only about 60 cubic inches on
contents and volume, and 100 inches on the bulk. The bulk of the bottom
18=23,830 ; and hence one side and end is on an average=23,335. Bulk of
bottom X3 is then=7i,490; and fxbulk of sides and ends=7o,ooo, subject to
about 100 cubic inches probable error.
p.
91
Sect. 6j.] chambers OF CONSTRUCTION. 91
62. The spaces, or " chambers of construction," as they have been called,
which lie one over the other above the King's Chamber, are entered from a
small passage which starts in the E. wall of the gallery, close under the roof.
This is apparently an original passage, and leads into the lower chamber ; the
other four spaces above that can only be entered by the forced ascent cut by
Col. Howard Vyse. This latter passage is not so easy to go up as it might be,
as it is nearly all in one continuous height, so that a slip at the top chamber
means a fall of thirty feet ; and as there are no foot-holes, and the shaft is wide,
and narrows upwards, an Arab guide of Dr. Grant's refused to venture up it,
alleging that he had a wife and family to think of. Ali Gabri, however, was
quite equal to the business, and held a rope ladder to help me, which he and I
together held for Dr. Grant
The mouth of the passage out of the top of the gallery is 26'3 wide
horizontally at top, 26*2 at base, the S. side of it being formed by the topmost
lap of the S. end of the gallery. The top and base of the mouth follow the
slope of the gallery, the top being the top of the gallery, and the base the
bottom of the topmost overlapping ; thus the mouth is 29^4 high, square with
the gallery. The rough passage is 28^ wide, 32 inches high, and over 20 feet
long.
All these chambers over the King's Chamber are floored with horizontal
beams of granite, rough dressed on the under sides which form the ceilings, but
wholly unwrought above. These successive floors are blocked apart along the
N. and S. sides, by blocks of granite in the lower, and of limestone in the upper
chambers, the blocks being two or three feet high,, and forming the N. and S.
sides of the chambers. On the K and W. are two immense limestone walls
wholly outside of, and independent of, all the granite floors and supporting
blocks. Between these great walls all the chambers stand, unbonded, and
capable of yielding freely to settlement This is exactly the construction of the
Pyramid of Pepi at Sakkara, where the end walls E. and W. of the sepulchral
chamber are wholly clear of the sides, and also clear of the sloping roof-beams,
which are laid three layers thick ; thus these end walls extend with smooth
surfaces far beyond the chamber, and e\'en beyond all the walls and roofing of
it, into the general masonry of the Pyramid.
The actual dimensions of these chambers are as follow : —
N. E. S. W.
Top 462 to 470 ... 468-4 247
4th 481 196 467 198
3rd 479 (?) ". 472 198
2nd ... 204-65 471-8
1st 4608 205-8 4646 205-9
(King's 412-8 206-4 412-5 206-1)
9» THE INSIDE OF THE ORE A T PYRAMID. [Chap. vii.
Bat Aese dimensions are merely of the rough masonry ; and some lengths
could not be measured owing to the encumbrance of blocks of stone and rubbish
left in the dambers from Vyse's excavations.
63. In the first chamber the S. wall has fallen outwards, dragging past
some of the nxif-beams, and breaking other beams at the S.E. comer. The
E. and \V. end walls have sunk, carrying down with them the plaster which had
been danbed into the top angle, and which cracked freely off the granite roofing.
On the E. eid one block is dressed flat, but all the others are rough quarried.
In tbe second chaipber are some bosses on the N. and S. wzdl stones ; and
several of the stones of the N. wall are smoothed, and one polished like those in
the King's Chamber, seeming as if some spare blocks had been used up here.
The S£. comer shows cracks in the roof "52 wide. The masons' lines, drawn in
red and black, are x-ery remarkable in this and the upper chambers, as they
show, to some extent, the methods of working. Some of the lines in this
chamber, drawn in red on the S. wall blocks of granite, are over some of the
plastering, bat nnder other parts of the plaster. These lines, therefore, were
drawn dnring the building, and while the plaster was being laid on, and slopped
like wWtewash into the joints. The red lines are always ill-defined and broad,
about ^ to li inch ; but, to give better definition, finer black lines were often
used, either over the red or alone, about ,-5 inch wide. On the S. wall, starting
from a drafted edge on the W. wall, 4 inches wide, there is a vertical mason'sline at 23-3, a \-eiy bad joint at Si'S, another line at 705, another at 4358, and
the E. wall at 471*8. Thus the two end lines are 4I3"S apart, evidently
intended for the length of the King's Chamber below them, and define the
required limits of this upper space. On the E. wall is a vertical mid-line drawn,
wdtfi a cross line and some signs ; from this mid-line to a line at the S. end is
ioi"8, and to a line at the N. end of the wall is io2"8s ; total, 20465, intended
for Ring's Chamber width. There is a large cartouche of Khnumu-Khufu,
nearly all broken away by Vyse's forced entrance; but this and other
hien^yphs need not be noticed here, as they have been already published,
while the details of the masons' marks and lines of measurement have been
n^lected.
In the third chamber, the N. and S. sides are of granite as before ; but
they rest «n pieces of limestone, put in to fill up hollows, and bring them up to
level : this showing, apparently, that the stock of granite supporting blocks had
b^un to run short at this stage of the building, and that any sort of pieces
were used up, being eked out by limestone, which in the upper chambers
supplied their places altogether. The flooring beams are very unequal in depth.
and hence the sides of many of them are exposed, and show us the masons'
marks. On the ist beam from the E. end is a mid-line on the W. face at 98
from the S On the 4th beam is a mid-line on the E face, 1028 to N., and loi
p.
93
Sect. 63.] CHAMBERS OF CONSTRUCTION, DETAILS. 93
to S. On the 6th beam is a mid-line on W. face, 100 to N. and lors to S.;
these N. and S. ends being merely the rough sides of the chamber. There are
two bosses on the S. side of the chamber. The chamber sides are much slopped
over with liquid plaster. On the N. side is a vertical line on the western
granite block, over the edge of a limestone block beneath it, apparently to show
the builders where to place it. From the W. end of the chamber this Une is at
10 inches, joints at 210 and 246, a red line at 260, chamber end at 479 (?), and
end of granite blocks at 503.
In the fourth chamber the supporting blocks along the N. and S. sides are
all of limestone, and are much cracked and flaked up by top pressure. The great
end walls, between which all these chambers stand, have here sunk as much as
3 inches in relation to the floors and sides ; as is shown by the ledges of plaster
sticking to them, which have originally fitted into the edges of the ceiling. The
roof-beam by the forced entrance has been plastered over, then coloured red, and
after that accidentally splashed with some thin pleistering. Along the N. wall,
from the E. end of the floor as o, there is a line at 378, another at S85, another
at 4506, and the W. end at 481 : thus the extreme lines are 4i2'8 apart, with a
supplemental line at 207 from one of them. This last was probably put on in
case the end line should be effaced in building, so that the workmen would not
need to remeasure the whole length. One stone, 65 inches long, has a mark on
it of " 3 cubits." On the S. wall, from the E. end =0, there is a line at 32-6,
another at 3847, another at 446'S, and the W. end at 467 ; here the extreme
lines are 4I3'9 apart, with a supplemental line 6r8 (or 3X20'6) from one end.
Along both sides of the chamber is a red line all the way, varying from 20-6 to
20'2 below the ceiling ; with the vertical lines just described crossing it near
each end. Remembering the Egyptian habit of building limestone courses in the
rough, and marking a line to show to where they were to be trimmed down level,
this line seems to have been put on to regulate the trimming down of these limestone sides ; either as a supplemental line, like those one cubit from the true marks
on the granite beams, or else placed a cubit lower than the trimming level, in
order that it should not be effaced in the cutting. On the] E. floor-beam is a
line 986 from the S. end. On the third beam is a line' 100 to N. and 96-2 to
S. end. On the 4th beam a line 98-3 to N., and icx)6 to S. end. On
the sixth beam a horizontal line running all along it, with a mid-line 980
to N. and 98*i to S. end ; and a supplemental line at 20*3 to 20-6
from S. end. On the other side of the beam a line is at qS"! to N. and
96 to S. end. The rough tops of the floor-beams of this chamber show most
interestingly the method of quarrying them ; exactly as may be seen on the
rough tops of the granite roofing inside the Third Pyramid. On the top of each
stone is a hollow or sinking running along one edge ; and branching from this,
at right angles across the stone, are grooves 20 to 25 inches apart, about 4
p.
94
94 THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. [Chap. vii.
wide, and i\ deep. These seem to show that in cutting out a block of granite,
a long groove was cut in the quarry to determine the trend or strike of the
cleavage ; and then, from this, holes were roughly jumped about 4 inches
diameter and 2 feet apart, to determine the dip of the cleavage plane. This
method avoids any danger of skew fractures, and it has the true solidity and
certainty of old Egyptian work.
In the fifth or top chamber, the width is quite undefined ; and we can only
say that between the points where the sloping roof-slabs appear is 247 inches.
The roof-slabs have separated at the apex 15 5 at E. end, and 10 at W. end.
The end walls are very rough, being merely the masonry of the core. On the
second floor-beam are two horizontal lines 20'6 to 207 apart, with three vertical
lines across them, I03'i and I03'S apart They have triangles drawn in black on
both the vertical and horizontal lines, the triangle on the horizontal being i2'S from
the end vertical line, and therefore not apparently at any exact distance along
it. On the fourth beam from the E. is a horizontal line on its W. side, with four
vertical lines : these are a mid-line, others at 1026 and 1026 from it, and a
suppleinental line 200 from one of these. On the E. side of the same is a
horizontal and three vertical lines ; the two end ones 2063 apart, and a
supplemental line 210 from one end. Both of these horizontal lines have a
small black triangle, with one side on the line. The third beam from the E. has
four verticals, with a triangle beyond the last These are I03"3 ^"d I03'25 from
a mid-line, with a supplemental line 20'95 from one end. The E. beam has five
verticals, I03'0 and 1027 from the mid-line, with supplemental lines at 207 and
I9"4 from the ends ; it has also a horizontal line, with a large red triangle on the
lower side of it, and a smaller black triangle inside the red. On the S. side is a
line 29*3 from the W. end, apparently one terminal of the 412-inch length. The
roofing-beams are all numbered, beginning at the W. end of the N. side, going
along to the E., turning to the S. side, and so back to the W. end. The numbers
visible on the under-sides of the beams are 4, 18, 21, and 23; probably the
numbers of the others are on the sides now covered.
From all these details of the lines, it seems that the roofing-blocks had
usually a mid-line and two end lines marked on their sides as a guide in placing
them ; and, in case of obliteration, extra lines were provided, generally a cubit
(20'6) from each end, but sometimes at other points. The horizontal lines were
probably to guide the workman in cutting the straight under-sides of the beams ;
and it would be desirable to measure through some cracks to find their distances
from the ceiling side. The flooring of the top chamber has large holes worked
in it, evidently to hold the butt ends of beams which supported the sloping
roof-blocks during the building.
Sect. 64.]
SUMMARY OF INTERIOR POSITIONS.
9S
64. General summary of the positions inside the Great Pyramid :
Horizontally; | Vertiolly.
Peginning of entrance
S. end of entrance passage
S. end of N. subterranean passage
Subterranean Chamber, centre ...
N. end of S. subterranean passage
S. end If M 19
Beginning Ascending fi
End of „ 19
Queen's Chamber, N.E. comer ...
„ „ mid. W. roof...
Gallery, virtual S. end, floor
Gallery, top of step face
Antechamber, N. end, floor
„ S. „ roof
King's Chamber, floor
„ I, N.E. wall base
9. 99 roof.
From M. Base.
SZ4'I±
•3
4228- ±2
4574- ±2
'
4737- ±2
4900' ±
2*
SS46- ±3
•
i5«7-8±
•3
2907-3 ±
•8
4402-1 ±
•8
4533-8 ±
•8
4595-8 ±
•9
4534-5 ±
•9
4647-8 ±
•9
4763-9 ±
•9
4S65o±
-9
4864-7 ±
•9
From Centre.
N. 40I0'0± '3
306-
I0I2
N. 3016-3 ±
N. i626-8±
I02-0±
•3±
6i-7±
•4±
ii3-7± "9
229-8 ± '9
330-9 ± -9
330-6 ± -9
±2-
±2-
±2-
±2-
±3-
•3
•8
•8
•8
•9
•9
£. from Centre.
mid. 287'0± '8
mid. 286-4 ±1"
mid. 286-3±i'
mid. 25 '9 ±2"
mid. 284 -9±i'
mid. 277-1
mid. 286-6 ± -8
mid. 287- ±I'5
side 308- ±3'
side 72- ±3'
mid. 284-4 ±3"
mid. 284-4 ±3*
same?
same?
mid. same ?
side 305 -oi 3"
Atx)ve Pavement.
+ 668
-1181
-1 178
- 1056
-1219
-1213
+ «79'
+ 852
+ 834
+ 1078
+ 1689
+ 1694
+ 1692
+ 1841
+ 1692'
+ 1688
+ 1921
to 1923
•2± •!
• ±1-
• ±1-
' ±2- roof
■ ±1-5
, ±2-
9± '2
•6± -3
■4± '4
■7 ± -6 roof
■o± -5
i± -7
6± -6
'5 ± '6 roof
8± -6
•6
5±
■6±
7±
p.
96
96 THE OUTSIDE OF THE SECOND PYRAMID. [Chap. viti.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE OUTSIDE OF THE SECOND PYRAMID,
65. The casing of the Second Pyramid is different in its arrangement from
that of the Great Pyramid, as already mentioned (section 15). The lowest two
courses* of the casing are of granite, very well preserved where it is not
altogether removed. In order to avoid the risk of working an acute angle for
the lower edge of the bottom course, the builders made the face drop down for
some depth vertically from the edge of the slope, building the pavement against
the vertical face (see PI. xiL). Thus no edge of the block was sharper than a
right angle, and the two outer edges top and bottom were considerably over a
right angle, and therefore not liable to injury. But by so arranging it they required
the vertical foot of the casing to be as high as the pavement thickness, or else
to be raised ; and as the pavement must not be too thin, for fear of cracking,
and also as they did not wish to be limited to the exact amount of surplus that
formed the vertical foot; they therefore cut the rock to support the casingblocks at a higher level than that for the pavement bed. The result is that
though both casing and pavement may be destroyed, there still remains a raised
square of rock, standing some inches above the surrounding surface, and
marking out the original extent of the Pyramid. An arrangement which was
thus far more permanent than that of the Great Pyramid, where the casing and
pavement, if once removed, leave behind no evidence of their site. The nature
of this arrangement can be easily examined at the W. end of the S. side, where
a block of casing remains, slightly shifted at one side, but otherwise in situ; it
rests on the raised square of njck, and has the S.W. corner of the raised square
within a few yards of it, showing the relationship very plainly.
Accordingly I did not waste labour by needing to search for actual casing
stones under the high rubbish heaps, in the midst of the sides ; at which points,
moreover, the casing would not define the direction of each side. I merely
required to uncover this raised square of rock, at places near the ends of each
side, and I also obtained the comers at the N.E., S.E., S.W. At the N.W. the
whole rock is dressed flat, the pavement having been the same thickness as the
* I have seen but one course ; Vyse reports finding two courses.
Sect. 67.]
ANCLE OF PYRAMID, AND HEIGHT.
casing foot, but the raised square is found a short way from this corner along
each side.
^. Having, then, found and fixed twelve points of the sides, the actual
corners of the square were adopted as being probably the most accurately
executed points, to define the intended size ; and they (with the points near the
N.W. corner) yield a square of the following size :—
Length.
Difference from mean.
Azimuth.
Diff. from mean.
N. side
E. „
S. „
W. ..
84719
8475-2
8476-9
8475-5
— 3-0 inches
+ -3
+ 2-0
+ -6
-5' 31"
-6' 13"
-5' 40"
-4' 21"
- 5"
-47"
-14"
+65"
Mean
84749
-5' 2(>"
33"
The various other points of the square of rock that were fixed, differ from the
above square but little.
At 425 N. of S.E.
At 720 W. of „
At 367 E. of S.W.
At 330 E. of „
corner, the edge is 26 inside the square.
•2
•7
•2
Thus there is a mean variation of "9 inch from the adopted square.
But beside this there is the casing still remaining on the upper part of the
Pyramid ; and the lowest corner of this casing at each edge of the Pyramid was
observed on in the main triangulation by the lo-inch theodolite. Hence there
is another check on the raised square. Taking, then, the differences between
the corners observed on, and the diagonals of the raised square, these differences
of the casing are thus : —
N.E, +17; S.E. +-6; S.W. +-3; N.W. +-3 ; mean +7 inch.
From this it is seen that the builders skewed round the planes of the casing as
they went upward ; the twist being + 1' 40" on the mean of the sides ; so that it
is absolutely — 3' 50" from true orientation at the upper part. But it must be
remembered that these differences include the errors of recognising the same
point of a stone, by natural markings without any definite signal or station, and
viewed from different directions at about \ mile distance.
The collateral evidence, then, confirms the position of the square, as first
stated.
67. For the angle of slope of the faces, the direct measures by goniometer
and level on the granite in situ gave 53° 12' ± 2', but by measurement from
plumb line 53" 2' ; the block has been slightly shifted, but the top surface only
varies i' from level, being high on the oiiter edge. By goniometer measures of
o
p.
98
98 THE OUTSIDE OF THE SECOND PYRAMID. [Chap.viii.
24 blocks, both of granite and limestone, lying around the Pyramid, the mean is
53* 14' ± 5' ; and though this involves the assumption of horizontal courses, if
this be taken as the angle of slope, yet it agrees so closely with the casing in
sUu^ that probably 53** 10' ±4' will be the best statement.
Hence the height will be 5,664 ±13 inches.
68. The lowest course of casing was of granite, and is 4i"52 ± "OS high,
vertically, from the top to the base of its slope, and its vertical face below
that 1 1 high, as measured at the S.W. The raised square of rock at the S.W .
under this casing, is only 1-3 to 1-9 above the pavement bed ; at the S.W. comer
it is 9-8 high ; at the S.E. comer, 2-3 to 28 high ; and at the N.E. o to 4J high.
All along the edge of it are holes, mdely rectangular, beginning in the pavement bed, and sloping deeper down into the raised square, where they end
vertically. Their average size is 10 inches along the rock edge, the sloping
bottom beginning 10 inches out^vards from the rock edge, and running 5 inches
into it, with a depth there of about 4 inches ; distance between one hole and
another 12 inches. These holes are evidently intended to allow space for the
ends of crowbars or beams used in placing the casing in position.
The upper part of the Pyramid was cased with Mokattam limestone, of a
rather different quality to that of the Great Pyramid ; it is grayer, harder, more
splintery, and of not such a regular and certain fracture.
Where some foundation stones had been removed, low down under the S.E.
socket a coin of Sultan Hasan, 1347-1361, was found in clearing the sand in
1881. As the mosque of this Sultan is said to have been built with stones from
Its Pyramids^ this coin rather suggests that some stones were removed for that
purpose from the base of the Second Pyramid. The casing in general, however,
was said to be still in its place in the time of Palerma, 1581, and of Albinus,
1591 ; though in Sandy's view, 161 1, only the present cap of casing is shown.
The lower part of the Pyramid core, all round, is of rock ; unmoved, but
hewn into shape ; higher on the W. and lower on the E, side. Above this lie
two or three courses of huge blocks of Gizeh rock, much larger than those
brought from the Mokattam quarries on the E. bank.
The heights of the lower courses, and position of the rock, and rock
blocks, are as follow : —
N.E. S.B.
458'0 4S7-0
438"0 4370
416X} 416-0
381-0 3810
340X) 3400
29i"S 2950
242-5 2450
2I3X> 207*5 » » 220-0
S.W.
N.W.
457-5
458-0
437-5
437-0
416-5
417-0
381-5
381-0
340-0
340-0
292-0
242-5
rock blocks
250-5
rock blocks
Sect. 70.] LEVELLED SITE.
N.E. S.E. S.W. N.W
J93'S ... ... 2100 ledge
1790 179s rock blocks 1700 rock top
■ 159-0 rock blocks 1620 rock blocks ...
••; 1430 » n 1425 rock top 1330
I30'0 „ „ ... 132-5 127-0 ledge
74-5 rock top 78-5 rock top 865 850
<52S ... 41-5 37S
o pavement 00 o
— 14-5 raised square — I i-o raised square-10-5 raised square
— i8(?)paving bed ... -20 paving bed — 23-5 paving bed
— 52*5 rock
These series of measurements were not levelled together, but are only
adjusted, so that they represent the builder's intention, though not his errors of
level. It is seen that though the courses are not very regular in thickness, yet
the loth course at 20 cubits level (416) runs all round ; and the 5th course is at
10 cubits level {207-5) on S.W., and at the ledge («.^., casing back) at N.W.
The first course is 2 cubits high (415) where seen at S.W.
69. The pavement around the Pyramid was sunk slightly in the rock, and
the edges of its bed were found near the N.W. corner. They were S28-S and
527-9 distant from Pyramid base on the N., and 530*9 on the W. side. This is
just about the same as the most usual breadth of the Great Pyramid pavement
bed. Vyse reports, finding 432 inches breadth of paving still in existence.
70. The whole site of the Pyramid is artificially levelled ; it is cut into the
sloping rock of the hill-side, deeply on the W., and less along the N. ; it is built
up at the N.E. to support the pavement, by a platform of immense blocks ; and
at the S.K the rock falls rapidly away and has probably also been built over, in
order to level it up for the pavement.
The great shelf or area (see PI. iv.), thus cut out on the hill-side to hold the
Pyramid, has approximately vertical sides along the W. and N. But these sides
are not equidistant from the Pyramid ; the top edge of the W. side being 1,105
distant from the N.W., and 1,083 fro™ the S.W. corners of the Pyramid ; while
the N. side is 2,255 from the N.W. corner, and 2,312 from near the middle of the
Pyramid side. The directions are not parallel to the Pyramid, the W. side lying
— 8' from the Pyramid azimuth, and the N. side — 56'.
Within this lowered area are rows of grooves and cross grooves cut in the
rock, which is thus divided up into squares. These are the remains of the
trenches by which the workmen cut out the whole of this space ; the reasons for
their being so are (i) they are considerably askew to the finished work, and
irregular in size, and have therefore not been made for any structural purpose ;
(2) they are simply grooves and cross grooves, so that they could not be the
beginning of any erection or rock chamber ; and (3) the grooves are exactly
105 THE OUTSIDE OF THE SECOND PYRAMID. [Chap. viii.
like others, on the rock surface outside the lowered area, just N. of these, and in
other places ; which others are clearly remains of unfinished dressing down of the
rock.
The sizes of these squares are rather variable ; the average distances of
similar parts being I32'3, with a mean difference of 57 ; and this is divided into
20'2 for the groove, and i I2*i for the block between the grooves. These are bymeasures from E. to W. ; the average breadths from N. to S. are 20+109=129 ;
evidently intended for the same, but only measureable on 4 or 5 squares, instead
of 18 from R toW.
Outside of the lowered area are other grooves on the rock N. of it, the most
distinct and continuous of which varies from 350 at W. end to 390 (at 4,400 E.
of that) from the edge of the area.
71. Around the N., W., and S. sides of the Pyramid and its area is a large
peribolus wall. This wall differs in its character on each side, and does not
seem to have been planned with any uniformity. On the N. side it is a wide
substructure of very large blocks, rather rudely hewn, and bearing cubit marks
and numbers on the backs. The N. face (which was the only one left exposed)
is 2,733 from the edge of the area, nearly opposite the middle of the Pyramid,
and 2,808 from the area at the N.W. corner. This substructure is 300 ± 3 inches
wide near the E. end, and 344 at the W. end ; but it is difficult to recognise its
original alignment as so much of it has been removed or buried. On the top of
this is a crest of ^vall, the N. face of which is + 15' different from the Pyramid
azimuth ; it is of less width than the substructure, being loS* near the E. and 206'
near the W. end ; but it is probable that this really refers to different lines of
construction. A higher part of it at the W. end appears to recede 8 inches on
the S. side, and a footing, formed by a lower course, projects 18 inches. On the
whole, it appears that each course was set a little backward ; and without largely
uncovering it, it would be hard to make certain what its original width was
before it was dilapidated. It is altogether about 13,300 long, or rather over j
mile. Its original height cannot be easily settled ; probably 20 feet would be
below the mark. On the S. side this wall is much less finished, and has been
banked up to the top of the broad part by a vast heap of chips, which have been
kept in position by building retaining walls in them. Two of these retaining
walls that I partly uncovered, were of rough broken stone, neatly put together,
and mud plastered on the S. faces. They had a considerable batter, and the tops
of their S. faces were at 137 and 299 from the S. face of the great wall. Among
the stones I observed pieces of basalt and granite waste ; these probably came
from cutting the basalt pavement E. of the Great Pyramid, and from trimming
the granite of the King's Chamber, or the lowest course of the Second Pyramid.
Exactly from the end of this great wall, there turns off a much narrower
wall which runs parallel with the W. side of the Pyramid. This W. wall is 70
Sec/. 72.) BARRACKS OF WORKMEN. loi
wide at the top, with a moderate batter of about i in lo. It is built of rough
scraps and blocks of limestone, neatly fitted together with a smooth face ; and
was probably 6 or 8 feet high when complete. The intention seems to have
been to place it as far from the edge of the area as is the N, wall ; the outer
face of the N. wall being 2,733 to 2,808 from the area, and the outside of the
W. wall 2,795 from the N.W. corner of the area, to 2,923 from the area at the
S.W. corner of the Pyramid. The azimuth of this W. wall is + 38' from tlie
Pyramid azimuth, and it runs on till it joins the wall of the Third Pyramid.
The true peribolus wall of the Second Pyramid, on the S. side, is only a
short piece, 500 feet long, which appears to have been incomplete when the
Third Pyramid walls were begun ; since it was merged into the latter by an
elbow wall, instead of being uniformly finished. It is a fine piece of work as
far as it goes, and was apparently intended to be at the same distance from the
Pyramid as is the great North wall. It is 5,166 at its outer side, from the S.E.
corner of the Pyramid ; and the outer face of the N. wall is 5,043 from near the
N.E. corner of the Pyramid. Thus the N. and S. walls were equidistant from
the Pyramid ; but the N. and W. walls were equidistant from the edge of the
area. The azimuth of the inner face of the S. wall is —9' from Pyramid
azimuth. The wall is broad in the lower part ; with a narrower crest upon the
top of it, which is 131 wide at the E. end, narrowing upwards to 113 in
breadth.
72. Beyond the western peribolus wall there lie the large barracks of the
workmen. These have been hitherto considered merely as lines of stone
rubbish, or masons' waste heaps ; and though Vyse cut through one part, he
merely says that the ridges " were found to be composed of stones and sand,
and their origin was not discovered" (vol. ii. p. 88). But on looking closely at
them I observed the sharply defined edges of walls ; and as soon as these were
Ijegun to be cleared, the ruined tops of the walls were seen, the spaces being
filled with blown sand. The wall first cleared was traced continuously for some
80 feet ; and at last the arrangement in all parts was found to consist solely of
long galleries. In the plan of Lepsius there is a variation apparently at the
easternmost walls, where something like a chamber is shown .: nothing of the kind
is visible on the surface, and on cutting along the northern ends and middles of
all these galleries, nothing but uniform walls were found. Also nearly the
whole length of the first gallery from the peribolus was cleared, showing a
continuous wall right along the site where the separate buildings are marked in
the " Denkmaler,"
These galleries are built of rough pieces of limestone (somewhat like the W.
peribolus wall), bedded in mud, and faced with hard mud, or mud and lime ; the
floors of the galleries are also of hard mud. The walls are all united at one end
into one head wall, which runs 14' skew of the Pyramid on the W. ; and the
p.
102
102 THE OUTSIDE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. Chap.viii.
open ends of the walls are finished with wider pilasters, or antae, of hewn stone.
The length of the galleries headed by the W. wall were measured as 1,062 at the
S. end of the row, and 1,058 at the N. end ; and the gallery next the peribolus
wall is 1,033 inches long. The enlarged ends of hewn stone are 62 to 75 inches
long; so the total length of the galleries is 1,124, I1I27, and 1,108 in different
parts. The walls average 51 "5 thick at the top, with a batter of i in 10 ; and
their centres are 1646 apart, leaving a clear width of Ii3'i for the gallery. The
hewn stone ends of the walls are 80 wide, thus leaving an entrance of 85 inches
wide. These measures are on the northern walls; those of the western range
are farther apart, their centres averaging 176 apart, and the ends yj to 87 wide,
leaving entrances 90 to 100 wide. There are in all 91 galleries ; which make
an aggregate of over a mile and a half of gallery length, g\ feet wide, and
7 feet high.
For what purpose, then, can such a vast amount of accommodation have
been provided ? Not certainly for priests' dwellings, since it is too extensive,
too rough in work, and in the very opposite direction to the temples. Hardly
either for storehouses, since it is so much out of the way, and too large for any
likely amount of stores. It seems, therefore, only attributable to the workmen's
barracks. The work is just suitable for such a purpose ; strong and useful, and
with about as much elaboration as an Egyptian would put into work that had
to last in daily use for one or two generations. The extent of the galleries is
also very reasonable. Supposing the men had a fair allowance of room (more
than in some works at present) the whole barrack would hold about 4,000 men ;
and such would not be an unlikely number for the permanent staff of masons
and their attendants employed on a pyramid. There is no probability of the
walls being later than the Second Pyramid, because (i) they are arranged square
with it ; (2) at a part of the hill which would be out of the way for any other
work ; and (3) they are built of exactly the same style as the adjoining western
peribolus wall and the retaining walls.
Most of the excavating that I did here was only on the tops of the walls, to
show their position ; but part of the westernmost of the N, series of galleries
was cleared out to within a foot or two of the bottom ; and then, while I
watched them, two men turned over all the remaining sand, down to the floor,
keeping a clear strip of floor between the .shifted and unshifted sand. Several
yards' length were thus cleared, and I closely looked at each shovelful of sand
as it was thrown. Many scraps of pottery were found, much like the style of
the pottery of the Great Pyramid masons ; but nothing else artificial appeared.
I had not time to make further clearances here ; but the barrenness of a spot
only fj^ of the whole extent of the galleries, should not discourage further work
in a place so likely to yield good results. During the general clearing of the
walls, many fragments of statues were found, in diorite and alabaster, of the
p.
103
Sect. 72.] BARRACKS OF WORKMEN. 103
fourth dynasty style : and among a large quantity of quartzite scraps lying on
the surface, I found part of a life-size head, of an unusual type. Unaccountable
blocks of granite were often found, lying loose in the sand ; they are smoothed
all over, about 30 lbs. weight, and of pillowy forms, with rounded faces and
slight edges. They never showed any wear, and so could hardly be cornrubbers ; and yet they were too smooth and not flat enough to be intended for
a building.
I04 THE INSIDE OF THE SECOND PYRAMID. [Chap. ix.
CHAPTER IX.
THE INSIDE OF THE SECOND PYRAMID.
73. The doorway of the Second Pjiamid is lost, along with the casing ;
and the granite blocks of the passage end irregularly. The position of the
passage was fixed from a station mark near it ; its axis is 4903 E. of the middle
of the N. face. Its azimuth was already observed by Prof. Smyth, as — 5' 37";
which is almost exactly the mean azimuth of the sides, as by my triangulation
they are —5' 26", with a mean difference of 33". Hence, if the horizontal
passage is the same azimuth as the sloping, the chamber lies altogether E. of
the Pyramid centre by about 47 inches. This is much the sam.e arrangement
as in the Great PjTamid.
The entrance passage is entirely of rough dressed granite, none of it
polished ; like the work of the King's Chamber ceiling and the Antechamber,
and not like the King's Chamber walls in the Great Pyramid. The flaws in it
are made good with plaster, much of which is to be seen on the first roof-stone,
and all along the side of the roof, sometimes half-way across it This was laid
on Avith a board or trowel, and afterwards painted red, like the plastering in the
Granite Temple.
This passage was measured thus, in height and breadth : —
E, W. Top. Base.
At mouth . . 47-33 47-32 41-62 41-21
Half-way down . 47-31 47-13 41-08 4i'i7
Near end . . 47-44 4723 41 "34 4i'33
Means . . Height 47-29±-03 Width 4i-29±os
The greater irregularity in the width than in the height of the passage,
shows the builders to have been less careful than the masons ; since the height
depends on gauging the side blocks to a uniform height, whereas the width only
depends on their position.
74. At the bottom of the slope, the roof has a half-round drum or roll across
it (see PI. xii.), like the " roller " over all the tomb doors. From this the passage
goes southward horizontally (see PI. vii.). From the end of the sloping roof to
the other side of the roll is 11-7 on E., 11 -6 on W. ; or, to the portcullis groove
Sect. 7S] GREA T CHAMBER.
los
40p2. The portcullis is a slab of granite working in vertical grooves in the
granite sides of the passage; the width of the passage being 41-38 there, the
grooves are 9-68 deep on E. and 10-05 on W., making 6rii in all ; the width by
a: single measurement being 61-14 in front, or N., and 61-35 at back, or S, The
width of the grooves is 15-77 E., and 15-19 W., and the stone slab of the
portcullis is about ^-inch thinner. Thus it is almost the same as the granite
leaf in the Great Pyramid, which is 15-14 to 16-28 thick. The granite walling
and roofing ends at 41-4 to 430 behind the portcullis. The portcullis was
fiercely attacked by Perring, who tried to break it up, with the vain idea of
finding a passage leading out of the top of its groove ; but it resisted all his
efforts, and it is now propped up high enough to crawl under it, by rough pieces
of limestone in each groove. All the lower part of the entrance passage is
obstructed with stones, left there by the Arabs when removing building
materials from the interior. At the end of the granite the walls are of good
limestone with finely-picked faces, like the walls of the gallery in the Great
Pyramid ; and the passage roof immediately rises 230, so that it measures
thus: —
E. W.
Near portcullis . 70*76 70-38
Beyond gaps in floor 71-53 71-36
Near chamber. . 71-27 71-10
Means . . Height 7i-o6±-i3
The height on the W. side, near the chamber, is taken to irregular
plastering on the roof. The fine picked walls near the portcullis, soon merge
along the horizontal passage into very rough picked work cut in the rock, and
plastered over ; farther on there is more masonry, but all plastered ; and after
that the rock continues on to the chamber. The intention in the 71 inch height
seems to be to make it half as high again as the ordinary passage : 7ro6x|
=47"38±-09 ; and the other passage is 47-29±"03.
75. The great chamber is entirely cut in the rock, excepting the pointed
gable roof, which is built of limestone beams, like that of the Queen's Chamber
in the Great Pyramid, Stone has been let into the walls to make good defects ;
and the whole surface was stuccoed. The floor is partly of rock and partly
paved ; the paving is of fine limestone 9 to 14 inches thick, except around the
coffer at the W. end, where it is q£ deep granite blocks. The coffer is of the
usual form, like that in the Great Pyramid, but \vas let into the floor up to the
level of its sliding lid. The floor was lamentably torn up by Perring in search
of other chambers, and the stones are now piled up all over the E. wall. The
chamber is,
195-8 on E., 195-9 on W,; 557-9 on N., 557-4 on S.;
206-4 h'S^i at N.W. ; 206-3 and 206-5 (?) at S.W.
P
Top.
Base.
41-56
41-78
41-65
41-55
41-70
41-30
Width 4rS9±'04
io6
THE INSIDE OF THE SECOND PYRAMID.
[Chap. ix.
Vyse gives 38 inches for the gable roof rise (though measuring the height
from the wall base instead of the floor), and this gives 244-4 for the height of
the ends. The doonvay is on the N. wall at I04'3 to I44'9 ^''oi" the E. wall.
On both N. and S. walls there is a vertical red line drawn, on the N. at I98"3
from E., and on the S. at 198-6 from E. These red lines on both walls run up
to '5 or •! on the W. side of a blind hole in the rock, which looks like the
beginning of an air-channel ; and there is a square of the same size marked
adjoining the line some way below the hole, as if it had been at first intended to
cut the hole lower down. These holes and squares were measured thus : —
Hole.
Squ
aie.
Base of Hole.
E.
w.
Top.
Base.
Deep.
E.
W.
Top.
Base.
To
Ceiling.
To
Square.
1 1-5
'lo-s
\V2
8-8
9-1
11-5
12-2
1 1-8
8-7
9-0
S3-6
10-2
7-4
8-1
13-4
11-6
ii-s
8-7? 9-0
55-2
62-1
N.
S.
The backs of the holes are quite irregular and unfinished.
The coffer is on the outside 43'i at N., and 42-9 at S. end, distant from W.
•wall ; increased now by "5 in shifting it To the N. wall it is 42-5, and to the S.
wall so"a
761 The coffer is well polished, not only inside but all over the outside ;
even though it was nearly all bedded into the floor, with blocks plastered
against it The bottom is left rough, and shows that it was sawn and afterwards dressed down to the intended height ; but in sawing it the saw was run
too deep and then backed out ; it was, therefore, not dressed down all over the
bottom, the worst part of the sawing being cut '20 deeper than the dressed part
This is the only error of workmanship in the whole of it ; it is polished all over
the sides in and out, and is not left with the saw lines visible on it like the
Great Pyramid coffer. The finish is about the same as on the walls of the
King's Chamber, and the horizontal polishing lines can be seen inside the
N. end.
The lid is lying on the floor of the chamber, unbroken ; it was slid on to
the coffer, and held by a projection on its base, which fitted into undercut
grooves along the N., E., and S. sides of the coffer, the W. side being cut away
to the depth of the groove. The grooves in the coffer are not parallel, but are
wider apart at the W., so that the lid should have no chance of jamming in
being put on. When finally slid into place, two pins (probably of bronze)
dropped down out of holes in the lid, into corresponding holes in the W, side of
the coffer.
The designers were evidently afraid, however, of the coffer being turned
over, so as to let the pins drop back into the lid ; they therefore sunk the coffer
into the floor. To make it still safer they put resin in the pin-holes, where it
may still be seen ; then the pins, being ready heated, were put into the holes
Sect. 77-]
COFFER, DIMENSIONS.
in the lid, which was quickly closed ; thus the pins sank \ inch to i inch,
melting their way into the resin, and probably forcing it up their sides. This
process made sure that there could be no way of getting the lid off without
breaking it, and the design answered perfectly; the lid never was drawn off,
Oa one side of the groove in the coffer may be seen a little scrap of cement
this shows that the lid was cemented on in the grooves, and that it never was slid
back, or it must have rubbed off such a fragile scrap. This cementing on of the
lid was also of use to prevent any shake ; so that the labour of wrenching it off,
and bruising the undercutting to pieces by wriggling and jogging it up and
down, must have been enormous. This seems, however, to have been the way
of forcing it, as the undercutting is much broken, and the cement in the groove,
and the melted-in pins, make it impossible to suppose any other mode of
removing the lid. There is a good deal of crystallized salt on the inside of the
coffer.
^^. The size of the coffer was measured thus : —
Outer length
Outer width
Outer height
Sides thick at the top
Inner length
Inner width
Inner depth
Ledge depth
■{
Top
Mid.
Base
(■Top
.\ Mid.
(Base
E.
E.
103-62
10373
10372
N.
41-95
Mid.
W.
103-64 10369
Inaccessible.
}
Mean,
103-68
±02
/East
• \ West
\ along. J aloDg.
41-97 41-96
Inaccessible.
All inaccessible.
38-12 38-12 37-98
All inaccessible.
7-59
w.
84-63
84-91
i along.
26-79
26-70
29-62
S.
1*60
1-69
3807 J 38-12
J intended.
7-61 \ 7-645
769 J ±-01
I8473
jd=-02
26*69
,01
s.
26-67
29-57 )
2958 1-29-59
29-61 3 ±x)i
:)26.
}
±•02
Mean
error.
•04
-015
•03
•07
•04
•03
•04
Ledge wide, 1*20 to 2*30 on N., i*o8 to 1-90 on S.
Lid, 10373 on W., 42-03 on S. Thickness, 9-89 W.S.W., 8-20 S.S.W., 8-22 S.
8-24 S.E.
io8 THE INSIDE OF THE SECOND PYRAMID. [Chafi. ix.
The mean error of the dimensions is thus only -04 inch. The two pin-holes
in the top of the W. side are cut with a tube drill, and average 107 diameter ;
their sides are thus :—
N. hole 5"40 to 6*42 from N. inner end. 376 to 4-84 from W. outside.
S. hole 574 to 6-85 from S. „ „ 3-86 to 492 „ „
On the outside bottom the height is constant all over the dressed part, being
38-12; and it only diminishes at the part where the saw ran too deep, and
where it has not been at all farther reduced by dressing.
This coffer being 42*0 inches wide, can never have been taken through
the passages, as the upper passage is only 41-3 wide, and the lower is 41-2
and 4r6. Hence it must have been put into the chamber before the roofing
was laid over it, and so before the Pyramid was built upon that.
78. Beside the coffer chamber there is one lower in the rock, which has
a rock passage leading to it, descending northwards out of the floor of the
horizontal passage (see PL vii.). This passage runs down for some way ; then
goes horizontal, has an enlargement on the E. side, and a sloping passage
to a chamber on the W. side ; and then re-ascends ; and (if cleared out) would
come out on the pavement in front of the N. face. The descending part is
all plastered with a flat tool The lower chamber is also plastered, and is
cut very roughly in some parts ; on the roof even 6 inches too much having
been taken off, and then plastered up ; this great deficiency is, however, the
same on both sides of the roof, and it looks as if some different form had
been begun, and then abandoned. This chamber is
411-9 on N. 411-2 on S. 123-1 on E. 123-6 on W.
The door in the E. side is 41-2 wide; and 409 from N., 41-0 from S. side.
The short sloping passage into the chamber is 41-0 wide at top, where
it branches from the other passage, which is 41-2 and 41-6 wide. The recess
opposite the passage into the chamber is 123-8 long in front (W.), 122-0 at
back (E.), and 68-2 wide on N., 67-8 on S., beside the width of the passage,
which makes a total of 109-4 N., and 109-4 S. The use of such a recess
opposite the passage, which turns off at right angles, is plainly seen in the
small pyramids to be for turning a cofl[in so as to pass it into the chamber.
This shows that it was intended to introduce a coffin into the lower chamber,
about 40 X 105 long. There is good reason to regard this chamber as a
second place of interment ; and it might well have been used quite apart
from the other chamber and passages, by blocking the communication between
them, and reaching this by the opening in the pavement The passage to
the pavement is blocked up with limestone; which was partly removed, but
not opened through, by Vyse.
This passage was closed by a granite portcullis, and it is important to
p.
109
Sect. 78.] LOWER CHAMBER AND PASSAGE. 109
observe how this was introduced. The block of granite was taken along the
passage from the southward on edge, and the wall was cut away on one
side in a slope, so as to just allow of the block being turned flat across the
passage by slewing it round in a complex way. The block was then pushed
up into the groove cut in the rock for it, and the cutting in the side required
to get it in was filled up by masonry at the back of the block. Thus, to
any one forcing an entrance, nothing but rock and the granite slab would
meet them. The skill required to turn over and lift such a block, in such
a confined space, is far more striking than the moving of much larger masses in
the open air, where any number of men could work on them. By measuring
the bulk, it appears that this portcullis was nearly two tons in weight, and
would require 40 to 60 men to lift it ; the space, however, would not allow of
more than a tenth of that number working at it; and this proves that some
very efficient method was used for wielding such masses, quite apart from
mere abundance of manual force.
"» THE OUTSIDE OF THE THIRD PYRAMID. [Chip. x.
CHAPTER X.
THE OUTSIDE OF THE THIRD PYRAMID.
79. The Third Pyramid has never been quite finished. Its granite casing
blocks are left in probably the same condition that they were sent from
Assouan, with their outer faces in the rough,* but smoothly dressed down
on the joint surfaces. These surfaces of contact are flat dressed, with a
slightly projecting line of polished stone round the edges of the faces ; thus
the stones would be in contact along the outer surfaces of the joints, though
there was cement between the stones on the face in general. This line of
polish is well defined on its outer edge, the stone being quite rough outside
it, and sinking away sharply from it This is important for estimating the
intended plane of finish. The limestone casing which covered the upper part
of the Pyramid was finished off like that of the other Pyramids ; as may be
seen by the worked faces, in the heaps of chips left by the Arab destroyers.
But the pavement seems most probably never to have been placed around
the Pyramid ; Perring found nothing but a substructure of rough megalithic
blocks, with wide joints, and concluded that it was to be covered with finer
work. On uncovering the granite casing, not only did I find no paving there,
but the casing foot is quite in the rough, so that no pavement could be fitted
to it ; and none underlies it, as the granite rests on rough limestone.
The question then is, whether the casing was to be finished like that of
the Second Pyramid, with a vertical foot, and the square-cut paving fitted
against it; or whether any other plan was to be followed? The evidence
seems rather in favour of a formation like that of the Second Pyramid. First,
the lower course is thicker than any other, being 4 to 8 inches thicker than those
* One writer has described them as " rusticated," as if the roughness was a prepared
feature ; and another has attributed all the rounded irregularity of the stones to their
weathering away since they were built To say nothing, however, of innumerable cut holes
in the outer surface, left for lifting the blocks, no weathering would add to a stone a part
above its original face (see PL xiL). I had the pleasure of showing these details to an
Engineer officer, experienced in Indian granite works, and he perfectly concurred as to
the method of leaving an excess of stone on the face, to prevent injury to the block in
transit.
Sect. 80.] LENGTH OF THE SIDES. Ill
just above it Secondly, the evidence of the stones in the rough shows that
their slope could not be continued down to their base : at the N.N.E. the
face of the bottom course is somewhat smoothed, though not finally dressed,
and it ends with a rounded fall at 8 inches above the rough pavement, the
granite descending also 9 inches below the limestone. At the E.N.E. the
line of finish of the side joint runs straight at 51° down the side of the
block, but ends abruptly at an irregular outer su^ace some inches above
the base. Similar rough terminations of the intended slope are seen at the
E.S.E. and S.S.E. ; the abrupt end being 6 to 18 inches above the limestone
outside of the casing. Thus, in four out of five places where the casing foot
is known, it is certain that the finished surface was not intended to run down
in a slope to the rough limestone outside of it. It is most likely, therefore,
that the face was intended, when finished, to end in a vertical foot ; and this
would be covered by the pavement to be afterwards added. ,
What, then, is to be reckoned as the size of the true base of the Pyramid ?
Not the present edges of the granite, for they are utterly rough. And not the
ends of the fine-dressed edges of the joints, for they end at various levels. But
looking to the fact that all the courses of granite are intended to be equal, and
a rather short two cubits each, it seems most suitable, to take a mean of all the
granite courses (since the upper are not thinner than the lower ones), and reckon
the intended base of the Pyramid at one mean course height (40"3 ± v$) below
the first joint. Remembering also that the Second Pyramid courses average
two cubits each near the base, and the bottom course was just two cubits above
the pavement.
80. At this level, then, the various data of the intended surfaces give the
following size for the base, reducing those data that are on higher levels by the
angle 51° o': —
Difference
Difference
Length.
firom Mean.
Angle.
from Mean.
N.
.
...
+ 16' 48''
+ 2; 45;;
E.
4149-2
-4-4
+ 12' 23"
- I' 40"
S.
4>S7-8
+ 4'2
+ 12' 57"
-I' 6"
W.
4153-9
+ -3
...
...
Mean . . 41 SS^ 3*0 +14' 3" i' So"
The N. end of the W. side could not be reached, after several attempts ; and
hence the lack of knowing the length of the N. or azimuth of the W. side.
The above results are from the best data of each part, but there are other
points which are useful as checks. The actual points used are : at N.N.W.,
finished line on top of 4th course; at N.N.E., close joint of face on ist course;
at E.N.E., line of finish along the side of casing, at adopted base level ; at E.S.E.,
foot of rough casing, which is further in than even the joint surface requires ;
at S.S.E., finished line on top of 3rd course ; at S.S.VV., close joint on face of ist
THE OUTSIDE OF THE THIRD PYRAMID.
\Chap. X.
course ; at W.S.W., finished line on top of 4th course. The check measures are
the following three : at the N. side, courses by the entrance projected down at
ix" O', fall -8 beyond the side stated ; on the E. end of the S. side the rough
foot of the casing which was to be dressed down projects 4-3 beyond the side
stated ; and at the W. end of the S. side the line of finish on the 4th course,
projected at 51° o', falls -9 beyond the side stated.
It must be remembered that if any different base level should be supposed
to have been intended, it will make no difference in the above azimuths, nor in
the differences between the sides.
81. For the angle of the Pyramid, the data are rather divergent ; and not
only do different methods vary in result, but the measures of similar stones vary
far beyond the errors of measuring the angle or judging of the surfaces.
By 7 measures on finished granite, in situ ... ... 50° S7'±28'
By 1st and 4th courses, ?« J?V«, at S.S.W. ... ,,, 50°42'± 7'
By 6 single blocks of granite, shifted ... ... 51° o'± 9'
By 9 pieces of limestone casing (brought to England) ... 51° S8'±iS'
Considering the various sources of error : that the dressed granite in situ is very
irregular ; that the ist course joint at S.S.W. may easily be estimated too far out ;
and that we have no guarantee in the moved granite blocks, or the limestone
from the upper part, that the courses were horizontal (on the contrary, one
granite block has two different joint surfaces, 1° 40' different) ; the best
conclusion seems to be 51° o'± 10', But from a consideration of the granite
courses (see below), the angle would be S 1° 10' 3o"± i' 20" ; and this might well
be adopted, as being close to the very uncertain result from the measured
angles.
Hence the height of the Pyramid would have been 2S64±iS ; or 2580'8±2'
by the granite courses.
82. The courses were measured to rather more than half-way up the N.E,
comer, beside measures of the lower courses taken at each corner. The series
at tlie N.E. is as follows, reducing to the base level above adopted, 40"3 below
the first joint : —
40 1383s
39 I3S0-I
38 1318-6
37 12847
36 1250-9
33"4
31S
33"9
33-8
36-8
1214-1
1191-3
iiSS-6
22-8
1134-6
2ro
. 32-2
1 102-4
24-s
1077-9
1052-3
1023-0
1002-4
967-0
25-6
29-3
20-6
35-4
23-s
943-5
916-8
890-6
860-4
831-8
26-7
26-2
30-2
2Z-6
33-0
Seel. 82.]
COURSES.
"3
20 7988
H, 19 758-9
S' 33"9
S 18 725-0
Z 3S-6
3 17 689-4
— 16 645-2
44-2
38-8
O 15 6064
s.- 14 5638
13 523-9
12 481*1
II 442-4
42-6
39-9
42-8
38-7
41-4
10 4oro
9 359-1
8 316-4
7 276-1
6 233-7
41-9
40-3
42-4
36-0
s 197-7
4 i6o'9
3 122-3
81S
40-3
38-6
41-2
40-3
The full height of the bottom course is : N.E., 45-5 ; S.E., 55-3 ; S.W.43-7,
The granite is here marked as ceasing at 645 '2, i.e., including the lower 16
courses. The reasons for this are : (i) the highest remaining fragments of
granite (mere back ends of casing stones) are at the same level on each of the
sides ; hence, the granite must have come as high, and probably did not go
higher, as all the pieces are on the same course ; (2) there is a thicker course
next over this, as if some great change took place there, and a fresh start was
made ; the 17th course is thicker than any other course of the whole Pyramid,
and is followed by a course thinner than any that underlie it ; (3) Diodorus
states that the casing was of black stone up to the isth course, and like the
other Pyramids above that level Now, by the stumps of the stones the granite
must have come to the i6th, and probably the lowest course was covered with
sand in his day ; but it is unlikely (unless we credit him with loose errors like
modem guide books *) that the casing went much higher. Hence the strong
suggestions (i) and (2) are confirmed by (3), and may well be accepted.
This being settled, it is worth notice that the granite just covered one
quarter of the height of the Pyramid, the total height being 4x641^4, Conversely this may be taken as giving a determination of the original total height,
perhaps more accurately than by the varying angles of the casing, thus : —
645-2 (±'5 (?) for uncertainty of paving) X4=258o-8±2'
And this yields an angle of 51° 10' 3o"±i' 20".
The mean planes of the edges of the core masonry are far more irregular
than those of the Great Pyramid. At the base level adopted they are 4,082 on
E., 4,077 on S., and 4,109 on \V, averaging 4,089 apart ; and their mean distance
• In one of the most scientific of guide books it is said that the Third Pyramid cannot be
ascended (it is easier than the Great PjTamid) ; and that it was " covered with slabs of polished
granite, and the upper part with rough stones/" or, making matters worse still, " in the case of
the Third Pyramid the whole surface was to be, as it were, vetuered -with slabs of granite I "
showing that the writer had ne\-er realised the proportions of a casing stone. But descriptions
of the Pyramids are usually replete with exuaordinary mistakes—" granite " for " limestone,"
"height" for "width," &c.
Q
p.
114
114 THE OUTSIDE OF THE THIRD PYRAMID. [Chap. x.
from the casing plane varies from 14 to 46, averaging 33. The core has no
uniform skew to the casing, as in the Great Pyramid. The thickness of the top
of separate granite casing stones is from 35 to 46, averaging 41.
The casing, though partly attacked in the 12th and 13th centuries, does
not seem to have been removed in the time of Belon (1548), or of Villamont
(1589), who describe it as perfect, and without steps.
83. The peribolus walls around the Third Pyramid (see PL v.) are all built
of unhewn stone, neatly laid with mud mortar, like the walls of the barrack
galleries of the Second Pyramid. They are, however, irregular in their position,
some being nearly square and parallel with the Pyramid, and the others on the
South being very different. They were all fixed in the survey by triangulation,
with more accuracy than the wall-surface can be defined.
The N. wall joins the portion of a wall, S. of the Second Pyramid, by an
elbow, and runs thence westwards at — 14' from true W. Beyond its corner,
where it turns to the S., a fainter enclosure wall begins, running due W. The
spaces along these walls are proportional to each other ; from the corner of the
small enclosure, E, to that of the larger, D ... ... 6,275 \ ^a — t ccq
or by the Southern side, F to G ... ... 6,196/ '4— >5 59
Corner, D, to j unction of Second Pyramid peribolus, B 7,689 -i- 5 = i ,5 3 8
Peribolus B to junction of cross-wall, A ... ... 7,813 -,-5= 1,563
The mean of these is 1,553, which is perhaps 75 cubits of 2071 inches.
Not only does the peribolus of the Second Pyramid appear to be thus
connected in its position, but the wall at the head of the galleries, if prolonged,
would pass but 29 inches within the W. side of the Third Pyramid ; and
therefore these seem to be intended for the same line. And this connection is
confirmed by the equality of the two divisions of this line : —
Outside of last gallery to S. side of Third Pyramid peribolus... 3,258
or inside „ „ „ „ „ ... 3,304
S. side of peribolus to N.W. corner of Third Pyramid ... 3,309
Also, W. side of gallery wall, C, to E. side Second P. peribolus 3,308
The mean of the latter three is 3,307, which is, perhaps, 160 cubits of 2067 inches.
The length of the W. enclosure, 9,599 N. to S., is subdivided by a very
faint ridge, in which no wall could be found. But this ridge runs straight
towards the centre of the Pyramid, and it appears to be roughly about the
breadth of the Pyramid, or 200 cubits, from the S. wall. Referring to the
Pyramid side produced out westwards, as being the best-defined line of division
for this, the N. side of the Pyramid is (3,309+92 (?) )=340i from the outside of
the N. peribolus ; and as this is intentionally in line with the N. wall of the
W. enclosure, therefore the S. wall of that enclosure is (9,599 -3401) =6,1 98 S.
Suet. S3.] PERIBOLUS WALLS, AND TEMPLE. 1 15
of the N. face of the Pyramid by intention— />., as laid off by the builders.*
Now this is exactly the breadth of this enclosure (6,196 to 6,275), and is equal to
300 cubits of 2066. Hence the design of this W. enclosure is a square of 300
cubits, W, of the pcribolus wall and S. of North face of the Pyramid, while its
N. wall is advanced to the line of the N. peribolus wall. The W. wall of the
enclosure is nearly straight, two points fixed on it lying 3 and 12 inches outside
a line joining the corners.
The total length of the W. wall of the peribolus, 14,049 from comer to
corner (D to J), does not seem to have any simple relation to other parts ; and
the only connection observed in it is that the distance of the S.W. corner (J)
from the S. wall of the enclosure (F) is equal to the distance of the VV. peribolus
from the side of the Pyramid. The measures are : —
S.W. corner (J) to S. wall of enclosure (F) ... ... 4,450
W. wall peribolus, from W. side Pyramid ... ... 4,450
Or N.VV. corner peribolus to line of galleries (C) ... 4,451
S.W. comer (J) to branch wall (at K; 8,897 = 2 x 4,448
This length is necessarily (375 — 160) cubits by the previous relations ; and the
mean 4,450, equals 215 cubits of 2070.
So it would seem that these walls had not been planned all in one design,
but added on by different schemes ; referring more or less to the Pyramid,
and using round numbers of cubits in general, but getting more complex
quantities by addition or subtraction of simple lengths. The irregularity of the
S. peribolus wall exactly agrees to this view, as it is impossible to suppose its
skew and bowing line to have been laid out along with the very regular lines of
the other parts.
The end of the S. wall runs through the side of a large mound, and
disappears, so that it could not be exactly fixed. The end of the branch wall
likewise runs through the side of a mound, and then ceases. These mounds
would have been cut through^ had time allowed. The temple on tlie E. side of
this Pyramid appears to have been the most perfect that was visible at Gizeh in
1755 ; and Fourmont mentions four pillars as then standing in it It has now
lost all its casing (used by the Mamelukes for houses at Gizeh), and merely the
core blocks remain, weathered away in some parts so as to have fallen over.
The marks where the walls have been cut, to fit in the backs of lining blocks,
show that it was cased (probably with granite) like the temple of the Second
Pyramid and the Granite Temple.
The causeway is just the v/idth of the entrance passage walls ; it is built of
• To tmderstand a scheme it is necessary to take measurements, as far as possible, in the
same order that the builders took them — i.e., including their mistakes in each step of the laying
out ; and so see, not what errors there are from a mathematically rigid plan, but what errors
there are in each part as it was planned.
Ii6 THE OUTSIDE OF THE THIRD PYRAMID. iChap.t.
large blocks, and raised, probably, 20 or 30 feet above the plain, though the
sides are now much hidden by sand. It ran down the hill for about 800 feet
from the temple ; but it had no connection with the other causeway, situated
half a mile further E. in the plain below, though they are often confounded
together. The lower causeway is not in the line of the upper, nor parallel to it ;
and it only ran up to the quarries in the limestone hill, which is such a striking
feature in the neighbourhood.
There wjis a considerable village of Graeco-Roman age around the Third
Pyramid. A great amount of crude brick and pottery lies on the S.E. ; crude
brick is also found on the causeway, and is mentioned by Vyse as found on
the pavement at the N. side.
Su/.6sA FIRST C HA Af HER. H7
CHAPTER XI.
THE INSIDE OF THE THIRD PYRAMID.
84. The entrance is in the fourth course, or from 165*3 to 202"i vertically
above the base ; it is in the middle of the face, unlike that of either of the
larger Pyramids. The centre of it is 2078-9 from the E. side of the Pyramid ;
and though we do not know the exact length of the N. face, yet this is precisely
half the length of the S. face.
The azimuth of the passage is + 13' 16", which is just between the
varying azimuths of the Pyramid sides.
The granite just around the doorway has been dressed down to pretty nearly
its final surface, but there is no trace of decoration or inscription.* The edges of
the doorway are much broken away, so that no remains of any means of closing
it can be traced.
The entrance passage is built of granite, until it enters the rock, in which it
is afterwards cut ; and all the chambers of this Pyramid are entirely hewn in
the rock.
85. Just beyond the foot of the slope of the passage, it opens into the first
chamber. This is symmetrical on each side of the passage, and the sides
measure thus : —
N. 125-5 S. 124-2 E. 153-7 W. 153-9
The ends are divided in equal thirds, by the doorway and the two side spaces,
like the lower chamber of the Second Pyramid.
N.E. 41-9 42-0 41-6 N.W.
S.E. 40-8 41-1 42-3 S.W.
Both the sides and the ends are decorated with the panel ornament (PI. xii.) so
universal in the earliest tombs, but not used before in a pyramid. The mean
dimensions of this panelling are marked on the diagram. The granite lintel of
the south door of this chamber is lying on the fioor. It has a half-round drum,
• The name of Menkaura, recorded by Diodorus as being on the N. side of this Pyramid,
was probably cut in the bold characters of the early kingdom upon the limestone above the
granite, easily visible, but safe from idle mischieE
Ii8 THE INSIDE OF THE THIRD PYRAMID. {Chap. xi.
or roll, sculptured on it (like that in the Second Pyramid, PI. xii.), and the
width between the square ends, which rested on the jambs, varies from 4i"23 to
41*35; the ends are 107 to 109 wide, making 6278 to 62*99 length overall.
The breadth of the block is i8'4, and its depth 150 inches. The granite jambs
are i8-i broad. In the passage beyond this chamber are the sites of apparently
three sliding portcullises, situated at 63-9 to 75 'o, ioSt to I2r4, and 149"3 to
l6i'S beyond the doorway. Beyond this last portcullis the passage rises from
its previous height of 490 ; with a half-round drum and raised band above that ;
and at the entry into the second chamber the passage is jv\ high, like the
passage of the Second Pyramid.
This passage has evidently been excavated from the South outwards;
whenever the excavators ran wrong (and they did so several times) the false cut
goes deeper towards the N., and then ends abruptly when the error was seen.
Also the direction of the pickmark points to its outward working. How the
men got inside the rock to begin with, is plain from a second passage which runs
above this; and which opens into the second chamber blankly, without any
means of getting to the chamber floor, except by a ladder or other help. This
upper passage runs through the rock up to the masonry, and was cut from the
North inwards.
86. The full dimensions of this second chamber are :
N. 560-2, S. 559-5, E. 151-6, \ along 152-0, f along IS2'6, W. 152-5.
But the length of it is divided into two parts, by projecting pilasters cut in the
rock; these separate it into an eastern space of 416-3 N., and 415-9 S. ; pilaster
of 41-7 N., and 41-4 S. ; and a western space of 102-2 on both N. and S. The
pilasters project 13-1 N.W., i2-6 N.E., 11-7 S.E., and 13-0 S.W. The doorway
enters on the N. side of the chamber at 103-7 to '4S"i from E. wall. It is 71*1
high; and above it at 117-7 to 172-1 over the floor opens the upper passage,
which is at 105-2 to 144-2 from the E. wall. The ceiling here is 191-8 over the
floor. Thus the * east part, ' pilaster, and ' west part, are nearly equal respectively to the * west of the door, " door, and * east of the door ; and these are
also nearly the same as the similar divisions of the Second Pyramid chamber.
This second chamber is not, however, the chamber that contained the coffer,
though it has a recess apparently intended to hold a coffer. Out of the middle
of its floor a sloping passage descends westwards, turns horizontal, and then comes
into the E. side of the granite-lined sepulchral chamber. The floor of this
passage begins at 203-2 from E. side of second chamber; and the passage is 35-4
to 35-6 wide, and 356 high. There are some remarkable holes cut in the walls,
appai-ently to hold the ends of rollers, over which ropes were run in lowering the
cofier ; these holes were not cut by Perring, as he engraves them in his plates.
87. The granite chamber is hewn in the rock with a flat ceiling like the
p.
119
Seel. 88.] LOCULUS CHAMBER. 119
other chambers. The granite lining and floor of it is built in; and in order to
introduce the roof-blocks a hole is cut from the end of the second chamber, into
the top of the lower chamber. The roofing is not by beams, as in the King's
Chamber, nor by cantilevers, as in the Queen's Chamber of the Great Pyramid ;
but by sloping blocks resting one against the other with a thrust, the essential
principle of an arch. The under-sides of these blocks are cut into a barrel of
hemi-cylindrical roof, like passages in tombs of the early period. This cavity
above the roof, entered from the second chamber, was originally closed ; but the
masonry has been forced out, and now the tops of the roofing slabs can be easily
seen. These have been quarried by means of a\ groove, and holes drilled at
intervals to determine the cleavage plane ; as was the roofing of the spaces
over the King's Chamber. The introduction of these massive blocks through
such a small space, and the placing them in such a confined position, is a good
piece of work.
This granite chamber is not at all as regular in form as it is in appearance.
The walls measure thus : —
E. 26075. W. 258-83.
N, I04'06, near N. 103-85, mid. 103-80, by door 103-7, over door, I03'50, S. 103*25.
Heiehtl^-'^- '°5-8, N.E. 105-7, S.E. 105-4, S.W. 105-9;
^ \ N. mid. 134-6, mid. 1346, S. mid. I3S'5.
The doorway is 54-52 wide, and one side of it in the plane of the S. wall.
The courses at the door (S.E. corner) are :
27-6 on floor, 26-5 next, 26-7 top of door, 24-2 over door ; total 105*2.
88. Beside the first, second, and granite chambers, there is a loculus
chamber : this is entered by a flight of steps turning out of the passage to the
granite chamber. These steps are by far the earliest known in any building
or excavation : they are six in number, and their breadths are from 105
to 12 inches, averaging 11*3. This loculus chamber was doubtless intended
to contain coffins, judging by the sizes of the recesses. The chcimber is on
N. 740, S. 770, E. 211, W. 205-1 ; 78-2 high on N., 800 in mid., 78*2 on S.
The doorway is in the S. wall at 380 to 73*9 from the E. side. In the E. wall
are four loculi, and in the N. wall two, of the following shapes : —
From S. wall. Width. Height. Depth.
i6*oto 42-7 32-7 59*5 I02|
In E. wall -» ^5-1 to 98-9 338 568 loi
i
120-2 to 153-6 33*4 SS'3 loij
176X) to 208* 320 55*3 gj
From E. wall.
In N wall / O to 275 27*5 (about lOI
In N. wall I ^g.j ^^ ^^.Q 25-7 55) 102
ISO THE INSIDE OF THE THIRD PYRAMID. [Chap.xi.
The floors of the loculi are level with the floor of the chamber, and their
tops average 23* i below the ceiling. Their inner ends are not fully worked to
the width of the openings, as they are left rather in the rough.
89. Reverting now to the original entrance passage (above the present
entrance), by which the chambers were first begun, it is 39.3 wide and 51-0 high
at the chamber. It runs horizontally for some distance northwards, and then
slopes up at the usual passage angle (27" 34' Vyse) ; and it is 40-6 wide, and
49"0 high, square with the passage floor. It runs through the rock, and then
through some masonry; and ends at last at about the level of the present
entrance, but far behind — or south of — that, in the masonry of the Pyramid.
Over the end of it is a large block, roughly 1 1 J x 8 J x 7 feet, or about 50 tons
weight ; used exactly as the lintel blocks over the entrance passages in the
smaller Pyramids.
From all these details it seems plain that the Third Pyramid was first
begun no larger than some of the small Pyramids on the same hill. That it
had a passage descending as usual, with a large lintel block over it ; and running
horizontally in the rock, into a rock-cut chamber, whose roof was 74- 1 above the
passage floor. That after this was made, the builders, for some reason, determined on enlarging the Pyramid before it was cased, and on deepening the
chamber. They accordingly cut a fresh passage, from the new floor level of the
chamber, working this passage from the inside outward. They not only
deepened the chamber, but also cut the sloping passage to the lower, granitelined, coffer chamber ; for the granite lining could not be put in until the second
chamber had been deepened to its present extent ; so the granite chamber must
be part of the second design, or is perhaps in itself a third design. The old
entrance passage was then built over on the outside, and the greater part of its
height blocked up. The blocking that remains is clearly ancient, as it consists
of large blocks wedged in by chips, and worn by passing over the tops. On one
block is a saw cut, 6 inches deep in part, running vertically on the face ; this cut
must therefore have been made by the Pyramid builders, before they used the
block for filling the passage.
SeeL 9al NORTHERN SMALL P YRAMID.
CHAPTER XII.
THE LESSER PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH.
9a Of the smaller Pyramids I had not time to uncover the bases, nor to
open those now dosed. Only two of them remain open at present, the northern
and middle ones by the Great Pyramid.
The northern one by the Great Pyramid (marked 7 by Vyse) has the
azimuth of its passage axis - 14' 4o"±2o" ; but the passage narrows to the
bottom, being 41-5 at 520 up it, and only 400 at bottom ; hence the azimuth
of the sides of the passage is about — 9' on E. and - 20' on W., so that we may
say - is'iz', considering the possibility of the axis being better adjusted than
either side:
The entrance passage, from the end of its sloping part, proceeds
horizontally, cut in the rock for 1 1 1*4 measured on roof; the edge of the roof is
bevelled ITS' however, so that the really flat roof is only 94. The passage then
opens into a chamber, whose floor slopes down to the S. This sloping floor
ends in a fiat part, along the S. side of the chamber, 38"3 wide ; from the W.
end of which starts another sloping passage leading down westwards into the
coffer chamber. The upper chamber is :
On N., 697 ; on S., 69*9 ; on W., 167-9.
The sloping floor is (1679 -38-3)= 1296 wide horizontally; 48-6 below
ceiling at N, and iiS'8 (W.) to ii6-0 (E.) below the ceiling at S. end. The
angle, thereforei between it and the flat ceiling is about 27° 29'. The floor is
much damaged by the tearing out of various blocks which had been inserted to
make good flaws in rock.
The most remarkable feature in this chamber (which is entirely rock-hewn)
is the cutting made.to get the coffer passed through it into the lower chamber,
this last being entered by a passage turned at right angles to the entrance
passage. In order to turn the coffer, a recess was needed in the E. wall,
opposite the mouth of the passage to the lower chamber. This recess ends at
the S. wall, and is 77-3 long on the E. wall, but slopes at its N. end, so as to be
only 6S-I long on its back. It is cut 207 into the wall, and its roof is 45 to 48
below the ceiling, so that it is 68 to 71 high. It has never been filled up with
R
p.
122
122 THE LESSER PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH. [Chap. xii.
masonry. The coffer cannot have been over 38 wide,* as it had to go down the
lower passage ; and the maximum length that could be turned by using this
recess, is 88. So probably the coffer was about 37 X 84, allowing for a little free
space. The recess would also allow the roofing-beams of the lining of the lower
chamber to be passed down; a beam iO"3 wide (| cubit) and 126 long could be
turned without needing to take a cubic diagonal. If the beam was 206
(i cubit) deep, as seems probable, then, by taking full advantage of the cubic
diagonal, it might be 139 long; this would be amply sufficient for the roofing,
leaving 10 inches for a bearing at each end.
Not only is there this recess, but at the S.E. corner, in the floor of the
recess, is a circular hole over 15 deep and 7*3 diameter. The centre of this
hole is at I9'2 from S. wall, and 5-1 from back of recess; it has a vertical
groove in the recess back exactly behind it, 8"6 wide and 3-5 deep, which runs
up the wall for 15, sloping off to 20 inches above the floor. The use of this
circular hole seems to be for holding a stout post, around which ropes could be
passed to control the coffer when sliding it down the lower passage, the groove
behind it being to allow for the thickness of the rope. The centre of the hole
is 19-2 from S. wall, and the middle of the passage is 19-15 from the same;
hence the hole is exactly in line with the passage axis.
The roof of the lower passage begins at 78"S below the ceiling of the upper
chamber ; and the passage is 49*6 high vertically (or 41-3 perpendicular) and
38*3 wide. The passage floor really begins its slope in the chamber, on the flat
strip of floor along the S. side, at iSS from the W. wall. The sloping length of
the passage is i6o"i. On the N. side it is lined with two courses of stone i7"8
thick, and the top one 13-45 bigh.
The lower chamber differs from all other parts of the inside in being lined
with fine Mokattam limestone. The dimensions are —
In rock . N., 201-4; S., 202-1 (.>) ; E., 165-7; W., 166-3.
In lining. N, 139-8 (?); S., 1405; (?) W., 118 (?)
Only portions of the lining remain, and the floor is deeply cumbered with
blocks of lining, and probably also of roofing. The lining has a ledge left on it
2-6 to 4-5 wide along the E. and W. sides — or it may be said to recede and
become thinner — at 25-0 below rock roof on E., and 25-1 to 258 on W. This
probably was where the long sides of the roofing-beams rested, overlapping the
wall-lining ; their length must have been from N. to S., as that is the shortest
way of the chamber ; and as they could not support an end over the doorway,
which is the full height of the chamber wall Over the doorway a dovetail
stone is very neatly inserted to make good a flaw.
• It might have been 40 wide (as the entrance), and the lining on one side of the lower
passage may have been inserted afterwards, but this would not materially affect its turning.
S''*- 9I-] MIDDLE SMALL PYRAMID.
The lining blocks which remain are of the following thicknesses : — S.E., 30*8.;
W.N.W., 31-0; N.N.W., 25-1 to 26-5. The doonvay sides are 363 from N.
rock, or 10 (?) from N. lining ; and 927 from S, rock, or about 61 from S.
lining.
91. The middle one of the small Pyramids by the Great Pyramid (No. 8,
Vyse) is almost exactly similar in arrangement to the preceding. The
azimuth of its passage axis is — 3'2o"±io"; but the difference in the width
of the ends make the sides — i' 20" on E., and - 5' 20" on W. Probably
-•3'±i'is the truest statement.
The sloping passage ends in a horizontal passage 112 long and 38'4
wide, which leads into the upper chamber. The chamber ceiling is I3'2
above the passage top, and is all flat. The floor slopes down southward, to
a flat strip along the S. wall ; and dips down within the chamber, to begin
the floor of the lower passage, which turns out of the W. wall. The chamber
is not square, from the E. side of the entrance to the E. wall being askew ;
this E. side of it is really an enlarged form of the recess for turning the
coffer and roofing-beams.
The chamber, then, is on N. 637+66-6 along diagonal slope to E. wall ;
71*2 on E. wall; 1180 on S.; 1106 on W. The N. side consists of 38-4
doorway, and 25*3 wall on W. of it, =637.
The slope-ended recess, or eastern enlargement of the chamber, would
allow a coffer 113 long to be taken in ; more likely it was 95 or icx) long; the
width being limited to 38-4 by the entrance passage. The necessary roofingbeams, for lining the lower chamber, could also be passed down.
The upper chamber is 93 high, from the flat strip of floor on the S. of
it ; but the floors are all so encumbered, and so rotten, that no precise height
can be taken.
The sloping roof of the lower passage begins 584 below the chamber
roof J and is 1038 long horizontally.
The lower chamber is lined, like that in the other Pyramid, with fine
limestone. Its size is
In rock ... 209'S N. 212-8 S. 209-8 E. 209-0 W.
In lining ... (?) (?) (?) i2r6W.
The N. side of the rock has been cut away too deeply over most of it ; but
the chamber length is shown, by the lining remaining, to have been about
1 21-6. As the largest beams that could be brought in (of 20-6x10-3 section)
would be 164 long, there would be probably 15 inches of bearing at each
end, and 10 inches allowed for free turning in bringing them in.
There are red lines on the rock walls, showing where the planes of the
inside of the lining were to come. These lines are on the S. wall at 288
from E. and 29-2 from W. ; on the W. wall at 217 from S, ; and on the
p.
124
124 THE LESSER PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH. \Chap. xii.
E. wall at 20*9 from S. The corresponding casing actually measuring 28"2
and 27'9, for the 29*2 lines; and 2ro for the 217 and 20*9 lines; the small
differences being due to irregularities in the rock cutting.
There are no traces of the cementing-in of the lining above 32*8 or 33-0
from the roof (except on the N, side) ; and this probably shows at about
what level the walls ended, and the roofing-beams were put on. The doorway
roof ends at 28'2 (N.) to 28-8 (S.) below the rock roof; and probably the
ceiling-beams would be flush with that The sides of the doorway are of
polished rock, evidently never lined; they come at I36'3 from the N. rock
wall, and 34-9 from the S. rock wall ; the passage being 386 wide.
A part of the casing of the southernmost of the Pyramids by the Great
Pyramid (No. 9, Vyse) was accidentally uncovered by the Arabs digging for
nitrous earth ; and I measured it as follows : — 52° 10', 52° 28' (both good
measures), 52° o', 52° 25', 51" o' (bad). Giving the good double, and the bad
half, weight of the others, the mean is 52^ ii'±8'.
Sect. 93.] ORIENTATION OF LARGE PYRAMIDS. us
CHAPTER XIII.
THE POSITIONS AND ORIENTATIONS OF THE PYRAMIDS.
92. The relative positions of the three larger Pyramids to one another
were completely fixed in the triangulation, which included them all. The
following are their distances apart, as measured on parallels inclined — 5' to
true N. — I.e., at the mean azimuth of the First and Second Pyramids ; and also
the distances, and the angles from these parallels, of the direct lines from one
Pyramid to another: —
N. E. Direct.
Centre of First to centre of Second Pyramid ... 13 93r6 and 13 i65'8= 19 168*4 at 43" 22' 52"
), „ „ Third „ ... 29 io2'o and 22 6i6'o=36 8577 at 37" 51' 6"
» Second „ „ „ ... 15 170*4 and 9 450*2= 17 873*2 at 34" 10' ii"
There does not appear to be any exact relation between their centres, or
between the comers ; and from the nature and appearance of the ground,
and the irregularity of the peribolus walls, it would not seem likely that any
connection had been planned.
93. The orientation of the Great Pyramid is about 4' West of North ; a
difference very perceptible, and so much larger than the errors of setting
out the form (which average 12"), that such a divergence might be wondered
at When, however, it is seen that the passage, which was probably set out
by a different observation, nearly agrees in this divergence, it seems unlikely
to be a mere mistaka And when, further, the Second Pyramid sides, and
also its passages, all diverge similarly to the W. of North, the presumption
of some change in the position of the North point itself, seems strongly
indicated. The Third and lesser Pyramids are so inferior in work, that they
ought not to interfere with the determination from the accurate remains ; they
would, however, scarcely affect the mean deviation if included with the better
data. The azimuths of the two large Pyramids are thus : —
Great Pyramid, casing sides .
„ „ core „
Second „ casing „
„ „ passage (Smyth)
Great „
-3'43"± 6"
-S' i6"±io"
-S'26'±i6"
-S'37"±io"(?)
-S'49"±7"
1j6 the positions and ORIENTA TIONS of the P VRAM ids. \Chap. xiii.
In considering these results, the difference of the casing and core azimuths
of the Great Pyramid shows that probably a re-determination of the N. was
made after the core was finished; and it must be remembered that the
orientation would be far more difficult to fix after, than during, the construction ; as a high face of masonry, for a plumb-line, would not be available.
The passages of the Great and Second Pyramids, are the most valuable
elements ; as, being so nearly at the polar altitude, a very short plumb-line
would transfer the observations to the fixed plane. Considering, then, that
the Great Pyramid core agrees with the passages far closer than does the
casing, the inference seems to be that the casing was fixed by a re-determination
of N., by the men who finished the building. These men had not the facilities
of the earlier workers ; and are shown, by the inferiority of the later work in
the Pyramid, to have been far less careful. Hence the casing may probably
be left out of consideration, in view of the close agreement of the four other
determinations, one of which — the passage — was laid out by the most skilful
workmen of the Great Pyramid, with their utmost regularity, the mean variation
of the built part being but A inch.
The simple mean of the last four data is — s' 32"±6"; their divergences
being just what would be expected from their intrinsic probable errors. The
passages are, however, probably far the most accurate lines in their execution ;
and as the Second Pyramid is inferior in its workmanship, — 5' 4S"±5" might
be well taken as the result from them alone. On the whole, considering the
various values of the data, —5' 4o"±io" may be taken as a safe statement of
the su^ested place of the pole, at the epoch of the Pyramid builders.
94. There are, however, two checks on the supposition of such a change
in the pole : the observations of any change in later times, and the existence
of an adequate cause for the change. Now, the best latitude observations at
Greenwich, those on Polcu-is — least affected by erroneous refractions — appear
to show a latitude of 51*' 28' 38-58" during 7 years, 1840-7; sS-so" during 10
years, 1851-61; 38-22" during 3 years, 1862-5; and 38-30" during 8 years,
1868-76;* or on an average a decrease of -28" latitude in 28 years, or i-o" per
century. But Maskelyne's discussion in the last century yielded 39-7", for mean
epoch 1761. This implies a decrease of 1-38" per century, agreeing as closely
as could be expected with the change in recent observations.
Hence, in 4,000 to 6,000 years— the age of the Pyramids by different
chronologers — the change of Greenwich latitude would amount to just about
l'. Thus, as far as observation can lead us, it seems to show a shifl of the
earth's axis in longitude 0° to a fifth of the extent shown in longitude 121" by
the Pyramid orientations ; and therefore a change of the same order, and not
improbable in its extent
• See diagram in Mr. Christie's paper: Mem. Ast. Soc, xlv.
Stcl. 94.] CHANCE OF EARTITS AXIS.
\rj
As to the adequacy of a cause for such a change, it is hopeless, in our
ignorance of the exact amount and velocity of the ocean currents at different
depths, for us to strike a balance of them, and see how much motion is
outstanding to affect the axis of rotation. But we can at least see what sort
of proportion the required effective current would bear to the whole of the
currents. Assuming a change of place of the axis amounting to i' in i.ooo
years, it seems that a ring of water circulating around the earth, across the
Poles, at I mile per hour, and only 4 square miles in section, would suffice to
cause such a change. This is an amount of unbalanced, or outstanding, current
which is quite imperceptible in the balancing effects of the various ocean
currents ; and therefore amply accounted for by existing and known causes,
even apart from atmospheric currents.
Thus the apparent change in the axis of rotation shown by the orientation
of the Pyramids, is of the same order as a change actually observed. It is also
far within the changes likely to be produced by known causes, and the uniform
deviation is otherwise unaccountable in its origin. Hence it appears that it may
legitimately be accepted as a determination of a factor which is of the highest
interest, and which is most difficult to observe in any ordinary period.*
• Careful re-determinations of the meridians fixed in the beginning of the Ordnance Survey
might be of value ; as (according to the Pyramids) a change of 5" might be expected in their
azimuths.
p.
128
128 THE GRANITE TEMPLE, AND OTHER REMAINS. [Chap. xiv.
CHAPTER XIV.
THE GRANITE TEMPLE, AND OTHER REMAINS.
9S. The Granite Temple stands near the Sphinx, at the foot of the hill of
Gizeh; and is directly connected with the Second Pyramid, by means of a
causeway which leads from its entrance, straight up to the entrance of the
temple of that Pyramid.
This causeway was a grand work, about 15 feet wide and over quarter of
a mile long. The rock has been uniformly cut down to a sloping bed, on which
has been laid apparently two layers of fine white limestone. The rock looks at
first as if it were ail masonry, owing to every stone that was placed on it having
been more or less let into its surface, just like the building of the Pyramid courses
one on the other. All the paving has been torn up, and only a few blocks are
left lying about : these have a shallow drain cut in them, apparently on the
upper side of the lower layer of paving. This causeway was only discovered
two or three years ago; though Professor Smyth, as far back as 1865, had
mentioned that the entrance of the Granite Temple pointed to the Second
Pyramid, and had thence argued for a connection between them.
The direction selected for this causeway is not due E. from the temple
of the Second Pyramid ; and it is therefore not square with the Pyramids,
nor with the Granite Temple, which is similarly oriented. For this divergence
from the nearly universal orientation of other constructions here, there seems
good reason in the fact of a very suitable ridge of rock running in this direction,
with a sharp fall away on each side of it Hence, unless an enormous mass
of masonry had been built up, to fill a valley that runs due E. of the Second
Pyramid, there was no means of making the causeway square with the other
constructions. This causeway may have been regarded as a Via Sacra ; for
on both sides of it the rock is closely perforated with the large shafts of rock
tombs, over which chapels were probably built, bordering the causeway.
The two temples which this causeway connects — the upper one, in front of
the Second Pyramid, and the lower one, or Granite Temple — are closely alike in
their character; and the temple of the Third Pyramid seems to have been
similar to them. Both of them were built with a core of megalithic blocks of
limestone, ranging in their weight to over a hundred tons each; and these
p.
129
Sect. 96.] DESCRIPTION OF TEMPLE. 129
were cased over by massive blocks of granite or of alabaster. The upper
temple has been far more destroyed than the lower ; only a few blocks of its
polished granite remain, and its ruins are half buried in heaps of chips of
alabaster,* limestone, and granite. It had a sloping ascent, like the lower
temple, probably to a court over the roof of its chambers ; and innumerable
fragments of polished diorite statues, beside alabaster vases and inscribed
ornaments, are mixed together in the rubbish, evidently derived from the
destruction of statues like those of Khafra, which were found dashed into the
well in the lower temple.
96. The lower temple, or Granite Temple, which has also been called the
Temple of the Sphinx, was apparently a free-standing building, like the upper
temple. This is not the view of some who have seen it, and who suppose that
it is a rock-excavated work, lined with granite, at least in the lower parts, for
the upper half is manifestly built But Mariette (Rev. Pol. et Lit. 6 Dec, 1879)
expressly says that it is all built ; and he describes the outer surfaces as being
smooth, and " ornamented with long grooves, vertical and horizontal, skilfully
crossed," which seems to imply a design like .the lattice-work pattern of the
early tombs. As far as the outside can be now seen, to about fifteen feet above
the base, it is built of megalithic blocks ; and in the inside a rough chamber, to
which an entrance has been forced, shows the hidden construction ; and here it
is all built of immense blocks of limestone, resting on a bed of rock at the base
level of the temple. Again, just outside it, on the N.E., is an enclosure of crude
brick and rough stone, lately cleared, and there the rock is at about the level of the
base of the temple. It seems most probable, therefore, that it is entirely built ;
though possibly heaped round with stones and sand on the outside, like the
tombs on the S. of the Great Pyramid, and at Medum. Until the outside shall
be cleared, and the construction put beyond doubt, the evidence points to this
resembling the upper temple in every respect.
The arrangement of the Granite Temple will be seen from the plan, PI. vi.
The causeway from the upper temple runs down the hill, in a straight line, into
the passage which slopes down into the great hall. The pillars in this hall are
all monoliths of dark red granite, like that of the walls ; they are 41 inches
(2 cubits) square, and I74'2 high, weighing, therefore, about 13 tons each. The
two larger pillars, placed at the junction of the two parts of the hall, to support
three beams each, are 58 inches wide, and weigh over 18 tons each. All these
pillars support beams of granite, which are likewise 41 inches square in the
double colonnade, and 47"8 to 48'4 deep Jn the single colonnade, where their
span is greater. The shorter spans are 128, and the longer 14S inches; so that
the beams are not as heavy as the columns, the two sizes being 9J and 12 J tons.
•This is carbonate of lime, in crystalline nodular sheets ; and is called Oriental alabaster,
by the wide use of that word for both sulphate and carbonate.
S
p.
130
130 THE GRANITE TEMPLE, AND OTHER REMAINS. [Chap. xiv.
Six of these beams, or a third of the whole, are now missing. The Arabs say
that they were found lying dislodged in the temple ; and that Mariette, when
clearing up the place to exhibit (at the festivities of the opening of the Suez
Canal) had them blasted to pieces by soldiers. This seemed scarcely credible,
although very similar stories are reported of that Conservator of Antiquities ;
but among the quantities of broken granite, which is built into a rude wall to
keep back the sand, I found many pieces with polished surfaces like the beams
in question, and with distinct blast-holes cut in them, quite diiferent in character
to the holes drilled anciently. This ugly story, therefore, seems confirmed.
Besides this great hall, with the colonnades 222-4 inches high, there is
another hall to the east of it, which has been much higher ; and from each end
of the eastern hall is a doorway, one now blocked up, the other leading to a
chamber. Out of the great hall a doorway, in the N.W. corner, leads to a set of
six loculi.; these are formed in three deep recesses, each separated in two by a
shelf of granite. These recesses still have their roofs on, and are dark except for
the light from the doorway, and from a ventilator. The lower part of the walls
of each recess is formed of granite, resting on the rock floor; this is 6 r6 to 617
high. Above this is the granite shelf, 28 thick, which extends the whole length
of the recess. In the southern recess this shelf is nearly all of one block
176 X over 72 X 28. Upon this shelf, over the lower recesses, are placed two
walls of alabaster, dividing the upper three loculi ; both walls are irregularly a
few inches southward of the lower walls. The extraordinary length of these
loculi — over 19 feet — seems strange ; especially as the turn to the side loculi
would prevent any coffin larger than 30 X j6 inches being taken in unless it were
tipped about to get the benefit of the cubic diagonal. The doorway is only
8o"4S high, so that nothing over 80 inches long could be taken in on end.
On the S. side of the short passage leading to these loculi, a stone has been
removed from the wall, and by climbing in, a curious irregular chamber is
reached, evidently never intended to be seen. It is entirely in the rough, the N.
and part of the W. side being merely the backs of the granite blocks of the hall
and passage ; these are irregular, in and out, but nevertheless very well dressed,
flat and true in most parts. The rest of this chamber is of rough core masonry,
just like the core of the upper temple, and the floor is of rock, with a step down
across it (broken line in plan) about the middle of the chamber. The base of
the S.W. corner of the chamber is entirely in one block, the lower or sunken
part of the rock floor being levelled up by a base plane cut in the block, and the
S. and W. sides being two vertical planes in the same block, so that it forms
a hollow corner all in one piece. On the S.E. the chamber is bounded by a
rough wall of stone scraps built in when it was recently opened. In the
chamber were found, it is said, several common mummies ; perhaps of late date,
like those I found in the E.N.E. rock trench.
^"'- 9*-l DESCRIPTION OF TEMPLE.
The history of the opening of this secret chamber seems to have been that
in destroying the temple, for the sake of building stones, the pillagers began at
the S.E. and S.W. corners ; here they pulled stones away until they opened into
this chamber, and then, finding a granite wall on one side of it, they dragged
out the smallest block, and so broke through into the passage. A clearance of
the outside of the temple is needed, however, to settle this as well as other
questions.
Another covered chamber also exists, branching from the entrance passage;
this is built of alabaster and granite. Opposite the entrance to it is a doorway,
leading to an inclined passage, which was the ascent up to the former roof of
the great halL This passage is of alabaster, and the upper doorway of granite.
The whole of the area above the great hall appears to have been at one
level, and to have formed a large uncovered court, surrounded by high walls.
That it was not subdivided into chambers would appear from the character of
the facing of the wall, which remains in one corner over the six loculi. This
wall is of fine limestone, and not of granite or alabaster, which were used in
covered parts of the building ; and it has a considerable batter, unlike the walls
of the halls or chambers below, and only resembling the external walls of
tombs. Each feature shows, therefore, that it was open to the sky. As no
temples more complete than this are known, except those built one to three
thousand years later, it is unsafe to argue by analogy ; but still -there is no case,
I believe, of a second story to a temple ; and smaller temples over the large
one (as at Dendera) are of the character of additions built in a court on the roof»
"and not upper stories as parts of a whole design.
The ventilators are a peculiar feature of the building, though somewhat like
those to be seen in the tombs. They were formed by sloping slits along the
top edge of the walls, a few inches wide, and usually 41 inches long. Only one
remains perfect, that opening out of the chamber of loculi ; this slit opens into a
rectangular shaft, which rises to some way above the roof, and there opens with
a square mouth of alabaster on the face of the upper court wall. The mouth is
on the same side of the shaft as the slit ; and hence the only light entering is
reflected from the side of the shaft. The slits cut for these ventilators exist
. all along the Western part of the great hall, and are marked on the walls in
the plan.
The Eastern hall appears to have been formerly much higher, probably as
high as the smaller chamber on the N. of it, which rises several feet above it.
The signs of this are the absence of ventilating slits along the present tops of its
walls, and the two large recesses at each end of it, which are now less than
half their original height What these recesses originally were like may be seen
by a similar recess in the small chamber at the N. end. Here is a large recess
in the W. wall, quite rectangular, and free from any ornament, like all the other
I3» THE GRANITE TEMPLE, AND OTHER REMAINS. [Chafi. xiv.
parts ; it is roofed across by a deep lintel, the whole being of the same red granite
as the rest of the walls.
What may have been the use of these recesses, is an inquiry which seems to
be solved by the other question, as to where were the original sites of the diorite
statues, so many of which were found thrown into the well in the Eastern hall.
These statues must have had some appropriate place in this hall, and no sign
appears of any pedestals upon which they could have stood. We mifjht look,
then, on such niches or recesses in the walls as the original sites of the great
diorite figure of Khafra, of his lesser statues, and of the equally valuable (though
sadly neglected) cynocephalus apes of Tahuti, carved in gray granite and green
basalt, which now lie scattered about the building. These recesses at the end of
the Eastern hall are 809 (S.) and 8S'S (N.) in width ; that in the north chamber
b not accessible.
97. The workmanship of the building in general, though fine looking, is not
at all equal to that of the Great Pyramid. The granite blocks are fitted
together anyhow, so long as their joints are horizontal, and somewhat upright ;
and in some cases even a re-entering angle is cut in one stone to receive the
comer of another. The walls are also far from vertical, or square with each
other in plan. The Eastern hall is longer on the present top than at the bottom
by 7"2 on E. and 97 on W. side, the difference being nearly all due to a very
perceptible batter of the S. end. It is also wider at the top than the bottom,
by 4*1 on N. end and 2'9 on S. end. The orientation of it is fairly close; for,
judging by the noonday gun of Cairo, it is +16' or —12' from true N. by two
different days' observations. The irregularity of the walls discouraged me from
using polestar observations for it, the difference of width of the ends being equal
to 10' on the length. All the dimensions marked on the plan are as measured
at the base, except the Western part of the great hall, which is much buried in
the sand.
The building is peculiar in the fitting of the corners ; not only are the
courses bedded alternately one over the other up a corner, as in the Great
I^ramid, but each course goes an inch or two round the corner ; the angle
being actually cut out in each stone. This may be very probably explained by
what we see in the granite casing of the Third Pyramid ; there the face was
left rough, to be dressed down after building. If, then, the faces of these blocks
were left with a small excess on them, and dressed down afterwards, that would
make each block turn the comer in the way described.
All the doorways seem to have been fitted with double valve doors : the
doorway to the loculi is the best to examine. There the pivot-holes cut in the
granite lintel by a jewelled tube drill are plainly to be seen ; with the stump of
the core left by the drill, still sticking in the southern hole. On the floor beneath
these there Is, not another hole, but a highly polished piece of black basalt, quite
p.
133
Su/.99^] DATE OF TEMPLE. 133
flat, and free from scratches. It is difficult to see what was the use of such a
stone, or how the doors were worked.
98. This Granite Temple, then, appears to have been a mass of masonry,
probably cased externally with fine limestone ; and measuring about 140 feet
in each direction, and 40 feet high. This contained a hall about 60 feet long,
12 wide, and 30 feet or more in height, with a large recess at each end
containing a statue. These recesses were high up above the doors which led
into lesser chambers, also containing statues, and from which outer doorways
may have led. Beside this hall there was the great hall, entered by a doonvay
over 8 feet wide and 14 feet high, and dimly lighted by its ventilators ; one
part of this was 81 feet long, 22 wide, and 19 feet high, the roof supported by
six massive pillars ; while the remainder was 55 feet long, 33 wide, and iSJ
high, with its roof supported by ten of the same monolithic pillars. There
were also six loculi, each 19 feet long, in one of the side chambers. Over
all this was the open-air court on the top, reached by a sloping passage
of alabaster, and cased with fine white limestone ; its area about 80 feet by loo
feet, and the walls around it over 15 feet high. From the great ceiled halls of
dark red granite — with their ranks of square monoliths, and vistas as much as
100 feet in length, all dimly seen by the light reflected through the openings
along the roof — the main passage led out in one straight line, up the wide
dazzling white causeway, for more than a quarter of a mile ; thus entering the
similar temple that stood before Khafra's Pyramid, richly furnished with
statues, bowls, and vases engraved with his royal name and titles.
99. The date of the Granite Temple has been so positively asserted to be
earlier than the fourth dynasty, that it may seem rash to dispute the point
Recent discoveries, however, strongly show that it was really not built before
the reign of Khafra, in the fourth dynasty.
The main argument for its earlier date is the mention of the " Temple of
the Sphinx," in the celebrated tablet discovered at Gizeh. But I found that the
building to which this tablet belonged was of the twenty-first dynasty ; and, as will
be seen in the " Historical Notes" (section 1 18), this tablet is either a refurbished
and altered copy of an older inscription, or more probably an entire invention. In
no case, however, would it be certain that the Granite Temple was the identical
temple of the Sphinx, rather than the temple of Isis, or that of Osiris, which are
also mentioned ; and there may easily have been other temples in the neighbourhood, whose foundations are as unknown now as the whole Granite Temple
was a generation ago. The whole reasoning turns on the supposition that
a building which is near the Sphinx, though not known to be in any way connected
with it, is yet necessarily identical with a temple of the Sphinx, mentioned on a
tablet which has internal evidences of being untrustworthy, and which was
written about a couple of thousand years after the time mentioned upon it
p.
134
134 THE GRANITE TEMPLE, AND OTHER REMAINS. iChap. xiv.
The argument, on the other hand, for the Granite Temple being of the
fourth dynasty, is drawn from its own construction, and is, therefore,
contemporary evidence. The great causeway from the temple runs askew
to the orientation of the temple and Pyramids ; and the adequate reason for
this is the presence of a ridge of rock running along in that direction. But
the entrance passage, which is built all in one mass with the temple, and is
certainly contemporary with it, is also skewed exactly as the causeway. This
shows that the causeway cannot have been designed after the temple, since there
must be a strong reason for building one part of an oriented structure askew to
the rest of it. If the causeway, then, is as old as the temple, what could be the
meaning of running a causeway up to a bare hill-top, if no temple or Pyramid
existed there ? more especially as all other causeways and approaches run east
instead of west. The only adequate reason for this arrangement is the
pre-existence of the Second Pyramid and its upper temple, before the causeway
and lower temple. The same conclusion is arrived at when we consider the
other Pyramid causeways, and see that the causeway of the temple was (in the
cases of the Great and Third Pyramids) doubtless the causeway by which the
materials were brought during the building. If the Granite Temple existed before
the causeway, and so blocked the end of it, there would be no way of taking the
stones up for building the Second Pyramid. The lower end of the causeway
must have opened freely on to the plain, until the completion of the Pyramid
and upper temple.
Thus the arrangements of the buildings themselves point dearly to the
following order of design. First, the Pyramid of Khafra ; second, the temple
built symmetrically in front of that Pyramid ; third, the causeway, leading
askew from that temple down a ridge of rock ; and fourth, the Granite Temple
at the foot of the causeway, with its entrance passage skewed into line with the
causeway, though the rest of the temple was oriented, like everj'thlng else in
the neighbourhood.
The fact that the only dateable remains found in the Granite Temple were
statues of Khafra also shows that it is of his period ; since the idea of his
appropriating an earlier building is very unlikely.
Such, then, is the contemporary evidence on the age of this building, given
by the causeway and passage.
lOO. There are, at Gizeh, remains of various other great buildings of the
Pyramid period, as well as the Granite Temple (or rather the lower Granite
temple of Khafra) and the upper temple by the Second Pyramid.
On the east side of the Great Pyramid a large building existed, of which
but little can be found to show its nature. The great basalt paving, about 90
feet by 180 feet, has been described already (section 28), and a great platform of
this sort must have been part of some large work. The superstructure, now
Sect. loi.] BASALT AND DIORITE CASINGS.
■ destroyed, appears to have been lined with granite, like the temples of Khafra ;
many large pieces of polished granite are to be seen lying on the S. side of the
basalt paving ; and on the E. side, in the inner end of the E.N.E. trench, is a
block with two adjacent faces, and a third worked surface on it is precisely
like that of the holes for the pivot blocks of the doors in the Granite Temple,
Again, when excavating on the basalt pavement, at the middle of it, I found
several large hewn blocks of granite, mixed up with the blocks of basalt which
lie all torn up there. By the basalt paving 1 also picked up several flat pieces
of diorite ; some polished, and others rough-dressed as for cementing in a
building. To understand somewhat more of the nature of this part, the whole
site of the basalt paving and around it should be cleared of sand and chips, and
all pieces of granite and diorite carefully noted down.
The great rock-cut trenches on the E, of the Great Pyramid have every
appearance of having been lined with fine stone ; not only in each of them are
blocks inserted with plaster, and other plaster remaining, but the surfaces are
very irregular, and certainly not final ; and in most parts the characteristic
recessing is to be seen, cut out to hold the irregular backs of the lining blocks, as
they were fitted one by one, exactly as in both of the granite-lined temples of
Khafra, This recessing can never occur from any cause, except the actual fitting
in of the irregularities of the individual blocks of lining; and it must always
show, not only that a lining was intended, but that it was also fitted in. Again,
the irregular, but flat, ledges on many parts (such as around the inner end of the
S. trench, and along the sides of the E.N.E. trench) are exactly what would be
made for fitting blocks of lining. Now the width of the inner end of the S.
trench is only 134 inches, and that of the E.N.E. trench 170, and its outer end
150; and lining blocks can hardly be reckoned at less than 30 inches thick,
considering the height was 20 feet ; hence these trenches must have been
narrowed to long vertical slits or crevasses about 5 or 6 feet wide, 20 feet deep,
and 160 feet long, lined with costly polished stone.
Of the smaller trenches, the N.N.E. is partly built, and was almost certainly,
by its form, position, and wear, a drain to carry off the washing of the basalt
pavement, or possibly for some sacrificial arrangement; the other slight trench,
at the N.E. corner of the Pyramid, has a uniform fall, as if for a drain.
loi. On the E. side of the Great Pyramid, among the rubbish near the
smaller Pyramids, were found two pieces of the casing of a Pyramid, each
unique. One is a piece of a basalt casing stone, with three worked faces, i.e., two
outer faces of a Pyramid, and the horizontal joint below them ; being, in fact, a
bottom comer of a ridge casing stone. The fragment is about 7 inches high on
the faces, and 5 inches wide along the base. The joint surface is beautifully
worked, by pick-dressing slightly ground ; being seldom over ~ inch from a true
plane, and generally much less. The angle of slope must have been 5 1" 9' ± S',
p.
136
136 THE GRANITE TEMPLE, AND OTHER REAfAINS. [Chap. xiv.
as determined by the angle of meeting of the faces ; but the joint dipped down
1° 1 8', so that the angle of the block is 52° 27'. From this it seems probable
that one of the smaller Pyramids had arris lines of basalt down each corner, to
prevent wear and weathering ; the general casing of all of these Pyramids was
certainly limestone ; as I picked up pieces (with the angle of slope) by each of
them.
The other remarkable piece of casing is a bottom comer, with an upright
joint, of a diorite casing stone. The idea, even of arris lines being cased with a
stone so valuable and difficult to work, is almost incredible ; but this chip, some
four inches long on the face, and one inch on the joint, cut to the regular
angle (?>., 52" 30' ± 10'), seems to admit of no other explanation.
It therefore appears as if the small Pyramids of the family of Khufu were
adorned with the protection of edges of the hardest and toughest stones, which
embraced the faces of polished white limestone ; an architectural effect quite
new to our ideas.
102. The use of diorite at Gizeh is worthy of study ; it is far from a common
stone, and was generally reserved for statues, no building stones of it being
known in situ. Hence, wherever it is found it is both unmistakable and important. Of wrought and finished diorite, I found opposite the N. face of the Great
Pyramid two pieces ; each with three faces meeting at right angles, two faces
rough dressed and cemented, and the other face fine ground. These must have
belonged to some building work in diorite ; and probably belonging to the same
were two angle pieces with both faces polished, and two plane chips, both
polished. Beside these, in the same place, were many pieces of diorite with
slight saw cuts in them, J to 2 inches deep, and hammer-dressed surfaces ; and
also innumerable chips of diorite lying about All these pieces are solely found
lying on the surface, and never within the sloping stratification of the ancient
Pyramid masons' rubbish. They seem exactly as if some small construction, or
object, in diorite, had been smashed up in one spot ; but there are no foundations
or traces of a building on the bare rock, for hundreds of feet on either side of it.
The site of these fragments is exactly opposite the entrance to the Great
Pyramid. Now, Greaves (in 1638) mentions a tradition that the niche in the
Queen's Chamber was the place for an idol; and it would be a very suitable
recess to hold a great diorite statue like that of Khafra, which probably stood
in a recess in the Granite Temple. If, then, such a statue and its pedestal had
been broken up, and carried out of the Pyramid, and finally chipped to pieces at
the edge of the hill, — with the same intensity of hatred that is shown in the destruction of the other statues at the temple of the Second Pyramid, at Abu Roash,
at Sakkara, and elsewhere, — this would account for the corners of built blocks
found here, which might be parts of the pedestal ; for the rough pieces, which
might be the backs of the blocks ; for the various pieces of polished diorite ; for
p.
137
Sect. 102.] DIORITE AT GIZEH. 137
the quantity of diorite chips ; and for some pieces of diorite statues, and other
dressed fragments, found a couple of hundred feet to the westward. There is no
place so likely for the diorite to be brought from, as from the Great Pyramid ;
since this site is the part of the hill edge nearest to the entrance, but not near to
any other place. Unhappily, there has been such a large amount of quarrying
and replacing in the Queen's Chamber, and so much rubbish from there has
been distributed elsewhere, that it is vain to look for any diorite chips still
remaining there.
Beside the diorite on the above site, I found many fragments of polished
statues, and probably thrones, among the rubbish overlying the tombs on
the E. of the Great Pyramid ; and also specimens illustrating tube-drilling,
ordinary sawing, and circular sawing in diorite. For an account of these, see
the " Mechanical Methods."
Beyond the tombs south of the Great Pyramid, I found a piece of a statue ;
but this most likely came from the great site for such pieces, the temple of the
Second Pyramid. There, in the rubbish, any quantity of chips of statues, bowls,
and other objects in diorite, may be found. Bits of statues large and small,
fingers, toes, drapery, and hieroglyphs are readily to be picked up.
Behind this Pyramid, in excavating the workmen's barracks, I turned up
several pieces of statues, both in diorite and alabaster ; these had been less worn
than is usual with such fragments, and all retained traces of their colouring;
black for hair, and green for dress, on the alabaster ; and uniform white plastering
on the diorite. Beside these I found a small piece of diorite, hammer-dressed in
curve, opposite the door of the Second Pyramid, on the rubbish.
The exact position of all wrought fragments of diorite, should be carefully
noted when they are found ; as by this means many suggestions may be obtained
as to objects that are now entirely destroyed.
p.
138
138 TOMBS AT GIZEH. [Chap.xv.
CHAPTER XV.
TOMBS AT GIZEH.
103. Although plans were made in 1880-81, of all the accessible tombs of
Gizeh, it is hardly desirable to add them to the bulk of the present volume,
especially as they have not much bearing on the Pyramids and temples. But
the determination of the typical angle of the built tombs is interesting, not only
in itself, but also in connection with the ilastaba-Pyramids of Sakkara and
Medum (see section 1 10).
The rows of tomb-chapels (in Arabic mastabd) built on the surface of the
rock at Gizeh, are nearly all constructed with the same angle. To determine
the amount and variations of this, I measured the following tombs, which I
selected as being mostly well wrought and in good condition. The numbers
given are those of Lepsius.
No. 45 mean
of 91
measures,
74''4'
±40'
No. 49
»
74^55'
I "20
No. 37
9f
7S»iS'
Between (^ „
»
N. and S.
7S<'34'
Nos.37and4oJ ( „
f>
KandW.
8o°S7'
IS)
No. 14
n
7S''36'
No. 44, N. part, „
»
76° 0'
No. 18
76»3o'
i°3o'
No. 17
»
78' 3'
I"
Properly weighting these data (inversely as the squares of their probable
errors) the mean is 7S"52'±io' ; and No. 44, which is by far the finest work of
all, is 76° o'_± S'. Now 75° 57' 50" is the angle produced by a rise of 4 on a base
of I ; hence the rule for the mastaba-angle seems to have been to set back the
face I cubit in every 4 cubits of height The slope of 8o''S7'±iS' on E. and W.
of one mastaba is probably designed on the same principle ; as a rise of 6 on i
yields a slope of 80° 32' 15".
104. The very remarkable tomb known as Campbell's tomb, requires some
notice here, as it has been associated with the name of Khufu by some writers.
For a detailed plan and measurements reference should be made to CoL Vyse's
volumes ; but we may state the general form of it as a large square pit in the
p.
139
Seel. 104.] CAMPBELL'S TOMB. 139
rock, 26 by 30 feet, and 53 feet deep ; outside this there is a trench, running all
round it at 9 to 22 feet distant ; this is 5 feet wide and 73 feet deep. Bars of
rock are left at intervals across this trench. Altogether about 10,000 tons of
limestone have been excavated here.
The gold ring found here, bearing the cartouche of Khufu, only belonged
to a priest of that king in late times, and the king's name on it is only introduced incidentally in the inscription, which does not profess to be of early
period. But there is, nevertlieless, ground for believing this excavation to be
the remains of a tomb of the Pyramid period.
When this pit was cleared out by Vyse, he found a tomb built in the
bottom of it ; but this cannot have been the original interment, for the following
reasons. On the sides of the pit may be seen the characteristic marks where
the backs of lining blocks have been fitted into the rock (see section 100) ; and
on the surface round the pit and the trench are numerous traces of the fitting
of stones, and of plastering, and even some remaining stones let into the
rock. Hence this pit has been lined with fine stone, and a pavement or a
building has existed above it at the ground level. This lining would so far
reduce the size of the pit, from 315 width to probably about 206 inches, that it
could be roofed either with beams or with sloping blocks. But the object of
such a deep pit seems strange, as it would form a chamber 50 feet high.
Perhaps the great rock-pit of the Pyramid at Abu Roash explains this ; as Vj-se
says that in his day, there were signs that it had been filled up with successive
spaced roofs, like those over the King's Chamber.
The remaining indications then show that this pit is merely the rough shell
of a fine-stone chamber, probably roofed with successive ceilings for its greater
security, and having some pavement, or probably a great mastaba chapel, on the
surface above it The access to it was perhaps down the square shaft in the
rock, which still remains. It is certain, then, that the tomb of the twenty-sixth
dynasty, built of small stones in the bottom of the great pit, after all the lining
had been removed, and when it was again a mere shell, cannot have been the
original interment. And from the character of the design, and its execution,
there can be but little hesitation in referring the original work to the fourth
dynasty. Though it may not have been the tomb of Khufu himself, as some
have suggested, yet the trench around it may at high Nile have readily held
water, insulating the central pit ; and it may thus be the origin of the description
of Khufu's tomb, given by Herodotus. For the details of the levels connected
with the question, and also plans and measures, see Prof. Smytli's account in
Edinburgh AsL Obs., voL xiii,, page lOi.
p.
140
140 NOTES ON OTHER PYRAMIDS. [Chap. wi.
CHAPTER XVI.
NOTES ON OTHER PYRAMIDS.
105. Some of tlie other pyramids that I have examined have such important bearings on those of Gizeh, that it will not be out of place to give some
notes here upon their construction, though they have been mostly described by
Vyse and Perring, to whose account this must only be considered supplementary.
Beginning at the north, the first P3n-amid is at Abu Roash, five miles N. of
Gizeh. It is situated on the top of a striking hill of white limestone, a culminating point of the Libyan Desert, which is seen from far in the Nile Valley.
This hill is deeply scored by watercourses which wind through it ; and its Nile
face rises at a steep slope of 35". The wild and desolate valleys of it were used
for interment by the ancient Egyptians ; as outside a cave, now partly fallen in,
I found fragments of bronze, and of a very large, thin, translucent alabaster
bowl. On this hill there are apparently the remains of two Pyramids, but of one
of them nothing much can be stated without excavations. Of the other, the
general appearance is a large pit cut in the rock, with a passage leading down
to it ; about ten courses of limestone around it, and a great quantity of broken
stones heaped about it, making a mass some 3CX) feet square and 40 feet high.
Beyond this are heaps of granite chips lying in a line all round the Pyramid,
and most abundemt just in front of the entrance. Leading away northward
from the Pyramid is a causeway, nearly a mile long, and in some parts 40 feet
high, running down to the plain.
The rock-cut pit and passage were originally lined with fine Mokattam
limestone, which, it is said, was stripped out in the time of Mohammed Ali by a
mudir. Since Vyse's time some more masonry is gone ; and this Pyramid
(perhaps the most ancient in existence) is being quarried during high Nile at
the rate of 300 camel-loads a day, I was told.
The pit is now about 30 feet N. to S., by 70 feet E. to W,,and about 30 feet
Aigh, besides the depth of a large quantity of broken stone in it, beneath which
Vyse found the pavement. The passage is about 18 feet wide. The sides have
a batter of about i in 30. The entrance passages of Pyramids are in no
p.
141
Sect. 10^. ABU ROASH, PYRAMID OF MEN . . . RA. 141
case over about 40 inches wide ; if such was the case here, then the lining must
have been 7 feet thick. Now, looking at the rock-pit, this would imply a
chamber about \6 feet by $6 feet (or probably 17 feet, *>., 10 cubits, in width),
the length of it being, perhaps, divided in separate chambers ; and what makes
this the more likely is that, by this thickness of lining, the sloping roof-beams
would lie on it and act as cantilevers without any thrust, just as they do at
Gizeh and Sakkara. Perring considered that there were traces of superposed
ceilings and spaces, like those over the King's Chamber at Gizeh ; and such a
covering seems very likely. Roughly observed, by the noon-day gun of Cairo
the rock-cut passage is only 20' W. of N. ; this, at least, shows it to be as well
oriented as could be expected in a mere rock cutting which was to be afterwards
lined.
An important question about this Pyramid is, whether it was ever finished.
. It has been often written of by Vyse and others as being unfinished ; and the
rude stone hammers met witli here have been classed as implements left by the
workmen. We now know, however, that jewelled ^aws and drills were the
tools used by Pyramid builders ; and the rough stone hammers are of exactly
the types belonging to the rude remains of Ptolemaic times. These, therefore,
more probably tell of destruction rather than of construction. The great heaps
of granite all round the Pyramid show that it has been cased with granite ;
and as it is always believed that no casing was put on a Pyramid until the core
was entirely finished, this is evidence of the completion of the Pyramid. The
far larger heaps of granite in front of the entrance, show that it has been lined
in part with granite. Now, all these heaps, like the hammers, tell of destruction,
for throughout them broken pieces of worked surfaces of granite may be seen,
some with two planes meeting; and also many blocks which have cleavage holes
in them, are too large to be masons' waste, and too small for casing blocks, but
exactly such as would result from cutting up the casing. The large amount of
masonry carried away is shown by the depth of 6 or 8 feet of chips lying on the
top of the remaining courses ; so that the objection that there is not sufficient
bulk here for the Pyramid to have been complete, is put to rest at all respects
by the remains of what has been destroyed.
Whether the body of the king was actually placed in the Pyramid or no, is
a point of less consequence compared with the fact of finding pieces of granite
coffer, and of diorite statue. The pieces of the granite coffer, which I observed
in the rubbish which had been carried out of the inside, are some of them
curved ; belonging, therefore, to a modified box-coffin, partially suited to the
figure. One curved piece of coffer is 8t thick, and a plane piece is io"2 thick.
Besides this I found fragments of the diorite statue, including several pieces of
the figure, and one piece of the throne. This throne had borne an inscription
arranged exactly like that on Khafra's large statue, and of the same scale ; the
Ua NOTES ON OTHER PYRAMIDS. [Chap.xvi.
fragment found reads, ". ... nub (Ramen . . . .)," showing that the king's
name was MEN . . . . RA (see PL xii). Altogether, eight pieces of the
polished surface and quantities of unwrought chips, were picked up ; and beside
these I also found chips of basalt (one wrought), and several scraps of Mokattam
limestone. Everything here has been smashed with great care ; the wrought
granite had been mainly burnt and powdered ; and the surfaces of the statue
were bruised to pieces before it was broken up ; the block with the piece of
cartouche on it had been used as a hammer, having a groove cut round it to
hold a cord by which it was swung. Exploration here would be most desirable,
to recover more of these remains, considering how much was found without
any aid in a couple of casual visits. For the remarks on the builder, see the
Historical Notes, section 112.
There is a large quantity of broken pottery on the N.E. of this Pyramid,
and well-wrought flint flakes mixed with it. This, from its character, I concluded to be of late period ; and this opinion was confirmed by finding a green
bead accidentally baked in one pot, which proved it to belong to the later
dynasties.
106. The recently opened Pyramid of Pepi of the sixth dynasty, at Sakkara,
is very interesting as showing many details of construction. The first description
of it that was published was one that I sent to Dr. Birch, and which was communicated by him to the Society of Biblical Archaeology, in April, 1881, with
seven plates of inscription which I copied one day.* As the description then
given did not contain all the measurements that were taken, I repeat them here.
The chamber is of the form of the Queen's Chamber in the Great Pyramid •
the beams of .the gable roof rest f on the side wall, and projects f over the
chamber ; thus they were completely cantilevers, and were quite free from arch
thrust until they were broken. The roof is not merely formed of one set of these
deep beams on edge, but of three successive layers of beams, or complete roofs, one
over another in contact Yet the destroyers have forced a way through all the
beams, and broken them up, so that many of them are upheld by merely the thrust
of the fragments against each other. Like the spaces over the King's Chamber in
the Great Pyramid, the E. and W. walls of this chamber are wholly independent
of the N. and S. sides and of the roofing-beams, the great end walls extending
into the masonry of the Pyramid past the building of the rest of the chamber.
The chamber is 123 wide (=6 X 205), and 3076 long (= 15 X 20-51);
the roof being composed of five beams (therefore of 3 cubits each), which divide
it thus from the E. end o, 62?, 122-2, 182-9, 244-7, 307'6. The vertical lines of
the inscription on the W. wall are spaced thus, beginning at the S. end each
successive ten columns occupies 21-3, 21-4, 2 r3, 21.3, 21-8 and seven columns I5'2,
• Unfortunately the lithographer confounded hawks and eagles, which were carefully
separated in the MS.
p.
143
Sect. 106.] SAKKARA, PYRAMID OF PEP I. . 143
The roof-bcams being 85 long over half the chamber, shows their angle to be
about 43I''; and they extended 93 inches horizontally over the wall, or 128 of
their total length of 213 on the under-side. These 30 beams of limestone thcrc-
• fore weigh over 30 tons each.
The coffer itself is of black basalt, of the plain box-shape; slightly curved,
with about 2 inches swell in the sides, to fit the body. The^lid slid on from the
W. ; and to support it a sort of side-board of masonry appears to have been
built up between the W. wall and the coffer, from off which the lid could be slid
over the coffer. The coffer has only one band of inscription, which is along the
E. side ; this is only the name Ra-meri and usual brief titles. The form of the
box is remarkably massive, the sides being over a foot thick, and the bottom 20
inches, although it was only 2 feet wide inside. The dimensions are : —
Outside io6'S long 48*6 wide 447 high.
Inside 82? 24-3 24-8 db' 2
The bottom was measured, in perhaps a rather different part to the depths above,
as 20'3 thick ; this might make the inside width and depth equal. The ledge for
the lid is ig below top, and 1-3 extreme width ; the lower side of it being cut with
a deep groove along its back, so that the surface in which the lid would rest is
convex. This was probably done to prevent scraps lodging in the groove, and
jamming the lid in its sliding. The fjottom of the coffer is crusted with resin ;
but this may have been melted out of the mummy wrappers when the coffer
was raised on stones, and a fire burnt under it, as appears to have been the case
during its destruction. It has been broken up by cutting rows of grooves in it,
and banging it to pieces ; one end being even broken off through the 12 inches
thickness of the sides. On the E. inside are two nearly vertical grooves, leaning
towards the S. at the top ; their places measured from the N. end are at 236 to
2S'0, and 26'2 to 27-6.
Beside this coffer there is a square box of granite sunk in the floor ; it
is 28"i X27"9 across the inside, and the sides are 6'2 thick; thus outside it
would be 40"4. There is a covering slab, quite flat, and without pin holes or
fastenings, 41 '2 square and 90 thick.
The chamber is at present half full of chips of the N. and S. walls, which
had been industriously destroyed in early times ; and of the large quantity of
the fragments taken out in the recent opening of the Pyramid, it will be impossible to restore the inscription now, as the inscribed parts were never collected or
examined, but lay with the rubbish and were carried off by Arabs and travellers.
Thus much of an extensive text of the early period has been lost. The heaps
still remaining in the Pyramid should be carefully sorted, and from the large
pieces of inscription which are among them a good deal might be put together.
The E. and W. walls are perfect ; but only the W. is yet visible, of which I
p.
144
144 NOTES ON OTHER PYRAMIDS. [Chafi. xvi.
copied more than half. The hieroglyphs are beautifully cut in the fine white
limestone and are painted bright green.
The general bulk of this Pyramid is of very poor work ; merely retaining
walls of rough broken stones, filled up with loose rubble shot in. This appears
to be the usual construction under the sixth dynasty. On a block of the W.
wall of the chamber, where it was covered over by the roof-beams, is a painted
slab. It is of the style of tomb decoration, with figures variously engaged, and
brief inscriptions. But it is very rough, and has been built in as a common
building stone and slopped over with mortar. It therefore seems probable that
we have here the first example yet known of a learner's work ; great quantities
of such must have been done by an artist, before he could be entrusted with the
execution of the bold clear drawing for decorating a tomb.
107. The Great Pyramid of Dahshur is of fine work, about equal to that of
the second P3Tamid of Gizeh ; and it was cased with fine white Mokattam limestone like that on the Great Pyramid of Gizeh. The entrance passage of limestone has never been polished, but is about equal in work to the fine hammerdressing of the granite passage of the Second Pyramid. The passage is 4r3
wide, and 47*5 high ; the fine stone of the floor is t\vo courses deep, but does not
go very far under the sides. The first chamber has 11 overlappings, like those
of the Great Pyramid gallery, and the work of it is much like that ; it measures :
N. 143*9, S. 142-8, E. 328-5, W. 330-0, N. door 41*2, S. door 41-1.
Height to first overlapping is 87*0 N., and 87*2 S., above the tops of the doorways (whose floor is invisible owing to encumbrance) ; from the first to the
second lap is 35-5, thence to third lap 32-0 ; width of first lap is 5-4 to 60. The
whole height of 87- is filled by a single block over each door ; these single blocks
extend 115-2 on the N., and 113-6 on the S. wall, besides a part of each hidden in
the side wall. The passage to the second chamber is 124-6 long ; and the second
chamber 103*0 wide, with a doorway 41 -2 wide. The dimensions were evidently
in the usual cubits ; 329-7 -^ 16 = 20-6i, 143-4 -r- 7 = 2049, 124-6 -4- 6 = 2073,
103*0 -*- 5 = 20*6o, 41 -I to 41-2 -5- 2 = 20-d In the chamber are many oxbones ; some in bitumen, and therefore probably ancient. The passage is much
polished, as by continual passing, and some animal has a lair in the inner
chamber; I did not disturb it, being unarmed and miles from any help; and
a pair of hyaenas with a family might have proved awkward acquaintances.
108. The Southern or Blunted Pyramid of Dahshur, is in many respects the
most interesting of any existing, as the greater part of its casing still remains ;
it is so out of the way, that the tide of Arab pillage (which only stripped the
Gizeh Pyramids in the last few centuries) has only lately reached it ; and much
of the destruction has been done in the present century, and even a few years
ago. It is also remarkable for containing two hieroglyphic scribbles of visitors,
the only examples of such known in the Pyramids ; and a curious Greek drawing,
Sect. 109,] DAHSHUR, SOUTH PYRAMID DOOR. 14$
of a beast of the pug-dog type. It is cased with yellowish Mokattam limestone,
of the same quality as that of the Second Pyramid of Gizeh, This is broken
away just round the bottom in most parts, also all over the top, and over a large
part of the W. and S. sides ; the S.W. corner being so much ruined that it can
be very easily ascended. The courses at the top are 20 to 21 inches high ; a
reputed cartouche of King Unas on one block is merely a royal bee. The
casing blocks are very deep from back to front, about 80 inches ; though only
20 inches high, and about 60 wide. They are more like layers bevelled off at the
edges than a coating of " slabs of stone," as such casing has been described. The
joints are not quite horizontal, but dip inward a little ; they are very good and close.
109. The most valuable part of the remaining casing is that of the doorway, as it shows the arrangement for closing the Pj-ramid (see PL xL). Oa
either side of the passage is a hole in the wall ; now very rounded and cavernous,
owing to weathering ; but apparently about 3 or 4 inches in diameter, and 5 or
6 deep, originally. These two holes are just opposite one to the other, the
centres being about 13 inside the Pyramid, and 6 above the passage roof*
From the point above these holes, the roof slopes upward more steeply to the
outside, being cut away ; the joint of the passage side, however, continues in a
straight line. This formation of the passage seems exactly adapted for a stone
door working on a horizontal hinge ; the holes being for the bronze bearings of
the pivot, and the cut-out of the roof being to allow the top edge of the dooi- to
rise when turning it on its hinge.
Some way within this point is a vertical hole in the roof, 6-2 to 8-2 from the
W. side, or 33'S to 355 from the E. side of the passage ; and from this hole
inwards the roof is cut away horizontally for about 32 inches. It is plain that
this is Intended for a door, probably of wood by the smallness of the pivot, and
working on a vertical hinge. The cut-out in the roof sho^vs this by its length,
which agrees with the width of the door required ; and also by its only
extending over the eastern part of the roof, up to the pivot ; while W. of that,
the 6 inches behind the door when opened, the roof slopes down as elsewhere.
Unhappily, the floor is all torn up for 195 inches from the outside ; a layer of
19 or 20 inches being missing from 36 to 195 inches, and a thicker amount of
25 inches from 36 to the outside. Hence the lower pivot hole and other details
are missing. At about 130 inches down the passage are two holes on each
side, one near the top and one near the bottom ; they are about tft'o inches
w ide and one deep, flat on the N. and curved on the S. Probably they were
for some fittings.
The form of the outer stone door may be roughly estimated by the
requirements and limitations of the case. A plain flat slab is what would
probably first occur to the observer ; but such a slab, which must be 20 inches
• The sides of the holes are 11 to 15J on E., 11 to i6'2 on W. ; the tops and bottoms are
4 to 8i on E. ; 2 to 8 on W.
U
14/S NOTES ON OTHER PYRAAflDS. [Chap. xvi.
thick by the position of the pivots, would need a pull varying from 700 to
1,500 lbs. to lift it up, which could hardly be applied in such a position ; also it
would leave a gap 1 3 inches wide at the top edge when shut. Considering
the various data, we may conclude that the door must have been thinned at
the lower edge to permit of a person getting in without needing to tilt it so
much as to require a great amount cut away at the top edge, and probably the
mass would be extended to the S. of the pivot, so as to bring the centre of
gravity more nearly under the pivot, and thus make the door easier to open.
Thus the conditions almost limit the form of the door to that shown in open
shade on the diagram (PI. xi.) ; the closed position of it being outlined by dots.
The pull required to open such a door by the lower edge would vary from
2\ cwL at the beginning, to 5 cwt. when fully open ; and it could be easily kept
open by a rod put across the mouth of the passage at A. Thus, when lifted,
there would be an opening about 15 inches high and 41 wide, for 4J feet long
under the block, which would leave"access to the lock of the wooden door inside.
For the further discussion of this, and the confirmatory passages of Strabo and
an Arabic author, see the Architectural Ideas, section 126.
The passage of this Pyramid is lower than any that I have measured,
being : —
Near the mouth ...
417 wide
417 high
Above the dislocation
.. 419 »
428 „
Below ...
•• 41-35 ..
431 »
The dislocation is at a remarkable place, where the roof and floor in their
outward course suddenly turn up in a curve to a point ii'i above the true line,
and then dropping sharply, they begin again only v\ above the true line, and
fully regain the old direction in 23 inches distance. This formation is not
due to a settlement, for (i) a settlement of 11 inches in such solid masonry, not
far from the ground, is impossible, the more so as it would need a uniform
settlement of the whole of the lower part of the passage, which should quickly
cease at one point, and soon after continue at an equal amount ; and (2) because
the roof on the upper side of the dislocation is cut away in a slope for 23 inches,
I'l being removed at the maximum. This shows that the builders were well
aware of this formation in their time ; and yet that they did not wish to smooth
it all out, as if it were an accident or settlement, though nothing would have
been easier for them than to have removed all trace of it This part, like the
rest of this Pyramid, needs far more examination.
The general work of this Pyramid is about equal to that of the Larger
Pyramid of Dahshur, and like that of the Gizeh Pyramids ; it is entirely of a
superior class to that of the sixth dynasty Pyramids of Sakkara,
110, The Pyramids which have been described above are all true Pyramids •
p.
147
Sect, iia] AtASTABA-PYRAAflDS, SAJCKARA AND MEDUif. 147
though they are often confounded all in one class with the Mastaba-Pyramids *
ofMedumt and Sakkara (the Step- Pyramid), which are really of a different
class, distinct in their system and construction. The Mastaba-angle Of about
76 > or a rise of 4 on a base of i, has been already described (section 103), and
the usual Pyramid angle of about 52° is well known. The two are wholly
distinct, and the examples of them do not merge one into the other. And it
may further be stated that there are no true Step-Pyramids. Those commonly
so called (at Gizeh, for instance,) are merely in process of destruction, showing
the successive working platforms of the building, which rise far steeper than the
Mastaba-angle ; and of one of the most step-like of all (the middle small one by
the Great Pyramid), sloping casing may still be picked up around it, and found
in situ under the rubbish. There are only two of the so-called PjTamids that
were not cased in a slope without re-entering angles ;' these are the two MastabaPyramids of Sakkara and Medum, which really consist of superposed Mastabas,
with the characteristic angle of y6''.t
The tower-like appearance of the Medum Pyramid is only due to the
lower steps having been broken away. Not only may the places where the
steps joined the existing surface be seen, but the lower part of each step-face
may be found standing in the rubbish at the base (see F. F. in PL vii., drawn
from a photograph). The roughened part of the face, where the step joined it,
has been supposed to be for affixing some decoration or moulding ; but (beside
the fact that such ornament is unknown in Pyramid architecture) the start of
the top of the step may be seen in some parts projecting out from the face.
The lower parts of the sloping faces which are still to be seen in the rubbish
(well figured in Denkmaler) are also conclusive evidence of faces having
existed outside of the present tower form ; these faces must have ended their rise
and been joined to the tower horizontally, at some level ; and the probable equality
of the steps would require them to join the body at just the places where the
roughened lines of junction are still visible. An historical proof of the existence
of the steps formed by these lower faces is given by Abu Abdallah Muhammed,
quoted by Makrisi (circ. 1400 A.D.), § who mentions a Pyramid built in five
terraces, and called " Meidoun." It is true that he says it is the highest of the
Pyramids, which it is far from being ; but, from its situation in a plain, as a
• Masfaba is the native Arabic name (adopted by antiquarians) for the sloping sided tombs,
of about 76° angle, and 10 to 20 feet height.
t This name has always been variable. In the third dynasty it is Mttun; Mariette, from
some hieroglyphic source, spells it Metuin or Meri-tumj Abu Abdallah Muhammed [ante,
1400 A.D.) writes Meidoun; modern Arabs say Medum.
J The Pyramid of Riga, near Abusir, is stated by Vyse to have had a slope of 75' 20* on
the upper part, and of 50" below that ; if so, it was a Pyramid on the top of a Mastaba ; but
more excavation and critical examination of it is needed.
{ See Vyse, ii, 354.
p.
148
148 NOTES ON OTHER PYRAMIDS. [Chap. ivL
modern author writes, " It is most imposing, more so thaii Gizeh, more so than
Sakkara;" and the name is conclusive as to which Pyramid he intended. The
five terraces visible about six centuries ago would be the five upper ones,
showing that the lowest was ruined, or buried in a heap of rubbish, at that time.
Both of these Mastaba-Pyramids are also peculiar as having been repeatedly
enlarged. In no case have successive enlargements been found in a true
Pyramid ;* but both of these structures have been several times finished, each
time with a close-jointed, polished casing of the finest white limestone ; and
then, after each completion, it has been again enlarged by another coat of rough
mcisonry and another fine casing outside of the former casing. This explains
how readily the Medum Pyramid was stripped into a towering form ; there were
the older polished casings inside it ; as soon as the later coats were stripped off,
the older surface was revealed again.
The Step-Pyramid of Sakkara is of poorer work, but on just the same
principle as that of Medum ; and in this case the additions have been very onesided, since on the South t\vo finished fine casings may be seen far inside it, only
about a third of the distance from the present middle to the W. side (see F. F.,
PL viL). On the South may also be seen, at the E. end, two polished casings,
one about 8 feet inside the present rough stripped outside, and another lo^ feet
inside of that casing. These two casings are not quite at the same slope,
showing that the exact angle of it is not important, as the additions were not
uniformly thick all over one side : hence the difference of a couple of degrees,
between this Pyramid and the best Mastaba-angle, is not astonishing.
The Step-Pyramid, or Mastaba- Pyramid, of Sakkara is of an oblong plan ;
unlike any Pyramid, but similar to the Mastabas. The Mastaba-el-Farun at
Sakkara is an intermediate form, being as large as the base of a Pyramid, but
as oblong and low in its proportion as a Mastaba. Now that the name of King
Unas has been found in one of the Pyramids, it is evident that his name
occurring in the Mastaba-el-Farun merely shows that he built it ; probably as a
base for an obelisk, such as is often seen in early inscriptions representing a
monument or temple to Ra.
• Even the Third Pyramid of Gizeh, the size of which has been increased from that of the
first design, has not been enlarged over a finished casing, but merely modified in the course of
its building.
^"'^- '"J CL/JfA TE OF EA RL Y TIMES.
CHAPTER XVII.
HISTORICAL NOTES.
III. In considering the arrangements of the early monuments, the questions
of the invariability of the climate, and the state of the ground when they were
built, become of interest. Was the sand as encroaching then as now ? And
did the builders anticipate the half-buried state of many monuments ?
In considering these questions we must first glance at the general course of
Egyptian climate. The country has undoubtedly been gradually drying up.
The prodigious water-worn ravines in the cliffs of the Nile valley show this ;
and there are remarkable evidences of the Nile having been habitually some
SO feet above its present level, thus filling up the whole valley at all times of the
year. At many points of the Nile valley, particularly at Tehneh, the cliffs are
all water-worn in holes, exactly in the manner of solution under water; while
above this action, over about 50 feet level, the cliffs are worn by aerial denudation in a wholly different manner : also the lower part projects forward as a foot,
in front of the upper part, the action by water being apparently much slower
than that in air, and tending to prevent aerial denudation afterwards.
Besides this, at the foot of the cliffs, particularly at Beni Hassan, wherever
the scour of the current was less, or ravines debouched into the main valley,
large banks of debris have been formed, showing the former power and height of
the stream. That it was fed by local rains throughout its course is seen by the
deep gorges in the cliffs, often a mile long, and ending in dried-up waterfalls.
In the history of the Faium the same drying up is seen ; that district appears to
have been originally a large lake, which has been gradually reduced, partly
artificially, until it is now not a tenth of its former size.
It therefore appears certain that the general change has been one of desiccation ; and the inquiry to be made is, if there be any evidence to show whether
this change has been continuing in historic times.
Rain was certainly known in Lower Egypt in the Pyramid times, though
there is but one evidence of it in the monuments ; the water-spout carved in
stone, leading from the roof of one of the tombs of the fifth dynasty at Gizeh, is
a proof that such a feature was known, and perhaps in common use on the mud-
'SO HISTORICAL NOTES. \CImp. xvii.
brick houses. Nevertheless, the rain can hardly have been much commoner
then than now, or more signs of its action on the tombs would remain. In
Greek times the rain appears to have been just as rare as it is now, or even
rarer, in Upper Egypt Herodotus says that the last that fell at Thebes was
two centuries before his time, under Psamtik, and then only in drops. Now,
last year, Mr. Tristram Ellis, while at Negadeh, just below Thebes, expected
rain one day, but he was told that none had been seen there for 45 years. So there
does not appear to have been appreciable climatic change in the Thebaid
during the last two thousand years. The pits in the Tombs of the Kings,
sometimes supposed to have been intended to arrest any storm-flooding, may as
likely have been to arrest or hinder intruders ; or may be sepulchral pits
abandoned, owing to the changes and amplifications of the plans. Again, it
may be observed that neither rain, nor any sign of rain, is shown in the paintings
of the tombs ; no wide hats, no umbrellas, no dripping cattle, are ever represented. Mud-brick tombs, covered with stucco, still remain from the third or
fourth dynasty, when they were built without any apparent fear of their
dissolution.
On the whole, the rain-fall does not appear to have perceptibly changed
during historic times.
The Nile, though so much higher in pre-historic or geologic times, as just
mentioned, does not seem to have sunk at all, in Middle or Lower Egypt, in
historic times ; though above the cataracts it has fallen some t\venty or thirty
feet. Below the cataracts, on the contrary, it has actually risen, owing to silting
up ; for many of the deepest tomb-shafts at Gizeh have now several feet of water
in them at high Nile, and can only be entered just before the inundation; Also
the thickness of mud over the remains both at Memphis and Karnak shows not
only the great amount of deposit, but also how much the river must have risen
for it to lay down mud so many feet above the old level of deposit.
'< The rise due to silting up proceeds, then, much faster than any slight
diminution of the river which may take place.
The amount of the sand, then, cannot be affected by any variation in
moisture ; and on looking back it seems very doubtful if there has been any
change in it The sand over the Serapeum might be supposed to have
increased, as it has buried the Sphinxes there. But these are of Greek work,
and were only erected shortly before the time of Strabo ; and he, nevertheless,
mentions them as being nearly buried in his day, though doubtless some
attempt was made then to keep them cleared. Before this, in the dream of
Tahutmcs IV., the Sphinx at Gizeh appears to have been buried very much as
at present. And on looking to the remains of the early dynsisties at Gizeh and
elsewhere, their buried state seems rather to be due to artificial changes accumulating the sand than to aiiy great increase in the general amount of sand.
Seel 112] MEN . . . RA OF ABU ROASH.
ISI
The usual way in which the sand is moved is by a few high winds in the
course of the year. These tear over the ground, as opaque as a London fog,
bearing just as much sand as their whirling will support; and as soon as any
obstacle checks their velocity the surplus of sand is dropped, and thus accumulates.
Now the tombs are either rock-hewn, in which case a face of rock is artificially
scarped for the fronts, or else they are built on the surface. In either case an
eddy is formed in the wind, and this will cause quantities of sand to be
thrown down during a sand storm. Again, the erection of the Pyramids would
be sufficient to interrupt the steady blow of the wind by causing numerous
oblique currents, and would so produce an increase of wind-borne sand in the
neighbourhood. Whatever cause checks the velocity of the wind is sure to lead
the sand to accumulate ; the Arabs know this well, and plant frail rows of reeds
(even spaced apart) around their gardens bordering the desert ; these make the
wind drop the sand, so as to form a bank outside them, and thus keep the
enclosures clear.
The general conclusion as to the climate, then, seems to be that there
has been no appreciable change in rain-fall, river-flow, or sand-blow during
historic times.
1 12. The builder of the Pyramid of Abu Roash and his epoch have hitherto '
been quite unknown ; there being merely a presumption that it is one of the
earliest Pyramids, because it is the most northerly. Now that we have obtained
part of the builder's name on the fragment of diorite throne that I found there,
we have some clue to the age. No name is known on the monumental lists like
Men ra, beside the three kings Men-ka-u-ra of the fourth, Men-ka-ra of the
sixth, and Ra-mentu-hotep of the eleventh dynasty. But M. Maspero has informed
me that there were other kings named Men-ka-ra, or Men-ka-u-ra, in the second
dynasty ; and Bunsen, in his fourth volume, edits Eratosthenes as giving
Menkheres II. in succession to Menkaura of the fourth dynasty.
When we consider the claims of these kings, some are disallowed by reason
of external circumstances. The Pyramid of Menkaura of the fourth dynasty
is well known already at Gizeh ; and the workmanship of the Pyramid at Abu
Roash excludes it from the period of the rubble Pyramids of the sixth dynasty
at Sakkara, and of the mud-brick Pyramids of the eleventh and twelfth
dynasties at Thebes and Howara. Thus it is almost certain that we must look
either to some king of the second or third dynasties not found in the lists, or
to a second Menkaura, successor to Menkaura of the fourth dynasty.
The work of this Pyramid suggests that of the fourth dynasty. The
Pyramid of Khufu at Gizeh had no granite outside it ; that of Khafra had one
or two courses of granite ; that of Menkaura had nearly half its surface covered
with granite casing ; thus there is a progressive use of granite by these
successive kings; and at Abu Roash the Pyramid was entirely cased with granite,
IS» HISTORICAL NOTES. [Chap. xvii.
and therefore next in order of work after that of Menkaura of Gizeh. And this
is all the stronger evidence, because no other examples of granite casing on a
Pyramid are known.* Again, the diorite statue at Abu Roash was apparently
like that of Khafra in size, material, and inscription (section 105), which also
tends to fix this Pyramid to the fourth dynasty. Hence, until more remains
shall be found at Abu Roash, and more is known of the other reputed Menkaura
kings, it may be considered that this Pyramid was built next after the three
Pyramids of Gizeh, though making a slight reservation in favour of the earlier
dynasties.
113. The builder of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh is well known. Khufu
(Grecianized as Kheopat and Soufis.f and Anglo-Grecianized as Cheops) is
named both by historians and by his cartouches, which are found as quarrymarks on the building stones. But another name is found on the blocks in the
Pyramid, side by side with those bearing the name of Khufu. This other name
is the same as that of Khufu, with the prefix of two hieroglyphs, a jug and a
ram ; and it is variously rendered Khnumu-Khufu, Nh-Shufu, and Shu-Shufu.
The most destructive theory about this king is that he is identical with Khufu,
and that the ram is merely a sj-mbol of the god Shu, and put as " the determinative in this place of the first s>*llable of the name." But against this hypothesis it must be observed (i) that the pronunciation was Khufu, and not Shufu,
in the early times ; (2) that the first hieroglyph, the jug, is thus unexplained ;
and (3) that there is no similair prefix of a determinative to a king's name, in any
other instance out of the hundreds of names, and thousands of variants, known.§
On the monuments bearing the name of Khnumu Khufu at Gizeh, and at
Wady Maghara, there also occurs, with different titles, the name of Khufu
himself. That the names should thus be found together is very likely, if they
were co-regents, as tlieir joint occurrence in the Pyramid would lead us to
expect
The choice, then, lies between the simple idea of a co-regency, such as we
know often existed ; or else, on the other hand, adopting a late pronunciation,
ignoring one character of the name, inventing the application of prefixed
determinatives in cartouches, and supposing that the king's name would be put
in duplicate on public monuments with and without a determinative. These
requirements are contradicted by the well-known usage found on all other
remains.
1 14. Beside Khumu-Khufu, there is the name of another king which
* Excepting some on the anomaloos little Pyramid at Riga, of the fifth dynasty.
t Herodotus. % Manetho.
{ Sent is sometimes named by a fish, a determinative without hieroglyphics ; and An
sometimes has a fish as a determinative in the name ; but there is no case of a determinative
prefixed.
p.
153
Sect. ii6.] MENKAURA, AND THE THIRD PYRAMID. 153
belongs to this period, and which is equally rare, though more often mentioned
by modern writers. This is Ra-tat-ef (or Doudew-Ra of the French), who
is placed in the monumental lists next after Khufu, and whose name is only
found in those lists, compounded in names of places, and as being worshipped
with Khufu and Khafra at a late period. That he did not succeed Menkaura,
as the name Ratoises in Manetho might indicate, is shown by the concurrence
of the monumental lists, and by Aseskaf being both successor and adopted son to
Menkaura. Here, then, are two names, Khnumu-Khufu and Ra-tat-f, apparently
contemporary, and yet never found placed together. It seems not improbable,
then, that these are the two names of one king ; that Ra-tat-f was the personal
name of the co-regent of Khufu, the name given to his lands, and by which he
was worshipped in later times ; and that Khumu-Khufu, or " he who is united
with Khufu " (v. Ebers on Khnum), was the name of the co-regent when he
was joined with Khufu in the government. It must be remembered that the
duplication of names is always difficult to prove ; and it is only by a single
point of evidence in each case that the identity of such well-known kings as
Kaka and Nofer-ar-ka-ra, of An and Ra-en-user, or of Assa and Tat-ka-ra,
has been inferred.
115. Khafra* has, on the strength of the historians, been considered by
most writers as the builder of the Second Pyramid ; but there was, till lately, no
monumental evidence on this point. About three years ago, however, the
great causeway was discovered which led from the lower granite temple, where
the statues of Khafra were found, to the upper temple by the Second Pyramid.
A closer connection of Khafra with this upper temple, I was happy enough to
find while there ; from the heaps of chips in the temple, I obtained (without
excavating) a piece of white magnesite, steel-hard, with part of the cartouche
and standard of Khafra, exquisitely cut ; and also a piece of alabaster with the
cartouche alone. Besides this, the base of a diorite statue that I found here, is
of just the same gauge as a piece of the base and feet of a small diorite statue
that I picked up at SakKara, iilscrjbed " . . . . nofer nuter, neb khaui . . . ."
and which is therefore almost certainly of Khafra. The finding of these
cartouche fragments gives the clearest monumental proof that has yet been
obtained of the Second Pyramid belonging to Khafra. It may be mentioned
here that I also picked up at Gizeh a piece of diorite bowl inscribed ". . nofru";
perhaps, therefore, of Senofru ; and another piece with the standard of Khufu.
116. The attribution of the Third Pyramid to Men-ka-u-ra, the successor of
Khafra, is disputed ; and the reasons for doubting his sole ownership appear to
be ^'S follows. First, that the Pyramid has certainly been altered from its first
* Here, again, Herodotus retains the final vowel, though adding a nasaJ in Khefrena.
X
p.
154
154 HISTORICAL NOTES. [Chafi.xvil.
design in the inside, and also, perhaps, on the outside ; secondly, that there appear
to have been two coiirers in it; thirdly, that Diodorus says that Menkaura died
before it was finished ; and, fourthly, that Manetho attributes it to Nitakerti,
the queen in whom the sixth dynasty became extinct, and who is supposed to
be identical with the Men-ka-ra of the lists of Abydos.
The change of design in this Pyramid does not seem, however, to have been
due to a later reign ; but to have occurred, like some after-thoughts in the Great
Pyramid, while it was in course of construction. It has been already pointed
out (section 89) in the description of this Pyramid, that no part of the panelled
chamber, of the lower (granite) chamber, or of the present floor of the upper
chamber, can belong to a first design, of which the upper and disused passage
was a part. Hence, if an earlier burial had existed before the finishing of the
Pyramid, the coffer must have stood in the upper chamber, the only one then
existing, and have been shifted about during the internal deepening of that and
the excavation of the other chambers, and finally reset in a fresh place, if the
coffer socket in the upper chamber be attributed to an earlier coffer ; a proceeding that is not likely on the part of a ruler who violated the sepulchre, and
appropriated it Also it would be difficult to see the object of so altering and
enlarging an existing Pyramid ; as such a Pyramid would supply but |th
of the whole mass required, and its excavations would be still more trifling
compared with the existing chambers. There would be, therefore, no adequate
reason for such an appropriation. Besides this, the plan of the Pyramid is shown
to have been enlarged while it was in course of construction, and not in a later
reign, by there being no finished casing to be found at the upper end of the
blind passage, the place where any earlier casing would be discoverable, if it
had ever been put on. The masonry about that part has been forced in \'arious
directions, in search of any continuation of the passage ; and hence, if any older
finished casing existed, like that of the inner coats of the Mastaba-PjTamids, it
would certainly have been found.
Next, looking at the historical side of the question, this Pyramid (as all
writers are agreed) cannot be earlier than the Pyramids of Khufu and Khafra, by
reason of its inferiority of position ; the poorer site was accepted for it, in a way
that clearly stamps it as being later. The question then lies thus : is the basalt
coffer that was found in the lowest chamber, that of the first builder or of any
later occupant ? Undoubtedly of the latest occupant, if there were tvvo ; since it
was far more carefully concealed, and more finely enshrined, than any coffer could
have been in the upper chamber. Now the lid of the basalt cofier of the lower
chamber was found lying in the upper chamber ; and along with it the lid of a
wooden coflin, bearing the well-known inscription of Menkaura. And therefore
the basalt coffer is always accepted, and rightly so, as that of Menkaura of the
fourth, and not of Menkara of the sixth dynasty. Thus, by the spelling, the latest
^'^- "7] BRICK PYRAMIDS.
'55
occupant of the Pyramid was the same king that we have already seen must be
the earliest builder of it ; so that any double origin, or later appropriation of it
is thus contradicted.
The evidence from the character of the work is entirely in favour of its
being of the fourth, and not of the sixth dynasty. The panel ornament both in
the first chamber and on the coffer (which is like that of tombs of the fourth),—
the absence of any stone-cut inscriptions, such as cover the walls of the pyramids
of the sixth dynasty, — the use of granite for the lower casing, and for the lining of
a passage and chamber, — the position of the Pyramid in relation to the others, —
the peribolus of the Pyramid of Khafra being unfinished when the Third Pyramid
peribolus was being built, — and the absence of any remains of the sixth dynasty
in the neighbourhood, — all these characteristic features point clearly to the
dynasty, and even to the reign, of Menkaura successor to Khafra.
The socket cut in the floor of the upper chamber, which Perring thought
might be for a second coffer, was also suggested by him to be for holding a
blind coffer to deceive explorers. It may very possibly have been intended
to hold the basalt coffer, for which afterwards another finer and more secret
chamber was prepared ; or it may very possibly have held the base of a diorite
or basalt statue of Menkaura. In any case no coffer, or fragments of one
belonging to this place, was to be found.
The evidence of Manetho is not quite certain in the mere extracts that we
possess ; he only mentions that Nitakerti built " the Third Pyramid," without
saying where it was ; and it is only a presumption that it refers to the same
group as " the largest Pyramid," which he mentions 20 reigns earlier. It might
have referred in the full original text to one of the Sakkara groups, where we
should naturally look for works of the sixth dynasty.
Diodorus Siculus, though saying" that Menkaura died before the Pyramid
was finished, yet expressly states that he was a son of Khufu. The unfinished
state of the granite casing, and absence of pavement, exactly accord with the
premature death of the king.
Thus the four reasons for doubting the earlier date of this Pyramid are
reversed or neutralized on examining the details ; excepting the testimony of
Manetho. The choice then lies between — on the one hand, Manetho being
misunderstood, or in error by confounding Menkaura and Menkara ; or, on the
other hand, ignoring the spelling of the names, — the character of the construction
and decoration, — the situation of the Pyramid, — the connections of the peribolus,
— the date of the neighbouring tombs, — and the testimony of Herodotus and
Diodorus.
117. Regarding the age of the brick Pyramids, it is well known that such
were built in the eleventh dynasty by the Antef kings at Thebes ; and probably in
the twelfth dynasty by Amenemhat III. at Howara, by the side of the labyrinth in
p.
156
156 HISTORICAL NOTES. {Chap. nni.
which that king's name is found. This shows that as a class they belong to the
times after the stone Pyramids, and thus gives a general clue to age of those at
Dahshur. Unhappily, Perring only found the end of a cartouche in his digging
there, with " kau " upon it. This mere fragment, however, is of value, as
there is no king in the lists whose name ends in kau until the eighth dynasty ;
excepting Ramenkau, whose Pyramid is the Third of Gizeh, and Hormenkau,
whose Pyramid is believed to be at Sakkara, by the slab bearing his figure being
found there in the Serapeum. It is not till the end of the eighth dynasty, when
there occurs three names ending in kau, that we meet then with any name that
can be applied to the S. brick Pyramid of Dahshur. The style of work of the fragments found along with the cartouche is also clearly of about this date ; they are
not in the style of any dynasty before the seventh, nor in that of the twelfth or later
periods ; but they most resemble a tomb of the eleventh dynasty at Kom Ahmar
(lat. 28° 5'). Hence, by the fragment of the name, — by the character of the work,
. — and by the material used, — there seems little doubt but that the brick Pyramids of Dah.shur belong to the dark and troubled period between the sixth and
eleventh dynasties ; and that they may probably be cissigned to the end of the
eighth dynasty,
118. The celebrated tablet containing a reference to the Sphinx requires some
notice here of its age and history. While I was Gizeh, the official excavations
by the authorities disclosed some fresh parts of the temple in which this tablet
was found ; it lies close to the E. side of the Pyramid, No. 9 of Vyse, the
southern of the small Pyramids by the Great Pyramid. Most happily the excavations disclosed a scene of the king offering to Osiris ; and, though much decayed,
the cartouche was legible, and was in every hieroglyph that of Petukhanu of the
twenty-first dynasty : he is represented wearing the crown of Lower Egypt.
This, then, gives the date of the temple ; and the character of all the work
agrees well to this epoch.
Now the question of the critical value of the little tablet that mentions the
Sphinx, turns on the choice of three hypotheses, ist. That it is the original tablet
of the age of Khufu, preserved through at least 1500 years (or, according to
Mariette, double that time), and built into the temple of Petukhanu. 2nd. That
it is a copy of such a tablet, more or less exact. 3rd. That it is an unhistorical
inscription written for the decoration and honouring of the temple of this
usurping dynasty. And it should be noted that it does not profess to be contemporary with Khufu, or even to be a copy of an early record. The style of
the engraving is quite unlike the work of the Old Kingdom ; in place of the finely
rounded and delicate forms in low relief, and the bold, handsome execution, of
the time of Khufu, this insignificant-looking tablet is cut in scratchy intaglio, worse
than any of the poorest tomb-decorations of the early times, and looking like
nothing but a degradation of the work of the decadence of the twentieth dynasty.
Most authorities now agree that it cannot be contemporary with Khufu. Is it
Ste/.ti-).] DESTRUCTION OF BUI LDIXCS. ic?
then an exact copy of any earlier tablet? This can only be judged by its matter,
and on looking at the figures represented on it, it will be seen that they are such
as are not found on early monuments ; they comprise Osiris, Isis and Horus, Isis
Selk, Khem, Bast ? the human-headed ursus, and the sacred bark. Of these,
scarcely one can be found on any monument, public or private, of the Old Kingdom ; not all of these figures could be matched under the twelfth dynasty ; even
the monuments of the eighteenth and perhaps nineteenth dynasties do not often
show such an assemblage together ; and it would be an entire novelty to find such
a company on any stele that Khufu could have seen. In the inscription itself, moreover, Osiris is repeatedly called " Neb Rustau," or, "lord of the abodes of the
dead " (Brugsch) : this title is one that does not occur in any of the dozen of
inscribed tombs of the Old Kingdom that are visible at Gizeh ; but it is found
repeatedly in this temple, built by Petukhanu in the twenty-first dynasty, from
which this tablet came. Also, though Pyramids are often mentioned in early
inscriptions, Isis is never connected with any of them, and her name is hardly
ever found in Pyramid times ; so that the title of " Patroness of the Pyramid "
seems (like " Mother of the Gods," also found there on the tablet) to be as late
an invention as " Neb Rustau."
Thus, by all that can be so clearly seen of the well-marked styles and
characteristics of the different periods of Egyptian art and religion, and by
the titles here used, this tablet is relegated to the third hypothesis, and stands
as an invented inscription designed for the decoration of the temple; This
relieves us from an apparent anachronism, as no trace of a Sphinx in statuary,
tablets, or inscription, is to be found until the Hyksos period ; and such a form
was not common until after that. It would seem, therefore, to be an Asiatic
idea, akin to the human-headed lions, bulls, and dragons of Assyria and
Babylonia. In any case, the allusions to the Sphinx in this tablet were merely
topographical, and might be struck out or inserted without altering the sense
of it ; hence, even if it were a refurbished copy of an older inscription, it would
not be of critical value in relation to the age of the Sphinx unless its rigorous
accuracy and freedom from additions could be proved.
1 19. Though the age of the foundation of buildings is always examined,
yet the date of their destruction is often of greater historical importance. The
many erasures of the names of Set, of Amen, of Hatasu, and others, show very
important changes, and the mode in which many of the remains have been
destroyed is also very suggestive. The Pyramid of Pepi shows one of the
most striking examples of spiteful violence that may be found. Such
destruction is commonly attributed to the Persians, or the Hyksos; but the
details seem to show violence of an earlier date. In the passage of this
Pyramid, the name Ra-meri is chopped out in almost every place, without
the rest of the inscription being attacked. This shows a personal spite, beyond
the mere dcstructiveness of an invader, and which can hardly be accounted
IS* HISTORICAL NOTES. . {Chap. xvit.
for even by the Hyksos conquest. Again, not content with tearing the body
out of its wrappings, the massive and tough basalt coffer was raised on stones,
lines of cleaving-holes cut in it, a fire burnt beneath it, and, with the utmost
violence, it was split asunder ; yet the religious inscriptions on the wall beside
it are uninjured. Such care in destruction is more than would be produced
by a general hatred to a conquered race.
Again, at Gizeh, the diorite statues in the lower granite tempJe have been
dashed down from their niches, and thrown into the well ; but in the upper
granite temple, by the Second Pyramid, the destruction is far more laborious
and elaborate ; the statues are broken into small chips ; a single toe, or half
a hieroglyph, is almost as much as can be found in one piece; the diorite
and alabaster vessels are broken in shivers ; and an imperfect cartouche is the
greatest prize obtainable from the ruins.
.Again, at Abu Roash, the king's diorite statue was not only broken up,
but the surfaces were bruised to powder, and a block of the tough diorite was
grooved round by chipping, so as to hold a rope by which it could be swung
to and fro, until even the ends of it were shivered, and it was finally cracked
in two. The granite coffer was burnt, and mostly ground to powder; while
stray chips of basalt show that some other object existed which is quite
unknown.
All this vehemence of destruction, this patient, hard-working vengeance,
can scarcely be attributed to an age, or a people, which only knew of the
kings as historical names. It is to the dark period of the seventh to the eleventh
dynasties that we must rather look for the destroyers of the Old Kingdom
monuments. The fourth, fifth, and sixth dynasties were one continuous and
peaceful succession; and when that was broken up, apparently by civil war
and rival dynasties, it would be highly probable that such personal spite, and
intelligent wrath, would be shown by embittered revolutionists. A modern
parallel to this vengeance was seen in the careful and painstaking clearance
of the bodies of the French kings out of Saint-Denis, and the fate allotted to
their monuments, in 1790; the latter were only saved from annihilation by the
strenuous claim of Lenoir and others on behalf of the museum.*
In later times there are some curious details of destruction at Karnak.
The great fallen obelisk of Queen Hatasu has her name unerased on the top
of it ; but the name of the god Amen is erased. This shows that Khuenaten
took means of erasing the name of Amen in places in which Tahutmes III.
did not care to hunt down the name of Hatasu. Her name and portraits in
the innermost chamber of her temple at Deir el Bahari were also not effaced ;
though in every other part they were cut away. On the standing obelisk of
• See the Precis-verbal in •' Monographic de I'Eglise de Saint-Denis," par le Bon. De
Guilbermy. 1848.
Sect. 120.] ACCURACY OF GREEK HISTORIA NS.
'59
Hatasu at Kamak neither Amen nor Hatasu are erased. This suggests that
the fallen obelisk may have been overthrown by Khuenaten, perhaps to destroy
the name of Amen; and as it lies upon a high mound of fragments of the works
of his predecessors, Tahutmes I. and Amenhotep III., it is not at all impossible
that such was the case. It is, in fact, so curiously perched, exactly along the
top of this mound of rubbish, as to suggest that the mound was placed to
receive it, and perhaps it was broken by careless letting down. To Khuenaten,
also, may well be due the careful abolition of the great temple of Amenhotep
III. at Thebes, of which but two colossi remain erect.
It may seem a strange idea that there should have been ruins lying about,
while the Great Hall was being built close to them, by Seti I. and Ramessu II. ;
but it is certain that such was the case. In the pylon of Horemheb stones may be
found with defaced cartouches of Khuenaten on their inner sides; and the
columns of the eastern temple of Ramessu II. are clearly built of ruined
polygonal pillars of Tahutmes I., plastered over, and roughly fitted together.
So, probably, ever since the dilapidation of the first temple of Usertasen, Karnak
has always shown an increasing amount of ruins, often worked up into later
buildings, which in their turn were ruined ; the destruction being partly due to
fanaticism, and partly to later builders, who would worship their predecessors
while destroying their works ; somewhat in the spirit of Caracalla, who deified
Geta, saying, " Let him be a god, provided he is not alive."
120.. The accuracy of the descriptions of the Greek travellers deserves
notice, as they are often much more accurate in their facts than modem
writers. Herodotus* states the base of the Great Pyramid to be 8 plethra, or
8oo feet, and it is actually 747 Greek feet ; so that he is as accurate as he
professes to be, within about half a plethron. The height he states to be
equal to the base ; and the diagonal height of the corner (which would certainly
be the way of measuring it, and was the later Egyptian mode of reckoning) is
Iff of the base, or quite as close as the statement professes. The name of the
builder is given almost unaltered, Kheopa for Khufu. In describing the Second
Pyramid, he states it to be 40 feet less in height than the Great Pyramid ;
the diflference is not quite so great, but the historian's error is only ,V of the
whole height. He is quite correct in saying that the foundations were of
Ethiopian stone, ue., red granite. Of the Third Pyramid, the statement,
apparently so precise, that the base was 280 feet seems in error. It is over
340 Greek feet, and such a difference could hardly be a mere oversight It is
just possible that this measure refers to the base of the limestone part, which
• The accuracy with which Herodotus states what he saw, and relates what he heard ;
the criticism he often applies to his materials ; and the care with which he distinguishes how
much belief he gives to each report ; — all this should prevent our ever discrediting his words
unless compelled to do sa
l6o HISTORICAL NOTES. \Chap. xvii.
was about 275 of such feet as go 800 in the Great Pyramid base. Of the Third
Pyramid casing, he says that "half of it consists of Ethiopian stone"; and
actually about y^ of the casing was of granite. The Rhodopis story seems akin
to the ruddy Nitokris of Manetho ; and there is a curious possibility of the whole
description of Nitokris having been transferred from the' Pyramid itself to the
ruler who built it.
Diodorus Siculus states the distance of the Pyramids from the Nile with
greater accuracy than we can now settle the ancient position of the river-bank.
The base of the Great Pyramid he gives as 7 plethra, or 700 Greek feet, as
against 747 such feet in reality ; hence he is accurate to less than half a
plethron. The height, he says, is more than 6 plethra ; the arris height is
actually just over 7 plethra, when complete. He mentions the fine preservation
of the stone, and that the original jointing was uninjured by time, showing that
the fine joints attracted his attention. The Second Pyramid he only roughly
describes as a stadium wide ; but this is not far wrong, as it is \\ stadia. The
Third Pyramid he underrates as 300 feet long, whereas it is 340 Greek feet ; if
however, he originally wrote 3 plethra, he would be correct to less than half a
plethron, as he is in the Great Pyramid size. It is noticeable that he slightly
underrates all the Pyramids, his statements being respectively "94, "87, and "88
of the truth. He states that the sides up to the 15th course were of black
stone ; actually it seems probable that the dark red granite ended at the
1 6th course : and he says that the upper part was cased with the same stone
as the other Pyramids, which is plainly true to any one who sees the angular
fragments lying thickly around it. Though Vyse was disappointed at not
finding the name of Menkaura inscribed over the doorway, yet Diodorus only
says that it was on the N. side of the Pyramid ; hence it was probably on the
fine limestone above the granite.
Strabo's account is less careful in the dimensions, merely giving roughly a
stadium for the height and base of each of the larger Pyramids, and saying that
one is a little larger than the other. As these dimensions vary from -85 to 1-25
stadia, he is, at least, quite as accurate aa he professes to be. He gives the
invaluable description of the Great Pyramid doorway, which (as will be seen in
sect 126) so exactly accords with the only remaining doorway of a pyramid.
He also mentions the Third Pyramid being cased nearly up to the middle with
black stone from Ethiopia.
Pliny gives a more exact measurement than any other ancient author,
stating the Great Pyramid base as 883 feet. This would require a foot of
10-2705 inches ; and this is just half of the cubit of 20-541, or a rather short form
of the Egyptian cubit. Taking the mean cubit, we cannot tax him with a
greater error than ^ of the whole, which is quite as close as some of the most
credible measures taken in this century.
Sect. J20.] ACCURACY OF GREEK HISTORIANS. i6i
Thus we see that there is in these historians an honesty and correctness in
their descriptions, and a fulfilment of the amount of accuracy which they
profess, which it would have been well for many — perhaps for most — modern
writers to have imitated.
The clear and unexaggerated account of the passages of the Great Pyramid
given by Edrisi, in 1236 A.D., deserves notice for its superiority to the greater
number of Arabic accounts.
i62 ARCHITECTURAL IDEAS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS. [Chap, xviii.
CHAPTER XVIII.
ARCHITECTURAL IDEAS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS.
121. In this chapter the more general principles, common to all the
pyramids, will be considered ; leaving the points which are peculiar to the Great
Pyramid, to be discussed in the History of the Great Pyramid and its design.
The characteristic Mastaba-angle, and the nature of Mastaba-Pyramids and
true Pyramids, have been already stated (section 103). The design of the various
slopes that are met with, appears to be always a simple relation of the vertical
and horizontal distance. It is important to settle this, as it bears strongly on
the whole planning of each building. And though the vertical and horizontal
distances would seem to be the natural elements for setting out a slope, yet
proof of this is necessary ; for Ahmes, in his mathematical papyrus, defines
pyramids by their sloping height up the arris edge, and their diagonal of the
base beneath that line. Such a method of measurement would naturally be
adopted, when the knowledge of the design was lost, as the arris height could
be easiest measured ; but it is very unlikely as a specification of design.
The angles of the various Pyramids, and so-called Pyramids, are as
follow : —
Blinding.
ObsMVCT.
Obscrvaiioo.
±
Theoretical Angle.
Difference.
Mastaba, between
37 & 40, Gizeh
(Petrie)
80° 57'
IS'
80° 32' 15"
rise
Df 6 on I
25' ± >S'
Mastaba 44
Gizeh (the best)
It
76° 0'
s'
75° 57' 50"
If
4 on I
2'± S
Maslabas, mean of all, Gizeh
It
75° 52'
10'
55° 57' 50"
II
4 on I
4'± 10
Mastaba-Pyramid
Medum
(Vyse)
74° 10'
I"?
75° 57' 50"
4 OR I
l°47'±i°?
tf
ti
Sakkara
ft
73° 30"
2"?
/S° 57' 50"
II
4 on I
2°27'±2''-'
Kursi Fat an
Beyahmu
tt
63° 30'
63° 26' 6"
If
2 on I
4'
South brick
Pyramid Dahshur
ft
57° 20' 2"
57° «5' 54"
II
14 on 9
4'
South stone
ft
base, „
»t
54° «4' 46"
54° 9' 46"
II
18 on 13
5'
Second
ft
Gizeh
(Petrie)
53° 10'
4'
53° 7' 48"
II
4 on 3
2'± 4'
4'± 8'
Ninth
II
II
• t
52° I 1'
8'
52 7 30
II
9 on 7
Great
n
II
tf
51° 5*'
2'
Si° SO 35
51° 51' 14"
II
II
14 on II
4 on w
i'± 2'
46" ± 2'
North brick
Dahshur
(Vyse)
51" 20' 25"
51° 20' 25"
II
son 4
0'
Third
If
Gizeh
(Petrie)
SI" 10-
10'
5.° 20' 25"
II
5 on 4
10' ± 10'
Small
II
Dahshur
(Vyse)
50° II' 41"
50° II' 40"
II
6 on 5
I"
North stone
•I
II
II
43° 36' II"
43° 36' 10"
ti
soon 21
I"
South „
top „
II
42° 59' 26"
43° «'3i"
ij
14 on 15
a'
By photographs of the inner casings they vary from 69" to 85" ; averaging 7o'i2.'
Sect. 122.] THE ACCRETION THEORY OF BUILDING. i6j
The angles determined by Perring for Colonel Vyse cannot be considered
very satisfactory for comparison with theories, as they seem in one case to be
distinctly in error (in the Second Pyramid angle) ; and some of the observations
are so extremely near to theoretical angles, that they seem to have been
modified by the observer. But taking those Pyramids of which I measured the
angles repeatedly in many ways, the variations from the slopes which would
result from integral amounts, is usually about half the probable error ; and the
variation only equals the probable error in the Third Pyramid, which is least
accurately built. From these close coincidences it seems clear that the rule for
slopes in designing, was to set back the face an integral number of cubits, on
a height of an integral number. The use of angles of 4 on 3 (which has
hypothenuse S), and 20 on 21 (which has hypothenuse 29), seems to suggest
that the square of the hypothenuse being equal to the squares of the two sides
may have been known ; particularly as we shall see that the use of squared
quantities is strongly indicated in the Great Pyramid.
122. No discussion of the sizes of the PjTamids can lead us to the ideas
involved in their design, unless it is first settled whether they were each
completely planned at their beginnings, or each carried forward as far as the
life of the builder permitted. This last idea, which may be called the " theory
of accretion," would show that the size of each Pyramid was solely due to a
series of accidental events ; and that no foreseen design can be expected in the
external dimensions, or in their relations to the inside. As several names have
been associated with this theory, it will be best to avoid them all ; and treat
it on its own merits impersonally, like all other theories mentioned in this work_
We will first, then, consider the questions that have been put forward on
Pyramid building, and the applicability of the theory of accretion to each of
them, and after that notice some of the other points bearing on this theory.
1^ (i) How does it happen that the Pyramids are of such different sizes? The
theory of accretion answers that each king continued building his Pyramid until
his death, and hence the Pyramids differ in size, because the reigns differed in
length. When^ however, we see that the lengths of the reigns are not in proportion to the bulk of the respective Pyramids, this apparent explanation merely
resolves itself into saying, that because two quantities vary they must be connected. On comparing the lengths of the reigns with the sizes of those Pyramids
whose builders we know, the disproportion is such that Khufu, for instance, must
have built the Great Pyramid 15 times as fast as Raenuser built the Middle
Pyramid of Abusir ; or else Raenuser built for only xV^ '^^ ^'^ reign ; either
alternative prevents any conclusion being drawn as to inequalities in time producing inequalities in the sizes of the Pyramids.
(2) How could later kings be content with smaller Pyramids after Khufu
and Khafra had built the two largest? This question the accretion theory
i64 ARCHITECTURAL IDEAS OF THE PYRA\flD BUILDERS, {Chap, xviii.
cannot explain ; for many of the later kings lived nearly as long as Khufu
and Khafra (one even much longer), without producing anything comparable
in size. When we look at the mournful declension in the designs of Pyramid
building, from the beauty of the fourth down to the rubble and mud of the
sixth dynasty, the falling off in size as well as quality is merely part of the
same failure.
(3) How is the fact to be accounted for that an unfinished Pyramid is never
met with ? In the same work in which this question is asked, it is said of one of
the Abusir Pyramids, that it " seems never to have been completed ;" and of the
South Stone Pyramid of Dahshur, "The whole pyramid was probably intended
to have the same slope as the apex, but the lower part was never completed."
This question is only another form of No. 5.
(4) How could Khufu have known that his reign would be long enough to
enable him to carry out such a vast design .' However this may be, he certainly
worked far more quickly than any other king, and the arrangement of the interior
of his Pyramid, as we shall see below, proves that it was all, or nearly all.
designed at first
(5) If a builder of a great pyramid had died early, how could his successor
have finished the work, and built his own pyramid at the same time ? First, we
have no proof that a successor did not appropriate the work to himself, or share
it with the founder ; and, secondly, no other kings worked at a half, or perhaps
a tenth, of the rate that Khufu and Khafra worked, or with anything like the
same fineness ; and hence any king might easily have had two pyramids on
hand at once, his father's and his own.
The accretion theory, then, though not actually condemned by the application of these questions which are adduced in its support, is at least far from
bejng the " one entirely satisfactory answer " to them, as it has been claimed to
b&7 And the supposed proof of it, from the successive coats of the MastabaPyramids of Medum and Sakkara, is, in the first place, brought from works that
are not true Pyramids ; and, in the second place, shows that the buildings quoted
were completely finished and cased many times over, probably by successive
kings, and not merely accreted in the rough, until the final casing was applied.
A confirmation claimed for this theory is " the ascertained fact that the more
nearly the interior of the pyramid is approached, the more careful does the construction become, while the outer crusts are more and more roughly and hastily
executed." This is certainly not true in many, perhaps most, cases. The
Pyramids of Sakkara, as far as they have been opened, show quite as fine work
in the outer casing as anywhere else ; and the rubble of the inside is equally bad
throughout The Great Pyramid of Gizeh shows far finer work in the outermost
|>^rts of the passage, casing, and pavement, than in most, or perhaps all, of the
insid6, and the Second Pyramid is similar. In a ^eat part of the pyramids we
p.
165
Sect. 124.] INAPPLICABILITY OF THE THEORY. 165
know nothing of the comparative excellence of the work of different parts, comparing fine work with fine work, and core with core masonry.
123. Now, if the accretion theory were true, it ought to be of the greatest
value when applied to the largest Pyramids ; for these are the most difficult to
account for, and their extraordinary size is the main feature appealed to iri
support of the theory.
Let it then be critically applied to the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, the largest
known (see PI. vii.). First, it must be noticed that the centre of the Pyramid
cannot have been much shifted by accretion on one side of it, as all the chambers
are near the middle ; and if any shift of its axis were due to this, the accretion
must have been on the N. side, as two chambers are S. of the middle. Trying^
therefore, how small a Pyramid might have been begun, let it be taken at A : if
a Pyramid existed of this size, it would be completely anomalous, and unlike
anything known ; it would have (i) a horizontal passage, (2) opening near the
top of it ; (3) a chamber close to the top of the Pyramid ; and (4) an entrance
to the lower chamber far outside the Pyramid. Each of these peculiarities condemn it as impossible. The next larger size that would not leave chambers
half exposed on the outside of the building, would be at B. With this size there
would be the anomalies of (i; two entrances on one face ; (2) one sloping upwards ; (3) a great hall and a chamber close to the outside, and near the top of
the Pyramid. Each of these points condemn such a design as un- Egyptian, and
unlike any other known pyramid, no matier how small. The least size, then,
that could possibly be supposed to be the first design would be at C, as it is
clear that any lesser design would leave impossible anomalies in the arrangements. Thus it is plain that the accretion theory breaks down in its application
to any size under 600 feet for the Great Pyramid ; and if we are thus compelled
by its arrangements to acknowledge a primary design" of a base of 600 feet
(which is larger than nineteen-twentieths of the other pyramids), what need is
there of a theory of accretion to account for its being 750 feet ?
Next let this theory be applied to the Second Pyramid of Gizeh, which is
only exceeded in size by that we have discussed above (see PI. vii.). Here the
chamber is practically central, and the axis of the Pyramid cannot therefore
have been much shifted by one-sided accretion. Supposing that it was designed
of any size less than A, there would then be the anomalous features of (i) an
entrance on the ground level ; and (2) a secondary entrance far out from the
Pyramid. These features are unknown in any other pyramid, large or small,
and the need of them thus condemns, as practically impossible, any design of
less size than about 500 feet. Here then the accretion theory breaks down, as
in the Great Pyramid design.
124, The summing up on this theory then is, that every argument brought
forward in its support is either inconclusive, or false in examples ; and that on
i66 ARCHITECTURAL IDEAS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS. [Chap, xviii.
applying it critically to the two cases in which it is most needed, and which
have been mainly adduced to support it, it is completely contradicted by the
essential formation of the pyramids. If we are then forced to accept the fact of
gigantic primarj' designs for the largest pyramids, where is there any need of a
theory to account for the far smaller designs, of very inferior workmanship, seen
in the other pyramids ? That some of the lesser and ruder pyramids (as the
Third of Gizeh, which is ninth in order of size) may have been enlarged, is not
unlikely ; but such enlargement was an accident of increased ambition, and not
a general law of construction ; and it has nothing to do with the great designs,
so magnificently carried out in the largest pyramids.
125. A theory which has obtained much belief, is that of the passages of
each pyramid having been plugged up after the interment of the builder. But
though this is often alluded to by some writers as even an undisputed fact, yet
the evidence for it is not forthcoming. No doubt special parts were plugged up
so as to conceal the openings of passages ; and ."iome disused passages might be
blocked, more or less entirely ; but, generally speaking, there is no evidence of a
plugging of the entire passages.
In the Great Pyramid the entrance passage is often spoken of as having
been plugged up ; and the holes in the floor are adduced in proof, as showing
where the destroyers got under the blocks to force them out. But these holes
have been cut by a person standing in the clear passage below them, and picking
at the stone from the southward ; as is clearly seen on examining the cutting
marks. Also the floor, being not only the most awkward part to work upon,
but also the hardest stone, would certainly not be attacked to loosen any plugs ;
but the sides or roof would rather be chosen. Again, the holes are not deep
enough to hold a man, though five or six feet long ; and they only reach as far
as Mamun's Hole, and not down to the subterranean parts. Moreover, if plugblocks had been dragged out, or broken up in the passage, the walls and roof
would inevitably have been bruised or broken where each block was attacked ;
whereas, there is no trace of such injury visible ; and the triangular stone
covering the plug-blocks in the roof would have been broken loose before
Arabic times. Besides these points, in the upper corners of the passage may
be seen remains of the plaster, rubbed by the fingers into the angle ; and this
would have been displaced if any blocks that were cemented in had been
dragged out
There is, of course, no question but that the lower end of the ascending
passage is plugged up with granite blocks, but it is very doubtful if there ever
was much more plugging than is there at present It is clear that the Arabs,
on forcing the way by Mamun's Hole, ran along the side of the granite plugs,
until they reached a higher point in the passage, where, owing to some reason,
they could get into the passage more easily. And if the rest of the passage had
p.
167
•S>f'- "6] DOORS OF THE PYRAMIDS. 167
teen plugged, they would either have forced their way in the softer limestone
alongside of the plugs, as they had already done ; or else, if the plugs were
removable they would have filled up the awkward hollow of Mamun's Hole
with them, to avoid the labour of carrying them all out of the Pyramid, But
there is not one known, out of the large number of such blocks that ought to be
found if the whole passage had been plugged up.
The mouth of the passage to the Queen's Chamber was certainly blocked ;
but no one has supposed that the whole of that passage, or that the gallery, was
blocked.
Thus there is an absence of any trace of blocking of the passages, beyond
the closing of the mouths of two passages, merely to prevent their being
detected.
In the Second Pyramid the flaws in the passage are plastered up — sonletimes
over a large surface — and then tinted red ; if, then, any blocks had been drawn
out, this plastering would have been scraped, and at least the colouring rubbed
off. On the sides of the passage are also projecting scraps of plaster 'i to '15
thick ; and in the top comer of the E. side are some scraps |-inch thick ; these
would have been rubbed off in removing any plugging. The evidence here,
then, is decidedly against the main passage having been plugged. The lower
passage from the pavement, as being a duplicate passage not required, was
plugged up, like the duplicate and disused passage in the Third Pyramid.
In the Pyramids of Dahshur, the passages have been filled with desert
pebbles, sand, and masons' chips ; a filling which could not come in by
accident, and would not be put in by design except by the builders. This,
therefore, was a filling up to prevent casual access to the inside ; but such as
could be readily taken out if it was required to be opened. It shows that no
stone plugging, or building up, was put in the entrance passage ; although a
duplicate passage in one of these Pyramids was plugged by blocks.
In the Pyramid of Pepi, and in another at Sakkara, the passages are
lined with long and delicate inscriptions ; which, at least in that of Pepi, do
not show any mortar in the hollows. Indeed, it would not be likely that
an inscription should be put where it Wcis to be built over afterwards with
plug-blocks.
Not only, then, is the evidence inconclusive that the main passages of the
Pyramids were ever plugged throughout their length, but, on the contrary,
there are incidental proofs that no general plugging was ever introduced or
extracted.
126. The possibility of the Pyramids having had movable doors has been
quite overlooked in modern times, owing to the general belief that the passages
were plugged up. Of course, if a passage was filled up solid there "could not
have been any door to it ; but as we have seen that there is no evidence of
i6S ARCHITECTURAL IDEAS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS. [Chap, xviii.
such plugging, doors may have existed. And as we shall further see that there
is very substantial evidence of the former existence of doors, we have, therefore,
equally valid proofs of the non-existence of any plugging.
The traces of a stone flap door, or turning block, in the mouth of the
South Pyramid of Dahshur, have been already described (section 109), as well as
the signs of a wooden door behind that Such a formation of the passage
mouth is unmistakable in its purpose ; but after drawing conclusions from
that doorway, it was a most satisfactory proof of the generality of such doors, to
observe the following passage from Strabo on the Great Pyramid. "The
Greater (Pyramid), a little way up one side, has a stone that may be taken out
(f£a(/9{ff(/iov, exemptUetti), which being raised up (a/oflevroe, sublatd) there is a
sloping passage to the foundations," This sentence is most singularly descriptive of opening a flap door ; first, the stone is' taken out, or lifted outwards
from the face; and then, being thus raised up, the passage isopened. The
two diff'erent words exactly express the change in the apparent motion,
first outwards and then upwards; and they show remarkable accuracy and
precision in their use. Besides this description, there is another statement
that the Pyramids of Gizeh had doors, in an Arabic MS., quoted by Vyse ;
this was written in 850 A.D., and, therefore, only twenty or thirty years aftef
Mamun had forced his way into the Great Pyramid, and thus reniiscovered
the real entrance.
The mechanical proofs of the existence of a door to the Great Pyramid are
of some weight, though only drcumstantia], and not direct evidence like that
of the above authors. No one can doubt that the entrance must have been
closed, and closed so as not to attract attention at the time when the Arabs
made their forced passage, abput a hundred feet long, through the solid
masonry. Moreover, it is certain that the entrance was not covered then by
rubbish : (i) because the Arabic hole is some way below it, and the groundlevel at the time of the forcing is seen plainly in the rubbish heap ; (2) because
the rubbish heap, which is even now much below the original doorway, is
composed of broken casing, and the casing was not yet broken up at the time of
forcing the passage. Therefore the doorway must have been so finely closed
that the various accidental chippings and weathering on all the general surface
of the casing completely masked any wear or cracks that there might be
around the entrance ; and so in\-isible was the door then, that, standing on the
heap from which they forced their hole, the Arabs could not see anything to
excite their suspicion on the surface only 35 feet above them ; they, therefore,
plunged into the task of tearing out the stone piecemeal, in hopes of meeting
with something in the inside. Yet we know from Strabo that the Romans had
free access to the passage, though he saj-s that it was kept a secret in his time.
No extractable plug or block, weighing necessarily some tons, would have been
p.
169
Sect. IJ7.] RELATIVE WORKMANSHIP OF PYRAMIDS. 169
replaced by every visitor until the Arab times, especially without there being
any shelf or place to rest it on while it was removed.*
The restoration of a door shown in PI. xi., would agree to these various
historical requirements, and be in harmony with the arrangement at Dahshur;
such a block would only need a pull of 2\ ovt on first taking it outwards, and
4 cwt. to lift it upwards to its final position ; it would leave no external opening ;
it would also allow just half of the passage to be quite clear ; and from the passage
being halved in its height by two courses at the beginning, such an opening is
the most likely. Though the general form is thus indicated, the details are of
course conjectural.
To sum up. A self-replacing door, which left no external mark, is absolutely
required by the fact of the Arabs having forced a passage Only a flap door, or
a diagonal-sliding portcullis slab, can satisfy this requirement. A flap door is
unequivocally shown to have been used at Dahshur. And Strabo's description
of the entrance agrees with such a door, and with no other. Such is the evidence
for the closing of the Pyramids by doors ; equally proving also the absence of
any plugging up of the entrance passages.
127. Reference has often been made in previous pages, to the varying
, character of the work of the Pyramids ; both for its own interest, and for its
historical value. Some connected remarks are therefore desirable, on the different
architectural ideas of the builders, in their general style of construction : and an
attempt is here made to range the principal pyramids in the order of their
excellence of workmanship.
The Great Pyramid at Gizeh (of Khufu, fourth dynasty) unquestionably takes
the lead, in accuracy and in beauty of work, as well as in size. Not only is the
fine work of it in the pavement, casing (section 26) King's (section 52) and
Queen's Chambers (section 41), quite unexcelled ; but the general character
of the core masonry is better than that of any other pyramid in its solidity and
regularity.
The small Pyramids by the (Great Pyramid of Khufu's family, fourth dynasty)
are of very good work in their passages, and in the remains of their chambers ;
they are also good in the core masonry (excepting one that has crumbled), and
were well cased with fine lirnestona Considering the internal work, and the
apparent use of hard-stone edging ofdiorite and basalt in the quoins (section lOi),
these Pyramids may rank next to the Great Pyramid.
The Third Pyramid (of Menkaura, fourth d>Tiasty), though not so accurate
in its interior as some of the others, may nevertheless come next, by reason of
* Exactly the same reasoning applies to the Second Pyramid. Diodorus Siculus mentions
the foot-holes up to its entrance, and Herodotus correctly describes the form of its passages j
and yet the Arabs forced a large passage in it, in entire ignorance of the real entrance, which
must, therefore, have had a door like the Great Pyramid.
■I
ijo ARCHITECTURAL IDEAS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS. [Chap, xviii.
the excellence of its core masonry. In this it equals the Great Pyramid, and
is far better than any other.
The rank of the Pyramid of Abu Roash (of Menkauta, fourth dynasty ?) is
doubtful, owing to its ruined state. The design of the vast rock chamber, after-*
wards so massively lined, is very bold : its core masonry might rank almost as
high as that of the following Pyramids ; and the use of a very large amount of
intractable red granite, both internally and externally, raises it character.
The Second Pyramid at Gizeh (of Khafra, fourth dynasty), would rank next
to the Great Pyramid by its accuracy of work, both inside and outside ; and
even before the Great Pyramid in the work of its coffer. But the lamentably
bad stone of its general core masonry, the rounded and carelessly shaped
blocks, and the inferior quality of its casing stone, prevents its taking the
second place.
The North Pyramid at Dahshur is about equal in general masonry to the
Second of Gizeh ; but inferior in the accuracy of its internal work. It is most
of all like the Great Pyramid of Gizeh in its style of work, the fineness and
whiteness of its casing, and the design of the overlapping roofs ; but it is inferior
to that Pyramid in every detail.
The South— or blunted — Pyramid at Dahshur is of good work ; very good
in the lower part of the core, but poorer in the upper parts, both in quality and
working of the stones. There, is however, some very good work in the joints of
the casing of it ; flaws in the stone have been cut out, and filled in with sound
pieces. It is only inferior to the preceding in the quality of the casing. The
general impression received, from the work and design of these two large
Pyramids of Dahshur, is that they are more archaic than the Great Pyramid of
Gizeh ; and the builders seem to be feeling their way, rather than falling off in
copying existing models.
The Mastabat-el-Farun (of Unas, fifth dynasty) at Sakkara can scarcely be
judged, without seeing either the casing or the inside ; but by the general
masonry, and the large size of the blocks used, it should rank close to the
preceding buildings. , • . . r -^
The Mastaba- Pyramid at Medum is of good work ; the jomts of its casmg
are fine and close, and the joint-surfaces are well dressed. The core masonry is
passable ; but it is inferior to those already mentioned in the size of the stones
of all parts. ^,, . . x
■ The Pyramids at Abusir (of Sahura and Raenuser, fifth dynasty) may,
perhaps, take about this rank; for though good in their fine masonry, the
general bulk of the core is poor, and begins to show the system of retaining walls
filled in with rubble. . ,v . v -u «f i,..^
The Mastaba-Pyramid at Sakkara (or Great Step-Pyramid) is built of bad
and small stones, often crumbling to dust: its casings are fairly good, though of
^ect. 128.] USE OF PLASTER.
»7i
small stones; but as they vary in angle, no accuracy seems to have been
aimed at.
The other Pyramids of Sakkara (of end of fifth, and of sixth dvnasty) as far
as their construction is visible, appear to be all of the same type. They are made
up of rude retaining walls, not even built continuously, but merely piecemeal ;
these walls are of rough broken small stones laid in mud ; and they are filled in
with loose stones, without even any mud. The outer casing was, however, of
very good work, and consisted of large stones of fine quality ; and the interiors
are equally good. It was in the unseen mass of the masonry that deterioration
took place.
The mud-brick Pyramids might, perhaps, stand before the generality of the
rubble Pyramids just mentioned ; as some skill is needed in the production of
sound bricks of large size, that will bear at the present day being bowled down
from top to bottom of the Pyramid, by the official excavators, without breaking.
The casing of these Brick Pyramids was also of excellent white Mokattam
limestone, where it has been seen.
Having thus pointed out a few of the reasons for assigning the above order
of excellence to the Pyramids, it may be observed that (as far as is yet known
absolutely) there is but slight exception to the rule of continuous decadence.
The Third Pyramid of Gizeh is ranked next above the Second, and the
Mastabat-el-Farun next above the Pyramids of Abusir; but otherwise the
degeneration of design and work, so particularly seen in the hidden parts,
follow the order of time. It is not likely that this is entirely the case if we
knew the name of the builder of each Pyramid, but it is at least a general clue
of value. And whether the Mastaba-Pyramids and those of Dahshur may
prove to be the oldest examples or no, still, it would be almost impossible to
assign a rubble Pyramid — so clearly a deteriorated type — to the age of the
sound masonry of the fourth dynasty.
128. The use of plaster by the Egyptians is remarkable ; and their skill in
cementing joints is hard to understand. How, in the casing of the Great Pyramid,
they could fill with cement a vertical joint about 5x7 feet in area, and only
averaging ^^ inch thick is a mystery ; more especially as the joint could not be
thinned by rubbing, owing to its being a vertical joint, and the block weighing
about 16 tons. Yet this was the usual work over 13 acres of surface, with tens
of thousands of casing stones, none less than a ton in weight.
The Egyptian notions about the use of plaster and stucco were very free ;
they never hesitated to use plaster in making good small defects in any place.
'In the monolith pillars of the Granite Temple, the flaws are filled by plaster,
which is coloured red ; the same is done on the roof of the King's Chamber, and
the granite passage of the Second Pyramid. On limestone also plaster was freely
used, especially in the faulty parts of the rock in the tombs. Often the rock has
I7i ARCHITECTURAL IDEAS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS. {Chap, xviii.
weathered away in powder, leaving the plaster with its hieroglyphs as sharp and
fresh as when first laid on ; this is well seen in the tomb of Khafra-ankh (" Tomb
of Numbers "), and in tombs in the cutting round the Second Pyramid. Probably
the continual use of plaster, to make good defects in building, was a habit which
arose from the necessity of using it for flaws in the rock in the large number of
excavated tombs ; these are of the earliest time, the use of fine stone linings to
the rock being a later method, not common till the fifth dynasty.
It is not usually known that the statues carved in diorite and alabaster were
painted. Yet such seems certainly to have been the case. The fragments of
diorite statues, that I found W. of the Second Pyramid, where all stuccoed on
the outside, with a firm hard white coat ; and the fragments of alabaster statues
had bright green paint on the dress, and black on the plaited wig. Though it
has long been known that the limestone statues were generally painted, and that
those of granite were partially coloured ; yet the concealing of the translucent
alabaster, and of the polished and variegated diorite, by a coat which might
merely hide limestone or plaster, seems to have escaped notice hitherto. This
custom shows that the qualities of the stone were regarded more for preciousness
than for beauty.
p.
173
Sect. 129.] NATURE OF TOOLS EMPLOYED ON HARD STONE. 173
CHAPTER XIX.
-THE MECHANICAL METHODS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS.
129. The methods employed by the Egyptians in cutting the hard stones
which they so frequently worked, have long remained in doubt. Various suggestions have been made, some very impracticable ; but no actual proofs of the
tools employed, or the manner of using them, has been obtained. From the
examples of work which I was able to collect at Gizeh, and from various fixed
objects of which I took casts, the questions so often asked seem now to be
solved.
The typical method of working hard stones, — such as granite, diorite, basalt,
&c., — was by means of bronze tools ; these were set with cutting points, far
harder than the quartz which was operated on. The material of these cutting
points is yet undetermined ; but only five substances are possible : beryl, topaz,
chrysoberyl, corundum or sapphire, and diamond. The character of the work
would certainly seem to point to diamond as being the cutting jewel ; and only
the considerations of its rarity in general, and its absence from Egypt, interfere
with this conclusion, and render the tough uncrystallized corundum the more
likely material.
Many nations, both savage and civilized, are in the habit of cutting hard
materials by means of a soft substance (as copper, wood, horn, &c.), with a hard
powder supplied to it ; the powder sticks in the basis employed, and this being
scraped over the stone to be cut, so wears it away. It is therefore very readily
assumed by many persons (as I myself did at first) that this method must necessarily have been also used by the Egyptians ; and that it would suffice to produce
all the examples now collected. Such, however, is far from being the case ;
though no doubt in alabaster, and other soft stones, this method was used.
That the Egyptians were acquainted with a cutting jewel far harder than
quartz, and that they used this jewel as a sharp-pointed graver, is put beyond
doubt by the diorite bowls with inscriptions of the fourth dynasty, of which I
found fragments at Gizeh. These hieroglyphs are incised, with a very free-cutting
point; they are not scraped nor ground out, but are ploughed through the
diorite, with rough edges to the line. As the lines are only t\ts inch wide (the
figures being about '2 long), it is evident that the cutting point must have been
p.
174
174 MECHANICAL METHODS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS. \Chap. xix.
much harder than quartz ; and tough enough not to splinter when so fine an
edge was being employed, probably only ^^ inch wide. Parallel lines are graved
only ^ inch apart from centre to centre.
We therefore need have no hesitation in allowing that the graving out of
lines in hard stones by jewel points, was a well-known art And when we find
on the surfaces of the saw-cuts in diorite, grooves as deep as -^ inch, it appears
far more likely that such were produced by fixed jewel points in the saw, than
by any fortuitous rubbing about of a loose powder. And when, further, it is seen
that these deep grooves are almost always regular and uniform in depth, and
equidistant, their production by the successive cuts of the jewel-teeth of a saw
appears to be beyond question. The best examples of equidistance are the
specimens of basalt No. 4 (PI. xiv.), and of diorite No. 12 ; in these the fluctuations are no more than such as always occur in the use of a saw by hand-power,
whether worked in wood or in soft stone.
On the granite core, broken from a drill-hole (No. 7), other features appear,
which also can only be explained by the use of fixed jewel points. Firstly, the
grooves which run around it form a regular spiral, with no more interruption or
wavlness than is necessarily produced by the variations in the component
crystals ; this spiral is truly symmetrical with the axis of the core. In one part
a groove can be traced, with scarcely an interruption, for a length of four turns.
Secondly, the grooves are as deep in the quartz as in the adjacent felspar, and
even rather deeper. If these were in any way produced by loose powder, they
would be shallower in the harder substance — quartz ; whereas a fixed jewel
point would be compelled to plough to the same depth in all the components ;
and further, inasmuch as the quartz stands out slightly beyond the felspar (owing
to the latter being worn by general rubbing), the groove was thus left even less
in depth on the felspar than on the quartz. Thus, even if specimens with similarly
deep grooves could be produced by a loose powder, the special features of this
core would still show that fixed cutting points were the means here employed.
That the blades of the saws were of bronze, we know from the green staining
on the sides of saw cuts, and on grains of sand left in a saw cut
The forms of the tools were straight saws, circular saws, tubular drills, and
lathes.
13a The straight saws varied from "03 to '2 inch thick, according to the
work ; the largest were 8 feet or more in length, as the cuts run lengthways on the
Great Pyramid coffer, which is 7 feet 6 in. long. The examples of saw cuts figured
in PI. xiv. are as follow. No. i , from the end of the Great Pyramid coffer of
granite, showing where the saw cut was run too deep into the stuff twice over,
and backed out again. No. 2, a piece of syenite, picked up at Memphis ; showing
cuts on four faces of it, and the breadth of the saw by a cut across the top of it
This probably was a waste piece from cutting out a statue in the rough. No. 3,
p.
175
Sett. 131.] EXAMPLES OF TUBULAR DRILLING. 175
a piece of basalt, showing a saw cut run askew, and abandoned, with the sawing
dust and sand left in it ; a fragment from the sawing of the great basalt pavement on the East of the Great Pj-ramid. No. 4, another piece froai the same
pavement, showing regular and well-defined lines. No. S, a slice of basalt from
the same place, sawn on both sides, and nearly sawn in two. No. 6, a sUce of
diorite bearing equidistant and regular grooves of circular arcs, parallel to one
another ; these grooves have been nearly polished out by crossed grinding, but
still are visible. The only feasible explanation of this piece is that it was produced by a circular saw. The main examples of sawing at Gizeh are the blocks
of the great basalt pavement, and the coffers of the Great, Second, and Third
Pyramids, — the latter, unhappily, now lost
131. Next the Egyptians adapted their sawing principle into a circular,
instead of a rectilinear form, curving the blade round into a tube, vrhfch drilled
out a circular groove by its rotation ; thus, by breaking away the cores left in
the middle of such grooves, they were able to hollow out large holes with a
minimum of labour. These tubular drills vary from \ inch to 5 inches diameter,
and from ^ to 4^ inch tliick. The smallest hole yet found in granite is 2 inches
diameter, all the lesser holes being in limestone or alabaster, which was probably
worked merely with tube and sand. A peculiar feature of these cores is that
they are always tapered, and the holes are always enlarged towards the top.
In the soft stones cut merely with loose powder, such a result would naturally
be produced simply by the dead weight on the drill head, which forced it into
the stone, not being truly balanced, and so always pulling the drill over to one
side ; as it rotated this would grind off material from both the core and the
hole. But in the granite core. No. 7, such an explanation is insumdent, since
the deep cutting grooves are scored out quite as strongly in the tapered end
as elsewhere ; and if the taper was merely produced by rubbing of powder, they
would have been polished away, and certainly could not be equally deep in
quartz as in felspar. Hence we are driven to the conclusion that aoxiliaiy
cutting points were inserted along the side, as well as around the edge of the
tube drill ; as no granite or diorite cores are known under two inches diameter,
there would be no impossibility in setting such stones, working either through
a hole in the opposite side of the drill, or by setting a stone in a hole cut
through the drill, and leaving it to project both inside and outside the tube.
Then a preponderance of the top weight to any side would tilt the drill so as to
wear down the groove wider and wider, and thus enable the drill and the dust
to be the more easily withdrawn from the groove. The examples of tube
drilling on PL xiv, are as follow : — No. 7, core in granite, found at Gizeh.
No. 8, section of cast of a pivot hole in a lintel of the granite temple at Gizeh;
here the core, being of tough hornblende, could not be entirely broken out, and
remains to a length of '8 inch. Na 9, alabaster mortar, broken in course of
p.
176
176 MECHANICAL METHODS OF THE PYRAMID BUILDERS. {Chap. xix.
manufacture, showing the core in place ; found at Kom Ahmar (laL 28° s"), by
Prof. Sayce, who kindly gave it to me to illustrate this subject. No. 10, the
smallest core yet known, in alabaster ; found with others at Memphis, by Dr.
Grant Bey, who kindly gave me this. No. 11, marble eye for inlaying, with
two tube drill-holes, one within the other; showing the thickness of the small
drills. No. 12, part of the side of a drill-hole in diorite, from Gizeh, remarkable
for the depth and regularity of the grooves in it No. 13, piece of limestone from
Gizeh, showing how closely holes were placed together in removing material by
drilling; the angle of junction shows that the groove of one hole just overlapped
the groove of another, without probably touching the core of the adjacent hole ;
thus the minimum of labour was required. The examples of tube drilling on a
large scale are the great granite coffers, which were hollowed out by cutting
rows of tube drill-holes just meeting, and then breaking out the cores and
intermediate pieces ; the traces of this work may be seen in the inside of the
Great Pyramid coffer, where two drill-holes have been run too deeply into the
sides ; and on a fragment of a granite coffer with a similar error of work on it,
which I picked up at Gizeh. At El Bersheh (lat. 27" 42') there is a still larger
example, where a platform of limestone rock has been dressed down, by cutting
it away with tube drills about 18 inches diameter; the circular grooves
occasionally intersecting, prove that it was merely done to remove the rock.
132. The principle of rotating the tool was, for smaller objects, abandoned
in favour of rotating the work ; and the lathe appears to have been as familiar
an instrument in the fourth dynasty, as it is in modern workshops. The
diorite bowls and vases of the Old Kingdom are frequently met with, and show
great technical skilL One piece found at Gizeh, No. 14, shows that the method
employed was true turning, and not any process of grinding, since the bowl has
been knocked off of its centring, recentred imperfectly, and the old turning
not -quite turned out; thus there are two surfaces belonging to different
centrings, and meeting in a cusp. Such an appearance could not be produced
by any grinding or rubbing process which pressed on the surface. Another
detail is shown by fragment No. i S ; here the curves of the bowl are spherical,
and must have therefore been cut by a tool sweeping an arc from a fixed centre
while the bowl rotated. This centre or hinging of the tool was in the axis of
the lathe for the general surface of the bowl, right up to the edge of it ; but as
a lip was wanted, the centring of the tool was shifted, but with exactly the
same radius of its arc, and a fresh cut made to leave a lip to the bowl. That
this was certainly not a chance result of hand-work is shown, not only by the
exact circularity of the curves, and their equality, but also by the cusp left where
they meet This has not been at all rounded off, as would certainly be the case
in hand-work, and it is a clear proof of the rigidly mechanical method of striking
the curves.
p.
177
Stct. 135.] REFERENCES ON OTHER DETAILS. 177
Hand graving tools were also used for working on the irregular surfaces of
statuary ; as may be well seen on the diorite statue of Khafra found at Gizeh,
and now at Bulak.
133. The great pressure needed to force the drills and saws so rapidly
through the hard stones is very surprising ; probably a load of at least a ton or
two was placed on the 4-inch drills cutting in granite. On the granite core,
No. 7, the spiral of the cut sinks "i inch in the circumference of 6 inches, or i in
60, a rate of ploughing out of the quartz and felspar which is astonishing. Yet
these grooves cannot be due to the mere scratching produced in withdrawing the
drill as has been suggested, since there would be about iV inch thick of dust
between the drill and the core at that part ; thus there could be scarcely any
pressure applied sideways, and the point of contact of the drill and granite could
not travel around the granite however the drill might be turned about. Hence
these rapid spiral grooves cannot be ascribed to anything but the descent of the
drill into the granite under enormous pressure ; unless, indeed, we suppose a
separate rymering tool to have been employed alternately with the drill for
enlarging the groove, for which there is no adequate evidence.
134. That no remains of these saws or tubular drills have yet been found
is to be expected, since we have not yet found even waste specimens of work
to a tenth of the amount that a single tool would produce ; and the tools,
instead of being thrown away like the waste, would be most carefully guarded.
Again, even of common masons' chisels, there are probably not a dozen known ;
and yet they would be far commoner than jewelled tools, and also more likely
to be lost, or to be buried with the workman. The great saws and drills of the
Pyramid workers would be royal property, and it would, perhaps, cost a man
his life if he lost one ; while the bronze would be remelted, and the jewels reset,
when the tools became worn, so that no worn out tools would be thrown away.
135. Of the various other details of mechanical work mention is made in
different sections of this volume. The red marking of the mason's lines is
described in section 6^. The use of testing-planes in working surfaces, in
section 170. The use of drafted diagonals, in section 55. The character of the
fine joints, in section 26. The accuracy of levelling, in section 26. The fitting of the
courses one on the other, in section 41. The arrangement of the courses on the
ground before building, in section 168. The lugs left for lifting the stone."!, in
sections 50, 55, and 6^. The method of raising the stones, in section 169-
The labour system employed on the Egyptian monuments, in section 166. And
the use of plaster, in section 128. A general statement of all these mechanical
questions, with fuller details of some of the specimens and examples of work,
will be found in a paper on the " Mechanical Methods of the Egyptians," in the
Anthropological J oumaliox 1883,
2 A
p.
178
178 VALUES OF THE CUBIT AND DIGIT. \Chip. xx.
CHAPTER XX.
VALUES OF THE CUBIT AND DIGIT.
136. The measurements which have been detailed in the foregoing pages
supply materials for an accurate determination of the Egyptian cubit. From
such a mass of exact measures, not only may the earliest value of the cubit be
ascertained, but also the extent of its variations as employed by different
architects.* There is no need to repeat here all the details of each case already
given, nor to enter on the principles of the determination of units of measure
from ancient remains, which I have fully described in " Inductive Metrology."
For the value of the usual cubit, undoubtedly the most important source is
the King's Chamber in the Great Pyramid ; that is the most accurately wrought,
the best preserved, and the most exactly measured, of all the data that are
known. The cubit in the Great Pyramid varies thus : —
By the base of King's Chamber, corrected for opening of joints 20'632±*oo4
By the Queen's Chamber, if dimensions squared are in square
cubits (section 153) ... ... ... ... 20-6i ±02
By the subterranean chamber ... ... ... 20-65 d='05
By the antechamber ... ... ... ... 20*58 ±-02
By the ascending and Queen's Chamber passage lengths
(section 149) ... ... ... ... ... 20-622±-002
By the base length of the Pyramid, if 440 cubits (section 143) 206 11 ±-002
By the entrance passage width ... ... ... 20765±"0i
By the gallery width ... ... ... ... 20-6o5±-032
The passage widths are so short and variable that little value can be placed on
them, especially as they depend on the builder's and not on the mason's work.
The lengths of the passages are very accurate data, but being only single
measures, are of less importance than are chambers, in which a length is often
repeated in the working. The chamber dimensions are rather variable, particularly in the Subterranean and Antechamber, and none of the above data
are equal in quality to the King's Chamber dimensions. If a strictly weighted
• On the facade of one of the tombs at Beni Hassan there is a scratch left by the workman
At every cubit length. The cubit there is a long variety, of 207 to 20-8.
p.
179
Sect. 138.] DIVISIONS OF LISTS IN THE TOMBS. 179
mean be taken it yields 20'620±'004 ; but taking the King's Chamber alone, as
being the best datum by far, it nevertheless contracts upwards, so that it is
hardly justifiable to adopt a larger result than 2o620±-oo5.
137. In the Second Pyramid the base is very indirectly connected with the
cubit, so that it is not probable that reference was made to the cubit, but only to
the King's Chamber or passage height which are derived from it. The cubit
found varies thus : —
By the tenth course level ... ... ... ... ... 20*82 ifoi
By the first course height ... ... ... ... ... 2076 ±03
By the passage widths ... ... ... ... ... 2072 ±'0i
By the great charnber, dimensions squared being in square cubits 2O'64O±"0O5
By the lower chamber, sides in even numbers of cubits ... 20"573±*0I7
The course heights and passage widths are less likely to be accurate than the
chamber dimensions ; a strictly weighted mean is 20'68±'03 ; but, considering
the details, probably 20'64±03 would be the truest determination of the
cubit here.
In the Third Pyramid the work is very rough in comparison with the preceding, and the cubit is correspondingly variable.
... 20768±-oiS
By the base
By the course heights of granite
By the first chamber ...
By the second chamber
By the granite chamber
20i62db'Oi7
2065 it'IO
2070 ±'OS
2074 ±2
Here it is evident that the courses are all too thin on an average, though
varying from 36"o up to 428, and they are certainly not worth including in a
mean. The average of the other elements, duly weighted, is 2076±'02, or the
simple average (as the previous gives scarcely any weight to the chambers) is
20'7i±"02, which may be most suitably adopted.
Arranging the examples chronologically, the cubit used was as follows : —
Great Pyramid at Gizeh, Khufu ... 20"620db"OOS
Second ., „ Khafra ... 2064 ±"03
Granite temple „ „ ... 2068 ±02
Third Pyramid „ Menkaura ... 2071 ±02
„ „ peribolus walls „ ... 20'6g ±02
Great Pyramid of Dahshur (?) ... 20-58 d=-02
Pyramid at Sakkara Pepi ... 20'Si ±02
Fourth to sixth dynasty, mean of all ... 2063 ±"02
' Average variation in standard ... X)6
138. Besides these examples of the cubit as used in various buildings, the
other principal unit of early times — the digit — may be obtained from the tombs.
A usual feature of the decoration, of both the rock-cut tombs and the built Mas-
i8o VALVES OF THE CUBIT AND DIGIT. [C/iap. xx.
tabas, is a list of offerings ; these are usually written in a tabular form, in a number
of square spaces like a chessboard. It was therefore necessary for the workman to
set out a series of equal spaces, and to do this he most naturally marked off an
even number of whatever small measure he was in the habit of using ; just as an
English workman would mark off a number of spaces of three or four inches
each, rather than adopt any irregular fractions. These lists are particularly
valuable in giving the unit, for two reasons : first, the designer was usually
unfettered by limits, he could make the spaces a little larger or smaller, so as to
work in round numbers, and he could mark off the lengths on a smooth wall
with great nicety ; and, secondly, the repetition of so many equal spaces gives an
admirable means of ascertaining where the workman's errors lay, and also gives
such a number of examples that the exact quantity may be very accurately
determined.
In the examples of such lists measured by me, the regularity of the spaces
deserves notice ; the errors of workmanship, shown by the average variations of
the lengths from the mean of the whole, stand thus : —
InV/idth.
In Height.
(i) Tomb No. IS of Lepsius, Apa
•013
■024 inch,
(2) „
..68
•038
•050 „
(3) ..
W. of Great Pyramid, Ka-nofer-a
•074
x)38 „
(4) ..
No. 64
•042
■072 „
(5) «
Under 6g
.025
^43 „
(6) „
Ases-kaf-ankh
•022
•044 ,.
(7) „
(Painter's canon)
•01 8
•022 „
(8) „
» ..
•041
•026 „
Here it is seen that, with one exception, the error of marking the spaces
one over the other is greater than that of marking them side by side. Omitting
the tomb of Ka-nofer-a (which was never finished, and is merely in the first
blocking out), the mean error in width is •028, and in height xu^o. Considering
that the engraved lines are usually about j^ inch wide, a mean error of ^V or gV
inch on the length of the spaces shows very careful work.
139. Of these engraved lists the first two have a unit of a decimal division
of the cubit ; in No. i the spaces are Aft of a cubit wide, and ,Vo high, or ^ and
■fj ; and in No, 2 the spaces are ^^ wide, and jVo high, o^ «o and ^. The
cubit of No. I would be 20*45 ± 'OS. and of No. 2, 2058 ± -08. This is of
course inferior as a cubit standard to the determinations from large buildings ;
but it is very valuable as showing the decimal division of this cubit, which is
also found in other countries.
140. Of the digit there are three good examples : —
No. 3, squares of 8 digits wide, 9 high, mean digit 739 ± 004
No, 4. „ 4 .... S .. » » TaSzb-ooi
No. 5, „ 3 » ..4 » .. .. 722 =t: -002
Weighted mean 727 ± "002
5#^/. MI.] COMPARISON VWITH PREVIOUS RESULTS. i8i
The squares of Na 6 may be designed in digits, but they seem to be irregular,
being 3600 ± "004 wide, and 3775 ± 012 high. In the same tomb of Aseskaf-ankb, are two subjects with the artist's canonsi drawn over the finished and
painted subject. What the purpose of this can have been it is not easy to say ;
but the squares in one subject are '4675 ± 0015 ; and in the other r407 =b '005,
or three times "4690; the mean of both is '468 db ooi, which is not simply
connected with any other quantity of digits or cubits.
141. The \-aIues of the cubit and digit, found in use in the cases mentioned
in this chapter, agree remarkably closely with what has been already worked
out For the cubit I had deduced (Inductive Metrology, p. 50) from a quantity
of material, good, bad, and indifferent, 2064 db '02 as the best result that I could
get ; about a dozen of the actual cubit rods that are known yield 20"6s ± •01 ;
and now from the earliest monuments we find that the cubit first used is 20"62,
and the mean value from the seven buildings named is 2063 ± 02. Here, then,
by the earliest monument that is known to give the cubit, by the mean of the
cubits in seven early monuments, by the mean of 28 examples of various dates
and qualities, and by the mean of a dozen cubit rods, the result is always within
^ inch of 20-63. On the whole we may take 2062 ± 01 as the original value,
and reckon that it slightly incrccised on an average by repeated copyings in
course of timt
The digit, from about a dozen examples deduced from monuments (Ind.
Met, p. S3), I had concluded to be 7276 4= 001 ; here, from three clear and
certain examples of it, the conclusion is 727 ± 002 for its length in the fourth
dynasty, practically identical with the mean value before found.
As I have already pointed out (Ind. Met, p. 56), the cubit and digit have no
integral relation one to the other ; the connection of 28 digits with the cubi'
being certainly inexact and merely adopted to avoid fractions. Now these
earliest values of the cubit and digit entirely bear out this view ; 28 of these
digits of 727 is but 20'36 ± '06, in place of the actual cubit 2062 ± •01. Is
there then any simple connection between the digit and cubit } Considering
how in the Great PjTamid, the earliest monument in which the cubit is yet found,
so much of the design appears to be based on a relation of the squares of linear
quantities to one another, or on diagonals of squares, it will not be impossible to
entertain the theory of the cubit and digit being reciprocally connected by
diagonals. A square cubit has a diagonal of 40 digits, or 20 digits squared has
a diagonal of one cubit ; thus a square cubit is the double of a square of 20
digits, so that halves of areas can be readily stated. This relation is true to
well within the small uncertainties of our knowledge of the standards ; the
diagonal of a square cubit of 20'62 being 40 digits of 729, and the actual mean
digit being '727 ± •CX)2. This is certainly the only simple connection that can
be traced between the cubit and digit ; and if this be rejected, we must fall back
on the supposition of two independent and incommensurable units.
l8a THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. [Ckafi. xxL
CHAPTER XXI.
THEORIES COJIPARED WITH FACTS.
142. Now that we are furnished, for the first time, with an accurate
knowledge of the ancient dimensions of the Pyramids, we can enter on an
examination of the theories which have been formed, and test them by the
real facts of the case Hitherto, on even the most important and crucial
question, the only resource has been taking the mean of a number of contradictory results ; a resource which has been, in the case of the Great Pyramid,
more fallacious than was suspected, owing to a complete misinterpretation of
the nature of the points measured.
The question of the value to be assigned to earlier measurements of the
Great Pyramid base, and the way in which the accurate obseryations agree
with the present survey, is discussed at the end of this chapter, in section 163.
In mentioning tlie following theories, it seemed best to avoid any prejudice
for or against them, and also to avoid questions of priority, by stating them
without any reference to their various sources. A theory should stand on its
own merits, irrespective of the reputation of its propounder. There is no need
here to explain the bearings of, and reasons for, all these theories; most of them
stand self-condemned at once, by the actual facts of the case. Others, framed
on the real dimensions, will bear the first and indispensable test of measurement,
which is but the lowest class of the evidences of a theory. Some theories which
have not appeared before now, need explanation to make them intelligible.
The general question of the likelihood of the theories, judging by their
connection together, and by analogies elsewhere, is summed up in the Synopsis,
section 1 57 ; and the conclusion formed, of what theories are really probable, is
given in section 178.
143. Applying, then, tlie first, and direct test — that of measurement — to
the most prominent subject of theorising — the size of the Great Pyramid —
the base was, as we have seen,
Average 9o68-8± '4
By theory, Circuit of S stadia (or i geographical mile of equator meridian) . . 9o68-6± -4
Side 360 cubits of 25-2 (cubit of Egyptians, Assyrians, Jews, &c) . 9072' ±35*
Side 440 cubits of 20620 (Egyptian cubit, as in Great Pyramid) . 9073- ± v
Sect, 144.]
THE GREAT PYRAMID, HEIGHT.
By theory, Circuit 50,000 digits of 727 (Egyptian digit) 9087- ±25-
Side 500 cubits of 18-2405 (Greek cubit, also claimed as Egyptian) . 9i2o'2
Side = width of band round the earth containing 10" square feet . 9I28'
Side 452 cubits of 20-2208 (u'd of a second of latitude) . . : 9139-8
Side ^65-242 cubits of 25-025 (theoretical Polar cubit) . . . 9140-2
Circuit 355 units of 5 Egyptian cubits ...... 9155-0
Side 366-256 cubits of 25-025 (theoretical Polar cubit) . . . 9165-2
Side 360 cubits of 2 5'488 9'757
Most of these theories are manifestly beyond consideration, but on two or three
of the best some further notes are desirable. The 440 cubit theory is supported
by the fact of the height being 280 cubits ; so that the well-known approximation to n-, ^, appears here in the form of the height being 7 X 40 cubits,
and the semi-circuit 22x40 cubits. From other cases (in the interior) of the
ratio of radius to circumference, it seems probable that a closer approximation
than 7 to 22 was in use ; and it is quite likely that the formula employed
for ir was iy, with a small fractional correction applied to the 22 ; such is
the most convenient practical way of working (if without logarithms), and it
is the favourite method of expressing interminable ratios among most ancient
nations. In any case all arithmetical statements of this ratio of tt are but
approximate, and the question is merely one of degree as to the amount of
error, in any figures that can be used for it The 360 cubit theory is simplelooking ; but no examples of such a cubit are known in the Pyramids, and it
is not prominent among other Egyptian remains. The stadium theory fits
remarkably closely to the facts. Beside the stadium of ^ geographical mile
on the equatorial meridian, there are several other modes of measurement on
the earth's surface, and it should be noted that these agree closely with what
the Pyramid circuit would be at the various levels of the sockets. Thus, 5
stadia on
Equatorial meridian . _ .
Mean ., outside Arctic circle
Mean of a whole meridian .
Mean of all azimuths at the Pyramid .
Mean of all azimuths, everywhere .
Mean of equatorial circle .
(stadium 7254*91= Pyramid circuit 'i above base. *o ^pavement
(7281-6)= „ „ ai-2 „ ,1 a3-o = S.W, socket.
a8-5 = N.E. socket.
32-8 = N.W. socket.
39'9=S.£. socket.
(73q2-o) =
»
■>
89*5
>i
(7296*3) =
(7304-5) =
tt
32-9
39'4
There are many arguments both for and against this theory j and they branch
into so many collateral subjects that it would be beyond both the size and the
nature of this statement to enter into them here.
144. For the height of the Great Pyramid there are also several
theories : —
The actual height originally was S776'0±7"0
By theory, 280 cubits of 2o-632d= -004 (Egyptian cubit) . 5776-9±ri
^ of Roman mile, s822o±40 . . . 5822* ±4
Circumference of earth -f- 270,000 . . . 58327
J" perihelion . . . 57^3
Sun's distance-*- 10' •< mean .... 5886
(aphelion . . . 5989
1 84
THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS.
[Ckap. xri.
C 1 "
S2'
^ - o
SI-
20"
- o
SI'
14-3"
so-
39-1"
so'
34-0"
49'
38-3"
Si°
40'
i6-2"
r t "
20'
25-"
145. For the angle of the Great Pyramid, of course any theory of the
base, combined with any theory of the height, yields a theoretic angle ; but
the angles actually proposed are the following: —
Angle of casing as measured . . . . . . 51" S2' ±2'
By theory of 34 slope to 2 1 base
height : circumference :: radius to circle
9 height on 10 base diagonally ,
7 height to 22 circumference
area of face=area of height squared .
(or sine=: cotangent, and many other relations)
2 height vertical to 3 height diagonal .
S height on 4 base
The weight of the Pyramid has been compared with that of the earth ; but
by the preceding data of size of the Pyramid, and the value already accepted by
the theorists for specific gravity of the earth, the
weight of the Great Pyramid in English tons is 5,923,400
and the weight of the earth -;- 1,000 billion is 6,062,000
or a difference of -^ of the whole.
146. The height of the courses has also been theorised on.
The 25 th course is at 885-0
By theory equal to Queen's Chamber level at . . 8s8'4
The 50th course is at i697'6
By theory equal to the King's Chamber floor level, i6gv4 to 16937
The position of the remarkably thick courses, which start out afresh as the
beginning of a new diminishing series, at so many points of the Pyramid's
height, are shown in PI. viii. ; they do not seem to have any connection with the
levels of the interior (see PI. ix.), nor any relation in the intervening distances or
number of courses. It is, however, possible that a relation may be approximately
intended between the introduction of the thick courses, and the various levels at
which the area of the Pyramid's horizontal section is a simple fraction of the
base area. Thus if we divided the base into 5 parts, or its area into 25 squares,
there are the following number of such squares in the Pyramid area at different
levels : —
Level above base.
Mean course level.
i
square
at .
4959-2
4954-3 top of thick
course
I
X
I I
II
46208
4620-6 top of „
II
squares
4142-3
4138-3 base
X
2 4
II
3465-6
3445-9 to 3472-6 „
i>
29464
2945 -8 base of „
-
II
2719-6
2711-2 to 2749-6,,
X
3 9
II
23104
2317-8 base of „
2122-9
21 12-4 to 21469 „
»4
»
I4S3-6
1460-9 base of „
X
4 16
iiSS-8
1 137-7 to 1 187-2,,
»
X
5 25
base of thickest course i
p.
185
Sect. 147.] ROCK TRENCHES BY GREAT PYRAMID. 185
These points are marked along the top edge of the diagram (PI. viii.), by which
their coincidence with the courses can be seen by eye. It appears that though
nothing exact was intended, yet as if the increased course thickness was started
anew when the horizontal area had been reduced to a simple fraction of the base
area: nearly all the prominent fresh starts of the courses are In the above list ;
and the fact that it includes each of the points where the simple length of the side
is a direct multiple of \ of the base, is also in favour of the theory ; or, in other
terms, a thicker course is started at each fifth of the whole height of the Pyramid.
147. The trenches in the rock on the E. side of the Pyramid have
Angle between S. and E.N.E. trench axes 104° i'43" = 2 x 52° o' 52"
Angle between E.N.E. and N.N.E. axes 51° 36' 52"
By theory equal to angle of slope of the Pyramid = 51° 52'
The distances of the Pyramid pavement, trench axes, and basalt pavement,
outwards from the Pyramid base, may have a connection with the interior of the
Pyramid. It has been a favourite notion of many writers to regard the sides of
the Pyramid as laid open around the base, like the form of a " net " for making a
Pyramid model. If then the East side be laid off from its base, the height of
the interior levels carried out to the slope of the face, nearly coincide with
certain distances on the ground.
On face
In Pyramid. Level, from base.
Gallery doorway 852'6 .". io84-o
Axis of Queen's passage 877'9 Iii6*i
Gallery N. top (852-6 + 344"4) 1 1968 1521-5
King's fwall base 1688-5 2146-6
Chamber i high floor 1693-7 2I53"3
On ground from base. Outside Pyramid.
io8o-6 to 1085-5 Axis of N. trench.
1 122-9 to "25-4 Axis of S. trench.
1 52 1 -4 Axis of mouth of N.N.E,
trench.
2148-0) Outer edge of basalt pave-
2153-0 ( ment.
The idea seems intrinsically not very improbable, and the exactitude of three of
the four coincidences is remarkable, being well within the variations of workmanship, and errors of measure.
Of the many coincidences pointed out about the trenches, we will only stop
to notice those that are within the bounds of possibility. The axis of the N. and
S. trenches is supposed to be a tangent to a circle equal to the core-base of the
Pyramid ; the trenches, as we now know, have not the sanie axis ; the S. being
a tangent to a circle of a square 1 1 $ inside the finished base, and the N. being a
tangent to a circle of a square 165 inside. Now, as the casing (on the N. side)
averages 108 ± 8 thick at the base, the theory is possibly true of the S. trench.
The outer ends of the trenches are said to be opposite to the points where the
core-base would be cut by an equal circle ; if so, this would require the casing
to be 86- wide at the base ; at the comer it is about 80 at the base, so this is not
far from the truth. The inner ends of the trenches are said to be points lying
on the circle equal to the finished base of the Pyramid ; the inner end of the N.
trench is nearest to that, being 5,782 from the Pyramid centre ; the Pyramid
height being 5,776 ± 6, or the radius of the base circuit 5,773"4. A line drawn from
2 B
i86
THEORIES CO At PA RED WITH FACTS.
[Ckap. xxi.
this same point, the inner end of the N. trench, to the centre of the Pyramid is
at 103° 48' 27" to the face of the Pyramid ; and it is said to be parallel to the
axis of the E.N.E. trench, which is at 103° 5/ 34", a difference equal to 15
inches in the position of the trench end. On all these theories of the ends of the
trenches, it must be remembered, however, that they were lined (section 100); and
therefore the finished length was very different to what it is at present.
148, The main theory of the positions of the chambers in the Great Pyramid, depends on the idea of a square equal in area to the vertical section of the
Pyramid ; and one-half of this square, subdivided into thirds, is said to show the
levels of the Queen's, King's, and top construction chambers ; and divided in
half, the level where the entrance passage axis passes the middle of the Pyramid.
The side of such a square is 5 1 17 6, and the levels therefore are thus : —
Qneen's Chamber passage axis (claimed in theory) 879'3 |
Gallery doorway (fits better) 852"6 (
King's Chamber floor 1691*4 to 16937
Entrance passage axis at Pyramid centre — 1307'
852-9 one-third of half square.
1705-8 two-thirds „ „
1279-4 half „ „
Thus the King's Chamber and the entrance passage decidedly disagree with this
theory ; and the Queen's Chamber passage has to be abandoned, in favour of
the N. door of the gallery. There is, however, a rather similar theory, derived
from a square inscribed in the vertical section of half of the Pyramid. The
levels in that would be : —
846-8 one-third of square.
1693-6 two-thirds „
1270-2 half
This agrees closely to the best defined level — of the King's Chamber ; but is no
better than the other theory on the whole.
Another theory is that the chambers are at intervals of 40 cubits, the height
being 280 cubits.
Queen's Chamber passage 834-9 ^^^ 8546
King's Chamber floor . 1691-4 to 1693-7
Around well in subterranean — 1254-
40 cubits ■) as by
80 „ y total
120 „ J height
280 ..
Queen's Chamber . . . 834-4 825-1
King's Chamber wall . . . 1688-5 1650-3
Top of construction chambers . 2525? 2475-4
Pyramid apex .... 5776 5776
This theory, therefore, fails worse than the others, the most definite level needing
acubit of 21-1 to fit it.
We will now note some connections which appear between the exact
dimensions.
The level of the virtual end of the gallery floor is . . . . 1689*0 ± -5
The horizontal length of the gallery floor is 16889 ± .2
The level of the base of the King's Chamber walls is . 1686*3 to 1688*5 ± "6
The level of the King's Chamber floor is . . . . 1691*4 to 1693*7 ± "6
ThelevelofthehorizontalareaofPyramid = Jofbaseareais 1691*7 ±1*8
(or vertical area of the Pyramid divided in half; or
diagonal of the Pyramid = side of Pyramid at base.)
Sect. I49l] lengths OF THE PASSAGES. i«7
Here then are three entirely independent quantities, all agreeing within about
three inches, or but little more than the range of the probable error of
determining them, even omitling the question of errors of workmanship.
According to this coincidence, then, the design of the level of the King's Chamber
was the halving of the vertical area of the Pyramid ; and we have already seen
a very similar idea in the thick courses, which are introduced apparently at
levels where the horizontal area of the Pyramid had simple relations to the
base, or where the vertical area was simply divided.
For the Queen's Chamber there is no similar theory of sufficient accuracy;
falling back, therefore, on the very general idea of its being at half the le\el of
the King's Chamber above the base, we are met with the question, \\"hat level
is to be taken for the Queen's Chamber : (i) the N. door of the gallery, (2) the
rough floor of the passage, (3) the rough floor of the chamber, (4) the finished
ceiling of the passage, or (5) the level of some supposed floor which was
intended to be introduced ? Remembering what accuracy is found in the
King's Chamber level, and its cognate lengths, this will be best answered by
seeing what level is at half the King's Chamber level. This is intended to be at
1688-5 ± '41 judging by the gallery length ; and half of this is 844*2 ± 'Z. No
existing level in the Queen's Chamber agrees to this ; so if the chamber was to
be at half the height of that above it, it would only be so on the hypothesis of a
fine limestone floor to be inserted. Such a floor must be (844-2 — 834'4) = 98
inches thick, not dissimilar to the floor in the Second Pyramid. Is there then
any confirmation of this hypothesis in the chamber itself? The heights will be
all 9-8 less from the supposed floor, and the height to the top will be 235-3
over this floor level, or exactly the same height as the King's Chamber walls,
235'3i ± "OJ. This is the more likely, as the width of this chamber is the
same as that of the King's Chamber. This is then the only hypothesis on
which the Queen's Chamber can have been intended to be at half the height
of the King's Chamber,
The level of the apex of the construction chambers (according to Vyse's
measure above the King's Chamber) is about 2,525 ; and this is nearly three
times the Queen's Chamber level, or three halves of the King's Chamber level,
as was commonly supposed ; the exact amount of that being 2532-7.
For the subterranean chamber levels the same principle, of even firactions
of the King's Chamber level, seems not impossible. But the fractions required
"being less simple, the intention of the coincidence is less ; and the levels below
are more likely to result from a combination of other requirements.
King's Chamber level X |=I0S5"3 I 1056^2 level of subtn. chamber roof.
„ » .1 X fj= I i8r9 I I i8l±l level of end of entrance passage.
149. Coming next to the passages of the Pyramid, the entrance is said to
««8 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. [Ckap.xxi.
be 12 cubits of 20-6 east of the middle. This would be 247, whereas it is
really 287.
The theory of the inside of the Pyramid, which has lately been published
with the greatest emphasis, is that the distances from certain lines drawn in the
entrance passage, up to the N. door of the gallery, reckoned in so-called
" Pyramid inches," is equal to the number of years from the date of the building
of the Great Pyramid to the beginning of our present era, which is claimed to
be the era of the Nativity. Granting, then, two preliminary theories: (i) that
the Nativity was at the beginning of our era (and not four or five years before,
as all chronologers are agreed), and (2) that the epoch of the Great Pyramid was
when a Draconis was shining down the entrance passage, at its lower culmination
(which is very doubtful, as we shall see below) — granting these points — the
facts agree within a wide margin of uncertainty. The epoch of a Draconis is
either 2162 or 2176 B.C., according as we take the angle of the built part of the
passage or of the whole of it ; and the distance in theoretical Polar- earth inches
between the points mentioned is 21 73*3. With such a range in the epoch,
nothing exact can be claimed for this coincidence ; and the other coincidences
brought forward to support it — the date of the Exodus, &c. — are of still less
exactitude and value. The 8th of August, 1882, which was to have been some
great day on this theory, has passed quietly away, and we may expect the
theory to follow it in like manner.
The theory of the date of the Great Pyramid — that it was the epoch when
the pole-star was in line with the entrance passage — seems likewise untenable
in the light of the facts. There is no fresh evidence to be produced here about
it ; so it will suffice to remark that the only chronologer on whose system such
a synchronism is possible, omitted ten dynasties, or a third of the whole number
known, by a supposed connection, which even his followers now allow to be
impossible. Such being the case, tlie chronology which admits of the fourth
dynasty being as late as 2200 B.C., appears to be hopeless ; and with it the
theory of the pole-star connection of the entrance passage falls to the ground.
The only possible revival of the theory, is by adopting the first appearance of
the star at that altitude in 3400 B.C. ; but this omits half the theory (that part
relating to the Pleiades) and may be left at present for chronological discussion.
The total original length of the entrance passage floor being 4,143, appears
to have been designed as 200 cubits of 2071 each; the roof is 4,133, or
20OX2O'66.
The length of the ascending passage is I546'S inches ; this is equal to 75
cubits of 20620; and therefore is f of the length of the entrance passage.
The length of the Queen's Chamber passage seems to have been ruled by
the intention of placing the chamber-ridge exactly in the mid-plane of the
Pyramid ; but the curiously eccentric niche on the E. wall seems as if intended
to mark some distance ; and measuring from the N. wall of the gallery, where
p.
189
Stet. ISO.) DIMENSIONS OF THE PASSAGES. 189
the passage virtually begins, to the middle of the niche is 165 r6, which equals
80 cubits of 20*645, and is, therefore, \ of the length of the entrance passage.
The horizontal length of the gallery at the top is also just about the
same amount, being 1648-5, or 80 cubits of 20606, which may possibly be
intentional ; this length, however, seems far more likely to be ruled by the
horizontal length at the bottom being equal to the level of the King's Chamber,
or upper end of the gallery floor, above the base level ; and the top being
narrowed i cubit at each end, as it is at each side, by the over-lappings.
150. The theories of the widths and heights of the passages are all connected, as the passages are all of the same section, or multiples of that. The
entrance passage height has had a curiously complex theory attached to it ;
supposing that the vertical and perpendicular heights are added together, their
sum is 100 so-called "Pyramid inches." This at the angle of 26° 31' would
require a perpendicular height of 47*27, the actual height being 47'24±"02. But
in considering any theory of the height of this passage, it cannot be separated
from the similar passages, or from the most accurately wrought of all such
heights, the course height of the King's Chamber. The passages vary from
46*2 to 486, and the mean course height is 47"040±"Oi3. So although this
theory agrees with one of the passages, it is evidently not the origin of this
frequently-recurring height ; and it is the more unlikely as there is no authentic
example, that will bear examination, of the use or existence of any such
measure as a "Pyramid inch," or of a cubit of 25025 British inches.
Another theory of the passage height is that the diagonals of the passage,
in a vertical section across it, are exactly at the angle of the Pyramid outside,
i.e., parallel with E. or W. face of the Pyramid. Taking the passage breadth,
as best defined by the King's Chamber, at 41*264 fthe passages varying from
406 to 42*6), the Pyramid angle at 51" 52'±2', and the passage angle as 26° 27',
the perpendicular height of the passage should be 47*o6it'05 by theory ; and
the King's Chamber course is actually 4704±oi, a coincidence far closer than
the small uncertainties. This, if combined with the following theory, requires a
pcissage slope of 26° 26'±8'.
The most comprehensive theory about the passage height is one which
involves many different parts of the Pyramid, and shows them to be all
developments of the same form. It is to the King's Chamber that we must go
for the explanation, and we see below how that type is CcU*ried out : —
Wide. High.
King's Chamber, mean dimensions 206-13 235*2 orSX4I'22and 47*04
Gallery, lower part, vertically 82*42 92*4 to 94*6 2 X 41*2 1 and 46*2 to 47*3
Passages ... ... 40'^ to 426 462 to 486 406 to 42-6 and 462 to 48-6
Ramps of gallery, vertically 19"3 to 204 2265 to 23*76 i X 38*6 to40-8 & 45-3 to 47S
Here is a system based on one pattern, and uniformly carried out ; for though
the measure is taken perpendicularly to the floor in the passages and King's
>90 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. \Ckap. rrf.
Chamber, and vertically in the gallery, yet as we have seen that the horizontal,
and not the sloping, length of the gallery wai designed, so here the vertical
measure is in accordance with that
To determine the origin of this form, the King's Chamber theories must be
referred to. One theory, that of the chamber containing 20 millions of the
mythical Pyramid inches cubed, is cleared away by measurement at once.
Taking the most favourable of the original dimensions, i.e., at the bottom, it
needs a height o[ 2^$-6g to make this volume, and the actual height differs half
an inch from this, being 235'20it-o6. The only other theory of the height of
the walls is similar to one of the best theories of the outside of the Pyramid ; it
asserts that taking the circuit of the N. or S. walls, that will be equal to the
circumference of a circle whose radius is the breadth of the chamber at right
angles to those walls, or whose diameter is the length of those walls. Now by
the mean original dimensions of the chamber the side walls are 4i2"2S long, and
the ends 206" 13, exactly half the amount. Taking, then, either of these as the
basis of a diameter or radius of a circle, the wall height, if the sides are the
circumference of such circle, will be 235-32±"io, and this on.'y varies from the
measured amount within the small range of the probable errors. This theory
leaves nothing to be desired, therefore, on the score of accuracy, and its consonance with the theory of the Pyramid form, and (as we shall see) with a
theory of the coffer, strongly bears it out.
But it is not the side wall but the end which is the prototype of the
passages; and so this theory would not be directly applicable to the passages.
There are, however, some indications that it was in the designer's mind. The
vertical section of the part of the gallery between the ramps is the same width as
the passages, though only half their height ; hence in each direction it is just
Ath of the side wall of the King's Chamber, or the breadth : its circuit : : a
diameter : its circumference. This same notion seems to be present at the very
entrance of the Pyramid, where the passage height is divided in half by two
courses being put instead of one ; thus either the upper or lower half of the
passage from the middle joint is Ath of the chamber side as above. The
awkwardness of making a passage nearly twice as wide as it is high, might well
cause the builders to adopt the end rather than the side of the King's Chamber
as a prototype ; just marking that the passage was designed of double height by
putting two courses in its sides, and in the gallery making the beginning of the
sides only rise to a single height Thus this family of dimensions, which so
frequently recur, seems to have originated,
151. The angle of the passages has two or three different theories attached
to it, besides the rough notion that it is merely the angle at which large masses
would just slide down the slope. As to this last idea, in the first place it does
not seem that any large masses ever were required to slide along it, except three
plug-blocks in the ascending passage ; and secondly, it is decidedly over the
•y«'- '53] QUEEN'S CHAMBER.
•91
practical angle of rest on such smooth stone, as anyone will know who has done
work on such a slope.
Another theory, which is quite impossible, is that the passages were
regulated by the divisions of the square, equal in area to the Pyramid section.
It was supposed that the slope from the centre of the Pyramid up to the gallery
N. wall, where that was cut by the ^ of equal-area square (or by the Queen's
passage axis), was parallel to the entrance passage ; but this gives an angle of
27" 40'. The other theory, of a line from the Pyramid centre, up to where
the semicircle struck by the Pyramid's height is cut by the level of the top of
the equal- area square, requires an angle of 26° 18' 10"; this is not the entrance
passage angle, though it might be attributed to the gallery ; but as the equalarea square has Just above been seen to be impossible in its application to the
chambers, this rather cumbrous application of it is certainly not to be thought
of. We have also seen already that the chronological theory of the pole-star
pointing of the entrance appears to be historically impossible.
There then remains only the old theory of i rise or 2 base, or an angle of
2^° 33' 54" ; and this is far within the variations of the entrance passage angle,
and is very close to the observed angle of the whole passage, which is 26° 31' 23";
so close to it, that two or three inches on the length of 350 feet is the whole
difference ; so this theory may at least claim to be far more accurate than any
other theory,
152. The subterranean chamber dimensions may be accounted for in two
ways, thus : —
Length SS3-5toS54-i
Width 325-9 to 329*6 ?
Height 121 -2
or l63*o
or 198*
= 27 cubits of 20-50 to 20"S2
= 16 „ 2037 to 2o*6o ?
= 6 „ 20-2
= 8 „ 2037
Squared = 720 sqnare cubits of 20-63 to 2065
„ =250 „ „ 20-6l tu 2085?
>f =60 „ „ 2I"0^
• > =90 M H 20-87
Here one theory supposes the length to be in whole numbers of cubits,
while the other theory supposes the square of each dimension to be in round
numbers of square cubits. This latter theory may seem very unlikely at first sight ;
but, as will be seen further on, it is applicable to all the chambers, and the only
theory that is so applicable. This second theory fits decidedly better to the
plan of this chamber than does the first; but on neither theory are the heights
satisfactorily explained, though rather the worse in the first.
153. The most comprehensive theory of the Queen's Chamber is similar to
the above; showing that the squares of the sides are in round numbers of square
cubits. This type of theory was first started in connection with this chamber,
and was only proposed as showing that the squares of the sides were multiples
of a certain modulus squared, without its being perceived that the square
modulus was just 20 square cubits. A beautiful corollary of this theory is that
the squares of the diagonals, both superficial and cubic, will necessarily be also
in round numbers of square cubits ; such a design is, in fact, the only way of
rendering every dimension that can be taken in a chamber equally connected
p.
192
192 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. [Chap.xxL
with a unit of measure without any fractions. Taking tlie mean dimensions,
and dividing them by the square roots of the corresponding numbers of square
cubits, the cubit required by each is as follows : —
Width . . 205-85 (max. 206*29) -^ a/ioo 20585 (max. 20*629)
Length . . 226-47 (niin. 225*51) -i-l/120 20-674 (min. 20*586)
Wall height . 184.47 -^-^/ 80 20625
Ridge height . 245*1 (min. 244*76) -,-^140 20*713 (min. 20*686)
Thus, though the mean dimensions do not agree very closely, yet the
variations of each will suffice to cover their differences ; except in the case of the
height to the roof ridge, the minimum of which is '66 too large for even the
maximum breadth. The applicability of similar theories to other parts, and the
absence of any more exact theory of this, gives it some amount of probability.
Another theory is that the chamber contains ten million "Pyramid inches";
the contents by the mean dimensions are 10,013,600 British cubic inches, and
this is y^ short of the required quantity, or would need a change of i inch in
some one mean dimension.
Another theory is that the circuit of the floor is J the circuits of the King's
Chamber side walls, which we have lately seen to be probably formed from a
circle struck with 10 cubits as a radius ; also the diagonal of the chamber end is
claimed as a diameter of a circle equal to the floor circuit ; and the passage
height is claimed as half of the radius of this same circle. The measures are : —
Mean circuit =864*64 x 3 = 2593*92
Circuit -j- v -=275*22
Circuit -i-2 IT =137-61 xi=68*8i
2590*20 circuit of King's Ch. walls.
275*6 minimum diagonal of end.
66- 5 to 690 passage height.
None of these relations are close enough to be very probable, and the
absence of a satisfactory representation of the radius or diameter of this circuit
makes it improbable that it was intended.
The theory of the wall-height being A of the Pyramid base is quite beyond
possibility, the wall being 183*58 at even the minimum, and A of the base
being i8r38.
The theory of the wall height : the breadth : : breadth : King's Chamber
height is quite possible. 184*47 : 20602 :: 206*02 : 230*09, so that the breadth
required (206*02), though a little over the mean, is well within the variations.
Or it might be stated that the product of the breadth of King's and Queen's
Chambers is equal to the product of their heights.
The simplest theory of all is that the dimensions were all regulated by even
numbers of cubits.
Height of side .
183-58 to 185*0?
■•- 9
20*398 to 20*555.
Breadth .
205*67 to 206*29
-i-IO
20*567 to 20629.
Length
22551 to 227*47
-MI
20*501 to 20*679.
Height of ridge .
244*76 to 245*9
-f-12
20*397 to 20*492.
■5«* 'S4-] ANTECHAMBER.
■93
But by this theory the maximum height is -9 too small to agree with the
minimum breadth ; and in its applicability it is inferior to the theory of the
squares first described.
Taking next the niche, which has been abundantly theorized on, there are
two instances claimed to show the so-called "sacred cubit "of 25 "Pyramid
inches," or 251025 British inches. The breadth of the top of the niche is not,
howe\-er, 25 inches, but only averages 20'3, and it is intended for a regular
Egyptian cubit, roughly executed. The excentricity of the niche is nearer to
the theoretical quantity, though in all parts it is too large for the theory, the
amount being 25-I9 (varying 25-08 to 25-31) from below the apex of the roof,
or 25-29 (varying 25-10 to 25-44) from the middle of the wall. So here, as
elsewhere, the supposed evidences of this cubit vanish on testing them.*
Then the niche height x 10 »■ is said to be = Pyramid height This
coinddence is close, the niche being 183-80, and the Pyramid height being lo x
X 183-85, but the use of v here is so arbitrary and unsystematic, that this
cannot rank as more than a chance coincidence. The "shelf" at the back of
the niche, being merely a feature of its destruction, and not original, cannot
have any connection with the original design. The niche being intentionally
the same height as the N. and S. walls, no theory can be founded on the very
small and fluctuating differences between them.
154. In the Antechamber only two or three dimensions have been theorized
on. The principle theory is that the length of the granite part of the floor is
equal to the height of the E. \vainscot of granite, and that the square of this length
is equal in area to a circle, the diameter of which is the total length of this
chamber. Now, as accurately measured by steel tape along the E. side the
granite floor is 103-20, and the E wainscot varies from 102-18 to 103-35 '"
height. A square of 103-20 is equal in area to a circle 1 16-45 diameter, and the
length of the chamber varies from 11407 to ii/xxx So no very exact or
certain coincidence can be proved from such quantities.
But it is also claimed that there are other coincidences " not less extraordinary, connected with their absolute lengths, when measured in the standards
and units of the Great Pyramid's scientitic theory, and in no others known."
Now since 103-2 is exactly 5 common Egyptian cubits, the negative part of
this boast cannot be true. And on testing the positive part of the declaration
it proves equally incorrect For 116-30 X ir X ^999 is 365-1, and not 362-1, the
number of so-called "sacred cubits" in the Pyramid base. Again, 11630x50
is 5,815, and not 5,776, the number of inches in the Pyramid height. And also
I03'2X50 is 5, 160, and not 5117-6, the side of a square of equal area to the half
of the Pyramid's vertical section. Thus the flourishing dictum with which
* There is doubtless a nvU-known ancient cubit of 25-3 inches; but that is decidedly not as
short as 35x1^ nor is it found employed in the Great r>'nunid.
2C
p.
194
194 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. [Chap. xxi.
these coincidences were published is exactly reversed ; the quantities have no
such relations to the Pyramid, as are claimed; and 103*2 is simply a length of
Egyptian cubits, and 116-3 possibly a derivative of that quantity.
The only satisfactory theory of the chamber is that of the squares of the
dimensions being even numbers of square cubits.
Length . . .116-3 (var. 114-1 10117-0)
Upper breadth . 65-0 (var. 64-48 to 65-4S)
Lower „ . var. 41-2 to 41-45.
Height, E. wainscot 103-01 (var. 102-30 to 103-36)
Height over „ 4632 (var. 45-96 to 47-14)
1 16-7 squared is 32 square cubits.
6524 » 10 I, r,
41-26 „ 4 „ „
103-15 „ 25 „ „
46-13 » 5 i> »
Thus each dimension is fairly accounted for ; though not much certainty
can be placed on any theory of this chamber, owing to its great irregularities.
The total length of the horizontal passages, beginning with the great
step in the gallery, and going through to the King's Chamber, is 330-5 ; this
equals 16 cubits of 20-66. The number somewhat confirms the notion of 32
square cubits in the square of the length of the Antechamber.
About a dozen other theories on the dimensions of this chamber have been
proposed, of more or less complexity; but when they are deprived of the
support of any deep meaning in the main dimensions, they are not worth time
and paper for discussion.
The granite leaf, which has been so much theorized on, is but a rough
piece of work ; and the " boss " on it is not only the crowning point of the
theories, but is the acme of vagueness as welL To seriously discuss a possible
standard of 5 " Pyramid inches," in a thing that may be taken as anywhere
between 4-7 and 5-2 inches in breadth ; or a standard inch in a thickness of
stone varying from "94 to I'lo, would be a waste of time. Enough has been
said of the character of this leaf (in describing it, section 50), and of the various
other bosses in different pjuts of the Pyramid, to make a farther notice of
the theories about it superfluous.
155. The principal theory of the King's Chamber has been already stated
in connection with the passages of which it is the prototype. There were two
theories of the origination of its dimensions, which were each apparently very
exact (to 80^), but which contradicted each other, and which are now known to
be both false. Compared with the real dimensions these are : —
Half-breadth of King's Chamber 103-15 I 102-33 lisdiam. of circle whose area = Pyramid base.
Length of „ „ 412-64 | 408-4 jV °f I'ne from apex to circle of Pyramid base.
The only connections traceable between the real dimensions of the Pyramid
outside, and those of the King's Chamber, are merely by the intermediary of
the common Egyptian cubit used alike in laying out both of them.
The connection of the passages with this chamber involves its wall-height ;
but, besides this, there is the height above the irregular floor ; this latter is
explained by tlie theory of the squares of the dimensions.
p.
195
^'^- «S60 COFFER. 195
Width 2o6-i2d='i2 squared, is 100 cubits of 20*6i2=fcoi2
Length 4i2-24±"i2 „ 400 „ 20'6i2dboo6
Height 23oo9±'iS „ 125 „ 20S8o±oi4
Thus this theory agrees with the facts within little more than the small
range of the probable errors. From the squares of the main dimensions being
thus integral numbers, it necessarily follows that the squares of all the diagonals
are integers ; and one result, that the height is half of the diagonal of the floor,
is veiy elegant, and may easily have been the origin of the height.
The mean of the heights of the wall, and of the chamber from the floor, is
stated to be double the length of the Antechamber ; it is actually double of
Ii6'36, and as the Antechamber varies from 114 to 117, it, of course, includes
this and any quantities at all near it.
Another theory involving the height is, that the contents of the chamber
are 1,250 cubic " sacred cubits." As yet, every instance of this supposed
cubit has melted away on being touched by facts, and in this instance it also
disappears : the theory requires a height of 230'48, which is '39 over the
truth, and far beyond the range of probable error.
The simplest theory of the height is, that the floor was raised above the
base of the walls a quarter of a cubit ; according to the mean of the measures
(of which I took about 32) it is raised 5-ii±'i2 inches, and the quarter of a
cubit is S'ld It is not a little singular that in this case the same theorist,
whose unhappy inversion of facts was noted above, has again dogmatized in
exactly the opposite direction to the truth; he writes of this 5"ii, or quarter
cubit, that it is "quite an unmeaning fraction when measured in terms of
the profane Egyptian cubit," as it pleases him to call the only standard of
measure really discoverable in the Great Pyramid.
The only other theory involving, the height concerns the coffer. It is
said that the lower course of the King's Chamber surrounds a volume equal
to SO times that of the coffer. Now, the coffer's contents are, by different
modes of measurement, 72,ooo±6o cubic inches, and for the first course to
comprise 50 times this amount it must be 42"30±04 inches high ; whereas it
is but 4i*9i±'i2, or about -^ '"ch too small. If, however, refuge be taken in
the inexact relation of the contents of the coffer about equalling its solid
bulk, the mean of the two amounts requires the course-height to be 4r87, or
close to the irregular quantity as measured. The most passable way, then, to
put this is to say that the outside of the coffer fills ^V of the volume of the
chamber up to the first course.
156. The theories of the coflfer Itself are almost interminable, and they
find ample room for discrepancies between them in the great irregularities
of the working of the coffer. The various theories have so much connection
with each other, and each have so many consequences which may be
p.
196
196 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. {Chap, xxi,
geometrically traced, that it is difficult to select the best phase of each
theory.
The most fundamental idea is that the solid bulk of the granite is equal
to the hollow contents : this is on the assumption that the grooves for a lid,
and the different height of the sides, are ignored, and the vessel treated as
having sides approximately uniform in height and thickness in every part The
relative amounts by the two independent methods are
By offsets from planes, contents 72,030, bulk 70,500 cubic inches. Difference i,S30
By calipers „ 71.960 „ 70,630 „ „ „ 1,330
The difference, then, between the amounts of contents and bulk is, on an
average, -^ of the whole ; and, looking at this difference as applied to the
least certain of all the dimensions — the thickness of the sides — it amounts to 'ii
inch, a quantity very far beyond any possible errors of measurement. It is
certain, then, that there is no transcendent accuracy in this particular.
Another, and further, theory is that the volume of the sides is double
that of the bottom ; or that the solid is divided into equal thirds, a side and
end, another side and end, and the bottom.
Bo"""- sidea^dTnd. ^^"^^''^
By mean planes entirely 23,830 23,335 495
By mean planes, cutting at arf«a/edge of bottom 23,895 23,303 592
By calipered sides 23,343 552
The differences here average -^ of the whole ; and if the bottom were neglected
altogether, and only the sides compared with the contents, there would still
remain a difference of 500 cubic inches on the contents.
The theory of 50 times the coffer being contained in the first course of
the King's Chamber is already noticed above.
The volume of the coffer has been attributed to the cube of a double
Egyptian cubit ; but this theory would need a cubit of 20"8o3, a value decidedly
above what is found in accurate parts of the Pyramid workmanship.
The volume has also been attributed to a sphere of 2J cubits (or \ width
of the chamber) in diameter ; by the true contents this would need a cubit
of 20*644, which is very close to the best determinations.
The main theory of the coffer contents, that such a bulk of water equals in
weight 12,500 cubic "Pyramid inches" of earth of mean density, cannot be
tested without accurate knowledge of the earth's density. As far as the best
results go, the coffer would require the density to be 5*739, and the earth's
density is 5'675±"004 (by Baily) ; this is somewhat clouded by other methods
giving S'3 and 65, but those other methods, on their own showing, have
respectively but ^ and ^^ of the weight of Baily's result. If it were desirable
to take a strictly weighted mean, of results of such different value, it. would
come out 571 ii
Sect. 156.3 COFFER. 107
Theories of lineal dimensions of the coffer have been less brought forward.
The principal one is the n proportion of the coffer ; the height being stated to be
the radius of a circle equal to the circumference. Now this has a strong confirmation in such a proportion existing, on 5 times the scale, in the chamber.
There, as we have seen, a radius of 206 inches has a circumference equal to the
circuit of the N. or S. walls at right angles to it ; and similarly the radius or
height of the coffer, 4r2, has a circumference nearly equal to the circuit of the
coffer. The height of the coffer is not very certain, owing to so much of the top
having been destroyed ; but comparing its dimensions with those of the King's
Chamber (which, as already shown, agrees to the it proportion) they stand thus : —
Circuit of chamber side wall 1295.1
Radius of circuit 2o6"l2 ^ 5= 41*224
I29'i6 (+'3? originally) N. and £. sides at base.
I27'96 S. and W. sides at base.
4i"3i (var. 4ri4 to 4r5o),
The length of the E. side was originally about '3 more than the length to the
broken parts now remaining, judging by the curvatures of the N. and S. faces.
This would make it 906 long ; and Prof. Smyth prolonging the broken parts
by straight edges read it as go'SAn old theory now revives, by having a shorter base for the Pyramid ; for
1^ of the Pyramid base. is 9069 ; and here the maximum length appears to have
been about 90"6, so that the theory of their connection is not at all impossible.
The most consistent theory of the coffer, and one which is fairly applicable
to all the dimensions, is that of the lengths squared being in even numbers of
square fifths of the cubit, or tenths of the height squared. On the decimal division of the cubit, see section 139. By this theory : —
Outer length squared = 480 square units, if 90-40 90'6 (?) actual maximum.
Outer width „ = 90 „ „ 39-14 38-97(?) ,. .. (39"i2 Smyth).
Outer height „ =100 „ „ 4r26 41-14 to 41-50 actual.
Inner length „ = 360 „ „ 78*29
Inner width „ = 42 „ „ 26-74
Inner height „ = 70 „ „ 3452
Though these multiples may seem somewhat unlikely numbers, yet they are
simply related to one another throughout The squares of outer and inner
lengths are as 4 : 3 ; of outer and inner height as 10 : 7 ; of inner width and
height as 3 : 5, &c. And in all cases the required dimensions are allowably
within the variations of the work. This theory, though perhaps not very satisfactory, has at least a stronger claim than any other, when we consider the
analogous theories of other parts of the building.
Another theory of the coffer outside, is that its circuit is half of the cubic
diagonal of the King's Chamber. This cubic diagonal actually is 515-17, and its
half is 257-58, against 257-4 (?) for the coffer circuit. But these quantities may
both be simply derived from one common source, the cubit ; for the cubic
diagonal of the chamber is 25 x 20-607, and the circuit of the coffer is 12J X
20-59. S° t^^* unless analogies can be shown elsewhere, the design might be
simply in numbers of cubits.
78-23 actual maximum.
26-81 ,, mean.
34-54 „ maximum.
p.
198
198 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. [Chap. xxi.
The length, breadth, and height, have also been attributed to fractions of
this cubic diagonal, by taking ^ of it. This theory of the height requires,
however, 4046, and the minimum height is 4i"i4; the bottom not being at
all hollowed, as had been supposed. The length and breadth theory only
amounts to an additional proposition that these are In the proportion of 7 : 3 ;
which is quite within their actual variations.
The outer length has also three other quantities connected with it, which
coincide far within the variations ;
Outer length mean.
Cube root of lO x
Cubic diagonal of mean
J cubic diagonal of
contents.
inside.
Queen's Chamber.
89-62
^9AZ
89-33
and further, the diameter of a sphere containing 1000 X ^ contents (or volume
of bottom) is 357'8s, nearly the diagonal of the Queen's Chamber, and 4 x 89'46-
This and the above value of the cube root of 10 x contents, are connected by
the similarity of a- and 3'I2S or *^°, which often leads to coincidences in variable
and uncertain quantities.
A r proportion has been seen in the inside ; the circuit of the inner end
being equal to a circle inscribed on the outer end ; or else the circuit of the two
inner ends have their diameters at right angles to them and joining, forming the
inner length. The quantities are : —
Mean circuit of ) ,22^6 -^ = ^8-08 I 39 °3 ^^^ inner length, mean,
inner ends J ^ • ■■ — 3 9 | 38-50 outer width, mean.
The diagonal of the inside end of the coffer rises at 52° $', by mean measures ;
and this has been compared with the angle of the Pyramid itself, 51° 52'.
Several direct connections of the dimensions with the cubit, have been
theorized on. The diagonal of the bottom inside is by mean measures 82-54, or
4 cubits of 20-63, exactly the value shown by the chamber. The inner diagonal
being thus double the outer height, is analogous to the diagonal of the chamber
being double of its height
It is already mentioned that the contents are equal to a sphere of 2j cubits
diameter ; this implying a cubit of 20-64. But this length of 2j cubits (S 1-58 inches),
or i the chamber breadth, maybe connected with other dimensions of the coffer thus:
51-58 x f = 4i'26 41-31 (var. 41-14 to 41-50) outer height.
8963 (var. 89-18 to 906 ?) outer length.
38-50 (var. 38-35 to 38S7) outer width.
7806 (var. 77-64 to 78-23) inner length.
34-42 (var. 34-36 to 34-54) inner height.
These theories comprise all that have any chance of showing intentional
relations ; others are either too diverse from the facts, or of too complex a
nature, to have any probability.
157. In considering the probability of these theories having been in the
designer's mind, it is (after settling the bare question of fitting the facts) of
X I = 90-26
X f = 38"68
X I- = 77-2,7
X I = 34-39
p.
199
Sect. IS7.] SYNOPSIS OF GREAT PYRAMID THEORIES. 199
the first importance to trace any connections and general plans running through
the design. Theories which are dissimilar from those of other parts of the
structure, may be judged almost alone ; merely from a general sense of the
character of the design elsewhere. But where the same motive appears in many
different parts, each occurrence of it strongly bears out the others ; and it must
stand or fall as a whole. It is hardly necessary to say that where there is a
choice of two equally concordant theories, the simpler of the two is the more
likely to be the true one ; but individual prepossession of the reader in some
cases will have to turn the balance of his opinion. On the knotty question of
the possible intention of two motives combined in one form, or necessarily interrelated, tlie individual feelings will hold a still stronger place ; and the probabilities of intention — like many other questions — will be believed or disbelieved,
not so much on physical as on metaphysical grounds, and conditions of mind.
There are three great lines of theory throughout the Pyramid, each of which
must stand or fall as a whole ; they are scarcely contradictory, and may almost
subsist together ; but it is desirable to point out the group of each, so as to
judge of their likelihood of intention. These are (i) the Egyptian cubit theory ;
(2) the ir proportion, or radius and circumference theory ; (3) the theory of
areas, squares of lengths and diagonals. Without, then, restating what has been
already described, we will briefly recall the coincidences which support each of
these theories.
(i) By the cubit theory, the —
Outside form of Pyramid is 280 and 440 cubits, confirmed by the jr theory.
Breadth of the passages are certainly in cubits.
Lengths of passages, entrance, ascending, and antechamber, and perhaps
Queen's and gallery, are in cubits.
Subterranean chamber sides squared are in square cubits.^ Many of these
Queen's Chamber sides and height „ „
Antechamber sides and height ,, „
King's Chamber sides and height „ „
Coffer dimensions, in and out, „ „
(2) To the n- theory, the —
Outside proportion of the Pyramid exactly agrees.
(Azimuth trench may indicate points on the v circle of the base).
Passage sections agree, being on one type derived from King's Chamber.
King's Chamber wall dimensions are precisely agreed.
Coffer proportions outside, and perhaps inside, are agreed.
By the theory of areas, the —
Outside proportion of the Pyramid is exactly given.
Large courses occur at proportionate levels.
Level of King's Chamber halves the Pyramid areas.
dimensions are
-also simple
numbers of
cubits.
«» THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. \Chap. xxi.
Subterranean chamber sides squared give areas in square cubits.
Queen's Chamber sides and height squared give areas in square cubits.
Antechamber sides and height squared give areas in square cubits.
King's Chamber sides and height squared give areas in square cubits.
Coffer dimensions, in and out, squared give areas in square cubits.
From this the diagonals of these parts, superficial and cubic, will, if squared,
also give areas in square cubits. And by the theories of the diagonals also the —
Level of the King's Chamber is where the Pyramid diagonal equals
the base side.
Diagonal of passage section (vertical) rises parallel to the Pyramid face
(51" 52').
Diagonal of inside end of coffer rises parallel to the Pyramid face (51° 52').
Diagonal of inside bottom of coffer is double its height, or 4 cubits.
Diagonal of floor of King's Chamber is double its height.
These theoretic systems scarcely contradict one another ; and, generally speaking,
there is nothing in most of these theories which would prevent their being
accepted as being parts of the real design. The other theories stated in the
previous pages are partly independent of these, and partly contradictory ; and
they are not strengthened by a unity of design like each of the above series.
158. It will be well, while discussing theories, to consider how the Tombic
theory of the Great Pyramid stands affected by the results of accurate measurement and examination.
In the first place, all the other Pyramids were built for tombs ; and this at
once throws the burden of proof upon those who claim a different purpose for the
Great Pyramid. In the second place, the Great Pyramid contains a coffer,
exactly like the ordinary Egyptian burial coffers of early times ; like them both
in its general form, and also in having grooves for a lid, and pin holes for
fastening that lid on. Very strong evidence is therefore required, if we would
establish any other purpose for it than that of receiving and safe-guarding a body.
What evidence, then, has been produced ?
1st. That Khufu was not buried in the Great Pyramid, according to Strabo.
2nd. That the passages are well defined, and would lead explorers straight
to the chambers, instead of concealing them.
3rd. That the coffer could not be taken in with its lid.
4th. That the coffer is unusually deep.
5th. That the grooves are not dovetailed to hold a lid on (since retracted).
6th. That no lid has ever been seen.
7th. That in no other case is a coffer devoid of ornament or inscription.
8th. That " in no other case are the neighbouring walls and passages of
the Pyramid so devoid of hieratic and every other emblem."
9th. That the upper passages are unique, and also the above-ground place
of the coffer.
^'^t- I $9-] SECOND PYRAMID, OUTSIDE. aoi
loth. That the coffer is not built around to protect it, as others were.
I ith. That the chamber has ventilating channels.
I2th. That the lid might be a later addition to the coffer.
13th. That the coffer has certain cubic proportions, which show a care
and design beyond what could be expected in any burial-coffer.
Now, of these objections totheTombic theory, the ist, 2nd, 3rd, 7th, and 8th,
would be equally forcible in the case of the Second Pyramid ; yet in that is a
coffer whose lid has been finally fastened on, and which undisputedly contained
the body of Khafra. The 4th objection is met by several cases of coffers equally
deep, such as the splendid one of Khufu-ankh at Eulak. The Sth has been
retracted, owing to the groove being proved to be undercut. As for the 6th, it
is plain that there are grooves, &c., for a lid ; hence whether such a lid can
actually be found, after the various destructions, is of little consequence. The loth
is of no value, as other coffers are not always built up, e^., that of Menkaura and
that of Pepi. The 12th point, that the lid (or the grooves for it) might be a later
work, is only a hope without any evidence. That the pin-holes are Egyptian
work is certain, by their being cut with a jewelled drill, such as the Pyramid
builders used. It is unreasonable to imagine any later king having intended that
his body should be ignominiously tumbled up the long narrow irregular passage
of the so-called well, which was the only pre-Arab way to the coffer ; and also
that any later king would have altered the coffer without putting his name upon
it. The habit of later kings was rather to smash than to utilize. The 13th point
has been already answered by the fact that the supposed accuracy of the relations
is by no means transcendent ; and that the workmanship is decidedly inferior
to that of other parts of the Pyramid, and to that of Khafra's burial coffer.
That in a building, whose design appears on good evidence to include the ir
proportion and the use of areas, some design of cubic quantities might be
followed in the principal object of the structure, is not at all improbable. But
any claim to even respectable accuracy and regularity in the coffer, is decidedly
disallowed by its roughness of work. It cannot be supposed that a piece of
granite, rough sawn, with the saw lines remaining on its faces, has any special
significance in the waves and twists of its sides, any more than in the other faults
of cutting, where the saw or drill have by accident run too deeply.
The damaged remains of this theory of accurate proportions, and the fact
of the upper passages and air-channels not being known in other Pyramids, are
then the only evidences which are left to reverse the universal rule of Pyramids
being tombs, and coffers being intended for coffins.
159. The Second Pyramid has not been theorized on to any large extent.
The theories of the base length are —
Actual mean length ... ... ... ... 8474'9±"8
6x modulus (mod. =30 passage heights, see below) 8467-2±2-4
2 D
p.
203
203 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. [Chap. xxL
420 cubits of 20'22o8 ... ... ... ... 8492-4
700 "Greek or Egyptian" feet 700X i2-i6 85f2
7" of arc ... ... ... ... 8494-5 to 8521-8
The angle of the Pyramid is actually ... ... ... 53° io'±4'
33 slant height on 20 base ... ... ... 52" 41' 41"
5 slant height, or 4 vertical height, on 3 base ... 53" 7' 48"
Here there can be scarcely any doubt that the 3:4:5 triangle was the design for
the slope ; and therefore any explanation of the lineal size should involve
dividing the base by 6, or height by 4. This \ of the base is the modulus above
mentioned, and the only quantity with which it seems to have any connection is
the perpendicular height of the passages. The entrance-passage is evidently
intended to be of the same size as that of the Great Pyramid, which, as we have
seen, is derived from the King's Chamber courses. Referring to the King's
Chamber for its most accurate value, the result is 47-040±-oi3 ; 30 times this is
I4ir2±*4> and \ of the Second Pyramid base is i4i2S±"i. The highest
corner of the King's Chamber yields a mean course height of 47065, and thence
a modulus of 1412-0, and \ of the shortest side of the Pyramid is 1412-0. The
difference between these quantities, therefore, does not exceed their small
variations ; and as there is no unlikelihood in the idea, and no other theory that
accounts for the dimensions, this connection may well be accepted until
disproved. Some authority is required for multiplying the passage height by
30, but there is good reason for adopting a triple multiple, as the higher passages
in this Pyramid are \\ times the usual passage height, as already described.
Hence the modulus is 30 times the ordinary passage height, or 20 times the
larger passage height ; and the measured height of the best wrought part of the
passage, just behind the portcullis, when X20 is 1415-2 and 1407-6, just including
the modulus of the base, which is 1412-5.
160. None of the dimensions of the Inside of this Pyramid have been
hitherto explained by theory, hence there are no rival hypotheses to consider in
the following cases ; and if the ideas suggested seem too improbable, we must
simply confess our ignorance of the design.
Taking the great central chamber as the best wrought part of the inside, it
is evident that the height of the sides is 10 cubits, being 206-4; but the breadth,
195-8, seems inexplicable, as g\ cubits is not a likely quantity. In the Great
Pyramid we have seen that all the dimensions of the chambers are explainable
on the theory of the squares of the lengths being a round number of square
cubits. Applying this theory to the Second Pyramid chamber, the
Wall height 206-4 squared = 100 square cubits of 20640
End height 244-4 „ = 140 „ „ 20656
Breadth 19S'85 » = 93 » » . 20-644
Length W. from door 4' 275 » =40O. » » 20637
Length E 1449 » = 50 „ » 20493
Sect. i6i.]
SECOND PYRAMID, COFFER.
The exactitude of the connection of theory and measurement here is remarkable ; the only perceptible difference being in the length from the W. side of the
doorway to the E. wall. And the value of the cubit required by the dimensions,
20-64, >s extremely close to the cubit as best shown in the King's Chamber,
2O'632±0O4. If any objection be made to dividing the lengths into two parts,
it should be noted that it is certainly so divided in the chamber, by the fact
of the length of one part, 41275, being exactly 20 cubits; the wall W. of the
door being a double square, 10x20 cubits, equal to the floor of the King's
Chamber,
The design of the squares of the dimensions, direct and diagonal, being in
round numbers of square cubits, appears then to have been employed in this
chamber, as in those of the Great Pyramid.
The rudely-worked lower chamber seems to have been simply designed in
cubits. The length 41 r6 being evidently 20 cubits of 20'S8 ; and the breadth,
I23'4, three times the passage breadth, or 6 cubits of 20"57. The recess opposite
the entrance to this chamber is 1220 to I23'8 long, apparently equal to the
chamber breadth.
161. For the coffer of the Second Pyramid there does not appear to be any
uniform theory, though it is so carefully wrought. The outer length and width
of it might seem as if rougly intended for 5 and 2 cubits, of 20*73 ''"d 20'98
respectively. But it is hard to suppose that such very different values of the
cubit would be used in a work so finely equilateral and regular. On applying
each of the theories of the Great Pyramid coffer to this, only two of them appear
to have been carried out here.
Internal length of coffer 8473±'02 | 8475±oi = roo of Second Pyramid base.
Thus the Second Pyramid being smaller than the First, and yet its coffer
being longer, the relation to ^ooth of the Pyramid base is produced in the inside,
and not on the outside, length.
The only simple relation between the lineal dimensions of the coffer is
Thickness of sides, 764±'Oi | 762 =i of outer height.
But on applying the theory of the squares of the dimensions, some of the
dimensions seem accounted for thus, taking j^- of the Pyramid base, =8"47S,
as a unit : —
Outer length ... 103*68 (max. 10373)
Inner length, ... 8473
Inner width ... 2669 (max. 2679)
Outer height + lid, 46-34
10379 squared = 1 50 square units.
84-75 » = 100 „
2680 „ = 10 „ „
4642 „ = 30 „ „
This theory agrees fairly with these dimensions ; and, comparing the similar
theory of the squares of the Great Pyramid coffer dimensions being multiples of
square fifths of a cubit, the theory seems not improbable, though it does not
apply to all the dimensions.
»04 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. [Chap. xxi.
There do not appear to be any volumetric relations intended in this coffer,
for though the outer volume over all is 2\ x the contents, true to tt» (or twice as
accurate as the relations claimed by the theory of the Great Pyramid coffer),
yet as this difference is 7 x the probable error, it renders such a design unlikely.
Two million times the contents is equal to the volume of the Pyramid, true to
lir ; but here again the difference is against such a relation being intentional.
It is only then by the execution of this coffer being superior to that of the
Great Pyramid coffer, that we are saved from being encumbered with accidental
coincidences, which have found such a wide shelter in the irregular work of the
coffin of Khufu.
162. The Third Pyramid has been commonly reputed to be just half the
size of the Second, but accurate measures disprove this —
Its actual base is ... ... 4iS3'6±i'8
Half of the Second Pyramid base is 4237-4^ '8
200 cubits is ... ... ... 41262
It seems most probable that it was designed to be 200 cubits long ; for the
length of the cubit required, 20768, is far within the variations of the cubit of
the Granite Chamber, and other parts inside. The first design of the Pyramid,
before its expansion, appears to have been a base of icxD cubits, like some of
the small Pyramids.
The angle of 51" o', or more likely 51° 10', may be designed by a rise of S
on a base of 4, which would produce 51° 20' ; but the whole of this Pyramid,
inside and outside, is so far less accurate than the two larger, that no refinement
of work or of design need be looked for.
The first chamber appears to be 6 x 'j\ cubits ; the 6 being divided by the
pass^e into 3 spaces of 2 cubits each. The length is I53'8, or 7 J x 2051 ;
and the breadth 1248, or 6 x 20"8o, varying in its divisions between 20'4 and
21" I for the cubit. The most accurate-looking piece of work here is the
granite lintel of the doorway, which is wrought to 41*23 to 4i'35 wide, yielding
a cubit of 206 1 to 20*67, which agrees with the true value.
The second chamber is divided in its length into spaces of 416*1, 41*5, and
102*2, in which we cannot fail to recognise 20, 2, and 5 cubits of 2a82, 2075,
and 20*44 respectively ; and the width 152*8 being similar to 153*8 in the previous chamber, seems to be intended for ^\ cubits of 20*3.
The Granite Chamber is from 103*2 to 1040 wide, or 5 cubits of 2064 to
20*80 ; and 2588 to 260*7 long, or 12J cubits of 20*70 to 2086, the length being
thus 2\ times the breadth.
The loculus chamber is so extremely rude that nothing certain can be
concluded from it ; but it seems to have been intended to be 3^ X 10 cubits,
and the loculi each S cubits in length.
Thus it appears that in the Third Pyramid the design was merely in even
p.
205
Sect. 163.] COMPARISON OF PREVIOUS SURVEYS. 205
numbers of cubits ; and that it had none of that refinement of the design in
areas, which prevailed in the Great Pyramid, and partly also in the Second.
The evident irregularity and want of attention even to mere equality, shows a
similar decadence in its character ; so that from every point of view its
inferiority is manifest
163. It may be asked, Why is more value to be attached to the present
measures of the Pyramid bases, than those of any of the various other observers ?
Why should not a simple mean be. taken, and the present and past measures be
all lumped together ?
This is a perfectly sound question ; and unless a difference of trustworthiness can be shown to exist between the different results, a simple mean is
the only true conclusion. But if the measurements vary in accuracy, they must
be weighted accordingly ; and it must be remembered that the weight, or value
assigned, increases as the square of the accuracy ; so that an observer probably
I inch in error, has 9 times the weight of one who is probably 3 inches in error.
But by what are we to assign weights, or to estimate the accuracy of the
observers ? With observations that have no checks by which they can be tested, it
is useless to depend on their professed or stated accuracy ; for, as any one knows
who has ever used check measurements, the unexpected sources of error are often
far larger than those known and recognised. Therefore all observers who have
not made distinct and separate checks (by repeated measures of angles or of
lengjths) can only have some value given them, where, from their agreements
with other checked measurements, they appear to have some likelihood of
accuracy.
Into this category of observers who worked without checks, or at least who
have made no mention of them, fall four of the six measurements yet made of the
Great Pyramid ; those of the French expedition, of Perring, of Inglis, and of the
Royal Engineers. The only two surveys made with check observations (and
those are abundant in both) are (i) that of Mr. Gill and Prof. Watson, in 1874;
and (2) that here published, which was made in 1881.
When I reduced Mr. Gill's observations, it was on the understanding that he
reserved the publication of them to himself; and hence I am not at liberty to
give their details, but will only state how nearly they are in accordance with
my own.
Unfortunately, so many of the metal station marks fixed in 1874 had been
torn up, and the stones in which they were inserted, shifted or broken, that I
had not many points of comparison. The screw-caps of other marks were set
tight ; and though I made inquiry at Cairo, I could not get the key which fitted
them ; even if I had had it, it seemed doubtful if they could be unscrewed, because
the Arabs had battered and punched the caps so much. Others of the stations
had been but uncertainly fixed by Mr. Gill, owing to their positions, and his lack
ao6 THEORIES COMPARED WITH FACTS. [Chap. xxi.
of time for completing tlie circuit of triangulation. Finally, but three stations
are really common to both triangulations, and fairly fixed. The result of comparing these is a mean variation between the two surveys of 2" of angle, or ,..'o„ »
equal to -^ inch. This is a variation such as professedly may exist in either of
the surveys ; and there is no reason therefore for doubting the professed accuracy of the survey of 1881, which results from the combination of dozens of
check observations. Beside the agreement in angles, there is the other question
of an absolute value for a base ; in this there is far more difference, the 1874
measures of length yielding a result tAw longer than those of 1881.
Turning now to the other observations, which are without checks, and
judging of their value by their difference from the two concordant and checked
triangulations, the French expedition result is beyond all probability, being 33
inches too long ; Perring's result is rather worse, being 38 inches too long ;
Inglis's varies in its error on different sides from 10 to 29 inches too short ; but
the Royal Engineer's results are only from 20 shorter to 2" i longer than the triangulation of 1 88 1. There is therefore no need to consider the first three results,
which vary from 10 to 38 inches, on one side or other of the 1881 survey; seeing
that we have the three intrinsically best surveys (the R.E., the 1874, and the
1 881) all agreeing within an inch or two.
As the R.E. survey* agrees so closely with the later ones in its proportions,
it becomes of value in determining the question of the absolute length of the
lines, in order to decide between the 1874 and 1881 surveys, which differ xhi
in the base. The R.E. and 1881 measurements in detail are thus : —
Sockets. RE. 188 1. Diflcrence.
N. side
9127-5
9129-8
-2-3
E. „
9129s
9130-8
-»-3
0. ,,
91225 1
9123-9
-14
w. „
9121-0
91 19-2
-frS
Here the mean difference in the scale of RE. from 1881 is only —-8, ± -6
for the absolute length ; whereas the 1874 base differs + 2-0 on the same length.
The RE. therefore confirms the 1881 result.
The relative advantages of the two bases of 1874 and 188 1 are as follows.
• I have heard, on the best authority, that the method for this survey was by transferring
the socket points outwards by theodolite, and measuring along the quasi-level ground between
the transferred points ; thus the absolute scale value is given by four independent measurements.
t This is stated as 9,140 j but as the other sides agree so closely with the 1874 and i88t
measures, this would seem to have been measured from a different point Now the outer W. edge
of the socket-block at the S.W. is 17-5 beyond the drawn line (which really defines the socket),
and it is therefore about 9,140 from the S.E. comer ; hence this was probably taken as the
comer, and 17-5 must therefore be deducted from the R.E. measure of this side in comparing it
with the other surveys.
Sec/. 163.] COAfPARISON OF PREVIOUS SURVEYS. toj
The 1874 base was read from the national Egyptian standard of 4 metres, with
great care, by microscope micrometers ; two readings were taken of each bar
length, and the temperature bar was also read. The resulting base of 3,300
inches had a probable error of about "Oi inch, which was far more accurate than
the observations of the ends of it by the theodolite. The observations were
unhappily not reduced till five years after ; and then by an entire stranger to the
apparatus. The 1881 base was read from a steel tape which had been accurately
compared both with the English public standard, and with a private standard
connected with the primary yard (see section 9). The readings of it were made to
•jT^ inch on 100 foot lengths ; and thermometers were continually read, both on
ground and in air; cloudy sky, and nearly equal temperature of ground and air
being obtained. Not only were three or four readings of each length taken in
each set, but three entirely separate sets of measurements were made on separate
days ; and the resulting mean value of 7,900 inches, has a probable error of only
'03. The transferrance apparatus was very simple, and free from a chance of
shifts or errors. The observations were all reduced by one of the observers, on
the days when they were each made. Though therefore the instrument, and probably the observations, were superior in 1874, yet the three independent series in
1881 — the immediate reduction of the observations — and the agreement of the R.E.
survey — combine to render it more likely that an error of "7 inch exists by
shift, by transferrance, or by misinterpreting the note-books, in the 1874 observations, than that an error of 17 exists in the 1881 observations.
There does not seem then to be any reason for not accepting the 1881
observations as they stand, as being the most accurate survey yet obtained ;
with the proviso that in no case is it the least likely that the true scale differs
from it more than zhi, or that the proportional distances are rw> in error.
3o8 SKETCH OF HISTORY AND DESIGN OF GREAT PYRAMID. {Chaprexii.
CHAPTER XXII.
A SKETCH OF THE HISTORY AND DESIGN OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
164. At the close of the period of the third 'dynasty, the hill of Gizeh was
a bare stretch of desert ground, overlooking the Nile valley. In ages long
before this dawn of living history,* that valley had been deeply scored out in the
great tract of limestone rocks through which it passes ; scored by the deep and
rushing streamf which filled the whole width of it from cliff to cliff. This stream
was fed along its course by cataracts, dashing down through gorges on either
side of it ; and thus forming a series of cascades, which continually ate further
back into the cliffs of the great river.J The present stream, meandering slowly
in a channel washed out amid its mud flats, and covering its ancient limits with
a few inches or feet of water but once a year, would seem a mere ditch if compared with its former grandeur.
In the days when the fourth dynasty arose, these changes were long past ;
and the valley would probably seem as familiar now to Prince Merhet, Semnefer
the architect, and the rest of the court of Khufu, as it did in the days of their
power. Above the then growing city of Memphis rose the low hills and cliffs
of the desert on the Libyan side ; and one of the higher parts of the edge of the
desert, a bare wind-blown rise of hill, attracted the attention of. Khufu for the
site of his great monument It is certainly the finest site for miles on either
side of it ; and probably the happiness of the blessed West in contrast to the
filthy East, and the nearness to the capital, Memphis, induced him to build here,
even though the materials had to be brought from the higher and more commanding cliffs of the eastern bank.
It may seem strange that the site chosen was not rather further from the
edge of the cliff, and thus on a higher part of the rock. But the principle in the
early days seems to have been to place the tomb as near to the home as possible ;
the tomb was looked on with pride and satisfaction ; it was the place where a
man would be periodically remembered and honoured by his descendants ; it
• See Climatic Changes, section iii. + See the banks of scoured lUiris at Beni Hassan.
t See the cliffs at Masara, Tehneh, Girgeh, Thebes, &c. ; and particularly the gorge south of
Beni Hassan, which ends in high waterfalls, with deep basins scooped out at the feet of them.
Sect. 166.] ORGANIZATION OF THE LABOUR. 109
was — as Aseskaf called his Pyramid— the " cool place," or " place of refreshing,"
where the body would rest in peace until revivified ; a character of the deep
rock-hewn chambers most'pleasing in such a climate. Hence we find the tombs
clustered as thickly as possible, where they actually look on the valley at Gizeh ;
and scattered less closely where but little of the sacred stream could be seen ;
and similarly Khufu placed his Pyramid on a slight rise of rock, as close to the
^dge of the cliff as possible.
To understand the purpose of the erection of the Pyramids, it should be
observed that each has a temple on the eastern side of it Of the temples of
the Second and Third Pyramids the ruins still remain ; and of the temple of the
Great Pyramid, the basalt pavement and numerous blocks of granite show its
site. That Khufu's temple is more destroyed than the others is easily accounted
for by the causeway of it being larger and more accessible from the plain than
are the causeways of the temples of Khafra and Menkaura ; hence it would
naturally be the first attacked by the spoilers. When in all the tombs of the
Pyramid age, we see that the kings are called the Great Gods (" nuter aa "), and
had more priests than any 'of the original deities, it is easy to understand the
relationship of a sumptuous temple to each of the royal Pyramids. The worship
of the deified king was carried on in the temple, looking toward the Pyramid
which stood on the west of it (the " blessed West," the land of souls) ; just as
private individuals worshipped their ancestors in the family tombs, looking
toward the " false doors," which are placed on the west side of the tomb, and
which represent the entrances to the hidden sepulchres.
165. It has always been assumed that only the finer stone, used for the
casing and passages, was brought from the eastern cliffs, and that the bulk of
the masonry was quarried in the neighbourhood. But no quarryings exist on
the western side in the least adequate to yield the bulk of either of the greater
Pyramids* ; and the limestone of the western hills is different in its character to
that of the Pyramid masonry, which resembles the qualities usually quarried on
the eastern shore. It seems, therefore, "that the whole of the stones were
quarried in the cliffs of Turra and Masara, and brought across to the selected
site.
166. The great amount of labour involved in quarrying and transporting
such a mass of masonry as even the casing, has always been a cause of astonishment. But an expression in the traditions reported by Heiodotus,t and a
consideration of the internal economy of the country in the present day, seem
to explain it In describing the transport of the stones, Herodotus expressly
* I have repeatedly examined the edge of the desert from Aba Roash to Dahshur, and
walked over all the district behind the Pyramids for several miles in each direction ; some very
slight quarrying just behind the barracks at the Second Pyramid is ail that I have seen, beyond
mere tomb excavations, f See Section 1 20.
2 E
I
p.
210
210 SKETCH OF HISTORY AND DESIGN OF GREA T PYRAMID. [Chap. xxiL
states that icxD.ooo men worked at one time, " each party during three months ;"
now the inundation lasts rather more than three months in the present day, and
during that time the inhabitants are almost idle, the land is covered with water,
the cattle are fed on dry fodder, and wander on the barren desert ; but few
hands are needed to regulate the flow of water into the dammed-up basins of
the country, and the greater part of the population turn willingly to any
employment they can get, or dream away their time in some cool shade. Here,
then, is the explanation of the vast amount of labour extracted from a country
of limited area. It was during the three months of the inundation that the idle
hands were set to all the mere routine of unskilled labour ; and while the Nile
was at its full height, rafts were busily employed in floating over the masses of
hewn stone, from the causeways at the quarries, across the five miles width of
waters, to the Pyramid causeway, about seven miles further down the stream.
It is noticeable that the period of three months is only mentioned in connection
with the removal of the stones, and not with the actual quarrying or building ;
on these labours probably a large staff of skilled masons were always employed,
though they were helped on by an abundance of unskilled labour, for the heavy
work of lifting and transport, during the three months when the general population was out of work.
The actual course of work, then, during the building of the Pyramid, would
have been somewhat as follows : — At the end of July, when the Nile had fairly
risen, the levy of 100,000 men would assemble to the work. Not more than
eight men could well work together on an average block of stone of 40 cubic
feet or 2\ tons ; and the levies would probably be divided into working parties
of about that number. If, then, each of these parties brought over 10 average blocks
of stone in their three months' labour — taking a fortnight to bring them down
the causeways at the quarries, a day or two of good wind to take them across
the stream, six weeks to carry them up the Pyramid causeway, and four weeks
to raise them to the required place on the Pyramid — they would easily accomplish their task in the three months of high Nile. They would thus be at liberty
to return to their own occupations in the beginning of November when the land
was again accessible.
Of course the actual distribution of labour would be more specialized ; but
this outline will show that such a scale of work would suffice for the completebuilding of the Great Pyramid in twenty years as stated by Herodotus.* We
thus see that the whole of the material, and not merely the casing, could readily
be obtained from the eastern shore; and that the levies need not have been
• The Great Pyramid contained about 2,300,000 stones, averaging 50 X 50 X 28 inches,
or 3i tons each. If 8 men brought 10 stones, 100,000 would bring 125,000 stones each season
or the total number in less than 20 years.
Sec/. i6y.] PREPARATION OF THE SITE. 2H
employed during more than the three months when all ordinary labour was
suspended.
Beside these hosts of unskilled hands, there must have been a smaller body
of masons permanently employed in quarrying the stone, and in trimming it at
the Pyramid. And it is likely that a year's supply of stone would be kept on
hand at the Pyramid, on which the masons would work ; and so the three
months' supply of labourers would put up the stones which had been trimmed
and arranged during the nine months' previously, while other labourers were
engaged bringing over a supply for the masons' work of the ensuing nine
months.
This system of employing all the unskilled labour of the country on public
work, when the lands were inundated, private labour was impossible, and the
Nile was in the fittest state for transport, is almost certain to have been followed
in all the great works of the Egyptians ; and the peculiarity of the country may
go far toward explaining their capacity for executing vast public works.
What the number of skilled masons was we may well guess from the
accommodation provided for them in the barracks behind the Second Pyramid
(see section 72). These barracks were used by the workmen of Khafra ; but
those of Khufu must have been equally numerous, and have occupied a similar
space, if not, indeed, these identical dwellings. These barracks would hold
3,600 or 4,coo m^n easily ; and as about 1 20,000 average blocks were required to
be prepared every year, this would be only one block of stone prepared in a
month by a party of four men, which would probably be the number of masons
working together. Hence this accommodation is really more than enough ; and
most likely a good deal of lifting and building work would be going on throughout the year, beside the great supply of labour during the inundation.
Thus we see that the traditional accounts that we have of the means
employed in building the Great Pyramid, require conditions of labour-supply
which are quite practicable in such a land, which would not be ruinous to the
prosperity of the country, or oppressive to the people, and which would amply
and easily suffice for the execution of the whole work.
167. The site being chosen, it was carefully levelled, and the lengths of the
sides were set out with great exactitude (see section 21). How the angles were
made square within 12" average error is difficult to see ; the rock rising up
irregularly in steps inside the masonry, to some 25 feet high, would render
accurate diagonal measurements very.difficult ; unless, indeed, narrow trenches
or passages were cut from corner to corner to measure through.
The setting out of the orientation of the sides (see section 93) would not be
so difficult. If a pile of masonry some 50 feet high was built up with a vertical
side from North to South, a plumb-line could be hung from its top, and observations could be made, to find the places on the ground from which the pole-star
p.
212
212 SKETCH OF HISTORY AND DESIGN OF GREAT PYRAMID. [Chap.xxH.
was seen to transit behind the line at the elongations, tweve hours apart. The
mean of these positions would be due South of the plumb-line, and about
100 feet distant from it ; on this scale 15" of angle would be about ^ inch, and
therefore quite perceptible.
168. From several indications it seems that the masons planned the casing,
and some at least of the core masonry also, course by course on the ground.
For on all the casing, and on the core on which the casing fitted, there are lines
drawn on the horizontal surfaces, showing where each stone was to be placed on
those below it If the stones were merely trimmed to fit each other as the
building went on, there would be no need to have so carefully marked the place
of each block in this particular way ; and it shows that they were probably
planned and fitted together on the ground below. Another indication of very
careful and elaborate planning on the ground is in the topmost space over the
King's Chamber ; there the roofing-beams were numbered, and marked for the
north or south sides ; and though it might be thought that it could be of no
consequence in what order they were placed, yet all their details were evidently
schemed before they were delivered to the builders' hands. This care in
arranging all the work agrees strikingly with the great employment of unskilled
labourers during t\vo or three months at a time, as they would then raise all the
stones which the masons had worked and stored ready for use since the preceding
season.
169. The means employed for raising such masses of stone is not shown to
us in any representations. For the ordinary blocks, of a few tons each, it would
be very feasible to employ the method of resting them on two pjles of wooden
slabs, and rocking them up alternately to one side and the other by a spar under
the block, thus heightening the piles alternately and so raising the stone. This
would also agree with the mysterious description of a machine made of short
pieces of wood — a description which is difficult otherwise to realise. This
method would also be applicable to the largest masses that we know of in the
Pyramid, the $6 roofing-beams of the King's Chamber and the spaces above it
These average 320 X 52 x 73 inches, or 700 cubic feet each ; weighing, therefore,
54 tons, some larger, some less. No simple system but that of rocking would
enable men to raise such a mass with only the help of crowbars ; if such a block
was put on two supports, say 30 inches apart, only 5 tons would have to be lifted
at once, and this would be easily done by 10 men with crowbars. Six such
parties might raise the whole of these blocks in one year.
170. That sheet iron was employed we know, from the fragment found by
Howard Vyse in the masonry of the south air channel ; and though some doubt
has been thrown on the piece, merely from its rarity, yet the vouchers for it are
very precise ; and it has a cast of a nummulite on the rust of it proving it to have
been buried for ages beside a block of nummulitic limestone, and therefore to be
Sect. 171.] DETERIORATION OF THE WORK. J 13
certainly ancient. No reasonable doubt can therefore exist about its being really
a genuine piece used by the Pyramid masons ; and probably such pieces were
required to prevent crowbars biting into the stones, and to ease the action of the
_ rollers.
The tools employed have been described in the chapter on the mechanical
methods ; they comprised bronze saws over eight feet long, set with jewels,
tubular drills similarly set with jewels, and circular saws. These were employed
on the granite work, and perhaps saws of a less costly nature on the limestone
The casing blocks were dressed by very fine picking or adzing. The system of
using true planes smeared with ochre, for testing the work, shows with what
nicety, they examined their work, and what care was taken to ensure its accuracy
-"and^trutlv
The masons' waste chips were thrown away over the cliffs, on both the
north and south of the Pyramid ; and they form banks extending about ICXJ
yards outwards from the original edge of the rock, and reaching from top to
bottom of the cliffs ; taking them altogether they are probably equal in bulk to
more than half of the Pyramid. This rubbish is all stratified at the angle of
rest, about 40° ; and the different qualities of it thrown away on different days
may be clearly seen.' In one part there will be a layer of large chips, up to the
size of a hand ; a foot above that a lot of fine dust and sweepings ; above that
perhaps more large chips, and here and there a layer of desert flints and sand,
showing when a piece of desert ground had been cleared to get more space for
^working. Among all this rubbish are pieces of the workmen's water-jars and
food vessels, of which I collected a hundred or more fragments, mixed with
chips of wood, bits of charcoal, and even a piece of string, which had probably
been used in patching up a rubbish basket. All these were obtained from pits
which hadijeen lately made in the oldest part of the heap, close to the edge of
the^dK^ and beyond which a thickness of some dozens of yards of waste had
been shot out ; there is thus a certainty that these remains show us the true
masons' waste and rubbish, as thrown away by the builders, and stretching otlt
from the cliff in lines of " tip," like a modern half-finished embankment
By means of this bank of waste, the space around the Pyramid was largely
increased in appearance, though it was not solid ground for building ; and the
tops of the rubbish heaps were smoothly levelled down in the nearer parts, so that
their junction to the rock can hardly be traced.
171. During the course of building there was evidently a great change in
the style of the work ; a change, however, belonging more to the builders than
to the masons. The pavement, lower casing, and entrance passage are
exquisitely wrought ; in fact, the means employed for placing and cementing the
blocks of soft limestone, weighing a dozen to twenty tons each, with such hairlike joints (section 26) are almost inconceivable at present ; and the accuracy of
314 SKETCH OF HISTORY AND DESIGN OF GREAT PYRAMID. \Chap. xxiL
the levelling is marvellous (section 26). But in the higher parts, the gallery, for
instance, is far from such excellence ; and the upper part of it is very skew and
irregular, the ramp surface being tilted more than an inch in a width of
20 inches. In the Antechamber the granite has never been dressed down flat,
and defective stones are employed ; where the limestone was very bad, it was
roughly plastered over, and many parts are strangely rough, 'in the King's
Chamber the masoniy is very fine, both in its accuracy of fitting and in the
squarene.ss and equal height of all the blocks ; but the builders were altogether
wrong in their levels, and tilted the whole chamber over to one corner, so that
their courses are 2\ inches higher at the N.E. than at the S.W., a difference
much greater than that in the whole base of the Pyramid. An error like this in
putting together such a magnificent piece of work, is astonishing, for the walls
are composed of nearly ^„ of a mile length of granite blocks about 4 feet high,
and probably as thick, all of which are gauged to the same height with an
average variation of only /„ of an inch. As it would be difficult to suppose any
architect allowing such errors of building, after so closely restricting the
variations of masons' work, it strongly suggests that the granite had been
prepared for the chamber long before it was built, and that the supervision was
less strict as the work went on, owing to more hurry and less care, or owing to
the death of the man who had really directed the superfine accuracy of the
earlier work.
172. Beside these signs of carelessness, there are several points in which
work that has been intended has never been carried out. The stone was left in
the rough where it was liable to damage, and was to be finished off after it was
safe from injury. Over the N. doorway of the gallery the stone is left roughly
in excess ; and in the Queen's Chamber the vertical edge of the doorway is left
with an excess of an inch or more, and as a guide a short bit was drafted to the
true surface at the top and bottom of each stone (section 42). From these
points we see that not only was the work hurried about the middle, but that
some parts never received the finishing strokes.
The plan of the passages was certainly altered once, and perhaps oftener,
during the course of building. The shaft, or " well," leading from the N. end
of the gallery down to the subterranean parts, was either not contemplated
at first, or else was forgotten in the course of building ; the proof of this is
that it has been cut through the masonry after the courses were completed.
On examining the shaft, it is found to be irregularly tortuous through the
masonry, and without any arrangement of the blocks to suit it ; while in more
than one place a corner of a block may be seen left in the irregular curved
side of the shaft, all the rest of the block having disappeared in cutting the
shaft. This is a conclusive point, since it would never have been so built
at first. A similar feature is at the mouth of the passage, in the gallery. Here
Sect. 173.] CLOSING OF THE PYRAMID. JIS
the sides of the mouth are very well cut, quite as good work as the dressing
of the gallery walls ; but on the S. side there is a vertical joint in the gallery
side, only 5-3 inches from the mouth. Now, great care is always taken in
the Pyramid to put large stones at a corner, and it is quite inconceivable
that a Pyramid builder would put a mere slip 5*3 thick beside the opening
to a passage. It evidently shows that the passage mouth was cut out after
the building was finished in that part. It is clear, then, that the whole of
this shaft is an additional feature to the first plan.
Another evidence of altered plans is in the Queen's Chamber floor. This
is not merely left in the rough core, but it has actually had another course
of the rough core masonry built, or at least fitted, on to it ; and this upper
course has been removed, or omitted, in order to build the chamber there. Of
the Subterranean Chamber, all that can be said is that it is wholly unfinished,
and hardly more than sketched out ; so that a change of plan with regard
to that also seems proved, since it was the part first begun.
173. Having now pointed out various mechanical considerations on the
history of the building, we will consider the history of the closing of the
Pyramid.
There can be doubt that the entrance passage was left clear and accessible
(sections 125-6), the door closing it on the outside against mere chance curiosity,
but being readily swung on its pivots when regularly opened. The upper
passages, however, were well concealed, though they had probably been
surreptitiously entered before the Arabic forcing (section $8).
It has often been said that the Queen's Chamber was intended to contain
the blocks for plugging the ascending passage, until they were required to
be let down. But there is an absolute impossibility in this theory; the
blocks are 47*3 X4r6 in section, while the Queen's Chamber passage is but
46*2 X40'6, or too small in both dimensions to allow the blocks to pass. Hence
the blocks must have stood in the gallery until they were wanted, since they
could never be got upwards through the ascending passage, as that is but
38"2 at the lower end, and the existing plugs are 4f6 wide above that Neither
could the plugs be brought up the well shaft, as that is but 28- square ; nor out
of the King's Chamber, as the passage is but 436 high. Now, though it is
most likely that there never were many plug-blocks (see section 125), yet the
existing ones land us in a further conclusion. The broken end of the upper
block, and a chip of granite still remaining cemented to the floor of the
passage a little above that, show that it was probably 24 inches longer than
it is now, judging by marks on the passage. Thus the total length of plugblocks would be about 203 inches, or very probably 206 inches, or 10 cubits,
like so many lengths marked out in that passage. Now, the flat part of the
Queen's Chamber passage floor within the gallery, on which blocks might
ai6 SKETCH OF HISTORY AND DESIGN OF GREAT PYRAMID. {Chap. xxii.
be placed, is but 176 long; and the whole distance, from the N, wall of the
gallery to the vertical cut down, is but I99"4 : so in no way could 203 inches
of blocks stand on the horizontal floor, and certainly any passage through
the gallery door would be impossible, to say nothing of the difficulty of pushing
such blocks along a rough floor, so as to tip them down the passage. Thus
the plug-blocks cannot have stood in any place except on the sloping floor
of the gallery.
For them, then, to be slid down the passage, it was necessary that the opening to the Queen's Chamber should be completely covered with a continuous
floor. The traces of this floor may still be seen, in the holes for beams of
stone, across the passage ; and in fragments of stone and cement still sticking
on the floor of the Queen's Chamber passage at that point. It is certain,
then, that the Queen's Chamber was closed and concealed before the ascending
passage was closed.
But we are met then by an extraordinary idea, that all access to the
King's Chamber after its completion must have been by climbing over the
plug-blocks, as they lay in the gallery, or by walking up the ramps on
either side of them. Yet, as the blocks cannot physically have been lying
*n any other place before they were let down, we are shut up to this view.
The cofier cannot have been put into the Pyramid after the King's
Chamber was finished, as it is nearly an inch wider than the beginning of
the ascending passage.
The only conclusion, then, is that the coffer was placed in the King's
Qiamber before the roof was put on ; that, if Khufu was finally buried in it
(and not in some more secret place), then the inner coffin, and any procession
accompanying it, must have gone up the gallery, on the narrow-side ramps
or benches, past the plug-blocks four feet high standing betsveen them ; that
before or after this the Queen's Chamber was blocked up ; then the plug-blocks
were slid down the ascending passage ; and, finally, the workmen retired by
the well shaft down to the entrance passage, closing the way by a plug of
stone not cemented in place, and probably removable at will (see section 58).
Finally, the lower mouth of the well shaft was closed, probably by a
plugging-block not cemented in ; and then visitors of later times crawled
in under the outer flap-door in the casing, the stone that could be "lifted
out," and so went down to the empty and unfinished Subterranean Chamber
in the rock.
174. It may be an open question whether the Queen's Chamber* was not
the sepulchre of Khnumu-Khufu (section 113), the co-regent of Khufu. Edrisi, in
• These names. King's and Queen's, were given by the Arabs, in conformity with their
custom of making the tombs or niches for men flat-topped, and those for women with a sloping
gable roof.
Sect. 176.] INSCRIPTIONS ON THE PYRAMID. 317
his accurate and observant account of the Pyramid (1236 A.D.), mentions an
empty vessel in the Queen's Chamber ; and that this was not a confused notion
of the coffer now known, is proved by his saying that in the King's Chamber
" an empty vessel is seen here similar to the former." Whether any fragments
of a coffer remained there, among the great quantity of stone exca\-ated from
the floor and niche, it is almost hopeless to inquire, since that rubbish is now all
shot away into various holes and spaces. Caviglia, however, did not find a
coffer when clearing the chamber, but fragments might have been easily overlooked.
175. When, then, was the Pyramid first violated ? Probably by the same
hands that so ruthlessly destroyed the statues and temples of Khafra, and the
Pyramids of Abu Roash, Abusir, and Sakkara. That is to say, probably during
the civil wars of the seventh to the tenth dynasties (see section 1 19). At that time
the secret opening of the Pyramid, by which the workmen retired, would still be
known ; and while that was the case, and before any forced openings had been
made (section 58), the coffer was lifted up to see if any hidden pass^p existed
beneath it ; then probably was its lid broken off, and the body of the great
builder treated to the spite of his enemies. Then also may the Queen's Chamber
— the serdab' of the Pyramid — have been forced open, and the diorite statue
torn from its grand niche, broken up, pedestal and all, and carried out to be
smashed to chips, and scattered on the hill opposite the Pyramid door, so that
no one should ever restore it This is more of a guess than an inference ; and
yet a guess, so far harmonious with what we know of other monuments, that it
perhaps deserves to be used as a working hypothesis.
In classical times we know from Strabo that the subterranean parts were
readily accessible ; though the supposed proof adduced by Caviglia, from I A"
M E R (M E joined) which he found smoked on the roof of the Subterranean
Chamber, has nothing to do with the question ; if he had noted the graffiti
around the entrance of the Pyramid, he would have found I A'= MERCATOR
1 563 (M E joined), which completely explsiins the smoked letters.
176. With regard to the many records of inscriptions on the outside of the
Pyramid, a few words are necessary. From the time of Herodotus down to the
1 5th century, inscriptions are continually mentioned, and their great abundance
is described with astonishment by travellers. This has led to the supposition
that the builders had left records inscribed on the outside, although not a letter
is to be found on the inside. But against the possibility of this view, it must be
remembered that no early inscriptions are found on the casing remaining at the
Great Pyramid, nor on any of the innumerable fragments of those stones, nor on
the remaining casing of the -Second Pyramid, nor on that of the Third Pyramid,
nor on the casing of the South Pyramid of Dahshur, nor on the casing of the
* Serdab is the Arabic name for the secret hollow in tombs in which (he statue vas pbced.
2 F
Ji8 SKETCH OF HISTORY AND DESIGN OF GREAT PYRAMID. [Chap. xxii.
Pyramid of Medum, nor on occasional blocks uncovered at the Sakkara Pyramids.
In fact, not a single example of hieroglyphs has ever been seen on any casing
nor on any fragments of casing. The truth then about these numberless inscriptions appears to be that they were all travellers' graffiti. Strabo says that
the characters were like old Greek, but were not readable ; this points to
Phoenician or Cypriote graffiti. The accounts of the inscriptions given by the
Arabs also show that they were mere graffiti ; Abu Masher Jafer (before 886
A.D.) mentions Mosannad (i.e., Himyaritic) letters ; Ibn Khordadbeh (loth cent.)
also mentions Musnad letters; Masudi(iith cent.) describes them as being in
various different languages ; Ibr Haukal (nth cent.) says they were in Greek ;
Abu Mothaffer {alias Sibt Al Jauzi, died 1250 A.D.) gives the fullest account,
mentioning seven sorts of writing: (i) Greek, (2) Arabic, (3) Syriac, (4)
Musnadic, (5) Himyaritic (or Hiritic or Hebrew in different MSS.), (6) Rumi,
(7) Persian, William of Baldensel (1336 A.D.) mentions Latin; and Cyriacus
(1440 A.D.) mentions Phoenician. Whether these travellers all understood
exactly what they were talking about may be doubted ; but at least none of
them describe hieroglyphs, such as they must have been familiar with on all the
tombs and other monuments ; and they agree in the great diversity of the
languages inscribed. The earlier travellers also do not describe such a great
number of inscriptions as do the Arabic writers ; suggesting that the greater
part recorded in later times were due to Roman and Coptic graffiti.
Now among the hundreds of pieces of casing stones that I have looked over,
very few traces of inscription were to be seen ; this was, however, to be expected,
considering that the pieces nearly all belonged to the upper casing stones, out
of the reach of mere travellers. Three examples of single letters were found,
two Greek and one unknown ; and on the W. side, in one of the excavations, a
piece was discovered bearing three graffiti, one large one attracting lesser scribblers, as in modem times. The earliest inscription was probably of Ptolemy X.,
showing portions of the letters IITO CwT ; the next was a
Romano-Greek of a certain M A P K I O C K ; and over that an Arab had
roughly hammered in maj This is the only example of continuous
inscriptions yet found, and it belonged to one of the lowest courses ; it is now
in the Bulak Museum. Thus, all the fragments and the descriptions point to
the existence of a large body of graffiti, but do not give any evidence of original
hieroglyphic inscriptions.
When one considers the large number of graffiti which are to be seen on
every ancient building of importance, it seems almost impossible but that the
Great Pyramid — one of the most renowned and visited of all — should not have
been similarly covered with ancient scribbles, like the host of modern names
which have been put upon it since the casing was removed.* The statues of
* Described and figured in " Archxological Journal," 1883.
p.
219
Sect. 177.] DESTRUCTION OF THE PYRAMID. 219
Ramessu II., at Abu Simbel, bear quantities of Greek graffiti, in fact, some of the
earliest Greek inscriptions known, besides Phcenician and Roman ; the top
of the temple of Khonsu at Karnak is crowded with the outlines of visitors' feet,
with their names and particulars appended, in hieroglyphic, demotic, and Greek ;
the inscriptions on the colossi of Amenhotep III. ("the Memnons") at Thebes,
and on the Sphinx at Gizeh are well known ; the long scribbles in demotic on
the temple walls at Thebes have lately been examined ; the corridors of Abydos
bear early Greek graffiti ; the passage of the S. Pyramid of Dahshur has two
hieroglyphic graffiti, besides Greek ; and there is scarcely any monument of
importance in Egypt but what shows the scribbling propensities of mankind ; be
they Egyptians, Phoenicians, Greeks, Romans, or the worst sinners of modern
times, Hellenes and Americans.
177. The history of the destruction of the Pyramids really begins with the
Arabs. They first, under Khalif Mamun, forced the great hole through the
masonry, from the outside to the part commonly called Mamun's Hole, at the
beginning of tlie ascending passage. Had it not been for tlieir shaking of the
masonry, which let fall the stone that concealed the plug-blocks, perhaps the
upper chambers would have remained yet unknown. Hearing the stone drop,
they turned aside their southward progress, and burrowing some t^venty feet
eastwards they broke into the entrance passage, and found the fallen stone ;
here they saw that it had covered the beginning of another passage, and so they
forced out of their hole a continuation southward and upward to get behind the
granite plug ; finding they only hit the side of the plug-blocks, they tracked
along them in the softer limestone, until they reached the upper end, and then
they rushed freely up the hitherto unused passage. Probably they found the
plug at the top of the well not replaced, after the earlier destroyers ; and so got
down the well and forced out its lower closing, which must have been in position
for the Greeks and Romans not to have been aware of the passage. Such, from
the statements of historians, and the details of the place, seems to have been the
history of the attack on the interior of the Great Pyramid.
After the time of Mamun the exterior was used as a quarry ; the casing
was apparently stripped off by Sultan Hasan for his mosque in 1356, since he is
said to have brought the stone hence, and William of Baldensel* in 1336 mentions both the large Pyramids as being " de maximis lapidibus et politis." It
was also Hasan, or a near successor of his, who stripped the Second Pyramid ;
as I found a coin of his deep down in the S.E. foundation. The top was not
much denuded in the 17th century; Lambert (Trois Relations de I'/Egypte) in
1630 mentions 12 stones as forming the top of the core, and says that the platform was 20 spans wide ; by his span measures of the coffer, this would be 230
inches; among these 12 stones was "une qui surpasseen largueuret longeur la
* Canisius, " Thesaurus Monumentum," iv. 343.
820 SKETCH OF HISTORY AND DESIGN OF GREAT PYRAMID. [Chap. xxii.
croyance deshommes." Greaves in 1638 found 9 stones, and reports two as missing. Thevenot in 1667 reports 12 stones ; but as he understood Arabic well he
probably accepted a statement of what had been there thirty years before.
Other stones of the top and edges of the core were thrown down at intervals,
until the beginning of the present century, as is evident from the weathering
marks, and the dates of the graffiti.
178. Having now sketched out its history, it is desirable not to close this account of the Great Pyramid, without summing up those theories of its design which
seem most likely, and which are consistent one with the other. In the following
sketch, then, no theory will be mentioned which is not well within the facts of the
case, and no dimensions will be required to do double duty for t^vo theories
which do not coincide. It is possible that some parts may have been made
intentionally varying in size, in order to include two different relations to other
parts ; but such is scarcely provable ; and in a general statement like the following, it is better to omit some things that may be true, than it is to include
a number of dubious theories which are not supported by a system of coincidences in different parts of the structure. And if some judge that this summary
includes too much, and others think that it states too little, it must be remembered that the whole of the materials for forming an opinion are impartially
provided in the previous chapters of this work.
For the whole form the v proportion (height is the radius of a circle =
circumference of Pyramid) has been very generally accepted of late years, and is
a relation strongly confirmed by the presence of the numbers 7 and 22 in the
number of cubits in height and base respecti\-ely ; 7 : 22 being one of the best
known approximations to Tr. With these numbers (or some slight fractional
correction on the 22) the designer adopted 7 of a length of 20 double cubits for
the height ; and 22 of this length for the half-circuit. The profile used for the
work being thus 14 rise on 1 1 base.
The form and size being thus fixed, the floor of the main chamber of the
building — the King's Chamber — was placed at the level where the vertical
section of the Pyramid was halved, where the area of the horizontal section was
half that of the base, where the diagonal from comer to comer was equal to the
length of the base, and where the width of the face was equal to half the diagonal
of the base.*
The Queen's Chamber was placed at half this height above the base; and
exactly in the middle of the Pyramid from N. to S.
• The employment of square measure, which appears to furnish the best solution of the
Pyramid design, is singularly parallel to the use of square measure mentioned in the " Sulvasutras ;" from those writings it appears that Hindu geometry in its origin sprung from the religious
ideas of the building of altars, differing in form but equal in area. (See Prot Thibaut in the
Second " International Congress of Orientalists."^
Sec/. ijS.] SUMMARY OF PROBABLE THEORIES. aji
Beside the level of the King's Chamber signalizing where the area was a
simple fraction of \ of the base area, thicker courses were perhaps intentionally
introduced where the area of the course was a multiple of ^ the base area : this
system accounts for nearly all the curious examples of a thick course being
suddenly brought in, with a series above it gradually diminishing until another
thick course occurs.
The angle of slope of the entrance passage is i rise on 2 base ; and the
other passages are near the same angle, probably modified in order to bring
the chambers to the required levels.
The length of the entrance passage, the ascending passage, the antechamber passages, and perhaps the Queen's Chamber passage, are all in round numbers
of cubits ; while the gallery length (horizontal) is equal to the vertical height of
its end above the base, which is determined by the King's Chamber being at the
level of half the Pyramid area.
The height and width of the passages, gallery, and ramps are all determined
by the form of the end of the King's Chamber, of which the passages are \, the
gallery f and the ramps ,^ the size in each direction.
The King's Chamber walls are determined by the same ir proportion which
rules the exterior of the Pyramid ; the circuit of the side of the chamber
being equal to a circle described by its width as a radius ; and further, the
length of the side of the chamber is equal to diameter of its circuit. Thus the
circuit of the side has its radius at right angles across the chamber, and its
diameter the length of the side along the chamber.
But the floor of the chamber is raised above the base of the walls ; a peculiar arrangement for which some reason must have existed. It gives in fact t\vo
heights ; the wall height we have just seen is required for the ir proportion ; and
the actual height from the floor agrees to another system, which is found txj run
throughout all the chambers. After the attention shown to square measure in
the various levels of the Pyramid, it is not surprising to find something of the
same kind in the chambers. Though the idea of making the squares of the
lineal dimensions of a chamber to be integral areas, may seem peculiar, yet the
beauty of thus making all the diagonals of a chamber to be on one uniform
system with its direct dimensions, would be perhaps a sufficient inducement to
lead the builders to its adoption. Practically it is the only consistent and
uniform theory which is applicable to all the chambers and coffer, and even to
the Second Pyramid chamber. By this theory, then, the squares of the dimensions of the King's Chamber, the Queen's Chamber, the Antechamber, and the
Subterranean Chamber, are all even numbers of square cubits, and nearly all
multiples of lO. From this it necessarily follows that the squares of all the
diagonals of the sides of these chambers, and their cubic diagonals, are likewise
multiples of lO square cubits ; and the King's and Queen's Chambers are so
SJa SKETCH OF HISTORY AND DESIGN OF GREAT PYRAMID. \Chap. xxiL
arranged that the cubic diagonals are in even hundreds of square cubits, or multiples of lo cubits squared.
For the coffer it it hard to say what theory is most likely ; its irregularities
of form and faults of cutting, are such that many theories are included in its
variations ; and certainly no theory of very great complexity or refinement, can
be expected. Taking most of its dimensions at their maximum, they agree
closely with the same theory as that which is applicable to the chambers ; for
when squared they are all even multiples of a square fifth of a cubit. That
the cubit was divided decimally in the fourth dynasty we know (see section 139);
and as this theory is also the only one applicable to all the chambersi
there is very strong ground for adopting it here. There is no other
theory applicable to every lineal dimension of the coffer ; but having found
the te proportion in the form of the Pyramid, and in the King's Chamber,
there is some ground for supposing that it was intended also in the coffer, on just
Jth the scale of the chamber ; the difference between the requirements of this
theory and that of the squares is only —5. Consistently also with the above
theories, the outer length at sm extreme maximum, may have been ^ of the
length of the Pyramid base ; and as the inner length of the Second Pyramid
coffer has the same relation to its Pyramid, this is rendered the more likely.
Finally, it is not impossible that some rough relation of the cubic bulk and
contents may have been aimed at, along with the foregoing designs ; and the
lineal dimensions required above, being nearly all maximum dimensions of the
actual coffer, renders it more likely that some other object was in view. In any
case the cubic relations were not very exactly attained, and it would have been
impossible to run them closer by merely sawing the granite, somewhat skew,
somewhat curved, and somewhat too deeply, without any adjustment afterwards
by polishing. The design of a coffer which should include more than one idea,
would not be unlikely in the Great Pyramid ; that structure being so remarkable
for the care and precision shown in the arrangement of its chambers, and particularly for the accuracy of the chamber in which the coffer is enshrined.
Such is the outline of what may be considered the tolerably safe theories of
the origination of the Great Pyramid ; others may by some further discovery
be shown to have been intended, but most of these will probably bear the
test of time, and certiunly bear the test of exact measurement
Sect. i8a] DISTRIBUTION OF THE OBSERVATIONS. ^^^
APPENDIX I.
ON THE ARRANGEMENT OF A TRIANGULATION.
179. In arranging the course of a triangulation, for a survey in which the
distances are short, many questions require to be considered, which never arise
in ordinary cases of delicate observing. The Uneal errors of centreing the
instrument and signals become in man}% perhaps most, instances as great as the
angular errors of the observations. And further, as some of the stations are
merely needed in the course of the triangulating, while others are required to
permanently fix certain ancient points, the different character of the classes of
the stations have, therefore, to be taken into consideration.
Of course, in every survey, the number of observations is limited ; and the
question therefore arises how to distribute the observations so as to obtain the
most accurate results. As a general rule, if there be a number of equally
determined stations around a point which has to be fixed, it will be best to
distribute the observations to and from it, equally among all the stations, as thus
their individual errors of position will be neutralized and not transmitted. But,
if among the stations around the point, some are much better fixed than others,
it will be best to take more observations to and from those superior stations.
Hence it is concluded that every station must have a certain weight of
observations (or accuracy) assigned to it, to be aimed at ; and a suitable number
of observations to — and from — it ; gi\Tng it, of course, a greater number of
observations if the conditions are bad, as when there is a want of good crossbearing in the directions of the observations.
180. Having, then, a given weight of accuracy, and a corresponding number
of observations, assigned to each station, how should this be distributed ? In
considering this it must be remembered that shifting the instrument and signals
takes time equivalent to a certain number of observations ; hence it is desirable
to limit the number of instrumental stations, or /ro/«-stations ; and make some
to be only /(7-stations, on which signals are observed. Again the time of putting
up observing signals (or testing the adjustment of them) over the stations, is
equcd to making several observations ; hence only those stations really required
should be observed to.
p.
224
224 ON THE ARRANGEMENT OF A TRIANGULATION. [Appendix i.
The distinction should also be kept in mind, between (i) stations requiredfor-themselves, to fix points needed in the plan ; and (2) stations required-forothers, to complete triangles, cany forward triangulation, &c., but which are of
no further value when the results are obtained. If stations are only requiredfor-themselves, observations to them are sufficient, and save time in moving the
instrument : beside this, observing from a station requires extra observations ;
a point may be fixed by two observations to it, as there are two unknown
quantities; whereas it needs three observations from it, as there are three
unknowns — the two co-ordinates and the zero of azimuth of the circle. But, on
the other hand, if a station is required-for-others, observations frotn the station
are best, as thus the rotational stiffness of the azimuth of the instrument is
increased.
Another consideration is that if the distances are short, and lineal errors of
centreings are greater than angular errors of instrument, all stations should be
observed from as much as possible, so as to increase the number of centreings,
and diminish their uncertainties ; on the other hand, in long distances, observations to are the best, as more can be obtained from a smaller number of
stations in a fixed time.
In actually arranging, then, the distribution of observations, after assigning
the number proportionate to the accuracy required at each station, the considerations are : — (i) Whether the station is required-for-itself, or required-forothers ; (2) whether the station maybe only a to station, and not a. from station ;
i.e., whether the observations to the signal upon it will suffice, without placing the
theodolite upon it ; and (3) the distance of the stations apart, and the consequent
relation of angular to lineal errors between them. Keeping these considerations
in view, the number of observations to be taken from each point to each other
point is to be allotted, and entered in a table of cross-columns ; and then the
field book is to be prepared, reading in accordance with this system of distribution.
181. Beside the distribution of the observations, the order of them is most
important Reference to one station at intervals, in order to detect any shifting
of the instrument, is but a poof check, as the epoch of any rotational shift
cannot be precisely defined. Observations should be broken into small groups,
so that there shall be immediate repetitions of allied stations; since any
undetected shift will be far more important between the azimuths of two stations
close together, than if between those far apart. Supposing, then, the stations
A, B, C, near together, K, L, M, another set, and R, S, T, another set, the
observations to these stations should be distributed thus :— A, B, C ; A, K, B, C ;
A,K.L,B,C; K,L,B,C; K,L,M,B: K,L,M,R; L.M,R,S; M,R,S,T;
r' S T. Now if a shift is suspected at any point, the values of the azimuths to
each' station are divided into two groups, one before and the other after that
epoch • and the mean value of each group is taken, with its probable error.
Sec/.iSi.] ORDER OF OBSERVATIONS. . ajj
Then if there be a constant difference between the first and second groups, in
each of the azimuths, which is well beyond the range of the probable errors, the
shift may be taken as proved ; or at least as having a certain and calculable
probability of its truth. As examples, the following were the shifts detected
and eliminated in the course of the 700 observations of the whole triangulation
(or a shift on an average at each 80 observations), with the probable errors of
each shift; r9"d=-4" ; 2-4"±-2"; 3-6"±-4" ; 3-8"±-S"; 4-2" ±- a" \ 4-6"±7";
6"o"± i"S" ; 9-2"±'2" ; ii-o"it ro". Thus the shifts are on an average over 10
times the extent of their probable errors, showing a probability of their reality,
which would run to 12 places of figjures. The first reduction applied was always
a search for shifts in the series of azimuths, by tabulating all the observations ;
and from one cause or other — heating of the instrument, vibration by the wind,
accidental touches in handling, &c. — these shifts thus occur to a perceptible
amount once on an average of 80 observations. If the observations are treated
in the usual way, without eliminating shifts, either they will be vitiated to some
extent, or else if the shift be large, they would be lost altogether by the rejection
of the whole of a set of observations as " inaccurate."
From the various considerations above mentioned, the distribution and
order of the observations were arranged, and then entered in blank form in the
field book ; thus in field work the order of the stations as entered had simply to
b6 followed, and the observations filled in as they were made. Such an arrangement may perhaps be set down as too complex for " practical " men ; but a
couple of days spent in planning out the work may easily double the value of a
month's surveying, and so save a great amount of time on the whole.
Of course, the physical features of the ground generally modify the arrangements to some extent ; as, for instance, if a station is much below the range of
sight, the observations then require to be nearly all taken from it, since one very
accurate centreing of the theodolite, by cross-transiting with an auxiliary
theodolite, would suffice, instead of occupying time by setting up a signal with
similar accuracy on several different days. In many other ways the irregularity
of the field alters the arrangement of the observations, though the distribution of
accuracy allotted to each remains unchanged.
2 c
aa6 THE REJECTION OF DISCORDANT OBSER VA TIONS. [ApfendU ii.
APPENDIX II.
THE REJECTION OF DISCORDANT OBSERVATIONS.
182. This subject has been so warmly argued, and is at the same time
looked on with so much disfavour by some workers, that ft may seem presumptuous to discuss it in brief here. But some common-sense considerations
seem to have been overlooked, while results were being deduced by more
elaborate methods. And, as Airy says, " The calculus (of probabilities) is, after
all, a mere tool, by which the decisions of the mind are worked out with accuracy,
but which must be directed by the mind."*
In the first place, errors are of two classes: (i) Continual, i.e., present in
every observation of a series ; and (2) Occasional, i.e., only present in a few
observations. Both these classes presumably, from theory and experience,
follow the law of the distribution of error, well known as the Probability
Curve.
But, further, to take the continual errors first : this curve of the continual
errors is in reality a curve of the sums of the errors due to various independent
causes ; for instance, the probable error of judgment in reading a circle might
be "S" ; of judgment in bisecting the object, another "S" ; of judgment in placing
the signal, =*3" ; of judgment in placing the theodolite, =*2" ; of flickering of
the air. '6" ; making a probable error on the complete observation equal to
v'('S'+'S'+'3'+'2'-f-'6')=i"o", without reckoning various unobserved sources of
error. And as all these sources of error are always present for certain in every
observation (only varying in amount), it is plain that it is impossible that they
should give rise to discordant observations, in the proper sense of the term, as
meaning beyond the normal distribution of the Probability Curve.
But the occasional errors are those which need not occur, and which, occuring
but seldom, may be to a large extent eliminated from the observations. They
doubtless follow the same law of probability as the continual errors ; but owing to
their rarity, and the many causes of different extents and different varieties
which give rise to them, Uieir regular distribution is not seen. Among these
• " Errors of Observation," 2n'd edition, p. 106.
5«/l 183.] DISCRIMINATION OF OCCASIONAL ERRORS. 217
causes are (1) absolute mistakes in reading, generally integral amounts, but
sometimes of complements ; (2) mistakes in identifying the signal, and mistakes
due to irregular background and illumination of it ; (3) instrumental defects of
accidental character, bruises, expansions, &c. ; (4) shifting of the instrument, or
of the clamping ; (5) constant lateral refraction in one line of sight, due to a
column of heated air from a black stone, a wall face, &c. There is no place for
these occasional errors in the usual classification, except with the continual errors
before mentioned.
183. Now the recognition of the difference between these two classes of
error will clear away a confusion which has arisen ; one writer claiming that
discordant observations should be rejected, while another says that errors of
extraordinary extent are recognised by theory as possible, and therefore should
never be rejected. In reality, both views are right ; for though discordant
observations should be rejected, if due to occasional errors, yet in continual
errors any extent of error has some small amount of probability, decreasing
with a diminution of the number of observations.
How, then, are occasional errors to be detected ? Solely by the application
of the law of distribution of errors. We have no other guide. If among
observations varying only a few seconds, one occurs differing by many minutes
or degrees from all the others, no computer could be found to include it in a
general mean ; and yet it is rejected solely on account of its improbability,
notwithstanding that extraordinarj' errors are recognised by theory as possible^
What theory does not recognise, is an erratic distribution of errors ; and it is precisely that which makes a computer throw out such a case as the above^by intuition.
But the occasional errors, as I have said, most likely follow the law of
probability, because in all cases in which a smaller error is more likely than a
larger (as in all the causes of occasional error noted above), it is plain that the
distribution will be like that due to continual errors. The real distinction
between the two classes being that (practically) only a small portion of the
observations are affected by occasional errors, and the greater part are absolutely
free from them.
If, then, the occasional errors follow the law of probability, they will (as
being generally of much larger amount than the continual errors) be distributed
over the whole range of continual errors, and far b^-ond that as well. But we
can only eliminate the affected observations when they lie beyond the range of
continual errors ; knd we cannot reject them when they lie within those limits.
Hence, as they are more evenly and widely distributed than the continual errors
(iheir Probability Curve being much wider), they will, on the whole, raise the
probable error and its functions, which are deduced from the observations, even
after the apparently discordant observations are omitted ; in fact, they broaden
the Probability Curve of the whole. Hence the true probable error of the
"8 THE REJECTION OF DISCORDANT OBSERVATIONS. [Appendix ii.
continual errors alone is really less than it appears, even after so-called
discordances are removed ; and it is therefore proper to reject observations as
being discordant to the full extent of this criterion, and not to save any cases
that are near the boundary of acceptance.
184, We should note parenthetically in this section, a system which has been
strongly advocated for the treatment of observations. This is by weighting
them according to their distance from the simple mean of them all ; and then
employing the mean thus found as a fresh starting point for weighting, and so
on a^ infinitum, until a practically stable result is reached. This is so clearly
fallacious when worked, that it is strange that it was ever proposed. The
impossibility which it involves is seen thus : — ^Any increase of weight of one
observation over another, dependent upon its distance from the mean, must
result in displacing the calculated probable error and all its functions in the
curve of distribution of the set of observations in question, bringing the probable
error much nearer to the centre ; this is at once a denial of the truth of the law
of probabilities, and a contradiction of terms which it is useless to discuss
further.
Beside this, the practical result of weighting observations inversely as their
distances from the mean, is that if the number of observations be even, the mean
is eventually thrown in a position anywhere between the two central observations ;
as its position is indifferent, provided it only have any equal number of
observations on each side of it Or, if the number is odd, the final mean is
immovably fixed to the central observation. If otherwise the weighting is
inversely according to square of the distcmce of the observation firom the mean,
the successive means are attracted more and more to whatever observation is
nearest to the first mean, and the final result sticks to this observation ; like a
south pole of a magnet, which has taken its choice of a lot of north poles. Thus,
both in theory and practice, the idea of any weighting dependent on the distance
from a mean is inadmissible.
185. The best practical way of appl}*ing the law of probabilities to a group
of observations, for the elimation of the occasional errors, will now be considered.
A usual method is to extract the probable error, and then (knowing the number
of observations) to find from a table what multiple of the probable error the
largest variation should be, and reject all beyond that Of coarse, this process
requires repeating until constant results are obtained, as the first probable error
is increased by the discordant observations which are afterwards rejected. The
defect of this method is that as the distribution of the most divergent
observations is very irregular, owing to their rarity, it is therefore not
suitable to regard their extent, so much as their number in relation to the
whole.
On looking at the Probability Cui\'e, it is seen that the point in which its
Sect. 185.] APPLICATION OF THE LAW OF DISTRIBUTION.
range is best defined (/^., in the direction of the magnitude of errors) is, of
course, at the point of maximum inclination. And this point is identical
practically (if not also theoretically) with the square root of the sum of the
squares of the differences, divided by the v number of observations, »>, the
" error of mean square " below.
As the various functions have received rather different names, it will be
as well to state them here, to avoid confusion. A, refers to Airy in " Errors of
Observations ; " D, to De Morgan in " Essay on Probabilities ; " and M, to
Merriman.in "Method of Least Squares." The notation adopted is Sz'=sum of
differences from mean; 2z''=sum of squares of differences; «= number of
observations.
•• Probable Error"
of A.' D. M.
<74SX
IXXXXXX)
•845347
•6744893
•4769360
"Mean Error." A. •
" 2 X mean risk. " D.
"Average Error." D.
n
IT 82946
I -000000
•797884
•5641906
Error of mean square." A.
"Mean Error." M.
" Modnlns." A.
I p.
^weight
1-482603 2-096717 X probable error.
I-253314 1-772454 X mean difference.
I^OOOOOO I-4I4213Xerrormeans<juare.
■707 1068 I XXXXXX) X modulus.
These formulae of course refer to the functions for a single observation, and
must be-T-;^« to obtain the functions for the ituan of a series.
The maximum inclination of the curve beings then, at the error of mean
square, the most accurate method of testing observations is to extract this error of
mean square from them by the formula ; and then (by the tables of the Probability
Curve) -682 of the number of observations, or a little over f of all, should have
their differences from the mean less than this amount Or it is nearly as satisfactory
to take the simple average of the differences, and then (by the tables) "575 of
the observations, or 4^ of all, should differ from the mean less than this function.
If on testing the observation thus, by either method, it is found that more than
the due proportion of all are within the limit stated, it shows that the Umit is
too wide ; and hence that the most divergent observations should be rejected,
and a fresh limit computed from the remainder, until the proper proportion of
all the observations is within the limit of the function calculated. This system
of weeding may thus be done by using any function of the curve ; but the error
of mean square is the most accurate in results, occurring at maximum inclination;
and the average error is the most easy to work.
• The values of probable error stated in Air/s " Errors of Observation," pp. 23, 24, are
all slightly wrong ; this is owing to simply proportioning from a table, for the relation of
probable error to modulus, instead of properly interpolating. The above values are by suict
interpolation, and agree with De Morgan.
THE REJECTION OF DISCORDANT OBSERVA TIONS. [Appendix ii.
1 86. To take a practical example, the following are the angular differences
between the observations and the mean stations, on distances between 10,000
and 20,000 inches, in the survey around the Great Pyramid. The limits of
distance are necessary, as the relation of lineal to angular error is other^vise too
variable, and so affects the character of the distribution ; the differences
requiring treating in groups according to the distances involved. The following
is the largest group, and thus best exhibits the method of weeding.
Data.
DiRerences.
Squares.
//
»
•2
•04
•2
•2
•04
•3
•09
•3
•3
•09
•4
•16
•5
•25
•6
•36
•8
•64
i-o
TOO
i-o
i-oo
1-2
1-44
1-2
1-44
1-3
1-69
(Continued
in next
column.)
DiffeSquares.
rences.
(Continued.)
//
If
i-s
2'2S
r6
2-56
1-6
2-56
I'S
3-24
2-0
4*oo
2-0
4-00
2"2
4-84
2-4
2-6
2-6
3-3
lo'Sg
3-5
I2"25
13-69
5-4
29-16
6-2
38-44
7-S
56-25
9*4
88-36
9-6
92-16
Worlung.
Result.
Sum of squares,
n — 1,
Error
Number of observations
at successive
at succesof mean
within the limit of these
points in the
sive
square, at
errors of mean square.
list of
points.
successive
Differences.
points.
Normal
number,
•682 of all
the observations.
Actual
number in
the series of
differences.
[Earlier
values
need
not be
computed.]
It
1-40
18-4
— 61-99
I-5I
I9-I
— 74'24
1-63
19-8
— 8;-93
20-5
— 1 1709
1-97
21-2
— 155-53
2-24
21-8
24'
?ti
— 211-78
2-57
22-5
^
— 300-14
3-02
23-2
%
— 392-30
3-40
23-9
"
Here all the earlier differences are certainly within the range of continuous
errors, and it is not until within the last 8 observations that there is any need
to search for the limit of rejection. Accordingly, the sum of the squares is
only taken after each of the last 8 observations ; i.e., each horizontal line of
figures of " Working " and " Result " shows what the result would be if all
the observations below that line were cut off and ignored. We see, on looking
to the last two columns, what the results are: that up to within four observations
from the end, the theoretical (or normal) and the actual number of observations,
within the limit of " error of mean square," are closely in accordance ; the actual
being rather too few in the first two, shows that some regular or continuous
observations have been cut off. Then, after that, the actual and normal numbers
agree within less than one number on three successive lines, showing that the
Sea. 187.) PROBABLE ERROR, A FACTOR, NOT A TERM. 331
limit of continuous observations is nearly reached. After this point, if any
more observations are included, the limit rapidly becomes too large, and
includes too many observations in the actual series. For instance, including
all the observations, the error of mean square is 3'40", and looking in the
series of differences in the column of " Data," it is seen that 28 of the differences
are less than that amount; whereas rather fewer than 24 differences should
exceed it by the regular law of errors {ix., -682 of the total number of 35
differences), and this proves that the limit g^ven by the mean square is unduly
increased by reason of including some discordant observations, affected by
occasional errors.
Thus in the above example we see that 4 out of 35 observations are affected
by occasional errors, and are- detected by their lying beyond the range of the
distribution of continual errors. These four are accordingly to be rejected, as
being influenced by some of the various occasional causes of error indicated
before ; and as nearly all of the quantities to which these differences belong, are
the mean of several observations repeated at intervals, it shows that the causes
are probably those not affected by the instrument or observer, but arising
from local conditions of refraction, deceptive view of signal, &c. In the whole
of the mean observations, on 108 sides of triangles around the Great Pyramid,
only 9 are rejected by the above criterion, as being vitiated by occasional errors.
187. A difficulty which has been raised against the universal application
of the law of distribution of errors (or Probability Curve) is that + and —
errors cannot be equally likely in certain cases. This may possibly be true
in some peculiarly conditioned cases of physical impossibility ; but the objection
was applied to a class of cases which really present no such difficulty. The
type which has been discussed is that of guessing the area of a field ; the
truth being, say, 2 acres, it was objected that a man might guess 4 or 6, but
could not guess o or —2. But this difficulty is due to a wrong statement
of probable error. It is true that in general, for convenience (and the probable
error being but a small fraction of the whole quantity), we usually denote it
as + or — ; but in reality it should be written x or -5-. It is a factor, and
not a term. For instance, a probable error of a tenth of the whole is not
±•1, but is really 2 ri.
This true expression of probable error becomes of great importance where the
probable error is large in relation to the whole. Suppose we write the angular width
of an object as 2"± i ", the limits then are i " and 3" ; but if we state its distance in
terms of its lineal breadth, we write ioo,ooo± 50,000, which implies limits of 50,000
and 150,000, or angularly of li" and 4". Thus it is impossible, writing +or — ,that
the limits shall be the same in stating a quantity, and in stating its reciprocal.
Hence our notation, + and — , must be defective. If, on the other hand, we
write 2" 5 2, the limits are i" and 4"; and writing 100,000+2, the Hniits are
93a THE REJECTION OF DISCORDANT OBSER VA TIONS. \Appendix it.
50,000 and 200,000, equivalent to i" and 4", just as they are given by the
angular probable error. Or again, in a rather different view, suppose in
stating the average distance of a ist magnitude star, it were put at 10" miles •
and suppose its superior limit of probable error to be itf" miles, then its inferior
limit is evidently 10" miles ; i.e., it is 10" ? 10. If it were io^±9 X 10" miles,
as it must be to have limit at 10'*, then its inferior limit would be 8 x lo'^ less than
nothing. Thus, if the probable error was + and — on the amount, and was
not a multiple of it, we should be landed in the absurdity of saying that if
the supposed distance is 10'* miles, it could not possibly exceed double that
distance, because it could not be, on the other hand, less than o.
It Is clear, then, that probable errors must be really multiples of the quantity ;
and therefore they can only be expressed by + and — when using the logarithm
of the quantity.* Similarly the factor -Jn in the probable error of a mean, must
really be applied to the logarithm of the probable error of one observation,
and not to the probable error itself. Suppose, for instance, the probable error
of one observation is 2 5 ; then, by obtaining 100 observations, the probable
error must be reduced by being -j-v/ioo ; but we could not write it ¥ h, since
that would be the same result as 5 2, which would be the value for only 6
observations instead of 100. The logarithm of the probable error must,
therefore, be -r- v^ioo, and we must write Log. of mean ± ■ ; and it will
\/ 100
thus be Mean? 1-175. Wherever the probable error is then a large fraction
of the whole quantity, it becomes necessary to work rigorously, and to perform
all operations on the logarithm, instead of on the probable error itself written
as + and — . The practical need of noting these distinctions is shown by
the above difficulty of the acre question, which was discussed at length a few
years ago without a satisfactory conclusion ; and the use of a correct notation
will also be seen in the discussion of the following sections.t
188, One class of cases might be supposed to illustrate the impossibility
of both + a"d — errors occurring ; namely, that of soundings, or measurements
with a flexible measure, and the adjustment of one object to fit within another.
Here it might seem as if errors could only exist in one direction. But, to
take the case of soundings, if we merely suppose the— half of the Probability
Curve abolished, we must expect by theory to find the greatest number of
observations nearest to the truth, no matter how slack the line, or how strong
* A similar example of the use of X and -f, rather than + and - (/.a, of logarithmic
scales), is given by Lord Rayleigh, in an article on the normal spectrum in " Nature,'*
xxviL 559. The need of a logarithmic scale is there arrived at, from considering the
irrationality of a + and - scale, and its reciprocal scale.
t An algebraic development of the same principle, by Mr. D. McAlister, is given by
Mr. Francis Galton, F.R.S., in Proc. Royal Soc, No. 198, 1879.
Secf. tSg.] SECONDARY PROBABLE ERRORS. 833
the current; whereas it is manifest that in practice we shall always have
some deflection of the line, never getting it quite straight, and seldom even
nearly straight. Hence there must be some amount of error which we are
more likely to make than none at all ; i.e., the curve of observations has not
its maximum at o difference. The explanation is, that what we really measure
is not one quantity, but two combined. The length of the line is equal to
the invariable distance measured, + the shortening of the line due to deflection.
This last quantity is the variable ; and its mean amount depends on the tension
of the line, the length, area, and friction of the line, and the strength of the
currents. And we have no reason to suppose that the variations, from this
mean amount of deflection, do not follow the law of probabilities. For instance,
if in sounding to a certain depth, the mean shortening of the line is loo feet,
then a variation of x or of -h S is equally unlikely ; i.e., a shortening of only
20 feet, or of 500 feet, is equally rare. We can see instantly that the amount
of shortening can never become o nor 00 ; and (in the absence of experiments)
our intuitive judgment would certainly not rebel at the idea of a mean
shortening of 100 being as unlikely to vary up to 1,000, as to be diminished
to only 10 feet, by the run of casual circumstances. Precisely the same
principle applies to one object inside another. If, on an average, a shake
of ~i inch is made (say, in filing a nut-spanner), anyone accustomed to do
delicate mechanical work will allow that a fit to j^ inch is cis unlikely to occur
as a misfit of ^ inch.* The value of the true view of the probable error as
a multiplier, and not a term, is seen in these considerations ; and it is very
doubtful whether any physical case can be found which, when properly stated,
does not involve an equal probability of the observations being both + and — ,
or, rather, being multiples and fractions of the true amount
189. In stating the probable error of our knowledge of a quantity, we really
state the exact unlikelihood of. the quantity exceeding or falling short of a
certain amount ; we introduce a second quantity to define the uncertainty of
the first. And this second quantity is liable to be in error, just like the first
quantity ; its exact amount, or the chance of the truth exceeding certain
limits, is only a fallible statement derived from a series of observations ; and
it may, therefore, be incorrect In short the probable error itself has a probable
error, and this secondary probable error has a tertiary probable error ; so that
the series of probable errors is infinite, though rapidly diminishing. In the
following discussion, which is limited to secondary probable errors, p.e. I
denotes the primary probable error of the datum ; and p.e. II the secondary
probable error, or probable error of p.e. I, its limits being rigorously stated
as a multiple of p.e. I.
• A similar application of the principle was arrived at by Herschel, in his essay on
Target Shooting ; " Familiar Lectures," p. 495.
2 H
p.
234
234 THE REJECTION OF DISCORDANT OBSERVA TIONS. [Appendix ii.
Now looking at the p.e, I of a single observation (deduced from the
divergencies between the observations), it is plain that it will be known more
and more accurately the greater be the number of observations; i.e., there will
be a diminution of the p.e. II of a single observation, by increasing the number
of observations, exactly as there is a diminution of the p.e. I of the mean by
increasing the observations. Hence log. p.e, II of one observation varies as
—^ But log. p.e. I of the mean also varies as -i-' Therefore log. p.e. II of
the mean varies as \ in relation to the whole quantity.
The arithmetical method for determining the value of p.e. II is precisely
like that for working out p.e. I. When the observations are all the same, U^
when the first differences vanish, p.e. I vanishes ; similarly, when the first
differences are all the same (irrespective of sign), ix., when the second differences
vanish, p.e. II vanishes. To practically exemplify these two statements, we take
two examples. The observations on the position of rest of a pendulum will be
all the same, and there will be no probable error, apart from mechanical
irregularities : in this case first differences have vanished, and p.e. I vanishes.
With a coin tossed up, its mean position when at rest again will be on edge
(since heads and tails are equally likely), and the difference from its mean
position will be constant, 90°: in this case, first differences being all equal
(ie,, 90°), the second differences have vanished, and p.e. II vanishes. This result
we can see to be true, since there is no uncertainty about p.e. I, but it is
absolutely known that the chance of heads or tails is exactly \, and can
never be anything else : hence there is no p.e. II ; it has vanished, as theory
shows us.
From this it follows that as there is a normal distribution of errors (the
Probability Curve), so there must also be a normal p.e. II. And this normal
p.e. II, thus deduced, is=p.e. I ? 1-825 on one observation (log. = *26i2) ; therefore on 9 observations, for instance, the p.e. II is = p.e. I ? 1-222, or roughly db i ;
on 25 observations p.e. II is = p.e. I ? 1-128, or roughly ±J; and on 100
observations it is = p.e. I ? 1-062, or roughly in vulgar notation ± 5 of p.e. I.
Now this theory is open to actual test thus : take a large series of observations casually arranged, and break it into groups, each containing an equal
number of observations, say 5, 10, or 25 in a group ; then take the probable error
of the mean value of each group, this is its p.e. I. So far the process is usual
enough ; but now compare these probable errors of the equal groups together,
see how much they vary, and take the mejm p.e. I for each method of division ;
the amount of variation from the mean p.e. I shows the uncertainty of the p.e. I
in each method of division; and from this we can calculate the p.e. II, just as we
calculate the p.e. I from any other set of differences from a mean. In this way
the tlieory can be checked ; and on working out five complete cases of this check,
p.
235
Sec/.t^] APPUCABILITY OF APPROXIMATE FORAfULX. 235
consisting of from 4 to 10 groups in each case, the pjc. II was practically found
to average = p.e. I ? 2-03 ; with a probable error of this multiple (or a Urtiary
probable error) of p.e. Ill = p.e. II ? ri 15 ; ix^ p^. II of a single observation is
as likely to be within the limits p.e. I ? r82 and pie. I ? 2-26. as to be beyond
those limits.
This is such a satisfactory approach in practice to the theoretical value
p.e. 15 1-82 (especially as it is all reduced to the extreme case of a single
observation), that no doubt can remain as to the correctness of the theory of
Secondary Probable Errors, and of its details here discussed.
190. The practical result of the recognition of the secondary probable error
is, that it is needless to employ rigorous formulae, or to spend any extra time, in
order to obtain the exact value of the primary probable error of the determination in question : and, that the fewer the obsersations the more useless is an
accurate formula, since the probable error has a much larger uncertainty
inherent in it. This fact is so far contrary to usual views that it is needful
to point it out ; one treatise, when mentioning the less rigorous formula: for
probable error says : " For values of « less than 24 it is best to hold fast to the
more exact formula ; " and then, half recognisii^ the increased uncertainty of
the probable error with fewer observations, it continues, " and e^xn that cannot
for such cases be expected to give precise results, since the hj-pothesis of its
development supposes that enough observations have been taken to exhibit the
several errors in proportion to their respective probabilities" (MerrinMn's
"Least Squares," p. 189).
Now of the approximate formulae sometimes employed for probable error,
one of the simplest and most useful is that formed by the mean difference,
instead of the error of mean square. By the law of distribution this mean
difference x-84S=probable error; ie.^ in a normal distribution of errors, the
one value above and below which are an equal number of errors, will be "845 x
the mean of all the errors. The variation of the result by this formula from
that by the formula on the error of mean square, will seldom be of any
importance in view of the secondary probable error ; for if there be much
difference between the two results it shows an irrationality of distributi"on, which
implies a large secondary probable error. Therefore time would be better spent
in carefully searching for " occasional " errors, rather than in taking the squares
of the quantities, in order to obtain a statement of probable error, with a fallacious
appearance of accuracy. In fact, the usually pretentious regard for rigorous
formulae of probable error, while ignoring altogether the secondary probable
error, is only another form of the old fallacy of stating a mean result to an
absurdly long row of figures, regardless of the primary probable error. ^Vhile
sliowing due honour to the system of observing the probability of the main
result, computers have fallen into just the same fallacy over the probable error
336 THE REJECTION OF DISCORDANT OBSER VA TIONS. [Appendix ii.
itself, through sinking the common-sense of the work in an unthinking regard
for rigorous methods.
Beside the formulae for probable error from mean square and from mean
difference, there is also the simplest formula of all, »>., selecting such a value as
shall have half of Uie differences larger and half of them smaller than the amount
of probable error. This definition is the fundamental meaning of the expression ;
and as a formula it has the advantage over all the others, that it does not depend
mainly on the amounts of the largest and most variable of all the observations,
but it gives equal value to every observation in the formation of the result. It
is true this method does not turn out a neat value to three places of figures, but
on the contrary faces the computer with the naked uncertainty which there is in
the amount of the probable error ; the fewer the observations, the more doubt
he must feel as to the exact value. But this is rather an advantage than otherwise, as no man can shut his eyes to the secondary probable error when he has
the vagueness of the primary error so plainly before him.
191. One other point of practice may be noted. It is usual, if a series
of differences are to be compared with the law of distribution, or Probability
Curve, to require that the total number shall be very large ; and to compare
them by taking the sums of all between certain successive limits. Or, graphically
speaking, to draw the curve of the heap of observations, and see how that
coincides with the normal curve.
But a more satisfactory method — ^which does away with the irregularity
of successive steps, and which may be applied to any number of observations
— is that of forming a table of the value of each difference (in terms of probable error of one observation=unity) according to the normal distribution.
Thus suppose it is wished to test 8 observations by the law of distribution.
Dividing the whole area of the curve in 8 equal parts, take the difference
due to the middle of each part : at -0625 area (middle of 1st ^th) difference
is •! 16 X p.e. ; and so on to '9375 area (middle of 8th |th), when difference
is 2.76 X p.e. ^
probable error
Table
of
Normal
Distribution
of eight
observations.
Such a table, for any given number of observations, may be readily constructed
from a curve formed by the number of observations (or area of Probability Curve) as one ordinate, and the multiple ofthe probable error as the other
ordinate. By such normal tables occasional errors can be readily searched for ;
rror
X
•116
»
X
•325
»
X
•596
n
X
•860
f>
X 1*150
n
X 1
•496
u
X 1-952
»
X2
Sut. 191.] TESTING THE NORMAL DISTRIBUTION. iyj
as, If a few of the more discordant observations ought to be rejected, it will be
found that the final entries in the normal table agree with the observed
differences a few lines higher up.
In this Appendix some exception may be taken by the reader to the consideration of every question by means of its practical applications ; and to the
absence of proofs deduced from the more elaborate processes of algebraical
deductions from the fundamental theories. But since these fundamental theories
have never been completely demonstrated, apart from all practical experience ;
so there is nothing unsuitable in referring directly to the practical working of a
method. With respect to the fundamental law of probability, Merriman writes :
" In the demonstration of this law of error ... there are two defects ... and they
cannot be bridged over or avoided, but will always exist in this mathematical
development of the law of probability of error " (" Method of Least Squares,"
p. 196-7). Airy writes, of the same law, " Whatever may be thought of the
process by which this formula has been obtained, it will scarcely be doubted by
any one that the result is entirely in accordance with our general ideas of the
frequency of errors " (" Errors of Observation," p. 15). And after giving at the
end of the same book, a practical example of the distribution of errors in the
N.P.D. of Polaris, he concludes thus, "the validity of every investigation in this
Treatise is thereby established " (p. 1 19). After these appeals to the ultimate
dependence on experience, it can hardly be thought objectionable to take the
shortest road to the practical demonstration of each question.
838 THE GRAPHIC REDUCTION OF TRIANGULA TION. [Apptndix Hi.
APPENDIX III,
THE GRAPHIC REDUCTION OF TRIANGULATION.
192. In the foregoing Appendix, on the Rejection of Discordant Observations,
the method for eliminating those observations affected by occasional errors, has
been pointed out It is needless to enlarge on the importance of some correct
and universal rule for the discrimination of errors which may lie beyond those of
the normal distribution ; extreme cases are always rejected arbitrarily by every
computer, and the question where to draw the line of selection should be determined by some law, rather than by caprice, or even intuition.
But in the reduction of triangulation by least squares, when once the equations are formed, the whole process is in a mill ; and the computer turns the
handle, and grinds out the result, without the chance of seeing anything until it
is finished. When completed, and the differences of the observations from the
mean azimuths are worked out, then if some of the differences are seen to be due to
occasional errors (or " discordant observations ") they ought to be rejected, as
certainly vitiating the result Yet this implies a re-working of the whole calculation, a matter perhaps of weeks ; and this would probably need to be done
several times, until the differences conformed to the normal distribution. Yet
unless some search is made for occasional errors, the apparent accuracy of the
results cannot be trusted for a moment ; and a few observations — which if
varying as much in a simple set of unentangled observations would be summarily
rejected by probabilities — will render useless the elaborate care spent on the
reduction of the whole.
What is needed, then, is some way of knowing how the results are going
during the working ; and above all some way of quickly seeing what difference
will be made by the rejection of some one discordant observation, and whether
omitting it will enable all the others to be easily reconciled. As no possible
clue to this can be obtained in the course of equational reduction, some graphical
method is the only apparatus which will suffice. Whether, then, we finally adopt
a rigorous equational reduction, or no, still a graphic reduction is needed in all
cases to point out the locality of the larger errors, and their approximate
amounts.
Sect. 194.] THE PRACTICE OF GRAPHIC REDUCTIO^ 339
193. Graphic reduction, as generally understood, means simply drawing the
results of the observations on sheets, and fitting them together. In the case of
angular observations, the angles are drawn radiating from a theodolite centre on
each sheet ; and then these sheets can be superposed, and moved in the unknown
elements of azimuth and position, i.e., shifted about in rotation and translation,
until the observations fit together with the least divergences. Now though this
is a very rude method in general, it contains the principle of a method which is
capable of being worked with any amount of accuracy. The rudeness of it only
results from the necessarily small size of the sheets, in relation to the whole
extent of the survey ; since this makes the errors of the graphic drawing on the
sheets far greater than the errors of the observations in any accurate v/ork.
If then we could have sheets, each as large as the whole ground of the
survey, — a furlong, a mile, or a hundred miles across, — and draw on each sheet
radii corresponding to the observed mean azimuths, or the traces of the observations, around some one station ; and then if these sheets were superposed, and
shifted in translation and rotation, until the traces coincided as nearly as possible
one with another, and with the theodolite centre, at each point ; then we should
have the most probable system of resulting stations, and differences of observations from these stations.
Now, if instead of the sheets covering the full size of the ground (which
would be physically impossible to realize), they are reduced to a fraction of that
size, and all the distances of the stations apart are similarly reduced, it is plain
that rotation or translation of a sheet (within a small angle), will affect all the
traces as before ; only if the reduction is, say, to ^th of the lineal distances,
then a rotation of I '^ of the sheet, will shift the traces lineally as much as a
rotation of l' on the full scale on the ground.
194. The practical method, then, for graphic reduction on any scale, is to
assume a provisional place for each station, and calculate by co-ordinates the
differences of the observations from the assumed places, exactly as in the first
step of the reduction by least squares. It is generally best to adopt a scale of
ijsth (or some simple multiple of that) for plotting the sheet with the
provisional places of the stations.* Then, with this reduction, if the angular
differences are plotted with a protractor, reading i^on it for every i" of actual
difference, the traces will be drawn on the same scale as they are on the actual
* As too great a translation or rotation of the sheets, involves secondary errors, it is best
to require that the distances between the stations shall be at least 8 or 10 times the largest
differences of observations. Taking 10 times the largest angular difference of any observation
from a provisional station, and converting it into actual lineal distance, we obtain the minimum
distance allowable between each station, and hence the smallest scale for the whole reduction.
Sometimes, if differences are large, a preliminary reduction (not drawing the differences their
actual size) is desirable to get nearer values for the provisional station co-ordinates.
^o THE GRAPHIC REDUCTION OF TRIANGULATION. [Appendix Hi.
ground. Thus the traces of the mean of the observations of each of the azimuths
around one station, are all plotted on one sheet (marking also the place of the
central station, ije., of the theodolite) ; all the azimuths around another station,
on another sheet, and so on, using as many separate sheets as there are
theodolite stations in the survey. These sheets being then all superposed, all
the traces to any one station are seen crossing one another ; and the theodolite
centre of each station will be seen on the sheet of that station, among the traces
which are drawn on the other sheets. Practically the traces are drawn on some
transparent substance (as mica), in order to see through a large number of
sheets together.
Then the actual work of reduction consists in shifting these sheets in
translation and rotation, until the most probable adjustment of all the traces is
reached. This is a work taking some hours or days ; but it is the equivalent of
some days or months of work in the reduction of simultaneous equations.
Many hypotheses have to be tried ; each sheet is shifted about in turn, and any
apparently erratic observation is disregarded for the time, and a fresh trial of
adjustment is made ; if no great improvement ensues in the adjustments, the
observation is taken into the general mass again ; also the likelihood of various
eccentricities of the theodolite setting over each station, can be investigated. In
short, the causes of all apparently abnormal discordances, can be felt for in
different directions ; and they can thus be generally tracked do\vn to some one
observation, the elimination of which reconciles many others. Some hesitation
may be felt at such a rejection of observations ; but it must be remembered
that the omission of the most discordant of, say eight, really normal observations,
would not diminish the mean divergence of them by more than } ;• an amount
not very striking, and making a difference which would certainly not lead the
adjuster to reject one observation in eight If an average improvement of the
adjustment greater than \ (or, say, \ ), can be made by omitting i in 8 of the
observations, then the computer is bound to omit it by the laws of probabilities,
as being due to some occasional error.
Having thus adjusted these sheets to apparently the most probable
arrangement, the mean stations to be adopted from the traces should be marked;
and the difference of this, from the provisional places of the same stations, is
then read off. Applying these corrections to the co-ordinates of the provisional
places, we have the finally adjusted co-ordinates. The sheet of provisional
places'of the stations may be applied in any position to the adjusted points of
the traces, for reading off the corrections ; its position is of no consequence, as it
affects all stations alike.
• See table in section 191 ; the mean of the differences there is riS7 ; but the mean after
rejecting the one most divergent is only -928 ; a reduction of \ of the total divergence by
mitting \ of the observations.
Sect 196.] ACCURACY IN THE PRESENT SURVEY. a4i
Finally, the differences of the observations from the adjusted positions of the
stations should be calculated ; just as at first they were calculated from the
provisional stations. Then these differences may be plotted all on one sheet,
and they represent the variations of the traces as finally adjusted, from the finally
adopted places of the stations.* If, then, the graphic adjustment has not been
satisfactory, or if an error has been made in any part of the computations, it will
be shown by the position of the station not being in the midst of the plotted traces.
195. Such a delineation of the traces may be seen, for the most important
part of the present sur\'ey, in the diagram of "Traces of the Actual Observations,"
?1. xvi. To have included all the stations of the survey, would have made the
sheet unmanageably large to print ; hence, only those around the Great Pyramid
are here shown.
But beside the traces themselves, their probable errors must also be
considered ; for it is needless to shift a sheet so as to bring one trace nearer
another, if the probable errors of the two traces already overlap, while perhaps
the shifting separates still further two traces, whose probable errors are already
far apart. Accordingly, instead of drawing lines to represent the traces on the
adjustment sheets, bands should always be drawn, extending in their widths to
the limits of the probable error ; and the distances of the traces apart should
always be regarded in terms of their probable errors. These bands of probable
error are represented as they cross at station U, on Pi. xvi ; only in actual
working they are a thin transparent wash of ink, through which other bands can
be easily seen; and which is made thinner the wider it is, and the less the
observation is worth. At W, here, only the halves of these bands are drawn, to
avoid confusion. And at all the other stations the half traces, without probable
error bcinds, are draw4 as the diagram would be othenvise too crowded to be
intelligible.
Another change in this diagram, from the actual appearance of the working
sheets of reduction, is that instead of a spot representing the position of the
theodolite at each centra here the reflex traces are marked ; these are the
lines in which the theodolite should lie, in order that the direct trace from it
should coincide with the adopted station. These reflex traces are dotted ; and
it should be remembered when looking at the diagram, that the theodolite station
is the mean of the dotted traces on any station ; and in so far as this does not
coincide with the mean of the direct traces, it shows an error of observing the
eccentricity of the theodolite position.
196. This diagram (PL xvi.) shows practically how nearly the observations
of a survey may be adjusted, by a single process of graphic reduction. No
alteration in any respect has been made from the results obtained by the first
• Of course this should tally with the positions of the traces on the adjustment sheets
as finally arranged.
2 I
Ui THE GRAPHIC REDUCTION OF TRIANGULATION. [Appendix Hi.
graphic working (in which all corrections for levelling, eccentricities, &c., were
duly made), except that the ultra-discordant observations, due to occasional
errors, are here omitted ; as, owing to their great divergence, they would become
confused with the wrong stations; but the 154 traces which agree to the law of
errors Eire all shown here. In no case could any improvement be suggested in
the adopted places of the stations, beyond the limits of their probable
errors. But in Z and a some change may be still needed, by a second
process of graphic reduction ; a going further north, and Z further south, and
somewhat west. This has not, however, been altered here, as the westing of Z
is the only change of importance, and it would diminish the base of survey by
about "oS (or "09 inch on Pyramid base length) ; and a re-comparison of the
standard tape used for the measurement of the survey-base, shows a similar
change of distance="i2 ; these errors therefore balance one another, far within
the limits of probable errors. Hence no notice has been taken of these
insignificant amounts in stating the results.
The base of survey was measured on three different days independently ;
each length in each operation being read four or five times. The probable error of
the final value of the base, is shown by the breadth of the black terminal band
at Z, with an arrow at the end of it ; and the actual differences between the
three days' results are shown by the three short lines above the terminal band .
It will be seen that the uncertainty of lineal measure is not much less than that
of angular position ; this is as it should be, for in all surveys the error of the
length of tiie base should be nearly of the same amount as the errors of
observing on it in triangulation ; otherwise either lineal or else angular accuracy
is wasted.
The probable errors of the positions of the stations, as deduced from the
adjusted traces, is here sho\vn by the radius of a small circle ciround each
station. It was calculated from the divergences of the traces ; and though this
is not entirely a rigorous method, yet it gives results quite as near as is
necessary, if we neglect the ellipticity of the probable errors. Strictly the
probable error limits of all stations in planes are elliptic, and cannot be
expressed by fewer than three elements ; describing it in the two co-ordinates
being insufficient, unless another element is added. The formula for probable
error in two dimensions differs, of course, from that for ordinary probable error
in one dimension. Instead of n we must take 2«, as only half the traces on an
average are available in any one direction ; and for «— i we must take » — 2, as
two traces are needed to fix a point
The general results of the differences of the traces from the mean stations
adopted, in the diagram here given, are as follow. The mean of the differences
in the various groups being :—
p.
243
Sect. 197.] APPLICABILITY OF GRAPHIC REDUCTION. 243
On distances over 20,000 inches
Between 20,000 and 10,000
Between 10,000 and 5,000
Under 5,000 inches
All obsenrations
2-22" or '28 inch
210 „ -13 „
262 „ -09 „
4"iS .. "oS „
After rejecting I in 17, aflected
by occasional errors ; as by
probabilities.
•75" or '106 inch
1-43 „ -081 „
2' 62 „ '090 „
3-81 „ -079 „
Hence it may be generally said that there was an average error of A inch lineally
in the azimuths ; and in distances over \ mile this error was exceeded by the
average angular error of 'S".
197. Such, then, is the method of graphic reduction, as applied to
observations on plane surfaces ; adaptable to any scale of representation, and
to showing any amount of accuracy. If meridian observations be taken, they
may be marked as lines (or ends of lines) on the sheets ; and one element of the
adjustment will then be the parallelism of these lines, or rather of their probable
error bands. For observations on a sphere, the same method of reduction is
equally applicable to co-ordinates of latitude and longitude, plotted on a suitable
projection ; provided the curvature is not extensive enough to modify the
distances, so that a rotational shift does not affect the various stations
proportionally. This error could not occur in terrestrial observations, and so
the method is applicable to all geodetic surveys.
It should be observed that the graphic reduction is equivalent, not merely
to the usual system of reduction by least squares, from equations of shift of the
points ; but it is equivalent to a system of equations which allows not only of
lateral shift of the points, but of rotational shift of all the observations around
each centre, and also of disseverance of the centreing of the theodolite over a
station, from all the other observations to that station ; beside this, it takes
account of the probable errors of all the observations. Thus it is equivalent to
the determination of five unknown quantities for each point ; i.e., the two station
co-ordinates, the two theodolite co-ordinates, and the zero of azimuth of the
circle. And any system of reduction which does not include all of these five
unknowns is defective, and cannot impartially render the truest results. Hence
the graphic reduction of a network of a dozen stations, which is easily performed,
is equivalent to the elaborate formation and solution of 60 normal simultaneous
equations, with cognizance of all the probable errors of the observations ; and
equivalent not only to doing that once, but to doing it many times over, until
all occasional errors have been weeded out In short, a few days' work with
graphic reduction will master a mass of observations and unknown quantities, so
complex that its solution by least squares would only be attempted for such an
object as a national survey. In any case it is desirable to employ the graphic
method ; as, if the method of least squares should eventually be used, still the
344 THE GRAPHIC REDUCTION OF TRIANGULATION. [Appendix iii.
graphic work takes but a small fraction of the labour ; and it is invaluable for
showing the places of occasional errors, which would otherwise vitiate the result
from the least squares. And it is almost certain that in all cases the graphic
results (especially by a repeated process), are well within the probable errors of
the most accurate determination obtainable ; and thus practically as accurate
as any result that can be procured. Hence the graphic method will in most
cases obviate the necessity for far longer processes ; and also bring the
adjustment of check observations within the range of practical work, to a far
larger extent than is the case at present
INDEX.
Abu Roash, pyramid
Accretion theory of building
Accuracy of base measuring
calipering
dividing rods
levels
observing levels
steel standard ,
steel tape
steel chain
theodolite, lo-inch
theodolites, small
triangulation
Greek travellers
Air channels, angles of
length of, originally
method of gauging
goniometer
All Gabri
Amen, name erased
Angle of pyramids
Great Pyramid
Second Pyramid
Third P]nramid
Pyiamid No. 9
basalt and diorite casing ...
Mastaba tombs ...
Antechamber, description of walls
dimensions of
lengths in
method of measoring
granite leaf in
Arabs, character of ■
Archsological Institnte, Royal, papers
Architectural ideas
Ascending passage, asimnth
beginning of
20s,
14O1ISI
... 163
8,207
... IS
... 14
... 17
II, 12
... 13
... 16
... 18
206, 242
... IS9
... 83
... 5»
... 23
... 19
... IS8
... 162
... 42
... 97
... 112
... 124
ziv
6S
«3S.
Ascending passage, gauged
measured along
Axis of earth, secular change in
Azimuth, system of notation
of Great Pyramid
of trenches
of entrance, G. P.
of ascending passages
ofgallery
of Second Pyramid
of Third Pyramid
of Third Pyramid passage
of Small Pyramid No. 7
of Small Pyramid No. 8 ...
of granite temple
of causeway
of Aba Roash pyramid ...
of earth's pole
Barracks of workmen, excavated
described ... .»
Basalt casing of pyramid ..,
pavement cleared
levels
description
part of temple..
Base of survey
Base of Great Pyramid
Beni Hassan, clilTs at
Borg, Mr. I^ph., Vice-Consul ...
Bosses in King's chamber
above King's dumber ...
Brick pyramids
Calipers for coffer
Calipering of coffer ^
Caps (see Slits)
rACB
. ... 6s
62, 63
... 126
XV
38. 39
. ... 48
. ... 58
. ... 65
... 71
. ... 97
... Ill
... 117
... 121
... 123
... 13*
... 128
... I4«
. ... >2S
3«
lOI, 102
... I3S
... 30
. ... 45
... 134
, 24, 207, 14a
38. 39
149, 208
... 8j
... »a
15s, 156
«4
2k
S46
INDEX.
FAOB
Casing of Great Pyramid, excavating ... .. 29
thickness 43
joints 44
leveb 44
of trenches (see Lining)
of Second Pyramid ... ... 96, 98
of Third Pyramid Iio, 112
of small pyramids I35i 136
ofdioiite _ 136
•ofbasalt 135
atBahshuf 145
.granite 151
Causeways ^ee Granite Templi) ... 128, 134
Chambers of construction over King's chamber 9 1
details of lines 92> 94
Chips of masons _ ... 213
Climatic changes 149
Closing of Great Pyramid 215
Coffer bnilt in 216
cabpers ... ... ■•» ... ... 14
dimensions, mean ... ... ... ... 86
form ... .a. .■. .•. 84, 86, 88
ganging the 8, 84
method of measuriqg 32,85
pebble under it 85
position ... ... ... ••*
raising the ...
thickness calipered
variations in .. ...
volume of .« .« ...
of Second Pyramid
of small pyramids,^mode of turning
Comparison of standards
Concentrated errors, principle of ».
Continual errors ...
Cos>rdinates of positions in Great Pyramid
of station marks
Core masonry of Great Pyramid
Courses of Great Pyramid ,m •••
' of Second Pyramid ... ._
of Third Pyramid
Cubit, dedmal division of
lengths marked on stones ...
of King's chamber ...
value of *M .M ... .*.
Dahshur, pyramids of ..
brick pyramids of
Destruction of buildings
of pyramid .c
(sM Smaskinit)
... 8
... 89
...87, 88
... 90
106, 108
121, 123
12, 207
... 26
... 226
... 95
... 35
37.38
41,52
98,99
112,113
... 180
9«. 94
... 81
178, 179
144.167
... 156
... 157
... 319
Diagonal mirrors
Digit, value of
relation to cubit _
Diodorus, accuracy of
Diorite, casing of
occurrence of at Gizeh
at Abu Roash ... .„
Discordant observations
Distances of pyramids
Dixon, Mr. Waynman, work at Girzeh
on ascending passage
Doorway of Great Pyramid, place of ...
door of ...
of Dahshur pyramid ... ...
Double names of early kings ...
Drills, tubular - 132.
Earth's axis shifted in the ground
Earthquake effects in King's chamber ...
Edrisi, description by
Ellis, Mr. Tristram, helps in work
Entrance of Great Pyramid, place of ...
blocks over
passage, clearing out
place of mouth
original end of
measures along ... .-
Errors of measurement, estunated ...
of triangnlation
continual and occasional
practical elimination of
^/(M and mutuj equal
distribution of
Excavations _
in entrance passage
in "grotto"
casing and pavement, G. P.
trenches
Second Pyramid
Third Pyramid
Fitting of courses on each other
Focussing by slit caps
Formulae of probable error, &c
rigorous, not needed
French expedition, nature of
Gallery in Great Pyramid, length
azimuth
roof of ...
ends of
rACB
... 18
180, 181
... l8f
... 160
... 136
... 136
... 141
... 226
... 125
... 64
... 55
... 168
... 145
... 153
173;
... 126
... 80
161, 216
... 55
... 53
... 27
... 51
S».S2
55.57
... 40
... 243
._ 226
... 230
231, 232
229, 236
... 27
.- 27
... 28
... 29
... 30
... 30
... 3»
... 312
... 17
... 229
... 335
7». 74
... 71
73.74
... 73
INDEX.
»47
Gallery in Great VymmA—continutJ,
groove in
step in „
ramps _
Galleries (see Bamuks)
Gambay, his fine work ._
Gill, Mr. David, work at Gizeh...
Gizeb, work required and done at
author's stay at
Goniometer, ordinary
for air channels
Graduation of rods ,„
of thermometers
Graffiti on pyramids, &c.
Granite found in passage
use of for casing
method of cutting
Granite temple, causeway of ...
all built
outside of
description of
recesses for statues
workmanship
orientation
date of ... ...
Grant Bey, Dr., assists the work
Graphic reduction of triangulation
Graving in hard stones
Grotto in well, excavations
Gauging of entrance passage
ascending passage
gallery
Guide books, errors of
Hatasn, name erased
Herodotus, accuracy of
Height of Great Pyramid
Second Pyramid
Third Pyramid
Howara, pyramid of
Inscriptions on tombs, &c.
on pyramids
Instruments, list of
(tee nteJtlUei, ileatuns. Steel, and
ifew Forms)
Iron found in pyramid
Jewel points used for graving . . .
in saws and drills
Khafta
raca
...
...
..
31, lOI
I
5. «7
...
...
...
«9
...
«3
...
»5
ai7.
•••
...
«5i
«73
128,
...
...
129,
»33
...
...
«32
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
<5
...
...
"3
...
IJS
...
25. 4«. A^ 1
...
9«
112,
"3
• ••
15s
• •■
nv
...
• •■
/, and
...
aia
...
...
..•
>S3
FACB
Kfanamn-Khnfu _ _ 152,216
Khoiii _ ~ ... 152
ring of priest of ... — _. •■• 139
KIi^s chamber, method of measoriiig ... ... 22
dimensions of ... — ... 79
original size ... ~ ~ ...to
disjointed » — ... 8a
IDofof « — ... 81
6oorof „ ... 82
basses or lugs ... » _. ... 82
air channels ... _. ». $2, 83
coffer (see Coffer)
Labour-system, ancient ... _. _. ... 209
Lathe, use of _. ._ ... 176
I.eaf in antechamber ... „ ... 78
Learner's slab at Sakkara _ _. ... 144
LeveHing up Great Fyiamid _. „. „, 8, 25
Le\ds of casing _. ... 44
sockets „ _. ... 40
pavement „ _. 41, 44
inside of Pyramid... _ _. ... 95
subterranean chamber » ... 59
Queen's chamber passage » ... 65
antechamber ... „ „. ... 75
King's chamber ... „ „ ... 79
Life in a tomb ... ... _. _. ... 6
Linii^ of chambers in small pyramids ... 123
temples _. _. ... 132
tombs _ „ ... 139
troiches « « ... 135
Maiiette's account of granite temple ». ... 129
clearance of granite tem{de _. ... 130
Masons' chips « ». ... 213
Maspero, M., thanks due to „ 7
permitted excavations » 27
Mastaba^J-Farun ... ._ 148
Mastaba-pyramid of Medam 147
of Sakkara 148
Ueasorement, methods of 22
of survey base 24, 207, 242
Measures (see Steel)
pine poles » ... 13
pine rods .~ 14
fine scales ~. ... 10
Mechanical methods of Egyptius ~ I73i >77
Mednm, Mastaba-pyramid I47
Mehrille, Mr. Arthur, helps in work 7
Menkaora, builder of Third Pyramid ... 153, 155
name of on Third P}iamid II7
INDEX.
Men . . . ta at Abu Roash
Microscopes of theodolites, rule for
New forms of instruments, &c
standard steel scale
steel chain
jointing of rod measures ...
calipers for coffer
transferring apparatus
tension apparatus
slit caps for focussing
diagonal mirrors
octahedral stands
agnals
plumb bobs \
station marks
New methods, &c.
catenary measurement ...
reversal of theodolites ...
graphic reduction
concentrated errors
elimination of errors
secondary probable error
Niche in Queen's chamber
Nile, changes in
Nitakerti,
Observations, distribution of ...
traces of
graphic reduction of
Occasional errors
Omar, Shekh
Oiganisation of labour
Orientation (see Azimuths)
of pyramids and pole
of causeway, askew
Painted statues .^
Panel ornament
Passages, method of gauging ...
never plugged up
Pavement of Great Pyramid ...
levels of
excavated
Fepi, pyramid of
Petukhanu, temple of
Plaster, use of
Pliny, accuracy of
Plug blocks in ascending passage
Plumb bobs
Pole cl earth, secular shift of ...
rACB
142, 151
Pottery at Abu Roash
... 16
Pressure on stone-cutting tools ...
Probable error, definition of
a factor, not a term
II
functions of
Secondary
... 14
Tertiary
... 14
Probability curve
... IS
Prussian expedition, nature of ...
13. >s
Pyramid, Great, built by Khufu
... 17
material from E. bank ...
... 18
setting out of
... 19
erection of
masons' chips
deterioration in work
... 20
changes in plan
history of closing
... 24
violation of
... 18
inscriptions on
... 238
work required to be done at
.26,79
excavations at
... 227
co-ordinates of survey
... 233
base of
69,70
original base of
149. «S0
sockets of
>S4. iSS
socket levels
aze of
223,224
height of
... 241
angle of
... 238
casing of, thickness
... 226
joints
... 8
levels
... 209
xore masonry of
form of top of
... I2S
connection of inside and out
... 128
summary of inside levels, &c
(inside — see separate heads)
... 172
pavement level
... 117
breadth
... 23
temple of
... 166
(see Theorits)
." 45
Pyramid, Second, built by Khafra
4ii45
excavations at
... 30
base
r42, 167
angle
... 156
height
... 171
casing
... 160
pavement
61, 63, 64
doorway
... 20
passages
... 126
great chamber
PAca
... 142
... 177
XV
... 231
... 229
... 233
... 235
... 227
... 152
... 209
... 211
209,212
... 213
... 213
... 214
... 215
... 217
... 217
...28, 30
... 34
... 24
... 39
... 37
... 40
38,39
...41,43
... 42
... 43-4
... 44
... 44
... 37
... 43
24. S»
... 95
41.45
... 45
... 134
... 153
... 30
... 97
... 97
... 98
96.97
... 99
... 104
104, 105
... los
INDEX.
Pyramid, Second — tonUnaed.
lower chamber „. ^
coffer „, ... „.
portcullis in ... „.
area around ... _
peribolus of .^ „.
barracks of
temple of _.
Pyramid, Third, bnilt by Menkatm
never finished
excavations at
base of
angle of „.
height of ^
casing of
courses of
entrance
passage
upper passage
first chamber
second chamber
granite chamber
loculns chamber
peribolus of
Pyramids, ofGizeh, No. 7 inside
Mo. 8 inside
No. 9 casing
Pyramid of Abu Roash
Dahshur, great
southern
Riga
Sakkara, Pepi's
brick
Fyramid-mastabasof Saklcara ...
Mednm
Pyramids, angles of
rule for slopes ... ~>
doors of
accretion theory rf building
passages never plugged ...
workmanship of
of Gizeh, builders of
orientatioa
relative pcsitions of
(see TAttria)
Queen's chamber, siie of ~
height of
roof of ... ... ~.
passage .••
niche -
statue in ? •
... 108
106,108
... 108
... 97
... ICO
... lOI
«S3. »5S
... no
... 31
... Ill
... 112
112, 113
III, 112
:.. 112
... 117
... 118
... 120
... 117
... 118
... 119
... 119
114, IIS
... 121
... 128
... 124
... 140
... 144
... 144
... 147
... 142
iSS. «S6
... 148
... 147
... 162
... 162
I4S. »67
... 163
... 166
... 169
XV
... I2S
... I2S
... 67
67,68
„. 69
... 6s
69,70
I36> »>7
Queen's chamber, coffer in ?
air channels, angles
method of measuring ...
goniometer
Rainfall, past and present ._
Raising the coffer ,
the stones
Ratatef
Rejection of errors
Residence at Gizeh
Reversal of theodolites ...
Royal Engineers, survey of ...
Sakkara, Mastaba-pyramid
pyramid of Pepi
Sand, blown
Saws for granite
circular ... ... ...
Shifts of theodolite ... ...
Signals for survey...
Slit caps for telescopes
Smashing of statues
at Abu Roash
at Gizeh .-
at Sakkara ... ...
Smyth, Prof., work at Gizeh
"Life and Work"
his list of required work ...
Sockets of Great Pyramid
levels of
Sphinx, tablet mentioning it
temple of (see Granite Temple)
not known before Hyksos
Spider lines ._
Square of steel
Standard steel scale, description
accuracy of
Stands for theodolites
Station marks
Statues, fragments found
painted
in Queen's chamber ? ... .
Steel chain, description
Steel standard (see 6'/an</ar</) ...
Steel tape
Steel square
Stone Pasha, General, advice of
Strabo, accuracy of
describes pyramid door ..
Straighlness of entrance passage
149.
FACE
*3
«9
ISO
•S3
6,7
... 142
«So
- 173. '74
32$
141, 142, 158
... IS8
142, 143, 157
xiv
«S7
'9
II
12, 20;
20^34
102, 137
«72
. ... 136
... 12
... II
«9
.- 8
... 168
INDEX.
Stridgbtness of ascending passage
gallery
Supports for tape and chain
Survey base, measuie of
co-ordinates of
accuracy of
Surveys, values attached to
Tablet of Khufa, so-called
Tatefra
Tehneh, cliffs
Temple (see Cianitt Temple)
of Great Pyramid
of Second Pyramid
of Sphinx (see Granite Temple)
ofPetulchann
Temples attached to pyramids ...
Tension apparatus for tape
for chain
Theodolite, lo-inch
5-inch <
4-inch
stands for
method of reversal
method of Sxing in passage
spider lines
Theories of Great Pyramid outside
trenches
of chambers
of snbtenanean chambers
of Queen's chamber
of King's chamber
of antechamber
of coffer ...
of date
of Great Pyramid grouped
of Second Pyramid
rAci
... 65
... 71
... 14
... 24
... 35
... 342
... SOS
133. 156
... IS3
... 149
... 128
- »34
... 128
... 128
... IS6
... 209
... 15
... 13
... 15
... 18
... 18
... 19
... 18
... 25
... 18
182, 184
... 185
... 186
188, 191
... 191
191, 192
... 194
... 193
... 195
... 188
... 199
20I| 2C4
Theories of Third Pyramid 204
summary of 220
Theory of pyramid building 163
Tombic ~ 200
Thermometers 15
Tomb, Campbell's I38
life in a 6
Tombs, angles of • 13^
divided squares in 180
Tools of pyramid builders 173
Top of Great Pyramid 43
Traces of observations 241
Transferring apparatus 15
Trenches, cleared 30
description of 48, 50
size and position 46, 47
angles of ' 48
lining of 135
Trial passages, position 48
description of 50
Triangulation 24
co-ordinates of 35
accuracy of 205, 206
arrangement of a 223
graphic reduction of 238
Tube drills 132, 173, >7S
Turning employed 176
Vyse, CoL Howard, nature of work 2
publication of xiv
Wages 3*
Weighting observations 228
Workmen's barracks 31,131
Workmanship of pyramids compared 169
of granite temple ^ 132
excess left on stones 69,110,132
bosses left on stones 78,82,110
lines left in chamber 92, 94
Printed by Field and Toer, at vk Leade.nhalle Presse.
