Syria and Egypt from the Tell el Amarna Letters (Petrie, 1898)
==============================================================
W. M. Flinders Petrie — Syria and Egypt from the Tell El Amarna Letters (London, 1898), public domain. The first English treatment of the Amarna archive. Scan via Internet Archive (syriaandegyptfr00petrgoog). Raw OCR, not proofread.


i


THEOLOGICAL UBRARY


^ipjffti^S^'^^


(pv4Jl


SYRIA AND EGYPT

FROM THE TELL EL AMARNA LETTERS


SYRIA AND EGYPT


FROM THE TELL EL AMARNA

LETTERS


BY


W. M. FLINDERS ^TRIE

D.C.L., LL.D^ Ph.D., Hon. F.I^ (Scot.)


METHUEN & CO.

36, ESSEX STREET, STRAND

LONDON

1898


b5h7/


CONTENTS


Chapter I.
INTRODUCTION

1. Discovery of the Letters at Tell el Amama

2. Transliteration and summaries

3. Historical order of the Letters

4. Allegiance of the Syrians to Egypt

5. Chronology of the Letters

6. Identification of the places named .

7. Published sources

8. Conquests of the Egyptians in Syria

9. Position of the principal personages named


PAGE

I

3

5

8

10

13
17
17
24


CHAFfBR II.


LETTERS OF THE PEACE


LBTTRRS


la Kings of the Khatti

11. Dushratta of Mitani

12. Kallimasin of Babylonia

13. Bumaburyash of Babylonia

14. King of Alashia

15. Elings of Assyria and Nukhashi

16. Petty Governors in peace


1-3 .


26


4-12 .


28


13-17 .


37


18-25


40


26-34 .


44


35, 36 .


48


37-106 .


50


VI


CONTENTS


Chapter III.


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR


17. Troubles in Amki with the Khatti

18. Trouble about Damascus

19. Namyawaza in trouble .

20. Galilee rebelling

21. Aziru in peace

22. Abdashirta stating his fidelity

23. Ribaddi attacked

24. Ribaddi in Simyra

25. Ribaddi in Gubla

26. Simyra lost

27. Abimilki of Tyre in trouble

28. Ribaddi in Beyrut

29. Ribaddi in Gubla

30. Ribaddi in Beyrut

31. Beyrut lost, Ribaddi in Gubla


LBTTBRS


PAGE


IO7-IIO


. 59


III-II3


. 61


II4-II7


. 63


I 18-126


. 66


127-142


. 70


143-150


. 73


I5I-I57


. 77


158-160


. 80


I6I-I7I


. 81


172-176


. 90


177-184


. 92


185-196


. 95


197-210


. 102


211-220


. no


221-225


. 114


Chapter IV.


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR


32. Abdkhiba in trouble

33. Milkili and allies doubtful
34 Abdkhiba attacked

35. Fighting round Gezer .

36. Fighting round Megiddo

37. Shuwardata in trouble .

38. Abdkhiba foiling

39. Loss of South Palestine •


226, 227


. 117


228-331


. 119


232-235


. 121


236-241


. 123


242-247


. 125


248-253


. 127


254-256


. 129


257-267


. 131


CONTENTS

40. Movements of the Hittites and Amorites

41. Varieties of Government in Syria .

42. Biographical notices of the principal persons

43. Index of persons

44. Index of places

45. Identification of places .


Vll

PAGB

140
149


^j;u,.o,r^ :^\T?7<^»^t}


SYRIA AND EGYPT

FROM THB

TELL EL AMARNA LETTERS


CHAPTER L

INTRODUCTION

I. During the age of the decline of
Egyptian power in Syria, when the great
conquests of Tahutmes I. were all gradually
lost, a splendid store of information was laid
by for us in the cuneiform correspondence at
Tell el Amama. The clay tablets, mostly
from Syria, but with a few duplicates of
letters from Egypt, were deposited in "The
place of the records of Jthe. palace of the
king,'' as it is called upon the stamped bricks
which I found still remainingthere, A few
years ago the natives, while plundering about
the ruins and carrying off Akhenaten's bricks
for their modern houses, lit upon this record
chamber containing many hundreds of tab-
lets. These were shown to dealers; they

B


2 INTRODUCTION

sent some to Dr. Oppert, at Paris, who pro-
nounced them to be forgeries ; others were
sent to M. Grebaut, then head of the Depart-
ment of Antiquities, and were treated by him
with customary silence. At last, when they
were supposed to be almost worthless, a
quantity were carried in sacks to Luqsor to
hawk about among the dealers there, and
these were largely ground to pieces on the
way. What has been preserved, therefore,
is but a wreck of what might have been, had
any person equal to the occasion placed his
hand upon them in time. The tablets thus
reaching the dealers' hands became known,
and were bought up mainly for the British
Museum and the Berlin Museum. Some
drifted to St. Petersburg, Paris, and the
Cairo Museums ; and some into the private
collections of Murch, Rostowicz, and others.
A similar miserable fate attends all dis-
coveries in Egypt, unless made by a skilled
observer, as witness the palace of Ramessu
III. at Tell el Yehudiyeh, the Deir el Bahri
treasure, the cemetery of Ekhmim, the
palace of Amenhotep III. at Thebes, as
well as unnumbered cemeteries and towns
throughout the land.

The tablets thus dispersed were published


INTRODUCTION 3

in many different ways and places ; and the
first synopsis of the whole was given in the
second volume of my History of Egypt.
But sincfi t^^" Q miirK larger niimbf** havc
beeiL_puhlishei . .with a more critical and
definitive _text of the whole by Hugo
Winckler, in The Tell el Amarna Letters.
An the Summaries of the letters which
I made before have been now revised with
Winckler's translations, and summaries of
all the new ones have been made from those
translations. I have retained the original
references to the older translations, because
Winckler's edition is so extremely bald and
deficient in general information, so purely
a linguistic exercise and not an effective
edition, that the older publications are still
of value for details of place, state, dockets,
&c. But in every case Winckler's number,
W. n., is placed against each summary.

2. With regard to transliteration I have
departed from the system used by Winckler,
not without good reason. The rage for
employing out-of-the-way and little -known
symbols in place of effective letters which are
understood, threatens to place historical and
linguistic works as much outside of the
ordinary reader's pronunciation as a set of


4 INTRODUCTION

chemical symbols or differential equations.
When almost everything required can be
expressed in commonly known terms, there
is a pedantry about adopting what only
specialists can read. Double letters, if in
common use, are no real objection, as in
the few cases where sh, th, kh, ts, &c., are
really two separate letters, it is easy to put
a hyphen between them to sepkrate them.
No mistake can thus arise; everyone can
read and understand the names^ and only the
theoretic beauty of one letter, one sign, is
interfered with. I accordingly use kh for
kheth, th for teth, y for yod, s for samekh,
ts for tsade, q for qoph, and sh for shin.
When we may come to see Greek names
written as Tales, Ahilles, Pilippos, &c, it
will be time enough to suppose that double
letters are not wanted. In no possible case
in any system should the sign j be used
instead of y, as for the greater part of man-
kind it means a soft g, and the y sign cannot
be misunderstood.

The summaries of each letter that are
given here include every name of person or
of place that occurs in the letter, every fact
mentioned which can be of value for judging
of the positions of persons or the conditions


INTRODUCTION 5

of affairs, and any presents or objects named.
In short nothing is omitted but verbiage and
phrases which are of no value for the history
or the understanding of the position. The
summaries are all that need to be compared
and considered for their connections ; yet in
all important cases the full translations have
been referred to here, when working out the
history and geography, in order to make
certain that no minute details were over-
looked.

3. The order of the letters has been deter-
mined by dividing them into three main
classes : ( i ) Royal letters and others during
the peaceful times of Amenhotep III., and
early in Amenhotep IV. ; (2) the North
Syrian war; (3) the South Syrian or
Palestine war.

In the first class the letters of different
places have no chronological interlocking,
and therefore each kingdom and person is
taken separately.

In the second class the main backbone
of the sequence is in the history of Ribaddi ;
and in the third series the history of Abd-
khiba (or Ebed-tob as formerly rendered) is
the main sequence.

The first step was to place the letters of


6 INTRODUCTION

each of these personal histories in the order
of time, judging from the waning power of
these allies of Egypt. The towns which they
successively lost, and the difficulties in which
they were, serve to fit the letters very
closely together one after the other. The
frequent changes of residence of Ribaddi
have particularly to be noticed, as otherwise
all the letters from one residence of his
might be supposed to be earlier or later than
those from another residence. No change of
residence has been assumed here, except
what is clearly required by the sequence of
events that are named. In particular we
may note the phrase, " May Baalat of Gubla
give po>yer to my lord the king." Such an
invocation of the local deity might be
supposed to show that the letter was written
from Gubla. After settling the order and
the locality of each letter of Ribaddi, as far
as is shown by the evidence of events, then
the invocations of the goddess of Gubla
were tabulated. In most cases such letters
appeared to have been written from Gubla.
The results appear thus, the letters naming
** Baalat of Gubla" or ** Gubla your hand-
maid " are thirty-two in all ; of these, from
the events, I classed :—


INTRODUCTION 7

22 written in Gublsu
3 „ „ Berut
7 early uncertain ones.

32 naming Gubla.

Of letters not naming Gubla in a gratui-
tous manner, there are twenty-five in all ; of
these, from the events, I classed : —

II written in Gubla.

10 „ „ Berut.

2 „ „ Tsumura.

2 early uncertain ones.

25 not naming Gubla.

Here, then, the test of the gratuitous
naming of Gubla is almost restricted to
letters written from Gubla, and it might
seem, therefore, that in three cases I had
made a mistake, in attributing three of this
class to Berut ; but in one of these three we
have the positive proof that an invocation
of Baalat of Gebal might be written else-
where, as Ribaddi says (No. 211, Winckler
62), "And behold at this time I am in
Berut." Hence I see no reason to change
to Gubla the venue of the other two letters.


8 INTRODUCTION

The above test, therefore, is not conclu-
sive; but it is interesting as showing that
of the letters naming Gubla my arrange-
ment only gives one in eight to other
places; while of those not naming Gubla
my arrangement gives more than half to
other places. This is a perfectly unbiassed
test, as it was not visible in the summaries
which I arranged, and was never looked at
in the letters until all the present arrange-
ment was done.

4. Another matter to be noted is the
change of allegiance of persons and places.
Such change is always shown in the
indices of persons and of places by a star ;
the references before the star (if any) being
friendly to Egypt, the references after the
star (if any) being hostile to Egypt. In
many cases, however, there is a dubious
period in which there are conflicting state-
ments from different parties; in such cases
the references that are dubious are placed
between two stars. Such dubious references
arise from several causes. Sometimes a
man was misrepresented by his enemies in
order to prejudice him in the opinion of the
Egyptians. Sometimes an enemy of the
Egyptians continued to claim to be on their


INTRODUCTION 9

side as long as he could. But the more
usual case seems to have been that the
Egyptians had lost interest in Syria, lost
the power of sparing troops to manage the
country and to keep order, and lost heart
in foreign matters since they were absorbed
in the home politics of religious revolutions.
So soon as the strong hand of the power
of Egypt ceased to act in all emergencies,
to interfere in every squabble, and to make
capital out of the internal discords of the
Syrians — so soon the Syrians began their
old life of aggression one on the other. It
was just what we see every year in India ;
any place without a garrison is liable to out-
bursts of the old feud of Hindu faith against
Muhamedan. So it was in Syria; all the
petty chiefs and shekhs whose ancestors had
been cutting each other's throats for genera-
tions, and who, doubtless, had venerable
blood-feuds unavenged, soon began to attack
one another when not vigorously kept in
hand by Egypt. Also any strong and
capable man like Abdashirta and his son
Aziru, soon found that he could safely bully
his neighbours, and gradually acquire power
over them.

Hence the weakening of Egypt threw


lo INTRODUCTION

Syria into a state of internal discord un-
repressed. The immediate effect of this
was that various parties, without caring
particularly about being for or against the
Egyptians, began to fight with one another.
Each tried to draw the power of Egypt to
his own side by representing that he was
l63rally acting in the interest of his suzerain ;
and the weaker party was sure to place his
trust most fully upon Egypt. It was only
when a man had played his own hand for
a long time, had strengthened himself by
absorbing much of his neighbour's goods
and lands, and had safely neglected the
orders of the Egyptians on several occa-
sions — it was only then that he cared to
throw off the mask and act openly in his
own interest, and allow himself to be classed
as an enemy. Hence we often find very
different views of people, and might put
them as being on the Egyptian side accord-
ing to their own account long after they
were on the enemies' side according to other
accounts.

5. A very important consideration which
has not been worked out hitherto lies in
the few chronological details which can be
gathered. It is obvious that excepting a


INTRODUCTION ii

small proportion of peaceful letters under
Amenhotep III., all the rest of these record
the downfall of Egyptian power under
Akhenaten. It is possible to glean some
indications, however, of a more exact dating,
and to allot the main outlines to their
approximate years.

In the Mitanni letters up to No. 8 they
are to Amenhotep III., No. 9 is to the
IVth.

In the Kardunyash letters up to No. 17
they are to Amenhotep III., No. 18 is to
the IVth. ;

In the letter from an unknown king to
the kings of Kinakhi (No. 40) condolences
on the death of a king, evidently Amen-
hotep III., are named. In letter 123 is
a reference to the 3rd year, which cannot
be any but the year of Amenhotep IVth,
and must have been written later, as his
father did not die till the 5th year of his
son's reckoning. At this time caravans
seem to have been freely passing.

Two important letters (iii, 112), of
Akizzi of Qatna, near Damascus, addressed
to Amenhotep III., show that serious
troubles were in progress before his death,
probably in the last year or two, the 4th


12 INTRODUCTION

and 5th year of Amenhotep IVth's joint
reign. The political prospect then was that
Nukhashi, Ni, Zinzar, and Kinanat (or the
Upper Orontes) were still faithful, but
in danger. The Damascus plain was
seriously threatened. The Lower Orontes,
or Amurra, was already in revolt under
Azira, and the Khatti were hostile.

From this point we may approximately
start the reckoning of Azira's wars and
attacks on Ribaddi, say in the 5th year of
Amenhotep IV., the epoch of letter 140,
when Ribaddi first asks for troops to defend
himself from Abdashirta and the Khabiri.

In letter 174 we read that Ribaddi had
fought for five years, bringing this point to
about the loth year of Akhenaten.

Then in letter 186 Ribaddi's son had been
sent from Berut to see the king, but had not
succeeded in doing so for three months.
About a year must be allowed to this point,
or the nth year.

In letter 204 Ribaddi complains that
Gubla has been besieged for three years,
causing famine, owing to the cutting off of
the arable land. As the complaints of the
trouble of Gubla begin in letter 187, this
three years will date from about then, so


INTRODUCTION 13

that letter 204 will be at least as late as the
14th year.

In the tomb of Huya, No. i, at Tell el
Amarna, there are prisoners of the Kharu ;
and this tomb shows only two figures of
princesses which are, therefore, about the
7th-8th year, and contains a date of the
1 2th year. The carvings occupied some
time therefore, and the prisoners may well
refer to some successes which Ribaddi seems
to have had about the 12 th year, when in
letter 192 he anticipates being able to drive
out Azira. We therefore have approximate
dates of

B.C. about.

Letter 1 1 1, 1 12 — ^4th, sth year Akhenaten

(endof Amenhotep III.) . . 1379
„ 123, referring to 3rd year, but after

4th year 1379


„ 140, 5th year (?) of Akhenaten
„ 174, lOth year (?) .
„ 186, nth year (?) .
„ 193, I2thyear(?) .
„ 204, 14th year (?) .
„ 225, 17th year (? ?) end of Ri-
baddi 1366


1378

1373

1372

1371
1369


6. The questions of the positions of the
various places named in these letters require
to be systematically treated and not dealt


14 INTRODUCTION

with by a hap-hazard system of verbal
coincidence.

That such has been far too much the
case can be seen in one well-known in-
stance. The king of Megiddo had three
country palaces, or storehouses, which were
plundered by the Egyptians immediately
after the fall of Megiddo, in the 23rd year
of Tahutmes III. {History ii. no); they
were named Yenuamu, Anaugasa, and
Harnekaru. From the history it is plain
that they were within the kingdom ruled
from Megiddo, and not far away therefore,
and that they were not on the Egyptian side
of Megiddo. Yet, in face of this, the
astounding identification of the kingdom
of Nukhashi, far in the north, for the store
city of Anaugasa, and the city of Rhinocolura,
far to the south, for the store city of
Harnekaru, have been gravely upheld in
defiance of all geography. When we look,
on the reasonable grounds of apparent posi-
tion, to the region a little north of Megiddo,
we there see Yanuh, or Yenu of the Amu
up one valley, and Nakura (with Ras en
Nakura, the hill or Har-nakura by it) up
another valley, and possibly even the third
name Anaugasa surviving in an intermediate


INTRODUCTION 15

valley where a ruin is called Medinet en
Nehas.

Though the positions must thus be the first
consideration in fixing places, yet we must
not go to the opposite extreme and say that
names cannot be trusted, and that nothing
can be certain. When we see the names of
Akka, Askaluna, Biruta, Danuna, Gazri,
Lakish, Qideshu, Timasgi, Tsiduna, Tsurri,
Tsumura, Tunip, Urushalim, Yapu, and
Zinzar, all lasting with no change— or only a
small variation in vowels— down to the present
day, when nearly all the most important places
might be named in cuneiform to the modern
peasant, it needs no further proof that
ancient names may be safely sought for in
the modem map. Altogether, out of about
150 names of places in these letters, about 100
can be fixed with more or less certainty, and
many of the others might probably be found
if there were indications of the district in
which to seek them.

The practical method followed in prepar-
ing the lists of places, and the map, has been
to extract from the letters every mention of
a place, with all other places which are
mentioned with it^ then by means of the
other names to delimit wh^t may be the


i6 INTRODUCTION

possible ground for the unknown name.
Next, considering the usual mutations between
the transcription of cuneiform and the modern
Arabic forms, to frame the shape in which
it would be most likely to occur; and then
to search the maps by reading over every
name within the possible limits.

In dealing with names there are several
sources of divergence between the cuneiform
transcription and modern Arabic. The
name may have been variable in form
anciently, as some names now are ; it may
have been changed in being transcribed into
cuneiform ; it may have changed during over
three thousand years and many conquests;
or it may have been changed on being
transcribed into Arabia Thus there are
so many possibilities of change, which
actually occur in many cases, that we may
wonder at the principal places having pre-
served their names so closely as they have
done. In identifying names another con-
sideration is in the descriptive nature of
many of them. In the present list we meet
with ' Amq, the valley or deep place ; Ginti,
the gardens ; Kirmil, the vineyard ; Gubla
or Gebal, the rock or mountain ; Kharabu,
the ruin; Magdali, a tower; Rubuta, a


INTRODUCTION 17

capital ; and Yarimuta, the Yerimoth or high
place. Being descriptive, such might be
easily found repeated, and hence there is
the more need to look fully at the indi-
cations of locality in fixing such names.

7. The references to the published sources
of the letters are given not only to the latest
and fullest edition by Winckler (W), The
Tell el Amama Letters, but also to the
earlier publications which are accompanied
by more details as to the place, state, &c., of
the tablets. These are indicated thus: —
R.P, xiii.-xviii., Records of the Past^
series ii., vols, i.-vi. S.B.A., Proceedings
of the Society of Biblical Archceology.
M.A.F., Mission Archeologique Frangaise.
B.O.D. Bezold, Oriental Diplomacy y and
the Tell el Amama Tablets^ same numbers.
P. A., Petrie, Tell el Amama. But in all
cases the summary follows the latest edition
by Winckler.

8. Before entering upon these letters it
win be well to give a sketch of the previous
relations of Egypt to Syria, which explain
the position of affairs at the time when this
correspondence begins. Before the XVIIIth
Dynasty the Egyptians had not much rela-
tion with the East. The kings of the IVth


i8 INTRODUCTION

Dynasty had a fighting frontier as near home
as in Sinai ; the Vth Dynasty carried the war
further east among the Sati, and besieged
and took fortified cities of theirs, as shown
at Deshasheh. The Xllth Dynasty fought
the Sati, as named by Amenemhat I., and
figured on the pectorals of Usertesen III.
and Amenemhat III. The independence of
all Southern Syria is evident from the history
of Sanehat, where it does not appear that
the Egyptians had an occupation beyond the
Isthmus of Suez.

It was not until the rolling back of the
tide of the conquering Syrians, in the expul-
sion of the Hyksos, that the Egyptians took
any permanent hold outside of their own
land. Aahmes, in the first rush of conquest,
reached as far as Zahi, or the middle of the
Syrian coast. Amenhotep I. seems to have
done nothing in Syria, occupied probably in
the consolidation and prosperity of Egypt.
Tahutmes I. conquered the whole length of
Syria as far as the Euphrates, having set up
his tablet of victory at Naharaina or northern
Mesopotamia. Tahutmes III. did as much,
but no more. Amenhotep II. seems to have
lost ground, as he found in his young days
an enemy to repulse at Harosheth, on the


INTRODUCTION 19

Kishon, just beyond Carmel. Tahutmes
IV. fought the Khita, who must at that time
have been far in the north, up to Cilicia, and
hence he seems to have occupied the whole
of Syria.

Of Amenhotep 1 1 1. — the first king of this
correspondence — there are, unfortunately,
very few records of his conquests or power.
For the names of the subject peoples of
Syria we are dependent on the decorative
figures of captives around the columns of the
temple at Soleb in Ethiopia. There are
three series of them, each series double ; part
facing one way and part the other. The
most probable order to read them is from
the pair face to face, reading first those
which face to right and then those which
face to left. The series then appear thus
(see Leps. Denk. iii. 88) :


First Sbribs.

Sengar . Singara, W. of Nineveh.

Upper Euphrates, both sides.

N. end of Syria, Comagene. \i^\\\ \\


Naharain
Khita


Kedesh
Tanepu
(lost)
(lost)


By Lake Homs }
Tunip, Tennib.

?
?


20 INTRODUCTION

Akarita . Ugarit,^mouth of Orontes.
Kefa ♦ NTPhoenicia.

Second Series.

Karkamish Karkhamish.
Asur . Assyria.

Apththena Aphadana, 35* 30', E. of Chaboras.
or Aphphadana, 34* 35', E. of Euphrates.


Makuuatsh Maguda, 35* 40', E. of Euphrates.
Mehpeni, or ?
Shedpeni ?

Third Series.

Kedina . Katanii, E. of Palmyra.

Aaro, or

Atiro ? . Atera, 45' S, 20' W., of Palmyra.


Pah . . . ?

Punt . Punda, about 31*, W. of Euphrates.

Sha . u . Shasu ? Bedawin.

Thyta , ?

Arerpaka . Arrapakhitis, N.E. of Nineveh.

In the first series there is the extreme
north of Syria, and then the north-central
and round to northern coast For the place
of Ugarit see the discussion farther on. In
the second series we begin on the Upper
Euphrates and go down the valley. In the
third series there is the Palmyra desert,


INTRODUCTION 21

and then the Lower Euphrates and up to
Nineveh. The name Aaro is unlikely, and
probably one of the a birds is really //, as
these are often confounded : it would then
read Atiro, and so may well be Atera near
Palmyra, The name Punt occurring here
with a strongly-marked Syrian figure, and
next to the Shasu, was a stumbling-block,
until the possibility was noticed of its being
really eastern, in accord with the figure and
position, and representing Punda on the
Lower Euphrates. This name of Ptolemy
is variable, reading also Gunda and Spunda.
The Shasu are well known as Bedawin in
general. Thyta is the next name, not
identified with any place; it seems barely
possible that it was the land of Queen Thy,
named after her by the Egyptians, and that
it would read " Thy's land." Lastly, Arer-
paka is Arapkha of the Assyrians, Arra-
pakhitis of the Greeks, a district just north
of Nineveh. /

These lists show that Amenhotep III., /
either by conquest or by treaty, had extended ^
even the empire which l^d been acquired by [
Tahutmes I. and III. /The whole Euphra-
tes appears to be subject to him, down to
li* N., the Tigris up to Assyria and Arra-


o^


A,


22 INTRODUCTION

pakhitis, and the Palmyra desert between
Syria and Mesopotamia. This shows ap-
parently the greatest extent of the Egyptian
power ever known ; in classical terms it
comprised the whole of Syria, Mesopotamia,
Chaldea, and Assyria, stopping only at the
frontiers of Susiana, Media, and Armenia.

It is now the breaking up of all this
power that we have detailed before us in the
letters from Tell el Amarna* Much had
been already lost in the later years of
Amenhotep III.; in letters iii, 112 the
governor of Qatna near Damascus states
that Azira, the centre of North Syrian in-
dependence, was in revolt, the Khatti were
at war, and places round Damascus were
rebelling. Yet up to the close of the reign
of the third Amenhotep and beginning of the
fourth, the letters passed regularly to and from
Babylonia and northern Mesopotamia, so
that no serious break of communications had
taken place. The serious overthrow belongs
to the reign of Akhenaten, when, having
openly broken with all the traditions of his
Amenhotep youth, he threw all his energies
into domestic reform, and abandoned foreign
politics with disastrous results. It was not
till a generation later, under Horemheb, that


INTRODUCTION 23

the Egryptians again obtained a hold on
Syria. Even the boasted conquests of
Sety I. and Ramessu II. did not more than
half recover the length of Syria ; while they
did not attempt alliances with Mesopotamia
and Babylonia, but were content to meekly
ma ke treaties on ec^ual ternis with. the. l£hita,
who had absorbed the greater part of
Syria, and who had laid out that kingdom
which was so familiar to the Israelites.

In later times the warlike Merenptah,
Ramessu III. and Sheshenq I., claimed
authority again over Palestine, but they did
not venture to go beyond the Ramesside
territory. In the XXVIth Dynasty Nekau
(Necho) struck boldly through Syria to the
Euphrates, only to be defeated at Car-
chemish ; and the Ptolemies, though holding
Cyprus and much of Phoenicia, yet did not
succeed in acquiring the Seleucid kingdom
of Antioch. At no period, therefore, can we
place the power of Egypt higher than it was
under Amenhotep III., lord of the two great
cradles of civilization, the narrow valley of
Nile, and the plains and highlands of
Mesopotamia.


24 INTRODUCTION

9. Positions of Principal Personages named.

Abdashirta of Amurra &c. (Orontes valley).

Abdkhiba of Jerusalem.

Abimilki of Tyre.

Addumikhir of Gaza.

Akizzi of Qatana.

Amanappa, commissioner.

Amunira of Beyrut.

Artamaniya of Bashan.

{Arzauni of Rukhizi.
Arzawiya of Mikhizi.

Assur-nadinakhi 1 , . c \

A ^ If t« f kmgs of Assyria.

Assur-ubalhdh J

Aziri of Amurra, &c.

Bikhura, commissioner in Kamid.

Biridya of Megiddo.

Burnaburyash of Babylonia.

Dushratta of Mitani.

Itakama of Kinza and Qedesh.

Kallimasin of Babylonia.

Kbaib, commissioner of Simyra.

Khatib, commissioner.

Lapaya in S. Palestine.

Milkili in S. Palestine.

Namiawiza of Kamid.

Ninur of Seffin.

Pakhura (see Bikhura).

Puaddi of Yerza.

Raman-nirari of Nukhashi.


INTRODUCTION 25

Shumadda of Merom.
Shutatna of Akko.
Suwarzana of 'Azziyeh.
Tarkhundaraush, king of Hittites.
Tiuwatti of Helbon.
Yabiteri of Gaza and Joppa.
Yabni-il of Lachish.
Yankhamu, commissioner.
Yapa-addi, commissioner.
Yapakhi of Gezer.
Yitya of Askelon.
Zimrida of Lachish.
Zimrida of Zidon.
Zitatna (see Shutatna).


CHAPTER IL

LETTERS OF THE PEACE

10. Kings of the Khatti.

An early letter to Amenhotep IIL cannot
be regularly translated, as it is in an unknown
language, but a few names can be trans-
literated and may lead to some results.
From the personal name it would seem that
the sender was a Hittite king, the word
Tarkhun being well known in the name
of the king Tarqu-dimme of the silver
boss, the same name as the king Tarkon-
demos of Greek times. From ' the letter
can be gleaned the following : —

(i) TARKHUNDARAUSH to NIMUTRIYA.
(Amenhotep III.) T. sends Irshappa for
a daughter of N. ; and sends a shuka of
gold, and will send a chariot, &c. Prince
of the Khatti on the mountains of Igaid
sends a shuka weighing 20 manehs, 3 kak
of ivory, 3 kak of pirkar^ 3 kak of khuzzi^
8 kak of kusittiu^ 100 kak of lead, 5
kukupu stones, 10 thrones of usu wood,

2 usu trees. (S.B A. xi. 336.)

36


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 27

The throne name of Amenhotep IIL,
which we render as Neb-maat-ra, was
variously vocalized by the cuneiform scribes
as Nimmuria, Nammuria, Nimutriya, or
Mimmuria ; these variations show how little
exactness can be expected in cuneiform
versions of names.

The reference to the mountain of Igaid
is a clue, as that is apparently the Ygatiy
of the Travels of the Mohar of Ramesside
times; and from the position of the name
there it seems to have been about the
Lebanon, perhaps connected with Ain
Yakut on the old pass over the Lebanon,
between Damascus and Beyrut. So this
prince of the Khatti ruled on the Lebanon
in the time of Amenhotep IIL, showing
how the Hittites had already begun to
occupy Syria. The Hittite writer of the
letter seems to have been entering on the
family alliances with the Egyptians, which
were carried on till Ramessu II. Another
letter appears to be also from the Hittites,
showing that they were tributaries, or, at
least, on good terms.

(2) ZIDA . .^. to king of Egypt. When mes-
sengers went to the Khatti, Z. alone sent


28 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

presents ; and now he sends i6 boys, and
asks for gold in return.

(Winckler 36; S.B.A. xiii. 132.)

Another letter has been supposed to be
from a king of the Khatti, but Winckler
does not accept this from the fragment of
the name, . « . ti.

(3) King of (KHA)TTI to KHURI (short for
Nipkhuriya, Amenhotep IV.). Asks for
an alliance, as between their fathers. Sends
a bibru of silver, 5 minas, another 3 minas,
2 gaggaru of silver, 10 minas, and 2 great
nikibtu. (W. 35 ; S.B.A. xiii. 549.)

1 1. Dtishratta of Mitani.

The principal series of letters which show
family relationships between the Egyptian
kings and those of Syria are those sent by
Dushratta, king of Mitani, to Amenhotep
III. and IV. The earliest of these refers
to the accession of Dushratta, and to his
troubles from the invasion of the Khatti.
The land of Mitani, in the north of Meso-
potamia, bordering on the Euphrates, was
close to the Hittite country, and would be
naturally in the way of their attacks.


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 29

(4) DUSHRATTA to NIPMUARIA (Amen-

hotep III.). D. greets Gilukhipa his sister.
Soon after his accession Pirkhi attacked his
land and his people ; but D. repulsed him,
and slew the murderers of D.'s brother
Artash-shumara, whom P. supported. D.
notifies N. of this, as N. was a friend of
D.'s father, who gave him D.'s sister. The
Khatti came into D.'s land, but D.'s god,
Tishub, gave them into his hand. D. sends
a chariot, 2 horses, a lad, and a girl, of the
booty of the Khatti. Also 5 chariots and
pairs of horses. Also to D.'s sister Gilu-
khipa a pair of breast ornaments of gold, a
pair of earrings of gold, a mash-hu of gold,
and a jar of oil. D. sends Gilia a messenger
and Tunip-ipri. Let N. return them soon.

(W. 16; S.B.A. XV. 120.)

(5) DUSHRATTA to NIMMURIYA. N. sent

Mani to ask for daughter of D. to be
mistress of Egypt Giliya, D.'s messenger,
reported words of N. which rejoiced D.
And D. asks much gold, as N. sent to his
father Shutama a dish, cup, and brick of
solid gold. D. sends Giliya, and a present
of a gold goblet set with lazuli ; a necklace
of 20 lazuli beads and 19 of gold, in middle
lazuli cased in gold; a necklace of 42
khulalu stones, and 40 gold beads ; and an
amulet of khulalu stone in gold, 10 pairs of
horses, 10 chariots of wood, and 30 women.

(W. 17 ; R.P. XV. 84.)


30 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

Here Dushratta is sending grand presents,
besides being willing to give up a daughter
to Egypt. This points to his being a
tributary, and not entirely independent.
Amenhotep III. sends an envoy to nego-
tiate for a princess to be the *' mistress of
Egypt," and this was not for himself, but
for his son, as the later letters show. To
Dushratta's letter above, Amenhotep replied
by accepting the present, and sending again
to fetch the princess. His request is
acknowledged in the next letter, while the
princess was preparing for the journey.

(6) DUSHRATTA to NIMMURIYA. Mani,
A.'s messenger, has come to fetch a wife
from D. to be the mistress of Egypt. Land
of Khani-galbat, and land of Egypt will
live in peace , . . After 6 months Giliya
and Mani were now sent with the queen.
Kharamashi sent by D. with letter. D.
asks for much gold; has sent an ushu
stone, an isizzu of Aleppo stone, and a
khulal stone set in gold.

(W. i8; R.P. XV. 74.)

In the next letter Dushratta calls himself
father-in-law to Amenhotep HL, referring
to some previous marriage, and not to the
one just negotiated, as this last was of


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 31

Amenhotep IV., as shown by letters 9, 10,

II. Two other letters to Amenhotep IV.
refer to the family relationships.

(7) DUSHRATTA to NIMMURIYA. D. is

father-in-law to N. May Istar bless N.

Mani the messenger, and Khani, dragoman

of N., have brought presents; D. sends

lazuli and some gold.

(W. 19 ; R.P. XV. 73.)

(8) DUSHRATTA to NIMMURIYA. D. greets

Tadukhipa his daughter and Nimmuriya
his son-in-law. Sends statue of Istar of
Nina to be honoured by N. and returned.

(W. 20; S.B.A. XV. 124.)

On the back of this is an hieratic docket,
apparently in the 36th year of Amenhotep
III., month of Pharmuthi. This is the
very latest date in the reign, and would be
two or three weeks later than the papyrus
of Kahun dated under Amenhotep IV.
Possibly in the last illness of Amenhotep

III. the dating under his co-regent son came
into use irregularly, and in any case official
correspondence of the palace would receive
the date of the king to whom it was ad-
dressed. By its date this must be the last
letter of this reign.

After the death of Amenhotep III.,


32 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

Amenhotep IV. was but a youth of about
1 8 years old ; and hence Dushratta hesitated
at addressing confidential diplomacy to him,
and wrote in the first place to Queen Tyi.
As we already know, from a quarry inscrip-
tion at Tell el Amama, this queen was for
a short time apparently sole regent Tyi
appears from the following letter to have
acted as regent independently of her son,
and to have taken the position of sending
out the diplomatic messengers to keep up
the relation with foreign states,

(9) DUSHRATTA to TEIE. D. greets Teie
her son, and Tadukhipa his bride. Appeals
to friendship with Mimmuria (Amenhotep
ni.), and Teie knows all the negotiations
better than the messengers' Gilia and Mani.
Asks that certain gold statues be sent, along
with presents to Yuni, D/s wife.

(W. 22 ; S.B.A. XV. 127.)

Gilia was the messenger of Dushratta, and
was sent back with the news of the death of
Amenhotep III., and a request for continu-
ance of friendship. Hence he must have
arrived just about the time of the kings
death, and was therefore the bearer of letter
8, which came just at that time. This letter
9 is Dushratta's next after No. 8.


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 33

(10) DUSHRATTA toNAPKHURIRlA(Amen.
hotep IV.). To N. my brother, my son-in-
law, D. your father-in-law, your brother:
salutations to N/s mother Teie, to D/s
daughter, Tadukhipa, N.'s other wives, sons,
&c. Pirizzi and Bubri were sent by D. to
condole with N. Mani N/s messenger was
kept by D. until the return of D/s mes-
senger. Teie knows all past discussions,
and N. must consult her.

(W. 24 ; M.A.F. vi. 304 ; R.P. xv. 89.)

The name of Amenhotep IV., Nefer-
kheperu-ra, was rendered in cuneiform as
Napkhuriria. This letter is conclusive as
to Tadukhipa being daughter of Dushratta
and wife of Amenhotep IV. On no monu-
ments is there any trace of any other wife of
the king, and from the great prominence of
Nefertiti, Akhenaten's devotion to her,
and the absence of any children but hers
(although all of hers were daughters), it
seems that Nefertiti must be this wife Tadu-
khipa. It is true that Dushratta also greets
other wives of Amenhotep IV., which would
imply several such ; but he also greets sons,
whereas there is no trace of any son, and
had there been one it is unlikely that he
would have been ignored and only a long
string of daughters put forward. The

D


34 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

phrase, therefore, of "wives and sons" is
merely a conventional presumption.

The next letter is the longest of the whole
series, about 190 lines in all, filling over eight
oc'tavo pages even in its defective condition.
It begins with the same relationships as the
previous letter, therefore omitted here.


(II) DUSHRATTA to NAPKHURIA. From
D.'s youth Nimmuria wrote to him, and
Teie knows all that passed. When Nim-
muria's father (Tahutmes IV.) sent to
Artatama, D.'s grandfather, for his daughter,
she was only granted at the 7th application.
Nimmuria sent to Shutama, D/s father, for
D.'s sister, who was only granted at the 6th
application. Nimmuria sent to D. for D.'s
daughter, and D. sent her, with an exchange
of presents, by Khamashi (Kha-em-uas),
N.'s messenger. And Nimmuria rejoiced
in Tadukhipa. Gilia was D.'s agent in
exchanges, and Nizag was N.'s agent
Nimmuria promised D. to make gold of
Egypt plentiful in Khanigalbat ; so D. asks
for golden images. D. describes his grief
at Nimmuria's death. Mani was Nim-
muria's messenger. D. sent Perizzi and
Bubri to condole. D.'s present messenger
is Mazipalali, uncle of Gilia. D. has
imprisoned Artishub and Asali who attacked


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 35

Egyptian territory. D. sends presents for
Teie and for Tadukhipa.

(W. 21 ; R.P. XV. 79.)

This letter is very important as showing
the long-standing relationships between the
Mitanian kings and the Egyptian : it gives
also the names of Dushratta's father,
Shutarna, and grandfather, Artatama. The
difference should be noted, that these two
earlier kings only yielded a daughter to the
Egyptian king after many applications,
whereas Dushratta says that he yielded at
one bargain. This agrees well to Amen-
hotep III. having much extended the
frontiers of Egypt; in earlier reigns the
Euphrates was the boundary, and frontier
neighbours, such as Mitani, were indepen-
dent, but after Amenhotep III. had absorbed
all Mesopotamia and Assyria, the king of
Mitani was his vassal and had to agree with
all decent dignity to his proposals.

The last letter of this series touches on
much the same lines, so that we must regard
all these three letters as having been written
within a short time. Thus this correspon-
dence with Mitani must have been cut off by
Aziru'ss attacks which began in the north


36 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

within the first year or two of the reign of
Amenhotep IV.

(12) DUSHRATTA to NAPKHURI. Mani,
N/s messenger, has come. N. desired that
as D. had been friends with his father,
Mimmuria, so D. should be with N. D.
will be ten times more so. M. sent Mani to
D. with the price for a wife. M, promised
golden images, lazuli, and instruments and
much gold, but N. has not sent them.
Khamashi took message from N. Names
Gilia and Perizzi. (W. 23 ; S.B.A. xiii. 556.)

Both Mani and Khamassi were employed
by Amenhotep III. as messengers. It is
clear that these letters were written with a
full appreciation of business. The marriages
are always connected with large gifts; pre-
sents are always sent, or expected, through
the messengers, and the kings of Mitani
were quite familiar with all the oriental ways
of politely screwing a present or a promise
out of their friends. We can hardly doubt
that the Egyptian letters were of the same
kind, but we have only one copy of a
letter to royalty, and a few letters to in-
feriors.


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 37

1 2. Kallimasin of Babylonia.

Beside the alliance with Mitani, the north-
western end of Mesopotamia nearest to Asia
Minor, there was a similar alliance with
Southern Mesopotamia or Babylonia, then
known as Karduniyash. The successive
kings of this region were Karaindash, Kalli^
masin, Kurigalzu, and Burnaburyash, who is
the best known.

(13) NIBMUARIA to KALLIMA-SIN, king of
Karduniyash. N. (Amenhotep III.) had
asked for a princess from K. But K. com-
plained that his sister, who had been given
to N. by K/s father, had not been seen
again. N. complains that K. never sent a
messenger who could recognize his sister.
Riqa, the messenger of Zaqara, was sent
K. complained that his messengers could
not tell if the queen shown to them was
a daughter of a beggar, or of Gagaia, or
Khanigalbat, or Ugarit But if K. doubts
in this way, does he demand likewise tokens
from all the other kings to whom his
daughters are married? And N. is angry
that K.'s messengers complain about not
receiving gifts, when they always have
presents given to them. N. asks that the
messengers be not believed, as they plot
treachery. K. said that N. had put his


38 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

chariots among those of the vassals, so that
K.'s agent could not find them. But both
agent and chariots belong to K., and N. has
no horses to spare. K. employs Riqa to
write. (W. i ; S.B.A. xv. 26.)

The last sentence seems to mean that N.
had no need of K.'s chariots, and his agent
might as well take possession of them;
and if K. was so particular N. had no
horses to give in exchange. It is evident
that the distance made communication
troublesome, and both parties became too
particular about being satisfied, so that there
was a good deal of ill-feeling. But the
representations and assurances of Amen-
hotep III. seem to have satisfied Kallimasin,
for he promised to send a daughter.

(14) KALLIMASIN to NIMMUWARIA. K.'s
daughter, whom N. asked for, is grown up
and will be sent N.'s father used to return
a messenger quickly, but N. has kept the
messenger for six years, and then only sent
30 minas of gold like silver, tested before
Kasi, N.'s messenger. K. sends 35 male
slaves and 15 female as a present.

(W. 2; S.B.A. xiii. 130.)

The large present of slaves sent, after such
a small return from Egypt, seems as if


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 39

Babylonia was practically tributary to Amen-
hotep III., and so agrees to his representing
places in that region as his subjects. Yet
the king could ask plainly for return presents,
as in the next letter, which is apparently from
him, though the names are lost

( 1 5) ;r to ^. X refers to a former request and

refusal of a daughter of the Egyptian king
for any foreign prince, x then said he would
take any beautiful Egyptian, and who should
say, "She is not a king's daughter"? x
asks for gold, either in Tammuz or Ab, and
he will send his daughter to^; he wants the
gold to finish work then, and if not sent by
that time he will not accept even 3000
talents of gold. (W. 3 ; S.B.A. xiii. 128.)

Another letter refers to a sending of an
Egyptian princess, and the presents sent to
Egypt in return.

(16) KALLIMASIN to NIBMUARI A. K. sends

necessaries for N.'s house to return by the
messenger Shuti who brings N.'s daughter,
even a couch of ushu wood, ivory, and gold,
three couches and six thrones of ushu and
gold, an object of 7 minas of silver, and 9
shekels of gold, and other furniture.

(W. 5 ; B.O.D. 4.)


40 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

And a fragment of a letter has some
references to marriages and presents.

(17) KALIMMASIN to NIMUWARIA. Greet-
ings, and mentions " my daughters," and a
few words relating to presents. (W. 4.)


1 3. Bumahuryash of Babylonia.

The death of Kallimasin seems to have
occurred very closely at the same time as that
of Amenhotep III., as none of his letters
are addressed to the IVth; and none of
the letters of Burraburiash, his successor, are
addressed to the Illrd. One of the first
letters, apparently, is a short one mainly
desiring continued alliance.

(18) BURRABURIASH to NAPKHURURIA.

Let N. write and ask for what he wants and
B. will send it. (W. 6.)

Next we see an active interchange going
on between the kings.

(19) BURRABURIASH to NAPKHURARIA.

From the times of Karaindash, since N/s
father's messengers came to B/s father, they
have been friendly. N.'s messengers have
thrice come without presents. When 20
minas of gold were sent it was short weight
and when smelted did not amount to 5 minas.


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 41

B. offers furs ; and if they are spoiled by keep-
ing, let Shindishugab, the messenger, hasten
to bring the chariots in order to get fresh
furs. B. sends 2 minas of uknu stone ; and
for N/s daughter, wife of B.'s son, a necklace
of 1048 stones. (W. 8 ; S.B.A. xv. 1 17.)

The daughter of N., being the wife of B.'s
son, can only possibly refer to a betrothal, as
this letter cannot be later than the 8th or
loth year of Akhenaten at the latest, and
hence his daughters were none over six years
old at the time.

Another letter refers to the subject of the
earlier letter (15) of Kallimasin. In that
letter the king was very anxious to get gold
to decorate a work of his, and here we see
that a temple was being adorned, and much
gold was needed for it.

(20) BURRABURIASH to NIPKHURIRIA.
Their fathers were allies, and sent presents,
but now N. has sent only 2 minas of gold.
"The work pn the Temple is great, and
vigorously have I undertaken its accomplish-
ment; send me therefore much gold." In
time of B.'s father Kurigalzu, the Kinakhaiu
sent to him to attack Egyptians, but K.
threatened to attack them in that case. B.
desires that the Ashuraiu should not be
allowed to trade with Egypt Presents


42 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

sent : 3 minas of lazuli, 5 pair of horses,
and 5 wooden chariots.

(W. 7 ; S.B.A. xiii. 540 ; R.P. xv. 63.)

In another letter the temple work again
comes in as a claim for gold, apparently
less urgently, and therefore later.

(21) BURNABURIASH to NAPKHURURIA.
N.'s father complained, and B. sent Khuaa,
and wrote promising another daughter;
and N. has sent Khamashshi • . . • and
Mikhuni. ... B. will send daughter with
S chariots, but fears king will scoff, as his
father sent B.'s sister with 3000 men. Asks
for Tsalma as commissioner. Khay who
was sent had no chariot or people with him.
Send many people, and Khay will bring
B.'s daughter. N.'s father sent much gold
to Kurigalzu. B. sends lazuli ; and to
queen only 20 stones of lazuli, as she
neglected him. Asks for more gold to
finish his temple. (W. 9.)

Another letter from the same king seems
to be the latest during the peace, as there
has been an illness of the king. There is
no mention of the temple affairs which he
took over from his predecessor, and the
caravans are beginning to be plundered.


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 43

(22) BURRABURIASH to NAPKHURURIA.

B. unwell, and annoyed at N. not condoling.
Messenger explains distance to account for
N.'s silence. Sends 4 minas blue stone and
5 pair of horses. Asks for much gold, last
was base, because N. did not see to it
himself, and much loss in melting. Caravan
of Tsalmu B.'s messenger twice plundered
— I. By Biriamaza; 2. By Pamakhu, in N.'s
land — ^so asks for compensation to Tsalmu.

(W. 10.)

The last letter of all from Karduniash will
be found later on, No. 124, as it belongs to
the beginning of the northern wars, and
throws light on the persons involved in those
troubles. This correspondence was not
limited entirely to official business, but the
princesses took advantage of the messengers
to exchange affectionate greetings with their
families ; probably many such went, though,
as they would not be likely to be kept in
official archives, only three have come down
to us.

(23) " Daughter of the king, to my lord . . . may

the gods of Burraburiash go with you.
Go out in peace, and in peace return to
your house." Sent by Kidin-Ramman.

(W. 13.)


44 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

(24) To ... . my mistress .... khipa your

handmaid. At the feet of my mistress I

fall. Health to my mistress. . . .

(W. 292.)

(25) To ... . my mistress, your daughter, your

handmaid. At the feet of my mistress
seven times and seven times I fall. . . .

(W. 293.)
14. King of Alashia.

A third series of royal letters are those
from Alashia, which by a docket in hieratic
upon one of them is identified with the
Egyptian Alasa. It has been usually sup-
posed that this was in the north of Syria,
but Winckler's identification of it with
Cyprus seems much more likely. Every
letter refers to sending quantities of copper
to Egypt, copper being commonly worked
in Cyprus, but not on the mainland; silver
is asked for in return, whereas silver was
common among North Syrian Hittites; the
ships of Alashia go to Egypt, whereas none
of the Syrian ships are named there ; all of
these details point to Cyprus. And also
Alashia was on the route followed from
Gubla to Egypt, see letter 16 1.

(26) King of ALASHIA to king of Egypt

Congratulates him on his accession, sends


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 45

200 talents of copper, desires messenger
back quickly, and a yearly embassy each
way. (W. 3a)

(27) King of ALASHIA to king of Egypt E.

had enquired why a messenger had not
come. A. did not know that E. was
celebrating a sacrificial feast A. now
sends a messenger with 100 talents of
copper. Asks for a couch of ushu wood
gilded, a gilded chariot, two horses, 42
garments, $0 . . . garments, 24 logs of
ushu wood, 17 boxes of good oil. . . .
Proposes a bond of alliance, and inter-
change of messengers. Sends a flask of
good oil to pour on E.'s head "now that
you have ascended the throne of your
kingdom.** (W. 27 ; B.O.D. 6.)

(28) X to y^ sends ivory, 5 talents of copper, 3

talents of good copper, and ushu wood, and
desires that the customs oflicers shall not
interfere with the men sent in the ship.

(W. 33 ; S.B.A. xi. 340.)

(29) King of ALASHIA to king of Egypt Asks

for return of messengers quickly, and says
they are his merchants, and desires that the
customs officer shall not interfere with them
or their ship.

(W. 29 ; S.B.A. xi. 334 ; xiii. 547.)

This bears a docket in hieratic " Letter
from Alasa." These letters show the marine


46 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

trade that was being carried on from
Alashia.

(30) King of ALASHIA to king of Egypt

Sends 5 talents of copper and 5 pair of
horses. Asks for silver. Desires messenger
back soon, and mentions Pashtummi, Kunia,
Itilluna, Ushbarra, and Bil-ram. (W. 26.)

(31) King of ALASHIA to king of Egypt.

Protests that the king of Egypt is mistaken
in supposing the Alashians to be allied
with the Lukki ; on the contrary the
Lukki yearly plunder the city of Zikhra in
Alashia. If Alashians are proved to have
plundered they shall be punished

(W. 28; S.B.A. XV. 130.)

This letter is important as showing that
the Lykian pirates, so well known in later
times, were already at their trade in 1500
B.C., and this gives more light on the early
Mediterranean shipping, as certainly the
rocky coast of Lycia is not the first place
to start shipping, and the naval battle, under
Ramessu III., at Medinet Habu, is quite
in keeping with such pirate habits. The
mention of the city of Zikhra may some
day be of great value for fixing Alashia;
it is not to be found in maps of northern
Syria, and if found in Cyprus it would help
the identification of the island.


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 47

(32) X \o y 9, frs^^ent naming copper, 30 talents,

procuring much copper for ^, the land of
Kinakhi (W.31.)

(33) King of ALASHIA to king of Egypt

Sends his messenger with 500 talents of
copper, apologizes for not sending more in
consequence of pestilence. Asks for silver,
an ox, oil, and one of the "Eagle Con-
jurers," People quarrel with the king of
A. about his sending wood to Egypt An
Alashian has died in Egypt, leaving son
and wife at home. Asks for return of
deceased's property by the messenger.
Warns king of E. against kings of Khatti
and of Shankhar, and whatever they send
A., A. will send double to Egypt

(W. 25 ; S.B.A. xiiL 544)

(34) Vizier of ALASHIA to Vizier of Egypt;

sends 5 talents of copper and 2 ivory. . . .

(W. 32.)

The above letter of the king seems to
come at the end, when outlying people were
beginning to be disaffected to Egypt by the
quarrel about supplying Egypt with wood.
The reference to "eagle conjurers'' is un-
explained ; the words are so read by
different translators, and have been sup-
posed to refer to men who caught eagles
by art, or to men who divined by the


48 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

flight of birds, like the Etruscan haruspex.
Another indication that trouble was brewing
is seen in the ambigfuouS position of the
kings of the Khatti and of Shankhar. The
reference to the claim on the property of a
merchant who had died is evidence that
some principles of international law were
recognized, and that the king interfered to
obtain justice for private rights. Lastly
we see the viziers of the two countries did
business together by the messengers ; send-
ing small presents, doubtless to receive a
return from Egypt.

These letters from Alashia, though not
showing the pomp and wealth of Upper
Mesopotamia or Babylonia, yet prove the
establishment of an organized government,
with regfular foreign relations, legal rights
defined, and an active trade going on.
Such is a most interesting view of the
early bronze age in Cyprus, and suggests
a growth of such institutions during some
considerable time before.

1 5. Kings of Assyria and Nukhashi.

Two isolated letters show that other king-
doms also kept up a friendly diplomatic
correspondence with Egypt From


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 49

(35) ASHUR-UBALLITH king of Ashshur
to NAPKHURIA. A. received mes-
sengers and sent a royal chariot with a
pair of horses^ two white horses, a chariot
without horses, and a seal of blue stone.
Asks for gold in return, for a new palace
being built A.'s father Ashur-nadin-akhi
sent to Egypt and received 20 talents
of gold: king of Khanigalbat sent and
had 20 talents of gold, A. asks for as
much. The Eg. messengers had been way-
laid by the Shuti ; asks for messengers to
be quickly returned. (W. 15 ; R.P. xv. 61.)

The other letter shows that Nukhashi had
been conquered and made a vassal state by
Tahutmes IIL

(36) RAMMAN-NIRARI to king of Egypt
R.'s grandfather had been set up over
Nukhashi by Manakhbiia (Men-kheper-ra,
Tahutmes III.), who anointed him, and
established him; names Takua; now the
king of Khatti is against him; asks for
help. (W. 37 ; S.B.A. xv. 20.)

As here an established king refers to his
grandfather being set up, we must allow
about 60 or 70 years to have elapsed. This
letter was written at the beginning of the
trouble with the Khatti at the close of the
reign of Amenhotep III., about 1380 B.C.

E


50 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

So the grandfather was set up about 1440
or 1450 B.a This throws him decidedly
to the time of Tahutmes III., 148 1- 1449,
rather than Tahutmes IV., 1423-1414 B.C.
We must read, therefore, Men-kheper-ra,
and not Men-kheperu-ra.

16. Petty Governors in Peace.

The remainder of the letters of the peace
are from various governors and chiefs of
smaller states and towns. Some of them
recur again in the troublous times which
followed. But these short letters as a whole
give such a picture of the affairs of the
Egyptian dominions that they should be
read together.

(37) SHUTARNA of Mushikhuna to the king.

Desires some attention, and for a garrison
to occupy the cities. (W. 232.)

The name of this place does not occur
again, but it was probably in the north, as
the ruler, Shutarna, is named after the king
of Mitani in the preceding generation.

(38) SHUTARNA of Mushikhuna to king:

remainder lost (W. 233.)

(39) X to the king : names the Akhlamu (between

Babylon and Nineveh) and the king of
Karduniash (Babylonia). (W. 291.)


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 51

(40) x\oy. A king writes to the kings of Kinakhi

(Galilee and the Hauran), saying that he is
going to send Akia to condole with the
king of Egypt. He desires that A. go in
safety to the city of Zukhli in Egypt

(W. 14 ; B.O.D. 58.)

This condolence must have been on the
death of Amenhotep III. ; and the issue
of this sort of passport points to the country
being somewhat disturbed. The city of
Zukhli, in Egypt, where the king resided,
must be one of the capitals of the country ;
and remembering the Egyptian union of /
and r, this can hardly be other than the
city of Sokari, or now Saqqarah, the main
capital Memphis.

(41) MUTZU' ... to king. King wrote by

Khaia about caravans to Khani-galbat,

which M. escorted, as (La)paia his father

did the caravans to Khani-galbat and

Karduniash. Let the king send other

caravans and M. will escort them.

(W. 256.)

The restoration of Lapaia is only a guess ;
and it does not seem very likely, as Lapaia
was in Judaea, whereas this writer seems
rather to have been in the north. Possibly
this . . paia is Yakhzibaia of two other


52 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

letters (104, 105), of whom no details are
known ; or it may be a fresh name.

(42) SHIPTURI ... to the king. Acknowledges

letter, guards the city, and provides for
caravans. (W. 242.)

(43) X to the king. Names caravans to Buznina.

(Bozrah.) (W. 145.)

(44) X prince of Qanu to king. Ready to join

troops. (W. 251.)

(45) RUSMANIA prince of Tanina to king.

Obeisance. (W. 260.)

Taruna may be Toran near Tiberias.

(46) ZISHAMINI to king. Obeisance.

(W. 261.)

(47) DASHRU to king. Obeisance. (W. 245.)

(48) DASHRU to king. Obeisance. (W. 244)

(49) GESDINNA to king. Report.

(S.B.A. X. 496.)

(50) SURASHAR prince of . . . .tiashna to king.

Obeisance. (W. 257.)

(51) SHABA .... to king. Sends presents.

(W. 222.)

(52) YAB to SHUMUKHA Y. is in

disgrace. (W. 223.)

(53) AM AY ASH I to king. A. will join troops.

(W. 253.)

(54) YIKTASU to king. Y. guards city.

(W. 254.)


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 53

(55) BADUZA to king. Obedient, and has been

maligned. (W. 255.)

(56) SHIPTIADDI to king of Egypt Acknow-

ledges letter. Yankhamu is faithful.

(W. 241 ; B.O.D. 65.)

(57) SHIPTI .... to king. Guards city.

(W. 243.)

(58) ZITRIYARA to king. Obeisance.

(W. 247.)

(59) ZITRIYARA to king. Acknowledges letter

and performs orders. (W. 248 ; B.O.D. y6.)

(60) ZITRIYARA to king. Report

(W. 246 ; S.B. A. X. 499.)

{61) X of Dubu or Gubbu to king, who sent

soldiers to king's army.

(W. 250 ; B.O.D. 78.)

(62) Fragment naming Ugarit (?)

(W. 287; S.B.A. X. 517.)

(63) SHUBANDI to king. Obeisance.

(W. 229.)

(64) SHUBANDI to king. Khanya has come to

S.9 and S. sends 300 oxen and 30 girls.

(W. 228; S.B.A. xi. 331.)

(65) SHUBANDI to king. S. was disabled by

illness. (W. 226 ; B.O.D. 40.)

(66) SHUBANDI to king, acknowledges letter

and defends his city. (W. 224 ; B.O.D. 38.)

{67) SHUBANDI to king, same.

(W.225; B.O.D. 39.)


54 LETTERS OF THE PEACE

(68) SHATIYA to king, guards city of Inishat-

si(ri?), and has sent his daughter to the
palace for the king. (W, 249 ; B.O.D. yj^

(69) ARTAMANYA of Ziri-bashani (plain pf

Bashan) to the king, is ready to go witfi his
troops wherever ordered.

(W. 161 ; R.P. xvii. 99.)

(70) ABDTIRSHI of Khazura to the king. A.

guards Khazura, (Hazor, near Tyre).

(W. 203.)

(71) X of Khazuri to die king, Will guard the

city until the king comes.

(W. 202 ; B.O.D. 47.)
This city of Khasuri is Hazor, 1 1 S.E. of
Tyre, as shown by letter 183.

(72) PUADDI of Wurza (Yerzeh near Shechem)

to king. P. guards his land under Rianapa.

(W. 236 ; B.O.D. 56.)

(73) PUADDI to king ; P. defends his place and

is ready to escort caravans. Names
Shakhshikhashikha. (W. 235 ; B.O.D. 55.)

(74) PUADDI prince of Wurza to king. Defends

city. (W. 234; S.B.A, xi. 329.)

(75) ARZAWAYA prince of Mikhiza to king.

A. will join the troops and send supplies.

(W. 175)

This Mikhiza appears in another letter as

Rukhizi, and was probably on the

south side of Hermon, by other

references to Arzawaya.


LETTERS OF THE PEACE 55

(76) ARZ AWA YA to king ; acknowledges letter.

(W. 176.)
The following is from a different person,
as it refers to the south instead of the
north of Palestine.

(77) ARZ AY A to king ; acknowledges letter, and

mentions Gazri (Gezer). - (W. 177.)

(78) ADDUMIKHIR to king. Obeisance.

(W. 187.)

(79) ADDUMIKHIR to king. City is secure

and obedient (W. 188.)

(80) TAGI to king. Obeisance. (W. 190.)

(81) TAGI to king. Sends Takhmaini, and asks

for gold. (W. 265.)

(82) MILKILI to king. City is safe. . . . Kha-

mu . . . sends to king 6 women, 5 boys, and
5 men. (W. 168.)

Probably Khamu ... is Khamuniri.

(83) MILKILI to king. Acknowledges letter and

asks for troops. (W. 172 ; B.O.D. 63.)

(84) MILKILI to king. M. will execute an order

sent to him. (W. 169 ; S.B.A. xi. 371.)

(85) ABDMILKI of Shaskhimi to king. Ready

to join troops. (W. 252.)

(86) SHUWARDATA to king. Carries out

orders. (W. 200 ; B.O.D. 69.)

(87) SHUWARDATA to king. Has sent a

present (W. 198 ; B.O.D. 67.)

(88) X prince of Nazima to king. States his

adhesion. (W. 263.)


1

\

\

56 LETTERS OF\THE PEACE

(89) DIYATI to king. Guards city and supplies

provision. (W. 264.)

(90) YITIA of Asqaluna (Ashkelon) to king.

Guards the city. (W. 210.)

(91) YITIA to king. Y. sends food, drink, oxen,

&c., as tribute. (W. 207 ; B.O.D. 52.)

(92) YITIA to king. Y. supplied the troops

with all necessaries. (W. 209 ; B.O.D. 54.)

(93) YITIA to king. Y. guards city and sends

tribute of Lupdkku stones.

(W. 208 ; B.O.D. 53.)

(94) YITIA of Asqaluna to king. Guards the

city. (W. 211.)

(95) YITIA of Asqaluna to king. Guards the

city. (W. 212.)

(96) YITIA to king. Guards the city. The

present officer is incapable, and asks that
Rianapa be appointed. (W. 213.)

(97) YABNMLU prince of Lakisha (Lachish) to

king. Obeisance, and attends to message
sent by Maia, (W. 218.)

(98) ZIMRIDA prince of Lakisha to king.

Has received orders and will execute them.

(W. 217; S.B.A. xiii. 319.)

(99) KHIZIRI to king. Protects Maia according

to orders, and provides for troops (see 97).

(W. 259)

(100) BAIAYA to king. Attends to orders of

Maya, and will follow troops. (W. 231.)


LETTERS OF THE PEACE $7

I

(loi) YABITIRI of Azzati (Gaza) to king. Yan-
khama took Y. Into Egypt when young and
Y. lived in the palace. Y. now guards
Azzati and Yapu (Joppa).

(W. 214; S.B.A. XV. 504.)

(102) ABDNA. ... to king. Obeisance.

(W. 271.)

(103) INBAUTA to king. Obeisance. (W. 272.)

(104) YAKHZIBAIA to king. Obeisance.

(W. 274.)

(105) YAKHZIBAIA to king. Obeisance.

(W, 266.)

(106) YAMIUTA prince of Ga(?)dashuna to king.

Obeisance. (W. 267.)

The preceding letters have here been
roughly classed by placing those which
belong to the north first, and then those
of the south. In some cases other clues
help, as the mention of Maia in three letters,
97, 99, icx), connected with Lachish. Other
letters are placed along with those to which
there is a clue by the resemblance of name.
But any strict classification is impossible
with so few data to guide us.

These letters show that frequent reports
were sent to Egypt without there being any
business on hand. The city of Askelon


S8 LETTERS OF THE PEACE


lying upon the high road had to supply food

for the passing troops, and probably Yitia ?

took advantage of a soldier messenger to

send in a litde report of his providing

supplies.


CHAPTER III.
THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

1 7. Trouble in Amki with the Khatti.

The next series are the letters which show
the gradual breaking up of the state of
peace, and the loss of Northern Syria.
The troubles seem to have begun in Central
Syria, and to have been provoked there by
attempts of the Egyptian allies to secure
more territory, trusting in their backing
from Egypt to support them. In this they
were disappointed, and so the power of
Egypt first showed its waning by abandon-
ing its friends.

The first four letters refer to attacks on
Amki, which by its name (the " hollow " or
"deep place") was a large valley, and by
its position must have been the upper par t
of t;he LitAny river, inland from Beyrut.
The chiefs about the lower Litdny, at the
bend of the river, thought that they could

capture the upper part of the valley.

59


m*


60 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

(107) ILDAYA of Khazi to the king. Warred

against cities in the land of Amki, but
Idagama of Kinza with the Khatti dr ove
him oflF. (W. 1 32.)

(108) BIRI [DASH YA?] of Khashabu to the

king. Warred against cities in the land of
Amki, but Idagama of Kinza with the
Khatti drove him oflF. ( W. 1 3 1 .)

(109) X (Namiawaza ?) to the king. Warred

against cities in the land of Amki> but
Idagama of Kinza with the Khatti drove
him off. (W. 133 ; B.O.D. 46.)

Here are three letters almost verbally
identical from three different chiefs, who
had evidently leagued together to attack
the upper LitAny valley. The position of the
land of Amki is very probably shown by
the place 'Ammlk, nineteen miles south-east
of Beyrut. The restoration of the name
Biridashya is almost certain, as he was acting
on Yinuama, and in league with Buzruna
and Khalunni in No. 115; hence he must
have been about the region of Khashabu,
the Arabic H6shaba. The result of this
affair appears in an extension of Hittite
power in the next.

(no) ADDU . . . lA and BATTI - ILU

to the king. Khatti and Lupakku have


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 61

taken cities of Amki, and cities belonging
to A-addu. Zitana and 9 men have arrived
in Nukhashi, and writers go to see about
them and enquire of king if they really
come from him. Greeting to Ben-ili,
Abd-urash, Ben-ana> Ben-zidki, Amur-addi,
and Anati. (W. 125 ; R.P. xvii. 99.)

Batti-ilu was a companion of Aziru's
brother, as we see in No. 191, and so he
probably belonged to Amurri ; as Nukhashi
seems to have lain immediately east of
the Orontes valley of Amurri this would be
very natural.

1 8. Tremble about Damascus.

After this first opening of serious troubles,
resulting in the Hittite s becoming establ ished^
in the Li^^ny vq^llgy^ the next difficulty IS

in Aziru coming down from the Orontes
valley into the plain of Damascus, and this
we learn took place even before the death
of Amenhotep III.

(in) AKIZZI to NAM-MUR-IA. A. is gover-
nor of Qatna (west of Damascus) ; he has
victualled troops, and asks for troops to
occupy the country, so as to secure Nuk-
hashi. If they delay in Martu (Amurri,
Orontes)^ Azira will succeed ; and if troops
do not march this year he will get the whole


62 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

country. The king of Khatti has burned a
city and taken spoils. Azira has captured
men of Qatna, and Akizzi asks for them to
be ransomed. King of Khatti has also
taken Shamash, the god of A.'s father, and"
A:ia^o7iddtolihso^^

(W. 138; B.O.D. 36.)

(112) AKIZZI to NAM-MUR-IA. King of
Khatti tries to seduce A. Tiuwatti of
Lapana (Helbon), Arzauia of Rukhizi, and
Aidagama are leagued ; but kings of Nu-
khashi, Ni, Zinzar, and Kinanat are faithful.
Asks for troops soon, as if Arzauia and
Tiuwatti come to land of Ubi, and Dasha
is in land of Amma, then Ubi will be lost
They daily call on Aidagama to conquer
Ubi. As Timashgi (Damascus) in the land
of Ubi stretches out her hands so does
Qatna. (W. 139; B.O.D. 37.)

From this it seems that an alliance of the
Hittites in their new possession of the upper
Litdny with the neighbouring chiefs, Itakama
of the Upper Orontes, and Tiuwatti of the
north of Damascus, had been formed to
attack the fertile plain of Damascus, which
included Qatna* But several chiefs around
this alliance remained faithful. Another
fragment of a letter of Akizzi is


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 63

(113) AKIZZI to the king. Complains of delay,

and names Kinza the city of Itakama.

(W. 140.)

19. Namyawaza in Trouble.

The other side of the matter appears in a
letter from Itakama, complaining of the
forward movement of the Egyptian party,
which we noticed in letters 107-109. Very
possibly letter 109, of which the writer's
name is lost, was from Namyawaza.

(114) ITAKAMA to the king. Namyawaza has

maligned him, and occupied all the land of

I.'s father in the land of Gidshi (Qedesh by

Lake Horns). I. appealed to Pukhari the

deputy. N. has delivered all the cities in

the land of Gidshi and in Ubi (Upper

Orontes and Damascus plain) to the Kha« \APi^Jt^

biri^ I. offers to drive out the Khabiri and

f?r (W. 146.)

The politics are complex, as there appears
to have been a triangular duel going on,
owing to everybody fighting for their own
hand. Itakama was opposed to Namyawaza
(see 114); Namyawaza was opposed to
Biridashyi (see 116, 117); and we can
hardly doubt that Biri ... is Biridashyi
opposed to Idagama (see 108). Namya-
waza was certainly on the Egyptian side, as


64 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

he was supported by the Egyptian resident,
who reckoned Biridashya as an enemy (see
122). The best way to understand this
seems to be that at first Namyawaza was
pro-Egyptian, and Itakama and Biridashyi
neutral. Then owing to the aggression of
N, and B. upon I., I. was thrown into
opposition and was successful (108, 109).
Finding I. successful, B, changed sides
and attacked N. with I. as we see in 11 6.

The Egyptian ally, Namyawaza, sends his
own version in a very full historical letter
(116), which we here preface by a note
(115), which shows how the Khabiri and
Sati were originally allies of the Egyptians,

(lis) NAMYAWAZA to the king. Reports his
readiness for service with his soldiers,
chariots, brothers, his Khabiri , and his Suti.

(W. 144 ; R. P. xvii. 96.)

This letter is important as showing that
the SAGAS, who are generally taken as the
same as the Khabiri, were at their earliest
appearance — while yet allies of the Egyptian
party — employed in Central Syria, and were
thus beyond the limit s of the sub sequent
occupation of Palestine by the Hebrews.
This should suffice to show now futile is


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 65

any connection proposed between the
SAGAS, Khabiri, and the Hebrew invasion,
which by all accounts took place in the
s outh of Palesti ne. We must regard the
►AGAS, Khabiri, or "confederates," as an
alliance of Syrian tribes near Damascus ;
though it is possible that Hebron took its
name from that alliance when its conquests
had spread to the south. The Khabiri are
mentioned by name only in the letters of
Abd-khiba.

(116) [NAMYAWAZA] to the king. Biridashya

has made the city of Yinuama rebel, and
brought chariots to the city of Ashtarti,
and delive red it to th e Khabiri. Kings
of Butsruna and Khalunni Join with
Biridashya, and say, "Come on, we will
kill Namyawaza." So N. took refuge in
..,,.(? Dimashqa.) N. claimed to be an
Egyptian subject, and Artsawaya went to
Gizza, brought Azira's troops, took Shaddu,
and g ave it tojhe jChabjri. Itakama has
destroyed Gizza, and Artsawaya and Biri-
dashya will destroy Abitu. N. will defend
Kumidi, (W. 142 ; B.O.D. 43.)

(117) NAMIAWAZA to king. Asks for troops,

and that Biridashya and Bawanamash be
punished by the king. (W. 14J.)

F


66 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

The history of this fighting is obvious,
with the map in hand. Itakama having
repelled the Egyptian advance under
Namyawaza, Biridashya turned and sided
with the winning side. He attacked die lan d
behind Tyr e, at Yinuama ( yanuA)^ and fear-
ing that Namyawaza would come down the
Litdny and fight him at Khashabu {HSsAada),
or Yinuama, he crossed over eastward and
drew the chiefs of Khalunni (Gaulonitis,
Jaulan) and Butsruna (Bozrah) to attack
Namyawaza on the east, driving him to take
care of himself and take refuge, perhaps, in
Damascus ; but, unhappily, some words are
missing at this part. Then Arzawaya and
Itakama were at leisure, with Biridashya, to
ravage northern Galilee, taking or threaten-
ing Gizza {GisK), Shaddu {Skatiyeh\ and
Abitu {Abdeh). But Namyawaza succeeded
so far in holding the important post of
Kumidi (Kamid), in the Litiny valley on the
road from Damascus to Beyrut

20. Galilee Rebelling.

The next letter shows the rebellion spread-
ing just south of this region, in southern
Galilee. From the names of places of
which news is sent, this letter must have


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 67

been written from some place near Akka;
and as it was a safe place, in communication
with Egyptians, it was probably from Akka
itself, but we know nothing more of
Mutaddi.

(118) MUTADDI to YANKHAMU. Aiab has

fled, also the king of Bikhishi, before the
Egyptian oflicer. Bininima, Tadua, and
Yashuia are there, x was driven out of
Ashtarti. Cities of the land of Gar (Gur)
rebel, Udumu (Adamah), Aduri {Et Ttreh\
Araru {Arareh\ Mishtu {Mushtah)^ Magdali,
(Magdala), and Khinianabi (^Andn ?). Also,
Tsarqi, Khawini (Kdaiin)^ and Yabishi
(Yabesh) are taken. Y came to Bikhishi
and heard the Egyptian orders. (W. 237.)

This land of Gar is the Heb. Gur,
and seems from the places named to have
included all the southeni .Jial£_ of Galilee.
Thus at this point we find that all Galilee
was lost to the Egyptians. Further news
comes from Akka.

(1 19) SURATA, of Akka, to the king. Obeisance.

(W. 157)
Sharatu was father of Shutatna, as we see
in letter 124.

(120) ZATATNA, of Akka, to the king.
Obeisance. (W. 158.)


68 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

(12 1) ZITATNA, of Akka, to the king.
Obeisance. (W. i6o ; B.O.D. 32.)

(122) ZATATNA, of Akka, to the king.
[Ziri]dayashda [ ? Biridashya] fled from
Namyawaza ..... Shuta, the (Egyptian)
officer. Egyptian soldiers are in Makida
with a female. Shuta sent to Zatatna
ordering Z. to deliver Zirdayashda to
Namyawaza, but it was impossible to do
so. Akka is like Magdali in Egypt, let
it not be taken by these men.

(W. IS9; R.P. xv«.95.)

This last letter seems as if it might well
refer to Biridashya, who had suffered a
reverse from Namyawaza, and fled to the
Egyptians in Akka ; we know nothing
else of Zirdayashda, and the resemblance to
the name Biridashya is near enough to be
thought of in connection with well-known
bungles of the scribes and uncertainties of
modern reading.

(123) AKIZZI to the king. Refers to a cara-

van (?) in the third year ; names Bidinaza.

(W. 290.)

This letter must have been written after
the death of Amenhotep IIL, as otherwise
the third year (of Amenhotep IV.) would
not be named ; so it muiSt be subsequent to


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 69

the other letters of Akizzi, iii, 112, The
difficulty about caravans seems to haye been
felt now that Galilee was Jn rebellion, thus
cuttingf the ro^td to northern Syria and
Mesogojaffiiat The last letter of Buma-
buryash refers to this matter.

(124) BURNABURYASH to NAPKHURU-
RIA. B.*s merchants went with Akhi-
thabu, and stayed in Kinakhi (E. of Merom)
on business ; Akhithabu went on, and then
in the city of Khinatuni (Kanawat) in
Kinakhi, Shumadda (of Merom, see 125),
son of Balumi, and Shutatna, son of
Sharatu of Akkaiu, killed them and took
the caravan. As Kinakhi belongs to Egypt,
so Napkhururia must subdue these robbers
and compensate the owners of the coods.
Otherwise trade will be cu^joff, Shumadda
has kept one of the Babylonians with his
feet cut off. Shutatna has taken another
as his slave. These must be returned.
Present sent i maneh of enamel (?).
Desires messenger to be returned soon.

(W. 1 1 ; R.P. XV. 65.)

Who Shumadda was is shown by the
following short note, written probably earlier,
while he was allied to Egypt

(125) SHAMUADDU, prince of Shamkhuna, to

the king. Has received message.

(W. 220 ; S.B.A. xii. 328.)


70 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

Another letter seems to belong to the
rebellious times, excusing not giving tribute.

(126) SHUMADDU to the king, S. does not
send soon because his father, Kuzuna, did
not do so. ( W. 22 1 ; B.O.D. 66.)

The position of Shummada at Shamkhuna,
allied with Akka, and attacking Kanawat, is
clearly identified with the name of Lake
Merom in Greek times, Semekhonitis. This
seems derived from some district named
Semkhon by the Lake, probably the region
of the spring of Semakh, six miles to the
north-east of the lake. The history of this
plundering of the caravans is very clear, and
shows that Galilee was more rebellious than
the Hauran at that time. The names are
some of them familiar in the Jewish writings
of a later time, as Ahitub (Akhi-thabu),
Shema-yah (parallel to Shamu-Addu), and
Balumi (Balaam).

21. Azim in Peace.

We now turn to the more northern part
of Syria where the rebellion of Aziru, which
we saw beginning in Akizzi's letter ( 1 1 1 ),
was steadily successful until he became
paramount in all that region. We begin


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 71

a little before that letter of Akizzi (m) in
order to show the earlier position of Aziru,
the most energetic son of Abd-ashratu, lord
of Ainuni or the middle Orontes valley. ^ti of\/

(127) ABDASHT[AR]TI to king. Obeisance.

(W. 40 ; B.O.D. 34.)

(128) AZIRI to king. Sends two men as slaves

(? messengers) and asks for their return to
Amurri. (W. 42 ; S.B.A. xv. 21.)

(129) . . . KHIBIYA to resident Obeisance.

Guards city, but enmity is powerful. A
message has come from Amurri. (W. 258.)

The above seem to show Aziru as an
obedient subject. But he soon falls under
suspicion and seeks to excuse himself.

(130) AZIRI to DUDU (Egyptian resident). A.

has dotie all that the king desired, and rules
the land of AmurL Desires D. to vindicate
him from certain slanders.

(W, 44; S.B.A. xiii. 217.)

(131) [ABDASHRATU ?] to DUDU. Asks for

the return of Aziru back quickly from

Egypt The kings of Nukhashi said to A.

that his father sent gold to the king of

Egypt but got nothing in return. Refers

to his Suti troops.

(W. 52; S.B.A. xiii. 216.)


^2 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

From this it seems that Aziru was in
Egypt as a hostage or messenger, and his
father was pointing out his fidelity in order
to get his son back again. The great
opponent of Aziru's advance was Ribaddi,
the governor of northern Phoenicia, and
the series of his letters is the most im-
portant of all. We turn back a little here
to take up his earlier notes before the great
struggle.

(132) [AMANAPPA ?] to RIBADDU. R. had

reported a plague in Tsumuri among people
and sheep. A. orders him to send sheep,
which are the king's. (W. 89.)

(133) X to y. Mentions Ribaddi, Abdaddi, and

Benazi. (W, 116.)

(134) RIBADDI to the king. Names the Kha-

biri and the officer Amanappa. . . . Let
Yapa-addi be blamed. . . . Two of R.'s
ships have been seized by Yapa-addi (?).

(W, 106; S.B.A. xi. 361.)

Other chiefs were also finding difficulties
overtaking them about this time.

(135) YAM A to the king. Y. defends his cities

till help shall come.

(W. 238 ; S.B.A. xf. 392.)

(136) SHUBANDU to the king, Thejaiabiri

are strong. (W. 227.)


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 73

(137) SUBAYADI to the king. Towns captured^

S. is unable to defend his. Asks for troops.
Khazu is against him. (W. 268.)

(138) ILKHA ... to the king. The governors

are destroyed, and all land falls away to
KhabirL Asks for Suti troops.

(W. 283 ; B.O.D. 80.)

We now turn back to Ribaddi beginning
his determined struggle against Aziru.

(139) RIBADDI to the king. R. will defend the

king's city. R.'s gifts which are with
Yapa-addu Y. will show the king.

(W. 72.)

(140) RIBADDI to the king. Asks for troops to

defend the king's land from Abdashirta and
the Khabiri. (W. 73.)

(141) RIBADDI to the king. King promised to

send Iribaiasha, who has not come. The
Khabiri su rround R. (W. 99.)

(142) RIBADDI to AMANAPPA (Egyptian
resident). R. asked A. to deliver him from
Abdashirta jind _ the_ _Khabiri. R. was
ordered^ to send a ship to Yarimuta; asks
for soldiers to occupy A murri.

[W. 59 ; M.A.F. vi. 307 ; R.P. xviiL 62.)

22, Abdashirta stating his fidelity.

But Abdashirta was not at all ready to be
classed as an enemy of Egypt.


74 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

(143) ABDASHRAT to the king. A. declares

that his enemies are strong, and desires
protection; will obey all commands, and
sends ten women. (W. 39 ; B.O.D. 33.)

(144) The end of a letter apparently from ABDA-

SHIRTA to the king. Khaya is hostile to
the king. Let not the ships of Ziduna and
Biruta come to Amurri to kill Abdashirta.
Let the king seize the ships of Arwada
which are in Egypt, and which were left
by Mani with A. A. asks for a governor
to be put in Ziduna and Biruta, who will
supply him with a ship, or else the Amurri
will kill him. (W. 124 ; B.O.D. 44.)

Here we see Abdashirta striving to make
out that he was in danger owing to his
friendship for Egypt, and abusing Khaya
who was the regular Egyptian agent or
officer. The request for a new governor
in Zidon and Berut is evidently to super-
sede Ribaddi, who was sincerely in Egyptian
interest, and against Abdashirta. Or, pos-
sibly, Ribaddi was not yet in charge of
those cities, as we find a Zimrida governor
of Zidon.

(145) ZIMRIDI to king. Z. is prince of Ziduna,

which is safe : but all his other cities
hflLW fallf^n ff} t\^^^ TChfiijirij and he aslcs

foiLtroops-^andjsuscQur. '

(W. 147 ; S.B.A. xiii. 318.)


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 75

(146) ZIMRIDI to the king. Mentions ^umuri

being in Egyptian hands. (W. 148.)

All the subterfuges of Abdashirta would
not suffice to stifle the complaints against
him, and a long and severe letter was sent
to him from Egypt, of which fortunately a
copy is preserved.

(147) The king to the Chief of Amurra. The Xho««t

Chief oi Gubla (Ribaddi?), living in
Zituna, asked the Chief of Amurra to
help him, but was not protected. Amurra
has allied with the Chief of Qidsha
(Itakama?), who is an enemy. The king
does not wish to threaten the land of
Kinakhi; and asks A. to send his son to
Egypt as a hostage, and allows this year
for him to do so ; next year will be too
late. A. had asked for Khanni in place
of the king, to deliver to him the enemies.
A. is asked to help in bringing in Sharru
and all his sons, Tuya, Liya and all his
sons, Yishiari and his sons, the son-in-law
of Malia and his sons and wives ....
Dashirti, Paluma, and Nimmakhi the
Khapadu in Amurri.

(W. SO ; S.B.A. xiii. 224.) •

Here we have the official Egyptian rebuke
for the alliance of which we saw the effects
in letters 107-109. And about this time we


76 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

have Aziri's letters excusing his going into
Egypt as a hostage, in compliance with the
Egyptian demand. The first refers probably
to the bearer of the previous letter,

(148) AZIRI to DUDU. Khatib has come from

the king; the king of Khatti has come

into Nukhashi, and therefore Aziri and

Khatib must stay.

(W. 45 ; S.B.A. xiii. 229.)

(149) AZIRI to KHAL A. and Khatib will soon

leave. King of Khatti is in Nukhashi, and
A. guards the land of Martu ( = Amurra),
and fears the fall of the city of Dunip.

(W. 46; S.B.A. xiii. 231.)

(150) AZIRI to the king. A. and Paluia serve

the king. A. and Khatib will come soon,
but the king of Khatti is in Nukhashi;
there are two roads to Tunip, and A. fears
its fall. (W. 47 ; S.B.A. xiii. 232.)

The successes of the Khatti, pushing south
to the land of Hamath, in real agreement
with Aziri, as we see by letter iii, are
skilfully used as a reason for his remaining
where he was, and not leaving for Egypt.
The fact of Tunip not being yet in the
hands of the Khatti, while it seems to lie
on the highway to Nukhashi, may point to


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 77

one of the following conclusions : ( i ) The
advance of the Khatti had been to the
Euphrates first, then down the stream and
striking across by the Sebkha to the
Orontes Valley, thus cutting off Tunip ; or
(2) Tunip may have been in Aziru's hands,
in real alliance with the Khatti, though he
professes to fear them ; or (3) Nukhashi
must be placed as far north as Tunip, Of
these the first seems the probable truth.

23. Ribaddi attacked.

We next enter on the long series of
Ribaddi's letters,

(151) RIBADDI to king. Abd_-ashrat holds R.'s

cities, and was not ashamed at R.'s com-
plaint King wrote to king of Biruna and
king of Tsiduna. • , , (W. 58.)

(152) RIBADDI to king. ]^cannot send s hips

to^Zalukhi and^ Ugarit b ecause ^Qf_Aziru.
The Khatti areplun3ering the lieges of
Gubla. (W. 104.)

(153) RIBADDI to king Names city of Tisa

... in land of Tsumuri, and land of Martu
(Amurri), (P.A. 35 No. 3.)

(154) RIBADDI to the king. Names Tsumuri

and Abdashirta. (P. A. 35 No. 2.)


78 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

These letters belong to the beginning of
the troubles, and it cannot be settled exactly
where they were written. The sending of
ships to Ugarit shows that it was on the
coast, and not far inland as has been proposed.
As we have already noticed, the mouth of
irwvv^ "^ I the Orontes appears to be the place ; and


\


Ugarit or Akaritu seems to be the Okrad
or Akrad — Kurdland— of modem times.
Zalukhi must also be on the coast.

(iSS) RIBADDI to the king. R. is only friendly
with Tsumura. Sent two messengers to
the king, but not returned. Asks for
general to^come and take Abdashirta and
Aziru . Uliaza named. If troops not sent
land will fall to the Khabiri ; or at least
write to Yankhamu or Bikhura to occupy
Amurru. R, strives with Yapa-addu and
Khatib. Asks for troops and people of
Milukha to save the city from falling to
the Khabm: 7W.>5 ; R.P. xviii. 52.)

(156) RIBADDI, governor of Gubla, to the king.
Tsumur is not taken, but in great danger.
Yapa-addi afflicts R. Abdashirta's pon?
^re tools of the kings of Mitan L Ka3h,
and the. JSlhatti . Let troops be sent with
Yankhamu . * . . Yarimuta .... deputy of
Kumidi (i>. Bikhura). . . .

(W. 87 ; R.P. xviii. 59.)


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 79

This last letter was evidently written from
Gubla ; and so, therefore, probably also was
the letter before it It appears that Ribaddi
was chief of Gubla, and in more or less
authority over all northern Phoenicia, as he
stays to and fro in various cities during his
troubles. The next letter was probably also
written from Gubla.

(is;) ribaddi to king. Enquiries about R.'s
messenger, who had been despoiled;
Kha biri takes posse ssion of all lands. If
TL_ a^ees with Abd-ashirta as Yapa-addi
and Zimrida.did he would be safe. If
Tsumur is lost, and Bit (Su?) art! is
given to Yankhamu, he ought to give
com to R. Shuti people are aggij nst I^ ,
Tell Y. that R. is really the king's. R.
has written to Y, that if Y. will not help,
R. must abandon city. Names Milkuru
and Mutshi (?), (W. 61.)

This shows that Zidon was now lost as we
know that Zimrida was governor of that city
(145), and in all later letters we shall see that
Zidon belongs to the enemy.


8o THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

24. Ribaddi in Simyra.

(158) RIBADDI to king. JR. is distre ssed._by
sons of Abdashirta who occu py A murrL
Only Tsumura and Irqata are left, and R.
is in Tsumura, for the deputy fled from
Gubla . • . Zimrida . • . and Yapaaddu . . .
against R., and would not attend to deputy.
Ask for troops for Tsumura and Irqata,
those of Tsumura having fled.

(W. ;8 ; R.P. xv. 70.)

This last letter shows Ribaddi to have
moved from Gubla to Tsumura in order to
maintain its defence, the troops having
deserted. The city of Irqata appealed also
directly to Egypt ; and this and the letter of
the men of Tunip are interesting pieces of
evidence of a municipal government then,
which could conduct public affairs in its own
name, without being headed by an in-
dividual. It begins "Irqata and its elders
fall down at the feet of the king."

(159) IRQATA, city, to the king. Babikha was
sent by the king. People in land of
Shanku are enemies. Strong appeal for
help. (W. 122 ; B.O.D. 42.)

It may be this [Ba ?]bikha is the same as
Abbikha of one of the last letters, who was
then rebellious.


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 8i

(i6o) X [Ribaddi ?] to the king. Names Abdashirti,
and people of Shikhlali. x has been driven
out of Irqata, and is in Tsumuri. He
delivered Shabi-ilu, Bishitanu, Maia, and
Arzaya from the people of Shikhlali, and
they are staying at the palace. Names
Yabaia. (W. 126.)

This letter was written from Tsumura,
and yet after the fall of Irqata, so it must
belong to this position as there is no sign of
Ribaddi being later at Tsumura.

25. Ribaddi in Gubla.

The next thirteen letters of Ribaddi are
from Gubla.

(161) RIBADDI to king. May the goddess of
Gubla give power to the king. Aziru is
his enemy, has taken 12 o f R.*s men^ and
asks ^o of silver ransom. A. has taken
in Yibuliya men whom R. had sent to
Tsumura. Ships of Tsumura, Biruta, and
Ziduna all_gone oyer to Jand .oif Axaum.
(i>., to'Aziri). Yapa-addi as well as Aziri
attacks R., and have taken one of hi§^higs,
and sail ou t ^" ^hp <^fia tn ^g^ptyrp^hj^
Others. R.'s subjects will go over to enemy
ifjlot,,§U9COureil R. holds Tsumura, but
is surrounded by enemies. Asks Amanma
if R. did not accompany him to Alashia on

G


82 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

his way to Egypt. R. asks for help to get
food from Yarimuta. Yapa-addi would not
let Amanma go to Alashia, and is joined
with Aziri. (S.B.A, xv. 359.)

This is the first mention of getting food
for Gubla from Yarimuta ; two earlier letters
name Yarimuta (142, 156), but its real
importance to Gubla comes out during the
siege and famine. It was obviously near to
Gubla, and a prosperous city in a fertile
country, as it exported provision. It was
probably to the north of Gubla, as all the
places to the south are referred to by
Ribaddi as being in his charge, whereas
Yarimuta was beyond his scope. All this
agrees to the position of the next important
place north of Gubla, now Latakia —
Laodicea — at the mouth of a large river,
the Nahr el Kebir. Yarimuta is obviously
a Yerimoth, or Ramoth=»a *'high place";
and the pre-Greek name of Laodicea was
Ramitha, which exactly agrees to this. The
importance of shipping on this coast should
be observed; there were sea-fights, when
vessels put out on the high seas to intercept
and capture others. The reference to going
to Alashia on the way to Egypt is somewhat
puzzling, as Cyprus is off the line that we


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 83

should expect for shipping between Gubla
and Egypt. Yet it is a valuable allusion in
two ways ; ( i ) it shows that Gubla could not
be at Byblos as is often supposed, as that
would be much farther from any possible
site for Alashia; and (2) it almost shows
that Alashia cannot be on the Syrian coast
from the Orontes northward, as that would
be an impossible position to take on the way
to Egypt It was possible to go across to
Cyprus in order to get the larger and better
shipping which seems to have regularly
traded to Egypt with copper (see 28, 29) ;
but any position further up the coast would
be impossible in this view,

(162) RIBADDI to king. Bumabula (?) son of
Abdasherta holds tJllaza, Ardata, Yikhliya,
Ambi, and Shigata; R. asks for help to
Tsumura, for A.'s sons conquer the king's
land for the kings of Mitani and Kash, If
king waits till they take Tsumura, what
will become of R ? who cannot go to help
Tsumura Ambi, Shigata, UUaza, and Yada
revolt, and R. fears that Gubla will fall

' ■■■■I III- - - ■ -^-%- . ■-.-»—< .-1- . _ ■ -r-r-r . J

into hands ofT Khabirj.. .

(W. 86 ; R,P. xviii. 58.)

Here we find that the rebels had seized
most of the coast, and only the more im-


84 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

portant places were holding out against
them. Ullaza {^El U$y\ Ardata (AriMst),
Shigata {Sukdt), and Tsumura {Sumra)^ are
all pretty certainly known ; and they help
us to gain some idea of the position of
Yikhliya, which agrees well to Qleiat be-
tween Tsumura and Ardata; and Ambi,
which is often named with Shigata, and was
probably near it, may well be Baldek^ an
ancient port lying next to Sukdt. We have
seen before (letter 156) that the kings of
Mitani and Kash were said to be behind all
this trouble, and pushing on Aziri to act for
them. Of the king of Mitani this may well
be believed so far as position goes. But
Kash is usually supposed to be Babylonia,
yet such an accusation against a distant land
is unlikely. It is repeated in 172, In 193
we see 600 men of Kashi asked for to
defend Gubla, and in 214 such a request is
repeated. In 234 Naharain and Kash are
linked together as being both within reach
of the Egyptian ships, and in 254 the Kashi
are interfering in the south by Jerusalem.
All these references show that Babylonians
cannot be thought of in such connections;
and we must rather look to the region of
Mitani and Naharain, bordering on Amurra,


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 85

and on or close to the sea. Possibly the
name may remain in Mount Kasios, which
belonged to the land of the warlike Kurds,
the Akarit or Ugarit.

(163) RIBADDI to the king. R. fears that

wj ll^fall t9_t tie jChabi ri. Pakham-

nata was in Tsumura and supplied Gubla
with food, and after that ordered it from
Yarimuta (W. 88.)

(164) RIBADDI to the king. Abd-ashirta is

camping against Tsumura Gubla as well
as Khikubta belong to the king. Send back
Abd-Ninib, whom R. sent with Bukhiya.

(W. S3.)

The mention of ordering food from Yari-
muta to Gubla, after Tsumura could not
supply it, shows that Yarimuta must have
been a very near port to Gubla, and agrees
with its being Ramitha. The place Khi-
kubta, which is said to belong to the king, is
supposed to be Ha-ka-ptah, Memphis ; and
so the sense would be that Gubla is as much
the king's as his own capital. This seems
very probable.

(165) RIBADDI to king. Tsumura is like a bird

in a snare, let the king look to it. Sons of
Abdashirta on land and Arwada by sea . . .
sent ... to Yankhami. ... If ships come


86 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

from Eg. they will not fear Abdashirta. A.
has seized Ullaza. R. is not strong enough
to aid Tsumura, for Yapa-addu is contrary,
and has plundered R., who complained to
Amanappa and Turbikhaza and Yankhami.
No grain left. (W. 84.)

(166) RIBADDI to king. Asks for men from
Misri and Milukha and horses. Has sold
everything to Yarimuta for food. King
ordered Khaya to be brought to Tsumur ;
R. gave 13 of silver and garments to the
Khabiri v^en he brought letter'tb' Tsumur.
Khaya is there, ask him. (W. 74.)


This request for troops shows that Mi-
lukha must be an ally of Egypt, and the
men of Milukha like the Shardani in the
Egyptian service. As they are most likely
Syrians, we should find Milukha probably
on the Syrian coast; and it seems very
likely that these men (also asked for in 155
and 175) were the mainlanders of Tyre, for
close south-east of Tyre is Khurbet el
Meluhiyeh. The Tyrians would naturally
have a body of trained troops to defend
Tyre, and such seem to have been taken
as organized auxiliaries into the Egyptian
service. As, however, Milukha means


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 87

merely "saltness," it might be applied to
more than one place.

(167) RIBADDI to king. Let Buribita stay in

Tsumura, and let Khaib take message, and
appoint him over feudal princes. Aziru an d_^
his brothers before Gubla. Thus Tsumura
cannot hold out No silver to buy horses,
all spent for food. (W. 80.)

(168) [RIBADDI to the king.] Aziru attacks

Gubla ( ?). Tsumura is in danger.

: (W. 95.)

(169) RIBADDI to the king. Formerly Mitani

was hostile to the king's fathers, but R. was
always faithful to his fathers. Names
Yankhamu . . . and land of Subari; . . .
kings of Kinaakhni used to flee from the
Egyptians, but now Abdashirta's sons
' resist R. cannot lead an oflicer into
Tsumura. All R.'s cities have fallen away.
If Khaib and Amanappa have Tsumura . . •

(W. loi.)

These letters deal with the danger of
Simyra, which seems to have lasted for some
time, as eight letters (i 62-- 169) are written in
nearly the same terms about it The fall of
Tsumur was a main event in the history of
the war ; but before we proceed to that we
should notice some other letters that seem to


88 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

come in during this rise of the power of
Aziru, resuming the history of Tsumur
at 172.

(i;o) People of DUNIP to the king. Who would
formerly have plundered Dunip without
being plundered by Manakhbiria? The
gods of Egypt dwell in Dunipt. But we
now belong no aiQW ta Egypt For 20
years (on times) we have sent messengers,
but they remain with the king; now we
desire the return of Yadi-addu, who had
been given by the king and then ordered to
return to him. Azi ra has ca ptured people
in the land of Khatat _A. will tr^^ Pj^J^Ip
as he has treated Nii ; and if we mourn the
king will also have to mourn. And when
Azira enters Tsumuri he will do to us as he
pleases, and the king will have to lament.
" And now Dunip your city weeps, and her
tears are running, and there is no help for
us. For 20 years we have been sending to
our lord,_the king, the king of Egypt, hut
ttee Tias not come to us a word from our
lord, hot one." (W. 41 ; S.B.A. xv. 18.)

This touching end to the letter is probably
a picture of much of the state of Syria at
this time, gradually forced by hard necessity
and neglect to give up an alliance which had
become a real bond of loyalty during the


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 89

easy yoke of the great kings of the previous
generations. This letter is of the greatest
interest, together with the previous one from
the elders of Irqata (159), as showing that
municipal rule was readily adopted, without
even any official head being elected. These
cities seem to have been republics, like the
Greek cities under Roman rule, managing
their own affairs subject to a suzerain, and
sending embassies and conducting political
business by their council of elders. The
date of this letter is shown to be before the
fall of Tsumura, yet after the fall of Ni,
which still was safe in letter 112, and after
the rise of Azira into command, and his
bringing Tsumura into danger.

(i;i) YAPAKHI-ADDItoYANKHAMI. Why
does Yan. neglect Tsumura ? All is falling
to Aziru from Gubla to Ugarit Shigata
and Ambi are revolting. Ships before (?)
Ambi and Shigata, and we cannot enter
Tsumura. (W. 123.)

This letter again belongs to the time of
the extremity of Tsumura, when it was
closely besieged.


90 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

26. Simyra lost

Henceforward Tsumura belongs to the
enemy, and one great landmark in the
history is passed.

(i;2) RIBADDI to the king. Abdashirta is
strong against R., and sends to Mitana and
Kash. A. has collected the Khabiri aeainsi


, * ^ m^t^tm0s^^


SWgata _and ...Afllhl " Tsum uia^^ your
fortress is now in the power of theKhabiri?'

(173) AZIRI to the king. A. has carried out all

his orders. The kings of Nukhashi are
hostile, and therefore A. has not built up
the city of Tsumuri, but will do so within
a year. (W. 48 ; S.B.A. xi. 410.)

Here Aziri is playing the faithful subject,
and excusing his wasting the city of Simyra
by the plea that he is so much occupied in
resisting the kings of Nukhashi. That
Tsumur was left waste after being taken,
is seen by the next letter of Ribaddi's.

(174) RIBADDI to king. Tsumura has fallen,

but is not occupied by enemy. War against
R. now for five years • . . Yapakhi-addi
Zimrida (of Sidon) and princes are


. • • .


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 91

against R. and Tsumura. Asks to have
Yankhamu sent, and for 20 pair of horses.

(W. 85.)

(i;S) RIBADDI to the king. The sons of
Abdashirta have taken horses and chariots
and have delivered men to the land of
Suri. When R. wrote to the king's father
he listened and sent troops to resist A.
When R. sent lately two messengers to
Tsumura, the deputy prevented a message
going to the king. Messengers now have
to go^ to and fro by night because of the
""Dog" (Abdashirta). If R. is distrusted
l et him retire^ _and^ iet the ^ King^send and
drive th e Khabiri out of Tsumura. R. asks
for 20 men of Milukha and 20 from Egypt
to defend the city.

(W. 83 ; R.P. xviii. 50.)

This shows that Ribaddi was correspond-
ing with Amenhotep III., and already had
trouble with Azira at that time, which is in
accord with the time of Azira's rise, in letter
III. A stray ruler, otherwise unknown, may
be noticed here.

(i;6) NURTUYA .... MA to the king.
Defends his city, which is about to fall,
and his father is slain. (W. 262.)


92 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

27. Abintilki of Tyre in trouble.

Tyre next claims our notice, as it fell
shortly after Tsumura. The letters about
it are here grouped together, but probably
the first eight should be interspersed some-
what between the defection of Zimrida after
letter 145, and, perhaps, the fall of Tsumura,
in letter 172. Certainly letter 185 is after
letter 172.

Vkl M ^It-^'^ (^77^ ABIMILKI to the king. A. addresses the

Vc u> l» ^ ^^"S ^* great length and very effusively. A.

guards the city of Tsurri until troops come

to give him water to drink and wood to

. bum. Zimrida, of Ziduna, \ daily has news

SvO<?Kl ^j^^^ ggyp^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^j^j ^^j^.^ ^j^^_

sharta's son. (W. 149 ; S.B.A. xv. 518.)

(178) ABIMILKI to the king. A. cannot leave
his city to see the king because of Zimrida,
of Ziduna, who will attack him if he leaves.
Asks for 20 men to guard the city in his
absence. Is hemmed in without water or
wood. Sent Ilu-miiki with 5 talents of copper
and other gifts. King asked for news from
Kinakhna. The king of Danuna is dead ;
his brother rules in peacc^ ^cy of Ugarit
is half burnt The Khatti are quiet. Itakama
took Qedesh, and Aziru has begun to fight
Namyawaza. Zimrida has collected ships
from Aziri's city against Abimilki.

(W. 151 ; S.B.A. XV. 507.)


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 93

The city of Danuna named here is Danian,
the Hebrew Danyaan, at the Tynan Steps,
on the headland south of Tyre. The
references to Itakama and Aziru fighting
Namyawaza, are later than the attack by
Namyawaza upon Itakama, but show that
this letter probably goes in somewhere before
the present point. The allusions to Zimrida,
however, put it after letter 145 ; and that
in its turn cannot be put earlier, as then the
Khabiri had already taken all the region
of Sidon.

The request for twenty men is like
the modern idiom of Egypt in asking for
two piastres, as a modest way of applying
for an indefinite amount. The position of
Tyre, on an island, has always made the
supply of wood and of water a difficulty
in war.

(179) ABIMILKI to the king. King gave orders
to supply grain and water, but it has not
been done. A. is the servant of Shalma-
yati, and Tsurri is the city of Shalmayati.
Names Tsumuri. Prince of Ziduna (Zim-
rida) has come with two ships, and A. will
go with all his ships.

(W. 152; S.B.A. XV. 515.)


94 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

(i8o) ABIMILKI to the king. A, will defend
city, and come to see the king. Asks for
Usu for his life {t,e., Hosah, to supply
water). (W. 153.)

(181) ABIMILKI to the king, x and Zimrida
fight him. (W. 155.)

(182) ABIMILKI to the king. Since the troops

left the prince of Zidon (Zimrida) stops his
getting wood and water.

(W. 156; S.B.A. X. 498.)

All of these letters must be about the
same period. Shalmayati seems to be the
god of Tyre.

(183) ABI MILKI to the king. A. asks for Uzu

to supply food and water. The prince of

Ziduna takes away his people, and therefore

he asks for Uzu. Princes of Ziduna and of

v-zo^ Khazura have joined the Khabiri. Let the

king enquire ot his officer in Kinakhi.

(W. 154; S.B.A. xiii. 323.)

This Khazura wa s Hazor, 11 S.E. of
Tyre, which prince had "earlier reported his
allegiance, in letters 70, 71.

(184) ABIMILKI to the king. King set A. in

Tsurri. A. asks for 20 soldiers to defend
the city, so that he may come to Egypt.
Names Aziru Abdashrat's son [A. ?] khuni-
milki, Khabi, . . . Tsumura lost to Azira.


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 95

Zimrida has seized Uzu, after the troops

abandoned it, and there is no water, and no

wood, nor burial ground. Zimrida of

Ziduna and Azira rebel, allied with people

of Arwada, and collect ships, chariots, and

soldiers to seize Tsurri, and they have

takenuTsuHHiFa.

(W. 150; S.B.A. XV. 511.)

This ends the correspondence of Abi-
milki, who seems to have found the force
of circumstances too strong for him, as
Ribaddi next reports his defection.

28, Ribaddi in Beyrut.

(185) RIBADDI to the king. Tsurri is rebelling

under Ya milki (?). R.'s property was put
into Tsurri with R.'s sister and her sons,
who have been killed with the commander ;
the sister's daughters were sent there to be
safe from Abdashirta. Tsurri is not like
the land of a feudal prince, but is as
Ugarita. (W. 70 ; R.P xviii. 63.)

(186) RIBADDI to the king. Names city of
Yabu (?). R. was not in Biruna. Aziru
has taken Tsumuri. If abandoned by the
king, all will fall to Aziri. x came to
Biruna to negotiate with Khamunira.
Half the city is attached to Abdashirta's
sons and half to the king. When R. came


96 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

to Biruna he sent his son to the king, but
for three months he has not seen the king.
R. sent a man as far as Takhida, but he was
seized. Names land of Yabu. A city will
say Ribaddi remains in Biruna, no one
comes to the rescue, and they will join
Aziri. Gublites write asking if troops will
be soon sent Asks for troops that sons of
Abdashirta may not take Biruna. (W. 91.)

The land of Yabu, or Yapu, is unknown, un-
less it be Yapu — Joppa — down in the south,
which seems unlikely. It seems that Ri-
baddi tried to attract help by sending his
son to personally represent the case in
Egypt, but quite fruitlessly. Takhida is
unknown, and no such name exists on the
road to Egypt. After Ribaddu went to
Beyrut, his brother Rabimur ruled at Gubla
in his absence.

(187) RABIMUR to the king. R. prays the king

not to neglect Gubla. Aziru has killed
kings of Ammia, Ardata, and Ni, . . . R.
begs for 30 or 50 men for Gubla. Messages
from Tsumuru and a governor now killed,
show that Aziru is a rebel.

(W. 120; B.O.D. 45.)

(188) RABIMUR to the king. Aziru killed
Aduna king of Irqata, king of Ammia,


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 97

King of Ardata, and the deputy. Also
has Tsumura and other cities. Gubla alone
remains « . . UUaza . « . Itakama, and has
taken land of Amki. And sent men to
occupy Amki; kings of Khatta and of
Narima (Naharain) are destroying . , .

(W. 1 19 ; S.B. A. xiii. 220 ; R.P. xvii. 90.)

We find here the echo of the earlier
affairs about Itakama, given in letters 107-
109. Probably recapitulated here by Rabi-
mur because he had not corresponded with
the king before. But the same present news
is given by Ribaddi.

(189) RIBADDI to the king. Gubla in danger.

Children and wood all sold to Yarimuta for

food. TChftbirt Willfflj Adtina king of Ir-

qata . p . seized Ardata, and take away
tiie lands of Qutu» and kings of Mitani and
Nakhrima . . . (W, 79.)

The whole of northern Phoenicia, just to
the north of Tripoli, seems to have been
lost by this time.

(190) RIBADDI to the king. Desires troops,

and that land may be put under city

governors, and then they will have peace,

and no longer write about R. and Yank-

hamu. (W. 98 ; B.O.D. 25.)

H


98 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

Next come more excuses from Aziru.

(191) AZIRI to the king. A. is slandered. King

wrote about Khani the envoy. A. explains
that he was staying at Tunip, and knew not
of K.*s coming. When he heard he started,
but did not overtake K. A.'s brother and
Bati-ilu waited upon K., and gave him full
supplies and animals. When A. came to
see the king, K. received him kindly. And
now king accuses A. of neglecting K. A.
appeals to the kings, gods, and the sun that
he really was at Tunip. King ordered A.
to rebuild Tsumur; but A. says kings of
Nukhashi are hostile, and are taking A.'s
cities by order of Khatib, so A. has not
rebuilt Tsumur, but will do so quickly.
Khatib took away half the implements and
all the gold and silver sent by the king.
King asks why A. refused his envoy and
welcomed that of the Khatti ; but A. will
give everything to an envoy.

(W. 5 1 ; S.B. A. XV. 372.)

Another letter of excuse is from Abda-
shirta, the father.

(192) ABDASHRATU to the king. A. guards

the whole land of Amurri for the king. A.
tells Pakhanati, his inspector, to bring a
guard to defend the king's land . . •
Amurru. • . • Ask Pakhanati if A. does
not defend Tsumuri and UUaza. A. is
under P. (W. 38 ; S.B.A. xv. 502.)


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 99

These letters show that the Amorite party
of Abdashirta and his son Aziri were posing
still as faithful subjects. This letter 192
gives the last mention of UUaza. The
excuse of Aziri for not receiving the king's
envoy might hold good; but we know too
well Aziri s reason for being at Tunip, from
the previous wail of the people of Tunip
about their fear of Aziri, in letter 170,
Evidently Aziri felt quite strong enough to
do as he chose, and to tell the king that he
would rebuild Tsumura soon, without really
troubling about it

While Ribaddi was absent in Beyrut the
people of Gubla wrote a municipal letter to
the king. This is the third such letter from
a community without any titular head, the
others being from Irqata (159) and Tunip
(170).

(193) People of GUBLA to the king. Tsumuri is
captured and people of Gubla are slain,
Ask for 240 men, 30 chariots, and 600
people of Kashi to defend Gubla. Biwari,
the " gate-keeper " of the king, is killed.
Pakhamnata will not listen* There is no
food Or graih for the troops • . . names
Yankhama. (W. 97 ; B.O.D. 24.)


100 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

This letter, though clearly addressed from
the people of Gubla, yet lapses into personal
expressions, **they will kill me," "I am
anxious/' and ''Pakhamnata did not listen
to me," showing probably the habit of the
scribe in writing for Ribaddi and other
officers. But the sequence of the letters
points to Ribaddi being in Beyrut when this
was written, and so agrees to its being a
municipal letter as it is headed

(194) [RIBADDI to the king.] Names Gubla;
desires if no troops come that ships be sent
to bring him alive to the king. Names
Biwari. (W. 105.)

It is not likely that this Biwari is the same
as Bikhura or Pakhura of Kumidi, as that
person must rather be connected with the
Paura who afterwards fought in the southern
campaign about Jerusalem, and who cannot
be the Biwari who was slain here.

Next we find letters of Ribaddi to various
officials in Syria.

(19s) RIBADDI to AMANAPPA. Asks why
A. does not come with troops and take the
land of AmurrL Agmiri have ji fort^ apd,
\o longer belong to Abdashir ta ; they hope
day and night for troops that they may fall


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR loi

on Aziri. All the governors hate Abda-
shi rta s ince he ordered pepple of Ammiya
to slay their master~aimr'join the Khabiri.
R. asks A. to tell all this to the king. A.
knew R. and his fidelity in Tsumura.

(W. 57; S.B.A. XV. 355.)

(196) RIBADDI to KHAIAPA. Why delay in
telling the king to occupy Tsumura ? Abda-
shirta is a dog, a nd the kinj^siand jjoesjo
him to sa ve its lifej being e ndan gere d by
the KhabJSr Send 50 yoke of horses and
200 men, and hold him in check at Shigata
till troops come ; tiiu s prev ent himb ringing
Khabiri to tak eShigata_and_AmbL

~{[W. 54 ; R>. xviii. 56.)

From these letters we see that the people
of Amurri were not satisfied with Abda-
shirta's advance, that there was a party
against hinii and that Ribaddi hoped to use
that party for his overthrow. Aziri's con-
quests and promotion of treachery had put
all the other chiefs in fear, and a good body
of opponents might be raised to attack him.
This gleam of Egyptian hopes would be
about the 12 th year of Akhenaten; and it
may be some success at that time which is
signalized by the captives of Kharu in the
tomb of Huya, Na i at Tell el Amarna,
dated in the 1 2th year.


102 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

29. Ribaddi in Gubla.

Next we find that Ribaddi went back from
Beyrut to Gubla in order to face Aziri in his
attack on Shigata and Gubla.

(197) RIBADDI to[KHAIAPA?] Now that K.
has entered Btt-tiri all is over. When K.
wrote to R. to go and occupy Tsumur, K.
should know that the enemy are too strong
for R. Ambi is hostile; and the deputy
and city governors are in alliance with
Abdashirta's sons. R. cannot march.

(W. 82 ; B.O.D, 23.)

This Beit Tiri to which Khaiapa retreated
seems to be probably the ruin of Et Tireh
on the foot of the hills behind Akka. It
seems as if, despairing of holding out against
Aziri, the Egyptian officer had retreated
southward, and taken up a position outside
Akka on the hills, where he could command
the approaches to that city.

(198) ARA ... of Kumidi to the king. Let the

king enquire of Khamashni about A., who
sent his son to Egypt to bring oil from the
king. (W. 141.)

This refers to some native ruler of Kumidi
apparently, where also was an Egyptian
officer, Bikhura, as we see in the next.


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 103

(199) RIBADDI to the king. Abdashirta long

afflicted R., who wrote to king's father for
troops to rescue the land. Aziru has
assembled Khabiri against Gubla. . . .
Appeals" to Yaiikhama as witness. Names
Paya — . . . "they did not listen to the
words of Khaib, their father." Khaib has
delivered over Tsumura ; and let not the
king overlook the killing of the deputy. If
help does not come Bikhura will be unable
to hold Kumidi. ... (W. 94; B.O.D. 18.)

This letter shows that Ribaddi, as well as
Akizzi (letter 1 1 1 ) had written to Amenhotep
III. about Aziru's hostility. In the next two
letters we see that Bikhura, not being able
to hold Kumidi, had yielded it up and joined
the enemy. He had been originally the
Egyptian deputy or officer, who was appealed
to by Itakama for help (letter 1 14).

(200) RIBADDI to the king. An unexampled

deed has been done against Gubla. Bik-
hura has sent Shuti men, who have slain
the Shirdanu. When the king writes
"Protect yourself," with whom is R. to
protect himself? Send back the three
people whom Bikhura sent to Egypt,
namely Abdirama, Natan - Addu, and
Abdmilki. (W. yy ; B.O.D. 20.)


104 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

(201) RIBADDI to the king. If king commands
R. to defend the city, send provision and
troops, for there are none. Pakhura has
committed a great sin against R. by sending
Shuti men and slaying the Shirdani, and
sending^ three men to Egypt SliTce then
the city has rebelled against R.

(W, 100 ; R.P* xviiL 66.)

These letters show the use of auxiliaries
by the Egyptians, the garrison of Gubla
being of Shirdani, who, we know, are shown
so frequently on the Egyptian monuments of
the Ramesside times, and who were doubt-
less a Mediterranean people. Their greater
vigour above the Egyptians is shown in the
large camp scene on the pylon of the Rames-
seum, where two of them are actively prac-
tising combat in the camp. The Shuti,
whom the Egyptian deputy sent to attack
them, were Sati or Bedawin, who were the
Syrian auxiliaries when not enemies of the
Egyptians. As we afterwards find this
deputy acting faithfully in the southern
campaign (letters 241, 254, 255) it seems
that either he misunderstood Ribaddi or else
the Shuti were acting irresponsibly and
without his authority.


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 105

Next Gubla appears to be in serious
straits, the presence of Ribaddi being
quite insufficient to hold back the activity
of Aziru,

(202) RIBADDI to the king. Abdashirta's

enmity is bitter. Only Gubla and Biruna
are left to R. All the Khabir i have become
like the city of Ammi[a] . < • names Shut!
and Shirdana R. remains shut up and
cannot get out of his city ; the people are
like a bird caught in a net, their sons and
daughters and timber of houses are gone,
sold to Yarimuta for food. If troops do
not come in two months Abdashirta will
capture the two cities.

(W. 64; R.P. xviii. 89.)

(203) RIBADDI to the king. R. protests his

family fidelity, but the Khabiri oppress
hiiiL Sons, daughters, and [dmBerpiffe
sold to Yarimuta for food. All BL's cities ,
on hill s an d oi]L -sea^ are lost to Khabirit.
Gubla and two cities remain. Abdashirta
has taken Shigata, and told men of Ammia
to slay their lord, and they did so and
became like Khabiri. And A. wrote to
men of Bit Ninib to join in falling on
Gubla. R. is like a bird caught in a net
in Gubla Amanappa is with the king, let
him be asked. (W. 55 ; S.B.A. xv. 351.)


io6 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

These two letters were evidently written
closely together, and just after the letters
200, 201, which Ivere written in the first
excitement of the slaughter of the Shir-
dana. The difficulties of famine, owing to
the close siege^ were being felt, and the
neighbouring port of Yarimuta or Ramitha
(Laodicea) being yet open, all valuable
things — even the houses and the children —
were being sold there for food. Ribaddi
was feeling how hopeless it was to make
head against Abdashirta, or even to get
outside the gate of the city. So his
favourite simile, of being like a bird caught
in a net, is often used. The B6t Ninib
named here must have been near Gubla,
and so cannot be the same as the BSt
Ninib which was near Jerusalem (letter

256).

The next letter seems to show increased
destitution.

(204) RIBADDI to the king. R. has written
similarly to the king, but was not attended
to. Three years have passed, for two years
grain was grown, now there is none. Sons,
daughters, and [timber] of houses are no
more, sold to Yarimuta for food. Let king


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 107

send grain in ships, and 400 men and 30
yoke of horses to Zu ... to guard city.
Perhaps Yankhamu will be against giving
com. Yapa-Addu has taken money, x is
with king, ask him about it. Corn formerly
given to Tsumura let them give to Gubla.
Asks for troops. Land is at disposal of
Yankhamu, ... he has taken money for
children ... to Yarimuta. King of Tana
(? or Tashu) has marched against Tsumura,
and was coming against Gubla, but turned
back for lack of water. If any prince
would join, R. would drive Abdashirta out
of Amurri. Since the king's father (Amen-
hotep III.) left Tsiduna lands have fallen to
the Khabiri. Names Mutshi (?) Milkuru (?)
handmaid of Ba'alat of Gubla.

(W. 69 ; R.P. xviii. 67:)

The king of Tana probably came from
the south of Tsumura, as he was going on
thence north to Gubla. Possibly we may
see in this name the district of Denniyeh
inland from Tripolis. It seems that Ribaddi
still kept up the hope of defeating Abda-
shirta if only he could get some assistance.
Here is again a reference to the troubles
beginning at the retirement of Amenhotep
III. The next two letters also refer to the
famine.


io8 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

(205) RIBADDI to the king. R. is ordered to

defend his city, but with whom shall he
defend it ? Formerly a garrison was there,
and com was sent from Yarimuta, But
now Aziru has raided everything. Other
princes hold their towns, but R.'s towns
all belong to Aziru. " What dogs the sons
of Abdashirta are ! And they act according
to their heart's wish and cause the king's
cities to go up in smoke."

(W. ^6 ; B.O.D. 19.)

(206) RIBADDI to AMANAPPA. Names

Amurri and Mitani: desires A. to speak
to Yankhamu. For three years no grain,
and all is sold to Yarimuta.

(W. 66 and 90; B.O.D. 21.)

The difficulties yet increased, and the
famine is even not noticed in the midst of
more urgent perils.

(207) RIBADDI to the king. Since Amanappa
. came all the Khabiri ha ve been se t against

^A ^^ R. by Ab dashirta. R7 asks for troops.

r(|iiv«^< uU^ Abdashirta has the city of Mar . . . and

^v ., ^ \ the foe is striving to take Gubla and

^^^\ *" Biruna, and all will fall to the Khabiri.

^vV^^^^ Two cities left to R. they strive for, and

R. is shut up in Gubla as a bird in a net

(W. 60.)


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 109

This letter shows, like some earlier ones,
that the wilder enemies of the Egyptians,
such as the Khabiri, Suti, &c., had been
their allies in the times of peace.

Domestic treachery now began to work,
and Rabimur, who was formerly faithful
(letters 187, 188), now began to give up
hope of Egyptian help and to turn to
Aziru.

(208) RIBADDI to the king. R, sent messenger
to the court, but he returned empty with-
out any troops. R. went to Khamuniri
(Amunira), and his brother occupied
Gubla in order to deliver it to Abdashirta's
sons. And if no garrison is sent his brother
will be hostile, and drive R. out of the
city. R. cannot come to Egypt Old age
and disease press upon him. R, sent his
son to the king and begs for troops for
Gubla, which he still guards for the king,
though his brother is inciting it to turn to
the sons of Abdashirta. Let the king not
neglect his city, for there is much silver and
gold in it, and property in the temples.
Let R. be allowed to live in Buruzilim.
R. will go to Khamuniri if Gubla is lost ;
and he fears A.'s sons will attack Buruzilim
if he goes to Khamuniri. R. now sends
his son. (W. 71 ; R.P. xviii. 70.)


no THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

This Khamuniri or Amunira was, as we
see in letters 216-218, the Egyptian
governor of Beyrut, to whom Ribaddi was
soon obliged to flee for refuge.

(209) RIBADDI to AMANAPPA. Asks for
300 men to defend Gubla and to occupy
Biruna, so that people may abandon
Abdashirta. (W. 68.)

(210) RIBADDI to the king. Aziru has taken

all but Gubla. (W. 103.)

This taking of all the cities evidently
does not include Beyrut, because that did
not belong to Ribaddi, but was under its
Egyptian governor, Amunira; but all of
Ribaddi's cities were lost except Gubla.
At last he fled to Beyrut for shelter, though
he finally managed to get back to Gubla,
and there he disappeared from sight

30. Ribaddi in Beyrut.

We read from Beyrut : —

(211) RIBADDI to the king. Abdashirta has
taken all but two cities. In Gubla he was
like a bird caught in a net, and he is now
in Biruna. (W. 62.)

(212) RIBADDI to the king. Only Biruna is

left. Names the Khatti. Namiawaza fears

the king. Names prince of Kumidi.

(W. 63.)


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR in

Hence we see that in Beyrut he had some
news through from the inland district. The
letter is too much mutilated to follow the
sense; but it seems as if the faithful
Namiawaza was still at large, and Beyrut
was not closely pressed. Another letter
much mutilated belongs perhaps to some
earlier period.

(213) X to the king. Tashu ... is hostile . . .

servants of my lord of Rukhizi. A mes-
senger of the king has said, "In Mitani
. . • and three or four kings treat as
hostile (?)... king of Khatti." . . .

(W. 136.)

Rukhizi was the city of Arzawaya or
Arzauia (letter 112), and is named with
Dasha, who is probably the same as Tashu
of this letter. Rukhizi is otherwise called
Mikhiza in letter 75. This letter may
perhaps best come in with the other late
mention of that district in letter 212.

(214) X [RIBADDI ?] to the king, y [Rabimur (?),

see 208] has taken Gubla. Let Yankhamu
be asked. Abdashirta has come against x.
Asks for 100 men and people from Kash
and 30 chariots to defend the city until the
king Occupies Amuni (W. 137.)


112 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

(215) X to [AMANAPPA ?]. [RIBADDU (?)
complaining of Rabimur (?)] Names Tsu-
muri. y has made treaty with prince of
Kubli ... "to all the Zukhluti people of
your lord" . . • (W. 121.)

These fragments seem to belong to about
this period, as Gubia had been lost to the
opposite party when they were written.
Of the Zukhluti we know no more; they
may have been a class of auxiliaries.

We get more detail of Ribaddi's flight
to Beyrut in the next three letters, which
supplement the brevity of letters 211, 212.

(216) RIBADDI to the king. The men of Gubla

and R/s house and wife say, ** Attach your-
self to Abdashirta's son so that we may all
have peace." But R. did not consent, but
often asked for more troops. No message
was returned, so R« went to treat with
Ammunira, and establish friendship; but
when he returned they had closed his
house against him. R. is still steadfast,
but if the king will not help he is a dead
man. Two boys and two women of his
have been given to the rebel.

(W. 96 ; S.B.A. XV. 362.)

Two earlier letters may be quoted here
to show the position of Amunira. It should


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 113

be noticed that he writes correctly Birutu,
whereas Ribaddi generally writes Biruna.

(217) AM UN IRA of Birutu to the king. A. was

ordered to place himself with the troops,
and he did so with all his resources.

(W. 128 ; S.B.A. XV, 366 ; B.O.D. 26.)

(218) AMUNIRA of Birutu to the king ... of

the king are all gone. . . . (W, 129a.)

(219) X to the king. When the king's ships come

to Birutu X will forward them . . . Biruna. . . •

(W. 130.)

Amunira's version of Ribaddi's affairs is
instructive, and clears up the condition of
matters.

(220) [AMUNI]RA to the king. A. has heard
the words of the tablet A. keeps close
guard and watches Birutu for the king.
'* As to the man from Gubla (Ribaddi) who
is with me I am indeed guarding him until
the king shall care for his servant" His
(R.'s) brother, who is in Gubla, has given
the sons of Ribaddi who is with me to the
enemy of Amurri.

(W. 129 ; S.B.A. XV. 368.)

This repeats about the treachery of

Rabimur which Ribaddi states in letter 216,

and which is alluded to in 214, 215. It

I


114 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

seems, however, that Beyrut was even in
more danger than Gubla, for the next news
that we have is of Beyrut being taken, and
the return flight of Ribaddi to Gubla, which
he seems to have been able to re-enter
safely, though he could hold it for but little
longer.

31. Ribaddi in Gubla.

(221) RIBADDI to the king. Names Amma
(»Ammia). Abdashirta is a dog, and
attacked R., and has now taken Biruna,
and will come against R. Shuarbi is the
gate of Gubla. If the king will march
A. will leave the gate, but R. cannot now
get out of the door. If the king does not
send troops Gubla will fall into A.'s hands,
and all the king's lands as far as Mitsri
(Egypt) will fall into the hands of the
Khabiri. Behold, Gubla is not like other
towns, Gubla is the faithful city.

(W. 61 ; B.O.D. 17.)

These statements of Beyrut being lost, of
the close siege of Gubla, of its fall entailing
the loss of all the coast down to Egypt, and
of Gubla being the faithful city, all show
that this is one of the last letters from
North Syria.


THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR 115

(222) Ar[RIBADDI] to the king. Hostility strong,

no provisions, and people will desert to
Abdeishirta's sons, and Ziduna and Biruta
are hostile. Let the king occupy them
that X may not have to yield his city.
When the people withdraw the Khabiri will
occupy it . . . Yankhami , . . (W. 92.)

(223) [RIBADDI] to the king. Names Tsumura.
y has taken Gubla . • . "(for) looo of silver
and 100 of gold he will depart from me,
and he has taken all my cities, Gubla alone
is left to me, and they are seeking to
capture it, for I hear that he has united jlU
the Khabiri ' ' (W. 102.)

(224) RIBADDI to the king. Gubla alone is

left t . . Behold Biruna . . . Behold my
cities are lost . . . Mitani . . . Khabiri • » .
Abdashirta. (W. 93.)

(22s) RIBADDI to AMANABBL Why has A.

told R. to send messenger to receive men

and chariots from Egypt ? R. did so, but

messenger returned alone. And Biruna

has fallen to y and the Khabiri, although

troops were there. And the enemy do not

depart from the gate of Gubla • . .

(W. 67.)

These four letters end the history of
northern Syria. Ribaddi flying from one
city to another to animate the Egyptian
resistance was at last reduced to Gubla


ii6 THE NORTH SYRIAN WAR

alone, and then he disappears altogether.
Whether he succeeded in fleeing down to
Egypt, or capitulated to his foe Aziru, or
was killed by treachery or capture, we have
no light. His resistance was faithful and
hardy ; and the Egyptian yoke cannot have
been very oppressive to Syria when a native
would be thus faithful in the face of the
greatest discouragement and opposition.
The Egyptian power had finally departed
from northern Syria after several generations
of dominion, and there is only left the south
Syrian war, where we shall see several of
the former actors again continuing their
support of the waning power of Egypt


,/VV/*,i


Va At-^Jf^t—M^. "-^ ^-^ " I >. 1~-^ --'WO


CHAPTER IV.
THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

32. Abdkhiba in Trouble.

One of the earliest letters of the troubles in
Palestine is that from Baiya, w ho was son of
Gulati, and whom we afterwards find seizing
Gezer and Rabbath (letter 260), and taking
prisoners (letter 261). In the peaceful times
he had sent reports of fidelity to the king
(letter 100).

(226) BAIYA to the king. If Yankhamu does
not come this year the Kh abiri will seize

W , II I • • ' II I ' ■

countg^, (W. 230 ; B.O.D. 60.)


But the main series of letters from

Palestine is that from Abdkhiba king of

Jerusalem. These show that Jerusalem

was not merely a Jebusite village made into

a capital by David and Solomon, but was

the capital of south Palestine from early

times. From the accounts of the state of

Palestine at the Israelite invasion it appears

117


ii8 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

that the Amorites held most of the country,
but this was apparently not the case in the
XVIIIth Dynasty. On the contrary, they
i are never mentioned in the south a t all
But the Israelites found Amorites in
possession of Jerusalem, Hebron, Yarmuth,
• — v> Lachish, and Eglon (Josh. x. 5). This
southern extension of the Amorite power is
probably the direct consecjuence of the rise
of Aziru,.. the chief of the Amorites, who
carried their rule from the land of Amurri,
or the Lower Orontes, down to Gish in
Galilee early in the present war (letter
116); and then seems to have spread on
southward, until by the time of the Israelite
invasion the Amorites were paramount in
the whole of Palestine. This also accords
with jhe^prominence jof the Amar m the
triumphj of J^^ 1 1 L on^ the wdGls of

Hei3inet Habu,.,lhQuaELjbe. d^^ seem"

to have at all touched northern Syria.
Apparently the earliest letter of Abdkhiba
refers to trouble already arising.

K^i J> (227) ABDKHIBA to the king. A. has been

^ \ V slandered, and accused of revolt He was

^'"'^^ not an hereditary chief, but was set up by

the king. He is slandered because he
reproached the king's officer with favouring


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 119

the Khabiri. Yankhamu has taken away a
garrison. Cities of the king under Ili-milki
have fallen away. A. continually tells the
officers that all the dependent princes will
be lost Let troops be sent, for the king
has no longer any territory, the Khabiri
have wasted all. "To the scribe of my
lord 3ie king— Abdkhiba your servant
Bring aloud before my lord the king the
words, * The whole territory of my lord, the
king, is going to ruin.' "

(W. 179; R.P. xvii. 66.)

This last injunction to the scribe, to
impress the facts on the king, is curious ; it
bears such a stamp of sincerity that it seems
alive in its earnestness even now.

33. Milkili and allies doubtful.

This Ili-milki or Milk-ili wrote also to
Egypt to clear his character.

(228) MILKILI to the king. Hostility against

M. is powerful, and against Shuwardata.
Let the king rescue the land iro m the
Khafeiri, or send chariots to remove the
loyal. Names Yankhama.

(W. 170; R.P. xvii. 80.)

(229) MILKILI to the king. Yankhamu has
taken 3(?)ooo talents from M., and de-
manded his wife and sons that Y. might


120 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

kill them. M. asks for chariots to bring
him and family to the court

(W- 171 ; B.O.D. 62.)

Here we see much what appeared in the
north, several parties, Abdkhiba, Yankhamu,
and Milkili, all acting in professed subjection
to Egypt, but all quarrelling for their own
success. The amount of 3000 talents seized
by Yankhamu seems prodigious, and is most
likely an error or exaggeration.

Shuwardata, mentioned above as an ally
of Milkili, also wrote to Egypt complaining
of troubles.

(230) SHUWARDATA to the king. S. was

invited to court, but cannot come. Yan-
khamu knows his troubles. Let the king
rescue him. Thirty towns are hostile, and
his enemies are powerful. (W. 166.)

Of another ally of Milkili, his son-in-law
Tagi, an early letter belongs to the beginning
of the troubles, when a brother was wounded.
Letters, during the peace, were received from
Tagi (80, 81).

(231) TAGI to the king. T.'s brother has been

wounded, so T. does not wait to send his
letter with his brother's. T. is now trying
to send caravans to Egypt

(W. 189; B.O.D. 70.)


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 121


34. Abdkhiba attacked.

But Tagi was soon in opposition along
with Milkili. The following letter is probably
from Abdkhiba, though Winckler attributes
to Addumikhir.

(232) [ABDKHIBA?] to the king. What has

A. done to Milkili that he should attack
him? M. gave servants to his father-in-
law, Tagl Names Milkili and the sons of
Lapaya. (W. 186.)

The next is certainly from Abdkhiba, as it
was written from Jerusalem.

(233) [ABDKHIBA to the king.] ... Urusalim.

If this land is the king's, why is not Khazati?
Ginti-kirmil is fallen to Tagi, and men of
Ginti are fallen. And we will conquer in
order that they may not give Lapaya and
his lands to the Khabiri. Milkili sent to
Tag! and sons. , . . . people of Qilti. We
will deliver Urusalim. The garrison sent
by Khaya was taken by Adda-mikhir to
Khazati. (W. 185 ; R.P. xvii. 73.) ^ ^1^^

Here we see that the hill country west of
Jerusalem was lost, also the coast town Gaza
The next letter gives more detail.


122 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

(234) ABDKHIBA to the king. A. has been
slandered, but protests his fidelity. When
Shuta, the officer, came, A. sent 21 women
and 20 men as a present to the king. Land
of Shiri, as far as Ginti-kirmil, its princes
are wholly lost, and fight against A. So
long as ships were on the sea the king
occupied land of Nakhrima and land of
Kash. Now the Khabiri occupy the cities.
Not one prince remains,., all._ are ruined.
Turbatsu was slain at the gate of Zilu.
Servants conspire against Zimrida, of
Lakisi. Yapti-Addi was slain at the gate
of Zilu. Asks for troops to Urusajim, or
all will be lost If not, desires tobe fetcked
away with his brothers, to the king. " To
the scribe of my lord the king, — Abdkhiba,
your servant At your feet I fall. Bring
these words plainly before my lord, the
king; 'I am your faithful servant'"

(W. 181 ; R.P. xvii. 68.)

This letter shows that not only the west,
but the north of Jerusalem was lost The
land of Shiri, as far as Ginti-kirmil, is
Shaaraim (Heb.), Khurbet es Sairah, which
is four miles nearer Jerusalem than En
Gannim (Heb.), Khurbet Umm Jina^ and
these ** gardens" would naturally be vine-
yards — kirmil — as it is in the Vale of
Sorek, "the choice vine." Then Zilu,


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 123

where two chiefs, Turbatsu and Yapti-
Addi, were slain, is Zelah (Heb.) north of
Jerusalem.

(23s) ABI .... to the general. Shipti-Addi
and Zimrida demand the city; and
Shipti-Addi spoke to Zimrida about
Abishiarami. (W. 219.)

. This is the celebrated tablet found at X^^^
Hesy ; and from its locality it doubtless
refers to Zimrida, of Lachish, and not to
Zimrida of Sidon. The other mention of
Shipti-Addi is in letter 56, with Yankhamu;
but the latter appears in both northern and
southern letters, so that proves nothing as
to place.

35. Fighting round Gezer.

We next turn to the prince of Gezer, west
of Jerusalem, close to Ginti.

(236) YAPAKHI to the king. Y. is obedient,

but has suffered from the Suti people.

(W. 206; B.O.D. SI.)

(237) YAPAKHI of GazrLto the king. Y.'s C'^Z^\

youngest brother rebels, and occupied
Mu . . khazi, allied with the Khabiri^ who
are now hostile to Y. Asks for instructions.

(W. 205 ; B.O.D. so.)


124 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

(238) YAPAKHI of Gazri to the king. Asks for

help, as the Khabiri are powerfu l^ and let
the king rescue him from the Khabiri^

(W. 204 ; B.O.D. 49.)

We have seen before some mention of
Lapaya, who in letter 232 seems to have
been faithful. He fell into trouble, how-
ever, as follows : —

(239) LAPAYA to the king. The city was taken

by an attack of the enemy, although in
peace, and with an officer of the king
with L. (W. 162 ; B.O.D. 61.)

The next, however, shows that he found it
expedient to join the enemy, and that his
next affair was attacking Yapakhi of Gezer.

(240) LAPAYA to the king. L. is a faithful

servant, and has been slandered. Is it an
offence that he has entered Gazri, and
levied the people? Let the king take all
that L. and Milkili have, and then decide
between him and M. King wrote asking
if Dummuia had joined the Khabiri. L.
had handed him to Adda-Dan. If king
demanded L.'s wife he would send her ; or
if he ordered L. to run a sword of bronze
into his heart he would do it.

(W. 163 ; R.P. xvii. 78.)

Here we see that Lapaya was against
Gezer, and also against Milkili. This seems


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 125

to be another three-cornered fight, in which
no one quite knew who sided with Egypt
Another letter has lost the name, but belongs
to this time.

(241) X to king. Y. has taken silver, people, sheep,

and everything from the cities the king
gave to X, who writes through Pakhura.
Names Tagi and Lapaya. (W. 191.)

Pakhura was at first in North Galilee,
but he appears later on at Gaza. This shift
southward, like the shift of the activities of
Yankhamu from north to south, is im-
portant as showing that the southern war
was not simultaneous with the northern, and
probably, therefore, succeeded it.

36. Fighting round Megiddo.

After Lapaya rebelled in the south, at
Gezer, he seems to have gone up through
Samaria to Megiddo. First we have a letter
from the chief of Megiddo early in the
affair.

(242) BIRIDIYA of Makidda to the king. Sent '^^\

30 cattle, but is attacked by some one.

(W. 194.)

(243) BIRIDIYA to the king. Two sons of

Lapaya gave money to the Khabiri.

(w. 192.)


126 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

(244) BIRIDIYA to the king. Since the troops
left, Lagayajias^att§£ke^ who cannot go
-2 out of Magidd^ ^ Let the king rescue his

f^% ^^ • city, that Lapaya may not take it.

(W. 195 ; R.P. xvii. 81.)

(24s) BIRIDIYA to the king. B. is defending
Makida, but powerful js the enmity of Jthe
Khabirl (W. 193 ; RJPfxvii. 82^

The following may probably be also from
Biridiya, but it is only a second tablet of
a letter, and the beginning cannot now be
identified.

(246) X to the king, x agreed with his brothers to

capture Lapaya and bring him to the king,
and go with Yashdata to Egypt, for Y. is
loyal, and goes into battle with x. But
Zurata took Lapaya out of Magidda and
said to X that Z. would send him by ship to
the king. But Zurata sent him home from
Khinatuna and took the money for his
ransom. Zurata also let Addumikhir go.

(W. 196 ; B.O.D. 72.)

(247) YARTA or YASHDATA to the king.

People of Takh. . . , have raided the cattle
of Y. who is with Biridiya.

(W. 197 ; B.O.D. 59.)

This shows that Zurata or Surata of
Akka (letter 119) was interfering, professedly
in Egyptian interests, but really for his own


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 127

profit : Akka being a port, he naturally pro-
posed to send Lapaya by sea. His taking
him over the J ordan to Kanawat to rgkasft
him, is TtT accord with Shutatna son of
Sharatu of Akkaiu seizing the caravan from
Burnaburyash in Kanawat (letter 1 24). The
E^inces^ofjAl^^

country across to^.Ba^shan. The writer of
246 may be read as Yashda . . . and is
probably the Yashdata of the previous letter.
The people of Takh . . . may be of
Takhida, where Ribaddi's messenger was
stopped on the way from Beyrut to
Egypt If so it must be looked for near
Megiddo.

37. Shuwardata in Trouble.

We now turn to Shuwardata, who we
have seen was an Egyptian ally (letter 230),
and was being attacked by the Khabiri
(letter 228).

(248) SHUWARDATA to the king. S. asks for

troops to rescue him. (W. 199.)

(249) SHUWARDATA to the king. S. in

trouble, wants troops. (W. 201.)

(250) SHUWARDATA to the king. The

country rebels and Qilti is lost.

(W. 167.)


128 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

(251) SHUWARDATA to the king. King

ordered S. to war against Qilti . He has
done so, and is successful. Why did
Abdkiba write to Qiltites saying, "Take
money and join me " ? Let the king know
that Abdkhiba has taken the city of S.
Lapaya is dead who took cities of S.
Lapa yawas allied with Afadkhiba^ ^ and
fobbed cities of S,

(W. 165 ; S.B.A. xL 348 ; R.P. xvii. 7^:)

This last letter must then be after letters
240-246, describing Lapaya's warfare.

Of a chief in northern Palestine we obtain
a little light,

(252) . , . .WARZANA prince of Khazi to the

king. Prince of Tushulti has attacked him.
Khabiri are taking, c ities, including Makh-
zi . . . ti, and burnt it. Khabiri betake
themselves to Amankhatbi. Khabiri have
occupied Sigi . . . and burnt it. The
house of Bil-garib (?) is rescued ; . . . .
rescued from the city of Mati . . , Ushtini
is taken by the Khai)ijri_and,^.bunit and
they will occupy Khazi. Amankhatbi
is an enemy. (W. 134; R.P. xvii. 85.)

(253) X to king, from city of Tu • . . Khabiri are

enemies. Names Amankhatbi, and city of
Khabi (W. 135.)


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 129

The district of this letter is not clear.
Tushulti seems like the Tasuret or Tasulet
of Tahutmes III., which is almost certainly
Teiastr near Shechem in Samaria. But on
the other hand, Khazi is probably the same
here as in 107, where the geography ap-
parently fixes it to eVAzziyek between the
Jordan and the LitAny. And Makhzi . . . ti
looks like Mikhiza, the city of Arzawaya
on the south of Hermon. If so, Ushtiru
would be Shtora^ between Beyrut and
Damascus. The second letter seems to
belong to the first, Tu . . . being Tushulti,
and possibly Khabi a mistake for Khazi.

38. Abdkhiba Failing.

We now turn back to Abdkhiba, in a later
letter, written after the letters 233, 234 from
him ; after 239, 240 from Lapaya ; after 244
from Biridiya; after 246 on Lapaya's cap-
ture; and after 251 on Lapaya's death. In
this Lapaya seems to be dead, and his sons
acting alone.

(254) ABDKHIBA to the king. All the countries A s ^^'
are hostile, Gazri, Asqaluna, and Lakisi; Va rU
if no troops are sent, nothing will be left to

the king. Milkili and the sons of Lapaya

K


130 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

are delivering land to the Khabiri. A. is
innocent about the Kashi (who seem to
have been plundering). Until the officer
Fauru went to Urusalim A daya was in
revolt. Caravans of the king were robbed
at Yaluna, so A. cannot forward them.
"To the scribe of my lord the king, —
Abdkhiba your servant. At your feet I
fall. I am your servant. Bring plainly
before my lord, the king, these words, ' I am
an officer of the king.' May you be
very well." And if A. has done evil to the
Kashi, let A. be killed.

(W. i8o ; R.P. xvii. 74.)

This letter has the curious little postscript
to the scribe, like most of his other letters ;
and it seems as if the cuneiform scribe at
Tell el Amarna were a personal friend of
Abdkhiba's, and was expected to specially
interfere on his behalf with the king.

(2S5) ABDKHIBA to the king. Milkili has
revolted to the sons of Lapaya, and the
sons of Arzawa. Milkili and Tagi have taken
Rubuta. Puuru is in Khazati. Let Yan-
khamu be sent. "To the king's scribe,
— Abdkhiba your servant Bring the
message plainly before the king. May
it be very well indeed with you. I am
your servant" (W. 182 ; R.P. xvii. 71.)


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 131

(256) ABDKHIBA to the king. Milkili and

Shuwardata have taken soldiers of Gazri,
Grimti, Qilti, and occupied the region of
Rubutl Men of Qilti have taken Blt-
Ninib belonging to Urusalim. I f no troo ps
are sent the land will belong to th e Khabirl
' (W. 183 ; R.P. xvii. 72.)

These last three letters of Abdkhiba close
his correspondence. We see how he was
hemmed in more and more. Gezer, Ash-
kelon, and Lachish lost; the caravans
plundered at Ayalon; then Gimzu, joining
the enemy in taking Rabbath; and a town
by Jerusalem taken. Arzawa named here
is probably Arzawaya, formerly of Mikhizi
by Hermon. Puuru, who was the officer in
Gaza, is most likely Pakhura, or Bikhura,
who was the officer in northern Palestine
somewhat earlier. It seems likely that
Abdkhiba himself joined the Khabiri at
last, as most of these princes and chiefs
did when they saw that help could not be
had from Egypt

39. Loss of South Palestine.

The following letter is from a man other-
wise unknown.

(257) ADDU-ASHARIDU to the king. Two

sons of Lapaya rebel, and desired A. to


132 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

join against men of Gina, who killed their
father, or else they would fight him. Asks
that an officer be sent to Namyawaza to
order him to fight the sons of Lapaya.
They ask A. to fight the king, as Lapaya
did when he besieged Shuna • ., and

Bur , and Kharabu, and Gitirimu . . .

Messengers of Milkili also stir rebellion.

(W. 164; R.P.xviL83.)

The places named here seem to belong
to the Joppa region; Shuna * . . may be
Shunama; Kharabu, £1 Khurab; and
Gitirimu • . . Gathrimmon. This shows
that Lapaya probably took Joppa. We
see here how Namyawaza has drifted down
into the southern seat of war, like so many
other of the northern fighters, Arzawaya,
Pakhura, Maia, Rianappa, &c. This shows
that the southern war succeeded the northern^
and was, probably, a sort of running fight
from the Orontes down to the Egyptian
frontier.

Addu-daian was another personage about
this time, but his locality is unknown.

(258) [ADDU]DAIAN to the king. Defends his

city. (W. 275.)

(259) ADDU-DAIAN to the king. Names

Y&b .... and Kaya . * . . ; asks for 30
men, and will come to Egypt (W. 240.)


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 133

(260) ADDU-DAIAN to the king. Ordered to

defend his city and will do so. City of
Tumurka rebels, and A. has fortified
Mankhatishum ; but Maya has taken it
from him, and put officer in it Asks for
order to Rianap to return it to A. Biia,
son of Gulati, has taken Gazri and Rubuti.
Ransoms to x were 30 of silver, to Biia
100 of gold (W, 239 ; M.A.F. vi. 279.)

(261) X to the king. Biia son of Gulati took

brothers of ;r, whom x had sent to serve in
Yapu. If X is ordered to give his city to
Biia he would do so, and go to serve the
king. (W. 178 ; B.O.D. 71.)

From these letters it seems that Addu-
daian was in the south of Judea. He names
Gezer and Rabbah. Tumurka is probably
Tumrah, near Gaza; and Mankhatishum
seems from its length to be a compound
name, including that of the Wady Menakh,
near Gezer. Biia was formerly an Egyptian
subject, as in letter icx), where he obeys
Maya, and letter 226.

(262) X to the king. Magdalim and Kuatsbat

are hostile; and Abbikha heads an in-
surrection. (W. 281 ; B.O.D. 73.)

This city of Kuatsbat seems to be Cozeba
of the Hebrew, now Kueiziba^ near Halhul.


134 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

This Magdalim must be a fortress, or tower,
in the Judean hills ; but the name does not
seem to have survived like the Magdala in
the north.

(263) DAGANTAKALA to the king. Asks for

rescue from the K h^biri and the Shuti.

. (W.216; B.O.D. 47.)

(264) DAGANTAKALA to the king. Father

and grairdfather were obedient, and D. will
listen and obey. (W. 215 ; S.B.A. xiii. 327.)

This chief seems to have been in the
south Palestine land, as the name of the god
Dagon is used by him. Beth Dagon —
now Dajun — is six miles S.E. of Joppa,
and Dagon was worshipped at Gaza and
Ashdod.

(265) NINUR to the king. Land has fallen away

to the Khabjri, who have sent to Aialuna,
and to Tsarkha .... two sons of Milkili
• . • • (W, 173.)

(266) [NINUR] to the king. Asks to be rescued

from the JQiabiri. City of Tsapuna has
been captured. (W. 174.)

The latter letter is doubtless from Ninur, as
in both she addresses the king as his hand-
maid, and writes in the same style.

The district of this queen was evidently


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 135

in Judea, as she mames Milkili, and the attack
on Ayalon and Zorah, in the hills, half-way
from Jerusalem to the coast. The city of
Tsapuna is therefore somewhere near there,
and Siffln, north of Ayalon, seems to corre-
spond to this. It is certain that these letters
must come late in the history, as the position
of the Khabiri corresponds to that of the
last of Abdkhiba's letters.

This last letter may belong to Galilee, but
cannot be safely placed.

(267) X to king. Brother of x has rebelled in
Tubikhi, and gone to besiege cities .....

lands of Amurri garrisons all gone

towns belong to Khabi ri. Asks

for help to retake Tubikhi. (W. 127.)

40. In taking a general view of these
letters, and the history that they show, we
may notice some broad conclusions. The
gradually shiftingrjoi;^ the peoples down Syrj^t
g2!Jj^^^^ fe rffflila^' «"^ rlpar, In the early
part of these letters the Khita, Hittites, are ^^
i n the far north , and only one or two princes
have established themselves southward. The
Hittite prince who went farthest south at
that time was that on the mountains of Igaid
(letter i) in the Lebanon; having come


136 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

from the mountainous north it was natural
that he should not do like other Syrians and
settle in the fertile low plains, but rather on
the colder mountain range. Then later the
Khat ti in general came south with Aziri , and
plundered on the coast^arpunj^^^ (letter
152). After this age, about 1375 B.C., the
Khatti advaijQed so that their chief city was
Qedesh by Lak&. Homs, and JRaniessjiJUL
only obtained a frontier jiistbeyond-^eymt

by his fighting witLthem.

The Amurri, Amar, or Amorites show a
similar and more complete shifting south-
ward. Originally from the references here

1]^ we glean that Amurri or Martu was the

a , ^ain part of t he Orontes valley! Then in
the time of Ramessu II . they appear side by

^^ side with the Khita at^42sdfish. Later, the
war of Ramgssu^JJI., which was mainly in

^ southern Syria, found the^ Amar throughgut
th^Tregion. Lastly^^when the Hebrews
came in they found the "five kings of the
Amorites" in Judea from Jerusalem down

^ ' to Hebron and Eglon in the soujh. Here
tKere is a continuous advance, and this is of
value as bearing on the date of the Hebrew
invasion. Had it been anywhere before
Ramessu II. we ought not to find Amorites


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 137

so far south, for there is not a single mention
of the Amurri or of their chiefs Abdashirta
and Aziru in the whole of the letters from I ^ '^ ^
Palestine, though they are the main factors
in the north Syrian letters. We must,
therefore, place all the accounts of the
Hebrew conquest as after these letters and
after the war of Ramessu IL, at^^ia.iax:t^rfi|e
latestjtagejifjdi^^

war4

41. Another noticeable point is the variety
of government in Syria at the time of this
correspondence. Five different forms of
government can be traced.

(i) Chiefs appointed by the king of
Egypt, such as Ramman-nirari's grandfather
(letter 36), and Yabitiri of Gaza and Joppa
(letter loi).

(2) Hereditary chiefs^ as Ramman-nirari
(letter 36), Itakama (letter 1 14), Shumaddu
(letter 1 26), and Aziri.

(3) Female rule, as by Ninur in Judea
(letters 265, 266) reminding us of Deborah
judging in Judea.

(4) Elective chiefs. Abdkhiba of Jerusa-
lem repeatedly uses the formula, " Neither
my father nor my mother appointed me in
this place. The strong arm of the king


138 THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR

established me over my fathers territory."
At first sight this would seem to be merely
a statement of his being the king's nominee.
But the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews
had some document containing a similar
statement about another king of Jerusalem,
Melkizedek, being "without father, without
mother, without genealogy." (Heb. vii. 3.)
Such cannot be a coincidence when it con-
cerns two kings of the same city, and is a
phrase never known elsewhere. We must
recognize in it a formula familiar at Jerusa-
lem, and so quoted by Abdkhiba in referring
his elevation to the king. It is the formula
of an elective rule distinctly, and shows that
the main city of south Palestine for several
centuries was familiar with elected chiefs.

(5) Municipal government. This occurs
in three cities. Irqata addresses a letter
from "Irqata and its elders" (letter 159).
Dunip also addresses the king as "The
inhabitants of Dunip " (letter 1 70). And in
the absence of Ribaddi, Gubla managed its
own affairs and wrote from "The people
who are occupying (?) Gubla" (letter 193).
With these we may compare the deputation
from ''the elders and all the inhabitants"


THE SOUTH SYRIAN WAR 139

of Gibeon. (Josh, ix, 11.) It is clear that
though government by chiefs was the more
usual, yet municipalities existed under the
Egyptian rule, much as they did in Asia
Minor and other countries under Roman
rule.


42. BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES OF
PRINCIPAL PERSONS

Abdashirta (B), Abdashirta's sons (S), and Aziri (Z),

all linked together.

Z attacked Qatna and threatened Nukhashi . ill
Z troops used by Arzawaya to take Shaddu . 1 16
B makes obeisance . . . . 127

Z sends slaves as messengers . . ,128

Z reports peace to Dudu • . .130

Z reports overtures to him from Nukhashi . 131
B attacks Ribaddi . . 140, 142

B sends tribute . . . . • 143

B dictates terms ..... 144
B ordered by king . . . . 147

Z refuses to leave, as Khatti are in Nukhashi

148, 149, 150
B attacks Ribaddi . 151, 154, 186, 202, 216

• 152

156, 162

. 157
. 158

. 161

161, 165

. 162

164


Z ties up Ribaddi's trade
Ribaddi desires to attack Z, S

S ally with Mitani, Kash, and Khita

B allies with Yapa-addi and Zimrida

S descend into Amurri .

Z takes Ribaddi's men and ships

Z allied with Yapa-addi .

Bumabula holds UUaza to Shigata

B attacks Tsumura

140


BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES 141


Ships needed to attack B

S ally with Arwada

Z attacks Gubla . •

S resist Egyptians

Z took Ni and threatens Tunip

Z has nearly all the coast

B allies with Mitani, Kash, and Khabiri

B takes Shigata, Ambi, and Tsumura

Z has not rebuilt Tsumura

S delivered men to Suri .

Z leagued with Zimrida .

Z attacks Namiawaza .

Z and S attack Abimilki

Z leagued with Ammiya, Ardata, and Ni

Z smites Irqata, Tsumur, and UUaza

Z excuses to king

Z attacked by Nukhashi and betrayed
Khatib

B excuses to king, will yield Tsumur

Amurri rebels against B

B ordered insurrection in Ammiya

Z leagued with Khabiri .

B took all but Gubla and Biruna

B writes to Bit Ninib

S bum the cities .

Z has raided all the land

S Gubla betrayed to, by Rabimur

Z obtains Gubla .

B takes Biruta .

Abdkhiba accused of revolt .

(of attacked by Milkili

Urusalim) at Urusalim


• 165

. 165

167, 168

169

. 170
171, 188

. 172
172, 188

. 173

177, 178
. 178
184
. 187
. 188
. 191

by
. 191
. 192

I9S» 209

I95> 203
. 199

202^ 211
. 203
. 205

205, 210
. 208
. 220

221, 222
. 227
. 232
. 233


142 BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES


Abdkhiba

f ^ 1


sends 41 slaves .
attacks Shuwardata
caravans robbed , .
asks for Yankhamu
lost all but Urusalim


Amanappa
(commis-
sioner)


234
251
254

255

256


ITAKAMA

(of Kinza
and Qedesh)


Khai

Khaya

Khaya

Khai

Khaya

Khaib

Khayapa

Khaib

Khaya

(The above


demands sheep from Ribaddi . 132

named by Ribaddi • 1 34, 207

asked to deliver Ribaddi . , 142

complained to by Ribaddi 165, 225

in Tsumura • . .169

appealed to by Ribaddi 195,

203, 206, 209, (215), 225

attacked Amki 107, 108, 109, 188

against Akizzi . • • 1 1 3

appeals to king . .114

takes Gizza . • .116

(?) allied with Amurra . . 147

took Qedesh • , .178

named by Rabimur • .188

sent to Bumaburyash • . 21

goes to Mutzu » • . 41

hostile to Abdashirta . • 144

addressed by Aziru . .149

ordered by king to Tsumur . 166

desired by Ribaddi to take
message • . 167, 169

addressed by Ribaddi . 196, 197

yielded up Tsumura • • ^99

sends garrison to Urusalim . 233

are all variants of the name of one
commissioner.)


BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES 143

Lapaya escorts caravans (?) . . 4a

named . • • • 232

Abdkhiba desires to save L. • 233

attacked and complains . . 239

excuses attack on Gazri • . 240

named with Tagi . . .241

sons join Khabiri . • . 243

against Biridiya • . . 244

taken out of Megiddo and let go 246

dead . . . . 241

sons joined Milkili as enemies . 254, 25$

sons defiant with Milkili • . 257

Milkili sends tribute . ..83

writes to king • . 82, 84

perverts king's cities . . 227

and Shuwardata attacked . 228

stripped by Yankhamu . . 229

attacks Abdkhiba. • . 232

joins^Tagi . . 248, 233, 255

allies with Lapaya, 240, 254, 255, 257

joins Shuwardata » . t 256

sons named • . . 265

Namyawaza attacks land of Itakama,(i09?}, 114

(holding reports to king with Khabiri

Kumidi) and Suti . . •US

fled to Damascus from Biri-
dashyi . . . * 116

asks that Biridashyi be punished 117

Zatatna ordered to deliver B.
to N. . , . . 122

attacked by Itakama and Aziri 178


144 BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES

Namyawaza named by Ribaddi . .212

asked for by Adduasharidu . 257

PUKHARI appealed to by Itakama . .114

Bikhura king asked to send B. to

Amurri. . . . 155

„ holds Kumidi . . (156)199

,, of Kumidi attacks Ribaddi . 200

Pakhura same . . . . 201

„ named . . . . 241

Pauru saves Urusalim . . • 254

Puru went to Khazati . . • 255

(The above all act as Egyptian commissioner,
and seem to be probably all variants of one name.)

Ribaddi ordered to supply sheep . .132

named . .133, 147-8


ships seized by Yapa-addi


134


will defend city .


139


defends against Abdashirta


140


surrounded by Khabiri .


141


ordered to send ships to Yari-


muta . . . .
(?) asked Abdashirta to help


142


him • . • •


147


attacked by Abdashirta .


til


stopped by Aziru .


152


names Tsumuri and Martu


153


names Tsumuri and Abdashirta


154


(not in Tsu-


desires king to occupy Amurri


155


mura)


(in Gubla)


Tsumura in danger


156


fears for Tsumura


157


BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES 145

(in Tsumura) only Ts. and Irqata left \ «

governor has fled from GublaJ

driven out of Irqata, now in
Ts. . . . . 160

(in Gubla) ships of Ts. Birutu and Ziduna

all lost, Tsumura still kept . 161

cannot go to Tsumura .. .162

fears for Tsumura ^ .163

Abdashirta besieges Tsumura . 164

Tsumura in great danger. . 165

Khaya in Tsumura . .166

„ Aziru attacking Gubla 167-8

let Khaib and Amanappa leave
Ts. . . •. . 169

Tsumura lost .. , .172

„ not occupied by enemy 174

desires to drive enemy from Ts. 175

Tyre rebelling . . .185

(in Biruta) Tsumura should be recaptured ) gg

Gubla faithful . . J

[Rabimur in Gubla . 187, 188]

Gubla is in danger . 1 i 8q

wood sold to Yarimuta . J

wants troops for Gubla, no
com . c . .. 190

wants to raise Amurri against
Aziru t. . •. • 19s

wants to reoccupy Tsumura,
and troops to go to Shigata
and Ambi .. .. •. 196

(in Gubla) cannot reoccupy Ts., Gubla

surrounded . .197

L


146 BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES

Khaib yielded up Tsumura . 199
attacked by Bikhura . 200, 201
only has Gubla and Biruna ^
girls and timber sold to Yari- V 202

muta . . . y

people sold to Yarimuta . )
only Gubla and two cities left ) ^
in 3rd year no com, asks^ 204

for supplies given before V to

to Tsumura . . ' 206

Gubla and Biruta Only left . 207
Rabimur tried to drive R. from

Gubla • • . • 208

asks for troops to Gubla and

Biruta . . . . 209

all but Gubla lost. . .210

(in Biruta) trapped in Gubla R. flees to

Biruta . • . . 211

only Biruta left . . .212

Rabimur (?) has taken Gubla . 214
family rebel in Gubla . .216
reported by governor of Biruta 220
(in Gubla) Biruta taken and Gubla will fall 22 1

Zidon and Biruta enemies . 222

Gubla only left . . 223-4

enemy at gate of Gubla . . 225

Yankhamu took Yabitiri to Egypt . . loi

(commissioner) with Shipti-addi • , 56

informed that S. Galilee is lost 118
^asked by Ribaddi to occupy

Amurri. • - ^SS


BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES 147

Yankhamu asked to bring troops . .156

ought to give corn . • ^57

named by Ribaddi, 165, 169,

174, 190, 222

reproached for neglecting Tsu
mura . . . . 171

named by Gublites . -193

gone to Egypt . . .199

can order com for Ribaddi . 204

to be spoken to by Amanappa 206


to be asked of by the king

to come, or all will be lost in
South •

took away a garrison

to be asked of by the king

took 3000 talents from Milkili

knows Shuwardata's troubles

asked for by Abdkhiba •

Yapa-ADDI blamed by Ribaddi

will explain Ribaddi's aifairs


fights Ribaddi . 155, 156, 165
named . . ^ .158

agrees with Abdashirta . • 1 57
« „ Aziru. . . 161

took money . • . 204

ZiMRlDA N. gov. of Tsiduna . . . 145

in Tsumura(?) . . . 146

gov. of Tsiduna . , .145

gone over to Abdashirta, 168,

^57, 158, 174
gets news from Aziri . • ^77


214

226
227
228
229
230

2SS

134
139


148 BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINES

ZiMRlDA N. shuts up Abimilki in Tyre, 178 (179)

fights Abimilki . . 181,182

takes Uzu. • . .184

ZiMRlDA S. obedient in Lachish . . 98

conspired against in Lachish • 234

demands service of Abishia-
rami . . . • 235?


43. INDEX OF PERSONS


The star shows a change of allegiance from Egypt to Syria.


Aaddu, no,*
Abanappa,?/, Amanappa
Abbikha, * 262
Abdaddi, 133,*


Abdashirta, v. Biog. out- Akhunlmilkl, * 184.


line

Abdirama, 20O, ♦

Abdkhib^ t^. Biog. out-
line

Abdmilki, 8$, 200, ♦

Abdna . • . 102, ♦

Abd Ninip, 164,*

Abdtirshi, 70, *

Abdurash, no*

Abi..., 23S,»

Abimilki, 177 to 185

Abishiarami, 235

Adaia» * 254

Addadan, 240, *

Adduasharidu, 257,*

Addudayan^ 258, 259,
260,

Addumikhir, 78, 79, 233,
♦246


Addu. . . .ya, no,*
Aduna, 188, 189,*
Akia, 40, *
Akhithabu, 1 24,*


AkizzI, III, ti2, 113,
123,

Amanapp^ v. Biog. out-
line

Amankhatbi, * 252, 253

Amanma, 161,*

Amayashi, 53,*

Amunira, (?82), 186, 208,
216, 217, 218, (219),

220,*

Amuraddi, 1 10, ♦
Anati, 1 10, *
Ara . . . ., 198, ♦
Artamanya, 69, ♦
Artashumra, 4, ♦
Artatama, 11,*
Ar Tishub, ♦ 11
Artsawiya (in N.), 75,
j6^* 112, 116


S49


ISO


INDEX OF PERSONS


Arzaya (in S.)i 7T, i6o,*

25 S
Asali, ♦ 1 1

Ashur-nadm-akhi, 35,*

Ashur-ubalUth, 35,*

Asshutimi (omitted by

W. ; B. 27)

Ayab, *ii8

Aziri, V. Biog. outline

Babikha, 159/

Baduza, S5»

Baiayai |00| 926,* a6o^

261
Balummi, *I24»*
Batti-ilu, no, 191/
Bawanamash, * 117
Benana, no,*
Benazi, 1 33, ♦
Benili, i lO, *
Benzidki, i lO, «
Bidinaza, 123
Biia, V. Baiaya
Bikhura, 1 14, 199, *
Bilgarib,352,»
Bilram . * • ^ 30^ *
Bininima, 118,*

Biri , loS,*

Biriamaza, * 22
Biridashya, {yA\^ ti6,

117.(122?)


Biridiya, 242 to 247, *
Bishitanu, 160,*
Biwari, 193, 194,*
Bubri, 10, II,*
Bukhiya, 164,*
Bumabula, ♦162
Buribita, 167,*
Burnaburyash, 18, 19,20,
21,22,23, 124,*

Dagantakala, 263, 264,*
Dasha, « 112
Dashirti, ♦ I47
Dashru, 47, 48,*
Diyati,89,*
Dudu, 130, 131, 148,*
Dummuya, * 240
Dushratta, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,

10, II, 12,*

Gesdinna, 49, *
Gilukhipa, 4, *
Gilya,4,s,6,9, II, I2,»
Gulati, * 260, 261

Ildaya, 107,*
Ilkha...,, 138,*
Ilumilki, A, 178*; B,

227
Inbauta» I03i*
Iribaiasha, 141,*


INDEX OF PERSONS


151


Irshappa, i,*
Itakama, v^ Biog. out-
line
Itilluna, 30, *

Kallimasin, 13, 14, (15?),
16, 17, •

Karaindash, ig,*

Kasi, 14, *

Kaya. . . .,259,*

Khabi, ♦ 184

Khai, Khaiapa, Khay,
Khaib, v. Biog. out-
line

Khamashi, ii| 12, 21,*

Khamashniy 198, «

Khamuniri, v. Amunira

Khani, 7,64, 147, 191,*

Kharamashi, 6,

Khatib, 148; 149, l$0,*

Khiziri, 99, *
Khua4, 21, «
Kidinramman, 23, *
Kunia, 30, ♦
Kurigalzu, 20, 21,*
Kuzuna, 126,*

Lapaya, v. Biog. out-
line
Liya, ♦ 147
Lupakku, * 1 10


Maia, 97, 99, 100, 160, ♦

260
Malia, * 147
Mani, s, 6, 7, 9, 10, 1 1,

12,144,*
Mazipalali, 11,*
Mikhuni, 21,*
Milkili, V. Biog. outline
Milkuru, 157, 204
Mutaddi, 118
Mutshi ? i/em.), 157, 204
Mutzu .... 41

Namyawaza v. Biog.

outline
Natanaddu, 2oo,
Nimmakhi, * 147
Ninur (Jem.), 265, 266. *
Nizag, II,*
Nurtuya .... ma, 176, *

Pakhamnata, 163,* 192,

193

Pakhura, v. Biog. out-
line

Paluia,»iso,«

Paluma, * 147

Pamakhu, * 22

Pashtumml, 30, •

Pauru, V. Pakhura

Paya . « . ., 199

Perizzi, 10, II, 12,*


152


INDEX OF PERSONS


Pirkhi,*4
Puaddi,72,73,74,»
Ramman-nirari, 36,*
Rabimur, 187, 188, ♦

(2 IS), (220)
Rianapa, 72, 96, 260, *
Ribaddi, v, Biog. out-
line
Riqa,i3,*
Rusmania, 45, *

Shaba . . . ., 5i>*
Shabi-ilu, 160,*
Shakhshikhashikha, 73
Sharatu, v. Zurata
Sharru, * 147
Shatiya,68,*
Shindishugab, 19,*
Shiptiaddi, 56, S7»* 235
Shipturi, 42, *
Shubandi, 63 to Cy^

136,*
Shumadda, * 124,* 125,

126
Shumukha. . , ., 52,*
Shuta, 16, 122,234,*
Shutama (king), 5, 11, ♦
Shutama (governor), 37,

38,*
Shutatna, v. Zatatna
Shuwardata, 86, 87, 228,


230, 248 to 251, *

256
Subayadi, 137,*
Surashar, 50, *
Surata, v. Zurata
[Su]warzana, 252, •

Tadua, 118,*
Tadukhipa, 8, 9, 10, 1 1,*
Tagi, 80, 81, 231, ♦232,

233. 241, 255
Takhmaini, 81, ♦
Takua, 36

Tarkhumdaraush, i,*
Tashu . . . ., *2I3
Tiuwati, ♦112
Tsalma, 21, 22, *
Tunip-ipri, 4, ♦
Turbazu, 234, ♦
Turbikhaza, 165,*
Tuya, ♦ 147

Ushbarra, 30, ♦

Yab . . . ., 52, 259, ♦
Yabaia, 160
Yabitiri, 10 1, ♦
Yabni-ilu, 97, ♦
Yadiaddu, 170,*
Yakhzibaia, 104, 105, *
Yama, 135,*


INDEX OF PERSONS


'53


Yamilki, v. Abimilki,
185

Yamiuta, 106, ♦

Yankhamu, v. Biog. out-
line

Yapa-addi, v, Biog. out-
line

Yapakhi, 236, 237, 238

Yapakhi-addi, 171, 174,*

Yaptiaddu, 234, ♦

Yashdata, 246, 247, ♦

Yashuia, 11 8,*

Yiktasu, 54, ♦

Yishiari, ♦ 147


Yitya, 90 to 96, ♦
Yuni, 9, ♦

Zaqara, 13,*

Zatatna, 120, 121, 122, ♦

I24,»

iLfioa • • ■ •! 2|

Zimrida, v. Biog. out-
line

Zirdayashda, * 1 22

Zishamini, 46, *

Zitana, no,*

Zitriyara, 58, 59, 6o,»

Zurata> 119, * 124, 246

Zu . . . ., 204, ♦


EGYPTIAN KINGS NAMED


Khuri = Napkhuriya, 3

Manakhbiia (Tahutmes

III.)> 36
Manakhbiria (Tahutmes

IV.), 170

Mimmuria (Amenhotep
III.), 9, 12


Napkhuria (Amenhotep
IV.), 10,11, 12,18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 35, 124

Nimmuria (Amenhotep
III.), 1,4,5,6,7,8, II,
13,14,16,17,111,112,
(204)

Tii(Tyi),9, 10,11


44. INDEX OF PLACES


Abitu, ii6, *
Aduri,* ii8
Akhlamu, 39
Akka, 119 to 122,*

124, •
Alashya, 26 to 34, i6l,*

Ambi, • 162, 171, I72>

196, 197
Amki,* 107, 108, 109,

no, 118
Ammia, • 112, 187, 188,

195, 202,203,221
Amurra, in, 128, 129,

130, 142, 144, • 147,

I49i IS3. iSSf IS8,»
161, 192, 19s, 204,

206,214,220,267
Araru,* 118
Ardata, • 162, 187, 188,

189
Arsapi; (omitted by W, ;

B. 10)
Arwada, 144,^ 165, 184
Ashtarti,* 116, 118


Asqaluna, 90, 94, 95,*

254
Asshur, 35, *

Asshuraiu, 20, *

Ayaluna, • 254, 265

Azzati, 101,*

Bikhishl,* 118

Biruna, Biruta, 144, 15I9
161, 186, 202, 207, 209,
211,212,217,219,220,
*22i, 222, 224, 225

Bit-arti, 157, •

Bit-Ninib N., 203 ; • S.,
256

Bit-tiri, ♦ 197

Bur(qa?),»2S7

Buruzilim, 208, *

Buzruna,43,* 116

Danuna, 178, •
Dimashqa, 112, 116, *
Dubu, 61, ♦


Gadashuna, 106, ^


>54


INDEX OF PLACES


iS5


Gagaya, 1 3, ♦

Gar,* 118

Gazrt, 77, 237, 238,*
240, 254, 256, 260

Gimti, ♦ 256

Gina, 257, *

Ginti-kirmil, * 233, 234

Giti-rimuna, ♦ 257

Gizza,* 116

Gubbu, 61, *

Gubla, 147, 152, 156,
158, 161, 163, 164, 167,
168,171,186,187,188,
189, 193,1941 199*202,
203, 204, 207, 208, 209,
210,211,214,215,216,
220, 221, 223, 224, *
225

Igaid, I, *

Ikhibni (omitted by W.;

B.27)
Inishatsi(ri), 60, *
Irqata, 158, 159, 160,*

188, 189

Karduniyash, 13, 39,

41,*
Kashi, 156, 162, 172,

193, 214,234,254

Khabi. .. 253,*


Khabiri . • in north, 1 14,

IIS,* 116, 134, 136,

138,140,141,142,145,
ISS> 1571X63,166,172,
17s, 183, 189, 19s, 196,
199, 202, 203, 204, 207,
221,222,223,224,225,
226; in south, 227, 228,
233,234,237,238,240,
243,245,252,253,254,
256, 263, 265, 266, 267

Khalunni,* 116

Khanigalbat, 6, ti, 13,

35. 4^
Kharabu, * 257

Khashabu, 108,

Khasugar! (omitted by

W.; B. 10)

Khatat,* 1 70

Khatti, I, 2, 3,* 4, 33,

36, 107, 108, 109, 1 10,
111,112,148,149,150,
152,156,178,188,191,
212, 213

Khawini,*il8
Khazati, 233, 255, *
Khazi, 107, 137,252,*
Khazura, 70, 71, * 183
Khikubta, 164, *
Khinatuna, * 124, * 246
Kh!nianabI,*Ii8
Kinakhaiu, 20, «


156


INDEX OF PLACES


Kinakhi, 32, 40, 124,

147,* 169,178, 183
Kinanat, 112,*
Kinza,* 107, 108, I09,

113
Kuatsbat, * 262

Kumidi, 116, 156, 198,

199, •(200, 201), 212


Lakisha, 97, 234,* 254
Lapana,* 112
Lukki,* 30


Magdali,* 118,262,

(Egypt), 122
Magidda, 122, 242, 244,

24s, 246, ♦
Makhzi . , • ti,*252
Mankhatishum, 260, *
Martu, V, Amurri
Mar ....,* 270
Mat! ...,* 252
Mikhiza, 75, •
Milukha, 155, 166, 175,*
Mishlu,* 118
Mitani (see 4 to 12),*

156,162,169,172^189,

206,213,224
Mu(ru?)khazl, * 137
Mushikhuna, 37, 38,


Nakhrima,* 189,

234 same

Narima,* 188
Nazima, 88, *
Ni, 112,* 170, 187
Nina, 8, *
Nukhashi, 36, no, in,

112,131,148,149,150,

173, ^9h *

Qanu,44,*
Qatna, in, 112,*
Qideshu, 114, * 147, 17S
Qilti, 233,* 250, 251,

256
Qutu,* 189

Rubuta,* 255, 256, 260
Rukhizi,* 112,213

Shaddu, 116,*
Shamkhuna,* 125
Shanira (omitted by W. ;

B.27)
Shankhar,*33
Shanku,* 159
Shaskhimi, 85, *
Shaushbi (omitted by

W.; B. 27)
Shigata,* 162, 171, 172,

196, 203


INDEX OF PLACES


157


Shikhlali,* i6o
Shimigi (omitted by W.;

B.27)
Shirdana, 200, 201, 202 *
Shiri, * 234
Shuarbi, 221,*
Shuna . . ., * 257
Shuti, 35, 115,131,138*

157, 200, 201, 202,236,

263
Sigi ..*.,* 252
Suarti(?), 157.*
Subari, 169
Suri, * 175

Takh ....,* 247

Takhida,* 186

Tana (? Tashu) ♦ 204

Taruna, 45, ♦

Tisa.. .*, 153

.... tiashna, 50, *

Tsapuna, 266, *

Tsarkha . . ., * 265

Tsarqi,* 118

Tsiduna, 144, 145, 147,
151,* 161, 177, 178,
179,183,184,204,222

Tsumura, 132, 146, 153,
154,155,156,157,158,
160, 161, 162, 163, 164,
165, 166, 167, 168, 169,


170, 171,* 172, 173,
174,175,179,184,186,
187, 188, 191, 192, 193,
195,196,197,204,215,
223
Tsurri, 177, 179, 184,*

Tu . .. .,253,*
Tubikhi,*267
Tumurkha, ♦ 260
Tunip, 149, 150, 170,*

191
Tushulti,* 252

Ubi,* 112, 114

Udumu,* 118

Ugarit, 13, 63, 152, 171,

178, 185, *
Ullaza, 155, *i62, 165,

188, 192

Urusalim, 233,234, 254,

256,*
Ushtiru,*252

Usu, 180, 183,* 184

Wurza, ^2, 74, *

Yabishi,*ii8
Yabu, *86
Yada,* 162
Yaluna, z/. Ayaluna


158


INDEX OF PLACES


Yapu, loi, 261, *
Yarimuta, 142, 156, 161,

163, 166, 189, 202, 203,

204, 205, 206, •
Yibuliya,* 161
Yikhliya,* 162
Yinuamma,* 116


Zalukhi, 152, *
Zikhra, 30, *
Zilu, 234, ♦
Zinzar, 112,^
Ziribashani, 69, *
Zukhli, 40, ♦
Zukhluti, 215, *


45. IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

Italic names are modem Arabic forms.
Kh.^ often prefixed, is Khurbet^ and shows an ancient

ruin to exist at the place.

Abitu occurs in a group of names which
must be considered together. The history
in the letter Ii6 is that Biridashya stirs up
Yanuh in the hinterland of Tyre, and then,
being afraid of Namyawaza coming down
from Kumidi by the Litdny, he boldly
struck across to the Hauran, brought up
forces of Bozrah, &c., and compelled N. to
retreat from Kumidi (on the Beyrut and
Damascus road) into Damascus, in order to
save that from the rebels. Then Aziru's
troops in Gish are brought up, either to the
bend of the Litdny, or on the Damascus
road, to Shaddu (not identified), to block
Namyawaza from reaching the Tyrian region.
Thus Gish was destroyed, and the territory
of Abitu will be taken* This points to
Abitu being S.W. of the line from Gish

IS9


i6o IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

to Yanuh, and this agrees to Kh. Abdeh^
15 S. of Tyre, 16 W. of Gish.

Aduri occurs in another group, 11 8,
The cities of the land of Gar are Udumu,
Aduri, Aram, Mishtu, Magdali, and Khini-
anabi. There is no general indication of
known locality, but most of these names
are found west of the lake of Tiberias. The
land of Gar is named in "the going up to
Gur which is by Ibleam," and which led to
Megiddo (2 Kings ix. 27); a phrase which
belongs to a whole region, like "the entering
in of Hamath." This "going up" must be
the valley of Jezreel, and the land of Gar
therefore about Nazareth. Here are found
Udumu (Adamah Heb.^ Damieh^ 5 S.W,
Tiberias), Aduri {^Et Tireh, 14 W.S.W.
Tiberias), Aram {Ararah, 8 S.W. Megiddo,
the key to that city in the Tahutmes war),
Mishtu {Kh. Mushtak, 14 W.N.W. Tiberias),
Magdali (Magdala, Mejdel, 3 N.W. Tiberias),
and Khinianabi (or 'Enanab, Winckler) may
be Hananieh iJCefr 'Andn, 12 N.W.
Tiberias). After this it is said Tsarqi,
Khawani, and Yabishi were captured. Ya-
bishi must be Yabesh Gilead (12 S.E.
Bethshean), Khawani agrees to Kh. KdaHn,


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES i6i

opposite across the Jordan (6 S. Bethshean),
and Tsarqi is probably a zerqa, or dark
place, a colour- name often found, though
hardly the Jebel Zerqa 20 S.E. of Jabesh.

Akhlami are named with the king- of
Kardunyash, a people known to the Assyrians
between Babylon and Nineveh (No. 39).

Akka is undoubtedly Akka^ Gr. Akko.

Alashya. This has been well proposed
to be Cyprus, and looking to the abundance
of copper it can hardly be doubted. One
good indication should be sought ; in No. 30
the Lycians plunder the city of Zikhru in
Alasiya.

Ambi. This occurs grouped with other
names. In clvi. there is the list of coast
places, Ullaza, Ardata, Yikhliya, Ambi, and
Shigata ; and other letters name the ships of
Ambi and Shigata. Ullaza is linked with
Tsumura (155, 162, 165, 192), and the next
port to Simyra is Mina Kabusi^ and at the
foot of the hill behind this is El Usy, or
Huzek, which is, therefore, probably very
close to the site of Ullaza, and may well
be it. Shigata at the other end of the list
can hardly be other than Tell Sukat on the

M


i62 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

Nahr Sukat 3 miles S. of Gibleh. The
name of Ambi is not seen now, but by being
linked with Shigata it is probably the next
port, Baldeh, 4 miles S. There are but
a small number of ports along this coast,
and they leave, therefore, but little un-
certainty when an associated point is already
known. Yikhliya is probably Qleiaty 13
N.E. of Tripoli, and 5 N.E. of Ardata.

Amki has been connected with the 'Amk
plain by Antioch, but without any proof in
favour of this more than the many other
plains or valleys generically called 'Amk
{ghamyq, deep, dark coloured), such as
'Ammlk (19 S.E. Beyrut), 'Amtiqa (10 N.
Capernaum), 'Amqa (8 N.E. Akka), Nahr
Ghamkeh (by Ruad), &c. The references
to Amki are mainly about an attempt by
Biridashya (?) of Khashabu and Ildaya of
Khazi to seize cities there, and their repulse
by Itakama, prince of Kinza, and the Khatti
(107-9, 188); Akizzi of Qatna refers to
Itakama as hostile in the land of Ubi ;
Damascus is in Ubi, and appeals for help as
Qatna does. And Nukhashi, Ni, Zinzar,
and Kinanat are faithful (112). The region
of Biridashya was in north Galilee, as


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 163

noticed under Abitu, his activities lying
west to Yinuama, and east to Ashtarti.
Here there is not a single reference to any
coast town ; evidently the whole group is
in the Orontes- Jordan valley. Damascus is
the fixed point; Ubi (Egn. Aup?) must be
the Damascus plain. In the region of
Biridashya we must fix Khashabu as the
H6shaba valley of Banias, the capital being
probably Banias. The other allied capital,
Khazi, must be near; and a key of the
country is Kh. 'Azziyeh (9 W.N.W. Banias),
between the bend of the Lit4ny and the
source of Jordan, one of the most important
strategic points. The only great plain that
these would command would be the Bukeiah
up the Lit4ny, where 'Ammtk stands (19
S.E. Beyrut). Itakama held Kinza himself,
and Gidshi (a Qedesh) had belonged to his
father (cviii.). For him to repel this north-
ward movement he must have been to the
north of 'Ammlk; his Qedesh then must
be that of Lake Homs, and cannot be that
by Lake Huleh. His Kinza is probably
lost to sight in one of the many Kneseh
(church) names in the Baalbek region.
There are three places that might be Qatna,
Tell Kateineh (by Lake Homs), Qatana


i64 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

(14 W. Damascus), Kh. Kataneh (5 E.N.E.
Safed). The first would be in Itakama's
power, and too far from Damascus for
Akizzi ; the last would have no relation to
Nukhashi, Ni, and Zinzar, with Itakama
cutting communications at Qedesh. Hence
the Qatana by Damascus must be the seat
of Akizzi. Lapuna, which joined Itakama
in attacking Qatna, is probably Halbftn (13
N.N.W. Damascus). This completes this
group of associated names.

Ammia. This country cut off Ubi (112),
and was therefore somewhere west of it
Aziru seized Ammia, Ardata, and Ni, also
Irqata and Tsumura (187-8, 195), and
the men of Ammiya were stirred to slay
their lord (203). The region thus indicated
would be the upper part of the Orontes
valley, and might thus be connected with
the land of Hamath, or Hamah.

Amurra is probably the middle and lower
parts of the Orontes, on looking to all the
connections ; but it certainly covered a wide
region.

Araru, see Aduri,

Ardata, known as Orthosia, ArtkUsi
(9 N.E. Tripoli).


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 165

Arsapi, probably Reseph.

Arwada known as Arvad, Aradus (Gr.),
Ruad.

AsHTARTi joined with Bozrah and Golan ;

evidently Ashteroth (29 E. Tiberias).

AsQALUNA, known as Ashkelon.

AssHUR, Assyria.

Ayaluna, known as Ajalon.

AzzATi, or Khazati, is probably Gaza, as
it was with Yafa guarded by Yabitiri.
Possibly, however, Ashdod might be con-
sidered.

BiDUNA is quite unknown.

BiKHiSHi. Only in letter 118, which was
written from some place in touch with
Nazareth and Jordan region, but quite safe,
probably Akka. Bikhishi should be near
there and open to the Egyptians ; possibly
El Bahjeh, 2 N.E. of Akka, remembering
the confusion of / and sh which exists.

BiRUNA, BiRUTA, is Well known as Beyrut
now.

BiTARTi, unknown, probably between
Tsumura and Gubla.


i66 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

Bit Ninib. (i) Near Gubla (203), after
Tsumura was lost; unknown. (2) Near
Qilti (Keilah), toward Jerusalem (256) ; un-
known.

BiT-TiRi. Occupied by Khaiapa in retreat
from Tsumura (?) ; probably Kk. et Tireh on
foot of hills 7 S.E. of Akka.

Bur[qa]. Perhaps Bene-beraq, 5 E. of
Joppa, as the other names with it in 257
agree with this region.

BuRZiLiM, near Gubla ; unknown.

BuzRUNA, certainly Bozrah by the con-
nection.

Danuna, certainly Danyaan Heb., Kh.
Ddnidn now, on the headland of Ras en
Nakurah at the Tyrian Steps. It is named
by Abimilki of Tyre, at a time when he was
besieged ; it is visible, as the headland to the
south, from Tyre.

DiMASHQA, also written Timashgi, is
Tamesqu of the Egyptians, Dimishq^ Da-
mascus.

DuBU, quite unknown, may read Gubbu.

Gadashuna has been connected with
Kitsuna of the Upper Ruten list of Ta-


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 167

hutmes III. This latter is Tell Keisan,

6 S.E. of Akka, as fixed by connection
with other names.

Gagaya is connected to Khanigalbat (far
N. Syria) and Ugarit (Orontes mouth).

Gar, see Aduri.

Gazri, Gezer, 20 S.E. of Joppa.

GiMTi is probably distinct from Ginti-
kirmil ; in 233 Ginti is destroyed, in 256
Gimti is part of the enemies* forces ; Ginti,
moreover, is qualified by Kirmil when it
occurs. Gimti is joined with Gezer and
Keilah in attacks on the land of Jerusalem,
and is probably in the same region as those
places. This answers well to Gimzo, Heb.
JimzUy 16 S.E. of Joppa, nearly half-way to
Jerusalem.

GiNA, in south Palestine, probably faniak,

7 W. of Bethel.

GiNTi-KiRMiL. As this name merely
means ** the gardens of the vineyard," like
the ''gardens," Nos. 44, 63, 70, and 93 in
Tahutmes III. list {History ii.), it cannot
be certainly identified. From the geography
it cannot have anything to do with Mount
Carmel, as has been absurdly supposed. Its


i68 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

place was somewhere in the approaches to
Jerusalem, and west of a "land of Shiri"
(234). Some presumption may exist for
seeing in this Ginti, En Gannim Heb., "the
gardens," now Kk. Umm Jina (16 W.
Jerusalem); the kirmil, ** vineyard," is cer-
tainly a pre- Hebrew form, as it appears as
a loan in Egyptian, Qirama^ a vineyard,
and the form with terminal / appears in
S. Palestine as Carmel, Kurmul (7 S.
Hebron). That Gannim should have the
adjective kirmil is most probable, as it is
in the vale of Sorek, "of the choice vine.'*
The connection with the land of Shiri, which
would lie on the Jerusalem side of it, points
to Shaaraim, Kh. es Saireh^ 4 E. of it
Letter 234 then would say from Jerusalem
that the hills of Shaaraim (12 W. of Jeru-
salem) were lost as far as En Gannim in
the valley of the vine, 4 miles further out.

GiTi-RiMUNA occurs in 257 with places
near Joppa, agreeing with Gath-rimmon of
Jos. xix. 45.

GizzA was ravaged by Itakama, who came
down the Litany valley (see Amki), and was
near Abdek, 1 5 S. Tyre (see Abitu) ; it was
a fortress occupied by Aziru's troops. All


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 169

this agrees to the fort of Giscala, El Jish^
22 S.E. Tyre.

GuBBU, see Dubu.

GuBLA. This very important place has
been assumed to be the same as Gebal,
Byhlos, Jedaz/ (24 S. Tripoli), while another
equally likely, Jebel, or ** mountain," is at
Gabula, Jibleh, ox Jebeleh (61 N. Tripoli).
In fact the latter name agrees rather better
to Gubla. The letters which point rather
to the southern Jebail are 147, chief of
Gubla is living at Zidon ; 197, Ribadda
cannot occupy Tsumura because Gubla is
surrounded ; 202, 207, 209, only Gubla and
Beyrut are left; 211, 216, 220, Ribadda left
Gubla and went to Beyrut. But, on the other
hand, none of these preclude the northern
Jibleh, and the following all point to that ;
152, Khatti plunder round Gubla, early in
the break - up ; 162, Ambi ( = Baldeh }),
Shigata ( = Saukat), UUaza (=E1 Usy) are
lost, and Gubla is in danger; 163, 189, 204
Gubla gets food from Yarimuta ( = Laodicea) ;
189, kings of Mitani and Naharaina are
hostile, which is more probable in a northern
site. Here Yarimuta is really a key to the
question. No such place has yet been


170 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

noted. Yerimoth, Heb., is impossible, as it
was inland. But it is obvious that Yerimoth,
Arimathea, Ramoth, Ramah, are all the
same name, "the high place," and we must
expect to find many such place-names.
There is no name like this along the coast
near the southern Jebail ; yet it is certain,
from the continual sale of timber and slaves
from Gubla, that Yarimuta must have been
an important port near Gubla. But on
turning to the northern Jibleh we see that
the next port to that is Laodicea, formerly
Ramitha. Here then is a Ramoth or
Yerimoth exactly in the required relation
to Jibleh. Such a series of names on the
coast as Ramitha, Saukat, and El Usy, for
Yarimuta, Shigata, and Ullaza, all near the
northern Jibleh or Jebeleky stamp that as
the true Gubla. There are constructions
and antiquities, and the harbour has several
piers of huge stones, some 1 1 feet in length
(Baedecker), so the conditions for a former
city and port are quite fulfilled.

Igaid is unknown. It occurs in the travels
of the Mohar in the order Kheta (Hittites),
Aupa (Ubi, plain of Damascus), Khaduma
(=** a fortress" i^), Ygatiy, Za . . . (Tyre?)


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 171

of king Sesisu (Sesostris = Ramessu II.),
Khal ... or Khar . . . , Qedesh (by Lake
Merom), Tubakhi (Kh. et Tubukah, 14 E.
Nakura), the Shasu (or Bedawin), Pamagar
(Magoras, = Nahr Beyrut?). This points
to its being in the north between Damascus
and Tyre of Ramessu II. The mountains
of Igaid are therefore Lebanon or Anti-
Lebanon ; and on the pass over the Lebanon
from Damascus to Beyrut is A in Yakuts
which may preserve the name.

Irqata, well known as Arkas (Tell Arqa),
14 E.N.E. Tripoli.

Karduniyash, the official name of the
Babylonian kingdom.

Kash is usually supposed to be the same
as the land of the Kassi or Babylonians.
But in letters 162 and 172 it is linked with
Mitani as urging on Aziri. In 193 and 214
men of Kashi are asked for to defend Gubla.
In 234 Naharain and Kash are both together
within reach of Egyptian ships. In 254 the
Kashi fight near Jerusalem. The Kashi
were then on the Mediterranean coast near
Mitani, and were auxiliary troops of Egyp-
tians. Babylonia is quite impossible, and we
are led to the Ugarit region on Orontes as


172 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

most likely. There Mount Kasios looks
down on the Orontes mouth, and seems to
retain the name of Kash.

Khabiri. This name, which merely means
** confederates," has been conjectured to refer
to the Hebrews. But we find them first
invading Ubi (Damascus) and Ashteroth,
and in alliance with Abdashirta. This points
to their coming in about the middle of Syria,
and not from the south, which seems to
have been the Hebrew way. It seems
quite possible that Hebron was named after
them.

Khalunni is connected with Bozrah, in
the region of Golan ; and though Khalunni
would normally remain as Holan, yet as there
is some variation in what seem to be forms
of this name, Golan for the city and region,
and 'Allin for the river traversing it, Khal-
unni may well represent the original name,
which has been modified to Golan and 'Allan
by later peoples.

Kharabu, named with places near Joppa,
may be El Khurab (ii E. Joppa); but
perhaps it is only a generic name for a
ruin.


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 173

Khanigalbat is supposed to be the same

' region as Mitani, which is in Naharaina, or

northern Mesopotamia. It was certainly the

land of Dushratta's residence. (See letter 11.)

Khashabu (see Amki) is the river H6shaba,
the valley of Banias, and very possibly an
earlier name of that town.

K hat AT, a district which seems to be not
far from Tsumura, yet it is named by people
of Tunip. Possibly it is the Lebanon region,
connected with the district El Hadith near
the cedars.

Khatti are certainly the Khita of the
Egyptians, or Hittites. They began to act
far in the north, and gradually pushed
southwards.

Khawini is Kh. KddUn^ 6 S. .Bethshean.
(See Aduri.)

Khazati is Gaza.

Khazi is Kh. el 'Azziyeh (20 E. Tyre).
(See Amki.)

Khazura occurs in 70, 71, but only has
any position shown in 183, where news of
its defection is given from Tyre, with news
of Uzu (Hosah) and Zidon. It was thus


174 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

near Tyre, and doubtless Hazor, ii S.E. of
Tyre.

Khikubta is named as being obviously the
king s, and is probably Ha-ka-ptah= Memphis.

Khinatuna was in the land of Kinakhi,
and messengers were on the way there from
Babylonia to Egypt, and were attacked from
Samkhuna (Merom) and Akka. It was
therefore east of the Jordan opposite Merom
(124). This agrees to Kenath, Heb., Kanatha,
now Kanawat.

Khinianabi, perhaps Hananieh, Kefr
'Andn (12 N.W. Tiberias). (See Aduri.)

KiNANAT is agreed to be the name Kanaan.
From Qatna by Damascus Akizzi reports
that Nukhashi, Ni, Zinzar, and Kinanat are
faithful. The ** lowland" indicated by this
Kinanat is probably, therefore, the head plain
of the Orontes, which leads down to near
Shins Mr ^ Zinzar.

Kinakhi included the Hauran, as Kanatha
was in it (124), and it sent to Mesopotamia
to revolt (20). But it seems to have ex-
tended right across Syria, as Tyre refers
to an officer in Kinakhi (183), and answers
about Kinakhi by reporting about Danuna


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 175

(178). It must, therefore, be a belt across
Galilee to the Hauran.

KiNZA, probably in the Baalbek region now
lost in one of the Kneseh (church) names.
(See Amki.) It certainly is not Gizza, Gish
(as has been stated), for the prince of Kinza
took Gish (116).

KuATSBAT was probably in the south, and
seems to be Chozeba, Heb. Kh Kudziba, 3
N.E. of Halhul

KuMiDi sent news of Bashan, Damascus,
and Galilee (116); but was hopeless after
the fall of Tsumura (199). This points to
somewhere between Damascus and Tsumura,
and agrees to Kamid el LauZy 29 S.E.
Beyrut, 31 W.N.W. Damascus, an excellent
position to command the upper Litiny basin,
and on the old Beyrut- Damascus road of
Tahutmes III.

Lakish was in the south, and is doubtless
Lachish.

Lapana was attacking Qatna near Damas-
cus; probably Helbon, 13 N.W. Damascus.

LuKKi are a people who professed alliance
with Cyprus, but attacked and plundered
there, and were repudiated by the Alashiyans.


176 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

This leaves no doubt that they are the Luka
or Lykians who appear as sea-rovers in the
next two dynasties.

Magdali, in ii8, is probably the Migdol
("tower") of Magdala (3 N.W. Tiberias).
(See Aduri.) In 262 it is a tower in the
south near Kuatsbat.

Magidda is certainly Megiddo; and by
the campaign of Tahutmes III. it is clear
that this is at Tell el Mutasellim, and not at
Kh. el Mujedday though the latter was very
likely a colony of Megiddo, as Umm Lakis
was a colony of Lachish (Tell el Hesy).

Makhzi . . . ti, not identified; see
UsHTiRU : perhaps the same as Mikhiza.

Mankhatishum was in the south, not far
from Gezer (260). The Wady Menakh (7
S. Gezer) seems to preserve the name.

Mikhiza was the city of Arzawaya (75),
evidently another reading of Rukhizi (112).
This is probably on the south side of
Hermon, as Arzawiya fought in Upper
Galilee (116), attacked Namyawaza of
Kumidi when he went into Damascus (116),
and was leagued with Itakama and Helbon
against Katana.


\


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 177

MiLUKHA. The men of Milukha were
auxiliaries of the Egyptians, and are thrice
asked for by Ribaddi. As they were pro-
bably coast Syrians, it is not improbable that
they were Tyrian troops, named from Kh. el
Maluhiyeh 4 S.E. of Tyre. Kh usually
softens to h in modern forms.

MiSHTU, Mushta (14 W. Tiberias) see
Aduri.

MiTANi is Aram Naharaim, or upper Meso-
potamia.

Mu . . KHAZi was near Gezer (237); possibly
Kh. el Mukhetzifty 8 S.W. Gezer.

MusHiKHUNA occupied by a ruler Shu-
tarna ; neither name occurs again.

Narima, Naakhrima, the country of
Naharain by Mitani, in upper Mesopotamia.

Nazima, unknown, and without any clue,

Ni, probably the same as the Egyptian
possession Niy. By one reference {Hist. ii.
63) it looks as if it were in Naharaina, but
this is explained by a similar passage {Hist.
116), where after setting up a tablet in
Naharaina, the king came to the city of
Niy in going south, after the tablet was set

N


178 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

up. Niy IS linked with Senzaru, Zinzar of
these letters, Shinshar^ lom. S. Horns (-flVj/.
123). Elephants were hunted in Niy {Hist.
1 24) ; and this shows that there must have
been fertile plains. It is linked with Am-
miya and Ardata (letter 187), and so might
be possibly Niha, 15 S.W. of Baalbek :
on the other hand it is referred to by the
men of Tunip (letter 170), which points
rather to Kefr Naya, 8 W.N.W. of Aleppo,
and this would better fit the week's march
of Amenhotep II. to Ugarit.

Nina, city of Ishtar, is Nineveh.

NuKHASHi. This is the name of an im-
portant country of N. Syria. It has been
strangely confused with Anaugasa of Tahut-
mes III. annals. {Hist, no, 117, 120.)
Anaugasa is connected with Zahi (Phoenicia),
and in its first mention is placed among three
country palaces of the king of Megiddo,
Yenuamu, Anaugasa, and Harnekaru.
These should be found near together, and
somewhere within the territories of Megiddo.
Yenuamu appears to be Yanuh (7 E. Tyre),
Yanu of the Amu or Syrians, for the latter
part of the name is spelled in some cases
exactly as the Amu. Harnekaru seems


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 179

almost certainly the Har or hill of Nekaru,
now Nakura, the great headland of the
Scala Tyriorum (12 m. S. Tyre), Nakura
and Yanuh and by streams, and Anaugasa
between them would probably be on the
intermediate stream of the Wady *Ezziyeh.
It is just possible that Anaugasa has been
corrupted into Medinet en Nahas (city of
brass) on that stream. Anyhow this de-
pendency, or country palace, of the king of
Megiddo can have nothing to do with the
far northern kingdom of Nukhashi. Nuk-
hashi appears to have been between the
Orontes and Euphrates, from the various
mentions of it.

Qanu, from the prince of which a letter
remains (44), might be **the water of
Qina," by Megiddo of the Tahutmes cam-
paign {Hist. ii. 107), or Qana, 8 S.E. of
Tyre, or Cana — Qanet el Jelil — 13 W.
Tiberias. There is nothing to prove the
position.

Qatna we have seen to be Qatana, 14
W.S.W. of Damascus. (See Amki.)

QiDESHU was the patrimony of Itakama
(114), and probably Qedesh by Lake Homs.


i8o IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

Qidsha, of 147, seems to be probably the
same Qedesh.

QiLTi is usually recognized as Keilah^ 8
N.W. of Hebron.

QuTU was near Ardata and Irqata, but is
now unknown.

RuBUTA is a Rabbath or capital, and was
near Gezer (260) and not far from Gimzu
and Keilah (256). This points to Kh. Rubba
(4 N.N.W. Keilah), supposed to be Rabbah
of Josh. XV. 60.

RuKHizi, see Mikhiza.

Shaddu was near Gizza, Gish^ and Abitu,
Abdeh ; perhaps Shatiyeh^ 6 S.E. of Tyre,

Shamkhuna was the city of Shumaddu,
who leagued with Akku to attack Kanawat
in the Hauran. Between these two places
is Lake Merom, known as Semekhonitis in
Greek times, with the 'Ain es Semakh^ 6
N.E. of the lake.

Shankhar was allied with the Khatti, in
relation to Alashiya. Probably the Egyptian
Senzar or Sangar. Whether it be the same
as ZiNZAR, Shinshar (11 S. Homs), or be
Sejar (13 N.W. Homs), is not clear.


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES i8i

Shanku, near Irqata ; apparently Shaqqa
on the coast lo S.W. of Tripoli

Shaskhimi, city of Abdimilki,not identified.

Shigata is Tell Saukat or Sukat, 3 m. S.
of Jebeleh, see Gubla.

Shikhlali would be found now most
likely as Sihlali, and this might well be a
sahel or plain on the coast near Tsumura,
with which it is mentioned.

Shirdana are named as Egyptian auxili-
aries, and are doubtless the Shardana, foreign
auxiliaries so well known in the XlXth
Dynasty.

Shiri, Shaaraim, Heb. Kh. es Saireh (12
W. Jerusalem), see Ginti Kirmil.

Shuarbi would be very important to
identify, as (216) it was "the gate to
Gubla," but it cannot be found on maps
either by Jebail or Jebeleh.

Shuna[ma ?], perhaps Selmeh (3 E. Joppa),
as it was in that neighbourhood. .

SuARTi ? or BiTARTi unidentified, probably
between Tsumura and Gubla.

SuBARi, a land perhaps between Mitani
and the Hauran. Perhaps Seburra^ 37 E.
Laodicea (Baedecker).

N 2


1 82 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

SuRi, a district not far from Tsumura;
possibly the region Esh Shara^ 15 E. of
Tsumura.

SuTi, the Sati of the Egyptians, Bedawin
of S.E. Syria.

Takh .... not far from Megiddo, very
possibly the same as

Takhida, to which a messenger from Tsu-
mura to Egypt reached, but could not get
through ; therefore on the Egyptian road.
The name is not now found.

Tana or Tashu not identified. Possibly
Denniyeh, district east of Tripolis.

Taruna has no localization. Possibly
Toran^ 10 W. Tiberias.

Timashgi, see Dimashqa, is undoubtedly
Tamesqu of Egyptians. Dimeshk^ Dam-
ascus.

TsAPUNA was in the south, as Ayalon and
Zorah are mentioned by the ruler. The
name corresponds to Siffln (9 E. of Ludd)
of Baedecker, but the Exploration Society's
map gives the name as Sfiebtin.

TsARKHA, named with Ayalon from Tsa-
puna, is doubtless Tsor'ah, Heb., now Tsur'ah,
6 S. Ayalon, 15 E. of Jerusalem,


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 183

TsARKHi, probably a zerga or dark place,
in the Jordan valley, see Aduri.

TsiDUNA is certainly Zidon.

TsuMUR is certainly Simyra, now Sumra,
as all the indications agree. The refusal to
agree to this, because the Assyrian spelling,
six centuries later, was Zimarra, is altogether
hypercritical, when we see the free variations
in rendering many important names in both
cuneiform and Egyptian.

TsuRRi is certainly Tsur, Tyre.

TuBiKHi has no indication of locality, but
agrees in name with Debkhu of the list of
Tahutmes III. (No. 6 Upper Ruten) which
is either Et Tabghah on N.W. of Sea of
Galilee, ox Jebel Tubakat, 7 N.W. of that.

TuMURKHA was in the south, being named

with Gezer and Rabbah and Mankhatishum
(Wady Menakh). It agrees thus well to
Tumrah (7 N.E. of Gaza); kh usually
softening to h.

TuNiP is generally agreed with .good
reason to be Tennib (18 N. of Aleppo). It
appears to have had the importance which
Aleppo has possessed in later times; this
may well be, as it was on the road from the


i84 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

plain of Antioch to the ruling kingdom of
Mitani, while Aleppo was on the line to the
later centre of rule, Babylon, lower down the
Euphrates.

TusHULTi attacked Khazi, Kh. eVAzziyeh
(20 E. Tyre). This makes it almost im-
possible to be Tasuret, of Tahutmes Upper
Ruten list No. 56, as that belongs to the
region of Shechem, and is almost certainly
Teiasir, 11 N.E. of Shechem. No name
corresponds with this near el 'Azziyeh ; but
there is a bare possibility that an inversion
might have occurred in the cuneiform, or in
subsequent history, and that Talluseh^ 5 S. W.
of el 'Azziyeh, might be the site.

Ubi, a district in which was Damascus,
evidently the plain of Damascus.

Udumu, Adameh, Heb. Damteh, 5 S.W,
of Tiberias, see Aduri.

Ugarit, a district in the north of Syria, on
the coast (letter 152 ; news obtained by sea,
letter 178), and far north, at the limits of
Egyptian claims (letter 171). The only
valuable piece of country on the coast north
of Gubla is the mouth of the Orontes, which
must have been of importance, and is not


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 185

otherwise mentioned. Looking down on
this is Jebel Okrad, which seems like Ugarit,
but which only means the mountain of the
Kurds (pi. Okrad or Akrad). There is,
however, a possibility that as the Kurds, or
Carduchi, were in Greek times much where
they are now, this Kurd mountain might
have been thus named as early as these
letters, and the land of Ugarit might be the
land of Okrad or the Kurds. The in-
dications fix it pretty clearly without any
identification of the name.

Ullaza, a port near Tsumura, probably
Mina Kabusi^ behind which is El Usy : see
Ambi.

Urusalim, generally agreed to be Jeru-
salem.

UsHTiRU was probably in the upper part
of the Litany valley, as it was on the route
of the northern enemy approaching Khazi,
el^Azziyeh (letter 252). This would agree
well to Shtora^ 21 E. Beyrut, on the
Damascus road.

Usu or Uzu was close to Tyre and agrees
with Hosah, Heb. 'Ezziyeh^ 6 S. of Tyre.

WuRZA has no locality shown, but may
well be Kh. Yerzeh, 11 N.E. Shechem.


i86 IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES

Yabishi is Yabesh Gilead, 12 S.E. Beth-
shean ; see Aduri.

Yada comes after Ambi, Shigata, and
Ullaza, but no modem name thereabouts
resembles it.

Yapu is certainly Yafa or Joppa

Yarimuta cannot be the Biblical Yeri-
moth, as that was inland; but Yerimoth,
Arimathea, Ramoth, and Ramah» are all
terms for a high place, and may occur any-
where. The best indication is that it was an
important port of commerce, and close to
Gubla. The nearest port to Gabula is
Laodicea, and as this was a Ramoth, being
known as Ramitha, it is pretty certainly
Yarimuta ; see Gubla.

YiBULiYA must be between Gubla, where
Ribadda was, and Tsumura, to which his man
was going when captured (letter 161): no
such name is in the map.

YiKHLiYA is linked with UUaza, Ardata,
Y., Ambi, and Shigata; it is probably Qleiat^
5 N.E. of Ardata.

YiNUAMMA is the Egyptian Yenuamu, or
Yanoah, Heb. Yanuh^ 7 E. Tyre, belonging
to the Amu or Syrians.


IDENTIFICATION OF PLACES 187

Zalukhi was a coast land near Ugarit, not
identified.

ZiKHRA a city of Alashiya or Cyprus, ex-
posed to Lycian incursions.

ZiLU was in the south, named next after
Ginti (En Gannim) ; it may well be Zelah,
Heb., N. of Jerusalem, but not identified.

ZiNZAR is named between Ni and Kinanat,
and can hardly be other than Shinshar, 11
S. of Homs.

ZiRiBASHANi is the plain of Bashan^

ZuKHLi is named as a city of Egypt,
where a messenger would find the king.
This was probably a capital city, and in
lower Egypt. It can hardly be other than
Memphis, the city of Ptah Sokar, now
Saqqara. The constant mutation of / and r
in Egyptian prevent any difficulty in this
identification.


■j


PLYMOUTH :

WILLIAM BRSNDON AND SON,

PRINTBRS.


A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS

PUBLISHED BY METHUEN

AND COMPANY: LONDON

36 ESSEX STREET

W.C.


CONTENTS


General Literature, .
Ancient Cities,
Antiquary's Books,
Arden Shakespeare,
Beginner's Books, .
Business Boaks, .
Byzantine Texts, .
Churchman's Bible,
Churchman's Library,
Classical Translations,
Classics of Art,
Commercial Series,
Connoisseur's Library,
Handbooks of English Church

History, ....
Illustrated Pocket Librairy of

Plain and Coloured Books,
Junior Examination Series,
Junior School-Books,
Leaders of Religion,
Library of Devotion,
Little Books on Art,
Little Galleries,
Little Guides, .


PAGE


PAGB


3-24


Little Library, . •


aa


24


Little Quarto Shakespeare,


33


25


Miniature Library, • •


33


25


New Historical Series,


34


26


New Library of Medicine, .


34


26


New Library of Music, .


34'


26


Oxford Biographies,' . •


34


26


Romantic History,


34


27


School Examination Series,


35


27


School Histories, . • •


35


2>


Simplified French Texts, •


35


27


Simplified German Text's, .


35


28


Six Ages of Eur6pean History, 36


Standard Library, . •


36


28


Textbooks of Science, • •


36


Textbooks of Technology, .


37


28


Handbooks of Theology,


37


29
29


Westminster Commentaries,


37


30
30


Fiction,


37-45


31


Books for Boys and Girls,


45


31


Novels of Alexandre Dumas,


4«


32


Methuen's Sixpbnny Books,


46


SEPTEMBER 1909


1


A CATALOGUE OF

Messrs. Methuen's


PUBLICATIONS


In this Catalogue the order is accordiug to audion. An asterisk denotes
that the book is in the press.

Colonial Editions are published of all Messrs. Mbthubn's Novels issued
at a price above ax. &/. . and^ similar editions are publidied of some works of
General Literature. Colonial editions are only for drculation in the British
Colonics and India.

All books marked net are not subject to discount, and cannot be bought
at less than the published price. Books not marked net are subject to the
discount which the bookseller allows.

Messrs. Mbthuen's books are kept in stock by all good booksellers. If
there is any difficulty in seeing copies, Messrs. Methuen will be^ very glad to
have early information, and specimen copies of any books will be sent on
receipt of the published price plus postage for net books, and of the published
price for ordinary books.

I.P.L. represents Illustrated Pocket Library.

Part I. — General Literature


Abraham (QeorgeD.y. THECOMPhETE
MOUNTAINEER. With 75 Illustrations.
S^ond Edition, Dentyivo. 1$*. net.

Acatos(M. J,)* See Junior School P>ooks.

Addleshaw (Percy). SIR PHILIP
SIDNEY. With xa Illustrations. Demj^
BtHf, los. td. net.

Adeoey (W. P.)i M. A. See Bennett (W. H .)

Ady (C«:llla M.). A HISTORY OF
MILAN UNDER THE SFORZA. With
30 lUustratious and a Map. Demy Zvo.
los. 6(L net.

Aeschylus. See Classical Translations.

Alnsworth (W. Harrison). See I.P.L.

Aldis (Janet). THE QUEEN OF
LETTER WRITERS, Marquise de
SiviGNit, Dams db Bourbilly, x636-96.
With 18 Illustrations. Second Edition.
Demy %vo, im. 6d. net,

Alexander (WllllamX D.D., Archbishop
of Armagh. THOUGHTS AND
COUNSELS OF MANY YEARS.
Demy z6mo, af. 6d.

Aiken (Henry). See I.P.L.

AUen (Charles C). See
Technology.

Allen (L. Jessie). See Little Books on Art.

Allen (J. Romilly), F.S.A. See Antiquary's
Books.

Almack (B.), F.S.A. See Little Books on
Art.

Amherst (Lady). A SKETCH OF
EGYPTIAN HISTORY FROM THE
EARLIEST TIMES TO THE PRE-
SENT DAY. With many Illustrations
and Maps. A New and Cheaper Issue
Demy %vo. ns. 6d. net.

Anderson (P. M.). THE STORY OF THE
BRITISH EMPIRE FOR CHILDREN.
With 4a Illustrations. Cr, Zxh>, 3f.


Textbooks of


Anderson (J. O.), B.A., NOUVELLB
GRAMMAIRE FRANCAISE, A l'usagb
DBS iCcoLKS Anglaises.' Crown 8tw. as.

EXERCICES DE GRAMMAIRE FRAN-
9AISE. Cr. 8cw. xs. 6d.

Andrewes (Bishop). PRECES PRI-
VATAE. Translated and edited, with
Notes, by F. E. Brightman. M.A., of
Pusey House, Oxford. Cr. 8ro. 6s,
See also Library of Devotion.

*Anglo-Australlan.' AFTER-GLOW ME-
&IORIES. Cr. 890. 6s.

Anon. THE BUDGET, THE LAND

AND THE PEOPLE. iSecon^ Edition,

Crown Sev. td. net.
HEALTH, WEALTH, AND WISDOM.

Crown Bvo, is, net,
THE WESTMINSTER PROBLEMS

BOOK. Prose and Verse. Compiled frook

The Saturday Westminster GmMotU Cbfla.

petitions, I904-Z907. Cr, Zoo, %s. 6d. net.
VENICE AND HER TREASURES. With

many Illustrations. Round comrrs, Fcm^

Bvo. 5s. net.

Aristotle. THE ETHICS OF. Edited,
with an Introduction and Notes by John
Burnet, M.A., Cheaperissue. J^emySvm,
zox. 6d. net.

Asman (H. N.), M.A., B.D. See Junior

School Books.

Atkins (H. Q.). See Oxford Biographies.

Atkinson (CM.). JEREMY BENTH AM.

DemySvo. 5s. net.

Atkinson (C. T.), M.A., Fellow of Exeter
College, Oxford, sometime Demy of Mas-
dalen College. A HISTORY OF GEK-
MANY, from 17 13 to 181 5. With 35 Maps
and Plans Demy 8vo, 15/. net.


General Literature


AtkinMn (T. DA ENGLISH ARCHI-
TECTURE. With 196 Illustrations.
Ftm^ Sew. 3X. 6d, net.

A GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN
ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE. With
965 lUostratioDs. Second Editien, Fcnp*
8tv. 3f • ^id, net*

Atteridge (A. H.). NAPOLEON'S
B R O T HE R S. With 24 lUustiations.
Demy 80a. z8x. net.

Auden (T.)f M. A , F.S. A. See Ancient Cities.

Aurellus (Marcus). WORDS OF THE
ANCIENT WISE. Thoughts from Epic-
tetus and Marcus Aurelins. Edited by
W. H. D. Rouse, M.A., Utt. D. Fcnp.
8vo. y. 6d, net.
See also Standard Library.

Austen (Jane). See Standard Library,
Little Library and Mitton (G. E.).

Aves (BrnestX CO-OPERATIVE IN-
DUSTRY. Crown Bvo. 5*. net.

Bacon (Francis). See Standard Library
and Little Library.

Baeot (Richard> THE LAKES OF
NORTHERN ITALY. With 37 lUustra-
tions and a Map. Fcap. Bvo. ss. net.

Bailey (J. C), M. A. See Cowper (W.).

•Bain (R. NIsbet). THE LAST KING OF
POLAND AND HIS CONTEMPORA-
RIES. With z6 Illustrations. Demy 8w.
JOS. 6d. net.

Baker (W. Q.), M.A. See Junior Examina-
tion Series.

Baker (Julian L.), F.I.C., F.C.S. See
Books on Business.

Balfour (Graham). THE LIFE OF
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON. With
a Portrait. Fonrth Edition in one Volume.
Cr. Bvo. Buckram^ 6s.

Ballard (A.), B.A., LL.D. See Antiquary's

Books.
Bally (S. B.). See Commercial Series.
Barham (R. H.). See Little Library.

Baring (The Hon. Maurice). WITH

THE RUSSIANS IN MANCHURIA.
, Third Edition, Demy Bvo. js, 6d. net.
A YEAR IN RUSSIA. Second Edition,

Demy Bvo. 10s. 6d. net.
RUSSIAN ESSAYS AND STORIES.
Second Edition. ^ Cr. Bzw. ^ ks. net.
Also published in a Colonial Edition.

Barinff-Qould (S.). THE LIFE OF
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE. Withnearly
200 Illustrations, including a Photogravure
Frontispiece. Second Edition, Wide
RoyalBvo. \os. 6d. net.

THE TRAGEDY OF THE CiESARS:
A Study op the Chakactbss op the

CiGSARS OP THB JUUAN AND ClAUDIAN

Houses. W ith numerous Illustrations from

Busts, Gems, Cameos, etc. Sixth Edition.

Royal Zvo. xos. 6d. net.

A BOOK OF FAIRY TALES. With

numerous Illustrations by A. J. Gaskin.


Second Edition, Cr. Bvo, Buckram, 6f.,

also Medium 0ev. 6d,
OLD ENGLISH FAIRY TALES. With

numerous Illustrations by F. D. Bbdfokd.

Third Edition. Cr.Bvo. Buckram, 6s.
THE VICAR OF MORWENSTOW. Re-

Tised Edition. With a Portrait. Third

Edition. Cr. Bvo. u. 6d.
OLD COUNTRY LIFE. With 69 lUustra-

tions. Fifth Edition, Leu^geCremmBno, 6s.
A GARLAND OF COUNTRY SONG:

English Folk Songs with their Traditional

Melodies. Collected and arranged by S.

Baring-Goulo and H. F. Shbppaso.

Demy eio, 6s,
SONGS OF THE WEST: Folk Songs of

Devon and ComwalL Collected from the

Mouths of the People. By S. Baring-Gould,

M.A.,and H. Flbbtwood Shbppard, M.A.

New and Revised Edition, under the musical

editorship of Cecil J. Sharp. Large Im-
perial Bvo. Ks. net.
A BOOK OF NURSERY SONGS AND

RHYMES. Edited by S. Baring-Gould.

Illustrated. Secoipdand Cheaper Edition.

Large Cr. Bvo. 9S. 6d. net.
STRANGE SURVIVALS : Some Chapters

IN thb History op Man. Illustrated.

Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. jm. 6d. net.
YORKSHIRE ODDITIES : Incidents

AND Strange Evbnts. Fi/th Edition.

Cr. Bvo. as. 6d. net.
THE BARING-GOULD SELECTION

READER. Arranged by G. H. Ross.

Illustrated. Crown Bvo. is. 6d.
THE BARING-GOULD CONTINUOUS

READER. Arranged by G. H. Rose.

Illustrated. Crown Bvo. is. 6d.
A BOOK OF CORNWALL. With 33

Illustrations. Second Edition. Cr.Bvo, 6s.
A BOOK OF DARTMOOR. With 60

Illustrations. Second Edition. Cr. Zvo.

6s,
A BOOK OF DEVON. With 35 lUus-

trations. Third Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.
A BOOK OF NORTH WALES. With 49

Illustrations. Cr, Bvo, 6s.
A BOOK OF SOUTH WALES. With 57

Illustrations. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
A BOOK OF BRITTANY. With 69 Illus-
trations. Second Edition Cr, Bvo, 6s.
A BOOK OF THE RHINE : From Cleve

to Mainz. With 8 Illustrations in Colour

by Trevob Hadden, and 48 other Illus-
trations. Second Edition. Cr, Bvo. 6s.
A BOOK OF THE RIVIERA. With 40

Illustrations. Cr. Boo. 6s.
A BOOK OF THE PYRENEES. With

25 Illustrations. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
See also Little Guides.
Barker (Aldred P.). See Textbooks of

Technology.
Barker (BA M.A. (Late) Fellow of Miertoo

College, Oxford. THE POLITICAL

THOUGHT OF PLATO AND ARIS-

TOTLE. Demy Bw. los. 6d. net.
Barnes (W. B.), D.D. See Churchman's

Bible.


1


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


BanMtt(Mrs.P. A.). See Lhtle librarr.

BanmCR. R. NA M.A. • FRENCH PR05B
COMPOSITION. Fourth SiHHm. Cr,
Zv0, 9f . td. Key^ v. net.
See also Junior School Booki.

Barron (H. M.). M.^V.. WaJbun College,
Orford. TEXTS FOR SKRMONS. With
a Preface by Canon ScoTT Hollanu.
Cr. tv9. yt. tii.

BartbolMBew (J. a.)i P.R.S.E See
kobertson (C. G.).

BntaMe (C. P.X LT«D. THE COM-
MERCE or NATIONS. Feurik Ed.
Cr. %vo. 2X. 6</.

Ba8tiaa(H. Charlton), M.A.,M.D., F.R.S.
THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE. With
Diagrams and ninny Photomicrogra|rfis.
/Vwj* trto. •js. 6ti. ni't.

Bat5on (Mrs. Stephen). A CONCISE
HANI) BOOK OK GARDEN FLOWERS.
heap. Srv. 3*. fxl.

THE SUMMER GARDEN OK
PLEASURE. With 36 Illustrationi in
Colour by Osmunu Pittman. \\ 'itie Detny
^vo. 15 J. net.

Uayley (R. Child). THE COMPLETE
PHOTOGRAPHER. With over too
Illustrations. With Note on Pirecl Colour
Process. Third Kdition. Demy 8i>o.
Tof. 6d. net.

Beard (W. S.). EASY EXERCISES IN
ALGEBRA KOR BEGINNERS. Cr. Bvo.
IS. 6d. With Answers. 1 J". 9</.

See also Junior Examination Series and
Beginner's Books.

Beckett (Arthur). 1 THE SPIRIT OF THE
DOWNS : Impressions and Reminiscences
of the Sussex Downs. With 20 Illustrations
in Colour by Stanley Inciihoi.u. Devty
Zx'o. JOS. 6d. net.

Beckfford (PctcrX THOUGHTS ON
H UN TING. Edited by J. Onio Packt,
and Illustrated by G. H. Jalland. Second
Edition. Demy 8rv. 6x.

Reckford (William). See Little Library.

Beechlng (H. C), M.A., Canon of West-
minster. See Library of Devotion.

Beerbohm (Max). A BOOK OK CARI-
CATURES. Im^erieUAto. 91s.net.

Beebie (Harold). MASTER WORKERS.
Illiistrated. Demy Bvo. 7s. 6d. net.

Behinon (Jacob). DIALOGUES ON THE
SUPERSENSUAL LIFE. Edited by
Bernard Holland. Eca/. Bvo, js. 6d.

Bell (Mrs. Arthur 0.). THE SKIRTS
OF THE GREAT CITY. With 16 Illus-
trations in (Colour by Arthur G. Bell,
17 other Illustrations, and a Map. Second
Edition. Cr. 8t'0. 6s.

Belloc (H.) PARIS. With 7 Maps and a
Frontispiece in Photogravure. Second Edi-
tion. Revised. Cr. Zvo. 6s.

HILLS AND THE SEA. Second Edition.
Crown 9vo. 6s.

ON NOTHING AND KINDRED SUB-
JP:CTS. Second Edition. Fcaf. Ivo. 5s.

*ON EVERYTHING. Eca/. 8w. 5*.

MARIE ANTOINETTE. With 35 Portraits


ud Hlatnrifaat, and as Maps. /V i w y lwfc

XV. mi.
THk PYRENEES. With j6 n i l i tii i * by

the Author, and n Ifaps. S^4 m d JttM/lm.

Demy 8m. 7'. 6^> arIL
B«llot(n.n.L.),M.A. SeeJoiiM(L.A.A.X

Bennett (JoMph). FORTY YBARS OF
MUSIC, 1865-1905. with- Af Ilhnrinaldas.
Demy 8rv. x6r. wtt.

Bennett (W. H.), M.A. A PRIlflCER OF

THE BIBLE. Fifth Edititm, Cr. 8wl

su. 6d.

Bennett (W. ft.) and Aden)^ ( W. P.\. A

BIBLICAL mTRODUCTION. With a
concise Bibliograi^iy. Fifth Editiofu Cr.

Zvo. 7s. 6d.

Benson (ArcAblshop) GOD'S BOARD.
Communion Addresses. Secaful £ditwit.
Fcap. 9va. 3X. 6d. net.

Benson (A. C), M.A. See Okfotd Bio-
graphies.

Benson (R. M.). THE WAY OF HOLI-
NESS. An Exposition of Psaiu cxix.
Analytical and DevotiondL Cr. 8cv. sc

Bernard (B. R.), M.A.f Canon of Salisbory
THE ENGLISH SUNDAY: its Okigins

AND ITS ClJklXS. Fcap. Bvo, XX. &/.

Berry (W. Orhiton), M.A. FRANCE
SINCE WATERLOO. With 16 Ulnstxa-
tions and Maps. Cr, Brto. 6*.

Bernete (A. de). See CLossics of Art.

Bethnnt- Edwards (Miss). HOME LIFE
IN FRANCE. With 30 Illustrations.
Fifth Edition. Crown Bvo, 6s.

Bethune- Baker (J. P.), &LA. See Hand-
books of Theology.

Bindley (T. HerbertX B.D. THE OECU-
MENICAL DOCUMENTS OF THK
FAITH. With Introductions and Notes.
Second Edition, Cr. Bvo, 6s, net.

Blnns (H. B.). THE LIFE OF WALT
WHITMAN. Illustrated. Demy 8vo.
IOC. 6d. net.

Blnyon(Mrs. Latfrteace). NINETEENTH
CENTURY PROSE. Selected and ar-
ranged by. Croztm Bvo, 6s.

Binyon (Laurence). THE DEATH OF
ADAM AND OTHER POEMS. Cr. 9vo.
2S, 6i/. net.
See also Blalce (William).

Birch (Walter de Oray), LLwD., F.S.A.
See Connoisseur's Library.

Birnstlnsrl (Bthel). See Little Books on Art.

Blackmamtle (Bernard). Seel.P.L.

BMr (Robert). Seel.P.L.

Bhtke (Winian). THE LETTERS OF
WILLIAM BLAKE, togetAkh with a
Life by Frederick Tatham. Edited
from the^ Original Manuscripts, with an
Introduction and Notes, by ARcicinALD G.
B. RossELL. With xa Illustrations.
Demy Bvo. js. 6d. net.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE BOOK OF

iOB. With Genera! Introduction by
AURENCB Binyon. Quarto, aij. net.
See also I.P.L., and Little Library.


General Literature


S


Bloom (J. Harvey), M.A. S«e Antiquary's

Books.
Blouflt (Henri). See Begiooor's Books.

Boardman (T» H.)f M. A. S«e FMnch (W.).
Bo4e(WilhebD),PJIi.D. See Classics of AxX.
Bodley (J. E. C.) THJE CORO^NATK);!^

OF EDWAJUiVlI. Dtntypuff, ^xt,n^U

By Conyxuind of the King,

Body (OAorfire), D.D. TjHE SOUL'S
PILGRIMAGE : Devotional ^ Readings
from the Published and Unpublished writ-
ings of George Body, D.D. Selected and
arrai^c^ by J. H. Bubn^ B.D., F.R.S.E:
Demy tdtno* 2S. 6d.

BoBA (Cardlaal). See Library of Devotion.

Bonnor (Maiy L.). See Little Books on Art.

BooQ (P. C.)«, B.A. See Commercial Series.

Borrow (Qeorffe). See Little Libravy.

Bos <J. Rttzena). AGRICULTURAL
ZOOLOGY. Translated by J. R. Ains-
woRTH Davis, M. A. With 155 Illustrations.
Second Edition, Cr, Zvo, 3;. td.

Bottiiifir(C.O.),B.A. EASY GR^EK
EXERCISES. Cr. &»tf. 2s.
See also Junior Examination SerieSr

Boulting: (W.) TASSO AND HIS TIMES.
With 34 Illustrations. Demy Svp, xof . 6d.
net.

Boulton (E. S.), M. A. GEOMETRY ON
MODERN LINES. /Cr. 8»tf. %f.

Boulton (William B.). SIR JOSHUA
REYNOLDS, P.R.A. With 49 lilusti*-
tions. Second Edition, Dewy Bvo. 7s. 6d.
net.

Bovill (W. B. Forster). HUNGARY
AND THE, HUNGARIANS. With t6
Illustrations in Colour by Wji^liam Pascoe,
13 other IMustrations and a Map. Demy
Zvo. 7f. 6d. net.

Bowdeii(e. M.). THE IMITATION OF
BUDDHA: Being Quotations from
Buddhist Literature for each Day in the
Year. Fifth Edition, Cr, i6tru>, as. td.

Bower (c.), B.A. See New Historical
Series.

Boyle (W.). CHRISTMAS AT THE ZOO.
With Verses by W. Boyle and 24 Coloured
Pictures by H. B. Neil50N. Su^er Royal
j6mo, 2S.

Brabant (F. G.), M.A. RAMBLES IN
SUSSEX. With 30 Illustrations. Crown
Bvo. 6s. See also Little Guides.

Bradley (A. Q.). ROUND ABOUT WILT-
SHIRE. With 14 Illustrations, in Colour
by T. C. GoTCH, 16 other Illustrations, and
a Map. Second Edition. Cr. Svo. 6s,

THE ROMANCE OF NORTHUMBER-
LAN D. With 16 Illustrations in Colour by
Frank Southgate, R.B.A., and 12 from
Photographs. Second Edition, Demy 8vo.

7s. 6d Hft.

Bradley (John W. ). See Little Books on Art.

Braid (James), Open Champion, looi, 1905
and 1906. ADVANCED GOLF. With
S8 Photographs and Diagrams. Fi/tk
Edition, Demy Zvo, zos. 6d* net.


Braid (Ja«|^) aad Oilers. GREAT
GOM'ERiS IN THli: MAKING. Edited
by Hbnrv Le4CH.. With 34 Illustrations.
Si^omdE^uMf^ Dtmylvo. fe,^d.net,

Brailsiord (fl. N.). MACEDONIA:

ITS KACBS Afro VUEIR FUTORJE. With

32 Illustrations and 2 Maps. Dtmt^ Zvo.

X3«. 6d,fut.
Brentano (C). See Simplified Geman

Texts.
Brifiiitman (F. B.), M.A. See Andrewes

(Lanoelot).
«Br«ck (A. ClwttOB). 3HELLEY: THE

MAN AND THE POET. With is lUus-

trations. Demy Zvo. ys. 64. net,

Brodrick (Mary) and Atortwi (A* AjBder-
spu). A CONCISE pECTIONARY OF
EGYPTIAN ARCHiEOLOGY. A Hand-
Bofik for Students and Travellers. With 80
lUtjsti^tions and many Cartouches. Cr,Zvo.
3t,6d.

Brooks j(B. £.), B.Sc. (Lond.)f Leicester
Municipal Technical School, and James
(W.H.N.),A.M.LE.E..A.R.C.Sc., Muni-
cipal School jof Technology, Manchester.
See Textbooks of Technology.

Brown (S, E.), M.A., B.Sc, Senior Science
Master at Uppingham. A PRACTICAL
CHEMISTRY NOTE - BOOK FOR
MATRICULATION AND ARMY CAN-
DIDATES. Easy Experiments on the
Commoner Substances. Cr.^to. is.6d.net.

Brown(J. Wood), M.A. THE BUILDERS
OF FLORENCE. With 74 Illustrations
by Herbest Railton. Demy 4,to. iSs.net.

Browne (Sir Tiionas). See Standard

Library.
BrowneU (C. L.). THE HEART OF

JAPAN. Illustrated. T/iird Edition.

Cr. Zvo, 6s. Also Medium Zvo. 6d.

BrownlHjg (Robert). See Little Library.

Bryant (Walter W.), B.A., F.R.A.S., F.R.
Met. So^., of the Royal Observatory, Green-
wich. A HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY.
With 47 Illustrations. Demy Zvo, js, 6d.net.

Buckland (Prancln T.).' CURIOSITIES
OF NATURAL HISTORY. Illustrated
by H. B. Neilson, Cr. Zvo. 3*. 6d.

B»cktoa iK M.) THE BURDEN OF
jENGELA. Second Edition. Cr, Zzfo, 3s.

6d, HSt,

EAGER HEART : A Mystery Play. Seventh

Edition. Cr. Zvo. is. net.
KINGS IN BABYLON : A Drama. Cr. Zvo.

IS. net,
SONGS OF JOY. Cr. Zvo. is, net.
Budge (E. A. Wallis). THE GODS OF

THE EGYPTIANS. With over ^ 100

Coloured Plates and many Illustrations.

Two Volumes. Royal Zvo. £^, 3*. net.
"Buist Massac (H.). THE COMPLETE

AERONAUT. With many IlUutratioDs.

Demy Zvo, 12s. 6d. net.
BttU (Paul), Army ChapUin. GOD AND

OUR SOLDIERS. Second EditUm

Cr, Zvo, 6s,


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


BaUey (MlM). See Dilke (Udy).

Banyan (John). THE PILGRIM'S PRO-
GRESS. Edited, with an Introduction by
C H. Firth, M.A. With 39 Illustradons
by R. Anning Bell. Ctvwn 8cwb 6s,
See also Standard Library and Lilnary of
Devotion.

R.S. A MANUAL


Bnrch (Q. J.), M.A., F.
OF ELECTRICAL


SCIENCE. Illus-
trated. Cr. Zvo. -^x.
Burgess (Qelett). 6OOPS AND HOW TO
\\K THEM. Illustrated. Small ^ta, 6s.

Bnrke (Edmund). See Standard Library.

Bum (A. E.), D.D., Rector of Handsworth
and Prebendary of Lichfield. See Hand-
books of Theology.

Barn (J. H.), B. D., F. R. S. E. THE
CHURCHMAN'S TREASURY OF
SONG: Gathered from the Christian
poetry of all aj^es. Edited by. Fcaf, Zvo.
3J. 6a. net. See also Library of Devotion.

Bnrnet (John), M.A. See Aristotle.

Bnras (Robert), THE POEMS. Edited by
Andrew Lang and W. A. Craigib. With
Portrait. Third Editicn, WidtDemyZvo,
gilt top. 6s.

See also Standard Library.

Bumside (W. F.), M.A. OLD TESTA-
MENT HISTORY FOR USE IN
SCHOOLS. Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 3s. 6d.

Barton (Alfred). See I. P. L.

Bury (J. B.), M.A., Litt. D. See Gibbon
(Edward).

Bussell (P. W.), D. D. CHRISTIAN
THEOLOGY AN D SOCIAL PROGRESS
(The Hampton Lectiures of 1905). Demy
Bvo. 10s. 6d. net.

Butler (Joseph), D.D. See Standard
Library.

Butlin (F. M.). AMONG THE DANES.
With 13 Illustrations in Colour by Ellen
Wilkinson, and 15 from Photographs.
Demy Bvo. js. 6d. net,

Cain (ueorges). Curator of the Camavalet
Museum, Paris. WALKS IN PARIS.
Translated by A. R. Allinson, M.A.
With a Frontispiece in Colour by Maxwell
Armfield, and 118 other Illustrations.
Demy Bvo. js. 6d. net.

Caldecott (Alfred), D.D. See Handbooks
of Theology.

Calderwood (D. S.), Headmaster of the Nor-
mal School, Edinburgh. TEST CARDS
IN EUCLID AND ALGEBRA. In three
packets of 40, with Answers, i* . each. Or
m three Books, price 2^., 2</., and 3d,

Cameron (Mary Lovett). OLDETRURIA
AND MODERN TUSCANY. With 32
Illustrations. Crown Bvo, 7s. 6d. net.

Cannan (Edwin), M.A. See Smith (Adam).

CanninefQeorge). See Little Library.

Capey (B. F. H.). See Oxford Biotrraphies.

Garden (Robert W.). THE CITY OF
GENOA. With Z2 Illustrations in Colour
bv William Parkinson, and 20 other
Illustrations. Demy Bvo, xos, 6d, net.


ABOUT
Illastratioii&


(John). SeeLP.L.

Cariyle (ThooMs). THE FRCNCH
REVOLUTION. Edited by C. R. L
Fletchu, Fellow of Magdalen Collie,]
Oxford. Three Volumgs. Cr, 8<w. rZs,

THE LETTERS AND SPEECHES OF I
OLIVER CROMWELL. With an In- 1
trodnction by C. H. Firth, M.A., and
Notes and Appendices by Mrs. S. C. Lomas
Three Volumes, Demy 9vo. z&r. net,

Cariyle (R. M. and A. J.), M.A. See

Leaders of Religion.
CMulchael (PtaUip). ALL

PHILIPPINE. With 8

Cr, Bvo. 2f . 6d,
Carpenter(MargaretB«yd). THBCHILD

IN ART. With 50 Illustntions. Second

Edition, Large Cr, Bvo, 6s,

*Carter (Qeorge), M.A. THE STORY OF
MILTON'S ^PARADISE LOST.' Crown
Bvo, IS. 6d.

Cavanaffh (Francis),^ M.D. (E^din.). See
New Library of Medicine.

Celano (Brother Thomas of). THE LIVES

OF FRANCIS OF ASSISL Translated
by A. G. Ferrers Howbll. With
Frontispiece. Cr. Bvo. 5s, net.

Chambers (A. M.). A CONSTITU-
TIONAL HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
Crown Bvo. 6s,

Chamtsso (A. von). See Simplified German
Texts.

Chandler (ArthurX Bishop of Bloemfontcin.
ARA CGCLI: An Essay in Mystical
Theology. Third Edition. Crown Bno,
3^ . 6d, net,

Channer (C. C.) and Roberts (M. B.).
LACEMAKING IN THE MIDLANDS,
PAST AND PRESENT. With 17 full-
pase Illustrations. Cr, Bvo, ax. 6d,

Chapman (S. J.). See Books on Btuness.

Chatterton (Thomas). See Standard

Library.
Chesterfield (Lord), THE LETTERS OF
THE EARL OF CHESTERFIELD
TO HIS SON. Edited, with an Introduc-
tion by C. Strachey, with Notes by A.
Calthrop. Two Volumes, Cr, Bvo, 12*.

Chesterton(Q.K.). CHARLES DICKENS.

With two Portraits in Photogravure. F'{ftk

Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s,
ALL THINGS CONSIDERED. Fourth

Edition, Fca^, Bvo, ^s.
TREMENDOUS TRIFLES. F^ap. 8w.

Childe (Charles P.), B.A., F.R.C.S. See

New Library of Medicine.

Cicero. See Classical Translations.

Clapham(J. H.), Professor of Economics in
the University of Leeds. THE WOOL-
LEN AND WORSTED INDUSTRIES.
With 3z Illustrations and Diagrams. Cr,
Bvo. 6s,

Clarke(P. A.), M.A. See Leaders of Religion.

Clausen (George), A.R.A.. R.W.S. SIX
LECTURES ON PAINTING. With x6


General Literature


Illustrations. Third Edition. Large Post
Svo. 3J. 6d, net,

AIMS AND IDEALS IN ART. Eight
Lectures delivered to the Students of the
Royal Academy of Arts. With 32 Illustra-
tions. Second Edition, Large Post ^vo.
5J. net.

Clay (Rotha MaryX See Antiquary's
Books.

Cleather (A. L.)« See Wagner (R).

Clinch (Q.), F.G.S. See Antiquary's Books
and Little Guides.

Clougrh (W. T.)and Dunstan (A. E.)*
See Junior School Books and Textbooks of
Science.

Clouston (T. S.)t M.D., C.C.D,, F.R.S.E.
See New Library of Medicine.

Coast (W. a.), B.A. EXAMINATION
PAPERS IN VERGIL. Cr. Zvo. aj.

Cobb (W. F.), M.A. THE BOOK OF
PSALMS : with an Introduction and Notes.
Demy Zvo, xos, 6d. net,

«Cock8hott (Winifred), St. Hilda's Hall,
Oxford, THE PILGRIM FATHERS,
Their Church and Colony. With 12
Illustrations. Demy Svo. js, 6d, net,

Cdlinsrwood (W. Q.), M.A. THE LIFE

OF JOHN RUSKIN. With Portrait.

Sixth Edition, Cr, Zvo, 7S. 6d. net,
Collins (W* E.)f M.A. See Churchman's

Library.
Colvlll (Helen H.) ST. TERESA OF

SPAIN. With 20 Illustrations. Demy

Svo. js. 6d, net.
Combe (William). Seel.P.L.
Conrad (Joseph). THE MIRROR OF

THE SEA: Memories and Impressions.

Third Edition, Cr, Svo. 6s,
Cook (A. M.)> M.A.,andMarcliant(B. C),

M.A. PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN

TRANSLATION. Selected from Latin and

Greek Literature. Fourth Ed, Cr.Svo. "is.td,
LATIN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN

TRANSLATION. Cr.Svo. is. 6d.
Cooke-Taylor (R.W.). THE FACTORY

SYSTEM. Cr, Svo. 2s. 6d.
Coolidgre (W. A. B.), M.A. THE ALPS.

With many Illustrations. Dem/ Svo.

ns, 6d. net.
Cooper (C. S.), F.R.H.S. See Westell (W. P.)
Corkran (Alice). See Little Books on Art.
Cotes (Rosemary). DANTE'S GARDEN.

With a Frontispiece. Second Edition.

Fcap. Svo. 2s. 6d.; leather^ y. 6d. net.
BIBLE FLOWERS. With a Frontispiece

and Plan. Fca/, Svo. 2s, 6d. net.

Cotton (Charles). See I.P.L. and Little
Library.

Coulton (Q. G.). CHAUCER AND HIS
ENGLAND. With 32 Illustrations.
Second Edition. Demy Svo. lof . 6</. net,

Cowley (Abraham). See Little Library.

Cowper (William). THE POEMS.
Edited with an Introduction and Notes by
J. C Bailey, M.A. Illustrated, including
two unpublished designs by William
Blake. Demy Svo. xos, 6d. net.


Cox (J. Charles). See Ancient Cities, Anti-
quary's Books, and Little Guides.

Cox (Harold), B.A., M.P. LAND
NATIONALIZATION AND LAND
TAXATION. Second Edition revised,
Cr, Svo, y, 6d. net,

Crabbe (George). See Little Library.

Craik (Mrs.). See Little Library.

Crane (C. P.), D.S.O. See Little Guides.

Crane (Walter^ R.W.S. AN ARTIST'S
REMINISCENCES. With 123 Illustra-
tions by the Author and others ftom. Photo-
graphs. Second Edition, Demy Svo, zSs.
net.

INDIA IMPRESSIONS. With 84 Ulus-
trations from Sketches by the Author.
Second Edition, Demy Svo, js, 6d. net.

Crasfaaw (Richard). See Little Library.

Crispe (T. E.), K.C. REMINISCENCES
OF A K.C. With Portraits. Demy Svo.
ros, 6d, net.

Cross (J. A.), M.A. THE FAITH OF
THE BIBLE. Fcap, Svo. zs. 6d, net,

*CrowlMr (Ralph HA THE HYGIENE
OF SCHOOL LIFE. Cr. Svo. y, 6d. net.

Crnikshank(Q.). THE LOVING BAL-
LAD OF LORD BATEMAN. With 11
Plates. Cr, i6tno. is, 6d. net.

Crump (B.). See Wagner (R.).

Crnttwell (C. T.), M.A., Canon of Peter-
borough. ^ See Handbooks of English
Church History.

Cnnynghame (H. H.), C.B. See Connois-
seur's Library.

Cutts (B. L.), D. D. See Leaders of Religion.

Daniell (Q. W.), M.A. See Leaders of
Religion.

Dante (Alisrhieri). LA COMMEDIA DI
DANTE. The Italian Text edited by
Paget ToYNBEE, M.A., D.Litt. Cr.Svo. 6s.

THE DIVINE COMEDY. Translated
by H. F. Gary. Edited with a Life of
Dante and Introductory Notes by Paget
ToYNBKK, M. A., D.Litt. Demy Svo, 6di

THE PUR(JATORIO OF DANTE.
Translated into Spenserian Prose by C.
Gordon Wright. With the Italian text.
Fcap. Svo. 2S, 6d. net.

See also Little Library, Toynbee (Paget),
and Vernon (Hon. W. Warren).

Darley (Qeor^e). See Little Library.

D* Arcy (R. P.), M.A. A NEW TRIGON-
OMETRY FOR BEGINNERS. With
numerous diagrams. Cr, Svo, 2S. 6d.

Daudet (Alphonse). See Simplified French
Texts.

Davenport (C^ril). See Connoisseur's
Library and Little Books oh Art.

Davenport (James). THE WASH-
BOURNE FAMILY. With 15 Illustra-
tions and a Map. Royal Svo, 2 if. net, '

Davey (Richard.) THE PAGEANT OF

. LONDON. With 40 Illustrations in
Colour by John Fulleylovb, R.I. InTwo
Volumes, Demy Svo. i$s, net.
See also Romantic History.

Davles (Gerald S. ). See Classics of Art.


8


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Dayles (W. O. P.X See Junior Kxunina-
tion Serie*.

Davis (H. W. C.\ M.A., Kellow and Tatar
cifBalliolColkKC KN(;LANI) UNDER
THK NORMANS AND ANGKVINS :
1066-1272. With Maps and Illiutrations.
Demy Br». » lof. 6rf. neU

DawM>n (Nelson). See Connoisaenr'i library.

Dawson (Mrs. Nelson). See Utile Books oa
Art

Deane (A. C). See Uttle Library.

Deans (Storry R.). THK TRIALS OF
FIVK QUK£NS: Katharine op
AKAr.oN, Annk lloi.EYN, Maky (Jubsn
OK Scots, Marir Antoinkttb and Caro-
LINK OP Hrunswick. With xa Illustrationi.
Dtmy Srf*. lor. bd. net,

Dearmer (Mabel). A CHILD'S LIFE OF
CHRIST. With 8 Illiistratioos in Coluur
by K. I'oktkkcuk-Bkickuai.k. LargtCr.

*D'n8te(Marffaret). IN THKCANARIKS
WITH A CAMKRA. Illustrated. Cr,
Zvo "js. ftt/ net.

Delbos (Leon). TI I K MKTRIC SYSTEM.
Cr. Rr'/». 2Jr.

DemosthencA. AC, A I N ST CONON AND
CALMCLKS. Kilitcd by Y, Dakwin
Swift, M.A. Second Edition. J'ca^,

Zt'O. 2f.

Dickens (Charles). Sre Little Library,

I.I'.L., and Chesterton ((>. K.)-
Dickinson (Bmily). POKMS. Cr. Zvo.

4s. 6d. net.
Dickinson (Q. L.). M.A., Fellow of Kinii's

Collejfe, Cambridge. THK GREKK

VIEW OF LIFE. Sixtk Edition, Cr.

S7/0. QS. td.

Dllke(Lady), Bulley (Miss), and Whitley

(Miss). WOMEN'S WORK. Cr. 8vo.

as. 6d.
Dillon (Edward), M.A. See Connoisseur's

library, Little Rooks on Art, and Classics

of Art.
Dltchffleld (P. H.), M.A., F.S.A. THE

STORY OF OUR ENGLISH TOWNS.

With an Introduction by Augustus

Jessopp.D.D. Second Edifirn. Cr.Bvo. 6s,
OLD ENGLISH CUSTOMS: Extant at

the Present Time. Cr, Bvo. 6s.
ENGLISH VILLAGES. With 100 Illustra-

tions. Second Edition. Cr.BT'o. ss.6d.net.
THE PARISH CLERK. With 31

Illustrations. Third Edition. Demy Bvo.

ys. 6d. net.
THE OLD-TIME PARSON. With 17

Illustrations. Second Edition, Demy Bvo.

ys, 6d. net.
Dixon (W. M.), M.A. A PRIMER OF

TENNYSON. Third Edition. Cr.Bvo.

ENCJLISH POETRY FROM BLAKE TO
BROWNING. Second Edition. Cr. Bvo.

QS.6d,

Dobbs (W. J.), M.A. See Textbooks of

Science.
Doney (May). SONGS OF THE REAL.

Cr. Bvo, 3^. 6d. net.


DoofiasCHiurhA.). VENICE ON FOOT.

with the Itinerary of the Grand CanaL

With 75 IlluBtmtiooi and 11 Maps. ^a^.

8tw. u. Mti.
Dofljrias (Jaaas). THE MAN IN THE

PULPIT. Cr. 8m as. 6d, sut.

Dowdeo (J.), D.D., Lord Bishop of Edin.
burgh. FURTHER STUDIES IN THK
PRAYER BOOK. Cr, %vo. 6s,
See also Churchman's Library.

Dnife (Q.). See Books on Businem.

Driver (S. R.), D.D., D.C.L., Regius Pro-
fessor of Hebrew in the University of
Oxford. SERMONS ON SUBJECTS
CONNECTED WITH THE OLD
TESTAMENT. ,Cr.8w#. 6*.
See also Westminster Commentaries.

Dry(Wakellnr). See Uule Guides.

Dryhnrst (A. R.). See Little Books on Art

* Duff (Nora). MATILDA OF TUSCANY.

With many Illustrations. Dciny%o0, xo*.6d.

nti,
Dngttld (Charles). See Doolcs on Business.

Dnmas (Alexandre). THE CRIMES OF

THE BORGIAS AND OTHERS.

With an Introduction by R. S. Gasmbtt.

With 9 Illustratioiu. Cr. Bivo, 6s
THE CRIMES OF URBAIN GRAN-

DIER AND OTHERS. With 8 liluatia.

tions. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE CRIMES OF THE MAR(2UISE

DE HRINVILLIERS AND OTHERS.

With 8 Illustrations. Cr. Bitfo, 6s.
THE CRIMES OF ALI PACHA AND

OTHERS. With 8 Illustrations. Cr.SiWL

6x.
MY MEMOIRS. Translated by £. M.

Wallkk. Withan Introduction by Andkbw

Lanc;. With Frontispiecesin Photogravure.

In six Volumes. Cr. Btw, 6s. each volume.

Vol. I. Z802-182Z. Vol. IV. 1830-1831.

Vol. II. 1S22-1825. Vol. V. 1831.1833.
Vol. III. 1826-1830. Vol. VI. 1833-1833.
MY PETS. Newly translated by A. R. Al-

LiKSON, M.A. With z6 Illustrations fay V.

Lrcomte. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
See also Simplified French Texts.
Dnncan(David),D.Sc.,LL.D. THE LIFE

AND LETTERS OF HERBERT

.SPENCER. With 17 Illustrations. Zfeti^

Bz'O,
Dunn (J.

GENERAL:

With Z14 Illustrations. Second EelHiPM.

Cr, Bvo. 3J. 6d,
Dunn-Pattlson (R. P.). NAPOLEON'S

MARSHALS. With 20 Illustrations. JDemy

Bvo. Second Edition, iss.6d.net,
Dunstan (A. E.), I^.Sc (Lond.). See Text-
books of Science, and Junior School Books.
Durham (The Earl of). A REPORT ON

CANADA. With an Introductory Note.

Demy Bvo. 4J. 6d. net
Dutt(W. A.). THE NORFOLK BROADS.

With coloured Illustrations by Frank

SouTHGATE, R.B.A Sccond Editiofu Cr,

Bvo. 6s.


L^').,D.Sc.,andMundella(y. A.).

KRALKLEMENTARYSCIENCE.


General Literature


WILD LIFE IN EAST


SOHE LITERARY A

EASTANGLIA. Wnn lo iim.i
Colour by W. Dexter, R.B.A.


MICRO-

rilE, OK A FIECE OF
1 DISCOVERED. PtH


Edwonla CW. DonelM). S« ComnKitial
Series.

Einn (Pierce). Scel.F.L.

EECrton (H. E,), M.A. A HISTORY
OF BRITISH COLONIAL POLICY.
SicimdEd.,litv!std. Dtmyivc. jj.W.iw*,

Ellobyic. a.). Ste Litlle Guides.

EllertaD(F.a.). S«Slon<<S. J.X

eplctetui. SseAuieUiuCMarciu).

Brasmui. A Sook called in Liiin EN-
CHIRIDION MILITIS CHRISTIANI,
snd in Knelisb Ibe Manual of Ibe Chriilian
KnLghl. fcap. lac. ji. 6d. rut.

Brcknanii -Cbatrlan. Sec Si mpliliedFiuch
Tuu.

Evairriiia. Sec Bysantbie TctU.

EwBld (CbtI). two legs, and othek
Stories. Translaud fiom tlie Danish

IlLsiraied by AucuSTA Guest. LargtCr,


FalrbretherCW. H.), M.A. THE PHILO-
SOPHY OF T. H. GREEN. Semid
Edition. Cr. Spa ji. 6d.

Fe« (AlUn). THE TLIGHT OF THE

KING. WiUioTeT 70 Sketches and Pbota.
grapb& by Ibc Aalhcr. JYtni' attd revistd
EdiHn. Dtmf ivs. IS. 6d. rut.

SECRET CHAMBERS AND HIDING-
PLACES. W;lh8oIllusl^llio^^L HTmiand
misid EdiliiM. Dimyiva. jt. td. net.

JAMES .1. AND HIS WIVES, With 40
IlluiUalions. Dcinyim. iai.6d.nil.

ftll (E. P. B.). THE FOUNDATIONS

!. cS. Sefc

P!ddiBE(H«r7). See Standard library.
HnnjS.W.), M.A. See Junior Eiaminuioa


r rr- Cluton), H.Ii


Oifoid. CROM.


'Flrtli f^ditli e.). S« Begino


Fttiaert.ia(Mdvt


BOOK OF CLIMBERS, TWINERS,
AND WALL SHRUBS. Illuuraled.
Vcaf. Btw. 31. &/. nel.
:zpatrlck<S. A. O.X See A"!'"' <^">i"
*ker(W. H.). M.A-.D.C.L.


L Paobt and F»a


Olmr gva. jr. 6d. mi.
1ax(A. W.), M.A., WiHjmDpwPi

MontiliL ECOnSjJ
I>tmy Sen. 71. 6d. Mtl.
"oat (P. W. Q.\ D.Liit., M.A. A LON-
DON READER FOR YOUNG CITI-
ZENS. With Plans and Illuitracuuii. Cr.


Forteacoe (Mr*. Q.). See Uttle Bu^oa

Fouqilj ttM Matte). SINTRAH AND

HIS COMPANIONS. Tmnslated by A.
C. Fakquharsoh. Withiotllu-ualioniby
Edhuhd J. Sullivan, and t, Frontis|Heca
in Fhotogravare from aa et^^ravuio; by
ALBKECHTDUliCR. Dimr^vo, is.6d.iui.


ON A WHEEL.
Fifth EditisH Cr. too. 5j.
'rcTtch(W.).M.A. See Ten books oTScieWB.
■ '— '■" - --" DAIRY BAC-


Freudenreicb (L.

TE RIO LOGY.


3s. 6d. tut.

Fyvle(JobD). TRAGEDY CJUEKNS OF
THEGF.ORGIANERA. Wiih .6 Illuttra-


10


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Qallaher (DO and Stead (W. J.), THE
COMPLKTK RUGBY KOOTKALLER,
ON THK NEW ZEALAND SYSTEM.
With 35 Illustrations. Second Ed* Dtmy
^vo, los. 6d. net,

Qallichan (W. M.). See Little Guides.

Qaltoii(Slr FranclsX F.R.S.; D-CL^Oxf.;
Hon. Sc.D.f Carab. ; Hon. Fellow Triniiy
College. Cambridge. MEMORIES OF
MY LIFE. With 8 IllustraUons. Third
Edition, Dtmy Bvo. xof. 6d, net,

Qambado (Geoffrey, Esq.). See I.P.L.

Qarnett(Lucy M. J.X THE TURKISH
PEOPLE : Thkik Social Life, Rkligious
Beliefs and Institutions, and Domestic
Life. With az Illustrations. Demy 8cv.
lof. 6d, net,

Qaskell (Mrs.). See Little Library, Stan-
dard Library and Sixpenny Novels.

Qasquet, the Right Rev. Abbot, O.S.6. See
Antiquary's Books*

Qee OHenry), D.D., F.S.A. See Handbooks
of English Church History.

Qeorsre (H. B.X M. A. .Fellow of New College,
Oxford. BATTLES OF ENGLISH HIS-
TORY. With numerous Plans. Fonrth
Edition Revised. Cr. 9vo, 3X. 6d.

A HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE
BRITISH EMPIRE. /''ourt/i Edition.
Cr. Svo, 3*. 6d.

Oibblns (H. de B.). Litt.D., M.A. IN.
DUSTRY IN ENGLAND : HISTORI-
CAL OUTLINES. With 5 Maps. />//A
Edition. Demy Zt>o. 10*. fid,

THK INDUSTRIAL HISTORY OF
lONGLAND. With Maps and Plans.
Fifteenth Edition, Revised. Cr. B7/0. 3*.

ENGLISH SOCIAL REFORMERS.
Second Edition. Cr. 8vo. at. 6d.

^ See also Hadfield (R. A.)m And Commer-
ci&l Series

Qibbon (Edward). MEMOIRS OF MY
LIFE AND WRITINGS. Edited by
G- BiRKBECK Hill, LL.D Cr. Zvo. 6s.

*THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE
ROMAN EMPIRE. Edited, with Notes,
Appendices, and Maps, . by J. B. Bury.
M.A., Litt.D^ Regius Professor of Modern
History at Cambridge. Illustrated. In
Seven Volumes, Demy Bvo, Gilt top.
Each JOS. 6d. net,

Qibbs (Philip). THE ROMANCE OF
GEORGE VlLLIERS : FIRST DUKE
OF BUCKINGHAM. AND SOME MEN
AND WOMEN OF THE STUART
COURT. With ao Illustrations. Second
Edition. Demy Bvo. 15J. net,

Oibson (B. C. S.), D.p., Lord Bishop of
Gloucester. See Westminster Commentaries,
Handbooks of Theology, and Oxford Bio-


See Little Books on Art.


gaphies.
ert(A. R.).
Qloas: (M. R.) and Wyatt (Kate M.). A
BOOK OF ENGLISH GARDENS.
With 24 Illustrations in Colour, Demy
Bvo, los. 6d, net* '


Qlover (T. R.), M.A., FeUow and Classical
Lcctnrer of St. John's CoUeae, Cambridge.
THE CONFLICT OF RELIGIONS IN
THE EARLY ROMAN EMPIRE.
Third Edition, Demy Bvo. is,ttd,neU

Qodfrey (BUsabeth). A BOOK OF RE-
MEMBRANCE. Being Lyrical Sdectkms
for every day in the Year. Arranged by.
Second Edition, Fcap, Bvo. at. 6d, net,

ENGLISH CHILDREN IN THE OLDEN
TIME. With 3a Illustrations. Second
Edition, Demy wo, tx. 6d, net.

Qodley (A. D.), M.A., Fellow of Magdalen
College, Oxford. OXFORD IN THE
EIGH'TEENTH CENTURY. With 16
Illustrations. Second Edition. DemyBivo*

js. 6d, net, .,«,..

Also published in a Colonial Edition.

LYRA FRIVOLA. Fourth Edition, Fcm^,
Bvo, 2S. 6d,

VERSES TO ORDER. Second Edition,
Fcap. Bvo, 9s. 6d.

SECOND STRINGS. Fcap. Bvo. os, 6d.

Qoldsmlth (Oliver). See I.P.L. and Stan-
dard Libnuy.

QoU (Ai«ffus4 CRIMINAL TYPES IN
SHAKESPEARE. Authorised Transla-
tion from the Danish by Mn. Chaklbs
Wbbkbs. Cr, Bvo, 5f . net,

Oomme (Q. L.)l See Antiquary's Books.

Qordon (Una Duff) (Mrs. Aubrey Waterfield).
HOME LIFE IN ITALY: Letters
FROM THE Apennines. With 13 Illustra-
tions by Aubrey Waterpiblo and 15 Illus-
trations from Photographs. Second Edi-
tion. Demv Bvo. jos. 6d. net.

Oorst (Rt. Hon., 5ir John). See New
Library of Medicine.

Oostllns (Frances M.). THE BRETONS
AT HOME. With xa Illustrations in
Colour by Gaston Fanty Lbscure, and
32 from Photographs. Demy Bzw, jos, 6d.
net.

Qoudffe (H. L.), M.A,, Principal of Wells
'i'heologtcal College. See Westminster Com-
mentaries.

Qraham (Harry). A GROUP OF SCOT-
TISH WOMEN. With x6 Illustrations.
Second Edition. Demy Bvo. jos.6d.net.

Oraham (P. Anderson). THE RURAL
EXODUS. The Problem of the Village
and the Town. Cr. Bvo. qs. 6d.

Qrahame (Kenneth). THE WIND IN
THE WILLOWS. With a Frontispiece
by Graham Robertson. Fourth Edition.
Cr. Bvo, 6s,

Qranirer (P. S.), M.A., Litt.D. PSYCH-
OLOGY. Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 9t. 6d.

THE SOUL OF A CHRISTIAN^
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

aray(B.M*Queen). GERMAN PASSAGES
FOR UNSEEN TRANSLATION. C^
Bvo, 9S. 6d.

Gray (P. L.), B.Sc. THE PRINCIPLES OF
MAGNETISM AND ELECTRICITY.
With i8i Diagrams. Cr. Bzfo. 3*. 6d.

Oreen (Q. Buckland), M.A., late Fellow
of St. John's College, Oxon. NOTES ON


General Literature


II


GREEK AND LATIN SYNTAX.
Second Ed. revisid. Crown Zvo, 3s. 6d.

Qreen (lAary Anne Bverett). ELIZA-
BETH; ELECTRESS PALATINE AND
QUEEN OF BOHEMIA. Revised by
her Niece S. C. Lomas. With a Prefatory
Note bv A. W. Ward, Litt.D. Deifty izw.
JOS, 6a. net,

Qreenidge (A.H. J.)|M.A., D.Litt. A HIS-
TORY OF ROME : From the Tribunate of
Tiberius Gracchus to the end of the Jt^ur^
thine War, B.C. 133-104. Demy Sva.
xos. 6d. net.

Gregory (Miss B, C). See Library of
Devotion.

QrubbCH. C.)« See Textbooks of Technology.

Owynn (Stephen), M. P. A HOLIDAY IN
CONN EM AR A. With 16 Illustrations.
DemyZvo. 10s. 6d. net.

Hadfleld (R. A.) and Oibbins (H. de B.).
A SHORTER WORKING DAY. Cr.
Zvo, as. 6d,

«HalI (Cyril). THE YOUNG CARPEN-
TER. With Diagrams, and Illustra-
tions. Cr. Zvo. Ks.

Hall (Hammond). THE YOUNG EN-
GINEER: OR Modern Engines and
THEIR Models. With 85 Illustrations.
Second Edition. Cr. Zvo. 5s,

Hall (Mary). A WOMAN'S TREK FROM
THE CAPE TO CAIRO. With 64 Illus-
trations and 2 Maps. Second Edition.
Demy Zvo. xts. net.

Hamel (Frank). FAMOUS FRENCH
SALONS. With 20 Illustrations.
Third Edition. Dettw Zvo. i2J. dd. net.

Hannay (D.). A SHORT HISTORY OF
THE ROYAL NAVY. Vol. I., 1217.X688.
Vol. II., 1689-1815. Demy Zvo, Eackjs.td.
net.

Hannay (James C), M.A. THE SPIRIT
AND ORIGIN OF CHRISTIAN
MONASTICISM. Cr. Zvo. 6s.

THE WISDOM OF THE DESERT. Fcap.
Zvo, 2S. 6d. net.

Hardie (Martin). See Connoisseur's Library.

Hare (A. T.), M.A. THE CONSTRUC-
TION OFLARGEINDUCTION COILS.

With 35 Illustrations. Demy Zvo, 6s,

Harker (Alfred), M. A., F.R.S., Fellow of St.
John's College, and Lecturer in Petrology in
the University of Cambridge. THE
NATURAL HISTORY OF IGNEOUS
ROCKS. With 112 Diagramsand 9 Plates.
Demy Zvo, 12s. 6d. net.

Harper (Charles Q.). THE AUTOCAR
ROAD-BOOK. In three Volumes. Crmtm
Zvo. Each 7s. 6d. net.
Vol. I.— South of the Thames.

Harvey (Alfred), M.6. See Ancient Cities
and Antiquary s Books.

Hawthome(Nathaniel). See Little Library.

*Headley (F. W.). DARWINISM AND
MODERN SOCIALISM.. Cr. 8w.^ 5*.
net.

Heath (Pi*ank R.X See Little Guides.


Heath (Dudley). See Connoisseur's Libraxy.

Henderson (B. W.), Fellov of Exeter
College, Oxford. THE LIFE AND
PRINCIPATE Otr tHE EMPEROR
NERO. Illustrated. iV>w and cheaper
issue. Demy Zvo, ns. 6d. net.

AT INTERVALS, Fcap Zvo, qs. 6d, net.

Henderson (M. Sturspe). GEORGE
MEREDITH: NOVELIST, POET,
REFORMER. With a Portrait fa Photo-
gravure. Second Edition, CrownZvo, 6s,

Henderson (T. P.). See Liule Library and
Oxford Biographies.

Henderson (T. Pw), and Watt (Francis)*

SCOTLAND OF TO-DAY. With 20
Illustrations in colour and 24 other Illus*
trations. Second Edition, Cr. 8vo, 6s,

Henley (W. E.). ENGLISH LYRICS.
CHAUCER TO POE, 1340-1849. Second
Edition. Cr. Zvo, as, 6d. net,

Henley CW.E.)andWhibley(C.) A BOOK
OF ENGLISH PROSE, CHARACTER.
AND INCIDENT, X3a7-x649. Cr. Zvo,
as. 6d. net.

Herbert (Qeorflre)^ See Library of Devotion.

Herbert of Cherbury (Lord)* See Minia-
ture Library.

Hett (Walter S.), B.A. A SHORT HIS-
TORY OF GREECE TGTHE DEATH
OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT. With
3 Maps and 4 PlanSi Cr, Zvo. y. 6d,

Hewins (W. A. 5.), B.A. ENGLISH
TRADE AND FINANCE IN THE
SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. Cr.Zvo.
as. 6d.

Hewitt (Ethel M.) A GOLDEN DIAL.
A Day Book of Prose and Verse. Ecap.
Zvo. as. 6d, net.

Hey (H.), Inspector, Surrey Education Com-
mittee, and Rose (Q. H.), Cityand Guilds
Woodwork Teacher. A WOODWORK
CLASS-BOOK. Pt I. Illustrated. 4/^.
as.


Heywood (W.).
Hill (Clare). Se<


See St. Francis of Assisi.

^ ,. See Textbooks of Technology.

«HiU(OeorffePrancis). ONE HUNDRED

MASTERPIECES OF SCULPTURE.

with loz Illustrations. Demy Zvo. xos, 6d,

net.
Hill (Henry), B.A., Headmaster of the Boy^s

High School, Worcester, Cape Colony, A

SOUTH AFRICAN ARITHMETIC.

Cr, Zvo, 3J. 6d.

Hind(C. Lewis). DAYS IN CORNWALL,
With 16 Illustrations in Colour by William
Pascob, and 20 other Illustrations and a
Map. Second Edition, Cr. Zvo. 6s,

Hirst (P. W.) See Books on Business.

Hobhouse (L. T.), late Fellow of C.C.C.,
Oxford. THE THEORY OF KNOW*
LEDGE. Demy Zvo. jos. 6d, net.

Hobson(J.A.), M.A. INTERNATIONAL
TRADE : A Study at Economic Principles.
Cr. Zvo. as. 6d. net.

PROBLEMS OF POVERTY. An In<jt»iry


13


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Into the Indostrbl Coodition of the Poor.

Sevtntk Edition, Cr. 8itf. 2X. td.
THE PROBLEM OF TH£ UNEM-
PLOYRD. Fourth Rdiiion, Cr.^vo, 9S.6d.
Hodfretts (B. A. Braylev). THK COURT

OF RUSSIA IN TJIK NINETKKNTII

CKNTURY. With ao Illustrations. 'J'wo
I'olumes. Demy Bro. 24J. net.
Hodffkin (T.), i3.C.L. See Leaders of

ReTicion.
HodlTsondVlrs.W.) HOW TO IDENTIFY

OLD CHINESE PORCELAIN. With 40

Illustratiunx. Second Edition, PostZvo, ts.
Hoiden- Stone (Q. deX See Books on

Business. .
Hoidlch (Sir T. H.), K.C.I.E., C.B.. F.S.A.

THE INDIAN liORDERlJVND, 1880-

1900. With 22 lllastrutions and a Map.

Second Edition. Demy Zvo, los. 6d. net.
Hoidsworth (W. S.). D.C.L. A HISTORY

O F EN G LI S H I .AW. In Four Volumes.

Vols. /., //., ///. Demy 8vo, Each

xox. 6d. net.
Holland (Clive). TYROL AND ITS

PEOPLE. With x6 Illustrations in Colour

by Adrian Stokes, and 31 other Illustra-
tions. Demy Szw. zox. 6a. net.
Holland (H. Scott), Canon of St. Paul's.

See Newman (J. H.X
Holllnffs (M. A.), M.A. See Six Ages of

European History.
Hollway-Calthrop (H. C), late of Balliol

Collef^e, Oxford ; Bursar of Eton College.

PETRARCH : HIS LIFE, WORK, AND

TIMES. With 24 Illustrations. Demy

Zvo. J2S. 6d. net.
Holmes (T. Scott). Sec Ancient Cities.
Holyoake(0. J.). THE CO-OPERATIVE

MOVEMENT OF TO-DAY. FonrtA Ed,

Cr, 8vo, 2f. 6d.
Hone (Nathaniel J.). See Antiquary's Books.
Hook (A,)_ HUMANITY AND ITS

PROBLEMS. Cr. 87'^. 5s. net.
Hoppner. See Little (laileries.
Horace. See Classical Translations.
Horsburgrh (E. L. S.). M.A. LORENZO

THE MAGNIFICENT: and Florence

IN HER Golden Age. With 24 Illustrations

and 2 Maps. Second Edition, Demy Zvo,

15s. net.
WATERLOO : With Plans. Second Edition.

Cr. Zvo, 5*.
See also Oxfonl Ciocrraphies.
Horth(A. C). See Textbooks of Technology.
Horton(R. F.), D.D. See Leaders of Religion.
Hosle (Alexander). MANCHURIA. With

^ Illustrations and a Map. Second Edition,

Demy Z7>o. 7*. 6d. net.
How (F. D.). SIX GREAT SCHOOL-
MASTERS. With X3 Illustrations. Second

Edition. Demy Zvo. js. 6d.
Howell (A. O. Ferrers). FRANCISCAN

DAYS. Being Selections for every day in

the year from ancient Franciscan writings.

Cr, Zvo. 3s. (td. net,
Howell (G.). TRADE UNIONISM— New

AND Old. Fourth Edition, Cr, Zvo,

9S. td.


Hanliic (Sir WlUtem), R.CB., O.M.,
lT.C.L.,F.R.S. THE ROYAL SOCIETY;

OR, SCUBNCK IN THE StATB AND IK THB

Schools. With 95 Illustrations. WieU
Royal Zvo, 4J. td. net.

Huffhes (C. e.). THB PRAISE OF
SHAKESPEARE. An English Anthc
logy. With a Preface by Sidnkt Lbb.
Demy Zvo, y. 6d. net.

Hugo (Victor). See Simplified French Texts.

*Hultoii (Samuel P.). THE CLERK OF
OXFORD IN FICTION. With xa
Illustrations. Demy 8vo. xw. n^f,

Hume (Martin), M.A. Sec Romantic His-
tory.

Hutchinson (Horace Q.) THE NEW
FOREST. Illustrated in colour with

go Pictures by Walter Tynjdalb and 4
y Lucy Kemp-Wklcil Third EelitUn.
Cr. Zvo. 6s,

Hutton (A. W.), M.A. See leaders of
Religion and Librarj of Devotion.

Hutton (Edward). THE CITIES OF
UMBRIA. With 30 Illustrations in Colour
b^ A. Pisa, and 12 other Illustrations.' TJkird
Edition, Cr.Svo, 6s,

THE CITIES OF SPAIN. With 34 Illus-
trations in Colour, by A. W. Rimincton,
30 other Illustrations and a Map. Third
Edition. Cr, Zvo, 6s,

FLORENCE AND THE CITIES OF
NORTHERN TUSCANY, WITH
GENOA. With x6 Illustrations in Colour
by WiLLiAac ParkinsoNj and x6. other
Illustrations. Second Edition, Ct. fivo, 6s,

ENGLISH LOVE POEMS. Edited with
an Introduction. Fca^. Zvo, or. 6d. net.

COUNTRY WALKS ABOUT FJLORENCE.
With 32 Drawings by Adblaiok Marchi
and 20 other Illustrations. Fcap, Zvo.
5«. net.

IN UNKNOWN TUSCANY. With an
Appendix by William Hkywood. With 8
Illustrations in Colour^and 20 others. Second
Edition. Demy Zvo. -js, 6d. net.

*ROME. With 16 Illustrations in Colour by
Maxwell Armfield, and Z2 other Illustra-
tions. Cr. Zvo, 6s.

Hutton (R. H.). See Leaders of Religion.

Hutton (W. H.). M.A. THE LIFE OF
SIR THOMAS MORE. With Portraits
after Drawings by Holbein. Second
Edition. Cr. Zvo. 5s.

See also Leaders of Religion.

Hyde (A. O.) GEORGE HERBERT AND
HIS TIMES. With 32 Illustrations.
Demy Zvo. los. 6d. net.

Hyett(F.A.). FLORENCE : Hbr Histoky
AND Art to the Fall of the Rbpublic.
Demy Zvo. ns. 6d. net.

Ibsen (Henrik). BRAND. A Drama.
Translated by William Wilson. Third
Edition. Cr, Zvo. 3*. 6d.

Inge (W. R.), M.A., Fellow and Tutor of
Hertford College, (Oxford. CHRISTIAN
MYSTICISM. (The Bampton Lectures of
1899.) Dem^ Zvo. X2s. 6d. net.
See also Library of Devotion.


General Literature


13


InnesCA. D.), M.A- A HISTORY OF THE

BRITISH IN INDIA. With Maps and

Plans. Cr, Bvo. 6s.
ENGLAND UNDER THE TUDORS.

With Maps. Second Edition. Demy Zvo.

10s. 6d. net,
•Innes (Mary). SCHOOLS OF PAINT-

INC. With 76 Illustrations. Cr. Bvo.

5s. net,
Isaiah. ' See Churchman's Bihle.
Jackson (C. B.), B.A. See Textbooks of

. Science.
Jackson (S.), M.A. See Commercial Series.
Jackson (F. Hamilton). See Little Guides.
Jacob (P.), M.A. See Junior Examination

Series.
Jeans (J. Stephen). TRUSTS, POOLS,

AND CORNERS AS AFFECTING

COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY. Cr,

ZVO. 2S. 6d,

See also Books on Business.

Jebb (Camilla). A STAR OF THE
SALONS: Julie db Lespinassb. With
20 Illustrations. Demy Bvo, 10s, 6d, net,

Jeffery (Reginald W.), M.A. THE
HISTORY OF THE THIRTEEN
COLONIES OF NORTH AMERICA
1497-1763. With 8 Illustrations and a
Map. Demy Bvo, ns, 6d. net.

Jeffreys(D.Owyn). DOLLY'S THEATRI-
CALS. Super Royal x6mo, as, 6d,

Jenks(B.), M.A, B.C.L. AN OUTLINE
OF ENGLISH LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Second Ed. Revised by R. C. K. Ensor,
M.A. Cr. Bvo, 2s. 6d,

Jenner (Mrs. H.)* See Little Books on Art.

Jennings (A. Of M.A. Siee Handbooks of
English Church History.

Jennings (Oscar), M.D. EARLY WOOD-
CUT INITIALS. Defmf ^to, 21*. net,

*Jemlngham (Charles Edward). THE
MAXIMS OF MARMADUKE. Crown
Bvo. ss,

Jessopp (Augustus), D.D. See Leaders of
Religion.

Jevons (F. B.), M.A., Litt.D., Principal of

Hatfield Hall, Durham. RELIGION

IN EVOLUTION. Cr.Bvo. 3s.6d.net.

See also Churchman's Library and Hand*

books of Theology.

Johnson (A. H.), M.A. See Six Ages of
European History.

Johnston (Sir H. H.), K.C.R. BRITISH
CENTRAL AFRICA. With nearly 200
I llustrations and Six Maps. Third Edition,
Cr. ^io, xBs. net,

Jones (H.). See Commercial Series.

Jones (H. P.). See Textbooks of Science.

Jones (L..A. Atherley), K.C., M.P., and
Bellot (Hugh H. L.), M.A., D.C.L.
THE MINER'S GUIDE TO THE COAL
MINES REGULATION ACTS AND
THE LAW OF EMPLOYERS AND
WORKMEN. Cr. Bvo, 2*. 6d. net.

COMMERCE IN WAR. RoyalBvo. axs.net.

Jones (R. Compton). M.A. POEMS OF
THE INNER LIFE. Selected by. TJkir-
Uenth Edition, Fcap.Bvo, 2s,6d, net.


Jonson (Ben). See Standard Library.

Julian (Lady) of Norwich. REVELA.
TIONS OF DIVINE LOVE. Ed.by Grace
Warrack. Third Ed. Cr. Bvo, y, 6d,

Juvenal. See Classical Translations.

'Kappa.' LET YOUTH BUT KNOW:
A Plea for Reason in Education. Cr. Bvo,
y. 6d. net.

Kaufmann (M.), M.A. SOCIALISM AND
MODERN THOUGHT. Second Edition
Revised and Enlarged. Cr. Bvo, as. 6d.
net,

Keats (John). THE POEMS. Edited
with Introduction and Note$ by E. de Si^lin*
COURT, M.A. With a Frontispiece in
Photogravure. Second Edition Revised.
Demy Bvo. js, 6d, net.

REALMS OF GOLD. Selections from the
Works of. Fcap, Bvo. y. 6d, net.

See also Little Library and Standard
Library.

Keble (John). THE CHRISTIAN YEAR.
With an Introduction and Notes by W. Locic,
D.D., Warden of Keble College. Illustrated
by R. Anning Bell, ThirdEdition, Fcap.
Bvo. 2s. 6d. : padded morocco^ ss.
See also Library of Devotion.

Kelvnack (T. N.X M-D., M.R.C.P. See
New Library of Medicine.

Kempls (Thomas ft). THE IMITATION
OF CHRIST. With an Introduction by
Dean Farrar, Illustrated by C M. Gerb.
ThirdEdition, Fcap.Bvo, 3s. 6d.; padded
fnorocco, 5^.

Abo Translated by C. Bigg, D.D. Cr,
Bvo, 3«. 6d.

See also Montmorency (J. E. G;. de).,
Libraryof Devotion, and Standard Library.

Kennedy (James Houghton), D.D., Assist-
ant Lecturer in Divinity in the University of
Dublin. See St. Paul.

Kerr (S. ParneU). GEORGE SELWYN
AND THE WITS. With 16 Illustrations.
Demy Bvo, xas. 6d, net,

Kimmlns (C. W.), M.A. THE CHEMIS-
TRY OF LIFE AND HEALTH. Illus.
trated. Cr, Bvo. as. 6d.

Klnglake (A. W.). See Little Library.

KlpUng (Rudyard). BARRACK-ROOM
BALLADS. 91M Thousand. Twenty-
sixth Edition, Cr. Bvo, 6s. Also Fcap.
Bvo, Leather, ^s.

THE SEVEN SEAS. 79th Thousand,
Fifteenth Edition. Cr, Bvo, 6s. Also
Fcap. BvOj Leather. 5; .

THE FIVE NATIONS. 66/A Thousand.
Fifth Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s, Also
Fcap, BvOf Leather. 5s.

DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES. Seventeenth
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s. Also Fcap. Bvo,
Leather, ks.

Knight (Albert E.). THE COMPLETE
CRICKETER. With 50 Illustrations.
Demy Bvo. 7s. 6d. net.

Knowling (R. J.), M.A., Professor of New
Testament Exegesis^ at King's College,
London. See Westminster Commentaries.


14


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Knox (Winifred p.). THE COURT OF A
SAINT. WUhx6Illuitntioiu. D4my2af0.
loj. 6^ net.

Kropotkln XPrincc). THE TERROR IN
RUSSIA. Stmntk Edition. Cr. 8m.

LabouUsre (Bdouard). See Simplified

French Texts.
LambCCharles and Mary), THE WORKS.

Edited by E. V. Lucas. Illustrated. In

Seven VolutMes, DemyZvo, 7s.6ti.encA.
See also Little Library and I^ucos (E. V.)
Lambert (P. A. H.). See Little Guides.
Lambrof (ProfeMer 5. P.). See Byxantine

Texts.
Lane- Poole (Stanley). A HISTORY OF

EGYPT IN THE MIDDLE AGES. With

loz Illustrations and a Map. Cr. Bzw. 6x.
Langbrldffe(P.),M.A. BALLADSOFTHE

BRAVE: Poems of Chivalnr, Enterprise,

Courace, and Constancy. Third Edition.

Cr, Zvo. 9S. 6d.
Lankester (Sir E. Ray), K.C.B., F.R.S.

SCIENCE FROM AN EASY CHAIR.

With many Illustrations, of which a are in

Colour. Cr. Bruf. 6s.
Law (William).^ See Library of Derotion

and Standard Library.
Leach (Henry). THE SPIRIT OF THE

LINKS. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
See also Braid (James).
Le Braz (Anatole). THE LAND OF

PARDONS. Translated by Frances M.

GosTLiNO. With 13 Illustrations m Colour

by T. C. GoTCH, and 40 other Illustrations.

Third Edition. Crtnvn Bvo, 6s.
Lees (Beatrice)* See Six Ages of European

History.
Lees (Frederick). A SUMMER IN

TOURAINE. With 13 Illustrations in

Colour by Maxwell Akmkiblu, and 87

from Photographs. Also a Map. Second

Edition. Demy Srv. tos. 6d. net.
Lehmann(R. CK M.P. THEC0MPLP:TE

OARSMAN. With 59 Illustrations. Demy

Svo, JOS, 6d. net.
Lewes (V. B.), M. A. AIR AND WATER.

Illustrated. Cr. Zvo, qs. 6d.

Lewis (B. M. Owyn). A CONCISE
HANDBOOK 9F GARDEN SHRUBS.
With 30 Illustrations. Fcap.Zvo. y. 6d.net.

Lindsay (Lady Mabei). ANNI DOMINI :
A (iosi'KL Study. In Two Volumes.
Super Royal B%to, lor. net.

Lindsay (W. M.), Fellow of Jesus College,
Oxford. See Plautus.

Lisle (Fortun^de). See T.ittle Book-son Art.

Littleliales (H.). See Antiquary's Books.

Llewellyn (Owen) and Raven- Hill (L.).

THE SOUTH-BOUND CAR. With 85

Illustrations. Crown Svo. 6s.
Lock (Walter), D.D., Warden of Keble

College. ST. PAUL, THE MASTER-

BUILDER. Second Ed. Cr. Bvo, y. 6d.
THE BIBLE AND CHRISTIAN LIFE.

Cr. Bvo, 6s.

See also Keble (J.) and Leaders of Religion.


Locker (P. ). See Uttle Library.

Lodee (Sir OUver), F.R.S. THE SUB-
S CANCE OF FAITH, ALLIED WITH
SCIENCE: A Catechism for Parents
and Teachers. JfAttk Ed. Cr. Bvo. 9s tui,

MAN AND THE UNIVERSE: A Study

OP THE InPLUBNCK OP TRB ADVANCE IN

SciENTiPic Knowledge upom ouk un-
derstanding or Chkistianitv. Sixth
Edition, Demy Bvo, is. 6d. u€t.
•THE SURVIVAL OF MAN : A Study op
Unbbcognised Human Faculty. Detny
Bvo, js, 6d, net

Lodge (Eleanor C). See Six Ages of

European History.

LofthoaaeCW. P.X M.A. ETHICS AND
ATONEMENT. With a Frontispiece.
Demy 8kv. u. net.

LongfeUow (11. W.). See Little Libiary.

Lorlmer (Oeorge Horace), LETTERS
FROM A SELF-MADE MERCHANT
TO HIS SON. SevenUmthEdiH^H, Cr.
Bvo. ix. 6d.

OLD GCJRGON GRAHAM. Second Ediiim^
Cr, Bvo. 6s.

*Lorinier (Norma). BY THE WATERS
OF EGYPT. With 12 Illustrations in
Colour by Benton Fletcher, and other
Illustrations. Demy Bvo. x&r. «#/.

Lover (Samuel). See I.P.L.

Llicas(B.V.). THE LIFE OF CHARLES
LAMB. With 28 Illustrations. Fourth
and Revised Edition in Ont Volume.
Demy Bvo, js. 6d. net,

A WANDERER IN HOLLAND. With
20 Illtistrations in Colour by Hbrbbkt
Marshall, 34 Illustrations after old Dutch
Masters, and a Map. IfiniA Edition.
Cr. Bvo, 6s.

A WANDERER IN LONDON. With 16
Illustrations in Colour by Nelson Dawson,
36 other Illustrations and a Map. Setfeuth
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 65.

A WANDERER IN PARIS. With 16 Illus-
trations in Colour by Walter Dexter,
and 32 from Photographs after Old Masters.
Second Edition. Cr, Bvo. 6s.

THE OPEN ROAD : a Little Book for Way-
farers. Fifteenth Edition. Fcap, Bvo. 5*. ;
India Paper ^ fs. 6d.

THE FRIENDLY TOWN : a Little Book
for the Urbane. Fourth Edition. Fcap.
Bvo. 5s. ; India Paper ^ js. 6d.

FIRESIDE AND SUNSHINE. Fourth
Edition. Fcap. Brio. 55.

CHARACTER AND COMEDY. Fourth
Edition. Fcap. Bvo, 5*.

THE GENTLEST ART. A Choice of
letters by Entertaining Hands. Fifth
Edition. Fcap. Bvo. jx.

A SWAN AND HER FRIENDS. With 24
Illustrations. Demy B7>o, i2f. 6d. net.

HP:R INFINITE VARIETY : A Feminine
Portrait Gallery. Fourth Edititm.
Fcap. Bvo. 5*.

LISTENER'S LURE : An Oblique Nak-
KATiON. Fifth Edition. Fcap. Bvo. 5*,


General Literature


IS


*GOOD COMPANY: A Rally of Men.

heap. Bz'o. $s.
ONE DAY AND ANOTHER : A Volume

OF Essays. Fcap. Bvo. sr.
OVER BEMERTON'S: An Easy-Going

Chronicle. Sixth Edition, Fcap, Bvo» ss,

net.
See also Lamb (Charles).
Lucian. See Classical Translations.
Lyde (L. W.), JM. A. See Commercial Series.
Lydon (Noel S.). A PRELIMINARY

GEOMETRY. With numerous Diagrams.

Cr, 8vo. IS.
See also Junior School Books.
Lyttelton(Hon.Mr8.A.). WOMEN AND

THEIR WORK. Cr. Zvo. zs. td.
M. (R.). THE THOUGHTS OF LUCIA

HALIDAY. With some of her Letters.

Edited by R. M. Fcap. %vo. as. 6d. net.
Macaulay (Lord). CRITICAL AND HIS-

TORICAL ESSAYS. Edited by F. C. Mon-
tague, M.A. Three Volumes. Cr. %vo. i8f.
M 'Allen (J. B. B.)« M.A. See Commercial

Series.
McCabe (Joseph) (formerly Very Rev. F.

Antony, O.S.F.). THE DECAY OF THE

CHURCH OF ROME. DemyZvo. js.ed.

net.
MacCunn (Florence A.)- MARY

STUART. With 44 Illustrations, in

eluding a Frontispiece in Photogravure.

New and Cheaper Edition, Large Cr, Zvo,

6s.
See also Leaders of Religion.
McDerniott(E. R.). See Books on Business.
McDousrall (William), M.A. (Oxon., M.B.

(Cantab.). AN INTRODUCTION TO

SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY. Cr.Zvo. 5s.net.
M*Dowall(A. S.). See Oxford Biographies.
MacFie (Ronald C), M.A., M.B. See New

Library of Medicine.
Mackay (A. M.)> B.A. See Churchman's

Library.
Mackenzie (W. Leslie), M.A., M.D.,

D.P.H., etc. THE HEALTH OF THE

SCHOOL CHILD. Cr. Zvo. as. 6d.
Macklln (Herbert W.), M.A. See Anti-

quary's Books.
M'Neile (A. H.), B.D. See Westminster

Commentaries.
• Mdlle Mori » (Author of). ST. GATHER-

INE OF SIENA AND HER TIMES.

With 28 Illustrations. Second Edition.

Demy Svo. js. 6d. net.
Maeterlinck (Maurice). THE BLUE

BIRD: A Fairy Play in Five Acts.

Translated by Alexander Teixera de

Mattos. Second Edition. Fcap, Bvo.

Deckle Edges, js. 6d. net.
Magnus (Laurie), M.A. A PRIMER OF

WORDSWORTH. Cr. Bvo. 7S. 6d.
Mahaffy (J. P.), Litt.D. A HISTORY OF

THE EGYPT OF THE PTOLEMIES.

With 79 Illustrations. Cr, Bvo, 6s,
Malthind (F. W.), M.A., LL.D. ROMAN

CANON LAW IN THE CHURCH OF

ENGLAND. RoyalBvo. 7s. 6d.
MaJor(H.), B.A., B.Sc. A HEALTH AND


TEMPERANCE READER. Cr. Bvo,

Maiden (H. E.), M.A. ENGLISH RE-
CORDS. A Companion to the History of
England. Cr. Bvo. 3X. 6d.

THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF A
CITIZEN. Seventh Edition. Cr, Bvo,
IS, 6d,
See also School Histories.

Marchant (E. C), M.A., Fellow of Peter-
house. Cambridge. A GREEK ANTHO-
LOGY Second Edition, Cr,Bvo, 3s. 6d,
See also Cook (A. M.).

Marett(R. R.), M.A., Fellow and Tutor of
Exeter College, Oxford. THE THRES-
HOLD OF RELIGION. Cr, Bvo, 3*. 6d
net.

Marks (Jeannette), M.A. ENGLISH
PASTORAL DRAMA from the Restora-
tion to the date of the publication of the
'Lyrical Ballads' (i66o-x798). Cr. Bvo.
SS. net,

Marr (J. B.), F.R.S., Fellowof St John's Col-
lege, Cambridge. THE SCIENTIFIC
STUDY OF SCENERY. Third Edition.
Revised. Illustrated. Cr. Bvo, 6s,

AGRICULTURAL GEOLOGY. Illustrated.
Cr. 9zf0. 6s.

Marriott (Charles). A SPANISH HOLI-
DAY. With 8 Illustrations by A. M.
Fowerakbr, R.B.A., and aa other Illustra-
tions. Demy Bvo. js. 6d, net.

Marriott (J. A. R.), M.A. THE LIFE
AND TIMES OF LORD FALKLAND.
With 23 Illustrations. Second Edition.
Demy Bvo. js. 6d. net.
See also Six Ages of European History.

Marvell (Andrew). See Little Library.

Masefield (John). SEA LIFE IN NEL-
SON'S TIME. With z6 Illustrations. Cr.
Bvo, 3«. 6d, net,

ON THE SPANISH MAIN: or, Some
English Forays in the Isthmus op
Daribn. With 32 Illustrations and a Map.
Dtmy Bvo, tos, 6d. net.

A SAILOR'S GARLAND. Selected and
Edited by. Second Ed. Cr. Bvo. y. 6d. net.

AN ENGLISH PROSE MISCELLANY.
Selected and Edited by. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Maskell (A.). See Connoisseur's Library.

Mason (A. J.), D.D. See Leaders of Religion.

Masterman (C. F. O.), M.A., M.P.
TENNYSON AS A RELIGIOUS
TEACHER. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE CONDITION OF ENGLAND.
Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Masterman (J. H. B.), M.A. See Six Ages
of European History.

Matheson (E. F.). COUNSELS OF
LIFE. Feap. Bvo. 2s. 6d. net.

Maude (J. H.), . M.A. See Handbooks of
Engli^ Church History.

May (Phil). THE PHIL MAY ALBUM.
Second Edition, ^to. zx. net,

Mayne (Ethel Colbum). ENCHANTERS
(5F men. With 34 Illustrations. Demy
Bvo, 10s. 6d, net.


I6


Messrs. Methuen's Cataxx)gue


Meakia (Annette M. B.)i Fellow of the
Anthropolo;:ical Institute. WOMAN IN
TRANSITION. Cr. 8rv. 6x.

GALICIA: The Switzkkland or Spain.
With 105 Illu»trationt and a Map. Dtmy
8;v. Z2X. td. net.

*MedJey (D. J.), M.A., Professor of History
in the University of Glasgow. ORIGINAL
ILLUSTRATIONSOFENGLISHCON.
STITUTIONAL HISTORY, Comprisxmg
K Sblectko Numbbx or the Chief
Chartbks and Statutes. Cr, 8zw. ^s, 6d.
net.

Mellows (Bmma S.). A SHORT STORY
OF ENliLlSH LITERATURE. Cr,
Zv0, V* 6f/.

M^rln^e (P.). See Simplified French Texts.

Methuen (A. M. S.), M.A. THE
TRAGEDY OF SOUTJl AFRICA.
Cr, %vo. as, net. Also Cr, 8ev. yi. net,

ENGLAND'S RUIN : Discussud in Four-
teen Letters to a Protectionist.
Ninth Edition, Cr. ^vo. ^d, net,

Meynell (Everard). COROT AND HIS
FRIENDS. With 38 Illustrations. Demy
Zvo los, 6d. net.

Miles (Eustace), M.A. LIFE AFTER
LIFE: OR, The Thf.orv op Reincarna-
tion. Cr. Bvo. as. 6d. net,

THE POWER OF CONCENTRATION :
How to Acquire it. Third Edition,
Cr. Zvo, y. 6d, net,

MiUais (J. O.). THE LIFE AND LET-
TERS OF SIR JOHN EVERETT
MILLAIS, Presidentof the Royal Academy.
With many Illustrations, of which a are m
Photogravure. New Edition, Demy Zvo.
js, 6d. net.
See also Little Galleries.

Millin (O. P.X PICTORIAL GARDEN-
ING. With 2z Illustrations. Crown Zvo,
u, 6d, net,

Millls (C. T.), M.I.M.K See Textbooks of
Technology.

Milne (J. O.). M.A. A HISTORY OF
EGYPT UNDER ROMAN RULE.
With 143 Illustrations. Cr, Zvo, 6s,

Milton (John). A DAY BOOK OF MIL-
TON. EditedbyR.F.TowNDROw. /'<?«/.
Zvo, as, 6d, net.
See^ also Little Library and Standard
Library.

Mincliin<H. C.),M.A. See Peel (R).

Mitchell(P. Chalmers), M.A. OUTLINES
OF BIOLOGY. With 74 Illustrations.
Seeond Edition, Cr, Zx^o, 6*.

Mitton (G. E.). JANE AUSTEN AND
HER TIMES. With 21 Illustrations.
Second and Clieaper Edition. I^arge Cr.
Zvo, 6s.

Moffat (Mary M.). QUEEN LOUISA OF
PRUSSIA. With 20 Illustrations. Fourth
Edition, Crojvn Zx'o, 6s,

Moil (A.). See Books on Business.

Moir (D. M.). See Little Library.

Molinos (Dr. Michael de)» See Library of
Devotion.

Money (L. Q. Chiozza), M.P. RICHES


AND POVERTY. EigAiUEdiium Dimj

Zvo, 5«. net. Also Cr, Zvo, ix. net,
Montafn ( Heniy)^ Earl of Manchester. See

Libmry of Devotion.
Moataine. A DAY BOOK OF. Edited

by Cf. Pond. Fcaf, Sew. ax. 6d, net,
Montcpniery(H. B.) THE EMPIRE OF

THE EAST. With a Frontispiece in Colour

and x8 other Illustrations. Second Edition,

Demy 8^. js, 6d. net.
Montmorency (J. B. Q. de)> B.A., LL.B.

THOMAS A KEMPIS. HIS AGE AND

BOOK. With aa lUustrations. Seeond

Edition, Demy Ztto, 7s, 6d, net,
Moore (H. E.). BACK TO THE LAND.

Cr, Zvo. as. 6d,
*Moore (T. Sturge). ART AND LIFF.

Illustrated Cr. Zvo, 5s. net.
Moorhouse (E. Hallam). NELSON'S

LADY HAMILTON. With 51 Portraits.

Second Edition, Demy Bvo. fs. 6d, net.
Moran (Clarence Q.)« See Books on Business.
More (Sir ThomasX See Standard Library.
Morflll (W. R.), Oriel CoUege, Oxford. A

HISTORY OF RUSSIA FROM PETER

THE GREAT TO ALEXANDER II.

With X 3 Maps and Plans. Cr, 8cw. ^. 6d.
Morlch (R. J.). See School Examination

Series.
Morley (Margaret W,\ Founded on. THE

BEE PEOPLE. With 74 Illustrations.

So. Crown Zvo. as. 6d,
LITTLE MITCHELL: Thb Stort of a

Mountain Squirrel told bt Himsklf.

With 26 Illustrations. So. Cr. Zvo, as, 6d.
Morris (J.). THE MAKERS OF JAPAN.

With 24 IlInstratioDs. Dem^ Bvok xas,6d,

net.
Morris (Joseph B.). See Little Guides.
Morton (A. Anderson). See BrodrickfM.).
Moule(H. C. 0.)i D.D., Lord Bishop of Dur-

ham. See Leaders of Rely^on.
Muir (M. M. Pattlson), M.A. THE

CHEMISTRY OF FIRE. lUustrated.

Cr, Zvo, as. 6d,
Mundella (V. A.), M.A. See Dunn (J. T.).
Munro(R.), M.A., LL.D. See Antiquaxy's

Books.
Musset (Alfred de). See Simplified French

Text.
Myers (A. Wallis), THE COMPLETE

LAWN TENNIS PLAYER. With 90

Illustrations. Second Edition, Demy Bvo.

10s. 6d. net.
Naval Officer (A). See I. P. L'.
Newman (Ernest). See New Library of

Music.
Newman (Oeorsre), M.D.,D.P.H.,F.R.S.E.

See New Library of Medicine.
Newman (J. H.) and others. See Library

of Devotion.
Newsholme (Arthur), M.D., F. R.C P. See

New Library of Medicine.
Nichols (Bowyer). See Little Library.
Nicklin (T.). M.A. EXAMINATION

PAPERS IN THUCYDIDES. Cr. 8cw. as,
Nimrod. See I. P. L.
Norffate (O. Le Grys). THE LIFE OF


General Literature


17


SIR WALTER SCOTT. With 53 Illuslra-
tions by JennyWylie. Demy Svo. js.6d. net.

Norway (A. H.). NAPLES. Past and
Present. With 25 Coloured Illustrations
by Maurice Grsiffenhagbn. Third
Edition, Cr. Svo, 6s.

Novalis. THE DISCIPLES AT SATS and
other Fragments. Edited by Miss Una
Birch. Fcap. Svo. 3J. 6d. net.

Officer (An). See I. P. L.

Oldfield (W. J.)f M.A., Prebendary of
Lincoln. A PRIMER OF RELIGION.
Based on the Catechism or thb Cnt/RCH
OF England. Cro7vn Svo. zs. 6d.

Oldhani (P. M.)i B.A. See Textbooks of
Science.

Ollphant (IVIrs. ). See Leaders of Religion.

Oliver^ Thomas, M. D. See New Library of
Medicine.

Oman(C. W.C.). M.A., Fellow of All Souls',
Oxford. A HISTORY OF THE ART
OF WAR IN THE MIDDLE AGES.
Illustrated. Detny Svo, los. 6d. net.

ENGLAND BEFORE TQE CONQUEST.
With Maps. Demy Svo. loj. dd. net,

Opp^ (A. P. )• See Classics of Art.

Ottley (R. L.)t I>>I>« See Handbooks of
Theology and Leaders of Religion.

Overton (J. H.). See Leaders of Religion.

Owen (DouglaB). See Books on Business.

Oxford (M. N.), ofGuy's Hospital. A HAND-
BOOK OF NURSING. Fifth Edition.
Cr. Svo. y. 6d.

Pake* (W. C. C). THE SCIENCE OF
HYGIENE. Illustrated. Demy Svo. xss.

Parker (Eric). THE BOOK OF THE
ZOO; By Day and Night. With 24
Illustrations from Photographs by Henry
Irving. Cr. Svo, 6s,

Parker (Gilbert), M.P. A LOVER'S
DIARY. Fcap.Svo. 5s.

Parkes (A. K.). SMALL LESSONS ON
GREAT TRUTHS. Fcap. Svo. ts. 6d.

Parkinson (Jolin). PARADISI IN SOLE
PARADISUS TERRESTRIS, OR A
GARDEN OF ALL SORTS OF PLEA-
SANT FLOWERS. Fotio. £3, -xs. net.

Parsons (Mrs. C). GARRICK aND HIS
CIRCLE. With 36 Illustrations. Second
Edition. Demy Svo. i2f . 6d. net.

THE INCOMPARABLE SIDDONS. With
2o Illustrations. Detny Svo, x^.6d.nei.

Pascal. See Library of Devotion.

Paston (Qeorsre). SOCIAL CARICA-
TURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH
CENTURY. With 214 Illustrations. Im-
perial Qt*arto, £3. 12S. 6d. net. .

LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGU
AND HER TIMES With 34 Illustra-
tions. Second Edition. Demy 800. 15;. net.
See also Little Books on Art and I.P.L.

Patmore (K. A.). THE COURT OF
LOUIS XIII. With 16 Illustrations. Demy
SviK JOS. 6d. net.

Patterson (A. H.). NOTES OF AN EAST
COAST NATURALIST. Illustrated in
Colour by F. Southgate, R.B. A. Second
Edition, Cr, Svo, 6s,


NATURE IN EASTERN NORFOLK;
With X2 Illustrations in Colour by Frank
Southgate, R. B.A. Second Edition, Cr,
Svo. 6s,

WILD LIFE ON A NORFOLK ESTU-
ARY. With 40 Illustrations by the Author,
and a Prefatory Note by Her Qraoe the
Duchess of Beofori;». D4fny Svo.
lor. 6d. net.

•MAN AND NATURE ON TIDAL
WATERS. With Illustrations by the
Author. Cr. Svo, 6s,

Peacock (Netta). See Little Books on Art.

Peake (C. M. A.), F.R.H.S. A, CON-
CISE HANDBOOK OF GARDEN
ANNUAL AND BIENNIAL PLANTS.
With 94 Illustrations. Fcap. Svo. 2*»6d, net.

Pee! (Robert), and IVUnchln (H. C.\ M. A.
OXFORD. With zoo Illustrations in
Colour. Cr, Bvo. 6s.

Peel (SidneyX late Fellow of Trinity College,
Oxford, and Secretary to the Royal Com-
mission on the Licensing Laws. PRACTI-
CAL LICENSING REFORM. Second
Edition, Cr. Svo, is, 6d,

Pentin (Herbert), M.A. See Library of
Devotion.

Petrie(W.M.FUnders),D.C.L., LL.D.. Pro-
fessor of Egyptology at University College.
A HISTORY OF EGYPT. Fully lUus-
trated. In six volumes, Cr, Svo. ts. each.

YoL. I. From the Earliest Kings to
XVIth Dynasty. Sixth Edition.

Vol. II. The XVIIth and XVIIIth
Dynasties. Fourth Edition,

Voi- III. XIXth to XXXth Dynasties.

Vol. IV. Egyi'T under the Ptolemaic
Dynasty. J. P. Mahaffy, Litt.D.

Vol. v. Egypt under Roman Rule. J. G.
Milne, M.A.

Vol. VI. Egypt in the Middle Ages.
Stanley Lane-Poole, M.A.

RELIGION AND CONSCIENCE IN
ANCIENT EGYPT. Lectures delivered
at University College, London. Illustrated.
Cr. Svo. 2S. 6d,

SYRIA AND EGYPT, FROM THE TELL
ELAMARNA LETTERS. Cn8w. as.6d,

EGYPTIAN TALES. Translated from the
Papyri. First Series, ivth to xiith D3^asty.
Edited by W. M. Flinders Petrie. Illus-
trated by Tristram Ellis. Second Edi-
tion. Cr, Svo. .V* 6d.

EGYPTIAN TALES. , Translated from the
Papyri. Second Series, xviiith to xixth
Dynasty. Illustrated by Tristram Ellis.
Crown Svo, y. 6d,

EGYPTIAN DECORATIVE ART. A
Course of Lectures delivered at the Royal
Institution. Illustrated. Cr, Svo. 3s. 6d,

Phillips (W. A.). See Oxford Biographies.

PhiUpotts (Bden). MY DEVON YEAR.
With 38 Illustrations by J. Ley Petht-
bridge. Second and Cheaper Edition,
Large Cr. Svo. 6s.

UP - ALONG AND DOWN - ALON(i.
Illustrated by Claude Shbppbkson.
Cr. \to, 5f. net, .


A3


I8


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Phythian (J. Ernest). TRKKS IN NA-
TURE, MYTH, AND ART. With 24
Illustrntions. Crt^vn Zth>. 6s.

PUrr (Victor O.). M.A. .See .School His-
tories.

Plato. See Standard Library.

PUutas. THE CAPTIVl. Edited, with
an Introduction, Textual Notes, and a Com-
mentary. by W. M. I.indsay, Fellow of
Jesus Colleee,Ozford. Demv^'Z'O, los.St/.Mrt.

Plowden-Wardlaw (J. t.), K.A. See
School Examination Series.

Podmore (Prank). MODERN SPIRI-
TUALISM. Two Vciuntes. Demy %vo,
3IX. net.

MESMERISM AND CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE : A Short History of Mental
Healing. Demy ^vo. lor. 6r/. net.

Pollard (Alice). See Little Hooks on Art.

Pollard (Alfred W.). THE SHAKE-
SPEARE'S FOLIOS AND QUARTOS.
With numerous Facsimiles. Folio, One
Guinea nrt.

PoIlard(EllzaP.). See Little Ik>olcs on Art.

Pollock (David), M.I.N.A. See hooks on
Business.

Potter (M. 0, M.A., F.L.S. AN
ELEMENTARY TEXT - HOOK OF
AGRICULTURAL BOTANY. Illus-
trated. Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 4s. bit.

Power (J. O'Connor). THE MAKING
OF AN ORATOR. Cr. 8vo. 6s.

Price (Eleanor C). A PRINCESS OF
THE OLD WORLD. With 21 Illus-
trations. Demy Zvo. J7S. 6d. net.

Price (L. L.), M.A., Fellow of Oriel College,
Oxon. A HISTORY OF ENGLISH
POLITICAL ECONOMY FROM ADAM
SMITH TO ARNOLD TOYNBEE.
Fi/th Edition. Cr. Bvo. ax. 6d.

Protlieroe (Bmeat). THE DOMINION
OF MAN. Gbography la its Human
Aspect. With 32 full-page Illustrations.
Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. qs.

P«ellU8. See Byzantine Texts.

PttUen-Burry (B.). IN A GERMAN
COLONY; or, Four Weeks in New
Britain. With 8 Illustrations and 2 Maps.
Cr. Bvo. 5x. net.

Pycraft (W. P.). BIRD LIFE. With 2
Illustrations in Colour by G. E. Lodge,
and others from Drawings and Photographs.
Demy Bxfo. xos. 6d. net.

*Q' (A. T. Quiller Couch). THE
GOLDEN POMP. A Procession of
English Lyrics from Surrey to Shir-
ley. Second and Cheaper Edition. Cr.Bvo.
3X. 6d. net.

a. R. and E. S. MR. WOODHOUSE'S
CORRESPONDENCE. Cr.Bvo. 6s.
Also published in a Colonial Edition.

Rackham (R. B.), M.A. See Westminster
Commentaries.

Rare (Laura M.). THE WOMEN ART-
ISTS OF B()L0GNA. With 20 Illus-
trations. Demy Bvo. 75. 6d. net.

RaSTff (Ijonsdafe). B.D., Oxon. DANTE


AND HIS ITALY. ¥rith 33 Illostn.
tioni. Demy 8ew. iu. &</. neU
Rahti (P. J.X M.A., B.Sc. HIGHER
ENGLISH. Fourth Edition, Cr, Qvo.

JUNIOR ENGLISH. Sseomd £ditzcm. Cr.

8fw. IX. 6d.
Randoi^ (B. W.), D.D. See Library of

Devotion.
Rannle (D. WA M.A. A STUDENT'S

HISTORYOFSCOTLAND. Cr.Btfo.%t.6d.
WORDSWORTH, AND HIS CIRCLE.

With 90 Illustrations. Demy 800. zax. 6d.

net,
Rashdall (HastliiMX M.A., FeUow and

'I'utor of New College, Oxford. DO(^

TRINE AND DEVELOPMENT. Cr.

8«w. €a.
Raven (J. J.), D.D., F.S.A. See Antiquary's

Books.
Raven-Hill (U). See Llewellyn (Owen).
Rawlinsrs (Gertrude BurfordX COINS

AND HOW TO KNOW THEM. With

906 Illustrations. Steond Edition, Cr. Sew.

6s.
Rawstorne (Lawrence, Esq.). See LP. L.
Raymond (Walter). See Sdiool Histories.
Rea (Uiian). THE LIFE AND TIMES

OF MARIE MADELEINE COUNTESS

OF LA FAYETTE. With ao Illnstntioas.

Demy Bvo. xos. 6d. net.

Read(C.Stanford),M.B.(Lond.),M.R.C.S..
L.R.C.P. FADS AND FEEDING. Cr,
Bvo. 2X. 6d.

Real Paddy (A). SeeLP.L.

Reason (W.), M. A. UNIVERSITY AND
SOCIAL SETTLEMENTS. Edited by
Cr. Bvo. at. 6d.

Redpath (H. A.X M.A, D.Litt. See West-
minster Commentaries.

Rees (J. D.), C.I.K, M.P. THE REAL
INDIA Second Edition, Demy^om. xos.
6d. net.

Reich (Bmil), Doctor Juris. WOMAN
THROUGH THE AGES. With 36 lUus-
trations. Two Volumes. DemyZvo, ans, mt.

Reynolds (Sir Joshua). See Little Galleries.

Rhodes (W. E.). See School Histories.

Ricketts (Charles). See Classics of Art.

Richardson (Charles). THE COMPLETE
FOXHUNTER. With 46 Illustrations, of
which 4 are in Colour. Second Mditimu
Demy Bvo. \%s. 6d. net.

Richmond (Wilfrid), Chaplain of Lincoln's
Inn. THE CREED IN THE
EPISTLES. Cr. Bvo. 2s. 6d. nst,

Riehl (W. H.K See Simplified (merman Texts.

Roberts (M. B.). See Channer (C. C).

Rol>ertson IK,), D.D., Lord Bishop of
Exeter. REGNUM DEI. (The Bampton
Lectures of 1901). A New etnd Chees^er
Edition. Demy Bvo. js. 6d, net,

Robertson (C. Grant). M.A, Fellow of
All Souls' College, Oxford. SEUECT
STATUTES, CASES, AND CONSTI-
TUTIONAL DOCUMENTS, x66o-z83a.
Demy Bvo. 10s. 6d, net.


General Literature


19


Robertson (C. Grant) and Bartholomew
(J. G.), F.R.S.E., F.R.G.S. A HIS-
TORICAL AND MODERN ATLAS OF
THE BRITISH EMPIRE. DemyQuarto.
4S, 6d. net.

Robert8on(Sir G. S.), K.C.S.I. CHITRAL:
The Story of a Minor Siege. With 8
Illustrations. Third Edition, Demy Zvo.
JOS, 6d. net,

Robinson (Cecilia). THE MINISTRY
OF DEACONESSES. With an Introduc
tion by the late Archbishop' of Canterbury.
Cr. Svo, qj. 6d, •

Robinson (F. S.). See Connolssetir's Library.

Rochefoucauld (La), See Little Library.

Rodwell (G.), B.A. NEW TESTAMENT
GREEK. A Course for Beginners. With
a Preface by Walter Lock, D.D., Warden
of Keble College. Fcap. 8vo, 3*. 6d.

Roe (Pred). OLD OAK FURNITURE. With
many Illustrations by the Author, including
a frontispiece in colour. Second Edition,
Detny^o, jos,6d,net.

Roeers (A. G. L.)f M.A. See Books on
Business.

Roland. See Simplified French Texts.

Romney (George). See Little Galleries.

Roscoe (K. S.). See Little Guides.

Rose (Edward). • THE ROSE READER.
Illustrated. Cn Svo. 2s. 6d. Also in 4
Parts, Parts I. and II, 6d. each. ; Part
III. Sd. ; Part IV. rod.

Rose(G. H.). See Hey (H.)and Baring-
Gould (S).

Rowntree (Joshua). THE IMPERIAL
DRUG TRADE. A Re-Statement of
THE Opium Question. Third Edition
Revised, Cr, Bvo. 2s. net.

Royde-Smith (N. G.). THE PILLOW
BOOK : A (7ARNER OF Many Moods.
Collected by. Second Edition. Cr, Bvo.
4s. 6d. net.

POETS OF OUR DAY. Selected,
with an Introduction, by. Fcap. Svo. 5s.

Rubie (A. E.), D.D. See Junior School
Books.

Rumbold (The Right Hon.fSir Horace).

Bart., G. C. B., G. C. M. G. THE
AUSTRIAN COURT IN THE NINE-
TEENTH CENTURY. With 16 Illus-
trations. 2?emy Bvo, iBs. net.

Russell (Archibald G. B.). See Blake
(William.)

Russell (W. Clark). THE LIFE OF
ADMIRAL LORD COLLINGWOOD.
With X2 Illustrations by F, Brangwyn.
Fourth Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Ryley (M. Beresford). QUEENS OF
THE RENAISSANCE. With 24 Illus-
trations. Demy Bvo, Jos, 6d. net.

Sainsbury (Harrington), M.D., F.R.C.P.

PRINCIPIA THERAPEUTICA.

Demy Bvo. js, 6d. net.
See also New Library of Medicine.
St. Anselm. See Library of Devotion.
St. Augustine. See Library of Devotion.
St. Bernard. See Library of Devotion.


St. Cyres (Viacount) See Oxford Bio-
graphies.

St. Francis ol Asalsl. THE LITTLE
FLOWERS • OF THE GLORIOUS
MESSER, AND OF HIS FRIARS.
Done into English, with Notes by Wiluam
Hbywood. With 40 Illustrations ^from
Italian Painters. Demy^xio, ss, net,- . .
See also Library of Devotion and
Standard Library.

St. Prlmcis de Sales. See Library of
Devotion.

St* James*. See Churchman's Bible and
Westminster Commentaries.

St. Luke. See Junior School Books.

St, Mark. See Junior School BoOk^ and
Churchman's Bible.

St. Matthew. See Junior School Books.

St. Paul. SECOND AND THIRD
EPISTLES OF PAUL THE APOSTLE
TO THE CORINTHIANS. Edited by
James Houghton Kennedy. D.D.^ Assis-
tant Lecturer in Divinity in the University
of Dublin. With Introduction, Dissertations,
and Notes by J. Schmitt. Cr, Bvo. 6s, See
also . Churchman'sj Bible and Westminster
Commentaries.

■Saki' (H«Munro). REGINALn. Second
Edition. Fcap. Bvo, as. 6d. net.

Salmon (A. L.). See Little Guides.

Sanders (Lloyd). THE HOLLAND
HOUSE CIRCLE. With 24 illustrations.
Second Edition. Depty^ Bvo, . xzs, 6d. net.

Sathas (C). See Byzantine Texts.

Schmitt (John). See Byzantine Texts.

Schofield (A. T.), M.D., Hon. Phys. Freiden-
ham ^ Hospital. See New Library of
Medicine.

Scudamore (Cyril). See Little Guides.

Scupoli (Dom. L.). See Library of De-
votion.

S^gur (Madame de). See Simplified French
Texts.

S61incourt (B. de. ) See Keats (John).

S^iincourt(Hughde). GREAT RALEGH.
With 16 Illustrations. Demy Bvo. 10s. 6d,
net.

Sells (V. P.), M.A. THE MECHANICS
OF DAILY LIFE. Illustrated. Cr. Bvo.

2S. 6d,

Selous (Edmund). TOMMY SMITH'S
ANIMALS. Illustrated by G. W. Ord.
Eleventh Edition, Fcap. Bvo, 2s, 6d.
School Edition^ is, 6d.

TOMMY SMITH'S OTHER ANIMALS.
Illustrated by Augusta Guest. ,^ J^jTth
Edition, Fcap. Bvo, 2s 6d.
School Edition, is. 6d.

Senter (George), B.Sc. (Lond.), Ph-D."
See Textbooks of Science.

Shakespeare (William).

THE FOUR FOLIOS, 1623; 1632^x664;
1685. Each £4, 4s. nefy or a complete aet,
£i2f Z2S. net.
Folios a, 3 and 4 are ready.

J'HE POE^IS OF WILLIAM SHAKE-
SPEARE. With an Introduction and Notes


20


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Ky Gborgh Wtndham. DemjfSvc. Buck-
ram, gilt top. xos. 6ii,
See also Afden Shakespeare, Standard

Library And Little Quarto Shake^)eare.
Sharp (A.). VICTORIAN POETS. Cr.

9v&, as. 6d.
Sharp (Cedl). See Bating-Gould (S.).
Sharp (BlizabetA). See Little Books on Art.
Sbedlock (J. S.) THE PIANOFORTE

SONATA. Cr. Zvo. 5*.
Shelley (Peror B.)« See Standard Library.
Sheppard (n. P.)f M.A. See Baring*

Gould (S.).
Sherwell (Arthur), M.A. LIFE IN WEST

LONDON. Third Edition. Cr, Zvo.

9S. 6d»

Shipley (Manr B.). AN ENGLISH

CHURCH HISTORY FOR CHILD-
REN. With a Preface by the Bishop of

Gibraltar. With Maps and Illustrations.

Cr, Zvo, Each part as. 6d. net.

Part I. — To the Norman Conquest.
Part II. — To the Reformation.
Sichel (Walter). See Oxford Biographies.
Sidffwick (Mrs. Alfred). HOME LIFE

IN GERMANY. With 16 Illustrations.

Second Edition. Demy Zvo. xos. 6d. net.
Sime (John). See lattle Books on Art.
Simonson (Q. A.). FRANCESCO

GUARDL With 41 Plates. Imperial

^to, £2, as. net,
Sketchley (R. B. D.). See Little Books on

Art.
SIdpton (H. P. K.). See Little Books on

Art.
Sladen (Douglas)., SICILY: The New

Winter Resort. With over aoo Illustrations.

Second Edition, Cr, Zvo, ss, net.
Smallwood (M. Q.). See Little Books on

Art.
Smedley (P. B. ). See I. P. L.
Smith (Adam). THE WEALTH OF

NATIONS. Edited tvith an Introduction

and numerous Notes by Edwin Cannan,

M.A. Two volumes. Demy Zvo, ais.net.
Smith (H. Bompas), M.A. A NEW

JUNIOR ARITHMETIC. Crown Zvo.

Without Answers, 2s. With Answers, a*. 6d.
Smith (H. Clifford). See Connoisseur's

Library.
Smith (Horace and James). See Little

Library.
Smith (R. Mudie). THOUGHTS FOR

THE DAY. Edited by. Fcap. Zvo.

3X. 6d. net.
Smith (Nowell C). See Wordsworth (W).
Smith (John Thomas). A BOOK FOR

A RAINY DAY: Or, Recollections of the

Events of the Years z766-i833. Edited by

Wilfred Whitten. Illustrated. IViae

Demy Zvo. 12s. 6d, net.
Snell (P. J.). A BOOK OF EXMOOR.

Illustrated. Cr. Zvo. 6s.
Snowden(C. B.). A HANDY DIGEST OF

BRITISH HISTORY. Demy Zvo, 4s, 6d,
Sophocles. See Classical Translations.
Sornet (L. A.X and Acatos (M. J.) See

Junior School Books.


Southey (R.). ENGLISH SEAMEN

Edited by David Hannay.
Vol. I. (Howard, Clifford, Hawkins,

Drake, Cavendish). Second EditioM. Cr,

Zvo, 6s,
Vol. n. (Richard Hawkins, (kaavUle,

Essex, and Raleigh). Cr. Zvo, 6t,.
See also Standard Library.
Soavestre (B.). See Simplified French Texts.
Spence (C. t\,% M.A. See School Examina-
tion Series.
Spicer (A, Dykes), M.A. THE PAPER

TRADE. A Descriptive and Historical

Survey. With Diagrams and Plans. Demy

Zvo, J2s. 6d, net.
Spooner (W. A.)* M.A. See Leaders of

Religion.
Spragr^e (W. HortonX MA. See Junior

School Books.
Staley (Bdrcumbe). THE GUILDS OF

FLORENCE. Illustrated. Second Edition.

RoyalZvo. 16s. net.

Stanbrld^e (J. W.), B.D. See Library of
Devotion.

• Stanclif f e.* GOLF DO'S AN D DONT'S.
Second Edition. Fcap. Zvo. is.

Stead (D.W.). See Gallaher (D.).

Stedman (A. M. M.), M.A.

INITIA LATINA : Easy Lessons on Elemen-

tary Accidence. Eleventh Edition, Fcap,

Zvo, XX.

FIRST LATIN LESSONS. Eleventh Edi-
tion, Cr. Zvo. 2S.

FIRST LATIN READER. With Notes
adapted to the Shorter Latin Primer and
Vocabulary. Seventh Edition, xZmo.
xs, 6d,

EASY SELECTIONS FROM CiESAR.
The Helvetian War. Fourth Edition,
xZmo, xs.

EASY SELECTIONS FROM LIVY. The
Kings of Rome. Second Edition, iZtno,
xs. 6d.

EASY LATIN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN
TRANSLATION. Twel/th Ed. Fcap.
Zvo, xs, 6d,

EXEMPLA LATINA. First Exercises
in Latin Accidence. With Vocabulary.
Fourih Edition. Cr. Zvo, xs,

EASY LATIN EXERCISES ON THE
SYNTAX OF THE SHORTER AND
REVISED LATIN PRIMER. With
Vocabulary. Twe^th Edition, Cr, Zvo.
xs. 6d, Kbv, 3X. net.

THE LATIN COMPOUND SENTENCE:
Rules and Exercises. Second Edition,
Cr. Zvo. IS, 6d, With Vocabulary, as,

NOTANDA 9UAEDAM: Miscellaneous
Latin Exercises on Common Rules and
Idioms. Ft^h Edition, Fcap, Zvo, xs, 6d,
With Vocabulary, as, ■ Key, asi ngt.

LATIN VOCABULARIES FOR REPE-
TITION: Arranged accordinit to Sub*
jects. Sixteenth Edition,' Fcap, Zvo,
xs. 6d,

A VOCABULARY OF LATIN IDIOMS.
iZmo, Fourth Edition, is. \


General Literature


STEPS TO GREEK. ^wM £«««.


C PRIMER. Third


A SHORTER (

EJiliim. Cr.emi. if. 0&

BASVGREEK PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN
TRANSLATION. Fsurlk S4itJtn, n-
Bbtd. Flat. ivt. II. 6d.

GREEK VOCABULARIES FOR RE-
PETITION. Amuifcd uxordini ta Kuh-

GB£BK

For th« oat ot ixaoaxi. wiiii idetociuc-
ikm. NotcE, Hid Voculnlaiy. Fnrtk
BdHim. Fcap.%r«. -u.id.
STEPS TO FRENCH. Ninth Edition.

lEdi-


r FRENCH LESSONS, ifini


EASY FRENCH PASSAGES FOR UN-
SEEN TRANSLATION- SiilA Edi-
tint, Fca*. Btu. u. M

EASY FRENCH EXERCISES ON ELE.
MENTARV SYNTAX. With Vocabu-
Ian. Fatirlh Editim. Cr. aeo, ai. 6J.
Knr. v.<ul.

FRENCH VOCABULARIES FOR RE-
PETITION ; AiranEed Bemrding la Sub-
jKts. FimrlaHlhEiiHtM. Fc^.Sm. ii.

Steel (R. EUlott), MA., F.CS. THE
WORLD OF SCIENCE, WLth 1,7
lUusuuiDQi. Seeand Edition. Cr. ion. at. 6d.
S« ilBO Scbod Euminuion Scries.

"■ - Ki

„-, ^OOK

DEALING WITH ORNAMENTAL
DESIGNFORWOVENFABRICS. Wilh
66 foU-uc* Plaletaiut DUiniTinu Diigrami
inrtieTMt, Third Editioii. Dimy ii«>.


StmfaeOMni (C), of the T<

EMdToia, and Suddardt (P.) _. ._.

Yoikilun College, Leeds. ATEXTBOOK


FRIENDS.


WXer.


Dimyl


•By Allan


ii(R.LO THE LETTERS OF

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON TO
HIS FAMILY AND FRIENDS. |
Sflecied and EdiMd .by Sidney Cdlvin. i
Eighth Editim. j v</U. Cr. ana. lai.

VAILIMA LETTERS. Willi lo Elched
Foiuii . by W1U.UH Stkanc. ^atnth |


ttoke* (R a.\ B.A. HOURS WITH
RABELAIS. From the DuBlUiDlii/SlI
T. UiguKAST and P. A. Motteuk. With
a Pormit in PlwiogrsTutt. Cr. tw. ja id.


le (5. 3.\
hh ■ Menu


Storr (Vernon F.J, M.A., Cukb. of WiB-

cheslei. DEVELOPMENT AND
DIVINE PURPOSE Cr. S». 5.. mt.
Story (Allreil T.X AMERICAN
SHRINES IN ENGLAND. With 4 II-
luilTaliont in Colour, and 19 other lllnsln-


A.), MODERN MUSIC


4 (Henry), D.Sc', M.A. ELEMEN-
TARY PRACTICAL PHYSICS. Wilh
iiiDiajErajiis. Stcond Edii.,rt^iMtd. Cr.
trt. is.f-d. .
.Sturcb (F.), Staff loanictor to tba Sumy
Couniv Council. MANUAL TRAINING
DRAWING {WOO_DWOB,K). Widi


Surtws(II
SutbeHaiu .

SIGNS INT

WITH EOKE FOIEIEH tLIAHrLES. Cr, Ollt,

'Swaat^iR. W.), MembBot tha Briii^
Mycological Society. FUNGI AND HOW
TO KNOW THEM. With 16 Cdeured
Plate. 1^ M. K. Sm ' - •


id While Plates. Cr. gi


iltf^FRENCH


Balfour (G.).


REVOLUTION. SaindEditHm. Cr. 1


ART. WTih ao lllnfflml
u. 6^ net.
Todtui. AGRICOLA Edited by R. F.

GERH^IA. By' Ihe'sami Editor. Cr.


FROM SARANAC


LETTERS FROM SAMOA 1891-95. Edited


Tethan (PrederlckX See Blake {William).
T*aler(J.). See Library of Devoiion.
Taylor (A. E.). THE ELEMENTS OF
METAPHYSICS. Sic«ul Sdiliini. Dmiy


22


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Taylor (John W.). THE^ COMING' OF

ItHE saints. With a6 Illustrmtions.
Deti^ 8cv. jt» 6tL net,

Taylor (!*• M.X M.A., F«Uow of Gonville
and Cuus College, Cambridge. A CON-
STITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL
HISTORY OF ROME. To the Reign of
Domitian. Cr, Zvo. js. 6dm

Teasdale-BnckeU (0. T.). THE COM-
PLETE SHOT. With 53 Illustrations.
Third Editi(m» Detny %vo. i9s. 6d. net.

Tonnyjion (Alfred, Lord). EARLY
POEMS. Edited, with Notes and an
Introduction, by J. Churtom Collins,
M.A. Cr. Zvo. 6f.

IN MEMORIAM, MAUD, AND THE
PRINCESS. Edited by J. Churton
Collins, M.A. Cr, Zvo. 6s.
See also Little Library.

Terry (C S.>. See Oxford Bionwphies.

Teny (P. J.), B.A. ELEMENTARY
LATIN. Cr. %vo. a*.

TEACHER'S HANDBOOK TO ELEMEN-
TARY LATIN. Containing the necessary
supplementary matter to Pupil's edition.
Cr, Zvo. 3f . 6d. net,

ThackerayJW. M.). See Little Library.

Theobald (P. v.), M.A. INSECT LIFE.
Illustrated. Second Edition Rooised. Cr,

%V0, 2S. 6d.

Thlbaudeau(A. C). BONAPARTE AND
THE CONSULATE. Transhited and
Edited by G. K. Fortbsque, LL.D. With
19 Illustrations. Demy Svo. los, 6di net.

Thompson (A. H.). See Little Guides.

Thompson (Prands). SELECTED
POEMS OF FRANCIS THOMPSON.
With a Biographical Note by WiLPRib
Meynell. With a Portrait in Photo-
gravure. Second Edition, ■ Fcap. 8vo.
Ss. net,

Thompson (A. P.). See Textbooks of
Technology;

*Thomson (J. M.), Feuovr and Dean of
Divinity of Magdalen College, Oxford.
JESUS ACCORDING TO ST. MARK.
Cr. 8vo. Ks.'

TUeston (Mary W.). DAILY STRENGTH
FOR DAILY NEEDS. Sixteenth Edi-
tion. Medium i6mo. 9S, 6d. net. Also ah
edition in superior binding, 6s.

Tompkins (H. W.), F.K.H.S. See Little
Books on Art and Little Guides.

Toynbee (Paget), M.A., D.Litt. IN THE
FOOTPRINTS OF DANTE. A Trea-
sury of Verse and Prose from the works of
Dante. Small Cr. Zvo. \s. 6d. net.

DANTE IN ENGLISH LITERATURE:
FROM CHAUCER TO CARY, Two
vols. Demy Bvo. 21*. «r/.
See also Oxford Biographies and Dante.

Tozer (Basil). THE HORSE IN HIS-
TORY. With 25 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo. 6s.

Tremayne (Eleanor B.). See Romantic
History.

Trench (Herbert). DEIRDRE WEDDED,
AND OTHER PoEMs. Second and Keznsetl
Edition, Large Post Svo. 6s.


NEW POEMS. Second Edition, Leirgt
Post Zvo. 6s.

APOLLO AND THE SEAMAN. Large
Post Zvo. Paper ^ ix. 6d, net; cloth, as 6d.
net.

Treyelyan(0. M.), Fellow of Trmity College,
Cambridge. ENGLAND UNDER THE
STUARTS. With Maps and Plans. Third
Edition, Demy Zvo, xos. 6d. net.

ENGLISH LIFE THREE HUNDRED
YEARS AGO : Being the first two chapters
of England under the Stuarts. Edited by
J. TuRRAL, B.A. Cr, Zvo. ix.

TriMS (Inlaro H.), A.R.LB.A. TOWN
PLANNING: Past, Presemt, and
Possible. With 173 Illustrations. JVide
Royal Zvo. \ss. net.

Trontbeck (O. E.). See Little Guides.

Tyler (B. A.), B.A., F.C.S. See Junior
School Books.

Tyrrell-Oill (Prances). See Little Books
on Art.

Unwin (Qeor^e). See Antiquary's Books.

Vardon (Harry). THE COMPLETE
GOLFER. With 63 Illustrations. Tenth
Edition, Demy Zvo. 10s. 6d. net.

Vauffhaa (Henry). See Little Library.

Vauffhan (Herbert M.),B. A. (Oxon.). THE
LAST OF THE ROYAL STUARTS,
HENRY STUART, CARDINAL,
DUKE OF YORK. With 20 Illustrations.
Second Edition, Demy Zvo, 10s, 6d, net.

THE MEDICI POPES (LEO X. and
CLEMENT VII. With ao Illustrations.
Demy Zvo. xss. net.

THE NAPLES RIVIERA. With 25 lUus-
trations in Colour by Maurice Greiffen-
HAGEN. Second Edition,- Cr, Zvo. 6s.

Vernon (Hon. W. Warren), M.A. READ-
INGS ON THE INFERNO OF DANTE.
With an Introduction by the Rev. Dr.
Moore. In Two Volumes* Second Edition.
Cr. Zvo. zss.net,

READINGS ON THE PURGATORIO
OF DANTE. With an Introduction by
the late Dean Church. In Two Volumes.
Third Edition. Cr. Zvo. xss. net.

READINGS ON THE PARADISO OF
DANTE. With an Introduction by the
Bishop op Ripon. In Two Volumes.
Second Edition. Cr.Zvo. x5s.net.

Vincent (J. B.). THROUGH EAST
ANGLIA IN A MOTOR CAR. With
x6 Illustrations in Colour by Frank South-
gate, R.B. A., and a Map. Cr.Zvo, 6s.

Voegelin (A.), M.A. See Junior Examina-
tion Series.

Waddell(CoL L. A.), LL.D., C.B. LHASA
AND ITS MYSTERIES. With a Record
of the Expedition of 1903-1904. With 155
Illustrations and Maps. Third and
Cheaper Edition. Medium Zvo. ys. 6d. net.

Wade (Q. W.), D.D. OLD TESTAMENT
HISTORY. With Maps. Sixth Edition.
Cr. Zvo, 6s.

Wade (G. W.), D.D., and Wade (J. H.),
M.A. See Little Guides.

Wagner (Richard). RICHARD WAG-


General Literature


23


NER'S MUSIC DRAMAS: Interpreta.
tions, embodying Wagner's own explana-
tions. By Alice Leighton Cleathbr
and Basil Crump. In Thru Volumes,
Fcap %vo. sx. td. each.
Vol. I.— The Ring of the Nibelung.

Third Edition.
Vol. il — Parsifal, Lohengrin, and

The Holy Grail.
Vol. III.— Tristan and Isolde.

Walneman (Paul). A SUMMER TOUR
IN FINLAND. With x6 Illustrations in
Colour by Alexander Federley, z6 other
Illustrations and a Map. Demy Bva,
xof. 6dt net*

Walkley (A. B.). DRAMA AND LIFE.
Cr. Bv0, 6s,

Wall (J. C). See Antiquary's Books.

Wallace-Hadrlll (P.), Second Master at
Herne Bay College. REVISION NOTES
ON ENGLISH HISTORY. Cr. 8w. is,

Walters (H. B.). See Little Books on Art
and Classics of Art.

Walton (P. W.). M. A. See School Histories.

Walton (iMaiO s^nd Cotton (Charles).
See I.P.L. and Little Lilnary.

Waterhottse (Elizabeth). %ITH THE
SIMPLE-HEARTED : Little HomiUes to
Women in Country Places. Seecnd Ediiion,
Small Pott Ztfo, sf. net,

COMPANIONS OF, THE WAY. Being
Selections for Morning and Evening Read-
ing. Chosen and arranged by ElizabetIi
Watbrhousb. Larre Cr. 8vo, v, net.

THOUGHTS OF A TERTIARY. Small
Pott ivo, IS. net.
See also Little Library.

Watt (Prancis). See Henderson (T. F.).

Weatherhead (T. C), M.A. EXAMINA-
TION PAPERS IN HORACE. Cr, Bvo, 2s.
See also Junior Examination Series.

*Webb (Oeoree W.), B.A. A SYSTEM-
ATIC GEOGRAPHY OFTHE BRITISH
ISLES. With Maps and Diagrams. Cr,
8vo, IS,

Webber (P. C). See Textbooks of Techno-

*W°^all (Arthur E. P.). A GUIDE TO
THE ANTIQUITIES OF UPPER
EGYPT : From Afaydos to the Sudan
Frontier. With 67 Maps, and Plans.
Cr, Bvo, 7S. 6d. net.

Weir (Archibald), M.A. AN INTRO-
DU(mON TO THE HISTORY OF
MODERN EUROPE. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Welch (Catharine). THE LITTLE'
DAUPHIN. With 26 Illustrations. Cr.
Bvo, 6s,

Wells (Sidney H.) See Textbooks of Science.

Wells(J.),M. A., Fellow and Tutor ofWadham
College. OXFORD AND OXFORD
LIFE. Third Edition, Cr. Bvo, 3*. 6d.

A SHORT HISTORY OF ROME. Ninth
Edition, With 3 Maps. Cr, Bvo, 3*. 6d.
See also Little Guides.

Wesl^ (John). See Library of Devotion.

WesteU (W. Percival). THE YOUNG
NATURALIST. With 8 Coloured Plates


by C. F. Newall, and many other lUusr
trations. Cr. Bvo, 6s,

Westell (W. Perdval), F.L.S., M.B.O.Uy
and Cooper (C. S.), F.R.H.S. THE
YOUNG BOTANIST. With .8 Coloured
and 63 Black and White Plates drawn from
Nature, by C. F. Newall. Cr, Bv^. 3*. 6eL
net,

Whibley (C). See Henley (W. E.).

Whibley (L.), M.A., Fellpw of Pembroke
College, Cambridge. GREEK OLIG^R-
CHIES : THEIR ORGANISATION
AND CHARACTER. Cr, Bvo. 6s.

Wlilte (Eustace B.). THE COMPLETE
HOCKEY PLAYER. With 3? Illustra-
tions. Second Edition, Demy wo. st,net,

WlUte (Qeorffe P.), Lieut..Col. A CEN-
TURY OF SPAIN AND PORTUGAL.
Demy Bvo, z2x. 6d. net

White (Gilbert). See Standard Library.

Whitfield (B. B.), M.A. See Commercial
Series.

Whitehead (A. W.). GASPARDDE
COLIGNY, Admiral or Francs.
With 36 , Illustrations and zo Maps and
Plans. Demy Bvo, las, 6d,nef,

Whiteley (R. Uoyd), F.I.C, Principal of
the Municipal Science School, West firom-
wich. AN ELEMENTARY TEXT-
BOOK OF INORGANIC CHEMISTRY.
Cr. Bvo, 2S. 6d. • '

Whitley (Miss). See Dilke (Lady).

Whitlingr (Miss L.), late Suff Teacher of
the National Training School of Cookery.
THE COMPLETE COOK. With 4a
Illustrations. Demy Bvo. ft. 6d. net,

Whitten (W.). See Smith (John Thomas).

Whyte(A. Q.), B.Sc. See Books on Business.

Wllberforce (WUfrid). See Uttle Books
on Art. I

Wilde (Oscar). DE PROFUNDIS.
Twelfth Edition, Cr, Bvo. $s, net, .

THE WORKS OF OSCAR WILDE. In
12 Votumes, Fcetp, Bvo, ss, net each
volume,

I, The Duchess of Padua. ii. Lady
Windermere's Fan. iiii. A Woman op
No Importance., iv. The Importance
OF being Earnest, v. An Ideal Hus-
band. VI. Db ■ Profundis and Prison
Letters, vil Int^ntio^s. viii. Essats.
IX. A House of Pomegranates, x. .
Lord Arthur Savile's Crimb and the
Portrait of Mr. W. H. xi. Poems.
XII. Salom6, a Florentine Tragedy,
and La Sainte Courtisanb

Wilklns (W. H.), B.A. THE ALIEN
INVASION. Cr. Bvo. qs. 6d.

Williams (H. Noel). THE WOMEN
BONAPARTES. The^Iother and three
Sisters of Napoleon. With 36 Illustrations.
In Two Volumes Demy Bvo, 24J net,

A ROSE OF SAVOY : Marie Adelaide op
Savoy, DuchessedeBourgogne, Mothfj(
of Louis xv. With a Frontispiece in
Photogtavnre and x6 other Illustrations.
Demy Bvo. 15s.net,


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


trananu (A.). PETSOL FETES: «
PceHf Storici uid FuBoy Picturo. lUui.
tnt«d ia Colour bf A. w. Mills. Dnn^

wtuiafUMi (M.' a.)., M.A. S« Ancient

Wllituina (W,), B.A. S« Junioi Ei-
amlDUian Seriu, Iiuiiiu School Boolu, ud
Begiiuier'i Boolu.

WUBwt-Baxtoa iS. M.l F. R. HJit. 9.
MAKERS OF EUROPE. OutJinu of
Eurapeu Hiiioiy for Ihc Middle Focms of
School!. Wilh II MiQi. Ttntk Bditim.
Ct. Bw. «. W.

THE ANCIENT WORLD. With Mapj »nd
Hiiutritioni. Cr.l™. 3£l«^

A BOOK OF NOBLE ^OHEN. With
iS IlluHnwioM. Cr. Spd. y.fid.

A HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN:

THK Vkak iBlo, With ao Map.. Cr. »™.

S,6^. SnulnBeginaer'illaaluicdNew
iULlricml Series.
WII«iB(Btihap.}. SnLibruvorDiYoliea.
WllMO(A.J.). See Book! on Businea.
WllwniJH. A.). Su Books on BuuEos.
WUtOQ (RUbam), M.A. LYRA PAS-
■™'° " 'S : Soogi of N«un, Church, and


Wli>bolt(5. B.). M.A. EXERCISES IN
LATIN ACCIDENCE. Cr. Bni. u.fi<'.

LATIN HEXAMETER VERSE: Ael Aid
to Coopotition. Cr, ivt. %i. 6d, Ksv,

n^ii«ia'CB.C. A.),D.Sc,F.R.S.,F.SA. See

AHiquur'i Boolu, Little Guides, Audeni

Gliei, and School Hiitofia.
Wood (Sir Bvelyo), r. M., V.C, o.CB.,

G.C.M.G. FROM MIDSHIPMAN TO

FIELD-MARSHAL. Whh Ilhucnlioaa,

andigMipi. F^aildCkti^trEilitiiHi.

Dtnty iva- J*. &• ntt-
THE REVOLT IN HINDXISTAN. 1B57.

;□. Wilh a Illuitrationt and s Maps.

Stiimd Editlim. Cr, Sew. 61.
Wood (J. A. e.>. See Tcnhwlu of

DAN LEND.


UckoijX


THE


STATES. W

Inttoductiiin by H- Spkmsbk Wili
With M Mapi and Plaui. SicmvH

WDi^aworth '(CbrUtopber), U.A

Wordiwonh {W.)l THE POEM
With BD Inltoduciion and Nc


s by


- College, OKford. /<• Tlira Valumil.

POEMS Bv'w'lLLIAM WORDSWORTH.

a! Bsoars. Wilh 40 Illustiuions by E.
H. Nkw, including B Fronlispiec in
Phoiogravott C^-liw. ji.6J.ntl.


VrlRht (C. Oordon). Set Dante.
Vrlrht (J. C). TCDAV. Thoughu
Life for eirery day. DaBrv^HW- is.6J.*
Vrighl (SophleV ^GERMAN


RIES FOR REPETITION, fca,

II. &L

'yatt (Kate M.). S» GIouc (M. K.l.
'yId>(A. B.). MODERN ABYSSINIA.

With s Map aad a Poncnit. £>tmy Sni.

NORWAY AND ITS
tiau, in Colo HI
and 17 other


Wvllia (M. A.). NOR\^

FJORDS. WithiGlUui

by W. L. WvLi-iB, R.

llimUalioDS. Cr/mmSv.. —
Wvudham caaoricB). 5« Sbsluspeara
(William).


VauofiPUtaa). THE COMPLETE
MOTORIST. With 13B llluitralions.
jVc» Edi/im iSnvn/A), allk nmny addi-
li<mj. Di«tj,. Sm. hi, 6rf. ■((.

THE JOY OF THE ROAD : An Appreria-


SBi


Zaclurlah of MItylcne
Tuti.
I ZImmern (Antonlal


:ORY OF THE CIVIL WAR IN I

Ancdent Oities

General Editor, B. C. A. WINDLE, D.Sc, F.R.S.

Cr. 8ni. 41. 6d. tul.


Toi, By Alfred Harvey, M.B. _..

iied by E. H. New.

rHBBUBV. ByJ.C.Coi,LL.D.,F.S.


3. Fitipalrick. llliutratEd


I, M.A.


By M. G, Willi,
jstraud by Herbert Railion.
□LH. By E. Maaiel Sympun, I>I..\.,
D. IUu.lraiedbyE.H-Mci».
wsBUFY. By T. Auden, M.A,, F.S.A.
nitrated by Katharine M. Roberts,
LS .-ind GLASTaHBURV. ByT. S. Hohnes.
usttattd by E. H. Sew.


General Literature


25


The Antianary's Bdclkn

General Editor. J. CHARLES COX, LL,D., F.S.A
Demy %vo, 7s, 6d, net.


AxCRiBOLOGV AKD FalSE ANTIQUITIES.

By R. Munro, LL.D. With 81 Illustrations.

Bells of England, The. By Canon J. J.
Raven, D.D., F.S.A. With 60 Illustra-
tions. Sicond Edition,

Bkassss or England, The. By Herbert
W. Macklin, M.A. With 85 Illustrations.
Second Edition.

Celtic Art in Pagan and . Christian
Times. By J. Romilly Allen, F.S.A
With 44 Plates and numerous Illustrations.

Domesday Inquest, The. By Adolphus
Ballard, B. A. , LL. B. With 27 1 Uustrations.

English Church Furniture. By J. C. Cox,
LL.D., F.S.A., and A. Harvey, M.B.
With Z3X Illustrations. Second Edition,

English Costume. From Prehistoric Timet
to the End of the Eighteenth Century. By
George Clinch, F.G.S. With Z3Z lUustia-
tions.

English Monastic Life. By the Right Rev.
Abbot Gasquet, O.S.B, With 50 Illustra-
tions, Maps and Plans. Third Edition,

English Seals. By J. Harvey Bloom.
With 93 Illustrations.


FOLIC>LORB AS AN HISTORICAL SCIENCB. By

G. L. Gomme. With 28 Illnstvations. '

Gilds and Companies op London, The.
By George Unwin. With 37 Illustrations.

Manor and Manoiiial Records, ■ The.

By Nathaniel J. Hone. With 54 lUustra-

tions.
Medieval Hospitals of England, The.

By Rotha Mary Clay. With many lUus-

tn^iotis.
Old Service Books of the English

Church. By Christopher Wordsworth,

M.A, and Henry Littlehales. With

38 Coloured and other Illustrations.
Parish Life in Medieval England. By

the Right Rev. Abbott Gasquet, O.S.B.

With 39 Illustrations. Second Edition,
Remains of the Prehistoric Age in

England. By B. C. A. Windle, D.Sc.,

F.R.S. With 94 Illustrations. Second

Edition,
Royal Forests of England, The. By J.

C. Cox, LL.D., F.S.A. With 35 Plates and

33 other Illustrations.
Shrines of British Saints. ByJ. C. Wall.

With 28 Plates and 50 other Illustrations.


The Arden Sliakespeare

Demy %vo, is, 6d, net each volume.

An edition of Shakespeare in single Plays. Edited with a full Introduction, Textual

Notes, and a Commentary at the foot of the page.


All's Well That Ends Well. Edited by

W. O. Brigstocke.
Antony and Cleopatra. Edited by R. H.

Case.

Cymbeline. Edited by E. Dowden.

Comedy of Errors, The. Edited by Henry
Cuningham.

Hamlet. Edited by E. Dowden. Second
Edition,

Julius Caesar. Edited by M. Macmillan.
King Henry v. Edited by H. A. Evans.
King Henry vi. Pt. i. Edited by H. C.

Hart.
Kino Henry vi. Pt. ii. Edited by H. C.

Hart and C. K. Pooler.
King Lear. Edited by W. JT. Craig.
King Richard hi. Edited by A. H.

Thompson.
Life and Death of King John,The. Edited

by Ivor B. John.
Love's Labour's Lost. Edited by H. C.

Hart.


*Macbeth. Edited by H. Cuningham.

Measure for Measure. Edited by H. C.

Hart.
Merchant of Venice, The. Edited by

C. K. Pooler.
Merry Wives of Windsor, The. Edited by

H. C. Hart.
A Midsummer Night's Dream. Edited by

H. Cuningham.
Othello. Edited by H. C. Hart.
Pericles. Edited by K. Deighton.
Romeo and Juliet. Edited by Edward

Dowden.
Taming of the Shrew, The. Edited by

R. Warwick Bond.
Tempest, The. Edited by M. Luce.
TiMON of Athens. Edited by K. Dei^ton.
Titus Andronicus. Edited by H. B. Baildon.
Troilus and Cressida. Edited by K.

Deighton.
Two Gentlemen of Verona, The. Edited

by R. W. Bond.
Twelfth Night. Edited by M. Luce.


26


Messrs. ■ Methuen's Catalogue


The Begiimer's Booka

Edited by W. WILLIAMSON. B.A.


Easy Dictation and Spelling. By W.

Williamson, B.A. Seventh Ed, Fcap.%vo, is.
East Exercises in Arithmetic. Arranged

by W. S. Beard. TMrd Edition. Fcap.

Svo, Without Answers, is. With Answers.

xf. 3^
Easy French Rhymes. By Henri Blouet.

Second Edition, Illustrated. Fca^.Zvo, is.
An Easy Poetry Book. Selected and

arranged by W. Williamson, B. A. Second

Edition. Cr, Svo, u.


Easy Stories from English History. By
E. M. WiUnot-Buxton, F.R.Hist.S. Eiytk
Edition, Cr. Svo. is.

A First History op Greece. By E. E. Firth.
With 7 Maps. Cr. 8zw. ii. 6d,

Stories from Roman History. By E. M.
Wilmot-Buzton. Second Edition, Cr. Svo,
IS. 6d,

Stories from the Old Testament. By
E. Wilmot-Buxton. Cr. Zvo, is, 6d,


Books on Business

Cr, Sva, 2s, 6d. net.


Automobile Indostry, The. G. Holden-

Stone.
Brewing Industry. The. J. L. Baker,

F.I.C., F.CS. With 28 llhistrations.
Business of Advertising^ The. C. G.

Moran, With zi Illustrations.
Business Side op Agriculture, The. A.

G. L. Rogers.
Business of Insurance, The. A. J. Wilson.

i^iviL Engineering. C T. Fidler. With 15
Illustrations.

Cotton Industry and Trade, The. S. J.
Chapman. With 8 Illustrations.

The Electrical Industry : Lighting,
Traction, and Power. A. G. Whyte,

Iron Trade op Great Britain, The. J.
S. Jeans. With 12 Illustrations.


Law in Business. H. A. Wilson.

Mining and Mining Investments. A.
MoiL

Money Market, The. F. Straker.

Monopolies, Trusts, and Kartells. F.
W. Hirst.

Ports and Docks. Douglas Owen.

Railways. E. R. McDermott.

Shipbuilding Industry The: Its History,
Practice, Science, and Finance. David
Pollock, M.I.N.A.

Stock Exchange, The. C. Duguid. Second
Edition.

Trade Unions. G. Drage.


Byzantine Texts


The Syriac Chronicle known as that op
Zachariah op Mitylene. Translated by
F. J, Hamilton, D.D., and E. W. Brooks.
Demy Zvo* 12s. 6d, net.


EvAGRius. Edited by L. Bidez and L^on
Parmentier. Demy Zvo. 10s. 6d. net.


Edited by J. B. BURY, M.A, Litl.D.

The History of Fsbllus. Edited by C

Sathas. Demy Svo. 15s. net.
Ecthesis Chronica AND Chronicon Athen.

ARUM. Edited by Professor S. P. Lambros.

Demy Svo. ^s. td. net.
The Chronicle of Morba. Edited by John

Schmitt. Demy Zvo. i^s. net.


The dmrclunan's Bible

General Editor, J. H. BURN, B.D., F.R.S.E.
Fcap. Svo, is, 6d. net each.


The Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to
the Galatians. Explained by A. W.
Robinson, M. A. Second Edition.

EccLESiASTfes. Explained by A. W. Streane,
D.D.

The Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to
THE Philippians. Explained by C. R. D.
Biggs, D.D. Second Edition.

The Epistle op St. Jambs. Explained by
H. W. Fulford M.A.


Isaiah. Explained by W. E. Barnes, D.D.
Two Volutnes. With Map. zs. net each.

The Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to
THE Ephesians. Explained by G. H. Whita*
ker, M.A.

The Gospel According to St. Mark.
Explained by J. C. Du Buisson, M.A.
2f . 6d. net.

The Epistle op Paul the Apostle to
the Colossians and Philemon. Ex-
plained by H. J. C. Knight. 2s. net.


General Literature


27


The OhurdunaAi's Llbraty

General Editor, J. H. BURN, B.D.,F.R.S.E.
Crown ^0. 3J. 6d, eeuh.


The Beginnings of English Christianity.

By W. E. ColUns, M. A. With Map.
The Churchman's Introduction to the

Old Testament. By A. M. Mackay, B. A.

Second Edition.
Evolution. ByF. B. Jevons, M.A., Litt.D.


Some New Testament Problems. By

Arthur Wright, D.D. dr.
The Workmanship of.the Prayer Book :

Its Literary and Liturgical Aspects. By J.

Dowden, D.D. Second Edition^ Revised

and Enlarged.


ABSCHVLUS'The Oresteian Trilogy (Agamem-
non, Choephoroe, Eumenides). Translated
by Lewis Campbell, LL.D. 5f.

Cicero— De Oratore I. Translated by E. N.
P. Moor, M.A. Second Edition. 3X. 6rf.

Cicero — The Speeches against Cataline and
Antony and for Murena and Mflo. Trans-
lated by H. E. D. Blakiston, M.A. sf.

Cicero — De Natura Deorum. Translated by
F. Brooks, M.A. 3*. 6</.

CiCERO^De Officils. Translated by G. B.
Gardiner, M.A. sf. 6(/.


Classical Translations

Crown Svo,

Horace— The Odes and Epodes. Translated
byA. D. Godley, M.A. as,

LuciAN— Six Dialogues Translated by S. T.
Irwin, M.A. 3*. 6d,


Sophocles— Aja^ and Electra. Translated by
B, D. Morshead, M.A; 2s, 6d,

Tacitus— Agricola and Germania. Trans-
lated by R. B. Townshend. 2s. 6d.

Juvenal — ^Thirteen Satires. Translated by
S. G. Owen, M.A as, 6d.


Classics of Art

. Edited by Dr. J. H. W. LAINQ

IVide Royal Zvo. Gilt top.


The Art of the Greeks. By H. B. Walters.
With XI2 Plates and x8 Illustrations in the
Text. I2J. 6d, net.

Florentine Sculptors of the Rennais-
ance. Wilhelm Bode, Ph.D. Trans-
lated by Jessie Haynes. With 94 Plates.
12s. 6d. net.

Ghirlandaio. Gerald S. Davies, Master of
the Charterhouse. With 50 Plates. Second
Edition, xos. 6d.

*Michblangelo. Gerald S. Davies, Master
of the Charterhouse. With X26 Plates.
X2S, 6d, net.


Rubens. Edward Dillon, M.A. With a
Frontispiece in Photogravure and 483 Plates.
25J. net.

Raphael. A. P. Opp6. With a Frontispiece
in Photogravure and 300 Illustrations.
Z2J. 6d, net,

Titian. Charles Ricketts. With aboiit 220
Illustrations. X2s, 6d. net,

Velazquez.. By A. de Beruete. - With 94
Plates, los, id, net.


British Commerce and Colonies from
Elizabeth to Victoria. By H. de B.
Gibbins,Litt.D., M.A. t^ourth Edition, as.

Commercial Examination Papers. By H.
de B. Gibbins, Litt.D., M.A. is. 6d,

The Economics of Commerce, By H. de
B. Gibbins, Litt.D., M.A. Second Edition.
IS. 6d,

A German Commercial Reader. By S. E.
Bally. With Vocabulary. 2*.

A Commercial Geography of the British
Empire. By L. W. Lyde, M.A. Seventh
Edition, as,

A Commercial Geography of Foreign
Nations. By F. C. Boon, B.A. as,

A Primer of Business. By S. Jackson,
M.A. Fourth Edition, is, 6d,


Commercial Series

Crown Svo,

A Short Commercial Arithmetic. By F,

G. Taylor, M.A. Fourth Edition, is, 6d.
French Commercial Correspondence. By

S. E. Bally. With Vocabulary. Fourth

Edition, as.
German Commercial Correspondence. By

S. £. Bally. With Vocabulary. Second

Edition, as. 6d,
A French Commercial Reader. ByS. E.

Bally. With Vocabulary. Second Edition, as.
Precis Writing and Office Correspond-
ence. By E. E. Whitfield, M.A. Second

Edition, as.
An Entrance Guide to Professions and

Business. By H. Jones, is, 6d.
The Prinoples of Book-keeping by Double

Entry. By J. E. B. M'Allen, M.A. as^
Commercial Law. By W. Douglas Eklwards.

Steond Edition, as.


28


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


The Ctoim^iiMr'i Idbnoy

Wide Royal %vo, z$s. nef.


Mkzzotints. By Cyril Davenport. With 40

Plates in Photogravure.
PoRCBLAiN, By Edward Dillon. With 19

Plates in Colour, 20 in Collotype, and 5 in

Photogravure.
Miniatures. By Dudley Heath. With 9

Plates in Colour, 15 in Collotype, and 15 in

Photogravure.
Ivories. By A. Maskell. With 80 Plates in

Collotype and Photogravure*
English Furniture. By F. S. Robinson.

With x6o Plates in Collotype and one in

Photogravure. Second Editi^H,
English Coloured Books. By Martin

Hardie. With 28 Illustrations In Colour

and Collotype.


Handbooks of

Edited by J. H. BURN. B.D.

The Foundations of the English Church.
J. H. Maude.

The Saxon Church and the Norman Con-
quest. C. T. Cruttwell.


European Einambls. By Henryr H. Cnnyng*
hame^ C.B. With 54 Plates in Collotype
and Half-tone and 4 Plates in Colour.

Goldsmiths' and Silversmiths' Work. By
Nelson Dawson. With ^ 51 Plates in
Collotype and a Frontispiece in Photo*
gravure. Second Edition,

Glass. By Edward Dillon. With 37 lUus-
traUons in Collotype and za in Colour.

Seals. By Walter de Gray Birch. With 52
Illustrations in Collotype and a Frontispiece
in Phot(^;ravnre.

Jewellery. By H. Clifford Smith. With 50
Illustrations m Collotype, and 4 in Colour.
Second Edition,

Oliurcli SOstory

Crown 8v0. sj. 6d, net^

The Medieval Church and the Papacy

A. C. Jenning^s.
*The Reformation Period. By Henry

Gee.


The Illustrated Pocket Lilnrary of Plain and Coloured Books

Fcap Svo, 31. 6d, net each volume.
COLOnREB BOOKS


Old Coloured Books. By George Paston.
With x6 Coloured Plates. lFca^.9/oo, as.net.

The Life and Death of John Mytton, Esq.
By Nimrod. With z8 Coloured Plates by
Henr^ Aiken and T. J. Rawlins. Fourth
Edition.

The Life of a Sportsman. By Nimrod.
With 35 Coloured Plates by Henry Aiken.

Handley Cross. By R. S. Surtees. With
17 Coloured Plates and xoo Woodcuts in the
Text by John Leech. Second Edition,

Mr. Sponge's Sporting Tour. By R. S.
Surtees. With 13 Coloured Plates and 90
Woodcuts in the Text by John Leech.

JoRRocKs' Jaunts and Jollities. By R. S.

Surtees. With 15 Coloured Plates by H.

Aiken. Second Edition.
Ask Mamma. By R. S. Surtees. With 13

Coloured Plates and 70 Woodcuts in the

Text by John Leech.
The Analysis of the Hunting Field. By

R. S. Surtees. With 7 Coloured Plates by

Henry Aiken, and 43 Illustrations on Wood.
The Tour of Dr. Syntax in Search of

the Picturesque. By William Combe.

With 30 Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson.
The Tour of Doctor Syntax in Search

of Consolation. By William Combe.

With 24 Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson.
The Third Tour of Doctor Syntax in

Search of a Wife. By William Combe.

With 24 Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson.


The History of Johnny Quae Genus : the
Little Foundling of the late Dr. Syntax.
By the Author of * The Three Tours.' With
24 Colourcfd Plates by Rowlandson.

The English Dance of Death, from the
Designs of T. Rowlandson, with Metrical
Illustrations by the Author of 'Doctor
Syntax.' Twp Volumes,
This book Contains 76 Coloured Plates.

The Dance op Li fe : A Poem. By the Author
of 'Doctor Syntax.' Illustrated with 26
ColpiQred Engravings by T. Rowlandson.

Life in London : or, the Day and Night
Scenes of Jerry Hawthorn, Esq. , and his
Elegant Friend, Corinthian Tom. By
Pierce Egan. With 36 Coloured Plates by
I. R. and G. Cruikshank.; With numerous
D,esigns on Wood.

Real Life in London: or, the Rambles
and Adventures of Bob Tallyho, Esq., and
his Cousin, The Hon. Tom Dashall. By an
Amateur (Pierce Egan). With 31 Coloured
Plates by Aiken and Rowlandson, etc.
Two Volumes,

The Life of an Actor. By Pierce Egan.
With 27 Coloured Plates by Theodore Lane,
and several Designs on Wood.

The Vicar of WakEfieLd. By Oliver Gold*
smith. With 24 Coloured Plates by T. Row.
landson.

The Military Adventures op Johnny
Newcome. By an Officer. With 1 5 Coloured
Plates by T. Rowlands(»it


General Literature


29


Illustrated Pocket Library of Plain and Coloukbd Books — edntinued.


The National Sports of Great Britain.
With Descriptions luid 50 Coloured Plates
by Henry Anten.

Th b' Adtknturbs of a Post Captain. By
A Naval Officer. With ^4 Coloured Plates
by Mr. WiUiams.

Gamonia : or, the Art of Preservuig Game ;
and an Improved Method, of making Planta*
tions and Covers, explained and illustrated
l^ Lawrence Rawstorne, Esq. With XS
Coloured Plates by T. Rawlins.

An Academy for Grown Horsemen : Con*

taining the completest Instructions for
Walking, Trotting, Cantering, Galloping,
Stumbling, and Tumbling. Illustrated with
27 Coloured Plates, and adorned with a
Portrait of the Author. By Geofirey
Gambado, Esq.


Real Life in Ireland, or, the Day and
Night Scenes of Brian Boru, £^., and his
Elegant Friend, Sir Shawn O'Dogherty.
By a Real Paddv. With 19 Coloured Plates
by Heath, Marks, etc.

Thb Adventures of Johnny Newcomb in
the Navy. By Alfred Burton. With z6
Coloured Plates by T. RowJandaon.

The Old English Squire: A Poem. By
John Careless, Esq. With so Coloured
Plates after the. style of T. Rowlandson. '

The English Spy. By Bernard Black-
mantle. An original Work^ Characteristic,
Satirical, Humorous, compnsing scenes and
sketches in everv Rank of Society, being
Portraits of the Illustrious, Eminent, Eccen-
trie, and Notorious. With 7a Coloured
Plates by R. Cruikshank> and many
Illustrations on wood. Two Vohtmts*
"js, net.


PLAIN BOOKS


The Grave : A Poem. By Robert Blair.
Illustrated b^ la Etchings executed by Louis
Schiavonetti from the original Inventions of
William Blake. With an Engraved Title Page
and a Portrait of Blake by T. Phillips, R.A.
The illustrations are reproduced in photo-
gravure.

Illustrations of the Book of Job. In-
vented and engraved by WilHam Blake.

These famous Illustrations — sx in number
— are reproduced in photogravure.

Windsor Castle By W. Harrison Ahisworth.
With 22 Plates and 87 Woodcuts in the Text
by George Cruikshank.


The Tower of London. By W. Harrison
Ainsworth. With 40 Plates and 58 Woodcuts
in the Text by George Cruikshank.

Frank Fairlegh. By F.^ E. Smedley. With
30 Plates by George Cruikshank.

Handy Andy. By Samuel Lover. With 34
Illustrations by the Author.

Thb Compleat Angler.^ By Izaak Walton
and Charles Cotton. With 14 Plates and 77
Woodcuts in the Text.

The Pickwick Papers.^ By Charles Dickens.
With the 43 Illustrations by Seymour and
Phiz, the two Buss Plates, and the 3a Con-
temporary Onwhyn Plates.


Junior Examination Series

Edited by A. M. M. STEDMAN, M.A. Fcap, Zvo.


IS.


Junior Algebra Examination Papers. By
S. W. Finn, M.A.

Junior Arithmetic Examination Papers.
By W. S. Beard. Ftytk Edition.

Junior English Examination Papers. By
W. Williamson, B.A. Second Edition.

Junior French Examination Papers. By
F. Jacob, M.A. Second Edition.

Junior General Information Examina-
tion Papers. By W. S. Beard. Key,
3^ . 6</. net.


Junior Gbography Examination Papers.

By W. G. Baker, M.A.
Junior German Examination Papers. By

A. Voegelin, M.A,
Junior Greek Examination Papers. By T.

C. Weatherhead, M.A. Key, 3^. td. net.
Junior Latin Examination Papers. By C.

G. Botting, B.A. Sixth Edition, Key,

3J. dd. net.
*JuNioR History Examination Papers. By

W. O. P. Davis.


Methnen's Junior School-Books

Edited by O. D. INSKIP, LL.D., and W. WILLIAMSON, B.A.


A Class-Book of Dictation Passages. By

W. Williamson, B. A. Fourteenth Edition.

Cr, 8vtf. If. dd.
The Gospel According to St. Matthew.

Edited by E. Wilton South, M.A. With

Three Maps. Cr. %vo. is. 6d,
ThbGospel AccordingtoSt. Mark. Edited

by A. E. Ruble, D.D. With Three Maps.

Cr. 8<w. IS* 6d,


A Junior English Grammar. By W.William,
son, B.A. With numerous passages for parsing
and analysis, and a chapter on Essay Writing.
Fourth Edition. Cr. Bvo, a*.

A Junior Chemistry. By E. A. Tyler, B.A. ,
F.C.S. With 78 Illustrations. Fourth Edi-
tion. Cr. Zvo, 2s. 6d.

The Acts o? the Apostles. Edited by
A. £. Ruble, D.D. Cr. Bvo, zs.


30


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Mbthuen's Jukior School BooKS-^amiiHued,


A Junior French Grammar. By L. A.
Sornet and M. J. Acatos. Third Edition.

S^BMENTART ExTBRIMENTAL SCISNCB. PhT*

sicsby W. T. Clough. AR.C.SC. (Lond.),
F.C.S. Chemistry by A, E. Danstan.
B.Sc. (Lond.), F.C.S. With a Plates and
154 Diagrams Seventh Edition. Cr, 8vo.
3X. 6d.

A Junior Geometry. By Noel S. Lydon.

With 276 Diagrams. Sezfonth Edition. Cr.

Bvo. 2S.
Elementary Experimental Chemistry.

By A. E. Dunstan, B.Sc. (Lend.), F.C.S.

With 4 Plates and X09 Diagrams.. Third

Edition, Cr. Zvo. as,
A Junior French Prose. By R. R. N.

Baron, M. A. Third Edition, Cr.Zvo. 2s.


The Gospel According to St. Luke. Wi^
an Introduction and Notes by William
Williamson, B.A. With Three Maps. Cr.
Bvo. as.

The First Book op Kings. Edited by A. £.
RuBiB, D.D. With 4 Maps. Cr. Bvo. qs.

A Junior Greek History. By W. H.
Spragge, M.A. With 4 Illustrations and 5
Maps. Cr. Bvo. as. 6d.

A School Latin Grammar. By H. G. Ford,
M.A. . Cr. Bvo. as. 6d,

A Junior Latin Prose. By H. N. Asman,
M.A., B.D. Cr. Bvo. as. 6d.

♦'Elementary Experimental Electricity
AND Magnetism. By W. T. Clough,
A.R.C.SC. ax>nd.), F.C.S. With 200 Illus-
trations and Diagrams. Cr, Bvo, as. 6d.

Englise Literature for Schools. By
Edith K Firth. Cf% Bvo. as, 6d,


Leaders of Beligion

Edited by H. C. BEECHING, M.A., Canon of Westminster.

Cr, 8vo. zs, net.


With Portraits.


Cardinal Newman. By R. H. Hntton.
John Wesley. By J. H. Overton, M.A.
Bishop Wilbbrforcb. By G. W. Daniell,

M.A.
Cardinal Manning. By A. W. Hutton, M.A.
Charles Simeon. By H. C. G. Moule, D.D.
John Knox. By F. MacCunn. .S'^cMN/iE^f /liMt.
John Howe. By R. F. Horton, D.D.
Thomas Ken. By F. A. Clarke, M.A.
George Fox, the Quaker. By T. Hodgkin,

D. C. L. Third Edition.
John Kbblb. By Walter Lock, D.D.


Thomas Chalmers. By Mrs. Oliphant.
Lancelot Andrewes. By R. L. Ottley,

D. D. Second Edition,
Augustine of Canterbury. By E. L.

Cutts, D.D.
William Laud. By W. H. Hutton, M.A.

Third Edition.
John Donne. By Augustus Jessopp, D.D.
Thomas Cranmer. By A. J. Mason, D.D.
Bishop Latimer. By R. M. Carlyle and A.

J. Carlyle, M.A.
Bishop Butuer. By W. A. Spooner, M.A.


The. Library of Devotion

With Introductions and (where necessary) Notes.
Small Pott Svfff cloth, 2s. ; leather, 2s. 6d. net.


The Confessions of St. Augustine. Edited

by C. Bigg, D.D. Sixth Edition.
The Imitation of Christ : called also the

Ecclesiastical Music. Edited by C Bigg,

D.D. Fifth Edition.
The Christian Year. Edited bv Walter

Lock, D.D. Fourth Edition.
Lyra Innocbntium, Edited by Walter

Lock, D.D. Second Edition.
The Temple. Edited by £. C. S. Gibson,

D.D. Second Edition,
A Book of Devotions. Edited by J. W.

Stanbridge. B.D. Second Edition.
A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy

Life. Edited by C. Bigg, D.D. Fourth Ed.
A Guide to Eternity. Eklited by J. W,

Stanbridge, B.D.
The Inner Way. By J. Tauler. Edited by

A. W. Hutton, M.A.


On the Love of God. By St. Francis de
Sales. Edited by W. J. Knox-Little, M.A.

The Psalms of David. Edited by B. W.
Randolph, D.D.

Lyra Apostolica. By Cardinal Newman
and others. Edited by Canon Scott Holland,
M.A., and Canon H. C. Beeching, M.A.

The Song of Songs. Edited by B. Blaxland,

M.A.
The Thoughts of Pascal. Edited by C.

S. Jerram, M.A.

A Manual of Consolation from the
Saints and Fathers. Edited by J. H.
Bum, B.D.

♦Devotions from the Apocrypha. Edited,
with an Introduction, by Herbert Pentin,
M.A.


General Literature


31


The Library op Dnvoriov—coHtinMed.
•The Spiritual Combat. By Dom Lorenzo

ScQfX)!!. Newly translated, with an Intro<

duction and Notes, by Thomas Barns, M. A.
The Devotions op St. Ansblm. Edited by

C. C j. Wcbb,M.A.
Grace Abounding to the Chiep op Sin-
ners. By John Bunyan. Edited by S. C

Freer, M.A.
Bishop Wilson's Sacra Privata. Edited

by A. E. Burn, B.D.
Lyra Sacra : A Book of Sacred Verse.

Edited by Canon H. C. Beeching, M.A.

Second Edition^ revised,
A Day Book from the S aints and Fathers.

Edited by J. H. Burn, B.D.
A Little Book of Heavenly Wisdom.^ A

Selection from the English Mystics. Edited

by E. C. Gregory.
Light, Life, and Love. A Selection from the

German Mystics. Edited byW.R.Inge,M. A.
An Introduction to The Devout Life.

By St. Francis de Sales. Translated and

Edited by T. Barns, M.A.
The Little Flowbrs of the Glorious

Messbr St. Francis and of his

Friars. Done into English by W. Hey-

wood. With an Introduction by A. G.

Ferrers Howell.


Manchester al Mondo : a Contemplation
of Death and Immortality. By Hepry
Montagu, Earl of Manchester. With an
Introduction by Elizabeth Waterhouse,
Editor of *A Little Book of Life and
Death.'

The Spiritual Guide, which Disentangles
the Soul and brings it by the Inward Way
to the Fruition of Perfect Contemplation,
and^ the Rich Treasure of Internal Peace.
Written by Dr. Michael de Molinos^ Priest.
Translated from the Italian copy, printed at
Venice, 1685. Edited with an Introduction
by Kathleen Lyttelton. And a Note by
Canon Scott Holland.

Devotions for Every Day op the Week
and the Great Festivals. Bjr John
Wesley. Edited, with an Introduction by
Canon C. Bodington.

Preces Privatae. By Lancelot Andrewes,
Bishop of Winchester. Selections from the
Translation by Canon F. E. Brightman.
Edited, with an Introduction, by A. E.
Burn, D.D.

Horae^ Mysticae : A Day Book from^ the
Writings of Mystics of Many Nations.
Edited by E. C. Gregory.


Little Books on Art

With many Illustrations. Demy i6mo. 2s, 6d. net,

£^ch volume consists of about 200 pages, and contains from 30 to 40 Illustrations,
including a Frontispiece in Photogravure.


Albrecht DOrer. J. Allen.
Arts op Japan, The. E. Dillon.
Bookplates. E.Almack.
Botticelli. Mary L. Bonnor.
Burne- Jones. F. de Lisle.
Christ in Art. Mrs. H. Jenner.
Claude. E. Dillon.
Constable. H. W. Tompkins.
Corot. a. Pollard and E. Birnstingl.
Enamels. Mrs. N. Dawson.
Frederic Leighton. A. Corkran.
George Romney. G. Paston.
Greek Art. H. B. Walters.
Greuze and Boucher. • E. F. Pollard
Holbein. Mrs. G. Fortescue.


Illuminated Manuscripts. J. W. Bradley.

Jewellery. C. Davenport.

John Hoppner. H. P. K. Skipton.

Sir Joshua Reynolds. J. Sime.

Millet, N. Peacock.

Miniatures. C. Davenport.

Our Lady in Art. Mrs. H. Jenner.

Raphaeu a. R. Dryhurst. Second Edition.

Rembrandt. Mrs. E. A. Sharp.

Turner. F. Tyrrell-Gill.

Vandyck. M. G. Smallwood.

Velasquez. W. Wilberforce and A. R.

Gilbert.
Watts. R. E. D. Sketchley.


The Little Galleries

Demy i6mo, 2s, 6d. net.

Each volume contains 20 plates in Photogravure, together with a short outline of
the life and work of the master to whom the book is devoted.


A Little Gallery of Reynolds.
A Little Gallery of Romney.
A Little Gallery op Hoppner.


A Little Gallery of Millais.

A Little Gallery of English Posts.


32


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


The Little Gnides

With many Illustrations by £. H. New and other artists, and from photographs.

Small PoU %7)0i cloth^ 2j. 6ar. neL; leaihtr^ 31.. 6^. net*

The main features of these Guides are (i) a handv and charming form ; (s) illus-
trations £rom photographs and by weU>known artists; (3) good plans and maps ; (4) an
adequate but compact presentation of everything that is interesting in the natura.
feattD-«8, history, archaeology, and architecture of the town or district treated.


Cambxidgb and its Collsgbs. a. H.

Thompson. Second Edition,
English Lakes, The. F. G. Brabant.
IsLB OP Wight. The. G. Clinch.
Malvern Country, The B. C. A. Windle.
North Wales. A. T. Story.
Oxford and its Colleges. J. Wells.

Eighth Edition,
Shakespeare's Countxt. B. C. A. Windle.

Third Edition,
St. Paul's Cathedral. G. Clinch.
Westminster Adbey. G. E. Troutbeck.

Second Edition,


Buckinghamshire. E. S. Roscoe.
Cheshire. W. M. Gallichan.
Cornwall. A. L. Salmon.
Derbyshire. J. C. Cox.
Devon. S. Baring-Gould.
Dorset. F. R. Heath. Second Edition*
Essex. J. C. Cox.
Hampshire. J. C. Cox.


Hertfordshire. H. W. Tompkins.
Kent. G. Clinch.
Kerry. C. P. Crane.
Middlesex. J. B. Firth.
Monmouthshire. G. W. Wade and T. H.

Wade.
Norfolk. W. A. Dutt.
Northamptonshire. W. Dry.
Oxfordshire. F. G. Brabant.
Somerset. G. W. and J. H. Wade.
Suffolk. W. A. Dtitt.
Surrey. F. A. H. Lambert.
Sussex. F. G. Brabant. Second Edition.
Yorkshire, The East Riding. J. E.

Morris.
Yorkshire, The North Riding. J. E.

Morris.

Brittany. S. Baring-Gould.
Normandy. C. Scudamore.
Rome. C. G. Ellaby.
Sicily. F. H. Jackson.


The Little Library

With Introductions, Notes, and Photogravure Frontispieces.
Small Pott Svo, Each Volume^ clothe is, 6d, net ; leather^ 2s, 6d, net.


Anon. A LITTLE BOOK OF ENGLISH
LYRICS. Second Edition,

Austen (Jane). PRIDE AND PREJU-
DICE. Edited by E. V.Lucas. Two Volt,

NORTHANGER ABBEY. Edited by E. V.
Lucas.

Bacon (Pniacis). THE ESSAYS OF LORD
BACON. Edited by Edward Wright.

Barham (R. H.). THE INGOLDSBY
LEGENDS. Edited by J. B. Atlay.
Two Volumes,

Barnett (Mrs. P. A,). A LITTLE BOOK
OF ENGLISH PROSE. Second Edition.

Beckford (William). THE HISTORY
OF THE CALIPH VATHEK. Edited
by E. Denison Ross.

Blake (William), SELECTIONS FROM
WILLIAM BLAKE. Fxiited by M.
Perugini.

Borrow (George). LAVENGRO. Edited
by F. Hindes Groome. Two Volumes.

THE ROMANY RYE. Edited by John
Sampson.

Browning (Robert). SELECTIONS
FROM THE EARLY POEMS OF
ROBERT BROWNING. Edited by W.
Hall Griffin, M.A.


Canning (George). SELECTIONS FROM

THE ANTI-JACOBIN : with George

Canning's additional Poems. Edited by

Lloyd Sanders.
Cowley (Abraham). THE ESSAYS OF

ABRAHAM COWLEY. Edited by H. C

Minchin.
Crabbe (George). SELECTIONS FROM

GEORGE CRABBE. Edited by A. C.

Deane.
Craik (Mra.). JOHN HALIFAX,

GENTLEMAN. Edited by Annie

Matheson. Tivo Volumes,
Crashaw (Richard). THE ENGLISH

POEMS OF RICHARD CRASHAW.

Edited by Edward Hutton.
Dante (Alighieri). THE INFERNO OF

DANTE. Translated by H. F. Gary.

Edited by Paget Toynbee, M.A., D.Litt.
THE PURGATORIO OF DANTE. Trans-

lated by H. F. Cary. Edited by Paget

Toynbee, M.A., D.Litt.
THE PARADISO OF DANTE. Trans-

lated by H. F. Cary. Edited by Paget

Toynbee, M.A., D.Litt.
Darley (George). SELECTIONS FROM

THE POEMS OF GEORGE DARLEY.

Edited by R. A. Stkbatfsild.


General Literature


33


The Little "Likraxv— continued.

Deane (A. C). A LITTLE BOOK OF

LIGHT VERSE.
Dickens (Charles). CHRISTMAS BOOKS.

Two Volumes,
Perrier (Susaii)^, MARRIAGE. Edited

by A. Goodrich - Freek and Lord

Iddesleigh. Two Volumes,
THE INHERITANCE. Two Volumes.
Qaskell(Mrs.>. CRANFORD. Edited by

£. V. Lucas. Second Edition.
Hawthorne (Nathaniel). THE SCARLET

LETTER. Edited by Percy Dearmer.
Henderson (T. P.). A LITTLE BOOK

OF SCOTTISH VERSE.
Keats (John). POEMS. With an Intro-
duction by L. BiNYON, and Notes by J.

I^Iasepield
klnsrlake (A.' W.). EOTHEN. With an

Introduction and Notes. Second Edition.
Lamb (Charles). ELIA, AND THE

LAST ESSAYS OF ELIA. Edited by

E. V. Lucas.
Locker (P.). LONDON LYRICS. Edited

by A. D. GoDLEY, M. A. A reprint of the

First Edition.
Longfellow (H. W.). SELECTIONS

FROM LONGFELLOW. Edited by

L. M. Faithfull. ■ •

Marvell (Andrew). THE POEMS OF

ANDREW MARVELL. Edited by R.

Milton (John). THE MINOR POEMS

OF JOHN MILTON. Edited by H. C.

Perching Ik^ A.
Moir(D. M.). MANSIEWAUCH. Edited

by T. F. Henderson.
Nlchols(J. B. B.). A LITTLE BOOK OF

ENGLISH SONNETS.


Rochefoucauld (La). THE MAXIMS OF
LA ROCHEFOUCAULD. Translated
by Dean Stanhope. Edited by G. H.
Powell.

Smith (Horace and James). REJECTED
ADDRESSES^. Edited by A. D. Gqdlev,
M.A.

Sterne' (Laurence). A SENTIMENTAL
JOURNEY. Edited by H. W. Paul.

Tennyson (AUrad, Lord). THE EARLY
POEMS OF ALFRED, LORD TENNY-
SON. Edited by J. Churton Collins, M. A.

IN ME MORI AM. Edited by H. C.
Beec'hing, M.A.

THE PRINCESS. Edited by Euzabeth
Wordsworth.

MAUD. Edited by^LiZABETHWoRDSwokTH.

Thackeray(:W. M.). VANITY FAIR.

Edited by S. Gwynn. Three Volumes.
PENDENNIS. Edited by S. Gwyh^.

Three Volumes,
ESMOND. Edited by S. Gwynn.
CHRISTMAS BOOKS. Edited by S. Gwynn.
Vau^han (Henry). THE POEMS OF

HENRY VAUGHAN. Edited by Edward

HUTTON.

Walton (Izaak). THE COMPLEAT

ANGLER. Edited by J . Buck an.
Waterhouse (BUzabeth). A LITTLE

BOOK OF LIFE AND DEATH. Edited

by. Twelfth Edition.
Wordsworth (W.). SELECTIONS FROM

WORDSWORTH. Edited by Nowell

C. Smith.
Wordsworth (W.) and Coleridge (S. T.).

LYRICAL BALLADS. Edited by George

Sampson.


The Little Quarto Shakespeare

Edited by W. J. CRAIG. With Introductions and Notes.

Pott i6m4>. In 40 Volumes. Leather, price is. net each volume.

Mahogany Revolving Book Case, los. net.


Miniature Library

Reprints in miniature of a few interesting books which have qualities of

humanity, devotion, or literary genius.


EuphRanor: A Dialogue on Youth. By
Edward FitzGerald. From the edition pub*
lished by W. Pickering in 1851. Demy
2^mo, Leather, 2s. net.

The Life of Edward, Lord Herbert of

• Cherburv. Written by himself. From the

edition printed at Strawberry Hill in the

year X764. Detny •^'zmo, Leathsr^ as. net.


PoLONius: or Wise Saws and Modern In-
stances. By Edward FitzGerald. From
the edition published by W. Pickering in
1852. Demy ^smo. Leather^ zs, net.

The RubAiyAt of Omar KhayvXm. By
Edward FitzGerald. From the ist edition
of Z859, Fourth Edition, Leaihery is.
net.


34


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


A New Historical Series

Edited by the Rev. H. N. ASM AN. M.A., B.D.

•Stories moM AnaENT History. By E. I ♦Stories from Modern History. ByE. M.
Bower, B.A. Cn 800. xs,'6d, \ Wilmot-Biucton,F.R.Hist.S. Cr.8zv. 7f.6</.


Tha New Library of Medicine

Edited by C. W. SALEEBY, M.D., F.R.S.Edin. Dtmy Zvo,


Care op the Body, The. F. Cavaoagh.

Second Edition, jm. 6d, net.
Children op the Nation, The. Right

Hon. Sir John Gorst. 7; . td, net.
Control of a Scourge, The: or. How

Cancer is Curable. Chas. P. C!hiMe.

7/. 6d, net.
Diseases of Occupation. Sir Thomas

Oliver, xox. 6d. net.
Drink Problem, The, in its Medico*Socio-

logical Aspects. Edited by T. N. Kelynack.

js,6d» nei»


Drugs and the Drug Habit. H. Sainsbury.

Functional Nerve Diseases. A. T. Scho-
field. ^s. 6d. net.

Hygiene op Mind, The. T. S. Clottston.
Fijlh Edition, 7s. 6d. net.

Infant Mortality. George Newman.
js, 6d. net.

Prevention of Tuberculosis (Consump-
tion), The. Arthur Newsholme. io«. 6d,
net,

*AiR AND Health. Ronald C. Macfie, M. A. ,
M.B. 7^. 6d, net.


The New Librae of Mnsic

Edited by ERNEST NEWMAN. DemySvo. 7s. 6d: net

With


Hugo Wolf. By Ernest Newman.
23 Illustrati(Kis.


Handel. By R. A. Streatfisild. With za
Illustratians.


Ozfbrd Biographies

Fcap, Szw. Each volume, cloth, 2s, 6d, net ; leather, 35. 6^. net.


Dante Alighieri. By Paget Toynbee, M.A.,

D. Litt. With 12 Illustrations. Third Edition,
GiROLAMO Savonarola. By ^. I*. S. Hors-

burgh, M.A« With xa' Illusuriitions. .S#cm»i/

Edition,
John Howard. By E. C. S. Gibson, D.D.,

Bishop of Gloucester. With 12 Illustrations.
Alfred Tennyson. - By A. C. Benson, M. A.

With 9 Illustrations. Second Edition,
Sir Walter Raleigh. By I. A. Taylor.

With 12 Illustrations.
Erasmus. By E. F. H. Capey. With 12

r Illustrations.
The Young Pretender. By C. S. Terry.

With zs Illustrations.


Robert Burns. By T. F. Henderson.

With 12 Illustrations.
CutATHAM. JBy Af S. M'Dowall. With 12

niostratfons.
Francis op Assisi. By Anna M. Stod-

dart. WUh 16 Illustrations.
Canning. By W. Albon Phillips. With xa

Illustrations. '
Beaconspielix By Walter Sichel. With 12

Illustrations.
Johann Wolfgang Goethe. By H. G.

Atkins. With 16 Illustrations.
FRAN901S Fenelon. By Viscount St Cyres.

With 13 Illustrations.


Romantic History

Edited by MARTIN HUME, M. A. With Illustrations, DemyZvo.

A series of attractive volumes in which the periods and personalities selected are
such as afiford romantic human interest, in addition to their historical importance.

The First Governess op the Nether- Hume, M.A. 15^. net,

LANDS, Margaret op Austria. Eleanor The Nine Days' Queen. Richard Davcy.

E. Tremayne. xos, Sd. net. With a Preface by Martin Hume, M.A.

Two English Queens and Philip Martiu With i« Illustrations, xou 6d, net, .


General Literature


35


School Examination Series

Edited by A. M. M. STEDMAN, M.A. Crown Bvo. 2s. 6ct,


Examination Papers in English Histoky.

By J. Tait Plowden-Wardlaw, B. A.
French Examination Papers. By A. M.
M. Stedman, M.A. Fifteenth EditioH.
Kby. Sixth Edition* 6s, net.
General Knowledge Examination
Papers. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A.
Sixth Edition,
Key. Fourth Edition, js. net.
Gbrman Examination Papers. By R. J.
Moricb* Seventh Edition,
Key. Third Edition, 6f. net.


Greek Examination Papers. By A M. M.
Stedman, M.A. Ninth Edition,
Key^ Fourth Edition, 6i,net,

History and Geography Examij^a+ion

Papers. By C. H. Spcncc, M.A. Third

Edition.
Latin Examination Papers. By A. M. M.

Stedman, M.A. Fourteenth Edition,
Key.* Sevmih Edition, 6s.. net.
Physics Examination Papers. By R. £.

Steel, M.A., F.C.S.


A School History op Warwickshire.

B. C. A. Windle, D.Sc, F.R.S.
A School History op Somerset. By

Walter Raymond. Second Edition,
A School History op Lamcashibx. By

W. E. Rhodes, M.A


School Histories

Illustrated,. Crown Svo. is, 6d,
By


A School History o*- Surrey. By K. E
Maiden, M.A.

A School History op Middlesex. By V. G.
Plarr, M.A., and F. W. Walton, M.A. "


Simplified French Texts

Edited by T. R. N. CROFTS, M.A.
Fcap Svo, IS,


Abdallah. By Edouard Laboulaye. Adapted
by J. A. Wilson.

*Deux Contes. By P. Merim^e. Adapted
by J. F. Rhoades.

*Edmond Dant&s. By A. Dumas. Adapted

by M. CeppL
Jean Valjean. By Victor Hugo. Adapted

by F. W. M. Draper, M.A.

La Bataillb dk Waterloo. By Erckmann-
Chatrian. Adapted by G. H. Evans.

La Bouillib au Miel. By A. Dumas.
Adapted by P. B. Ingham, M.A.

La Chanson db Roland. Adapted by H.
Rieu, M.A. Second Edition,

Le Conscrit de 1813. By Erckmann-Chatrian.
Adapted by H. Rieu.


Le DoctEUR Math6us. By Erckmann-

Chatrian. Adapted by W. P. Fuller, M.A.
*Lb Due DE Beaufort. By A. Dumas.

Adapted ^y P. B. Ingham, Al. A.
L*Equipagb de la Belle-Nivernaisb. By

Alphonse P^det. Adapted by T. R. N.

Crofts, M.A.
L'Histoirb d'une Tulipe. By A. Dumas.

Adapted by T. R. N. Crofts, M.A. Second

Edition,
L'Histoirb de Pierre et Camille. By'A. de

Musset. Adapted by J. B. Patterson, M.A.
M^moires de Cadichon. By Madam de

S^gur. Adapted by J. F. Rhoades.
♦D'AjACCib A Saint Hel&nb. By A. Dumas.

Adapted by F. W. M. Draper, M.A.
Rrmy le Chevribr. By E. Souvestre.

Adapted by E. E. Chottin, B>es*L.


Simplified German Texts

Edited byT. R. G. CROFTS, M.A. Fcap, Bvo, is.


Dbr Mullbr am Rhein. By C. Brentano.
Adapted by Florence A. Ryan.

DiB GEsqHiCHTB yon Pster Schlemihl.
ByA. V. Chamisso. Adapted by R. C. Perry.


Die Nothelfer. By W. H. Riehl. Adapted

by P. B. Ingham, M.A.
Undine und Huldbrand. By La Motte

Fouqui. Adapted byT. R. N. Crofts,.M.A,


36


Messrs. Methubn's Catalogue


8iz Ages of European History

Edited by A. H. JOHNSON, M.A. With Maps. Crown Svo. 2s. 6d.


Age op the Enlightened Despot, the,

1660-1780. A. H. Johnson.
Central Period of the Middle Age, the,

9i8<x373. Beatrice A. Lees.
Dawn of MsDiiGVAL £urope, the, 476.918.

J. H. B. Mastenaan.


End of the Middle Age, the, 1273-1453.
E. C. Lodge.

Europe in Renaissance and Reforma-
tion, 1453-1659. M. A. Hollings.

Remaking of Modern Europe, the, 1769-
X878. J. A. R. Marriott.


Methaen's Standard Library

CiofA, I J. net; doudie volumes, is. 6d,net, Paper, 6d. net; double volume, is, net.


The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius.

Translated by R. Graves.
Sense and Sensibility. Jane Austen.
Essays and Counsels and The New

Atlantis. Francis Bacon, Lord Voalam.
Religio Medici and Urn Burial. Sir

Thomas Browne. The text collated by

A. R. Waller.
The Pilgrim's Progress. John Bunyan.
Reflections on the French Revolution.

Edmund Burke.
The Poems and Songs of Robert Burns.

Double Volume.
The Analogy of Religion, Natural and

Revealed. Joseph Butler.
Miscellaneous Poems. T. Chatterton.
The Rowley Poems. T. Chatterton.
Tom Jones. Henry Fielding. Treble Vol.
Cranford. Mrs. Gaskell.
The Poems and Plays of Oliver Goldsm ith.
The Case is Altered. Every Man in

His Hum3Ur. Every Man Out of His

Humour. Benjonson.
Cynthia's, Revels. Pobtastbr. Ben

Jonson.


The Poems of John Keats. Double voldfne.

The Text has been collated by E. de

S^lincourt.
On the Imitation of Christ. By Thomas

k Kempis. Translation byC. Bigg.
A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy

Life, W. Law.
Paradise Lost. John Milton.

ElKONOKLASTES AND THE TenURE OF KiNGS

AND Magistrates. John Milton.
Utopia and Poems. Sir Thomas More.

The Republic of Plato. Translated by

Sydenham and Taylor. Double Volume.

Iranslation revised by W. H. D. Rouse.
The Little Flowers of St. Francis.

Translated by W. Hey wood.
The Works of William Shakespeare. In

xo volumes. '
The Poems of Percy Bysshe Shelley. I n
4 volumea With Introductions by C. D.
Locock.
The Life of Nelson. Robert Southey.

The Natural History and Antiquities of
Sblbornb. Gilbert White.


Textbooks of Science

Edited by G. F. GOODCHILD, M.A., B.Sc.. and G. R. MILLS, M.A.

Fully Illustrated.


Complete School Chemistry, The. By F.

M. Oldham, B.A. With 126 Illustrations.

Third Edition. Cr, Zvo. 4s. 6d.
Elementary Science for Pupil Teachers.

Physics Section. By W, T. Clough,

A.R.C.SC. (Lond.), F.C.S. Chemistry

Section. By A. E. Dunstan, B. Sc. (Lond. ),

F.C.S. With 2 Plates and 10 Diagrams.

Cr. Svo. as.
Examples in Elementary Mechanics,

Practical, Graphical, and Theoretical. By

W. J. Dobbs, M.A. With 52 Diagrams.

Cr. Zvo. ss.
Examples in Physics. By C. E. Jackson,

M.A. Cr. Zvo, 2f. 6d.
First Year Physics. By C. E. Jackson,M.A.

With 51 Diagrams. Cr. Svo. is. 6d.
Outlines ok Physical Chemistry. By
. George Senter, B.Sc. (Lond.), Ph.D. With

many Diagrams. Cr. Svo, y, 6d.


Organic Chemistry, An, for Schools and
Technical Institutes. By A. E. Dunstan,
B.Sc. (Lond.), F.CS. With many
Illustrations. Cr. Bvo. 2s. 6d.

Plant Life, Studies in Garden and School.
By Horace F. Jones, F.C.S. With 320
Illustrations. Cr. SzHf. 3;. Od.

Practical Chemistry. Parti. W. French,
M.A. Fifth Edition. Cr. Svo. is. 6d.

Practical Chemistry. Part 11. W. French,
M. A., and T. H. Boardman, M.A. Cr. Svo.
IS. 6d.

♦Practical Chemistry for Schools and
Technical Institutes, A. By A. E. Dun-
stan, B.Sc, (Lond.), F.C.S. Cr. Svo. 2s. 6d.

Practical Mechanics. S. H. Welk.
Fourth Edition. , Cr. Svo. y. 6d.

Technical Arithmetic and Geometry.
By C T. MiUis, M.LM.E. Cr. Svo.
3f . 6d.


General Literature:


37


TeztlM>ok8 of Technology

■ -Fully Illustrated,


Builders' Quantities. By H. C. Grubb.
Cr. Zvo, 41. td.

Carpentry and Joinery. By F. C. Webber.
Fifth Edition, Cr. Svo, y. 6d.

Electric Light and Power: An Intro-
duction to the Study of Electrical Engineer-
ing. By E. E. Brooks, B.Sc. (Lond.). and
W. H. N. James, A.M.I.E.E., A.R.C.Sc.
Cr. Zvo, 4^. 6d.

Engineering Workshop Practice. By
C. C. Allen. Cr. Zvo, 3; . 6d,


How TO Make a Dress. By J. A. E. Wopd,

Fourth Edition, ' Cr. Bvo. is. 6d.
Instruction in Cookery. A.P.Thomson.

Cr. 8vo. as. 6d.
Introduction to the Study of Textile

Design, An. By Aldred F. Barker. Dgm^

8vo. js. 6d.
MiLUNERY, Theoretical and Practical.

By Clare Hill. Fourth Edition. Cr.Bvo. ss.
K&povsst Metal Work. By A. C. Horth.

Cr. Bvo. 2s. td.


Handbooks of Theology


The Doctrine op the Incarnation. By R.

L. Ottley, D.D. Fourth Edition rezfised.

Demy Bvo. 12J. 6d.
A History of Early Christian Doctrine.

By J. F. Bethune-Baker, M.A. Demy Bvo.

10s. 6d.
An Introduction to the History of

Religion. By F. B. Jevons. M.A.,
. hitt.D. Fourth Edition. Dewy Bvo, jos,6d.


An Introduction to the History of thb
Creeds. By A. E. Bcuh, D.D» D^ny
Bvo. JOS. 6d,

The Philosophy of Religion in England
AND America. By Alfred Caldecott, D.D.
Demy Bvo, xos, 6a,

The XaXIX. Articles of the Church ot
England. Edited by E. C. S. Gibson,
D.D. Sixth Edition. Demy Bvo. xaj.6<f.


The Westminster Commentaries

General Editor, WALTER LOCK, D.D., Warden of Keble CQllcge,


Dean Ireland's Professor of Exe

The Acts of the Apostles. Edited by R.
B. Rackham, M.A. Demy Bvo, Fourth
Edition, 10s, 6d,

The First Epistle of Paul the Aposti b
TO THE Corinthians. Edited by H. L.
Goudge, M.A. Second Ed, Demy Bvo, 6s,

A Commentary on Exodus. By A. H.
M'Neile, B.D. With a Map and 3 Plans.
Demy Bvo. los. 6d,


gesis in the Univei'sity of Oxford.

The Book of Ezekiel. Edited H. A. Red*
path, M.A., D.Litt. Demy Bvo, los. 6d,

The Book of Genesis. Edited with Intro-
duction and Not^s by S. R. Driver, D.D.
Seventh Edition Demy Bvo. lox. 6d.

The Book of Job. Edited by E. C S. Gibson,
D.D. Second Edition, Demy Bvo. 6s.

The Epistle of St. James. . Edited with In-
troduction and Notes by R. J. Koowling,
D.D. Demy Bvo. 6*. , .


Part II. — Fiction


Albanesi (E. Maria). StJSANNAH AND
ONE OTHER. Fourth Edition. Cr.
Bvo, 6s.

THE BLUNDER OF AN INNOCENT.
Second Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

CAPRICIOUS CAROLINE. Second Edi-
tion, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

LOVE AND LOUISA. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s. Also Medium Bvo. 6d,

PETER, A PARASITE. Cr. Bvo. 6s,

THE BROWN f:YES OF MARY. Third
Edition, Cr, Bvo, 6s.

I KNOW A MAIDEN. Third Edition,
Cr, Bvo, 6s, Also Medium Bvo. 6d.


THE INVINCIBLE AMELIA: or, Thb
Polite Adventuress. Third Edition,
Cr, Bvo. 3s. 6d, ...

Annesley (Maude). THIS DAY'S MAD-
NESS. Cr.Bvo, 6s.

Anstey (P.). A BAYARD FRObIi
BENGAL. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Austen (Jane). PRIDE AND PREjtX.
DICE. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Avellne (Francis). ARNOUL THE EI^jQ-
LISHMAN. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

Bagot (Riciiard). A ROMAN MY3TERX.
Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo, 6d. ' *


S8


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


THR PASSPORT. Fourth Edition. Cf.

Zvo. 6f.

TEMPTATION. Fifth Edition, Cr, 8m.
6*.

ANTHONY CITTHBERT. Fourth EdUion
Cr, Ssvk 6x.

LOVE'S PROXV. A New Edition. Cr,Bvo,

DONNA DIANA. Second Edition. Cr.
St/o. 6s. Also Medium 8z>o. 6d,

CASTING OF NETS. Twef/tk Edition. Cr.
Svo, 6s. Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

Balfour (Andrew). BY STROKE OF
SWORD. Medium 8vo. 6d.

Ball (Oona H.) (Barbara Burke). THEIR
OXFORD YEAR. With i6 Ulustrattons
Cr, 8zv. 6s.

BARBARA GOES TO OXFORD. With i6
IlhistrntioAs. TMrdEdition. Cr. Bvo, 6s,

Baring-Qould (S.). ARMINELL. Ftyth
Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

URITH. Fifth Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6$,
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

IN THE ROAR OF THE SEA. Seventh
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s,
Also Medium Bvo. 6d,

CHEAP JACK ZITA. Medium Bvo, 6d.

MARGERY OF QUETHER. Third
Edition. Cr: Bvo. 6r.

THE QUEEN OF LOVE. Fifth Edition.
Cr, ^vo. 6s. Also Medium Bvo, 6d.

JACQUETTA. Third Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6e.

KITTY ALONE. Fi/ih Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6$.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

N0£MI. Illustrated. Fourth Edition. Cr.
Bvo. 6s. Also Medium Bvo. 6d,

THR BROOM-SQUIRE. Illustrated.
Fifth Edition, Cr. Bvo, 6s.
Also Medium Bvo, 6d,

DARTMOOR IDYLLS. Cr. ^o. 6s.

GUAVAS THE TINNER. Illustrated.
Second Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s,

BLADYS OF THE STEWPONEY. Illus-
trated. Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s,

PABO THE PRIEST. Cr, Btro. 6s.

WINEFRED. Illustrated. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s. Also Mediunt Bvo. 6d.

ROYAL GEORGIE. Illustrated. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

CHRIS OF ALL SORTS. Cr. Svo. 6s.

INDEWISLAND. Second Ed. Cr.Bvo. 6r.

THE FROBISHERS. Crown Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6di •

DOMITIA. Illus. Second Ed: Cr. Bro. 6s.

MRS. CURGENVEN OF CtJROENVEN.
Crown Bvo. 6s.

LITTLE TU'PENNY. Medium Bvo. 6d.'

FURZE BLOOM. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Bamett (Edith A.). A WILDERNESS
WINNER. Second Edition. Cr, Bvo. 6s.


BarrCJMesV LAUGHING THROUGH
A WILDERNESS. Cr, Bvo. 6s.

Barr (Robert). IN THE MIDST OF
ALARMS. Third Edition. Cr.Bvo, 6s,
Aho MediumBvo, 6d,

THE COUNTESS TEKLA. Fourth
Edition, Cr, Bvo, 6s.
Also Medium Bvo, 6d.

THE MUTABLE MANY. Third Edition.
Cr. Bvo, 6s. Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

THE TEMPESTUOUS PETTICOAT.
Illustrated. Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

JENNIE BAXTER JOURNALIST.
Medium Bvo. 6d.

Begble (Harold). THE CURIOUS AND
DIVERTING ADVENTURES OF SIR
JOHN SPARROW; or, The Progress
OP AN Open Mind. With a Frontispiece.
Second Edition. Cr, Bvo. 6s,

Belloc (H.X EMMANUEL BURDEN,
MERCHANT. Wi^ 36 Illustrations by
G.K. Chesterton. Second Ed. Cr.Bvo, 6s,

A CHANGE IN THE CABINET. Second
Edition* Cr, Bvo. 6s,

Benton (B. P.) DODO : A Detail or the
Dat. Fifteenth Edition. Cr. Bro, 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d,
THE VINTAGE. Medium Bvo. 6d.

BeiMon (Margaret). SUBJECT TO
VANITY. Cr.Bvo, y.6d,

Birmingham (George A.). THE BAD
TIMES. Second Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

SPANISH GOLD. Fourth Edition, Cr,
BnfO. 6s,

THE SEARCH PARTY. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Bowles (O. Stewart). A GUN-ROOM
DITTY BOX. Second Ed. Cr.Bvo. is.Cd

Bretherten (Ralph Harold). THE

MILL. Cr. Bvo, 6s,

AN HONEST MAN. Second Edition. Cr,
Bvo.' 6s.

Bronte (Charlotte). SHIRLEY. Medium
Bvo, 6d,

Barton (J. Bloundelle). ACROSS THE
SALT SEAS. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Caffyn (Mr».) (* Iota'). ANNE MAULE-
VERER. MediumBvo. 6d.

Campbell (Mrs. Vere). F E R R I B Y.
Second Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s.

Capes (Bernard). THE EXTRAOR-
DINARY CONFESSIONS OF DIANA
PLEASE. Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

A JAY OF ITALY. Fourth Ed. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

LOAVES AND FISHES. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

A ROGUE'S TRAGEDY. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE GREAT SKENE MYSTERY.
Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE LOVE STORY OF ST. BEL. Second
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.


Fiction


39


THS LAKE OF WINE. Medhim 8w. td.
Carey (Wymond). LOVE THE JUDGE.
Second Edition. Cf. Bvo. 6s.

Qutle (Agnes and EfertonX FLOWER
O' THE ORANGE,^ and Other Tales.
With a Frontispiece in Colour by A. H.
Buckland. Third Edition, Cr. tvo. 6s.

Charlton (Randal). MAVE. Second
Edition. Cr. 9vo. 6s.

. THE VIRGIN WIDOW, Cr. Zvo. 6s.

ChesneyCWeatherby). THE MYSTERY
OF A BUNGALOW.- Second Edition.
Cr, Svo. 6s,

aifford (Mrs. W. K.). THE GETTING
WELL OF DOROTHY. Illustrated by
Gordon Brownb. Second Edition. Cr. 2ivo,
2^, 6d.

A FLASH OF SUMMER. Medium Bvo, 6d.

MRS. KEITH'S CRIME. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Conrad (Joseph). THE SECRET AGENT:
A Simple Tale. Fourth Ed, Cr. Svo. 6s.

A SET OF SIX. Fourth Edition, Cr. 8cv. 6s.

Corbett (Julian). A BUSINESS IN
GREAT WATERS. Third Edition. Cr,
Zvo, 6s, Also Medium Svo, 6d.

Corelll (Marie). A ROMANCE OF TWO
WORLDS. Twenty Ninth Ed. Cr.Svo, 6s.

VENDETTA. Twenty-Seventh Edition, Cr.
tvo. 6s.

THELMA. Thirty-NinthEd. Cr.Svo, 6s.

ARDATH: THE StORY OF A DEAD
Self. Nineteenth Edition. Cr. Svo. 6s.

THE SOUL OF LILITH. Sixteenth Edi-
tion. Cr. Svo. 6s.

WORMWOOD. Sixteenth Ed. Cr.Svo. 6s.

BARABBAS: A DREAM OF THE
WORLD'S TRAGEDY, Forty-Fourth
Edition. Cr. Svo. 6s.

THE SORROWS OF SATAN. Fifty-Fifth
Edition, Cr. Sivo. 6x»

THE MASTER CHRISTIAN. Twelfth
Edition, xjjth Thousand, Cr. Svo. 6s.

TEMPORAL POWER: A STUDY IN
SUPREMACY. Second Edition. xsQth
Thousand. Cr. Svo. 6s.

GOD'S GOOD MAN : A SIMPLE LOVE

STORY. Thirteenth Edition. 150th Thou-

sand. Cr. Svo. 6s.
HOLY ORDERS: the Tragedy op a

Quiet Life. Second Edition. xaoth

7housand. Crown Svo. 6s,
THE MIGHTY ATOM. Tzoenty-seventh

Edition. Cr, Svo, 6s,
BOY: a Sketch. Eleventh Edition, Cf\ Svo.

6s.
CAMEOS. Thirteenth Edition, Cr, Svo, 6s.

Cotea (Mrs. Everard). See Duncan (Sara

Jeannette).
Cotterell (Constance). THE VIRGIN

AND THE SCALES. Illustrated. Second

Edition, Cr, Svo, 6s,


Crockett/ (S. R.), LOCHINVAR. Illus-
trated. Third Edition. Cr.Svo, to. ' •
Also Medium Svo. 6d.

THE STANDARD BEARER. Cr, Svo. dx.

Croker(Mra. B. M.). THE OLD CAN.
TONMENT. Cr.Svo, 6s.

JOKASN A. Second Edition, Cr,9p0, 6s,
Also Medium Svo, 6d,

THE HAPPY VALLEY. Fourth Edition,
Cr. Svo, 6s.

A NINE DAYS' WONDER. Third
Edition, Cr. Svo. 6s,

PEGGY OF THE BARTONS. Seventh
Ed, Cr, Svo, 6s. Also Medium Svo, 6d,

ANGEL. Ftfth Edition. Cr,Svo, 6f,

Also Medium Svo, 6d,
A STATE SECRET. Third Edition. Cr.
Svo. y. 6d. Also Medium Svo. 6d,

KATHERINE THE ARROGANT. Fifth
Edition, Cr, Svo. 6s^

CrosUe (Mary). DISCIPLES. Second Ed*
Cr, %vo, 6s, ■ ■

Cothell (Edith E.). ONLY A GUARD.
ROOM DOG. Illustrated by W. Parkin-
son. Crown SvOf 3/. 6d.

Dawson (Warrington). THE SCAR.
Second Edition. Cr. Svo, 6s.

THE SCOURGE Cr.Svo. 6s.

Deaidn (Dorothea). THE YOUN.Q

COLUMBINE. With a Fromtispicce by
Lewis Baumer. Cr. Svo. 6s,
Deane (Mary). THE OTHER PAWN.
Cr, Svo. 6s.

Doyle (A. Conan). ROUND THE RED
LAMP. Eleventh Edition, Cr. Svo, 6s,
Also Medium Svo, 6d.

Dumas (Aleaundre). See page 46.

Duncan (Sara Jeannette) (Mrs. Everard
Cotes). THOSE DELIGHTFUL
AMERICANS. Medium Svo. 6d,

A VOYAGE OF CONSOLATION. Ulus-
trated. ThirdEdition. Cr, Svo. 6s,
Also Medium. Svo, 6d.

COUSIN CINDERELLA. Second Edition,
Cr. Svo. 6s.

THE BURNT OFFERING. Cr. Svo. 6s,

Bldridge(QeorseD.). INTHE POTTER'S
HOUSE. Cf. Svo. 6s.

Ellot (George). THE MILL ON THE
FLOSS. Medium Svo. 6d.

Erskine (Mrs. Steuart). THE MAGIC
PLUMES. Cr, Svo. 6s.

Penn (Q. ManvlUeX SYD BELTON ; or,
The Boy who would not go to Sea. Illus-
trated by Gordon Browne. Second Ed.
Cr. Svo, 3*. 6d,

Pindlater(J. H.). THE GREEN GRAVES
OF BALGOWRIE. Fi/ih Edition.
Cr. Svo. 6i. Also Medium Svo. 6d.

THE LADDER TO THE STARS. Second
Edition, Cr. Svo. 6*. ^


46


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


Pladkter (Mary). A NARROW WAY.

Third Edition, Cr.Zvo, 6f.
OVER THE HILLS. Second Edition. Cr,

Bvo. 6s.
THE ROSE OF JOY. TAir^ Edition.

Cr. Zvo. 6s.
A BLIND BIRD'S NEST. With 8 Illos-

trations. Secottd Edition, Cr. 9vo. 6s.

Pftzpatrfck (K.) THE WEANS AT

ROWALLAN. Illustrated. Second Edi-

tion, Cft. Bvo, 6s.
Francis (M. E.). (Mrs. Francis Blundell).

STEPPING WESTWARD. SecondEdi-

tion* Cr. Bvo, 6s,
MARGERY O* THE MILL. Third

Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s.
HARDY4DN.THE-H1LL. Third Edition,

Cr, Bvo, 6s,

GALATEA OF THE WHEATFIELD.
Second Edition, Cr, Bxto, 6s,

PraMT (Mrs. Hash). THE SLAKING
OF THE SWORD. Second Edition,
\Cr» Bvo* 6s,

GIANNELLA. Cr,Bvo, 6s,

IN THE SHADOW OF THE LORD.

Third Edition. CrottnBvo, 6e.
Fry (B. and C.B.). A MOTHER'S SON.

Ei/th Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s.

Paner-Maitlaad (Ella). BLANCHE
ESMEAD. Second Edition, Cr.Bvo, 6s.

Qalloa (Tom). RICKERBY'S FOLLY.
Medium Bvo. 6d.

Qaskell (Mrs.). CRANFORD. Medium

Bxfo. 6d.
MARY BARTON. Medium Bvo. 6d.
NORTH AND SOUTH. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Gates (Eleanor). THE PLOW-WOMAN.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Gerard (Dorothea). HOLY MATRI.
MONY. Medium Bvo. 6d.

MADE OF MONEY. Medium Bvo. 6d. .

THE IMPROBABLE IDYL. Third
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE BRIDGE OF LIFE. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE CONQUEST OF LONDON. Medium
Bvo. ^d.

Glbbs (Philip). THE SPIRIT OF RE-
VOLT. Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Qissine (George). THE TOWN TRA-
VELLER. Medium Bvo. 6d.

THE CROWN OF LIFE. Cr. Bvo. 6s,
Also Medium Bvo, 6d.

Qlanvine (Ernest). THE INCA'S TREA-
SURE. Illustrated. Cr. Bvo. 3*. 6d.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

THE KLOOF BRIDE. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Qleiff (Charles). BUNTER'S CRUISE.
Illustrated. Cr, Bvo. ^s. 6d.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

Qrlmm(TheBrother8X GRIMM'S FAIRY
TALES. Illustrated. Medium Bvo. 6d.


Halff (J. C). IN THE GRIP OP THE
TRUSTS: A Story or 19x4. Cr. Bvo.
IS. net,

Haoiliton (M.). THE FIRST CLAIM.
Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Harraden (Beatrice). IN VARYING

MOODS. Fourteenth Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

THE SCHOLAR'S DAUGHTER. Fourth
Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

HILDA STRAFFbRD and THE REMIT-
TANCE MAN. Twelfth Ed. Cr. Bvo.
6s.

INTERPLAY. Fifth Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

Harrod (P.) (Frances Forbes Robertson).

THE TAMING OF THE BRUTE. Cr.
Bvo. 6s,

Hart (Mabel). SISTER K. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

Hichens (Robert). THE PROPHET OF
BERKELEY SQUARE. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

TONGUES OF CONSCIENCE. Third
Edition, Cr. Bvo, 6s.

FELIX. Sixth Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE WOMAN WITH THE FAN. Seventh
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

BYEWAYS. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

THE GARDEN OF ALLAH. Eighteenth
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE BLACK SPANIEL. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE CALL OF THE BLOOD. Seventh
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s,

BARBARY SHEEP. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 3X. 6d.

Hope (Anthony). THE GOD IN THE
CAR. Eleventh Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s.

A CHANGE OF AIR. Sixth Ed. Cr.Bvo, 6s.
Also Medium Bvo, 6d.

A MAN OF MARK. Sixth Ed, Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo, 6d.

THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT AN-
TONIO. Sixth. Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

PHROSO. Illustrated by H. R. Millar.
Eighth Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s.
Also Medium Boo. 6d,

SIMON DALE. Illustrated. Eighth Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE KING'S MIRROR. Fourth Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s,

QUISANTE. Fourth Edition. Cr,Bvo. 6s.

THE DOLLY DIALOGUES. Cr. Bvo, 6s.
Also Medium Bvo, 6d,

A SERVANT OF THE PUBLIC lUus-
trated. Fourth Edition, Cr, Bvo. 6s.

TALES OF TWO PEOPLE. With a Fron-
tispiece by A. H. BucxLAND. Third Ed.
Cr. Bvo, 6s,

THE GREAT MISS DRIVER. With a
Frontispiece by A. H. Buckland. Fourth
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.


Fiction


41


HoraunsT (B. W.\

" LES.


..^ „ ^ DEAD MEN TELL

No TALES. Medium %vo. td,

Housman (Clemence). THE LIFE OF
SIRAGLOViS.EDEGALIS. Cr.Zvo.6f,

Hueffer (Ford Madox). AN ENGLISH
GIRL: A Romance. Second Edition,
Cr. %vo. 6s.

MR. APQJ^LO: A Just Possiblk Story.
Second Edition. Cr. Sow. 6f.

Hutten (Baroness vpn). THE HALO.
Fifth Edition. Cr. %vo. 6*.

Hyne (C. J. Cutclifle). MR. HOR-
ROCKS, PURSER. Fourth Edition.
Cr. Zvo. 6f.

PRINCE RUPERT, THE BUCCANEER.
Illustrated. Third Edition. Cr. Zvo. 6s.

Ingraham (J. H.). THE THRONE OF
DAVID. Medium Zvo. 6d.

Jacobs (W. W.). MANY CARGOES.
Thirty.firsi Edition. Cr. Zvo. 3*. 6d.

SEA URCHINS. Fifteenth Edition.. Cr.
Zvo. y. 6d.

A MASTER OF CRAFT. Illustrated by Will
OwBN. Eighth Edition. Cr, Zvo, 3*. 6d.

LIGHT FREIGHTS. Illustrated by Will
OwKN and Others. Seventh Edition. Cr.
Zvo. 3*. 6^.

THE SKIPPER'S WOOING. Ninth Edi-
tion. Cr. Zvo. y. 6d.

AT SUNWICH PORT. Illustrated by
Will Owen. Ninth Edition. Cr.Zvo. •y.Sd.

DIALSTONE LANE. Illustrated by Will
Owen. Seventh Edition. Cr. Zvo. 3s. 6d.

ODD CRAFT. Illustrated by Will Owen.
Third Edition. Cr. Zvo. y. 6d.

THE LADY OF THE BARGE. IJlustiated.
Eighth Edition. Cr. Zvo. y. 6d.

SALTHAVEN. Illustrated by Will Owen.

Second Edition. Cr. Zvo. y. 6d.
SAILORS' KNOTS. Cr. Zvo, 3s. 6d.

James (Hennr). THE SOFT SIDE. Sec0nd
Edition. Cr. Zvo, 6s.

THE BETTER SORT. Cr. Zvo. 6s.

THE GOLDEN BOWL. Third Edition,
Cr. Zvo. 6s.

Keays (H. A. Mitchell). HE THAT
EATETH BREAD WITH ME. Cr,
Zvo. 6s.

KesterCVauirban). THE FORTUNES OF
THE LAN DRAYS. Cr. Zvo. 6s.

Lawless (Hon. Emily). WITH ESSEX
IN IRELAND. Cr. Zvo. 6s.

Le Queux (William). THE HUNCH-
BACK OF WESTMINSTER. Third Ed.
Cr. Zvo. 6s. Also Medium Zvo. 6d.

THE CLOSED BOOK. Third Edition.

Cr. Zvo. 6s,
THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW.

Illustrated. Third Edition. Cr. Zvo. 6s,
BEHIND THE THRONE. Third Edition,

Cr. Zvo, 6s,


THE CROOKED WAY. Second Edition.

Cr, Zvo. 6s.
Levett- Yeats (S. K.). ORRAIN. Second

Edition. Cr, Zvo, 6e. Also Medium

Zvo, 6d,

THE TRAITOR'S WAY. Medium Zr>o. 6d.

Unton(E. Lynn). THE TRUE HISTORY
OF JOSHUA DAVIDSON. Medium
Zvo. 6d,

London (Jack). WHITE FANG. With a
Frontispiece by Charles Rivingston
Bull. Sixth Edition, Cr. Zvo. 6s.

Lubbock (BasU). DEEP SEA WAR-
RIORS. ,Iil9Strated. Second Edition, Cr.
Zvo. 6s.

*LH<:;as(St.J[oly|i). THE FIRST ROUND.
Cr. Zvo. 6s,

Lyall (E4nB). DERRICK VAUGHAN,
NOVELET. 43rd T/iousattd. Cr. Zvo.
3s, 6d. Also Medium Zvo. 6d.

Maartens(Maarten). THE NEW RELI-
GION : A Modern Novel. Third Edi-
tion. Cr. Zvo. 6s.

BROTHERS ALL; More Stories of
Dutch Peasant Life. Third Edition.
Cr. Zvo. 6s.

THE PRICE OF LIS DORIS. Cr. Zvo. 6s,

M*Carthy(JastinH.). THE LADY OF
LOYALTY HOUSE. Illustr»ted. Third
Edition. Cr. Zvo, 6s.

THE DRYAD. Second Edition. Cr.Zvo. 6s.
THE DUKE'S MOTTO. Third Edition.
Cr. Zvo, 6s.

Macdonald (Ronald). A HUMAN
TRINITY. Second Edition. Cr. ^vo. 6s.

MacnauffhlUin (S.). THE FORTUNE OF
CHRISTINA M*NAB. Fourth Edition.
Cr, Zvo, 6s.

Malet (Lucas). COLONEL ENDERBY'S
WIFE. Fourth Edition. Cr. Zvo. 6s.

A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION. Second
Edition. Cr. Zvo, 6s,
Also Medii^pp Zvo, 6d,

THE WAGES OF SIN. Sixteenth Edition.

Cr, Zt(o, 6s.
THE CARISSIMA. Fifth Ed. Cr.Zvo. 6s.
Also Medium Zvo. 6d.

THE GATELESS BARRIER. Fifth Edi-
tion, Cr, Zvo. 6s.

THE HISTORY OF SIR RICHARD
CALMADY. Seventh Edition. Cr.Zvo, 6s.

Mann (Mrs. M. E.). OLIVIA'S SUMMER,

Second Edition. Cr. Zvo. dr.
A LOST ESTATE. A New Ed. Cr.Zvo. 6s,
Also Medium Zvo. 6d.

THE PARISH OF PILBY. A New Edition.
Cr. Zvo, 6s.

THE PARISH NURSE. Fourth Edition.
Cr, Zzto. 6s.

GRAN'MA'SJANE. Cr.Zvo, 6s,


42


Messrs. Methuen*s Catalogue


MRS. PETER HOWARD. Second Edition,
Cr. Svo, 6s. Also Mediunt Bvo. 6d.

A WINTER'S TALE. A New Edition,
Cr, Zvo. 6s, Also Medium Bvo, 6d,

ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS. A New
Edition. Cr, Zvo. 6s,
Also Medium Zvo, 6d,

ROSE AT HONEYPOT. Third Ed. Cr.

Zvo. 6s,
THERE WAS ONCE A PRINCE. Illus-

trated by M. B. Mann. Cr, Zvo, 31. 6d.
WHEN ARNOLD COMES HOME. Illus-

trated by M. B. Mann. Cr, Zvo, 31. 6d.

THE EGLAMORE PORTRAITS. Third

Edition. Cr, Bvo, 6s,
THE MEMORIES OF RONALD LOVE.

Cr. Bvo, 6s,

THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. Third
Edition, Cr, Bvo, 6s,

A SHEAF OF CORN. Second Edition,

Cr, Bvo, 6s,
THE HEART-SMITER. Second Edition.

Cr, Bvo. 6s,
AVENGING CHILDREN. Cr, Bvo, 6s,
THE PATTEN EXPERIMENT. Medium

Bvo, 6d,

THE CEDAR STAR. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Marchmont (A. W.). MISER HOAD-
LEY'S SECRET. MediumBvo, 6d,

A MOMENTS ERROR. MediumBvo. 64.

Marriott (Charles). GENEVRA. Second

Edition, Cr, Bvo. 6s.
Marryat (Captain). PETER SIMPLE

Medium Bvo, 6d,
JACOB FAITHFUL. Medium Bvo, 6d.
Marsh (Richard). THE TWICKENHAM

PEERAGE. Second Edition. Cr.Bvo, 6s,
Also Medium Bvo. 6d,
THE MARQUIS OF PUTNEY. Second

Edition, Cr, Bvo, 6s.
IN THE SERVICE OF LOVE. Third,

Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s,
THE GIRL AND THE MIRACLE.

Third Edition, Cr.Zvo. 6s.
THE COWARD BEHIND THE CUR-
TAIN. Cr. 9vo. 6s.
THE SURPRISING HUSBAND. Second

Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s.
A ROYAL INDISCRETION. Cr, Bvo, 6s.
A METAMORPHOSIS. Medium Bvo. 6d.
THE GODDESS. Medium Bvo. 6d.
THE JOSS. MediumBvo, 6d,
Marshall (Archibald). MANY JUNES.

Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE SQUIRE'S DAUGHTER. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

Ma8on(A. E. W.). CLEMENTINA.

Illustrated. Third Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
Mathers (Helen). HONEY. Fourth Ed,

Cr. Bvo. 6s, Also Medium Bvo, 6d,


GRIFF OF GRIFFITHSCOURT. Second

Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
THE FERRYMAN Second Edition. Cr,

Bvo. 6s.
TALLY-HOI Fourth Edition. Cr.Bvo, 6s,
SAM'S SWEETHEART. MediumBvo. 6d,

Maud (Constance). A DAUGHTER OF
FRANCE. With a Frontispiece. Second
Edition, Cr, Bvo, 6s.

MaxwelKW. B.). VIVIEN. Ninth Edi-
tion. Cr. Bvo. 6s,

THE RAGGED MESSENGER. Third
Edition, Cr. Bvo, 6s,

FABULOUS FANCIES. Cr. Bvo, 6s.

THE GUARDED FLAME. Seventh Edi-
tion, Cr, Bvo, 6s,

ODD LENGTHS. Second Ed. Cr, Bvo, 6s.

HILL RISE. Fourth Edition, Cr, Bvo, 6s,

THE COUNTESS OF MAYBURY : Be-
TWEEN You AND I. Fourih Edition,
Cr, Bvto, 6s,

Meade (L. T.). DRIFT. Second Edition,

Cr, Bvo, 6s. Also Medium^ Bvo, 6d.
RESURGAM. Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

VICTORY. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

A GIRL OF THE PEOPLE. Illustrated.

Fourth Edition, Cr. Bvo, y. 6d.
HEPSY GIPSY. Illustrated. Cr. Bvo. 2s. 6d.
THE HONOURABLE MISS : A Story of

AN Old-fashioned Town. Illustrated.

Second Edition. Cr. Bvo, jr. 6d,
Melton (R.). CiESAR'S WIFE. Second

Edition, Cr, Bvo, 6s

Meredith (Ellis). HEART OF MY

HEART. Cr. Bvo. 6s
Miller (Esther). LIVING LIES. Third

Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s,
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

Mitford (Bertram). THE SIGN OF THE

SPIDER. Illustrated. Sixth Edition.

Cr, Bzw, 3^. 6d, Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
IN THE WHIRL OF THE RISING.

Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE RED DERELICT. Second Edition.

Cr, Bvo. 6s,
MoIesworth(Mrs.). THE RED GRANGE.

Illustrated. Second Edition, Cr, Bvo,

3^. 6€U
Montgomery (K. L.). COLONEL KATE.

Second Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Montresor (P. P.). THE ALIEN. Third
Edition, Cr, Bvo. 6s.
Also MetUum Bvo. 6d
Morrison (Arthur). TALES OF MEAN
^ STREETS. Seventh Edition, Cr.Bvo. 6s,

A CHILD OF THE JAGO. Ftyth Edition,

Cr. Bvo. 6s,
THE HOLE IN THE WALL. Fourth Edi-

tion, Cr. Bvo, 6s. Also Medium Bvo. 6d.


Fiction


43


TO LONDON TOWN. Second Ed, Cr.

DIVERS VANITIES. Cr. 8w. 6s,

Nesbit <E.). (Mrs. H. Bland). THE RED
HOUSE. Illustrated. Fourth Edition,
Cr. Zvo, 6x. Also Medium Sva. 6d,

Noble (Edward). LORDS OF THE SEA.
Second Edition. Cr, Ztw, 6f.

Norris (W. E.X HARRY AND URSULA:
A Story with two Sides to it. Second
Edition, Cr. Zvo. 6s,

HIS GRACE. Medium Svo. 6d.

GILES INGILBY. Medium ivo. 6d.

THE CREDIT OF THE COUNTY.
Medium Sew. 6d.

LORD LEONARD THE LUCKLESS.
Medium Bvo. 6d.

MATTHEW AUSTIN. Medium ^o. 6d.
CLARISSA FURIOSA. Medium 8cw. 6d.

Oliphant (MfA). THE LADY'S WALK.
Medium Zvo. 6d.

SIR ROBERTS FORTUNE. Medium
&V0. 6d.

THE PRODIGALS. Medium Svo. 6d.

THE TWO MARYS. Medium Bvo. 6d,

Ollivant (Alfred). OWD BOB, THE
GREY DOG OF KENMUIR. With a
Frontispiece. Eleventh Ed. Cr. Zvc. 6s.

Oppenheim (B. Phillips). MASTER OF
MEN. Fourth Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

Ozenham (John). A WEAVER OFWEBS.
With 8 Iliostrations by Maurice Grbif-
FENHAGEN. Fourth Edition. Cr. &vo. 6s.

THE GATE OF THE DESERT. With
a Frontispiece in Photogravure by Harold
ComNG. Fi/th Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

PROFIT AND LOSS. With a Frontispiece
in photogravure by Harold Copping.
Fourth Edition, Cr, Bvo. 6s,

THE LONG ROAD. With a Frontispiece
in Photogravure by Hakold Copping,
Fourth Edition, Cr. Svo. 6s.

THE SONG OF HYACINTH, AND
OTHER STORIES. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

MY LADY OF SHADOWS. Fourth Edi.
tion, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Pain (Barry). LINDLEY KAYS. Third
Edition. Cr. Bvo, ts.

Parker (OUbert). PIERRE AND HIS
PEOPLE. Sixth Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

MRS. FALCHION. Fi/th Edition. Cr.Bvo.
6s.

THE TRANSLATION OF A SAVAGE.
Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE TRAIL OF THE SWORD. Illus-
trated. Tenth Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s.
Also Medium Bvo* 6d.


WHEN VALMOND CAME TO PONT! AC :

The Story of a Lost Napoleon. Sixth

Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s,
Also Medium B-no, 6d,
AN ADVENTURER OF THE NORTH.

The Last Adventures of * Pretty Pierre.'

Fourth Edition. Cr, Bvo. 6s.

THE SEATS OF THE MIGHTY. Illus-
trated. Sixteenth Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE BATTLE OF THE STRONG: a
Romance of Two Kingdoms. Illustrated.
Sixth Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s,

THE POMP OF THE LAVILETTES.
Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 3*. 6d.
Also Medium Bvo, 6d.

NORTHERN LIGHTS. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

"Pasture (Mrs. Henry de la). THE
TYRANT. Cr.Bvo. 6s,

Patterson (J. E.). WATCHERS BY THE
SHORE. Second Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Pemberton (Max). THE FOOTSTEPS

OF A THRONE. lU-strated. Third

Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
I CROWN THEE KING. With lUustra-

tions by Frank Dadd and A. Forrestier.

Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bno. 6d.
LOVE THE HARVESTER: A Story of

THE Shires. Illustrated. Third Edition.

Cr. Bvo. 3*. 6d.

Phillpotts (Eden). LYING PROPHETS.

Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
CHILDREN OF THE MIST. Fifth Edi-
tion. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
THE HUMAN BOY. With a Frontispiece
Sixth Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bxw. 6d.

SONS OF THE MORNING. Second

Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE RIVER. Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. ts.

Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
THE AMERICAN PRISONER. Fourth

Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE SECRET WOMAN. Fourth Edition.

Cr. Bvo. 6s.
KNOCK AT A VENTURE. With a Frontb-

piece. Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE PORTREE VK Fourth ^d. Cr.Bvo. 6s.
THE POACHER'S WIFE. Second EdiHon.

Cr.Bvo. 6s. Also Medium Bvo. 6d
THE STRIKING HOURS. Second Edition.

Crown Bvo. 6s.
THE FOLK AFIELD. Crown Bvo. 6s.

Pickthall (Marmadnke). SAID THE
FISHERMAN. Seventh Ed. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

BRENDLE. Second Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

THE HOUSE OF ISLAM. Third Edi-
tioH, Cr, Bvo. 6s,


44


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


* ' CA. T. QalUer Coucli). THE WHITE
WOLF. Second EdUion. Cr.^. 6s.
Also Medium ^vo, 6d,

THE MAYOR OF TROY. PomikS^ion.
Cr, .8v9. 6s,

MERRY .jGARDEN, and othbx Stores.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

MAJOR VIGOUREUX. Third SdiUoti-
Cr. 8r0. dr.

Querido (Israel). TOIL OF MEN. Tians^
lated by F. S. Arnold. Cr. %vo, 6s,

Rawson (Maud Stepaey^. THE EN-
CHANTED GARDEN. Fourtk Edition.
Cr. Bva, 6s.

THE EASY GO LUCKIES : or, Ohb Way
OP Living. Second Editum. Cr. Bvo. .6s.
HAPPINESS. Cr.Bvo. 6s,

Rhy. (Grace). THE WOOHTG OF
SHEIX.A. Second Edition. Cr. Bvo, 6s,

THE BRIPE. Cr, Bivo. 6s.

Rtdep W. Pett). LOST PROPERTY.
Second Edition. Cr. %vo. 6s,
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.

t.'KB. Second Edition. Cr. 8tv. 6x.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d,

A SON OF THE STATE. Second EdiHon.

Cr. Bvo. 3f . 6d. Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
A BREAKER OF LAWS. A New Edition-

Cr. Bvo. y. 6d.
MRS. GALER'S BUSINESS. Illustrated.

Second Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE WICKHAMSES. Fourth Edition.

Cr. Bvo. 6s.
NAME OF OAKLAND. Third Edition.

Cr. Bvo. 6s.
SPLENDID BROTHER. Second Edition.

Cr, Bvo. 6s. . .

GEORGE and THE GENERAL. Medium

Bvo. 6d.

Ritchie (IVU-f. David Q.). MA^ AND
THE CASSOCK. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Roi>ert8 (C. 0. D.). THE HEART OF
THE ANCIENT WOOD. Cr. Bvo,
$s. 6d.

Robins (Blizabetli). THE CONVERT.
Third Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Rosenlcraiits (Baron PaHe). THE

MAGISTRATE'S OWN CASE. Cr.

Bvo. 6s.

Russell (W. Clark). MY DANISH
SWEETHEART. Illustrated. Ei/ih
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
HIS ISLAND PRINCESS. Illustrated.
Second Edition. Cr, Bvo. 6s.
Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
ABANDONED. Second Edition. Cr.Bao. 6s,

Also Medium Bvo. 6d.
MASTER R(X:KAFELLAR'S VOYAGE.
Illustrated by Gordon Browns. Fourth
Edition. Cr, Bvo. 3X. 6d.


A MARRIAGE AT SEA. Medium Bvo. 6d,

Ryan (Marah ElMs). FOR THE SOUL

OF RAFAEL. Cr.Btfo. 6s.
Sandys (Sydney). JACK CARSTAIRS

OF THE POWER HOUSE. With 4

illustrations by Stanljey L Wood. Cr,

Bzfo, 6s.

Serjeant (AdeHne). THE PASSION OF

PAUL MARILLIER. Crown Bvo. 6s.
THE (JUEST OF GEOFFREY

DARRELL. Cr.Bivo. 6s.
THE COMING OF THE RANDOLPHS.

Cr, Bvo, 6s.
THE PROGRESS OF RACHAEL. Cr.

Bvo. 6s.
BARBARA'S MONEY. Medium Bw. 6d.
THE MASTER OF BEECH WOOD.

Medium Bvo. 6d.
THE YELLOW DIAMOND. Second Ed.

Cr. Bvo. 6s. Also Medium Bvo. 6d
THE LOVE THAT OVERCAME. Medium

Bvoi 6d.

SlMUey(BejrtlWi). ENDEJIBY. Third Ed.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Sidgwick (Mr*. Alfred). THE KINS-
MAN. With 8 filustratjoiv by C. E.
Brock. Third Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6s.

THE SEVERJNS. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Smith (Dorothy V. IK^ace). MISS

MONA. Cr. Bvo. 3X. 6d.
Sonnichsen (Albert). DEEP-SEA VAG A-

BONDS. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Stewart (Newton v.). A SON OF THE
EMPEROR : Bbing Passages from the
Life op Enzio, King op Sardinia and
Corsica. Cr, Bvo. 6s.

Sunbury (George). THE HA'PENNY
MILLIONAIRE. Cr.Bvo. 3s. 6d.

Surtees (R. S.). HANDLEY CROSS.

Illustrated. Medium Bvo. 6d
MR. SPONGES SPORTING TOUR.

Illustrated. Medium Bvo, 6d.
ASKMAMiV^ lUus. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Swayne (Martin LutreU). THE BISHOP
AND THE LADY. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Thurston (E. Temple)* MIRAGE. Fourth
Edition. Cr. BzHf. 6s.

UnderhiH (Evalya). THE COLUMN OF
DUST. Cr. Bvo, 6s.

Urquhar^ (M.). A TRAGEDY IN COM-
MONPLACE. Second Ed. Cr, Bvo. .6s.

Worst (Marie Van). THE SENTIMEN-
TAL ADVENTURES OF JIMMY DUL-
STRODE. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

IN AMBUSH. Cr. Bvo. 6s,

Waineman (Paul). THE BAY OF
LILACS: A Romance from Finland.
Second Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE SONG OF THE FOREST. Cr. Bpo.
. 6t.


FlCttO^


45


WaUord (Mrs. L. B.)< MK. SMITH.
Medium Zvo, 6d.

THE BABY'S GRAWBMOTHER.
Medium Zvo. 6d,

COUSINS. Medium Zvo. 6d,

TROUBLESOME DAUGHTERS. Medi>$hk

Svo. 6d.

WitlAee (ae^tM Lew). tfEl^-ftxTR.

Medium^ Bvo. 6d,
THE FAIR GOD. Mediu^Hf^d, 6d,
Waltz (EUzabeth C._). TH^ AlfCIiftNT

LANDMARK: A KfiNTucifcV RorI^XKce.

Cr, Zvo, 6s.

Watson (H. B. Marriott). tWlSTED
EGLANTINE Illustrated. Third Edi-
tion, Cr, Bvo, 6s,

THE HIGH TOBY : Being fiirther Chapters
in the Life and Fortunes of Dick Ryder,
otherwise Galloping Dick. With a Frontis-
piece. Third EdiHon, Cr, Ba/0. 6s,

A MIDSUMMER DAYS DREAM.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

THE CASTLE BY THE SEA. Second
Edittdn, Cr. Bvo, 6s.

THE PRIVATEERS. Illustrated. Second
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s,

A POPPY SHOW: Being Divers and

Diverse Tales. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE FLOWER OF THE HEART. Third

Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.
THE ADVENTURERS. Medium Bvo, 6d.
Webliii? (Pernr). THE STORY OF

VIRGINIA PERFECT. Third Edition.

Cr, Bvo, 6s,

Weekes (A. B.). THE PRISONERS OF
WAR. Medium Bvo. 6d.

Wells (H. Q.). THE SEA LADY. Cr,

Bvo. 6s, Also Medium. Bvo, 6d,

Weymaki (Stanley). UNDER THE RED
ROBE. With Illustrations byR. C. Wood-
viLLic. Twenty-Second Ed, Cr, 6vo, 6s.

Whitby (Beatrice). THE RftSlftT OF

AN ACCIDENT. Second EdiHon. Cr,
Bvo. 6s.
White (Percy). THE SYSTEM. Thi^d
Edition, Cr.Bvo. 6s.


A PASSIOIffATB PILGRIM. Medium

^o, 6a,
LOVft' AND THE WISE MEN. Cr. Bvo.

6s.

WlUiams (Maryery). THE BAR. Cr.
Bvo, 6s,

Winiamson (Mrs. C. R.). THE AD-
VENTURE OF PRUNCASS SYLVIA.
Second Edition. Cr', ^o, 6s.

THE WOMAN WHO D'ARtb. CA Bvo.
6s,

THE SEA C:OUtD TfeLL. Second Edition.
Cr. Bvo. 6s.

THE CASTLE OF THE SHADOWS.

Third Edition. Cr. Bvol 6t,

PAPA. Cr. Bvo. 6s,

Williamson (C. N. and A. MO. THE
LIGHTNING CONDUCTOR: The
Strange Adventures of a Motor Car. With
i6 Illustrations. Seventeenth Edition. Cr.
Bvo. 6s. Also Cr, Bvo, is, net,

THE PRINCESS PASSES: A Romance
of a Motor. With x 6 Illustrations. Ninth
Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

MY FRIEND THE CHAUFFEUR. With
z6 Illustrations. Tenth Edit. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

LADY BETTY ACROSS THE WATER.
Tenth Edition, Cr. Bvo, 6s,

THE CAR OF DESTINY AND ITS
ERRAND IN SPAIN. With 17 Illus-
trations. Fourth Edition, Cr. Bvo, 6s.

THE BOTOR CHAPERON. With a Fron-
tispiece in Colour by A. H. Buckland, 16
other Illustrations, and a Map. Fi/ih Edi-
tion. Cr. Bvo. 6s,

SCARLET RUNNER. With a Frontispiece
in dolour by A. H. Buckland, and 8 other
Illustrations. Third Ed. Cr, Bvo. 6s,

SET IN SILVER. With a Fronti.spiece.
Second Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Wyllarde (Dolf). THE PATHWAY OF
THE PIONEER (Nous Autres). Fourth
Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s.

Yeldham (C. C). DURHAM'S FAKM.
Cr, Bvo, 6s.


BdoikA ftit Boys and Oisls

Illustrated. Crown Svo, 31. 6d.


The Getting Well of Dorothy. By Mrs.
W. K. Clifford. Second Edition,


Only a Guard-Room Dog.

Cuthell.


By Edith E.
By W.


Master Rockafsllar's Voyage.
Clark RusselU Fourth Edition.

Syd Bklton : Or, the Boy who would not go
to Sea. By G. Manville Felm. Second Ed.


The Red Grange. By Mrs. Molesworth.
A GikL of the People. By L. T. Meade.

Fourth Edition.
Hepsy Gipsy. By L. T. Meade. 2f. 6d.
The Honourable Miss. By L. T. Meade.

Second Edition.
There was once a Prince. By Mrs. M. B.

Mann.
When Arnold comes Home. By Mrs. M. E.

Mann.


46


Messrs. Methuen's Catalogue


The NoTels of Alexandre Dnmas

Medium %vq. Price 6d, Double Volumes^ u.


ActAi

Thk Adventures of Captain Pamphile.

Amaury.

The Bird op Fate.

The Black Tuup.

The Castle op Eppstbin.

Catherine Blum.

Cecils.

The Chevalier D'Harmental. (Double

volume.) rs.
Chicot the Jester.
Conscience.
The Convict's Son.
The Corsican Bkothers ; and Otho the

Archer.
Crop-Eared Jacquot.
dom gorenflot.
The Fatal Combat.
The Fencing Master.
Fernande.
Gabriel Lambert.
Georges.

The Great Massacre.
Henri ue Navarre.


H]iL&NB DB ChaVERNV.

The Horoscope.

LouiSB DB LA VALLikKE. (Double volume.)

XX.

The Man in thb Iron Mask. (Double

volume.) zx.
MaItre Adam.
Thb Mouth op Hell.
Nanon. (Double volume.) is.
Pauline ; Pascal Bruno ; and Bontekoe.
P&re la Ruine.
The Prince of Thieves.
The Reminiscences of Antony.
Robin Hood.

The Snowball and Sultanetta.
Sylvandire.

Tales of the Supernatural.
Tales of Strange Adventure.
Thb Three Musketeers. (Double volume.)

zx.
The Tragedy of Nantes.
Twenty Years After. (Double volume.) is.
The Wild-Duck Shooter.
The Wolf-Leader.


Methuen's Sixpenny Books

Medium Svo,


AllMinesi (E. Maria). LOVE AND

LOUISA.
1 KNOW A MAIDEN.

Aaatey(F.). A BAYARD OF BENGAL.
Aiwteii(J.). PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

Bagot (Richard). A ROMAN MYSTERY.
CASTING OF NETS.
DONNA DIANA.

Balfour (Andrew). BY STROKE OF
SWORD.

Barine-Qould ^S.). FURZE BLOOM.

CHEAP JACK ZITA.

KITTY ALONE.

URITH.

THE BROOM SQUIRE.

IN THE ROAR OF THE SEA.

NOEML

A BOOK OF FAIRY TALES. lUustrated.

LITTLE TU'PENNY.

WINEFRED.

THE FROBISHERS.

THE QUEEN OF LOVE.

ARMINELL.

Barr (Robert). JENNIE BAXTER.
IN THE MIDST OF ALARMS.
THE COUNTESS TEKLA.
THE MUTABLE MANY.

Benson (B. P.). DODO.
THE VINTAGE.

Bronte (Charlotte). SHIRLEY.


Brownell (C. L.). THE HEART OF
JAPAN.

Burton (J. Bloundelle). ACROSS THE

SALT SEAS.

Caffyn (Mrs.). ANNE MAULEVERER.
Capes (Bernard). THE LAKE OF

CUfford (Mrs. W. K.). A FLASH OF

SUMMER.
MRS. KEITH'S CRIME.
Corbett (Julian). A BUSINESS IN

GREAT WATERS.

Crolcer (Mrs. B. M.). ANGEL.
A STATE SECRET.
PEGGY OF THE BARTONS.
JOHANNA.

Dante (Aliffhlerl). THE DIVINE
COMEDY(Cai7).

Dearie (A. Conan). ROUND THE RED

LAMP.
Duncan (Sara Jeannette). A VOYAGE

OF CONSOLATION.

THOSE DELIGHTFUL AMERICANS.

Eliot (Qeorsre). THE MILL ON THE

FLOSS
PIndlater (Jane H.). THE GREEN

GRAVES OF BALGOWRIE.

Gallon (Tom). RICKERBY'S FOLLY.

Qaskell(Mrs.). CRANFORD.
MARY BARTON.
NORTH AND SOUTH.


Fiction


47


Gerard (Dorothea). HOLY MATRI-
MONY.
THE CONQUEST OF LONDON.
MADE OF MONEY.

GissinsrCQ). THE TOWN TRAVELLER.
THE CROWN OF LIFE.

OlanvUle (Ernest). THE INCA^S

TREASURE.
THE KLOOF BRIDE.

Gleifi: (Charles). BUNTER'S CRUISE.

Qrimm (The Brothers). GRIMM'S
FAIRY TALES.

Hope (Anthony). A MAN OF MARK.

A CHANGE OF AIR.

THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT

ANTONIO.
PHROSO
THE DOLLY DIALOGUES.

Hornuns: (E. W.). DEAD MEN TELL
NO TALES.

Ingraham (J. H.). THE THRONE OF
DAVID.

Le Queux (W.). T HE HUNCHBACK OF
WESTMINSTER.

Levett- Yeats (S. K.). THE TRAITOR'S

WAY.
ORRAIN.

Linton (E. Lynn). THE TRUE HIS-
TORY OF JOSHUA DAVIDSON.

Lyall (Edna). DERRICK VAUGHAN.

Malet (Lucas). THE CARISSIMA.
A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION.

Mann (Mrs. M. E.). MRS. PETER

HOWARD.
A LOST ESTATE.
THE CEDAR STAR.
ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS.
THE PATTEN EXPERIMENT.
A WINTER'S TALE.

Marchmont (A. W.). MISER HOAD-

LEY'S SECRET.
A MOMENT'S ERROR.

Marryat (Captain). PETER SIMPLE.
JACOB FAITHFUL.

Marsh (Richard). A METAMORPHOSIS.

THE TWICKENHAM PEERAGE.

THE GODDESS.

THE JOSS.

Mason(A. E. W.). CLEMENTINA.

Mathers (Helen). HONEY.
GRIFF OF GRIFFITHSCOURT,
SAM'S SWEETHEART.

Meade (Mrs. L.T.). DRIFT.

Milter (Esther). LIVING LIES.

Mitford (Bertram). THE SIGN OF THE
SPIDER.


Montresor (F. F.). THE ALIEN.

Morrison (Arthur). THE HOLE IN
THE WALL.

Nesblt(E.) THE RED HOUSE.

Norris(W. B.). HIS GRACE.

GILES INGILBY.

THE CREDIT OF THE COUNTY.

LORD LEONARD THE LUCKLESS.

MATTHEW AUSTIN.

CLARISSA FURIOSA.

OIiphant(Mrs.). THE LADY'S WALK.
SIR ROBERT'S FORTUNE.
THE PRODIGALS.
THE TWO MARYS.

Oppenheim (E. P.). MASTER OF MEN.

Parlcer (Gilbert). THE POMP OF THE

LAVILETTES
WHEN VALMOND CAME TO PONTI AC.
T HE TRAIL OF THE SWORD.

Pemberton (Max). THE FOOTSTEPS

OF A THRONE.
I CROWN THEE KING.

Phlllpotts (Eden). THE HUMAN BOY.
CHILDREN OF THE MIST.
THE POACHER'S WIFE.
THE RIVER.


*Q' (A. T. .Quiller Couch).


THE
HITE WOLF.

Ridge (W.Pett). A SON OF THE STATE.

LOST PROPERTY.

GEORGE and THE GENERAL.

ERB.

Russell (W. Clark). ABANDONED.
A MARRIAGE AT SEA.
MY DANISH SWEETHEART.
HIS ISLAND PRINCESS.

Sergeant (Adeline), THE MASTER OF

BEECHWOOD.
BARBARA'S MONEY.
THE YELLOW DIAMOND.
THE LOVE THAT OVERCAME.

Sidgwick CMrs. Alfred). THE KINS-
MAN.

Surtees (R. S.). HANDLEY CROSS.
MR. SPONGE'S SPORTING TOUR.
ASK MAMMA.

Walford (Mrs. L. B.). MR. SMITH.

COUSINS.

THE BABY'S GRANDMOTHER.

TROUBLESOME DAUGHTERS.

Wallace (General Lew). BEN-HUR.
THE FAIR GOD.

Watson (H. B. Marriott). THE ADVEN-
TURERS.

Weekes (A. B.). PRISONERS OF WAR.

Wells (H. G.). THE SEA LADY.

White (Percy). A PASSIONATE
PILGRIM.


I


•■;/'


^/^/ , i^Q -^ ^^Hf^W


A


i liiifcaa


\


;.n


• i


. p, 'JL') : JLv^.xkr-44 3 2044 026 023 2


Go -TUt^O


I


''-■

C-.'-


jyfi=M985


t ■


I

i

f

I
I


t


a h


■ I

. p, ^^- X^'-cX^ A^ • T2044"026"023"2


f •#v^
i' _ ' I


Go


U I'l o


Y-^'h


11


.>l


I


I;


^ ■


'n '


p, ^^- JL^':- d'^r- 4a ' 3 2044 026 023 2


Go "TUC^U*


P.n


vrr'^i


.. 1


K


;*■'


. i


> '


. 1.


n ^ .


. p, ^^-^ JL^ J-vj- A^ ' "2044"026 "023'"2


y.il


Go. _-T^ l^*^....


* 1
■ 1


