The Formation of the Alphabet (Petrie, 1912)
============================================
W. M. Flinders Petrie — The Formation of the Alphabet (London, 1912), public domain. The Egyptian-origin theory of the alphabet, first stated. Scan via Internet Archive (formationofalpha00petr). Raw OCR, not proofread.

EGYPTIAN    OSTRAKA    WITH    FOREIGN    SIGNS.    XIX.    DYN. 


I  :  I 


H  rchaeb 


BRITISH  SCHOOL  OF  ARCHAEOLOGY  IN  EGYPT 
STUDIES   SERIES.     VOL.   Ill 


THE  FORMATION 
OF  THE  ALPHABET 


BY 

W.   M.   FLINDERS   PETRIE 

Hon.  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  Ph.D. 
F.R.S.,  F.B.A.,  Hon.  F.S.A.  (Scot.),  A.R.I.B.A. 

MEMBER     OF    THE     ROYAL     IRISH     ACADEMY 

MEMBER     OF     THE     IMPERIAL     GERMAN     ARCHAEOLOGICAL     INSTITUTE 

CORRESPONDING   MEMBER  OF  THE  SOCIETY  OF   ANTHROPOLOGY,   BERLIN 

MEMBER   OF  THE   ITALIAN   SOCIETY  OF   ANTHROPOLOGY 

MEMBER    OF    THE    ROMAN    SOCIETY   OF    ANTHROPOLOGY 

MEMBER   OF   THE   SOCIETY   OF   NORTHERN   ANTIQUARIES 

MEMBER    OF    THE    AMERICAN    PHILOSOPHICAL    SOCIETY 

EDWARDS   PROFESSOR   OF   EGYPTOLOGY,    UNIVERSITY   OF   LONDON 


A* 


yp 


¥" 


LONDON 
MACMILLAN   AND   CO.,    ST.    MARTIN'S    STREET,   W.C. 

AND 

BERNARD    QUARITCH 
ii,     GRAFTON     STREET,     NEW     BOND     STREET,     W. 

1912 


p 

ai 

Ps 


THE    STUDIES    SERIES 


This  series  was  begun  for  publishing  miscellaneous  work  connected  with 
the  British  School  of  Archaeology  in  Egypt,  and  University  College,  London. 

Vol.  I.    NAMES   AND    TITLES   OF   THE   OLD    KINGDOM. 

By  M.  A.  Murray. 
An  index  to  all  names  and  titles  in  hieroglyphs.     iSs. 

Vol.  II.    HISTORICAL  STUDIES. 

By  E.  B.  Knobel,  W.  W.  Midgley,  J.  G.  Milne,   M.  A. 
Murray,  and  W.  M.  F.  Petrie. 

Eleven  articles,  the  longest  on  chronology.     25*. 

Vol.  III.    THE  FORMATION  OF  THE  ALPHABET. 

By  W.  M.  F.  Petrie. 
The  present  volume.     5*. 

Other  volumes  in  preparation  are : 

Egyptian  Architecture  ; 

A  Classified  Index  of  Published  Scenes  and  Subjects  ; 

Names  and  Titles  of  the  Middle  Kingdom, 

Those  who  wish  to  have  the  whole  of  the  above  series  as  issued  can 
receive  volumes  at  two-thirds  the  issue  price  on  paying  in  advance  contribu- 
tions of  £2  at  one  time,  to  Prof.  Petrie,  University  College.  The  volumes 
will  then  be  sent  as  soon  as  published. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER    I 

THE   GENERAL   POSITION 

Diversity  of  alphabets  and  languages 
Position  a  generation  ago     . 
Difficulties  in  older  view 
New  material  compels  revision     . 
Series  of  fresh  discoveries     . 
Sources 


CHAPTER   II 

THE   GROWTH   OF   SIGNS 

Savage  use  of  signs       .... 
Signs  earlier  than  pictures    .... 
Children's  arbitrary  signs     .... 
Reversal  and  rotation  of  signs  among  children 

and  untrained 

Different  planes  of  perception 

Signs  for  property  marks      .... 

Signs  used  for  words 

Signs  used  for  syllables  and  letters 

A  signary  not  an  alphabet    .... 

Signs  used  in  many  stages   .... 

Nicknames  for  signs 

Related  forms 

Some  signs  not  generally  used 

Material  but  little  noticed  yet 

No  history  of  alphabets  attempted  here 


PAGE 
I 

I 

I 

2 
2 
2 


CHAPTER   III 

THE  SIGNARY   BEFORE  THE   ALPHABET 

PAGE 

Reasons  against  the  Phoenician  theory        .         .  6 

Early  age  of  signs 6 

Begin  before  drawing 7 

Wide  diffusion  of  non-Phoenician  signs        .        .7 

European  and  Arab  signs  non-Phoenician   .         .  7 

Runic  signs  Mediterranean,  not  Greek          .        .  7 

Rare  forms  widely  spread 8 

Later  rows  of  alphabet  lost  by  Phoenicians .         .  8 

Confusion  in  Greek  alphabets       ....  8 

CHAPTER    IV 

NOTES  ON   VARIOUS  SIGNARIES 

Extent  of  known  values  of  signs  ....  9 

Reason  for  grouping  the  signs      ....  9 

Varying  pronunciation 9 

Influence  of  writing  materials       ....  9 

Egyptian  sources 10 

The  ostraka 10 

Libyan 10 

Lydian  and  Karian 10 

Spanish         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .11 

CHAPTER   V 

THE   VOWELS   AND   LABIALS 

Details  line  by  line 11 


111 


IV 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  GUTTURALS  AND   DENTALS 

Details  line  by  line 

CHAPTER   VII 

THE   LIQUIDS,  SIBILANTS,  AND  APHONICS 
Details  of  liquids  and  sibilants      . 
Aphonic  signs  not  in  alphabets    . 
Small  proportion  of  signs  of  unknown  values 

CHAPTER   VIII 

THE  ORDER  OF   THE  ALPHABET 

Advantages  of  a  selection  of  signs 
Regular  structure  of  the  Greek  alphabet 


PAGE 

13 


15 
16 
16 


17 
17 


Primitive  horn-book      .... 

Five  letters  lost 

Restoration  of  these  from  other  alphabets 
Original  form  of  systematic  horn-book 
Letters  inserted  later    . 
Sibilants  ignored  by  the  compilers 
Region  without  sibilants 
Letters  used  as  numerals 
Region  of  source  of  the  numerals 


APPENDIX 

The  Arabic  rearrangement  of  the  alphabet 


PAGE 

17 
17 
17 
18 
18 
18 
18 
19 
19 


20 


1. 

ii. 
iii. 
iv. 

v. 

vi. 

vii. 

viii. 

ix. 


LIST    OF    PLATES 

Ostraka  of  the  xixth  dynasty. 

Signs  of  vowels  and  labials. 

Signs  of  gutturals  and  dentals. 

Signs  of  liquids  and  sibilants. 

Aphonic  signs. 

References  to  sources  of  signs. 

Signs  on  pottery. 

Map  of  non-sibilant  names  of  places. 

Map  of  places  using  numerical  letters. 

Spanish,  Cretan,  and  Egyptian  inscriptions. 


BLOCKS   IN   TEXT 


European  and  Arabian  signs,  p.  7. 
Runic  and  Mediterranean  signs,  p.  8. 


Order  of  Greek  alphabet,  p.  17. 
Primitive  horn-books,  p.  18. 


THE  FORMATION  OF  THE  ALPHABET 


CHAPTER  I 

THE   GENERAL    POSITION 

At  first  sight  the  diversity  of  alphabets  seems  as 
little  connected  as  the  diversity  of  languages.  But 
as  the  labours  of  the  philologist  have  gradually  traced 
the  various  relations  of  the  better-known  languages 
one  to  the  other,  so  likewise  the  epigraphist  has 
dealt  with  the  varieties  of  the  Greek  and  Roman 
alphabets  which  are  the  more  familiar,  while  the 
archaeologist  has  yet  to  trace  and  connect  the  alpha- 
bets of  the  less-known  races,  many  of  which  were 
used  for  languages  which  are  still  unread. 

The  more  obvious  questions  of  the  origins  and 
connections  of  the  better-known  alphabets  of  various 
countries  seemed  to  have  been  fairly  settled  and 
put  to  rest  a  generation  ago ;  the  more  remote 
alphabets  and  the  more  ancient  signary  had  not 
then  been  brought  to  light  to  complicate  the  subject. 
The  old  traditional  view  of  the  derivation  of  the 
western  alphabets  from  the  Phoenician  fitted  well 
enough  to  most  of  the  facts  then  known,  and  was 
readily  accepted  in  general.  Further,  De  Rouge's 
theory  of  the  derivation  of  the  Phoenician  from  the 
Egyptian  hieratic  writing  of  the  xiith  dynasty  was 
plausible  enough  to  content  most  enquirers,  though 
only  two  out  of  twenty-two  letters  were  satisfactorily 
accounted  for.  In  1883  Isaac  Taylor  could  safely 
claim  that  he  had  "  summarised  and  criticised  all 
previous  discoveries  and  researches  as  to  the  origin 
and  development  of  alphabets  "  by  his  general  out- 
line in  his  work  on  The  Alphabet;  in  that  book  a 
sound  general  basis  seemed  to  have  been  reached, 
and  only  minor  questions  needed  further  discussion 
and  adjustment. 

Yet  the  voice  of  caution  was  heard  even  then. 
Dr.  Peile,  in  1885,  when  judicially  reporting  on 
Isaac  Taylor's  work,  and  while  agreeing  that  "  his 
book  deserves  to  be,  and  doubtless  will  be,  the 
standard    book  in    England   on    the   history   of    the 


alphabet,"  yet  saw  that  other  solutions  might  arise. 
He  added  ;  "  But  no  proof  of  the  affiliation  of  the 
Phoenician  alphabet  can  be  complete  without  evi- 
dence from  writing  to  fill  up  the  long  gap  between 
the  period  of  the  Papyrus  Prisse  and  that  of  the 
Baal  Lebanon  and  Moabite  inscriptions.  In  default 
of  this  it  must  always  be  possible  that  the  Phoenician 
alphabet  is  descended  from  some  utterly  lost,  non- 
Egyptian  system  of  writing,  traces  of  which  may 
some  day  turn  up  as  unexpectedly  as  the  so-called 
Hittite  hieroglyphs."  Within  a  generation  later 
this  possibility  clearly  appears  to  be  the  forecast  of 
the  real  history. 

Beside  these  questions  of  the  possible  sources 
for  the  alphabet,  which  were  seen  to  be  still  open  to 
a  fresh  solution,  there  were  also  the  questions  which 
were  suggested  by  the  internal  evidence  of  the 
alphabets  themselves.  The  relations  of  different 
alphabets  one  to  another  often  point  to  lost  phases 
of  their  history  ;  and,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  following 
chapters,  this  evidence  may  well  show  from  which 
source  an  alphabet  has  arisen. 

Berger,  in  his  Histoire  de  PEcriture,  more  than 
once  remarks  on  the  strangeness  of  some  facts  of 
distribution,  as,  for  instance,  in  Spain.  "  If  the 
Iberian  alphabet  were  born  directly  from  the 
Phoenician,  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  was  born 
at  a  very  remote  epoch,  and  that  it  has  not  varied 
since,  as  it  is  the  most  ancient  forms  of  Phoenician 
that  resemble  it ;  but  by  the  side  of  the  letters  which 
recall  the  Phoenician  there  are  others  much  more 
numerous  which  are  conceived  in  altogether  another 
spirit,  and  which  can  only  be  explained  by  the  Greek 
alphabet.  To  this  difficulty  must  be  added  another, 
which  arises  from  the  propagation  of  the  Iberian 
alphabet.  The  greater  part  of  Celtiberian  coins 
belong  to  the  north  or  north-east  of  Spain  ;  it  seems 
therefore  that  the  Iberian  alphabet  spread  from 
north  to  south  .  .  .  the  Turdetan  (southern),  which 
is  more  simple,  approaches  nearer  to  the  Phoenician  " 


THE   GENERAL   POSITION 


(pp.  337-8).  He  further  refers  to  Grimm's  idea  that 
the  Iberian  was  connected  with  Runic,  which 
alphabet  is  said  to  have  extended  to  Gaul ;  and 
again  he  adds  that  in  a  few  signs  it  resembles  the 
Berber  of  North  Africa. 

Here  it  is  evident  that  in  face  of  the  detail  of  a 
more  elaborate  alphabet, /the  old  simplicity  of  the 
Phoenician  derivation  is  felt  to  be  quite  inadequate 
to  account  for  the  facts. '  With  the  apparently  com- 
pound and  remote  origins  of  this  Iberian  alphabet 
thus  becoming  unaccountable,  let  us  turn  to  the 
Karian  alphabet.  At  almost  the  length  of  the  Medi- 
terranean from  Spain  we  find  in  Karia  a  nearly 
identical  variety  of  signs  with  the  same  values  as 
in  Spain.  No  great  commercial  intercourse  linked 
the  rocky  Karian  coast  with  distant  Spain.  All 
probability  would  rather  suggest  a  Phocean  alphabet 
passing  westward  by  Marseille. 

Isaac  Taylor  also  remarks  that  "In  many  respects 
the  Libyan  agrees  curiously  with  the  South  Semitic 
alphabets."  Again,  he  felt  the  insufficiency  of  the 
data  of  his  time,  when  he  wrote  of  the  Asia  Minor 
alphabets  as  having  "some  characters  plainly  of 
Greek  origin,  and  others  of  an  unknown  and  mys- 
terious type." 

The  standpoint  of  the  older  writers  was  thus 
much  like  an  accurate  map  of  an  icefield,  appearing 
like  solid  land,  yet  in  which  the  more  curious  ob- 
servers had  already  noticed  many  awkward  cracks 
and  unfathomed  depths.  The  movements  of  the 
last  twenty  years  have  broken  up  the  ice  ;  and  now 
the  neat  history,  which  began  at  1000  B.C.  in 
Phoenicia,  is  floating  over  a  sea  of  unexpected 
conditions,  and  the  new  land  which  is  descried  needs 
entirely  fresh  charting. 

The  first  clear  breach  in  the  Phoenician  tradi- 
tion was  made  by  the  discovery  of  foreign  alphabetic 
signs  at  Tell  el  Yehudiyeh  in  Egypt.  Such  were 
observed  on  the  backs  of  glazed  tiles  bearing  the 
name  of  Ramessi^  III  ;  but  they  were  ignored,  by 
means  of  the  purely  arbitrary  hypothesis  of  a 
restoration  of  the  building  in  Greek  times.  Next, 
I  found  in  1889  a  mass  of  signs  in  use  at  Gurob  in 
Middle  Egypt,  which  were  unquestionably  fixed  to 
the  period  of  1 400-1 200  B.C. ;  and  these  signs  were 
more  akin  to  the  western  than  to  the  Phoenician 
forms.  In  subsequent  years,  such  signs  were  found 
likewise  on  pottery  of  the  xiith  dynasty,  earlier  still 
in  the  ist  dynasty,  and  most  of  them  were  carried 
back  far  earlier,  even  to  the  first  prehistoric  civilisa- 
tion.     Their     being    thus    found    long    before    the 


hieroglyphic  system  in  Egypt,  removed  the  last 
refuge  of  those  writers  who  would  see  in  them  only 
a  fresh  type  of  cursive  hieroglyphs,  and  would  deny 
any  connection  with  the  same  signs  used  in  other 
lands. 

Beside  the  great  historic  perspective  of  the  long 
use  of  signs  in  Egypt,  other  discoveries  in  Europe 
have  opened  entirely  new  ground.  /These  signs  are 
largely  found  used  for  writing  in  Crete,  as  a  geo- 
metrical signary/  and  the  discovery  of  the  Karian 
alphabet,  and  its  striking  relation  to  the  Spanish 
alphabet,  has  likewise  compelled  an  entire  reconsidera- 
tion of  the  subject.  Thus  on  all  sides — Egyptian, 
Greek,  and  Barbarian — material  appears  which  is 
far  older  and  far  more  widespread  than  the  Graeco- 
Phoenician  world ;  a  fresh  study  of  the  whole 
material  is  imperatively  needed,  now  that  the  old 
conclusions  are  seen  to  be  quite  inadequate. 

The  point  of  view  here  presented  is  not  that  of 
a  systematic  alphabet,  invented  by  some  single  tribe 
or  individual  in  a  developed  civilisation.  On  the 
contrary  it  appears  that  a  wide  body  of  signs  had 
been  gradually  brought  into  use  in  primitive  times 
for  various  purposes.  These  were  interchanged  by 
trade,  and  spread  from  land  to  land,  until  the  less- 
known  and  less  useful  signs  were  ousted  by  those 
in  more  general  acceptance.  Lastly  a  couple  of 
dozen  signs  triumphed ;  these  became  common 
property  to  a  group  of  trading  communities,  while 
the  local  survivals  of  other  forms  were  gradually 
extinguished  in  isolated  seclusion. 

The  principal  sources  of  material  beyond  the 
useful  summaries  of  ISAAC  TAYLOR  and  BERGER 
are,  for  the  Egyptian  Prehistoric,  Naqada,  Diospolis, 
El  Amrah.  For  the  ist  dynasty,  Royal  Tombs 
i  and  ii.  For  the  xiith  and  xviiith  dynasties,  Kahun, 
Illahun,  Diospolis,  Gizeh  and  Rifeh,  Dendereh.  For 
the  xixth  dynasty  ostraka,  the  photographs  here 
published,  which  show  for  the  first  time  groups  of  such 
signs  in  consecutive  order,  as  words  or  sentences. 
For  Roman  Egypt,  Diospolis,  probably  of  Asianic 
source.  For  Libya,  HANOTEAU,  Grammaire 
Tamachek  and  inscriptions.  For  Lydia,  Sayce, 
Soc.  Bib.  Arch.  1905,  123,  and  inscriptions.  For 
Karia,  Sayce,  Trans.  Bib.  Arch,  ix,  138,  and  later 
papers.  For  Spain,  Hubner,  Mon.  Ling.  Tberici, 
also  using  Berger,  Delgado  and  Boudard.  For 
Crete,  Evans,  Scripta  Minoa.  For  Phylakopi  in 
Melos,  Edgar  and  Evans  in  Hellenic  Journal,  1907, 
177.  For  Lachish,  whieh  is  important  as  an  early 
local   Phoenician  script,   Tell  el  Hesy,  BLISS,   Mo2itid 


PRIMITIVE   USE  OF   SIGNS 


of  Many  Cities.      For   Greek   alphabets,    LARFELD, 
Handbuch  der  GriechiscJien  Epigrapliik,  1907. 

The  exact  references  for  each  of  the  Egyptian 
signs  are  given  in  the  table  of  references,  pi.  vi ; 
the  others  are  easily  found  in  tabular  form  in  the 
publications. 


CHAPTER    II 

THE   GROWTH   OF   SIGNS 

BEFORE  we  can  realise  the  conditions  of  the  early 
use  of  signs,  we  must  look  to  the  state  of  civilisation  in 
which  they  first  came  into  use.  Man  is  a  sign-using 
animal.  The  snapped  twigs  on  the  bush  at  the 
wayside,  by  which  the  Red  Indian  showed  his  path 
to  those  behind  him,  was  a  sign  which  doubtless  was 
as  old  as  any  human  community.  The  score  on  the 
path,  the  rough  signs  added  to  show  whether  the 
hunter  was  successful,  or  if  he  would  return  that  way, 
were  signs  needed  in  the  rudest  intercourse  of  a  clan. 
To  suppose  that  these  necessary  beginnings  of  silent 
communication  would  not  be  developed  as  needs 
arose,  would  be  absurd.  The  next  necessity  would 
be  the  personal  sign  to  show  who  had  gone  along  the 
path  ;  and  the  personal  sign  would  naturally  be  placed 
upon  the  objects  which  the  man  made  for  his  own  use. 
Thus  the  simplest  needs  of  the  most  savage  com- 
munity would  necessitate  the  use  of  signs,  which 
would  naturally  be  developed  in  use  as  more  complex 
purposes  arose.  Even  now  arbitrary  signs  for  trade 
marks  and  for  marking  cargoes  have  not  been 
superseded. 

Signs  rather  than  pictures  are  the  primitive  system. 
It  is  true  that  pictographs  or  hieroglyphs  tend  to  wear 
down,  owing  to  being  used  in  haste,  until  they  become 
arbitrary  marks  or  letters  ;  yet  that  is  only  a  late 
degradation,  and  cannot  be  looked  on  as  the  primitive 
growth  of  linear  signs. 

In  Egypt,  especially,  the  monumental  evidence 
shows  two  entirely  different  sources  of  conventional 
marks.  In  late  times  the  picture  writing  passed 
through  many  stages,  until  it  became  the  complex 
grouping  of  slightly  varying  strokes  in  the  demotic 
writing.  But  far  before  all  this  there  had  existed, 
from  the  beginning  of  the  prehistoric  ages,  a  totally 
different  system  of  linear  signs,  full  of  variety  and 
distinction.  This  early  system  was  certainly  in  its 
decadence  long  before  any  hieroglyphs  were  used  in 
Egypt.  Similarly  in  Crete  a  system  of  linear  signs 
precedes  the  pictographic  records  (see  pi.  ix).     The 


older  view  of  Taylor  was  limited  to  systems 
originating  from  picture  writing,  as  the  Egyptian, 
Cuneiform,  Chinese,  Mexican,  and  Hittite. 

To  understand  the  position  and  movement  of 
thought  in  a  primitive  age  it  must  be  approached  on 
a  far  simpler  plane  than  that  of  our  present  familiarity 
with  writing.  To  reach  the  working  of  the  childhood 
of  our  races  we  should  look  to  the  mind  of  children. 
If  the  child  passes  through  ancestral  stages  in  its 
bodily  formation,  so  certainly  it  passes  through  such 
stages  in  the  growth  of  capacity  of  its  brain.  When 
we  observe  the  mental  processes  of  children  in  regard 
to  their  own  conceptions,  apart  from  the  complica- 
tions which  later  invention  has  placed  around  them, 
we  see  probably  quite  as  true  a  reflection  of  their 
ancestral  frame  of  mind  as  we  could  find  in  any 
different  race  of  savages  of  the  present  time.  The 
racial  unity  will  more  than  compensate  for  differences 
of  age. 

Thus  from  observing  children  we  realise  that  rude 
marks,  which  seem  unlike  any  definite  object,  are 
used  by  the  untrained  mind  as  symbols  of  a  definite 
idea.  For  instance,  it  is  observed  that  a  girl  of  two 
years  old  will  draw  a  row  of  similar  signs,  and  explain 
them  by  saying  that  they  are  alternately  choir-boys 
and  pussy-cats.  The  same  child  will  draw  rough 
circles  and  explain  them  as  butterflies.  The  need  of 
a  physical  resemblance  to  the  form  is  scarcely  felt, 
although  pictures  may  be  keenly  appreciated.  The 
symbolism  of  a  mark  when  once  started  is  retained  by 
the  mind.  The  necessity  of  a  resemblance  between 
the  object  and  the  mark  is  an  aftergrowth  of  artistic 
perception. 

When  therefore  we  see  signs  used  primitively 
which  have  no  apparent  resemblance  to  any  object, 
we  must  not  conclude  that  they  had  no  connection  of 
idea  with  surrounding  things  in  the  mind  of  the 
maker.  They  probably  started  by  being  used  for 
some  definite  object,  and  were  used  continuously 
with  the  same  traditional  idea  attaching  to  them. 

In  the  development  of  children's  minds  another 
stage  may  be  seen  in  the  later  growth  of  representa- 
tion. It  is  seen  that  form  may  be  observed  and 
followed  while  direction  is  disregarded.  A  boy  of 
three  years  old  would  draw  a  ship  standing  up  on  its 
bows,  with  the  stern  at  the  top,  without  the  least  sense 
of  inconsistency.  Another  boy  of  three  to  four  years 
old  would  write  those  letters  which  he  knew — and 
even  words— as  readily  from  right  to  left  as  from  left 
to  right ;  he  would  reverse  both  the  forms  of  letters 
and  the  direction  of  writing,  or  later  on  only  reverse 


THE   GROWTH   OF   SIGNS 


the  forms,  while  writing  from  left  to  right.  He  had 
never  been  shown  reversed  writing,  every  example 
that  he  saw  was  normal  ;  yet  the  reversal  seemed  not 
only  unintentional,  but  so  entirely  immaterial  to  his 
mind,  that  he  could  hardly  see  any  purpose  in  writing 
direct  rather  than  reversed,  the  two  were  all  one  in 
idea.  See  the  figures  I  to  15  at  the  beginning  of  a 
letter  given  on  pi.  ix. 

This  same  lack  of  sense  of  direction  may  often  be 
seen  in  uneducated  writing,  where  such  letters  as  N> 
S,  and  Z  are  reversed.  The  turned  S  may  even  be 
seen  in  the  epitaph  of  an  archbishop  at  Ravenna. 

Drawings  may  likewise  be  equally  recognised  in 
any  position  if  they  are  understood.  An  Egyptian 
fellah  may  be  in  the  stage  of  not  understanding  a 
drawing  at  all,  for  one  insisted  that  a  picture  of  an 
Eton  boy  represented  a  fish.  But  if  there  is  the 
perception  of  form,  the  position  is  immaterial,  and 
the  fellah  will  observe  and  describe  a  drawing  with- 
out taking  the  trouble  to  turn  the  paper  the  right 
way  up. 

Such  instances  serve  to  show  that  the  sense  of 
direction  is  a  far  later  acquirement  than  the  sense 
of  form.  Much  light  is  thus  thrown  on  the  treatment 
of  signs  in  the  early  alphabets  ;  they  are  turned  up- 
side down,  or  tilted  over  one  way  or  another,  they  are 
written  reversed,  and  the  direction  of  writing  may  be 
from  either  side,  or  each  way  alternately,  as  in  the 
boustrophedon  inscriptions.  All  of  these  variations 
were  as  nothing  to  the  men  who  had  not  yet  de- 
veloped the  sense  of  direction  as  significant,  and  who 
thought  only  of  the  form  in  whatever  position  or 
reversal  it  might  appear. 

We  see  therefore  that  we  must  interpret  the 
mental  attitude  and  the  purpose  of  the  sign-users 
quite  apart  from  our  own  usual  thoughts;  and  we 
should  then  rather  try  to  view  the  subject  from  the 
plane  of  children  who  have  scarcely  begun  learning 
to  read  and  write.  In  the  advanced  system  of  writing 
which  was  in  use  in  Easter  Island,  we  can  scarcely 
grasp  the  intended  sense  of  signs,  though  the  key  of 
the  meaning  is  partly  supplied  ;  and  in  the  vigorous 
picture  writing  of  the  North-American,  where  form 
and  direction  have  been  fully  grasped,  the  mode  of 
expressing  abstract  ideas,  or  anything  beyond  visible 
objects,  is  outside  of  our  planes  of  thought  and 
imagination.  The  difference  of  mental  attitude  be- 
tween any  two  written  languages  is  nothing  in 
comparison  to  the  gulf  which  has  to  be  bridged  in 
establishing  any  system  of  the  representation  of 
thought. 


We  now  turn  to  consider  the  purposes  for  which 
signs  were  first  required.  The  way-marking,  which  we 
have  already  mentioned,  naturally  would  lead  to  using 
some  personal  sign.  There  can  be  no  question  that 
the  most  primitive  use  of  signs  on  portable  objects  is 
for  denoting  personal  property.  The  sense  of  pro- 
perty arises  so  soon  as  a  man  has  made  a  tool  or 
weapon  for  his  own  purposes  ;  and  children  have  a 
keen  sense  of  property  long  before  they  attempt  to 
make  any  marks.  The  requirement  of  denoting 
property  was  therefore  much  earlier  than  the  use  of 
signs,  and  would  be  the  first  purpose  of  marking 
objects.  In  the  early  prehistoric  graves  in  Egypt 
there  are  often  found  in  a  single  burial  several  jars 
bearing  the  same  mark,  evidently  that  of  the  owner. 
A  primitive  use  of  signs  is  that  by  Sudani  women 
for  signing  their  hand-made  pottery  before  it  goes 
into  the  kiln,  so  that  they  may  claim  it  after  baking. 
At  the  present  day  among  the  illiterate  fellahin,  of 
whom  not  one  in  twenty  can  read,  the  women  will  cut 
marks  on  their  water  jars  to  distinguish  their  respec- 
tive properties  (see  pi.  ix). 

As  we  have  noticed,  such  marks  —  however 
meaningless  to  us— doubtless  have  some  sense  in 
the  user's  mind,  and  hence  some  kind  of  names ; 
such  a  name  is  perhaps  at  first  but  dimly  present, 
but  by  habit  the  mark  and  its  name  would  gradually 
become  associated.  Thus  a  series  of  apparently 
arbitrary  signs  would  arise,  with  names  attached  to 
them. 

The  next  stage  would  be  using  the  marks  to 
denote  the  word,  regardless  of  its  meaning  as  a 
property-sign.  Many  of  the  rock  cuttings  and  cave 
markings,  found  especially  in  northern  Europe,  appear 
to  belong  to  this  stage. 

After  that  came  another  great  wrench  of  thought, 
when  the  sign  came  to  be  attached  to  the  sound,  and 
not  to  the  sense  of  its  original  form  ;  and  when  it 
could  be  used  for  a  word,  or  a  part  of  a  word,  like  a 
mediaeval  rebus.  In  the  rebus  this  stage  has  been 
preserved  with  pictorial  instead  of  arbitrary  signs. 
It  seems  very  probable  that  the  rebus  arose  among 
people — such  as  the  mediaeval  masons — who  could 
not  write  but  could  carve,  as  an  intelligible  way  of 
marking  property.  In  this  system  we  have  the 
actual  stage  of  the  shifting  of  signs  from  their 
inherent  to  their  artificial  meaning,  following  sound 
alone  instead  of  sense. 

It  must  have  needed  an  active  intercourse  to 
drive  men  through  this  stage,  and  much  resolution 
to  overcome  the  confusion  inherent  in  beginning  to 


RESERVATIONS   AND   LIMITATIONS 


break  from  the  sense  of  the  sign.  The  Egyptian 
soon  achieved  it  to  some  extent,  and  obtained  enough 
signs  for  the  principal  sounds  during  the  first  or  second 
dynasty  ;  he  occasionally  went  further  in  the  same 
direction  in  the  "  enigmatical "  writing  of  the  xiith 
dynasty,  and  in  the  rebus  writing  indulged  in  at  later 
times. 

The  next  stage  is  when  signs  become  purely 
syllabic,  as  in  the  later  Babylonian  and  Cypriote 
syllabaries.  Comparatively  short  and  compact  lists 
of  syllables  without  any  duplicates  can  be  used  with 
ease,  and  with  but  little  burden  to  the  memory.  We 
keep  parts  of  such  a  method  still,  in  various  ligatures 
and  abbreviations,  which  we  look  upon  as  units  of 
expression  ;  and  moreover  we  actually  read  mainly 
by  syllable  groups  rather  than  by  the  separate 
letters,  both  in  eye-grasp,  and  in  vocalising  a  strange 
word. 

The  final  analysis  into  bare  elements  of  sound, 
and  only  attaching  an  irreducible  minimum  of 
sound  to  each  sign,  has  been  reached  in  the 
alphabets.  Such  analysis  really  goes  beyond  the 
necessities  of  the  case ;  but  as  it  gives  the  least 
burden  to  the  memory,  it  has  supplanted  the  syllabic 
varieties,  while  it  is  practically  used  to  construct 
syllables,  which  are  the  real  units  of  speech  and  of 
rapid  reading. 

Now  from  this  sketch  of  the  stages  of  the  use  of 
signs  we  see  that  it  would  be  quite  an  anachronism  to 
look  on  early  signs  as  letters, — we  have  to  deal  with 
a  signary,  not  an  alphabet.  The  alphabetic  stage  of 
signs  was  probably  not  reached  till  about  iooo  B.C., 
at  least  we  cannot  yet  prove  it  to  be  used  earlier. 
The  word  and  syllabic  stages  may  well  cover  the 
xiith  and  xviiith  dynasties.  It  would  be  rash  to 
assume  that  the  shift  from  the  original  sense  to  the 
mere  sound  in  the  use  of  signs  occurred  before  the 
beginning  of  the  Egyptian  dynasties.  It  is  more 
likely  than  not  that  the  mental  attitude  of  thinking 
of  signs  phonetically  occurred  in  the  same  age  to  the 
Egyptian  with  his  pictorial  hieroglyphs,  and  also  to 
the  dweller  in  Egypt — whoever  he  may  have  been — 
who  used  the  linear  signs. 

There  are  some  reservations  and  limitations  in 
dealing  with  this  wide  subject,  which  should  be  noted 
before  we  go  further. 

We  must  by  no  means  assume  that  because  a  sign 
may  be  found  in  use  through  many  lands  that  it  was 
used  in  the  same  manner.  The  various  signaries  and 
alphabets  given  in  the  plates  here  are  of  very  different 
ages  ;  the  earliest  belong  to  the  early  prehistoric  age 


of  Egypt,  probably  before  7000  B.C.,  the  majority  to 
the  latest  stages  of  the  extended  signary  before  it  was 
extinguished  by  the  spread  of  the  Greek  and  Roman 
alphabets. 

Even  at  the  same  age  a  sign  might  linger  in 
the  word  stage  in  one  country,  while  it  was  reduced 
to  a  single  letter  elsewhere  ;  and  we  can  actually  see 
cases  where  a  sign  was  a  syllable  in  Cyprus,  while  it 
was  a  single  letter  in  Asia  Minor  or  Greece. 

As  we  have  seen  that  signs  arise  before  the  power 
of  drawing  pictures,  it  would  then  certainly  be  pre- 
mature to  attempt  to  find  the  original  object  which 
was  in  the  mind  of  the  inventor  of  each  sign  ;  in  only 
one  or  two  cases  could  we  even  guess  it  with  any 
probability,  such  as  the  tree  e  or  the  two  hills  m.  If 
then  it  may  sometimes  be  convenient  to  use  a  nick- 
name for  a  sign  in  referring  to  it,  that  is  merely  on 
the  same  footing  as  the  Phoenician  nick-names,  or  our 
children's  books  with  A  was  an  Archer  ;  and  such  a 
name  conveys  no  implication  of  its  being  that  of  the 
original  subject.  The  Phoenician  aleph,  beth,  etc., 
which  passed  on  to  Greece,  was  entirely  a  late 
meaning ;  this  is  shown  by  the  earlier  forms  of  the 
signs  having  no  connection  with  the  name,  which 
was  only  applicable  to  the  Phoenician  variant. 
That  the  Phoenician  names  were  but  nick-names 
was  seen  by  De  Rouge  and  agreed  to  by  Taylor, 
who  gives  the  parallel  re-naming  of  letters  in 
Russian,  Runic,  the  Keltic  tree-names  and  the  Irish 
Bobeloth. 

In  the  tables  here  given,  the  necessity  of  compact 
comparison  has  prevented  more  than  two  forms  of  a 
letter  being  shown  in  one  column.  There  are  how- 
ever sometimes  a  dozen  variants,  and  those  which  are 
here  given  are  continuous  with  the  forms  in  other 
columns,  or  serve  to  show  the  limits  of  variation  ;  the 
varieties  which  have  less  immediate  use  for  com- 
parison, and  seem  to  be  only  local  corruptions,  are 
necessarily  left  aside,  though  in  some  cases  we  may 
refer  to  them  in  detail. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  every  line  of  signs 
here  was  of  independent  origin.  In  some  cases  the 
forms  are  evidently  allied,  if  not  indeed  derived  from 
one  prototype.  The  M  forms  (43-46)  are  certainly 
all  connected  ;  yet  so  separate  in  the  early  stages,  and 
continuing  to  show  such  diversity — except  in  the 
Graeco-Phocnician  group — that  it  is  best  to  trace 
them  apart.  Similarly  the  Z  (49,  50)  and  S  (51,  52), 
with  a  central  stem  or  without,  are  obviously  monu- 
mental and  cursive  forms  respectively.  The  carrying 
forward   of  forms   that    first  appear    in   Egypt,   into 


THE   GROWTH   OF   SIGNS 


Crete,  Melos,  and  Spain,  is  a  feature  worth  attention, 
and  is  illustrated  by  keeping  forms  on  separate  lines. 
The  three  forms  of  Etruscan  F,  12,  14,  15,  which  are 
usually  put  together,  each  belong  to  an  early  and 
definite  type  of  the  letter.  The  number  of  lines  here 
is  therefore  a  matter  of  convenience,  to  enable  allied 
forms  to  be  more  readily  traced  from  one  land  to 
another. 

The  total  number  of  signs  used  is  not  exhausted 
in  these  sixty  lines.  These  comprise  those  signs 
which  are  found  in  several  different  sources,  and 
which  have  survived  into  alphabets  of  known  values. 
There  are  also  some  signs  with  a  long  history  which 
never  touched  the  shores  of  continuous  literature,  and 
which  remain  floating  as  Aphonics  (see  pi.  v).  Doubt- 
less they  were  as  useful  in  their  day  as  any  of  the 
other  signs ;  but  like  extinct  species  they  have  left  no 
living  descendants,  even  in  the  fullest  alphabets. 
There  are  also  many  signs  with  a  very  brief  history, 
which  only  appear  in  one  or  two  ages.  These  deserve 
a  record,  if  merely  to  show  the  diversities  of  human 
invention.  More  than  that,  we  are  as  yet  only  on  the 
opening  of  this  great  subject,  and  any  day  a  basketful 
of  broken  sherds  from  some  unknown  town  in  Asia 
Minor  or  Mesopotamia  may  open  a  fresh  chapter, 
and  show  the  extension  of  many  signs  hitherto  scarcely 
recognised. 

It  must  always  be  remembered  that  our  materials 
are  comparatively  scanty,  and,  for  the  earlier  ages,  are 
derived  from  sources  which  are  generally  entirely 
neglected.  All  of  the  signs  on  pottery  and  ostraka, 
which  yield  the  first  half  of  the  history  of  signs, 
shown  in  the  first  seven  columns  of  the  tables,  have 
been  recorded  only  by  myself  and  my  students,  for  no 
other  excavators  have  preserved  them.  The  signs 
used  by  humble  captives,  by  working  potters,  by  the 
illiterate  who  could  not  learn  the  complex  system  of 
the  scribes — such  are  ignored  by  those  who  only  seek 
long  inscriptions  and  documents.  These  signs,  how- 
ever, constitute  the  long-lived  groundwork,  extending 
through  all  lands  linked  by  trade  and  traffic  ;  they  are 
simple  enough  to  defy  corruption,  and  were  ready  to 
crystallize  into  a  general  system  so  soon  as  the  selec- 
tive influence  began  to  work. 

Here  we  cannot  attempt  anything  like  a  general 
history  of  alphabets,  we  are  only  concerned  with  the 
growth  of  the  alphabet  out  of  the  general  signary. 
Nor  can  we  deal  with  the  comparative  phonetics, 
especially  in  lands  of  whose  speech  we  know  nothing 
beyond  the  bare  alphabet ;  the  mutations  of  sounds 
are  only  touched  on  so  far  as  to  explain,  to  those 


not  familiar  with  such  changes,  the  reason  for 
accepting  forms  as  identical  of  which  the  values  are 
cognate. 

Lastly  there  is  no  attempt  here  to  touch  on  the 
languages  which  were  expressed  by  these  signs  ;  they 
were  probably  as  diverse  as  the  languages  written 
to-day  in  the  Roman  or  the  Arabic  alphabets. 


CHAPTER  III 

THE    SIGNARY   BEFORE    THE    ALPHABET 

The  question  as  to  whether  the  signs  were  derived 
from  the  more  pictorial  hieroglyphs,  or  were  an 
independent  system,  has  been  so  little  observed  by 
writers  on  the  subject,  that  the  matter  has  been 
decided  more  than  once  without  any  consideration 
of  the  various  details  involved.  We  purpose  here  to 
state  the  different  lines  of  observation  which  bear 
upon  this  main  question. 

The  two  opposite  views  to  bear  in  mind  are  :  1st, 
the  old  Phoenician  theory,  that  the  small  system  of 
the  definite  alphabet  has  been  enlarged  and  cor- 
rupted by  additions ;  or,  2nd,  that  a  gradually 
formed  signary,  spread  by  traffic  far  and  wide,  was 
slowly  contracted  and  systematised  until  it  was 
reduced  to  a  fixed  alphabet. 

We  will  deal  now  with  the  various  reasons  which 
prevent  the  acceptance  of  the  Phoenician  theory, 
numbering  them  for  distinction. 

(1)  The  general  age  of  most  of  the  signs  points 
to  their  being  pre-alphabetic  and  pre-hieroglyphic. 
Out  of  the  sixty  lines  in  the  tables,  forty-four  begin 
in  prehistoric  Egypt — that  is  to  say,  before  any 
hieroglyphs  were  known  in  Egypt  from  which  they 
could  be  derived.  It  is  impossible,  in  view  of  the 
continuity  with  which  these  signs  are  found,  age 
before  age,  as  we  trace  them  back,  to  set  up  a  barrier 
and  say  that  all  before  that  have  no  connection  with 
all  after  the  barrier.  We  might  as  reasonably  draw 
a  division  down  through  the  Greek  alphabets,  and 
deny  any  connection  between  the  earlier  and  the 
later  alphabets.  This  fact  of  continuity  of  form 
does  not  at  all  imply  that  all  the  signs  are  equally 
ancient.  Many  seem  to  have  begun  in  later  times, 
the  yod,  8,  and  three  sibilants,  56,  57,  59,  only  start 
in  the  first  dynasty,  and  are  unknown  in  prehistoric 
Egypt.  Another  letter,  the  Phoenician  tzade,  which 
is  the  only  one  clearly  connected  with  a  Cretan 
hieroglyph,  is  entirely  unknown  in  the  various  early 


REASONS   AGAINST   PHOENICIAN   ORIGIN 


signaries,  and  was  probably  an  addition  at  about 
1 500-1000  B.C.  As  Taylor  states,  from  his  old  point 
of  view,  "  Tzade  .  .  .  is  .  .  .  the  only  Phoenician 
letter  which  has  disappeared  from  every  European 
alphabet."  We  can  now  see  that  it  never  belonged 
to  the  older  general  signary,  and  had  no  chance 
therefore  of  being  adopted  by  Europe  merely  on  its 
Phoenician  usage.  Conversely  the  tall  triangle  has 
in  Egyptian  hieroglyphs  the  value  d  or  du,  and  no 
object  is  known  from  which  it  could  be  derived  ;  it 
seems  likely  that  the  hieroglyph  system  incorporated 
the  triangle  d  33,  which  in  Spanish  has  the  value  du, 
and  thus  the  signary  lent  at  least  one  sign  to  the 
later  system  of  hieroglyphs. 

(2)  Further,  the  body  of  signs  belong  to  the 
early  age,  when  drawing  was  of  the  rudest,  and  only 
mechanical  abilities  were  developed  in  the  art. 
Hence  from  the  psychological  point  of  view  it  is 
impossible  to  presuppose  a  pictorial  source  for  them. 
They  start  at  an  age  when  rude  marks  satisfy  the 
mind  by  symbolizing  the  intended  meaning,  and  long 
before  more  exact  copies  of  forms  were  thought 
needful. 

(3)  In  the  fullest  forms  of  the  alphabet,  so  far 
apart  as  Spain  and  Karia,  we  see  many  exact  re- 
lations of  form  and  sound.  So  close  is  the  connection 
that  some  kind  of  borrowing  has  been  presupposed 
by  various  writers.  Yet  on  the  Spanish  side  the 
problem  is  too  wide  and  too  complex  to  be  at 
all  accounted  for  by  the  supposition  that  this  con- 
nection was  merely  due  to  visits  of  hypothetical 
Karian  sailors.  Some  common  base  must  underlie 
both  alphabets.  We  see  that  the  peculiar  signs  of 
these  alphabets  are  found  in  Egypt  in  the  xiith 
dynasty  and  earlier  (as  in  lines  2,  3,  5,  6,  15,  17,  20, 
22,  26,  28,  31,  32,  36,  40,  43,  44,  45,  56,  57,  59),  and 
as  none  of  them  belong  to  the  Graeco-Phoenician 
alphabet,  it  is  obvious  that  these  twenty  signs 
have  some  common  origin  entirely  outside  of  the 
Phoenician  group.  Further,  this  origin  must  be  a 
very  remote  one  to  embrace  Egypt,  Karia,  and  Spain, 
which  are  as  far  apart  as  three  Mediterranean  lands 
can  lie. 

(4)  Turn  now  to  another  test.  Were  the  Phoe- 
nician alphabet  the  primitive  basis,  it  is  clear  that  the 
western  forms  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  eastern 
forms  in  Arabia,  should  find  their  common  source  in 
Phoenicia  which  divides  them.  Yet  just  the  con- 
trary is  the  case.  There  are  many  forms  in  common 
in  Arabia  and  the  Mediterranean,  which  have  been 
entirely  lost  in  Phoenicia. 


i«>r~ 

««£ 

CO 

z 

«x 

1 

LfrJI 

Lj-J 

— 

=3 

«sc 

=xz 

5E5 

tSL 

ce 

SEE 

rfi 

«=c 

=3 

a. 

«SC 

-=c 

«=c 

ea 

QC 

go 

1 — 

GO 

-J£L 

w 

V 

3 

* 

Y 

6 

- 

<PCD 

T© 

<r(D 

18 

v\ 

V\ 

M 

23 

§ 

€ 

CD 

AA 

3 

m 

30 
32 
32 
34 
43 

T 

U-l 

rfi 

57 

Here  we  see  ten  signs,  with  known  values,  all  in 
common  between  Arabia  and  the  west,  yet  Phoenicia 
knows  nothing  of  any  of  these.  It  would  be  too 
absurd  to  suppose  that  both  sides  independently 
developed  similar  additions  to  Phoenician  in  such  a 
series,  which  is  nearly  half  the  extent  of  the  Phoe- 
nician alphabet.  /The  only  possible  conclusion  is 
that  Arabia  and  the  west  had  a  common  basis  of 
signs,  and  that  Phoenicia  dropped  a  third  of  those 
which  were  retained  by  Arabia.  , 

(5)  The  same  kind  of  result  is  seen  on  comparing 
the  most  northern,  rather  than  the  most  eastern, 
alphabet.  Runic  has  been  thought  to  be  derived 
from  Latin,  or  with  more  reason  from  Greek,  yet  it 
has  many  signs  in  common  with  Spain,  Karia,  and 
Cyprus,  which  do  not  appear  in  Greek  and  Latin. 

Here  nine  letters  are  in  common  between  the 
Runic  and  Mediterranean  alphabets,  and  these  are 
quite  unknown  in  either  the  Greek  or  Latin  from 
which  a  descent  has  been  supposed.  The  only 
conclusion  is  that  Runic  is  a  branch  of  the  Medi- 
terranean alphabets  much  older  than   the  formation 


THE  SIGNARY   BEFORE   THE   ALPHABET 


09 

09 

-s 

«s 

:^ 

*=E 

l_t-l 

— 

— 

ex: 

ee 

ss 

< 

ee 

64- 

LkJ 

=3 

ex. 

^ 

3»- 

ac 

ce 

GO 

** 

CJ> 

H— 

J 

$ 

8 

n 

n 

11 

c 

12 

F 

^ 

15 

M 

n 

23 

X 

>K 

x 

* 

28 

\[/ 

Y 

32 

* 

t 

i 

T 

40 

M 

IX 

44 

of  the  Greek  and  Latin  forms,  which  at  a  later  date 
barred  it  off  from  further  communication  southward. 
Whatever  it  has  in  common  with  Greek  or  Latin 
letters  it  has  merely  in  common  with  other  alphabets 
as  well. 

(6)  Another  point  of  view  is  that  several  rare 
forms  appear  in  countries  far  apart.  Such  are  line  2 
in  Karia  and  Egypt ;  1.  5  in  Karia  and  Egypt ;  1.  6 
in  Spain,  Lydia,  and  Egypt ;  1.  17  in  Cyprus,  Korinth, 
and  Spain,  beside  apparently  Egypt ;  1.  19  in  Libya, 
Karia,  Spain,  and  Italy  ;  1.  22  in  Spain,  Libya,  and 
Egypt;  1.  31  in  Spain,  Karia,  and  Egypt;  1.  36  in 
Libya,  Karia,  and  Egypt  ;  I.  59,  Spain  and  Egypt. 
This  wide  diffusion  of  rare  signs,  without  any  inter- 
mediate remains  in  countries  between,  is  a  strong 
mark  of  a  generally  diffused  body  of  signs,  many 
of  which  have  been  lost,  and  only  stray  survivors 
appear. 

(7)  We  must  next  trench  on  a  later  chapter,  that 
on  the  Order  of  the  Alphabet.  In  that  chapter  it 
will  be  shown  how  we  may  develop  further  the  old 
view  that  the  order  is  (1)  a  series  of  vowel-labial- 
guttural-and-dental,  a  b  c  d,  e  f  g  8,  i  k,  o  p  q  t,  with 
(2)  some  losses  in  the  third  row,  (3)  some  additions 
of  liquids,  and  (4)  addition    of  sibilants  irregularly. 


All  this  has  long  been  recognised,  and  it  is  granted 
that  this  order  belongs  to  a  stage  long  before  the 
separation  of  Phoenician  and  Greek,  as  the  losses 
and  gains  are  found  alike  in  both.  The  old  order 
was  already  therefore  lost  to  sight  when  the  Greek 
parted  from  the  Phoenician.  Now  the  point  as  yet 
ignored  is  that  the  Greek  has  the  whole  of  a  fifth 
series,  and  the  beginning  of  a  sixth,  v  <£  ^  yfr, 
<u.  .  .  .  The  sign  yfr  is  of  varying  values,  ks,  ps, 
and  tz  in  different  countries ;  it  seems  to  have 
been  a  sibilant  dental  form,  which  might  well 
be  at  first.  Further,  on  recognising  these  six  rows 
of  values  of  the  same  construction,  we  see  that  the 
liquids  L,  M,  N,  are  put  in  at  the  middle  in  a  neutral 
position,  as  I  further  suggest  probably  on  the  handle 
of  the  primitive  hornbook.  Now  it  is  always  granted 
that  the  Greek  had  broken  up  this  old  order,  before 
it  parted  from  the  Phoenician  ;  and  yet,  nevertheless 
it  has  a  further  form  of  the  old  order,  in  the  5  th  and 
6th  series.  Therefore  it  is  apparent  that  the  5th  and 
6th  series  cannot  have  been  composed  later,  but 
must  be  a  primitive  feature  which  the  Phoenician 
has  lost.  It  is  true  that  the  Greek  may  not  have  had 
these  signs  in  use  at  first,  but  if  so  the  Greek  must 
have  taken  them  over  from  some  more  complete 
form  of  the  alphabet,  from  which  it  supplemented 
and  made  good  the  losses  of  its  Phoenician  source. 
However  this  detail  may  be,  the  Greek  maintenance 
of  a  piece  of  the  old  order,  which  was  not  in  Phoe- 
nician, shows  that  the  Phoenician  was  a  reduced  form 
of  a  fuller  original. 

(8)  In  the  old  view  of  the  solely  Phoenician 
source  of  the  Greek  alphabets,  it  was  difficult  to  see 
why  there  should  be  so  much  diversity  between  them. 
If  a  single  source  sufficed,  why  should  such  gratuitous 
confusions  of  letters  and  varieties  of  forms  have 
arisen  ?  The  muddle  of  B  for  e,  of  %  and  $  for  i,  of 
1j  for  b,  the  confusion  of  g  and  1,  of  s  and  m,  all 
seem  madness  if  one  clear  and  simple  Phoenician 
alphabet  was  the  source,  as  none  of  these  confusions 
exist  in  Phoenician.  But  when  we  now  see  the 
great  diversity  of  the  signary  which  underlay  the 
whole  of  the  alphabetic  sources,  it  is  only  natural 
that  different  cities  should  have  started  with  different 
materials.  Thus  Korinth  began  with  a  b  also  belong- 
ing to  Cyprus  and  Egypt,  with  an  i  belonging  to 
Crete  and  Karia,  and  with  an  s  belonging  to  Karia 
and  Spain.  The  general  signary  explains  the  position 
entirely,  though  it  is  quite  insoluble  on  the  hypo- 
thesis of  a  Phoenician  source. 

We  have  now   seen,   by  eight  different   lines   of 


FORMS  AND   SOUNDS  OF   SIGNS 


evidence,  how  it  is  unlikely  or  impossible  for  the  short 
Phoenician  alphabet,  on  any  similar  body,  to  have 
been  the  starting  point  of  all  the  systems  that  are 
found.  On  the  contrary  all  the  material  shows,  both 
by  direct  historical  instance,  and  by  inference  from 
its  use,  that  a  wide-spread  body  of  signs — or  signary — 
must  have  been  in  more  or  less  general  use,  and  that 
the  shorter  alphabets  were  selections  from  such  a 
body. 


CHAPTER  IV 

NOTES    ON    VARIOUS    SIGNARIES 

WHEN  we  turn  from  the  general  questions  which 
we  have  been  dealing  with,  to  look  at  the  material  in 
detail,  the  first  mode  of  regarding  it  is  by  taking 
each  signary  as  a  whole— that  is,  taking  each  column 
of  the  tables  one  by  one.  Thus  we  deal  with  each 
system  of  signs  of  each  country,  regarding  its  source 
and  character  ;  while  in  the  succeeding  chapters  the 
history  of  each  sign  through  various  lands  is  traced 
along  the  lines  of  the  tables. 

It  should  first  be  stated  that  no  phonetic  values 
are  known  for  any  of  the  signs  in  the  first  six 
columns  of  the  tables.  In  Roman  Egypt  some  values 
are  known  by  comparison  with  Asianic  alphabets. 
Most  of  the  values  are  known  in  Libya,  but  some 
signs  are  drawn  from  untranslated  inscriptions  :  the 
same  is  the  case  in  Lydia.  No  values  are  known 
for  the  signs  from  Crete,  Phylakopi,  or  Lachish.  All 
of  the  other  columns  contain  signs  of  known  values, 
the  sounds  of  which  determine  the  relationship  of  the 
signs  from  one  column  to  another.  The  various 
signs  of  which  the  values  are  not  known  are  here 
classed  entirely  according  to  their  forms.  In  many 
lines  the  forms  are  peculiar,  and  when  we  look  at 
such  forms  as  in  lines  8,  17,  20,  24,  31,  43,  45,  58, 
or  59,  we  see  that  such  are  not  at  all  likely  to  be 
independently  invented  in  different  centres. 

It  is  always  granted  that  there  is  a  connection 
between  signs  or  letters  which  have  the  same  value 
and  the  same  form;  and  it  seems  impossible  to 
assume  that  when  the  form  is  the  same,  and  the  value 
is  unknown,  the  forms  have  no  connection  with  each 
other,  or  with  the  same  form  of  known  value  in  other 
lands.  For  instance,  to  look  along  the  first  line  at 
the  A  sign,  everyone  agrees  that  where  it  is  of  known 
value  it  is  connected  ;  but  it  would  be  absurd  to  say 
that  in  the  columns  where  the  values  are  yet  unknown 
the  A  signs  have  no   connection  with  those  in  any 


other  column.  The  chance  limits  of  our  present 
acquaintance  with  the  sounds  of  the  signs  cannot 
be  supposed  to  have  any  connection  with  the  size 
of  groups  of  signs  that  are  really  related  to  each  other. 
jWe  must  in  all  reason  grant  that  all  similar  signs  are 
most  likely  to  be  connected  with  a  common  source./ 

If  then  the  large  number  of  peculiar  forms  must 
be  granted  to  be  respectively  connected  throughout, 
there  is  no  reason  to  deny  the  connection  of  the 
simpler  forms,  though  such  may  have  more  risk  of 
being  linked  by  a  merely  casual  connection.  For 
the  present  the  more  likely  condition  is  that  all  of 
the  examples  in  any  one  line  are  due  to  copying  one 
primitive  type. 

Another  consideration,  however,  now  comes  into 
play.  The  phonetic  values  are  not  an  absolute  proof 
of  connection  ;  the  same  sign  may  vary  in  pronuncia- 
tion in  different  lands.  In  line  12  the  identity  of 
the  signs  is  obvious,  but  they  have  the  allied  values 
of  p,  i>,  a.nd  v.  In  line  18  forms  that  are  alike  have 
the  values  p,  b,  v,  and  w.  There  is  nothing  surprising 
in  this,  as  these  sounds  in  many  instances  are  inter- 
changeable, as  we  shall  note  in  going  over  the  letters 
in  detail.  But,  to  avoid  any  uncertainty,  all  such 
variations  are  marked  here  by  small  roman  type 
placed  by  each.  Again,  in  56  there  occur  for  the 
same  sign  the  values  ss,  sh,  z,  and  tz  ;  in  58  the 
values  ks,  tz,  and  ps.  There  is  no  difficulty  about 
such  variations,  only  the  signs  must  not  be  classed 
solely  by  their  sound,  but  in  allied  sounds  the 
form  must  obviously  determine  their  original  con- 
nection. 

Badly  made  forms  of  signs  are  often  of  value  as 
showing  in  what  way  their  composition  was  regarded, 
for  instance,  44  in  the  istand  xviiith  dynasties  is  seen 
not  to  be  regarded  as  two  triangles,  but  as  two 
parallel  lines  linked  by  a  cross,  which  agrees  with  the 
m  value  in  later  examples. 

An  important  consideration  is  the  writing  material, 
as  shown  by  the  forms  of  the  letters.  It  has  long 
been  recognised  that  a  brush-  or  pen-writing  has 
rounded  forms,  while  a  chisel-cutting  has  square 
forms  and  straight  lines.  Further,  it  may  be  seen  that 
pen  forms  tend  to  be  compact  and  round,  but  not  to 
cross  the  strokes,  as  that  leads  to  blotting.  Brush 
forms  run  to  long  vague  strokes,  as  the  tails  of 
Phoenician  letters,  on  the  Roman  scrawls ;  and  owing 
to  the  dryness  of  the  strokes  there  is  no  objection  to 
crossing,  as  in  Chinese.  Clay-writing  with  an  im- 
pressing stroke  is  always  built  up  of  short  straight 
lines,  as  cuneiform.     But  clay-writing  with  a  scraping 

2 


10 


NOTES   ON    VARIOUS   SIGNARIES 


stroke  has  short  lines,  owing  to  avoiding  too  great  a 
ruck  of  scraped  clay,  curved  lines  owing  to  play  of 
the  hand,  and  disconnected  lines  owing  to  the  wish 
to  keep  the  ruck  from  blocking  a  previous  line,  and 
to  avoid  tearing  away  the  corners  where  lines  cross. 
This  is  specially  seen  in  the  Cypriote  writing,  which 
was  evidently  scratched  on  soft  clay,  as  in  Crete  and 
Phylakopi.  Chiselled  forms  are  compact,  with  lines 
straight  where  possible,  and  with  joined  forms  as 
much  as  possible  to  save  cutting  neat  ends  to  the 
lines.  The  extreme  form  of  this  is  seen  in  the 
Libyan  inscriptions,  where  there  are  scarcely  any 
curves  left.  This  type  might  also  be  the  result  of 
wearing  out  letters  by  scraping  with  a  piece  of  sand- 
stone or  flint.  The  marks  scratched  on  pottery  are 
seldom  curved,  as  it  was  evidently  a  difficulty  to 
work  round  ;  long  scratches  with  a  flint  point,  some- 
times sawn  deep  into  the  sherd,  are  the  usual  method 
of  marking,  running  into  long  tails  and  scores. 

We  now  turn  to  the  details  of  each  of  the 
columns  of  the  plates  ii,  iii,  and  iv. 

The  columns  of  the  prehistoric  Egyptian  signs 
are  entirely  derived  from  the  marks  upon  pottery 
found  in  the  forms  of  that  age.  These  were  all 
marked  by  the  owner,  being  cut  into  the  finished 
pot.  The  tool  used  was  doubtless  a  flint  flake.  It  is 
seldom  that  two  signs  are  found  together,  and  these 
are  probably  all  in  the  stage  of  owner's  marks. 
Many  figures  of  animals,  and  some  of  men  rudely 
scratched,  are  also  found :  they  have  no  feet  or 
hands,  the  limbs  merely  ending  in  points. 

The  ist  dynasty  signs  are  also  cut  on  pottery, 
but  more  firmly,  and  sometimes  mixed  with  regular 
hieroglyphs.  Groups  of  two  or  three  signs  are  not 
uncommon.  The  whole  of  these  are  exactly  dated 
by  the  pottery  belonging  to  the  tombs  of  various 
kings  of  the  ist  dynasty. 

The  column  of  xiith  dynasty  signs  includes 
scattered  examples  from  the  ivth  to  the  xiith,  and 
some  rather  later.  They  are  mostly  scratched  or 
cut  on  pottery,  but  some  are  on  wood.  Here  we 
meet  with  a  group  of  five  signs  for  the  first  time, 
cut  around  a  cylinder  of  wood,  which  formed  a  tool 
of  unknown  use.  This  earliest  inscription  of  signs  is 
given  on  pi.  ix.  On  the  pottery  of  this  age  a  few 
marks  are  found  which  were  scored  in  the  wet  clay  ; 
these  were  evidently  made  by  the  potter  before 
baking. 

In  the  xviiith  dynasty  column  are  included  a  few 
earlier  signs.  At  this  period  the  marks  are  rather 
more   oftener   used   by   the  potters,  especially  such 


curved  forms  as   36,   53,   or   55,  though  the  owner's 
marks  are  still  by  far  the  more  usual. 

The  xixth  dynasty  ostraka  are  a  class  apart. 
They  are  here  published  in  photograph,  in  the 
Frontispiece,  as  they  show  the  earliest  regular  use 
of  the  signary  for  sentences.  It  is  obvious  that  they 
are  mixed  with  one  or  two  hieroglyphs,  such  as  the 
use  of  neb  ta  or  neb  taui  (figs.  4,  6),  to  express  the 
king  of  Egypt.  Beside  these  there  are  one-third  of 
the  forms  that  seem  to  be  outside  of  the  usual  signs 
which  are  here  tabulated.  But  the  other  two-thirds 
accord  well  with  the  signs  of  earlier  times,  so  far  as 
the  forms  of  thick  ink-writing  can  be  like  those  of 
scratching  on  pottery.  These  ostraka  were  brought 
from  a  Qurneh  dealer,  along  with  dozens  of  others 
also  on  limestone,  ink-written  in  hieratic.  As  when  I 
got  these  the  Ramesseum  was  then  being  cleared  out 
by  the  Government,  and  work  was  going  on  at  the 
tombs  of  the  kings,  these  probably  came  from  one  or 
other  of  those  sources. 

The  signs  from  Roman  Egypt  are  all  from 
Diospolis  (Hu),  and  are  probably  due  to  a  garrison 
of  men  from  Asia  Minor  stationed  there.  Some 
signs  are  from  a  continuous  writing  scratched  on  a 
potsherd,  others  are  found  very  coarsely  cut  into  the 
thick  pottery  stands,  which  served  as  tables  for  the 
garrison.  Yet,  if  these  were  of  Asianic  origin,  it  is 
singular  to  find  here  the  yod,  8,  of  Phoenician  form, 
which  belongs  in  earlier  ages  to  Egypt,  and  is  entirely 
unknown  in  Asia  Minor.  The  same  is  true  of  the 
sign  59>  and  both  of  these  are  on  the  pottery  stands. 
It  may  be  that  some  of  these  signs  were  survivals  in 
Egypt. 

The  Libyan  alphabet  has  been  partly  worked  out 
from  ancient  inscriptions,  and  the  modern  Tifinar 
script  is  clearly  descended  from  it.  But  though  the 
majority  of  values  are  thus  known,  there  are  many 
other  signs  also  in  the  inscriptions  which  are  included 
here,  classed  according  to  their  forms  only.  The  use 
of  this  alphabet  extends,  as  Berger  says,  from  Sinai 
to  the  Ferro  isles ;  and  in  Gizeh  and  Rifek  I  have 
translated  two  gravestones  found  on  the  east  of  the 
Delta :  these  must  be  early  Libyan,  as  they  were 
much  weathered  and  decayed  when  re-used  for  roof- 
ing in  a  Roman  grave.  The  Lydian  script  has  not 
been  fully  worked  out,  and  beyond  the  forms  in 
Sayce's  paper  of  1905  the  inscriptions  have  been 
searched  for  other  signs.  The  Lykian,  Cypriote,  and 
Runic  are  taken  from  the  usual  authorities. 

The  Karian  is  of  course  mainly  drawn  from 
Sayce's   long   paper   in    T.S.B.A.   ix,   138,  but  with 


THE   SPANISH   ALPHABETS 


II 


additions  from  his  subsequent  papers.  It  is  of  the 
greatest  value  as  being  particularly  rich,  and  giving 
values  for  the  signs  5,  15,  36,  and  43,  which  are  not 
even  found  in  the  Spanish  alphabets. 

The  Spanish  alphabets,  north  and  south,  offer 
some  difficulty  as  to  their  values.  The  latest 
authority  is  Hubner's  Mon.  Ling.  Iberia,  and  natur- 
ally we  might  accept  that  as  final.  But  in  the  values 
of  some  letters  he  runs  contrary  to  all  previous 
students  :  especially  in  treating  the  tz  57  as  t,  and 
putting  the  </  31  down  as  tz.  He  also  shifts  the  in 
44,  45  to  tz.  The  matter  is  complicated  by  his  blind 
adherence  to  the  Phoenician  alphabet,  thus  reducing 
to  the  bare  limits  of  22  letters  all  the  various 
sounds  recognised  by  others.  The  questions  of  the 
attribution  of  coins,  on  which  these  readings  depend, 
are  so  difficult,  owing  to  the  differences  between  the 
Spanish  and  the  classical  forms  of  words,  that  it 
would  be  a  long  affair  to  really  judge  Hubner's 
grounds.  There  is,  however,  an  external  clue  ;  and 
when  we  see  that  the  other  students  in  their  values 
of  31  and  57  agree  with  the  Karian  alphabet,  which 
is  so  similar  to  the  Spanish  in  other  respects,  it 
seems  probable  that  such  values  should  be  accepted, 
and  they  are  so  taken  here.  I  have  also  occasionally 
followed  variants  found  in  duplicate  inscriptions  on 
the  coins,  as  in  13,  32,  33,  46,  48,  in  which  cases  there 
appeared  to  be  a  kinship  with  other  alphabets. 

The  remaining  columns  of  alphabets  are  all  taken 
from  the  well-known  authorities.  The  signs  found 
at  Lachish  are  specially  interesting  for  comparison 
with  the  Phoenician,  as  they  are  south  Phoenician 
forms  of  early  date,  showing  six  letters  (and  some 
variants)  which  were  lost  in  the  northern  Phoenician. 

The  list  of  publications  used  will  be  seen  at  the 
end  of  chapter  I,  and  the  detailed  references  of  each 
of  the  Egyptian  signs  in  the  key,  pi.  vi. 


CHAPTER   V 

THE  VOWELS   AND   LABIALS 
See  pi.  it,  following  the  lines  of  the  tables 

The  order  adopted  here  for  all  those  signs  with 
known  values,  which  can  be  compared  in  many 
lands,  is  to  group  them  in  the  primitive  order  of  the 
alphabet— vowels,  labials,  gutturals,  dentals,  liquids, 
and  sibilants.  This  order  has  the  advantage  that  the 
cognate  sounds  which  are  interchangeable  are  kept 


together.  If  once  the  European  order  is  given  up,  it 
is  better  to  form  a  classification  on  historical  lines 
than  to  adopt  the  partial  changes  of  Lepsius,  or  the 
variation  of  Levi,  which  are  only  confusing  without 
giving  a  logical  basis. 

The  order  of  the  columns  has  been  carefully 
considered,  to  show  their  connection.  The  Egyptian 
forms,  as  being  by  far  the  oldest,  lead  the  way,  and 
must  be  kept  together.  The  Libyan  should  not  be 
separated  from  them.  The  Asia  Minor  forms  come 
next,  as  they  are  much  more  similar  to  the  primitive 
than  they  are  to  the  European  forms.  The  Runic  is 
put  before  the  Karian,  as  it  seems  to  be  nearest  to 
the  Asianic.  The  Spanish,  so  closely  allied  to  the 
Karian,  follows  that.  The  three  South  Arabian 
alphabets,  which  are  akin  to  the  early  signs  rather 
than  to  the  Phoenician,  follow  next.  Beyond  comes 
the  intermediate  group  of  Crete,  Phylakopi,  and 
Lachish,  leading  to  the  Phoenician  ;  and  after  that 
succeed  the  Greek  alphabets,  so  largely  influenced 
by  the  Phoenician.  Lastly  come  the  Italian  alphabets, 
which  were  influenced  by  the  Greek.  We  shall  now 
consider  each  line  separately. 

Line  1.  It  seems  strange  that  two  formshave  existed 
since  the  ist  dynasty,  one  with  two  equal  legs,  the 
other  with  only  one  leg  ;  and  this  latter  form,  of  the 
xiith  dynasty,  is  the  origin  of  the  Greek  minuscule 
form,  which  was  also  used  in  early  uncials.  In  order 
to  distinguish  the  one-legged  form  from  r  in  Lykia 
and  Spain  a  short  tail  was  added,  a  distinction  which 
afterwards  became  fixed  on  r  itself.  This  tailed  form 
became  fully  established  in  Italy  as  the  Faliscan. 
The  one-legged  form  was  used  by  Phoenicia,  by  the 
early  Greeks,  and  also  in  Italy.  It  has  served  as  the 
base  for  the  minuscule  of  modern  times  in  a  different 
construction  to  that  which  led  to  the  Greek  minuscule, 
not  a  but  <X.  The  type  with  a  V-shaped  cross-bar 
occurs  as  early  as  the  xiith  dynasty  (///.  xv)  and  with 
a  very  deep  V-bar  and  rounded  head  (K.  iv).  In 
Spain  it  dwindled  to  a  mere  triangle. 

2.  This  curious  form,  with  value  at  in  Karia,  is 
also  known  from  the  prehistoric  to  the  xiith  dynasty, 
but  never  took  root  elsewhere.  It  is  probably  a  form 
of  the  next. 

3.  This  form,  which  lasted  through  the  dynasties 
in  Egypt,  continued  in  Libya,  Spain,  and  Arabia,  and 
probably  the  same  is  seen  in  a  variant  in  Karia. 
The  values  vary,  he  or  a  in  Arabia,  ai  in  Karia,  and 
u  in  Spain. 

4.  The  three-stroke  e  is  found  at  all  times  in  two 
varieties,    both  sloping   down    and    square.      Rarely 


12 


THE   VOWELS   AND   LABIALS 


it  was  reduced  to  two  strokes,  and  was  then 
only  distinguished  from  f  by  the  direction  of  the 
strokes. 

5.  The  closed  e  is  rare,  belonging  to  Karia 
and  Crete,  and  curiously  appearing  in  a  modifica- 
tion at  Korinth.  It  has,  however,  an  early  ancestry 
in  Egypt. 

6.  The  tree-form  e  belongs  to  Spain  and  Lydia, 
and  it  is  very  likely  that  it  originated  the  simpler 
form  in  Arabia.  It  should  probably  be  accepted  as 
the  value  of  the  same  sign  in  Crete  and  Phylakopi,  as 
well  as  in  Egypt. 

7.  The  plain  stroke  i  has  that  value  in  the  great 
alphabets  of  Karia  and  Spain,  as  well  as  in  all  the 
western  alphabets  after  the  archaic.  So  simple  a 
mark  when  standing  alone  naturally  might  not  have 
an  intentional  value,  so  the  connection  of  the  early 
occurrences  in  Egypt  cannot  be  proved.  The  rela- 
tion of  it  to  the  next  sign,  the  yod,  is  not  so  direct 
as  generally  stated.  The  fact  that  the  Greek  alpha- 
bets accept  one  or  the  other,  but  never  both,  has  led 
to  the  view  that  the  plain  stroke  is  merely  the  yod 
simplified,  and  the  name  iota  agrees  with  this.  But 
on  the  other  hand  both  forms  were  used  in  the  Runes 
and  in  Spain  ;  and  the  stroke  (with  a  little  ring) 
occurs  in  Arabia  without  the  yod,  showing  that  it 
was  separated  from  yod  while  the  Arabian  and 
Mediterranean  stocks  were  in  common.  It  cannot  be 
looked  on  therefore  as  a  Greek  innovation  ;  but 
whether  formed  from  yod,  or  no,  it  is  at  least  a  pre- 
alphabetic  form. 

8.  The  yod  \s  of  so  peculiar  a  shape  that  we  may 
safely  identify  it  in  Egypt  with  the  Spanish  and 
Phoenician  forms.  We  can  see  that  a  secondary 
form  like  N  was  derived  by  omitting  the  middle 
stroke,  see  Libya  and  the  Runes,  and  this  was  turned 
to  the  position  of  Z.  Hence  come  the  three-stroke  i 
forms  of  the  archaic  Greek.  The  separation  of  this 
from  N  and  S,  when  the  values  are  unknown,  is  a 
difficult  question  which  we  shall  deal  with  under 
the  sibilants.  The  Cypriote  ve  seems  connected  with 
this. 

9.  The  0  in  both  square  and  round  form  is  found 
in  Spain,  and  doubtless  the  same  sign  without  values 
in  Egypt  belongs  to  this.  The  difficulty  of  cutting  a 
round  o  on  pottery  or  stone  would  lead  to  squaring 
it ;  and  the  presence  of  the  round  form  nevertheless 
on  these  materials  shows  that  it  was  the  original 
intention,  and  that  the  square  is  only  an  accommoda- 
tion to  the  material. 

10.  The  y  or  upsilon  is  one  of  the  most  widely- 


spread  signs.  The  cursive  form  leads  to  a  sloping 
tail,  as  in  later  Egypt,  Libya,  Lykia,  Karia,  and 
Roman  minuscule  ;  or  else  to  a  ram's-head  form  as 
in  Cyprus  and  Crete.  The  loop  on  one  side  of  the 
stroke  begins  in  the  xiith  dynasty,  and  appears 
evidently  as  a  cursive  form  in  Phoenicia  and  Thera 
as  well  as  in  Spain. 

11.  The  long  0  is  primitively  three  sides  of  a 
square  somewhat  drawn  in  at  the  base,  as  seen  in 
the  Runes  and  in  Karia  with  known  values,  and 
doubtless  it  is  all  one  with  the  Lachish  and  Egyptian 
forms.  The  cursive  treatment  rounded  it,  and  added 
a  leading  and  following  stroke  as  in  Spain,  and  also 
in  later  Greece  ;  and  this  re-translated  into  stone,  or 
more  probably  wood-cutting,  made  the  closed  form 
seen  in  the  Runes  and  in  Spain. 

The  Labials.  12.  The  three  sides  of  a  square 
is  the  sign  very  familiar  as  the  Hebrew  beth,  though 
the  Phoenician  and  Greek  adopted  the  closed  form. 
The  open  square  occurs  in  Egypt  and  Arabia,  but  it 
shows  a  tendency  to  draw  inward  in  the  Runes,  and 
the  Runic  form  cropped  below  seems  to  have  sur- 
vived in  Melos  and  Korinth.  The  top  and  bottom 
closing  in  further  give  the  incurving  which  starts  the 
closed  form. 

13.  The  closed  form  begins  with  the  xiith 
dynasty,  and  continued  in  Phylakopi,  in  the  south 
Phoenician  of  Lachish,  and  in  Arabia  where  it  was 
rounded.  This  must  also  have  been  familiar  in 
Greece,  though  not  used  monumentally,  as  it  has 
been  preserved  in  £,  one  form  of  the  minuscle  ft. 

The  partly-closed  form  occurs  in  Crete  and 
Phoenicia,  in  much  the  same  stage  ;  while  the  entirely 
closed  form  begins  as  early  as  the  xiith  dynasty, 
continued  later  in  Egypt,  and  became  the  standard 
form  of  both  Greece  and  Italy.  In  Spain  it  seems  as 
if  the  C  form  had  joined  ends.  The  single-loop  b  of 
Lykia  and  Karia  is  a  strange  forecast  of  the  Roman 
minuscule,  and  suggests  that  cursive  writing  was  very 
familiar  in  south  Asia  Minor. 

The  sounds  of  all  the  labials  are  hard  to  fix. 
This  sign  12,  13,  is  what  we  call  b.  Yet  in  Greek  it 
was  certainly  v  in  the  second  century  A.D.,  as  used 
for  the  Imperial  name  Berous— Verous  ;  and  also 
three  centuries  earlier,  as  used  for  Dabid.  The 
modern  Greek  pronunciation,  as  in  Vasili,  certainly 
goes  far  back.  Yet  in  the  Arabic,  as  beyt,  and 
Hebrew,  as  beth,  it  keeps  the  b  value  till  now.  B 
does  not  occur  in  the  earliest  Greek  alphabets  and  is  a 
very  rare  letter  in  early  inscriptions.  On  the  Delphic 
tripod  it  is  never  required  except  in  the  name  of  the 


THE   LABIALS 


13 


Ambrakiots,  where  p  does  duty  for  it.  The  sound 
was  evidently  unfamiliar  in  Greece.  The  absence  of 
distinction  in  modern  Spanish  between  b  and  v 
sounds,  probably  represents  the  ancient  idea ;  and  a 
soft  b,  with  little  or  no  explosion,  may  be  the  best 
equivalent.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  to  find  the 
values  p,  b,  v,  and/ for  this  sign. 

14.  This  top-stroke  /  was  common  in  Asia  Minor, 
and  has  a  long  history  in  Egypt.  It  passed  to  Crete 
and  Phylakopi,  but  was  avoided  by  most  of  the 
Greeks,  only  appearing  at  Korinth  and  Elis  under 
the  quaint  name  of  the  digamma.  Italy,  and  hence 
modern  Europe,  fully  accepted  it. 

15.  A  variant  form  is  the  mid-stroke  /  the  value 
of  which  is  given  in  Karia,  and  is  kin  apparently  to 
the  Cypriote  pa,  pha,  or  6a.  The  Runic,  Elis,  and 
Etruscan  also  kept  it,  but  otherwise  the  top-stroke 
form  has  driven  it  out. 

16.  The  p  was  originally  a  sort  of  walking-stick 
hook,  as  it  still  remained  in  Karia.  The  hook 
developed,  and  finally  closed,  as  in  the  Spanish  and 
Roman/.  The  prolongation  down  into  a  two-legged 
sign  is  a  late  Greek  device  to  avoid  confusion  with 
the  r,  beginning,  however,  as  early  as  the  Abu  Simbel 
inscriptions.  The  value  has  not  been  fixed  through- 
out, varying  to  b  is  all  the  -polls  names,  and  uniformly 
becoming /"in  Arabic  names. 

17.  The  second  p  or  b  is  interesting  from  its 
rarity.  In  Spain  and  Korinth  there  occurs  the 
strange  form  like  a  rectangular  reversed  s.  This  is 
evidently  linked  with  the  Cypriote  po  or  bo,  and  the 
pc  or  bi.  The  Egyptian  forms  of  the  prehistoric  and 
xiith  dynasty  seem  to  be  the  originals  of  these 
forms,  which  passed  by  another  line  of  change  into 
the  Sabaean  b.  The  Egyptian  form  appears  as 
b  at  Megara  in  late  times. 

18.  The  phi  sign  has  a  long  history  and  diffusion, 
varying  as  b,  p,  ph,  v,  and  w.  The  identity  of  the 
forms,  both  with  a  long-stroke  and  a  short-stroke,  has 
been  well  kept  up  from  Egypt  to  Italy  ;  yet,  though 
thus  rooted  in  the  west,  it  has  entirely  disappeared 
now  outside  of  Greece.  It  was  not  a  rival  of/,  as 
the  Faliscan  and  Oscan  had  neither,  and  the  early 
Italic  and  Etruscan  had  both  letters.  Its  Cypriote 
form  had  the  value  pu  or  bu. 

19.  This  letter  has  the  value  vu  in  Karia  or  u  in 
Spain,  Greece,  and  Italy.  It  kept  the  value  u  in 
Rome  in  the  ist  century,  as  in  the  Greek  transcrip- 
tion Ouespasianos  ;  but  it  was  sharpened  into  v  on 
reaching  the  second  century,  when  rendered  in  the 
name  Berous. 


20.  This  sign  was  wide-spread  and  vigorous  in 
the  earlier  times,  but  obtained  no  footing  in  the 
Phoenicio-Greek  development,  and  only  survived  in 
the  Faliscan.  Its  value  is  well  marked  as  v  in  Karia 
and  Spain  or  vo  in  Cyprus,  thinned  to  e  in  Lykia. 
The  forms  where  the  mid-stroke  cuts  one  side,  as  in 
xiith  dynasty  and  Karia,  suggest  a  connection  with 
the  cognate  14  /:  but  the  usual  broad-arrow  form 
marks  it  off  as  a  separate  letter. 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE    GUTTURALS    AND    DENTALS,    PL.     Ill 

The  aspirates  and  gutturals  are  so  blended 
that  they  can  only  be  treated  as  one  class  ; 
h,  kh,  k,  g,  and  q,  each  passing  readily  from  one  into 
the  other  in  certain  instances.  The  softening  of 
k  and  g  into  sibilants  as  ch  and  j,  though  familiar 
in  modern  times,  seems  happily  less  common  an- 
ciently. 

21.  The  short  simple  curve  of  the  Egyptian 
examples  is  evidently  the  necessary  prototype  both 
of  the  sharp  angle  and  of  the  large  curve,  which  seem 
so  diverse  in  the  later  alphabets.  The  hard  g  was 
always  retained  as  the  value,  except  in  the  Latin, 
where  k  was  omitted  and  the  sound  transferred  to 
this  sign.  The  Rvalue  is  still  kept  in  South  Italy, 
where  the  Corrlere  paper  is  shouted  in  Naples  as 
II  Gorrler.     In  Cyprus  it  appears  as  go. 

22,  23.  Forms  of  the  three-stroke  g  can  hardly 
be  separated,  except  that  some  have  an  upright 
stem  and  shorter  ends,  while  others  are  sloping  in  the 
middle.  The  distinction  between  these  and  s  is  hard 
to  fix  if  the  values  are  unknown.  Evidently  the 
difficulty  was  felt  in  the  xviiith  dynasty,  where  a 
like  sign  is  distinguished  by  two  dots,  much  as 
in  Spain  the  kh  27  was  marked  with  dots  to  dis- 
tinguish it  from  the  similar  t  37.  The  Nabathaean 
kh  23  is  apparently  of  the  same  family.  The 
Phoenicio-Greek  alphabets  entirely  ignored  these 
signs. 

24.  The  barred  aspirate  has  something  to  show 
for  its  old  name  of  a  gate  or  door,  as  in  the  xixth 
dynasty  and  in  Crete  it  shows  the  pivots  very 
clearly.  It  is  obviously  the  same  sign  running 
through  from  prehistoric  Egypt  to  Italy,  but  it  was 
strangely  omitted  in  Asia  Minor  and  Arabia. 

25.  The  single-bar  k  was  probably  a  weaker  form 
of  the  same   letter,   which  appears  at   Lachish   but 


H 


THE  GUTTURALS  AND  DENTALS 


not  in  Phoenicia.     It  was  entirely  absent  from   Asia 
Minor  and  Arabia. 

26.  The  skew-cross  h  is  but  little  known,  as  it  was 
generally  avoided  by  the  Phoenicians  and  Greeks.  It 
appears  together  with  the  X  kh  in  Korinth,  Athens, 
Egypt  and  in  the  Faliscan  alphabet,  so  it  cannot  be 
confounded  with  that.  It  was  preferred  to  the  barred 
forms  of  h  in  Asia  Minor,  but  it  was  there  made 
symmetrical. 

27.  The  diagonal  cross  kh  belongs  to  Karia,  the 
Greek  mainland,  and  Spain,  while  it  had  the  heavier 
value  g  in  Runic  ;  but  it  was  entirely  absent  in 
Arabia,  Phoenicia,  and  its  colonies,  and  in  Italy. 

28.  The  star  kh,  commonly  used  in  Spain,  Karia, 
Cyprus,  and  Egypt,  was  never  used  by  Phoenicians, 
Hellenes,  or  Italians.  It  had  the  value  ku,  khu,  or  gu 
in  Cypriote,  and  plain  h  in  Runic. 

29.  K  begins  as  early  as  the  ist  dynasty  in  exactly 
the  modern  form.  The  sloping  stem  with  two  short 
strokes  on  it  is  evidently  cursive,  and  arose  later, 
becoming  the  usual  Phoenician  form.  It  was  not, 
however,  adopted  by  Greece  and  Italy,  where  the  full 
capital  was  always  used.  In  Cypriote  the  sign  ke, 
khe,ge,  or  ghe  seems  to  be  derived  from  it;  but — as  in 
the  previous  sign — with  an  additional  stroke. 

30.  The  Q  or  koph  is  a  widely-spread  sign,  which 
penetrated  Italy,  yet  which  completely  died  out  in 
Greece.  In  its  early  forms  it  seems  to  have  a  short 
stroke  added  to  the  stem  in  some  cases.  This  may 
be  connected  with  a  curious  decay  which  the  sound 
has,  in  dropping  the  explosive  velal,  and  becoming 
only  a  velal  breathing,  as  a  modified  a.  This  is 
characteristic  of  its  Egyptian  pronunciation  at 
present,  and  also  seems  to  have  taken  place  in  Karia, 
where  it  was  a  modified  a  and  in  Spain  an  0.  The 
other  modification  which  it  undergoes  is  in  bringing 
the  explosion  forward  in  the  mouth,  and  so  making 
it  into  a  g,  as  also  in  Egypt  now.  This  took  place 
in  Runic,  where  we  must  recognise  the  same  sign, 
especially  in  view  of  the  Thamudite  form. 

31.  This  curious  sign  was  entirely  banned  by  the 
Phoenician  and  Greek,  and  so  dropped  out  of  use 
in  Europe.  It  is  common  in  every  period  in  Egypt, 
and  the  value  is  given  as  kh  in  Spain  or  go  in 
Karia.  In  modern  Libya  it  is  the  soft  g  or  j,  and 
anciently  the /was  sharpened  to  tz.  It  also  reached 
Crete,  and  probably  South  Phoenicia  in  Lachish. 
The  form  open  at  one  end  seems  to  have  the  same 
value. 

32.  The  last  guttural  is  one  that  spread  far,  and 
yet  has  died  out  although  it  had  a  footing  in  Italy. 


The  Egyptian  examples  strongly  suggest  a  sprouting 
herb  as  the  origin.  The  Spanish  examples  are  very 
diverse,  over  a  dozen  varieties  being  used,  some 
probably  with  a  syllabic  value  as  ka  and  ki.  The 
rounded  form  like  e  appears  in  Arabia  as  well  as 
Spain.  The  Phoenician  avoided  this  sign,  as  also 
did  the  early  Greek,  who  drew  from  that  source. 
But  a  western  class  persisted  in  Elis,  Pelasgic,  Italy, 
and  Etruria,  showing  that  it  had  covered  much 
ground  originally. 

The  Dentals.  33.  The  triangle  d  is  one  of  the 
oldest  and  most  generally  used  signs.  As  already 
noted,  it  is  probable  that  it  gave  rise  to  the  regular 
hieroglyphic,  with  value  d  or  du,  the  sign  of  giving ; 
and  da  is  one  of  the  earliest  and  most  widespread 
roots  having  that  meaning.  The  value  of  the  sign 
in  Spanish  is  du.  The  rounded  form  is  European, 
occurring  in  Athens  and  Italy,  and  in  the  Runic 
signs ;  it  is  evidently  a  cursive  corruption  of  the 
triangle. 

34.  The  single-bar  th  is  usual  side  by  side  with 
the  cross-bar  ;  possibly  therefore  it  had  a  slightly 
different  value.  Most  likely  the  Greek  and  Italian 
form  with  a  central  point  is  a  variant  of  this. 

35.  The  cross-bar  th  is  the  more  usual,  and  is 
found  square  or  round  according  to  the  influence  of 
graving  or  writing  upon  the  script.  The  sound 
seems  to  have  been  almost  universal  and  only  to 
have  been  neglected  in  Asia  Minor.  The  Arabian 
form  is  a  cursive  corruption,  in  which  the  turn  in  of 
the  circumference  indicates  the  cross  lines. 

36.  This  is  an  interesting  letter,  from  the  very 
peculiar  form  of  it,  and  its  sparse  appearance.  The 
value  dh  is  given  in  Karia  and  Lykia.  It  appears 
from  the  earliest  times  in  Egypt  ;  and  the  more 
formal  shape  of  it  in  the  xiith  dynasty  is  singularly 
like  one  of  the  Cretan  signs.  It  also  occurs  at 
Lachish,  but  was  omitted  in  Phoenician  and  in  all 
the  Greek  and  Italian  alphabets.  This  sound  has 
short  measure  also  elsewhere  ;  in  Anglo-Saxon 
it  was  written,  and  is  still  required  in  English,  as 
in  the,  this,  that,  but  the  form  has  been  dropped.  The 
cause  probably  is  that— not  being  in  the  Italian 
founts — printers  used  y  for  it,  and  after  some 
generations  of  ye  for  the,  the  idea  of  it  has  been  lost. 
In  the  Jutish  pronunciation  of  East  Kent  the  dh  has 
been  modified  to  d,  and  words  such  as  this  and  that 
may  be  heard  as  dis  and  dat. 

37.  We  now  reach  the  variations  of  the  cross  t. 
The  diagonal  cross  has  this  value  in  Libya,  Spain,  and 
Arabia  ;  and  with  this  may  be  classed  the  Lachish 


THE   DENTALS 


15 


sign,  and  probably  that  of  Crete  and  Phylakopi. 
This  cross  in  Egypt  is  here  ranked  with  the  kh  of 
Spain  and  Greece,  as  the  signs  in  those  lands  seem 
rather  more  generally  linked  with  Egyptian  forms, 
but  the  separation  of  the  cross  signs  between  kh  and  t 
is  far  from  clear. 

38.  The  upright  cross  is  entirely  absent  from 
the  great  alphabets  of  Karia  and  Spain  ;  but  the 
Arabian  forms  join  with  the  Italian. 

39.  The  usual  t  is  widely  spread,  and  Phoenicia 
pushed  it  in  Greece  and  Italy,  but  it  is  unknown 
in  Arabia.  In  Cyprus,  turned  on  the  side,  it  is 
ta,  tlia,  or  da. 

40.  The  arrow  /  is  to  In  Cypriote.  It  was  used 
in  Egypt,  Libya,  Spain,  the  Runic,  Cyprus,  Crete, 
and  Phylakopi  ;  but  the  Phoenician,  Greek,  and 
Italian  would  none  of  it,  so  it  passed  out  of  living 
use. 

CHAPTER   VII 

THE   LIQUIDS   AND   SIBILANTS  (PL.   IV),  AND 
APHONICS  (PL.   V) 

We  have  now  reviewed  the  material  which  was 
first  systematized  in  alphabetic  series,  and  we  must 
turn  to  the  additions  which  were  found  needful  to 
complete  the  sounds  in  use. 

41.  Two  shapes  of/  are  usual,  the  acute  angle  and 
the  right  angle,  42.  The  acute  form  was  much  the 
more  usual,  and  the  bend  was  always  at  the  top  until 
the  Phoenicians  turned  the  bend  below  ;  the  Greeks, 
however,  would  not  follow,  except  at  Athens,  and  it 
was  the  Italians  who  finally  accepted  the  lower  turn. 
This  clinging  to  the  top  bend  is  strange,  as  it  was 
almost  the  same  as  g,  and  must  have  made  much 
confusion.  The  cursive  form,  which  was  like  the 
Greek,  appears  in  the  xiith  dynasty  Egyptian. 

42.  The  square  /  was  preferable,  as  distinct  from 
early  g  forms.  But,  old  as  it  was,  the  Phoenician  and 
Greek  would  not  have  it ;  however,  it  occurs  at 
Lachish.  In  Cyprus  the  modification  has  the 
value  It. 

43.  The  m  signs  are  a  puzzling  group,  43-46  ; 
they  are  all  guaranteed  by  alphabets  of  known  values, 
they  seem  to  run  one  into  the  other,  and  yet  there 
are  apparently  different  sources  mingled.  The  two- 
hill  m,  or  mi  in  Cypriote,  is  an  early  shape  in  Egypt, 
before  the  similar  hieroglyph  du  arose.  It  travelled 
as  far  west  as  Karia  and  Crete,  but  there  vanished. 
In  Arabia  it  was  turned  on  its  side,  and  a  similar 
rotation  is  also  seen  in  49  (Thamudite)  and  55. 


44.  The  diagonal  cross  between  two  vertical  lines 
was  very  common  in  Egypt,  and  appears  in  Spain 
and  in  the  Runic,  travelling  westward  and  north 
without  being  known  to  the  Asiatic  or  Greek 
world. 

45.  The  mid-stem  me  has  many  forms,  but  all 
marked  by  the  upright  mid-line ;  it  may  well  have 
been  a  syllabic  ligature  of  m  and  i.  The  value  is 
given  in  Spain. 

46.  The  strokes  with  diagonal  connecting-bars 
seem  to  form  one  group  of  m,  without  mid-stem 
or  base  line.  The  form  in  the  xiith  dynasty  is  so 
close  to  the  Lydian  that  it  is  here  brought  in  to 
the  series.  The  three  linked  lines  are  also  the 
usual  Italic  forms,  as  in  the  last  three  columns. 

The  Cypriote  ma  is  only  the  normal  m  broken 
up  by  the  influence  of  writing  on  soft  clay.  The 
long  stroke  on  one  side,  seen  in  the  Lydian,  Lykian, 
Phoenician,  and  early  Greek  forms,  is  merely  due 
to  cursive  brush-writing,  and  has  no  original  value. 

47.  The  n  forms  are  simple  and  clearly  connected, 
presenting  no  difficulties.  It  is  curious  that  this 
sign  does  not  appear  till  the  xiith  dynasty. 

48.  Though  the  sound  of  r  is  often  confounded 
with  /,  especially  in  historic  Egypt,  yet  the  series  of 
distinctive  forms  of  both  signs  runs  back  to  the 
earliest  times.  In  Cyprus  the  sign  ro  was  tilted  over 
partly,  but  seems  to  be  the  same  form.  The  short 
tail,  to  distinguish  this  from/,  was  tried  in  Korinth, 
and  Athens  and  in  the  Runes,  but  did  not  root  well 
till  in  Italy,  where  it  began  in  Faliscan,  and  soon 
became  general. 

The  Sibilants.  Here  we  meet  a  most  tangled 
group,  the  variations  of  which  cross  their  values  in  a 
confusing  way.  The  sibilants  were  the  latest  and 
worst  organized  part  of  the  alphabet. 

49.  The  two-bar  z,  linked  by  a  stem,  is  of  wide 
diffusion,  but  varies  much  in  the  length  of  stem.  It 
was  usually  z,  but  was  used  also  for  s,  as  on  coins  of 
Smyrna. 

50.  In  cursive  writing  the  mid-stem  of  49  was 
reduced  to  a  mere  tail. 

51.  The  three-bar  s  had  a  sharp  thin  sound  if  we 
credit  it  as  the  samekh.  It  also  dropped  the  mid- 
stem  in  cursive  writing,  as  in  52,  from  Egypt,  Spain, 
and  Phylakopi. 

53.  The  three-stroke  s  or  sigma  has  two  forms, 
one  with  the  mid-stroke  sloping,  the  other  with 
it  horizontal.  The  cursive  form,  curved  instead  of 
angular,  begins  as  early  as  the  prehistoric,  and  is 
freely   used   on    the   potters'   marks    of  the   xviiith 


i6 


THE   LIQUIDS   AND   SIBILANTS,   AND   APHONICS 


dynasty.  It  also  prevailed  in  Lykia,  and  the  double 
sign  in  Cyprus  has  the  value  zo.  It  is  quite  absent 
from  Arabic  and  Phoenician,  yet  it  flourished  in 
Greece  and  Italy,  and  has  ruled  in  Europe  ever 
since. 

54.  The  horizontal-bar  form  was  common  in 
Egypt,  and  reached  Crete  and  Spain  but  otherwise 
perished. 

The  difficulty  of  disentangling  the  allied  forms  of 
t,  g,  and  s  can  only  be  overcome  by  comparing  all 
those  of  known  values.  It  appears  that  the  variations 
keep  within  some  limits  as  follows  : 

Z  forms  have  the  top  and  base,  or  else  the  mid 
bar,  horizontal  for  i,  but  all  the  strokes  slope  for 
£"and  s. 

^  forms  have  the  stem  vertical  for  g,  but  sloping 
for  i. 

$  forms  have  the  bends  square  for  s,  but  at 
irregular  angles,  acute  or  obtuse,  for  i. 

The  horizontal  bar  s  54  is  indistinguishable 
from  i. 

N  forms  are  common  to^,  s,  and  n. 

The  types  of  different  alphabets  thus  cross  each 
other  largely,  and  very  likely  these  distinctions  would 
not  be  found  always  to  hold  good.  The  separation 
of  these  letters  therefore  without  the  aid  of  known 
names  or  words  cannot  be  safely  attempted. 

55.  The  four-stroke  s  is  fairly  clear,  and  only 
liable  to  some  confusion  with  m.  So  long  as  the 
strokes  were  one  below  the  other,  as  in  all  the  early 
examples  and  in  Arabia,  it  was  safe.  The  Libyans, 
Karians,  and  Spaniards  having  no  four-stroke  m,  set 
the  s  in  this  position.  This  was  unhappily  copied  by 
the  archaic  Greeks  and  caused  trouble  with  m.  The 
Phoenicians  avoided  the  confusion  by  turning  the  s 
over  as  W,  but  no  other  alphabet  followed  this 
direction. 

56.  57.  A  sharp  sibilant,  whose  values  are  varied, 
is  only  preserved  in  the  Libyan,  Karian,  and  Spanish 
with  known  sounds,  of  z,  ss,  sh,  tz,  and  /.  This  hissing 
sound  was  avoided  by  the  Phoenician,  Greek,  and 
Italian,  and  so  is  unknown  in  the  west.  The  trident 
form,  with  or  without  a  long  handle,  is  common 
in  Egypt  during  the  historic  ages,  and  one  example 
survived  in  Arabia  ;  in  Cyprus  a  somewhat  similar 
form  has  the  value  si,  and  it  is  known  also  in  Crete 
and  Lachish.  The  absence  of  this  sign  from  all 
western  and  modern  alphabets  has  brought  it  to 
oblivion. 

58.  A  somewhat  similar  sound  is  attached  to 
another    three-pointed    sign  ;    but   as   this    and    the 


previous  are  both  found  in  various  ages  in  Egypt 
they  can  hardly  be  variants  of  one  sign.  This  form 
is  the  older,  going  back  to  the  early  prehistoric  age. 
It  has  the  values  ks  in  Runic,  tz  in  south  Spain,  and 
ps  in  Greece.  A  similar  confusion  is  heard  in  the 
name  of  the  Danish  quarter  of  Dublin,  where 
(7^/mantown  has  become  0;rmantown.  From  its 
position  as  a  dental  in  the  5th  Greek  series,  it  seems 
probable  that  the  Spanish  tz  is  its  original  value, 
a  sibilant  dental,  much  like  the  modern  Italian  zz. 

59.  A  cognate  form  has  a  closed  top  ;  but  only 
two  examples  survived  outside  of  Egypt,  the  tz  of 
north  Spain  and  Halikarnassos.  The  bars  on  the 
stem,  of  this  and  the  preceding  form,  are  probably 
ligatures  of  vowel  sounds. 

60.  Lastly  there  is  another  sign  in  Egypt,  of 
which  only  one  value  has  been  preserved,  the  Cypriote 
si,  which  also  appears  in  Crete. 

Aphonic  signs.  There  is  but  little  to  be  said 
about  the  Aphonic  signs,  pi.  v.  Those  shown  here 
seem  to  have  had  some  currency,  as  they  are  found 
in  more  than  one  age  or  country  ;  but  they  did  not 
survive  into  the  regular  alphabets  of  later  times. 
Two  of  them  might  have  values  assigned  from  the 
Cypriote  syllabary  ;  and  two  resemble  signs  in  the 
Sabaean  alphabet,  but  that  alphabet  tends  so  much 
to  such  square  forms  that  these  values  are  uncertain. 
It  appears  safer  to  class  all  of  these  as  of  yet  unknown 
values,  or  aphonic  so  far  as  our  knowledge  goes ; 
though  probably  they  all  had  sounds  attributed  to 
them,  like  the  other  signs  which  passed  on  into  the 
alphabets. 

One  consideration  should  be  noticed,  as  to  the 
bearing  of  these  on  the  whole  question.  There  are 
some  sixty  signs  which  are  of  known  values,  and 
beyond  these  only  twenty-one  remain  which  were  in 
use.  Thus  it  cannot  be  said  that  there  is  such  a 
multitude  of  signs  that  it  is  easy  to  pick  out  those 
agreeing  to  known  alphabets.  Of  all  the  signs  which 
appear  in  more  than  one  country,  three-quarters 
belong  to  known  alphabets  as  already  described  ; 
and  one  quarter  only  have  not  survived  to  the  later 
stages.  This  is  quite  as  small  a  proportion  of 
aphonics  as  could  be  expected,  representing  the  loss 
of  signs  between  the  two  stages  of  (A)  their  having 
some  general  recognition,  and  (B)  their  surviving 
into  the  later  regular  system  of  a  recorded  alphabet. 
Of  the  still  earlier  stage,  of  signs  which  never 
attained  to  general  use,  there  are  not  more  than  a 
dozen  in  any  one  period.  Thus  the  great  majority — 
about  two-thirds — of  all  the  signs  found  attained  to 


THE   REMAINS   OF  ORIGINAL  GROUPING 


17 


general  currency,  and  passed  into  known  alphabets ; 
and  those  extinct,  as  local  signs  and  aphonics,  are 
only  a  fraction  of  the  whole.  It  is  remarkable  that 
so  few  signs  passed  out  of  use,  and  we  certainly 
could  not  expect  a  larger  proportion  than  two-thirds 
of  them  to  attain  to  general  currency  in  times  late 
enough  to  appear  in  the  alphabets.  There  is  no 
possible  ground  left  for  raising  the  objection  that 
only  a  small  number  of  the  signs  have  been  arbitrarily 
picked  out  in  the  present  work  to  fit  the  known 
alphabets  :  on  the  contrary  it  is  astonishing  how  few 
signs  are  outside  of  the  alphabetic  survivals. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

THE  ORDER  OF  THE   ALPHABET 

Having  now  passed  in  review  all  the  signs  which 
seem  to  have  had  a  long  or  wide-spread  use,  we  can 
turn  to  see  what  may  be  gleaned  as  to  the  history 
of  the  ordering  of  some  of  these  signs  into  a  regular 
series.  By  the  systematic  arrangement  of  some  of 
them,  they  were  rendered  easier  to  learn  and  to 
remember ;  they  supported  each  other  to  the  ex- 
clusion of  the  unregulated  signs,  and  so  obtained  a 
permanent  preference  ;  and  lastly  they  were  adopted 
as  numerals,  and  thus  they  were  thrust  upon  all  the 
world  of  trade  as  an  exclusive  system. 

It  had  long  ago  been  noticed  by  Lepsius,  Donald- 
son, and  Taylor  that,  embedded  in  the  Phoenician, 
Greek,  and  Italian  alphabets  there  is  a  repeated 
sequence  of  letters, — vowel,  labial,  guttural,  and  dental. 
What  has  however  been  ignored  is  that  this  system 
is  extended  a  whole  series  further  in  the  Greek  than 
in  the  Phoenician  alphabet,  forming  a  fifth  row  and 
the  beginning  of  a  sixth.  The  liquids  and  sibilants 
were  added  later  and  form  no  part  of  such  a  scheme. 
If  we  follow  the  Greek  alphabet  we  may  put  the 
original  series  in  capitals,  and  the  additions  in 
minuscules,  thus  : 


A 

E 

I 

O 

Y 

n 


B    r 

•     K 


A 

e 


n 

4> 


?? 

X 


TAMNi 
Y 


Some  such  grouping  must  have  been  that  originally 
made,  from  which  the  alphabet  has  been  read  off 
across  the  columns.  Further,  such  a  grouping  would 
be  at  first  a  standard,  which  would  be  copied  and 
spread  in  order  to  reduce  the  vague  mass  of  signs  to 
order.  It  was  thus  the  prototype  of  the  mediaeval 
horn-book  ;  and  it  was  probably  cut  on  wood  or  bone 
for  current  use.  It  appears  then  that  we  should 
think  of  it  as  a  horn-book  for  learners  ;  and  as  the 
horn-book  has  a  handle,  it  seems  not  unnatural  to 
regard  the  middle  group  of  liquids  as  having  been 
on  the  handle,  outside  of  the  systematic  series. 

Now  in  such  a  series  we  see  that  five  letters  are 
missing,  marked  here  by  circles  ;  these  are  two  labials, 
one  guttural,  and  two  dentals.  The  two  letters, 
digamma  and  koph,  which  the  later  Greeks  omitted 
are  inserted  in  their  proper  place  equivalent  to  the 
Phoenician. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  Phoenicio-Greek 
alphabet  is  only  a  selection  from  a  much  larger 
number  of  signs  commonly  used  elsewhere.  When 
therefore  we  notice  that  five  signs  are  missing  from 
the  systematic  order  shown  by  the  Greek  alphabet,  it 
is  only  reasonable  to  see  if  there  is  sufficient  indica- 
tion to  show  which  of  the  signs  of  the  pre-Greek 
signary  had  held  these  five  places. 

First  we  may  notice  that  there  is  some  parallelism 
between  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  horn-book, 
as  here  illustrated.  The  1st  line  is  most  like  the 
4th  line,  and  the  2nd  like  the  5th  line :  observe 
B  and  TT,  F  and  <t>,  r  and  ?,  H  and  X,  A  and  T — 
the  members  of  each  of  these  pairs  are  more  like 
one  to  another  than  either  is  to  the  others  of  their 
series.  There  is  thus  some  suggestion  as  to  the 
natures  of  the  missing  letters. 

Of  the  labials — the  second  column — the  third  and 
sixth  are  missing,  and — as  we  have  just  noticed — they 
should  be  nearly  alike.  Now  no  v  is  yet  included  in 
the  Greek  labials  ;  but  there  are  two  v  sounds  among 
the  general  labials,  which  were  well  known  in  Karia, 
Spain,  and  Italy.  It  seems  most  likely  therefore  that 
nos.  19  and  20  in  pi.  ii  were  originally  in  the  3rd 
and  6th  places  of  labials  of  the  original  system. 

Of  the  gutturals — the  third  column — the  6th  is 
missing,  which  is  the  parallel  to  K.  There  is  a  well- 
known  k,  no.  32,  spread  in  Karia,  Spain,  and  Italy, 
and  which  was  therefore  likely  to  have  been  im- 
portant in  early  times.  As  there  is  no  other  k  which 
could  take  this  place  the  probabilities  are  limited  to 
this  sign  for  the  6th  place  of  gutturals. 

Of  the  dentals — the  fourth  column — the  3rd  and 

3 


i8 


THE   ORDER   OF   THE   ALPHABET 


6th  are  missing.  The  choice  is  closely  limited  by 
the  small  number  of  dental  signs.  Apart  from  those 
which  are  only  variants  of  the  present  Greek  dentals, 
there  were  only  two  other  dentals  generally  known, 
dh  16,  and  t  40.  There  seems  no  choice  but  to 
accept  these.  Thus  altogether  there  does  not  appear 
to  be  any  likely  alternative  to  these  signs  for  the  five 
missing  letters. 

We  can  now  restore  pretty  closely  the  appearance 
of  the  primitive  horn-book,  following  the  early  forms 
of  the  signs. 


A 

O 

Y 

n 


3 
F 

V 

r 

A 


( 

B 
K 
? 
X 


A 
<S> 
"If 

T 
Y 
t 


A  AAA/ 


For  convenience  they  are  written  here  from  left 
to  right  ;  and  we  cannot  be  at  all  certain  that  the 
primitive  order  was  from  right  to  left,  though 
that  is  rather  more  probable,  if  there  were  a  fixed 
order. 

The  reason  that  the  signs  of  the  last  row  soon 
fell  into  abeyance  may  well  be  that  they  were  so 
much  alike  that  they  seemed  confusing  ;  and  as 
alphabets  tend  to  diminish  by  careless  approxima- 
tions of  the  sounds,  so  the  last  row  was  dropped  from 
most  alphabets,  and  the  last  but  one,  or  fifth,  row 
was  also  dropped  out  of  the  Phoenician. 

The  further  letters  that  were  inserted  in  the 
alphabet  were  r  and  the  sibilants.  It  is  likely  that  r 
had  been  omitted  at  first  as  equivalent  to  /,  and  that 
it  was  afterwards  inserted  next  to  the  cognate  forms 
of p  and  q,  so  as  to  be  readily  distinguished.  In  the 
same  way  we  see  that  similar  forms  are  grouped 
together  in  the  modern  Arabic  alphabet  reconstructed 
in  mediaeval  times  (see  Appendix).  We  cannot  at 
present  see  any  satisfactory  reason  for  the  position 
of  the  sibilants. 

The  question  now  arises,  when  and  where  was  this 
system  of  the  alphabet  devised  ?  There  is  a  promis- 
ing indication  in  the  fact  that  the  sibilants  were 
disregarded.  Had  they  been  in  frequent  use  we 
should  have  found  a  fifth  column  of  sibilants,  prob- 
ably following  the  dentals.  At  first  it  might  be 
thought  that  no  language  could  be  practicable  with- 


out sibilants.  But  they  are  entirely  unknown  in 
various  parts  of  the  world  at  present.  The  Poly- 
nesian languages  generally  avoid  them  ;  and  nearer 
at  hand  in  Europe  we  see  that  the  French  have 
steadily  eliminated  them,  century  by  century,  till 
there  are  only  a  few  left  of  the  sibilants  sounded 
originally  in  their  words.  In  past  times  we  see 
how  h  stood  in  place  of  s,  the  Iranians  writing  of 
haoma  for  the  Indian  soma.  Similarly  now  children 
acquire  s  last  of  all  sounds,  and  use  h  instead  of  it, 
saying  hun  for  son.  There  is  nothing  surprising  in 
a  people  avoiding  sibilants,  but  where  was  there  such 
a  people  anciently  ?  Unfortunately  at  the  period 
which  we  should  regard,  before  1000  B.C.,  there  are 
but  few  languages  known  to  us  within  the  possible 
region  of  the  alphabetic  system. 

There  is  however  another  line  of  search,  that  of 
place  names.  A  large  number  of  these  names  have 
been  preserved  in  the  records  of  Egyptian  conquests, 
and  the  list  of  Tahutmes  III  on  the  pylon  of  Karnak 
gives  about  three  hundred  names  in  Syria,  extending 
up  to  the  Euphrates.  These  are  far  earlier  than  any 
recorded  languages  of  that  region,  and  free  from  any 
subsequent  mixture  or  changes.  The  northern  part 
of  this  region  is  shown  on  pi.  viii,  the  numbers  being 
those  of  the  names  on  the  pylon  in  MARIETTE, 
Karnak,  pis.  20,  21.  The  names  are  those  of  places 
that  have  been  already  identified  in  that  region 
{Student's  History  of  Egypt,  ii,  330) ;  the  forms  here 
are  as  in  Egyptian,  the  modern  equivalents  are  given 
in  the  Student's  History. 

It  will  be  seen  that  of  over  thirty  names  here  there 
is  but  one  which  has  s  in  it.  Two  have  the  j, 
which  is  usually  translated  z,  but  which  appears  to 
have  been  j  in  this  region,  by  the  modern  equivalents, 
164  being  now  Terija  and  215  El  Jineh.  Contrasted 
with  this  rarity  of  sibilants  we  see  on  the  south 
half  a  dozen  places  bounding  this  region  all  contain 
s  ;  to  save  confusion  these  names  are  not  entered  here, 
but  the  s  or  z  in  the  name  is  placed  alone.  Beside 
the  names  which  can  be  identified  now,  there  are 
others  which  must  be  in  this  region  as  they  are 
placed  between  two  identified  names ;  such  are 
123  .  .  Kthu,  124  Thuka,  284  Nepiryuru,  286  Attama, 
287  Abrennu,  290  Annauy,  291  Tak  .  .  u.  These 
bring  up  the  number  to  forty  names,  with  only  one 
(Magnasa  186)  containing  the  letter  s  which  is  so 
common  elsewhere.  I  am  informed  by  Mr.  T.  E. 
Lawrence  that  even  at  present  there  are  but  few 
sibilants  used  in  he  speech  of  the  people  of  this 
region. 


THE   NUMERICAL  SYSTEM 


19 


In  another  line  of  search  also  it  is  possible  to  gain 
some  later  light  on  the  region  where  the  alphabet 
was  systematized.  After  the  grouping  of  the  signs 
came  the  addition  of  the  sibilants,  and  the  omission 
of  the  less-needed  signs.  At  this  stage  another 
system  came  into  play,  namely,  the  use  of  the 
letters  for  numerals.  These  ran  A  to  O  1  to  9,  I  to  ? , 
10  to  90,  P  to  n  100  to  800.  This  system  was 
quite  foreign  to  the  Greek  mind ;  all  the  earlier 
Greek  inscriptions  state  numbers  either  in  words 
or  in  a  numerical  notation  apart  from  the  order  of 
letters.  The  region  where  this  numerical  system  of 
letters  belonged  is  indicated  by  the  use  of  it  for 
recording  dates  on  coins  from  fixed  eras.  The 
geographical  distribution  of  the  cities  which  used 
such  dating  will  therefore  throw  some  light  on  the 
centre  from  which  it  originated.  It  certainly  did 
not  begin  with  the  Phoenicians,  as  there  is  no  trace 
of  it  in  Phoenician  colonies.  On  marking  on  a  map 
each  of  the  cities  thus  using  dates  (see  pi.  viii)  they 
are  seen  to  be  very  thick  all  down  Syria  and  scattered 
in  Asia  Minor,  while  there  are  scarcely  any  in 
Europe.  The  custom  is  therefore  pretty  clearly 
Syrian,  and  the  dividing  line,  which  has  an  equal 
number  of  examples  north  and  south  of  it,  is 
immediately  north  of  Antioch,  which  may  be  taken 
roughly  therefore  as  the  centre  of  diffusion  of  the 
numerical  alphabet.  This  is  just  the  district  where, 
as  we  have  seen,  the  absence  of  sibilants  indicates 
that  the  first  system  of  the  alphabet  arose. 

We    must    conclude   then   that   in   North    Syria 


originated  the  first  system  of  classification  ;  subse- 
quently some  signs  were  added,  and  others  omitted, 
and  then  the  use  of  the  alphabet  for  numbers  started 
from  the  same  district.  That  Greece  was  indebted 
to  North  Syria  for  the  alphabet  is  indicated,  as 
Taylor  remarks,  by  the  Aramaean  names  of  the 
letters  alpha,  beta,  etc.,  ending  in  vowels,  unlike 
the  Phoenician  and  Hebrew ;  and  this  agrees  with  the 
tradition  that  the  Asiatic  Greeks  of  Ionia  had  the 
alphabet  from  Lykian  and  Kilikian  tribes. 


We  have  now  reviewed  the  various  evidences  of 
the  wide  diffusion  of  the  signary,  from  which  the 
alphabets  were  selected,  and  the  antiquity  of  the 
beginning  of  that  system.  The  knowledge  of 
the  fuller  form  of  the  alphabet  has  enabled  us  to 
reconstruct  the  first  arrangement,  most  of  which  still 
remains  embedded  in  our  own  alphabet.  That  in 
turn  has  led  us  to  see  in  Northern  Syria  the  source 
of  this  systematic  arrangement.  All  of  this  is  but 
pioneer  work  ;  we  know  nothing  yet  of  the  linear 
writing  of  that  region,  or  of  most  of  the  lands  around  ; 
we  might  easily  see  ten-fold  as  much  material  come 
to  light  in  a  few  years,  if  sites  and  excavators  were 
propitious.  These  pages  therefore  appear  rather 
as  indicating  the  need  of  further  research,  than 
as  professing  to  be  a  full  statement.  The  main 
outlines  are  hardly  likely  to  be  changed,  but  the 
details  will  be  increased  far  beyond  what  we  have 
sketched. 


20 


NOTE   ON   THE  ARABIC   ALPHABET 


APPENDIX 

NOTE  ON  THE  ARABIC  ALPHABET 

Though  at  first  sight  the  Arabic  alphabet  seems 
senseless  in  the  irregularity  of  its  order,  yet  the 
original  construction  can  be  traced,  and  also  the 
reasons  for  the  alterations  that  have  been  made. 
The  letters  in  original  order  are  : 

i  Alef,  2  Be,  5  Gim,  8  Dal,  11  Ze,  16  Te,  21  Kaf, 
23  Lam,  24  Mim,  25  Nun,  corresponding  to  Alef, 
Beth,  Gimel,  Daleth,  Zayn,  Teth,  Kaph,  Lamed,  Mem, 
Nun,  of  the  usual  Semitic  order.  Owing  to  the 
desperate  corruption  of  forms  in  the  Cufic,  different 
numbers  of  dots  were  added  above  and  below  certain 
forms  to  distinguish  the  letters.  It  was  then  de- 
sirable to  group  these  similar  forms  together  in 
order  to  distinguish  them  readily.  Hence  after 
2  Be,  were  put  in  3  Ta  and  4  Tha  ;  after  5  Gim  were 
put  in  6  Ha  and  7  Kha ;  after  8  Dal  was  the  variant 
9  Dhal ;  10  Re  was  put  before  11  Ze,  because  as  the 


commoner  letter  it  was  not  dotted.  Another  principle 
here  comes  in,  that  of  grouping  the  sibilants  ;  as 
11  Ze  begins  the  sibilants,  then  follow  12  Sin, 
13  Shin,  14  Sad,  15  Dad.  After  16  Ta  is  the 
variant  17  Za.  18  Eyn  and  19  Gheyn  were  perhaps 
brought  in  here  owing  to  a  similarity  to  the  next 
signs.  20  Fe  is  like  21  Qaf,  but  having  one  dot  it 
precedes  Kaf  with  two  dots.  21  Qaf  is  brought  in 
owing  to  the  sound  being  like  23  Kaf,  which  is  in 
its  old  order,  succeeded  by  23  Lam,  24  Mim,  25  Nun. 
Lastly  the  three  semivowels  26  He,  27  Wau  and 
28  Ye  were  banished  to  the  end  with  a  truly 
Semitic  hatred  of  vowels.  Thus  the  similarity  of 
form  has  guided  most  of  the  rearrangement,  and 
the  similarity  of  sound  has  also  had  influence. 
If  ever  the  Arabic  alphabet  is  to  survive  it  must 
go  back  to  good  distinctive  Aramaean  forms  ; 
perhaps  if  such  were  introduced  as  "  the  Quran 
alphabet"  the  present  disgraceful  writing  might  be 
amended. 


WORKS    BY   W.    M.   FLINDERS    PETRIE 


British  School  Series 

Hyksos  and  Israelite  Cities.     25*. 

Gizeh  and  Rifeh.     25^. 

Memphis  I.     25*. 

Palace  of  Apries  (Memphis  II).     25s. 

Qurneh.     50s. 

Memphis  III.     255. 

Historical  Studies.     25s. 

Roman  Portraits  and  Memphis  IV.     25*. 

The  Hawara  Portfolio.     501. 

The  Labyrinth,  Gerzeh,  &c.     255-. 


History  of  Egypt,  I,  II,  III.     6*. 
Decorative  Art.     35.  6d. 
Syria  and  Egypt.     2s.  6d. 
Religion  and  Conscience  in  Egypt. 
Egyptian  Tales,  I,  II.     3*.  6d.  each. 
Methods  and  Aims  in  Archaeology. 
Growth  of  the  Gospels.     2s.  6d. 
Personal  Religion  in  Egypt.     2s,  6d. 
Revolutions  of  Civilisation.     2s.  6d. 
Arts  and  Crafts  in  Ancient  Egypt.     $s. 
Egypt  and  Israel.     2s.  6d. 


2S.  6d. 


6s. 


The  volumes  at  25^.  are  supplied  to  subscribers  to  the  British  School  in  Egypt  at  a  guinea. 


Printed  by  Hazell,  Watson  &  Vincy    Ld.    London  and  Aylesbury. 


1 

!      O            O 

O          O                      O 

[ 

---  .   0 

o 

o 

roRic 

EARLY 

fORIC 
LATE 

DTNASTV 

STRAKA 

is 

CO 

=3     !    c« 

co 

Lkl 

5 

UJ 

10O 
1   UJ         UJ 

a 

C_3 

loo,    -JQO,    - 

3=  Q.    =Q- 
Lj_l  >-    u_l  ="— 

OC  *""   ft"  ''" 

£ 

g     >- 

E        °° 

3           ~~ 

a*. 

>- 

r-r-       1      U-l 

s 

t—          i 
O           i 

£ 

s 

=3         *— 
— i           UJ 

CO 

c-3         a 

«X              3= 

Q_  UJ    C3—  UJ 

-22         x 

*" 

»<    "-      c 

SC             1 

"*     !    — J 

CJ 

m 

** 

SZE          ' 

>9           3B 

*"" 

C/9 

S»       co 

°~ 

— ' 

Q_ 

A  A 

XW\ 

A 

Al 

A^P 

AAfPA^  y 

■- 

X 

a. iA 

^ 

A 

Q 

9,g 

? 

al 

mv 

V 

v^ 

J  ¥ 

Ld 

Uri 

hi 

ai 

i 

► 

/*a^ 

BE 

I 

>  E 

P 

E;^ 

n$E.£V&  H 

> 

•  E 

H 

^ 

& 

4 

» 

■flB 

•l« 

>.^ 

^^$ 

-   *| 

' 

Y 

^^ 

Y 

e 

¥ 

¥ 

1 

i 

1 

1 

1 

1 

I 

Ti 

? 

■ 

i 

i<i^ 

f« 

\1 

iz^ 

s 

V 

IWI1\ 

■ 

i 

^1 

2 

ODOD 

OD  D 

OD 

o 

p 

o 

o 

o 

on  o 

o 

o<> 

0 

OOOD 

YKYY 

YYHyYIH  'i 

/   yYK 

yv 

Tul 

WYHYH 

IK 

y 

T 

Y 

Y 

pi  no 

nln  n 

ins 

a  $n 

0 

n 

ntt 

?  1 

X 

P       I 

l^pi    V-\v 

J 

b 

€ 

/             . 

pfc* 

B  B 

B  Bb 

&jb 

t> 

3 

*. " 

b 

E 

C 

3  55 

r 

f=7 

F 

:  ][ 

FFF 

F^ 

f 

7 

I* 

1       n 

t= 

* 

* 

J 

f 

1     „       P 

1 

r 

rr 

p> 

p 

ppr 

pr 

P 

1 

1    JlfcT 

rxp 

^$ 

-5 

► 

n 

b 

<l>  I^P;  S>  <D9 

<t>  <t 

>  (Db 

DlC 

yv 

<p 

- 

c}>(DcpcDci 

D 

^, 

h®. 

phcfxD 

\l  uL/;i/v 

V 

A 

\/v\!V 

V 

V 

O    VALUES     NOT     KNOWN     INDEPENDENTLY 

>M 

v  T 

* 

*t 

7 

1SA^t/> 

it 

* 

VOWELS    AND     LABIALS. 


esc 

UJ 

CO 
UJ 

C2C 

CO 

UJ 

3= 

UJ 

BO 

CO 
CD 

CO 
UJ 

CO 

a 

CO 
CO 

«x 
oc 

CJ 

CO 
CO 

UJ 

FALISCAN 
ETRUSCAN 
OSCAN 

< 

AA 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

AA 

fl  «flN 

AA 

1 
2 

3 

M? 

EE 

^ 

^ 

fe 

E 

^E 

^1133  3 

E 

3 
4 

^B 

5 

o 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1   1 

1 

b 

7 

>l 

h 

St 

8 

oo 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

0 

9 

\T 

ry 

r 

KYKN 

Y 

K 

Y 

\| 

10 

o 

o 

n 

11 

"1 

^ 

3f3 

12 

C 

^ 

B 

B 

B 

8 

f  8 

B 

13 

W=" 

^ 
k 

f> 

- 

14 
15 

rr 

r 

r 

r 

rn 

r 

r 

p^nr  ^ 

n 

P 

16 

■L 

17 

4>® 

© 

<$> 

m 

4> 

? 

% 

18 

V,  v. 

v. 

V 

vvv 

V 

19 

— 

1 

^ 

1 

20 

o 


C/3. 


o 

r  lUJ 
CO.     - 


VM 


\ 
X 


\i/ 


1,0 


ir 

+ 


o 


CO 


O 


CO 


O 

>- 

CO 


^oiccc 


B 


f 


wcxx 


m 


T 


H 
X 
X 

K 
? 


H++H-H- 
X 


•^n^rvji/ 


AMAa 


B 


sz- 

HI' 


0 


m 

EB©ffl® 

+ 
T 
T 


+ 
T 
t 


o 


CO 


\\ 


CO 


xrl 


x^xx 


A 

m 
© 

X 

•x. 

+ 


X 

? 


V 


X 

X 

?? 


nP 


^aC^>A 


© 


T 


^ 


tz 


X 


X 

+ 


+ 


K 


V 


T 


< 


A 


CO 


K 


\l/ 


A 


>c 


T 


< 

HH 

Xa 

r 


GUTTERALS    AND    DENTALS. 


CO 


B$ 


<CC<C 


Dt> 


t 


X 
X 

K 

Xac 


H 


CO 


CO 


A3 


H 


H 


kh, 


in. 


1 


X 


XX 


VY«V€ 


DCTf 


T 


A>A« 


X 


k>l 

to 


x 


t 


4> 

^3 


0 


CO 


1 


CO 


A 

m 


X 

4- 


y 


III 


X 


Q       VALUES     NOT     KNOWN      INDEPENDENTLY. 


g 
g 
g 
h 

h 

h 

kh 
kh 
k 

q 
q 

k 


o 


d 
th 
th 

dh 

t 

t 

t 

t 


Z 

HI 

H 

X 
)K 
7 
? 


o 


z 


A 

m 
© 

KX 
X 
+ 
I- 


o 


CO 
CO 


+T 


o< 


1A 


00 


vr 


B 


1 

?? 


A4^A^N 
CD 


© 

X 


Mr 


)C 

X 

T- 

T 


X 
+ 


CO 


1 


KCAA 


H 


K 


A 


ffi® 


A 

O 


B 

+ 

X 

K 
? 


CO 


B 

+ 
X 

K 
? 


CO 


l>A»D 
O 


T 


T 


©<g> 


T 


hr 


B 

X 

K 
? 


CO 


< 


© 


T 


!> 

® 


K 


\^ 


CO 


CO 
CO 


r 


t> 


H 
X 
K 


CD 
CO 


A 
O 


T 


T 


<C 

B 


K 


CO 
CO 


CO 
CO 


CO 
CO 


3 


B 
H 


)3 


N0 


> 


B 


<c 


D 

o 
© 


a 


T 


T 


)l 


4. 


» 


H 

X, 

K 


O 


fl 


>D 


T 


21 
22 

23 
24 

25 

26 
27 
28 
29 

30 
31 

32 
33 

34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 


LIQUID" 

3    AND 

SIBILLANTS. 

IV 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

0          o 

o 

o 

o 

PREHISTORIC 
EGYPT,  EARLY 

PREHISTORIC 
EGYPT,  LATE 

oo 

CO 

oo 

i— 
>< 

XVIIIth  DYNAST 
XIXth  OSTRAKA 

ROMAN  EGYPT 

OO 

en 

CO 

or 

O- 
U 

oo 

U_l 

oc 
■<e 

oo 

1 — 
or 

o_ 
oo 

1 — 

en 
oo 

U-J 

oo 

U-l 

CO 

-a 
oo 

oo 

U-l 

U-l 
U-l 

CO 

cr> 
o_ 

oo 

CO 

CO 

U-l 

C3 

1 — 

oo 

CO 
U_l 

or 
cr> 

5*= 

oo 

U-l 

U-l 

oa 
oo 
oa 

OO 

Ul 

OO 

c=> 
oo 
oo 

2«£ 

«E 
1 — 

CJ 

CD 
OO 

«X 

U-l 

o_ 

CO 

oo 
u_ 

-a 

CO 

oo 

U-l 

CO 

oo 

«x 

K 

rA 

M 

Wk 

h 

rA 

vr 

A 

h 

rA 

rA 

M 

1 

1 

rn 

1 

A1A1I.AA 

/-  r  h 

rA 

h/A 

v^ 

A 

r 

A 

1, 

nJ/I 

nJ 

n| 

1/ 

41 

L7 

r 

Lr 

V> 

r 

i 

r 

Z_ 

r 

Lr 

1 

Lr 

J 

L 

42 

AA 

AA 

t 

J.A^ 

/^ 

AA 

§> 

S3 

m 

AA 

43 

N 

\ft 

00 
ISM 

N 

VfV 

V) 

IX? 

VtV 

M 

VfV 

m 
m 

Ofd 

w 

44 
45 

HH 

"M*/*!*! 

)v( 

A^ 

M 

in 

m 

\A/f 

rn 

|W 

M 

rA\ 

Mm 

M 

NA/ 

m 

mw 

w 

M 

46 

■<^ 

HN 

NNNP 

1  N 

^ 

N/ 

AM 

* 

MN 

V\N 

n 

1 

1 

V 

n 

^N 

Nh 

<7 

r 

A' 

Ny 

r 

A/N 

N 

/V 

r 

M 

1V\ 

M 

N 

47 

1 

y 

TPf 

f7 

PY 

l» 

D 

P 

* 

p 

P1 

M 

^ 

!> 

!>« 

r 

1 

q 

1 

^A 

f>Df>P 

n 

f>D 

f> 

P 

p 

9\ 

oaq 

a 

PR 

48 

^ 

KL 

*I 

i- 

+1 

I 

+1 

F 

1 

TT 

H 

z 

^H 

=i= 

tx 

i 

1 

±1 

* 

tt 

i 

z 

49 

$ 

£fe 

TT 

Y 

I 

z 

s 

T 

* 

i 

£e 

5 

50 

51 

T 

5   * 

-> 

f^c 

s 

T 

T 

52 

K^ 

u 

^ 

^ 

ss< 

>S 

*5S 

S 

5H 

5 

Ss 

s 

** 

S2 

$ 

IS 

xz 

^ 

* 

ss 

53 

<V 

iH 

y  ^ 

>  *] 

h 

s 

/"> 

r1 

54 

-^S 

M 

^M 

*£ 

fM 

Kk 

MM 

M£ 

M 

£ 

a 

G 

sh 

s 

W 

w 

w 

M 

M 

M 

^ 

^ 

M^ 

MM 

55 

Lum 

mm  rn  u 

Wrrl 

lum 

ss     sK 

mm 

LULi) 

ss 

hH 

r-M 

56 

m 

m 

L|J 

uin 

\» 

f 

W 

\T\t7 

s 

tY 

^ 

57 

w 

Y 

Y 

tT 

f  Y 

t 

Iks 

^ 

% 

ts 
tz 

Y 

\|/ 

Y 

T 

58 
59 

O     VALU 

in 

ES     NOT     KNOWN      INDE 

PENDENTLY 

< 

T' 

1 

s 

A 

L 

i 

60 

APHONIC    SIGNS. 


>_ 

O^ 

CJI-tJ 

>- 

CO 

co 

s 

£ 

t '<  I  .   I 

s< 

CO 

?E 

£E 

CD 
l_kJ 

'  51 

CO 

*c 

IEHISTI 
IYPT,  1 

IEHISTI 
IYPT,  1 

s 

= 

H- 

CO 

i— 

i 

LjlJ 
U-l 

2      ^ 

ijjt 

0-u_||   Cu-LjJ 

CO 

** 

^ 

*"* 

*== 

CD 

°- 

CO 

CO 

JMll 

11 

Y 

! 

1 

T^-* 

1 

«M^^. 

^ 

Rffl 

htyt 

Tf 

R 

q?qpp 

o 

■9 

fin 
qy 

o 

On 

k  s 

^ 

d 

« 

* 

<! 

0 

/v 

-1/ 

n 

•• 

48 

/u\  In 
TTre 

JL 

<l 

SOURCES    FOR    THE    THREE    PLATES    OF    SIGNS,    PLS.    II,    III,    IV. 


VI. 


For    tke.    First    six 
Co  LtuvvuvvS       h.e.r-e.  :  — 

A    Abvdos    I 
D    D  i  os  po Lis  Pcutvcl 
DN  D  e-rvdLcyeiv 

G    G-  u-roo 
ILL  ILIclKiuyv 

K  KcUvu-n 

N  Niot-OcudLcL 

R  R i F  ^k 

KT  RcwclI  Towubs  i^-i 

(tVX.    vvoC   Ytpeja-tttA.  uv  coIu.vm.-k) 

T   Tcur-k^oun 


dL  < 

0  ui 
t- 

1  °" 

u  >- 


D    151 


o        -1 

pi        ^ 
o_        UJ 


D  2.S2. 

D    loi 

N    2.70 


>- 
h 
ia 
< 

7. 

v- 

Q 

H 


R.T. 


N  302,497 


N2.?l-5",495      A  I5-  ,    I 


i/vw  tKj-i      V  O  L*-^  vv\-  €_  ■ 

LlB^A       X    Cc-rt5_cw.  v^-Lu^s 
yh.  a  dL  •   >vu<p  cLe-r-n. 

LYDIa    5oA(ce.r5.E..A. i^os; iz3 
L^fKiA    B^e.r. 
CYPRUS    &«,^Qe,r-1hTajLjLor, 
R.ONES   TixjuUr- 
KAPylA    Scujce.,  S.B.A. 
SPAIN    Hajb-yve-^Be-T-aerCoLns 
NA&ATHAEA    Tcv^lni". 
THAfAU  D     Ta^«lo->*. 
SAfcAEA    To-mU>v. 

Crete     Evo-yls. 

PhUAI^oPI      EdUcur, 
LACHISH     PeJ^le-,  BLl^s 

TCLM  l-l 

Larfeld 


PHOENICIA^     Taylor. 


N  169  ,  D2.S0 

N  34-' 
N  3  17 


N  497,  ^46 

N  4^8 
N  2.65 
N   2.85 


N  249,  D  10  1 
N  2.38 

N   3  2.0 

n  1  6F~ 
N    I72- 


A4"  ,  N4-52- 


N  142.^,   H9 
N    2.83 
N    2.63 


N     5"0O 


N      181 


N   176,  2.74. 
£)    z97.lS2.66 

N    14*-- 


N    49 
N    ^96 


D  S3  ,  A  2.8 


A3,    D2.I8 
D    I  34- 

* 

N   5-18 

# 

D   2.2.2. 

N405",   A  18 


N  352  ,  D22.4 

A  2.   ,    I  4 

N    2-5  3 

A  4 

D   I  94 


N    I  4-7 
N    5-13 


N  1 17  ,  1  4  9 
D   2.02 

D    2-4  6 

N    2  14 


D    140 
D   2.0S 


D  1-34  NlfS 
N   2.57 
D  SO 


N    2-9  > 
NJ  331 


N,i38  ,  416 

N  247  .417 

N  2.35".  2-2>9 


D  Wf 
DZ47  ■   87 


A   5- 
D2-7?",   1  04 
N  2.42-, 2.4-4 


N  2-3  6  .2.87 


N    2.82. 
A    I 


2.  60 

J  844,1063- 
|  484-  11451 

ii  436 


i    1302. 
i  82.0,  840 

i  SS2.   ii  2.2.7 
I  187-207 
i  783 


i   127^-7 


i    2.5-1 

T 
ii  3  47-9 


i  973,0.32.,  97S- 
T 

ii  162,  i  1147 

T 


i    140  4-7 
i     2.6  6 
ii  47','     '362 
A  (r.  xx  ix 
i  80S-9 


i  170  ,  J  62 
j  gOI    ,  M4ST3 
i  X7  l  ,   i  1  4  6  6 

i     I03S" 

ii    377/  49' 
T 

j     1  4  10 
i  12.79  1   669 


ii  4-41,4-07 

ii  4  44 
i   5-11-5-33 

i    8  52. 

i  8rr-6 


ior7,  T 


i  1374.  '373 

0 

ii  48  5" 
i  14-37,  1441 


i   12.0I-5- 

i    I3  64-8 

2.0^-236,1 843 

ii  351-3 
I035  ,1041 


h 
iA 
< 

Z 
>- 

a 

1 

>< 


K43      R47 

K    142. 
K  54     KH4 
D  83     KJ06 


RlFEH      19 

K  Z4 

K  102.,  12.8 

ILL.  xv 

IO  91,  R-41 


^S3 
K  85,  83 
D    19  -  K79 
K  95"  .  K99 

K  15 


K   2.3,  22. 
D    63,    K7 

ILL.  XV,  XV 


K  166    ,    D  5-8 
K.  21 
Ps    5-6 
K 

K  68, 75- 


K  166  ,  165 
K  I  b3 

ILL. XV, XV 


K    I 
K  8  ,    III.  XV 
K  32  ,    31 

K    134 
1 11 .  xv,  xv 


D 


77 


18  ,  K.33 
K85 

K  91 


KI4.D9S",  Kiv 
DN  37,     K9° 

ILL.   XV 
D40 


K  25 
£20  ,  D^  36 

ILL.  XV,  XV 
PsloS,  KI30 
K  H3  ,   ILL  XV 


K   1  O  3 
ILL.    XV 

DN  31,  ILL  XV 


K  ST.  ,   5:8 
DM40 
K4    ,  D79 

KM    ,    MS 

544 


>- 
h 

< 

1 


> 


G  24- 

ILL.  XV 
ILL.  XV,  XV 


G4 

ILL.  XV 

G  65,   ILL. XV 

G  19,    I  LI. XV 


G  42 


R  40 


G  61 


ILL.  XV,  XV 

ILL.  XV,  XV 

K40,   ILL. XV 


JLL.XV,  K5| 

» 

K  60 


XI    ,  ill  xv 

K.  9 
K  2.0 

ILL.  XV 

K 


K64  ,  ILL-  XV 

# 

K34,  III   xv 


ILL.  xv 
ILL. xv,    KI8 

K  27 


ILL.  XV,  R.5T- 
D  2.2.  ,  ILL    XV 

K  67 


K-  5-9 
K74, 77 

ILL. xv,  ^7 


ILL-  XV 
K.  27 
K   12. 

k  ir 


h 

0- 

>- 

LxJ 

Z 
< 

o 


D   96 

D  2.8S 
D  xU 
D  2o5-7 


D   126 

D  311 
D  12S-25  2, 143-S 

DxLL 


D  xLL 

DxLL 
DxLl 


D  224 


D  X. 


Li- 


X)    28-30 

D   2  68-9 

D  |69,260-4 

D  X  Li- 


D  l  5T)  ,  I  53" 

T>     170 
D     |63-8 

D 


D  27  1-4 
T3  x  U 


DxLl  ,  22.5 
DxLw 

D  3  6-4  2- 
D.  85,  1 8  O 


D  234 

D  xLl 


D     292. 
D    105--M8 


D   2.4I 
D    1-4 
D   27 
D   I  69 


< 


X  rwod 


r>x.ocL 
? 
X 


X 

? 

X 


X 
? 


X 
X 


? 
X 


X  x 


X  x 


m 

z 

o 

UJ 

z 


1 

3 
4 
5" 


l  I 
12 

13 
14 
15 


16 

17 
18 

19 
20 


2.1 
2Z 
23 

Z4 
25 


26 

27 
28 

2-9 
30 


3 

32. 

33 

34 

3S 


36 

37 
38 

39 
40 


41 

42. 

43 

44 

45 


46 

4-7 

48 

4-?| 
5~0 


5| 

53 
54 
55 


56 

57 
58 

5-9 
60 


I  :  2         EGYPTIAN    POTTERY    WITH    FOREIGN    SIGNS.    PREHISTORIC,    AND    XII. -XVIII.    DYN.  VII. 


NON-SIBILLANT    NAMES    IN    N.    SYRIA.       PLACES    USING    LETTER    NUMERALS. 


VIII 


2.gioTM-UKH 


209«AURE-MA  KAYNABoltl 

"2.88AVRANEL 


285°  NATAK1NA 


I64«TARI  J  A 

I880TETUNA 
I77oMUR*KHENA 

KANRETU0I6J       !76o   KHAJU 
KHATUMAI8ff°         0,87  TtPEKNENA 
WRUT    lllo  ate  02.10  AKHMELUL 


O*        "12.7    P.ECADA 


3IZopUNER      .j> 


AUMAY-MO-  0|2_bREGABA 

TUaBENAT°ll7  KKAL6U°5II 

NEREB°l8? 


191  o  ATUG-ER.EN 


TEREB      °I90 
AJNEH°  tiff 


3J3oluREMA 
lt2°AN\ADU  5 


£85   LE 
Z79oKHAYTU 


JtSI  ATELITEN 
S"^<»3I6    PURETH 


SPANISH,  CRETAN    AND    EGYPTIAN    INSCRIPTIONS. 


IX. 


I 


6PK)  II /I  M5 
U' 

M  T  D  EAfrST 


MODERN    EGYPTIAN    WOMENS    MARKS       MODERN    BOYS    &OUSTROPH E DO N 


!*5 


;%iO 


/* 


ft>  jS 


<^li 


/ 


COINS    WITH  SPANISH    INSCRIPTIONS 


nn 


L 


GROUP  OF  5IGNS    XII  DYN        HAGIA    TR1ADA     END   or  MIDDLE  PERIOD 


BiNumu  ocui.       ArK  2  y  Wd 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


P  Petrie,   William  Matthew  Flinders 

211  The  formation  of  the  alphabet 

P5 


~?r 


