The Economics of Welfare (Arthur C. Pigou, 1920)
==========================================================
Externalities and the Pigouvian tax named here; welfare economics' founding text. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (economicsofwelfa00pigouoft).

Digitized  by  tlie  Internet  Arcliive

in  2007  witli  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


littp://www.arcli  ive.org/details/economicsofwelfaOOpigouoft


e/


THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE

c3  iif


s^


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Limited

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  • CALCUTTA  •  MADRAS
MELBOURNE

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

NEW  YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO
DALLAS  •  SAN  FRANCISCO

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA,   Ltd.

TORONTO


THE    ECONOMICS
OF   WELFARE


BY


A.    Cf  PIGOU,    M.A.

PKOFKSSOR  OF    POLITICAL   ECONOMY   IK   THE   UNIVERSITY   OF   CAMBRIOGB


b'<li«7


MACMILLAN   AND   CO.,   LIMITED

ST.  MARTIN'S   STREET,  LONDON

1920


WJ3

171

PC


PREFACE

TfflS  volume  was  originally  conceived  as  a  rewritten  and
revised  edition  of  my  Wealth  and  Welfare  published  in  1912.
But  the  work  has  grown  to  such  an  extent  and  has  come  to
cover  so  much  more  ground  that,  though  considerable  sections
of  Wealth  and  Welfare  are  incorporated  in  it,  it  is  essentially
an  independent  book.  In  writing  it  I  have  made  use  of
passages  from  various  earlier  books  of  my  own,  and  also  from
articles  contributed  by  me  to  the  Economic  Journal,  Quarterly
Jourrud  of  Economics,  Nineteenth  Century  and  After  and
Contemporary  Jteview.

The  general  plan  is  as  follows.  In  Part  L  it  is  argued,
subject,  of  course,  to  a  large  number  of  qualifications,  that
the  economic  welfare  of  a  community  is  likely  to  be  greater  i

(1)  the  larger  is  the  average  volume  of  the  national  dividend,

(2)  the  larger  is  the  average  share  of  the  national  dividend
that  accrues  to  the  poor,  and  (3)  the  less  variable  are  the
annual  volume  of  the  national  dividend  and  the  annual  share  \
that  accrues  to  the  poor.  Parts  II.,  Ill^and  IV.  are  devoted
to  a  study  of  certain  principal  influences  by  which  the  average
volume  of  the  national  dividend  is  affected.  Part  II.  deals
with  the  distribution  of  productive  resources  in  general  among
different  places  and  occupations;  Part  III.  with  various
problems  connected  with  the  organisation  of  Labour,  and  Part
IV.  with  the  relation  between  the  national  dividend  and
Government  finance.  In  Part  V.  the  question  is  raised  in  what
circumstances  it  is  possible  for  the  absolute  share  of  dividend


vi  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


I


accruing  to  the  poor  to  be  increased  by  a  cause  which  at  the
same  time  diminishes  the  volume  of  the  dividend  as  a  whole ;
and  the  relation  of  disharmonies  of  this  kind,  when  they  occur,
to  economic  welfare  is  discussed.  Finally,  Part  VI.  is  devoted
to  an  investigation  of  the  causes  of  variability  in  the  national
dividend  and  in  the  absolute  share  of  the  poor  and  of  certain
relevant  problems  of  practice.

In  preparing  the  book  for  the  press  I  have  done  my  best,
by  restricting  as  far  as  possible  the  use  of  technical  terms,  by
relegating  specially  abstract  discussions  to  Appendices,  and  by
summarising  the  main  drift  of  the  argument  in  an  Analytical
Table  of  Contents,  to  render  what  I  have  to  say  as  little
difl&cult  as  may  be.  But  it  would  be  idle  to  pretend  that  the
hnnk  ia  nth(;'T_than  a  severe  one.  In  part,  no  doubt,  the
severity  is  due  to  defects  of  exposition.  But  in  part  also  it
is  due  to  the  nature  of  the  problems  studied.  It  is  sometimes
imagined  that  economic  questions  can  be  adjudicated  upon
without  special  preparation.  The  "  plain  man,"  who  in  physics
and  chemistry  knows  that  he  does  not  know,  has  still  to  attain
in  economics  to  that  first  ante-chamber  of  knowledge.  In
reality  the  subject  is  an  exceedingly  difficult  one,  and  cannot,
without  being  falsified,  be  made  to  appear  easy.

In  publishing  my  book  at  the  present  time,  I  have  had  to
face  one  somewhat  special  difficulty.  The  process  of  printing
now  takes  so  long,  and  legislative  and  other  changes  both  here
and  abroad  are  so  numerous  and  rapid,  that  some  of  the  legal
enactments  and  general  conditions  to  which  I  have  referred  in
the  present  tense  are  certain,  by  the  time  the  book  is  in  the
reader's  hands,  to  have  been  superseded.  Even  an  illustration
from  geometry,  which  I  have  employed  in  the  introductory
chapter,  should  now,  in  the  light  of  the  confirmation  recently
won  for  Einstein's  theory,  be  expressed  somewhat  differently  !
I  do  not  think,  however,  that  the  impossibility  of  being  com-
pletely up-to-date  in  a  world  of  continuous  change  matters


PEEFACE  vii

werry  greatly.  For  the  illustrations  I  have  used  are  not
brought  forward  for  their  own  sake.  The  service  I  ask  of
them  is  to  throw  light  on  principles,  and  that  purpose  can  be
performed  as  well  by  an  arrangement  or  a  fact  that  lapsed  a
year  ago  as  by  one  that  is  still  intact.

I  would  add  one  word  for  any  student  beginning  economic
study  who  may  be  discouraged  by  the  severity  of  the  effort
which  the  study,  as  he  will  find  it  exemplified  here,  seems  to
require  of  him.  The  complicated  analyses  which  economists
endeavour  to  carry  through  are  not  mere  gymnastic.  They
are  instruments  for  the  bettering  of  human  life.  The  misery
and  squalor  that  surround  us,  the  dying  fire  of  hope  in  many
millions  of  European  homes,  the  injurious  luxury  of  some
wealthy  families,  the  terrible  uncertainty  overshadowing  many
families  of  the  poor — these  are  evils  too  plain  to  be  ignored.
By  the  knowledge  that  our  science  seeks  it  is  possible  that
they  may  be  restrained.  Out  of  the  darkness  light !  To
search  for  it  is  the  task,  to  find  it,  perhaps,  the  prize,  which
the  "  dismal  science  of  Political  Economy  "  offers  to  those  who
face  its  discipline.

A.  C.  P.

King's  College,
Cambridge,  June  1920.


ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

PART    I

WKLFAKS  AND   THE   NATIONAL   DIVIDEND
CHAPTER   I

^  PAOB

Welfare  akd  Economic  Welfare        .....  3

§  1.  The  main  motive  of  economic  study  is  to  help  social  improve-
ment,   §2-3.  Ek;onomic  science  will,  therefore,  be  "  realistic  "  rather
than   "pure";    but   not   merely   "descriptive."     §4.  It  is  very
diflBcult  to  make  its  analysis  quantitative.     §  5.  Economic  welfare  •/
may  be  defined  roughly  as  that  part  of  welfare  that  can  be  brought  ./
into  relation  with  the  measuring  rod  of  money.     §§  6-9.  Instances  ^
can  be  multiplied  in  which  economic  causes,  which  affect  economic
welfare  in  one  way,  affect  total  welfare  in  a  different  way.     §  10.
Nevertheless  there  is  a  presumption  that  qualitative  conclusions
about  effects  upon  economic  welfare  will  hold  good  also  of  effects
upon  total  welfare.    §  11.  And  reasonably  adequate  conclusions  about
effects  upon  economic  welfare  can  often  be  obtained  by  economic
science,  in  spite  of  the  partial  and  limited  character  of  that  science.


/


CHAPTER   II

Desires  and  Satisfactions        ......        23

§  1.  The  relation  between  satisfaction  and  the  money  measure  is  not
direct,  but  is  mediated  through  desires,  the  intensity  of  which  need
not  always  bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  satisfaction  their  fulfil-
ment yields.  §  2.  For  the  most  part  this  circumstance  is  not
important  §  3.  But  for  the  choice  between  using  resources
for  the  present  and  for  the  distant  future  it  is  very  important.
§§  4-5.  Coupled  with  the  fact  of  individual  mortality,  it  points
towards  State  action  to  conserve  exhaustible  natural  resources  and
to  stimulate  investment  in  undertakings  from  which  the  return
must  be  long  delayed.

ix


F'


TT


^y


THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


CHAPTER    III

PAQB

The  National  Dividend  ......        30

§  1.  For  the  most  part  economic  causes  act  upon  economic  welfare,
not  directly,  but  through  the  national  dividend.  §§  2-3.  In  spite  of
the  paradoxes  involved,  this  is  most  conveniently  taken  to  embrace
only  things  purchased  with  money  income,  together  with  the  services
a  man  obtains  from  inhabiting  a  house  owned  by  himself.  §§  4-7.
The  national  dividevd  and  the  national  consumable  income  are
distinguished,  and  various  problems  connected  with  the  definition
and  evaluation  of  the  dividend  are  examined.


CHAPTER   IV

The  Relation  of  Economic  Welfare  to  the  National  Dividend        42

§  1.  Economic  welfare  is  dependent  on  (1)  the  average  volume,  (2)
the  distribution,  and  (3)  the  variability  of  the  national  dividend.
§§  2-4.  After  an  analysis  of  diflBculties,  a  first  main  proposition  is  set
out  as  follows  :  Any  cause,  which,  without  the  exercise  of  compulsion
or  pressure  upon  people  to  make  them  work  more  than  their  wishes
and  interests  dictate,  increases  productive  efficiency  and,  therewith,
the  average  volume  of  the  national  dividend,  provided  that  it
neither  injures  the  distribution  nor  augments  the  variability  of  the
country's  consumable  income,  will,  in  general,  increase  economic
welfare.  §§  5-7.  The  bearing  on  this  proposition  of  various  complica-
tions and  reactions  is  examined.  §  8.  A  second  main  proposition  is  :
Any  cause  which  increases  the  proportion  of  the  national  dividend
received  by  poor  persons,  provided  that  it  does  not  lead  to  a
contraction  of  the  dividend  and  does  not  injuriously  affect  its
variability,  will,  in  general,  increase  economic  welfare.  §§  9-11.
Some  general  considerations  bearing  on  this  proposition  are  examined.
§§  12-16.  Certain  diflBculties  connected  with  the  reactions  of  income
upon  population  are  examined.  §  17.  After  a  somewhat  intricate
discussion,  a  third  main  proposition  is  set  out :  Any  cause  which
diminishes  the  variability  of  the  national  dividend,  provided  that  it
neither  diminishes  its  volume  nor  injures  its  distribution,  will,  in
general,  increase  economic  welfare.  §  18.  A  fourth  main  proposition,
the  practical  importance  of  which  is  comparatively  small,  is  :  Any
cause  which  diminishes  the  variability  of  the  part  of  the  national
dividend  accruing  to  the  poor,  even  though  it  increases  in  corre-
sponding measure  the  variability  of  the  part  accruing  to  the  rich,
will,  other  things  being  equal,  increase  economic  welfare.


CHAPTER   V

The    Measurement    of    Changes   in    the    Magnitude    of    the
National  Dividend  and  its  Parts  ....

§  1.  Since  the  dividend  is  made  up,  not  of  a  single  sort  of  commodity,
but  of  many  sorts,  the  quantities  of  which  vary  differently,  it  is
desirable  so  to  define  a  change  in  the  actual  heterogeneous  dividend


CONTENTS  xi

PAOK

that  the  propositions  laid  down  in  the  preceding  chapter  about  a
dividend  tacitly  assumed  to  be  homogeneous  may  still  hold  good.
§  2.  We  have  to  determine  (1)  what  measure  would  best  satisfy  this
condition  if  all  relevant  information  were  accessible  ;  (2)  what
practicable  approximation  to  this  can  be  obtained  from  the  limited
data  that  are  in  fact  accessible  ;  (3)  how  reliable  the  practicable
approximation  is  likely  to  be.  §§  3-8.  The  first  of  these  problems  is
discussed.     §§  9-11.  Then  the  second.     §§  12-14.  Finally  the  third.


CHAPTEE   VI

The  National  Dividend  and  the  Qxtautt  of  the  Pkople  .        91

§  1.  The  conclusions  reached  in  the  fourth  chapter  must  now  be
reviewed  in  the  light  of  modern  biological  knowledge.  §  2.  That
knowledge  warrants  the  belief  that  general  welfare  and  economic
welfare  aUke  could  be  increased  by  measures  restricting  props^ation
among  the  obviously  degenerate.  This  belief,  however,  is  additional
to,  and  does  not  disturb,  our  results.  §  3.  It  is  sometimes  held  that
modern  biology,  by  demonstrating  the  dominant  part  played  by
heredity  as  compared  with  environment,  has  proved  economic
inquiries,  which  are,  in  the  main,  concerned  with  environment,  to
be  unimportant.  Reasons  are  offered  for  rejecting  this  view.  §§  4-6.
It  is  sometimes  held,  further,  that  the  advantage  to  economic  welfare
claimed  in  the  fourth  chapter  to  result  fi-om  (1)  an  increase  in  the
magnitude  and  (2)  an  improvement  in  the  distribution  of  the
national  dividend  are  cancelled  by  indiiect  biological  effects.
Reasons  are  offered  for  rejecting  these  views.


CHAPTER    VII
The  Method  of  Discussion  to  be  followed  ....       107

PAET    II

THE   MAGNITtTDE   OF  THE   NATIONAL  DIVIDEND   AND  THE
DISTRIBUTION    OF    RESOURCES    AMONG   DIFFERENT    USES

CHAPTER    I
Introdttctory        ........      Ill

§§  1-2.  The  general  problem  of  this  Part  is  to  asicertain  how  far  the
free  play  of  self-interest,  acting  under  the  existing  legal  system,
tends  to  distribute  the  country's  resources  in  the  way  most  favourable
to  the  production  of  a  large  national  dividend,  and  how  far  it  is
feasible  for  State  action  to  improve  upon  "natural"  tendencies.


xii  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


CHAPTER   II


PAGE


The    National    Dividend    and    Equality    of    Makginal    Social

Net  Products      .      .  .  .  •  •  .  .114

§§  1-4.  The  mea.miig  of  the  term  value  of  marginal  social  Tiet  product
is  explained.  §  5.  In  the  absence  of  costs  of  movement,  it  can  be
shown  that,  provided  there  is  only  one  arrangement  of  resources
which  makes  the  values  of  the  marginal  social  net  products  equal  in
all  uses,  that  arrangement  will  maximise  the  national  dividend.  §  6.
In  so  far  as  there  are  costs  of  movement,  the  optimum  arrangement
is  different,  and,  within  limits,  indeterminate.  §  7.  In  general  a
lessening  of  costs  of  movement  will  increase  the  national  dividend.
■  §§  8-10.  In  real  life  there  are  likely  to  be  a  number  of  different
arrangements  of  resources,  each  one  of  which  will  make  the  values
of  the  marginal  social  net  products  equal  in  all  uses.  Hence  equality
of  values  of  marginal  social  net  products  does  not  imply  that  all
departures  from  an  arrangement  yielding  it  must  damage  the  national
dividend.  It  is  fair  to  conclude,  however,  that  caisual  departures
are  likely  to  have  that  effect.  §  11.  There  is  diflBculty  in  extending
this  analysis  to  differences  in  degree  of  inequality.

4


CHAPTER   III

The  Tendency  to  Equality  of  Returns  in  Different  Occupa-
tions   .........      125

§  1.  Subject  to  important  qualifications  it  can  be  shown  that  the
tendency  of  self-interest,  if  not  interfered  with,  is  to  bring  about
equality  in  the  returns  to  resources  in  different  uses.  §§  2-4,  In  a
general  way  the  elimination  of  obstacles,  in  the  form  of  costs  of
movement  or  lack  of  knowledge,  to  the  free  working  of  self-interest
is  likely  to  promote  equality  in  these  returns.  But  this  statement
is  subject  to  qualifications.  §  5.  In  particular  it  is  important  to
distinguish  between  a  real  reduction  in  costs  and  a  mere  trans-
ference of  costs  from  the  persons  who  control  the  movement  of
resources  to  the  shoulders  of  the  State.  §  6.  In  so  far  as  rates  of
return  correspond  to  values  of  marginal  SQcial  net  products,  inter-
ference with  the  tendency  to  equality  of  returns  is  likely  to  damage
the  national  dividend.  But  it  will  be  shown  presently  that  the
correspondence  between  rates  of  return  and  values  of  marginal  social
net  product  is  often  very  imperfect.


CHAPTER    IV

Hindrances  to  Equality  of  Returns  doe  to  Imperfect  Know-
ledge .........

§§  1-4.  The  tendency  towards  equality  of  returns  in  different  occupa-
tions is  obstructed  by  imperfect  knowledge,  resulting  partly  from
the  character  of  business  accounts,   and   partly  from  the  general


CONTENTS  xiii

PAGE

organisation  of  business  finance.  §  5.  The  intervention  of  banks,
which  naturally  look  to  permanent  and  not  merely  to  immediate
profit,  in  the  work  of  promotion  may,  if  other  conditions  allow,  do
something  to  improve  matters.  §  6.  The  control  exercised  in  minor
fields  of  investment  by  People's  Banks  of  the  Raiifeisen  type  is  a
safeguaixl  against  the  wasteful  employment  of  borrowed  resources.


CHAPTER   V

Hindrances  to  Equality  of  Retukns  due  to  Impekfect  Divisi-
bility OF  THE  Units  in  Terms  of  which  Transactions  are
conducted       ........      139

§  1.  When  the  units  in  which  transactions  are  made  are  large,  or
w^hen  they  are  compounded  of  two  factors  in  a  fixed  proportion,  the
tendency  of  self-interest  to  make  the  rate  of  returns  equal  in  all
uses  is  obstructed.  §  2.  In  modem  times  the  size  of  the  unit  in
which  transactions  in  respect  of  capital  take  place  has  been  diminished
in  a  twofold  manner,  partly  with  the  help  of  the  Stock  Exchange.
§  3.  The  compound  character  which  formerly  belonged  to  this  unit
has  also,>.in  great  part,  been  eliminated  by  arrangements  which  the
great  growth  of  securities  adapted  to  serve  as  collateral  has  facilitated.
^  4-5.  The  device  of  dividing  shares  into  several  grades  and  the
holding  of  them  in  their  riskiest  early  age  by  financiers,  who  after-
wards pass  them  on,  work  in  the  same  direction.  §  6.  In  general,
in  present  conditions,  imperfect  divisibility  in  the  units  of  trans-
actions has  but  little  effect.


CHAPTER


>


(Vl)


Divergences  between  Marginal  Social  Net  Product  and  Marginal

Trade  Net  Product  .  .  .  .149

§1.  Trade  net  product  and  social  net  product  are  distinguished.  In
80  far  as  self-interest  tends  to  bring  about  equality  in  the  values  of
marginal  trade  net  products  in  different  fields,  equality  in  the  values
of  marginal  social  net  products  is  obstructed  whenever  marginal
trade  and  marginal  social  net  products  diverge.  Some  sorts  of
divergence  occur  under  simple  competition  ;  further  sorts  under
monopolistic  competition,  and  yet  further  sorts  under  bilateral
monopoly.  §  2.  The  source  of  the  first  of  these  sorts  of  divergence
is  that,  in  some  occupations,  a  part  of  the  efi'ects  of  the  empIojTnent
of  a  unit  of  resources  fails  to  be  reflected  in  the  remuneration  of  the
person  responsible  for  the  investment ;  as,  for  example,  when  durable
instruments,  capable  of  improvement  through  investment,  are
operated  by  tenants.  §§  3-7.  This  point  is  illustrated  by  a  discussion
of  laws  providing  compensation  for  tenants'  improvements  and  of
kindred  matters.  §  8.  Divergences  under  simple  competition  may
also  arise  independently  of  leasing  arrangements,  in  respect  of  forms
of  investment  which  render  uncompensated  services  or  disservices  to
the  general  public.  Illustrations  are  given.  §  9.  But  it  is  an  error
to  suppose  that  divergence  is  involved   when   the   investment   of


xiv  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE

resources  in  improved  plant  or  methods  reduces  the  value  of  plant
already  in  existence.  §  10.  Divergence  may  also  arise  through  the
setting  up  of  certain  psychological  reactions.  §  11.  The  above
classes  of  divergence  can  be  mitigated  by  a  judicious  employment  of
taxes  and  bounties,  and  sometimes  by  direct  coercion.  §  12.  Under
monopolistic  competition  further  divergences  arise  in  connection  with
resources  invested  in  advertisement.  §§  13-15.  Under  bilateral
monopoly  divergences  arise  in  respect  of  resources  devoted  to
"  bai-gaining  "  and  to  fraudulent  practices.  These  can  be  mitigated
to  some  extent  by  penal  laws.


CHAPTER  VII


^'


Marginal    Trade   and    Social    Net    Products    in    Relation    to

Industrial  Forms     .......      180

§  1.  The  relation  between  marginal  trade  net  products  and  marginal
social  net  products,  besides  being  different  in  respect  of  investments
in  different  uses,  is  also  different  in  respect  of  investments  made
under  different  forms  of  industrial  organisation.  §2.  For  some
forms  do,  and  others  do  not,  yield  a  return  in  the  shape  of  trained
capacity  among  the  workpeople  engaged  in  them,  as  well  as  a
return  of  commodity  products.  §  3.  In  present  conditions  invest-
ments in  Workers'  Copartnership  Associations  and  in  various  kinds
of  small  holdings  probably  yield  a  marginal  social  net  product  greater
than  the  marginal  trade  net  product.  §  4,  But  the  opposite  is
probably  true  of  i investments  leading  to  the  "trustification"  of
industry.  §  5.  And  possibly,  :  after  a  point,  of  investments  to
promote  standardisation.  §  6.  It  may  also  be  true  of  investments
made  in  connection  with  some  aspects  of  "  scientific  management."


CHAPTER   VIII

Divergences  betwteen  Marginal  Trade  Nbt  Product  and  Marginal

Individual  Net  Product    ......       189

§  1.  Hitherto  it  has  been  provisionally  assumed  that  self-interest
tends,  so  far  as  it  is  not  obstructed,  to  make  the  values  of  the  marginal
trade  net  products  of  resources  in  different  uses  equal.  §  2.  In  fact,
however,  under  conditions  of  simple  competition,  in  industries  of
increasing  returns,  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  tends
to  exceed,  and  in  industries  of  diminishing  returns  to  fall  short  of,
the  average  level  of  the  values  of  marginal  trade  net  products
yielded  in  industries  in  general.  §  3,  Further,  when  the  various
producers  in  an  industry  are  not  situated  similarly,  the  values  of
marginal  trade  net  products  of  resources  invested  at  different  centres
within  the  same  industry  tend,  except  under  constant  returns,  to
be  different.  §  4.  It  is  possible  by  resort  to  taxes  and  bounties,
differential  and  otherwise,  to  mitigate  these  divergences.  §  5.
Analogous  considerations  suggest  that  economic  welfare  might  be
increased  by  taxes  upon  things  which  are  desired  for  their  un-
commonness,  and  by  bounties  upon  things  which  are  desired  for  their
commonness.


CONTENTS  XV


CHAPTER    IX

PAOB

State  Reoclation  of  Competitive  Peices      ....      197

§  1.  Apart  from  the  qualifying  circumstanoes  considered  in  the
preceding  chapters,  our  discussion  suggests  that  State  interfereQce
with  competitire  prices  muat^  injure  the  nationaf  dividen3^  This
pl^sOTSpuon  has  now  to  be  confronted  with  the  extensive  price
regulation  of  the  war  period.  §§  2-4.  An  account  is  given  of  the
problems  and  practice  of  price  control  in  the  United  Kingdom  during
that  period.  §§  5-6.  Owing  to  a  variety  of  causes  it  is  improbable
that  price  control,  in  the  special  circumstances  of  the  great  war,
damaged  production  to  any  significant  extent.  §  7.  But  there  is
strong  reason  to  fear  that  a  general  permanent  policy  of  control
over  competitive  prices,  designed  to  prevent  groups  of  producers
from  reaping  abnormal  profits  on  favourable  occasions,  would  not  be
thus  innocuous.


CHAPTER   X

Statb  Regulation  of  Supplies  .  .  .  .211

§  1.  State  regulation  of  prices  during  the  war  involved  State  regula-
tion of  distribution  also.  §§  2-4.  SuppUes  of  material  were  allocated
to  different  uses  on  the  basis  of  their  comparative  war  urgency  ;  a
criterion  for  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  satisfactory
substitute  in  normal  times.  §  5.  Within  each  use  materials  were
allocated  to  different /rjns  on  the  basis  of  their  pre-war  purchases  ;
an  arrangement  impossible  in  normal  times.  §  6.  Finished  products
were  allocated  among  ultimate  consumers  on  the  basis  of  an  estimate
of  their  necessary  rations.  §  7.  Arrangements  of  this  kind  do  not
directly  affect  the  volume  of  the  national  dividend,  though  the  price
regulations  to  which  they  are  supplementary,  as  was  explained  in
the  preceding  chapter,  do  have  this  effect.


I


CHAPTER   XI


The  Conditions  of  Monopoli&ation     .....      218

§  1.  It  will  presently  be  necessary  to  inquire  how  far  the  values  of
marginal  trade  net  products  in  different  uses  tend  to  equality  under
monopoly.  As  a  preliminary  to  this  inquiry,  the  conditions  which
determine  the  appearance  of  monopolistic  power  have  to  be  studied.
§  2.  Circumstances,  which,  when  the  aggregate  scale  of  an  industry
is  given,  make  it  structurally  economical  for  the  typical  individual
establishment  to  be  large,  are  favourable  to  the  advent  of  mono-
polistic power.  §  3.  So  also  are  circumstances  which  make  it
structurally  economical  for  the  typical  individual  unit  of  business
management  (embracing,  perhaps,  a  number  of  establishments)  to
be  large.  §  4.  So  also  are  conditions  under  which  amalgamation  is
able  greatly  to  reduce  expenses  by  cutting  down  competitive
advertisement.  §  5.  So  also  is  the  existence  of  a  highly  inelastic
demand  for  any  commodity,  since  this  implies  the  possibility  of
large  gains  if  monopolisation  takes  place.     The  influences  by  which


xvi  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE

the  degree  of  elasticity  of  demand  for  different  commodities  is
determined  are  discussed.  §  6.  On  the  other  hand,  anything  that
renders  it  difficult  for  negotiations  aiming  at  amalgamation  to  be
opened  up  is  unfavourable  to  the  advent  of  monopolistic  power.
§  7.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  those  obstacles  to  agreement  which
arise  out  of  conflicting  claims  about  "  participation."


CHAPTER   XII

Monopolistic  Competition  .  .  .  .  .      232

§  1.  Under  monopolistic  competition,  self-interest  does  not  tend  to
make  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources  in
the  industry  affected  equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net
product  of  resources  in  general.  §§  2-4.  Rather,  it  leaves  the  value
of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  indeterminate  over  a  range,  the
extent  of  which  depends  upon  certain  influences  that  are  briefly,
discussed.


CHAPTER   XIII

Simple  Monopoly  ........      236

§§  1-4.  Under  simple  monopoly  plus  restriction  of  entry  to  the
industry  affected  it  is  probable  that  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade
net  product  of  resources  in  that  industry  will  diverge  from  the
value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources  in  general  more
widely  than  it  would  do  under  simple  competition.  §  5.  If  the
entry  to  the  monopolised  industry  is  not  restricted,  the  national  divi-
dend will  suffer  in  another  way.

CHAPTER   XIV

Discriminating  Monopoly  ......      240

§  ] .  Under  certain  conditions  monopolists  are  able  to  charge  dis-
criminating prices,  §§  2-4.  The  nature  of  these  conditions,  which
depend  essentially  upon  the  non-transferability  of  the  commodities
affected,  is  discussed.  §§  5-7.  Of  three  distinguishable  forms  of  dis-
criminating monopoly,  the  only  one  of  practical  importance  is
discriminating  monopoly  of  the  third  degree,  under  which  different
prices  are  cliarged  between  markets,  the  composition  of  which  is
determined  otherwise  than  by  the  monopolist's  own  choice.  §§  8-10.
But  a  brief  analysis  of  the  other  two  forms  is  given.  §§  11-15.  Under
discriminating  monopoly  of  the  third  degree,  plus  restriction  of
entry  to  the  industry  affected,  the  output  may,  not  improbably  in
certain  circumstances,  approach  more  nearly  to  the  ideal  output,  which
makes  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources
in  that  industry  equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net
product  of  resources  in  general,  than  it  would  do  under  simple
monopoly  ;  but  it  is  unlikely  to  approach  more  nearly  to  this  output
than  it  would  do  under  simple  competition.  §  16.  Under  dis-
criminating monopoly,  without  restriction  of  entry  to  the  industry
affected,  the  situation  is  still  less  favourable.


CONTENTS  xvii


CHAPTER   XV

PAOK

Thr  Spbcial  Problem  of  Railway  Rates       ....      256

§  1.  The  discussion  of  the  preceding  chapter  throws  light  on  the
controversy  between  advocates  of  "the  cost  of  service  principle"
and  "the  value  of  service  principle"  in  respect  of  railway  rates.
§  2.  The  meaning  in  concrete  form  of  "  the  cost  of  service  principle  "
is  explained,  and  this  principle  is  shown  to  imply  uniform  charges
to  different  purchasers  of  ton-miles  of  transportation,  so  far  as  the
ton-miles  sold  to  different  purchasers  are  not  "jointly  supplied."
§§  3-4.  The  common  view  that  railway  services  are  in  large  part
jointly  supplied — that  the  carriage  of  copper  and  the  carriage  of
coal,  or  the  carriage  of  coal  destined  for  A  and  the  carriage  of  coal
destined  for  B,  over  a  given  piece  of  line  are  joint  products — is
incorrect.  §  5.  However,  some  measure  of  jointness,  as  for  instance
between  out  and  home  journeys,  does  in  fact  prevail.  §  6.  The
meaning  in  concrete  form  of  "the  value  of  service  principle"  is
explained.  §§7-8.  "The  cost  of  service  principle"  corresponds  to
simple  competition,  and  "the  value  of  service  principle"  to  dis-
criminating monopoly  of  the  third  degree.  In  general,  the  former
is  the  more  advantageous  to  the  national  dividend  ;  but,  as  stated
in  the  preceding  chapter,  circumstances  may  arise  in  which  the
latter  is  the  more  advantageous.  §§  9-10.  These  circumstances,
however,  are  less  common  than  writers  on  railway  economics
usually  suppose.  §11.  Moreover,  such  benefit  as  the  "value  of
service  principle  "  is  competent  to  bring  about  can  often  be  attained
more  satisfactorily  by  means  of  a  bounty.  §  12.  The  policy  of
permitting  discriminating  charges,  subject  to  the  condition  that
profits  are  prevented  from  rising  above  the  normal,  is  discussed.
§  13.  Lastly,  something  is  said  of  zone  systems  of  railway  tariffs.


CHAPTER   XVI

POBCHASEBS'  ASSOCIATION'S  ......         283

§  1.  The  preceding  chapters  have  shown  that,  in  many  industries,
neither  simple  competition,  nor  monopolistic  competition,  nor
simple  monopoly,  nor  discriminating  monopoly  will  make  the  value
of  the  marginal  social  net  product  of  resources  invested  in  them
equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  social  net  product  of  resources  in
general.  We  have  next  to  inquire  whether  this  result  can  be  secured
by  resort  to  the  device  of  Purchasers'  Associations-  §  2.  The  answer
is  clearly  in  the  affirmative  ;  but  no  inference  follows  as  to  the
effect  on  the  national  dividend,  until  the  comparative  advantages
in  respect  of  productive  efficiency  of  Purchasers'  Associations  and
ordinary  commercial  businesses  have  been  ascertained.  §  3.  Not
mnch  light  can  be  thrown  on  that  matter  by  historical  examples.
Ss  4-5.  Purchasers'  Associations  have  advantages  in  respect  of  pro-
duction, so  far  as  they  save  costs  in  advertisement,  are  exceptionally
well  fitted  to  spread  knowledge  of  the  best  methods  of  production
among  their  members  and  have  exceptionally  small  need  of
bargaining  and  safeguards  against  fraud.  These  advantages  have
led  to  their  successful  establishment  over  a  considerable  field.
§  6.  But  for  various  reasons  this  field  is  limited,  and  a  study  of
further  remedies  for  the  imperfections  of  ordinary  business  forms  is,
therefore,  still  required.

h


xviii  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE


CHAPTER  XVII,

PASE

State  Intervention         .......      293

/  §  1.  This  chapter  is  concerned  with  the  general  merits  of  State

"^  intervention  in  industry,  including  both  contro.l  and  operation,  as  a

remedy  for  the  failures  of  private  enterprise.  §  2.  For  various  reasons
the  experience  of  the  war  can  afford  much  less  guidance  on  this
matter  than  might  be  expected  from  it  at  iirst  sight.  §  3.  The
problem  is  essentially  the  same  in  industries  whose  operation  does,
and  in  those  whose  operation  does  not  require  resort  to  the  right  of
eminent  domain.  §  4.  The  mere  failure  of  private  industry,  when
left  free  from  State  interference,  to  maximise  the  national  dividend
does  not  of  itself  warrant  intervention,  for  this  might  make  things
worse.  §  5.  Certain  modern  developments  have,  however,  rendered
governmental  agencies  better  fitted  for  intervention  than  they  were
in  former  times.


CHAPTER   XVIII

Public  Control  of  Monopoly    ......      30O

§  1.  This  chapter  is  concerned  with  attempts  by  the  State  so  to
control  private  monopoly  that  supply  shall  be  adjusted  to  demand,
and  the  national  dividend  shall,  therefore,  be  as  large  as  it  would  be
under  simple  competition.  §  2.  The  policy  of  maintaining  actual
competition  by  refusing  to  allow  rival  concerns  to  combine  is  dis-
cussed. §  3.  A  second  indirect  method  of  control  is  embodied  in
the  policy  o!  Ta&int&imng  potential  competition.  This  is  worked  by
penalising  the  "clubbing"  devices  of  cut-throat  competition,  or
destructive  dumping,  and  of  boycott.  §§  4-5.  The  nature  and  effect
of  these  "clubbing"  devices  are  explained.  §  6.  In  spite  of  many
diflSculties,  it  is  probable  that  legislation  directed  against  them,  if
carefully  prepared,  may,  at  all  events,  lessen  the  extent  to  which
they  are  employed.  §  7.  But  such  legislation,  even  if  successful  in
its  immediate  object,  would  not  serve  completely  to  maintain
potential  competition.  §  8.  The  inadequacy  of  indirect  methods  of
control  makes  it  necessary  to  supplement  them  by  direct  methods.
§  9.  The  policy  of  encouraging  the  formation — over  against  combina-
tions of  sellers — of  combinations  of  sellers  also  possessing  mono-
polistic powers,  is  discussed.  §  10.  Control  over  the  terms  of  sale
in  monopolised  industries  involves  a  special  complication  under
diminishing  returns  but  not  under  increasing  returns.  §  11.  War
experience  affords  little  guidance.  §  12.  Control  may  be  either  nega-
tive— forbidding  "  unreasonable  "  prices — or  positive — establishing
maximum  prices.  §§  13-14.  The  problem  of  "sanctions  "  is  discussed.
§§  15-18.  And  the  very  difficult  problem  of  settling  the  basis  in
accordance  with  which  the  reasonableness  of  prices  shall  be
determined.  §§  19-21.  Several  methods  designed  to  prevent  or  limit
errors  on  the  part  of  the  price-regulating  authority,  including  the
device  of  sliding  scales,  are  examined.  §  22.  There  is  also,  in  old-
established  monopolies,  the  difficulty  that  price  limitation  may
disturb  "legitimate  expectations."  §  23.  Moreover,  control  is
necessarily  cumbersome  and  expensive.


CONTENTS  xix


CHAPTER   XIX

PAGE

Public  Operation  of  Industries  .....       339

§  1.  The  difficulty  of  satisfactory  public  control  over  monopolistic
industries  suggests  that  the  national  dividend  might  be  increased
by  the  public  operation  of  these  industries,  provided  that  this  would
not  involve  a  serious  loss  of  economy  in  production.  §  2.  The
economic  efficiency  of  public  and  of  joint-stock  operation  of  industry
cannot  be  successfully  compared  by  reference  to  statistics.  §  3.  The
efficiency  of  management  under  the  two  forms  is  likely  to  be  pretty
much  the  same.  §  4.  But,  first,  under  public  operation  there  is  a
danger  that  the  operating  authority  may  be  tempted  to  maintain  its
enterprise  by  the  use  of  unfair  extra-commercial  methods  at  the
expense  of  rival  enterprises  capable  of  satisfying  the  same  wants
more  cheaply,  §  5.  Secondly,  under  public  operation  efficiency  is
likely  to  suffer  through  unwillingness  to  take  risks  and  make
experiments.  §§  6-7.  Thirdly,  efficiency  is  likely  to  suffer  through
the  establishment  of  units  of  management  of  an  uneconomical  size  ;
though,  in  industries  where  the  normal  state  of  things  is  monopolistic
competition,  public  operation  is,  in  this  respect,  superior  to  joint-
stock  operation.  §  8.  On  the  whole,  j^part  from  a  f*w  special
exceptions,  the  proposal  for  public  operation  is  a  live  one  only  where
there  is  monopoly  ;  and  here  the  case  for  it,  as  against  that  for
public  control,  works  out  differently  in  different  industries.  §  9.
When  public  operation  is  determined  upon  for  a  concern  hitherto  in
private  hands,  the  determination  of  a  proper  purchase  price  presents
difficulties.  §  10.  But,  even  when  a  heavy  ransom  has  to  be  paid  to
vested  interests,  it  may  still  be  for  the  general  good  that  a  public
authority  should  buy  up  a  private  monopoly,  in  order  to  stop
artificial  restriction  of  output.


PAET    III

THE   NATIONAL   DIVIDEND   AND   LABOUR

CHAPTER    I

Industrial  Peace  .......      363

Industrial  peace  being  obviously  relevant  to  the  magnitude  of  the
national  dividend,  the  machinery  designed  for  maintaining  it  mast
be  examined.

CHAPTER   II

The  Classification  of  Industrial  Differences       ,  .  .       367

§§  1-5.  Various  possible  lines  of  classification  are  compared  and
discussed.

&2


XX  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


CHAPTER   III

PAOB

Voluntary  Arrangements  for  Conciliation  and  Arbitration     .      372

§  1.  The  United  Kingdom  is  the  classical  home  of  voluntary  arrange-
ments for  dealing  with  differences  about  broad  general  questions.
§  2.  A  permanent  organ  of  negotiation  is  more  eftective  than  ad  hoc
meetings  called  specially  to  deal  with  differences  as  they  arise.  sy
§§  3-4.  The  constitution  of  this  organ  and  methods  of  procedure  are
discussed.  §  5.  Agreements  for  conciliation  alone  are  compared
with  agreements  which  also  provide  for  arbitration  in  the  last
resort.  §  6.  The  qualities  required  in  arbitrators,  their  number,
and  the  best  method  of  appointing  them,  are  discussed.  §§  7-8.  Also
the  question  of  a  referendum,  and  the  question  of  monetary
guarantees.


CHAPTER    IV


Mediation


§§  1-5.  In  the  event  of  a  failure  on  the  part  of  employers  and  work-
people in  an  industry  to  reach  agreement,  mediation  may  be  usefully
undertaken  by  eminent  outsiders,  non-governmental  Boards  or
governmental  agencies.  But  care  should  be  taken  not  to  allow  the
existence  of  this  machinery  to  check  the  development  of  direct
voluntary  arrangements  between  the  parties.


CHAPTER   V


Coercive  Intervention


§  1.  Coercive  intervention  may  provide  for  disputants  to  enter  a  court
of  compulsory  arbitration  if  both  of  them  wish  to  do  so.  §  2.  Or
for  "extending  "  agreements  made  between  associations  of  employers
and  employed  so  as  to  make  them  binding  on  outside  employers  and
workpeople.  §  3.  Or  it  may  follow  the  model  of  the  Canadian
Industrial  Disputes  Investigation  Act.  §  4.  Or  it  may  take  the
form  of  compulsory  arbitration  as  understood  in  Australasia.


CHAPTER  VI

An  Analytical  View  of  Industrial  Peace  ....

§  1.  Disputes  between  associations  of  employers  and  employed  are
in  some  respects  analogous  to  disputes  between  nations.  §2.  Within
limits  the  wage  rate  subject  to  a  bargain  between  two  organisations
is  indeterminate.  §§  3-11.  The  influences  by  wliich  the  range  of
indeterminateness  and  tlie  range  of  practicable  bargains  are  determined
are  examined.  §  12.  The  bearing  of  this  study  upon  the  prospects
of  industrial  i)eace  in  various  circumstances  is  explained.  §  13.  And
also  its  bearing  u^wn  a  common  view  of  an  arbitrator's  functioiis.


CONTENTS  xxi


CHAPTER  VII

PACK

Hours  of  Laboitr  .......      412

§  1.  In  each  several  industry  for  each  class  of  workers  there  is  some
length  of  working  day,  varying  with  the  circumstances  of  different
occupations,  the  overstepping  of  which  is  disadvantageous  to  the
national  dividend.  §  2.  There  is  evidence  that  in  fact  this  limit
tends  to  be  passed.  §§  3-5.  The  way  in  which  this  can  and  does
happen  is  explained.  §  6.  There  is  a  prima  facie  case  for  State
intervention  to  prevent  the  limit  being  passed.  §  7.  In  this
connection  the  problem  of  overtime  is  discussed.


CHAPTER    VIII

Thk  Methods  of  Ixdustrial  Rkmuseratiok  ....      424

§  1.  Broadlv  speaking,  the  workers'  output  will  be  larger,  and  the
national  dividend  more  advantaged,  the  more  nearly  his  remunera-
tion is  adjusted  to  services  rendered.  §  2.  Adjustment  is  compli-
cated by  the  fact  that  a  man's  services  to  his  firm  include  more  than
his  immediate  physical  output.  §  3.  By  the  fact  that  output  is
liable  to  vary  in  quality  as  well  as  in  quantity.  §  4.  And  by  the
fact  that  even  quantity  of  output  cannot,  in  some  occupations,  be
measured.  §  5.  The  problem  of  adjustment  under  time-wages  is
discussed.  §§  6-7.  Under  piece-wages  adjustment  could  be  made
closer  if  it  were  not  for  the  diflBculty  created  by  the  ' '  cutting  "  or
"nibbling"  of  rates.  §§  8-9.  Premium  bonus  plans  and  piece-rate
plans  are  compared.  §  10.  The  diflSculty  of  "cutting"  and  "nib-
bling" may  be  dealt  with  by  means  of  collective  bargaining.  §§  11-12.
The  task -wage  system  is  discussed.  §  13.  The  conclusion  reached
is  that  the  interests  of  the  national  dividend  will  be  best  promoted
under  a  system  of  piece  -  wage  scales  controlled  by  collective
bargaining.


CHAPTER    IX

The  Distbibtttiok  of  Labour  axong  Oocttpations  and  Places      .       446

§  1.  In  general  the  national  dividend  is  injured  by  causes  that
prevent  labour  being  so  distributed  that  the  demand  prices  for  and
the  wages  of  labour  of  any  given  grade  are  equal  in  ditferent  places
and  occupations.  The  chief  of  these  causes  are  ignorance,  costs  of
movement  and  restrictions  imposed  upon  movement.  §§  2-3.  The
most  fundamental  way  in  which  ignorance  operates  is  by  impairing
the  initial  distribution  of  new  generations  of  workpeople  as  they  flow
into  industry.  §4.  The  working  in  this  respect  of  "biassed"
ignorance  is  examined.  §  5.  Ignorance  also  interferes  with  the
correction  of  errors  in  the  initial  distribution  of  labour  by  subsequent
movement.  §  6.  The  extent  to  which  it  does  this  depends  upon  the
form  in  which  wage-contracts  are  made.  §  7.  And  upon  the  develop-
ment of  Employment  Exchanges  and  their  utilisation  as  centres  of
eugagement.    §  8.  Some  principal  influences  upon  which  the  efficiency-


xxii  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE

of  these  Exchanges  depends,  are  considered.  §§  9-10.  The  effects  of
"costs  of  movement"  as  an  obstacle  to  adjustment  are  studied.
§  11.  Including  the  peculiar  element  of  cost  involved  in  the  geo-
graphical unity  of  the  family.  §  12.  The  most  important  instance
of  restrictions  imposed  from  without  is  afforded  by  the  traditional
and  customary  exclusion  of  women  workers  from  certain  occupations.
§  13.  The  foregoing  obstacles  to  what  may  be  called  the  ideal  dis-
tribution of  labour  may  (1)  crumble  from  within,  (2)  be  pulled  down
at  public  cost,  or  (3)  be  leapt  over.  §  14.  When  they  crumble  from
within,  the  national  dividend  is  practically  certain  to  be  increased.
§  15.  When  they  are  pulled  down  at  public  cost,  there  is  a  pre-
sumption that  it  will  be  diminished,  but  this  presumption  may  be
rebutted.  §  16.  When  they  are  leapt  over,  the  effect  on  the  dividend
is  bound  to  be  beneficial  if  the  obstacle  is  ignorance,  but  there  is
a  presumption  that  it  will  be  injurious  if  the  obstacle  is  costs.


CHAPTER   X


Unemployment  versus  Short  Time


T/


§  1.  The  analysis  of  the  preceding  chapter  is  relevant  to  a  comparison
of  the  three  principal  ways  open  to  employers  of  meeting  periods  of
depression  :  namely  (1)  working  full  time  and  dismissing  some  of
the  staff ;  (2)  working  full  time  and  rotating  employment  among
the  whole  staff ;  (3)  working  short  time  with  the  whole  staff.  §  2.
The  causes  determining  the  choice  between  the  short  time  plan  and
both  the  other  two  plans  are  considered.  §§  3-4.  Those  detennining
the  choice  between  the  dismissal  plan  and  both  the  others.  §  5.
And  those  determining  the  choice  between  the  rotation  plan  and
both  the  others.  §  6.  The  short  time  plan  and  the  dismissal  plan
are  the  most  usual.  §  7.  Prima  facie  the  dismissal  plan  seems
certain  to  be  the  more  injurious  to  the  national  dividend,  because,
through  the  unemployment  it  creates,  it  reacts  adversely  on  the
quality  of  the  workpeople.  §  8.  But  against  the  other  method  is  to
be  set  its  tendency  to  prevent  workpeople  from  moving  to  other  jobs
or  places  when  the  interests  of  the  dividend  require  that  they  should
do  so.


CHAPTER   XI

The  Peacticability  of  Interference  to  raise  Wages       .  .      488

§  1.  The  "natural  course  of  wages"  is  understood  to  mean  the
system  of  wage  rates  that  would  prevail  in  the  absence  of  interfer-
ence on  the  part  of  some  person  or  body  of  persons  external  to  the
workmen  and  employers  involved  in  the  discussion  of  them.  §  2.
Interference  may  be  attempted  by  consumers'  associations  or  by
governmental  authorities.  §  3.  In  some  conditions  interference  can  /
be  baffled  by  undetected  evasion  ;  but  this  cannot  generally  be  done
when  workpeople  are  organised.  §  4.  There  are  special  opportunities
for  evasion  when  the  regulating  authority  is  only  able  to  determine
minimum  day-rates  for  "  ordinary  "  workers.  §5.  Where  undetected
evasion  is  not  practicable,  there  are  various  sanctions  by  which  ^
interference  can  be  made  effective.


CONTENTS  xxiii


CHAPTER   XII

PACK

Methods  of  Engaging  Labottb  .  .  .  .  .  .497


§  1.  Three  methods,  the  casual  method,  the  preference  method,  and
the  privileged  class  method,  are  distinguished.  §  2.  Examples  are
given.  §  3.  The  influences  which  favour  the  adoption  of  one  or
other  of  these  methods  are  indicated.  §  4.  The  relation  between  the
casual  method  and  short  engagements  is  brought  out.  §  5.  The
suggestion  that  the  State  should  intervene  to  encourage  continuity
of  engagements  is  discussed.


/


CHAPTER   XIII

IXTERFBRENCE  TO  RAISE  WaGES  IN  PLACES  AND  OCCUPATIONS  WHERE

THEY  ARE   UNFAIR        .......        505

§  1.  Fair  wages  having  been  defined,  it  is  proposed  in  this  chapter
to  investigate  the  effects  of  interference  with  unfair  wages.  §  2.  In
the  concrete  several  kinds  of  unfairness  may  be  combined  in  a  single
unfair  wage,  but  this  complication  may  be  ignored  in  our  analysis.
§  3.  Unfair  wages  may  be  distinguished  into  two  broad  classes,
those  which,  though  unfair,  are  equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal
net  product  of  labour  in  the  place  or  occupation  to  which  they
refer,  and  those  which  involve  an  element  of  exploitation  and  are
less  than  the  value  of  this  marginal  net  product.  §  4.  As  regards
the  former  type,  the  eflfect  which  interference  will  produce  on  the
magnitude  of  the  national  dividend  is  independent  of  the  reason  why
the  general  conditions  of  demand  for  labour  at  any  point  where
wages  are  unfairly  low  are  what  they  are,  and  depends  exclusively
on  the  nature  of  the  cause  by  which  the  distribution  of  labour  has
been  prevented  from  adjusting  itself  to  those  conditions.  §  5.  "When
wage  rates  are  unfairly  low  because  costs  of  movement  prevent  a
redistribution  of  labour  in  ways  that  would  make  them  fair,  inter-
ference will  injure  the  national  dividend.  §  6.  When  wage  rates
are  unfairly  low,  because  ignorance  prevents  the  desired  redistribu-
tion of  labour,  the  effect  of  interference  will  be  different  in  different
circumstances,  being  dependent  in  part  upon  the  methods  of  engag-
ing labour  that  prevail.  §  7.  The  way  in  which  the  latter  type  of
unfair  wages  distinguished  in  §  3  (that  namely  in  which  the  wage
is  less  than  the  value  of  the  workman's  marginal  net  product)  is
liable  to  arise  is  explained.  §  8.  It  is  shown  that  interference
directed  against  unfair  wages  of  this  kind  is  likely,  in  general,  to
benefit  the  national  dividend.  §  9.  "When  the  wage  rates  of  women
workers,  in  any  occupation,  while  fair  relatively  to  those  of  women
workers  elsewhere,  are  unfairly  low  relatively  to  those  of  men  workers
in  the  same  occupation,  interference  designed  to  make  them  fair
relatively  to  men's  wages  will,  in  general,  injure  the  national
dividend.  §  10.  In  practice  the  detailed  discriminating  forms  of
interference  to  which  the  preceding  discussion  points  may  need  to
give  place  to  rougher  methods.


xxiv  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


CHAPTER   XIV

PAOE

The  Statistical  Determination  of  Fair  Wages      .  .  .527

§  1.  If  the  results  achieved  in  the  preceding  chapters  are  to  be  applied
in  the  concrete,  means  must  be  devised  of  determining  what  the  fair
rate  of  wages  is,  (1)  within  a  single  industry  where  piece-wages  are
paid,  (2)  within  a  single  industry  where  time-wages  are  paid,  and
(3)  as  between  different  industries.  §  2.  The  fair  wages  we  are
seeking  are,  of  course,  fair  real  wages,  and  not  fair  money  wages.
§  3,  Within  a  piece-wage  industry,  in  order  to  ascertain  what  rates
would  be  fair  at  different  points,  it  is  necessary  to  know  what
allowances  should  be  made  under  three  principal  heads.  §  4.  First,
an  allowance  is  required  for  differences  in  the  assistance  which
different  men  receive  in  their  work  from  machinery  and  nature.  This
allowance  can  be  calculated  closely.  §§  5-6.  Secondly,  an  allowance  v/
is  required  for  differences  in  the  exact  character  of  the  operation
which  different  men  perform.  This  also,  with  the  help  of  "elementary
rate-fixing,"  can  be  calculated  closely.  §  7.  Thirdly,  allowance  is
required  for  differences  in  the  assistance  they  receive  from  the  co-
operation of  managing  power.  The  calculation  of  this  is  much  more
difficult ;  but  something  can  be  done  by  the  establishment,  alongside
of  the  piece-rate  scale,  of  a  minimum  day  wage.  §  8.  Within  a
time-wage  industry,  in  order  to  ascertain  what  rates  would  be  fair
to  different  workpeople,  it  is  necessary  to  discover  by  direct  observa-
tion their  comparative  capacity  and  energy.  With  the  help  of
technical  experts  this  can  be  done,  not,  of  course,  exactly,  but  often
within  reasonably  close  limits.  §  9.  As  between  different  industries,
in  order  to  ascertain  what  rates  would  be  fair  in  any  one  relatively
to  others,  the  best  available  method  is  to  discover  by  observation
some  year  in  which  the  wage  in  the  industry  we  are  interested  in
was  generally  considered  to  be  fair,  and  to  multiply  the  wage  then
prevailing  there  by  the  proportionate  change  which  has  taken  place
since  then  in  the  wages  of  other  industries.


CHAPTER   XV

Interference  to  raise  Wages  in  Places  and  Occupations  where

THEY  ABE  ALREADY   FAIR        ......         537

§§  1-2.  We  have  now  to  inquire  in  what,  if  any,  circumstances,  inter-
ference with  wages  that  are  fair  would  benefit  the  national  dividend.
§  3.  It  is  plain  that  general  movements  may  occur  of  a  kind  that
would  make  a  change  in  all  wage  rates  advantageous  for  the  national
dividend  ;  and  that,  therefore,  the  existence  of  fairness  in  a  wage
rate  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  conclusive  reason  against  change.  §  4.
This  consideration  is  especially  important  when  general  prices  have
been  suddenly  and  largely  altered  by  currency  changes.  §  5.  It  is
sometimes  claimed  that,  even  when  the  wages  in  an  industry  are  fair,
they  should,  nevertheless,  always  be  forced  up  if  they  are  less  than
"  living  wages."  §§  6-9.  This  claim  is  examined  in  detail  ;  and  the
general  conclusion  is  reached  that  to  act  on  it  effectively  would
injure  the  national  dividend.


CONTENTS  XXV


CHAPTEK    XVI

PAGE

Wage  Rates  and  EFyiciEN-cy    ......      547

§  1.  Where  workpeople  are  highly  inefficient  and,  therefore,  in
receipt  of  very  low  wages,  it  appears  prima  facie  probable  that  the
national  dividend  might  be  indirectly  advantaged  by  forcing  ap
wages  above  what  previous  considerations  suggest ;  because  higher
wages  might  improve  efficiency.  §  2.  Not  ranch  light  can  be  thrown
on  this  matter  by  statistical  comparisons.  §  3.  When  low  wages  are
due  to  exploitation,  the  forcing  up  of  wages  will  not  cause  the  work-
people affected  to  lose  their  jobs,  and  so  there  is  full  scope  for
reactions  on  efficiency.  §  4.  Apart  from  exploitation,  the  prospect
of  these  reactions  is  more  favourable  in  occupations  where  the
demand  for  labour  is  inelastic.  §  5.  Where  interference  is  warranted
by  this  class  of  consideration,  it  is  essentially  a  temporary  interference.


CHAPTER    XVII

A  National  MiNnfCM  Time-wage         .....      553

§  1.  In  this  chapter  we  have  to  consider  the  effects  of  establishing
by  law  a  national  minimnm  time-wage.  §  2.  This,  being  of  general
application  throughout  the  country,  could  not  be  evaded  by  any
redistribution  of  workpeople  of  different  qualities  among  occupations.
§  3.  It  would,  incidentally,  prevent  a  certain  amount  of  exploitation,
and  would  so  far  do  good.  §  4.  But  its  main  consequence  would  be
to  drive  a  number  of  inefficient  workpeople  out  of  private  industry
altogether.  §  5.  If  the  State  took  no  further  action  in  regard  to
these  people,  the  dividend  woidd  be  certain  to  suffer ;  and,  even  if
it  undertook  to  organise  training  for  them,  the  driving  out  of  old
and  incapacitated  people  who  are  past  training  would  stiU  be  an  evil.


CHAPTER    XVIII

Fixed  and  FLUCTtrATiKG  Wage  Rates  .....      559

§  1.  It  remains  to  examine  the  comparative  effects  on  the  national
dividend  of  wage  rates  fixed  by  a  rigid  settlement  and  wage-rates
fluctuating  on  both  sides  of  a  standard  set  up  by  the  settlement  in
accordance  with  temporary  changes  of  circumstance.  §  2.  Wage
rates  fluctuating  (or  plastic)  in  response  to  temporary  changes  of
demand  can  be  shown  to  be  directly  more  advantageous  to  the
national  dividend  than  fixed  wage  rates.  §  3.  And  the  result  of  a
comparison  of  the  direct  effects  is  rarely  upset  when  the  indirect
effects  also  are  taken  into  account.  §  4.  A  like  conclusion  holds
good  of  wage  rates  fluctuating  in  accordance  with  temporary  changes
of  supply.  §  5.  But  for  practical  reasons  wage  changes  cannot  be
operated  at  intervals  of  less  thanltwo  or  three  months.  §§  6-7.  When
the  demand  schedule  for  labour  in  any  occupation  fluctuates  in  a
given  manner,  the  wage  fluctuation  appropriate  to  that  fluctuation
is  smaller  the  more  elastic  is  the  supply  of  labour  in  the  occupation.


xxvi  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE

PACK

The  practical  implications  of  this  proposition  are  drawn  out.  §  8.
When  the  supply  schedule  for  labour  in  any  occupation  fluctuates  in  .
a  given  manner,  the  wage  fluctuation  appropriate  to  that  fluctuation
is  smaller  the  more  elastic  is  the  demand  for  labour  in  the  occupa-
tion. The  practical  implications  of  this  proposition  are  drawn  out.
§  9.  Other  things  being  equal  (1)  the  more  elastic  the  demand  for
labour  in  any  industry,  the  larger  is  the  wage  fluctuation  appropriate
to  any  given  fluctuation  of  demand,  and  (2)  the  more  elastic  the
supply  of  labour,  the  larger  is  the  wage  fluctuation  appropriate  to
any  given  fluctuation  of  supply.  §§  10-14.  When  the  elasticities
of  the  demand  and  supply  of  labour  in  any  occupation  are  given,
the  wage  fluctuation  appropriate  to  any  given  fluctuation  of  the
demand  schedule  is  larger,  the  larger  is  the  fluctuation  of  that
schedule.  The  practical  implications  of  this  proposition  are  drawn
out ;  and  the  consequences  of  the  practice  of  making  for  stock  are
indicated.  §  15.  When  the  elasticities  of  the  demand  and  supply
of  labour  in  any  occupation  are  given,  the  wage  fluctuation  appro-
priate to  any  given  oscillation  of  the  supply-schedule  is  larger,  the
larger  is  the  oscillation  of  that  schedule.  §  16.  Automatic  machinery
for  making  adjustments  to  fluctuations  in  the  demand  for  labour  is
provided  by  sliding  scales.  §§  17-24.  A  detailed  study  is  made  of
the  various  forms  which  these  may  assume  and  of  the  problems
connected  with  them.  §  25.  When  relations  between  the  parties
are  sufficiently  good,  better  results  may  be  obtained  by  arrangements
under  which  joint-committees  adjust  wages  at  two-  or  three-monthly
intervals,  not  merely  in  accordance  with  a  mechanical  index,  but
also  with  a  view  to  other  factors  of  which  this  may  fail  to  take
account.


J  PART    IV

THE    NATIONAL   DIVIDEND   AND    GOVERNMENT   FINANCE

CHAPTEE   I

Inteoduotokt        ........      589

§  1.  The  first  nine  chapters  of  this  Part  are  concerned  with  the
levying  of  taxes  for  ordinary  expenditure.  §§  2-4.  They  aim  at
comparing  different  ways  of  raising  money  with  one  another,  not
with  balancing  the  effects  of  collecting  revenue  and  of  spending  it.

f  CHAPTER    II

The  Effects  of  the  Fact  of  Taxation  .  .  .  .      593

§§  1-2.  The  fact  of  taxation,  since  it  makes  people  poorer,  stimulates
them  to  work  a  little  harder  in  order  to  sustain  their  standard  of  life.
§§  3-5.  On  the  other  hand,  it  causes  some  people,  particularly  rich
people,  to  withdraw  the  resources  required  by  the  tax-gatherer  from
what  would  have  been  productive  capital.  §  6.  For  any  given  cla.s3
of  taxpayer,  very  large  taxes  are  likely  to  trench  on  capital  in  a


CONTENTS  xxvii

.     PACE

greater  proportion  than  moderate  taxes.  §  7.  This  applies  to  death
duties.  §  8.  The  effects  of  the  fact  of  taxation  discussed  in  this
chapter  are  associated  with  effects  of  the  expectation  of  it,  which
will  be  discussed  in  the  following  chapters  with  reference  to  several
important  kinds  of  taxes.


CHAPTEE    III

Taxes  on  Windfalls       .......       600

§  1.  Taxes  on  windfalls  are  both  innocuous  to  the  national  dividend
and  also  unobjectionable  on  the  side  of  equity.  §  2.  Integral  and
partial  windfalls  are  distinguished.  §  3.  The  excess  profits  duty
during  the  war  was  an  attempt  at  windfall  taxation.  §  4.  Also
increment  duties  on  land  values.  §§  5-6.  There  is,  however,  a
distinction  between  real  and  apparent  increments.  §§  7-9.  And  even
of  real  increments  not  all  can  proj>erly  be  regarded  as  windfalls.
§  10.  When  allowance  is  made  for  these  considerations,  it  becomes
apparent  that  increment  duties,  as  instruments  for  hitting  windfalls,
are  not  likely  to  yield  a  large  revenue.


CHAPTER    IV

Taxes  on  the  Public  Value  of  Laud.  ....      609

§§  1-2.  Examples  of  these  taxes  are  given,  and  the  way  in  which
"unimproved  value"  may  be  distinguished  from  "improvement
value  "  is  illustrated  from  New  Zealand  practice.  §  3.  The  nature
of  the  distinction  is  explained.  §  4.  Whether  assessed  on  annual  or
on  capitalised  unimproved  values,  these  taxes  are  innocuous  to  the
national  dividend.  §  5.  But  on  the  side  of  equity  they  are  inferior
to  taxes  on  windfalls,  and  resort  to  them  must  be  limited.


CHAPTER   V

Taxes  on  Particular  Consumable  Commodities        .  .  .      616

§  1.  An  equal  ad  valorem  tax  on  all  consumable  goods  would  be
equivalent  to  a  general  expenditure  tax.  §  2.  But  this  is  neither
practicable  nor  desirable.  §  3.  In  practice  taxes  upon  particular  com-
modities differentiate  between  rival  forms  of  consimiption.  §§  4-5.
The  effect  on  the  national  dividend  depends  on  the  conditions  of  pro-
duction of  the  taxed  articles  and  the  rates  of  tax  imposed.  §§  6-7.  A
nearly  similar  analysis  is  applicable  to  taxes  upon  particular  imports.


CHAPTER   VI

Income  Tax  ........       624

§  1.  This  chapter  considers  ctrtain  general  proMems  connected  with
income  tax.     §§  2-11.  First  the  policy  of  excluding  income  that  is


xxviii  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE

saved,  so  as  to  convert  the  income  tax  into  an  expenditure  tax,  is
examined  at  some  length.  §§  12-13.  Secondly,  the  policy  of
differentiating  between  "earned"  and  "unearned"  income.  §14.
Thirdly,  the  policy  of  family  allowances.  §§  15-16.  Lastly,  the
problem  of  graduation.


CHAPTER   VII

Peopbrty  Taxes  and  Death  Duties     .....       640

§  1.  Annual  property  taxes  are  compared  with  taxes  on  "  unearned  "
income.  §  2.  Also  ordinary  death  duties.  §  3.  Also  a  special  form
of  death  duties  extended  beyond  immediate  heirs.

CHAPTER   VIII

The  Comparative  Effects  on  the  National  Dividend  of  Taxes

AND  Loans       ........      645

§§  1-2.  The  sources  from  which  it  is  possible  for  real  funds  for
abnormal  expenditure  to  be  drawn  are  much  the  same  under  loans  as
under  taxes.  §  3,  But  they  may  in  fact  be  drawn  from  different
sources  under  the  two  methods,  with  different  effects  on  the  national
dividend.  §§  4-8.  This  matter  is  examined  in  detail,  and  it  is  found
that  the  reactions  of  the  fact  of  the  loan  method  are  likely  to  be
somewhat  more  injurious  to  the  national  dividend  of  the  future
than  the  reactions  of  the  fact  of  the  tax  method.  §  9.  The  excess
of  damage  under  the  loan  method  is  enhanced  by  the  effects  of  the
future  taxation  which  it  implies.  §§  10-12.  But  practical  issues  are
not  necessarily  settled  by  this  analysis.

CHAPTER    IX

DiSTKIBUTION   UNDER  TaXES   AND   LOANS  ....         654

§  1.  An  important  factor  in  the  choice  between  loans  and  taxes
for  financing  abnormal  expenditure  is  the  comparative  effect  on
distribution.  §§  2-4.  This  matter  is  discussed  as  regards  distribution
between  the  present  and  future  generations.  §§  5-12.  And,  more
elaborately,  as  regards  distribution  among  different  members  of  the
present  generation.  It  is  concluded  that,  when  the  abnormal
expenditure  is  required  to  finance  a  war,  distributional  considerations
suggest  that  a  large  part  should  be  raised  by  taxes.


CHAPTER   X

Finance  by  Bank  Credits         ......      665

§§  1-3.  The  method  of  financing  Government  needs  through  the
creation  of  bank  credits  is  described.  §§  4-5.  The  tendency  of  this
method  to  set  up  a  drain  on  the  reserve  of  the  Bank  of  England  is


CONTENTS  xxix

PACK

indicated.  §  6.  In  the  Great  War  this  tendency  had  to  be  met  by  the
creation  of  currency  notes.  §§  7-8.  The  British  Goyernment's  method
of  credit  creations  backed  by  note  creations  is  compared  with  the
method  of  resorting  directly  to  the  printing  press.  §  9.  War  finance
has  left  as  a  legacy  a  depreciation  of  sterling.  §  10.  The  problem
of  the  return  to  an  effective  gold  standard  is  considered.  §  11.  And
the  problem  of  settling  the  amount  of  the  fiduciary  issue  after  normal  •
conditions  have  been  restored.


CHAPTER    XI

War  Debt  and  a  Special  Levy.  .  ...      678

§§1-2.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  a  special  levy  so  arranged  as  to
wipe  out  a  substantial  part  of  the  British  war  debt  would,  by  lessening
the  need  for  taxation  on  new  efforts  and  savings,  help  the  national
dividend  of  the  future.  §  3.  The  objection  that  it  would  hit  those
who  have  saved  while  letting  off  others,  since  it  applies  also  to
income-tax,  is  without  force.  §§  4-5.  Ideally  the  special  levy  should
be  assessed  on  both  material  capital  and  brain  capital :  but  the  levy
on  material  capital  will  be  much  more  important  than  the  other.
§  6.  The  problem  of  valuing  material  capital  is  discussed.  §  7.  The
problem  of  collecting  the  levy.  §  8.  And  ceruin  questions  concern-
ing the  rates  of  levy.


./


PAET   V

THE   DISTRIBUTION    OF   THE    NATIONAL   DIVIDEND

CHAPTER   I

The  General  Problbm  of  Disharmony     ....   691

The  purpose  of  this  Part  is  to  inquire  whether  any  important  causes
can  be  distinguished  which  atfect  in  different  senses  the  volume  of
the  national  dividend  as  a  whole  and  the  volume  of  that  part  of  it
which  accrues  to  the  poor ;  and  to  study  the  practical  problems
which  the  existence  of  such  causes  suggests.

CHAPTER    II

Pareto's  Law         .  .  .  ...  .  .  .       693

§  1.  Certain  statistical  investigations  by  Professor  Pareto  seem,  at
first  sight,  to  show  that  the  magnitude  and  distribution  of  the
dividend  are  rigidly  bound  together,  in  such  wise  that  it  is  impossible
for  the  dividend  as  a  whole  and  the  real  income  of  the  poor  to  move
otherwise  than  in  the  same  direction.  §  2.  But  the  statistics  set
out  are  not  adequate  to  support  this  conclusion.  §§  3-5.  Nor  are  its
logical  foundations  sound.  §  6.  The  possible  openings  for  dis-
harmony must,  therefore,  be  studied  in  detail.


XXX  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


CHAPTER   III

PAOB

The  Sitpply  of  Capital  and  Labour    ,  .  .  .  ,701

§  1.  The  distribution  of  income  among  people  is  analytically  quite
distinct  from  the  distribution  among  factors  of  production  discussed
in  economic  text-books.  Nevertheless  no  great  error  is  introduced
/  if  we  identify  the  income  of  the  poorer  classes  with  the  receipts  from
/  wages  of  the  factor  labour.  §§  2-6.  In  an  elaborate  discussion  it  is
shown  that  a  cause  operating  to  increase  the  national  dividend  by
increasing  the  supply  of  capital  cannot,  in  present  conditions,  at  the
same  time  diminish  the  real  income  of  labour.  §  7.  A  cause  facilitat-
ing the  investment  of  capital  abroad  may  act  discordantly  from  the
standpoint  of  a  short  period,  though  hardly  from  that  of  a  long
period.  §  8.  On  the  basis  of  a  proof  that  the  demand  for  labour  in
general  in  any  one  country  is  likely  to  be  highly  elastic,  it  is  shown
that  a  cause  operating  to  increase  the  national  dividend  by  increasing
the  supply  of  labour  cannot  at  the  same  time  diminish  the  real
income  of  labour.  §  9.  A  complicating  side-issue  is  examined,
§  10.  And  some  practical  implications  of  the  results  attained  are
noticed.


CHAPTER    IV

Invrntions  and  Improvements  .  ,  .  ,  ,  .      716

§  1,  The  problem  of  this  chapter  is  to  determine  in  what,  if  any,
conditions,  an  invention  or  improvement,  which  increases  the
aggregate  dividend,  will  diminish  the  absolute  share  of  labour.  §  2.
This  problem  is  not  settled  by  determining  whether  an  invention
increases  or  decreases  employment  in  the  industry  in  which  it  is
made,  §  3,  Its  solution  turns  on  the  comparative  proportions  in
which  the  quantities  of  labour  and  capital  respectively  available  in
occupations  outside  the  one  to  which  the  invention  applies  are
affected,  §§  4-6.  An  analysis  on  this  basis  is  carried  out  in  detail,
§  7.  The  conclusion  is  reached  that  an  invention  that  benefits  the
national  dividend  may  at  the  same  time  lessen  the  real  income  of  the
poor ;  but  that  this  is  a  very  improbable  contingency.


CHAPTER    V

The  Manipulation  of  Wages    ......      725

§  1.  It  is  next  required  to  determine  in  what,  if  any,  conditions  tlie
forcing-up  of  the  wage  rate  of  a  group  of  workpeople  will  at  the
same  time  injure  the  national  dividend  and  increase  the  real  income
of  labour  as  a  whole,  §  2.  The  particular  workpeople  directly
concerned,  if  they  are  not  themselves  purchasers  of  the  commodity
they  produce,  will  be  benefited  if  the  demand  for  their  labour  has  an  /

elasticity  less  than  unity,  §  3.  The  influences  which  determine  this
elasticity  in  different  circumstances  are  examined.  §  4.  The  whole
body  of  workpeople,  if  they  are  not  purchasers  of  the  commodity,
will  be  benefited  if  the  demand  for  the  labour  of  the  particular


CONTENTS  xxxi

PAOK

workpeople  has  an  elasticity  less  than  unity.  §  5.  Since,  in  fact,
workpeople  are  themselves  purchasers  of  most  of  the  things  that
workpeople  make,  the  prospect  of  a  ,net  gain  is  not,  prima  fade,
very  bright.  §  6.  Moreover,  when  account  is  taken  of  the  cumulative
reactions  set  up  on  the  side  of  capital,  this  prospect,  and  with  it  the
possibility  of  disharmony  between  the  effect  on  the  dividend  and  the
effect  on  the  absolute  share  of  the  poor,  practically  disappears.  §  7.
This  conclusion  must,  however,  be  qualified,  in  so  far  as  the  State
undertakes  to  help  with  public  funds  persons  thrown  into  distress
through  unemployment.


CHAPTER    VI

Rationing  . —        ........      738

§  1.  Pritna  facie  the  policy  of  rationing  discussed  in  Chapter  X.  of
Part  II.  may  produce  disharmony.  It  has  to  be  asked  whether  in
fact  it  can  do  so.     §  2.  In  the  Great  War  rationing  benefited  dis-  /

tribution  without  damaging  production.  §§  3-5.  In  normal  times
rationing,  so  arranged  as  to  check  the  consumption  of  rich  people,
would,  if  applied  to  increasing  return  commodities,  lessen  both  the  "a^
aggregate  national  dividend  and  the  share  accruing  to  the  poor.  /'
§  6.  If  applied  within  suitable  limits  to  diminishing  return  com-
modities, it  would  increase  both  these  things  ;  whereas,  if  pressed
beyond  these  limits,  it  would  injure  tiie  dividend  while  benefiting
the  poor,  thus  involving  disharmony.  §  7.  The  possibility  of  net
social  advantage  from  rationing,  brought  out  in  the  course  of  this
chapter,  must  not  be  taken,  in  view  of  the  friction  and  administra-
tive difficulties  involved,  to  prove  that  it  is  on  the  whole  desirable.


CHAPTER    VII

Direct  Transfebences  from  the  Relatively  Rich  to  the  Rela-        - —
TiVELY  Poor    ........       743

§  1.  It  is  sometimes  argued  that  transferences  from  the  rich  to  the
poor  are  impossible  because  (1)  all  money  taken  from  the  rich  is
really  taken  from  the  poor,  or  (2)  the  beneficiaries  will  give  back
what  they  have  received  by  accepting  lower  wages.  §§  2-3.  Neither
of  these  arguments  is  valid.  §  4.  The  following  chapters  will
consider  in  turn  the  effect  of  (a)  the  expectation  of  transferences
from  the  rich,  (6)  the  expectation  of  transferences  to  the  poor,  and
(c)  the  fact  of  transferences.


CHAPTER    VIII

The  Effect  on  the  National  Dividend  of  the  Expectation  of

Transferences  from  the  Relatively  Rich         .  .  .       748

§  1.  The  expectation  of  voluntary  transferences  from  the  rich  tends
to  increase  the  contributions  they  make  to  the  upbuilding  of  the
national  dividend.     §§  2-3.  Special  opportunities  for  these  transfer-


xxxii  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE

ences  are  open  to  wealthy  employers  as  regards  their  workpeople,
and  to  wealthy  citizens  as  regards  their  fellow-townsmen.  §  4.  They
may  be  further  stimulated  by  a  judicious  use  of  honours  and
decorations.  §  5.  The  expectation  of  compulsory  transferences
through  taxation  tends  somewhat  to  check  the  contribution  which
rich  people  make  to  the  upbuilding  of  the  dividend.


CHAPTER   IX

The  Effect  on  the  National  Dividend  of  the  Expectation  of

Transferences  to  the  Poor  .....      752

§  1.  Transferences  may  be  distinguished  according  as  they  (1)
differentiate  against  idleness  and  thriftlessness,  (2)  are  neutral,  (3)
differentiate  in  favour  of  idleness  and  thriftlessness.  §  2,  Transfer-
ences that  differentiate  against  idleness  and  thriftlessness  are
illustrated  ;  the  expectation  of  them  tends  to  augment  the  dividend.
§  3.  Neutral  transferences  are  illustrated.  §§  4-6.  If  they  are  made
in  money  or  things  readily  convertible  into  money,  the  expecta-
tion of  them  tends  slightly  to  lessen  the  dividend  ;  but  if  they
are  made  in  things  that  poor  people  would  not  otherwise  have
bought  at  all,  they  need  not  do  this,  but  may  have  the  opposite
effect.  §  7.  The  expectation  of  transferences  which  differentiate  in
favour  of  idleness  and  thriftlessness  damages  the  dividend.  §  8.
Such  transferences  may  be  in  part,  but  only  in  part,  avoided  by
devices  like  universal  old-age  pensions.  §  9.  Their  injurious  con-
sequences are  small  when  they  differentiate  in  favour  of  a  failure  to
make  provision  by  insurance.  §  10.  But  they  are  large  when  they
differentiate  in  favour  of  idleness,  so  far  as  this  is  voluntary.  §  11.
In  some  circumstances,  therefore,  deterrent  conditions,  the  form  of
which  is  discussed,  have  to  be  coupled  with  relief.


CHAPTER   X

Bounties  on  Things  purchased  by  the  Poor  .  .  .      769

§§  1-2.  Three  forms  of  bounty  are  distinguished.  §  3.  They  all
involve  neutral  transferences.  §  4.  And  are  likely  in  general  to  be
somewhat  more  injurious  to  the  national  dividend  than  the  direct
neutral  transference  discussed  in  §§  3-6  of  the  preceding  chapter.


CHAPTER   XI

The  Effect  on  the  National  Dividend  of  the  Fact  of  Trans-
ferences from  the  Relatively  Rich  to  the  Poor       .  .      773

§  1.  A  transference  of  resources  from  the  rich  to  the  poor  means  a
substitution  of  commodities  consumable  by  the  poor  for  commodities
consumable  by  the  rich  and  for  machinery.     §  2.   It  is  bound  to


CONTENTS  xxxiii

PACK

benefit  the  national  dividend  if  the  rate  of  return  yielded  by  invest-
ment in  the  poor  is  larger  than  the  normal  rate  of  interest.  §  3.
Among  the  degenerate  and  the  old  there  is  little  chance  of  this.
§§  4-6.  But  transferences  in  the  form  of  training  or  of  care  in  sickness
to  normal  adult  workers  may  yield  a  large  return.  §  7.  And  well-
managed  transferences  in  the  form  of  education  and  nurture  to
children  a  very  large  return.  §  8.  Transferences  in  the  form  of
general  purchasing  power  are  less  likely  to  be  employed  eflFectively.
§  9.  Some  friendly  supervision  over  the  use  made  of  them  seems  to
be  desirable.


CHAPTER    XII

A  National  Mikimxtm  Staitdakd  of  Ekal  Income     .  787

§  1.  The  establishment  of  a  national  minimum  standard  of  real
income  may  affect  the  aggregate  dividend  disadvantageous! y  at  the
same  time  that  it  benefits  the  poor.  §  2.  The  nature  of  the  national
minimum  that  is  contemplated  is  described.  §3.  The  theoretical
considerations  relevant  to  the  level  at  which  it  should  be  placed
are  analysed.  §  4.  Practically  we  may  conclude  that  it  can  safely  be
set  higher  the  larger  is  the  real  income  per  head  of  the  community.
§§  5-6.  This  conclusion  is  developed  with  special  reference  to  the
United  Kingdom.  §§  7-8.  Its  relation  to  international  labour  legisla-
tion is  discussed.    §  9.  And  its  relation  to  the  problem  of  immigration.


PAET    VI

THE  VARIABILITY   OF  THE   NATIONAL  DIVIDEND

CHAPTER    I

The  Economic  Rhythm    .......      799

§  1.  The  volume  of  income-getting  power  and  also  the  extent  to
which  income-getting  power  is  actually  engaged  in  work  both  vary.
§§  2-3.  The  latter  variations  are  smaller  than  they  appear  to  be,  and
are  associated  with  less  than  equivalent  variations  in  production.
§  4.  Industries  making  instrumental  goods  fluctuate  most.  §  5.  The
demand  for  and  earnings  of  labour  also  fluctuate.  §  6.  These
fluctuations  are  more  or  less  rhythmical.

CHAPTER  II

A  False  Scent      ........       806

§§  1-2.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  cause  of  indostrial  fluctuations
resides  in  the  constructional  industries.


xxxiv  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE


CHAPTER   III

PAOB

The  Accumulation  and  Conveusion  of  Unused  Savings     .  .      809

§§  1-4.  The  view  that  industrial  fluctuations  are  explained  by  the
gradual  accumulation  and  subsequent  discharge  of  unused  savings  is
illustrated  by  reference  to  hypothetical  and  actual  conditions.  §  5.
Unused  savings  of  purchasing  power  and  of  things  must  be  dis-
tinguished. §§  6-7.  Apart  from  foreign  trade  relations,  unused  sav-
ing of  things  do  not  accumulate  in  depressions.  §  8.  Even  if  they
did,  this  fact  would  not  "explain"  tlie  rhythmical  fluctuations
which  history  displays.


CHAPTER  IV

Harvest  Variations        .......      Slfi

§§  1-5.  The  sort  of  efi"ect  which  harvest  variations  might  be  expected
to  produce  in  industry  depends  on  the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for
agricultural  products.  §  6.  The  magnitude  of  the  eff'ect  dejjends
also  upon  four  other  factors.  §  7.  The  elasticity  of  demand  for  non-
agricultural  products.  §  8.  The  proportion  between  the  community's
normal  expenditure  upon  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  products.
§  9.  The  extent  of  harvest  variations.  §  10.  The  extent  to  which
crops  can  be  stored.  §  11.  Harvest  variations,  if  operating  by  them-
selves, would  bring  about  some  measure  of  rhythmical  industrial
fluctuation.


CHAPTER   V

Inventions  ........      827

§§  1-3.  Inventions  involve  expansions  of  industrial  activity  when
they  are  first  introduced.  §  4.  After  the  constructional  works  they
have  stimulated  are  finished  there  is  a  period  of  comparative
quiescence.  §  5.  This  tends  to  be  followed  by  a  secondary  period
of  activity  when  the  instruments  made  in  the  original  boom  become
worn  out  and  have  to  bo  replaced.


CHAPTER   VI

The  Psychological  Tendencies  of  the  Business  Community         .      831

§  1.  Business  men  oscillate  between  errors  of  optimism  and  pessim-
ism. §  2.  The  optimistic  (or  pessimistic)  error  of  one  partially,
but  only  partially,  "justifies  "  similar  errors  in  others.  §  3.  Errors
are  stimulated  by  the  "  prospectiveness "  of  industry.  §4.  The
interlocking  of  different  industries.  §  5.  And  the  failure  to  realise
the  eff'ect  of  the  future  of  what  one  is  oneself  doing  now.  §  6.  Or  of
what  other  people  are  doing.  §  7.  Or  of  the  probable  reactions  of
these  things  on  the  prices  of  labour  and  materials.    §§  8-9.  The  bear-


CONTENTS  XXXV

PAGE

ing  of  these  considerations  on  the  "  trustification  "  of  industry  is  dis-
cussed. §§  10-11.  Errors  of  optimism,  once  generated,  tend  to  grow
and  spread  until  the  discovery  that  supply  has  outrun  demand
destroys  them.  §§  12-13.  Then  there  comes  an  error  of  excessive
pessimism  until  discovery  of  the  real  position  undermines  it,  and  the
cycle  begins  again.


CHAPTER   VII

A  Synthetic  View  .......      845

§§  1-4.  The  several  causes  of  industrial  fluctuations  distinguished
in  the  preceding  chapters  are  brought  together  and  the  comparative
parts  played  by  them  evaluated.


CHAPTER    VIII

ACCEXTFATION   OF   "WaV.E   MOVEMENTS   DVE   TO   THE  "WOKKINO   OF    THE

MoNETAKY  System     .......       849

§  1.  The  fact  that  business  is  conducted  in  terms  of  money,  varia-
tions in  the  purchasing  power  of  which  are  imperfectly  foreseen,
modifies  the  form  of  industrial  fluctuations.  §§  2-3.  Rising  prices  are
associated  with  upward,  and  falling  prices  with  downward  movements
of  business  confidence.  §  3.  And  the  changes  in  prices  are  not  fully
allowed  for  in  interest  and  wages  rates.  §§  4-5.  Consequently,  busi-
ness men  are  made  more  prosperous  and  more  optimistic  in  good
times,  and  less  prosperous  and  more  pessimistic  in  bad  times  than
they  would  be  if  general  prices  varied  less.  §§  6-7.  The  English  pre-
war currency  system  checked  price  fluctuation  to  some  extent.
§§  8-14.  Professor  Fisher's  plan  for  checking  them  more  thoroughly
is  examined.


CHAPTER   IX

Wave  Movements  and  the  Handling^  of  Financial  Crises  .       865

§  1.  The  amplitude  of  industrial  fluctuations  is  made  less  by  any-
thing that  lessens  the  volume  of  business  failures  at  the  turn  of  the
tide.  §  2.  This  volume  partly  depends  on  the  way  in  which  in-
dustry is  financed.  §  3.  But  mainly  on  the  policy  of  bankers  in  the
face  of  crisis  demands.  §§  4-8.  This  is  discussed  in  relation  to  gold
reserves  and  the  regulation  of  not«  issues.


CHAPTER  X

Special    Causes   affecting    the  ;Real   Income   of   the   Manual

Labouring  Classes    .  .  .  .  .876


xxrvi  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


CHAPTER   XI

PACK

Philanthropic  and  State  Action  designed  to  lessen  the  Varia-
bility OF  Industrial  Activity  and  the  Demand  for  Labour      878

§  1.  Philanthropists  and  public  authorities  sometimes  try  to  stabi-
lise the  real  income  of  workpeople  by  transferring  a  part  of  their
demand  for  labour  from  times  of  boom  to  times  of  depression.  §  2.
The  popular  idea  that  this  is  not  possible  is  incorrect.  §  3.  Four  /
forms  of  it  are  distinguished.  §  4.  Particular  employers  try  to  keep
their  investments  in  labour  stable.  §  5.  Particular  consumers  dove-
tail the  intermittent  part  of  their  demands  into  the  interstices  of
general  demand.  §  6.  Particular  consumers  stabilise  their  own  de-
mands. §  7.  Particular  consumers  make  their  own  demands  fluctu-
ate so  as  to  compensate  fluctuations  in  general  demand.


CHAPTER   XII

The  Relation  between  Variations  in  the  Real  Income  of
Labour  as  a  whole  and  Variations  in  the  Consumption  of
THE  Representative  Working  Man  ....

§§  1-3.  The  first  three  of  the  policies  described  in  the  preceding
chapter  make  both  the  aggregate  earnings  of  labour  and  the  earnings
of  the  representative  working  man  less  variable  ;  but  the  last  may,  in
some  conditions,  make  these  latter  earnings  more  variable.


CHAPTER    XIII

Insurance  .........      893

§  1.  With  given  variability  of  the  representative  workman's  income
his  consumption  can  be  made  less  variable  by  insurance.  §  2.  Safe-
guards are  required  to  ensure  that  the  events  insured  against  shall
not  be  simulated  or  deliberately  brought  about.  §  3.  If  the  system
is  to  be  voluntary,  premiums  must  be  adjusted,  within  fairly  wide
limits,  to  the  risks  of  the  various  classes  of  members.  §  4.  In
fact,  insurance  is  likely  to  be  carried  less  far  by  private  eS'ort  than  /

is  socially  desirable.  §  5.  It  can  be  stimulated  either  by  bounties  or
by  compulsion.  §  6.  The  advantages  of  these  rival  methods  are
compared.  §  7.  In  certain  sorts  of  insurance  there  is  a  strong  case
for  having  the  costs  provided  out  of  general  taxation  rather  than  out
of  premiums.


APPENDICES

I.  Uncertainty-bearing  as  a  Factor  of  Production
II.  The  Measurement  of  Elasticities  of  Demand
III.  A   Diagrammatic    Analysis  of    certain    Problems   of    Com

PETITION   AND   MONOPOLY     .....

INDEX


915
925

931
955


PAET  I
WELFARE  AND  THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND


CHAPTER   I

WELFARE    AND    ECONOMIC    WELFARE

§  1.  When  a  man  sets  out  upon  any  course  of  inquiry,  the
object  of  his  search  may  be  either  light  or  fruit — either  know-
ledge for  its  own  sake,  or  knowledge  for  the  sake  of  good  things
to  which  it  leads.  In  various  fields  of  study  these  two  ideals
play  parts  of  varying  importance.  In  the  appeal  made  to  our
interest  by  nearly  all  the  great  modern  sciences  some  stress  is
laid  both  upon  the  light-bearing  and  upon  the  fruit-bearing
quality,  but  the  proportions  of  the  blend  are  different  in
different  sciences.  At  one  end  of  the  scale  stands  the
most  general  science  of  all,  metaphysics,  the  science  of
reality.  Of  the  student  of  that  science  it  is,  indeed,  true
that  "  he  yet  may  bring  some  worthy  thing  for  waiting  souls
to  see " ;  but  it  must  be  light  alone,  it  can  hardly  be  fruit
that  he  brings.  Most  nearly  akin  to  the  metaphysician  is  the
student  of  the  ultimate  problems  of  physics.  The  corpuscular
theory  of  matter  is,  hitherto,  a  bearer  of  light  alone.  Here,
however,  the  other  aspect  is  present  in  promise  ;  for  speculations
about  the  structure  of  the  atom  may  lead  one  day  to  the
discovery  of  practical  means  for  dissociating  matter  and
for  rendering  available  to  human  use  the  overwhelming
resources  of  intra-atomic  energy.  In  the  science  of  biology
the  fruit-bearing  aspect  is  more  prominent.  Eecent  studies
upon  heredity  have,  indeed,  the  highest  theoretical  interest ;
but  no  one  can  reflect  upon  that  without  at  the  same  time
reflecting  upon  the  striking  practical  results  to  which  they
have  already  led  in  the  culture  of  wheat,  and  upon  the
far-reaching,   if  hesitating,  promise   that   they  are  beginning

3


4  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

to  offer  for  the  better  culture  of  mankind.  In  the  sciences
whose  subject-matter  is  man  as  an  individual  there  is  the
same  variation  of  blending  as  in  the  natural  sciences  proper.
In  psychology  the  theoretic  interest  is  dominant — particularly
on  that  side  of  it  which  gives  data  to  metaphysics ;  but
psychology  is  also  valued  in  some  measure  as  a  basis  for
the  practical  art  of  education.  In  human  physiology,  on  the
other  hand,  the  theoretic  interest,  though  present,  is  sub-
ordinate, and  the  science  has  long  been  valued  mainly  as
a  basis  for  the  art  of  medicine.  Last  of  all  we  come  to  those
sciences  that  deal,  not  with  individual  men,  but  with  groups
of  men  ;  that  body  of  infant  sciences  which  some  writers
call  sociology.  Light  on  the  laws  that  lie  behind  develop-
ment in  history,  even  light  upon  particular  facts,  has,  in
the  opinion  of  many,  high  value  for  its  own  sake.  But
there  will,  I  think,  be  general  agreement  that  in  the  sciences
of  human  society,  be  their  appeal  as  bearers  of  light  never
so  high,  it  is  the  promise  of  fruit  and  not  of  light  that
chiefly  merits  our  regard.  There  is  a  celebrated,  if  somewhat
too  strenuous,  passage  in  Macaulay's  Essay  on  History :  "  No
past  event  has  any  intrinsic  importance.  The  knowledge
of  it  is  valuable,  only  as  it  leads  us  to  form  just  calculations
with  regard  to  the  future,  A  history  which  does  not  serve
this  purpose,  though  it  may  be  filled  with  battles,  treaties
and  commotions,  is  as  useless  as  the  series  of  turnpike
tickets  collected  by  Sir  Matthew  Mite."  That  paradox  is
partly  true.  If  it  were  not  for  the  hope  that  a  scientific
study  of  men's  social  actions  may  lead,  not  necessarily
directly  or  immediately,  but  at  some  time  and  in  some
way,  to  practical  results  in  social  improvement,  not  a
few  students  of  these  actions  would  regard  the  time  devoted
to    their    study    as    time    misspent.       That    is    true    of   all

(social  sciences,  but  especially  true  of  Economics.  For
Economics  "  is  a  study  of  mankind  in  the  ordinary  business
of  life " ;  and  it  is  not  in  the  ordinary  business  of  life  that
mankind  is  most  interesting  or  inspiring.  One  who  desired
knowledge  of  man  apart  from  the  fruits  of  knowledge,  would
seek  it  in  the  history  of  religious  enthusiasm,  of  martyrdom,
or  of  love  ;  he  would  not  seek  it  in  the  market-place.     When


cH.i        WELFAEE  AND  ECONOMIC  WELFAEE  5

we  elect  to  watch  the  play  of  human  motives  that  are
ordinary — that  are  sometimes  mean  and  dismal  and  ignoble
— our  impulse  is  not  the  philosopher's  impulse,  knowledge
for  the  sake  of  knowledge,  but  rather  the  physiologist's,
knowledge  for  the  healing  that  knowledge  may  help  to
bring.  Wonder,  Carlyle  declared,  is  the  beginning  of  philo-
sophy. It  is  not  wonder,  but  rather  the  social  enthusiasm
which  revolts  from  the  sordidness  of  mean  streets  and  the
joylessness  of  withered  lives,  that  is  the  beginning  of  economic
science.  Here,  if  in  no  other  field,  Comte's  great  phrase
holds  good :  "  It  is  for  the  heart  to  suggest  our  problems ;
it  is  for  the  intellect  to  solve  them.  .  .  ,  The  only  position
for  which  the  intellect  is  primarily  adapted  is  to  be  the  serv^ant
of  the  social  sympathies."

§  2,  If  this  conception  of  the  motive  behind  economic
study  is  accepted,  it  follows  that  the  type  of  science  thati
the  economist  will  endeavour  to  develop  must  be  one  adapted  I
to  form  the  basis  of  an  art.  It  will  not,  indeed,  itself  be'
an  art,  or  directly  enunciate  precepts  of  government.  It  is
a  positive  science  of  what  is  andjends  to  be,  not  a  normative
science  of  what  ought  to  be.  Nor  will  it  limit  itself  to )
those  fields  of  positive  scientific  inquiry  which  have  an  obvious
relevance  to  immediate  practical  problems.  For  this  course
would  hamper  thorough  investigation,  and  shut  out  inquiries
that  might  ultimately  bear  fruit.  For,  as  has  been  well  said,
"in  our  most  theoretical  moods  we  may  be  nearest  to  our
most  practical  applications."  ^  But,  though  wholly  independent
in  its  tactics  and  its  strategy,  it  will  be  guided  in  general
direction  by  practical  interest.  This  decides  its  choice  of
essential  form.  For  there  are  two  main  types  of  positive
science.  On  the  one  side  are  the  sciences  of  Formal  Logic
and  Pure  Mathematics,  whose  function  it  is  to  discover
implications.  On  the  other  side  are  the  realistic  sciences,
such  as  physics,  chemistry,  and  biology,  which  are  con-
cerned with  actualities.  The  distinction  is  drawn  out  in
Mr.  Eussell's  Principles  of  Mathematics.  "  Since  the  growth
of  non- Euclidean  Geometry,  it  has  appeared  that  pure
mathematics  has  no  concern  with  the  question  whether  the

1  WMtehead,  Introduetioa  to  Mathemaiies,  p.  100.


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


PT.  I


axioms  and  propositions  of  Euclid  hold  of  actual  space  or
not :  this  is  a  question  for  realistic  mathematics,  to  be
decided,  so  far  as  any  decision  is  possible,  by  experiment
and  observation.  What  pure  mathematics  asserts  is  merely
that  the  Euclidean  propositions  follow  from  the  Euclidean
axioms,  i.e.  it  asserts  an  implication :  any  space  which
has  such  and  such  properties  has  also  such  and  such  other
properties.  Thus,  as  dealt  with  in  pure  mathematics,  the
Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean  Geometries  are  equally  true :
in  each  nothing  is  affirmed  except  implications.  All  pro-
positions as  to  what  actually  exists,  like  the  space  we  live  in,
belong  to  experimental  or  empirical  science,  not  to  mathe-
matics." ^  This  distinction  is  applicable  to  the  field  of
economic  investigation.  It  is  open  to  us  to  construct  an
iconomic  Science  either  of  the  pure  type  represented  by  pure
athematics  or  of  the  realistic  type  represented  by  experimental
hysics.  Pure  economics  in  this  sense — an  unaccustomed  sense,
no  doubt — would  study  equilibria  and  disturbances  of  equilibria
among  groups  of  persons  actuated  by  any  set  of  motives  x.
Under  it,  among  innumerable  other  subdivisions,  would  be
included,  at  once  an  Adam-Smithian  Political  Economy,  in
which  X  is  given  the  value  of  the  motives  assigned  to  the
economic  man — or  to  the  normal  man — and  a  non-Adam-
Smithian  Political  Economy,  corresponding  to  the  geometry
of  Lobatschewsky,  under  which  x  consists  of  love  of  work
and  hatred  of  earnings.  For  Pure  Economics  both  these
Political  Economies  would  be  equally  true ;  it  would  not
be  relevant  to  inquire  what  the  value  of  x  is  among  the
actual  men  who  are  living  in  the  world  now.  Contrasted  with
;this  pure  science  stands  Eealistic  Economics,  the  interest
of  which  is  concentrated  upon  the  world  known  in  experience,
and  in  no  wise  extends  to  the  commercial  doings  of  a
community  of  angels.  Now,  if  our  end  is  practice,  it  is
obvious  that  a  Political  Economy  that  did  so  extend  would
be  for  us   merely  an  amusing  toy.     Hence,  it  must  be  the

I I  realistic,  and  not  the  pure,  type  of  science  that  constitutes  the

»  object  of  our  search.     We  shall  endeavour  to  elucidate,  not  any

1  Principles  of  Mathematics,   p.   6.     I  have  substituted  realistic  for  Mr.
Russell's  word  applied  in  this  passage.


/


\.


CH.  I       WELTAEE  AXD  ECONOMIC  WELFAEE  7

generalised   system  of  possible  worlds,  but  the   actual  world/  i^
of  men  and  women  as  they  are  found  in  experience  to  be.         /
§  3.  But,  if  it  is  plain  that  a  science  of  the  pure  type  will
not  serve  our  purpose,  it  is  equally  plain  that  Eealism,  in  the
sense  of  a  mere  descriptive  catalogue  of  observed  facts,  will
not  serve  it  either.      Intinite   narration  by  itself  can  never
enable  forecasts  to  be  made,  and  it  is,  of  course,  capacity  to
make  forecasts  that  practice  requires.      Before  this  capacity
can  be  obtained,  facts  must  be  passed  upon  by  reason.     Besides
the  brute  facts,  there  must  be  what  Browning  calls,  "  something
of  mine  which,  mixed  up  with  the  mass,  made  it  bear  hammer
and  be  firm  to  file."     It  is  just  the  presence  of  this  something
which  is  essential  to  a  realistic  science  as  distinguished  from
mere  description.      In  realistic  science  facts  are  not  simply/   /
brought  together ;  they  are  compelled  by  thought  to  speak.    Ad
M.  Poincare  well  writes :  "  Science  is  built  up  of  facts  as  a
house  is  built  of  stones ;  but  an  accumulation  of  facts  is  no
more  a  science  than  a  heap  of  stones  is  a  house."  ^     Astrono-
mical physics  is  not  merely  a  catalogue  of  the  positions  which
certain  stars  have  been  observed  to  occupy  on  various  occasions.
Biology  is  not  merely  a  list  of  the  results  of  a  number  of
experiments    in    breeding.       Bather,    every    science,    through/
examination   and    cross-examination    of   the    particular    facts  \     /
which   it   is  able   to  ascertain,  seeks  to  discover  the  general  I
laws  of  whose  operation  these  particular  facts  are  instances.  I
The  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  are  exhibited  in  the  light
of  the  laws  of  Newton ;  the  breeding  of  the  blue  Andalusian
fowl  in  the  light  of  that  of  Mendel.     These  laws,  furthermore,
are  not  merely  summaries  of  the  observed  facts  re-stated  in  a
shorthand  form.     They  are  generalisations,  and,  as  such,  extend
our  knowledge  to  facts  that  have  not  been  observed,  may  be,
that  have  not  as  yet  even  occurred.     On  what  philosophical
basis  generalisations  of  this  sort  rest  we  are  not  here  concerned
to  inquire.      It  is  enough  that  in  every  realistic  science  they
are  made.     As  Mr.  Whetham,  speaking  of  physics,  puts  it,  any
such  science  "  seeks  to  establish  general  rules  which  describe  Wj  —
the   sequence  of  phenomena   in  all  cases." '      It   is  only  by  i

^  Seienee  and  Hypothesis,  p.  141.
^  Beeent  Developments  in  Physical  Science,  p.  30.     The  italics  are  mine.


8  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

I  reference  to  these  general  rules  that  the  forecasts,  which
jl  practice  needs,  are  rendered  possible.  It  is  in  their  funda-
mental aspect  as  an  organon  of  laws,  and  not  in  their  super-
ficial aspect  as  a  description  of  facts,  that  the  realistic  sciences
have  bearing  upon  the  conduct  of  affairs.  The  establishment
of  such  an  organon  adapted  and  ready  for  application  to
particular  problems  is  the  ideal  at  which  thej  aim.

§  4,  To  say  this  without  saying  something  more  would,
however,  be  very  misleading.  It  is  not  pretended  that,  at
the  present  stage  of  its  development,  economic  science  is  able
to  provide  an  organon  even  remotely  approaching  to  what  it
imagines  for  itself  as  its  ideal.  Full  guidance  for  practice
requires,  to  borrow  Dr.  Marshall's  phrase,  capacity  to  carry  out
quantitative,  not  merely  qualitative,  analysis.  "  Qualitative
analysis  tells  the  ironmaster  that  there  is  soTne  sulphur  in  his
ore,  but  it  does  not  enable  him  to  decide  whether  it  is  worth
while  to  smelt  the  ore  at  all,  and,  if  it  is,  then  by  what  process.
For  that  purpose  he  needs  quantitative  analysis,  which  will
tell  him  how  much  sulphur  there  is  in  the  ore."  ^  Capacity  to
provide  information  of  this  kind  Economic  Science  at  present
almost  entirely  lacks.  Before  the  application  of  general  laws
to  particular  problems  can  yield  quantitative  results,  these
laws  themselves  must  be  susceptible  of  quantitative  statement.
The  law  is  the  major  premiss  and  the  particular  facts  of  any
problem  the  minor.  When  the  statement  of  the  law  lacks
precision,  the  conclusion  must  generally  suffer  from  the  same
defect.  And,  unfortunately,  the  task  of  setting  out  economic
laws  in  precise  form  has  scarcely  been  begun.  For  this  there  are
three  reasons.  First,  the  relations  which  have  to  be  determined
are  extremely  numerous.  In  physics  the  fundamental  thing,  the
gravitation  constant,  expressing  the  relation  between  distance
and  attractive  force,  is  the  same  for  all  sorts  of  matter.  But  the
fundamental  things  in  the  economic  world — the  schedules
expressing  the  desires  or  aversions  of  groups  of  people  for
different  sorts  of  commodities  and  services — are  not  thus
simple  and  uniform.  We  are  in  the  position  in  which  the
physicist  would  be  if  tin  attracted  iron  in  the  inverse  ratio  of
the  cube  of  its  distance,  lead  in  that  of  the  square  of  its
1  Marshall,  The  Old  Oeneration  of  Economists  and  the  New,  p.  11.


CH.  I


WELFAEE  AJ^D  ECONOMIC  WELFARE


distance,  and   copper  in  some  other  ratio.     We  cannot  say,
as   he   can   of   his   attractions,    that    the    amount    offered    or
required   of  every   several   commodity   is  one   and  the   same
specified    function    of   the    prica     All    that  we    can   say  in
this  general  way  is  that  it  is  some  one  of  a.  specified  large
family  of  functions  of  the  price.     Hence,  in  Economics  there  j
is   not,   as    in    Dynamics,   one    fundamental    law   of    general  I     y
application,  but  a  great  number  of  laws,  all  expressible,  as  it  1
were,  in  equations  of  similar  form  but  with  different  constants,  f
On  account   of  this  multiplicity,  the  determination  of  those ^
constants,  or  to  put  the  matter  broadly,  the  measurement  of|
the   elasticities   of  demand   and  supply  of  the  various  com-j
modities  in  which  economics  is  interested,  is  a  very  large  task.
Secondly,  this  task  is  one  in  attacking  which  the  principal!    ^
weapon  employed  by  other  sciences  in  their  inquiries  cannot  |
be  fully  used.       "  Theory,"  said  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  "  is  the
general ;  experiments  are  the  soldiers."     Economic  science  has
already  well-trained  generals,  but,  because  of  the  nature  of  the
material  in  which  it  works,  the  soldiers  are  hard  to  obtain.
"  The  surgeon  dissects  a  dead  body  before  he  operates  on  a
living  one,  and  operates  upon  an  animal  before  he  operates  upon
a  human  being;   the  mechanic  makes  a  working  model  and
tests  it  before  he  builds  the  full-sized  machine.     Every  step
is,  whenever  possible,  tested  by  experiment  in  these  matters
before  risks  are  run.      In  this  way  the  unknown  is  robbed  of
most  of  its  terrors."  ^     In  economics,  for  the  simple  reason  that  I     /
its  subject  matter  is  living  and  free  men,  direct  experiment  under  |
conditions  adequately  controlled  is  hardly  ever  feasible.      But
there  is  a  third  and  even  more  serious  difficulty.    Even  if  the  con-
stants which  economists  wish  to  determine  were  less  numerous,
and  the  method  of  experiment  more  accessible,  we  should  still  be
faced  with  the  fact  that  the  constants  themselves  are  different
at  different  times.     The  gravitation  constant  is  the  same  always.
But  the  economic  constants — these  elasticities  of  demand  and
supply — depending,   as   they  do,  upon   human  consciousness,
are  liable  to  vary.      The  constitution  of  the  molecule,  as  it
were,  and  not  merely  its  position,  changes  under  the  influence
of  environment.      Thus  the  real  injury  done  to  Ireland  by
*  Cecil,  Ckmseroatism,  p.  18.


/


10  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

the  earlier  English  administration  of  that  country  was  not  the
destruction  of  specific  industries  or  even  the  sweeping  of  its
commerce  from  the  seas.  "  The  real  grievance  lies  in  the  fact
that  something  had  been  taken  from  our  industrial  character
which  could  not  be  remedied  by  the  mere  removal  of  the
restrictions.  Not  only  had  the  tree  been  stripped,  but  the
roots  had  been  destroyed."  ^  This  malleability  in  the  actual
substance  with  which  economic  study  deals  means  that  the
goal  sought  is  itself  perpetually  shifting,  so  that,  even  if  it
were  possible  by  experiment  exactly  to  determine  the  values  of
the  economic  constants  to-day,  we  could  not  say  with  confidence
that  this  determination  would  hold  good  also  of  to-morrow.
Hence  the  inevitable  shortcomings  of  our  science.  We  can,
indeed,  by  a  careful  study  of  all  relevant  facts,  learn  something
about  the  elasticities  of  demand  and  supply  for  a  good  number
of  things,  but  we  cannot  ascertain  their  magnitude  with  any
degree  of  exactness.  In  other  words,  our  fundamental  laws,
and  therefore  inferences  from  these  laws  in  particular  conditions,
cannot  at  present  be  thrown  into  any  quantitatively  precise
form.  The  result  is  that,  when,  as  often  happens,  a  practical
issue  turns  upon  the  balancing  of  opposing  considerations,  even
though  these  considerations  are  wholly  economic,  Economic
Science  must  almost  always  speak  with  an  uncertain  voice.

§  5.  The  preceding  paragraph  has  been  somewhat  of  a
digression.  It  has  now  to  be  added  that,  just  as  the
motive  and  purpose  of  our  inquiry  govern  its  form,  so
also  they  control  its  scope.  The  goal  sought  is  to  make
more  easy  practical  measures  to  promote  welfare — practical
measures  which  statesmen  may  build  upon  the  work  of  the
economist,  just  as  Marconi,  the  inventor,  built  upon  the
discoveries  of  Hertz.  Welfare,  however,  is  a  thing  of  very
wide  range.  There  is  no  need  here  to  enter  upon  a  general
discussion  of  its  content.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  lay  down
more  or  less  dogmatically  two  propositions ;  first,  that  welfare
includes  states  of  consciousness  only,  and  not  material  things ;
secondly,  that  welfare  can  be  brought  under  the  category  of
greater  and  less.  A  general  investigation  of  all  the  various
groups  of  causes  by  which  welfare  thus  conceived  may  be
*  Plunkett,  Ireland  in  the  New  Century,  p.  19.


cH.  I       WELFAEE  AJSTD  ECONOMIC  WELFAEE         11

affected  would  constitute  a  task  so  enormous  and  complicated
as  to  be  quite   impracticable.     It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to
limit   our   subject-matter.     In   doing   this   we   are   naturally
attracted   towards   that    portion   of   the    field    in   which   the
methods  of  science  seem   likely  to  work  at  best  advantage.
This  they  can  clearly  do  when  there   is   present   something
measurable  on  which  analytical  machineiy  can  get  a  firm  grip.
The  one  obvious  instrument  of  measurement  available  in  social  f
ETe  Ts   money.     Hence,   the   range   of   our   inquiry   becomeaif
restricted  to  that  part  of  social  weKare  that  can  be  brought^
directly  or  indirectly  into  relation  with  the  measuring-rod  of  i
money.     This  part  of  welfare  may  be  called  economic  welfare.  I
It  is  not,  indeed,  possible  to  separate  it  in  any  rigid  way  from
other  parts,  for  the  part  which  can  be  brought  into  relation
with  a  money  measure  will  be  difierent  according  as  we  mean
by  can,  "  can  easily  "  or  "  can  with  mild  straining "  or  "  can
with  violent  straining."     The  outline  of  our  territory  is,  there-
fore, necessarily  vague.     Professor  Cannan  has  well  observed :
"  We  must  face,  and  face  boldly,  the  fact  that  there  is  no
precise  line  between  economic  and  non-economic  satisfactions,
and,  therefore,  the  province  of  economics  cannot  be  marked  i     \J
out  by  a  row  of  posts  or  a  fence,  like  a  political  territory  or  aW
landed   property.      We   can    proceed    from   the   undoubtedly  '
economic  at   one  end  of  the  scale  to  the  undoubtedly  non-
economic  at  the  other  end  without  finding  anywhere  a  fence ;
to   climb   or   a   ditch   to   cross."  ^      Nevertheless,   though   no
precise  boundary  between  economic  and  non-economic  welfare
exists,  yet  the  test  of  accessibility  to  a  money  measure  serves  c^  ^
well  enough  to  set  up  a  rough  distinction.     Economic  welfare,
as  loosely  defined  by  this  test,  is  the  subject-matter  of  economic
science.     The  purpose  of  this  volume  is  to  attempt  a  partial
study  of  the  causes  affecting  economic  welfare  in  actual  modem
societies.

§  6.  At  first  glance  this  programme,  if  somewhat  ambitious,
appears,  at  all  events,  a  legitimate  one.  But  reflection  soon
shows  that  the  proposal  to  treat  in  isolation  the  causes
affecting  one  part  of  welfare  only  is  open  to  a  serious
objection.  Our  ultimate  interest  is,  of  course,  in  the  effects
»   Wealth,  pp.  17-18.


J

1/


12  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pu  i

which  the  various  causes  investigated  are  likely  to  have
upon  welfare  as  a  whole.  But  there  is  no  guarantee  that
the  effects  produced  on  the  part  of  welfare  that  can  be
brought  into  relation  with  the  measuring -rod  of  money
may  not  be  cancelled  by  effects  of  a  contrary  kind  brought
about  in  other  parts,  or  aspects,  of  welfare ;  and,  if  this
happens,  the  practical  usefulness  of  our  conclusions  is  wholly
destroyed.  The  difficulty,  it  must  be  carefully  observed,  is
not  that,  since  economic  welfare  is  only  a  part  of  welfare
as  a  whole,  welfare  will  often  change  while  economic
welfare  remains  the  same,  so  that  a  given  change  in
economic  welfare  will  seldom  synchronise  with  an  equal
change  in  welfare  as  a  whole.  All  that  this  means  is  that
economic  welfare  will  not  serve  for  a  barometer  or  index  of
total  welfare.  But  that,  for  our  purpose,  is  of  no  importance.
What  we  wish  to  learn  is,  not  how  large  welfare  is,  or
has  been,  but  how  its  magnitude  would  be  affected  by  the
introduction  of  causes  which  it  is  in  the  power  of  statesmen
or  private  persons  to  call  into  being.  The  failure  of  economic
welfare  to  serve  as  an  indea:  of  total  welfare  is  no  evidence  that
the  study  of  it  will  fail  to  afford  this  latter  information :
for,  though  a  whole  may  consist  of  many  varying  parts,  so
that  a  change  in  one  part  never  measures  the  change  in
the  whole,  yet  the  change  in  the  part  may  always  affect
the  change  in  the  whole  by  its  full  amount.  If  this
condition  is  satisfied,  the  practical  importance  of  economic
study  is  fully  established.  It  will  not,  indeed,  tell  us  how
total  welfare,  after  the  introduction  of  an  economic  cause,  will
differ  from  what  it  was  before  ;  but  it  will  tell  us  how  total
welfare  will  differ  from  what  it  would  have  been  if  that
cause  had  not  been  introduced  :  and  this,  and  not  the  other,
is  the  information  of  which  we  are  in  search.  The  real
objection  then  is,  not  that  economic  welfare  is  a  bad  index
I  of  total  welfare,  but  that  an  economic  cause  may  affect  non-
j  economic  welfare  in  ways  that  cancel  its  effect  on  economic
welfare.     This  objection  requires  careful  consideration.

§  7.  One  very  important  aspect  of  it  is  as  follows.  Human
beings  are  both  "ends  in  them^lves"  and  instruments  of
production.     On   the   one    handt   a   man  who   is   attuned   to


I


OH.  I       WELFAEE  AND  ECONOMIC  WELFAEE         13

the  beautiful  in  nature  or  in  art,  whose  character  is  simple
and  sincere,  whose  passions  are  controlled  and  sympathies
developed,  is  in  himself  an  important  element  in  the  ethical
value  of  the  world ;  the  way  in  which  he  feels  and  thinks
actually  constitutes  a  part  of  welfare.  On  the  other  hand,
a  man  who  can  perform  complicated  industrial  operations,
sift  difficult  evidence,  or  advance  some  branch  of  practical
activity,  is  an  instrument  well-fitted  to  produce  things  whose
use  yields  welfare.  The  welfare  to  which  the  former  of
these  men  contributes  directly  is  non- economic ;  that  to
which  the  latter  contributes  indirectly  is  economic.  The
fact  we  have  to  face  is  that,  in  some  measure,  it  is  open  to
the  community  to  choose  between  these  two  sorts  of  men,
and  that,  by  concenVating  its  effort  upon  the  economic  welfare
embodied  in  the  second,  it  may  unconsciously  sacrifice  the
non-economic  welfare  embodied  in  the  first.  The  point  is
easy  of  illustration.  The  weak  and  disjointed  Germany  of
a  century  ago  was  the  home  of  Goethe  and  Schiller,  Kant
and  Fichte.  "We  know  what  the  old  Germany  gave  the
world,"  says  Mr.  Dawson  in  a  book  published  several  years
before  the  war,  "  and  for  that  gift  the  world  will  ever  be
grateful ;  we  do  not  know  what  modem  Germany,  the
Germany  of  the  overflowing  barns  and  the  full  argosies,  has  to
offer,  beyond  its  materialistic  science  and  its  merchandise.  .  .  .
The  German  systems  of  education,  which  are  incomparable
so  far  as  their  purpose  is  the  production  of  scholars  and
teachers,  or  of  officials  and  functionaries,  to  move  the  cranks,
turn  the  screws,  gear  the  pulleys,  and  oil  the  wheels  of  the
complicated  national  machine,  are  far  from  being  equally
successful  in  the  making  of  character  or  individuality."  ^  In
short,  the  attention  of  the  German  people  was  so  con-
centrated on  the  idea  of  learning  to  do  that  they  did  not
care,  as  in  former  times,  for  learning  to  he.  Nor  does  Germany
stand  alone  before  this  charge ;  as  witness  the  following
description  of  modern  England  written  by  an  Englishman  from
the  standpoint  of  an  Oriental  spectator.  "  By  your  works
you  may  be  known.  Your  triumphs  in  the  mechanical  arts
are  the  obverse  of  your  failure  in  all  that  calls  for  spiritual
*  T?ie  Evolution  of  Modem  Oermany,  pp.  15-16.


14  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt,  i

insight.  Machines  of  every  kind  you  can  make  and  use
to  perfection ;  but  you  cannot  build  a  house,  or  write  a
poem,  or  paint  a  picture ;  still  less  can  you  worship  or
aspire.  .  .  .  Your  outer  man  as  well  as  your  inner  is
dead ;  you  are  blind  and  deaf.  Eatiocination  has  taken
the  place  of  perception ;  and  your  whole  life  is  an  infinite
syllogism  from  premises  you  have  not  examined  to  conclusions
you  have  not  anticipated  or  willed.  Everywhere  means,
nowhere  an  end.  Society  a  huge  engine  and  that  engine
itself  out  of  gear.  Such  is  the  picture  your  civilisation
presents  to  my  imagination."  ^  There  is,  of  course,  exaggeration
in  this  indictment ;  but  there  is  also  truth.  At  all  events  it
brings  out  vividly  the  point  which  is  here  at  issue ;  that  efforts
devoted  to  the  production  of  people  who  are  good  instruments
may  involve  a  failure  to  produce  people  who  are  good  men.
' "  ^8.  The  possibility  of  conflict  between  the  effects  of  economic
/  causes  upon  economic  welfare  and  upon  welfare  in  general,  which
(^these  considerations  emphasise,  is  easily  explained.  The  only
aspects  of  conscious  life  which  can,  as  a  rule,  be  brought  into
relation  with  a  money  measure,  and  which,  therefore,  fall
within  economic  welfare,  are  a  certain  limited  group  of  satis-
f actions  and  dissatisfactions.  But  conscious  life  is  a  complex
of  many  elements,  and  includes,  not  only  these  satisfactions
and  dissatisfactions,  but  also  other  satisfactions  and  dis-
satisfactions, and  along  with  them,  cognitions,  emotions  and
desires.  Environmental  causes  operating  to  change  economic
satisfactions  may,  therefore,  either  in  the  same  act  or  as  a
consequence  of  it,  alter  some  of  these  other  elements.  The
ways  in  which  they  do  this  may  be  distinguished  for  purposes
of  illustration  into  two  principal  groups.
k  First,  non-economic  welfare  is  liable  to  be  modified  by  the
|f  manner  in  which  income  is  earned.,.  For  the  surroundings  of
work  react  upon  the  quality  of  life.  Ethical  quality  is  affected
by  the  occupations — menial  service,  agricultural  labour,  artistic
creation,  independent  as  against  subordinate  economic  positions,^

1  Dickinson,  Letters  of  John  Chinaman,  pp.  25-6.

2  Thus,  it  is  important  to  notice  that  machinery,  as  it  comes  to  be  more
elaborate  and  expensive,  makes  it,  pro  tanto,  more  difficult  for  small  men,  alike
in  industry  and  agriculture,  to  start  independent  businesses  of  their  own.  Cf.
Quaintance,  Farm  Machinery,  p.  58.


CH.  I       WELFAEE  AND  ECONOMIC  WELFAEE  15

monotonous  repetition  of  the  same  operation/  and  so  on — into
which  the  desires  of  consumers  impel  the  people  who  work  to
satisfy  them.  It  is  affected,  too,  by  the  influence  which  these
people  exert  on  others  with  whom  they  may  he  brought  into
personal  contact.  The  social  aspect  of  Chinese  labour  in  the
Transvaal  and  of  the  attempt  by  Australian  pastoralists  to
maintain  the  convict  system,  as  a  source  of  labour  supply,'
have  relevance  to  welfare.  So,  too,  have  the  unity  of  interest
and  occupation  which  characterise  the  farm  family  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  town-dwelling  family.^  In  the  Indian
\'illage  "  the  collaboration  of  the  family  members  not  only
economises  expenses,  but  sweetens  labour.  Culture  and
refinement  come  easily  to  the  artisan  through  his  work  amidst
his  kith  and  kin."  *  Thus,  the  industrial  revolution,  when  it
led  the  cottager  from  his  home  into  the  factory,  had  an  effect
on  other  things  besides  production.  In  like  manner,  increased
efficiency  in  output  was  not  the  only  result  which  the
agricultural  revolution,  with  its  enclosures  and  large-scale
farming,  brought  about.  There  was  also  a  social  change  in
the  destruction  of  the  old  yeoman  class.  The  human  relations
that  arise  out  of  industrial  relations  are  also  relevant.  In  the
great  co-operative  movement,  for  example,  there  is  a  non-
economic  side  at  least  as  important  as  the  economic.  Whereas
in  the  organisation  of  ordinary  competitive  industry  opposi-
tion of  interest,  both  as  between  competing  sellers  and  as
between  sellers  and  buyers,  necessarily  stands  in  the  fore-
front, and  results  at  times  in  trickery  and  a  sense  of  mutual
suspicion,  in    a    co-operative    organisation    unity    of   interest

1  Munsterberg  writes  "  that  the  feeling  of  monotony  depends  mnch  less  upon
the  particular  kind  of  work  than  upon  the  special  disposition  of  the  individual "
{Psychology  and  Industrial  Efficiency,  p.  198).  But,  of  course,  the  ethieaJ  effect
of  monotony  must  be  distinguished  from  the  unpleasantness  of  it.  This  efiFect
is  not  measured  adequately  by  the  money  offered  as  wages.  Marshall  maintains
that  monotony  of  life  is  the  important  thing,  and  argues  that  variety  of  life  is
compatible  with  monotony  of  occupation,  in  so  far  as  machines  take  over  strain-
ing forms  of  work,  with  the  result  that  "  nervous  force  is  not  very  much  exhausted
by  the  ordinary  work  of  a  factory"  {Principles  of  Seonomies,  p.  263).  On  the
other  hand,  as  Smart  observes,  "  the  work  of  the  majority  is  not  onlv  toilsome
monotonous,  undeveloping,  but  takes  up  the  better  part  of  the  day,  and  leaves
little  energy  for  other  pursuits"  {Second  Thoughts  of  an  Economist,  p.  107).

-  Cf.  V.  S.  Clark,  The  Labour  Movement  in  Australia,  p.  32.

'  Cf.  Proceedings  of  the  American  Bamomie  Association,  toL  x.  pp.  234-5.

*  Cf  Muckergee,  The  Foundations  of  Indian  Economies,  p.  326.


16  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  i

is  paramount.  This  circumstance  has  its  influence  on  the
general  tone  of  life.  "  As  a  member  of  a  society  with  interests
in  common  with  others,  the  individual  consciously  and  un-
consciously develops  the  social  virtues.  Honesty  becomes
imperative,  and  is  enforced  by  the  whole  group  on  the  in-
dividual, loyalty  to  the  whole  group  is  made  an  essential  for
the  better  development  of  individual  powers.  To  cheat  the
society  is  to  injure  a  neighbour."  ^  In  the  relations  between
employers  and  workpeople  in  ordinary  industry  the  non-economic
element  is  fully  as  significant.  The  esprit  de  corps  and  interest
in  the  fortunes  of  the  firm,  which  animate  the  workpeople  in
establishments  where  the  personal  intercourse  of  employers  and
employed  is  cordial,  besides  leading  to  increased  production  of
wealth,  is  in  itself  an  addition  to  welfare.  As  large-scale
industry  extended  during  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth
centuries,  employers  and  employed  became  more  distant  in
station,  and  their  opportunities  of  meeting  one  another
diminished.  In  the  wake  of  this  inevitable  physical  separa-
tion there  followed  a  moral  separation — "the  personal  aliena-
tion of  the  employer  from  his  fellow-men  whom  he  engages  to
work  for  him  in  large  numbers."^  This  spirit  of  hostility
was  an  obvious  negative  element  brought  about  in  non-economic
welfare  by  an  economic  cause ;  and  the  partial  suppression  of
it  through  Boards  of  Conciliation  and  Copartnership  arrange-
ments is  an  equally  obvious  positive  element.  Nor  is  this  all.
It  is  more  and  more  coming  to  be  recognised  that,  if  one  root
of  "  labour  unrest "  has  been  dissatisfaction  with  rates  of  wages,
a  second  root,  also  of  great  importance,  has  been  dissatisfaction
with  the  general  status  of  wage-labour — the  feeling  that  the
industrial  system,  as  it  is  to-day,  deprives  the  workpeople  of
the  liberties  and  responsibilities  proper  to  free  men,  and  renders

1  Smith-Gordon  and  Staples,  Rural  Reconstruction  in  Ireland,  p.  240.  Cf.
the  enthusiastic  picture  which  Wolff  draws  of  the  general  social  benefits  of
rural  co-operation  on  the  Raiffeisen  plan  :  "  How  it  creates  a  desire  and  readiness
to  receive  and  assimilate  instruction,  technical  and  general,  how  it  helps  to  raise
the  character  of  the  people  united  by  it,  making  for  sobriety,  strict  honesty,
good  family  life,  and  good  living  generally."  It  has  been  seen,  he  says,  to
produce  these  effects  "  among  the  comparatively  educated  peasantry  of  Germany,
the  illiterate  country  folk  of  Italy,  the  j)rimitive  cultivators  of  Serbia,  and  it  is
beginning  to  have  something  the  same  effect  among  the  ryots  of  India "  (The
Future  of  Agriculture,  p.  481).

2  Oilman,  A  Dividend  to  Labour,  p,  15.


CH.  I       WELFARE  AND  ECONOMIC  WELFARE  17

them  mere  tools  to  be  used  or  dispensed  with  at  the  convenience
of  others :  the  sense,  in  short,  as  Mazzini  put  it  long  ago,  that
capital  is  the  despot  of  labour.^  Changes  in  industrial  organisa-
tion that  tend  to  give  greater  control  over  their  own  lives  to
workpeople,  whether  through  workmen's  councils  to  overlook
matters  of  discipline  and  workshop  organisation  in  conjunction
with  the  employer,  or  through  a  democratically  elected  Parlia-
ment directly  responsible  for  nationalised  industries,  or,  if  this
should  prove  feasible,  through  some  form  of  State-recognised
and  State-controlled  national  guilds,"  might  increase  welfare
as  a  whole,  even  though  they  were  to  leave  unchanged,  or
actually  to  damage,  economic  welfare.

Secondly,  non-economic  welfare  is  liable  to  be  modified  by
the  manner  in  which  income  is  spent.  Of  different  acts"^
consumption  that  yield  equal  satisfactions,  one  may  exercise
a  debasing,  and  another  an  elevating,  influence.  The  reflex
effect  upon  people's  characters  of  public  museums,  or  even  of
municipal  baths,^  is  very  different  from  the  reflex  efl'ect  of
equal  satisfactions  in  a  pubUc  bar.  The  coarsening  and
brutalising  influence  of  bad  housing  accommodation  is  an
incident  not  less  important  than  the  direct  dissatisfaction
involved  in  it.  Instances  of  the  same  kind  could  be  multiplied.
The  point  that  they  would  illustrate  is  obviously  of  large
practical  importance.  Imagine,  for  example,  that  a  statesman
is  considering  how  far  inequality  in  the  distribution  of  wealth
influences  welfare  as  a  whole,  and  not  merely  in  its  economic
aspects.  He  will  reflect  that  the  satisfaction  of  some  of  the
desires  of  the  rich,  such  as  gambling  excitement  or  luxurious
sensual  enjoyment,  or  perhaps,  in  Eastern  countries,  opium-
eating,  involves  reactions  on  character  ethically  inferior  to
those  involved  in  the  satisfaction  of  primary  physical  needs,

»  Cf.  Mazzini,  Th^  Duties  of  Man,  p.  99.

*  Cf.  7%«  MeaniTig  of  National  Gruilds,  by  Befckhover  and  Eeckitt,  passim.
"  The  essence  of  Laboor's  demand  for  responsibility  is  that  it  should  be  recognised
as  responsible  to  the  community,  not  to  the  capitalist"  (p.  100).  The  goal  of
National  Guilds  ' '  is  the  control  of  production  by  self-governing  Guilds  of  workers
sharing  with  the  State  the  control  of  the  produce  of  their  labour "  (p.  285).
The  fact  that  schemes  of  industrial  reorganisation  on  these  lines  are  exposed  to
serious  practical  difficulties,  which  their  authors  do  not  as  yet  seem  fully  to
have  faced,  does  not  render  any  less  admirable  the  spirit  of  this  ideal.

'  Cf.  Darwin,  Municipal  Trade,  p.  75.


f


"\


18  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

to  the  securing  of  which  the  capital  and  labour  controlled  by
the  demand  of  the  rich  would,  if  transferred  to  the  poor,
probably  be  devoted.  On  the  other  hand,  he  will  reflect  that
other  satisfactions  purchased  by  the  rich — those,  for  example,
connected  with  literature  and  art^ — involve  reactions  that  are
ethically  superior  to  those  connected  with  the  primary  needs,
and  still  more  to  those  derived  from  excessive  indulgence  in
stimulants.  These  very  real  elements  in  welfare  will,  indeed,
enter  into  relation  with  the  measuring  rod  of  money,  and  so
be  counted  in  economic  welfare,  in  so  far  as  one  group  of
people  devote  income  to  purchasing  things  for  other  people.
When  they  do  this,  they  are  likely  to  take  account  of  the
total  effect,  and  not  merely  of  the  effect  on  the  satisfactions
of  those  people — especially  if  the  said  people  are  their  own
children.  For,  as  Sidgwick  acutely  observes :  "  A  genuine
regard  for  our  neighbour,  when  not  hampered  by  the  tyranny
of  custom,  prompts  us  to  give  him  what  we  think  really  good
for  him,  whereas  natural  self-regard  prompts  us  to  give  our-
selves what  we  like."  ^  In  these  special  circumstances,  there-
fore, the  gap  between  the  effect  on  economic  welfare  and  the
effect  on  total  welfare  is  partially  bridged.  Generally,  however,
it  is  not  so  bridged.

^  9.  There  is  one  further  consideration,  of  the  great
importance  of  which  recent  events  can  leave  no  doubt.  It
has  to  do  with  the  possible  conflict,  long  ago  emphasised
by  Adam  Smith,  between  opulence  and  defence.  Lack  of
security  against  successful  hostile  attack  may  involve  "  dis-
satisfactions "  of  a  very  terrible  kind.  These  things  lie
outside  the  economic  sphere,  but  the  risk  of  them  may  easily
be  affected  by  economic  policy.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that
between  economic  strength  and  capacity  for  war  there  is  a
certain   rough   agreement.     As    Adam    Smith    wrote :    "  The

1  Sidgwick,  for  example,  observes  after  a  careful  discussion  :  "There  seems,
therefore,  to  be  a  serious  danger  that  a  thorough-going  ecjualisation  of  wealth
among  the  members  of  a  modern  civilised  community  would  have  a  tendency  to
check  the  growth  of  culture  in  the  community  "  {Principles  of  Political  Economy,
p.  523).

2  Practical  Ethics,  p.  20.  Cf.  Effertz :  "Ce  que  les  interesses  savent
g($n6ralement  mieux  que  les  non-interesses,  ce  sout  les  moyens  propres  i\  ri^aliser
ce  qu'ils  croient  etre  leur  interet.  Mais,  dans  la  determination  de  riut^ret  le
non-interess^  voit  g^neralement  plus  clair  " {Anlagonis7)ies  dconomiques,  pp.  237-8).


CH.  I       WELFAEE  AND  ECONOMIC  WELFAEE         19

nation  which,  from  the  annual  produce  of  its  domestic
industry,  from  the  annual  revenue  arising  out  of  its  lands,
labours  and  consumable  stock,  has  wherewithal  to  purchase
those  consumable  goods  in  distant  countries  can  maintain
foreign  wars  there."  ^  But  agreement  between  economic
and  military  strength  is  ultimate  and  general,  not  immediate
and  detailed.  It  must,  therefore,  be  clearly  recognised  that
the  effect  upon  economic  welfare  of  the  policy  which  a
State  adopts  towards  agriculture,  -shipping  and  industries
producing  war  material  is  often  a  very  subordinate  part  of  its
whole  effect.  Injury  to  economic  welfare  may  need  to  be
accepted  for  the  sake  of  defensive  strategy.  Economically  it
is  probably  to  the  advantage  of  this  country  to  purchase
the  greater  part  of  its  food  supplies  from  abroad  in  exchange
for  manufactured  goods,  and  to  keep  more  than  two-thirds
of  its  cultivated  land  under  grass — in  which  state  compara-
tively little  capital  and  labour  is  employed  upon  it  and
correspondingly  little  human  food  produced.^  In  a  world  of
perpetual  peace  this  policy  would  also  probably  be  advan-
tageous on  the  whole  ;  for  a  small  proportion  of  the  population
engaged  in  agriculture  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  small
proportion  living  under  rural  conditions.  But,  when  account
is  taken  of  the  possibility  that  imports  may  be  cut  off  by
blockade  in  war,  that  inference  need  not  follow.  There  can
be  little  doubt  that  G-ermany's  policy  of  conserving  and
developing  agriculture  for  many  years  at  an  economic  loss
enabled  her  to  resist  the  British  blockade  in  the  Great  War
for  a  much  longer  period  than  would  otherwise  have  been
possible ;  and,  though  there  are,  of  course,  alternative  means
of  defence,  such  as  the  establishment  of  large  national  grain
stores,  it  is,  from  a  general  political  point  of  view,  a  debat-
able question  whether  in  this  country  some  form  of  artificial
encouragement  should  be  given  to  agriculture  as  a  partial
insurance  against  the  danger  of  food  difficulties  in  the
event  of  war.  This  issue,  and  the  kindred  issue  concerning
materials  and   industries   essential   for  the   conduct    of   war,

1  Wealth  of  Nations,  p.  333.

2  Cf.   The  Recent  Development  of  German  Agriculture  [Cd.    8305],    1916,
p.  42  and  passim.


20  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

cannot   be   decided   by   reference   to  economic   considerations
alone.

§  10.  The  preceding  discussion  makes  it  plain  that  any
rigid  inference  from  effects  on  economic  welfare  to  effects
on  total  welfare  is  out  of  the  question.  In  some  fields  the
divergence  between  the  two  effects  will  be  insignificant,  but
in  others  it  will  be  very  wide.  Nevertheless,  I  submit  that,
in  the  absence  of  special  knowledge,  there  is  room  for  a
judgment  of  probability.  When  we  have  ascertained  the
effect  of  any  cause  on  economic  welfare,  we  may,  unless,  of
course,  there  is  specific  evidence  to  the  contrary,  regard
^  this  effect  as  probably  equivalent  in  direction,  though  not
in  magnitude,  to  the  effect  on  total  welfare  ;  and,  when  we
have  ascertained  that  the  effect  of  one  cause  is  more  favour-
able than  that  of  another  cause  to  economic  welfare,  we
may,  on  the  same  terms,  conclude  that  the  effect  of  this  cause
on  total  welfare  is  probably  more  favourable.  In  short,
there  is  a  presumption — what  Professor  Edge  worth  calls
an  "  unverified  probability " — that  qualitative  conclusions
about  the  effect  of  an  economic  cause  upon  economic  welfare
will  hold  good  also  of  the  effect  on  total  welfare.  This
presumption  is  especially  strong  when  experience  suggests
that  the  non-economic  effects  produced  are  likely  to  be
small.  But  in  all  circumstances  the  burden  of  proof  lies
upon  those  who  hold  that  the  presumption  should  be
overruled.

^  11.  The  above  result  suggests  'prima  facie  that
economic  science,  when  it  shall  have  come  to  full  develop-
ment, is  likely  to  furnish  a  powerful  guide  to  practice.
Against  this  suggestion  there  remains,  however,  one  consider-
able obstacle.  When  the  conclusion  set  out  in  the  preceding
section  is  admitted  to  be  vaUd,  a  question  may  still  be  raised
as  to  its  practical  utility.  Granted,  it  may  be  said,  that  the
effects  produced  by  economic  causes  upon  economic  welfare  are
probably,  in  some  measure,  representative  of  those  produced
on  total  welfare,  we  have  really  gained  nothing.  For  the  effects
produced  upon  economic  welfare  itself  cannot,  the  argument
runs,  be  ascertained  beforehand  by  those  partial  and  limited
investigations  which  alone  fall  within  the  scope  of  economic


i


cH.  I   WELFAEE  Al^D  ECONOMIC  WELFAEE    21

science.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  effects  upon  \
economic  welfare  produced  by  any  economic  cause  are  likely  i
to  be  modified  by  the  non-economic  conditions,  which,  in  one  1
form  or  another,  are  always  present,  but  which  economic  science  i
is  not  adapted  to  investigate.  The  difficulty  is  stated  very  I
clearly  by  J.  S.  Mill  in  his  Logic.  The  study  of  a  part  of  things,
he  points  out,  cannot  in  any  circumstances  be  expected  to  yield
more  than  approximate  results :  "  Whatever  affects,  in  an
appreciable  degree,  any  one  element  of  the  social  state,  affects
through  it  all  the  other  elements.  .  .  ,  We  can  never  either
understand  in  theory  or  command  in  practice  the  condition  of
a  society  in  any  one  respect,  without  taking  into  consideration
its  condition  in  all  other  respects.  There  is  no  social
phenomenon  which  is  not  more  or  less  influenced  by  every
other  part  of  the  condition  of  the  same  society,  and,  therefore,
by  every  cause  which  is  influencing  any  other  of  the  con-
temporaneous social  phenomena."  ^  In  other  words,  the  j
effects  of  economic  causes  are  certain  to  be  partially  dependent
on  non-economic  circumstances,  in  such  wise  that  the  same
cause  will  produce  somewhat  different  economic  effects  accord- 1
ing  to  the  general  character  of,  say,  the  politiced  or  religious
conditions  that  prevail.  So  far  as  this  kind  of  dependence
exists,  it  is  obvious  that  causal  propositions  in  economics  can
only  be  laid  down  subject  to  the  condition  that  things  outside
the  economic  sphere  either  remain  constant  or,  at  least,  do
not  vary  beyond  certain  defined  limits.  Does  this  condi-
tion destroy  the  practical  utility  of  our  science  ?  I  hold  that,
among  nations  with  a  stable  general  culture  like  those
inhabiting  Western  Europe,  the  condition  is  fulfilled  nearly
enough  to  render  the  results  reached  by  economic  inquiry
reasonably  good  approximations  to  truth.  This  is  the  view
taken  by  Mill.  While  fully  recognising  "the  paramount
ascendancy  which  the  general  state  of  civilisation  and  social
progress  in  any  given  society  must  exercise  over  all  the
partial  and  subordinate  phenomena,"  he  concludes  that  thej
portion  of  social  phenomena,  in  which  the  immediately!
determining  causes  are  principally  those  that  act  through
the  desire  for  wealth,  "  do  mainly  depend,  at  least  in  the  first!

*  Logic,  ii.  p.  488.


y


L


22  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

resort,  on  one  class  of  circumstances  only."  He  adds  that,
"even  when  other  circumstances  interfere,  the  ascertainment
of  the  effect  due  to  the  one  class  of  circumstances  alone  is  a
sufficiently  intricate  and  difficult  business  to  make  it  ex-
pedient to  perform  it  once  for  all,  and  then  allow  for  the
effect  of  the  modifying  circumstances ;  especially  as  certain
fixed  combinations  of  the  former  are  apt  to  recur  often,  in
conjunction  with  ever  varying  circumstances  of  the  latter
class."  ^  I  have  nothing  to  add  to  this  statement.  If  it  is
accepted,  the  difficulty  discussed  in  this  section  need  no
longer  give  us  pause.  It  is  not  necessarily  impracticable  to
ascertain  by  means  of  economic  science  the  approximate  effects
of  economic  causes  upon  economic  welfare.  The  bridge  that
has  been  built  in  earlier  sections  between  economic  welfare
and  total  welfare  need  not,  therefore,  rust  unused.

^  Logic,  ii.  pp.  490-91,


CHAPTEK    II

DESIRES    AND    SATISFACTIONS

f  S  1.  In   the   preceding   chapter  economic  welfare  was   taken'
broadly  to  consist  in  that  group  of  satisfactions  and  dissatisfac-
tions which  can  be  brought  into  relation  with  a  money  measure;_
We  have  now  to  observe  that  this  relation  is  not  a  direct  one,
but  is  mediated  through  desires  and  aversions.     That  is  to
say,  the  money  which,  a  person  is  prepared  to  offer  for  a  thing


ay.


^et  from  the  thing.
This   distinction,


measures  directly,  not  the  satisfaction  he  will
but^he  intensity  of  Eis  desire  for  it.
obvious  when  stated,  has  been  somewhar-atJ^ured  for  English
speaking  students  by  the  employment  of  the  term  utility —
which  naturally  carries  an  association  with  satisfaction — to
represent  desiredness.  Thus,  when  one  thing  is  desired  by  a
person  more  keenly  than  another,  it  is  said  to  possess  a  greater
utility  to  that  person.  Several  writers  have  endeavoured  to
get  rid  of  the  confusion  which  this  use  of  words  generates  by
substituting  for  "  utility  "  in  the  above  sense  some  other  term,
such,  for  example,  as  Professor  Pareto's  "  ophelimitv.'''  /  It  msL^  Outk
be  suggested  that,  in  English  writing,  "  'Ifi^JrH"*'^" '  would  be'  '
equally  effective  and  much  more  readily  intelligible.  I  shall
myself  employ  that  term.  The  verbal  issue  is,  however,  a
subordinate  one.  The  substantial  point  is  that  we  are  entitled
to  use  the  comparative  amounts  of  money  which  a  person  is
prepared  to  offer  for  two  different  things  as  a  test  of  the  com-
parative satisfactions  which  these  things  will  yield  to  him,  only
on  condition  that  the  ratio  between  the  intensities  of  desire
that  he  feels  for  the  two  is  equal  to  the  ratio  between  the
amounts  of  satisfaction  which  their  possession  will  yield  to  him.  ,
This  condition,  however,  is  not  always  fulfilled.     We  are  not,

23


24  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

/  of  course,  here  concerned  with  the  obvious  fact  that  people's
expectations  as  to  the  satisfaction  they  will  derive  from
different  commodities  are  often  erroneous.  The  point  is  that,
even  apart  from  this,  the  condition  sometimes  breaks  down.
Thus,  Sidgwick  observes :  "I  do  not  judge  pleasures  [and  the
same  thing  obviously  holds  of  satisfactions  other  than  pleasures]
to  be  greater  and  less  exactly  in  proportion  as  they  exercise
more  or  less  influence  in  stimulating  the  will  to  actions  tending
to  sustain  or  produce  them  " :  ^  and  again,  "  I  do  not  think  it
ought  to  be  assumed  that  intensity  of  immediate  gratification
is  always  in  proportion  to  intensity  of  pre-existing  desire."  ^
This  consideration  obviously  has  great  theoretical  importance.
When  it  is  recollected  that  all  comparisons  between  different
taxes  and  different  monopolies,  which  proceed  by  an  analysis  of
their  effects  upon  consumer's  surplus,  tacitly  assume  that  demand
price  (the  money  measure  of  desire)  is  also  the  money  measure
of  satisfaction,  it  is  apparent  that  it  rtiay  have  great  practical
importance  also.  The  question  whether  it  has  in  actual  fact
great  practical  importance  has,  therefore,  to  be  examined.

§  2.  In  a  broad  general  way  we  may,  I  think,  safely
answer  this  question  in  the  negative.  It  is  fair  to  suppose
that  most  commodities,  especially  those  of  wide  consumption
that  are  required,  as  articles  of  food  and  clothing  are,  for  direct
personal  use,  will  be  wanted  as  a  means  to  satisfaction,  and
will,  consequently,  be  desired  with  intensities  proportioned  to
the  satisfactions  they  are  expected  to  yield.^  For  the  most
general  purposes  of  economic  analysis,  therefore,  not  much
harm  is  likely  to  be  done  by  the  current  practice  of  regarding
money  demand  price  indifferently  as  the  measure  of  a  desire
/  and  as  the  measure  of  the  satisfaction  felt  when  the  desired  thing
I  is  obtained.  To  this  general  conclusion,  however,  there  is  one
very  important  exception.

§  3.  This  exception  has  to  do  with  people's  attitude  toward
the  future.  Generally  speaking,  everybody  prefers  present
pleasures  or  satisfactions  of  given  magnitude  to  future  pleasures
oF'satisfactions  of  equal  magnitude,  even  when  the  latter  are

>  Methods  of  Ethics,  p.  126.

2  The  Ethics  of  T.  H.  Green,  etc.,  p.  340.

3  Of.  my  "Some  Remarks  ou  Utility,"  Economic  Journal,  1903,  p.  58  et  seq.


cH.  II  DESIEES  AND  SATISFACTIONS  25

perfectly  certain  to  occur.  But  this  preference  for  present
pleasures  does  not — the  idea  is  self-contradictory — imply  that
a  present  pleasure  of  given  magnitude  is  any  greater  than  a
future  pleasure  of  the  same  magnitude.  It  implies  only  that
our  telescopic  faculty  is  defective,  and  that  we,  therefore,  see
future  pleasures,  as  it  were,  on  a  diminished  scale.  That  this
is  the  right  explanation  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  exactly  the
same  diminution  is  experienced  when,  apart  from  our  tendency
to  forget  ungratifying  incidents,  we  contemplate  the  past.
Hence,  the  existence  of  preference  for  present  over  equally
certain  future  pleasures  does  not  imply  that  any  economic
dissatisfaction  would  be  suffered  if  future  pleasures  were
substituted  at  full  value  for  present  ones.  The  non-satis-
faction this  year  of  a  man's  preference  to  consume  this  year
rather  than  next  year  is  balanced  by  the  satisfaction  of
his  preference  next  year  to  consume  next  year  rather  than
to  have  consumed  this  year.  Hence,  there  is  nothing  to
set  against  the  fact  that,  if  we  set  out  a  series  of  exactly
egual  satisfactions  - —  satisjacfions,  not  objects  that  yield
satisfactions — all  of  them  absolutely  certain  to  occur  over
a  series  of  years  beginning  now,  the  desires  which  a  man
will  entertain  for  these  several  satisfactions  will  not  be
equal,  but  will  be  represented  by  a  scale  of  magnitudes  con-
tinually diminishing  as  the  years  to  which  the  satisfactions
are  allocated  become  more  remote.  This  reveals  a  far-
reaching  economic  disharmony.  For  it.  implies  that  people
distribute  their  resources  between  the  present,  the  near  future,
a_nd  the  remote  future  on  the  basis  of  a  wholly  irrational
preference.  When  they  have  a  choice  between  two  satisfactions,
they  will  not  necessarily  choose  the  larger  of  the  two,  but  will
often  devote  themselves  to  producing  or  obtaining  a  small  one
now  in  preference  to  a  much  larger  one  some  years  hence.
The  ine\'itable  result  is  that  efforts  directed  towards  the  remote
future  are  starved  relatively  to  those  directed  to  the  near  future,
while  these  in  turn  are  starved  relatively  to  efforts  directed
towards^  the  present.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  person's
telescopic  faculty  is  such  that  he  discounts  future  satisfactions,
which  are  perfectly  certain  to  occur,  at  the  rate  of  5  per  cent
per  annum.     Then,  instead  of  being  ready  to  work  for  next


26  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

year,  or  a  year  ten  years  hence,  so  long  as  a  given  increment
of  effort  will  yield  as  much  satisfaction  as  an  equal  increment
devoted  to  work  for  the  present,  he  will  only  work  for  next
year  so  long  as  the  yield  of  an  increment  of  effort  employed
for  that  year  is  1'05  times,  and  for  ten  years  hence  so  long
as  it  is  (1'05)^°  times,  the  yield  of  an  increment  employed  for
the  present.  Itjjollpws  that  the  aggregate  amount  of  economic
satisfaction  which  people  in  fact  enjoy  is  much  less  than
it  would  be  if  their  telescopic  faculty  were  not  perverted,  but
equal  (certain)  satisfactions  were  desired  with  equal  intensity
whatever  the  period  at  which  they  are  destined  to  emerge.

^  4.  This,  however,  is  not  all.  Since  human  life  is
limited,  such  fruits  of  work  or  saving  as  accrue  after  a
considerable  interval  are  not  enjoyed  by  the  person  to  whose
efforts  they  are  due.  This  means  that  the  satisfaction  with
which  his  desire  is  connected  is  not  his  own  satisfaction,
but  the  satisfaction  of  somebody  else,  possibly  an  immediate
successor  whose  interest  he  regards  as  nearly  equivalent  to  his
own,  possibly  somebody  quite  remote  in  blood  or  in  time  about
whom  he  scarcely  cares  at  all.  It  follows  that,  even  though
our  desires  for  equal  satisfactions  of  our  ovm  occurring
at-  different  times  were  equal,  our  desire  for  future  satisfaction
would  often  be  less  intense  than  for  present  satisfaction,
because  it  is  very  likely  that  the  future  satisfaction  will
not  be  pur  own.  This  discrepancy  will  be  more  important
tjie  more  distant  is  the  time  at  which  the  source  of  future
satisfaction  is  likely  to  come  into  being;  for  every  addition
to  the  interval  increases  the  chance  of  death,  not  merely
to  oneself,  but  also  to  children  and  near  relatives  and  friends
in  whom  one's  interest  is  likely  to  be  most  keen.^     No  doubt,

1  If  &  be  the  fraction  of  importance  that  I  attach  to  a  pound  in  the  hands  of
my  heirs  as  compared  with  myself,  and  0(<)  the  probability  that  I  shall  be  alive
t  years  from  now,  a  certain  pound  to  me  or  my  heirs  then  attracts  me  now  equally
with  a  certain  pound  multiplied  by  {(p{t)  +  k{l  -  (f>{t))}  to  me  then.  This  is
obviously  increased  by  anything  that  increases  either  ^(<)  or  k.

If,  through  an  anticipated  change  of  fortune  or  temperament,  one  pound  after
t  years  is  expected  to  be  equivalent  to  (1  —  a)  times  one  pound  now,  a  certain
{'l>(f)  +  k(l  -  <p{t))}  pounds  of  the  then  prevailing  sort  to  me  then  attracts  me
equally  with  (1  -  a)  {4>{t) -\- k{l  -  <P(t))}  pounds,  of  the  now  prevailing  sort,  to  me
then.  Therefore,  a  certain  pound  to  my  heirs  will  be  as  persuasive  to  call  out
investment  now  as  the  above  sum  would  be  if  I  were  certain  to  live  for  ever,  and
always  to  be  equally  well  off  and  the  same  in  temperament.


cH.  II  DESIEES  AXD  SATISFACTIOXS  27

this  obstacle  to  investment  for  distant  returns  is  partly  over-
come" by  stock-exchange  devices.  If  £100  invested  now  is
expected  to  reappear  after  50  years  expanded  at,  say,  5  per
cent  compound  interest,  the  man  who  originally  provides  the
£100  may  be  able,  after  a  year,  to  sell  his  title  in  the  eventual
fruit  for  £105;  the  man  who  buys  from  him  may  be  able
similarly  to  get  his  capital  of  £105  back  with  5  per  cent
interest  after  one  year,  and  so  on.  In  these  circumstances  the
fact  that  any  one  man  would  require  a  higher  rate  of  interest
per  annum  to  induce  him  to  lock  up  £100  for  50  years  than
he  would  to  induce  him  to  lock  up  the  same  sum  for  one  year
makes  no  difference.  But,  of  course,  in  actual  life  this  device
is  of  very  narrow  application.  As  regards  investments,  such
as  planting  a  forest  or  undertaking  drainage  development  on
one's  own  estate,  which  can  only  be  accomplished  privately,  it
is  not  applicable  at  all ;  and,  even  when  investment  is  under-
taken by  a  company,  investors  cannot  seriously  expect  to  find
a  smooth  and  continuous  market  for  non- dividend  paying
securities.

/  §  5.  The    practical    way    in    which    these    discrepancies  ]
between  desire  and  satisfaction  work   themselves  out  to  the  /
injury   of  economic   welfare   is   by   checking  the  creation  of
new  capital  and  encouraging  people  to  use  up  existing  capital/
to  such  a  degree  that  larger  future  advantages  are  sacrificed^
for    smaller    present   ones.     Always   the   chief  effect   is   felt
when  the  interval  of   time  between  action  and  consequence
is  long.       Thus,  of    the  check  to  investment,  Giffen   wrote :
"  Probably  there  are  no  works  more  beneficial  to  a  community
in   the  long  run  than  those,  like  a  tunnel   between  Ireland
and    Great    Britain,    which  open   an   entirely  new  means   of
communication  of  strategical  as  well  as  of  commercial  value,
but  are  not  likely  to  pay  the  individual  enterpriser  in  any
short    period    of    time."     A    number    of   other   large   under-
takings,   such    as    works    of    afforestation    or    water    supply,
the  return   to    which  is   distant,   are   similarly   handicapped
by  the  slackness  of  desire  towards  distant  satisfactions.^     The

*  In  this  connection  the  following  passage  from  Knoop's  Principles  and
Methods  of  Municipal  Trade  is  of  interest:  "To  secure  an  additional  supply
of  water  to  a  town,  ten  or  more  years  of  continuous  work  may  easily  be


28  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

same  slackness  is  responsible  for  that  over-hasty  exploitation
of  stored  gifts  of  nature,  which  must  make  it  harder  for  future
generations  to  obtain  supplies  of  important  commodities.
Eesources  devoted  to  the  development  of  high-speed  vessels
that,  in  order  to  secure  a  slightly  shortened  passage,  consume
enormous  extra  quantities  of  coal ;  the  reckless  cutting  down
of  forests ;  fishing  operations  so  conducted  as  to  disregard
breeding  seasons,  thus  threatening  certain  species  of  fish  with
extinction ;  ^  farming  operations  so  conducted  as  to  exhaust
the__fertility  of  the  land^  are  all  instances  in  point.  As  a
palliative  of  these  tendencies  it  is  natural  to  suggest  Govern-
ment intervention.  Nobody,  of  course,  holds  that  the  State
should  force  its  citizens  to  act  as  though  so  much  objective
wealth  now  and  in  the  future  were  of  exactly  equal  import-
ance. In  view  of  the  uncertainty  of  productive  developments,
to  say  nothing  of  the  mortality  of  nations  and  eventually  of
the  human  race  itself,  this  would  not,  even  in  extremest  theory,
be  sound  policy.  But  there  is  wide  agreement  that  the  State
should  protect  the  interests  of  the  future  in  some  degree.  The
whole  movement  for  "  conservation  "  in  the  United  States  is
based  on  this  conviction.  It  is  the  clear  duty  of  Government
to  watch  over,  and,  if  need  be,  by  legislative  enactment,  to
defend,  the  exhaustible  natural  resources  of  the  country.  How
far  it  should  itself,  either  out  of  taxes,  or  out  of  State  loans,  or
by  the  device  of  guaranteed  interest,  press  resources  into  under-
takings from  which  the  business  community,  if  left  to  itself,
would  hold  aloof,  is  a  more  difficult  problem.  The  idea,  to
which  a  hasty  reader  of  the  preceding  discussion  might  perhaps
be  led,  that  it  should  push  them  all  up  to  the  point  at  which
the  marginal  £  invested  yields  no  interest,  is  plainly  illusory.
For  though,  no  doubt,  a  part  of  the  resources  which  it  would

required.  This  means  that  for  several  years  a  large  amount  of  capital  will
be  unproductive,  thus  seriously  affecting  the  profits  of  the  undertaking  and  mak-
ing boards  of  directors  very  chary  about  entering  upon  any  large  scheme.  .  .  .
It  is  almost  inconceivable  that  a  water  company  would  have  undertaken  the
great  schemes  by  which  Manchester  draws  its  supply  of  water  from  Lake
Thirlmere  in  Cumberland,  a  distance  of  some  96  miles  ;  Liverpool  its  supply  from
Lake  Vyrnwy  in  North  Wales,  a  distance  of  some  78  miles  ;  and  Birmingliam
its  supply  from  the  Elan  Valley  in  Mid  "Wales,  a  distance  of  some  80  miles  "
(loc.  cit.  p.  38).

1  Of.  Sidgwick,  Principles  of  Political  Ecorwmy,  p.  410.


cH.ii  DESIRES  AND  SATISFACTIONS  29

thus  turn  to  its  purposes  would  otherwise  have  been  devoted
to  unproductive  consumption,  another  part  would  have  been
employed  by  the  owners  in  occupations  yielding  the  normal
return   of  interest.      On_the  wholgj.  we   may   conclude   that.,
special  State  stimulation,  based  on  the  class  of  consideration  \
advanced    here,   should    be    confined    to    undertakings   which  |
promise  a  commercial  profit,  but  only  after  an  interval  too  |
long  to  attract  private  capital  in  the  ordinary  way  of  business^


CHAPTEE    III

THE    NATIONAL    DIVIDEND

^   1.    Generally    speaking,    economic    causes    act    upon    the
economic  welfare  of  any  country,  not  directly,  but  through  the
earning  and  spending  of  that  objective  counterpart  of  economic
welfare     which    economists    call    the    national    dividend_..or
national  income.     Just  as  economic  welfare  is   that  part  of
total  welfare  which  can  be  brought  directly  or  indirectly  into
relation  with  a  money  measure,  so  the  national  dividend —
the  concept  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  dividends  paid  by
joint  stock  companies — is  that  part  of  the   objective  income
of  the   community   that   can    be   measured   in   money.     The
two  concepts,  economic  welfare  and  the  national  dividend,  are
Jthu§..C9,-iirdinate,  in   such   wise   that   any  description  of  the
content  of  one  of  them  implies  a  corresponding  description
of  the  content  of  the  other.     In  the   preceding   chapter,  it
was  shown  that  the  concept  of  economic  welfare  is  essentially
elastic.       The    same    measure    of   elasticity    belongs    to    the
concept   of  the   national    dividend.     It    is    only    possible   to
define    this    concept    precisely   by    introducing    an    arbitrary
line  into  the  continuum  presented  by  nature.     It  is  entirely
plain   that   the   national   dividend    is    composed   in   the   last
resort    of   a    number    of   objective    services,   some   of  which
are  rendered  through  commodities  while  others  are  rendered
direct.     These   things   may   be   described    at    will  either    as
goods  and  services  or  as  services  simply,  the  choice  between
the    two    terms    being    a    matter,    not,    as   Professor    Fisher
appears    to   suggest,  of  principle,^  but   of   convenience.      It

'   The  Nature  of  Capital  and  Income,  pp.  105-6,
30


I


cH.  Ill  THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  31

is  not,  however,  entirely  plain  which  part  of  the  stream  of
services,  or  goods  and  services,  that  flows  annually  into  being
can  usefully  be  included  under  the  title  of  the  national
dividend.  That  is  the  question  which  has  now  to  be  discussed
§  2.  The  answer  which  first  suggests  itself  is  that  those
goods  and  services  should  be  included  (double  -  counting,
of  course,  being  avoided),  and  only  those,  that  are  actually
sold  for  money.  This"  plan,  it  would  seem,  must  place  us
in"  the  best  possible  position  for  making  use  of  the  monetary
measuring  rod.  Unfortunately,  however,  for  the  symmetry
of  this  arrangement,  some  of  the  services  which  would  be
excluded  under  it  are  intimately  connected,  and  even  inter-
woven, with  some  of  the  included  services.  The  bought  and
the  unbought  kinds  do  not  differ  from  one  another  in  any
fundamental  respect,  and  frequently  an  unbought  service  is
transformed  into  a  bought  one,  and  vice  versa.  This  leads
to  a  number  of  violent  paradoxes.  Thus,  if  a  man  hires
a  house  and  furniture  belonging  to  somebody  else,  the
services  he  obtains  from  them  enter  into  the  national  dividend,
as  we  are  here  pro\'isionaUy  defining  it,  but,  if  he  receives
the  house  and  furniture  as  a  gift  and  continues  to  occupy
it,  they  do  so  no  longer.  Again,  if  a  farmer  sells  the  produce
of  his  farm  and  buys  the  fod3  "he  n~eeds  for  his  family  in  the
market,  a  considerable  amount  of  produce  enters  into  the  national
dividend  which  would  cease  to  enter  into  it  if,  instead  of
buying  things  in  the  market,  he  held  back  part  of  his  own
meat  and  vegetables  and  consumed  them  on  the  farm.  A^ain,
the  philanthropic  work  done  by  unpaid  organisers,  church
workers  and  Sunday  school  teachers,  the  scientific  work  of
disinterested  experimenters,  and  the  political  work  of  many
among  the  leisured  classes,  which  at  present  do  not  enter,
or,  when  there  is  a  nominal  payment,  enter  at  much  less  than
their  real  worth,  into  the  national  dividend,  would  enter
into  it  if  those  people  undertook  to  pay  salaries  to  one
another.  Thus,  for  example,  the  Act  providing  for  the  pay-
ment of  members  of  Parliament,  increased  the  national  dividend
by  some  £250,000  worth.  Yet  again,  the  services  rendered
by  women  enter  into  the  dividend  when  they  are  rendered
in    exchange   for   wages,   whether  in   the   factory   or  in    the


32  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

home,  but  do  not  enter  into  it  when  they  are  rendered  by
mothers  and  wives  gratuitously  to  their  own  families.  Thus,
iL_aL„man..mariies..iiis- housekeeper  or  his  cook,  the  national
dividein!ij£.dy,minished.  These  things  are  paradoxes.  It  is  a
paradox  also  that,  when  Poor  Law  or  Factory  Eegulations
divert  women  workers  from  factory  work  or  paid  home-work
to  unpaid  home-work,  in  attendance  on  their  children,  pre-
paration of  the  family  meals,  repair  of  the  family  clothes,
thoughtful  expenditure  of  housekeeping  money,  and  so  on,
the  national  dividend  on  our  definition  appears  to  suffer  a
loss  against  which  there  is  to  be  set  no  compensating  gain.^
And  it  is  a  paradox,  lastly,  that  the  frequent  desolation
of  beautiful  scenery  through  the  hunt  for  coal  or  gold,  the
desecration  widely  wrought  by  uncontrolled  smoke  from
factories  and  the  injury  done  to  natural  beauty  by  public
advertisements  must,  on  our  definition,  leave  the  national
dividend  intact,  though  if  it  had  been  practicable,  as  it  is
in  some  exceptional  circumstances,  to  make  a  charge  for
viewing  splendid  scenery,  it  would  not  have  done  so.^

8  3.  Reflection  upon  these  objections  makes  it  plain  that
they  are  of  a  type  that  could  be  urged  in  some  degree  against
any  definition  of  the  national  dividend  except  one  that  coincided
in  range  with  the  whole  annual  flow  of  goods  and  services.
But  to  adopt  a  definition  so  wide  as  that  would  be  tantamount
to  abandoning  dependence  upon  the  measuring  rod  of  money.
We  are  bound,  therefore,  either  to  dispense  altogether  with
any   formal   definition   or   to   fall   back   upon  a   compromise.

1  It  would  be  wrong  to  infer  from  the  above  that  the  large  entry  of  women
into  industry  during  the  war  was  associated  with  an  approximately  equal  loss
of  work  outside  industry.  For,  first,  a  great  deal  of  war  work  was  undertaken
by  women  who  previously  did  little  work  of  any  kind  ;  secondly,  the  place  of
women  who  entered  industry  was  taken  largely  by  other  women  who  had  previously
done  little — for  example,  many  mistresses  in  servant-keeping  houses  themselves
took  the  place  of  a  servant — and,  thirdly,  owing  to  the  absence  of  husbands
and  sons  at  the  war,  the  domestic  work  which  women  would  have  had  to  do
if  they  had  not  gone  into  industry  would  have  been  much  less  than  in  normal
times.

2  The  Advertisement  Regulation  Act,  1907,  allows  local  authorities  to  frame
by-laws  designed  to  prevent  open-air  advertising  from  affecting  prejudicially
the  natural  beauty  of  a  landscape  or  the  amenities  of  a  public  park  or  pleasure
promenade.  It  is  not,  we  may  note  in  this  connection,  a  decisive  argument
against  underground,  and  in  favour  of  overhead,  systems  of  tramway  power  wires
that  they  are  more  expensive.  The  London  County  Council  deliberately  chose
the  more  expensive  underground  variety.


cH.iii  THE  NATIONAL  DIVEDEND  33

The  former  policy,  though  there  is  more  to  be  said  for  it  than

is  sometimes  allowed,  would  certainly  arouse  distrust,  even
though  it  led  to  no  confusion.  The  latter,  therefore,  seems  on
the  whole  to  be  preferable.  The^ethod  I  propose  to  adopt
is  as  follows.  First,  in  accordance  with  the  precedent  set  by
Dr.  Marshall,  I  shall  take,  as  the  standard  meaning  of  the
term  national  dividend,  that_suggested  by  the  practice  of  the
British  Income  Tax  Commissioners.  I  therefore  include
everything  that  people  buy  with  money  income,  together  with
the  services  that  a  man  obtains  from  a  liouse  owned  and
inliabited  by  himself.  But  "  the  services  which  a  person
ren^efs~To~EiniseIf  and  those  which  he  renders  gratuitously
to  members  of  his  family  or  friends;  the  benefits  which  he
derives  from  using  his  own  personal  goods  [such  as  furniture
and  clothes],  or  public  property  such  as  toll-free  bridges,  are
not  reckoned  as  parts  of  the  national  dividend,  but  are  left  to
be  accounted  for  separately."  ^  Secondly,  while  constructing
in  this  way  my  standard  definition  of  the  national  dividend,
I  reserve  full  liberty,  with  proper  warning,  to  use  the  term  in
a  wider  sense  on  all  occasions  when  the  discussion  of  any
problem  would  be  impeded  or  injured  by  a  pedantic  adherence
to  the  standard  use.  There  is,  no  doubt,  a  good  deal  that  is
unsatisfactory  about  this  compromise.  Unfortunately,  however,
the  conditions  are  such  that  nothing  better  appears  to  be
available.

§  4.  The  above  conclusion  does  not  complete  the  solution
of  our  problem.  Given  the  general  class  of  things  which  are
relevant  to  the  national  dividend,  a  further  issue  has  to  be
faced.  For  the  dividend  may  be  conceived  in  two  sharply
contrasted  ways :  as  the  flow  '^^  ■jr.nrU  and  services  which  is
produced  during  the  year,  or  dow  which  is  consumed

during  the  year.  Dr.  Marshall  adopts  the  former  of  these
alternatives.  He  writes :  "  The  labour  and  capital  of  the
country,  acting  on  its  natural  resources,  produce  annually  a
certain  net  aggregate  of  commodities,  material  and  immaterial,
including  services  of  all  kinds.  This  is  the  true  net  annual
income  or  revenue  of  the  country,  or  the  national  dividend."  ^

1  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economies,  p.  524.
*  lUd.  p.  523.


34  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

Naturally,  since  in  every  year  plant  and  equipment  wear  out
and  decay,  what  is  produced  must  mean  what  is  producecj.  op.
the  whole  when  allowance  has  been  made  for  this  process  of
fj  attrition.  To  make  this  clear,  Dr.  Marshall  adds  elsewhere  :
"  If  we  look  chiefly  at  the  income  of  a  country,  we  must
allow  for  the  depreciation  of  the  sources  from  which  it  is
derived."  ^  In  concrete  terms,  his  conception  of  the  dividend
includes  an  inventory  of  all  the  new  things  that  are  made,
accompanied,  as  a  negative  element,  by  an  inventory  of  all  the
decay  and  demolition  of  old  things.  Professor  Fisher,  on  the
^/'  other  hand,  placing  in  the  forefront  of  his  argument  the
1  proposition  that  savings  are  in  no  circumstances  income,
/claims  unequivocally  to  identify  the  national  dividend  with
'  those  services,  and  those  only,  that  enter  directly  into  con-
l  sumption.  According  to  him.  Dr.  Marshall's  national  dividend
represents,  not  the  dividend  that  actually  is  realised,  but  the
dividend  that  would  be  realised  if  the  country's  capital  were
maintained  and  no  more  than  maintained.  In  a  stationary  state,
where  the  creation  of  new  machinery  and  plant  in  any
industry  exactly  balances,  and  no  more  than  balances,  loss  by
wear  and  tear,  these  two  things  would  be  materially  equivalent.
The  dividend  on  either  definition  would  consist  simply  of  the
flow  of  goods  and  services  entering  into  final  consumption ;
for  all  new  materials  at  earlier  stages  in  the  productive  process
.  that  came  into  factories  and  shops  would  be  exactly  balanced
by  the  corresponding  materials  that  left  them  in  worked-up
products ;  and  all  newly  created  machinery  and  plant  would
exactly  take  the  place,  and  no  more  than  take  the  place,  of
corresponding  machinery  and  plant  that  became  worn  out
during  the  year.  In  practice,  however,  the  industry  of  a
country  is  hardly  ever  in  this  kind  of  stationary  state.  Hence,
it  is  extremely  rare  for  the  two  versions  of  the  national
dividend  to  be  materially  equivalent,  and  it  is  impossible  for
them  to  be  analytically  equivalent.  The  question  how  the
choice  between  them  sliould  fall  is,  therefore,  an  important
one.

S  5.  The   answer  to  it,  as  I   conceive   the   matter,   turns
upon  the  purpose  for  which  we  intend  the  conception  to  be
'  Marshall,  FrirvcipUs  of  Economics,  p.  80.


CH.  Ill  THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  35

used  If  we  are  interested  in  the  comparative  amounts  of
economic  welfare  which  a  community  obtains  over  a  long
series  of  years,  and  are  looking  for  an  objective  index  with
which  this  series  of  amounts  can  be  suitably  correlated,  then,
no  doubt,  Professor  Fisher's  conception  is  the  proper  one.  It
is  also  much  more  relevant  than  the  other  when  we  are
considering  how  much  a  country  is  able  to  provide  over  a
limited  number  of  years  for  the  conduct  of  a  war ;  because,
for  this  purpose  we  want  to  know  what  is  the  utmost
amount  that  can  be  squeezed  out  and  "  consumed,"  and  we
do  not  premise  that  capital  must  be  maintained  intact.
The  majoi  part  of  this  volume,  however,  is^jjoncenied,  not
with  war)  but  with  peace,  t  and  not  with  measurement,
but  with  causation.  The  general  form  of  our  questions  will
Dei  ^What  effect  on  economic  welfare  as  a  whole  is  pro-
duced by  such  and  such  a  cause  operating  on  the  economic
circumstances  of  1920?"  Now,  it  is  agreed  that  the  cause
operates  through  the  dividend,  and  that  direct  statements
of  its  effects  must  refer  to  the  dividend.  Let  us  consider,
therefore,  the  results  that  follow  from  the  adoption  of
Professor  Fisher's  and  Dr.  Marshall's  conceptions  respectively.
On  Professor  Fisher's  plan,  we  have  to  set  down  the  difference
made  by  the  cause  to  the  dividend,  not  merely  of  1920,  but  of
every  year  following  1920;  for,  if  the  cause  induces  new
savings,  it  is  only  through  a  statement  covering  all  subsequent
years  that  its  effect  on  the  dividend,  as  conceived  by  Professor
Fisher,  can  be  properly  estimated.  Thus,  on  his  showing,  if  a
large  new  factory  is  built  in  1920,  not  the  capital  value  of
that  factory,  but  only  the  value  of  the  services  rendered  by  it
in  1920,  should  be  reckoned  in  the  dividend  of  1920;  and
the  aggregate  effects  of  the  creation  of  the  factory  cannot  be
measured  without  reference  to  the  national  dividend  of  a  long
series  of  years.  On  Dr.  Marshall's  plan  this  inconvenient
elaboration  is  dispensed  with.  When  we  have  stated  the
effect  produced  on  the  dividend,  in  his  sense,  for  the  year
1920,  we  have  implicitly  included  the  effects,  so  far  as  they
can  be  anticipated,  on  the  consumption  both  of  1920  and  of
all  subsequent  years ;  for  these  effects  are  reflected  in  the
capital  value  originally  possessed  by  the  factory.    The  immediate


36  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

effect  on  consumption  is  measured  by  the  alteration  in  the
1920  dividend  as  conceived  by  Professor  Fisher.  But  it  is
through  total  consumption,  and  not  through  immediate
consumption,  that  economic  welfare  and  economic  causes  are
linked  together.  Consec[uently,  Dr.  Marshall's  definition  of
the  national  dividend  is '  likely,  on  the  whole,  to  prove  more
useful  than  the  other,  and  I  propose  in  what  follows  to  adopt
it.  The  entity — also,  of  course,  an  important  one — which
Professor  Fisher  calls  by  that  name,  I  shall  speak  of  as  the
national  income  of  consumable  goods^  or,  more  briefly,  consumable
income.

§  6.  We  have  thus  achieved  a  definition  which,  unsatis-
factory as  it  is,  is  still  reasonably  precise,  of  the  concrete
content  of  the  national  dividend.  This  definition  carries
with  it  certain  plain  implications  as  to  the  way  in  which
that  dividend  must  be  evaluated.  The  first  and  most  obvious
of  these  is  that,  when  the  value  of  a  finished  product  is
counted,  the  value  of  materials  employed  in  making  that
product  must  not  be  counted  also.  In  the  British  Census
of  Production  of  1907  this  form  of  double  counting  was
carefully  avoided.  The  Director  described  his  method  as
follows :  The  result  of  deducting  the  total  cost  of  materials
used,  and  the  amount  paid  to  other  firms  for  work  given
out,  from  the  value  of  the  gross  output  for  any  one  industry
or  group  of  industries  is  to  give  a  figure  which  may,  for
convenience,  be  called  the  "  net  output "  of  the  industry
or  the  group.  This  figure  "  expresses  completely  and  without
duplication  the  total  amount  by  which  the  value  (at  works)  of
the  products  of  the  industry  or  the  group,  taken  as  a  whole,
exceeded  the  value  (at  works)  of  the  materials  purchased  from
outside,  i.e.  it  represents  the  value  added  to  the  materials  in
the  course  of  manufacture.  This  sum  constitutes  for  any
industry  the  fund  from  which  wages,  salaries,  rent,  royalties,
rates,  taxes,  depreciation,  and  all  other  similar  charges,  have

1  For  a  somewhat  different  liue  of  criticism,  vide  an  article  by  Professor
Flux  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  for  February  1909,  to  which
Professor  Fisher  replied  in  the  May  issue  of  the  same  journal.  The  problem
of  how  to  distribute  charges  between  income  and  capital  account  from  the
standpoint  of  an  individual  business  is  well  discussed  in  Cole's  Accounts,
chapter  xiii.


CH.  Ill  THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  37

to  be  defrayed,  as  well  as  profits."  ^  When,  however,  it
is  desired  to  evaluate  the  national  dividend  as  a  whole,
these  allowances  are  not  sutiicient.  There  is  no  real  differ-
ence between  the  flour  which  is  used  up  in  making  bread,
and  bread-making  machinery  which  is  used  up  and  worn  out
in  the  process  of  efifecting  the  conversion.  If  adding  together
the  flour  and  the  bread  in  summing  the  national  dividend
involves  double  counting,  so  also  does  adding  together  the
machinery  and  the  bread.  "Logically,"  as  Dr.  Marshall
observes,  "  we  ought  to  deduct  the  looms  which  a  weaving
factory  buys  as  well  as  its  yarn.  Again,  if  the  factory  itself
was  reckoned  as  a  product  of  the  building  trade,  its  value
should  be  deducted  from  the  output  (over  a  term  of  years)
of  the  wea\dng  trade.  Similarly  with  regard  to  farm  build-
ings. Farm  houses  ought  certainly  not  to  be  counted,
nor  for  some  purposes  any  houses  used  in  trade."  ^  At  first
sight  it  might  seem  that  these  considerations  could  be  taken
quite  fully  into  account  by  simply  subtracting  from  the
sum  of  the  values  of  the  net  products  of  various  industries,
as  defined  in  the  Census  of  Production,  the  value  of  the
annual  depreciation,  and,  therefore,  the  annual  renewal  of
all  kinds  of  machinery  and  plant^  Thus,  if  a  particular
sort  of  machinery  wears  out  in  ten  years — Professor
Taussig's  estimate  for  the  average  life  of  machinery  in  a
cotton  mill  * — it  is  obvious  that  the  value  of  the  national
dividend  over  ten  years  falls  short  of  the  value  of  the
aggregated    net   product    by    the    value    of   this   machiner}'.^

»  [Cd.  6320],  p.  8.

*  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economics,  p.  614  «.
3  Cf.  Flux,  Staiisticta  Journal,  1913,  p.  559.

*  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1908,  p.  342.  The  report  of  the  Census
of  Production  sanctions  the  view  that  an  average  life  of  ten  years  may  reason-
ably be  assigned  to  buildings  and  plant  in  general  (Report,  p.  35).

*  In  industries  where  large  individual  items  of  assets  need  replacement  at
fairly  long  intervals,  it  is  usual  to  meet  this  need  by  the  accumulation  of
a  depreciation  fund  built  up  by  annual  instalments  during  the  life  of  the
wasting  asset.  For  machinery  which  wears  out  in  about  equal  quantities
every  year.  Professor  Young  argues  that,  provided  the  renewals  and
repairs  required  every  year  are  duly  furnished,  capital  will  be  maintained
intact  by  that  fact  alone,  and  no  depreciation  fund  is  necessary  {Quarterly
Journal  of  Ecmwmics,  1914,  pp.  630  ct  seq.).  It  is  true  that  by  this  method,
when  the  plant  has  been  running  for  some  time,  the  capital  is  maintained
in   one   year   at   the   level   at  which   it   stood   in  the  preceding  year.     But


38  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

Again,  in  so  far  as  any  sort  of  crop  wastes  the  productive
powers  of  the  soil,  the  value  of  the  dividend  falls  short  of
the  value  of  the  aggregated  net  product  by  the  cost  of
returning  to  the  soil  those  chemical  ingredients  that  it
removes.^  Yet  again,  when  minerals  are  dug  out  of  the
ground,  a  deduction  should  be  made  equal  to  the  excess  of
the  value  which  the  minerals  used  during  the  year  had  in
their  original  situation  (theoretically  represented  by  the
royalties  paid  on  their  working),  over  the  value  which  what-
ever is  left  of  them  possesses  to  the  country  after  they  have
been  used.  If  "using"  means  exporting  in  exchange  for
imports  that  are  not  used  as  capital,  this  latter  value  is  zero.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  means  allowing  Nature  miraculously
to  transmute  the  mineral  into  something  possessing  greater
value  than  it  had  in  the  mine,  then,  in  order  to  obtain
the  value  of  the  national  dividend  from  the  value  of  the
aggregated  net  product,  we  shall  need  to  add,  and  not  to
subtract,  something.  All  this  is  simple  enough.  But  in
fact  the  problem  of  evaluating  the  national  dividend  is
more  delicate  than  this.  The  concrete  content  of  the  dividend
is,  indeed,  unambiguous — the  inventory  of  things  made
and  (double  counting  being  eliminated)  services  rendered,
minus,  as  a  negative   element,  the  inventory  of  things  worn

Professor  Young  himself  shows  that,  in  static  conditions,  when  a  plant  has
been  established  for  some  time,  it  will  normally  be  about  half  worn  out
{loc.  cit.  p.  632).  If  half-worn-out  plant,  that  is  to  say,  plant  half-way
through  its  normal  life — is  technically  of  the  same  efficiency  as  new  plant,
this  fact  does  not  injure  his  conclusion.  But,  in  so  far  as  the  efficiency
of  plant  diminishes  with  age,  the  case  is  otherwise.  If  the  capital  is  to
be  maintained  at  the  level  at  which  it  stood  when  first  invested,  it  is  necessary,
not  merely  to  provide  renewals  and  repairs  as  needed,  but  also  to  maintain
a  permanent  depreciation  fund,  to  balance  the  difference  between  the  values
of  a  wholly  new  plant  and  of  one  the  constituents  of  which  are  on  the  average
half-way  through  their  effective  life.  (Cf.  also  a  discussion  between  Professor
Young  and  Mr.  J.  S.  Davis  under  the  title  "  Depreciation  and  Rate  Control "  in
the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  Feb.  1915).

*  Professor  Carver  writes  of  the  United  States:  "Taking  the  country  over,
it  is  probable  that,  other  things  equal,  if  the  farmers  had  been  compelled  to
buy  fertilisers  to  maintain  the  fertility  of  their  soil  without  depletion,  the  whole
industry  would  have  become  bankrupt.  .  .  .  The  average  farmer  had  never
(up  to  about  1887)  counted  the  partial  exhaustion  of  the  soil  as  a  part  of  the
cost  of  his  crop "  (Sketch  of  Ainerican  Agriculture,  p.  70).  Against  this
capital  loss,  however,  must  be  set  the  capital  gain  due  to  the  settlement  of
the  land.


OH.  Ill  THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  39

out  durmg_the_^ear.  But  how  are  we  to  value  this  negative
element  ?  For  example,  if  a  machine  originally  costing  £1000
wears  out  and,  owing  to  a  rise  in  the  general  price  level,  can
only  be  replaced  at  a  cost  of  £1500,  is  £1000  or  £1500  the
proper  allowance  ?  Nor  is  this  the  only,  or,  indeed,  the  prin-
cipal difficulty.  For  depreciation  is  not  measured  merely  by
the  physical  process  of  wearing  out,  and  capital  is  not  there-
fore maintained  intact  when  provision  has  been  made  to  replace
what  is  thus  worn  out.  Machinery  that  has  become  obsolete
because  of  the  development  of  improved  forms  is  not  really
left  intact,  however  excellent  its  physical  condition ;  and
the  same  thing  is  true  of  machiuery  for  whose  products
popular  taste  has  declined.  If,  however,  in  deference
to  these  considemtions,  we  decide  to  make  an  allowance
for  obsolescence,  this  concession  implies  that  the  value,  and
not  the  physical  efficiency,  of  instrumental  goods  is  the
object  to  be  maintained  intact.  But,  it  is  then  urged,  the
value  of  instrumental  goods,  being  the  present  value  of
the  services  which  they  are  expected  to  render  in  the
future,  necessarily  varies  with  variations  in  the  rate  of
interest.  Is  it  really  a  rational  procedure  to  evaluate  the
national  dividend  by  a  method  which  makes  its  value  in
relation  to  that  of  the  aggregated  net  product  of  the  country's
industry  depend  on  an  incident  of  that  kind  ?  If  that
method  is  adopted,  and  a  great  war,  by  raising  the  rate
of  interest,  depreciates  greatly  the  value  of  existing  capital,
we  shaU  probably  be  compelled  to  put,  for  the  value  of  the
national  dividend  in  the  first  year  of  that  war,  a  very  large
negative  figure.  This  absurdity  must  be  avoided  at  all
costs,  and  we  are  therefore  compelled,  when  we  are  engaged
in  valuing  the  national  dividend,  to  leave  out  of  account
any  change  in  the  value  of  the  country's  capital  equip-
ment that  may  have  been  brought  about  by  broad  general
causes.  This  decision  is  arbitrary  and  unsatisfactory,
but  it  is  one  which  it  is  impossible  to  avoid.  During
the  period  of  the  war  a  similar  difficulty  was  created
by  the  general  rise,  for  many  businesses,  in  the  value
of  the  normal  and  necessary  holding  of  materials  and  stocks,
which    was    associated     with    the    general    rise    of    prices.


40  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


PT.  I


On  our  principles  this  increase  of  value  ought  not  to
be  reckoned  as  an  addition  to  the  income  of  the  firms
affected,  or,  consequently,  to  the  value  of  the  national
dividend.  ^

§  7.  It  remains  to  consider  the  relation  between  the
national  dividend  as  thus  evaluated — an  addition,  of  course,
being  made  for  the  value  of  income  received  from  abroad —
and  the  money  income  accruing  to  the  community.  On  the
face  of  things  we  should  expect  these  two  sums  to  be  sub-
stantially equal,  just  as  we  should  expect  a  man's  receipts
and  his  expenditure  (including  investments)  to  be  equal.  With
proper  account-keeping  this  clearly  ought  to  be  so.  In  order
that  it  may  be  so,  however,  it  is  necessary  for  the  money
income  of  the  community  to  be  so  defined  as  to  exclude  all
income  that  is  obtained  by  one  person  as  a  gift  against  which
no  service  entering  into  the  evaluation  of  the  national  dividend
is  rendered — all  allowances,  for  example,  received  by  children
from  their  parents.  This  point  is,  of  course,  well  understood.
But  certain  further  implications  are  less  fully  realised.  Thus,
the  income  of  all  old-age  pensioners  must  be  excluded,  or,
alternatively,  that  part  of  the  income  of  tax-payers  which  is
paid  to  the  State  to  provide  these  pensions.  So  also  must
income  received  by  native  creditors  of  the  State  in  interest
on  loans  that  have  been  employed  "  unproductively,"  i.e.  in  such
a  way  that  they  do  not,  as  loans  to  buy  railways  would  do,
themselves  "  produce  "  money  with  which  to  pay  the  interest
due  on  them.  This  means  that  the  income  received  as  interest
on  War  loan — or  the  income  paid  to  the  State  to  provide  this
interest — ought  to  be  excluded.  Nor  is  it  possible  to  over-
throw this  conclusion  by  suggesting  that  the  money  spent  on
the  war  has  really  been  "  productive,"  because  it  indirectly
prevented  invasion  and  the  destruction  of  material  capital  that
is  now  producing  goods  sold  for  money  ;  for  whatever  product
war  expenditure  may  have  been  responsible  for  in  this  way
is  already  counted  in  the  income  earned  by  the  material
capital.  Finally,  it  would  seem  that  income  obtained  by
force     or    fraud,    against   which    no    real    service    has    been

1  For  a  discussion  of  this  question  in  its  bearing  on  the  Excess  Profits  Duty,
cf.  Report  of  tlie  Committee  on  Excess  Profits.


CH.  Ill  THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  41

rendered,  ought  not  to  be  counted.  When  the  nominal
money  income  of  the  country  has  been  "  corrected "  in
these  various  ways,  what  is  left  should  approximate  fairly
closely  to  the  value  of  the  national  dividend  (inclusive
of  incomes  from  abroad)  estimated  on  the  plan  set  out
above.


CHAPTEK    IV

THE    RELATION    OF    ECONOMIC    WELFARE    TO    THE    NATIONAL
DIVIDEND

/

''^  §  1.  The  national  dividend,  as  it  flows  into  being  in  any  year,
is  the  fruit  of  the  activities  of  the  people  working  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  accumulated  results  of  past  activities  and  with
the  materials  and  forces  provided  by  nature.  It  consists  of
an  indefinite  number  of  parts  which  are  distributed  in  various
proportions  ^mong  different  groups  and  individuals.  Further-
more, both  the  magnitude  of  the  whole  and  the  magnitude  of
the  separate  parts  are  variable  quantities,  oscillating  about,
perhaps  a  fixed,  but  more  probably  a  changing  average,  and
differing,  therefore,  from  one  year  to  another.  An  entity  of
this  kind  is  far  too  complex  to  be  handled  in  its  concrete
actuality  by  any  scientific  machinery  of  which  we  are  at
present  possessed.  If,  therefore,  the  relation  of  economic
welfare  to  the  national  dividend  is  to  be  examined  with  any
prospect  of  success,  it  is  necessary  to  construct  some  artificially
simplified  picture  of  the  dividend,  which  will  leave  detail  on
one  side  and  focus  attention  on  a  small  number  of  dominant
characteristics.  In  this  book  I  shall  make  use  of  the  follow-
ing "  modeLl' jjQac&ption.  First,  over  any  period  of,  say,  a,
decade,  covering  a  cycle  of  good  and  bad  years  together,  the
national  dividend  will  possess  some  d^^^nit^  average  mluTrie-
Secondly,  over  this  peiiod  the  portion  of  the  dividend  accruing
to^poor  persons — the  precise  definition  of  what  we  mean  by  a
poor  person  need  not  trouble  us — will  constitute  some  definite
^proportion,  of  the  whole.  Thirdly,  both  (a)  the  dividend  as  a
whole,  and  (6)  the  part  of  it  accruing  to  poor  persons  will  vary

42


CH.  IV      RELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND         43

ah03li-Ji&^  n/f>fifrn/jp.  Ip.vpI  hy  n.  definUc.  nnie.rn^R  gmmmJ  '^^^-^
purpose  of  the  present  chapter  is  to  exhibit  in  a  general  waj_
the  relations  between  economic  welfare  and  each  of  these  severaj
characteristic  features  of  the  national  dividend.  It  is  evident
that  these  relations  are  never  direct,  but  are  always  mediated
through  the  income  of  consumers'  goods.  Under  each  head,
it  will  be  necessary  to  bear  this  fact  in  mind.

§  2.  Let  us  begin  with  the  relation  between  economic
welfare  and  the  average  volume  of  the  national  dividend.
Here  the  necessary  mediation  through  consumable  income
raises  no  difficulties.  In  general,  anything  that  increases  or
diminishes  the  average  volume  of  the  national  dividend  will
affect  the  average  volume  of  the  national  consumable  income
in  the  same  sense.  We  need  not,  therefore,  trouble  to  maintain
the  distinction  between  them,  but  rnay  treat  natinna.!  dividend
and  consumable  income. as,  for  this  purpose — not,  of  course,
for  all  purposes — practically  equivalent  terms.  For  economy
of  language  I  shall,  in  fact,  adopt  this  plan.  With  this  under-
standing it  is  tempting  to  maintain  that  any  cause  which
increases  the  volume  of  the  dividend,  provided  that  it  neither
injures  its  distribution  nor  increases  its  variability,  will  in-
crease economic  welfare.  But  this  proposition  is  not  valid.
The  quantity  of  economic  welfare  associated  with  any  volume
of  the  dividend  depends,  not  only  on  the  satisfaction  yielded  1
by  consumption,  but  also  on  the  dissatisfaction  involved  in
production.  There  must,  therefore,  be  some  point  after  which!  ^
an  addition  to  the  resources  expended .  in  production,  while!
still  adding  something  to  the  dividend,  would  involve  a  direct  ,
loss  of  satisfaction  greater  than  the  indirect  gain.  Suppose,
for  example,  that  the  whole  community  was  compelled  by  law
to  work  for  eighteen  hours  a  day,  and — which  is  in  fact
improbable — that  this  policy  made  the  national  dividend
larger.  It  is  practically  certain  that  the  satisfaction  yielded
by  the  extra  product  would  be  enormously  less  than  the
dissatisfaction  caused  by  the  extra  labour.  And  the  same
thing  is  true  if  extra  work  is  done,  not  under  compulsion,  but
because  some  workpeople  have  formed  an  erroneous  estimate  of
their  own  interests.  No  doubt,  in  the  modem  world,  apart
from  military  conscription,  we  have  to  do,  not  with  forced.


44  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  i

but  with  voluntary  labour.  No  doubt  too,  hours  of  labour
cannot  be  carried  far  beyond  the  point  to  which  the  work-
people's interests,  rightly  interpreted,  would  lead  them,  without
causing  a  diminution,  instead  of  an  increase,  in  the  national
dividend.  Hence,  it  is  unlikely  that  we  shall  often  meet  in
practice  with  any  considerable  expansions  of  the  national
dividend  that  are  injurious  to  economic  welfare.  Still  the
mere  fact  that  injurious  expansions  are  possible  invalidates
the  proposition  suggested  above.

§  3.  Nor  is  the  somewhat  obvious  disharmony  just  displayed
the  only  one  that  may  arise.  It  is  fairly  plain  that,  if  two
regions,  between  which  capital  or  labour  have  hitherto  been
unable  to  move,  with  the  result  that  a  unit  of  capital  or
labour  in  one  of  them  is  producing  a  considerably  larger
output  than  a  similar  unit  in  the  other,  are  brought  into
communication,  economic  welfare  is  bound  to  be  increased.
For  hereafter  labour  (or  capital)  will  be  so  distributed  between
the  two  regions  that  nothing  could  be  gained  by  movement,
and  the  amount  of  labour  exercised  (or  capital  created)  will
be  such  that  the  exercise  (or  creation)  of  any  additional  unit
would  destroy  more  satisfaction  than  the  product  for  which  it
might  be  responsible  could  yield.  If,  therefore,  there  is  to  be
harmony,  it  is  necessary  that  the  opening  up  of  communication
between  the  two  regions  shall  also  cause  the  national  dividend
to  increase.  It  can  be  shown,  however,  that  this  need  not
happen.  Working  along  the  lines  of  an  argument  developed
by  Couruot  in  his  chapter  on  "The  Competition  of  Markets,"^-
we  perceive  that  the  abolition  of  obstacles  between  the  two
regions  7(iay  cause  the  aggregate  quantity  of  labour  exercised,
or  capital  created,  to  be  smaller  than  it  was  before.  Suppose,
for  example,  that  one  group  of  workpeople  is  assembled  at  A
and  another  at  B ;  that  the  marginal  hour's  work  at  A
yields  a  much  smaller  return  than  the  marginal  hour's  work
of  similar  quality  yields  at  B ;  and  that  at  both  places  the
return  yielded  per  hour's  work  is  smaller  the  greater  is  the
quantity  of  work  that  is  done  there.  The  removal  of  an
obstacle  which  has  hitherto   prevented  workmen   at  A  from

1  Mathematical  Theory  of  Wealth,  ch.   xi.  ;  cf.   Bowley,  "  The  Mobility  of
Labour,"  Economic  Journal,  1912,  pp.  46  et  seq.


CH.  IV       EELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  45

going  to  B  at  once  causes  a  migration.  Since,  after  the
change,  an  hour's  work  both  at  B  and  at  A  yields  more  return
than  an  hour's  work  at  A  formerly  yielded,  the  men  who  were
originally  at  A  may  be  led  to  provide  more  hours'  work  than
they  provided  before.  But  the  men  originally  at  B,  finding
that  an  hour's  work  there  now  yields  a  less  return  than  it
used  to  yield,  may  be  led  to  provide  fewer  hours'  work  than
they  provided  before.  It  is  evident  that  conditions  of  demand
and  supply  at  A  and  B  may  be  such  that  the  diminution  in  the
amount  of  work  provided  by  the  natives  of  B  will  be  greater  than
the  increase  in  that  provided  by  the  natives  of  A  ;  in  such  wise
that  the  quantity  of  labour  forthcoming  in  both  regions
together  is  made  smaller  by  the  removal  of  the  obstacle
between  them.  Suppose  again  that  in  agricultural  districts
the  capital  employed  is  yielding  a  low  return,  while  in
manufacturing  districts  isolated  from  them  it  is  yielding  a
high  return ;  that  the  demand  is  elastic  in  the  agricultural
districts  and  very  inelastic  in  the  manufacturing  districts  ;  and
that  the  supply  is  about  equally  elastic  in  the  two  sets  of
districts.  On  these  suppositions,  after  the  removal  of  the
obstacles  that  separated  them,  say,  by  the  development  of  banking,
the  amount  of  capital  made  available  in  manufacturing  districts
would  remain  practically  unchanged ;  but  the  amount  made
available  in  agricultural  districts  would,  on  account  of  the
increase  in  cost,  be  greatly  diminished.  On  balance,  therefore,
there  would  be  a  smaller  aggregate  of  capital  than  before  in
•the  two  sets  of  districts  taken  together.  These  examples  show
that  the  abolition  of  obstacles  to  movement  between  two
districts  may  diminish  the  aggregate  quantity  of  resources
availaTi)le  for  production  in  the  two  together.  Further,
mathematical  analysis  enables  us  to  conclude  that,  when  an
obstacle  selected  at  random  is  removed,  an  increase  and  a
decrease  In  the  quantity  of  productive  resources  that  come
into  being  are  about  equally  probable,  or,  if  we  prefer  to  put
it    so,   will    occur   about   equally   often.^       This    result    does    •

*  When  there  is  no  communication  between  two  fields  in  which  productiTe
resources  are  employed,  let  the  demands  for  these  resources  be

<h{pi)  and  ^4j)^)
and  the  supplies  f^{p^)  a.n^f^{p^.


46  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

\  not,  of  course,  imply  that  an  increase  and  a  decrease  in  the
i  magnitude  of  the  national  dividend  are  about  equally  probable.
For,  whether  or  not  the  aggregate  quantity  of  resources
available  for  work  is  diminished,  such  resources  as  are  available
are  necessarily  employed,  on  the  average,  under  conditions
more  favourable  to  production.  Thus,  in  our  example  of  the
two  groups  of  workpeople  assembled  at  A  and  B,  let  us  suppose
that,  before  the  obstacle  was  removed,  x  hours'  work  was
forthcoming  at  A  and  y  hours'  work  at  B,  and  that,  after  it
is  removed,  {x  +  y  —  h)  hours'  work  are  performed  at  B  and  no
hours'  work  at  A.  Then  each  one  of  the  (x  —  h)  hours  now
added   to   the   work   done   at   B   necessarily   yields   a   larger

Then  we  have  the  equations

<t>'z<^i)=Mv2)  •         •  (II-)

When  communication  is  introduced,  we  have  the  equation

<t>l{Pz)  +  <P2{P3)  =/l(?'3)  +A{Ps)  ■  (III-  )

Let  the  root   of  (I.)   be   a,  of  (II.)  b,  of  (III.)  a  +  k,   where   k   is   such    that
a  +  k  +  h  =  b.

Let  it  be  assumed  that  all  the  functions  involved  are  linear,  so  that  all  dif-
ferentials beyond  the  first  are  equal  to  zero.
Then  it  is  easily  proved  that

(6-a)(^j'-/i')


h  =


4>\  +  ^2'  -fi  -fi


Hence,  a  +  k=  — .  ,  ,   ,  , — 77 — ji— .

01+92  -/i  -/a

a  value  intermediate  between  a  and  b.

It  is  also  easily  proved  that  the  increase  in  the  amount  of  the  factor  in
question,  when  communication  is  opened  up,

=  {fi{a  +  k)+Ma  +  k)}  -  {Aa+Ma  +  k  +  h)}

~  A.'^^' — T' — T'  i/1'^2'  -/2V1'}

This  may  be  either  positive  or  negative.     In  order  that  it  may  be  negative,
{fii'i  ~f'l'i'\\  must  be  positive,

9\       02
Tf  the  elasticities  of  supply  of  and  demand  for  productive  resources  in  the  two

fields  respectively  are  written  ej,  t/j,  e^,  t\^,  this  condition  becomes  -  >  — ;  or,  in

'?!        '?2

other  words,  the  elasticity  of  supply  must  bear  a  higher  ratio  to  the  elasticity
of  demand  in  the  market  where,  before  communication,  price  was  lower,  than
in  the  other  market.  There  is,  obviously,  no  reason  for  thinking  that  this
condition  is  either  more  or  less  likely  than  not  to  be  fulfilled.  Nor  would  our
ignorance  be  in  any  way  lightened,  if  the  assumption  that  all  the  functions
involved  are  linear  was  abandoned.


cH.  IV       KELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  47

product  than  it  would  have  yielded  had  it  continued  to  be
performed  at  A.  The  addition  that  is  made  in  this  way
to  the  efficiency  of  productive  resources  will  bring  about  an
enhanced  product,  not  only  on  all  occasions  when  the  aggregate
quantity  of  resources  is  increased,  but  also  on  some  occasions
when  it  is  diminished.  Hence,  more  often  than  not  the
removal  of  an  obstacle  to  movement  between  two  le^ona  will
increase  the  natiijnal  dividend.  It  is  easy  to  show,  however,
that  sometimes  it  will  diminish  it.  Suppose,  for  example,
that  in  the  region,  where,  before  the  obstacle  is  removed,
production  per  unit  of  labour  or  capital  is  larger  than  in  the
other,  there  is  not  room  to  employ  more  than  a  few  further
units  except  at  a  greatly  reduced  return.  In  these  circum-
stances, when  the  obstacle  is  removed,  the  output  as  well  as
the  capital  and  labour  employed  there,  will  be  practically
the  same  (if  the  demand  is  perfectly  inelastic,  exactly  the
same)  as  before ;  while  capital  and  labour  having  been  with-
drawn from  the  other  region  in  order  to  take  the  place  of  those
units  that  it  is  no  longer  worth  while  to  provide  in  the  first,  the
output  in  the  other  region  will  be  smaller  than  before.  This
proves  that  the  removal  of  the  obstacle  may  lessen  the
national  dividend.  Since,  therefore,  it  must  increase  economic
welfare,  there  may,  or  in  other  words,  sometimes  wUl,  be
disharmony.  Some  causes  that  injure  the  national  dividend
will  increase  economic  welfare,  and  vice  versa.

§  4.  The  qualification  set  out  in  the  preceding  section
is  probably  of  small  importance  otherwise  than  academically.
That  set  out  in  §  2,  however,  is  obviously  of  very  great
importance.  For  practical  purposes  it  will  be  sufficient
to  modify  our  statement  of  the  relation  between  economic
welfare  and  the  average  volume  of  the  national  dividend
with  reference  to  it  alone.  Broadly  and  generally  then
we  may  lay  down  the  following  proposition  :  Any  caitse  \
which,  without  the  exercise  of  compulsion  or  pressure  upon
people  to  make  them  work  more  than  their  vAshes  and  interests
dictate,  increases  productive  efficiency,  and,  therewith,  the  average
volume_  of  the  na t ional  dividend^,  provided  th at  it  neither  injures  |
the  _distributio7i  nor  augments  the  variaMlity  of  the  country's
eonsum^lejmcpm^wini^'m  general,  increase  economic  welfare.


9


48  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

§  5.  This  proposition,  it  will  be  observed,  is  purely
qualitative  in  form,  and  states  nothing  about  the  quantitative
relation  between  an  expansion  of  the  national  dividend  and
additions  to  economic  welfaxe._  To  remedy  this  deficiency
completely  is,  of  course,  impossible.  It  is  not  impossible,
however,  to  throw  some  further  light  on  the  matter.  To
this  end  we  may  begin  by  leaving  out  of  account  the  reactions
that  may  be  produced  by  the  fact  of  consumption  upon
capacity  for  deriving  enjoyment  from  consumption.  When
this  is  done,_the  familiar  "law  of  diminishiiig^utilit_^_^[_instructs
us  that  a  given  expansion  "1)T  the  national  dividend  is
likely  to  be  accompanied  by  a  less  than  proportionate  inci;ease
in  economic  Welfare.  This  conclusion  is,  moreover,  reinforced
by  a  further  consideration.  The  satisfaction  which  a  man
i)btains  from  his  economic  environment  is,  in  great  part,
derived,  not  from  the  absolute,  but  from  the  comparative,
giagnitude  of  his  income.  Mill  wrote :  "  Men  do  not
desire  to  be  rich,  but  to  be  richer  than  other  men.  The
avaricious  or  covetous  man  would  find  little  or  no  satisfaction
in  the  possession  of  any  amount  of  wealth,  if  he  were  the
poorest  amongst  all  his  neighbours  or  fellow-countrymen."  ^
More  elaborately.  Signer  Rignano  writes  :  "  As  for  the  needs
whicli  vanity  creates,  they  can  be  satisfied  equally  well  by  a
small  as  by  a  large  expenditure  of  energy.  It  is  only  the
existence  of  great  riches,  which  makes  necessary  for  such
satisfaction  a  very  large,  instead  of  a  very  small,  expenditure.
In  reality  a  man's  desire  to  appear  '  worth '  double  what
another  man  is  worth,  that  is  to  say,  to  possess  goods  (jewels,
clothes,  horses,  parks,  luxuries,  houses,  etc.)  twice  as  valuable
as  those  possessed  by  another  man,  is  satisfied  just  as  fully,  if
the  first  has  ten  things  and  the  second  five,  as  it  would  be  if
the  first  had  a  hundred  and  the  second  fifty."  ^  Moreover,
it  is  not  merely  rivalry  that  is  in  question.  Besides  the
desire  for  a  good  relative  position  among  people,  which  im-
provement benefiting  all  people  similarly  obviously  does
nothing  to  satisfy,  there  is  the  nobler  desire  for  excellence  for

*  Posthumous  Essay  on  Social   Freedom,    Oxford  and  Cambridge  Review,
Jan.  1907.

2  Di  un  socialismo  in  accordo  colla  dottrina  economica  liherale,  p.  285.


CH.IV       KELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  49

its  own  sake.  "  We  needs  must  love  the  highest  when  we  see
it  " ;  we  desire,  in  a  measure,  that  what  we  have  shall  be  the
best  of  its  kind.  This  desire  obviously  receives  no  fuller
satisfaction,  or,  in  other  words,  economic  welfare  gains  nothing,
when  improvements  create  a  new  "  best "  superior  to  the
old  one.  Considerations  of  this  order  are  much  more
important  than  is  sometimes  recognised.  An  ordinary  man*8
satisfaction  does  not,  of  coursCj  depend  entirely  upon  his
comparative,  but  partly  at  least  upon  his  absolute,  income.
It  cannot  be  maintained  seriously  that  an  increase  in  the  latter
will  add  nothing  vjhatever  to  the  satisfactions  which  constitute
his  economic  welfare.^  But  there  is  good  reason  to  believe
that  it  will  add  considerably  less  to  these  satisfactions  than
might  have  been  thought  probable  at  a  first  careless  glance.

§  6.  It  remains  to  take  account  of  the  reactions  which
the  fact  of  consumption  may  produce  on  taste.  Prima  facie
it  would  seem  that  those  reactions  may  enable  a  given
expansion  in  the  average  volume  of  the  dividend  to  augment
economic  welfare  more  largely  by  indirect  means  than  it  is
able  to  do  directly.  Obviously,  the  amount  of  economic  satis-
faction that  a  community  obtains  from  a  given  economic  environ-
ment depends,  not  only  on  the  environment,  but  also,  in  an  at
least  equal  degree,  upon  the  mentality  of  the  people  concerned.
Jevons  observed  long  ago  that  a  small  change  in  wants  and
tastes  niight  often  by  itseK  lead  to  a  very  great  increase  in
economic  welfare.  And  he  added  a  characteristic  illustration  :
"  While  the  great  Irish  famine  was  at  its  worst,  abundance  of
salmon  and  other  fish  could  have  been  had  for  the  trouble  of
catching ;  scarcely  any  of  the  starving  peasantry  would  consent
to  touch  it."  ^  A  similar  thought  underlies  the  late  Canon
Bamett's  observation  :  "  Children  should  be  prepared  for  leisure
with  as  much  care  as  they  are  prepared  for  work.  Great  pains
are  taken  that  boys  should  learn  some  skill  and  that  girls

'  Lassalle's  view,  as  quoted  by  Leroy-Beaulieu,  that  "  la  situation  de  chaque
dasse  a  toujours  pour  unique  mesure  la  situation  des  autres  classes  dans  le
m^me  temps "  {Repartition  des  richesses,  p.  45),  is  clearly  an  extravagance,
but  there  may  be  literal  truth  in  Professor  Carver's  epigram,  ' '  We  all  spend
more  in  trying  to  live  like  our  neighbours  than  in  trying  to  live  comfortably  "
(Essays  on  Social  Justice,  p.  379).  Veblen's  Theory  of  the  Leisured  Class  contains
a  number  of  acute,  if  somewhat  one-sided,  observations  upon  this  matter.

*  Principles  of  Economics,  p.  32.

E


re    /


50  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

should  do  needlework,  but  surely  as  great  pains  should   be

taken    that    they    may    develop    powers    of   self  -  amusement   ,

.  and  others'  amusement."  ^      It  follows  that,  if  a  cause,  which  /

directly  increases  the  output  of  any  of  th'e'^ods' or  services

/  contained  in  the  national  dividend,  thereby  indirectly  increases

I  people's   capacity  for   deriving  satisfaction   from   these  goods

I  and  -services,   it    will,   to    that    extent,   make    an    important

1  indirect    contribution    to    economic    welfare.       And    in    fact

it  can  be  shown  that  this  frequently  happens.     For  in  the

economic  world  "  infant,"   or   undeveloped,    demands    are   to

be  found  equally  with  "  infant,"  or  undeveloped,  industries.

People    may    be    given    a    taste    for    a    particular    thing,   or

the    keenness    of    their    desire    for    it    may    be   permanently

increased,  through  the  temporary  use  of,  or  acquaintance  with,

s  it.     When  machines  are  sent  out  on  trial,  or  articles  presented

in  sample-packets,  or  pictures  exhibited  free  to  the  public,  the

popular  taste  for  these  objects  tends  to  be  augmented.     When

public-houses,  or  lotteries,   or  libraries   are   easily  accessible,

the  taste  for  drink,  or  gambling,  or  literature  is  not  merely

gratified,  but  is  also  stimulated.     When  cleanliness,  or  light,^

or    model    dwellings,    or    model    plots    of    agricultural    land

are   set   up,   though  it  is  only   to   be  seen,   and  not  owned,

by   the  neighbours,  the  object  lesson  may  still  succeed  and

make  plain  superiorities  hitherto  unrecognised.^     Thus,  "  free

libraries    are    engines    for    creating    the    habitual    power    of

enjoying  high-class  literature,"  and  a  savings  bank,  if  confined

to   the    poor,  is   an    "  engine   for   teaching  thrift."  *      In  like

*  Towards  Social  Reform,  p.  302  ;  cf.  Fisher,  The  Nature  of  Capital
and  Income,  p.  176.

2  Cf.  Walpole's  account  of  tlie  way  in  which  the  introduction  of  sti'eet  lamps
led  to  an  increased  demand  for  illuminants  within  the  neighbouring  houses
(History  of  England,  i.  86).  An  elaborate  method  of  advertising  electric  light
is  quoted  in  Whyte's  Electrical  Lidustry  (p.  57).  A  company  undertakes  to
instal  six  lamps  in  a  house  free  of  all  charge  for  a  six  months'  trial,  the  liouse-
holder  paying  only  for  the  current  that  he  uses.  After  the  six  months,  the  com-
pany undertakes  to  remove  the  whole  arrangement  if  the  customer  so  desires.

^  Cf.  Miss  Octavia  Hill's  practice  of  insisting  on  the  cleanliness  of  the  stair-
eases  of  her  houses,  and  Sir  H,  Plunkett's  account  of  the  Cork  Exhibition,
1902  (IrelaTui  in  the  New  Century,  pp.  285-7).

*  Jevons,  Methods  of  Social  Reform,  p.  32.  It  should  be  noted,  however,
that  Dr.  Marshall  thinks  this  order  of  consideration  is  of  relatively  small
range.  He  writes:  "Those  demands,  which  show  high  elasticity  in  the  long
run,   show  a  high  elasticity  almost  at  once  ;  so  that,  subject  to  a  few  excep'


cH.  IV      KELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  51

manner    the   policy   of  many    German   cities,   in    subsidising
theatres  and  opera-houses  and  in  providing  symphony  concerts
two  or   three   evenings  a   week   at   a   very   small   admission
fee,   is   an   educational  policy   that   bears   fruit   in    increased
capacity  for   enjoyment.^     No  doubt  sometimes  the  incfease  /
in  iaste   for   one    thing    is    associated    with   a    substa!ntially
equivalent    decline    in    taste    for    another    thing    that    fulfils
the  same  purpose, — e.^.  wool  as  against  cotton, — and  does  not,  |
therefore,  lead  to  any  appreciable  increase  in  agiiiecrate  welfare.  \
But,  frequently,  as  a  conSlderaliun-of  the  exain[ :  above   |

will  show,  there  is  a  genuine  creation  or  deveiupiL^cnt  of  a  ^
new  taste.  The  mdlfSCt  b(ineflC§"which  are  thus  conferred
upon  economic  welfare  by  an  increase  in  the  dividend  have
the  further  characteristic  that  they  may  be  permanent,  even
though  the  increase  in  any  part  of  the  dividend  is  itself  only
temporary.  For,  peoples'  tastes  being  altered  in  an  enduring
manner,  they  will  continue  to  obtain  more  satisfaction  than
they  did  before,  if  and  when  the  supply  of  the  commodity
they  have  become  trained  to  like  falls  again  to  its  original
amount.

§  7.  This  line  of  reasoning  is,  however,  subject  to  an  im-
^rtaut  qualification.     It  is  true  that  experience  of  a  particular  J
thing  will  often  enable  people  to  get  increased  satisfaction  out    ^FV"^.
of  it.      But  it  is  at  least  arguable  that,  after  a  point,  as  growing
wealth  gives  a  man  command  over  more  and  more  luxuries,
the   satisfaction  that  he  gains   from    each   new  one   is,  as  it  )
were,  taken ~ijut  uf'Teraxed  interest   in   the    others,   so   that  I
the  economic"?atrsfaclion  which  he  achieves  on  the  whole  is
not  substantially  increased.     He  may  be  conceived,  in  short,
as  a  vessel  able,  according  to  his  temperament,  to  ^contain"
a   certain   limited   amount   of  economic    satisfaction.     When
satiety  point  is  reached,  further  new   satisfactions   can  only
be  admilled  at  the  cost  of  driving  out  an  equivalent  volume
of  other   satisfactions.      There    can    be   no    doubt   that    this
conception  embodies  a  large  element  of  truth.      It  need  not

tions,  we  may  speak  of  the  demand  for  a  commodity  as  being  of  higli  or  low
elasticity  without  specifying  how  far  we  are  looking  ahead"  (Principles  of
Economics,  p.  456).

•  Cf.  Howe,  European  Cities  at  Work,  pp.  147-50.


52  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

be  denied  that  a  rich  man  accustomed  to  a  yacht  would  be
much  hurt  at  the  time  by  having  to  do  without  his  yacht :
but,  when  he  had  got  accustomed  to  a  new  and  lower  standard
of  living,  provided  that  it  still  remained  fairly  high,  it  might
well  be  that  he  would  be  no  less  happy  than  before.  Per
contra,  a  man  accustomed  to  a  standard  of  living  represented,
say,  by  £3000  a  year,  may  well  get  quite  as  much  satisfaction
out  of  life  as  another  man  of  similar  temperament  with
£300,000  a  year  and  accustomed  to  the  standard  which  that
income  implies.  These  considerations  suggest  that  the  re-
actions which  take  place  between  consumption  and  taste
may,  on  the  whole,  lessen  rather  than  augment  the  beneficial
effects  which  a  given  expansion  of  the  dividend  is  likely  to
have  upon  economic  welfare.  It  must  be  noted,  however,
that  they  are  relevant  to  a  change  from  riches  to  greater
riches,  rather  than  to  one  from  poverty  to  less  poverty ;
and,  looked  at  as  a  whole,  every  modern  nation,  when  its
real  income  is  balanced  against  its  population,  is  still  very
poor.  Hence,  as  things  actually  are,  I  am  inclined  to  think
that  the  reactions  which  occur  between  consumption  and
taste  are  likely,  on  the  whole^  to  make  the  benefit  to  economic
welfare  resulting  from  a  given  expansion  of  the  dividend
a  little  larger  than  it  would  be  if  there  were  no  reactions.
,  But  this  conclusion  in  the  present  state  of  economic  science,
1  is,  of  course,  little  better  than  a  guess.

\        §8.  We    now    turn    to    the   relation   between    economic

welfare  and  the  proportion  of  the  national  dividend  accruing

(10  poor  persons.     Here  the  distinction  between  total  income

/and  consumed  income  is  more  important,  because,  generally

'  speaking,  the  richer  a  man  is,  the  larger  proportion   of  his

income  he  is  likely  to  save,  so  that,  if  his  total  income  is,

say,   twenty   times   as    large,  his    consumed   income  may  be

only,   say,   five   times   as   large.     Nevertheless,  it  is  evident

that  any  transference  of  income  from  a  relatively  rich  man

ito   a   relativeTj7~pb6r   man   of  similar  temperament,  since  it

j  enables  more   intense   wants   to   be  satisfied   at  the  expense

'of  less  intense   wants,  must  increase  the   aggregate   sum   of

satisfaction.      The    old    "law    o^   diminishing    utility"    thus

leads  securely  to  a  second  main  proposition,   which   may  be


CH.  IV      RELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  53

stated  as  follows :    Any  cause  which  increases  the  prwffriion  of  L
the  national  divideiuTlfcevved  hy  poor  2ersons,_^_ovidedJhM,t  it
does  not  lead  to  a  contraction  of  the  ^tr'V/^"/^?  T'^^  rh-..^  vot  injuri-
otisTy^affect   its  variabiiit)/,  xmll,   in  tconomic^

welfare.  This  conclusion  is  further  fortitied  by  the  fact  that,
of  the  satisfaction  yielded  by  the  incomes  of  rich  people,  a
specially  large  proportion  comes  from  their  relative  rather  than
their  absolute  amount,  and,  therefore,  will  not  be  destroyed  if
the  incomes  of  all  rich  people  are  diminished  together/

§  9.  It  must  be  conceded,  of  course,  that,  if  the  rich~an3^
the  poor  were  two  races  with  different  mental  constitutions,
such  that  the  rich  were  inherently  capable  of  securing  a
greater  amount  of  economic  satisfaction  from  asj'  given
income  than  the  poor,  the  possibility  of  increasing  welfare
by  this  type  of  change  would  be  seriously  doubtful  Further-
more, even  without  any  assumption  about  inherent  racial
difference,  it  may  be  maintained  that  a  rich  man,  from
the  nature  of  his  upbringing  and  training,  is  capable  of
obtaining  considerably  more  satisfaction  from  a  given  income
— say  a  thousand  pounds — than  a  poor  man  would  be.
For,  if  anybody  accustomed  to  a  given  standard  of  living
suddenly  finds  his  income  enlarged,  he  is  apt  to  dissipate
the  extra  income  in  forms  of  exciting  pleasure,  which,
when  their  indirect,  as  well  as  their  direct,  effects  are  taken
into  account,  may  even  lead  to  a  positive  loss  of  satisfaction.
To  this  argument,  however,  there  is  a  sufficient  answer.  It
is  true  that  at  any  given  moment  the  tastes  and  temperament
of  persons  who  have  long  been  poor  are  more  or  less  adjusted
to  their  environment,  and  that  a  sudden  and  sharp  rise  of
income  is  likely  to  be^fotiowed'  by  a  good  deal  of  foolish
expenditure,  which  involves  little  or  no  addition  to  economic
welfare.  If,  however,  the  higher  income  is  maintained  for
any  length  of  time,  this  phase  will  pass  ;  whereas^  if  the
increase~Ts^adual  or,  still  better,  if  it  .comes  about  in  such  a
way  as  not  to  be  directly  perceived — through  a  fall  in  prices,
for  example — the  period  of  foolishness  need  not  occur  at  all.
In  any  case,  to  contend  that  the  folly  of  poor  persons  is  so
great  that  a  rise  of  income  among  them  will  not   promote

*  Of.  Rignano,  2>i  un  sodeUismo,  p.  289.


54  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

'    economic  welfare  in  any  degree,  is  to  press  paradox  beyond
'    the  poinF"u*p    to  which   discussion  can  reasonably  be  called
upon   to   follow.      The   true   view,    as    I    conceive   it,   is   ad-
mirably   stated    by    Messrs.    Pringle    and    Jackson    in    their
I  special   report   to   the   Poor   Law   Commissioners :  "  It  is   in
/  the  unskilled  and  least  educated  part  of  the  population  that
I   drink  continues  to  hold  its  ground  ;  as  greater  regularity  of
employment  and  higher  wages  are  achieved  by  sections  of  the
,    working- classes,  the  men  rise  in  respectability  and  character.
'\   That  the  drink   bill   is  diminishing,  while   wages    are  rising
I   throughout  the  country,  is  one  of  the  most  hopeful  indications
'    of  progress  we   possess."  ^     The   root   of  the  matter  is  that,
even  when,  under  existing  conditions,  the  mental  constitution
of  poor   persons   is    such    that   an    enlarged    income   will   at
the  moment  yield  them  little  benefit,  yet,  after  a  time — more
especially  if  the  time  is  long  enough  to  allow  a  new  generation
to   grow   up — the   possession   of  such  an   income  will  make
possible    the   development  in    them,    through    education    and
/    otherwise,  of  capacities  and  faculties  adapted  for  the  enjoy-
ment of  the  enlarged  income.     Thus,  in   the  long  run  differ-
ences of  temperament  and  taste  between  rich  and  poor  are
overcome  by  the  very  fact  of  a  shifting  of  income  between  them.
Plainly,  therefore,  they   cannot  be  used   as  an  argument   to
disprove  the  benefits  of  a  transference.^

S  10.  After  all,  however,  general  reasoning  of  the  above
type,  though  perhaps  necessary  to  provide  formal  justification
for  our  thesis,  is  not  necessary  to  convince  us  practically  that
it  is  valid.  For  that  purpose  it  is  sufficient  to  reflect  on  the
way  in  which,  in  this  country,  income  is  in  fact  distributed,  or
rather,  since  more  recent  information  is  not  available,  was
distributed  before  the  war.  There  are  not  sufficient  data  to
enable  this  to  be  calculated  with  any  degree  of  accuracy.
On  the  basis,  however,  of  work  done  by  Dr.  Bowley,^  we  may

^    1  Cd.  4795,  p.  46.

/  2  Similarly,  of  course,  when  we  are  taking  a  long  view,  the  argument  that

/    a  reduction  in  the  real  income  of  the  rich  inflicts  a  special  injury,  because  it

forces  them   to  abandon  habits  to  which  they  have  grown  accustomed,  loses

;.^ most  of  its  force.

3  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  Feb.  1914,   p.  261  ;  and  The  Division  of

the  Prodiict  of  Industry  before  the  War,  1918,  pp.  11  and  14.


Z^'^y/A


EELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND


55


hazard  the  following  rough  estimate  for  the  period  immediately
prior  to  the  war.  The  12,000  richest  families  in  the  country
received  about  one-fifteenth  of  the  total  national  income ;  the
richest  fiftieth  of  the  population  received  about  one-quarter,
and  the  richest  ninth  of  the  population  received  nearly  one-
half  of  that  total  income.  The  remainder  of  it,  a  little  more
than  a  half,  was  left  to  be  shared  among  small  independent
workers  and  salary-receivers  earning  less  than  £16U  a  year
and  practically  the  whole  body  of  wage-earners.  The  table
below,  giving  Dr.  Bowley's  estimate  of  distribution  among  a
portion  of  this  last  group  in  1911,  carries  the  matter  a  little
further.


Weekly  Monky  Wages  op  Adult  Workmek  in  Ordinary
Full  Work

(xncludrsg  valuation  for  payment  in  kind)  ^


Wage.

Number  of  Meu.

Per  cent  of
whole.

Under  15/-    .
15/-  to  20/-  .
20/-  to  25/-  .
25/-  to  30/-  .
30/-  to  35/-  .
35/-  to  40/-  .
40/-  to  45/-  .
45/-  and  over

320,000  (mainly  agriculture)

640,000
1,600,000
1,680,000
1,680,000
1,040,000

560,000

480,000

4

8

20

21

21

13

7

6

What  these  figures  meant  in  the  concrete  is  brought  out
very  clearly  in  the  same  author's  study  of  the  conditions  of
life  in  four  industrial  towns.  Together  these  towns  embrace
"about  2150  working-class  households  and  9720  persons.
Of  these  households  293  or  13^  per  cent,  of  these  persons
1567  or  16  per  cent,  are  living  in  a  condition  of  primary
poverty,"  i.e.  with  incomes  so  low  that,  even  if  expended  with
perfect  wisdom,  they  could  not  have  provided  an  adequate
subsistence.     "  Out  of  3287  children  who  appear  in  our  tables,

^  From  the  Contemporary  Review,  Oct.  1911,  p.  1.


56  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

879,  or  27  per  cent,  are  living  in  families  which  fail  to  reach
the  low  standard  taken  as  necessary  for  healthy  existence."  ^
Of  course  since  the  war  the  whole  scale  of  money  incomes
has  altered.  But  the  scale  of  money  prices  has  altered
also ;  and  the  general  forces  that  produced  the  state
of  things  depicted  above  are  still  at  work.  In  con-
sidering how  far  that  state  of  things  is  susceptible  of
remedy  by  an  alteration  in  the  distribution  of  income,
it  is  essential  to  recollect  that  the  dominant  part  of  the
annual ,  new  investments  of  the_  country — before  the  war
perhaps  350  millions — and  a  large  part  of  the  expenses,  of
centraL  and  „  local  government-^ — over  200  millions — bad  ..to
be  provided  out  of  the  larger  incomes.  Moreover^^  estimates
of  money  income  tend  to  exaggerate  the  relative  real  income
of  wealthy__perspns,  because  these  persons  are  often  charged
higher  prices  than  poor  persons  pay  for  the  same  services.  A
number  of  London  shops,  for  example,  discriminate  against
"  good  addresses,"  and  hotel  charges  are  also  often  discrimina-
tory. It.  has  even  been  suggested  that  as  much  as  25  per
cent  of  the  money  income  of  the  rich,  as  spent  by  them,
represents  no  equivalent  in  real  income.^  In  Jike  manner,
estimates  of  money  income  sometimes  'make  it  appear  that
The_  real  incomes  of  poor  persons  are  less  than  they  really
are,  by  ignoring  discriminations  in  their  favour.  Thus  Dr.
Bowley  points  out :  "  A  butcher  can  perhaps  raise  his  prices
to  his  day  customers  without  much  affecting  the  sale,  but
not  to  those  in  the  evening.  In  this  case  the  working
class  would  suffer  a  smaller  rise  than  the  richer  class.  This
consideration  applies  especially  to  the  very  large  volume  of
purchases  made  late  on  Saturday  night."  But,  when  all
qualifications  have  been  made,  the  figures  cited  above  leave
no  room  for  doubt  that,  so  longas_the  dividend  as  a  whole
is  not  diminished,  any  increase,  within  'wide  limits,  in  the
real  income  enjoyed  by  the  poorer  classes,  at  the  expense
of  an  equal  decrease  in  that  enjoyed  by  the  richer  classes,

^  Livelihood  and  Poverty,  pp.  46-7.  The  reason  for  the  excess  in  the
proportion  of  children  in  poverty  is  the  twofold  one,  that  poor  families  are  apt
to  be  larger  than  others,  and  that  a  large  family  is  itself  a  cause  of  life  in  poverty.
Cf,  Bowley,  The  Measurement  of  Social  Phenomena,  p.  187.

2  Urwick,  Luxury  and  the  Waste  of  Life,  pp.  87  and  90.


cH.iv      EELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  57

is   practically   certain   to    involve    an    addition    to    economic
welfare.^

§  11.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  conclusion  set  out
above  is  not  exactly  equivalent  to  the  proposition  that  economic
welfare  will  .be  jncMased  by  anything  that,  ceteris  'parHms,
renders  the  national  dividend  less  unequal.  If  the  community
consisted  of  two  members  only,  it  would,  indeed,  coincide  with

*  It  should  be  observed,  in  passing,  that  a  change  in  the  proportions  of  real
income  received  by  the  rich  and  the  poor  implies  a  change  in  the  nature  of  the
commodities  that  are  purchased,  and,  therefore,  produced.  Expensive  luxuries
give  place  to  more  necessary  articles,  rare  wines  to  meat  and  bread,  private
parks  to  grazing  grounds  or  wheat  fields,  new  machines  and  factories  to  clothes
and  improved  dwellings.  Furthermore,  among  the  things  in  which  the  poor  are
likely  to  take  out  their  increased  income  is  the  quasi-commodity,  leisure.  It  is
well  established  that  the  high-wage  countries  and  industries  are  generally  also  both
the  short-hour  countries  and  industries  and  the  countries  and  industries  in  which
the  wage-earning  work  required  from  women  and  children  in  supplement  of  the
family  budget  is  the  smallest.  The  former  point  is  illustrated  by  some  statistics
of  the  wage  rate  and  hours  of  labour  of  carpenters  in  the  United  States,  Great
Britain,  France,  Germany,  and  Belgium,  published  in  No.  54  of  the  Bulletin  of
the  U.S.  Bureau  of  Labour  (p.  1125).  In  illustration  of  the  latter  point,
Professor  Chapman  notes  the  assertion  that,  whereas  the  German  collier  finds
only  65-8  per  cent  of  his  family's  earnings,  the  wealthier  American  collier  finds
7 7 -5  per  cent  {Work  and  Wages,  i.  p.  17)  ;  Mr.  Rowntree's  interesting  table
for  York  ix)ir.ts,  when  properly  analysed,  in  the  same  direction  (^Poverty,  p.  171)  ;
and  Miss  Vessellitsky  shows  that  low-paid  home-work  among  women  is  found
principally  in  those  districts,  e.g.  East  Anglia,  "  where  the  bad  conditions  of
male  labour  make  it  almost  indispensable  for  the  wife  to  supplement  the  husband's
earnings,"  whereas,  in  districts  where  men's  wages  are  good,  women  only  work
at  industry  if  they  themselves  can  obtain  well-paid  jobs  {Thf  Home-worker,  p.  4).
Agr.in,  reference  may  be  made  to  the  familiar  correlation  found  in  recent  English
history  between  rising  wages  and  falling  hours.  Yet  again,  a  study  of  the  rates
of  wages  and  hours  of  labour  in  different  districts  in  England  would,  I
suspect,  reveal  a  correlation  of  the  same  tyi>e.  It  does  so  for  the  wages  and
hours  statistics  of  bricklayers  as  given  in  the  Abstract  of  Labour  Statistics_/or
1908  (pp.  42,  etc.).  Leisure,  however,  is  not  reckoned  in  the  national  dividenJ,~)
when  the  manner  of  book-keeping  explained  in  the  preceding  chapter  is  adopted.  /
Hence,  on  that  manner  of  book-keeping  a  transference  of  resources  to  the  poor/
may  appear  to  be  accompanied  by  a  reduction  in  the  volume  of  the  national]
dividend  as  a  whole  when  in  reality  there  is  no  reduction.  (Cf.  Chapter  III.
§  2.)  Finally,  even  when  the  redistributed  dividend  is  equal  to  the  old
dividend,  in  the  sense  of  being  the  product  of  equal  quantities  of  labour  and
capital,  the  money  measure  of  it  may  be  changed  in  consequence  of  the  changes
that  have  occirrred  in  its  constituent  elements.  As  Dr.  Bowley  writes  :  ' '  The
values  included  in  incomes  are  values  in  exchange,  which  are  dependent,  not
only  on  the  goods  or  services  in  question,  but  also  on  the  whole  complex  of  the
income  and  purchases  of  the  whole  of  a  society.  .  .  .  The  numerical  measure-
ment of  total  national  income  is  thus  dependent  on  the  distribution  of  income
and  would  alter  with  it."  (The  Measurement  of  Social  Phenomena,  pp.  207-8.)
This  point  is  also  taken  by  Dr.  Stamp,  British  Incomes  and  Property,
pp.  420-21.


58  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

this.  But,  in  a  community  consisting  of  more  than  two
members,  the  meaning  of  "  rendering  the  distribution  of  the

l—dividend  less  unequal "  is  ambiguous.  Professor  Pareto
measures  inequality  of  distribution  by  dividing  the  logarithm
of  the  number  of  incomes  in  excess  of  any  amount  x  into  the
logarithm  of  x.  This  measure  is  very  difficult  to  apply  unless
we  accept  Pareto's  view  that  in  any  given  income  distribu-
tion the  ratio  between  his  two  logarithms  is  approximately
the  same  for  all  values  of  x ;  and,  even  so,  it  is  a  matter  of
dispute  whether  the  reciprocal  of  his  measure, — which  of
course  would  indicate  less  equality  when  the  measure  itself
indicates  greater  equality, — is  not  to  be  preferred  to  that
measure.''  The  other  measures  of  equality  in  common  use
are  all  likely  to  be  roughly  accordant  with  the  mean  square
deviation  from  the  mean.  With  that  criterion  it  can  be
proved  that,  assuming  similarity  of  temperament  among  the
members  of  the  community,  a  diminution  in  the  inequality  of
distribution  probably,  though  not  necessarily,  increases  the
aggregate  sum  of  satisfaction.^

J  §  12.  So  far  we  have  said  nothing  about  possible  reactions
on  the  numbers  of  the  population.  This  omission  must  now
be  remedied.  To  both  the  broad  propositions  set  out  above,
relating  respectively  to  the  volume  and  to  the  distribution
of  the  national  dividend,  it  may  be  objected  that  an  in-
crease in  the  income  per  head  enjoyed  by  any  group  causes
population  to  increase  until  that  income  is  again  reduced  to  the

('  old  level,  and,  therefore,  that  it  leads  to  no  permanent  benefit.
In  practice  this  argument  is  most  often  used  about  the  effects

1  Cf.  Gini,  Fariabilita  e  rautahilitd,  p.  72.

2  If  A  be  the  mean  income,  and  a-^,  a^  .   .  .  deviations  from  the  mean,
aggregate  satisfaction,  on  our  assumption,

=7i/A  +  (ai+a2+.  .  .)/'  +  ^K  +  «2'+-  •  •)/"  +  ^K  +  V+  •  •  •)/'"+  .  :  .

But  we  know  that {ai  +  a2+    •   •   -I^^O.

We  know  nothing  to  suggest  whether  the  sum  of  the  terms  beyond  the  third
is  positive  or  negative.  But  it  is  certain  that  \{ai+ci'2+  •  ■  .}/"  is  negative.
If,  therefore,  the  fourth  and  following  terms  are  small  relatively  to  the  third  term,
it  is  certain,  and  in  general  it  is  probable,  that  aggregate  satisfaction  is  larger,
the  smaller  is  {a^-\-a^+  .  .  .).     This  latter  sum,  of  course,  varies  in  the  same


sense  as  the  mean  square  deviation  or  standard  deviation


»        It.


EELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND        (59    '


of  an  increase  in  the  income  of  manual  workers ;  and  it  is,  \
of  course,  much  more  plausible  in  this  field  than  in  any  I
other.  It  will,  therefore,  be  enough  to  examine  this  aspect
of  it.  I  shall  consider  it  first  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  whole  world,  or  of  a  single  country  imagined,  for
the  purposes  of  the  argument,  to  be  isolated,  and  after-
wards shall  enquire  how  far  the  results  achieved  need
to  be  modified  for  a  single  country  constituting  one
among  the  associated  family  of  modern  nations.  In  the
argument  to  be  developed  under  these  two  heads  it  must
be  understood  that  the  additions  to  the  income  of  wage-
earners  that  we  have  in  mind  do  not  include  additions
brought  about  by  the  offer,  on  behalf  of  the  State,  of  deliberate
and  overt  bounties  upon  the  acquisition  of  large  families.
Under  the  old  Poor  Law  in  the  United  Kingdom  bounties  were,
in  effect,  given ;  our  present  income-tax  law  acts  in  a  slight
degree  in  the  same  sense ;  and  in  a  law  passed  in  France  ^
shortly  before  the  war  a  similar  policy  was  adopted.  This
class  of  addition  to  the  income  of  the  poor  has,  of  course,  a
strong  tendency  to  augment  population,  and,  in  some  practical
problems,  the  point  is  of  importance.  For  the  present,
however,  we  are  concerned  with  additions  that  do  not
offer  a  special  differential  inducement  to  the  begetting  of
children.

§  13.  If  we  provisionally  ignore  the  deeper-seated  reactions
which  increased  income  may  exert  upon  wants  and  tastes,  ,
our  discussion  virtually  resolves  itself  into  an  enquiry  into
the  validity  of  the  celebrated  "  iron  law  of  wages."  Accord-
ing to  this  "  law,"  exp^iiclTng^  numbers  continually  press
the  earnings  of  the  workpeople  down  "  to  subsistence  level,"
thus  making  it  impossible  for  their  real  income  iper  head
in  any  circumstances  to  increase.  It  should  be  noted  in
passing  that,  even  if  there  really  were  such  a  law,  the
proposition  that  better  fortune  for  the  workers  increases
economic  welfare  would  not  be  definitely  disproved.  For
it  might  still  be  urged  that,  provided  the  average  working
family  attains  in  the  whole  period  of  life  any  surplus  of
satisfaction    over    dissatisfaction,    an    increase    of    numbers

*  EcoTiomic  Journal,  Dec.  1913,  p.  641.


60  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

implies  by  itself  an  addition  to  economic  welfare.^  But,
for  my  present  purpose,  there  is  no  need  to  press  this
doubtful  point.  Population  does  not  tend  to  expand  in
such  a  manner__as  to  hold  down"  income  per  head  to  a
predetermined  "subsistence  level."  It  is  true,  no  doubt,
that  the  direct  and  immediate  result  of  an  increase  in
the  dividend  accruing  to  any  group  is  likely  to  be  some
increase  of  population.  It  is  well  known  that  the  English
marriage  rate  was  negatively  correlated  with  wheat  prices
in  the  earlier  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  was
positively  correlated  with  exports,  clearing-house  returns
and  so  on  in  the  latter  part :  ^  and  that  the  rate  of  mortality
falls  with  growing  wealth,  and  vice  versa.  But  it  is  contrary
to  experience  to  assert  that  increased  income  stimulates
population  to  so  large  an  extent  that  the  individual  earnings
of    workpeople    are   brought   down   again    to   the   level   they

*  occupied  before  the  improvement.  There  are  two  ways  in
which  the  manual  workers  can  use  their  increase  J  "claims
over    material    things,    namely,    an    increase    in    population

i  and  an  increase  in  the  standard  of  comfort.  The  distinction
between  these  two  ways  is  well  illustrated  by  the  following
contrasted  passages  from  Malthus's  Principles  of  Political
Economy.  On  the  one  hand,  he  found  that  the  greater
wealth  resulting  from  the  introduction  of  the  potato  into
Ireland    in     the    eighteenth    century    was     "  spent    almost

.  exclusively  in  the  maintenance  of  large  and  frequent
families."  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  price  of  corn  in
England  fell  between  1660  and  1720,  a  considerable  portion
of  the  workpeople's  "  increased  real  wages  was  expended
in  a  marked  improvement  of  the  quality  of  the  food  consumed,
and   a   decided   elevation   in   the   standard  of  their  comforts

J  and  conveniences."  ^     It  is  not  possible  to  prophesy  a  priori

I  the  precise  proportion  in  which  increased  resources  will   be

1  But  cf.  Sidgwick's  observation :  "It  seems  at  least  highly  doubtful
whether  a  mere  increase  in  the  number  of  human  beings  living  as  an  average
unskilled  labourer  lives  in  England  can  be  regarded  as  involving  a  material
increase  in  the  quantum  of  human  happiness  "  {Principles  of  Political  Economy,
p.  522,  note).

2  Cf.  Pareto,  Cours  d'dconomie  politique,  pp.  88  et  seq.  Cf.  also  Marshall,
Principles  of  Economics,  pp.  189-90.

3  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  pp.  252  and  254.


CH.  IV      EELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  61

devoted  to  these  two  uses.  The  proportion  will  vary  at
different  times  and  in  different  places.  Leroy-Beaulieu,  for
example,  suggests  that  the  population  use  has  been  pre-
dominantly followed  in  recent  times  in  Belgium  and  Germany,
and  the  standard-of-comfort  use  in  other  European  countries.^
But — and  this  is  the  point — it  is  practically  certain  thaf
the  population  use  will  not  be  allowed  to  absorb  the  wEole
fruits  of  increased  command  over  nature.  --^

§  14.  The  preceding  argument,  as  was  indicated  at  the
outset,  leaves  out  of  account  the  deeper-seated  reactions
that  may  be  set  up  by  expanded  earnings.  An  important
school  of  writers,  headed  by  Professor  Brentano,  admits
that  the  direct  and  immediate  effect  of  enhanced  material
prosperity  in  any  class  will,  in  general,  be  to  increase  the
marriage  rate  and,  therewith,  the  birth  rate.  They  maintain,
however,  that  the  enhanced  prosperity  will  in  the  long  run
bring  about  the  development  of  a  higher  spiritual  and
cultural  level,  in  which  more  forethought  is  exercised  about
children,  and  more  satisfactions  rival  to  that  of  having
children  come  to  the  front.  Hence,  they  urge^ia  the  long
riyi  .an  increase  in  the  income  of  any  class  is  likSly"to  lead
to.  no  increase  at  all,  but  actually  to  a  decrease,  in  their
birt£_rate__jajad.  their  numbers.^  Thus,  Professor  Brentano
declares  that  a  permanent  improvement  in  wealth  and
culture,  "  as  a  comparison  of  different  ranks,  as  well  as
of  the  same  ranks  and  the  same  people  at  different  stages
of  development  has  shown  us,  results  in  a  diminution
of  births.  ...  As  prosperity  increases,  so  do  the  pleasures
which  compete  with  marriage,  while  the  feeling  towards
children  takes  on  a  new  character  of  refinement,  and  both
these  facts  tend  to  diminish  the  desire  to  beget  and  to  bear
children."  ^  Those  persons,  for  instance,  who  have  something
to  leave  to  their  children  are  more  affected  by  the  fact  that,
if  their  family  is  large,  what  is  left  at  their  death  must
be  divided  into  a  number  of  small  parts,  than  those  who
have  nothing  to  leave  and  act  apart  from  economic  motives.

^  La  B/partition  des  richesses,  p.  439.

^  Cf.  Mombert,  Arckiv  fur  Sodalvnssenschaft,  vol.  rxxiv.  p.  817.     Cf.  also
Aftalion,  Les  Crises  p6riodic[Ms  de  surprodicction,  vol.  i.  pp.  208-9.
5  Economic  Journal,  1910,  p.  385.


62  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

Detailed  confirmation  of  this  view  is  afforded  by  Dr.  Heron's
statistical  study  of  London.  In  certain  selected  districts
he  found  the  correlation  co-efficients  between  the  number
of  births  per  100  wives  and  various  indices  of  social  status.
The  indices  chosen  were  the  proportion  of  occupied  males
engaged  in  professional  occupations,  the  number  of  female
domestic  servants  per  100  families,  the  number  of  general
labourers  per  1000  males,  the  proportion  of  the  population
living  more  than  two  in  a  room,  and  the  number  of  paupers
and  of  lunatics  per  1000  of  the  population.  A  low  index
of  prosperity  and  a  high  birth  rate  were  found  to  go  together.
Against  this  result  there  had  to  be  set  the  fact  that  a  low
index  of  prosperity  was  also  accompanied  by  a  high  rate
of  infant  mortality.  Investigation,  however,  showed  that
the  excess  of  mortality  was  not  sufficient  to  balance  the
excess  of  births ;  and  the  conclusion  emerged,  that  "  the
wives  in  the  districts  of  least  prosperity  and  culture  (and
of  course  these  poor  wives  were  married  to  poor  husbands)
have  the  largest  families."  ^  Furthermore,  a  comparison
between  the  conditions  of  1851  and  1901  brought  out
the  startling  fact  "  that  the  intensity  of  this  relationship
has  almost  doubled  in  the  last  fifty  years."  ^  The  inferences
suggested  by  these  statistical  comparisons  are,  indeed,  less
firmly  based  than  they  appear  to  be  at  first  sight.  The
correlation  between  high  prosperity  and  low  birth  rate  may
be  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  a  man  with  a  small  family
is  in  a  better  position  to  accumulate  a  fortune,  and  that
between  rich  districts  and  low  birth  rate  may  be  partly
due    to   the    accumulation    of   domestic    servants    and    other

^  The  Relation  of  Fertility  in  Man  to  Social  Status,  pp.  15  and  19.
M.  Bertillon  has  shown  that,  in  general,  a  higli  birth  rate  and  a  high
death  rate  are  correlated  {La  Depopulation  de  la  France,  pp.  66  et  seq.).
This  correlation  is  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  death  of  children  induces
parents  to  get  more,  and  partly  to  the  fact  that  a  high  birth  rate  often  means
many  children  born  in  poor  circumstances  and  so  likely  to  die.  Thus,
Dr.  Newsholme  suggests  that  the  observed  correlation  "  is  probably  due  in
great  part  to  the  fact  that  large  families  are  common  among  the  poorest
classes,  and  these  classes  are  specially  exposed  to  influences  producing  excessive
infant  mortality"  (Second  Report  on  Infant  Mortality  [Cd.  6909]  p.  57).
A  similar  conclusion  as  regards  the  North  of  England  is  reached  in  Elderton's
Report  on  the  Enqlish  Birth-rate,  Part  I.

2  The  Relation  of  Fertility  in  Man  to  Social  Status,  pp.  15  and  19.


cH.  IV      EELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  63

dependants — a  particularly  infertile  class — in  these  districts.^
Moreover,  probably  a  part  of  the  correlation  between  wealth
and  small  families  is  due  to  the  fact  that  physiologically
infertile  stocks,  having  their  property  divided  among  fewer
persons  on  inheritance,  tend,  on  the  average,  to  be  more
than  ordinarily  rich."  But  these  considerations,  important
as  they  are,  do  not,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  com-
pletely account  for  the  observed  facts.  What  has  been
said  of  the  deeper -seated  reactions  of  prosperity  appre-
ciably strengthens  our  conclusion  that  an  iniprovement
in  the  fortunes  of  the  poor  is  not  likely,  in  an  Isolated
community,  to  cancel  itself  l^y  "causing  a  large  expansion  of
population.

8  15.  When  account  is  taken  of  the  fact  that,  in  the
modern  world,  no  country  is  isolated  from  the  rest,  the  issue
becomes  less  plain.  Of  course,  if  the  real  income  of  the  manual
working  class  anywhere  is  increased  because  the  average  level
of  efficiency  among  that  class  has  been  raised,  no  inducement
is  thereby  offered  to  immigration  from  elsewhere.  But,  if
their  real  income  has  been  increased  through  some  discovery,
or  invention,  or  stroke  of  policy,  that  improves  the  economic
position  of  one  country  considerably  more  than  it  improves
that  of  others,  an  inducement  is  offered.  The  same  thing
happens  if  legislative  or  other  measures  bring  about  a  trans-
ference of  income  from  the  richer  to  the  poorer  members  of
some  one  community — provided,  of  course,  that  poor  persons
who  have  immigrated  are  not  excluded  from  the  benefits  of

^  Cf.  Leroy-Beaulieu's  argument :  "  II  se  trouve  dans  les  quartiers  riches
une  plus  forte  proportion  de  menages  ages,  de  gens  retraites,  de  doniestiques,
classe  particulierement  sterile,  et  personnes  qui  ne  passent  qu'une  partie  de
I'annee  a  la  ville  ;  la  natality  enregistree  doit  done  y  etre  plus  faible,  sans
qu'on  puisse  rien  en  inferer.  On  qualifie  le  XVIe  arrondissement  qui  compte
135,000  habitants  comme  un  arrondissement  riche  et  le  VIII^  egalement  qui,
de  son  cote,  compte  104,000  habitants.  Or,  il  est  manifeste  que  les  gens
vraiment  riches  ne  representent  pas  la  dixieme  partie,  peut-etre  pas  meme  la
vingtieme  partie,  de  la  population  de  ces  arrondissements  dits  riches  ;  les  gens
opulents  ne  se  comptent  pas,  menie  a  Paris,  par  centaiues  de  mille  ;  le  gros
de  la  population  de  ces  arrondissements  est  compose  de  domestiques,  de
concierges,  de  petits  boutiquiers  et  d'ouvriers  d'elite.  Les  conclusions  que  Ton
tire  de  la  natalite  dans  les  quartiers  dits  riches  de  Paris  sent  done  sans  valeur."
(ia  Question  de  la  population,  p.  399.)

'  Cf.  Darwin,  ' '  Eugenics  in  Relation  to  Economics  and  Statistics, "  Journal
of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  1919,  p.  7.


64  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

these  measures/  These  considerations  are  very  important ;
for  they  show  that  many  causes  tending  to  increase  the  real
income  per  head  of  the  wage-earners  in  a  single  country  will
ultimately  exercise  a  smaller  influence  in  that  direction  than
they  appear  likely  to  do  at  first  sight.  It  should  not  be
forgotten,  however,  that  that  very  immigration,  which  lessens
their  effect  at  the  point  of  primary  impact,  involves  indirectly
an  improvement  in  the  fortunes  of  labour  elsewhere.  Hence,
in  any  event,  the  beneficial  influence  of  the  changed  conditions
is  not  destroyed,  but  is  merely  spread  over  a  wider  area.  In
the  country  primarily  affected  some  addition  to  economic
welfare  is  necessarily  secured.
j\  §  16.  The  above  discussion  disproves  the  suggestion  that
I  an  increase  in  the  real  income  of  any  group  will  be  neutralised
Iby  an  expansion  of  population.  For  the  defence  of  our
iproposition  about  the  relation  between  economic  welfare  and
jthe  average  volume  of  the  national  dividend,  this  is  all  that
fis  wanted.  But  the  proposition  about  the  effect  on  economic
welfare  of  transferences  of  income  from  the  rich  to  the  poor  is
less  secure.  For,  in  order  to  cancel  the  direct  benefit  of  these
transferences,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  gain  of  economic
welfare  to  the  poor  should  be  destroyed — -only  that  it  should
be  made  smaller  than  the  loss  of  economic  welfare  to  the
rich.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  this  might  happen.  But,  in
a  country  where  the  distribution  of  wealth  is  as  uneven  as  it
is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  where,  therefore,  there  are  many
high  incomes  which  could  be  largely  cut  down  with  very  little
injury  to  economic  welfare,  the  chance  that  it  will  happen
may  reasonably  be  regarded  as  small.

1/  §  17.  We  come  next  to  the  relation  between  economic
welfare  and  the  variability  of  the  national  dividend  as  a  whole,
1  Here,  since  it  Ts  possible  by  deliberate  action  greatly  to
diminish  the  variability  of  the  community's  consumable
income,  while  leaving  that  of  the  national  dividend  unelianged,
the  distinction  between  national  dividend  and  consumable
income   has   much   greater   importance   than   it   had    in   any

1  The  inducement  to  immigration  offered  by  old-age  pensions  might  be  kept
very  small  by  a  rule  requiring  previous  residence  of,  say,  20  years  as  a  condition
of  qualification  ;  for  a  far-off  benefit  affects  action  but  slightly,  the  more  so  if,
as  in  this  case,  the  possibility  of  death  makes  it  uncertain  as  well  as  distant.


CH.  IV      EELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  65

previous   portion   of  this   discussion.      This   fact   makes   the
argument  a  complicated  one.

The  first  step  is  as  follows.      In  8  11  it  was  shown  that,  if
a  given  quantitj^of  resources  is  consumed  by  two  .similar  naen,
economic  welfare  is  larger^te  morg.  evenlv^tliis^uantitj^is     j^^
share^^betwee^  them.     When  the  number  of  our  imaginary/;   ,'
group  was  in  creased  from  two  similar  men  to  many  similar?  ,f^
men,  it  was  shown  that  economic  welfare  is  likdy  to  be  larger^
the   more   evenly  consumption  is  divided  among   them — the
degree   of  evenness   of  distribution   being   measured   by   the
standard,  or  mean  square,  deviation.     It  is  obvious  that  the
result   thus   achieved   is   equally  applicable  when,  for   many
similar  men  at  one  moment,  we  substitute  one  man  at  many
similar   moments.      When  the  aggregate  consumption  of  oA
individual,  whose  tastes  and  needs  over  a  series  of  years  are
constant,   is   given,    economic    welfare  is   likely   to  be   larger
the  more  evenly  that  consiimption~'is~"5pT5!n!~w'er  these  years.^
From  this  proposition  we  proceed  to  the  further  proposition,*
U\;at  the  economic  welfare  of  a  group  of  individuals  is  likely'
to    be    larger    the    more    evenly    the    consumption    of    thei
representatTve  or  average  member  of  that  group  is  distributed!
through  time.      By  an  extension  of  the  reasoning  of  the  note!
to  §  11  above  it  is  readily  shown  that  this  latter  proposi-1
tioh  has  equal  validity  with  that  just  enunciated,  when  the\
evenness  of  the  distribution  through  time  of  the  representative  \
member's  consumption  is  measured  by  the  arithmetical  average  j
of  the  standard,  or  mean  square,  deviations   of  the   several   I
members.  ^  '

The  second  step  of  the  argument  has  to  do  with  the
relation  between  the  variability  of  the_jcon§jmiption  of  the
representative  member  and  the  variability  of  the  aggregate
consumption  of  the  whole  community.  When  the  variability
of  the  community's  consumption  is  given,  the  variability,  of
the  representative  man's  consumption  will  partly  depend  on

1  Of  course,  if  the  individual's  needs  vary — they  are  likely  to  be  greater  in
the  period  when  he  has  a  family  to  support  than  they  are  either  before  he  marries
or  after  his  children  become  self-supporting — welfare  will  be  greater,  the  more
cjosely  variations  in  consumption  are  adapted  to  variations  in  needs.  For  a
good  account  of  the  way  in  which  a  normal  working  man's  needs  vary  in  different
periods  of  his  life,  cf.  Leroy-Beaulieu,  R^rUtion  des  richesses,  pp.  452-3.

F


^\^4^


66  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

how  far  mutual  insurance  arrangements  provide,  in  effect,  that
those  who  are  temporarily  prosperous  shall  assist  the  temporarily
unfortunate.  Let  us  suppose,  however,  that  the  state  of  these
arrangements  is  given.  Then,  if  people  were  perfectly  mobile
between  different  places  and  occupations,  anything  that  made
the  whole  community's  consumption  less  variable  would
necessarily  also  make  the  representative  man's  less  variable.
When  perfect  mobility  does  not  exist  this  need  not  happen ;
//  for  the  consumption  of  the  community  as  an  aggregate  might
be  made  steadier  by  a  cause  which  made  less  steady  the
consumption  of  each  several  part  of  it.  It  is  plain,  however,
that  the  generality  of  economic  causes  affecting  the  variability
of  consumption  will  not  act  in  this  way.  One  reason  is  that
they  are  bfind'caus'es,  '^random  in  the  technical  sense "  from
the  present  point  of  view ;  and  a  cause  which  diminishes
variability  in  one  part  of  a  group  is  most  unlikely,  unless  it  is
specially  selected  for  that  end,  so  to  react  on  variability  in
other  parts  that  it  increases  the  variabilify"6T' the  whole.  A
second  reason  is  that  by  far  the  most  important  of  these  causes,
those,  namely,  that  act  through  the  bounty  of  Nature  or
through  business  confidence,  impinge  directly  upon  the  whole,
without  being  specialised  to  any  part.  When  these  causes  are
at  work,  the  variability  of  the  representative  man's  consumption
necessarily  rises  and  falls  with  that  of  consumption  in  the
community  as  a  whole.

The  third  step  concerns  the  relation  between  the  variability
of  the  aggregate  consumption  of  the  community  and  the
variability  of  \he.  income  of  consumable  goods — or  consumable
income — accruing  to  it.  These  two  variabilities  will  be
different  if  people  in  good  times  store  up  consumable  goods
in  warehouses  and  shops  against  the  bad  times  that  may
follow.  But,  though  they  may  be  different,  it  is  obvious  that
the  two  are  correlated.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  variability
of  consumption  is  certain  to  be  greater  the  greater  is  the
variability  of  the  consumable  incoine.  ""^

The  fourth  and  final  step  in  the  argument  concerns  the
relation  between  the  variability  of  the  consumable  income  of
the  community  and  that  of  the  aggregate  dividend  accruing  to
it.     It  is  plain  that  the  former  variability  will,  in  general,  be


cH.iv      EELATION  TO  NATIONAL  DIYIDEXD  67

considerably  smaller  than  the  latter,  because  many  people
invest  in  producers'  goods,  not  a  constant  proportion  of  their
income,  but  the  surplus  that  is  left  to  them  after  living  up  to
their  normal  standard  of  life.  This  means  that  the  quantity
of  resources  invested  in  producers'  goods  mil  in  bad  times  be
diminished  much  more  than  the  national  dividend,  and  in  good
times  expanded  mucli  more  than  the  national  dividend.  Hence,
the  part  of  the  dividend  that  constitutes  consumable  income
must  vary  less  than  the  whole  dividend  varies.  This  is  certain.
But  it  is  also  certain  that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  varia-
bility of  the  consumable  income  of  the  community  will  be
greater  the  greater  is  the  variability  of  the  aggregate  dividend
accruing  to  it.

There  results  from  the  above  analysis  my  third  main  pro-
position :  Any   cause  which  diminishes  the  variability   of  the
national  dividendTprovided  that^iLneiUuT  d^Jnishes  its  volume
nor  injures  its  distribution,  taill,  in  generals  vncrea^.  eeononne\
welfare.

§  18.  There  remains  the  last  of  the  four  attributes  of  the
national  dividend  that  were  distinguished  in  §  1,  namely  the
variability  of  that  part  of  it  which  accrues  to  the  poorer
members  of  the  community.  Here,  as  in  the  preceding
section,  we  must  study  first  the  relation  between  economic
welfare  and  the  variability  of  consumption.  Experience  shows
that  the  rate,  at  which  the  "  desiredness  "  of  consumable  income
to  an  individual  diminishes,  itself  diminishes  as  the  magnitude
of  his  consumption  increases.^  It  follows  that  the  difference
between  the  economic  satisfaction  yielded  by  a  constant
consumption  x  and  a  consumption  the  average  volume  of  which
is  X,  but  which  oscillates  from  {x-\-h)  to  {x  —  h),  is  greater  the
smaller  is  x.  Hence,  other  things  being  equal,  a  given  absolute
variability  in  the  consumption  of  a  poor  man,  or  _a_^roup  of
poorjmen^Jsjnore^etrimental  to  economic  welfare  than  an  equal
ab^u^~variability  fh  the  consumption  of  a  rich  man  or  a  rich
gjSjup.  This  "conclusion  is  emphasised  by  the  reflection  that,
among  poor  persons,  variability  of  consumption  often  involves,

'  That  is  to  say,  in  geometrical  terms,  the  curve  representing  the  desired-
-s  of  successive  increments  of  consumable  income  to  an  individual  is  convex
en  looked  at  from  the  origin.     Cf.  my  Principles  and  Methods  of  Industrial

'■ze,  p.  70.


68  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

not  merely  loss  of  satisfaction  at  the  moment,  but  also  physical,
and  perhaps  moral,  damage  injurious  to  their  productive  power
in  the  future  ;  while  among  rich  people  there  are  not  likely  to  be
any  significant  reactions  of  this  kind.  It  follows  that  the
economic  welfare  of  rich  and  poor  jointly  will  be  increased  by
any  system  of  transferences  which,  while  leaving  the  average
consumption  of  each  group  unaltered,  makes  the  consumption
of  the  poor  less  variable  at  the  cost  of  making  that  of  the  rich
in  a  corresponding  degree  more  variable.  It  is,  of  course,
conceivable  that,  by  means  of  elaborate  systems  of  borrowing,
poor  persons  might  estabhsh  for  themselves  a  perfectly  stable
consumption  in  spite  of  their  income  being  unstable ;  so  that  no
advantage  could  be  got  by  stabilising  their  income  at  the  cost
of  rendering  unstable  the  income  of  better-to-do  persons.  In
practice,  however,  it  is  quite  certain  that  they  will  not  succeed
in  doing  this.  Consequently,  from  what  has  been  said  it  is
legitimate  to  infer  a  fourth  main  proposition :  Any^cause^
which  diminishes  the  variability  of  the  part  of  the  national
dividend  accruing  to  the  poor,  even  though  it  increases  in  corre-
sponding TTieasure  the  variability  of  the  ;part  accruing  to  th^
rich,  will,  other  things  being  equal,  increase  economic  welfare.
For  analytic  completeness,  it  is  worth  while  to  set  out  this
proposition.  But,  when  we  come  in  Part  VI.  to  discuss
variability  in  detail,  it  will  be  found  that  practical  interest  is
confined  to  causes  which  affect  in  the  same  sense  the  variability
of  the  aggregate  national  dividend  and  of  the  part  of  it  accru-
ing to  the  poor ;  and  that  nothing  will  need  to  be  said  of  the
type  of  cause  contemplated  in  this  section.


CHAPTER    V

THE    MEASUREMENT    OF     CHANGES    IN    THE    MAGNITUDE     OF    THE
/  NATIONAL   DIVIDEND    AND    ITS    PAKTS

^  1.  In  the  preceding  chapter  it  was  tacitly  assumed  that
the  conception  of  an  increase  or  decrease  in  the  national
dividend  as  a  whole,  or  in  the  share  of  it  accruing  to  any
group  of  persons,  is  definite  and  unambiguous.  If  the
dividend  consisted  of  a  single  sort  of  commodity  only,  such
as  wheat,  this  condition  would,  of  course,  be  fulfilled.  In
fact,  however,  what  the  community  as  a  whole,  or  any  group
within  the  community,  receives  from  time  to  time  as  dividend
is  not  one  large  parcel  of  one  single  thing,  but  a  number
of  small  parcels  of  different  things.  The  sizes  of  these
different  parcels  vary  independently,  so  that  their  increases
or  decreases  are  generally  in  different  proportions,  and  not
infrequently  some  are  growing  larger  at  the  same  time  that
others  are  growing  smaller.  In  these  circumstances  the
conception  of  an  increase  or  decrease  in  the  quantity  of
dividend  or  real  income  accruing  to  any  group  is  not
unambiguous.  On  the  contrary,  it  can  be  defined  in  any
one  of  several  different  ways.  Between  these  it  is  impossible
to  make  a  choice  on  grounds  of  absolute  rightness.  The
only  sort  of  rightness  that  is  relevant  is  suitability  for
the  purpose  in  hand.  That  purpose  is  as  follows.  It  has
been  shown  that,  if  the  diN'idend  was  homogeneous,  any  cause
(operating  otherwise  than  through  compulsion  to  work  or
through  certain  exceptional  obstacles  to  movement)  which
increases  the  productive  efficiency,  and,  therewith,  the  real
earnings  of  any  group,  would,  in  general,  increase  the  economic
welfare  or  satisfaction   enjoyed  by   that  group.     The  object

69


70  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.i

of  a  large  part  of  this  volume  being  to  develop  the  practical
implications  of  that  proposition,  it  is  obviously  desirable
so  to  define  our  terms  that  the  above  proposition  shall  also
hold  good  of  the  heterogeneous  dividend  which  emerges  in
actual  life.  Therefore,  I  define  a  change  in  the  dividend,
or  real  income,  of  a  group  as  follows.  Apart  from  the
introduction  of  compulsion  to  work  or  of  the  exceptional  obstacles
to  movement  referred  to  in  the  last  chapter,  this  quantity  is  larger
or  smaller  in  period  A  than  in  period  B,  according  as  the  amount
of  economic  satisfaction  derived  from  it  (including  the  dis-
counted future  yield  due  to  the  machinery  included  in  it),
hy  a  representative  member  of  the  group — in  so  far  as  the
tastes  and  temperament  of  the  group  have  not  been  changed
by  external  causes  (i.e.  otherwise  than  as  an  indirect  effect
of  their  changed  purchases) — is  larger  or  smaller?  The  quali-
fication set  out  in  the  last  part  of  this  sentence  is  obviouslv
necessary ;  for,  unless  it  was  made,  we  should  have  to
say  that  the  dividend  necessarily  jncreases^^  people  come
to  get  more  enjoymentout_ofit,  even  though  its  actual
material  content  has  remained  unaltered.  This  is  para-
doxical  and  is  not  required  In  order  to  make  our  definition
fit  in  with  the  main  propositions  of  the  preceding  chapter.^
It  will  be  noticed  that  the  definition  does  nx>t  rule  out
of  account   changes  in   tastes   that   come   about  as   a   result

^  In  this  definition  and  the  discussion  that  follows  it  the  distinction
between  the  measure  of  desire  for  a  thing  and  the  measure  of  satisfaction
obtained  from  the  possession  of  a  desired  thing,  to  which  attention  was  drawn
in  Chapter  II.,  is  left  out  of  account  as  not  being  of  great  practical  importance.
For  theoretical  completeness,  of  course,  allowance  would  need  to  be  made  for  it.

2  The  autonomous  changes  in  tastes  and  temperament,  whose  effects  on
satisfaction  are  thus  ruled  out  as  irrelevant  to  the  magnitude  of  the  national
dividend,  may  be  distinguished  into  two  groups :  (1)  changes  in  the  intensity
of  desire  generally,  and  (2)  changes  in  the  desire  for  some  things  as  compared  with
others.  This  distinction  can  be  illustrated  most  easily  from  different  places
instead  of  different  times.  Thus,  if  we  contrast  social  classes,  we  may  some-
times be  able  to  say  that  the  more  cultured  class  A  has  a  keener  appreciation
of,  and  derives  more  satisfaction  from,  practically  all  objects  than  the  less
cultured  class  B  does.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  contrast  the  same  social
class  in  different  countries,  say  English  and  German  workmen,  we  may  expect
to  find  general  temperaments  to  be  much  the  same,  but  particular  tastes  to
be  different.  To  put  the  point  more  precisely,  in  case  (1)  we  should  expect
£100  to  yield  more  satisfaction  in  either  environment  to  the  more  cultured
class  than  to  other  classes  ;  whereas  in  case  (2)  we  should  expect  the  aggregate
satisfaction  obtained  by  a  German  workman,  from  spending  £100  this  year
in  Germany  and  £100  next  year  in  England,  to  be  about  the  same  as  that


CH.  V   MEASUEEMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      Yl

of  cbangesm  purchases.  This  is^.aa-~tmportaDt__2omt.  If
certain  commodities  become  scarce  and  others  abundant,
people,  though  at  first  perhaps  getting  less  satisfaction
out  of  the  new  purchases  than  out  of  the  old,  may  after
a  time  get  accustomed  to  them  and  prefer  them  to  the  old.
It  might,  therefore,  happen  that  an  enforced  change  from,
say,  a  meat  diet  to  a  tish  diet  would  lessen  satisfaction
for  the  moment,  and  that,  if,  after  a  year  orso,  there  were
an  enforced  return  to  the  ongmal  meat  diet,  this  change
also  would  lessen  satisfaction  for  the  moment.     This  fluidity


and  adaptability  of  tastes  cannot  rightly  be  left  out  of
account  in  a  definition  of  the  national  dividend  framed
for  the  purpose  here  indicated.  That  purpose  being  avowedly
selected  in  an  arbitrary  manner,  it  would  be  idle  to  canvas
the  general  merits  of  the  definition.  Its  merit  here  is
that  it,  and  it  alone,  is  fitted  for  the  purpose  which  I  wish
to  carry  out.

S  2.  So  far  as  the  main  thesis  of  my  book  is  concerned,
it  would  be  legitimate  to  stop  at  this  point,  and  those  who
are  not  interested  in  technical  problems  would  do  well  to
adopt  that  course.  I  propose,  however,  to  go  a  step  further.
Given  the  above  definition  of  a  change  in  the  volume
of  the  dividend  enjoyed  by  a  group,  it  is  desirable  to  devise
a_  measure  of  change  that  shall  conform  to  that  definition.
The    seaich   for  that    measure   comprises   three    parts:     first,


derived  by  an  English  workman  from  a  like  proceeding,  but  the  £100  spent
in  Germany  to  yield  more  to  the  German,  and  the  £100  spent  in  England
more  to  the  English  workman.  Differences  of  the  first  type,  i.e.  in  the  general
level  of  tastes,  can  never  be  revealed  by  statistics.  But  differences  in  the
relative  level  of  various  tastes  can  sometimes  be  revealed  by  them.  For
example,  Germans  before  the  war  would  not  eat  mutton  though  it  was  a  penny
cheaper  than  pork,  while  Englishmen  eat  it  readily  (Cd.  4032,  pp.  xlviii  and  xlix).
Again  Germans  eat  rye  bread,  whereas  English  people  eat  white  bread.  We
know  that  this  is  not  due  merely  to  the  fact  that  rye  bread  is  relatively  cheap
in  Germany  and  that  Germans  are  poorer  than  Englishmen,  because,  if  it  were
cheapness  alone  that  was  responsible  for  the  consumption  of  rye  in  Germany,
there  woiild  presumably  be  a  higher  consumption  of  white  bread  among
better-to-do  Germans.  This,  however,  is  not  found.  Hence,  we  may  legitimately
infer  that  Germans  have  a  taste  for  rye  bread,  as  against  wheaten  bread,
different  from  the  English  taste.  When  either  of  the  two  types  of  difference,
or  change,  of  taste  thus  distinguished  is  present,  the  measure  constructed  in  the
text  cannot  safely  be  used  as  an  index  of  changes  or  differences  in  economic
welfare.


72  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

y'  a  general  enquiry  as  to  what  measure  would  satisfy  the
condition  if  all  relevant  information  were  accessible  ;  secondly,
a  mathematical  enquiry  as  to  what  practicable  measure
built  up  from  the  sample  information  that  we  can  in  fact
obtain  would  approximate  most  closely  to  this  ideal  measure ;
*  thirdly,  a  mixed  general  and  mathematical  enquiry  as  to
Iww  reliMe  the  practicable  measure  is  likely  to  be.

)  ^3.  The  root   fact   confronting  us   is   that   in    the    first

'  period  our  group  expends  its  purchasing  power  upon  one
collection  of  commodities,  and  in  the  second  period  it
expends  it  on  a  second  and  different  collection.  Each
collection  must,  of  course,  be  so  estimated  that  the  same
thing  is  not  counted  twice  over,  that  is  to  say,  it  must
be  taken  to  include  direct  services  rendered  to  consumers —
e.g.  the  services  of  doctors,  finished  consumable  articles,
and  a  portion  of  the  finished  durable  machines  produced
during  the  year,^  but  not  the  raw  materials  or  the  services
of  labour  that  are  embodied  in  these  things,  and  not,  of
course,  "  securities."  Let  us  ignore  the  fact  that  in  one
of  the  collections  there  may  be  some  newly  invented  kinds
of  commodity  which  are  not  represented  at  all  in  the  other.
The  first  collection,  which  we  may  call  C^,  then  embraces
x^,  y^,  2j  .  .  .  units  of  various  commodities;  and  the  second
collection,  Cg,  embraces  x^,  y^,  z^  .  .  .  units  of  the  same
commodities.  Let  the  prices  per  unit  of  these  several
commodities  be,  in  the  first  period,  a^,  b^,  c^,  .  .  .;  and  in
the  seco7id  period,  a^,  h^,  c^.  .  .  .  Let  the  aggregate  money
income  of  our  group,  in  the  first  period,  be  I^,  in  the  second
I2.      The  following  propositions  result :

1.  If  our  group  in  the  second  period  purchased  the  several
commodities  in  the  same  proportion  in  which  it  purchased
them  in  the  first  period,  that  is  to  say,  if  it  purchased  in  both
periods  a  collection  of  the  general  form  C^,  its  purchase  of

1  This  is  necessary  in  order  to  conform  to  the  definition  of  the  national
dividend  given  in  Chap.  III.  Had  we  defined  the  dividend  so  that  it  included
only  what  is  actually  consumed  during  the  year,  no  machines  would  come  into
it.  On  our  definition  we  ought  strictly  to  include  all  new  machinery  and  plant
over  and  above  what  is  required  to  maintain  capital  intact,  minus  an  allowance
for  that  part  of  the  value  of  this  machinery  and  plant  that  is  used  up  in
producing  consumable  goods  during  the  year  itself.  In  practice,  of  course,  these
subtleties  must  be  ignored.


CH.  V    MEASUREMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      73

each  commodity  in  the  second  period  would  be  equal  to  its
purchase  of  each  commodity  in  the  first  period  multiplied  by
the  fraction

Ij  T^a.^  +  y^ftg  +  V2  +
2.  If  our  group  in  the  first  period  purchased  the  several
commodities  in  the  same  proportion  in  which  it  purchased
them  in  the  second  period,  that  is  to  say,  if  it  purchased  in
both  periods  a  collection  of  the  general  form  Cg,  its  purchase
of  each  commodity  in  the  second  period  would  be  equal  to  its
purchase  of  each  commodity  in  the  first  period  multiplied  by
the  fraction

I2  3:2^1  +  yA  +  ^2^1  +  •  •  '  ^

II    «2«2  +  ^2^2  +  V2  +    •    •    •

On  the  basis  of  these  propositions  the  problem  which  we
have  set  ourselves  can  be  solved.

I  4.  First,  it  sometimes  happens  that  both  the  fractions
distinguished  above  lie  upon  the  same  side  of  unity ;  they  are
either  both  greater  than  unity  or  both  less  than  unity.  If
they  are  both  greater  than  unitv.  this  means  that  our  crroup.

if    it  wishes,  can   b"y  tti^t-p  rnmmnrlitiPQ    in    fViP    spppTld    p^^^^^

than  in  the  first,  whether  its  purchases  are  arranged  in  the
form  of  collection  0,  or  in  that  of  collection  Q,.  Hence,  the
fact  that  jji  the  second  period  it  chooses  the  form  C^  proves


that  what  it  purchases  in  this  form  yields  it  more  satisfaction

than  it  could  get  from  a  collection  of  the  form  C^  larger  than

the- collection  of  that   form  which  it  purchased  in  the  first

period.^      A  fortiori,   therefore,   its   purchase   in   the   second

period   yields   it   more   satisfaction  than  it  did  get  from  the

actual  collection  of  the  form  C^  which  it  did  purchase  in  the

first   period.      Hence,  if   both  our  fractions  are  greater  than

unity,   it   necessarily   follows — provided   that   the   tastes   and

temperament  of  the  representative  man  are  not  changed  through

external  causes — that  the  ennnomic  satisfaction  enjoyed  by  the

'  This  proposition  and  the  results  based  upon  it  depend  on  the  condition
that  our  group  is  able  to  buy  at  the  ruling  price  the  quantity  of  any  commodity
which  it  \<,-ishes  to  buy  at  that  price.  When  official  maximum  prices  have  been
fixed,  and  people's  purchases  at  those  prices  are  restricted,  either  by  a  process  of
rationing  or  by  the  fact  that  at  those  prices  there  is  not  enough  of  the  commodity
to  satisfy  the  demand,  this  condition  is,  of  course,  not  satisfied.


74  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.i

group  in  the  second  period  is  greater  than  it  was  in  the  first
period.  By  analogous  reasoning — again  provided  that  the
tastes  and  temperament  of  the  representative  man  are  not
changed  through  external  causes — it  can  be  shown  that,  if
both  fractions  are  less  than  unity,  the  economic  satisfaction
enjoyed  by  the  group  in~tKe~iirst  period  is  greater  than  it  is
in  the  second  period.  In  these  circumstances,  therefore,  either
of  the  two  fractions

h  gi^i  +  yi^  +  ^1^1  •  •  •  Q^  I2  ^^2^1  +  Vzh  +  Hh  +  •  •  •

II     aJjffg  +  yi&2  +  V2    •    •    •  II     a;2«2  +  2/2*2  +  ^2^2  +    •    ■    •'

or  any  mean  between  them,  will  satisfy  the  condition  that  our
measure  is  required  to  fulfil  as  a  criterion  of  changes  in  the
volume  of  the  dividend.

§  5.  In  the  above  circumstances,  therefore,  the  condition  we
have  laid  down  does  not  determine  the  choice  of  a  measure,
but  merely  fixes  the  limits  within  which  that  choice  must
lie.  The  width  of  these  limits  depends  upon  the  extent  to
which  the  two  fractions  differ  from  one  another.  In  some
conditions  there  exists  between  them  a  relation  of  approximate
equality.  In  recent  years,  as  regards  the  United  Kingdom,
this  relation  seems  to  have  prevailed.  Half  a  century  ago,  no
doubt,  man's  power  in  different  directions  was  increasing  very
unevenly.  Of  late,  however,  the  dominant  factor  in  the
Englishman's  increased  capacity  to  obtain  almost  every  im-
portant commodity  is  one  and  the  same,  namely,  improved
transport ;  for  a  main  part  of  what  improvements  in  manu-
facture now  accomplish  is  to  cheapen  means  of  transport.  In
other  conditions  the  difference  between  the  two  fractions  is
considerable.  Illustrations  that  would  be  directly  applic-
able could  easily  be  found.  I  prefer,  however,  to  make  use
of  one  drawn,  not  from  an  inter-temporary  comparison  of
two  states  of  the  same  group,  but  from  a  contemporary
comparison  of  the  states  of  two  groups.  This  illustration  is
provided  in  the  Board  of  Trade's  Report  on  the  Cost  of  Living
in  German  Tovms.  The  Report  shows  that,  at  the  time  when
it  was  made,  what  an  English  workman  customarily  consumed
cost  about  one-fifth  more  in  Germany  than  in  England,  while
what  a  German  workman  customarily  consumed  cost  about


CH.  V   MEASUREMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      75

one-tenth  more  in  Germany  than  in  England.^  If  we  assnme
— iL'hat  is,  of  course,  not  true — that  English  and  German
workmen's  incomes  and  tastes  are  equivalent,  and  that  their
consumption  differs  only  on  account  of  price  differences,  and,
if  the  collection  x^,  etc.,  is  the  German  consumption  and  the
collection  x^,  etc.,  the  English  consumption,  this  result  can
be  expressed  in  the  form :

§  6.  Though  our  condition,  in  the  class  of  problem  so  far  con-
sidered, only  fixes  these  two  limits  within  which  the  measure
of  dividend  changes  should  lie,  considerations  of  convenience
suggest  even  here  the  wisdom  of  selecting,  though  it  be  in  an
arbitrary  manner,  some  one  among  the  indefinite  number  of
possible  measures.  When  we  proceed  from  this  class  of
problem  to  another  more  difficult  class,  the  need  for  purely
arbitrary  choice  is  narrower  in  range.  It  sometimes  happens
that  one  of  the  above  two  fractions  is  greater  than  unity  and
the  other  less  than  unity.  Then  it  is  clear  that  both  of  them
cannot  indicate  the  direction  in  which  the  economic  satisfaction
enjoyed  by  the  group  has  changed.  In  the  second  period,  let
us  suppose,  the  representative  man's  later  money  income
commands  a  larger  amount  of  the  collection  of  form  C,  than
his  earlier  income  commanded ;  but  it  commands  a  smaller
amount  of  the  collection  of  form  C^  than  his  earlier  income
commanded.  In  these  circumstances  common  sense  suggests
that,  if  the  fraction

Ig  x^a^  +  y^h^  +  gjC^  -{-  .  .  .

\  ^4^2  +  y A  +  ^i'^2  +  •  •  •

falls  short  of  unity  by  a  large  proportion,  while  the  fraction

I3  Zgft^  +  yg&i  +  ggCi  +  .  .  .
Ij   x^^  +  yjftg  +  %  +  .  .  .

exceeds  unity  only  by  a  small  proportion,  the  economic
satisfaction  enjoyed  by  the  representative  member  of  our
group  has  probably  diminished ;  and  that,  if  conditions  of  an
opposite  character  are  reaUsed,  it  has  probably  increased.
1  [Cd.  4032],  pp.  Tii  and  xlv.


7Q  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  it.  i

This  prima  facie  conclusion  can  be  confirmed  by  direct
analysis  as  follows.     If

Ii  *  a^i^a  +  ^A  +  V2  +  •  •  •

is  less  than  unity  by  a  large  fraction,  this  means  that,  were
our  representative  man  to  purchase  in  the  second  year  a
collection  of  the  form  C^,  his  purchases  of  each  item  would  be
less  by  a  large  percentage  than  they  were  in  the  first  year,
and  therefore — tastes  and  temperament  being  unchanged — he
would  probably  enjoy  an  amount  of  satisfaction  less  than  in
the  first  year  by  a  large  amount,  say  by  K^.  Therefore,  the
fact  that,  instead  of  doing  this,  he  purchases  in  the  second
year  a  collection  of  the  form  C^  proves  only  that  the  satisfac-
tion yielded  by  his  purchase  of  this  collection  in  the  second
year  does  not  fall  short  of  that  yielded  by  his  purchase  of  the
other  collection  in  the  first  year  by  more  than  K^.  In  like
manner  if

12/^2^  +  3/2^  +  ^1+  •  •  •
II  "  «2«2  +  VA  +  hh+  •   •  ■

is  greater  than  unity  by  only  a  small  fraction,  this  means
that,  were  our  representative  man  to  purchase  a  collection
of  the  forms  C^  in  the  first  year,  his  purchases  of  each
item  would  be  less  by  only  a  small  percentage  than  they
are  in  the  second  year,  and — tastes  and  temperament  being
unchanged — he  would  probably  enjoy  an  amount  of  satis-
faction less  than  in  the  second  year  by  only  a  small  amount,
say  K^.  Hence,  we  know  that  the  satisfaction  yielded  by
the  collection  actually  purchased  in  the  second  year  does  not
exceed  that  of  the  collection  actually  purchased  in  the  first
year  by  more  than  Kg.  Since,  therefore,  in  view  of  the
largeness  of  K^  relatively  to  K^,  there  are  more  ways  in  which
the  satisfaction  from  the  second  year's  purchase  can  be  less,
than  there  are  ways  in  which  it  can  be  more,  than  the  satis-
faction from  the  first  year's  purchase,  and  since,  further,  the
probability  of  any  one  of  these  different  ways  is  prima  facie
equal  to  that  of  any  other,  it  is  probable  that  the  satisfaction
from  the  second   year's   purchase  is  less  than  that  from  the


h    x^a^  +  yA  +  h^i      •  '  •  ^h

x^^  +  yA  +  z^^+  .  .  .

li  ^i«2  +  yA  +  V2+  •  .  •    ii

«2«2  +  ^2^2  +  ^^2  +    •    •    •

Ig   z^a.^  +  y,  &!  +  ZiC^  +     Ij

x^a.2  +  y^b^  +  z^c^  +

CH.  V    MEASUREMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      77

first  This  argument,  as  stated  thus  far,  depends  on  the
assumption  that  temperament  and  tastes  are  unchanged.
When  account  is  taken  of  the  fact,  referred  to  at  the  end
of  ^  1,  that  tastes  tend  to  adapt  themselves  to  what  they
feed  on,  it  must  be  recognised  that  both  K^  and  K,  will
prove  in  fact  to  be  smaller  than  they  would  have  been  on
the  assumption  of  fixed  tastes.  But  this  gives  no  reason
to  suppose  that  their  relative  magnitude  will  be  significantly
affected;  and  all  that  our  argument  essentially  needs  is
that  Kj  shall  be  large  relatively  to  K^.  Hence  the  argument
remains  valid ;  and  we  may  conclude  that  the  satisfaction
obtained  by  the  representative  man  in  our  group  probably
decreases  or  increases  in  the  second  period  according  as
either


or


Ii    x^a^  +  y^  +  z^c,2.  +      ^2    ^2^*1  +  ^2^1  +  hh  +  *

or  any  power  of  either  of  these  expressions,  is  greater  or  less

than  unity.      Any  fraction  constructed  on  any  of  the  above

plans  will,  therefore,  probably   satisfy  the  conditions  required

of  our  measure.^

1  It  may  be  thought  at  first  sight  that  the  formulae  of  the  text  will  often
fail  to  yield  a  correct  indication  of  changes  in  economic  welfare,  because  they
pay  no  attention  to  the  fact  that,  of  two  commodities  costing  equal  amounts  of
money,  one  may,  nevertheless,  carry  a  much  greater  quantity  of  "  satisfaction  "
than  the  other.  Thus  Pierson  writes:  "The  price  of  an  article,  though  it
expresses  the  utility  of  the  last  increment  of  that  article,  affords  no  indication
whatever  of  each  of  the  preceding  increments.  With  respect  to  this  two  things
are  possible  ;  the  value  attached  to  them  may  be  only  slightly  greater  than  that
attached  to  the  last  increment,  or  the  difference  in  value  may  be  very  great "
(^Principles  of  Economics,  vol.  ii.  pp.  33-4).  It  follows  from  this  that,  if  we  start
with  two  articles,  equal  alike  in  quantity  and  in  price,  a  halving  of  the  supply  of  the
one  may  affect  economic  welfare  very  much  more  than  a  halving  of  the  supply
of  the  other.  That  is,  of  course,  perfectly  true.  But  it  is  an  error  to  suppose
that  this  fact  is  not  taken  into  account  by  our  formulae.  It  is  taken  into
account,  because  a  given  contraction  in  the  supply  of  a  commodity  of  inelastic
demand  is  necessarily  associated  with  a  much  larger  rise  of  price  than  an  equal
contraction  in  the  supply  of  a  commodity  of  elastic  demand.  Thus,  if  the
commodity  of  which  x^  units  is  purchased  in  the  first  period  and  x^  (say  half
of  a^)  in  the  second  is  of  inelastic  demand,  this  implies  that  a.,  will  be
very  large  relatively  to  a^  and,  therefore,  that  our  formulae  are  much  more
likely  to  work  out  at  a  figure  less  than  unity,  thus  indicating  diminislied
economic  welfare,  than  they  would  have  been  if  the  demand  for  this  commodity
had  been  elastic.


78  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

§  7.  The  results  thus  obtained  fix  these  limits  within
which  the  choice  of  an  appropriate  measure  must  lie.  Since,
however,  they  still  exhibit  an  indefinite  number  of  possible
measures,  any  one  of  which  would  satisfy  the  fundamental
condition  that  has  been  laid  down,  they  do  not  determine
the  choice  of  that  measure.  We  have,  therefore,  to  take
a  further  step  and  to  choose  among  many  eligible  forms
the  one  we  deem  most  eligible.  In  this  matter  our  procedure
must  necessarily  be  more  or  less  arbitrary.  Simplicity  and
convenience,  on  the  whole,  point  to  the  square  root  of  the
product  of  the  proportionate  change  in  the  purchasable
amount  of  a  collection  of  the  form  C^  and  of  the  proportionate
change  in  the  purchasable  amount  of  a  collection  of  the
form  Cy     In  other  words,  they  point  to  the  formula

I2    /^\0'x  +  .Vi^i  +  hh  +  .  .  .    ^2^1  +  y^i  +  .^2^1  +  •  •  •

Ii  V  x^a^  +  yi&2  +  hh  +...''  x^a^  +  y^h^  +  z^c^  +  .  .   .
as  the  measure  of  change  most  satisfactory  for  our  purpose.
Obviously  the  portion  of  this  expression  to  the  right  of  ^  is

the  reciprocal  of  an  index  of  the  change  that  has  taken  place
in  general  prices.

§  8.  The  successful  employment  of  the  above  formula
depends,  it  will  be  observed,  upon  the  assumption  that  no  com-
modities are  included  in  either  of  the  collections  C^  and  C^
which  are  not  included  in  both.  If,  therefore,  a  commodity  is
available  for  purchase  in  one  of  the  two  years  but  not  in
the  other,  the  satisfaction  yielded  by  this  commodity  in
the  year  in  which  it  is  purchased  is  wholly  ignored  by  our
measure.  So  far  then  as  "  new  commodities  "  are  introduced
between  two  periods  which  are  being  compared,  that  measure
is  imperfect.  This  matter  is  important,  because  new  com-
modities, in  the  sense  here  relevant,  embrace,  not  merely
commodities  that  are  new  physically,  but  also  old  commodities
that  have  become  obtainable  at  new  times  or  places,  such
as  strawberries  in  December,  or  the  wheat  which  railways
have  introduced  into  parts  of  India  where  it  was  formerly
unknown.  Obviously,  we  must  not  count  December  straw-
berries along  with  ordinary  strawberries,  and  so  make  inven-


cH.  V   MEASUEEMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      79

tions  for  strawberry  forcing  raise  the  price  of  strawberries,  but
must  reckon  December  strawberries  as  a  new  and  distinct
commodity.  Since,  however,  new  commodities  seldom  play
an  important  part  in  the  consumption  of  any  group  till  some
little  while  after  they  are  first  introduced,  the  imperfection
due  to  this  is  much  less  serious  for  comparisons  between  two
successive  years  than  for  comparisons  between  years  separated
by  a  long  interval.^  This  consideration  suggests  that  com-
parisons between  distant  years  are  best  made,  not  directly,
but  by  year  to  year  steps.  This  can  be  done  by  means
of  the  chain  method  devised  by  Dr.  Marshall.^  On  this
method  direct  comparisons  are  made  only  between  each  year
and  its  immediate  predecessor  and  successor,  and  the  year
1860  is  compared  with  1890,  not  directly,  but  through  a
chain  of  successive  comparisons.  Thus,  we  may  suppose
prices  in  1861  to  be  95  per  cent  of  what  they  were  in
1860  :  those  in  1862  to  be  82  per  cent  of  those  in   1861,

and  so  on.     Then  prices  in  1890  will  be  100  J

per  cent  of  prices  in  1860.

§  9.  "We  now  turn  to  the  second  main  problem  of  this
chapter.  The  formula  set  out  above  is  accepted  as  the  ideally
best  measure  for  our  purpose.  But  it  cannot  be  employed
in  practice  because,  in  order  to  construct  it,  a  great  deal  of
information  would  be  necessary  which  is  never  in  fact
available.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  construct,  from  such
information  as  we  can  obtain,  a  model,  or  representative,
measure  that   shall  approximate  to  it  as  closely  as  possible.

Our  ideal  measure,  apart  from  its  multiplier  f   representing

change  of  income,  is  built  up  of  two  parts :  the  reciprocal
of  the  price  change  of  the  collection  C^  (containing  quantities
of  different  commodities  equal  to  x^,  y^,  z^,  .  .  .),  and  the
reciprocal  of  the  price  change  of  the  collection  C,  (containing
quantities  equal  to  x^,  y,,  2^,  •  •  •)•      Our  approximate  measure

1  Similar  considerations  suggest  that  the  existence  of  "  new  commodities,"
or  rather,  in  this  case,  different  commodities,  is  a  more  serious  obstacle  in  the
way  of  comparing  two  distant  than  two  neighbouring  places,  because  it  is  much
more  likely  that  one  of  the  two  distant  places,  than  it  is  that  one  of  the  two
neighbouring  places,  will  purchase  commodities  that  are  not  known  in  the  other.

*  Cf.  Marshall,  CoTUemporary  JReview,  March  1887,  p.  371  et  seq.


95        82
loo''  100


/


80  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

will,  therefore,  also  be  built  up  of  two  parts  constituting
approximations  to  the  price  change  of  C^  and  of  G^  respectively.
By  what  use  of  the  method  of  sampling  can  these  approxima-
tions best  be  made  ?

S  10.  With  whatever  collection  of  commodities  we  are
concerned,  whether  it  be  that  purchased  at  any  time  by
people  in  general,  or  by  the  manual  workers,  or  by  any  other
body  of  persons,  it  is  likely  to  contain  commodities  drawn
from  several  different  groups,  the  broad  characteristics  of
whose  price  movements  are  different.  It  is  obvious  that  a
good  sample  collection  should  contain  representatives  of  all
the  groups  with  different  characteristics  that  enter  into  the
national  dividend,  or  that  part  of  it  which  we  are  trying  to
measure.^  Unfortunately,  however,  practical  considerations
make  it  impossible  that  this  requirement  should  be  satisfied,
and  even  make  it  necessary  that  resort  should  be  had  to
commodities  that  do  not  themselves  enter  into  the  purchases
of  ordinary  people,  but  are,  like  wheat  and  barley,  raw  materials
of  commodities  that  do.  For  the  range  of  things  whose  prices
we  are  able  to  observe  and  bring  into  our  collection  of  samples
is  limited  in  two  directions.

First,  except  for  certain  articles  of  large  popular  consump-
tion, the  retail  prices  charged  to  consumers  are  difficult  to
ascertain.  Giffen  once  went  so  far  as  to  say :  "  Practically  it
is  found  that  only  the  prices  of  leading  commodities  capable  of
being  dealt  with  in  large  wholesale  markets  can  be  made  use  of."
This  statement  must  now  be  qualified,  in  view  of  recent  studies
of  retail  prices  of  food  that  have  been  made  by  the  Board  of
Trade  and  Ministry  of  Food,  but  it  still  holds  good  over  a  con-
siderable field.  Even,  however,  when  the  difficulty  of  ascertain-
ing retail  prices  can  be  overcome,  these  prices  are  unsuitable
for  comparison  over  a  series  of  years,  because  the  thing  priced

1  Professor  Mitchell  writes  :  "  The  sluggish  movement  of  mamifactured  goods
and  of  consumers'  commodities  in  particular,  the  capricious  jumping  of  farm
products,  the  rapidly  increasing  dearness  of  lumber,  etc. ,  are  all  part  and  parcel
of  the  fluctuations  which  the  ])rice  level  is  actually  undergoing.  .  .  .  Every
restriction  in  the  scope  of  the  data  implies  a  limitation  in  the  significance
of  the  results"  (Bulletin  of  the  U.S.A.  Bureau  of  Labour  Statistics,  No.  173,
pp.  66-7).  This  is  quite  correct  as  it  stands,  but  it  must  not  be  interpreted  to
imply  that  both  finished  products  and  the  raw  materials  embodied  in  those  same
finished  products  should  be  included.


CH.  V    MEASUEEMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      81

is  apt  to  contain  a  different  proportion  of  the  services  of  the
retailer  and  of  the  transporter,  and,  therefore,  to  be  a  different
thing  at  one  time  from  what  it  is  at  another.  "  When  fresh
sea  fish  could  be  had  only  at  the  seaside,  its  average  price
was  low.  Now  that  railways  enable  it  to  be  sold  inland,  its
average  retail  price  includes  much  higher  charges  for  distribu-
tion than  it  used  to  do.  The  simplest  plan  for  deaHng  with
this  difficulty  is  to  take,  as  a  rule,  the  wholesale  price  of  a
thing  at  its  place  of  production,  and  to  allow  full  weight  to
the  cheapening  of  the  transport  of  goods,  of  persons,  and  of
news  as  separate  and  most  weighty  items."  ^

Secondly,  it  is  very  difficult  to  take  account  even  of  the
wholesale  prices  of  manufactured  articles,  because,  while  still
called  by  the  same  name,  they  are  continually  undergoing
changes  in  character  and  quality.  Stilton  cheese,  once  a
double-cream,  is  now  a  single-cream  cheese.  Clarets  of
different  vintages  are  not  equivalent.  A  third-class  seat  in  a
railway  carriage  is  not  the  same  thing  now  as  it  was  twenty
years  ago.  "  An  average  ten-roomed  house  is,  perhaps,  twice
as  large  in  volume  as  it  used  to  be ;  and  a  great  part  of  its
cost  goes  for  water,  gas,  and  other  appliances  which  were  not
in  the  older  house."  ^  "  During  the  past  twelve  years,  owing
to  more  scientific  methods  of  thawing  and  freezing,  the  quality
of  the  foreign  mutton  sold  in  this  country  has  steadily  improved  ;
on  the  other  hand,  that  of  foreign  beef  has  gone  down,  owing
to  the  fact  that  the  supply  from  North  America  has  practically
ceased,  and  its  place  has  been  taken  by  a  poorer  quality
coming  from  the  Argentine."  ^  The  same  class  of  difficulty  is
met  with  in  attempts  to  evaluate  many  direct  services — the
services  of  doctors,  for  example,  which,  as  Pareto  pointedly
observes,  absorb  more  expenditure  than  the  cotton  industry  "* —
for  these,  while  retaining  their  name,  often  vary  their  nature.

It  would  thus  seem  that  the  principal  things  available  for
observation — though  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  official
Canadian  Index  Number  and  more  than  one  index  number
employed  in  the  United  States  have  attempted  a  wider  survey

'  Cf.  Marshall,  CorUemporary  Beview,  M&rch  1887,  p.  374.

*  Ibid.  p.  375.

3  Mrs.  "Wood,  Eamomic  Journal,  1913,  pp.  622-3.

*  Cours  cC&ojunnie  politique,  p.  281.

G


82  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.i

— are  raw  materials  in  the  wholesale  markets,  particularly  in
the  large  world  markets.  These  things — apart,  of  course,  from
the  war — have  probably  of  late  years  fallen  in  price  relatively
to  minor  articles,  in  which  the  cost  of  transport  generally  plays
a  smaller  part ;  they  have  certainly  fallen  relatively  to  personal
services ;  and  they  have  probably  risen  relatively  to  manufac-
tured articles,  because  the  actual  processes  of  manufacture
have  been  improving.  The  probable  tendency  to  mutual  com-
pensation in  the  movements  of  items  omitted  from  our  samples
makes  the  omission  a  less  serious  evil  than  it  would  otherwise
be.  But,  of  course,  the  approximation  to  a  true  measure  is  -pro
tanto  worsened ;  and  it  is  almost  certain,  since  the  value  of  raw
materials  is  often  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  value  of
finished  products,  so  that  a  5  0  per  cent  change  in  the  former
might  involve  only  a  5  per  cent  change  in  the  latter,  that  it
will  give  an  exaggerated  impression  of  the  fluctuations  that
occur.

Nor  does  what  has  just  been  said  exhaust  the  list  of  our
disabilities.  For  the  samples  wanted  to  represent  the  several
"  collections "  is  a  list,  not  merely  of  prices,  but  of  prices
multiplied  by  quantities  purchased :  and  our  information
about  quantities  is  in  general  even  more  limited  than  our
information  about  prices.  There  are  very  few  records  of
annual  output — still  less  of  annual  purchases — of  commodities
produced  at  home.  Quantities  of  imports  are,  indeed,  recorded,
but  there  are  not  very  many  important  things  that  are  wholly
obtained  by  importation.  The  difficulty  can,  indeed,  be  turned,
for  some  purposes,  by  resort  to  typical  budgets  of  expenditure.
These  make  it  possible  to  get  a  rough  idea  of  the  average
purchases  of  certain  principal  articles  that  are  made  by
particular  classes  of  people.  But  this  method  can  scarcely
as  yet  provide  more  than  rough  averages.  It  will  seldom
enable  us  to  distinguish  between  the  quantities  of  various
things  that  are  embodied  in  the  collections  representative  of
different  years  fairly  close  together.

S  11.  Let  us  next  suppose  that  these  difficulties  have  been
so  far  overcome  that  a  sample  embracing  both  prices  and
quantities  at  all  relevant  periods  is  available.  The  next
problem  is  to  determine  the  way  in  which  the  prices  ought


cH.  V    MEASUEEMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      83

to  be  "  weighted."  At  first  sight  it  seems  natural  that  the
weights  should  be  proportioned  to  the  quantities  of  the  several
commodities  that  are  coutained  in  the  collection  from  which
the  sample  is  drawn.  But,  in  theory  at  all  events,  it  is
possible  to  improve  upon  this  arrangement.  For  some  of
the  commodities  about  which  we  have  information  may  be
connected  with  some  excluded  commodities  in  such  a  way
that  their  prices  generally  vary  in  the  same  sense.  These
commodities,  being  representative  of  the  others  as  well  as  of
themselves,  may  properly  be  given  weights  in  excess  of  what
they  are  entitled  to  in  their  own  right.  Thus,  ideally,  if  we
had  statistics  for  a  few  commodities,  each  drawn  from  a  different
broad  group  of  commodities  with  similar  characteristics,  it
would  be  proper  to  "  weight "  the  prices  of  our  several
sample  commodities  in  proportion,  not  to  their  own  importance,
but  to  that  of  the  groups  which  they  represent.  This,  however,
is  scarcely  practicable.  There  may  be  certain  commodities
whose  representative  character  is  so  obvious  that  exceptional
weight  may  rightly  be  given  to  them,  but  we  shall  seldom  have
enough  knowledge  to  attempt  this  kind  of  discrimination.
A  system  of  weighting  based  on  the  quantities  of  the  several
commodities  that  are  contained  in  our  sample  is,  in  general,
the  best  that  is  practically  available.^  Hence,  the  ideal
measure  of  the  price  change  of  the  collection  C^  being

^1^2  +  yA  +  ^i<^2  +  •  •  •
a^Oi  +  y  A  +  ^i^^i  +  •  •  •'
the  best  available  approximation  to  this  will  be

^<ii  +  yA+  '  •  •
x^a^  +  yA  +  •  •  •'

^  This  proposition  can  be  proved  by  means  of  the  principle  of  inverse
probability.  There  are  more  ways  in  which  a  sample  that  will  change  in  a
given  degree  can  be  drawn  from  a  complete  collection  which  changes  in  that
degree  than  there  are  ways  in  which  such  a  sample  could  be  drawn  from  a
collection  that  changed  in  a  different  degree.  Therefore  any  given  sample
that  has  been  taken  without  bias  from  any  collection  is  more  likely  to  represent
that  collection  correctly  as  it  stands  than  it  would  do  after  being  subjected  to
any  kind  of  doctoring.  It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that  the  question,
whether  a  commodity  whose  price  has  moved  very  differently  from  the  main
part  of  our  sample  ought  to  be  included,  is  a  delicate  one.  The  omission  of
"extreme  observations"  is  sometimes  deemed  desirable  in  the  calculation  of
physical  measurements.     What  should  be   done   in  this   matter   depends   on


84  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

where  the  terms  are  limited  to  the  number  of  sample  articles
available.  It  follows  that  the  best  approximation  to  the  full
ideal  measure  of  dividend  change  set  out  at  the  end  of  ^  7  is

IiV  x^a^^ry^^      x^a^  +  y^h^  +

When  the  available  statistics  do  not  make  it  possible  to
distinguish  the  quantities  purchased  by  our  group  in  the  two
periods  that  are  being  compared,  and  we  have  to  put  up  with
mere  rough  quantities  representing  the  average  purchases  of
the  group  in  the  two  periods  taken  together — quantities  that
may  be  symbolised  by  x^,  y^,  etc. — this  formula  necessarily
yields  place  to  the  much  inferior  expression

h   ^r^i  +  yA+  •  ■  •

II       iC^2  +  yA+    •    •    •

But  this  is  a  pis  alter.  The  other  formula  is  the  one  that
must  be  aimed  at.^

§  12.  There    remains    the    third   portion    of  our   inquiry,
namely,  a  study  of  the  circumstances  upon  which  the  reliability


whether  or  not  a  priori  expectations,  coupled  with  the  general  form  of  our
sample,  show  that  the  original  distribution,  from  which  the  sample  is  taken,
obeys  some  ascertained  law  of  error.  Whether  they  do  this  or  not  will  often  be
hard  to  decide.  It  should  be  added  that  the  practical  effect  of  omitting  extreme
observations  is  only  likely  to  be  important  when  the  number  of  commodities
included  in  our  sample  is  small  ;  and  that  it  is  just  when  this  number  is  small
that  adequate  grounds  for  exclusion  are  most  difficult  to  come  by.

1  In  the  majority  of  index  niimbers  purporting  to  provide  an  approximate
measure  of  the  price  change  of  a  collection,  some  year  or  average  of  years  is
taken  as  base  ;  for  this  base  year,  or  base  period,  each  of  tlio  prices  included  in
the  index  number  is  represented  by  100  ;  for  all  other  years  by  a  number  bear-
ing the  same  ratio  to  100  that  the  price  then  bears  to  the  price  in  the  base
period.  It  is  often  supposed  that  this  process  gives  the  same  result  as  the
last  formula  given  in  the  text  and  differs  from  it  merely  in  being  arithmetically
more  convenient.  That  is  a  mistake,  li  Pi  and  p.^  represent  "the  general
price  level  "  in  the  first  and  second  period  respectively,  the  text  formula  implies

P2_Xra2  +  yrh+  •    •    •

Pi~Xra^  +  yrbi+  .  .  .

The  formula  of  the  ordinary  weighted  index  number,  which  purports  to  be
identical  with  tliis,  is,  if  the  first  year  is  taken  as  base,

xJlOO-A+yJlOO^A         ,,    ^,       ,,

P2_^\  ^1  /  V         hJ  ^  («A)«2+iMl)^2.

^1  a;^(100)  +  yr(100)  («A)ai  +  {2/rai)&i

If  the  second  year  is  taken  as  base,  it  is

Pi    (aiA)*!  +  (Z/raa)^!


CH.  V    MEASUREMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      85

of  the  above  measure,  as  an  index  of  changes  (in  the  sense
defined  in  §  1)  in  the  volume  of  the  dividend  or  real  income
of  any    group,  depends.      This    reliability    is    a    complex   of

If  the  average  of  the  two  years  is  taken  as  base,  it  is

■P3_  W^  +  &2)}a-;+{yr(gi+g-2)}^2.

Pi     {^Ah  +  h)}  Oj  +  {yrioi  +  <h)}  h '

It  is  evident  from  these  formulae  that  the  ordinary  weighted  index  number
surreptitiously  assigns  different  weights  to  the  various  commodities  included
in  it  according  to  the  period  that  is  chosen  as  base.  Consequently,  the  same
facts  represented  in  the  formula  appropriate  to  one  base  may  indicate  a  rise  in
price,  and  represented  in  that  appropriate  to  another  base  they  may  indicate
a  fall.  An  excellent  practical  illustration  of  this  discrepancy  is  afforded  by
certain  tables  in  the  Board  of  Trade  publications  concerning  the  cost  of  living
in  English  and  German  towns  respectively.  In  the  Blue-book  dealing  with
England  the  real  wages  of  London,  the  Midlands,  and  Ireland  are  calculated  by
means  of  index  numbers,  in  which  London  (corresponding  in  our  time  index,
say,  to  the  year  1890)  is  taken  as  base,  and  the  price  of  consumables  and  the
rents  prevailing  there  are  both  represented  by  100.  On  this  plan,  prices  of
consumables  and  rents  being  given  weights  of  4  and  1  respectively,  the  Board  of
Trade  found  real  wages  in  London  to  be  equal  to  those  of  the  Midlands,  and
3  per  cent  higher  than  those  of  Ireland.  If,  however,  Ireland  had  been  taken
as  base,  real  wages  would  have  appeared — in  London  98,  in  the  Midlands  104,
in  Ireland  100.  A  similar  difficulty  emerges  in  the  Blue-book  on  German  towns.
The  Board  of  Trade,  taking  Berlin  as  base,  found  real  wages  higher  in  that  city
than  in  any  place  save  one  on  their  list  (Cd.  4032,  p.  xxxiv).  "  If  the  North
Sea  ports,  instead  of  Berlin,  had  been  taken  as  base,  Berlin  would  have  appeared
fourth  on  the  list  instead  of  second,  and  the  order  of  the  other  districts  would
have  been  changed  ;  and,  by  taking  Central  Germany  as  base,  even  greater
changes  in  the  order  would  have  been  effected"  (J.  M.  Keynes,  Economic
Journal,  1908,  p.  473).  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  large  discrepancies  of  this
sort  are  not  likely  to  occur,  except  when  there  are  large  differences,  or,  as  between
different  times,  large  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  commodities  that  are  heavily
weighted.  But  it  is  practically  certain  that  there  will  be  some  discrepancy.
Since  the  choice  between  different  base  periods  is  obviously  a  matter  of  more  or  less
arbitrary  choice,  this  circumstance  is  in  itself  sufficiently  disturbing.  It  is  not,
however,  the  main  objection  to  the  method  of  percentages.  This  is  that,  what-
ever base  period  is  chosen,  the  weights  employed  are  almost  necessarily  different
from  those  set  out  in  our  text  fonnula  and  are,  therefore,  almost  necessarily
wrong.  A  formula  built  up  on  the  percentage  plan,  though  it  purports  to  be
identical  with  the  text  formula,  is  only  in  fact  identical  with  it  if  our  units  of
quantity  are  so  selected  that  the  weights  applied  to  all  the  spveral  prices  in  the
period  chosen  as  base  are  equal.  In  general,  the  a's  and  Vs  being  absolute
quantities  and  the  percentage  numbers  ratios,  the  latter  cannot  be  substituted
for  the  former  without  substantially  altering  the  result.  It  follows  that,  in  the
construction  of  an  approximate  measure  for  the  purpose  contemplated  in  this
discussion,  price  statistics  should  be  employed  in  their  raw  form  and  not  in
the  form  of  percentages.  It  may  be  added  that,  if  expenditures,  instead  of
quantities,  are  employed  as  weights,  the  resultant  formula

Po _ {xa^)a^  +  (y\)\+  .  .  .
ft  xai  +  yh^+  .  .  .

is  again  equivalent  to  the  text  formula  only  if  the  base  year  weights  are  made  equal


86  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

two  elements,  the  reliability  of  our  ideal  measure  as  an
index  of  dividend  changes  and  the  reliability  of  our  approxi-
mate measure  as  a  representative  of  the  ideal  measure.
The  reliability  of  the  approximate  measure  as  an  index  of
dividend  changes  will  evidently  be  diminished  (or  increased)
by  anything  that  diminishes  (or  increases)  either  of  these
subordinate  reliabilities.  These  two  subordinate  reliabilities
depend,  however,  on  quite  different  sets  of  circumstances,  and
must,  therefore,  be  examined  separately.
^  ^  13.  In  I  6  it  was  shown  that  our  ideal  measure  will,
on  certain  conditions,  jprdbably  vary  in  the  same  sense  as
the  satisfaction  derived  from  his  purchases  by  the  repi-esenta-
tive  man  of  our  group.  This  probability  may,  however,  be
of  a  high  degree  or  of  a  low  degree.  In  other  words,  the
ideal  measure  may  be  very  much  more  likely  than  not  to
speak  the  truth,  or  it  may  be  only  a  little  more  likely
than  not  to  do  this.  Evidently  it  is  more  likely  to  indicate
rightly  the  direction  in  which  the  national  dividend  has
changed  when  it  shows  a  large  movement  in  either  direction
than  when  it  shows  a  small  movement,  because  then  a
larger  error  is  needed  to  make  it  point  wrongly.  The  follow-
ing more  special  considerations  may  be  added.

First,  it  will  be  remembered  that,  on  our  definition,  the
national  dividend  is  not  altered  when  people's  tastes  change
otherwise  than  as  a  result  of  changed  purchases.  But,  when
this  happens,  our  measure  may  be  changed.  Suppose,  for
instance,  that  people  come  to  have  a  greater  affection  for
some  commodity  which  is  being  produced  under  conditions
of  diminishing  returns.  The  price  of  that  commodity  will
go  up,  and  our  measure  of  the  national  dividend  may,  in
consequence,  go  down,  though  the  dividend  itself  is  by  defini-
tion unchanged.  If  the  measure  employed  had  been  simply
the  price  of  the  collection  consumed  in  either  of  the  two
periods,  it  would  be  necessary  that  this  misrepresentation
of  the  facts  should  occur.  The  failure  of  our  measure  does
not,  however,  go  so  far  as  this.  Whether  the  misi-epresenta-
tion  will  in  fact  occur  depends,  among  other  things,  upon
the  elasticity  of  the  supply  of  the  commodity  for  which
taste   has   changed.     The  more  elastic  the   supply   is,  or,  in


CH.  V   MEASUEEMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      87

other  words,  the  less  sharply  diminishing  returns  act,  the
smaller  is  the  probability  of  misrepresentation.^  Still,  a
considerable  chance  of  this  form  of  error  in  the  measure
exists.  No  doubt,  it  could  be  obviated  analytically,  if
ftg,  ^2'  ^^^•'  ^^^®  taken  to  represent,  not  the  actual  prices
prevailing  in  the  second  period,  but  the  supply  prices  of  the
nth  unit  (n  being  the  number  of  units  consumed  in  the
first  period).  In  practice,  however,  the  available  statistics
do  not  permit  of  this  device,  and  our  measure  cannot  be  thus
emended.  Here,  therefore,  is  a  source  of  error,  the  serious-
ness of  which  it  is  not  feasible  accurately  to  gauge.

Secondly,  a  high  degree  of  confidence  in  our  measure
cannot  be  warranted  unless  our  group  is  more  or  less  homo-
geneous, and  is  not  made  up  of  two  parts  containing,
respectively,  very  rich  people  and  very  poor  people,  whose
standards  of  living  are  widely  divergent.  For  in  groups
made  up  in  that  way  the  relation  between  the  amount
of  aggregate  satisfaction  purchasable  with  the  representative
man's  sovereign  at  two  different  times — and  it  is  in  reference
to  this  that  the  dividend  is  here  defined — will  be  largely
determined  by  the  distribution  of  the  price  movements  which
have  taken  place  among  things  chiefly  consumed  by  the  rich
or  by  the  poor;  and  no  account  of  this  distribution  is,  or
could  be,  taken  in  our  analysis.^  Furthermore,  the  proportion
in  which  the  income  of  the  group  as  a  whole  is  shared
among  differently  constituted  parts  of  it  may  change.      This

*  This  can  be  proved  as  follows.  If  the  representative  man's  money  income
is  supposed  to  be  constant,  3^iai+yib^=x./i^+y^j,  and  our  measure,  as  given

ia  §  7,  reduces  to     /  ^i"»"*"^i  2+  •  •   ■  where  the  as  and  b'B  represent  prices

'V    x.^^  +  yj>^+  .   .   .
and  the  x's  and  y'a  quantities.

Suppose  that,  under  the  influence  of  enhanced  taste,  a-,  becomes  equal
to  (xi  +  h)  and  a^  to  (Oj+A-).

Then  our  measure  becomes  /l/^^"'^  + !/]  ^2  +  ^

When  the  values  of  a^Wj  and  (a^  +  AX«i+^)  "^  gi^'en,  it  is  plain  that
this  fraction  is  more  likely  to  be  less  than  unity,  in  which  case  the  representa-
tion given  is  a  true  one,  the  smaller  k  is  relatively  to  h  :  that  is  to  say,  the
smaller  is  the  change  in  the  position  of  the  demand  cui-ve  that  calls  out  a
given  change  in  production  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  more  elastic  is  the  supply
of  the  commodity.

2  The  importance  of  this  point  is  made  apparent  by  Pareto's  observation  :
"  II  convient  a  un  riche  anglais  de  venir  vivre  en  Italie  ;  il  convient  egalement
k  un  ouvrier  italien  de  s'etablir  a  Londres."


88  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

will  involve  a  change  in  the  collection  of  things  purchased,
the  meaning  of  which,  from  the  standpoint  of  economic
welfare  and  the  national  dividend,  will  be  entirely  different
according  as  the  gain  of  income  has  accrued  to  the  richer
or  to  the  poorer  part  of  the  group.  For  this  reason  the  large
Hransference  of  money  available  for  immediate  expenditure,
which  took  place  from  the  middle  class  to  the  artisan  class
during  the  course  of  the  great  war,  practically  destroys  the
value  of  general  index  numbers  for  making  comparisons  in  the
volume  of  the  national  dividend,  as  defined  above,  between
different  parts  of  that  period  either  with  one  another  or
with  any  other  period.

§  14.  In  conclusion,  we  have  to  consider  the  reliability  of  our
approximate  measure  as  a  representative  of  the  ideal  measure.
Upon  this  matter  four  general  observations  may  be  made.
First,  when  the  sample  is  drawn  from  most  of  the  principal
sets  of  commodities,  included  in  the  collection,  which  have
characteristic  price  movements,  the  probable  error  of  our
measure  will  be  less  than  it  is  when  a  less  representative
field  is  covered.  Secondly,  when  the  sample  is  large,  in
the  sense  that  the  expenditure  upon  the  items  included
in  it  comprises  a  large  part  of  the  aggregate  expenditure
of  the  group  upon  the  whole  collection,  the  probable  error
is  less  than  it  is  when  the  sample  is  small.  With  random
sampling  in  the  strict  technical  sense,  the  reliability  increases
as  the  square  root  of  the  number  of  items  contained  in  the
sample.  Thirdly,  when  each  of  the  items  constituting  the  total
collection  absorbs  individually  a  small  part  of  the  aggregate
expenditure  upon  that  collection,  the  probable  error  is  less
than  when  some  of  the  items  absorb  individually  a  large  part
of  the  total  expenditure.  The  mathematical  considerations
upon  which  the  two  latter  of  these  propositions  rest  have
been  worked  out  by  Professor  Edgeworth  in  his  Report  to
the  British  Association  in  1889.  On  the  strength  of  them
it  has  sometimes  been  argued  that  any  reasonably  constructed
index  nurnber — and,  of  course,  our  measure  is  only  an
elaborated    index  number^ — is  fairly  certain    to    have    only

1  It  is  a  question  of  convenience  whether  the  term  index  number  should
be  applied  to  all  tables  exhibiting  variations  of  price,  or  should  be  confined  to


CH.  V


MEASUREMENT  OF  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND      89


a  small  probable  error.  Attempts  to  confute  these  arguments
by  citing  particular  years  for  which  index  numbers  framed
on  different  principles  have  given  widely  different  results
are  not  really  to  the  point.  For,  as  Professor  Edgeworth
has  pointed  out,  it  may  be  very  improbable  that  a  given
series  of  index  numbers  will  seriously  misrepresent  the
price  movement  of  any  specified  year,  and  yet  not  at  all
improbable  that  it  will  seriously  misrepresent  the  movement
of  some  unspecified  year}  None  the  less,  the  confidence
generated  by  a  purely  abstract  treatment  of  this  matter
should  never  be  more  than  a  restricted  confidence.  For
it  would  be  difficult  to  prove  that  the  assumptions,  upon
which  the  mathematical  defence  of  such  existing  index
numbers  as  those  of  Sauerbeck  and  the  Economist  rest,  are
realised  in  fact  as  fiilly  as  theoretical  statisticians  are  some-
times inclined  to  assume.^  Lastly,  the  magnitude  of  the
error  to  which  our  index  numbers  are  liable  is  greater — apart
altogether  from  the  difficulty  of  "  new  commodities  "  referred
to  in  §  8 — as  between  distant  years  than  as  between  years
that  are  close  together.  The  reason  for  this  is  that,
as  Professor  Mitchell,  on  the  basis  of  a  wide  survey  of
facts,  has  shown,  the  distribution  of  the  variations  in  whole-
sale prices  as  between  one  year  and  the  next  is  highly  con-


those  which  indiceUe  changes  in  respect  of  one  object  by  recording  changes
in  respect  of  some  other  related  object.  On  the  whole,  it  seems  linguistically
fitter,  as  well  as  more  consonant  with  authority,  to  reserve  the  term  for  the
latter  meaning  only  (cf.  Bowley,  Elements  of  Utatisiics,  p.  217).  I  do  not,
therefore,  speak  of  a  list  of  wheat  prices,  worked  out  as  percentages  of  the
price  at  some  given  point,  as  an  index  number  of  the  price  of  wheat ;  whereas
I  might  speak  of  it  as  an  index  number,  though  a  very  bad  one,  of  the  price
of  a  bushel  of  wheat,  pltis  a  pound  of  beef,  plus  a  pound  and  a  half  of  bacon.
In  like  manner,  I  might  regard  a  table  of  wholesale  price  changes  as  an  index
number  of  retail  price  changes,  and  the  index  would  be  a  good  one,  if  I  had
reason  to  believe  that  the  relation  between  wholesale  and  retail  prices  had
remained  fairly  constant.  Or,  finally,  I  might  regard  a  table  giving  the  output
of  coal  or  iron,  or,  in  this  age  of  electricity,  of  copper  (cf.  Watkins's  The
Oroicth  of  Large  Fortunes,  p.  91),  as  an  index  number  of  the  output  of
business  in  general.

^  Journal  of  Royal  Staiistiedl  Society,  Jan.  1913,  p.  175.

*  Thus  it  may  be  noted  that,  unless  we  know  both  (1)  that  the  collection
from  which  samples  are  taken  is  distributed  in  accordance  with  the  normal
law  of  error,  and  (2)  that  the  sampling  is  not  subject  to  any  bias  or  "  systematic
error,"  it  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the  probable  error
(cf.  Poincare,  Science  and  Hypothesis,  p.  209).


90  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

centrated — more  concentrated  than  the  distribution  proper
to  the  normal  law  of  error ;  but  the  distribution  of  variations
as  between  one  year  and  a  somewhat  distant  year  is
highly  scattered.  "  "With  some  commodities  the  trend  of
successive  price  changes  continues  distinctly  upwards  for  years
at  a  time ;  with  other  commodities  there  is  a  constant
downward  trend ;  with  still  others  no  definite  long  period
trend  appears."  ^  This  proves  the  statement  made  above :
sampling  will  provide  a  much  more  reliable  approximation
to  our  ideal  measure  when  the  comparison  attempted  is
between  successive  years  than  when  it  is  between  widely
separated  years.  This  is  true  whether  the  comparison
between  the  distant  years  is  made  directly  or  by  means
of  a  chain  index  number.^

1  U.S.  Bulletin  of  Labour,  No.  173,  p.  23.

2  As  Professor  Edgeworth  has  pointed  out,  the  further  inference  which
Professor  Mitchell  seeks  to  draw  from  his  data,  that — apart  altogether  from  new
commodities — comparisons  made  by  the  chain  method  between  years  a  given
distance  apart  are  more  reliable  than  comparisons  made  by  the  direct  method
between  these  same  years,  does  not  seem  to  be  justiiied.  Cf.  "The  Doctrine
of  Index  Numbers,"  Economic  Journal,  1918,  p.  181  et  seq.


CHAPTER  YI

THE    NATIONAL    DIVIDEND    AND    THE    QUALITY    OF   THE    PEOPLE

S  1.  The   general   conclusions   of   the   fourth   chapter   might,
until  quite  recently,  have  been  stated  as  they  are  there  stated,
without    evoking    quarrel  or    dispute.      But    of  late  years   a
great    advance    has    occurred    in    biological    knowledge.      In
former  times  economists  had,  indeed,   to  take  some  account
of    the   reactions   of  economic   causes   upon   the   quantity  of
the    population,   and   upon    its    quality    so   far   as    that  was
determined  by  environment  :  but  questions  about  the  reaction
of  economic   causes  upon    the  quality  of   the   population  as
determined    by  fundamental    biological    attributes    were    not
raised.      Xow,  the  situation  is   different      Biometricians  and
Mendelians   alike  have   turned   their    attention   to   sociology,
and  are   insisting  upon  the  fundamental  importance  for  our
science  of  a  proper  understanding  of  the  laws  of  heredity.
Economists,    it  is   said,  in   discussing,  as   I  have  done,   thTj
direct  effect  of  the  state  of  the  national  dividend  upon  welfare,  I
are    wasting    their    energies.       The    direct    effect    is    of    no  j
significance;    it   is   only    the  indirect  effect  on    the  size   of  J
the  families  of  good  and  bad  stocks  respectively  that  really
matters.      For,  every  form  of  welfare  depends  ultimately  on
something   much   more   fundamental  than  economic  arrange-
ments,   namely,     the    general     forces     governing     biological
selection.      I    have    intentionally    stated    these    claims    in    a
somewhat  indefinite  form,  because  I  am  anxious  to  investigate
the    problem    thus   raised  in  a  constructive   rather    than    in
a  critical  spirit.      I  shall  endeavour,  in  the  following  sections,
to    indicate,    as    precisely    as    possible,    how    far    the    recent
advance    in    biological   knowledge  really   affects  our  science.

91


92  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

To  this  end,  I  shall  distinguish,  first,  certain  results  of  that
knowledge,  which,  though  of  great  value,  are  not  strictly
relevant  to  economics ;  secondly,  the  general  claim  that
the  method  of  economic  study  indicated  in  the  preceding
chapters  is  rendered  by  the  new  knowledge  trivial  and  un-
important ;  and,  thirdly,  certain  points,  in  respect  of  which
the  new  knowledge  comes  directly  into  contact  witji  the
problems  I  have  undertaken  to  investigate,  and  makes  it
necessary  to  qualify  the  conclusions  that  have  been  reached.

§  2.  By  far  the  most  important  contribution  of  modern
biological  study  to  sociology  is  the  assurance,  which  it
affords,  of  the  definite  heritable  character  of  certain  inborn
defects.  Whatever  view  be  taken  of  the  physiological
mechanism  of  inheritance,  the  practical  result  is  the  same.
^AVe  know  that  persons  with  congenital  defects  are  likely,
if  they  marry,  to  hand  down  a  defective  organisation  to
some  of  their  children.  We  do  not  possess  this  definite
knowledge  with  regard  to  general  desirable  qualities,  par-
ticularly on  the  mental  side.  Professor  Bateson  issues  a
wise  caution  when  he  writes  :  "  Whereas  our  experience  of
what  constitutes  the  extremes  of  unfitness  is  fairly  reliable
and  definite,  we  have  little  to  guide  us  in  estimating  the
qualities  for  which  society  has  or  may  have  a  use,  or  the
numerical  proportions  in  which  they  may  be  required.  .  .  .
There  is  as  yet  nothing  in  the  descent  of  the  higher  mental
qualities  to  suggest  that  they  follow  any  simple  system  of
transmission.  It  is  likely  that  both  they  and  the  more
marked  developments  of  physical  powers  result  rather  from
the  coincidence  of  numerous  factors  than  from  the  possession
of  any  one  genetic  element."  ^  Again,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Whetham
rightly  observe  that  desirable  qualities,  such  as  ability,  moral
character,  good  health,  physical  strength  and  grace,  beauty
and  charm,  "  are,  from  the  point  of  view  of  heredity,
essentially  different  from  some  of  the  bad  qualities  hitherto
considered,  in  that  they  depend  on  the  conjunction  of  a
great  many  factors.  Such  a  conjunction  must  be  very  hard
to  trace  in  the  hereditary  process,  where  possibly  each
character  may  descend  independently,  or  different  characters

'  Mevdel's  Principles  of  Heredity,  p.  305.


CH.  Yi  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  93

may  be  linked  together,  or  be  incompatible,  in  far  more
complicated  ways  than  we  have  traced  in  the  qualities  of
plants  and  animals.  Our  present  knowledge  is  quite  in-
sufficient to  enable  us  to  predict  how  a  complex  combination
of  factors,  making  up  the  personality  of  an  able  or  charming
man  or  woman,  will  reappear  in  their  offspring."  ^  We  are,
in  fact,  in  this  region,  surrounded  by  so  much  ignorance
that  the  utmost  caution  is  essential.  Dr.  Doncaster  has
well  observed :  "  In  this  direction  empirical  rules  and  common
sense  must  still  be  followed,  until  the  time  shall  come  when
science  can  speak  with  no  uncertain  voice."  ^  More  recently,
the  late  Sir  Francis  Galton  lent  the  weight  of  his  authority
to  this  opinion :  "  Enough  is  already  known  to  those  who
have  studied  the  question  to  leave  no  doubt  in  their  minds
about  the  general  results,  but  not  enough  is  quantitatively
known  to  justify  legislation  or  other  action,  except  in  extreme
casea"  ^  It  is  well  not  to  forget  that  Beethoven's  father  was
an  habitual  drunkard  and  that  his  mother  died  of  con-
sumption.'* About  definite  defects  our  ignorance  is  much
less  profound.  These  are  the  extreme  cases  of  which  Galton
was  thinking.  Xot  a  few  medical  men  have  long  been
urging  that  authoritatively  to  prevent  propagation  among
those  afflicted  with  imbecility,  idiocy,  syphilis,  or  tuberculosis
would  mean  the  cutting  off  at  its  source  of  a  long  stream
of  defective  humanity.  This  matter  is  especially  urgent
among  the  mentally  defective,  on  account  of  the  exceptionally
high  rate  at  which,  if  left  to  themselves,  they  tend  to  produce
children.  Thus,  before  the  Eoyal  Commission  on  the  Feeble-
Minded,  "Dr.  Tredgold,  an  especially  experienced  witness,
pointed  out  that  the  average  number  of  children  in  the
jEamilies  which  now  use  the  public  elementary  schools  is  about
four ;  whereas,  in  the  degenerate  families,  whose  children  are
passed  over  to  the  special  schools,  there  is  an  average  of
7*3    children,    not    includiug    those    still-born."  *     Further-  ^^ y

'  The  Family  and  the  Nation,  p.  74.
'  Independent  Beview,  May  1906,  p.  183.
'  Probability  the  Basis  of  Eugenics,  p.  29.

*  Cf.   Bateson,   Presidential  Address  to  the   British  Association,   Nature,
Ang.  1914,  p.  677.

6  The  Family  and  the  Nation,  p.  71.


94  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  i

more,  feeble-minded  women  often  begin  child-bearing  at
an  exceptionally  early  age ;  and  it  must  be  remembered  that,
even  if  the  size  of  families  is  unaffected,  early  marriage  is
not  a  matter  of  indifference;  for,  when  the  normal  age
of  marriage  in  any  group  is  reduced,  "generations  succeed
one  another  with  greater  rapidity,"  so  that  the  proportion
of  the  whole  population  embraced  among  the  descendants
of  the  original  members  of  that  group  is  increased.-'  The
mentally  defective  are  not,  however,  the  only  class  among
which  propagation  might  with  advantage  be  restrained.
Some  writers  suggest  that  certain  forms  of  criminality  an4^
certain  qualities  conducive  to  pauperism  might  be  eradicated
from  the  race  in  the  same  way.  Professor  Karl  Pearson
makes  a  suggestion,  which,  if  correct,  strengthens  considerably
the  probability  that  this  sort  of  policy  would  reach  its  goal.
He  thinks  that  imperfections  of  quite  different  kinds  are
correlated,  and  that  "  there  is  something  akin  to  germinal
degeneracy,  which  may  show  itself  in  different  defects  of
the  same  organ  or  in  defects  of  different  organs."  ^  Professor
Bateson,  to  the  same  practical,  though  not  to  the  same
theoretical,  effect,  speaks  of  the  existence  of  "  indications  that,
in  the  extreme  cases,  unfitness  is  comparatively  definite  in  its
genetic  causation,  and  can,  not  unfrequently,  be  recognised
as  due  to  the  presence  of  a  simple  genetic  factor."  ^  In  sum,
as  the  last  quoted  writer  states,  there  is  little  doubt  that
"  some  serious  physical  and  mental  defects,  almost  certainly
also  some  morbid  diatheses,  and  some  of  the  forms  of  vice
and  criminality  could  be  eradicated  if  society  so  determined."  *
This  is  a  conclusion  of  extreme  importance.  It  is  one,  too,
that  seems  prima  facie  susceptible,  without  great  difficulty,
of  some  measure  of  practical  application.  Occasions  frequently
arise  when  tainted  persons,  whether  on  account  of  crime
or  dementia,  are  compulsorily  passed  into  governmental
institutions.  When  this  happens,  propagation  might  be
prevented,  after  careful  inquiry  had  been  made,  either  by
permanent  segregation,  or  possibly,  as  is  authorised  by  law

'  Haycraft,  Darwinism  and  Eace  Progress,  p.  144.
2   The  Scope  and  Importance  of  National  Eugenics,  p.  38.
'  MendeVs  Principles  of  Heredity,  p.  305.
*  Ibid.  p.  305.


CH.  VI  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  95

in  certain  American  States,  by  surgical  means.^  The  know-
ledge we  possess  seems  clearly  sufiBcient  to  warrant  ns  in
taking  some  cautious  steps  in  this  direction.  There  can  be
no  doubt  that  such  a  policy  would  redound  both  to  the
general,  and  to  the  economic,  welfare  of  the  community.  Eor
this  conclusion,  and  for  the  great  step  forward  which  it  is
hoped  may  follow  from  it,  we  are  indebted  to  modern  biology.
The  conclusion,  however,  is  outside  the  sphere  of  economics,
and  does  not  in  any  way  disturb  the  results  that  were  attained
in  our  fourth  chapter.

S  3.  I  pass  therefore,  to  something  of  whose  relevance  at
all  events  there  can  be  no  doubt,  the  view,  namely,  that
biological  science  proves  all  such  inquiries  as  we  are  pursuing
here  to  be  trivial  and  misdirected.  Put  broadly,  the  charge
is  this.  Economic  changes,  such  as  alterations  in  the  size,
the  distribution,  or  the  steadiness  of  the  national  dividend,
affect  environment  only;  and  environment  is  of  no  importance,
because  improvements  in  it  cannot  react  on  the  quality  of  the
children  bom  to  those  who  enjoy  the  improvements.  This
view  was  crystallised  by  Professor  Punnett,  when  he  declared
that  hygiene,  education  and  so  on  are  but  "fleeting  palliatives
at  best,  which,  in  postponing,  but  augment  the  difficulties  they
profess  to  solve.  .  .  .  Permanent  progress  is  a  question  of
breeding  rather  than  of  pedagogics ;  a  matter  of  gametes,  not
of  training."  ^  Mr.  Lock  ^  is  even  more  emphatic  in  the  same
sense.  The  opinions  of  these  writers  on  the  practical  side  are
substantially  in  agreement  with  those  of  Professor  Karl  Pearson.

The  scientific  foundation  on  which  all  such  views  rest  is,
of   course,   the   thesis   that   acquired   characters,  which   arise

*  According  to  Dr.  Rentoul,  sterilisation  can  be  efiFected  in  either  sex  by  a
simple  operation  that  carries  few  incidental  ill-effects  (Jiace  Culture  and  Race
Suicide,  chap.  xx.).  Sterilisation  by  this  or  some  other  method  has  been
legalised  to  prevent  the  procreation  of  the  imbecile,  insane,  and  criminal  in
eight  of  the  American  States,  including  Indiana  (1907),  California  (1909),
Connecticut  (1909),  New  Jersey  (1911),  and  New  York  (1912)  {Quarterly
Journal  of  Economics,  November  1911,  p.  46).  It  would  seem,  however,
that  the  constitutionality  of  these  laws  is  somewhat  in  doubt,  and  scarcely  any
practical  application  of  them  has  hitherto  been  made  (Report  of  the  American
Breeders'  Association,  Problems  in  Eugenics,  pp.  460  et  seq.).

2  Menddism  (second  edition),  pp.  80-81.

'  Cf.  Recent  Progress  in  the  Study  of  Variaium,  Heredity  and  Ewlvium,  by
R.  H.  Lock.


96  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

out  of  the  influence  of  environment,  are  not  inherited.  It  is
held,  at  least  as  regards  the  more  complicated  multicellular
organisms,  that  the  germ-cells,  which  will  ultimately  form  the
offspring  of  a  living  being,  are  distinct  at  the  outset  from
those  which  will  form  the  body  of  that  being.  Thus,  Mr.
Wilson  writes :  "It  is  a  reversal  of  the  true  point  of  view  to
regard  inheritance  as  taking  place  from  the  body  of  the
parent  to  that  of  the  child.  The  child  inherits  from  the
parent  germ-cell,  not  from  the  parent  body,  and  the  germ-cell
owes  its  characteristics,  not  to  the  body  which  bears  it,  but
to  its  descent  from  a  pre-existing  germ- cell  of  the  same  kind.
Thus,  the  body  is,  as  it  were,  an  offshoot  from  the  germ-cell.
As  far  as  inheritance  is  concerned,  the  body  is  merely  the
carrier  of  the  germ-cells,  which  are  held  in  trust  for  coming
generations."  ^  Dr.  Doncaster  takes  up  substantially  the
same  position :  "  In  the  earlier  theories  of  heredity  it  was
assumed  that  the  germ-cells  were  produced  by  the  body,  and
that  they  must,  therefore,  be  supposed  either  to  contain
samples  of  all  parts  of  it,  or  at  least  some  kind  of  units
derived  from  those  parts  and  able  to  cause  their  development
in  the  next  generation.  Gradually,  as  the  study  of  heredity
and  of  the  actual  origin  of  the  germ-cells  has  progressed,
biologists  have  given  up  this  view  in  favour  of  a  belief  in
germinal  continuity,  that  is,  that  the  germ  -  substance  is
derived  from  previous  germ-substance,  the  body  being  a  kind
of  offshoot  from  it.  The  child  is,  thus,  like  its  parent,  not
because  it  is  produced  from  the  parent,  but  because  both
child  and  parent  are  produced  from  the  same  stock  of  germ-
plasm."  ^  If  this  view  be  sound,  it  follows  that  those  definite
characteristics  of  an  organism,  whose  appearance  is  determined
by  the  presence  of  definite  structures  or  substances  in  the
germ-cells,  cannot  be  directly  affected  by  any  quality  "acquired"
by  an  ancestor.  It  is  only  characteristics  of  an  indefinite
quantitative  kind,  such  as  may  be  supposed  to  arise  from  the
intercommunication  of  the  germ-cells  with  the  other  cells  of
the  body  and  the  reception  of  fluid  or  easily  soluble  substances

*  Wilson,    The  Cell   in  Development  and  Inheritance,    p.    13  ;    quoted  by
R.  H.  Lock,  Variation,  Heredity  and  Evolution,  p.  68.
-  Heredity,  p.  124.


CH.  VI  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  97

from  them,  that  can  be  affected  in  this  way.  The  character-
istics thus  reserved  are  not,  of  course,  wholly  without
significance.  The  question  whether  the  submission  of  germ-
cells  to  a  poisonous  environment  reacts  permanently  upon
the  descendants  of  those  cells  does  not  seem  to  be  a  closed
one.  Professor  J.  A.  Thomson  writes :  "  There  is  a  great
difference  between  a  poisoning  of  the  germ-cells  along  with
the  body,  and  the  influencing  them  in  a  manner  so  specific
that  they  can,  when  they  develop,  reproduce  the  particular
parental  modification."^  The  germ- cells  do  not  lead  "a
charmed  life,  uninfluenced  by  any  of  the  accidents  or  incidents
of  the  daily  life  of  the  body  which  is  their  bearer."  ^  On  the
contrary,  there  is  some  evidence  that,  not  only  direct  poisons
like  alcohol,  but  even  injuries  to  the  parent,  may,  by  reacting
on  the  nutrition  of  the  germ-cells,  cause  general  weakness  and
resultant  bad  properties  in  the  offspring,  though  how  far  the
offspring  of  their  offspring  would  be  affected  is  doubtful.  But
the  general  opinion  among  biologists  appears  to  be  that  the
effect  of  the  acquired  characteristics  of  one  generation  upon
the  quality  of  the  succeeding  generation  is,  at  all  events,
very  small  compared  with  the  effect  of  the  inborn  character-
istics of  the  one  generation.^  "Education  is  to  man  what
manure  is  to  the  pea.  The  educated  are  in  themselves  the
better  for  it,  but  their  experience  will  alter  not  one  jot
the  irrevocable  nature  of  their  offspring."  *  And  "  neglect,
poverty,  and  parental  ignorance,  serious  as  their  results  are,
(do  not)  possess  any  marked  hereditary  effect."  ^

This  biological  thesis,  which,  since  it  is  dominant  among
experts,  an  outsider  has  no  title  to  dispute,  is,  as  I  have
said,  the  scientific  foundation  of  the  view  that  economic
circumstances,  because  they  are  environmental,  are  not,  from
a  long -period  standpoint,  of  any  real  importance.  The
biological   premise  I  accept.     To  the  sociological  conclusion,

*  J.  A.  Thomson,  Heredity,  p.  198.

*  Ibid.  p.  204.

'  Lock,  Variation  and  Heredity,  pp.  69-71.

*  Punnett,  Mendelism,  p.  81.

'  Eichholz,  "  Evidence  to  the  Committee  on  Physical  Deterioration,"  Report,
p.  14.  Dr.  Eichholz's  view  appears  to  be  formed  a  posteriori,  and  not  to  be
an  inference  from  general  biological  principles.

H


98  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  i

however,  I  demur.  Mr.  Sidney  Webb  has  uttered  a  genial
protest  against  a  too  exclusive  attention  to  the  biological
aspect  of  social  problems.  "  After  all,"  he  writes,  "  it  would
not  be  of  much  use  to  have  all  babies  born  from  good  stocks,
if,  generation  after  generation,  they  were  made  to  grow  up
into  bad  men  and  women.  A  world  of  well  -  bom,  but
physically  and  morally  perverted  adults  is  not  attractive."^
My  criticism,  however,  goes  deeper  than  this.  Professor
Punnett  and  his  fellow  -  workers  would  accept  Mr.  Webb's
plea.  They  freely  grant  that  environing  circumstances  can
affect  the  persons  immediately  subjected  to  them,  but  they,
nevertheless,  hold  that  these  circumstances  are  unimportant,
because,  not  being  able  to  influence  the  inborn  quality  of
succeeding  generations,  they  cannot  produce  any  lasting
result.  My  reply  is  that  the  environment  of  one  genera-
tion can  produce  a  lasting  result,  because  it  can  affect  the
environment  of  future  generations.  Environments,  in  short,
as  well  as  people,  have  children.  Though  education  and  so
forth  cannot  influence  new  births  in  the  physical  world,  they  can
influence  them  in  the  world  of  ideas ;  ^  and  ideas,  once  pro-
duced or  once  accepted  by  a  particular  generation,  whether

*  Eugenics  Review,  November  1910,  p.  236.

2  An  interesting  comparison  can  be  made  between  the  process  of  evolution
in  these  two  worlds.  In  both  we  find  three  elements,  the  occurreiux  ofy  pro-
pagation of,  and  conflict  between,  mutations.

In  both  worlds  the  kind  of  mutations  that  occur  appear  to  be  forttiitous,
and  cannot  be  controlled,  though  in  both  it  is  sometimes  suggested  that  the
tendency  to  mutate  is  encouraged  by  large  changes  in,  and  particular  kinds  of,
environment.  For  example,  Rae  suggested,  as  conditions  favourable  to  the
emergence  of  inventions,  general  upheavals,  such  as  wars  or  migrations,  and  the
adoption  in  any  art  of  a  new  material — such  as  steel  in  building — either  for
lack  of  the  old  material  or  through  the  possession  of  a  specially  effective
new  one,  and  he  maintained  that  the  stable  agricultural  districts  rarely
yield  inventions  (The  Sociological  Theory  of  Capital,  pp.  172-3).  In  both
worlds  again,  with  every  increase  of  variability,  the  chance  that  a  "good"
mutation  will  occur  is  increased.  Hence,  ceteris  paribus,  environments  that
make  for  variability  are  a  means  to  good.  Thus,  of  local  governments  Dr.
Marshall  writes:  "All  power  of  variation  that  is  consistent  with  order  and
economy  of  administration  is  an  almost  unmixed  good.  The  prospects  of  pro-
gress are  increased  by  the  multiplicity  of  parallel  experiments  and  the  inter-
communion of  ideas  between  many  people,  each  of  whom  has  some  opportunity
of  testing  practically  the  value  of  his  own  suggestions."  {Memorandum  to  the
Royal  Commission  on  Local  Taxation,  p.  123  ;  cf.  also  Booth,  Industry,  v.  p.
86  ;  and  Hobhouse,  Democracy  and  Reaction,  pp.  121-3.)

The  propagation  of  mutations,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  proceed  in  the
same  way  among  ideas  as  among  organisms.     Among  the  latter  the  fertility  of


CH.YI  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  99

or  not  they  can  be  materialised  into  mechanical  inventions,
may  remodel  from  its  very  base  the  environment  which
succeeding  generations  enjoy.*  In  this  way  a  permanent
change  of  environment  is  brought  about,  and,  since  environ-
ment is  admitted  to  have  an  important  influence  on  persons
actually  subjected  to  it,  such  a  change  may  obviously  produce
enduring  consequences.  Among  animals,  indeed,  and  among
the  primitive  races  of  men  this  point  is  not  important.  For,
there  what  the  members  of  one  generation  have  wrought  in
the  field  of  ideas  is  not  easily  communicated  to  their  successors,
"  The  human  race,  when  widely  scattered  and  incapable  of
intercommunication,  makes  the  same  discovery  a  hundred
times.  Its  efforts  and  its  triumphs  are  annihilated  with
the  death  of  the  individual,  or  of  the  last  member  of  the
family  in  which  the  invention  has  been  passed  on  by  oral
tradition."-  But  among  civilised  men  the  arts  of  writing
and  of  printing  have  rendered  thought  mobile  through  time,
and  have,  thus,  extended  to  each  generation  power  to  mould
and  remodel  the  ideal  environment  of  its  successors.  M.
Tarde  grasps  this  point  when  he  writes :  "  To  faciHtat'e
further  production  is  the  principal  virtue  of  capital,  as  that
term  ought  to  be  understood.  But,  in  what  is  it  inherent  ?
In  commodities  or  in  particular  kinds  of  commodities  ?  Nay,
rather  in  those  fortunate  experiments  of  which  the  memory
has  been  preserved-     Capital  is  tradition  or  social  memory.

the  mutated  members  that  sarviye  is  not,  but  among  the  former  it  is,  affected  by
their  adaptation  or  otherwise  to  successful  struggle.  Animals  that  are  failures
and  those  that  are  saecesaes  are  equally  likely,  if  they  survive,  to  have  oSspring.
But,  among  ideas,  tboae  that  fail  are  likely  to  be  barren  and  those  that  succeed
to  be  prolific.

Still  more  marked  is  the  difference  between  the  character  of  the  struggle
that  takes  place  between  mutated  members  in  the  two  groups.  In  the  physical
•world  the  process  is  negative — the  failures  are  cut  off.  In  the  world  of  ideas  it
18  positive — successful  ideas  are  adopted  and  imitated.  One  consequence  of
tiiis  is  that,  in  general,  a  successftd  erperiment  diffuses  itself  much  more  rapidly
than  a  successful  "sport."

^  This  consideration  afiords  a  powerful  argument  for  the  expenditure  of  State
funds  upon  training  the  girls  of  the  present  generation  to  become  competent
mothers  and  housewives,  because,  if  only  one  generation  were  so  taught,  a  family
tradition  would  very  probably  become  established,  and  the  knowledge  given  in
tile  first  instance  at  public  cost  would  propagate  itself  through  successive
generations  without  any  further  cost  to  anybody.  (Cf.  Report  of  the  Inter-
departmental Committee  on  Physical  Deterioration,  p.  42.)

^  Majewski,  La  Science  de  la  eirnlisation,  p.  228.


100  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

It  is  to  societies  what  heredity  or  vital  memory, — enigmatical
term, — ^is  to   living  beings.     As  for  the  products  that  have
been  saved  and  stored  up  to  facilitate  the  construction  of  new
copies  of  the  models  conceived  by  inventors,  they  are  to  these
models,  which  are  the  true  social  germs,  what  the  cotyledon,
a  mere  store  of  food,  is  to  the  embryo."  ^     Bacon  had  already
exclaimed :  "  The  introduction  of  new  inventions  seemeth  to
be  the  very  chief  of  all  human  actions.     The  benefits  of  new
inventions  may  extend  to  all   mankind  universally,  but  the
good  of  political   activities   can   respect  but  some  particular
country   of  men :    these   latter  do  not  perdure  above  a   few
ages,  the  former  for  ever."     Dr.  Marshall  writes  in  the  same
spirit :  "  The  world's  material   wealth   would   quickly  be   re-
placed if  it  were  destroyed,  but  the  ideas  by  which  it  was
made  were  retained.     If,  however,  the  ideas  were  lost,  but  not
the  material  wealth,  then  that  would  dwindle  and  the  world
would  go  back  to  poverty.     And  most  of  our  knowledge  of
mere  facts  could  quickly  be   recovered   if  it   were   lost,  but
the   constructive    ideas    of  thought   remained ;    while,  if  the
ideas   perished,   the  world  would   enter   again   on   the   Dark
Ages."  ^     Nor  is  even  this  a  full  account  of  the  matter.     As
Dr.  Marshall  observes  in  another  place :  "  Any  change  that
awards   to   the  workers    of   one    generation   better    earnings,
together   with   better   opportunities   of  developing  their  best
qualities,  will    increase   the   material    and   moral   advantages
which  they  have  the  power  to  offer  to  their  children ;  while,
by  increasing  their  own  intelligence,  wisdom  and  forethought,
such  a  change  will  also,  to  some  extent,  increase  their  willing-
ness to  sacrifice  their  own  pleasures  for  the  well-being  of  their
children."  ^    Those  children,  in  turn,  being  themselves  rendered
stronger  and  more  intelligent,  will  be  able,  when  they  grow
up,  to  offer  a  better  environment — and  under  the  term  en-
vironment   I    include    the    physical    circumstances    of    the
mother  before,  and  immediately  after,  child-birth* — to  their

1  La  Logique  sociale,  p.  352.

*  Principles  of  Economics,  p.  780.
s  Ibid.  p.  563.

*  The  importance  of  this  point  is  illustrated  by  the  observation  of  the
London  Education  Committee  of  1905,  that  the  children  born  in  a  year  when
infant  mortality  is  low  show  an  improved  physique,  and  vice  versa.  (Cf.  Wells,
New  Worlds  for  Old,  p.  216.)


n/


CH.  VI  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  101

children,  and  so  on.  The  effect  goes  on  piling  itself  np.
Changes  in  ancestral  environment  start  forces,  which  modify
continuously  and  cumulatively  the  conditions  of  succeeding
environments,  and,  through  them,  the  human  qualities  for
which  current  environment  is  in  part  responsible.  Hence,
Professor  Punnett's  assertion  is  unduly  sweeping.^  Progress,
not  merely  permanent  but  growing,  can  be  brought  about
by  causes  with  which  breeding  and  gametes  have  nothing  to
do.  There  is  no  fundamental  difference  of  the  kind  supposed
between  causes  operating  on  acquired,  and  causes  operating  on
inborn,  qualities.  The  two  are  of  co-ordinate  importance;
and  the  students  of  neither  have  a  right  to  belittle  the  work
of  those  who  study  the  other.

§  4,  I  proceed  now  to  the  third  of  the  topics  indicated
for  discussion  in  the  first  section  of  this  chapter,  namely,
the  extent  to  which  new  biological  knowledge  makes  it
necessary  for  us  to  qualify  the  conclusions  laid  down  in
the  preceding  chapter.  These  conclusions,  it  will  be
remembered,  were  to  the  effect  that,  other  things  being
equal,  a  general  increase  in  the  national  dividend — provided
that  it  is  not  brought  about  by  the  exercise  of  undue
pressure  upon  workpeople, — a  change  in  the  distribution
of  the  dividend  favourable  to  the  poor,  and  a  "  steadying ""
of  the  dividend,  particularly  of  that  part  of  it  which  goes|
to  the  poor,  would  all  be  likely  to  increase  economic  welfare
and,  through  economic  welfare,  general  welfare.  The  last
of  these  conclusions  may,  perhaps,  in  the  present  connection,^
pass  without  challenge.  But  against  the  other  two  the
biologically  trained  critic  urges  an  important  caution.  May
it  not  be,  he  asks,  that  advance  along  the  first  of  these  lines,
by  checking  the  free  play  of  natural  selection  and  enabling
feeble  children  to  survive,  will  set  up  a  cumulative  influence
making  for  national  weakness ;  and  that  advance  along  the
second  line,  by  differentiating  in  favour  of  inferior  stocks,
will  have  a  similar  evil  effect  ?  Is  there  not  ground  for  fear
that   the   brightness   of  the  stream  of  progress   is   deceptive,

*  In  later  editions  of  his  book  Professor  Punnett's  argument  is  stated  in  a
less  sweeping  form  and  does  not  conflict  with  what  has  been  said  above.  (Cf.
MencUlism,  third  edition,  p.  167.)


102  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  i

that  it  bears  along,  as  it  flows,  seeds  of  disaster,  and  that
the  changes  we  have  pronounced  to  be  productive  of  welfare
are,  at  the  best,  of  doubtful  import  ?  The  two  parts  of  this
thesis  must  now  be  examined  in  turn.

§  5.  The  danger  to  national  strength,  that  results  from
a  growth  of  wealth  in  general,  has  been  emphasised  by  many
writers.  In  a  softened  environment  children  of  feeble  con-
stitution, who,  in  harder  circumstances,  would  have  died,  are
enabled  to  survive  and  themselves  to  have  children.^  It  has
even  been  suggested  that  in  this  fact  may  lie  the  secret  of
the  eventual  decay  of  nations  and  of  aristocracies  which
have  attained  great  wealth.  There  are,  indeed,  mitigating
circumstances  which  may  be  urged  in  extenuation  of  this
view.  First,  according  to  the  most  recent  biological  opinion,
the  survival  of  weakly  children,  if  their  weakness  is,  as  it
were,  accidental,  and  not  due  to  inherited  defect,  is  not
ultimately  harmful  to  the  stock,  because  the  children  of  the
weakly  children  are  quite  likely  to  be  strong.  Secondly,
weakness  in  infancy  is  not  necessarily  a  good  index  of
essential  inborn  weakness :  and  Mr.  Yule,  after  reviewing
the  available  statistics  by  mathematical  methods,  is  led  to
suggest  that,  perhaps,  "  the  mortality  of  infancy  is  selective
only  as  regards  the  special  dangers  of  infancy,  and  its
influence  scarcely  extends  beyond  the  second  year  of  life,
whilst  the  weakening  effect  of  a  sickly  infancy  is  of  greater
duration."  ^  These  mitigating  circumstances  somewhat  limit,
though  they  may  well  fail  to  overthrow,  the  thesis  that
growth  in  wealth,  unaccompanied  by  any  safeguard,  is  likely
to  deteriorate  the  inherent  quality  of  the  race.  There  is
also  available  a  further  mitigating  circumstance,  which  is
less  fundamental  though  not  less  important.  For,  even  if
the  inherent  quality  of  the  race  is  somewhat  injured,  it  does
not  follow  that  the  finished  products  which  contain,  of
course,  at  once  inherent  and  environmental  qualities,  are  so
injured.  If  increased  wealth  removes  influences  that  make
for  the  elimination  of  the  unfit,  it  also  removes  influences
that   make  for  the   weakening   of  the   fit.     The   total   effect

'  Cf.  Haycraft,  Darvnnism  omd  Race  Progress,  p.  58.
2  [Cd.  5263],  p.  82,  (1909-10).


cH.  VI  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  103

of  this  twofold  action  may  well  be  beneficial  rather  than
injurious.  That  this  is  in  fact  so  is  suggested  by  a  recent
important  report  published  by  the  Local  Government  Board
on  the  relation  of  infantUe  mortality  to  general  mortality.
In  that  report  Dr.  Newsholme  directly  combats  the  view
that  improvements  making  for  a  reduction  of  infant  mortality,
by  enabling  more  weaklings  to  survive,  must  be  inimical
to  the  average  health  of  the  population.  He  finds,  on  the
contrary,  "  that  the  counties  having  high  infant  mortalities
continue,  in  general,  to  suffer  somewhat  excessively  throughout
the  first  twenty  years  of  human  life,  and  that  counties
having  low  infantile  mortalities  continue  to  have  relatively
low  death-rates  in  the  first  twenty  years  of  life,  though  the
superiority  is  not  so  great  at  the  later  as  at  the  earlier
ages.  ...  It  is  fair  to  assume,  in  accordance  with  general
experience,  that  the  amount  of  sickness  varies  approximately
with  the  number  of  deaths ;  and  there  can  be  no  reasonable
doubt  that,  in  the  counties  having  a  high  infant  death-rate,
there  is — apart  from  migration — more  sickness  and  a  lower
standard  of  health  in  youth  and  in  adult  life  than  in  counties
in  which  the  toll  of  infant  mortality  is  less."  ^  Dr.
Newsholme's  argument  is,  indeed,  open  to  the  reply  that
ascertained  differences  between  the  several  counties  in
infantile  death-rate  and  later  death-rate  may  hoth  be  due
to  differences  in  the  quality  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  several
counties.  The  argument,  therefore,  fails  to  prove  that  the
direct  beneficial  effect  of  better  environments  due  to  greater
wealth  outweighs  the  indirect  injurious  effect  of  the  impedi-
ment they  place  in  the  way  of  natural  selection.  It  may
be  that  the  injurious  effect  is  really  the  stronger,  but  that
it  is  masked  in  the  statistics  because  it  is  exercised  upon
persons  who  are  ai  initio  of  better  physique — as  is,  indeed,
suggested  by  their  ability  to  earn  more  and  so  to  live  in
better  conditions — than  the  average.  This  criticism  lessens
the    force   of  Dr.   Newsholme's    statistical   argument."      Still

1  Report  for  1909-10  [Cd.  5263],  p.  17.

^  Dr.  Newsholme's  argument  was  severely  criticised — partly  under  a
misapprehension  of  its  purpose — by  Professor  Karl  Pearson  in  his  Cavendish
lecture,  1912,  p.  13.  Dr.  Newsholme  replied  in  his  second  (1913)  report
[Cd.  6909],  pp.  46-52.


104  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

the  directly  observed  fact  that  good  environment  removes
influences  tending  to  weaken  the  fit  remains.  In  company
with  the  considerations  set  out  earlier  in  this  section,  that
fact  militates  against  the  view  that  a  growing  dividend,
and  the  improvements  that  naturally  accompany  it,  carry
seeds  of  future  weakness,  and  so  ultimately  make  against,
rather  than  in  favour  of,  economic  welfare.  In  any  event,
the  danger  that  they  may  have  this  effect  can  be  readily
and  completely  counteracted,  if  the  policy  of  segregating
the  unfit,  advocated  in  the  second  section,  is  adopted.  As
Professor  Thomson  points  out,  no  biological  evil  can  result
from  the  preservation  of  weaklings,  provided  that  they  are
not  allowed  to  have  children.^  There  is,  therefore,  no  need
to  surrender  our  conclusion  that  causes,  which  make  for
an  expansion  of  the  dividend,  in  general  make  for  economic
and,  through  economic,  for  aggregate,  welfare.

§  6.  The  danger  to  national  strength  and  efficiency
through  an  improvement  in  the  distribution  of  the  dividend
^  might  seem  a  priori  to  be  very  important.  For,  improved
distribution  is  likely  to  modify  the  proportion  in  which
future  generations  are  born  from  the  richer  and  poorer  classes
respectively.  If,  therefore,  the  poorer  classes  comprise  less
efficient  stocks  than  the  richer  classes — if,  in  fact,  economic
status  is  anything  of  an  index  of  inborn  quality — improved
distribution  must  modify  the  general  level  of  inborn  quality,
and  so,  in  the  long  run,  must  react  with  cumulative  force
upon  the  magnitude  of  the  national  dividend.  Now,  1  do
not  agree  with  those  who  hold  that  poverty  and  inborn
inefficiency  are  obviously  and  certainly  correlated.  Extreme
poverty  is,  no  doubt,  often  the  result  of  feckless  character,
physical  infirmity,  and  other  "  bad "  qualities  of  finished
persons.  But  these  themselves  are  generally  correlated  with
bad  environment ;  and  it  is  ridiculous  to  treat  as  unworthy
of  argument  the  suggestion  that  the  "  bad "  qualities  are
mainly  the  result,  not  of  bad  original  properties,  but  of  bad
original  environment.^     Nevertheless,  though  I  do  not  regard

1  Heredity,  p.  528.

2  This  class  of  difficulty  is  experienced  in  many  statistical  investigations
of  social  problems.     For  example,  an  interesting  inquiry  into  the  inheritance


OH.  VI  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  105

it  as  self-evident,  I  do  regard  it  as  probable,  that  a  consider-
able measure  of  correlation  exists  between  poverty  and
"  bad "  original  properties.  For  it  is  apparent  that  among
the  relatively  rich  are  many  persons  who  have  risen  from
a  poor  environment,  which  their  fellows,  who  have  remained
poor,  shared  with  them  in  childhood ;  and  this  sort  of
movement  is  probably  becoming  more  marked,  as  opportunities
of  education  and  so  forth  are  being  brought  more  within  the
reach  of  the  poorer  classes.  In  like  manner,  of  course,
among  the  poor  are  some  persons  who  have  fallen  from  a
superior  environment.  Among  the  original  properties  of
these  relatively  rich  there  are  presumably  qualities  making
for  efficiency,  which  account  for  their  rise ;  while,  among  the
original  properties  of  these  relatively  poor,  there  are,  presum-
ably, qualities  of  an  opposite  kind.^  Hence,  it  is  probably
true  that  causes  affecting  the  comparative  rate  of  child-
bearing  among  the  relatively  rich  and  the  relatively  poor
respectively  affect  the  comparative  rate  among  those  with
"  better "  and  "  worse "  original  properties  (from  the  point
of  view  of  efficiency)  in  the  same  direction.  If  it  were  true
that  increased  prosperity  in  a  poor  class  involved  a  higher
rate  of  reproduction,  it  would  follow  that  an  improved  dis-
tribution  of  the  dividend   would   increase   the   number  and,

of  ability,  as  indicated  by  the  Oxford  class  lists  and  the  school  lists  of  Harrow
and  Charterhouse,  was  published  some  years  ago  by  Mr.  Schuster.  But,  the
value  of  his  results  is  in  some  measure — it  is  not  possible  to  say  in  what
measure — impaired  by  the  fact  that  the  possession  of  able  parents  is  apt  to
be  correlated  with  the  reception  of  a  good  formal,  and,  still  more,  informal,
education.  Mr.  Schuster  argues  (p.  23)  that  the  error  due  to  this  circum-
stance is  not  likely  to  be  large.  (Cf.  also  Karl  Pearson,  Biometrika,  vol.  iii.
p.  156.)  M.  Nicefero,  on  the  other  hand,  in  his  study  of  Lts  Classes  pauvres,
lays  stress  on  the  effects  of  environment  in  promoting  the  physical  and  psychical
inferiority  of  these  classes  ;  but  he  does  not  seem  to  justify  by  evidence  his
conclusion  that  ' '  tons  les  facteurs — en  derniere  analyse — plongent  leur  racine
bien  plus  dans  le  milieu  economique  de  la  societe  modeme,  que  dans  la
structure  meme  de  I'indiridu  "  (p.  332).

^  Professor  Pareto  ignores  these  considerations  when  he  argues  (SystcTties
sodalistes,  p.  \Z  et  seq.)  that  an  increase  in  the  relative  number  of  children
bom  to  the  rich  must  make  for  national  deterioration  because,  since  the
children  of  the  rich  are  subjected  to  a  less  severe  struggle  than  those  of  the
poor,  feeble  children,  who  would  die  if  bom  to  the  poor,  will,  if  bom  to  the
rich,  survive  and,  in  turn,  have  feeble  children.  In  view  of  the  facts  noted
in  the  text,  this  circumstance  should  be  regarded  merely  as  a  counteracting
force,  mitigating,  but  not  destroying,  the  beneficial  consequences  likely  to  result
from  a  relative  increase  in  the  fertility  of  the  rich.


106  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  i

therewith,  the  proportion,  of  children  born  from  parents
of  stock  other  than  the  best.  Since,  however,  it  is  notorious
that  propagation  among  the  lowest  class  of  all  is  practically
untrammelled  by  economic  considerations,  an  increase  in
fortune  to  the  poor  as  a  whole  could  only  increase  the  number
of  children  born  to  sections  of  the  poorer  classes  other
than  the  worst.  It  would  not,  therefore,  necessarily  follow
that  the  average  quality  of  the  population  as  a  whole  would
be  lowered.  It  is  not,  however,  necessary  to  stop  at  this
point.  Professor  Brentano's  investigations,  which  were
previously  noticed,  have  suggested  that  increased  prosperity
in  a  class  tends,  on  the  whole,  to  diminish  rather  than  to
increase  the  reproduction  rate  of  that  class,  and  reason
has  been  shown  for  believing  that  this  tendency  is  not
fully  offset  by  accompanying  improvements  in  the  mortality
rate.^  Hence,  it  would  seem,  an  improvement  in  the  distribu-
tion of  the  dividend  may  be  expected  actually  to  diminish
the  proportion  of  children  born  from  inferior  stocks.  In
short,  this  biological  consideration,  so  far  from  reversing  the
conclusion  of  the  fourth  chapter,  that  improved  distribution
makes  for  economic  and  general  welfare,  lends,  in  present
conditions,  some  support  to  that  conclusion.  None  of  the
main  results  of  that  chapter  are,  therefore,  reversed  by
biological  considerations.

1  Cf.  ante,  Chapter  IV.  §  14.


CHAPTEE    VII

THE    METHOD    OF   DISCUSSION    TO    BE    FOLLOWED

The  conclusions  we  have  reached  may  now  be  repeated.  They
are  to  the  effect  that :  (1)  other  things  being  equal,  an
increase  in  the  size  of  the  national  dividend  will  probably
increase  economic  welfare ;  (2)  other  things  being  equal,  an
increase  in  the  proportion  of  the  national  dividend  accruing
to  the  poor  will  probably  increase  economic  welfare ;  (3)  other
things  being  equal,  a  diminution  in  the  variability  of  the
national  dividend  will  probably  increase  economic  welfare ;
and  (4)  other  things  being  equal,  a  diminution  in  the  vari-
ability of  the  part  of  the  national  dividend  accruing  to  the  poor
at  the  cost  of  correspondingly  increased  variability  of  the  part
accruing  to  the  rich  will  probably  increase  economic  welfare.
If  causes  affecting  the  size  of  the  dividend  had  no  influence  on
the  absolute  share  of  the  poor  or  on  the  variability  of  the
dividend,  and  causes  affecting  the  absolute  share  of  the  poor
and  the  variability  of  the  dividend  respectively  were  similarly
self-contained,  the  remaining  stages  of  our  inquiry  would  be
simple.  Each  of  these  groups  of  causes  could  be  examined
in  turn  separately.  As  a  fact,  however,  the  same  cause  will
often  affect  at  once  the  size,  the  distribution  and  the  variability
of  the  dividend,  and,  prima  facie,  it  is  not  necessary  that  it
should  affect  them  all  harmoniously.  That  this  circumstance
must  greatly  complicate  our  exposition  is  obvious.  No  method
of  treatment  that  is  wholly  satisfactory  seems  to  me  to  be
possible.  After  some  hesitation  I  have  decided  to  proceed  as
follows.  The  entirely  obvious  general  causes  affecting  the
magnitude  of  the  national  dividend,  such  as  inventions  and
discoveries, — including  inventions  in  organisation,  such  as  the

107


108  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  i

banking  system,  limited  liability  and  shift  systems  that  allow
machinery  to  operate  continuously, — the  opening  up  of  ex-
tensive sources  of  foreign  demand,  and  the  accumulation  of
capital,  I  shall  scarcely  discuss  at  all.  Leaving  these  things
aside,  I  shall  examine  in  Parts  II.,  III.  and  IV.  the  way  in
which  three  important  groups  of  influences  affect  the
magnitude  of  the  national  dividend.  These  influences  are,
respectively,  those  associated  with  the  distribution  of  the  pro-
ductive resources  of  the  community  among  various  uses  or
occupations,  those  associated  with  the  organisation  of  Labour,
and  those  associated  with  the  collection  of  revenue.  In  Part
V.  I  shall  inquire  in  what  circumstances  it  is  possible  for
causes  which  affect  the  volume  of  the  national  dividend  favour-
ably or  unfavourably  to  affect  the  absolute  share  of  the  dividend
enjoyed  by  the  poor  in  the  opposite  sense  ;  and,  when  ambiguous
causes  are  discovered,  I  shall  study  their  net  efifect  upon
economic  welfare.  Part  VI.  will  be  devoted  to  an  investigation
of  the  principal  causes  which  affect  the  variability  of  the
dividend  as  a  whole  and  of  the  share  of  it  accruing  to  the
poor.  This  arrangement  is,  of  course,  open  to  numerous
objections.  But,  on  the  whole,  it  is  more  convenient  than
any  other  that  I  have  been  able  to  devise.


PAKT  II

THE  MAGNITUDE  OF  THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND
AND  THE  DISTEIBUTION  OF  RESOUKCES
AMONG  DIFFERENT  USES


109


CHAPTEK    I

INTRODUCTORY

8  1.  The  first  of  the  three  groups  of  causes,  whose  influence
upon  the  average  volume  of  the  national  dividend  we  have
agreed  to  investigate,  consists  of  those  that  affect  the  distribu-
tion of  the  nation's  productive  resources  among  different  uses
or  occupations.  Throughout  this  inquiry — indeed  throughout
the  whole  of  the  present  Part — it  is  assumed  that  no  resources
of  any  kind  are  unemployed  contrary  to  the  will  of  their
owners.  This  reservation  will  need  to  be  withdrawn  in  later
Parts,  but  for  the  general  analysis  of  this  Part  it  conforms
closely  enough  to  the  facts.  In  this  introductory  chapter  the
general  scope  of  the  problem  before  us  will  be  indicated.

§  2.  Certain  optimistic  followers  of  the  classical  economists
have  sometimes  suggested  that  the  "  free  play  of  self-interest,"
if  only  Government  refrains  from  interference,  will  automatically
cause  the  land,  capital  and  labour  of  any  country  to  be  so
distributed  as  to  yield  a  larger  output  than  could  be  attained
by  any  arrangement  other  than  that  which  comes  about
"naturally."  And  Adam  Smith  himself,  while  making  an
exception  in  favour  of  State  action  in  "  erecting  and  maintain-
ing certain  public  works  and  certain  public  institutions  which
it  can  never  be  for  the  interests  of  any  individual,  or  small
number  of  individuals,  to  erect  and  maintain,"  lays  it  down
that  "  any  system  which  endeavours,  either  by  extraordinary
encouragements  to  draw  towards  a  particular  species  of  industry
a  greater  share  of  the  capital  of  the  society  than  what  would
naturally  go  to  it;  or,  by  extraordinary  restraints,  to  force
from  a  particular  species  of  industry  some  share  of  the  capital
which  would  otherwise  be  employed  in  it  .  .  .  retards,  instead

111


112  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

of  accelerating,  the  progress  of  the  society -towards  real  wealth
and  greatness,  and  diminishes,  instead  of  increasing,  the  real
value  of  the  annual  produce  of  its  land  and  labour."-^  It
would,  of  course,  be  unreasonable  to  interpret  this  passage  in
any  abstract  or  universal  sense.  Adam  Smith  had  in  mind
the  actual  world  as  he  knew  it,  with  an  organised  system  of
civilised  government  and  contract  law.  He  would  not  have
quarrelled  with  the  dictum  of  a  later  economist  that  "  the
activities  of  man  are  expended  along  two  routes,  the  first
being  directed  to  the  production  or  transformation  of  economic
goods,  the  second  to  the  appropriation  of  goods  produced  by
others."  ^  Activities  devoted  to  appropriation  obviously  do
not  promote  production,  and  production  would  be  promoted
if  they  were  diverted  into  the  channels  of  industry.  We  must,
therefore,  understand  him  to  assume  the  existence  of  laws
designed,  and,  in  the  main,  competent,  to  prevent  acts  of
TKiere  appropriation  such  as  those  perpetrated  by  highwaymen
and  card-sharpers.  The  free  play  of  self-interest  is  conceived
by  him  to  be  "  confined  to  certain  directions  by  our  general
social  institutions,  especially  the  Family,  Property,  and  the
territorial  State."  ^  More  generally,  when  one  man  obtains
goods  from  another  man,  he  is  conceived  to  obtain  them  by
the  process,  not  of  seizure,  but  of  exchange  in  an  open  market,
where  the  bargainers  on  both  sides  are  reasonably  competent
and  reasonably  cognisant  of  the  conditions.  There  is  ground,
however,  for  believing  that  even  Adam  Smith  had  not  realised
fully  the  extent  to  which  the  System  of  Natural  Liberty  needs
to  be  qualified  and  guarded  by  special  laws,  before  it  will
promote  the  most  productive  employment  of  a  country's
resources.  It  has  been  said  by  a  recent  writer  that  "the
working  of  self-interest  is  generally  beneficent,  not  because  of
some  natural  coincidence  between  the  self-interest  of  each  and
'^^  the  good  of  all,  but  because  human  institutions  are  arranged
so  as  to  compel  self-interest  to  work  in  directions  in  which  it
will   be  beneficent."*     The  correctness  of  this  standpoint  is

1  Wealth  of  Nations,  book  iv.  chapter  iv.,  third  paragraph  from  the  end.

2  Pareto,  Manuah  di  economia  poHtica,  pp.  444-5.

'  Cannan,  7%e  History  of  Local  Rates,  p.  176.     Cf,  also  Carver,  Essays  in
Sfflcial  Justice,  p.  109.

^  £!aiBnan,  Economic  Review,  July  1913,  p.  333.


CH.  I  INTRODUCTOEY  113

well  illustrated  by  the  limitations  which  the  laws  of  civilised
States  impose  upon  the  absolute  powers  of  owners  of
property — such  limitations  as  the  Bavarian  rule  forbidding
owners  of  forests  to  exclude  pedestrians  from  their  land,  the
French  and  American  rules  restraining  a  man  from  setting
fire  to  his  own  house,  and  the  practice  prevalent  in  all
countries  of  expropriating  private  owners  where  their  expropria-
tion is  obviously  required  in  the  general  interest.^  It  is
further  illustrated  by  the  attitude  of  the  law  of  modem
nations  towards  types  of  contract — gambling  debts,  contracts
in  restraint  of  trade,  agreements  for  contracting-out  of  certain
legal  obligations — which  are  deemed  contrary  to  public  policy
and  are,  therefore,  treated  by  the  courts  as  void.'  This  adjust-
ment of  institutions  to  the  end  of  directing  self-interest  into
beneficial  channels  has  been  carried  out  in  considerable  detail.
But  even  in  the  most  advanced  States  there  are  failures  and
imperfections.  We  are  not  here  concerned  with  those  de-
ficiencies of  organisation  which  sometimes  cause  higher  non-
economic  interests  to  be  sacrificed  to  less  important  economic
interests.  Over  and  above  these,  there  are  many  obstacles
that  interfere  with  production  by  withholding  some  of  the
nation's  resources  from  uses  in  which  they  might  make  a
larger  contribution  than  they  actually  do  towards  the
national  dividend.  The  study  of  tnese  constitutes  our
present  problem.  That  study  involves  some  difficult  analysis.
But  its  purpose  is  essentially  practical.  It  seeks  to  bring  into
clearer  light  some  of  the  ways  in  which  it  now  is,  or  eventually
may  become,  feasible  for  governments  to  control  the  play  of
economic  forces  in  such  wise  as  to  promote  the  economic
welfare,  and  through  that  the  total  welfare,  of  their  citizens  as
a  whole.'

*  Cf.  Ely,  Property  and  Contract,  pp.  61  and  150.

^  Ibid.  pp.  616  and  731.

'  Cf.  Marshall's  observation  :  ' '  Much  remains  to  be  done,  by  a  careftd
collection  of  the  statistics  of  demand  and  supply  and  a  scientific  interpretation
of  their  results,  in  order  to  discover  what  are  the  limits  of  the  work  that  society
can  with  advantage  do  towards  turning  the  economic  actions  of  individuals  into
those  channels  in  which  they  will  add  the  most  to  the  smn  total  of  happiness  "
{Principles  of  Ec(nwmic&,  p.  475),


CHAPTER    II

THE    NATIONAL   DIVIDEND    AND    EQUALITY    OF   MAKGINAL
SOCIAL    NET   PRODUCTS

§  1.  Concerned  as  we  are  with  the  average  volume  of  the
national  dividend  as  a  continuing  flow,  we  naturally  under-
stand by  the  resources  directed  to  making  it,  not  a  stock  of
resources,  but  a  similarly  continuing  flow ;  and  we  conceive
the  distribution  of  these  resources  among  different  occupations
on  the  analogy,  not  of  a  stagnant  pond  divided  into  a  number
of  sections,  but  rather  of  a  river  divided  into  a  number
of  streams.  This  conception  involves,  no  doubt,  many  minor
difficulties  in  connection  both  with  the  varying  durability
of  the  equipment  employed  in  different  industries  and  with
the  dynamic,  or  changing,  tendencies  of  industry  as  a  whole.
In  spite  of  these  difficulties,  however,  the  general  idea  is
exact  enough  for  the  present  purpose.  That  purpose  is
to  provide  a  suitable  definition  for  the  concept  which
is  fundamental  throughout  this  Part,  namely,  the  value  of
marginal  social  net  product.  The  essential  point  is  that  this
too  must  be  conceived  as  a  flow — as  the  result  per  year  of
the  employment  per  year  of  the  marginal  increment  of  some
given  quantity  of  resources.  On  this  basis  we  may  proceed
to  work  out  our  definition.

§  2.  The  most  obvious  element  in  the  marginal  social
net  product  of  any  flow  of  resources  employed  in  any  occupation
is  the  jdirect  physical  net  product.  This  is  equal  to  the
difference  between  the  aggregate  flow  of  physical  product
for  which  that  flow  of  resources,  when  appropriately  organised,
is  responsible  and  the  aggregate  flow  of  physical  product
for  which  a  flow  of  resources  differing  from  that  flow  by  a

114


CH.  II  EQUALITY  OF  MAKGINAL  NET  PEODUCTS    115

small     (marginal)     increment,   when    appropriately    organised,
would   be   responsible.     In   this   statement   the   phrase  when
appropriately  organised  is  essential.      If  we  were  thinking  of
marginal  physical  net  product  in  the  sense  of  the  difference
between  the  products  of  two  adjacent  quantities  of  resources,
we  should   normally  imagine   the   resources   to  be  organised
suitably  to  one  of  these  quantities  and,  therefore,  not  to  the
other.      Siuce,    however,    our    interest    is    in    the    difference
between  the  products  of  two  adjacent  flows  of  resources,  it
is  natural  to  conceive  each  of  the  two  flows  as  organised  in
the  manner  most  appropriate  to  itself.     This  is  the  conception
we  need.      It   is   excellently   illustrated  by  Professor  J.   B.
Clark.       The   marginal   increment   of    capital   invested   in    a
railway    corporation    is  in   reality,   he   writes,   "  a    difference
between  two  kinds  of  plant  for  carrying  goods  and  passengers.
One  of  these  is  the  railroad  as  it  stands,  with  all  its  equip-
ment brought  up  to  the  highest  pitch  of  perfection  that  is
possible  with  the  present  resources.     The  other  is  the  road
built  and  equipped  as  it  would_^  have  been  if  the  resources
had  been  by  one  degree  less.     A  difference  in  all-round  quality
between  an  actual  and  a  possible  railroad  is  in  reality  the
final  increment  of  capital  now  used  by  the  actual  corporation.
The   product   of  that   last   unit   of  capital  is   the   difference
between  what  the  road  actually  produces  and  what  it  would
have  produced  if  it  had  been  made  one  degree  poorer."  ^

§  3.  So  much  being  understood,  it  must  next  be  observed
that  the  marginal  social  net  product  of  any  given  flow  of
resources  in  any  occupation  may  include,  over  and  above
the  direct  physical  net  product  just  described,  indirect  physical
effects  outside  the  occupation  in  which  the  resources  we  are
contemplating  are  invested.  It  might  happen,  for  example,
as  will  be  explained  more  fully  in  a  later  chapter,  that  costs
are  thrown  upon  other  people  not  directly  concerned,  through,
say,  uncompensated  damage  done  to  surrounding  woods  by
sparks  from  railway  engines.  All  such  effects  must  be
included — some    of   them  will   be    positive,    others    negative

'  The  Distribution  of  Wealth,  p.  250.  I  have  substituted  "produced"
for  "earned"  in  the  sentence  quoted  above.  For  a  further  account  of  the
distinction  here  emphasised  cf.  Appendix  III.  footnote  to  §  2.


116  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

elements — in  reckoning  up  the  full  physical  net  product
of  the  marginal  increment  of  any  volume  of  resources  turned
into  any  occupation.  Further,  it  may  happen  that,  besides
the  physical  product,  there  will  also  be  effects  that  are
not  physical — modifications,  for  example,  in  people's  tastes,
that  cause  them  to  get  more  or  less  satisfaction  than  before
from  some  of  their  possessions  or  purchases.  When  there
is  any  product  of  this  kind  we  must  add  it  to  the  physical
product  already  described.  The  result  is  the  full  marginal
social  net  product  of  the  given  volume  of  resources.

§  4.  The  value  of  this  marginal  social  net  product  is
the  money  value  of  the  economic  satisfaction  due  to  it.
When  there  is  no  element  present  other  than  the  direct
physical  addition  made  to  output  in  the  industry  directly
concerned,  this  money  value  is  identical  with  the  marginal
increment  of  product  multiplied  by  the  price  per  unit  at
which  the  product  is  sold  when  the  given  volume  of  resources
is  being  employed  in  producing  it.^  For  example,  the
value  of  the  marginal  net  product  per  year  of  a  million  units
of  resources  invested  in  weaving  is  equal  to  the  number
of  bales  of  cloth  by  which  the  output  of  a  million  plus  a
small  increment,  say  a  million  and  one,  exceeds  the  output
of  a  million  units,  multiplied  by  the  money  value  of  a  bale
of  cloth  when  this  output  is  being  produced.^  This,  it  should
be  observed  in  passing,  is  different  from,  and  must  by  no
means  be  confused  with,  the  excess  of  the  money  value
of  the  whole  product  when  a  million  and  one  units  of
resources  are  being  employed  over  the  money  value  of  the

*  This  definition  tacitly  assumes  that  the  realised  price  is  equal  to  the
(marginal)  demand  price.  If  government  limitation  of  price  causes  it  to  be
temporarily  less  than  this,  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  will  need
to  be  interpreted,  as  will  be  shown  in  Chap.  IX.,  as  the  marginal  (physical)
net  product  multiplied  by  the  marginal  demand  price,  and  the  marginal
demand  price  in  these  conditions  will  not  be  equal  to  the  actual  selling  price.

^  Cf.  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economies,  p.  847.  It  might  be  thought
at  first  sight,  on  the  basis  of  this  definition,  that  the  marginal  net  product
of  labour  in  any  industry  is  equal  to  the  product,  allowance  being  made  for
the  cost  of  material,  which  a  typical  workman  hands  over  as  the  fruit  of
his  work  to  his  employer.  In  fact,  however,  it  is  smaller  than  this,  because,
when  the  (71+  l)th  workman  is  removed,  there  is  available  more  capital  to  assist
the  work  of  each  of  the  remaining  workmen,  and  the  product  handed  over  by
them  to  the  employer  is,  therefore,  larger  than  before.


CH.  11  EQUALITY  OF  MAEGINAL  NET  PEODUCTS    117

whole  product  when  a  million  units  are  being  employed.
When  there  are  in  the  marginal  social  net  product  other
elements  besides  the  direct  physical  product,  our  statement
must  assume  a  more  general  form.  The  value  of  the  marginal
social  net  product  of  any  volume  of  resources  in  any  occu-
pation is  defined  as,  and  is  measured  by,  the  money  value
of  the  difference  made  by  the  marginal  increment  of  those
resources  so  employed  to  the  sum  total  of  economic  welfare.

§  5.  On  the  basis  of  this  definition  it  can  be  shown  that,
provided  there  are  no  costs  of  movement  between  different
occupations,  and  provided  conditions  are  such  that  only  one
arrangement  of  resources  will  make  the  values  of  the  marginal
net  products  in  all  occupations  equal,  that  arrangement  must
make  the  national  dividend  larger  than  it  would  be  under  any
other  arrangement  If  the  national  dividend  consisted  of  one
sort  of  commodity  only,  manufactured  by  means  of  a  number  of
different  occupations,  this  conclusion  would  be  obvious ;  for,  if
the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  in  one  of
the  occupations  was  smaller  than  in  another,  the  aggregate
quantity  of  this  single  commodity  could  be  directly  increased  by
a  transference.  To  obtain  a  proof  in  the  conditions  that  rule  in
actual  life,  we  need  to  recall  the  definition  of  a  change  in  the
volume  of  a  dividend  made  up  of  a  number  of  diverse  com-
modities that  was  given  in  Chapter  V.  §  1  of  the  preceding  Part.
The  national  dividend,  it  was  there  said,  is  larger  or  smaller  in
period  A  than  in  period  B  according  as,  apart  from  compulsion  to
work  or  certain  exceptional  obstacles  to  movement,  the  amount  of
economic  satisfaction  derived  from  it  by  a  representative  member
of  the  group  to  which  it  accrues  is  larger  or  smaller.  Now,
the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  in  any  use
is  the  money  measure  of  the  satisfaction  which  the  marginal
increment  of  resources  in  that  use  is  yielding  to  the  representa-
tive man.  Plainly,  therefore,  whenever  the  value  of  the  marginal
net  product  of  resources  is  less  in  any  one  use  than  it  is  in
any  other,  the  money  measure  of  satisfaction  in  the  aggregate,
and,  therefore,  the  national  diWdend  as  here  defined,  can  be
increased  by  transferring  resources  from  the  use  where  the
value  of  the  marginal  net  product  is  smaller  to  the  use  where
it  is  larger.      It  follows  from  this  that,  since,  ex  hypothesi,


118  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

there  is  only  one  arrangement  of  resources  that  will  make  the
values  of  the  marginal  net  products  equal  in  all  uses,  this
arrangement  is  necessarily  the  one  that  makes  the  national
dividend,  as  here  defined,  a  maximum.^

§  6.  So  far  we  have  premised  that  there  are  no  costs
involved  in  moving  resources  from  one  occupation  (or  place)
to  another.  But  it  is  obvious  that  in  fact  there  are  costs —
sometimes  serious  costs — in  the  way  of  movement.  We  have.,
therefore,  to  inquire  in  what,  if  any,  respects  this  fact  makes
it  necessary  to  modify  the  conclusions  set  out  above.  The
kernel  of  the  matter  can  be  displayed  as  follows.  Suppose
that  between  two  points  A  and  B  the  movement  of  a  unit  of
resources  can  be  effected  at  a  capital  cost  which  is  equivalent
to  an  annual  charge  of  n  shillings  for  every  year  during  which
a  unit  that  is  moved  continues  in  productive  work  in  its  new
home.  In  these  circumstances  the  national  dividend  will  be
increased  by  the  movement  of  resources  from  A  to  B,  so  long
as  the  annual  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  at  B  exceeds
that  at  A  by  more  than  n  shillings ;  and  it  will  be  injured  by
any  movement  of  resources  which  occurs  after  the  excess  of
the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  at  B  has  been  reduced
below  n  shillings.  If  the  initial  distribution  of  resources
between  A  and  B  is  such  that  the  value  of  the  marginal  net
product  at  B  exceeds  (or  falls  short  of)  the  value  of  the
marginal  net  product  at  A  by  any  number  of  shillings  less
than  n,  say  by  (71  —  h)  shillings,  the  existing  arrangement — that
under  which  the  values  of  the  marginal  net  products  at  the
two  points  differ  by  (n  —  h)  shillings — is  the  best  arrangement
from  the  standpoint  of  the  national  dividend,  not  indeed
absolutely,  but  relatively  to  the  fact  of  the  initial  distribution
and   the   existing   costs  of  Tnovement.      It  is  not,  be  it  noted,

^  A  minor  point  should  be  noticed  in  passing.  In  occupations  in  which  110
resources  are  employed,  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  will,
in  general,  be  smaller  than  it  is  in  occupations  where  same  resources  are  employed.
This  circumstance  clearly  does  not  imply  the  existence  of  inequality  among  the
values  of  marginal  net  products  in  any  sense  incompatible  with  the  maximisation
of  the  national  dividend.  But,  if  it  should  anywhere  happen  that  the  value  of
the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  in  an  occupation  where  no  resources  are
employed  is  larger  than  it  is  in  occupations  where  some  resources  are  employed,
— e.g.  a  profitable  venture  which  for  some  reason  people  have  failed  to  exploit —
that  inequality  would  be  an  effective  inequality  and  would  be  incompatible  with
the  maximisation  of  the  dividend.


cH.  II  EQUALITY  OF  MAEGINAL  NET  PEODUCTS    119

the  best  arrangement  relatively  to  the  existing  costs  of  move-
ment alone.  We  cannot  say  that,  when  the  costs  of  movement
are  equivalent  to  n  shillings,  the  national  dividend  is  best
served  by  a  distribution  under  which  the  values  of  the  marginal
net  products  at  A  and  B  differ  by  such  and  such  a  defined
number  of  shillings.  The  only  accurate  statement  is :  when
the  costs  of  movement  between  A  and  B  ai-e  equivalent  to  n
shillings,  the  national  dividend  is  best  served  by  the  mainten-
ance of  the  existing  distribution,  whatever  that  may  be,  provided
that  this  distribution  does  not  involve  a  divergence  in  the
values  of  marginal  net  products  greater  than  n  shillings ;  and,
if  the  existing  distribution  does  involve  a  divergence  greater
than  n  shillings,  by  a  new  distribution  brought  about  by  the
transference  of  sufficient  resources  to  bring  the  divergence
down  to  n  shillings.

§  7.  We  have  thus  inquired  what  is  the  best  dis-
tribution of  resources  from  the  standpoint  of  the  national
dividend  (a)  where  there  are  not,  and  (b)  where  there  are,  costs
of  movement.  For  completeness  we  must  compare  with  one
another  the  two  arrangements  that  are  respectively  best  in
these  two  sets  of  conditions.  In  this  connection  it  is  well
to  recall  the  possibility,  explained  in  Chapter  IV.  of  Part  I,,
that  certain  special  obstacles  to  movement  (and  cost  is,  of
course,  one  form  of  obstacle)  may,  though  injuring  economic
welfare,  at  the  same  time  increase  the  national  dividend.
This,  however,  is  an  exceptional  possibility  of  little  relevance
to  practice.  Apart  from  this,  it  is  obvious  that,  since  the
scheme,  which  is  best  for  the  dividend  (and  economic  welfare)
when  there  are  costs,  is  only  best  because  the  additional
advantage  to  be  got  from  an  arrangement  yielding  equal  values
of  marginal  net  products  would  be  less  than  the  costs  of
getting  it,  the  dividend  will  be  larger  if  no  costs  exist  and
the  distribution  of  resources  is  adjusted  to  no  costs,  than
it  will  be  if  costs  exist  and  the  distribution  is  adjusted  to
that  fact.  Similarly,  the  dividend  will  be  increased  if  costs
of  movement  are  lessened,  though  not  destroyed,  and  the
distribution  of  resources  is  adjusted  accordingly.

§  8.  The  foregoing  analysis  rests  upon  the  assumption
that  there  is  only  one  arrangement  of  resources  which  makes


120  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

the  values  of  marginal  social  net  products  everywhere  equal
— or  as  nearly  equal  as,  in  view  of  costs  of  movement,
it  is  to  the  interest  of  the  national  dividend  that  they  should
be  made.  This  assumption  would  be  justified  if  the  value  of
the  marginal  social  net  product  of  resources  employed  in
each  several  use  was  always  smaller  the  greater  the  volume
of  resources  employed  there.  That  condition,  it  will  be
noticed,  is  not  equivalent  to  the  condition  that  what
economists  call  "  the  law  of  diminishing  returns "  prevails
in  each  several  use.  Diminishing  returns  in  this  sense  rule
when  the  increment  of  product  due  to  the  increase  by
a  unit  in  the  quantity  of  resources  occupied  in  producing
some  commodity  is  smaller,  the  greater  is  the  quantity  of
resources  so  employed.^  The  law  of  diminishing  returns
thus  refers  to  (marginal)  physical  output,  and  our  condition
to  (marginal)  physical  output  multiplied  by  value  per  unit ;
and  it  may  easily  happen  that  the  expansion  of  an  industry
involves  a  diminution  in  this  complex  quantity,  even  though
actual  physical  production  obeys  the  law  of  increasing
returns.  But,  when  the  law  of  increasing  returns  is  acting
strongly,  it  is  evident  that  even  our  condition  may  very
well  Tiot  be  fulfilled.  Hence,  the  conclusions  set  out  above
require,  to  be  restated  in  a  modified  form.  Allowance  being
made  for  costs  of  movement,  it  is  true  that  the  dividend  cannot
reach  the  maximum  attainable  amount  unless  the  values
of  the  marginal  social  net  products  of  resources  in  all  uses
are  equal.  For,  if  they  are  not  equal,  the  dividend  can
always  be  increased  by  a  transference  of  resources  from  the
margin  of  some  uses  to  the  margin  of  others.  But,  when
the  values  of  the  marginal  social  net  products  in  all  uses
are  equal,  the  dividend  need  not  attain  an  unequivocal
maximum.     For,    if    several    arrangements    are   possible,    all

*  Dr.  Cannan  has  objected  to  the  use  of  the  term  "law"  in  connection
with  diminishing  and  increasing  returns  as  defined  above  on  the  ground  that,
whereas  in  some  industries  diminishing,  and  in  others  increasing,  returns
prevail,  a  scientific  law  is  a  statement  that  holds  true  in  all,  and  not  only
in  some,  circumstances  {Wealth,  p.  70).  It  might  be  answered  that  in  fact
this  is  only  true  of  the  most  general  laws  of  physics.  Biologists,  for
example,  regularly  speak  of  Mendel's  law  of  inheritance,  without  any  implica-
tion that  all  inheritance  obeys  this  law.     But  in  any  event  the  point  is  a  verbal


i


cH.  II  EQUALITY  OF  MAEGINAL  KEfl  PRODUCTS    121

of  which  make  the  values  of  the  marginal  social  net  products
equal,  each  of  these  arrangements  does,  indeed,  imply  what
may  be  called  a  relative  maximum  for  the  dividend ;  but
only  one  of  these  maxima  is  the  unequivocal,  or  absolute,
maximum.  All  of  the  relative  maxima  are,  as  it  were,  the
tops  of  hills  higher  than  the  surrounding  country,  but  only
one  of  them  is  the  highest  hill-top  of  all.  Furthermore,  it
is  not  necessary  that  all  positions  of  relative  maximum  should
represent  larger  dividends  than  all  positions  which  are  not
maxima.  On  the  contrary,  a  scheme  of  distribution  approxi-
mating to  that  which  yields  the  absolute  maximum,  but
not  itself  fulfilling  the  condition  of  equal  marginal  yields,
would  probably  imply  a  larger  dividend  than  most  of  the
schemes  which  do  fulfil  this  condition  and  so  constitute
relative  maxima  of  a  minor  character.  A  point  near  the
summit  of  the  highest  hill  may  be  higher  than  any  summit
except  the  highest  itself.  It  is,  therefore,  very  important  to
inquire  in  what  conditions,  in  any  industry  or  use,  different
quantities  of  investment  may  yield  equal  values  of  marginal
89cial  net  products.

9.  The  answer  is  as  follows.  In  an  industry  in  which
production  obeys  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  and
demand  is  not  capable  of  being  developed  by  acquaintance
with  the  commodity  supplied,  this  state  of  things  is
impossible.  But  there  are  two  sets  of  conditions  in
which  it  is  not  impossible.  First,  the  employment  of
additional  resources  in  the  production  of  a  commodity  may,
after  a  time,  enable  improved  methods  of  organisation  to
be  developed.  This  means  that  conditions  of  increasing
return  prevail,  in  such  wise  that  the  marginal  (physical)
net  product  of  a  greater  quantity  of  resources  exceeds  the
marginal  (physical)  net  product  of  a  smaller  quantity :  and,
whenever  this  happens,  it  is  possible,  though,  of  course,  it
is  not  necessary,  that  the  value  of  the  marginal  (physical)
net  product  of  several  different  quantities  of  resources  will
be  the  same.  Secondly,  the  employment  of  additional
resources  in  the  production  of  a  commodity  may,  after  a
time,  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  price  per  unit  offered  by
consumers    of    any    given    quantity    of    it     For    their    taste


7


122  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

for  it  may  be  lastingly  enhanced — obvious  examples  are
afforded  by  the  taste  for  music  and  tobacco — through
experience  of  it.  When  this  happens  the  value  per  unit
of  a  larger  product  will  (after  an  appropriate  interval  of
time)  be  greater  than  the  value  per  unit  of  a  smaller  product.
It  follows  that,  even  for  commodities  whose  production  obeys
the  law  of  diminishing  returns,  there  may  be,  though,  of
course,  there  need  not  be,  several  different  quantities  of
invested  resources  the  values  of  whose  marginal  social  net
products  are  the  same.

^10.  The  practical  outcome  of  this  analysis  is  plain.
Even  though  the  values  of  marginal  social  net  products  were
equal  in  all  occupations,  it  would  not  follow  that  the  national
dividend  was  incapable  of  increase.  On  the  contrary,  in
any  industry  where  the  conditions  are  such  that  there
is  not  only  one,  but  more  than  one,  volume  of  investment  which
would  yield  a  marginal  social  net  product  equal  in  value
to  that  obtainable  elsewhere,  unless  it  so  happens  that  the
volume  actually  hit  upon  is  that  one  of  these  which  is  the
most  favourable  to  the  national  dividend,  an  opening  for
improvement  must  exist.  Benefit  could  be  secured  by
a  temporary  bounty  (or  temporary  protection)  so  arranged
as  to  jerk  the  industrial  system  out  of  its  present  poise  at  a
position  of  relative  maximum,  and  induce  it  to  settle  down
again  at  the  position  of  absolute  maximum — the  highest
hill-top  of  all.  This  is  the  analytical  basis  of  the  argument
for  the  protection,  or  other  encouragement,  of  infant
industries ;  and,  if  the  right  infants  are  selected,  the  right
amount  of  protection  accorded,  and  this  protection  removed
again  at  the  right  time,  the  argument  is  perfectly  valid.
Benefit  could  also  be  secured  by  a  permanent  bounty  so
arranged  as  to  force  the  industrial  system  from  the  summit  of  the
hill- top  on  which  it  is  found  to  any  position,  that  overtops
its  present  site,  on  the  slope  of  a  higher  hill.  The  conditions
in  which  interference  may  be  expected  to  have  this  effect,
rather  than  that  of  shifting  the  economic  system  to  a
different  position  on  the  hill  that  it  is  on  already,  are  some-
what special.  But  it  can  be  shown  that,  in  certain  states
of  demand  and  supply,  some  rates  of  bounty  must  have  this


cH.  II   EQUALITY  OF  MAKGINAL  NET  PEODUCTS    123

efifect.^  These  possibilities  have  considerable  practical
importance.  It  must  be  clearly  understood,  however,  that
the  possible  advantage  of  particular  disturbances  of,  and
departures  from,  existing  arrangements  that  involve  equality
in  the  values  of  marginal  social  net  products  affords  no
argument  in  favour  of  disturbances  or  departures  in  general.
It  is  true  that,  when  the  values  of  the  marginal  social  net
products  of  resources  in  all  uses  are  equal,  some  disturbances
and  departures  would  augment  the  national  dividend.  But
the  majority  of  possible  movements  would  not  do  this.  Any
change  from  a  distribution  of  resources  involving  equality
in  the  values  of  marginal  net  products  in  all  uses,  which
was  not  specially  arranged  with  a  view  to  increasing  the
national  dividend,  would  probably  in  fact  diminish  it.

§  11.  This  general  conclusion  may,  moreover,  be  extended
in  an  important  way.  Just  as  the  national  dividend  is  likely
to  be  damaged  by  a  change  in  the  distribution  of  resources
that  brings  about  inequality,  instead  of  equality,  in  the  values
of  marginal  social  net  products,  so  also,  subject  to  the  same
conditions  as  above,  it  is  likely  to  be  damaged  by  a  change
that  brings  about  greater  inequality  instead  of  less  inequality.
This  conclusion  cannot,  however,  be  laid  down  without  ex-
planation. If  the  uses  in  which  resources  are  employed  were
only  two  in  number,  its  meaning  would  be  perfectly  clear  and
its  validity  undoubted.  In  fact,  however,  these  uses  are  very
numerous.  This  circumstance  gives  rise  to  a  difficulty,  which
has  already  been  referred  to  in  another  connection.^  The
meaning  of  the  concept  of  greater  or  less  equality  among  a
large  number  of  values  is  ambiguous.  Are  we  to  naeasure  the
degree  of  equality  by  the  mean  deviation  from  the  average
value,  or  by  the  standard  deviation,  or  by  the  "  probable  error,"
or  by  some  other  statistical  measure  ?  If  we  use  the  standard
deviation  as  our  criterion,  the  reasoning  of  the  footnote  on
p.    58    shows   that   an   increase   in  the  degree  of  inequality

^  The  shapes  of  the  demand  and  supply  curves  and  the  size  of  the  bounty
must  be  such  that,  when  the  demand  curve  is  raised  by  the  bounty,  it  does  not
cut  the  supply  curve  at  any  point  corresponding  to  its  former  point  of  intersection,
but  does  cut  it  at  a  point  corresponding  to  a  point  of  stable  equilibrium  farther
to  the  right  than  this.     This  condition  can  readily  be  depicted  in  a  diagram.

2  Cf.  anie,  Part  I.  Chapter  IV.  §  11.


124  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.ii

subsisting  among  the  values  of  marginal  net  products  in
different  uses  will  probably  lead  to  a  decrease  in  the  national
dividend.  But  the  probability  is  of  a  lower  order  than  the
probability  that  an  increase  in  the  degree  of  inequality  when
there  are  only  two  uses,  and,  therefore,  no  ambiguity  about
the  meaning  of  this  increase,  will  have  that  effect.  A
probability  of  the  same  order  as  that  probability  arises  only
where  the  increase  of  inequality  is  brought  about  by  a  group
of  (one  or  more)  changes  of  individual  values,  each  one  of
which  taken  by  itself  tends  to  increase  inequality.  Thus,  if
the  distribution  of  resources  is  so  altered  that  a  number  of
values  of  marginal  net  products  which  are  below  the  average
are  all  reduced,  or  if  a  number  which  are  above  the  average
are  all  increased,  the  probability  that  the  dividend  will  be
decreased  is  of  a  fairly  high  order.  But,  if  a  cause  comes
into  play,  which,  while  increasing  the  degree  of  inequality
among  the  values  of  marginal  net  products  on  the  whole,  yet
diminishes  some  values  that  are  above  the  average  and  increases
some  that  are  below  it,  the  probability  may  be  of  a  much  lower
order.  This  type  of  difficulty  is  not,  however,  of  great  practical
importance,  because  the  obstacles  to  equality  with  which  we
have  to  deal  are,  for  the  most  part,  general  obstacles,  and
operate  in  the  same  sense  at  nearly  all  points  where  they
operate  at  all.


CHAPTER    III

THE   TENDENCY    TO    EQUALITY    OF    RETURNS    IN
DIFFERENT    OCCUPATIONS

§  1.  It  is  widely  believed  that  the  return  per  unit  obtained
from  the  use  of  any  kind  of  resource  in  any  occupation  tends
to  be  equal  to  the  value  of  the  whole  marginal  net  product,  or,
in  the  language  of  the  preceding  chapter,  to  the  value  of  the
marginal  social  net  product,  of  the  resources  employed  in  that
occupation.  Let  us  provisionally  accept  this  thesis.  On  the
basis  of  it  is  easily  shown  that  the  free  play  of  seK-interest  tends
so  to  distribute  resources  among  different  occupations  as  to
render  the  values  of  marginal  social  net  products  everywhere
equal.  For  there  are  a  number  of  different  uses  into  which
resources  may  flow.  Any  person  considering  how  to  employ
those  over  which  he  has  control  will  naturally  prefer  that  use
which  promises  the  largest  return.  But,  after  a  while,  each
several  use  tends  to  become  satiated,  so  that  the  devotion  of
further  resources  to  it  yields  a  less  than  proportionate  return.
So  long  as  the  addition  of  a  further  pound  to  investment  in  any
one  use  would  yield  a  larger  return  than,  allowing  for  cost  of
movement,  could  be  obtained  elsewhere,  it  will  be  to  every-
body's interest  to  pour  his  resources  into  that  use.  When
this  process  has  gone  on  for  some  time,  the  addition  of  a
further  pound  to  that  use  will  no  longer  yield  a  larger  return
than  it  would  yield  elsewhere ;  and  it  will,  therefore,  no  longer
pay  to  divert  resources  away  from  other  uses  into  that  one.
But,  until  equality  of  returns,  which,  on  our  hypothesis,  means
equality  in  the  values  of  marginal  social  net  products,  in  all
uses  has  been  established,  it  will  pay  to  do  this,  and,  on
the  reasoning  of  the  preceding  chapter,  the  national  dividend

125


126  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

will  probably  benefit  thereby.  Of  course,  this  does  not  imply
that  self-interest  will  suffice  at  every,  or  indeed  at  any,  moment
to  secure  that  distribution  of  resources  which  is  best  adapted  to
the  interest  of  the  national  dividend.  Mill's  illustration  from
wave  movements  on  the  ocean  is  wholly  apposite.  Under  the
influence  of  gravity  there  is  a  constant  tendency  to  equality
of  level  in  all  parts ;  but,  since,  after  any  disturbance,  this
tendency  takes  time  to  assert  itself,  and  since,  before  the
necessary  time  has  elapsed,  some  fresh  disturbance  is  always
introduced,  equality  of  level  does  not  in  fact  ever  occur.  It
is,  in  short,  with  a  tendency,  and  not  with  a  fact,  that  we  have
to  do.  This,  however,  does  not  affect  the  practical  conclusion
of  the  argument.  Provided  that  the  conditions  contemplated
above  are  satisfied,  obstacles  in  the  way  of  that  distribution  of
resources  which  self-interest  tends  to  bring  about  will  render
the  values  of  the  marginal  social  net  products  of  resources  in
different  uses  more  unequal,  and  so  will  probably  damage  the
national  dividend.

§  2.  It  would  seem  at  first  sight  to  follow  from  this  that
the  removal  or  lessening  of  any  obstruction  to  free  movement
must  make  these  values  less  unequal  and  should,  therefore,  make
the  dividend  larger.  This,  however,  is  not  really  so.  The
situation  is  made  complex  by  the  fact  that  obstructions  to  free
movement  comprise  both  costs  of  movement  and  imperfections  of
knowledge.  If  they  consisted  of  costs  alone,  or  of  imperfect
knowledge  alone,  it  would  be  obvious  that  a  removal  or  lessening
of  them  would  make  the  values  of  marginal  net  products  more
equal  and  thus,  in  general,  increase  the  dividend.  But  in
actual  life  we  have  to  contemplate  reduction  of  costs  while
knowledge  is  still  imperfect  and  improvement  of  knowledge
while  costs  remain.  The  resulting  complications  need  careful
study.

§  3.  It  is  plain  that,  if  people  wrongly  think  that  a  larger
return  can  be  obtained  by  sending  resources  away  from  A  for
investment  at  B,  a  diminution  in  costs  will  cause  resources  to
be  sent  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  would  have  been  more
productive  if  left  where  they  were.  It  is  thus  certainly
possible  that  a  reduction  of  costs  in  actual  life  may  render  the
values  of  marginal  net  products  more  unequal  and  so  lessen


CH.III  EQUALITY  OF  EETUENS  127

the  national  dividend.  In  the  appended  footnote,  however,  it
is  shown  by  a  technical  argument  that  this  is,  on  the  whole,
unlikely.  Thus,  our  main  proposition,  stated  as  it  was  in  a
probable  form,  remains  so  far  intact.^

S  4.  There  is  a  different  kind  of  complication  when  costs
of  movement  remain  unchanged  but  knowledge  is  improved.

'  The  proof  is  as  follows.  Let  people's  judgment  concerning  the  yalue  of
the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  invested  at  B  be  correct,  but  let  their
estimate  of  the  corresponding  value  at  A  differ  from  fact  by  a  defined  quantity  k.
Let  the  costs  of  movement  between  A  and  B  be  equated  to  an  annual  sum  spread
over  the  period  during  which  the  unit  of  resources  that  has  moved  may  be
expected  to  find  profit  in  staying  in  its  new  place.  This  annual  sum  is  not
necessarily  the  same  in  respect  of  movements  from  A  to  B  and  movements  from
B  to  A.  Transport,  for  example,  "  acts  more  easily  down  than  up  hiU  or  stream
[and]  .  .  .  the  barrier  of  language  acts  more  strongly  from  England  to  Germany
than  vice  versa  "  (Macgregor,  Industrial  Combinaiion,  p.  24).  For  the  present
purpose,  however,  we  may  ignore  this  complication  and  represent  costs  in  either
direction  by  an  annual  sum  equal  to  n.  Construct  a  figure  in  which  positive
values  are  marked  off  to  the  right  of  0  and  negative  values  to  the  left.  Mark
off  OM  equal  to  k  ;  and  MQ,  MP  on  either  side  of  M  each  equal  to  n.  It  is
then  evident  that  the  excess  of  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources
at  B  over  that  at  A — let  this  excess  be  known  as  h — is  indeterminate  and  may
lie  anywhere  between  a  value  OQ,  which  may  be  either  positive  or  negative,
and  a  value  OP  which  may  also  be  either  positive  or  negative.  A  diminution
in  the  value  of  n  is  represented  by  movements  on  the  part  of  the  two  points  P
and  Q  towards  M.     So  long  as  the  values

M


Q       O
M


^  0      Q

of  k  and  n  are  such  that  P  and  Q  lie  on  opposite  sides  of  0,  it  is  obvious  that
these  movements  make  impossible  the  largest  positive  and  the  largest  negative
values  of  h  that  were  possible  before,  and  have  no  other  effect.  "When,  however,
P  and  Q  lie  on  the  same  side  of  0 — in  which  case,  of  course,  all  possible  values
of  h  are  of  the  same  sign — they  make  impossible  both  the  largest  values  of  h
that  were  possible  before  and  also  the  smallest  values.  This  double  change
seems  equally  likely  to  increase  or  to  diminish  the  value  of  h.  Hence,  if  it
were  the  fact  that  the  points  P  and  Q  always  lay  on  the  same  side  of  0,  we
could  not  infer  that  dininutions  of  the  value  of  n  would  be  likely  to  affect  the
value  of  h  either  way.  In  fact,  however,  it  must  often  happen  that  P  and  Q
lie  on  opposite  sides  of  O,  When  account  is  taken  of  these  cases  as  well  as  of
the  others,  we  can  infer  that,  over  the  mass  of  many  cases,  diminutions  in  the
value  of  n  are  likely  to  reduce  the  value  of  h.  In  other  words,  diminutions  in
the  costs  of  movement  are  likely,  in  general,  to  make  the  values  of  the  marginal
net  products  of  resources  at  A  and  B  less  unequal.  Furthermore,  it  is  evident
that,  when  the  distances  MP  and  MQ  are  given,  the  probability  that  P  and  Q
will  both  lie  on  the  same  side  of  0  and,  therefore,  the  probability  that  a
diminution  in  the  distances  MP  and  MQ  will  be  associated  with  an  increase  in
the  value  of  h,  is  smaller  the  smaller  is  the  value  of  k.


128  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  vx.  u

This  improvement  need  not  lead  to  an  increase  in  equality
among  the  values  of  marginal  net  products.  For  suppose
the  conditions  to  be  such  that,  if  perfect  knowledge  prevailed,
the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  at  one
point  A  would  exceed  the  corresponding  value  at  another
point  B  by  one  shilling,  and  that  the  cost  of  moving  a  unit
of  resources  from  B  to  A  would  just  balance  this  advantage.
But,  in  fact,  let  us  further  suppose,  knowledge  is  imperfect ;
people  believe  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  at
A  to  be  higher  than  it  really  is ;  they  therefore  send  more
resources  from  B  to  A  than  they  would  do  if  better  informed ;
and,  therefore,  the  excess  of  the  value  of  the  marginal  net
product  at  A  over  that  at  B  stands  at  less  than  n  shillings.
In  these  circumstances  the  growth  of  a  more  correct  judg-
ment would  evidently  increase  the  degree  of  inequality
prevailing  between  the  values  of  the  marginal  net  products
of  resources  at  A  and  B.  This  is  an  awkward  result.  Any
one  holding  in  a  loose  general  way  that  anything  which  has
this  effect  must  injure  the  national  dividend  would  be  forced
to  the  paradox  that  an  increase  in  knowledge  about  productive
opportunities  would  actually  do  harm.  But  the  analysis
of  Chapter  IV.  §  3  of  the  preceding  Part  disposes  of  this
difficulty.  It  enables  us  to  conclude  that,  in  the  example  chosen
above,  an  improvement  in  knowledge  both  makes  the  values  of
marginal  net  products  less  equal  than  they  would  have  been
in  a  regime  of  greater  ignorance,  and  increases  the  national
dividend.

§  5.  This  last  line  of  thought,  pushed  a  little  further,
enables  us  to  clear  up  yet  another  difficulty.  This  has  to
do  with  the  effect  of  State  bounties  designed  to  lessen
ignorance  or  reduce  the  costs  of  movement.  If  it  was  in
all  circumstances  beneficial  to  the  national  dividend  that
equality  among  the  values  of  marginal  net  products  should
be  promoted,  it  must  follow  that  the  effect  of  a  cheapening
of  knowledge  or  of  movement  to  persons  who  control  resources
is  the  same  whether  that  cheapening  results  from  a  real
reduction  of  costs  or  from  a  transference  of  costs  to  the
shoulders  of  other  people.  In  either  case,  movements  will
be  stimulated  which    diminish   inequality  among  the  values


CH.  Ill  EQUALITY  OF  EETUENS  129

of  marginal  net  products  and,  therefore,  it  would  seem,
which  also  increase  the  national  dividend.  The  analysis  cited
above  enables  us  to  see  that  this  conclusion  is  incorrect.  A
cheapening  of  knowledge  and  movement  to  individuals,
brought  about  by  the  transference  of  a  part  of  the  cost  of
these  things  to  the  State,  does,  indeed,  involve  increased
equality  among  the  values  of  marginal  net  products
at  different  points.  But  the  increase  of  equality  is  an
increase  beyond  what,  relatively  to  existing  conditions,  is
most  advantageous.  Prima  fa>cie,  this  sort  of  cheapening,
despite  the  fact  that  it  makes  the  values  of  marginal  net
products  more  equal,  is  likely  to  injure  the  national  dividend.^
§  6.  The  foregoing  somewhat  complicated  analysis  leaves
intact  the  main  thesis  of  our  first  section.  Private  seK-
interest,  so  far  as  it  is  not  obstructed,  tends  to  direct
resources  into  various  competing  channels  in  such  a  way
that  the  returns  obtainable  from  further  increments  of
investment  are  approximately  equal  in  all  of  them.  It
must  be  remembered,  indeed,  that  this  tendency  has  only
been  proved  favourable  to  the  national  dividend  upon  the  j,
assumption  that  the  rate  of  returns  to  resources  in  any  »
occupation  is  equivalent  to  the  value  of  the  marginal
social  net  product  there.  In  later  chapters  it  will  be
shown  that  this  assumption  is  often  not  warranted.  When
it  fails,  an  arrangement  involving  equality  of  returns
must  differ  in  certain  definite  ways  from  the  most  advan-
tageous arrangement ;  and  there  is  a  prima  fade  case  for
State,  or    other,   interference  designed   to   correct   the  error.

1  To  obviate  misunderstanding  two  modifying  considerations  should
be  added.  First,  the  presumption  just  established  against  the  grant  of  a
bounty  to  the  industry  of  promoting  mobility  is  merely  a  special  case  of
the  general  presumption  against  the  grant  of  a  bounty  to  any  industry.
It  may,  therefore,  be  oTerthrown  if  there  is  special  reason  to  believe  that,
in  the  absence  of  a  bounty,  investment  in  the  industry  in  question  would
not  be  carried  so  far  as  is  desirable.  Secondly,  when  the  State  takes  over  the
work  of  providing  either  information  or  the  means  of  movement,  and  elects
for  any  reason  to  sell  the  result  of  its  efforts  either  for  nothing  or  below  cost
price,  we  have,  in  general,  to  do,  not  merely  with  the  grant  of  a  bounty
on  these  things,  but  at  the  same  time  with  a  real  cheapening  due  to  the
introduction  of  large-scale  methods.  Even,  therefore,  though  the  bounty
element  in  the  new  arrangement  were  proved  to  be  injurious,  it  might  still
happen  that  that  arrangement  as  a  whole  was  beneficial.

E


130  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pr.n

A  recognition  of  this  fact,  however,  is  quite  consistent
with  the  view  that  obstructions  which  check  equality,  intro-
duced otherwise  than  with  deliberate  curative  design,  are
likely  to  prove  injurious.  It  is  true,  as  was  implicitly
argued  in  §  10  of  the  last  chapter,  that  particular  drugs
consumed  in  particular  quantities  at  particular  times  may
cure  diseases ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  the  consumption
of  drugs  in  general  in  a  casual  and  miscellaneous  manner
will  damage  a  person's  health.


CHAPTEE    IV

HINDRANCES    TO    EQUALITY    OF    RETURNS    DUE    TO    IMPERFECT
KNOWLEDGE

§  1.  Among  the  casual  obstructions  to  equality  of  returns
a  high  place,  as  has  already  been  hinted,  is  held  by
ignorance.  A  flowing  stream  of  resources  is  continually
coming  into  being  and  struggling,  so  far  as  unavoidable  costs
of  movement  allow  of  this,  to  distribute  itself  away  from
points  of  relatively  low  returns  towards  points  of  relatively
high  returns.  Success  in  this  struggle  is  interfered  with
by  imperfect  knowledge  on  the  part  of  those  in  whose  hands
the  power  to  direct  the  various  branches  of  the  stream  resides.
To  obtain  an  idea  of  the  scale  of  the  damage  which  results
from  this  cause,  it  is  desirable  to  study  briefly  certain  aspects
of  modern  business  finance.

§  2.  The  first  thing  that  calls  for  comment  is  the  general
character  of  business  accounts.  In  businesses  conducted  by
private  firms  no  statement  of  profits  is  made  public.  In
businesses  conducted  by  joint  stock  companies  a  certain
amount  of  publicity  is  enforced  by  law.  But  the  device  of
stock-watering  and  other  devices  for  concealing  from  outsiders
the  real  rate  of  return  that  is  obtained  on  the  capital  actually
invested  make  it  exceedingly  difficult,  even  here,  for  anybody
other  than  a  specialist  to  form  a  good  judgment  of  the  com-
parative prospects  of  different  occupations.  The  difficulty  is
still  further  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  the  prospects  which  it
is  necessary  to  forecast  refer,  not  to  immediate  returns  only,
but  to  retxirns  spread  over  a  considerable  period ;  for  it  is
evident  that,  as  regards  these  returns,  even  correct  knowledge
of  the  immediate  past  gives  but  imperfect  guidance.     In  view

131


132  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.h

of  these  facts,  it  might  seem  that,  in  existing  conditions,
ignorance  will  almost  entirely  inhibit  the  tendency  towards
equality  among  the  returns  to  resources  in  different  uses.
Such  a  view,  however,  would  be  unduly  pessimistic.  "  Though
it  may  be  difficult,"  Dr.  Marshall  writes,  "  to  read  the  lessons
of  an  individual  trader's  experience,  those  of  a  whole  trade
can  never  be  completely  hidden,  and  cannot  be  hidden  at  all
for  long.  Although  one  cannot  tell  whether  the  tide  is  rising
or  falling  by  merely  watching  half-a-dozen  waves  breaking  on
the  seashore,  yet  a  very  little  patience  settles  the  question ;
and  there  is  a  general  agreement  among  business  men  that
the  average  rate  of  profits  in  a  trade  cannot  rise  or  fall  much
without  general  attention  being  attracted  to  the  change  before
long.  And  though  it  may  sometimes  be  a  more  difficult  task
for  a  business  man  than  for  a  skilled  labourer  to  find  out
whether  he  could  improve  his  prospects  by  changing  his  trade,
yet  the  business  man  has  great  opportunities  for  discovering
whatever  can  be  found  out  about  the  present  and  future  of
other  trades ;  and,  if  he  should  wish  to  change  his  trade,  he
will  generally  be  able  to  do  so  more  easily  than  the  skilled
workman  could."  ^  Ignorance,  in  short,  as  to  the  relative
profitableness  of  different  occupations  taken  as  a  whole,  though
it  may  be  complete  enough  among  the  general  public,  is
probably  much  less  important  than  it  appears  to  be  at  first
sight  among  those  persons  by  whose  agency  the  flow  of  resources
into  different  occupations  is,  in  the  main,  directed.  Neverthe-
less, there  is  clearly  room  for  improvement  in  the  matter  of
business  publicity,^  and,  if  such  improvement  were  made,
ignorance  would  be  lessened,  equality  in  the  values  of  marginal
net  products  promoted,  and  the  volume  of  the  national  dividend
consequently  increased.

§  3.  I  turn  next  to  the  relation  between  ignorance  and
the  quality  of  the  persons  by  whom  the  investment  of  resources
is  controlled.  In  a  primitive  community  investment  is
carried  on  almost  exclusively  by  entrepreneurs  actually
engaged  in  the  various  industries  and  devoting  to  the  conduct
of  them  resources   belonging   to  themselves.      Their   quality

1  Principles  of  Economics,  p.  608.
2  Cf.  Layton,  Capital  and  Labour,  ch.  iv.


CH.  IV  IMPEEFECT  KNOWLEDGE  133

alone  is  relevant  to  our  problem ;  and  it  is  obvious  that  the
range  of  error  in  the  forecasts  that  are  made  is  likely  to  be
smaller  or  larger  according  as  able  men  are  or  are  not  content
to  adopt  business  as  a  career.  In  the  modern  world,  however,
most  forms  of  industry  are  financed  from  resources  belonging
to  a  great  number  of  other  people,  besides  those  who  actually
manage  businesses.  These  other  people  include,  on  the  one
hand,  professional  financiers,  company  promoters  or  promoting
syndicates,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  moneyed  people  among  the
general  public  whom  these  promoters  induce  to  invest  in  their
ventures.  "  The  promoter's  special  province,"  writes  Professor
Mitchell,  "  is  to  find  and  bring  to  the  attention  of  investors
new  opportunities  for  making  money,  new  natural  resources
to  be  exploited,  new  processes  to  be  developed,  new  products
to  be  manufactured,  new  organisations  of  existing  business
enterprises  to  be  arranged,  etc.  But  the  promoter  is  seldom
more  than  an  explorer  who  points  out  the  way  for  fresh
advances  of  the  army  of  industry.  .  .  .  There  are  always
being  launched  more  schemes  than  can  be  financed  with  the
available  funds.  In  rejecting  some  and  accepting  others  of
these  schemes,  the  men  of  money  are  taking  a  very  influential,
though  not  a  very  conspicuous,  part  in  determining  how  labour
shall  be  employed,  what  products  shall  be  used,  and  what
localities  built  up."  ^  In  modern  industry  then  the  direction
of  a  large  part  of  the  community's  investment  is  in  the  joint
control  of  professional  financiers  interested  in  company  pro-
moting and  of  the  moneyed  part  of  the  general  public.
What  is  to  be  said  about  the  capacity  and  business  judgment
of  this  complex  directing  agency  ?

§  4.  The  comparative  capacity  for  detecting  good  new
openings  for  enterprise  of  the  professional  financier  and  of  the
ordinary  business  man — the  entrepreneur  investor  of  former
days — is  not  difficult  to  determine.  First,  the  professional
financier  is  a  specialist  in  this  particular  work,  whereas  to  the
ordinary  business  man  an  opportunity  for  undertaking  it  would
come,  if  at  all,  only  at  rare  intervals.  Clearly,  the  specialist  is
likely  to  make  better  forecasts  than  the  general  practitioner.
Secondly,  the  international  character,  which  the  development
^  Mitchell,  Business  Cycles,  pp.  34-5.


134  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

of  the  means  of  communication  has  in  recent  times  given  to
many  industries,  has  made  the  advantage  enjoyed  by  the
specialist  much  greater  than  it  used  to  be  when  a  knowledge
of  local  conditions,  such  as  an  intelligent  business  man  would
naturally  possess,  afforded  a  sufficient  basis  for  a  good  forecast.
Lastly,  the  fact  of  specialisation  gives  freer  play  to  the  selective
agency  of  bankruptcy,  in  eliminating  persons  who  undertake
to  choose  openings  for  new  enterprises  and  cannot  choose  well.
When  the  functions  of  financier  and  manufacturer  are  rolled
together  in  one  man,  the  man  may  flourish  through  his  manu-
facturing skill  —  good  business  tactics  —  despite  of  incom-
petent business  "strategy."  When  the  two  functions  are
separated,  anybody  who  undertakes  the  one  in  which  he  is
incompetent  relatively  to  other  people  is  apt  to  lose  his
money  and  be  driven  from  the  field.  Furthermore,  the
efficiency  of  this  natural  selection  is  augmented  by  the  fact
that  a  professional  financier  undertakes  a  great  number  of
transactions,  and  that,  therefore,  the  element  of  chance  plays
a  small  part,  and  the  element  of  efficiency  a  large  part,  in  the
result.  Hence,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  advent  into  any
industry  of  professional  financiers  means  the  advent  of  persons
better  able  than  those  immediately  concerned  in  the  industry
to  forecast  future  conditions.  Against  this  has  to  be  set  the
fact  that  the  great  bulk  of  those  members  of  the  general
public,  who  ultimately  supply  the  funds  for  the  enterprises
that  professional  financiers  have  organised,  are  much  less
capable  than  ordinary  business  men  of  forecasting  future
conditions.  If  promoters  always  looked  for  the  openings
most  profitable  on  the  whole,  as  distinguished  from  those
that  can  be  so  manipulated  as  to  become  most  profitable  to
themselves,  this  ignorance  on  the  part  of  people  who  follow
their  lead  would  not,  perhaps,  greatly  matter.  Unfortunately,
however,  it  is  often  to  the  interest,  and  it  is  usually  in  the
power,  of  the  professionals,  by  the  spread  of  false  information
and  in  other  ways,  deliberately  to  pervert  the  forecasts  of
their  untutored  colleagues.  It  is  this  fact  that  makes  the  net
eflFect  of  the  modern  system  upon  the  distribution  of  the
community's  investments  among  openings  of  varying  merit
somewhat  doubtful.     The  prospect  of  advantage  is  probably


CH.  IV  IMPEEFECT  KNOWLEDGE  135

increased  when,  as  in  Germany,  the  flotation  of  new  companies
on  the  basis  of  shares  of  extremely  low  nominal  value  is
forbidden  by  law ;  for  then  a  certain  number  of  the  poorer
and,  perhaps,  more  ignorant  persons,  who  might  be  most  easily
tricked,  are  driven  away.^  Again,  any  legislative  enactment,
capable  of  being  enforced,  that  checks  the  fraudulent  exploita-
tion of  incompetent  investors  by  dishonest  professionals,  tends
pro  tanto  to  diminish  the  range  of  error  to  which  the  general
mass  of  operative  forecasts  made  in  the  community  are  liable.
"  The  public  regulation  of  the  prospectuses  of  new  companies,
legislation  supported  by  efficient  administration  against  fraudu-
lent promotion,  more  rigid  requirements  on  the  part  of  the
stock  exchanges  regarding  the  securities  admitted  to  official
lists,  and  more  efficient  agencies  for  giving  information  to
investors  fall  under  this  head."  ^

8  5.  A  more  fundamental  remedy  is  introduced  when  the
work  of  promotion  itself  is  kept  in  the  hands  of  bankers —
whose  reputation,  of  course,  depends  upon  the  permanent
success  of  the  business  undertakings  that  they  have  founded.
This  is  done  in  Germany.  Big  German  banks  retain  a
staff  of  technical  experts  to  investigate  and  report  upon
any  industrial  ventures  that  may  be  proposed,  decide  after
elaborate  inquiries  which  ventures  to  promote  and,  in  short,
constitute  themselves  a  financial  general  staff  to  industry.
The  contrast  with  the  English  system  is  well  pointed  out
in  the  following  passage :  "  The  English  joint  stock  companies
(banks),  conforming  to  the  theory,  have  abstained  in  a  direct
way  from  flotations  and  the  underwriting  business,  as  well
as  from  bourse  speculation.  But  this  very  fact  causes
another  great  evil,  namely,  that  the  banks  have  never  shown
any  interest  in  the  newly  founded  companies  or  in  the
securities  issued  by  these  companies,  while  it  is  a  distinct
advantage  of  the  German  system  that  the  German  banks,
even  if  only  in  the  interest  of  their  own  issue  credit,  have
been  keeping  a  continuous  watch  over   the   development   of

'  In  Germany  shares  are,  in  no  case,  permitted  of  a  lower  face  value  than
£10,  and  they  are  not  usually  permitted  of  a  lower  face  value  than  £50.
(Schuster,  Tlie  Principles  of  German  Civil  Law,  p.  44.)

2  Cf.  Mitchell,  Business  Cycles,  p.  585.


136  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

the  companies  which  they  founded."  ^  No  doubt,  this
practice  of  banks  acting  as  promoters  involves  great  risks
and  absolutely  requires  that  their  capital  resources  shall  be,
as  they  are  in  Germany,^  very  much  larger  relatively  to
their  liabilities  than  is  usual  among  English  banks ;  for
otherwise  losses  sustained  in  the  promotion  business,  or  even
the  temporary  "solidification"  of  funds  locked  up  in  this
business,  might  render  the  banks  unable  to  meet  their  obliga-
tions to  their  depositors.  Moreover,  it  must  be  remembered
that  the  position  of  this  country  as  the  banking  centre  of
the  world,  and,  until  recently,  the  principal  free  market
for  gold,  would  make  the  locking  up  of  bank  resources  in
long  ventures  more  dangerous  than  in  other  countries.  I
make  no  suggestion,  therefore,  that  the  general  policy  hitherto
pursued  by  British  banks  has  been  other  than  well  advised,
Nevertheless,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  when  conditions
are  such  as  to  allow  banks  safely  to  undertake  the  work
of  promotion,  a  real  advantage  results.  They  are  more  likely
than  are  certain  types  of  private  financiers  to  look  out  for
openings  which  really  are  sound,  as  distinguished  from  openings
which  can  be  made  for  a  short  time  to  look  sound.  It  is,
indeed,  possible  that,  in  some  circumstances,  where  the
rival  interests  of  different  nationalities  are  affected,  powerful
banking    institutions    operating    along    these    lines    may    be

^  Riesser,  Tlie  German  Great  Banks,  p.  555.

^  The  general  practice  of  the  English  banks  is  to  supply  "banking
facilities,"  that  is  to  say  advances,  whether  by  discount  of  bills  or  otherwise,
that  have  a  short  currency  only,  and  not  "financial  facilities,"  i.e.  advances
with  a  long  currency.  It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  this  practice  handicaps
those  British  industries  in  which  opportunities  may  arise  for  the  profitable
expansion  of  plant  at  short  notice, — to  make  possible,  for  example,  their
acceptance  of  some  large  order  which  might  throw  open  for  them  the  entry
into  some  new  market ;  for  the  raising  of  fresh  capital  by  an  issue  of  shares
or  debentures  necessarily  takes  time.  It  is  also  sometimes  claimed  that
our  banking  practice  makes  it  difficult  for  British  traders  to  make  their  way
in  those  foreign  markets  where  purchasers  are  accustomed  to  expect  very  long
credits.  It  was  with  a  view  to  meeting  these  complaints  that  Lord  B'arringdon's
Committee  on  Financial  Facilities  (1916)  recommended  that  an  institution
should  be  established  witli  a  large  capital,  not  undertaking  ordinary  deposit
banking,  but  prepared  to  provide  financial  facilities  both  for  the  development
of  industries  at  home  and,  where  necessary,  for  the  conduct  of  foreign  trade.
This  recommendation  was  acted  upon,  and  an  institution  of  the  kind  con-
templated— the  British  Trade  Corporation — was  gi-anted  a  Charter  in  April
1917.


CH.  IT  IMPEKFECT  KNOWLEDGE  137

made  the  instruments  of  a  political  movement,  and  may  allow
their  conduct  to  be  swayed  by  other  than  economic  considera-
tions. But  this  aspect  of  the  matter  is  unsuited  for
discussion  here.

§  6.  It  is  not,  however,  only  by  acting  as  promoting
agents  that  bankers  can  help  to  direct  resources  into
productive  channels.  It  is  true  that  ordinary  bankers  in
their  loans  to  traders,  whether  made  directly  or  through
bill-brokers,  are  concerned  only  with  the  safety  of  the  debt.
The  judgment  that  they  make  about  the  capacity  of  would-
be  borrowers  to  meet  their  obligations  involves,  when
acceptable  security  is  offered,  no  judgment  as  to  the
comparative  profitableness  of  the  undertakings  into  which
different  would-be  borrowers  will  put  the  money  they  succeed
in  raising.  But,  when  bankers  are  required  to  make  loans
to  persons  who  are  not  in  a  position  to  offer  full  banking
security,  they  are  compelled  to  assume  a  more  important
role.  They  cannot  lend  on  a  mere  promise  to  pay,  but
are  bound,  in  their  own  interest,  to  make  elaborate  inquiry,
both  as  to  the  trustworthiness  of  the  borrower,  and  also
as  to  the  purpose  to  which  he  proposes  to  devote  the  proceeds
of  the  loan.  Speaking  of  the  peasant  borrowers  of  India,
Sir  Theodore  Morison  writes :  "  It  is  useless,  however  amiable,
to  believe  that  the  ryot  is  only  thirsting  for  capital  in  order
to  invest  it  at  once  in  the  improvement  and  development
of  his  estate."  ^  Again,  in  the  Eeport  on  the  working  of
the  Co-operative  Credit  Societies  Act  in  Burma,  issued  in
1907,  it  is  urged  that  "in  Burma  borrowing  is  mostly  due
to  habit  and  want  of  forethought  and  not  to  necessity  ;  that
the  capital  really  required  to  finance  cultivation  (apart  from
luxury)  is  very  much  less  than  what  is  generally  supposed,
and  that  mere  provision  of  cheap  money,  through  co-operative
societies  or  otherwise,  tends,  owing  to  the  existing  state
of  public  feeling,  to  induce  waste  of  income  rather  than
thrift ;  and,  lastly,  that  in  Burma  very  special  care  will  be
necessary  to  see  that  the  societies  are  managed  in  such  a
way  that  the-  prevention  of  waste  and  inculcation  of  thrift

'  The  Industrial  Organisation  of  an  Indian  Province,  p.  110.


138  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

are  effectively  impressed  on  the  members'  minds."  ^  The
recognised  machinery  for  exercising  this  type  of  control  and
supervision  is  provided  by  People's  Banks,  such  as  the
Eaiffeisen  Banks  in  Germany  and  their  Italian  counterparts.
These  banks  evoke  the  necessary  knowledge  by  a  double
process.  First,  the  persons  brought  together  as  members
of  the  Bank  and,  therefore,  as  potential  borrowers,  are
gathered  from  a  small  area  only,  in  such  wise  that  the
controlling  committee  can  easily  obtain  intimate  personal
information  concerning  all  of  them.  Only  those  persons
are  allowed  to  become  members,  of  whose  probity  and  general
good  character  the  committee  have  satisfied  themselves.  In
some  banks — in  the  Italian  Banchi  Popolari,  for  instance —
the  committee  draw  up,  db  initio  and  independently  of  any
particular  application,  a  list  of  the  sums  which  in  their
opinion  may  safely  be  lent  to  the  various  members.^  This
list  is  afterwards  used  as  a  basis  for  loans,  just  as  the  lists
of  the  communal  bureaux  de  hienfaisance  in  France  are  used
as  a  basis  for  the  grant  of  Poor  Relief.  Secondly,  the
grant  of  a  loan  is  often  made  conditional  on  its  being
employed  for  a  specified  purpose,  and  subject  to  certain  rights
of  supervision  reserved  for  the  lender.  Thus,  whereas  in
most  land-banks  (where  material  security  is  taken)  "  the
proceeds  of  mortgages  may  be  used  as  the  borrower  pleases,
e.g.  in  paying  off  loans,  in  portioning  younger  sons,  etc.,"  in
the  Raiffeisen  Banks  careful  inquiry  is  undertaken  into  the
purpose  for  which  the  loan  is  required,  and  provision  is
made  for  its  recall  should  the  borrower  divert  it  from  that
purpose.^  The  general  tendency  of  this  arrangement  is  to  lessen
the  number  of  investments  made  under  the  impulse  of
ignorance  in  undertakings  that  yield  an  abnormally  low
return,  and  so  indirectly  to  augment  the  national  dividend.

^  Report,  p.  15.

2  Cf.  Wolf,  Peoples  Banks,  p.  154,

^  For  an  account  of  Raiffeisen  and  kindred  Banks,  cf.   Fay,   Co-operation
at  Home  and  Abroad,  Part  I.


CHAPTER   V

HINDRANCES  TO  EQUALITY  OF  RETURNS  DUE  TO  IMPERFECT
DIVISIBILITY  OF  THE  UNITS  IN  TERMS  OF  WHICH
TRANSACTIONS   ARE    CONDUCTED

§  1.  Alongside  of  imperfect  knowledge,  as  discussed  in  the
preceding  chapter,  there  is  a  further  influence  hindering
the  tendency  to  a  distribution  involving  equality  of  returns
in  different  occupations.  This  is  a  peculiar  kind  of  cost
of  movement.  A  pure  mathematical  treatment  of  economic
problems  always  a-ssumes  that,  wlieu  there  is  opportunity
at  any  point  for  the  profitable  employment  of  given  quantities
of  the  several  factors  of  production,  each  factor  can  be  received
there  in  units  that  are  indefinitely  small  and  are  capable
of  being  separated  completely  from  units  of  any  other  factor.
In  so  far  as  this  assumption  is  not  warranted,  it  is  readily
seen  that  the  tendency  to  equality  of  returns  will  be  imper-
fectly realised.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  if  an  enterprise  is
only  financed,  in  respect  of  any  one  factor,  by  means  of
units,  each  of  which  has  the  value  of  £1000,  it  is  obvious
that,  though  the  transference  of  £1000  worth  of  the  factor
to  or  from  elsewhere  could  not,  when  equilibrium  is  established,
bring  about  an  increased  aggregate  return,  the  transference
of  any  sum  less  than  £1000  might  have  this  effect  In
short,  when  the  units,  in  terms  of  which  transactions  are
made,  are  not  indefinitely  small,  the  tendency  to  equality
of  returns  in  all  uses  degrades  into  a  tendency  to  limitation
of  inequality — a  limitation  the  extent  of  which  is  diminished
with  every  increase  in  the  size  of  the  units.  On  the  other
hand,  if  an  enterprise  is  only  financed,  in  respect  of  any
two    factors,    by    means    of   units  which   combine    factor    A

139


140  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

and  factor  B  in  a  definite  proportion,  it  is  obvious  that,
though  the  transference  of  one  of  those  complex  combined
units  to  or  from  elsewhere  could  not,  when  equilibrium  is
established,  bring  about  an  increased  aggregate  return,  the
transference  in  isolation  of  some  quantity  of  either  of  the
two  factors  might  have  this  effect.  Hence,  when  the  units,
in  terms  of  which  transactions  are  made,  are  compounded
of  fixed  proportions  of  two  or  more  factors,  the  tendency
to  equality  of  returns  in  all  uses  again  degrades  into  a
tendency  to  limitation  of  inequality.  It  follows  that  largeness
or  complexity  in  the  units,  in  terms  of  which  transactions
are  made,  act  in  the  same  way  as  obstacles  to  movement.
In  general  they  obstruct  the  tendency  of  self-interest  to  make
the  return  obtainable  by  each  several  factor  of  production
equal  in  all  uses.

§  2.  At  one  time  it  may  have  been  true  that  the  units
in  which  capital  transactions  were  made  were  noticeably
large.  Of  recent  years,  however,  the  size  of  those  units
has  been  greatly  reduced  in  two  ways.  Of  these  one  is
obvious,  the  other  relatively  obscure.  The  obvious  way
is  the  diminution  in  the  value  of  individual  deposits  which
banks  will  accept — the  Savings  Bank,  for  example,  allows
pennies  to  be  deposited  separately — and  a  similar,  though
less  extensive,  diminution  in  the  value  of  the  individual
shares  issued  by  companies.^  The  more  obscure  way  depends
upon  the  fact  that  a  unit  of  capital  is,  as  it  were,  two-
dimensional.  A  man  can  reduce  the  quantity  of  capital
which  he  provides,  not  only  by  altering  the  number  of  pounds
that  he  lends  over  a  defined  time,  but  also  by  altering  the
time  over  which  he  lends  a  defined  number  of  pounds.
Eeduction  in  the  time-extension  of  the  units  in  which  capital
is  borrowed  is  of  great  importance  in  practice,  because,
whereas  most  enterprises  require  funds  for  a  long  period,
many  borrowers  are  only  willing  to  cut  themselves  off
inexorably  from  their  resources  for  a  short  period.  There
have  been  evolved  in  the  modern  world  two  devices,  through
which    the    required    reduction   in    time-extension    has    been

1  It  must  be  remembered,  as  was  indicated  in  §  5  of  the  preceding  chapter,
that  this  tendency  is  not  without  incidental  disadvantages.


cH.v  IMPEEFECT  DIVISIBILITY  141

effected.  The  first  of  these  is  the  actual  acceptance  of  loans
for  short  t^rms  by  entrepreneurs,  in  dependence  partly  on  the
elasticity  of  the  wants  of  their  enterprise,  and  partly  on  the
chance  of  opportunities  for  reborrowing  elsewhere.  The
second  is  the  organisation  of  the  Stock  Exchange,  by  resort
to  which  the  funded  debts  of  enterprises  can  be  transferred,
— a  device  which  is,  from  the  lender's  point  of  view,  the
next  stage  to  permission  to  recall  his  loan  from  the  enterprise
itself.  These  two  devices  have  fairly  distinct  spheres.  To
rely  too  largely  on  short  loans  is  felt  to  be  dangerous.  "In
proportion  as  enterprises  depend  upon  short-time  credits
rather  than  upon  paid-up  capital  or  permanent  loans
are  they  in  danger  of  failure  in  times  of  stress  "  ^ — through
inability  to  renew  the  credits.  There  has,  therefore,  grown
up  a  rough  general  understanding  that  ,  short-time  paper
is  an  unsuitable  means  of  raising  money  for  things  like  new
equipment,  from  which  the  turn-over  is  necessarily  slow ;  it
should  be  used  only  to  finance  expenditure  on  materials
and  labour  employed  in  making  commodities  that  are  likely
to  be  sold  before  the  maturity  of  the  paper,^  This  distinction
between  the  two  devices  is  not,  however,  important  for  the
present  purposa  Both  of  the  devices  are  essentially  similar,
for  both  depend  on  the  general  probability  that  the  willing-
ness of  the  aggregate  community  to  lend  will  be  less  variable
than  that  of  an  average  individual  In  consequence  of  this,
on  the  one  hand,  a  company,  by  discounting  bills  through
banks,  borrows  part  of  its  capital  for  a  series  of  short  terms
from  difi*erent  people,  thus  enabling  any  one  of  them  to  lend
for  a  few  months.  On  the  other  hand,  a  man,  who  makes
savings  for  a  "  treat "  or  to  meet  an  accident,  instead  of
storing  what  he  expects  to  want,  invests  it  in  long-time
securities,  in  reliance  on  the  organisation  of  the  Stock
Exchange  to  enable  him  to  realise  his  capital  at  need.  These
devices  are  not  perfect.  In  times  of  stress  the  discounting
of  new  bills  may  prove  very  difficult  and  costly,  and  the
realisation  of  capital  by  the  sale  of  shares  may  not  be
possible  except  at  heavy  loss.     They  have  availed,  however,

I  Bniton,  Finandal  Oriris,  p.  263.
'  CC.  Meade,  Corporation  Finanee,  p.  231.


142  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

to  bring  about  a  large  and  important  reduction  in  the  time-
extension  of  the  units  in  terms  of  which  capital  transactions
are  conducted.  As  regards  labour  transactions,  it  is  plain
enough  that  the  units  are  fairly  small.  Hence,  in  the  modern
world,  apart  from  certain  special  problems  of  land  transfer  that
cannot  conveniently  be  discussed  here,  the  only  department
in  which  largeness  in  the  units  of  transactions  obstructs  the
tendency  of  self-interest  to  bring  about  equality  of  returns
in  different  occupations  would  seem  to  be  that  of  employing
power.  The  average  wielder  of  employing  power  cannot
be  regarded  as  indefinitely  small,  as  compared  with  the
aggregate  quantity  of  employing  power  that  is  in  action
in  any  use.  This  fact  brings  it  about  that  the  returns  to
employing  power  in  different  uses  are  checked  from  approach-
ing very  closely  towards  equality ;  and,  hence,  that  the  national
dividend  is  rendered  smaller  than  it  would  be  if  employing
power  were  more  fully  divisible.

^  3.  Let  us  next  consider  complexity,  or  compound  char-
acter, in  the  units  in  terms  of  which  transactions  are  made.
Here,  as  before,  it  is  capital  which  calls  for  the  greatest
amount  of  discussion.  For,  capital,  as  ordinarily  conceived
in  business,  is  not  a  pure  elementary  factor  of  production.
In  the  concrete,  of  course,  it  appears  in  the  form  either  of
plant  and  equipment  or  of  a  system  of  connections  called
goodwill.  But  this  concrete  capital  is  always  made  up  of
a  combination,  in  varying  proportions,  of  two  factors,  namely,
waiting  and  uncertainty-bearing.^  Under  primitive  condi-
tions,  if  an   enterprise  was   undertaken   by    more  than   one

'  The  nature  of  tlie  service  of  "waiting"  has  been  much  misunderstood.
Sometimes  it  has  been  supposed  to  consist  in  the  provision  of  money,  sometimes
in  the  provision  of  time,  and,  on  both  suppositions,  it  has  been  argued  that  no
contribution  whatever  is  made  by  it  to  the  dividend.  Neither  supposition  is
correct.  "Waiting"  simply  means  postponing  consumption  which  a  person
has  power  to  enjoy  immediately,  thus  allowing  resources,  which  might  have
been  destroyed,  to  assume  the  form  of  productive  instruments  and  to  act  as
' '  harness,  by  which  natural  powers  are  guided  so  as  to  assist  mankind  in  his
efforts"  (Flux,  Principles  of  Economics,  p.  89).  The  unit  of  "waiting"  is,
therefore,  the  use  of  a  given  quantity  of  resources— for  example,  labour  or
machinery — for  a  given  time.  Thus,  to  take  Professor  Carver's  example,  if  a
manufacturer  buys  one  ton  of  coal  a  day  on  each  day  of  the  year  and  buys  each
day's  supply  one  day  ahead,  the  waiting  he  supplies  during  that  year  is  one
ton  of  coal  for  one  year — a  year-ton  of  coal  (Distribution  of  Wealth,
p.  253).     In  more  general  terms,   we  may  say  that  the  unit  of  waiting  is  a


cH.  V  IMPERFECT  DIYISIBILITY  143

person,  it  was  practically  necessary  for  each  of  the  several
contributors  to  furnish  waiting  and  uncertainty-bearing  in
the  proportions  in  which  these  factors  were  required  in  the
aggregate.  They  would,  in  effect,  pool  their  capital,  taking
upon  each  £  lent  an  equal  measure  of  uncertainty-bearing.
They  would  be  partners,  or,  if  we  wish  to  suppose  them  in
the  enjoyment  of  limited  liability,  joint  shareholders  in  a
company  whose  capital  consisted  entirely  of  ordinary  shares.
In  modern  times,  however,  this  is  no  longer  necessary.  An
enterprise  that  requires,  say,  x  units  of  waiting  plus  y  units
of   uncertainty-bearing,    need    no    longer    obtain    from    each

subscriber   of   one   unit   of   vraiting   -   units   of  uncertainty-

X

bearing  also.  By  the  device  of  guarantees  its  demand  can
be  separated  into  two  streams,  in  such  wise  that  waiting
alone  is  drawn  from  one  set  of  people  and  uncertainty-
bearing  alone  from  another  set.  Guarantees  may  assume
a  great  variety  of  forms.  They  are  given  to  industrialists
by  insurance  companies,  which  undertake,  for  a  consideration,
that  the  industrialists'  earnings  shall  be  unaffected  by  fire
or  accident  They  are  given  by  Exchange  Banks,  such
as  those  which,  in  India  before  1893,  bought  importers'  and
exporters'  bills  at  the  time  of  their  bargain,  and  so,  for  a
price,  insured  them  against  loss  (or  gain)  from  any  fluctuations
in  the  exchange  which  might  occur  in  the  interval  between
the  bargain  and  the  realisation  of  the  bills.  Where  indus-
trialists have  to  do  with  staple  goods,  for  which  grading
permits  the  establishment  of  future  markets,  they  are  given,
for  the  more  general  risks  of  business,  by  speculators.  For
a  miller  or  cotton  merchant,  undertaking  an  order  to  supply
flour  or  cotton  goods,   can   buy   the   speculator's   promise   to

year-yalue-unit,  or,  in  the  simpler,  if  less  accurate,  language  of  Dr.  Cassel,
a  year-pound.  The  graver  difficulties  involved  in  the  conception  of  uncertainty-
bearing  are  discussed  in  Appendix  I.  A  caution  may  be  added  against
the  common  view  that  the  amount  of  capital  accumulated  in  any  year  is
necessarily  equal  to  the  amount  of  "savings  "  made  in  it.  This  is  not  so  even
when  savings  are  interpreted  to  mean  net  savings,  thus  eliminating  the  savings
of  one  man  that  are  lent  to  increase  the  consumption  of  another,  and  when
temporary  accumulations  of  unused  claims  upon  services  in  the  form  of  bank-
money  are  ignored  ;  for  many  savings  which  are  meant  to  become  capital  in
fact  fail  of  their  purpose  through  misdirection  into  wasteful  uses.


144  ECONOMICS    OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

provide  him  with  his  raw  material  in  the  future  for  a
stipulated  sum,  irrespective  of  the  price  which  may  then
prevail  in  the  market;  and,  in  like  manner,  a  farmer  whose
crop  has  not  yet  been  harvested,  can  buy  the  speculator's
promise  to  take  it  off  his  hands  in  the  future  for  a  stipulated
sum,  irrespective  of  the  price  then  ruling.^  Like  guarantees
are  given  to  a  banker  preparing  to  discount  a  bill  for  an
industrial  enterprise,  when  a  second  banker,  or  a  bill-broker,
or  some  independent  person,  consents  to  accept,  or  endorse,
the  bill,  or,  as  is  usual  with  "  cash  credits "  in  Scotland,  to
stand  surety  for  the  original  borrower.^  They  are  given
to  a  Central  Bank,  when  a  People's  Bank,  working,  either
on  unlimited  liability  or  with  a  subscribed  capital  of  guarantee,
in  effect  borrows  money  on  behalf  of  its  local  clients.^     They

1  In  actual  practice  tlie  method  usually  pursued  of  transferring  uncertainty-
bearing  to  the  speculative  market  is  somewhat  more  complicated  than  the
above.  The  miller  protects  himself  by  "  buying  a  future  "  in  wheat  when  he
makes  a  contract  for  future  delivery  of  flour,  and  then  selling  the  future  pari
passu  with  purchases  of  spot  wheat  of  various  grades  as  he  needs  them  for  his
milling.  In  like  manner,  the  farmer  protects  himself  by  selling  a  future  at  an
early  stage,  and  then  buying  to  cover  it  in  the  speculative  market  and  selling
his  actual  wheat  in  the  spot  market  at  the  same  time.  The  detailed  methods
that  may  be  adopted — and  there  are  many  varieties  of  them — do  not,  however,
affect  the  essential  nature  of  these  transactions.  One  further  point  should  be
added.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  all  the  transactions  that  occur  on  the
produce  exchange  consist  in  purchases  from  producers  or  sales  to  ultimate
consumers.  There  are  many  transactions  between  traders  neither  of  whom
will  ever  come  in  contact  with  the  commodity  traded  in.  These  transactions
act  upon  price  in  the  same  way  as  the  others,  and  constitute,  in  fact,  the
machinery  through  which  a  number  of  persons,  who  make  it  their  business  to
forecast  market  conditions,  are  enabled  to  make  their  influence  felt.  Mr.
Emery's  remark  that  ' '  speculation  consists  in  assuming  the  inevitable  economic
risks  of  changes  in  value"  (Stock  and  Produce  Exchanges,  p.  101)  is  thus  some-
what misleading.  Speculation  as  ordinarily  understood  does,  indeed,  only
assume  uncertainties  which  arise  in  connection  with  inevitable  changes  of  value,
but  the  mass  of  uncertainties  which  it  assumes  is  considerably  larger  than  the
mass  that  would  exist  if  there  were  no  speculation.

^  The  essence  of  the  guarantee  given  by  the  acceptor's  signatiire  is  the
same  whether  the  bill  is  drawn  in  respect  of  goods  received,  or  is  an  accom-
modation bill  endorsed  by  an  accepting-house,  wliich  lends  its  name  for  a
consideration.  The  variety  of  accommodation  bills  known  as  "  pig-on-bacon, "
where  the  acceptor  is  a  branch  of  the  drawing  house  under  an  alias,  is,  of
course,  difierent,  because  these  bills,  in  eff'ect,  bear  only  one  name  ;  and  the
same  thing  is  substantially  true  when  the  fortunes  of  the  endorsing  house  and
the  original  borrower  are  so  closely  interwoven  that  the  failure  of  the  one  would
almost  certainly  involve  the  failure  of  the  other.

3  The  controversy  between  the  advocates  of  limited  and  unlimited  liability
has  sometimes  been  keen.     In  the  ordinary  banks  and  in  tlie  Schulze-Delitzsch


cH.v  IMPERFECT  DIVISIBILITY  145

are  given  finally  to  a  banker  or  other  lender  when  a  borrower
obtains  a  loan  from  him  by  a  deposit  of  "  collateral "  security.
By  far  the  most  effective  form  of  security  consists  in  the
stock  and  share  certificates  of  industrial  enterprises.  For
the  deposit  of  these,  unlike  the  deposit  of  chattel  security,
involves  no  present  loss  to  the  depositor,  while  their  ultimate
assumption,  unlike  the  foreclosure  of  a  mortgage,  threatens
no  difl&culty  to  the  person  in  whose  favour  the  deposit  has
been  made.  Furthermore,  the  "  continuous  market "  provided
for  securities  by  the  Stock  Exchanges  of  the  world  safe-
guards the  holders  of  them  against  the  danger  of  slumps  in
value  so  sudden  and  large  as  those  to  which  persons  holding,
as  collateral,  the  title-deeds  of  parcels  of  real  estate  are  liable.^
In  recent  times,  partly  in  consequence  of  the  supersession
of  partnerships  by  joint  stock  companies,^  the  proportion  of
national  wealth  represented  by  stocks  and  shares,  and,  there-
fore, available  as  collateral  security,  has  enormously  increased.
According  to  Schmoller's  estimate  of  a  few  years  before
the  war,  whereas  100  years  ago  only  a  very  small  proportion
of  any  country's  wealth  was  in  this  form,  to-day  in  Germany
17  per  cent — Riesser  says  33  per  cent — and  in  England
40  per  cent,  of  it  is  covered  by  paper  counterparts.^  Accord-
ing to  Mr.  Watkins's  investigations,  77  per  cent  of  the  capital
value  owned  by  residents  in  the  United  Kingdom,  on  which
estate  duty  was  levied  in  1902—3,  was  "personalty,"  and,
out  of  personalty,  70  per  cent  was  paper  property.*  As
a  natural  consequence,  the  area  over  which  the  device
of  guarantees  can  be  employed,  and,  therefore,  the  segregation
of  waiting  from  uncertainty-bearing  brought  about,  has  been
greatly  extended.

§  4.  This   device   is   not,  however,  the   only   method   by

People's  Banks  limited  liability  is  the  universal  rule.  On  the  other  hand,  in
the  People's  Banks  of  Italy  and  originally,  before  their  absorption  by  the
Imperial  Federation,  in  the  Raiffeisen  Banks  of  Germany  (except  that  the  law
insists  on  some  small  shares)  the  method  of  unlimited  liability  was  adopted,
for  the  reason  that  the  poor  people,  for  whom  the  banks  were  designed,  would  find
diCBculty  in  becoming  shareholders  to  any  substantial  extent.

^  Of.  Brace,  TTie  Value  of  Organized  Speculation,  p.  142.

2  Cf.  Fisher,  The  FuUe  of  Interest,  p.  208.

»  Q\ioted  by  Watkins,  The  Growth  of  Large  Fortimes,  p.  42.

*  Ibid.  pp.  48-9.


146  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

which  modern  ingenuity  has  broken  up  the  complex  unit
of  capital  into  its  component  parts.  It  enables  waiting  to
be  separated  from  "  uncertainty-bearing."  But  uncertainty-
bearing  is  itself  not  a  single  simple  thing.  To  expose  a
£  to  an  even  chance  of  becoming  21s.  or  19  s.  is  a  different
thing  from  exposing  it  to  an  even  chance  of  becoming
39s.  lOd.  or  2d.  There  are,  in  short,  a  great  number  of
different  schemes  of  uncertainty  which  different  people  are
ready  to  shoulder.  Over  against  these  there  are  a  great  number
of  different  schemes  of  uncertainty  which  the  undertaking
of  various  business  enterprises  involves.  It  is  evident  that
what  is  offered  can  be  adjusted  to  what  is  wanted  more
satisfactorily  when  any  given  demand  of  industry  can  be
met  by  combining  together  a  number  of  different  schemes  that
individually  do  not  fit  with  it.  This  can  now  be  done.
When  enterprises,  for  which  capital  had  to  be  provided  by
several  people,  were  worked  on  the  partnership  plan,  all
those  concerned  submitted  the  resources  invested  by  them
to  the  same  scheme  of  uncertainty.  Consequently,  unless
a  sufficient  number  of  people  could  be  found  ready  to  under-
take that  particular  scheme  of  uncertainty,  profitable  industries
were  liable  to  be  hung  up.  In  the  modern  world  this  difficulty
has  been,  in  great  part,  overcome  by  the  device,  which  joint
stock  companies  now  invariably  adopt,  of  raising  capital  by
means  of  different  grades  of  security.  Instead  of  an  arrange-
ment, under  which  every  pound  invested  in  an  enterprise
is  submitted  to  the  same  scheme  of  uncertainty,  we  have
systems  of  capitalisation  combining  debentures,  cumulative
preference  shares,  non-cumulative  preference  shares,  ordinary
shares,  and  sometimes  further  special  sub-varieties.  Each
of  these  classes  of  security  represents  a  different  scheme,
or  sort,  of  uncertainty-bearing.  This  specialisation  of  shares
into  a  number  of  different  classes  has  the  same  kind  of  effect  in
facilitating  the  distribution  of  resources  in  the  way  most
advantageous  to  the  national  dividend  as  the  simpler  specialisa-
tion into  two  grades,  one  involving  some  uncertainty  and  the
other  involving  none.

§   5.  There    is    yet    one    more    form    of    specialisation.
Hitherto  we  have  tacitly  assumed  that  a  given  type  of  holding


cH.v  IMPERFECT  DIVISIBILITY  147

in  a  company  wiU  always  remain  what  it  was  when  it  was  first
taken  up.  In  fact,  however,  this  is  obviously  not  so :  as  a
company  becomes  established,  holdings  that  at  first  involved
much  uncertainty-bearing  often  cease  to  do  so.  The  modern
system  of  industrial  finance  enables  adjustment  to  be  made  to
this  fact,  so  that  shares  of  companies  are  in  general  held  by  one
set  of  people  while  the  companies  are  new,  and  by  a  different
set  of  people  when  they  become  established.  Thus,  when  an
important  "  proposition "  is  floated,  the  funds  are  provided
in  the  first  instance  by  a  contributing  syndicate — or  are
guaranteed  by  an  underwriting  syndicate — consisting  of
persons  who  are  willing  to  risk  large  losses  in  the  hope  of
large  gains  but  are  not  prepared  to  lock  up  their  capital  for
long.  The  syndicate  in  its  early  stages  may  succeed  in
disposing  of  many  shares  to  speculators  on  margins  and
others  who  are  similarly  willing  to  provide  uncertainty-
bearing  but  not  waiting ;  ^  and  these,  in  turn,  after  a  short
"  flutter,"  may  sell  again  to  others  like  unto  themselves.  At
a  later  stage,  when  trial  has  shown  what  the  concern  is
really  like,  and  so  has  greatly  reduced  the  element  of
uncertainty-bearing  involved  in  taking  up  its  shares,
the  "  investing  public,"  those  who  are  anxious  to  furnish
waiting  alone,  come  into  the  field  and  purchase  the  shares.
In  this  way  providers  of  uncertainty-bearing  and  providers
of  waiting  are  both  afibrded  an  opportunity  of  playing  the
parts  for  which  they  are  respectively  fitted.

§  6.  The  broad  result  of  these  modem  developments
has  been  to  break  up  into  simple  and  convenient  parts  the
compound  units  in  terms  of  which  it  was  formerly  necessary
for  capital  transactions  to  be  conducted.  In  transactions
affecting  labour  and  land — apart  from  the  fact,  to  be  examined
in  Part  III.,  that  the  family  must  sometimes  be  taken  as
the  unit  of  migration — there  has  never  been  any  great
complexity  in  the  units.  In  the  field  of  "  enterprise  "  com-
plexity still  rules,  in  so  far  as  employing  power  can  only
find  an  engagement  if  it  brings  with  it  a  certain  amount  of
capital.  But  the  advent  of  salaried  managers,  working  on
behalf  of  joint  stock  companies,  has  done  much  to  break  down
*  For  details  cf.  Meade,  Corporation  Finance,  pp.  153-7.


148  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  u

the  complex  unit  here  also.  In  general,  therefore,  we  may
conclude  that,  in  the  modern  world,  complexity  in  the
structure  of  the  units  in  which  transactions  are  conducted
is  not  an  important  hindrance  to  adjustments  making  for
equality  of  returns  in  different  occupations.


#•


CHAPTEE    Vr


DIVERGENCES    BETWEEN    MARGINAL   SOCIAL   NET    PRODUCT    AND
MARGINAL   TRADE   NET    PRODUCT

§  1.  We  now  return  to  the  caution  set  out  in  the  last
section  of  Chapter  III.  The  returns  per  unit  to  resources  in
certain  uses  may  differ  from  the  value  of  their  marginal  social
net  product.  When  this  happens,  an  arrangement  which  makes
returns  equal  may  make  the  values  of  marginal  social  net
products  unequal,  and,  consequently,  certain  specific  acts  of
interference  with  normal  economic  processes  may  be  expected,
not  to  diminish,  but  to  increase  the  national  dividend.  In
developing  this  thesis  the  first  step  is  to  distinguish  between
the  social  net  product  of  any  unit  of  investment  and  the
trade  net  product.  By  the  "  social  net  product "  is  meant  the
aggregate  contribution  made  to  the  national  dividend ;  by  the
"  trade  net  product,"  the  contribution  (which  may  be  either
greater  or  less  than  the  above)  that  is  capable  of  being  sold
and  the  proceeds  added  to  the  earnings  of  those  responsible
for  the  industry  under  review.  It  is  evident  that,  in  general,
industrialists  are  interested,  not  in  the  social,  but  only  in
the  trade,  net  product  of  their  operations.  Clearly,  therefore,
there  is  no  reason  to  expect  that  self-interest  will  tend  to
bring  about  equality  'between  the  values  of  the  marginal
social  net  products  of  investment  in  different  industries,
when  the  values  of  social  net  product  and  of  trade  net
product  in  those  industries  diverge.  But  there  does  seem
reason  to  expect  that  self-interest  will  tend  to  bring  about
equality  in  the  values  of  marginal  trade  net  products,
because  prima  facie  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  pro-
duct  of  resources  in   any   occupation  must  be  equal  to  the

149


150  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

returns  per  unit  yielded  there.  In  the  present  chapter  I
shall  provisionally  assume  that  this  is  in  fact  so.  On  this
assumption  we  may  lay  it  down  that  the  value  of  the
marginal  social  net  product,  in  any  selected  industry,  will
exceed  or  fall  short  of  the  value  of  the  marginal  social  net
product  yielded  in  the  generality  of  industries,  by  the  amount
by  which  it  exceeds  or  falls  short  of  the  value  of  the  marginal
trade  net  product  in  the  selected  industry.  I  shall  proceed,
therefore,  to  examine  the  various  circumstances  in  which
the  values  of  the  social  net  product  and  the  trade  net  product
of  any  given  (r*^)  increment  of  investment  in  an  industry
diverge  from  one  another  in  either  direction.  There  are
certain  general  sorts  of  divergence  that  are  liable  to  occur
even  under  conditions  of  simple  competition,  certain  additional
sorts  that  may  be  introduced  under  conditions  of  monopolistic
competition,  and  yet  others  that  may  be  introduced  under
conditions  of  bilateral  monopoly.

^  2.  The  source  of  the  general  divergences  that  occur
under  simple  competition  is  that,  in  some  occupations,  a  part
of  the  effects  of  employing  a  unit  of  resources  fails  to  be
reflected  in  the  remuneration  of  the  person  responsible  for  the
investment.  Such  failure,  when  it  occurs,  is  usually  the  result
of  practical  and  technical  difficulties  impeding  complete  adjust-
ment ;  and  these  difficulties  are,  of  course,  various.  We  may
consider  first  resources  that  are  invested  to  build  up,  or  to
improve,  a  durable  instrument  of  production  by  persons  who
do  not  own  the  instrument  but  only  hold  a  lease  of  it  for  a
limited  period  of  time.  The  extent  to  which  the  actual  owners
of  durable  instruments  leave  the  work  of  maintaining  and
improving  them  to  temporary  occupiers  varies,  of  course,
in  different  industries  and  is  largely  determined  by  con-
siderations of  technical  convenience.  It  also  depends  in
part  upon  tradition  and  custom,  and  is  further  liable  to  vary
in  different  places  with  the  comparative  wealth  of  the  owners
and  the  occupiers.  It  appears,  for  example,  that  in  Ireland,
owing  to  the  poverty  of  many  landlords,  the  kinds  of  expendi-
ture on  land  which  they  leave  wholly  to  their  tenants  are
more  numerous  than  in  England.^  Details  thus  vary,  but
^  Cf.  Bonn,  Modem  Ireland,  p.  63.


CH.VI        SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PEODUCT         151

there  can  be  no  doubt  that  over  a  wide  field  some  part  of
the  investment  designed  to  improve  durable  instruments
of  production  is  often  made  by  persons  other  than  their
owners.  "Whenever  this  happens,  some  divergence  between
the  trade  and  the  social  net  product  of  this  investment  is
liable  to  occur,  and  is  larger  or  smaller  in  extent  according
to  the  terms  of  the  contract  between  lessor  and  lessee.  These
terms  we  have  now  to  consider.

§  3.  The  social  net  product  of  an  assigned  dose  of
investment  being  given,  the  trade  net  product  will  fall  short
of  it  by  an  especially  large  amount  under  a  system  which
merely  provides  for  the  return  of  the  instrument  to  the
owner,  at  the  end  of  the  lease,  in  the  condition  in  which
the  instrument  then  happens  to  be.  Under  this  arrangement,
the  trade  net  product  of  any  r^^  increment  of  investment
falls  short  of  the  social  net  product  by  nearly  the  whole
of  the  deferred  benefit  which  would  be  conferred  upon
the  instrument.  It  need  not  fall  short  of  it  by  quite  the
whole  of  this  deferred  benefit,  because  a  tenant,  who  is  known
to  leave  hired  instruments  in  good  condition,  is  likely  to
obtain  them  more  easily  and  on  better  terms  than  one  who
is  known  not  to  do  this.  So  far,  careful  tenancy  yields  an
element  of  trade,  as  well  as  of  social,  net  product.  Since,
however,  separate  contracts  are  often  made  at  considerable
intervals  of  time,  this  qualification  is  not  especially  important.
Passing  it  over,  therefore,  we  notice  that,  since  the  effects
of  investment  in  improving  and  maintaining  instruments
generally  exhaust  themselves  after  a  while,  the  contraction  of
trade  net  product  below  social  net  product,  which  the  form  of
tenancy  just  described  brings  about,  is  not  likely  to  be  con-
siderable in  the  earlier  years  of  a  long  lease.  In  the  later
years  of  such  a  lease,  however,  and  during  the  whole  period
of  a  short  lease,  it  may  be  very  considerable.  Indeed,
it  is  often  found  that,  towards  the  close  of  his  tenancy,  a
farmer,  in  the  natural  and  undisguised  endeavour  to  get  back
as  much  of  his  capital  as  possible,  takes  so  much  out  of  the
land  that,  for  some  years  afterwards,  the  yield  is  markedly
reduced.^

^  Cf.  Nicholson,  Principles  of  Economics,  vol.  i.  p.  418.


152  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

§  4.  The  form  of  tenancy  just  described  is  obviously
illustrated  by  that  primitive  type  of  contract  between  landlord
and  tenant,  in  which  nothing  is  said  about  the  condition
of  the  land  at  the  end  of  the  lease.  But  it  is  by  no  means
confined  to  this  type  of  contract.  Another  very  important
field  in  which  it  is  present  is  that  of  "  concessions "  to  gas
companies,  electric  lighting  companies  and  so  forth.  An
arrangement  under  which  the  plant  of  a  concessionaire
company  passes  ultimately,  without  compensation,  into  the
hands  of  the  town  chartering  it,  corresponds  exactly  to  the
system  of  land  leases  without  provision  for  compensation  for
tenants'  improvements.  Such  an  arrangement  governs  the
Berlin  Tramways.  The  Company's  charter  provides  that,
"  at  the  end  of  the  contract,  all  property  of  the  road  located
in  the  city  streets,  including  poles,  wires,  any  waiting-rooms
built  on  city  property,  and  patents,  come  into  the  possession
of  the  city  without  charge."  ^  From  the  present  point  of
view,  this  system  is  similar  to  that  of  the  British  Tramways
Act  of  1870  and  Electric  Lighting  Act  of  1881,  which
provide  for  the  taking  over  of  the  company's  plant  "  upon
terms  of  paying  the  then  value  (exclusive  of  any  allowance  for
past  or  future  profits  of  the  undertaking,  or  any  compensation
for  compulsory  sale  or  other  consideration  whatever)."  For
the  "  reproduction  cost,"  which  value  in  this  sense  seems
to  represent,  of  a  concern  established  many  years  back  bears
very  little  relation  to  the  quantity  of  investment  originally
made  in  it.  On  the  one  hand,  the  physical  cost  of  replacing  the
plant  is  likely,  through  the  progress  of  industry,  to  be  quite
different  from  the  cost  of  setting  it  up  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
the  expenses  of  advertisement,  including  the  supply  of  service
at  a  loss  with  a  view  to  establishing  a  connection  and  building
up  goodwill,  are  not  counted  in  reproduction  cost  at  all.  It
follows  that,  under  the  German  and  English  plans  alike,  the
terminating  franchise  system  must,  unless  some  plan  is
adopted  to  obviate  that  result,^  reduce  the  trade  net  product

^  Beamish,  Municipal  Problems,  p.  565.

2  Of  course,  the  English  plan  is  not  so  severe  as  the  German  in  respect  of
investments  in  plant  made  near  to  the  close  of  the  lease  ;  for,  presumably,  for
a  short  time  the  cost  of  manufacturing  such  plant  will  remain  fairly  constant.
But  for  investments  designed  to  create  goodwill,  and,  through   this,   future


cH.vi        SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PEODUCT         153

of  investments  in  extensions  and  so  forth  considerably  below
their  social  net  product,  thus  causing  them  to  be  carried  less
far  than  the  best  interests  of  the  national  dividend
require.  Furthermore,  it  is  obvious  that  the  restrictive
influence  will  be  most  marked  towards  the  close  of  the  con-
cession period.  In  view  of  this  fact,  M.  Colson  recommends  a
policy,  under  which  negotiations  for  the  renewal  of  concession
charters  would  be  taken  up  some  15  or  20  years  before  these
charters  are  due  to  expire.^

§  5.  The  deficiency  of  the  trade,  as  compared  with  the
social,  net  product  of  any  r*^  increment  of  investment,  which
arises  in  connection  with  what  I  have  called  the  primitive  type
of  tenancy  contracts,  can  be  mitigated  in  various  degrees
by  compensation  schemes.  These  may  conveniently  be
illustrated  from  the  recent  history  of  land  tenure.  Arrange-
ments can  be  made  for  "  compensating "  tenants  when  they
leave  their  holdings  for  whatever  injury  or  benefit  they  may
have  caused  to  the  land.  Negative  compensation  for  injury
is   practically  everywhere   provided   for  in  the  terms  of  the


business,  it  is  exactly  similar.  Thus,  after  the  agreement  of  1905,  by
which  the  Post  Office  undertook  to  buy  up  in  1911  such  part  of  the  National
Telephone  Company's  plant  as  proved  suitable,  at  the  cost  of  replacement,  the
Chairman  of  the  Company  stated  that  "the  Company  would  not  attempt  to
build  up  business  that  would  require  nursing  as  well  as  time  to  develop  ;
it  would  confine  itself  to  operations  that  from  the  start  would  pay  interest  and
all  other  proper  charges  "  (H.  Meyer,  Public  Oicnersh  ip  and  the  Telephones,  p.
309).  A  device  for  getting  over  the  difficulty  considered  in  the  text  was  embodied
in  the  contract  extending  the  franchise  of  the  Berlin  Tramway  Company  to  1919.
This  contract  provided,  inter  aliu  :  "If,  during  the  life  of  the  contract,  the  city
authorities  require  extensions  within  the  city  limits,  which  are  not  specified  in
the  contract,  the  company  must  build  as  much  as  93  miles,  double  track  being
oonnted  as  single.  But  the  company  should  receive  from  the  city  one-third  of
the  cost  of  construction  of  all  lines  ordered  between  Jan.  1,  1902,  and  Jan.  1,
1907  ;  and  one-half  of  the  cost  on  all  lines  ordered  between  Jan.  1,  1908,  and  Jan.
1,  1914.  For  all  lines  ordered  after  that  the  city  must  pay  the  fall  costs  of  con-
struction, or  a  full  allowance  towards  the  cost  of  operation,  as  determined  by
later  agreement  The  overhead  trolley  was  to  be  employed  at  first,  except  where
the  city  demanded  storage  batteries  ;  but,  if  any  other  motor  system  should
later  prove  practicable  and  in  the  judgment  of  the  city  authorities  should  appear
more  suitable,  the  company  may  introduce  it ;  and,  if  the  city  authorities
request,  the  company  must  introduce  it.  If  increased  cost  accrue  to  the
company  thereby,  due  allowance  being  made  for  benefits  obtained  from  the  new
system,  the  city  must  indemnify  the  company  "  (Beamish,  Municipal  Problems,
p,  563).

^  Cf,  Colson,  Coura  cC6co7u>mie  politique,  vol.  vi.  p.  419.


154  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

leases.  In  its  simplest  form  it  consists  in  monetary-
penalties  for  failure  on  the  part  of  tenants  to  return  their
land  to  the  owner  in  "  tenantable  repair."  These  penalties
may  be  made  operative  directly,  through  an  explicit  legal
contract ;  or  they  may  be  made  operative  indirectly,  by  a
rule  forbidding  the  tenant  to  depart  from  the  local  customs
of  husbandry ;  or,  again,  they  may  be  made  operative  through
a  modification  in  this  rule  concerning  local  customs,  so
arranged  as  to  free  enterprising  tenants  from  the  burden
which  the  rule  in  its  simple  form  imposes,  without  sacrificing
the  purpose  of  the  rule.  Thus,  under  the  Agricultural
Holdings  Act,  1906,  a  tenant  may  depart  from  local  custom,
or  even  from  a  contract,  as  to  cropping  arable  land,  provided
that  he  shall  make  "  suitable  and  adequate  provision  to
protect  the  holding  from  injury  or  deterioration " — except
in  the  year  before  the  expiration  of  the  contract  of  tenancy.
If  the  tenant's  action  under  this  section  does  injure  the
holding,  the  landlord  is  entitled  to  recover  damages  and
to  obtain,  if  necessary,  an  injunction  against  the  continuance
of  the  tenant's  conduct.  Positive  compensation  was  of  some-
what later  growth.  Rules  about  it  were  at  first  a  matter  of
voluntary  arrangement  in  the  yearly  leases  made  by  landlords.
Mr.  Taylor  quotes  a  Yorkshire  lease,  in  which  the  landlord
covenants  to  allow  the  tenant  "  what  two  different  persons
shall  deem  reasonable,"  in  payment  for  the  capital  put  into
the  land  in  the  course  of  ordinary  farming  operations  during
the  last  two  years  of  the  lease.^  Gradually,  compensation
schemes  have  been  given  a  legal  status.  Something  in  this
direction  was  done  in  Ireland  under  the  Act  of»  1870 — the
need  for  it  being  specially  great  in  a  country  where  the  English
custom,  under  which  the  landlord  provides  the  buildings
and  permanent  improvements,  seldom  applied.^  In  1875  an
Act  laying  down  conditions  for  compensating  the  outgoing
tenant  in  England  and  Wales  was  passed,  but  contracting-
out  was  permitted.  In  1883  a  new  Act,  the  Agricultural
Holdings  Act,  was  passed,  in  which  contracting-out  was
forbidden.       This   Act   distinguished    between    improvements

1  Cf.  Taylor,  Agricultural  Economics,  p.  305.
'  Of.  Smith-Gordon  and  Staples,  Rural  Heconstrv^lion  in  Ireland,  p.  20.


cH.vi        SOCIAL  AND  TRADE  NET  PRODUCT         155

for  which  the  landlord's  consent  was  necessary  and  those
for  which  it  was  not  necessary.^  Scotland  is  now  under  a
similar  Act.  It  has  largely  superseded  the  old  long  leases,
and  these  are  now  practically  being  modified  out  of  existence.^
In  the  detailed  drafting  of  all  Acts  of  this  class  difficulty  is
caused  by  the  fact  that  some  "  improvements "  do  not  add
to  the  enduring  value  of  the  estate  the  equivalent  of  their
cost  of  production.  If  the  compensation  for  these  improve-
ments is  based  upon  their  cost,  the  trade  net  product  is
raised  above  the  social  net  product.  In  practice,  this  danger
is  largely  overcome  by  the  rejection  of  initial  cost  as  a  basis
of  compensation  value,  coupled  with  the  requirement  of  the
landlord's  consent  to  some  kinds  of  improvement.  Under
the  Town  Tenants  (Ireland)  Act,  1906,  for  example,  when
a  tenant  proposes  to  make  an  improvement,  he  must  give
notice  to  the  landlord,  and,  if  the  latter  objects,  the  question
whether  the  improvement  is  reasonable,  and  will  add  to
the  letting  value  of  the  holding,  is  determined  by  the  County
Court.  But  even  on  this  plan  the  trade  net  product  may
be  slightly  in  excess.  In  order  that  trade  and  social  net
product  may  coalesce,  the  value  of  an  improvement,  for
compensation  purposes,  should  in  strictness  be  estimated
subject  to  the  fact  that,  at  interchanges  of  tenants,  the
land  may  stand  for  a  time  unlet,  and  that  during  this  time
the  improvement  is  not  likely  to  yield  its  full  annual  value.
If  this  is  not  done,  it  will  pay  a  tenant  to  press  investment
slightly — very  slightly — further  than  it  will  pay  either  the
landlord  or  society  to  have  it  pressed ;  and  hence,  where,  as
in  market-gardening,  improvements  can  be  made  without
the  landlord's  consent,  it  will  check  landlords  from  letting
land.  It  is,  thus,  theoretically  an  error  in  the  Agricultural
Holdings  Act  of  1906,  that  it  defines  the  compensation,
which  an  outgoing  tenant  may  claim  for  improvements,  as
"  such  sum  as  fairly  represents  the  value  of  the  improvements
to  an  incoming  tenant."  The  standard  ought  to  be  "the
value  to  the  landlord."  But  when,  as  is  usual,  improvements
exhaust  themselves   in   a  few   years,   the   practical   effect  of

*  Cf.  Taylor,  Agricultural  Ecmurmies,  pp.  313  e^  scq.
2  IMd.  p.  320.


156  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

this  slight  error  is  negligible,  and  does  not  cause  the  trade
and  social  net  products  of  any  r^^  increment  of  investment
to  diverge  appreciably.

§  6.  These  compensation  arrangements,  as  so  far  considered,
possess  one  obvious  weakness,  which  generally  impedes  the
adjustment  they  are  designed  to  effect  between  trade  and
social  net  product.  It  is  true  that  a  tenant  can  claim
compensation  for  improvements  on  quitting.  But  he  knows
that  the  rent  may  be  raised  against  him  on  the  strength  of
his  improvements,  and  his  compensation  claim  does  not  come
into  force  unless  he  takes  the  extreme  step  of  giving  up  his
farm.  Hence,  the  trade  net  product  of  investment  is  still  con-
tracted below  the  social  net  product.  This  result  is  partially
mitigated  under  the  Agricultural  Holdings  Act  of  1906,
where  it  is  provided  that :  "  When  the  landlord,  without  good
and  sufficient  cause,  and  for  reasons  inconsistent  with  good
estate  management,  terminates  a  tenancy  by  notice  to  quit,"
or  when  the  tenant  leaves  in  consequence  of  a  proved  demand
for  increased  rent  consequent  upon  tenants'  improvements,  the
tenant  may  claim,  not  merely  compensation  for  the  improve-
ments, but  also  "  compensation  for  the  loss  or  expense  directly
attributable  to  his  quitting  the  holding,"  in  connection  with
the  sale  or  removal  of  household  goods,  implements  of
husbandry,  and  so  forth.  The  above  remedy  is,  however,
defective  in  several  respects.  In  the  first  place,  since  a
tenant  quitting  his  holding  under  the  conditions  contemplated
obtains  no  compensation  for  the  loss  of  "  good-will "  or  the
non-monetary  inconveniences  of  a  change  of  home,  he  will
still  be  very  unwilling  to  leave,  and  the  landlord  will  still
possess  a  powerful  weapon  with  which  to  force  him  to  consent
to  an  increase  of  rent.  And,  in  the  second  place,  notice  to
quit  on  account  of  sale  is  not  held  to  be  "  incompatible  with
good  estate  management."  Consequently,  when  the  land
farmed  by  a  sitting  tenant  is  sold  by  one  landlord  to  another,
the  tenant,  if  he  leaves,  obtains  no  secondary  compensation  of
the  kind  just  described.  He  will,  therefore,  be  even  more
unwilling  to  leave.  Should  he  elect,  however,  to  rent  the
farm  under  the  new  landlord,  he  "  is  liable  to  the  rent  on  any
improvement  which  he  has  executed,  without  receiving  any


cH.vi        SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PEODUCT         15  V

compensation."  ^  It  is  probably  a  recognition  of  this  danger
that  has  given  rise  to  the  growing  demand  among  farmers  for
legislation  permitting  them,  when  the  landlord  wishes  to  sell,
to  purchase  their  holdings  on  the  basis  of  the  old  rent.  A
provision  for  secondary  compensation  on  disturbance  similar
to  that  of  the  Agricultural  Holdings  Act  is  contained  in  the
Town  Tenants  (Ireland)  Act,  1906.  Here,  under  the  circum-
stances specified,  compensation  may  also  be  claimed  for  "  good-
will." "  But  even  with  this  provision  it  is  apparent  that  the
adjustment  secured  cannot  be  more  than  partial.

§  7.  In  view  of  these  imperfections  in  compensation
arrangements,  it  is  often  contended,  in  effect,  that  for  a  really
adequate  adjustment,  not  merely  compensation  for  tenants
vacating  their  holdings,,  but  legal  security  of  tenure  coupled
with  the  legal  prohibition  of  renting  tenants'  improvements,  is
required.  Of  course,  in  some  circumstances  the  state  of  things
which  this  policy  is  designed  to  bring  about  is  attained  with-
out any  legislative  intervention.  In  Belgium,  for  example,
it  is  substantially  established  everywhere  by  the  force  of
custom :  ^  and,  no  doubt,  many  English  landlords  conduct  the
management  of  their  estates  in  a  like  spirit.  It  is  plain,
however,  that  the  willingness  of  landlords  to  refrain  from
using  economic  power  for  their  own  advantage,  when  the  use
of  this  power  is  permitted  by  law,  cannot  always  be  assumed ;
indeed,  if  it  could  be  assumed,  the  whole  elaborate  develop-
ment of  compensation  laws,  which  we  have  been  discussing,

^  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Tenant  Farmers  [Cd.  6030],  p.  6.  Notice  given
to  a  sitting  tenant  on  the  ground  that  his  land  is  wanted  for  buUding  is  also
"  not  incompatible  with  good  husbandry  "  and  carries  no  secondary  compensation.
There  would  plainly  be  danger  in  the  grant  of  such  compensation  here,  since  it
would  encourage  the  investment  of  resources  in  agricultural  improvements  at
the  cost  of  a  more  than  equivalent  social  injury  in  postponing  the  use  for
building  of  land  that  has  become  ripe  for  it.

2  The  argument  for  compensation,  it  should  be  noted,  is  not  that  it  would
benefit  the  tenant.  Professor  Nicholson  is  right  when  he  observes  "that
compensation  for  improvements  will  not  benefit  the  tenant  so  much  as  is
generally  supposed,  because  the  privilege  itself  will  have  a  pecuniary  value  ;
that  is  to  say,  a  landlord  will  demand,  and  the  tenant  can  afford  to  give,  a
higher  rent  in  proportion.  Under  the  old  improving  leases,  as  they  were
called,  the  rent  was  low  because  ultimately  the  permanent  improvements  were
to  go  to  the  landlord  "  {Principles  of  Economics,  vol.  i.  p.  322).  Cf.  Morison's
account  of  Indian  arrangements  {The  IvdvMrial  Organisation  of  an  Indian
Province,  pp.  154-5).

'  Cf.  Rowntree,  Land  and  Labour,  p.  129.


158  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

would  have  been  unnecessary.  We  are  thus  led  forward  to  a
consideration  of  the  policy  of  legally  enforced  security  of
tenure  plus  "  fair  rents."  In  the  way  of  this  policy
there  are  two  principal  difficulties.  In  the  first  place,  the
security  of  tenure  that  is  granted  cannot  be  absolute ;  for,  if
it  were,  considerable  economic  waste  might  sometimes  result.
It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  security  must  be  conditional
upon  reasonably  good  farming.  Furthermore,  it  must  be
"  conditional  upon  the  land  not  being  required  in  the  public
interest,  whether  for  small  holdings,  allotments,  labourers'
cottages,  urban  development,  the  working  of  minerals,  or  the
making  of  water-courses,  roads,  and  sanitary  works.  When  it
is  required  for  any  of  these  purposes  the  Land  Court  should
have  the  power  to  terminate  the  tenancy,  while  ensuring
adequate  compensation  to  the  tenant."  -^  The  precise  drafting
of  appropriate  conditions  is  not  likely  to  prove  altogether  easy.
In  the  second  place,  security  of  tenure  being  plainly  illusory
if  the  landlord  can  force  the  tenant  to  give  notice  by  arbitrary
increases  of  rent,  it  is  necessary  that  fair  rents  be  somehow
enforced.  This  cannot  be  done  by  a  mere  prohibition  of  any
increases  of  rent,  for  in  some  circumstances  an  increase  would
be  fair.  There  would  be  no  justice,  for  example,  in  taking  from
the  landlord  and  giving  to  the  tenant  the  benefit  of  an  addition
to  the  value  of  the  land  brought  about  by  some  general  change
in  agricultural  prices  wholly  independent  of  the  tenant's  action.
Hence,  this  policy  seems  to  involve  the  setting  up  of  a  tribunal
to  fix  rents,  or,  at  all  events,  to  settle  disputes  about  rents
when  invoked  for  that  purpose.  Were  the  Land  Court,  or
whatever  the  body  set  up  may  be,  omniscient  and  all-wise
there  would,  indeed,  be  no  objection  to  this.  But,  in  view  of
the  necessary  imperfection  of  all  human  institutions,  there  is
some  danger  that  a  tenant  may  be  tempted  deliberately  to  let
down  the  value  of  his  holding,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a
reduced  rent.  Under  the  Irish  system  of  judicial  rents,  a
defence  against  this  abuse  is  nominally  provided  in  the  form
of  permission  to  the  Courts  to  refuse  revision.  But  this
remedy  is  not  utilised  in  practice.  Very  often,  "  not  pro-
ductivity, but  production,  and  more  especially  the  evidences  of
*  Land  Ervquiry  Beport,  p.  378.


I


cH.vi        SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PEODUCT         159

production  in  the  fifteenth  year,  were  the  determining  factors  "
in  rent  revision.^  Professor  Bonn  illustrates  the  result  thus :
"  Two  brothers  divided  a  farm  into  two  shares  of  equal  values
— the  good  husbandman  got  a  rent  reduction  from  the  Courts
of  7^  per  cent,  the  bad  got  one  of  17|-  per  cent"  ^  It  is  not,
therefore,  by  any  means  obvious  that  the  policy  of  fixity  of
tenure  and  judicial  rents  will  really  bring  marginal  trade  net
product  and  marginal  social  net  product  more  closely  together
than  they  are  brought  by  simple  compensation  laws.  The
gap  between  the  two  marginal  net  products  can  only  be
completely  closed  if  the  person  who  owns  the  land  and  the
person  who  makes  investments  in  it  are  the  same.  But  this
arrangement  is  frequently  uneconomic  in  other  ways.  For,
especially  when  the  farmers  are  small  men,  they  are  likely,  as
owners,  to  find  much  difficulty  in  raising  the  capital  required
for  those  larger  improvements  which,  under  the  English  land-
system,  it  is  now  usual  for  the  landlord  to  undertake.  It  is
beyond  the  scope  of  this  volume  to  attempt  a  detailed  discus-
sion of  the  controversial  topics  thus  opened  up.  What  has
been  said,  however,  wiU  suffice  to  illustrate  one  type  of  dis-
crepancy between  marginal  trade  net  product  and  marginal
social  net  product,  that  is  liable  to  arise  in  occupations  where
resources  have  to  be  invested  in  durable  instruments  by  persons
who  do  not  own  the  instruments.

§  8.  I  now  turn  to  a  group  of  causes  of  divergence
between  social  and  trade  net  product  which  are  not  dependent
on  this  peculiar  condition.  Here  the  essence  of  the  matter
is  that  one  person  A,  in  the  course  of  rendering  some  service,
for  which  payment  is  made,  to  a  second  person  B,  incidentally
also  renders  services  or  disservices  to  other  persons  C,  D  and
E,  of  such  a  sort  that  technical  considerations  prevent
payment  being  exacted  from  the  benefited  parties  or  com-
pensation being  enforced  on  behalf  of  the  injured  parties.
If  we  were  to  be  pedantically  loyal  to  the  definition  of  the
national  dividend  given  in  Chapter  III.  of  Part  I.,  it  would  be
necessary  to  distinguish  further  between  industries  in  which
the  uncompensated   benefit  or  burden  respectively  is  and  is

'  Smith-Gotdon  and  Staples,  Sural  Beamstrtution  in  Ireltmd,  p.  24.
2  Bonn,  Modem  Ireland,  p.  113.


160  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

not  one  that  can  be  readily  brought  into  relation  with  the
measuring  rod  of  money.  This  distinction,  however,  would  be
of  formal  rather  than  of  real  importance,  and  would  obscure
rather  than  illuminate  the  main  issues.  I  shall,  therefore,
in  the  examples  I  am  about  to  give,  deliberately  pass  it  over.

^Xmong  these  examples  we  may  set  out  first  a  number  of
instances  in  which  marginal  trade  net  product  falls  short
of  marginal  social  net  product,  because  incidental  services
are  performed  to  third  parties  from  whom  it  is  technically
difficult  to  exact  payment.  Thus,  as  Sidgwick  observes,
"  it  may  easily  happen  that  the  benefits  of  a  well-placed  light-
house must  be  largely  enjoyed  by  ships  on  which  no  toll
could  be  conveniently  levied."  ^  Again,  uncompensated
services  are  rendered  when  resources  are  invested  in  private
pai:ks  in^  cities ;  for  these,  even  though  the  public  is  not
admitted  to  them,  improve  the  air  of  the  neighbourhood.
The  same  thing  is  true — though  here  allowance  should  be
made  for  a  detriment  elsewhere — of  resources  invested
in  roads  and  tramways  that  increase  the  value  of  the
adjoining  land — except,  indeed,  where  a  special  betterment
rate,  corresponding  to  the  improvements  they  enjoy,  is  levied
on  the  owners  of  this  land.  It  is  true,  in  like  manner,  of
resources  devoted  to  afforestation,  since  the  beneficial  effect
on  climate  often  extends  beyond  the  borders  of  the  estates
owned  by  the  person  responsible  for  the  forest.  It  is  true
also  of  resources  invested  in  lamps  erected  at  the  doors  of
private  houses,  for  these  necessarily  throw  light  also  on  the
streets.^  It  is  true  of  resources  devoted  to  the  prevention
of  smoke   from  factory  chimneys :  ^  for  this   smoke  in  large

^  Principles  of  Political  EcoTwmy,  p.  406.

2  Cf.  Smart,  Studies  in  Ecotiomics,  p.  314.

3  It  has  been  said  that  in  London,  owing  to  the  smoke,  there  is  only  12
per  cent  as  much  sunlight  as  is  astronomically  possible,  and  that  one  fog  in  five
is  directly  caused  by  smoke  alone,  while  all  the  fogs  are  befouled  and  prolonged
by  it  (J.  W.  Graham,  The  Destruction  of  Daylight,  pp.  6  and  24).  It  would
seem  that  mere  ignorance  and  inertia  prevent  the  adoption  of  smoke-preventing
appliances  in  many  instances  where,  through  the  addition  they  would  make  to
the  efficiency  of  fuel,  they  would  be  directly  profitable  to  the  users.  The
general  interest,  however,  requires  that  these  devices  should  be  employed  beyond
the  point  at  which  they  "pay."  There  seems  no  doubt  that,  by  means  of
mechanical  stokers,  hot-air  blasts  and  other  arrangements,  factory  chinmeys  can
be  made  practically  smokeless.  Noxious  fumes  from  alkali  works  are  suppressed
by  the  law  more  vigorously  than  smoke  {ibid.  p.  126).


i:


CH.VI        SOCIAL  AND  TRADE  NET  PRODUCT         161

towns  inflicts  a  heavy  uncharged  loss  on  the  community,  in
injury  to  buildings  and  vegetables,  expenses  for  washing
clothes  and  cleaning  rooms,  expenses  for  the  provision  of
extra  artificial  light,  and  in  many  other  ways.  Lastly  and
most  important  of  all,  it  is  true  of  resources  and  activities
devoted  alike  to  the  fundamental  problems  of  scientific
research,  out  of  which  in  unexpected  ways  discoveries  of  high
practical  utility  often  grow,  and  also  to  the  perfecting  of
inventions  and  improvements  in  industrial  processes.  These
latter  are  often  of  such  a  nature  that  they  can  neither  be
patented  nor  kept  secret,  and,  therefore,  the  whole  of  the
extra  reward  which  they  at  first  bring  to  their  inventor  is  very
quickly  transferred  from  him  to  the  general  public  in  the  form
of  reduced  prices.  The  patent  laws  aim,  in  effect,  at  bringing
marginal  trade  net  product  and  marginal  social  net  product
more  closely  together.  By  offering  the  prospect  of  reward  for
certain  types  of  invention  they  do  not,  indeed,  appreciably  stimu-
late inventive  activity,  which  is,  for  the  most  part,  spontaneous,
but  they  do  direct  it  into  channels  of  general  usefulness.^

Corresponding  to  the  above  investments  in  which  marginal

trade  net  product  falls  short  of  marginal  social  net  product,
there  are  a  number  of  others  in  which,  owing  to  the
technical  difficulty  of  enforcing  compensation  for  incidental
disservices,  marginal  trade  net  product  is  greater  than  marginal
social  net  product.  Thus,  incidental  uncharged  disservices  are
rendered  to  third  parties  when  the  game-preserving  activities
of  one  occupier  involve  the  overrunning  of  a  neighbouring
occupier's  land  by  rabbits — unless,  indeed,  the  two  occupiers
stand  in  the  relation  of  landlord  and  tenant,  so  that  com-
pensation is  given  in  an  adjustment  of  the  rent.  They  are
rendered,  again,  when  the  owner  of  a  site  in  a  residential
quarter  of  a  city  builds  a  factory  there  and  so  destroys  a  great
part  of  the  amenities  of  the  neighbouring  sites ;  or,  in  a  less
degree,  when  he  uses  his  site  in  such  a  way  as  to  spoil
■  the  lighting    of  the   houses   opposite : "    or   when  he  invests

^  Cf.  Taussig,  Inventors  and  Money  Makers,  p.  51.
In  Germany  the  town-planning  schemes  of  most  cities  render  anti-social
action  of  this  kind  impossible  ;  but  in  America  individual  site-owners  appear  to
be  entirely  free,  and  in  England  to  be  largely  free,  to  do  what  they  will  with
their  land.     (Cf.  Howe,  European  Cities  at  Work,  pp.  46,  95,  and  346.)

M


162  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

resources  in  erecting  buildings  in  a  crowded  centre,  which,
by  contracting  the  air  space  and  the  playing-room  of  the
neighbourhood,  tend  to  injure  the  health  and  efficiency  of  the
families  living  there.  Yet  again,  third  parties — this  time
the  public  in  general — suffer  incidental  uncharged  disservices
from  resources  invested  in  the  running  of  motor  cars  that  wear
out  the  surface  of  the  roads.  The  case  is  similar — the
conditions  of  public  taste  being  assumed — with  resources
devoted  to  the  production  and  sale  of  intoxicants.  To  enable
the  social  net  product  to  be  inferred  from  the  trade  net
product  of  a  sovereign  invested  in  this  form  of  production,
the  industry  should,  as  Mr.  Bernard  Shaw  observes,  be
debited  with  the  extra  costs  in  policemen  and  prisons  which
it  indirectly  makes  necessary.^  Exactly  similar  considerations
hold  good  of  certain  sorts  of  foreign  enterprise.  When  the
indirect  effect  of  an  investment  made  abroad,  or  of  the
diplomatic  manoeuvres  employed  in  securing  the  concession
for  it,  is  an  actual  war  or  preparations  to  guard  against
war,  the  cost  of  these  things  ought  to  be  deducted  from
any  interest  that  the  investment  yields  before  its  net  con-
tribution to  the  national  dividend  is  calculated.  When  this
is  done,  the  net  contribution  even  of  investments  which,
as  may  often  happen  in  countries  where  highly  profitable
openings  are  still  un worked  and  hard  bargains  can  be  driven
with  corrupt  officials,  yield  a  very  high  return  to  the
investors,  may  easily  turn  out  to  be  negative.  Yet  again,
when  the  investment  consists  in  a  loan  to  a  foreign  govern-
ment and  makes  it  possible  for  that  government  to  engage
in  a  war  which  otherwise  would  not  have  taken  place,  the
indirect  loss  we  shall  suffer  in  consequence  of  the  impoverish-
ment caused  by  the  war  to  the  rest  of  the  world  should  be
debited  against  the  interest  we  receive.  Here,  too,  there  may
well  be  a  net  loss  to  the  country  as  a  whole.  Perhaps,
however,  the  crowning  illustration  of  this  order  of  excess  of  trade
over  social  net  product  is  afforded  by  the  work  done  by  women
in  factories,  particularly  during  the  periods  immediately
preceding  and  succeeding  confinement;  for  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  this  work  often  carries  with  it,  besides  the  earnings
*  The  Common  Seme  of  Municipal  Trading,  pp.  19-20.


cH.  VI        SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PRODUCT         163

of  the  women  themselves,  grave  injury  to  the  health  of  their
children.^  The  reality  of  this  evil  is  not  disproved  by  the
low,  even  negative,  correlation  which  sometimes  is  found  to
exist  between  the  factory  work  of  mothers  and  the  rate  of
infantile  mortality.  For  in  districts  where  women's  work
of  this  kind  prevails  there  is  presumably — and  this  is  the
cause  of  the  women's  work — great  poverty.  This  poverty,
which  is  obviously  injurious  to  children's  health,  is  likely,
other  things  being  equal,  to  be  greater  than  elsewhere  in
families  where  the  mother  declines  factory  work,  and  it  may
be  that  the  evil  of  the  extra  poverty  is  greater  than  that
of  the  factory  work.*  This  consideration  explains  the
statistical  facts  that  are  known.  They,  therefore,  militate  in
no  way  against  the  view  that,  other  thivgs  equal,  the  factory
work  of  mothers  is  injurious.  All  that  they  tend  to  show  is
that  prohibition  of  such  work  should  be  accompanied  by
relief  to  those  families  whom  the  prohibition  renders
necessitous.'

§  9.  At  this  point  it  is  desirable  to  call  attention  to  a
somewhat  specious  fallacy.  Some  writers  unaccustomed  to
mathematical   analysis    have   imagined   that,   when   improved

1  Cf.  Hutchins,  Eemumic  Journal,  1908,  p.  227.

2  C£.  Newsholme,  Sreond  Beport  oh  Ir^ant  and  Chiid  Mortaliiy  [Od.  6909],
p.  56.  Similar  consideratioiis  to  the  above  hold  good  of  night  work  by  boys.
The  recent  Departmental  Committee  on  Night  Employment  did  not,  indeed,  obtain
any  strong  evidence  that  this  work  injures  the  boys'  health.  But  they  found  that
it  reacts  injuriously  on  their  eflBciency  in  another  way,  i.e.  by  practically  pre-
cluding them  from  continuing  their  education  in  continuation  classes  and  so
forth.  The  theory  of  our  factory  laws  appears  to  be  that  boys  between  14  and  18
should  only  be  permitted  to  work  at  night  upon  continuous  processes  of  such  a  kind
that  great  loss  would  result  if  they  did  not  do  so.  The  practice  of  these  laws,
however,  permits  them  to  be  employed  at  night  on  unnecessary  non-continuous
processes  which  are  carried  out  in  the  same  factory  as  continuous  processes.
Consequently,  the  Committee  recommend  that  in  future  "  such  permits  should
be  granted  in  terms  of  processes,  and  not  of  premises,  factories,  or  parts  of
GKtories  without  reference  to  processes  "  ([Cd.  6503],  p.  17).

^  Cf.  Annual  Beport  of  the  Local  Government  Board,  1909-10,  p.  57.
The  suggestion  that  the  injurious  consequences  of  the  factory  work  of  mothers
can  be  done  away  with,  if  the  factory  worker  gets  some  unmarried  woman  to  look
after  her  home  in  factory  hours,  is  mistaken,  because  it  ignores  the  fact  that  a
woman's  work  has  a  special  personal  value  in  respect  of  her  own  children.  In
Birmingham  this  fact  seems  to  be  recognised,  for,  after  a  little  experience  of
the  bad  results  of  putting  their  children  out  to  ' '  mind,"  married  women  are

•pt,  it  was  said  before  the  war,  to  leave  the  factory  and  take  to  home  work.

(idbury,   Women's  Work,  p.  175.


164  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

methods  of  producing  some  commodities  are  introduced,  the
value  of  the  marginal  social  net  product  of  the  resources
invested  in  developing  these  methods  is  less  than  the  value  of
the  marginal  trade  net  product,  because  there  is  not  included
in  the  latter  any  allowance  for  the  depreciation  which  the
improvement  causes  in  the  value  of  existing  plant ;  and,  as
they  hold,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  value  of  the  marginal
social  net  product,  such  allowance  ought  to  be  included.^  If
this  view  were  correct,  reason  would  be  shown  for  attempts
to  make  the  authorisation  of  railways  dependent  on  the  railway
companies  compensating  existing  canals,  for  refusals  to  license
motor  omnibuses  in  the  interests  of  municipal  tramways,  and  for
the  placing  of  hindrances  in  the  way  of  electric  lighting  enter-
prises in  order  to  conserve  the  contribution  made  to  the  rates
by  municipal  gas  companies.  But  in  fact  the  view  is  not
correct.  The  marginal  social  net  product  of  resources  devoted
to  improved  methods  of  producing  a  given  commodity  is  not,  in
general,  different  from  the  marginal  trade  net  product ;  for
whatever  loss  the  old  producers  suffer  through  a  reduction  in  the
price  of  their  products  is  balanced  by  the  gain  which  the  re-
duction confers  upon  the  purchasers  of  these  products.  This  is
obvious  if,  after  the  new  investment  has  been  made,  the  old
machines  continue  to  produce  the  same  output  as  before  at
reduced  prices.  If  the  production  of  the  old  machines  is
diminished  on  account  of  the  change,  it  seems  at  first  sight
doubtful.  Eeflection,  however,  makes  it  plain  that  no  unit
formerly  produced  by  the  old  machinery  will  be  supplanted  by
one  produced  by  the  new  machinery,  except  when  the  new
machinery  can  produce  it  at  a  total  cost  smaller  than  the  prime
cost  that  would  have  been  involved  in  its  production  with  the
old  machinery :  except,  that  is  to  say,  when  it  can  produce  it
at  a  price  so  low  that  the  old  machinery  would  have  earned
nothing  by  producing  it  at  that  price.     This  implies  that  every

1  For  example,  J.  A.  Hobson,  Sociological  Review,  July  1911,  p.  197,  and  Odd,
Prices  atid  Wages,  pp.  107-8.  Even  Sidgwick  might  be  suspected  of  countenan-
cing the  argument  set  out  in  the  text  (cf.  Principles  of  Political  Econovuj,  p.  408).
It  does  not  seem  to  have  been  noticed  that  this  argument,  if  valid,  would
justify  the  State  in  prohibiting  the  use  of  new  machinery  that  dispenses  with
the  services  of  skilled  mechanics  until  the  generation  of  mechanics  possessing
that  skill  has  been  depleted  by  death.


%


cH.  VI        SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PRODUCT         165

unit  taken  over  by  the  new  machinery  from  the  old  is  sold  to
the  public  at  a  price  reduced  by  as  much  as  the  whole  of  the
net  receipts,  after  discharging  prime  costs,  which  the  old
machinery  would  have  obtained  from  it  if  it  had  produced
that  unit.  It  is  thus  proved  that  there  is  no  loss  to  the
owners  of  the  old  machines  in  respect  of  any  unit  of  their
former  output  that  is  not  offset  by  an  equivalent  gain  to
consimiers.  It  follows  that  to  count  the  loss  to  these  owners,
in  respect  of  any  unit  taken  over  from  them  by  the  new
machinery,  as  a  part  of  the  social  c<)st  of  producing  that  unit
would  be  incorrect.

An  attempt  to  avoid  this  conclusion  may,  indeed,  still  be
made.  It  may  be  granted  that,  so  far  as  direct  effects  are
concerned,  ordinary  commercial  policy,  under  which  investment
in  improved  processes  is  not  restrained  by  consideration  for
the  earnings  of  other  people's  established  plant,  stands  vindi-
cated from  the  standpoint  of  social  advantage.  There  remain,
however,  indirect  effects.  If  elaborate  and  costly  plant  is
liable  to  have  its  earnings  reduced  at  short  notice  by  new
inventions,  will  not  the  building  of  such  plant  be  hindered  ?
Would  not  the  introduction  of  improved  processes  on  the  whole
be  stimulated,  if  they  were  in  some  way  guaranteed  against
too  rapid  obsolescence  through  the  competition  of  processes
yet  further  improved  ?  The  direct  answer  to  this  question  is,
undoubtedly,  yes.  On  the  other  side,  however,  has  to  be  set
the  fact  that  the  policy  proposed  would  retain  inferior  methods
in  use  when  superior  methods  were  available.  Whether  gain
or  loss  on  the  whole  would  result  from  these  two  influences
in  combination,  is  a  question  to  which  it  seems  difficult  to
give  any  confident  answer.  But  this  impotent  conclusion  is  not
the  last  word.  The  argument  so  far  has  assumed  that  the
rapidity  with  which  improvements  are  invented  is  independent
of  the  rapidity  of  their  practical  adoption ;  and  it  is  on  the
basis  of  that  assumption  that  our  comparison  of  rival  policies
fails  to  attain  a  definite  result.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,
improvements  are  much  more  likely  to  be  made  at  any  time,
if  the  best  methods  previously  discovered  are  being  employed
and,  therefore,  watched  in  actual  operation,  than  if  they  are
being  held  up  in  the  interest  of  established  plant.     Hence,


166  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

the  holding-up  policy  indirectly  delays,  not  merely  the  adoption
of  improvements  that  have  been  invented,  but  also  the  invention
of  nev?'  improvements.  This  circumstance  almost  certainly
turns  the  balance.  The  policy  proper  to  ordinary  competitive
industry  is,  therefore,  in  general  and  on  the  whole,  of  greater
social  advantage  than  the  rival  policy.  It  is  not  to  the  interest
of  the  community  that  business  men,  contemplating  the  in-
troduction of  improved  methods,  should  take  account  of  the
loss  which  forward  action  on  their  part  threatens  to  other
business  men.  The  example  of  some  municipalities  in  post-
poning the  erection  of  electric-lighting  plant  till  their  gas  plant
is  worn  out  is  not  one  that  should  be  imitated,  nor  one  that
can  be  successfully  defended  by  reference  to  the  distinction
between  social  and  trade  net  products.  The  danger  that
beneficial  advances  may  be  checked  by  unwise  resistance
on  the  part  of  interested  municipal  councils  is  recognised  in
this  country  in  the  rules  empowering  the  central  authority  to
override  attempts  at  local  vetoes  against  private  electrical  enter-
prise. The  policy  followed  by  the  Board  of  Trade  is  illustrated
by  the  following  extract  from  their  report  on  the  Ardrossan,
Saltcoats  and  District  Electric  Lighting  Order  of  1910:  "As
the  policy  of  the  Board  has  been  to  hold  that  objection  on  the
grounds  of  competition  with  a  gas  undertaking,  even  when
belonging  to  a  local  authority,  is  not  sufficieut  reason  to  justify
them  in  refusing  to  grant  an  Electric  Lighting  Order,  the  Board
decided  to  dispense  with  the  consent  of  the  Corporation  of
Ardrossan."  ^

§  10.  So  far  we  have  considered  only  those  divergences
between  trade  and  social  net  products  that  come  about  through
the  existence  of  uncompensated  services  and  uncharged  dis-
services, the  general  conditions  of  popular  taste  being  tacitly
assumed  to  remain  unchanged.  It  remains  to  observe  that  a
further  element  of  divergence  may  emerge  in  the  form  of
uncompensated  or  uncharged  effects  upon  the  satisfaction  that
consumers  derive  from  the  consumption  of  things  other  than  the
one  directly  affected.  For  the  fact  that  some  people  are  now
able  to  consume  the  new  commodity  may  set  up  a  psycho-
logical reaction  in  other  people,  directly  changing  the  amount
^  Of.  Knoop,  Frinciples  and  Methods  of  Municipal  Trading,  p.  35.


4


CH.  VI        SOCIAL  AND  TRADE  NET  PEODUCT         167

of  satisfaction  that  they  get  from  their  consumption  of  the  old
commodity.  It  is  conceivable  that  the  reaction  may  lead  to
an  increase  in  the  satisfaction  they  obtain  from  this  commodity,
since  it  may  please  them  to  make  use  of  a  thing  just  because
it  is  superseded  and  more  or  less  archaic.  But,  in  general,  the
reaction  will  be  in  the  other  direction.  For,  in  some  measure,
people's  affection  for  the  best  quality  of  anything  is  due  simply
to  the  fact  that  it  is  the  best  quality ;  and,  when  a  new  best,
superior  to  the  old  best,  is  created,  that  element  of  value  in
the  old  best  is  destroyed.  Thus,  if  an  improved  form  of  motor
car  is  invented,  an  enthusiast  who  desires  above  all  "the  very
latest  thing  "  will,  for  the  future,  derive  scarcely  any  satisfac-
tion from  a  car,  the  possession  of  which,  before  this  new  in-
vention, afforded  him  intense  pleasure.  In  these  circumstances
the  marginal  social  net  product  of  resources  invested  in  pro-
ducing the  improved  type  is  somewhat  smaller  than  the
marginal  trade  net  product.^  It  is  possible  that  the  introduc-
tion of  electric  lighting  into  a  town  may,  in  some  very  slight
degree,  bring  about  this  sort  of  psychological  reaction  in  regard
to  gas :  and  this  possibility  may  provide  a  real  defence,
supplementary  to  the  fallacious  defence  described  in  the
preceding  section,  for  the  policy  of  municipalities  in  delaying
the  introduction  of  electricity.  This  valid  defence,  however,
is  almost  certainly  inadequate.  The  arguments  actually
employed  in  support  of  the  view  that  municipalities  should
not  permit  competition  with  their  gas  plant  are  those  described
in  the  preceding  section.  They  are,  in  general,  independent  of
any  reference  to  psychological  reactions,  and  "are,  therefore,  like

*  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  argument  of  the  text  may  be  applicable  even
where  the  product  formerly  consumed  is  wholly  superseded  by  the  new  rival,
and  where,  therefore,  nobody  is  actually  deriving  diminished  satisfaction  from
the  old  product :  for  it  may  be  that  complete  supersession  would  not  have  come
about  unless  people's  desire  for  the  old  product  had  been  reduced  by  the  psycho-
logical reaction  we  have  been  contemplating.  Furthermore,  the  preceding
argument  shows  that  inventions  may  actually  diminish  aggregate  economic
welfare  ;  for  they  may  cause  labour  to  be  withdrawn  from  other  forms  of
productive  service  to  make  a  new  variety  of  some  article  to  supersede  an  old  one,
whereas,  if  there  had  been  no  invention,  the  old  one  would  have  continued  in  use
and  would  have  yielded  as  much  economic  satisfaction  as  the  new  one  yields  now.
This  is  true,  broadly  speaking,  of  inventions  of  new  weapons  of  war,  so  far  as
these  are  known  to  all  nations,  because  it  is  no  advantage  to  one  country  to
Bave  improved  armaments  if  its  rivals  have  them  also.


168  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

the  arguments  which  persons  interested  in  canals  brought  against
the  authorisation  of  the  early  railways,  wholly  fallacious.

^11.  It  is  plain  that  divergences  between  trade  and
social  net  product  of  the  kinds  we  have  so  far  been  con-
sidering cannot,  like  divergences  due  to  tenancy  laws,  be
mitigated  by  a  modification  of  the  contractual  relation  between
any  two  contracting  parties,  because  the  divergence  arises
out  of  a  service  or  disservice  rendered  to  persons  other  than
the  contracting  parties.  It  is,  however,  possible  for  the  State,
if  it  so  chooses,  to  remove  the  divergence  in  any  field  by
"  extraordinary  encouragements  "  or  "  extraordinary  restraints  "
upon  investments  in  that  field.  The  most  obvious  forms,
which  these  encouragements  and  restraints  may  assume,  are,
of  course,  those  of  bounties  and  taxes.  Broad  illustrations
of  the  policy  of  intervention  in  both  its  negative  and  positive
aspects  are  easily  provided.

The  trade  net  product  of  any  unit  of  investment  is  unduly
large  relatively  to  the  social  net  product  in  the  businesses  of
producing  and  distributing  alcoholic  drinks.  Consequently,
in  nearly  all  countries,  special  taxes  are  placed  upon  these
businesses.  Dr.  Marshall  has  proposed  to  treat  in  the  same
way  resources  devoted  to  the  erection  of  buildings  in  crowded
areas.  He  suggested,  to  a  witness  before  the  Eoyal  Com-
mission on  Labour,  "  that  every  person  putting  up  a  house
in  a  district  that  has  got  as  closely  populated  as  is  good,
should  be  compelled  to  contribute  towards  providing  free
playgrounds."  ^  The  principle  is  susceptible  of  general
application.  It  was  employed,  though  in  a  very  incomplete
and  partial  manner,  in  the  British  enactment  of  a  special
petrol  tax  and  motor  car  licence  upon  the  users  of  motor
cars,  the  proceeds  of  which  were  to  be  devoted  to  the  service
of  the  roads.^     It  is  employed  again  in  an  ingenious  manner

1  Royal  Commission  on  Labour,  Q.  8665.

"  The  application  of  the  principle  is  incomplete,  because  the  revenue  from
these  taxes,  administered  through  the  Road  Board,  must  be  devoted,  "not
to  the  ordinary  road  maintenance  at  all,  however  onerous  it  might  be,  but
exclusively  to  the  execution  of  new  and  specific  road  improvements "  (Webb,
The  King's  HUihway,  p.  250).  Thus,  in  the  main,  the  motorist  does  not  pay
for  the  damage  he  does  to  the  ordinary  roads,  but  obtains  in  return  for  his
payment  an  additional  service  useful  to  him  rather  than  to  the  general
public.


CH.  VI       SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PRODUCT        169

in  the  National  Insurance  Act.  When  the  sickness  rate  in
any  district  is  exceptionally  high,  provision  is  made  for
throwing  the  consequent  abnormal  expenses  upon  employers,
local  authorities  or  water  companies,  if  the  high  rate  can
be  shown  to  be  due  to  neglect  or  carelessness  on  the  part
of  any  of  these  bodies.  Some  writers  have  thought  that
it  might  be  employed  in  the  form  of  a  discriminating  tax
upon  income  derived  from  foreign  investments.  But,  since
the  element  of  disadvantage  described  in  §  8  only  belongs
to  some  of  these  investments  and  not  to  others,  this  arrange-
ment would  not  be  a  satisfactory  one.  Aloreover,  foreign
investment  is  already  penalised  to  a  considerable  extent  both
by  general  ignorance  of  foreign  conditions  and  by  the  fact
that  income  earned  abroad  is  frequently  subjected  to  foreign
income  tax  as  well  as  to  British  income  tax.

The  trade  net  product  of  any  unit  of  investment  is  unduly
small  in  industries,  such  as  agriculture,  which  are  supposed  to
yield  the  indirect  service  of  developing  citizens  suitable  for
military  training.  Partly  for  this  reason  agriculture  in  Germany
was  accorded  the  indirect  bounty  of  protection.  In  Kke  manner,
uses  promising  a  distant  return,  the  trade  net  product  of  which
is  made  by  the  fact  of  death  unduly  small,  may  sometimes  claim
the  encouragement  of  a  State  loan  free  of  charge,  or,  as  with
Indian  railways,  of  a  Government  guarantee  of  interest.^
Finally,  an  extreme  form  of  bounty,  in  which  a  governmental
authority  provides  all  the  funds  required,  is  given  upon
such  services  as  the  planning  of  towns,  police  administration,
and,  sometimes,  the  clearing  of  slum  areas.  This  type  of
bounty  is  also  not  infrequently  given  upon  the  work  of
spreading  information  about  improved  processes  of  production
in  occupations  where,  owing  to  lack  of  appreciation  on  the
part  of  potential  beneficiaries,  it  would  be  difficult  to  collect
a  fee  for  undertaking  that  task.  Thus  the  Canadian  Govern-
ment has  established  a  system,  "  by  means  of  which  any  farmer
can  make  inquiry,  without  even  the  cost  of  postage,  about  any
matter  relating  to  his  business "  ;  ^  and  the  Department  of
the    Interior    also    sometimes    provides,    for    a    time,    actual

»  Cf.  Part  I.  Chap.  II.  §  5.
2  Mayor  Eeport  on  the  Canadian  North-  West,  p.  36.


170  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

instruction  in  farming.^  Many  Governments  adopt  this  same
principle  in  respect  of  information  about  Labour,  by  providing
the  services  of  Exchanges  free  of  charge.  In  the  United
Kingdom  the  various  Agricultural  Organisation  Societies  are
voluntary  organisations,  providing  a  kindred  type  of  bounty
at  their  subscribers'  expense.  An  important  part  of  their
purpose  is,  in  Sir  Horace  Plunkett's  words,  to  bring  freely
"  to  the  help  of  those  whose  life  is  passed  in  the  quiet  of  the
field  the  experience,  which  belongs  to  wider  opportunities
of  observation  and  a  larger  acquaintance  with  commercial  and
industrial  affairs."^  The  Development  Act  of  1909,  with
its  provision  for  grants  towards  scientific  research,  instruction,
aj|Uid3xperiment  in  agricultural  science,  follows  the  same  lines.
It  should  be  added  that  sometimes,  when  the  inter-
relations of  the  various  private  persons  affected  are  highly
complex,  the  Government  may  find  it  necessary  to  exercise
some  means  of  authoritative  control  in  addition  to  providing
a  bounty.  Thus  it  is  coming  to  be  recognised  as  an  axiom
of  government  that,  in  every,  town,  power  must  be  held  by
some  authority  to  limit  the  quantity  of  building  permitted
to  a  given  area,  to  restrict  the  height  to  which  houses  may
be  carried, — for  the  erection  of  barrack  dwellings  may
cause  great  overcrowding  of  area  even  though  there  is  no
overcrowding  of  rooms,^ — and  generally  to  control  the  building
activities  of  individuals.  It  is  as  idle  to  expect  a  well-
planned  town  to  result  from  the  independent  activities  of
isolated  speculators  as  it  would  be  to  expect  a  satisfactory
picture  to  result  if  each  separate  square  inch  were  painted  by
an  independent  artist.  No  "  invisible  hand  "  can  be  relied  on
to  produce  a  good  arrangement  of  the  whole  from  a  combina-
tion  of  separate   treatments   of  the   parts.     It  is,  therefore,

'  Mavor,  Report  on  the  Canadian  North-  West,  p.  78.

^  C.  Webb,  Lidustrial  Co-operation,  p.  149.

'  Mr.  Dawson  believes  that  this  type  of  overcrowding  prevails  to  a  consider-
able extent  in  German  towns.  He  writes  :  "The  excessive  width  of  the  streets,
insisted  on  by  cast-iron  regulations,  adds  greatly  to  the  cost  of  house-building,
and,  in  order  to  recoup  himself,  and  make  the  most  of  his  profits,  the  builder
begins  to  extend  his  house  vertically  instead  of  horizontally  "  {Municipal  Life
and  Oovernment  in  Germany,  pp.  163-4).  Hence,  German  municipalities  now
often  control  the  height  of  buildings,  providing  a  scale  of  permitted  heights
which  decreases  on  passing  from  the  centre  to  the  outlying  parts  of  a  town.


CH.  VI        SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PRODUCT         171

necessary  that  an  authority  of  wider  reach  should  intervene
and  should  tackle  the  collective  problems  of  beauty,  of  air,
and  of  light,  as  those  other  collective  problems  of  gas  and
water  have  been  already  tackled.  Hence,  shortly  before  the
war,  there  came  into  being,  on  the  pattern  of  long  previous
German  practice,  Mr.  Burns's  extremely  important  town-
planning  Act.  In  this  Act,  for  the  first  time,  control  over
individual  buildings,  from  the  standpoint,  not  of  individual
structure,  but  of  the  structure  of  the  town  as  a  whole,  is
definitely  conferred  upon  those  town  councils  that  are  willing
to  accept  the  powers  offered  to  them.  Part  II.  of  the  Act
begins :  "  A  town-planning  scheme  may  be  made  in  accord-
ance with  the  provisions  of  this  Part  of  the  Act  as  respects
any  laud  which  is  in  course  of  development,  or  appears  likely
to  be  used  for  building  purposes,  with  the  general  object
of  securing  proper  sanitary  conditions,  amenity,  and  con-
venience in  connection  with  the  laying  out  and  use  of  the
land,  and  of  any  neighbouring  lands."  The  scheme  may
be  worked  out,  as  is  the  custom  in  Germany,  many  years
in  advance  of  actual  building,  thus  laying  down  beforehand
the  lines  of  future  development  Furthermore,  it  may,  if
desired,  be  extended  to  include  land  on  which  buildings  have
already  been  put  up,  and  may  provide  "for  the  demolition
or  alteration  of  any  buildings  thereon,  so  far  as  may  be
necessary  for  carrying  the  scheme  into  effect."  Finally,
where  local  authorities  are  remiss  in  preparing  a  plan  on
their  own  initiative,  power  is  given  to  the  Local  Government
Board  to  order  them  to  take  action.  There  is  ground  for
hope,  however,  that,  so  soon  as  people  become  thoroughly
familiarised  with  town-planning,  local  patriotism  and  inter-
local emulation  will  make  resort  to  external  pressure  from
the  central  Government  no  longer  necessary.

§12.  So  far  we  have  been  concerned  with  forms  of
•divergence  between  social  and  trade  net  product  that  are  liable
to  occur  even  under  conditions  of  simple  competition.  Where
conditions  of  monopolistic  competition  ^ — competition,  that  is
to  say,  between  several  sellers  each  producing  a  (Jonsiderable
proportion  of  the  aggregate  output — are  present,  the  way  is

»  Cf:  post,  Ch.  XII.


172  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

opened  up  for  a  new  kind  of  investment.  This  consists  in
competitive  advertisement  directed  to  the  sole  purpose  of
transferring  the  demand  for  a  given  commodity  from  one
source  of  supply  to  another.^  There  is,  indeed,  little
opportunity  for  this  as  regards  goods  of  a  kind  whose  quality
is  uniform  and,  as  with  salt,  lumber  or  grain,  can  be  easily
tested  ;  but,  where  quality  cannot  be  easily  tested,  and  especially
where  goods  are  sold  in  small  quantities,  which  can  readily  be
put  into  distinctive  packages  for  the  use  of  retail  customers,
there  is  plenty  of  opportunity.^  Not  all  advertisement  is,  of
course,  strictly  competitive.  Some  advertisement,  on  the
contrary,  fulfils  a  social  purpose,  in  informing  people  of  the
existence  of  articles  adapted  to  their  tastes.  Indeed,  it  has
been  said  "  that  advertising  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  sale
by  description,"  and  represents  merely  a  segregated  part  of
the  complex  work  formerly  done  by  those  middlemen  who
exhibited,  as  well  as  sold,  their  goods.^  Without  it  many
useful  articles,  such  as  new  machines,  or  useful  services,  such
as  that  of  life  insurance,  might  not  be  brought  at  all  to  the
notice  of  potential  purchasers  who  have  a  real  need  for  them.
Furthermore,  some  advertisement  serves  to  develop  an  entirely
new  set  of  wants  on  the  part  of  consumers,  the  satisfaction  of
which  involves  a  real  addition  to  social  well-being ;  and  the
development  of  which  on  a  large  scale  at  the  same  time
enables  the  commodity  that  satisfies  them  to  be  produced  on
a  large  scale  and,  therefore,  cheaply.'*  Under  this  head  it  is
possible  to  make  out  a  case  in  favour  of  the  peculiar  system
of  advertisement  arranged  on  behalf  of  the  general  body  of  its
currant  growers  (without  the  mention  of  individual  names)  by
the  Greek  Government :  *  though,  of  course,  the  development
of  a  taste  for  currants  is  probably  in  part  at  the  expense  of
the  taste  for  something  else.     It  is  not,  however,  necessary  to

'  Under  simple  competition,  there  is  no  purpose  in  this  advertisement,
because,  tx  hypothesi,  the  market  will  take,  at  the  market  price,  as  much  as  any
one  small  seller  wants  to  sell.  Practically  monopolistic  competition  comprises
all  forms  of  imperfect  competition.

2  Cf.  Jenks  and  Clark,  The  Trust  Problem,  pp.  26-7.

^  Cf.  Shaw,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1912,  p.  743.

*  Cf.  the  discussion  of  "constructive"  and  "combative"  advertisements  in
Marshall's  Iridustry  and  Trade,  pp.  304-7.

*  Cf.  Goodall,  Advertizing,  p.  49.


cH.vi        SOCIAL  AND  TEADE  NET  PEODUCT         173

my  purpose  to  attempt  an  estimate  of  the  proportion  which
strictly  competitive  advertisement  bears  to  advertisement  in
the  aggregate — an  aggregate  the  cost  of  which  has  been  put,
for  the  United  Kingdom,  at  eighty  million  pounds,  and,  for  the
world,  at  six  hundred  million  pounds  per  annum.^  That  a
considerable  part  of  the  advertisement  of  the  modern  world  is
strictly  competitive  is  plain."  This  is  true  alike  of  the  more
obvious  forms,  such  as  pictorial  displays,  newspaper  paragraphs,^
travellers,  salesmen,  and  so  on;  and  of  the  more  subtle  forms,
such  as  a  large  exhibit  of  jewellery  in  the  shop  window,  the
according  of  credit,  with  the  consequential  expenditure  on
book-keeping  and  on  the  collection  of  recalcitrant  debts,
expenditure  in  keeping  shops  open  at  hours  inconvenient  and
costly  to  the  sellers,  and  other  such  forms.  It  is  plain  that,
up  to  a  point,  investment  of  this  type,  in  so  far  as  it  retains,
or  gains,  for  the  investor  "a  place  in  the  sun,"  yields,  like
expenditure  upon  national  armaments,  a  considerable  trade
net  product.  A  curve,  representing  the  trade  net  products
yielded  by  successive  increments  of  it,  would  indicate  positive
values  for  a  long  distance.  What  relation  does  this  curve
bear  to  the  corresponding  curve  representing  the  social  net
products  of  successive  increments  ?

First,  it  may  happen  that  the  net  result  of  the  expenditures
made  by  the  various  rivals  in  conflict  with  each  other  is  to
bring  about  an  alliance  between  them.  If  this  happens,  the
expenditures  induced  by  a  state  of  monopolistic  competition
are  responsible  for  the  evolution  of  simple  monopoly.  It  does
not  seem  possible  to  determine  in  a  general  way  the  compara-
tive effects  on  the  volume  of  national  dividend  of  simple  mono-

'  Cf.  Goodall,  Advertizing,  p.  2.

'  It  should  be  observed  that  this  type  of  advertisement,  which  aims  in  effect
at  diverting  custom  from  a  rival  to  oneself,  may  be  pressed  to  lengths  that  the
law  of  modem  States  will  not  tolerate.  Thus  in  some  European  States  certain
definite  false  statements  about  awards  alleged  to  have  been  won  at  exhibitions
or  about  an  exceptional  offer  of  bankrupt  stock,  direct  disparagement  of  a  rival's
character  or  produce,  and  attempts  to  pass  off  one's  own  goods  as  the  goods  of  a
well-known  house  are  punishable  offences  (cf.  Davies,  Trust  Laics  and  Unfair
Competition,  Ch.  x.).

^  Of  course  the  "resources"  invested  in  these  things  are  measured  by  the
actual  capital  and  labour  involved  in  the  production  of  the  paragraphs,  not  by  a
monopoly  charge — if  such  is  made — exacted  for  them  by  the  newspaper  con-
cerned.


174  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

poly  and  of  monopolistic  competition.  Consequently,  no
general  statement  can  be  made  as  to  whether  the  curve
representing  the  social  net  products  of  successive  increments
of  investment  will  indicate  positive  values  over  any  part  of  its
course.

Secondly,  it  may  happen  that  the  expenditures  on  advertise-
ment made  by  competing  monopolists  will  simply  neutralise
one  another,  and  leave  the  industrial  position  exactly  as  it
would  have  been  if  neither  had  expended  anything.  For,
clearly,  if  each  of  two  rivals  makes  equal  efforts  to  attract  the
favour  of  the  public  away  from  the  other,  the  total  result  is
the  same  as  it  would  have  been  if  neither  had  made  any  effort
at  all.  This  point  was  set  in  a  very  clear  light  in  Mr.  Butter-
worth's  Memorandum  to  the  Board  of  Trade  Kailway  Conference
in  1908.  He  points  out  that,  under  competitive  arrangements,
the  officers  of  rival  companies  spend  a  great  part  of  their  time
and  energy  in  "  scheming  how  to  secure  traffic  for  their  own
line,  instead  of  in  devising  how  best  to  combine  economy  with
efficiency  of  working.  At  present  much  of  the  time  and
energy  of  the  more  highly-paid  officials  of  a  railway  company
is  taken  up  with  work  in  which  the  trading  community  has
no  interest,  and  which  is  only  rendered  necessary  in  the
interest  of  the  shareholders  whom  they  serve  by  the  keen
competition  which  exists  between  companies."  ^  In  these
circumstances,  the  curve  representing  the  social  net  products
of  successive  increments  of  investment  will  indicate  negative
values  throughout.

Thirdly,  it  may  happen  that  the  expenditures  lead  simply
to  the  substitution  in  a  market  of  goods  made  by  one  firm  for
the  same  quantity  of  equivalent  goods  made  by  another  firm.
If  we  suppose  production,  both  under  A's  auspices  and  under
B's,  to  obey  the  law  of  constant  return,  and  to  involve  equal
cost  per  unit,  it  is  clearly  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the
national  dividend  from  which  of  these  two  producers  the
public  buys.  In  other  words,  all  units  of  resources  expended
by  either  producer  in  building  up  goodwill  as  against  the
other  have  a  social  net  product  equal  to  zero.  If  conditions
are  such  that  a  diminution  in  the  aggregate  cost  of  production
»  [Cd.  4677],  p.  27.


CH.  VI        SOCIAL  A2JD  TEADE  NET  PEODUCT        175

of  the  commodity  would  be  brought  about  by  the  transference
of  some  of  the  orders  from  B  to  A,  some  units  of  resources
employed  by  A  to  abstract  orders  from  B  would  yield  a
positive  social  net  product,  while  all  units  of  resources
employed  by  B  to  abstract  orders  from  A  would  yield  a  nega-
tive social  net  product.  If  we  suppose  the  more  efficient
and  the  less  efficient  firms  to  expend  resources  in  these
hostilities  in  about  equal  measure,  in  such  wise  that  their
efforts  cancel  one  another  and  leave  things  much  as  they
would  have  been  had  the  efforts  of  both  been  removed,  it  is
obvious  that  the  social  net  product  of  any  compound  unit  of
these  efforts  taken  as  a  whole  is,  again,  zero.  There  is,  however,
some  slight  ground  for  believing  that  firms  of  low  productive
efficiency  tend  to  indulge  in  advertisement  to  a  greater  extent
than  their  productively  more  efficient  rivals.  For,  clearly,
they  have  greater  inducements  to  expenditure  on  devices,  such
as  special  packages,  designed  to  obviate  comparison  of  the  bulk
of  commodity  offered  by  them  and  by  other  producers  at  a
given  price.  This  consideration  suggests  that  the  curve
representing  the  social  net  products  of  successive  increments  of
investment  is  likely  to  indicate  negative  values  throughout.

The  discussion  of  the  preceding  paragraphs  makes  it  plain
that,  speaking  generally,  the  social  net  product  of  any  r^^  in-
crement  of  resources  inves^EeS'  in  competitive  advertisement  is
exceedingly  unlikely  to  be  as  large  as  the  trade  net  product.
The  consequent  wasfe  might  be  diminished  by  special  under-
takings among  competitors  not  to  advertise,  such  as  hold  good
among  barristers,  doctors  and  members  of  the  London  Stock
Exchange.  Failing  this,  the  evil  might  be  attacked  by  the
State  through  the  taxation,  or  prohibition,  of  competitive
advertisements  —  if  these  could  be  distinguished  from
advertisements  which  are  not  strictly  competitive.  It  could
be  removed  altogether  if  conditions  of  monopolistic  competition
were  destroyed.

§  13.  We  now  turn  to  conditions  of  bilateral  monopoly,
that  is  to  say,  conditions  under  which  the  relations  between
individual  buyers  and  sellers  are  not  rigidly  fixed  by
a  surrounding  market.  The  presence  of  bilateral  monopoly
in  this  sense  implies  an  element  of  theoretical  indeterminateness.


176  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

and,  therefore,  opens  up  the  way  for  the  employment  of
activities  and  resources  in  efforts  to  modify  the  ratio  of
exchange  in  favour  of  one  or  other  of  the  "monopolists."
The  nature  of  the  indeterminateness  present  is  different
according  as  the  monopolists  are,  as  it  were,  solidified  units,
such  as  single  individuals  and  joint-stock  companies,  or
representative  units,  such  as  Trade  Unions  or  Employers'
Federations,  whose  officials  negotiate  to  establish  a  rate  of
pay,  but  whose  individual  members,  when  this  rate  is
established,  are  still  free  at  will  to  continue  or  to  abandon
business.  This  distinction  is,  for  some  purposes,  important
and  ought  not  to  be  ignored.^  It  does  not,  however,  bear
directly  upon  our  present  inquiry.  For,  whatever  the  nature
of  the  indeterminateness,  it  is  plain  that  activities  and  resources
devoted  to  manipulating  the  ratio  of  exchange  may  yield  a
positive  trade  net  product ;  but  they  cannot — even  the  earliest
dose  of  thern  cannot — -yield  a  positive  social  net  product,
and  they  may  in  some  conditions  yield  a  negative  social  net
product.^  The  activities  here  contemplated  consist  chiefly —
for  physical  force  exercised  in  direct  plunder  does  not  operate
through  exchange — in  the  brain  work  of  "  bargaining  "  proper
and  in  the  practice  of  one  or  other  of  two  sorts  of  deception.
These  latter  are,  first,  deception  as  to  the  physical  nature  of
a  thing  offered  for  sale,  and,  secondly,  deception  as  to  the
future  yield  that  it  is  "  reasonable  to  expect "  from  a  thing
offered  for  sale,  when  the  physical  nature  of  that  thing  has
been  correctly  described.

§  14.  Of  bargaining  proper  there  is  little  that  need  be
said.  It  is  obvious  that  intelligence  and  resources  devoted  to
this  purpose,  whether  on  one  side  or  on  the  other,  and  whether
successful  or  unsuccessful,  yield  no  net  product  to  the_com-

1  With  solidified  units  the  settlement  locus — i.e.  the  range  of  possible
bargains — lies  along  the  contract  curve,  and  with  representative  units  along
portions  of  the  two  reciprocal  demand  (or  supply)  curves.  For  a  technical
discussion  of  this  and  connected  points  cf.  my  paper  "  Equilibrium  under
Bilateral  Monopoly"  (Economic  Journal,  Jan.  1908,  pp.  205  et  seq.)  ;  also  ray
Principles  and  Methods  of  Industrial  Peace,  Appendix  A.

2  It  will  be  understood  that  net  product  here  means  net  product  of
dividend.  It  is  not,  of  course,  denied  that,  if  a  poor  man  outbargains  a  rich
one,  there  is  a  positive  net  product  of  economic  satisfaction,  and,  if  a  rich
man  outbargains  a  poor  one,  a  corresponding  negative  net  product  of
satisfaction.


CH.  VI        SOCIAL  AND  TKADE  NET  PEODUCT        177

munity  as  a  whole.  According  to  Professor  Carver,  a  con-
siderable part  of  the  energies  of  business  men  is  devoted
to,  and  a  considerable  part  of  their  earnings  arise  out  of,
activities  of  this  kind/  These  activities  are  wasted.  They
contribute  to  trade,  but  not  to  a  social,  net  product.  But
this  conclusion  does  not  exhaust  the  subject.  It  is  often
pointed  out  that,  where  their  clients,  be  they  customers  or
workpeople,  can  be  squeezed,  employers  tend  to  expend  their
energy  in  accomplishing  this,  rather  than  in  improving  the
organisation  of  their  factories.  When  they  act  thus,  the  social
net  product  even  of  the  earliest  dose  of  resources  devoted
to  bargaining  may  be,  not  merely  zero,  but  negative.  When-
ever that  happens,  no  tax  that  yields  a  revenue,  though  it
may  affect  an  improvement,  can  provide  a  complete  remedy.
For  that  absolute  prohibition  is  required.  But  absolute
prohibition  of  bargaining  is  hardly  feasible  except  where
prices  and  conditions  of  sale  are  imposed  upon  private
industry  by  some  organ  of  State  author ity.-

§  15.  Deception  as  to  the  physical  nature  of  a  thing
offered  for  sale  is  practised  through  false  weights  and  measures,
adulteration  and  misnaming  of  goods,  and  dishonest  advertise-
ment. Before  the  days  of  co-operation,  "  the  back  streets
of  the  manufacturing  towns  swarmed  with  small  shops,  in
which  the  worst  of  everything  was  sold,  with  unchecked
measures  and  unproved  weights."  ^  To  a  less  degree  similar
practices  still  prevaiL  There  is  little  temptation  to  adopt
them  in  marketing  "production  goods,"  where  the  buyers
are  large  industrial  concerns,  like  railway  companies,  which
possess  elaborately  organised  "  testing  "  departments.  But,
In  selling  "  consumption  goods  " — particularly  semi-mysterious
consumption  goods  like  patent  medicines — to  poor  and
ignorant  buyers,  and  even  in  selling  production  goods  to  less
skilled  buyers,  such  as  farmers,  there  is  still  some  temptation.
It  is  always  profitable  for  sellers  to  "  offer  commodities  which
seem  rather  than  are  useful,  if  the  difference  between  seeming

*  Cf.  American  Economic  Association,  1909,  p.  51.

-  The  legislation  of  many  States  concerning  private  labour  bureanx  is
•  vant  here.  For  an  account  of  this  legislation,  cf.  Becker  and  Bernhardt
ietzliche  Eegelung  tier  ArbeitsverviiUelung.

^  Aves,  Co-operative  Industry,  p.  16.

N


178  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

and  reality  is  likely  to  escape  notice."  ^  Deception  as  to
the  future  yield,  which  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  from  a  thing
offered  for  sale,  is  practised,  in  the  main,  by  unscrupulous
financiers  selling  stocks  and  shares.  Among  the  methods
employed  are  the  manipulation  of  dividend  payments,
"  matched  orders,"  the  deliberate  publication  of  false
information,^  and  —  a  practice  less  clearly  over  the  border
line  of  fairness — the  deliberate  withholding  of  relevant
information.^  It  is  evident  that,  up  to  a  point,  activities
devoted  to  either  of  these  forms  of  deception  bring  about  a
positive  trade  net  product,  but  not  a  positive  social  net
product.  Furthermore,  they  often  lead  to  enhanced  purchases
and,  therefore,  enhanced  production  of  the  thing  about  which
deception  has  been  practised.  Hence,  they  divert  to  the
production  of  this  thing  resources  that  would  otherwise  have
been  devoted  to  investments  yielding  the  normal  marginal
return.  Therefore,  when  this  indirect  consequence  is  taken
into  account,  the  social  net  product,  even  of  the  earliest  dose
of  resources  devoted  to  deception,  is,  in  general,  not  zero  but
negative.  If  the  thing  in  question  is  something  the  pro-
duction of  which  involves  no  expenditure  of  resources,  like

1  Sidgwick,  Frinciples  of  Political  Economy,  p.  416.

^  For  a  lurid  account  of  some  of  these  methods  vide  Lawson,  Frenzied  FiTiance,
passim,  and  for  an  analysis  of  the  protective  devices  embodied  in  the  celebrated
German  law  of  1884,  vide  Schuster,  "The  Promotion  of  Companies  and  the  Valua-
tion of  their  Assets  according  to  German  Law,"  Economic  Journal,  1900,  p.  1
et  seq.  It  should  be  observed  that  the  device  of  "matched  orders"  may
be  made  difficult  by  a  rule  forbidding  offers  and  bids  for  large  amounts
of  stock  on  the  terms  "all  or  none."  For,  when  such  a  rule  exists,  there  is
more  chance  that  a  seller  or  buyer  operating  a  matched  order  may  be  forced
unwillingly  to  make  a  deal  with  some  one  other  than  his  confidant  (cf.  Brace,
The  Value  of  Organised  Speculation,  p.  241).

3  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that,  whereas  the  law  often,  and  public  opinion
generally,  condemns  a  seller  who  withholds  relevant  information,  a  buyer  who
acts  in  this  way  is  generally  commended  for  his  "good  bargain."  Thus,  to  pick
up  a  piece  of  valuable  oak  furniture  in  an  out-of-the-way  cottage  for  much  less
than  it  is  worth  is  thought  by  some  to  be  creditable ;  and  nobody  maintains  that
the  Rothschild,  who  founded  the  fortunes  of  his  house  by  buying  government
stock  on  the  strength  of  his  early  knowledge  of  the  battle  of  "Waterloo,  was
honourably  bound  to  make  that  information  public  before  acting  on  it.  The
reason  for  this  distinction  probably  is  that  the  possessor  of  an  article  is
presumed  to  have  full  opportunity  of  knowing  its  real  value,  and,  if  he  fails  to
do  this,  becomes,  for  his  carelessness,  "legitimate  prey."  A  director  of  a
company  who  bought  up  shares  in  that  company  on  the  strength  of  knowledge
gained  in  the  Board  room,  and  so  obviously  not  available  to  the  shareholders
generally,  would  be  universally  condemned.


f


cH.vi        SOCIAL  AKD  TKADE  NET  PKODUCT        179

the  fictitious  situations  created  by  fraudulent  registry  offices,
the  social  net  product  does  not,  indeed,  sink  below  zero,
for  extra  production  of  these  imaginary  entities  involves
no  withdrawal  of  resources  from  elsewhere.  As  a  rule,
however,  the  social  net  product  of  any  dose  of  resources
invested  in  a  deceptive  activity  is  negative.  Consequently,
as  with  bargaining,  no  tax  that  yields  a  revenue,  though  it
may  affect  an  improvement,  can  provide  a  complete  remedy,
and  absolute  prohibition  of  the  activity  is  required.
Attempts  to  establish  such  prohibition  have  been  made,  on
the  one  side,  in  various  laws  concerning  false  weights  and
measures  and  the  adulteration  of  foods,  and,  on  the  other
side,  in  various  laws — laws,  which  to  be  effective,  must  be
enforcible  at  the  instance,  not  of  the  damaged  party,  but
of  public  inspectors  or  commissioners  ^ — designed  to  control
and  regulate  the  practice  of  company  promotion.  In
other  fields  the  evil  can  be  met  in  a  more  direct  way  by
the  establishment  of  Purchasers'  Associations,  in  which
the  interests  of  the  sellers  and  the  buyers  are  unified.^

1  Cf.  Van  Hise,  ConeejUratton  and  Control,  pp.  76-8.
«  Cf.  post,  Part  II.  Ch.  XVI.


CHAPTER   VII

MARGINAL    TRADE   AND    SOCIAL   NET   PRODUCTS    IN    RELATION
TO    INDUSTRIAL   FORMS

§  1.  In  the  preceding  chapter  we  were  engaged  in  a  study  of
the  differences  between  the  marginal  social  net  product  and
the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources  devoted  to  various
occupations  or  industries.  It  is  now  necessary  to  conduct  an
analogous  inquiry  about  resources  devoted  to  various  forms  of
economic  organisation  within  the  several  occupations  or  in-
dustries. Dr.  Marshall  has  observed  that  "  as  a  general  rule
the  law  of  substitution — which  is  nothing  more  than  a  special
and  limited  application  of  the  law  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest —
tends  to  make  one  method  of  industrial  organisation  supplant
another  when  it  offers  a  direct  and  immediate  service  at  a
lower  price.  The  indirect  and  ultimate  services,  which  either
will  render,  have,  as  a  general  rule,  little  or  no  weight  in  the
balance."  ^  These  indirect  services  constitute  the  difference
between  the  social  net  product  and  the  trade  net  product  of
a  unit  of  resources  invested  in  any  form  of  economic  organisa-
tion. Our  present  task  is  to  distinguish  the  principal  fields
in  which  they  play  an  important  part.

§  2.  One  very  important  indirect  service  is  rendered  by
the  general  economic  organisation  of  a  country  in  so  far  as,  in
addition  to  fulfilling  its  function  as  an  instrument  of  production,
it  also  acts,  in  greater  or  less  degree,  as  a  training  ground  of
business  capacities.  In  order  that  it  may  do  this  effectively,
the  size  of  business  units  must  be  so  graded  that  persons
possessed  of  good  native  endowments  can  learn  the  principles
of  enterprise  in  some  small  and  simple  concern,  and  thereafter

^  Principles  of  Ecoru/mics,  p.  597.
180


cH.Tii  IKDUSTKIAL  FOEMS  181

can  gradually  move  upwards,  as  their  capacity  improves  with
practice,  to  larger  and  more  difficult  posts.  The  point  may
be  put  in  this  way.  When  the  separate  steps  in  the  agricultural
or  industrial  ladder  are  large,  it  is  difficult  for  a  man  adapted,
if  adequate  practice  is  obtained,  for  life  at  one  stage,  but
standing  by  some  accident  at  another  stage,  to  move  to  his
proper  place.  Thus — to  take  a  hypothetical  example — if
agriculture  or  industry  were  worked  exclusively  in  large  units
consisting  of  one  or  two  large  entrepreneurs  assisted  by  a
number  of  mere  labourers,  any  capacity  for  management  and
direction  that  might  be  bom  among  people  in  the  labouring
class  would  have  no  opportunity  for  use  or  development.
Many  persons  endowed  with  native  capacity  would  thus  be
compelled  to  be  watchers  only  and  not  doers.  But,  as
Jevons  has  well  taught,  it  is  doing,  and  not  watching,  that
trains.  "  A  few  specimens  probed  thoroughly,"  he  writes,
"  teach  more  than  thousands  glanced  at  through  a  glass  case.
The  whole  British  Museum  accordingly  will  not  teach  a
youth  as  much  as  he  will  learn  by  collecting  a  few  fossils
or  a  few  minerals,  in  situ  if  possible,  and  taking  them  home
to  examine  and  read  and  think  about."  ^  The  point  was  put
even  more  forcibly  by  Dr.  Marshall  in  his  address  to  the
Co-operative  Society  in  1885:  "  It  is  a  better  training  in
seamanship  to  sail  a  fishing-boat  than  to  watch  a  three-
masted  ship,  the  tops  of  whose  masts  alone  appear  above
the  horizon."  ■  Thus  it  would  seem  that,  in  the  absence  of  a
proper  ladder,  a  great  deal  of  the  business  capacity  bom
among  the  working  classes  must  run  to  wast€.  If,  however,
industry  or  agriculture  is  organised  by  way  of  units  of  many
diflferent  sizes,  a  workman  possessing  mental  power  beyond
what  is  normal  to  his  class  can,  without  great  difficulty,
himself  become  the  entrepreneur  of  a  small  establishment,
and  gradually  advance,  educating  his  powers  the  while,
higher  up  the  ladder  that  is  provided  for  him.

§  3.  This  train  of  thought  suggests  that,  in  a  community
organised  on  the  general  lines  of  a  modern  industrial  State,
associations  of  workers  combined  together  in  small  co-partner-

1  Methods  of  Social  Beform.^  p.  61.
*  hoc  dt.  p.  17.


182  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  h

ship  workshops  constitute  an  industrial  form,  investment
in  which  is  likely  to  yield  a  marginal  social  net  product
considerably  in  excess  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product.
For  such  workshops  provide  the  first  stage  of  the  ladder
that  is  needed  to  lift  upwards  the  great  fund  of  capacity
for  management  that  is  almost  certainly  lying  latent  among
the  manual  labouring  classes.  They  furnish,  as  it  were,  a
first  school  in  which  this  capacity  can  be  developed,  and,  in
so  doing,  contribute  for  the  service  of  the  community,  not
merely  boots  and  shoes,  but  well-trained,  competent  men.
Much  the  same  thing  holds  good  of  the  analogous  workers'
businesses  in  agriculture.  Gardens  and  small  allotments
near  their  cottages  for  workmen  in  regular  employment
elsewhere,  large  allotments  for  workmen  occasionally  taking
odd  jobs  elsewhere,  and  small  holdings  for  those  who  devote
themselves  entirely  to  work  on  these  holdings,  provide  in
combination  a  complete  ladder  from  the  status  of  labourer
to  that  of  independent  farmer.  This  ladder  yields  a  product
of  human  capacity  over  and  above  its  immediate  product  of
crops.  That  element  of  social  net  product,  however,  does
not  accrue  to  those  persons  by  whom  the  size  of  agricultural
holdings  is  regulated,  and  is  not  included  in  the  marginal
trade  net  product  of  the  resources  invested  in  them.  This
is  enough  to  establish  a  prima  facie  case  for  the  "  artificial
encouragement,"  by  State  action  or  by  private  philanthropy,
of  Workers'  Associations  and  of  various  grades  of  allotments
and  small  holdings.  Such  encouragement  is  given  to
Workers'  Associations,  in  England  by  the  support  of  Eetail
Co-operative  Societies,  and  in  France  and  Italy  by  the  grant
of  special  facilities  for  tendering  on  Government  work.  The
movement  for  developing  allotments  and  small  holdings
has  also,  in  this  country,  received  governmental  help.

§  4.  The  same  line  of  thought,  looked  at  from  the  other
side,  suggests  that  the  marginal  social  net  product  of  activities
devoted  to  bringing  about  any  widespread  "  trustification  "  of
industry  is  likely  to  be  smaller  than  the  marginal  trade  net
product.  For  large  combinations — this  does  not  apply  to
those  Kartels  whose  members  remain  separate  and  in-
dependent on  the  productive  side — by  lessening  the  oppor-


CH.VII  INDUSTEIAL  FOEMS  183

tunities  for  training  in  the  entrepreneur  function,  tend  to
prevent  the  level  of  business  ability  from  rising  as  high  as  it
might  otherwise  do.  "  The  development  of  a  high  order  of
undertaking  genius  in  the  few  seems  to  depend  upon  a  wide
range  of  undertaking  experience  in  the  many."  "With  the
main  part  of  industry  organised  into  million  dollar  combines,
the  ladder  connecting  different  stages  of  managing  ability
would  be  gravely  damaged.  Xor  would  the  opportunity  for
obtaining  positions  as  managers  of  departments  in  a  giant  concern
go  far  to  make  up  for  this ;  for,  apart  from  the  limited  degree
of  independent  initiative  which  the  management  of  a  department,
as  compared  with  the  control  of  a  business,  necessarily  involves,
departments  will  not  vary  in  size  so  widely,  or  reach  so  low
down  in  the  scale,  as  private  businesses  may  do.  In  his  address
to  the  Eoyal  Economic  Society  in  1908,  Dr.  Marshall  called
attention  to  the  educative  possibilities  of  small  businesses,  illus-
trating his  thesis  from  the  present  organisation  of  the  milk  trade.
He  pointed  out  that,  so  far  as  the  working  of  industries  by  the
State — and  the  same  thing,  of  course,  applies  to  the  working
of  them  by  large  commercial  combinations — does  away  with
this  sort  of  educative  ladder,  the  mere  proof  that  it  was  im-
mediately more  economical  than  private  management  would
not  suffice  to  show  that  it  was  more  economical  on  the  whole.*
This  is  the  same  thing  as  saying  that  the  marginal  social  net
product  is  less  than  the  marginal  trade  net  product  The
practical  inference,  so  far  as  the  present  argument  goes,  is
plain.  Though  in  the  special  emergency  of  the  great  war,
when  immediate  output  was  absolutely  essential  and  had  to
be  won  even  though  the  future  suffered,  the  State  might
rightly  intervene  to  enforce  various  forms  of  combination  that
would  not  have  come  about  without  it,  yet  in  normal  times  of
peace  it  should  always  hesitate  before  encouraging,  and  should
perhaps  in  some  instances  impede,  any  threatened  excess  in
the  growth  of  giant  businesses,  whether  these  are  publicly  or

*  We  may  notice  that,  when,  as  in  such  a  country  as  India,  the  narrowness
of  the  markets  and  other  causes  prevent  the  development  of  any  large  scale
industries,  the  top  end  of  the  industrial  ladder  is  cut  off,  and  there  is  a  difficulty,
analogous  to  the  difficulty  discussed  in  the  text,  about  the  provision  of  an
adequate  training-ground  for  the  higher  forms  of  business  ability.  (Cf.  Morison.
The  Industrial  Organisation  of  an  Indian  Province,  p.  186.)


184  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

privately  owned.  What  has  been  said  above,  however,
obviously  does  not  exhaust  the  considerations  relevant  to  this
problem.  Further  discussion  of  it  will  be  found  in  Chapters
XL  and  XVIII.

§  5.  Considerations  of  the  same  general  character  as  the
above  are  relevant  to  certain  developments  in  the  method  and
practice  of  standardised  production.^  It  has  long  been  known
that,  by  specialisation  to  a  limited  number  of  standard  forms,
great  economy  of  cost  and  increase  of  production  can  be
achieved.  This  economy,  furthermore,  is  not  confined  to  the
point  at  which  standardisation  is  first  applied ;  for,  if  one
industry  agrees  to  standardise  its  product,  the  industries  which
make  machines  and  tools  for  making  that  product  are  in  turn
enabled  to  standardise  theirs.  The  Standards  Committee  of
the  Engineering  Trade  of  this  country  has  done  much  work  in
drawing  up,  for  screws,  nuts,  certain  motor  parts  and  various
other  things,  standard  specifications  which  have  been  adopted
throughout  the  engineering  industry  of  the  country  generally.
The  experience  of  the  great  war,  in  which  military  equipment
and  munitions  had  necessarily  to  be  of  uniform  patterns,
brought  out  more  clearly  than  before  the  enormous  scope  for
direct  economies  which,  partly  by  making  possible  the  em-
ployment of  relatively  unskilled  labour,  standardisation  of
product  is  able,  in  favourable  circumstances,  to  create.  The
urgent  need  for  immediate  large  output  at  a  minimum  of
cost  even  led  to  standardisation,  under  Government  authority,
of  such  things  as  ships  and  boots.  The  essence  of  the  matter
is  that  the  standardisation  of  certain  products  over  the  whole  of
an  industry,  by  enabling  the  firms  that  make  them,  and  the
other  firms  that  make  tools  for  making  them,  to  specialise  more
closely  than  would  otherwise  be  possible,  leads  immediately  to
an  enormously  increased  output  of  these  products.  This  in-
creased output  we  may  call,  if  we  will,  the  trade  net  product  of
the  method  of  standardisation.  If,  however,  attention  is  concen-
trated exclusively  upon  this,  the  net  advantages  of  the  method
will  sometimes  be  greatly  exaggerated.     For  standardisation

1  In  Industry  and  Trade,  bk.  ii.,  chapters  ii.  and  iii.,  Dr.  Marsliall,  after
distinguishing  between  standards  particular  to  an  individual  producer  and
standards  that  are  general  to  the  greater  part  of  an  industry,  has  much  inter-
esting discussion  of  modem  developments  in  standardisation.


cH.  yii  INDUSTRIAL  FORMS       •  185

almost  inevitably  checks  the  development  of  new  patterns,
new  ^ocesses  3^  ne^  ideas.  It  is  all  very  well  to  make
rules  for  revising  periodically  the  standard  specifications.
This  is  not  an  adequate  remedy,  because  the  real  danger  of
standardisation  is,  not  so  much  that  it  will  prevent  the  adoption
of  new  things  when  their  superiority  has  been  recognised,  but
that  it  will  greatly  lessen  the  inducement  to  manufacturers  to
de\dse  and  try  new  things.  For  in  normal  industry  the
profit  which  a  man  gets  out  of  an  improvement  is  chiefly  won
in  the  period  when  he  is  ahead  of  his  competitors,  before  the
improvement  is  adopted  generally.  With  a  rigid  system  of
standardisation  nobody  would  be  able  to  be  ahead  of  anybody
else  or  to  introduce  a  new  pattern  till  the  whole  trade  did  so.
The  whole  line,  in  short,  must  advance  together ;  and  this
means  that  no  part  of  it  has  any  great  inducement  to  advance
at  alL  The  marginal  social  net  product  of  effort  devoted
towards  standardising  processes  falls  short  of  the  marginal
trade  net  product  to  an  extent  measured  by  its  indirect  conse-
quences in  checking  inventions  and  imj)rovements  and  so  lessen-
ing productive  powers  iu  tlie  future.  Obviously  the  gap  thus
indicated  is  not  equally  wide  for  all  commodities.  It  is
difficult  to  believe,  for  example,  that  the  establishment  of
standard  sizes  and  standard  forms  for  such  things  as  screws
and  nuts  is  likely  to  prevent  the  development  of  any  important
improvement.  In  these  simple  things  there  is  little  or  no
room  for  improvement.  But  with  complex  manufactures  the
position  is  altogether  different.  Even  in  the  course  of  the
great  war,  when  large  output  was  of  overwhelming  importance,
it  would  have  been  madness  to  standardise  the  production  of
aeroplanes  ;  the  opening  for  discovery  and  for  the  development  of
better  types  was  so  wide.  And  plainly,  in  many  other  finished
manufactures,  it  is  impossible  to  feel  any  confidence  that  the
fiinal  form  has  already  been  evolved.  There  is,  therefore,
always  the  danger  that,  by  standardisation,  we  shall  augment
enormously  the  production  of  the  good  at  the  cost  of  never
attaining  to  the  better.  In  any  action  that  the  State  may
take  to  foster  standardisation  for  the  sake  of  the  immediate
and  direct  stimulus  which  it  gives  to  output  this  danger
must  be  carefully  home  in  mind.


186  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

§  6.  Yet  again  the  analysis  iiere  developed  is  applicable  to
certain  aspects  of  that  method  of  business  organisation  that
has  come  to  be  known  as  "  scientific  management."  The
general  characteristics  of  that  system  are  well  known.  Elaborate
study  of  the  various  operations  to  be  performed  is  undertaken
by  trained  experts,  who  analyse  these  operations  into  their
separate  elements,  and,  on  the  basis  of  this  analysis,  coupled
with  careful  observation  of  the  methods  actually  followed  by
a  number  of  good  workmen,  construct,  by  combination,  an  ideal
method  superior  to  any  yet  in  vogue.  The  kind  of  improve-
ment to  which  this  process  leads  is  illustrated  by  the  results
of  Mr,  Gilbraith's  investigation  of  the  problem  of  laying  bricks.
He  "  studied  the  best  height  for  the  mortar  box  and  brick  pile,
and  then  designed  a  scaffold,  with  a  table  on  it,  upon  which
all  of  the  materials  are  placed,  so  as  to  keep  the  bricks,  the
mortar,  the  man,  and  the  wall  in  their  proper  relative  positions.
These  scaffolds  are  adjusted,  as  the  wall  grows  in  height,  for
all  of  the  bricklayers,  by  a  labourer  especially  detailed  for  this
purpose,  and  by  this  means  the  bricklayer  is  saved  the  exertion
of  stooping  down  to  the  level  of  his  feet  for  each  brick  and
each  trowelful  of  mortar  and  then  straightening  up  again.
Think  of  the  waste  of  effort  that  has  gone  on  through  all  these
years,  with  each  bricklayer  lowering  his  body,  weighing,  say,
150  pounds,  down  two  feet  and  raising  it  up  again  every  time
a  brick  (weighing  about  5  pounds)  is  laid  in  the  wall !  And
this  each  bricklayer  did  about  one  thousand  times  a  day."  ■^
This  device  is,  however,  merely  one  example  of  what  scientific
management  endeavours  to  achieve  in  general.  The  central
conception  involved  in  it  is  that  of  handing  over  the  task  of
planning  methods  to  trained  experts,  and  then  explaining  to
the  workmen  in  elaborate  detail  what  it  is  they  have  to  do,
including  even  the  pauses  and  rest  periods  that  they  should
take  between  successive  operations  and  movements.  "The
work  of  every  workman  is  fully  planned  out  by  the  manage-
ment at  least  one  day  in  advance,  and  each  man  receives  in
most  cases  complete  written  instructions,  describing  in  detail
the  task  which  he  is  to  accomplish,  as  well  as  the  means  to
be  used  in  doing  the  work.     And  the  work  planned  in  advance

1  Taylor,  The  Principles  of  Scientific  Management,  p.  78.


CH.  Yii  INDUSTEIAL  FOEMS  187

in  this  way  constitutes  a  task  which  is  to  be  solved,  as  explained
above,  not  by  the  workman  alone,  but  in  almost  all  cases  by
the  joint  effort  of  the  workman  and  the  management.  This
task  specifies,  not  only  what  is  to  be  done,  but  how  it  is  to  be
done  and  the  exact  time  allowed  for  doing  it."  ^  The  work  of
teaching  the  workmen  how  to  do  it,  and  of  seeing  that  they
properly  understand  and  carry  out  their  instructions,  is  en-
trusted to  a  new  class  of  officials  known  as  "  functional  fore-
men." These  officials,  working  in  conjunction  with  the
accounting  officer,  can  ascertain  at  once  how  far  the  costs  of
any  particular  workman's  output  exceed  the  proper  costs  laid
down  beforehand,  and  can  then  concentrate  attention  and
instruction  at  any  point  where  there  is  prima  facie  reason  to
hope  for  improvement.^  Now  it  is  perfectly  plain  that  this
type  of  industrial  organisation  is  likely  to  yield  large  immediate
economies,  and  that  the  careful  teaching  involved  in  it  must
up  to  a  point  yield  much  permanent  good.  It  is  a  paradox  that,
"though  in  the  athletic  world  instructors  exist  to  teach  boxers
how  to  balance  themselves  and  use  their  arms,  and  cricket
professionals  are  constantly  at  work  improving  the  efficiency  of
batsmen  and  bowlers,  and  coaches  are  a  necessity  to  teach  a
boat's  crew  collectively  and  individually  how  and  when  to
move  their  bodies  and  hands,  yet  in  the  industrial  world  the
value  of  teaching  operatives  how  to  earn  their  livelihood  is
hardly  yet  recognised."^  Nevertheless,  there  is  real  danger
lest  this  new-found  science  should  be  pushed  too  far.  Carried
to  excessive  lengths  it  may,  from  a  long  period  point  of  view,
defeat  its  own  ends.  First,  it  is  plain  that,  so  far  as  the
operations  of  the  individual  workman  are  reduced  to  a
mechanical  plan,  the  original  source  from  which  the  directing
authority  derived  its  standard  methods — namely,  a  combina-
tion of  the  best  points  in  the  varied  individual  methods  of
different  workmen — would  be  dried  up.  Overt  suggestions
from  workpeople  for  improvements  in  method  would  also,
perhaps,  be  rendered  less  probable.     No  doubt,  this  loss  could

^  Taylor,  The  Principles  of  Scientific  Management,  p.  39.

^  Cf.  Emerson,  Efficiency,  ch.  vii  Mr.  Dicksee  draws  some  instructire
comparisons  between  these  methods  and  the  various  forms  of  drill  practised
among  soldiers.     (Business  Methods  and  the  War,  Lecture  2.)

'  Health  of  Munition  Workers  Committee,  Interim  Repcrt,  p.  77.


183  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

be  partly  atoned  for  by  the  employment  of  scientific  experts
specially  charged  with  the  task  of  experimenting  in  new
methods.  But,  after  all,  these  are  available  under  ordinary
systems  of  works'  management  and  cannot,  therefore,  be
regarded  as  a  peculiar  asset  of  the  Taylor  system  to  be  set
against  its  peculiar  failings.  Nor  is  it  only  in  respect  of
specific  suggestions  and  devices  that  injury  may  be  indirectly
wrought  by  this  system.  There  is  grave  reason  to  fear  lest
the  general  initiative  and  independent  activity  of  workpeople
may  be  injured  by  their  complete  subordination  to  the  detailed
control  of  functional  foremen,  much  as  the  general  initiative
of  soldiers  is  injured  by  the  grinding  of  an  over-rigid  and
mechanical  military  system.  By  the  removal  of  opportunities
for  the  exercise  of  initiative,  capacity  for  initiative  may  be
destroyed,  and  the  quality  of  the  labouring  force  may  in  this
way  be  subtly  lowered.  In  so  far  as  this  happens,  the
marginal  social  net  product  of  resources  invested  in  the
development  and  application  of  scientific  management  falls
short  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product.  Unless  the  State  or
philanthropy  intervenes,  there  is  a  danger  that  this  method
of  industrial  organisation  may  be  carried  further  and  applied
more  widely  than  the  interest  of  the  national  dividend — not
to  speak  of  the  more  general  interest  of  society— when  viewed
as  a  whole,  demands.


CHAPTER   VIII

DIVERGENCES    BETWEEN    MAEGINAL   TRADE   NET    PRODUCT   AND
MARGINAL   INDIVIDUAL   NET    PRODUCT^

§  1.  In  the  preceding  chapters  it  was  provisionally  assumed
that  the  rate  of  return  to  investment  in  any  industry  is
equivalent  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product
there,  and,  therefore,  that  the  tendency  of  self-interest  to
equalise  returns  in  all  industries  is  in  effect  a  tendency
to  equalise  the  values  of  marginal  trade  net  products.
From  this  assumption  it  followed  that  seK-interest  fails  to
equalise  the  values  of  marginal  social  net  products  only  in
so  far  as  trade  and  social  net  products  diverge.  We  have
now  to  inquire  how  far  the  provisional  assumption  thus
made  is  correct.  Is  it  the  fact  that  the  free  play  of  self-
interest  tends  to  equate  the  values  of  marginal  trade  net
products  in  different  industries  ?  To  simplify  this  inquiry
I  shall  imagine  a  central  level  of  value  of  marginal  trade
net  products  in  industries  in  general,  and  shall  concentrate
attention    upon    the    influences    which     determine     whether

I  or  not  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of
resources  in  some  single  occupation  selected  for  review  will
tend  to  stand  at  that  central  leveL^  In  future  chapters  I
shall  investigate  this  problem  as  it  presents  itself  under
conditions  of  monopolistic  competition,  simple  monopoly  and
discriminating    monopoly    respectively.       But     the     present

^  A  diagrammatic  version  of  the  argument  of  this  chapter  will  be  fonnd  in
Appendix  III.

*  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  this  central  level  is  actually  attained
in  any  industry  ;  it  is  rather  to  be  conceived  as  the  level  which  would  be
attained  in  any  industry  operating  under  conditions  of  constant  return,  or,  as
the  average  of  the  levels  which  would  be  attained  in  all  industries  if  their
departures  from  constant  return  in  both  directions  balanced  each  other.

189


190  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

chapter  will  be  concerned  exclusively  with  "simple  com-
petition," that  is  to  say,  with  conditions  under  which  it  is
to  the  interest  of  each  seller  to  produce  as  much  as  he  can
at  the  ruling  market  price,  and  not  to  restrict  his  output  in  the
hope  of  causing  that  price  to  rise.

§  2.  The  broad  general  solution  of  this  problem  can  be
reached  without  great  difficulty.  Let  us  place  ourselves  in
imagination  in  a  country  where  the  flow  of  resources  coming
annually  into  being  has  to  be  distributed  regularly  among
a  variety  of  occupations.  It  is  assumed  that,  when  any  given
quantity  of  resources  is  devoted  to  a  given  occupation,  the
concrete  form  assumed  by  these  resources — their  distribu-
tion, for  example,  into  many  or  few  individual  firms  and  so
forth — is  the  most  economical  form  available  (from  the
standpoint  of  the  period  of  time  relevant  to  our  problem)
for  that  quantity  of  new  resources ;  and  that,  when  a
slightly  greater  quantity  is  devoted  to  the  occupation,  the
concrete  form  assumed  is  the  most  economical  form  available
(from  the  same  standpoint)  for  that  quantity.^  When  this
assumption  is  made,  it  is  plain  that,  if  one  unit  is  added  to
the  resources  that  normally  flow  into  any  one  occupation,  that
unit  will  yield  the  same  net  product  as  each  of  the  other
units  in  the  flow.  All  the  units  are  interchangeable  in  this
sense.  But,  in  consequence  of  the  addition  of  the  extra
unit,  the  general  organisation  of  the  industry  may  be  modified
in  such  wise  that  each  unit  of  the  flow  directed  towards
it  yields  a  dififerent  net  product  from  what  it  would  have
done  had  the  addition  not  been  made.  Thus,  the  net  product
of  the  (marginal)  10,000th  unit  consists  of  two  parts,  a  direct
net  product  equal  to  the  net  product  which  every  unit  would
have  yielded  had  the  organisation  of  the  industry  remained
unchanged,  i.e.  which  every  unit  did  yield  when  9999  units
were  employed,  and  an  indirect  net  product,  equal  to  the
increase  or  decrease  in  the  net  product  of  all  the  units
employed,  which  is  due  to  the  changed  organisation  of  the
industry.  These  two  things  together  constitute  the  marginal
trade  net  product  of  the  resources  devoted  to  the  industry
when    10,000    units   of   resources   are   devoted    to   it.      But

1  Of.  the  definition  of  marginal  net  product  given  in  Chap.  II.  §  1.


CH.VIII     TEADE  &  INDIVIDUAL  NET  PEODUCT      191

the  assumption  that  the  value  of  this  marginal  trade  net
product  is  equal  to  the  returns  obtained  by  the  investor
is  not  correct.  The  owner  of  the  marginal  unit  of  the  flow
of  resources  wiU  not  reap  for  himseK  the  whole  of  this  net
product.  He  will  only  reap  the  direct  net  product  of  this
unit,  together  with  a  fraction  of  the  indirect  net  product
equal  to  the  fraction  which  his  private  investment  bears
to  the  aggregate  investment.  Under  simple  competition,
however,  since  that  condition  of  things  implies  that  each
individual  seller  is  only  responsible  for  a  very  small  share
of  the  aggregate  output,  this  fraction  is  necessarily  very
small  It  follows  that  the  marginal  trade  net  product  in
any  industry  differs  from  the  net  product  reaped  by  the
individual  investor — the  marginal  individual  net  product
as  we  may  say — by  very  nearly  the  whole  amount  of  the
indirect  net  product  due  to  changes  brought  about  in  the
general  organisation  of  the  industry.  In  an  industry  working
under  conditions  of  constant  returns,  an  increment  of
resources  yields  no  indirect  net  product ;  hence  marginal
trade  net  product  is  equal  to  marginal  individual  net
product.  In  an  industry  working  under  conditions  of
diminishing  returns,  an  increment  of  resources  yields  a
n^ative  indirect  net  product ;  hence  marginal  trade  net
product  is  less  than  marginal  individual  net  product.  In
an  industry  working  under  conditions  of  increasing  returns,
an  increment  of  resources  yields  a  positive  indirect  net
product ;  hence  marginal  trade  net  product  is  greater  than
marginal  individual  net  product.  These  results  are,  of  course,
equally  valid,  whether  the  product  of  the  industry  in  question
is  a  single  commodity  or  a  number  of  different  commodities
produced  by  it  under  conditions  of  joint  supply.  An  important
practical  conclusion  immediately  follows.  Clearly  it  is  the
value  of  the  marginal  individual  net  product  in  any  industry
that  self-interest  tends  to  make  equal  to  the  value  of  the
marginal  net  product  of  resources  in  general  Hence,  in  an
industry  where  marginal  trade  net  product  differs  from  marginal
individual  net  product,  the  value  of  marginal  trade  net
product  does  not  tend  to  coincide  with  that  general  level
Eather,  in  industries  of  increasing  returns  the  value  of  the


192  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

marginal  trade  net  product  of  investment  tends  to  exceed,
and  in  industries  of  diminishing  returns  to  fall  short  of,  the
value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  yielded  in  industries
in  general.  Furthermore,  the  "error"  in  either  case  is
greater,  the  more  sharply  diminishing  or  increasing  returns,
as  the  case  may  be,  are  acting.^

§  3.  The  argument  of  the  preceding  sections  is  complete,
if  we  suppose  that  all  the  various  sources  or  regions  of  supply,
from  which  the  aggregate  supply  is  contributed,  are  precisely
similar.  Prima  facie,  indeed,  it  might  seem  that,  in
industries  subject  to  increasing  returns,  we  need  to  suppose
further — a  supposition  incompatible  with  our  assumption
of  simple  competition — that  only  a  single  producer  is  at
work ;  for,  with  more  than  one  supplier  in  the  market,  it
is  difficult  to  understand  how  stable  equilibrium  can  exist.
But  the  difficulty  is  apparent  rather  than  real.  Provided
that  certain  external  economies  are  common  to  all  the
suppliers  jointly,  the  presence  of  increasing  returns  in  all
together  is  compatible  with  the  presence  of  diminishing
returns  in  the  special  work  of  each  severally ;  and  this  is
sufficient  to  permit  of  stable  equilibrium.  Hence,  no  second
supposition  is  required  to  validate  our  argument.  It
remains,  however,  to  consider  what  results  will  follow  if  the
first  supposition  mentioned  above,  that,  namely,  of  precise
similarity  of  all  the  various  sources  or  regions  of  supply,
is  withdrawn.  In  conditions  of  simple  competition,  equili-
brium will  be  established,  when  the  marginal  individual
net  products  of  new  resources  in  all  the  sources  of  supply
are  equal.  But  equality  of  marginal  individual  net  products
between  two  sources  only  implies  equality  of  marginal  trade
net  products,  provided  that  the  difference  between  marginal
trade  net  product  and  marginal  individual  net  product  is  the
same  in  the  two  sources ;  and  this  implies  that  the  circum-
stances of  the  two  sources  are  exactly  alike.  But,  when
the  various  sources  of  supply  are  not  exactly  alike,  it  is  by
no  means  obvious  that  the  difference  between  the  marginal
trade  net  product  and  the  marginal  individual  net  product  in

^  Cf.  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economics,  bk.  v.  chapter  xiii. ,  for  the  whole  of
the  preceding  argument.


H


cH.  VIII     TEADE  &  INDIVIDUAL  NET  PKODUCT    193

any  one  of  them  will  be  the  same  as  it  is  in  any  other.  It
can,  indeed,  be  shown  that,  in  general,  this  will  not  be  so.^
Hence,  simple  competition  involves  a  further  element  of
maladjustment,  additional  to  that  wliich  has  so  far  been
discussed.  The  values  of  the  marginal  trade  net  products  of
resources  invested  in  different  sources  of  supply  will  diverge
from  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources
in  general,  not  in  a  uniform  manner,  but  some  to  a  greater,
and  others  to  a  smaller,  extent.

§  4.  The  results  we  have  obtained  lead  directly  to  the
following  conclusions.  When  there  is  only  one^  source  of
supply,  or  when  all  the  sources  are  similar,  it  is  possible  to
conceive,  for  every  industry  obeying  the  law  of  diminishing
returns,  some  uniform  rate  of  tax,  the  levy  of  which  on  the
industry  would  make  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net
product  of  resources  in  that  industry  more  nearly  equal  to
the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources  in
general  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.  In  like  manner,
it  is  possible  to  conceive,  for  every  industry  obeying  the
law  of  increasing^  returns,  some  uniform  rate  of  bounty,  the
grant  of  which  would  have  this  effect.  W'hen  fwo  or  more
of  the  sources  of  supply  are  not  precisely  similar  to  one
another,  it  is  still  possible  to  conceive  under  diminishing
returns  some  uniform  rate  of  tax,  and  under  increasing
returns  some  uniform  rate  of  bounty,  which  would  make  the
values  of  the  marginal  trade  net  products  of  resources  in  the
different  centres  of  our  industry  more  nearly  similar  to  the
value  of  the  mairginal  trade  net  product  of  resources  in
general  than  they  would  have  been  under  a  regime  of  complete
laissez-faire.  But  it  is  not  possible,  in  general,  to  conceive
any  uniform  rate  of  tax  (or  of  bounty)  which  would  make  the
values  of  the  marginal  trade  net  products  of  resources  in  all
the  centres  of  our  industry  equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal
trade  net  product  of  resources  in  general  To  achieve  this
latter  purpose  a  system  of  differential  taxes  (or  bounties)  is
necessary,  under  which,  in  general,  a  heavier  impost  is  laid
on  those  sources  of  supply  where  the  law  of  diminishing
returns   acts   with   the   greatest  force,  and   a  lighter  one  on

1  Cf.  Appendix  III.  §  12.

O


194  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

the  other  sources.^  This  result  is  of  considerable  theoretical
importance,  because  it  is  in  direct  conflict  with  the  widespread
opinion  that,  apart  from  certain  possible  indirect  effects,
differential  taxes  are  necessarily  wasteful  and  necessarily
cause  people  to  obtain  what  they  want  by  a  more  costly,
instead  of  by  a  less  costly,  route.  This  opinion  is  incorrect,  and
the  nature  of  the  error  can  be  easily  illustrated.  Suppose
there  are  two  roads  ABD  and  ACD  both  leading  from  A
to  D.  If  left  to  itself,  traffic  would  be  so  distributed  that
the  trouble  involved  in  driving  a  "  representative  "  cart  along
each  of  the  two  roads  would  be  equal.  But,  in  some  circum-
stances, it  would  be  possible,  by  shifting  a  few  carts  from
route  B  to  route  C,  greatly  to  lessen  the  trouble  of  driving
those  still  left  on  B,  while  only  slightly  increasing  the  trouble
of  driving  along  C.  In  these  circumstances  a  rightly  chosen
measure  of  differential  taxation  against  road  B  would  create
an  "  artificial "  situation  superior  to  the  "  natural  "  one.  But
the  measure  of  differentiation  must  be  rightly  chosen.
J  §  5,  What  has  been  said  in  the  preceding  paragraphs
exhausts  the  topic,  which,  if  the  logical  scheme  of  this
work  is  strictly  adhered  to,  is  proper  to  the  present  place.
For  the  relation  between  the  magnitude  of  the  national
dividend  and  economic  welfare  was  examined  in  a  general
way  in  Part  I.,  and  Part  II.  has  been  reserved  for  a  dis-
cussion of  certain  influences  by  which  the  magnitude  of  the
national  dividend  is  affected.  After  all,  however,  logical
arrangement  is  a  servant,  not  a  master,  and  may  be  dis-
regarded for  sufficient  cause.  In  the  present  instance  such
cause  exists.  The  fact  that  individual  producers,  in  deter-
mining their  investments  under  simple  competition,  disregard
an  element  in  the  marginal  trade  net  product,  namely,  the
indirect  effect  exercised  upon  the  costs  of  other  producers,
is  interesting  to  us  'primarily  because  it  makes  the  national

*  The  whole  of  the  above  remarks  apply  to  joint  products  as  well  as  to
commodities  produced  in  isolation.  But  a  peculiar  effect  is  possible  when  a  tax
in  kind — not  an  ordinary  tax  in  money — is  levied  on  one  of  two  joint  products.
If  the  elasticity  of  demand  for  one  of  them  is  less  than  unity,  a  tax  in  kind  on
that  product  will  increase  the  output  of  both  products,  thus  positively  benefit-
ing the  consumers  of  the  other  product  and,  in  some  conditions,  adding  to  the
aggregate  sum  of  consumers'  surplus.


cH.viii     TKADE  &  INDIVIDUAL  NET  PEODUCT     195

dividend  smaller  than  it  might  be.  But  this  fact  itself  is
only  interesting  to  ws,  uUinidiely  for  the  reason  that,  generally-
speaking,  anything  that  affects  the  national  dividend  in-
juriously also  affects  injuriously  the  sum  of  economic  welfare.
If,  therefore,  there  exists  a  fact  precisely  analogous  to  the
one  we  have  been  discussing,  which  exercises  an  influence
upon  national  welfare  directly,  and  not  through  the  national
dividend,  it  would  be  mere  pedantry  to  refuse  to  discuss  it
here.  A  precisely  analogous  fact  of  the  kind  described  does
exist.  Just  as  the  investment  of  jin  increment  of  resources
sometimes  yields  an  indirect  product,  not  taken  account
of  by  the  investor,  through  its  "eHecT  on  the  productive
efficiency  of  other  people's  resources,  so  ako  it  sometimes
yields  an  indirect  product  by  affecting  the  amount  of  satis-
faction which  other  people  derive  from  the  consumption  of
a  given  quantity  of  commodity.  This  form  of  indirect
product  may  be  either  positive  or  negative.  Among  com-
modities, the  desire  for  which  is  partly  a  desire  to  possess
what  other  people  possess,  the  creation  of  the  1000*^  unit
adds  more  to  the  aggregate  satisfaction  than  it  actually
carries  itself,  because  it  makes  every  unit  of  the  commodity
more  common.  Top-hats  are  examples.  Among  commodities,
the  desire  for  which  is  partly  a  desire  to  possess  what  other
people  do  not  possess,  the  creation  of  the  1000^^  unit  adds
less  to  aggregate  satisfaction  than  it  actually  carries  itself,
because  it  makes  every  unit  of  the  commodity  more  common.
Diamonds  are  examples.^  Among  industries  whose  products
are  desired  for  their  own  sake,  and  not  as  means  to  any
form  of  distinction,  the  creation  of  the  1000*'*  unit  adds  to
aggregate  satisfaction  exactly  as  much  satisfaction  as  it
carries  itself  On  the  basis  of  this  analysis,  practical  infer-
ences analogous  to  those  set  out  in  §  4  are  easily  obtained.
In  every  industry,  the  desire  for  whose  products  is  enhanced

^  It  should  be  added  that,  when  commonness  or  rareness  is  an  element  in
the  esteem  in  which  a  person  holds  a  thing,  it  is  often  not  general  commonness
or  general  rareness  alone,  but,  in  many  instances,  both  commonness  among  one
set  of  people  and  also  rareness  among  another  set.  As  Mr.  McDougall  writes
of  the  followers  of  fashion  :  ' '  Each  victim  is  moved  not  only  by  the  prestige  of
those  whom  he  imitates  but  also  by  the  desire  to  be  dififerent  from  the  mass  who
have  not  yet  adopted  the  fashion  "  (Social  P$ychx}logy,  p.  336).  This  aspect  of
the  matter  cannot,  however,  be  pursued  here.


196  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

it  they  become  less  common,  it  is  possible  to  conceive  some
uniform  rate  of  tax,  tlie  levy  of  which  on  the  industry  would
increase  economic  welfare;  and  in  every  industry  the  desire
for  whose  products  is  enhanced  if  they  become  more  common,
it  is  possible  to  conceive  some  uniform  rate  of  bounty,  the
imposition  of  which  would  produce  a  like  effect.  But  there
is  reason  to  believe  that  the  great  bulk  of  common  com-
modities consumed  by  the  mass  of  the  population  are  desired
almost  entirely  for  their  own  sake,  and  not  as  a  means  to
any  form  of  distinction.  The  sphere  of  usefulness  that
could  belong,  even  under  a  perfectly  wise  and  perfectly
virtuous  Government,  to  these  fiscal  devices  is,  therefore,
probably  smaller  than  it  might  appear  to  be  at  first  sight.


CHAPTEK    IX

STATE    REGULATION    OF    COMPETITIVE    PRICES

^  1.  The  preceding  discussion  seems  at  first  sight  to  prove
that,  apart  from  divergences  between  individual,  trade  and
social  net  product,  State  interference,  designed  to  modify  in
any  way  the  working  of  free  competition,  is  bound  to  injure
the  national  dividend ;  for  this  competition  left  to  itself  will
continually  push  resources  from  points  of  lower  productivity  to
points  of  higher  productivity,  thus  tending  always  away  from
less  favourable,  and  towards  more  favourable,  arrangements  of
the  community's  resources.  We  have  now  to  confront  this
general  presumption  with  the  extensive  policy  of  price
regulation  which  was  followed  by  the  British,  as  by  moat  other
Governments,  during  the  course  of  the  great  European  War.
I  propose  first  to  give  a  general  account  of  that  policy  and
then  to  inquire  how  far,  if  at  all,  the  experience  gained  should
modify  the  conclusions  reached  in  preceding  chapters.
\/  §  2.  Broadly  put,  the  position  was  as  follows.  The  war
caused  in  two  ways  a  great  shortage  in  certain  things.  On
the  one  hand,  for  munition  articles,  army  clothes  and  so  forth,
there  was  an  enormous  new  Government  demand  much  in
excess  of  normal  supplies.  On  the  other  hand,  for  various
articles  of  ordinary  civilian  use,  the  contraction  of  available
tonnage  and  the  withdrawal  of  labour  for  the  army  and
munition  work  caused  supplies  to  fall  much  below  the  normal.
The  shortage  brought  about  in  one  or  other  of  these  ways  put
it  in  the  power  of  persons  who  happened  to  hold  stocks  of
short  commodities,  or  to  be  able  to  produce  them  quickly,  to
charge  for  them  prices  very  much  higher  than  usual.  "WHien
the  shortage  was  due  to  increased  Government  demand,  the

197


198  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

scale  of  business  done  by  these  persons  being  as  large  as,  or
larger  than,  before,  the  high  prices  that  they  were  enabled  to
charge  necessarily  yielded  them  abnormally  large  profits.
When  it  was  due  to  contraction  of  supply  {e.g.  through  the
withdrawal  of  labour  or  other  obstacles  to  output),  the  gain
from  high  prices  might  be  cancelled  by  loss  due  to  lessened
sales ;  so  that  abnormally  large  profits  were  not  obtained.
For  a  great  number  of  things,  however,  the  conditions  of
demand  are  such  that  a  shortage  of,  say,  10  per  cent  in  the
supply  causes  the  price  offered  by  purchasers  to  rise  by  much
more  than  10  per  cent.  For  the  sellers  of  articles  of  this
class  the  shortage,  even  when  it  was  due  to  a  supply  contrac-
tion, often  meant  abnormal  profits.  Of  course,  some  of  these
abnormal  profits  were  more  apparent  than  real,  for,  if  prices
all  round  are  doubled,  a  doubling  of  money  profits  will  only
enable  a  man  to  get  the  same  amount  of  things  as  before.
Very  often,  however,  the  money  profits  were  enhanced  very
raiich  more  than  in  proportion  to  the  rise  in  general  prices.
Wherever  this  happened,  certain  specially  favoured  persons
were  benefiting  greatly  as  a  direct  consequence  of  the  war.
This  state  of  things  naturally  caused  resentment,  and  suggested
State  interference.

§  3.  This  interference  might  follow  either  of  two  principal
lines.  On  the  one  hand,  fortunately  situated  sellers  might  be
allowed  to  charge  such  prices  as  the  market  would  bear,  thus
collecting  abnormal  profits  in  the  first  instance ;  but,  there-
after, be  deprived  of  the  bulk  of  these  for  the  benefit  of  the
Exchequer  by  a  high  excess  profits  tax.  On  the  other  baud,
the  prices  they  were  allowed  to  charge  might  be  limited  by
authority  to  rates  at  which  it  was  estimated  that  abnormal
profits  would  not  accrue  to  them.  Apart  from  points  of
technique  and  administration,  the  choice  between  these  two
plans  makes  no  difference  to  the  fortunately  situated  seller.
But  it  does  make  a  difference  to  the  people  who  happen  to
need  the  particular  goods  or  services  that  he  sells.  For,
whereas  under  the  maximum  price  plan  they  are  left  un-
touched, under  the  excess  profits  plan  a  special  levy  is,  in
effect,  placed  upon  them  for  the  benefit  of  the  general  taxpayers.
It  follows  that,  where  the  taxpayers  themselves,  through  the


cH.n  STATE  REGULATION  OF  PEICES  199

Government,  are  the  principal  buyers,  or  where  the  public  are
buyers  more  or  less  in  the  proportion  in  which  they  aie  tax-
payers, it  does  not  greatly  matter  which  of  the  two  plans  is
chosen.  But  where,  as  in  practically  all  articles  of  food,  poor
people  play  a  much  larger  part,  compared  with  rich  people,
as  buyers  of  an  article  which  is  short  than  they  play  as  tax-
payers, it  does  greatly  matter.  For,  if  the  State  were  to
adopt  the  excess  profits  plan  in  preference  to  the  maximum
prices  plan,  it  would  be  relieving  the  well-to-do  of  a  large
block  of  taxation,  and  throwing  it,  by  a  roundabout  and  semi-
secret  process,  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  poor.  Whatever
might  be  thought  of  the  desirability  of  exacting  a  larger
contribution  to  the  expenses  of  the  war  from  relatively  poor
persons,  it  was  obvious  that  a  device  of  that  kind  would  never
be  tolerated.  Consequently,  over  a  large  part  of  the  field,
the  excess  profits  plan  could  not  practically  be  made  the  main
engine  for  preventing  fortunately  situated  sellers  from  making
fortunes  out  of  the  war.  Eesort  had  of  necessity  to  be  had
to  the  plan  of  maximum  prices.

§  4.  In  the  actual  working  out  of  that  plan,  a  great
number  of  difficulties  emerged,  which  it  will  be  well  to  set
out  in  order.  The  first  of  these  was  the  difficulty  of  definition.
The  same  name  often  covers  a  great  variety  of  different
qualities  of  article,  which  it  may  be  extremely  hard  to
disentangle  in  any  formal  schedule.  When  this  condition
prevaUs  it  is  impossible  to  exercise  control  over  prices  by
general  rules,  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  fall  back  upon  the
cumbrous  device  of  individual  appraisement.  Thus,  under  the
Raw  Cocoa  Order  of  March  1918,  it  was  laid  down  that  no  raw
cocoa  might  be  sold  except  at  "  a  fair  value,"  this  fair  value
being  determined  by  a  person  authorised  by  the  Food  Controller
to  determine  the  grade  of  the  various  lots  of  cocoa.  A  similar
plan  was  adopted  at  the  end  of  1 9 1 7  for  controlling  the  prices  of
cattle  and  sheep  sold  by  live  weight  at  market.  Obviously,  how-
ever, this  plan  could  not  be  employed  on  a  large  scale,  owing
to  the  vast  amount  of  labour  that  it  involves.  Consequently,  in
general,  some  modification  of  it  was  essential,  and  some  general
classification  of  grades  had,  in  spite  of  the  openings  for  evasion
that  this  permits,  to  be,  in  one  way  or  another,  relied  upon.


200  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

A  second  difficulty,  when  the  problem  of  definiTig  grades
of  quality  was  overcome,  resulted  from  the  mere  fact  that
grades  were  often  very  numerous.  The  task  of  fixing  prices
directly  for  a  great  variety  of  these  might  well  be  more  than
any  authority,  at  all  events  in  the  earlier  stages  of  its
operation,  was  prepared  to  enter  upon.  When  there  were
only  a  few  grades,  it  was  comparatively  easy,  with  the  help
of  advice  from  experts,  to  do  this;  but,  when  there  were
a  great  many,  it  was  thought  better  to  rely,  not  on  a  schedule
of  maximum  prices,  but  on  a  general  Order  determining  the
relations  between  the  prices  that  might  be  charged  in  the
future  and  those  that  had  been  charged  in  the  past.  An
example  of  this  plan  was  the  Order  of  the  Ministry  of
Munitions,  issued  in  August  1916,  by  which  sellers  of
machine  tools  were  forbidden,  except  with  the  sanction  of
the  Minister,  henceforward  to  charge  prices  higher  than  they
were  charging  in  July  1915.

An  analogous  difficulty  had  to  be  faced  when  a  com-
modity, about  the  grading  of  which,  perhaps,  there  was  no
need  to  trouble,  was  produced  under  different  conditions  in
a  number  of  different  localities,  in  such  wise  that  a  single
maximum  price  would  not  treat  different  producers  fairly.
Here,  too,  inability  to  construct  a  schedule  as  varied  as  the
circumstances  required  forced  the  controlling  authority  to
fall  back  on  the  plan  of  fixing,  not  future  prices  themselves,
but  the  relation  between  future  prices  and  past  prices.  Thus,
in  May  1917,  an  Order  was  issued  that  no  imported  soft
wood  should  be  sold  at  prices  above  those  that  ruled  in  each
several  locality  in  the  week  ending  31st  January  1917.
This  Order  was  subsequently  modified  as  regards  imports
from  Scandinavia ;  but  with  that  we  are  not  concerned.

So  far  it  has  been  tacitly  assumed  that  the  maximum
price  aimed  at  for  any  one  commodity  of  a  given  grade  is
a  single  price.  For  some  commodities,  however,  no  one
uniform  price  ruling  throughout  the  year  is  adapted  to  the
conditions  of  their  production  and  sale,  and  a  series  of  maxima
is  needed.  Plainly,  a  series  is  more  difficult  to  determine
correctly  than  a  single  price.  Consequently,  here  again  the
controlling  authority  was  driven  to  the  method  of  regulating


cH.ix  STATE  EEGULATION  OF  PEICES  201

the  relation  between  future  and  past  prices.  Thus,  in  July
1917,  it  was  ordered  that  the  wholesale  price  of  milk  per
imperial  gallon  should  not  henceforward  anywhere  exceed
by  more  than  6^d.  the  price  charged  in  the  corresponding
month  a  year  before,  and  that  the  retail  price  per  imperial
quart  should  not  exceed  this  corresponding  price  by  more
than  2d.  The  same  plan  was  followed  in  the  Price  of  Coal
(Limitation)  Act  of  1915,  which  decreed  that  no  colliery
company  should  charge  a  price  exceeding  by  more  than  4s.
(afterwards  raised  to  6s.  6d.)  the  price  charged  on  a  similar
sale  at  a  similar  date  in  1913—14.

Plainly,  all  these  indirect  and  roundabout  methods  of
control  left  the  way  open  for  evasion  and  were  likely
to  prove  difficult  to  enforce.  Consequently,  controlling
authorities,  as  they  got  a  better  grip  and  better  knowledge
of  the  conditions  of  various  industries,  tried  to  step  forward
to  the  more  precise  method  of  maximum  price  schedules.
More  and  more  this  became  the  predominant  plan.  The
producers'  and  wholesalers'  prices  of  most  of  the  more
important  articles  of  food  came  to  be  fixed  directly  by
schedule,  as  were  also  the  prices  of  most  of  the  commodities
controlled  by  the  Ministry  of  Munitions.  For  most  things
it  was  found  sufficient  to  set  up  a  single  schedule.  But
sometimes  different  producers'  prices  were  fixed  for  different
parts  of  the  country.  For  hay,  for  example,  Scotland  was
given  one  price,  England  another.  Sometimes,  too,  a  series
of  schedules  were  set  up  to  apply  to  different  parts  of  the
year.  For  potatoes  the  Order  of  February  1917  fixed  one
price  up  till  March  31st,  and  another  higher  price  after  that
date;  and  for  peas  and  beans  an  Order  of  May  1917  fixed
three  prices,  diminishing  in  amount,  for  sales  in  June,  July,
and  later  months.  Similarly  for  wheat,  oats  and  barley,  to
be  harvested  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Food  Controller,
in  August  1917,  fixed  a  series  of  prices  rising  gradually
in  each  successive  two  months  from  November  1917  on  to
June  1918.  A  later  Order  fixing  maximum  milk  prices
made  a  similar  differentiation  between  different  parts  of  the
year.  It  is  plain  that  the  direct  establishment  of  maximum
prices  is,  if  the  appropriate  prices  can  once  be  worked  out


202  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

satisfactorily,  likely  to  prove  much  more  effective  than  any
roundabout  plan.

So  far  we  have  only  taken  account  of  industries  so
simply  organised  that  the  producers  sell  a  finished  product
direct,  without  any  intermediary,  to  ultimate  consumers.
In  most  industries,  however,  there  are  several  stages  between
the  original  material  or  service  and  the  finished  product  in
consumers'  hands.  This  fact  gives  rise  to  further  problems.
The  conditions  of  demand  for  any  finished  product  being
given,  when  an  artificial  price  is  fixed  for  any  material  or
service  used  in  the  course  of  making  and  selling  it,  the  price
of  the  finished  product  need  not  be  lowered  correspondingly,
but  it  is  in  the  power  of  other  persons  in  a  line  between  the
provider  of  this  material  or  service  and  the  finished  product
to  add  on  to  their  charges  the  equivalent  of  whatever  has
been  knocked  off  the  charges  of  the  regulated  sellers.  Thus,
if  the  price  of  coal  at  the  pit-mouth  were  reduced  by  State
action  and  nothing  else  were  done,  the  only  effect  might  be
that  dealers  in  coal  could  buy  more  cheaply  while  retaining
the  old  price  of  sale.  Again,  if  the  price  of  cattle  were
forced  down,  and  nothing  else  done,  retail  prices  might  remain
unaltered,  while  butchers  and  meat  dealers  gained  enormously.
Yet  again,  if  freight-rates  on  imported  materials  were  kept
artificially  low  by  Government  action,  the  various  people
who  use  these  materials  in  their  industries  might  get  the
whole  benefit.  Nor  is  it  merely  possible  that  this  might
happen.  In  general  it  would  happen,  except  in  so  far  as  the
people,  on  whom  a  power  of  exaction  was  thus  conferred,
deliberately  from  patriotic  motives,  or  from  fear  of  popular
resentment,  decided  to  forgo  their  advantage.  In  order  to
prevent  this,  the  fixing  of  maximum  prices  at  the  earlier
stages  of  production  had  to  be  coupled  with  control  over
the  profits  which  manufacturers  or  dealers  at  a  later  stage
may  make  by  adding  further  charges  on  to  these  prices.
One  way  in  which  this  control  was  exercised  was  by  limiting
Hhe  percentage  addition  that  might  be  made  by  any  seller  in
the  line.  In  May  1917,  for  example,  it  was  decreed  that
no  timber  from  Russia  should  be  sold  at  an  advance  of  more
than  10  per  cent  on  the  purchase  price;  and  in  September


CH.  IX  STATE  EEGULATION  OF  PKICES  203

1917  a  schedule  of  prices  for  fish  was  fixed  as  between
fish-curers  and  wholesale  dealers,  and  other  sellers  (with
the  exception  of  retailers)  were  prohibited  from  adding  more
than  10  per  cent  on  to  the  scheduled  prices.  More  usually
it  was  not  the  percentage,  but  the  amount,  of  addition  that
was  limited.  Thus,  under  the  Cheese  Order  of  August
1917,  first-hand  prices  of  various  sorts  of  British-made  cheese
were  fixed  as  from  the  maker,  and  it  was  provided  that  no
dealer  other  than  the  maker  should  add  on  to  them  more  than
the  actual  charge  for  transport  plus,  in  general,  6  s.  per  cwt.
In  October  it  was  provided  further  that  retailers  should  not
add  on  to  the  prices  actually  paid  by  them  more  than  2-|d.
per  lb.  In  the  same  month  the  prices  of  the  various  sorts
of  leather  were  regulated  on  the  same  general  plan.  In  like
manner  the  price  of  horse  and  poultry  mixture  was  controlled,
in  November  1917,  by  an  Order  forbidding  the  maker  to
charge  a  price  exceeding  the  cost  to  him  of  his  ingredients
by  more  than  £1  :  lOs.  per  ton  ;  and  the  amount  that  other
sellers  might  add  on  was  limited  to  Is.  per  cwt.  on  sales
of  6  cwt.  and  more,  3s.  per  cwt.  on  sales  of  from  3  to  6  cwt.,
and  so  on.  In  meat  a  variant  on  this  plan  was  adopted,  in
the  first  instance,  on  account  of  difficulties  due  to  the  custom
among  retailers  of  obtaining  different  proportions  of  their
profit  from  the  sale  of  different  joints.  In  an  Order  of
September  1917  it  was  laid  down  that  no  person  shall  in
any  fortnight  sell  meat  by  retail  at  such  prices  as  cause  the
J^gregate  price  received  by  him  to  exceed  actual  costs  to  him
by  more  than  a  prescribed  percentage  (20  per  cent  or  2^d.
per  lb.,  whichever  shall  be  less).  In  August  1917  a  rule
on  similar  lines  was  laid  down  for  retailers  of  bacon  and
hams.

It  is  evident  that  plans  of  this  kind  for  controlling  the
charges  to  be  made  at  the  later  stages  of  a  commodity's
progress  to  the  consumer  suffer  from  the  same  sort  of  dis-
advantage that  roundabout  attempts  to  control  producers'
charges  suffer  from.  They  are  liable  to  evasion.  Con-
sequently, the  controlling  authorities  sought,  as  they  became
more  masters  of  their  work,  to  evolve  some  more  satisfactory
arrangement.     One  stage  in  this  evolution  is  illustrated  by


204  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

the  Butter  Prices  Order  of  August  1917.  In  that  Order
it  was  laid  down  that  retailers  may  not  add  to  the  price  of
butter  sold  by  them  more  than  2^d.  per  lb.  above  the  actual
cost  of  it  to  them ;  but  it  was  provided  further  that  local
Food  Control  Committees  might  prescribe  a  scale  of  maximum
retail  prices  in  accordance  with  the  general  directions  of  the
Order  (which  includes  rules  about  maker's,  importer's,  and
wholesaler's  prices),  although  conformity  with  that  scale
should  not  relieve  any  retailer  from  the  obligation  not  to
add  on  more  than  2^d.  per  lb.  A  slightly  more  advanced
stage  is  illustrated  by  the  plan  adopted  for  regulating  the
retail  prices  of  coal.  The  general  principle  was  laid  down
that  retailers  should  not  add  on  to  their  own  purchase  price
more  than  Is.  per  ton  over  and  above  the  costs  of  actual
handling  and  dealing  with  the  coal  (including  office  expenses
apart  from  the  trader's  own  salary).  But  this  principle  was
not  left,  as  it  were,  in  the  air.  It  was  provided  that  local
authorities,  after  consultation  and  inquiry,  should  work  it  out
and  apply  it  in  the  form  of  a  definite  list  of  retail  prices
applicable  to  their  district.  Yet  a  further  stage  is  reached
when  the  controlling  authority  itself  fixes  lists  of  maximum
prices  at  more  than  one  point  on  the  way  from  production
to  consumption.  The  Potato  Order  of  September  1917
was  of  this  type.  Maximum  prices  were  fixed  for  growers ;
wholesale  dealers  were  forbidden  to  sell  in  any  week  at  prices
that  yielded  them  more  than  7s.  6d.  a  ton  beyond  their
total  costs  on  all  purchases  of  potatoes — costs  which  varied
with  the  transport  conditions  of  different  districts ;  and  an
elaborate  scale  of  retail  prices  was  fixed,  which  related  the
permitted  price  per  lb.  to  the  price  per  cwt.,  including  price
of  transport,  that  the  retailer  had  actually  paid  for  different
classes  of  potatoes.  The  final  stage  is  reached  when  definite
schedules  are  fixed  throughout — for  producer,  wholesaler,  and
retailer  equally — by  the  controlling  authority  itself.  This  was
the  arrangement  to  which  the  Ministry  of  Food  steadily
progressed.  It  was  definitely  attained  in  regard  to  British
onions,  most  sorts  of  fish,  beef  and  mutton,  fruit  for  jam  and
jam,  peas  and  beans,  and  hay,  oats  and  wheat  straw.  Lest,
through  imperfect    knowledge,   the    special   circumstances    of


CH.  IX  STATE  REGULATION  OF  PEICES  205

particular  districts  should  have  been  neglected  in  the  con-
struction of  these  scales,  a  safeguard  was  sometimes  provided
in  the  form  of  a  rule  empowering  local  Food  Committees,
with  the  sanction  of  the  Food  Controller,  to  vary  the  maxima
in  their  district.  This  provision  was  introduced  into  the
Order  of  January  1918,  fixing  maximum  prices  for  rabbits.
In  Hke  manner  it  was  provided  in  an  Order  of  September
1917,  that,  where  the  Food  Controller  or  a  local  Food
Committee  was  satisfied  that,  by  reason  of  some  exceptional
circumstance,  flour  or  bread  could  not  be  sold  by  retail  at
the  official  maximum  price  "so  as  to  yield  a  reasonable
profit,"  a  licence  might  be  issued,  either  for  the  whole  or  for
a  part  of  any  Committee's  area,  permitting  higher  prices  to  be
charged.  The  Order  of  January  1918,  fixing  a  schedule
of  maximum  prices  for  most  kinds  of  fish,  was  made  subject,
as  regards  retail  prices,  to  similar  local  revision,  as  was  also
the  Milk  Prices  Order  of  March  1918.  A  like  power  of
varying  local  retail  prices,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Food
Controller,  was  accorded  to  the  local  Food  Committees  under
the  Potato  Prices  Order  of  September  1917.

Hitherto  attention  has  been  confined  to  commodities  that
come  into  the  consumer's  hands  in  much  the  same  form  as
that  in  which  they  leave  the  hands  of  producers.  Further
complications  are  introduced  when  we  have  to  do  with  raw
materials  that  are  worked  up  into  elaborately  finished  articles.
Here,  owing  to  the  various  parts  which  the  raw  material  plays
in  different  types  and  grades  of  finished  goods,  it  is  not  generally
possible  to  fix  schedules  of  price  beyond  the  raw  material
Consequently,  for  two  important  articles,  boots  and  clothes,  an
ingenious  roundabout  plan  was  adopted.  An  attempt  was
made  to  induce  or  compel  manufacturers  to  devote  a  consider-
able part  of  their  plant  to  making  "  standard  articles  "  to  be
sold  at  prices  calculated  on  a  basis  of  conversion  costs,  in  the
hope  that  the  competition  of  these  articles  in  the  market
would  indirectly  keep  down  the  price  that  it  is  profitable  to
charge  for  similar  articles  that  are  not  standardised.  In  boots,
manufacturers  were  ordered  to  devote  one-third  of  that  part
of  their  plant  which  was  engaged  on  civilian  work  to  making
"  standard  boots."     In  clothes,  no  fixed  proportion  of  plant  was


206  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

forced  into  making  standard  goods,  but  manufacturers  were
tempted  to  take  up  this  kind  of  work  by  relatively  favourable
treatment  in  the  matter  of  the  quota  of  raw  wool  allowed  to
them.  In  cotton  goods,  though  the  price  of  raw  cotton  was
artificially  controlled,  no  corresponding  control  of  the  finished
commodity  was  attempted,  the  argument  being  that  cotton
manufacturers  were  sufficiently  burdened  by  having  to  provide
a  special  levy  to  pay  benefit  to  workpeople  thrown  out  of  work
by  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  spindles  and  looms  that

/ight  be  operated.
The  foregoing  account  of  the  difficulties  encountered  and
the  expedients  employed  in  the  exercise  of  price  control
suggests  a  question  of  some  theoretical  interest.  It  is  plain
enough  that,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  control,  practical  considera-
tions make  it  necessary  to  begin  at  the  producer's,  rather  than
the  retailer's,  end ;  for  the  local  differentiations  needed  in  a
retail  schedule  are  generally  much  more  serious  and  require
much  more  knowledge  to  allow  of  their  being  fairly  made.
As  has  been  shown,  however,  as  the  controlling  authority
became  more  expert  and  got  a  better  grip  on  its  industries,
it  tended  to  make  price  schedules  all  along  the  line  from  the
producer  to  the  final  seller.  Thus,  in  the  end,  retail  maximum
prices  often  were  fixed.  The  point  in  doubt  is  whether,  when
this  has  all  been  arranged,  there  is  any  real  need  to  continue
the  earlier  stages  of  control.  Will  not  maximum  retail  prices
be  reflected  back  all  along  the  line,  and  so  automatically  stop
"  profiteering  "  at  earlier  stages  ?  The  view  that  this  will  be  so
seems  to  have  guided  the  work  of  some  of  the  Ministry  of
Food's  controls.  For  example,  the  prices  of  turnips  and
swedes  were  regulated  by  a  rule  that  nobody  might  sell  them
for  more  than  l^d.  per  lb,,  and  the  price  of  chocolates  and
sweets  by  a  rule  that  Twhody  might  sell  them  for  more  than
3d.  per  oz.  and  2d.  per  oz.  respectively.  In  general,  however,
it  was  thought  better  to  maintain  price  schedules  at  the
earlier  stages,  separate  from,  and  adjusted  to,  the  retail  maxima.
In  a  world  of  pure  competition  it  does  not  appear  that  this
would  really  have  been  necessary.  If  the  retail  maxima  were
rightly  arranged,  everybody  in  line  would  automatically  be
forced  to  charge  prices  that  yielded  them  about  the  ordinary


CH.IX  STATE  EEGULATION  OF  PRICES  207

rate  of  profits.  The  artificial  restriction  upon  retail  price
would  act  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  a  fall  in  the  public
demand  for  the  commodity  sufficient  to  counteract  the  shortage
of  supply.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  this  adjustment
would  not,  in  real  life,  be  made  without  a  certain  amount  of
friction,  and  that  some  of  the  traders  affected  might  be  in  a
position  to  exercise  quasi-monopolistic  pressure  against  particular
shopkeepers  or  others  who  happened  to  be  mainly  dependent
on  them.  Consequently,  when  schedules  of  maximum  prices
for  the  earlier  stages  had  already  been  worked  out,  to  drop
them,  in  the  hope  that  the  retailers'  schedules  subsequently
superimposed  would  by  themselves  achieve  the  whole  of  the
ends  desired,  would  probably  have  been  unwise.
Y  ^  5.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  broad  analytical  problem
which  these  expedients  of  war  time  suggest.  "WTiat  exactly  is
to  be  said  of  the  relation  between  the  kind  of  price  regulation
that  was  then  attempted  and  the  volume  of  the  national  dividend  ?
The  great  upheaval  of  the  war  had  caused  the  existing  distri-
bution of  resources  to  be  uneconomic,  in  the  sense  that  the
value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  those  employed  in  making
certain  specially  scarce  articles  was  abnormally  high.  Apart
from  outside  interference  abnormal  values  of  marginal  net
products  mean  abnormal  returns  to  the  investor ;  and  these
abnormal  returns  tend  to  draw  resources  from  occupations  of
relatively  low  productivity  to  those  occupations  of  greater
productivity  in  which  they  rule.  When  prices  are  cut  down
by  law,  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  any  given
quantity  of  resources  in  any  occupation  is,  indeed,  necessarily
cut  down  also,  because  we  have  defined  this  value  as  the
marginal  physical  net  product  multiplied  by  the  realised
price.  Plainly,  however,  this  definition  tacitly  assumes  the
realised  price  to  be  identical  with  the  demand  price.  When
these  two  are  artificially  divorced,  our  definition  must  be
changed.  The  values  of  the  marginal  net  products  of  resources,
which  it  is  to  the  interest  of  the  national  dixidend  to  make
equal  everywhere,  consist  in  the  marginal  physical  net  products
multiplied  by  the  demand  prices.  When  this  is  understood,  it
is  evident  that  an  artificial  reduction  of  price,  while  lowering
returns  in  the  industry  affected  by  it,  leaves  the  true  value  of


208  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

the  marginal  net  product  of  any  quantity  of  resources  invested
there  unchanged.  The  desirability,  from  the  standpoint  of  the
national  dividend,  of  a  transference  of  resources  is  thus  un-
altered, while  the  principal  influence  tending  to  bring  it  about
is  weakened.  To  put  the  same  point  in  more  general  terms,
any  external  limitation  imposed  on  the  price  of  an  article
produced  under  competitive  conditions  (i.e.  otherwise  than  by
a  monopolist)  must  lessen  the  inducement  that  people  have  to
make  that  article.  Normally  it  is  just  through  high  prices
and  high  profits  that  a  shortage  of  anything  corrects  itself.
The  prospect  of  exceptional  gain  directs  free  resources  into
the  industry  which  makes  the  thing  that  is  short.  Cut  off
this  prospect,  and  that  increase  of  supply,  which  the  interest
of  the  national  dividend  demands,  will  be  checked,  and  checked
more  severely  the  greater  is  the  cut  made  from  the  "  natural "
price.

§  6.  In  the  special  circumstances  of  the  Great  War  this
injurious  tendency  of  price  limitation  was  largely  counteracted
by  other  influences.  For  the  State  itself,  in  many  departments
of  industry,  took  over  the  task  of  allocating  resources  among
different  occupations.  It  built  up  munition  works,  controlled
shipbuilding,  and  urged  on  agricultural  production  by  the
promise  of  land,  tractors,  and  labour  drawn  from  the  Army.
Thus,  though  price  regulation  might  weaken  the  directive  force
normally  exercised  by  economic  motives,  the  task  of  direction
was  taken  over  by  another  and  more  powerful  agency.  No
doubt,  had  prices  in  any  occupation  been  artificially  pushed
down  so  low  that  profits  to  the  "  representative "  firm  fell
actually  below  the  ordinary  money  level,  capital  and  labour
would  have  gone  elsewhere  in  spite  of  government  pressure.
But,  of  course,  prices  were  not  artificially  pushed  down  to
this  extent  in  any  occupation.  On  the  contrary,  complaint
was  often  made  that  they  were  left  high  enough  to  yield
abnormally  large  profits,  not  merely  to  firms  that  could  fairly
be  regarded  as  "  representative,"  but  even  to  those  very  weak
and  inefficient  firms  which,  in  the  ordinary  course,  would  have
been  making  losses  and  decaying  out  of  business.^     On  the

*  It  has  been  suggested  that  maximum  prices  could  have  been  fixed  at  a
considerably  lower  level  if  the  good  and  bad  firms  had  been  formed  into  a  kind


cH.  IX  STATE  EEGULATION  OF  PEICES  209

whole,  therefore,  we  may  conclude  that,  as  things  were,  in
view  of  the  abnormal  activity  of  the  State,  and,  it  should  be
added,  of  the  effectiveness  of  appeals  to  patriotism,  price  control
in  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  war  probably  caused  very
little  damage  to  the  volume  of  the  national  output.

§  7.  It  would,  however,  be  a  great  error  to  infer  from
this  that  a  general  permanent  policy  of  control,  designed
to  prevent  groups  of  producers  from  reaping  abnormal  profit
on  occasions  when  the  conditions  of  the  market  give  them
power  to  do  so,  would  be  equally  innocuous.  People,  in
making  choice  of  investment,  take  account  of  these  ups  and
downs,  and,  so  far  as  their  judgment  is  correct,  place  their
resources  in  such  a  way  that,  on  the  average  and  on  the
whole,  the  marginal  yield  works  out  about  equally  in  different
occupations.  In  these  circumstances  it  is  obvious  that  any
general  State  policy  of  cutting  down  prices  in  any  industry
below  the  competitive  level,  on  occasions  when  the  conditions
of  demand  and  supply  would  enable  that  industry  to  obtain
exceptional  profits,  must,  in  effect,  penalise  it  as  compared
with  stable  industries.  For  if,  in  a  hilly  district  where  the
average  level  of  peaks  and  valleys  is  the  same  as  it  is  on
a  plateau,  the  tops  of  the  peaks  are  removed,  the  average  level
there  will,  of  course,  be  reduced  below  that  of  the  plateau.
The  discouraging  effect  of  this  differential  action  cannot  be
made  good  by  any  direct  manipulation  of  production  by  the
State.  For  here  we  have  to  do,  not  merely  with  a  tendency
for    free    resources  to   go    elsewhere   at   the    time  when    the


of  pool,  the  war  profits  in  the  better  firms  being  used  to  cancel  any  excess  of
cost  above  selling  price  that  there  might  be  in  the  worst  firms.  Professor
Taussig  has  pointed  out  that,  before  an  arrangement  of  this  kind  could  be
worked,  very  serious  administrative  difi&culties  would  have  to  be  overcome  and
an  elaborate  system  of  detailed  costings  set  up  (Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,
Feb.  1919).  But,  besides  this  technical  objection,  and  the  obvious  further
objection  that  eflBcient  management  would  be  very  greatly  discouraged  since  it
would  reap  no  reward,  there  is  also  an  objection  of  principle.  Some  of  the
consumers  of  an  article  treated  in  this  way  would  be  getting  their  stuff  at
actually  less  than  it  cost  to  produce  it.  The  abnormal  profit  which  the  war
accorded  to  more  favourably  situated  or  better  managed  concerns  would  be  used,
not  for  the  service  of  the  State  in  general,  as  under  the  excess  profits  tax,  but
to  provide  this  exceptional  and  peculiar  privilege.  At  a  time  when  the  State
has  need  of  all  possible  resources,  very  special  reasons  are  required  to  justify  it
in  using  them  up  in  this  way.


210  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  h

regime  of  price  control  is  at  work,  but  with  a  tendency  that
operates  continually  and  checks  the  general  flow  of  resources
that  would  otherwise  seek  investment  in  building  up  the
permanent  equipment  of  the  threatened  industry.  If,  for
example,  the  State  adopted  a  general  policy  of  forbidding
farmers  to  charge  high  prices  when  they  have  power  to  do
so  on  account  of  a  bad  world  harvest,  this  would  check  invest-
ment in  agriculture  ;  because  people  expect  bad  world  harvests
from  time  to  time  and  look  to  high  prices  then  to  set  against
low  prices  in  bumper  years.  While,  therefore,  on  the  one
hand,  our  analysis  does  not  imply  that  the  policy  of  price
control  adopted  in  the  abnormal  circumstances  of  the  war
worked  injury  to  the  national  dividend,  on  the  other  hand,
the  experience  of  the  war  gives  no  ground  for  doubting  that
a  general  permanent  policy  of  price  limitation,  in  non-
monopolised  industries,  would  produce  this  effect.  This  con-
clusion is,  of  course,  subject  to  the  special  considerations  set  out
in  Chapter  VIII.,  and  also  to  the  qualification  that,  if  maximum
prices  are  fixed  so  high  as  to  leave  all  ordinary  sales  unaffected
and  merely  to  protect  an  occasional  weak  purchaser  from  ex-
ploitation by  unscrupulous  dealers,  they  will  not  hurt  the
dividend.


CHAPTEK  X

STATE  EEGULATION  OF  SUPPLIES


Vs


1.  It  is  not  only  in  the  matter  of  prices  that  the  war
afforded  examples  of  Government  interference  with  com-
petitive industry.  Extensive  interference  also  took  place
with  the  free  distribution  of  commodities  among  different
industries,  different  firms  within  the  same  industry,  and
different  ultimate  consumers.  This  interference  had  to  be
undertaken  in  order  to  get  over  difficulties  to  which  the  price
regulations  described  in  the  preceding  chapter  gave  rise.  For,
when  prices  in  competitive  industries  are  artificially  reduced
below  the  level  that  they  tend  naturally  to  assume,  the
ordinary  market  influences  regulating  the  distribution  of
commodities  between  different  purchase  are  thrown  out  of
gear.  When  there  are  no  price  restrictions,  at  any  price
everybody  buys  for  every  purpose  as  much  of  a  thing  as,
at  that  price,  he  wants,  and  this  process  exhausts  the  whole
supply.  But,  when,  in  competitive  iiidustries,  pricei^  are
artificially  kept  down,  the  sum  of  the  demands  of  all
purchasers  for  all  purposes  is  greater,  and  may  be  much
greater,  than  the  supply.  In  the  United  States,  where  the
wheat  for  the  whole  year  comes  from  the  national  harvest,
the  result  of  price  limitation  unaccompanied  by  ration-
ing was  that  everybody  got  all  they  wanted  in  the
earlier  part  of  the  harvest  year  and  had  to  fall  back  on
substitutes  in  the  later  part.^  There  was,  in  short,  a  bad
distribution  through  time.  For  most  commodities,  however,
production  as  well  as  consumption  is  continuous.  Thus,  at
no  time   can  everybody  get  aU   they   want,   but  there  is   a

'  Cf.  Supplement  to  American  Economic  Review,  March  1919,  p.  244.

211


212  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

continuous  shortage.  Distribution  becomes,  if  nothing  is  done,
the  sport  of  accident,  influence,  and  ability  to  stand  for  a
long  time  without  fainting  in  a  queue.  There  is  no  reason
to  expect  that  the  result  reached  through  these  agencies
will  be,  in  any  sense,  a  good  distribution.  Consequently,
when,  during  the  course  of  the  war,  the  policy  of  controlling
prices  was  adopted,  it  was,  in  general,  found  necessary  to
control  distribution  also,  and,  with  that  object,  to  establish
some  criterion  for  fixing  the  shares  available  for  different
purchasers.

§  2.  "When  the  commodity  dealt  with  was  a  material  that
could  be  employed  for  several  alternative  purposes,  the  obvious
criterion  was  relative  urgency,  from  the  point  of  view  of
national  war  service,  of  these  several  purposes.  The  simplest
method  of  applying  this  criterion  was  to  make  rules  cutting  off
the  supply  of  material  from  the  least  urgent  uses  either  in
part  or  altogether,  thus  leaving  more  available  for  more  urgent
uses.     Examples  of  this  method  were  :

(1)  The  imposition  of  Treasury  restrictions  upon  the
investment  of  new  capital  abroad  and,  in  a  less  degree,  in
civilian  home  industries.

(2)  The  enunciation  of  a  rule  that  no  building  costing
more  than  £500,  and  no  building  whatever  containing
structural  steel,  should  Ipe  put  up  without  a  licence.

(3)  The  reduction  Nm  railway  service  for  all  forms  of
civilian,  as  distinguished  from  military,  use.

(4)  The  prohibition  of  the  use  of  petrol  for  pleasure,
(5V^e    withdrawal    of    materials,    etc,    from    the    less

important  tramways  and  light  railways  to  others  of  greater
nationlPittportance.

(6)Hpb  regulation  of  the  use  of  horses  in  towns  and  on
farms  and  the  control  of  road  transport  generally.

(7)  The  prohibition  of  the  use  of  paper  for  newspaper  j
contents  bills,  and,  under  certain  conditions,  traders'  circulars,  !
and  the  abolition  of  "  Eeturns,"

(8)  The  prohibition  by  the  Timber  Supplies  Department  '
against  packing  various  articles  in  wooden  cases  and  crates.

(9)  The  prohibition  of  the  use  of  electricity  for  lighting
shop  fronts,  and  the  order  restricting  the  liours  during  which  ,


CH.  X  STATE  REGULATION  OF  SUPPLIES  213

hotel  and  restaurant  dining-rooms  might  use  artificial  light  or
theatres  might  remain  open.  This  method  is  entirely  nega-
tive :  the  least  urgent  uses  are  definitely  ruled  out,  either  by
a  general  order,  or  by  making  a  licence — which,  of  course,
is  refused  to  the  least  urgent  uses — a  necessary  condition  of
action.

§  3.  Obviously,  devices  of  this  character  are  of  limited
application.  They  take  no  account  of  the  fact  that  uses
other  than  the  least  urgent  are  not  all  of  equal  urgency.
Consequently,  if  the  material  or  labour  available  is  insufficient
for  all  the  uses  that  are  left  when  the  least  urgent  uses  have
been  cut  ofi",  it  becomes  necessary  to  an-ange  for  some  system  of
priority  among  those  that  are  left.  The  simplest  way  in
which  this  was  attempted  was  as  follows.  The  material  was
left  in  private  hands,  but  a  system  of  Priority  Certificates  was
instituted,  which  only  permitted  sales  to  would-be  buyers
with  certificates  of  lower  urgency  after  those  with  certificates
of  higher  urgency  had  been  satisfied.  Government  work  had
the  first  grade  of  certificate,  work  of  special  national  import-
ance {e.g.  export  work  deemed  valuable  for  protecting  the
foreign  exchanges)  the  next,  and  so  on  in  successive  stages.
Iron  and  steel  products  were  dealt  with  on  this  plan,  and
quarry  stone  and  other  road  material  /)n  less  elaborate,  but
substantially  equivalent,  lines.  "VMien  the  proportion  of  the
available  commodity  that  is  needed  for  Government  war
work  or  other  especially  urgent  need  is  very  large,  the  plan
of  priority  certificates  by  itself  is  not  always  safe.  *  The
Government  may  get  less  than  it  needs.  To  meet  this  risk
it  is  tempted  itself,  either  by  purchase  or  requisition,  to
become  an  owner  (or  hirer)  of  so  much  of  the  commodity  as
is  of  specially  urgent  need.  It  may  then  hand  over  to  firms
engaged  on  Government  work,  or  other  specially  urgent  work,
the  supplies  that  are  required  for  that  work;  but,  even  so,
it  will  need  to  distribute  the  surplus  on  some  system  of
priority  to  other  firms.  This  plan  was  followed  in  a  rough
general  way  with  imported  leather  and  flax  and  with  a
number  of  metals.

§  4.  The  application  in  these  different  forms  of  the
criterion    of    comparative     urgency    among    competing    uses


4


214  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

presented  very  considerable  difficulties  during  the  war.
These  difficulties,  however,  were  necessarily  much  less  than
those  which  would  have  to  be  overcome  if  a  similar  criterion
had  to  be  applied  to  normal  conditions  of  peace.  For  the
comparative  urgency  of  different  uses  in  war  time  depends
on  the  contribution  which  they  severally  make  to  national
war  efficiency.  This  provides  a  definite  standard  to  which
to  work.  It  is  obvious  that  food  and  munitions  and  the
support  of  the  armed  forces  must  take  precedence  over  every-
thing else  ;  and,  though,  as  the  rivalry  between  the  demands
of  munitions  and  of  ships  for  steel  made  plain,  it  is
difficult,  still  it  is  not  impossible,  by  conferences  between
representatives  of  the  various  Ministries,  to  work  out  a
fairly  satisfactory  scheme  of  priorities.  The  reason  for  this
is  that  everything  is  subordinated  to  a  single  relatively  simple
end.  Under  a  regime  of  established  peace — apart,  of  course,
from  possible  "  key  "  industries,  for  which  the  obvious  method
of  assistance  is  bounties  or  a  tariff,  and  not  the  allocation
of  material — there  is  no  single  end  of  this  kind.  We  have
no  longer  to  deal  with  the  Government's  wants  for  war  service,
but  with  the  wants  of  an  immense  and  varied  population
for  necessaries,  comforts  and  luxuries.  In  war  time  it  is
obviously  more  important  to  bring  steel  into  the  country
than  it  is  to  bring  paper,  and  to  manufacture  army  baking
ovens  than  private  kitchen  ranges.  But  in  peace  time  none
of  these  simple  propositions  can  be  laid  down.  Those  things
ought  to  be  made  which  are  most  wanted  and  will  yield
the  greatest  sum  of  satisfaction.  But  the  Government
cannot  possibly  decide  what  these  things  are ;  and,  even  if
it  could  decide  what  they  are  at  one  moment,  before  its
decision  had  been  put  into  effect  conditions  would  very
probably  be  changed,  and  they  would  have  become  something
entirely  different.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  how  this  obstacle
to  a  permanent  policy  of  rationing  materials  among  the
several  industries  of  the  country  could  be  satisfactorily
overcome.

§  5.  To  allocate  materials  to  different  uses  according  to  the
comparative  national  urgency  of  these  uses  was  not  a  com-
plete   solution    of   the    war    problem.      Within    each    grade


CH.X         STATE  KEGULATION  OF  SUPPLIES  215

of  use  purchases  are  sought  by  a  number  of  rival  firms
anxious  to  work  up  the  material  into  the  finished  product.
Normally  price  would  have  established  itself  at  such  a
level  that  each  firm  obtained  the  quantity  of  material  which,
at  that  price,  it  desired.  With  restricted  prices  it  is  necessary
to  provide  an  alternative  basis  for  distribution  among  these
firms  as  well  as  among  the  different  categories  of  ui^ency.
The  basis  adopted  by  the  British  Government  was  that  of
comparative  pre-war  purchases.     It  is  illustrated  by —

(a)  The  regulation  of  the  Cotton  Control  Board  (1918),
limiting  the  proportion  of  machinery  that  any  firm  might
keep  at  work  on  American  cotton ;

(b)  The  condition  imposed  on  importers  by  the  Paper
Control  that  they  should  supply  their  customers  (ix.  manu-
facturers) in  the  same  proportion  as  in  1916—17.

In  highly  organised  trades,  like  the  cotton  industry,  there
was  no  technical  difficulty  in  applying  regulations  on  these
lines.  But  in  many  of  the  metal  trades  a  special  organisation
had  to  be  created  for  the  purpose.  It  is  clear  that  this  basis
of  allocation  could  not  be  employed  in  connection  with  any
policy  designed  to  last  for  more  than  a  short  period.  For
an  arrangement,  which  tended  to  maintain  the  various  firms
engaged  in  an  industry  always  in  the  same  relative  position
as  they  occupied  in  an  arbitrarily  chosen  year,  would
constitute  a  quite  intolerable  obstacle  to  efficiency  and
progress.

^  6.  When  the  prices  of  finished  products  as  well  as  of
their  raw  materials  were  limited  by  regulation,  a  problem
exactly  analogous  to  the  above  had  to  be  faced  as  regards
distribution  among  ultimate  consumers.  To  organise  a  basis
for  this  is  obviously  only  practicable  in  connection  with
commodities  in  wide,  regular  and  continuous  consumption.
The  basis  aimed  at  here  was,  not  comparative  pre-war
purchases,  but  an  estimate  of  comparative  current  need.
For  coal,  gas  and  electricity  an  objective  measure  of  this
was  sought  in  the  numbei  and  size  of  rooms  and  the  number
of  inhabitants  in  difierent  people's  houses.  For  food  products,
while  some  differentiation  was  attempted  by  means  of  supple-
mentary rations   to  soldiers,   sailors,  heavy  workers,  invalids


216  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

and  children,  in  the  main  the  knot  was  cut  by  assuming
the  needs  of  the  general  body  of  all  the  civil  population
to  be  equal,  and  rationing  all  alike.  This  sort  of  dis-
tributional arrangement  is  fundamentally  different  from  the
other  two  kinds.  The  passage  from  war  to  peace  does  not
destroy  or  render  violently  unsuitable  the  criterion  adopted
for  it.  Plainly,  however,  in  peace,  as  indeed  in  war  also,
its  necessarily  rough  and  arbitrary  character  constitutes
a  very  serious  objection  to  it.  "  The  proportion  in  which
families  of  equal  means  use  the  different  '  necessaries  of
life '  are  very  different.  In  ordinary  times  they  distribute
their  expenditure  among  the  different  necessaries  in  the  manner
which  seems  best,  some  getting  more  bread,  some  more  meal
and  milk,  and  so  on.  By  equal  rationing  all  this  variety
is  done  away  with ;  each  household  is  given  the  same  amount
per  head  of  each  commodity ;  allowance  for  age,  sex,  occupa-
tion and  other  things  can  only  be  introduced  with  difficulty."^
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  British  Food  Rationing  during
the  war,  in  spite  of  this  disability,  led  to  a  much  more  satis-
factory result  than  would  have  been  attained  from  the
scramble — a  scramble  in  which  rich  people  would  have  been
able  to  exercise  various  sorts  of  pull  upon  tradesmen — that
must  have  resulted  had  food  prices  been  limited  but  dis-
tribution left  to  take  care  of  itself.  In  peace,  however,
where  presumably  the  alternative  to  rationing  would  be  less
intolerable,  the  inconvenience  and  inequalities  attaching  to  it
have  correspondingly  greater  weight.

§  7.  If  we  are  content  to  regard  the  various  arrangements
which  I  have  been  describing  as  merely  supplementary  to
price  restrictions  already  decided  upon,  it  is  plain  that,  though
they  may  affect  the  volume  of  the  national  dividend,  as  it
were,  at  the  second  remove — if,  for  example,  they  grant
priority  to  steel  for  making  machinery  rather  than  motor-
cars— they  cannot  affect  it  directly  or  fundamentally.  They
modify  the  use  to  which  the  dividend  is  put,  not  the  pro-
duction of  it.  This  is  modified  by  the  price  regulations
in  the  way  that  was  explained  in  the  preceding  chapter.  It
is  not  modified  further  by  any  distributional  supplements
*  Cannan,  Economic  Journal,  Dec.  1917,  p.  468.


cfl.  X         STATE  REGULATION  OF  SUPPLIES  217

to  those  regulations.  Consequently,  from  the  standpoint
of  the  present  Part,  no  further  analysis  is  required ;  though  in
Part  v.,  where  the  distributional  relations  of  rich  and  poor
are  examined,  something  more  will  have  to  be  said  about
the  rationing  of  food.


CHAPTER    XI

THE   CONDITIONS    OF   MONOPOLISATION

§  1.  We  may  now  return  to  the  main  argument.  In
Chapter  VIII.  we  supposed  self-interest  to  act  along  the
route  of  simple  competition,  and  we  inquired  into  its
tendency  to  equalise  the  values  of  marginal  trade  net  products
in  all  uses  upon  the  basis  of  this  supposition.  The  sup-
position, however,  is  not  always  warranted.  As  has  already
been  observed,  an  essential  note  of  "  simple  competition "
is  that  the  supply  of  each  seller  constitutes  so  small  a  part
of  the  aggregate  supply  that  his  advantage  is  best  consulted
if  he  "  accepts  market  prices  without  trying,  of  set  purpose,
to  modify  them."  ^  When  any  seller's  output  constitutes
a  substantial  part  of  the  whole,  there  is  scope  for  various
sorts  of  monopolistic  action ;  and,  when  any  sort  of
monopolistic  action  is  present,  self-interest  does  not  tend
to  evolve  an  output  such  that  the  value  of  the  marginal
net  product  of  resources  devoted  to  its  production  is  equal
to  that  yielded  by  resources  employed  elsewhere.  In  future
chapters  I  shall  examine  monopolistic  action  in  detail.
Before  that  is  done,  however,  convenience  suggests  that  some
study  should  be  made  of  the  conditions  which  determine
the  appearance  of  monopolistic  power.

§  2.  First,  other  things  being  equal,  circumstances  which,
when  the  aggregate  scale  of  an  industry  is  given,  make  it
structurally  economical  for  the  typical  individual  establish-
ment to  be  large,  'pro  tanto  increase  the  likelihood  that  a
single  seller  will  market  a  considerable  part  of  the  aggregate
output    of    his    industry ;     for    such    circumstances     neces-

*  Pareto,  Cours  d'iconomie  polUiqtce,  i.  p.  20.
218


OH.  XI  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  MONOPOLISATION     219

sarily  increase  the  probability  that  a  single  establishment
will  market  a  considerable  part  of  that  output.  "Whether
any  single  establishment  will,  in  fact,  become  big  enough,
relatively  to  the  whole  of  an  industry,  to  procure  an  element
of  monopolistic  power,  depends  on  the  general  characteristics
of  the  various  industries  concerned.  Such  an  event  is  more
than  usually  likely  in  industries  that  produce  fancy  goods
liable  to  become  "  specialities."  For,  in  these  industries,
there  often  exist,  within  the  broad  general  market,  minor
markets,  to  a  certain  extent  non-competitive  among  them-
selves ;  and,  when  this  is  so,  an  individual  seller  may  supply
a  considerable  proportion  of  his  own  minor  market,  without
himself  being  of  very  great  size  absolutely.  In  a  few  peculiar
industries,  among  those  concerned  with  staple  goods  and
services,  it  may  also  well  be  that  the  prospect  of  internal
economies  will  lead  to  the  evolution  of  single  establishments
large  enough  to  control  a  predominant  part  of  the  whole
output  of  the  industry.  One  of  the  most  notable  instances
of  this  is  afforded  by  the  industry  of  railway  trans-
portation along  any  assigned  route.  In  view  of  the  great
engineering  cost  of  preparing  a  suitable  way,  it  will,  obviously,
be  much  less  expensive  to  have  one  or,  at  most,  a  few
railways  providing  the  whole  of  the  transport  service  between
any  two  assigned  points  than  to  have  this  service  undertaken
by  a  great  number  of  railways,  each  performing  an  in-
significant proportion  of  the  whole  service.  Similar  remarks
hold  good  of  the  industries  of  furnishing  water,  gas,  electricity,
or  tramway  service  to  a  town.  The  existence  of  many
separate  estabHshments  involves  a  large  number  of  main
pipes,  wires  and  rails.  But  the  whole  business  of  any
ordinary  district  can  be  worked  with  a  very  small  number
of  these  mains.  Therefore,  the  existence  of  many  separate
establishments  implies  the  investment  of  a  great  quantity
of  capital  in  mains  that  are  only  employed  up  to  a  very
small  proportion  of  their  capacity.  There  is  an  obvious
economy  in  avoiding  such  investment.  This  economy  is  the
ultimate  reason  for  the  tendency,  which  appears  strongly
in  the  class  of  industry  just  discussed,  for  individual
establishments   to   furnish    a    large    proportion   of   the   total


220  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

supply.  The  truth  is  partly  veiled  by  the  fact  that  the
immediate  reason  is,  in  general,  unwillingness,  on  the  part
of  national  and  local  governmental  authorities,  to  allow  the
right  of  eminent  domain  to  be  invoked,  or  the  streets  to  be
disturbed,  on  more  occasions,  or  by  more  people,  than  is
absolutely  necessary.  It  is,  however,  the  extra  expense  of
such  procedure  that  lies  behind  this  unwillingness  on  the
part  of  the  authorities.  In  the  general  body  of  industries
concerned  with  staple  goods  and  services,  the  conditions
peculiar  to  railways  and  their  allied  industries  are  not
reproduced.  Internal  economies  reach  the  limit  at  different
points  in  different  kinds  of  industry,  at  one  point  in  the
cotton  industry,  at  another  in  the  iron  and  steel  industry ;
generally  at  a  less  advanced  stage  where  the  part  played  by
labour  relatively  to  capital  is  large  and  at  a  more  advanced
stage  where  it  is  small ;  but  always  long  before  the  individual
establishment  has  grown  to  any  appreciable  fraction  of  the
whole  industry  of  which  it  is  a  part.^  When  this  happens,
internal  economies  evidently  cannot  be  responsible  for  mono-
polistic power.

§  3.  Secondly,  other  things  being  equal,  circumstances
which,  when  the  aggregate  scale  of  an  industry  and  the  size
of  the  typical  individual  firm  are  given,  make  it  structurally
economical  for  the  typical  individual  unit  of  business  manage-
ment— a  number  of  establishments,  for  example,  controlled  by
one  authority — to  be  large,  pro  tanto  increase  the  likelihood
that  a  single  seller  will  market  a  considerable  part  of  the
aggregate  output  of  his  industry.  This  proposition  has,  in
recent  times,  become  of  predominant  importance,  and  it  is,
therefore,  necessary  to  examine  carefully  the  various  structural
economies,  for  which  large  scale  control  may,  in  different
situations,  be  responsible.

Much  has  been  made  by  some  writers  of  the  fact  that,
when  a  number  of  parallel  establishments  are  grouped  under
a  single  head,  the  different  plants  can  be  thoroughly  specialised
to  particular  grades  of  work ;  and  of  the  other  kindred  fact

*  Cf.  Van  Ilise's  account  of  the  development  of  various  important
industries  in  the  United  States  {Concentration  and  Control,  pp.  42  et  seq.)
and  Prof.  Chapman's  discussion  of  the  normal  size  of  individual  factories  in  the
cotton  industry  {Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  April  1914,  p.  513).


OH.  XI  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  MONOPOLISATION     221

that   the   orders   in   any   place   can   be  met   from   the  plant
nearest  to  that  place,  and  that,  thus,  cross  freights  are  saved.
That  the  economies  resulting  from  close  specialisation  upon
particular  articles  or  even  particular  processes  may,  in  some
circumstances,  be  very  great  has  been  abundantly  proved  in
the    British   engineering   industry   during  the    war.       But  it
does   not   appear   that   a   single   control  over  many  separate
establishments  is  essential  in  order  to  secure  these  economies.
Even   though   the   different    estabKshments    were    to    remain
separate,  it   might   be  expected,   when  once   thefr  great  im-
portance is  realised,  that  the  industrial  organism  would  tend,
under  the  sway  of  ordinary  economic  motives,  to  evolve  them.
In  the   paper  industry   of  the   United   States,    for   example,
each  mill  confines  itself  as  a  rule  to  the  manufacture  of  some
one  quality  of  paper ;  ^  and  in  the  Lancashire  cotton  industry,
not  only    was   fine   spinning,   coarse   spinning,   and    weaving
localised  separately,  but  individual  firms  frequently  specialise
on  a  narrow  range  of  counts  for  spinning.^     The  same  thing  is
true  of  the  economies  obtainable  from  the  utilisation  of  by-
products.    Nor  does  it  appear  that  those  economies  in  respect
of  marketing,  which  some  writers  ascribe  to  large-scale  control,
are  a  dominating  factor  making   for  combination.     For,  "if
a  manufacturer  is  purchasing  raw  material,  there  is  generally
a  market  price  for  it  which  all  must  pay,  and  which  any  one
can  obtain  it  for,  so  long  as  he  buys  the  customary  minimum
quantity ;  while,  if  what  he  requires  is  a  partly  manufactured
article,  purchases  amounting  in  value  to  hundreds  of  pounds
per  annum,  accompanied  by  prompt  payment,  can  generally
be  made  at  the  cheapest  possible  rate.     The  sole  advantage
enjoyed    by    the    largest    concerns    in    the    purchase   of  raw
materials  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  the  possibility  of  occasionally
clearing  the  market  of  raw  materials  or  of  a  surplus  output
of  partly   manufactured   stuff,    by  some    purchase  quite  out
of  the  power   of  a   smaller    concern    to   compass.      Such   an
operation,  however,  partakes  of  the  nature  of  a  speculation,
and  the  profit,  when  gained,  is  hardly  to  be  called  a  cheapen-
ing of  the  cost  of  production,  if  only  for   the   reason   that

*  Cf.  Chapman,   Work  and  Wages,  vol.  i.  p.  237.
^  Cf.  Marshall,  Industry  and  Trade,  p.  601.


222  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

the  opportunity  for  such  a  special  purchase  cannot  be  relied
upon  to  occur  very  often,  and,  when  it  does  occur,  is
perhaps  as  likely  to  result  in  a  loss  as  in  a  gain."  ^  Nor,
again,  should  much  importance  be  attached  to  those
advantages  of  large-scale  management,  which  have  been
summarised  as  "concentration  of  office  work,  provision  of
central  warehouse  for  goods,  centralisation  of  insurance  and
banking,  establishment  of  a  uniform  system  of  accounts,
enabling  easy  comparison  to  be  made  of  the  working  of
branches,  institution  of  a  uniform  system  of  costing  and
of  a  central  sales  agency,"  ^  and  so  forth.  For  these
economies  are  scarcely  practicable  under  the  lower  types
of  price-fixing  kartel,  which  are  common  in  Germany,  and,
even  in  fusions  and  holding  companies,^  they  are  very  soon
outweighed  by  the  immense  difficulty  of  finding  people
competent  properly  to  manage  very  large  businesses.

There  are,  however,  certain  structural  economies  of  large-
scale  management,  which  are  of  a  different  order  and  have
a  wider  reach.  First,  greater  size,  implying,  as  it  does,  greater
wealth,  makes  it  possible  and  profitable  to  spend  more  money
on  experiment.  The  Committee  on  Scientific  and  Industrial
Research  report :  "  Our  experience  up  to  the  present  leads
us,  indeed,  to  think  that  the  small  scale  on  which  most  British
industrial  firms  have  been  planned  is  one  of  the  principal
impediments  in  the  way  of  the  organisation  of  research  with
a  view  to  the  conduct  of  those  long  and  complicated  investiga-
tions which  are  necessary  for  the  solution  of  the  fundamental
problems  lying  at  the  basis  of  our  staple  industries."  *  This  is
obviously  a  very  important  matter ;  though  it  is  not  clear  why

1  Hobson,  The  Induslrml  System,  p.  187,  quoted  from  W.  R.  Hamilton,
The  Cost  of  Production  in  Relation  to  Increasing  Output.

2  McOrosty,  Economic  Joiornal,  Sept  1902,  p.  359.

3  Dr.  Liefmann  writes  :  "  Einige  Trusts,  so  der  Zucker-  und  Spiritustrust,
bildeten  sich  zu  einer  einzigen  GesellscJiaft  um,  also  im  Wege  der  vollstandigen
Verschmelzung,  der  Fusion,  d.h.  die  betreffenden  Unternehmungen  gehen  alle
in  einer  einzigen  derart  auf,  dass  sie  als  besondere  wirtschaftliche  Organisation
aufhoren  zu  existieren.  Die  meisten  aber  nahmen  in  neuester  Zeit  nach
verschiedenen  Versuchen  die  Form  der  sogenannten  Holding  Company,  einer
Kontrollgcscllschaft,  wis  wir  es  nennen  konnen,  an,  d.h.  die  Gesellschaft  erwarb
alle  oder  doch  die  Mehrheit  der  Aktien  siimtlicher  zum  Trust  gehiirender
Einzelgesellschaften  "  (^Karlelle  und  Trusts,  p.  114).

*  Report,  p.  25.


CH.  XI  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  MONOPOLISATION     223

a  number  of  small  firms  should  not,  while  retaining  full
independence  in  other  respects,  agree  to  collaborate  in
promoting  research.  Secondly,  the  union  into  one  of  what
would  have  been  many  firms  means  that,  instead  of  each
wielding  only  the  secret  processes  discovered  by  itself,  each
can  wield  the  secrets  of  all ;  and  in  some  circumstances  this
may  involve  large  savings.  Thirdly,  a  business  combining
many  establishments  is,  in  general,  in  contact  with  a  number
of  different  markets,  in  which  the  fluctuations  of  demand  are,
in  some  measure,  independent.  It  follows  that  the  operation
of  such  a  business  involves  in  the  aggregate  less  uncertainty-
bearing  than  the  operation  of  its  parts  would  involve  if  they
were  separated.  The  general  economy  resulting  from  this
fact  may  manifest  itself  in  the  greater  facility  with  which
loans  can  be  obtained,  or  in  the  lower  price  that  has  to  be
paid  for  them,  or  in  the  smaller  proportionate  reserve  fund
that  the  concern  needs  to  keep  for  equalising  dividends,
or  in  other  ways.  The  essential  point  is  that  the
general  economy,  however  it  manifests  itself,  is  necessarily
there.  The  larger  the  unit  of  individual  control,  the  larger
is  this  economy.  After  a  point,  indeed,  its  growth,  as  the
unit  grows,  becomes  exceedingly  slow.  But,  until  the  unit
has  reached  a  very  large  size,  it  grows  rapidly,  and  constitutes
a  powerful  force  making  for  larger  units — except,  indeed,
among  commodities  suitable  for  grading,  for  which  a  general
speculative  market  may  be  developed,  enabling  small  manu-
facturers, through  the  practice  of  hedging,  to  put  themselves
in  this  respect  on  a  level  with  large  manufacturers.^  Further,
even  if  the  actual  volume  of  fluctuations  were  not  lessened,
amalgamation  might  stiU  lead  to  economies,  by  enabling  the
bulk  of  the  plant  to  be  run  steadily,  and  reserving,  after  the
pattern  of  the  Sugar  Trust,  one  specially  adapted  plant  to
i  adjust  its  output  to  the  fluctuations  in  aggregate  demand.^
One  further  point  may  be  mentioned.  In  certain  special
j  industries  large-scale  control  not  only  achieves  a  direct  economy
'  by  lessening  the  uncertainty-bearing  that  is  involved  in  given
fluctuations  in  the  individual  fortunes  of  different  firms;   it

'  Of.  Brace,  The  Value  of  Organised  Speculation,  p.  210.
»  Cf.  Jenks  and  Clark,  The  Trust  Problem,  p.  43.


224  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pi.  „

also  achieves  an  indirect  economy  by  reducing  the  probability
that  fluctuations  will  occur.  It  does  this  in  occupations
where  public  confidence  is  important,  and  where  largeness
of  capital  resource  is  calculated  to  create  confidence.  This
condition  is  fulfilled  in  banking — the  more  so  since  publicity
of  bankers'  accounts  has  become  common.  The  reason  that
banks  differ  in  this  respect  from  other  concerns  is,  of  course,
that  their  customers  are  their  creditors,  and  not,  as  in  most
trades,  their  debtors.^

§  4.  So  far,  we  have  considered  exclusively  what  I  have
called  structural  economies.  There  is  also  another  sort  of
economy  that,  in  certain  circumstances,  favours  the  growth
of  large-scale  management.  So  long  as  an  industry  is
occupied  by  a  number  of  establishments  separately  controlled,
expenditure  is  likely  to  be  incurred  by  all  in  defending  their
market  against  the  others.  A  large  part  of  the  expenditure
upon  advertisements  and  travellers  is,  as  was  indicated  in
Chapter  VI,,  of  this  character.  But,  when,  instead  of
a  number  of  competing  firms,  there  appear,  in  any  section
of  an  industry,  a  number  of  firms  under  a  single  authority,
a  great  part  of  this  expenditure  can,  as  was  also  indicated
in  that  chapter,  be  dispensed  with.  A  and  B  being  united,
it  is  no  longer  to  the  interest  of  either  to  spend  money
in  persuading  people,  whether  through  travelling  salesmen
or  in  other  ways,  to  prefer  the  one  to  the  other.  It  was
stated,  in  regard  to  railways,  before  the  Board  of  Trade
Conference  of  1908:  "It  is  well  known  that  railway  com-
panies find  it  necessary  to  spend  large  sums  of  money  in
canvassing  against  one  another,  and,  if  competition  were
removed  by  judicious  amalgamation,  the  greater  part  of  this
money  could  be  saved."  ^  This  economy  is,  of  course,  liable
to  be  largest  where,  apart  from  unification,  "competitive"
expenditure  would  be  largest,  namely,  not  in  staple  industries
providing  easily  recognised  standard  articles,  but  in  various
sorts  of  "  fancy  "  trades.^

^  For  a  very  full  study  of  the  subject-matter  of  §§  2-3,  of.  Marshall,  Industi-y
cmd  Trade,  bk.  ii.  chaps.  iiL-iv.

2  Jlailway  Conference,  p.  26.

3  The  suggestion,  that  combination  enables  savings  to  be  made  in  respect  of
the  number  or  quality  of  travelling  salesmen  and  so  on,  is  not  upset  by  the


ii


cH.xi  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  MONOPOLISATION     225

j/  §  5.  Let  us  next  suppose  that  the  size  of  the  individual
firm  and  the  size  of  the  individual  unit  of  management  in
an  industry  have  been  adjusted  to  the  structural  and  other
economies  obtainable,  and  that  the  units  evolved  in  this
way  are  not  large  enough  to  exercise  any  element  of  mono-
polistic power.  It  is  then  clear  that  monopolistic  power  will
not  be  called  into  being  incidentally,  as  a  by-product  of
developments  that  take  place  without  reference  to  it.  But
there  still  remains,  as  an  influence  tending  to  produce  it,
the  direct  expectation  of  the  gains  to  which  it  may  lead.
When  promoters  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  speculative
community  will  expect  a  particular  monopoly  to  prove  more
profitable  than  it  really  will  do,  this  fact  promises  extra  gains
to  those  who  form  amalgamated  companies,  because  it  enables
them  to  unload  their  shares  at  inflated  values.  Apart  from
this  special  consideration,  however,  we  may  lay  it  down
that  the  magnitude  of  the  gains  obtainable  from  monopolisa-
tion depends,  the  conditions  of  supply  being  given,  on  the
elasticity  of  the  demand  —  i.e.  the  fraction  obtained  by
dividing  a  (small)  percentage  change  in  price  into  the
associated  percentage  change  in  quantity  purchased — for
the  commodity  concerned.^  The  less  elastic  the  dem  nd,
the  greater,  ceteris  paribus,  are  the  probable  gains.  rhe
principal  conditions  of  highly  inelastic  demand,  as  given
in  Dr.  Marshall's  authoritative  exposition,  must,  therefore,
be  set  out  here.

The  first  condition  is  that  the  commodity  shall  be  of  a
kind  for  which  it  is  not  easy  to  find  convenient  substitutes.

£act  that,  in  some  instances,  after  the  formation  of  a  combination,  the  aggregate
annual  wages  paid  to  salesmen  increased.  For  the  increase  was  probably  due
to  attempts  on  the  part  of  the  combination  to  extend  its  market  into  fields
which  were  not  formerly  occupied  by  any  of  its  constituent  members,  or  in
which  the  business  accessible  to  single  firms  was  not  enough  to  make  it  worth
while  for  any  of  them  to  have  salesmen  there.

^  If  a;  is  the  quantity  purchased  and  <f>{x)  the  demand  price  per  unit,  the

elasticity  of  demand  is  represented  by    /J",.^  .     If  this  is  equal  to  nnity  for

all  values  of  x,  the  demand  curve  is  a  rectangular  hyperbola.  The  verbal
definition  of  the  text  is  an  approximate  translation  of  the  above  technical
definition  so  long  as  the  term  STnall  contained  in  it  is  emphasised.  But,
of  course,  a  50  per  cent  fall  in  price  must  be  accompanied,  if  the  elasticity
of  demand  is  to  be   equal   to  imity,  by  a  100  per  cent  rise  in  consumption.

Q


226  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

The  demand  for  mutton  is  made  comparatively  elastic  by
the  existence  of  beef,  the  demand  for  oil  by  the
existence  of  gas,  and  the  demand  for  the  service  of  trams
by  the  existence  of  omnibuses.  In  like  manner,  the  demand
for  the  service  of  transport  by  rail  is  relatively  more  elastic
in  England  than  in  continental  America,  because  "  the  long
broken  coast-line  of  England  and  the  great  number  of  ports  "
render  the  competition  of  water  carriage  exceedingly
powerful ;  ^  and  the  demand  for  the  services  of  any  particular
line  of  railway  is,  in  general,  fairly  elastic,  even  where  no
water  competition  exists,  in  consequence  of  the  indirect
competition  of  lines  running  to  other  markets.^  From
another  field  a  good  example  of  the  point  I  am  now  con-
sidering is  furnished  by  Jevons,  in  his  book  on  the  Coal
Question :  "  When  the  Government  of  the  Two  Sicilies  placed
an  exorbitant  tax  on  sulphur,  Italy  having,  as  it  was  thought,
a  monopoly  of  native  sulphur,  our  manufacturers  soon  had
resort  to  the  distillation  of  iron  pyrites  or  sulphide  of  iron."  ^
As  regards  the  kinds  of  commodity,  for  which  it  is  likely
that  substitutes  can  be  employed,  little  of  general  interest
can  be  said.  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  the
products  of  a  district,  or  a  country,  whose  efforts  are  directed
to  leadership  in  quality,  as  distinguished  from  quantity,
are  less  exposed  to  the  competition  of  substitutes  than  other
products.  For  example,  the  prime  qualities  of  beef  and
mutton  in  Great  Britain  have  not  been  affected  by  the
development  of  the  American  and  Australian  trade  to  nearly
the  same  extent  as  the  inferior  qualities.^  It  is,  therefore,
a  commercially  important  fact  that  English  manufacturers
enjoy  a  very  marked  leadership  of  quality  in  wall-papers,  fine
textiles  and  cables,  whereas  in  the  electrical  and  chemical"
industries  they  are  in  a  decidedly  inferior  position.*  Obviously,
from  the  present  point  of  view,  we  must  include  among  the
substitutes  for  any  commodity  produced  by  a  seller  exercising
monopolistic  power  the  same  commodity  produced  by   other

^  Cf.  Macpherson,  Transportation  in  En  ropey  p.  231.

2  Cf.  Johnson,  American  Railway  Transportation,  pp.  267-68.

3  The  Coal  Question,  p.  135.

*  Cf.  Besse,  U Agriculture  en  Angleterre,  pp.  45  and  85.

^  Cf.  Levy,  Monopole,  Kartelle  und  Trusts,  pp.  227,  229,  237.


CH.  XI  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  MONOPOLISATION     227

sellers.  The  larger,  therefore,  is  the  proportion  of  the  total
output  of  product  that  a  seller  exercising  monopolistic  power
provides  in  any  market,  the  less  elastic  the  demand  for  his
services  will  be.  Inelasticity  of  demand  for  monopoly  goods  is,
therefore,  promoted  in  industries  where  importation  from  rival
sources  is  hindered  by  high  transport  charges,  high  tariifs,  or
international  agreements  providing  for  the  division  of  the  field
between  the  combined  producers  of  different  countries.^
Furthermore,  in  order  that  the  elasticity  of  demand  may  be
affected  by  substitutes,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  rival  source
of  supply  should  be  actually  existing.  In  some  industries
manufacture  by  people  who  are  normally  purchasers  is
itself  a  possible  rival  source  of  supply.  Thus,  the  Committee
on  Home  Work  observe :  "  Unless  the  price,  at  which  these
articles  (baby  linen  and  ladies'  blouses  and  underclothing)  are
sold  to  the  wives  and  daughters  of  the  better-paid  working
men  and  small  middle-class  people,  is  low,  those  who  would
otherwise  be  purchasers  will  buy  the  materials  and  make
the  articles  at  home."  The  same  remark  seems  to  apply
to  laundry-work  and  charing.  The  poor  housewife  has  the
power,  if  reason  offers,  to  do  these  things  for  herself.  Con-
sequently, the  demand  for  the  services  of  specialists  at  such
tasks  is  exceptionally  elastic.^  For  example,  it  has  been
remarked  of  Birmingham :  "  The  washerwomen  are  among
the  first  to  suffer  in  any  period  of  trade  depression,  for,
as  the  first  economy  in  bad  times  is  to  do  your  own  washing,
the  tiny  laundry  with  a  very  local  connection  is  soon
emptied."  ^

^     The  second  condition,  making  for  inelasticity  of  demand,

is  that  a  commodity  shall  give  rise  to  only  a  small  proportion

*  of  the  total  cost  of  any  further  commodities  in  the  production

of  which  it  may  be  employed.     The  reason,  of  course,  is  that,

'  Since  1905  an  international  agreement  of  this  kind  seems  to  have  existed
in  regard  to  steel  rails  (Levy,  Monopole,  KarUlle  und  Trusts,  p.  250).  There
is  a  similar  agreement  in  the  tobacco  industry  {ihid.  p.  254).

^  Cf.  Chapman,  Unemployment  in  Lancashire,  p.  87.

^  Cadbury,  Women's  Work,  p.  172.  It  may  be  added  that,  from  a  short-
period  point  of  view,  the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  new  production  of  certain
durable  goods  is  made  greater  than  it  would  otherwise  be  by  the  fact  that
half-worn-out  garments  and  other  such  things  are  possible  substitutes  for  new
ones.     (Cf.  Chapman,  Tlie  Lancashire  Cotton  Industry,  p.  120.)


228  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

when  the  proportion  is  small,  a  large  percentage  rise  in  the
price  of  the  commodity,  with  which  we  are  concerned,  involves
only  a  small  percentage  rise  in  the  price  of  these  further
commodities,  and,  therefjore,  only  a  small  percentage  con-
traction of  consumption.  Dr.  Levy  suggests  that  this
condition  makes  the  demand  for  the  ordinary  raw  materials  of
industry  highly  inelastic.^  A  similar  line  of  thought  brings
out  the  fact  that  the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  commodities
at  wholesale  will  be  smaller,  the  larger  is  the  proportionate
part  played  by  retailing  and  transport  expenses  in  the  cost
of  the  commodities  to  consumers.

The  third  condition  is  that  the  further  commodities,
if  any,  in  whose  production  our  commodity  is  employed,
shall  be  such  that  substitutes  cannot  easily  be  found  for
them.  Thus,  the  raw  materials  of  the  building  trade  should
be  subject,  other  things  being  equal,  to  a  less  elastic  demand
than  those  of  the  engineering  trade,  because  foreign  machines
can  compete  with  English  machines  much  more  easily  than
foreign  houses  can  compete  with  English  houses.^

The  last  condition  is  that  the  other  commodities  or  services,
which  co-operate  with  our  commodity  in  the  making  of  a  finished
product,  shall  be  easily  "  squeezable,"  or,  in  technical  language,
shall  have  an  inelastic  supply  schedule.

§  6.  The  preceding  considerations  suggest  that  units  of
control  adequate  to  exercise  monopolistic  power  will  often  be
found,  even  though  neither  structural  economies  nor  advertise-
ment economies  dictate  their  formation.  The  tendency  towards
this  result  is  opposed  by  the  difficulty  and  cost  involved  in
bringing  about  agreements  among  competing  sellers.  This
difficulty  and  cost  depend  upon  the  following  general  circum-
stances. First,  combination  is  easier  when  the  number  of
sellers  is  small  than  when  it  is  large ;  for  small  numbers  both
facilitate  the  actual  process  of  negotiation,  and  diminish  the
chance    that   some  party  to  an  agreement  will  subsequently'

*  Monopole,  Kartelle  und  Trusts,  p.  280.

2  It  should  be  noticed,  however,  that,  though  houses  as  wholes  cannot  be
imported,  it  is  becoming  always  easier  to  import  parts  of  them.  The  imports
of  wrought  stone,  marble,  and  joinery  doubled  between  1890  and  1902  ;
whereas,  from  the  provinces  to  London  the  "imports"  of  these  things  have
increased  still  more  largely  (Dearie,  The  London  Building  Trades,  p.  52).


CH.  XI  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  MONOPOLISATION     229

violate  it.  An  attempt  to  form  a  Kartel  in  the  German
match  trade  in  1883  is  reported  by  Liefmann  to  have  failed,
because  no  less  than  245  separate  producers  had  to  be  con-
sulted.^ Secondly,  combination  is  easier  when  the  various
producers  live  fairly  close  to  one  another,  and  so  can  come
together  easily,  than  when  they  are  widely  scattered.  The
reason  why  combination  prevails  in  the  German  coal  industry,
and  not  in  the  English,  is  partly  that,  in  Germany,  the  pro-
duction of  coal  is  localised,  and  not  spread  over  a  number  of
different  districts,  as  it  is  in  this  country.^  A  similar  reason
probably  accounts,  in  great  measure,  for  the  excess  of  combina-
tion that  appears  among  sellers  in  general,  as  compared  with
buyers  in  general  ;  for,  it  may  be  observed,  at  auctions,
where  buyers  also  are  closely  assembled,  combination  among
them  is  not  infrequent.  Thirdly,  combination  is  easier  when
there  is  a  certain  uniformity  about  the  product  of  the  various
firms.  There  is  great  difficulty  in  arranging  any  form  of
Kartel  agreement  in  respect  of  goods  that  have  to  be  adapted
to  individual  tastes,  or  are  subject  to  the  influence  of  changes
of  fashion.  One  writer  suggests  that  a  reason  why  English
firms  are  combined  to  a  less  extent  than  foreign  firms  is  that
they  concern  themselves,  as  a  rule,  with  the  higher  qualities,
and  the  more  specialised  kinds,  of  commodities,  rather  than
with  "  mass  goods  "  ;  ^  and  another,  iu  like  manner,  attributes
the  greater  ease  with  which  Coke  Kartels  are  formed  in
Germany,  as  against  Coal  Kartels,  to  the  greater  uniformity
of  quality  generally  found  ia  coke.*  Fourthly,  combination  is
easier  when  the  tradition  and  habit  of  the  country  is  favourable,
than  when  it  is  unfavourable,  to  joint  action  in  general.  When
employers  have  been  accustomed  to  act  together  in  Chambers
of  Commerce,  in  agreements  as  to  discounts  and  rebates,  or  in
negotiations  with  unions  of  workpeople,  the  friction  to  be
overcome  in  making  a  price  agreement  is  evidently  less  than
it  would  be  if  they  came  together  for  the  first  time  for  that
purpose.  Thus  :  "  The  Association — such  as  the  Merchants'
Association  of  New  York — has,  indeed,  no  monopoly  power,

1  UiiUmehmeverbinde,  p.  57.

2  Cf.  Levy,  Monopole,  Kartdle  und  Trusts,  p.  172.

3  Levy,  Monopole,  Kartelle  und  Trusts,  p.  187.

*  Walker,  Cojnbinations  in  the  German  CoaZ  Industry,  p.  43.


230  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

but  it  is,  nevertheless,  of  very  great  importance,  owing  to  its
socialising  effects  and  its  tendency  to  prepare  the  way  for  a
stronger  organisation,  the  combination  or  pool."  -^  In  like
manner,  the  New  Zealand  arbitration  law  "  forces  employers
into  unions,  for  only  thus  can  they  defend  themselves  under
the  Act,  and  these  naturally  evolve  into  organisations  for
restricting  competition."  ^  Yet  again,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  various  forms  of  joint  action  which  British  engineering
firms,  for  example,  were  compelled  to  take  during  the  Great
War,  must  have  done  much  to  smooth  the  way  for  future
combination.  Perhaps,  the  opposing  friction  is  also  somewhat
smaller  when  the  producers  concerned  are  companies  than  it
is  when  they  are  private  firms,  in  whose  operations  the  sense
of  personal  importance  plays  a  larger  part.

§  7.  The  preceding  section  has  tacitly  implied  that,  where
the  gain  from  unification  exceeds  the  cost  and  trouble  involved,
unification  will,  in  fact,  occur.  This  implication,  however,
is  not  warranted.  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that,
because  an  opportunity  for  agreement  advantageous  to  all
parties  exists,  an  agreement  will  in  fact  be  made.  The
reason  is  that  mutual  jealousy  may  cause  A  and  B  to  leave
the  melon  of  common  gain  uncut,  rather  than  that  either
should  allow  the  other  to  obtain  what  he  considers  a  share
unduly  large  relatively  to  his  own.  Shall  "  participation  "  be
proportional  to  the  capacity  of  the  several  combining  firms,  or
to  their  average  product  during  recent  years,  or  to  the  amount
of  the  investment  that  has  to  be  made  in  plant  and  goodwill,
or  to  some  other  quantity  ?  "  One  manufacturer  has  patents
and  special  machinery,  which  have  cost  him  a  great  deal  of
money,  and  by  which  he  sets  much  store.  He  will  not  enter
the  proposed  combination  unless  these  costs  are  made  up  to
him.  Another  manufacturer  may  have  a  large  productive
capacity,  fifty  nail  machines,  for  example.  He  may  have
been  unable  to  find  a  market  for  the  output  of  more  than
half  his  machines,  but  in  the  combination,  he  contends,  all  his
capacity  will  become  available.  He,  therefore,  insists  that
productive  capacity  should  be  the  basis  on  which  the  allotment

*  Robinson,  American  Economic  Association,  1904,  p.  126.
2  V.  S.  Clark,  United  States  Bulletin  of  Lahaiir,  No.  43    j).  1251.


cH.  XI  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  MONOPOLISATION     231

of  shares  in  the  trust  should  be  made.  A  third  man,  by  the
excellence  of  his  equipment  and  the  energy  of  his  methods,  has
been  able  to  run  his  plant  at  its  full  capacity,  while  his  com-
petitor, with  a  larger  productive  capacity  but  a  less  favourable
location  or  a  less  capable  body  of  subordinates,  has  operated
only  haK  time.  The  successful  manufacturer  contends  that
average  sales  should  be  the  basis  of  allotment."  ^  Disputes  on
these  lines  may  easily  prevent  agreement  if  direct  negotiation
between  the  different  firms  is  attempted.  It  should,  however,
be  noticed  that  they  can,  in  great  part,  be  obviated,  and  that
the  difficulty  of  combination  can  be  correspondingly  reduced,
when  an  amalgamation  is  effected  gradually  by  the  process  of
absorption  (exemplified  among  English  banks),  or  when  a
company  promoter,  undertaking  to  buy  up  and  consolidate  a
number  of  competing  concerns,  negotiates  terms  separately
with  each  of  them,  without  stating  into  what  arrangements  he
has  entered  with  the  others.

*  Meade,  Corporation  Finance,  p.  36.


CHAPTEK    XII

MONOPOLISTIC    COMPETITION

§  1.  A  CONDITION  of  monopolistic  competition  exists  when
each  of  two  or  more  sellers  supplies  a  considerable  part  of  the
market  with  which  they  are  connected.  In  these  circumstances
it  can  be  shown  that  there  is  no  tendency  for  either  of  them
to  devote  to  production  such  an  amount  of  resources  as  will
render  the  value  of  their  marginal  trade  net  products  equal  to
that  yielded  by  resources  employed  in  industries  in  general.
A  demonstration  of  this  proposition  can  be  given  in  ordinary
language  as  follows.

§  2.  Let  us  first  ignore  all  forms  of  action  which  aim,  by
sacrifice  in  the  present,  at  obtaining  an  advantage  against
rivals  in  the  future.  We  have,  then,  to  do  with  the  pure
problem  of  "  multiple  monopoly."  This  problem  assumes  its
simplest  form  when  two  monopolists  only  are  supposed  to  be
present ;  and,  in  this  form,  it  has  been  much  discussed  among
mathematical  economists.  Cournot  decided,  as  is  well  known,
that  the  resources  devoted  to  production  under  duopoly  are  a
determinate  quantity,  lying  somewhere  between  the  quantity
that  would  have  been  so  devoted  under  simple  competition
and  under  simple  monopoly  respectively.  Professor  Edgeworth,
on  the  other  hand,  in  an  elaborate  critique,  maintains  that  the
quantity  is  indeterminate.  This  latter  view  is  now  accepted
by  all  mathematical  economists.  The  quantity  of  resources
which  at  any  moment  it  will  be  most  profitable  to  A  to
employ  in  his  business  depends  on  the  output  which  B  is
employing,  and  vice  versa.  The  quantity  employed  by  each,
therefore,  depends  on  his  judgment  of  the  policy  which  the
other  will  pursue,  and  this  judgment  may  be  anything  accord-

232


cH.xii  MONOPOLISTIC  COMPETITION  233

iiig  to  the  mood  of  each  and  his  expectation  of  success  from  a
policy  of  bluff.  As  in  a  game  of  chess,  each  player's  move  is
related  to  his  reading  of  the  psychology  of  his  opponent  and
his  guess  as  to  that  opponent's  reply.  Hence,  the  investment
of  each  separately  and  of  the  two  jointly  is  indeterminate.
There  are,  however,  limits  outside  of  which  it  cannot  travel.
At  the  one  extreme,  it  cannot,  in  any  circumstances,  pay  either
seller  to  invest  less  than  nothing.  At  the  other  extreme,  it
cannot,  in  general,  pay  either  to  invest  more  than  it  would
pay  him  to  invest  if  the  other  seller  were  investing  nothing.
Hence,  the  range  of  indeterminateness  of  aggregate  investment
stretches  from  nothing  at  the  one?  extreme,  up  to  the  sum  of
the  investment  that  would  maximise  A's  monopoly  revenue  in
the  absence  of  B  and  the  investment  that  would  maximise  B's
monopoly  revenue  in  the  absence  of  A.  It  can  be  shown  by
a  technical  argument,  developed  in  Appendix  III.  §  15,  that
this  sum  is  likely  to  be  smaller  than  the  quantity  of  resources
that  would  have  been  invested  by  A  and  B  jointly  under
conditions  of  simple  competition.  Now,  we  have  learned  from
Chapter  VIII.  that,  under  conditions  of  constant  return,  this
last  quantity  would  be  such  as  to  make  the  value  of  the
marginal  trade  net  product  in  our  industry  equal  to  the  value
of  marginal  trade  net  products  in  general  ;  under  conditions  of
increasing  return  greater  than  this ;  and  under  conditions  of
diminishing  return  less  than  this.  It  follows  that,  where
conditions  of  constant  or  increasing  return  prevail,  the  quantity
of  resources  invested  in  an  industry  subject  to  monopolistic
competition  will,  in  general,  be  such  that  the  value  of  the
marginal  trade  net  product  there  exceeds  the  value  of  marginal
trade  net  products  in  general,  the  extent  of  the  excess  being
indeterminate ;  and  that  in  conditions  of  diminishing  return,
the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  in  an  industry
subject  to  monopolistic  competition  is  not  likely  to  be  equal
to,  but  may  be  either  greater  or  less  than,  the  corresponding
general  value.

§  3.  So   far,  we  have  specifically  excluded  the  effects  of

•  price   warfare   designed  to    secure  future  gains  by  driving  a

rival  from  the  field  or  exacting  favourable  terms  of  agreement

from  him.     The  indeterminateness  just  described  exists  under


234  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

monopolistic  competition,  even  though  neither  of  the  monopolists
"  hopes  to  ruin  the  other  by  cut- throat  prices."  ^  In  many
instances  of  monopolistic  competition,  however,  price  warfare
— or  cut-throat  competition — does,  in  fact,  take  place.  It
consists  in  the  practice  of  selling  at  a  loss  in  order  to  inflict
injury  on  a  rival.  It  must  be  distinguished  carefully  from
the  practice  of  reducing  prices  down  to,  or  towards,  prime  cost,
which  frequently  occurs  in  periods  of  depression.  This  latter
practice  may  involve  large  reductions  of  price  below  the
"  normal,"  and  it  is  certain  to  do  this  when  demand  is  variable
and  prime  cost  is  small  relatively  to  supplementary  cost ;  but
it  does  not  involve  "  selling  at  a  loss "  in  the  strict  sense.
Cut-throat  competition  proper  occurs  only  when  the  sale  price
of  any  quantity  of  commodity  stands  below  the  short-period
supply  price  of  that  quantity.  When  it  occurs,  the  quantity
of  investment  is  no  longer  indeterminate  between  nothing  and
some  quantity  smaller  than  the  quantity  proper  to  simple
competition,  but  is  liable  to  exceed  this  quantity  to  an  extent
determined  by  the  opinion  entertained  by  each  of  the  combatants
about  the  staying  power  of  his  opponent,  and  by  other  strategical
considerations.  There  is,  obviously,  no  tendency  for  it  to
approximate  to  the  quantity  that  will  make  the  value  of  the
marginal  trade  net  product  of  the  resources  employed  equal  to
that  which  is  yielded  by  resources  in  general ;  but  it  is  not
possible  to  say  anything  further  than  this.

§  4.  The  broad  result  of  this  discussion  is  that,  in  industries
under  monopolistic  competition  minus  the  "  cut-throat "  element,
the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  investment  is
indeterminate,  but  is  likely,  except  under  conditions  of
diminishing  returns,  to  exceed  the  value  of  marginal  trade
net  products  in  general ;  and  that,  in  industries  under  mono-
polistic competition  plus  the  cut-throat  element,  it  is  uncon-
ditionally indeterminate.

'  Edgeworth,  Giornale  degli  ccoivomisti,  November  1897,  p.  405.


CHAPTER    XIII

SIMPLE    MONOPOLY

§  1.  A  CONDITION  of  simple  monopoly  exists  when  a  single
seller  only  is  exercising  monopolistic  power — whether  or
not  there  are  other  sellers  in  the  market  who  accept  the
price  fixed  by  this  seller — and  when,  allowance  being  made
for  cost  of  carriage  and  so  forth,  the  same  price  rules
throughout  the  whole  of  his  market  This  condition  of  things
works  out  in  two  different  ways,  according  as,  on  the  one
hand,  the  entry  to  the  industry  is  so  far  restricted  that  no
resources  are  drawn  into  it  other  than  those  actually  finding
employment  in  it,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  entry  to  the  industry
is  free.     I  shall  study  first  industries  of  restricted  entry.

§  2.  In  Chapter  VIII.  it  was  shown  that,  when  simple  com-
petition prevails,  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product
of  resources  invested  in  an  industry  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the
marginal  trade  net  products  of  resources  in  general  if  production
obeys  the  law  of  constant  returns,  greater  than  this  central  level
if  it  obeys  increasing  returns,  and  less  than  this  central  level
if  it  obeys  diminishing  returns.  When  simple  monopoly
prevails,  it  is  to  the  interest  of  the  monopolist  to  restrict
his  investment  of  resources  in  order  to  raise  the  price  of
the  product ;  and  he  will  so  regulate  its  amount  as  to  make
the  excess  of  his  aggregate  receipts  over  his  aggregate  costs
(including  earnings  of  management  and  so  forth)  as  large
as  possible.  It  follows  that  under  simple  monopoly  the
value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  will  always  be  larger
than  that  which  would  emerge  under  conditions  of  simple
competition.  Hence,  in  any  industry  working  under  con-
ditions   of    constant    returns    or   of    increasing    returns,    the

235


236  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  ii

substitution  of  simple  monopoly  for  simple  competition
necessarily,  other  things  being  equal,  causes  the  value  of
the  marginal  trade  net  product  to  diverge  from  (in  the  sense
of  exceeding)  the  central  level  more  widely  than  it  did
before ;  and,  when  the  conditions  are  such  that  several
positions  of  equilibrium  exist,  the  divergence  may  be  very  large
indeed.  In  an  industry  working  under  conditions  of
diminishing  returns  this  result  is  not  certain ;  for  in  such
an  industry  simple  competition  causes  the  value  of  the
marginal  trade  net  product  to  fall  short  of  the  central  level.
In  these  circumstances  that  contraction  of  investment,  to
which  simple  monopoly  leads,  may  evolve  a  value  of  marginal
trade  net  product  that  diverges  from  the  central  level  to
a  smaller  extent  than  the  value  of  marginal  trade  net  product
associated  with  simple  competition.  In  Appendix  III.  the
conditions  in  which  output  under  monopoly  will  diverge
less  than  output  under  simple  competition  from  the  ideal
output — which  are  substantially  equivalent  to  the  conditions
in  which  monopoly  will  be  less  injurious  to  the  national
dividend — are  displayed.  It  does  not  seem  possible  to  say
generally  whether  these  conditions  are  likely  or  unlikely
to  be  realised  in  an  industry  obeying  diminishing  returns
that  is  selected  at  random.  But  in  practice  simple
monopoly  is  much  more  likely  to  be  introduced  into  industries
of  increasing  returns  than  into  industries  of  diminishing
returns ;  and  here,  as  indicated  above,  there  is  no  uncertainty
about  the  result.

y  §  3.  When  monopolistic  power  is  exercised  by  a  com-
bination of  sellers  through  the  agency  of  a  price-agreement,
the  restrictive  influence  upon  investment  may  be  enhanced
in  an  indirect  way  by  a  further  circumstance.  It  is  not
practicable  to  make  an  agreement  touching  more  than  one
or  two  roughly  defined  grades  of  service.  Consequently,
since  an  adapted  charge  cannot  be  made  for  them,  the
intermediate  grades  tend  to  disappear,  even  though  numerous
purchasers — some  of  whom,  as  things  are,  buy  nothing —
would  have  bought  these  grades,  if  they  had  been  obtainable
at  a  proportionate  charge.  Therefore,  resources,  which,  under
a    perfectly    constructed    monopoly    agreement,    would    have


CH.  XIII  SIMPLE  MONOPOLY  237

been  devoted  to  the  production  of  these  grades,  are  excluded
by  the  imperfect  character  of  actual  agreements.  This  effect
is  chiefly  found  among  railway  and  shipping  companies,
which  are  bound  by  freight-rate  conventions  but  compete
in  the  frequency,  speed,  and  comfort  of  their  trains  or  ships.^
Thus,  there  may  be  a  demand  for  slow  delivery  of  goods
at  a  cheap  rate,  but  no  such  delivery  may  be  available,
"  Vans  are  sent  out  with  light  loads  in  order  to  secure  the
earliest  delivery,  and,  in  many  cases,  and  particularly  in  the
suburbs  of  larger  towns,  two  or  three  vans  will  be  engaged
in  delivering  light  loads  which  could  easily  be  conveyed  in
one  " ;  ^  first-class  rapid  vessels  are  employed  to  carry  things
for  which  they  are  quite  unnecessary,  because  agreements
preclude  the  offer  of  lower  rates  if  slower  and  cheaper  vessels
are  used ;  ^  and  so  forth.  The  misdirection  of  resources  that
arises  in  this  way  is  additional  to  the  misdirection  due  to
a  simple  exercise  of  monopolistic  power.

\y  §  4.  Some  qualification  of  the  above  results  is  necessary
in  industries  where  temporary  low  prices  may  lead  to  the
development  of  new  demands.  For,  when  a  prospect  of  this
kind  exists,  particularly  if  conditions  of  increasing  return
prevail  and  if  the  ruling  rate  of  interest  on  investments
is  low,  it  may  pay  a  monopolist  to  accept  low  prices  for
a  time,  even  though  to  do  so  involves  production  at  a
loss,  for  the  sake  of  the  future  gain ;  whereas  it  would  not
pay  any  one  among  a  large  number  of  competing  sellers
to  do  this,  since  only  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  future
gain  resulting  from  his  action  would  accrue  to  himself  It
is  important,  however,  to  observe  that  the  creation  of  a
new  demand,  which  may  thus  sometimes  be  credited  to
monopoly,  is  only  a  social  gain  when  the  demand  is  really
new,  and  not  when  it  is  merely  a  substitute  for  some  other
demand  which  is  at  the  same  time  destroyed.  It  is  not,
for  example,  a  social  gain  if  a  railway  company,  by  temporary

'  The  agreements,  short  of  pooling,  between  railways  sometimes  embrace
agreements  as  to  speed  ;  those  between  the  members  of  some,  but  not  all,
shipping  conferences,  agreements  as  to  the  relative  number  of  sailings  permitted
to  the  various  members  {BoyaZ  Comviission  on  Shippijig  Hings,  Report,  p.  23).

2  Beport  of  the  Board  of  Trade  Railway  Conference,  p.  39.

s  Royal  Commission  on  Shipping  Rings,  Report,  p.  108.


238  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  u

low  prices,  "  develops  the  traffic "  from  one  district  at  the
expense  of  destroying  the  traffic  from  another  equally  well
situated  district;  and  it  is  not  a  social  gain  if,  by  a  like
policy,  some  ring  of  traders  causes  people,  who  used  to  obtain
a  given  measure  of  satisfaction  from  crinolines  and  no  satis-
faction from  hobble-skirts,  to  obtain  the  like  given  measure
of  satisfaction  from  hobble-skirts  and  no  satisfaction  from
crinolines.  This  consideration  suggests  that  the  transitional
advantage  of  simple  monopoly,  that  has  just  been  set  out,
is  not  generally  very  important  in  comparison  with  the
long-period  disadvantages  previously  explained.

§  5.  In  the  discussion  so  far  we  have  assumed  the  entry
to  industries,  in  which  simple  monopoly  prevails,  to  be  so
far  obstructed  or  restricted  that  no  resources  are  drawn  into
them  other  than  those  actually  finding  employment  there.
As  a  rule  this  condition  is  fulfilled,  because,  when  it  is  not
fulfilled,  the  trouble  of  forming  monopolistic  agreements  will
seldom  be  worth  undertaking.  Still,  monopolistic  agree-
ments without  restriction  of  entry  are  sometimes  made.  It
is  easy  to  show,  that,  under  these  agreements,  the  national-
dividend  suffers  more  than  it  would  do,  if  the  same  mono-
polistic price  policy  prevailed  in  conjunction  with  restriction
of  entry  to  the  industry.  For,  broadly  speaking,  what
happens  is  this.  The  marginal  net  product  of  resources
actually  finding  employment  in  the  monopolised  industry  is
the  same  as  it  would  be  under  a  system  of  restricted  entry.
But,  besides  these  resources,  other  resources  have  been  drawn
away  from  employment  elsewhere  and  have  become  attached
to  the  industry.  These  extra  resources  will  either  be  all
idle  themselves,  or  wiU  make  a  corresponding  quantity  of
resources  already  in  the  industry  idle.  The  dividend,  there-
fore, will  be  reduced  below  what  it  would  have  been  under
a  system  of  restricted  entry,  by  the  difference  between  the
productivity  of  that  quantity  of  resources  which  it  pays  to
set  to  work  in  the  monopolised  industry  and  the  pro-
ductivity of  that  quantity  for  which  the  receipts  of  the
industry  would  suffice  to  provide  normal  earnings.  This  con-
sideration does  not,  of  course,  prove  that  restriction  of  entry
to    an    industry,    in    which    monopoly    prevails,    is    socially


CH.  nil  SIMPLE  MONOPOLY  239

desirable  ;  for  it  may  well  happen  that  free  entry  would  compel
the  monopolist  to  change  his  policy,  and  to  adopt  one
approximately  equivalent  to  that  dictated  by  competition.
It  only  proves  that  restriction  is  advantageous  in  those —
probably  exceptional  —  monopolies  where  the  removal  of
restriction  cannot  affect  price  policy .^

•  Attention  may  be  called  here  to  a  pecnliar  case.  Suppose  the  same
process  to  yield  two  joint  products,  one  of  which  is  controlled  monopolistically
but  the  other  is  not.  Then,  as  shown  above,  if  entry  to  the  industry  can  be
restricted,  simple  monopoly  will  make  the  outputs  of  both  products  less  than
they  would  be  under  simple  competition.  The  whole  of  the  non-monopolised
joint  product  that  is  produced  wUl  be  sold,  but  a  part  of  the  other  product  wiU
probably  be  thrown  away.  If,  however,  entry  to  the  industry  is  not  restricted,
more  resources  will  flow  into  it  than  would  so  flow  under  simple  competition.
This  will  mean  that  the  output  and  sale  of  the  non-monopoliscd  joint  product
iarger  than  it  woTild  have  been  under  simple  competition.  It  is  poasibk,
iigh  improbable,  that,  as  a  net  result,  there  may  be  evolved  a  larger  som  of
consumers'  surplus  than  simple  competition  would  allow.  (Of.  anU,  Ch.  VIII.
footnote  to  p.  194.)


I


CHAPTEE    XIV

DISCRIMINATING   MONOPOLY  ^

§  1.  Up  to  this  point  we  have  supposed  that  monopolisation,
when  it  occurs,  will  be  of  the  simple  form  which  does  not
involve  discrimination  of  prices  as  between  different
customers.  We  have  now  to  observe  that  this  variety
of  monopolisation  is  not  the  only  possible  sort.  Dis-
criminating power  will  sometimes  exist  alongside  of  mono-
polistic power,  and,  when  it  does,  the  results  are  affected.
It  is,  therefore,  important  to  determine  the  circumstances
in  which,  and  the  degree  to  which,  monopolists  are  able
to  exercise,  and  find  advantage  in  exercising,  this  power.

§  2.  The  conditions  are  most  favourable  to  discrimination,
that  is  to  say,  discrimination  will  yield  most  advantage  to
the  monopolist  when  the  demand  price  for  any  unit  of  a
commodity  is  independent  of  the  price  of  sale  of  every  other
unit.  This  implies  that  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  unit
to  take  the  place  of  any  other  unit,  and  this,  in  turn,  implies
two  things.  The  first  of  these  is  that  no  unit  of  the
commodity  sold  in  one  market  can  be  transferred  to  another
market.  The  second  is,  that  no  unit  of  demand,  proper  to
one  market,  can  be  transferred  to  another  market.  The
former  sort  of  transference  needs  no  description,  but  the  latter
is  somewhat  subtle.  It  would  occur  if  the  promulgation  of
different  rates  for  transporting  coal  originating  in  A  and  coal
originating    in    B    enabled    the    more    favoured    district    to

*  In  this  chapter  some  of  the  results,  depending,  as  they  do,  on  mathematical
reasoning  that  cannot  readily  be  translated  into  ordinary  language,  are
necessarily  stated  in  a  somewhat  dogmatic  form.  For  proof  of  these  results
reference  must  be  made  to  Appendix  III.

240


cH.  XIV  DISCEIMINATING  MONOPOLY  241

increase  its  production  of  coal  and,  therefore,  its  demand
for  carriage,  at  the  expense  of  the  less  favoured  district.  In
order  that  the  conditions  most  favourable  to  discrimination
may  prevail,  this  sort  of  transferability,  as  well  as  the  other,
must  be  excluded.  Under  the  monopolistic  arrangements
practicable  in  real  life  the  above  kinds  of  transferability  are
absent  or  present  in  varying  degrees.  I  propose  to  set  out
a  series  of  examples  under  each  of  the  heads  just
distinguished.

§  3.  Units  of  commodity  are  entirely  non-transferable
when  the  commodity  in  question  consists  of  services  applied
directly  by  the  sellers  to  the  persons  of  their  customers,
such  as  the  services  of  medical  men,  barristers,  teachers,
dentists,  hotelkeepers  and  so  forth.  A  medical  man's  offer  to
charge  any  one  set  of  persons  less  than  any  other  set  cannot
lead  to  the  one  set  becoming  middlemen  for  the  services
which  the  other  set  desire.  Services  applied  directly  by  the
seller  to  commodities  handed  to  them  for  treatment,  such  as
the  service  of  transporting  different  articles,  are  also  entirely
non-transferable.  A  railway's  offer  to  charge  one  price  for  a
ton-mile  of  transport  service  to  copper  merchants  and  a  lower
price  to  coal  merchants  cannot  lead  to  any  middleman  device,
because  it  is  physically  impossible  to  convert  copper  into  coal
for  the  purpose  of  transport  and  afterwards  to  reconvert  it.
A  slightly,  but  only  slightly,  lower  degree  of  non -transferability
exists  among  services  that  are  normally  rendered  in  physical
connection  with  the  private  dwellings  of  purchasers.  Gas  and
water  supplied  to  private  houses  are  instances  in  point.  Here
transference  is  not  entirely  excluded,  because  it  is  possible,  at
sufficient  cost  of  money  and  trouble,  to  detach  the  commodities
from  the  distributing  plant  along  which  they  are  brought  and
to  carry  them  elsewhere.  Lesser  degrees  of  non-transferability
exist  among  commodities  whose  transference  is  obstructed
merely  by  high  costs  of  transportation  or  by  tariff  charges.
The  degree  of  non-transferability  in  these  circumstances
may,  evidently,  be  large  or  small,  according  as  the  distance,
or  the  rate  of  customs  duty,  that  separates  two  markets
between  which  discrimination  is  attempted  is  large  or  small.
In    like    manner,   various   degrees  of  non-transferability   can

K


II


242  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

be  brought  about  artificially  by  enforcing  upon  purchasers
contracts  that  penalise  re-sales.  For  example,  in  the  Ruhr
coal  district,  the  agreement  made  by  the  syndicate  with
industrial  purchasers  provides  "  that  re-sale  to  railways,  gas
works,  brick  works  or  lime-kilns,  or  any  reshipment  from
the  original  point  of  destination,  shall  be  penalised  by  an
addition  of  3  marks  per  ton  to  the  selling  price."  -^  If  no
agreement  of  this  kind,  no  cost  of  carriage,  and  no  tariff
exist,  complete  transferability  will  prevail.

§  4.  Units  of  demand  are  almost  completely  non-transfer-
able from  one  market  to  another,  when  the  commodity
concerned  is  something  ready  for  final  consumption,  and  when
the  markets,  between  which  discrimination  is  to  be  made,
are  distinguished  according  to  the  wealth  of  the  purchasers.
It  is  clear,  for  instance,  that  the  willingness  of  doctors  to
charge  less  to  poor  people  than  to  rich  people  does  not  lead
to  any  rich  people,  for  the  sake  of  cheap  doctoring,  becoming
poor.  In  like  manner,  the  provision  of  the  service  of
transport  at  difterent  rates  to  coal  merchants  and  to  copper
merchants  does  not  lead  to  any  copper  merchants,  for  the
sake  of  the  cheap  transportation,  becoming  coal  merchants.
No  doubt,  in  both  these  examples  some  slight  transference  may
be  achieved  through  successful  fraud,  such  as  a  pretence  on
the  part  of  rich  people  that  they  belong  to  the  poorer  group,
and  the  smuggling  of  copper  in  the  guise  of  coal;  but  this
kind  of  thing  is  of  no  practical  importance.  It  is  interesting
to  note  that  sellers  often  attempt  artificially  to  create  the
above  type  of  non-transferability  by  attaching  to  different
grades  of  their  product  trade  marks,  special  brands,  special
types  of  packing  and  so  on — all  incidents  designed  to  prevent
possible  purchasers  of  the  grades  that  are  highly  priced
relatively  to  the  cost  of  production  from  becoming  instead  pur-
chasers of  the  grades  that  are  sold  at  a  lower  rate  of  profit.*

1  Walker,  Comhinaticm  in  the  German  Coal  Industry,  p.  274.

2  It  must  be  added,  liowever,  that,  though  trade  marks  are  sometimes  mere     I
devices  for  creating  monopoly  power,  tliere  is,  nevertheless,  a  valid  reason  for
protecting  them  against  infringement  by  legal  enactments,  because  "an  induce-
ment is  thereby  given  to  make  satisfactory  articles  and  to  continue  making
them."     (Cf.  Taussig,  American  Economic  Review  Supplement,  vol.  vi.,  1916,

p.  177.)


CH.  XIV  DISCEIMINATING  MONOPOLY  243

A  smaller  degree  of  non-transferability  exists  between  the
markets  for  hotel  accommodation  in  the  season  and  out  of
the  season;  for  heavy  discrimination  might  cause  a  con-
siderable number  of  people  to  change  the  time  of  their
holiday.  A  still  smaller  degree  of  non-transferability  exists
between  the  markets  for  railway  transport  from  A  to  B,
which  are  provided  respectively  by  traders  in  A  wishing
to  send  a  given  commodity  direct  to  B,  and  by  traders  in
C  wishing  to  send  this  commodity  to  B  through  A.  For
a  large  difference  in  the  rates  charged  would  cause  production,
that  would  normally  occur  at  the  less  favoured,  to  take  place
instead  at  the  more  favoured,  point.  Perfect  transferability
exists  when  the  markets  are  distinguished  by  some  badge,
the  attachment  of  which  involves  no  cost,  as,  for  example,
if  railways  charged  one  fare  to  passengers  carrying  pencils
and  another  fare  to  passengers  without  pencils.  The
immediate  effect  of  this  discrimination  would  be  to  transfer
all  demands  from  the  less  to  the  more  favoured  market,  and
discrimination  would  yield  tw  advantage  to  the  monopolists.

§  5.  When  a  degree  of  non-transferability,  of  commodity
units  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  demand  units  on  the  other
hand,  sufficient  to  make  discrimination  profitable,  is  present,
the  relation  between  the  monopolistic  seller  and  each  buyer  is,
strictly,  one  of  bilateral  monopoly.  The  terms  of  the  contract
that  will  emerge  between  them  is,  therefore,  theoretically
indeterminate  and  subject  to  the  play  of  that  "  bargaining "
whose  social  effects  were  analysed  at  the  end  of  Chapter  VI.
When  a  railway  company  is  arranging  terms  with  a  few  large
shippers,  the  indeterminate  element  may  have  considerable
importance.  Usually,  however,  where  discrimination  is
of  practical  interest,  the  opposed  parties  are,  not  a  single
large  seller  and  a  few  large  buyers,  but  a  single  large  seller
and  a  great  number  of  relatively  small  buyers.  The  loss
of  an  individual  customer's  purchase  means  so  much  less
to  the  monopolistic  seller  than  to  any  one  of  the  many
monopolistic  purchasers,  that,  apart  from  combination  among
purchasers,  all  of  them  will  almost  certainly  accept  the
monopolistic  seller's  price.  They  will  recognise  that  it  is
useless  to  stand  out  in  the  hope  of  bluffing  a  concession,  aud


244  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

will  buy  what  is  offered,  so  long  as  the  terms  demanded
from  them  leave  to  them  any  consumers'  surplus.  In  what
follows  I  assume  that  the  customers  act  in  this  way.  So
assuming,  we  may  distinguish  three  degrees  of  discriminating
power,  which  a  monopolist  may  conceivably  wield.  The
ideal  degree  would  involve  the  charge  of  a  different  price
against  all  the  different  units  of  commodity,  in  such  wise
that  the  price  exacted  for  each  was  equal  to  the  demand
price  for  it,  and  no  consumers'  surplus  was  left  to  the  buyers.
A  second  degree  would  obtain  if  a  monopolist  were  able  to
make  n  separate  prices,  in  such  wise  that  all  units  with
a  demand  price  greater  than  x  were  sold  at  a  price  x,  all  with
a  demand  price  less  than  x  and  greater  than  y  at  a  price
y,  and  so  on.  A  third  degree  would  obtain  if  the  monopolist
were  able  to  distinguish  among  his  customers  n  different
groups,  separated  from  one  another  more  or  less  by  some
practicable  mark,  and  could  charge  a  separate  monopoly  price
to  the  members  of  each  group.  This  degree,  it  will  be
noticed,  differs  fundamentally  from  either  of  the  preceding
degrees,  in  that  it  may  involve  the  refusal  to  satisfy,  in  one
market,  demands  represented  by  demand  prices  in  excess  of
some  of  those  which,  in  another  market,  are  satisfied.

^  6.  These  three  degrees  of  discriminating  power,  though
all  theoretically  possible,  are  not,  from  a  practical  point  of
view,  of  equal  importance.  On  the  contrary,  in  real  life  the
third  degree  only  is  found.  No  doubt,  we  can  imagine
conditions  in  which  discrimination  even  of  the  first  degree
could  be  achieved.  If  all  consumers  had  exactly  similar
demand  schedules,^  it  could  be  achieved  by  the  simple  device
of  refusing  to  sell  in  packets  of  less  than  the  quantity  which
each  consumer  required  per  unit  of  time,  and  fixing  the
price  per  packet  at  such  a  rate  as  to  make  it  worth  the
consumer's  while,  but  only  just  worth  his  while,  to  purchase
the  packet.  Thus,  if  every  demander  would  give  for  a
hundredth  physical  unit  of  commodity,  when  he  already  has
ninety-nine  units,  the  sum  of  one  shilling,  but  would  prefer

1  A  person's  demand  schedule  for  any  commodity  is  the  list  of  different
quantities  of  that  commodity  that  he  would  purchase  at  different  price  levels.
Cf.  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economics,  p.  96.


cH.  XIV  DISCEIMINATING  MONOPOLY  245

to  give  300  shillings  for  a  hundred  units,  rather  than  have
no  units  at  all,  the  monopolist  may  make  his  unit  of  sale
one  hundred  physical  units  and  charge  for  this  unit  of
sale  a  price  of  300  shillings.  If  there  is  no  combination
among  the  buyers,  the  number  of  units  sold  will  then
be  the  same  as  would  have  been  sold  at  a  price  of
one  shilling  per  physical  unit,  and,  in  effect,  the  physical
units  satisfying  demands  of  different  keenness  will  have
been  sold  at  different  prices.  But  this  method  of  dis-
crimination, whether  in  a  complete  or  a  partial  form,  is
scarcely  ever  practicable,  because  the  individual  demand
schedules,  of  which  the  market  demand  schedule  is  made
up,  are,  as  a  rule,  very  far  indeed  from  being  similar.  For
this  reason  an  analysis  of  the  method  is  of  academic  interest
only.^  Apart  from  this  method,  ideal  discrimination  might
still  conceivably  be  established  by  detailed  separate  bargain-
ing with  every  separate  customer.  But  it  is  obvious  that
that  method  involves  enormous  cost  and  trouble.  Further-
more, since  it  implies  separate  bargains  with  individuals,
it  opens  the  way,  not  only  to  error,  but  also  to  the  perversion
of  agents  through  bribery.  These  considerations  are,  in
general,  sufficient  to  make  monopolists  themselves  unwilling
to  adopt  the  method ;  and,  even  if  they  were  not  thus
unwilling,  it  would  be  hardly  possible  for  the  State,  in  view
of  the  large  opportunities  for  "  unfair "  competition  which
the  method  affords,  to  leave  their  hands  free.  "Whatever
financial  advantage  there  may  be  in  charging  against  each
act  of  transport  a  rate  adapted  to  its  individual  circumstances,
the  arbitrary  nature  of  a  system  of  rates  arranged  on  this
plan  implies  so  much  uncertainty  and  lends  itself  to  such
serious  abuses,  that  we  are  compelled  to  condemn  it."^     Thus,

'  For  such  an  analysis,  cf.  my  paper  "  Monopoly  and  Consumers'  Surplus, "
Economic  Journal,  September  1904.

'  Colson,  Cours  d'e'conomie  politique,  vol.  vi  p.  211.  Special  opportunities
for  injurious  discrimination  of  this  sort  exist  when  a  railway  company  is  also
itself  a  large  producer  of  some  commodity,  say  coal,  which  it  also  transports
for  rival  producers.  To  prevent  the  obvious  abuses  to  which  this  state  of  things
may  lead,  the  "commodity  clause"  of  the  Hepburn  Act  passed  in  1906  in  the
United  States  made  it  unlawful  for  any  railway  to  engage  in  interstate
transport  of  any  commodity  which  had  been  mined  or  manufactured  by  itself.
The  law  does  not,  however,  prevent  a  railway  from  transporting  a  commodity


246  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

a  powerful  influence  is  always  at  work  persuading  or  com-
pelling monopolists  to  act  on  general  rules,  with  published
tariffs,  guarded,  as  effectively  as  may  be,  against  the  under-
mining influence  of  unpublished  rebates.  This  means  that
they  cannot,  except  in  extraordinary  circumstances,  introduce
either  the  first  or  the  second  degree  of  discrimination,  and
that  the  third  degree  is  of  chief  practical  importance.

§  7.  Monopoly  plus  discrimination  of  the  third  degree  is
not  a  determinate  conception.  It  is  theoretically  possible
to  divide  any  market  in  an  indefinitely  large  number  of
different  ways,  of  which  some  would  be  more,  and  others  less,
advantageous  to  the  monopolist.  If  the  monopolist  had  an
absolutely  free  hand  in  the  matter,  the  division  he  would
choose  would  be  such  that  the  lowest  demand  price  in  sub-
market  A  exceeded  the  highest  demand  price  in  sub-market
B,  and  so  on  throughout.  If  the  aggregate  demand  of  the
markets  collectively  had  an  elasticity  greater  than  unity
throughout,  the  resulting  system  would  be  identical  with
that  proper  to  the  second  degree  of  discrimination,  for  the
lowest  demand  price  in  each  group  would  also  be  the  price
calculated  to  yield  maximum  monopoly  revenue  from  that
group.  If  the  aggregate  demand  had  not  an  elasticity  greater
than  unity  throughout,  the  maximising  price  in  some  groups
would  be  greater  than  the  lowest  demand  price  in  those  groups,
and  the  system  would,  therefore,  be  different  from  the  above.
In  any  event,  the  separation  of  markets,  in  such  wise  that  the
lowest  demand  price  in  the  first  exceeds  the  highest  demand
price  in  the  second,  and  so  on,  would  obviously  be  better,
from  the  monopolist's  point  of  view,  than  any  other  kind  of
separation.  But  in  practice  the  monopolist's  freedom  of  action
is  limited  by  the  need,  already  referred  to,  of  acting  on  general
rules.  This  consideration  makes  it  necessary  that  he  shall
choose,  for  his  sub-markets,  groups  that  are  distinguishable
from  one  another  by  some  readily  recognisable  mark.  More-
over, since  a  hostile  public  opinion  might  lead  to  legislative
intervention,  his  choice  must  not  be  such  as  to  outrage  the

produced  by  a  company  in  which  it  liolds  a  majority  of  the  shares,  and  it  can,
therefore,  be  evaded  without  great  ditliculty.  (Cf.  Jones,  2'Iie  Aiiihracite  Coal
Gornbinoition,  pp.  190  e<  seq.)


CH.  XIV  DISCRIMINATING  MONOPOLY  247

popular  sense  of  justice.  Thus,  he  will  uot  distinguish  and
bring  together  entirely  new  groups,  but  will  make  use  of
distinctions  already  given  in  nature.  Nor  is  this  alL  For  in
some  circumstances  the  condition  of  non-transferability  holds
good,  not  generally,  but  only  as  between  certain  markets  which
are  constituted  independently  of  the  monopolist's  volition.
Thus,  the  existence  of  an  import  tariff  or  of  high  transport
charges  on  imports  to  all  parts  of  his  country's  frontier — a
condition  easiest  to  realise  when  that  country  is  an  island —
may  make  it  possible  for  a  seller  to  charge  a  lower  price  for
his  goods  abroad  than  at  home  without  the  risk  of  inviting  the
return  and  resale  of  his  exports.  Clearly,  therefore,  a  monopolist
cannot  hope  to  find  a  series  of  sub-markets  that  conforms  to
his  ideal  altogether,  but  he  may  find  one  in  which  only  a
comparatively  small  number  of  the  demand  prices  embraced  in
the  first  sub-market  are  lower  than  the  highest  demand  price
of  the  second  sub-market,  and  so  on  throughout  all  the
sub-markets.

§  8.  I  now  pass  to  an  analysis  of  consequences,  and,  as  in
the  preceding  chapter,  I  shall  begin  with  monopolised  industries
to  which  entry  can  be  restricted.  The  analysis,  to  be  complete,
would  need  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that,  in  real  life,  the
demand  of  one  purchaser  for  any  r"*  unit  of  a  commodity  is
sometimes,  in  part,  dependent  upon  the  price  at  which  this
commodity  is  being  sold  to  other  purchasers.^  When  markets
are  interdependent  in  this  way,  the  issue  is  comphcated,  but
the  broad  results,  though  rendered  less  certain,  are  not,  it  would
appear,  substantially  altered.  Consequently,  in  the  following
pages  I  shall  assume  that  the  quantity  demanded  in  each  sub-
market  depends  only  on  the  price  ruling  in  that  sub-market.
This  procedure  enables  resort  to  be  had  to  the  same  general
method  that  has  been  pursued  hitherto.

§  9.  As  already  explained,  practical  interest  centres  upon
monoTpolj  plies  discrimination  of  the  third  degree.  But,  before
studying  this,  we  may,  with  advantage,  glance  at  the  simpler
problem  presented  by  the  two  higher  forms  of  discrimination.
It  is  easily  seen  that  under  mono'polj  plus  ideal  discrimination,
since,  with  a  monopolist,  individual  net  product  and  trade
>  Cf.  Appendix  III.  §§  9-10.


248  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

net  product  are  necessarily  identical,  it  is  to  the  advantage
of  the  monopolist  to  push  forward  investment  in  his  industry
to  the  point  at  which  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net
product  of  resources  there  is  exactly  equal  to  the  value  of  the
marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources  in  general.  In  general,
this  result  is  more  advantageous  to  the  national  dividend
than  anything  that  can  be  hoped  for  under  simple  monopoly.
It  is,  indeed,  equally  advantageous  with  that  yielded  by  simple
competition,  provided  that  conditions  of  constant  returns  prevail.
But,  when  conditions  of  diminishing  returns  prevail,  it  is  more
advantageous,  because,  in  these  conditions,  simple  competition,
as  was  shown  in  Chapter  VIII.,  would  cause  investment  in  the
industry  to  be  pushed  unduly,  so  that  the  value  of  the  marginal
trade  net  product  there  would  be  less  than  that  attainable
elsewhere.  When  conditions  of  increasing  returns  prevail,  it
is  also  more  advantageous,  because,  in  these  conditions,  simple
competition  would  cause  investment  in  the  industry  to  be  pushed
inadequately,  so  that  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  there
would  be  greater  than  that  obtainable  elsewhere.  It  appears
further  that  the  advantage  involved  in  monopoly  phis  ideal
discrimination  is  greater,  the  more  elastic  is  the  demand  for
the  commodity  produced  by  the  industry,  and  the  more  markedly
the  conditions  of  supply  depart  from  constant  returns,  either
on  the  side  of  diminishing  or  on  the  side  of  increasing  returns.^
Finally,  it  should  be  observed  that,  when  conditions  of  in-
creasing returns  prevail,  monopoly  plus  ideal  discrimination
may  be  associated  with  a  considerable  amount  of  investment
in,  and  output  from,  an  industry  in  which,  under  a  regime  of
simple  competition,  it  would  not  have  been  to  anybody's  interest
to  make  any  investment  at  all.  It  is  shown  in  Appendix  III.
that  this  result  is  most  likely  to  be  realised  (1)  if,  other
things  being  equal,  increasing  returns  are  acting  strongly,  in
such  wise  that  a  small  increase  of  output  involves  a  large  fall
in  the  cost  of  production  per  unit,  and  (2)  if,  other  things
being  equal,  the  demand  for  the  commodity  or  service  is
elastic  till  fairly  low  price  levels  have  been  reached.^

§  10.  It    is  readily   seen  that   the    effects    of  monopoly

1  Appendix  III.  §  20.
2  Of.  ihid.  §  21.


CH.  XIV  DISCRIMINATING  MONOPOLY  249

jplvs  discrimination  of  the  second  degree  approximate  towards
those  of  monopoly  plus  discrimination  of  the  firat  degree,  as
the  number  of  different  prices,  which  it  is  possible  for  the
monopolist  to  charge,  increases ;  just  as  the  area  of  a  polygon
inscribed  in  a  circle  approximates  to  the  area  of  the  circle  as
the  number  of  its  sides  increases.  Let  us  call  the  output
proper  to  ideal  discrimination  a.  Then  monopoly  of  the
second  degree  would  lead  to  an  output  less  than  a,  but
approaching  more  nearly  towards  it  the  larger  is  the  number
of  the  different  price  groups  which  the  monopolist  is  able
to  distinguish ;  and  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net
product  of  resources  invested  in  our  industry  would,  in  like
manner,  approach  more  nearly  towards  equality  with  the
value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  elsewhere,  the  larger
is  this  number.

§  11.  The  study  of  monopoly  plus  discrimination  of  the
third  degree  is  more  complicated  than  that  of  either  of  the
two  higher  forms.  In  the  discussion  of  these  we  were  able
to  make  use  of  a  simple  relation  between  the  aggregate
output  which  comes  about  in  various  circumstances,  and  the
output  which  I  have  called  the  ideal  output.  According  as
actual  output  exceeds,  falls  short  of,  or  is  equal  to  the  ideal
output,  we  could  conclude  that  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade
net  product  of  resources  invested  in  our  industry  falls  short
of,  exceeds,  or  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade
net  product  in  industries  in  general.  But,  under  monopoly
plus  discrimination  of  the  third  degree,  the  relation  between
actual  output  and  ideal  output  no  longer  suffices  for  a
criterion.  The  reason  is  that,  when  a  demand  represented
by  a  demand  price  p  is  satisfied,  it  is  not  necessary,  as  it
has  been  necessary  so  far,  that  all  the  demands  represented
by  demand  prices  greater  than  p  shall  have  been  satisfied.
On  the  contrary,  the  monopolist  may,  in  one  market,  be
satisfying  all  demands  represented  by  demand  prices  higher
than  p,  while,  in  another  market,  he  is  refusing  to  satisfy
any  demands  whose  demand  prices  fall  short  of  (p  +  h).  It
follows  that  the  resources  invested  in  the  industry  fall  into
a  number  of  different  parts,  in  each  of  which  the  value  of  the
marginal  trade   net   product   is   different.     Consequently,  we


250  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

have  no  longer  to  ask  how  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade
net  product  of  resources  invested  in  the  indvstry  is  related
to  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources
in  industries  in  general,  but  how  the  various  values  of  marginal
trade  net  products  of  resources  invested  in  each  of  the  several
markets  of  the  industry  are  related  to  that  standard.  Our
ideal  output  ceases  to  be  a  single  output  of  the  whole
industry,  and  becomes  a  number  of  separate  outputs  sold
in  separate  markets.  A  given  out|)ut  of  the  whole  industry-
may  be  broken  up  in  different  ways  among  these  markets,
and  the  system  of  values  of  marginal  trade  net  products  will
be  different  according  to  the  way  in  which  it  is,  in  fact,
broken  up.  Hence,  a  study  of  the  effect  which  monopoly  jplius
discrimination  of  the  third  degree  produces  upon  output,
is  only  a  first  step  to  a  study  of  the  effect  which  it  produces,
as  compared  with  that  which  simple  monopoly  and  simple
competition  respectively  produce,  upon  the  relation  between
the  values  of  marginal  trade  net  products  in  different  parts
of  the  industrial  field.  Nevertheless,  it  is  well  that  such
a  study  should  be  made.  To  facilitate  it,  let  us  suppose  that
the  demands  for  the  product  of  an  industry  can  be  broken
up  into  two  markets  A  and  B,  between  which  price
discrimination  is  feasible ;  and  let  us  ask  first  whether
output  under  discriminating  monopoly  of  the  third  degree
will  be  absolutely  greater  or  smaller  than  output  under
simple  monopoly  and  simple  competition  respectively.

§  12.  To  compare  the  output  proper  to  discriminating
monopoly  with  that  proper  to  simple  monopoly,  we  may
conveniently  distinguish  three  principal  cases.  First,  let
the  conditions  be  such  that,  under  simple  monopoly,  some
of  the  commodity,  in  which  we  are  interested,  would  be
consumed  in  both  A  and  B.  In  these  conditions  there  is
no  adequate  ground  for  holding  either  that  output  under
discriminating  monopoly  is  likely  to  exceed,  or  that  it  is
likely  to  fall  short  of,  output  under  simple  monopoly.
Mathematical  analysis  shows  that  the  result  is  quite
uncertain.^  Secondly,  let  the  conditions  be  such  that,  under
simple  monopoly,  some  of  the  commodity   would   have   been

1  Cf.  Appendix  III.  §  23.


I


cfl.  XIV  DISCRIMINATING  MONOPOLY  251

consumed  in  A,  but  none  in  B.  In  these  conditions  it  is
impossible  that  the  introduction  of  discriminating  power
should  lead  to  diminished  output.  On  the  contrary,  if  there
is  any  substantial  demand  in  B,  it  must  lead  to  increased
output.  The  amount  of  the  increase  will  be  specially  great
if  the  demand  in  B  is  elastic,  and  if  the  supply  of  the
commodity  obeys  the  law  of  increasing  returns.  These
conditions  are  often  fulfilled  among  Kartels  seUing  regularly
at  specially  low  rates  in  markets,  foreign  and  other,  where
they  are  exposed  to  competition.  An  interesting  practical  infer-
ence is  that,  if  a  commodity  whose  production  obeys  the  law
of  increasing  returns  is  monopolised,  it  is  to  the  interest  of
the  consumers  in  the  producing  country  that  the  Govern-
ment should  allow  the  monopolist  to  make  sales  abroad  at
lower  prices  than  at  home,  rather  than  that,  while  still  per-
mitting monopoly,  it  should  forbid  this  discrimination.  This
inference  cannot  be  upset  by  reference  to  the  more  advanced
industries  that  use  the  commodity  as  a  raw  material,
because  the  sales  abroad,  being  at  market  prices  there,
do  not  enable  foreign  users  to  get  it  more  cheaply  than
they  could  before.  Finally,  let  the  conditions  be  such
that,  under  simple  monopoly,  none  of  the  commodity  would
have  been  consumed  in  either  A  or  B.  In  these  con-
ditions it  is  obviously  impossible  that  the  introduction  of
discriminating  power  should  lead  to  diminished  output.  It
is  possible  that  it  may  lead  to  increased  output  The
condition  for  this  is  the  same  as  the  condition,  mentioned
in  the  next  paragraph,  that  enables  discriminating  monopoly
of  the  third  degree  to  yield  some  output,  though  simple
competition  would  yield  none.

^13.  We  have  now  to  compare  the  output  proper  to
discriminating  monopoly  with  that  proper  to  simple
competition.  Under  conditions  of  constant  returns  and
diminishing  returns  it  is,  obviously,  impossible  for  dis-
criminating monopoly  of  any  sort  to  make  output  greater
than  it  would  be  under  simple  competition.  Discriminating
monopoly  of  the  third  degree  must  make  it  smaller  than  it
would  be  under  that  system.  When,  however,  increasing
returns  prevail,  the  question  is  more  complex.     It  has  been


252  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  u

proved  in  an  earlier  section  that,  in  that  event,  monopoly
jplus  ideal  discrimination  must  raise  output  above  the  quantity
proper  to  simple  competition.  Furthermore,  it  is  evident
that  discrimination  of  the  third  degree  approximates  towards
ideal  discrimination,  as  the  number  of  markets  into  which
demands  can  be  divided  approximate  towards  the  number
of  units  for  which  any  demand  exists.  Hence,  it  follows
that,  under  increasing  returns,  monopoly  plus  discrimination
of  the  third  degree  may  raise  output  above  the  competitive
amount,  and  is  more  likely  to  do  this  the  more  numerous
are  the  markets  between  which  discrimination  can  be  made.
Sometimes,  but  not,  of  course,  so  frequently  as  with  ideal
discrimination,  discriminating  monopoly  of  the  third  degree
will  evolve  some  output  where  simple  competition  would
have  evolved  none.  In  view,  however,  of  the  limitation,
which  practical  considerations  impose,  alike  upon  the  number
of  markets  that  can  be  formed,  and  upon  the  monopolist's
freedom  to  make  up  the  several  markets  in  the  way  most
advantageous  to  him,  it  appears,  on  the  whole,  exceedingly
improbable  that,  in  an  industry  selected  at  random,  monopoly
plus  discrimination  of  the  third  degree  will  yield  an  output
as  large  as  would  be  yielded  by  simple  competition.

§  14.  In  the  preceding  paragraphs  we  have  compared
the  absolute  amount  of  output  under  discriminating  monopoly
of  the  third  degree  with  the  absolute  amount  under  simple
monopoly  and  simple  competition  respectively.  The  next
step  is  to  compare  the  degree  of  approximation  towards  the
ideal  output  that  is  attained  under  these  different  systems.
Under  diminishing  returns,  an  output  less  than  that  proper
to  simple  monopoly  is  likely  to  diverge  more  from  the  ideal
output  than  either  the  output  of  simple  monopoly  or  the
output  of  simple  competition;  and  an  output  intermediate
between  that  of  simple  monopoly  and  that  of  simple  competi-
tion may  or  may  not  be  nearer  to  the  ideal  output  than  either
the  one  or  the  other  of  these.  Under  increasing  returns,  an
output  less  than  that  proper  to  simple  monopoly  is  certain
to  diverge  further  from  the  ideal  output  than  either  the
output  of  simple  monopoly  or  that  of  simple  competition  :
an    output    intermediate   between   these    two   will  be  nearer


cH.xiv  DISCRIMINATIXG  MONOPOLY  253

to  the  ideal  than  that  of  simple  monopoly,  and  further  from
it  than  that  of  simple  competition  ;  and  an  output  greater
than  that  of  simple  competition  will  be  nearer  to  the  ideal
than  either  of  the  rival  outputs.  Combining  these  results  with
those  set  out  in  the  two  preceding  sections,  we  conclude  that,
both  under  diminishing  and  under  increasing  returns,
discriminating  monopoly  of  the  third  degree  will  not
improbably  yield  an  output  closer  to  the  ideal  output
than  simple  monopoly  yields ;  that,  under  diminishing  returns,
it  may,  but  is  unlikely  to,  yield  one  closer  to  the  ideal
output  than  simple  competition  yields ;  and  that,  under
increasing  returns,  it  may,  but  is  very  unlikely  to,  yield  one
closer  than  this.

§  15.  I   now  return   to   the   considerations   suggested   in
§  11.     It  was  there  pointed  out  that  the  measure  of  corre-
spondence between  the  actual  aggregate  output  of  an  industry
and  the  ideal  output  does  not,  when  discriminating  monopoly
of  the  third  degree  is  in  question,  carry  the  same  implication
as  in  other  circumstances.      Suppose,  for  example,  that  dis-
criminating monopoly  of  this  degree  brings  about  an  output
closer  to  the   ideal   output   than  either  simple  monopoly  or
simple   competition   would   bring   about      The   value   of  the
marginal   trade   net   product   of  resources   invested  in   those
parts  of  the  industry,  that  satisfy  the  demand  of  markets  to
which   discriminating  monopoly  accords   a   lower   price   than
simple  monopoly  or  simple  competition  would  do,  exceeds  the
value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources  in  in-
dustries in  general  by  less  than  it  would  do  under  either  of
he  rival  systems.     But,  per  contra,  the  value  of  the  marginal
trade  net  product  of  resources  invested  in  those  parts  of  the
industry,  if  there  are  any  such,  that  satisfy  the  demands  of
markets,  to  which  discriminating  monopoly  accords  a  higher
price  than  simple  monopoly  or  simple  competition  would  do,
exceeds  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources
in   industries    in  general    by   more  than  it  would  do  under
these  systems.     Hence,  even  where  discriminating  monopoly
makes  aggregate  output  more  nearly  conformable  to  the  ideal
than  simple  monopoly  or  simple  competition  would  do,  it  does
not  follow  that  it  will  involve  greater  equality  between  the


254  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

values  of  marginal  trade  net  products  in  our  industry  and
elsewhere.  Nor  need  we  stop  at  this  negative  result.  It  can
be  shown,  further,  that  the  establishment  in  any  industry  of  a
given  output  associated  with  discriminating  prices  is  likely  to
conduce  less  towards  equalisation  among  the  values  of  marginal
trade  net  products  as  a  whole  than  the  establishment  of  the
same  output  associated  with  uniform  prices.  For  let  the
value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources  in  general
be  P ;  and  let  the  quantity  of  resources  invested  in  our  in-
dustry be  such  that,  if  the  product  is  sold  at  the  same  price  in
all  markets,  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  the
resources  employed  to  supply  each  of  them  will  be  equal  to
•p.  Then,  if  this  same  quantity  of  resources  is  invested
in  the  industry,  but  the  product  is  sold  at  a  higher  price  in
some  markets  than  in  others,  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade
net  product  of  the  resources  utilised  for  *the  higher  priced
markets  will  be  greater  than  ^,  and  that  of  the  resources
utilised  for  the  lower  priced  markets  will  be  less  than  -p.  This
implies  that  the  mean  square  deviation  (our  measure  of
inequality)  of  these  various  values  from  P  is  likely  to  be
greater  than  it  would  have  been  if  all  of  them  had  stood  at  p.
Hence,  the  probability,  that  discriminating  monopoly  of  the
third  degree  will  be  more  favourable  to  equality  among  the
values  of  marginal  trade  net  products  than  simple  monopoly
or  simple  competition,  is  less  than  the  probability  that  it  will
be  more  favourable  than  they  are  to  the  production  of  the
ideal  output.  When  this  result  is  added  to  those  achieved  in
previous  sections,  we  may  summarise  the  situation  as  follows.
First,  there  will  sometimes  be  some,  but  there  will  generally
not  be  much,  advantage  to  the  national  dividend  in  discriminat-
ing monopoly  of  the  third  degree  as  against  simple  monopoly ;
but,  when  discriminating  monopoly  makes  it  profitable  to  sell
in  a  market,  in  which  under  simple  monopoly  no  sales  would
occur,  some  advantage  fmist  result.  Secondly,  as  between  dis-
criminating monopoly  of  the  third  degree  and  simple  competition,
it  is,  in  general,  very  unlikely  that  discriminating  monopoly  will
prove  superior.  It  must  prove  superior,  however,  when  the
conditions  are  such  that  simple  competition  would  yield  no
output,  but  discriminating  monopoly  does  yield  some  output.


cH.xiv  DISCRIMINATING  MONOPOLY  255

§  16.  So  far  we  have  supposed  that  discriminating  monopoly
is  coupled  with  power  to  restrict  the  entry  to  the  monopolised
industry.  When  this  condition  is  not  satisfied,  reasoning
analogous  to  that  employed  at  the  close  of  the  preceding
chapter  is  applicable.  Eesources  tend  to  be  attracted  into
the  industry  till  the  point  is  reached  at  which  the  expectation
of  earnings  there  is  equal  to  that  ruling  elsewhere.  So  long
as  monopoly  prices  are  maintained,  this  means  that  a  consider-
able part  of  the  resources  so  attracted  are  standing  idle  and
are  yielding  no  net  product  whatever.  It  is  evident,  therefore,
that  the  national  dividend  suffers  more  from  discriminating
monopoly  without  restriction  of  entry  than  it  does  from  dis-
criminating monopoly  phLs  restriction  of  entry.  But,  as  with
simple  monopoly,  so  also  here,  it  may,  nevertheless,  be
desirable  that  restriction  should  be  forbidden,  because,  when
it  is  absent,  there  is  a  better  chance  that  the  entrenchments
of  monopolistic  power  will  ultimately  be  broken  down.


CHAPTEE    XV

THE    SPECIAL    PKOBLEM    OF    KAILWAY   EATES

§  1.  The  discussion  of  the  preceding  chapter  has  necessarily
been  somewhat  abstract.  It  has,  however,  practical  applications
of  very  great  importance  in  connection  with  the  charges  that
should  be  made  for  such  things  as  water,  gas  and  electricity,  when
these  commodities  are  supplied  to  different  groups  of  consumers
or  for  different  purposes.  Still  greater  interest,  however,
attaches  to  it  in  connection  with  the  rates  chargeable  by
railway  companies.  Considerable  controversy  has  taken  place
between  those  who  hold  that  these  rates  should  be  based  on
"  the  cost  of  service  principle,"  and  those  who  would  base  them
on  the  "  value  of  service  principle."  -^  The  "  cost  of  service
principle"  is,  in  effect,  the  simple  competition  discussed  in
Chapter  VIII. :  "  the  value  of  service  principle  "  is  discriminat-
ing monopoly  of  the  third  degree.  In  the  light  of  what  has
been  said,  the  issue  between  them  can  be  clearly  set  out ;  and
it  will,  in  the  present  chapter,  be  examined.  We  have  no
concern  with  the  circumstance,  explained  in  Chapter  XIII.,  that,
in  certain  conditions,  a  railway  with  power  to  discriminate
may  find  it  profitable,  as  a  temporary  measure,  to  charge  ex-
ceptionally low  rates  for  transport  between  certain  places  or
for  certain  selected  commodities,  with  a  view  to  building  up  a
new  demand ;  nor  yet  with  the  related  circumstance  that  this
policy,  if  the  demand  is  really  a  new  one,  and  not  merely  a

1  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  problem  of  how  retail  shops  should
distribute  their  charges  for  the  act  of  retailing  over  the  various  commodities
that  they  sell  is  very  closely  analogous  to  the  problem  of  railway  charges.
Among  retail  shops,  however,  there  is  the  additional  complication  that  a  retailer
is  sometimes  able  to  obtain  a  general  advertisement  for  his  shop  by  selling
particular  well-known  goods  practically  free  of  retailer's  profit.

256


cH.  XV  SPECIAL  PKOBLEM  OF  RAILWAY  RATES     257

substitute  for  another  that  has  been  supplanted,  may  be
more  advantageous  to  the  national  dividend  than  anything
which  simple  competition — unless  it  were  modified  by  a
system  of  State  bounties  —  could  evolve.  These  matters
call  for  no  further  investigation  here.  Leaving  them  aside,
I  propose  to  exhibit  the  meaning,  in  concrete  form,  of
the  cost  of  service  principle — or  simple  competition — and
of  the  value  of  service  principle — or  discriminating  monopoly
of  the  third  degree, — and  to  compare  their  respective  con-
sequences.

§  2.  It  is  generally  agreed  that,  except  in  so  far  as  the
transport  services  sold  to  one  set  of  purchasers  are  "  supplied
jointly"  with  those  sold  to  another  set,  simple  competition
would  tend  to  bring  about  a  system  of  uniform  rates  per
ton-mile  for  similar  services.^  For  these  services  the  level
of  the  uniform  rate  would  be  such  that  the  demand  price
and  the  supply  price  would  coincide ;  and,  when  the  service
of  railway  transport  was  sold  in  conjunction  with  some  other
service,  such  as  cartage  or  packing,  an  appropriate  addition
would  be  made  to  the  charge.  This  general  analysis  can  be
briefly  developed  as  follows.

First,  the  actual  level  of  the  uniform  mileage  rate,  to
which  simple  competition  would  lead  on  any  particular
railway,  will  depend  on  the  circumstances  and  position  of  the
railway.  Ceteris  parihis,  a  specially  high  rate  would  be
j  appropriate  if  the  route  lay  through  districts,  where,  as  with
mountain  railways,  the  engineering  costs  of  making  a  line
are  specially  great,  or  where  the  traffic  is  very  irregular  from

^  It   is,    indeed,    sometimes    maintained    that    this   will   only   happen    if

j    "  simple  competition "  is  defined   to   include  complete  transferability  of  the

I   things  that  are  sold  among  customers,  and  it  is  pointed  out  that  competition,

apart  from  this  condition,  has  proved  compatible  with  discriminating  charges

for  services  sold  to  ditferent  sets  of  persons  by  shipping  companies  and  by

retailers  ;  different  sorts  of  cargoes  are  carried  at  different  rates,  and  the  absolute

charge  for  retailing  work  is  different  in  regard  to  different  articles.     (Cf.  G.  P.

Watkins,  "The  Theory  of  Differential  Rates,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Ewnomics,

,  1916,  pp.  693-5.)     Reflection,  however,  shows  that,  when  competition  really

'  prevails,  seller  A  must  always  endeavour  to  undersell  seller  B  by  offering  to

serve  B's  better-paying  customers  at  a  rate  slightly  less  than  B  is  charging,  and

that  this    process   must    eventually  level  aU  rates.     The   explanation  of  the

discriminations  cited  above  is,  not  the  absence  of  complete  transferability,  but  the

fact  that  custom   and   tacit   understandings  introduce  an  element   of  mono-

istic  action.


258  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  h

one  time  to  another ;  ^  because,  in  these  conditions,  the  supply
prices  of  all  quantities  of  transportation  along  the  route  is
specially  high.  In  like  manner,  ceteris  paribus,  a  specially
high  rate  would  be  appropriate  if  the  route  lay  through
sparsely  populated  regions  where  little  traffic  can  be  obtained,
or  through  regions  where  the  configuration  of  the  country
renders  water  transport  a  readily  available  substitute  for
land  transport  for  certain  classes  of  commodities  between  the
terminals ;  because,  in  these  conditions,  the  demand  schedule
is  specially  low,  and  the  supply  schedule  indicates  increasing
returns  ;  the  expenses  involved  in  building  and  working  a
railway  adapted  for  a  small  amount  of  traffic  being  pro-
portionately greater  than  those  involved  in  the  production
of  transport  service  on  a  large  scale.  It  is,  no  doubt,  in
recognition  of  these  considerations  that  the  maxima,  imposed
in  the  British  Parliamentary  freight  classification,  are  made
different  for  different  lines,  though  the  classification  itself
is,  of  course,  the  same  for  all  of  them.

Secondly,  departures  from  the  uniform  mileage  rate  would
occur  under  simple  competition,  in  so  far  as  buyers  of  a
ton-mile  of  transportation  require,  along  with  this,  other
incidental  services  involving  expense.  The  adjustments
needed  are  exactly  analogous  to  the  adjustments  made  in
the  price  of  plain  cotton  cloth  delivered  c.i.f  to  buyers  who
live  at  different  distances  from  the  seat  of  manufacture.
Thus,  rates  should  be  comparatively  low  for  the  transport
of  any  class  of  goods,  when  the  method  of  packing  adopted
is  convenient  to  the  railway.  It  is  more  costly,  other  things
being  equal,  to  carry  small  consignments  than  large.  "  Small
consignments  mean  to  a  railway  three  distinct  sources  of
serious  additional  expense :  separate  collection  and  delivery,
separate  handling,  invoicing,  accounting,  etc.,  at  the  terminal
stations ;  and  bad  loading  in  the  railway  waggons."  ^  It
is,  therefore,  proper  that,  in  the  English  parliamentary
classification,  goods,  which  are  placed  in  class  A — the
cheapest  class — when  loaded  in  lots  of  4  tons,  are  raised
to    class    B    when    despatched    in    loads   between    2    and   4

^  Cf.  Williams,  Economics  of  Itailv)ay  Transport,  p.  212.
^  Acworth,  Elements  of  Railway  Ecmwviics,  p.  120.


cH.xv  SPECIAL  PROBLEM  OF  RAILWAY  RATES    259

txjns,  and  to  class  C  when  despatched  in  loads  of  less  than
2  tons.  On  a  like  principle,  it  is  proper  that  English  railway
companies  should  voluntarily  make  arrangements,  under
which  certain  goods  are  put  into  a  class  lower  than  the
parliamentary  classification  requires,  on  condition  that  they
are  loaded  in  certain  quantities  or  packed  in  certain  ways.
Further,  when  the  method  of  packing  is  given,  it  is  proper
that  rates  per  ton  should  vary  with  conditions  that  affect  the
cost  of  handling,  such  as  bulk,  fragility,  liquidity,  explosive-
ness,  structure  and  so  on;  and  also  with  the  speed  and
regularity  of  the  service  required.^  This  point  is  clearly
brought  out  in  one  of  the  decisions  of  the  United  States
Railway  Commissioners.  They  declared :  "  Relatively  higher
rates  on  strawberries  appear  to  be  justified  by  the  exceptional
character  of  the  service  connected  with  their  transportation.
Tliis  exceptional  service  is  necessitated  by  the  highly  perish-
able character  of  the  traffic,  requiring  refrigeration  en  route,
rapid  transit,  specially  provided  trains,  and  prompt  dehvery
at  destination.  There  is  also  involved  in  this  servdce  extra
trouble  in  handling  at  receiving  and  delivering  points,  the
"  drilling  "  of  cars  in  a  train,  reduction  of  length  of  trains  to
secure  celerity  of  movement,  partially  loaded  cars,  the  return
of  cars  empty,  and  perhaps  other  similar  incidentals."  ^
Finally,  it  is  proper  that  the  rate  for  carrying  from  A
to  B  goods  that  are  to  go  forward  to  C  on  the  same  line
ll  should,  in  general,  be  less  than  the  rate  for  so  carrying  goods
destined  for  consumption  at  B.  In  so  far  as  terminal  charges
are  paid  for  in  the  rate,  this  is  obvious,  because,  on  the
former  class  of  goods,  terminal  charges  at  B  are  saved
altogether.  Even  apart  from  terminals,  however,  the  journey
from  A  to  B,  as  a  part  of  a  longer  journey,  is  less  costly
than  the  same  journey  undertaken  as  an  isolated  whole.  The
reason  is  that,  roughly  speaking,  the  interval  of  idleness  for
engines  and  plant,  following  upon  any  journey,  involves  a  cost
properly  attributable  to  that  journey,  and  the  length  of  the
interval  does  not  vary  with  the  length  of  the  journey  which
it  follows.       Thus,    "  long    hauls    get    more    mileage    out    of

^  Cf.  Haines,  Restrictire  Raihcay  Legislation,  p.  148.
2  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  November  1910,  p.  47.


260  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

engines,  waggons,  train-staff,  etc.,  than  a  number  of  short
hauls,  necessarily  with  waits  between;  engines  and  waggons
are  better  loaded,  and  the  line  is  more  continuously  utilised."  ^
This  consideration  points  to  some  form  of  tapering  rate  for
the  actual  service  of  carriage,  apart  from  terminal  charges.
The  English  classification  of  merchandise  rates  accepts  this.
It  provides  for  one  maximum  ton-mile  rate  for  the  first
20  miles,  a  lower  maximum  for  the  next  30  miles,  a  still
lower  one  for  the  next  50  miles,  and  the  lowest  of  all  for
further  distances.  This  scale  does  not  include  terminal
charges,  which  are  fixed  independently  of  distance.^

Thirdly,  attention  must  be  called  to  the  fact  that  services,
though  physically  similar,  are  not  necessarily  similar  in
respect  of  cost,  when  they  are  rendered  at  different  times
or  seasons  of  the  year.  This  consideration  is  in  practice
chiefly  important  as  regards  the  supply  of  electricity.  In
order  that  it  may  be  possible  to  provide  the  current  required
at  "  the  peak  of  the  load,"  a  large  quantity  of  equipment
must  be  erected  additional  to  what  would  be  required  if
there  were  no  hours  or  seasons  of  exceptional  demand.  Let
us  suppose  that  during  one-fifth  of  the  time  2  million  uuits
per  hour  are  wanted  and  during  the  rest  of  the  time
1^  million  units,  and  that,  in  consequence,  the  equipment
costs  ^  times  what  it  would  have  done  had  1^  million  units
been  required  always.  Then  the  real  cost  of  the  peak-load
current,  so  far  as  it  depends  on  cost  of  equipment,  can  be
calculated  as  follows :  the  equipment  cost  of  producing
the  units  needed  in  the  aggregate  of  off-peak  times  is  ^  times
l^ths  (i.e.  f  ths)  of  the  total  equipment  cost,  and  the  equipment
cost  of  producing  the  units  needed  in  peak  times  is  g  times
|-ths  of  the  total  equipment  cost,  plus  the  whole  of  ^  of  that  cost,
i.e.  I^ths  of  the  whole.  That  is,  the  cost  of  providing  2  million
units  at  the  peak  is  equal  to  -|rds  that  of  providing  6  million
units  off  the  peak  :  or,  in  other  words,  the  equipment  cost  (apart
from  prime  cost)  of  peak  load  service  is  twice  as  much  per
unit  as  the  equipment  cost  of  normal  service.  This  shows  that
simple  competition,  or  the  cost  of  service  principle,  involves

^  Acworth,  Elements  of  Railway  Economics,  footnote,  pp.  122-3.
*  Of.  Marriott,  The  Fixing  of  Rates  and  Fares,  p.  21.


CH.  XV  SPECIAL  PEOBLEM  OF  RAILWAY  EATES    261

difterent  charges  for  electricity  supplied  at  different  times.
The  same  thing  obviously  holds  good  of  telephone  service
and  cable  service — not  to  speak  of  hotel  and  lodging-house
service  in  places  that  cater  specially  for  seasonal  visitors.
In  industries  the  product  of  which  can  be  stored  in
slack  times,  and  where,  therefore,  the  equipment  can  be
adjusted  to  produce  continuously  the  average  output
demanded,  these  differences  should  not  exceed  the  cost  and
the  loss  of  interest  involved  in  storage.  Eailways,  however,
at  least  in  the  matter  of  passenger  transport,  are  directly
akin  to  electricity  concerns,  in  that  they  proWde  a  service
which  must  be  produced  at  the  time  that  it  is  supplied.
Consequently,  the  cost  of  service  principle  would  seem  to
warrant  higher  fares  for  travel  at  busy  seasons  and  at  busy
hours  of  the  day  than  are  charged  at  other  times.  Differential
charges  of  this  character  are  not,  of  course,  exactly  adjusted.
Indeed,  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  so  happens  that,  for  other
reasons,  it  is  just  for  the  most  crowded  parts  of  the  day  and
week  that  the  cheapest  tickets  (workmen's  tickets  and
week-end  tickets)  are  issued.  In  a  concealed  form,  however,
differential  charges  of  this  type  do  exist :  for,  when  a  man
travelling  as  a  straphanger  in  the  London  Tube  at  5  o'clock
in  the  evening  pays  the  same  absolute  price  as  he  does  when
travelKng  in  comfort  at  3  o'clock,  it  is  obvious  that  the  service
which  he  buys  is  a  very  much  inferior  one.  There  is  just
as  real  a  differentiation  as  there  would  be  if  he  travelled  in
equal  comfort  on  both  journeys  and  paid  a  considerably
higher  fare  at  the  crowded  time.

Lastly,  the  cost  of  service  principle  in  some  conditions
leads  logically  to  lower  charges  to  people  whose  purchases
are  continiious  than  to  those  who  buy  intermittently.  One
reason  for  this  is  that  a  man  taking  continuous  service
cannot  contribute  to  the  existence  of  a  peak  load,  whereas
one  taking  intermittent  service  is  likely,  in  some  degree,  to
do  so.  Hence,  if  it  is  impracticable  to  charge  differential
rates  directly  as  between  peak  and  off-peak  service,  this
may  sometimes  be  attempted  indirectly  by  differentiation
between  continuous  and  intermittent  services.  The  defence  of
the  practice  of  issuing  season  tickets  at  less  than  ordinary  rates


262  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

rests  in  part  on  this  ground.  In  the  main,  however,  the  cost
of  service  principle  will  lead  to  this  type  of  differentiation
only  in  industries  where  special  equipment  has  to  be  laid  down
to  enable  the  service  to  be  supplied  to  the  various  customers
severally.  Obviously,  if  this  equipment  is  used  rarely,  a
greater  sum  will  have  to  be  charged  for  each  act  of  service
than  if  it  is  used  frequently.  If  desired,  adjustment  can,  of
course,  be  made  by  exacting  a  lump  charge,  or  an  annual  rent,
for  the  installation  of  the  equipment  and,  thereafter,  charging
the  same  rate  to  everybody  per  unit  of  service  obtained
through  it.  This  is,  broadly,  the  plan  in  vogue  with  telephones.
When,  however,  for  any  reason  this  plan  is  not  followed,  and
the  whole  charge  is  levied  through  the  price  of  the  service,
the  cost  of  service  principle  necessarily  leads  to  differentia-
tion against  customers  whose  individual  load  factor  is  small.
But  this  consideration  has  no  direct  application  to  railway
rates,  since,  apart  from  special  sidings  for  which  direct  charges
are  made,  railways  do  not  provide  equipment  specialised  to
the  service  of  particular  customers.

^  3.  The  results  so  far  obtained  are  only  valid  in  so  far
as  transport  services  sold  to  different  groups  of  purchasers
are  not  jointly  supplied.  If  they  are  jointly  supplied,  simple
competition,  or  the  cost  of  service  principle,  would  no  longer
imply  that,  subject  to  the  reservations  of  the  preceding
section,  all  ton-miles  of  transportation  must  be  sold  at  the
same  price.  It  would  not  imply  this  any  more  than  it
implies  that  a  pound  of  beef  and  a  pound  of  hides  must  be
sold  at  the  same  price.  For,  when  two  or  more  commodities
or  services  are  the  joint  result  of  a  single  process,  in  such
wise  that  one  of  them  cannot  be  provided  without  facilitat-
ing the  provision  of  the  other,  simple  competition  evolves,
not  identical  prices  per  pound  (or  other  unit)  of  the
various  products,  but  prices  so  adjusted  to  demand  that
the  whole  output  of  all  of  them  is  carried  off.  Thus,  if
the  transport  of  two  commodities  A  and  B,  or  the  transport
of  commodity  A  for  two  purposes  X  and  Y,  were  joint
products,  simple  competition  might  well  evolve  for  them
different  rates  per  ton-mile.  It  is,  therefore,  of  great  im-
portance to  determine  how  far  the  various  services  provided


cH.  XV  SPECIAL  PKOBLEM  OF  KAILWAY  RATES    263

by  railway  companies  are  in  fact  joint  products  in  the  sense
defined  above.

§  4.  Many  writers  of  authority  maintain  that  joint  costs
play  a  dominant  part  in  the  industry  of  railway  transporta-
tion. They  believe  that  the  transport  of  coal  and  the
transport  of  copper  along  a  railway  from  any  point  A  to
any  point  B  are  essentially  and  fundamentally  joint  products  ;
and  that  the  same  thing  is  true  of  the  transport  from  A
to  B  of  commodities  to  be  consumed  at  B  and  the  transport
from  A  to  B  of  commodities  to  be  carried  forward  to  C.
This  argument  is  developed  by  Professor  Taussig  as  follows.
First,  he  obser\^es :  "  Whenever  a  very  large  fixed  plant  is
used,  not  for  a  single  purpose,  but  for  varied  purposes,  the
influence  of  joint  cost  asserts  itself."^  Further:  "The  labour
which  built  the  railway — or,  to  put  the  same  thing  in  other
words,  the  capital  which  is  sunk  in  it — seems  equally  to
aid  in  carrying  on  every  item  of  traflBc.  .  .  .  Not  only  the
fixed  capital  of  a  railway,  but  a  very  large  part,  in  fact  much
the  largest  part,  of  the  operating  expenses,  represents  outlay,
not  separate  for  each  item  of  traffic,  but  common  to  the
whole  of  it  or  to  great  groups  of  it."^  The  existence  of
a  large  mass  of  common  supplementary  costs  is  not,  in
Professor  Taussig's  view,  by  itself  sufficient  to  bring  joint
supply  into  action.  For  that  it  is  essential  that  the  plant
be  used  for  varied  jmrposes.  Thus,  he  writes :  "  Where  a
large  plant  is  used  for  producing  one  homogeneous  commodity
— say  steel  rails  or  plain  cotton  cloth — the  peculiar  effects
of  joint  cost  cannot,  of  course,  appear." '  Further,  he  is
willing  to  admit  that  the  transport  of  tons  of  different  things
and  the  transport  of  the  same  thing  for  different  purposes
from  A  to  B  do  constitute,  in  one  sense,  a  single  homogeneous
commodity,  on  precisely  the  same  footing  as  plain  cotton
cloth.  The  fact  that  some  "  carrying  of  tons "  is  sold  to
copper  merchants  and  some  to  coal  merchants  does  not  imply
that  two  different  services  are  being  provided,  any  more  than
the  fact  that  some  plain  cotton  cloth  is  sold  to  one  purchaser

*  Frinciples  of  Economics,  vol.  i.  p.  221.     Cf.  also  vol.  ii.  p.  369,

*  Taussig,    "Theory  of  Railway  Rates,"   in   Ripley's   Bailtcay  Problems,
pp.  128-9.

3  Principles  of  Economics,  vol.  i.  p.  221.


264  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

and  some  is  sold  to  another  implies  that  two  different  com-
modities are  being  provided.  He  holds,  however,  that  these
different  transports,  though  homogeneous  in  one  sense,  are
not  homogeneous  "  in  the  sense  important  for  the  purpose
in  hand — namely  as  regards  the  conditions  of  demand."  ^
Thus,  his  essential  contention  is  that,  when  a  commodity,  in
the  production  of  which  supplementary  general  costs  play
a  large  part,  is  supplied,  not  to  different  people  in  a  single
unified  market,  but  in  a  number  of  separated  markets,  the
provision  to  one  market  is  supplied  jointly  with  the  provision
to  the  other  markets,  in  such  wise  that  simple  competition
might  be  expected  to  evolve  a  system  of  divergent  prices.

Now,  whether  or  not  the  term  joint  products  should  be
used  of  services  related  in  the  way  that  Professor  Taussig  is
contemplating  is,  of  course,  a  verbal  question :  but  whether
these  services  are  joint  products  in  such  vjise  that  simple  com-
petition might  he  expected  to  evolve  a  system  of  divergent  prices
is  a  real  question.  In  my  view,  the  conjunction  of  large  common
supplementary  costs  with  separation  between  the  markets
to  which  they  are  supplied  does  not  make  railway  services
joint  products  in  this — the  only  significant — sense.  In  order
that  they  may  be  joint  products,  it  is  further  necessary,  not
merely  that  additional  investment  in  plant  and  so  on  may
be  used  alternatively  to  facilitate  the  supply  to  either  market,
but  that  such  additional  investment  cannot  be  used  to
facilitate  the  supply  to  one  market  without  facilitating  the
supply  to  the  other.  The  point  may  be  illustrated  as  follows.
When  cotton  goods  are  provided  for  two  distinct  and  isolated
markets,  the  costs  of  furnishing  these  different  markets  are,
in  great  part,  common :  for  they  consist,  to  a  large  extent,
of  the  supplementary  expenses  of  the  cotton  industry,  which
cannot  be  allocated  specifically  to  the  goods  destined  for  the
different  markets.  A  given  addition  to  these  costs  does  not,
however,  necessarily  add  anything  to  the  output  available
for  each  of  .the  two  markets.  If,  before  it  occurred,  the  first
market  received  x  units  of  cotton  and  the  second  y  units,  after
it  has  occurred  the  extra  cotton  may  be  divided  between
them,   or   it   may   go   wholly  to  the  first,  or   wholly  to  the

^  QuAirterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1 9 1 3,  "p.  3  8 1 .


CH.  XV  SPECIAL  PKOBLEM  OF  RAILWAY  EATES    265

second.  When,  however,  cotton  fibre  and  cotton  seed  are
provided  for  two  distinct  and  isolated  markets  by  one  and
the  same  process,  a  given  addition  to  these  costs  does
necessarily  add  something  to  the  output  available  for  each
of  the  two  markets.  In  the  latter  case  it  is  easily  seen  that
simple  competition  will,  in  general,  lead  to  divergent  prices.
In  the  former  case,  however,  it  will  not  do  this.  For,  if  there
are  a  number  of  competing  sellers  supplying  transportation,
or  anything  else,  to  several  markets  with  separate  demand
schedules,  and  if  the  price  in  one  of  these  markets  is  higher
than  in  another,  it  is  necessarily  to  the  interest  of  each
individual  seller  to  transfer  his  offer  of  service  from  the
lower-priced  market  to  the  higher-priced  market ;  and  this
process  must  tend  ultimately  to  bring  the  prices  in  the  different
markets  to  a  uniform  level.  This  result,  iclien  conditions  of
simple  competition  prevail,  obviously  holds  good  independently
of  the  question  whether  or  not  the  commodity  or  service
under  discussion  is  one  in  the  production  of  which  supple-
mentary costs  are  large  relatively  to  prime  costs.  Hence,
Professor  Taussig's  argument  cannot  be  accepted.  Joint
supply,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  are  here  using  the  term,
does  not  prevail  in  the  industry  of  railway  transport  in  that
fundamental  and  general  way  that  he  supposes  it  to  do.^

1  On  the  general  subject  of  the  relation  of  the  concept  of  joint  costs  to

railway  service,   cf.   a  discussion  between   Professor  Taussig  and  the   present

writer  in   the   Quarterly   Journal  of  Economics   for   May   and    August    1913.

One  further  point  should  be  added.     It   is  sometimes  maintained  that  the

concept  of  joint  costs,  in  the  sense  assigned  to  it  in  the  text,  is  applicable

where  only  one   sort  of  commodity  is  produced,   provided   that   the  units  of

ess,  by  which  the  commodity  is  made,  are  large  relatively   to  the  units

ommodity.     WTien,   for  instance,   the  marginal  unit  of  process  produces

i  JO  units  of  product,   it  may  be  argued  that  100  units  must  yield  a  price

iurficient  to  remunerate  one  unit  of  process,  but  that  it  is  immaterial  to  the

■  suppliers  by  what  combination  of  individual  prices  the  aggregate  price  of  100

i  units  is  made  up.     This  suggestion,  however,  ichen  stated  in  the  above  general

\form,   ignores  the  fact  that  100  units  of  product  can  be  removed,  not  only

'  by  abstracting  one  unit  from  the  fruit  of  each  of  a  hundred  units  of  process,  but

I  also  by  abolishing  one  unit  of  process,  and  that,  under  free  competition,  if  any

units  of  product  were  refused  a  price  as  high  as  T-J-^th  part  of  the  supply  price

of  a  unit  of  process,   this  latter  method  of  abstraction  would  naturally  be

employed.     This  shows  that  physically  identical  products,  yielded  by  the  same

process  at  the  same  time,  are  not,   in  general,  joint  products  in  every  sense,

even  though  the  marginal  unit  of  the  process  of  production  is  large.      But  this

rpnly   js   uot   relevant,    and    the    concept   of    joint    supply    cannot    be    ruled

when  the  number  of  units  of  process  that  are  actually   being  provided


266  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

§  5.  At  the  same  time  it  should  be  clearly  recognised
that,  in  the  services  rendered  by  railway  companies,  joint
supply  does  play  some  part.  This  is  conspicuously  true  as
between  transportation  from  A  to  B  and  transportation  in
the  reverse  direction  from  B  to  A.  The  organisation  of  a
railway,  like  that  of  a  steamship  company,  requires  that
vehicles  running  from  A  to  B  shall  subsequently  return  from
B  to  A.  The  addition  of  a  million  pounds  to  the  expenditure
on  moving  vehicles  necessarily  increases  both  the  number
of  movements  of  vehicles  from  A  to  B  and  the  number  of
movements  from  B  to  A.  This  implies  true  jointness.  It
follows  that  a  competitive  system  of  railway  or  shipping
rates  would  not,  in  general,  make  the  vehicle  charges  the
same  for  journeys  from  A  to  B  and  from  B  to  A,  but  the
direction,  for  which  the  demand  was  higher,  would  be  charged
a  higher  rate.  This  is,  of  course,  the  reason  why  outward
freights  from  England  are  generally  low,  relatively  to  inward
freights,  for  commodities  of  similar  value.  Our  imports  being
largely  food  and  raw  materials,  and  our  exports,  apart  from
coal,  mainly  finished  manufactures,  the  former  naturally  make
a  greater  demand  for  shipping  accommodation.  If  it  were
not  for  our  coal  exports,  the  disparity  would  be  much  greater
than  it  is.  There  is  a  similar  relation  in  the  transport  of
goods — though  not  of  passengers — between  eastward  and
westward  travel  in  the  United  States ;  because  "  those  who
supply  the  world  with  food  and  raw  materials  dispose
of  much  more  tonnage  than  they  purchase."  ^     This  element

is  the  minimum  number  that  it  is  practicable  to  provide  so  long  as  any  are
provided.  In  these  circumstances  there  is  nothing  incompatible  with  the
analysis  of  the  text  in  regarding  the  resultant  units  of  product  as  jointly
supplied.  The  costs  of  constructing  through  any  region  the  least  expensive
railway  that  it  is  possible  to  construct  at  all  are  joint  costs  of  all  the  various
items  of  service  rendered  by  the  railway.  It  is  possible  by  following  this  line
of  analysis  to  reach  the  results  obtained  by  the  different  line  of  analysis  to  be
followed  in  §  8.  In  the  special  problem  of  the  least  expensive  railway  that
it  is  possible  to  contract  at  all,  the  two  lines  are  equally  admissible.  (Cf.
Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  August  1913,  p.  688.)  Since,  however,  analysis
by  way  of  joint  supply  is  only  applicable  in  a  single  and  peculiar  type  of  problem,
whereas  analysis  by  way  of  discriminating  monopoly,  to  be  adopted  in  the  text|
is  applicable  to  all  problems,  the  latter  method  should  be  given  preference.

^  Cf.  Johnson,  American  Railway  Transportation,  p.  138.  It  should  be
noticed  that,  whereas  there  is  little  jointness  as  between  first  and  third  cla«8
passenger  service  on  railways,  there  is  probably  a  considerable  element  of  suoh


cn.xv  SPECIAL  PEOBLEM  OF  EAILWAY  EATES    267

of  jointness  is,  however,  of  comparatively  small  importance.
Contrary  to  the  general  opinion  of  writers  on  railway
economics,  the  services  provided  by  railway  companies  are,
in  the  main,  not  jointly  supplied.  Hence,  the  conclusion
emerges  that,  subject  to  the  reservations  set  out  in  §  2,
simple  competition  would,  in  general,  evolve  a  system  of
equal  ton-mileage  rates  for  all  commodities,  whatever  their
character,  and  whether  they  are  to  be  consumed  at  B  or
sent  on  from  B  for  some  further  part  of  a  "  long  haul."

S  6.  The  meaning  in  concrete  form  of  "  the  value  of  service
principle,"  or  monopoly  pltts  discrimination  of  the  third  degree,
is  more  complicated.  It  was  shown  in  the  last  chapter
that  a  monopolist  adopting  this  principle  will  divide  the
total  market  served  by  him  into  a  number  of  minor  markets,
by  discriminating  between  which  he  may  make  his  aggregate
advantage  as  large  as  possible.  It  was  shown,  further,  that
the  kind  of  division  best  calculated  to  promote  this  end  is  one
under  which  the  separate  markets  are  arranged,  so  far  as
practical  considerations  allow,  in  such  a  way  that  each  higher
priced  market  contains  as  few  demands  as  possible  with
a  demand  price  lower  than  the  highest  demand  price  contained
in  the  next  market  When  once  the  minor  markets  have
been  separated,  the  determination  of  the  rates  to  be  charged
in  them  presents  no  analytical  difficulty,  and  can  be  expressed
in  a  simple  mathematical  formula.^  It  is  not,  indeed,  true,
as  is  sometimes  supposed,  that  the  relative  rates  charged  to
different  markets  will  depend,  if  this  plan  is  adopted,  simply
upon  the  comparative  elasticities  (in  respect  of  some  un-
specified amount  of  output)  of  the  demands  of  these  markets,
nor  yet  that  they  will  depend  simply  upon  the  comparative

jointness  as  between  first  and  third  class  service  on  ships  :  because  the  structure
of  a  ship  necessarily  involves  the  provision  at  the  same  time  of  more  and  of  less
comfortable  parts  of  the  vessel.

1  Thus,  let  ^](xi),  (^2)^2  •  •  •  represent  the  demand  prices  in  n  separate
markets  and /(as)  the  supply  price.

The  prices  proper  to  the  separate  markets  under  monopoly  plus  discrimina-
tion of  the  third  degree  are  given  by  the  values  of  ^^(a^,  <f>^x^  •  •  •  that  satisfy
n  equations  of  the  form  :

^\Xr{<h(-^)-A^  +  X,+    .    .    .)}]=0.
These  n  equations  are  sufficient  to  determine  the  n  unknowns.


268  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  n-.n

demand  prices  (also  in  respect  of  some  unspecified  amount
of  output)  ruling  in  these  markets.  The  true  determinant
is  the  whole  body  of  conditions  represented  in  the  complete
demand  schedules  of  the  different  markets.^  Still,  though  the
determinant  is,  in  general,  complex,  when  once  the  con-
stitution of  the  different  markets  has  been  settled,  it  is
precise.  The  real  difficulty  lies  in  the  choice,  limited,  as  it  is,
by  practical  conditions,  which  a  railway  company  has  to
make  between  various  possible  systems  of  minor  markets.
The  search  for  the  most  advantageous  system — from  the
company's  point  of  view — has  evolved,  in  practice,  elaborate
schemes  of  classification  both  for  passenger  traffic  and  for  goods
traffic.  To  show  the  application  of  the  value  of  service  principle
in  practice,  some  description  of  these  schemes  is  required.

In  passenger  traffic,  railway  companies  find  the  value
of  service  principle  most  nearly  satisfied  by  a  classification
based,  in  the  main,  on  the  relative  wealth  of  different  groups
of  persons,  the  presumption  being  that  most  of  the  demands
for  the  transport  of  richer  people  yield  demand  prices  higher
than  most  of  the  demands  for  the  transport  of  poorer  people.
Since  it  is  impracticable  to  make  a  classification  founded
directly  on  differences  of  wealth,  various  indices  or  badges,
generally  associated  with  varying  degrees  of  wealth,  are
employed.  Thus,  in  the  United  States,  certain  railways
make  specially  low  rates  for  immigrants — lower  than  those
required  from  native  Americans, — even  though  the  latter  are
willing  to  travel  in  immigrant  cars.'^  In  certain  colonies
there  is  a  discriminating  rate  according  to  the  colour  of  the
traveller,  black  men,  who  are  supposed,  in  general,  to  be  less
well-to-do,  being  charged  lower  fares  than  white  men.®
Again,  in  England,   and    still   more   markedly    in    Belgium,*

^  "VNTiere  the  curves  representing  the  demand  schedules  are  straight  lines,
this  complex  determinant  dissolves  into  a  simple  one,  namely,  the  comparative
demand  prices  of  those  units  which  are  most  keenly  demanded  in  each  of  the
several  markets.  Under  these  conditions,  if  constant  returns  prevail,  the
monopoly  price  proper  to  each  market  can  be  shown  to  be  equal  to  one  lialf
of  the  difference  between  the  supply  price  and  the  demand  price  of  the  unit
that  is  most  keenly  demanded  there.  _

2  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  November  1910,  p.  38.

3  Cf.  Colson,  Cours  d'6conomie  polUiqiie,  vol.  vi,  p.  230.
*  Cf.  Rowntree,  Land  and  Labour,  p.  289.


cH.  XV  SPECIAL  PKOBLEM  OF  EAILWAY  RATES    269

railway  companies  charge  specially  low  rates  for  workmen's
tickets.  This  procedure  is  exactly  analogous  to  that  of
those  London  shopkeepers,  who  charge  to  customers  with
"  good  addresses "  prices  different  from  those  charged  to
others,  and  of  the  Cambridge  boatmen  who  used  to  charge  a
collective  customer  of  five  persons  5s.  for  the  hire  of  a  boat
for  an  afternoon,  while  to  a  single  person  they  would  let  the
same  boat  for  one  shilling.  A  classification  based  on  indices
of  wealth  alone  is,  however,  somewhat  crude,  since  people
of  the  same  wealth  will  desire  a  given  journey  with  very
different  intensities  on  different  occasions.  In  recognition
of  this  fact,  railway  companies  have  constructed  a  variety
of  cross-groupings,  based  on  such  incidents  as  the  degree  of
comfort  or  of  speed  with  which,  or  the  hour  at  which,  journeys
are  undertaken,  or  the  presumed  purpose  which  these  journeys
serve.  Thus,  the  fares  for  first-class  accommodation,  or  for
conveyance  by  certain  express  trains,  are  made  to  exceed  those
for  inferior  accommodation  or  lower  speed  by  more  than  the
difference  in  the  cost  of  providing  these  different  sorts  of
service  ;  ^  and  specially  low  fares  are  sometimes  charged  for
journeys  made  in  the  early  morning."  In  like  manner,
attempts  are  made  to  separate  holiday  journeys,  of  presumed
low  demand,  from  necessary  business  journeys,  by  the  supply,
on  special  terms,  of  tourist,  week-end  and  excursion  tickets.

In  goods  traffic,  railway  companies  find  the  value  of
service  principle  most  nearly  satisfied  by  a  classification  based,
in  the  main,  upon  the  relative  value  of  the  different  com-
modities claiming  transport,  the  presumption  being  that
most  of  the  demands  for  the  transport  of  a  more  valuable
group  of  goods  yield  demand  prices  higher  than  most  of
the  demands  for  the  transport  of  a  less  valuable  group.
The  reason  for  this  presumption  is  as  follows.  The  demand
price  for  the  transport  of  any  n^^  unit  of  any  commodity
from  A  to  B  is  measured  by  the  excess  of  the  price  of
that  commodity  in  B  over  its  price  in  A,  which  would  prevail

^  M.  Colson  suggests  that  a  plan,  under  which  all  trains  should  take  third-
class  passengers,  the  fast  trains  charging  a  supplement,  would  be  superior  to
the  present  continental  plan,  under  which  a  passenger,  who  wishes  to  travel  fast,
has  to  pay  the  whole  diflerence  between  third  and  second  class  fare.

-  Cf.  Mahaim,  Les  Abonnemenis  cTouvrien,  p.  12.


I


270  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

if  the  said  n^^  unit  were  not  transported.  But,  on  any
law  of  distribution,  the  probable  difference  between  the  prices
of  any  article  in  A  and  B  respectively,  which  would  arise
if  these  two  places  were  not  connected  by  the  assigned  act  of
transport,  is  greater,  the  greater  is  the  absolute  price  that
would  prevail  in  either  of  them ;  just  as  the  probable  differ-
ence in  the  heights  of  poplars  in  A  and  B  is  greater  than
the  probable  difference  in  the  heights  of  cabbages.  There
is  no  reason  to  expect  that  the  percentage  difference  will  be
greater  for  valuable  than  for  cheap  commodities,  but  there  is
reason  to  expect  that  the  absolute  difference  will  be  greater.
A  study  of  the  details  of  the  classification  adopted  for  British
railways  under  the  Railway  Rates  and  Charges  Act  shows
that,  in  the  main,  the  value  of  the  commodities  concerned
has  been  taken  as  a  basis.  Broadly  speaking,  the  lower  the
position  of  any  class  in  the  list,  the  cheaper  are  the  goods
that  it  contains.^  In  like  manner,  several  of  the  decisions  of
the  United  States  Railway  Commissioners  have  been  founded
on  the  proposition  that  less  expensive  articles  ought  not  to
be  put  in  a  higher  class  than  more  expensive  articles — chair
materials  than  finished  chairs,  raisins  than  dried  fruits,  and
so  on.^

Sometimes  it  is  practically  inconvenient  for  a  company
or  a  regulating  authority  to  group  goods  directly  in  accordance
with  their  value.  When  this  is  so,  a  like  result  can  be
obtained  indirectly  by  grouping  them  according  to  indices,
whose  differences  are  likely  to  correspond  to  differences  of
value.  Thus,  since  the  valuable  qualities  of  any  commodity
are  generally  packed  better  than  the  cheap  qualities,  rates
are  sometimes  made  to  vary  with  the  elaboration  of  the
packing  employed.  For  example,  in  France,  where  good
wines  are  generally  packed  "en  barriques  de220  k  230
litres  "  and  common  wines  "  en  demi-muids  de  650  h  700  litres
ou  en  wagons-reservoirs,"  ^  wines  in  "  barriques  "  are  charged
on  a  higher  scale.

It  must  be  added  that,  as  with  passenger  service,  so  also


*  Cf.  Marriott,  The  Fixing  of  Rates  and  Fares,  p.  27  e.t  seq.  for  these  lists.
2  Cf.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  November  1910,  pp.  13,  15,  and  29,
'  Colson,  Cours  d'dconomie  politique,  vol.  vi.  p.  227.


J


cH.xv  SPECIAL  PEOBLEAI  OF  EAILWAY  EATES    271

with  goods  service,  a  classification  based  exclusively  on  the
value  of  the  commodities  transported  is  necessarily  somewhat
crude.  In  consequence  of  this,  cross-groupings  based  upon
other  incidents  have  also  been  employed.  Thus,  within  each
group  of  commodities  of  given  value  transported  from  A  to  B,
a  subdivision  may  be  made  between  those  which  B  can  easily
make  for  itself  or  obtain  elsewhere  than  from  A,  and  those
which  it  cannot  so  make  or  obtain ;  and  a  higher  rate  may  be
charged  to  the  latter  group.  Again,  within  a  homogeneous
group  made  up  of  units  of  the  same  commodity,  sub-groups
are  constructed.  For  example,  vegetables  imported  from
Germany  to  England  during  the  weeks  before  the  English
crop  is  ready  used  to  be  charged  more  than  vegetables
imported  from  Germany  to  England  after  this  crop  had
appeared ;  and  the  same  thing  is  true  of  vegetables  sent  from
the  south  to  the  north  of  France.^  Sometimes,  again,  an
attempt  is  made  to  charge  different  rates  for  the  transport
of  the  same  thing  according  to  the  use  to  which  it  is  to  be
put — bricks  for  building,  paving  bricks  and  fire  bricks  being
put  in  different  classes.  It  should  be  observed,  however,
that  the  United  States  Interstate  Commerce  Commission
has  declined  to  recognise  the  validity  of  a  classification  on
this  basis.^  More  important  is  the  subdivision  according
to  ultimate  place  of  destination.  Thus,  commodities  sent
from  A  to  B,  to  be  consumed  at  B,  are  placed  in  a  different
group,  and  charged,  for  that  act  of  transport,  a  different  rate,
from  commodities  sent  from  A  to  B  to  be  forwarded  from
B  to  C.  The  reason  is  that  different  parts  of  the  world
do  not  differ  in  nature  in  proportion  as  they  differ  in  distance.
There  is  not  much  ground  for  expecting  a  priori  that  the
costs  of  producing  a  given  commodity  in  B  will  differ  from
the  cost  in  A  to  a  greater  extent  if  A  is  500,  than  if  it  is
100,  miles  away.  Consequently,  the  demand  for  any  r^
mile's  worth  of  carriage  is  probably  less  in  long  transports
of  goods  than  in  short  transports.  This  consideration  applies
with  especial  force  to  articles  of  food  and  raw  material,  which
'  are    physically    adapted    to    growth    over    a    wide    range    of

'  Cf.  Colson,  Cours  cCdconomie  politique,  p.  227.
2  Ripley,  Bailroads,  Boies  and  Regulation,  p.  318.


272  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

temperature  and  climate.  But  it  has  some  relation  to  all
sorts  of  goods  and  is,  no  doubt,  partly  responsible  for  the
systems  of  tapering  rates  for  goods, — but  not  for  passengers, —
that  prevail  in  England,  France  and  Germany.^  The  case
for  discriminating  rates  is,  however,  much  stronger,  when
A  is  connected  with  C  by  direct  water  transport,  as  well  as
by  a  railway  from  A  to  B  plus  either  more  railway  or  water
from  B  to  C,  In  these  circumstances,  the  demand  price
of  many  units  of  transportation  from  A  to  B,  of  any  com-
modity to  be  consumed  at  B,  is  likely  to  be  much  higher  than
the  demand  price  of  any  unit  of  transportation  from  A  to  B,
of  the  same  commodity  to  be  carried  on  from  B  to  C.
Grouping  in  accordance  with  this  fact  is  responsible  for  the
occurrence  of  rates  from  Cheshire  to  London,  for  goods
imported  through  Liverpool,  much  below  the  rates  for  corre-
sponding goods  originating  in  Cheshire.  On  the  same  principle,
"  special  rates  have  been  granted  by  the  Prussian  State
Railways  for  the  conveyance  of  grain  traffic  from  Russia
to  oversea  countries  (Sweden,  Norway,  England,  etc.),  and
the  rate  per  ton  per  kilometre  from  the  frontier  to  the
German  harbours,  Konigsberg,  Danzig,  etc.,  is  lower  than
the  charge  for  German  grain  between  the  same  points.
...  It  was  pointed  out  that  this  specially  low  rate  was
granted  with  the  object  of  securing  the  traffic  to  the  Prussian
railways,  as  it  need  not  necessarily  pass  over  the  Prussian
lines,  but  could  go  via  Riga,  Reval,  and  Libau,  and  would
have  done  so  without  this  reduction  in  the  rates."  ^

§  7.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  compare  the  principle
of  cost  of  service  and  the  principle  of  value  of  service
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  national  dividend.  It  is  well
known  that,  in  common  opinion,  the  determination  of  railway
rates  by  the  value  of  service  principle,  or,  in  the  alternative
phrase,  by  what  the  traffic  will  bear,  is  unquestionably
superior  to  its  rival.  The  popular  view,  however,  as  I
understand  it,  rests,  in  the  main,  upon  two  confusions.  The
first  of  these  starts  from  the  assumption  that  the  transport
of  copper  and  the  transport  of  coal,  and  the  transport  from


1  Of.  Marriott,  The  Fixing  of  Hates  and  Fares,  p.  43.
*  Report  of  the  Railway  Conference,  1909,  p.  99.


I


CH.IY  SPECIAL  PEOBLEM  OF  RAILWAY  EATES    273

A  to  B  when  further  transport  respectively  is,  and  is  not,
required,  are  joint  products.  This  assumption  was  proved  to
be  unwarranted  in  §  4.  It  proceeds  by  means  of  the  further
assumption  that  to  charge  for  joint  products  rates  adapted
to  comparative  marginal  demands  is  to  charge  in  accordance
with  the  value  of  service  principle.  This  assumption  is  no
less  unwarranted  than  the  other.  A  moment's  reflection
shows  that  to  charge  for  joint  products  in  this  way  would  be
to  foUow  the  guidance  of  the  cost  of  service  principle  or —
what  is  another  name  for  the  same  thing — of  simple  com-
petition. The  second  confusion  is  an  ignorcUio  ehnchi.
Arguments  are  advanced  to  prove  that  the  value  of  service
principle,  in  the  proper  sense  of  discriminating  monopoly,  is
superior  to  simple  monopoly.  Thus,  it  is  pointed  out  that,
when  the  conditions  are  such  that  the  rate  most  advantageous
to  himself  which  the  monopolist  can  make,  subject  to  the
condition  that  equal  rates  shall  be  charged  for  the  transport
of  copper  and  of  coal,  will  cause  him  to  stop  transporting
coal  altogether  while  continuing  to  transport  copper  at  a  high
rate,  the  national  dividend  could  be  increased  by  permission
to  discriminate  between  the  two  rates.^  Such  an  argument,
it  is  obvious,  though  valid  in  its  own  field,  is  wholly  irrelevant
to  the  question  whether  discriminating  monopoly  of  the  third
degree  is  superior,  not  to  simple  monopoly,  but  to  simple
competition.  When  these  confusions  are  swept  away,  the
issue  between  the  value  of  service  principle  and  the  cost
of  service  principle  in  railway  rates  is  seen  to  constitute  a
special  case  of  the  general  issue,  set  out  in  the  preceding
cjhapter,  between  the  said  discriminating  monopoly  of  the
third  degree  and  the  said  simple  competition.

§  8.  The  result  of  the  discussion  on  that  issue  was  that
simple  competition  is,  in  general,  more  advantageous.  There
emerged,  however,  one  set  of  conditions,  in  which  the
advantage  Hes  with  its  rival  These  conditions  are  that,
while  no  uniform  price  can  be  found,  which  will  cover  the
expenses  of  producing  any  quantity  of  output,  a  system  of
discriminating  prices  is  practicable,  which  will  make  some  output
profitable.  They  have  been  illustrated  by  Principal  Hadley,
»  Cf.  Gh.  XIV.  §  12.

T


274  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

with  special  reference  to  discriminations  between  the  charges  for
carriage  from  A  to  B,  that  are  made  for  goods  going  to  B
for  consumption  at  B,  and  for  goods  going  to  B  for  further
transport  to  C.  "  Suppose,"  he  writes,  "  it  is  a  question
whether  a  road  can  be  built  through  a  country  district,  lying
between  two  large  cities,  which  have  the  benefit  of  water
communication,  while  the  intervening  district  has  not."  To
meet  water  competition,  the  charge  for  carriage  from  oue
extreme  A  to  an  intermediate  point  B  must  be  low  for  goods
to  be  carried  forward  to  the  other  extreme  C ;  so  low  that,
if  it  were  applied  to  all  carriage  from  A  to  B,  it  would  make
the  working  of  this  part  of  the  road  unprofitable.  But,  the
demand  for  carriage  from  A  to  B,  in  respect  of  goods  to
be  retained  at  B,  is  so  small  that  this  alone  cannot  support
the  road,  no  matter  how  low  or  how  high  the  rates  are  made.
"  In  other  words,  in  order  to  live  at  all,  the  road  must  secure
two  different  things — the  high  rates  for  its  local  traffic,  and
the  large  traffic  of  the  through  points,  which  can  only  be
attracted  by  low  rates.  If  they  are  to  have  the  road,  they  must
have  discrimination."  ^  It  is  obvious  that  an  exactly  analogous
argument  can  be  constructed  in  favour  of  discriminations  in  the
ton-mile  rate  that  is  charged  on  different  commodities,  when
the  conditions  are  such  that,  apart  from  discrimination,  there
would  be  no  quantity  of  transportation  units,  the  proceeds
of  whose  sale  would  cover  their  expenses  of  production.  On
the  same  principle,  it  may  happen  that  a  roundabout  line
ought  to  be  permitted  to  charge  abnormally  low  rates
between  its  terminal  points,  with  the  effect  of  preventing  the
development  of  a  direct  line  between  these  points;  for  con-
ditions may  be  such  that,  apart  from  this  arrangement,  no
roundabout  line  could  be  profitably  built,  and  so  centres
which  it  might  serve  would  suffer.  I  have  no  quarrel  with
the  proposition  that  these  conditions  may  occur  in  practice.
Principal  Hadley  and  his  followers,  however,  not  content  with
demonstrating  that  they  are  possible,  implicitly  add,  without

I  Railroad  Tratisportation,  p.  115.  It  may  conceivably  be  objected  to  the
construction  of  a  railway  in  these  circumstances  that  it  \vill  injure  the  rival
industry  of  water  carriage  to  an  extent  that  will  offset  the  advantages  to  which
it  leads.  This  objection  can,  however,  be  shown  to  be  inapplicable,  so  long
as  the  railway  as  a  whole  pays  its  way.    Cf.  ante,  Part  II.  Ch.  VI.  §  9.


CH.  XV  SPECIAL  PEOBLEM  OF  KAILWAY  KATES    275

argument,  that  they  are  typical  of  the  whole  railway  world,
and  suppose  themselves,  therefore,  to  have  proved  that  the
value  of  service  principle  ought  to  be  followed  in  the  deter-
mination of  all  railway  rates.  Such  an  unargued  inference  is,
plainly,  illegitimate.  A  careful  inquiry  is  necessary  concern-
ing the  range  over  which  conditions,  justifying  the  value
of  serNace  principle,  are  likely  to  extend  in  practice.

§  9.  From  an  analytical  point  of  view,  the  situation  is
simple.  As  explained  in  the  preceding  chapter,  in  order  that
monopoly  plus  ideal  discrimination  may  create  an  output
where  simple  competition  fails  to  do  so — I  take  the  simplest
case,  in  which  the  demand  in  one  market  is  independent  of
the  price  in  the  other — certain  relations  which  were  there
described  between  the  general  conditions  of  demand  and
nf  supply  must  exist.  The  conditions  enabling  monopoly
Im  discrimination  of  the  third  degree  to  lead  to  this  result
are  less  precise.  Circumstances,  in  which  ideal  discrimination
would  only  just  succeed,  will  not,  in  general,  enable  discrimina-
tion of  the  third  degree  to  succeed.  We  may  conclude,
roughly,  however,  that  discrimination  of  the  third  degree
win  have  a  good  chance  of  succeeding — a  chance  that  is
better,  the  more  numerous  are  the  markets  between  which
discrimination  is  made,  and  the  more  satisfactory,  from  the
monopolist's  standpoint,  is  their  constitution — when  the
conditions  are  such  that  ideal  discrimination  would  succeed
with  a  wide  margin.  Our  problem  is  to  determine  how  far
this  state  of  things  is  likely  to  occur  in  practice.

First :  it  has  been  shown  that  the  likelihood  of  this  is
greatest  in  forms  of  investment  in  which  the  law  of  increasing
returns  acts  strongly.  Among  railways  there  is  ground  for
believing  that,  at  all  events  until  considerable  development
has  been  reached,  this  condition  is  generally  satisfied.  The
reason  is  that  the  fixed  plant  of  a  railway  cannot,  in  practice,
be  so  made  as  to  be  capable  of  effecting  less  than  a  certain
considerable  minimum  of  transportation.  The  aggregate
costs  of  arranging  for  rail  transport  for  one  ounce  per  week
are  very  nearly  as  great  as  those  of  arranging  for  the
transport  of  many  thousand  tons.  For  the  same  he^vy
expenditure    must    be    undertaken    for    surveying    and    legal


276  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  ii

charges,  bridging  valleys  and  torrents,  tunnelling  through
rock,  erecting  stations  and  platforms,  and  so  on.  This  implies
increasing  returns  acting  strongly  till  a  large  investment  has
been  made,  and  afterwards  less  strongly.  So  far,  therefore,
conditions  in  which  discriminating  monopoly  would  prove
superior  to  simple  competition  are  more  likely  to  occur  in
railway  service  than  in  some  other  industries.

Secondly,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  likelihood  of
discriminating  monopoly  yielding  some  output  when  simple
competition  yields  none  is  greatest  in  forms  of  investment
where  the  demand  for  the  product  is  elastic.  In  railway
service,  when  once  rates  have  been  brought  down  to  a  moderate
level,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  a  small  reduction
of  rates  would  call  out  a  large  increase  of  demand,  not  only
from  commodities  that  might  otherwise  have  been  transported
by  some  other  machinery,  but  also  from  commodities  that
otherwise  would  not  have  been  transported  at  all.  In  other
words,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  condition  of  elastic
demand  is,  in  general,  satisfied.  Here,  too,  then,  it  may  be
said  that  railway  service  is  more  apt  to  yield  conditions
suitable  for  discriminating  monopoly  than  some  other
industries.

Granted,  however,  both  that  increasing  returns  act
strongly  until  considerable  density  of  traffic  has  been  attained,
and  that  the  demand  for  the  service  of  railway  transport
is  elastic,  these  conditions  alone  are  by  no  means  sufficient
to  ensure  that  discriminating  monopoly  would  evolve  some
output,  while  simple  competition  would  fail  to  do  this.  It
is  necessary,  further,  that  the  actual  levels  of  demand  price
and  supply  price  for  a  small  quantity  of  service — more
generally,  the  demand  schedule  and  the  supply  schedule  as
a  whole — shall  be  related  in  a  particular  way.  Clearly,  if
the  demand  price  for  a  sftiall  quantity  is  greater  than  the
supply  price,  some  output  will  be  evolved  under  simple
competition,  and,  therefore,  the  conditions  we  have  in  view
do  not  arise.  Clearly,  again,  if  the  demand  price  for  a  small  j
quantity  is  very  much  less  than  the  supply  price,  it  is  I
unlikely  that  any  output  will  be  evolved  either  under  simple  ^
competition  or  under  discriminating  monopoly,  and,  therefore,


CH.  XV  SPECIAL  PEOBLEM  OF  RAILWAY  EATES    277

again  these  conditions  do  not  arise.  In  order  that  they  may
arise,  a  sort  of  intermediate  position  must,  it  would  seem,
be  established.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  the  district  affected
must  not  be  too  busy  and  thickly  populated ;  on  the  other
hand,  it  must  not  be  too  little  busy  and  sparsely  populated.
There  is  a  certain  intermediate  range  of  activity  and  popula-
tion that  is  needed.  This  range,  compared  with  the  total
range  of  possibility,  is  naturally  not  extensive.  Hence,  the
probability  that  the  conditions  necessary  to  make  discriminat-
ing monopoly  more  advantageous  to  the  national  dividend
than  simple  competition  will  be  present  in  any  railway
selected  at  random  at  any  time  seems  a  jpriori  to  be  very
small.  There  are,  indeed,  many  dicta  of  practical  experts
which  suggest  that  they  have  in  fact  a  wide  range.  But,
as  Professor  Edgeworth,  who  lays  stress  upon  this  point,
recognises,  "  the  testimony  of  high  authorities  would,  no  doubt,
carry  even  greater  weight  if  it  should  be  repeated  with  a
fall  recognition  of  the  a  priori  improbability "  to  which  it
is  opposed.^

§  10.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that,  as  population

and  aggregate   wealth  in   any   country  expand,  the  demand

schedule    for    railway    service,    along    any    assigned    route,

gradually    rises.     Hence,    though,    at    any    moment    selected

at    random,   it    is    improbable   that    the   conditions   affecting

any  route,  selected  at  random,  are  such  that  a  railway  rate

stem,   based  on   the   value   of  service  principle,  would   be

more  advantageous  to  the  dividend  than   one  based  on  the

"  cost    of  service   principle,"  it  is  not  improbable   that   any

route,  selected  at  random,  will  pass  through  a  period  during

which  the  conditions  are  of  this  kind.      Such  conditions  tend

to    emerge    when    one    point    in   the   growth   of  wealth   and

population  has  been  reached,  and  to  disappear  when  another

somewhat    later    point    has    been    reached.     If   the    cost    of

service  principle  ruled  universally,  and  if  no  State  bounties

were  given,  certain  lines  would  not  be  built  till  the  arrival

1  of  the  latter  point — when  there  is  hope  of  "  building  up "

I  a  demand  by  experience  of   supply,  this  point  need  not,  of

I  course,   be   such   that   the    railway  pays    at    the    moment —

I  ^  Ectnwmic  Journal,  1913,  p.  223.


278  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

despite  the  fact  that  they  could  have  been  built,  with
advantage  to  the  community,  on  the  arrival  of  the  earlier
point.  The  inference  is  that  discrimination,  or  the  value
of  service  principle,  should  be  adopted  when  any  route  is
in  the  intermediate  stage  between  these  two  stages,  and  that
this  principle  should  give  place  to  simple  competition,  or  the
cost  of  service  principle,  as  soon  as  population  has  grown
and  demand  has  risen  sufficiently  to  lift  it  out  of  that  stage.^
The  period  proper  to  the  value  of  service  principle  would
seem,  in  most  ordinary  lines,  to  be  a  comparatively  brief  one.^
§  11,  Even  this  limited  application  of  the  principle  is
only  warranted  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  no  third  way
between  the  pure  value  of  service  principle  and  the  pure  cost
of  service  principle.  In  fact,  however,  there  is  a  third  way.
The  cost  of  service  principle  may  be  maintained  and  the  State
may  give  a  bounty.  Plainly,  with  the  help  of  a  bounty  exactly
the  same  effect  in  speeding  up  the  building  of  a  railroad  could
be  accomplished  under  the  cost  of  service  principle  as  would
be  accomplished  under  the  value  of  service  principle  without
a  bounty.  The  community  as  a  whole  would  be  providing
out  of  taxes  the  necessary  profit  for  the  railway,  which,  on
the  other  plan,  would  come  from  the  charges  made  to  the
people    who    buy    the    most    highly -charged    freight    service.

^  Mr.  Bickerdike  {Economic  Journal,  March  1911,  p.  148)  and  Mr.  Clark
{Bulletin  of  Aynerican  Economic  Association,  September  1911,  p.  479)  argue,  in
efifect,  that  the  transition  from  the  one  system  to  the  other  should  occur,  not
when  rising  demand  lifts  the  railway  in  question  out  of  the  stage  just  described,
but  when,  if  ever,  it  rises  so  high  as  to  impinge  on  that  point  of  the  supply
curve,  at  which  a  negative  slope  passes  into  a  positive  one.  There  is  not,  in
my  opinion,  any  adequate  ground  for  this  view.

2  It  is  possible  to  maintain,  on  lines  similar  to  the  above,  that,  after  a
railway  has  been  built,  and  has  reached  the  stage  of  profitable  working  on  the
cost  of  service  principle,  another  stage  will  presently  arrive,  at  which  a  return
to  the  value  of  service  principle  would  enable  a  second  track  to  be  laid  down
with  advantage  to  the  community,  though,  under  a  rate  system  based  on  the
cost  of  service  principle,  such  an  extension  would  not  as  yet  be  profitable  to
the  company.  This  argument  justifies  the  establishment  of  a  system  of
discriminating  rates,  to  be  applied  to  traffic  carried  on  the  new  track  only  ;  and
a  modification  of  it  justifies  the  establishment  of  such  a  system,  to  be  applied
exclusively  to  traffic  carried  in  any  additional  train  or  truck  which,  apart  from
discrimination,  it  is  just  not  worth  while  to  run.  In  practice,  however,  it  is
impossible  to  apply  the  value  of  service  principle  in  this  limited  way.  If  it  is
introduced  for  the  traffic  proper  to  the  second  track  or  the  extra  truck,  it  must,
in  real  life,  be  introduced  for  all  the  traffic  carried  on  the  line.  The  argument
set  out  above  does  not  justify  this.


CH.XV  SPECIAL  PEOBLEM  OF  EAILWAY  EATES    279

Since  the  building  of  the  railway  is  in  the  general  interest,  it
would  seem,  on  the  whole,  to  be  fairer  that  the  taxpayers,  and
not  a  special  class  of  traders — or  rather,  in  the  end,  the
consumers  of  these  traders'  products — should  provide  these
funds.  In  view  of  the  obvious  awkwardness  of  changing
from  a  discriminating  to  a  non -discriminating  system  of
rates  when  the  intermediate  stage  described  in  the  preceding
paragraph  is  passed,  the  plan  of  giving  a  bounty  for  a  time  and
withdrawing  it  when  it  is  no  longer  needed,  is  also  superior
from  the  side  of  administrative  convenience.  If,  on  account  of
the  indirect  advantages  of  cheap  railway  transport  in  facilitat-
ing the  division  of  labour. between  different  parts  of  the  country,
making  possible  the  development  of  large  -  scale  localised
industries,  and,  through  the  improved  communication  of
markets,  lessening  local  price  fluctuations — all  changes  which  in
one  way  or  another  benefit  production — it  is  held  that  the
railway  industry  is  one  to  which  a  general  bounty  should  be
accorded  permanently,  it  is  obvious  that  a  second  instrument
for  doing  what  bounties  can  do  by  themselves  is  not  required,
and  that  no  place  is  left  for  the  value  of  service  principle.

§  12.  Of  the  relative  advantages  of  the  cost  of  service
principle,  or  prices  proper  to  simple  competition,  and  the
value  of  service  principle,  or  prices  proper  to  discriminating
monopoly,  this  is  all  that  need  be  said.  There  is,  however,
yet  another  possible  arrangement.  Control  might  be  exercised
in  such  a  way  that  a  railway  company  should  only  secure
competitive  or  normal  profits  on  the  whole,  but  these  profits
might  be  obtained  by  a  combination  of  some  charges  below
cost  with  others  above  cost,  just  as  a  doctor's  profits  are
obtained  by  a  combination  of  low  prices  to  poor  patients
and  high  prices  to  rich  patients.  In  one  field  of  railway
service  there  is  a  plain  prima  facie  case  for  an  arrange-
ment of  this  kind.  Great  social  advantage  can  be  derived
from  the  provision  of  cheap  workmen's  tickets  :  for  in  favourable
circumstances  this  makes  it  possible  for  workpeople  to  live  in
the  country,  though  working  in  towns,  and  thus  to  bring  up
their  children  in  healthy  surroundings.^      Such  provision  can  be

*  In  Belgium  the  system  of  cheap  workmen's  tickets,  which  has  been  carried
to  great  perfection,  seems  to  act  in  this  way.     (Cf.  Eowntree,  Land  and  Labour,


280  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

ensured  if  railway  companies  (whose  earnings  are  supposed  to
be  kept  down  by  regulation  to  a  normal  competitive  level)  are
compelled  to  make  it,  and  are  allowed  to  recoup  themselves
by  "  monopolistic  "  charges  upon  other  traffic.  Plainly,  how-
ever, exactly  the  same  result  can  be  achieved  if  the  reimburse-
ment required  for  the  railway  companies  is  provided  out  of  the
national  revenue.  There  seems  to  be  no  good  reason  for
throwing  this  burden  upon  persons  who  make  use  of  the
service  of  railways  rather  than  upon  the  general  body  of  tax-
payers. For,  though  it  may  well  be  that  railway  service  is  a
suitable  object  through  which  to  impose  a  tax  on  these  persons,
we  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  extent  to  which  they  ought
to  be  taxed  through  this  object  exactly  corresponds  to  the
amount  of  funds  required  for  the  bounty  to  poor  purchasers  of
railway  service.  There  is  still  less  reason  for  allowing  dis-
criminated rates,  determined  not  in  the  purchasers'  interest,
but  at  the  choice  of  the  railway  companies  themselves.  Hence,
this  system  of  discriminated  charges  coupled  with  regulated
profits  cannot,  on  the  whole,  be  justified.  We  are  thus  left
with  the  cost  of  service  principle  modified  at  need,  some-
times by  general  bounties,  sometimes  by  bounties  on  particular
services  deliberately  sold  for  less  than  cost  price.

§  13.  One  last  point  remains.  To  apply  this  cost  of
service  principle  accurately  involves,  as  was  shown  in  §  2,  a
number  of  delicate  adjustments.  For  the  principle  leads,  not
to  a  single  price  for  everybody,  but  to  prices  that  vary  with
the  incidental  costs  attaching  to  each  service  and  with  the  time
at  which  it  is  provided  in  relation  to  the  peak  of  the  load.
To  provide  for  these  adjustments  in  practice  is  often  a  very
difficult  matter  involving  costly  technique  and  account-keeping.
It  is,  therefore,  always  a  question  how  near  to  the  ideal  it  is
desirable  to  approach ;  at  what  point  the  advantage  of  getting

p.  108.)  Dr.  Mahaim'offers  some  confirmation  of  the  view  that  it  acts  so  in  the
fact  that  Belgium  is  a  land  of  "large  towns"  rather  than  of  "great  cities,"  a
much  larger  proportion  of  the  population  living  in  communes  of  from  5000  to
20,000  inhabitants  in  that  country  than  in  France  or  Germany  {Les  AbonneiiierUs
d'ouvriers,  p.  149).  At  the  same  time,  Dr.  Mahaim  admits  that  the  cheap
tickets  have  also  an  adverse  effect.  "On  commence  par  aller  h.  la  ville  ou  k
I'usine  en  revenant  tous  les  soirs  ou  tons  les  samedis  chez  soi ;  puis  ou  s'habitue
peu  k  pen  au  nouveau  milieu,  et  Ton  finit  par  s'y  implanter  "  (ibid.  p.  143).  In
fact  the  cheap  tickets  "apprennent  le  chemin  de  I'dmigration."


I


cH.xv  SPECIAL  PKOBLEM  OF  KAILWAY  EATES    281

closer  is  outweighed  by  the  complications,  inconveniences,  and
expense  involved  in  doing  so.  In  the  early  days  of  the  telegraph
service,  the  desire  for  simplicity  and  ease  in  rate  making  led  to  a
system  in  which  flat  rates  were  charged  for  the  use  of  instruments,
without  any  reference  whatever  to  the  number  of  calls  made;  and
water  rates  are  even  yet  often  based,  not  on  any  measurement
of  the  supply  that  is  actually  taken,  but  on  an  estimate  of  what
is  likely  to  be  taken,  derived  from  the  rental  of  the  houses
served.  For  electricity,  while  ingenious  meters  have  been
devised,  which  not  only  record  the  supply  taken,  but  also
weight  more  heavily  the  part  of  it  which  is  taken  in  the
peak  hours,  nevertheless  the  high  cost  of  any  sort  of  meter
still  causes  the  service  of  small  houses  to  be  charged  in  many
districts  on  a  flat  unmetred  rate.  In  like  manner,  though  for
the  transport  of  parcels  it  has  been  thought  worth  while  to
take  account,  in  the  charges  made,  of  those  differences  in  the
cost  of  service  which  arise  out  of  differences  of  weight,  for
the  transport  of  letters  this  is  not  done  :  and  for  neither  parcels
nor  letters  are  charges  adjusted  to  the  distance  (within  the
British  Empire)  over  which  they  have  to  be  conveyed.  On
similar  grounds  of  simplicity  and  cheapness,  a  railway
administration,  which  had  decided  to  base  its  rating  system
upon  the  cost  of  service  principle,  must,  nevertheless,  ignore,
within  considerable  limits,  differences  in  the  weight  of  luggage
which  different  passengers  carry.  This  class  of  consideration
shows  that  there  is  not  necessarily  any  departure  from  the
spirit  of  the  cost  of  service  principle  when  a  railway  ad-
ministration elects  to  utilise  a  system  of  zone  tariffs.  A  street
railway  system  obviously  must  do  this;  for  the  mere  fact  that
there  is  no  coin  smaller  than  a  farthing  makes  it  physically
impossible  to  fix  different  fares  for  every  different  distance  of
journey.  So  long  as  the  zones  are  narrow,  zone  tariffs  on
ordinary  railways  have  an  equally  good  defence.  If,  however,
the  zones  are  made  broad,  the  cost  of  service  principle  is
deliberately  violated.  A  system  under  which  the  rates  are
the  same  for  all  places  in  broad  zones  involves  substantial
differentiation  in  favour  of  firms  situated  far  from  their
markets,  as  against  firms  situated  nearer  to  them.  In  effect,
it  confers  upon  them  a  kind  of  bounty  at  the  expense  of  their


282  ilCONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

rivals.  It  was,  indeed,  shown  in  Chapter  VIII.  that  differentia-
tion in  favour  of  one  source  of  supply  as  against  another
source  may,  in  certain  circumstances  and  if  introduced  in  a
certain  manner,  be  advantageous  to  the  national  dividend.
The  sort  of  differentiation  that  results  from  the  zone  system  is,
however,  random  differentiation,  not  specially  designed  to
favour  a  carefully  chosen  list  of  selected  firms.  It  is,  thus,  on
the  average,  like  differentiation  in  favour  of  one  set  against
another  set  of  similar  firms.  This  sort  of  differentiation  can
easily  be  shown  to  imply  the  production  (including  transport)
of  some  part  of  the  commodity  concerned  at  greater  real  cost
than  is  necessary ;  for  the  marginal  real  costs  of  producing
anything  in  the  distant  source  and  bringing  it  to  the  market
must  necessarily  be  greater  than  the  marginal  real  costs  of
producing  it  in  the  nearer  source  and  bringing  it  to  the  market.^
It  is  possible  to  maintain  that  the  direct  loss  resulting  from
this  may  be  balanced  by  the  effect  of  the  zone  system  in
scattering  the  producing  firms  belonging  to  an  industry,  and
so  making  combination,  with  the  opportunity  this  gives
for  anti-social  monopolistic  action,  more  difficult.^  But  this
argument  does  not  appear  to  have  great  force.  It  is  not,  in
itself,  desirable  to  check  the  formation  of  large  productive
units,  since  such  units  introduce  economies.  As  will  be
argued  presently,  it  would  seem  a  better  policy  to  attack  the
evil  consequences  of  monopolistic  action,  which  combination
threatens,  directly,  rather  than  indirectly  by  attempts  to  dis-
courage unification.^

*  Cf.  QvMrterly  Journal  of  Economics,  February  1911,  pp.  292-3,  297-8  and
300  :  also  Departmental  Committee  on  Railway  Rates,  p.  10.
^  Cf.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  May  1911,  pp.  493-5.
3  Cf.  post,  Chap.  XVIII.  §  2.


CHAPTEE    XVI

purchasers'  associations

§  1.  The  results  of  the  preceding  chapters  make  it  plain  that,
in  many  industries,  neither  simple  competition,  nor  monopolistic
competition,  nor  simple  monopoly,  nor  discriminating  monopoly
will  lead  to  equality  in  the  values  of  marginal  trade  net  products
in  different  fields,  and,  hence,  through  a  consequent  equality
in  the  values  of  marginal  social  net  products,  to  the  maximisa-
tion of  the  national  dividend.  It  will  have  been  noticed,
however,  that  the  systems  so  far  investigated  have  all  been
systems  under  which  goods  are  produced  by  one  set  of  people
and  sold  to  another  set.  The  failures  of  adjustment,  to  which
they  lead,  have,  therefore,  all  been  dependent  on  this  fact.
Hence,  the  question  naturally  arises ;  Could  not  these  failures
be  eliminated  by  the  device  of  voluntary  groups  of  purchasers
undertaking  for  themselves  the  supply  of  the  goods  and
services  they  need  ?

S  2.  Now,  the  essence  of  a  Purchasers'  Association,
whether  it  is  formed  of  the  consumers  of  finished  goods  or  of
producers  who  will  utilise  their  purchases  in  further  pro-
duction, is  that  its  policy  is  directed  to  maximise  aggregate
purchaser's  benefit  minus  aggregate  costs.  It  must,  therefore,
tend  to  produce  just  that  quantity  of  output  which  equates
demand  price  and  marginal  supply  price,  and  so,  except
where  others  besides  the  purchasers  of  any  commodity  are
affected  by  its  production,  it  must  make  the  value  of  the  mar-
ginal social  net  product  of  investment  in  the  occupation  covered
by  it  equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  social  net  product  of
resources  in  general.  Consequently,  other  things  being  equal,
it  must  eliminate,  in  great  measure,  the  disharmonies  belong-

283


284  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

ing  alike  to  monopoly  and  to  simple  competition.  This
preliminary  abstract  statement  does  not,  however,  solve  our
problem.  It  is  not  enough  to  know  that,  if  other  things  are
equal,  Purchasers'  Associations  will  advantage  the  national
dividend.  Before  we  can  infer  anything  from  this  about
the  effect  of  these  Associations  in  actual  life,  we  need  to
inquire  how  they  compare  with  ordinary  commercial  businesses
in  crude  economic  efficiency;  for  it  is  clear  that  any
advantages,  which  a  Purchasers'  Association  may  possess  in
price  policy,  are  liable  to  be  outweighed  if  it  is  inefficient  on
the  productive  side.

83.  As  a  prelude  to  this  task,  it  is  desirable  to  guard
against  certain  confusions.  First  and  most  obviously,  we
need  to  rule  out  all  appeals  to  the  superior  efficiency,  in
certain  fields,  of  Purchasers'  Associations,  as  compared  with
the  members  of  these  Associations  operating  as  isolated
individuals.  It  is  easy  to  point  to  services,  which  many
persons  need  in  small  individual  lots,  but  which  can  be
produced  much  more  economically  in  large  lots.  An  obvious
example  is  the  service  of  marketing  agricultural  products
of  variable  quality  produced  in  small  quantities  by  small
farmers.  For  economical  selling  requires  careful  grading
of  qualities  and  a  fairly  continuous  supply  of  each  grade ;  and
small  farmers,  who  attempt  individually  to  market  their
butter  or  their  eggs,  are  not  operating  on  a  large  enough  scale
to  meet  these  requirements  satisfactorily.  Thus,  Mr.  Ptider
Haggard  writes  of  Denmark:  "In  1882  what  was  called
'peasant  butter'  fetched  33  per  cent  less  than  first-class
butter  made  on  the  big  farms,  but  in  1894  the  co-operative
butter,  which,  of  course,  for  the  most  part  comes  from  the
peasant  farms,  took  more  medals  and  prizes  than  that  from
the  great  farms,  and  what  used  to  be  called  second  and  third
class  butter  ceased  to  exist  as  a  Danish  commodity  of
commerce."  ^  The  fact,  however,  that,  for  this  kind  of  reason,
the  manufacture  of  butter,  the  curing  of  bacon,  and  the
marketing  of  eggs  "  afford  a  splendid  openiug  for  the  applica-
tion of  co-operative  principles,"  is  irrelevant  to  the  present
issue,  since  these  things  also  afford  a  splendid  opening  for  the

1  Rural  Denmark,  pp.  195-6.


cH.  xTi  PUECHASERS'  ASSOCIATIONS  286

application  of  commercial  principles.^  It  is  true  that  a
Purchasers'  Association  can  work  in  this  field  much  more
cheaply  than  a  single  small  farmer ;  but,  exactly  the  same
thing  is  true  of  an  ordinary  commercial  firm,  undertaking  to
sell  the  service  of  marketing  to  these  farmers.  Two  examples
are  given  by  Sir  E.  H.  Eew.  "  One  is  the  French  butter  trade.
This  has  been  built  up  by  the  merchants  in  Normandy  and
Brittany — some  of  whom  are  Englishmen — who  purchase
the  butter  at  the  local  markets  from  the  individual  farmers,
and  work  it  up  in  their  blending  houses.  Another  instance
is  the  poultry  trade  in  the  Heathfield  district  of  Sussex.  There
the  system  is  that  the  fatteners,  or  '  higglers '  as  they  are
termed,  purchase  and  collect  the  chickens  from  those  who
rear  them ;  they  are  then  duly  fattened,  killed  and  prepared
for  market,  and  again  collected  by  the  carrier  or  railway
agent  by  whom  they  are  forwarded  to  London  and  other
markets.  Both  these  are  instances  of  complete  organisation
without  co-operation." "  Secondly,  we  must  refrain  from
stressing  unduly  the  history  of  English  Co-operative  Stores.
The  reason  is  that,  when  the  device  of  Purchasers'  Associations
was  introduced  into  the  field  of  retail  trading,  it  is  very
doubtful  if  the  rival  method  was  fairly  represented.'  Partly
in  consequence  of  the  imperfect  competition  between  different
shops,  not  all  the  economies  that  were  available  had  been
taken    up.     Even  from   their   own  point  of  view,  "  retailers

^  In  like  manner,  the  charge  that  the  development  of  Purchasers'  Associations
on  the  part  of  groups  of  persons  other  than  ultimate  consumers  may  make
possible  monopolistic  action  against  these  consumers  is  irrelevant ;  for,  so  also
may  the  development  of  commercial  firms.

-  Rew,  An  Agricultural  Faggot,  p.  120.

^  Care  must  be  taken,  however,  not  to  treat  as  waste  in  the  work  of
retailing  those  costs  that  are  necessarily  involved  in  the  kind  of  retailing  that
the  public  chooses  to  ask  for.  "  Imagine  that  every  one  intending  to  buy  a  pair
of  shoes  or  a  suit  of  clothes  was  called  on  to  send  notice  of  his  proposed
purchase  a  week  or  two  in  advance,  to  give  a  preliminary  account  of  the  thing
wanted,  and  then  to  accept  an  appointment  for  a  stated  place  or  time  at  which
the  purchases  must  be  made.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  the  work  of  retailing  could
be  systematised,  how  the  selling  force  would  be  kept  constantly  employed,  how
stocks  would  be  kept  to  the  minimum.  As  things  now  stand,  we  pay  heavily
for  the  privilege  of  freedom  in  the  use  of  our  time,  for  vacillation  and  choice,
for  the  maintenance  of  a  stock  and  a  stafiF  adequate  for  all  tastes  and  all
emergencies.  It  is  common  to  speak  of  the  waste  of  competition  ;  much  of  it
is  in  reality  the  waste  necessarily  involved  in  liberty "  (Taussig,  ATnerican
Economic  Beview,  voL  vi.  No.  1  Supplement,  1916,  p.  1S2).


286  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

as  a  body  kept  far  more  shops  than  was  necessary,  spent
far  too  much  trouble  and  money  in  attracting  a  few  customers,
and  then  in  taking  care  that  those  few  customers  paid  them
in  the  long  run — the  very  long  run — for  those  goods  which
they  had  bought  on  credit,  or,  in  other  words,  had  borrowed ;
and  for  all  this  they  had  to  charge.  .  .  .  Eetail  trade  was
the  one  accessible  business — Dr.  Marshall  was  probably  not
thinking  of  house-keeping  and  domestic  cooking  as  a  business
— in  which  there  were  great  economies  to  be  effected."  ^
This  view  of  the  matter  is  fortified  by  Professor  Pareto's
observation,  that  retail  shops  were  easily  ousted  by  the
competition,  not  only  of  socUUs  co-opdratives,  but  also  of  les
grands  magasins}  A  comparison  between  retail  trading,  as
it  stood  when  our  consumers'  stores  came  into  being,  and
these  stores  cannot,  therefore,  be  accepted  with  confidence  as
a  conclusive  test  of  the  relative  merits  of  the  industrial
forms  they  represent.  It  is  like  a  comparison  between  a
member  of  one  race  whom  there  is  some  reason  to  suspect
of  being  less  healthy  than  the  average  of  his  compatriots  and
a  thoroughly  sound  member  of  another.  No  great  weight,
therefore,  can  reasonably  be  attached  to  historical  examples,
and  we  are  driven  forward  to  an  analytical  study .^

8  4.  In  attempting,  from  this  point  of  view,  to  estimate
the  economic  efficiency  of  Purchasers'  Associations,  we  may
observe,  first,  that  these  Associations  are,  in  structure,  a
form  of  Joint  Stock  Company.  Like  any  other  Joint
Stock  Company,  a  Purchasers'  Association  is  owned  by  share-
holders, and  is  controlled  by  a  manager  under  the  supervision
of  a  committee  elected  from  among  the  shareholders.  The
alternatives  to  it  are  the  private  business  and  the  ordinary
commercial  company.  In  attempting  to  compare  its  economic
efficiency  with  theirs,  we  naturally  look  to  the  organisation
of    the     management.     Under    this     head    the     Purchasers'

*  Marshall,  hvaugural  Address  to  the  Co-operative  Congress,  1889,  p.  8.

2  Of.  Cours  d'dconomie  politique,  p.  274.

3  It  should  be  added  that,  even  if  other  things  were  equal,  the  payment
of  a  dividend  by  a  co-operative  society  trading  at  the  same  price  as  another
concern  would  not  prove  greater  efficiency  of  management ;  for,  if,  as  is
common,  the  society  proceeded  to  a  greater  extent  on  a  system  of  cash  sales,
the  dividend  would  pro  tanto  be  simply  payment  to  purchasers  of  interest  on
their  earlier  discharge  of  indebtedness.


cH.xvi  PUECHASEES'  ASSOCIATIONS  287

Association  and  the  commercial  company  alike  are  inferior
to  the  private  business,  just  in  so  far  as  Boards  of  officials
lack  the  opportunities  for  quick  action  and  the  stimulus  of
personal  possession  belonging  to  the  private  business.^  But
the  Purchasers'  Association  is  likely,  in  some  degree,  to  make
up  for  this  deficiency  through  the  ardour  instilled  into  the
manager  and  the  committee  by  the  fact  that  they  are  engaged
in  a  service  suited  to  evoke  public  spirit.  The  Purchasers'
Association  may,  in  fact,  utilise  the  altruistic  motives,  along-
side of  the  egoistic,  as  a  spur  to  industrial  efficiency.  Against
this  consideration,  however,  there  has  to  be  set  a  second.
In  so  far  as  Purchasers'  Associations  consist  of  poor  persons,
unaccustomed  to  large  business,  there  is  a  danger  that  they
may  grudge  adequate  salaries  to  managers,  and  so  may  be
forced  to  employ  less  able  men  than  commercial  companies.
Furthermore,  their  committee-men  are  drawn  from  a  more
limited  area,  and  are  apt  to  possess  less  business  experience
than  the  directors  of  commercial  companies.  These  conflict-
ing influences  will,  of  course,  have  different  weights  in  different
circumstances.

Secondly,  when  any  section  of  a  country's  industry  is  given
over  to  monopolistic  competition,  ordinary  commercial  businesses
are  bound  to  engage  in  much  wasteful  expenditure  on  advertis-
ing in  the  manner  "described  in  Chapter  VI.  §  12.  In  this
respect  Purchasers'  Associations  are  in  a  much  more  favourable
position.  When  the  services  they  provide  consist  of  such
things  as  the  purchase  of  agricultural  feeding  stuffs  or  manures,
or  the  work  of  wholesale  trading,  they  are  practically  assured,
without  any  direct  effort  on  their  part,  of  the  whole  demand
of  their  members.  When  they  provide  the  service  of  packing
eggs,  or  curing  bacon,  or  converting  milk  and  cream  into
cheese  and  butter,  their  members  may,  indeed,  sometimes  be
tempted  by  an  offer  of  better  terms  to  go  elsewhere,  but  it  is

*  In  the  United  States,  where  the  President  of  a  company  often  holds  a  very
large  individual  interest,  it  appears  that  he  sometimes  acts  on  behalf  of  the
company,  just  as  a  private  owner  would  do.  "Generally  speaking,  the
President  of  an  American  Corporation  acts  just  as  freely  and  energetically  on
behalf  of  his  company  as  he  would  on  his  own  behalf"  (Knoop,  American
Business  Enterprise,  p.  26).  He  only  consults  the  directors  when  he  wishes
to  do  so.


288  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

possible  for  the  Societies,  by  making  "  loyalty  "  within  limits
a  condition  of  membership,  in  great  measure  to  restrain  such
action  without  resort  to  advertisement.  When  they  provide
the  service  of  retailing  or  of  granting  credit,  the  enforcement
of  loyalty  by  rule  is,  indeed,  impracticable,  and  is  not  attempted ;
but  even  here  loyalty  will  in  fact  be  largely  maintained  through
the  members'  sense  of  proprietary  interest  in  their  own  shop.
Among  non-members,  no  doubt,  when  it  is  desired  to  extend
the  range  of  any  Association's  business,  advertisement  of
one  sort  or  another  may  be  necessary.  The  Purchasers'
Association,  however,  has  a  considerable  advantage  over  an
ordinary  Joint  Stock  Company,  because  it  is  able  to  offer  to
those  who  join  it,  not  only  cheap  goods,  but  also  a  certain
sense  of  part  ownership  in  an  important  corporate  institution.
Such  advertisement  as  it  does  undertake,  therefore,  is  likely  to
prove  more  effective,  and  less  of  it  is  needed  to  achieve  a
given  result.  By  so  much  its  efficiency  is,  ceteris  paribus,
greater  than  that  of  its  rivals.

Thirdly,  there  is  another  way,  besides  the  saving  of
advertisement  costs,  in  which  the  "  loyalty  "  referred  to  in  the
preceding  paragraph  makes  for  economy.  It  enables  the  work
of  a  co-operative  concern  to  be  conducted  steadily  without
those  large  fluctuations,  to  which  private  concerns  are  often
subject  and  the  presence  of  which  inevitably  involves  cost.
Thus,  the  rule  insisting  upon  loyalty  as  a  condition  of  member-
ship of  co-operative  bacon  factories  and  creameries  enables
these  establishments  to  count  on  a  constant  supply  of  raw
material  with  greater  confidence  than  private  firms  can  do ;  ^
and,  in  like  manner,  the  practice  of  the  English  and  Scotch

'  In  the  Danish  co-operative  bacon  factories  loyalty  is  generally  enforced  by
a  provision  to  the  effect  that  members  shall  deliver  all  their  saleable  pigs  (with
certain  specified  exceptions)  to  the  factory  for  a  period  of  seven  years,  unless  in
the  meantime  they  remove  from  the  district  (Rew,  An  Agricultural  Faggot,
pp.  123-4).  In  like  manner  many  Irish  dairying  societies  provide  that  "any
member  who  shall  supply  milk  to  any  creamery  other  than  that  owned  by  the
society  for  the  space  of  three  years  from  the  date  of  his  admission  to  membership,
without  the  consent  in  writing  of  the  Committee,  shall  forfeit  his  shares  together
with  all  the  money  credited  thereon  "  {Report  on  Co-operative  Societies  [Cd.  6046],
1912,  p.  xxxix).  It  will  be  noticed  that  in  these  classes  of  societies — and  it  is
only  in  them  that  loyalty  is  enforced  in  the  rules — the  use  of  a  considerable
plant  makes  the  maintenance  of  a  steady  demand  a  more  important  influence  in
eliminating  cost  than  it  would  be  in,  say,  an  agricultural  purchasing  society.


cH.  XVI  PUKCHASERS'  ASSOCIATIONS  28'9

Wholesale  Societies  and  of  local  Retail  Associations,  iu  con-
centrating the  constant  part  of  their  demand  upon  their  own
productive  departments  and  throwing  the  variable  part  upon
outside  traders,  greatly  lessens  the  fluctuations  to  which  these
productive  departments  are  exposed.  No  doubt,  the  economies
which  co-operative  concerns  secure  in  this  way  have,  from  a
national  point  of  view,  to  be  balanced  against  any  diseconomies
that  may  be  caused  to  outside  concerns  by  increased  fluctua-
tions thrown  upon  them ;  and  so  are  not  a  net  gain  to  the
nation.  To  the  co-operative  concerns  themselves,  however,
they  are  a  net  gain.  Moreover,  in  so  far  as  the  aggregate
demand  or  supply  of  a  market  is  constant,  and  fluctuations  in
the  parts  are  due  to  other  causes  than  fluctuations  in  the
whole,  the  introduction  of  steadiness  in  one  part  cannot
increase,  but  necessarily  diminishes,  the  fluctuations  of  other
parts.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  a  considerable  part  of  the
economies  which  co-operative  concerns  derive  from  loyalty
represent  a  net  increase  in  efficiency  for  the  community  as  a
whole  as  well  as  for  themselves.

Fourthly,  the  relation  that  is  set  up  between  the  various
members  of  a  Co-operative  Society  greatly  facilitates  the  dis-
semination among  them  of  knowledge  about  the  best  methods
of  production.  Thus,  Sir  Horace  Plunkett  observes  of  the  work
of  the  Irish  Department  of  Agriculture  :  "  It  was  only  where
the  farmers  were  organised  in  properly  representative  societies
that  many  of  the  lessons  the  Department  had  to  teach  could
effectually  reach  the  farming  classes,  or  that  many  of  the  agri-
cultural experiments  intended  for  their  guidance  could  be  pro-
fitably carried  out."  ^  And  the  root  of  the  matter  is  reached  by
Mr.  Fay  when  he  writes  :  "  Both  the  co-operative  society  and  the
firm  are  trading  bodies,  and  they  will  not  pay  the  farmers  more
than  their  milk  is  worth.  But,  whereas  the  firm's  remedy  is  to
punish  the  farmer  by  the  payment  of  low  prices,  the  society's
remedy  is  to  educate  him  so  that  he  may  command  high  ones."  ^

Fifthly,  when  in  any  field  of  industry  there  is  an  element
of  bilateral  monopoly,  ordinary  commercial  businesses  and
their  customers,  respectively,  are  driven  to  expend  energy,  if

^  Ireland  in  the  New  Century,  p.  241.
^  Co-operation  at  HoToe  and  Abroad,  p.  164.


290  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  vr.  n

not  money,  after  the  manner  described  in  Chapter  VI.  §§  13-15,
in  attempts  to  get  the  better  of  one  another.  When  a
Purchasers'  Association  exists,  this  class  of  expenditure  is
likely  to  be  reduced.  In  co-operative  retail  stores,  as  Dr.
Marshall  has  observed,  the  proprietors,  since  they  are  also  the
customers,  have  no  inducement  to  adulterate  their  goods,  and
costly  precautions  to  prevent  such  adulteration  are  therefore
unnecessary.^  The  gain  is  no  less  clear  in  societies  providing
for  their  members  the  services  of  insurance  and  the  retailing
of  loans.  The  insurance  contract  is  conditional  on  some  event
happening  to  the  buyer ;  the  loan  contract  is  conditional  on
the  buyer's  promise  to  repay.  In  the  one  case,  the  buyer
may  gain  at  the  seller's  expense  by  simulating,  or  even  by
voluntarily  bringing  about,  the  event  provided  against ;  in  the
other,  he  may  gain  by  deliberately  breaking,  or  by  so  acting
as  to  render  himself  unable  to  perform,  his  promise.  Now,  it
is,  of  course,  true  that  individual  buyers  are  able  to  gain  by
this  class  of  conduct,  not  only  when  the  relation  of  identity
between  buyers  and  sellers  collectively  does  not  exist,  but  also
when  it  does  exist.  The  point,  however,  is  this.  Under  the
Joint  Stock  form  of  industrial  organisation  the  fraudulent  or
quasi-fraudulent  conduct  of  one  buyer  does  not  matter  to  the
other  buyers,  and  can,  therefore,  only  be  guarded  against  by  an
elaborate  and  continuous  system  of  inspection.  Under  the
Purchasers'  Association  form,  however,  the  other  buyers  are
directly  injured  by  such  conduct,  and  are,  therefore,  interested
to  prevent  it.  If,  then,  the  Purchasers'  Association  consists
of  neighbours,  all  will,  incidentally  and  in  the  course  of  the
ordinary  conduct  of  life,  constitute  themselves  voluntary  and
unpaid  inspectors  of  each.  In  this  way  small  local  Purchasers'
Associations  for  the  supply  of  insurance  or  the  retailing  of  loans
are,  in  effect,  free  from  a  substantial  part,  not  merely  of  the
nominal,  but  also  of  the  real,  costs  that  Joint- Stock  Companies,
attempting  to  furnish  these  services,  would  be  compelled  to  bear.
In  so  far  as  people  are  less  willing — apart  altogether  from  the
prospect  of  success — to  try  to  defraud  a  Mutual  Association  than
a  commercial  company,  the  gain  under  this  head  is  increased.
§  5.  The  various  advantages  that  have  been  enumerated  above

'  Cf.  Inaugural  Address  to  the  Co-operative  Congress,  1889,  p.  7.


CH.  XVI  PUECHASEES'  ASSOCIATIONS  291

suggest  that  there  is  a  wide  field  over  which  Purchasers'  Associa-
tions are  likely  to  prove  at  least  as  efficient  as  any  other  form
of  business  organisation.  And  in  many  important  departments
of  industry  they  have  proved  their  fitness  by  prosperous  survival.
This  is  true  of  the  so-called  supply  associations  often  formed
by  farmers — associations,  that  is  to  say,  which  supply  to  their
members  the  service  of  marketing  from  manufacturing  firms
such  things  as  manure,  seeds  and  agricultural  machinery.  It
is  true  of  the  agricultural  selling  societies  which  provide  such
services  as  the  sorting,  grading,  selling  and  packing  of
eggs  or  of  butter.  It  is  true  of  the  Co-operative  Creameries,
which  play  so  important  a  part  in  Denmark  and  in  Ireland,  and
whose  services  include  a  manufacturing  as  well  as  a  marketing
operation.  And,  last  but  not  least,  it  is  true  of  the  general
organisation  based  on  consumers'  stores,  which  provides  for  the
retailing,  wholesaKng,  and  sometimes  even  the  manufacturing
of  staple  household  goods  (including  houses  themselves)  for
large  agglomerations  of  working  people  with  fixed  homes.

S  6.  Even,  however,  in  departments  of  work  where  ex-
perience gives  good  hope  of  efficiency  and  success,  it  does  not
follow  that  Purchasers'  Associations  will  always  come  into
being.  Very  poor  people  may  lack  the  initiative  and  under-
standing needed  to  form  one.  When  the  population  is
migratory,  attempts  are  especially  unlikely  to  be  made  —  a
circumstance  which  explains  why  co-operative  stores  "  have
seemed  to  shun  capital  and  seafaring  towns."  Better-to-do
persons,  while  fully  competent  to  develop  Purchasers'  Asso-
ciations, if  they  had  the  wish,  may,  in  fact,  not  have  the
wish.  With  commodities  on  which  they  only  spend  a  very
small  part  of  their  income  at  rare  intervals — commodities  that
are  luxuries  to  the  main  body  of  purchasers — the  possible
savings  may  be  too  small  to  be  worth  while.  Or  again,  even
when  they  are  worth  while,  it  may  be  possible  to  get  an
equivalent  advantage  in  some  other  less  troublesome  way.
British  tenant  farmers,  for  example,  with  their  traditional  right
to  appeal  to  the  squire  in  times  of  difficulty  for  a  reduction  of
rent,  are  slow  to  overcome  their  native  individualism  for  the
(to  them)  relatively  small  advantages  of  co-operation  with  their
neighbours.      No  doubt,  encouragement  may  be  given  to  them


292  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

by  State  action.  Thus,  in  Canada  "in  1897  the  Dominion
Department  of  Agriculture  established  a  system  by  means  of
which  loans  were  made  to  farmers  who  undertook  to  organise
themselves  into  Butter  and  Cheese  Manufacturing  Associations
and  to  send  their  produce  to  Co-operative  Creameries  equipped
by  means  of  the  loans.  The  Department  undertook  to
organise  the  management  of  these  creameries,  and  to  manu-
facture and  sell  the  butter  for  a  fixed  charge  of  four  cents
(2d.)  per  lb.,  an  additional  charge  of  one  cent  per  lb.  being
made  for  the  amortisation  of  the  loans."  ^  But  this  device  is
obviously  of  limited  scope.  Moreover,  there  are  a  number  of
very  important  sorts  of  work  to  which  the  Purchasers'
Association  form  of  organisation  is  plainly  unsuited.  When-
ever a  large  speculative  element  is  present,  whenever,  in  other
words,  much  uncertainty  has  to  be  borne,  this  factor  of  pro-
duction will  not  be  readily  forthcoming  from  organised
purchasers.  For,  if  capital  has  to  be  ventured  at  a  hazard,  the
people  who  venture  it  will  expect  to  exercise  control  and  to
harvest  the  profits  more  or  less  in  proportion  to  their  venture.
Associations  that  raise  capital  at  fixed  interest  and  distribute
surplus  in  accordance,  not  with  investment,  but  with  purchases,
do  not  enable  them  to  do  this.  The  graded  machinery  of
debentures,  preference  shares  and  ordinary  shares  furnished  by
joint-stock  companies  is  much  more  satisfactory.  In  risky
undertakings,  therefore.  Purchasers'  Associations  will  not  work.
Nor  will  they  work  as  regards  commodities  and  services  for
which  economy  demands  centralised  production,  but  of  which
the  purchasers  are  spread  over  wide  areas.  The  idea,  for
instance,  that  the  services  now  rendered  by  the  cotton  industry
could  be  provided  satisfactorily  by  any  arrangement  of
Purchasers'  Associations  is  plainly  fantastic.  We  conclude,
therefore,  that,  though  the  Purchasers'  Association,  as  a  means
of  overcoming  the  evils  of  ordinary  competitive  and  ordinary
monopolistic  industry,  has,  undoubtedly,  an  important  part  to
play,  the  field  open  to  it  is  limited  in  extent,  and  the  study
of  further  remedies  is,  therefore,  still  required.^

1  Mavor,  Report  on  the  Canadian  North-West,  p.  44.

2  For  a  full  discussion  of  the  various  forms  of  co-operative  activity,  vide  Fay,
Co-operation  at  Home  and  Abroad.  I  am  also  indebted  to  Mr.  Fay  for  useful
criticism  and  suggestion  in  connection  with  the  revision  of  this  chapter.


CHAPTER    XVII

STATE    INTSRVENTION

§  1,  Over  the  large  field  of  industry,  where  voluntary
Purchasers*  Associations  are  not  an  adequate  means  of  over-
coming those  failures  in  industrial  adjustment  which  occur
under  the  more  ordinary  business  forms,  the  question  arises
whether  the  magnitude  of  the  national  dividend  might  not  be
increased  by  some  kind  of  governmental  intervention,  either  by
the  exercise  of  control  over  concerns  left  in  private  hands  or
by  direct  public  management.  In  the  present  chapter  we  are
concerned,  not  with  the  comparative  merits  of  these  two  sorts
of  intervention,  but  with  the  broadest  aspects  of  intervention
generally.

§  2.  It  is  natural  at  first  sight  to  look  for  light  on  this
question  from  the  experience  of  the  war.  The  urgent  national
need  for  enlarged  supplies  of  munitions,  home  -  grown  food,
ships,  and  certain  other  articles,  led  to  extensive  State  inter-
vention in  production.  National  productive  establishments
were  set  up,  and  private  establishments  were  controlled
and  sometimes  accorded  special  grants  to  enable  them  to  ex-
pand their  operations ;  while  the  Board  of  Agriculture  took
powers  to  encourage,  and,  if  need  be,  to  compel,  increased
cultivation  of  land,  and  also  provided  a  number  of  facilities  in
the  way  of  soldiers'  and  prisoners'  labour  and  specially  im-
ported machinery  to  assist  farmers.  A  study  of  what  was
accompHshed  under  these  and  other  heads  would,  indeed,  be
of  great  interest.  But  it  would  not  really  do  much  to  help
our  present  inquiry.  The  difference  between  war  and  peace
conditions  is  too  great.  In  those  four  years  of  strain  the
underlying    motive  of   the    main    part  of   the  Government's

293


294  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  ii

industrial  action  was  to  force  capital,  enterprise  and  labour
forthwith,  and  at  no  matter  what  cost,  into  the  production
of  particular  urgently  needed  things.  Nobody  denies  that,
when  there  is  a  shortage  of  anything  relatively  to  the  demand
for  it,  this  fact  by  itself  always  tends  to  stimulate  people  to
direct  their  efforts  towards  producing  that  thing  rather  than
other  things.  But  this  reaction  is  usually  a  slow  one ;  and  in
the  Great  War  the  essential  requirement  was  always  speed.
The  principal  purpose  of  government  assistance  and  coercion
was  to  secure  this ;  to  surmount  at  once  by  direct  attack
obstacles  that,  in  the  ordinary  course,  could  only  be  turned  by
a  slow  and  gradual  movement.  And  the  need  for  such  action
was,  of  course,  intensified  in  industries  where  the  Government
itself,  by  artificially  keeping  down  prices,  had  removed  what
would  normally  have  been  the  main  stimulus  to  private  efforts
after  increased  production.  With  the  end  of  the  war  all  this
has  been  changed.  The  problem  of  national  economy  is  no
longer  to  effect  an  instantaneous  transformation,  but  to
maintain  a  steady  stream  of  production  at  the  smallest  cost.
Nor  is  this  the  only  difference.  On  the  one  hand,  the  thing
aimed  at  by  Government  during  the  war  was  fundamentally
different  from  what  it  would  be  in  normal  times.  Products  were
wanted  of  uniform  types  and  in  enormous  quantities  for  the
direct  use  of  the  Government  itself.  No  evidence  that  govern-
mental interference  was  effective  for  this  end  could  demonstrate
its  competence  for  the  quite  different  end  proper  to  normal
times,  namely,  to  help  ordinary  citizens  to  satisfy  their  current
needs  with  reasonable  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  the
various  controls  set  up  by  Government  were  necessarily  im-
provised in  a  great  hurry  in  a  time  of  abnormal  difficulty  and
pressure.  No  evidence  that  interference  in  these  conditions
was  wasteful  or  ineffective  could  prove  that  it  would  display
the  same  defects  in  the  more  favourable  conditions  of  normal
life.  For  these  reasons  war  experience  can  afford  very  little
real  guidance,  and  our  problem  must  be  attacked  by  other
means.

§  3.  For  some  persons  the  obvious  approach  towards  it
is  blocked  by  the  supposition  that  there  are  certain  industries,
those,  namely,  that  make  use  of  the  right  of  eminent  domain.


CH.  xvii  STATE  INTEEYENTION  295

such  as  railway  service  (national  and  street),  gas-lighting,
electric  supply,  water  supply  and  so  forth,  with  which  govern-
mental authorities  have  a  special  title  to  interfere,  over  and
above  what  they  possess  in  connection  with  other  industries.
This  supposition  is  erroneous.  It  is  true  that  the  exercise
of  eminent  domain  practically  implies  monopoly,  since  neither
State  nor  municipal  authorities  are  at  all  Hkely  to  allow
double  parallel  interference  with  streets  and  highways.  But
this  circumstance  only  puts  these  public  utiUty  services  into
the  general  class  of  monopolistic  services  :  it  does  not  render
them  different,  in  any  essential  respect,  from  services  that
have  come  into  that  class — like  the  oil  and  steel  industries
in  America — in  quite  other  ways.  Thus,  eminent  domain
is  in  no  way  a  condition  precedent,  either  to  governmental
management,  or  to  governmental  control  through  a  licence.
Public  slaughter-houses,  licensed  premises  for  the  sale  of
intoxicants  and  the  system  of  licensed  cabs  in  London  are
practical  illustrations  of  this  fact.  The  broad  question  of
policy  is  different,  according  as  we  are  concerned  with  mono-
polistic or  with  non-monopolistic  industries ;  it  is  different
again,  within  monopolistic  industries,  according  as  dis-
criminating prices  are,  or  are  not,  practicable ;  but  it  is  the
same,  ceteris  paribus,  whether  the  industry  concerned  does  or
does  not  require  to  exercise  the  right  of  eminent  domain.
No  doubt,  as  wiU  appear  presently,  undertakings  at  the
start  of  which  this  right  has  to  be  exercised,  since  they
necessarily  come  into  contact  with  the  public  authorities  in
their  first  beginnings,  and  therefore  can  be  brought  under
control  at  once  before  any  vested  interests  have  grown  up,
can  be  subjected  to  State  intervention  much  more  easily
than  others.  This  distinction  of  practice  is  very  important,
but  it  is  not,  and  should  not  be  treated  as,  a  distinction  of
principle.

§  4.  It  is  clear  that  there  has  already  emerged  a  prima
facie  case  for  governmental  intervention  in  regard  to  industries
of  a  monopolistic  character.  The  case,  however,  cannot
become  more  than  a  prima  facie  one,  until  we  have  considered
the  qualifications,  which  governmental  agencies  may  be
expected  to  possess    for    intervening    advantageously  in   this


29.6  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

class  of  matter.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  contrast  the  imperfect
adjustments  of  unfettered  private  enterprise  with  the  best
adjustment  that  economists  in  their  studies  can  imagine.
For  we  cannot  expect  that  any  State  authority  will  attain,
or  will  even  whole-heartedly  seek,  that  ideal.  Such  authorities
are  liable  alike  to  ignorance,  to  sectional  pressure  and  to
personal  corruption  by  private  interest.  A  loud-voiced  part
of  their  constituents,  if  organised  for  votes,  may  easily
outweigh  the  whole.  This  objection  to  public  intervention
in  industry  applies  both  to  intervention  through  control  of
private  companies,  and  to  intervention  through  direct  public
operation.  On  the  one  side,  companies,  particularly  when
there  is  continuing  regulation,  may  employ  corruption,  not
only  in  the  getting  of  their  franchise,  but  also  in  the  execution
of  it.  "  Regulation  does  not  end  with  the  formulation  and
adoption  of  a  satisfactory  contract,  itself  a  considerable  task.
...  As  with  a  constitution,  a  statute,  or  a  charter,  so  with
a  franchise.  It  has  been  proved  that  such  an  agreement
is  not  self-enforcing,  but  must  be  fought  for,  through  a  term
of  years,  as  vigorously  as  at  the  time  of  formulation  and
adoption.  A  hostile,  lax,  or  ignorant  city  council,  or  even
a  State  legislature,  may  vary  the  terms  of  the  agreement
in  such  a  manner  as  totally  to  destroy  or  seriously  to  impair
its  value."  -^  For  this  the  companies  maintain  a  continuing
lobby.  "  It  is  from  them  that  the  politicians  get  their
campaign  funds."  ^  This  evil  has  a  cumulative  effect ;  for
it  check;s  the  entry  of  upright  men  into  government,  and
so  makes  the  corrupting  influence  more  free.  On  the  other
side,  when  municipalities  themselves  work  enterprises,  the
possibilities  of  corruption  are  changed  only  in  form.  "  The
new  undertakings  proposed  by  the  municipalisers  would  lead
to  dealings  to  the  extent  of  many  million  dollars  with  trades-
men, builders,  architects,  etc.,  to  the  increase,  by  hundreds,  of
important  offices,  and  to  the  employment  of  tens  of  thousands
of  additional  public  servants.  Party  leaders  would  have  their
proportion  of  increased  patronage.     Every  public  official  is  a

*  Municipal  and  Private  Operation  of  Public  Utilities  (Report  to  the  National
Civic  Federation,  U.S.A.),  vol.  i.  p.  39.
2  Bemis,  Municipal  Monopolies,  p.  174.


cH.  xvii  STATE  INTEKVENTION  2;97

potential  opportunity  for  some  form  of  self-interest   arrayed
against  the  common  interest."  ^

§  5.  The  force  of  this  argument  for  non-interference  by
public  authorities  is,  clearly,  not  the  same  at  all  times  and
places ;  for  any  given  kind  of  public  authority  will  vary,  alike
in  efficiency  and  in  sense  of  public  duty,  with  the  general
tone  of  the  time.  Thus,  during  the  past  century  in  England,
there  has  been  "  a  vast  increase  in  the  probity,  the  strength,
the  unselfishness,  and  the  resources  of  government.  .  .  .  And
the  people  are  now  able  to  rule  their  rulers,  and  to  check
class  abuse  of  power  and  privilege,  in  a  way  which  was
impossible  before  the  days  of  general  education  and  a  general
surplus  of  energy  over  that  required  for  earning  a  living."  ^
This  important  fact  implies  that  there  is  now  a  greater  likeli-
hood that  any  given  piece  of  interference,  by  any  given
governmental  authority,  will  prove  beneficial  than  there  was
in  former  times.  Nor  is  this  all.  Besides  improvement  in
the  working  of  existing  forms  of  public  authority,  we  have
also  to  reckon  with  the  invention  of  improved  forms.  This
point  may  be  put  thus.  The  principal  disadvantages  of
municipal  and  national  representative  assemblies,  as  organs
for  the  control  or  the  operation  of  business,  are  four  in
number.  First,  in  the  United  Kingdom — though  this  state-
ment is  hardly  true  of  Germany — these  bodies  are  primarily
chosen  for  purposes  quite  other  than  that  of  intervention  in
industry.  Consequently,  there  is  little  reason  to  expect  in
their  membei-s  any  special  competence  for  such  a  task.
Secondly,  the  fluctuating  make-up  of  a  national  government
or  of  a  town  council  is  a  serious  handicap.  Sir  W.  Preece
wrote :  "  I  have  the  experience  of  electric  lighting  in  my
mind.  Large  municipalities  overcome  the  difficulty  by
forming  small  and  strong  committees  and  selecting  the  same
chairman,  and  thus  maintain  a  kind  of  continuity  of  policy.
Small  corporations  start  with  very  large  committees ;  they
are  constantly  changing,  and  the  result  is  that  you  find,  some-
times inability  to  agree  upon  the  system  to  be  used,  some-
times inability  to  agree  upon  the  means  to  be  employed  to

1  Municipal  and  Private  Operati&n  of  Public  Utilities,  vol.  i.  p.  429.
2  Marshall,  "Economic  Chivalry,"  Economic  Journal,  pp.  18-19.


298  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

conduct  the  service;  and  it  is  incessant  trouble  and
squabble."^  Secondly,  this  incident  of  fluctuating  mem-
bership may  lead  to  action  based  on  short  views — views
bounded  by  the  next  election,  instead  of  looking  to  the
permanent  interests  of  the  State.  Thirdly,  the  areas,  to  which
public  authorities  are  severally  allocated,  are  determined  by
non-commercial  considerations,  and,  consequently,  are  often
likely  to  prove  unsuitable  for  any  form  of  intervention  with
the  working  of  an  industry.  It  is  well  known,  for  example,
that  attempts,  on  the  part  of  some  municipalities  to  regulate,
and  of  others  to  operate,  the  service  of  street-traction  and  the
supply  of  electrical  power  have  suffered  greatly  from  the
fact  that  these  services,  since  the  development  of  modern
inventions,  can  be  organised  most  economically  on  a  scale
much  in  excess  of  the  requirements  of  any  one  municipality.
Finally,  as  indicated  above,  regular  governmental  agencies,
in  so  far  as  they  are  elective  bodies,  are  obviously  liable
to  injurious  forms  of  electoral  pressure.  These  four  dis-
advantages are  all  serious.  But  all  of  them  can  be,  in  great
measure,  obviated.  The  first,  second  and  fourth  are  practically
done  away  with  under  a  system  of  municipal  government
such  as  prevails  in  Germany,  where  the  burgomasters  and
aldermen,  corresponding  to  the  English  chairmen  of  com-
mittees, are  whole-time  paid  experts  with  practically  permanent
tenure  of  office.  All  four  disadvantages  can  be  overcome,
perhaps,  even  more  effectively  by  the  recently  developed
invention  of  "  Commissions,"  that  is  to  say,  bodies  of  men
appointed  by  governmental  authorities  for  the  express
purpose  of  industrial  operation  or  control.  An  example
of  a  Commission  for  operation  is  afforded  by  the  Eailway
Department  of  New  South  Wales,  and  one  of  a  Commission
for  control  by  the  Interstate  Railway  Commission  of  the
United  States.  The  members  of  these  Commissions  can  be
specially  chosen  for  their  fitness  for  their  task,  their  appoint-
ment can  be  for  long  periods,  the  area  allotted  to  them  can
be  suitably  adjusted,  and  their  terms  of  appointment  can  be
such  as  to  free  them,  in  the  main,  from  electoral  pressure.
It  may  be  added  that  the  system  of  Commissions  also,  in  great
^  H.  Meyer,  Municipal  Ovmership  in  Oreat  Britain,  p.  258.


cH.  XVII  STATE  INTEKVENTION  299

part,  escapes  a  further  important  objection  to  intervention
in  industry  by  municipal  councils.  This  objection,  as  stated
by  Major  Darwin,  is  that  such  intervention  "  lessens  the
time  which  these  bodies  can  devote  to  their  primary  and
essential  duties,  and,  by  increasing  the  unwillingness  of  busy
men  to  devote  their  time  to  public  affairs,  it  lowers  the
average  administrative  capacity  of  the  Local  Authorities."^
When  industries  are  operated  or  controlled  by  special  public
Commissions,  this  objection  is  inapplicable.  The  broad  result
is  that  modern  developments  in  the  structure  and  methods  of
governmental  agencies  have  fitted  these  agencies  for  beneficial
intervention  in  industry  under  conditions  which  would  not
have  justified  intervention  in  earlier  times.

^  Darwin,  Municipal  Trade,  102.


CHAPTEK    XVIII

PUBLIC  CONTROL  OF  MONOPOLY

§  1.  In  the  course  of  Chapters  VI.,  VII.,  and  VIII.,  reference
was  frequently  made  to  devices,  by  which  the  State  could
interfere,  where  self-interest,  acting  through  simple  com-
petition, failed  to  make  the  national  dividend  as  large  as
it  might  be  made.  Apart  from  governmental  operation
of  the  industries  concerned,  and  apart  also  from  penal
legislation  in  extreme  cases,  these  devices  were  fiscal  in
character  and  consisted  in  the  concession  of  bounties  or
the  imposition  of  taxes.  Where  self-interest  works,  not
through  simple  competition,  but  through  monopoly,  fiscal
intervention  evidently  ceases  to  be  effective.  A  bounty
might,  indeed,  be  so  contrived  as  to  prevent  restrictions  of
output  below  what  is  socially  desirable,  but  only  at  the
cost  of  enabling  the  monopolist  to  add  to  his  already
excessive  profits  a  large  ransom  from  the  State.  In  the
present  chapter,  therefore,  I  propose  to  consider  what  methods
are  available  under  conditions  of  monopoly.  For  simplicity
of  exposition,  I  shall  ignore  the  qualifications  set  out  in
Chapter  VIII.  and  proceed  as  though  simple  competition
might  still  be  believed,  as  it  was  believed  by  some  of  the
more  rigid  followers  of  the  classical  economists,  to  make  the
national  dividend  a  maximum.  The  State,  then,  contemplating
a  monopoly  or  the  possibility  of  a  monopoly,  may  be  supposed
to  contrast  the  dividend  under  it  with  the  dividend  under
simple  competition.  Its  problem  will  be,  not  to  make  things
perfect,  but  to  make  them  as  good  as  they  would  be  if  mono-,
polistic  power  were  not  at  work.

§  2.  In   some  departments  of  production,  roughly  those

300


CH.  XVIII      PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  301

departments  where  monopolistic  power  is  liable  to  be  in-
troduced through  the  development  of  industrial  combinations,
it  is  open  to  the  State,  if  it  chooses,  to  aim  at  preventing
monopoly  power  from  arising,  or,  if  it  has  arisen,  at  destr6ying
it.  The  original  Federal  Anti-Trust  Law  (1890)  of  the
United  States,  commonly  known  as  the  Sherman  Act,  was
overtly  directed  against  actions  "in  restraint  of  trade  or
commerce  among  the  several  States,"  but  was  interpreted  in
the  earlier  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  as  an  Act  banning
all  combinations  large  enough  to  possess  a  substantial  element
of  monopolistic  power.  Thus,  Justice  Harlan's  judgment  in
the  jSorthern  Securities  Case,  1904,  asserted  that  "  to  vitiate  a
combination,  such  as  the  Act  of  Congress  condemns,  it  need
not  be  shown  that  the  combination  in  fact  results,  or  will
result,  in  a  total  suppression  of  trade  or  in  a  complete
monopoly,  but  it  is  only  essential  to  show  that  by  its  necessary
operation  it  tends  to  restrain  interstate  or  international  trade
or  commerce,  or  tends  to  create  a  monopoly  in  such  trade  or
commerce  and  to  deprive  the  public  of  the  advantages  that
flow  from  free  competition."^  The  Clayton  Law  of  1914,
while  making  no  further  provision  as  regards  combinations
that  had  already  been  formed,  follows  the  line  of  this  inter-
pretation as  regards  the  formation  of  new  combinations  in  the
future.  It  lays  it  down,  not  only  that  no  person  shall  be
a  director  of  more  than  one  large  bank  or  large  corporation,
but    also    that    no    corporation    shall    acquire    (acquirements

Iready    made    are    not   affected)  the   whole   or   part  of  the
jtock    of   any   other    corporation,   when    the    effect    of   such

3quisition   may   be   substantially   to   lessen    competition,   or
restrain  commerce  in   any  section  of  the  community,  or
tend  to  the  creation  of  a  monopoly  in  any  line  of  commerce.
Vlhis  general  policy — trust  prohibition  and  trust  breaking —
seems,  however,  to  be  open  to  three  serious  objections.

First,  it   is  a  poHcy   exceedingly   difiScult   to   enforce   in

m  effective   manner.     The    legislature   and   the   courts   may

succeed    in    getting    rid    of   certain    forms    of    combination,

[but  the  result  will  often  be  merely  the  appearance  of  other

Iforms — possibly    of   forms    which,    as    would    happen    if    an

1  Jenks  and  Clark,  Th£  TniM  Problem,  p.  295.


302  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

informal  price-fixing  agreement  took  the  place  of  a  complete
amalgamation,  sacrifice  the  merits,  without  getting  rid  of
the  demerits,  of  those  which  preceded  them.  The  declaration
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  that  the  granting
of  a  power  of  attorney  to  common  trustees  by  a  number
of  companies  was  ultra  vires,  led,  in  some  industries,  to  the
purchase  of  a  majority  of  stock  in  each  of  the  companies  by  •
the  said  trustees,  and,  in  others,  to  the  substitution  of
a  holding  company  for  a  Trust.  Governmental  attacks
on  holding  companies  can  easily  be  met  either  by  com-
plete consolidation,  if  this  is  not  also  made  illegal,  or  by
dissolution  into  separate  companies,  each  subject  to  the
same  controlling  interest.  The  Austrian  law  against  Kartels
likely  to  injure  the  revenue  abolished  Kartels  possessed  of
a  central  office ;  but  only  with  the  result  of  substituting
informal  understandings.  A  recent  British  Committee  on
Eailway  Agreements  and  Amalgamations  sums  up  the  situa-
tion thus :  "  While  Parliament  may  enact  that  this  must  be
done  and  that  must  be  prohibited,  past  experience  shows  that
even  Parliament  appears  to  be  powerless  to  prevent  two  parties,
either  by  agreement  or  without  formal  agreement,  from
abstaining  from  a  course  of  action,  namely,  active  competition,
that  neither  party  desires  to  take.  Parliament  can,  of  course,
refuse  to  sanction  Bills  authorising  the  amalgamation  or
working  union  of  two  or  more  railway  companies,  and  may
provide  that  certain  classes  of  agreement  shall  be  invalid
or  even  illegal.  But  it  cannot  prevent  railway  companies
[and,  of  course,  the  same  thing  is  true  of  industrial  companies]
coming  to  understandings  with  each  other  to  adopt  a  common
course  of  action,  or  to  cease  from  active  competition."  ^  The
recent  policy  of  the  United  States  Government  and  Courts,
in  forcing  the  dissolution  of  monopolistic  companies  into  their
constituent  parts  and  providing  at  the  same  time  various
regulations  to  prevent  these  becoming  subject  to  a  common
control,  may,  indeed,  for  a  time  be  more  effective,  and,  even
though  it  does  not  succeed  in  stimulating  real  competition
among  men  formerly   colleagues,  yet   may,  by   its   harassing

'  Departmental   Committee  on   Railway  Agreements  and  Amalgamations,
1911,  p.  18.


OH.  XVIII      PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  303

effect,  make  the  task  of  forming  new  combinations  less  attractive.
It  is  alleged,  for  example,  by  Professor  Durand,  that  no
new  combinations  have  been  formed  since  the  Government
began  to  bring  suits  under  the  Sherman  Act.^  This  policy,
however,  is  too  recent  to  afford  much  scope  for  generalisa-
tion. It  may  still  be  claimed,  as  the  teaching  of  experience
as  a  whole,  that  laws  aimed  directly  at  "  maintaining  com-
petition "  have  very  small  prospect  of  succeeding  in  their
purpose.

There  is  a  second  serious  objection  to  this  policy.  The
root  idea  lying  behind  it  is  that  competition  implies  a
condition  of  things,  in  which  the  value  of  the  marginal
social  net  product  of  investment  in  the  businesses  affected
is  about  equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  social  net
product  elsewhere.  But,  passing  by  the  qualifications  to
this  view  set  out  in  Chapters  VL  and  VIIL,  we  have  to
note  that  the  competition,  from  which  the  above  good  result
may  be  expected,  is  "  simple  competition,"  whereas  the  com-
petition, to  which  laws  against  combination  lead,  will  very
probably  be  monopolistic  competition,  namely,  competition
among  a  few  competitors.  With  railway  combinations  this
result  is  certain ;  for  the  number  of  railways  plying  between
any  two  given  centres  is  necessarily  very  small.  With
industrial  combinations  the  issue  at  first  sight  seems  more
doubtful,  since  there  is  no  such  necessary  limitation  in  the
number  of  industrial  concerns  of  any  given  type.  "V\Tien,
however,  we  reflect  that  combination  can  rarely  be  organised
except  in  industries  where,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  number
of  leading  firms  is  small,  the  force  of  this  objection  is  much
reduced.  Among  industrial  combinations,  as  well  as  among
railway  combinations,  dissolution  is  much  more  likely  to
lead  to  monopolistic  than  to  simple  competition.  It  has
been  shown,  however,  in  Chapter  XIL,  that  monopolistic
competition  does  not  tend  to  bring  about  an  output
of  such  a  magnitude  that  the  value  of  the  marginal  net
product   of  investment   in  the  industry  affected  is  equal   to

*  Amerkan  Economic  Revie^c  Supplement,  March  1914,  p.  176.  For  a  full
account  of  American  anti-Trust  Laws  and  Cases  of,  Davies,  Trust  Laws  and
Unfair  Competition.


304  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  rr.  n

that  prevailing  elsewhere.  On  the  contrary,  the  output  is
indeterminate.  When  the  competitors  hope  to  destroy  or  to
absorb  one  another,  we  may  get  "  cut-throat  competition,"
under  which  production  is  carried  so  far  as  to  involve  absolute
loss ;  and  the  chance  of  this  is  made  greater  by  the  desire  of
one  giant  business  to  win  even  a  barren  victory  over  another.
In  short,  even  if  the  conditions  were  such  that  laws  for  "  main-
taining competition"  could  really  prevent  combination,  they
would  still  be  unable  to  secure  the  establishment  of  competi-
tion in  that  sense  in  which  alone  it  can  be  expected  to  evolve
the  level  of  prices  and  rates  which  is  most  advantageous  to
the  national  dividend.

Even  now,  however,  the  case  against  the  policy  we  are
considering  is  not  exhausted.  There  remains  a  third  objection.
Combination  is  not  the  parent  of  monopoly  only,  but  also,
very  often,  of  incidental  benefits.  Thus,  as  was  observed  in
Chapter  XI,,  a  combination,  which  is  large  relatively  to  the
market  in  which  it  trades,  has  more  inducement  than  a  small
single  seller  to  adopt  a  policy  of  developing  demand  among
potential  customers,  since  it  may  reckon  on  receiving  a
larger  proportion  of  the  gain  resulting  from  any  investments
it  may  make  with  this  object.  In  addition  to  this,  a  large
combination  will  often  enjoy  certain  economies  of  production,
which,  if  the  Government  were  to  adopt  a  policy  of  main-
taining active  competition,  would  fail  to  emerge.  No  doubt,
some  of  those  forms  of  Kartel  agreement,  under  which  a  pro-
portion of  the  market  is  guaranteed  to  the  several  members,
since  they  tend  to  conserve  weak  firms,  which  competition
would  "  naturally "  destroy,  not  only  fail  to  yield  economies,
but  actually  yield  diseconomies.^  It  should  be  observed,  how-
ever, that  pooling  agreements  do  not  necessarily  act  in  this  way.

1  Cf.  Walker,  Combinations  in  the  German  Coal  Industry,  p.  322.  Mr.  Walker
points  out,  however,  that  this  tendency,  at  all  events  in  the  Ruhr  Kartel,  is
smaller  than  appears  at  first  sight,  since  the  large  mines,  by  sinking  more
shafts  and  by  buying  up  small  mines,  can  increase  their  "participation"
(ibid.  p.  94).  Morgenroth,  in  his  Export  politik  der  Kartclle,  emi)hasises  this  point
in  regard  to  Kartels  generally.  He  points  out  further  that  the  anti-economic
effects  of  Kartels  are  mitigated  by  their  tendency  to  lead  to  the  development
of  "mixed  works,"  which  refuse  to  admit  any  limitation  in  their  output  of
raw  stuff  to  be  worked  up  in  their  own  further  products.  Thus,  among  these
important  mixed  works  the  selective  influence  of  competition  is  not  restrained
by  agreements  (loc.  cit.  p.  72).


CH.  xvin      PUBLIC  CONTKOL  OFSMONOPOLY  305

The  British  Committee  on  Trusts  (1919),  for  example,  reports
that  in  a  great  many  associations  there  is  an  arrangement
under  which  firms,  on  producing  less  than  their  quota,  receive
from  the  pool  5  per  cent  in  value  upon  the  amount  of
their  deficiency.  It  was  urged  by  some  witnesses  that  this
arrangement  had  the  effect  of  driving  weak  firms  out  of  the
industry  by  the  economical  method  of  pensioning,  instead  of
the  more  costly  method  of  fighting  them.^  Against  this,  indeed,
we  have  to  set  the  fact  that  the  money  to  provide  the
pensions  has  to  be  obtained  by  some  kind  of  tax  on  firms
that  exceed  their  quota — a  necessary  discouragement  to  them.
Moreover,  some  forms  of  pool,  by  making  the  profits  of  each
severally  depend  on  the  efficiency  of  all  collectively,  may  lead
to  relaxed  energy  and  enterprise.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
in  all  combinations  that  involve  any  measure  of  common
management,  savings  of  the  kind  referred  to  in  Chapter  XI.
are  bound  to  accrue  in  greater  or  less  degree.^  In  a
peculiar  industry  like  the  telephones,  where  the  actual  thing
supplied  to  A  is  improved  if  B  draws  his  supply  from  the
same  quarter,  the  advantage  is  especially  great.  It  may  also
be  considerable  in  more  ordinary  industries.  Inter  alia,
weak  or  badly  situated  plants  are  apt  to  be  shut  down
much  more  quickly  than  they  would  be  under  competition ;
while,  among  those  that  remain,  the  purposive  force  of  "  com-
parative cost  accounting"  is  apt  to  stimulate  the  energy
of  managers  more  strongly  than  the  blind  force  of  market
rivalry  could  ever  do.^

We    must,   indeed,  be    on  our    guard   against  exaggerat-
ing the  importance  of  these  economies.     For,  if  by  combina-

^  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Trusts,  1919,  p.  3.

2  Cf.  Liefmaim's  statement :  ' '  Verschiedene  grosse  Untemehmungen  erwarben
niimlich  diese  kleinen  Zechen  nur  um  ihrer  Beteiligungsziffer  im  Syndikat
willen,  legten  sie  aber  dann  still  und  fdrderten  deren  Absatzqnote  auf  ihren
eigenen  Schachten  bUliger.  War  dies  auch  natiirlich  fiir  die  betroffenen  Arbeiter
und  Gemeinden  sehr  nachteilig,  so  ist  doch  zu  beriicksichtigen,  dass  diese
kleinen  Zechen  bei  freier  Konkurrenz  langst  zugrnnde  gegangen  vraren.  Hoch-
stens  kann  man  sagen,  dass  dann  die  Stdl-legung  und  die  Eutlassung  der
Arbeiter  sich  weniger  plotzlich  vollzogen  hatte  und  langer  voraussehbar  gewesen
ware"  {Kartelle  uiid  Trusts,  pp.  61-62).

^  Cf.  Macgregor,  Industrial  Combination,  p.  34.  This  device  rules  prominently
in  the  United  States  Steel  Corporation  (Van  Hise,  Concentration  and  Control,
p.  136).  An  elaborate  account  of  it  is  given  by  Jenks  in  the  U.S.A.
Bulletin  of  Labour,  1900,  p.  675.


306  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

tion  we  mean  existing  combinations,  it  is  necessary  to
recollect  that,  since  the  magnitude  of  the  unit  of  control  is
determined  by  monopolistic  considerations  as  well  as  by  con-
siderations of  structural  and  other  economies,  this  unit  is  often
larger  than  the  unit  of  maximum  efficiency.  If  we  mean  only
such  combinations  as  it  would  be  profitable  to  form  de  novo,
were  the  exercise  of  monopolistic  power  wholly  excluded,
combination  will,  indeed,  evolve  the  unit  of  maximum  im-
mediate efficiency,  but  that  unit  will  very  likely  prove  too  large
when  ultimate  indirect  effects,  as  well  as  immediate  effects,
are  taken  into  account.  For  this  there  are  two  reasons.  The
first  is  that  a  producer  controlling  the  main  part  of  any
industry,  in  considering  the  wisdom  of  adopting  any  mechanical
improvement,  is  tempted  to  take  account,  not  merely  of  the
direct  positive  yield  to  be  expected  from  capital  invested  in
that  improvement,  but  also  of  the  indirect  negative  yield  in
lessening  the  returns  to  his  existing  plant.  But,  if  he  does
this,  he  will,  as  was  shown  on  pp.  164-5,  be  holding  back  from
improvements  which  it  is  to  the  interest  of  the  national
dividend  that  he  should  adopt.  A  monopoly  makes  no  proper
use — at  all  events  is  under  temptation  to  make  insufficient
use — of  that  invaluable  agent  of  progress,  the  scrap  heap.^
The  second  reason  is  that  indicated  in  Chapter  VII.,  namely,
that  large  combinations,  by  lessening  the  opportunities  for  train-
ing in  the  entrepreneur  function,  which  are  available  when  men
who  have  done  well  in  one  company  can  be  passed  on  to  more
responsible  work  in  another,  and  by  weakening  the  stimulus
to  keenness  and  efficiency,  which  is  afforded  by  the  rivalry  of
competing  concerns,  tend  indirectly  to  prevent  the  average  level
of  business  ability  from  rising  as  high  as  it  might  otherwise  do.
The  qualifications  which  these  considerations  suggest
are  of  great  importance.  They  tell  strongly  against  the  claim
made  by  Professor  Clark,  when  he  writes :  "  A  nearly  ideal
condition  would  be  that  in  which,  in  every  department
of  industry,  there  should  be  one  great  corporation,  working
without  friction  and  with  enormous  economy,  and  compelled
to  give  to  the  public  the  full  benefit  of  that  ecoTtomyT  ^    Neverthe-

^  Clark,  The  Control  of  Trusts  (revised  edition),  p.  14.
*  The  Control  of  Trusts,  p.  29.     .


cH.  xvm       PUBLIC  CONTKOL  OF  MONOPOLY  307

less,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that,  in  some  circumstances,  the
combination  of  competing  institutions  into  "  Trusts  "  and  con-
solidations that  dominate  the  market  does  involve,  even  from
a  long -period  point  of  view,  considerable  net  economies.^
These  economies  mai/  be  so  great  that  the  favourable  effect
produced  by  them  on  the  dividend  exceeds  the  unfavourable
effect  due  to  the  exercise  of  monopolistic  power.  Attempts  to
determine,  by  a  comparison  of  prices,  or  of  "  margins  "  between
prices  and  the  costs  of  material,  before  and  after  the  formation
of  any  combination,  whether  or  not  this  has  actually  been  so,
are  inevitably  baffled  by  inability  to  allow  for  changes  in
manufacturing  methods  and  the  utilisation  of  by-products,  or
to  gauge  accurately  the — probably  abnormal — price  conditions
that  ruled  immediately  before  the  combination  was  formed.^
Analysis,  however,  enables  us  to  say  that,  under  increasing  and
diminishing  returns  alike,  combination  would,  on  the  whole,
increase  output  and  lower  prices,  provided  that  the  economies
were  so  large  that,  had  they  been  introduced  without  monopolisa-
tion, they  would  have  raised  output  to  about  double  its  former
amount.^  Economies  so  large  as  this  are,  no  doubt,  improbable,
and  I  do  not,  therefore,  seriously  claim  that  the  abolition  of
combination  in  any  department  of  industry  would  often  make  the
dividend  actually  smaller  than  it  is  at  present.  I  do  claim,  how-
ever, that  such  abolition  would  often  be  more  injurious  than  the
retention  of  combination  ^?i/5  the  abolition  of  monopolistic  action.
§  3.  A  second  line  of  policy  which  it  is  open  to  the  State
to  pursue  is  as  follows.     Instead  of  endeavouring,  by  obstruct-

1  Professor  Durand  argues  in  favour  of  a  policy  of  Trust-breaking  that,
in  general,  the  business  units  evolved  apart  from  combination  would  be  large
enough  to  secure  practically  all  the  structural  and  other  economies  of  pro-
duction available  to  Trusts  (Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1914,  p.  677
el  seq.).  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that,  even  if  this  were  true,  the
policy  of  Trust- breaking  would  not  be  shown  to  be  superior  to  one  of  depriving
Trusts  of  monopolistic  power :  for  both  policies  would  then  lead  to  the
establishment  of  business  units  of  a  size  yielding  maximum  efficiency.  In
fact,  however,  it  is  plainly  not  true  in  all  industries  ;  and,  when  it  is  not  true.
Trust- breaking  leads  to  the  establishment  of  units  too  small  to  yield  TnaTimnm
efficiency.

^  For  these  reasons  the  admirable  price  studies  in  Jenks's  Trust  Problems  are
hardly  adequate  to  support  the  favourable  judgment  as  to  the  effect  of  combina-
tions that  he  rests  on  them.

*  This  proposition  is  exactly  true  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  curves  of
demand  and  supply  are  straight  lines.


308  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

ing  combination,  to  prevent  industrial  concerns  from  becoming
possessed  of  monopolistic  power,  it  may  seek,  by  conserving
'potential  rather  than  actual  competition,  to  make  it  to  their
interest  to  leave  that  power  unexercised ;  the  idea,  of  course,
being  that,  if  they  know  new  competitors  will  come  into  the
field  should  prices  become  high  enough  to  yield  abnormal
profits,  they  will  have  no  inducement  to  charge  more  than
"  reasonable "  prices.  The  policy  to  which  this  line  of
thought  leads  is  that  of  penalising  the  use  of  "  clubbing "
devices,  whose  repute  might  otherwise  drive  potential  com-
petitors away.  Among  these  devices  the  two  principal  are
cut-throat  competition,  as  described  in  Chapter  XII.,  and  various
forms  of  boycott,  namely,  the  exercise  of  pressure  upon  third
parties  not  to  purchase  services  from,  or  sell  services  to,  a
rival  seller  on  terms  as  favourable  as  they  would  have  offered
to  him  if  left  to  themselves.^

^  4.  It  is  obvious  that  the  weapon  of  cut-throat  competi-
tion, or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  "  destructive  dumping,"
when  practised  by  a  business  already  large  enough  to  mono-
polise any  department  of  industry,  must  prove  overwhelmingly
powerful  against  newcomers.  The  monopolist  necessarily
possesses  immense  resources,  and  these  can  be  poured  out,
in  almost  unlimited  quantities,  for  the  destruction  of  a  new,
and  presumably  much  less  wealthy,  intruder.  This  is
especially  clear  when  a  monopolist,  dealing  in  many  markets
or  in  many  lines  of  goods,  has  to  do  with  a  competitor  dealing
only  in  a  few ;  for  in  these  conditions  the  competitor  can
be  destroyed  by  a  cut,  made  either  openly  or  through  a  bogus
independent  company,^  that  affects  only  a  small  part  of  the

1  The  weapon  of  boycott  can  also  be  used  to  force  upon  retailers  an
agreement  to  maintain  the  prices  of  particular  goods  sold  by  them  at  a  level
dictated  by  the  manufacturers  of  the  goods.  It  would  seem  that  manufacturers
do  not  wish  quality  articles  to  be  sold  too  cheap  to  consumers,  lest  they
should  ' '  lose  caste  "  with  them.  But  probably  their  main  motive  is  the
knowledge  that,  if  the  goods  are  made  into  "leaders,"  on  which  the  retailers
make  scarcely  any  direct  profit,  and  which  serve  merely  to  advertise  other  wares,
the  retailers  will  tend  not  to  push  their  sale  (Taussig,  American  Economic
Review,  vol.  vi.  No.  1  Supplement,  1916,  pp.  172-3).

^  This  method  is  alleged  to  have  been  practised  by  the  Standard  Oil
Company.  The  object,  of  course,  is  to  obviate  a  clamour  fiom  customers  in
other  markets  for  a  similar  cut  on  their  purchases.  (Of.  Davies,  Trust  Laws
and  Unfair  Competition,  p.  319.)


CH.  XVIII       PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  309

monopolist's  business.  An  extreme  example  of  this  kind
of  cut  is  given  in  the  statement  of  certain  opponents  of
the  Standard  Oil  Trust,  "  that  persons  are  engaged  to  follow
the  waggons  of  competitors  to  learn  who  their  customers  are,
and  that  then  they  make  lower  offers  to  those  customers ;  and
it  is  still  further  asserted  that  at  times  the  employes  in  the
offices  of  rivals  are  bribed  to  disclose  their  business  to
the  Standard  Oil  Company."  ^  It  is  needless  to  emphasise
the  immense  power  of  this  weapon.  "After  two  or  three
attempts  to  compete  with  Jay  Gould's  telegraph  line  from
New  York  to  Philadelphia  had  been  frustrated  by  a  lower-
ing of  rates  to  a  merely  nominal  price,  the  notoriety  of
this  terrible  weapon  sufficed  to  check  further  attempts  at
competition."  ^

^  5.  The  weapon  of  boycott  has  a  narrower  range  than
that  of  cut-throat  competition.  It  is  worked  through  a
refusal  to  deal,  except  on  specially  onerous  terms,  with  any
one  who  also  deals  elsewhere.  When  the  worsened  terms
attached  by  a  dominating  seller  to  dealings  with  himself  are
more  injurious  to  the  client  than  the  loss  of  that  client's
other  dealings,  the  monopolist  can  force  the  client  to  boycott
his  rivals.  In  order  that  he  may  be  able  to  do  this,  the
goods  or  services  that  he  offers  for  sale  must  be  rendered,  by
nature  or  by  art,  non-transferable ;  ^  for  it  is  impossible
to  hurt  a  customer  by  refusing  to  sell  to  him,  if  he  is  able
to  purchase  through  a  middleman  the  goods  which  are
refused  to  him  by  the  monopolist.  Hence,  when  nature
does  not  cause  non-transferability,  there  must  be  stringent
conditions  about  re-sales  in  the  contracts  between  the
monopolist  and  any  intermediary  agents,  if  such  there  are,
who  intervene  between  him  and  the  ultimate  consumers.
But  non-transferability  is  not  sufficient  by  itself.  It  is
necessary,  further,  that  the  rival  producer's  possible  supply  to  one
recalcitrant  consumer  at  current  prices  shall  be  very  small.
Usually,  of  course,  though  any  one  seller's  output  is  likely
to  be  small  relatively  to  the  total  consumption  of  the  market,

*   U.S.A.  Industrial  Commission,  I.  i.  p.  20.
-  Hobson,  Evolution  of  Modem  Capitalism.,  p.  219.

^  Cf.  my  paper,  "Monopoly  and  Consumers'  SurpluB,"  Economic  JoumuH^
September  1904,  p.  392.


310  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

it  is  many  times  as  large  as  that  of  any  representative  single
consumer.  Where  this  is  so,  recalcitrant  consumers  can
successfully  counter  a  refusal  to  sell  on  the  part  of  the
monopolist  by  purchasing  all  that  they  want  from  outside
competitors  and  leaving  to  non-recalcitrants  the  whole  output
of  the  monopolist.  This  consideration  is  not,  however,  entirely
fatal  to  the  weapon  of  boycott,  because,  in  many  industries
though  by  no  means  in  all,^  producers  deal  with  their  customers
indirectly  through  wholesalers  or  further  manufacturers  or
transporters,  who  purchase  individually  a  considerable  mass
of  products.  When  intermediaries  of  this  kind  are  present,
effective  boycott  may  become  practicable.

First,  a  boycott  can  be  forced  when  the  commodities  or
services  supplied  by  the  monopolist  consist,  not  in  a  single
kind  of  good,  but  in  several  goods,  and  wheii,  among  these
several  goods,  there  are  one  or  more  for  which  the  demand
is  very  urgent,  and  of  which  the  monopolist  has,  through
patents  or  reputation  {e.g.  brands  of  tobacco)  or  otherwise,
exclusive  control.  A  good  example  is  furnished  by  the  boot
and  shoe  trade,  in  which  certain  firms  control  important
patents.  The  patented  machines  are  not  sold,  but  are  let  out
on  lease,  under  "  conditions  which  debar  manufacturers  from
employing  these  machines  save  and  except  in  conjunction
with  other  machines  supplied  by  the  same  controlling  owners
.  .  .  one  of  the  conditions  being  that  the  latest  machines
must  not  be  used  for  goods  which  have,  in  any  other  process
of  manufacturing,  been  touched  by  machines  supplied  by  other
makers."  ^  This  kind  of  boycott  is  also  illustrated  by  the
"  factors'  agreement,"  which  makers  of  popular  proprietary
goods  sometimes  secure  from  retailers.

Secondly,  a  boycott  can  be  forced  where  it  is  important
for  purchasers — here  as  before,  the  purchasers  are,  in  general,
manufacturers — to  be  able  to  get  the  service  that  they  need

1  Thus,  Jenks  (U.S.A.  Bulletin  of  Labour,  1900,  p.  679)  states  that  "about
half  the  combinations  reporting  sell  direct  to  consumers."

2  Times,  8th  February  1903.  Cf.  Appendix  to  the  Report  of  the  (British)
Committee  on  Trusts,  1919,  p.  27.  Action  of  this  kind  is  directly  prohibited
in  Australia  under  the  Patents  Act  of  1903.  (Cf.  Da  vies,  Tru^t  Laws  and
Unfair  Competition,  p.  247.)  The  British  Patents  Act  of  1907  permits  it  only
provided  that  the  lessee  is  given  an  opportunity  of  hiring  the  patented  machine
without  the  tying  clauses  on  "reasonable,"  though  not,  of  course,  equal  terms.


I


CH.  XVIII      PUBLIC  CONTROL  OF  MONOPOLY  311

immediately  the  need  arises,  and  where  an  ordinary  supplier,
though  producing  much  more  service  in  the  aggregate  than
any  single  purchaser  wants,  may  not  be  producing  more  than
such  a  purchaser  wants  at  some  definite  single  moment.  This
condition  is  realised  in  the  transport  for  goods  which  are
so  perishable,  or  for  which  the  demand  is  so  instant,  that
transport,  to  be  of  use,  must  be  available  at  the  moment  when
it  is  asked  for.  It  is  in  the  transport  by  sea  of  goods  of  this
kind  that  the  method  of  boycott  has  been  most  fully  elaborated.
The  transport  of  goods,  which  are  in  fairly  steady  demand
and  which  have  no  need  of  speedy  delivery,  can  be  arranged
for  by  purchasers,  if  they  wish,  wholly  through  tramp
steamers ;  but  the  transport  of  urgent  goods  cannot  be  so
arranged  for,  because  tramps  and  small  lines  cannot  guarantee
regular  sailings.^  Hence,  it  comes  to  be  practicable  for  shipping
rings  to  force  a  boycott  against  independent  lines.  They
usually  accomplish  this  through  "  deferred  rebates."  ^  Of  these
there    are    two    degrees.       In    the    West    African    Shipping

*  Cf.  Royal  Commission  on  Shipping  Rings,  Report,  p.  13.  The  commis-
sioners suggest  that  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  deferrad  rebate  system  is  not
applied  to  our  outward  trade  in  coal  or  to  the  greater  part  of  our  inward  trade,
which  consists  of  rough  goods,  but  only  to  those  cargoes  for  which  a  regular  service
of  high-class  steamers  is  essential.     (Cf.  ibid.  p.  77.)

"^  This  method  has  been  described  by  the  Royal  Commissioners  on  Shipping
Rings  thus  :  "The  Companies  issue  a  notice  or  circular  to  shippers  informing
them  that,  if  at  the  end  of  a  certain  period  (usually  four  or  six  months)  they
have  not  shipped  goods  by  any  vessels  other  than  those  despatched  by  members
of  the  Conference,  they  will  be  credited  with  a  sum  equivalent  to  a  certain  part
(usually  10  per  cent)  of  the  aggregrate  freights  paid  on  their  shipments  during
that  period,  and  that  this  sum  will  be  paid  over  to  them,  if  at  the  end  of  a
further  period  (usually  four  or  six  months)  they  have  continued  to  confine  their
shipments  to  vessels  belonging  to  members  of  the  Conference.  The  sum  so  paid  is
known  as  a  deferred  rebate.  Thus  in  the  South  African  trade  at  the  present  day
the  amount  of  the  rebate  payable  is  5  per  cent  of  the  freight  paid  by  the  shipper.
The  rebates  are  calculated  in  respect  of  two  six-monthly  periods  ending  with  the
30th  June  and  31st  December  respectively,  but  their  payment  to  the  shipper  is  not
due  until  a  further  period  of  six  months  has  elapsed,  that  is  to  say  that,  as  to
shipments  made  between  the  1st  January  and  the  following  30th  June,  the  rebates
are  payable  on  the  1st  January  following,  and,  as  to  shipments  made  between  the
1st  July  and  the  31st  December,  the  rebates  are  payable  on  the  following  1st  July.
It  follows  that  in  this  instance  the  payment  of  the  rebate  on  any  particular
item  of  cargo  is  withheld  by  the  shipowners  for  at  least  six  months,  and  that,  in
the  case  of  cargo  shipped  on  the  1st  January  or  1st  July,  it  is  withheld  for  a  period
of  twelve  months.  If  during  any  period  a  shipper  sends  any  quantity  of  goods,
however  small,  by  a  vessel  other  than  those  despatched  by  the  Conference  Lines,
he  becomes  disentitled  to  rebates  on  any  of  his  shipments  by  Conference  vessels
during  that  period  and  the  preceding  one  "  (Report,  pp.  9-10).


312  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

Conference  and  in  all  the  Conferences  engaged  in  the  trade
with  India  and  the  Far  East,  the  rebates  are  paid  to  exporting
merchants  only,  on  condition  that  these  merchants  have  not
been  interested  in  any  shipment  by  rival  carriers,  but  there
is  no  requirement  that  the  forwarding  agent,  through  whom
the  merchant  may  have  acted,  shall  have  dealt  exclusively
with  the  Conference  in  respect  of  the  goods  of  his  other
clients.-^  In  the  South  American  Conferences,  however,  "  the
form  of  claim  for  rebates  has,  in  the  case  of  goods  shipped
through  a  forwarding  agent,  to  be  signed  by  such  agent  as
well  as  by  the  principal,  and,  if  the  forwarding  agent  has  not
conformed  to  the  conditions  of  the  rebate  circular  in  all  his
shipments  for  all  his  clients,  claims  to  rebates  are  invalidated."  ^

Thirdly,  a  boycott  can  be  forced  when  the  intermediary,
whom  a  monopolist  wishes  to  use  as  his  instrument,  is,  not
a  manufacturer  or  a  wholesaler  purchasing  that  rival's  goods,
but  a  railway  company  conveying  them.  When  an  alternative
route  for  his  own  goods  is  available,  the  monopolist,  by
threatening  the  railway  with  the  withdrawal  of  his  custom,
is  sometimes  in  a  position  to  compel  it  to  charge  differential
rates  against  his  rival.  In  the  boycott  engineered  by  the
Oil  Trust  it  is  even  asserted  that  the  railways  were  compelled
to  hand  over  a  part  of  the  extra  charges  levied  on  their
rivals  to  the  executive  of  the  Trust.^  A  boycott  of  this  kind
may  also  be  operated  through  banks,  pressure  being  exerted
upon  them  to  refuse  loans  to  a  rival  producer.

§  6.  Attempts  to  prevent  the  use  of  cut-throat  competition,
i.e.  destructive  dumping,  by  legal  enactment  are  confronted
with  the  difficulty  of  evasion.  The  American  Industrial
Commission  recommended  that  "cutting  prices  in  any  locality
below,  those  which    prevail    generally,    for    the    purpose    of

^  RoyaZ  Oommission  on  Shipping  Rings,  Report,  pp.  29-30.

2  Ibid.  p.  30.  The  decision  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  the  Mogul  Steamship
Co.  case,  1892,  was  to  the  effect  that  the  party  injured  hy  an  arrangement  of
this  kind  had  no  ground  of  action  for  damages,  but  it  did  not,  it  would  seem,
necessarily  imply  that  the  combination  against  which  action  was  brought  was
itself  lawful  (Davies,  Trust  Laios  and  Unfair  Compctitimi,  p.  234).  In  a  similar
case  in  the  German  Imperial  Court  (1901),  an  injunction  against  discrimination
was  granted  {ibid.  p.  262).

3  Cf.  The  Great  Oil  Octopus,  p.  40  ;  Ripley,  Railroads,  Rates  and  Regulation,
p.  200.


CH.  xviii      PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  313

destroying  local  competition,"  should  be  made  an  offence.
Any  person  damaged  was  to  have  the  right  to  sue  for  penalties,
and  officers  were  required  to  prosecute  offenders.^  It  is  plain,
however,  that,  even  when  it  is  possible,  as  it  is  with  public
service  corporations,  to  insist  that  tariff  rates  shall  be  regularly
published,  evasion  may  be  practised  by  unpublished  discounts
and  rebates  to  particular  customers ;  nor,  since  discovery  is
unlikely,  will  the  enactment  of  heavy  penalties  against
breaches  of  the  law  necessarily  secure  obedience  thereto.^
Where  destructive  dumping  is  threatened,  not  by  public
service  corporations,  but  by  industrialists  engaged  in  the
manufacture  of  many  commodities  at  different  places,  the
enforcement  of  regular  published  rates  is  impracticable.
Hence,  the  problem  confronting  the  legislator  demands  the
unravelling  of  still  more  tangled  knots.  Where  the  form
of  destructive  dumping  which  is  employed  is  that  of  price-
cutting  limited  to  the  local  market  of  a  particular  competitor
or  group  of  competitors,  the  offence  is  at  least  definite,  though,
especially  when  worked  through  a  bogus  independent  company,
it  may  be  extraordinarily  difficult  to  detect.  Against  destructive
dumping  of  this  kind  operated  hy  foreigiwrs  the  Governments
of  Canada  (1904)  and  South  Africa  (1914)  have  endeavoured
to  guard  their  citizens  by  anti-dumping  legislation,  providing
that,  when  goods  are  imported  at  prices  substantially  below
the  contemporary  prices  ruling  at  home,  these  goods  shall  be
subjected  to  a  special  import  duty  equivalent  to  the  difference
between  the  home  and  foreign  prices.^  This  legislation,
however,  hits,  not  merely  destructive  dumping  in  the  sense
here  defined,  but  also  (1)  the  clearing  of  surplus  stock  on  a

'   United  States  Industrial  Commission,  vol.  xviii.  p.  154.

'  It  is  instructive  to  read  in  M.  Colson's  great  work  (Cours  d^^eonomie
politique,  vol.  vi.  p.  398)  that  abusive  discriminations  "semblent  Stre  devenus
bien  plus  rares  en  Angleterre  qu'en  Amerique,  bien  que  TAdministration  y  ait  des
pouvoirs  beaucoup  moins  etendus  et  que  les  penalites  y  soient  moins  severes,
parce  que  1' entente  entre  Compcignies  y  est  admise  par  la  loi  ;  au  contaire,  en
Amerique,  les  pouvoirs  publics  s'efforcent  d'empecher  les  accords  qui  mettraient
fin  a  la  concurrence,  cause  essentieUe  des  inegalites  de  traitement,  et  par  suite  ne
sont  pas  arrives,  jusqu'ici,  a  deraciner  celles-ci."

^  For  these  laws  cf.  Davies,  Trust  Laws  and  Unfair  CoTnpetition,  pp.  550-1.
Australia  (1906)  has  a  more  complicated  law  which  condemns  dumping  in  the
Canadian  sense,  along  with  certain  other  forms  of  importation,  under  the
general  head  of  unfair  competition,  and  meets  it  w^ith  a  penalty,  not  a  special
duty.


314  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

foreign  market  at  less  than  home  prices  in  periods  of  depres-
sion, and  (2)  the  permanent  selling  abroad  at  the  world  price,
by  a  foreign  monopolistic  producer,  of  goods  for  which  at
home  he  is  able  to  charge  monopoly  prices.  The  policy  of
discouraging  the  former  of  these  two  practices  is  one  whose
merits  are  open  to  debate,  but  clearly  there  is  nothing  to  be
said  for  discouraging  the  second — except,  indeed,  the  least
tenable  of  the  things  that  can  be  said  in  favour  of  all-round
protection.  The  United  States  Government,  wishing  to
direct  its  legislative  blows  against  destructive  dumping  ex-
clusively, included  in  the  Federal  Revenue  Act,  of  1916,  the
following  modified  version  of  the  Canadian  anti-dumping
law.  In  Section  801  of  the  Act  it  is  enacted:  "That  it
shall  be  unlawful,  for  any  person  importing  or  assisting  in
importing  any  articles  from  any  foreign  country  into  the
United  States,  commonly  and  systematically  to  import,  sell
or  cause  to  be  imported  or  sold  such  articles  within  the
United  States  at  a  price  substantially  less  than  the  actual
market  value  or  wholesale  price  of  such  articles,  at  the  time
of  exporting  to  the  United  States,  in  the  principal  market  of
the  country  of  their  production,  or  of  other  foreign  countries
to  which  they  are  commonly  exported,  after  adding  to  such
market  value  or  wholesale  price  freight,  duty  and  other
charges  and  expenses  necessarily  incident  to  the  importation
and  sale  thereof  in  the  United  States.  Provided,  that  such
act  or  acts  be  done  with  the  intent  of  destroying  or  injuring
an  industry  in  the  United  States  or  of  preventing  the
establishment  of  an  industry  in  the  United  States  or  of
restraining  or  monopolising  any  part  of  the  trade  or  commerce
in  such  articles  in  the  United  States."  Offences  against  this
clause  are  penalised,  not,  as  in  Canada,  by  a  special  duty,  but
by  fines  or  imprisonment.  "We  need  not  concern  ourselves
here  with  the  dilB&cult  problems  which  legislation  of
this  kind  provides  for  the  officials  charged  with  ascertaining
the  relevant  facts — including,  as  these  do  under  the  United
States  law,  the  motive  actuating  foreign  sellers — and  for  those
who  have  to  detect  and  prevent  the  evasive  use  of  nominally
independent  agents,  on  whose  account  goods  may  be  im-
ported at  full  price,  thereafter  to  be  sold  at  less  than  was


cH.xvni       PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  315

paid  for  them.  The  main  point  for  our  present  purpose
is  that,  when,  as  in  the  conditions  which  this  legislation
contemplates,  destructive  dumping  is  attempted  by  inter-
local price  discriminations,  the  task  of  preventing  it  is  relatively
easy,  because  there  is  something  definite  to  go  on.  When,
however,  as,  in  domestic  trade,  often  happens,  we  have  to  do
with  cuts  made  on  cdl  sales  of  a  particular  line  of  goods,  the
offence  is  not  definite ;  for,  clearly,  not  all  cuts  are  destructive
dumping,  and  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  among  them  the
innocent  from  the  guilty.  One  authoritative  writer  proposes
as  a  test  that,  "  if  the  price  of  the  particular  grade  of  goods
were  first  put  down  and  then  put  up  again,  and  if  rivals  were
crushed  in  the  interval,  this  would  be  evidence  that  the
purpose  of  the  cut  was  illegitimate."  ^  Such  a  test  has  been
attempted  in  the  American  Mann-Elkins  Eailway  Law  of  1910,
which  provides  that,  "  when  a  railway  reduces  rates  between
competitive  points,  it  shall  not  be  permitted  to  increase  the
rates  on  the  cessation  of  the  competition,  unless  it  can  satisfy
the  Commission  that  the  conditions  are  changed  otherwise
than  by  the  mere  elimination  of  water  competition."  ^  There
is  a  similar  provision  in  the  American  Shipping  Act  of  1916
as  regards  shipping  charges  in  interstate  trade.^  But  this
test  cannot  be  pushed  very  vigorously  ;  for,  if  it  were,  any
firm,  which  lowered  prices  in  a  time  of  depression  or  for
purposes  of  experiment,  might  find  itself  precluded  from
afterwards  raising  them  again,  if,  meanwhile,  any  other  firm
in  the  same  line  had  failed.

Similar  difficulties  stand  in  the  way  of  effective  legislation
against  boycotts.  It  is  true  that  such  legislation  has  been
widely  attempted.  The  United  States  (under  the  Clayton
Law),  Australia,  and  New  Zealand  all  prohibit,  under  penalty,
any  person  from  making  the  act  of  sale,  or  the  terms  of  sale,
of  anything  conditional  on  the  buyer  not  using  or  dealing  in
the  goods  of  any  competitor.  On  similar  lines  the  United
States  Federal  Kevenue  Law  of  September  1916  "imposes  a
double  duty  upon   goods  imported  under  agreement  that  the

1  Clark,  The  Control  of  Trusts,  p.  69.

2  Economist,  25th  Jan.  1910,  p.  1412.     Cf.  Ripley,  Railroads,  Rates  and
Regulation,  p.  566.

3  Federal  Revenue  Act  1916,  Section  502.


316  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

importer  or  others  shall  use  those  goods  exclusively."  ^  Yet
again,  the  American  Shipping  Act  of  1916  makes  deferred
rebates  illegal.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that,  when  the  condition
or  agreement  is  made  between  a  manufacturer  and  a  dealer,
both  of  whom  profit  by  it,  the  difficulty  of  preventing  evasion
must  be  very  great.  When  the  boycott  is  worked,  not  through
a  wholesaler,  but  through  a  railway  company,  the  difficulty  is  still
greater.  American  law  has  long  endeavoured  to  prevent  rail-
way discriminations  favourable  to  the  large  Trusts.  But :  "A
partisan  of  the  Trust  said  to  me :  '  The  Pennsylvania  Railroad
could  not  refuse  the  cars  of  a  competitor  of  the  Standard  Oil
Company,  but  nothing  could  hinder  it  from  side-tracking
them.'  "^  "A  consignment  note  acknowledges  the  receipt  of
70  barrels  of  flour  ;  65  only  are  shipped,  and  the  railway  com-
pany pays  damages  for  the  loss  of  the  five  non-existent
barrels."  Except  when  long  notice  of  alterations  is  required
by  law,  rates  may  be  changed  suddenly,  secret  notice  being
given  to  the  favoured  shipper  and  no  information  to  others ;
and  so  forth.  It  is  true  that  the  Attorney-General  of  the
United  States  declared  in  1903,  after  the  passing  of  the
Elkins  law  :  "  The  giving  and  taking  of  railroad  rebates  is  now
prohibited  by  a  law  capable  of  effective  enforcement  against
corporations  as  well  as  against  individuals."  ^  This  view,  how-
ever, appears  to  have  been  unduly  optimistic.  The  Interstate
Commerce  Commission  reported,  as  to  the  conditions  in  1908,
that  many  shippers  still  enjoy  illegal  advantages.  "  Thus  the
rebate,  as  an  evil  in  transportation,  even  since  amendment  of  the
law  in  1906—10,  while  under  control,  is  still  far  from  being
eradicated.  Favouritism  lurks  in  every  covert,  assuming
almost  every  hue  and  form.  Practices  which  outwardly  appear
to  be  necessary  and  legitimate,  have  been  shown  to  conceal
special  favours  of  a  substantial  sort."  *  The  boycott  engineered
through  railway  companies  is,  therefore,  not  yet  dead,  and,

'  The  English  Patents  and  Designs  Amendment  Act  of  1907  prohibits
exclusive  dealing  contracts  of  this  kind,  unless  the  seller,  lessor,  or  licensee
proves  that,  when  the  contract  was  made,  his  competitors  had  the  option  of
obtaining  the  patented  goods  on  reasonable  terms  without  the  exclusive  condition
(Davies,  Trust  Laws  avd  Unfair  Competiticm,  p.  539).

*  Quoted  by  Ely,  Monopolies  and  Trusts,  p.  97.
3  Economist,  28th  Feb.  1903,

*  Ripley,  Railroads,  Bates  and  Regulation,  p.  209.


cH.  XVIII      PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  317

indeed,  many  authorities  hold  that  it  is  likely  to  survive  so
long  as  competition  is  retained  in  the  railway  world.

These  considerations  make  it  clear  that  a  policy  of  legal
prohibition  against  the  exercise  of  clubbing  methods  cannot
easily  be  rendered  proof  against  evasion.  It  should  not  be
forgotten,  however,  that  laws,  which  could  be  evaded  if  people
took  sufficient  pains,  as  a  matter  of  fact  are  often  not  evaded.
For  the  mere  passage  of  a  law  reacts  on  public  opinion  and
throws  on  the  side  of  the  practice  upheld  by  law  the  strong
forces  of  "  respectability  "  and  inertia.  Hence,  we  may  reason-
ably expect  that  laws  of  this  character,  if  carefully  prepared,
would,  at  all  events,  partially  succeed  in  their  immediate
purpose.  It  is,  therefore,  of  great  interest  to  observe  that
Section  5  of  the  United  States  Federal  Trade  Commission
Act  of  1914  declares  "that  unfair  methods  of  competitive
commerce  are  hereby  declared  unlawful,"  and  establishes  a
Federal  Trade  Commission  to  take  proceedings  to  enforce  this
declaration  whenever  it  appears  to  it  to  be  in  the  public
interest  to  do  so.  Section  14  of  the  Clayton  Act  provides
further  that,  whenever  a  corporation  violates  any  of  the
penal  provisions  of  any  of  the  anti-trust  laws,  "  such  violation
shall  be  deemed  to  be  also  that  of  the  individual  directors,
officers,  or  agents  of  such  corporation  as  shall  have  authorized,
ordered,  or  done  any  of  the  acts  constituting  in  whole  or  in
part  such  violation."  Upon  conviction  any  director,  officer,
or  agent  is  subject  to  a  fine  not  exceeding  5000  dollars,  or  to
imprisonment  not  exceeding  one  year,  or  to  both,  in  the  dis-
cretion of  the  Court.

§  7.  Granted  that  clubbing  methods  can  be,  in  some
measure,  prevented,  we  turn  to  the  further  question,  how  far
their  prevention  would  avail  to  maintain  potential  competition.
Professor  Clark  appears  to  hold  that  it  would  avail  completely
for  this  purpose.  "  In  so  far,"  he  writes,  "  as  legitimate
rivalry  in  production  is  concerned,  it  is  safe  enough  to  build
a  new  mill."  In  reality,  however,  even  when  clubbing
methods  are  excluded,  other  obstacles  to  the  full  maintenance
of  competition  are  still  present.  First,  when  the  unit  firm
normal  to  any  industry  is  very  large,  the  heavy  capital
expenditure  required  to  start  a  new  firm  will  check  the  ardour


318  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

of  aspirants.  Furthermore,  it  should  be  noticed,  in  this
connection,  that,  in  many  industries,  the  size  of  the  normal
unit  firm  has  recently  been  increasing.  For  example,  the  out-
put of  the  English  paper  industry  between  1841  and  1903  rose
from  43,000  to  773,080  tons,  but  the  number  of  firms
fell  from  500  to  282;^  and  a  like  development  has  taken
place  in  the  raw  iron  industry.  Secondly,  the  ease  with
which  new  competitors  can  spring  up  is  smaller,  the  greater
are  the  productive  economies  which  concentration  on  the  part
of  the  monopolistic  seller  has  involved.  For,  if  great  economy  has
been  brought  about  by  concentration,  a  potential  competitor
will  know  that  the  monopolistic  seller,  by  simply  abandoning
some  of  his  monopoly  revenue,  can,  without  suffering  any
positive  loss,  easily  undersell  him.  Thirdly,  the  obstacles
in  the  way  of  new  competition  are  further  enlarged,  when
a  policy  of  secrecy  as  to  costs  and  profits  makes  it  difl&cult  for
outsiders  to  guess  at  what  rate  the  monopolistic  seller  could
sell,  if  he  were  to  content  himself  with  the  normal  gains  of
competitive  industry.  Fourthly,  a  combination,  by  extensive
advertising  or  a  distinctive  trade  mark,  may  have  established
a  sort  of  monopoly  of  reputation,  which  it  would  require  heavy
advertising  expenditure  on  the  part  of  any  would-be  rival  to
break  down.  It  may,  indeed,  be  suggested  that,  even  so,  the
combination  would  be  kept  in  check  for  fear  of  a  rival  concern
being  started  with  a  view  to  forcing  the  combination  to  buy  it
out.  But  there  is  less  in  this  than  there  might  appear  to  be
at  first  sight.  For,  if  a  rival  did  succeed  in  this  policy,  ihe
increase  in  the  combination's  capital  might  well  be  so  large
that  the  rate  of  profit  available  per  unit  of  capital  would
turn  out  too  small  to  make  the  venture  worth  the  rival's
while.^  These  considerations  would,  of  course,  tend  strongly  to
hold  him  back.  Thus,  attempts  to  maintain  potential  com-
petition by  preventing  the  employment  of  clubbing  devices
can  at  best  be  only  partially  successful,  and  are,  therefore,
very  imperfect  means  of  preventing  bodies  that  possess  mono-
polistic power  from  making  use  of  that  power.  This  is  true
even  of  industry  proper.      In  some  departments  of  production,

^  Levy,  Monopole,  Kartelle  vmd  Trusts,  p.  197.
2  Of.  Jenks  and  Olark,  The  Trust  Problem,  pp.  69-70.


cH.xvin       PUBLIC   CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  319

roughly  those  covered  by  public  utility  concerns,  the  obvious
wastefulness  of  competition  makes  it  practically  certain
that  the  public  authorities  will  not  permit  it,  and  so  exempts
monopolists  from  any  check  which  the  fear  of  it  might  other-
wise exercise  upon  them.

S  8.  The  inadequacy,  as  ajmethod  of  control,  of  preventing
combination,  which   means  maintaining    actual    competition,
or    of   anti-clubbing    legislation,    which    means    maintaining
potential  competition,  leads  forward  naturally  to  the  sugges-
tion   of   direct    methods.      The    position,    which    is  relevant
to   industrial,  no   less   than   to   railway,  monopolies,  is  well
put    by    the    Departmental    Committee  on    Eailway    Agree-
ments and  Amalgamations  (1911)  with  special  reference  to
the  latter  class.     They  write  :  "  To  sum  up,  we  are  strongly
of    opinion    that,  in   so    far    as    protection  is  required    from
any  of  the  consequences  which  may  be  associated   with  rail-
way   co-operation,  such   protection  should,  in  the   main,  be
afforded  by  general  legislation  dealing  with  the  consequences
as  such,  independently  of  whether  they  occur  as  the  result  of
agreement    or  not.      Such   a  method   would   afford   a    much
more  extensive  protection  than  the  regulation  of  agreements.
It  would  protect  the  public  in  the  case  of  understandings  as
weU   as   agreements.  ...  It    would  not   tend    to   introduce
a    confusing    distinction    between    what    a    company   might
reasonably  do  under  an  agreement  and  what  it  might  reason-
ably do  if  no  agreement  existed."  ^    If  this  method  could  be
employed  with  perfect  accuracy,  there  would,  of  course,  be  no
need  for  any  accompanying  indirect  methods  of  the  kind  we
have  so  far  been  discussing.     In  practice,  however,  the  policy
of  dealing  directly  with  the  consequences  of  monopolistic  power
is,  as  will  presently  appear,  exposed  to  very  great  difficulties.
Furthermore,  since  in  most  forms  it  must  almost  necessarily
work  on  the  basis  of  some  standard  of  reasonable  earnings,
deduced  from  the  circumstances  of  other  industries  in  which
competition     is    available,     these    difficulties    would    become
enormous,  if  attempts  to  maintain  potential  competition  were
abandoned  altogether   and  resort   had    universally   to  direct

^  Beport  of  the  Departmental  Committee  on  Bailuxty  Affreements  and  Amaiga-
mations,  p.  21.


320  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

methods.  Consequently,  it  would  seem  that  the  policy  of
maintaining  potential  competition  should  be  pursued  every-
where vigorously,  and  that  direct  methods  of  dealing  with
the  consequences  should  be  employed,  not  instead  of,  but  in
addition  to  it.

§   9.  At  first  sight  it  seems  obvious  that  direct  dealing
with    the    consequences    of   monopolistic    power  means,   and
can  only  mean,  some  kind  of  direct  interference  by  the  public
authority  with  the  terms  of  sale.     In  the  main,  of  course,  this
is  what  it  does  mean.     But  it  is  of  some  theoretical  interest  to
note  a  possible  alternative  line  of  policy,  which  was  advocated,
as  regards  shipping,  by  the  Royal  Commission  on  Shipping
Rings.      The   Commission   recommended,  in  effect,   that   the
State     should    encourage    the     formation,    over    against    a
monopolistic  seller,  of  a  combination  of  buyers  possessing  also
monopolistic   powers.       It  was  hoped  that   the  combination
of  buyers  might  be  able  to  neutralise  attempts  on  the  part
of    the    seller    to    charge    monopoly    prices.     This    plan    was
advocated    by  the    majority    of    the    Royal    Commission    on
Shipping  Rings,  as  a  partial  remedy  for  the  evils  that  have
arisen  out  of  the  conference  system.     Analytically,  the  plan
is    a    weak    one,    because    what    the  creation  of  the  second
monopolist   does  is,  not  to   bring   prices   to   the   natural,  or
competitive,  point,  but  to  render  them  indeterminate  over  a
considerable  range,  within  which  that  point  lies.     No  doubt,
the  position  of  the  purchasers  is  made  better  than  it  would
be  if  combination  among   them   were  absent ;    and   there   is
reason  to  hope  that  prices  and   output   will  approach   more
nearly    to    what,    from     the    standpoint    of    the     national
dividend,    is    desirable    than    they    would    do    under    those
conditions.     But  the   chance  that   the  bargain  between    the
two  combinations  will  lie  in  the  near  neighbourhood  of  that
proper    to    simple    competition    is    not    very    large.     This
difficulty  would    exist,   even   though    the    monopoly    created
to    stand    against   the  sellers  were   a  monopoly  of  ultimate
consumers.      In  practice,    however,    ultimate    consumers    are
scarcely  ever  in  a  position  to  combine  in  this  way.      The  only
persons   who    can    so    combine    are   middlemen   between   the
ultimate  consumers  and  the  monopolistic  seller, — middlemen


CH.  XVIII       PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  321

who  are  not  particularly  concerned  to  fight  for  the  consumers'
interests.^  If  they  combine,  the  goods  in  which  they  deal  will
have  to  pass  through  the  hands  of  two  monopolistic  combina-
tions instead  of  one,  before  they  reach  the  ultimate  consumers.
The  effect  upon  the  price  which  those  people  will  then  have
to  pay  is  economically  indeterminate.  The  price  may  be  less
than  it  would  have  been  if  the  middlemen  had  not  combined,
but  it  may,  on  the  other  hand,  be  greater.  In  any  event,
it  is  likely  to  be  exceedingly  unstable.^  These  considerations
make  it  plain  that  there  is  a  serious  flaw  in  the  Commissioners'
policy.

8  10.  We  turn,  therefore,  to  the  direct  method  of  interfer-
ence with  the  terms  of  sale — a  method  which  may  be  necessary
even  in  industrial  enterprises,  when  the  "  remedies  "  considered
so  far  prove  inadequate,  and  which,  apart  from  public  operation,
is  the  only  possible  method  in  public  utility  concerns.  Analytic-
ally, the  problem  may  be  stated  as  follows.  Assuming  that
the  output  proper  to  simple  competition  (allowing,  of  course,
for  any  economies  in  production  which  a  combination  may
have  introduced)  is  also  the  output  most  advantageous  to  the
national  dividend,  we  need  so  to  regulate  things  that  that
output  will  be  forthcoming.  In  industries  operating  under
conditions  of  diminishing  returns,  this  type  of  regulation
cannot  be  accomplished  by  the  machinery  of  price  control
alone.  For,  if  the  price  be  fixed  by  the  State  at  the  level
proper  to  competitive  conditions,  i.e.  at  such  a  level  that,  if
competitive  conditions  prevailed,  the  output  would  be  adjusted
to  yield  normal  profit,  it  will  pay  a  monopolist  to  produce
less  than  this  output.  By  reducing  output  he  will,  under
conditions  of  diminishing  returns,  also  diminish  the  supply
price,  thus  obtaining  a  monopoly  gain  measured  by  the  difier-
ence  between  the  regulated  selling  price  multiplied  by  the
output  and  the  supply  price  multiplied  by  the  output.  It
will  be  to  his  interest  to  control  his  output  in  such  a  way  as
to  make  this  monopoly  gain  as  large  as  possible.  According
to  the  form  of  the  demand  and  supply  schedules,  the  resultant
output   may   be    greater   or    less   than  it   would    have  been

*  Cf.  Marshall,  Ijidustry  and  TratU,  p.  625.
'  Cf.  Marshall,  Prindples  of  Econcnnics,  bk.  v.  ch.  xIf.  §  9,


322  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

under  unregulated  monopoly ;  but,  in  any  event,  it  is  certain
to  be  less  than  the  output  proper  to  competition,  at  which  the
Government  is  aiming.  This  difficulty,  however,  is  only  present
in  industries  operating  under  conditions  of  diminishing  returns.
When  constant  returns  or  increasing  returns  prevail,  it  will  not
pay  a  monopolist,  when  price  is  fixed  at  the  competitive  level,
to  reduce  output  below  the  competitive  output ;  for  he  would  not
secure  any  diminution  in  his  costs  by  doing  this.  Consequently,
if  the  Government  can  succeed  in  fixing  prices  at  the  competi-
tive level,  it  will  also  indirectly  secure  competitive  output.
Since,  therefore,  as  a  matter  of  practice,  concerns  (whether
industrial  combinations  or  public  utility  corporations)  which
it  is  necessary  to  regulate  are  hardly  ever  found  in  industries
of  diminishing  returns,  but  almost  always  in  industries  of
increasing  returns,  regulation  of  output  can  be  effected  in  the
way  required  by  regulation  of  price.  Control,  in  short,  means
control  over  price.^

§  11.  When  this  has  been  said,  there  inevitably  comes  to
mind  the  sort  of  control  over  prices  which  was  exercised  during
the  great  war,  and  some  account  of  which  was  given  in  Chapter
IX.  It  is  very  important,  however,  to  realise  that  what  we
are  now  concerned  with  is  fundamentally  different  from  that.
In  controlling  monopoly,  it  is  required  to  prevent  the  mono-
polist from  charging  high  prices,  because,  by  so  doing,  he  will
reduce  output  below  the  level  at  which  he  could  put  it  with
normal  profit  to  himself.  As  explained  above,  under  condi-
tions of  constant  returns  or  increasing  returns,  the  fixing  of
maximum  prices  at  the  rate  corresponding  to  the  "competi-
tive "  output  will  in  fact  cause  that  output  to  be  forthcoming.
There  is  no  question  of  the  maximum  price  being  associated
with  an  output  for  which  the  demand  price  that  the  public
are  prepared  to  pay  exceeds  that  price.^  But  in  the  war
problem,  as  was  clearly  brought  out  in  Chapter  IX.,  the
whole  point  of  intervention  was  to  fix  a  maximum  price
below  the  demand  price  that  the  public  would  be  prepared,  at
need,  to  pay  for  such  quantity  of  the  commodity  as  was  forth-

»  Cf.  Appendix  III.  §  18.

^  In  technical  language,  the  limitation  of  monopoly  prices  moves  the  exchange
index  along  the  demand  curve  towards  the  right ;  the  limitation  of  competitive
prices  pushes  the  exchange  index  below  the  demand  curve.  i


CH.  XVIII       PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  323

coming.  This  is  the  reason  why,  at  the  maximum  price,  there
was  always  a  greater  quantity  demanded  than  could  be  sup-
plied, and  why,  therefore,  it  was  necessary  to  prevent  accidental
inequalities  in  distribution  by  rationing  all  consumers  to  pur-
chases smaller  than  many  of  them  would  have  wished  to  make.
This,  too,  is  the  reason  why  it  was  not  sufficient  to  fix  prices  as
from  the  producer  only.  Because  the  demand  price  was  bigger
than  the  price  which  the  Government  wished  to  allow,  to  have
limited,  e.g.,  shipping  freights,  without  also  limiting  the  price  of
the  things  brought  in  at  the  limited  freights,  would  merely  have
enabled  the  intermediaries  between  the  ship  and  the  consumer
to  take  the  whole  benefit  for  themselves.  It  was  necessary,
therefore,  not  merely  to  fix  maximum  prices  to  the  original
producer,  but  also  to  fix  maximum  additions  that  might  be
put  on  to  these  prices  by  the  various  persons  through  whose
hands  (whether  as  further  manufacturers  or  as  retailers)  the
controlled  commodities  would  afterwards  pass.  In  the  regula-
tion of  monopoly  charges  there  is,  of  course,  no  need  for  any
of  these  secondary  arrangements.

§  12.  We  may  now  proceed  to  investigate  this  form  of  i
price  control  directly.  One  way  in  which  it  may  be  exercised
is,  as  it  were,  negative.  It  may  take  the  form  of  general
provisions  against  "  unreasonable  "  conduct,  leaving  the  defini-
tion of  what  is,  in  fact,  unreasonable  to  the  decision  of  a
Commission  or  of  the  Courts.  This  way  is,  in  substance,
followed,  for  proposed  changes  of  rates,  in  the  work  of  the
English  and,  prior  to  the  Hepburn  law,  the  American  com-
missioners regulating  railways.  The  commissioners  have  to
decide  whether  any  proposed  increase  of  rates  is  reasonable
and  to  permit  or  forbid  it  accordingly.  Thus,  their  task  is
comparatively  light.  They  have  not  to  regulate  all  prices
always,  but  only  to  intervene  against  specially  unreasonable
prices  ;  and,  furthermore,  the  knowledge  of  their  existence  is
likely  to  serve  indirectly  as  a  check  against  the  setting-up  of
unreasonable  prices.^  The  negative  way  is  also  followed  in
certain  franchises,  which  permit  municipalities  to  take  over
the  business  of  a  licensed  corporation  at  a  proper  price — an
ambiguous  phrase — should  the  corporation  fail  to  "  operate  and

1  Cf.  Van  Hise,  Coneentraiion  and  Control,  p.  261.


3  24  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFABE  pt.  ii

develop  it  in  compliance  with  reasonable  public  requirements."  ^
It  is  followed  again  in  the  Canadian  Industrial  Combines
Investigation  Act  (1910).  Provision  is  made  for  determining
whether,  with  regard  to  any  article,  on  the  subject  of  which
complaint  has  been  made,  "there  exists  any  combine  to  promote
unduly  the  advantage  of  the  manufacturers  or  dealers  at  the
expense  of  the  consumers  by  fixing  the  price  higher  than  is
proper " ;  and,  if  the  charge  is  established,  penalties  are  pro-
vided. In  New  Zealand  the  Act  of  1910  applies  the  same
test.  "  Any  person  commits  an  offence,  who,  either  as  principal
or  agent,  sells  or  supplies,  or  offers  for  sale  or  supply,  any  goods
at  a  price  which  is  unreasonably  high,  if  that  price  has  been
in  any  manner,  directly  or  indirectly,  determined,  controlled,  or
influenced  by  any  commercial  trust  of  which  that  person  or
his  principal  (if  any)  is  or  has  been  a  member."  The  Eussian
Criminal  Code  of  1903  had  a  similar  proviso :  "  A  merchant  or
manufacturer  who  increases  the  price  of  victuals  or  other
articles  of  prime  necessity  in  an  extraordinary  degree  in  accord
with  other  merchants  or  manufacturers  dealing  in  the  same
articles  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment."  ^  In  all  these
rules  excessive  prices  are  forbidden,  but  no  attempt  is  made
actually  to  fix  prices  by  decree.  The  other,  positive,  way,  in
which  control  may  be  exercised,  consists  in  the  authoritative
determination  of  definite  maximum  rates  of  charge  or  minimum
provision  of  service.  This  way  is  illustrated  by  the  terms  of
the  charters  usually  accorded  to  companies  operating  public
utility  services  under  lease  from  city  governments,  and  by  the
power,  conferred  on  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  by
the  Hepburn  law  of  1906,  to  "determine  and  prescribe"
maximum  rates  for  railway,  telephone  and  other  services  of
communication.

§  13.  Whether  the  negative  or  the  positive  way  of
regulation  is  followed,  it  is  obvious  that  some  sort  of  sanction
to  the  law  must  be  provided.  This  can  be  done  in  a  variety
of  ways.  Sometimes  the  penalty  for  breach  is  a  direct  money
fine.     Sometimes,    in    protected    countries,    for    example    in

*  National  Civic  Federation,  Municipal  and  Private  Operation  of  Public
Utilities,  vol.  i,  p.  41.

2  The  text  of  these  laws  is  printed  in  Apjwndix  G  to  Jenks  and  Clark,
The  Trust  Problem.


CH.  XVIII      PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  325

Brazil/  it  consists  in  the  withdrawal  of  duties  on  competing
foreign  goods.  The  Canadian  Industrial  Combines  Investi-
gation Act  of  1910  provides  for  both  sorts  of  penalty.  If
a  statutory  Commission  "  finds  that  there  is  a  Combine,  the
Government  may  either  lower  or  repeal  the  duties,  and,  in
addition,  impose  a  fine  of  1000  dollars  a  day  on  those  who
continue  in  their  evil  courses  after  the  judgment  of  the  Board
has  been  officially  published."  ^  Another  interesting  form  of
sanction  is  provided,  as  against  the  owners  of  vessels  which
violate  any  of  the  American  anti-trust  laws,  by  a  clause  in
the  Panama  Canal  Act  of  1912  forbidding  the  use  of  the
canal  to  their  ships.'  Sometimes  the  sanction  consists  in  the
threat  of  governmental  competition.  Thus,  in  connection  with
the  1892  agreement,  by  which  the  Post-Office  took  over  the
National  Telephone  Company's  trunk  lines,  the  Chancellor  of
the  Exchequer  hinted  that  the  State,  while  securing  its  right
to  compete,  would  not  be  likely  to  exercise  that  right  if  the
Company  acted  reasonably.*  Sometimes,  again,  the  sanction
consists  in  the  threat  of  State  purchase,  on  terms,  either
fixed  beforehand  or  to  be  decided  by  arbitration,  of  the  whole
of  the  plant  of  the  regulated  business.  Sometimes,  finally, —
and  this,  in  effect,  is  what  seems  to  be  contemplated  under  the
authoritative  interpretation  of  the  Sherman  Act,  as  given  by
the  United  States  Supreme  Court  in  the  Standard  Oil  Case
(1911) — combinations,  whose  price  (and  other)  policy  is  found
to  be  reasonable,  may  be  left  imdisturbed,  but  combinations
which  use  their  power  to  the  injury  of  the  public  may  be
dissolved  by  order  of  the  Court.^

§  14.  Though,  however,  many  sanctions,  some  of  them
of  great  force,  are  available,  when  breaches  of  the  law
are  detected,  it  is  necessary  to  add  that,  whether  the
negative  or  the  positive  method  of  control  is  adopted,
it  is  jBxceedingly  difficult   to  prevent  these  sanctions  being  i

*  Cf.  Davies,  Trust  Laws  and  Unfair  Competition,  p.  294.

^  Economist,  March  26,  1910,  p.  665.  Cf.  Ammls  of  the  American  Academy,
July  1912,  p.  152.

^  Cf.  Johnson  and  Huebner,  Principles  of  Ocean  Transportation,  p.  386.

*  H.  Meyer,  Public  Ownership  and  the  Telephones,  pp.  56,  199.

*  Cf.  The  judgment  of  Chief- Justice  White,  laying  down  in  thi"*  case  what
has  now  become  known  as  ' '  the  rule  of  reason  "  in  interpreting  the  Act  (quoted
by  Jenks  and  Clark,  The  Trust  Problem,  p.  299).


326  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

escaped  by  evasion.  Thus,  in  the  pre-war  period  our
railway  companies,  in  effect,  raised  their  rates  without  apply-
ing for  the  sanction  of  the  railway  commissioners.  Charges
for  rent  of  sidings  and  so  forth  were  created ;  the
number  of  articles  which  the  companies  refuse  to  carry
at  owner's  risk,  unless  packed  to  their  satisfaction,  was
increased ;  rebates  were  withdrawn ;  and  other  such  devices
were  employed.^  But  the  kind  of  evasion  which  it  is  hardest
to  deal  with  is  that  which  meets  price  regulation  by  mani-
pulating quality.  To  prevent  this  it  is  essential  to  couple
with  rules  about  maximum  price  further  rules  about  mini-
mum quality.  But  in  some  things,  such  as  the  comfort  and
punctuality  of  a  tramway  service,  or  the  sanitary  condition  of
slaughter-houses  and  sewers,  it  is  difficult  to  define  a  minimum
of  quality.  When  there  are  a  number  of  different  grades  of
quality,  all  of  which  have  to  be  distinguished  from  one  another
and  subjected  to  a  separate  maximum  price — different  grades,
even  of  simple  things  like  tea,  and  still  more  of  complicated
things  like  hats — the  difficulty  of  effective  definition  is
enormous.  It  is  easy  to  sell  a  lower-grade  thing  at  a  higher-
grade  price.  In  other  things,  such  as  water  supply,  gas
supply,  milk  supply  and  house  accommodation,  where  tests
of  quality  are  available  to  give  a  basis  for  definition,  it  may
be  difficult  to  detect  departures  from  the  stipulated  minimum.
Something  can,  no  doubt,  be  done  by  an  elaborate  system  of
inspection,  like  that  developed  in  support  of  the  Adulteration
of  Food  and  Drugs  Act,  but  the  openings  for  evasion  are,  in
any  event,  likely  to  be  considerable.

^15.  Even,  however,  if  this  difficulty  could  be  com-
pletely overcome,  the  most  formidable  obstacle  in  the  way  of
--direct  control  would  still  remain.  It  is  necessary  to  determine
-w.liat  prices  shall  be  regarded  as  unreasonable,  and,  when
the  positive  method  of  fixing  maxima  is  adopted,  what  the
ma,xima  shall  be.  As  was  explained  at  the  beginning  of  this
chapter,  tlie  goal  aimed  at  is  the  competitive  price,  i.e.  the
price  which  would  have  been  arrived  at  had  other  things
been  the  same  but  the  monopoly  element  absent.  It  is-^  ob-
viously impossible,  in  any  jenterprise^  to  calculate  this  except
'  Cf.  Railway  Conference  Report,  p.  57.


CH.  XVIII      PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  327

by  reference  to  the  earnings  of  the  enterprise.  Competitive
pricei~^iist  ^e  taken  ^o^Be  prices  that  yield  competitive
earnings — that  is,  earnings  normal  to  the  type  of  enterprise.
It  is  conceivable  that  some  reader,  thinking  loosely  upon
recent  experience,  may  question  this  statement  and  claim
that  competitive  prices  could  be  determined  directly  from  the
ascertained  expenses  of  converting  the  raw  material  used
into  finished  goods.  Plainly,  however,  in  order  to  get  the
full  conversion  costs,  we  need  to  know  how  much  should
be  added  to  the  cost  of  material  and  labour  for  the  share
due,  for  the  article  we  are  studying,  to  the  standing  charges  and
profits  of  the  business.  This  implies  some  prior  and  inde-
pendent decision  as  to  what  these  profits  are  to  be.  Given  a
decision  about  that,  we  can,  indeed,  then,  by  conversion  cost
accounting — the  technique  of  which  has  greatly  developed
during  the  war — determine  the  proper  price  for  any  particular
product;  but  to  proceed  in  the  reverse  direction  is  impossible.
The  calculation  of  conversion  costs  is,  of  course,  a  necessary
step  towards  any  practical  scheme  of  price  regulation.  But
it  is  a  subordinate  step.  The  crux  of  our  problem — to  which
it  is  altogether  irrelevant, — is,  as  I  have  said,  to  determine
what  profits  in  any  particular  enterprise,  the  price  of  whose
products  have  to  be  regulated,  may  rightly  be  considered
normal.

§  16.  At  first  sight  it  might  be  thought  that  this  could
be  settled  fairly  easily.  Will  not  normal  profit  be  such
profit  that,  when  allowance  is  made  for  earnings  of  manage-
ment (as  in  joint-stock  companies  is  done  automatically),
what  is  left  provides  interest  at  the  ordinary  rate  on  the
capital  of  the  concern  ?  This  plausible  suggestion  is,  however,
easily  shown  to  be  very  far  from  adequate.  Let  us,  to  begin
with,  suppose  that  the  ordinary  rate  of  interest  really
does  correspond  in  all  businesses  to  normal  profits.  We  have
still  __to  determine  what  the  capital  is  on  which  this
ordinary  rate  is  to  be  paid  Clearly,  we  cannot  interpret  it
as  the  market  value  of  the  concern,  because,  the  market  value
of  a  business  being  simply  the  present  value  of  its  anticipated
earnings,  these  earnings  viust  yield  the  ordinary  rate  of  interest
on  it,  allowing  for  the  particular  risks  involved,  whatever  sum


328  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

they  amount  to.  Indeed,  if  we  are  to  take  existing  market
value  as  our  basis,  since  this  depends  on  what  people  believe  the
system  of  rate  regulation  will  be,  we  should  come  perilously
near  to  circular  reasoning.  Capital  value,  therefore,  for
rate  control  purposes,  is  something  quite  different  from  capital
value  for,  say,  taxation  purposes.  It  must  mean,  in  some
sense,  that  capital  which  has  in  fact  been  invested  in  the
business  in  the  past.  If  we  were  to  push  our  analysis  to  the  end,
we  should  need  to  note  that,  since  price  levels  are  different  in
different  times,  the  practice  of  estimating  capital  investments
merely  by  reference  to  their  money  value  at  the  time  they
were  made  is  incorrect.  A  real  investment  of  1000  days'
labour  will  be  called  £1000  if  it  is  made  in  one  year,  while
an  exactly  identical  real  investment  will  be  called  £2000  if
it  is  made  in  another  year.  To  this  class  of  difficulty,
however,  if  we  are  to  hope  for  any  result  at  all,  we  must
resolutely  close  our  eyes.  Apart  from  it  the  task  is  complex
enough.  When  the  sums  of  money  invested  include  commission
paid  to  a  promoter  for  accomplishing  a  fusion,  the  advantage
of  which  is  expected  to  consist  in  the  power  to  exact  monopoly
charges  from  the  public,  this  commission  ought  not,  it  would
seem,  to  be  counted,  except  in  so  far  as  the  fusion  has  also
brought  about  increased  productive  efficiency.  That  this  is
an  exceedingly  important  point  becomes  apparent  when  we
learn  that,  according  to  high  officials  in  some  of  the  industrial
combinations  of  the  United  States,  "  the  cost  of  organisation,
including  the  pay  of  the  promoter  and  financier,  amounts
often  to  from  20  to  40  per  cent  of  the  total  amount  of  stock
issued."^  The  same  difficulty  has  to  be  faced  as  regards
that  part  of  the  capital  expenditure  which  has  been  employed
in  buying  up  existing  concerns  at  a  price  enhanced  by  the
hope  that  combination  will  make  monopolistic  action  practicable.
Apart  from  these  difficult  items,  what  we  want  to  ascertain  is
the  original  capital  expenditure,  whether  employed  in  physical
construction,  parliamentary  costs,  the  purchase  of  patent  rights
or  the  upbuilding  of  a  connection  by  advertisement,  together
with  such  later  expenditure,  in  excess  of  the  repairs  and
renewals  required  to  keep  the  original  capital  intact,  as  has

1  Jenks  and  Clark,  The  Trtist  Problem,  p.  90.


i


cH.xviii       PUBLIC  CONTROL  OF  MONOPOLY  329

not  been  taken  out  again  in  earnings,  allowance  being  made  for
the  different  dates  of  the  various  investments.^  For  new
businesses,  to  be  established  in  the  future,  it  would  be  easy
enough  to  secure  by  law  that  information  about  all  these
items  should  be  made  available.  But  for  businesses  already
long  established  it  may  be  impossible  to  get  this  information.
For  example,  similar  expenditures  on  good-will  and  so
forth,  which  one  concern  may  have  charged  to  capital,
another  will  have  treated  as  current  expenditure,  in  such
a  way  that  it  cannot  practically  be  distinguished.  In  view
of  these  difficulties  some  roundabout  way  of  approximating  to
the  truth  may  have  to  be  employed.  Obviously  the  nominal
capital  is  quite  useless  for  this  purpose.  It  may  have  been
watered  and  manipulated  in  ways  that  completely  disguise  the.
real  facts.  The  market  value  of  the  capital  we  have  already
shown  to  be  inappropriate.  It  is  usual,  therefore,  to  make  use
either  of  the  estimated  "  cost  of  reproduction  "  of  the  concern's
plant — which  may  be  very  misleading  if  prices  have  changed
substantially  since  the  original  investment  was  made — or  of  a
value  ascertained  by  direct  physical  valuation  of  the  plant —
the  amount  of  which  will,  of  course,  depend  on  the  principles
in  accordance  with  which  the  valuation  is  made — ;  and  then  to
make  some  more  or  less  arbitrary  allowance  for  costs  of
tpromotion,  investments  to  build  up  good-will,  patent  rights,
ind  so  on.  These  data  are  not  wanted  for  themselves,  but
re  supposed  to  enable  a  rough  estimate  to  be  made  of  the
3tual  capital  investment,  when  this  is  not  directly  ascertain-
ibl&  To  develop  the  difficulties  of  this  process  is  outside  my
present  purpose.  What  has  been  said  will  suffice  to  show
khat  to  determine  what  the  capital  of  a  concern  is,  on  which
y*  ordinary  "  interest  is  to  be  allowed,  is  not  an  easy  task.^

§  17.  But  this  is  not  all.      It  is  not  true  that  the  normal

competitive "  profits  of  any  enterprise  are  the  profits  that

[.would  yield  the  "  ordinary "  rate  of  interest  on  the  capital

ithat  has  actually  been  invested  in  that  enterprise.     For  the

establishment  of  different  enterprises  involves  both  different

*  Cf.  Heilman,  "  Principles  of  Public  Utility  Valuation,"  Qvarterly  Journal
of  Economics,  Feb.  1914,  pp.  281-90.

*  Cf.  Barker,  Public  Utility  Bates,  Chapters  v.  and  vi.


330  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

degrees  of  risk  and  different  initial  periods  of  development
during  which  no  return  at  all  is  likely  to  be  obtained ;  and
appropriate  compensation  under  these  heads  must  be  made  to
those  investors — -the  only  ones  with  whom  the  State  can  deal
— whose  enterprises  turn  out  successfully,  and  who,  therefore,
j  must  be  paid  enough  to  balance  the  losses  of  those  who  have
'  failed.^  This  circumstance  need  not,  indeed,  be  responsible  for
large  practical  difficulties  in  industries  in  which  production
has  attained  more  or  less  of  a  routine  character,  but  in  all
industries  in  an  experimental  stage  it  is  of  dominant  import-
ance.^ Furthermore,  even  if  there  were  no  risks,  we  could  not
regard  as  proper  prices  which  would  yield  the  ordinary  rate
of  interest  in  all  circumstances,  but  only  prices  which  would
yield  that  rate,  if  the  management,  and  indeed  the  actual
organisation  of  the  original  investment  also,  were  conducted
with  "  ordinary  "  ability  ;  and  this  is  a  vague  and  difficult  con-
ception. As  Professor  Taussig  pertinently  observes :  "  Every
'•  one  knows  that  fortunes  are  made  in  industries  strictly  com-
I  petitive,  and  are  to  be  ascribed  to  unusual  business  capacity.
.  .  .  When  a  monopoly  or  quasi-monopoly  secures  high  returns,
how  are  we  to  separate  the  part  attributable  to  monopoly  from
the  part  attributable  to  excellence  in  management  ? "  ^  To
allow  the  same  rate  of  return  to  companies  which  invest  their
capital  wastefuUy  as  to  those  which  invest  it  well  plainly  makes
against  economical  production.  Incidentally,  if  there  were
two  competing  combinations  to  be  dealt  with,  it  would
logically  require  forcing  the  better  managed  one  to  charge
lower  prices  than  the  other,  an  arrangement  which  would  not
only  have  awkward  consequences  at  the  moment  but  would
effectively  discourage  good  management.      In  this  connection,

*  Of.  Greene,  Corporation  Finmice,  p.  134.

*  If  a  concern  has  been  taken  over  by  a  company  after  the  first  stage  of
speculative  adventure  has  been  successfully  passed,  the  purchase  price  will  probably
include  a  large  sum  above  cost.  This  may  be  a  fair  remuneration  for  the  risk
taken  and  uncertainty  borne.  But  clearly,  after  it  has  been  paid,  to  allow  the
new  company  to  reap  profits  which  are  both  adjusted  to  the  risks  of  the  occupa-
tion and  also  calculated  upon  a  capital  which  includes  the  above  sum,  would  be
to  compel  the  public  to  reward  it  for  risk-taking  for  which  it  has  not  been  re-
sponsible, and  recompense  for  which  has  already  been  made.  For  an  excellent
general  discussion  of  good-will  cf.  Leake,  Oood-will,  its  nature  and  how  to
value  it.

'  American  Economy  Review  SuppleiTicnt,  March  1913,  p.  132.


cH.xYin       PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  331

it  should  be  noted  that  to  extend  combination  further,  so  long
as  extension  involves  economies,  is  a  form  of  good  management,
and  a  form  that  would  be  discouraged  if  prices  were  so  regu-
lated that  no  advantage  were  allowed  to  accrue  to  those  who
had  brought  it  about.  In  view  of  these  complications,  and  of
the  necessary  limitations  of  its  knowledge — for,  as  a  rule,  the
controllers  are  bound  to  be  much  behind  the  controlled  in
technical  experience — a  public  authority  is  almost  certain  /
either  to  exact  too  easy  terms  from  the  concerns  it  is  seeking '
to  control,  and  so  to  leave  them  with  the  power  of  simple
monopoly,  or  to  exact  too  hard  terms,  and  so,  though  not
permitting  monopoly  exaction  to  them,  nevertheless  to  prevent
the  development  of  their  industry  to  the  point  proper  to
simple  competition.  The  British  Tramways  Act  of  1870
appears  to  have  failed  in  the  latter  way,  and  to  have  been
responsible  for  prolonged  delay  in  the  development  of  electric
traction  in  this  country.

§  18.  It  is  evident  that  the  difficulties,  which  are  in-
volved in  determining  what  scale  of  return  should  be  regarded
as  noiTual  in  any  particular  productive  enterprise,  complicate
alike  the  negative  way  of  control,  under  which  the  Legislatui'e
simply  condemns  imreasonable  prices,  leaving  "the  Courts  to
decide  whether  any  given  price  scheme  is  in  fact  unreasonable,
and  the  positive  way,  which  lays  down  definite  price  maxima.
Plainly,  however,  they  complicate  the  positive  way  more  seri-
ously than  the  other.  An  ordinary  industrial  concern  produces
a  great  number  of  different  varieties  of  goods,  the  raw  materials
for  which  are  continually  altering  in  cost,  and  the  distinctive
character  of  the  finished  product  continually  being  modified.
For  any  outside  authority  to  draw  up  a  schedule  of  permitted!
charges  for  a  concern  of  this  sort  would  be  a  hopeless  task.
On  the  other  hand,  for  a  trained  Commission  or  judicial  body,
[equipped,  like  the  American  Federal  Trade  Commission,  to
make  full  inquiries,  it  would  not  be  impossible  to  decide
in  a  broad  way  whether,  taking  one  product  with  another  and
one  time  with  another,  some  selected  large  combination — the
Standard  Oil  Company,  the  United  Steel  Corporation,  or
another — was  charging  prices  calculated  to  yield  to  it  more
'than  the  return  deemed  in  the  circumstances  to  be  reasonable.


332  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  jt.  n

For  industrial  concerns  in  normal  times  no  attempt  has  ever
been  made  to  go  beyond  this  negative  way,  and  it  does  not
seem,  at  all  events  in  the  present  condition  of  economic
knowledge  and  governmental  competence,  that  any  such
attempt  either  can,  or  should  be,  made.  Imperfect  as  the
results  to  be  hoped  for  from  the  negative  way  are,  they
are  better  than  would  be  got  from  a  blundering  struggle
after  the  other.  In  public  utility  concerns,  on  the  other
hand,  the  excess  difficulty  of  the  positive  over  the  negative
way  is  slight.  As  a  general  rule,  the  service  provided  by  these
concerns  is  single  and  relatively  simple  (gas,  water,  elec-
tricity, transport  of  passengers).  Not  many  separate  prices
— railway  freight  rates  are,  of  course,  a  very  important  ex-
ception— have,  therefore,  to  be  fixed.  Further,  the  demand
is  generally  unaffected  by  fashion,  and  equipment  plays
so  large  a  part  in  the  cost  that  changes  in  the  price
of  raw  material  do  not  very  greatly  matter.  Finally,
even  if  these  things  were  otherwise,  the  nature  of  the
goods  sold  and  the  convenience  of  customers  make  it
very  desirable  that  the  prices  charged  should  not  undergo
frequent  change.  In  these  concerns,  therefore,  the  positive
way  of  control  by  fixing  maximum  prices  has  generally  been
adopted.

§  19.  When  this  is  done,  it  becomes  imperative  to  seek
out  the  best  means  of  guarding  against  the  two  opposite
sorts  of  error,  undue  laxness  and  undue  harshness,  to  which,
as  was  shown  in  §  17,  all  forms  of  regulation  are  in  practice
inclined.  For  this  purpose  one  device  sometimes  recom-
mended is  to  put  up  the  licence  to  operate  certain  public
utility  services  to  a  kind  of  auction.  This  plan  allows
the  persons  most  interested  themselves  to  present  estimates
of  terms  which  they  would  reckon  profitable.  It  has  been
described  thus :  "  According  to  the  best  plan  now  in  vogue,  the
City  sells  the  franchise  for  constructing  the  works  to  the  com-
pany, which  bids  to  furnish  water  at  the  lowest  rates  under
definitely  specified  conditions,  the  franchise  being  sometimes
perpetual,  but  often  granting  to  the  City  at  some  future  date
an  option  for  the  purchase  of  the  works."  Since,  however,
in    many  cities,  the    companies   capable    of  making    tenders


CH.  XVIII       PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  333

will  be  very  few  in  number,  and  since,  furthermore,  their  own
estimates  must  be  largely  tentative,  the  adoption  of  this
device  is  not  incompatible  with  large  errors.  The  likelihood
of  error  is  made  greater  by  the  fact  that  the  conditions  of
most  industries  are  continually  changing,  in  such  wise  that
the  scheme  of  price-regulation,  which  is  proper  at  one  time,
necessarily  becomes  improper  at  another.

§  20.  A  further  effort  at  limiting  the  range  of  error  can
be  made  through  arrangements,  under  which  the  regulations
imposed  are  submitted  to  periodical  revision.  Franchises
"  cannot  be  fixed,  or  justly  fixed,  for  all  time,  owing  to  rapidly
changing  conditions."  ^  With  the  general  growth  of  im-
provements and  so  on,  it  may  well  happen  that  a  maximum
price  designed  to  imitate  competitive  conditions  will,  after
a  while,  stand  above  the  price  that  an  unrestricted  monopolist
would  find  it  profitable  to  charge,  and  will,  therefore,  be
altogether  ineffective.  "  The  public  should  retain  in  all
cases  an  interest  in  the  growth  and  profits  of  the  future."  ^
A  provision  for  periodic  revision  in  a  franchise  may,  however,  ;
by  creating  uncertainty,  restrict  investment  in  the  industry^
concerned  to  an  extent  that  is  injurious  to  the  national
dividend-  Further,  if  the  revision  is  to  occur  at  fixed  intervals,
it  may  tempt  companies,  shortly  before  the  close  of  one  of  these
intervals,  to  hold  back  important  developments  till  after  the
revision  has  taken  place,  lest  a  large  part  of  their  fruits
should  be  taken  away  in  the  form  of  lowered  prices ;  ^  and
this  difficulty  cannot  be  wholly  overcome  by  clauses  stipulating
for  the  introduction  of  such  technical  improvements  as  are,
from  time  to  time,  invented  elsewhere.  One  way  of  meeting
these  dangers  is  to  hedge  round  the  revising  body  with
conditions  designed  to  defend  the  company's  interest.  For
example,  the  Railway  Act  of  1844  provided  that,  if  dividends
exceeded  10  per  cent  on  the  paid-up  capital  after  twenty-one
years  from  the  sanctioning  of  the  lines,  the  Lords  of  the
Treasury  might  revise  tolls,  fares,  etc.,  on  the  condition  that
they  guaranteed  a  10  per  cent  dividend  for  the  next  twenty-

^  Bemis,  Municipal  Monopolies,  p.  32.

^  Municipal  and  Private  (^ration  of  Public  Utilities,  voL  i.  p.  24.
*  Cf.  Whitten,  Hegulalion  of  Public  Service  Companies   in  Great  Britain,
p.  224.


334  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

one  years.  Another  way  is  to  make  the  revision  period
so  far  distant  from  the  date  at  which  an  undertaking  is
initiated  that  the  effect  upon  investment  due  to  the  anticipa-
tion of  it  will  be  very  small.  It  is  evident  that,  just  in
so  far  as  either  of  these  lines  of  defence  is  adopted,  the
efficacy  of  revision,  as  a  means  of  lessening  the  gap  between
actual  regulation  and  ideal  regulation,  is  diminished.  But
plainly,  if  regulation  is  to  be  attempted  at  all,  the  retention
by  the  State  of  revising  powers  in  some  form  is  absolutely
essential.  It  would  seem  that  this  could  be  provided  for  without
imposing  a  serious  check  either  to  investment  or  to  enterprise,
if  the  principles  on  which  the  revision  would  proceed  were
clearly  laid  down  and  understood.  The  revisers  might  be
instructed  at  each  revision  period  to  fix  a  price — or,  when
they  have  to  do  with  joint  products,  several  adjusted  prices —
sufficiently  high  to  continue  to  the  company  a  fair  rate
on  their  total  real  investment,  account  being  taken  of  the
fact  that  the  capital  turned  into  it  in  the  first  instance  was
probably  subject  to  great  risk,  while  that  added  subsequently
needs  a  less  reward  under  this  head.  And  they  might  be
instructed  further,  in  deciding  what  constitutes  a  fair  return,
to  consider  generally  the  quality  of  management  that  has
been  displayed,  fixing  prices  to  yield  higher  returns  when
the  management  has  been  good  than  when  it  has  been
indifferent  or  bad.  No  doubt,  the  technical  difficulty  of
this  kind  of  revision  would  be  exceedingly  great,  but  it
would  not  be  nearly  so  great  as  that  of  the  initial  regulation.
It  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  a  class  of  official
might  eventually  be  evolved  whose  decision  on  such  matters,
when  founded  on  adequate  comparative  statistics,  would  at
once  deserve  and  command  the  confidence  of  would-be
investors.  Such  investors  would  have  the  consolation  of
knowing  that,  while,  on  the  one  hand,  the  price  of  their
product  was  liable  to  enforced  reduction,  on  the  other  hand,
if  costs  of  material  and  labour  went  against  them,  it  might
be  raised  in  their  favour.

§  21.  Yet  another  device  designed  to  limit  the  range  of
error  remains.  In  all  ordinary  industries  many  variations
of  demand  occur  within  the  successive  revision  periods.      If


I


CH.  XVIII       PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  335

the  guidance  of  "  simple  competition  "  is  to  be  followed,  such
variations  should  be  accompanied  by  variations  in  the  price
charged.  Furthermore,  it  is  easily  shown  that  these  corre-
sponding variations  in  price  should  be  especially  great,  in
response  to  given  variations  of  demand,  in  industries  where
the  part  played  by  supplementary  costs — which  are  not
reduced  proportionately  when  output  is  reduced — is  large
relatively  to  the  part  played  by  prime  costs.  There  is
reason  to  believe  that  these  costs  are  in  fact  becoming  more
important  in  the  generality  of  industries.  It  follows  that
any  system  of  control,  which  endeavours  to  fix  prices  at  a
constant  level  independent  of  short  period  oscillations  of
demand,  is  liable  to  miss  somewhat  widely  the  mark  of
simple  competition.  No  doubt,  where,  as  in  railway  service,
the  technical  inconvenience  of  constantly  changing  prices
would  be  very  great,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  adopt  such
a  system  for  fairly  long  periods,  in  spite  of  its  tendency
to  reduce  output  both  in  times  of  depression  and,  unless
special  arrangements  are  made  in  times  of  boom  to  increase
production  beyond  the  point  of  maximum  profit,  in  these
times  also.  Obviously,  however,  this  defence  of  constant
prices  cannot  be  pressed  beyond  a  point.  "Where  it  is  not
applicable,  and  adjustment  of  prices  to  demand  changes  is
deemed  desirable,  franchises  sometimes  lay  down,  not  a
fixed  system  of  rates,  but  some  form  of  self  -  adjusting
scale.  Such  a  scale  might  conceivably  be  based  on  the
price  of  some  commodity  which  the  regulated  industry
buys,  or  in  connection  with  which  it  renders  its  services.
A  scale  on  these  lines  appears  in  "  the  arrangement  adopted
on  at  least  one  railway,  according  to  which  the  rates  charged
for  the  conveyance  of  iron -making  materials  rise  and  fall
according  to  the  price  of  pig-iron."^  More  frequently,
however,  scales  based,  not  on  any  kind  of  price,  but  on
the  rate  of  dividend  paid  to  shareholders,  are  utilised.  These
scales  permit  an  increase  in  the  rate  of  dividend  during  any
licence  period,  only  on  condition  of  an  accompanying  defined
reduction  of  prices.  Illustrations  of  them  are  furnished  in
English    Acts    of   Parliament    dealing    with    gas   companies.

'  Departmental  Committee  on  JRailioay  Agreements,  p.  23.


336  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

One  Act,  for  example,  fixes  a  standard  price  of  Ss.  9d.  per
thousand  cubic  feet,  and  provides  that,  for  every  penny
put  on  or  off  that  price,  the  company  may,  when  there  are
reductions,  and  must,  when  there  are  increases,  move  the
dividend  up  or  down  a  quarter  per  cent.  Another  illustra-
tion is  furnished  by  the  Act  governing  the  Lancashire  Power
Company  which  furnishes  electricity  in  bulk.  This  Act
"  provides  for  a  dividend  of  8  per  cent  and  an  additional
1*25  per  cent  reduction  in  price  for  every  0*25  per  cent
increase  of  dividend  above  8  per  cent,  in  respect  of  every
5  per  cent  charged  below  the  maximum  price  allowed  by
the  Act."  ^  Sliding  scales  of  this  kind,  like  sliding  scales
of  wages,  are,  of  course,  provided,  not  as  a  substitute  for,
but  as  a  complement  to,  a  system  of  periodic  revision  of
the  licence  terms ;  for,  if  they  were  treated  as  permanent
arrangements,  all  improvements  and  discoveries  that  reduced
cost  of  production,  whether  made  by  the  concerns  themselves
or  by  others,  would  steadily  and  continually  enhance  profits.
They  are  not  easily  organised  for  new  companies,  because  the
appropriate  standards  of  price  and  dividend  cannot  be  deter-
mined till  some  experience  has  been  gained  of  the  working
of  a  concern.  But  it  is  feasible,  and  is  in  fact  the  practice
of  the  Board  of  Trade  in  dealing  with  gas  companies,  to
fix  a  simple  maximum  price  at  first  and  to  reserve  power  to
substitute  a  sliding  scale  after  the  lapse  of  a  certain  interval.^
An  important  objection  to  these  scale  arrangements  is  that
they  are  liable  to  push  prices  up,  not  only  when  the  costs
of  raw  materials  and  labour  rise,  but  equally  when  the
profits  of  a  company  are  reduced  by  incompetent  manage-
ment. This  characteristic  represents  a  lapse  from  the  ideal
of  simple  competition  and  pro  tanto  weakens  the  inducement
towards  enterprising  management — unless,  indeed,  as  some-
times happens,  the  manager's  salary,  or  a  part  of  it,  is  also
made  dependent  on  the  scale.  But,  in  spite  of  these  diffi-
culties, sliding  scales,  when  carefully  constructed,  may  be
expected  to  make  possible  a  nearer  approach  to  the  system  of

1  H.  Meyer,  Municipal  Ownership  in  Oreat  Britain,  p.  281.

2  Cf.  Whitten,  Regulation  of  Public  Service  Companies  in  Oreai  Britain,
p.  129.


CH.  XVIII       PUBLIC  CONTEOL  OF  MONOPOLY  337

prices  proper  to  simple  competition  than  would  be  possible
without  them.^

§  22.  There  remains,  however,  another  difficulty  of  a
different  order.  The  main  part  of  what  has  been  said  so  far  has
tacitly  assumed  that,  in  forming  our  control  policy,  we  start
with  a  clear  table.  For  industrial  monopolies  that  come  into
being  after  the  general  lines  of  our  policy  have  been  fixed,  and
for  public  utility  corporations  upon  which  conditions  are
imposed  at  the  time  when  the  original  franchise  is  granted,  this
is,  of  course,  true.  But,  in  so  far  as  we  have  to  do  with
monopolistic  concerns  over  which  at  present  control  is  either
not  exercised  at  all  or  exercised  in  a  very  imperfect  manner,
the  case  is  different.  To  bring  these  concerns  now  under  a
system  of  price  regulation  of  the  type  that  we  are  contemplat-
ing would,  in  many  instances,  involve  a  large  reduction  in  their
income  and  in  the  capital  value  of  their  shares.  So  far  as  original
shareholders  or  persons  who  have  inherited  from  them  are
concerned,  this  does  not  greatly  matter.  The  fact  that  these
persons  have  made  abnormal  profits  in  the  past  is  no  reason
why  they  should  be  allowed  to  do  so  in  the  future.  But  the
position  is  different  with  recent  purchasers  of  shares,  whose
purchase  price  has  been  regulated  by  the  conditions  ruling
before  control,  or  the  strict  form  of  control  here  contemplated,
was  seriously  thought  about.  Such  persons  may  perhaps  be
getting  now,  say  8  per  cent  on  their  money,  and  control  may
knock  it  down  to  5  per  cent,  reducing  the  value  of  their  capital
by  one-third  or  even  one-half.  To  make  regulations  that  will
strike  with  cruel  severity  on  arbitrarily  selected  groups  of
perfectly  innocent  persons  is  not  a  thing  to  be  lightly
\mdertaken.  There  are  limits  to  the  right  of  the  State  to/
ride  rough-shod  over  legitimate  expectations.  And  yet  to
refrain  from  control  that  ought  to  be  imposed,  because  we
neglected  our  duty  in  not  imposing  it  before,  is  to  enslave
ourselves  to  past  mistakes.  Surrender  to  the  "  widows  and
orphans "   argument    means,    in    substance,    abandonment    of

*  It  should  perhaps  be  mentioned  that  this  system  of  sliding  scales  in  gas
companies  was  originally  introduced,  not  for  the  purpose  discussed  in  the  text,
but  as  a  substitute  for  regulation  by  the  fixing  of  a  maximum  dividend.  That
method,  involving  as  it  does  severe  discouragement  to  good  management,  is
plainly  much  inferior  to  a  scale  system.

7.


338  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

reform.  No  perfect  solution  of  this  conflict  can  be  hoped  for.
But  it  would  seem  a  reasonable  compromise,  and  one  adequately
careful  of  vested  interests,  to  provide  that,  when  the  sudden
introduction  of  a  full  measure  of  price  control  on  the  principles
indicated  above  would  greatly  depress  values,  this  control
should  only  be  introduced  after  an  interval  of  notice,  and  then
by  gradual  steps.

§  23.  Even,  however,  if  this  somewhat  special  difficulty  be
left  out  of  account,  the  preceding  general  review  makes  it
evident  that,  under  any  form  of  State  control  over  private
monopoly — and  it  should  be  noticed  that,  though  the  examples
cited  have  to  do  only  with  special  kinds  of  private  monopoly,
the  argument  refers  to  all  kinds — a  considerable  gap  between
the  ideal  and  the  actual  is  likely  to  remain.  The  method  of
control,  whether  positive  or  negative,  is,  in  short,-  an  exceedingly
I  imperfect  means  of  approximating  industry  towards  the  price
level  and  output  proper  to  simple  competition.  Moreover,
it  is  apt  to  prove  a  costly  method.  As  Professor  Durand
observes :  "  Government  regulation  of  prices  and  profits  of
private  concerns  always  involves  a  large  element  of  waste,
of  duplication  of  energy  and  cost.  It  means  that  two  sets  of
persons  are  concerning  themselves  with  the  same  work.  The
managers  and  employees  of  the  corporation  must  study  cost
accounting  and  conditions  of  demand  in  determining  price
policy.  The  officers  and  employees  of  the  Government  must
follow  and  do  it  all  over  again.  Moreover,  the  fact  that
these  two  sets  of  persons  have  different  motives  in  approaching
their  work  means  friction  and  litigation,  and  these  spell  further
expense.  To  superimpose  a  vast  governmental  machinery
upon  the  vast  machinery  of  private  business  is  an  extrava-
gance which  should  be  avoided  if  it  is  possible  to  do  so."  ^
This  consideration  is  one  that  ought  not  to  be  ignored.

'  Quarterly  Journal  of  Eamomics,  1914,  pp.  674-5  ;  and  Tlve  Trust  Problem,
p.  57.


CHAPTEE  XIX

PUBLIC    OPERATION    OF    INDUSTRIES

§  1.  The  preceding  chapter  has  shown  that  attempts  at
public  control  over  monopolistic  industries,  whether  direct
or  indirect,  are  likely  to  be  very  imperfectly  successful.  It  is
sometimes  thought  that  the  difficulties  can  be  got  over  by  an
arrangement  under  which  a  government  (or  municipal)  author-
ity owns  a  concern  and  leases  it  out  to  a  private  company  to
operate.  This  is  the  plan  under  which  railways  are  worked  in
Italy  and  Holland.  No  doubt,  it  provides  the  controlling
authority  with  a  more  powerful  means  of  enforcing  its  orders
that  would  be  available  against  a  privately  owned  railway
company ;  for  the  authority  could  threaten  to  terminate  the
lease,  as  it  can  now  do  with  the  leases  granted  to  private
tramway  companies.  This,  however,  is  comparatively  a  small
matter.  When,  indeed,  the  Government  desires  to  regulate
an  industry  which  is  not  alrea(^  a  monopoly,  as,  for  example,
the  coal  industry,  the  leasing  system  has  the  advantage
of  maintaining  some  measure  of  individual  initiative
and  competitive  enterprise,  which  nationalisation  in  the  full
sense  would  exclude.  When,  however,  we  have  to  do  with
undertakings  in  which  the  competitive  element  is  already
practically  extinct,  it  would  seem  that,  though  various
compromise  arrangements  are  possible,  and  sometimes,
for  political  or  other  reasons,  may  be  desirable,  the  dominant
issue  is  between  clear-cut  public  control  of  private  concerns
and  clear-cut  public  operation  of  public  ones.  It  is  in  this
relatively  simple  form  that  I  propose  to  study  it  here.  In  view
of  the  difficulties  of  control  described  in  the  preceding  chapter,
coupled  with  the  evident  fact   that  it  is   easier  to   regulate

339


340  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  n

oneself  than  to  regulate  somebody  else,  the  question  arises
whether  the  national  dividend  would  not  be  advantaged  if  the
public  authorities  themselves  operated  monopolistic  industries,
instead  of  struggling  to  control  their  operation  by  others.  If
nothing  else  were  involved  besides  the  comparative  precision  with
which  output  can  be  adjusted  under  the  two  plans,  in  such  wise
as  to  make  the  values  of  marginal  net  products  everywhere  equal,
there  could  be  no  doubt  that  this  question  should  be  answered
in  the  affirmative.  In  actual  practice,  however,  other  things
besides  this  are  involved,  just  as  other  things  were  involved  in
our  comparison  between  voluntary  Purchasers'  Associations
and  ordinary  commercial  businesses.  We  are  not  entitled  to
assume  without  argument  that  the  economies  of  supply  will
be  the  same  under  public  operation  and  private  operation.
It  may  be  that  public  operation  is  less  economical  than  private
operation,  even  when  private  firms  are  subject  to  public  control
If  this  is  so,  the  disadvantages  of  public  operation  on  the  side
of  economical  production  have  to  be  balanced  against  its  advan-
tages on  the  side  of  adjustment  between  supply  and  demand.
Hence,  before  any  real  answer  to  our  question  can  be  attempted,
it  is  necessary  to  undertake  some  comparison  of  public  with
private  operation,  from  the  standpoint  of  productive  efficiency.
§  2.  At  the  outset,  it  must  be  made  clear  that  attempts
to  conduct  such  a  comparison  by  reference  to  statistics  are
foredoomed  to  failure.  No  doubt,  if  it  could  be  shown  that,
other  conditions  being  the  same,  a  given  output  was,  in
general,  obtained  at  greater,  or  at  less,  real  cost  under  public
than  under  private  management,  genuine  evidence  about  the
relative  efficiency  of  the  two  forms  of  organisation  would  be
obtained.  But  in  real  life  this  is  impracticable.  In  the  first
place,  the  quality  of  services,  which  are  called  by  the  same  name,
varies  enormously  in  different  places,  and  it  is  almost  impos-
sible properly  to  allow  for  these  variations.  "  Our  street  cars,"
say  the  Reporters  of  the  American  Civic  Federation,  "run
faster,  carry  more  strap  passengers,  and  kill  and  injure  more
people  than  the  street  cars,  public  or  private,  of  any  other
country.  Our  people  seem  to  like  this,  but  the  English  would
not."  ^     How  can   differences  of  this  sort  possibly  be  taken

*  Municipal  and  Private  Operation  of  Public  Utilities,  vol.  i.  p.  287.


CH.  XIX    PUBLIC  OPEEATION  OF  INDUSTEIES        341

into  account  ?  Again,  the  conditions  of  production  in  different
places  are  utterly  different.  "  In  Syracuse  (U.S.A.)  the  water
flows  to  the  city  by  gravity ;  in  Indianapolis  it  must  be
pumped."  ^  "  To  compare  a  private  corporation  within  the
limits  of  a  great  city,  where  an  immense  supply  is  furnished,
and  where  special  conditions  of  non-interference  with  adjoining
property  rights  are  to  be  met,  with  some  municipal  plant  in  a
suburban  town,  upon  a  basis  of  the  relative  amount  of  supplies
and  labour  required  per  unit  of  electrical  energy,  would
obviously  be  unfair  to  both  contestants.  Nor  is  it  possible  to
compare  in  this  manner  two  lighting-stations  having  approxi-
mately the  same  yearly  output,  and  which  are  similarly  located
with  reference  to  adjoining  interests,  but  are  situated,  the  one
in  the  North  and  the  other  in  the  South,  for  the  reason  that
the  daily  period  of  service  will  vary  in  these  two  localities  on
account  of  variation  in  the  hours  of  darkness.  For  the  same
reason  we  cannot  compare  the  summer  service  of  one  station
with  the  winter  service  of  another,  even  though  we  should
attempt  to  reduce  them  both  to  a  common  basis  by  obtaining
the  amount  of  human  effort  employed  per  unit  of  electrical
energy."  ^  In  short,  arguments  from  statistics,  even  apart
from  the  pitfalls  with  which  unwary  inquirers  are  confronted
in  the  interpretation  of  municipal  accounts,^  are,  in  this
field,  almost  entirely  valueless.  This  remark  is  of  general
application.  But,  in  view  of  the  exceptional  psychological
conditions  of  war-time  and  the  temporary  use  by  Government
of  a  large  number  of  able  men  normally  engaged  in  private
business,  as  well  as  of  the  fact  that  the  commodities  produced
in  Government  factories  during  the  war  were  for  State  nse
and  not  for  the  market,  it  has  very  special  relevance  to
arguments  drawn  from  the  experiences  of  the  war  period.

§  3.  Statistical  evidence  being  thus  inadequate,  it  is
necessary  to  proceed — again  as  in  our  study  of  voluntary
Purchasers'  Associations — by  way  of  general  considerations.
The  discussion  along  these  lines  may  well  be  started  with  an
observation  of  the  Committee  of  the  American  Civic  Federation :

^  Municipal  and  PrivaU  Operation  of  Public  Utilities,  toL  L  p.  21.

*  Bemis,  Municipal  Monopolies,  pp.  289-90.

'  Of.,  inter  alia,  Enoop,  PrinapUs  and  Methods  of  Municipal  Trading,  chap.  v.


342  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

"  There  are  no  particular  reasons  why  the  financial  results
from  private  or  public  operation  should  be  different  if  the
conditions  are  the  same."  ^  The  reason  for  this  remark,  of
course,  is  that,  whether  a  service  is  provided  by  a  private
company  or  by  a  public  governmental  authority,  the  actual
running  of  the  business  must  be  similar.  An  expert  staff
must  be  appointed,  controlled  in  a  general  way,  in  the  one
case  by  a  committee  of  directors  chosen  by  the  shareholders,
in  the  other  case  by  a  committee  appointed  —  perhaps  by
direct,  perhaps  by  indirect,  election — to  represent  the  public.
Managing  power,  as  a  whole,  may  be  conceived  as  distributed
among  electors,  directors — or  committee — and  staff,  and  Major
Darwin  has  undertaken  an  elaborate  inquiry  into  the  probable
comparative  efficiency  of  these  three  bodies  under  private
enterprise  and  that  particular  form  of  public  enterprise  known
as  municipal  trading.  It  is  obvious  that  the  result  of  such
an  inquiry  must  be  indefinite,  and  I  do  not  propose  to  repeat
it  here.  It  is  enough  to  say  that,  in  England,  a  public  under-
taking is  substantially  equivalent  to  a  voluntary  Purchasers'
Association,  save  only  that  its  directors  are  less  permanent  and
are  elected  for  their  political,  rather  than  for  their  commercial,
qualifications,  and  are,  therefore,  likely  to  prove,  other  things
being  equal,  somewhat  less  well  fitted  for  commercial  leader-
ship. One  point,  however,  demands  attention.  So  far  as  the
electors  of  the  committee,  under  the  system  of  public  manage-
ment, are,  at  the  same  time,  employees  in  the  business  affected,
public  operation  is  analogous  to  "  productive  co-operation,"  and
is  liable  to  experience,  in  respect  of  discipline  and  the  adequate
remuneration  of  the  higher  officials,  the  difficulties  which  these
bodies,  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  Consumers'  Associations,
have  always  encountered.  It  has  even  been  suggested  that,
in  some  towns,  city  engineers  have  been  hindered  by  the
Council  from  introducing  labour-saving  devices,  by  which  the
employment  of  some  of  the  Councillors'  electors  would  be
threatened.^  Against  this  disadvantage,  however,  must  be
set  a  corresponding  advantage  also  found  in  connection  with
productive    co-operation,    the    advantage,    namely,    that,    for

'  Municipal  cmd  Private  Operation  of  Public  Utilities,  vol.  i.  p.  23.
«  Ibid.  vol.  i.  pp.  342-3.


CH.  XIX    PUBLIC  OPEEATION  OF  INDUSTEIES        343

a  given  sum  of  money,  a  more  efficient  engineer  or  manager
can  be  obtained  than  will  be  forthcoming  under  private
management,  for  the  reason  that  the  position  of  a  public
servant  is  at  once  attractive  in  itself  and  also  makes  appeal  to
altruistic  motives.  This  advantage,  it  must  be  clearly  xmder-
stood,  is  a  real  advantage,  and  not  a  kind  of  bounty  obtained
at  the  expense  of  the  engineer  or  manager ;  for  there  is  created
a  new  value  in  the  extra  satisfaction  which  the  said  engineer
or  manager  derives  from  the  fact  of  serving  the  public.  The
difference  between  what  a  man  of  given  ability  would  have
been  willing  to  work  for  in  a  private  company  and  what  he
does  work  for  in  a  State  department  is,  in  effect,  extra  product
due  to  the  adoption  of  the  public  form  of  industrial  organisa-
tion. This  difference  is  not,  of  course,  equivalent  to  the
difference  between  the  earnings  of  the  head  of  a  State  depart-
ment and  those  of  the  head  of  a  private  business,  because,  in
the  earnings  of  the  latter,  there  is  generally  included  a  return
for  "waiting"  and  "uncertainty-bearing" — services  which  in  the
public  departments  are  provided  by  the  taxpayer.  It  is,  thus,
fallacious  to  take  the  excess  of  the  income  of  an  American
railway  king  over  that  of  the  administrator  of  the  Prussian
State  railways  as  a  measure  of  the  comparative  wasteful-
ness of  private  enterprise.  Still  there  is  an  advantage,  and
one  that  can  reasonably  be  set  against  the  preceding  dis-
advantage. The  general  conclusion  is  that  the  efficiency  of
management  in  public  and  in  joint-stock  enterprise — apart,
of  course,  from  special  examples  of  incompetent  officialdom  in
certain  small  towns — is  likely  to  be  pretty  much  the  same.

§  4.  This  broad  statement  does  not,  however,  exhaust
the  discussion.  There  remain  three  important  groups  of
considerations,  which  tend  to  suggest  that  public  operation
is,  on  the  whole,  inferior  to  public  control.  The  first  of  these
has  to  do  with  the  fact  that,  not  only  different  producers
within  the  same  industry,  but  also  different  producers  in
apparently  disconnected  industries,  are  often,  in  reality,
rivals.  No  doubt,  an  industry  can  be  imagined  which  is
monopolistic  in  the  widest  possible  sense,  in  such  wise  that,
not  only  are  there  no  competing  firms  within  it,  but  also
that  there  are  no  competing  industries  outside  it.     There  is


344  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

some  reason  to  believe  that  the  service  of  supplying  a  modern
city  with  water  is  monopolistic  in  this  sense.  It  would  be
possible,  by  combining  together  a  number  of  industries  that
are  now  separate,  to  create  other  monopolies  of  the  same  sort.
For  example,  the  various  means  of  communication,  such  as
omnibuses,  tram-lines,  motor  cars  and  carriages  might  all
conceivably  be  brought  together  under  one  hand.  The  same
thing  might  conceivably  be  done  with  all  the  means  of  pro-
viding artificial  light  or  all  the  means  of  providing  power.
But  such  arrangements  are  quite  out  of  relation  to  actual
facts.  As  things  are  at  present,  I  should  doubt  if  any  in-
dustry, except  that  of  water  supply,  can  properly  be  regarded
as  monopolistic  in  the  wide  sense  here  taken.  Now,  the
interest  of  the  national  dividend  requires  that,  where  a
number  of  establishments,  whether  in  the  same  industry  or
in  different  industries,  are  competing  for  the  supply  of  some
public  need,  that  one  which  can  supply  it  most  efficiently
shall  oust  the  others.^  But,  when  any  enterprise  is  operated
by  a  public  authority,  it  is  likely  to  be  maintained  by  artificial
support,  even  though  it  is  less  efficient  than  its  rivals.  The
reason  is  that  persons  in  control  of  any  governmental  enter-
prise, being  naturally  anxious  to  make  that  enterprise  a
success,  tend  to  identify  the  good  of  the  whole  with  the  good
of  their  own  department.  Hence,  a  governmental  authority
embarked  on  business  is  almost  certain,  if  it  prove  com-
mercially weak,  to  employ  unfair  weapons  from  its  non-
commercial armoury,  the  use  of  which  will  maintain  it  more
or  less  permanently  in  the  industry,  despite  the  fact  that
its  productive  methods  are  more  costly  than  those  of  its  rivals.
These  unfair  methods  are  of  two  sorts,  according  as  they  are
directed  primarily  to  defend  the  governmental  enterprise  or
to  obstruct  its  competitors.

Defensive  non-commercial  methods  consist,  in  the  main,
in  the  conscious  or  unconscious  practice  of  devices  for  securing
a  differential  bounty  from  the  general  public.  A  government
authority,  which  is  engaged  partly  in  business  and  partly  in
rendering  general  unremunerated  services,  may  charge  expenses
that  really  belong  to  the  business  against  the  other  part  of
1  Cf.  aiUe,  Chapter  VI.  §  9.


cH.  XIX    PUBLIC  OPEEATION  OF  INDUSTKIES        345

its  work.  A  very  glaring  example  is  the  practice  of  the
London  County  Council  in  writing  down  the  value  of  land
purchased  for  workmen's  dwellings  to  the  value  which  it  has,
not  in  the  general  market,  but  as  ear-marked  for  this  parti-
cular purpose.  Again,  municipal  tramway  accounts  may  be
given  a  false  appearance  of  prosperity  by  the  charging  of
expenditure  upon  roads,  which  is  properly  attributable  to
them,  to  the  general  road  account.^  A  like  device  is  adopted
in  a  milder  form  when  a  municipality  fails  to  set  aside
a  special  fund  to  balance  the  advantage  it  possesses  over
private  enterprise  in  the  lower  rate  at  which  it  can  borrow
money.  "  A  municipality  can  float  bonds  at  a  lower  rate
of  interest  than  a  private  company,  since  the  whole  assessable
property  of  the  town  is  generally  liable  for  the  payment  of
interest  and  principal,  while  the  company  can  give  security
only  on  the  works."  ^  This  ability  on  the  part  of  a  muni-
cipality is,  thus,  due,  in  the  main,  simply  to  the  fact  that  it
is  able  to  force  upon  the  ratepayers  an  obligation  to  pay
its  bondholders  even  if  the  enterprise  fails,  while  a  private
company  has,  by  the  offer  of  higher  pay,  to  secure  debenture
holders  who  are  prepared,  in  the  event  of  failure,  to  lose
their  money.  Except  in  so  far  as  the  fear  of  failure,  and,
therefore,  the  extra  compensation  asked  for  by  debenture
holders,  is  due  to  public  ignorance  of  facts  which  are
more  readily  ascertainable  in  connection  with  municipalities
than  with  companies ' — to  that  extent  municipal  operation
effects  a  small  real  saving — the  social  cost  of  the  muni-
cipality's cheap  loan  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  company's
relatively  dear  loan.  If  the  two  enterprises  are  to  compete
fairly,  the  municipality  ought  to  transfer  to  the  rates  the
bulk  of  its  gain  from  better  credit,  before  balancing  the
accounts  of  its  business.     If  it  does  not  do  this,  it  is,  in

•  Municipal  and  Private  Operation  of  Public  Utilities,  vol.  i.  p.  469.

*  Bemis,  Municipal  Monopolies,  p.  45.

'  The  advantage  available  for  municipal  enterprise,  thus  hinted  at,  turns
upon  the  fact  that,  when  people  invest  in  any  undertaking  through  an  inter-
mediary, they  necessarily  assume  the  risk  that  this  intermediary  may  prove
to  be  unwilling  or  unable  to  fulfil  his  obligations.  The  uncertainty-bearing
undertaken  in  this  way  is  a  real  element  in  the  cost  of  production.  When  the
State  is  the  intermediary,  its  honesty  and  financial  strength  are.  in  general,  so
well  known  that  this  element  is  practically  eliminated.


346  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

effect,  assisting  that  business  by  a  contribution  from  the
general  public.  In  so  far  as  the  lower  terms  on  which  it
can  engage  managers  and  engineers  is  due  to  the  fact  that
the  shouldering  of  risks  by  the  rate-payers  safeguards  them
against  the  possibility  of  their  employers'  going  bankrupt,  it
is  doing  the  same  thing  a  second  time,  unless  it  transfers  the
gain  made  under  this  head  also  to  the  rates.  Of  course,  if
a  municipally-managed  undertaking,  on  account  of  superior
efficiency,  is  less  likely  to  make  a  loss  than  a  corresponding
private  concern,  there  is  a  real  gain.  But  since,  in  any  event,
there  is  the  gilt-edged  guarantee  of  the  rate-payers,  that  gain
is  not  reflected  in  the  better  terms  on  which  the  municipality
can  borrow.

Aggressive  non-commercial  methods  are  made  possible  by
the  fact  that  public  authorities,  besides  operating  their  own
enterprises,  are  often  also  endowed  with  powers  of  control
over  other  enterprises.  When  they  are  in  this  position,  there
is  a  grave  danger  that  the  public  authorities  may  be  tempted
to  use  their  powers  of  control  in  such  a  way  as  to  obstruct
and  injure  rivals.  It  is  obvious  that  an  Education  Authority,
which  both  runs  schools  of  its  own  and  makes  regulations  for
the  running  of  rival  schools,  is  under  strong  temptation.  So
is  an  authority  which  at  once  builds  houses  and  frames  build-
ing bye-laws ;  and  so  also  are  municipalities  operating  gas-
lighting  or  tramways  and  controlling  electric  -  lighting  or
motor-omnibuses.  Among  the  methods  of  aggression  open  to
them  perhaps  the  simplest  is  that  of  making  the  conditions
about  sinking  funds,  under  which  their  own  establishments
work,  more  favourable  than  the  conditions  about  purchase  at
the  end  of  the  lease,  which  are  imposed  upon  private  com-
panies. A  public  authority  which  provides  a  sinking  fund  to
extinguish  the  capital  debt  of  its  enterprise,  as  well  as  a  fund
to  cover  depreciation  and  obsolescence,  is,  in  effect,  taxing  its
present  citizens  for  the  benefit  of  posterity.^  In  like  manner,
a  public  authority  which  confers  a  franchise  on  a  private
company  upon  condition  that  the  company's  plant  shall  pass

^  The  Board  of  Agriculture  has  made  a  new  departure  in  not  requiring  the
County  Councils  to  charge  small  holders,  who  hire  land  from  them,  rents  high
enough  to  provide  this  kind  of  sinking  fund. — [Cd.  4246],  p.  12.


cH.  iix    PUBLIC  OPERATION  OF  INDUSTRIES        347

to  itself  at  the  end  of  the  lease,  either  free  of  charge  or  at
"  cost  of  replacement,"  is  imposing  a  similar  tax.  It  is
readily  seen  that  the  terms  of  sinking  funds  and  franchises  re-
spectively can  be  so  arranged  that  the  burden  under  the  sinking
fund  is  the  smaller,  and,  therefore,  that  private  operation
suffers,  as  against  the  rival  system,  a  differential  injury.

There  are,  however,  grosser  forms  of  aggression  than  the
above.  It  is  notorious  that  those  municipalities  which  operated
their  own  gas-plant  vigorously  obstructed,  by  the  exercise  of
their  veto  and  in  other  ways,  the  development  of  electric
lighting  companies.  Again :  "  Since  1898  the  desire  to
protect  the  local  municipal  electric  light  plants  has  been
permitted  to  impede  the  spread  of  the  so-called  electricity-in-
bulk  generating  and  distributing  companies."  ^  In  like  manner,
the  central  government,  in  order  to  protect  its  telegraph
monopoly,  has  placed  administrative  obstacles  in  the  way
of  other  means  of  electrical  communication.  In  1884  the
Postmaster-General  declined  to  allow  the  National  Telephone
Company  to  receive  or  deUver  a  written  message  at  any  of
its  offices,  and,  in  defending  this  course,  said,  "  It  would
make,  I  am  afraid,  a  serious  hole  in  the  telegraph  revenue,
if  written  messages  were  allowed  to  be  sent." "  Finally,
in  the  charter  granted  to  the  Marconi  Wireless  Company
in  1906,  permitting  the  transmission  of  wireless  messages
between  the  United  Kingdom  and  North  America,  it  is  speci-
ally provided  that  permission  will  not  be  granted  for  messages
to  or  from  any  European  country  except  Italy,  the  purpose
being  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  the  cables  owned  by  the
British  and  Continental  governments.'

The  use  of  defensive  and  aggressive  weapons  of  an  "  unfair  "
uncommercial  character  by  public  authorities  operating  indus-
tries brings  it  about,  as  already  explained,  that  an  industry
run  by  them  is  often  maintained  in  existence,  despite  the
fact  that  the  end  served  by  it  would  be  served  more  cheaply
by  a  rival  industry.  It  is  necessary  to  note,  in  conclusion,
that  the  use  of  these  methods  tends  to  extrude  economically
superior  rivals  even  more  effectively  than  it  appears  to  do  at

1  H.  Meyer,  Public  Oumership  and  the  Telephones,  p.  351.
*  Ibid.  p.  18.  8  f^iel^  pp_  341.2.


348  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ii

first  sight.  For  it  acts,  not  only  directly,  but  also  indirectly
tbrough  anticipation.  It  not  only  drives  out  of  the  market
existing  competitors,  but  checks  the  entry  of  new  ones.  When
a  man  contemplating  a  philanthropic  enterprise  is  given  to
understand  that,  should  his  experiment  succeed,  a  govern-
mental authority  will  enter  the  field  he  has  proved  fruitful,
he  does — or  should — rejoice.  But,  when  a  man  engaged  in  a
business  enterprise  is  given  to  understand  this,  the  end  he  is
pursuing  is  not,  like  the  philanthropist's,  furthered.  It  is,  on
the  contrary,  thwarted,  and  his  energies  are,  therefore,  diverted
from  the  undertaking.  An  effect  of  this  kind  is  claimed  to
have  resulted  from  municipal  experiments  in  house-building.
These  considerations,  when  they  have  relevance,  evidently
strengthen  the  probability  that  governmental  operation  of
industries  will  be  injurious  to  productive  efficiency ;  and  they
are  bound  to  have  some  degree  of  relevance  except  in  industries
that  are  monopolistic  in  the  widest  possible  sense.

§5.1  pass  to  a  second  consideration.  This  has  to  do  with
the  fact  that  the  working  of  any  industrial  enterprise  involves
some  degree  of  uncertainty.  As  will  be  explained  at  length  in
Appendix  I.,  the  exposing  of  money  to  uncertainty  is  a  definite
factor  of  production,  which  makes  output  larger  than  it  would
become  without  it.  In  the  long  run,  willingness  to  expose
£100  to  an  equal  chance  of  becoming  £160  or  of  becoming
£50  is  bound  to  increase  the  national  dividend.  If  willing-
ness to  expose  money  to  uncertainty  on  the  part  of  people  in
control  of  industry  is  "  artificially "  restricted,  enterprise  and
adventure  that  make  for  industrial  progress,  and,  therewith,
production,  will  be  hampered.  Furthermore,  the  injury  thus
wrought  is  very  much  larger  than  appears  at  first  sight.  For,
since  any  experiment  with  an  untried  process  may  fail,  a
diminished  willingness  to  expose  money  to  uncertainty  implies
a  restriction  of  experiment,  and,  hence,  a  diminution  in  the
inducement  to  enterprising  persons  to  make  useful  inventions.
No  doubt,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that,  with  the  growing
dependence  of  industry  upon  non-commercial  science,  this
consideration  has  become  less  important  than  it  used  to  be.
Dr.  Mertz  has  well  observed :  "  The  great  inventions  of  former
ages  were  made  in  countries  whose  practical  life,  industry  and


cH.  XIX    PUBLIC  OPEEATION  OF  INDUSTRIES        349

commerce  were  most  advanced ;  but  the  great  inventions  of
the  last  fifty  years  in  chemistry,  electricity  and  the  science  of
heat  have  been  made  in  the  scientific  laboratory ;  the  former
were  stimulated  by  practical  wants ;  the  latter  themselves
produced  new  functional  requirements,  and  created  new  spheres
of  labour,  industry  and  commerce."  ^  It  still  remains  true,
however,  that,  though  the  fundamental  discoveries  are  often
non-commercial,  yet  the  application  of  them  through  "  in-
ventions," in  the  earlier  stages  before  the  inventions  have
been  proved  by  experience,  generally  requires  a  commercial
stimulus.  Anything  which  restricts  unduly  willingness  to
make  ventures  in  any  industry  must  still,  therefore,  threaten
heavy  loss.  The  point  I  have  to  urge  is  that  a  public  body
engaged  in  industrial  operations  is  likely  to  restrict  imduly
this  willingness.

The  defence  of  this  proposition  rests  on  the  following
reasons.  First,  public  authorities  recognise  that  hostility  to
government  on  the  part  of  the  people  is  an  evil,  and  they  also
recognise  that  an  unsuccessful  State  speculation,  "  if  it  involves
repudiation  or  oppressive  taxation  for  years  to  come,  produces
a  popular  revulsion  and  deep-seated  distrust  of  government
itself  in  all  its  branches."  Secondly,  the  persons  at  any  time
in  control  of  a  public  authority,  when  that  authority  is  de-
pendent on  the  party  system,  cannot  but  know  that  "  failure
would  give  their  political  opponents  too  good  an  opportunity
to  ride  into  power."  ^  Thirdly,  these  persons  are  partly  able  to
perceive  that,  if  people  are  compelled  to  expose  resources  to
uncertainty  in  proportion  to  the  rateable  value  of  their  houses,
more  real  sacrifice  will  be  involved  than  if  the  same  aggregate
of  resources  to  be  exposed  to  the  same  scheme  of  uncertainty
were  obtained,  by  way  of  voluntary  contributions,  in  proportion
to  the  attractive  force  exercised  upon  the  several  contributors
by  the  prospective  profits.  Finally,  and  this  is  really  the  most
fundamental  point,  if  inventors  must  appeal  to  government
ofi&cials,  they  are  confronted,  as  it  were,  with  the  average
daring  of  the  community,  whereas,  if  they  are  free  to  appeal
to  private  enterprise,  they  can  select  a  group  of  supporters

1  Mertz,  History  of  European  ThougM,  vol.  L  p.  92.
2  H.  Meyer,  Public  Ownership  and  the  Telephones  in  Cfreai  Britain,  p.  349.


350  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  n

from  persons  above  this  average.  As  Leroy  Beaulieu  well
writes :  "  A  man  of  initiative  will  always  find,  among  the  forty
million  inhabitants  of  a  country,  some  audacious  persons  who
will  believe  in  him,  will  follow  him,  will  make  their  fortunes
with  him  or  will  ruin  themselves  with  him.  He  would  waste
his  time  in  trying  to  convince  those  hierarchical  bureaus  which
are  the  heavy  and  necessary  thought-organs  and  action-organs
of  a  State."  ^  It  follows  that,  in  general,  while  the  hope  of
gain  operates  more  strongly  on  private  enterprise  than  on  the
public  authority,  the  fear  of  loss  operates  more  strongly  on
the  public  authority.  This  implies  that  a  public  authority  will
be  less  willing  than  a  private  concern  to  take  risks,  or,  to  put
it  technically,  to  provide  the  factor  uncertainty-bearing.  A
good  illustration  of  this  tendency  is  afforded  by  the  conduct  of
the  British  Government  in  regard  to  the  working  of  the  tele-
phone trunk  lines  after  they  had  been  taken  over  by  the
Post  Office  in  1892.  "The  Treasury  compelled  the  Post
Office  to  adopt  the  policy  of  refusing  to  make  any  extensions
of  doubtful  prospect,  unless  private  persons,  or  the  local
authority  interested,  should  guarantee  *  a  specific  revenue  per
year,  fixed  with  reference  to  the  estimated  cost  of  working
and  maintaining  a  given  mileage  of  trunk-line  wire.' "  ^  The
opinion  of  Sir  George  Gibb  may  be  cited  in  evidence  that  this
proceeding  is  representative  of  the  general  attitude  of  public
authorities.  He  writes  :  "  Whatever  may  be  thought  as  to  the
respective  merits  of  private  and  public  ownership,  it  cannot  be
denied  that  private  enterprise  does  take  more  risk  than  any
government  is  likely  to  do  except  under  pressure  of  military
necessities."  ^  Dr.  Marshall  brings  out  very  clearly  the  effect
upon  inventions  implied  in  this  unwillingness  of  public  bodies
to  bear  uncertainty :  "  It  is  notorious  that,  though  departments
of  central  and  municipal  governments  employ  many  thousands
of  highly-paid  servants  in  engineering  and  other  progressive
industries,  very  few  inventions  of  any  importance  are  made  by^
them ;  and  nearly  all  of  these  few  are  the  work  of  men  like
Sir  W.  H.  Preece,  who  had  been  thoroughly  trained  in  free


^  L'Etat  modcme,  pp.  56,  208.

*  H.  Meyer,  Public  Ovmership  and  tJie  Telephones  in  Great  Britain,  p.  66.

3  Railway  Nationalisation,  p.  9.


f


CH.  XIX    PUBLIC  OPERATION  OF  INDUSTRIES        351

enterprise  before  they  entered  Government  service.  Govern-
ment creates  scarcely  anything,  ...  A  Government  could
print  a  good  edition  of  Shakespeare's  works,  but  it  could  not
have  got  them  written,  .  .  .  The  carcase  of  municipal  electric
works  belongs  to  the  officials,  the  genius  belongs  to  free  enter-
prise." ^  The  position  is  summed  up  in  the  Report  of  the
American  Civic  Federation,  where  we  read :  "  The  Assistant
Secretary  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  Mr.  Pelham,  told  the  Com-
mittee [of  the  Civic  Federation]  that  they  did  not  encourage
the  trying  of  new  inventions,  or  the  trying  of  systems  in  any
way  experimental,  by  municipalities.  They  waited  for  these
to  be  proven  out  by  private  companies.  Progress  is  all  with
the  companies."^

Now,  it  is  evident  that  the  effect  of  a  restriction  of  the
willingness  to  take  risks,  and,  therewith,  of  the  stimulus  to
invention,  upon  the  economies  of  production  will  vary  in
importance  in  different  industries,  according  to  the  extent  of
the  speculative  element  involved  in  them.  Hence,  it  follows
that  the  relative  inefficiency  of  public  operation,  as  compared
with  private  operation,  is  very  large  in  highly  speculative
undertakings  and  dwindles  to  nothing  in  respect  of  those
where  the  speculative  element  is  practically  non-existent.
This  idea  is  sometimes  crystallised  in  an  attempt  to  group
industries  into  two  divisions,  the  speculative  and  the  non-
speculative,  after  the  manner  in  which  trustees  distinguish
between  speculative  securities  and  investment  securities.
This  grouping,  it  is  sometimes  suggested,  can  be  adequately
worked  out,  by  setting  on  the  one  side  new  industries  in  an
experimental  stage,  and,  on  the  other,  industries  that  are
already  tried  and  known.  Thus,  Sir  George  Gibb  distin-
guishes, from  this  point  of  view,  the  railway  industry  at
an  early,  and  at  a  mature,  age.  "  As  regards  the  age  of
construction,  at  all  events,  England  has  derived  incalculable
-^  benefit  from  the  fact  that  the  railway  system  has  been  made
by  private  enterprise.  But  the  problem  of  working  the
railway    system   after   it   has   been   constructed   is,   I   admit,

*  Economic  Journal,  1907,  pp.  21-22.     Cf.  also  Ryan,  Distributive  Justice,
p.  165.

'  Municipal  and  Private  Operation  of  Public  Utilities,  toI.  i.  p.  437.


352  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  ii

essentially  different  from  the  problem  of  securing  its  construc-
tion." ^  In  like  manner,  Professor  Commons,  writing  in  1904,
while  he  approved  of  the  establishment  of  city  electric  lighting
plants  at  that  time,  considered  that  "  those  cities  which  entered
upon  municipal  electric  lighting  eight  or  ten  years  ago  are
open  to  criticism."  "  Private  parties,"  he  holds,  "  should  be
encouraged  to  push  forward  in  all  the  untrod  fields."  ^  The
distinction  thus  insisted  on  has,  no  doubt,  considerable  im-
portance. Two  points,  however,  should  be  noticed.  First,
an  industry,  which  is  old-established  at  one  place,  may  need
new  construction  at  another,  and  the  conditions  of  construction
there  may  be  such  that  a  large  speculative  element  remains.
For  example,  though  the  industry  of  water  supply  is  an  old
one,  different  towns  have  to  be  supplied  from  sources  situated
so  differently,  and  along  routes  of  such  varying  character,  that
little  guidance  for  one  town  can  be  drawn  from  the  experience
of  others.  Secondly,  no  industry  is  likely  to  be  so  far  estab-
lished that  experimentation — which  involves  speculation — as
to  improved  methods  is  undesirable.  In  some  measure,  all
industries,  in  which  possibilities  of  development  remain,  demand
readiness  to  take  risks  if  further  inventions  are  to  be  made,
and  are,  therefore,  liable  to  be  hampered  by  anything  that
obstructs  this  readiness.  It  would,  therefore,  be  an  error  to
suppose  that  the  relatively  uneconomic  character  of  public
operation,  due  to  the  circumstances  discussed  in  this  section,
is  significant  only  for  new  industries.  It  probably  has  some
appreciable  significance  in  regard  to  nearly  all  industries,
though,  of  course,  its  importance  is  greatest  in  regard  to  those
in  an  experimental  stage.

8  6.  I  pass  to  a  third  consideration.  The  relative  in-
feriority of  public  operation,  due  to  the  interference  which  it
causes  with  the  most  economical  combination  of  the  different
factors  of  production — for  that  is,  in  effect,  what  obstacles  in
the  way  of  people's  readiness  to  take  risks,  or  to  brave  uncertainty,
implies — is  paralleled,  in  many  industries,  by  a  further  in-
feriority due  to  interference  with  the  most  economical  size  of
business  unit.     Practically  speaking,  public  undertakings  can

'  Railway  Nationalisation,  p.  11.
*  Bemis,  Mwnicipal  Monopolies,  p.  56.


cH.xix    PUBLIC  OPEKATION  OF  INDUSTEIES        353

only  be  operated  by  groups  of  people  united  into  some  form
of  political  organisation.  But  it  is  highly  improbable  that
the  areas  of  control,  most  economical  for  the  working  of  any
industry,  will  correspond  in  size  with  the  areas  covered  by  the
public  authorities  existing  in  a  modern  State,  since  these  are
set  up  with  regard  to  quite  other  considerations  than  the
efficient  running  of  industries.  Consequently,  in  general,  it
must  either  happen  that  special  public  authorities  are  created
for  the  express  purpose  of  running  certain  industries,  or  that
the  size  of  the  units  of  control  in  these  industries  is  altered  to
fit  the  scope  of  existiEg  public  authorities.  For  very  large
enterprises  having  a  scope  midway  between  that  of  the  central
government  and  that  of  the  relevant  local  authority,  experience
shows  that  special  public  bodies,  adapted  to  this  scope,  can  be,
and  have  been,  erected.  We  are  familiar,  for  example,  with
the  various  harbour  trusts  and  dock  trusts,  with  the  London
Water  Board  and  the  Port  of  London  Authority.  Another
device  is  that  of  joint  boards  of  management  representing  two
or  more  local  authorities.  "  In  England  and  Wales,  during
the  year  1907-8,  there  were  twenty-five  joint  boards  or  com-
mittees for  the  supply  of  water,  two  for  the  supply  of  water
and  gas,  and  one  for  the  supply  of  electricity  and  the  manage-
ment of  a  tramway  undertaking."  ^  Though,  however,  for  very
large  businesses,  the  creation  of  special  public  bodies  is  ad-
mittedly a  practicable  policy,  it  is  not  always  likely  to  be
adopted.  The  danger  that,  under  public  operation,  local
authorities  inadequate  in  area  will  become  the  agents  of  that
operation,  is  especially  great  in  industries  originally  adapted
to  the  area  covered  by  these  agents,  but  afterwards  fitted,  as  a
result  of  new  inventions,  for  larger  areas.  In  former  times  the
areas  of  management  most  suitable  for  the  industries  of  water
supply,  gas  lighting  and  electric  power  supply  were  approxi-
mately coincident  with  the  several  municipal  areas.  But,  since
the  advent  of  certain  modern  discoveries,  the  areas,  which  might
be  expected  to  prove  economically  most  efficient,  are  often
much  larger  than  municipal  areas.     Thus,  "  with  horse  traction

^  Knoop,  Principles  and  Methods  of  ifunicipal  Trading,  p.  117.  As  Mr.  Knoop
further  points  out,  it  not  infrequently  happens  that  a  municipality  enters  into
an  arrangement  with  smaller  authorities  to  extend  its  tramway,  water  or  gas
system  beyond  its  own  boundaries  so  aa  to  include  adjacent  areas  also.

2  A


354  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

the  limit  of  each  local  authority  was,  roughly,  the  limit  of
commercial  working.  With  electric  traction  the  parish  became
a  mere  item  in  a  comprehensive  system,  which  might  extend
over  a  whole  county."^  Again,  with  the  improvement  in
methods  of  distribution  for  electricity  in  bulk,  the  most
economical  area  for  the  supply  of  electricity  has  come  to
extend  over  thousands  of  square  miles.  Even  in  the  supply
of  water,  now  that  the  needs  of  large  towns  are  satisfied  by
the  tapping  of  distant  lakes,  there  is  obvious  economy  in  a
joint  organisation  for  supplying  a  number  of  towns  along  the
route  that  the  pipes  must  follow.  Indeed,  it  would  seem  that
gas  lighting  is  the  only  one  of  the  public  utility  industries
for  which  the  most  economical  area  of  management  at  the
present  time  does  not  exceed  the  municipal  area.  These
changes  in  the  area  proper  to  management  have  not,  however,
in  general,  been  followed  by  the  transference  of  the  public
utility  industries  to  new  public  authorities  created  ad  hoc ;
for  the  task  of  ousting  the  municipalities  is  opposed  by  an
immense  amount  of  friction,  and  is,  therefore,  little  likely  to
be  successfully  undertaken.  Hence,  in  practice,  public  opera-
tion often  implies  that  industries,  whose  most  economical  area
of  management  is  intermediate  between  those  representative
of  the  central  authority  and  of  local  authorities  respectively,
will,  in  fact,  be  worked  by  local  authorities  ;  and  this,  of  course,
implies  a  reduction  of  the  unit  of  management  below  what  is
economically  best.^  In  enterprises  whose  most  economical  area
of  management  is  smaller  than  that  covered  by  the  smallest
existing  type  of  public  authority,  the  creation  of  new  authorities
for  the  special  purpose  of  running  them  cannot  even  be  said  to  be

1  Porter,  Dangers  of  Municipal  Ownership,  p.  245.

^  It  may  be  objected  that  the  alternative  to  municipal  operation  is  usually
municipal  control,  and  that  tliis  control,  when  the  area  of  the  municipality  is
too  small,  may  render  private  undertakings  as  inefficient  as  municipal  under-
takings would  be.  But  it  is  easier  to  transfer  control  than  it  is  to  transfer  |
operation  to  an  authority  of  wider  scope  than  the  municipalities.  The  British
Light  Railways  Act  of  1906  establishes  such  a  wider  authority  in  the  shape  of
the  Light  Railway  Commissioners.  (Of.  H.  Meyer,  Municipal  Ownership  in
Cheat  Britain,  p.  69.)  Again  :  "When,  as  in  Massachusetts,  it  is  not  uncommon
for  a  street  railway  comjiany  to  operate  franchises  from  ten,  and,  in  one  case,  from
nineteen  different  towns,  independent  nmnicipal  control  is  out  of  the  question.
The  State  railroad  commission  is  the  recognition  in  law  of  this  condition  of
fact"  (Rowe,  Annals  of  the  American  Academy,  1900,  p.  19).


cH.xix    PUBLIC  OPERATION  OF  INDUSTEIES        355

practicable.  If  such  industries  are  to  be  taken  over  by  any
public  authority,  this  authority  can  hardly  be  other  than
one  of  the  authorities  that  already  exist  for  other  purposes.
Consequently,  in  these  industries  public  operation,  not  merely
in  general,  but  practically  always,  implies  the  introduction
of  a  scale  of  management  larger  than  is  economically  most
efficient.

^  7.  Now,  if  it  were  the  fact  that  under  private  enterprise
all  industries  would  always  evolve  the  most  economical  unit
of  management,  it  would  follow  that  public  operation  could
not,  in  this  respect,  be  superior,  and  would,  in  general,  be
greatly  inferior,  to  private  operation.  In  industries  normally
conducted  under  conditions  of  simple  competition,  such  as  the
industries  of  baking,  milk -supply,  house-building  or  farming,
we  may  fairly  presume  that  private  enterprise  will,  for  the
most  part,  evolve  the  most  efficient  size  of  unit.  But,  where
any  element  of  monopoly  is  present,  we  may  by  no  means
presume  this.  The  most  economical  unit  may  be  prevented
from  realising  itself  through  friction,  or  through  the  hindrance
imposed  by  popular  dislike  of  large  amalgamations,  or  in  other
ways.  The  probability  that  it  will  be  so  prevented  is  especially
great  in  an  industry  whose  normal  condition  is,  not  that  of
simple  monopoly,  but  that  of  monopolistic  competition.
Here,  as  was  pointed  out  in  Chapter  VI.,  there  are  large
wastes  due  to  competitive  advertisement  and  so  forth,  which
centralisation  under  a  single  management  might  remove.  Of
railways,  for  example.  Sir  George  Gibb  wrote  some  years  ago :
"  Each  railway  company  works  for  its  own  rout^.  The  result
is  that  unnecessary  mileage  is  run,  and  train  loads  are
lessened.  ...  If  those  responsible  for  the  handling  and
carriage  of  railway  traffic  could  work  with  a  single  eye  tx)
economical  results,  and  in  all  cases  forward  traffic  by  the
routes  which  yielded  the  best  working  results,  great  economies
could  undoubtedly  be  effected."^  This  statement  has  been
borne  out  by  the  experience  of  the  joint  working  of  British
railways  during  the  war  ;  though  it  must  be  remembered  that
the  character  of  war-time  traffic,  with  its  large  trainloads  of
munitions  and  troops,  has  been  exceptionally  favourable  to
1  Bailicay  NcUionalisation,  p.  21.  '


356  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

economical  working.  Like  economies  are  sometimes  obtainable
from  the  combination,  not  of  different  firms  engaged  in  the
same  occupation,  but  of  different  occupations.  There  is
probably  an  economy  in  the  co-ordination  under  one  hand
of  the  various  industries  that  utilise  the  public  streets.
"  "Water  mains  may  be  laid  before  streets  are  paved,  thus
saving  the  damage  and  expense  of  tearing  up  good  pavement
to  lay  water  pipes."  ^  In  like  manner,  it  may  well  be  held
that  important  economies  would  result  if  the  work  of  treat-
ing disease  could  be  brought,  by  means  of  a  State  medical
service,  into  direct  connection  with  the  work  of  preventing
disease  that  is  now  undertaken  by  the  Public  Health
authorities.  Though,  therefore,  the  danger  of  indirect  evil
consequences  of  the  kind  discussed  in  Chapter  VI.  must  not  be
forgotten,  it  is  at  least  possible  that,  in  enterprises  of  this
sort,  public  operation,  instead  of  hindering,  might  actually
foster  the  growth  of  the  most  economical  unit  of  management.
§  8.  So  far  of  generalities.  When  the  practical  issue  is
raised  whether  a  particular  class  of  enterprise  could,  with
greater  advantage  to  the  national  dividend,  be  publicly  con-
trolled or  publicly  operated,  it  will  be  necessary,  in  order  to
reach  a  satisfactory  conclusion,  to  take  into  account  both  the
comparative  effects  which  the  two  forms  of  management  are
likely  to  have  on  productive  efficiency,  and  also  the  comparative
ease  with  which  whatever  regulation  the  public  interest  may
require  can  be  applied  to  them.  In  industries  closely  asso-
ciated with  the  public  health,  where  reliable  quality  is  elsential
and  where  inspection  cannot  easily  be  made  thorough,  public
operation  may  be  desirable,  even  though  the  probable  alternative
is  competitive,  and  not  monopolistic,  production.  Thus,  there
is  much  to  be  said  for  the  public  provision  of  slaughter-houses,
to  which,  as  in  Germany,  all  butchers  are  compelled  to  resort,
and  for  the  public  provision  of  milk  for  the  use  of  young
children.  The  Eeporters  to  the  American  Civic  Federation
are  of  opinion  that  "  undertakings  in  which  the  sanitary
motive  largely  enters  should  be  operated  by  the  public."'
But,    broadly    speaking,    industries    which    would    normally

*  Bemis,  Municipal  Monopolies,  p.  46.
'  MwnicipaZ  and  Private  Operation  of  Public  Utilities,  vol.  i.  p.  23.


j


cH.xix    PUBLIC  OPEEATION  OF  INDUSTEIES        357

be  operated  under  competitive  conditions  cannot  usefully  be
managed  on  a  large  scale  by  public  authorities.  Apart  from
a  few  special  exceptions,  the  proposal  for  public  operation  is  a
live  one  only  in  industries  that  tend  towards  monopoly.  The
case  for  it,  as  against  the  case  for  public  control,  is  strongest
in  industries  which  have  been  reduced  more  or  less  to  routine
and  in  which  there  is  comparatively  little  scope  for  daring  ad-
venture. It  is  relatively  weak  in  industries  which  are  to  an
important  extent  rival  to  other  privately  operated  industries,
or  in  which  the  normal  unit  of  management  is  widely  different
from  the  area  of  existing  public  authorities.  Whether  any
particular  monopolistic  industry  should  be  publicly  operated
or  publicly  controlled  cannot  be  determined  in  a  general  way.
Before  a  decision  between  these  alternative  methods  is  arrived
at,  a  detailed  investigation  of  the  industry  must  be  made,  and
this  should  be  supplemented  by  an  impartial  estimate  of  the
quality  of  the  particular  public  authority  whose  action  is
involved,  as  well  as  of  the  probable  effect  of  new  tasks
upon  its  efficiency  for  the  purpose  of  its  primary  non-
industrial  duties.

§  9.  If,  on  the  strength  of  the  foregoing  or  other  con-
siderations, it  is  decided  that  an  industry  already  in  existence
and  operated  by  private  persons  shall  be  taken  over  by
public  authority,  it  is  necessary  to  settle  the  terms  on
which  this  shall  be  done.  Let  us,  for  simplicity,  suppose  the
conditions  to  be  such  that  under  public  operation  the  technical
efficiency  of  production  will  be  unaltered.  Public  ownership
is  desired  because,  without  it,  a  monopolistic  or  partially
monopolistic  concern  is  able  to  force  up  prices  against  the
public  and  so  to  check  the  development  of  the  industry  under
its  command.  If,  in  these  circumstances,  a  public  authority
buys  up  the  concern  ai  its  market  value,  it  will  have  either
itself  to  charge  the  same  price  for  its  services  as  the  private
company  was  charging,  or  else  to  operate  the  concern  at
a  loss.  In  other  words,  if  it  buys  the  concern  at  its  market
value,  the  proprietors  will  have  made  the  public  huy  their
right  to  make  monopolistic  exactions ;  for  the  market  value
wiU,  of  course,  be  in  part  the  result  of  people's  belief  in  their
possession  of  that  right.      It  is  natural,  therefore,  to  say  that


358  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  n

the  price  paid  ought  not  to  be  the  market  value  as  it  actually
is,  but  the  market  value  as  it  would  be  if  this  anti-social
right  were  eliminated.  But  here  the  considerations  set
out  at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter  give  us  pause.  Some
concession  must,  it  would  seem,  be  made  in  the  interests
of  recent  purchasers  who  have  acquired  shares  in  the  concern
in  good  faith  at  the  high  existing  values.  How  large  this
concession  should  be  cannot,  of  course,  be  laid  down  in
general  terms.  In  each  separate  instance  a  detailed  review
will  have  to  be  made  of  all  relevant  circumstances,  including
"  legitimate  expectations  "  that  have  been  created,  and  on  this
foundation  common  sense  must  be  invoked  to  furnish  a
"  reasonable "  compromise.  When  the  purchase  price  is
settled,  payment  will,  of  course,  in  general  be  made  by
an  issue  of  government,  or  municipal,  or  "  public  authority  "
{e.g.  Port  of  London  Authority)  stock  bearing  fixed  interest,
and  not  by  an  actual  transfer  of  cash.

§  10.  This  question  of  the  purchase  price  leads  on  to
a  very  important  consideration  with  which  this  Part  may
suitably  close.  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  that,  if  the
public  has  to  pay  the  full  market  value  for  a  monopolistic
concern,  which  is  charging  exorbitant  prices  for  its  products,
no  national  advantage  can  possibly  result.  The  monopolist
simply  takes  in  a  lump  sum  what  otherwise  he  would  have
got  in  an  annual  tribute.  This  way  of  looking  at  the
matter  is,  however,  mistaken.  The  evil  of  monopoly  is  not
merely,  or  even  mainly,  that  it  enables  one  set  of  people  to
mulct  another  set.  It  is  that  it  causes  resources  to  be  held
back  from  a  form  of  investment  in  which  the  value  of  the
marginal  social  net  product  is  larger  than  it  is  elsewhere,
and  thereby  contracts  the  national  dividend.  To  do  away
with  this  monopolistic  policy  will  increase  production  and  so
benefit  the  country  as  a  whole,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that,
in  order  to  do  away  with  it,  one  part  of  the  community  has
to  pay  a  fine  to  another  part.  From  the  standpoint  of  the
national  dividend,  therefore,  it  is  greatly  preferable  that  the
Government  should  pay  the  ransom  demanded  by  the
monopolist,  write  off  part  of  the  purchase  price,  and  then
operate  the  concern  on  terms  that  would  have  yielded  normal


CH.  XIX    PUBLIC  OPEEATION  OF  INDUSTRIES        359

returns  if  no  ransom  had  been  necessary,  than  that  it  should
allow  the  private  monopolist  to  continue,  by  exorbitant
charges,  to  hold  back  production  and  check  the  flow  of
resources  into  the  enterprise.  This  fact  must  not,  of  course,
be  allowed  to  make  those  who  have  to  bargain  on  the  public's
behalf  unduly  pliant  to  the  pressure  of  interested  sellers.
But  it  is  none  the  less  the  governing  and  dominant
fact.  When  the  vested  interests  of  new  shareholders  in
monopolistic  concerns  make  the  Government  unwilling  to
force  prices  down  to  the  proper  level  through  a  policy  of
control,  it  constitutes  a  very  powerful  argument  for  a  policy
of  purchase.  If  purchase  is  made,  the  natural  consequence
would  be  for  the  Government  to  operate  the  industry  itself.
But  if,  for  any  reason,  it  does  not  wish  to  do  this,  and  prefers
to  sell  or  lease  it  to  private  persons  on  new  terms,  which
involve  a  money  loss  to  itself  but  provide  for  the  establish-
ment of  a  proper  price  level,  it  will  still  have  eliminated  the
evil  of  monopolistic  restriction  of  output  and  indirectly
benefited  the  national  dividend-


PART  m
THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND   AND   LABOUR


381


1


CHAPTEK  I

mDUSTKIAL    PEACE

It  is  obvious  that,  when  labour  and  equipment  in  any
industry  are  rendered  idle  by  a  strike  or  lock-out,  the
national  dividend  must  suffer.  Furthermore,  the  loss  of
output  for  which  these  disputes  are  responsible  often  extends
much  beyond  the  industry  directly  affected.  This  is  well
illustrated  by  the  fact  that,  during  the  great  coal  strike  of
March  1912,  the  general  percentage  of  unemployment  over  the
whole  body  of  trade  unionists  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
no  less  than  1 1  per  cent,  as  against  an  average  level  for  March
during  the  ten  years  1903-12  of  5^  per  cent.  The  reason
for  this  is  that  a  stoppage  of  work  in  an  important  industry
checks  activity  in  other  industries  in  two  ways.  On  the
one  hand,  by  impoverishing  the  people  actually  involved  in
the  stoppage,  it  lessens  the  demand  for  the  goods  the  other
industries  make ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  industry  in  which
the  stoppage  has  occurred  is  one  that  furnishes  a  commodity
or  service  largely  used  in  the  conduct  of  other  industries,  it
lessens  the  supply  to  them  of  raw  material  or  equipment  for
their  work.  Naturally  not  aU  strikes  and  lock-outs  produce
this  secondary  effect  in  equal  measure.  The  larger  the  range
they  cover  and  the  more  fundamental  the  commodities  or
services  they  supply,  the  more  marked  is  their  influence.  Coal
and  transport  service,  for  example,  are  basal  goods  essential  to
practically  all  industries,  and  a  miners'  or  a  railway  servants'
strike  will,  therefore,  produce  a  much  larger  indirect  effect
than  a  cotton-workers'  strike  of  the  same  extent  and  duration.
But,  in  some  degree,  all  stoppages  of  work  inflict  an  indirect
injury  upon  the  national  dividend  by  the  reactions  they  set  up

363


364  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

in  other  industries,  in  addition  to  the  direct  injury  that  they
carry  in  themselves.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  the  net  contrac-
tion of  output  consequent  upon  industrial  disputes  is  generally
smaller  than  the  immediate  contraction ;  for  a  stoppage
of  work  at  one  place  may  lead  both  to  more  work  at  the
same  time  in  rival  establishments  and  to  more  work  at  a
later  time  (in  fulfilling  delayed  orders)  in  the  establishments
where  the  stoppage  has  occurred.  It  must  be  admitted  also
that,  on  some  occasions,  the  direct  damage  caused  by  strikes
and  lock-outs  is  partly  compensated  by  the  stimulus  indirectly
given  to  improvements  in  machinery  and  in  the  organisation
of  work.  Mr.  Nasmyth,  in  his  evidence  before  the  Trades
Union  Commission  of  1868,  laid  very  great  stress  upon  this.
"  I  believe,"  he  said,  "  that,  if  there  were  a  debtor  and  creditor
account  made  up  of  strikes  and  lock-outs  with  the  interests
of  society,  up  to  a  certain  point  they  would  be  found  to  have
been  a  benefit.  Such  has  been  the  stimulus  applied  to
ingenuity  by  the  intolerable  annoyance  resulting  from  strikes
and  lock-outs,  that  it  has  developed  more  than  anything  those
wonderful  improvements  in  automaton  machinery  that  produce
you  a  window  frame  or  the  piston-rod  of  a  steam-engine  of
such  an  accuracy  as  would  make  Euclid's  mouth  water  to
look  at.  These  things  are  pouring  in  in  quantities  as  the
result  of  the  stimulus  given  to  ingenuity  through  the  annoy-
ance of  strikes.  It  is  not  being  coaxed  on  by  some  grand
reward  in  the  distance,  but  I  think  a  kick  from  behind  is
sometimes  as  useful  as  a  gentle  leading  forward  in  front."  ^
These  refiex  effects  of  conflict  are,  no  doubt,  important.  But
it  would  be  paradoxical  to  maintain  that  the  reaction  of  the
industrial  organism  against  the  evils  threatening  it  ordinarily
outweigh  those  evils  themselves.  By  adapting  itself  to
injurious  changes  of  environment  it  can,  indeed,  lessen,  but
it  cannot  altogether  abolish,  the  damage  to  which  it  is  exposed.
An  excellent  parallel  is  afforded  by  the  effects  of  a  blockade

*  Minutes  of  Evidence,  p.  71.  Clifford  {Agricidtural  Lock-out,  p.  179)
describes  the  way  in  which  farmers  were  stimulated  by  the  1874  dispute  to
improve  their  organisation,  and  to  do  the  same  work  as  before  with  fewer  men.
In  like  manner,  the  great  anthracite  coal  strike  in  the  United  States  in  1902
led  to  the  invention  of  economical  methods  of  utilising  other  fuels,  whicli  con-
tinued to  be  employed  after  normal  conditions  had  returned.


I


CH.  I  INDUSTKIAL  PEACE  365

instituted  by  one  State  against  the  ports  of  another.  The
immediate  effect  both  upon  the  blockaded  State  and  upon
neutrals  is  an  obvious,  and  sometimes  a  considerable,  injury.
By  altering  the  direction  and  character  of  their  trade  they
may  reduce  the  extent  of  their  losses.  It  is  even  conceivable
that  the  search  for  new  trade  openings  may  lead  to  the
discovery  of  one,  which  otherwise  would  not  have  heen  found,
and  which  is  possessed  of  advantages  great  enough  to  out-
weigh all  the  evils  of  the  blockade  period.  Any  such  result
is,  however,  extraordinarily  improbable,  and  nobody,  on  the
strength  of  it,  would  dream  of  suggesting  that  blockades  in
general  are  likely  to  do  the  world  more  good  than  harm.  So
with  industrial  disputes.  It  is  conceivable  that  one  of  them
may  stir  to  action  some  otherwise  mute,  inglorious  inventor  ;
but  it  is  immensely  unlikely  that  it  will,  at  best,  do  more
than  slightly  antedate  the  discovery  that  he  makes.  On  a
broad  view,  the  hypothetical  gaia  is  altogether  outweighed
by  the  certain  loss  of  production  in  the  industries  directly
affected  and  in  related  industries  the  raw  material  of  which  is  cut
off  or  the  product  of  which  cannot  be  worked  up  into  its  final
stage.  Moreover,  there  may  be  lasting  injury  to  the  workpeople
in  industrial  careers  interrupted,  a  load  of  debt  contracted  to
meet  a  temporary  emergency,  and  permanent  damage  to  their
children's  health  through  the  enforced  period  of  insufficient
nourishment.  The  extent  of  these  evils  varies,  of  course,
partly  with  the  degree  to  which  the  commodity  whose  pro-
duction is  stopped  is  consumed  by  the  poorer  classes,  and
partly  with  its  importance  for  life,  health,  security  and  order.
But,  in  any  event,  the  aggregate  damage  with  which  industrial
disputes  threaten  the  national  dividend  is  very  grave.  It
has  been  pertinently  asked  :  "  "Would  any  Board  of  Managers
attempt  to  run  a  railway  or  start  an  electric-lighting  plant,
or  operate  a  mill  or  factory,  or  send  a  liner  to  sea,  with  a
mechanical  equipment  which  was  certain  to  break  down
periodically  and  lie  in  inevitable  idleness  until  repairs  could
be  patched  up  ?  And  yet  that  is  almost  an  absolute  analogy
to  the  state  of  labour  conditions  throughout  nearly  the
whole   range  of  such   enterprisea"  ^     Anything   that   makes

*  Goring,  Engineering  Magcaine,  toL  zx.  p.  922.


366  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

it  less  likely  that  these  break-downs  will  occur  is  bound  to
prove  of  substantial  benefit  to  the  national  dividend.  Hence
the  eagerness  of  social  reformers  to  build  up  and  fortify  the
machinery  of  industrial  peace.  They  recognise,  indeed,  that
in  the  work  of  pacification  constitutions  and  agreements  cannot
accomplish  much.  In  industrial,  as  in  international  negotia-
tions, perfection  of  machinery  counts  for  far  less  than  good
faith  and  good  will.  Care  must,  therefore,  be  taken  not  to
stress  unduly  matters  of  mere  technique.  Nevertheless,  the
type  of  machinery  employed  is  certain  to  have  some  effect,
and  may  have  a  considerable  effect,  both  directly  and  also  by
its  reflex  influence  on  the  general  attitude  which  employers
or  employees  take  to  one  another.  It  is,  therefore,  important
to  the  present  purpose  to  examine  the  principal  problems
which  have  to  be  faced  in  building  up  machinery,  through
whose  aid  it  is  hoped  that  industrial  peace  may  be  preserved.


CHAPTEE   II

THE    CLASSIFICATION    OF   INDUSTRIAL    DIFFERENCES

§  1.  A  NECESSARY  preliminary  to  analysis  is  some  classification
of  differences.  The  classification  which  naturally  suggests
itself  in  the  first  instance  is  one  based  upon  the  character
of  the  matters  in  dispute.  Such  a  classification  yields  two
divisions,  each  in  turn  containing  further  subdivisions.  The
divisions  comprise  respectively  differences  about  "  the  fraction
of  wages  "  and  differences  about  "  the  demarcation  of  function."
Differences  about  the  fraction  of  wages  may  be  subdivided  into  :

(1)  Those  connected  with  the  reward  of  labour,  generally
raising  an  issue  as  to  the  money  rate  of  wage,  but  sometimes
touching  such  matters  as  workshop  fines  or  the  amount  of
special  allowances,  whether  in  money  or  in  kind ;

(2)  Those  connected  with  the  doing  and  bearing  of  the
employees,  generally  involving  the  question  of  hours.

Differences  as  to  demarcation  of  function  include,  besides
the  well-known,  but  relatively  imimportant,  "  demarcation
disputes  "  between  kindred  trades,  all  quarrels  arising  out  of
claims  by  the  workpeople  to  a  larger  share  in  the  work  of
management.      They  generally  relate  to  either :

(1)  The  way  in  which  work  is  apportioned  between
different  classes  of  workmen  and  machine  tools  ;  or

(2)  The  sources  from  which  the  employer  draws  his
workpeople ;  or

(3)  The  voice  allowed  to  workpeople  in  the  settlement
of  working  conditions.

The  second  of  these  subdivisions  includes  all  questions
concerning  discrimination  against,  preference  to,  or  exclusive
employment  of  trade  unionists.

367


368  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

§  2.  For  many  purposes  the  above  classification  is
the  most  convenient  to  follow.  But  for  the  task  of  con-
structing machinery  for  preserving  industrial  peace  it  is
not  of  serious  value,  because  in  practice  the  design  of  the
machinery  never  turns  upon  distinctions  between  wages
differences,  differences  about  hours,  or  differences  about  the
demarcation  of  work.  We  have,  therefore,  to  seek  some  classi-
fication better  adapted  to  the  purpose  in  hand.  In  this  search
we  are  driven  to  follow  two  lines  of  thought,  neither  of  which
affords  exact  or  sharp  distinctions,  but  both  of  which,  as
will  presently  appear,  somehow  run  together  and  yield  a
compound  classification.  They  turn,  respectively,  upon  the
degree  of  self-suf&ciency  enjoyed  by  the  parties  to  the
difference  and  upon  the  extent  of  the  theoretical  ground  which
they  have  in  common.

^  3.  Under  the  former  of  these  two  heads  the  determining
factor  is  the  relation  between  the  bodies  which  control
negotiations  and  those  which  are  directly  affected  by  their
result.  Both  the  employers  and  the  workpeople  implicated
may  be  entirely  independent,  or  both  may  be  subordinate
branches  of  larger  organisations;  or  the  employers  may  be
independent  and  the  workpeople  a  branch ;  or  the  employers
a  branch  and  the  workpeople  independent.  This  distinction  is,
however,  somewhat  blurred  in  practice,  because  to  be  a  branch
of  a  wider  organisation  is  not  the  same  thing  as  to  have  no
control  over  negotiations  affecting  one's  own  interests.  The
extent  to  which  local  organisations  are  subordinated  in  this
matter  to  national  unions  varies  greatly  in  different  times
and  places.  They  may  be  left  entirely  free ;  they  may  be
free  to  make,  but  not  to  denounce,  agreements ;  they  may  be
offered  advice  or  deprived  of  strike  pay;  or  they  may  be
mere  branches,  compelled  to  carry  out  the  instructions  of
the  central  executive.  Consequently,  in  this  form  of  classi-
fication, no  sharp  dividing  lines  can  be  drawn.

S  4.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  latter  of  the  two
forms  distinguished  above.  In  every  industrial  difference
there  is  some  common  ground  between  the  parties.  Even
when  they  diverge  most  widely,  both  sides  agree  that  the
decision   ought  to   be  "just."     Sometimes   the   full   limit   of


cH.ii  CLASSIFICATION  369

agreement  is  expressed  by  this  phrase.  A  case  in  point  is
the  coal  strike  of  1893,  in  which  the  employers  imderstood
by  justice  payment  according  to  efficiency,  and  the  work-
people, in  a  vague  way,  payment  according  to  needs.  The
common  basis  is  wider  when  it  is  agreed,  whether  formally
or  informally,  that  justice,  rightly  interpreted,  is  the  doctrine
that  the  wage  level  should  move  in  the  same  general
direction  as  some  accepted  external  index.  This  stage  is
often  reached  when  the  wages  of  a  small  group  of  workmen
are  in  question ;  for  it  is  generally  recognised  that  these
ought  not,  as  a  rule,  to  move  very  differently  from  the
average  wage  level  of  other  men  in  the  neighbourhood
engaged  in  similar  employment.  It  is  also  reached  with
regard  to  the  wages  of  larger  groups,  when  the  doctrine  is
accepted  that,  other  things  being  equal,  wages  ought,  in  some
sense,  to  follow  prices.  Thus,  throughout  the  series  of  arbitra-
tions in  the  North  of  England  iron  trade,  studied  by  Mr.
Price,  "  there  is  a  general  agreement  that  the  basis  of  award
is  to  be  primarily  the  relation  of  wages  to  selling  price."  ^
The  common  ground  here,  however,  is  merely  that  wages
shall  rise  when  prices  rise  and  fall  when  prices  fall.  The
question  of  what  proportion  should  hold  between  the  two
movements,  or  what  change  on  the  one  side  "  corresponds  "  to
a  given  change  on  the  other,  is  left  unanswered.  A  further
stage  is  reached  when  the  exact  proportion  that  the  wage
change  ought  to  bear  to  a  given  change  in  the  index  is
agreed  upon.  This  is  done  where  employers  and  employed,
in  any  locality  or  firm,  accept,  as  in  the  spinning  industry,
the  average  efficiency  wage  of  the  trade  or  district  as  their
own  standard,  or  when  wage  is  related  to  price  by  a  definite
shding  scale.  Here  the  common  ground,  so  far  as  principle
is  concerned,  is  complete,  and  differences  between  the  parties
can  only  arise  upon  matters  of  fact.

§  5.   The  discussion  of  the  two  preceding  sections  shows
that  no  sharp  divisions  are  to  be  found  along  either  of  the
lines  of  classification  which  have  been  discussed.      This,  how-
ij  ever,  is  not  the  last  word  upon  the  matter.      It  may  still  be
necessary,  here  as  elsewhere,  for  the  student  with  a  practical

'  L.  L.  Price,  Industrial  Peace,  p.  62.

2  B


370  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  rx.  m

end  in  view  to  depart  somewhat  from  the  majestic  continuity
of  Nature,  and  to  erect  an  arbitrary  landmark  of  his  own.
Such  a  landmark  may  be  made  out  of  the  common  division
of  industrial  differences  into  "  those  which  concern  the  inter-
pretation of  the  existing  terms  of  employment,"  and  "  those
which  have  to  do  with  the  general  terms  of  future  employ-
ment." ^  This  distinction  is  analogous  to  one  familiar  to  the
theory  of  jurisprudence.  "  The  settlement  of  such  general
questions  may  be  likened  to  an  act  of  legislation ;  the  inter-
pretation and  application  of  the  general  contract  may  be
likened  to  a  judicial  act."  ^  The  place  assigned  to  any  parti-
cular difference  is  made  to  turn  primarily  upon  the  question
whether  or  not  it  is  governed  by  a  formal  agreement  between
the  parties.  All  differences  which  arise  when  there  is  an
agreement  are  called  "  interpretation  differences,"  and  are
distinguished  from  "  those  which  arise  out  of  proposals  for
the  terms  of  engagement  or  contract  of  service  to  subsist  for
a  future  period."  ^  Furthermore,  these  differences  are  often
identical  with  those  which  superior  organisations  undertake
to  settle  on  behalf  of  their  local  branches ;  they  "  are  for  the
most  part  limited  to  particular  establishments,  of  little
importance  and  often  purely  personal " ;  *  dealing,  it  may
be,  with  controversies  of  fact  concerning  quantity  or  quality,
or  the  more  precise  definition  of  the  mutually  accepted  pattern
of  quality  itself  "  General  questions,"  on  the  other  hand,  are,
for  the  most  part,  equivalent  to  those  in  which  independent
organisations  are  directly  concerned;  they  are  "frequently
of  wide  interest,  affect  large  bodies  of  men,  and  are  the
most  general  cause  of  strikes  and  lock-outs  on  a  large  scale."  ^
Of  course,  it  is  not  maintained  that  interpretation  differences
in  the  above  sense  are  necessarily  of  minor  importance.  Not
only,  as  with  judge-made  law,  may  the  act  of  interpretation
slide  insensibly  into  that  of  alteration,  but  also  what  is  called
interpretation  may  cover  as  wide  a  field,  and  raise  questions
quite  as  fundamental,  as  those  treated  in  the  general  agree-
ment.    For   example,  there   is  no   difference  in  this  respect

1   U.S.A.  Industrial  Commission,  xvii.  p.  Ixxv.  ^  md.  p.  Ixxvi.

3  Royal  Commission  on  Lahour,  Report,  p.  49.

*  lUd.  p.  49.  s  Ibid.  p.  49.


CH.  n  CLASSIFICATIOIT  371

between  the  question  how  many  pounds  a  ton  of  coal  is
to  be  taken  to  contain,  or  how  much  "  topping "  the  men
must  put  upon  a  car-load,  and  the  question  what  the  wage
per  ton  or  car-load  ought  to  be.  Moreover,  it  sometimes
happens  that  general  questions  are  deliberately  submitted  for
discussion  on  what  are  apparently  interpretation  references.
For  example,  in  the  pottery  boom  of  1871,  it  was  arranged
that,  for  each  branch  of  the  trade,  an  individual  case  should
be  selected  for  arbitration,  and  that  the  whole  branch  should
act  in  accordance  with  the  award.^  On  subsequent  occasions
exactly  the  same  result  was  achieved  by  general  arbitrations
of  the  ordinary  type.  Similarly,  it  is  not  maintained  that
differences  as  to  the  terms  of  a  future  contract,  to  be  made
otherwise  than  by  the  interpretation  of  some  overshadowing
agreement,  must  necessarily  affect  large  bodies  of  men.  Where
the  local  branches  of  ill-organised  trades  have  to  negotiate
new  contracts  for  themselves  without  reference  to  such  an
agreement,  the  number  of  men  affected  by  any  difference
which  may  arise  must  be  small.  Nevertheless,  the  sentences
quoted  above  from  the  American  Industrial  Commission  and
the  British  Eoyal  Commission  on  Labour  represent  the  facts
sufficiently  well  to  provide  the  basis  of  a  rough  practical
classification.

>  Cf.  Owen,  Pofterles,  p.  142.


CHAPTEK    III

VOLUNTARY    ARRANGEMENTS    FOR    CONCILIATION
AND    ARBITRATION

§  1.  It  is  well  known  that,  as  industries  become  better
organised  and  the  associations  of  employers  and  employed
grow  more  powerful,  differences  about  matters  other  than
general  questions  are  more  and  more  likely  to  be  adjusted.  It
is  not  in  the  interest  of  powerful  organisations  to  fight  about
a  little  thing,  and  it  is  generally,  though  not,  of  course,  always,
in  their  power  to  control  small  bodies  of  their  members.
Various  arrangements — the  most  perfect,  perhaps,  is  the
famous  system  of  "  professional  experts "  in  the  Lancashire
cotton  industry — are  made  for  the  prompt  and  effective  solu-
tion of  minor  difficulties.  "We  need  not  pause  to  examine
them.  The  real  problems  to  be  faced  are  found  in  connection
with  those  broad  general  questions,  of  the  successful  treatment
of  which  by  purely  voluntary  means  the  United  Kingdom
may  fairly  claim  to  provide  the  classical  example.

§  2.  In  any  study  of  the  comparative  advantages  of
different  types  of  machinery  devoted  to  this  end,  the  first
question  to  decide  is  whether  it  is  better  to  rest  content  with
a  simple  agreement — which  must,  of  course,  be  subject  to
renewal  or  denunciation  from  time  to  time — to  employ  de-
fined conciliatory  processes  when  a  conflict  is  threatened,  or
to  set  up  and  maintain  permanently  in  being  some  regularly
constituted  organ  of  negotiation.  Upon  the  right  answer  to
this  question  there  is  a  fairly  general  consensus  of  opinion.
Unless  there  is  some  machinery  already  established,  it  will  be
necessary  to  appoint  negotiators  at  a  moment  of  heated  contro-
versy, and  the  attempt  to  do  this  may  not  only  involve  delay

372


i


CH.  Ill  VOLUNTAEY  AEEANGEMENTS  373

but  also  afford  opportunity  for  obstraction  and  friction.  More
generally,  as  Professor  Foxwell  observed  many  years  ago  :  "  The
fact  is  that,  where  human  beings  are  concerned,  where  personal
relations  should  be  formed,  and  where  moral  forces  are  at  work,
a  certain  permanence  of  conditions  seems  to  be  essential  The
altruistic  and  social  feelings,  which  are  the  very  cement  of
the  social  fabric,  and  enormously  lessen  the  irksomeness  of
effort  and  the  friction  of  industry,  seem  to  require  time  for
their  development,  and  frequently  cannot  exert  their  full
strength  unless  they  are  embodied  in  the  symbol  of  an  or-
ganisation." ^  No  doubt,  when  the  Associations  upon  both  sides
are  exceptionally  strong  and  the  relations  between  them  ex-
ceptionally satisfactory,  this  consideration  loses  much  of  its
importance.  In  general,  however,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that
the  prospects  of  peace  will  be  substantially  improved  by  the
establishment  of  permanent  Boards  containing  representatives  of
employers  and  employed  meeting  together  regularly.  They
will  be  still  further  improved  if  these  Boards  are  entrusted,  as
is  contemplated  under  the  Whitley  Scheme  for  national,  dis-
trict, and  local  industrial  councils  in  each  principal  industry,
not  merely  with  the  settlement  of  differences,  but  with
general  collaboration  in  determining  conditions  of  work,
methods  of  remuneration,  technical  education,  industrial  re-
search, improvement  of  processes,  and  so  forth.  For,  working
jointly  at  these  broad  problems,  the  representatives  of  em-
ployers and  employed  will  come  to  regard  themselves  more
as  partners  and  less  as  hostile  bargainers,  and,  consequently,
when  differences  between  them  do  arise,  not  only  will  the
general  atmosphere  of  discussion  be  a  good  one,  but  also  both
sides  will  have  at  the  back  of  their  minds  a  feeling  that
extreme  action  must  at  all  costs  be  avoided,  lest  it  destroy  an
organisation  proved  capable  of  much  valuable  work  in  their
common  interest.

§  3.  The  constitution  of  the  Boards  or  Councils  has
next  to  be  considered.  The  essential  point  is  that  the
representatives  of  either  side,  and  particularly  of  the  workmen,
should  have  the  confidence  of  their  clients.  The  mechanism
by  which  this  can  best  be  secured  varies  somewhat  according

*  The  Claims  of  LcibouT,  p.  190.


374  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

to  the  character  of  the  two  organisations.  In  some  of  the
Boards  in  the  Iron  and  Steel  industry,  and  in  the  Eailway
Conciliation  Board  under  the  agreement  of  1914,  represen-
tatives are  appointed  by  a  vote  of  the  employers  and  employed
connected  with  separate  firms  or  districts.  When,  however,
the  Associations  are  strong,  this  device  is  not  necessary.  The
confidence  of  the  rank  and  file  in  the  Board  can  be  obtained
without  it.  The  important  thing  is  that  the  chief  Association
officials  should  have  confidence  in  it.  If  they  are  convinced,
the  loyalty  of  the  rest  is  as  well  assured  as  it  can  be  ;  if  they
are  not  convinced,  the  authority  of  the  Board  is  worthless.
Consequently,  though  delegates  from  different  works  may  still
attend  to  supply  information,  the  Board  ought,  essentially,  to
represent  the  Associations  themselves.  The  old  forms,  where
they  exist,  may  be  retained,  and  new  Boards  may  be  started,
whose  forms  are  copied  from  the  old.  But  the  representa-
tives must  always  be  controlled  by  the  officials  of  the  Asso-
ciations, and,  in  many  instances,  may  also,  with  advantage,  be
appointed  by  them.

^  4.  The  next  point  has  reference  to  procedure.  The
fact  that  "  general  questions  "  are  important,  and  bear  directly
upon  the  permanent  interests  of  all  concerned,  makes  the  dis-
cussion of  them,  both  on  the  Board  itself  and  among  those
who  will  be  bound  by  its  decisions,  peculiarly  delicate.  Con-
sequently, even  when  the  relations  between  the  parties  are
good,  it  is  important  that  everything  which  might  engender
irritation  should  be  excluded  from  the  machinery  of  industrial
peace.

From  this  principle  the  most  obvious  inference  is  that
technicalities  and  lawyers  should  not  be  admitted  before  the
Board.  Such  a  policy — apart  altogether  from  the  saving  in
cost  and  time — tends  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  appearance,
and  hence,  indirectly,  the  reality,  of  the  opposition  between
the  parties.  There  is  less  of  a  struggle  for  victory,  and,
therefore,  less  fear  of  the  introduction  of  "  matters  of  senti-
ment." In  the  practice  of  the  chief  English  Boards  and  in
the  report  of  the  Labour  Commission,  the  policy  of  excluding
legal  representatives,  and  the  legal  forms  which  may  be
expected   to   accompany  them,  is  fully  recognised.      Finally,


CH.  Ill  VOLUNTAEY  AEEANGEMENTS  375

the  conciliatory,  as  distinguished  from  the  litigious,  character
of  negotiations,  is  often  still  further  emphasised  by  an  arrange-
ment, in  accordance  with  which  the  chairman  (a  representative
employer)  and  vice-chairman  (a  representative  workman)  sit
side  by  side  at  the  Board,  thus  securing  opportunities  for
conference  at  critical  points  in  the  discussion.^

A  second  inference  is  that  the  Board  should  not  be  allowed
to  pronounce  upon  any  matter  by  the  vote  of  a  bare  majority.
When  the  solidarity  of  both  of  the  two  sides  is  complete,  there
is,  of  course,  little  prospect  that  any  vote  will  be  given,  which  is
not  either  unanimous  or  equally  divided.  But,  when  organisation
is  less  perfect,  there  is  always  the  possibility  of  defection  on
the  part  of  one  or  two  representatives  of  either  party.  To
allow  the  result  of  the  discussion  to  be  determined  by  such  an
incident  is  to  court  grave  danger.  So  much  dissatisfaction
might  be  aroused  that  the  whole  conciliatoiy  machinery  would
be  immediately  overturned.  It  is  true  that  these  difficulties
do  not  seem  to  have  been  experienced  in  this  country,  and
that,  in  a  number  of  instances,  the  rules  provide  for  a  bare
majority  vote,  subject,  of  course,  to  the  condition  that,  if  equal
numbers  of  employers  and  employed  happen  to  be  present,
only  equal  numbers  shall  have  the  opportunity  of  voting.  In
the  United  States,  however,  where,  owing  to  the  weakness
of  the  Unions,  there  is  a  greater  probability  of  cross- voting,
things  have  worked  out  differently.  Thus,  Mr.  Durand,
Secretary  of  the  Industrial  Commission,  asserts,  both  that
the  bare  majority  method  will  not  work,  and  also  that  decision
by  unanimous  agreement  has  become  the  ordinary  practice."

Thirdly  and  lastly,  it  will  not,  as  a  rule,  be  desirable  for
the  meetings  of  the  Board  to  be  conducted,  like  those  of  the
American  interstate  bituminous  coal  conferences,  in  public.
It  may,  indeed,  be  held  that  such  a  system  has  educative
advantages ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  policy  of  deliberation
in  camera,  which  is  usual  in  England,  may  be  expected  to

*  As  in  the  Midland  Iron  and  Steel  Board  (Ashley,  British  Industries,
p.  57).

^  Industrial  Conciliation  Conference,  p.  43.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  suggested
that  a  decision  by  a  large  majority,  e.g.  seven-eighths  of  those  present,  would
be  a  still  better  plan,  as  it  would  eliminate  the  possibility  of  obstructiye  tactics
on  the  part  of  a  single  faddist.


376  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

conduce  better  both  to  frankness  in  the  discussion  itself  and
also  to  uncomplaining  acceptance  of  the  decision  reached.

§  5.  We  have  next  to  compare  mere  agreements  to  submit
differences  to  conciliation  with  those  under  which  provision
is  also  made  for  arbitration  in  the  last  resort.  The  relative
merits  of  the  two  plans  have  long  been  the  subject  of  vigorous
controversy.  A  number  of  authorities  argue  in  favour  of
the  former,  and  the  Lancashire  cotton  trade,  the  British
engineering  industry,  and  most  of  "  the  important  systems  of
collective  bargaining  in  the  United  States "  ^  follow  their
views  in  practice.  Other  authorities,  on  the  contrary,  agree
with  Mr.  Crompton  that  all  conciliation  agreements  should
contain  a  clause  providing  for  "  some  power  in  reserve  by
which  recurrence  to  strikes  may  be  avoided,"  ^  and  are,  in
turn,  followed  by  certain  of  the  best -developed  English
industries.  Thus,  in  important  conciliation  schemes  in  the
coal -mining,  iron -mining,  and  boot  and  _  shoe  industries
provision  has  been  made  in  one  way  or  another  for  reference
to  arbitration.

Before  entering  upon  the  merits  of  the  controversy  between
the  two  methods,  we  may  note  a  preliminary  matter  upon
which  the  champions  of  both  views  are  agreed.  Everybody
admits  that,  in  differences  so  important  as  "  general  questions,"
a  settlement  by  arbitration  will  almost  always  stir  up  con-
siderably more  irritation  and  bad  feeling  than  a  settlement
by  mutual  agreement  on  a  Conciliation  Board.  Consequently,
resort  to  it  should  never  take  place  except  when  it  is
absolutely  necessary.  Conciliation  should  be  developed  and
arbitration  reduced  to  a  minimum.  In  the  United  Kingdom
it  may  safely  be  said  that  there  is  no  trade  in  which  the
relations  between  employers  and  employed  are  so  good  that
this  proposition  fails.  In  the  United  States  the  right  line
of  policy  is  still  clearer ;  for  there,  as  was  strongly  urged
twenty  years  ago,  to  allow  the  conditions  under  which  they
shall  work  to  be  determined  by  an  outsider  is  "peculiarly
obnoxious  to  the  workmen,"  and  they  will  never  agree
to    it    till    conferences    have    failed    and    no    other    resort

'  Ivdustrial  Commission,  xvii.  p.  c.
2  Industrial  Conciliation,  p.  134.


cH.  in  VOLUNTAEY  AEEANGEMENTS  377

is  left.^  Hence,  in  general  questions,  even  when  there
is  an  arbitration  agreement  in  reserve,  it  is  well  to  enforce
delay,  in  the  hope  that  the  greater  coolness  of  an  adjourned
discussion  may  bring  about  a  settlement.  The  Federated
Districts  Coal  Board  realises  this  so  fully  that,  when  they
fail  to  agree,  a  second  meeting  is  held  of  which  twenty-one
days'  notice  must  be  given.  At  this  meeting  the  neutral
chairman  is  present,  but  he  only  exercises  his  casting  vote
after  another  effort  has  been  made  to  bring  about  a  settle-
ment acceptable  to  both  sides.

Granted,  however,  that  arbitration  is  a  pis  oiler,  the
question  still  remains  whether  provision  should  be  made
for  resort  to  it  in  the  last  instance.  The  argument  in
favour  of  incorporating  a  clause  to  this  effect  in  industrial
agreements  is  drawn  from  the  obvious  direct  advantages
derivable  therefrom.  In  the  absence  of  such  a  provision,
differences  may  entail  strikes  and  lock-outs,  with  all  the
material  loss  and  mutual  irritation  which  these  involve.
And,  even  if  a  modus  vivendi  upon  the  immediate  issue  be
found,  we  can  never  be  certain  that  the  controversy  will
pass  away  without  incidentally .  destroying  the  established
conciliatory  system."  If,  however,  the  means  of  securing
an  arbitrator  are  provided  beforehand,  both  sides  have
guarded  themselves,  in  a  calm  moment,  against  a  possible
future  access  of  passion  and  excitement.  Their  policy  is
similar  to  that  of  a  person  who,  unable  to  trust  his  will
to  be  sober,  goes  voluntarily  into  an  inebriate  home.  The
vis  inertiae  is  thrown  upon  the  side  of  peace,  since  there
is  no  escape  from  an  amicable  solution  except  the  strong
step  of  withdrawal  from  the  Board.

The  opposing  argument  depends  upon  certain  indirect
disadvantages,  to  which  the  inclusion  of  an  arbitration
clause  is  said  to  lead.  In  the  first  place,  the  representatives
of  the  two  sides  will  not  make  so  serious  an  effort  to  agree.
They  may  hesitate  to  offer  concessions  lest,  in  the  subse-
quent arbitration,   their  suggestions   should   be  used  against

^  Cf.  Aldrich,  U.S.  Federation  of  Labour,  1898,  p.  253.
*  This  restilt  came  about  in  the  federated  coal  district  in  1896  (MacPherson,
U.S.  Bulletin  of  Labour,  1900,  p.  478).


378  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

them ;  ^  or,  in  loyalty  to  their  constituents,  they  may  "  feel
obliged  to  win,  if  possible,  through  the  odd  man."  In  the  second
place,  the  possibility  of  gain,  unbalanced  by  the  danger  of
a  stoppage  of  work,  will  tend  to  breed  speculative  differences.
If  these  things  happen,  though  one  or  two  strikes  will  be
prevented,  the  number  of  differences,  which  reach  the  stage
of  arbitration,  will  be  so  far  increased  that  a  large  amount
of  friction  is  generated,  and,  as  a  result,  before  very  long
the  whole  arrangement  breaks  down.  This  danger  is,  indeed,
comparatively  slight,  when  the  parties  are  on  good  terms  with
one  another  and  are  educated  up  to  a  proper  appreciation  of
their  own  ultimate  interests.  It  can  also  be  obviated,  in
some  degree,  by  a  rule  enabling  the  arbitrators,  at  their
discretion,  to  order  the  defeated  side  to  pay  the  whole  cost
of  an  arbitration,  thus  checking  speculative  appeals.  It  is
evident,  however,  that  it  cannot  be  eliminated  altogether.
]  Between  these  two  conflicting  sets  of  arguments  no  general
'a  priori  decision  can  be  made.  Until  we  know  the  temper
of  the  parties  in  each  particular  industry,  their  affection  or
otherwise  for  a  "policy  of  pin -pricks,"  the  strength  of  their
organisations,  the  power  of  the  leaders  over  the  men,  and
the  probability  that  an  award  will  be  obeyed,  it  is  impossible
to  judge  whether  a  provision  for  arbitration  in  the  event  of
conciliation  failing  can  safely  be  put  into  an  industrial
agreement.  In  some  circumstances  a  third  way  may  be
the  best.  A  number  of  conciliation  agreements  among,  for
example,  the  iron -founders  of  the  north-east  coast,  the
Leicester  dyeing  trade  and  the  Scotch  coal  trade,  while  not
containing  a  regular  arbitration  clause,  have,  nevertheless,
provided  for  arbitration  by  "mutual  consent,"  if,  when  the
time  arrives,  both  parties  desire  it.  Of  course,  an  intractable
difference  is  more  likely  to  end  in  a  strike  under  this  system
than  under  one  backed  by  an  arbitration  clause.  But  this
result  is  indecisive  so  long  as  we  are  unable  to  gauge  the-
chances,  under  the  two   systems  respectively,  that  the  stage

1  Cf.  the  discussion  in  the  boot  and  shoe  trade  conference  previous  to
arbitration  in  1893.  The  employers  were  careful  to  insist  that  the  concessions
they  proposed  were  not  to  be  taken  as  prejudicing  their  case  in  the  event  of
arbitration  becoming  necessary.  Cf.  also  Mr.  V.  S.  Clark's  Report  on  Labour
Conditions  in  New  Zealand,  U.S.A.  Bulletin  of  Labour,  No,  49,  pp.  1192-3.


J


cH.  Ill  VOLUNTAEY  ARRANGEMENTS  379

of  intractability  will  be  reached.  Plainly,  however,  when  the
conditions  are  such  that  the  arbitration  clause  can  be  inserted
without  danger  of  indirect  ill-consequences,  the  direct  ad-
vantages that  follow  from  it  leave  no  doubt  that  it  ought
to  be  adopted.

§  6.  When  it  is  adopted,  the  constitution  of  the  arbi-
trating authority  has  to  be  determined.  We  have  to  inquire
into  the  qualities  of  the  persons  of  whom  it  should  be  com-
posed, the  number  of  these  persons  and  the  best  method  of
appointing  them.  These  points  may  conveniently  be  examined
in  the  order  in  which  they  have  just  been  stated.

The  qualities  most  needed  for  a  successful  panel  are  obviously
a  reputation  for  impartiality  and  a  reputation  for  competence.
These  requirements  in  combination  are,  however,  not  easily
satisfied.  Persons,  whether  employers  or  workpeople,  who  have
been  brought  up  in  a  trade  are  inclined  to  believe  that  nobody
without  a  "  practical  knowledge  "  of  it  can  possibly  form  an
intelligent  judgment  upon  its  problems.  The  natural  infer-
ence is  that  the  rule  of  the  Midland  Iron  and  Steel  Board/
which  required  the  independent  chairman  to  be  personally
connected  with  the  industry,  should  be  followed.  Since,  how-
ever, practical  knowledge  is  scarcely  found  except  among
employers  or  workpeople  who  have  been,  or  are,  actually
engaged  in  the  calhng,  it  will  rarely  happen  that  a  practical
expert  is  available  whom  hoth  sides  believe  to  be  unbiassed.
It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  demand  for  "  practical
knowledge"  will,  in  general,  have  to  be  abandoned.  This
can  be  done  the  more  readily  because,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
decision  of  broad  disputes  on  such  matters  as  wages  and
hoiirs  calls  chiefly  "  for  a  general  economic  knowledge  of  the
industry  concerned,  and,  inasmuch  as  all  industries  are  con-
nected, an  acquaintance  with  the  condition  of  the  whole
national  trade." "  When  technical  knowledge  is  needed,  this
can  be  provided  by  associating  with  the  arbitrator  assessors
representing  both  sides,  whose  business  it  is  to  give  him
whatever  help  he  requires,  and  not  to  take  part  in  the  decision.
Even  so,  however,  the  field  of  selection  for  the  arbitrator  will

1  Indiistrial  Crnnmission,  xvii.  p.  500.
^  Schultze-Gaevemitz,  Socitd  Peace,  p.  165.


380  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

be  limited.  Employers,  for  example,  will  not  be  enthusiastic
over  a  politician  in  the  House  of  Commons,  because  work-
people's votes  are  worth  winning,  while  workpeople  are  apt  to
think  that  any  member  of  the  professional  classes  must,  from
the  very  nature  of  his  life  and  upbringing,  be  unconsciously
biassed  in  favour  of  capital.  Hence,  though  a  judge  or  a
member  of  the  House  of  Lords  may  satisfy  the  employers,  the
workpeople's  ideal  arbitrator  can  hardly  be  other  than  one  of
themselves.  Unless,  therefore,  there  happens  to  be  available
some  one  like  Sir  David  Dale  or  Lord  Askwith,  personally
known  to,  and  trusted  by,  both  sides,  the  choice  can  hardly
be  other  than  a  compromise.^  In  these  circumstances,  the
best  way  out  of  the  difficulty  may  often  lie  in  the  selection
of  some  man  of  outstanding  eminence,  whose  conscious
motives,  at  all  events,  whatever  may  be  said  of  his  sub-
conscious ones,  are  above  suspicion.  Such  a  man,  moreover,
if,  like  the  late  Lord  James  of  Hereford  or  Sir  Edward  Fry,
he  serves  in  the  same  way  without  payment  frequently,  may
gradually  win  for  himself  a  large  measure  of  respect  and
confidence  throughout  the  industrial  community.  Another
solution  may  be  found  in  the  governmental  manufacture  of
professional  arbitrators.  Something  in  this  direction  was
attempted  when  an  official  panel  of  arbitrators  was  set  up
by  the  Board  of  Trade.  The  establishment  of  a  standing
Industrial  Court  under  the  Act  of  1919  is  a  further  step  on
the  same  lines.

What  has  just  been  said  implicitly  determines  the
number  of  persons  by  whom  the  arbitration  panel  should  be
constituted.  Eminent  outsiders  are  not  likely  to  be  obtained
in  groups.  If  their  services  are  to  be  secured  at  all,  it  is  practi-
cally necessary  that  the  panel  shall  consist  of  a  single  man —
very  likely  the  man  who  also  serves  as  neutral  chairman  to"
the  Conciliation  Board.  This,  however,  is  not  the  only  argu-
ment against  a  compound  tribunal.  Eeasoning  of  a  general
character  shows  that,  even  when  practicable,  such  an  arrange-
ment is  to  be  deprecated.     The  compound  body  in  its  most

^  Even  Sir  David  Dale,  though  entirely  trusted  by  the  men's  representatives,
seems  on  one  occasion  to  have  been  suspected  by  some  of  the  rank  and  file,  who
knew  him  less  well  (of.  Price,  iTidustrial  Peace,  p.  50).


CH.  Ill  VOLUNTARY  AERANGEMENTS  381

attractive  form  comprises  one  representative  of  each  side  together
with  an  umpire,  selected  either  by  these  representatives  or  by
their  principals,  to  be  referred  to  in  the  event  of  disagreement.
The  argument  in  favour  of  it  is  that  the  two  representatives  may
possibly  agree.  On  one  occasion  Messrs.  Mundella  and  "Williams
succeeded  in  doing  this,  and,  in  a  miners'  strike  on  the  Loire,
M.  Jaures  and  the  employers'  representative  followed  their
example.  A  decision  reached  in  this  way  is  likely  to  command
a  higher  degree  of  confidence  than  one  imposed  upon  the  parties
by  a  single  arbitrator.  On  the  other  hand,  agreement  between
the  representatives  is  improbable,  and  the  real  decision  will
generally  rest  with  the  umpire.  When  that  happens,  a  com-
pound tribunal  resembles  an  elaborate  machine,  two-thirds  of
which  is  ornament.  Nor  is  this  all.  So  often  as  a  division
of  opinion  emerges  in  this  type  of  tribunal  the  authority  of
its  decisions  is  weakened.  It  is  true  that  the  division  can  be
concealed  by  devices  like  that  once  adopted  in  a  Staffordshire
potteries'  agreement.  "  The  award  when  given  in  such  general
arbitration  shall  be  signed  by  the  umpire  and  the  arbitrators,
and  shall  be  issued  as  their  joint  award,  signified  by  their
individual  signatures  thereto,  and  nothing  shall  be  divulged
by  any  of  them,  or  appear  on  the  face  of  such  award,  to
signify  whether  the  umpire  and  arbitrators  are  unanimous  in
their  decision,  or  whether  it  is  only  the  award  of  the  majority
of  them."  ^  It  may,  however,  be  questioned  whether  make-
shifts of  this  kind  are  really  of  much  avail.  For  it  is  highly
probable  that,  in  spite  of,  or,  perhaps,  partly  because  of,  them,
the  Board  will  be  thought  to  have  disagreed,  and  this  is  the
important  point.  Except,  therefore,  when  the  opinion  of  the
parties  tends  strongly  in  favour  of  multiplicity,  it  seems  clear
that  the  panel  had  best  be  a  single  man.

Thirdly,  we  have  to  consider  the  method  of  an  arbi-
trator's appointment.  There  are  several  different  ways  in
which  he  may  be  chosen."     Perhaps  the  most  satisfactory  is

*  Strikes  and  Lock-outs,  1892,  p.  217.  There  was  the  same  nile  for  the
National  Arbitration  Board,  agreed  upon  in  1901  between  the  American
Newsiiaper  Publishers'  Association  and  the  International  Typographical  Union
{Industrial  Commission,  xvii.  p.  367).

*  The  Window  Glass  Cutters'  League  of  North  America  has  the  following
interesting  method  of  selection  :   "If  the  arbitrators  cannot  agree  on  the  referee.


382  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

that  of  the  Durham  Wages'  Board,  where  he  is  elected  at  the
first  Board  meeting  of  each  year.  Annual  election  of  this
kind,  while  not  incompatible  with  prolonged  tenure  of  office,
avoids  some  of  the  dangers  involved  in  a  permanent  or  very
long  appointment.  For  great  friction  might  arise  if  one  side
came  to  consider  the  arbitrator  at  once  irremovable  and
biassed  in  favour  of  their  opponents.  Furthermore,  election
at  fixed  periods  is  superior  to  election  ad  hoc,  because  an
arbitrator  is  most  likely  to  command  confidence  if  he  is  chosen
by  agreement  of  both  sides,  and  he  will  seldom  be  so  chosen
if  his  election  is  deferred  until  after  a  difference  has  arisen.
When,  in  spite  of  these  considerations,  an  ad  hoc  appointment
is  preferred,  the  most  obvious  arrangement  is  that  the  parties
should  first  try  to  agree  on  an  arbitrator,  and,  if  unsuccessful,
should  accept  one  nominated  by  an  impartial  outsider.  There
is,  however,  a  danger  that  they  may  try,  and  fail,  to  agree  on
the  very  man  who  is  afterwards  imposed  on  them  from  with-
out, or  that  they  may  have  urged  against  some  other  suggested
name  reasons  which  hold  equally  against  him.  It  is,  there-
fore, more  satisfactory  for  them  to  nominate  an  impartial
person,  such  as  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons,  whose
duty  it  shall  be  to  appoint  an  arbitrator  when  requested  to
do  so,  no  name  having  previously  been  discussed  by  the
Conciliation  Board.

8  7.  The  next  point  to  notice  is  relevant  both  to  arrange-
ments in  which  there  is,  and  to  arrangements  in  which
there  is  not,  provision  for  arbitration  in  the  last  resort.  On
the  whole  it  seems  unwise,  if  it  can  he  helyed,  to  allow  any-
thing in  the  nature  of  a  referendum  from  the  appointed
negotiators  to  the  main  body  of  either  employers  or  employed.
The  ill-informed  popular  discussion,  which  would  necessarily
follow,  could  hardly  fail  to  stir  up  irritation  and  water  the
seeds  of  conflict.  When  the  Conciliation  Board  cannot  agree,
and  when  there  is  not  provision  for  arbitration,  it  might,
indeed,  appear  at  first  sight  as  though   an  appeal  from  the

then  each  arbitrator  shall  write  two  names  of  disinterested  parties,  not  in  any
way  connected  with  the  glass  business,  on  slips  of  paper,  and  all  names  put  into
a  bag,  and  the  first  name  drawn  out  shall  be  the  person  selected  as  the  referee  "
(Rule  18,  ibid.  p.  365).


i


H.  Ill  VOLUNTAEY  AEEANGEMENTS  383

representatives  to  their  constituents  is  worth  trying  as  a  forlorn
hope  to  prevent  war.  Practically,  however,  such  a  provision
will  often  do  more  harm  than  good.  If  the  men's  repre-
sentatives— it  is  on  the  men's  side  only  that  the  question  of
a  referendum  has  any  practical  importance — think  a  point
worth  fighting  for,  their  constituents  are  perfectly  certain
to  be  at  least  as  bellicose  as  they.  If  the  representatives
do  not  think  it  worth  fighting  for,  were  there  no  referendum,
they  would  arrange  it;  if  there  is  a  referendum,  they  may
be  weak  enough  to  shift  the  responsibility,  and  the  men  may
elect  to  fight.  Moreover,  the  employers  will  probably  limit
their  attempts  at  conciliation  when  failure  to  agree  means  to
them,  not  the  absolute  certainty  of  a  strike,  but  only  a
probability,  the  extreme  greatness  of  which  optimism  may
lead  them  to  minimise.^  Hence,  the  chance  of  an  agreement
being  reached,  so  far  from  being  augmented,  is  actually
reduced.  When  there  is  provision  for  arbitration,  an
intermediate  reference  to  the  Board's  constituents  after
the  failure  of  conciliation  is  at  least  equally  dangerous.
For,  again,  the  men  are  practically  certain  to  support  their
leaders  when  these  are  bellicose,  and  it  will  hardly  conduce
to  calmness  or  good  feeling  should  they  vote  in  a  body  against
the  very  terms  which  an  arbitrator  afterwards  finds  it  his
duty  to  award.  The  off-chance  of  avoiding  arbitration  is  a
worse  argument  for  the  referendum  than  the  off-chance  of
avoiding  a  strike.

What  has  been  said  against  this  policy  in  controversies
about  which  the  Conciliation  Board  has  failed  to  agree  has,
of  course,  still  greater  force  in  those  where  it  has  succeeded.
If  there  is  no  arbitration  clause,  a  referendum,  in  these
circumstances,  might  not  improbably  substitute  war  for  peace.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  such  a  clause,  the  referendum
would  be  futile,  since  an  arbitrator,  called  in  through  the
refusal  of  either    side    to    endorse    the    Board's    decision,    is

'  This  argument  is  more  strong,  but  the  preceding  one  is  considerably  less
so,  when  the  referendum  is  on  the  plan  of  that  provided  for  in  the  rules  of  the
American  Amalgamated  Association  of  Iron,  Steel  and  Tin  Workers.  Here,
when  a  conference  between  employers  and  employed  fails  to  agree,  "it
requires  two-thirds  of  all  the  members  of  the  organisation  voting  to  insist  upon
the  demands  which  have  given  rise  to  the  disagreement "  {Industrial  Commission,
xvii.  p.  340).


384  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  hi

practically  bound  to  reiterate  that  decision,  if  not  still  further
to  stiffen  it  in  opposition  to  the  dissatisfied  party.

These  results  are,  of  course,  subject  to  the  general  caution
that  what  appears  to  be  ideally  best  is  not  always  practically
possible.  When  the  men's  organisation  is  weak  or  the
authority  of  their  leaders  slight,  acceptance  by  referendum  may
sometimes  be  the  only  form  in  which  acceptance  for  a  decision
can  be  secured  at  all.  In  a  Grimsby  fishing  dispute  in  1902
the  officials  of  the  Gasworkers'  Union  even  found  it  necessary  to
take  a  ballot  as  to  whether  a  decision  promulgated,  not  by  a
conciliation  committee,  but  by  a  regularly  appointed  Board
of  Trade  arbitrator  applied  for  by  both  sides,  should  or  should
not  be  accepted.  These  difficulties  must  be  clearly  recognised.
They  do  not,  however,  interfere  with  our  conclusion  that
a  referendum  from  negotiators  to  their  constituents  should  be
avoided  whenever  this  is  possible.

^  8.  Finally  there  is  the  question  of  guarantees — whether
for  the  observance  of  agreements  entered  into  directly  by  the
parties,  or  for  the  acceptance  of  the  award  of  an  arbitrator,  to
whom  they  have  agreed  to  submit  the  dispute.  In  some  agree-
ments each  party  gives  a  guarantee  in  the  form  of  a  money
deposit  subject  to  forfeit.  Thus,  after  the  great  strike  of
1895,  the  National  Associations  in  the  English  boot  and  shoe
trade  agreed  to  place  £1000  each  with  trustees,  part  of  which
would  be  forfeited  should  either  be  "  deemed  to  have  broken
an  agreement,  award  or  decision " ;  while,  "  if  any  provision
of  this  agreement,  or  if  an  award,  agreement  or  decision  is
broken  by  any  manufacturer  or  body  of  workmen  belonging  to
the  Federation  or  National  Union,  and  the  Federation  or
National  Union  fail  within  ten  days  either  to  induce  such
members  to  comply  with  the  agreement,  decision  or  award,
or  to  expel  them  from  the  organisation,  the  Federation  or
the  National  Union  shall  be  deemed  to  have  broken  the
agreement,  award  or  decision,"^  and  shall  thereupon  become

*  Provision  9  of  the  Agreement,  Report  on  Collective  Agreevunts,  Cd.  5366,
1910,  p.  231.  When  the  Union  failed  to  expel  the  London  strikei-s  in  1899,
Lord  Jamea  of  Hereford  awarded  £300  damages  from  the  Union's  deposit  to  the
employers  {ibid.  p.  505).  Evasion  of  the  fine  by  refusal  to  replace  money  with-
drawn under  it  can  be  met  by  a  rule  that,  in  this  event,  the  whole  of  the  deposit
shall  be  forfeited.  When  the  agreement  was  renewed  in  1909,  the  phrase
providing  for  expulsion  from  the  organisation  was  deleted.


cH.  in  VOLUNTAEY  AEEANGEMENTS  385

liable  to  forfeit  some  or  all  of  their  deposit.  Xo  doubt,
when  there  is  uncertainty  as  to  the  power  of  an  as-
sociation to  maintain  discipline  among  its  members,  its
ability  to  show  recalcitrant  members  that  their  conduct  is
causing  it  to  be  fined  would  do  something  to  strengthen  its
position  against  them.  Apart,  however,  from  this  con-
dition— and  in  strong  Unions  it  is  not  an  important  one —
the  value  of  monetary  guarantees  is  doubtful.  The  Eeport
of  the  Industrial  Council  (1912)  on  the  advantages  and
disadvantages  involved  is  as  follows :  "  Considerable  diversity
of  opinion  appears  to  exist  in  regard  to  the  efficacy  of  a
monetary  guarantee.  If  the  fund  is  intended  to  be  one  out
of  which  a  penalty  is  payable  equivalent  to  the  amount  of
damage  suffered,  it  is  clear  that,  in  order  to  provide  for
a  case  involving  a  large  number  of  persons,  the  sum  of  money
which  it  would  be  necessary  to  deposit  would  be  such  that
many  of  the  smaller  organisations  would  be  unable  to  set
aside  so  large  a  proportion  of  their  funds,  or  to  obtain  money
for  such  a  purpose.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  penalty  to  be
paid  is  merely  in  the  nature  of  a  fine,  it  does  not  appear  that
the  adoption  of  the  principle  adds  much  to  the  restraining
influence  which  is  already  exercised  by  the  moral  obligation
to  observe  agreements.  .  .  .  We  are  of  opinion,  therefore,  that
the  general  adoption  of  the  system  of  monetary  guarantees,
in  the  form  of  a  deposit  of  money,  cannot  be  regarded  as
constituting  a  practicable  and  efficient  means  of  ensuring  the
fulfilment  of  agreements.  At  the  same  time,  when  monetary
guarantees  are  voluntarily  offered,  we  see  no  objection  to  their
adoption."  ^  This  conclusion  will  probably  command  general
assent.

1  Zoc  at,  p.  11.


2  c


CHAPTER    IV

MEDIATION

§  1.  The  experience  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  of  the
United  States  affords  abundant  proof  that  purely  voluntary
arrangements  entered  into  by  employers  and  workpeople,  when
worked  in  a  friendly  spirit,  can  do  a  great  deal  towards  pro-
moting industrial  peace.  But  these  arrangements  are  not
adequate  to  prevent  strikes  or  lock-outs  in  all  circumstances.
Purely  conciliatory  schemes  may  be  broken  into  by  war  even
during  the  period  of  their  currency ;  and  schemes  in  which  pro-
vision is  made  for  arbitration  may  fail  to  be  renewed  when
this  period  comes  to  an  end.  On  occasions  of  this  kind,  when
voluntary  machinery  within  an  industry  is  lacking  or  threatens
to  prove  inadequate,  something  further  is  necessary  if  indus-
trial war  is  to  be  averted.  The  solution  which  naturally
suggests  itself  is  that  of  friendly  mediation.  In  behaK  of
this  the  general  argument  is  strong  and  straightforward.
When  once  a  difference  has  become  accentuated,  and,  still
more,  when  it  has  developed  into  an  open  conflict,  both  sides
are  apt  to  be  striving  for  the  "  mastery,"  as  well  as  for  the
particular  object  in  dispute.  They  stand  to  lose  dignity  as
well  as  money,  and,  consequently,  their  obstinacy  will  be  much
greater  than  the  material  point  alone  can  justify.  Not
only  is  this,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  so,  but  it  is  frequently  known
to  be  so  by  the  parties  themselves.  They  will  often  have
considered  some  matter  worth  the  chance  of  a  rupture,  but
not  worth  the  certainty  of  one.  Hence,  when  the  rupture
actually  arrives,  all  that  may  be  needed  is  some  device  for
facilitating  withdrawal,  without  undue  loss  of  dignity,  from
a  position  assumed  for  purposes  of  bluff.     Even  if,  in  the

386


CH.  IV  MEDIATION  387

earlier  stages  of  a  conflict,  no  way  out  seems  acceptable,
a  point  is  sure  to  be  reached  sooner  or  later  when  one  party
will  be  willing  to  yield,  if  it  can  "  save  its  face "  in  doing
so.  Hence  the  opportunity  for  the  "  good  offices "  of  a
mediator.  His  appearance  on  the  scene  makes  prominent
the  fact,  apt  to  be  lost  sight  of  in  the  heat  of  controversy,
that  the  general  public,  as  well  as  the  parties  directly  con-
cerned, have  an  interest  in  peace.  The  mere  suggestion  from
him  that  a  conference  should  be  held  may,  in  some  circum-
stances, of  itself  suffice  to  bring  about  a  settlement;  and,  where
it  falls  short  of  this  large  measure  of  success,  tact  and  a  genial
luncheon  party  may  still  indirectly  advance  the  prospects  of  peace.*
For,  in  the  presence  of  a  mediator,  the  element  of  "  proper
pride  "  and  "  courage  never  to  submit  or  yield "  is  eliminated
by  the  suggestion  that  reconciliation  is  made  as  a  favour  to
a  friend  and  not  as  a  concession  to  an  adversary.  Furthermore,
even  when  good  offices  do  not  effect  an  actual  settlement,  they
may  secure  that  a  difference  shall  be  resolved  by  arbitration
instead  of  by  industrial  war.  Perhaps  the  most  effective  way  in
which  a  mediator  can  forward  this  result  is  by  helping  the  dis-
putants in  the  difficult  task  of  finding  some  mutually  acceptable
person  to  decide  between  them.  In  this  matter  the  assistance
of  the  British  Board  of  Trade,  before  its  duties  were  taken
over  by  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  used  frequently  to  be  invoked.
§  2.  Since  there  is,  thus,  scope  for  mediatorial  intervention,
it  becomes  important  to  examine  the  different  institutions
through  which  it  may  be  made  to  work.  There  are  three
kinds  of  mediators — the  eminent  outsider,  the  non-govern-
mental Board,  and  the  Board  connected  with  some  part  of
the  governmental  system  of  the  country.  These  are  not
mutually  incompatible,  but  can  advantageously  be  used  to
supplement  one  another.  The  great  advantage  of  the  first
is  that  the  intervention  of  men  like  Bishop  Westcott,^  Lord
Eosebery,^  Lord  James,*  Mr.  Asquith,^  or  the  Prime  Minister

^  Of.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Webb's  opinion  of  the  efficacy  of  Lord  Rosebery's
Inncheon  party  ia  conciliating  the  parties  in  the  coal  dispute  of  1893
{Industrial  Democracy,  p.  242).

2  The  Durham  Coal  Strike,  1892.  '  The  Federation  Coal  Strike,  1893.

*  The  Clyde  and  Belfast  Engineering  Dispute,  1895.

'  the  London  Cab  Strike.


388  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

of  the  day,  of  itself  tends  somewhat  to  smooth  the  course  of
events  by  flattering  the  disputants  with  a  sense  of  their  own
importance.  The  ordinary  Board  of  Mediation,  whether
voluntary  or  official,  has  not,  as  a  rule,  such  distinguished
names  to  conjure  with,  and  is,  so  far,  inferior.  Hence,  for
a  certain  class  of  disputes  the  eminent  outsider  cannot  be
dispensed  with.

§  3.  The  usefulness  of  the  non-governmental  Board  is  less
generally  admitted.  It  has,  indeed,  the  advantage  over  the
eminent  outsider  that,  not  being  constituted  ad  hoc,  it  is  more
readily  brought  into  play,  and  has  a  better  chance  of  making
its  voice  heard  in  that  breathing  space  before  a  strike  or  lock-
out actually  begins,  when  mediation  is  most  likely  to  succeed.
It  has  been  urged,  however,  that  whereas  in  this  country  a
great  number  of  mediatorial  Boards  have  been  set  up  by  the
Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Trades  Councils  of  different  towns,
none  of  them,  except  the  London  Board,  has  produced  the
slightest  effect.  In  short,  according  to  this  argument,  the
system  of  non-governmental  Boards  has  been  tried  and  found
by  experience  to  be  worthless.  The  evidence  adduced,  how-
ever, is  inadequate  to  support  so  sweeping  a  conclusion.  The
Boards  which  have  failed  are  exclusively  municipal  Boards,  and,
with  labour  organised  as  it  is  in  England,  the  conduct  even  of
purely  local  differences  is  not  likely  to  be  left  altogether  to
the  men  on  the  spot.  May  it  not,  then,  be  fairly  urged  that
the  failure  of  these  Boards  was  due,  not  to  their  non-govern-
mental character,  but  to  the  narrowness  of  the  area  which
they  covered,  and  does  not  the  comparative  success  of  the
London  Board  add  weight  to  this  suggestion  ?  If,  however,
the  facts  can  be  thus  explained,  they  do  not  warrant  us  in
supposing  that  local  non -governmental  Boards  would  fail  if
tried  on  the  less  completely  unionised  soil  of  the  Continent.
Still  less  do  they  prove  that  a  non-governmental  national
Board  is  doomed  to  failure.  Indeed,  a  Board  of  this  kind,
under  the  name  of  the  Industrial  Department  of  the  National
Civic  Federation,  has  had  considerable  success  in  the  United
States.

§  4.  Nevertheless,  though  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  ignore
the  possibilities  of  non-governmental  Boards,  it  is  plain  that


cH.  IV  MEDIATION  389

there  are  certain  advantages  inaccessible  to  them,  but  readily
available  to  Boards  attached  to  the  governmental  machinery  of
the  country.  In  the  first  place,  the  latter  possess  exceptional
facilities — facilities  second  only  to  those  enjoyed  by  voluntary
Conciliation  Boards  in  particular  industries — for  ascertaining
the  existence  of  differences  at  the  earliest  possible  moment.  For
administrative  ofi&cials  can  be  required  to  supply  them  with
immediate  information  whenever  a  strike  or  lock-out  occurs  or
is  seriously  threatened.  In  the  second  place,  they  have  greater
intellectual  and  financial  resources,  and  are  likely  to  be  more
liberal  in  the  use  of  them.  Thus,  it  is  probable  that  the
trained  ability  which  the  Board  of  Trade  (now  Ministry  of
Labour)  can  command  has  a  good  deal  to  do  with  the  prefer-
ence displayed  for  it,  as  against  local  Boards,  by  the  parties  to
disputes  covering  a  small  area.  Lastly,  when,  as  on  the  plan
adopted  in  England,  the  emissaries  employed  are  sent  out
directly  from  a  central  State  department,  instead  of  being,  as
in  France,  mere  local  officials  endowed  with  mediatorial  powers,
they  are  likely  to  wield  a  modicum  of  reputation  which  may
help  them  considerably  in  their  work.  Consequently,  it  is  not
surprising  to  find  that  in  recent  times  the  work  of  mediation
in  industrial  disputes  has  been  taken  over  in  great  part  by
machinery  attached  to  some  organ  of  government.  In  some
countries  the  offer  of  mediation  may  only  be  made  on  the
request  of  one  or  other  of  the  parties  to  a  difference.  Thus,  a
Belgian  law  of  1887  authorises  the  establishment  locally  of
councils  of  industry  and  labour  with  sections  representing
different  industries,  and  provides ;  "  Whenever  circumstances
appear  to  demand  it,  at  the  request  of  either  party,  the
governor  of  the  province,  the  mayor  of  the  commune,  or  the
president  of  the  section  for  the  industry  in  which  the  dispute
occurs  must  convene  that  section,  which  is  to  endeavour,  by
conciliation,  to  arrange  a  settlement."  ^  More  frequently,  how-
ever, mediation  is  authorised  at  the  discretion  of  the  public
authority,  whether  it  is  asked  for  by  a  party  to  the  difference
or  not.  This  is  the  arrangement  under  the  French  law  of  1892
and  under  the  English  Conciliation  Act  of  1896.  The  latter
Act  provides :  "  When  a  difference  exista,  or  is  apprehended,

»  BuUetin  of  U.S.A.  Bureau  of  Labour,  TSo.  60,  p.  421.


390  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  in

between  an  employer  or  any  class  of  employers  and  workmen,
the  Board  of  Trade  may,  if  they  think  fit,  exercise  all  or  any
of  the  following  powers,  namely:  (1)  inquire  into  the  causes
and  circumstances  of  the  difference ;  (2)  take  such  steps  as  to
the  Board  may  seem  expedient  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the
parties  to  the  difference  to  meet  together,  by  themselves  or
their  representatives,  under  the  presidency  of  a  chairman
mutually  agreed  upon  or  nominated  by  the  Board  of  Trade  or
by  some  other  person  or  body,  with  a  view  to  the  amicable
settlement  of  differences ;  (3)  on  the  application  of  employers
or  workmen  interested,  and  after  taking  into  consideration  the
existence  and  adequacy  of  means  available  for  conciliation  in
the  district  or  trade  and  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  appoint
a  person  or  persons  to  act  as  conciliator  or  as  a  board  of
conciliators."  The  Ministry  of  Labour,  fortified  with  the
Industrial  Courts  Act  of  1919,  has  inherited  these  powers
from  the  Board  of  Trade.  Experience  shows  that  mediation,
skilfully  and  sympathetically  conducted  along  these  lines,  can
often  bring  about  the  adjustment  of  differences  that  might
otherwise  very  probably  have  led  to  a  stoppage  of  work.

§  5.  Thus,  we  may  conclude  generally  that  eminent  out-
siders, non-governmental  Boards  and  official  agencies  of
mediation  are  all  valuable  in  their  spheres.  It  must  not,
however,  be  forgotten  that  they  are  also  dangerous.  As  an
indirect  consequence  of  their  presence,  the  development  of
peace-promoting  machinery  within  separate  industries — a
more  effective  solvent  of  differences  than  "  good  offices "  are
ever  likely  to  be — may  be  checked.  To  prevent  this  result,
discretion  on  the  part  of  the  intervening  body  is  essential.  It
should  never  arrogate  to  itself  the  claim  to  more  than  a
transitory  usefulness,  and  should  carefully  encourage — as  the
British  Board  of  Trade,  under  the  Act  of  1896,  has  always
aimed  at  doing — the  formation  of  mutual  Boards  in  the  in-
dustries with  which  it  is  brought  into  contact.


CHAPTEK   V

COERCIYE   INTERVENTION

§  1.  Just  as  differences  may  prove  too  hard  for  voluntary
conciliation  schemes,  so  too  they  may  defy  the  efforts  of
mediators.  The  possibility,  or  rather,  except  in  the  developed
industries  of  countries  which  have  reached  a  high  stage  of
industrial  peace,  the  frequent  occurrence  of  these  intractable
controversies  makes  it  necessary  to  inquire  whether,  and  how
far,  resort  should  be  had  to  the  coercive  powers  of  the  State.
Intervention  of  this  kind  may  take  place  in  four  principal
ways.  Of  these  the  simplest  and  mildest  merely  makes  pro-
vision for  disputants  to  enter  the  net  of  compulsory  ad-
judication whenever  both  of  them  wish  to  do  so.  Examples
are  fairly  numerous.  In  New  South  Wales  the  Industrial
Arbitration  Act  of  1901  empowered  any  industrial  union
to  make  an  agreement  relatively  to  any  industrial  matter  with
another  union  or  with  an  employer,  which,  "  if  made  for  a
specified  term  not  exceeding  three  years,  and,  if  a  copy  be
filed  with  the  registrar,  will  be  binding  on  the  parties  thereto
and  on  every  person  while  he  is  a  member  of  any  union
which  is  a  party  to  the  agreement " ;  and  declares  "  that  any
such  agreement,  as  between  the  parties  bound  by  the  same,
shall  have  the  same  effect,  and  may  be  enforced  in  the  same
way,  as  an  award  of  the  Court  of  Arbitration."^  The  New
Zealand  law  makes  industrial  agreements  enforceable  in  the
same  way  as  awards  of  the  national  Court  of  Arbitration.
Mr.  Mundella's  abortive  English  Act  of  1872,  the  Massa-
chusetts provision  that,  when  both  parties  refer  a  difference
to  the  State  Board,  the  decision  automatically  becomes  binding,
»  Labour  GazdU,  Feb.  1902,  p.  39.
391


392  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

and  the  Federal  Railway  Act  of  1898,  enabling  interstate
carriers  voluntarily  to  establish  Arbitration  Boards  with  com-
pulsory powers/  were  similar  in  character  and  intention.
The  English  law  has  proved  a  dead  letter,  and  was  repealed
in  1896,  but  those  of  Massachusetts  and  New  Zealand  have
had  a  considerable  measure  of  success.

In  opposition  to  this  arrangement  it  may  be  urged,  first,
that,  when  once  arbitration  has  been  agreed  upon,  a  sense  of
what   is    fair    and    a   wholesome   respect   for   public   opinion
already  afford   an   adequate  guarantee   that    awards   will    be
obeyed ;  secondly,  that  the   introduction  of  a  legal  sanction
would  so  far  destroy  the  honourable  one — the  payment  of  the
penalty   being   felt   to    condone   the    offence^ — that   the    net
sanction  would  be  no  stronger  than  before ;  and  thirdly,  that,
through  the  association  in  the  popular  mind  of  the  idea  of
compulsion  with  that  of  arbitration,  "  resort  to  [Conciliation
Boards]  for  their  various  purposes  would  be  made  less  freely
than  at  present."  ^     It  may  be  replied,  however,  that,  at  the
worst,  since  non-coercive  arbitration  would  still  be  open  to
those  who  preferred  it,  there  is  little  reason  to  believe  that
differences    which,   save    for    the    change,   would    have    been
settled    peaceably,    will    now    involve    a    conflict.     Further-
more, the  effect  of  coercive  sanctions,  in  checking  resort  even
to  those  Courts  which  wield  them,  is  much  slighter  than  is
generally  supposed.     In   some   circumstances   their  influence
would  actually  tend  in  the  opposite  direction.     In  differences
where  each  party  considered  itself,  and  knew  that  the  other
party  considered  itself,  the  stronger,  there  might  be  no  settle-
ment   procurable   under   a   system    of  weak   sanctions,  from
which  one  or  other  of  them  would  not  think  it  worth  while
to  break  away.     Consequently,  arbitration  might  be  declined
from   dislike  to  the   risk  of  these  ineffective  sanctions.     If,
however,  the  sanctions  offered  were  strong,  the  position  would
be   different.       A    series    of   possible    settlements   would    be

*   U.S.A.  Industrial  Commission,  vol.  xvii.  p.  423.

2  Cf.  TTie  Report  of  the  Industrial  Council  on  Industrial  Agreements,
1912,  p.  7.

■''  Royal  Commission  on  Labour,  Report,  p.  99.  Of  course,  universal  com-
pulsion to  accept  awards,  unaccompanied  by  universal  compulsion  of  reference,
would  have  this  effect  in  a  far  more  marked  degree.


CH.V  COEKCIVE  INTEEVENTION  393

opened  up,  which,  when  awarded,  could  not  be  profitably
violated  by  either  side,  and  the  risk  of  which  both  would
be  willing  to  incur,  since  the  extra  loss  involved  in  failure
would  be  balanced  by  an  extra  gain  in  success.  Finally,
the  power  to  invoke  legal  sanctions  may  strengthen  the
hands  of  the  leaders  of  either  organisation  against  their
discontented  followers.  This  consideration  is  especially  im-
portant when,  as  in  the  United  States,  the  direct  control  of
Union  executives  over  individual  members  is  comparatively
slight.  It  is  not,  however,  to  be  ignored  even  in  this
country,  for,  though,  in  our  greater  Unions,  breaches  of
award  in  defiance  of  the  central  authority  are  rare,  among
the  low-skilled  industries  they  are  fairly  common.  On  the
whole,  therefore,  the  case  seems  to  be  made  out  for  some
system  under  which  opportunities  for  referring  differences  to
a  Court  with  coercive  powers  is  given  to  those  who  desire  to
avail  themselves  of  it.

§  2.  The  second  way  in  which  the  State  may  intervene
is  by  enabling  organisations  of  employers  and  employed  to
invoke  Government  aid  in  extending  to  the  whole  of  a  trade
in  a  district  or  country  an  agreement  that  has  t  been  entered
into  by  associations  representing  the  main  body  of  employers
and  workpeople  engaged  in  it.  In  South  Australia  an  Act  of
1910  provides  that,  in  trades  where  there  are  no  Wages
Boards,  three-fifths  of  the  employers  and  of  the  employed
may  make  an  agreement  and  require  the  Government  to
promulgate  it,  so  that  it  becomes  binding  upon  the  whole
trade.  The  English  Munitions  Act  of  1917  contained  a
substantially  similar  provision.  The  principal  argument  in
favour  of  legislation  of  this  kind  is  that,  in  the  absence  of  it,
agreements  entered  into  by  the  great  majority  of  those  engaged
in  an  industry  are  liable  to  be  disrupted  by  the  competition  of
a  few  "  bad "  employers.  It  has  been  stated,  for  example,
that  "  one  of  the  provoking  causes  of  the  second  and  dis-
astrous transport  strike  in  London  was  the  withdrawal  of
a  firm  of  carters  from  an  agreement  which  it  had  signed,  in
order  to  compete  with  the  other  firms  by  paying  a  lower  scale
of  wages  than  they  did."  ^     On  the  other  side,  however,  several

*  Ramsay  MacDonald,  The  Social  Unrest,  p.  109.


394  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

considerations  of  weight  may  be  advanced.  In  the  first  place,
State  action  of  the  kind  contemplated  would  dangerously
facilitate  the  formation  of  rings  and  alliances  to  the  detriment
of  consumers.  Secondly,  there  would  sometimes  be  very  great
practical  difficulty  in  determining  the  lengths  to  which
extension  should  be  carried.  For  the  similarity  between  the
products  of  different  districts  in  an  industry  is  often  more
apparent  than  real,  and,  when  this  is  so,  the  maintenance  of  a
parallel  movement  between  the  rates  prevailing  in  them  might
work  against  peace  rather  than  in  favour  of  it.  This  difficulty
may  be  illustrated  from  certain  voluntary  arrangements  which
have  prevailed  at  one  time  or  another  in  this  country.  Thus,
in  1874  a  combined  scale  was  constructed  for  the  iron  trade
of  the  Midlands  and  the  north  of  England.  In  the  north,
however,  iron  rails  were  still  the  chief  product,  while  in  the
Midlands  manufacturers  were  already  engaged  in  producing
bars,  plates  and  angles.  For  the  former  the  market  was
falling,  but  it  was  rising  for  the  latter,  with  the  result  that
the  employers  of  the  north  were  compelled,  at  the  first
adjustment  under  the  scale,  to  raise  wages  3d.,  although
the  price  of  their  own  chief  ware  was  falling.  Consequently,
the  scale  collapsed  within  the  year.  Similarly,  there  existed
for  some  time  in  many  parts  of  Lancashire  an  understanding
that  the  wages  of  cotton-spinners  should  rise  and  fall  with
advances  and  reductions  in  the  Oldham  district.  But  "  the
increasing  specialisation  of  districts,  with  respect  to  the  yarns
produced  in  them,  was  instrumental  in  rendering  unworkable
an  arrangement  which  had  at  least  been  possible,  if  not
desirable,  some  time  before.  What  had  been  one  market  for
yarns,  roughly  speaking,  became  many  markets ;  and  the
prices  for  different  ranges  and  qualities  of  yarn  beginning  to
move  more  independently,  rendered  any  sliding  arrangements
between  the  lists  unsatisfactory."^  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that
a  policy  of  extension  does  not  absolutely  exclude  adjustment
to  the  varying  conditions  of  different  districts.  But  it  can
hardly  be  doubted  that  the  task  of  making  these  adjustments
would  often  demand  greater  elasticity  in  the  extensions
than  the  patience  and  wisdom  of  the  officials  concerned  are

'  Chapman,  Economic  Journal,  1899,  p.  598.


OH.  V  COERCIVE  INTEEVENTION  395

competent  to  provide.  Thirdly,  it  may  be  urged  that,  where
the  workpeople's  organisation  is  powerful,  extension  by
authority  is  superfluous,  because  private  enterprise  is
suflSicient  to  ensure  it.  The  employers  are  anxious  to  have
recalcitrant  competitors  brought  into  line,  and  the  workpeople
are  no  less  anxious  to  help  them.  Hence,  "  Trade  Unions
assist  employers'  associations  to  coerce  employers  into  sub-
mission to  an  agreement  which  they  have  not  signed,"  and
"collective  bargaining  thus  extends  over  a  much  larger  field
than  Trade  Unionism."  ^  The  United  States  Industrial  Com-
mission found,  for  example,  that  in  Illinois  the  United
Mine  Workers'  Society  is  expected  to  strike  or  threaten  to
strike  in  order  to  bring  recalcitrant  employers  to  terms  and
that  in  practice  it  is  generally  successful  in  securing  this
result.^  This  last  consideration,  however,  is  obviously  not
relevant  to  industries  in  which  the  workpeople's  organisation
is  weak.  On  the  whole,  in  spite  of  the  possible  risks  to
consumers  and  of  the  practical  difiSculties  set  out  above,  and  in
spite  also  of  the  danger  that  "  the  extension  of  the  benefits  of
organisation  to  the  unorganised  may  tend  to  perpetuate  the
class  of  non-union  hangers-on  of  labour,  and  unfederated
hangers-on  of  capitalists,  men  who  reap  the  benefit  of
organisation  but  refuse  to  pay  their  share,"  ^  it  would  seem
that  opinion  in  this  country  is  moving  in  favour  of  this
strictly  limited  form  of  coercive  State  intervention.  Definite
support  was  given  to  it  in  the  Report  of  the  Industrial
Council  (1912),  subject  to  the  condition  that  the  Board  of
Trade  should  not  entertain  any  application  for  the  extension
of  an  agreement,  unless  such  application  was  received  from
both  the  parties  to  the  agreement.

§  3.  The  third  way  of  State  intervention  is  by  laws  com-
pelling industrial  differences  to  be  referred  to  some  tribunal
before  any  strike  or  lock-out  in  the  industries  covered  by  the
law  is  permitted.  This  system  is  best  illustrated  by  the
Canadian  Industrial  Disputes  Investigation  Act  of  1907.
This  Act  is  not  of  general  application,  but  refers  exclusively

^  Oilman,  Methods  of  Industrial  Peace,  pp.  116-17.

2  Cf.  Industrial  Commission,  vol.  xvii.  p.  329.

3  Cole,  The  World  of  Labour,  p.  314.


396  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  m

to  certain  industries  in  which  there  is  reason  to  believe  that
a  stoppage  of  work  would  prove  exceptionally  injurious  to  the
community  as  a  whole.  The  industries  covered  are  mining,
transportation,  all  forms  of  railway  service,  the  supply  of
electricity  and  other  motive  power,  the  working  of  steamships,
the  telegraph  and  telephone  services,  gas  supply  and  water
supply.  Practically  speaking,  the  Act  comes  into  play  in  these
industries  whenever  a  stoppage  of  work  is  seriously  threatened,
and  it  cannot  be  successfully  evaded  by  a  joint  refusal  of
both  parties  to  invoke  it.  The  principal  provisions  are  as
follows.  Thirty  days'  notice  must  be  given  of  any  proposed
change  in  the  terms  of  contract  between  employers  and  em-
ployed. If  the  proposed  change  is  resisted  by  the  other  side,
a  strike  or  lock-out  in  reference  to  it  is  prohibited,  under
penalties,  until  the  dispute  has  been  investigated  by  a  Board
appointed  by  public  authority,  and  until  this  Board  has
made  a  report,  together  with  recommendations  as  to  the  proper
terms  of  settlement,  for  publication  by  the  Minister  of  Labour.
When  the  report  has  been  published,  there  is  no  obligation
upon  either  party  to  accept  its  recommendations,  and  a
stoppage  of  work  may  legally  take  place.  But,  until  the
report  is  published,  a  stoppage  is  prohibited  by  law  and
renders  any  individual  taking  part  in  it  liable  to  a  fine,  for
employers  engaging  in  a  lock-out,  of  from  100  to  1000  dollars
per  day  ;  for  workpeople  engaging  in  a  strike,  of  from  10  to  5  0
dollars  per  day.

This  law,  it  will  be  noticed,  has  three  distinct  aspects.
First,  it  goes  a  long  way  towards  ensuring  serious  discussion
between  the  parties — this  is  practically  involved  in  the  Board's
investigations — and  an  attempt  to  settle  their  differences  under
the  guidance,  and  with  the  help,  of  an  impartial  authority.
Secondly,  it  gives  full  power  to  a  tribunal  appointed  by  the
Government  "  to  investigate  the  matter  in  dispute,  with  similar
powers  in  regard  to  witnesses,  production  of  documents  and
inspection  as  are  vested  in  a  court  of  record  in  civil  cases,  with
a  view,  if  conciliation  fails,  to  recommendations  being  made  as
to  what  are  believed  to  be  fair  terms."  ^  Thirdly,  it  makes
a  stoppage  of  work  unlawful  until  the  investigation  of  the
>  Report  by  Sir  George  Askwith  [Cd.  6603],  p.  17.


CH.  V  COERCIVE  INTERVENTION  397

difference  has  been  completed  and  a  report  presented.  It
has  been  held  by  competent  authorities  who  have  studied  the
working  of  the  law  that  the  first  of  these  aspects  is,  in
practice,  the  most  valuable.  The  Reporter  to  the  United
States  Bureau  of  Labour  writes :  "The  principal  service  of  the
Board  is  in  bringing  the  parties  to  the  controversy  together
for  an  amicable  discussion  and  in  guiding  the  negotiations  to
a  voluntary  settlement."  ^  And  again  :  "  The  Government  in
appointing  Boards,  and  the  most  successful  Boards  in  conducting
proceedings,  have  interpreted  the  Act  as  a  statute  for  concilia-
tion by  informal  methods,  looking  towards  a  voluntary  agree-
ment between  the  parties  as  its  object."  ^  In  like  manner.
Sir  Greorge  Askwith,  in  his  Report  to  the  British  Board  of
Trade  in  1913,  expressed  the  opinion  "that  the  forwarding  of
the  spirit  and  intent  of  conciliation  is  the  more  valuable
portion  of  the  Canadian  Act."  ^  None  the  less,  the  provision
for  the  promulgation  at  need  of  an  authoritative  report  and
recommendations  may  also,  on  occasions,  yield  good  results.
It  is  true  that  in  trifling  disputes,  in  which  the  general  public
takes  small  interest,  little  pressure  from  public  opinion  can  be
evoked,  and  that  in  all  disputes,  when  once  the  passion  of
conflict  has  been  aroused,  even  strong  pressure  may  be  ignored.
But,  when  the  issue  is  one  which  seriously  affects  the  whole
community,  by  threatening  to  disorganise,  e.g.,  the  railway
service  or  the  coal  supply,  public  opinion  is  a  force  which
must  at  least  be  reckoned  with ;  and  it  is  interesting  to
observe  that,  on  a  number  of  occasions,  when  one  or  another
of  the  parties  at  first  refused  to  accept  the  recommendations
of  the  Board  and  a  strike  or  lock-out  took  place,  the  dispute
was  ultimately  settled  substantially  on  the  basis  of  the  Board's
proposals.  The  third  aspect  of  the  law,  that  which  makes  a
strike  or  lock-out  unlawful  until  after  the  Board  has  reported,
is  the  one  about  which  the  most  serious  doubts  have  been
expressed.  There  is  the  objection  that,  given  determined  op-
position, it  may  prove  impracticable  to  enforce  the  law ;  and
the  objection  that  the  success  of  a  strike  often  depends
upon  its  suddenness,  so  that  any  enforced  delay  necessarily

1   United  States  Bulletin  of  Labour,  No.  86,  1910,  p.  17.
2  Ibid.  No.  76,  p.  666.  3  ^q^    6603],  p.  17,


398  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

handicaps  the  workpeople.  These  objections  are  undoubtedly
substantial,  though  there  are  some  industries,  e.g.  the  transport
industries,  in  which  the  strike  weapon  is  not  appreciably  weak-
ened by  delay  in  resort  to  it.  On  the  other  side,  stress  is  laid
upon  the  fact  that,  when  once  industrial  war  has  broken  out,
the  issue  chiefly  in  dispute  is  apt  to  be  lost  in  a  fight  for
mastery,  which  only  exhaustion  can  end,  and  that,  therefore,
even  though  the  law  should  often  fail  to  prevent  an  outbreak,
the  chance  that  it  will  sometimes  succeed,  and  so  obviate
grave  injury  to  the  community,  constitutes  for  it  an  adequate
defence.  Plainly,  on  this  issue  no  decision  of  a  general  kind
is  possible.  What  ought,  in  fact,  to  be  done  depends  chiefly
on  what  workpeople  and  employers  think  ought  to  be  done
and  are,  therefore,  prepared  to  support.  There  can,  however,
be  little  doubt  that  an  Act  on  the  Canadian  model,  without
penal  clauses  against  strikes  and  lock-outs  prior  to  the  pro-
mulgation of  the  Board's  recommendations,  and  accompanied,
so  far  as  possible,  by  safeguards  to  prevent  injurious  reactions
upon  the  development  of  voluntary  schemes  of  conciliation  and
arbitration,  would,  in  Lord  Askwith's  words,  be  "  suitable  and
practicable  for  this  country."  Part  II.  of  the  Industrial
Courts  Act  of  1919  in  effect  constitutes  such  an  Act.  At
present  it  could  not  safely  include  the  critical  penal  clause.
But  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  that  clause ;  and  if,  through
the  establishment  of  a  League  of  Nations,  delay  in  political
war  comes  really  to  be  enforced  by  an  overriding  authority,
public  opinion  may  be  ready  to  accept  a  similar  restraint
upon  the  outbreak  of  industrial  war.

S  4.  The  fourth  and  last  way  of  State  intervention  is  what
is  commonly  and  loosely  known  as  compulsory  arbitration.
Under  the  Canadian  Act,  if  the  parties  remain  intractable
alike  to  efforts  at  conciliation  and  to  the  suasion  of  opinion,
strikes  and  lock-outs  can  ultimately  take  place  without  any
infringement  of  the  law.  It  has  been  left  to  the  Australasian
colonies  to  introduce  a  type  of  legislation  under  which,  not
only  does  a  publicly  appointed  Board  recommend  terms  for
the  settlement  of  differences,  but  the  terms  so  recommended
are  legally  binding  and  a  strike  or  lock-out  against  them  is
a  punishable  offence.     This   type   of  legislation,  when   fully


cH.  V  COERCIVE  INTERVENTION  399

developed,  closes  that  loop-hole  for  a  stoppage  of  work  which
the  Canadiau  law  leaves  open.  Generally  speaking,  some
effort  is  made  not  unduly  to  discourage  settlement  by  dis-
cussion and  conciliation,  but  the  principal  stress  is  laid  on
preventing  resort  to  a  strike  or  lock-out  in  those  difficult
conflicts  where  less  heroic  expedients  have  failed.  In  New
Zealand,  indeed,  contraiy  to  common  opinion,  a  small  loop-hole
is  still  left.  For  the  compulsory  arbitration  law  of  that
colony  applies  only  to  unions  of  workpeople  registered  under
the  arbitration  law.  In  the  corresponding  laws  of  New  South
Wales  and  Western  Australia,  however,  there  is  no  such
reservation,  and  the  same  remark  holds  true  of  the  Common-
wealth law  relating  to  differences  that  extend  over  more  than
one  State.  In  all  these  laws  the  arbitration  awards  are
"  sanctioned  "  by  a  money  fine.  In  New  Zealand  individual
employers  and  unions  of  workpeople  who  break  the  law  are
liable  to  a  penalty  of  £500,  and,  if  a  union  of  workpeople
fails  to  pay,  its  individual  members  are  each  held  liable  to  a
fine  of  £10,  which  may  be  collected  through  a  WTit  of  attach-
ment of  wages.  Western  Australia,  like  New  Zealand,  relies
wholly  on  money  penalties,  but  the  New  South  Wales  law
provides  also  for  the  imprisonment  of  persons  who  fail  to  pay
their  fines,  and  the  Commonwealth  law  awards  imprisonment,
without  the  option  of  a  fine,  for  a  second  offence.  It  is
obvious,  of  course,  that  no  legal  prohibition  and  no  provision
of  penalties  can  ensure  that  the  prohibited  action  will  never
be  performed.  No  surprise  need,  therefore,  be  caused  by  the
circumstance  that,  in  the  Australasian  colonies,  in  spite  of
their  coercive  laws,  stoppages  of  work  on  account  of  industrial
disputes  have,  in  fact,  occurred.  This  is  only  to  be  expected.
The  advocates  of  compulsory  arbitration  do  not  deny  it.  Nor
are  they  blind  to  the  practical  difficulties  that  may  be  pre-
sented by  collusive  evasions  of  the  law  or  by  independent
refusals  to  pay  fines.  Their  claim  is,  not  that  these  laws
can  create  a  "  country  without  strikes,"  but  that,  by  invoking
a  pressure  more  direct  and  potent  than  that  of  unorganised
opinion,  upon  which  alone  the  Canadian  law  in  the  last  resort
relies,  they  can  render  stoppages  of  work  less  frequent  than
they  would  otherwise  be.     How  far  this  claim  has  been  made


400  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  in

good  in  the  experience  of  New  Zealand  and  the  Australian
States  is  a  controversial  question,  which  could  only  be
answered  satisfactorily  after  prolonged  study  on  the  spot.
But,  from  the  practical  standpoint  of  English  statesmen  at
the  present  time,  that  study  is  not  necessary.  It  is  common
ground  that  legislation,  to  which  the  opinion  of  large  masses
of  the  population  is  strongly  opposed,  is  likely  to  prove  at
once  difficult  to  enforce  and  injurious  to  that  general  respect  for
law  which  it  is  to  the  interest  of  every  community  to  maintain.
Mr.  Pember  Eeeves,  the  author  of  the  New  Zealand  law,  has
himself  declared  that  "  to  attempt  to  force  such  a  statute
upon  an  unwilling  people  would  be  foredoomed  to  disaster."  ^
In  England — and  the  same  thing  would  seem  to  be  true  of  the
United  States — anything  in  the  nature  of  compulsory  arbitra-
tion is  at  present  looked  upon  by  employers  and  employed
alike  with  very  great  distrust.  To  introduce  it  at  a  single  stride
in  the  face  of  this  general  sentiment  would  be  both  impracticable
and  unwise.  Public  opinion  may,  no  doubt,  change,  and  at
a  future  time  welcome  what  it  now  rejects,  but  at  present,
whatever  may  be  thought  of  its  abstract  merits,  compulsory
arbitration  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  not  practical  politics  in
any  department  of  industry.  The  partial  resort  that  was  had
to  it  during  the  war  does  not  suggest  that  it  affords  a  satis-
factory method  of  avoiding  strikes,  and  in  normal  times,  when
the  pressure  of  the  national  need  is  slighter,  it  would  probably
meet  with  still  less  acceptance  and,  therefore,  with  still  less


^  Stcde  Experiments  in  Australia,  p.  168.

2  Of.  The  Report  on  Conciliation  and  Arbitration,  to  the  Ministry  of  Recon-
struction [Cd,  9099],  1918,  Par.  2.'


CHAPTER    VI

AN    ANALYTICAL    TIEW    OF    INDUSTRIAL    PEACE

§  1.  What  has  been  said  in  the  preceding  chapters  will
serve  well  enough  for  the  rough  purposes  of  practice.  But
it  is  interesting  to  the  economist  to  probe  somewhat  deeper
and  to  set  out  some  of  the  broader  issues  that  have  been
raised  in  a  dififerent  guise.  From  an  analytical  point  of  view
disputes  between  a  workmen's  union  and  a  employers*  associa-
tion are  closely  analogous  to  disputes  between  two  nations.
When  the  disputes  concern  such  things  as  the  general
conditions  of  work,  the  methods  of  wage  payment,  the  hours
of  labour  and  the  demarcation  of  work,  the  analogy  is
complete.  But,  when  they  concern  wages,  there  is  an  im-
portant difference.  Disputes  between  nations  relate  to  a
thing,  disputes  about  wages  to  a  rate.  In  bargains  about
a  thing  it  is  obvious  that,  the  more  either  side  can  push
the  terms  up  against  the  other,  the  greater  the  advantage  it
will  gain  for  itself.  But  in  bargains  about  a  rate,  when
the  amount  to  be  sold  is  not  included  in  the  terms  of  the
bargain,  this  is  not  so.  For,  after  a  point,  any  further  raising
of  the  rate  against  one's  opponent  will  bring  about  such  a
reduction  in  the  quantity  of  the  thing  which  he  is  prepared
to  buy  that,  to  put  it  paradoxically,  one  is  made  actually
worse  off  by  getting  better  terms.  Thus,  when  the  bargain
is  about  a  rate,  there  will  be  certain  upper  and  lower  limits
outside  of  which  it  will  not  pay  either  party  to  go,  whereas,
when  the  bargain  is  about  a  thing,  there  are  no  such  limits.

§  2.  When,  both  on  the  side  of  workpeople  and  on  that
of  employers,  competition  works  with  perfect  freedom,  the
result  of  a  bargain  about  the  rate  of  wages  is  determinate  at

401  2  D


402  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

a  single  definite  rate,  which  is  settled  by  the  conditions  of
reciprocal  demand.  If  any  worker  asks  for  more  than  this
from  any  employer,  that  employer  will  refuse  to  engage
him  and  take  somebody  else,  and,  if  any  employer  offers
any  less  than  this  to  any  workman,  that  workman  will  refuse
to  work  for  him  and  go  to  somebody  else.  Where,  however,
wage  rates  are  settled,  not  by  the  action  of  free  competition,
but  by  bargaining  between  a  workmen's  association  on  one  side
and  an  employers'  association  on  the  other,  the  rate  of  wage
is  no  longer  determinate  at  a  single  point.  There  is,  on
the  contrary,  a  range  of  indeterminateness.  The  workmen's
association  will  prefer  to  the  competitive  rate  something
higher  than  that  rate,  and  the  employers'  association  some-
thing lower.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  a  rise  in  the  rate
will  lessen  the  amount  of  employment  obtainable,  there  will
be  a  certain  maximum  rate  above  which  the  workpeople's
association  will  not  wish  to  go,  and,  in  view  of  the  fact  that
a  reduction  in  the  rate  will  lessen  the  amount  of  labour
obtainable,  there  will  be  a  certain  minimum  rate  below  which
the  employers'  association  will  not  wish  to  go.  The  range
of  indeterminateness  is  constituted  by  all  the  rates  enclosed
within  these  two  limits.  Let  us  suppose  that  they  are  40s.
and  30s.  respectively.  From  any  rate  lying  outside  this
range  it  is  to  the  interest  of  both  sides  to  depart  in  the  same
direction.  It  is,  therefore,  impossible  for  a  settlement  to  be
reached  with  any  wage  rate  outside  that  range.  If  there  is
any  settlement  it  must  fall  at  some  point  within  it.  The
extent  of  the  range  will  be  larger  the  less  elastic  is  the
demand  for  labour  by  the  employers,  and  the  less  elastic  is
the  demand  for  jobs  with  these  employers  by  the  workpeople.
§  3.  In  considering  their  policy,  the  workpeople's  associa-
tion will  reflect  that,  if  they  elect  to  fight  a  battle  about
wages,  the  fight  will  cost  them  so  much  and  the  terms
obtained  at  the  end  of  the  fight  are  likely  to  be  such  and
such.  Weighing  up  these  things,  they  will  determine  on
a  certain  minimum  wage  which  it  is  worth  while,  if  necessary,
to  accept  rather  than  fight.  This  will  be,  as  it  weie,  their
sticking  point.  If  they  think  that  a  fight  would  cost  them
a  great  deal  and  that  they  would  get  bad  terms  at  the  end,


CH.  VI  AN  ANALYTICAL  VIEW  403

this  sticking  point  will  be  low.  It  may  be  a  good  deal  lower
than  the  30s.,  which  we  have  supposed  to  be  the  lower
limit  of  the  range  of  indeterminateness.  On  the  other  hand,
if  they  think  that  a  fight  would  cost  them  very  little  (or,  still
more,  if  they  think  that  the  actual  process  of  it  would  benefit
them),  and  that  they  would  get  good  terms  at  the  end,  their
sticking  point  will  be  high.  It  may  be  as  high  as,  but  cannot
be  higher  than,  the  40s.,  which  is  the  upper  end  of  the  range
of  indeterminateness.  Thus,  the  workpeople's  sticking  point
may,  according  to  circumstances,  be  any  wage  less  than  40s.
By  similar  reasoning  it  can  be  shown  that  the  employers'
sticking  point  may,  according  to  circumstances,  be  any  wage
greater  than  30  s.  When  the  workpeople's  sticking  point
is  lower  than  the  employers'  sticking  point,  the  range  of
wages  between  the  two  sticking  points  constitutes,  subject
to  a  qualification  to  be  introduced  presently,  the  range  of
jrracticable  hargains.  Thus,  if  the  workpeople  would  take
32s.  rather  than  fight  and  the  employers  would  pay  37s.
rather  than  fight,  this  range  is  made  up  of  all  rates  between
32s.  and  37s.  When,  however,  the  workpeople's  sticking
point  is  above  the  employers'  sticking  point,  when,  for
example,  the  workpeople  would  go  as  low  as  35s.,  but  no
lower,  rather  than  fight,  and  the  employers  would  go  as
high  as  33s.,  but  no  higher,  rather  than  fight,  there  is
no  range  of  practicable  bargains;  and  it  is  impossible  for
the  issue  between  the  two  sides  to  be  settled  without  a
fight.

§  4.  If  both  sides  have  the  same  expectations  as  to  the
way  in  which  a  fight  would  end  and  as  to  the  wage-rate  that
would  be  established  in  consequence  of  it,  and  if  each  side
believes  that  the  process  of  the  fight  would  involve  some
positive  cost  to  it,  the  workpeople's  sticking  point  must  be
below  the  employer's  sticking  point,  and  there  must,  therefore,
be  some  range  of  practicable  bargains.  If,  however,  the  work-
people expect  a  fight  to  yield  a  higher  wage  rate  than  the
employers  do,  this  is  not  necessaiy,  even  though  each  side
expects  the  conflict  to  involve  some  positive  cost.  And,  if  one
side  expects  the  conflict  to  be  actually  of  benefit  to  it, — to
involve,  as  it  were,  negative  cost — it  is  not  necessary,  even


404  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  in

though  workpeople  and  employers  both  anticipate  the  same
result  to  the  fight.

§  5.  It  should  be  added  in  this  connection  that  negative
cost  is  by  no  means,  as  might  perhaps  be  thought  at  firstsight,
a  mere  mathematical  figment.  On  the  side  of  the  employers
it  may  easily  be  looked  for  if  their  commodity  is  one  the  demand
for  which  is  highly  inelastic,  and  if,  at  the  time  of  the
conflict,  they  have  large  accumulated  stocks  in  hand.  Thus,
it  is  sometimes  alleged  that  coalowners  are  enabled  by  a  con-
flict "to  clear  their  stocks  at  famine  prices, while  postponing
the  fulfilment  of  their  contracts  under  strike  clauses."  ^  They
may  also  anticipate  negative  costs  if  they  have  reason  to
believe  that,  by  precipitating  a  conflict  in  times  of  bad  trade,
they  can  insure  themselves  against  being  hampered  by  one
when  trade  improves.^  On  the  side  of  the  workpeople,  negative
cost  is,  in  the  early  stages  of  industrial  organisation,  fairly
common.  For  in  that  period  what  the  men  are  really  aiming
at  is,  not  the  concession  of  a  higher  wage,  but  respect  for
their  Trade  Union  and  consequent  increased  readiness  to  deal
fairly  with  them  in  the  future.  Or  again,  the  real  purpose
of  the  conflict  may  be  to  solidify  the  trade  union  itself  and
to  attract  non-unionists  to  its  ranks.  So  far  as  conflicts  are
undertaken  for  objects  of  this  kind,  the  advantage  anticipated
from  the  acquisition  of  those  objects  needs  to  be  subtracted
from  the  anticipated  material  losses  of  the  dispute,  and,  when
so  subtracted,  may  leave  a  net  negative  result.  In  these
circumstances  the  men  may  elect  to  fight,  even  though  they
expect  both  to  be  beaten  and  to  be  subjected  to  great  suffering
in  the  process.  Negative  costs  are,  however,  obviously  ex-
ceptional ;  as  a  general  rule  both  sides  are  sure  to  expect  that
the  actual  conduct  of  a  conflict  will  involve  them  in  loss.

§  6.  The  qualification  forecasted  in  §  3  has  now  to  be
introduced.  Since  the  workpeople's  sticking  point  may  be
anything  below  the  highest  point  in  the  range  of  indetermin-
ateness,  it  may  be  below  the  lowest  point  in  that  range.  In
like  manner,  the  employers'  sticking  point  may  be  above  the
highest  point  in  that  range.     Thus,  with  a  range  of  indeter-

'  Political  Sdervce  Quarterly,  vol.  xii.  p.  426.
*  Cf.  Chapman,  The  Lanccushi/rt  Cotton  Irtduslry,  p.  211.


CH.  VI  AN  ANALYTICAL  VIEW  405

minateness  between  30s.  or  40s.  we  might  have  the  work-
people's sticking  point  at  25  s.  and  the  employer's  sticking
point  at  48s.  In  these  circumstances  the  range  of  practicable
bargains  will  not  extend  to  the  two  sticking  points :  for  no
bargain  is  practicable  that  lies  outside  the  range  of  inde-
terminateness.  Though  one  side  may  be  willing  to  concede
such  a  wage  rather  than  fight,  the  other  side  will  not  be
willing  to  accept  it.  Consequently,  any  wage  rate  above  the
workpeople's  sticking  point  and  any  wage  rate  below  the
employer's  sticking  point,  which  lies  outside  the  range  of
indeterminateness,  is  wholly  ineffective.  The  range  of  ■practic-
able bargains,  that  is  the  series  of  wage  rates  which  both
parties  would  prefer  to  a  fight,  is  constituted  by  the  wage
rates  (if  any)  which  both  lie  above  the  workpeople's  sticking
point  and  below  the  employers'  sticking  point  and  also  fall
within  the  range  of  indeteiminateness.  This  explanation  is
essential  to  the  practical  inferences  to  which  we  now  pass.

§  7.  The  extent  of  the  range  of  indeterminateness  is  de-
termined, as  was  pointed  out  in  §  2,  by  the  elasticities  of  the
reciprocal  demands  of  the  two  parties.  From  the  present  point
of  view,  therefore,  it  may  be  taken  as  fixed.  The  range  of
practicable  bargains  cannot,  in  any  circumstances,  be  extended
beyond  the  limits  so  determined.  Within  these  limits  it  is  in-
creased by  anything  that  moves  the  workpeople's  sticking  point
downwards  or  the  employers'  sticking  point  upwards.  The
workpeople's  sticking  point  is  moved  down  by  anything  that
increases  the  cost  which  they  look  to  suffer  in  a  conflict ;
and  the  employers'  sticking  point  is  moved  up  by  anything
that  increases  the  cost  which  they  look  to  suffer  in
it.  An  increase  in  the  strength  of  the  workpeople's  associa-
tion alone  will  probably  both  lower  the  anticipated
cost  to  them  and  increase  it  to  employers.  Hence,  it  will
probably  raise  both  sticking  points,  but  it  is  impossible  to
say  whether  it  will  widen  the  gap  between  them.  An
increase  in  the  strength  of  the  employers'  association  alone
will,  in  like  manner,  lower  both  sticking  points.  In  practice,
since  the  development  of  one  rival  association  is  almost
certain  to  lead  to  the  development  of  the  other  also,  the
most  likely  form  of  increase  of  strength  is  an  increase  on  both


406  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

sides,  leading  to  an  increase  in  the  cost  anticipated  by  both.
This  will  mean  a  lowering  of  the  workpeople's  sticking  point
accompanied  by  a  rise  of  the  employers'.  Within  the  limits
set  by  the  range  of  indeterminateness  it  will,  therefore,
extend  the  range  of  practicable  bargains  in  both  directions,
provided  that  such  range  already  exists,  and  it  may  bring
such  a  range  into  being  if  none  exists.  This  tendency  is
exhibited  in  international,  as  well  as  in  industrial,  negotiations.
If  the  adjustment  of  some  political  difference  by  war  means
adjustment  by  a  world  war  embracing  powerful  alliances  on
both  sides,  the  enormous  probable  cost  of  a  fight  makes  it
certain  that,  unless  the  stake  at  issue  is  of  almost  incon-
ceivable importance,  some  range  of  practicable  bargains  will
be  available.  In  like  manner,  when  the  organisations  of
workpeople  and  employers  in  some  industry  are  extended  to
embrace  the  whole  country  instead  of  being  merely  local,  so
that  a  strike  or  lock-out,  if  it  occurred,  would  be  national  in
its  scope,  an  issue  affecting,  say,  the  wages  payable  in  some  small
district,  for  which,  before,  it  may  be,  no  range  of  practicable
bargains  was  available,  is  likely  no  longer  to  prove  intractable.
Broadly  speaking,  as  things  are  to-day,  with  the  great  strength
which  nations  and  industrial  associations  alike  possess,  we
may  safely  conclude  that,  for  nearly  all  minor  matters  and
interpretation  differences,  a  wide  range  of  practicable  bargains
will  be  available.  To  both  parties  there  will  be  an  enormous
number  of  ways  of  settling,  say,  the  political  status  of  an
obscure  African  village,  or  the  exact  application  to  a  particular
pit  of  a  general  wage  agreement  between  coal-owners  and  coal-
miners,  any  one  of  which  would  be  very  much  more  advantage-
ous to  both  parties  than  a  conflict  could  possibly  be.  When  the
matter  in  dispute  is  an  important  one,  such  as  the  possession
of  a  large  and  rich  territory  or  the  determination  of  the
general  standard  of  wages  in  an  industry,  it  is  not,  of  course,
equally  certain  that  a  range  of  practica,ble  bargains  will  exist.
§  8.  When  two  nations,  or  two  associations,  representing
employers  and  employed  respectively,  have  entered  into  an
agreement  not  to  fight  but  to  settle  differences  by  arbitration,
there  is  created  a  real  cost,  partly  moral  and  partly  material
(through  the  probable  loss  of  outside  support),  to  either  of


cH.  VI  AN  ANALYTICAL  VIEW  407

them  if  it  breaks  the  agreement.  This  is  additional  to  the
direct  cost  which  conflict  would  involve  whether  there  had
been  an  arbitration  agreement  or  not.  Thus,  the  setting
up  of  such  an  agreement  increases  the  cost  of  war  to  both
parties,  and  so,  within  the  limits  set  by  the  range  of  indeter-
minateness,  tends  to  bring  into  being,  and,  if  it  is  already  in
being,  to  widen,  a  range  of  practicable  bargains.  Workers,  who,
apart  from  the  agreement,  would  have  fought  rather  than
accept  32s.,  may,  in  view  of  the  agreement,  keep  at  work
though  only  Sis.  is  awarded;  and  employers,  who  would
have  locked  out  against  a  358.  demand,  may  now  go  to  36s.

§  9.  When  arbitration  is  voluntary,  entrance  into  it  means
to  each  party,  in  the  circumstances  contemplated  above,  the
risk  of  having  to  accept  a  rate  less  favourable  to  itself  than
the  worst  rate  it  would  have  accepted  without  fighting  if  it
had  not  entered  into  arbitration.  This  consideration  will  not
prevent  the  parties  entering  into  it  if  each  thinks  that  the  risk
of  loss,  which  it  assumes  by  doing  so,  will  be  roughly  balanced
by  a  corresponding  chance  of  gain.  But  it  ia  not  certain
that  there  will  be  a  balance  of  this  kind.  If,  for  instance,
the  lower  end  of  the  range  of  practicable  bargains  is  already
lying  at  the  lower  end  of  the  range  of  indeterminateness,
the  introduction  of  an  arbitration  agreement  cannot  extend
the  range  of  practicable  bargains  in  a  sense  favourable  to
employers,  while  it  may  extend  it  in  a  sense  adverse  to  them.
In  these  circumstances  they  will  be  disinclined  for  arbitration
agreements.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  workpeople  in  the
converse  case.  When,  however,  conditions  are  such  that
entrance  into  an  arbitration  agreement  leaves  both  ends  of
the  range  of  practicable  bargains  within  the  range  of  indeter-
minateness, the  chances  of  gain  and  loss  resulting  from  it  are
likely  to  balance  for  both  sides,  and,  consequently,  both  sides
will  often  be  willing  to  enter  into  it  in  spite  of  the  danger
of  losing  more  by  it  than  they  would  look  to  have  lost  by  war.

§  10.  But  this  does  not  exhaust  the  matter.  If  it  were
feasible  to  construct  a  voluntary  arbitration  agreement  in  such
a  way  as  to  preclude  the  arbitrator  from  making  an  award  out-
side that  range  of  practicable  bargains,  which  is  established  by
general  conditions  coupled  with  the  fact  of  the   agreement,


408  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

there  would,  indeed,  be  nothing  more  to  be  said.  But  it  is
very  hard  to  include  a  provision  of  this  kind  in  any  workable
scheme.  Even  when  arbitration  is  proposed  in  respect  of  a
single  existing  dispute,  the  parties  can  hardly  give  their  case
away  so  far  as  to  reveal  to  the  arbitrator  beforehand  what
their  respective  sticking  points  are,  and  bind  him  not  to  go
outside  them.  When  it  is  a  question  of  a  general  arbitration
treaty  to  cover  future  disputes  not  yet  in  being,  the  difficulty
is  still  greater.  If,  however,  no  provision  of  this  kind  is
included,  each  side  will  fear  that  the  arbitrator  may  award
terms  so  unfavourable  to  him  that,  in  spite  of  the  agreement,
he  will  feel  compelled  to  fight  against  them,  and  so  make  a
net  loss  of  his  honour.  For  this  danger  the  knowledge  that
his  opponent  may  be  placed  in  a  similar  position  by  an  award
of  an  opposite  character  is  no  compensation.  Consequently,
both  sides  will  tend  to  confine  arbitration  agreements  to  types
of  dispute,  in  which,  in  their  judgment,  it  is  practically  certain
that  arbitrators  will  not  give  awards  falling  beyond  their  re-
spective sticking  points.  Thus,  in  international  treaties.  States
have  often  reserved  from  arbitration  "  vital  interests  "  and
"  questions  of  national  honour  " ;  and  in  several  plans  for  the
League  of  Nations  a  distinction  was  drawn  between  "justiciable"
disputes,  to  be  submitted  to  a  Court  whose  awards  the  League
would  enforce,  and  non-justiciable  disputes,  which  should  go  to
a  Council  empowered  only  to  make  non-binding  recommenda-
tions. Similarly  in  industrial  affairs,  while  employers  and
workpeople  are  generally  ready  to  arbitrate  minor  matters  or
interpretation  differences,  they  often  hesitate  to  deal  in  this  way
with  the  general  question  of  wage  rates.

§  11.  This  unwillingness  of  the  parties  to  enter  voluntarily
into  far-reaching  arbitration  agreements  has  been  an  important
factor  in  determining  State  authorities  to  intervene.  Com-
pulsory reference  of  disputes  to  a  body  entitled  to  recommend,
but  not  to  enforce,  an  award,  as  under  the  Canadian  Industrial
Disputes  Investigation  Act,  tends,  subject  to  the  conditions
which  have  been  enumerated,  to  widen  the  range  of  practicable
bargains,  because  a  hostile  public  opinion  adds  to  the  cost  of
fighting  against  any  settlement  which  has  been  recommended
by  an  impartial  public  authority.     It  may,  therefore,  in  some


OH.  VI  AN  ANALYTICAL  VIEW  409

instances  create  a  range  where  none  would  otherwise  exist.
The  Canadian  system  is  exactly  parallel  to  the  arrangement
under  which  international  disputes  are  to  be  submitted  to  a
Conciliation  Council  before  war  about  them  is  permitted  by
the  League  of  Nations.  Laws  which  provide,  not  only  that
disputes  must  be  submitted  to  arbitration,  but  also  that  the
arbitrator's  award  must  be  accepted  on  pain  of  legal  penalties,
since  they  make  battle  more  costly  and  success  in  it  less
probable  to  a  recalcitrant  party,  will  act  still  more  forcibly  to
create  and  to  extend  in  both  directions  the  range  of  practic-
able bargains.

§  12.  We  have  now  to  make  clear  the  bearing  of  these
results  upon  the  prospects  of  industrial  peace.  It  has  already
been  shown  that,  when  there  is  no  range  of  practicable  bargains,
a  settlement  without  conflict  is  impossible.  But  it  would  be
wrong  to  infer  that,  when  there  is  such  a  range,  a  peaceful
settlement  niitst  occur.  This  is  by  no  means  so.  The  existence
of  a  range  of  practicable  bargains  implies  that  there  are  a
number  of  possible  |idjustments,  whether  it  be  of  territory  or
of  wages  or  of  anything  else,  any  one  of  which  both  disputants
would  prefer  to  accept  rather  than  engage  in  conflict.  Each
of  them,  however,  naturally  wishes  to  obtain  the  best  teiins
that  he  can,  and  is  also,  though  this  is  not  necessary  to  the
analysis,  almost  certainly  ignorant  of  how  far  the  other  would
yield  rather  than  fight.  Thus,  we  may  suppose  that  a  Trade
Union  has  decided  to  fight  rather  than  to  accept  a  wage  below
30a,  and  the  corresponding  employers'  Association  to  fight
rather  than  pay  more  than  35  s.  There  is  then  a  range  of
practicable  bargains  including  all  rates  between  30s.  and  358,
But,  even  though  the  workmen  know  that  35s.  is  the  sticking
point  of  the  employers,  and  the  employers  know  that  30s.  is
the  sticking  point  of  the  workmen,  there  is  still  a  conflict  of
will  as  to  the  precise  point  within  the  range,  30s.  to  35s.,  at
which  the  wage  shall  be  put.  Each  side  tries  to  push  the
other  to  his  Umit.  The  employers  may  think  that,  if  they
say  firmly  enough,  "  not  a  penny  more  than  31s.,"  the  workmen
wiU  give  way;  the  workmen  may  think  that,  if  they  insist
unfalteringly  on  34s.,  the  employers  will  give  way.  In  the
result,  both  sides,  equally  the  victims    of  unsuccessful  bluff,


k


410  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

may  find  themselves  in  a  fight  over  an  issue  which  both  know
is  not  worth  it.  In  the  circumstances  the  chance  that  conflict
will  be  avoided  is  clearly  greater  the  more  cordial  are  the  general
relations  between  workpeople  and  employers  and  the  better
is  the  machinery  available  for  bringing  about  friendly  negotia-
tions. Thus,  when  a  regular  Conciliation  Board  is  ready  to
hand  or,  failing  that,  when  a  mutually  acceptable  mediator  is
prepared  to  intervene,  the  prospect  of  a  peaceful  settlement  is,
so  far,  improved.  When  an  arbitrator  is  available  in  the  last
resort,  it  is  improved  still  further.  For,  when  once  an
award  is  given  that  falls  within  the  range  of  practicable
bargains,  it  will  not  pay  either  side  to  fight  rather  than  accept
this  award.  One  or  other  of  them  may,  indeed,  think  it  worth
while  to  bluff  in  the  hope  of  modifying  the  award  by  later
negotiation.  But  the  award  having,  as  it  will  have,  particu-
larly when  the  arbitration  has  been  entered  upon  voluntarily,
a  certain  moral  force  behind  it,  is  not  likely  to  be  disputed
unless  one  side  thinks  it  bad  enough  to  fight  against — unless,
in  fact,  it  lies  outside  the  range  of  practicable  bargains.  But
the  wider  the  range  of  practicable  bargains  is,  the  greater  is
the  chance  that  an  arbitrator  will  succeed  in  placing  his
award  somewhere  upon  it.  It  follows  that,  when  settlements
are  arbitrated,  the  chances  of  a  peaceful  adjustment  are  greater
when  the  range  of  practicable  bargains  is  wide  than  when  it
is  narrow.  This  conclusion,  however,  does  not  follow  when
settlements  are  negotiated.  On  the  contrary,  since,  the  wider
the  range  of  practicable  bargains,  the  greater  are  the  oppor-
tunities for  bluff  by  both  sides,  the  opposite  conclusion  seems
more  easily  defensible.

§  13.  From  the  general  course  of  this  discussion  it  is
easily  seen  that  the  need  for  arbitrators  does  not,  as  is  some-
times supposed,  arise  solely  out  of  the  ignorance  of  the  parties
to  a  dispute,  and  that  their  function  is  not  "  simply  to  find
out  what  the  price  would  naturally  have  tended  to  become."  ^
Dr.  Schultze-Gaevernitz,  who  enunciates  this  view,  suggests
that  "the  determination  of  relative  strength,  which  is  the
function  of  a  contest,  could  be  equally  well  performed  by  an
exercise  of  the  intelligence,  just  as  we  test  the  pressure  of
1  Schultze-Gaevernitz,  Social  Peace,  p.  192.


CH.  VI  AN  ANALYTICAL  VIEW  411

steam  by  a  special  gauge  instead  of  finding  it  out  by  the
bursting  of  the  boiler,"  ^  The  implication  of  this  argument  is
that,  when  all  the  facts  are  known  to  both  sides,  the  range  of
practicable  bargains  is  necessarily  a  single  point,  representing
a  wage  equal  to  the  one  which  battle  would  have  established.
This,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not  so.  It  is  true  that  an  arbitrator,
if  he  is  to  be  successful,  must  act  as  an  interpreter  and  not  as
a  controller  of  economic  tendencies,  in  the  sense  that  he  must
place  his  award  within  the  range  of  practicable  bargains — a
range,  be  it  remembered,  which  the  appointment  of  the
arbitrator  has  probably  somewhat  widened.  It  is  also  true
that,  if  all  the  facts  are  known  to  both  parties,  the  wage  rate
which  battle  would  have  established  will  necessarily  be  repre-
sented by  a  point  within  this  range.  But  it  is  not  true  that
this  wage  rate  is  the  only  award  open  to  the  arbitrator  which
the  litigants  would  be  prepared  to  obey.  The  range  of
practicable  bargains  is  not  limited  to  that  point  unless,  not
only  are  all  facts  known  to  both  sides,  hut  also  the  costs
which  a  fight  is  expected  to  involve  is,  for  both  of  them,
nothing  at  all.^

'  Schultze-Gaevemitz,  Social  Peace,  p.  136.

2  For  a  mathematical  treatment  of  the  problems  discussed  in  this  chapter,
of.  Appendix  A  of  my  Principles  and  Methods  of  Industrial  Peace.


CHAPTEK   VII

HOUKS    OF    LABOUR

§  1.  Our  next  problem  has  to  do  with  the  relation  between
the  volume  of  the  national  dividend  and  workpeople's  hours  of
labour.  The  effect  of  improved  shift  systems,  under  which,
with  any  given  hours  for  workpeople,  the  hours  for  the
employers'  machinery  are  prolonged,  and,  therefore,  the  quantity
of  machinery  required  to  maintain  a  given  output  correspond-
ingly reduced,  will  not  be  discussed  here.  It  is  evident  that,
after  a  point,  an  addition  to  the  hours  of  labour  normally
worked  in  any  industry  would,  by  wearing  out  the  work-
people, ultimately  lessen  rather  than  increase  the  national
dividend.  Physiology  teaches  that,  after  a  certain  period  of
work  of  given  intensity,  the  body  requires  a  certain  interval
of  rest  in  order  to  return  to  its  initial  state,  and  that  this
interval  grows  more  rapidly  than  the  period  of  work.  Failing
adequate  intervals,  our  faculties  become  progressively  blunted.
The  extra  nourishment  that  enlarged  earnings  afford  cannot
be  properly  digested  and  yields  little  benefit.  "  Fatigue  so
closes  the  avenues  of  approach  within  that  education  does  not
educate,  amusement  does  not  amuse  nor  recreation  recreate."^
Furthermore,  besides  this  direct  injury  to  efficiency,  indirect
injury  also  comes  about,  in  so  far  as  recourse  to  stimulants  or
unhealthy  forms  of  excitement  is  induced  by  the  fact  of
exhaustion.^  As  a  result,  output  suffers  both  from  lost
time  due  to  slacker  attendance  and  unpunctuality  and  from
diminished  vigour  and  application  throughout  the  working
spell.     Of  course,   the  exact  length  of  working   day   beyond

*  Goldmark,  Fatigtie  and  Efficiency,  p.  284.
2  Cf.  Chapman,  "  Hours  of  Labour,"  Economic  Journal,  1909,  p.  360.

412


cH.  VII  HOUES    OF    LABOUR  413

which  an  increase  would  contract  the  national  dividend  varies
with  the  class  of  workpeople  affected.  Children  and  women,
particularly  women  who,  besides  industrial  work,  have  also
the  burden  of  looking  after  their  homes,  can,  in  general,  stand
less  than  adult  men.  Further  leisure  for  them  yields  a
bigger  return — for  children  in  opportunities  for  healthy  sleep
and  play,  for  women  in  opportunities  for  better  care  of  their
homes.^  An  important  factor,  too,  is  the  kind  of  work  that  is
done.  Long  hours  of  heavy  muscular  exertion  and  mental  or
nervous  strain  are  obviously  much  more  injurious  to  efficiency
than  long  hours  of  mere  mild  attention.  Again,  workers  earn-
ing good  money  will  be  better  nourished,  and  so  likely  to  be
able  to  stand  more,  than  very  poor  workers.  Yet  again,  the
effects  will  vaiy  according  to  the  way  in  which  the  work-
people spend  their  leisure,  whether  in  mere  dissipation  or  in
hard  work  on  gardens  of  their  own  or  in  true  recreation.  It
will  also  vary  according  as  the  shortened  hours  do  or  do  not
lead  to  greater  intensity  of  effort  and  consequent  strain
during  the  hours  that  are  worked — a  matter  which  depends
partly  on  whether  wages  are  paid  by  piece  or  by  time,  partly
on  whether  the  work  is  of  a  sort  that  can  be  speeded  up  by
improved  ways  of  working  or  only  by  greater  exertion,  and
partly  upon  whether  or  not  the  intervals  of  rest  and  the
hour  of  starting  work  are  based  on  careful  tests  of  what  best
promotes  efficient  working.^  In  view  of  these  considerations
it  is  clear  that  no  general  statement  as  to  the  relation
between  hours  of  labour  and  the  national  dividend  can  be
made.  The  relation  will  be  different  for  different  types  of
workpeople  and  different  kinds  of  work.  "  Where  output  is
controlled  mainly  by  machinery  the  loss  [due  to  long  hours]
may  be  small.  Where  it  depends  more  especially  upon  the
worker  it  will  be  great.  Purely  mechanical  work  can  some-
times be  performed  sufficiently  well  by  tired  men.  Skilled
work  calling  for  judgement  and  discretion  demands  freshness
and  vigour." '     It  must  be  remembered,  indeed,  that  even  the

^  Cf.  Marshall,  Royal  Commission  on  Labour,  Q.  4253.

2  On  the  eflfects  upon  output  of  a  pre-breakfast  start,  cf.  [CJd.  8511],  p.  58
et  seq.  This  Report  concludes  that  in  certain  types  of  munition  work  the  start
before  breakfast  may  be  abolished  with  advantage  to  the  output  (p.  66).

2  Second  InUrim  Report  on  Industrial  Fatigue  [Cd.  8335],  p.  50.


414  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  in

feeding  of  a  purely  automatic  machine  can  be  done  with  greater
or  less  regularity  and  completeness,  and  that  the  number  of
machines  which  can  be  entrusted  to  the  control  of  an  un-
fatigued  worker  is  larger  than  can  be  entrusted  to  a  fatigued
one/  The  essential  point,  however,  is  that,  in  each  several
industry,  for  each  class  of  workers  there  is  some  length
of  working  day  the  overstepping  of  which  will  be  disadvan-
tageous to  the  national  dividend.  A  detailed  official  investiga-
tion into  the  condition  of  munition  workers  in  1916  led  the
investigators  to  conclude  that  the  hours  of  work  yielding
maximum  output  were,  for  men  on  "  very  heavy  work  "  about
56  hours  a  week,  for  men  on  "heavy  work"  about  60  hours,
for  men  on  "  light  work "  about  70  hours,  for  women  on
"  moderately  heavy  "  work  5  6  hours,  and  for  women  on  "  light
work  "60  hours.^  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that,  as
the  investigators  point  out,  their  data  relate  to.  those  fittest
persons  among  would-be  munition  workers,  who  did  not  drop
out  from  the  strain.  "  Hence,  the  lest  hours  for  work,  suited
for  peace-time,  are  in  every  case  considerably  shorter  than
those  mentioned."  ^

§  2.  Prima  fa^ie  it  might  be  thought  that  this  conclusion
is  of  academic  rather  than  of  practical  importance,  because  the
self-interest  of  employers  and  workpeople  must  prevent  unduly
long  hours  from  being  worked.  There  is,  however,  a  large
volume  of  experience,  which  contradicts  this  optimistic  view
and  suggests  that  private  self-interest  has  often  seriously  failed
in  this  matter.  It  is  not  necessary  to  invoke  the  terrible
history  of  the  early  days  of  the  factory  system.  In  quite
recent  times  Dr.  Abbe  of  Zeiss's  works  maintained,  on  the
strength  of  experiments  conducted  by  himself,  that,  among  at
least  three-quarters  of  all  industrial  workers,  a  greater  absolute
product — not  merely  a  greater  product  per  hour — may  be
expected  from  regular  work  of  between  8  and  9  hours  a  day
than  from  regular  work  of  any  longer  period.*  In  his  own
works,  "in  253  different  kinds  of  work,  he  found  that  a  4  per
cent  larger  output  was  obtained  in  nine  hours  [than  in  ten],

*  Cf.  Leverhulrae,  The  Six  Hours  Day,  p.  21.

'  Health  of  Munition  Workers,  Memorandum,  No,  12  [Cd.  8344],    p.  9.
3  Ibid.  p.  10.

*  Oonrad,  Handworterbuch  der  Staatswischenscha/ten,  vol.  i.  p.  1214.


CH.  vn  HOUES    OF    LABOUE  415

using  exactly  the  same  machinery,"  ^  and  a  number  of  similar
instances  are  on  record  from  elsewhere  both  before  and  during
the  period  of  the  war."  It  is,  indeed,  very  difficult  to  diaw
confident  conclusions  from  even  the  most  careful  experiments
in  this  field.  For  the  results  will  be  misleading ;  (1)  if  the
extra  output  per  hour  that  is  obtained  is  due  to  a  mere  spurt
by  men  temporarily  on  their  mettle,  and  not  to  a  real  increase
of  efficiency ;  (2)  if  the  reduction  of  hours  has  been  introduced
in  company  with  improvements  in  the  general  organisation  of
the  business — especially  if  it  has  been  introduced  in  con-
junction with  the  substitution  of  a  three-shift  for  a  two-shift
system,  involving  an  increase  of  from,  say,  a  15 -hour  to  a
24-hour  day  for  the  machinery  employed;  or  (3)  if  the  reduction
of  hours  has  attracted  to  the  experimenting  works  a  grade  of
workmen  superior  to  those  formerly  employed  there.  In  spite,
however,  of  these  and  other  difficulties,^  the  evidence  is  fairly  '
conclusive  that  hours  of  labour  in  excess  of  what  the  best
interests  of  the  national  dividend  require  have  often  in  fact
been  worked.  This  inference  is  strengthened  when  we  reflect
that  any  distant  effect,  which  shorter  hours  may  have  in
prolonging  the  working  life  of  the  persons  concerned,  cannot
be  displayed  in  these  experimenta

§  3.  The  question  how  such  a  state  of  affairs  can  come
about  can  be  elucidated  by  the  following  considerations.  In
ordinary  economic  discussion  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of
the  demand  for,  and  supply  of,  labour  in  any  industry,  as
though  both  these  things  represented  simply  a  series  of  rela-
tions between  wage  rates  and  quantities  of  labour.  But  this
conception  is  only  exact  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  number  of
hours  embraced  in  the  normal  day's  work  is  already  fixed.  If
that  is  not  assumed,  the  demand  price  or  the  supply  price  of,
say,  a  million  hours'  work  of  a  particular  kind  in  a  year  is  not
a  single  thing.  There  are,  rather,  a  series  of  demand  prices
for  this  aggregate  quantity  of  hours,  which  are  greater  or  less

'  Report  of  the  Labour  Association,  Special  Committee  on  Hours  of  Labour  in
itinuous  Industries,  p.  10.

2  Ihid.  pp.  10,  11.

^  For  a  good  discussion  of  the  pitfalls  to  be  avoided  in  a  concrete  study  of
16  relation  between  hours  of  labour  and  efficiency,  cf.  Sargent  Florence,  Use  of
factory  Statistics  in  the  Investigation  of  Industrial  Fatigue.


416  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

according  as  the  work  is  to  be  done  in  longer  or  shorter  day
spells.  Thus,  employers  might  be  willing  to  offer  lOd.  an
hour  for  this  aggregate  amount  of  work,  if  it  were  to  be  done
in  16-hour  days,  9d.  if  it  were  to  be  done  in  12-hour  days,
8d.  if  it  were  to  be  done  in  9 -hour  days,  and  so  on.  The
reason  for  their  preference  for  long  days  is,  of  course,  that,
other  things,  including  the  number  of  shifts,  being  equal,  the
longer  the  daily  hours,  the  sooner  the  whole  million  hours  is
accomplished,  and  the  plant,  therefore,  set  free  for  further
profitable  employment.  In  like  manner,  there  are  a  series  of
supply  prices  for  this  same  aggregate  quantity  of  hours,  which
are  also  greater  or  less  according  as  the  work  is  to  be  done  in
longer  or  shorter  day  spells  ;  for  naturally,  after  a  point,  work-
people prefer  a  shorter  day  to  a  longer  one,  and  require,  other
things  being  equal,  a  greater  inducement  to  provide  a  million
hours'  work  in  20-hour  days  than  in  12-hour  days.  The
general  form  of  the  schedules  embodying  these  demand  and
supply  prices  would,  of  course,  be  different  in  different  in-
dustries. The  employers'  preference  for  long  days  over  short
days — except,  of  course,  when  shifts  can  be  so  arranged  that
there  is  a  full  day  for  the  plant  irrespective  of  the  length  of
day  for  the  representative  workman — would  be  greater  the
more  important  is  the  part  played  in  his  business  by  plant  and
equipment  as  compared  with  that  played  by  labour ;  and  the
workpeople's  aversion  to  long  days  would  be  greater  the  greater
the  amount  of  muscular  or  nervous  strain  involved  in  the
occupation.  But,  whatever  the  forms  of  the  schedules  might
be,  in  conditions  of  perfect  competition  the  length  of  the
working  day  would  be  determined  in  such  a  way  as  to
establish  equilibrium  between  them.

§  4.  Now,  it  seems  at  first  sight  that,  in  occupations  where
this  competitive  adjustment  is  in  fact  brought  about,  the
resultant  working  day  cannot  be  longer  than  the  interests  of
the  national  dividend  require.  This,  however,  is  not  so ;  for
the  reason  that,  in  general,  both  the  employers'  demand
schedule  and  the  workpeople's  supply  schedule  are  built  up
without  adequate  reference  to  the  injurious  effect  which
unduly  long  hours  exercise — despite  their  accompaniment  of
larger   immediate  earnings — upon   the   efficiency   and  conse-


CH.  VII  HOUES  OF  LABOUR  417

quent  productivity  of  the  workpeople  subjected  to  them.
That  the  workpeople  should  lack  forethought  in  this  matter
is  on  a  par  with  the  general  inability  of  all  classes  adequately  to
foresee  future  happenings  in  themselves  as  distinguished  from
future  happenings  to  themselves ;  while,  even  if  they  foresaw
correctly,  their  poverty  must  cause  them  to  discount  the
future  at  an  abnormally  high  rate.  Furthermore,  in  making
choice  between  leisure  and  the  payment  to  be  got  by  sacrificing
leisure,  they  are  apt  to  reckon  the  satisfaction  from  extra  pay-
ment on  the  basis  of  the  present  length  of  their  daily  leisure,
and  to  ignore  the  fact  that,  if  a  part  of  this  leisure  is  sacrificed,
they  will  have  less  opportunity  of  enjoying  whatever  purchases
their  extra  earnings  enable  them  to  make:  The  position  of
employers  is  somewhat  different.  Frequently,  no  doubt,  they
too  fail  to  realise  that  shorter  hours  would  promote  efficiency
among  their  workpeople,  and  so  would  redound  to  their  own
interest.  But  this  is  not  the  principal  thing.  Except  in
firms  which  possess  a  practical  monopoly  in  some  department  of
industry,  and  so  expect  to  retain  the  same  hands  permanently,
the  lack  of  durable  connection  between  individual  employers
and  their  workpeople  makes  it  to  the  employers'  interest  to
work  longer  hours  than  are  in  the  long  run  to  the  interest  of
the  national  dividend  as  a  whole.  This  point  was  well  brought
out  in  some  remarks  of  an  employer  who  has  successfully
undertaken  many  schemes  for  the  welfare  of  those  whom  he
employs.  "  The  employer  as  such,"  he  said,  "  is  not  primarily
interested  in  keeping  labour  in  excellent  condition.  What  he
wants  is  a  sufficient  supply  of  efficient  labour  to  meet  his
immediate  demands  ;  and,  though  ultimately  this  supply  will
be  curtailed  unless  the  whole  nation  allows  a  margin  for  wear-
and-tear  and  for  the  stimulation  of  progressive  efficiency,  he
cannot  afford,  under  our  present  competitive  system,  to  take  a
very  long  view.  He  can  act  with  others,  but  not  much  in
advance  of  them.  In  so  far  then  as  he  represents  immediate
and  limited,  rather  than  ultimate  and  general,  interests,  his
economic  outlook  must  stand  in  marked  contrast  to  that  of
the  nation  as  a  whole."  ^  From  the  state  of  things  thus
depicted  it  follows  that,  even  if  competitive  forces  acted  quite

1  Cf.  Proud,  Welfare  Work,  pp.  50-1.

2  E


418  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

freely,  the  length  of  the  working  day  would  often  be  sub-
stantially longer  than  the  real  interests  of  the  national
dividend  demand.  This  is  naturally  most  likely  to  happen
with  the  hours  worked  by  children  and  young  persons,  whose
aggregate  efiftciency  throughout  life  is  especially  liable  to  suffer
injury  from  overstrain  in  youth.

§  5.  What  has  been  said  does  not,  however,  exhaust  the
subject.  In  real  life  it  may  well  be  that  hours  of  labour  are
established  in  excess  of  those  which  conditions  of  perfect  com-
petition would  bring  about.  For,  where  mobility  is  imperfect,
and  where,  therefore,  as  will  be  shown  when  we  come  to  discuss
"  unfair  wages,"  there  is  some  range  of  indeterminateness
in  the  bargain  between  an  employer  and  his  workpeople,  the
employer's  bargaining  power,  as  against  unorganised  work-
people, is  greater  in  the  matter  of  hours  of  labour  than  it  is
in  the  matter  of  wages.  For,  whereas  a  workman  striving  to
get  better  wages  has  only,  as  it  were,  to  lift  his  own  weight,
it  is,  as  a  rule,  impossible,  for  technical  reasons,  that  any  con-
cession about  the  hours  of  labour  should  be  made  to  him  that
is  not  general  in  character,  and,  therefore,  less  willingly  granted.
Moreover,  if  an  employer  succeeds  in  exploiting  his  work-
people in  the  matter  of  wages,  the  poverty  which  he  thus
induces  in  them  will  often  make  them  willing  to  work  for
longer  hours.  It  follows  that,  when  exploitation  is  present
at  aU,  it  is  extremely  likely  to  make  itself  felt  in  hours  of
labour  too  long  for  the  best  interests  of  the  national  dividend.

§  6.  To  have  shown  that  the  play  of  economic  forces,  if
left  to  itself,  is  liable  to  bring  about  a  longer  working  day
than  the  true  interests  of  the  national  dividend  require  is  to
have  made  out  a  prima  facie  case  for  State  intervention.
This  case,  however,  cannot  be  regarded  as  established  until
the  possibility  of  evasions  of  the  law  has  been  considered.
In  laws  about  wages,  as  will  appear  presently,  this  point  is
of  great  practical  importance.  For  example,  when  it  is  pro-
posed to  force  up  wage  rates  on  the  ground  that  an  increase
of  pay  would  soon  produce  a  corresponding  increase  of
efficiency,  it  can  be  objected  that,  since  the  reaction  on
efficiency  will  not  be  immediate,  employers  will  be  tempted
by  an  enforced   increase  in  the   wage  rate  to  dismiss  those


cH.vii  HOURS  OF  LABOUR  419

workpeople  who  are  not  already  worth  what  they  are  called
upon  to  pay.  But  against  proposals  to  reduce  hours  of  labour
this  class  of  objection  does  not  hold  good.  Provided  that  the
hourly  rate  of  wages  is  not  raised,  a  shortening  of  the  hours
of  labour  does  not,  at  all  events  until  there  has  been  time
for  it  to  bring  about  a  reduction  in  the  mechanical  equip-
ment of  factories,  make  it  to  the  interest  of  employers  to
employ  fewer  workpeople  than  before.  It  follows  that  a
sufficient  interval  will  be  allowed,  as  it  will  not  always
be  allowed  when  wage  rates  are  increased,  for  the  improve-
ments in  efficiency  which  they  tend  to  produce  to  work
themselves  out.  This  means  that,  by  the  time  the  danger
of  dismissals  has  become  real,  efficiency  will  often  be  so
far  improved  as  to  neutralise  and  abolish  it.  This  con-
sideration is  important,  but  it  is  not,  of  course,  decisive.  It
is  still  necessary  to  consider  how  far  governmental  authorities
are  competent  to  frame  the  delicately  adjusted  regulations
which  analysis  shows  to  be  desirable.  Hitherto,  the  basis  of
systematic  knowledge  upon  which  policy  should  be  built  up
has  been  small,  and  there  is  wide  scope  for  further  study.
Meanwhile,  it  may  be  agreed  that  the  general  principle
underlying  legislation  to  limit  the  hours  of  work  in  industry
is  sound.  The  movement,  which  has  advanced  with  remarkable
rapidity  in  many  countries  since  the  beginning  of  1919,  to
fix  a  general  maximum  of  eight  hours  a  day  in  all  industries,
subject  to  certain  special  exceptions,  may  well  be  justified
on  broad  social  grounds.  But  it  is  very  important  that  the
different  needs  of  different  classes  of  workers  should  be
recognised,  and  that  the  general  maximum  should  not  tend
to  become  a  general  minimum  also.

§  7.  One  further  aspect  of  this  matter  has  to  be  con-
sidered. It  is  plain  that,  whatever  limitation  is  imposed,
it  cannot  be  made  absolutely  rigid ;  because,  if  this  were  done,
work  would  be  prevented  on  some  occasions  when  the  im-
mediate need  for  it  was  so  urgent  as  to  outweigh  any  indirect
consequences.  Certain  materials,  for  example,  become  fit  for
use  for  a  brief  space  only,  and,  if  they  are  not  worked  upon
then,  are  absolutely  wasted.  An  obvious  example  is  the  fruit
used  in  the  fruit-canning  industry.     To  refuse  permission  for


420  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  in

occasional  excessive  hoursji  of  work  in  this  industry  might
mean,  from  time  to  time,  the  total  loss  of  very  valuable
crops.^  Certain  forms  of  repair  work  are  in  a  similar  position.
They  are  urgent  in  the  sense  that  they  must  be  executed  at
once  on  pain  of  very  serious  loss.  It  is  evident  that,  when
conditions  of  this  kind  prevail,  some  relaxation  from  rigid
rules  should  be  made.  In  other  words,  some  amount  of
overtime  beyond  the  hours  normally  permitted  should  some-
times be  permitted.  But  it  is  very  important  that  this
concession  should  not  be  abused.  It  must  be  clearly  under-
stood that  overtime  is  injurious,  even  though  it  be  followed
by  an  equivalent  period  of  slack  time.  "During  overtime
leisure  and  rest  are  cut  down  at  the  very  same  time  that
heavier  and  longer  demands  are  made  upon  the  human
organism.  It  is  practically  inevitable  that  the  metabolic
balance  should  be  thrown  out  of  gear.  .  .  .  There  is  no
rebound,  or  an  infinitely  slow  one,  when  our  elastic  capacities
have  been  too  tensely  stretched.  It  takes  much  more  time,
rest,  repair  than  the  working -girl  can  possibly  afford  to
make  good  such  metabolic  losses.  Compensation — ofif-time —
comes  too  late.  .  .  .  After  a  doubled  task  muscle  requires,
not  double,  but  four  times,  as  long  a  rest  for  recuperation,
and  a  similar  need  for  more  than  proportionally  increased  rest
after  excessive  work  is  true  also  of  our  other  tissues  and  of
our  organism  in  its  totality."  ^  "  When  once  an  individual  has,
through  labour  during  ordinary  hours,  reached  a  certain  degree
of  fatigue,  and  proceeds  to  further  labour  (overtime)  without
taking  the  repose  necessary  to  dissipate  the  fatigue  already
produced,  this  further  labour  has  a  greater  physiological
effect  and  exhausts  the  organism  more  than  would  a
similar  amount  of  labour  performed  when  fatigue  was
absent."  ^  These  injurious  effects  follow  from  overtime  work,
however  cogent  the  excuses  for  it  may  be.  The  excuses
offered    should    always,   therefore,   be    scrutinised   with    very

1  As  Miss  Goldmark  points  out,  however,  this  consideration  affords  no  excuse
for  the  overtime  that  in  fact  often  prevails  in  the  United  States  Canneries
among  the  workpeoiile  who  label  and  stamp  the  cans  after  they  have  been
sealed  {Fatigue  and  Efficiency,  p.  187).

^  Goldmark,  Fatigue  and  Ffficienq/,  p.  88.

*  Second  Interim  Report  on  Industrial  Fatigue  [Cd.  8835],  1916,  p.  16.


CH.  Yii  HOUES  OF  LABOUR  421

great  care.  In  the  conduct  of  this  scrutiny  it  is  essential
to  bear  in  mind  that  the  immediate  damage,  which  the
prohibition  of  overtime  would  bring  about,  is  often  in  fact
much  smaller  than  it  appears  to  be  at  first  sight.  For,
first,  in  so  far  as  pressure  upon  one  set  of  firms  in  an
industry  occurs  when  other  firms  are  slack,  the  prohibition
need  not  kill  the  work  they  would  have  done,  but  may
lead  to  its  being  given  out,  either  on  commission  or  by
direct  order,  to  other  firms.  Secondly,  in  industries  that
manufacture  goods  capable  of  being  made  for  stock,  pro-
hibition of  overtime  in  periods  of  general  boom  will,  indeed,
directly  lessen  the  hours  of  work  done  in  these  periods,  but
it  will  also  indirectly  increase  the  hours  of  work  done
in  antecedent  periods  of  depression.  Furthermore,  in  this
connection,  the  notion  "  making  for  stock "  should  be  given
a  significance  more  extended  than  usual.  Articles  which
have  to  be  manufactured  to  individual  order  are  not
capable  of  being  made  for  stock  in  the  ordinary  sense.  But,
in  80  far  as  they  are  capable  of  being  stored  prior  to  need
by  their  purchasers,  they  ought  to  be  so  regarded  from
the  present  point  of  view.  It  is  this  class  of  commodity
that  the  Minority  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  had
in  view  when  they  wrote :  "  The  variations  in  the  consumers'
pressure  can  be  made  much  less  extreme  by  means  of  a  legal
limitation  of  the  hours  of  labour.  When  the  hours  of  cotton
operatives  were  settled  by  the  individual  mill-owner,  cotton-
spinning  and  weaving  were  extreme  instances  of  seasonal
trades ;  and  the  manufacturer  was  unable  to  resist  the
customers'  insistence  on  instant  delivery.  Now  that  the
maximum  hours  are  legally  fixed,  the  buyer  has  learnt
to  be  more  regular  in  his  demands.  The  extreme  seasonal
irregularity  of  the  London  dressmaking  trade  would  un-
doubtedly be  mitigated,  if  dressmakers  were  absolutely  pre-
vented from  working  more  than  a  fixed  maximum  day.
Customers  would  simply  not  be  able  to  insist  on  delivery
in  an  unreasonably  short  time."  ^  As  a  result,  the  out-
put produced  in  antecedent  times  would  be  increased,  thus
partly  offsetting  the  diminution'of  output  directly  consequent
*  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  p.  1185,  footnote.


422  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

upon  the  diminution  of  overtime  in  periods  of  boom.  Thirdly,
there  are  certain  things,  whether  or  not  they  are  capable
of  being  made  for  stock  in  any  sense,  the  demand  for  which
can  be  postponed  for  a  substantial  period.  Commodities  and
services  that  are  consumed  in  a  single  use  do  not  as  a  rule
fall  into  this  class.  If  a  desire  for  bread  or  beer  or  doctor's
services  or  railway  travel  existing  now  is  not  satisfied,  that
fact  does  not  cause  any  greater  desire  for  these  things  to
exist  in  the  future  than  would  have  existed  if  it  had  been
satisfied.  Some  goods  and  services,  indeed,  even  of  an
immediately  consumable  kind,  are  subject  to  demands  which  can
be  postponed.  For  example,  a  man  may  wish  to  do  the  Grand
Tour  once  in  his  lifetime ;  if  he  cannot  do  it  this  year,  he
will  desire  to  do  it  next  year.  But  much  the  most  important
things  for  which  the  demand  can  be  postponed  are  durable
goods,  such  as  boots,  clothes,  pianos,  machinery  and  houses.
The  desire  for  these  things  is  based  upon  an  expectation  of
services  to  be  rendered  by  them  through  a  considerable  period.
Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  bicycle  has  a  normal  life  of  seven
years  and  that  I  desire  to  purchase  one  now.  If  I  succeed  in
doing  this,  I  shall  have  no  desire  to  repeat  my  purchase  next
year ;  but,  if  I  fail,  the  effect  of  failure  will  be  to  carry  over
to  next  year  a  demand  at  least  six-sevenths  as  intense  as
my  present  demand.  In  all  industries  which  make  commodi-
ties of  this  class,  the  check,  which  the  prohibition  of  over-
time puts  upon  work  in  boom  periods,  is  partially  cancelled  by
a  stimulus  to  work  in  subsequent  periods  of  depression.  Against
these  considerations  it  is,  indeed,  necessary  to  set  one  upon
the  other  side.  If  overtime  is  prohibited,  employers  may  find
it  to  their  interest  to  attach  to  themselves,  through  the  offer
of  higher  wages,  a  larger  reserve  of  workpeople  than  they  would
otherwise  have  thought  necessary.  For,  the  more  extensive
this  reserve  is,  the  less  likely  it  is  that  inability  to  work  over-
time will  prevent  them  from  fulfilling  orders  that  they  would
like  to  fulfil.^  When,  however,  the  reserve  is  large,  the
workmen  comprising  the  fringe  of  it  are  only  actually  em-

^  This  point  is  illustrated  indirectly  by  the  small  amount  of  overtime  found
among  women  workers,  as  compared  with  men  workers,  in  the  bespoke  tailoring
traule.     The   men   are  skilled  hands  whose  number  cannot  easily  be  supple-


I


CH.  VII  HOUES  OF  LABOUE  423

ployed  during  boom  periods ;  in  moderate  and  bad  times  they
are  attached  in  idleness  to  the  industry  which  commands  their
services,  instead  of  being  employed,  as  they  might  otherwise  have
been,  in  some  different  industry.  In  so  far  as  this  happens,
restriction  of  overtime  leaves  the  amount  of  work  done  in  the
industry  directly  affected  substantially  unaltered  both  in  boom
periods  and  in  depression  periods,  but  makes  the  amount  of
work  done  throughout  the  whole  body  of  industries  smaller
than  it  would  otherwise  have  been  in  both  sorts  of  period.  This
form  of  reaction  is  specially  liable  to  be  set  up  in  industries
where  casual  methods  of  engaging  workpeople  prevail.  When
it  is  threatened  and  cannot  be,  or  is  not,  successfully  resisted,
the  case  in  favour  of  close  restrictions  upon  overtime  is  so
far  weakened.

men  ted.  But  the  women  are  unskilled  hands,  and  "  the  readily  available
reserve  of  semi-skilled  wives  and  daughters,  who  may  at  any  time  be  pressed
into  work,  tends  to  relieve  the  seasonal  pressure  upon  the  less  skilled,  or  women's
section  of  the  trade  "  (Webb,  Seasonal  Trades,  p.  87).


CHAPTEE   VIII

THE    METHODS    OF   INDUSTRIAL    REMUNERATION

§  1.  An  influence,  less  important,  indeed,  than  the  hours  of
labour,  but  still  very  important,  is  exercised  upon  the  national
dividend  by  the  methods  of  industrial  remuneration.  What-
ever methods  are  adopted  in  any  industry,  the  general  tendency
of  economic  forces  will  be  to  cause  the  wages  offered  for  each
class  of  workpeople  to  approximate,  on  the  whole  and  on  the
average,  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  that
class.  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  that,  if  this  be  so,  things
must  work  out  the  same  whatever  method  of  remuneration  is
in  vogue.  But  the  truth  is  otherwise.  For,  though  under
all  systems  a  man  will  be  paid  over  a  year  the  worth  of  his
work  during  the  year,  under  some  systems  it  will  be  to  his
interest  to  do  more  work,  and  so  to  have  a  larger  worth,  than
under  others.  Thus,  payment  may  be  made  independently  of
the  results  achieved  by  the  worker  at  any  moment,  being
adjusted  only  to  what  experience  shows  he  may  be  expected
under  that  method  of  remuneration  to  achieve  on  the  average ;
or  it  may  be  adjusted  to  results,  not  merely  on  the  average,
but  continuously  and  in  detail ;  or  some  compromise  between
these  plans  may  be  adopted.  Broadly  speaking,  the  worker's
output  will  be  larger  and  the  national  dividend  more  ad-
vantaged the  more  nearly  the  method  of  remuneration  in
vogue  approximates  to  complete  adjustment.  This,  no  doubt,
is  not  true  invariably.  There  are  certain  sorts  of  work  where
interest  in  the  work  itself,  or  interest  in  the  result  to  which
it  ultimately  leads,  induces  people  to  work  as  hard  as  they  can
without  reference  to  the  mode  in  which  payment  for  their
services   is    made.     This   is   probably  true  of  most  work   of

424


CH.  VIII  METHODS  OF  EEMUNEEATION  425

original  artistic  creation,  of  the  higher  administrative
work  of  the  civil  service  and  even  of  some  kinds  of  private
business.  In  these  occupations  the  national  dividend  will  be
none  the  worse  if  a  fixed  salary  by  the  year,  or  a  fixed  wage
by  the  hour,  is  paid  without  any  reference  to  what  the
worker  actually  accomplishes  in  any  particular  period.  There
is  even  an  opening,  if  the  jobs  are  sufficiently  stable  to
make  a  high  degree  of  mobility  unnecessary,  for  pay-
ment by  a  life  salary  with  yearly  increments,  adjusted
not  so  much  to  presumed  changes  in  the  value  of  the
employee's  work  as  to  presumed  changes  in  his  domestic
status,  and,  therefore,  in  his  "  needs."  Most  of  the  tasks,
however,  that  ordinary  manual  workers  have  to  perform,  are
routine  tasks,  and — owing  to  the  division  of  labour — are  so
remotely  connected  with  any  finished  product  that  interest  in
them  sufficient  to  evoke  continuous,  spontaneous  and  dis-
interested effort  can  hardly  be  expected.  Even  here,  no
doubt,  some  men  will  be  found  whom  an  ardour  for  excellence
for  its  own  sake  or  a  stern  sense  of  public  duty  will  cause  to
exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  without  reference  to  expecta-
tions of  reward ;  and  the  prospect  that  this  will  happen  is
specially  favourable  where  systems  of  Labour  Copartnership
have  succeeded  in  evoking  in  the  workpeople  a  feeling  of
proprietorship  in,  and  patriotism  towards,  the  concern  in  which
they  are  employed.  From  the  main  body  of  ordinary  work-
people engaged  in  manual  occupations  this,  however,  is  not  at
present  to  be  looked  for.  The  amount  of  work  they  will  do
in  any  hour,  week  or  year  will  be  greater  if  the  payment
made  to  them  does,  than  it  will  be  if  it  does  not,  vary  as  this
amount  varies.  The  national  dividend  will  be  larger  the
more  nearly  each  increment  of  effort  on  the  part  of  any
individual  worker  is  rewarded  by  a  payment  equal  to  the
value  of  the  difference  which  that  increment  of  effort  makes
to  the  total  product.  This  does  not,  of  course,  imply  that  the
pay  should  be  equal  to  the  value  of  a  man's  output  as  ordinarily
understood ;  for  this  output  is  in  part  due  to  machinery  and
equipment,  which,  if  not  engaged  in  assisting  him,  would  have
helped  to  increase  the  output  of  other  workpeople.  But  it
does  imply  that  the  pay  should  be  proportioned  (in  a  ratio


426  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

calculable  and  different  in  different  occupations)  to  output  as
ordinarily  understood.  In  other  words,  it  should  correspovd
for  any  worker  with  the  results,  conditions  remaining  constant,
actually  achieved  by  him.

^  2.  In  order  to  construct  a  wage  system  of  this  kind,
under  which  a  man's  pay  is  based  directly  and  immediately
on  his  output,  we  must  have  some  means  of  ascertaining,  with
greater  or  less  accuracy,  how  large  that  output  from  time  to
time  actually  is.  In  the  way  of  this  there  are  a  number  of
obstacles,  the  importance  of  which  varies  in  different  occupa-
tions. The  first,  though  not  the  principal,  of  these  is  that
a  workman's  output,  when  strictly  interpreted,  may  include
other  elements  in  addition  to  the  physical  product  that  his
labour,  in  conjunction  with  the  machinery  entrusted  to  him,
brings  to  birth.  For,  as  Jevons  long  ago  observed,  "  In  every
work  there  are  a  thousand  opportunities  where  the  workman
can  either  benefit  or  injure  the  establishment,  and,  could  he
really  be  made  to  feel  his  interests  identical  with  those  of
his  employers,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  profits  of  the
trade  could  be  greatly  increased  in  many  cases."  ^  Among
these  additional  elements  perhaps  the  most  important  are
the  suggestions  which  a  workman  may  be  able  to  offer  for
more  effective  or  more  economical  methods  of  work,  and  the
contribution  which  he  may  make  by  his  influence  towards  a
spirit  of  harmony  and  good-fellowship  in  the  shop.  These
elements  can,  indeed,  be  taken  account  of  in  a  rough  general
way,  and  money  rewards  designed  to  induce  workpeople
to  provide  them  can  be  offered ;  but  anything  in  the  nature
of  approximate  measurement  of  their  value  is  obviously
impossible.^

1  Jevons,  Essays,  p.  123.

2  Arrangements  are  frequently  made  by  progressive  firms  both  in  America
and  in  this  country  for  enabling  workmen  to  submit  .suggestions  that  occur  to
them  to  the  higher  officials  of  the  business  without  the  intervention  of  overseers
and  foremen  who  might  be  actuated  by  motives  of  jealousy  towards  them  ;  and
for  rewarding  with  prizes  and  premiums  such  suggestions  as  it  is  decided  to
adopt.  (Cf.  Oilman,  A  Dividend  to  Labour,  p.  230  ;  Rowntree,  Industrial
Betterment,  p.  31,  and  Meakin,  Model  Factories  and  Villages,  p.  322.)  And
in  Van  Marken's  establishment  a  premium  is  given  for  "evidences  of  good-
fellowship  and  co-operation,  thus  encouraging  those  whose  behaviour  conduces
to  the  smooth  working  of  the  concern  "  (Meakin,  Model  Factories  and  Villages,
p.  315).


cH.  viir  METHODS  OF  EEMUNEKATION  427

§  3.  The  second  difficulty  is  that  the  physical  output
for  which  an  individual  workman  is  responsible  is  liable  to
vary,  not  only  in  quantity,  but  also  in  quality.  Ability  to
measure  its  quantity  is,  therefore,  not  sufficient,  unless
workmen  can  be  prevented  from  making  output  larger  at  the
expense  of  making  it  worse.  In  some  circumstances  this
can  be  done  by  means  of  carefully  thought-out  schemes  of
inspection  and  supervision.  Mechanical  "  gauges "  can  also
be  made  use  of  in  certain  types  of  work.  It  has  been  said
that  "in  the  munition  industry,  where  accuracy  is  of  such
vital  importance,  quite  as  many  employees  are  engaged  in
gauging  the  output  as  will  be  actually  producing  it,  and  every
single  unit  of  output — not  merely  samples — will  be  subjected
to  the  process."  *  These  devices,  however,  cannot  be  effectively
applied  either  to  work  that  has  to  be  done  by  workmen
acting  in  scattered  places  or  to  work  the  results  of  which —
as  in  plumbing  and  sewer-making — are  speedily  covered  up.
In  these  types  of  work,  since  defects  of  quality  threaten  serious
injury  to  health,  it  is  generally  thought  better  to  refrain  from
any  attempt  at  making  the  wage-payment  depend  on  the
quantity  of  output.

§  4.  Even  where  a  proper  standard  of  quality  can  be
enforced  and  the  danger  of  injurious  reactions  on  quality
eliminated,  to  measure  the  quantity  of  output  by  itself  is
often  difficult.  It  is  especially  so  when  the  work  consists  of
general  surveillance  and  attention  rather  than  of  specific
mechanical  operations.  The  work  done  by  seamen,  telegraph
and  telephone  operators,  carmen  and  railway  signalmen,
is  of  this  kind.  So  also  is  much  agricultural  work.  Thus,
M.  Besse  writes :  "  The  essence  of  measurable  things  is
their  homogeneity,  their  identity  with  themselves.  Harvest-
ing and  the  weeding  of  roots,  for  example,  allow  of  piece-
wages,  because  the  work  remains  the  same  for  days  and  weeks,
and,  in  order  to  measure  its  efficiency,  all  that  is  needed  is  to
count  the  sheaves  amassed  or  to  calculate  the  surface  weeded.
The  greater  part  of  the  work  of  cultivation  is  similar.  But,
on    the   other   hand,    the    task   of  men  who   look   after   and

*  Sargent  Florence,  Use  of  Factory  Statisiies  in  ihe  Investigation  of  Industrial

Fatigue,  p.  72.


428  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  hi

manage  animals  varies  from  hour  to  hour  of  the  day  and
begins  again  every  morning  in  such  wise  that  no  summary
or  addition  of  it  is  possible.  It  consists  of  watching  the
pasture  lands,  grooming  the  animals,  cleaning  the  stables,  and
80  on,  all  operations  complex  in  themselves,  admitting  of  no
common  measure,  needing  to  be  done  in  a  limited  time  and
at  a  fixed  hour,  and  often  of  such  a  kind  that  nothing  would
be  gained  by  any  extra  stimulus  to  exertion.  This  is  why
piece-wages,  very  widespread  in  arable  districts  like  the  east
and  south-east  of  England,  are  so  rare  in  the  districts
devoted  to  stock-raising."  ^  In  mechanical  work  the  total
product  of  a  body  of  men  is,  in  general,  fairly  definite  and
measurable.  But  even  here  it  is  sometimes  very  difficult
to  distinguish  and  measure  separately  the  contribution  that
is  made  to  it  by  separate  individuals.  This  difficulty  is
prominent  in  the  work  done  by  gangs  of  harvesters  or  navvies.
It  is  also  of  some  slight  importance  in  that  of  shop-assistants,
for  it  is  the  business  of  these  people,  not  merely  to  serve
customers,  but  also,  when  they  are  themselves  engaged,  to
hand  them  over  tactfully  to  some  other  assistant.

§  5.  Let  us  now  suppose  that  we  have  to  deal  with  occu-
pations in  which  this  difficulty  has  been,  in  some  degree,
overcome,  so  that  some  rough  measure,  or  estimate,  of  the
individual  worker's  contribution,  as  he  works  from  day  to
day  or  week  to  week,  can  be  made.  It  is  required  so  to
arrange  things  that  pay  is  adjusted  to  this  measure.  To
some  extent — a  more  considerable  extent  than  is  often  supposed
— this  can  be,  and  is,  done  under  ordinary  systems  of  time-
wages.  By  means  of  careful  records  and  corresponding  adjust-
ments, time-wages  can  be  arranged  at  differing  rates  adapted
to  the  different  efficiencies  of  individual  workpeople.^  It  is
frequently  urged,  indeed,  that,  where  standard  rates  for  average
workpeople  are  established,  either  by  bargaining  between
associations  of  employers  and  employed  or  by  authoritative
intervention  on  the  part  of  the  State,  adjustment  is  exceed-
ingly  difficult,  alike   for    workpeople    below    the   average   of

^  La  Crise  et  l'£vohdion  de  V Agriculture  en  Angleterre,  pp.  99-100.
2  Cf.   for  an  elaborate  attempt  on  these  lines,  Gannt,    Work,    Wages,  and
Profits,  ch.  iv.


CH.  Yiii  METHODS  OF  EEMUx^EKATION  429

efficiency  and  for  workpeople  above  it.     Experience,  however,
does  not  bear  out  this  view.

As  regards  workpeople  below  the  average,  when  their  rela-
tive inferiority  arises  out  of  some  definite  physical  cause,  such
as  old  age,  adjustments  are  made  very  freely.  Trade  unions
often  have  special  arrangements  permitting  men  over  sixty  to
accept  less  than  the  standard  (time)  rate.  Such  arrangements,
Mr.  Beveridge  states,  "  occur,  for  instance,  in  the  rules  of  several
furnishing  trade  unions,  and  of  others  in  the  printing,  leather,
and  building  trades.  In  one  union,  indeed,  members  over  fifty-
six  years  of  age  may  not  only  be  allowed,  but  be  compelled,
by  their  branches  to  accept  less  than  the  standard  rate  (so  as
to  clear  the  unemployed  fund)."  ^  "  It  is,"  he  adds,  "  of  course,
possible  that,  in  some  of  these  cases,  the  formal  rule  of  excep-
tion is  seldom  put  in  force,  or  that  the  branch  refuses  its
consent  to  a  lower  rate.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite  certain
that  many  unions  in  fact  make  exceptions  for  their  aged
members  without  possessing  any  formal  rules  on  the  subject.
This  is  done  by  the  Amalgamated  Society  of  Carpenters  and
Joiners,  and,  to  a  less  extent,  by  the  Amalgamated  Society  of
Engineers.  The  question  is,  indeed,  very  largely  one  of  the
strength  and  feeling  of  the  particular  branch  concerned.  If
the  standard  rate  is  firmly  established,  it  may  appear  safe  to
make  exceptions  for  the  older  men." "  There  are,  however,
many  relatively  inefficient  men  in  industry,  even  among  the
membership   of  trade   unions   with    fairly  stringent  capacity

^   Unemployment,  p.  124,  footnote.

'  Ihid.  p.  i24.  The  peculiarity  and  uncertainty  of  these  arrangements  is
brought  out  in  Mr.  Barnes'  evidence  to  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners:  "In
the  Amalgamated  Society  of  Engineers  we  do  not  require  a  man  to  shift  from
one  town  to  another  after  he  is  fifty  years  of  age,  and,  putting  it  generally,
we  do  not  require  him  to  get  the  standard  rate  of  wages — according  to  the
discretion  of  the  committees  who  may  deal  with  the  matter — after  about  fifty-
five  years  of  age."  But  the  percentage  of  men  who  take  advantage  of  this
is  very  small.  ' '  In  fact,  although  we  allow  men  to  work  under  the  rate  at
fifty-five  years  of  age,  it  is  rather  the  case  that  the  men  at  fifty-five,  or  even  sixty,
do  not  avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity.  So  strong  is  the  sense  of  dis-
cipline in  the  trade  unions,  and  their  sense  of  loyalty  to  their  fellows,  that
in  most  cases  a  man  would  rather  give  up  work  altogether  than  accept  work
at  the  lower  rate.  So  that,  instead  of  trade  unions  standing  in  the  way  of
the  men  accepting  lower  rates,  the  opposite  is  the  fact,  and  the  trade  unions
rather  encourage  it"  (Evidence  of  Mr.  G.  N".  Barnes,  M.P.,  quoted  in  the
Report  of  the  Commission,  p.  313,  footnote).


430  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

tests  at  the  time  of  admission,  whose  inefficiency  is  not  asso-
ciated with  a  definite  objective  thing,  such  as  old  age  or
infirmity.  For  these  men  adjustment  is  more  difficult.  The
nature  of  the  difficulties  involved  may  be  illustrated  from  the
much  discussed  case  of  the  "  slow  workers "  under  the  New
Zealand  Arbitration  Law.  In  connection  with  its  award  of
"  minimum "  wages,  it  is  usual  for  the  Arbitration  Court  to
provide  for  a  tribunal  to  fix  an  "  under-rate  "  for  slow  workers.^
In  the  earlier  years  of  the  Act,  permits  to  claim  the  under-
rate used  to  be  obtainable  from  the  president  or  secretary  of
the  trade  union  concerned.  But  it  was  found  that,  for  slow
workers,  as  distinct  from  those  who  are  more  obviously  afflicted
by  age,  accident,  or  infirmity,  these  officials  hesitated  to  issue
permits.  Under  the  revised  Act,  therefore,  the  power  of  issue
is  entrusted  to  the  chairmen  of  local  Conciliation  Boards,  after
hearing  the  representatives  of  the  unions.  In  Victoria  the
issue  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Chief  Inspector  of  Factories,
subject  to  the  condition  that  the  persons  working  with  licences
in  any  factory  must  not  exceed  one-fifth  of  the  adult  workers
who  are  employed  there  at  the  full  minimum  rate.^  The
unwillingness  of  the  unions  to  sanction  permits  is  due  to  the
fear  that,  through  them,  the  standard  required  of  the  ordinary
grade  of  workmen  in  the  industry  may  be  raised,  and  the
minimum  thus  insidiously  lowered.^  This  unwillingness  tends,
of  course,  to  be  checked,  when  the  unions  are  under  obliga-
tion to  pay  large  out-of-work  benefit  to  unemployed  members.

1  Of.  Broadhead,  State  Regulation  of  Labour  in  New  Zealand,  p.  66.

'  Of.   Aves,  Report  on  Wages  Boards,  \).  61,   and  Raynaud,  Vers  h  salaire
minimum,  p.  96.

^  The  danger  of  allowing  under-i'ating  to  become  a  means  of  evasion  of
awards  is  clearly  seen  by  those  in  charge  of  the  Acts.  "In  granting  per-
mits, the  Chief  Inspector  is  guided  by  claims  based  on  personal  disability  of
some  kind,  and  not  by  the  exigencies  either  of  an  industry  or  of  a  particular
business.  If  conditions  have  changed,  making  the  applications  for  permits
more  urgent  on  that  account,  the  view  is  hold,  very  consistently,  that  the
occasion  would  then  have  arisen  for  the  reconsideration  of  its  determination
by  the  Board  concerned.  While  the  determinations  are  in  force,  wages  con-'
ditions,  it  is  held,  should  conform  to  them,  and  in  their  power  to  arrest  or
postpone  a  fall  some  consider  that  they  will  in  the  future  prove  their  greatest
value.  Such  is  the  hope,  but  to  that  form  of  testing  they  have  not  yet  been
subjected.  The  jioint,  which  it  is  necessary  to  emphasise  liere,  is  tiiat  at
such  a  period  the  permit  is  not  regarded  as  the  appropriate  instrument  on
which  to  fall  back  "  (Aves,  Report  on  Wages  Boards,  p.  63).


CH.  vm  METHODS  OF  EEMUNEEATIOJf  431

In  all  circumstances,  however,  it  is  likely  to  operate  to  some
extent,  and  it  is,  furthermore,  backed  by  the  reluctance  of
border-line  workpeople  to  ask  for  permits,  and  of  employers  to
obtain  a  reputation  for  employing  under-rate  workers.  Thus,
it  would  be  idle  to  pretend  that  for  these  under-rate  workers
adjustment  is  a  perfectly  smooth  and  simple  matter.  Even
for  them,  however,  a  good  deal  is  done.

As  regards  workpeople  above  the  average  of  capacity,  there
is,  of  course,  never  any  formal  rule  precluding  payment  to  them
of  more  than  the  standard  rate.      But,  it  is  often  asserted,
employers  as  a  matter  of  fact  refuse  to  pay  more  than  the
standard  rate  for  efficiency  in  excess  of  the  standard,  for  fear
that   trade    unions   should   make    this  action   an    excuse   for
demanding  a  rise  in  the  standard  itself.^     And  it  is,  no  doubt,
true  that,  especially  among  large  employers,  the  convenience
of  a  uniform  rate  acts  strongly  to  prevent  adjustment  to  indi-
vidual differences.     "  The  secretary  of  the  Composition  Eoofers
estimates  that  not  more  than  two  per  cent  of  the  members  in
New  York  City  receive  more  than  the  minimum.     An  official
of  the  Steam  Filterers  estimates  that  for  his  union  in  New
York  City  the  proportion  is  not  less  than  five  nor  more  than
ten  per  cent."  ^     On  the  whole,  however,  the  tendency  for  the
minimum  rate  to  become  the  maximum  does  not  appear  to  be
nearly  as  strong  as  is  generally  supposed.      Thus,  the  Inspector
of  Factories  in  Victoria  in  1902  stated  that,  in  the  clothing
trade,   while    the  minima   for  men   and   women  workers   re-
spectively were  45s.  and  20s.,  the  average  wages  were  53s.  6d-
and  22s.  3d.^     Furthermore,  in  the  Eeport  of  the  Bureau  of
Labour  for   1909,  it  is  stated  that  "out  of  2451  employees
in  factories  in  Auckland  City,  excluding  under-rate  workers
and  young  persons,   949    received    the    minimum    rate,  and
1504,  or   61   per  cent  of  the  whole,  received  more  than   the
minimum.     In  Wellington  the  percentage  receiving  more  than

'  It  should  be  noted  that,  when  it  is  a  question  of  an  excess  of  wage  sought
by  particular  men  above  the  standard  time-wage,  the  unions  under  a  time-wage
system  are  not  in  a  position  to  resort  to  collective  bargaining,  and  that,  therefore,
the  employers'  bargaining  power  is  more  likely  to  be  superior  to  the  worki>eople's
than  it  is  as  regards  the  standard  itself.  (Cf.  McCabe,  Tfie  Standard  Hate  in
American  Trade  Unions,  p.  114.)

2  McCabe,  ibid.  p.  118  ti.

'  Cf.  Webb,  Socialism  and  the  National  Minimum,  p.  73.


432  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

the  minimum  was  57,  in  Christchurch  47,  and  in  Dunedin
46."  ^  The  same  point  is  illustrated  in  a  rough  way  by  the
policy  of  certain  American  unions,  which  enter  into  agree-
ments with  employers  concerning  both  a  standard  and  a
minimum  wage.  In  the  Norfolk  and  Western  Eailway  shops
in  Roanoke  the  minimum  wage  was  20  cents,  while  the
standard  rate  was  that  received  by  the  largest  number  of  men
in  the  shop,  namely,  24  cents  per  hour.  Again,  in  an  agree-
ment made  in  1903  between  the  "  Soo "  Railway  and  the
International  Association  of  Machinists,  "  it  is  stipulated  that
in  the  machine  shops  of  the  railway  company  the  minimum
rate  shall  be  30  cents  per  hour,  and  the  standard  rate  34^
cents  per  hour."  ^  The  whole  matter  is  well  summed  up  by
the  Reporter  to  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labour  in  1915:
"  Employers  have  frequently  said  to  me  that  they  believed
there  was  a  tendency  in  that  direction — i.e.  for  the  minimum
to  become  the  maximum — but  they  have  seldom  been  able
to  furnish  evidence  to  that  effect  from  their  own  establish-
ments. At  times  I  have  found  on  enquiry  that  not  a  single
man  in  their  own  plants  was  receiving  the  minimum  wage.
The  employers'  opinion  seems  to  be  more  the  result  of
a  priori  reasoning  than  the  result  of  experience.  Nor  on  re-
flection is  it  easy  to  see  why  the  minimum  should  become  the
maximum.  .  .  .  There  seems  to  be  no  reason  why  under  this
system  there  should  not  be  the  same  competition  among  em-
ployers as  under  the  old  system  to  secure  the  most  efficient
and  highly  skilled  workmen,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  such
men  should  not  get  wages  based  on  their  superior  efficiency.
Victorian  statistics  on  this  point  are  lacking,  but  in  New
Zealand,  where  minimum  wages  are  fixed  by  the  arbitration
court,  statistics  as  to  wages  tabulated  in   1909  by  the  Labour

1  Qiiarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1910,  p.  678.  The  tendency  of  the
minimum  to  become  the  maximum  is,  of  course,  stronger  in  some  circumstances
than  in  others.  Thus,  Mr.  Broadhead  writes  of  New  Zealand  :  "In  those
trades,  in  which  there  is  no  competition  with  the  outside  world,  many  of  the
workers,  according  to  their  degree  of  skill,  are  paid  more  than  the  minimum
wage  fixed  by  the  court,  but,  in  others,  in  which  there  is  competition  with  the
imported  article,  the  practice  of  making  the  minimum  the  maximum  wage  is,  I
believe,  pretty  general.  In  the  latter  case  the  employers  contend  that  they
cannot  afford  to  pay  to  any  worker  any  more  than  is  fixed  by  law "  {State
Regulation  of  Labour  in  New  Zealand,  p.  72).

2  Holland  and  Barnett,  Studies  in  American  Trade  Unionism,  p.  118.


cH.  vni         METHODS  OF  EEMUNEEATION  433

Department  showed  that,  in  the  four  leading  industrial  centres
of  the  Dominion,  the  percentages  of  workers  in  trades  where
a  legal  minimum  wage  was  fixed,  who  received  more  than  the
minimum,  varied  from  51  per  cent  in  Dunedin  to  61  per  cent
in  Auckland.  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  a  dissimilar
situation  would  be  revealed  by  a  statistical  investigation  in
Victoria."  ^  Even  where  the  open  payment  of  increased  time-
wages  as  a  reward  of  increased  efi&ciency  is  prevented  by
friction  and  jealousy,  the  result  aimed  at  may  sometimes  be
attained  by  secret  payments."  It  should  be  remembered,  too,
that,  when  time  wages  are  fixed  rigorously  and  there  is
no  machinery  for  payments  in  excess  of  the  standard  rate,
the  standard  rate  is  usually  fixed  at  different  levels  in  different
centres,  and  men  of  more  or  less  similar  quality  tend  to  be
concentrated  at  each  several  centre.  Thus,  even  when  a
specially  efficient  workman  cannot  increase  his  earnings  by
working  harder  at  the  place  where  he  is,  he  can  do  so  by
migrating  to  one  where  higher  wages  and  larger  output  are
the  rule,  and  working  harder  there.

Yet  again,  even  when  extra  efficiency  is  not  rewarded  by
any  addition  to  the  wage  rate,  it  may  be  rewarded  by  selection
for  continued  employment  in  bad  times  and,  in  businesses  where,
as  in  railway  service,  there  are  a  number  of  grades  of  employees
receiving  different  rates  of  pay,  for  promotion  when  opportunity
offers.  The  former  of  these  processes  is  particularly  important.
Its  working  is  well  illustrated  from  the  records  of  the  Amalga-
mated Society  of  Engineers  made  in  the  days  when  the  trade
worked  predominantly  upon  time-wages.     The  "  vacant  books  "

1  "  Minimum  Wage  Legislation,"  U.S.  Bulletin  of  Labour  Statistics,  1915,
p.  136,  No.  167.

'  For  example,  a  New  Zealand  employer  told  Mr.  Aves  that  "he  was  alive
to  the  danger  of  a  rigid  scale  of  remuneration,  and  that  to  some  of  his  men  he
was  paying  'something  extra'  a  day.  But  this  was  done  '  on  the  quiet.'  The
men  are  paid  in  paper  and  metal  currency,  the  loose  coinage  being  folded  in  the
notes.  The  array  of  little  packages  was  shown  me.  All  are  paid  with  great
rapidity,  and  '  no  one  can  tell  what  any  one  else  receives ' "  (^Report  on  Wages
Boards  [Cd.  4167],  p.  109).  In  like  manner,  an  English  employer  told  the
Charity  Organisation  Society's  Committee  on  Unskilled  Labour :  "If  one  man
is  better  than  another,  we  give  him  Is.  or  2s.  extra  at  the  end  of  the  week.  We
have  to  be  careful  that  other  men  do  not  know  that,  or  they  want  to  know  why.
They  cannot  understand  that  it  is  because  the  man  has  served  us  better.  You
cannot  say  openly,  '  I  will  give  you  2s.  more.'  The  man  would  be  considered
a  favourite,  and  he  would  have  a  warm  time  in  the  stable  at  night"  {Report,  p.  109).

2  F


434  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  m

of  the  Society,  after  the  results  of  a  number  of  years,  some
good  and  some  bad,  had  been  averaged,  yielded  the  following
table  of  days  lost  through  want  of  work :

Loss  less  than  3  days  per  annum
„     between  3  days  and  4  weeks
„     from  4  to  8  weeks
„     from  8  to  12  weeks    .
„     over  12  weeks  .

Thus,  the  greater  part  of  the  unemployment  that  occurred
was  concentrated  upon  a  comparatively  small  number  of  men.
That  its  distribution  was  associated  with  inefficiency  is  sug-
gested by  the  annexed  table  showing  the  age-distribution
of  the  men  who  drew  unemployment  benefit  in  1895  (a
medium*year).  ^


.      70-4  %  of  the  Union.

.      13    %

»

4-6%

»

2-8%

j>

•        9     %

»

Average  number  of  days
lost  in  a  year.
8-8
131
12-3
20-1
331


Members  between  15-25  years  old
25-35  „  .
35-45  „  .
45-55  „  .
55-65  „  .
65  and  over  (excluding  superannuated)     26'9

These  tables  take  no  account  of  time  lost  through  "  short
time,"  sickness,  unpunctuality  or  trade  disputes,  or  of  time
gained  through  overtime.  It  is  apparent  that  the  older,  and
presumably  less  efficient,  men  suffer  most.  Moreover,  "  a
comparison  of  1890  with  1893  yields  the  rather  striking
result  that  almost  as  large  a  proportion  of  members  (21*4
per  cent)  were  unemployed  during  one  of  the  best  years
as  during  the  worst  (26*4  per  cent)."^  The  implication  of
these  figures  is  emphasised  in  the  blunt  statement  of  the
Transvaal  Indigency  Commission.  "  The  really  efficient  man
is  rarely  unemployed  except  for  short  periods  between  jobs,
because,  being  competent,  he  is  the  last  to  be  thrown  out  of
employment,  and  has  generally  sufficient  money  to  enable  him
to  migrate  to  some  place  where  his  services  are  wanted."^

The  general  result  of  this  discussion,  therefore,  is  that
under  time-wages  some  considerable  degree  of  adjustment
of  payment  to  immediate  output  can  be  achieved.

^  Of.  British  a/ad  Foreign  Trade  and  Industry,  Second  Series,  p.  99.

2  Beveridge,  Unemployment,  p.  72.

3  JRqwrt  of  the  Transvaal  Indigency  Commission,  p.  121.


CH.  viii  METHODS  OF  EEMUNEEATION  435

§  6.  Plainly,  however,  a  very  much  closer  adjustment  can
be  made  by  resort  to  the  method  of  piece-wages.  Under  this
plan  workmen,  working  in  given  conditions  and  with  given
machinery,  are  paid  exactly  in  proportion  to  their  physical
output.  Of  course,  the  piece-rate  offered  to  a  man  on  a  new
machine  in  a  factory  or  in  a  good  place  in  a  mine  is  lower
than  that  offered  to  a  man  on  an  old  machine  or  in  a  bad
place ;  and,  of  course,  it  is  recognised  "  that,  if  a  manufacturer
contributes  anything  directly  toward  reduction  in  the  time  by
supplying  an  improved  machine,  or  improved  jigs  or  fixtures,
or  high-speed  steel  cutting  tools,  where  previously  carbon  steel
tools  had  been  used  at  the  original  setting  of  the  time,  that
then  it  would  be  perfectly  proper  and  faii:  to  lower  the  time
set," — which  means,  in  effect  to  lower  the  piece-rate.  If  this
were  not  done,  the  benefit  of  improvements  made  in  any  industry
would  be  seized  by  the  particular  workers  engaged  there — and
they,  in  order  to  keep  it,  would  have  to  form  themselves  into  a
close  ring  and  exclude  new-comers — instead  of  being  spread,  as
normally  it  would  be,  over  the  general  body  of  the  purchasing
public.  In  given  conditions,  however,  under  simple  piece-wages
a  workman  is  paid,  frotn  the,  standpoint  of  the  moment,  in  direct
proportion  to  his  output,  the  actual  amount  of  the  pay  per
unit  of  service  being  approximately  equal  to  the  (marginal)
value  of  his  services  in  assisting  the  machinery  to  make
this  output.^  It  is  true  that  the  adjustment  is  not  exact.
In  a  factory — though  not,  of  course,  among  home  workers —
the  worker,  who  is  inferior  because  he  is  slow,  "  occupies "
the  employer's  machine  or  workspace  for  a  longer  period
than  the  fast  worker  in  producing  the  same  quantity  of
commodity ;  and  the  worker,  who  is  inferior  because  he  is
careless,  is  more  likely  to  have  an  accident,  and  so  to  mulct
the  employer  under  the  "Workmen's  Compensation  Act,  than
the  careful  w^orker.  For  these  reasons,  in  order  to  obtain
equality  of  efficiency  wages,  we  should,  in  strictness,  need
a  piece-rate  wage,  varying,  not  proportionately,  but  pro-
gressively, with  the  number  of  pieces  accomplished ;  and  this

^  Of  course,  tliis  statement  does  not  hold  good  of  "collective  piece-wages,"
where  each  man's  pay  depends  upon  the  output  of  the  whole  gioup  of  which  he
forms  a  part.  When  the  group  is  very  small,  some  inducement  to  exertion  is
offered  by  this  form  of  piece-wage,  but,  when  the  group  is  large,  practically  none.


436  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

point  becomes  more  important  the  greater  is  the  value  of  the
plant  in  a  factory  relatively  to  its  wages-bill.^  Even  under
piece-wages,  therefore,  superior  efficiency  is  not  rewarded
directly  in  full  proportion  to  its  superiority.  Nevertheless,
when  account  is  taken  of  the  fact  that,  on  this  system  as  well  as
on  the  time-wage  system,  the  better  worker  is  more  secure  of
regular  employment,  while  unemployment  is  concentrated  on
the  worse  worker,^  it  may  fairly  be  said  that  adjustment  is
nearly  exact.  Consequently,  it  would  seem  at  first  sight
that  this  is  the  system  under  which,  apart  from  possible
overstrain  to  the  workpeople,  to  be  referred  to  presently,  and
provided  that  the  level  of  the  rate  is  properly  adjusted,  the
largest  practicable  output  is  bound  to  be  obtained.^  The
system  has  been  for  a  long  time  established  and  has  oper-
ated with  great  success  in  this  country  in  coal-mining,  the
textile  industries,  the  boot  and  shoe  industry  and  a  number
of  others.

§  7.  Experience  has  shown,  however,  that  over  a  wide
range  of  industries  piece-wages  have  been  a  failure.  "When
a  piece-rate  has  been  introduced,  and,  under  its  influence,  the
workers  have  increased  their  output,  employers,  thinking  that
some  men  were  now  earning  too  much  money,  have  sometimes

1  This  consideration  is  sometimes  used  as  an  argument  against  paying  equal
piece-rates  to  women  engaged  in  the  same  operations  as  men.  In  certain
engineering  operations,  for  example,  employers  have  claimed  that  women,  being
slower  workers  than  men,  involve  much  higher  proportionate  overhead  charges
{^Report  of  the  War  Cabinet  Committee  on  Women  in  Industry,  p.  84).  Plainly,
however,  reasoning  of  this  type  points  to  a  lower  piece-rate  to  all  slow  workers,
whether  male  or  female,  than  to  fast  workers,  not  for  a  lower  piece-rate  to
women  as  such  than  to  men  as  such.

2  Thus  in  the  London  Compositors'  Society,  where  work  is  mainly  on  piece-
wages,  Mr.  Beveridgehas  shown  that  "  about  seven-eighths  of  the  total  payment
(of  unemployed  benefit)  in  1904  went  to  men  who  had  to  claim  again  in  1905  "
[Unemployment,  p.  140).

3  It  may  be  noted  that,  if  piece-wages  were  substituted  for  time-wagea
throughout  industry  generally,  with  the  result  that  a  large  increase  of  effort  was
put  out  by  workpeople,  the  value  per  unit  of  workpeople's  effort  would  by  that
fact  be  slightly  depreciated,  and,  therefore,  the  payment  for  a  given  effort  and
output  would  have  to  be  slightly  less  than  before.  Thus,  if  under  time-wagea
at  Is.  an  hour  two  pieces  had  normally  been  produced,  so  that  6d.  was  paid  for
each,  under  a  general  system  of  piece-wages  the  basis  of  adjustment  would  have
to  be  slightly  less  than  6d.  per  piece.  When,  liowever,  a  change  from  time  to
piece-wages  is  accomplished  in  one  industry  only,  tlie  effect  in  this  direction
(after  the  distribution  of  workpeople  among  different  industries  lias  been
adjusted)  will,  in  general,  be  very  small.


CH.  VIII  METHODS  OF  EEMUNERATION  437

"  cut "  or  "  nibbled  "  the  rate.  The  workers,  perceiving  this,
realise  that  extra  effort  on  their  part  is  likely  to  involve,  not
only  an  immediate  increase  of  earnings,  but  also  a  subsequent
reduction  of  the  piece-rate,  the  effect  of  which  will  be  to  make
it  impossible  for  them  to  earn  their  original  wage  without
working  harder  than  before.  To  prevent  this  they  tend,
whether  by  formal  agreement  or  otherwise,  deliberately  to
limit  their  output,  so  that  very  little,  if  any,  advantage  is
secured  for  the  national  dividend  as  against  the  output  under
time-wages.

§  8.  The  apparently  obvious  solution  of  this  difficulty,
namely  that  employers  should  rigidly  abstain  from  rate-
cutting  in  any  circumstances,  has  occasionally  been  adopted.
Thus,  in  the  United  States,  "in  the  spring  of  1902,  the
Moulders  officially  agreed  with  the  Employers'  Defence  Asso-
ciation that  no  limit  (of  output)  should  be  observed  in  the
stone-moulding  branch,  in  view  of  the  agreement  that  the
earnings  of  the  individual  moulders  should  not  be  considered
in  adjusting  prices  of  work."  ^  Apart,  however,  from  the
fear  of  indirect  cutting  by  slight  alterations  in  the  nature
of  a  job  and  large  accompanying  alterations  in  the  rate,
which  would  enable  unscrupulous  employers  to  get  round  this
kind  of  guarantee  in  a  dishonourable  way,  the  extreme  difficulty
of  ensuring  that  rates  are  fixed  reasonably  in  the  first  instance
will  make  even  the  best  employers  hesitate  to  give  such  a
guarantee.  For,  as  a  result  of  it,  they  might  find  themselves
bound  for  a  long  time  to  pay  four  or  five  times  as  much  for  a
piece  of  work  as  they  could  get  the  work  done  for  in  a  free
market.  Some  of  them  have,  therefore,  taken  the  line  that,  if
there  is  to  be  an  effective  guarantee  against  "  nibbling,"  they
must  be  insured  against  the  guarantee  costing  them  too  much.
This  is  the  origin  of  the  various  methods  of  remuneration
embraced  under  the  general  title  of  premium  plans.  The
essential  characteristic  of  these  is  that  the  increases  of  wage,
which  correspond  to  increases  of  output  above  the  standard,  are
proportionately  smaller  than  these  increases  of  output,  but  that,
in  compensation  for  this,  the  workpeople — in  theory  at  least —
are  guaranteed  against  any  cutting  or  nibbling  of  the  rate,  so

'  McCabe,  T?ie  Stavdard  Rate  in  American  Trade  Unions,  pp.  224-5.


438  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  in

long  as  the  existing  methods  of  production  are  maintained.
The  precise  relation  between  the  amount  of  the  premium  and
the  amount  of  increases  of  output  above  the  standard  varies
with  different  systems.  Under  the  plan  known  as  the  Halsey
plan,  for  every  1  per  cent  increase  of  output  above  the
standard  output  the  wage  rises  above  the  standard  wage  by
a  constant  fraction  of  1  per  cent :  under  the  equally  well-
known  Eowan  plan,  it  rises  by  a  constantly  diminishing
fraction  of  1  per  cent.-^  The  advocates  of  these  plans  main-
tain that  the  low  rate  of  the  premium,  as  compared  with  that
ruling  under  simple  piece-wages,  which  is  offered  under  them,
and  the  consequent  limitation  of  the  employers'  liability,
make  it  possible  for  a  really  effective  guarantee  to  be  given
against  any  nibbling  of  the  rate,  and  that,  therefore,  on  the
whole,  the  adjustment  of  remuneration  to  output  is  closer
than  it  would  be  under  simple  piece-wages.  There  is,  indeed,
considerable  difficulty  in  the  employment  of  premium  plans
except  in  workshops  where  all  the  workpeople  are  of  more  or
less  similar  capacity.  For,  if  their  capacities  are  widely
different,  a  strong  man  who  produces  half  as  much  again  as
a  weak  man  is  paid  much  less  than  half  as  much  again  in
wages ;  and,  in  these  circumstances,  friction  can  hardly  fail  to
result.      But,    when,    for    technical    reasons,    the    differences

^  These  plans  can  conveniently  be  represented  by  the  following  formulae,
which  are  convertible  into  those  printed  by  Mr.  Schloss  in  the  Journal  of  the
Royal  Economic  Association  for  December  1915.

Let  W  be  the  standard  wage,  P  the  standard  output,  w  the  actual  wage
earned  by  a  workman,  and  p  the  actual  output  of  that  workman  :

Then  the  general  formula  for  the  Halsey  plan  is


w


-A^*l  '-^)


when  n  is  any  integer.  In  the  particular  variety  of  this  plan  employed  in  Mr.
Halsey's  works,  n  has  the  numerical  value  2.  The  general  formula  of  the
Rowan  plan  is

io  =  W-!  1  +^^^—  f(j?)\  when  f{p)  is  negative.

In  the  particular  variety  of  this  plan  employed  in   the  Rowan  works  /(p)  is

p
given  the  value  —     The  resulting  equation  is  that  of  a  parabola,  and   the

P
maximum  value  to  which  w  can  attain  is  2W.      In  England,    but   not  in
Germany,   plans   of  this   type  are   usually  associated  with   the   guarantee  of
a  minimum  time-wage  irrespective  of  output ;  that  is  to  say,  when  p  i8<P,  the
formula  is  not  applied,  but  the  standard  wage  W  is  paid.


OH.  vni  METHODS  OF  EEMUNERATION  439

of  output  between  individuals  cannot  be  great,  this  difficulty
does  not  arise,  and  it  is  claimed  that  premium  plans  should
prove  an  effective  means  of  stimulating  production.^

§  9.  Now,  it  is  quite  possible  that,  if  workpeople  can  be  got
to  regard  them  as  fair,  and  to  trust  the  guarantee  against
cutting,  these  plans  will  be  more  effective  than  piece- wages
under  which  cuts  are  feared.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,
they  are  not  fair.  When  a  workman,  other  things  being
equal,  doubles  his  output,  he  contributes,  owing  to  his  shorter
occupation  of  machinery  for  a  given  product,  rather  more
than  twice  as  much  as  before  to  his  employer's  service.  For
the  employer  to  give  him,  as  under  all  premium  plans  he  will
do,  considerably  less  than  twice  his  former  pay,  is,  and,  when
the  position  is  realised,  is  felt  to  be,  exploitation.  Nor  is
it  an  adequate  reply  that  the  prospect  of  retaining  a  part  of
the  resulting  gain  stimulates  the  employer  to  provide  a  number
of  conveniences  and  aids — "  additional  facilities,  small  tools,
more  power,  improved  lighting,  better  organisation,  etc."  ^ —
which  are  themselves  partly  responsible  for  the  worker's  extra
output.  These  things  may  or  may  not  be  provided.  If  they
are  provided,  the  rate  should  be  adjusted  to  allow  for  them.
But  premium  plans  do  not  give  any  pledge  that  this  will  be.
done ;  they  ensure  that,  even  when  conditions  are  absolutely
unchanged  and  the  whole  additional  output  is  due  to  the
worker's  effort,  a  doubled  output  shall  mean  much  less  than
a  doubled  wage.  This  unfairness  is  bound  sooner  or  later  to
be  perceived,  and,  when  it  is  perceived,  the  resentment  which  the
worker  will  naturally  feel  at  it  is  likely  to  drive  down  the  out-
put and  nullify  any  good  effect  the  plan  may  at  first  have  had
upon  the  national  dividend.  In  any  event,  the  only  advantage
that  premium  plans  can  claim  over  piece-wages  is  that  they
make  possible  effective  guarantees  against  cuts.  Clearly,  there-
fore, they  must  be  inferior  to  a  piece-rate  system  so  organised
that  the  cut  difficulty  is  overcome.  The  real  problem  is,  not
to  evade  the  task  of  devising  such  a  system,  as  premium
plans  substantially  do,  but  to  confront  that  task  in  those
industries  in  which  it  is  still  formidable,  and  to  overcome  it

*  Cf.  Chapman,  Work  and  Wages,  vol.  ii.  pp.  184-5.
2  Roivan  Thompson,  77ie  Rowan  Premium  Bonus  System,  p.  12.


440  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

there,  as  it  has  already  been  overcome  in  the  textile  industries
and  in  coal-mining.

§  10.  The  cutting  or  nibbling  of  rates  may  be  attempted
by  an  employer  either  quite  honestly,  when  experience  has
shown  that  a  particular  rate  was  fixed  too  high  relatively
to  rates  generally,  or  dishonestly  in  pure  exploitation.  It  is
plain  that  the  first  sort  of  cutting  ought,  in  any  satisfactory
system,  to  be  provided  for,  just  as  provision  should  also  be
made  for  raising  rates  which  have  accidentally  been  set  too
low.  Elaborate  precautions  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that
both  these  sorts  of  error  occur  very  rarely,  but,  when  they  do
occur,  machinery  for  correcting  them  should  be  available.  If
the  machinery  is  regarded  with  confidence  by  the  workpeople,
the  fear  of  this  class  of  cut  will  do  little  harm.  Exploitation
cuts,  on  the  other  hand,  must  be  absolutely  prevented.  With
piece-wages  settled  by  individual  bargaining  between  separate
wage-earners  and  their  employers,  neither  of  these  things  can
be  done.  Furthermore,  when  a  bad  employer,  under  this
arrangement,  succeeds  in  "  nibbling "  the  rate,  his  success
makes  it  difficult  for  his  competitors  to  refrain  from  following
his  example,  and  is  apt,  therefore,  to  start  a  cumulative
movement.  But  it  is  not  necessary  that  piece-rates  should
be  fixed  by  individual  bargaining.  In  this  fact  the  solution
of  the  problem  may  be  found.  For  collective  bargaining
furnishes  a  guarantee  against  the  kind  of  nibbling  which
is  really  exploitation  and  also  makes  it  easy  to  provide
machinery  —  whether  joint-committees  or  jointly  appointed
rate-fixers — to  adjust  particular  rates,  in  the  original  fixing
of  which  a  mistake  has  been  made.  In  this  connection  it  is
interesting  to  note  that  the  rapid  extension  of  piece-work  in
the  engineering  trade,  which  took  place  during  the  war — it
was  no  doubt  facilitated  by  the  greater  uniformity  of  products
which  was  required — "  led  to  a  great  variety  of  forms  of
collective  bargaining.  In  some  establishments  a  new  piece-
price  is  submitted  to  the  Works  Committee  before  it  is
discussed  with  the  individual  workman.  In  others  an
Appeals  Committee  has  been  instituted  to  consider  and  bring
forward  complaints  against  piece-prices  or  premium  bonus
times   fixed    by    the    management.       In    others    again  .  .  .


CH.  VIII         METHODS  OF  EEMUNEEATION  441

prices  have  been  discussed,  not  with  the  individual  workman,
but  with  the  workman  and  two  or  three  of  his  mates  on
similar  work."  ^  These  collective  bargains  within  particular
works  are,  of  course,  not  made  in  the  air.  They  aim  at  such
an  adjustment  of  ratefe  to  the  peculiar  conditions  of  the  works
as  will  bring  them  into  line  with  the  standard  conditions
estabUshed  for  the  industry  as  a  whole  by  collective  bargaining
between  representative  associations  of  employers  and  employed."
In  industries  such  as  textiles,  coal-mining  and  the  boot  and
shoe  industry,  where  piece-wages  have  been  successful  and
willingly  accepted  by  the  workpeople,  they  have  always  been
associated  with  collective  bargaining.  Where  there  has  been
difficulty  and  opposition,  as  in  engineering,  woodworking  and
building,  the  real  reason  has  been  that  subtle  differences  of
quahty  and  detail  and  great  differences  in  the  amount  and  kind
of  machinery  in  use  in  different  shops  have  made  anything  like
uniform  piece-rates  unsuitable,  and  so  have  stood  in  the
way  of  successful  collective  bargaining.  In  these  circumstances
the  supersession  of  time-wages  by  piece-wages  would  often  have
meant  the  surrender  of  collective  bargaining  in  favour  of
rates  really  fixed  by  the  arbitrary  decision  of  employers
or  their  representatives  dealing  with  isolated  workmen.
In  order  that  the  piece-wage  system,  and  the  benefit  to  pro-
duction which  it  carries  with  it,  may  win  further  ground,
what  is  required  is  to  develop  in  these  more  difficult
industries  an  adequate  machinery  for  subordinating  piece-
wages,  as  they  are  subordinated  in  the  textile  industry,  to
the  full  control  of  collective  bargaining.^

§  11.  A  word  must  here  be  said  about  a  method  of
wage  payment,  different  from  both  time-wages  and  piece-
wages,  which  has  been  associated  with  some  developments
of  "  scientific  management "  under  the  name  of  task- wages.
The  essence  of  this  method,  of  which  there  are  several  different
forms,  is  as  follows.  Experiments  are  set  on  foot  to  ascertain
how  large  an  output  a  first-class  workman,  working  under  given
conditions  and  exerting  himself  to  his  full  capacity  without

1  Report  on  Works  Committers,  1918,  p.  11.  2  cf,  j;^j^   pp^  37.3

'  For  an  excellent  discussion  of  this  subject  cf.  Webb,  The  Works  Manager
To-daij,  chap.  vi. ;  also  D.  H.  Cole,  The  Payment  of  Wages,  passim.


442  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

overstrain,  can  produce  in  a  given  time.  The  output  thus
ascertained  then  becomes  the  standard  task.  The  workpeople
are  so  selected  and  trained  that  all  those  employed  in  establish-
ments operating  the  system  are  first-class  workmen  (it  would
serve  equally  well  if  they  were  of  any  other  class  provided  all
were  similar)  from  the  standpoint  of  the  operations  to  be  per-
formed there  ;  and  the  wage  system  is  adjusted  in  such  a  way
that  they  earn  very  much  better  pay  if  they  succeed  in
accomplishing  the  standard  task  than  if  they  fail  to  do
this.^  The  method  has  been  described  thus :  "  Under
this  system  each  man  has  his  work  assigned  to  him  in  the
form  of  a  task  to  be  done  by  a  prescribed  method,  with
definite  appliances,  and  to  be  completed  within  a  certain  time.
The  task  is  based  on  a  detailed  investigation  by  a  trained
expert  of  the  best  method  of  doing  the  work ;  and  the  task
setter,  or  his  assistant,  acts  as  an  instructor  to  teach  the
workmen  to  do  the  work  in  the  manner  and  time  specified.
If  the  work  is  done  within  the  time  allowed  by  the  expert
and  is  up  to  the  standard  for  quality,  the  workman  receives
extra  compensation  (usually  20  to  50  per  cent  of  the  time
allowed)  in  addition  to  his  day's  pay.  If  it  is  not  done  in  the
time  set,  or  is  not  up  to  the  standard  for  quality,  the
workman  receives  his  day's  pay  only."  ^  Under  the  Gannt
variety  of  the  method  ordinary  time-wages  are  paid  phis  a
large  bonus  to  those  who  perform  the  standard  task :  under
the  Taylor  variety  ordinary  piece-wages  are  paid,  but  the  rate
of  piece-wages  is  abruptly  raised  by  a  large  amount  when  the
standard  task  is  attained.

§  12.  Hitherto,  when  this  plan  has  been  employed  in  the
United  States,  the  standard  has  been  fixed  by  the  employers
without  resort  to  collective  bargaining.  "When  workpeople
are  prepared  to  allow  this,  and  when  employers  are  reasonable

^  It  should  be  noted  that,  in  effect,  a  very  stringent  form  of  this  method
is  employed  as  regards  the  number  of  hours  during  which  workpeople  work  per
day  ;  for,  if  a  man  is  not  willing  to  work  the  regular  factory  day,  he  will  not  be
employed  at  all  and  will  get  no  wages.  The  reason  for  this  is,  of  course,  to  be
found  in  technical  considerations  of  factory  management.  To  liave  different
men  working  in  a  factory  different  numbers  of  hours  per  day  would  be  a  much
more  serious  inconvenience  than  to  have  them  working  with  different  intensities
of  effort.

2  Going,  Principles  of  Industrial  Engineering,  p.  135.


I


OH.  VIII         METHODS  OF  REMUNEEATION  443

and  liberal,  there  may,  no  doubt,  be  good  results.  But  there
is  an  obvious  danger  that  unscrupulous  employers  may  use
their  power  to  fix  the  standard  as  a  means  of  exploitation ;  ^
and  it  is  certain  that  in  this  country,  where  trade  unions  are
strong,  the  workpeople  would  never  consent  to  place  this  power
in  their  hands.  If  the  standard  was  fixed  by  collective
bargaining,  so  that  the  workpeople  were  prepared  to  accept
it,  and  was  fixed  right,  the  best  result  possible  would  be
only  equal  to  that  given  by  a  smoothly-working  piece-wage
system  ;  and,  for  that  result  to  be  achieved,  it  would  be  necessary
that  all  the  workpeople  to  whom  any  standard  was  applied
should  be  exactly  equal  in  capacity  and  temperament.  Unless
this  impossible  condition  is  fulfilled,  adjustment  under  the
task-wage  system  is  bound  to  be  less  perfect  than  under  a
properly  arranged  piece-wage  plan.  On  the  whole,  therefore,
since  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  circumstances  in  which  it  would
be  practicable  to  set  tasks  rightly  but  not  practicable  to
arrange  simple  piece-wages,  there  is  little  to  be  said  for
introducing  the  task-wage  system  into  this  country.^

^  Certain  investigations  into  the  effect  of  the  Taylor  system  upon  some
women  employed  under  it  do  not  suggest  that  this  evil  possibility  has  been
realised  in  fact  {Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1914,  p.  549).  But  Mr.
Hoxie  {Scientific  Management  and  Labour,  pp.  44  et  seq.)  is  less  optimistic
upon  this  point.  He  writes:  "As  a  matter  of  fact,  time  study  for  task
setting  is  found  in  scientific  management  shops  in  all  its  possible  variations,
both  with  reference  to  methods  and  results.  In  some  the  highest  standards  are
maintained  in  regard  to  all  the  factors  enumerated — all  or  a  large  proportion  of
the  workers  are  timed,  the  largest  practicable  number  of  readings  is  made,  cordial
relations  are  established  between  the  time  study  man  and  the  workers,  and  the
latter  are  cautioned  against  speeding  up  when  being  timed,  and,  if  doubt  remains,
the  allowances  are  purposely  made  large  to  cover  all  possible  errors.  Liberality
of  the  task  is  the  keynote.  In  other  shops  the  maximum  task  is  just  as  surely
sought,  and  the  method  is  warped  to  this  end.  The  swiftest  men  are  selected
for  timing,  they  work  under  special  inducements  or  fear,  two  or  three  readings
suflSce,  allowances  are  disregarded  or  cut  to  a  minimum.  The  task  of  100  per
cent  eflSciency  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  arbitrarily  fixed,  sometimes
practically  before  the  time  study,  at  what  it  is  judged  the  workers  can  be  forced
to  do.  The  main  use  of  the  time  study  is  to  prove  to  the  workers  that  the  task
can  be  done  in  the  time  allowed  "  (loc.  cit.  p.  53).

2  The  central  argument  of  this  chapter  can  be  brought  into  clear  light  by
means  of  a  simple  diagram.  Let  us  suppose  the  number  of  workpeople  employed
in  any  industry  and  the  length  of  the  working  day  to  be  given.  It  is  then
possible  to  construct  a  demand  curve  representing  the  employers'  demand  prices
(in  terms  of  product)  for  different  amounts  of  exertion  per  unit  time  from  a  typical
workman,  and  a  supply  curve  representing  the  workman's  supply  prices  (in
terms  of  product)   for  different  amounts  of  exertion.     Units  of  exertion   are


444


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


PT.   Ill


§  13.  The  practical  conclusion  to  which  the  reasoning  of
this  chapter  has  tended  is  that  the  interest  of  the  national
dividend  will  be  best  promoted  when  immediate  reward  is
adjusted  as  closely  as  possible  to  immediate  results,  and  that
this  can,  in  general,  be  done  most  effectively  by  piece-wage
scales  controlled  by  collective  bargaining.  This  conclusion,
it  has  now  to  be  remarked,  depends  on  the  tacit  assumption
that  the  marginal  trade  net  product  of  labour  is  not  appreci-
ably in  excess  of  the  marginal  social  net  product.  It  is
possible  to  argue  that  under  a  piece-wage  system  this  condition
is  not  satisfied,  but  that  workpeople  produce  a  large  material
output  at  the  cost  of  exertions  that  wear  them  out  prematurely
and  so  damage  their  efficiency  and  output  in  the  long  run.  If
these  charges  were  true,  the   advantage  I  have  claimed  for


marked  off  along  Ox,  and  the  demand  and  supply  prices  (in  terma  of  product)  of
different  amounts  of  it  along  Oy.

Since  every  increase  of  exertion  on  the  part  of  workpeople  enables  employers
to  finish  any  given  job  more  quickly,  and  so  to  start  their  machinery  upon  some

other  job,  the  demand  curve  DD'
will  slope  upwards  towards  the
right.  Since,  if  a  man  is  at  work
at  all,  neither  public  opinion  nor
his  own  comfort  will  allow  him  to
do  absolutely  nothing,  the  supply
curve  SS'  will  start  at  a  point
some  distance  along  Ox,  and,
thereafter,  will  slope  upward  some-
what steeply.  Let  it  cut  DD'  in
P.  Through  P  draw  PM  jier-
pendicular  to  Ox,  and  PR  per-
pendicular to  Oy.  Then,  apart
from  possible  injurious  reactions
on  efficiency  that  are  not  here
considered,  the  amount  of  exertion
by  a  typical  workman,  which  is
most  advantageous  to  the  national
dividend  and  economic  welfare,  is
measured  by  OM,  and  the  cor-
responding amount  of  his  output
by  the  rectangle  OMPR.  If  the  wage  paid  to  him  is  wholly  independent  of  his
exertions  and  consequent  output,  the  amount  of  his  exertions  will  approximate
to  OS,  and  his  output  to  OSCJK.  An  amount  of  exertion  OM,  and  consequent
output  OMPR,  can  be  obtained  eitJier  by  the  offer  of  a  rate  (in  product)  PM
for  each  unit  of  exertion  (which  means  each  PM  units  of  output)  ;  or  by  the
offer  of  an  aggregate  wage  (in  product) — per  day  or  whatever  the  time-unit  may
be — equal  to  OMPR,  conditional  upon  the  man  producing  OMPR  units  of  out-
put, any  failure  to  reach  this  standard  involving  the  payment  of  a  considerably
lower  wage.


CH.  VIII  METHODS  OF  EEMUNEEATION  445

piece-wages  would  be  proved  to  be,  in  part  at  least,  illusory.
It  must  be  admitted  that,  when  a  piece-wage  system  is  first
introduced  among  workpeople  not  hitherto  accustomed  to  it,
it  sometimes  leads  to  a  spurt  of  energy  that  could  not  be
maintained  for  long  without  bad  results.  But  experience
does  not  show  that  it  promotes  overstrain,  when  once  the
men  who  have  been  brought  under  it  have  become,  as  it  were,
acclimatised  to  the  new  conditions.  Moreover,  it  has  to  be
remembered  that  greater  intensity  of  work  often  means  more
thought,  care  and  interest — which  do  not  imply  extra  wear
and  tear — rather  than  greater  muscular  or  nervous  effort.^
Little  weight,  therefore,  need  be  assigned  to  this  objection,  and
the  conclusions  set  out  above  may  be  taken  to  hold  good.

'  Thus  Mr.  Cadbury  writes  of  piece-wages  :  "If  properly  trained,  the  worker
will  try  to  find  the  quickest  method  of  work,  and  the  one  involving  the  least
strain  ;  and  it  has  been  found  that,  when  a  piece-rate  has  been  fixed  where
previously  there  had  been  a  time-basis,  the  output  has  doubled  without  any
undue  strain  on  the  part  of  the  worker,  largely  as  the  result  of  adopting  better
methods.  This  especially  applies  to  hand  processes  "  (^Experiments  in  Industrial
Organisation,  p.  142).


CHAPTER    IX

THE    DISTKIBUTION    OF   LABOUR    AMONG    OCCUPATIONS
AND    PLACES

^   1.  The  subject  matter  of  this  Chapter  is  the  distribution
of  labour  among  different  occupations  and  places.      The  analysis
of  the  preceding  Part  showed  that,  if  the  national  dividend  is
to  stand  absolutely  at  its  maximum,  the  values  of  the  marginal
social  net  products  of  every  form  of  resource  in  all  uses  must
be    equal.     It    showed,   further,    that    in    many    occupations
marginal  social  net  product  differs  from  marginal  trade  net
product,  and  that  in  yet  other  occupations  this  again  differs
from  marginal  individual  net  product.      Hence,  the  maximisa-
tion of  the  national  dividend  does  not  require  that  the  values
of   marginal    individual    net  products    shall  be  equal  in  all
uses.     On  the  contrary,  such  a  condition  of  universal  equality
is  incompatible  with  maximisation.     In  spite  of  this,  however,
our  argument  showed  that  any  departure  from  equality  at  any
point,  brought  about  otherwise  than  with  the  deliberate  design
of  improving  the  dividend,  is  likely  to  indicate  a  lapse  on  the
part  of  the  dividend  below  the  level  at  which  it  might  have
stood.       This  general  result  is  applicable    to    labour.      Any
failure  from  equality  in  the  values  of  the  marginal  individual
net  products  of  labour — values  that  are  always  equivalent  to
the  demand  prices,  and  generally  equivalent  to  the  wages  paid
per  efficiency  unit  at  different  points — prohdbly   indicates  a
distribution  of  labour  between  different  points  other  than  the
distribution  most   favourable  to  the  national    dividend.       In
general,   therefore,   causes    of    failure    from    equality   in    the
demand  prices  and  wage-rates  of  labour  of  given  quality  at
different   points   are   also    causes   of   injury   to    the    national

446


cH.  IX  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LABOUR  447

dividend.  These  causes  may  be  divided  into  three  broad
groups — ignorance  or  imperfect  knowledge,  costs  of  movement,
and  restrictions  imposed  upon  movement  from  outside.

§  2.  The  most  fundamental  way  in  which  the  first  of
these  causes,  ignorance,  operates  is  by  impairing  the  initial
distribution  of  new  generations  of  workpeople  as  they  flow
into  industry.  Those  persons  who  direct  the  choice  of
avocations  made  by  young  men  and  women  are  ignorant  of  the
level  at  which  the  demand  price  for  labour  of  any  particular
grade  will  stand  in  different  occupations  at  a  later  period  of
those  young  persons'  lives.  A  great  part  of  this  ignorance  is,
of  course,  inevitable  in  a  world  of  change.  Even  though
opinions  were  continually  modified  in  the  light  of  the  most
recent  experience,  yet  newer  experience  would  necessarily  belie
the  best -based  forecasts.  But,  besides  the  ignorance  that  is
inevitable,  there  is  also  ignorance  due  to  the  frailty  of
individual  minds  and  the  poverty  of  organised  information.
About  occupations  for  people  this  ignorance  is  likely  to  be
more  extensive  than  it  is  about  occupations  for  capital ;  for
the  same  reason  that  ignorance  about  the  relative  advantages
of  different  forms  of  spending  is  more  extensive  than  ignorance
about  the  choice  of  investments.  Those  persons  who  have
to  direct  their  children's  choice  of  a  career  are  not  rendered
efficient  by  the  selective  influence  of  competition.  Fathers
who  invest  their  sons'  activities  unremuneratively  are  not
expelled  by  bankruptcy  from  the  profession  of  fatherhood,
but  continue,  however  incapable  they  may  be,  to  exercise  in
this  matter  the  functions  of  entrepreneurs.  The  grave  errors
that  result  are  well  known,  "  Many  parents  let  their  boys
go  into  offices  or  as  telegraph  messengers,  because  they  seem
respectable  jobs,  but  they  have  never  considered,  and,  perhaps,
have  no  means  of  knowing,  whether  there  are  any  future
prospects.  This  aspect  is  dwelt  upon  in  the  reports  of  many
of  the  skilled  employment  committees.  If  the  father  is  not
himself  in  a  position  to  get  a  boy  into  a  good  trade,  he  does
not  know  in  many  cases  how  to  manage  it."  ^  The  point  is
well  illustrated  by  Sir  H.  Llewellyn  Smith's  observation,  some

^  Jackson,  Report  on  Boy  Labour,  Royal   Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,
Appendix,  vol.  xx.  pp.  9-10.


448  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

years  back,  that,  among  the  Cradley  Heath  hand  naihnakers,
"  although  the  trade  has  been  decaying  for  more  than  half
a  century,  children  are  still  going  into,  and  are  further
crowding,  their  parents'  trade."  Again :  "  A  very  large
number  of  parents  are  ignorant  of  the  relative  advantages
of  different  occupations.  .  .  .  The  boys  tend  always  to
follow  their  older  companions  into  the  same  factory  or
yard,  or  at  any  rate  into  the  same  kind  of  occupation ;
and,  where  the  prevailing  trades  are  of  a  poor  grade  .  .  .
the  boys  will  generally  follow  the  line  of  least  resistance."  ^
This  sort  of  ignorance  may,  of  course,  be  overcome  in
part  through  the  spread  of  accessible  information  about
the  prospects  of  different  trades,  together  with  improved
education  enabling  parents  to  make  better  use  of  the  informa-
tion that  is  open  to  them.  And  it  may  be  overcome  still
further  if  those  parents,  who  are  not  themselves  in  a  position
to  make  any  good  study  of  the  labour  market,  have  access  to
the  advice  of  persons  who  are  in  a  position  to  do  this.  At  the
best,  however,  since  the  prospects  that  are  relevant  are  the
prospects  that  will  prevail  in  future  years  when  the  children
and  youths  now  selecting  an  occupation  are  grown  up,  this
type  of  ignorance  must  always  be  extensive.

§  3.  But  this  type  of  ignorance  is  not  the  only  one  that
prevents  labour  of  any  particular  grade  from  being  initially
distributed  among  different  uses  in  such  a  way  as  to  make
the  demand-prices  —  or  values  of  marginal  net  products  —
equal.  The  same  effect  is  produced  by  ignorance  as  to  what
the  grade  is  to  which  any  individual  boy  or  girl,  whose  fate
is  being  decided,  belongs.  For  different  children  are  born
with  different  capacities  and  aptitudes.  So  far  as  some
of  those  belonging  to  one  grade  drift  into  occupations
more  fitted  to  those  of  another  grade,  the  value  of  their
marginal  net  product  there  will  be  less  than  that  of  children
of  the  same  grade  who  have  been  turned  into  occupations
more  suitable  to  that  grade.     Hence  the  immense  importance

*  Jackson,  Report  on  Boy  Labour,  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,
Appendix,  vol,  xx.  p.  161.  The  general  tendency  of  children  to  enter  their
parents'  trades  is  illustrated  by  a  very  interesting  special  inquiry  undertaken
by  Prof.  Chapman  and  Mr.  Abbot  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Manchester  (Statis-
tical JouTTial,  May  1913,  pp.  599  et  seq.).


CH.  IX  DISTEIBUTION  OF  LABOUE  449

of  a  rational  sorting  of  children  of  different  intellectual
qualities,  and  their  guidance  into  lines  of  work  for  which
their  several  qualities  are  fitted.  "  It  is  probable  that  labour
exchanges  for  boys  leaving  school  would  be  of  very  great
value  in  securing  that  all  the  more  intelligent  and  able
boys  had  a  chance  of  securing  good  openings.  It  is  the
ignorance  of  the  boy  which  so  often  leads  him  into  employ-
ment which  is  not  suited  to  him."^  There  is — or  was — an
excellent  example  of  the  organisation  required  in  Strasburg,
where  the  Labour  Exchange  works  in  definite  association  with
the  teachers  of  the  municipal  schools.  Our  own  Education
(Choice  of  Employment)  Act,  1910,  endeavours  to  foster  an
alliance  of  this  kind.  But,  if  this  type  of  organisation
is  to  be  made  thoroughly  effective,  the  fitness  of  different
boys  for  different  occupations  must  not  be  judged  by  mere
rough  general  impressions.  There  is  required  a  scientific
analysis,  on  the  one  hand  of  the  qualities  for  which  various
occupations  call,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  qualities
which  different  individual  boys  possess.  The  practical  prob-
lems thus  suggested  have  been  discussed  in  a  very  interesting
manner  by  Professor  Munsterberg.  He  cites  a  bicycle  factory
in  which  the  reaction  times  of  different  individuals
were  scientifically  measured,  and  the  results  used  as  a  test
of  fitness  for  the  work  of  inspecting  the  balls  of  bicycle-
bearings  ;  ^  and  he  describes  certain  devices  which  he  himself
has  invented  for  testing  fitness  for  the  work  of  motor-men.
Tests  with  the  same  general  purpose  have  recently  been  used
by  the  military  authorities  to  assist  them  in  the  selection  of
recruits  for  the  Eoyal  Air  Force.  Such  methods  can  often
guide  the  individual's  choice  of  employment  when  he  first
steps  into  industry — or  first  moves  from  a  boy's  occupation  to
a  man's  occupation  ^ — more  effectively,  and  much  less  blindly,

^  Jackson,  Report  on  Boy  Labour,  Soyal  Commission  on  the  Pom  Laws,
Appendix,  vol.  xx.  p.  31.

2  Psychology  and  Industrial  Efficiency,  pp.  54-5.

^  Cf.  Professor  Chapman's  observation:  "Certain  occupations  cannot  be
entered  by  any  adequate  number  of  people  until  they  have  nearly  attained  their
full  strength  ;  for  instance,  the  occupations  of  manual  workers  on  the  railways,
navvies,  and  dock  labourers,  and  certain  occupations  in  the  building  trades.
This  means  that  other  callings  must  employ  more  young  people  than  they  can
permanently  find  room  for,  unless  some  young  people  in  search  of  work  are  to

2  G


450  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  vr.  m

than  the  ordinary  rough  and  tumble  of  trial  and  error.
They  would  be  made  still  more  effective  if  a  device  could
be  invented  for  testing,  not  merely  capacity  at  the  moment,
but  also  capacity  to  attain  capacity  through  training.  It
is,  therefore,  of  interest  to  learn  that  experiments  "  have
been  actually  started  to  determine  the  plasticity  of  the  psycho-
logical apparatus  as  an  independent  inborn  trait  of  the
individual."  ^

§  4.  The  ignorance  so  far  considered  has  been  mere
ignorance.  But  the  initial  distribution  of  new  generations
of  workpeople  among  different  occupations  is  also  injured
by  a  more  special  kind  of  ignorance,  which  may  be  called
biassed  ignorance.  By  this  is  meant  definite  false  judgments
tending    to    direct  the  new  generation's   labour  into  certain

be  left  standing  idle  in  tlie  market-place.  But  to  seek  to  obviate  this  tendency
by  making  each  industry  more  self-contained  would  not  be  a  very  wise  proceed-
ing, because  it  is  poor  economy  to  have  a  man  doing  a  lad's  work,  or  a  lad
doing  a  man's  work,  and  from  the  operation  of  a  certain  amount  of  selection
among  the  labour  forces  of  the  community  productive  efficiency  results.  .  .  .
It  may  be  that  the  partial  cul-de-sac  employment  is  a  necessary  part  of  a  highly
developed  industrial  system.  If  this  is  so,  the  establishment  of  labour-training
institutes  becomes  doubly  necessary,  and  an  added  importance  attaches  to  Labour
Exchauges  with  special  reference  to  the  claims  of  the  rejected  of  certain  trades
whom  it  is  essential  to  deal  with  before  they  become  demoralised  or  suffer  in  vigour
or  spirit "  ("  Industrial  Recruiting  and  the  Displacement  of  hahour," Proceedings
of  the  Manchester  Statistical  Societij,  1913-14,  pp.  122-3).

1  Munsterherg,  Psychology  of  Industrial  IJfficiency,]).  126.  Initial  testing  of
cajiacity  is,  perhaps,  not  very  important  among  workpeople  who  begin  their  career
in  large  and  varied  establishments,  where  employees  found  unsuitable  for  the  job
they  first  select  can  be  rapidly  transferred  to  other  jobs.  Of  firms  which  follow  Mr.
Taylor's  doctrine  of  scientific  management  it  is  said  that,  "  by  a  careful  study  of
each  individual  of  a  group  of  men  in  any  department,  it  may  be  found  that  many
are  not  physically  or  temperamentally  adapted  to  performing  the  particular
functions  required  in  that  department  and  that  they  are  adapted  to  the  per-
forming of  functions  in  some  other  department.  There  follows  a  redistribution
of  men  between  departments,  with  the  result  that,  without  an  increase  in  aggregate
energy  expended,  there  is  an  increase  in  aggregate  productivity.  It  is  the
scientific  method  of  adapting  instrument  to  purpose  "  (Tuck  School  Conference,
Scientific  MaTiagement,  p.  6).  But  in  comparatively  small  and  homogeneous
establishments — and  these  employ  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  world's  workers
— "the  working  man  who  is  a  failure  in  the  work  which  he  undertook  would
usually  have  no  opportunity  to  show  his  strong  sides  in  the  same  factory,  or  at
least  to  be  protected  against  the  consequences  of  his  weak  points.  If  his
achievement  is  deficient  in  quality  or  quantity,  lie  generally  loses  his  place  and
makes  a  new  trial  in  another  factory  under  the  same  accidental  conditions,
without  any  deeper  insight  into  his  particular  psychical  traits  and  their  relation
to  special  industrial  activities  "  (Munsterberg,  Psycliology  of  Industrial  Efficiency,
p.  121).


*


CH.  IX  DISTEIBUTION  OF  LABOUE  451

specified  occupations  to  a  greater  extent  than  is  requii'ed  to
make  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  there  equal
to  what  it  is  in  other  occupations.  In  the  industrial  world
of  to-day  two  principal  forms  of  such  false  judgments  are
prominent.  On  the  one  hand,  as  it  seems,  workpeople  over-
estimate the  advantages  of  dangerous,  unhealthy  and  fluctuat-
ing trades,  as  against  safe,  wholesome  and  steady  trades ;
on  the  other  hand,  they  overestimate  the  advantages  of  trades
which  yield  a  large  immediate  wage  with  little  training  of
capacities,  as  against  trades  which  yield  a  smaller  immediate
wage  and  more  training.  Both  these  forms  of  over-estimate
arise,  in  the  main,  out  of  a  common  cause,  namely,  the  fact
that  people  can  grasp  more  easily  the  obvious,  which  forces
itself  into  the  field  of  vision,  than  the  more  remote,  which
has  to  be  dragged  there.  The  wage  rate  that  is  paid
anywhere  is  obvious  in  this  sense;  but  the  chances  of
accident  or  unemployment,  and  the  prospect  of  future  gains
through  enhanced  industrial  capacity,  cannot  be  fully  realised
without  inquiry  and  a  deliberate  act  of  attention.  Further-
more, the  exaggerated  view  which  workmen  hold  of  the
advantages  of  dangerous,  unhealthy  and  fluctuating  industries —
the  problem  of  training  versus  non-training  occupations  is
deferred  for  separate  treatment  in  Part  V. — is  enhanced  by
the  subconscious  sentiment  inherent  in  most  men  that  they
personally  are  somehow  superior  to  the  "  average "  man
aituated  similarly  to  themselves.  They  do  not  need  that
machinery  should  be  fenced ;  their  constitution  is  not  so
feeble  that  deficiencies  of  light,  air  and  sanitation  in  their
place  of  work  will  injure  them  ;  they  are  not  the  sort  of
men  who  will  lose  their  job  in  bad  times.  In  short,  workpeople
are  endowed,  in  Adam  Smith's  phrase,  with  "  that  natural
confidence  which  every  man  has,  more  or  less,  not  only  in
his  own  abilities,  but  in  his  own  good  fortune."  This  personal
optimism  towards  the  facts  on  the  part  of  the  persons  directly
concerned  intensifies  the  maladjustment  due  to  the  difficulty,
which  they  and  their  parents  alike  experience,  in  learning
folly  what  the  facts  are.  So  far  as  false  judgments  in  these
matters  prevail,  labour  is  pressed  into  dangerous,  unhealthy
and   fluctuating   trades,  till   the   value   of   its   marginal    net


452  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

product  there  falls  short  of  the  value  of  its  marginal  net
product  elsewhere  by  the  excess  of  the  imagined  advantage,
which  the  false  judgments  attribute  to  these  trades  over  their
actual  advantage ;  and,  so  far  as  the  false  judgments  are
corrected,  the  inequality  in  the  values  of  marginal  net  products
is  correspondingly  reduced.  Against  these  definite  false
judgments  more  direct  and  specific  measures  of  correction  can
be  applied  than  are  practicable  against  mere  general  ignorance.
Such  specific  measures  are  provided  in  Workmen's  Com-
pensation Acts  and  in  State  coercion  towards  insurance
against  industrial  accidents,  industrial  diseases  (including  the
premature  general  wearing  out  of  a  man's  strength  by
continued  overstrain)  and  unemployment,  in  dangerous,
unwholesome  and  fluctuating  trades  —  trades,  that  is  to
say,  which  are  more  dangerous,  unwholesome  and  fluctuating
than  the  trade  least  unfavourably  situated  in  these  respects.
In  one  form  or  another,  these  devices  exhibit  the  remote
and  inobvious  chances  of  injury,  illness,  or  unemployment
in  the  obvious  shape  of  reductions  in  wages  or  immediate
payments  out  of  wages.^  They  thus  tend  to  lessen  the
proportion  of  people  who  enter  dangerous,  unwholesome  and
fluctuating  trades,  and  so  to  bring  the  value  of  the  marginal

'  Whether  the  funds  required  to  meet  compensation  or  insui-ance  claims
are  collected  from  the  employers  in  proportion  to  the  wages  they  pay,  or
whether  workpeople  pay  a  part  and  employers  another  part,  is,  from  a  long-
period  point  of  view,  a  matter  of  small  importance,  just  as  it  is  a  matter  of
small  importance  whether  local  rates  are  collected  from  landlords  or  from
tenants.  The  employers'  demand  for  labour  varies  in  accordance  with  the
proportion  of  the  bm-den  that  is  thrown  on  them,  in  such  wise  that,  when
they  provide  the  compensation  fund,  wages  are  less  by  the  amount  of  that
fund  than  they  would  have  been  if  the  workpeople  had  provided  it.  The
Austrian  law  requires  one-tenth  of  the  necessary  funds  to  be  raised  by  work-
people and  nine-tenths  by  employers  ;  the  British  Workman's  Compensation
Law  (1897)  and  the  German  Accident  Insurance  Law  require  the  whole  funds
to  be  raised  by  the  employers.  Of  course,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference
whether  the  arrangements  are  or  are  not  such  that  the  employer  stands  to  gain
by  improving  his  mechanical  arrangements  so  as  to  reduce  the  probability  of
accident.  In  Germany  each  mutual  association  "determines  for  itself  tlm
danger  class  to  which  each  of  the  contributory  establishments  belongs,  and  is
authorised  to  levy  a  premium  according  to  hazard.  It  is  also  empowered  to
enforce  rules  and  regulations  "  (Frankel  and  Dawson,  Working  Men's  lns\i,ranrc
in  Ihirope,  p.  96).  Employers  neglecting  the  rules  may  be  put  into  a  liigher
hazard  class  {ibid.  p.  115).  In  Austria  "it  is  to  the  interest  of  each  employer
to  cut  down  the  number  of  accidents  in  his  establishment,  as  his  annual  con-
tribution may  then  be  apportioned  on  the  basis  of  a  lower  danger  coefficient.


CH.  IX  DISTKIBUTION  OF  LABOUR  453

net  product  of  labour  in  these  trades  more  nearly  to  equality
with  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  labour  in
general.  State  bounties,  so  arranged  as  to  persuade  people
to  expend  more  money  on  insurance,  serve,  though  less
effectively,  to  promote  the  same  object.  On  the  other
hand.  State  provision  of  insurance  against  accidents,  in-
dustrial diseases  and  unemployment,  in  so  far  as  it  relieves
people  from  the  need  of  providing  against  these  things,
whether  the  provision  be  of  the  whole  cost  or  of  a
proportion  of  it,  differentiates  in  favour  of  dangerous,  un-
healthy and  fluctuating  trades,  and  causes  an  excess  of
people  to  enter  them.^  It  is  plain,  for  example,  that  to
follow  the  practice  of  the  old  relief  works  and  "  to  give
regularly  to  a  casual  labourer  13  s.  a  week  employment  relief
for  four  weeks  in  each  year  is  arithmetically  equivalent  to
subsidising  his  weekly  wages  by  a  shilling  throughout  the
year "  ^  and  must  operate  as  a  direct  bounty  to  casual
trades.

§  5.  So  far  attention  has  been  concentrated  upon  the
initial  distribution  of  new  generations  of  workpeople  among
the  various  occupations  open  to  them.  Plainly,  however,
this  initial  distribution  is  not  the  only  thing  to  be  considered ;


This  is  the  chief  factor  in  the  campaign  of  accident  prevention  in  Austria,
insurance  institutions  not  being  permitted  to  make  prevention  regulations,  as
is  the  case  in  the  trade  associations  of  Germany  "  {ibid.  p.  120).  A  device  on
the  same  lines,  designed  to  encourage  preventive  measures  against  unemploy-
ment, is  found  in  the  English  National  Insurance  Act.  This  Act,  in  effect,
imposes  a  reduced  rate  on  employers,  so  far  as  they  engage  men  for  long  terms
and  so  far  as  they  meet  periods  of  depression  by  working  "short  time."

*  For  a  further  discussion  of  Insurance,  cf.  Part  TI.  Chapter  XIII.  It  should
be  added  that,  since  there  is  evil  in  uncertainty  as  such,  the  invention  of
insurance  and  compensarion  devices  incidentally  renders  to  dangerous,  unhealthy,
and  fluctuating  trades  a  greater  benefit  than  it  renders  to  other  trades.  The
efiFect  is  similar  to  that  of  the  invention  of  a  machine  applicable  in  one  depart-
ment of  industry  and  not  elsewhere.  By  altering  general  conditions,  the  inven-
tion brings  it  about  that  a  different  distribution  of  workpeople  among  industries
is  fitted  to  maximise  the  national  dividend  from  the  distribution  which  would
have  been  fitted  to  do  this  apart  from  the  invention.  This  effect  is  obviously
additional  to  the  effect,  discussed  in  the  text,  of  approximating  the  actual
distribution  towards  the  most  favourable  distribution  that  is  possible  under
existing  general  conditions.  We  have  to  deal,  in  practice,  with  a  change  which
both  alters  the  position  of  a  target  and  alters  the  mean  deviation  of  shots  from
the  bull's  eye.     In  the  text  attention  is  paid  to  the  latter  effect  flnly.

'  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  p.  395.


454  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

for  mistakes  made  at  the  start  may  be  rectified  by  subsequent
movement.  This  may  happen  even  for  certain  forms  of  capital.
Thus,  Dr.  Clapham  writes  of  the  worsted  weaving  industry :
"  The  light  women's  dress  goods  have  very  generally  a  cotton
warp  and  a  worsted  weft.  They  often  approach  cotton  goods
in  character ;  and  the  quite  narrow  looms  on  which  they  are
mostly  made  can  readily  be  used  for  the  weaving  of  pure  cotton
fabrics,  linings,  and  so  forth,  and  constantly  are  so  used  when
wool  is  dear,  or  when,  for  any  other  reason,  fashion  turns
towards  cotton."  ^  In  like  manner,  certain  kinds  of  machinery
can  be  readily  removed,  not  merely  from  one  factory  to  another,
but  from  one  occupation  to  another.  For  labour  there  are,
prima  facie  at  least,  equal  facilities  for  correcting  mistakes  by
movement.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  distribution  of  labour,  not
only  between  occupations  but  also  between  places,  may  be
made  wrong  from  time  to  time  by  temporary  fluctuations  in
the  demand  for  and  supply  of  different  things,  even  though  we
suppose  the  initial  direction  given  to  new  generations  of  work-
people to  have  been  guided  by  perfect  wisdom.  Here,  too,
there  is,  in  rightly  directed  movement,  a  means  of  making
the  distribution  of  labour  better.  The  point  we  have  now
to  consider  is  that  ignorance,  over  and  above  the  injury
described  already,  inflicts  a  further  injury  on  the  national
dividend  by  impeding  and  deflecting  movement.

§  6.  Beyond  doubt  a  great  deal  of  ignorance  prevails
among  workpeople  in  one  place  or  occupation  as  to  the  com-
parative demand  prices — by  which  the  values  of  their  marginal
net  products  are  represented — for  their  services  prevailing
there  and  elsewhere.  The  discussion  of  this  matter  is  compli-
cated by  the  fact  that,  since,  from  seasonal  and  other  causes,
work  is  less  regular  in  some  occupations  than  in  others,
wage  rates  per  day  or  per  week  do  not  by  themselves  afford
an  adequate  measure  of  comparative  demand  prices  as  a
whole.  Such  a  measure  can  only  be  obtained  when  both
the  wage  rate  for  full  employment  and  the  prospect  of
unemployment  have  been  taken  into  account.  Clearly,  work-
people can  less  easily  gather  information  about  the  com-
parative  liability  of  different   occupations   to  unemployment

^  The  Woollen  and  Worsted  Industries,  p.  144.


I


CH.  IX  DISTEIBUTION  OF  LABOUE  455

than  about  comparative  wage  rates.  This  point,  however,
need  not  be  enlarged  upon  here,  and  attention  may  be
confined  to  wages.  The  extent  of  people's  ignorance  about
the  level  of  wage  rates  in  any  place  or  occupation  depends,  in
great  part,  upon  the  form  in  which  wage  contracts  are  made.
Some  forms  make  the  real  prospect  of  earnings  offered  to  work-
people much  more  difficult  to  calculate  than  other  forms.  In
nearly  all  forms,  indeed,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  obscurity.  For
real  wages,  in  the  widest  sense,  embrace  the  conditions  of  a
man's  work  in  respect  to  sanitary  arrangements,  safety  appli-
ances, and  so  forth ;  and  these  cannot  be  fully  known  to  any
workman  before  he  is  actually  working  under  them.  But  the
obscurity  is  much  enhanced  when  fines  are  charged  for
damaged  work  and  information  about  this  is  suppressed,  and
when  wages  are  paid  partly  in  commodities  on  which  some
fictitious  value  may  be  set.  It  is,  therefore,  an  important
fact  that  wage  contracts  embracing  these  elements  are  re-
stricted in  most  modern  States.  To  meet  direct  suppression  of
relevant  information,  the  law  has  intervened  in  this  country
through  the  Particulars  Clause  inserted  in  the  Factory  and
Workshops  Act,  1901.  "That  section  provides  that,  in
industries  to  which  it  is  applied  by  Order  of  the  Secretary
of  State,  persons,  to  whom  work  is  given  out  to  be  done,  shall
receive  from  the  employer  sufficient  particulars  of  the  rate  of
wages  appHcable  to  the  work  to  be  done  and  of  the  work  to
which  that  rate  is  to  be  applied  to  enable  the  worker  to
compute  the  total  amount  of  wages  payable  in  respect  of
the  work.  This  provision,  the  enforcement  of  which  is
placed  upon  the  Inspectors  of  Factories,  is  intended  to  secure
to  the  outworker  information  beforehand  as  to  the  price  he  is
to  get  for  the  work,  and  to  protect  him  against  arbitrary
alterations  or  reductions  when  the  work  is  brought  in.  The
provision  has  been  extended  by  Orders  of  the  Secretary  of
State  to  the  outworkers  in  a  number  of  trades."  ^  To  meet
indirect  suppression  of  information  through  part  payment  in
objects  of  ambiguous  value,  the  law  in  this  country  has
adopted  the  broad  policy  of  prohibiting  such  part-payment,
despite  the  risk  that  in  so  doing  it  might  incidentally  suppress
^  Select  Committee  on  Home  Work  Report,  1908,  p.  viii.


456  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

some  useful  institutions.^  The  fundamental  provision  of  the
Truck  Act  of  1831  was  that  "wages  are  to  be  made  payable
in  current  coin  of  the  realm  only,"  and  that  no  condition
should  be  made  as  to  where  or  with  whom  any  part  of  the
wages  should  be  expended.^  This  provision  was  made  to
apply  by  the  Act  of  1887  to  any  one  engaged  in  manual
labour  who  has  entered  into  or  works  under  an  expressed
or  implied  contract  with  an  employer ;  it  did  not  include
outworkers  who  contract  in  terms  of  product,  not  of  work.
It  was  decided  by  the  Courts  that  to  make  deductions  for
rent  of  machines,  standing-room,  etc.,  was  not  incompatible
with  the  Act,  because  wages  meant  what  was  left  after  such
payments  had  been  made.  Fines  were  also  held  to  be  no
contravention.  By  the  Act  of  1896,  however,  "deductions  in
respect  of  fines,  in  respect  of  loss  to  the  employer  by  bad  or
spoiled  work  or  materials,  etc.,  and  in  respect  of  the  supply  of
materials,  tools  and  other  conveniences  to  the  worker  were
made  subject  to  conditions  intended  to  protect  the  worker
against  harsh  or  unfair  charges  on  the  part  of  the  employer." '
Some  practical  problems  under  this  head  still  demand  solution
and  were  discussed  at  length  by  the  Committee  of  1908.^

§  7.  In  what  has  just  been  said,  a  very  important  problem
was  left  on  one  side.  It  was  tacitly  assumed  that  a  worker,
if  he  chose,  could  always  continue  at  full  work  where  he  was,

^  Cf.  C.  D.  Wright's  account  of  some  American  sys'enis  of  company
stores  ill  regions  remote  from  ordinary  shops  {The  Industrial  Evolution  of  the
U.S.A.,  pp.  282  d  seq.).

2  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  tJie  Truck  Acts,  p.  6.  This  provision
can  be  evaded  by  a  company  establishing  a  provision  store  and  informally
putting  pressure  on  its  workpeople  to  buy  there.  The  French  law  of  1910  meets
this  danger  by  forbidding  any  employer  to  "connect  with  his  establishment
any  store  at  which  he  shall  sell  directly  or  indirectly  to  his  employees  or  to  their
families  provisions  or  goods  of  any  description  whatever"  {Labour  Gazette,  May
1910,  p.  156).

.3  liepoi-t  of  the  Select  Committee  on  the  Truck  Acts,  p.  9.

*  Thus,  the  Committee  find  that  some  deductions  in  respect  of  fines  may
be  useful  to  secure  discipline,  and  suggest  that  abuse  be  guarded  against  by  a
statutory  provision  that  "the  maximum  fine  or  accumulation  of  fines  in  any
one  week  permissible  by  law  shall  not  exceed  5  per  cent  of  the  wages  of  the
worker"  (p.  29).  Deductions  for  damage  to  materials  and  so  on  they  hold  may
bo  usefully  employed  to  prevent  waste,  under  an  arrangement,  say,  for  charging
for  the  material  as  given  out  and  adding  the  value  of  it  to  the  wage  for  the  work
in  which  it  is  afterwards  incorporated  (p.  41).  Still,  they  conclude  that,  in
view  of  the  liability  of  such  charges  to  become  fraudulent,  they  should  be  pro-


CH.  IX  DISTEIBUTION  OF  LABOUK  457

his  wages  being  adjusted  to  the  value  of  his  product  aud  any
movement  that  he  might  make  to  another  place  or  occupation
being  entirely  voluntary.  In  actual  life,  however,  though,  no
doubt,  many  workpeople  are  always  free  agents  in  this  sense,
there  are  also  great  numbers  who,  in  the  face  of  short-period
variations  of  demand,  have  not  the  choice  between  staying  at
work  where  they  are  and  going  elsewhere.  They  are  definitely
thrown  out  of  work,  and,  if  they  are  to  be  employed  at  all,  have
to  go  elsewhere.  So  long  as  they  are  out  of  work,  the  national
dividend  is  damaged,  not  because  they  are  working  at  less
productive  jobs  that  they  might  have  been  engaged  on,  but
because  they  are  not  working  at  all.  What  is  needed  is  that
they  shall,  as  speedily  as  possible,  move  from  where  they  are
not  wanted  to  where  they  are  wanted.  So  long  as  in  one
place  or  occupation  men  are  out  of  work,  while  in  another
place  or  occupation  there  are  vacancies  which  they  are  capable
of  filling,  the  national  dividend  suffers  loss.  Ignorance  delays
the  required  corrective  movement.  If  it  was  complete  and  if,
in  spite  of  this,  workpeople  who  had  lost  their  jobs  were  to  set
out  to  look  for  work  elsewhere — a  step  which  their  ignorance
would  make  them  hesitate  long  to  undertake — they  would
wander  aimlessly  round  to  the  firms  that  have  not,  as  well  as
to  those  that  have,  vacancies,  engaging  themselves  in  a  weary
"  tramp  from  one  firm  to  another,  in  the  attempt  to  discover,
by  actual  application  to  one  after  another,  which  of  them  wants
another  hand."  ^

As  a  rule,  ignorance  is  somewhat  less  complete  than  this.
Some  sort  of  general  information  is  available  about  the  com-
parative state  of  the  demands  for  labour  in  various  places  and
occupations.  This  can  be  obtained  through  newspaper  adver-
tisements, the  talk  of  friends  and  the  reports  about  local  condi-
tions collected  by  trade  unions.     Mr.  Dearie  has  an  interesting

hibited,  subject  to  a  power  of  the  Home  Secretary  to  relax  the  prohibitions  in
special  cases  {e.g.  of  costly  material).  The  Committee  further  hold  that  the
general  provisions  of  the  Truck  Acts  should  be  extended  to  outworkers  (p.  78).
They  discuss,  but  do  not  definitely  recommend ,  rules  prohibiting  employers  from
making  it  compulsory  for  their  hands  to  live  in  houses  provided  by  them  (p.
53).  The  real  objection  to  such  compulsion  is,  not  so  much  possible  deception
through  it  as  regards  real  wages,  as  the  power  it  carries  with  it  of  putting  undue
pressure  on  employees  in  times  of  strike.

^  Roijal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Minority  Report,  p.  1125.


458  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

account  of  the  development  of  these  methods  in  the  London
building  trades  :  "  That  system  of  mutual  assistance  in  getting
jobs,  which  a  man  and  his  mates  render  to  one  another,  is
extended  and  carried  out  in  a  more  systematic  manner  by
means  of  the  vacant  books  of  the  trade  unions.  Each  man,  as
he  becomes  unemployed,  writes  his  name  in  the  vacant  book  at
the  local  branch  office  or  meeting-place ;  and  then  every  other
member  of  the  branch — and  branches  ordinarily  number  from
20  up  to  400  or  500 — is  looking  for  a  job  for  him,  or,  to  be
more  exact,  all  members  of  the  branch  are  on  the  look-out  for
vacancies  to  clear  the  vacant  book.  Obligations  are  imposed
on  all  members  to  inform  the  branch  secretary  when  men  are
wanted  anywhere;  and,  whilst  in  some  unions — for  instance,
the  Amalgamated  Carpenters  and  Joiners — a  small  sum,
generally  6d.  per  member,  is  given  to  any  one  who  will  take
unemployed  men  off  the  books,  a  heavy  fine  is  imposed  on
any  one  known  to  be  giving  preference  to  non-union  men.
The  usual  thing  is  to  inform  the  secretary  where  men  are,  or
are  likely  to  be,  wanted,  and  the  latter  is  bound  to  inform  out-
of-work  members  where  best  to  look  for  jobs."  ^  In  England
since  1893  still  further  information  of  this  kind,  in  a  more
widely  accessible  form,  has  been  furnished  officially  through
the  Labour  Gazette.  At  the  present  time  the  Employment
Exchanges  also  act  as  powerful  informing  agencies.  They
extend  the  inquiry  work  carried  on  by  trade  unions,  and
"  enable  the  workman  to  ascertain,  by  calling  at  an  office  in
his  own  neighbourhood,  what  enquiries  have  been  made  for
his  own  kind  of  labour  all  over  London."  ^  When  the  Ex-
changes of  different  towns  are  inter-connected,  the  workman  is
brought  into  contact  with  a  still  wider  range  of  information.
Thus,  in  Germany :  "  In  order  to  ensure  the  mobility  of
labour,  it  is  considered  to  be  of  importance  that  the  agencies
for  obtaining  employment  in  the  different  parts  of  the  German
Empire  should  be  linked  up  by  a  system  of  inter-communica-
tion. This  system  is  provided  by  the  Federations  of  Labour
Registries.  ...  In  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Baden  all  are  tele-
phonically    in    communication,    and    want    or   superfluity   of

'   Unemploytnent  in  the  London  Building  Trades,  p.  133.
2  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Minority  Eeport,  p.  1125.


cH.  IX  DISTEIBUTION  OF  LABOUE  459

labour  in  one  place  is  immediately  known  in  all  the  others."  ^
In  Bavaria  the  system  is  extended  by  the  publication  of  lists
of  vacancies  in  villages  in  which  no  Exchange  exist&^  In
England  the  development  from  the  isolated  to  the  connected
form  was  consummated  in  the  Labour  Exchanges  Act.  It  is
evident  that  an  organised  system  of  this  character  may  serve
as  a  powerful  instrument  for  facilitating  the  movement  of
workpeople  out  of  jobs  to  vacancies  having  need  of  them.

It  might  seem  at  first  sight  that,  when  once  this  system
has  been  set  up,  nothing  further  can  be  required.  That,  how-
ever, is  a  mistake.  Information  that  at  the  present  moment
there  are  two  vacancies  open  in  the  works  of  a  particular  firm
is  not  equivalent  to  information  that  the  vacancies  will  be
open  when  the  men,  to  whom  this  fact  has  been  narrated,
arrive  there  in  search  of  work.  The  ignorance  that  obstructs
mobility  may,  therefore,  be  stiU  further  reduced  if,  in  place  of
centres  of  information  as  to  the  vacancies  there  and  then  avail-
able in  different  establishments  or  departments  of  establish-
ments, there  are  instituted  centres  at  which  hands  can  be
definitely  engaged  for  these  different  establishments  or  de-
partments. When  that  is  done,  workmen  are  informed,  not
merely  that  there  are  so  many  vacancies  now  in  certain  places,
but  also  that  these  vacancies  will  still  be  available  when  they
arrive  in  quest  of  them.  The  probability  that  this  kind  of
unification  will  be  brought  about  is,  naturally,  different  in
different  circumstances.  The  obstacles  in  the  way  of  it  are
least  when  separate  establishments  belong  to  the  same  company
— this  is,  pro  tanto,  an  argument  in  favour  of  Trusts, — when
they  are  fixed  in  position,  and  when  they  are  physically  close
together.  Thus,  in  the  London  and  India  Docks  unification
came  about  many  years  ago.^     The  obstacles  are  somewhat

1  [Cd.  2304],  p.  65.  2  z^-^,  p.  93

3  For  on  account  of  the  introduction  of  the  new  policy  at  the  Docks  after
the  strike  of  1889,  cf.  Report  of  the  Roycd  Commission  on  the  Poor  Lairs,  p.  356.
Mr.  Beveridge  summarises  the  changes  introduced  as  follows  :  "  Formerly  each
of  the  forty-seven  departments  of  the  Company's  work  was  a  separate  unit  for  the
engagement  of  men  ;  each  department  had  its  insignificant  nucleus  of  regiilar
hands  and  its  attendant  crowd  of  more  or  less  loosely  attached  casuals  ;  80  per
cent  of  the  work  was  done  by  irregular  labour.  Now  the  whole  Dock  system  is,
ao  far  as  the  Company's  work  goes,  the  unit  for  the  engagement  of  men  ;  80  per
cent  of  the  work  is  done  by  a  unified  statf  of  weekly  servants  directed  from  on
spot  to  another  by  a  central  office"  (Beveridge,  Economic  Journal,  1907,  p.  73


460  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  in

more  serious  when  the  different  establishments,  though  still
belonging  to  the  same  company  or  person,  are  scattered  and
moving,  as  in  the  London  building  trade.  No  doubt,  even
here  unification  is  sometimes  introduced.  Before  the  Com-
mittee on  Distress  from  "Want  of  Employment,  a  witness,
referring  to  the  building  trade,  observed :  "  In  the  case  of  one
employer,  he  said  he  did  not  hand  over,  as  was  the  common
practice,  the  responsibility  of  taking  on  men  to  his  foremen,
but  did  it  himself,  with  this  special  object  of  having  men
permanently,  and  being  able,  as  the  foreman  is  not  able  to  do,
to  move  them  on  from  job  to  job,  the  foreman  being  unable  to
pass  them  on  to  another  job  of  which  another  foreman  would
be  in  charge.  Although  one  understands  why  the  other  practice
is  adopted,  it  seems  a  very  desirable  thing  that  the  practice  of
this  individual  employer  should  be  more  widely  followed."  ^  In
general,  however,  builders'  workmen  in  London  are  engaged  inde-
pendently by  the  different  foremen  of  the  firm  employing  them.
The  obstacles  to  unification  are  still  more  serious,  when  the
separate  establishments  belong,  not  to  one  company  or  person,
but  to  several ;  for  then,  in  order  that  unification  may  come
about,  a  definite  organisation  for  engaging  workpeople  has  to
be  set  up,  either  by  the  companies  themselves  or  by  some  outside
body,  and,  having  been  set  up,  has  to  be  used  for  this  purpose.
This  evidently  involves  the  overcoming  of  considerable  friction.
§  8.  If  and  when  this  friction  has  been  overcome,  it  is
evident  that  the  range  over  which  ignorance  is  dissipated
and  mobility  improved  will  be  greater,  the  larger  is  the
proportion  of  the  vacancies  occurring  in  any  locality  that  are
filled  by  engagements  negotiated  through  the  local  Employ-
ment Exchange  acting  as  an  engagement  agency.  This
proportion,  under  a  voluntary  arrangement,  will  be  larger,  the
more  attractive  Exchanges  are  made  to  employers.  Experience
seems  to  show  that,  if  they  are  to  win  an  extensive  clientele,
they  should  be  public — not  run  as  a  private  speculation  by
possibly  fraudulent  private  persons ;  that  they  should  be
managed  jointly  by  representatives  of  employers  and  employed ;
that  they  should  take  no  notice  of  strikes  and  lock-outs,  but

'  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Distress  from  Want  of  EmploymerUy  Evidenci
by  Aves,  Q.  10,917.


CH.  IX  DISTEIBUTION  OF  LABOUK  461

simply  allow  each  side  to  post  up  in  the  Exchange  a  statement
that  a  stoppage  of  work  exists  in  such  and  such  an  establish-
ment ;  that  they  should  be  wholly  separated  from  charitable
relief — association  with  such  relief  both  keeps  away  the  best
men  from  fear  of  injuring  their  reputation  as  workers  and
makes  employers  unwilling  to  apply  to  the  Exchanges ;  that
they  should  be  given  prestige  by  municipal  or  State  author-
isation, and  should  be  advertised  further,  so  far  as  practicable,
by  being  made  the  exclusive  agency  for  the  engagement  of
workpeople  employed  by  public  authorities.  The  question
whether  fees  should  be  charged  to  the  workpeople  making
use  of  them  is  debatable.  The  French  law  of  1904  forbids
even  private  Exchanges  to  make  such  a  charge.  But  the
Transvaal  Indigency  Commission  points  out  that  "  the  charging
of  fees  is  by  far  the  most  effective  method  of  keeping  away
those  who  are  not  really  in  search  of  work  " ;  ^  and,  if  such
persons  are  driven  off,  the  Exchanges  will  undoubtedly  prove
more  attractive  to  employers.  It  is,  further,  open  to  the
State,  if  it  chooses,  to  increase  the  proportion  of  vacancies
that  are  filled  through  Exchanges  by  some  form  of  legal
suasion.  A  step  in  this  direction  would  be  taken  if  the
registration  at  an  Exchange  of  all  workpeople  out  of  em-
ployment were  made  obligatory ;  for,  if  that  were  done,  the
inducement  to  employers  to  resort  to  these  centres  of  engage-
ment would  be  increased.  Such  a  step  is  suggested  by  the
Poor  Law  Commissioners  in  these  terms :  "  We  think  that,
if,  as  will  be  proposed  subsequently,  the  State  contributes
to  the  unemployed  benefit  paid  to  each  trade  unionist,  the
State  might  well  make  it  a  condition  of  such  payment  that
the  trade  unionist,  when  out  of  work,  should,  register  his
name  and  report  himself  to  the  local  Labour  Exchange,  in
addition  (if  it  is  so  desired)  to  entering  his  name  in  the
vacant  book  of  his  imion.  If  the  State  supports  and
encourages  the  trade  unions,  it  seems  only  reasonable  that
the  trade  unions  should  assist  the  State  by  supporting  the
national  and  nationally  needed  Labour  Exchanges."  ^  A
more  drastic  arrangement  would  be  to  provide  by  law  that

*  Report  of  the  TruTisvaal  Indigency  Commission,  p.  135.
2  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Majority  Report,  p.  403.


462  ECOlSrOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

employers  and  workmen  should  never  enter  into  a  contract  of
work  without  reference  to  an  Exchange,  This  plan,  which
already  rules  in  England  for  sailors  in  the  mercantile  marine,
was  at  one  time  recommended  for  general  adoption  by  Mr.
Beveridge.  Fearing  that  the  effectiveness  of  the  Exchanges
might  be  weakened  by  lack  of  support  from  employers,  he
boldly  claimed  complete  compulsion.  "  If  the  thing  cannot
be  done  voluntarily,  it  will  have  to  be  done,  and  will  be  done,
compulsorily.  A  new  clause  in  the  Factory  Code,  e.g.  that
no  man  should  be  engaged  for  less  than  a  week  or  a  month,
unless  he  were  taken  from  a  recognised  Labour  Exchange,
would  be  a  legitimate  and  unobjectionable  extension  of  the
accepted  principle  that  the  State  may  and  must  proscribe
conditions  of  employment  which  are  disastrous  to  the  souls
and  bodies  of  its  citizens."  ^  The  British  National  Insurance
Act,  without  going  so  far  as  this,  offers  the  inducement  of
what  is,  in  effect,  a  slightly  reduced  charge  for  the  insurance
of  their  workmen  both  against  sickness  and,  where  this  form
of  insurance  is  provided,  against  unemployment,  to  those
employers  who  engage  their  workpeople  through  Employment
Exchanges.^  All  these  devices,  in  so  far  as  they  foster  a
more  extended  use  of  the  Exchanges,  tend,  other  things  being
equal,  to  break  down  ignorance  of  the  conditions  of  the
demand  for  labour,  hence  to  lessen  unemployment,  and  hence
to  increase  the  national  dividend.  It  must  be  observed,
however,  that  the  extent  to  which  they  do  this,  and,  therefore,
the  benefit  to  be  expected  from  their  introduction,  is  likely  to
be  smaller  in  a  country  already  provided  with  a  widely-
extended  system  of  trade  unions  than  in  one  where  unionism
is  comparatively  little  developed.  This  point  is  brought  out  by
the  fact  that,  while  in  G-ermany,  before  the  war,  the  Employ-
ment Exchanges  were  as  effective  in  finding  places  for  skilled
men  as  for  unskilled  men,  in  the  United  Kingdom  their
success  was  confined  in  the  main,  at  all  events  as  regards  the
finding  of  work  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  to  the  latter
class,  among  whom  no  strong  union  organisation  existed.^

1  Beveridge,  Contemporary  Review,  April  1908,  p.  392.

2  Of.  National  Insurance  Act,  §  99  (1).

'  Cf.  Schloss,  Econ/ymic  Journal,  1907,  p.  78  ;  &]ao  Bulletin  dc  V Association
pour  la  lutte  conire  la  ch6mage,  Sept.  1913,  p.  839.


cH.is  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LABOUR  463

§  9.  Our  study  of  ignorance  as  a  cause  of  errors  in  the
distribution  of  labour  is  now  complete.  "VYe  turn,  therefore,  to
the  second  cause  distinguished  in  ^  1,  namely,  "  costs  of  move-
ment." But,  before  these  costs  can  be  examined  in  detail,
certain  matters  of  a  general  character  require  elucidation.
As  was  indicated  in  the  footnote  to  p.  127,  the  cost  of  move-
ment may  most  conveniently  be  regarded  as  equivalent  to  an
annual  sum  spread  over  the  period  during  which  the  workman
who  has  moved  may  expect  to  find  profit  in  staying  in  his
new  place  or  occupation.  The  task  of  calculating  this  annual
sum  presents  some  difficulty.  First,  the  costs  of  movement
are  not  the  same  for  all  persons  liable  to  move.  Old  workmen
with  families  are,  for  example,  rooted  more  firmly  to  their
homes  than  young  unmarried  men.  At  first  sight  it  might
seem,  indeed,  that  this  fact  does  not  greatly  concern  us,  since
the  movement  in  which  we  are  interested  is  the  movement  of
those  persons  whose  movement  costs  least — not  fluidity  in
general,  but  fluidity  at  the  edges.  But  the  costs  of  movement
of  those  persons  whose  movement  costs  least  are  themselves  de-
pendent upon  the  number  of  persons  who  are  moving.  Hence,
for  complete  accuracy,  we  should  need  to  treat  these  costs,  not
as  a  constant,  but  as  a  function  of  the  volume  of  movement.
For  purposes  of  approximation,  however,  it  is  generally  suffi-
cient to  take  rough  discontinuous  groups,  for  which  different
fixed  costs  of  movement  can  be  set  out.  Thus,  whether  A
and  B  represent  different  places  or  different  occupations,  and
j  whether  movement  means  movement  in  space  or  the  acquisi-
tion of  a  new  trade,  we  can  in  ordinary  times — the  position
in  the  later  period  of  the  Great  War  was,  of  course,  different
— take  for  our  costs  those  proper  to  the  movement  of  young
men  without  family  encumbrances.  It  should,  indeed,  be
noted  that,  as  a  trade  or  place  decays  and  the  young  men
gradually  leave,  the  relevant  costs  of  movement  will  tend  to
rise,  because  the  age  distribution  of  the  population  will  be
modified.  Statistical  inquiry  shows  that  in  decaying  trades  the
proportion  of  old  men  is  above  the  normal,  and  becomes  greater
and  greater  as  the  decay  proceeds.^     But  this  complication  is

*  Cf.   Booth,  Life  and  Labmtr,  Industry,   toI.  v.  pp.  43  and  49.      In  like
manner,  Lord  Dunraven  observes  that  "  Ireland  has  a  larger  population  of  aged


464  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  hi

one  of  detail  rather  than  of  principle.  Secondly,  when  the
capital  cost  of  movement  is  given,  the  annual  sum,  to  which
we  have  to  equate  it,  is  not  fixed,  but  is  larger,  the  shorter  is
the  period  during  which  a  workman  who  has  moved  expects
to  find  profit  in  staying  in  his  new  place.  For  example,  in
the  eyes  of  a  man  considering  whether  or  not  to  move
away  from  a  point  of  slack  demand,  this  annual  sum  will
be  larger  if  the  depression  is,  say,  a  seasonal  depression  and
likely  to  pass  away  rapidly  than  if  it  is  likely  to  continue
for  a  long  time.  Thirdly,  from  the  present  point  of  view,  the
costs  of  movement  between  any  two  places  or  occupations  A
and  B  are  not  necessarily  the  actual  costs,  but  may  be  a  lesser
amount,  which  we  may  call  the  "  virtual "  costs,  and  which
consist  of  the  sum  of  the  costs  of  movement  along  each  of  the
separate  stages  that  lie  between  A  and  B.  When  the  costs  in
view  are  merely  costs  of  physical  transport,  this  point  is  not,
indeed,  likely  to  be  important.  For,  in  general,  long-distance
journeys  are  cheaper  per  mile  than  short-distance  journeys,
and,  therefore,  there  will  not  exist  any  virtual  cost  smaller
than  the  actual  cost.  If,  however,  the  costs  in  view  are  those
arising  out  of  the  need  of  learning  particular  accomplishments,
it  is  very  important.  The  costs  of  transport,  in  this  sense,
between  the  occupation  of  agricultural  labourer  and  that  of
master  manufacturer  may  be  infinite ;  but  those  between
agricultural  labourer  and  petty  shopkeeper,  between  petty
shopkeeper  and  large  shopkeeper,  between  large  shopkeeper
and  departmental  manager,  between  departmental  manager
and  general  manager,  between  general  manager  and  master
manufacturer,  may  all  be  small.  The  same  class  of  con-
sideration is  applicable  to  those  costs  which  consist  in  the
subjective  burden  of  leaving  one's  home  and  settling  elsewhere.
Probably  these  costs,  in  respect  of  one  movement  of  a  thousand
miles,  greatly  exceed  those  involved  in  two  hundred  move-

than  any  othor  country  in  the  king's  dominions  "  {Tlic  Outlook  in  Ireland,  p.  21).
It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  we  cannot  infer  decay  or  expansion  unreservedly
from  such  considerations,  because,  in  some  industries,  the  normal  age  distribu-
tion differs  widely  from  the  average.  Messengers  are  young  men  who  expect  to
become  something  else,  and  lightermen  are  generally  retired  sailors.  Further-
more, some  industries  have  an  abnormal  proportion  of  old,  simply  because  they
are  abnormally  healthy  or  attract  abnormally  healthy  people.


CH.  IX  DISTKIBUTION  OF  LABOUE  465

ments  of  five  miles  each.  A  good  illustration  of  this  point
is  afforded  by  the  following  account  of  mediaeval  France :
"  If  Lyons  had  need  of  workmen,  it  called  upon  Chalon-sur-
Saone,  which  supplied  them.  The  void  made  at  Chalon  was
filled  by  men  drawn  from  Auxerre.  Auxerre,  finding  that
less  work  was  offered  than  was  required,  called  to  its  aid  Sens,
which,  at  need,  fell  back  upon  Paris.  .  .  .  Thus,  all  the
different  places  were  stirred  at  once  by  a  demand  for  labour,
however  distant  that  might  be,- just  as  a  regiment  in  column,
marching  in  one  piece  and  only  advancing  a  few  paces,
would  be."  ^     This  class  of  consideration  is  important.

§  10.  We  may  now  look  at  the  costs  of  movement  some-
what more  in  detail.  As  between  two  given  places,  we
perceive  at  once  that  they  include,  not  only  the  sheer  money
cost  of  travel  to  a  workman  who  contemplates  moving,  but
also  the  sacrifice  of  the  goodwill  of  shopkeepers  to  whom  the
workman  is  known,  and  the  wrench  involved  in  leaving  his
friends  and  the  district  with  which  he  is  familiar.  The  money
cost,  of  course,  becomes  less  in  any  country,  as  the  means  of
communication  are  developed  and  transport,  therefore,  becomes
cheaper.  The  other  element  of  cost,  in  like  manner,  becomes
less  as  the  speed  of  travel  is  increased,  because,  as  this  happens,
it  becomes  easier  for  workpeople  to  change  the  seat  of  their
work  without  having  at  the  same  time  to  change  their  homes.^
As  between  two  given  occupations,  the  costs  of  movement
become  less,  the  more  closely  industrial  progress  causes  the
operations  required  in  one  occupation  to  resemble  those  re-
quired in  another.  Assimilation  of  this  sort  tends  to  come
about  more  and  more  markedly  the  further  the  division  of
labour  is  carried.  For  division  of  labour  means  the  splitting
up  of  complex  operations,  formerly  executed  as  wholes,  into
their  elementary  parts,  and  it  so  happens  that  a  comparatively

'  De  Foville,  Transformation  des  moyeTis  de  transport,  p.  396.  There  is  an
exactly  analogous  phenomenon  in  the  movement  of  capital  between  countries.
People  in  the  United  States  can  move  a  given  capital  to  Central  or  South
America,  and  at  the  same  time  people  in  England  move  an  equal  capital  to  the
United  States  at  a  less  aggregate  cost  in  uncertainty — because  of  differences  of
local  knowledge — than  that  at  which  Englishmen  could  move  that  capital  to
Central  or  South  America  direct.  Hence,  this  roimdabout  method  of  investment
in  fact  occurs.     Cf.  C.  K.  Hobson,  The  Export  of  Capital,  pp.  29-32.

2  Cf.  Mahaim,  Les  Abonnements  d'ouvriers,  p.  170.

2h


466  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

small  number  of  elementary  parts,  when  combined  in  different
ways,  make  up  nearly  all  the  wholes.  Consequently,  the  range
of  movements  open  to  workmen  helping  to  produce  any  given
article,  while  "  narrowed  as  regards  the  power  of  interchange
among  themselves  is,  as  a  rule,  widened  as  regards  the  power
of  interchange  with  those  performing  corresponding  processes
of  other  trades."  ^  As  M.  de  Eousiers  well  observes  :  "  More
and  more  the  constantly  developing  applications  of  machinery
are  approximating  the  type  of  the  mechanic  to  that  of  the
shop  assistant.  The  shop  assistant  passes  readily  from  one
kind  of  commerce  to  another,  from  drapery  to  provisions,  from
fancy  goods  to  furniture,  so  much  so  that,  at  the  present  time,
retail  shopkeeping,  in  the  hands  of  men  of  superior  ability,  is
no  longer  confined  to  one  or  another  single  branch,  but  takes
on  the  form  of  the  large  general  store.  Manufacture  cannot
yet  pretend  to  so  large  a  range,  but,  just  as  an  assistant  passes
easily  from  one  counter  to  another,  so  the  workman  passes
easily  from  the  supervision  of  one  machine  to  the  supervision
of  another  machine,  from  the  loom  to  bootmaking,  from  paper-
making  to  spinning,  and  so  forth."  ^  In  like  manner,  the  same
persons,  at  different  times,  may  be  found  at  match-box  making,
hopping,  step-cleaning  and  hawking;  and  the  Poor  Law
Commissioners'  investigators  "  found  a  tailoress  working
at  bookbinding,  a  jam  girl  at  screws,  and  a  machinist
giving  pianoforte  lessons  at  Is.  an  hour."^  In  these  develop-
ments there  is  evidence  of  great  versatility.  Specialised
technical  skill  is  coming  to  play  a  smaller  part  in  in-
dustrial operations,  relatively  to  general  capacity,  than  it
used  to  do ;  and  this  means  that  the  costs  of  the  new
training  required  to  enable  a  workman  to  move  from  one
occupation  to  another  are  becoming  smaller.  It  should  be
added  that,  in  so  far  as  people's  estimate  of  the  cost  of  new
training  is  greater  than  the  actual  cost,  it  is  the  estimated
cost  that  is  relevant  to  mobility;  and,  therefore,  if  they  come
to  realise  that  the  estimate  has  been  excessive,  mobility  is

*  Llewellyn  Smith,  The  MoMUty  of  Labour,  p.  19.

2  La  Question  ouvrUre  en  Angleterre,  p.  334.     Cf.  also  Marshall,  Principles
of  Economics,  pp.  207  and  258.

3  lieport  of  tlie  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  p.  406.  •


CH.  IX  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LABOUR  46*7

increased.  There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  the  experience  of
the  war  has  taught  people  that  specialised  skill  can  be  gained
more  easily  and  quickly  than  used  to  be  supposed.''

So  far,  we  have  spoken  of  movement  between  places
and  movement  between  occupations  separately.  But,  of
course,  in  the  concrete,  movement  from  one  occupation  to
another  may  well  necessitate,  at  the  same  time,  movement
from  one  place  to  another.  Hence,  the  aggregate  costs  of
movement  from  one  occupation  to  another  are  kept  low,
when  kindred  occupations,  in  which  the  fluctuations  of
demand  for  labour  more  or  less  compensate  one  sfnother,
are  carried  on  in  the  same  neighbourhood.  This  is  one
of  the  advantages  of  the  cottage  industries  of  the  country
districts  of  India,  where  for  three  months  of  the  year  agricul-
ture is  almost  at  a  standstill ; "  and  also  of  recent  extensions
of  small  holdings  and  allotments,  to  which  workpeople
can  resort  during  temporary  unemployment  in  their  main
industry.  The  reduction  of  costs  is  still  greater  when  the
complementary  occupations  are  conducted  in  the  same  estab-
lishment. It  is,  therefore,  especially  interesting  to  read  in
a  Board  of  Trade  Report  issued  shortly  before  the  war:
"  The  more  competent  and  thoughtful  employers  endeavour
to  overcome  the  natural  fluctuations  of  the  seasons  by
superior  organisation.  With  the  manufacture  of  jam  and
marmalade  they  combine  the  making  of  sweets  and  the  potting
of  meats.  They  thus  occupy  the  time  of  the  majority  of  their
employees.  An  artificial  florist,  employing  over  two  hundred
girls  and  women  in  a  trade  which  occupies  six  months  of  the
year,  has  introduced  a  second  trade,  the  preparing  of  quills  for
hat-trimming,  and  now  the  workers  are  employed  all  the  year
round.  In  Luton,  where  the  staple  trade  is  straw-hat  making,
and  where  work  is  always  slack  during  six  months  of  the  year,
felt-hat  making  has  been  introduced  ;  and  it  is  now  very  usual
to  find  the  two  trades  carried  on  by  the  same  firm,  employing
the  same  workpeople  at  different  periods  of  the  year."  ^    Some-

*  Cf.  Cannan,  The  Beorganisaium  of  Industry  (Baskin  CMlege),  Series  iii.
p.  11.

*  Cf.  Muekerjee,  Zft«  Foundations  of  Indian  Economics,  p.  323.
3  Cost  of  Living  of  the  Working  Classes  [Cd.  3864],  p.  284.


468  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  in

times,  no  doubt,  arrangements  of  this  kind  are  introduced
from  philanthropic  motives.  But  there  is  also  a  powerful
motive  of  a  purely  self-regarding  character  at  work  in  the
same  direction.  It  is  clearly  cheaper  for  one  factory  to  work
all  the  year  round  than  for  two  to  be  built  to  work,  one  in
one  part  and  the  other  in  another  part  of  the  year  ;  and  the
gain  in  cheapness  is  particularly  great  when  the  plant  and
equipment  are  elaborate  and  costly.  Hence,  whenever  it  is
practicable,  it  is  to  the  interest  of  employers  to  adapt  their
factories — if  they  are  engaged  in  seasonal  production — to  the
manufacture  of  a  series  of  different  things  so  arranged  that
there  is  work  to  do  at  some  of  them  in  every  part  of  the  year.
Anything  that  facilitates  the  adoption  among  employers  of
this  policy  necessarily  reduces  the  effective  costs  of  movement
to  labour.

^11.  In  the  preceding  sections  we  have  permitted  our-
selves certain  refinements  of  analysis.  Turning  back  to  coarser
matters,  we  may  conclude  generally  that  workpeople's  move-
ments away  from  their  present  occupation  to  other  occupations
offering  a  higher  wage,  and,  therefore,  presumably  yielding  a
larger  value  of  marginal  net  product,  are  often  impeded  by
considerable  costs ;  and  that  workpeople's  movements  from
their  present  locality  to  other  and  distant  countries,  particularly
if  these  are  separated  off  by  strong  barriers  of  race,  religion  and
language,  may  often  be  similarly  impeded.  But,  so  far  as  the
forms  of  cost  hitherto  discussed  are  concerned,  workpeople's
movements  to  other  parts  of  their  native  land,  at  all  events  in  a
small  country  such  as  England,  will,  in  general,  only  be  impeded
by  small  costs.  There  remains,  however,  a  peculiar  form  of
cost  obstructing  movements  from  certain  places  to  certain  other
places,  which  may  be  large  even  in  a  country  like  England.
This  cost  arises  out  of  the  fact  that  husband,  wife  and  young
children  generally  live  together.  Because  of  this  the  movement
of  one  member  of  the  family  implies  the  movement  of  the  others,
and  the  movement  of  the  others  may  carry  with  it  a  large  loss
by  cutting  off  the  wages  that  they  have  hitherto  been  able  to
earn.  This  loss  is  really  a  part  of  the  cost  of  movement  of
the  member  of  the  family  who  is  tempted  by  higher  wages
to    move    elsewhere.     For   example,   the   men   workers   in   a


CH.  IX  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LABOUR  469

district  where  there  are  opportunities  for  their  women  folk  to
earn  wages  might  know  that  they  themselves  could  earn  more
in  other  districts  where  these  opportunities  do  not  exist.
But,  in  reckoning  up  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of
movement,  they  would  need  to  count  as  a  true  cost  the  pro-
spective loss  of  their  women  folk's  contribution.  This  cost
may  be  very  large  and,  consequently,  may  make  possible  wide
differences  in  the  values  of  the  marginal  net  products,  and
therefore  in  the  wages,  of  labour  of  a  given  grade  in  two
districts  of  the  same  small  country.  As  Dr.  Marshall  has  well
observed :  "The  family  is,  in  the  main,  a  single  unit  as  regards
geographical  migration ;  and,  therefore,  the  wages  of  men  are
relatively  high,  and  those  of  women  and  children  low,  where
heavy  iron  or  other  industries  preponderate,  while  in  some
other  districts  less  than  half  the  money  income  of  the  family
is  earned  by  the  father,  and  men's  wages  are  relatively  low."  ^  It
is  evident  that  all  improvements  in  the  speed  and  all  cheapening
in  the  cost  of  passenger  transport,  to  which  reference  was  made
in  an  earlier  section,  because  they  make  it  possible  for  different
members  of  a  family,  while  living  together,  to  work  in  places
more  widely  separated  from  one  another,  wiU  mitigate  the
injury  to  the  distribution  of  labour  for  which  this  kind  of  cause
is  responsible.

§  1 2.  In  addition  to  ignorance  and  costs  there  remains  the
third  'cause  of  error  in  the  distribution  of  labour  which  was
distinguished  in  §  1,  namely,  artificial  restrictions  upon  move-
ment  imposed  from  without  These  restrictions  may  assume
any  number  of  different  forms.  For  example,  until  the  end  of
the  eighteenth  century  "  place  mobility"  was  seriously  obstructed
by  the  law  of  settlement,  which,  in  order  to  prevent  workpeople
born  in  one  part  of  the  country  from  becoming  "  chargeable  "  on
the  rates  of  another  part,  greatly  limited  their  right  to  move.
"  It  was  often  more  difficult,"  Adam  Smith  wrote,  "  for  a  poor
man  to  pass  the  artificial  boundary  of  a  parish  than  an  arm  of
the  sea  or  a  ridge  of  high  mountains,"  Again,  at  the  present
day,  mobility  between  occupations  is,  in  some  industries,
considerably  impeded  by  the  demarcation  rules  of  Trade
Unions — rules  which   attempt   to   reserve  particular  jobs  to

*  Principles  of  Economics,  footnote  to  p.  715.


470  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

workers  at  a  particular  trade,  and  forbid,  under  threat  of  a
strike,  their  being  undertaken  by  other  tradesmen.  A
bricklayer,  for  example,  is  not  allowed  by  his  union  to  do
stone-mason's  work,  or  a  pattern-maker  to  do  joiner's  work.
Nor  can  a  man  easily  escape  this  kind  of  obstacle  by
changing  his  union.  For,  apart  from  affiliation  arrangements
among  kindred  unions,  if  he  tries  to  do  this,  "and  is  not
blocked  by  rules  about  apprenticeship,  he  will  be  penalised  by
the  immediate  loss  of  unemployed  and  other  benefit,  and  he  is
not  for  some  time  qualified  for  the  trade  union  benefit  of  the
trade  into  which  he  transfers  his  labour."  ^  This  difficulty  is
of  real  importance,  and  it  is  one  which,  whether  by  the
development  of  industrial  unionism,  as  exemplified  by  the
National  Union  of  Railway  Workers,  alongside  of  craft  union-
ism, or  by  some  system  of  affiliation,  both  among  the  craft
unions  themselves  and  between  the  craft  unions  and  unions
of  unskilled  workers,  the  leaders  of  the  Labour  movement  will
need  before  long  to  face.  Probably,  however,  the  most  serious
artificial  restrictions  that  are  current  in  modern  times  are
certain  traditin.na  and_customs.  which  obstruct  and  practically
prevent  labour  power,  when  embodied  in  a  particular  type  of
person,  from  flowing  to  channels  where  similar  labour  power,
embodied  in  other  types  of  persons,  is  yielding  a  more  valuable
marginal  net  product  than  is  obtainable  in  the  channels  to
which  all  labour  has  free  access.  In  some  countries  traditions
and  customs  of  this  sort  relate  to  industrial  occupations  open
to  workpeople  of  different  race  and  colour.  But  their  most
important  action — at  all  events,  so  far  as  Europe  is  concerned —
is  in  the  sphere  of  women's  work.  There  are  a  number  of
occupations  in  which  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product,
and,  therefore,  the  wage,  of  women's  work  would,  if  women  were
admitted  to  them,  be  larger  than  it  is  in  occupations  where
they  are  in  fact  engaged ;  but  they  are  excluded  from  these
occupations  by  tradition  and  custom.  When  new  occupations
such  as  the  working  of  typewriters  and  telephones  are  intro-
duced, or  when  old  occupations  are  transformed  by  the
introduction  of  new  types  of  machinery,  women  are,  indeed,
generally  offered  a  free  field.     But  in  occupations  which  men

'  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  p.  398.


CH.  IX  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LABOUR  471

have  for  a  long  time  been  accustomed  to  regard  as  their  own,
even  though  under  present  conditions  women  could  adequately
pursue  them,  tradition  and  custom  frequently  exercise  a
powerful  excluding  influence.  The  best  known  occupations  in
which  such  exclusion  still  prevails  in  fact,  if  not  in  form,  are
the  two  branches  of  the  legal  profession.  Waiting  in  restaurants
and  railway  clerical'  work  were  also,  until  a  year  or  two  ago,
notable  instances.  The  entrance  of  women  into  these  occupa-
tions, prior  to  1914,  was  hindered,  as  Mr.  Cannan  observes,
"  not  so  much  by  law  as  by  the  inertia  of  employers  and  their
fear  of  inconvenience  from  the  active  resistance  of  the  men
employed  at  present."  ^  This  kind  of  resistance  may  be  broken
down  by  a  world-shattering  event  like  the  Great  War,  but
the  difficulty  with  which  it  was  overcome  in  1915—16,  even
in  munition -making  trades,  is  witness  to  its  strength.  It  is
probable  that  employers  do  not  battle  with  it  so  strongly  as
they  otherwise  might  do,  because  women  workers  are  liable  to
leave  after  a  little  while  on  getting  married.  As  one  employer
put  it :  "  There  are  many  jobs  one  might  teach  women  to  do,
but  it  does  not  seem  worth  while  to  risk  a  quarrel  with  the
men  when  you  know  that  the  brighter  a  girl  is,  the  more  likely
she  is  to  go  off  and  get  married  just  as  she  is  beginning  to  be
of  some  use."  ^  The  men's  opposition  can,  indeed,  be  modified
by  a  stringent  rule  that  women  shall  be  paid  equal  wages  with
men  of  equal  efficiency ;  for,  when  this  rule  exists,  the  men  are
less  afraid  of  losing  their  jobs.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  when
this  rule  is  insisted  upon,  either  by  the  State,  or,  as  in  ordinary
times  is  more  likely  to  happen,  by  the  men,  and  when  it  means
that  women  in  the  industry  affected  must  be  paid  more  than
similar  women  earn  in  the  generality  of  industries,  a  strong
motive,  which  employers  would  otherwise  have,  for  fighting
against  the  tradition  that  excludes  them,  is  removed.  The  rule
of  equal  pay  for  equal  efficiency  is,  in  these  circumstances,
though  not,  of  course,  in  all  circumstances,  itself  an  artificial
barrier — a  second  line  of  defence  set  up  by  the  men  when  attempts
at  direct  exclusion  are  overcome — to  save  them  from  being
ousted  by  women  from  occupations  in  which  it  is  to  the  general

1  Cannan,   Wealth,  p.  206.
2  The  Round  Table,  March  1916,  p.  275.


472  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

interest  that  women  should  be  employed  exclusively  instead  of
them.  Women  who  support  the  claim  for  equal  pay  for  equal
efficiency  in  industries  where  this  rate  of  pay  affords  them
more  than  normal  women's  earnings,  are  really  fighting  at  once
against  the  general  advantage  and  against  their  own  cause.  A
better  understanding  by  women  workers  of  what  their  proper
interest  is,  no  less  than  a  diminution  of  sex  jealousy  on  the  part
of  men  workers,  is  wanted,  if  the  most  advantageous  distribu-
tion of  women  workers  among  the  industrial  occupations  which
they  are  qualified  to  undertake  is  to  be  secured.^

^  13.  "We  have  now  studied  in  some  detail  the  principal
causes  that  make  the  distribution  of  labour  diverge  from  the
most  advantageous  distribution.  All  these  causes  alike  work
against  the  maximising  of  the  national  dividend,  and  it  might,
therefore,  seem  at  first  sight  that,  if  the  deflection  of  labour
distribution  for  which  they  are  responsible  were  overcome,
the  national  dividend  would  necessarily  be  increased.  This
conclusion,  however,  ignores  the  fact  that  there  are  three
distinct  and  different  methods  by  which  this  deflection  can  be
overcome.  The  obstacles  in  the  way  of  a  nearer  approach
to  what  may  be  called  the  ideal  distribution  may  crumble
from  within,  or  they  may  be  'pulled  down  at  public  cost,  or
they  may  be  left  as  they  are  and  leapt  over.  The  effects  of
these  three  methods  of  overcoming  them  are  not  the  same,
but  require  separate  investigation.

§  14.  When  it  is  said  that  obstacles  to  ideal  distribution
crumble  from  within,  it  is  meant  that  information  and  the
means  of  movement  are  supplied  more  cheaply  to  workpeople,
or  that  traditions  hostile  to  movement  are  weakened,  through
the  general  progress  of  ideas,  the  introduction  of  large  scale
organisation  into  the  machinery  of  mobility,  or  in  other  such
ways.  The  essence  of  the  matter  is  that  the  real  costs  to
the  community  as  a  whole  of  providing  information  and
transport,  and  not  merely  the  expenses  charged  to  particular
workpeople  purchasing  these  facilities,  are  lessened.  When
this  happens,  the  actual  distribution  of  labour  will,  generally
speaking,  be  brought  closer  to  the  ideal  distribution.  It  is
true  that,  if  the  obstacle  whose  magnitude  is  diminished  is

>  Cf.  post.  Chapter  XIII.  §  9.


cH.  IX  DISTKIBTJTION  OF  LABOUK  473

costs  of  movement  or  tradition,  this  does  not  necessarily
happen.  For,  as  was  pointed  out  in  Part  II.  Chapter  III.,
increased  freedom  to  move  may,  when  knowledge  is  imperfect,
lead  to  movement  in  the  wrong  direction.  Thus,  it  is  some-
times an  open  question  whether  a  mere  cheapening  of  the
costs  of  travel  to  workpeople,  unaccompanied  by  any  other
change,  will  have  a  beneficial  effect ;  though,  of  course,  it  is
never  an  open  question  whether  cheapening,  coupled  with
intelligent  direction  to  specific  vacancies,  will  have  such
an  effect.  That  this  point  is  now  winning  general  recogni-
tion is  suggested  by  the  fact  that,  in  England,  travelling
benefit,  originally  paid  out  by  Trade  Unions  indiscriminately
to  all  members  in  search  of  work,  is  now  mainly  used  to
enable  selected  members  to  reach  places  in  which  work  has
actually  been  found  for  them ;  by  tl^e  fact  that  the  British
Labour  Exchanges  Act  contains  a  clause  permitting  the
Exchanges,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Treasury,  to
authorise  advances,  by  way  of  loan,  towards  the  expenses
of  workpeople  travelling  to  definite  situations ;  and  finally,
by  the  fact  that,  in  Grermany,  the  Exchanges  provide  cheap
railway  tickets,  not  to  work-seekers  in  general,  but  to  those
only  for  whom  they  have  found  definite  situations.^  The
difficulty  thus  exemplified  is  an  important  one.  There
would,  however,  be  no  dispute  among  economists  that,  with
the  organisation  of  knowledge  concerning  industrial  conditions
developed  to  the  point  at  which  it  stands  in  modern  civilised
States,  a  reduction  in  the  costs  of  movement,  or  a  breach  in
traditions  of  exclusion,  would,  on  the  whole  and  in  general,
cause  the  distribution  of  labour  to  approach  more  closely
towards  the  ideal.  In  so  far  as  it  has  this  effect,  it  must
also  increase  the  national  dividend."

'  Report  of  the  RoycU  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laicg,  p.  401.

2  To  make  our  discussion  complete,  it  is  desirable  to  add  here  that  the
increase  in  the  national  dividend  may,  if  information  about  vacancies  is  pro-
vided, not  merely  to  the  workpeople  who  are  unemployed  at  one  place,  but  to
all  the  workpeople   there,    be   accompanied,  not   by  a   decrease,   but   by  an
increase  in  the  volume  of  unemployment.     Mr.  Jackson  has  observed,  in  his   /%
discussion  of  boy  labour,  that  the  very  fact  that  boys  can  secure  a  new  job     j
with  ease  makes  them  abandon  jobs  light-heartedly  (Jiepoit  on  Boy  Labour,  p.  _^
14),   and  Mr.    Heath  has   suggested   that    the  development   of  Employment  \,jW^^
Exchanges  in  Germany  increased  the  extent  to  which  men  were  employed  for


474  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

§  15.  When  it  is  said  that  obstacles  to  ideal  distribution
are  pulled  down  at  public  expense,  it  is  meant  that  information
or  the  means  of  movement  are  supplied  more  cheaply  to
workpeople,  not  because  the  real  costs  have  been  reduced,
but  because  a  part  of  these  costs  has  been  transferred  to
the  shoulders  of  the  tax -payers.  This  form  of  cheapening
and   that   discussed  in  the  preceding    section    do    not    react

short  periods  (^Economic  Journal,  1910,  p.  345).  Plainly,  the  greater  number
of  people  who  fall  out  of  old  jobs  may  have  more  effect  in  increasing
unemployment  than  the  greater  speed  with  which  new  jobs  are  found  has  in
diminishing  it.

Let  us  suppose  there  is  no  conventional*  element  in  wage  rates  anywhere,
so  that  anybody,  by  staying  where  he  is,  could  get  employment  at  sovie
wage  ;  and  that  some  new  arrangement  is  introduced  which  shortens  the
average  time  required  to  move  from  one  job  to  another.

Let  the  loss  of  earnings  resulting  from  the  time  occupied  in  movement  from
A  to  B  be  equivalent,  before  ^hat  time  is  lessened,  to  a  diminution  of  the  wage
byC.

After  the  time  is  lessened,  let  it  be  equivalent  to  a  diminution  by  C  (1  -  h).
Then  the  actual  quantity  of  unemployment  that  takes  place  is,  before  the
improvement,  mC  times  the  number  of  men  displaced  from  A,  and,  after  the
improvement,  viG  (1  -  h)  times  the  number  displaced.

Let  the  wage  in  both  A  and  B  stand  originally  at  W  ;  and  let  the  wage  in
B  be  raised  somehow  to  a  level  W  +  g.

In  these  circumstances,  before  the  time  required  for  movement  is  shortened,
the  wage  in  A  will  be  raised  to  (W  +  g  —  C)  ;  after  the  time  is  shortened,  to
{W+g-C(l-/0}.

Let  7)  be  the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  labour  at  A,  and  k  a  constant.  Then
the  number  displaced  at  A,  before  the  time  is  shortened


after  the  time  is  shortened


-{^}.;


.  •.  the  unemployment  involved  before  the  time  is  shortened
after  the  time  is  shortened

=»o(i-.),fe-ca-^)(,,

.-.   the  excess  of  unemployment  after  the  improvement,   over  that  before  the
improvement,

=  ^[(1  -  ^)  {?  -  C(l  -  h)}  -  {(q  -  C)}]k.

This  is  positive  or  negative,  according  as  {C(2  -h)  -q}  is  positive  or  negative.
That  is  to  say,  an  improvement  in  mobility  is  more  likely  to  diminish  unemploy-
ment, (1)  the  larger  are  the  fluctuations  that  start  movement,  (2)  the  smaller
was  the  cost  of  movement  before  the  improvement,  and  (3)  the  larger  is  the
reduction  of  this  cost  consequent  on  the  improvement.


CH.  IX  DISTEIBUTION  OF  LABOUR  475

in  the  same  way  upon  the  relative  values  of  marginal  net
products  at  different  points  and,  therewith,  upon  the  magni-
tude of  the  national  dividend.  For  this  kind  of  cheapening
implies  that  a  greater  quantity  of  resources  is  invested  in
the  work  of  securing  knowledge  and  effecting  movement  than
would  normally  be  devoted  to  that  work.  It  implies,  in  fact,
that  a  particular  form  of  investment  is  being  stimulated  by
means  of  a  bounty.  Economic  analysis,  however,  warns  us
that,  as  a  general  rule,  bounties  lead  to  economic  waste.
There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  such  waste  actually  occurs,
to  some  extent,  as  a  result  of  the  system  of  artificially
cheapened  workmen's  tickets  operated  by  the  Belgian  railways.
The  following  passage  from  Dr.  Mahaim's  interesting  mono-
graph is  strongly  suggestive  of  this  conclusion :  "  A  villa
had  to  be  built  in  the  suburbs  of  Li6ge,  where,  assuredly,  there
was  no  lack  of  labour.  The  contract  was  secured  by  a  builder
from  Nivelles.  He  employed  exclusively  Brabant  work-
people, who  came  in,  some  every  day  and  some  every  Monday,
Not  one  iota  of  the  general  labour  required  was  executed
by  Li^ge  men,"  ^  There  are  other  passages  of  like  effect,  sug-
gesting that  the  bounty — for  such  in  substance  it  is — which
the  State  pays  upon  workmen's  tickets  tempts  employers
in  one  place,  when  they  are  given  work  to  do  in  another,
to  have  workmen  transported  there,  despite  the  fact  that
suitable  labour  could  be  found  for  the  job  in  the  place
where  it  has  to  be  done.  This  leads  to  something  very
like  a  double  transference  of  gold,  instead  of  the  use  of
bills  of  exchange,  in  the  settlement  of  the  accounts  of
international  trade — a  process  that  is  necessarily  wasteful
to  the  community  as  a  whole,  whether  or  no  the  fiscal
arrangements  in  vogue  make  it  wasteful  to  the  individuals
undertaking  it.  As  was  shown,  however,  in  Chapters  VI,
and  VIII.  of  Part  II.,  the  presumption  thus  established  against
the  grant  of  a  bounty  to  any  industry  may  be  overthrown,
if  there  is  reason  to  believe  that,  in  the  absence  of  a  bounty,
investment  in  that  industry  would  not  be  carried  far  enough
to  bring  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources
employed  in  it  down  to  the  general  level.  Partly  because
*  Lei  Abomiements  cTouvriers,  p.  157.


476  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


PT.  Ill


the  industry  of  promoting  the  mobility  of  workpeople  yields  a
product  difficult  to  sell  satisfactorily  for  fees,  it  is  one  about
which  there  is  reason  to  believe  this.  Consequently,  up  to  a
point,  it  is  probable  that  the  expenditure  of  public  money  in
improving  mobility  would  make  the  values  of  the  marginal  net
products  of  resources  in  different  occupations  more  equal,  and
so  would  increase  the  national  dividend.  It  is  necessary,
however,  for  the  State  to  watch  this  expenditure  carefully ;
for,  if  it  is  carried  too  far,  though  it  will  yield  a  benefit  in  the
matter  of  unemployment,  that  benefit  will  be  at  the  expense
of  more  than  equivalent  injury  to  the  aggregate  output  of  the
nation's  industry.

§  16.  When  it  is  said  that  obstacles  to  ideal  distribution
are  leapt  over,  it  is  meant  that  ignorance,  costs  of  movement
and  tradition  remain  unaltered,  but  that,  in  spite  of  their
existence,  the  distribution  of  labour  is  somehow  forced
towards  what  it  would  have  been  if  they  did  not  exist.
This  may  be  done  by  the  compulsory  removal  of  workpeople,
or  more  probably,  as  will  be  explained  in  Chapter  XIII.  §  5,
by  certain  forms  of  authoritative  interference  with  wage  rates.
The  way  in  which  it  is  done  is  not,  however,  important  for
our  present  problem.  What  we  wish  to  ascertain  is  the
effect  on  the  national  dividend  of  an  "  improvement "  in
the  distribution  of  labour  brought  about  in  spite  of
the  continued  existence  of  ^obstacles.  This  effect  is  different
with  different  obstacles.  A  redistribution  of  labour  more
conformable  to  ideal  distribution,  which  is  brought  about
in  spite  of  opposing  ignorance  or  tradition,  necessarily
augments  the  national  dividend.  For  the  defiance  of  these
obstacles  involves  no  expense,  and  so  leads  to  exactly  the
same  consequences  as  would  be  produced  by  their  crumbling
from  within.  But  the  result  is  different  with  a  redistribution
brought  about  in  spite  of  opposing  "costs  of  movement."
For,  when  the  obstacles  to  movement  which  these  costs
present  are  overborne,  the  costs  themselves  are  by  that
very  process  incurred.  Thus,  defiance  does  involve  expense,
and  leads  to  the  same  consequences  as  would  be  produced
if  the'  obstacle  were  piUled  down  at  public  cost.  That  is
to   say,  there   is  a   general  presumption  that   it  will   injure


CH.  IX  DISTEIBUTION  OF  LABOUK  477

the  national  dividend,  but  there    are   grounds  for   believing
that  this  presumption  is,  within  certain  limits,  reversed.^

'  This  conclosion  involves  the  verbally  inconvenient  result  that  the  idtal
distribution  of  labour,  when  brought  about  in  certain  ways,  is  not  the  best
possible  distribution.  Confusion  wiU  be  avoided,  however,  if  we  recollect  that
the  distribution  we  have  called  ideal,  namely,  that  which  makes  the  values
of  the  marginal  net  products  of  labour  everywhere  equal,  is  only  ideal  in  an
absolute  sense.  It  is  the  best  distribution  accessible  to  a  man  who  has  un-
limited power  over  all  relevant  circumstances,  and  can,  therefore,  at  will
abolish  costs  of  movement.  But  it  is  not  the  best  distribution  accessible
to  one  who  must  accept  the  costs  of  movement  as  brute  fact,  and  has,  there-
fore, to  aim  at  maximisiog  the  national  dividend  subject  to  that  limiting
condition.


CHAPTEE    X

UNEMPLOYMENT    VERSUS  SHORT   TIME

§  1.  The  general  analysis  of  the  preceding  chapter  has  an
important  bearing  upon  a  problem  from  which  it  seems  at
first  sight  to  be  remote.  This  problem  is  to  determine  the
comparative  effects  on  the  national  dividend  of  the  principal
ways  which  are  open  to  employers  for  meeting  periods  of
depression.  When,  in  consequence  of  lessened  demand  for
his  product,  an  employer  finds  that  a  continuance  of  output
on  his  former  scale  will  involve  him  in  loss,  he  can  accomplish
the  necessary  reduction  in  any  one  of  three  ways;  (1)  by
working  full  time  and  dismissing  a  part  of  his  staff;  (2)  by
working  full  time  and  retaining  his  whole  staiBf,  but  rotating
employment  so  that  only  a  proportion  (say  2/3rds)  is  actually
at  work  at  any  one  time;  or  (3)  by  working  short  time  and
putting  the  whole  of  his  staff  to  work  during  the  whole  of  the
working  period.

§  2.  As  between  the  short  time  plan  and  both  the  others
the  relevant  influences  are  primarily  technical.  Eesort  to
the  short  time  plan  is  easiest  when  the  conditions  are  such
that  an  appreciable  advantage  can  be  gained  by  cutting  down
the  most  expensive  hours  of  work,  those,  for  example,  that
involve  extra  charges  for  lighting  and  heating.  But  one  or
other  of  the  rival  plans  is  favoured  when  much  expensive
machinery  is  employed  and  it  is  practicable,  by  spreading
labour  more  sparsely,  to  keep  the  whole  of  this  going  with  a
reduced  staff.

§  3.  As  between  the  dismissal  plan  and  both  the
others  the  issue  depends  to  a  large  extent  upon  how
important   it   is    to   an   employer   to  maintain   a   lien  upon

478


CH.  X    UNEMPLOYMENT    VERSUS  SHOET  TIME     479

the  services  of  the  people  who  have  so  far  been  working  for
him.  When  the  work  to  be  done  is  skilled  and  specialised,
it  is  often  very  important  for  him  to  do  this.  Workpeople
possessed  of  special  aptitudes  practically  always  acquire  special
value  to  the  particular  firms  which  have  employed  them  for  any
length  of  time.  This  is  partly  because  the  detailed  methods
of  different  factories  are  diflferent,  and,  therefore,  workmen
who  have  become  accustomed  to  any  given  factory,  particularly
if  the  work  they  have  to  do  in  it  is  of  an  all-round  kind,  are
more  useful  there  than  other  similar  workmen  would  be.  It
is  partly  also  because  skilled  workmen  often  handle  expensive
materials  or  delicate  machinery,  and  employers  naturally
prefer  to  entrust  these  things  to  men  of  whose  qualities  they
have  had  continuing  experience.  And  finally,  among  firms
making  certain  proprietary  articles,  it  is  partly  because  work-
men may  be  expected  after  a  time  to  get  an  inkling  of  their
firm's  manufacturing  secrets,  and  the  firm  is,  therefore,  unwill-
ing to  let'  them  enter  the  service  of  its  rivals.^  Thus,  "  among
goldsmiths  and  jewellers  the  masters  share  work  among  a
permanent  staff,  since  there  are  many  secret  and  special
patterns,  and  adjust  production  by  overtime  for  short  periods."  ^
In  like  manner,  employers  are  keenly  anxious  to  retain  a  lien
on  the  services  of  engine-drivers,  domestic  servants  and
specialised  agricultural  labourers.'  Even  when  the  work  to
be  done  is  of  such  a  sort  that  a  man  who  has  been  employed
before  with  a  particular  firm  is  not  appreciably  more  valuable
to  that  firm  than  one  who  has  not,  an  employer  in  bad
times,  who  knows,  or  hopes,  that  things  will  improve,  will  like
to  keep  in  touch  with  more  men  than  he  needs  at  the  moment,
so  as  to  make  sure  that  enough  will  be  available  later  on.
This  consideration  is  especially  likely  to  influence  employers
in  industries  where  the  fluctuations  are  known  to  be  seasonal ;
for  in  these  industries  there  is  practical  certainty  that  a  full
staff  wUl  be  needed  again  shortly.  It  has  been  suggested
that  seasonality  of  this  kind  is  partly  responsible  for  the
prevalence  of  the  short  time  method  in  coal-mining  and  in
agriculture.       Moreover,    even    when    employers,    if    left    to

,  ^  Cf.  Fay,  Co-part7iership  in  Industry,  p.  90.

2  Webb,  Seascmal  Trades,  p.  43.  3  ji{^^  p_  23.


480  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  hi

themselves,  would  tend  to  the  dismissal  method,  trade  unions,
which  naturally  dislike  that  method  because  it  involves  them
in  a  larger  burden  of  unemployment  benefit,  sometimes  sway
them  in  favour  of  one  or  other  of  the  rival  plans.

^  4.  In  this  choice  between  the  dismissal  plan  and  the
other  two,  another  very  important  factor  is  the  degree
of  accuracy  with  which  wages  are  adjusted  to  efficiency.
When  the  payment  normally  made  to  inferior  workers  is
higher  relatively  to  their  efficiency  than  that  made  to  better
workers,  there  is  a  strong  inducement  to  employers  to  meet
bad  times  by  dispensing  with  the  least  profitable  part  of  their
staff.  It  is,  thus,  natural  to  find  that  the  dismissal  method
is  relatively  dominant  in  time-wage  industries  as  compared
with  piece-wage  industries.  Discussing  the  principal  ways  in
which  a  slackness  of  demand  is  met  in  this  country.  Sir  H.
Llewellyn  Smith  once  wrote:  "Looking  at  the  question
broadly,  we  may  distinguish  two  main  methods.  The  first
general  method  is  by  short  time,  or  short  work,  for  all-  or  the
majority  of  those  employed.  A  good  example  of  that  is
mining,  in  which,  for  the  most  part,  the  contractions  do  not
result  so  much  in  throwing  out  a  certain  number  of  colliers
altogether,  but  in  the  colliery  working  a  smaller  number  of
days  per  week.  Another  example  would  be  the  boot  and
shoe  trade  (I  mean  apart,  for  the  moment,  from  the  great
factories  where  machinery  is  used,  but  where  it  is  carried  on
on  the  ordinary  piece-work  system),  in  which  in  slack  times
there  are  not  many  people  entirely  unemployed,  but  a  very
large  number  of  people  will  have  a  short  amount  of  work.
The  second  method,  which  applies  in  other  industries,  is  not
by  working  short  time,  but  by  throwing  out  of  work  a  certain
proportion  of  the  workers,  who  form  a  fluctuating  margin  of
unemployed.  Examples  of  such  trades  are  the  building,
engineering  and  shipbuilding  trades.  I  do  not  mean  to  say
there  is  not  short  time  known  in  any  of  those  trades,  or  that
overtime  is  not  worked  in  times  of  inflation ;  but,  the  main
method  by  which  they  adjust  themselves  to  a  change  in  de-
mand is  by  throwing  out  workers  or  taking  on  more  workers."^

*  Third  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Distress  from   Ward  of  Employiruntf
Evidence,  Q.  4540.


CH.  X    UNEMPLOYMENT    VERSUS  SHOET  TIME     481

An  examination  of  the  industries  mentioned  in  this  passage,
shows  that  those,  (which  Sir  H.  Llewellyn  Smith  classes
among  the  short-time  industries,  are  just  those  in  which
piece-wages  predominate,  while  those,  which  he  classes  as
dismissal  industries,  employ  time-wages.  It  may,  indeed,  be
thought  at  first  glance  that  the  engineering  trade  belies  this
rule.  Though,  however,  this  trade  contains  a  good  deal  of  piece-
work, it  was  until  recently  mainly  a  time-work  trade,  and  so
is  no  exception.^  In  like  manner,  it  is  natural  to  find  that  in
Grermany  where,  before  the  war,  trade  unions  were  relatively
weak,  and  where,  partly  as  a  consequence  of  this,  a  rigid
standard  rate  in  time-wage  industries  was  much  less  effectively
enforced  than  it  was  in  this  country,  the  practice  of  meeting
slack  periods  by  working  short  time,  rather  than  by  a  reduc-
tion of  staff,  was  considerably  more  general.  "  Some  of  the
German  authorities  declare  that  the  practice  of  short  time
in  some  industries  reduces  earnings  by  as  much  as  one-fourth
or  one-third  in  the  course  of  a  year.  It  is  certain  that,
though  certain  British  industries,  notably  coal-mining  and
the  cotton  industry,  resort  to  the  system  of  short  time,  the
extent  to  which  this  system  operates  to  lower  the  figure  of
unemployed  workmen  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  much  less
than  in  the  German  Empire."  ^  I  do  not  wish  to  stress  these
facts  xmduly.  They  seem,  however,  to  illustrate  the  general
tendency  set  out  at  the  beginning  of  this  section.

§  5.  As  between  rotation  of  hands  and  the  two  other  plans
the  dominant  fact  is  that  the  rotation  method  is  troublesome
to  arrange  and  involves  a  good  deal  of  organisation  and  colla-
boration with  the  workpeople.  It  appears  to  prevail  among
**  the  riverside  corn  porters  working  regularly  at  the  Surrey
docks ; "  ^  it  has  been  practised  to  some  extent  among  the  iron-
workers of  the  north  of  England ;  and  it  was  tried,  alongside  of
the  short  time  plan,  in  the  cotton  industry  during  a  part  of
1918.  Yet  again,  as  a  result  of  negotiations  with  the  Tailors'
Trade  Union,  the  Master  Tailors'  Association  announced :
'We  fully  recognise  that  the  work  ought  to  be  fairly  shared

*  Third  Report  of  the  Commitiee  on  Distress  from    Want  of  EmploymeTit,
Evidence,  Q,  4541,  et  seq.

*  Report  on  the  Cost  of  Living  in  Qerman  Towns  [Cd.  4032],  p.  522.-
'  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Law,  p.  1156,  footnote.

2  I


482  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

during  the  slack  seasons  (subject  to  certain  explanations),  and
we  urge  upon  our  members  throughout  the  country  to  carry
these  principles  into  effect."  ^  But,  broadly  speaking,  the
inconvenience  of  this  method  has  not  permitted  it  to  be
adopted  at  all  widely.

§  6.  The  general  result  is  that,  in  the  main  part  of
industry,  depressions  are  met  by  either  the  short  time  method
or  the  dismissal  method,  or  a  mixture  of  the  two.  Professor
Chapman  gives  some  interesting  figures  to  illustrate  the  vary-
ing degrees  in  which  different  textile  industries,  all  employing
the  same  (namely  the  piece  wage)  form  of  wage  payment,
have  adopted  the  two  methods  respectively.  Between
November  1907  and  November  1908  it  appears  that,  in  the
cotton  industry,  among  the  firms  investigated,  a  13 '3  con-
traction of  output  was  met,  to  the  extent  of  5  per  cent  by
reduction  of  staff,  and  to  the  extent  of  8*3  per  cent  by  short
time ;  whereas,  in  the  silk  industry,  an  8*1  per  cent  contraction
of  output  led  to  a  6*2  per  cent  reduction  of  staff  and  2*1  per
cent  short  time.^  As  is  well  known,  the  method  of  short  time
is  dominant  in  coal-mining,  where  it  is  carried  out  by  a  reduc-
tion, in  times  of  depression,  in  the  number  of  shifts  worked
per  week ;  and  the  method  of  dismissal  in  the  building,  ship-
building and  engineering  trades.^

§  7.  Prima  facie  it  would  seem  that,  from  the  standpoint

^  Report  on  Collective  Agreements,  1910,  p.  xxviii.

2  Of.  Chapman,  Uiiemployment  in  Lancashire,  p.  51.  When  a  firm  employs
both  factory  workers  and  home  workers,  it  is,  of  course,  to  its  interest  in  bad
times  to  withdraw  work  from  home  workers  rather  than  to  reduce  factory  work
and  home  work  equally,  because  it  is  thus  enabled  to  keep  its  machinery  going.
It  may  be  added  that  the  power  to  treat  home  workers  in  this  way  indirectly
checks  employers  from  superseding  home  work  altogether  by  factory  work,
because  it  enables  them  to  face  the  prospect  of  periodic  expansions  without  the
need  of  erecting  factories  too  large  for  the  demand  of  ordinary  times.  (Of.  Vessi-
litsky,  The  Home  Worker,  p.  3.)

2  Of  course,  it  is  not  meant  that  in  these  trades  no  short  time  is  known.  On
the  contrary,  even  when  the  dismissal  method  is  adopted  for  contractions  of
work  from  below  the  normal,  what  is,  in  effect,  the  short  time  method  is  always
adopted  to  some  extent  for  contractions  from  above  the  normal.  Thus,  in  the
engineering  trade,  whereas  the  average  amount  of  formal  short  time  is  very
small,  overtime  adds  on  the  average  3|  per  cent  to  the  normal  man's  working
time  (Cd.  2337,  p.  100),  and,  as  against  overtime  working,  normal  hours  are,
of  course,  really  short  time.  All  that  is  meant  is  that  ' '  the  main  method  by
which  these  industries  adjust  themselves  to  a  change  in  demand  is  by  throwing
out  workers  or  taking  on  more  workers"  (Llewellyn  Smith,  Third  Report  of  the
Committee  on  Distress  from  Unemployment,  Evidence,  Q.  4540).


f


cH.  X    UNEMPLOYMENT    VERSUS  SHOKT  TIME     483

of  the  national  dividend,  the  dismissal,  or  reduction  of  staff,
method  is  certain  to  be  more  injurious  than  the  short  time
method,  because  it  reacts  injuriously  on  the  quality  of  those
men  whom  it  condemns  to  longer  or  shorter  periods  of  un-
employment. The  most  obvious  way  in  which  it  does  this  is
through  the  larger  and  more  concentrated  loss  of  individual
earnings,  which  unemployment,  as  compared  with  short  time,
involves.  This  threatens  severe  privation  in  food,  clothing
and  firing,  not  only  to  the  men  directly  affected,  but  also  to
their  wives  and  children.  If  pushed  far  enough,  this  privation
may  easily  lead  to  a  lasting  physical  deterioration.  Nor  is
this  all.  It  may  also  cause  those  who  suffer  from  it  to  supply
their  needs  by  means  which  threaten  a  permanent  weakening
of  moral  fibre.  Iriter  alia,  it  may  lead  to  resort  to  the
Poor  Law ;  for,  as  is  well  known,  the  curve  of  pauperism  in
this  country  follows  about  a  year  behind  the  curve  of  un-
employment.^ Eesort  to  the  Poor  Law,  however,  or  to
vagrancy,  marks,  according  to  some,  a  definite  stage  of  descent.
There  is  a  definite  Line  between  poverty,  where  struggle  and
independence  prevail,  and  pauperism.  "  Paupers  are  not,  as
a  rule,  imhappy.  They  are  not  ashamed ;  they  are  not  keen
to  become  independent ;  they  are  not  bitter  or  discontented.
They  have  passed  over  the  line  which  separates  poverty  from
pauperism."  ^  Again  :  "  the  men  who  enter  the  workhouse  or
go  on  tramp,  leaving  their  families  to  the  Poor  Law,  are,  as
a  rule,  those  whom  adversity,  combined,  no  doubt,  with  their
own  weaknesses,  has  made  no  longer  able-bodied  or  respectable.
Having  once  entered,  they  seldom  return  to  industry  again."  ^
Sir  H.  Llewellj-n  Smith  sums  the  matter  up  thus :  "  It  is,  I
think,  a  definite  induction  from  history  and  observation  that,
when  risk  falls  outside  certain  limits  as  regards  magnitude
and  calculability,  when,  in  short,  it  becomes  what  I  may  call
a  gamblers'  risk,  exposure  thereto  not  only  ceases  to  act  as
a  bracing  tonic,  but  produces  evil  effects  of  a  very  serious

1  The  interval  is  probably  partly  due  to  resistance  made  possible  by  savings,
the  pawning  of  household  goods,  children's  earnings,  eta  ;  partly  to  the  £act  that
a  check  to  the  inflow  of  pau})€rism  will  not  involve  a  diminution  of  pauperism
until  the  inflow  falls  below  the  outflow  brought  about  by  death  and  other  causes.
(Cf.  Beveridge,  Unemployment,  p.  49.)

'  Hunter,  Poverty,  p.  3.  ^  Beveridge,  Unemplmpnent,  p.  50.


484  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  in

kind."  ^  Leroy-Beaulieu  in  like  manner  declares,  and  is  surely
right  in  declaring :  "  It  is  not  the  insufi&ciency  of  pay  which
constitutes,  in  general  and  apart  from  exceptional  cases,  the
social  evil  of  to-day,  but  the  precariousness  of  employment."  ^
Nor  is  it  only  through  the  sense  of  insecurity  that  harm  is
done.  The  mere  fact  of  idleness,  apart  altogether  from  the
privation  by  which  it  is  normally  accompanied,  is  likely,  imless,
indeed,  it  is  mitigated  by  opportunities  for  work  on  land
belonging  to,  or  rented  by  themselves,^  to  exercise  a  seriously
deteriorating  influence — an  influence,  too,  which  grows  rapidly
as  the  amount  of  the  idleness  grows — upon  the  economic  and
general  efliciency  of  those  affected  by  it.  It  is  well  known,
for  instance,  that  drunkenness  is  often  worst  in  times  of  slack
employment.*  The  Eoyal  Commissioners  on  the  Poor  Laws
have  in  evidence :  "  The  enforced  idleness  on  completion  of
a  job  naturally  throws  the  men  upon  their  own  resources,
which  is,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  the  nearest  public-house.
The  frequent  change  from  strenuous  hard  work  to  absolute
indolence  to  men  of  this  character  naturally  tends  to  gradual
moral  and  physical  degeneration,  and  ultimately  the  indi-
viduals become  unfit  for  work,  even  when  opportunity  offers."^
A  large  employer  of  labour  is  reported  to  have  said:  "Between
5  and  6  per  cent  of  my  skilled  men  are  out  of  work  just  now.
During  the  long  spell  of  idleness  any  one  of  these  men  invari-
ably deteriorates.  In  some  cases  the  deterioration  is  very
marked.  The  man  becomes  less  proficient  and  less  capable,
and  the  universal  experience  of  us  all  who  have  to  do  with

1  Economic  Jowrnal,  1910,  p.  518.

2  Repartition  des  richesses,  p.  612.

3  In  Belgium  the  cheapness  of  workmen's  tickets  on  the  railways  enables
many  workers  to  live  in  cottages  with  gardens  attached  to  them,  to  the  cultiva-
tion of  which  they  turn  when  out  of  ordinary  work  (cf.  Rowntree,  Unemploy-
ment, p.  267).

*  Cf.  Charity  Organisation  Committee's  Report  on  Unskilled  Labour,  p.  56.

^  Quoted  in  the  Minority  Report,  p.  1138.  It  should  be  noted,  however,
as  observed  by  Mr.  Beveridge  (p.  47),  that  unemployment  is  correlated  negatively
with  both  the  consumption  of  alcohol  and  the  convictions  for  drunkenness.
The  reason,  no  doubt,  is  that  periods  of  high  unemployment  mean  reduced
wages  also  to  the  employed  and  so  less  drink.  That  this  is,  in  fact,  so  is
well  shown  by  Mr.  A.  D.  Webb  in  an  article  on  "The  Consumption  of
Alcoholic  Liquors  in  the  United  Kingdom"  (^Statistical  Journal,  Jan.  1913).
These  statistics  do  not  prove,  however,  that  those  who  are  actually  unemployed
drink  less.


CH.  X    UNEMPLOYMENT    VERSUS  SHOET  TIME     485

large  numbers  of  working  men  is  that  nothing  has  a  worse
effect  upon  the  calibre  of  such  men  than  long  spells  of  idleness."  ^
The  Transvaal  Indigency  Commission  report:  "Unemployment
is  one  of  the  most  fruitful  causes  of  indigency  of  a  permanent
and  hopeless  kind.  However  skilled  a  man  may  be,  he  is
bound  to  deteriorate  during  a  long  period  of  unemployment.
His  hand  loses  some  of  its  cimning  and  he  acquires  the  habit
of  idleness.  The  tendency  is  for  the  unemployed  to  sink  to
the  level  of  the  unemployable."  -  There  is  evidence  that  the
men  who  have  once  become  casuals  are  not  readily  reconciled
again  to  regular  work.^  Eeference  may  also  be  made  to
the  results  of  a  recent  American  inquiry :  "  If  a  period  of
enforced  idleness  were  a  season  of  recuperation  and  rest,  there
would  be  a  good  side  to  lack  of  employment.  But  enforced
idleness  does  not  bring  recuperation  and  rest.  The  search  for
labour  is  much  more  fatiguing  than  labour  itself.  An  appli-
cant, sitting  in  one  of  the  charity  offices  waiting  for  the  arrival
of  the  agent,  related  his  experiences  while  trying  to  get  work.
He  would  rise  at  5  o'clock  in  the  morning  and  walk  3  or  4
miles  to  some  distant  point,  where  he  had  heard  work  could
be  had.  He  went  early  so  as  to  be  ahead  of  others,  and  he
walked  because  he  could  not  afford  to  pay  car  fare.  Dis-
appointed in  securing  a  job  at  the  first  place,  he  would  tramp
to  another  place  miles  away,  only  to  meet  with  disappointment
again.  ...  As  the  man  told  his  story,  he  drove  home  the
truth  that  lack  of  employment  means  far  more  than  simply  a
loss  in  dollars  and  cents  ;  it  means  a  drain  upon  the  vital  forces
that  cannot  be  measured  in  terms  of  money."  ^  Moreover,  the
evil  consequences  of  lean  months  are  not  balanced  by  good
consequences  in  fat  months.  Indeed,  it  may  well  be  that,
when,  as  often  happens,  the  fat  months  imply  long  hours  of
overtime,  they  will  not  yield  any  good  effects  to  set  against
the  evil  effects  of  the  lean  months,  but  will  themselves  add
further  evil  effects.

^  Alden,  Thi  Uriemployed,  a  National  Question,  p.  6.

-  Report  of  the  Transvaal  Indigency  Commission,  p.  120.

^  Some  evidence  before  the  Unskilled  Labour  Committee  of  the  G.O.S.
relates  how  an  attempt  to  convert  casual  dockers  into  permanent  hands  failed
through  the  men  refusing  to  turn  up  regularly  (Iteport,  p.  183).

*  United  States  Billletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labour,  No.  79,  pp.  906-7.


486  ECONOMICS   OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

§  8.  It  is  at  this  point  that  the  analysis  of  the  preceding

chapter  becomes  relevant.     The  inference  that  the  short  time

method  of  meeting  depressions  is  always  more  advantageous

to  the  national  dividend  than  the  dismissal  method,  to  which

the  preceding  observations  seem  to  lead,  must  not  be  accepted

out  of  hand.      There  is  an  important  consideration  to  be  set

on  the  other  side.     When,  in  the  analysis  just  referred  to,

costs  of  movement  were  discussed,  it  was  tacitly  assumed  that

the  gains  from  movement  to  be  set  against  them  were  definitely

determined  by  the  economic  situation,  and  needed  no  special

investigation.      In  fact,  however,  this  assumption  is  not  wholly

warranted.       If  in   a  factory   (or    industry)   employing    100

men  the  demand  so  falls  that,  at  the  current  rate  of  wages

— which    we    assume    to    be    maintained — ywu^^    P^^^    ^^^^

work  than  before  is  required,  this  state  of  things  may  be  met

either  by  short  time  all  round  to  the  extent  of  xw*^  P^^'^  ^^

noimal  time  or  by  the  dismissal  of  one  man.      It  is  plainly  in

the  interest   of  the  national  dividend  that  one  man  should

move  elsewhere  if  the  cost  of  movement,  translated  into  terms

of  daily  payment  in  the  way  described  on  p.  463,  is  less  than

the  whole  of  the  daily  wage.     If  the  method  of  dismissal  rules,

one  man — the  one  who  has  been  dismissed — will,  in  fact,  given

that  he  has  the  necessary  knowledge,  move  elsewhere  when

this  condition  is  fulfilled.     But,  if  the  method  of  short  time

(or  rotation  of  work)  rules,  nobody  will  move  unless  the  cost

of  moving,  translated  as  above,  is  less  than  ywu^  P^^^  ^^  ^^^®

daily   wage.     On   this   side,  therefore,   the   method   of  short

time — and  it  may  be  remarked  in  passing  that  the  method

of   engaging   employees    at   an   annual   salary   operates   even

more    strongly   against  movement — must  be  more    injurious

to  the  national  dividend  than  the  method  of  dismissal.     When

the  costs  of  movement  are  so  large  (e.g.  when  it  is  a  question

of  moving  from  one  skilled  industry  to  another),  or  when  the

depression  of  demand  is  only  expected  to   last  for  so  short

a  time,  that  movement  would  not  take  place  on  either  plan,

there  is,  indeed,  nothing  to  set  against  the  direct  and  immediate

advantages  of  short  time.      But,  when  the  conditions  are  such

that  movement  would  have  taken  place  on  the  dismissal  plan,

but  does  not  take  place  on  the  short  time  plan,  the  national


CH.  X     UNEMPLOYMENT    VERSUS  SHOKT  TIME     487

dividend  so  far  suffers.  This  objection  to  the  short  time  plan
is  often  not  decisive ;  for  it  has  to  be  balanced  against  the
greater  damage  the  dismissal  method  may  do  to  workpeople's
efficiency.  But  it  deserves  more  attention  than  is  usually  paid
to  it.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  an  objection  on  exactly
the  same  lines  lies  against  the  cotton  industry's  war  policy  of
a  special  levy  on  employers  to  provide  an  unemployment  fund
for  workpeople  out  of  work,  and,  in  a  lesser  degree,  against  all
plans  of  unemployment  insurance ;  for  these  plans  lessen  the
gain  that  a  man  will  get  if  he  moves  to  a  new  trade  where
work  might  be  obtained.  This  objection  also,  it  need  hardly
be  said,  is  not  decisive.^  The  difference  made  to  movement
will  generally  be  small,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  many  men
will  be  saved  from  the  grave  injury  which  unemployment,
if  no  pro\dsion  has  been  made  against  it,  may  inflict.  Still,
the  fact  that  the  objection  exists  ought  not  to  be  ignored,

'  The  Jate  Control  Id  March  1918  introduced  a  scheme  for  compensating
workers  dismissed  owing  to  a  decision  to  stop  certain  machinery  with  a  view  to
reducing  jute  consimiption  by  10  per  cent.  But  the  compensation  was  specifi-
cally confined  to  workpeople  who  were  not  able  to  find  other  employment,  and
any  workman  who  refused  suitable  employment  without  reasonable  cause  was  to
receive  no  further  benefit  (cf.  Labour  Gazette,  1918,  p.  135).  A  similar  condition
was  made  in  a  plan  adopted  in  Germany  at  about  the  same  time  for  com-
pensating workpeople  whose  work  was  stopped  through  shortage  of  coal
{Labour  Gazette,  1918,  p.  141).


CHAPTEE    XI

THE    PEACTICABILITY    OF   INTERFERENCE    TO    RAISE    WAGES

§  1.  The  purpose  of  the  remainder  of  this  Part  is  to  inquire
whether,  and  if  so  in  what  circumstances,  the  magnitude  of  the
national  dividend  can  be  increased  by  interference  designed  to
raise  the  rate  of  wages  in  any  industry  or  part  of  an  industry  above
the  "  natural  rate."  The  natural  rate  is  here  taken  to  mean
the  rate  that  would  prevail  apart  from  interference  by  some
person  or  body  of  persons  external  to  the  workmen  and  em-
ployers directly  concerned.  Monopolistic  action,  whether  by
employers  or  by  employed,  is  thus  included  in  the  "  natural
course  of  things  " ;  and  the  only  interference  that  we  have  to
consider  is  interference  by  consumers  and  interference  by  public
authorities,  acting,  not  as  consumers,  but  as  governors.

§  2.  Interference  by  consumers  consists  in  attempts  by
customers  to  compel  employers  to  grant  better  conditions  to
their  workpeople  by  agreeing  to  confine  their  custom  to  those
whose  treatment  of  their  workpeople  comes  up  to  a  standard
that  is  considered  fair.  The  scope  of  this  method  varies
greatly  in  different  industries.  It  can  be  applied  more  readily,
for  example,  to  the  hours  of  labour  of  assistants  in  retail  shops,
whom  the  customers  actually  see,  than  to  those  imposed  on
factory  or  domestic  workers,  whom  they  do  not  see.^  It  is
always  much  restricted  by  the  imperfections  of  customers'
knowledge,  and  by  the  fact  that  many  articles  pass  through  a
number  of  stages  of  manufacture  before  they  reach  the  man
who  ultimately  sells  them  to  the  consumer.  Associations  of
private  persons  have,  nevertheless,  sought  to  employ  this  method
through  the  devices  of  the  White  List  and  the  Trade  Union

*  Of.  M^ny,  Le  Travail  a  domicile,  p.  173.
488


CH.  XI         INTEEFEEENCE  TO  EAISE  WAGES  489

Label.^  It  has  been  employed  with  greater  effect  by  public
bodies  which  have  extensive  contracts  to  offer.  The  Fair
Wages  Eesolution  of  the  British  House  of  Commons  in  1893
endeavoured  to  secure  that  Government  Departments  should
use  it  by  demanding  that,  on  Government  contracts,  not  less
than  "  the  rate  of  wages  current  (ia  the  district)  should  be  paid
to  employes."  The  London  County  Council  furnish  a  schedule
of  wages,  which  all  firms  tendering  on  their  contracts  must
agree  to  pay  to  the  workpeople  they  employ  on  them.  Some
municipal  authorities  insist,  further,  that  no  contract  shall  be
given  to  a  firm  that  fails  to  pay  "  fair  "  rates,  not  merely  on
the  town's  contract,  but  regularly  on  all  its  work.  Thus,
"  Belfast  and  Manchester  have  standing  orders,  under  which
contractors  tendering  for,  or  executing,  work  must  be  paying
all  their  workpeople  the  rate  of  wages,  and  observing  the
hours  of  labour,  agreed  upon  by  the  organisations  of  employers
and  workpeople,  and  must  not  prohibit  their  workpeople  from
joining  trade  unions ;  while  at  Bradford  the  contractor  gives
an  assurance  that,  for  three  months  immediately  preceding  his
tender,  he  has  paid  all  his  workmen  the  rate  agreed  upon
between  the  employers'  association  and  the  trade  union,"  ^
Interference  by  pubUc  authorities — acting  in  their  capacity,
not  as  consumers,  but  as  governors — has  been  made  familiar
by  Australasian  experience,  and  now  plays  a  considerable  part
in  this  country  also.  To  determine  the  way  in  which  these
different  sorts  of  interference  are  likely  to  affect  the  national
dividend  is  a  complicated  problem,  which  it  is  necessary  to
approach  by  stages.  In  this  chapter  I  shall  ask  the  prelimin-
ary question  whether  it  can  in  practice  be  made  operative,
and  whether,  therefore,  it  can  reaUy  affect  the  magnitude  of
the  national  dividend  at  all.

^  The  Australian  Trade  Marks  Act  of  1905,  which  directed  that  all  goods  sold
should  be  marked  with  a  label,  showing  whether  or  not  their  makers  employed
Union  labour  exclusively,  was  ruled  by  the  High  Court  to  be  unconstitutional,  on
the  ground  that  the  Federal  title  to  legislate  about  trade  marks  did  not  permit
legislation  in  respect  of  marks  not  designed  for  the  benefit  of  the  manufacturer
using  them  (Ec&iwmist,  Sept.  19,  1908,  p.  532).

-  jReport  of  the  Fair  Wages  Committee,  p.  50.  Unless  the  requisition  that
contractors  shall  pay  standard  wages  is  made  to  apply  to  all  their  work,  and  not
merely  to  their  work  on  particular  contracts,  unscrupulous  contractors  can  evade  it
by  employing  the  same  men  for  part  of  their  time  on  contract  work  at  full  wages
and  for  another  part  of  their  time  on  other  work  at  exceptionally  low  wages.


490  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

I  3,  The  answer  to  this  question  depends  in  part  on  the
further  question  whether  it  is  possible  for  employers  and
workpeople  to  evade  the  recommendations  or  decrees  of  the
intervening  body  without  being  detected.  Detection  is  made
difficult  by  the  fact  that  the  contract  which  an  employer
makes  with  his  workpeople  for  their  services  is  complex,
including,  besides  the  money  wage,  explicit  or  implicit  condi-
tions as  to  speed  of  work,  arrangements  for  the  workers'
comfort  during  the  work,  and  also  sometimes  provision  for
certain  payments  in  kind.  By  operating  on  one  or  other  of
these  items  it  may  be'  possible  for  an  employer,  if  he  wishes
to  do  so,  to  neutralise  apparent  additions  to  the  money  wage.^
It  is  not,  however,  only  in  this  way  that  undetected  evasion
can  come  about.  Since  a  poor  man  will  often  prefer  to  accept
a  low  wage  rather  than  lose  his  job,  collusion  may  take  place
between  employer  and  employed,  and,  as  is  well  known  to
happen  in  the  Chinese  factories  of  Victoria,  a  lower  wage  may
be  paid  actually  than  is  paid  nominally.  When  workpeople
are  unorganised — and  they  are  specially  likely  to  be  unor-
ganised if  they  are  very  poor  or  if  they  work  apart  from  one
another  in  their  own  homes  ^ — even  a  strong  Government,  not
to  speak  of  a  Consumers'  Association,  must  have  immense  diffi-
culty in  enforcing  its  will.  This  fact  may  be  illustrated  from
the  experience  of  our  own  laws  about  sanitation,  safety  and
hours  of  labour  for  women  and  children.  It  has  always  been
found  very  difficult  to  bring  the  smaller  and  less  obvious  units
of  a  trade  under  effective  control — especially  as  to  hours  of
labour — since,  in  "domestic  workshops"  and  among  solitary
workers,  household  and  workshop  labour  can  so  easily  be  inter-
mingled.^    In  England  at  present  any  place  where  employers,

*  In  this  connection  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  State  Wages  Boards
of  California,  Oregon,  Washington  and  Wisconsin  are  given  power  to  regulate,
not  merely  wage-rates  but  also  hours  of  work  and  "  conditions  of  labour"  for
the  women  whom  they  cover  {The  World's  Labmir  Laws,  Feb.  1914,  p.  78).

^  Mr.  Lloyd  writes :  ' '  The  chief  reason  why  the  grinders  both  in  Sheffield
and  Solingen  have  been  better  organised  than  the  cutlers  is  that  they  are  more
congregated  at  their  work  "  {Economic  Journal,  1908,  p.  379).

^  It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  they  could  be  enforced  more  easily  if  the
giver-out-of-work,  or  even  the  landlord,  as  well  as  the  employer,  in  a  domestic
workshop,  were  made  legally  responsible  for  breaches  of  tlie  law.  (Cf.  Webb,
Evidence  before  the  Royal  Commission  on  Labour  [C.  7063-1],  Q.  3740.)  In
Massachusetts  responsibility  is  sometimes  thrown  on  the  giver-out-of-work.


CH.  XI         INTEEFEEENCE  TO  EAISE  WAGES  491

working  in  their  own  houses,  employ  persons  from  outside,  is
a  "  workshop,"  and  is  subject  to  the  ordinary  provisions  of  the
factory  law.  Any  place  where  employers,  working  in  their
own  houses,  employ  only  members  of  their  own  family,  is  a
"  domestic  workshop,"  and  its  sanitary  arrangements,  and  also,
though  in  a  less  degree  than  ordinary  workshops,  the  hours
of  young  persons  and  children  working  in  it  are  regulated.
But,  when  a  home-worker  works  alone  in  her  house  for  an
outside  firm,  these  things  are  not  regulated.  Even  in  work-
shops and  domestic  workshops,  it  is  doubtful  whether,  with
the  existiug  staff  of  inspectors,  the  rules  are  satisfactorily
enforced,^  Throughout,  the  inspectors'  task  is  exceedingly
heavy ;  so  much  so  that,  in  England,  the  demand  for  a
larger  staff  is  continually  being  made.  If,  however,  the
kind  of  regulation  we  have  just  been  discussing  is  thus  diflB-
cult,  wage-regulation  is  more  difficult  still.  As  has  been
well  observed,  wage  rates  are  not,  like  sanitary  arrangements,
hours  and  so  forth,  things  easily  detected  by  the  watch  or  nose
of  an  inspector."  Hence,  the  violation  of  rules  about  them
can  sca,rcely  be  discovered  except  through  overt  action  by
the  workers ;  and,  when  they  are  not  organised,  individual
workers  will  often  fail  to  act  for  fear  a  worse  thing  should
befall  them.  The  administration  of  the  English  Trades  Boards
Act  has  been  much  hampered  by  this  difficulty,  especially  in
its  relation  to  home-workers.^  Where,  however,  an  effective
workers'  association  exists,  this  difficulty  can  be  overcome.
For  the  workers,  having  unemployed  benefit  to  fall  back  upon,
will  not  be  terrorised  into  accepting  less  than  the  union  rate
by  fear  of  losing  their  job,  but  will  complain  to  the  union
officials ;  and,  even  when  individual  workmen  do  not  do  this,
their  officials  will  play  the  part  of  a  body  of  lynx-eyed  unpaid
inspectors.  It  is,  therefore,  encouraging  to  learn  that  State
action  designed  to  raise  wages  in  depressed  industries  {e.g.  the

'  Cf.  the  diflBculties  experienced  in  New  Zealand  and  Victoria  in  enforcing
the  law  limiting  the  hours  of  shop  assistants.  In  New  South  Wales  these  diffi-
culties are  partly  avoided  by  means  of  a  general  law  regulating  the  hours  for
all  shops,  whether  employing  assistants  or  not.  (Cf.  Aves,  Report  on  Hours  of
Employmenl  in  Shops,  p.  12).

2  Mrs.  Macdonald,  Economic  Journal,  1908,  p.  142.

2  Cf.  Vessilitsky,  Tfie  Home  Worker,  chap,  vii.


492  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

chain-making  industry)  has  several  times  led  to  an  improve-
ment in  the  workpeople's  organisation.  "  One  especially
hopeful  feature  in  the  situation  (connected  with  the  estab-
lishment of  Trade  Boards)  is  that  women  in  the  industries
affected  are  taking  heart  to  join  their  trade  unions,  some
of  which  have  received  large  accessions  of  members.  A
frequent  objection  to  wages  regulation  has  been  that  it  would
be  useless  for  unorganised  trades,  which  are  the  very  ones
that  need  it  most.  The  actual  fact  seems  to  be  that  the
prospect  of  wages  regulation  is  encouraging  organisation  by
giving  these  poor  workers  the  sense  of  some  public  support  at
their  back."  ^  At  the  same  time,  of  course,  by  giving  them
more  money,  it  makes  it  easier  for  them  to  pay  trade  union
subscriptions.  These  considerations  seem  to  show  that  inter-
ference, though  it  may  sometimes  be  baffled  by  undetected
evasion,  cannot  be  thus  baffled  generally.

I  4.  This  general  statement,  however,  does  not  do  full
justice  to  the  difficulty  involved  in  setting  up  a  really  water-
tight system  of  regulation.  When  it  is  practicable  for  the
regulating  authority  itself  to  construct  and  impose  a  com-
plete scale  of  piece-rates,  there  is,  indeed,  no  additional
difficulty.  But  this  procedure  can  only  be  resorted  to  over
a  limited  field,  because  in  many  industries  differences  of
machinery,  factory  arrangements,  quality  of  work  required
{e.g.  in  making  button-holes)  and  so  on,  make  a  different  piece-
rate  "  appropriate  "  to  different  firms  ;  and  it  is  seldom  practic-
able for  a  Trade  Board  or  other  official  authority  to  have  the
knowledge  needed  to  deal  with  these  differences.  Conse-
quently, as  the  Boards  appointed  under  the  British  Trades
Board  Act  have  often  found,  the  best  they  can  do  is  to  lay
down  a  so-called  minimum  day-wage  as  a  standard,  at  the  same
time  authorising  employers  to  draw  up  a  piece-list,  subject  to
the  condition  that  the  piece-rate  shall  allow  an  "  ordinary "
worker  in  their  industry  to  earn  the  equivalent  of  this  day-
wage.  On  this  plan,  unless  some  further  provision  is  made,
there  is  a  subtle  opportunity  for  evasion  on  account  of  the

'  Hatchings  and  Harrison,  History  of  Factory  Legislation,  p.  269.  For
evidence  as  to  the  favourable  reaction  of  Trade  Boards  upon  organisation  in  the
tailoring  trade,  cf.  Tawney,  Minimum  Bates  in  the  Tailoring  Industry,  pp.
90-94.


I


CH.  XI         INTERFERENCE  TO  RAISE  WAGES  493

ambiguity  attaching  to  the  term  "  ordinary."  To  shut  this  loop-
hole some  definition  of  the  term  must  be  furnished.  In  the
wage-determination  given  by  the  Trade  Board  controlling  [the
paper-box-making  trade,  this  is  done  by  providing  that  any
piece-work  operation  must  yield  not  less  than  the  minimum
day-wage  to  8  5  per  cent  of  any  group  of  piece-workers.  Thus,
the  85  th  worker  (out  of  a  hundred)  from  the  top  of  the  scale  of
capacity  was  taken  to  represent  the  worst  "  ordinary  "  worker.
But  even  a  numerical  definition  of  this  kind  will  not  make
evasion  impossible.  It  is  still  in  the  power  of  employers  in
effect  to  force  down  the  general  standard  of  pay  by  dismissing
their  worst  workmen,  engaging  better  men  instead  of  them,
and  then  fixing  a  piece-rate  below  what  would  have  been
necessary  to  enable  85  per  cent  of  their  original  workpeople
to  earn  the  standard  day-wages.  To  escape  this  danger  the
Trade  Board  in  the  tailoring  trade  fixes  a  minimum  time- wage
for  "  ordinary  "  workers,  and  lays  it  down  that,  if  8  5  per  cent
of  a  firm's  employees  are  earning  this  minimum,  there  is  'prima
facie  evidence  that  the  piece-rates  established  there  are  adequate.
But  it  permits  this  jyrima  facie  evidence  to  be  rebutted  by
information  that  the  number  of  slow  workers  employed  by  a
firm  at  a  particular  rate  has  been  substantially  reduced.  The
85  th  man  in  a  hundred  is  only  to  be  regarded  as  the  lowest
"  ordinary  "  worker  when  the  firm  has  not  specially  selected  its
workpeople.  ^  The  rule  established  by  the  Trade  Board  in  the
box-making  industry  is  similar.  ^  Such  a  rule  obviously
leads  to  delicate  questions  of  detail,  which  must  be  referred  in
the  last  resort  to  some  form  of  joint  Board.  Thus,  under  the
Minimum  Wage  (Coal  Mines)  Act,  the  question  whether  any
workman,  whom  an  employer  wishes  to  treat  as  below  the
ordinary,  can  rightly  be  so  regarded,  is  adjudicated  upon  by
a  joint  Committee  of  employers  and  employed.  Under  an
arrangement  of  this  kind,  evasion,  if  not  stopped  altogether,
can  at  all  events  be  effectively  checked.

§  5.  Granted,  however,  that  evasion  cannot  take  place
without  an  overt  breach  of  law  that  is  capable  of  being
detected,  this  does  not  by  itself  make  interference  with  the

1  Cf.  Tawney,  Minimum  Boies  in  the  Tailoring  Industry,  pp.  50-1.
^  Cf.  Bulkley,  Minimum  Bcttes  in  the  Box-maJcing  Industry,  pp.  21-2.


494  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

natural  course  of  wages  really  operative.  For  it  might  happen
that  no  sanction  was  available  to  restrain  evasion  even  when
it  was  detected.  But  in  fact  sanctions  are  available.  Even  a
Consumers'  Association  commands  the  weapon  of  the  boycott,
and,  when  it  is  backed  by  a  trade  union,  can  also  call  upon
that  body  to  exercise  in  its  behalf  the  weapon  of  the  strike.
And  a  public  authority  controls  a  large  armoury  of  sanctions.
Of  these  the  least  stringent  is  a  simple  appeal  to  informed
public  opinion,  like  that  relied  upon  in  the  Canadian  Industrial
Disputes  Investigation  Act,  On  this  model,  a  law  recently
passed  in  the  State  of  Massachusetts  sets  up  a  Commission
with  authority  to  investigate — through  a  Wages  Board — any
trade  in  which  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  wages
paid  to  women  workers  are  "  inadequate  to  supply  the  necessary
cost  of  living  and  to  maintain  the  worker  in  health."  After  a
public  hearing,  the  Commission  recommends  rates  of  wages,  and
"  issues  a  decree  of  its  award  together  with  a  list  of  the
employers  who  fail  or  refuse  to  accept  it.  This  list  is  there-
upon published  in  at  least  four  newspapers,  but  no  further
penalty  is  imposed."  ^  It  would  be  an  error  to  belittle  the
power  of  this  form  of  sanction.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
the  rates  of  pay  of  our  low-grade  workers  "  would  be  lower
than  they  actually  are  but  for  the  effective  force  of  conven-
tional or  customary  standards."  ^  It  is  probable,  too,  that  the
frequency  with  which  the  wage  of  women  workers  used  before
the  war  to  approximate  to  10s.  a  week  was,  in  some  measure,
due  to  the  sanction  of  public  opinion,  A  somewhat  more
stringent  sanction  is  made  use  of,  for  a  special  and  limited
purpose,  in  the  English  Trade  Boards  Act  of  1909.  This  Act
provides  that,  in  the  preliminary  period  before  the  determina-
tions of  Boards  are  made  obligatory.  Government  contracts
shall  only  be  given  to  firms  which  pay  the  wage-rates  they
have  recommended.  A  more  stringent  sanction  still  was
proposed  by  the  Australian  Excise  Tariff  Act  of  1906,  which
was  afterwards  declared  by  the  Supreme  Court  to  be  uncon-

^  The  World's  Labour  Laws,  Feb.  1913,  p.  49,  A  summary  of  this  law  and
of  the  similar  laws  of  other  American  States  is  given  in  Marconcini's  Industria
domestica  salariata,  p.  546  e<  scq.

2  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Appendix,  vol.  xvii.
p,  377,


CH.  XI         INTERFERENCE  TO  RAISE  WAGES  495

stitutionaL^  A  dififerential  excise  duty  was  to  be  imposed  upon
native  manufacturers  who  pay  less  than  "  fair  and  reasonable
rates "  to  their  workpeople.  If  these  lesser  sanctions  fail,
resort  may  be  had  to  fines,  a  sanction  which  is  embodied,  not
only  in  the  well-known  laws  of  Victoria  and  other  Australian
colonies  and  in  the  British  Trades  Boards  Act,  but  also  in  more
recent  laws — applicable  only  to  women  and  minors — which
have  been  passed  by  the  States  of  Oregon  and  Washington.^
In  some  of  these  laws  there  is  added  also  the  sanction  of
imprisonment.  Nor  has  the  last  word  even  yet  been  said.
There  is  a  sanction  more  powerful  than  fines  and  imprisonment.
For  there  is  always  a  margin  between  rates  of  wages  which
employers  resent  and  would  elect  to  resist  by  a  temporary
stoppage  of  work,  and  rates  which  would  drive  them  to  abandon
their  industry  altogether.  Of  this  margin  the  State  or  other
public  authority  can  make  use  in  two  distinct  ways.  First,
in  certain  specially  situated  industries,  it  can  threaten  to  expel
employers  from  their  occupation  unless  they  consent  to  pay
the  wage-rate  which  it  decrees.  When,  for  instance,  as  in
ordinary  or  street  railways,  a  business  depends  upon  franchises
granted  by  authority,  the  terms  of  the  concession  may  provide
that  any  refusal  to  accept  the  authority's  decision  about  wage-

H  rates  shall  cause  it  to  lapse.  ^  Secondly,  in  industries  in
general,  if  obdurate  employers  try  to  pay  less  than  the  decreed
wage,  the  State  can  subsidise  workpeople  who  strike  against
them,  or  can  even  close  their  works  by  force.  By  these
devices  it  can  deprive  them  of  any  third  way  between  surrender
and  a  permanent  change  of  occupation.     Nor  is  resort  to  such

i  measures  rendered  impracticable  by  the  chaotic  character  of  the
procedure  which  they  would  involve.  They  cannot  be  laughed
out  of  court  as  meaning  a  ceaseless  conflict  between  the  Execu-
tive and  rebellious  associations  of  employers.  For  their  success
is  so  certain  that,  if  once  the  Government  was  understood  to  be
determined  upon  them,  resistance  would  never  take  place.  At
the  worst,  a  single  exhibition  of  force  would  be  sufficient :

^n        1  Mr.  St.  Leger,  in  his  book,  Australian  Socialism,  pp.  394  ei  seq.,  prints

^^kthe  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court.

^H       -  Cf.  Labour  Gazette,  Jan.  1913,  p.  204.


496  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  in

That  great  two-handed  engine  at  the  door
Stands  ready  to  strike  once  and  strike  no  more.

This  form  of  sanction  is  the  most  powerful  of  all  that  are
available.^  Of  course,  neither  it  nor  any  of  the  other  sanctions
is  absolute  and  compelling  in  all  circumstances.  Critics  can
easily  show  that,  when  employers  are  extraordinarily  obstinate,
interference  to  raise  wages  cannot  be  successfully  carried  out.
But  this  fact  is  not  relevant  to  the  practical  issue.  When
it  is  asked  how  people  can  be  compelled  to  continue  in  a
particular  industry  at  a  loss,  the  answer  is  that  they  cannot
be  so  compelled.  But,  as  was  indicated  in  the  chapter  dealing
with  compulsory  arbitration,  to  prove  that  a  law  will  sometimes
fail  in  its  purpose  is  a  very  different  thing  from  proving  that
it  is  futile.  It  is  not  impossible  for  murderers  and  incendiaries
both  to  break  the  law  and  to  escape  the  penalty.  Judges  may
order  a  mother  to  deliver  up  her  child  to  the  custody  of  such
and  such  a  person ;  but,  if  she  chooses  to  disappear,  or,  in  the
last  resort,  to  destroy  either  the  child  or  herself,  they  cannot
compel  her  to  obey.  Nobody,  however,  cites  these  obvious
facts  as  evidence  that  the  general  body  of  our  laws  is  without
powerful  sanctions.  In  like  manner,  nobody  ought  to  cite  the
fact  that  the  sanctions  to  authoritative  decisions  about  wages
are  imperfect  as  evidence  that  they  are  non-existent.^  They
are  real  and  potent.  "With  their  help  interference  to  raise
wages  can  be  made  operative  in  practice.

^  Cf.  my  Principles  and  Methods  of  Industrial  Peace,  pp.  191-2.
2  Ibid.  p.  185.


CHAPTEE  XII

METHODS  OF  ENGAGING  LABOUR

8  1.  Before  the  effect  of  interfereuce  to  raise  wages  is
examined,  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  preliminary  inquiry  into
the  methods  of  engaging  workpeople ;  for  the  effect  produced
by  interference  depends  in  part  upon  what  these  methods  are.
The  reason  for  this  dependence  is  that,  when  wages  in  any
occupation  or  place  are  raised,  an  influence  is  set  at  work
which,  according  to  circumstances,  may  draw  new  workpeople
from  outside  into  the  occupation  or  place,  or,  per  contra,  may
push  out  workpeople  who  are  already  there.  This  influence
acts  through  the  change  which  the  wage  movement  brings
about  in  the  attractiveness  of  the  industry,  on  the  one  hand,
to  people  outside  it,  and,  on  the  other,  to  those  already
belonging  to  it.  But  the  change  in  attractiveness  to  these  two
sets  of  people  is  not  determined  solely  by  the  amount  of  the
change  in  wage  and  the  nature  of  the  demand  for  labour  in
the  industry,  but  also  by  certain  other  conditions  associated
with  the  methods  of  engagement  in  vogue.  This  can  be
proved  as  follows.  The  mathematical  expectation  of  earnings
in  any  place  or  occupation  is  measured  by  the  aggregate  annual
earnings  of  all  the  workpeople  of  given  quality  attached
to  it  at  any  time  divided  by  the  number  of  those  workpeople.
If  the  methods  of  engagement  are  such  that  everybody  of  given
quality,  whether  already  engaged  in  the  industry  or  at  present
outside  it,  has  an  equal  chance  of  obtaining  a  share  of  employ-
ment in  it,  the  attractiveness  of  the  industry  to  outsiders  and
insidei-s  alike  corresponds  to  this  mathematical  expectation,
and,  from  the  standpoint  of  both  these  classes,  changes  in  the
mathematical  expectation  correspond  roughly  to   changes  in

497  2  K


498  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

attractiveness.  This  correspondence  is  not,  indeed,  complete,
because  to  many  men  a  given  "  expectation  of  earnings  "  made
up  of  a  higher  nominal  wage  coupled  with  a  worse  prospect  of
employment  is  more  attractive  than  an  equal  expectation  made
up  of  a  lower  nominal  wage  coupled  with  a  better  prospect  of
employment.  Thus,  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  report :  "  In
Liverpool  it  is  freely  said  that  the  nominally  high  wages
attract  men  from  the  country  and  from  Ireland,  under  the
impression  that  they  can  get  regular  work  at  these  rates."  ^
Mr.  Dearie  speaks  to  like  effect  of  the  London  building  trades.^
And  Mr.  Beveridge  puts  the  point  strongly  thus :  "  Men  can
be  got  to  follow  up  work  which  gives  them  five  shillings  a  day
about  four  times  in  a  fortnight,  when  they  would  repudiate
with  scorn  a  regular  situation  at  fifteen  or  eighteen  shillings
a  week."  ^  But  this  consideration  need  not  be  pressed  here.
It  is  enough  that,  in  the  conditions  contemplated,  there  is  a
rough  general  correspondence  between  changes  in  the  mathe-
matical expectation  of  earnings  and  changes  in  the  attractive-
ness of  the  industry  both  to  outsiders  and  to  insiders.  If,
however,  the  methods  of  engagement  are  of  such  a  sort  that
anybody  of  given  quality,  who  has  already  been  employed  in
the  industry,  will  be  taken  on  rather  than  a  new  man  from  out-
side, the  attractiveness  to  outsiders  of  the  industry,  when  the
rate  of  wages  there  is  forced  up — and  the  quantity  of
employment  available  thereby  reduced — is  necessarily  zero,
whatever  the  effect  of  the  change  may  be  upon  the  mathe-
matical expectation  of  earnings.  Yet  again,  if  the  methods  of
engagement  are  such  that,  among  the  workpeople  of  given
quality,  who  have  already  been  employed,  men  are  always
selected  for  employment  in  accordance  with  a  formal  or  in-
formal preference  list,  an  enforced  rise  in  the  wage  rate  must
press  the  attractiveness  of  the  place  or  occupation  to  those
insiders  who  are  near  the  bottom  of  the  list  down  to  zero.
Of  course,  divergencies  in  the  methods  of  engagement  are
more  or  less  blotted  out  from  the  point  of  view  of  people  con-
sidering  a   long   time   beforehand   for  what   industries    their

^  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  tlie  Poor  Laws,  p.  353.

2  U'fiemploymcnt  in  the  London  Building  Trade,  p.  127.

3  Unemployment,  p.  197.


CH.  XII        METHODS  OF  ENGAGING  LABOUE  499

children  shall  be  trained.  This,  however,  does  not  lessen  their
relevance  to  the  effect  produced  by  interference  designed  to  raise
wages.  In  the  face  of  an  enforced  rise  there  are  three
possibilities:  (1)  the  attractiveness  of  the  occupation  or  place
affected  may  correspond  after  the  change,  both  for  outsiders
and  for  insiders,  to  the  mathematical  expectation  of  earnings
there  ;  (2)  for  all  insiders  it  may  correspond  to  this  mathe-
matical expectation,  but  for  all  outsiders  to  zero ;  and  (3)  for
displaced  insiders  as  well  as  for  all  outsiders  it  may  be  zero.
The  first  of  these  possibilities  will  be  realised  if  the  method  of
engagement  of  labour  is  entirely  haphazard  and  engagements
are  for  short  periods ;  the  second  if  the  method  is  such  that  all
insiders  are  preferred  to  any  outsiders,  but  among  themselves
are  on  an  equal  footing ;  the  third  if  all  workpeople  interested
in  the  occupation  are  implicitly  or  explicitly  arranged,  for
purposes  of  engagement,  upon  some  sort  of  preference  scale.  Of
the  three  methods  thus  distinguished  the  obvious  label  for  the
first  is  the  casual  method  and  for  the  third  the  preference  method.
For  the  second  no  satisfactory  label  is  available,  and  it  is  necessary
to  invent  a  name :  I  shall  caU  it  the  privileged  class  method.

8  2.  The  distinction  between  these  three  methods  can  be
made  clear  by  examples.  The  casual  method  reigns  when  all
comers  of  given  quality  (not  necessarily  all  comers  of  different
quality)  are  accepted  indifferently.  The  general  nature  of
the  method  is  obvious.  It  is  sometimes  supposed  that,  when
workpeople  for  a  number  of  firms  are  engaged  through  a
central  institution,  it  is  necessarily  ruled  out  by  that  fact.
But  this  is  a  confusion.  It  is  open  to  Employment  Ex-
changes, just  as  much  as  to  single  firms,  to  engage  men  by  the
casual  method ;  and  in  fact  the  rules  often  in  effect  provide
that  they  rmist  do  so.  Thus,  in  many  Employment  Bureaux
organised  by  trade  unions  in  France,  the  officials  "  allot  situa-
tions to  their  members  strictly  in  order  of  priority  of  applica-
tion." ^  "  The  Antwerp  Bureau  adopts  the  rule  of  sending
workmen  to  situations  in  the  order  in  which  they  apply  at
the  office — a  method  which  has  been  the  subject  of  much
criticism."  ^  And  in  the  Labour  Bureau  of  the  Berlin  brewers,
"  a  workman  must  wait  his  turn  before  he  is  placed,  i.e.  on

*  U.S.A.  Bulletin  of  Labour,  No.  72,  p.  761.  2  IMd.  p.  766.


500  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  in

registration  he  gets  a  number  and  must  then  wait  till  all  the
numbers  on  the  list  prior  to  his  own  have  been  satisfied."  ^
Under  all  these  arrangements  the  method  of  engagement
that  rules  is  the  casual  method.  The  privileged  class  method  is
formally  established  under  the  Liverpool  docks  scheme  of  1912.
All  workmen  who  were  dockers  at  a  given  date  were  furnished
with  a  tally,  possession  of  which  gave  them  preference  over
workmen  not  holding  tallies,  while  leaving  certain  classes  of
them  still  equal  among  themselves.^  The  preference  method,
whether  formally  or  informally  applied,  is  of  wide  scope.  It
implies  that  different  workpeople  of  given  quality  are  not
hired  indifferently  but  in  some  sort  of  more  or  less  definite
order,  so  that  whatever  work  there  is  tends  to  be  concentrated
upon  certain  individuals  while  the  others  get  nothing.  When
an  actual  preference  list  is  used  it  does  not  matter,  from  the
present  point  of  view,  upon  what  basis  this  list  is  drawn  up.
One  made  by  placing  the  names  of  applicants  in  order  of
their  length  of  service  in  the  industry — a  specially  good
arrangement  in  a  decaying  trade — or  even  in  alphabetical
order,  would  answer  the  purpose.  In  practice,  when  prefer-
ence lists  among  similar  men  exist,  they  are  always  a  mere
bye-product  of  lists  designed  to  set  in  order  of  capacity  a
number  of  workpeople  presumed  to  be  dissimilar.  Thus,  the
Central  (Unemployed)  Body  for  London  suggested,  among  its
model  rules,  that  "  the  superintendent  will  recommend  ap-
plicants for  employment  according  to  suitability,  but  employers
may  select  from  the  registered  applicants  any  one  whom  they
consider  suitable."^  Broadly  speaking,  this  policy  is  pursued
by  the  Berlin  Central  Labour  Eegistry.*  It  involves  in-
cidentally the  placing  in  order  of  precedence  of  a  number  of
men  of  equal  capacity,  and  this  implies  preference  of  the  kind
relevant  to  this  discussion.

§  3.   It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  methods  of  engage-
ment   ruling    in    different    places    and    occupations    are   not

*  Schloss,  Report  on  Ageiudes  and  Methods  for  dealing  with  the  Unemployed,
p.  84.

^  Cf.   Williams,  The  First  Year's  Working  of  the  Liverpool  Docks  Scheme,
chapter  i.

3  U.S.A.  Bulletin  of  Labour,  No.  72,  p.  803.

*  Cf.   Schloss,   Report  on  Agencies  and  Methods  for  dealing  loith  the   Un-
employed, p.  87.


CH.  XII        METHODS  OF  ENGAGING  LABOUE  501

sharply  separated  into  the  three  types  that  have  just  been
described.  Bather,  actual  existing  arrangements  are,  in  general
compromises  tending  towards,  but  not  identical  with,  one  or
another  of  them.  The  influences  which  determine  the  choice
made  between  them  are  very  similar  to  those  which  were
discussed  in  Chapter  X.  in  connection  with  the  choice
between  different  ways  of  meeting  periods  of  depression.
Many  of  the  considerations  which  make  employers  unwilling
to  resort  to  a  reduction  of  staff  in  these  periods — fear  of
losing  men  who  for  any  reason  have  a  special  value  to  them
and  so  on — also  make  them  hostile  to  the  casual  method.
Therefore  this  method  is  likely  to  be  adopted  only  when  the
men  are  so  unskilled,  and  the  detailed  conditions  of  particular
plants  or  works  so  similar,  that  a  man's  value  to  an  employer  is
not  appreciably  increased  by  his  having  been  employed  by
him  before.  The  preference  method  is  favoured  when  the
conditions  are  such  that  continuity  of  work  by  the  same  man
is  important,  while  to  retain  in  bad  times  a  larger  number  of
men  than  is  necessary  by  resort  to  short  time  would  be  costly
or  otherwise  injurious.  When  the  technical  difficulties  in  the
way  of  short  time  are  less  serious,  the  way  is  open  for  the
privileged  class  method.  It  will  be  readily  perceived  that  in
a  "  stationary  state "  the  last  two  methods  would  lead  to
identical  results.

§  4.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  there  is  a  connection
between  the  casual  method  and  the  custom  of  short  engage-
ments. Long  engagements  are  not,  indeed,  incompatible  with
some  degree  of  casualness,  because,  even  with  annual  engage-
ments, pro\dded  the  hii'ings  of  different  people  terminate
irregularly,  there  will  always  be  a  certain  number  of  jobs
on  offer ;  whereas,  if  the  hirings  of  different  individuals  all
terminate  at  the  same  time,  at  those  times  all  the  jobs  that
there  are  will  be  on  offer.  "With  very  short  engagements,
however,  practically  all  the  jobs  there  are  will  be  con-
tinuously on  offer.  Since  it  is  only  in  respect  of  jobs  on  offer
that  casualness  is  possible,  it  follows  that  the  casual  method
cannot  be  developed  so  completely  when  long  engagements
prevail  as  when  short  engagements  do  ;  or,  more  generally,  that
every  increase  in  the  length  of  the  normal  period  of  engage-


502  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

ment,  in  an  industry  in  which  the  casual  method  prevails,  will
to  some  extent  undermine  that  method.  In  great  measure,
long  engagements  are  a  bye-product  of  the  same  causes  that
make  employers  prefer  the  preference  or  privileged  class
method  to  the  casual  method,  and  have  not  themselves  any
causal  influence.  Sometimes,  however,  long  engagements  are
fostered  by  causes  other  than  these,  and  then  the  long  engage-
ments, or,  more  strictly,  the  causes  which  bring  them  about,
operating  through  them,  are  properly  regarded  as  additional
factors  making  against  the  casual  method.  Among  skilled
manual  workers,  in  industries  where  continuous  service  to  the
public  is  extremely  important,  long  engagements  have  some-
times been  introduced  as  a  device  for  obviating  strikes.  An
example  is  afforded  by  the  agreement  of  the  South  Metro-
politan Gas  Company  with  its  "  co-partners."  "  The  agreement
is  a  definite  engagement  on  our  part  to  give  a  man  work  for  a
period  varying  from  three  months  to  twelve  months,  and  the
great  bulk  of  our  men  work  under  such  agreements.  The
origin  of  it  was,  as  perhaps  you  may  have  heard,  in  order  to
prevent  a  large  number  of  men  giving  notice  to  us  at  the
same  time.  At  the  time  of  our  strike  in  1889  all  the
stokers  gave  notice  at  one  time.  In  order  to  obviate  that,  we
instituted  a  series  of  agreements,  to  fall  in  so  many  every
week.  It  is  not  compulsory.  The  men  can  sign  them  or
not  as  they  please,  but  those  who  do  sign  partake  in  the
prosperity  of  the  Company.  At  present,  the  men  who  have
signed  are  getting  10  per  cent  on  their  wages  as  a  result  of
being  under  agreement,  so  you  may  realise  that  there  is  no
difficulty  in  getting  the  bulk  to  sign."  ^  Among  unskilled
workpeople,  not  only  is  this  positive  motive  for  long  engage-
ments generally  weak,  because,  in  the  event  of  a  strike,  their
work  can  be  more  easily  replaced,  but  there  is  sometimes  a
negative  motive  working  definitely  in  the  opposite  sense.
For,  whereas,  among  skilled  men,  their  own  greater  intelli-
gence and  the  existence  of  strong  union  organisation  make
disciplinary  machinery  unnecessary,  among  the  rougher  class
of  the  unskilled,  foremen  may  find  it  impossible  to  enforce  a

*  Report  of  the  Charity  Organisation  Society's  Committee  on  Unskilled  Labour,
1908,  p.  170.


I


cH.  XII       METHODS  OF  ENGAGING  LABOUE  503

fair  day's  work  unless  the  weapon  of  instant  dismissal  is  ready
to  hand.^  Moreover,  it  must  be  remembered  that,  among  all
classes  of  workers,  short  engagements  may,  as  was  indicated
in  ^  1,  be  preferred  by  the  men  themselves,  just  because  they
make  casualness  possible.  The  majority  of  the  Poor  Law
Commissioners  write :  "  The  '  docker's  romance,'  as  it  is  called,
is  that  he,  alone  of  all  tradesmen,  can  take  days  off  when
he  likes,  without  suffering  for  it.  .  .  .  At  Southampton  docks
several  cases  have  come  under  notice,  where  permanent  hands
have  asked  to  be  given  casual  employment."  '^  Mr.  Walsh,  in
like  manner,  writes  that  a  large  percentage  of  men  have  taken
to  the  docks,  "  because  the  work  there  is  intermittent  and,
therefore,  more  congenial  to  them  than  other  occupations,
where  regularity  in  attendance  is  required."  ^

§  5.  It  is  possible  for  the  Government,  by  direct  action
designed  to  encourage  the  re -engagement  of  the  man  whose
engagement  has  just  terminated  rather  than  of  a  new  man,
to  combat  the  casual  method  in  the  same  way  that  the
establishment  of  a  system  of  long  engagements  would  do.
Thus,  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  write :  "  One  method  of
discouraging  casual  labour  would  be  the  imposition  of  what
we  might  call  an  '  employment  termination  due.'  That  is
to  say  that,  to  the  termination  of  an  engagement,  either  by
the  master  or  by  the  man,  should  be  attached  a  small
payment,  both  by  the  master  and  the  man,  in  the  nature
of  a  fine  or  stamp  duty  to  the  State.  The  tax,  or  '  employ-
ment termination  due,'  could  be  very  easily  le\ded  by  means
of  stamps  placed  upon  a  '  termination  of  employment '  form,
which  it  might  be  made  incumbent  upon  every  workman  to
produce  to  the  labour  exchange  upon  registration.  It  is
urged  that  the  advantages  of  this  system,  if  it  could  be
adopted,  would  be  threefold.  In  the  first  place,  it  would
discourage  the,  so  to  speak,  wanton  termination  of  employ-
ment either  by  the  employer  or  the  employee.  In  the
second  place,  it  would  discourage  also  the  employment
of  casual   labour,  inasmuch   as,  the   more   casual   the  labour

^  Cf.   Messrs.   Pringle  and  Jackson's  Report  to  the  Poor  Law  Commission,
Appendix,  vol.  xix.  p.  15.

-  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  pp.  335  and  354,
3  Report  on  Dock  Labour,  p.  19.


k


504  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

employed  in  a  concern,  the  greater  would  be  the  amount
of  '  employment  termination  due,'  which  would  have
to  be  paid.  And,  thirdly,  to  the  extent  to  which  it  did
not  deter  either  of  these  practices,  it  would  afford  a  source
of  revenue,  which  might  be  devoted  to  defraying  the  cost
of  one  or  other  of  the  proposals  which  we  shall  make."  ^
Devices  of  this  sort,  if  introduced,  would  undoubtedly  strengthen
the  desire  of  employers  to  keep  posts  occupied  as  far  as  possible
by  the  same  men,  and  so  would  enhance  the  stimulus,  which  this
desire  affords,  towards  the  adoption  of  methods  of  engagement
other  than  the  casual  method.  The  provision  of  the  National
Insurance  Act,  to  the  effect  that,  "  when  an  employer  has  em-
ployed a  man  continuously  throughout  a  period  of  twelve
months,  he  may  recover  one -third  of  the  contributions  paid  for
that  man  "  ^  is  a  device  of  the  kind  contemplated.  We  must
not  forget,  however,  that  all  such  devices  not  only  encourage
employers  to  fill  posts,  which  they  have  decided  in  any
event  to  fill  somehow,  with  the  same  man  continuously,
but  also  encourage  them,  in  some  slight  measure,  to  keep
men  on  in  posts  which  otherwise  they  would  have  been
inclined  temporarily  to  close  down.  Pro  tanto,  the  effect  of
this  is  to  check  the  free  movement  of  labour  from  centres
of  falling  demand  to  centres  of  rising  demand,  thus  impeding
its  most  profitable  employment.  Th^  direct  injury  which  these
devices  would  in  this  way  inflict  on  the  national  dividend
needs  to  be  set  against  whatever  indirect  benefit  they  may
confer  upon  it.

^  Beport  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  pp.  410-11.
2  Explanatory  Memorandum  [Cd.  8911],  p.  5,


CHAPTEE    XIII

INTERFERENCE    TO    RAISE    WAGES    IN    PLACES    AND    OCCUPATIONS
WHERE    THEY  ARE    UNFAIR

§  1.  The  way  is  now  prepared  for  a  direct  inquiry  into
the  probable  effect  upon  the  national  dividend  of  interference
to  raise  the  rate  of  wages  at  any  point  above  the  "  natural
level."  As  a  preliminary  to  this  attempt  it  is  convenient
to  set  out  Dr.  Marshall's  definition  of  a  fair  rate  of  wages.
Keal  wages  in  any  occupation  are  fair,  according  to  this
definition,  when,  allowance  being  made  for  differences  in
the  steadiness  of  the  demand  for  labour  over  a  year  in
different  industries,  "  they  are  about  on  a  level  with  the
payment  made  for  tasks  in  other  trades  which  are  of  equal
difficulty  and  disagreeableness,  which  requii'e  equally  rare
natural  abilities  and  an  equally  expensive  training."  ^  It
is  easily  seen  that,  provided  the  wages  paid  to  workpeople
in  all  occupations  are  equal  to  the  values  of  the  marginal
net  produces  of  their  work,  fair  wages  in  this  sense  are  a
necessary  correlate  of  what  I  have  called  in  Chapter  IX.
the  ideal  distribution  of  labour.  This  circimistance  enables
us  to  state  our  problem  in  such  a  way  that  some  of  the
results  obtained  in  Chapter  IX.  can  be  utilised  in  the
discussion  of  it.  I  shall  ask  first  whether,  and,  if  so,  in
what  circumstances,  the  national  dividend  will  be  benefited
by  interference — in  the  form,  for  example,  of  the  legal
enforcement  throughout  a  district  or  occupation  of  real
piece-rates  equal  to  those  paid  by  reputable  firms  there —
designed  to  raise  wages  that  are  unfairly  low ;  and  secondly,
whether,  and,  if  so,  in  what  circumstances,  it  will  be  benefited
*  Introduction  to  L.  C.  Price's  Industrial  Peace,  p.  xiii.
505


506  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

by  interference  designed  to  raise  wages  that  are  already  fair.
In  the  present  and  following  chapters  I  shall  endeavour  to
answer  these  questions  upon  the  assumption  that  the  reactions
produced  by  the  earnings  of  workpeople  upon  their  efficiency  can
be  ignored,  and  I  shall  reserve  for  Chapter  XVI.  the  inquiry
how  far  our  results  must  be  modified  when  that  assumption
is  removed.  Let  us  turn  then  to  the  theme  of  the  present
chapter,  namely,  the  effect,  apart  from  the  reactions  on
workpeople's  efficiency,  of  interference  with  unfair  rates  of
wages.

§  2.  In  real  life,  when  the  wage  rate  ruling  at  any  point
is  unfairly  low,  the  unfairness  may  be  the  resultant  of  two  or
more  separate  elements  of  unfairness,  produced  by  different
causes,  which  operate,  perhaps  in  the  same,  perhaps  in  contrary
directions.  In  the  practical  treatment  of  a  case  of  this  kind,
the  consequences  of  interference  against  each  of  the  different
elements  of  unfairness  would  need  to  be  examined  separately,
since  it  might  happen  that  interference  was  desirable  against
one  element  and  undesirable  against  another.  But,  though
this  consideration  creates  a  difficulty  for  practice,  it  makes
no  difference  to  the  form  of  our  analysis.  For  purposes  of
exposition,  therefore,  we  are  justified  in  ignoring  it  and  in
confining  attention  to  those  forms  of  unfair  wages  in  which
the  unfairness  consists  of  a  single  element.  This  is  the
method  that  I  propose  to  adopt  in  the  following  discussion.

§  3.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  distinguish  between
two  principal  sorts  of  unfair  wage.  On  the  one  hand,  wages
may  be  unfair  in  some  place  or  occupation,  because,  though
they  are  equal  to  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of
the  labour  assembled  there,  this  is  not  equal  to  the  value  of
the  marginal  net  product,  and,  therefore,  to  the  wage  rate,  of
the  labour  assembled  elsewhere.  On  the  other  hand,  wages
may  be  unfair  in  some  place  or  occupation,  because  work-
people are  exploited,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  paid  less
than  the  value  which  their  marginal  net  product  has  to  the
firms  which  employ  them.  The  effects  of  interference  with
these  two  kinds  of  unfairness  are  by  no  means  the  same,  and
the  discussion  of  them  must  be  kept  sharply  separate.  In
the    next  three    sections  I  shall   be  considering    exclusively


CH.  nil  UlfFAIE  WAGES  507

interference  with  wages  which,  though  unfair,  are  equal  to
the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  the  workers  directly
affected,  and  thus  involve  no  exploitation.

S  4.  One  preliminary  observation  of  a  general  character
should  be  made.  Given  that  the  number  of  workpeople
assembled  in  a  particular  place  or  occupation  is  such  that,  in
the  existing  conditions  of  demand  there,  the  value  of  the
marginal  net  product  of  labour,  and,  therefore,  the  wage  rate,
is  unfairly  low,  the  effect  which  interference  would  have  on
the  national  dividend  is  entirely  independent  of  the  reason
why  the  conditions  of  demand  there  are  what  they  are.  On
reflection  this  point  is  ob\'ious.  But  in  popular  argument
it  is  frequently  ignored.  Thus,  manufacturers  in  out-of-the-
way  districts  often  urge  that  the  inferiority  of  their  machinery
or  the  magnitude  of  their  freight  -  charges  (factors  which
depress  the  level  of  their  demand  for  labour)  "  justify "  the
payment  of  a  wage  lower  than  that  paid  by  their  competitors.
In  an  agreement  made  in  the  coal  industry  of  Illinois,  Indiana,
Ohio  and  Pennsylvania,  the  validity  of  this  plea  was  formally
recognised,  and  "  the  scale  nicely  adjusted  so  that  the  districts
with  the  better  quality  of  coal  and  the  lower  railway  charges
are  required  to  pay  enough  higher  wages  than  other  districts
to  counterbalance  their  superior  natural  advantages."  ^  In
hke  manner,  employers  in  towns  often  urge  that  it  is  "  justifi-
able "  for  them  to  pay  lower  real  wages  than  are  paid  for
similar  labour  in  the  country,  because  the  payment  of  fair
real  wages  would  involve  a  greater  cost  to  them  than  it
involves  to  their  country  competitors ;  or,  in  other  words,
because  the  level  of  the  real  demand  for  labour  is  forced
down  by  the  high  price  of  workpeople's  food.  Much  argu-
ment has  been  expended  upon  the  question  whether  pleas  of
this  type  are  sound  or  unsound.  The  truth  of  the  matter
is  that  they  are  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  because  they
are  irrelevant.  The  effect  which  interference  with  unfairly
low  real  wage  rates  at  any  point  produces  on  the  national
dividend  ^vill  be  good  or  bad  according  to  the  way  in  which
it  reacts  on  the  distribution  of  labour  power  between  dif-
ferent places  and  occupations  (including  the  occupation  of
^  Clanae  8  of  agreement,  U.S.  BuUetin  of  Labour,  Janoary  1897,  p.  173.


508  'ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  ni

idleness).  The  character  of  this  reaction  is  not  made  different
by  any  difference  in  the  causes  through  which  the  existing
conditions  of  the  demand  for  labour  at  the  point  affected  have
come  about.  It  depends  exclusively  on  the  causes  which
have  prevented  the  number  of  workpeople  attached  to  that
point  from  so  adjusting  itself  to  the  existing  conditions  of
demand  there  as  to  make  the  real  value  of  the  marginal  net
product  of  labour  equal  to  what  it  is  elsewhere.  We  have,
therefore,  to  distinguish  the  principal  causes  to  which  failure
of  adjustment  may  be  due,  and  to  examine  in  turn  the  effect
of  interference  with  each  of  the  different  types  of  unfair
wages  for  which  these  several  causes  are  responsible.

§  5.  First,  the  wage  rate  in  some  place  or  occupation
may  be  unfairly  low  because  the  costs  of  movement  prevent
workpeople  there  from  moving  to  other  places  or  occupations
where  the  wage  rate  is  higher.  Among  unfairly  low  wages
of  this  kind  are  included  the  abnormally  low  wages  that  may
rule  (1)  in  some  country  distant  from  others,  and  differing
from  them  in  race,  language  and  religion;  (2)  in  some
occupation,  movement  from  which  to  other  occupations  would
involve  much  loss  of  skill ;  (3)  in  some  occupation  mainly
filled  by  low-grade  unskilled  workpeople,  the  failures  of  higher
classes,  who  have  spent  their  energies  in  attempting  a  skilled
trade  or  in  confidential  service  to  a  particular  firm,  and  are,
consequently,  incapable  of  becoming  either  high-grade  un-
skilled labourers  or  skilled  workers  of  another  kind ;  (4)  in
some  district,  movement  away  from  which  would  involve  for
the  workmen  who  move  the  loss  of  special  opportunities  for
earnings  which  that  district  offers  to  their  women  [folk,
or,  for  women  workers,  to  their  men  folk ;  and  (5)  in  some
form  of  work,  to  wit,  home  work,  to  which  more  people
are  tied  by  the  non-economic  compulsion  of  family  cares — a
very  large  proportion  of  home  workers  are  married  women  or
widows^ — than,  in  the  existing  highly  developed  state  of
factory  manufacture,  economic  considerations  alone  would
warrant.  It  can  be  shown  in  a  summary  manner  that  inter-
ference designed  to  raise  any  of  these  forms  of  unfairly  low
wages  will,  apart  from  reactions  on  efficiency,  be  injurious  to
1  Cf.  Vessilitsky,  The  Honu  Worker,  p.  13.


cH.xiii  UNFAIR  WAGES  509

the  national  dividend.  The  only  part  of  the  effect  that  even
appears  to  be  advantageous  is  the  movement  of  certain
workpeople  from  points  of  lower  productivity  to  points  of
higher  productivity ;  for  the  diminution  of  work  available  to
those  workpeople  who  do  not  move  from  the  point  where  the
wage  rate  is  raised  obviously  involves  nothing  but  loss.  But
the  argument  of  Chapter  IX,  has  already  shown  that  that
movement  of  workpeople,  though  it  appears  to  be  advan-
tageous, is  not  really  so.  For  no  doctoring  of  the  wage  rate
can  alter  the  costs  of  movement ;  it  can  only  cause  the  obstacles
set  up  by  them  to  be  leapt  over  or  forced.  So  long,  however,
as  the  costs  of  movement  are  what  they  are,  that  distribution
of  labour  which  differs  from  the  absolute  ideal  only  on  account
of  the  costs  of  movement  was  shown  in  Chapter  IX.  to  be
the  ideal  distribution  relatively  to  the  fact  of  those  costs}
Any  change  of  distribution,  therefore,  so  long  as  those  costs
remain,  must  actually  make  the  dividend  smaller  than  it
would  otherwise  have  been.  Plainly,  therefore,  no  loop-hole  is
left  for  any  gain.-

§  6.  Secondly ;  the  wage  rate  in  some  place  or  occupa-
tion may  be  unfairly  low  because  ignorance  retains  there
workpeople  who,  if  costs  of  movement  alone  were  in  question,
would  find  it  advantageous  to  move.  To  determine  the  effect
of  interference  in  these  conditions  is  more  difficult  than  it
was  in  the  conditions  discussed  in  the  preceding  section.
For,  as  was  shown  in  Chapter  IX.,  while  the  forcing  of
obstacles  set  up  by  costs  of  movement  involves  a  loss  to  the
dividend,  the  forcing  of  those  set  up  by  ignorance  involves
a  gain.  Hence,  so  far  as  the  effect  of  pushing  up  wages  in
a  low-wage  trade  or  district  is  to  transfer  workpeople  from
employment  in  that  trade  or  district  to  employment  elsewhere,

^  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that,  as  old  employees  die  off,  these  costs
will  disappear  ;  for  to  young  men  contemplating  a  choice  between  the  occupation
we  are  considering  and  others  there  will  be  no  costs.  Hence,  if  wages  there  are
still  unfairly  low  after  a  number  of  years,  this  will  presumably  not  be  because
of  costs,  and  the  above  argument  against  interference  does  not  apply.

*  Thus,  in  so  far  as  home  workers  earn  a  wage  equal  to  their  maroinal
worth  —  which  is  often  low  because  they  are  in  direct  competition  with
machinery  of  great  efficiency — and  are  prevented  from  moving  into  factory
work  by  family  necessities,  the  national  dividend,  apart  from  possible  reactions
on  efficiency,  would  be  injured  by  any  forcing  up  of  their  wage  rate.


510  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

the  national  dividend  will  be  increased.  The  apparent  ad-
vantage involved  in  movement,  where  movement  occurs,  is  also
a  real  advantage.  Before,  however,  any  conclusion  can  be
drawn  as  to  the  net  effects  of  interference,  we  need  to  inquire
how  far,  and  in  what  circumstances,  the  pushing  up  of  wages
will  transfer  superfluous  workpeople  elsewhere.

When  the  method  of  engagement  that  prevails  is  the
preference  method,  it  is  plain  that,  whether  the  demand  for
labour  is  elastic  or  inelastic,  no  superfluous  new  employees
will  be  tempted  to  attach  themselves  to  the  place  or  occupa-
tion where  the  wage  rate  has  been  raised,  and  that  all  persons
dislodged  from  employment  there  will  know  themselves  to  be
definitely  and  finally  dislodged.  For,  under  this  method,
certain  men  are  formally  preferred  to  others,  and  it  is  known
that  whatever  work  is  available  will  be  wholly  concentrated
upon  them.  In  these  circumstances,  since,  if  these  others  do
not  move,  they  must  expect  to  earn  nothing  at  all,  they  will
be  under  a  very  strong  inducement  to  move.  Hence,  the
whole  effect  of  the  enhancement  of  wages  will  consist  in  the
transference  of  some  workpeople  from  points  of  less  productive
employment  to  points  of  more  productive  employment.  No
unemployment  or  partial  employment  will  be  created  anywhere
as  a  set-off  against  this  gain.  Consequently,  interference
designed  to  force  up  wages  to  the  fair  level  must  benefit  the
national  dividend.

When  the  method  of  engagement  of  labour  is  either
the  privileged  class  or  the  casual  method,  the  effect  on  the
national  dividend  is  different,  according  as  the  demand  for
labour,  in  the  place  or  occupation  where  the  wage  rate  is
raised,  has  an  elasticity  less  than,  or  greater  than,  unity.
If  the  elasticity  is  less  than  unity,  the  attractiveness  of  that
place  or  occupation  to  workpeople  already  assembled  there  will
be  increased,  because  the  mathematical  expectation  of  earnings
will  be  increased.  Consequently,  under  either  of  these  two
methods  of  engagement,  there  is  no  reason  to  anticipate  any
movement  of  workpeople  away  from  there  to  more  productive
places  or  occupations  ;  and  under  the  casual  method  there
will  probably  be  some  movement  in  the  opposite  direction.
It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  amount  of  work  available  in


CH.  xiii  UNFAIR  WAGES  511

that  place  or  occupation  will  be  diminished.  Hence,  the
national  dividend  will  necessarily  suffer.  If  the  elasticity  of
the  demand  for  labour  is  greater  than  unity,  the  attractiveness
of  the  place  or  occupation  to  the  workpeople  assembled  there,
as  well  as  to  the  outsiders,  will,  under  both  these  methods
of  engagement,  be  diminished  when  wages  are  raised.  There-
fore, it  is  prima  facie  probable  that  some  workpeople  will
move  away ;  though  it  should  be  remembered  that,  in  so  far
as  workpeople  are  better  acquainted  with,  and  so  attach
more  importance  to,  the  nominal  wage  than  to  the  prospect  of
continuous  employment,  the  tendency  to  move  may  meet  with
considerable  obstruction.  To  the  extent  that  movement  does
occur,  the  national  dividend  will  be  made  larger.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  some  workpeople,  who  formerly  were  fully
employed,  are  likely,  at  all  events  for  some  time,  to  remain
in  the  place  or  occupation  in  partial  employment.  The
injury  which  the  national  dividend  suffers  from  this  cause
may  either  exceed  or  fall  short  of  the  benefit  which  it
receives  from  the  movement  of  the  other  workpeople.  It
is  impossible  to  say  generally  whether  the  net  result
will  be  advantageous  or  disadvantageous.  It  will  be  different
in  different  circumstances.  There  is,  however,  one  case  in
which  a  definite  solution  is  obtainable.  Where  the  elasticity
of  demand  is  so  great  that  the  raising  of  the  wage  rate
to  the  "  fair  "  level  reduces  the  demand  for  labour  to  zero,  the
attractiveness  of  the  place  or  occupation  to  all  workpeople
is  also  reduced  to  zero,  and  those  assembled  at  it  must,  there-
fore, move  away.  This  condition  is  satisfied  when  individual
employers  are  so  incompetent,  or  individual  factories  or
mines  are  so  badly  situated,  that  the  enforcement  of  fair
wages  causes  them  to  collapse  altogether  before  the
competition  of  others.  When  it  is  fulfilled,  the  national
dividend  is  bound  to  be  increased  by  interference  desicrned
to  enforce  fair  wages.

§  7.  We  now  turn  to  the  second  main  class  of  unfair
wage  rates  that  was  distinguished  in  ^  3,  namely,  wage  rates
that  are  unfair,  not  because  the  value  of  the  marginal
net  product  of  labour  at  the  places  where  they  occur  is
different  from  what  it  is  elsewhere,  but  because  exploitation


512


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


on  the  part  of  employers  forces  workpeople  to  accept  in
payment  for  their  services  less  than  the  value  which  the
marginal  net  product  of  their  services  has  to  these  employers.
There  is,  indeed,  something  artificial  in  this  statement  of
the  problem,  because,  if  any  employer,  or  body  of  employers,
exploits  the  workpeople  in  his  service,  he  will,  in  general,
not  be  able  to  hire  as  much  labour  as  would  have  been
available  for  him  otherwise,  and,  consequently,  the  value
of  the  marginal  net  product  of  such  labour  as  he  does
hire  will  be  indirectly  raised.  Hence,  in  general,  if  an
employer  exploits  his  men  by  paying  them  5s.  a  week
less  than  the  value  of  their  marginal  net  product  to  him,
this  will  not  mean  that  they  are  getting  5  s.  a  week  less
than  the  fair  wage  obtainable  for  similar  work  elsewhere,
but  perhaps  only  4s.  or  3s.  less  than  this.^  This  being
understood,  we  may  proceed  to  investigate  the  way  in  which
unfairly  low  wages  due  to  exploitation  may  be  brought
about.

It  was   explained  in  Chapter  VI.  that,  if  perfectly  free
competition  prevailed  everywhere,  the  wage  rate  paid  by  any

^  This  point,  and  the  general  relation  of  the  discussion  that  follows  to  the
analysis  of  Chapter  VI.,  can  be  most  easily  understood  by  the  help  of  a  diagram.
Let  DD'  be  the  employers'  demand  curve  for  labour  and  SS'  the  workers'  supply

curve  in  the  district  under  review.  Let
PM  be  the  wage  that  would  result  from
free  competition  and  is  equal  to  the  general
rate  of  wages  for  workpeople  of  the  grade
concerned  ;  QM"  the  wage  most  profitable
to  the  workpeople  if  they  were  combined  ;
and  RM'  the  wage  most  profitable  to  the
employers.  Then  the  range  of  indeter-
minateness  described  in  Chapter  VL  is
constituted  by  all  rates  between  QM"  and
EM'.  There  is  necessarily  exploitation
if  the  employers  succeed  in  paying  any
wage  less  than  PM.  Let  us  suppose
that  they  succeed  in  paying  a  wage
RM'.  It  follows  that,  if  they  obtain
an  amount  of  labour  represented  by
OM',  then  the  measure  of  tinfaimess  in
the  wage  is  the  excess  of  PM  over  RM',
but  the  measure  of  exploitoiion  is  the  excess  of  KM'  over  RM'.  If  the  work-
people succeeded  in  establishing  a  wage  larger  than  PM,  the  exchange  index
would  necessarily  fall  on  the  demand  curve  to  the  left  of  P,  say  at  the  point  Q,
and  we  might  speak  of  an  exploitation  of  employers  by  workpeople  measured
by  the  excess  of  QM"  over  FM".


I


cu.  xni  UNFAIE  WAGES  513

employer  in  any  occupation  would  be  determinate  at  a
definite  point.  The  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of
labour  of  given  quality  would  be  the  same  to  all  employers,
and,  if  one  employer  offered  a  man  less  than  others,  that
man  would  know  that  he  could  at  once  get  as  much  as
this  value  of  his  marginal  net  product  from  others.  In  so
far,  however,  as  movements  of  workpeople  are  hampered  by
ignorance  and  costs,  a  monopolistic  element  is  introduced  into
the  wage  bargain.  Consequently,  there  is  created  a  range  of
indeterminateness,  within  which  the  wages  actually  paid  to
any  workman  can  be  affected  by  individual  "  higgling  and
bargaining."  The  upper  limit  of  this  range  is  a  wage  equal
to  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  the  workman  to
the  employer  engaging  him,  it  being  understood  that  this
value  is  not  fixed  from  outside,  but  depends  in  part  upon
how  many  men  the  employer  concerned  chooses  to  engage.
The  lower  limit  is  a  wage  equal  to  what  the  workman  believes
he  could  obtain  by  moving  elsewhere  minus  an  allowance  to
balance  the  costs  of  the  movement.  The  width  of  the  gap
between  the  workers'  minimum  and  the  employers'  maximum
varies  in  different  circumstances.  It  is  made  larger  when  the
employers  in  a  district  tacitly  or  openly  enter  into  an  agree-
ment not  to  bid  against  one  another  for  labour,  since,  in
that  event,  the  alternative  to  accepting  terms  from  them
is  to  seek  work,  not  near  by,  but  in  a  perhaps  unknown
district.  For  example,  in  some  districts  the  rate  of  pay  to
agricultural  labourers  had,  before  the  war,  become  a
matter  of  tradition  and  custom.  Though  conditions  had
become  quite  different  from  what  they  were  when  this
tradition  crystallised,  nobody  ventured  to  take  the  initia-
tive in  breaking  away  from  it.  "  The  farmer,"  says  the
Report  of  the  Land  Inquiry  Committee,  "  has  been  accustomed
to  pay  a  certain  wage  and  to  feel  that  the  conditions  of
farming  would  not  allow  him  to  go  beyond  that  limit,  and  we
have  found  instances  of  his  going  without  labour  for  a  time
rather  than  grant  a  rise  in  wages.  .  .  .  His  line  of  defence  is
greatly  strengthened  by  the  solidarity  of  interests  among
farmers.  If  an  employer  in  the  town  wishes  to  make  a  sub-
stantial advance  in  wages,  he  can  afford  to  be  indifferent  to

2  L


514  ECONOMICS  OF   WELFAKE  pt.  m

the  resentment,  if  any,  among  other  employers.  But  the
personal  bonds  between  farmers  are  extremely  close,  and  the
best  employer  of  labour  is  sensitive  to  social  ostracism.  From
many  parts  of  the  country  we  have  heard  of  cases  where
farmers  would  willingly  raise  wages  but  for  fear  of  local
opinion.  Thus,  a  farmer  told  us  that,  to  avoid  the  appearance
of  paying  higher  wages  than  the  farmers  round  him,  he  had
actually  resorted  to  subterfuge  and  adopted  a  bonus  method
of  payment."  ^  The  width  of  the  gap  is  also  greater  the  more
free  employers  are  to  make  use  of  devices  likely  to  aggravate
the  ignorance  of  their  workpeople  as  to  the  real  amount  of
the  earnings  they  are  receiving — such  devices  as  are  combated
by  the  "  particulars  clause,"  the  Truck  Acts  and  the  other  forms
of  protective  legislation  that  were  discussed  in  Chapter  IX.,
§  6.  Whenever  any  gap  exists,  exploitation  of  the  work-
people up  to  the  measure  of  this  gap  is  possible.^

Whether  and  how  far,  when  the  extent  of  the  gap  is
given,  exploitation  will  actually  take  place,  depends  partly
on  the  relative  bargaining  power  of  the  employers  and  work-
people concerned  and  partly  on  the  willingness  of  the  stronger
party  to  exercise  its  power.  Even  when  the  gap  is  large,  the
occurrence  of  exploitation  is  not  certain,  and,  in  occupations
where  the  workpeople  have  been  able  to  organise  themselves
into  strong  Trade  Unions,  supported  by  a  reserve  fund  and
bargaining  for  their  wage  rates  as  single  collective  wholes,  it  is
not  even  probable.  But  in  occupations  in  which  the  work-
people— whether  because  they  are  widely  scattered  in  space,
or  because  they  are  poor  and  ignorant,  or  because  they  are
women  who  do  not  expect  to  continue  in  industry  after
marriage,  or  for  any  other  reason — are  unorganised,  there  are
grounds  for  fearing  that  exploitation  will  often  occur.     The

^  Report  of  the  Land  Inquiry  Committee,  1914,  vol.  i.  p.  40.

"  It  is  sometimes  thought  that  an  employer's  power  of  exploitation  is
always  gi-eater  under  a  piece-wage  than  under  a  time-wage  system.  But  this  is
not  so.  Workpeople  engaged  in  operations,  the  pace  of  which  is  dependent  upon
machinery  controlled  by  employers,  often  prefer  piece-wages  on  the  gi'ound  that,
under  that  system,  they  will  be  subjected  to  less  overstrain  through  speeding-up
than  they  would  have  to  put  up  with  under  time-wages.  The  cotton  operatives
and  the  operatives  in  those  sections  of  the  boot-trade  where  machinery  is
largely  employed  appear  to  take  this  view.  (Cf.  Lloyd,  Trade  Unionism,  pp.
92-4.)


cH.  XIII  UNFAIR  WAGES  515

chief  of  these  is  that,  when  workpeople  are  unable  to  combine,
an  employer  generally  possesses  considerably  greater  strategic
strength  than  his  opponents.  First,  the  actual  process  of
bargaining  is  one  to  which  he  is  accustomed  and  to  which  he
is,  in  a  sense,  trained,  while  these  things  are  not  true  of  the
generality  of  workpeople.  Women  workers  and  children  are
especially  weak  from  this  point  of  view.  Secondly,  partly
because  he  is  generally  richer  and  partly  because  he  generally
employs  a  considerable  number  of  workmen,  an  employer
stands  to  suflfer  a  smaller  proportionate  loss  of  well-being
when  a  bargain  with  an  individual  workman  fails  to  be
consummated  than  that  individual  workman  stands  to  suffer.
He  is,  therefore,  in  a  better  position  to  push  things  to
extremes.  The  significance  of  the  number  of  people  employed
is  brought  out  by  the  comparative  weakness  of  employers  in
bargains  about  domestic  service :  "  The  alternative  to  the
well-to-do  woman  of  doing  without  a  servant  for  a  single  day
is  perhaps  as  disagreeable  to  her  as  the  alternative  to  the
servant  of  being  out  of  a  place ;  and  the  worry  and  incon-
venience to  the  mistress  of  finding  another  servant  is  at
least  as  great  as  the  discomfort  to  the  servant  of  getting
another  situation."^  Thirdly,  in  some  circumstances  for  a
workman  to  refuse  an  employer's  terms  involves  for  him
further  evil  in  addition  to  loss  of  wages.  This  will  happen
if,  besides  being  a  workman,  he  is  also  a  tenant  to  his
employer,  and  so  liable  to  eviction  from  his  house.  In  view
of  these  considerations,  if  an  employer  of  unorganised  work-
people chooses  to  exercise  his  bargaining  power,  he  can  pay
wages  much  nearer  to  the  workman's  minimum  than  to  his
own  maximum.  Where  employers  reckon  to  keep  the  same
workpeople  for  a  long  time,  fear  of  injuring  these  work-
peoples'  future  efficiency  may  induce  them  in  their  own  interest
to  concede  terms  more  liberal  than  they  need  have  done.
Furthermore,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  feelings  of  generosity  and
kindliness  will  often  prevent  employers  from  fully  exercising
their  power.  But,  when  they  are  themselves  very  poor,  there  is
little  scope  for  generosity:  and,  even  when  they  are  not  very
poor,  if  they  work  through  foremen  or  sub-contractors  employed
*  Webb,  Lidustrial  Demoemey,  p.  675.


516  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

upon  piece-profits,  there  is  little  prospect  of  it.^  It  follows  that,
among  unorganised  workpeople  unable  to  bargain  collectively,
a  number  of  men  and  women  are  likely  to  be  paid  wages
approaching  much  more  nearly  to  the  lower  than  to  the  upper
end  of  the  range  of  possible  rates.  Such  wages  are,  in  general,
lower  than  the  wages  for  similar  work  that  are  paid  elsewhere,
and  are,  therefore,  "  unfair."  ^

§  8.  The  establishment  anywhere  of  unfair  wages  of  this
type  does  not  involve,  at  all  events  directly,  any  divergence
in  the  actual  distribution  of  labour  from  the  most  advan-
tageous distribution.  All  that  it  involves  directly  is  that  in
some  places  certain  workpeople,  who  would  in  any  event  have
been  employed  there,  are  mulcted  of  part  of  their  possible
earnings  by  the  greater  strategic  strength  of  opposing  bargainers.
Thus,  it  appears  prima  facie  that,  though  the  abolition  of  this
type  of  unfairness  would  presumably  benefit  economic  welfare
as  a  whole  by  preventing  the  relatively  rich  from  taking
money  from  the  relatively  poor,  it  would  make  no  difference
to  the  magnitude  of  the  national  dividend.  This  prima  facie
conclusion  omits,  however,  to  take  account  of  certain  important
indirect  effects.  These  are  three  in  number,  and  have  now  to
be  noticed  in  turn.

First,  the  forcing  down  of  wages  in  particular  places  or
occupations,  though  it  does  not  reduce  the  labour  supply
sufficiently  to  compel  employers  to  refrain  from  it,  does  reduce
it  to  some  extent.     When  this  happens,  the  quantity  of  labour

1  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  excessive  pressure  to  which  children
were  subjected  under  the  old  factory  system  was  partly  due  to  the  fact  that
overseers  were  paid  piece-wages.  (Cf.  Oilman,  A  Dividend  to  Labour,  p.  32.)
In  like  manner,  the  "  sweating  "  that  is  sometimes  found  among  the  employees
of  sub-contractors  is  probably  traceable,  not  to  the  system  of  sub-contract,  but
to  the  fact  that  sub-contractors  are  generally  small  masters  on  piece  profits.

2  It  may  possibly  be  argued  against  the  above  analysis  that,  though  an
employer  may  succeed,  by  bargaining,  in  forcing  upon  workmen,  other  than  the
man  most  expensive  to  him,  a  wage  below  the  value  of  their  marginal  net  product,
it  cannot  pay  him  to  treat  this  man  so.  For  it  will  be  to  his  interest  to  go  on
engaging  fresh  hands  till  the  wage  and  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of
the  workman  most  expensive  to  him  are  equal.  Hence,  it  is  impossible  for  any
employer  who  pays  to  all  his  workpeople  the  same  efficiency-wage  to  pay  to  any
of  them  less  than  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  their  work.  This
argument,  however,  tacitly  assumes  that  an  employer,  whom  it  would  pay  to
engage  fresh  hands  at  an  exploited  wage  rate,  will  be  able  to  do  this  to  an
indefinite  extent.     No  such  assumption  is  warranted.


f


CH.  XIII  UNFAIK  WAGES  517

employed  there  will  be  so  far  contracted  that  the  value  of  the
marginal  net  product  of  labour  there  is  greater  than  it  is
elsewhere.  This  involves  injury  to  the  national  dividend.  Con-
sequently, a  forcing-up  of  the  wage  rate,  by  bringing  in  men
from  other  occupations  which  yield  a  smaller  marginal  return,
would  benefit  it.  In  so  far,  for  example,  as  the  wages  of  agri-
cultural labourers  before  the  war  were  kept  down  by  tacit
understandings  among  farmers,  the  legal  enforcement  of  a  higher
wage  would  have  increased  the  number  of  these  labourers  in  a
way  unambiguously  advantageous  to  the  national  dividend.^

Secondly,  it  was  pointed  out  in  Part  II.  Chap.  VI.  §  14,
that,  "  when  their  clients,  be  they  customers  or  workpeople,
can  be  squeezed,  employers  tend  to  expend  their  energy  in
accomplishing  this,  rather  than  in  improving  the  organisation
of  their  factories."  To  prevent  them  from  seeking  profit  along
the  line  of  bargaining  power  indirectly  impels  them  to  seek  it
along  that  of  technical  improvement.  Thus,  Mr.  MaUon
writes  :  "An  employer,  compelled  by  the  Trade  Board  [through
the  institution  of  a  minimum  wage]  to  scrutinise  his  factory,
found  that,  through  lax  organisation,  its  workers  were  often
kept  waiting  for  work  to  their,  and  his  own,  considerable  loss.
Applying  himself  to  the  removal  of  this  cause  of  waste,  he
was  soon  able  to  provide  for  the  steady  and  continuous
employment  of  the  workers,  the  outcome  being  substantial
gain  to  them,  and,  in  at  least  an  equal  degree,  to  himseK.
Such  cases  could  be  multiplied  indefinitely.  In  many  factories
and  workshops  for  the  first  time  methods  and  equipment  are
being  overhauled,  with  results  at  which  many  of  the  employers,
not   at   the   outset   in    favour   of  the   Act,   are   pleased   and

^  It  is  thus  perfectly  correct  to  attribute  a  portion  of  the  transference  from
arable  to  grass  farming  that  has  taken  place  in  England  since  the  'seventies  to  the
low  rates  of  wages  driving  the  labourers  off  the  land.  (Cf.  Hall,  Agriculture  after
the  War,  p.  121.)  Another  and  a  larger  portion  of  it  is,  however,  dne  to
the  cheapening  of  imported  food,  which  has  rendered  the  employment  of  British
resources  in  direct  food  production  less  profitable  relatively  to  other  employ-
ments than  it  used  to  be.  To  substitute  grass  farming  for  arable  farming  is
merely  one  way  of  reducing  the  resources  devoted  to  food  production  in  this
country,  as  against  the  production  of  other  things  by  the  sale  of  which  food  can
be  purchased  from  abroad  ;  for,  as  Mr.  Hall  observes,  ' '  land  [apart,  of  course,
from  special  sorts  of  land]  under  arable  cultivation  produces  nearly  three  times
as  much  food  as  when  under  grass  and  employs  ten  times  as  many  men "
(ibid.  p.  127).


518  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

astonished."  ^  With  this  passage  may  be  compared  a  kindred
observation  of  Mr.  Hunter's :  "  Through  cheap  labour,  manu-
facturers are  often  able  to  retain  and  perpetuate  methods
of  manufacture  which  are  unnecessary  and  antiquated.
Mechanical  ingenuity  and  inventive  skill  are  enabled  to  lie
dormant,  because  the  labour  of  women  and  children  is  cheap
and  plentiful."  If  the  cheap  labour  were  excluded,  "a
thousand  devices  latent  in  inventive  brains  would  quickly
make  good  any  momentary  loss."  ^  Other  writers  emphasise
the  same  point.  Miss  Black  argues  :  "  Low-priced  labour  is  a
great  obstacle  to  improvement.  It  discourages  invention  and
removes  or  prevents  the  growth  of  a  great  stimulus  to  progress
and  efficiency.  ...  It  has  been  shown  over  and  over  again
that,  when  employers  are  prevented  from  developing  their
business  along  the  lines  of  cheap  labour  or  bad  conditions,
they  proceed  to  develop  it  along  the  lines  of  improved  methods,
and  that  the  improved  methods  tend  both  to  increased  output
and  to  greater  cheapness."  ^  In  like  manner,  Mr.  Eowntree
believes  factory  equipment  and  so  forth  to  be  worse  in
Belgium  than  in  England.  As  the  employer,  he  writes,
"  finds  ready  to  his  hand  a  large  supply  of  badly  organised
labour  willing  to  work  very  long  hours  for  exceedingly  low
wages,  he  naturally  takes  the  line  of  least  resistance,  and
makes  use  of  this  instead  of  striving  after  improved  methods
and  investing  in  labour-saving  machinery."  *  Care  must,
indeed,  be  taken  to  avoid  confusion  in  this  matter.  When
workpeople  are  paid  the  full  value  of  their  marginal  net
product,  no  less  than  when  they  are  exploited,  employers  are
likely  to  introduce  a  larger  amount  of  machinery,  the  more
expensive  is  hand  labour.  It  might,  therefore,  seem  at  first
sight  that  the  forcing  up  of  exploited  and  of  unexploited
wage  rates  is  on  all  fours.  But  this  is  not  really  so.  For
the  forcing-up  of  unexploited  wage  rates  causes  employers  to
resort  to  machinery  as  a  second-best  alternative  to  the  labour
which  they  are  compelled  to  forgo ;  whereas  the  forcing  up  of
exploited  wages  leaves  the  quantity  of  labour  which  it  pays

1  Iiidustrial  Unrest  and  the  Living  Wage,  p.  165.

*  Poverty,  pp.  244-5,

3  Black,  Makers  of  our  Clotlies,  pp.  185  and  192.

*  Laiid  and  Labour,  p.  530.


cH.  XIII  UNFAIK  WAGES  519

them  to  employ  unaffected,  and  simply  adds  a  stimulus  to
their  inventive  energy.  Hence,  the  general  statement  set  out
at  the  beginning  of  this  paragraph  gives  a  correct  representa-
tion of  the  facts.

Thirdly,  if  particular  employers  outbargain  their  workmen,
in  such  wise  as  to  compel  some  or  all  of  them  to  accept  a  wage
below  the  value  of  their  marginal  net  product,  it  necessarily
happens  that  these  employers  are  receiving  more  than  the
normal  earnings  of  persons  of  their  degree  of  competence ; —
a  state  of  affairs  which,  in  view  of  the  imperfect  mobility  of
employing  power  between  occupations,  may  continue  for  some
time.  If  the  exploiting  employers  were  persons  of  the
ordinary  competence  of  their  grade,  interference  which  forced
up  the  wages  paid  by  them  to  the  fair  level  would  simply
compel  them  to  hand  over  to  workpeople  profits  formerly
exacted  from  them  hj  force  majeure,  and  would  have  no  other
effect.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  exploitation  of  this  kind
is  much  more  often  practised  by  incompetent  or  badly  situated
employers,  who,  without  it,  could  not  maintain  themselves  in
business,  than  by  competent  and  well- situated  men.  The
small  masters  have,  throughout  history,  been  always  the
worst  exploiters.  Hence,  exploitation  provides,  in  the  main,  a
bounty  at  the  workers'  expense  for  relatively  incompetent  and
badly  situated  employers ;  and  the  prevention  of  exploitation
would  tend  to  hasten  their  defeat  at  the  hands  of  more  efficient
rivals.  This  consideration,  in  conjunction  with  the  others  that
have  preceded  it,  makes  it  plain  that  external  interference  to
prevent  that  type  of  unfair  wages  which  I  have  described  as
exploitation  is  desirable  in  the  interest  of  the  national  dividend
as  well  as  upon  other  grounds.

§  9.  All  that  has  been  said  hitherto,  both  of  unfair
wages  that  are  equal  to  the  value  of  marginal  net  product,
and  of  unfair  wages  that  are  exploited  below  the  value
of  marginal  net  product,  is  of  quite  general  application.  It
holds  good  equally  of  men's  wages  and  of  women's  wages  ;
and,  of  course,  in  view  of  their  inferior  organisation,  the
danger  of  exploitation  is  especially  great  with  women.
Any  specific  plea  that  the  wage  of  either  sex  in  any
place    or    occupation    is  unfair  would  need  to    be    reviewed


520  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  m

in  the  light  of  it.  There  still  remains,  however,  a  somewhat
special  problem  arising  out  of  the  relation  between  men's  wages
and  women's  wages,  which  our  airatysis  does  not  cover.  It
may~happeii  that  women's  wages  in  some  place  or  occupation
are  fair  relatively  to  women's  wages  in  other  places  or  occupa-
tions, but  unfair  relatively  to  men's  wages  in  that  place  or
occupation.  This  statement  has  not,  of  course,  anything  to
do  with  the  well-known  fact  that  women's  day  wages  on
the  average  are  considerably  lower  than  men's  day  wages.
Women,  looking  forward,  as  they  do,  to  matrimony  and  a
life  in  the  home,  are  not  trained  to  industry  as  men  are,
and  do  not  devote  to  it  that  period  of  their  lives  when
they  are  strongest  and  most  capable.  Thus,  between  the
age -periods  of  18  —  20  and  25  —  35  there  is  a  great  decrease
in  the  percentage  of  women  who  are  engaged  in  wage-earning
occupations,  and  this  is  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  withdrawal
of  many  of  them  at  marriage.  In  the  period  45-55,  and
still  more  markedly  in  the  period  55  —  65,  while  the  per-
centage of  "  occupied "  men  declines  very  rapidly,  the  per-
centage of  "  occupied "  women  hardly  declines  at  all,  the
explanation  being  that  many  women  return  to  industry
after  the  death  of  their  husbands.^  In  these  circumstances,
even  though  women's  natural  endowments  of  mind  and
muscle  were  equal  to  those  of  men,  which,  on  the  average,
they  are  not,  it  would  be  surprising  if  their  day  wages
were  not  lower.  Certainly,  the  fact  that  they  are  lower
involves  no  unfairness  in  the  sense  in  which  that  term  is
here  used.  '  In  some  places  or  occupations,  however,  it  may
happen  that,  not  only  the  day  wages,  but  also  the  piece  wages,
or,  more  accurately,  the  efficiency  wages,  of  women  are  lower
than  those  of  men.  This  state  of  things  may  come  about
because  women's  wages  in  those  places  or  occupations  are
unfair  relatively  to  women's  wages  elsewhere.  In  that
event  there  is  nothing  special  about  it,  and  the  analysis
relevant  to  it  has  already  been  given  in  preceding  sections.

^  Of.  [Cd.  4671],  p.  23.  Professor  Chapman  refers  to  this  point  in  connection
with  home  work,  pointing  out  that  much  of  this  work  requires  only  such  skill
as  can  be  acquired  by  anybody  at  any  time  of  life,  and  is  taken  up  by  untrained
persons,  who  "suddenly  find  it  necessary  to  do  something,  or  have  to  make
money"  (Home  Work,  Manchester  Statistical  Society,  Jan.  1910,  p.  93).


CH.  XIII  UNFAIR  WAGES  521

But  it  may  also  come  about  because  women's  wages  in  those
places  or  occupations  are  unfair  relatively  to  men's  wages  there,
although  they  are  fair  relatively  to  women's  wages  elsewhere.
It  is  this  state  of  things  that  constitutes  our  present  problem.
In  order  to  understand  the  matter  rightly,  analysis  is
necessary.  The  common  idea  is  that  women  are  normally
paid  less  than  men,  because  men's  wages  have,  in  general,  to
support  a  family,  while  women's  wages  have  only  to  support
the  women  themselves.  This  is  very  superficial.  The  correct
line  of  approach  would  seem  to  be  as  follows.  The  pro-
ductive efficiency  of  a  representative  woman  relatively  to
that  of  a  representative  man  is  different  in  different  occupa-
tions: in  some,  such  as  nursing  and  the  tending  of  infants,
it  is  much  greater;  in  others,  such  as  coal -mining  and
navvy  work,  it  is  much  less.  If  we  knew  enough  of  the
facts,  we  could  draw  up  a  Ust  of  all  occupations,  giving  for
each  of  them  the  amount  of  normal  man's  labour  to  which
a  day  or  week  of  normal  woman's  labour  is  equivalent.
The  relation  between  the  demand  schedules  for  women's
work  and  for  men's  work  is  determined  by  the  facts  em-
bodied in  this  list,  in  conjunction  with  the  general  conditions
of  demand  for  the  products  of  the  several  occupations.  The
relation  between  the  supplies  of  women's  work  and  of  men's
work  is  determined  partly  by  the  physiological  fact  that  male
and  female  children  survive  in  nearly  equal  numbers,  what-
ever the  comparative  wages  ruling  for  men's  work  and  women's
work  may  be ;  and  partly  by  the  economic  fact  that  the
proportions,  respectively,  of  the  men  and  women  in  existence
who  offer  their  work  in  industry  depends,  not  only  on
the  wages  offered  to  members  of  either  sex  separately,  but
also,  since  women  are  the  less  likely  to  work  at  industry  the
more  money  their  husbands  are  earning,  on  the  aggregate
amount  of  the  joint  family  income.  These  two  sets  of
influences  together  govern  and  determine  the  relation  between
the  general  level  of  the  wages  per  day  paid  to  representative
members  of  the   two  sexes.  ^      In  equilibrium  there    is    one

'  This  analysis  may  be  formulated  mathematically  as  follows  :
Let  lOj  be  the  rate  of  women's  wages  per  day,
iTg  the  rate  of  men's  wages  per  day.
Then,  since  the  amount  of  women's  labour  offered  in  industry  at  any  given


522  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  hi

general  rate  of  representative  men's  day  wages  and  one
general  rate  of  representative  women's  day  wages,  the  one
or  the  other  being  higher  according  to  the  circumstances
of  supply,  and  according  as  the  commodities  demanded  by
the  public  are  chiefly  commodities  for  the  manufacture  of
which  the  one  or  the  other  sex  is  specially  well  fitted.^
Men  alone  are  employed  in  all  occupations  where  the  ratio  of
their    efficiency  to  women's    efficiency  exceeds    the    ratio    of


wage  depends  in  part  upon  the  rate  of  men's  wages — being,  in  general,  smaller
the  larger  these  are,  the  supply  of  women's  labour  may  be  written  f-i^iw^jW^.
In  like  manner,  the  supply  of  men's  labour  may  be  viviiten  f^(w^,w^.

_   n^A  £.  are  positive,  and  — V— ' —


And  we  know  that ^^ —  and ; are  positive,  and  — V-


3/2(^1,^2)
and  — V"^ are  negative.

Again,  since  the  amount  of  women's  labour  demanded  in  industry  at  any
given  wage  depends  upon  the  rate  of  men's  wages — being,  in  general,  smaller
the  smaller  these  are  —  the  demand  for  women's  labour  may  be  wi-itten
^1  (w^jWo),  and  the  demand  for  men's  labour  <p2  {iv^jW.^.     And  we  know  that

are  positive.

The  two  equations,  which  suffice  to  determine  our  two  unkno\vns,  are :

(1)  /i(w'i,W2)  =  9^1  (^1.^2)

(2)  f2(lOi,lV2)  =  <p.2(tVi,W^).

It  may  be  added  that,  if  the  proportion  of  women  and  men  offering  work  in
industry  were  determined  solely  by  the  proportion  of  women  and  men  in
existence,  we  should  have  to  do  with  a  straightforward  problem  of  joint-supply;
for,  obviously,  the  comparative  numbers  of  the  two  sexes  are  determined  by  physio-
logical causes  outside  the  range  of  economic  influences.  In  these  conditions,
therefore,  both  the  supply  of  women  workers  and  the  sujjply  of  men  workers
would  be  functions  of  one  variable,  this  variable  being  some  symbol  of  a  normal
family  income,  such  as  (^o^  +  w^).  'For  /^{w^yVJ^,  sm^  f2{w^,w^,  we  should
have  to  write  /  (w^  ■{■  w<^  and  kf  (w^  +  w.^)  :  and  in  countries  where  males  and
females  survive  in  equal  numbers,  k  would  be  equal  to  unity.

1  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  European  war,  while  the  withdrawal
of  men  from  industry  for  the  army  naturally  tended  to  raise  men's  wages
relatively  to  women's  wages,  the  character  of  the  commodities  demanded  by  the
public  was  changed  in  a  way  tending  in  the  opposite  direction.  Ordinary
tailoring  and  munition  making,  the  demand  for  both  of  which  enormously
expanded,  appear  to  be  better  adapted  for  women's  work  than  the  general  run
of  industries.  In  the  Report  of  the  Conference  of  the  British  Association  on
Outlets  for  Labour  after  the  J  far  it  is  suggested  that,  on  the  whole,  the  special
war  demand  of  the  Government  was  "a  demand  for  a  class  of  goods  in  the
production  of  which  a  greater  proi)ortion  of  women  rather  than  men  can  be
more  usefully  and  economically  employed  than  under  normal  peace  conditions  "
{lieport,  1915,  p.  8).


CH.  XIII  UNFAIE  WAGES  523

their  day  wages  to  women's  day  wages ;  women  alone  in  all  f
occupations  in  opposite  case  ;  and  men  and  women  indifferently
in  the  marginal  occupations  in  which  their  respective  efl&ciencies
bear  to  one  another  the  same  ratio  as  their  respective  day  '
wages.  In  these  marginal  occupations,  that  is  to  say,  the  /
efficiency  wages  of  the  two  sexes  are  equal.  This  equality
of  efficiency  wages  means,  with  certain  allowances,  equality
of  piece  wages.  The  principal  allowances  are,  first,  a  small
extra  for  men  because,  since,  at  need,  they  can  be  put  on
night -work  and  can  be  sworn  at  more  comfortably,  it  is
rather  more  convenient  to  employ  them ;  secondly,  a  small
extra  to  the  more  skilful  workers,  whether  men  or  women,
because  they  occupy  machinery  for  a  shorter  time  than
less  skilful  workers  in  accomplishing  a  given  job^  In  equili-
brium the  piece  wages  paid  to  the  members  of  the  two
sexes  in  the  marginal  occupations  are,  with  these  limitations,
equaL^  This  is  the  state  of  things  which  the  play  of  economic
forces  tends  to  bring  about ;   and,  so  far  as  it  in  fact  brings  it

*  It  so  happens  in  fact — as  indeed  is  probable  a  priori — that  the  range  of
these  marginal  occupations  is  in  this  country  smalL  The  Poor  Law  Com-  i
missioners  report:  "About  four-fifths  of  the  occupied  male  population  aft  >
engaged  in  employments  which  they  monopolise,  or  in  which  women  are  a
negligible  factor  as  regards  possible  competition,  such  as  agriculture,  mining,
fishing,  btiilding,  transport,  wood,  gas  and  water,  and  the  staple  metal  and
machine-making  trades,  all  of  which  are  virtually  male  preserves.  Only  one-
fifth  of  the  males  are  engaged  in  trades  where  women  enter  to  the  extent  of  1
per  cent  of  the  whole  number  of  occupied  females  "  {Report,  p.  324).  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Webb  witness  to  the  same  efiect :  "There  are  a  very  small  number  of
cases  in  which  men  and  women  compete  directly  with  each  other  for  employ-
ment on  precisely  the  same  operation  in  one  and  the  same  process "  (TS'ebb,
Industrial  Democracy,  "p.  oQQ.  Ci.  &\ao^vaa.ri.  Economic  Studies,  ^.\\%.)  When
one  sex  appears  to  be  invading  the  province  of  the  other,  the  fact  generally  is
that  the  process,  as  well  as  the  workers,  is  being  changed.  Thus,  machinery
and  males  have  come  into  lace  and  laundry  work  :  machinery  and  females  into
boot-making  and  tailoring.  The  Poor  Law  Commissioners  report :  "In  the  boot
and  shoe  trade — which  has  been  distinctively  a  male  industry — women  are
certainly  obtaining  a  relatively  stronger  hold,  owing  to  the  division  of  labour
which  now  furnishes  certain  lighter  processes,  suitable  for  women,  that  were
formerly  done  as  part  of  the  general  work  of  male  shoemakers.  Slipper-making,
for  instance,  is  now  passing  entirely  into  female  hands  "  {Report  of  the  BoyaZ
Commissioji  on  the  Poor  La^c,  p.  324).  Also,  on  the  authority  of  the  Board  of
Trade  inquiry  into  the  Cost  of  Living  of  the  Working  Classes:  "The  same
phenomenon  occurs  in  other  fields  ;  for  instance,  in  Sheffield,  file -cutting,  an
occupation  which  used  to  be  largely  done  by  female  out-workers — the  work
requiring  rather  dexterity  than  strength  —  is  now  being  done  by  heavy
machinery  requiring  male  attendants "  {ibid.  p.  324).  The  Commissioners
summarise  their   views   thus :    ' '  The   conclusion  is   that,  while   women   and


524  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  m

about,  it  is  not  possible  for  women's  wages  in  any  place  or
occupation  to  be  fair  relatively  to  women's  wages  elsewhere
and  yet  unfair  relatively  to  men's  wages  there.

In  real  Hfe,  however,  it  happens  from  time  to  time  that
economic  equilibrium  in  this  matter  is  not  attained.  In
particular  occupations  employers  may  pay  to  women  workers  an
efficiency  wage  which,  though  fair  relatively  to  women's  wages
elsewhere,  is  less  than  the  efficiency  wage  they  are  paying  to
men  workers,  and  yet  may  still  employ  some  men.  They  may
do  this  either  for  a  short  time,  while  they  are  in  process  of
substituting  the  one  sex  for  the  other ;  or  for  a  long  time,
because  trade  union  pressure  or  custom  either  compels  the
retention  of  some  men,  or  vetoes  the  entry  of  more  than  a
limited  number  of  women.  In  these  conditions  is  the  claim
"  equal  pay  for  workers  of  equal  efficiency "  justified  ?  In
what  way  would  interference  to  raise  the  women's  efficiency
wage  to  the  level  of  the  men's  affect  the  national  dividend  ?

If  the  power  of  tradition,  custom  or  trade  union  pressure
is  such  that  neither  the  number  of  women  attached  to  the
occupation  under  review  nor  the  number  of  women  employed
there  will  be  different  if  employers  are  allowed  to  pay  them  the

juveniles  are  now  engaged  in  many  industries  in  which  the  specialisation
of  machinery  enables  them  to  take  part,  they  are  not,  in  any  considerable
trade  or  process,  displacing  adult  males  in  the  sense  that  they  are  being
more  largely  employed  to  do  work  identical  with  that  formerly  done  by
men.  The  great  expansion  of  women's  labour  seems  to  have  been  in
new  fields  of  employment,  or  in  fields  which  men  never  occupied.  It
should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that,  even  when  women  are  employed
where  men  used  to  be  employed,  this  is  largely  due  to  the  men  going  into
more  highly  paid  industries.  Mining,  machine-making  and  building  have
■  of  late  years  attracted  an  abnormal  number  of  men  and  boys "  {ibid.  p.
325),  This  view  is  fully  borne  out  by  what  occurred  during  the  European
war.  The  British  Association  Conference  of  1915  on  Outlets  for  Labour  after
the  War  reported  :  "  Even  during  the  present  time  of  stress,  when  women  are  to
a  certain  extent  doing  work  which  would  normally  be  done  by  men,  the  work,
as  shown  in  the  detailed  portion  of  this  Report  dealing  with  separate  trades,  is
very  rarely  similar  either  as  regards  process  or  conditions.  With  the  introduc-
tion of  women  the  work  has  often  to  be  sub-divided,  and  the  men  generally
have  at  least  the  ardupusness  of  their  work  increased,  with  oft-times  the
addition  of  over-time  and  night-work  and  a  larger  amount  of  work  entailing  a
greater  strain.  Where  workshops  have  been  recently  built  for  women  workers,
they  have  been  equipped  with  machines  of  a  different  type  from  what  would
have  been  installed  had  the  management  been  able  to  procure  trained  men  "
{loc.  cit.  p,  15).  Cf.  also  Report  of  tlie  War  Cabinet  Committee  on  Women  in
Industry,  1919,  pp.  21-2.


CH.  XIII  UNFAIE  WAGES  525

lower  rate  from  what  it  will  be  if  they  are  forced  to  pay  the
higher  rate,  the  national  dividend  will  not  be  affected  at  all.
This,  however,  is  a  very  improbable  state  of  affairs.  For,
even  though  the  number  of  women  who  may  be  employed  in
the  occupation  is  rigidly  limited,  it  is  likely  that  the  number
trained  for  and  attached  to  it  will  be  made  greater  by  the
higher  wage  rate ;  and,  if  this  happens,  the  dividend  obviously
suffers  from  the  enforced  idleness  of  those  who  are  attached
but  not  employed.  Furthermore,  in  real  life  permission  to
pay  the  lower  wage  rate  will  seldom  be  without  effect  on  the
number  of  women  who  are  employed  there  and  take  the  place
of  men.  For  example,  "  in  Stoke-upon-Trent  it  appears  that
women  and  girls  are  very  largely  employed  in  the  pottery
industry.  In  some  branches  of  this  trade  they  are  being
employed  to  an  increasing  extent  upon  work  which,  a  few
years  ago,  was  performed  almost  exclusively  by  men ;  they  are
now  acting  in  competition  with  male  labour ;  and,  as  they  are
able  to  do  similar  work  for  lower  wages,  they  are  gradually
driving  men  from  certain  sections  of  the  trade."  ^  This  con-
sideration confirms  Professor  Cannan's  contention,  that  "  the
most  powerful  lever  for  increasing  the  opportunities  of  women  is
taken  away  if  they  are  not  allowed  to  do  the  work  cheaper."  ^
It  follows  that,  generally  speaking,  to  compel  the  payment  to
them  of  an  efficiency  wage  equal  to  that  paid  to  men  in
occupations  which  they  are  seeking  to  enter,  and  in  which
such  a  rate  would  give  them  higher  earnings  than  similar
women  can  obtain  elsewhere,  must  obstruct  their  entry  either
directly,  or  indirectly  by  relaxing  employers'  efforts  to  break
down  the  customs  and  rules  that  hinder  it.  But,  since,
ex  hypothesi,  they  are  more  efficient,  relatively  to  men,  in
these  occupations  than  they  are  in  marginal  occupations
common  to  both  sexes,  their  entry  would  necessarily  be
beneficial  to  the  national  dividend.  Hence,  generally  speak-
ing, interference  designed  to  enforce  the  payment  to  them  of  a
"  fair "  wage,  as  compared  with  the  wages  paid  to  men,  in
circumstances  when  this  means  an  unfairly  high  wage  as  com-
pared with  women's  wages  elsewhere,  would  injure  the  national

*  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  p.  323.
2  WeaUh,  p.  206.


I


526  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

dividend.^  Interference  may  still  conceivably  be  advocated  by
those  who  wish  to  exclude  women  from  industry,  as  far  as  that
can  be  done,  on  general  social  grounds.  Such  a  defence  for  it
is,  however,  insecure,  because  interference  of  the  type  here  dis-
cussed, not  only  lessens  the  aggregate  number  of  women  in
industry,  but  distributes  them  among  different  occupations  in  a
wasteful  manner.  The  social  argument  for  excluding  women  from
industry  generally  cannot  sustain  a  policy  which  has  this  effect.
S  10.  In  view  of  the  distinctions  that  have  been  found,
in  the  course  of  this  chapter,  to  exist  between  different  forms
of  unfair  wages,  it  is  plain  that  interference  directed  indis-
criminately against  all  forms  must  do  harm  as  well  as  good.
The  procedure,  which,  if  practicable,  would  most  advantage
the  national  dividend,  would  be  to  examine  and  deal
separately  with  every  place  or  occupation  where  there
was  prima  facie  reason  to  believe  that  wages  were  unfair
in  any  of  the  senses  studied  in  the  text.  It  may,  however,
be  argued  that  this  plan  is  an  impracticable  one,  and  that
it  is  necessary  either  to  interfere  against  unfair  wages  by
broad  general  rules,  or  else  not  to  interfere  at  all.  Thus,
it  may  be  said,  it  is  practicable  to  pass  and  administer  a  law
like  the  French  law  of  1915,  which  provides  that  female
outworkers  shall  be  paid  a  piece  wage  that  will  yield  the
average  outworker  earnings  equal  to  those  of  an  average
factory  worker ;  ^  but  it  is  not  practicable  to  enact  that  a  wage
lower  than  this  shall  be  permitted  when  it  is  due  to  the  ties
which  restrain  home  workers  from  going  into  factories,  and
forbidden  when  it  is  due  to  exploitation.  When  the  issue
raised  is  of  this  type,  policy  must  be  based  on  a  balancing
of  conflicting  considerations.

1  It  is  possible  to  employ  the  term  "unfair"  wages  in  reference  to  women's
wages  in  a  somewhat  diflerent  sense,  and  to  hold  that  women's  wages  in  general
are  unfairly  low,  because  they  fall  short  of  what  they  would  have  been,  were
it  not  that  custom  and  tradition  permanently  exclude  women  from  certain
occupations  suited  to  their  powers,  and  so  force  some  of  them  to  take  up  work
for  which  they  are  relatively  ill-fitted.  As  was  shown  in  Chapter  IX.,  the
removal  of  all  artificial  barriers  of  this  kind  would  benefit  the  national  dividend.
But,  so  long  as  the  barriers  arc  left  standing,  reasoning  analogous  to  that
employed  in  §  5  of  the  present  chapter  proves  that  any  attempt  to  force  up
women's  wages  towards  what  they  would  be  if  the  barriers  were  removed,  will
injure  the  national  dividend.

2  Labour  Gazette,  Sept.  1915,  p.  357.


CHAPTER  XIV

THE    STATISTICAL    DETERMINATION    OF    FAIR    WAGES

Si.  Our  analysis  has  shown  that  interference  designed  to
substitute  fair  wages  for  unfair  wages  will  sometimes  benefit
the  national  dividend.  This  theoretical  result  must,  however,
remain  barren  until  we  can  ascertain  whether  the  actual  rate
of  wages  in  any  place  or  occupation  is  in  fact  fair,  and,  if  not,
what  rate  would  be  fair.  Paraphrasing  Dr.  Marshall's  defini-
tion in  shorter  form,  we  may  say  that  the  wage  paid  to  A  is
fair  relatively  to  that  paid  to  B,  when  it  bears  to  the  wage
paid  to  B  the  same  ratio  that  A's  efficiency  bears  to  B's
efficiency.^  Hence,  the  wage  that  is  fair  to  one  workman  or
group  of  workmen  relatively  to  the  wage  paid  to  another  work-
man or  group  of  workmen  can  be  determined  if,  and  in  so  far
as,  the  comparative  efficiencies  of  the  two  workmen  or  groups
of  workmen  are  known.      I  propose  to  inquire  how  far  know^-

^  The  term  efBciency  contains  ambiguities  and  difficulties  which  it  is  not
possible  to  investigate  fully  here.  Two  uses  of  it  we  may  definitely  exclude.
Efficiency  does  not  mean  for  us,  as  it  means  for  engineers,  the  ratio  of  the  output
of  energy  to  the  intake  of  fuel,  or,  in  other  words,  the  ratio  of  the  value  of  a
workman's  product  to  his  wage.  And  it  does  not  mean  for  us,  as  it  means  for
Mr.  Emerson,  the  ratio  of  a  man's  actual  output  to  the  output  which  the  task-
setter  holds  that  he  ought  to  be  able  to  produce  without  undue  strain  ;  a  man  of
100  per  cent  efficiency  being  one  who  produces  exactly  the  allotted  task.
What  it  does  mean,  however,  is  much  more  difficult  to  state  precisely.  Roughly,
we  may  speak  of  it  as  exercised  capacity.  But  in  this  definition  there  is  an
unsolved  perplexity.  On  the  one  hand,  it  seems  imperative  to  find  some  measure
of  efficiency  independent  of  the  value  which  a  unit  of  it  is  capable  of  producino'.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  this  can  be  done,  while  at  the
same  time  the  proposition  that  wages  tend  to  correspond  to  efficiency  is  main-
tained. For  a  person  with  a  units  of  moral  force,  b  of  mental,  and  c  of
physical  force  tends  to  earn  more  or  less  than  a  person  with  h  units  of  moral
force,  c  of  mental,  and  a  of  physical  force,  according  to  the  comparative
popular  demand  for  things  in  the  production  of  which  these  different  qualities
are  respectively  most  important.

527


528  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

ledge  on  this  subject  is  attainable,  first  as  between  different
workmen  engaged  in  a  single  industry  where  piece-wages  are
paid ;  secondly,  as  between  different  workmen  engaged  in  a
single  industry  where  time- wages  are  paid ;  and  thirdly,  as
between  different  workmen  engaged  in  different  industries.

§  2.  As  a  preliminary  to  this  investigation,  it  must  be
made  clear  that  the  wage,  in  the  "  fairness"  or  "  unfairness"  of
which  we  are  interested,  is  not  the  nominal  money  wage,  but
the  real  wage.  The  point  is  important,  because  the  com-
parative money  wages  ruling  in  different  places  or  occupations
frequently  do  not  afford  a  true  measure  of  the  comparative
real  wages.  In  some  occupations,  notably  agriculture,  very
considerable  payments  in  kind  are  made  in  addition  to  pay-
ments in  money.  Again,  even  when  no  payments  in  kind  are
made,  equal  money  wages  do  not  necessarily  imply  equal  real
wages,  because  the  purchasing  power  of  money  in  terms  of  the
things  that  workpeople  are  accustomed  to  purchase — princi-
pally food  and  house-room — is  different  in  different  places.
Furthermore,  in  some  occupations  special  "  amenities "  exist
which  it  is  proper  to  count  as  a  part  of  the  real  wage.  The
home  worker,  for  example,  "  cares  very  much  about  being  able
to  settle  her  own  times  of  work,  and  about  being  able  to  go
out  in  the  afternoons  and  to  have  visitors."  ^  Whenever,  for
the  above  or  any  other  reason,  money  wages  are  not  truly
representative  of  real  wages,  allowance  must  be  made  for  what-
ever discrepancy  may  exist.  That  this  may  be  done  properly,
elaborate  inquiries  as  to  the  methods  of  wage  payment  that
are  in  vogue  in  different  occupations  and  as  to  the  relative
levels  of  retail  prices  in  different  places  must  be  made.  Unless
information  on  these  subjects  is  to  hand,  any  accurate  statis-
tical determination  of  fair  real  wages  is  out  of  the  question.
There  is,  however,  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  greater  part  of
the  information  required  can  be  obtained  ;  and,  indeed,  for  the
United  Kingdom,  large  masses  of  it  are  already  available  in
various  official  publications.  We  may,  therefore,  pass  away
from  this  aspect  of  the  problem,  and  concentrate  attention
upon  more  difficult  matters.

§  3.  If  in  a  piece-wage  industry  all  workpeople  rendered

^  Miss  Collett,  Evidence  before  the  Committee  on  Home  Work,  Q.  793.


CH.  XIV  THE  STATISTICAL  PEOBLEM  529

their  services  under  exactly  similar  conditions,  their  com-
parative efficiencies  would  be  reflected  in  their  comparative
outputs,  and,  therefore,  their  wage  rates  would  be  fair  relatively
to  one  another  if,  subject  to  the  extra  for  fast  work  referred
to  in  §  9  of  the  preceding  chapter,  they  were  all  paid  at
the  same  piece  rate.  In  real  life,  however,  all  the  work-
people in  an  industry  do  not,  in  general,  render  their  services
under  exactly  similar  conditions.  When  they  do  not  do
this,  their  comparative  efficiencies  are  not  reflected  in  their
comparative  outputs,  and,  therefore,  in  order  that  wages  may
be  fair,  the  piece  rates  must  be  so  adjusted  that  different
outputs  representing  equal  efficiencies  shall  receive  the  same
reward.  The  nature  of  the  necessary  adjustments  and  their
susceptibility  to  statistical  estimation  may  most  conveniently
be  indicated  under  three  separate  heads.

§  4.  First,  allowance  must  be  made  for  differences  in  the
assistance  which  different  men  receive  in  their  work  from
machinery  or  from  nature.  Thus,  the  piece  rate  must  be
higher  for  men  working  with  obsolete  machinery,  or  in  mines
where  the  easiest  seams  have  been  used  up,  than  it  is  for  men
assisted  by  the  most  modern  appliances,  or  hewing  coal  from  a
face  that  is  easy  of  access.  Allowances  of  this  kind  have
frequently  been  provided  for  in  the  wage-agreements  of  im-
portant industries.  For  example,  "  in  mining  the  tonnage
rates  paid  to  hewers  vary  almost  indefinitely,  not  only  from
colliery  to  colliery,  but  from  seam  to  seam  within  the  same
pit,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  coal  and  the  conditions
under  which  the  coal  has  to  be  won  in  each  place ;  yet  in
some  districts  (as,  for  example,  in  Northumberland  and  Durham)
the  agreement,  which  governs  wages,  requires  that  the  tonnage
rates  throughout  the  county  shall  be  so  fixed  that  each  collier
shall  be  able  to  make  certain  agreed  earnings,  i.e.  the  "  county
average."  ^  There  is  abundant  evidence  that  men  of  local  and
trade  experience  can  calculate  with  very  close  accuracy  what
this  kind  of  allowance  ought  in  different  circumstances  to  be.

§  5.  Secondly,  allowance  must  be  made  for  differences  in
the  exact  character  of  the  article  which  different  workpeople
in  the  same  industry  are  engaged  in  making.     These  allowances

*  Report  on  Standard  Price  Sates,  1900,  p.  xiv.

2  M


530  ECONOMICS   OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

also  have  often  been  provided  for  in  important  industries  by
means  of  piece-wage  lists.  The  general  method  by  which
they  are  arranged  is  well  described  in  a  report  of  the  Labour
Department  as  follows :  "A  close  inspection  will  show  that,
notwithstanding  the  variety  of  detail  which  these  lists  exhibit,
there  are  certain  salient  features  of  construction  and  arrange-
ment common  at  least  to  the  more  important  among  them.
The  most  noteworthy  of  these  common  features  will  be  seen  to
be  the  definition  of  a  'Standard'  article  or  process,  with  a
corresponding  piece-price  fixed  in  relation  to  this  unit.  From
this  point  of  departure  the  whole  wage-scale  starts,  all  other
articles  or  processes  having  their  price  fixed  by  means  of
extras,  deductions  and  allowances,  specified  in  the  Ust,  and
corresponding  to  clearly  defined  variations  from  the  standard.
In  this  manner  it  is  possible  to  provide  for  a  very  large
number  of  processes  with  very  fine  shades  of  difference  under
a  single  price-list.  As  an  example  of  a  standard  unit  we  may
take  the  basis  of  the  book-work  scale  for  compositors  in  the
London  printing  trade :

All  works  in  the  English  language,  common  matter,  including
english  and  brevier,  are  to  be  cast  up  at  7|d.  per  1000  [ens];
minion  7fd.,  nonpareil  8|d.,  ruby  9d.,  pearl  9|d.,  diamond  ll|d.,
head  and  white  lines  included.

Here  we  have  the  piece-rates  for  the  simplest  form  of  the
work ;  if  the  language  be  foreign,  if  the  matter  involve  special
difficulty,  if  any  other  variation  or  extra  be  required,  the  scale
will  be  found  to  provide  for  the  case,  and  to  specify  the
amount  of  extra  remuneration  due  in  respect  of  the  particular
departures  from  the  standard  work  which  the  compositor  may
be  required  to  make."  ^  In  industries  whose  "  output  consists
of  a  limited  range  of  staple  articles,  more  or  less  uniform  in
character,  and  produced  in  considerable  quantities,  year  after
year,  by  identical  or  very  similar  processes  of  manufacture,"  ^
experience   shows  that   technical   experts   can  calculate  with

*  Report  on  Standard  Price  Hates,  1900,  p.  xvi,

^  Schloss,  Report  on  Gain-sharing,  p.  113.  For  a  detailed  account  of  the
arrangements  by  which  piece-scales  in  the  United  States  are  adjusted  to  varia-
tions in  the  sizes  and  patterns  of  products,  the  materials  used  and  the  physical
conditions  of  the  work,  cf.  McCabe,  The  Standard  Jiate  in  American  Trade
Unions,  Chapter  i.


CH.  XIV  THE  STATISTICAL  PROBLEM  531

close    accuracy    how     large     the    various    allowances    ought
to  be.

§  6.  For  operations  which  have  not  been  standardised  by
frequent  use,  such  as  the  great  bulk  of  repairing  work  and,
during  the  period  of  their  novelty,  all  new  operations  of  which
experience  is  lacking,  the  task  of  calculating  these  allowances
correctly  is  naturally  much  more  difficult.  But  of  late  years
it  has  been  made  easier  by  the  device  of  "  elementary  rate-
fixing."  This  device  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  great  bulk
of  industrial  operations  consist  of  some  out  of  a  comparatively
small  number  of  elementary  movements  combined  together  in
various  ways.  As  a  consequence  of  this  fact,  it  is  possible,  by
determining  from  experience  the  time  appropriate  for  each
elementary  operation,  to  calculate  beforehand  the  time  appro-
priate for  new  complex  jobs  which  have  never  been  done
before.  Of  course,  the  process  of  combining  any  set  of  elements
can  be  performed  more  rapidly  by  men  who  undertake  it
frequently  than  by  those  to  whom  the  task  falls  on  compara-
tively rare  occasions,  and,  therefore,  our  reckoning  of  the
efficiency  implied  in  any  job  will  be  somewhat  different  ac-
cording as  it  is,  or  is  not,  carried  out  often  enough  to  make  it
worth  while  for  a  group  of  workmen  to  become  specialised  upon
it.  But  this  difficulty  is  comparatively  unimportant.  The
general  character  of  the  device  of  elementary  rate-fixing  is
illustrated  in  the  following  description  :  "  Suppose  the  work  to
be  planing  a  surface  on  a  piece  of  cast  iron.  In  the  ordinary
system  of  piece  work,  the  rate-fixer  would  look  through  his
records  of  work  done  by  the  planing  machine  until  he  found
a  piece  of  work  as  nearly  as  possible  similar  to  the  proposed
job,  and  then  guess  at  the  time  required  to  do  the  new  piece
of  work.  Under  the  elementary  system,  however,  some  such
analysis  as  the  following  would  be  made :


Work  done  by  Man.

Time  to  lift  piece  from  floor  to  planer  table

Time  to  level  and  set  work  true  on  table

Time  to  put  on  stops  and  bolts

Time  to  remove  stops  and  bolts

Time  to  remove  piece  to  floor   .

Time  to  clean  machine      ....


Minutes.


532  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE

Work  done  by  Machine.

Time  to  rough  off  cut  \  in.  thick,  4  ft.  long,  2|  in.  wide
Time  to  rough  off  cut  ^  in.  thick,  3  ft.  long,  1 2  in.  wide,  etc
Time  to  finish  cut  4  ft.  long,  2|  in.  wide    .
Time  to  finish  cut  3  ft.  long,  12  in.  wide,  etc.    .

Total

Add  —  per  cent,  for  unavoidable  delays    .

It  is  evident  that  this  job  consists  of  a  combination  of
elementary  operations,  the  time  to  do  each  of  which  can  be
readily  determined  by  observation,  and,  while  this  exact  com-
bination of  operations  may  never  occur  again,  elementary  opera-
tions similar  to  some  of  those  given  will  be  performed  in
differing  combinations  almost  every  day  in  the  same  shop.
The  rate-fixer  soon  becomes  so  familiar  with  the  time  for  each
of  the  elements  that  he  can  write  them  down  from  memory.
For  the  part  of  the  work  which  is  done  by  the  machine  he
refers  to  tables,  which  are  made  out  for  each  machine,  giving
the  time  required  for  any  combination  of  breadth,  depth  and
length  of  cut."^  This  method  is  not,  of  course,  perfect,  for  to
determine  what  interval  shall  be  allowed  for  passing  from
one  elementary  process  to  another  is  still  a  matter  of  more
or  less  arbitrary  judgment.^  Nevertheless,  the  method  un-
doubtedly makes  it  feasible  to  ascertain  what  rate  of  wage  is
a  fair  one  in  a  number  of  jobs,  for  which,  apart  from  it,
this  could  not  possibly  be  done.

§  7.  Thirdly,  allowance  must  be  made  for  differences  in
the  assistance  which  different  workpeople  receive  in  their  work
from  the  co-operation  of  managing  power.  When  the  organisa-
tion of  a  factory  is  bad,  so  that  men  are  kept  waiting  for
their  material  and  so  on,  a  man  of  given  efficiency  will  be
able  to  produce  a  smaller  output,  and,  therefore,  ought  to  be
paid  a  larger  piece- wage,  than  when  the  organisation  is  good.
That  this  point  is  very  important  is  suggested  by  the  following
comment  of  an  experienced  observer :  "  The  methods  and  dis-
tribution of  work  vary  surprisingly  in  different  places,  and  the
real  wage  received  is  greatly  affected  by  the  degree  of  organis-
ing and  administrative  ability  that  may  happen  to  be  possessed

^  Engineering  Magazine,  1901,  p.  624.
2  Of.  Hoxie,  Scientific  Management  and  Labour,  p.  51.


CH.  XIV  THE  STATISTICAL  PEOBLEM  533

by  the  person  in  command.  It  is  a  common  thing  for  groups
of  workers  employed  in  different  rooms  of  the  same  factory,
doing  precisely  the  same  work  under  identical  outward  condi-
tions, and  at  the  same  piece-work  rates,  to  show  weekly  general
averages,  one  of  which  will  be  always  steadily  larger  than  the
other."  ^  It  is  obvious  that  very  great  difficulties — not  the
least  of  them  being  that  the  quality  of  the  management  in  all
firms  is  liable  to  vary  from  time  to  time — must  be  met  with
in  any  attempt  to  calculate  with  accuracy  the  allowances  that
ought  to  be  made  under  this  head.  These  difficulties  cannot
be  completely  overcome.  When,  however,  they  seem  likely  to
be  serious,  they  may,  to  some  extent,  be  met  by  the  estab-
lishment, as  an  adjunct  to  the  piece-wage  system,  of  a  minimum
time-wage,  below  which  the  earnings  of  workmen  of  average
quality  shall,  in  no  circumstances,  be  allowed  to  fall.  Strong
trade  unions  generally  aim  at  securing  this,^  and  the  Minimum
Wage  (Coal  Miners)  Act  enforces  it  by  law.  This  arrangement,
in  effect,  makes  an  allowance  for  extremes  of  incapable  manage-
ment. It  also  makes  an  allowance  for  accidental  fluctua-
tions of  management.  Within  any  factory  or  mine,  in
which  managing  ability  stands  on  the  whole  at  the  average
level,  there  will  necessarily  occur  from  time  to  time  accidental
variations  in  the  facilities  afforded  to  individual  workmen  in
the  conduct  of  their  operations.  "  Suppose  a  gang  is  unloading
coal  cars  at  so  much  per  ton,  and  the  switching  crew  is  tardy
in  moving  away  empties  and  setting  in  loaded  cars,  and  so
keeps  them  idle  for  considerable  periods,  or  suppose  that,  in
setting  in  the  new  cars,  it  places  them  badly,  so  that  the  men
have  an  extra  long  throw  and  work  at  a  disadvantage.  Again,
the  workmen  may  be  unable  to  make  fair  wages  through  no
fault  of  their  own.  Suppose,  once  more,  a  working  gang  is
made  up  by  the  foreman  so  that  green  men  are  mixed  with
skilled,  and  these  green  men  by  their  awkwardness  cut  down
the  output  of  the  whole  gang.  Here,  again,  if  they  are
working  at  piece-rates,  their  earnings  are  reduced  without
their  fault." '     On  the  average  of  a  long  period,  no  doubt,

^  Black,  Makers  of  our  Clothes,  p.  145.

"^  Cf.  Cole,  The  Payment  of  Wages,  p.  4.

'  Going,  Principles  of  Industrial  Engineering,  p.  123.


534  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

accidents  of  this  kind  would  be  spread  fairly  evenly  among
all  the  workpeople  employed,  so  that  everybody  would  get
approximately  fair  wages  on  the  whole.  Wide  occasional
variations  from  a  man's  ordinary  weekly  wages  are,  however,
injurious  and  ought,  if  possible,  to  be  prevented.  The  addi-
tion of  a  properly  constructed  minimum  time- wage  does  prevent
them.  In  order  that  it  may  provide  against  extremes  of  bad
management  and  against  these  accidental  fluctuations,  without
also  bringing  about  other  and  unintended  consequences,  it
must  possess  the  following  characteristics.  First,  when  the
minimum  time-wage  is  introduced,  the  general  level  of  the
prevailing  system  of  piece-rates  should  be  slightly  lowered ;
for,  if  this  is  not  done,  the  average  efficiency-wage  paid  in  the
industry  is,  in  effect,  raised ;  and  that  is  an  unintended  conse-
quence. A  corollary  is  that  the  minimum  time-wage  should
change  when  the  general  average  piece-rate  of  a  district
changes.  Secondly,  the  minimum  time-wage  should  be
such  as  to  yield  somewhat  lower  day  earnings  to  the  man  of
normal  efficiency  than  such  a  man  might  expect  to  earn,  with
average  good  fortune,  upon  piece-wages.  For,  otherwise,  the
stimulus  to  effort,  which  piece-wages  are  designed  to  afford,
will  be  in  great  measure  destroyed,  and,  as  a  consequence,
output  may  be  much  reduced  ;  and  this  is  a  second  unintended
consequence.  Thirdly,  provision  should  somehow  be  made  to
secure  that  the  full  minimum  time-wage  is  only  payable  to
workmen  of  normal  efficiency.  If  it  is  a  perfectly  general
minimum,  it  will  imply — yet  a  third  unintended  consequence
— an  enforced  enhancement,  above  the  general  level,  of  the
efficiency  wages  of  incompetent  men.  There  is,  therefore,
required  a  rule,  such  as  is  provided  under  the  British  Minimum
Wage  (Coal  Miners)  Act,  that  those  workmen  who  frequently
fail  to  turn  out  a  stipulated  amount  of  output  in  a  normal
week,  when  they  are  not  hindered  by  accident,  sickness  or
abnormality  in  their  workplace,  shall  be  placed  outside  the
scope  of  the  minimum  time- wage.

§  8.  In  an  industry  where  time- wages  are  paid,  in  order
to  know  what  wage  rates  are  fair  between  different  groups  of
workpeople,  we  need,  as  before,  a  knowledge  of  the  comparative
efficiencies  of  different  workpeople.    Whereas,  however,  in  piece-


CH.  XIV  THE  STATISTICAL  PEOBLEM  535

wage  industries  this  knowledge  was  sought  indirectly  by  calcu-
lating the  comparative  difficulty  of  different  individual  tasks,
under  time-wages  it  must  be  sought  directly  by  observing  the
capacity  and  energy  of  different  individual  men.  Sometimes
these  direct  estimates  are  assisted  by  records  of  output ;  but
often  no  extraneous  aid  is  available.  Nevertheless,  persons  of
technical  knowledge  and  experience  are  able  to  make  fairly
close  estimates  of  the  relative  worth  of  different  men  whom
they  observe  at  work  in  an  industry  familiar  to  them.  Our
knowledge,  therefore,  need  not  be  limited  to  such  generalities
as  that  the  agricultural  labourers  of  the  north  of  England  are
more  efi&cient,  and  should,  therefore,  receive  higher  real  wages
than  those  of  the  south.  By  making  use  of  the  direct  judg-
ment of  specialists,  we  can  often  say,  not  indeed  that  the  fair
wage  for  a  given  group  of  workpeople  would  fall  at  a  rate
which  can  be  specified,  but  that  it  would  fall  between  limits
which  can  be  specified,  and  which  are  not  very  wide  apart.
Thus,  though  it  is  not  generally  possible  to  make  so  close  a
statistical  determination  of  the  wages  that  will  be  fair  to  any
particular  workman  or  group  of  workpeople  in  a  time-wage
industry  as  in  a  piece- wage  industry,  it  is  generally  possible
to  make  a  reasonably  close  one.

§  9.  To  ascertain  the  comparative  efficiencies  of  workpeople
engaged  in  different  industries,  and,  thereby,  to  determine  what
wage  in  one  of  them  would  be  fair  relatively  to  that  prevailing
in  others,  is  much  more  difficult.  The  centre  of  the  problem
is  the  appropriate  relation  between  the  wages  of  average  work-
people in  different  industries.  For,  when  the  wage  that  is
fair  for  an  average  worker  anywhere  is  known,  to  discover  the
allowance  that  should  be  made  for  those  above  or  below  the
average  is  a  comparatively  simple  matter.  But  how  is  relative
efficiency,  and,  therewith,  the  fair  rate  of  wages  to  be  ascertained
as  between  an  average  worker  in  one  industry  and  an  average
worker  in  other  industries  ?  The  judgment  of  technical  experts
is  difficult  to  employ,  because  practically  nobody  is  a  technical
expert  in  more  than  one  industry ;  and,  apart  from  their  judg-
ment, no  direct  way  of  reaching  a  decision  seems  to  be  possible.
Any  attempt,  for  example,  to  use  value  of  product  as  a  test
plainly  involves  circular  reasoning,  since  the  value  of  anything


536  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

is  itself  partly  determined  by  the  wage  that  is  paid  to  the
people  who  make  it.  Frequently,  however,  an  indirect  method
is  available.  It  may  be  possible  to  find  some  model,  or  standard,
year,  in  which  there  was  a  general  agreement  among  employers
and  employed  in  an  industry  that  the  wage  rate  there  bore  the
same  proportion  to  efficiency  as  that  ruling  in  other  industries,
and  was,  therefore,  fair.  This  wage  rate  will  be  our  starting-
point.  Having  ascertained  it,  we  try  to  discover  by  statistical
inquiry  in  what  proportion  wage  rates  in  other  industries
have  changed  since  our  standard  year.  Suppose  that  they
have  risen  by  20  per  cent.  Then,  if  no  obvious  change  has
occurred  in  the  comparative  average  quality  of  the  workpeople
in  our  industry  and  in  other  industries,  we  may  conclude  that
the  fair  wage  for  our  industry  now  is  the  wage  that  ruled  there
in  the  standard  year  ^lus  a  rise  of  20  per  cent.  This  method,
which  was,  in  effect,  pursued  for  a  long  time  by  Conciliation
Boards  in  the  coal  industry,  often  enables  a  reasonably  close
determination  of  fair  wages  to  be  made.


CHAPTEK  XV

LNTERFERKNCE  TO  RAISE  WAGES  IN  .PLACES  AND  OCCUPATIONS
WHEKE  THET  ABE  ALBEADT  FAIB

^  1.  Up  to  this  point  attention  has  been  confined  to  the  effects
of  interference  designed  to  force  up  wages  in  places  and
occupations  where  they  are  unfairly  low  to  a  rate  equivalent  to
that  paid  for  similar  labour  elsewhere.  It  is  sometimes  claimed,
however,  that  wages  which  are  low  and  fair,  as  well  as  those
which  are  low  and  unfair,  may  often  be  forced  up  with
advantage  to  the  national  dividend.  We  have  now  to  inquire
how  far  and  in  what  circumstances  this  claim  is  valid.

§  2.  First,  as  was  implied  at  the  beginning  of  Chapter  XIIL,
fair  wages  at  particular  points  may  sometimes  emerge  as  the
result  of  a  conflict  and  cancelling  among  two  or  more  imfair
elements.  Thus,  in  some  place  or  occupation  the  value  of  the
marginal  net  product  of  labour  may  be  abnormally  high
because  the  number  of  workpeople  there  is  kept  down  by
custom  or  by  heavy  costs  of  entry.  If  this  circumstance
operated  alone,  the  wage  rate  would  be  unfairly  high.  But
it  may  also  happen  that  these  workpeople  are  outbai^ined  by
their  employers,  and  compelled  to  accept  a  wage  less  than  the
value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  their  work.  If  this
circumstance  operated  alone,  the  wage  rate  would  be  unfairly
low.  Conditions  are  possible  in  which  these  opposing  tend-
encies exactly  balance  one  another,  so  that  the  resultant  wage
stands  precisely  at  the  level  of  fairness.  But  this  fairness
embodies  two  elements  of  unfairness,  interference  with  one  of
which  would  not  benefit,  while  interference  with  the  other
would  benefit,  the  national  dividend  The  interest  of  the
dividend  requires  that  the  wage  rate  should  not  be  fiair,  but

537


538  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  m

should  be  put  at  a  level  that  embodies  the  former  of  the  two
cancelling  elements  of  unfairness.  Interference,  therefore,  is
desirable  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  wage  is  fair.  It  is
obvious,  however,  that  an  exact  cancelling  of  elements  of
unfairness  that  act  in  opposite  senses  is,  in  a  high  degree,
improbable.  Consequently,  wage  rates  that,  as  wholes,  are
fair  cannot  reasonably  be  suspected,  except  on  very  special
grounds,  of  embodying  any  element  of  unfairness.  Hence,  the
considerations  set  out  in  this  paragraph  are  only  of  academic
interest  and  need  not  be  taken  into  account  in  practical
discussion.

§  3.  Secondly,  in  order  that  in  any  particular  industry  or
place  a  wage  that  is,  fair  as  compared  with  other  industries  or
places  may  also  be  right  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  national
dividend,  a  certain  definite  condition  must  be  fulfilled.  This
condition  is  that  in  industries  or  places  in  general  work-
people are  receiving  as  wages  the  value  of  the  marginal  net
product  of  their  work.  If  they  are  receiving  less  than  this,
they  are  without  the  normal  inducement  to  give  as  much
work  as  the  general  interest  demands.  ^  The  pushing
up  of  their  wages  to  a  level  that  equates  demand  price  and
supply  price  would  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  national  dividend
more  than  sufficient  to  compensate  them  for  their  extra  sacri-
fice of  leisure.  Now,  when  things  have  settled  down  in  more
or  less  stable  conditions,  the  play  of  economic  forces  tends
to  secure  that  in  industries  in  general  wages  do  correspond  to
the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  labour.  But  conditions
are  liable  to  change,  on  account,  for  example,  of  new  mechanical
discoveries,  the  accumulation  of  capital,  the  opening  up  of
foreign  trade,  or  an  expansion  in  the  supply  of  the  substance
used  as  money.  Any  one  of  these  changes  necessarily  tends  to
raise  the  value  (in  money)  of  the  marginal  net  product  of
labour  throughout  occupations  generally.  The  old  wage,
therefore,  though  still  fair,  will,  nevertheless,  be  too  low.  It  is
to  the  interest  of  the  national  dividend  that  all  wages  should
be  raised.  If,  however,  fairness  in  every  individual  wage  rate
was  regarded  as  a  conclusive  reason  against  altering  it,  this
change  could  never  come  about.     Suppose,  for  example,  that

1  Of.  the  diagrammatic  footnote  to  Chapter  XIII.  p.  512.


CH.  XV  FAIE  WAGES  539

wage  rates  over  the  whole  of  industry  were  settled  by  Boards
of  Conciliation  and  Ai"bitration,  whether  wholly  voluntary  or
partly  controlled  by  State  authority ;  and  that  the  principle
which  each  of  these  Boards  followed  was  that  of  making  its  own
wage  rate  equal  to  that  paid  for  similar  work  in  other  occupa-
tions. The  result,  in  the  face  of  changing  general  conditions,
would  be  a  complete  impasse.  In  like  manner,  it  is  conceivable
that  workpeople  might,  even  in  stable  conditions,  have  their
wages  "  exploited  "  everywhere  to  exactly  the  same  extent,  and
for  this  reason  might  be  everywhere  receiving  less  than  the
value  of  their  marginal  net  product.  Here  again  a  rigid  rule
against  interfering  with  fair  rates  would  make  any  correction
of  the  abuse  impossible.  Hence,  it  follows  that  fairness  in
a  wage  rate  must  not  be  taken  as  a  conclusive  reason  against
interference  to  raise  it.

§  4.  If  it  were  the  fact,  either  that  workpeople  were
exploited  over  the  general  body  of  industry,  or  that,  over  the
general  body  of  industry,  wages  were  settled  by  Joint  Boards
whose  sole  principle  of  action  was  to  establish  fairness,  the
results  of  the  preceding  section  would  be  of  great  practical
importance.  There  would  be  a  wide  field  over  which  inter-
ference to  raise  wages  that  are  already  fair  would  benefit  the
national  dividend.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  the  general
body  of  industry  is  not  controlled  by  Joint  Boards  actuated
by  the  single  principle  of  fairness,  and  there  is  good  reason
to  believe  that  the  occupations  and  districts  in  which  work-
people are  exploited  form  but  a  small  part  of  the  whole.
Hence,  these  special  reasons  for  interfering  with  wage  rates
in  particular  industries,  in  spite  of  their  being  "  fair,"  are  not
of  wide  application.  It  must,  however,  be  conceded  that,  when
a  large  and  sudden  change,  such  as  might  be  brought  about
by  the  issue  of  a  large  quantity  of  paper  money,  takes  place
in  the  money  costs  of  li\'ing,  money  wages  in  general  will
not  respond  immediately,  and,  therefore,  for  a  time  real  wages
all  round  will  tend  to  be  too  low.  Hence,  a  policy  which
only  interferes  to  raise  unfair  wages  will  lose  opportunities
for  speeding  up  the  required  adjustment.  If  an  external
authority  could  force  wages  in  any  industry  or  group  of
industries  from  that  old  level,  which  is  at  the  moment  still


540  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

"  fair,"  to  the  new  level  which  will  be  "  fair  "  in  a  short  time,
it  would  benefit  the  national  dividend.  It  will,  of  course,  be
understood  that,  when  the  money  cost  of  living  undergoes  a
large  and  sudden  change,  the  response  on  the  side  of  money
wages,  which  it  is  the  function  of  the  authority  to  expedite,
is  not  the  same  in  all  circumstances.  If  a  given  rise  iu  the  money
cost  of  living  is  a  part  of  an  equivalent  rise  in  prices  generally,
caused  by  a  banking  or  currency  change,  the  proper  response
is  a  rise  in  money  wages  sufficient  to  make  real  wages  equal  to
what  they  were  before.  If  the  given  rise  in  the  cost  of  living  is
a  part  of  an  equivalent  rise  in  prices  generally  caused  by
diminished  facilities  for  production,  such  as  might  result  from
the  destruction  of  real  capital  in  war,  the  proper  response  is
either  no  rise  in  money  wages,  or,  at  all  events,  a  rise  less
than  sufficient  to  establish  the  old  real  wage ;  for  the  real
demand  for  labour  will  have  fallen  ofi'.  Lastly,  if  the  given
rise  in  the  cost  of  living  is  the  result  of  a  real  rise  in  the  cost
of  producing  the  things  on  which  wages  are  predominantly
spent,  unaccompanied  by  any  similar  rise  in  the  real  cost  of
producing  other  things,  the  proper  response  is  a  rise  in
money  wages  less  than  sufficient  to  establish  the  old  real
wage,  but  more  nearly  sufficient  to  do  this  than  the  response
proper  to  high  general  prices  due  to  a  general  shortage ;  for
the  real  demand  for  labour  in  terms  of  general  value  will  not
have  fallen  off  so  much.

^  5.  We  have  now  to  consider  a  much  broader  claim.
This  is  that  in  any  occupation  where  wages  are  low,
whether  or  not  they  are  fair  (relatively  to  the  degree  of
efficiency  among  the  workers  engaged  in  them),  they  ought
to  be  raised  far  enough  to  yield  a  decent  subsistence  to
the  average  worker.  Some  approach  to  a  recognition  of
this  claim  was  made  in  a  modification  introduced  into  the
British  Trades  Boards  Act  of  1918,  as  against  the  original
Act  of  1909.  Whereas  under  the  original  Act  a  condition
precedent  to  the  establishment  of  a  Trade  Board  in  an  industry
is  that  wages  there  are  exceptionally  low,  under  the  new  Act  it
is  sufficient  that  the  trade  be  unorganised  and,  therefore,  likely
to  be  in  receipt  of  wages  unduly  low.  Elsewhere  the  claim
has   been   accepted   explicitly.     Thus,  the   South   Australian


CH.  XT  FATE  WAGES  541

Industrial  Arbitration  Act  1912  provides  that  "the  Court
shall  not  have  power  to  order  or  prescribe  wages  which  do
not  secure  to  the  employees  affected  a  living  wage.  '  Living
wage '  means  a  sum  sufficient  for  the  normal  and  reasonable
needs  of  the  average  employee  living  in  the  locality  where
the  work  under  consideration  is  done  or  is  being  done."  ^
In  the  "Western  Australian  Act  it  is  laid  down  that  "  no
minimum  rate  of  wages  or  other  remuneration  shall  be
prescribed  which  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  the  average
worker  to  whom  it  applies  to  live  in  reasonable  comfort,
having  regard  to  any  domestic  obligations  to  which  such
average  worker  would  be  ordinarily  subject."  ^  Obviously,
since  the  price  of  the  things  on  which  workpeople  spend  their
incomes  varies,  the  sum  of  money  required  to  yield  a  "  living
wage  "  must  vary  also.  In  terms  of  money,  therefore,  a  living
wage  will  not  be  a  fixed  amount,  but  an  amount  that  changes
at  short  intervals  in  accordance  with  changes  in  the  prices
of  ordinary  articles  of  food,  clothing  and  housing  accommoda-
tion. A  special  "  cost  of  living "  index  number  might  be
computed  by  the  Board  of  Trade  at  monthly  intervals,  and
wage  awards  for  low-grade  industries  might  be  given  in  the  form
of  a  standard  to  be  varied  automatically  every  month  in  corre-
spondence with  variations  in  this  index  number.

§  6.  In  popular  discussion  the  issue  which  these  proposals
raise  is  sometimes  blurred  by  a  confused  idea  that  a  living
wage  implies,  for  workmen  of  normal  efficiency  in  any  industry
which  enjoys  it,  a  "  living  income."  This,  of  course,  is  not  so.
A  living  wage,  as  ordinarily  conceived,  is  a  wage  that  will
enable  the  working  man  who  receives  it,  if  he  has  an  average
family  to  maintain  and  if  he  has  average  good  fortune  in  the
matter  of  sickness,  to  earn  an  income  sufficient  for  a  good  life.
But  a  rate  of  wages  that  will  achieve  this  end  in  these  condi-
tions obviously  will  not  achieve  it  for  a  man  with  a  family
in  excess  of  the  average  or  subjected  to  an  unusual  amount
of  sickness.^     Nor  can  the  "  living  wage "  take   account  of

*  Bulletin  ofiht  U.S.  Bureau  of  Labour  Statistics,  No.  167,  pp.  165-6.

2  Ibid.  p.  167.

'  During  the  Great  War  the  payment  made  to  soldiers  in  effect  varied  with
the  size  of  their  families,  when  account  is  taken  of  the  maintenance  allowances  •
and  war  bonuses  on  accoimt  of  the  increase  in  the  cost  of  living  were  paid  to


542  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

the  fact  that  some  workpeople  need  to  support  parents  who
are  past  work  as  well  as  their  own  children,  or  of  the
further  fact  that  the  wives  of  some  workpeople  contribute
nothing  towards  the  family  income,  while  those  of  others  con-
tribute largely.  Moreover,  a  wage  for  the  breadwinner,  which
would  provide  a  "  living "  for  his  family  at  one  stage  of  its
growth,  would  be  quite  inadequate  at  another  stage.  This  con-
sideration is  very  important.  Dr.  Bowley,  for  example,  on  the
basis  of  his  investigations  into  the  condition  of  the  poor  at
Reading  in  1912,  estimated  that  the  minimum  expenditure
necessary  for  the  attainment  of  a  reasonable  standard  of  living
"at  marriage  would  be  16s.  weekly  and  would  rise  gradually
to  about  25  s.  in  five  years  and  28  s.  in  ten  years,  provided
that  there  were  four  children  all  surviving.  It  would  remain
at  28  s.  for  another  five  years,  and  then  fall  back  to  IGs.  as
the  children  became  self-supporting."  ^  Yet  again,  when  the
industry  under  review  is  one  that  employs  women,  the  notion
of  a  living  wage  to  a  worker  in  "average"  circumstances  is  almost
meaningless, in  view  of  the  great  dijBferences  between  the  positions
of  women  mainly  supported  by  their  husbands,  self-supporting
single  women,  and  women  who  are  themselves  the  principal  bread-
winners of  a  family.  These  various  considerations  taken  together
make  it  plain  that  the  enforcement  in  any  industry  of  a  living
wage,  in  any  plausible  sense  of  that  term,  would  go  a  very
little  way  towards  ensuring  a  "  living  income  "  even  to  those
workpeople  who  regularly  received  it.  Our  natural  desire
to  ensure  in  every  industry  a  living  income  is  thus  not  really
relevant  to  the  "  living  wage."  The  policy  of  forcing  up  wage
rates  in  industries  employing  workpeople  of  such  a  low  grade
that  fair  rates,  as  defined  in  Chapter  XIII.,  are  less  than  living
rates — however  we  may  choose  to  define  these — has,  therefore,
to  be  considered  separately  on  its  own  merits.

S  7.  An  argument  by  which  it  is  widely  supported  is  as
follows :    "  An   industry,  which  uses   up    the   human  capital

members  of  the  police  force  on  the  same  principle.  It  is,  of  course,  in  the
power  of  the  State  to  decree  for  itself  arrangements  of  this  kind  even  in  normal
times.  But  plainly  no  such  adjusted  living  wage  could  be  imposed  on  industry
generally  without  setting  up  a  powerful  tendency  to  throw  persons  with  large
families  out  of  employment  altogether.

*  The  Measurement  of  Social  Phenomena,  pp.  179-80.


CH.  XV  FAIR  WAGES  543

without  replacing  it,  is  not  seK-supporting  and  does  positive
harm  to  the  community.  When,  therefore,  a  woman  is
partially  maintained  by  some  other  source,  such  as  by  a
father,  husband,  etc.,  the  industry  which  employs  her  is
being  subsidised  from  these  other  sources  to  the  extent  by
which  her  wages  fall  short  of  proper  maintenance."  ^  In  other
words,  to  allow  the  low  wages,  which  make  this  subsidisation
necessary,  to  continue,  is  to  allow  a  process  to  go  on
by  which  productive  power,  and,  consequently,  the  national
dividend  of  the  future,  is  steadily  eaten  away.  This
argument  is  invalid.  It  depends  upon  an  ambiguity  in  the
phrase  "  uses  up."  If  the  setting  to  work  of  people  at  some
industry  wears  out  and  destroys  productive  powers  which,  had
they  not  been  set  to  work  in  that  industry,  would  be  avail-
able to  augment  the  national  dividend,  then  the  destruction
of  this  productive  power  ought  strictly  to  be  debited  against
that  industry.  Its  social  net  product  falls  short  of  its  trade
net  product  to  that  extent.  But  there  is  no  general  pre-
sumption that  an  industry  employing  low-grade  workers  and
paying  them  a  wage  equivalent  to  what  they  could  obtain
elsewhere  is  using  up  human  capital  in  this  sense.  For,  if
it  did  not  employ  them,  they  would  either  be  employed  in
another  industry  at  the  same  wage  or  they  would  not  be
employed  at  all ;  and  in  either  event  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  their  productive  powers  would  be  worn  out  any
less  soon.  The  industry,  therefore,  only  uses  up  their  pro-
ductive powers  in  the  sense  of  using  or  employing  them,  not
in  the  sense  of  wearing  them  out.  Hence,  there  is  no  difference
between  the  (marginal)  social  and  the  (marginal)  trade  net
product  of  the  work  done  in  it,  and  no  damage  is  caused  to  the
national  dividend  by  its  continuance.  Nor  is  this  conclusion
affected  by  the  fact — when  it  is  a  fact — that  the  workers
engaged  in  the  industry  are  "  subsidised  "  from  other  sources  ;
because,  if  they  were  not  engaged  in  this  industry,  they  would
still  have  to  be  "  subsidised  "  to  at  least  as  great  an  extent.
It  is  true,  as  was  argued  at  length  in  Chapter  XIII.,  that,  if  an
occupation  or  section  of  an  occupation  is  maintaining  itself  in
being  by  its  power  to  pay  to  workpeople  of  a  given  grade  of

*  Women's  Supplement  to  New  Statesman,  Feb.  21,  1914.


544  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

efficiency  less  wages  than  such  workpeople  could,  and,  apart
from  the  existence  of  that  occupation  or  section  of  occupation,
would  earn  elsewhere,  then  the  continuance  in  existence  of
that  occupation  or  section  involves  a  waste  of  the  resources  of
the  community.  Here  there  is  true  parasitism.  The  essence  of
it,  however,  lies  in  the  fact  that  workers  are  paid  less  than  they
could  and  would  earn  elsewhere.  When  this  is  not  happening,
there  is  no  parasitism,  even  though  workers  are  being  paid
much  less  than  is  required  to  maintain  them  in  independent
self-support.  The  thesis  that  industries  which  pay  less  than
"  fair  wages  "  ought  to  be  forbidden  by  law  to  do  this,  even
though  such  prohibition  involves  their  destruction,  is  quite
different  from,  and  lends  no  support  to,  the  thesis  that  in-
dustries which  pay  less  than  a  "  living  wage  "  to  workpeople
who  are  in  fact  worth,  for  all  purposes,  less  than  a  living
wage,  ought  to  be  subjected  to  a  similar  prohibition.  This
common  argument,  therefore,  breaks  down,  and  our  problem
must  be  studied  without  reference  to  it.

§  8.  We  suppose  that  a  particular  industry  is  employing
low-grade  workers,  and  that  these  workers  are  being  paid  a
wage  which,  in  view  of  their  comparative  inefficiency,  is  fair
relatively  to  that  paid  in  other  industries ;  and  we  suppose
further  that  equality  of  efficiency  wages  in  this  industry  and
elsewhere  is  accompanied  both  by  equality  in  the  values  of
marginal  net  products  there  and  elsewhere  and  also  by  a  general
equality  between  wages  and  these  values.  In  these  conditions,
if  the  wage  rate  in  our  industry  is  forced  up,  a  strong  induce-
ment is  offered  to  employers  to  distribute  inferior  workpeople
away  from  the  occupations  in  which  they  are  specially  privi-
leged, leaving  these  occupations  to  be  occupied  exclusively
by  more  efficient  men.  For  example,  the  establishment
of  different  (real)  trade  union  rates  of  wages  in  different
towns  is  met,  in  the  main,  by  the  gravitation  of  the  abler
workpeople  to  the  towns  with  higher  real  wages,  just  as  the
establishment  of  the  "  dockers'  tanner  "in  1889  was  met  by
the  substitution,  in  part,  of  strong  immigrants  from  the
country  for  the  weaker  men  among  the  old  dockers.  If  this
class  of  reaction  occurs,  it  will  not  really  happen  to  any  sub-
stantial extent  that  the  workers  aimed  at  are  paid  higher  wages


cH.  XV  FAIK  WAGES  545

than  before.  All  that  will  be  accomplished  will  be  a  redis-
tribution of  workers  of  different  grades  between  different
occupations.  Consequently,  no  significant  effect,  either  favour-
able or  adverse,  will  be  produced  upon  the  volume  of  the
national  dividend.  The  attempt  at  interference  in  favour  of
particular  workpeople  will,  in  fact,  be  parried  by  evasion.  Let
us  suppose,  however,  that  for  some  reason  this  reshuffling
of  workpeople  is  impracticable.  Then,  unless,  of  course,
the  demand  for  labour  is  perfectly  inelastic,  it  must  happen
that  some  labour  is  ejected  from  employment  in  the
industry  where  wages  have  been  raised,  with  the  result
that,  according  to  circumstances,  it  is  either  not  employed
at  all  or  is  employed  elsewhere  in  conditions  such  that  the
value  of  the  net  product  of  most  of  it  is  less  than  it  was.
That  this  must  be  so  foUows  directly  from  the  analysis  sketched
out  in  Chapter  XIIL  The  inevitable  inference  is  that,  apart
from  reactions  on  efficiency,  interference  to  force  up  wages  to
a  "  living  "  standard  in  an  industry  where  the  fair  wage  is  less
than  a  living  wage,  must  injure  the  national  dividend.

§  9.  At  first  sight  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  damage
done  will  be  roughly  proportionate  to  the  number  of  occupa-
tions to  which  the  interference  extends ;  so  that  the  dividend
will  be  reduced  three  times  as  much,  if  a  living  wage  is
enforced  in  all  of  three  similar  industries,  where  the  fair  wage
is  less  than  a  living  wage,  as  it  would  be  if  only  one  of  them
was  touched.  This,  however,  is  an  underestimate.  When
labour — and,  consequently,  capital  also — is  driven  out  of  one
occupation,  it  moves,  in  the  ordinary  course,  into  others ;  and,
though  it  produces  there  less  than  it  was  producing  before,  it  still
produces  a  good  deal.  If  only  a  little  labour  and  capital  are
thus  sent  seeking  a  new  home,  and  there  is  a  large  field  open
to  them,  the  new  contribution  of  each  unit  will  be  worth
very  nearly  as  much  as  the  old  contribution.  But  if,  with
a  given  field  open  to  them,  more  labour  and  capital  are
sent  to  seek  work,  they  will  have  to  be  pushed  into  less
'productive  uses,  and  the  new  contribution  made  by  each  unit
wiU  be  less.  Hence,  a  doubling  or  trebling  of  the  amount  of
interference,  and,  consequently,  of  the  quantity  of  labour  and
capital  turned  loose,  will  involve  more  than  a  doubling  or

2  N


546  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  hi

trebling  of  the  damage  done  to  the  dividend.  This  con-
sideration must  be  borne  in  mind  when  any  inference  is
attempted  from  Australian  experience  as  to  the  probable
effect  of  forcing  up  the  wages  of  low-paid  industries  in  this
country.  For  "  industrialism  is  relatively  simple  in  form  and
limited  in  extent  in  the  Australian  colonies.  Agriculture  is
the  chief  occupation,  and  this,  being  untouched  by  the  arbitra-
tion laws,  is  a  vent  for  any  labour  or  capital  driven  out  of  the
industries."  ^  In  this  country  the  proportionate  part  played
by  agriculture  is  enormously  smaller,  and,  therefore,  the  vent
available,  if  a  wide-reaching  policy  of  forcing  up  industrial
wages  were  attempted,  would  be  far  less  extensive.  More-
over, it  is  practically  certain  that  in  the  United  Kingdom
this  policy  could  not  be  applied  to  industry  without  being
applied  to  agriculture  also.  The  danger  to  the  national
dividend  would,  therefore,  be  very  much  greater  than  Australian
experience  suggests.

*  Chapman,  Work  and  Wages,  vol.  ii.  p.  263.  Since  the  passing  of  the
Industrial  Arbitration  (Further  Amendment)  Act  of  1918,  this  is  no  longer  wholly
true  of  New  South  Wales.


CHAPTER  XVI


WAGE  RATES  AND  EFFICIENCY


S  1.  The  whole  of  the  analysis  of  the  three  preceding  chapters
has  been  conducted  without  reference  to  the  effects  which
interference  to  raise  wages  may  produce  upon  the  efficiency
and,  therefore,  the  productiveness  of  the  workpeople.  But,  as
we  have  just  seen,  certain  industries  exist  whose  operations
require  little  or  no  skill,  and  in  which  even  the  normal  so-
called  able-bodied  workers  are  of  an  exceedingly  low  grade  of
efficiency.  In  these  industries — simple  sewing  at  home  is  one
of  them — even  a  fair  rate  of  wages,  and,  still  more,  an  unfair
rate,  is  necessarily  an  exceedingly  low  rate.  In  such  industries
it  seems  probable  prima  facie  that  interference  designed  to
force  up  wage  rates  would  react  upon  the  efficiency  of  the
workpeople  and  so  might  indirectly  increase  the  national
dividend,  even  though  the  direct  effects,  taken  by  themselves,
would  have  been  adverse.  The  reaction  to  be  expected  is
partly  physical,  resulting  from  increased  capacity  due  to  better
food  and  better  conditions  of  life.  It  is  also  partly  psycho-
logical, resulting  from  a  sense  of  fair  treatment,  an  increased
feeling  of  hopefulness,  and  the  knowledge  that,  with  the
increased  wage,  slack  work  is  more  likely  to  lead  to  a  loss  of
employment.  Hence,  in  occupations  employing  exceptionally
inefficient  workpeople — and  an  argument  of  the  same  kind,
though  of  less  force,  can  be  advanced  about  those  employing
better  workpeople — there  would  seem  to  be  a  stronger  case  for
interference  to  raise  wages  than  the  considerations  advanced
in  the  preceding  chapters  by  themselves  suggest.  This  pre-
sumption has  now  to  be  examined.

§  2.  It  is  sometimes  thought  that  light  can  be  thrown

547


548  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

upon  it  jjby  comparing  the  efficiencies  of  workpeople  employed
in  occupations  or  firms  where  the  earnings  are  high  and  low
respectively.  It  is  found  that  people  who  earn  good  money
are  very  much  more  efficient  than  those  who  earn  bad  money,
and  it  is  inferred  that,  if  the  latter  were  paid  as  much  as  the
former,  they  would  thereby  be  raised  to  their  standard.  This
reasoning  is  inadequate.  The  fact  that  workpeople  in  high-
wage  districts  are,  in  general,  more  efficient  than  workpeople
in  low-wage  districts  does  not  prove  that  high  wages  cause
high  efficiency ;  for  there  is  available  the  alternative  explana-
tion that  high  efficiency  causes  high  wages.  Nor  does  the  fact
that  workpeople,  who  have  moved  from  low-wage  to  high-wage
districts,  are  soon  -found  to  be  earning  the  wages  proper  to
these  latter  districts  prove  this;  for  the  people  most  likely
to  undertake  such  journeys  are  just  those  who  feel  themselves
already  more  efficient  and  worth  a  larger  wage  than  their
neighbours.  All  statistical  arguments  of  the  above  type  must
be  regarded  with  the  greatest  suspicion.  In  order  to  discover
experimentally  how  increased  earnings  react  upon  efficiency,
we  should  need  to  investigate  the  output  of  the  same  individual
workman  in  the  same  environment  under  both  low-wage  and
high- wage  conditions.  It  is  only  thus  that  we  could  ascertain
the  extent  of  the  reaction  which  improved  pay  would  produce
in  workpeople  of  different  income  grades.  Unfortunately,
investigations  of  this  kind  are  not  available.  The  rapid
improvement  which  took  place  in  the  appearance  of  the  men
recruited  and  trained  for  the  new  armies  in  the  great  war  does,
indeed,  suggest  that  human  quality  is  more  rapidly  and  com-
pletely plastic,  at  all  events  in  youth,  than  we  had  been
accustomed  formerly  to  suppose.  The  effects,  as  reported  by
those  who  have  studied  them,  of  the  increased  wages  that  have
been  awarded  by  the  Trade  Boards  in  the  tailoring  and  box-
making  industries  points  in  the  same  direction.^     These  things

'  Cf.  Tawney,  Minimum  Wages  in  the  Tailoring  Trade,  pp.  121-134  ;  and
Bulkley,  Minimum  Wages  in  the  Box-making  Trade,  p.  51.  In  the  box-
making  industry  the  workpeople's  efficiency  has  also  been  benefited  in  an
indirect  way,  because  the  enforcement  of  higher  rates  has  induced  employers  to
pay  more  attention  to  their  training  ;  "every  worker  has  to  be  trained  to  earn
the  minimum,  whereas  formerly  it  did  not  matter  how  little  they  earned  "
(loc.  cit.  p.  51).


cH.  XVI         WAGE  EATES  AND  EFFICIENCY  549

give  ground  for  hope,  but  they  do  not  enable  us  to  formulate
any  precise  conclusions.  We  are  thus  in  the  end  thrown
back  on  the  vague  guess-work  called  common  sense.  This
suggests  that  the  reaction  will  be  most  marked  among  work-
people who  are  exceedingly  poor,  and  in  whom,  therefore,
there  is  large  scope  for  physical  improvement  through  better
food,  clothing  and  house  accommodation ;  that  it  will  vary
with  the  age  of  the  people  affected  and  with  their  previous
condition ;  that  it  is  more  likely  to  occur  where  employment
is  fairly  regular,  so  that  a  definite  standard  of  life  can  be
built  up,  than  it  is  among  people  whose  employment  is
"  casual "  and  intermittent ;  and  that  the  longer  the  im-
proved payment  lasts,  the  greater  is  the  chance  that  efi&ciency
will  benefit  to  an  appreciable  extent.

^  3.  In  industries  and  places  where  wages  are  low,  because
low-grade  workpeople  are  being  "exploited"  by  employers  and
paid  less  than  they  are  worth,  there  is  no  reason  to  expect  that
the  forcing  of  the  wage  rate  up  to  a  fair  level  will  cause  any  of
the  people  affected  to  lose  their  jobs  for  any  length  of  time ;
for  it  will  not  pay  employers  to  dispense  with  their  services.
Consequently,  all  that  has  to  be  considered  is  the  direct  effect
upon  the  eflBciency  of  the  people  who  actually  receive  the
better  wage.  It  is,  therefore,  practically  certain  that  there
will  be  some  net  benefit  to  the  national  dividend.  Moreover,
there  is  reason  to  expect  that  this  benefit  will  be  cumulative.
If  exploitation  is  allowed,  and  a  bad  bargain  by  workmen  leads
to  a  reduction  of  their  efficiency  and  so  to  a  diminution  in  the
value  of  their  marginal  net  product,  they  will  start  for  the  next
round  of  bargaining  from  a  lower  level;  if  they  again  get  slightly
the  worse  of  the  deal, —  and,  being  weaker,  they  are  now  more
likely  to  do  so, — they  will  again,  in  the  same  manner,  be
driven  yet  lower.  Thus,  their  efficiency,  as  well  as  the  wage
they  receive,  is  cumulatively  and  progressively  reduced,  and  the
national  dividend  suffers  thereby  a  serious  injury.  If,  however,
exploitation  is  prevented  and  wages  are  forced  up  to  a  fair
level,  the  benefit  to  efficiency  will  start  an  upward  movement
exactly  analogous  to  this  downward  movement.  High  earnings
will  lead  to  greater  efficiency ;  greater  efficiency  will  lead  to
the   power  of  obtaining   higher  earnings,  both    because   the


550  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

workers'  services  are  worth  more  and  because,  being  better
off,  they  are  in  a  stronger  position  for  bargaining ;  the  higher
earnings  so  obtained  will  react  again  to  increase  efficiency ;
and  so  on  cumulatively.  This  consideration  is  of  special  im-
portance among  those  extremely  poor  workpeople,  whose  very
poverty,  so  long  as  it  continues,  makes  them  easy  victims  to
the  superior  bargaining  power  of  employers.  In  these  circum-
stances, therefore,  the  conclusion  reached  in  Chapter  XIII.  that
the  national  dividend  will  be  increased  by  the  forcing  up
of  wage  rates,  which  are  rendered  unfairly  low  by  exploitation,
is  confirmed  and  enforced  when  account  is  taken  of  reactions
upon  efficiency.

§  4.  By  similar  reasoning  it  is  easily  shown  that,  when
conditions  are  such  that  the  forcing  up  of  wage  rates,  which  are
either  already  fair  or  are  unfair  from  other  causes  than  exploita-
tion, would  benefit  the  national  dividend  apart  from  re-
actions on  efficiency,  these  reactions  are  likely  to  make  the
benefit  still  greater.  When,  however,  conditions  are  such
that,  apart  from  reactions  on  efficiency,  the  forcing  up  of  a
wage  rate  would  damage  the  national  dividend,  the  way  in
which  these  reactions  will  work  is  much  more  difficult  to
determine.  The  reason  is  that,  in  these  conditions,  some
workpeople  are  necessarily  ejected  from  employment  in  the
industry  or  place  where  the  wage  is  raised,  and  either  reduced
to  unemployment  or,  at  best,  set  to  work  where  the  value  of
their  output  is  less  than  it  was  before.  For,  unless  this
happens,  the  dividend  will  not  be  damaged,  and  we  are  now
assuming  that,  apart  from  reactions  on  efficiency,  it  is  damaged.
But,  if  some  workers  are  made  worse  off  than  before,  the  net
effect  on  efficiency  will  not  consist  merely  of  benefit  done
to  those  who  actually  receive  the  better  wage  rate,  but  also
of  injury  done  to  these  others.  Prima  facie  it  seems  reason-
able to  suppose  that,  if,  after  the  increase  of  wage  rate  in
one  particular  industry,  the  aggregate  sum  paid  in  wages
throughout  the  grand  total  of  industries  is  less  than  before,
the  aggregate  efficiency  of  the  workpeople  as  a  whole  will  not
be  enhanced.  The  conditions  in  which  an  increase  of  wages
in  a  particular  industry  may  increase  the  real  earnings  of  wage-
earners  as  a  body  in  spite  of  damaging  the  national  dividend


cH.  ivi         WAGE  KATES  AND  EFFICIENCY  551

will  be  examined  at  length  in  the  course  of  Part  V.  It  is
evident  that  the  prospects  are  best  when  the  demand  for  labour
in  the  occupation  whose  wage  rate  is  forced  up  is  highly  inelastic
From  the  standpoint  of  a  short  period,  which  alone  is  relevant
to  reactions  on  efi&ciency,  the  causes  making  for  inelastic  demand
are,  in  general,  much  more  powerful  than  they  are  from  that
of  a  long  period.  For  example,  if  the  wage  of  any  group  were
forced  up,  employers  would  not  generally  dismiss  many  of  their
workpeople  so  long  as  existing  orders  were  still  in  hand.  If,
then,  the  "reaction  time"  of  wages  upon  efficiency  is  fairly
rapid,  the  chances  of  a  favourable  reaction  may  be  taken,  at  aU
events  when  the  commodity  affected  by  the  increased  wage
rate  is  not  one  largely  purchased  by  working  men,  to  be  reason-
ably good.  They  are  particularly  so  if  the  rate  fixed  for  any
group  of  workpeople  is  not  raised  suddenly  much  above  the
existing  rate — in  which  event  a  large  number  of  dismissals
might  take  place — but  is  pushed  up  gradually  by  small  stages.
Hence,  it  may  not  infrequently  happen  that,  in  circumstances
where,  apart  from  reactions  on  efficiency,  the  forcing  up  of  a
wage  rate  would  inflict  damage  on  the  national  dividend,  the
damage  will  be  at  least  partially  cancelled  by  these  reactions.
When  a  State  authority  is  available  to  help  people  who  may
have  been  incidentally  thrown  out  of  work,  the  extra  State
contribution,  which  is  an  indirect  effect  of  the  forcing  up  of
the  wage  rate,  will  make  this  cancelling  benefit  somewhat
larger  than  it  would  have  been  otherwise.  Whether  the
cancelling  benefit  will  be  large  enough  to  outweigh  the  direct
damage  to  the  dividend,  against  which  it  has  to  be  balanced,
cannot  be  determined  generally,  but  will  depend  on  the
detailed  conditions  of  each  separate  problem.

§  5.  It  should  be  added  that,  in  any  event,  such  inter-
ference to  raise  wages  as  is  warranted  by  the  considerations
set  out  in  the  preceding  section  is  essentially  a  temporary
interference.  Where  wages  are  paid  by  the  piece  it  is
temporary  in  form  as  well  as  in  substance.  For,  though
an  enhanced  piece-wage,  by  providing  large  earnings,  may  so
improve  a  workman's  efficiency  that  he  can  produce  more
pieces  in  the  day,  and  is  thus  enabled  permanently  to  make
larger  earnings  at  the  old  piece-rate,  it  cannot  cause  him  to


552  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  hi

become  worth  the  new  piece-rate.  Hence,  there  is  no  case
for  retaining  that  rate  for  a  longer  time  than  is  necessary  for
its  reaction  upon  efficiency  to  be  completed — no  case,  at  least,
from  the  standpoint  of  the  national  dividend.  If  it  is  main-
tained for  longer  than  this,  it  will  add  nothing  further  to
efficiency,  but  will  injure  the  national  dividend  by  preventing
labour  from  distributing  itself  among  different  uses  in  the
most  advantageous  manner.  When  wages  are  paid  by  time,
the  interference  warranted  is  no  longer  temporary  in  form,
and  there  is  no  reason  why  the  enhanced  time-wage  should
ever  be  reduced.  But  it  is  temporary  in  substance,  because,
after  a  while,  the  workpeople,  in  consequence  of  their  improved
efficiency,  will  become  worth  the  new  time-wage,  and,  therefore,
this  wage  will  become  the  "natural"  wage,  for  the  maintenance
of  which  no  interference  is  necessary.


CHAP  TEE    XVII

[

f  A   NATIONAL   MINIMUM    TIME-WAGE

I

f  §  1.  In  Chapter  XV.  we  considered  the  efifects  of  interference
designed  to  raise  the  wages  of  a  low-paid  industry  or  part  of
an  industry  above  the  "  fair "  level  The  centre  of  the
problem  was  the  wage  of  the  "  average "  worker,  and  it  was
tacitly  supposed  that  the  rates  paid  to  workers  above  and  below
the  average  would  be  adjusted  according  to  their  compara-
tive efficiencies.  We  have  now  to  consider  a  different  type
of  interference,  directed  not  so  much  towards  trades  as
towards  individuals.  Granted  that  the  average  worker  in
all  —  or  in  most  —  industries  is  suitably  remunerated,  the
very  inefficient  worker  in  some  of  them  will,  on  account  of
his  inefficiency,  if  paid  on  a  like  scale,  often  earn  so  small
a  sum  of  money  that  the  public  conscience  is  shocked-  It  is
widely  held  that  this  state  of  things  ought  to  be  prevented  by
the  legal  establishment  of  a  national  minimum  day-wage,
below  which  no  workman  whatever  can  be  legally  engaged.
This  type  of  policy  is  illustrated — though  very  imperfectly,
since  the  minimum  fixed  was  very  much  below  the  worth  of
anybody  except  an  extraordinarily  inefficient  apprentice — by
certain  of  the  labour  laws  of  Australasia.  The  Parliaments
of  Victoria  and  South  Australia  "  have  decided  that  no  person
whatsoever  can  be  employed  there  in  a  registered  factory,
without  receiving  some  minimum  remuneration — in  Victoria
2s.  6d.  a  week,  and  in  South  Australia,  48."  ^  In  Like  manner,
the  New  South  Wales  Minimum  Wage  Act  of  1908  provided
that  no  workman  or  shop  assistant  shaU  be  employed,  unless
in  receipt  of  a  weekly  wage  of  at  least  4s.,  irrespective  of  any

*  Aves,  Report  on  Wages  Boards,  p.  88.
553


I


554  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  hi

amount  earned  as  overtime.^  Again,  in  the  Factory  Act  of
New  Zealand,  it  is  enacted  that  every  person  who  is  employed
in  any  capacity  in  a  factory  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  from
the  occupier  payment  for  the  work  at  such  rate  as  is  agreed
on,  in  no  case  less  than  58.  per  week  during  the  first  year  of
employment  in  the  industry  and,  thereafter,  an  annual  increase
of  not  less  than  3  s.  weekly  till  a  wage  of  20s,  per  week  is
attained.^  This  clause  in  its  original  form — the  form  given
above  is  the  slightly  modified  form  of  the  1907  amendment —
was  passed  in  order  to  prevent  persons  being  employed  in
factories  without  "  reasonable  remuneration  in  money."  Pay-
ment is  always  to  be  made  irrespective  of  overtime,  and
premiums  are  forbidden.^  The  same  idea  is  embodied  in  the
statute  by  which  the  State  of  Utah  in  1913  fixed  a  minimum
wage  for  all  "experienced"  adult  women  of  1*25  dollars  per
day,  no  exceptions  to  this  minimum  being  allowed  even  for
defective  workers,*  and  in  a  flat-rate  law  of  the  same  general
character  enacted  in  the  State  of  Arizona  in  1 9 1 7.^  A  more
elastic  form  of  the  same  policy  is  expressed  in  the  third  section
of  the  Minimum  Wage  law  of  the  State  of  Washington.
This  section  runs :  "  There  is  hereby  enacted  a  Commission
....  to  establish  such  standards  of  wages  and  conditions
of  labour  for  women  and  minors  employed  within  the  State
of  Washington,  as  shall  be  held  hereunder  to  be  reasonable
and  not  detrimental  to  health  and  morals,  and  which  shall
be  sufficient  for  the  decent  maintenance  of  women."  ^  The
Industrial  Arbitration  Act  (1918)  of  New  South  Wales,  in  a
similar  spirit,  provides :  "  The  Board  of  Trade  shall,  from  year
to  year,  after  public  inquiry  as  to  the  increase  or  decrease  in
the  average  cost  of  living,  declare  what  shall  be  the  living
wages  to  be  paid  to  adult  male  employees  and  to  adult  female
employees  in  the  State  or  any  defined  area  thereof." ''

1  Labour  Gazette,  March  1909,  p.  103,

'  Of.  Ares,  Report  on  Wages  Board,  p.   88  ;  and  Raynaud,  Vers  le  salaire
minimum,  p.  335.
3  Ibid.  p.  88.

<  The  World's  Labour  Laws,  Feb.  1914,  p.  77.
'  Douglas,  American  Economic  Review,  December  1919,  p.  709.
'  Bulletin  of  U.S.  Bureau  of  Labour  Statistics,  No.  167,  p.  81.
^  Loc.  cit.  Paragraph  79  (1).


cH.  XVII    A  NATIONAL  MINIMUM  TIME-WAGE       555

§  2.  Now,  as  was  shown  in  Chapter  XY.  §  8,  any  attempt
to  force  the  wage  rate  of  low-grade  workpeople  above  their
"  fair "  level,  so  long  as  the  area  over  which  it  is  extended  is
narrow,  may  be  rendered  inoperate  by  a  perfectly  legal  form  of
evasion,  namely,  a  reshuffling  of  workpeople  of  different  grades
between  this  area  and  occupations  not  included  in  it.  When,
however,  the  State  interferes  to  establish  a  national  minimum
time-wage,  the  area  affected  by  its  action  will  not  be  a  narrow
one.  On  the  contrary,  it  will  be  more  or  less  nation-wide,
leaving  no  field  free  into  which  low-grade  workers  can  be
pushed  to  be  paid  a  derisory  wage.  Evasion  by  way  of  a
redistribution  of  work  among  workers  of  various  qualities  is,
therefore,  altogether  excluded.  Hence,  the  effect  produced
upon  the  national  dividend  may  prove  serious  and  substantial.

§  3.  It  is  probable  that  the  enactment  of  a  national  minimum
time-wage  will  incidentally  prevent  the  payment  of  certain
low  wages  that  are  unfair,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  the
result  of  exploitation  or  the  payment  by  employers  of  less
than  their  workpeople's  services  are  worth  to  them.  The
forcing  up  of  this  sort  of  low  wage  will,  as  was  explained  in
Chapter  XIII.,  react  favourably  upon  the  volume  of  the  national
dividend,  by  strengthening  competent  employers  in  their  com-
petition with  incompetent  rivals.  Nor  is  it  only  in  this  field
that  advantage  will  be  won.  Even  when  low  wages  are  fair
wages,  in  the  sense  of  being  proportioned  to  efficiency,  it  does
not  necessarily  follow  that  a  higher  wage  will  not  be  fair  also.
For,  as  was  shown  in  the  preceding  chapter,  if  only  an  inefficient
worker  can  be  secured  good  payment  for  a  little  while,  he  or
she  may  be  so  far  improved  in  efficiency  as  to  become  worth
the  higher  wage.  In  so  far  as  these  things  happen,  the
national  dividend  will  be  pro  tanto  benefited.  Obviously,  how-
ever, these  are  mere  incidents,  by-products  as  it  were,  of  the
establishment  of  a  national  minimum  wage,  and  not  the  main
consequence  of  it.

§  4.  This  main  consequence  is  the  expulsion  from  private
industry  of  a  number  of  low-grade  workers — the  number  being
greater  the  higher  the  level  at  which  the  national  mini-
mum wage  is  fixed.  When  it  is  enacted  that  low-grade  work-
people shaU  not  in  future  be  paid  rates  as  low  as  many  of


k


556  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

them  are  now  receiving,  it  necessarily  follows  that  some  of
them  will  no  longer  be  worth  employing.  Of  course,  not  all
those  who  are  now  worth  less  than  the  new  wage  will  be  affected
in  this  way,  because  the  withdrawal  of  some  workers  from
private  industry  increases  the  worth  of  those  that  remain.
Some,  however,  of  those  not  now  worth  the  new  wage  will
still  not  be  worth  it  when  it  is  established.  The  proportion
that  these  make  of  the  whole  will  be  greater  or  less  according
as  the  demand  for  labour  is  elastic  or  inelastic.  It  is  some-
times argued  that  this  demand  is  highly  inelastic,  upon  the
ground  that  in  certain  special  industries,  such  as  the  chain
trade,  there  is  statistical  evidence  that  the  demand  is  of  this
character.  But,  when  it  is  a  question  of  a  general  minimum
wage,  it  is  the  demand  for  labour  as  a  whole,  and  not  merely
in  particular  industries,  that  is  relevant ;  and,  whether  from  a
short-period  or  from  a  long-period  point  of  view,  there  can  be
little  doubt  that  the  elasticity  of  this  aggregate  demand  is
much  greater  than  the  elasticity  of  the  special  demand  of  the
chain  trade.^  Hence,  the  number  of  low-grade  workers  that
the  establishment  of  a  national  minimum  wage  substantially
higher  than  the  wage  they  are  now  worth  will  render  not  worth
employing  in  private  industry,  is  likely  to  be  considerable.
Some  of  these,  no  doubt,  employers  will  still  keep  on  from  kindli-
ness or  old  association.  But  many  will  lose  their  jobs,  and,
consequently,  will  have  no  opportunity  to  reap  improved  efficiency
from  improved  earnings.  As  far  as  they  are  concerned,  therefore,
there  will  be  no  indirect  gain  to  the  national  dividend.  And
there  will  be  the  obvious  direct  loss  that  their  labour  is
withdrawn  from  production  in  private  industry.  No  doubt,
some  of  them  might  be  set  to  work  in  State  controlled
institutions.  But  the  enforced  labour  of  assisted  persons  in
institutions  invariably  yields  but  little  product ;  and,  there-
fore, the  main  part,  at  all  events,  of  their  capacities  would  be
wasted.

§  5.  Under  a  regime  of  complete  aloofness  and  passivity  on
the  part  of  the  State  this  effect  would  be  dominant,  and  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  national  dividend  would  be  injured.
In  the  actual  world,  however,  it  must  be  remembered  that  a

1  Cf.  post,  Part  V.  Chapter  II.


OH.  xvii    A  NATIONAL  MINIMUM  TIME-WAGE       557

weU-organised  system  of  care  for  the  poor  may  rebuild  the
strength  of  persons  who,  through  unemployment,  fall  in  need
of  public  relief,  and  may  accord  to  them,  in  farm  colonies  or
elsewhere,  an  economic  training  of  which  they  can  afterwards
make  use.  It  follows  that  the  establishment  of  a  national
minimum  time-wage,  though  it  will,  for  a  time,  cause  the
withdrawal  of  some  persons  from  effective  production,  need
not,  even  in  respect  of  these  persons,  harm  the  national  divi-
dend in  the  long  run,  provided  that  it  is  associated  with  a
well-organised  State  policy  towards  the  poor  on  the  pattern
that  will  be  exhibited  in  Part  V.  of  this  volume.

A  little  reflection  shows,  however,  that  the  benefit  to
be  looked  for  in  this  connection  is  more  apparent  than
real.  The  establishment  of  a  national  minimum  time-wage
would  really  accomplish  very  little  more  than  could  be
accomplished  without  it.  If  there  is  not  a  well-organised
system  of  care  for  the  poor,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
any  of  the  persons  expelled  from  private  industry  by  the
operation  of  the  minimum  will  be  trained  and  rehabilitated ;
and,  even  if  there  is  such  a  system,  only  those  persons
will  come  in  contact  with  it  and  so  secure  its  benefit  who
do  not  belong  to  families  able  and  willing  to  support  them
without  State  help.  But,  if  there  were  no  national  minimum,
most  of  the  people,  whom  the  minimum  expels  from  private
industry,  would,  since  the  minimum  itself  will  presumably
be  a  low  one  based  on  a  consideration  of  what  is  essential  for
subsistence,  be  earning  so  little  that  they  would  be  nearly
sure,  in  one  way  or  another,  to  come  into  contact  with  the
State  organisation  for  looking  after  poor  persons.  This
organisation,  therefore,  will  have  much  the  same  opportunity

■  for  withdrawing  from  private  industry  those  suitable  for
m      training  or  those  needing  treatment  for  sickness  as  it  would

■  have  if  there  were  no  national  minimum  wage.

I  Nor  is  this  all.     It  has  to  be  remembered,  further,  that

■  by  no  means  all  those  persons  who  are  prevented  from
WL  working  at  ordinary  industry  by  the  establishment  of  a
H  national  minimum  time-wage  will  be  in  a  position  to  derive
B  benefit  from  State  training.  There  will  be  no  hope  of  this
B  kind    for    old    men    who   have   hitherto   done  a  little   work

I


558  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  hi

and  have  derived  the  remainder  of  their  support  from  their
families  and  friends.  These  men  will  simply  be  precluded
from  rendering  those  partial  and  occasional  services  to  industry
which  they  are  both  able  and  willing  to  render.  Elderly
women  home  workers  and  younger  women  workers  in  factories,
who  are  of  low  efficiency  and  are  partly  supported  by  hus-
bands and  fathers,  will  be  in  like  case.  So  also  will  State
pensioners  and  others  who  would  gladly  work  up  to  their  capacity
and  thus  help  to  support  themselves  if  they  were  permitted
to  do  so.  The  driving  of  these  persons  into  idleness  will
inflict  definite  and  uncompensated  damage  upon  the  national
dividend.  Consequently,  if  damage  is  not  to  be  done,  it  is
essential  that,  in  any  law  establishing  a  national  minimum  time-
wage,  provision  shall  be  made  for  excepting  from  its  operation
would-be  workers  of  the  above  type  whom  there  is  no  serious
prospect  of  rendering  more  efficient  by  training.  But  a
satisfactory  arrangement  effecting  this,  which  should  not
at  the  same  time  effect  a  number  of  other  things  that
are  not  desired,  is  extremely  difficult  to  devise.  Until  it  is
devised  we  may  fairly  conclude  that  the  establishment  of
an  effective  national  minimum  time-wage  (effective  in  the
sense  of  being  substantially  above  what  a  considerable
number  of  people  are  earning  now)  is  likely,  on  the  whole,
to  damage  rather  than  to  benefit  the  national  dividend.
No  doubt,  in  the  absence  of  such  a  minimum  a  number
of  low-grade  workers,  particularly  low-grade  women  workers
with  families,  will  be  left  in  private  industry  with  earnings
insufficient  to  maintain  a  decent  life.  This  evil,  as  will
be  urged  with  emphasis  in  Part  V.,  it  is  imperative  to
remedy.  But  the  cure  for  it  consists,  not  in  establishing
a  national  minimum  time-wage  at  a  level  that  will  drive
low-grade  women  workers  out  of  private  industry  altogether,
but  by  the  direct  action  of  the  State,  in  securing  for  all
families  of  its  citizens,  with  the  help,  if  necessary,  of  State
aid,  an  adequate  minimum  standard  in  every  department
of  life.


CHAPTER    XVIII

FIXED    AND    FLUCTUATING    WAGE    RATES

S  1.  When  in  practice  it  is  decided  to  interfere  with
wages  in  any  industry,  either  because  they  are  "  unfair "
or  for  any  other  reason,  there  is  at  once  presented  a  new
problem.  Effective  interference  involves  either  the  authorita-
tive award  of  a  new  wage  rate  or  encouragement  to  employers
and  employed  to  agree  upon  a  new  wage  rate.  Equally
whether  an  award  or  an  agreement  is  made,  it  would  be
ridiculous  that  the  terms  laid  down  should  be  fixed  for
ever.  The  industrial  situation  generally,  no  less  than  the
circumstances  of  particular  trades,  is  in  a  continuous  state  of
flux.  Every  award  and  agreement,  therefore,  must  be  restricted,
either  explicitly  or  implicitly,  to  a  short  period  of  time.  How
short  the  period  shall  be  before  revision  can  be  called
for  depends  entirely  upon  the  practical  difficulties  that
revision  would  have  to  face.  Apart  from  this,  it  would
seem,  on  the  face  of  things,  that,  since  conditions  may
change  fundamentally  at  any  moment,  revision  should  be
permitted  whenever  either  side  desires  it.  In  practice,  however,
considerations  of  convenience  alone  would  make  it  imperative
that  some  minimum  interval  should  be  provided  for.  But
there  are  also  other  considerations.  Except  where  the
relations  between  employers  and  employed  are  exceptionally
good,  it  is  dangerous  to  reopen  fundamental  wage  con-
troversies more  frequently  than  can  be  avoided.  In  view
of  this  it  often  happens  that  the  governing  decisions
are  given  a  currency  of  not  less  than,  say,  two  years  from
the  date  when  they  are  launched.  For  the  purpose  of  this
discussion   we   will    suppose    that    that    practice    is    adopted

559


560  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

generally.  It  does  not,  however,  follow  from  this  that,  whenever
a  governing  award  or  agreement  about  wages  is  made,  the
rate  must,  thereafter,  be  fixed  rigidly  for  at  least  two  years.
For  it  may  be  possible  to  devise  methods  by  which  the
governing  award  or  agreement  shall  provide  for  variation
in  wages  in  response  to  temporary  changes  of  circumstances
during  the  period  that  it  covers.  A  choice,  therefore,  has
to  be  made  between  a  rigid  arrangement  and  a  plastic
arrangement,  and  our  investigation  is  not  complete  until
the  comparative  effects  of  these  have  been  ascertained.

§  2.  Let  us  postulate  a  trade  in  general  equilibrium,
which  is  neither  expanding  nor  decaying  on  the  whole,  but
in  which  the  demand  for  labour — for  the  present  we  ignore
fluctuations  in  the  supply  of  labour — now  falls  below  and  now
rises  above  its  mean  level.  The  argument  of  Chapters  XIII.
to  XV.  has  shown  that,  allowance  being  made  for  certain
obstacles  and  for  possible  reactions  on  efficiency,  the  wage  rate
that  will  most  advantage  the  national  dividend  will  be  a
rate  that,  taking  one  thing  with  another,  is  equal,  over  the
period  of  the  agreement  or  award,  to  the  rate  paid  for  similar
work  elsewhere.  Ought  this  rate  to  be  single  and  constant,
or  ought  it  to  vary  about  a  mean  ?

In  the  first  place,  let  us  consider  a  rise  in  the  demand  for
labour.  If  a  fixed  wage  system  is  adopted,  this  implies  that
the  nominal  rate  remains  unaltered.  Hence,  we  should  expect
that  the  amount  of  labour  provided  will  also  be  unaltered,  and,
consequently,  that  the  aggregate  amount  of  work  done  will
be  less  than  if  the  wage  fluctuated.  It  must  be  remembered,
indeed,  that,  though  the  wage  per  man  remains  the  same,
the  wage  per  efl&ciency  unit  of  labour  is,  in  effect,  raised  for
new  employees.  An  adjustment  is  brought  about,  either  by
employers  taking  on  inferior  men  at  the  wage  formerly  paid
to  good  men  only,^  or  by  resort  to  overtime  at  special  rates.

*  It  may  be  suggested  that  under  a  piecework  system  this  device  is
impracticable,  since  a  given  wage  bears  the  same  relation  to  a  given  output,
whoever  the  worker  may  be.  But  (1)  equal  pieces  are  not  always  of  the  same
quality,  and  are  not  always  obtained  with  the  same  amount  of  injury  to  the
employer's  property  (e.g.  in  coal-mining,  a  ton  of  coal  badly  cut  may  damage
the  general  conditions  of  the  mine  in  the  neighbourhood)  ;  and  (2)  even  when
two  pieces  are  similar  in  all  respects,  one  man,  in  finishing  his,  may  occupy
the  fixed  plant  of  his  employer  for  a  longer  time  than  his  neighbour.


cH.  I VIII    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    561

In  either  event  more  is  paid  for  the  new  labour  units  than
for  the  old.  It  is  conceivable,  if  the  rise  in  demand  is  small,
that  the  same  addition  is  made  to  the  aggregate  amount  of
labour  employed  as  would  have  been  made  had  the  general
wage  rate  been  raised  in  an  equal  proportion.  The  difference
is  that  the  employer,  by  fixing  what  practically  amounts  to
two  prices  as  between  his  new  labour  and  his  old,  preserves
for  himself  a  sum  of  money,  which,  under  a  one-price  system,
would  have  been  added  to  the  remuneration  of  the  latter.
This  result  is  best  illustrated  under  the  method  of  overtime.
Suppose  that  the  normal  working  day  was  six  hours  at
sixpence  per  hour — sixpence  being  the  equivalent  payment
for  the  disenjoyment  caused  to  the  workman  by  the  sixth
hour's  work.  Suppose,  further,  that  the  disenjoyment  of  an
extra  hour's  equally  efficient  work,  to  a  man  who  has
already  worked  six  hours  and  received  three  shillings  pay,
is  measured  by  sevenpence.  Then  the  employer  can  obtain
seven  hours'  work  from  that  man,  either  by  raising  the
general  rate  per  hour  to  sevenpence,  or  by  paying  the  same
as  before  for  a  six  hours'  day,  and  offering  sevenpence
for  one  hour  of  "  overtime."  The  amount  of  work  done
is  exactly  the  same  on  either  plan ;  the  only  difference
is  that,  if  the  former  is  adopted,  the  employer  pays  over
to  the  workman  an  extra  sixpence,  which,  under  the
latter,  he  retains  for  himself.  This  point  is  of  some  im-
portance. As  a  general  rule,  however,  particularly  if  the
rise  in  demand  is  large,  not  all  the  extra  labour  that
employers  would  like  to  have  can  be  got  by  working  over-
time and  taking  on  inferior  men.  Though,  therefore,  there
will  be  some  expansion  in  the  dividend  imder  the  fixed
wage  plan,  the  expansion  is  not  likely  to  be  so  big  as  it
would  be  imder  the  fluctuating  plan.

In  the  second  place,  let  us  consider  a  fall  in  the
demand  for  labour.  If  the  wage  rate  remains  at  the  old
level,  the  quantity  of  labour  which  it  will  pay  the  employer
to  keep  at  work  will  be  diminished.  If  the  rate  is  lowered,
it  may  still  be  diminished,  but  not  in  so  high  a  degree.
The  point  is  well  illustrated  by  a  comparison,  made  shortly
before    the    war    in    a    Report    of    the    British     Board    of

2  0


562  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

Trade,  between  conditions  here  and  in  Germany.  "  Trade
Union  standard  rates  of  wages  do  not  prevail  in  Germany
to  the  same  extent  as  in  Great  Britain.  In  consequence
workpeople  have  greater  liberty  in  accepting  work  at
wages  lower  than  those  at  which  they  have  previously
been  employed,  especially  in  bad  times.  A  more  speedy
return  to  employment  of  some  kind  and  a  consequent  reduc-
tion in  the  percentage  of  trade  union  members  unemployed
results  from  this."  ^  The  general  result  is  that  in  bad  times
more  work  is  done  under  the  plastic  than  under  the  rigid
form  of  wage  system.

From  a  combination  of  these  results  it  follows  that,  over
good  and  bad  times  together,  a  wage  system  fluctuating  on
both  sides  of  the  mean  level  in  accordance  with  temporary
movements  of  the  demand  for  labour  means  more  work  and,
therefore,  a  larger  national  dividend  than  one  permanently
fixed  at  that  level.  This  gain  arises  directly  out  of  superior
adjustment  between  demand  and  supply.  It  is  the  fruit  of
improved  organisation,  and  is  similar  to  the  gain  produced
by  improved  machinery.  It  is  not  retained  for  long  as  an
exclusive  possession  of  the  industry  which  first  secures  it,
but  is  distributed  over  the  community  as  a  whole,  with  the
result  that  a  new  general  equilibrium  is  established  some-
what more  advantageous  than  the  old.  The  interest  of  the
national  dividend  thus  requires  that  the  wage  should  not  stand
at  the  mean  level  for  periods  as  long  as  two  years,  but  should
undergo  short-period  oscillations  about  this  level,  in  such
wise  as  always  to  make  the  demand  for  labour  and  the  supply
of  it  equal.

§  3.  To  this  conclusion  there  is  an  objection,  the  limits
of  whose  validity  require  careful  investigation.  It  has  been
urged  that  fluctuations  in  the  wages  of  individual  work-
people tend  indirectly  to  impair  both  their  moral  character
and  their  economic  efficiency.  Thus,  Professor  Chapman
writes :  "  It  may  be  argued  that  there  is  far  more  chance  of
a  somewhat  steady  wage,  which  varies  infrequently  and  by
small  amounts  only,  contributing  to  build  up  a  suitable  and
well-devised  standard  of  life,  than  a  wage  given  to  sudden

*  Report  on  tlie  Cost  of  Living  in  German  Tovms  [Cd.  4032],  p.  521.


cH.xvni    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATmG  WAGE  EATES    563

and  considerable  alterations."  ^  If  this  is  true,  it  follows
that  the  direct  advantages  of  a  wage  rate  fluctuating  with
fluctuations  of  demand  may  be  more  than  counteracted  by
indirect  disadvantages.  For,  though  the  national  dividend
will,  indeed,  be  enhanced  for  the  moment,  it  may  ultimately
be  diminished,  in  a  more  than  corresponding  degree,  through
the  injury  done  to  the  quality  of  some  of  the  nation's
workers.

In  examining  this  argument  we  at  once  observe  that
the  term  "  wages "  ought  to  be  deleted  in  favour  of  the
term  "  earnings."  It  is  stability  of  earnings  that  enables  a
well-devised  standard  of  life  to  be  built  up,  and  not  stability
of  wages.  Hence,  if,  for  the  moment,  questions  connected  with
distribution  between  different  individuals  are  left  out  of
account,  we  may  put  aside,  as  unaffected  by  Professor
Chapman's  argument,  all  occupations  in  which  the  earnings
are  not  liable  to  be  pushed  to  so  low  a  point  under  a
fluctuating  wage  as  they  are  under  a  fixed  wage.  The
occupations  thus  excluded  comprise  all  those  in  which  the
elasticity  of  the  demand  for  labour  is  greater  than  unity.  It
may,  indeed,  be  objected  that,  though,  in  these  occupations,
the  workpeople  collectively  earn  more  in  bad  times  under  the
fluctuating  system,  yet  the  particular  workpeople,  who  are  so
skilful  as  to  command  employment  always,  earn  less,  and  that
it  is  stability  in  their  earnings  rather  than  in  those  of  others
that  is  of  especial  importance.  Since,  however,  these  superior
workpeople  are  presumably  better  off  than  their  less  skilful
fellows,  this  latter  statement  is  highly  disputable.  For  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  fluctuations  in  the  income  of  a  poor
man  cause  more  suffering,  and,  hence,  more  loss  of  productive
efficiency,  than  fluctuations  of  the  same  size  in  that  of  a  rich
man  of  similar  temperament.  Hence,  the  rejoinder  fails,  and
it  follows  that,  where  the  elasticity  of  the  relevant  part  of  the
demand  for  labour  is  greater  than  unity.  Professor  Chapman's
argument  is  of  no  force  against  a  fluctuating  wage.

In  occupations  where  the  demand,  from  a  short-period
point  of  view,  is  highly  inelastic,  the  result  may  be  different.
In  these  conditions,  the  total  earnings  of  the  workpeople  will

*  Economic  Journal,  1903,  p.  194


564  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  in

touch  a  lower  level  in  bad  times  under  the  fluctuating  system.
If  it  were  the  fact  that  in  good  times  adequate  provision  were
regularly  made  for  bad  times,  the  consequent  evil  effects  on
efficiency,  and,  therefore,  on  the  national  dividend,  would  not  be
great.  But,  as  everybody  knows,  the  ordinary  workman  does
not  "  conform  his  expenditure  and  his  savings  to  the  standard
wage,  and  regard  what  he  sometimes  gets  above  that  standard
as  an  insurance  fund  against  what  he  will  at  other  times
get  below  it."  ^  Hence,  it  is  probable  that  there  is  a
considerable  net  evil  effect  on  efficiency.  Against  this,
however,  there  has  to  be  set  the  fact  that,  under  a  fixed
wage,  unless  the  demand  is  perfectly  inelastic,  the  avail-
able employment  in  bad  times  will  be  smaller,  and  more
workpeople  are  likely  to  be  thrown  out  of  work  altogether.
It  is  not,  of  course,  certain  that  this  will  happen.  In  some
industries,  as  was  seen  in  Chapter  X.,  a  constriction  of
employment  is  met  by  short  time  all  round  instead  of  by  a
reduction  in  the  numbers  of  the  staff,  and,  in  others,  by  a
sharing  of  work  more  or  less  in  rotation.  But,  in  general,
the  actual  number  of  unemployed  persons  in  bad  months  will
be  greater  under  a  fixed  than  under  a  fluctuating  wage  system  ;
and  the  efficiency  of  totally  unemployed  persons  is  likely  to
suffer  in  a  very  special  measure.  Hence,  even  in  occupations
where  the  demand  for  labour  is  highly  inelastic,  so  long  as
it  is  not  absolutely  inelastic,  the  evil  effect  on  efficiency  due
to  a  fluctuating  wage  is  matched  by  another  due  to  a  fixed
one.  This  does  not,  of  course,  show  that  circumstances  can
never  arise  in  which  fluctuating  wages  are,  on  the  whole,  more
injurious  to  efficiency,  and  so  indirectly  to  the  national  dividend,
than  fixed  wages.  It  does,  however,  throw  the  burden  of
proof  upon  those  who  maintain,  in  any  particular  instance,
that  such  circumstances  have  arisen.  For  the  two  evils  noted
above  are  so  vague  and  indefinite  that  it  will  often  be
practically  impossible  to  weigh  them  against  one  another.
In  the  absence  of  special  detailed  information  our  decision
must    then   be   based   upon   the   one   fact   which    is   known,

^  This  is  tlie  advice  given  him  by  Smart,  Sliding  Scales,  p.  13.  It  may  be
noted  that  the  pawn-shop  and  the  power  to  get  credit  afford,  for  short  periods  of
unemployment,  a  partial,  though  probably  an  injurious,  substitute  for  saving.


CH.  XVIII    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    565

namely,  that  a  wage  fluctuating  with  fluctuations  in  the
demand  for  labour  has  the  better  direct  effect  upon  the  national
dividend.  In  general,  therefore,  the  defence  of  a  system  of
rigid  wage  rates  examined  in  this  section  must  be  adjudged  to
have  failed.

§  4.  The  preceding  analysis  has  reference  only  to  fluctua-
tions in  the  demand  for  labour  in  any  industry.  It  is  easily
seen  that  analogous  conclusions  hold  good  as  regards  fluctuations
in  the  supply  of  labour.  No  formal  demonstration  of  this
seems  to  be  necessary.

§  5.  These  results  carry  with  them  the  implication  that,  if
economic  considerations  alone  are  taken  into  account,  the
wage  level  ought  to  fluctuate  from  moment  to.  moment,  never
remaining  the  same  over  a  period  of  more  than  infinitesimal
duration.  For,  even  though  changes  in  the  conditions  of
demand  or  supply  occur  only  at  intervals,  yet,  in  strictness,
the  wage  appropriate  to  any  given  change  varies  in  accordance
with  the  period  which  has  elapsed  since  the  change  occurred.
It  is,  in  short,  a  function  of  the  time  since  which,  as  well
as  of  the  amount  by  which,  demand  or  supply  has  oscillated.

This  point  is  brought  out  very  clearly  when  attention  is
directed  to  the  reactions  on  the  side  of  supply  induced  by
oscillations  of  demand.  A  diminished  wage  in  any  occupation
will  command  a  smaller  number  of  labour  units  per  week  after
a  little  than  it  does  at  first,  because  men  will  gradually  seek
and  find  work  elsewhere.  Similarly,  an  increased  wage  will
command  more  labour  units  when  time  has  been  allowed  for
new  men  to  come  into  the  trade,  and  when,  therefore,  labour
units  can  be  furnished  by  them  as  well  as  by  the  overtime
exertions  of  the  "old  gang."  Hence,  the  only  correct  adjust-
ment to  a  given  oscillation  of  demand  would  consist  in  a
movement  of  wages  most  considerable  at  first,  and,  thereafter,
gradually  falling  back  towards  its  old  level.

When  it  is  supply  that  oscillates,  similar  considerations

apply  to  the  reactions  upon  demand.      So  soon  as  we  take

account  of  the  element  of  time,  it  becomes  necessary  to  allow

for  the  working  of  the  law  of  substitution.      If  the  price  of

l|c   one  factor  of  production,  labour,  is  raised,  the  amount  of  it

\^  ~  ^ "" "


566  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

employment  of  other  factors — whether  different  kinds  of
labour  or  mechanical  tools — in  its  stead.  In  like  manner,  if
the  price  of  one  factor  is  lowered,  the  amount  of  it  demanded
gradually  increases  as  it  is  introduced  into  uses  to  which  it
could  not,  hitherto,  be  profitably  put.  Hence,  the  only  correct
adjustment  to  a  given  oscillation  of  supply  would  consist  of
a  wage  at  first  abruptly  altered  and  then  slowly  moving  back
towards  its  previous  amount.

Thus,  it  appears  that,  whenever  the  unit  of  time  over
which  wage  adjustments  are  made  is  of  more  than  infinitesi-
mal length,  there  is  a  failure  to  reach  the  position  most  ad-
vantageous to  the  national  dividend.  This  circumstance  is,
however,  for  several  reasons,  inadequate  to  justify  a  perpetually
fluctuating  wage.  For  to  the  establishment  of  such  a  wage
there  are  insuperable  practical  obstacles.  Time  is  required
for  the  collection  and  arrangement  of  the  statistics  upon  which
the  changes  must  be  based.  Considerations  of  book-keeping
and  ordinary  business  convenience  come  upon  the  stage,  and
fix  a  lower  limit,  beyond  which  the  interval  between  successive
adjustments  must  not  be  reduced.  Of  course,  this  limit  is
not  always  the  same.  In  a  small  local  industry,  for  example,
it  will  probably  be  lower  that  in  a  great  national  one.  But
in  every  industry  it  must  lie  considerably  above  the  infini-
tesimal level  which  pure  theory  recommends.  So  far  as  it  is
possible  to  judge  from  the  practice  of  those  industries  in
which  the  interval  is  determined,  as  under  a  sliding  scale,  by
considerations  of  convenience  alone,  it  seems  as  though  this
interval  should  not  be  less  than  two  or  three  months.^

§  6.  Having  thus  satisfied  ourselves  that  the  interest  of
the  national  dividend  requires  a  wage  system  fluctuating
within  the  normal  period  of  agreement  or  award,  and  having
determined  the  intervals  that  should  elapse  between  successive
fluctuations,  we  have  now  to  discover  on  what  plan  the
fluctuations  themselves  should  be  organised.  A  preliminary
solution  of  this  problem  can  be  given  in  the  form  of  six
fundamental  propositions.  The  first  of  these  is  that,  when
a  given  fitictuation  occurs  in  the  demand  schedule  for  labour
in  any  occupation,  the  wage  fluctuation,  which  is  required  to
^  Cf.  for  illustrations,  L.  L.  Price,  Industrial  Peace,  p.  80.


cH.  XVIII    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    567

equate  demand  and  supply,  and  which,  therefore,  in  accordance
with  our  principle,  ought  to  be  introduced,  will  he  smaller  the
more  elastic,  from  the  standpoint  of  a  short  period,  is  the  supply
of  labour  in  that  occupation.  This  proposition,  when  set  out
in  diagrammatic  form,  is  self-evident.  It  is  readily  applied
to  practice.  The  supply  of  labour  is  elastic  in  occupations  so
situated  that  a  small  change  in  the  wage  rate  offered  in  them
suffices  to  divert  a  considerable  quantity  of  labour  between  them
and  other  occupations.  In  general,  therefore,  the  following
results  hold  good.  First,  when,  as  with  the  Scottish  shale
and  coal-miners,^  a  small  industry  is  neighbour  to  a  kindred
and  very  large  one,  the  wage  change  corresponding  to  a  given
oscillation  of  demand  should  be  less  than  in  an  isolated  industry.
Secondly,  a  set  of  circumstances,  which  would  justify  a  given
change  in  the  wages  of  workmen  specialised  to  a  particular
industry  or  locality,  would  justify  a  smaller  change  in  those
of  labourers,  whose  lack  of  skill,  or  managers,  the  general
character  of  whose  skill,  renders  them  more  mobile.^  Thirdly,
among  workmen  trained  to  a  particular  job,  the  wage  fluctua-
tions corresponding  to  given  changes  in  the  demand  of  one
industry  employing  them  should  be  smaller  when  there  are
other  industries  in  which  their  services  are  required.  Thus,  in
a  boom  or  depression  in  the  coal  trade,  the  wages  of  mechanics
employed  in  the  mines  should  fluctuate  less  than  those  of
hewers.  Fourthly,  when  wages  are  paid  by  the  piece,  the
percentage  fluctuation  corresponding  to  a  given  fluctuation  in
demand  should  be  smaller  than  when  they  are  paid  by  the
time.     For,  since,  under  the  latter  system,  a  rise  of  pay  has

1  Cf.  Sheriff  Jameson's  award  in  a  shale-miners'  arbitration  (^Economic
Journal,  1904,  p.  309).

^  When  specialisation,  either  to  trade  or  place,  is  very  high,  the  labour
supply  will,  for  considerable  variations  of  wage,  remain  practically  constant.
The  workman  may  know  that  his  skill  is  useless  in  other  districts  or  occupations,
and  may,  therefore,  be  driven  to  accept  a  great  drop  in  wages  before  leaving.
Nor  (except  for  navvies  and  other  labourers  the  muscular  character  of  whose
work  makes  it  specially  dependent  upon  their  nourishment)  need  his  efficiency
suffer  appreciably.  Thus,  the  supply  may  be  perfectly  inelastic.  It  may  also
be  inelastic  on  account  of  conservative  feeling  among  the  workers  affected.  For
example,  Dr.  Clapham  writes  of  the  decline  of  the  hand-loom  industry  :  "The
independence  and  professional  pride  of  the  old  race  of  weavers  made  them  hate
the  thought  of  the  factory,  and  stick  to  their  home  work  ^vith  a  tenacity  that,
in  the  long  run,  did  them  no  good  "  {Bradford  Textile  Society,  June  1905,  p.  43).


568  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

not  the  same  effect  in  inducing  workmen  to  pack  more  labour
into  an  hour,  the  elasticity  of  the  supply  of  efficiency  units  is
lower.  Fifthly,  any  general  change,  such  as  the  spread  of
information,  improvements  in  communication,  or  an  increased
willingness  on  the  part  of  workpeople  to  work  at  a  distance
from  their  homes,  will  tend  to  increase  the  elasticity  of  the
labour  supply  and  so  to  diminish  the  wage  change  appro-
priate to  any  given  fluctuation  of  demand.  Lastly,  in  industries
subject  to  regular  seasonal  fluctuations,  many  of  the  work-
people will  have  prepared  themselves  for  their  slack  periods
by  acquiring  some  form  of  skill  for  which  the  demand  at
these  times  is  apt  to  increase.  Hence,  within  the  normal
limits  of  seasonal  fluctuations,  the  supply  of  labour  will  be
fairly  elastic,  and,  therefore,  seasonal  demand  changes  should
not  seriously  alter  wages.  Thus,  despite  the  great  fluctuations
in  the  demand  for  gas  stokers  in  summer  and  winter,  wages
do  not  fluctuate  much,  because  these  workers  are  often  also
employed  in  making  bricks,  the  demand  for  which  expands  in
the  summer.

§  7.  So  far  of  the  general  problem.  We  have  still  to
inquire  whether  the  wage  fluctuation  that  corresponds  to
a  given  change  in  labour  demand  is  related  to  it  in  the
same  way,  whatever  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  this
latter  change  may  be.  The  answer  must  be  in  the  negative,
since  the  supply  of  labour  will  not  have  the  same  elasticity
for  all  amounts.  We  may,  indeed,  presume  that  the  elasticity
will  not  vary  greatly  for  changes  in  demand  fairly  near  to  the
mean.  The  entrance  and  the  exit  to  most  trades  are  about
equally  open.  In  the  North  of  England  mining  districts,
for  example,  "  the  migratory  miners  include  a  large  number
of  skilled  mechanics,  who  divide  their  time  between  mining
and  their  other  handicraft  according  as  either  industry  offers
a  better  chance  of  profit."  ^  A  moderate  upward  movement
in  demand  should,  therefore,  in  general  be  met  by  about  the
same  percentage  of  wage  change  as  an  equal  downward
movement.  But  for  large  upward  and  downward  movements
this  symmetry  no  longer  obtains.  When  the  labour  demand
falls  considerably,  there  is  a  limit  beyond  which   the  wage

1  Statistical  Jov/rnal,  Dec.  1904,  p.  635.


CH.  XVIII    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    569

cannot  be  reduced  without  reducing  the  available  amount  of
the  labour  in  question  to  zero.  This  limit  will  be  determined,
for  unskilled  men,  by  the  conditions  of  life  in  the  workhouse,
and,  for  skilled  men,  by  what  they  can  earn  in  unskilled
occupations.  Thus,  if  the  labour  demand  has  fallen  in  more
than  a  moderate  degree,  a  further  fall  should  be  accompanied
by  a  less  than  proportionate  fall,  and  eventually  by  no  fall,
in  wage.  These  considerations  justify  the  establishment,  in
connection  with  sliding  scales  alike  for  skilled  and  unskilled
work,  of  a  minimum  wage  uncompensated  by  any  corresponding
maximum.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  labour  demand  rises
considerably,  the  effect  upon  unskilled  wages  should  be  pro-
portionate to  that  produced  when  it  rises  a  little.  For  skilled
labour  the  percentage  of  wage  increase  should  be  even  greater.
For,  while  the  power  of  those  already  in  a  trade  to  work
extra  hours,  and  the  probable  presence  of  a  floating  body  of
unemployed,  will  enable  a  moderate  addition  to  the  labour
supply  to  be  made  fairly  easily,  these  resources  will  be  in-
effective when  a  large  addition  is  required.  This  consideration
affords  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  device  of  the  "  double-
jump  "  after  a  certain  point  has  been  reached,  which  found  a
place  in  a  former  scale  in  the  South  Wales  coal  industry  and
also  in  certain  English  sliding  scales.

§  8.  The  second  fimdamental  proposition  is  that,  when  a
given  Jlibctuation  occurs  in  the  supply  schedule  for  labour  in
any  occupation,  the  wage  Jiuctuation  which  is  required  to  equate
demand  and  supply,  and  which,  therefore,  in  accordance  with  our
principle,  ought  to  be  introduced,  will  be  smaller  the  more  elastic,
from  the  standpoint  of  a  short  period,  is  the  demand  for  labour
in  that  occupation.  This  proposition,  like  the  preceding,  is
self-evident  so  soon  as  it  is  set  out  in  diagrammatic  form.
In  order  that  it  may  be  fnutful  of  practical  application,
the  principal  factors  on  which  the  elasticity  of  the  demand
for  labour  in  different  occupations  depends  must  be  kept
in  view.  It  will  be  more  convenient  to  examine  them  in
Chapter  V.  of  Part  V.  There  remains,  as  in  the  preceding
discussion  of  supply  conditions,  the  minor  question  whether  the
labour  demand  is  equally  elastic  for  all  quantities  demanded-
The  answer  is  that  it  is  likely  to  be  least  elastic  when  un-


570  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

usually  small  or  unusually  large  amounts  of  labour  are  being
employed.  If  the  number  of  workmen  is  reduced  below  a
certain  minimum,  there  is  a  danger  of  organisation  deteriorating,
or  machinery  being  spoilt,  or  the  place  of  work  injured.  This
point  is  important  in  the  industry  of  iron-smelting,  for,  if
a  blast-furnace  is  once  allowed  to  go  out,  heavy  expense  is
involved  in  relighting  it.  It  is  important,  again,  in  industries
that  employ  a  large  quantity  of  delicate  machinery.  Thus,
Mr.  Brooks  writes :  "  A  very  large  proportion  of  capitalistic
investment  is  now  embodied  in  machinery  of  the  most  delicate
and  costly  character.  When  the  complex  enginery  is  once
started,  it  has  to  be  '  tended '  precisely  as  if  it  were  the  most
frail  human  life  or  plant.  It  is  as  safe  to  shut  up  and
desert  a  hothouse  of  dainty  flowers  as  to  close  up  and  desert
modern  machinery.  Every  hostile  element  attacks  it  as  if
bent  on  instant  destruction."  ^  Again,  of  coal-mining  it  has
been  said :  "  So  much  loss  and  damage  are  incurred,  or  at  all
events  risked,  by  the  shutting  down  of  pits  otherwise  healthy,
that  a  coalowner  will  rather  go  on  year  after  year  working
at  a  loss  than  shut  down  at  what  may  be  a  much  greater
loss."  ^  Finally,  in  some  instances,  considerations  akin  to  the
above  hold  good  about  the  more  specialised  part  of  the  labour
staff;  for,  if  the  staff  is  once  broken  up,  it  may  prove  very
difficult  to  reconstitute  it.  For  this  reason,  if  the  number  of
workmen  is  reduced  below  a  certain  minimum,  the  relevant
demand  on  the  part  of  employers  is  apt  to  be  exceedingly  in-
elastic. In  like  manner,  if  the  number  of  workmen  is
increased  beyond  a  certain  maximum,  physical  difficulties  will
be  encountered  in  mere  lack  of  floor-space  and  will  make  the
employers'  demand  for  further  labour  highly  inelastic.  Hence,
other  things  being  equal,  a  considerable  oscillation,  either  up
or  down,  in  the  supply  schedule  for  labour  should  lead  to  a
change  in  wage  rate  more  than  proportionate  to  that  which
is  proper  when  a  moderate  oscillation  takes  place.

§  9.  The  third  and  fourth  fundamental  propositions  are
respectively  as  follows:  First,  other  things  being  equal,  the
more  elastic  the  demand  for  labour  in  any  industry,  the  larger

»   The  Social  Unrest,  p.  188.
2  Economist,  25th  October  1902,  p.  1639.


cH.  XVIII    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    571

is  the  wage  change  appropriate  to  any  given  oscillation  of
demand.  Secondly,  other  things  iein^  equal,  the  more  elastic
the  supply  of  labour  in  any  industry,  the  larger  is  the
wage  change  appropriate  to  any  given  oscillation  of  supply.
These  propositions  again  are  self-evident  when  expressed
diagrammatically.  Their  practical  implications  can  readily
be  worked  out  in' the  light  of  what  has  already  been  said
about  the  circumstances  on  which  the  elasticities  of  demand
and  of  supply  depend.

§  10.  The  fifth  fundamental  proposition  is  that,  when  the
short-period  elasticities  of  the  demand  and  supply  of  labour  in
any  occupation  are  given,  the  wage  fluctuation  appropriate
to  any  given  fiuctuation  of  the  demand  schedule  is  larger  the
larger  is  the  fluctuMion  of  that  schedule.  This  proposition
again  is  self-evident.  In  order  that  it  may  be  fruitful  in
practice  the  principal  factors  upon  which  the  magnitude
of  demand  fluctuations  depends  must  be  described.  These
fall  into  two  divisions:  (1)  movements  in  the  employers'
demand  schedule  for  the  commodity,  which  the  labour  we
are  interested  in  is  helping  to  produce ;  amd  (2)  movements
in  the  supply  schedule  of  the  other  factors  that  co-operate
in  production  with  that  labour.  These  two  sets  of  influences
will  now  be  reviewed.

^  §  11.  Movements  in  the  employers'  demand  for  the  com-
modity the  labour  is  helping  to  make  are  derived  directly  from
movements  in  the  public  demand  for  the  commodity.  The
liability  to  oscillation  of  that  demand  is,  of  course,  diflerent  for
different  classes  of  commodities.  The  most  obvious  distinction
is  between  articles  which  are  desired  for  immediate  personal
use  "  for  their  own  sake  "  and  articles  which  are  desired  largely
as  means  to  distinction  through  display.  The  demand  for
articles  of  the  former  sort  is  likely  to  be  the  more  stable,
because,  as  Jevons  suggests,  people's  desire  for  them  is
generally  steady  for  a  longer  period.  For  example,  we  may
notice  the  stability  of  the  pinafore  industry :  "  No  clothing
trade  (in  Birmingham)  suffers  so  little  from  short  time."  ^  On
the  other  hand,  commodities  that  are  largely  display  articles
are  liable  to  fluctuations  of  desire,  as  opinion  transfers  the

^  Cadbury,  Women  s  Work  and  Wages,  p.  93.


572  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

distinction-bearing  quality  from  one  thing  to  another.  Thus,
the  demand  would  seem  to  be  less  variable  for  common  objects
of  wide  consumption  than  for  luxuries.  To  these  special
considerations  should  be  added  the  more  general  one,  that  an
industry  which  supplies  a  wide  market  made  up  of  many
independent  parts  is  likely  to  enjoy  a  steadier  demand  tlian
one  which  supplies  a  narrow  market.  This  is  merely  a
particular  application  of  the  broad  proposition  familiar  to
statisticians,  that  "  the  precision  of  an  average  is  proportionate
to  the  square  root  of  the  number  of  terms  it  contains."  ^  It  is
well  illustrated  by  the  interesting  study  of  M.  Lazard  on  Le
Choniage  et  la  profession.  Using  figures  from  the  French
census  of  1901,  he  takes  the  percentages  of  unemployment
there  recorded  in  a  number  of  industries,  and  sets  them  along-
side of  the  average  number  of  men  {moyen  effectif)  per  establish-
ment in  the  several  industries,  and  finds,  on  a  method  of  his
own,  an  inverse  correlation.  Connecting  large  unemployment
with  variable  demand,  he  explains  this  correlation  by  the
relation,  which  he  believes  to  subsist,  between  a  large  moyen
effectif  and  V extension  des  deboucMs  commerciaux.  "  The  con-
nection between  this  latter  phenomenon  and  the  size  of  the
personnel  is  evident.  Large  establishments  exist  only  when
the  markets  to  be  served  are  considerable.  Now,  a  large
market  must  also  be  a  relatively  stable  market,  because  in  it
considerable  decreases  in  the  consumption  of  some  customers
have  a  chance  of  being  balanced  by  increases  in  the  consump-
tion of  others  ;  and  this  stability,  implying,  as  it  does,  stability
of  production,  implies  at  the  same  time  the  absence  or,  at  all
events,  a  diminution  of  unemployment."  ^  In  like  manner,  he
argues :  "  If  unemployment  seems  to  grow  as  we  pass  upward
from  primary  towards  finishing  industries,  this  circumstance  is

*  Bowley,  Elements  of  Statistics,  p.  305.

2  Le  Chdrnage  et  la  profession,  pp.  336-7.  M.  Lazard  adds  :  "A  ce  premier
avantage,  propre  aux  grandes  entieprises,  du  fait  de  leiir  organisation  com-
raerciale,  il  s'en  ajoute  d'autres,  resultant  du  mecanismc  de  la  production.
Lorsque  la  direction  de  I'industrie  est  concentree  dans  un  petit  nombre  de
mains,  les  chefs  d'entreprises  connaissent  le  marche  qu'ils  fournissent  mieux
que  ne  font,  dans  leurs  spheres  respectives,  les  petits  ou  moyens  entrepreneurs
des  autres  branches  industrielles.  Sachant  sur  quelle  consommation  ils  peuvent
compter,  ils  reglent  leur  production  en  consequence.  .  .  .  Notre  hypoth^se
deraanderait  d'ailleurs  h,  etre  verifiee,  car  plus  d'une  industric  fait  apparomment
exception  k  la  regie  indiquee  ;  on  remarque,   par   example,  que   I'agriculture,


cH.xvin    FIXED  &  rLUCTUATDTa  WAGE  EATES    573

explained  by  the  fact  that  the  industries  at  the  top  of  the
scale,  being  more  specialised,  have  narrower  markets.  On
the  other  hand,  the  industries  that  deal  with  raw  products
provide  the  material  needed  by  numerous  other  industries,
and,  therefore,  enjoy  the  advantages  which  a  multitude  of
outlets  confer."  ^  The  same  principle  may,  of  course,  be  invoked
to  explain  the  stability  of  the  demand  for  railway  transporta-
tion as  compared  with  the  demand  even  for  such  things  as
coal,  sugar  or  iron.  In  like  manner,  an  industry  which  sells
largely  in  foreign  markets  as  well  as  in  the  home  market  is
likely,  other  things  equal,  to  have  a  more  stable  demand  than
one  which  sells  in  the  home  market  only — except,  indeed,
when  it  is  disturbed  by  changes  in  the  rate  of  duty  imposed
on  its  products  by  an  important  foreign  customer.

§  12.  When  the  oscillations  of  the  public  demand  for  any
commodity  are  given,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  oscilla-
tions of  the  employers'  demand  for  it  will  be  exactly  equivalent
to  them.  As  a  fact,  however,  the  employers'  demand  usually
oscillates  through  the  smaller  distance  of  the  two.  The  reason
for  this  is  the  common  practice  of  making  for  stock.  In  bad
months  the  employer  is  glad  to  acquire  and  warehouse  more
goods  than  he  wishes,  for  the  moment,  to  sell,  while  in  good
months,  because  he  has  these  goods  to  fall  back  upon,  his
demand  for  new  ones  rises  less  for  them  than  that  of  the
public  whom  he  supplies.  His  demand  this  month  is,  in  short,
derived  from  the  anticipated  public  demand  of  a  considerably
longer  period,  thus  divesting  itself  to  some  extent  of  temporary
oscillations.  Naturally  the  extent  to  which  making  for  stock
takes  place  is  different  in  different  industries.  The  practice
is  less  attractive  to  employers,  the  greater  is  the  cost  of  carry-
ing a  unit  of  the  commodity  affected  from  one  point  of  time
to  another.  This  cost  depends,  of  course,  in  part,  upon  a
circumstance  affecting   all  commodities  equally,   namely,   the

Tindustrie  hnmaine  par  excellence,  est  assez  epargnee  par  le  chomage,  bien
que  I'effectif  moyen  des  etablissements  y  soit  tres  reduit.  II  semble  que  Ton
puisse  attribuer  cet  ^tat  de  choses  au  fait  que  les  debouches  sont  plus  stables
dans  Tagriculture  que  dans  I'mdustrie  proprement  dite  ;  en  outre,  le  nombre
des  entreprises  agricoles  est  naturellement  limite  par  rinextensii)ilite  de  la
surface  cultivee  "  {ibid.  pp.  337-8).

'  Le  Ch&mage  et  la  profession,  p.  337.


574  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

rate  of  interest.  For  all  carriage  through  time  implies  a
loss  of  interest  through  holding  commodities  unsold.  It  also
depends  upon  a  number  of  circumstances  which  differ  for
different  commodities.  Of  these  the  most  obvious  is  the
expense  of  storage.  One  important  determinant  of  this
expense  is  the  resistance  that  the  commodity  makes  to
physical  wear  and  tear  in  transit  across  time,  or,  more
broadly,  its  durability,  in  respect  both  of  decay  and  of
accidental  breakage.  In  this  quality  the  precious  metals
and  hard  materials,  like  timber,  are  specially  favoured.  As
we  should  expect,  things  that  are  extracted  from  the  earth
are,  in  general,  more  durable  than  things  that  are  grown  on
it.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  in  recent  times,  the  develop-
ment of  refrigerating  and  other  preserving  processes  has
rendered  a  number  of  commodities,  chiefly  articles  of  food,
much  more  durable  than  they  used  to  be.  The  Committee  on
Hops,  for  instance,  wrote  in  1908:  "At  the  time  of  the
previous  inquiry  in  the  year  1856,  attention  was  called  to
the  fact  that  '  the  deterioration  which  hops  suffer  when  kept
prevents  the  superabundance  of  one  year  from  adequately
supplying  the  deficiencies  of  another.'  The  advent  of  cold
storage  has  effected  an  adjustment  between  years  of  plethora
and  years  of  scarcity,  with  the  resultant  effect  upon  prices."  ^
It  may  be  added  that  such  things  as  the  direct  services
rendered  by  missionaries,  doctors,  teachers,  train-drivers  and
cab-drivers  are  wholly  incapable,  and  such  things  as  gas  and
electricity  are  in  great  measure  incapable,  of  being  stored.  A
second  important  determinant  of  the  expense  of  storage  is  the
resistance  that  the  commodity  makes  to  psychical  wear  and
tear  in  transit  across  time,  or,  more  broadly,  its  steadiness  of
value.  The  contrast  I  have  in  view  is  between  staple  goods
of  steady  demand — Charles  Booth  once  cited  philosophic  and
optical  instruments  as  instances  of  this  class  of  goods  ^ — and
fashion  goods  of  unsteady  demand.  Clearly,  there  is  a  higher  cost
of  carriage  and  less  inducement  towards  storage  for  a  commodity
which,  next  week,  nobody  may  want,  than  there  is  for  one
for  which  a  constant  market  is  assured.  Thus,  the  turned
and  pressed  parts  of  bicycles,  which  are  much  the  same  what-
'  Report,  p.  X.  ^  Industry,  v.  p.  253.


cH.  xTiii    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    575

ever  type  of  frame  is  in  vogue,  are  largely  made  for  stock,
whereas  this  is  not  done  with  completed  bicycles,  the  form  of
which  is  liable  to  fashion  changes.  An  extreme  instance  of
unfitness  for  stock-making  is  afforded  by  commodities,  such  as
ball-dresses,  which  every  purchaser  will  wish  to  have  con-
structed to  her  own  special  order,  and  which,  when  "  ready-
made,"  have  practically  no  appeal  for  her.  It  is  possible
that  things  at  one  time  customarily  made  to  individual  order
may,  subsequently,  become  more  generalised ;  and  v^ice  versa.
Houses  are  sometimes  built  to  the  order  of  would-be  private
owners,  and  sometimes  as  a  speculation.  The  boot  industry
has  developed  from  an  earlier  stage,  in  which  the  individual
order  method  predominated,  to  the  present  condition,  in  which
most  boots  are  ready-made.  In  certain  textiles,  on  the  other
hand,  there  is  evidence  of  a  movement  in  the  opposite  direction.
A  recent  Report  on  unemployment  in  Philadelphia  observes :
"  Twenty  years  ago  a  manufacturer  made  carpet  or  hosiery  or
cloth  and  then  went  out  and  sold  that  carpet  or  hosiery  or
cloth.  To-day  the  order  comes  in  for  a  particular  design,
with  a  certain  kind  of  yam  or  silk  and  a  certain  number  of
threads  to  the  inch,  and  the  manufacturer  makes  that  par-
ticular order.  Formerly  a  manufacturer  produced  standard
makes  of  his  particular  line,  and  simply  piled  up  stock  in  his
warehouse  in  the  off-season.  .  .  .  To-day  manufacturers  make,
as  a  rule,  very  little  to  stock  and  run  chiefly  on  orders."  ^
It  is  evident  that  every  development  towards  the  standardisa-
tion of  products  renders  making  for  stock  more  practicable,
while  every  development  away  from  standardisation  renders  it
more  difficult.

§  1 3.  There  is  another  point  to  be  made  in  this  connection.
Granted  that  the  practice  of  making  for  stock  causes  the
oscillations  of  employers'  demand  for  any  commodity  to  be
less  than  the  associated  fluctuations  in  the  public  demand,
it  might  be  thought  by  the  hasty  reader  that  the  relation
between  these  two  oscillations  can  be  expressed  by  a  constant
fraction,  different  in  different  industries,  but  the  same  in  any
one  industry  whatever  the  size  of  the  oscillation.     This  is  a

*  "  Steadying  Employment,"  AnnaU  of  the  American  Academy  of  Political
Science,  May  1916,  pp.  6-7.


576  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

mistake.  If,  in  response  to  a  given  percentage  elevation  or
depression  of  the  public  demand,  the  employers'  demand  is
elevated  or  depressed  through  a  percentage  five-sixths  as
great,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  same  proportion  will
hold  good  for  larger  changes  of  public  demand.  As  a  rule,
making  for  stock  is  carried  up  to  a  certain  point  for  a  small
inducement,  and,  after  that,  is  extended  only  with  great
reluctance.  Hence,  the  public  demand  is  apt  to  undergo  slight
oscillations  without  producing  on  the  employers'  demand  any
appreciable  effect.  But,  after  a  point  is  passed,  further  oscil-
lations in  it  tend  to  be  accompanied  by  further  oscillations  in
employers'  demand,  the  magnitude  of  which  rapidly  approaches
towards  equality  with  theirs.  These  considerations  justify
the  provision,  which  is  found  in  most  sliding  scales,  that
alterations  in  the  price  of  the  commodity  must  exceed  some
definite  amount  before  any  alteration  takes  place  in  wages.^
They  also  serve  as  a  ground  for  the  rule,  which  in  practice  is
universal,  that,  when  wages  are  conjoined  to  prices  under  a
sliding  scale,  the  percentage  change  in  wages  shall  be  smaller
than  the  percentage  price  change  to  which  it  corresponds^iJ

§  14.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  second  determinant  of
fluctuations  in  the  demand  for  labour  in  any  occupation,  which
was  distinguished  in  §  10.  Among  the  co-operant  agents
whose  supply  schedule  is  liable  to  move  the  most  obvious  are
the  raw  materials  used  in  the  occupation.  In  extractive  in-
dustries, such  as  coal-mining,  these  do  not  play  any  significant
part;  but  in  the  majority  of  industries  they  are  very  important.
In  accordance  with  what  was  said  in  §  11,  it  is  evident  that,
when  they  are  obtained  from  a  large  number  of  independent
sources,  the  oscillations  of  supply  are  likely  to  be  less  than
when  reliance  has  to  be  placed  on  a  single  source.  For  this
reason  the  imposition  of  high  protective  duties  upon  any
material,  with  a  view  to  ousting  foreign  sellers,  may  be  ex-
pected to  bring  about  increased  fluctuations.  In  addition  to
raw  materials,  the  co-operant  agents  include  the  services  of
auxiliary  labour  and  the  services  of  machines.  Mechanical
improvements,  for  example,  involve,  in  effect,  a  lowering  of

*  Cf.  Price,  IndtbstriaZ  Peace,  p.  97.
2  Cf.  Marshall,  Economics  of  Industry,  p.  381  n.


cH.  xvxii    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    577

the  supply  schedule  of  the  services  rendered  by  capital
invested  in  the  occupation  that  is  affected  by  them.  More-
over, in  some  industries,  Nature  herself,  as  represented  by  the
light  and  heat  received  from  the  sun,  is  a  very  important  co-
operant  factor  in  production.  Thus,  there  is  a  high  degree  of
seasonal  variability  in  the  demand  for  labour  in  the  building
trades,  because  the  advent  of  frost  in  winter  seriously  interferes
with  brick-laying,  masonry  and  plastering,  while  the  shortening
of  the  hours  of  daylight,  by  necessitating  resort  to  artificial
illumination,  adds  to  the  costs  and  further  handicaps  such
work.  No  doubt,  recent  developments,  such  as  the  substitu-
tion of  cement  for  mortar,  are  doing  something  to  lessen  the
influence  of  climatic  changes  upon  this  industry,^  but  their
influence  is  still  very  important.  The  same  remark  applies
to  the  industry  of  discharging  cargoes  at  the  London  Docks,
which  is  liable  to  serious  interruptions  by  frost  and  fog.  On
the  other  hand,  indoor  trades  and  trades  little  dependent  on
weather  conditions,  such  as  engineering  and  shipbuilding —
dress-making  is  obviously  not  relevant  here — display  a
relatively  smaU  amount  of  seasonal  variability.  Thus,  accord-
ing to  a  study  by  Sir  H.  Llewellyn  Smith  extended  over  some
years,  the  mean  difference  in  the  percentage  of  unemployment
between  the  best  month  and  the  worst  month  was  3^  per
cent  in  the  building  trades  and  only  1^  per  cent  in  the
engineering  and  shipbuilding  trades."

§  15.  The  sixth  and  last  fundamental  proposition  is  that,
when  the  short-period  elasticities  of  the  demand  and  supply  of
labour  in  any  occupation  are  given,  the  wage  fluctuation  appro-
priate  to  any  given  oscillation  of  the  supply  schedule  is  larger,
the  larger  is  the  oscillation  of  that  schedule.  Like  all  the  rest,
this  proposition  also  is  self-evident.  The  oscillations  to  which
it  refers  will,  as  a  rule,  be  caused  by  temporary  expansions
or  contractions  of  neighbouring  or  kindred  industries.  A
depression,  for  example,  in  the  contiguous  agricultural  districts,
or  in  the  Northumberland  mines,  necessarily  increases  the
number  of  men  on  the  look-out  for  employment  in  the
Durham  mines.     The  extent  of  the  oscillations  caused  in  this

1  Cf.  Dearie,  Economic  JoumcU,  1908,  p.  103.
^  Cf.  Committee  on  Distress  from  Want  of  Employment,  Q.  4580.

2  p


578  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

way  can  be  roughly  inferred  from  the  wage  movement  which  has
occurred  in  those  allied  industries.  Some  guidance  on  the
matter  can  also  be  obtained  from  the  figures  for  unemployment
in  the  industry  with  which  we  are  primarily  concerned.

§  16.  In  the  light  of  this  general  analysis,  we  have  now
to  inquire  how  far  it  is  possible  to  provide,  in  the  terms  of
a  governing  award  or  agreement,  automatic  machinery  for
adjusting  the  wage  rate  to  changes  in  conditions  occurring
within  the  period  covered  by  it.  The  best-known  instrument
intended  for  this  purpose  is  a  sliding  scale  connecting  the
wage  rate  of  an  industry  with  the  price  of  its  finished  product.
This  instrument  makes  no  attempt  to  take  account  of  fluctua-
tions in  the  supply  of  labour,  and  is,  therefore,  limited  in
range.  It  is,  nevertheless,  very  important.  Other  things
being  equal,  changes  in  price  serve  as  an  index  of  changes  in
the  demand  schedule  for  labour,  and,  with  sufficient  knowledge,
it  would  be  possible  so  to  frame  a  scale  that  under  it  exactly
the  right  wage  movement  would  come  about  in  reference  to
any  given  movement  in  this  demand  schedule.

§  17.  The  prices  made  use  of  may  be  "average,"  "typical,"
"  realised,"  "  quoted,"  or  "  newspaper  "  prices  of  the  commodity
concerned,  or  even  of  some  different  commodity,  in  which  it
forms  an  important  ingredient.^  "  Newspaper "  prices  are
rightly  suspect,  since  they  are  apt  to  be  collected  on  a
different  basis  on  different  occasions.  "  Quoted "  prices  are
doubtful,  since  the  freaks  of  speculation  "on  Change,"  which
help  to  mould  them,  scarcely  have  time  to  eliminate  one
another  during  the  short  periods  intervening  between  succes-
sive adjustments.^  Prices  realised  by  a  single  typical  firm
may  be  influenced  sporadically  by  fluctuations  in  managing
ability,  good  fortune,  and  so  forth.  But,  when  the  firms
of  whose  prices  account  is  taken  are  fairly  numerous,  in-
constant causes  of  this  kind  are  likely  to  be  eliminated ;  for
an  exceptional  increase  of  competence  in  some  managers  will

*  e.g.  the  Cleveland  iron-stone  workers'  wages  are  determined  by  a  scale
based  upon  fluctuations  in  No.  3,  Cleveland  pig-iron  (Price,  hidustricU  Peace,
p.  90).

2  Nevertheless,  the  West  Cumberland  pig-iron  industry  bases  its  scale  on
the  prices  declared  on  the  Glasgow  Exchange  (Jeans,  Concilmlion  aivd  Arbitration,

p.  79).  ;


cH.xvin    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    579

probably  be  balanced  by  a  corresponding  decrease  in  others.^
The  consensus  of  practice  in  taking  the  average  realised  price
of  a  good  number  of  firms  appears,  therefore,  to  be  justified
by  theory.

§  18.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  practice,  embodied
in  all  sliding  scales,  of  making  wage  changes  depend,  not  upon
contemporaneous,  but  upon  antecedent  price  changes.  For  the
connection  between  the  employers'  and  the  public's  demand
for  any  commodity  always  bridges  an  appreciable  interval.
Oscillations  in  the  employers'  demand  lag  behind  the  primary
oscillations  to  which  they  correspond.  It  is  generally  only  after
prices  have  remained  up  for  some  little  while  that  employers
think  seriously  of  expanding  their  business,  and  they  hesitate  in
a  similar  manner  about  reducing  production  when  a  depression
sets  in.  Their  demand  for  labour  at  any  time  is  thus  derived
from  the  public  demand  for  the  commodity  which  existed  at
an  earlier  time.  It  foUows  that  the  supposed  defect  in  sliding
scales,  that  they  fix  future  wages  by  past  prices,"  is  really  an
advantage.  It  is,  indeed,  sometimes  objected  that  an  intelli-
gent anticipation  of  events  before  they  occur  is  coming  to
influence  more  and  more  the  conduct  of  industrial  concerns ;
and  that,  so  far  as  this  tendency  prevails,  the  adequacy  of  past
prices  as  an  index  of  future  demand  necessarily  diminishes.
"  Why,  then,  should  wages  automatically  fall  when  the  leaders
of  industry  have  cast  their  eyes  over  the  future,  and  pro-
claimed the  need  of  an  enlarged  output  and  more  hands  ?  Or
why  should  wages  rise  when  employers  see  that  good  trade  is
behind,  and  are  preparing  for  a  period  of  marking  time  ? " '
The  answer  to  this  argument  is  found  in  a  closer  analysis  of

^  In  view,  presumably,  of  considerations  of  this  kind,  the  renovated
StafiFordshire  sliding  scale  in  1888  was  established,  not  on  the  old  basis  of
a  single  brand  of  Lord  Dudley's  coal,  but  "upon  the  average  selling  price
of  all  qualities  of  coal  throughout  the  district."  (Labour  Commission,  "  Digest
of  Evidence,"  p.  95.)  When,  however,  an  industry  is  dominated  by  a  combine,
the  divergence  between  the  qualities  of  the  men  at  the  head  at  one  time  and  at
another  cannot  be  eliminated  by  any  process  of  averaging.  It  is  difficult
in  that  event  to  see  how  those  fluctuations  of  fortune,  which  are  due  to  fluctua-
tions of  managing  ability,  can  be  distinguished  in  practice  from  those  due  to
general  causes,

2  Cf.  Ashley,  Adjustment  of  Wages,  pp.  56-7.

^  Chapman,  "Some  Theoretical  Objections  to  Sliding  Scales,"  Eamomie
Journal,  1903,  p.  188.


580  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

the  phrase  "public  demand."  In  the  present  connection  it
signifies  the  demand,  not  of  the  ultimate  consumers,  but  of
those  intermediate  dealers  who  buy  from  the  manufacturers,
and  whose  operations  are  the  proximate  cause  of  changes  in
wholesale  prices.  Where  such  persons  are  present,  it  is
extremely  improbable  that  prices  will  fall  when  the  anticipa-
tion of  the  leaders  of  industry  are  roseate,  or  rise  when  they
are  gloomy.  For  these  anticipations  will  generally  be  shared
by  the  dealers,  and,  if  so,  will  be  reflected  in  their  present
demand  and,  hence,  in  present  prices.  The  foregoing  objection
is,  therefore,  only  relevant  on  occasions  when  the  forecasts  of
manufacturers  and  of  dealers  are  at  variance.  Since,  however,
the  former  forecasts  are,  in  the  main,  based  upon  the  latter,
these  occasions  will  be  exceedingly  rare.

§  19.  At  this  point  it  is  necessary  to  revert  to  the
condition  other  things  being  equal,  which  has  underlain  the
whole  of  the  reasoning  of  the  two  last  sections.  In  real
life  other  things  are  often  not  equal.  For  the  present  we
are  not  concerned  with  the  assumption  of  stable  conditions  in
the  supply  of  the  labour  whose  rate  of  wages  is  directly
in  question.  Apart  from  that,  "  other  things "  embrace  all
the  remaining  factors  which  are  required  in  the  manufacture
of  the  commodity.  These  are  raw  material,  the  services  of
auxiliary  workpeople  and  the  services  of  machinery.  We  have
now  to  take  account  of  possible  changes  in  the  circumstances
attending  the  supply  of  these  things.  It  is  evident  that  a
given  oscillation  in  one  direction  of  the  supply  schedule  of
any  one  of  them  causes  the  employers'  demand  for  the  labour,
whose  wages  we  are  considering,  to  oscillate  in  exactly  the
same  manner  as  an  equal  oscillation  in  the  opposite  direction
in  his  demand  schedule  for  the  finished  commodity.  Hence,  in
order  to  infer  the  oscillations  in  labour  demand  from  those  in
the  employers'  commodity  demand,  we  need  to  subtract  from
the  latter  whatever  oscillations  occur  in  the  supply  schedules
of  the  other  factors  of  production.  It  is  true  that  no  provision
has  to  be  made  for  corrections  under  this  head  (1)  when  the
supply  schedules  of  the  other  factors  are  certain  not  to
oscillate,  and  (2)  when  the  part  they  play  in  the  cost  of  the
commodity  is  so  small  that  their  oscillations  can  be  neglected


CH.  XVIII    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  RATES    581

without  serious  inaccuracy.  It  is  not  easy  to  imagine  an
industry  in  which  the  former  of  these  conditions  could  be
postulated;  but  the  latter  holds  good  in  extractive  industries,
such  as  coal-mining,  where  nearly  the  whole  cost  of  production
is  labour  cost.  Except  in  these  industries  the  index  afforded  by
price  changes  is  seriously  defective.  A  fall  in  price  will  occur
in  consequence  of  a  fall  in  the  demand  for  the  commodity,  and
also  in  consequence  of  a  cheapening  in  the  supply  of  the  raw
material.  Thus,  there  are  two  routes  connecting  changes  in
price  with  changes  in  labour  demand.  A  price  movement
caused  in  one  way  indicates  a  fall ;  caused  in  another  way,  a
rise.  If,  for  example,  the  price  of  iron  goes  up  on  account
of  an  increase  in  the  public  need  for  iron,  there  is  a  rise  in
the  demand  for  iron-workers'  services ;  if,  however,  it  goes  up
because  a  strike  in  the  coal  trade  has  rendered  one  of  the  con-
stituents used  in  making  it  more  expensive,  there  is  a  fall  in
this  demand.  It  is  obvious  that,  in  the  latter  event,  wages
ought  not  to  follow  prices,  but  should  move  in  the  opposite
direction.

^20.  As  a  way  of  escape  from  these  difficulties,  it  is  some-
times proposed  that  the  index  should  be,  not  the  price  of  the
finished  commodity,  but  the  margin  between  its  price  and  that
of  the  raw  material  used  in  making  it.  "  Margins "  are
utilised  with  apparent  success  by  the  officials  of  the  Cotton
Workers'  Union,  who  obtain  them  by  "subtracting  the  price
of  raw  cotton  (calculated  from  the  five  leading  sorts)  from  the
price  of  yarn  (of  eleven  kinds)  or  of  calico  (of  twenty-three
kinds),"  ^  and  order  their  wage  negotiations  accordingly.  This
index  has  the  advantage  of  moving  in  the  same  way  in  response
to  a  fall  in  the  demand  for  the  commodity  and  to  an  increase  in
the  expense  of  obtaining  raw  material.  The  solution  it  affords
is  not,  however,  perfect.  Among  the  contributory  factors  to
the  production  of  the  finished  article  raw  material  is  only
one.  The  conditions  of  supply  of  auxiliary  labour  and  of  the
services  of  machines  are  also  liable  to  vary,  but  their  variations
are  not  reflected  in  any  change  in  the  "  margin."  Mechanical
improvements,  for  example,  mean,  in  effect,  a  cheapening  of
the  help  rendered  by  machines.  When  such  improvements
*  Schultze-Gaevemitz,  Social  Peace,  p.  160.


582  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

are  occurring,  margins  are  liable  to  mislead  in  the  same
manner  as,  though  in  a  less  degree  than,  crude  price  statistics.
Furthermore,  margins,  equally  with  prices,  and  because  prices
enter  into  their  construction,  are  subject  to  a  serious  practical
inconvenience.  They  are  not  likely  to  afford  a  good  index  in
industries  where  the  general  level  of  elaborateness  and  so  forth
in  the  goods  produced  is  liable  to  vary.  In  these  industries
an  apparent  change  in  price  may  really  indicate  nothing  more
than  a  change  in  the  kind  of  article  manufactured.  This  diffi-
culty is  specially  likely  to  occur  when  prices  are  deduced  from
the  quantities  and  values  of  exports,  since  there  is  reason  to
expect  that  the  cheaper  varieties  of  goods  will  gradually
yield  place  in  foreign  trade  to  the  finer  and  more  valuable
varieties.

§  21.  These  considerations  suggest  that  a  still  better  index
is  afforded  by  output  or  profits.  Since  these  indices  take
account  of  factors  which  margins  ignore,  a  plea  for  a  reduction
of  wages  based  upon  a  fall  in  the  margin  can  always  be  met
by  a  proof  that  the  output  or  profit  of  the  industry,  or  of  the
representative  firm  in  it,  has  increased.  There  are,  however,
obstacles  in  the  way  of  both  the  above  indices.  The  employ-
ment of  output  is  rendered  difficult  by  considerations  affecting
the  element  of  time.  As  has  already  been  observed,  a  given
change  in  labour  demand  is  generally  correlated  with  a  change
in  public  demand  occurring  previously.  This  change  in  public
demand  is,  in  turn,  correlated  with  a  contemporaneous  change
in  prices,  margins  and  profits  (in  the  sense  of  net  receipts).
Therefore,  changes  in  any  of  these  indices,  determined  on  the
record  of  the  past  two  or  three  months,  may  fairly  be  used  as
data  for  wage  changes  in  the  next  two  or  three.  A  change
in  the  output,  however,  consequent  upon  an  oscillation  of
public  demand,  occurs,  not  contemporaneously  with,  but  sub-
sequently to,  this  oscillation — at  the  same  time,  in  fact,  as  the
change  in  labour  demand  itself.  Therefore,  since  statistics
take  some  time  to  collect,  output  is  necessarily  a  very  incon-
venient index.  In  like  manner,  it  appears,  from  the  report  of
the  negotiations  for  conciliation  in  the  cotton  trade  in  1900,
that  there  are  very  great  practical  difficulties,  at  all  events  in
that  trade,  in  arriving  at  a  satisfactory  estimate  of  "  repre-


cH.xvni    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    583

sentative  profits."  ^  One  obvious  difficulty,  for  example,  is  the
reckoning,  that  ought  to  be  taken,  of  firms  which  have  failed
altogether.  The  net  result  of  these  considerations  is  that
attention  should,  when  practicable,  be  directed,  not  to  one,
but  to  all  of  the  available  indices,  and  that  these  should  be
employed  mutually  to  check  one  another.

§  22.  At  this  point  it  is  necessary  to  advert  to  a  funda-
mental objection,  which,  if  it  holds  at  all,  applies  equally  to  the
employment  of  all  of  the  indices  of  demand  change  discussed
in  the  preceding  sections,  though  in  practice  it  is  generally
urged  only  against  regular  sliding  scales  based  upon  prices.
This  objection  is,  in  essence,  that  either  party  can,  if  it  chooses,
"  rig  "  the  index.

On  the  side  of  the  workpeople  it  is  often  urged  that  a
scale  tempts  employers  to  cut  prices  in  the  hope  of  recouping
themselves  out  of  the  pockets  of  their  employees.  This
argument  is,  in  the  first  place,  invalid  generally,  whether
employers  are  combined  or  not,  since  under  no  practicable
form  of  scale  would  the  gain  on  reduced  wages  equal  the
loss  on  reduced  price.  Secondly,  in  trades  comprising  large
numbers  of  competing  employers,  it  is  doubly  invalid,  since
the  effect  on  the  index  brought  about  by  the  action  of  any
one  firm  must  be  negligibly  small.  Of  course,  it  is  conceiv-
able that,  if  the  index  were  obtained  from  the  sales  of  a
"  typical  firm,"  other  firms  might  combine  to  bribe  it  into
selling  below  the  market  rate.  This  rather  "  academic "
danger  can,  however,  easily  be  met  by  an  enlargement  of  the
basis  upon  which  the  index  rests.

On  the  side  of  the  employers  it  may  be  argued  that  the
workpeople  under  a  scale  are  tempted  to  work  slackly  or  to  adopt
a  policy  of  stop-days,  in  order  to  make  prices  rise,  and  so,  for
the  moment,  to  benefit  themselves.  This  form  of  argument
is  invalid  unless  the  men  are  rigidly  combined.      For  to  act

^  Mr.  L.  L.  Price,  in  discussing  these  negotiations,  speaks  of  a  "  profits  "
scale  in  the  cotton  trade  as  a  "  closer  approach  to  the  conception  of  profit-sharing
than  that  made  by  the  usual  type  of  sliding  scale"  {Econyinic  Journal,  1901,
p.  244).  This  view  appears  to  be  erroneous,  so  long  as  the  "profits  "  of  the  repre-
sentative firm  are  taken  as  the  index.  Of  course  a  system  which  should  make
the  wage  paid  by  individual  firms  fluctuate  with  their  own  particular  "profits"
would  be  an  entirely  ditferent  thing.


584  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  m

in  the  way  suggested  would  not  be  to  the  direct  advantage
of  any  one  man,  since  his  effect  upon  output  would  be
negligible,  and  he  would  lose,  under  piece  wages  in  pay,  and
under  time  wages  in  prospects  of  employment.  In  a  rigid
combination  the  danger  contemplated  is  real.  The  stimulus
to  monopolistic  action  is,  however,  no  greater  when  wages
are  arranged  with  the  help  of  an  index  than  when  they  are
arranged  otherwise.  On  the  contrary,  if  anything,  the  danger
is  diminished,  since  the  adoption  of  "ca'  canny"  devices
would  be  exceedingly  likely  to  lead  to  a  rupture  of  the
industrial  agreement,  by  the  maintenance  of  which  the  men
are  presumably  benefited.

§  23.  The  preceding  discussion,  while  it  has  revealed  ex-
plicitly or  implicitly  many  difficulties  in  the  way  of  constructing
an  effective  sliding  scale,  has,  nevertheless,  made  it  plain  that
scales  adequate  to  take  account  of  all  changes  in  the  demand
schedule  for  labour  are  theoretically  possible.  In  favourable
circumstances,  when,  for  example,  as  in  coal-mines,  labour  is
by  far  the  most  important  element  in  the  cost  of  production,
there  is  no  reason  why  a  fairly  close  approach  to  the  theo-
retical ideal  should  not  be  made.  Obviously,  when  this  can
be  done,  an  award  embodying  a  scale  is  much  superior  to  one
embodying  a  single  fixed  wage  for  the  whole  period  covered
by  it.  But,  while  this  is  so,  we  have  to  recognise  the  very
serious  disability  from  which  even  a  perfectly  constructed  scale
must  suffer.  A  given  rise  or  fall  in  the  price  of  the  com-
modity covered  by  it  may  be  brought  about  either  by  a
change  in  the  real  demand  for  the  commodity  or  by  an
expansion  or  contraction  of  money  or  credit,  which  affects
the  general  level  of  money  prices  but  leaves  real  conditions
substantially  unaltered.  It  is  plain  that,  if  the  price  of  coal
goes  up,  say  50  per  cent,  as  a  part  of  a  general  50  per
cent  rise  due  to  a  purely  monetary  cause,  the  proper  response
in  the  wages  of  coal-miners  is  a  50  per  cent  rise.  But,  if
the  price  of  coal  goes  up  50  per  cent  in  consequence  of  an
increase  in  the  real  demand  for  coal,  the  proper  response,
as  indicated  in  §  13,  will  be  a  rise  of  considerably  less  than
50  per  cent.  It  follows  that  any  scale,  which  provides  for
the  right  adjustment  of  wages  when  the  price  of  coal  changes


CH.  XVIII    FIXED  &  FLUCTUATING  WAGE  EATES    585

from  a  cause  special  to  itself,  must  provide  a  wrong  adjust-
ment when  it  changes  from  a  general  monetary  cause.
Something  might  be  done  to  remedy  this  defect  by  making
wage  changes  depend  both  on  changes  in  the  price  of  coal
and  on  changes  in  general  prices.  Thus,  there  might  be  a
scale  of  the  type  described  in  previous  sections,  but  referred
not  to  absolute  changes  in  coal  prices,  but  to  differences
between  the  changes  in  coal  prices  and  in  general  prices ;
and,  superimposed  upon  this,  there  might  be  a  second  scale
making  wages  vary  in  the  same  proportion  as  general  prices.
Thus,  if  coal  rose  50  per  cent  while  general  prices  rose
20  per  cent,  wages  should  rise  20  per  cent  plus  whatever
fraction  of  30  per  cent  (the  rise  peculiar  to  coal)  the  special
coal  scale  might  decree.  This  arrangement,  however,  though
it  would  work  satisfactorily  when  changes  in  general  prices
were  due  to  monetary  or  credit  causes,  would  not,  as  was
shown  in  Chapter  XV.  §  4,  give  a  right  result  when  these
changes  were  due  wholly  or  in  part  to  such  causes  as  the
destruction  of  capital  in  war,  bad  harvests,  general  improve-
ments in  transport  methods,  and  so  on.

§  24.  There  is  yet  another  disability,  even  less  open  to
remedy,  from  which  sliding  scales  necessarily  suffer.  As  was
indicated  in  §  16,  they  cannot  from  their  nature  recognise  or
in  any  way  allow  for  alterations  of  the  supply  of  labour  in
the  industry  to  which  they  refer.  In  the  course  of  this
chapter,  however,  it  has  been  made  abundantly  clear  that,  for
complete  adjustment,  notice  must  be  taken  of  these  alterations
equally  with  alterations  of  demand.  The  necessary  failure
of  scales  to  do  this  has  sometimes  led  to  results  so  plainly
unreasonable  that  it  has  been  necessary  for  one  party  to  a
scale  agreement  voluntarily  to  concede  to  the  other  terms
more  favourable  than  those  which  the  scale  decreed.

§  25.  From  these  considerations  it  appears  that,  though
we  may  expect  from  scale  awards  better  adjustments  than  could
be  got  from  wage  awards  covering  jBxed  periods  of  equal
length,  better  adjustments  still  will  be  obtained  if  the  re-
lations between  employers  and  employed  are  good  enough  to
allow  the  two-monthly  or  quarterly  variations  of  the  wage  rate,
which  take  place  during  the  currency  of  the  governing  agree-


586  ECONOMICS   OF  WELFAEE  pt.  m

ment  or  award,  to  be  based,  not  exclusively  upon  the  varia-
tions of  price  or  some  other  mechanical  index,  but  also  upon
any  other  relevant  considerations  that  may  present  themselves.
There  are  several  examples  of  this  type  of  settlement.  In
the  Scottish  coal  agreement  of  1902,  the  relevant  portion  of
which  remained  unchanged  till  1907,  it  was  provided  "  that  the
net  average  realised  value  of  coal  at  the  pit  bank  for  the  time
being,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  state  of  the  trade  and  the
prospects  thereof,  is  to  be  considered  in  fixing  miners'  wages
between  the  minimum  and  the  maximum  for  the  time  being,
and  that,  in  current  ordinary  circumstances,  a  rise  or  fall  of
6|-  per  cent  in  wages  on  1888  basis  for  each  4i^d.  per  ton  of
rise  or  fall  in  the  value  of  coal  is  reasonable."  ^  In  like
manner,  in  the  agreement  entered  into  in  the  Federated
Districts  in  1906,  it  was  provided  that  "alterations  in  the
selling  price  of  coal  shall  not  be  the  sole  factor  for  the  decision
of  the  Board,  but  one  factor  only,  and  either  side  shall  be
entitled  to  bring  forward  any  reasons  why,  notwithstanding  an
alteration  in  the  selling  price,  there  should  be  no  alteration
made  in  the  rate  of  wages."  ^  Even  under  this  type  of
arrangement  wage  rates  are  not  perfectly  plastic ;  for,  as  was
explained  previously,  perfect  plasticity  involves  fluctuations
from  moment  to  moment  instead  of  at  intervals  of  two  or
three  months.  Evidently,  however,  schemes  fashioned  on  the
model  of  the  Scottish  and  the  Federated  Districts  agreements
carry  with  them  a  greater  measure  of  plasticity  than  is  to  be
found  in  sliding  scale  agreements,  and,  therefore,  a  fortiori,
than  is  to  be  found  in  fixed  wage  agreements.  Moreover,  they
have  the  great  advantage  that  they  enable  allowance  to  be
made  for  fluctuations  in  the  supply  of  labour  in  the  industries
they  cover  as  well  as  for  fluctuations  in  the  demand  for  it.
Under  these  schemes  reasoned  and  agreed  action,  instead  of
automatic  action,  is  required  every  two  or  three  months.  The
successful  introduction  of  them  is,  therefore,  only  practicable  in
industries  where  cordial  relations  prevail  between  employers
and  employed.

'  Report  on  Collective  Agreements  [Cd.  5366],  1910,  p.  32.
2  "ibid.  p.  27.


PART  IV

THE  NATIONAL  DIVIDEND  AND  GOVERNMENT

FINANCE


587


I


CHAPTEK    I

INTRODUCTORY

S  1.  In  normal  times  the  main  part  of  a  Government's  revenue
is  required  to  meet  current  expenditure  on  the  army  and  navy,
civil  service,  education,  administrative  services,  and  so  forth.
There  can  be  no  question  that  in  a  well-ordered  State  all
ordinary  recurrent  expenditure  of  this  type  will  be  provided  for
out  of  taxation,  and  not  by  borrowing.  To  meet  it  by  borrowing,
whether  from  foreign  or  domestic  lenders,  would  involve  an  ever-
growing national  debt  and  a  corresponding  ever-growing  obliga-
tion of  annual  interest.  In  the  end,  more  would  have  to  be
spent  in  providing  the  interest  every  year  than  would  have  been
required  if  the  Government  had  paid  its  way  out  of  taxes  from
the  beginning.  The  national  credit  would  suffer  heavy  damage,
and  ultimately  the  Government  might  find  itself  forced  into
bankruptcy.  These  considerations  are  not,  indeed,  incompatible
with  the  financing  by  loans  of  abnormal  expenditure.  If
a  certain  class  of  expenditure  occurs,  not  annually,  but  at
intervals  of  a  number  of  years,  it  is  admissible,  so  far  as  the
present  argument  goes,  to  meet  it  by  borrowing,  provided  that
a  sinking  fund  is  established  to  discharge  the  debt  oiit  of  taxes
within  the  limit  of  each  interval.  And,  if  an  expenditure  has
to  be  undertaken  which  is  reproductive,  in  the  sense  that  it
yields  an  annual  return  to  the  Government  adequate  to  pay
full  interest  and  also  to  provide  its  own  sinking  fund,  taxation
will  not  need  to  be  resorted  to  at  all.  These  matters  wiU  be
discussed  later  on.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the  main  expen-
diture of  Governments  in  normal  times  is  of  a  sort  that  must  be
provided  out  of  taxes  levied  contemporaneously  with  the  expen-

589


590  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  iv

diture.  Our  task  in  the  first  nine  chapters  of  this  Part  is  to
study  that  portion  of  the  general  problem  of  Government
finance  which  is  concerned  with  the  levying  of  these  taxes.

§  2.  This  task  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  collec-
tion of  revenue  by  a  Government  is  not  an  act  complete  in
itself.     It  is  one  side  of  a  complex  operation,  of  which  the
other  side  is  the  expenditure  of  the  revenue  that  has  been
collected.      It   would   seem,   therefore,   that  any   attempt  to
discuss  the  relation  of  the  national  dividend  to  the  levying
of  taxes,  in  isolation  from  the  use  to  which  the  proceeds  of
the  taxes  are  put,  must  be  incomplete  and  one-sided.     The
question  that  ought  to  be  asked  is,  rather ;  "  How  will  the
national   dividend  be  affected  by  the   collection  of  so  much
revenue  by  this   means   and   the   expenditure  of  it  in  that
way  ? "     To   obtain    any   adequate   answer   to   this  question,
we  should  need  to  compare  what  is  in  fact  done  with  the
resources  that  the  taxes  represent  and  what  would  have  been
done  with  them,  if  they  had  been  left  "to  fructify  in  the  pockets
of  the  people."     Thus,  other  things  heiiig  equal,  if  the  Govern-
ment  takes   resources,  which  would  have  been  employed  in
making  plant  and  machinery,  and  uses  them  to  make,  instead,
guns  and  shells  destined  for  immediate  destruction  in  war,  the
dividend  afterwards  will  be  smaller  than  it  would  have  been
if  this  had  not  been  done.     On  the  other  hand,  if  the  Govern-
ment takes  resources,  which  would  have  been  used  in  wasteful
consumption,  and  uses  them  to  build  railways,  the  dividend
afterwards  will  be  bigger  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.
Again,  if  it  takes  resources,  which  would  have  been  used  for
the  creation  of  some  sort  of  capital,  and  uses  them  to  make
another  sort  of  capital  either  more  or  less  productive  than  this,
the  dividend  afterwards  will  be,  in  the  one  event,  benefited,  and,
in  the  other,  injured.     Yet  again,  if  it  takes  resources  from  the
taxpayers  generally  to  pay  interest  to  those  among  them  who
are  also  holders  of  national  debt,  it  increases  or  diminishes  the
national  dividend  of  the  future,  according  as  the  average  holder
of  national  debt  or  the  average  taxpayer  devotes  the  larger
proportion  of  his  income  to  capital  uses.     This  aspect  of  things,
though  it  is  partial  and  incomplete  and  does  not  enable  us  to
gauge  the  total  effect  produced  on  the  national  dividend,  is,


cH.  I  INTRODUCTORY  591

plainly,  very  important.  Prima  facie  it  appears  as  though
the  effects  of  collecting  and  spending  revenue  could  and  should
be  discussed  in  such  a  way  as  to  place  it  in  the  foreground.

8  3.  That  plan,  however,  would  not  really  serve.  One
reason  is  that  the  quantity  of  revenue  to  be  spent  by  Govern-
ment on  particular  services  {e.g.  interest  on  the  national  debt,
army  and  navy,  education,  police,  and  so  on)  is  often  deter-  **
mined  already  apart  from  economic  considerations,  so  that  the
practical  issue  on  which  light  is  required  is,  not  how  the
dividend  would  be  affected  by  the  collection  of  so  much
revenue  and  its  expenditure  on  such  and  such  an  object,  but,
given  the  e:i:j)eiuliture,  how  it  would  be  affected  by  collecting
the  revenue  in  this  way  as  compared  with  that  way.  Some-
times, indeed,  the  other  issue  is  raised,  and  in  Part  V.,  when
we  are  studying  the  effects  of  raising  money  from  the  rich
for  investment  in  the  quality  and  capacities  of  the  poor,  some
study  of  it  will  be  attempt*^.  Grenerally,  however,  the  practical
problem  is  to  compare  different  ways  of  raising  money  with
one  another,  rather  than  to  balance  the  effects  of  collecting
revenue  and  of  spending  it.

^  4.  This,  however,  is  not  the  enly  reason  that  renders  the
method  of  analysis  sketched  out  in  §  2  unsuitable  for  our
purpose.  There  is  also  another  reason.  That  method  is  con-
cerned exclusively  with  the  effect  of  the  fact  of  collecting  (and
spending)  money.  But,  as  a  general  rule  and  apart  from  special
circumstances,  such  as  the  outbreak  of  war,  the  bulk  of  a  Govern-
ment's tax  revenue  is  not  very  greatly  different  in  one  year
from  what  it  is  in  neighbouring  years.  In  these  circumstances
the  fact  that  a  tax  is  levied  in  one  year  carries  with  it  the  *
expectation  that  it  will  continue  to  be  levied  in  later  years.
This  expectation  modifies  people's  conduct,  inducing  them  to
act  differently  in  the  matter  of  work  and  saving  than  they  '
would  have  done  if  there  had  been  no  tax,  with  a  view,  when
the  form  of  the  tax  allows  this,  to  withdrawing  themselves,  in
greater  or  less  degree,  from  its  impact.  This  type  of  reaction
must  be  given  a  dominant  place  in  any  adequate  discussion  of
taxation.     For  these  reasons  in  the  present  Part  the  line  of

L analysis  suggested  in  ^  2  will  not  be  followed.  Instead,  several
principal  types  of  taxation  will  be  discussed,  in  such  a  way  as    '


592  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

to  bring  out  the  comparative  effects  which  they  themselves,
apart  from  the  spending  of  the  revenue  they  yield,  tend  to
produce  on  the  national  dividend ;  and  in  this  discussion  the
distinction  between  the  fact  of  an  impost  and  the  expectation
of  its  continuance  will  be  made  fundamental.  It  will  be
understood  that  the  chapters  which  follow  do  not  profess  to
contain  a  complete  account  of  the  problem  of  Government
finance.  Many  aspects  of  that  problem,  which  are  not  directly
connected  with  the  national  dividend,  are  omitted  altogether,
and  others  are  only  touched  upon  very  lightly.  In  particular,
the  very  important  subjects  of  method  of  levy  and  administrative
machinery  and  technique,  which,  as  regards  one  part  of  the  tax
field,  were  investigated  at  length  by  the  Eoyal  Commission  on
the  Income  Tax,  have  been,  of  set  purpose,  ignored.


\lm


CHAPTER  II

E    EFFECTS    OF   THE    FACT    OF   TAXATION


§  1.  The  fact  of  taxation  reacts  on  the  national  dividend  in
two  principal  ways.  Both  of  these  are  independent  of  the
object  through  which  taxes  are  levied,  and  are  associated  with
the  total  quantity  of  money  taken,  not  by  particular  single
taxes,  but  by  the  tax  system  as  a  whole,  from  the  persons
affected.  Consequently,  the  discussion  of  this  part  of  our
problem  can  be  made  compact  and  self-contained.

§  2.  The  first  way  is  by  altering  the  marginal  desiredness
of  money  to  the  taxed  person.  Since  a  part  of  his  income  is
taken  away,  the  last  unit  of  income  that  is  left  to  him  will  be
desired  more  urgently  than  the  last  unit  of  income  that  would
have  been  left  to  him  if  there  had  been  no  taxation.  But  the
last  unit  of  energy  that  he  devotes  to  work  will  not  affect  him
differently  from  what  it  did.  Consequently,  there  will  be  a
tendency  for  him  to  work  a  little  harder,  and  so  to  make  a
slightly  larger  contribution  to  the  national  dividend,  than  he
would  have  done  otherwise.  This  tendency  may  be  strong
from  the  point  of  view  of  a  short  period,  when  heavy
taxation  is  suddenly  laid  upon  people  who  are  accustomed  to
live  nearly  up  to  their  income,  and  whose  standard  of  life  has
become  more  or  lees  fixed.  They  may  then  work  a  good  deal
harder  in  the  hope  of  maintaining  this  standard,  just  as
miners  upon  piece-wages  often  work  harder  when  the  piece-rate
is  suddenly  lowered.  But,  when  a  system  of  taxation  has  been
in  vogue  for  some  time,  the  standard  of  living  is  itself  likely
to  have  been  modified,  and  the  tendency  to  increased  effort  on
the   part  of  persons   subjected  to  taxation  will   become  less.

593  2  Q


594  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

Among  the  very  poor,  indeed,  whose  standard  of  living  is
already  near  the  minimum  of  subsistence,  there  is  little  room
for  any  further  lowering,  and,  therefore,  the  tendency  to
increased  work  may,  so  long  as  their  physical  capacity  is  not
reduced,  continue  in  full  force.  Among  better-to-do  persons,
however,  there  is  considerable  scope  for  a  lowering  of  the
standard.  Furthermore,  there  is  generally  an  alternative  way,
besides  extra  work,  by  which,  if  it  is  so  desired,  their  standard
may  be  maintained.  For  better-to-do  people  generally  either
make  a  certain  amount  of  annual  saving,  or  at  all  events
possess  a  store  of  capital ;  and  it  is  possible  to  meet  taxation
by  saving  less  or  by  selling  capital.  Broadly,  therefore,  we
may  conclude  that,  except  among  the  very  poor  and  possibly
some  proportion  of  the  middle  classes,  the  fact  of  taxation  is
not  likely  in  the  long  run  to  have  any  substantial  effect  in
increasing  the  contribution  of  work  that  taxed  persons  make
towards  the  national  dividend.

I  3.  The  second  way  in  which  the  fact  of  taxation  reacts
on  the  dividend  is  more  complex  and  needs  longer  discussion.
Let  us  assume,  for  the  moment,  that  the  taxes  are  not  large
enough  to  drive  anybody  to  provide  for  them  by  actually
selling  existing  capital  goods.  The  essence  of  the  matter  then
is  that,  of  the  money  collected  in  taxation,  some  is  withdrawn
from,  or  held  back  from,  consumption  and  some  from  investment.
Now,  investment  by  one  person,  though  it  may  take  the  form
of  buying  existing  property,  implies  the  creation  of  equivalent
new  capital,  because  the  property,  if  not  sold  to  this  person,
would,  in  general,  have  been  sold  to  some  other  would-be
investor,  who,  apart  from  its  coming  on  the  market,  would
have  had  to  find  a  place  for  his  money  in  new  creations.
When,  therefore,  money  is  held  back  from  investment  in  order
to  meet  taxation,  it  is,  in  effect,  held  back  from  creating  new
capital,  which  would  have  enabled  a  larger  dividend  to  be  pro-
duced in  future  years.  It  is  essential,  however,  that  our  terms
should  not  be  misunderstood.  Expenditure  upon  food,  clothing
and  house-room  is  not  usually  spoken  of  as  an  investment  of
capital.  Nevertheless,  if  a  man's  expenditure  on  these  things
were  reduced  below  a  certain  level,  his  efficiency  would
deteriorate  and  the  contribution  that  he  makes  to  the  national


I


CH.  II     EFFECTS  OF  THE  FACT  OF  TAXATION      595

dividend  diminish.  Hence,  for  the  present  purpose,  we  ought
to  regard  all  expenditure  on  "  necessaries  for  efficiency "  as
equivalent  to  investment,  and,  therefore,  as  included  within
that  portion  of  a  man's  income  which  is  devoted  to  producing
capital  in  the  widest  sense ;  and  consumption  should  be  taken
to  mean  that  part  of  consumption  which  goes  beyond  what  is
necessary  for  efficiency.  With  this  explanation  of  terms  it  is
plain  that  the  fact  of  taxation  upon  any  taxpayer  causes  an
injury  to  the  dividend  of  future  years,  which  is  greater  or  less
according  as  the  money  for  paying  the  tax  is  withdrawn  to  a
larger  or  smaller  extent  from  investment  in  the  widest  sense
instead  of  from  consumption.  We  have  now  to  apply  this
general  conception  to  practice.

§  4.  First,  when  taxation  is  raised  from  persons  who  have
no  surplus  beyond  what  they  spend  for  efficiency,  the  whole  of
the  taxation  must  be  taken  out  of  investment  in  the  widest
sense ;  for  there  is  no  other  source  out  of  which  it  can  be
taken.  Nor  does  it  make  any  real  difference  if  a  part  of  the
income  of  the  taxed  person  is  spent  on  things  which  are  not
really  necessary  for  efficiency,  but  to  which  insistent  conven-
tion gives  precedence  over  these  things.  For  in  that  event
the  conventional  necessaries  are  likely  to  be  retained  and  the
real  necessaries  cut  short.  No  doubt,  as  was  explained  in
§  2,  a  part  of  what  taxation  takes  away  from  investment
in  the  widest  sense  may  be  replaced  from  the  fruits  of  extra
work ;  but  that  is  not  the  present  point.  The  broad  fact
remains  that,  of  taxation  raised  from  persons  so  poor  that  they
have  no  sui'plus  above  what  is  necessary  for  efficiency,  practi-
cally the  whole  must  come  out  of  investment  in  the  widest
sense.

§  5.  Secondly,  let  us  consider  taxation  raised  from  better-
to-do  persons  who  normally  devote  some  income  to  consumption
beyond  what  is  productive  of  efficiency,  and  some  to  invest-
ment in  the  ordinary  narrow  sense  of  the  market  place.
The  natural  presumption  is  that  the  taxation  will  come  out  of
unproductive  consumption  and  out  of  investment  respectively
more  or  less  in  proportion  to  the  amounts  of  income  which  the
taxed  person  is  devoting  to  these  two  uses.  No  doubt,  when
a  large  new  tax  is  put  on,  the  standard  of  living  of  the  taxed


596  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

person  will,  for  a  time,  be  very  resistant  to  change,  so  that  a
larger  proportion  will  tend  to  be  taken  out  of  income  that
would  have  been  invested.  But,  if  we  have  in  mind  a  system
of  taxation  that  is  more  or  less  permanent,  the  standard  of  living
may  become  modified ;  and,  broadly  speaking,  the  presumption
that  taxes  will  be  withdrawn  from  income  spent  on  unproduc-

a  tive  consumption  and  on  investment  roughly  in  proportion  to
their  respective  amounts  appears  to  be  a  reasonable  one.^  Now,
we  may  fairly  suppose  that,  as  incomes  increase,  the  proportion
of  them  that  is  invested  increases  also ;  for,  after  a  point,  the
attractiveness  of  further  expenditure  upon  consumption  must
become  very  slight.  Hence,  other  things  being  equal,  capital,
and,  therefore,  the  national  dividend  of  the  future,  will  be  hit
more  severely  by  taxes  upon  the  rich  than  by  taxes  upon  the
moderately  well-to-do,  and  by  taxes  upon  the  very  rich  than  by
taxes  upon  the  rich.

§  6.  So  far  we  have  assumed  that  the  taxation  con-
templated is  moderate  in  amount  relatively  to  the  income  of
the  taxed  persons,  so  that  the  practical  choice  is  between  taking
it  from  income  that  would  have  been  spent  and  from  income
that  would  have  been  invested.  It  remains  to  consider  taxa-
tion on  a  higher  scale.     Such  taxation  may  be  paid  out  of

%*  capital  in  a  different  sense,  namely  out  of  the  proceeds  of  a  sale
of  capital  already  existing.  Of  course,  the  sale  of  capital  does
not  mean  the  direct  destruction  of  capital,  or,  unless  it  is  sold
to  foreigners,  the  loss  of  it  to  the  nation  viewed  collectively.
But,  as  was  indicated  in  §  3,  since  the  buyer  was  presumably
intending  to  invest  his  purchase  money,  it  means  that  he  buys
old  capital  with  resources  that  would  otherwise  have  gone  to
create  new  capital     Hence,  the  total  stock  of  the  nation's

y  capital  is  diminished  to  the  same  extent  as  it  would  have  been

'  if  the  capital,  by  the  sale  of  which  the  taxes  are  paid,  had  been
literally  melted  down.     When  taxes  are  placed  on  anybody,

1  Analytically,  if  A  be  the  amount  of  his  income  that  a  man  normally  turns
into  capital  (whether  in  a  wide  or  narrow  sense),  B  the  amount  he  normally
'' consumes,"  and  e„  and  e^  the  elasticities  of  his  desire  for  these  two  uses
respectively,  it  is  easily  shown  that  a  given  levy  will  be  withdrawn  from  the
two   uses   in    the   proportion   of  e^A    to   e^B.     The   conclusion   of  the    text,

therefore,  implies  that,  from  a  long  period  point  of  view,  —  differs  from  unity

to  a  much  less  degree  than   -  does.


\


CH.  II      EFFECTS  OF  THE  FACT  OF  TAXATION      597

so  large  that  they  exceed  or  approach  the  sum  of  his  normal
savings  and  his  unproductive  consumption  together,  they  are
certain,  in  the  year  of  levy,  to  be  taken,  in  the  main,  from
income  that  would  have  been  saved  and  from  capital  in  the
above  sense ;  for,  though  unproductive  consumption  may  be
reduced  a  little,  the  standard  of  living  will  almost  certainly  be
too  rigid  to  allow  it  to  be  reduced  a  great  deal,  in  preference  to
trenching  on  these  resources.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  in
accordance  with  the  argument  of  ^  2,  that,  when  a  large  amount
of  a  man's  capital  has  been  taken  away  in  taxation,  this  fact
may  cause  him  to  make  efforts  and  savings  in  later  years,  in
order  to  reconstitute  it,  that  he  would  not  otherwise  have  made.
If  this  happens,  the  proportion  of  the  tax  levy  that  is  taken  out
of  capital  on  the  whole  is  less  than  the  proportion  that  is  so
taken  at  the  moment.  In  general,  however,  it  does  not  seem
likely  that  this  kind  of  reaction  will  be  very  important.  We
may  conclude,  therefore,  that,  for  any  given  class  of  taxpayer,
very  large  taxes  will  trench  upon  capital,  and,  therefore,  will
injure  the  national  dividend  of  the  future  in  a  greater  pro-
portion than  moderate  taxes.

§  7.  There  remains  one  somewhat  special  point.  It  is
possible  to  obtain  any  given  revenue  either  by  relatively  small
taxes  levied  annually  or  by  relatively  large  taxes  levied  at  long
intervals.  For  example,  the  annual  collection  of,  say,  twenty
millions  from  a  given  group  by  income  tax  on  incomes  derived
from  investments  involves  a  comparatively  small  annual  levy
on  each  member  of  the  group ;  whereas  the  annual  collection
of  the  same  sum  by  death  duties  involves  a  comparatively  large
occasional  levy  from  the  estates  of  that  small  proportion  of  the
group  who  die  during  the  year.  Let  us  suppose  the  income-
tax  method  to  raise  an  annual  twenty  millions  by  collecting
£100  every  year  from  each  of  a  group  of  200,000  people,  and
the  death-duty  method  to  raise  the  same  sum  by  collecting
£2000  from  each  of  these  people  once  in  twenty  years.  We
have  to  inquire  which  of  these  two  methods  is  likely  to  trench
the  more  seriously  upon  capital  in  the  widest  sense.  Clearly,
things  might  be  so  arranged  that  there  would  be  no  difference
whatever  between  them.  Under  the  death-duty  method  each
person  might  furnish  about  £100  annually  to  insurance  com-


598  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

paniea,  to  be  handed  over  by  them  in  payment  of  the  estate-
duties  falling  due  during  the  year,  instead  of  furnishing  it,  as
under  the  income-tax  method,  to  the  Treasury.  In  actual  life,
however,  it  is  not  likely  that  a  tax  falling  due  from  any  estate
every  twentieth  year  will  be  fully  provided  against  in  the
untaxed  years  that  precede  or  follow.  Consequently,  it  is
probable  that  under  the  death-duty  method  a  good  deal  more
than  £100  will  have  to  be  furnished  towards  the  tax  from  the
resources  accruing  in  the  actual  year  of  the  tax,  and  a  good
deal  less  from  those  accruing  in  other  years.  It  is  fairly  clear,
however,  that,  as  the  amount  withdrawn  from  the  resources  of
any  year  grows,  people  will  be  less  and  less  willing,  owing  to
the  wrench  threatened  to  their  habits,  to  take  it  out  of  con-
sumption. If  this  be  so,  it  follows  that,  in  general,  the  death-
duty  method  is  likely  to  trench  on  capital  somewhat  more
than  the  income-tax  method.  The  fact  that  death  duties  are,
in  fact,  levied  on  estates,  not  merely  at  long  intervals,  but  at
the  particular  moment  when  property  is  changing  hands
through  death,  and  when,  therefore,  payment  out  of  capital  is
often  specially  easy,  constitutes  a  further  influence  favouring
this  tendency.

§  8.  The  general  result  of  this  discussion  is  to  show  that,
though  there  are  differences  of  detail,  and  though,  especially
among  the  moderately  well-to-do,  unproductive  consumption
may  yield  some  contribution,  yet  a  considerable  part  of  the
money  taken  from  the  public  in  taxation  is  likely,  especially  if
the  rate  of  taxation  is  high,  to  come  out  of  what  would  other-
wise have  been,  or  become,  capital  in  the  widest  sense.  To
that  extent,  therefore,  the  national  dividend  of  the  future  is
injured.  This  injury,  as  was  said  at  the  outset,  is  quite  inde-
pendent of  the  object  through  which  taxes  are  raised ;  and  it
will,  furthermore,  be  wiped  out  if  the  Government  either  itself
uses  the  money  that  it  has  raised  for  equally  effective  capital
purposes,  or  transfers  it  to  State  creditors  who  so  use  it.  This,
however,  is  not  the  whole  injury.  Even  if  the  money  raised
in  taxation  were  employed  by  the  State  or  its  creditors  in
exactly  the  same  way  as  it  would  have  been  if  allowed  to
"  fructify  in  the  pockets  of  the  people,"  the  national  dividend
will,  in  general,  still  suffer.     It  will  suffer,  not  directly  from  the


cH.  II     EFFECTS  OF  THE  FACT  OF  TAXATION      599

fact  of  taxation,  but  indirectly,  because  the  fact  creates  the
expectation  of  taxation,  and  this  expectation  often,  though  not
always,  tempts  people  to  modify  their  conduct  with  a  view  to
avoiding  the  threat  of  a  tax.  How  far  they  are  tempted  to
act  in  this  way,  and  how  far,  therefore,  the  national  dividend
is  injured,  depends  upon  the  objects  through  which  taxation  is
assessed-  In  the  following  chapters  certain  principal  forms  of
taxation  will  be  studied  from  this  point  of  view.


h


~\


CHAPTEE    III


TAXES    ON    WINDFALLS


§  1.  The  expectation  of  a  tax  may  lessen  the  national  dividend
by  inducing  people  to  work  less  in  the  taxing  country,  to  save
less  in  the  taxing  country,  or  to  divert  their  purchases  from  one
commodity  to  another.  It  is  only  in  these  ways  that  the
expectation  of  a  tax  can  ajffect  the  dividend  at  all.  Conse-
quently, the  dividend  will  escape  injury  from  this  side  under
any  tax  so  constructed  that  the  impact  of  it  upon  the  taxpayer
is  not  lessened  if  he  works  less  or  saves  less  or  alters  the  direc-
tion of  his  purchases.  Taxes  based  on  personal  peculiarities,
the  natural  colour  of  people's  hair  or  eyes,  their  age  or  their
height,  or  other  qualities  fixed  by  nature,  would  fall  into  this
class.  But  all  such  taxes,  since  they  treat  people  who  are
essentially  alike  in  an  unlike  way,  and  since,  furthermore,
they  make  no  attempt  whatever  to  adjust  the  burden  to  the
strength  of  the  back,  are  inequitable,  and,  therefore,  strictly
limited  in  scope.  There  is,  however,  one  kind  of  tax,  which  is
as  satisfactory  from  the  standpoint  of  the  national  dividend  as
any  of  these,  but  which  also  has  the  great  merit  of  not  run-
ning counter  to  any  canon  of  equity.  I  mean  taxes  upon
accretions  to  the  value  of  people's  property  that  are  not  fore-
seen by  them  and  are  not  due  in  any  degree  to  efforts  made,
intelligence  exercised,  risks  borne,  or  capital  invested  by  them.
These  accretions  of  value  may  suitably  be  called  windfalls  and
taxes  upon  them  taxes  upon  windfalls.  It  is  desirable  to
undertake  a  brief  study  of  this  type  of  tax.

§  2.  At  the  outset  an  observation  must  be  made  on  the
point  of  equity.     It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  what

600


CH.  Ill  TAXES  ON  WINDFALLS  601

may  be  called  integral  windfalls  and  partial  windfalls.  By  an
integral  windfall  is  meant  an  accretion  in  the  nature  of  a
windfall  to  the  aggregate  value  of  a  person's  property  reckoned
relatively  to  the  whole  period  of  his  life ;  by  a  partial  windfall
an  accretion  of  this  nature  occurring  at  some  definite  moment
to  some  definite  part  of  a  person's  property.  The  equity  of  a
tax  upon  integral  windfalls  needs  no  proof.  Such  a  tax  would
merely  do  away  with  accidental  accretions  of  wealth,  for  the
maintenance  of  which  no  defence  can  possibly  be  given.  The
knowledge  that  it  will  be  imposed  if  a  windfall  occurs  has  no
appreciable  effect  on  the  value  of  any  property  now.  But
with  partial  windfalls  the  issue  is  less  clear.  For  a  windfall
increment  to  one  part  of  a  man's  property  in  one  year  may  be
offset  by  a  windfall  decrement  to  another  part  of  it  in  another
year.  If  there  were  a  presumption  that  an  observed  windfall
increment  would  in  fact  be  balanced  by  a  windfall  decrement
that  is  not  observed,  equity  woidd  point  against  the  taxation
of  partial  windfalls.  Integral  windfalls  would  be  equitable
objects  of  taxation,  but  partial  windfalls  would  not.  Since  in
practice  it  would  be  quite  impossible  to  ascertain  by  direct
inquiry  whether  or  not  an  integral  windfall  had  occurred, — for
this  would  imply  knowledge  of  the  future  as  well  as  of  the
past, — or,  if  it  had,  how  large  it  had  been,  this  conclusion
would,  in  effect,  rule  all  windfall  taxation  out  of  court.  There
is  not,  however,  in  fact,  any  presumption  of  the  kind  contem-
plated. When  a  partial  windfall  increment  is  observed,  it  Tnay,
of  course,  be  cancelled  by  a  partial  windfall  decrement  to  the
same  property ;  but  there  is  no  presumption  that  it  will  be.
Consequently,  in  the  absence  of  definite  knowledge  that  it  is  in
fact  so  cancelled,  there  is  nothing  inequitable  in  taxing  it.
Those  windfalls  that  are  observed  are  not  rendered  improper
objects  for  taxation  by  the  fact  that  windfall  decrements  and
other  windfall  increments  occur,  which  cannot  in  practice  be
brought  into  account.

§  3.  The  exceptional  circumstances  of  the  great  war
brought  into  being  a  new  and  very  important  class  of  wind-
fall, in  the  abnormal  profits  made  by  certain  businesses
as  a  direct  consequence  of  it.  The  values  of  certain  sorts
of  goods  and   services  were  enormously  enhanced,  with   the


602  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

result  that,  as  was  shown  in  Part  II.  Chapter  IX.,  those  persons
who  had  a  store  of  these  things  or  the  means  of  making  them
quickly — shipowners,  iron  and  steel  makers,  munition  makers,
farmers,  and  many  others — were  in  a  position,  except  in  so
far  as  the  Government  interfered  by  fixing  maximum  prices
for  the  commodities  in  which  they  were  interested,  to  reap
undreamt-of  fortunes.  In  these  fortunes  there  was  a  large
element  of  windfall.  In  order  to  isolate  that  element  it  was
necessary  to  determine  what  the  normal  profit  of  the  business
was,  to  add  on  to  that  an  allowance  for  extra  profit  due  to
new  capital  investments  and  additional  work,  and  to  take
account  of  the  fact  that  machinery  set  up  and  adaptations
made  specially  for  war  purposes  would  be  of  little  use,  and
might  even  be  in  the  way,  after  the  war  was  over.  The
estimate  of  normal  profits  ought  strictly  to  have  taken  account,
not  merely  of  what  the  profits  in  the  years  immediately
preceding  the  war  actually  were,  but  also  of  the  prospects
that  then  existed  of  their  increasing ;  and  it  ought  to  have
taken  account  both  of  the  high  level  of  general  prices
prevailing  during  the  war,  in  consequence  of  which  a  given
money  profit  represented  a  much  smaller  real  profit  than
before,  and  also  of  the  probability  that  prices  would  be  high
for  some  time  after  the  war,  in  consequence  of  which  larger
reserves  should  properly  be  held  against  depreciation.  The
English  excess  profits  duty  aimed,  in  a  general  way,  at
isolating  the  windfall  element  in  war  profits  on  these  lines
and  at  taxing  this  element  at  as  high  a  rate  as  possible ;  the
only  restraining  influence  being  the  fear  that,  since  it  was  not
possible  completely  to  isolate  the  windfall  element,  a  tax
above,  say,  80  per  cent  would  discourage  enterprise  in
a  dangerous  degree.^

^  The  original  American  excess  profits  duty  was  based  on  the  absolute  rate
of  profit,  not  on  the  excess  above  the  profits  obtained  before  the  war.  It  was,
therefore,  much  less  nearly  a  true  tax  on  windfalls  than  the  English  tax.  It
was,  moreover,  open  to  the  serious  objection  that  it  penalised  inventions,  the
skilful  seizing  of  opportunities  and  good  management.  "  Something  can  be
said  for  a  graduated  tax  on  income ;  something  can  even  be  said  for  a  graduated
tax  on  capital ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  say  anything  in  defence  of  a  tax  which  is
graduated  on  the  varying  percentages  which  income  bears  to  capital.  To
penalise  enterprise  and  ingenuity  in  a  way  that  is  not  accomplished  by  a  tax  on
either  capital  or  income — that  is  the  unique  distinction  of  the  law  "  (Belignian,
"The  War  Revenue  Act,"  Political  Science  Quarterly,  March  1918,  p.  29).


CH.  Ill  TAXES  ON  WINDFALLS  603

8  4.  Windfall  taxation,  as  an  instrument  for  raising
revenue  in  normal  conditions,  was  until  recently  practically  un-
known. Some  years  before  the  war,  however,  several  attempts
were  made  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  to  tax  windfalls  of  a
particular  kind,  namely  those  in  respect  of  the  public  value
of  land,  by  means  of  increment  duties.  In  Frankfort-on-Main,
"  if,  since  the  previous  change  of  ownership  less  than  twenty
years  have  elapsed,  and  if  there  has  been  an  increase  in  value
amounting  to  at  least  15  per  cent  of  the  previous  purchase
price,  after  allowance  has  been  made  for  expenditure  on
improvements,  loss  of  interest  and  costs  of  transfer,  increment
duty  is  levied  on  the  following  scale :  2  per  cent  on  the
increase  in  value  for  increases  between  15  and  20  per  cent,
3  per  cent  for  increases  between  20  and  25  per  cent,  and
so  on,  1  per  cent  being  added  to  the  rate  of  duty  for
every  5  per  cent  increase  of  value,  up  to  a  maximum  rate
of  25  per  cent."^  In  Cologne  the  general  arrangements  are
similar.  The  scale  of  duty  starts  at  1 0  per  cent  for  increases
of  value  of  more  than  10  and  less  than  20  per  cent,  and  the
rate  increases  by  1  per  cent  for  every  additional  10  per  cent
in  the  increase  of  value,  up  to  the  same  maximum  rate  of  25
per  cent.  This  scale  is  charged  in  its  entirety  when  not  more
than  five  years  have  elapsed  since  the  previous  change  of
ownership,  two-thirds  of  the  scale  when  not  more  than  ten
years  have  elapsed,  and  one-third  in  respect  of  any  period
exceeding  ten  years.^  In  1911  the  Conservative  party  in  the
Eeichstag  carried  a  proposal  for  the  introduction  of  kindred
arrangements  into  the  imperial  fiscal  system,  but  "  by  the
amendment  of  the  law  in  1913,  the  revenue  accruing  from  the
Wertzuwachssteuer  was  relegated  entirely  to  the  states  and
local  authorities."  ^  In  the  United  Kingdom  a  cruder  form
of  duty  upon  increments  of  land  value  was  imposed  by  the
Budget  of  1909.  It  might  be  thought  at  first  sight  that
these  duties  satisfy  the  conditions  required  of  windfall  taxes,
and  that  nothing  more  complicated  is  necessary.  This,  how-
ever, is  not  really  so ;  and  it  is  desirable  to  show  why  it  is
not  so.     We  shall  thus  be  able  to  bring  into  clear  light  the


L


1  Cf.  Cd.  4750,  p.  21.  *  Rnd.  p.  18.

2  Scheftel,  The  Taxation  of  Land  Value,  p.  145,  footnote.


604  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

practical  difficulties  by  which  any  attempt  to  devise  effective
windfall  taxes  is  confronted.

§  5.  To  begin  with,  there  are  two  classes  of  increment
which  are  apparent  and  not  real.  One  of  these  arises  in  this
way.  If  the  general  level  of  prices  during  one  decade  is  50
per  cent  higher  than  in  the  previous  decade,  then  the  money
value  of  unimproved  land  may  increase  50  per  cent  and  yet
not  experience  any  real  increment.  The  income  that  the
owner  derives  from  it,  or  the  capital  sum  that  he  would  obtain
by  selling  it,  though  50  per  cent  larger  than  before  in  terms
of  money,  is  exactly  the  same  as  before  in  terms  of  the  things
which  this  money  enables  him  to  buy.  This  sort  of  difficulty
does  not  exist  as  against  ad  valorem  taxes,  but  it  must  exist
wherever  the  taxed  object  is  the  difference  between  the  money
value  which  a  particular  thing  has  at  different  points  of  time.
The  only  way  to  avoid  it  is  to  revise  the  valuation  assigned  to
the  basis  period  in  the  light  of  the  new  level  of  general  prices,
which  exists  in  the  period  when  the  amount  of  increment
liable  to  duty  has  to  be  determined.  This  revision  would  be
a  difficult  task.  The  method  of  performing  it  that  naturally
suggests  itself  is  to  multiply  the  original  site  value  by  the  ratio
which  an  ordinary  index  number  of  general  prices  in  the  assess-
ment year  bears  to  the  corresponding  index  number  in  the
original  valuation  year.  This  method,  however,  would  not  be
satisfactory,  because  the  capital  value  of  an  instrument  of
production  does  not  vary  in  correspondence  with  the  income
derived  from  it  in  a  single  year,  but  depends  upon  the  expecta-
tion of  income  for  a  number  of  years.  Nevertheless,  by  a
reasonable,  and  not  a  mechanical,  application  of  index  numbers,
it  would  seem  that  a  competent  authority  could  eliminate  from
the  field  of  taxation  the  main  part  of  the  merely  apparent
increments  of  this  class  that  come  into  being.  By  a  similar
process,  though  here  much  popular  prejudice  would  have  to  be
overcome,  a  competent  authority  might  be  able,  in  times  of
depressed  prices,  to  bring  into  the  field  of  taxation  real  incre-
ments of  value  which  appeared  as  decrements.

§  6.  The  other  class  of  apparent  increment  arises  when
the  general  rate  of  money  interest  on  long-period  investments
falls.      This  kind  of  change  means  that  an  investment  yielding


TAXES  ON  WINDFALLS


605


exactly  the  same  annual  return  must  rise  in  capital  value.
Such  a  rise  is  of  no  advantage  to  the  owner  of  the  investment —
unless,  indeed,  he  wishes  to  turn  the  proceeds  into  consumable
income — because,  even  if  he  sells  it,  he  will  not  be  able  to  invest
the  proceeds  in  anything  that  will  yield,  on  equal  security,  a
higher  annual  return  than  he  was  obtaining  before.  Here,  again,
adjustment  would  be  difficult.  But,  if  account  were  taken  of
the  place  occupied  by  the  year  of  the  original  valuation  and
the  year  of  assessment  in  their  respective  credit  cycles,  it  would
seem  that  a  competent  authority  could  so  qualify  the  original
valuation  that  the  increments  assessed  to  taxation  should  not
include  this  class  of  apparent  increment.

§  7.  Our  task,  however,  is  not  completed  when  apparent
increments  have  been  eliminated.  For  even  real  increments,
when  they  are  anticipated  and  discounted,  are  not  windfalls.
The  point  may  be  put  in  this  way.  The  capital  value  of  a
site  is  the  present  worth  of  the  annual  income  which  it  is
expected  to  yield.  Increments  in  capital  value  must,  there-
fore, arise  regularly  as  the  period  at  which  an  increase  in
annual  value  will  begin  draws  nearer.  For  simplicity  of
illustration,  let  us  imagine  an  estate,  which  is  not  expected  to
yield  any  income  at  all  for  the  next  twenty  years,  but  is,
thereafter,  expected  to  yield  an  income  (apart  altogether  from
expenditure  on  the  land)  of  £500  a  year.  This  example  is
typical  of  the  condition  of  much  land  in  the  neighbourhood
of  towns,  which  is  expected  at  a  future  date  to  become
valuable  for  building  purposes.  Interest  being  reckoned  at
5  per  cent,  a  simple  calculation  shows  that  the  capital  site
value  of  our  imaginary  estate  will  progress  approximately
as  follows :


Value  in  1920

.      £3800

Value  in  1925

4800

Value  in  1930

6100

Value  in  1935

7800

Value  in  1940

.      10,009

The  increment  of  value  over  the  fifteen  years  following  1920
is  thus  £4000,  and  a  duty  of  20  per  cent  on  this  increment,
payable    in    1935,  is    £800.     A  further   simple   calculation


606  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

shows  that,  with  interest  at  5  per  cent,  £800  in  1935  is
equivalent  to  a  little  less  than  £400  in  1920.  This  means
that,  if  an  owner  wished  to  sell  the  estate  we  have  been  consider-
ing in  1920,  the  existence  of  a  20  per  cent  increment  duty
payable  in  1935  would  cause  him  to  get  some  £3400  for  it
instead  of  £3800.  The  tax,  in  short,  would  be  a  direct
impost  on  the  present  owner,  and  not  in  any  sense  a  windfall
tax.

§  8.  In  practice,  of  course,  many  actual  increments  of  value
are  partly  windfalls  and  partly  increments  of  this  kind.
When  the  element  of  appearance  in  actual  increments  has
been  removed,  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  the  windfall  element
in  the  real  increment  in  the  following  manner :  If  a  piece  of
land  in  1920  has  a  total  value  {x  +  y),  made  up  of  a  value  x
due  to  its  present  (agricultural  or  other)  use,  and  a  value  y
due  to  expectations  of  building  rents  after  1940,  there  should,
interest  being  reckoned  at  5  per  cent,  be  a  non-windfall
increment  in  the  value  of  the  land  by  the  year  1935  equal
to  about  108  per  cent  of  y.  In  order,  therefore,  that  incre-
ment tax  may  be  confined  to  windfalls,  it  ought  only  to  be
levied  on  the  excess  of  the  then  value  of  the  land  over  its
present  value  plus  108  per  cent  of  that  portion  of  its  present
value  which  is  due  to  its  prospects  as  building  land.  For
periods  of  greater  or  less  length  than  fifteen  years  similar
calculations  could,  of  course,  easily  be  worked  out.  The  root
idea  of  this  plan  was  embodied  both  in  the  increment  duties
established  at  Frankfort  and  Cologne  and  also  in  the  <jrerman
imperial  increment  tax.  The  fourth  section  of  the  Frankfort
bye-law,  for  example,  provided  that,  "  in  the  case  of  unbuilt
land  which  the  vendor  does  not  himself  use  for  purposes  of
agriculture  or  industry,"  before  the  increment  which  has
accrued  at  any  time  is  calculated,  there  shall  be  added  to
the  original  basis  valuation  interest  to  the  extent  of  4  per
cent.^  Compound  interest  was,  however  —  it  would  seem
incorrectly — not  allowed.

8  9.  Yet  one  more  point  remains.     In  some  circumstances

an  increment,  which  is  not  definitely  expected,  nevertheless

enters,  in  some  measure,  into  present  value,  and  is,  therefore,  not

1  Cf.  Od.  4750,  p.  21.


cH.  Ill  TAXES  ON  WINDFALLS  60V

true  windfall.  I  may,  for  instance,  have  a  piece  of  land  which
is  expected  to  yield  for  a  long  while  £500  a  year,  but  in  regard
to  which  it  is  recognised  vaguely  that  either  a  rise  or  a  fall
may  take  place.  This  land — with  interest  at  5  per  cent —
will  have  a  capital  value  of  £10,000,  and  it,  therefore,  seems
at  first  sight  that  the  possibility  of  its  rising  in  value  is  not
being  discounted.  In  reality,  however,  this  possibility  does
enter  into  present  value,  acting  there  as  a  counterweight  to
the  possibility  of  a  fall.  The  measure  of  influence  which  this
possibility,  reckoned  over  the  ensuing  fifteen  years,  exercises
upon  present  value  is  given  by  the  sum  for  which  the  right
to  all  increment  of  this  class — I  am  not,  of  course,  now
referring  to  the  anticipated  increment  already  discussed —
accruing  during  the  said  fifteen  years  could  be  sold.  It  is
fairly  certain  that  the  sum  obtainable  would,  in  general,  be  a
very  small  fraction  of  the  capital  value  of  the  land.  Con-
sequently, these  increments,  when  they  accrue,  are  predomin-
antly, though  not  entirely,  windfalls ;  and  the  passing  of
a  law  for  their  taxation  would  not  strike  present  owners  to
any  substantial  extent.  In  order,  however,  to  reduce  the
risk  of  this  to  a  minimum,  it  might  be  well  to  provide  for
the  exemption  from  duty  of  increments  amounting  to  less
tHan  10  per  cent.  This  provision,  combined  with  that
suggested  in  the  preceding  section,  would  exempt  from
increment  duty  all  increments  arising  in  a  fifteen-year  period
amounting  to  less  than  10  per  cent  of  the  value  x,  plus,  say,
120  per  cent  of  the  value  y.

§  10.  The  various  safeguards,  which  this  discussion  shows
to  be  required  in  an  increment  tax  that  is  to  strike  windfall
increments  only,  are  probably  too  complicated  for  practical
politics.  The  cause,  however,  is  not  yet  lost.  For  it  is  still
possible — at  the  expense,  indeed,  of  letting  some  real  windfalls
go  free — to  avoid  serious  danger  of  taxing  increments  that
are  not  windfalls  by  the  simple  device  of  exempting  all
increments  other  than  those  which  are  very  large  indeed.  In
normal  circumstances,  apart  from  war  and  its  aftermath,  we
may  reasonably  expect  that  no  enormous  variations  in  general
prices  or  in  the  general  rate  of  interest  will  occur  in  the
course  of  fifteen  years.    If,  therefore,  we  decree  that  increment


608  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

duty  shall  only  be  levied  on  land  which  in  fifteen  years  has
trebled  in  value — or,  if  our  period  be  of  some  other  length,
has  improved  in  a  proportionate  degree — it  is  very  unlikely
that  anything  other  than  true  windfall  increments  will  be
enmeshed  by  our  scheme.  Nearly  the  whole  amount  by
which,  at  the  end  of  fifteen  years,  the  unimproved  value  of
any  man's  holding  of  land — it  seems  necessary  to  take  the
total  holding  as  our  unit — exceeds  treble  its  original  un-
improved value  might  safely  be  taken  by  the  State.  If  the
unimproved  values  of  land  are  periodically  estimated  for
some  other  purpose,  with  a  view,  for  example,  to  a  direct  tax
on  the  body  of  these  values,  it  would  not  appear  to  be  a  very
difficult  or  expensive  matter  to  collect  a  tax  of  this  kind  also.
But  the  various  complications,  to  which  attention  has  been
called,  make  it  plain  that  such  a  tax  is  never  likely  to  yield
a  large  revenue  from  windfalls  that  accrue  in  landed  property.
The  task  of  constructing  a  tax  to  catch  analogous  wind-
falls in  other  kinds  of  property,  with  the  single  exception
of  treasure  trove,  is  so  difficult  that  no  attempt  has  yet  been
made  to  cope  with  it.^

1  There  is  no  resemblance  between  the  arrangement  discussed  above  and  the
German  "property  increment"  tax  introduced  in  1913,  which  hit  increments
of  property,  whether  inherited  or  saved,  while  exempting  the  general  corpus  of
possessed  property.     (Of.  Cohn,  Economic  Journal,  1913,  p.  543  et  seq.).


CHAPTER  IV

TAXES  ON  THE  PUBLIC  VALUE  OF  LAND

§  1.  A  TAXABLE  object,  which,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
national  dividend,  is  closely  analogous  to  windfalls,  is  that
part  of  the  annual,  or  of  the  capital,  value  of  real  property
which  is  not  due  to  the  efforts  or  investments  of  owners
or  occupiers.  In  this  country,  apart  from  the  small
"  undeveloped  land  "  duty  of  the  1909  Budget,  no  resort  has
been  had  to  this  taxable  object.  In  New  Zealand  and  the
Australian  colonies,  however,  it  has  for  many  years  played  an
important  part  both  in  local  and  in  national  finance ;  and  the
municipalities  of  Western  Canada  have  made  considerable  use
of  it  for  local  purposes.  "  In  Queensland  practically  all  the
local  revenue  is  raised  from  this  source.  All  rates,  general,
special,  and  separate,  are  levied  on  the  unimproved  value."  ^  In
South  Australia  a  special  national  tax  on  unimproved  land
values  has  existed  since  1884.  One  halfpenny  in  the  £  is
levied  on  all  unimproved  (capital)  values ;  an  extra  halfpenny
on  unimproved  values  exceeding  £5000  ;  and  an  absentee
tax,  amounting  to  20  per  cent  on  absentee  owners.^  In
New  South  Wales :  "  The  land  tax  of  the  State  is  levied
on  unimproved  value  at  the  rate  of  Id.  in  the  £.  A  sum  of
£240  is  allowed  by  way  of  exemption,  and,  when  the  unim-
proved value  is  in  excess  of  that  sum,  a  reduction  equal  to  the
exemption  is  made ;  but,  when  several  blocks  of  land  within
the  State  are  held  by  a  person  or  company,  only  one  amount
of  £240   may  be   deducted   from  the  aggregate   unimproved

*  Scheftel,  The  Taxatim  of  Land  Value,  1916,  p.  49.
*  [Cd.  3191],  p.  20.

609  2  B


610  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

value.  In  cases  where  land  is  mortgaged,  the  mortgagor  is
permitted  to  deduct  from  the  tax  payable  a  sum  equal  to  the
income  tax  paid  by  the  mortgagee  on  the  interest  derived  from
the  mortgage  on  the  whole  property  including  improvements."  ^
In  New  Zealand :  "In  1891  the  Property  Tax  Act  then  in
force  was  repealed  and  replaced  by  the  Land  and  Income
Assessment  Act,  under  which  a  land  tax  was  imposed  on  land
and  mortgages  of  land,  and  an  income  tax  on  all  income  other
than  income  derived  from  land  and  mortgages  of  land.
Improvements  on  land  were  exempted  up  to  £3000.  In  1893
an  amending  Act  was  passed  by  which  all  improvements  on
land  were  entirely  exempted,  and  in  1896  an  Act  was  passed
by  which  the  principle  of  taxation  on  the  '  unimproved  value '
was  extended  to  local  rating,  by  enabling  local  authorities  to
adopt  the  system  on  a  poll  of  the  ratepayers  being  taken  and  a
majority  voting  in  favour  of  its  adoption."  ^  The  amount  of
the  national  tax  in  this  colony  is  ordinarily  one  penny  in  the
£  on  unimproved  (capital)  value.  "  Land  in  possession  of
natives  is  treated  specially,  and,  out  of  consideration  for  small
peasant  farmers,  plots  worth  less  than  £500  are  exempted,
and  plots  worth  less  than  £1500  are  allowed  an  abatement.
In  addition  to  the  ordinary  land  tax,  the  same  Act  imposed  a
graduated  State  tax  on  large  estates,  commencing  at  one-
sixteenth  of  a  penny  in  the  £  on  land  of  an  unimproved
value  of  £5000,  and  rising  to  threepence  in  the  £  on  land  of
an  unimproved  value  of  £210,000  or  more.^

8  2.  In  all  these  arrangements  the  essential  matter  is  the
distinction  between  improved  and  unimproved  value  respec-
tively. Some  light  on  the  precise  way  in  which  this  distinc-
tion is  drawn  may  be  gathered  from  a  very  interesting
explanatory  memorandum  furnished  by  the  Valuer-General  of
New  Zealand,  Mr.  G.  F.  C.  Campbell.  Mr.  Campbell  cites  the
definition  clauses  of  the  Government  Valuation  of  Land  Act,
1896,  and  adds  certain  comments  of  his  own.  The  principal
points  to  be  noted  are  the  following :

First :  "  The  increased  value  attaching  to  any  piece  of  land
due  to  the  successful  working  of  other  lands  in  the  district  or

'  [Cd.  3191],  p.  21.  «  Ibid.  p.  24.

•■'  Chorlton,  T/ie  Ilating  of  Land  Values,  p.  160.


CH.  IV      TAXES  ON  PUBLIC  VALUE  OF  LAND        611

to  progressive  works  effected  by  the]  State,  the  general  pros-
perity of  the  country,  high  markets  for  produce,  &e.,  form  a
portion  of  the  unimproved  value  under  the  New  Zealand  law.
Any  increased  value,  however,  which  is  re_presen$g4.  ..by.the
"Improvements'  i^f^fect  by  the  individual  possessor,  either  past
or  present,  doeaflfll^omL  part  of  the  unimproved  value."  ^

Secondly :  "  Lnprovements  can  only  be  valued  to  the  extent
to  which  they  increase  the  selling  value  of  the  land.  This  fact
should  not  be  forgotten ;  the  valuer  must,  therefore,  value  an
improvement  at  the  proportionate  sum  which  it  represents  in
the  selling  value  of  the  whole  property.  We  sometimes  find
a  large  house  built  on  a  small  area  of  farming  land.  The
ordinary  farmer  who  would  purchase  such  a  property  would
not  be  likely  to  pay  for  the  house  anything  approaching  its
cost — he  would  only  pay  the  price  of  a  house  which  suits  the
requirements  of  the  farm.  The  selling  value  of  the  house
must,  therefore,  be  valued  at  what  the  ordinary  purchaser  would
be  likely  to  give  for  it,  or,  in  other  words,  at  the  sum  by  which
it  increases  the  selling  value  of  the  property.  Sometimes  an
owner  will  expend  his  capital  and  labour  injudiciously,  and  the
result  will  prove  detrimental  to  the  land  instead  of  being  an
improvement.  Some  lauds  hold  grass  better  without  first
being  ploughed  than  they  do  after  the  plough.  The  effect  of
ploughing  in  such  cases  would  not  be  to  improve  the  selling
value.  Some  improvements,  such  as  ornamental  shrubbery,
orchards,  lawns,  vineries,  etc.,  rarely  increase  the  selling  value
to  the  full  extent  of  their  cost,  and  should,  therefore,  be  valued
accordingly.  .  .  .  No  work  can  be  considered  an  improvement
if  the  benefit  is  exhausted  at  the  time  of  valuation.  .  .  .  The
amount  at  which  improvements  are  to  be  valued  is  defined  by
the  Act  as  the  sum  by  which  they  increase  the  selling  value
of  the  land,  provided  that  the  valiie  must  not  exceed  the  cost,
although  it  may  be  below  the  cost  if  their  condition  warrants
it.  The  cost  of  an  improvement  is  not  necessarily  its  selling
value,  as  its  suitability  and  condition  must  be  taken  into
consideration."  ^

Thirdly :  "  It  is  the  actual  improvement  which  is  valued,
not  the  effect  of  that  improvement.  For  instance,  suppose
1  [Cd.  3191],  p.  37.  2  jfyid,  pp.  39.40.


612  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

that  the  expenditure  of  a  small  sum  in  cutting  an  outlet  for
water  has  converted  a  swamp  into  tirst-class  agricultural  land.
The  fact  that  the  swamp  was  capable  of  easy  drainage  would
enhance  its  unimproved  value,  and  the  cost  only  of  cutting  the
drain  would  be  valued  as  the  improvement."  ^

Lastly :  An  improvement,  to  be  classed  as  such,  must  be
made  by  the  owner.  Suppose  that  there  are  two  pieces  of
land  adjacent  to  one  another,  and  that  the  cutting  of  a  drain
or  the  erection  of  a  fence  upon  one  of  them  would  enhance  the
total  value  of  both.  If  the  two  pieces  are  owned  by  the  same
person,  their  unimproved  value,  both  before  and  after  the  drain
is  cut,  would  appear  to  be  equal  to  their  total  value  minus  the
cost  of  cutting  the  drain.  If,  however,  they  are  in  different
hands,  the  unimproved  value  of  the  piece  on  which  the  im-
provement is  not  required  is  enhanced  so  soon  as  the  improve-
ment on  the  other  piece  is  carried  out.  The  same  point
arises  in  connection  with  collective  improvements.  Thus,  Mr.
Campbell  observes :  "  It  has  been  argued  that  public  works
done  by  small  communities,  and  for  which  those  communities
agree  to  rate  themselves,  shall  be  valued  as  an  improvement "
for  the  purpose  of  the  national  land  tax.^  The  New  Zealand
Act,  however,  does  not  accept  this  view.^

^  3.  The  general  nature  of  the  distinction  between  im-
proved and  unimproved  value  has  long  been  familiar  to
economists.  It  corresponds  to  the  Ricardian  distinction
between  true  economic  rent  and  profits  from  capital  invested
in  land.  Unimproved  value  is  the  capitalised  value  of  the  true
rent,  and  improvement  value  that  of  the  profits.  A  terminology
for  some  purposes  more  convenient  has  been  suggested  by  Pro-
fessor Marshall.  True  rent  is,  of  course,  that  part  of  the
annual  value  of  land  which  arises  from  its  position,  its
extension,  its  yearly  income  of  sunlight  and  heat  and  rain  and
air.  "  This  (annual)  value  of  the  land,"  he  writes,  "  is  some-
times called  its  '  inherent  value ' ;  but  much  of  that  value  is
the  result  of  the  action  of  men,  though  not  of  its  individual
holders ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  perhaps  more  correct  to  call  this

1  [Cd.  3191],  pp.  40-41.  2  2bid.  p.  40.

'  For  an  account  of  some  of  the  difficulties  of  valuation,  of.  Scheftel,  The
Taxation  of  Land  Valiie,  pp.  69  et  seq.


CH.  IV      TAXES  ON  PUBLIC  VALUE  OF  LAND        613

part  of  the  annual  value  of  land  its  '  public  value,'  while  that
part  of  its  value  which  can  be  traced  to  the  work  and  outlay
of  its  individual  holder  may  be  called  its  '  private  value.' " '
Public  value  capitalised  corresponds  to  the  unimproved  (capital)
value,  and  private  value  capitalised  to  the  improvement
(capital)  value  of  the  Australasian  laws.

§  4.   It  is   easily  seen  that  taxes  assessed  on  the  public
value  of  laud,  whether  annual  or  capitalised,  will,  like  taxes  on
windfalls,  leave  the  national  dividend  wholly  unaffected.      The
value  of  the  taxed  object,  being  due  to  public  causes,  cannot  be  \
made  less  by  any  action  or  abstention  from  action  on  the  part  \
of  the  owner.      He  cannot  avoid  the  tax  either  by  working  I
less  or  by  saving  less.     Nor  can  he  avoid  it  by  selling  his
right  in  the  land  and  devoting  the  proceeds  to  buying  some-
thing else ;  because,  if  he  sells  it,  the  tax  will  be  discounted  in
the  price  that  he  gets  for  his  right.      The  tax  is,  therefore,
completely  "  unavoidable,"  and  the  expectation  of  it  whoUy
innocuous,  provided  only  that  the  technical  difficulty  of  appro-
priate definition  can  be  overcome.

^  5.  From  the  point  of  view  of  equity,  however,  the
position  is  different.  True  windfall  taxes  are  equitable  be-
tween all  citizens,  because,  in  a  sense,  they  touch  none  of
them.  But  taxes  on  the  public  value  of  land  single  out  a
particular  class  of  property- owners  for  a  special  and  exceptional  ^
burden.  The  inequity  is  the  more  serious  in  that  the  capitalised
value  of  the  levies  expected  in  future  years,  and  not  merely  the
actual  levy  of  the  moment,  is  concentrated  on  those  persons  who
happen  to  own  land  at  the  time  the  tax  is  first  devised ;  for,  as
has  just  been  said,  selling  gives  no  escape.  This  is  true  equally
whether  the  annual  amount  of  the  tax  is  fixed  once  for  all  or
whether  provision  is  made  for  a  progressive  increase  as  time
passes.  Naturally,  therefore,  owners  of  site-values  complain
that  new  site-value  taxes  constitute  discriminating  imposts
upon  a  particular  section  of  the  propertied  class.  Their  title,
they  argue,  is  as  good  as  that  of  any  one  else.  They  have
bought  it,  or  inherited  it,  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  the
present  owners  of  furniture  or  of  Stock  Exchange  securities.
The  proposal  to  subject  them  to  a  burden  not  borne  by  other

»  [Cd.  9528],  p.  115.


614  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

persons  of  equal  wealth  is,  therefore,  fundamentally  unjust.
Let  it  be  granted  that  for  the  State  to  have  allowed  its  land
to  become  the  property  of  private  persons  was  a  grave  error.
None  the  less,  the  faults  of  a  national  institution  ought  not  to
be  paid  for  at  the  cost  of  arbitrarily  selected  individuals.    ^

Against  this  class  of  criticism  some  answer  can  be  made  along
the  lines  of  "  betterment."  Dr.  Marshall  has  written  :  "  There
may  be  great  difficulty  in  allocating  the  betterment  due  to  any
particular  improvement.  But,  as  it  is,  the  expenditure  of  such
private  societies  as  the  Metropolitan  Public  Gardens  Associa-
tion, and  much  of  the  rates  raised  on  building  values  for  public
improvements,  is  really  a  free  gift  of  wealth  to  owners  who
are  already  fortunate."  ^  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  those  who
have  purchased  urban  land  recently  may  have  partially  dis-
counted this  betterment  in  their  purchase  price ;  but  they  are
not  likely  to  have  discounted  it  entirely ;  while  those  owners
who  are  not  recent  purchasers  will  not  have  discounted  it  at
all.  Consequently,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  special
burden  which  new  taxes  upon  site-values  would  impose  upon
site-owners — at  all  events  in  urban  districts — will  be  partially
offset  by  a  special  increment  in  no  way  due  to  their  own  effort
and  expenditure.  This  answer,  however,  is  obviously  a  plea  in
mitigation,  rather  than  a  rebuttal.

It  may  be  supplemented  in  certain  circumstances  by  the
further  plea  that  revenue  requirements  make  it  necessary  that
some  new  particular  tax  or  combination  of  taxes  shall  be  imposed,
and  that  every  particular  tax  regarded  in  isolation  is  unjust,  in
the  sense  that  it  strikes  one  group  of  persons  more  severely  than
other  groups.  The  tea  tax  strikes  tea-drinkers  only,  the  tobacco
tax  smokers  only.  These  persons,  no  doubt,  can,  if  they  choose,
evade  payment  by  abandoning  the  use  of  the  taxed  articles,
whereas,  as  was  remarked  above,  the  landowner,  since  the  tax
would  be  discounted  in  selling  price,  cannot  escape  by  parting
with  his  land.  But,  though  the  smoker  can  evade  a  payment,  he
cannot  evade  a  burden  from  the  tax — for  it  is  a  burden  to
smoking — ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  is  most  unlikely  even
to  make  the  change  needed  to  evade  any  large  part  of  the  pay-
ment.    In  matters  of  taxation,  therefore,  a  moderate  degree  of

»  [Cd.  9528],  p.  125.


CH.  IV      TAXES  ON  PUBLIC  VALUE  OF  LAND        615

injustice,  since  it  exists  everywhere,  cannot  be  appealed  to  any-
where. Arguments  founded  upon  it,  since  they  would  condemn
all  taxes,  cannot  be  used  to  condemn  any  tax.

Plainly,  however,  these  considerations,  though  valid  in
respect  of  small  taxes  upon  site-values,  do  not  provide  an
adequate  defence  for  very  heavy  taxes.  Unless,  therefore,
equity  is  defied,  no  very  large  amount  of  money,  even  in
substitution  for  existing  local  rates,  could  be  raised  by  this
means.  Site-values  are,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  national
dividend,  very  suitable  objects  of  taxation,  but  their  scope  is
strictly  limited.


CHAPTEE   V

TAXES    ON    PARTICULAR    CONSUMABLE    COMMODITIES

§  1.  An  equal  ad  valorem  tax  on  all  consumable  goods  and

V,  services  would  be  equivalent  to  a  general  ungraduated  tax  on

expenditure.     The    presumption    is   that  the   expectation   of

^    such  a  tax,  by  lessening  the  net  reward  of  work,  would  tend

somewhat  to  check  work,  and  so,  in  part  directly,  and  in  part

indirectly  through  the  diminution  caused  in  the  funds  available

^    for  saving,  to  contract  the  national  dividend.     But,  as  will  be

argued  presently,  unless  the  rate  of  tax  were  large,  this  effect

would  not  be  very  marked.     There  would  be  no  differential

effect  additional  to  this  effect,  either  between  rival  forms  of

consumption,    or,   as   will    appear    in    Chapter   VI.,   between

"  spending  "  in  general  and  "  saving  "  in  general.      It  is  not,

of  course,  denied  that  a  general  expenditure  tax  will  alter  the

■>,    proportion  of  his  resources  which  a  man  spends  on  different

things,  because,  with  a  smaller  total  to  spend,  he  will  naturally

economise  to  a  different  extent  in  different  directions.     It  may

conceivably  increase  the  absolute  amount  of  his  expenditure  on

some   relatively   cheap   things   {e.g.  bread),   which,  with   his

diminished  spending  power,  he  finds  it  desirable  to  substitute

in  his  budget  for  others.     But  these  adjustments  do  not  mean

that  productive  resources  are  shifted  in  such  a  way  that  the

values  of  their  marginal  net  products  in  different  uses  become

unequal.     Eather,   net    spendable    incomes   having   changed,

resources  are  shifted  in  such  a  way  that,  in  spite  of  the  new

conditions,  the  values  of  their  marginal  net  products  in  different

uses    are    still    kept    equal.^       That    is    to    say,   a    general

*  I.e.  the  position  of  the  various  "  desiredness  "  curves  is  unaltered,  and  all
that  happens  is  a  movement  along  them  due  to  a  change  in  total  resources.

616


J


I


cH.  V    TAXES  ON  CONSUMABLE  COMMODITIES     617

expenditure  tax  does  not  cause  any  injury  to  the  national
dividend  by  creating  inequality  among  the  values  of  the
marginal  net  products  of  resources  employed  in  different
uses.  So  far  as  that  aspect  of  things  is  concerned  no  harm
is  done.

§  2.  In  fact,  however,  a  general  expenditure  tax,  operated
through  equal  ad  valorem  duties  on  aU  consumable  goods  and  i^
services,  is  not  practical  politics.  It  is  ruled  out  of  court  by  two
fatal  objections.  The  first  is  an  objection  of  technique — the  ^
practical  difficulty,  to  say  nothing  of  the  enormous  cost,  of  col-
lecting equal  ad  valorem  duties  on  all  commodities  and  services
purchased  for  consumption  throughout  the  country.  To  collect
them  through  shopkeepers,  though  it  may  be  worth  trying  in
the  special  emergency  of  a  great  war,  gives  such  an  open  invi-
tation to  fraud  that  an  army  of  inspectors  would  be  needed  to
combat  it.  And  to  collect  them  otherwise  than  through  shop-
keepers is  even  less  feasible.  For,  besides  the  difficulty  of
securing  the  due  payment  of  the  tax  on  such  objects  as  the
services  of  professional  musicians,  doctors,  teachers,  and  so
forth,  it  would  be  necessary  to  set  up  a  system  of  production
in  bond  for  all  consumable  articles  made  at  home  !  Even  for  ^
imported  articles  an  ad  valorem  system  is  exceedingly  difficult
to  work  on  the  side  of  valuation.  The  customs  duties  of  the
United  States  and  Canada  are,  indeed,  arranged  on  this
system,  but  the  task  of  safeguarding  it  against  fraud  and
evasion  has  proved  so  exacting  that  Germany,  after  trial,
abandoned  it,  and  France,  Belgium,  Italy,  Austria,  and
Russia  all  fought  shy  of  it.^  Nor  is  there  any  way  round
the  difficulty.  Owing  to  the  innumerable  grades  of  quality  in
many  commodities  it  is  not  feasible  to  get  a  common  ad
valorem  rate  by  means  of  scales  of  specific  duties.  Each
specific  rate  is  bound  to  cover  more  than  one  quality,  and,
whenever  this  happens,  the  higher  quality  will  get  off  with  a
lower  proportionate  tax.  The  second  objection  is  of  another  ^
class.  If  the  technical  difficulties  could  be  got  over,  and  it
were  found  practicable  to  set  up  a  system  of  equal  ad  valorem,
duties  on  all  consumable  goods  and  services  purchased  in  the
country,  we  should,  indeed,  have  a  general  expenditure  tax.

'  Cf.  Higginson,  Tariffs  at  Work,  Chapter  iii.


618  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  n.  iv

But  this  tax  would  hit  the  expenditure  of  all  people,  whatever

'^  the  aggregate  amount  of  their  expenditure,  in  exactly  the  same
proportion.  There  would  be  no  graduation  whatever  as  between
the  poor,  the  moderately  well  off,  the  rich  and  the  very  rich ;
and  it  would  be  equally  difficult  to  make  the  rate  higher  for
a  bachelor  or  spinster  than  for  a  man  or  woman  with  a  large
family.  It  is,  however,  generally  agreed — the  matter  will  be
discussed  more  fully  presently — that  any  fair  tax  system  must
be  graduated  and  must  be  adjusted  through  family  allowances
to  the  ability  to  pay  of  various  classes  of  taxpayers.  Con-
ceivably, no  doubt,  we  might  have  a  proportionate  general
expenditure  tax  as  a  part  of  a  tax  system  into  which
graduation  and  allowances  were  introduced  by  means  of
other  taxes.  There  would,  however,  be  very  little  object  in
having  an  expenditure  tax  operated  through  uniform  ad  valorem
duties,  unless  it  constituted,  at  all  events,  a  predominant  part
of  the  whole  tax  system ;  and,  if  it  does  this,  graduation  and
allowances  in  the  system  as  a  whole  cannot  practically  be
provided  for  unless  they  are  embodied  in  the  expenditure
tax  itself      The  inference  is  that,  as  a  matter  of  real  politics,

X  the  uniform  taxation  of  all  consumable  commodities,  so  as  to
constitute  a  general  expenditure  tax,  is  not  practicable,  and,  if
it  were  practicable,  would  not  be  desirable.

§  3.  When    consumable    commodities    are    subjected     to
taxation,  it  may  be  expected,  therefore,  that  the  choice  made

"•'  among  them  and  the  rates  imposed  on  one  or  another  of  them
will  be  determined,  not  so  much  by  a  general  plan  as  by
detailed  considerations  of  technical  convenience  and  revenue
needs.  Some  commodities  will  be  taxed  and  others  left
exempt,  and  among  those  that  are  taxed  the  rates  of  taxation
will  vary.  Generally  speaking,  since  mass -goods  are  more
convenient  and  more  economical  objects  of  taxation  than  goods
purchased  in  small  quantities,  and  since  the  method  of  specific
duties   involves  lower  rates  on  the  finer  qualities  of  goods  in

"^  each  general  class,  taxes  on  consumable  commodities  are  likely,
as  a  whole,  to  take  a  much  larger  proportion  of  income  from
the  poor  than  from  the  rich.  According  to  Mr.  Herbert
Samuel's  estimate,  in  1918—19  British  indirect  taxes  took  on
the  average  13'8  per  cent  from  a  £100  income  and  only  0"1


cfl.  V    TAXES  ON  CONSUMABLE  COMMODITIES     619

per  cent  from  a  £50,000  income.^  This  class  of  inequity  can,
however — at  aU  events  in  theory — be  compensated  in  other
parts  of  the  tax-system ;  and,  since  this  is  not  a  general  work
upon  taxation,  I  do  not  propose  to  enlarge  upon  it.  For  my
present  purpose  the  important  point  is  that  in  practice  taxes
on  particular  commodities  are  differential  as  between  different
forms  of  consumption.  This  fact  modifies  in  an  important
degree  their  relation  to  the  national  dividend.

§  4.  Broadly  speaking,  we  may  reckon  that,  if  a  given  sum
of  money  is  collected  by  a  tax  on  a  particular  consumable  com-
modity instead  of  by  special  le\'y  on  consumable  commodities
in  general,  the  effect  produced  on  the  dividend,  through  the
quantity  of  work  that  people  do  and  the  share  of  their  income
that  they  save,  will  not  be  substantially  different.  But,
whereas  a  general  expenditure  tax  leaves  the  relative
attractiveness  of  expenditure  on  various  sorts  of  commodities
unaltered,  a  tax  system,  under  which  different  rates  of  duty  are
imposed  on  different  things,  alters  this  relative  attractiveness,
and  so  modifies  the  way  in  which  purchasing  power,  and,
consequently,  productive  power  is  distributed.  This  shifting
of  the  lines  of  production,  reacting,  as  it  does,  upon  the  relation
between  the  values  of  the  marginal  net  products  of  resources
in  different  occupations,  affects  the  volume  of  the  national
dividend.  The  change  which  it  induces  is  superimposed  upon
any  change  that  a  general  expenditure  tax  yielding  the  same
revenue  would  have  brought  about.  If  it  is  an  advantageous
change,  the  total  effect  on  the  dividend  is  less  injurious  than
it  would  have  been  under  such  a  general  tax ;  if  it  is  a
disadvantageous  change,  the  total  effect  is  more  injurious.
Whether,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  an  advantageous  or  a
disadvantageous  change  can  only  be  determined  by  a  detailed
study  of  the  individual  duties  that  are  embodied  in  the
general  scheme.

§  5.  Since  neither  the  demand  nor  the  supply  of  any
ordinary  commodity — bread  is  sometimes  an  exception — is
ever  perfectly  inelastic,  taxes  on  particular  commodities  must,
in  general,  discourage  the  employment  of  resources  in  pro-

1  "  The  Taxation  of  the  Various  Classes  of  the  People,"  Statistical  Jmimal,
March  1919,  p.  177.


k


620  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

ducing  the  commodities  that  are  taxed  and  divert  them  to
producing  other  untaxed  commodities.  If,  therefore,  a  taxed
commodity  is  one  to  the  production  of  which,  apart  from
taxation,  too  small  a  volume  of  resources  would  have  been
devoted,  so  that   the  value   of  the  marginal  net  product  of

^  resources  there  would  have  stood  above  the  general  level,
taxation  necessarily  disturbs  the  distribution  of  the  com-
munity's resources  in  a  way  injurious  to  the  national  dividend.
.  All  commodities  produced  under  conditions  of  increasing  returns
fall  into  this  class,  and  many  commodities  produced  under  con-
ditions of  diminishing  returns,  provided  that  the  producer  is
exercising  monopolistic  powers,  also  fall  into  it.  But  commo-
dities  that  obey  the  law  of  diminishing  returns,  and  the  produc-
tion of  which  is  not  monopolised,  are  different.  Apart  from
taxation,  too  much  of  the  country's  resources  would  have  been
devoted  to  turning  out  these  commodities,  in  such  wise  that
the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  there  would
have  stood  lelow  the  general  level.  As  was  explained  in
Part  II.  Chapter  VIII.,  taxation  imposed  upon  a  commodity  in
this  class  up  to  a  certain  definite  rate,  the  amount  of  which  is
determined  by  the  conditions  of  the  demand  and  supply  of  the
commodity,  would  disturb  the  distribution  of  the  community's
resources  in  a  way  beneficial  to  the  national  dividend ;  whereas
a  rate  higher  than  this  would  be  injurious.  This  fact  suggests
that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  national  dividend  will
benefit  most,  or  suffer  least,  if  the  commodity  taxes  which  the
tax  system  includes  are  all  assessed  upon  articles  obeying  the
law  of  diminishing  returns,  and  if  they  are  imposed  at  low

"^  rates  upon  a  large  number  of  objects  rather  than  at  high  rates
upon  a  small  number,  i  Experience  shows,  however,  that  a  large
number  of  taxes  of  small  amount  are  relatively  far  more  costly
and  inconvenient  to  collect  than  a  few  taxes  of  large  amount.
For  this  reason  there  is  a  strong  tendency  to  concentrate
indirect  taxes  upon  a  small  number  of  important  mass  goods.
When  this  is  done,  the  rate  of  taxation  is  determined,  in  the
main,  by  the  needs  of  the  revenue,  rather  than  by  ggibtle  con-
siderations of  the  type  now  under  review.  Nevertheless,  it  is
evident  that  these  considerations  afford  relevant  data,  which,
if  a  statesman  should  arise  who  enjoyed  acquaintance  with


CH.  V


TAXES  ON  CONSUMABLE  CO^IMODITIES     621


them,  would  have  a  part  to  play  in  the  structure  of  the
tax-system.

S  6.  What  has  just  been  said  is  applicable  to  taxes  on
imported  commodities  as  well  as  to  taxes  on  commodities
manufactured  or  grown  at  home.  For  an  imported  commodity
is,  in  effect,  produced  by  the  resources  devoted  to  making  the
exports  against  which  it  is  exchanged.  There  is,  however,  an
incidental  element  of  advantage  in  taxes  upon  imports  that  is
not  present  in  other  commodity  taxes.  In  so  far  as  foreigners
want  our  goods,  a  check,  such  as  a  tax  causes,  to  our  readiness  to
accept  in  payment  any  one  kind  of  import  makes  them  willing
to  offer  all  other  kinds  on  slightly  better  terms.  In  other  words,
it  indirectly  adds  something  to  the  real  productivity  of  those
of  our  resources  that  are  still  devoted  to  making  exports.  As
is  well  known,  conditions  are  conceivable,  in  which  foreigners
have  so  urgent  a  demand  for  our  goods  that  they  will  con-
tribute the  whole  of  any  import  taxes  we  may  impose  on  the
goods  they  send  to  us  in  payment,  and  will  thus  carry  off  the
same  quantity  of  our  goods  as  they  would  have  done  if  no  tax
had  been  imposed.  Generally  speaking,  however,  there  are
many  rival  sources  of  supply  from  which  the  goods  we  export
can  be  obtained.  Consequently,  the  foreign  demand  for  these
goods  is  highly  elastic,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  compel  foreigners
permanently  to  pay  any  substantial  part  of  our  import  taxes.
These  taxes  lessen  our  imports  and  divert  resources  from  the
production  of  those  goods  with  which  our  imports  used  to  be
purchased — or,  more  compendiously,  from  the  indirect  pro-
duction by  exchange  of  these  imports.  The  main  effect  of  a
tax  on  an  import  is,  thus,  precisely  similar  to  that  of  a  tax  on
any  other  sort  of  commodity.  Eesources  are  diverted  away
from  the  route  which  the  tax  obstructs.  To  what  extent  they
are  diverted  and  how  precisely  the  national  dividend  is
affected  depends,  in  the  manner  explained  in  the  preceding
section,  upon  the  general  conditions  of  demand  and  supply
(through  exchange)  of  the  particular  commodity  concerned.

§  7.  In  what  has  been  said  so  far  it  has  been  tacitly
assumed  that  imports  subject  to  tax  consist  of  goods  that  are
not  also  capable  of  being  produced  at  home.  In  these  circum-
stances the  differentiation  involved  in  import  taxes  would  be


622  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

simply  differentiation  against  certain  commodities  as  compared
with  others.  There  are  also,  however,  protective  import
duties,  namely,  import  duties  unaccompanied  by  corresponding
excise  duties,  on  goods  normally  produced  in  this  country  as
well  as  abroad.  These  duties  are  differential  in  a  fuller  sense  ;
for  they  hit  one  way  of  getting  the  commodities  affected,
namely,  making  something  else  and  exchanging  it  for  them,
while  leaving  the  rival  way,  namely,  making  these  commodi-
ties themselves,  untouched.  It  is  widely  held  that  this  sort
of  differentiation  must  cause  some  part  of  the  commodities  to
be  obtained  by  a  more  costly  process  than  need  have  been
employed,  and,  therefore,  must  injure  the  national  dividend.
The  analysis  of  the  fourth  section  of  Part  II.  Chapter  VIII.
will,  however,  have  shown  that  this  reasoning,  in  spite  of  the
high  authority  that  can  be  cited  in  its  support,  is  not  valid.
In  that  section  it  was  proved  that,  when  a  commodity  is  being
obtained  from  two  independent  sources  of  supply — and  the
same  argument  is  obviously  applicable  when  it  is  being
obtained  by  two  independent  methods — there  is  a  presumption
that  the  national  dividend  would  be  increased  by  the  imposi-
tion of  some  rates  of  differential  tax  upon  the  portion  of  the
supply  that  is  due  to  the  less  elastic  of  the  two  sources  or
methods.  Though,  however,  customs  duties  unaccompanied
by  excise  duties  cannot  be  condemned  out  of  hand  merely
upon  the  ground  that  they  are  differential,  the  subtleties  of  the
chapter  cited  do  not  afford  any  basis  for  a  defence  of  them.
The  elasticity  of  the  supply  of  the  commodity  from  direct  home
manufacture  is  equivalent  to  the  elasticity  of  its  production.
The  elasticity  of  the  supply  from  the  exchange  method  is  ap-
proximately equal  to  the  elasticity  of  production  abroad  minus
the  (negative)  elasticity  of  the  foreign  demand.^  Hence,
except  for  commodities,  the  production  of  which  abroad  is
very  much  less  elastic  than  it  is  at  home,  the  supply  from  the

'  I  say  approximately,  because  the  statement  of  the  text  requires  that  tlie
real  supply  price  of  the  things  in  general  which  we  produce  to  exchange  against
the  particular  import  shall  not  change  in  response  to  changes  in  the  quantity  of
the  import  that  is  purchased.  Since  a  large  percentage  change  in  this  quantity
could  not  involve  more  than  a  very  small  change  in  our  production  generally,
this  condition  is  sure  to  be  approximately,  though  it  need  not  be  exactly,
realised.


cH.  V    TAXES  ON  CONSUMABLE  COMMODITIES     623

foreign  source  must  be  substantially  more  elastic  than  the
supply  from  the  home  source.  In  general,  therefore,  our
analysis,  so  far  from  justifying  the  imposition  of  customs
duties  unaccompanied  by  excise  duties,  points,  if  anything,  to
excise  duties  unaccompanied  by  customs  duties !  This  con-
clusion does  not,  of  course,  by  itself  suffice  to  condemn  pro-
tective duties ;  and,  in  view  of  the  assumption  of  diminishing
returns,  which  is  implicit  in  it,  it  has  no  relevance  to  the
problem  of  infant  industries  or  of  industries  threatened  with
destruction  from  "dumping"  at  unremunerative  rates  by  foreign
trust  or  kartels.^

*  Cf.  Part  II.  Chapter  XVIII.  §  6.  It  is  also  arguable  that,  under  pro-
tective duties,  a  little  more  of  the  sort  of  tribute  from  the  foreigner,  described  at
the  beginning  of  §  6,  is  obtainable  than  under  non-protective  duties.  This,
however,  is  probably  a  very  small  matter.


OHAPTEE    VI

INCOME    TAX

§  1.  We  now  come  to  income  tax.  In  earlier  days,  when
fiscal  technique  was  less  perfectly  developed  than  it  is  now,  it
was  often  found  much  easier  to  ascertain  the  size  of  certain
specified  parts  of  a  man's  income  than  to  ascertain  the  size  of  the
whole.  Consequently,  income  derived  from  a  particular  source
was  taken  as  representative  of  income  generally,  and  taxation
was  based  upon  it,  in  the  hope  that  the  indication  of  "  ability
to  pay  "  which  it  afforded  would  not  be  very  seriously  wrong.
This  is  substantially  the  principle  upon  which  local  rates  have
been  organised  in  this  country.  Lands  and  houses  are  forms
of  property,  the  virtual  and  actual  income  from  which  a
local  authority  can  ascertain  relatively  easily ;  and,  conse-
quently, they  have  been  used  as  the  assessable  basis  for  rates.
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  national  dividend  taxes  of  this
character  are  highly  objectionable.  They  disturb  the  free  flow
of  investment  under  the  influence  of  economic  inducements  by
differentiating  against  resources  invested  in  buildings  and  land
improvements,  as  compared  with  resources  invested  in  machinery
and  stock  in  trade.  Consequently,  they  tend  to  divert  capital
away  from  agriculture  and  houses  into  other  kinds  of  enter-
prise, with  the  result  that  the  values  of  the  marginal  net
products  of  capital  in  different  occupations  are  made  more
unequal,  and  the  national  dividend  is  made  smaller  than  it
would  have  been  under  a  more  scientific  and  less  haphazard
arrangement.  Nor  is  there,  to  put  against  this,  any  compen-
sating advantage  on  the  side  of  equity.  On  the  contrary,
taxes  based,  either  on  a  man's  possessions  of  immohilia  gener-

624


cH.vi  INCOME  TAX  625

ally  or  on  his  possessions  of  any  particular  sort  of  immohilia
are  bound  to  be  highly  inequitable.  The  proportion  of  income
that  is  derived  from  "  lands  and  houses/'  as  compared  with
the  proportion  derived  from  machinery  and  stock  in  trade,
is  necessarily  different  for  people  engaged  in  different  kinds  of
business;  while  a  man,  the  main  part  of  whose  property
happens  to  consist  in  holdings  of  government  securities,  escapes
entirely  from  any  form  of  taxation  based  upon  real  property.
Monsieur  Caillaux  brought  out  this  point  very  weU  in  the
French  Chamber  in  introducing  his  income  tax  bill :  "  We
must  understand  that  taxes  founded  on  external  signs  of
wealth,  on  the  system  of  presumptions,  have  had  their  day ;
that  their  injustice  condemns  them,  and  that  we  must  replace
them  by  taxes  on  actual  income  or  on  capital,  or  part  on  one
and  part  on  the  other."  ^  Leaving  aside  for  the  present  taxes
assessed  on  capital,  I  proceed  to  consider  certain  general
problems  presented  by  a  general  income  tax.

^  2.   From  the    standpoint  of   the  national  dividend  the
most  important  of  these  relates  to  the  exemption  of  savings
from    taxation,   an    arrangement   which    would    convert    the
income  tax  into  a  tax  on  expenditure.      It  will  be  remembered
that  in  Chapter  III.  of  Part  I.  attention  was  called  to  the  differ-
ence between  Dr.  Marshall's  and  Professor  Fisher's  use  of  the
term  national  dividend,  the  former  applying  it  to  what  would
be   consumed   in   any  year   if  sufficient  were   withdrawn   to  *^
maintain  capital  intact/  and  the  latter  applying  it  to  what    ^
actually  is  consumed   in    any  year.      Under   a  pure   income
tax  the  national  dividend  in  Marshall's  sense  would  be  the
object  of  taxation ;  under  a  pure  expenditure  tax  the  national  »^
dividend  in  Fisher's  sense.

§  3.  The  British  income  tax,  we  may  note  in  pass-
ing, does  not  conform  exactly  to  either  of  these  ideals.  It
is  not  a  pure  expenditure  tax,  because  it  strikes  the  great
bulk  of  income  that  is  devoted  to  investment,  and  does  not  strike
the  great  bulk  of  capital  that  is  realised  and  "  spent."  It  is
not  a  pure  income  tax,  because  it  exempts  appreciations —
even  appreciations  realised  by  sales — in  the  capital  value  of
property,  which  are  virtual  income,  and  (within  limits)  income

'  Seligman,  The  Income  Tax,  p.  309.

2  s


626  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

invested  in  life-insurance  premiums,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
it  strikes  terminable  annuities  as  wholes  and  does  not  exempt
that  part  of  them  which  represents  a  refund  of  capital.
Plainly,  however,  these  last  discrepancies  are  much  smaller
than  those  that  separate  it  from  a  pure  expenditure  tax.  For
a  rough  approximation,  to  speak  of  it  as  an  income  tax  is  not
unreasonable.^

§  4.  It  is  easily  seen  that  an  expenditure  tax  derived  from
a  general  income  tax  by  the  device  of  exempting  savings  is  not
open  to  the  objection  which  was  urged  in  Chapter  V.  against
an  expenditure  tax  derived  from  a  system  of  uniform  duties
levied  on  all  commodities,  i.e.  that  it  is  necessarily  proportional
and  not  graduated.  On  the  contrary,  expenditures  of  different
magnitudes  could  be  taxed  at  different  rates,  just  as  incomes
of  different  magnitudes  are  taxed  at  different  rates  now.  The
rates  could  be  made  to  depend  upon  the  amount  of  the  income,
or,  if  that  were  thought  preferable,  upon  the  amount  of  the
expenditure.  Nor  need  the  graduation  be  based  solely  upon
amount.  Arrangements  could  easily  be  made — ^just  as  easily  as
under  an  ordinary  income  tax — for  different  rates  to  be  levied
upon  equal  amounts  of  expenditure,  according  to  the  number
of  people  in  the  families  that  they  had  severally  to  support.
Moreover,  it  would  be  possible,  if  it  were  so  desired,  -  to
exempt,  not  merely  income  that  is  saved  for  investment  in
the  popular  sense,  but  also  income  saved  for  investment  in
personal  capital — the  purchase  of  necessaries  for  efl&ciency,  the
education  of  children,  and  so  forth.  No  doubt,  there  would
be  difficulty  in  doing  this  at  all  accurately.  Some  expendi-
tures of  this  character,  such  as  charges  for  education,  might,
indeed,  be  exempted  eo  nomine.    But  "  necessaries  for  efficiency  "

^  It  may  be  noticed  in  passing  that,  in  so  far  as  taxation  is  required  by
Government  to  provide  interest  for  domestic  holders  of  Government  stock,  the
practice  of  taxing  both  the  fundholders'  dividends  and  the  income  devoted  to
paying  these  dividends  involves  an  element  of  double  taxation.  Strictly,  just  as  a
private  mortgagor  is  allowed  to  deduct  the  mortgage  interest  he  has  to  pay
before  he  is  assessed  to  income  tax,  so  taxpayers  ought  to  be  allowed  to  deduct
that  part  of  their  tax  payment  which  is  needed  to  pay  the  fundholders.  If  this
were  done,  however,  the  general  rate  of  tax  required  to  yield  a  given  revenue
would  have  to  be  considerably  increased.  Incidentally,  the  burden  would  be
shifted  to  some  extent  away  from  persons  who  pay  taxes  but  hold  no  Govern-
ment loans  on  to  the  shoulders  of  large  fundholders.


CH.  VI  INCOME  TAX  627

is  a  vague  conception,  which,  it  may  well  be  supposed,  repre-
sents different  sums  of  money  for  persons  engaged  in  different
occupations;  and  it  would  hardly  be  practicable  to  allow  for
this  fact.  Still,  some  approach  to  the  ideal  could  be  made
by  deductions,  not  only  of  saved  incomes  in  the  popular
sense,  but  also  of  an  arbitrary  sum,  varying  with  the  size
of  the  family,  somewhere  perhaps  in  the  neighbourhood  of
£50  per  head  per  year,  before  a  man's  liability  to  the  tax  is
assessed.

§  5.  An  income  tax  modified  into  an  expenditure  tax
along  these  lines  would  strike  the  national  dividend  in  one
way,  and  one  only ;  namely,  by  diminishing  people's  desire  to
exercise  the  productive  capacity  that  is  already  in  existence,  ^
or,  more  especially,  to  exercise  it  for  the  benefit  of  the  taxing
country.  Thus,  a  heavy  general  expenditure  tax  may  have  the
effect  of  (1)  driving  propertied  men  to  live  and  hold  their  capital
invested  abroad  ;^  (2)  driving  able  men  to  live  and  exercise  their  -•
ability  abroad;  and  (3)  relaxing  the  productive  efforts  of  other
able  men  who  are  not  driven  abroad.    Its  influence  along  the  two

^  Some  part  of  the  popular  fear  that  high  rate  of  income  tax  in  this  country
will  drive  capital  abroad  arises  from  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  exact
scope  of  the  British  income  tax  law.  It  is,  no  doubt,  true  that  a  tax
striking  the  fruits  of  capital,  in  so  far  as  it  impinges  on  the  investments  of
foreigners  ui  England,  lessens  the  advantage  to  foreigners  of  investment  here,
and,  'pro  Undo,  stimulates  foreign  individuals  to  withdraw  their  capital,  and
foreign  corporations  with  plant  abroad  to  withdraw  their  head  offices.  This,
however,  is  a  minor  matter,  for  foreign  investment  here  is  admittedly  small  in
amount.  The  substantial  fear  is  that  high  income  tax  will  drive  British-owned
capital  to  foreign  fields.  This  fear  is  not  well  grounded.  Since  the  English
income  tax,  unlike  the  income  taxes  of  the  colonies,  is  levied  on  incomes
received  in  England,  and  not  merely  upon  those  earned  or  built  up  there,
there  is,  in  general,  no  inducement  for  an  Englishman  resident  in  England  to  send
his  capital  abroad  for  investment,  in  consequence  of  high  income  tax  here.
He  will  have  to  pay  income  tax  when  he  brings  the  income  derived  from  it
home  from  abroad  ;  and,  under  an  amendment  of  the  income  tax  law  in  1914,
he  must  even  pay  if  he  leaves  it  abroad  for  investment  there.  Nor  is  this  all.
As  things  are  at  present,  the  income  from  English  capital  invested  abroad
will  often  have  to  pay  a  foreign  (or  colonial)  income  tax  as  well  as  the  British
income  tax  ;  so  that  a  man,  by  sending  his  capital  abroad,  so  far  from  escaping
taxation,  would  actually  encounter  more  of  it.  Hence,  apart  from  deliberate
and  purposed  fraud,  if  English  capital  is  to  be  driven  abroad,  English  capitalists
must  be  driven  there  also.  Nor  is  it  even  true  that  the  supposed  indirect  effect  of
high  income  tax,  namely,  the  fear  of  "  Socialism,"  could  rationally  drive  capital
abroad  without  ^ivfng  its  owners  abroad  al§o  ;  iox^^  presumably,  ' '  Socialism  "
would  not  fasten  on  British" factory-owners  and  leave  British  owners  of  foreign
securities  unsfiath^.'     "'  -—      -^       —^        _  _


628  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

former  of  these  lines  is  exercised  by  modifying  the  comparative
incomes  and  general  amenities  obtainable,  after  taxes  have  been
paid,  at  home  and  in  foreign  countries.  There  is,  however,  some
danger  of  misapprehension  on  this  subject.  It  is  not  necessary
that  a  tax  diminishing  the  relative  advantages  of  residence  in
England  should  drive  any  one  abroad.  For,  when,  as  between
two  places,  movement  from  one  to  the  other  involves  cost  or
inconvenience,  the  net  incomes  of  persons  of  the  same  ability
or  property  may  differ  permanently  by  any  annual  amount  the
capitalised  value  of  which  does  not  exceed  the  equivalent  of
this  cost  and  inconvenience.  There  is,  in  fact,  a  locus,  or  range,
of  possible  differences  between  net  incomes  in  the  two  places,
such  that  any  difference  within  the  locus  might  exist  without
movement  between  the  two  places  being  brought  about.^  If  a
tax  is  imposed  on  the  returns  of  ability  or  of  property  in  one  of
the  two  places,  A,  it  is  not  certain  that  movement  will  occur,
unless  the  tax  is  larger  than  the  difference  between  the  maxi-
mum possible  excess,  compatible  with  equilibrium,  of  returns  in
A  over  returns  in  B.  It  is  not  probable  that  movement  will
occur,  unless  the  tax  is  such  that  its  capitalised  value  is
nearly  equivalent  to  half  the  sum  representing  the  cost  and
inconvenience  of  the  act  of  movement.  If,  therefore,  the  cost
and  inconvenience  of  movement  are  large,  a  very  large  tax
would  be  needed  to  drive  people  abroad.  There  is  reason  to
believe  that  residence  in  their  native  land  means  so  much  to
many  rich  men — particularly,  since  the  advantage  of  wealth
is  largely  social  advantage — that  the  cost  and  inconvenience
of  movement  would  be  enormous.  It  does  not  seem,  therefore,
that  a  moderate  tax  upon  large  incomes  available  for  spending
would  have  any  important  effect  in  driving  the  owners  of
capital  and  ability  abroad,  even  if  similar  taxes  did  not  exist
in  other  countries  ;  whereas,  of  course,  if  the  high  taxation  was
world-wide,  the  tendency  to  migrate  would  be  wholly  destroyed.
There  remains  the  tendency  of  taxation  to  check  the  output  of
ability  on  the  part  of  the  able  men  who  are  not  driven
abroad.  Here,  again,  it  seems  probable  that  the  effect  of  a
moderate  tax  would  be  small.  Such  a  tax  could  hardly  affect
the  training  of  ability,  and,  when  an  able  man  is  actually

1  Cf.  Part  II.  Chapter  II.  §  G.


CH.  VI  INCOME  TAX  629

engaged  in  industry,  his  aim  is  so  largely  "  success  " — an  aim
in  no  wise  interfered  with  hy  a  tax  absorbing  part  of  his
profits — that  he  is  likely  to  work  much  the  same  whether
it  is  imposed  or  not.  Hence,  I  do  not  think  that  the  expec-
tation of  a  moderate  system  of  taxation  upon  expenditure  would
check  the  supply  of  industrial  effort  to  any  important  extent.
That  is  to  say,  an  income  tax,  from  the  purview  of  which
savings  are  exempted,  so  long  as  it  was  moderate  in  amount,
might  be  levied  without  serious  detriment  to  the  national
dividend.  When,  however,  the  rates  of  taxation  reach  the
extremely  high  levels  now  attained  under  the  British  income
tax  law,  the  damage  is,  of  course,  much  more  serious.  This
aspect  of  the  matter  will  be  examined  at  a  later  stage.

§  6.  We  have  now  to  compare  an  expenditure  tax  of  the
type  I  have  been  describing  with  an  income  tax  under  which
savings  are  not  exempt.  The  essence  of  the  contrast  between
the  two  forms  of  tax  is  that  the  former  does  not,  and  the
latter  does,  differentiate  against  saving.  It  might  be  thought
at  first  sight  that  an  expenditure  tax  actually  differentiates
in  favour  of  saving  as  compared  with  consumption.  If  we
had  in  mind  a  tax  to  be  imposed  for  one  year  only,  or  for  a
short  period  only,  at  a  given  rate,  this  would  be  so.  But,  if
we  are  thinking  of  a  system  of  taxation  that  is  expected  to
continue  indefinitely  with  constant  rates,  an  expenditure  tax
is  neutral  as  between  saving  and  spending,  and  not  difierential
in  favour  of  spending;  for  the  only  ultimate  advantage  a
man  gets  from  savincr  is  the  return  from  his  investment  that
he  and  his  heirs  can  afterwards  consume.  This  means  that,
under  a  tax  system  based  on  expenditure,  resources  that  are
saved  are  taxed  indirectly  through  their  subsequent  yield  to  the
same  extent  as  resources  that  are  consumed  at  once.  There
is,  therefore,  no  differentiation  of  any  kind.  An  income  tax,
on  the  other  hand,  differentiates  against  saving,  by  striking
savings  both  when  they  are  made  and  also  when  they  yield
their  fruits.  Thus,  a  general  permanent  income  tax  at  the
rate  of  x  per  cent  strikes  the  part  of  income  that  is  spent  at
this  rate.  But,  if  £100  of  income  is  put  away  for  saving,  it
removes  £x  from  ft  at  the  moment  and,  thereafter,  every  year
removes  xou^^^  o^  ^^^  fi™i^  ^^  ^^^  £(100  —  a)  that  are  actually


630  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  tt.iv

turned  into  the  investment.  The  effective  rate  of  tax  per  cent  is,
in  fact,  {x  +  y§(y(100  —  x)}  ;  that  is,  x{2—  ywg}-  Thus,  the
effective  rate  on  saved  income  is  practically  double  the  rate
on  spent  income  when  the  tax  is  small,  and  substantially  more
than  equal,  though  less  than  double,  when  it  is  large.  For
example,  a  general  rate  at  10s.  in  the  £  implies  a  tax,  not  of
10s.,  but  of  15s.  in  the  £  on  saved  income.  Of  course,  when
there  is  steep  graduation  against  large  incomes,  income  which
is  saved  by  a  rich  man  and  left  to  a  relatively  poor  man,  on
whose  income  the  income  tax  (including  super-tax)  rate  is
lower,  is  not  differentiated  against  so  heavily  as  it  would  have
been  if  the  rich  man's  rate  held  generally ;  but  it  is  still
differentiated  against  to  a  substantial  extent.  This  aspect  of
the  problem  need  not  be  elaborated.  Apart  from  it,  there  is
a  clear-cut  contrast  between  an  income-tax,  which  differen-
tiates against  saving  in  the  way  described  above,  and  an
expenditure  tax,  which  puts  saving  and  spending  on  an  equal
footing.

§  7.  This  statement  must,  indeed, be  qualified.  The  contrast
^  I  have  drawn  is  strictly  true  only  of  an  expenditure  tax,  which
leaves  free  from  tax  such  "  expenditure  "  as  is  necessary  for
efficiency.  For,  as  was  explained  in  Chapter  II.  §  3,  expenditure
on  real  necessaries  produces  future  income,  and  is,  therefore,
really  capital,  in  just  the  same  sense  as  expenditure  devoted  to
the  purchase  of  machinery.  A  general  tax  which  includes  it
hits  this  sort  of  expenditure  twice,  while  hitting  expenditure
other  than  that  on  necessaries  once  only.    Therefore,  a  general

.^  expenditure  tax  that  does  not  allow  an  abatement  for  necessaries
for  efficiency  is  not  wholly  non-differential.  Obviously,  how-
ever, it  does  not  differentiate  against  capital  in  the  widest

-«  sense  so  largely  as  a  general  income  tax  under  which  savings
are  not  exempt.  Under  this  type  of  tax  a  man,  by  diverting
income  from  saving  to  expenditure,  is  able  to  escape  taxation
that  he  would  otherwise  have  had  to  meet»  Consequently,  we
may  presume  that,  if  the  raising  of  a  given  sum  of  money
by  a  general  expenditure  tax  would  have  checked  the  national
dividend  of  the  moment,  and,  through  it,  new  investments  in
capital,  by  so  much,  the  raising  of  an  equal  sum  by  a  general
income  tax  will  check  the  national  dividend  of  the  moment  to


CH.  VI  INCOME  TAX  631

about  the  same  extent/  but  will  check  the  share  of  it  that  is
devoted  to  investment  to  a  greater  extent.

§  8.  How  much  more  seriously  the  collection  of  a  given
revenue  by  an  income  tax  will  check  saving  than  the  collection
of  an  equal  sum  by  an  expenditure  tax  would  do,  depends
upon  (1)  the  amount  of  revenue  raised  relatively  to  the  real
income  of  the  country,  (2)  the  proportion  of  the  coimtry's
income  that  is  normally  saved,  and  (3)  the  comparative
urgency,  to  those  persons  who  make  savings,  of  the  savings
use  and  the  spendings  use  respectively.  In  so  far  as  people
save  with  a  view  to  providing  some  definite  sum  to  leave  to
their  children,  and  in  so  far  as  very  rich  people  save  merely
what  is  left  over  after  their  customary  standard  of  life  has
been  satisfied,  the  amount  saved  will  not  be  affected  by  the
fact  that  it  is  subject  to  differential  taxation.  On  the  whole,
I  do  not  think  that  any  large  difference  is  made  to  the  amount
of  annual  savings  in  this  country  by  the  fact  that  we  have  a
6s.  standard  income-tax  instead  of  a  standard  expenditure
tax  calculated  to  yield  about  the  same  aggregate  amount  of
revenue.

§  9.  It  is  important  to  remember,  however,  that  the  effect
of  any  continuing  check  to  investment  is,  from  the  point  of
view  of  the  national  dividend,  cumulative.  For  let  us  suppose
that  the  annual  creation  of  new  capital  amounts  normally  to,
say,  Jjjth  of  the  existing  stock  of  capital  Let  the  check  to
the  creation  of  new  capital  due  to  the  tax  be,  say,  -^th  each
year.  Then  at  the  end  of  the  first  year  the  check  to  the  growth
of  capital  stock  is  equal  to  ^V  ^  sV '  *-^-  lo\>o^^  ^^  ^^^  initial
amount.  By  the  second  year  the  check  has  become  equal  to
Y^^Q^ths,  by  the  third  year  to  YxnjTJ^^^'  ^^^  ^^  ^^  continuously.
This  does  not,  of  course,  imply  that  the  capital  stock  will
eventually  become  smaller  than  it  is  now.  But  it  does  imply
that  the  restriction  of  its  amount  below  what  it  would  other-
wise have  been  becomes  larger  every  year.  In  the  limit,  the
proportionate  check  to  the  capital  stock  of  the  country  will  be
equal  to  the  proportionate  check  to  the  annual  saving.      We

'  Probably  very  slightly  more,  since,  people's  free  choice  of  the  way  to  use
the  income  derived  from  their  work  being  interfered  with,  the  inducement  to
get  income  is  a  little  less.


632  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

may  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  effect  on  the  national  dividend
of  maintaining  a  general  income  tax  instead  of  a  general  ex-
penditure tax  as  a  means  of  raising  a  given  revenue  on  the
present  scale,  though  very  small  at  first,  is  likely  in  the  end  to
be  substantial.

§  10.  In  practice  the  choice  between  income  tax  and  ex-
penditure tax  must  take  account,  not  only  of  effects  on  the
national  dividend,  but  also  of  fairness  between  differently
situated  individuals.  From  this  point  of  view  two  contrary
arguments  may  be  advanced.  First,  it  may  be  urged  that  persons
whose  income  terminates  with  their  life  will,  in  general,  need
to  save  more,  in  order  to  make  provision  for  their  families,
than  persons  in  enjoyment  of  equal  incomes  derived  from
permanent  property.  This  implies  that  they  have  a  smaller
taxable  capacity.  An  undifferentiated  expenditure  tax  allows
for  this  while  an  undifferentiated  income  tax  does  not,  and  it
is,  therefore,  "fairer"  between  people  with  equal  incomes  de-
rived from  different  sources.  Secondly,  it  may  be  replied  that,
generally  speaking,  the  richer  a  man  is,  the  larger  is  the  pro-
portion of  his  income  that  he  is  able  to,  and  in  fact  usually
does,  save.  An  ungraduated  expenditure  tax  will,  therefore,
take  a  smaller  proportion  of  his  income  from  a  rich  man,  as
compared  with  a  jpoer  man,  than  an  ungraduated  income  tax
will  do,  and  this  will  generally  be  judged  to  be  unfair.  These
two  arguments  from- equity  thus  point  in  opposite  directions.
But  it  is  easily  seen  that,  since  the  former  can  be  neutralised
by  appropriate  diiS^rentiation  and  the  latter  by  appropriate
graduation — if  desired  the  graduation  could  be  made  to  depend
on  amount  of  income  and  not  of  expenditure — there  is  little
substance  in  either.  Considerations  of  equity  cannot,  therefore,
properly  be  urged  as  decisive  either  for  or  against  the  exemp-
tion of  savings  from  income  tax.  As  we  have  seen,  considera-
tions touching  the  national  dividend  point  definitely,  if  not
very  strongly,  in  favour  of  it.

§  11.  There  is,  therefore,  only  the  question  of  feasibility.
From  one  point  of  view  it  would  seem  to  be  easier  to
exempt  savings  than  to  tax  them ;  because,  whereas  "  expendi-
ture "  is  a  concept  fairly  easy  to  define,  the  determination  of
"  income,"  as  conceived  for  income  tax  purposes,  involves  the


I


cH.  VI  INCOME  TAX  633

difi&cult  problem  of  making  proper  allowance  for  maintaining
intact  the  existing  capital  fund.^  Are  royalty  rents,  for
example,  to  be  assessed  for  income  tax  at  their  full  value,  or
should  a  deduction  be  made  on  the  ground  that  the  property
from  which  they  are  derived  is  being  gradually  exhausted  ?
If  a  deduction  is  conceded,  in  what  way,  particularly  when  the
life  of  the  royalty-yielding  property  is  uncertain,  should  the
amount  of  the  deduction  be  determined  ?  There  are  many
similar  problems  connected  with  the  difficult  subject  of
"  wasting  assets,"  all  of  which  are  at  once  swept  aside  if  we
agree  to  exempt  all  savings,  whether  made  for  the  purpose  of
creating  new  capital  or  of  maintaining  intact  capital  that
already  exists.  This  argument,  however,  is  less  powerful  from
the  side  of  practice  than  it  is  from  that  of  logical  consistency  ;
because,  after  all,  compromise  decisions  can,  and,  indeed,  have
been  made  on  wasting  asset  puzzles,  which,  however  un-
satisfactory and  unsystematic,  nevertheless  allow  an  income
tax  on  the  British  plan  to  work  and  to  yield  an  enormous
revenue.  The  opposing  argument  is  of  a  different  order.  It
is  that  a  provision  for  exempting  all  savings  would  strike  at
the  root  of  income  tax  administration  by  opening  a  wide  door
for  evasion.  Dishonest  citizens  might  save  one  year,  so  escaping
taxation,  and  secretly  sell  out  and  spend  their  savings  next  year.
It  is  possible  that  the  revenue  officials  would  succeed  in  master-
ing this  form  of  dishonesty  as  they  have  already  mastered  other
forms.  But  on  this  practical  issue  it  would  be  unbecoming
for  an  academic  student  to  venture  any  decided  opinion.

§  12.  The  next  important  problem  is  concerned  with  differ-
entiation between  the  rates  to  be  charged  on  income  derived
from  the  recipient's  own  exertions  and  income  derived  from
property.  The  distinction  between  the  two  classes  of  income
is  not,  indeed,  quite  so  simple  as  it  seems  to  be  at  first  sight.
Thus,  the  income  which  a  man  receives  from  a  business  controlled
by  himself  would  seem  rightly  to  be  divisible  between  the  two
categories  ;  but,  under  the  English  law,^  it  is  classed,  along  with

^  Cf.  for  an  analogous  difficxUty  in  the  definition  of  the  n&tional  dividend
Part  I.  Chapter  III.  §  6.

-  Under  the  Italian  law  the  distinction  between  incomes  obtained  from
different  sources  is  carried  much  further  than  in  England.

(1)  Income  from  practically  gilt-edged  securities  is  assessed  at  full  value.


634  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

the  earnings  of  professional  men,  as  exclusively  earned  income.
There  is  difficulty,  too,  as  to  the  right  position  in  this  classifica-
tion of  the  incomes  received  by  pensioners  and  by  tenants
for  life  of  land.  The  general  drift  of  the  distinction  is,  however,
plain  enough.  It  is  widely  held  that,  since  earned  incomes  are
dependent  on  the  life  and  activity  of  the  recipient,  he  will  be
under  a  sterner  obligation  to  save  for  his  children  and  for  his
own  old  age  than  the  recipient  of  an  equal  income  derived  from
durable  property.  Consequently,  his  taxable  capacity  being
smaller,  he  ought  to  be  taxed  at  a  lower  rate.  If  the  income
tax  were  so  modified  as  to  exempt  all  savings  and  to  become  in
effect  an  expenditure  tax,  the  extra  provision,  which  the  man
with  an  earned  income  finds  it  necessary  to  make  for  the  future,
would  be  fully  allowed  for  in  this  exemption,  and  no  plea  for
further  assistance  by  way  of  differentiation  could  be  derived
from  this  line  of  thought.  As  regards  income  tax  proper,
however,  the  argument  for  differentiation  to  allow  for  the
smaller  taxable  capacity  of  earned  income  is  extremely  strong.
§  13.  In  endeavouring  to  estimate  the  consequences  of
differentiation  upon  the  national  dividend,  we  must,  of  course,
assume  that  the  aggregate  quantity  of  revenue  to  be  raised  is
given.  Thus,  a  diminution  in  the  taxation  of  earned  income,
due  to  a  decision  to  differentiate,  must  be  taken  to  imply  an
increase  in  the  taxation  of  "  unearned  "  or  investment  income.
From  a  short  period  point  of  view  it  is  almost  certain  that  this
shifting  of  taxation  from  earned  to  "  unearned  "  income  would
benefit  the  national  dividend.  For  it  would  lessen  the  dis-
couragement to  earn  income  by  work,  and,  though  it  would
also  discourage  saving,  yet,  since  annual  saving  is  only  a  small
part  of  the  total  capital  existing  in  any  year,  it  would  only
lessen  the  aggregate  amount  of  capital  to  a  very  slight  extent.
The  relief,  in  short,  would  extend  over  the  whole  range  of
work,  but  the  new  burden  would  fall,  in  the  main,  on  capital
that  already  exists  and  so  cannot  be  discouraged.     If,  however.


(2)  Income  from  other  securities  at  |f  of  value.

(3)  Temporary  mixed  revenues,  i.e.  business  and  trade,  Jf  of  value.

(4)  Income  purely  from  individual  earnings,  e.g.  professional,  J^  of  value.

(5)  Income  from  pensions  and  Government  salaries  ^^  of  value.
(Seligman,  The  Income  Tax,  1911,  p.  348).


cH.  VI  INCOME  TAX  635

we  look  at  things  sub  specie  aetemitatis,  imagining  a  long  con-
tinued reign  of  the  supplemental  tax  on  unearned  income,  the
position  is  different.  For,  from  this  point  of  view,  new  capital,
or  what  would  have  been  new  capital,  is  large  relatively  to  the
capital  in  existence  when  the  tax  is  imposed,  and  so  the  check  ^
which  the  tax  puts  upon  saving  has  an  effect  on  capital  of  the
same  order  as  the  effect  on  saving.  It  is  no  longer  clear,  there-
fore, that  the  advantage  to  the  dividend  from  relieving  work
is  greater  than  the  disadvantage  from  hitting  saving.

Nor  need  we  stop  at  this  negative  conclusion.  From  the
point  of  \ievf  of  a  very  long  period,  the  main  part  of  unearned
income  is  the  interest  resulting  from  past  saving ;  so  that  to
impose  a  special  tax  on  imeamed  income  is  to  differentiate  in
favour  of  spending  and  against  saving  even  more  largely  than
is  done  imder  a  non-difierential  income  tax.  In  accordance,
therefore,  with  the  reasoning  of  the  preceding  sections,  it  would
seem  that,  from  a  long  period  point  of  view,  the  collection  of
revenue  with  the  help  of  what  is,  in  effect,  a  surtax  on  unearned
income  is  likely  to  be  more  injurious  to  the  national  dividend
than  the  collection  of  an  equal  income  by  a  general  undifferen-
tiated income  tax.  Probably,  however,  there  is  not  very  much
in  this.

On  the  whole,  I  incline  to  the  view  that,  unless  either
savings  are  exempted,  or  property  incomes  are  substantially  hit
by  special  property  taxes,  the  case  for  differentiation  should  be  "
conceded  on  grounds  of  equity.  It  seems  reasonable,  however,
that,  after  a  certain  limit  of  earned  income  has  been  attained,
the  proportion  in  which  earned  income  as  a  whole  is  relieved  ^
relatively  to  unearned  income  should  continually  dimmish.

§  1 4.  Akin  to  differentiation  between  equal  incomes  derived
from  different  sources  is  differentiation  between  equal  incomes  "
received  by  persons  in  different  economic  situations.  Equity
plainly  demands  that  allowance  should  be  made  for  the  widely
different  "  ability  to  pay "  of  bachelors  or  spinsters,  persons
with  small  families  and  persons  with  large  families.  When
the  rate  of  taxation  is  low,  the  injustice  that  results  if  these
allowances  are  not  made  is  small.  But,  when  once  the  rate  is
made  heavy,  it  becomes  glaring.  If  the  basis  of  taxation  was,
not  income,  but  expenditure,  the  case  for  allowances  for  wife  and


k


636  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

children  would  be  still  stronger,  because,  other  things  being
equal,  a  man  with  a  family  is  bound  to  spend  a  larger  propor-
tion of  his  income  than  a  bachelor,  and  so  would  have  to  pay,  not
merely  the  same  amount  in  taxation,  but  a  larger  amount.  Even,
however,  under  an  ordinary  income  tax,  the  general  principle  of
charging  a  given  income  with  less  income  tax  the  more  persons
it  has  to  maintain  is  obviously  equitable.  No  doubt,  the  pro-
portion of  the  tax  of  which  a  family  man  is  relieved  as  against  a
bachelor  should  diminish  as  income  increases.  If,  for  example,
a  married  couple  with  one  child  at  £500  a  year  has,  say,  half
the  taxable  capacity  of  a  bachelor  with  the  same  income,  a
similar  married  couple  with  £100,000  a  year  has  more  than
half  the  capacity  of  a  £100,000  bachelor.  But  some  relief
should  in  equity  be  given  at  all  points  of  the  income  scale ;
and  an  appropriately  diminishing  proportion  might  be  provided
by  enacting  that,  for  all  incomes  above  a  certain  limit,  the
absolute  amount  of  the  allowances  of  tax-free  income  should
be  the  same.  Of  course,  whatever  is  done  in  this  matter,
puzzles  will  be  met  with  in  the  precise  definition  of  what  a
family  includes — on  what  conditions  dependent  parents  or  a
widower's  sister  should  be  reckoned  in  it,  and  so  forth.  But
these  are  minor  difficulties,  and,  once  the  general  principle
is  accepted,  can  be  easily  overcome.  No  danger  to  the
national  dividend  need  be  apprehended  from  the  adjustments
required  by  this  principle.

§  15.  I  pass  to  the  next  point.  When  it  is  decided,  as  in
a  modern  State  it  is  fairly  certain  to  be,  that  a  large  portion  of
the  annual  revenue  shall  be  obtained  by  means  of  a  general
income  tax,  whether  or  not  savings  are  exempted,  there  is
general  agreement  that  the  rates  of  taxation  should  be  gradu-
ated steeply  as  the  incomes  of  persons  otherwise  similarly
situated  increase,  and  that  persons  with  incomes  below  a  certain
minimum  should  be  exempted  altogether.  This  would  be
desirable  even  though  income  tax  constituted  the  whole  of  the
tax  system  of  the  country.  The  view  that  taxes  which
take  equal  proportions  from  incomes  of  different  sizes  are
equitable  as  between  richer  and  poorer  persons  is  no  longer
seriously  entertained.  It  is,  indeed,  still  sometimes  held
that    the    actual    burden    of    dissatisfaction    involved    to    a


cH.vi  INCOME  TAX  637

man  with  an  income  of  £1000  in  paying  £100  is  about  the
same  as  that  involved  to  a  man  with  an  income  of  £10,000
in  paying  £1000.^  But  it  is  no  longer  assumed  that  equity
in  taxation  must  mean  equality  in  burden  imposed ;  it  may
mean  equality  in  situation  left  after  the  tax  has  been  paid.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  coming  to  be  realised  with
increasing  clearness  that,  when  a  total  revenue  of  £1000  is
wanted,  the  aggregate  burden,  which  the  collection  of  it  inflicts,
will  be  very  much  greater  if  it  is  raised  in  ten  pieces  of  £100
from  each  of  ten  persons  with  incomes  of  £1000  than  if  it  is
raised  in  one  piece  of  £1000  from  one  person  with  an
income  of  £10,000;  and  smallness  in  the  aggregate  amount
of  sacrifice  involved,  as  well  as  equality  in  the  distribution  of
that  sacrifice,  is  an  important  element,  not  perhaps  in  the
equity  in  a  narrow  sense,  but  certainly  in  the  general  "  pro-
priety," of  taxation.  In  the  light  of  these  considerations,  some
considerable  measure  of  graduation  is  universally  recognised
as  proper  in  any  modern  tax  system.  When,  as  in  real  Ufe,
an  income  tax  constitutes  only  a  part  of  a  system,  in  which
there  are  also  included  a  number  of  taxes  on  commodities  of  •^
wide  consumption,  the  case  for  graduation  is  still  stronger.
For,  as  already  observed,  commodity  taxes,  if  they  are  to  be
reasonably  inexpensive  to  collect,  must  be  levied,  in  the  main,
on  mass-goods  of  fairly  general  consumption.  These  goods
are,  of  course,  purchased  by  poorer  persons  in  much  larger  "
quantities  relatively  to  their  income  than  they  are  by  richer
persons.  A  man  with  £10,000  a  year  does  not  consume
one  hundred  times  as  much  tea  or  sugar  or  beer  as  a  man
with  £100  a  year.  Hence,  whatever  part  of  the  tax  system
of  modern  States  is  made  up  of  taxes  on  commodities  is  apt

*  If  weignoredifferenoesof  temperamentandasstinietIiat(l)for  everybody  alike
the  satisfaction  derived  from  income  is  one  and  the  same  function  of  the  amount
of  income,  and  (2)  that  the  curve,  whose  ordinates  represent  the  increments  of
satisfaction  from  successive  increments  of  income,  slopes  downward  towards  the
right,  the  condition  required  to  make  it  true  that  proportionate  taxation  involves
equal  sacrifice  is  that  this  curve  shall  be  a  rectangular  hyperbola.  For,  x
being  the  income,  f{x)  the  satisfaction  due  to  the  x'^  increment  of  income,  and  h

I'x  fhx

any  constant  fraction,  in  order  that   /  f{x)  —  j    /(hx)   may  be  constant  for  all

values  of  x,  it  is  necessary  that  x/{x)  =  hxf(hx),  a  condition  which,  in  general
implies  that  xf{x)  is  constant  for  all  values  of  x.


638  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

to  be  graduated  inversely,  in  the  sense  that  it  takes  a  larger
proportion  of  their  incomes  from  poor  than  from  rich  persons.
Even,  therefore,  if  it  was  thought  proper  to  make  the  whole
tax  system  a  proportionate  one,  it  would  be  necessary  for  the
income  tax  portion  of  it  to  be  graduated  progressively.  If,  as
was  argued  above,  the  whole  system  ought  to  be  progressive,
the  argument  for  progression  in  this  portion  of  it  is,  by  so
much,  strengthened.  What  has  been  said  implies  that  the
scale  of  graduation  which  is  equitable  in  an  income  tax  cannot
be  determined  until  account  has  been  taken  of  the  other
components  of  the  tax  system.  As  regards  small  incomes,
the  part  played  by  those  taxes  on  commodities,  which  are
commonly  known  as  indirect  taxes,  is  very  important.  As
regards  large  incomes,  on  the  present  English  system  these
taxes  constitute  so  small  a  fraction  of  the  sum  total  of  taxa-
tion that  little  attention  need  be  paid  to  them.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  great  attention  must  be  paid  to  the  existing  scale
of  death  duties.

§  16.  It  is  evident  that  graduation  has  a  bearing  on  the
national  dividend  very  much  more  intimate  than  either
differentiation  or  family  allowances.  Equity  in  the  widest
sense  might  point  to  a  scale  so  steep  that  practically  the
whole  of  the  revenue  would  be  raised  from  the  highest
incomes.  But  this  arrangement,  when  the  aggregate  revenue
required  is  large,  would  involve  a  rate  of  taxation  upon
those  brought  under  it  so  enormous  that  it  would  be  bound  to
discourage  enterprise,  check  saving,  and  stimulate  emigration.
It  must  be  remembered  in  particular  that,  if  effective  rates  of
taxation  on  total  incomes  are  graduated  very  steeply,  the
rate  on  increments  of  income  at  some  points  is  liable  to  be
much  greater  than  the  rate  on  aggregate  income.  If,  for
example,  the  effective  rate  on  £2000  was  6s.  and  on  £2100
68.  6d.,  a  £2000  man,  who  by  extra  work  added  £100  to  his
income,  would  have  to  pay  on  the  £100  not  68.  6d.  but
16s.  6d.  in  the  £;  and  it  is  this  rate  that  is  really  relevant
to  his  decision  whether  or  not  he  shall  undertake  the  extra
work.  When  the  total  revenue  required  is  small  relatively  to
the  aggregate  income  of  the  country,  steep  graduation  is
compatible  with  moderate  rates  even  on  very  high  incomes,


cH.  VI  mCO:ME  TAX  639

and  is,  therefore,  relatively  innocuous  to  the  national  dividend.
But,  when  the  total  revenue  required  is  large,  a  like  degree
of  steepness  is  literally  impossible.  More  generally,  if  we  call
E  the  standard  rate  on  incomes  of  £2000  and  m  the  multiplier
(fractional  or  integral)  to  be  applied  to  this,  so  as  to  yield
the  rate  on  any  other  income  x,  this  multiplier  cannot  be
simply  a  function  of  x,  but  must  be  a  function  of  E  also.
To  retain  the  same  set  of  multipliers,  whatever  the  standard
rate,  would  imply,  for  example,  that,  if  the  present  standard  rate
were  doubled,  the  effective  rate  on  the  largest  incomes — super
tax,  of  course,  being  counted  along  with  income  tax — would
rise  to  more  than  20  s.  in  the  £  ;  and  this  must  inevitably  cause
these  incomes,  and  the  portion  of  the  national  dividend  which
they  represent,  totally  to  disappear.  The  conclusion  to  which
we  are  forced  is  that,  while  graduation  is  in  equity  essential,  and,
moreover,  when  a  large  revenue  is  required,  is  the  only  possible  v^
means  of  raising  such  a  revenue,  nevertheless  the  interests  of
the  national  dividend  are  seriously  threatened  if  the  rates
in  the  upper  part  of  the  scale  become  very  larga  The
extremely  heavy  rates  prevailing — and  in  view  of  the  large
volume  of  our  national  debt  necessarily  prevailing — in  this
country  at  the  present  time  give  cause  for  serious  appre-
hension.


CHAPTEE   VII

PEOPERTY    TAXES    AND    DEATH    DUTIES

§  1.  The  last  important  category  of  taxes  requiring  study  con-
sists of  taxes  assessed  on  property,  whether  annually,  or  at
specified  intervals,  or  on  special  occasions  such  as  transfer  or
death.  In  a  rough  general  way  annual  property  taxes
correspond  to  taxes  on  income  derived  from  property ;  for  to
a  man  with  an  estate  of  £100,000  yielding  £5000  a
year,  it  is  indifferent  whether  a  tax  at  10  per  cent  is
imposed  on  the  income  or  one  at  ^  per  cent  on  the  capital.
The  correspondence  between  the  two  sorts  of  tax  is  not,
however,  complete.  As  compared  with  the  tax  on  unearned
income  under  the  British  system,  a  property  tax  has  certain
advantages  of  detail.  First,  the  British  tax  on  unearned
income  is  not  strictly  a  tax  on  income  from  property,  because,
as  was  observed  in  the  preceding  chapter,  the  incomes  of  private
business  men,  which  are,  of  course,  partly  derived  from  pro-
perty, are  defined  in  law  as  wholly  "  earned."  Thus,  the
British  system  favours  one  form  of  industrial  organisation
(namely  the  private  business)  as  against  the  chief  rival  form
(namely  the  joint-stock  company).  A  property  tax  would  be  free
jfrom  this  element  of  differentiation.  Secondly,  a  property  tax  has
the  advantage  of  hitting  the  gain  that  a  man  makes  when  he
buys  property  (land,  pearls,  or  anything  else)  and  holds  it  to
re-sell  after  it  has  appreciated.  Under  any  ordinary  form  of
income  tax  this  gain,  which  in  equity  ought  to  be  hit,  is  not
hit.  On  the  other  hand,  a  property  tax  has  several  disad-
vantages. First,  on  sorts  of  property,  the  income  derived  from
which  varies  greatly  in  different  years,  its  continuous  incidence

640


cH.  VII  PEOPEETY  TAXES  AND  DEATH  DUTIES     641

may  involve  difficulty  and  inconvenience  in  the  lean  years.  '
Secondly,  on  sorts  of  property,  which  have  value  because  it  is
expected  that  they  will  yield  income,  say,  ten  years  hence,  a
property  tax  will  not  only  be  inconvenient  in  the  way
described  above,  but  will  also,  in  effect,  involve  double  taxation
on  incomes  derived  from  these  sorts  of  property,  thus  differen-
tiating against  them.  Thirdly,  it  is  less  easy  to  make
arrangements  for  graduation  in  tax  rates  when  there  is  an
income  tax  on  earned  income  coupled  with  a  property  tax
than  when  the  whole  of  everybody's  income  is  brought  under
review  under  some  form  of  general  income  tax.  Lastly,  and
probably  most  important  of  all,  whereas  the  tax  on  unearned
income  can,  by  the  device  of  taxation  at  the  source,  be  levied
easily  and  cheaply  and  without  any  opening  for  evasion,  a
property  tax  would  involve  expensive  valuations,  would  be
complicated  by  the  fluctuations  of  stock  exchange  values,  and
would,  in  some  branches,  offer  great  inducements  to,  and  con-
siderable opportunities  for,  evasion.  On  the  national  dividend
an  annual  property  tax  might  be  expected  to  have  much  the
same  effect  as  an  annual  tax  on  unearned  income  producing  an
equal  revenue.

§  2.  An  annual  property  tax  is  not,  however,  the  only
possible  form  of  that  tax.  Eesort  may  also  be  had  to  a  property
tax  at  long  intervals  in  the  form  of  death  duties.  This  type  of
tax  has  an  advantage  over  either  an  annual  tax  on  unearned  *"
income  or  an  annual  tax  on  property  calculated  to  yield  an
equivalent  return.  For,  let  us  revert  to  the  contrast  set
out  in  Chapter  II.  between  raising  an  annual  20  millions
by  collecting  £100  every  year  from  each  of  a  group  of  200,000
people  and  raising  the  same  sum  by  collecting  £2000  from
each  of  those  people  once  in  twenty  years.  The  choice  between
the  two  methods  is  indifferent  to  the  State.  But  it  is  not
indifferent  to  the  persons  concerned.  Since  these  persons
discount  future  taxes  precisely  as  they  discount  all  futui'e
events,  the  expectation  of  taxes  levied  after  the  second  method  *-
will  have  the  smaller  restrictive  influence  upon  the  quantity
of  capital  created  by  them.  The  fact,  that  distance  in  time
introduces  a  considerable  chance  that  the  investor  may  no
longer  be  living  when   the  postponed  tax  falls  due,  greatly

2  T


642  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.iv

emphasises  this  difference.  The  superiority  of  postponed
over  immediate  taxes  is  further  enhanced  when  the  levy  is
made,  not  after  a  distinctive  time,  during  which  there  is  a
chance  of  the  occurrence  of  the  investor's  death,  but  definitely
at  his  death ;  for,  obviously,  a  certainty  influences  conduct
more  strongly  than  a  probability.  Moreover,  there  are  addi-
tional reasons  why  this  form  of  postponed  tax  should  impose  a
relatively  small  check  upon  the  supply  of  capital.  A  part  of
the  stimulus  to  accumulation  consists  in  the  power  and
prestige  that  riches  confer.  In  persons  of  only  moderate
fortune,  who  have,  or  hope  to  have,  children,  this  motive  is
not,  indeed,  likely  to  play  a  dominant  part.  A  desire  to  pro-
vide for  their  children  will  be  the  main  motive,  and,  if  it  were
removed,  many  of  them  would  elect  to  "  retire  "  from  work
much  earlier  than  they  do  now.  But,  as  Professor  Carver
observes :  "  After  one's  accumulation  has  increased  beyond  that

.  which  is  necessary  to  safeguard  one's  offspring  and  to  provide
for  the  genuine  prosperity  of  one's  family,  the  motive  to  further
accumulation  changes.  One  then  engages  in  business  enterprises
because  of  a  love  of  action  and  a  love  of  power.  Accumulated
capital  becomes  then  one  of  the  instruments  of  the  game.
So  long  as  the  player  is  left  in  possession  of  this  instrument
while  he  is  one  of  the  players,  he  is  not  likely  to  be  discouraged
from  accumulation  merely  by  the  fact  that  the  State,  rather
than  his  heirs,  gets  it  after  he  is  through  with  it."  ^  In  a  like
spirit  the  late  Mr.  Carnegie  wrote  :  "  To  the  class  whose  ambition
it  is  to  leave  great  fortunes  and  to  be  talked  about  after  death,
it  will  be  even  more  attractive,  and,  indeed,  a  somewhat  nobler
ambition  to  have  enormous  sums  paid  over  to  the  State  from
their  fortunes."     Hence,  very  heavy  death  duties  could  probably

^  be  levied  on  large  legacies — particularly  on  legacies  not  in  the
direct  line — without  causing  any  important  check  to  saving
and  the  national  dividend.

§  3.   One  further  point  may  be  added.     Signor  Eignano  has
published  an  ingenious  plan  under  which  death  duties  would


^  Essays  in  Social  Justice,  p.  323.  Professor  Fisher  even  writes:  "The
ordinary  normal  self-made  American  millionaire  is  rather  disposed,  I  believe,  to
look  on  the  inheritance  of  his  millions  by  his  children  with  some  misgiving  "
{Journal  of  Political  Economy,  vol.  xxiv.  !>.  711).


I


CH.  VII  PEOPEETY  TAXES  AND  DEATH  DUTIES    643

be  levied,  not  only  on  the  death  of  the  original  accumulator,
but  also  on  that  of  the  first  and  second  inheritors.  On  this
plan  resources  would  be  taxed  to  the  extent,  say,  of  one-third,
when  they  descended  from  their  original  accumulator  to  his
successor,  the  remainder  would  be  taxed  t«  the  extent  of  two-
thirds  when  this  successor  handed  them  on,  while,  at  the
next  succession,  the  whole  of  what  was  left  would  be  absorbed.^
There  would,  of  course,  be  some  technical  difficulty  in  enforcing
any  plan  of  this  kind,  and  it  might  even  be  necessary  for  a  law
to  be  passed  requiring  all  legacies  to  be  settled  in  such  a  way
that  the  heirs  could  not  touch  the  principal  But,  if  these
difficulties  could  be  overcome,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  a
large  revenue  could  be  obtained  from  rich  persons  by  this  plan,
in  such  wise  that  the  expectation  of  the  le\y  of  it  would
involve  an  even  smaller  restrictive  effect  upon  the  supply  of
capital,  and  an  even  smaller  injury  to  the  national  dividend,
ihsLU  is  associated  with  the  existing  system  of  death  duties.
Indeed,  there  is  much  force  in  S.  Eignano's  contention  that
his  plan  would  actually  lead  to  an  increase  of  saving.  For,
"as  regards  one's  own  children,  every  sum  saved  by  the  heir
of  a  given  patrimony  would  come  to  have,  in  his  eyes,  a  much
greater  value,  even  three  or  four  times  greater^  than  the  same

^  Cf.  Rignano,  Di  un  aoexaiismo  in  cuxordo  colla  doetrina  eonotniea  liberals.
The  plan  is  described  by  its  author  in  detail  thus  :  ' '  Sia  ad  esempio  A  che  alia
saa  morte  lasci  un  patrimonio  di  nn  ammontare  complessivo  a  ;  lo  Stato  inter-
venga,  come  coerede,  a  prelevame,  ad  es.,  il  terzo  ;  e  i  due  terzi  restanti  vadano
a  B,  da  A  di  sno  pieno  arbitrio  designate  come  erede.  B  aumenti  col  proprio
lavoro  e  col  proprio  risparmio.  o  col  semplice  risparmio  sui  redditi  del  patrimonio
ereditato,  o  coll'  nno  e  1'  altro  insieme,  questo  patrimonio  ereditato  2/3  a  di  nn
ammontare  complessivo  b.  Alia  sua  morte  lo  Stato  divida  nn  tale  ammontare
2/3  a  +  b,  nel  quale  i  due  patrimoni  siano  venuti  comunque  a  fondersi  e  a  con-
fondersi,  in  due  parti  del  valore  rispettivo  appunto  2/3  a  e  b,  e  su  questa  quota
b  prelevi  pur  sempre  il  terzo,  ma  suJla  quota  2/3  o,  che  rappresenta  I'ammontare
del  patrimonio  che  B  ha  ereditato  di  prima  mano  dal  suo  effettivo  accumulatore
A,  prelevi,  invece,  una  frazione  o  percentuale  maggiore,  ad  es.,  i  2/3  (assumendo
questa  progressivita  particolare  ^,  ^  e,  come  andiamo  ora  a  vedere,  f ,  cioe  il  33,
fl  66,  e  il  100  per  100,  naturalmente  a  semplice  titolo  d'  esempio)"  (loe.  ciL
p.  60).  It  is  pointed  out,  further,  that  an  arrangement  permitting  duty-free
transfer  from  A  to  B,  accompanied  by  the  State  absorption  of  everything  which
A  had  left  to  B,  when  B  in  turn  dies,  can  be  brought  under  the  same  general
formula  ;  "la  progressivita  particolare  venendo  ad  essere  in  tal  caso  ^,  ^ "  (ibid,
p.  61).  Rignano  su^ests  that  direct  descendants,  who  come  into  being  after
their  progenitor  is  dead,  stand,  as  regards  his  desire  to  save  for  their  benefit,
in  much  the  same  position  as  distant  connections  among  his  contemporaries
{ibid.  p.  87).


644  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

sum  inherited  by  him ;  whereas  to-day  the  heir  of  a  great
fortune  is  not  much  inclined  to  increase  further  the  patrimony
which  he  has  inherited,  for,  as  it  is  more  than  sufficient  for
him,  he  thinks  it  will  be  the  same  for  his  son."  ^

*  Jounml  of  the  Royal  Economic  Society,  1919,  p.  308.


CHAPTER   VIII

THE    COMPARATIVE    EFFECTS    OX   THE    NATIONAL    DIVIDEND
OF   TAXES    AND    LOANS

§  1.  In  the  first  chapter  of  this  Part  it  was  pointed  out  that
the  reasons  which  make  it  imperative  for  the  normal  expendi-
ture of  Governments  to  be  met  out  of  taxation  do  not  apply  to
abnormal  expenditures  that  occur  onlj  at  intervals,  or  to  ex-
penditures on  reproductive  investments,  the  proceeds  of  which
would  suffice  to  pay  interest  and  sinking  fund  on  capital
borrowed  to  finance  them.  The  mere  fact,  however,  that  loans
for  these  purposes  are  not  ruled  out  of  court  ah  initio  does  not
prove  that  resort,  either  exclusive  or  partial,  ought  to  be
had  to  them.  That  important  question  has  still  to  be  debated.
To  this  end  I  propose  in  the  present  chapter  to  investigate
the  comparative  effects  on  the  national  dividend  of  raising  a
given  sum  of  money  by  taxation  and  by  loan.  I  suppose  the
money  to  be  required  for  the  purchase  of  actual  goods  and
services  by  Government,  and  not  for  the  repayment  of  an
internal  debt  or  the  purchase  of  some  existing  concern
hitherto  conducted  by  private  enterprise.  I  suppose,  too,  for
simplicity  of  exposition,  that  the  emergency  to  be  dealt  with
is  one  which  nobody  expects  to  recur,  so  that,  if  it  is  met  by
taxation,  that  finishes  everything,  and,  if  it  is  met  by  a  loan,
all  that  is  left  over  to  the  future  is  the  need  for  paying
interest  and  sinking  fund  on  the  loan.  On  these  suppositions
it  is  plain  that,  under  the  tax  plan,  the  only  way  in  which
the  national  dividend  can  be  affected  is  through  the  fact  of  the
tax,  while  on  the  loan  plan  it  can  be  affected  both  through
the  fact  of  the  loan  and  through  the  expectation  of  the  taxes

645


646  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

that  have  to  be  levied  subsequently  for  its  service.  We  may
begin  by  ignoring  this  last  reaction  and  compare  simply  the
fact  of  a  big  tax  levy  with  the  fact  of  a  big  loan  levy.

§  2.  Whichever  plan  is  chosen,  the  source  from  which  it  is
possible  for  the  money  to  be  drawn  is  much  the  same.  What  the
Grovernment  wants  is  the  services  of  men  and  certain  materials.
For  this  purpose  a  large  part  of  the  capital  wealth  of  the  country
as  ordinarily  conceived  is  not  available.  What  is  available
can  be  set  out  roughly  as  follows.  Some  of  the  materials
wanted  can  be  got  out  of  capital  stocks,  but  in  the  main  they
must,  if  the  quantity  needed  is  at  all  large,  be  grown  upon,  or
dug  out  of,  the  ground  at  the  time  they  are  wanted.  Existing
capital  can  be  drawn  upon  indirectly  if  people  choose  to  sell
claims  to  it  in  the  form  of  securities,  or  actual  pieces  of  it  in
the  form  of  pictures  and  houses,  to  foreigners,  in  exchange  for
work  on  their  part  in  providing  materials  and  other  sorts  of
income  that  the  Government  may  need.  Non-existing  capital,
to  put  it  paradoxically,  can  be  drawn  upon  by  the  creation  of
capital  obligations  abroad  through  borrowing  on  the  part  of
individuals.  New  resources,  which  would  normally  have  gone
to  the  creation  of  new  capital  or  to  the  maintaining  in  repair
of  existing  capital,  can  be  drawn  upon.  Eesources  that  would
normally  have  been  devoted  to  consumption  can  be  drawn
upon.  Lastly,  new  resources  can  be  created  for  the  purpose
by  extra  effort,  which,  apart  from  the  need  for  national  ex-
penditure, would  not  have  come  into  existence  at  all.  All
these  sources  are  available  alike  under  taxation  and  under
purely  domestic  loans.  When  the  loan  plan  is  so  arranged
as  to  admit  of  subscriptions  by  foreigners,  and,  still  more
markedly,  when  a  Government  directly  negotiates  a  foreign
loan,  it  is,  by  creating  a  new  capital  obligation  from  the
nation  as  a  whole,  tapping  a  source,  which,  under  the  tax  plan,
is  only  available  to  a  smaller  extent  through  the  indirect  pro-
cess of  individual  foreign  borrowing  or  selling  of  securities.

§  3.  It  is  plain  that,  under  either  plan,  in  so  far  as  the
funds  required  are  drawn  from  consumption  (in  excess  of
what  is  needed  for  efficiency)  or  from  the  creation  of  new
resources  (by  means  that  do  not  diminish  the  efficiency  of
the  people  or  niachinery  employed),  the  national  dividend  of


CH.  vrii  TAXES  VERSUS  LOANS  647

the  future  is  left  intact.  So  far  as  they  are  drawn  from  any
of  the  other  sources,  it  is  damaged  to  the  full  extent  of  the
interest  loss  which  the  depletion  of  capital  implies.  Our
first  problem,  therefore,  is  to  determine  how  far  the  choice
between  the  loan  plan  and  the  tax  plan  makes  a  difference  to
the  source  from  which  the  funds  raised  are  in  fact  drawn.  It
is  supposed  in  some  quarters,  where  the  source  and  the  object  of
taxation  are  confused,  that  under  the  loan  plan  the  whole
levy  comes,  in  effect,  out  of  capital,  while  under  the  tax  plan
the  whole  comes  out  of  income.  When  loans  are  raised
abroad,  it  is  fair  enough  to  suppose  that  the  whole  levy  is,  in
effect,  taken  out  of  capital :  that  is  to  say,  the  raising  of  it
involves  to  the  nation  a  new  capital  obligation,  such  that  the
national  income  left  over  after  interest  has  been  paid  on  it
will  be  less,  to  the  extent  of  that  interest,  than  it  would
have  been  if  the  loan  had  not  been  raised.  Nor  is  this
burden  on  the  future  alleviated  if  citizens  of  the  country
making  the  loan  afterwards  buy  up  the  debt  claims  held  by
foreigners ;  for,  when  they  do  that,  the  funds  with  which
they  buy  them  are  themselves  withdrawn  from  what  other-
wise would  probably  have  been  income-producing  uses  in  the
country  itself.  But,  of  course,  the  bulk  of  the  loans  raised  by
Grovernments — or  at  all  events  by  the  British  Government —
will  be  raised  by  subscriptions  from  citizens  of  the  country
where  the  loan  is  made.  For  this  sort  of  loan  the  above
simple  solution  does  not  hold ;  and  it  is  necessary  to  compare
the  effects  of  the  loan  method  and  of  the  tax  method  in  a  more
careful  manner.

§  4.  It  may  be  well  to  clear  the  ground  by  remarking
that  on  either  plan  the  extent  to  which  the  various  sources
are  drawn  upon  will  be  affected  by  the  nature  of  the  cause
which  renders  the  raising  of  the  money  necessary.  If  this
cause  is  the  opening  up  of  some  enterprise  capable  of  yielding
a  large  money  income  to  the  State,  people  will  know  that  the
taxes  they  will  have  to  pay  in  the  future  will  be  by  so  much
lower.  Consequently,  they  will  not  feel  themselves  hit,  and
will  not  be  inclined  to  economise  in  consumption  or  engage
in  extra  work  in  order  to  provide  the  money.  The  position
will  be  in  some  degree  similar  if  the  expenditure,  though  it


648  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

does  not  actually  yield  a  money  income  to  the  State,  is  of
such  a  sort  that  large  economic  benefits  for  the  public  in
general — in  effect  an  increase  in  their  real  incomes — is
anticipated  from  it.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  cause  of  the
need  for  money  is,  not  opportunity  for  constructive  work,  but
the  necessity  of  warding  off  a  threatened  evil, — as  in  a  war
of  defence — no  positive  gain,  as  distinguished  from  the  pre-
vention of  harm,  will  be  expected  from  it,  people  will  feel
themselves  hit,  and  will  be  inclined  to  economise  more  and
work  harder  to  meet  the  call.  These  considerations  are
applicable  both  to  levies  made  by  taxes  and  to  levies  made
by  loans.  It  is  important  that  they  should  be  borne  in  mind ;
but  they  are  not  directly  relevant  to  a  comparison  between
the  effects  of  these  two  methods.

§  5.  To  carry  out  this  comparison,  let  us  begin  by
supposing  that  the  loan  contemplated  as  an  alternative  to
taxation  is  not  a  voluntary  but  a  forced  one,  and  that  it  will
take  from  each  individual  exactly  the  same  sum  as,  under  the
rival  plan,  would  have  been  taken  from  him  in  taxes ;  and  let
us  suppose  further  that  each  lender  is  given  to  understand
that,  of  the  taxation  required  to  pay  interest  and  sinking  fund
on  the  Government  debt  created  by  the  loan,  he  will  have  to
provide  a  proportion  exactly  equal  to  his  proportion  of  loan-
holdings.  It  is  possible  to  imagine  a  world  in  which  the
levy  of  a  forced  loan  on  these  terms  would  have  the
same  effect  as  the  collection  of  an  equal  sum  of  money  by
taxation.  To  tell  a  man  who  expects  to  live  for  ever,  in  a
country  where  the  rate  of  interest  is  always  5  per  cent,  that
he  must  surrender  £1000  now,  is  approximately  the  same  thing
as  to  tell  him  that  he  will  have  to  surrender  £50  a  year  from
now  onwards  for  ever.  Or,  to  put  the  point  otherwise,  to
take  from  him  £1000  now  in  taxation  is  approximately  the
same  thing  as  to  borrow  from  him  £1000  on  a  loan  at  5  per
cent,  at  the  same  time  informing  him  that  the  £50  interest
to  be  paid  on  his  loan  will  be  collected  every  year  by  that
amount  of  taxation  levied  on  himself.  I  have  said  that  these
two  things  are  approximateli/,  and  not  exactly,  the  same,
because  the  loan  plan  would  leave  the  £1000  in  our  citizen's
possession    and     thus    available     to    fall    back    upon    in    an


CH.  vm  TAXES   VERSUS  LOANS  649

emergency,  while,  on  the  tax  plan,  he  would  be  deprived  of
this  stand-by.  But,  if  we  carry  our  supposition  further  and
abolish  all  economic  friction,  it  will  appear  that  our  citizen
could  not  make  use  of  his  £1000  for  an  emergency  without
sacrificing  £50  a  year  in  interest  afterwards,  and — always
apart  from  economic  friction — if  he  were  prepared  to  do  this,
he  could,  on  the  rival  plan,  borrow  £1000  for  the  emergency.
On  these  suppositions  the  two  plans  would  work  in  exactly
the  same  way,  and  no  one  who  understood  what  was  being
done  would  act  otherwise  if  confronted  with  the  one  than
he  would  do  if  confronted  with  the  other.

8  6.  Let  us  now  return  by  degrees  to  the  actual  world.
And  first  let  us  reintroduce  economic  friction.  What  this
means  from  the  present  point  of  view  is  that,  when  a  person
has  collateral  to  offer,  even  though  he  is  subject  to  extra
taxes  equivalent  to  the  interest  on  the  securities  which  this
represents,  it  is  practically  very  much  easier  for  him  to
borrow  from  bankers,  not  merely  in  an  emergency,  but  on  any
occasion,  than  it  would  be  otherwise.  He  is,  therefore,  likely
to  consider  himself  slightly  more  hurt  by  a  tax  than  by  an
equivalent  loan :  and  he  may,  in  consequence,  make  slightly
greater  efforts  to  meet  the  impost  by  harder  work  and  by  economy
of  consumption.  In  view,  however,  of  the  fact  that  most  people
rich  enough  to  be  subject  to  large  levies  have  securities,
which,  if  they  are  prevented  from  borrowing,  they  can  sell,
this  effect  is  probably  too  small  to  need  serious  attention.

§  7.  A  more  important  distinction  is  as  follows.  In
practice,  when  a  man  is  forced  to  lend  £1000  at  5  per  cent,
it  is  not  possible  to  decree  that  the  £50  required  annually  to
pay  him  his  interest  shall  be  taken  in  taxes  from  himself
The  tax  system  may  be  designed  to  effect  this  object,  and
may  succeed  in  effecting  it  at  first.  But  taxation  cannot  be
worked  by  way  of  poll  taxes ;  it  must  be  based  on  some
objects — income,  expenditure,  commodities  or  what  not.
Hence,  whenever  any  given  amount  of  future  taxation  has  to
be  provided  for,  the  portion  of  it  that  will  faU  on  any
particular  individual  cannot  be  determined  beforehand.  It
will  depend  roughly  on  the  ratio  at  the  time  between  his
income  and  the  aggregate  income  of  the  community,  and  this


650  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

ratio  is  liable  to  be  modified,  not  only  by  what  he  does,  but  also
by  what  other  people  do.  The  tax  method  of  raising  money,
therefore,  means  to  any  citizen  the  loss  in  after  years  of  the
interest  that  he  would  have  received  on  the  money  he  is  forced
to  give  to  the  Government :  the  (forced)  loan  method  means
the  loss  in  after  years  of  an  amount  of  taxation,  which  may
exceed  or  fall  short  of  this  sum,  according  as  his  income  comes
to  constitute  a  larger  or  a  smaller  proportion  of  the  aggregate
national  income.  This  necessary  looseness  of  connection
between  the  loan  burden  and  the  future  taxation  that  a
lender  will  have  to  meet  towards  providing  his  own  interest
leads  to  too  little  attention  being  paid  to  the  debit  side  of  the
account  under  the  loan  method.  People  in  general  may,
therefore,  be  expected  to  think  themselves  considerably  less
hard  hit  under  the  loan  plan  than  under  the  tax  plan.  Con-
sequently, they  will  be  appreciably  less  keen  to  meet  the  call
upon  them  by  economies  in  consumption  and  increased  output
of  work.  So  far  as  this  happens,  the  capital  of  the  community
will  be  depleted  appreciably  more  under  the  loan  plan  than
under  the  tax  plan,  and  the  dividend  in  future  years  will
suffer  in  proportion.

^  8.  Hitherto  we  have  supposed  the  loan  plan  to  be
carried  out  by  way  of  a  forced  loan  taking  from  each  citizen
exactly  the  sum  that  would  have  been  taken  from  him  under
the  tax  plan.  In  actual  practice,  however,  loans  are  generally
voluntary,  and  large  subscribers  have  good  reason  to  hope
that  the  interest  on  their  holdings  will  exceed  the  con-
tribution in  taxes  which  they  will  have  to  make  to  provide  this
interest ;  for  experience  has  never  yet  revealed  a  tax  system
graduated  for  increasing  incomes  anything  like  as  steeply  as
loan  subscriptions  are  likely  to  be  graduated,  at  all  events
when  the  loan  required  is  large.  Hence,  the  richer  classes,
from  whom,  when  a  large  amount  of  money  is  wanted,  con-
tributions under  any  plan  must  chiefly  come,  will  think,  and
rightly  think,  that  a  loan  hits  them  much  less  hardly  than
equivalent  taxation  would  do.  They  are,  therefore,  less  likely  to
be  induced  to  check  consumption  or  to  work  more  strenuously,
and  more  likely  to  subscribe  to  Government  only  such  resources
as  they  would  otherwise  have  invested  in  industry.     Conse-


cH.vin  TAXES   VEBSUS  LOANS  651

quently,  the  check  to  the  provision  and  maintenance  of  capital
will  be  more  serious,  and  the  national  dividend  of  the  future
will  be  diminished  to  a  correspondingly  greater  extent.

§  9.  So  far  we  have  left  out  of  account  the  effects  of  the
future  taxation  which  the  loan  method  implies.  Whereas  a
levy  raised  by  taxation,  when  once  it  has  been  made,  is  over
and  done  with,  a  levy  made  by  the  loan  method  leaves  an
aftermath  in  permanent  or,  at  all  events,  long-enduring  taxes
to  raise  the  money  with  which  to  pay  interest  on  the  loan.
These  taxes,  being  long-enduring,  are  foreseen ;  and  the  expec-
tation of  them  must  tend,  in  ways  that  have  already  been
described,  to  check  production  and  injure  the  national  dividend,
so  long  as  they  endure.  This  aspect  of  the  matter  has  been
discussed  at  length  in  previous  chapters,  and  there  is  no
need  to  dwell  upon  it  here.  Our  discussion  has  thus  made  it
plain  that,  not  in  one  way  only,  but  in  several  ways,  the  levy
of  any  given  sum  of  money  by  a  loan  is  likely  to  prove  more
injurious  to  the  national  dividend  of  the  future  than  the  levy
of  an  equal  sum  by  taxation.

§  10.  These  results  are  clearly  correct  when  the  choice  is
between  a  single  large  loan  levy  and  a  single  large  tax  levy.
Caution  is  required,  however,  before  they  are  applied  to  the
controversy  between  advocates  of  loans  and  advocates  of  taxes
as  a  means  of  financing  war.  If  all  wars  were  very  short,  and
the  funds  needed  for  them  could  be  raised  at  one  single  blow,
what  has  been  said  above  would  be  entirely  applicable.  But,
in  fact,  wars  may  last  for  a  number  of  years.  When  this
happens,  or  there  is  fear  of  this  happening,  the  tax  plan  acts,
not  merely  through  the  fact  of  it  at  the  moment,  but  also
through  the  expectation  of  its  continuance  during  the  war.
Just  in  so  far,  therefore,  as  it  is  thought  by  the  people  subjected
to  it  to  hit  them  more  severely  than  the  loan  method  would
do,  the  knowledge  that  a  large  part  of  the  fruit  of  any  exer-
tions they  may  make  wiU  be  absorbed  by  the  State  may,  in
spite  of  the  patriotic  stimulus  that  wars  provide,  seriously
lessen  their  exertions.  Had  that  part  of  the  expenses  of  the
great  war  which  was  defrayed  out  of  domestic  loans — even  apart
from  creations  of  bank  credit — been  defrayed  instead  out  of
taxation,  not  only  would  the  standard  rate  of  income  tax  have


652  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

had  to  be  enormously  higher  than  the  6s.  level  which  it
actually  attained,  but  a  great  mass  of  other  taxation  must
also  have  been  imposed.  Such  a  state  of  things  continuing
for  a  number  of  years  might  well  have  relaxed  effort  very
seriously  during  the  war  itself.  This  is  an  important  con-
sideration. It  partially  excuses  what  many  economists
considered  the  undue  caution  of  the  British  Government  in
the  use  of  taxation  to  finance  the  war.

§  11.  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  that  yet  another  quali-
fication is  needed.  If,  it  may  be  said,  it  becomes  the  estab-
lished custom  to  finance  abnormal  expenditure  out  of  taxation,
there  will  be  created  a  general  expectation  of  these  occasional
levies,  and  this  will  check  the  accumulation  of  savings  during
the  intervals  between  the  levies,  and  so  indirectly  injure  the
national  dividend.  This  argument,  however,  ignores  the  fact
that  the  alternative  to  a  tax  levy  is,  not  nothing  at  all,  but  a
series  of  levies  later  on  to  provide  interest  on  a  loan,  and  that
the  expectation  of  these  should  prima  facie  react  on  saving
at  least  as  seriously  as  the  expectation  of  larger  levies  at  long
intervals.  Hence,  we  conclude  generally  that,  from  the  stand-
point of  the  national  dividend,  and  apart  altogether  from
political  difficulties,  taxation  affords  a  somewhat  better  method
than  loans  of  raising  money  for  emergencies.  ITow  much
better  it  is,  it  is  not,  of  course,  possible  to  say.  When  account
is  taken  of  the  fact  that  economies  of  consumption  and  extra
work  very  likely  react  injuriously  on  the  future  productive
power  of  the  human  capital  of  the  community,  it  may  well  be
that  the  presumed  advantage  of  taxation  in  causing  a  larger
proportion  of  the  levy  to  be  drawn  from  these  sources  is
in  part  illusory,  and  that,  on  the  whole,  the  dividend  of
the  future  will  be  only  a  little  larger  than  it  would  have  been
had  the  method  of  loans  been  employed.  Still,  we  may  fairly
conclude  that  some  advantage  is  probable.

§  12.  One  further  point  remains.  A  part  of  this  advantage
is  looked  for  because,  as  has  been  explained  above,  the  tax  plan
will  cause  the  people  actually  living  and  working  at  the  time
the  expenditure  is  being  undertaken  to  contract  their  consump-
tion and  to  increase  their  productive  efforts  to  a  greater  extent
than  they  would  do  under  the  other  plan.      In  other  words,


CH.  VIII  TAXES   F^i?^C7S'  LOANS  653

the  dividend  of  the  future  is  benefited  at  the  cost  of  an
enhanced  real  burden  upon  the  present.  It  is  possible  to
maintain  that  an  improvement  in  the  dividend  brought  about
by  these  means  is  not  an  improvement  in  any  ultimate  sense,
but  really  involves  on  the  whole — apart  from  its  effects  on
distribution — an  injury  to  economic  welfare.  When,  however,
it  is  recalled  that  the  reason — apart  again  from  distribution —
why  the  loan  method  leads  to  less  economies  of  consumption  and
less  extra  work  than  the  tax  method  is  largely  that  under  it,
as  was  shown  above,  people  estimate  their  real  position  over-
optimistically,  whereas  under  the  rival  plan  they  are  forced  to
estimate  it  rightly,  the  ground  for  this  demurrer  is  cut  away.


CHAPTER  IX

DISTEIBUTION    UNDER    TAXES    AND    LOANS

§  1.  The  preceding  chapter  contains  all  that  is  directly-
relevant  to  the  main  theme  of  this  Part — namely,  the  relation
between  fiscal  methods  and  the  national  dividend.  To  stop  at
this  point  would,  however,  be  highly  misleading,  because  it
would  leave  out  of  account  all  those  considerations  which
must  be  dominant  in  any  practical  choice  between  the  rival
plans  of  taxes  and  loans.  So  far  as  effects  on  the  dividend  go,
the  tax  method  has,  as  has  been  shown,  a  slight  advantage.
But  there  is  not  very  much  in  it.  The  really  decisive  factor
is  the  comparative  effect  of  the  two  plans  on  distribution.
Though,  therefore,  to  do  so  involves  something  of  a  digressioir,
I  propose  in  the  present  chapter  to  make  some  study  of  this
aspect  of  the  problem.  It  will  be  convenient  to  consider  in
turn  distribution  between  the  present  and  future  generations,
distribution  between  people  of  equal  wealth  in  different  situa-
tions, and  distribution  between  people  of  different  degrees  of
wealth.

§  2.  It  is  evident  that,  in  so  far  as  the  loan  method  causes
more  of  the  monies  required  by  Government  to  be  taken  out
of  what  would  have  been  capital  and  so  injures  the  dividend  of
the  future  more  than  the  tax  method  does,  it  must  throw  a
larger  share  of  the  real  burden  of  suffering  and  discomfort
upon  future  generations  and  less  upon  the  present  generation.
It  has  been  argued,  however,  that,  over  and  above  this,  the
choice  of  loans  in  preference  to  taxes  to  finance,  say,  a  great;
war,  throws  a  direct  and  special  burden  on  the  future.  That  is|
the  contention  we  have  now  to  investigate.

654


CM.  IX    DISTEIBUTION  UNDER  TAXES  &  LOANS    655

§  3.  In  this  task  it  is  well  to  distinguish  between  the
payment  of  interest  on  the  Government  debt  and  the  repay-
ment of  principal  through  a  sinking  fund.  As  in  the  preceding
chapter,  we  ignore  foreign-held  debt.  So  far  as  interest  is
concerned,  it  is  obvious  that  what  is  taken  from  the  income  of
taxpayers  in  taxes  goes  into  the  income  of  holders  of  loan
stock,  and  that,  therefore,  all  that  happens  is  a  transfer  of
income  from  one  section  of  the  community  to  another  section,
and,  in  so  far  as  taxpayers  and  loan  holders  are  identical,  from
one  pocket  to  another  pocket  in  the  same  coat.  Plainly,  in  a
transfer  of  this  kind,  it  is  impossible  that  any  direct  objective
burden — I  am  not  at  present  concerned  with  other  sorts  of
burden — can  be  involved.  There  remains  the  money  raised
for  repayment  of  principal  through  a  sinking  fund.  As
regards  this,  it  has  been  claimed  by  certain  writers  that  the
preceding  argument  is  inapplicable.  They  reason  that,  when
a  holder  of  loan  stock  has  the  principal  of  his  loan  paid  off  by
the  Government,  he  receives  no  benefit,  but  is  simply  left  in
his  old  position — possibly  a  slightly  worse  position,  because  he
will  have  the  trouble  of  finding  a  new  investment — and  that,
therefore,  there  is  nothing  to  set  against  the  objective  burden
thrown  on  the  taxpayer  in  the  form  of  taxation  to  provide  the
money  to  pay  him.  Professor  Seligman  writes  :  "  The  fallacy
involved  in  the  contention  that  the  sacrifice  imposed  upon  the
future  taxpayer  is  counterbalanced  by  the  benefit  accruing  to  the
bondholder  consists  in  the  failure  to  realise  that  there  are  no
benefits  thus  accruing  to  the  bondholder."  ^  Professor  Scott
arrives  by  similar  reasoning  at  the  same  conclusion  :  "  Speaking
quite  generally,  the  effect  of  a  loan  (he  is  discussing  an  internal
loan)  is  that  posterity  is  rendered  liable  to  do  the  amount  of
work  which  is  necessary  to  pay  it  off."  ^  The  substance  of
this  argument  is  that,  since,  in  the  main,  repayments  of  prin-
cipal made  to  holders  of  loan  stock  are  certain  to  be  reinvested,
posterity  as  a  whole  will  be  forced  by  the  process  of  debt
repayment  to  create  new  capital,  and  so  to  refrain  from  con-
sumption, to  approximately  the  extent  of  the  debt  repayment.
Let   us  provisionally  accept   this   presentation   of    the  facts.

*  Annals  of  the  American  Academy,  Jan.  1918,  p.  64.
2  Economic  Journal,  Sept.  1918,  p.  258.


656  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.iv

Even  so,  to  suggest,  as  the  language  used  by  Professors
Seligman  and  Scott  seems  to  do,  that  there  is  a  direct  objective
burden  on  posterity  equal  to  the  amount  of  the  debt  repayment
is  highly  paradoxical.  Posterity  will  possess  the  new  capital
which  it  has  been  induced  by  the  fiscal  expedients  of  the  State
to  create.  We  have  no  right  to  ignore  this  possession.  To  do
so  is  as  though  one  should  say  that  a  man,  who  has  been
induced  by  circumstances  to  put  £100,000  into  a  factory
instead  of  into  a  yacht  or  a  feast,  was  thereby  made  poorer  to
the  extent  of  £100,000  than  he  would  otherwise  have  been.
If  there  were  reason  to  suppose  that  the  world  would  end
immediately  after  the  investment  had  been  made,  there  would,
indeed,  be  something  to  be  said  for  this  view.  But  at  present
no  cosmical  catastrophe  is  in  sight,  and  posterity  may  be
expected  to  reap  thQ  fruit  of  its  investments  in  the  same  way
as  its  ancestors.  Thus,  though  it  is  true,  as  Professor
Seligman  asserts,  that  the  bondholder  gets  no  benefit  from
debt  repayment,  it  is  also  true  that  the  taxpayer  suffers  no
loss.  What  he,  in  effect,  does  is  to  make  an  investment  of
certain  funds,  the  proceeds  of  which  will  serve  in  future  years
to  keep  the  bondholder's  position  intact  and  so  to  relieve  him
(the  taxpayer)  of  the  need  for  making  annual  contributions  out
of  his  income  for  this  purpose.  On  posterity  as  a  whole  no
direct  objective  burden  is  imposed  by  the  repayment  of  an
internal  loan,  any  more  than  by  payment  of  interest  upon  it.
The  payment  of  interest  and  the  repayment  of  principal  alike
are  transfers,  not  costs,  and  to  whatever  is  somewhere  lost
there  corresponds  elsewhere  an  exactly  equivalent  objective  gain.
§  4.  It  does  not,  however,  follow  from  this  that  no  difference
is  made  by  the  choice  between  the  two  methods  in  the  subjec-
tive burden  borne  by  future  generations.  There  is  reason  to
believe  that  it  is  of  this  rather  than  of  the  objective  burden  that
both  Professor  Seligman  and  Professor  Scott  are  really  thinking
— though  to  interpret  them  so  involves  a  rather  generous
straining  of  their  language.  Let  us,  therefore,  consider  the
effects  upon  subjective  burden.  To  simplify  the  discussion  I
shall  begin  by  studying  a  representative  man  so  situated  that,
what  he  pays  in  taxes  to  finance  the  national  debt  exactly
corresponds  to  what  he  receives  in  interest  and  in  repayment  of


CH.  IX    DISTRIBUTION  UNDER  TAXES  &  LOANS    657

the  principal  of  his  loan  holdings.  In  these  circumstances  it
is  plain  that  the  money  for  interest  merely  comes  out  of  one
pocket  and  goes  into  another,  and  that  a  subjective  burden  is
excluded  as  completely  as  an  objective  one.  But  with  the
part  of  the  tax  used  to  repay  principal  the  position  is  a  little
different.  In  effect  £100  has  been  taken  from  our  representa-
tive man  in  taxes  and  then  paid  back  to  him  as  a  price  for
cancelling  his  £100  bond.  If  this  procedure  had  not  been
gone  through,  this  £100  would  have  remained  in  his  dispos-
able income,  and  would,  we  may  suppose,  have  been  spent.
As  the  procedure  has  been  gone  through,  he  realises  that,
should  he  spend  the  £100,  his  "capital"  will  be  £100  less
than  before,  and  his  future  income,  therefore,  £5  less.  He
will,  therefore,  it  would  seem,  need  to  save  the  greater  part
of  that  £100  and  invest  it,  so  as  to  keep  up  his  capital  and
conserve  his  future  income ;  and  this  new  need  will  involve
a  real  subjective  burden.  This  reasoning,  however,  ignores
the  fact  that,  though,  if  he  does  not  save  that  £100,  his
future  income  will  be  £5  less,  his  future  taxes,  out  of  which
loan  interest  is  paid,  will  also  be  £5  less,  since  the  £100  of
State  loan,  to  provide  interest  on  which  the  taxation  is  required,
has,  e,x  hypothesi,  been  cancelled.  "When  accoimt  is  taken  of
this  fact,  it  becomes  apparent  that  the  representative  man's
net  income,  after  taxation  has  been  deducted,  will  be  exactly
the  same  in  the  future  as  it  has  been  in  the  past.  His  posi-
tion as  a  whole,  therefore,  is  not  damaged  in  any  way,  and
there  is  no  reason  why,  to  safeguard  himself,  he  should  8ave_
that  £100  which  he  would  normally  have  spent.  It  may,
perhaps,  be  replied  that  the  prospective  escape  from  taxation
will  not  balance  the  prospective  loss  of  interest,  because  he
may  reckon  that,  as  general  wealth  increases,  the  amount  of
taxation  which  he  personally  will  have  to  contribute  will  falL
But  this  reply  is  illicit,  because  he  must  be  taken  as  a  repre-
sentative man,  whose  wealth  and  (in  his  family)  numbers
expand  in  the  same  ratio  as  that  of  the  whole  community.  A
second  possible  reply — that  the  tax  will  fall  through  loan
conversion — is  obviously  irrelevant,  since  conversion  would
reduce  loan  interest  equally  with  the  taxation  made  to  provide
that  interest.     We  may  conclude,  therefore,  that,  if  he  realises

2  u


658  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  iv

the  whole  situation,  our  representative  man  will  suffer  no
subjective  burden  in  consequence  of  debt  repayment.  No
doubt,  it  is  probable  that  in  practice  he  will  not  realise  the
whole  situation,  and  will  not  perceive  that  his  loss  of  capital  is
balanced  by  his  relief  from  prospective  taxation.  So  far  as  he
fails  to  perceive  this,  he  will  be  pushed  into  saving  part  of  the
£100  which  he  would  normally  have  spent,  and  so  will  suffer
a  subjective  burden.  This  appears  to  be  the  leaven  of  truth
in  Professor  Seligman's  and  Professor  Scott's  reasoning.  Plainly,
however,  it  is  a  small  matter.  The  only  really  significant
way  in  which  the  choice  of  loans  instead  of  taxes  affects  the
future  is,  as  was  explained  in  §  2,  that  it  causes  rather  more
of  the  money  needed  when  the  levy  is  made  to  be  drawn  from
sources  which  would  otherwise  have  constituted  capital  yielding
future  income.  It  was  argued  in  the  preceding  chapter  that
this  effect  is  not  likely  to  be  large.  Pro  tanto,  however,  it
makes  relevant  to  the  choice  between  taxes  and  loans  argu-
ments concerning  the  relative  interest  of  present  and  future
generations  in  the  object  on  which  the  resources  required
by  Government  are  to  be  spent.

§  5.  Turning  to  distribution  between  people  of  equal
wealth  in  different  situations,  we  find,  in  favour  of  the  loan
method,  a  very  important  practical  argument.  Under  that
method,  loans  in  general  being  voluntary,  those  persons  tend
to  subscribe  who  can  do  so  with  least  difficulty.  Of  two  men,
for  example,  of  equal  wealth,  one  of  whom  is  half-way  through
the  building  of  a  factory  when  the  levy  comes,  while  the  other
has  no  special  call  on  his  income,  the  second  will  naturally
take  up  a  much  larger  share  of  the  loan.  Under  the  tax
method  both  these  men  would  be  forced  to  make  the  same
contribution,  and,  though,  no  doubt,  the  factory  builder  would
probably  be  able  to  arrange  things  somehow  by  borrowing
himself,  yet,  unless  he  happened  to  have  a  considerable  amount
of  suitable  collateral,  he  might  find  it  very  difficult,  expensive
and  inconvenient  to  do  this.  Under  the  loan  method,  those
who  have  free  money  contribute  it  naturally  and  simply;
under  the  tax  method  it  may  have  to  be  got  from  them
through  an  elaborate  roundabout  process  of  loans  to  people
subject  to   the  levy  but   lacking   free  money  of   their  own.


I


cH.  IX    DISTEIBUTION  UNDEE  TAXES  &  LOANS    659

When  money  is  suddenly  needed  to  finance,  say,  a  war,  the
relatively  small  disturbance  and  agitation,  which  the  loan
method  is  likely,  for  this  reason,  to  cause,  is  a  clear  point
in  its  favour.

§  6.  After  all,  however,  the  main  problem  of  a  State
levy  is  not  to  organise  it  conveniently  as  between  people  of
equal  wealth  who  happen  to  be  differently  situated  at  the
moment,  but  to  organise  it  fairly  as  between  people  of  different
grades  of  wealth.  The  fundamental  point  is  this.  The  amount
of  resources  which  it  is  possible  for  a  government  by  any  plan
to  draw  in  a  short  time  from  the  poor  is  strictly  limited.  The
available  margin  among  them  is,  both  for  individuals  and  for
the  poor  as  a  group,  smalL  Consequently,  when  a  large  sum
has  to  be  raised  in,  say,  a  single  year,  it  is  necessary  that  by
far  the  greater  part  of  it  shall  be  raised  somehow  from  better-
to-do  people.  Furthermore,  it  is  plain  that,  generally  speak-
ing, as  we  pass  up  the  scale  of  wealth,  every  increase  in  an
individual's  income  means,  not  merely  an  increase  in  the
available  margin  of  resources,  but  an  increase  which  grows
more  than  in  proportion  to  the  growth  of  income.  If  one
man  is  twice  as  rich  as  another,  other  things  being  equal,  his
available  margin  is  not  twice  as  large,  but  more  than  twice  as
large.  Hence,  of  the  money  needed  by  the  State  the  rich
man  must  provide,  in  one  way  or  another,  more  than  the  poor
man,  and  the  very  rich  man  more  than  the  moderately  rich
man ;  and  the  amount  provided  must  increase,  not  merely
proportionately,  but  progressively  as  wealth  increases.  Now,
if  the  practical  choice  was  between  the  provision  of  money  in
these  proportions  by  taxes  and  by  loans,  the  revenue  to  pay
interest  on  which  would  afterwards  he  assessed  on  the  different
classes  in  these  same  propo7'tions,  there  would  be  no  difference
between  the  distributional  effects  of  the  two  plans.  But,  if
the  italicised  condition  is  not  appended  to  the  loan  plan,
there  is  a  very  important  difference — one  which  in  some
circumstances  provides  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  loan
plan,  and  in  others  an  argument  against  it.

§  7.  Suppose  that  a  Government  proposes  to  raise  money
to  develop  a  coal-bearing  area,  or  to  build  a  system  of  electric
power  stations,  the  products  of  which  it  will  afterwards  sell


660  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

at  a  profit  on  the  market ;  and  suppose,  further,  that  the  sum
needed  is  so  big  that  it  has  to  be  drawn  from  the  richer
classes  in  a  larger  proportion  than  the  ordinary  taxes  are
drawn.  If,  in  these  circumstances,  the  money  is  raised  by
a  loan,  the  fees  from  the  people  who  buy  the  Government's
coal  or  electricity  will  pay  the  interest  on  it,  and  the  tax-
payers will  not  be  affected  at  all.  But,  if  it  is  raised  by
a  special  tax — which  we  assume  to  fall  on  the  rich  in  a  larger
proportion  than  ordinary  taxes — these  fees  will  go  in  relief
of  the  ordinary  taxpayer.  The  better-to-do  classes  will  thus,
in  effect,  be  forced  to  provide  money  for  an  investment  the
fruits  of  which  go  to  taxpayers  in  general.  Now,  it  may  be
a  good  thing — in  the  next  Part  it  will  be  argued  that  it  is  a
good  thing — for  the  Government  to  take  money  from  the  rich
for  the  benefit  of  the  less  rich.  But  there  is  no  defence  for
their  doing  this  in  the  roundabout  way  just  described.  •  When,
therefore,  large  sums  of  money  are  wanted  to  build  up  an
enterprise  whose  products  are  to  be  sold  at  a  profit,  considera-
tions of  right  distribution  point  to  loans  rather  than  to  taxes
as  the  proper  channel  of  finance.

§  8.  Let  us  next  suppose  that  the  money  is  required  for
some  work,  the  products  of  which  will  not  be  sold  for  money,
such  as  the  establishment  of  national  art  galleries,  libraries,
museums,  or,  more  pointedly,  the  conduct  of  a  war.  In
these  circumstances  the  loan  plan  means  that  the  costs  of  the
undertaking  are  borne  by  all  classes  roughly  in  proportion  to
the  shares  of  ordinary  taxation  which  they  respectively  bear.
The  tax  plan  means  that  they  are  borne  in  proportion  to  the
shares  in  which  an  abnormally  large  levy  has  to  be  distributed
among  them ;  in  other  words,  that  the  very  rich  and  the  rich
bear  a  share  of  the  costs  of  this  enterprise  much  larger  than
their  share  of  ordinary  taxation.  Our  judgment  as  to  which
of  these  two  arrangements  is  the  better  must  turn  partly  upon
our  general  views  about  equity  in  distribution,  and  partly  on
the  purpose  which  the  expenditure  to  be  financed  serves.  If,
for  example,  its  purpose  is  to  remodel  at  the  State's  charge
the  housing  conditions  of  the  poorer  classes  throughout  the
country,  there  is  less  to  be  said  for  throwing  a  main  part  of
the  burden  on  the  better-to-do  than  there  would  be  if  the


I


cH.  IX    DISTKIBUTION  UNDEE  TAXES  &  LOANS    661

purpose  were,  for  example,  to  cover  the  country  with  a  system
of  roads  adapted  for  motor-touring.  In  order,  therefore,  to
determine  the  comparative  advantages  of  the  tax  method  and
the  loan  method  from  the  side  of  distribution,  it  is  necessary
to  know  the  nature  and  purpose  of  the  expenditure  that  has
to  be  financed.

§  9.  I  do  not  propose  to  pursue  that  inquiry  into  all  its
ramifications.  But  the  general  character  of  the  problem  may
be  usefully  illustrated  by  reference  to  the  finance  of  a  great
war,  such  as  that  which  has  recently  closed.  There  the  object
aimed  at  by  the  expenditure  is  political — self-defence,  the
enforcement  of  treaties,  the  security  of  small  nations,  or  what
we  will :  and  the  costs  of  conducting  the  war  are  colossal.
Our  problem  is,  assuming  the  distribution  and  the  general
principles  of  graduation  adopted  in  the  tax  system  of
this  coimtry  to  be  fair  and  proper  for  ordinary  purposes,  will
it  be  fair  and  proper  also  to  apply  these  same  principles  to
the  financing  of  war  ?  For  this  is  in  substance  what  is  done
if  war  costs  are  met  from  domestic  loans,  on  which  interest
and  sinking  fund  are  paid  out  of  taxes  based  on  these
principles.  This  somewhat  complicated  problem  has  now  to
be  attacked.

§  1 0.  In  discussions  which  have  taken  place  about  it,  a  good
deal  of  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  effects  which  a  great
war  produces  upon  the  relative  economic  position  of  various
classes  of  the  population.  Thus,  it  has  been  argued  that  the
very  rich  and  the  rich  may  well  find  in  a  great  war  an
opportunity  for  positive  gain.  For  they  possess  large  incomes
of  free  resources,  and  free  resources  can,  in  such  circumstances,
demand  that  the  rate  of  interest,  which  people  (including  the
Government)  promise  for  the  use  of  them,  shall  go  up  to  a
very  high  level.  In  view  of  the  high  probability  that  prices
after  the  war  will  fall  again  considerably  below  their  war
level,  the  real  rate  of  interest  which  they  may  reasonably  look
for  is  considerably  above  even  the  high  nominal  rate.  The
very  rich  and  the  rich  are,  in  short — like  the  owners  of  iron-
works— possessed  of  something  for  whicB.  the  demand  is
enormously  enhanced,  and,  consequently,  ak'e  in  a  position
to  become,  without  any  suggestion  of  illicit  practice,  "profiteers"


662  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  tr.  iv

on  a  large  scale.  Eurthermore,  whenever  the  rich  are  thus
advantaged,  the  poor,  it  is  urged,  are  likely  to  suffer  damage.
When  the  Government  requires  an  abnormal  amount  of  money,
whatever  method  of  finance  it  adopts,  it  is  both  likely  itself
to  borrow  largely  from  the  banks,  and,  through  its  heavy
taxes  or  calls  for  loans,  to  cause  a  number  of  private  persons
to  do  the  same.  The  large  expansion  of  bank  credit  thus
brought  about  raises  prices  all  round,  and,  consequently,  acts
like  a -general  tax  roughly  proportionate  to  income.  There
being  no  graduation  or  abatement  in  this  virtual  tax,
the  poor  are  hit  much  more  severely,  as  compared  with  the
rich,  than  they  are  under  the  ordinary  tax  system.  Thus,
it  is  said,  not  only  have  the  rich  special  opportunities
for  profiteering,  but  also  the  poor  are  subjected  to  a  special
detriment.  On  the  other  side  it  is  answered  that  the  peculiar
circumstances  of  a  great  war  place  many  important  sections
of  the  poorer  classes  in  at  least  as  strong  a  position  for
profiteering  as  anybody  else ;  and  play  is  made  with  the
enormous  wages  earned  in  munition  works  and  shipyards.  In
view  of  these  high  wages,  it  is  said,  the  poor  are  better,  rather
than  worse  off,  relatively  to  the  rich  during  the  course  of
a  great  war.

§  11.  The  issue  set  out  in  the  preceding  paragraph  is  an
important  one.  But  it  has  no  real  bearing  on  our  present
problem.  One  very  obvious  reason  for  this  is  that  the  main
extra  burden  which  the  loan  method  throws  upon  poor  people
falls  on  them — for  the  benefit  of  the  heirs  of  present  rich
people — not  in  the  actual  years  of  the  war,  but  in  the  later
years  during  which  taxes  are  raised  to  provide  interest  and
sinking  fund  on  war  loans.  There  is  also  another  considera-
tion. In  so  far  as  any  part  of  the  population  are  enriched
during  the  course  of  a  war,  they  are  hit  in  respect  of  the
taxes  that  are  levied  at  the  time ;  and,  if  it  is  desired,  war
profits  can  be  specially  aimed  at  through  an  excess  profits
duty  so  arranged  as  to  cover  workpeople  as  well  as
capitalists.  But,  after  all,  these  are  secondary  matters.
Fundamentally,  the  question  how  the  income  of  different  people
is  changed  by  a  war  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  more  general
question  whether  the  relation  between  the  imposts  levied  on


cH.  IX    DISTEIBUTION  UNDEE  TAXES  &  LOANS    663

incomes  of  different  sizes  that  is  proper  for  ordinary  expwiditure
is  proper  also  for  war  expenditure.  This  latter  question  only  is
relevant  to  the  choice  between  financing  war  predominantly  by
loans  or  predominantly  by  special  taxation.  The  solution  of  it
depends,  not  on  statistical,  but  on  general  considerations.

§  1 2.  These  considerations  are  two  in  number.  First,  when,
as  in  normal  times,  what  is  wanted  is  a  regular  annual  revenue,
it  is  natural  to  base  taxation  in  a  general  way  upon  income.
But,  when  a  single  and  entirely  abnormal  expenditure  has  to
be  met,  ability  to  pay  is  best  reflected,  not  in  the  income
that  happens  to  accrue  in  that  particular  year,  but  rather
in  income-getting  power  or  capital — this  term  being  taken
to  include  objects  of  wealth  not  used  in  trade,  such  as
houses  and  pictures,  and  also  the  capitalised  value  of  a
man's  mental  and  manual  powers.^  Since  £100  of  "  earned  in-
come," being  terminable  with  life,  represents  much  less  "capital"
than  £100  of  income  derived  from  the  funds,  and  since  funded
and  other  property  is  held  predominantly  by  the  rich,  this  con-
sideration suggests  that  war  charges  ought  to  be  thrown  upon
the  rich  in  a  greater  proportion  than  the  principles  appro-
priate to  peace  taxation  would  warrant.  Secondly,  there  is
a  general  feeUng  that,  in  a  pre-eminent  national  emergency,
the  call  from  each  should  be  for  his  utmost  rather  than  for  his
share.  Men  are  required  to  give  of  their  physical  strength,
not  in  equal  proportions,  but  from  each  his  alL  There  is  no
question  of  proportionate  sacrifice  between  men  of  fuller  and
emptier  lives.  Indeed,  the  strong  are  taken  and  the  weak
rejected.  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  ground  of  equity  there
can  be  for  any  different  distribution  in  the  summons  to
financial  strength.     But  this  is  certainly  not  the  distribution

'  It  is  not,  of  course,  suggested  that  the  costs  of  a  war  can  be  paid  for  out  of
capital,  in  the  sense  that  a  person's  holdings  of  land  or  factories  or  railways
(except  so  far  as  they  are  saleable  abroad  in  return  for  "  income  ")  can  actually
be  used  for  war  purposes.  The  main  source  of  the  funds  raised  must  be  the  real
income  of  the  country.  None  the  less,  it  would  be  possible  for  the  Government
to  collect  a  large  part  of  what  is  required  for  war  from  persons  who  have  no
income  at  all  but  only  property.  If  £1000  were  taken  from  such  a  person,
he  would  have,  in  effect,  to  buy  with  £1000  worth  of  property  £1000  worth
of  real  income  from  somebody  else  and  to  hand  this  over  to  the  Government.
He  would  be  the  subject  of  the  tax,  though  his  property  would  not  be  the  source
ofit.


664  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

aimed  at  in  the  ordinary  tax  system;  and,  therefore,  some
departure  from  the  principles  that  underlie  that  system  seems
to  be  called  for.  This  suggests  that,  from  the  standpoint  of
a  sound  distribution,  a  great  war  ought  not  to  be  financed  pre-
dominantly by  loans,  interest  on  which  will  afterwards  be  pro-
vided out  of  ordinary  taxes.  Rather,  a  large  part  of  the  costs
should  be  met  by  taxation  levied  at  the  time,  on  principles
calculated  to  throw  a  much  greater  proportion  of  the  burden
on  the  rich  than  they  are  accustomed  to  sustain  under  the
ordinary  forms  of  taxation.


CHAPTEE    X

FINANCE    BY    BANK    CREDITS

S  1.  To  make  our  discussion  complete  it  is  desirable  that  some-
thing further  should  be  said  of  the  type  of  borrowing  alluded
to  in  §  10  of  the  preceding  chapter,  under  which  loans  are
obtained  through  the  manufacture  of  bank  credits.  This  type
of  borrowing,  supported  by  abnormal  issues  of  fiduciary  notes,
was  largely  resorted  to  during  the  war  in  all  the  principal
belligerent  countries,  including  the  United  Kingdom.  I
propose  in  the  present  chapter  to  describe  and  discuss
our  national  variant  of  this  common  method.  In  that  way
it  will  be  easy  to  exhibit  the  general  principles  that  are
involved.

^  2.  It  is  customary  for  critics  of  British  war  finance  to
make  use  in  connection  with  it  of  the  term  "  inflation."  It
is,  however,  exceedingly  difficult  to  find  any  definition  of  this
term  that  is  at  all  satisfactory.  One  popular  definition  asserts
that  inflation  is  an  increase  in  money  more  than  proportionate
to  the  accompanying  increase  in  production.^  Since,  however,
this  definition  compels  us  to  say  that  a  bad  harvest  involves
inflation,  it  is  too  far  out  of  touch  with  the  common  under-
standing of  words  to  be  admissible.  An  alternative  defini-
tion applies   the   term   inflation   to  that  part   of  the  rise  of

^  This  definition  is  incidentally  thought  to  imply  that  "inflation  is  inherent  in
the  flotation  of  a  loan  for  purposes  other  than  the  construction  of  material  repro-
ductive capital,"  the  idea  being  that,  when  the  loan  is  employed  productively,
extra  things  are  created  to  offset  the  extra  money.  Obviously,  however,  no
more  extra  things  are  produced  at  the  time  when  a  factory  is  built  than  when  a
house  is  built,  or  even  than  when  people  are  set  to  work  to  make  fireworks  or
guns.  More  extra  things  are,  no  doubt,  produced  later  on  when  the  factory
begins  to  operate,  but  this  fiact  is  not  relevant.

665


666  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  tt.iy

prices  that  is  consequent  wpon  governmental  interference  with
money  and  banMng.  Practically,  however,  it  seems  im-
possible to  disentangle  this  part  from  the  part  that  would
have  taken  place,  particularly  in  war,  if  the  Government
had  allowed  monetary  affairs  to  proceed  along  the  usual
lines.  Furthermore,  the  notion  of  Government  "  interference
with  money  and  banking  "  is  not  precise.  Certain  Government
acts,  of  course,  clearly  constitute  such  interference,  but  certain
others — for  example,  the  commandeering  of  foreign  securities
to  support  exchange  and  propaganda  to  persuade  people  not  to
present  Treasury  notes  for  encashment — are  doubtful.  Again,
certain  things,  which  cannot  take  place  in  England  without
very  definite  Government  interference,  are  permissible  in  other
countries  under  the  ordinary  law.  Thus,  the  fiduciary  note
issue  of  the  Eeichsbank  might,  under  pre-war  legislation,  be
increased  beyond  the  normal  maximum  on  condition  that  a  tax
was  paid  on  the  extra  issues.  In  view  of  these  considerations  it
would  appear  that  the  only  really  satisfactory  way  of  defining
inflation  along  these  lines  would  be  to  make  an  arbitrary
schedule  of  the  various  sorts  of  action,  which,  for  the  purposes  of
the  definition,  are  to  be  regarded  as  governmental  interference
with  money  and  banking,  and  the  fruits  of  which,  therefore,  are
are  to  be  called  inflation.  But,  when  we  are  driven  to  an
artificial  plan  of  this  kind,  there  is  much  to  be  said  for
abandoning  the  term  altogether,  and  in  the  following  pages
I  do  not  propose  to  make  use  of  it.-^

§  3.  During  the  Great  War,  and  particularly  during  the
earlier  stages  of  it,  the  Government,  whether  rightly  or  wrongly,
were  unwilling  to  push  overt  taxation  beyond  moderate  limits,
for  fear  of  checking  production  and  rousing  powerful  resent-
ment. They  were  equally  unwilling  to  put  the  rate  of  interest
offered  for  war  loan  subscriptions  above  a  moderate  amount,
lest  our  reputation  for  financial  power  should  be  damaged  in
the  eyes  of  the  world.  As  a  result  of  these  two  things  the
amount  of  money  obtained  by  overt  taxes  and  public  loans
fell  in  most  weeks  considerably  below  the  exigent  demands  of
the  army,  navy,  air  force  and  munitions  establishments.  Given
these  conditions  and  given  the  determination  to  cut  our  cloth

'  Cf.  my  article  on  "  Inflation,"  Economic  Journal,  December  1918.


cH.  X  FINAKCE  BY  BANK  CREDITS  667

according  to  our  coat  and  not  vice  versa,  the  only  course  open
to  the  Grovemment,  apart  from  direct  resort  to  the  printing
press,  was  to  fill  the  gap  between  income  and  expenditure  by
causing  the  banks,  and  particularly  the  Bank  of  England,  to
create  credits  in  its  favour.  The  process  by  which  these
credits  were  brought  to  birth  and,  thereafter,  as  it  were,
expanded  in  stature,  is  described  in  the  First  Interim  Report  of
the  Committee  on  Currency  and  Foreign  Exchanges  (1918)  in
the  following  terms :  "  Suppose,  for  example,  that  in  a  given
week  the  Government  require  £10,000,000  over  and  above
the  receipts  from  taxation  and  loans  from  the  public.  They
apply  for  an  advance  from  the  Bank  of  England,  which,  by  a
book  entry,  places  the  amount  required  to  the  credit  of  Public
Deposits,  in  the  same  way  as  any  other  banker  credits  the
account  of  a  customer  when  he  grants  him  temporary  accom-
modation. The  amount  is  then  paid  out  to  contractors  and
other  Grovemment  creditors,  and  passes,  when  the  cheques  are
cleared,  to  the  credit  of  their  bankers  in  the  books  of  the  Bank
of  England ;  in  other  words,  is  transferred  from  Public  to
"  Other  "  deposits ;  the  effect  of  the  whole  transaction  thus
being  to  increase  by  £10,000,000  the  purchasing  power  in
the  hands  of  the  public  in  the  form  of  deposits  in  the  joint
stock  banks,  and  the  bankers'  cash  at  the  Bank  of  England  by
the  same  amount.  The  bankers'  liabilities  to  depositors  having
thus  increased  by  £10,000,000,  and  their  cash  reserves  by  an
equal  amount,  their  proportion  of  cash  to  liabilities  (which
was  normally  before  the  war  something  under  20  per  cent)  is
improved,  with  the  result  that  they  are  in  a  position  to  make
advances  to  their  customers  to  an  amoimt  equal  to  four  or
five  times  the  sum  added  to  their  cash  reserves,  or,  in  the
absence  of  demand  for  such  accommodation,  to  increase  their
investments  by  the  difference  between  the  cash  received  and
the  proportion  they  require  to  hold  against  the  increase  of
their  deposit  liabilities.  Since  the  outbreak  of  war  it  is  the
second  procedure  which  has  in  the  main  been  followed,  the
surplus  cash  having  been  used  to  subscribe  for  Treasury  bills
and  other  Government  securities.  The  money  so  subscribed
has  again  been  spent  by  the  Grovemment  and  returned  in  the
manner  above  described  to  the   bankers'   cash   balances,   the


668  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

process  being  repeated  again  and  again  until  each  £10,000,000
originally  advanced  by  the  Bank  of  England  has  created  new
deposits  representing  new  purchasing  power  to  several  times
that  amount."  ^

§  4.  Now,  in  normal  times  it  is  possible  for  the  Govern-
ment, like  any  ordinary  customer,  to  persuade  banks  to  create
credits  in  its  favour  by  the  offer  of  a  good  rate  of  interest.
It  is  well  known  that  in  times  of  growing  confidence  bankers
are  accustomed  to  expand  their  loans  and  liabilities,  thus
raising  prices  and  transferring  command  over  resources  from
receivers  of  fixed  incomes  to  the  persons  to  whom  these  loans
are  made.  In  normal  times,  however,  there  are  powerful
forces  at  work  to  prevent  this  process  from  being  carried  far.
The  rise  of  prices,  by  encouraging  imports  and  discouraging
exports,  turns  the  exchanges  against  us  and  threatens  a  foreign
drain  of  gold.  At  the  same  time  it  makes  it  necessary  for
people  to  carry  rather  more  money  than  before  in  their
pockets  and  in  their  tills  for  the  payment  of  expanded  wages
bills  and  for  the  conduct  of  retail  business  on  the  higher  price
level.  In  this  way  it  sets  up  a  domestic  drain.  These  two
drains  together,  by  lessening  the  reserve  of  the  Bank  of
England,  compel  the  Bank  to  raise  its  discount  rate  and  to  take
steps,  by  selling  Government  stock  or  otherwise,  to  make  the
new  rate  effective  in  the  market.  The  higher  rate  tends  to
check  borrowing.  If  it  does  not  actually  do  this  at  first,  it
will  have  to  be  raised  still  higher  until  it  does  do  it ;  for  other-
wise the  Bank  would  see  its  resources  completely  exhausted.
The  financing  of  any  customer,  the  Government  or  anybody
else,  by  the  creation  of  bank  credits  is  thus,  in  normal  times,
held  closely  in  check.

§  5.  A  state  of  things  is  conceivable  in  which  these
limitations  should  be  greatly  widened  and  large  credit
creations  in  favour  of  Government  made  possible  without  any
interference  with  the  normal  working  of  the  monetary  machine.
If  other  countries  outside  England  were  to  create  paper
money   in    large    quantities,   thus    throwing   gold    upon   the

^  First  Interim  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Currency  and  the  Foreign  Ex-
changes, p.  2.  I  have  made  free  use  of  the  Keport  of  this  Committee,  of  which
I  was  a  member.


cH.x  FINANCE  BY  BANK  CREDITS  669

markets  of  the  world  and  greatly  raising  prices,  gold  would
tend  to  flow  here.  This  gold  would  constitute  a  basis  for
enlarged  credits  by  the  Bank  of  England  and  ultimately  by
the  joint-stock  banks.  These  credits  when  expended  would,
of  course,  raise  wage-bills  and  prices  here  and  so  set  up  an
internal  drain.  But  the  new  gold  brought  in  from  abroad
would  be  more  than  enough  to  meet  this  drain :  and,  so  long
as  prices  here  were  not  raised  more  than  foreign  prices,  there
would  be  no  tendency  to  an  external  drain.  Consequently,
there  would  be  no  reason  for  discount  rates  here  to  be  raised
and  no  obstacle  to  continued  credit  expansion.  The  Govern-
ment could  finance  itself  to  its  heart's  content  out  of  bank
loans  so  long  as  the  credit  expansion  set  up  here  lagged
behind  that  set  up  in  the  rest  of  the  world.

§  6.  In  actual  fact,  in  spite  of  the  large  credit  expansion
of  other  countries,  there  was  never,  after  the  very  early  stages
of  the  war,  any  question  of  the  United  Kingdom  being  in
the  position  thus  sketched  out.  The  enormous  Government
demands  for  munitions  and  materials  from  abroad,  coupled
with  the  check  imposed  by  war  upon  our  export  trade,
dominated  the  exchange  position.  By  exporting  securities,
negotiating  foreign  loans  and  stopping  British  investments
abroad,  we  continued,  with  difficulty,  to  provide  funds  against
our  excess  of  imports,  while  still  retaining  a  large  holding  of
gold ;  but  there  was  not,  and  in  the  circumstances  there  could
not  have  been,  any  question  of  a  net  inflow  of  gold  from
the  surfeited  currencies  of  other  countries.  Consequently,  no
basis  for  enlarged  credits  could  be  obtained  from  these  sources.
If  credits  were  to  be  enlarged  sufficiently  to  fill  the  gap
between  the  Government's  outgoings  for  the  war  and  its
incomings  from  taxes  and  ordinary  loans,  the  Government
itself  must  create  that  basis.  The  external  drain  normally
consequent  upon  credit  creation  did  not,  indeed,  require
to  be  specially  countered.  For  the  export  of  gold  by
private  persons  was  sufficiently  provided  against  by  the
submarine  peril  and  the  refusal  of  the  Government  to  insure
gold  cargoes.  But,  unless  a  basis  had  been  provided  by  direct
State  action,  collapse  must  have  come  about  through  the
internal    drain.     As    the    Committee   on    Currency   and    the


670  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

Foreign  Exchanges  observe  :  "  The  greatly  increased  volume  of
bank  deposits,  representing  a  corresponding  increase  of
purchasing  power,  and,  therefore,  leading,  in  conjunction  with
other  causes,  to  a  great  rise  of  prices,  brought  about  a  corre-
sponding demand  for  legal  tender  currency,  which  could  not
have  been  satisfied  under  the  stringent  provisions  of  the  Act  of
1844.  Contractors  were  obliged  to  draw  cheques  against  their
accounts  in  order  to  discharge  their  wage-bill — itself  enhanced
on  account  of  the  rise  of  prices."  ^  To  meet  this  situation
and  to  provide  the  required  basis  of  legal  tender  money,
currency  notes,  at  first  devised  for  a  quite  different  purpose
in  the  early  days  of  the  war,  were  issued  by  the  Treasury  in
continually  increasing  quantities.  These  notes  were  handed
to  the  banks — not,  of  course,  to  the  Bank  of  England — in
exchange  for  a  transfer  of  balances  belonging  to  the  banks
at  the  Bank  of  England  to  the  Government's  currency  note
account,  the  Government,  thereafter,  substituting  in  that
account  their  own  securities,  and  thus,  in  effect,  purchasing  the
banks'  balances  for  its  own  use  by  the  exchange  of  an
equivalent  amount  of  newly  created  notes.  By  this
arrangement  the  banks  were  put  in  a  position  to  convert  at
will  their  balances  at  the  Bank  of  England,  enhanced  in  the
way  described  in  §  3,  into  legal  tender  currency,  without
causing  notes  to  be  drawn,  as  they  would  have  been  under
the  pre-war  system,  from  the  banking  reserve  of  the  Bank  of
England,  and  so  without  compelling  the  Bank  to  apply  the
normal  safeguards  against  an  excessive  expansion  of  credit.
"  Fresh  legal  tender  was  thus  continually  being  issued,  not,  as
formerly,  against  gold  but  against  Government  securities.
Plainly,  given  the  necessity  for  the  creation  of  bank  credits  in
favour  of  the  Government  for  the  purpose  of  financing  war
expenditure,  these  issues  could  not  be  avoided.  If  they  had
not  been  made,  the  banks  would  have  been  unable  to  obtain
legal  tender  with  which  to  meet  cheques  drawn  for  cash
on  their  customers'  accounts.  The  unlimited  issue  of  currency
notes  in  exchange  for  credits  (belonging  to  other  bankers)
at  the  Bank  of  England  is  at  once  a  consequence  and  an
essential  condition   of  the  methods  which   the   Government

1  Loc.  cit.  p.  5.


cH.  X  FINANCE  BY  BANK  CKEDITS  671

found    it  necessary   to   adopt    in   order    to  meet    their    war
expenditure."  ^

§  7.  It  is  a  matter  of  some  interest  to  determine  how  far,
if  at  all,  this  very  complicated  method  of  obtaining  resources
for  the  Government  has  different  effects  from  those  that  would
have  been  produced  by  a  straightforward  issue  of  currency
notes  in  direct  payment  for  the  Government's  purchafies.
Apologists  of  British  war  finance  have  made  a  great  point  of
the  fact  that  the  printing  press  was  not  used  in  this  way  and
that  notes  were  only  issued  in  response  to  business  demands.
At  first  sight  it  seems  that  this  complacency  is  justified.
For  on  the  plan  actually  adopted  the  Government's  credits
have  been  obtained  in  the  form  of  bank  balances,  and  notes
have  only  been  issued  sufficient  to  support  these  balances :
whereas,  if  Government  had  simply  created  notes  to  pay  for
its  purchases,  these  notes  would  have  formed  a  basis  for  a
very  much  larger  creation  of  bank  credit.  This  distinction,
however,  rests  upon  the  assumption  that,  if  the  Government
had  issued  notes  in  direct  payment  of  its  purchases,  all  the
notes  so  issued  would  have  remained,  as  it  were,  "  alive."  This
assumption  is  not  justified.  If  the  Government  in  any  week
had  created  and  paid  to  contractors  ten  million  one-pound
notes,  the  contractors  presumably  would  have  deposited
these  notes  with  their  bankers,  only  keeping  in  their
own  hands  for  wage  payments  the  same  number  as,  on
the  plan  actually  adopted,  they  drew  out  of  their  account
for  this  purpose.  The  joint-stock  banks  in  turn  would
have  deposited  these  notes  with  the  Bank  of  England,
thus  creating  balances  to  their  credit  there  equal  to  the
balances  that,  on  the  other  plan,  they  would  have  created  by
book  transfers,  and,  equally  with  them,  available  for  the  purchase

*  First  Interim  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Currency  and  the  Foreign
Exchanges,  p.  5.  For  simplicity  of  exposition  I  have  assumed  in  the  text  that
the  whole  of  the  balances  due  to  credit  creation  which  were  transferred  from  the
banks  to  the  Government  were  transferred  direct.  In  fact  a  certain  proportion
of  them  were  transferred  through  the  mediation  of  private  persons  who  borrowed
from  the  banks  money  to  invest  in  war  loans.  The  banks,  however,  did  not,
as  a  rule,  make  loans  to  customers  for  this  purpose  for  more  than  a  short  period,
and  the  proportion  was  probably  small.  In  any  event,  the  effects  of  the  trans-
action were  the  same  whether  the  created  credits  did  or  did  not  pass  through
an  intermediary  on  the  way  to  their  final  destination.


672  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

of  Treasury  bills.  So  soon,  however,  as  currency  notes  enter
the  Bank  of  England,  they  are  automatically  cancelled  and  die.
To  make  our  comparison  a  fair  one,  we  must  suppose  that  this
same  rule  would  hold  good  under  the  printing  press  plan.
But,  if  it  holds  good,  that  plan,  though  it  would  involve  the
creation  of  many  more  notes  than  the  actual  plan,  would  only
involve  the  survival  of  an  approximately  equal  number.  The
only  difference  would  be  that  the  balances  of  bankers  at  the
Bank  of  England,  instead  of  being  created  by  simple  book
transfers,  would  be  brought  into  being  through  the  agency  of
extra  notes  marked  for  destruction,  which,  in  their  brief  span  of
life,  accomplished  nothing  except  to  bring  those  balances  into
being.  The  printing  press  method,  combined  with  the
proviso  that  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  Bank  of  England  no
currency  note  can  live,  is  thus,  contrary  to  common  opinion,
identical  in  its  operation  and  consequences  with  the  more  round-
about policy  that  was  in  fact  pursued  by  the  British  Treasury.
§  8.  On  the  financial,  as  distinct  from  the  monetary,  side
that  policy  has  the  peculiarity  that,  whereas,  from  the  point  of
view  of  the  Government,  the  money  raised  under  it  (except
those  balances  which  are  obtained  in  direct  exchange  for  currency
notes)  is  a  loan,  on  which  interest  must  be  paid  and  the
principal  eventually  liquidated,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
public  it  is  a  tax.  If  we  may  suppose  the  total  money  value
of  the  country's  real  income  to  have  stood  in  any  year  at,  say,
£2400  millions,  then  the  banks,  by  creating  credits  to  the  value
of  £200  millions,  would  get  command  over  -^^^th  of  the  pur-
chasing power,  and  so  of  the  real  income,  of  the  country,  at  the
cost  of  making  every  £  in  the  hands  of  anybody  else  worth
-j3g-th  less  goods  and  services  than  it  was  worth  before.  More-
over, this  levy,  like  a  levy  through  a  protective  duty,  would  be
accompanied  by  a  large  transfer  from  one  set  of  people  (mainly
the  receivers  of  fixed  incomes)  to  another  set  of  people,  in
addition  to  the  transfer  made  to  the  Treasury.  In  sub-
stance the  Government  has  asked  bankers,  and,  by  providing
them  with  currency  notes,  has  enabled  them,  to  make  a
forced  levy  on  the  public,  and  then  to  lend  the  proceeds  of
this  levy  to  itself.  The  public  as  a  whole  receives  no
interest,  and    will    never    get   back    any  principal,   but   the


cH.  X  FINANCE  BY  BANK  CEEDITS  673

banks,  for  their  services  as  tax-collectors,  achieve  both  these
things.

^  9.  I  shall  not  here  inquire  how  far  this  obviously
objectionable  arrangement  could  have  been  avoided  by  a
Government  more  careful  in  expenditure  and  more  courageous
in  taxation.  That  question  touches  the  competence  of  particular
politicians,  and  not  the  general  principles  of  finance.  It  is,  how-
ever, desirable  that  something  should  be  said  of  the  aftermath
of  problems  in  the  monetary  sphere,  which  the  financial  methods
adopted  during  the  war  left  behind  it  at  its  close.  So  long  as
the  war  continued,  the  activities  of  enemy  submarines  and  the
refusal  of  the  Government  to  insure  gold  for  export  made
it  possible  for  certain  foreign  exchanges  to  stand  much  below
the  ordinary  export  specie  point  without  any  export  of  gold
taking  place.  Moreover,  the  most  important  exchange,  that
with  the  United  States  of  America,  was  deliberately  "  pegged  "
and  held  up  by  the  G^)vernment  through  sales  abroad  of  foreign
securities  collected  for  the  purpose,  through  the  issue  in
America  of  British  Government  loans  on  extremely  favourable
terms,  and,  after  the  entry  of  the  United  States  into  the  war,
through  credits  granted  by  the  American  Government  to  the
British  Government.  When  the  war  ceased,  the  protection  to
our  gold  hitherto  provided  by  the  submarines  was  automatically
withdrawn,  and  shortly  afterwards  the  pegging  of  the  exchanges
— a  process  necessarily  involving  the  continual  piling  up  of
further  foreign  debt — was  also  dropped.  In  these  conditions
the  heavy  adverse  balance  of  immediate  indebtedness,  resulting
from  our  large  need  for  imported  materials  and  the  loans  we
were  still  making  to  some  of  our  allies,  at  a  time  when  our
export  industries  were  still  disorganised,  threatened  to  bring
about  a  tremendous  foreign  drain  of  gold.  "We  might  have  lost
practically  all  our  gold,  and  yet,  in  view  of  our  imperative
need  for  imports,  equilibrium  might  not  have  been  brought
about.  In  these  circumstances  it  was  decided  (in  March  1919)
to  make  the  export  of  gold  by  private  persons  illegal.  This
regulation,  coupled  with  the  already  established  war-time
regulation  against  the  melting  of  sovereigns,  opened  the  way,
in  spite  of  the  legal  convertibility  of  currency  notes  into
sovereigns  on  demand,  for  a  specific  depreciation  of  these  notes

2  X


674  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

in  terms  of  gold  bullion  and  a  corresponding  depreciation  of
the  American  exchange  in  terms  of  British  currency.  There-
after, an  extensive  depreciation  in  this  sense  (over  30  per  cent
in  January  1920,  diminished  to  18  per  cent  in  April)  soon
made  its  appearance.  This  constitutes  by  far  the  most  urgent
currency  problem  bequeathed  to  this  country  by  the  war.

S  10.  It  is  generally -agreed  that,  apart  from  a  fundamental
reorganisation  of  our  monetary  system  on  some  such  plan  as
that  to  be  discussed  in  Chapter  VIII.  of  Part  VI. — a  plan
which  might  well  be  made  the  subject  of  international  dis-
cussion, but  is  at  the  moment  scarcely  practical  politics — the
removal  of  this  specific  depreciation  and  the  restoration  of  an
effective  gold  standard  are  imperatively  needed  in  the  in-
terest of  national  industry  and  trade.  An  effective  gold
standard  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  actual  circulation  of
sovereigns.  But  it  does  imply  the  absence  of  all  restrictions
upon  the  import  of  gold,  the  free  exchange  for  export  of  gold
(though  not  necessarily  of  coined  sovereigns)  against  Bank  of
England  and  currency  notes  at  par  value  at  the  Bank  of  England,
and  the  absence  of  all  restrictions  on  the  export  of  gold.
Under  those  conditions  our  price  level  necessarily  tends  to
equilibrium  with  the  world  (gold)  price  level ;  and  the
exchanges  with  gold  countries  cannot,  except  momentarily,
move  against  us  beyond  the  export  specie  point.  In
order  that  an  effective  gold  standard  in  this  sense  and  with
these  consequences  may  be  safely  re-established,  an  essential
preliminary  condition  is  such  a  reduction  of  our  balance
of  adverse  immediate  indebtedness  as  to  insure  that  the
restoration  of  a  free  market  for  gold  will  not  lead  to  an  over-
whelming foreign  drain.  This  implies  that  the  war-time
practice  of  making  repeated  long-time  loans  to  foreigners  ceases,
that  'our  export  trade  is  rehabilitated,  that  the  rates  for
money  here  are  maintained  at  at  least  as  high  a  level  as
prevails  in  the  United  States,  and,  for  security,  that  the  main
part  of  the  short-time  debt  owing  from  us  abroad  is  funded.
It  is  further  necessary  that  the  automatic  connection  between
our  gold  reserve  and  the  rate  of  discount,  which  war-time
practice  broke  down,  shall  be  re-knit  in  such  wise  that,  if,
at  any  time  after   the   restoration  of  a  free   gold  market,  a


i


cH.  X  FINANCE  BY  BANK  CKEDITS  675

heavy  foreign  drain  does  set  in,  the  discount  rate  will  be
immediately  forced  up  and  credits  contracted.  There  can  be
full  assurance  that  this  will  be  done  only  if  the  practice  of
selling  new  currency  notes  on  request  to  bankers  in  exchange
for  balances  held  by  them  at  the  Bank  of  England  is  definitely
abandoned.  An  important  step  in  this  direction  was  taken
in  December  1919,  when  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,
by  Treasury  Minute,  fixed  the  maximum  fiduciary  issue  of
Treasury  notes  in  1920  at  320  millions.  The  policy  thus
inaugurated  implies,  if  it  is  to  be  successfully  maintained,  that
the  authorities  are  prepared,  at  need,  to  face  a  substantial
rise  both  in  the  Bank  rate  and  in  the  rates  offered  for
Treasury  bills.  For,  if  they  are  not  prepared  to  do  this,
conditions  may  arise  in  which  bank  loans  to  industry  become
so  large  that  new  currency  has  to  be  created  to  support  the
high  prices  caused  thereby,  while  at  the  same  time  the
Government  finds  itself  unable  to  renew  its  Treasury  bills,
and  so  is  forced  to  apply  for  further  Ways  and  Means
Advances  from  the  Bank  of  England,  thus  still  further
expanding  credits,  forcing  up  prices,  and  enlarging  the  need
for  currency  in  the  pockets  of  the  people.

§  11.  Assuming  that  an  effective  gold  standard  is  restored,

the  most  urgent  of  our  problems  would  be  settled.     It  would

stiU    be    necessary,  however,  before    the    situation    could   be

regarded  as  completely  stabilised,  that  some  decision  should  be

taken  as  to  the  permanent  relation  between  the  note  issue  of  the

country  and  the  gold  basis  on  which  that  issue  rests.     All

1  notes    being  legally  convertible   into   gold   on  demand,  it  is

essential  that  a  sufficient  gold  reserve  should  be  held  to  afford

Ian  adequate  guarantee  that  this  legal  obligation  will  always  be

jmet.     Some  authorities  desire  that   this   should  be  done  by

Ifixing  a  proportion  of  note  issue  to  gold  reserve,  which  it  shall

Ibe  illegal  to  exceed.     But  this  plan  is  open  to  a  serious  objec-

ion.      If,  say,  the  proportion  was  fixed  at  three  to  one,  every

lin  of  £1  of  gold  from  the  reserve  would,  in  certain  condi-

ions,  involve  a  forced   contraction  of  £3   in   the   currency  ;

id  this  could  hardly  fail  to  cause  a  great  deal  of  disturbance

id  difficulty.     For  this  reason  it  seems  clear  that  the  thing

lited   by  law  should  be,  not    the  proportion,  but,  subject.


676  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

perhaps,  to  special  arrangements  to  meet  emergencies/  the
amount  of  the  fiduciary  issue.  It  is  not  practicable  to  deter-
mine now  in  a  direct  way  at  what  figure  this  limiting  amount,
for  the  period  when  things  have  settled  down  after  the  war,
should  be  put.  But  it  is  practicable  to  lay  down  a  rule
determining  this  indirectly.  This  point  is  explained  in  the
Interim  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Currency  and  Foreign
Exchanges,  as  follows :  "  Assuming  the  restoration  of  an
effective  gold  standard,  and  given  the  conventional  standard
of  banking  practice  and  the  customs  of  the  public  as  regards
the  use  of  currency,  the  amount  of  legal  tender  currency
(other  than  subsidiary  coin)  which  can  be  kept  in  circula-
tion, including  the  currency  holdings  of  the  banks  and  the
banking  department  of  the  Bank  of  England,  will  determine
itself  automatically,  since,  if  the  currency  becomes  redundant,
the  rate  of  discount  will  fall  and  prices  will  rise ;  notes  will  be
presented  in  exchange  for  gold  for  export  and  the  volume  of
the  currency  will  be  reduced  pro  tanto.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
the  supply  of  currency  falls  below  current  requirements,  the
rate  of  discount  will  rise,  prices  will  fall,  gold  will  be  imported
and  new  notes  taken  out  in  exchange  for  it."  It  was
contemplated  by  the  Committee  that  virtually  the  whole
amount  of  the  currency  gold  in  the  country  would  be  held  in
the  central  reserve  at  the  Bank  of  England.  In  these
circumstances,  "  the  total  circulation  (in  the  above  sense)
being  automatically  determined,  it  will  follow  that,  the  higher
the  amount  fixed  for  the  fiduciary  issue  (including,  of  course,  the
fiduciary  part  of  the  Bank  of  England's  notes),  the  lower  will
be  the  amount  of  the  covered  issue  and,  consequently,  of  the
central  gold  reserve,  and  vice  versa,  while  if  the  fiduciary
issue  was  fixed  at  a  figure  which  proved  to  be  higher  than  the
total  requirements  of  the  country  for  legal  tender  currency,
the  covered  issue,  and,  with  it,  the  central  gold  reserve  would
disappear  altogether.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  amount
of  the  fiduciary  issue  must  be  fixed  at  a  figure  low  enough
to  make  sure,  not  merely  that  there  will  always  be  some
covered  issue,  but  that  there  will  always  be  a  covered  issue  of
sufficiently  substantial  amount  to  secure  that  the  covering  gold,
»  Ofc  post.  Part  VI.  Chapter  IX.  §  7.


CH.  X  FINANCE  BY  BANK  CEEDITS  677

which  constitutes  the  central  reserve,  never  falls  so  low  as  to
give  rise  to  apprehension  as  to  the  stability  of  the  gold
standard."  The  Committee  suggest  that  a  normal  gold  reserve
of  150  millions  would  be  a  reasonable  one  to  aim  at ;  and
they  accordingly  recommend  that,  "  until  this  amount  has  been
reached  and  maintained  concurrently  with  a  satisfactory
foreign  exchange  position  for  a  period  of  at  least  a  year,  the
policy  of  reducing  the  uncovered  note  issue  as  and  when
opportunity  ofiers  should  be  consistently  followed.  .  .  .  When
the  exchanges  are  working  normally  on  the  basis  of  a  minimum
reserve  of  1 5  0  millions,  the  position  should  again  be  reviewed  in
the  light  of  the  dimensions  of  the  fiduciary  issue  as  it  then
exists."  ^  Presumably,  if  the  position  was  considered  satisfactory,
the  volume  of  the  fiduciary  issue  would  thereupon  be  fixed
permanently  at  the  amount  then  outstanding.  When  this  has
been  done,  the  monetary  problems  left  over  by  the  Govern-
ment's use  of  bank  credits  as  a  means  of  war  finance  will  have
been  finally  cleared  away.

1  Loc.  cit.  pp.  9-10.


1


CHAPTEE   XI

WAR    DEBT    AND    A    SPECIAL    LEVY

§  1.  In  the  actual  rush  and  difificulty  of  a  modern  war
statesmen  are  certain  for  political  reasons  to  rely  predominantly
upon  some  form  of  borrowing — we  need  no  longer  distinguish
between  loans  through  bank  credits  and  normal  loans — rather
than  upon  taxation.  This  was  the  course  followed  in  every
country — even  in  the  United  States  of  America — during  the
Great  War.  The  hurried  decisions  thus  taken  are  not,  however,
necessarily  final.  Their  consequences  can  be,  in  the  main,
undone,  if,  shortly  after  the  war  has  closed,  a  special  levy  is
made  to  pay  off  the  whole  or  a  large  part  of  the  internally
held  war  debt.  To  complete  the  present  Part  some  study  of
this  policy  will  now  be  undertaken.

§  2.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  national  dividend  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  its  adoption  would  be  advantageous,
because  the  obstructive  effect  of  the  expectation  of  higher
annual  taxes,  which  strike  new  efforts  and  savings,  would  be
lessened.  This  consideration  holds  good  even  if  the  levy  is
payable  in  instalments  spread  over  a  number  of  years,  so  long
as  the  amount  of  the  instalments  depends  on  the  amount  of
property  held  when  the  law  is  passed,  and  not  on  the  amount
held  when  each  instalment  is  paid.  It  should  be  noted,  indeed,
that,  since  in  this  country  interest  on  war  debt  is  itself
assessable  to  income  tax,  the  wiping  out  of  a  portion  of  the
war  debt  would  lessen  assessable  income,  and,  therefore,  the  rate
of  taxation  would  not  be  reduced  in  quite  so  large  a  proportion
as  the  volume  of  taxation.  Evidently,  however,  this  circum-
stance does  no  more  than  slightly  weaken  the  force  of  my
argument.     A  more  important  objection  is  that,  if  people  fear

678


I


CH.XI         WAE  DEBT  AND  A  SPECIAL  LEVY  679

the  special  levy  will  be  repeated,  this  fear  may  have  the  same
kind  of  obstructive  effect  as  the  expectation  of  large  annual
taxes.  But,  since  the  threat  of  repetition,  if  a  levy  is  made,  is,
at  the  worst,  distant  and  uncertain,  whereas  the  obligation  to
pay  high  annual  taxes,  if  it  is  not  made,  is  perfectly  sure,  and
since,  moreover,  if  the  levy  is  not  made,  there  is  always  the
fear  that  it  may  be  made  in  the  future,  we  may  reason-
ably conclude  that  the  net  effect  of  wiping  out  debt  by  a
levy  will  be  to  oil  the  wheels  of  production  and  increase  the
national  dividend.  If  the  amount  of  the  annual  taxation
which  the  levy  would  cancel  is  small,  this  conclusion  could,
indeed,  only  be  held  somewhat  tentatively.  But,  as  the
amount  of  this  taxation  rises,  assurance  rightly  grows.  It
may  be  fairly  easy  to  devise  a  scheme  which  will  raise  in
taxation  10  per  cent  of  the  national  income  without  seriously
hampering  production.  But  to  devise  an  equally  innocuous
scheme  for  raising  20  per  cent  will  be  much  harder;  and  to
devise  one  for  raising  30  per  cent  very  much  harder.  More
generally,  when  the  amount  of  the  national  money  income  is
given,  every  extra  50  millions  of  revenue  which  has  to  be
raised  is  more  difficult  to  arrange  for  satisfactorily  and  more
likely  to  involve  injurious  reactions  upon  national  produc-
tivity. Consequently,  every  addition  to  the  size  of  the  Budget,
which  will  he  Tieeded  if  no  special  levy  is  raised  to  wipe  off  debt,
makes  the  change  greater  than  any  given  special  levy  will  do
more  good  by  lessening  the  Budget  requirements  than  it  will  do
harm  through  the  reactions  which  it  itself  sets  up.  The  volume
of  the  debt  left  in  this  country  by  the  Great  War  is  so  enormous
that,  even  if  it  is  converted  fairly  soon  into  a  debt  bearing  a
lower  rate  of  interest,  and  even  if  the  money  income  of  the
country  grows  very  rapidly — a  thing  which,  in  view  of  the
probable  tendency  of  prices  ultimately  to  fall  as  a  result  of
post-war  deflation,  will  by  no  means  necessarily  happen,  despite
the  prospect  of  production  being  largely  increased — the  general
rates  of  taxation  associated  with  it  are  certain  for  a  long  time
to  be  enormously  high.  For  that  debt,  therefore,  the  conclusion
that  a  special  levy,  so  arranged  as  to  wipe  out  a  substantial
part  of  it,  would  help  the  national  dividend  may  be  taken  as
tolerably  well  assured.


680  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  iv

§  3.  In  popular  discussion  these  economic  considerations
are  often  swept  aside  with  the  general  objection  that  any  form
of  special  levy  is  indefensible,  because  it  would  necessarily
penalise  people  who  have  saved  and,  maybe,  lent  the  proceeds
of  their  savings  to  the  State,  while  letting  off  those  who,  in
a  time  of  dire  national  need,  squandered  their  incomes.
This  objection  rests  on  a  misconception.  It  is  perfectly  true
that  a  special  levy  must  hit  the  man  who  has  saved  in  the
way  described.  But  so  also  must  an  income  tax  which,  as
all  income  taxes  do,  covers  income  from  property.  The  only
practicable  alternative  to  a  special  levy  to  wipe  off  the  principal
of  the  war  debt  is  a  heavy  annual  income  tax  to  provide  interest
on  it.  Whichever  of  these  methods  is  adopted,  the  man  who
has  saved  cannot  escape,  and  the  man  who  has  squandered  his
income  must  escape.  Consequently,  this  general  objection
really  misses  its  mark.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  there  are  no
other  broad  objections,  though,  of  course,  there  are  many  objec-
tions based  on  considerations  of  technique  and  practical  working.
From  now  onwards,  therefore,  I  shall  assume  that  the  policy
of  a  special  levy  is  acceptable  in  principle,  and  shall  proceed
to  inquire  what  exactly  it  implies  in  practice.

§  4.  The  first  thing  to  settle  is  the  general  basis  of  assess-
ment. Apart  from  war  fortunes,  the  taxation  of  which  mighty
indeed,  supplement,  but  in  any  event  could  not  yield  enough
money  to  supplant,  a  more  broadly  based  levy,  the  principal
alternatives  are  current  incomes  and  aggregate  existing  capitals.
Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  of  these  rival  bases  is  essential
to  the  main  idea  of  a  special  levy.  The  only  essential  thing
is  that,  on  whatever  basis  the  levy  is  made,  it  shall  be  so
framed  that  people  in  the  future  will  not  have  to  pay  more
under  it  if  they  make  new  contributions  of  work  and  saving
than  if  they  do  not.  Given  this  condition,  the  choice  of  the
basis  of  assessment — the  basis  or  object  of  taxation  does  not,
of  course,  as  was  made  clear  in  an  earlier  chapter,  determine  the
source  out  of  which  taxation  comes — is  a  secondary  matter.
But,  though  secondary,  it  is  nevertheless  important,  and  some
decision  on  it  must  be  reached.

The  principal  argument  against  income  as  a  basis  for  the
purpose  of  a  special  levy  is  one  already  referred  to  in  another  con-


GH.  XI        WAR  DEBT  AND  A  SPECIAL  LEVY  681

nection  in  Chapter  IX.  §  1 2,  namely,  that  equal  incomes  do  not
always  imply  equal  abilities  to  pay.  For  an  annual  tax,  indeed,
the  fact  that  a  man's  income  is  variable  does  not  matter ;  for
the  tax  varies  correspondingly  whenever  the  income  varies.  But
for  a  single  special  levy  it  does  matter ;  because  it  means  that,
among  people  "  worth  "  substantially  the  same  amount,  those
whose  holdings  are  paying  specially  well  in  the  particular  year
of  the  levy  are  hit  more  severely  than  those  who  in  that
particular  year  happen  to  be  doing  badly.  Moreover,  among
properties  of  equal  present  values,  those  in  which  the  annual
return  is  high  now  with  the  prospect  of  a  later  fall  are  hit  more
hardly  than  those — unripe  building  land,  for  example — in  which
the  return  is  small  or  possibly  nothing  now,  but  is  expected
to  become  large  in  the  future.  These  objections  to  the  income
basis  are  important  even  when  attention  is  confined  to  incomes
from  property.  "When  account  is  taken  of  incomes  derived
from  personal  work,  they  are  still  more  serious ;  for,  plainly,  a
man  with  £2000  a  year  received  as  a  salary  and  terminating
with  his  present  employment  is  much  less  able  to  bear  a  levy
of,  say,  £3000  than  one  with  an  equal  income  derived  from
£40,000  of  war  loan  stock.  Considerations  of  this  character
point  strongly  to  capital  rather  than  income  as  the  proper
basis,  not,  of  course,  for  regular  annual  taxation,  but  for  the
imposition  of  a  single  special  levy.

The  principal  argument  on  the  other  side  is  that,  if  capital
is  taken  as  a  basis  and  the  special  levy  turned  into  a  levy  on
capital,  wealthy  people  with  large  incomes  earned  in  salaries
and  fees  will,  except  in  so  far  as  they  also  own  property,
escape  altogether.  Why,  it  is  asked,  should  a  barrister  with
£50,000  a  year,  the  whole  of  which  he  spends,  contribute
nothing,  while  a  comparatively  poor  man,  who,  out  of  savings,
has  accumulated  a  capital  of,  say,  £5000,  has  to  pay  his  share?
In  point  of  equity  there  is  no  answer  to  this.  Capital  alone,
as  a  basis  for  a  special  le^y,  is  not  a  fair  basis.

The  practical  inference  is  that  the  levy  should  be  based  on
a  double  foundation.  There  should  be  a  capital  levy  as  ordin-
arily understood,  based  on  capital,  and,  alongside  of  this,  a
subsidiary  levy  based  on  incomes  derived  from  work.  To
work  out  a  fair  arrangement  for  this  subsidiarv  levv  would,  no


682  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv.

doubt,  be  very  difficult.  It  is  impossible  to  hope  for  more
than  a  rough  adjustment.  Perhaps  the  simplest  plan  would
be  to  make  people  in  receipt  of  incomes  from  work  liable  to  a
levy  of  some  multiple,  adjusted  with  regard  to  the  general
scale  of  the  capital  levy  proper,  of  the  average  of  their  income
tax  payment  over  the  last  three  years.  This  levy  might  be
payable  in,  say,  ten  annual  instalments,  later  instalments  to
lapse  if  the  income-receiver  died,  or  if  other  cause  deemed
adequate  by  the  Inland  Ee venue  authorities  could  be  shown.
Of  course,  this  plan  is  open  to  serious  objections.  But  it  seems
clear  that,  if  a  special  levy  is  decided  upon,  something  of  the
kind  ought  to  be  attempted,  in  order  to  remove  a  legitimate
sense  of  grievance  from  small  owners  of  property  and  to
emphasise  the  exceptional  character  of  the  levy,  as  a  unique
financial  effort  to  meet  an  unprecedented  situation.

I  5.  Whatever  is  done  in  this  matter,  there  is  no  doubt
that  very  much  the  larger  part  of  the  proceeds  of  any  special
levy  that  might  be  made  would  have  to  come  from  that  part
of  it  which  falls  on  material  capital  as  ordinarily  understood,
and  not  on  brain  capital.  On  the  basis  of  such  imperfect
statistics  as  are  available  it  may  be  hazarded  that,  of  income
falling  within  the  province  of  the  income  tax  in  this  country,
probably  as  much  as  three-quarters  is  due  to  material  capital.
Since  the  largest  "  earned "  incomes  are  likely  to  belong  to
elderly  men,  the  number  of  years'  purchase  at  which  they
should  be  capitalised  is,  presumably,  small.  Say  it  is,  on  the
average,  ten  years.  This,  with  interest  at  5  per  cent,  will
make  the  present  value  of  the  existing  immaterial  capital
something  like  one-tenth  of  the  value  of  existing  material
capital.  Even,  therefore,  if  no  account  is  taken  of  the  fact
that  a  considerable  part  of  the  country's  brain-capital  belongs
to  people  whose  total  capital  is  relatively  small,  and  would,
therefore,  under  a  graduated  scale,  be  subject  to  a  low  rate
of  levy,  it  will  follow  that  the  supplementary  levy  on
brain  capital  would  only  yield  about  one-tenth  of  the  whole,
leaving  the  other  nine-tenths  to  be  provided  by  the  capital
levy  proper.  Necessarily,  therefore,  the  principal  technical
problems  connected  with  the  general  policy  of  a  special  levy
centre  upon  that.


CH.  XI        WAK  DEBT  AND  A  SPECIAL  LEVY


683


§  6.  The  first  of  these  problems  is  that  of  valuation.  It  is
sometimes  urged  that  this  would  prove  so  difficult  that  a
special  levy  could  not  possibly  be  worked  in  practice.  To
determine  the  force  of  this  objection  we  need  to  know
in  what  forms  the  capital  of  the  country  is  held,  and
what  is  the  relative  importance  of  the  several  forms.  Upon
this  matter  no  direct  information  is  available.  But  for  this
country  the  statistics  of  estates  passing  at  death  throw  some
light  upon  it.  For  the  fiscal  years  1913-14  and  1914-15
the  gross  capitals  of  which  the  Estates  Duty  Commissioners
had  notice  were  made  up  as  follows :

Distribution  of  Propbkty.


Stocks,  funds,  shares,  etc.   .

Cash  in  home  and  bank

Money  on  mortgage,  etc.     .

Policies  on  insurance    .

Trade  assets,  book  debts,  goodwill,  etc

Household  goods,  apparel,  etc.    .

Agricultural  land

House  property  and  business  premises

Ground  rents,  etc.

Other  property     ....


Passing  at
death  in
19ia-14.
Percent.

Passing  at
death  in
1914-15.
Per  cent.

Estimated  at
the  present

time.
Per  cent.

45

39

60

6

6

4

7

6

4

4

3

2

5

5

3

3

3

2

5

8

6

14

16

10

1

1

1

10

13

8

Total


100


100


100


Except  in  so  far  as  some  forms  of  property  evade  death  duties
more  easily  than  others,  the  first  two  columns  of  the  above
table  may  be  taken  to  represent  roughly  the  distribution  of
property  among  different  forms  before  the  war.  At  the
present  time,  however,  in  consequence  of  the  enormous
volume  of  war  loan  securities,  the  proportion  of  the  whole
represented  in  stocks,  funds,  shares,  etc.,  must  be  very  much
larger.  War  loan  by  itself  very  probably  amounts  to  one-
third  of  the  whole,  so  that,  though  there  must  be  set  against
it  a  large  diminution  in  our  holdings  of  foreign  securities,  it
may  well  be  that  the  first  item  in  the  table  should  be  raised
to  60  per  cent.  If  this  is  so,  all  the  other  percentages  must
be  reduced  to  two-thirds  of  what  they  stood  at  in  1914-15,
and  the  third  column  of  the  table  will  roughly  represent  the
facts.  In  that  column,  then,  in  the  absence  of  direct  statistical
information  of  more  recent  date,  we  have  a  starting-point  for


684  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.iv

estimating   the  true  scale  of  the  valuation  problem  in  this
country.

Clearly,  there  need  be  no  serious  difficulty  about  the  first
four  items,  with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  those  classes  of
securities  which  change  hands  so  seldom  that  their  quotations
are  more  or  less  fictitious.  These  items  together  we  have
estimated  to  amount  to  some  70  per  cent  of  the  whole.
Further,  the  most  important  of  the  other  items,  namely,
house  property,  business  premises  and  agricultural  land,
could  be  roughly  assessed  on  the  basis  of  the  income-tax
returns,  appeal  being  allowed  to  any  one  who  felt  himself
aggrieved.  But  for  the  trade  assets  group,  household  goods
and  apparel,  and  miscellaneous  property,  it  would  seem  that
the  only  available  method  is  direct  appraisement — a  process
which  it  would  take  years  to  apply  over  the  whole  country.
On  the  figures  given  in  the  table,  these  items  should  work
out  at  some  13  per  cent  of  the  whole.  But,  since  they
probably  evade  death  duties  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  so
are  not  fully  counted,  it  would  be  safer  to  reckon  them  at,
say,  20  per  cent.  Plainly,  to  leave  them  outside  the  purview
of  a  special  levy  would  be  very  unfair  to  owners  of  other  sorts
of  property,  and  would  be  the  more  objectionable  in  that  it
would  directly  benefit  those  persons  who,  during  the  war,
endeavoured  to  evade  their  obligations  to  the  State  by
investing  their  resources  in  pearls  and  pictures,  which  were
expected  to  appreciate  in  value  and  so  to  yield  a  return  of  a
kind  not  liable  to  assessment  for  income  tax.^  On  the  other
hand,  the  task  of  a  general  valuation  is  so  prodigious  and
would  prove  so  irritating  that  any  Government  would  think
many  times  before  embarking  upon  it.  Here,  therefore,  is  a
serious  impasse.  It  would  seem,  however,  that  the  difficulty
might  be  got  over  by  postponing  the  levy  due  from  these
items  and  storing  it  up,  as  it  were,  till  the  next  occasion  on

*  Under  the  German  capital  levy  law  of  1919,  a  compromise  arrangement
exempts  furniture  and  household  stuff  unless  they  form  part  of  the  accessories
to  real  estate  or  of  working  capital  ;  but  precious  stones  and  precious  metal  goods
are  liable  if  their  value  exceeds  20,000  marks  (Par.  11).  The  owner  of  buildings
under  this  law  may  demand  to  be  assessed  on  his  own  valuation  ;  but,  in  this  event,
the  central  Government  or  a  municipality  may  buy  in  the  buildings  at  that
valuation  (Par.  19).


CH.  XI        WAK  DEBT  AND  A  SPECIAL  LEVY  685

which  they  pass  at  death  and  have  to  be  valued  in  the
ordinary  course.  No  doubt,  this  postponement  would  offer
opportunities  for  evasion  to  unscrupulous  persons.  That,
however,  cannot  be  helped.  It  would  probably  be  better  to
accept  that  loss  than  to  undertake  the  gigantic  task  of  an
immediate  general  valuation.  The  evasion  and  the  loss  to
Grovernment  that  must  result  from  it  is  regrettable.  But  it
is  not  a  fatal  objection  to  a  special  levy,  any  more  than  the
evasion  of  death  duties  and  income  tax  that  now  takes  place
is  a  fatal  objection  to  these  means  of  raising  revenue.

S  7.  A  second  difficulty  concerns  the  actual  collection  of
a  special  levy.  It  is  often  maintained  that  this  cannot
practically  be  done,  because,  if  it  were  attempted,  a  vast
number  of  people  would  be  compelled  to  throw  securities
and  other  property  on  the  market  in  order  to  obtain  the
wherewithal  to  pay  the  levy,  and  would  find  there  no  buyers.
The  first  and  most  obvious  answer  to  this  objection  is  that
the  Government  need  not  require  payment  of  the  levy  in
cash.  There  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  accept  all
Trustee  securities,  and  many  others  in  which  there  is  normally
a  free  and  fairly  wide  market,  at  their  market  value  on  some
specified  day.  Of  course,  if  it  did  this,  it  would  lose  through
some  of  these  securities  falling  in  value  before  it  itself  disposed
of  them,  but,  the  field  being  wide,  it  would  probably  gain  to
about  an  equal  extent  through  others  rising.  Since  then  we
have  reckoned  that  some  60  per  cent  of  the  capital  of  the
country  is  represented  by  securities,  the  great  majority  of
people  subjected  to  the  levy  would  probably  be  able  to  meet
it  without  making  any  sales  at  alL  But,  even  if  this  were  not
so,  or  if,  for  any  reason,  the  Government  decided  to  accept  in
payment  only  a  very  limited  class  of  securities,  the  argument
here  under  review  would  not  be  valid.  For,  after  all,  whatever
money  is  paid  over  to  the  Treasury  will  not  be  locked  up  there
in  a  box,  but  will  probably  be  expended  in  buying  up  and  cancel-
ling war  loan  stock.  The  people  from  whom  this  stock  is  bought
will  want  other  securities  instead  of  it  and  will,  therefore,
constitute  a  market  for  those  that  other  people  are  offering
for  sale  in  order  to  raise  money  for  the  levy.  There  should
be  no  difficulty  about  so  arranging  things,  with  the  help  of


686  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  iv

temporary  loans  from  the  banks,  that  the  Government
purchase  of  war  loan  kept  pace  with  the  sale  of  the  other
securities,  thus  making  the  market  for  them  effective  and
obviating  the  need  of  forced  sales.  No  doubt,  certain  persons
would  not  be  in  a  position  to  raise  either  money  or  securities
to  meet  the  levy  upon  them,  if  they  were  compelled  to  pay
the  whole  of  it  at  once.  Owners  of  private  businesses,  the
greater  portion  of  whose  resources  is  locked  up  in^  their
businesses  and  whose  holding  of  securities  is  not  more  than
sufficient  to  provide  collateral  for  loans  in  case  of  need,
cannot  be  expected  to  raise  large  sums  quickly.  Some
landowners  may  be  similarly  situated.  It  would  be  necessary
to  allow  these  persons  the  option  of  payment  by  instalments,
as  is  done  at  present  for  death  duties,  or  even  perhaps,  in
special  circumstances,  to  accept  the  payment  of  interest  on
the  levy,  until  such  time  as  the  property  affected  was  broken
up  on  the  death  of  its  owner  or  otherwise,  and  the  payment
of  the  principal  thus  became  feasible.  It  should  not  be
beyond  the  power  of  the  revenue  authorities  to  make
satisfactory  rules  for  overcoming  technical  difficulties  of  this
kind.  If  this  was  done,  the  objection  urged  by  Professor
Dietzel,  that  different  persons  would  be  affected  differently
according  to  the  facilities  they  have  for  borrowing  cheaply,
would  be  mitigated,  though  not  entirely  overcome.  On  the
whole,  therefore,  it  would  seem  that  the  problem  of  actually
collecting  the  levy,  as  well  as  the  problem  of  valuation,  can
be  solved.  The  plea  that  a  special  levy  would  be  unworkable
in  practice  cannot  be  sustained.

S  8.  There  remain  certain  questions  concerning  the
rates  at  which  the  levy  should  be  imposed  upon  different
capitals.  It  is  evident  that,  after  provision  has  been  made
for  the  exemption  of  minimum  capitals  and  for  certain  classes
of  capitals,  e.g.  charitable  trusts,  not  belonging  to  indivi-
duals, the  rates  should  be  arranged  on  a  graduated  scale,
increasing  as  capacity  increases.  It  is  equally  evident  that
the  precise  scale  of  graduation  can  only  be  settled  by  a
rough  balancing  of  conflicting  considerations.  Apart  from
this    main    problem,   one    important    minor    matter    needing

'  Economic  Jowmal,  1919,  p.  359.


cH.  XI        WAR  DEBT  AND  A  SPECIAL  LEYY  687

settlement   is :    Ought   holdings   of  war  loan    to   be    placed,
in  the  matter  of  rates,  on  the  same  footing  as  other  capital,
or  should  they  be  accorded  specially  favourable    treatment  ?
There  is,  clearly,  no  case  for  the  special   treatment  of  war
loan   stock   which   has  been   obtained   by  the   conversion   of
consols  or  from  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  other  securities
held   before    the    war.      But    some    of    the    war    loan    stock
which  has  been  purchased  with   new  money  has,  no  doubt,
been  the  fruit  of  special  and  patriotic  saving,  for  which  some
recognition    might    be    claimed.     Furthermore,    it    must    be
remembered  that  all  capital  created  with  new  money  during
the  war  has  been  subjected  to  a  burden,  not  experienced  by
the  capital  accumulated  in  earlier  times,  in  consequence   of
the   high   war   income   tax ;     and    war    loan    constitutes    the
predominant     part    of    this    war-time     creation     of    capital.
Against  these  considerations  has  to  be  set  the  fact  that  it
would  be   practically  very  difficult   to   distinguish  war  loan
holdings  ^that  have  been  bought  with  new  money  from  other
war   loan   holdings ;    and   still   more   difficult   to   distinguish
among   them   those   that   are   the   fruit   of    special   patriotic
saving  from  those  that  have  been  secured  out  of  abnormal
war  profits.     It   has  also  to   be   remembered  that  a  special
levy  on  capital  would  be,  to  a  large  extent,  a  substitute  for
high   continuous  income  tax  on   unearned   income,  and  that
nobody   has   proposed   to   give   income   from    (ordinary)   war
loan  any  special  abatement  under  income  tax.      Probably  it
would  be  convenient  to  privilege  war  loan  to  the  extent  of
accepting  it  in  payment  of  the  special  levy  on  terms  some-
what more  favourable  than  are  accorded  to  cash  and  other
securities,   but,   on    the   whole,   particularly   in    view   of  the
heavy   reduction   that   any   more   substantial   privilege   must
cause  in  the  yield  of  the  levy,  the  case  for  going  further  than
this  does  not  seem  to  be  made  out.     A  more  difficult  point
to   decide   is  whether   the   rates   of  the   special   levy   should
depend  simply  on  the  amount  of  people's  holdings  or  should
take  account  also  of  the  size  of  their  families.     There  can  be
no  doubt  that,  under  an  annual  income  tax,  to  make  bachelors
and    the   fathers    of    a    number    of   young   children    pay   at
equal    rates    would    be    exceedingly    unfair.       But,   under   a


688  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.iv

special  levy  there  is  the  difficulty  that  a  man  who  was
a  bachelor  at  the  moment  the  levy  was  made  might  be  a
family  man  a  few  years  later,  while  one  who  was  a  family
man  then  might,  in  a  little  while,  have  become  a  childless
widower.  Under  an  income  tax  adjusted  to  family  conditions
these  changes  would  be  allowed  for  automatically ;  but,  under
a  special  levy,  since  this  accomplishes  itself  once  and  for  all,
no  allowance  for  them  would  be  possible.  Clearly,  therefore,
if  it  is  decided  to  modify  the  rate  of  levy  according  to  family
conditions,  the  extent  of  the  modification  ought  to  be  much
smaller  than  is  appropriate  under  income  tax.  Probably  the
best  that  can  be  done  practically  is  to  allow  some  slight
modification  where  capitals  are  small,  but  none  where  they
are  large.^

1  It  may  be  noted  that  under  the  German  law,  in  families  where  there  are
two  or  more  children,  a  sum  of  5000  marks  in  respect  of  each  child  is  released
from  levy  (Par.  25).


PART  V

THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  NATIONAL
DIVIDEND


889


2y


CHAPTEE   I

THE    GENEEAL    PROBLEM    OF    DISHARMONY

In  the  three  preceding  Parts  we  have  examined  the  way  in
which  the  magnitude  of  the  national  dividend  is  affected
by  three  important  groups  of  influences.  It  is  not,  of  course,
pretended  that  all  the  influences  that  are  relevant  have  been
brought  under  review.  On  the  contrary,  many  of  the  more
remote  causae  causarum,  such  as  those  that  determine  the
general  attitude  of  people  toward  work  and  saving,  as  well  as
many  less  remote  causes  that  affect  the  development  of
mechanical  inventions  and  improved  methods  of  workshop
management,  have  been  deliberately  left  on  one  side.  This
deficiency  I  do  not  propose  to  remedy.  There  is,  however,
another  deficiency  which  cannot  be  thus  lightly  left  unfilled.
From  the  propositions  laid  down  in  Chapter  IV.  of  Part  I.
it  follows  that,  while,  apart  from  incidental  effects  upon
temporal  variability,  \anythiixg — thaiL__.fiither_  jncrei!ses_  the
dividend  without  injuring  the  absolute  share  of  the  poor,
or  increases^T5e~~absolute^  share  of  the  poor  without  injuring
the  dividend,  must^  in  generalTTiicxease  econnrnic  weJiare*  the
effect  upon  economic  welfare  of  anything  that  increases  one
of  these  quantities  but  diminishes  the  other  is  g,^^hi§^oug.
Plainly,  when  this  kind  of  disharmony  exists,  the  aggregate
effect  upon  economic  welfare  brought  about  by  any  cause
responsible  for  it  can  only  be  determined  by  balancing  in
detail  the  injury  (or  benefit)  to  the  dividend  as  a  whole
against  the  benefit  (or  injury)  to  the  real  earnings  of  the
poorer  classes.  No  general  solution  of  problems  of  that  class
is    possible.     It    is  important,   therefore,   to    determine   how

691


692  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

far  they  are  likely  to  arise  in  real  life ;  to  discover,  in  other
words,  whether  causes  acting  discordantly  upon  the  dividend
as  a  whole  and  upon  the  absolute  share  of  the  poor  are
frequent  or  rare.  When  disharmonies  are  found,  certain
practical  problems  arising  out  of  them  will  have  to  be
examined.


CHAPTER   II


PARETOS    LAW


§  1.  The  mere  statement  of  this  problem  brings  us  into
contact  with  an  interesting  thesis  which,  if  valid,  would
immediately  dispose  of  it.  This  thesis  is  that  no  cause^
operating  in  opposite  senses  upon  the  aggregate  amount  or|
the  dividend  and  upon  the  absolute  share  of  the  poor  caqj
possibly  exist.  It  is  backed  by  an  inductive  proof.  The
data  for  the  induction  are  derived  from  some  remarkable
investigations  conducted  by  Professor  Pareto  and  published
by  him  in  his  Cours  d'^onomie  politique.  Statistics  of
income  in  a  number  of  countries,  principally  during  the
nineteenth  century,  are  brought  together.  It  is  shown  that,
if  X  signify  a  given  income  and  N  the  number  of  persons
with  incomes  exceeding  x,  and  if  a  curve  be  drawn,  of  which
the  ordinat^s  are  logarithms  of  x  and  the  abscissae  logarithms
of  N,  this  curve,  for  all  the  countries  examined,  is  approxi-
mately a  straight  line,  and  is,  furthermore,  inclined  to  the
axis  of  X  at  an  angle,  which,  in  no  country,  differs  by  more
than  three  or  four  degrees  from  56°.  This  means  (since
tan  56°=1*5)  that,  if  the  number  of  incomes  greater  than
X  is   equal   to    N,   the   nimiber   greater    than    mx    is    equal

to  ^5-  •  N,  whatever  the  value  of  m  may  be.    Thus,  the  scheme

of  income  distribution  is  everywhere  the  sama  "  We  are
confronted,  as  it  were,  with  a  great  number  of  crystals  of  the
same  chemical  composition.  There  are  large  crystals,  middle-
sized  crystals  and  small  crystals,  but  they  are  all  of  the
same  form."  ^     These  are  the  facts  as  found  by  Professor  Pareto.

*  Cours  cdoonomie  politique,  ii.  pp.  306-7.
693


694  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  t

The  inference,  which  he  appears  to  draw  from  them  in  the
Cours   d'6conomie  politique,  contains   two  parts.      He  defines
diminished  inequality  among   incomes   thus :    "  Incomes  can
J  tend  towards   equality  in  two  quite  different  ways ;  that  is,
(  either  because  the   larger   incomes  diminish,  or  because   the
[jpaaller  incomes  increase.     Let  us  give  this  latter  significance
to  the  diminution  of  inequality  among  incomes,  so  that  this
will  take  place  when  the  number  of  the  individuals  having
an  income  less  than  an  income  x  diminishes  compared  with
the  number  of  persons  having  an  income  greater  than  x."  ^
On  this  basis  he  finds :  First,  "  we  may  say  generally  that
I  the  increase  of  wealth  relatively  to  population  will  produce
I  either  an  increase  in  the  minimum  income,  or  a  diminution
/  in   the  inequality  of  income,  or   both  these  effects  in  com-
!   bination."  ^     Secondly,   "  to  raise  the  level  of  the  minimum
\  income  or  to  diminish  the  inequality  of  income,  it  is  necessary
^^at    wealth    should    grow    more    rapidly    than    population.
Hence  we  see  that  the  problem  of  improving  the  condition
of  the  poor  is,  before  everything  else,  a  problem  of  the  pro-
Vi^uction  of  wealth."  ^     Now,  on  Professor  Pareto's  definition,
"  to   increase   the   minimum  income,  or  to  diminish  the   in-
equality  of  income  or   both "   is  substantially  equivalent  to
"  to  increase  the  absolute  share  of  the  national  dividend  accru-
ing  to   the   poor."     Hence,  what  this  thesis   amounts   to  in
'  effect  is  that,  on  the  one  hand,  anything  that  increases  the
I  national  dividend  must,  in  general,  increase  also  the  absolute
^_share  of  the  poor,  and,  on  the  other  hand — and  this  is  the
/  side   of   it   that   is   relevant   here — it   is   impossible   for  the
/  absolute  share  of  the  poor  to  be  increased  by  any  cause  which
\    does  not  at  the  same  time  increase  the  national  dividend  as
j  a  whole.     Hence,  disharmony  of  the  type  referred  to  in  the
preceding  chapter    is   impossible :    we   cannot   be   confronted
with  any  proposal  the  adoption  of  which  would  both  make
the  dividend  larger  and  the  absolute  share  of  the  poor  smaller,
or  vice  versa.

§  2.  Now  it  is  quite  evident  that  a  sweeping  proposition
of  this  kind,  based  upon  an  inductive  argument,  requires  very

'  ManttcUe  di  iconomia  politica,  p.  371.
*  Coura  d'iconomie  polUique,  ii.  p.  324.  '  Ibid.  p.  408.


CH.1I  PAEETO'S  LAW  695

careful  consideration.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  at  the  outset
to  call  attention  to  certain  defects  in  its  statistical  basis.
The  sum  of  what  has  to  be  said  is  that,  though  the  various
distributions  that  are  brought  under  review  are  similar  in
form,  the  likeness  among  them  is  by  no  means  complete.  In
all  of  them,  it  is  true,  the  logarithmic  income  curve — at  least
for  incomes  of  moderate  size — is  approximately  a  straight
line ;  but  the  inclination  of  this  line,  though  it  does  not  differ
widely,  stiU  does  differ  distinctly,  for  the  different  groups  of
statistics  that  have  been  observed.  Professor  Pareto's  lowest
figure  from  adequate  data  for  the  tangent  of  the  angle  made
with  the  axis  of  X  is,  for  instance,  124  (Bale,  1887),  and
his  highest  1-89  (Prussia,  1852).  Xor  is  this  aU.  As  Dr.
Bowley  has  pointed  out,  in  the  most  important  set  of  figures
observed  over  a  long  period  (those  for  Prussia)  the  slope  of
the  curve  has  been  decreasing  with  the  lapse  of  time.  The
figures  which  Dr.  Bowley  gives  differ  slightly  from  those
of  Professor  Pareto,  but  the  general  effect  is  the  same  in  both
sets.  According  to  Pareto,  however,  a  smaller  slope  of  the
curve  means  a  greater  equality  in  his  sense — a  sense
the  appropriateness  of  which,  it  will  be  remembered,  is
matter  for  debate — in  the  distribution  of  income.^  Dr.
Bowley,  therefore,  naturally  offers  as  an  explanation  of  the
Prussian  figures :  "  The  incomes  are  becoming  more  imiformly
distributed  in  Prussia,  and  the  result  is,  from  these  figures,
that  the  Prussian  income  is  getting  to  the  more  uniform  dis-
tribution of  the  English."  -  Hence,  interesting  as  Professor
Pareto's  comparisons  are,  to  build  upon  them  any  precise
quantitative  law  of  distribution  is  plainly  unjustifiable.

S  3.  But,  if  the  position  is  to  be  fully  understood,  it  is
well  that  this  point  should  be  waived.  Let  us  suppose  that
the  statistical  basis  of  Professor  Pareto's  reasoning  is  not
defective  in  the  way  that  has  been  indicated.  Even  so,  much
material  for  criticism  remains.  For  let  ds  consider  what
exactly  this  scheme,  or  form,  of  distribution  is,  for  the  exist-
ence of  which  a  mysterious  necessity  seems  to  have  been
discovei-ed.     If  we  were  to  plot  it  out,  not  as  Pareto  does,  but

1  Cf.  ante,  p.  58.
'  Select  Committee  on  the  Income  Tax,  1906,  Evidence,  p.  81.


696  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

in  the  simpler  form  of  a  curve  so  drawn  that   the  abscissae
represent  amounts  of  income,  and  the  ordinates  the  number
of  people  in  receipt  of  these  amounts,  the  curve  would  rise
very  quickly  to  its  highest  point  and  thereafter  continuously
fall.     This  would  express  in  a  picture  the  well-known  fact
that  there  are  a  very  large  number  of  people  with  incomes
much  below  the  average  income,  and,  comparatively,  a  very
small  number  with  incomes   above  the  average  income.     In
(short,  the  essential  characteristic  of  current  income  distribu-
itions  is  that  the  great  bulk  of  incomes  are  massed  together
\near  the  lower  end  of  the  income  scale.      This  fact  is  signi-
ficant for  the  following  reason.     There  is  clear  evidence  that
the  physical  characters   of  human  beings — and  considerable
evidence  that  the  mental  characters — are  distributed  on  an
altogether   different  plan.     When,    for    instance,   a   curve   is
plotted  out  for  the  heights  of  any  large  group  of  men,  the
resulting  picture  will  not  be,  as  with  incomes,  more  or  less
like  a  hyperbola,  but  it  will  be  a  symmetrical  curve  shaped
like  a  cocked-hat.     It  will,  in  short — to  use  a  technical  term
— be   the   characteristic   Gaussian   curve    or    curve   of  error,
symmetrical  about  the  mean,  in  such  wise  that  there  is  no
massing  near  either  end,  but  equal  numbers  of  heights  above
the  average  and  below  it,  and  a  lessening  number  of  people
at  every  height  as  the  distance  from  the  average  in  either
direction  is  increased.     Now,  on  the  face  of  things,  we  should
expect  that,  if,  as  there  is  reason  to  think,  people's  capacities
are  distributed  on  a  plan  of  this  kind,  their  incomes  will  be
distributed  in  the  same  way.     But  in  fact  they  are  not  dis-
tributed in  the  same  way ;   and  a  little  reflection  shows  at
once  why  they  are  not.     The  reason  is  that  income  depends,
/not  on  capacity  alone,  but  on  a  combination  of  capacity  and
inherited  property,  and  inherited  property  is  not  distributed
I  in  proportion  to  capacity,  but  is  concentrated  upon  a  small
number  of  people  not  selected  in  accordance  with  their  own,
or  even,  in  many  families,  their  parents'  capacity,  but  owing
1  their    good    fortune,   perhaps    to    their    being    only    sons    or
daughters,  perhaps  to  some  other  "  accident."     The  significance
of  this  fact  from  the  standpoint  of  our  present  problem  is
obvious.      If  the  form  of  the  income  distribution  is  partly


CH.II  PARETO'S  LAW  697

determined  by  the  facts  of  bequest  and  inheritance,  the
particular  form  which  is  found  to  be  dominant  in  current  con-i
ditions  cannot  possibly  be  necessary,  except  upon  the  assump-l
tion  that  the  general  scheme  of  inheritance  now  generally  id
vogue  is  maintained.  An  alleged  law,  then,  that  should  speak
of  any  form  as  necessary  in  an  absolute  sense,  runs  counter  to
apparently  irrefutable  reasoning.^

§  4.  The  statistics  adduced  by  Professor  Pareto  do  not
provide  a  basis  for  any  counter-argument  For,  as  a  matter  of
logic,  it  is  plain  that,  if  all  the  different  groups  to  which  his
statistics  refer  possess  any  common  characteristic  in  addition
to  the  fact  that  they  are  all  in  receipt  of  income,  no  general
inference  about  income  distribution,  that  is  based  upon  them,
can  be  extended  to  groups  not  possessing  these  characteristics.
And,  in  fact,  all  these  groups  are  communities  enjoying  the
general  type  of  inheritance  laws  common  to  modern  Europe,^
It  follows  at  once  that  no  inference  can  be  drawn  as  to  how
the  form  of  the  income  distribution  would  be  affected  if  these
laws  were  abolished  or  fundamentally  changed-  In  his
Manuale  di  ^onomia  politica,  published  some  years  after  the
Cours,  Professor  Pareto  himself  explicitly  recognises  this.
He  writes :  "  We  cannot  assert  that  the  form  of  the  curve
would  not  change  if  the  social  constitution  were  to  change
radically ;  if,  for  example,  collectivism  were  to  take  the  place
of  the  system  of  private  property."  ^

§  5.  Nor  is  it  necessary  to  imagine  so  large  a  change  as
the  destruction  of  inheritance  laws,  in  order  that  the  form  ofl
the  income-curve  may  be  largely  affected.     There  is  groundj
for  believing   that  a  like   result  would  come   about  in  con-V
sequence  of  anything   that  affected,  in   a   marked   way,  the  I
proportion    between   "  earned "   income    and    income    derived )
from  investments.     The  reason  for  this  opinion  is  twofold-  '

^  Cf.  Benini,  Principii  di  slatistica  metodologica,  p.  310.

*  Of  course  it  is  not  suggested  that  the  inheritance  laws  of  all  modem
Enropean  countries  are  exactly  identicaL  They  differ  considerably  in  detail.
The  French  laws,  for  example,  force  a  more  even  division  of  estates  among
children  than  the  Ejiglish  laws  and  deny  special  privileges  to  the  eldest  son.
It  is  interesting  to  connect  this  fact  with  the  observation  of  Benini  {Principii
di  statistica  metodologica,  p.  191),  that  the  distribution  of  wealth  is  more  even
in  France  than  it  is  here.     (Cf.  also  Ely,  Property  and  ConircuU,  voL  i.  p.  89.)

'  Loc.  dL  pp.  370-71.


698  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

I  First,  it  is  found  by  experience  that  incomes  from  property
/  are  distributed  much  more  unevenly  than  incomes  from  either
/  head-work  or  hand-work.  Mr.  Watkins,  in  his  Growth  of
^    Large  Fortunes,  after  printing  an  interesting  table,  comments

on  it  as  follows :  "  In  making  the  comparisons  made  possible
by  this  table,  the  criterion  must  be  relative,  not  absolute.
Convenient  relative  numbers  are  the  ratio  of  the  upper  decile,
or  the  upper  centile,  to  the  median.  It  will  be  observed  that,
in  the  statistics  of  wages,  the  upper  decile  is  always  somewhat
less  than  twice  the  median,  and,  in  one  occupation  of  the
nine,  it  is  little  more  than  one-fourth  greater.  In  the
distribution  of  salaries  the  upper  decile  is  approximately
twice  the  median,  the  inequality  thus  being  not  greatly
different  from  that  prevailing  among  wage-incomes.  But
there  is  a  great  gap  between  this  and  the  prevailing  dis-
tribution of  income  from  property.  In  the  Massachusetts
probate  statistics  the  upper  decile  is  eight  or  nine  times
the  median,  and  the  error  is  doubtless  in  the  direction  of
under-statement,  since  the  figures  are  not  net,  so  that  large
deductions  for  debts  should  be  made  from  the  smaller  estates,
and  also  since  many  very  small  properties  do  not  pass  through
the  courts.  Among  French  estates  the  upper  decile  is
thirteen  times  the  median."  ^  Secondly,  the  distribution  -of
Earned  income  itself  is  likely  to  be  more  uneven,  the  greater
is  the  importance  of  the  unevenly  distributed  income  from
investments.  This  result  comes  about  because  differences  in
/pncome  from  investments  make   possible   different  degrees  of

I I  educational    training    and    afford   different   opportunities  for
1  entering  lucrative  professions.     The  correlation  between  the  two

sorts  of  income  is  illustrated  by  Benini  in  a  table,  in  which  he
divides  the  figures  for  certain  Italian  incomes  into  two  parts :
"  The  one  represents  the  income  that  people  derive  from
property,  supposed  to  be  invested  for  all  the  different
categories  at  a  uniform  rate  of,  say,  5  per  cent,  the  other
represents  the  strictly  personal  income,  due  to  work,  enjoyed
by  the  same  people.  For  example,  a  total  income  of
2000  lire,  accompanied  by  a  property  of  9016  lire,  may  be
regarded  as  composed  of  451  lire,  the  fruit  of  investment,  and

^  The  Growth  of  Large  Fortunes,  p.  18.


CH.  II  PAEETO'S  LAW  699

of  1549  lire,  the  fruit  of  professional  activity.  Calculating  in
this  manner,  we  obtain  the  following  table :

™  ^  ,  T  T  J    •     J     Income  derived

Total  Income      Income  denved      from  Personal

(lire).  from  Property.  Activity.

1,000  =  143  +  857

2,000  =  Aol  +  1549

4,000  =  1,458  +  2542

8,000  =  4,285  +  3715

16,000  =  11,665  +  4335

20.000  =  15,885  +  4115

32,000  =  28,640  +  3360

40,000  =  37,500  +  2500

It  will  be  noticed,  of  course,  that,  so  soon  as  total  incomes
begin  to  exceed  16,000  lire,  the  part  derived  from  personal
activity  diminishes;  but  this  does  not  mean  that  the  remunera-
tion of  the  profession  followed  diminishes  ;  it  only  means  that
many  will  now  live  wholly  on  the  income  derived  from
their  property  without  following  any  gainful  profession,  and
that  this  conduct  of  theirs  reduces  the  average  of  the  income
due  to  work  for  the  class  to  which  they  belong."  ^  Moreover,
there  is  yet  another  way  in  which  the  form  of  the  income-
curve  might  be  modified.  A  change  in  the  distribution  of
training  and  so  forth,  that  is,  of  investment  of  capital  in
people,  may  take  place  apart  from  variations  in  income  from
investments.  "When  this  happens,  the  change  must  tend
directly  to  alter  the  distribution  of  earned  income,  even
though  original  capacities  are  distributed  in  accordance  with
some  (the  same)  law  of  error.  It  is  perhaps  some  change
of  this  kind  that  accounts  for  the  conclusion,  which  Professor
Moore  derives  from  his  study  of  American  wage  statistics,
that  the  variability  of  wages  (as  between  different  people  at
the  same  time)  was  less  in  1900  than  it  had  been  in  1890.

§  6.  When  these  points  are  conceded,  the  general  defence
of  "  Pareto's  Law  "  as  a  law  of  even  limited  necessity  rapidly
crumbles.  His  statistics  warrant  no  inference  as  to  the
effect  on  distribution  of  the  introduction  of  any  cause  that
is  not  already  present  in  approximately  equivalent  form  in

'  Principii  di  sUUistica  metodologica,  pp.  336-7.


700  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

at  least  one  of  the  communities — and  they  are  very  limited
in    range — from    which    these    statistics    are    drawn.       This
consideration  is  really  fatal ;  and  Professor  Pareto  is  driven,
in  effect,  to  abandon  the  whole  claim  which,  in  the  earlier
exposition    of   his    formula,   he    seemed    to   make.       In    the
Manucde  di  ^conomia  politica   he   insists   that   that  formula
is   purely  empirical.     "  Some  persons  would  deduce  from  it
a  general  law  as  to  the  only  way  in  which  the  inequality  of
incomes    can    be    diminished.      But    such    a    conclusion    far
transcends  anything  that  can  be  derived  from  the  premises.
Empirical  laws,  like  those  with  which  we  are  here  concerned,
have  little  or  no  value  outside  the  limits  for  which  they  were
found  experimentally  to  be  true."^      This  means  that,  even
if  the  statistical  basis  of  the  "  law  "  were  much  securer  than
it  is,  the  law  would  but  rarely  enable  us  to  assert  that  any
contemplated  change  must  leave  the  form  of  income  distri-
bution unaltered.     As   things  are,  in  view  of  the  weakness
-of  its   statistical   basis,  it   can   never   enable   us   to   do  this.
Disharmony  between    movements    of   the    national   dividend
jas  a  whole  and  of  the  absolute  share  accruing  to  the  poor
/  cannot    be    proved    by    general    statistical    inference    to    be
/  impossible,  and  a  detailed  study  of  the  matter  must,  therefore,
I   be  made.

*  Manuale  di  ^conomia  politica,  pp.  371-2.


CHAPTEK   III

THE    SUPPLY    OF    CAPITAL    AND    LABOUR

§  1.  In  undertaking  that  study  we  are  forced  to  avail  our-
selves of  a  somewhat  rough  method  of  approximation.  Our
inquiry  is  concerned  with  the  comparative  effects  of  certain  i
causes  upon  the  magnitude  of  the  national  dividend  and  upon/
its  distribution  among  rich  and  poor  persons.  1  Ko  machinery
exists  by  which  effects  upon  distribution  in  this  sense  can  be
directly  investigated.  But  economists  have  carried  through,
and  have  made  common  property,  a  very  full  analysis  of  the
influences  that  affect  distribution  in  another  sense,  namely,
distribution  among  the  various  "factors  of  production."!
These  two  sorts  of  distribution  are  not  the  same.  They
would  he  the  same  if  each  factor  were  provided  exclusively
by  a  set  of  persons  who  provided  nothing  of  any  other  |
factor.  But,  of  course,  in  real  life  the  same  man  often  |
provides  portions  of  several  factors,  obtaining  part  of  his
income  from  one  and  part  from  another.  A  landlord  is
not  merely  the  owner  of  "the  original  and  indestructible
properties  of  the  soil."  On  the  contrary,  he  frequently
invests  a  great  deal  of  capital  in  his  land,  and  sometimes
also  considerable  mental  labour  in  choosing  his  tenants,
exercising  a  certain  control  over  their  methods,  and  deciding,
it  may  be,  upon  the  necessity  of  evictions.  A  shopkeeper
provides  capital,  or  waiting,  to  some  extent,  but  he  also
provides,  especially  if  his  sales  are  on  credit,  much  mental
labour  in  judging  the  "  standing  of  his  customers "  and  not
a  little  uncertainty-bearing  in  respect  of  bad  debts.  A
large  capitalist   employer   is  still  more  obviously   capitalist,

701


702  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

brain-worker  and  uncertainty-bearer  combined.     Finally,  an
ordinary  manual  worker  is  frequently,  in  some  measure,  also

!a  capitalist.  In  view  of  these  considerations,  it  is  plain  that
doctrines  about  distribution  among  factors  of  production
cannot  be  applied  directly  and  unreservedly  to  problems
concerning  distribution  among  people.  The  difficulty  is  not,
/  however,  as  it  so  happens,  of  decisive  practical  importance.
By  far  the  largest  part  of  the  poorer  classes  in  this  country
consists  of  wage-earning  workpeople.  It  is  true,  of  course,
that  "  there  is  no  definite  line  between  wage-earners  and
persons  working  directly  for  customers  and  small  employers
and  small  farmers,  .  .  .  nor  is  there  any  clear  and  uniform
division  between  wages  and  salaries."  ^  But  the  dominant
position  of  wage-earners  among  the  poor  is  illustrated  by  the
fact  that,  whereas,  before  the  war,  they  numbered  some
fifteen  and  a  half  millions,  persons  other  than  wage-earners
with  incomes  below  £160  a  year  numbered,  say,  three  and
a  half  millions.^  Moreover,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that
a  large  number  of  persons  earning  small  salaries  or  small
incomes  from  working  on  their  own  account  are  affected  by
the  main  body  of  relevant  economic  causes  in  much  the  same
way  as  wage-earners  proper.  For  the  purpose  of  the  present
discussion,  therefore,  though  not,  of  course,  for  all  purposes,
we  shall  not  commit  any  serious  error  if  we  treat  manual
workers  and  the  poor  as  roughly  equivalent  classes.  Further-
more, statistics  show  that  by  far  the  most  important  income-
yielding  instrument  actually  possessed  by  the  poor  of  the
United  Kingdom,  as  thus  defined,  is  manual  labour.  Persons
in  receipt  of  wages  number,  as  I  have  said,  some  fifteen  and
a  half  millions,  and  it  is  probable  that  persons  dependent
upon  wages  amount  to  30,000,000,  or  nearly  two- thirds
of  the  population.  The  accumulated  property  of  these
persons  before  the  war — it  is,  of  course,  a  good  deal  larger
now — was  estimated  at  £450,000,000,  and  the  interest  on  it
might,  therefore,  be  put  at  some  £20,000,000  a  year.  This
was  probably  little  more  than  ^j^gth  part  of  the  total  income  of
the   wage-earners,   all    the   rest   being    received   as  wages   of

*  Bowley,  The  Division  of  the  Product  of  Industry,  p.  12.
2  Bid.  p.  11.


cH.iii       SUPPLY  OF  CAPITAL  A^D  LABOUK         703

labour.^     Hence,  just  as  we  have  agreed  roughly  to  identify  I
the  poor  with  the  wage-earners,  we  may  agree  also  to  identify  k
the  earnings  of  wage-earners  with  the  earnings  of  the  factor  I
labour.     No  appreciable  error  is  introduced  by  this  simplifica-
tion.     When    we    have    made    it,  the    familiar   analysis    of
economists  can  be  directly  applied.

§  2.  We  may  divide  the  factors  of  production,  from  whose  I
joint  operation  the  national  dividend  results,  into  two  broad]
groups,  labour  and  the  factors  other  than  labour.  Of  course
neither  labour  nor  the  factors  other  than  labour  constitute
a  homogeneous  group  made  up  of  similar  units.  Labour
embraces  the  work  both  of  wholly  unskilled  workpeople  and
of  numerous  sorts  of  skilled  artisans.  The  factors  other  than
labour  embrace,  along  with  the  work  of  Nature,  the  work  of
many  kinds  of  mental  ability  and  of  various  sorts  of  capital
instruments.  This  circumstance  is  not,  however,  relevant  to
our  present  problem.  That  problem  is  to  determine  whether
and  how  far  economic  causes,  which  affect  the  national  divi-
dend as  a  whole  in  one  sense,  can  affect  the  receipts  of  the
factor  labour  in  the  opposite  sense.  In  the  present  chapter
attention  will  be  concentrated  upon  two  sets  of  causes  of  the
broadest  kind,  namely,  those  that  act  respectively  on  the
supply  of  capital  in  general  and  on  the  supply  of  labour  |
in  general.      It  will  be  convenient  to  begin  with  capital.  !

§  3.  Capital,  or  to  put  the  same  thing  in  concrete  terms,
capital  instruments,  are  the  embodiment  of  labour  itself,  wait-
ing for  the  fruits  of  labour  and  uncertainty-bearing.     Con-
sequently, apart  from  inventions  and  improvements,  which  will
be  considered  presently,  an  increase  in  the  supply  of  capital  J
instruments  can  only  mean  that  people  have  been  willing  to
undertake  more  waiting  for  the   fruits   of  labour   and  more
exposure  of  those  fruits  to  uncertainty.     In  other  words,  thel
supply  of  waiting,  or  of  uncertainty-bearing,  or  of  both  has  beenl
increased.     It  is  obvious  that  a  cause  of  this  kind  will  make  I
for  an  increase  in  the  national  dividend  as  a  whole.     Can  it  at
the  same  time  make  for  a  decrease   in  the  real    income    of
labour  ?      The   analysis   relevant   to  this   question  has  been
developed   by  Dr.   Marshall.      Subject  to   certain  important

^  Cf.  Chiozza-Money,  Riches  and  Poverty,  p.  49.


704  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

qualifications,  which  do  not  affect  the  present  argument,  this
analysis  shows,  first,  that  every  factor  of  production,  including
entrepreneurs'  work,^  tends  to  be  remunerated  at  a  rate  equiva-
lent to  its  marginal  net  product  of  commodities  in  general.
It  shows,  secondly,  that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  marginal
net  product,  in  this  sense,  of  every  factor  diminishes  as  the
supply  of  this  factor  increases.  This  proposition  expresses
I  what  may  be  called  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  to  in-
dividual factors  of  production — the  law,  namely,  that  the
increase  of  production  due  to  the  increase,  by  a  small  incre-
ment, of  any  factor  of  production,  wiU,  in  general,  be  smaller,
other  things  remaining  the  same,  the  greater  is  the  supply  of
that  factor  already  employed.  This  law  must  not  be  confused
with  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  to  resources  in  general
invested  in  a  given  occupation,  as  defined  in  Part  II.  Chapter
II.  §  8.  This  latter  law  is  applicable  to  some  commodities
only,  and  corresponds  to  the  law  of  increasing  returns,  as
ordinarily  understood,  which  is  applicable  to  others.  The  law
of  diminishing  returns  to  individual  factors  of  production  is
quite  different  from  this,  and  is  valid,  not  merely  in  some  con-
ditions, but,  apart  from  a  few  unimportant  exceptions,  in  all.^
There  is  no  law  of  increasing  returns  to  individual  factors  of
production  corresponding  to  it.  The  ground  of  it  is  the  general
fact  that,  as  the  supply  of  any  factor  increases,  it  pushes
forward  an  irregular  boundary  along  a  great  number  of  routes.^
The  more  of  it  there  is,  the  smaller  is  the  quantity  of  other
factors,  with  which  to  co-operate  and  from  which  to  derive
assistance,  that  each  new  unit  finds  available.  Consequently,
as  the  quantity  of  any  factor  increases,  its  marginal  net  product
in  terms  of  commodities  in  general  continually  falls.

'  The  special  case  of  the  entrepreneur's  earnings  is  discussed  in  detail  by
Professor  Edgeworth  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Ecoiwmics  for  February  1904  ;
it  is  also  touched  upon  in  his  paper  on  ' '  Mathematical  Theories  "  in  the  Economic
Jmimal  of  December  1907.

2  For  a  discussion  on  lines  somewhat  similar  to  the  above,  of.  Carver,  The
Distribution  of  Wealth,  pp.  65-6  ;  and  Wicksteed,  The  Common  Sense  of  Political
Economy,  bk.  ii,  ch.  v.

3  This  idea  is  well  expressed  by  Turgot  in  an  elaborate  figure  (cf.  Cassel,
Naiure  and  Necessity  of  Interest,  p.  22).  In  illustration,  it  may  be  noticed
that,  as  the  rate  of  interest  falls,  instrumental  goods  come  to  be  built  more
solidly  and  to  be  repaired  and  renewed  more  readily  when  need  arises.


CH.  Ill       SUPPLY  OF  CAPITAL  AND  LABOUK         705

§  4.  From  this  analysis  an  important  proposition  directly
relevant  to  our  present  problem  can  be  derived  This  proposition
has  two  sides,  and  is  to  this  effect :  If  the  quantity  of  any  factor
of  production  is  increased,  the  reward  per  efficiency  unit  reaped
by  all  factors  completely  rival  to  that  factor  (in  the  sense  of
being  perfect  substitutes)  will  be  diminished,  and  the  reward  per  1
efficiency  unit  reaped  by  all  factors  completely  co-operant  with
it,  and  in  no  degree  substitutes,  will  be  increased.  The  former
half  of  this  proposition  is  obvious.  The  advent  of  Chinese  immi-
grants in  the  retailing  business  must  injure  the  British  retail
shopkeepers  of  New  Zealand,  and  the  steady  flow  of  low-grade
European  immigrants  must  keep  down  the  wages  of  unskilled
workmen  in  the  United  States.^  The  latter  half  of  the  pro-
position is  easily  proved  as  follows.  Since  each  unit  of  the
increased  factor  must  be  paid  at  the  same  rate,  and  the  rate
for  the  new  units  is  less  than  the  old  rate,  a  part  of  the
product  of  the  old  as  well  as  of  the  new  units  is  handed  over
to  the  co-operant  factors.^  As  an  illustration,  we  may  note
that  a  high  level  of  wages  generally  prevails  in  new  countries
because,  first,  there  is  a  large  quantity  of  land  available,  and
secondly,  by  mortgaging  the  land  to  foreigners,  the  inhabitants
can  obtain  a  large  quantity  of  capital  also.^

§  5.  If,  as  is,  of  course,  generally  true  in  the  concrete,
different  factore  are  partly  co-operant  and  partly  rival,  the

*  Professor  Taussig  points  out  that,  whereas  most  money  incomes  in  the
United  States  have  increased,  "the  wages  of  ordinary  day  labour  and  of  snch
factory  labour  as  is  virtually  unskilled  seem  to  have  remained  stationary  and
sometimes  seem  even  to  have  fallen"  {Quarterly  Journal  of  Economies,  1906,
p.  521).  Whether  the  unskilled  immigrants  are  mainly  rival  or  mainly  co-
operant  with  the  skilled  workers  of  America  is  another  and  more  difficult
question.  Dr.  Hourwich  writes  on  this  point :  "  It  is  only  because  the  new
immigrants  have  furnished  the  class  of  unskilled  labour  that  the  native  workmen
and  older  immigrants  have  been  raised  to  the  plane  of  an  aristocracy  of  labour  "
{Immigration  and  Labour,  p.  12).  In  the  same  sense  Prof.  Prato  {Le  Protec-
tionisms (hivrier,  p.  72)  maintains  that,  in  general,  the  low-grade  immigrant
takes  on  occupations  which  native- bom  workpeople  wish  to  leave,  and  that  this  is
true  not  only  of  the  Chinese  and  European  immigrant  into  the  United  States,  but
also  of  the  Italian  and  Belgian  immigrant  to  France,  Switzerland  and  Germany.

*  It  is  not  relevant  to  the  present  argument  to  note,  though  the  point  may
be  added  for  completeness,  that,  in  response  to  the  improved  demand,  the
co-operant  factors  tend  to  increase  in  quantity,  but,  since  their  supply  curve  is
inclined  positively,  not  to  a  sufficient  extent  to  reduce  their  receipts  to  the  old
level.

'  C£  Marshall,  Soyal  Commisgion  on  Labour,  Q.  4237-8.

2  z


706  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

effect  of  an  increase  in  the  quantity  of  one  of  them  upon  the

reward  obtained  by  the  others  can  be  analysed  in  this  wise.

Suppose  that  the  quantity  of  factor  A  increases  from  A  to

(A  +  a),  and  that  x  of  the  new  units  are  substituted  in  uses

formerly  occupied  by  mx  units  of  the  other  factor  B.      Then

the  effect  produced  on  the  reward  per  unit  of  B  is  equal  to

that  which   would  have  been  produced  had  the  two  factors

been  entirely  co-operant,  and  had  the  quantity  of  A  increased

from   A  to   {A-{-a  —  x)   and   the   quantity   of   B   from   B   to

(B  +  mx).     It  is  obvious  that  this  effect  may  represent  either

an  increase  or  a  decrease  in  the  reward  per  unit  of  B,  and  that

it   is   more    likely   to    represent   an    increase,    the    larger    is

A  +  a  — X     ,  ^.     ,     ^    B  +  ma?

relatively  to — - — .      It  is  not  possible,  in    the

absence  of  knowledge  as  to  the  form  of  the  function  repre-
senting the  relations  between  the  factors  and  their  product,
to  make  any  statement  more  precise  than  this.  Interpreted
roughly,  the  condition,  under  which,  on  the  hypothesis  taken,
an  increase  in  the  quantity  of  A  would  lead  to  an  increase  in
the  reward  per  unit  of  B,  is  that  the  predominant  part  of  the
(  extra  units  of  A  can  be  profitably  turned  to  uses  other  than

1  those  formerly  occupied  by  units  of  B.  Hence,  in  general,
where  two  factors  are  partly  co-operant  and  partly  rival,  an
increase  in  the  quantity  of  the  one  will  augment  the  reward
per  unit,  and,  therefore,  the  absolute  share  of  the  dividend,

I  enjoyed  by  the  other,  if  the  relation  of  co-operation  between

;'  the  two  factors  is  more  important  than  the  relation  of
rivalry.

■^  §  6,  The  question  whether  the  relation  between  waiting
and  uncertainty-bearing  in  general  and  labour  in  general  is,
in  the  concrete,  mainly  co-operant  or  mainly  rival  is  not  one
to  which  an  a  priori  answer  can  be  given.  If  the  only  sort
of  capital  instruments  which  mankind  had  learned  how  to
make  were  a  kind  of  Frankenstein  monster  capable  of  exactly
duplicating  the  labour  of  manual  workers,  and  not  capable  of
doing  anything  else,  this  relation  would  be  wholly  one  of
rivalry.  What  it  is  in  actual  fact,  therefore,  chiefly  depends
on  the  nature  of  the  things  which  people  are  able,  by  com-
bining   labour    with    waiting    and    uncertainty  -  bearing,    to


CH.  Ill       SUPPLY  OF  CAPITAL  AND  LABOUE         707

create.     If  we  consider  realistically  what  these  things  in  the
main  are — and,  of  course,  when  what  is  contemplated  is  a
general  increase  in   the  supply  of  waiting  and  uncertainty-
bearing,  we   must  imagine  the  new  supplies  to  be   used  in
an  aU-roimd  addition  to  existing  capital  instruments — it  is
apparent  that  their  work  is  mainly  co-operant.    Eailways,  ships,i
factory  buildings  and  machines,  taken  broadly,  are  tools  for,  and/
not  rivals  to,  men.     By  giving  help,  they  enable  any  nth  worker
to  produce  more  stuff  than  he  could  have  produced  without
them  ;  they  do  not,  by  supplanting  him,  compel  him  to  produce  \
less.     This  is  the  general  teaching  of  experience.    In  particular  /
instances,  indeed,  the  relation  is  predominantly  one  of  rivalry.  1
But,  comparatively,  these  are  unimportant.     As  Dr.  Marshall
well  writes  :  "  There  is  a  real  and  effective  competition  between
labour   in   general  and  waiting   [to   which  should  be   added'
uncertainty -bearing]  in  general.     But  it  covers  a  small  part  of  I
the  whole  field,  and  is  of  small  importance  relatively  to  the  1
benefit  which  labour  derives  from  obtaining  cheaply  the  aid  of
capital,  and,  therefore,  of  efficient  methods  in  the  production
of   things    that    it    needs."  ^      In    other    words,   the  relation
between  capital  as  a    whole   and  labour  as   a  whole  is  pre-
dominantly one  of  co-operation.     It  follows  that  the  question
set    out    for    discussion    in    §   2    must  be   answered    in    the
negative.    It  is  not,  in  present  conditions,  practically  possible
that  a  cause  (other  than  inventions  and  improvements  which
will  be  considered  in  the  next  chapter)  operating  to  expand
the   national   dividend   by  increasing   the  supply    of   capital
generally   should    at    the  same  time  lessen  the  real  income
of  labour.     Similarly,  of  course,  it  can  be  shown  that  a  cause
operating  to  contract  the  dividend  by  diminishing  the  supply
of  capital  generally  cannot  at  the  same  time  increase  the  real
income  of  labour.     In  this  field,  in  short,  disharmony  cannot
occur.

§  7.  This  conclusion  leads  up  to  the  difficult  problem  of  \
capital  investments  abroad.     Apart  from  the   special   quali-    \
fications   indicated  on  page  162,  it  may  be  presumed  that,
since  nobody  will  invest  abroad  rather  than  at  home  unless  l\
he  expects  a  better   return,   freedom    to    invest    abroad  wiU
*  PrindpUs  of  Economics,  p.  540.


708  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

f  augment  the  national  dividend.  As  against  this,  it  seems
at  first  sight  that  it  will  diminish  the  real  income  of  labour.
The  funds  for  investment  must  be  obtained  either  by  ex-
porting goods  or  by  refraining  from  the  import  of  goods  to
which  we  have  a  claim.  It  makes  very  little  difference
whether  or  not  the  granting  of  a  loan  is  made  conditional
upon  the  proceeds  of  it  being  expended  in  purchasing  the
railway  material,  or  other  things,  which  it  is  destined  to  pay
for,  in  the  lending  country.  If  this  is  done,  the  kind  of
goods  that  we  export  may  be  altered,  but  the  volume  of  them
will  not  be  substantially  affected.  In  any  event  the  volume
of  things  immediately  available  in  this  country  will  be
diminished.  This  is  practically  certain  to  involve  a  direct
injury  to  labour,  either  by  making  the  things  workpeople
buy  more  expensive,  or  by  reducing  the  supply  of  tools  and
machines  that  help  them  in  production.  It  is  true  that,
since  some  capital  will  have  been  withdrawn  from  home  uses,
the  rate  of  interest  here  will  go  up,  and  this  will  encourage
isaving  to  create  more  capital.  But  this  tendency  can  only
pnitigate,  and  not  wipe  out,  the  initial  injury  to  labour.  It
follows  that  labour  must  be  less  well-off  in  terms  of  things
in  general  than  it  would  have  been  if  the  opening  for  investing
capital  abroad  had  been  closed.

This  result,  however,  is  not  decisive.  In  certain  cir-
cumstances, even  though  this  happens,  labour  may,  neverthe-
)less,  be  better  off  in  terms  of  the  particular  things  which
workpeople  are  interested  to  buy.  For,  as  an  indirect  effect
of  our  foreign  investments,  these  things  may  have  been  generally
cheapened.  In  actual  fact  this  has  happened.  Sir  George
Paish,  writing  in  1914,  stated:  "In  the  aggregate.  Great
Britain  has  supplied  the  world  outside  these  islands  with
nearly  £600,000,000  for  the  construction  of  railways  in  the
last  seven  years  (out  of  a  total  so  supplied  by  her  of  upwards
of  eleven  hundred  millions),  and  all  of  the  money  has  been
placed  in  countries  upon  which  we  depend  for  our  supplies  of
food  and  raw  material."  ^  When  our  foreign  investments  are
of  this  character,  the  real  income  of  labour,  in  the  only  sense

*  "The  Export  of  Capital  and  the  Cost  of  Living,"  Manchester  Statistical
Society,  Feb.  1914,  p.  78.


CH.  Ill       SUPPLY  OF  CAPITAL  AKD  LABOUK         709

that  signifies,  is  fairly  certain  to  be  increased,  so  that  no
disharmonj  arises.  No  doubt,  if  there  were  special  reason
to  believe  that,  had  the  export  of  capital  been  forbidden,  the
funds  set  free  would  have  been  devoted  to  domestic  uses
specially  beneficial  to  workpeople,  such  as  the  erection  of  a
large  number  of  healthy  workmen's  cottages,  this  conclusion
would  not  hold  good.  But  there  is  not,  in  general,  special
reason  to  believe  this.

Moreover,  it  is  necessary  to  take  account  of  certain  more
remote  consequences  of  foreign  investment.     When  the  export
of  capital  is  free,  the  opportunity  to  obtain  higher  interest
abroad  both  causes  more  British  capital  to  be  created — in  lieu
of  consumption — than  would  have  been  created  otherwise,  and
also  enables  a  part  of  it  to  be  invested  in  enterprises  yielding
a  larger  return  than  would  otherwise  have  been  open  to  it.
Thus,  freedom  to  export  capital  at  one  time  exercises  a  twofold\
influence  in  enlarging  the  aggregate  real  income  of  the  country[
at  a  later  time.      It  follows  that,  other  things  being  equal,  the
amount  of  new  capital  that  can  be  created  there  at  a  later
time  will  be  enlarged.     This  effect  will  repeat  itself  cumula-
tively year  after  year.      In  the  end,  therefore,  if  we  suppose  >
the  amount  of  capital  exported  to  remain  constant,  the  extra
capital  created  on  account  of  past  exportation  must,  it  would
seem,  exceed  the  amount  withdrawn  by  contemporary  exporta-  /
tion.      This  means  that,  in  the  end,  labour  as  a  whole  will  be/
benefited   and   not  injured-      Though,  therefore,  disharmony  1
may  prevail  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  short  period,  in  the  I
higher  unity  of  the  long  view  it  is  likely  to  be  resolved.     The
practical  inference  is  that  all  proposals  to  restrict  the  export
of  capital  in  the  interests  of  labour — apart  from  the  special
reasons  discussed  on  page  162  cited  above — should  be  subjected
to  a  very  cautious  and  critical  scrutiny.

§  8.  "We  turn  to   the  second  main  group   of  causes   dis-
tinguished in  I  2,  those,  namely,  which  operate  through  the
supply  of  labour.    It  is  evident  that,  if  this  supply  is  increased,  j
whether  the  increase  comes  about  through  an  addition  to  the
number  of  workpeople  or  through  an  addition  to  their  average  I
efficiency,  the   national    dividend    must    be    increased.      Our  '
problem,  therefore,  is  to  ascertain  the  effect  that  will  be  pro-


710  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

ducjed  upon  the  aggregate  real  income  of  labour.     The  analysis

(set  out  in  the  preceding  section  shows  that  the  marginal  net
product  of  labour,  in  terms  of  things  in  general,  and,  therefore,
its  real  earnings  -per  unit,  must  be  diminished.  Whether  its
aggregate  income  will  be  increased  depends,  therefore,  on
whether  the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  labour  in  general  is
greater  or  less  than  unity.  If  this  elasticity  is  greater  than
unity,  labour  in  the  aggregate  will  receive  a  larger  absolute
quantity  of  dividend  than  before  ;  whereas,  if  the  elasticity  is
less  than  unity,  it  will  receive  a  smaller  absolute  quantity.-'

^  The  general  proposition,  of  which  the  statement  in  the  text  is  a  special
instance,  is  that,  other  things  being  equal,  an  increase  in  the  quantity  of  any  one
factor  of  production  will  be  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  absolute  share  of
product  accruing  to  that  factor,  provided  that  the  demand  for  the  said  factor  has
an  elasticity  greater  than  unity.  The  condition  on  which  it  will  be  accompanied  by
an  increase  in  the  proportionate  share  of  product  accruing  to  the  factor  is  different
from  this,  and  can  be  determined  as  follows.  The  supply  functions  of  the
other  factors  being  given,  the  aggregate  output  P  depends  on  the  quantity
of  the  variable  factor,  in  such  wise  that,  if  x  represents  this  quantity,  P  =f{x).
The  absolute  share  accruing  to  the  variable  factor  is,  therefore,  represented  by

xf,  and  the  proportionate  share  by  -^.     The  condition  that  this  latter  magni-
tude shall  increase  when  x  increases  is  that


^|/  +  «/"|  +  »/'|ry-p|  is  positive.


/
Let  e  represent  the  elasticity  of  demand  for  the  factor  in  question.    Then,  since

the  above  condition  can  be  expressed,  by  easy  substitution,  in  the  form

This  magnitude  exceeds  unity  by  a  larger  amount,  the  larger  is  the  propor-
tionate share  of  the  product  accruing,  before  the  variation,  to  our  variable  factor.
The  above  formula,  besides  its  general  application,  has  also  a  subordinate
one  ;  for  it  gives  the  conditions  under  which  an  improvement  in  the  methods
of  cultivation  will  increase  the  proportion  that  true  rent  bears  to  the  gross
produce  of  farm-land.  When  additional  doses  of  capital  and  labour  yield  only
slightly  diminishing  returns,  when,  that  is  to  say,  the  elasticity  of  the  demand
for  them  in  terms  of  product  is  very  large,  an  improvement  (which  is  equivalent
to  an  increase  in  the  quantity  of  capital  and  labour  apjilied)  generally  accords
to  capital  and  labour  a  larger  proportion,  and,  therefore,  to  true  rent  a  smaller
proportion,  than  before.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  diminishing  returns  act
sharply,  the  proportion  accruing  to  true  rent  will  generally  be  increased  by  an
improvement.  When  changes  in  the  proportion  of  product  accruing  to  different
factors  are  considered  historically,  it  is,  of  course,  vital  to  note  that  an  increase
in  the  "  share  "  of  land,  the  amount  of  which  necessarily  remains  stationary,
may  mean  something  very  different  from  a  similar  increase  in  the  "share"  of
capital,  the  amount  of  which  may  have  been  very  greatly  increased.


CH.  in       SUPPLY  OF  CAPITAL  AND  LABOUR         711

It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  determine  whether  in  fact  the
elasticity  of  demand  is  greater  or  less  than  unity.

Let  us  begin  by  ignoring  the  fact  that  an  addition
to  the  supply  of  labour  available  in  industry  is  likely
to  react  upon  the  supply  of  other  factors  co-operating  with
it.  It  may  then  be  observed  that  there  is  a  certain  field
of  personal  service  where  labour  works  practically  unaided
by  other  factors,  where,  therefore,  its  productivity  per  unit
would  not  appreciably  fall  with  an  increase  in  its  quantity,
and  where  a  good  deal  could  be  absorbed  without  greatly
reducing  the  value  of  its  product  in  terms  of  other  things.!
This  circumstance  points,  pro  tanto,  to  a  fairly  low  rate  of
diminution  in  the  (real)  demand  for  labour  in  general  as  the
quantity  of  it  increases ;  though  exactly  how  rapid  the  rate  of
diminution  would  be,  or,  in  other  words,  how  elastic  is  the
demand  for  labour,  it  is  quite  impossible  to  say.  In  real  life,
however,  it  is  illegitimate  to  ignore  reactions,  indirectly
brought  about  by  an  increase  in  the  supply  of  labour,  in
the  supply  of  other  factors.  In  particular,  the  supply  of
capital  is  known  to  be  very  far  from  rigidly  fixed.  When
the  quantity  of  labour  increases,  and,  hence,  indirectly,  the
return  per  unit  of  capital  is  enhanced,  people  in  general  will
be  willing  to  save  more  and  so  to  create  a  greater  quantity
of  capital  Moreover,  owing  to  the  greater  volume  of  the  ^
national  dividend,  their  ability  to  save  will  be  increased.  The
resultant  increase  in  the  supply  of  capital  will  react  to
increase  the  marginal  productivity  of  any  given  quantity  of  I
labour.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  is  probable  that  the
demand  for  labour,  even  viewed  from  the  general  standpoint]
of  the  whole  world,  is  fairly  elastic.^  And  the  probability  is
far  stronger  as  regards  the  demand  for  labour  in  any  single
country.  For  capital  is  so  mobile  that  a  small  increase  in
the  return  per  unit  obtainable  by  it  in  any  one  country  must
inevitably — apart  from  complications  due  to  double  income-tax,
r  about  which  it  may  be  hoped  that  international  arrangements
will  soon  be  made — bring  about  a  large  influx  from  foreign  \
countries,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  a  large  contraction

1  Cf.  Edgeworth,  "  On  the  Use  of  the  Differential  Calculus  in  Economics,"
Rm^a  di  Scientia,  vol.  vii.  pp.  90-91.


712  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

of  the  outflow  that  formerly  went  to  foreign  countries.  Hence,
the  elasticity  of  the  aggregate  demand  for  British  labour  is
greater  than  the  elasticity  of  that  part  of  the  demand  which
depends  on  British  capital  alone.  It  is,  indeed,  so  much
fgreater  that,  with  any  reasonable  assumption  as  to  this  latter
lelasticity,  the  elasticity  of  the  aggregate  demand  is  practically
3ertain,  from  the  standpoint  of  a  long  period,  which  is  alone
m  question  here,  to  be  immensely  larger  than  unity.

Hence,  it  follows  that  an  increase  in  the  supply  of  labour,
[whether  through  an  increase  in  the  number  of  units  of  labour
of  given  efficiency  that  the  average  workman  provides,  or
through  an  increase  in  the  number  of  workmen  providing,  on
I  the  average,  a  given  number  of  units  of  labour,  must  increase
the  absolute  quantum  of  dividend  that  labour  in  the  aggre-
[gate  receives.  It  is,  no  doubt,  true  that,  within  the  broad
group  labour,  an  increase  in  efficiency,  which  only  affected
some  of  the  sub-groups,  might  involve  injury  to  other  sub-
groups, whose  efficiency  has  not  been  improved.  Even  this
danger,  however,  is  likely  to  be  avoided  where  the  different
sub-groups  are  not  strictly  homogeneous,  but  are  partly
co-operant,  and  where,  as  occurs  when  some  unskilled  labourers
are  trained  to  trades,  the  group,  which  is  not  made  more
efficient,  is  diminished  in  numbers  by  the  indirect  operation
of  the  change  that  has  occurred.  Furthermore,  these  incidents
within  the  broad  group  labour  are,  in  any  event,  of  sub-
ordinate interest.  So  soon  as  it  is  shown  that  the  absolute
share  of  labour  as  a  whole  possesses,  along  with  the  aggregate
dividend,  the  property  of  increasing  with  increases  in  the  supply
of  labour,  the  only  proposition  that  is  of  direct  relevance  to
the  present  argument  is  established.

§  9.  When  the  increase  in  the  supply  of  labour  comes  about
through  an  increase  in  the  efficiency  of  labouring  people,  it  is
obvious  that  the  consequent  increase  in  the  absolute  share  of
dividend  accruing  to  them  carries  with  it,  in  accordance  with  the
jargument  of  previous  chapters,  an  increase  in  their  economic
/welfare.  When,  however,  the  increase  of  supply  comes  about
through  an  increase  in  numbers,  the  absolute  share  per  man
is  lessened,  despite  the  fact  that  the  absolute  share  of  the  group
as  a  whole  is  increased.      If  there  were  reason  to  believe  that


CH.  HI       SUPPLY  OF  CAPITAL  AND  LABOUR         713

the  loss  per  man  were  large,  we  should  hesitate  to  conclude-
that  an  increase  of  this  sort  in  the  supply  of  labour  involves
an  increase  in  the  economic  welfare  of  labour.      In  fact,  how-
ever, it  can  be  shown  that,  under  the  conditions  now  existing
in  this  country,  the  loss  per  man  would  be  very  small.     That
it  would  be  very  small  in  terms  of  commodities  in  general
follows  from  the  fact  already  established,  that  the  elasticity  of
the  demand  for  labour  in  England  is  large.     If  the  conditions
were  such  that  an   increase    in    numbers    would    materially
increase  the  real   cost  of  producing   food    or    other    articles
predominantly   consumed    by   the   working-classes,   it   might,
indeed,  be  large  in  terms  of  the  things  that  are  of  signifi-
cance to  them.     At  present,  however,  the  fact  that  abundant
supplies  of  imported  food  are  available  makes  it  impossible
that  an  increase  in  the  population  of  a  small  country  such
as  ours  should,  to  any  important  extent,  evoke  the  law  of
diminishing  returns  in   respect   of  food  production.     Hence,
in    all    senses,   the    diminution   of  real   wages    per    head    of
the  working-classes  would  be  very  small.^     Consequently,  it
seems  reasonable  to  conclude  that  an  increase  in  the  absolute
share  of  labour,  even  when  it  results  from  an  increase  in  the
numbers  of  the  population,  will  carry  with  it  an  increase  in  the
economic   welfare   of  working   people.     It  is   not   necessary,
therefore,  to   qualify  our  conclusion,  that   causes  impinging
upon   the  supply  of  labour  affect  the  aggregate  amount  of
the   dividend  and  the  aggregate   real   earnings   of  labour  in
the  same  sense,  by  emphasising  the  caution  that  the  welfare
of  labour  is   sometimes  diminished   by  causes   that   increase
its  wealth.

§  10.  The  conclusions  that  have  been  reached  in  this
chapter  serve  to  rebut  two  popular  opinions.  The  first  of
these  has  to  do  with  hours  of  labour,  and  is  to  the  effect  that  }
a  general  shortening  of  the  working  day,  because  it  will  cut
down  the  supply  of  labour,  will  enable  workpeople  as  a  whole
to  secure  terms  so  much  better  than  before  that  their  \
aggregate  real  income  must  be  increased.  The  truth  is  that,
in  so  far  as  a  diminution  in  the  hours  of  work  leads  to
a  more  than  corresponding  increase  in  efficiency,  both  the
^  Cf.  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economies,  p.  672.


714  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

national  dividend  and  the  absolute  share  of  labour  will  benefit.
But,  if  the  reduction  of  hours  is  pushed  beyond  this
point,  so  that  it  injures  the  national  dividend,  the  real
income  of  labour  must,  in  view  of  the  elasticity  of  the
demand  for  labour,  necessarily  be  injured  also.  The  second
popular  opinion  is  that  the  compulsory  withdrawal  from
work  of  persons  in  receipt  of  State  assistance  would  in-
crease the  aggregate  real  earnings  of  the  poor,  and,  therefore,
from  the  point  of  view  of  labour,  ought  to  be  encouraged.
Two  schemes  were  submitted  to  the  Royal  Commission  on
the  Aged  Poor,  one  of  which  contained,  as  a  condition  for  the
receipt  of  a  pension,  "  the  abstention  from  all  work  of
pensioners,  male  and  female,"  while  the  other  would  have
awarded  pensions  to  "  every  one  over  sixty,  and  prohibited
work  beyond  that  age."  ^  The  defence  proffered  for  those
schemes  was  that,  if  pensioners  did  not  abstain  from  work,
independent  workpeople  would  find  their  earnings  diminished.
From  a  long-period  point  of  view,  however,  the  interests  of
the  poor  should  be  identified,  not  with  those  of  independent
workpeople  only,  but  with  those  of  all  workpeople ;  for  all
workpeople  are  liable  to  become  dependent  at  some  period  of
their  lives.  But  it  follows  directly  from  what  was  said  in
the  preceding  section  that,  if  the  supply  of  labour  is  contracted,
the  aggregate  earnings  of  independent  and  dependent  work-
people together  will  be  diminished.  Hence,  so  far  as  the
present  argument  goes,  it  is  inadvisable  to  adopt  the  policy
embodied  in  these  two  pension  schemes.  It  should  be  noted,
however,  that  the  cessation  of  work  by  pensioners  can  be
defended  from  a  more  special  point  of  view.  It  may  be  held
desirable  that  the  qualification  for  a  pension  should  be,  not
age,  but  declining  strength.  This  cannot  be  tested  directly,
but,  if  abstention  from  work  were  made  a  condition  for
receiving,  say,  a  10  s.  pension,  conformity  to  the  condition
would  ensure  that  recipients  were  really  incapable  of  earning
much  more  than  lOs.  regularly.  Hence,  such  an  arrangement,
though  it  would  abolish  work  on  the  part  of  many  persons
below  the  10s.  line,  might,  nevertheless,  be  desirable  as  a  means
of  preventing  many  other  persons  from  obtaining  pensions,
1  Beport  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Aged  Poor,  p.  72.


CH.  Ill


SUPPLY  OF  CAPITAL  AND   LAEOUR


715


and,  in  consequence  of  obtaining  or  expecting  them,  from
relaxing  their  efforts  in  industry.  The  pension  policy  pursued
by  certain  friendly  societies  seems  to  be  based  on  considera-
tions of  this  order.^  Clearly,  however,  this  argument  is  not
relevant  where  the  condition  for  the  receipt  of  a  pension  is,
not  declining  strength,  but  the  attainment  of  some  definite  age.

1  £(n/al  Commission  on  the  Aged  Poor,  MinuUs  of  Evidence  (Q.  10,880).


CHAPTEK  IV

INVENTIONS    AND    IMPROVEMENTS

§  1.  We  have  thus  seen  that  in  existing  conditions  causes
acting  through  the  supply  of  capital  in  general  and  also  causes
acting  through  the  supply  of  labour  in  general  operate  harmoni-
ously. They  either  increase  both  the  national  dividend  and  the
real  earnings  of  labour,  or  they  decrease  both  of  them.  A  more
complicated  problem  has  to  be  faced  when  the  initiating
cause  is  an  invention  or  improvement  in  processes  or  methods.
All  developments  of  this  kind,  since  they  enable  something
to  be  produced  which  was  not  being  produced  at  all  before,
or  enable  something  which  was  being  produced  before  to  be
'produced  more  easily,  must  increase  the  national  dividend,
^f  Unless  at  the  same  time  they  indirectly  alter  distribution
[^.dversely  to  labour,  they  must  also  increase  the  real  income
which  falls  to  labour.  Hence,  of  any  invention  considered
in  the  abstract,  there  is  an  initial  presumption  that  its  effects
will  be  harmonious,  in  the  sense  that  it  will  benefit  labour  as
well  as  increase  the  national  dividend.  But  it  is  possible
that  any  given  invention  may  change  the  parts  played  by
capital  and  labour  in  production  in  such  a  way  as  to  make
labour  less  valuable  relatively  to  capital  than  it  was  before ;
and,  if  this  happens,  the  absolute  share  received  by  labour
may  be  diminished.  Our  problem  is  to  determine  in  what,  if
any,  conditions  this  result  will  come  about.  It  is  interesting
to  observe  that  exactly  the  same  analysis  is  appropriate
when  the  initiating  cause  is,  not  an  invention  in  the  ordinary
sense,  but  a  development  which  enables  a  country  to  obtain
some  commodity  more  cheaply  than  before  by  making  some-

716


cit.  IV        m^^ENTIONS  AND  IMPEOVEMEXTS  717

thing  else  with  which  to  purchase  it  from  elsewhere,  instead
of  making  the  commodity  itself.  Here  too  more  of  what
people  want  is  made  available  ;  and  here  too  the  proportionate
parts  played  by  labour  and  capital  in  production  may  be
changed.

§  2.  The  popular  solution  of  our  problem  is  very  simple.
It  is  thought  that  workpeople  will  be  injured  if  an  inventionJ
causes  less  labour  to  be  employed  in  the  industry  to  which  ill
refers,  and  benefited  if  it  causes  more  labour  to  be  employed!
there.  Such  a  view  leads  at  once  to  optimism.  Mr.  Hobson
has,  indeed,  shown  that  inventions  do  not  always  cause  more
labour  to  be  employed  in  the  industry  where  they  are
introduced :  "  The  introduction  of  spinning  and  weaving
machinery  into  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  afforded  a  con-
siderable increase  of  employment,  and  a  number  of  suc-
cessive inventions  and  improvements  during  the  second
and  third  quarters  of  the  last  century  had  a  similar
result,  but  later  increments  of  machinery  have  not  been
attended  by  similar  results ;  on  the  contrary,  there  has
been  a  decline  in  the  number  of  persons  employed  in  some
of  the  staple  textile  processes.  The  introduction  of  type-
setting machines  into  printing  works  has  been  followed  by
a  large  increase  of  employment ;  the  introduction  of  clicking
machinery  into  the  shoe  trade  has  been  followed  by  a  net
reduction  of  employment."  ^  A  broader  illustration  of  a
diminution  of  employment  in  a  particular  sphere,  in  con-
sequence of  an  invention  in  that  sphere,  may  be  found  in
agriculture  :  for  it  is  well  known  that  agricultural  machines
have  displaced  agricultural  labourers.  An  occasional  failure
of  this  kind  is  fully  admitted  by  all.  Still,  broadly  speaking,
inventions,  as  a  general  rule,  are  believed  by  those  who  have
studied  the  matter  to  increase,  and  not  to  diminish,  employ-
ment at  the  point  at  which  they  act.  Thus,  M.  Levasseur
writes :  "  The  common  opinion  is  that  '  the  machine  drives
out  the  workman'  and  robs  a  part  of  the  working- classes
of  work.  It  is  certainly  true  that  a  shop  furnished  with
powerful  machinery  yields  in  a  given  time  a  greater  product,
with  the  help  of  a  much  smaller  number  of  employees,  than  a

*  Hobson,  The  Industrial  System,  p.  281.


718  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

shop  where  the  same  goods  are  made  by  hand.  It  is  this
that  one  perceives  in  the  first  instance.  What  one  only
perceives  later,  by  dint  of  study,  is  that  the  goods  made
economically  by  machinery,  being  sold,  in  general,  at  a
lower  price,  often  find  such  a  number  of  new  purchasers
!  that  the  increased  production,  thus  made  necessary,  provides
I  employment  for  a  greater  number  of  workpeople  than  were
employed  before  the  machinery  was  introduced."  ^  Again,
I  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  are  gratified  to  find  among
manufacturers  a  remarkable  consensus  of  opinion  concerning
the  effects  of  improvements  in  machinery.  They  believe  that
such  improvements  "  do  temporarily  reduce  the  demand  for
labour  within  the  department  where  such  changes  occur ;
that  the  displacement  does  not,  as  a  rule,  reduce  the  labour
employed  in  each  producing  unit,  the  workers  dispensed  with
being  readily  absorbed  within  the  same  business — particularly
in  shipbuilding,  where  changes  are  slowly  introduced  and
affect  only  a  few  men  at  a  time— and  that  the  final  result
is  that  more  labour  is  required  instead  of  less."  ^  Now,  I
am  not  concerned  to  deny  the  empirical  part  of  these  con-
clusions. I  do  not  dispute  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners'
assertion  that  the  conditions  necessary  to  secure  that  increased
employment  in  any  sphere  will  ultimately  result  from  an
invention  in  that  sphere  are,  as  a  matter  of  practice,  usually
fulfilled.  I  do  dispute,  however,  the  very  widespread  opinion
that  these  facts  are  directly  relevant  to  the  question  whether
inventions  and  improvements  are  beneficial  allies  or  injurious
foes  to  the  fortunes  of  labour,  and  so  of  the  poor  as  a  whole.
To  elucidate  that  issue  a  different  and  more  far-reaching
analysis  is  necessary.

§  3.  Every   invention   or  improvement    either   facilitates

the  manufacture  of  some  commodity  or  service  that  is  already

being  produced,  or  makes  possible  the  manufacture  of  some

new  commodity  or  service.      It  is  certain,  therefore,  to  lead

to    a    cheapening    and    an    increased    consumption    of    the

(  commodity  affected  by  it.     With   the  differently  made  and

lenlarged   output,  a   different   amount   of  labour,  and   also   a

Vifferent   amount   of  capital   (or   waiting),  will  be  employed

*  Salariat  et  salaires,  p.  421.  2  Jigport,  p.  344.


CH.  IV        INVENTIONS  AND  IMPEO YEMENIS  719

in  the  industry  and  in  the  subsidiary  industries  engaged
in  making  machinery  for  it.  Let  us  suppose  that  work
people  purchase  absolutely  none  of  the  product  which  the]
invention  has  cheapened.  Then  the  effect  of  the  invention
upon  their  real  income  depends  upon  its  effect  on  the
marginal  net  product  of  things  for  which  labour  is  responsible
in  other  industries ;  for,  when  equilibrium  is  established,
it  will  get,  in  the  industry  where  the  invention  has  taken
place,  the  same  real  wage  as  it  gets  in  these  industries.  For
the  present  purpose  we  may  reasonably  leave  out  of  account
factors  of  production  other  than  labour  and  capital.  It
will  then  foUow  that,  if,  as  a  result  of  the  invention,
the  quantity  of  labour  in  industries  other  than  the  im-
proved industry  and  its  subsidiaries  is  diminished  in  a  larger
ratio,  or  increased  in  a  smaller  ratio,  than  the  quantity
of  capital,  the  marginal  net  product  of  labour  in  t^rms  of
the  things  workpeople  buy — and,  therefore,  the  aggregate  real
income  of  workpeople — must  be  increased.  In  the  converse
event,  this  aggregate  real  income  must  be  diminished.  If
the  two  ratios  of  change  are  equal  it  must  be  left  unaltered.
Inventions  which  have  these  several  effects  I  shall  call,
respectively,  capital- saving  inventions,  labour-saving  inventions,
and  neutral  inventions.  It  wiU,  of  course,  be  observed  that
this  use  of  terms  is  different  from  the  common  use,  according
to  which  every  invention  which  enables  a  given  amount  of
product  to  be  got  with  the  help  of  less  labour  is  labour-saving.
§  4.  It  is  easy  to  apply  this  analysis  to  practice,  provided
we  have  to  do  with  an  industry  in  which  (and  also  in  its
subsidiaries)  the  proportion  of  the  country's  total  labour
employed  is  equal  to  the  proportion  of  its  total  capital.  In
this  class  of  industry  anything  which  changes  in  one  direction
the  ratio  between  the  labour  and  capital  employed  there  must
change  in  the  opposite  direction  the  ratio  outside.  Hence,  on
my  definition,  an  invention  or  improvement  which  reduces  the
ratio  of  capital  to  labour  in  the  industry  to  which  it  applies  will
be  capital-saving,  one  which  increases  it  labour-saving,  and  one
which  leaves  it  unchanged,  neutral  In  these  conditions,  there-
fore, we  are  able  with  fair  confidence  to  distinguish  in  the  con-
crete the  several  classes  of  inventions.     Thus,  assuming  the


720  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

above  conditions  to  prevail,  the  introduction  of  two-shift  or  three-
shift  systems,  making  possible  the  more  continuous  working
of  machinery,   must   be   a  capital-saving   invention.      For  if,
instead  of  only  12  hours  being  worked  in  each  24-hour  period,
the  whole  24  hours  are  worked,  a  staff  of  100  men,  50  work-
ing by  day  and  50  by  night,  will  only  require  half  as  much
machinery  to  produce  a  given  output  as  they  would  need  if
the  whole  100  worked  by  day  only.      Of  course,  the  machinery
will  wear  out  more  quickly  when  it  is  worked  for  a  longer
time  per  day.      But  for  many  kinds  of  machinery  the  working
life  is — on  account  of  obsolescence — much  shorter  than  the
physical  life.     Consequently,  though  the  substitution  of  two
twelve-hour  shifts  for  one  twelve-hour  shift  would  not  reduce
the   capital   required  for   a  given   scale  of  production  by  as
much  as  a  half,  it  would,  in  general,  reduce  it  a  good  deal.     In
whatever  way,  therefore,  the  absolute  quantity  of  output  is
changed,  the  ratio   of  capital   to  labour  employed   must   be
diminished.     The  same  result  holds  good  of  developments  that
enable  the  manufacturers,  wholesalers  or  retailers,  who  deal
in  any  commodity,  to  conduct  their  business  equally  efficiently
with  a  smaller  amount  of  capital  locked  up  in  the  form  of
stocks.     For,  here  again,  whatever  happens  to  absolute  amounts,
the  ratio  of  capital  to  labour  employed  must  be  diminished.
This  point  is  of  some  importance  in  view  of  the  economy  in
the    matter   of  stock- holding,   which,    as   will   be  shown    in
Appendix  I.,  modern  improvements  in  communication  have
made    practicable.       Among    developments    more    ordinarily
named  inventions,  we  might,  still  assuming  the  industries  to
which  they  apply  to  have  previously  employed  capital  and
labour   in   normal   proportions,  count  as   capital-saving  such
things  as  Marconi's  invention  of  wireless  telegraphy,  by  which
the    need    for    cables    is    removed.     Probably,    however,   the
majority   of  inventions   in   the    narrower   sense   would   have
to  be  reckoned  as  "  labour-saving,"  because,  as  Dr.  CasseU  has
observed,   "  almost   all    the   efforts   of  inventors  are   directed
towards  finding  durable  instruments  to  do  work  which  has
hitherto   been  done  by  hand."  ^     These   results,   it   must   be
remembered,  are  not  necessarily  valid,  unless,  before  the  inven-

^  Nature  and  NecessUy  of  Interest,  p.  112.


OH.  IV        INVENTIONS  AND  IMPKOYEMENTS  721

tion,  the  industry  (and  its  subsidiaries),  in  which  the  invention  is
made,  was  employing  labour  and  capital  in  the  same  proportion
as  the  general  average  of  all  industries.  If  it  was  employing
an  abnormally  large  proportion  of  labour  or  of  capital,  an
invention,  which  changed  the  ratio  in  it  in  any  direction,
might  change  the  ratio  in  other  industries  in  the  same,  and
not  in  the  opposite,  direction.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  in
a  particular  industry  3000  units  of  labour  and  1000  units
of  capital  are  being  employed,  and  in  the  rest  of  industry
one  million  units  of  each.  In  consequence  of  an  invention  in
this  particular  industry  only  2000  units  of  labour  and  500  units
of  capital  come  to  be  needed  there.  The  ratio  of  labour  to
capital  there  is,  therefore,  increased  from  3  to  1  to  4  to  1.
At  the  same  time  in  the  rest  of  industry  it  is  increased  from
1  to  1  to  1,001,000  to  1,000,500.  It  is  thus  evident  that  a
knowledge  of  the  effect  on  the  ratio  in  the  improved  industry
would  not  by  itself  enable  us  to  determine  whether  the  inven-
tion is  labour-saving  or  capital-saving  or  neutral.  But,  plainly,
we  have  no  ground  for  supposing  that  labour-saving  inventions
in  my  sense  are  impossible.  If  they  take  place  in  the  condi-
tions contemplated  up  to  this  point  of  our  analysis,  disharmony
must  result.  The  national  dividend  will  be  increased,  but  the
real  earnings  of  labour  will  be  lessened.

§  5.  The  conditions  so  far  contemplated  are  not,  however,
in  conformity  with  the  facts.  It  has  been  assumed  that
workpeople  purchase  absolutely  none  of  the  commodity  or
service  which  the  invention  or  improvement  has  cheapened.
Obviously,  this  assumption  is  highly  unfavourable  to  the
prospect  of  their  obtaining  an  increased  real  income.  When
conditions  are  such  that,  even  on  this  assumption,  they  would
gain,  in  so  far  as  in  fact  they  do  purchase  the  commodity,
they  will  gain  still  more ;  and,  when  conditions  are  such
that,  on  this  assumption,  they  would  lose,  nevertheless  in  real
life  they  may  gain.  In  short,  the  more  important  is  the^
part  played  by  the  commodity  to  which  the.  invention  refers
in  the  consumption  of  poor  people,  the  more  likely  it  is  that
the  net  effect  of  the  invention  will  be  advantageous  to  them.

In   the   light   of  this  result  it  is  a  very  significant  fact'
that  the  things  principally  purchased  by  the  working-classes

3  A


722  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

are  relatively  crude  things  which  can  be  readily  made  on  a
large  scale  by  machinery,  while  the  things   principally  pur-
chased by  the  well-to-do  are  of  higher  quality,  and,  therefore,
involve  a  larger  use  of  human  labour.     Dr.  Marshall  writes :
"  Probably    about    twice    as    much    horse-power    is    used    in
providing   for   each    pound's  worth  of  expenditure   on   com-
modities  by  the  poor  as  by  the  rich."     But    it   is   just  in
things  of  this  kind  that  the  readiest  opportunities  are  found
for  mechanical  inventions  and  improvements,  and  in  which,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  these  are  most  extensively  made.     No
doubt,  the  consumption  of  the  poor  embraces  a  much  larger
proportion  of  houseroom  and  food  than  the  consumption  of
the  rich,  and  both  building  labour  and  agricultural  labour  are
relatively  little   aided   by  those   mechanical   instruments,  in
respect    of    which    technical    improvements    and    devices    of
organisation    have   the   widest   scope.       This   qualification    is
especially  applicable  to  the  very  poor.     "  The  fall  of  prices
does  not  benefit  the  various  grades  of  wage-earners  in  direct
ratio    to    their    wages.       Kent   and   certain    other   necessary
elements  of  expenditure,  such  as  fuel,  which  have  risen  in
amount  for  the  large  majority  of  workers,  play  a  relatively
larger  part  in  the  budget   of  the  lower  grades  of  workers,
I  reducing  to  that  extent  their  gain  from  the  general  fall   of
prices.     The  poorest  classes,  whose  retail  purchases  are  made
in  very  small  quantities,  also  gain  least  from  the  lower  prices
of  other  commodities  than  housing  and  fuel."  ^      But  these
qualifications  leave  the  main  result  untouched.     On  the  whole,
(the  poor  spend  a  larger  proportion  of  their  income  than  other
J  classes  on  things  the  manufacture  of  which  specially  lends
(.itself  to  inventions.     Thus,  Leroy-Beaulieu  finds  :  "  The  man  of
fashion,  who  is  fitted  for  his  clothes  by  a  tailor,  gains  nothing
from  the  great  reduction  of  prices  which  shops  selling  clothes
ready-made  offer  to  the  less  comfortable  section  of  the  popula-
tion." ^     And  he  contrasts  with  these  things  "  all  those  objects
which  the  mass  of  the  people  have  hitherto  done  without,  but
which  have  now  come  into  general  use,  and  which  contribute
either  to  better  hygiene  or  to  increased  decency  and  dignity

^  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  p.  309.
2  La  Rdpartition  des  richesses,  p.  37.


CH.  IV       INVENTIONS  AND  IMPROVEMENTS         723

in  the  homes  of  the  workpeople.  Stockings,  handkerchiefs,
more  varied  and  more  suitable  garments,  curtains  for  the
windows,  carpets  on  the  floors,  a  less  exiguous  array  of
furniture,  these  things  constitute  democratic  luxury,  the  fruit
of  the  development  of  mankind's  powers  of  production."  ^
Nor  is  this  all.  It  has  to  be  added,  as  Dr.  Marshall  has
strongly  urged,  that  the  staple  articles  of  food  mainly  consumed
by  the  poor  are,  so  far  as  this  country  is  concerned,  largely
brought  from  abroad,  and  that  one  of  the  most  marked  features
of  recent  times  has  been  the  development  of  improvements  in
the  machinery  of  transport,  and  the  consequent  heavy  fall  in
transport  charges.  To  this  may  be  added  the  important
improvement  in  the  machinery  for  retailing  goods  to  poor
persons,  which  has  been  realised  by  co-operative  stores,  and  the
consequent  heavy  fall  in  the  cost  of  the  service  of  retailing.

Of  course,  the  historical  fact  that  recent  inventions  have
largely  affected  commodities,  which  enter  directly  or  indirectly
into  the  consumption  of  the  working-classes,  is  not  a  proof
that  further  inventions  will  be  predominantly  of  a  like  kind.
It  is,  however,  open  to  us  to  urge  that  this  historical  fact  is
conformable  to  a  priori  expectation,  because,  not  only  are  tha
openings  for  profit,  and,  therefore,  the  stimulus  to  invention,
exceptionally  great  among  "  mass-goods  "  of  wide  consumption,
but  also,  as  Dr.  Marshall  has  pointed  out,  even  those  improve-
ments which  were  originally  designed  exclusively  for  the
luxuries  of  the  rich  are  apt  soon  to  spread  themselves  to  the
comforts  of  other  classes."  These  considerations  lead  to  the
conclusion  that  it  is  less  likely  than  the  argument  of  the
preceding  section  alone  would  suggest  that  any  given  inven-
tion will  injure  the  real  income  of  labour.

§  6.  Yet  another  qualification  must  be  added  to  the
analysis  of  ^§  3-4.  That  analysis  tacitly  assumed  that  the
invention,  whose  consequences  were  examined,  had  no  effect
on  the  quantity  of  new  waiting  or  capital  which  people  are
prepared  annually  to  create.  This  assumption,  however,  is
not  warranted.  Certain  sorts  of  inventions,  by  giving  a  new^
field  for  "  spending,"  may  cause  rich  people  to  save  less  and  \

*  La  Repartition  des  ricAesses,  p.  440.

*  Cf.  PrincipUs  of  Economies,  p.  541.


724  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

\sp  to  provide  less  new  capital  to  help  labour  in  production.
The  invention  of  luxurious  motor  cars  for  private  travel  has
probably  had  this  effect,  and  the  impending  invention  of
comfortable  private  air  cars  probably  will  have  it.  Nor  is
the  effect  necessarily  confined  to  inventions  which  create
new  articles  of  consumption.  It  may  also  follow  from  those
that  cheapen  articles  which  are  already  known,  provided  that
they  are  of  highly  elastic  demand.  People  who  could  have
saved  and  created  capital  may  be  tempted  to  spend  instead.
On  the  other  hand,  inventions  that  cheapen  things  for  which
the  demand  is  highly  inelastic,  by  enabling  people  to  get  what
they  want  at  less  cost,  will  leave  them  a  greater  margin  out
of  which  to  make  savings,  and  so  will  indirectly  increase  the
annual  creation  of  new  capital.  Whether  the  tendency  thus
set  up  by  inventions  is  towards  a  decrease  or  towards  an
increase  of  capital,  it  is  cumulative,  in  the  sense  that  in  each
successive  year  further  effects  of  the  same  sort  are  piled  up.
For  this  reason  it  is  more  important  than  it  might  be  thought
to_be^t  first  sight.  J  When  the  indirect  effect  of  an  invention
ni  to  diminish  ^aVmgs,  it  may  injure  labour  even  though  it
is  capital-saving ;  and,  when  the  indirect  effect  is  to  increase
savings,  it  may  benefit  labour  even  though  it  is  both  labour-
1  saving  and  also  concerned  with  some  product  which  does  not
jenter  at  all  into  workpeople's  consumption.  There  is  reason
to  believe  that  hitherto  the  general  body  of  inventions  has
had  the  effect  of  increasing,  and  not  of  diminishing,  the
opportunity  and  the  will  to  accumulate  new  capital.

§  7.  From  these  various  considerations  it  is  plain  that
no  rigid  and  exact  conclusions  can  be  drawn.  The  general
impression  created  by  our  study  is  that,  though  inventions
9,nd  improvements  injurious  to  the  real  income  of  the
working-classes  may  occur,  they  will  not  occur  often.  The
great  majority  of  inventions  and  improvements  will  increase
the  real  income  of  labour  as  well  as  the  aggregate  national
dividend.  Disharmony,  as  a  result  of  inventions,  is  a  possible,
but  a  decidedly  improbable,  contingency.  Nobody  would
seriously  propose  to  interfere  with,  or  to  obstruct,  inventions
in  order  to  provide  a  safeguard  against  it.


CHAPTER    V


THE    MANIPULATION    OF    WAGES


§  1.  In  the  latter  portion  of  Part  III.  I  examined  at  length
the  conditions  under  which  an  enforced  increase  in  the
wages  rate  paid  in  a  particular  occupation  or  place  would
injure  the  national  dividend.  We  have  now  to  consider  the
effect  that  will  be  produced  on  the  real  income  of  workpeople,
and  so  of  the  poor,  as  a  whola  For  simplicity  we  may  take
for  examination — no  difference  is  made  in  the  substance  of
the  argument — the  state  of  things  contemplated  in  Part  III.
Chapter  XV.  §§  8-9.  The  wage  rate  was  there  supposed  to
be  forced  up  in  an  occupation  where  it  had  formerly  been
both  "  fair  "  relatively  to  other  industries  and  equal  to  the
value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  the  work  for  which  it
was  paid.  It  was  assumed  that  no  difference  was  made  to
the  efficiency  of  the  workpeople  to  whom  the  increased  wage
was  given  :  and,  on  this  assumption,  it  was  proved  that  the
national  dividend  must  be  diminished.  In  what,  if  any,
conditions  will  the  real  income  of  labour  as  a  whole,  neverthe-
less, be  increased  ?

§  2.  The  first  step  towards  answering  this  question  is
to  determine  in  what  circumstances  the  enforcement  of  an
uneconomically  high  wage — that  is  a  convenient  term  for
a  wage  that  damages  the  dividend — will  increase  the  real
earnings  of  the  particular  group  of  workpeople  in  whose
behalf  it  is  won.  It  should  be  noticed  in  passing  that  an
imeconomic  enhancement  of  the  wage  rate  in  any  occupation
may  take  the  form  either  of  a  special  enhancement  of  the  rate
per  unit  of  labour  paid  to  inferior  workpeople — e.g.  such  work-

725


726  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  vt.  v

people  may  be  given  the  same  time-wages  as  competent  workers —
or  of  a  general  enhancement  of  the  rate  per  unit  of  efficiency
paid  to  all  workpeople.  It  is  evident  that  an  uneconomic
enhancement  of  the  former  kind  must  either  throw  all  the
inferior  workpeople  out  of  work  altogether,  or  must  diminish
the  aggregate  quantity  of  labour  employed  to  exactly  the
same  extent  as  an  equal  enhancement  in  the  rate  per  unit  of
efficiency  paid  to  all  the  workpeople  in  the  occupation.  Hence,
it  is  bound  to  have  a  less  favourable  effect  on  the  aggregate
earnings  of  the  whole  group  of  workpeople  concerned  than  the
latter  kind  of  enhancement.  In  what  follows,  therefore,  it
will  be  sufficient  to  consider  that  type  of  uneconomically  high
rate  which  affects  equally  the  wages  per  unit  of  efficiency  paid
to  all  workpeople  in  an  occupation.  To  determine  in  the
abstract  the  conditions  in  which  the  establishment  of  this
type  of  uneconomically  high  wage  will  increase  the  real  earn-
ings of  this  group  of  workpeople  is  perfectly  simple.  It  will
increase  them  if  the  demand  for  the  labour  of  the  group  has
an  elasticity  less  than  unity,  and  it  will  diminish  them  if  the
elasticity  is  greater  than  unity.  This  result — on  the  assump-
tion, of  course,  that  the  workpeople  concerned  are  not  them-
selves purchasers  to  any  appreciable  extent  of  the  commodity
they  produce — is  an  obvious  arithmetical  truism,  following
at  once  from  the  definition  of  elasticity.  To  fill  it  out  in  the
concrete,  to  investigate,  that  is  to  say,  the  conditions  that
determine  whether  the  demand  for  the  services  of  any  assigned
group  of  workpeople  is  likely  to  have  a  high  elasticity  or  a
low  one,  is  the  task  we  have  now  to  essay.

§  3.  In  the  fifth  section  of  Part  II.  Chapter  XI.,  an  analysis
was  given  of  the  determinants  of  elasticity  with  reference
to  the  demands  for  different  classes  of  commodities.  This
analysis  is  applicable  to  the  demands  for  different  classes  of
labour  also.      In  that  apphcation  it  may  be  set  out  as  follows.

First,  we  have  the  general  fact  that  the  demand  for
anything  is  likely  to  be  more  elastic,  the  more  readily  sub-
stitutes for  that  thing  can  be  obtained.  This  fact  has  an
important  bearing  on  the  relation  between  labour  and
machinery ;  for,  in  some  industries,  a  very  small  addition  to
the  cost  of  working  a  process  by  hand  would  induce  employers


cH.v  THE  MANIPULATION  OF  WAGES  727

Ik)  adopt  mechanical  appliances.  Mr.  Aves,  for  example,  quotes
the  statement  of  an  ex-inspectress  that,  in  the  Victorian
clothing  trade,  where  minimum  wage  determinations  have
unintentionally  discriminated  against  home  work,  employment
was  transferred  to  factories  using  machinery,  and  "  practically
all  outside  work  was  stopped."  ^  In  Like  manner,  the  tanners
of  Victoria,  commenting  on  the  effects  of  the  Wages  Board  in
their  industry,  state  :  "  Labour-saving  machinery  is  forced  into
use,  so  much  so  that  the  tannery  trade  has  been  practically
revolutionised  since  the  Wages  Board  system  was  applied  to
the  trade."  ^  In  circumstances  of  this  kind  the  high  elasticity
of  demand  for  labour  is,  in  effect,  due  to  the  fact  that  there  is
a  readily  available  and  closely  competing  substitute  for  its
services  in  the  rival  factor  capital,  or,  more  strictly,  other
labour  accompanied  by  a  greater  amount  of  waiting.  Since
it  is  easier  to  introduce  this  substitute  after  an  interval  than
immediately,  elasticity  in  demand  due  to  this  cause  is  greater
from  the  standpoint  of  a  long  period  than  of  a  short  period.

Secondly,  we  have  the  general  fact  that  the  demand  for
anything  is  likely  to  be  less  elastic,  the  less  important  is  the
part  played  by  the  cost  of  that  thing  in  the  total  cost  of  some
other  thing,  in  the  production  of  which  it  is  employed.  This
general  fact  enables  us  to  point  out  certain  occupations  in
which  the  demand  for  a  particular  class  of  labour  is  likely  to
be  especially  inelastic.  One  of  these  is  the  occupation  of
women  in  sewing  on  the  covers  of  racquet  and  fives  balls.^

1  Report  on  Wages  Boards,  p.  197.  This  "determination"  fixed  both  an
hour  rate  and  a  piece-work  rate,  compelling  the  latter  to  be  paid  to  outworkers.
The  intention  was  that  the  two  should  be  equivalent,  but  employers  in  practice
found  the  hour,  or  wages,  rate  much  the  cheaper.  The  ex-inspectress  added  :
' '  When  the  wages  rate  and  the  piece-work  rate  were  nearly  the  same,  as  in  the
shirt  and  underclothing  trade,  the  trouble  did  not  occur,  and,  after  ten  years'
working  of  the  determination,  these  trades  count  many  outworkers  to-day. "  The
choice  between  an  out-  and  an  in-worker  is  affected  by  the  fact  that,  when
employing  outworkers,  the  employer  escapes  charges  for  working  space,  light,
firing  and  so  forth.  "  The  savings  upon  factory  rent,  upkeep  and  superinten-
dence appear  to  be  larger  factors  in  the  cheapness  of  home  work  than  the  lowness
of  wages "  (Black,  Makers  of  Our  Clothes,  p.  44).  Cf.  also  Marconcini,
L'industria  domestica  salariata  (pp.  432-3).  On  the  other  hand,  of  course,
economies  of  superintendence  and,  sometimes,  of  power  are  to  be  obtained  in
factory  work.

2  Repm-t  <m  Wages  Board,  p.  179.     Cf.  anU,  Part  III.  Chapter  XIII.  §  8.
^  Cf.  Lyttleton,  Contemporary  Review,  February  1909.


728  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

Another  is  that  of  making  trouser-buttons.  Lord  Askwith
writes :  "  The  rich  man's  trousers  may  be  cut  by  an  expensive
tailor.  The  buttons  on  those  trousers  may  be  made  by  sweated
industry.  High  payment  for  those  buttons  would  be  but  a
minute  part  of  the  cost  of  the  whole  article."  ^  The  engineer-
ing work  done  by  engineers  engaged  by  building  firms,  since
these  persons  are  employed  only  incidentally  and  as  a  trivial
part  of  the  total  producing  force,  is  in  a  similar  position.  In
like  manner,  the  part  played  by  the  original  labour  is  small
in  commodities  for  which  the  addition  to  wholesale  price  made
by  the  work  of  the  retailer  is  large.  "  For  example,  when  we
find  that  the  maker  of  a  lady's  costume  is  paid  lOd.  or  Is.,
while  the  article  is  sold  for  25s.  to  30s.,  it  is  obvious  that
the  wage  paid  is  so  small  in  relation  to  the  retail  price  that,
even  were  the  wage  doubled,  it  need  necessarily  affect  the
price  but  little,  if  at  all."  ^  This  condition,  that  the  part
played  by  labour  in  a  particular  act  of  production  shall  be
small,  is  probably  fulfilled  fairly  often,  and  it  is  Hkely  to
be  fulfilled  still  more  often  as  the  relative  importance  of
installations  of  plant  and  machinery  in  production  increases.
One  writer  has  even  suggested  that  "  the  labour  cost  of  pro-
duction in  most  industries  is  usually  not  sufficient  materially
to  affect  the  price  of  the  finished  article."  It  should  be
noticed,  however,  that,  in  the  important  work  of  coal  pro-
duction, hewers'  labour  constitutes  a  very  large  part  of  the
total  cost,  and  the  condition  stipulated  for  is,  therefore,  not
fulfilled.

Thirdly,  we  have  the  general  fact  that  the  demand  for
anything  is  likely  to  be  more  elastic,  the  more  elastic  is  the
supply  of  co-operant  agents  of  production.  This  fact  makes
it  evident  that  the  demand  for  labour  will  be  specially
inelastic  in  industries  which  make  use  of  raw  materials  of
highly  inelastic  supply.  Apart  from  raw  materials,  the
principal  co-operant  agents  working  with  labour  in  any
industry  are  capital  instruments,  managing  ability  and  other
labour.  From  the  standpoint  of  a  long  period  the  supply  of
these  to   any  single   industry  is,  beyond  doubt,  exceedingly

1  Fortnightly  Review,  August  1908,  p.  225.
'''  Cadbury  and  Shann,  Sweating,  p.  124.


CH.  V  THE  MANIPULATION  OF  WAGES  729

elastic.  But,  from  the  standpoint  of  a  short  period  or  a
period  of  moderate  length,  it  is  likely  to  be  inelastic ;  for
specialised  machinery  and  managing  skill,  and  even  other
labour,  can  neither  be  created  or  brought  from  elsewhere,
nor  yet  destroyed  or  carried  off  elsewhere,  in  the  twinkling
of  an  eye.  Here  again,  therefore,  the  forces  making  for
elasticity  of  demand  are  stronger  from  the  standpoint  of  a
long  period  than  of  a  short  period.  It  should  be  added  that
in  some  industries,  notably  coal-mining,  Xature  herself  acts
as  a  very  important  co-operant  factor  of  production.  In
times  of  expanded  demand  new  men  have  to  be  set  to  work
on  seams  much  more  difficult  and  less  productive  than  those
ordinarily  worked.^  This  means,  from  a  short  period  point
of  view,  a  highly  inelastic  demand  for  labour.

Fourthly,  we  have  the  general  fact  that  the  demand  for
anything  is  likely  to  be  more  elastic,  the  more  elastic  is  the
demand  for  any  further  thing  which  it  contributes  to  produce.
This  fact  impKes  that  the  demand  will  be  specially  inelastic
for  the  services  of  workpeople  engaged  in  the  manufacture
of  commodities  of  highly  inelastic  demand.  When  the
elasticity  of  the  public  demand  for  any  commodity  is  given,
it  is  obvious  that,  from  a  short  period  point  of  view,  the
elasticity  of  the  demand  for  new  production  of  it  will  be
greater  or  less,  according  as  the  thing  can  or  cannot  be  readily
made  for  stock.  Apart  from  this,  the  circumstances  upon
which  the  elasticity  of  demand  for  various  classes  of  com-
modities depends  were  discussed  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of
Part  II.  The  most  significant  of  them  for  our  present  purpose
is  the  presence  or  absence  of  foreign  competition.  Thus,  a  critic
comments  on  some  of  the  effects  of  New  Zealand  wage  regulation :
"  In  some  trades  employers  have  not  been  able  to  cope  with  the
extra  cost  of  production  owing  to  competition  with  the  imported
article.  They  have,  therefore,  had  to  give  up  the  producing
part  of  their  business  and  increase  their  importations.  In
the  tanning  and  fellmongering  business  some  serious  results
have  followed  the  fixing  of  a  minimum  wage.  I  will  mention
two  instances.  Some  years  ago  a  firm  in  the  district  of
Dunedin  closed  down  its  works  and  removed  its  plant  to
>  Cf.  Hooker,  Statistical  Journal,  1894,  p.  635  n.


730  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

Australia,  largely  owing  to  the  conditions  imposed  by  the
Arbitration  Court.  A  member  of  a  Christchurch  firm  has
informed  me  that,  since  the  Court's  award  in  the  Canterbury
district  was  made  about  six  years  ago,  a  much  larger  propor-
tion of  sheepskins  have  been  shipped  to  London,  without  being
handled  by  the  local  fellmonger,  than  was  formerly  the  case.
Hides  which  should  have  been  tanned  here  have  been  shipped
raw.  Prior  to  the  award,  my  informant's  firm  paid  from
£10,000  to  £15,000  in  wages;  now  the  wages  sheet  amounts
to  only  about  £5000.  The  number  of  bales  of  wool  scoured
annually  by  the  same  firm  since  the  award  came  into  force
has  not  been  more  than  2000  ;  formerly  the  number  was
from  6000  to  8000."^  In  connection,  however,  with  this
matter  of  foreign  competition  a  word  of  caution  is  necessary.
Let  us  imagine  that  there  are  a  dozen  industries  in  this
country,  all  of  about  the  same  size  and  all  subject  in  about
equal  measure  to  foreign  competition  in  the  home  market.
Looking  at  any  one  of  these  industries  singly,  we  conclude,
perhaps,  that  the  elasticity  of  demand  for  its  product  is  such
that  an  increase  of  1 0  per  cent  in  the  cost  of  making  it  in  this
country  would  reduce  the  demand  for  it  by  50  per  cent.  It
is  natural  to  infer  that  a  10  per  cent  increase  in  costs  in  all
twelve  industries  together  would  reduce  the  demand  in  all  of
them  by  50  per  cent.  This,  however,  is  not  so.  Foreign
imports  collectively  constitute  the  demand  for  British  exports.
When,  therefore,  for  any  reason  it  becomes  advantageous  to
increase  the  sendings  of  one  kind  of  import,  other  kinds  of
import  will  tend  to  fall  off,  the  adjustment,  being  brought
about  through — but  not  hy — a  change  in  price  levels.  Thus,
when  extra  imports  cause  the  demand  in  one  industry  to
contract  by  50  per  cent,  the  contraction  will  be,  in  great  part,
cancelled  by  an  expansion,  made  possible  by  lessened  imports,
in  other  industries.  In  other  words,  the  demand  for  the  whole
body  of  British  products  subject  to  foreign  competition  is  less
elastic  than  the  demand  for  a  single  representative  item
among  these  products.  It  follows  that,  other  things  being
equal,  the  workpeople  immediately  affected  are  more  likely  to
be  benefited  by  interference  to  raise  their  wages  if  the  inter-

1  Broadhead,  StMe  Regulation  of  Labour  in  New  Zealand,  p.  215.


cH.v  THE  MANIPULATION  OF  WAGES  731

ference  is  extended  to  several  industries  subject  to  foreign
competition  than  they  would  be  if  it  were  confined  to  one.

§  4.  With  these  results  in  mind  we  may  proceed  to
the  next  stage  in  our  inquiry,  and  ask  in  what  conditions
the  establishment  at  one  point  of  an  uneconomical! y  high
wage,  which  raises  the  real  earnings  of  the  workpeople  there,
will  also  raise  the  real  earnings  of  workpeople  as  a  whole.
Let  us  still  suppose  that  the  commodity,  to  the  makers  of
which  an  uneconomically  high  wage  has  been  assigned,  is
exclusively  consumed  by  persons  other  than  workpeople.  It
may  be  noted,  in  passing,  that,  when  a  factor  making  for
inelasticity  in  the  demand  for  the  services  of  the  particular
group  of  workpeople  in  whom  we  are  interested  is  inelasticity
of  supply  and,  therefore,  "  squeezability  "  in  some  co-operant
group,  a  part  of  the  gain  to  the  first  group  will  be  offset  by
loss  to  the  second.  For  the  purpose  of  a  general  analysis,
however,  we  may  neglect  this  rather  special  point.

If  the  elasticity  of  demand  for  labour  in  the  occupation
where  the  wage  rate  has  been  raised  is  less  than  unity,  the
aggregate  earnings  of  labour  as  a  whole,  and  not  merely  the
earnings  in  that  occupation,  will  be  increased,  provided  that
either  the  casual  method  or  the  privileged  class  method  of  engag-
ing labour,  as  described  in  Chapter  VIII.  of  Part  III.,  pre-
vails in  that  occupation.  Under  the  casual  method  workpeople
will  be  attracted  into  the  occupation  from  outside  until  the
prospect  of  earnings  per  man  inside  and  outside  are  brought
to  equality :  and,  since  the  number  of  workpeople  left  outside
is  diminished  by  this  drain,  the  wage  rate  there  will  be  raised.
This  proves  that  aggregate  earnings  inside  and  outside
together  must  be  raised.  Under  the  privileged  class  method
of  engagement  no  one  will  be  attracted  from  outside  and  no  one
will  be  driven  out.  Hence,  earnings  outside  will  be  unchanged.
Since,  therefore,  earnings  inside  are,  ex  hypoihesi,  increased,
it  again  follows  that  earnings  as  a  whole  are  increased.  If
the  preference  method  of  engagement  prevails,  conditions
are  conceivable  in  which  earnings  as  a  whole  would  not  be
increased.  For  some  persons  must  be  driven  out  of  the
industry  where  the  wage  is  raised,  and,  though  those  left
there  will  be  getting  more  than  they  were  getting  before,  the


732  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  v

influx  of  labour  into  other  industries  might,  if  the  demand  in
these  industries  had  an  elasticity  less  than  unity,  so  lower  earnings
outside  as  to  outweigh  the  gain  inside.  Since,  however,  as  was
shown  in  Chapter  III.,  the  demand  for  labour  in  industry  in
general  is  highly  elastic,  the  conditions  necessary  to  this  result
are  not  fulfilled.  In  real  life,  therefore,  the  earnings  of  labour
as  a  whole  must  be  increased  whenever  an  uneconomically  high
wage  is  enforced  in  a  selected  occupation,  provided  that  the
elasticity  of  the  demand  for  labour  there  is  less  than  imity.

If  the  elasticity  of  demand  in  the  occupation  where  the
wage  rate  is  raised  is  greater  than  unity,  analogous  reasoning
shows  that  earnings  as  a  whole  cannot  be  increased,  provided
that  either  the  casual  or  the  privileged  class  method  of  engage-
ment prevails  in  the  occupation.  For  some  workpeople  will
be  driven  out  of  the  occupation,  and  a  new  equihbrium  will  be
established,  with  an  expectation  of  earnings  for  every  one  equal
to  the  earnings  in  other  occupations ;  and  these  will  have  been
made  lower  than  before  by  an  influx  of  new  workers.  If,
however,  the  preference  method  prevails,  earnings  as  a  whole
may  be  increased  even  though  the  elasticity  of  demand  is
greater  than  unity.  Those  who  are  left  in  the  industry
where  the  wage  is  raised  will  be  getting  more  than  they  were
getting  before ;  and,  though  everybody  else  will  be  getting
less  than  before,  yet,  if  the  demand  for  labour  in  other
industries  is  sufficiently  elastic,  their  loss  need  not  be  so  great
as  the  others'  gain.

§  5.  It  is  now  time  to  remove  the  assumption  set  out  in  ^  2,
that  the  commodity  produced  by  the  group  of  workpeople,
whose  wage  is  being  interfered  with,  is  exclusively  consumed
by  persons  other  than  workpeople.  On  the  strength  of  that
assumption  we  have  been  able,  up  to  this  point,  to  ignore  the
distinction  between  effects  on  money  earnings  and  effects  on
real  earnings.  Where  the  assumption  is  unwarranted  we  are
not  justified  in  doing  this.  An  increase  of  money  earnings
may  be  associated  with  a  decrease  of  real  earnings,  and  may,
therefore,  be  delusive.-  If  the  commodities  produced  by  the
favoured  workers  are  consumed  by  nobody  except  members
of  the  working  classes,  it  must  be  delusive,  for  it  is  bound
to    involve    a    more    than    equivalent    loss    to    workpeople


cH.v  THE  MANIPULATION  OF  WAGES  733

(those  inside  the  privileged  industry  and  those  outside  it
together)  in  their  capacity  as  consumers.  If  the  consumers
consist  partly  of  workpeople  and  partly  of  others,  it  is  not
possible  to  say  absolutely  whether  the  workpeople's  gain  as
producers  or  loss  as  consumers  will  be  greater.  All  we
can  lay  down  is  that,  the  more  important  the  part  of  the
consumption  for  which  non-wage-eamers  are  responsible,  the
more  likely  it  is  that  the  establishment  of  an  uneconomically
high  wage  rate  will  succeed  in  bringing  about  an  increase
in  the  real  income  of  workpeople  as  a  whole.  When,  there-
fore, the  main  part  of  the  product  of  any  group  of  workers
is  consumed  by  other  workers,  though  the  establishment  of
an  uneconomically  high  wage  rate  may  enhance  the  aggregate
real  income  of  the  favoured  workers,  it  is  not  probable  that
it  wiU  enhance  that  of  all  workers  collectively.  This  point
is  important,  because,  in  real  life,  it  is  rich  people  who  make,
or  otherwise  provide,  a  great  part  of  the  luxuries  of  the  rich,
while  poor  wage-earners  make  things  for  other  wage-earners.
Thus,  Mrs.  Bosanquet  writes :  "  Nothing  strikes  one  more
forcibly  in  studying  the  position  of  the  lowest-paid  workers
than  that  they  are  almost  always  engaged  in  producing  goods
for  the  consumption  of  their  own  class.  .  .  .  Badly  paid
tailors  are  making  cheap  clothing  that  no  rich  man  would
look  at ;  badly  paid  servants  are  rendering  services  that
would  not  be  tolerated  by  any  one  of  refinement  and  culture ;
while  the  real  requisites  of  refinement  and  culture,  if  by
these  we  mean  such  things  as  art,  music  and  literature,  are
produced  by  professional  people."  ^  Again :  "  The  great
majority  of  wage-earners  are  engaged  in  producing  for  the
hetiefit  of  other  wage-earners,  and  have  no  direct  connection
with  the  non-wage-earning  classes.  The  majority  of  builders
are  building  houses  for  wage-earners ;  the  very  large  majority
in  the  clothing  trades  are  making  clothing  for  the  wage-
earners  ;  the  majority  of  food-preparers  are  preparing  food
for  the  wage-earners.  More  especially  of  the  sweated  trades
is  it  literally  true,  almost  without  exception,  that  they  are
working  for  the  wage-earners  alone,  and  that  a  rise  in  the
price  of  their  products  would  be  paid  by  the  wage-earners

^  Bosanqnet,  The  Strength  of  the  People,  p,  71,


734  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

alone.  How  would  it  be  possible  that  the  propertied  classes
should  pay  any  share  in  the  increased  price  of  ready-made
suits,  or  cheap  blouses,  or  shoddy  boots  and  shoes,  or  Pink's
jams  ?  The  burden  must  fall  on  the  consumers  of  these  articles,
and  they  are  the  wage-earners."  ^  Mrs.  Bosanquet  would
not,  of  course,  pretend  that  there  are  no  rich  men's  luxuries,
towards  which  poor  men's  labour  contributes  an  important
part.  It  would  seem,  however,  that  not  much  of  the  labour
of  poor  persons  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  devoted  to  the
supply  of  luxuries  of  this  sort.^  It  follows  that  the  estab-
lishment of  an  uneconomically  high  wage  rate  for  a
particular  group  of  workpeople  is  much  less  likely  to  involve
a  real  increase  in  the  earnings  of  workpeople  as  a  whole  than
it  appears  to  be  when  the  distinction  between  money  earnings
and  real  earnings  is  ignored.  So  far,  however,  the  possibility
that  it  may  involve  this  remains.

§  6.  But  against  the  realisation  of  this  possibility  there
is  at  work  a  corrective  tendency,  the  general  character  of
which  has  already  been  indicated  in  §  8  of  Chapter  III.
A  change,  which,  while  it  increases  the  real  earnings  of
labour,  also  diminishes  the  national  dividend,  since  it  implies
a  decrease  in  the  rate  of  interest,  will  decrease  people's  willing-
ness to  save,  thus  hindering  the  creation  of  further  capftal.
Nor  is  the  reaction  on  willingness  to  save  the  only  reaction
which  will  take  place.  The  fact  that  the  national  dividend  is
diminished  implies  also  a  diminution  in  the  power  to  save,
for  the  simple  reason  that  the  fund  available  for  possible
savings  is  made  smaller.  Thus,  every  decrease  in  the  national
dividend  is  in  itself  a  cause  making  for  diminished  capital
and,  therefore,  for  lower  payment  to  labour.  Here  plainly
is  a  tendency  adverse  to  disharmony.  Furthermore,  this
tendency  is  cumulative.  For  suppose  a  policy  to  be  adopted,
which,  while  increasing  the  real  income  of  labour,  causes  the
aggregate  national  dividend  each  year  to  be  one  per  cent  less,
not  necessarily  than  it  was  before,  but  than  it  would  have
been  apart  from  this  policy.     The  addition  made  to  capital

1  TTie  Strength  of  the  People,  p.  294-5.

2  For  examples  of  things  made  by  "sweated"  workers  and  consumed  by
others  than  wage-earners,  cf.  Cadbury  and  Shann,  Sweating,  p.  123.


I


CH.  V  THE  MANIPULATION  OF  WAGES  735

stock  in  each  year  is  thxis  diminished.  In  any  one  year  the
loss  inflicted  on  that  stock  is  small.  But  the  annual  losses
are  curmdative.  After,  say,  ten  years,  the  capital  stock  that
is  available  to  assist  labour  in  its  activities  may  be  consider-
ably smaller  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.^  And  the
reduction  of  this  stock  is  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  it  must
itself  cause  a  reduction  in  the  national  dividend ;  that,  there-
fore, the  transference  to  labour  of  any  given  annual  sum  must
throw  a  continually  increasing  burden  on  profits ;  that,  there-
fore, the  diminution  (or  check  to  the  growth)  of  the  national
dividend  must  be  greater  in  the  second  year  than  in  the  first,
greater  in  the  third  year  than  in  the  second,  and  so  on ;
and  that,  therefore,  the  rate  of  fall  in  the  capital  stock  must
be  progressively  accelerated.  As  this  stock  falls  in  amount
below  what  it  would  otherwise  have  been,  the  annual  earnings
of  labour  also  fall  continuously.  In  the  end  it  would  seem
that,  as  against  any  policy,  which,  in  the  first  instance,  benefits
labour  at  the  expense  of  injuring  the  national  dividend,  this
cumulative  tendency  is  bound  to  prevail,  and  that,  therefore,
from  the  standpoint  of  a  sufficiently  long  period,  any
disharmony  that  may  have  been  set  up  must  disappear.
Since,  however,  relatively  to  the  stock  of  capital,  the  annual
creation  of  new  capital  is  small,  and,  consequently,  any
probable  change  in  the  annual  creation  very  small,  the
harmonising  tendency  will  work  slowly.  This  implies  that
for  some  time  after  the  establishment  of  an  uneconomically
high  wage  in  particular  occupations  disharmony  may  prevail.
§  7.  Up  to  this  point  we  have  been  concerned  with  the
consequences  of  fixing  an  uneconomically  high  wage,  as  if
this  were  a  single  self-subsistent  act.  In  actual  Hfe,  however,
it  is  inevitably  mixed  up  with  State  policy  as  regards  the
protection  of  persons  in  distress.  If  the  enforcement  of  an
uneconomically  high  wage  in  some  occupation  throws  a
certain  number  of  people  out  of  work  for  a  long  time,  the
State  will  have  to  help  these  people.  Consequently,  if  we
count  as  a  part  of  the  real  income  of  the  poor  what  the  State
provides  for  assisted  persons,  their  real  income  in  this  wider
sense  may  well  be  raised  by  a  poUcy  which  lowers  the  earned

^  Ct  Marshall,  Economics  of  Industry,  pp.  372-3,


736  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

part  of  their  real  income.  Thus,  by  a  forcing  up  of  the
wage  rate  in  some  occupations,  we  may  suppose  that  the
national  dividend  is  injured,  and  that  those  workers  who  are
left  in  industry  gain  a  little  less  than  those  who  are  thrown
out  of  it  lose.  There  is  then  harmony  between  the  effects
on  the  national  dividend  and  on  the  real  income  of  the  poor
in  the  narrower  sense.  But,  if,  in  consequence  of  increased
unemployment,  the  expenditure  of  State  aid  to  poor  persons
becomes  £1,000,000  bigger  than  it  would  otherwise  have
been,  there  may  be  disharmony  between  the  effect  on  the
dividend  and  the  effect  on  the  real  income  of  the  poor  in  the
wider  sense.  The  way  is  thus  opened  for  a  somewhat  special
argument  in  favour  of  forcing  up  wage  rates  in  low-grade
occupations.  It  may  be  granted  that  both  the  national
dividend  and  the  real  earnings  of  labour  as  a  whole  will  be
diminished.  But,  it  may  be  claimed,  at  all  events  if  the  prefer-
ence method  of  engagement  prevails,  that  a  number  of  people,
who  otherwise  would  have  earned  too  little  to  maintain  inde-
pendently a  decent  life,  will  now  get  adequate  earnings.  A
number  of  others  will,  indeed,  earn  less  than  before — possibly
nothing  at  all — but,  owing  to  the  action  of  the  State,  they
need  not  receive  less  than  before.  Thus,  we  shall  have,  instead
of  a  large  body  of  people,  all  of  them  occasionally  or  partially
supported  by  the  State,  one  moderate-sized  body  fully  self-
supporting  and  another  moderate-sized  body  scarcely  self-
supporting  at  all.  From  the  point  of  view  of  economic
welfare  as  a  whole,  particularly  if  the  conditions  are  such  as
to  make  the  fully  self-supporting  body  much  larger  than  the
other,  the  latter  state  of  things  may  be  deemed  the  better,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  it  involves  a  smaller  national  dividend.
It  may  be  objected,  no  doubt,  that  the  persons  now  rendered
fully  self-supporting  will  really  be  sustained  by  the  help  of
what  is,  in  effect,  a  special  tax  upon  the  people  who  purchase
the  things  they  happen  to  make ;  and  that  the  care  of
relatively  incapable  citizens  is  an  obligation  upon  the  whole
community,  and  not  merely  upon  those  members  of  it  who
buy  racquet  balls,  or  whatever  the  article  may  be.  It  may
be  replied,  however,  that,  in  so  far  as  relatively  incapable
citizens  are  responsible  for  products  of  general  consumption,


CH.V  THE  MANIPULATION  OF  WAGES  737

or  in  so  far  as  they  do  work  for  mimicipalitias  or  the  State
in  connection  with  commodities  or  services  not  designed  for
sale,  this  objection  loses  the  greater  part  of  its  force ;  and
that,  in  any  event,  since  every  indirect  tax  must  hit  some
people  "  unfairly,"  it  is  not  of  very  great  weight.  Moreover,
since  the  workers  who  benefit  will  not  think  of  themselves  as
being  in  any  sense  "  relieved  by  their  customers,"  there  is  no
danger  that  any  injurious  moral  effect  analogous  to  the  "  taint
of  pauperism  "  will  be  produced  upon  them.  Plainly,  an  issue
turning  upon  considerations  of  this  kind  is  not  susceptible  of
any  general  solution.  Whenever  it  is  proposed  to  enforce
an  uneconomically  high  wage  in  any  occupation  upon  the
grounds  suggested  in  this  section,  a  decision  can  only  be
reached  by  a  careful  balancing  of  conflicting  tendencies,  after
all  the  relevant  circumstances  have  been  studied  in  detail.


3b


CHAPTEE    VI


RATIONING


^  1.  In  Chapter  X.  of  Part  II.  some  discussion  was  under-
taken of  the  policy  of  rationing,  as  an  adjunct  to  State  control
over  the  prices  of  commodities  produced  under  competitive
conditions.  A  brief  study  of  this  policy  is  now  required  from
another  point  of  view.  The  rationing  of  essential  commodities
to  the  better-to-do  classes,  whether  coupled  or  not  with  price
control,  may  be  advocated  as  a  means  of  ensuring  that
sufficient  supplies  at  reasonable  prices  shall  be  available  for
the  poor.  Prima  facie  it  would  seem  that  this  policy  may
affect  the  national  dividend  in  one  way  and  the  absolute  share
of  it  accruing  to  the  poor  in  another,  thus  involving
disharmony.  The  question  whether  or  not  this  is  in  fact  so
will  be  examined  in  the  present  chapter.

8  2.  In  the  special  emergency  of  the  Great  War  supplies
were  short  as  a  result  of  causes  which  could  not  have  been
got  over,  whatever  prices  sellers  had  been  allowed  to  charge.
Price  regulation  and  rationing  did  not,  therefore,  as  was
argued  in  Part  II.  Chapters  IX.  and  X.,  substantially  reduce
the  volume  of  the  national  dividend.  At  the  same  time,  they
jointly  saved  the  poor  from  a  disaster  that  could  not  otherwise
have  been  avoided.  The  grant  of  large  bonuses  on  wages
would  not  have  enabled  poor  people  to  obtain  essential  articles
of  which  the  supply  was  short  and  the  demand  of  the  rich
inelastic.  The  prices  of  these  things  would,  indeed,  have
been  forced  up,  but  the  rich,  at  the  cost  of  paying  more
money,  would  still  have  obtained  as  much  as  before  out  of
the   shortened  supply,  and  would   have   correspondingly  cut

738


CH.  VI  EATIONING  739

down  the  share  available  for  the  poor.  Moreover,  the  fixing
of  maximum  prices  without  rationing  would  not  have  been
sufficient ;  for  the  presumption  is  that  the  rich,  by  various
pulls,  would  still  have  skimmed  the  market.  From  the  joint
facts  that  in  the  war  price  control  coupled  with  rationing  did
not  injure  production  and  did  benefit  distribution  it  has
sometimes  been  inferred  that  the  same  policy  continued  in
normal  conditions  would  produce  the  same  harmoniously
beneficial  result.     That  is  the  issue  we  have  to  judge.

^  3.  In  attempting  to  elucidate  it  we  have  first  to  make
clear,  from  the  present  point  of  view,  the  relation  between
rationing  and  price-fixing.  Clearly,  in  a  brief  period  of
shortage  it  is  possible,  with  a  given  system  of  rations,
to  have  any  one  of  a  large  number  of  regulated  price
maxima,  because,  for  the  time  being,  the  output  and  (within
limits)  the  amount  offered  for  sale  are  independent  of  the  price.
But,  when  we  are  contemplating  a  policy  for  normal  times,
the  position  is  different.  Suppose,  first,  that  a  given  scale
of  rations  is  established  unaccompanied  by  any  price  restric-
tion, and  that  everybody  is  purchasing  the  whole  of  the
ration  to  which  he  is  entitled.  This  implies  a  definite
quantity  demanded ;  and  there  is,  in  general,  only  one  price
that  will  call  out  this  quantity.  If  the  State  fixes  a  maximum
price  higher  than  this,  the  sellers  will  not  be  able  to  realise
it,  and  the  maximum  price  will  become  otiose.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  the  State  fixes  a  price  less  than  this,  not  enough
will  be  produced  to  enable  everybody  to  get  his  ration :
and,  consequently,  if  the  rations  are  to  be  effective,  in  the
sense  that  whoever  wants  his  allotted  ration  can  obtain  it,
the  whole  ration  scale  will  have  to  be  altered  to  fit  the  new
price.  Suppose,  secondly,  that  a  given  ration  scale  is
established,  but  that,  while  the  scale  limits  the  purchases  of
some  people,  others  are  buying  less  than  their  ration  allow-
ance. As  before,  to  whatever  aggregate  quantity  is  being
purchased  there  corresponds  one  single  price  that  will  caU  out
that  quantity ;  and,  as  before,  if  the  State  fixes  a  maximum
price  higher  than  this,  the  maximum  will  become  otiose.
If  the  State  fixes  a  maximum  lower  than  this,  it  seems
at  first  sight  that  a  new  equilibrium  may  be  established,  in


740  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

which  some  of  those  now  buying  less  than  their  ration  will
buy  the  full  amount.  But,  in  fact,  the  lower  price  must
mean  a  lower  output,  so  that  nobody  can  buy  more,  or  even
as  much  as  before,  unless  others  buy  less.  It  must  happen,
therefore,  that  some  of  those  who  before  were  purchasing
their  full  ration  are  now  unable,  although  they  still  wish,  to
do  so.  Here  again,  therefore,  the  ration  scale  becomes
ineffective,  and  a  new  and  lower  ration  must  be  established
to  fit  the  new  price.  Hence,  generally,  to  any  effective  ration
scale  only  one  price  level  can  correspond ;  and  it  is
impossible  for  the  State  to  establish  any  other  price  level
without  at  the  same  time  establishing  another  effective  ration
scale.  This  conclusion  is  a  very  important  one  for  my
present  purpose :  because  it  makes  it  unnecessary  to  study
both  rationing  by  itself  and  also  rationing  accompanied  by
price  regulation.  The  two  things  work  out,  when  the
numerical  constants  are  adjusted,  in  exactly  the  same  way ;
and  the  whole  problem  is  exhausted  when  the  consequences
of  rationing  alone  have  been  examined.

§  4.  It  is  evident  that  any  rationing  system,  which  aims
at  benefiting  the  poor,  must  be  so  designed  as  to  cut  down
the  consumption  of  the  rich.  Such  facts  as  that,  for  example,
a  uniform  bread  ration  on  a  scale  tolerable  to  the  poor  would
not  accomplish  this,  because  normally  poor  people  eat  more
bread  per  head  than  rich  people,  are  not  really  relevant.  We
are  not  concerned  here  with  technique,  but  with  principle ;
and  any  rationing  scheme  that  pretends  to  increase  the
supplies  available  for  the  poor  as  a  body  must  be  so  devised —
the  scale  need  not,  of  course,  be  uniform — that  it  cuts  down
those  available  for  the  rich.  So  much  being  understood,  our
analysis  of  rationing  in  normal  times  may  proceed.  It  works
out  differently  for  commodities  produced  under  conditions  of
increasing  returns  and  of  diminishing  returns.

S  5.  Under  increasing  returns  the  ultimate  consequence
of  extruding  from  the  market  a  part  of  the  demand  of  the
relatively  well-to-do  is  necessarily  to  contract  the  production  of
the  commodity  and,  therefore,  since,  as  was  shown  in  Part  II.
Chapter  VIII.,  too  little  of  it  is  being  produced  anyhow,
to  lessen  the  national  dividend.     At  the  same  time  the  rise


CH.  VI  RATIONING  741

in  price,  which  a  diminution  in  the  supply  of  an  article
produced  under  conditions  of  increasing  returns  must  involve,
forces  poor  people  both  to  buy  less  of  the  commodity  than  they
would  have  done  and  also  to  pay  more  for  what  they  do
buy.  Thus,  they  are  unequivocally  damaged.  The  aggregate
dividend  and  their  share  of  it  alike  suffer,  and  disharmony  is
impossible,

§  6.  Under  diminishing  returns  the  extrusion  of  part
of  the  demand  again,  of  course,  contracts  the  production  of  the
commodity.  But  this  time,  since,  apart  from  interference,  its
production  would — as  was  shown  in  the  chapter  just  cited —
have  been  carried  further  than  the  interest  of  the  national
dividend  requires,  the  contraction  will,  if  it  does  not  go
beyond  a  certain  definite  amount,  benefit  and  not  injure  the
national  dividend.  The  price  of  the  commodity  will,  however,
be  reduced,  so  that  the  poor  probably  get  more  of  it  and
certainly  get  it  at  a  lower  price.  Hence,  the  poor  must  gain.
If  the  slice  cut  off  the  demand  of  the  rich  is  not  too  large,
there  is,  therefore,  harmony  of  an  opposite  sort  to  that  which
comes  about  under  increasing  returns ;  the  national  dividend
and  the  slice  accruing  to  the  poor  are  both  increased.  But,
if  the  check  to  the  purchases  of  the  rich  is  pressed  beyond
a  certain  point,  there  is  disharmony,  the  poor  still  getting  a
benefit  but  the  national  dividend  as  a  whole  suffering  loss,

§  7.  This  analysis  makes  it  plain  that  conditions  may
exist  in  which  a  system  of  rationing  in  normal  times,  if  con-
ducted with  perfect  skill  and  without  any  friction,  might
yield  a  net  social  benefit.  It  does  not  prove,  however,  that
in  practice  the  rationing  of  any  commodity  is  in  normal  times
desirable.  Not  only  is  the  skill  of  Government  officials
limited,  but  also  a  large  adverse  balance  of  inconvenience
and  irritation  would  have  to  be  neutralised  before  any  positive
advantage  could  begin.  Moreover,  it  must  be  remembered
that,  since  the  rich  are  relatively  few  in  number,  and  their
consumption  of  common  articles — with  the  exception  of  coal,
the  consumption  of  which  is  regulated  by  the  size  of  a  man's
house  and  not  by  his  bodily  capacity — a  small  proportion  of
the  whole,  a  very  large  percentage  cut  in  their  per  capita
purchases  would  involve  only  a  very  small  percentage  cut  in


742  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

the  consumption  of  the  country  as  a  whole,  and  an  almost
negligible  cut,  for  most  things,  in  the  production  of  the
world.  In  general,  therefore,  its  effect  in  cheapening  the
supplies  of  diminishing  return  articles  to  poor  persons  would
be  scarcely  perceptible.  The  practical  conclusion  seems  to
be  that,  while  it  may  redound  slightly  to  the  general  interest-
for  well-to-do  persons  voluntarily  to  restrict  their  purchases
of  these  articles,  yet,  in  the  present  state  of  economic  know-
ledge and  administrative  efficiency,  it  would,  in  ordinary  times,
do  more  harm  than  good  for  the  State  to  force  them  to  do
this  by  any  system  of  compulsory  rationing.


CHAPTER  VII

DIRECT  TRANSFERENCES  FROM  THE  RELATIVELY  RICH
TO  THE  RELATIVELY  POOR

•

§  1.  We  now  turn  to  what  is  in  practice  by  far  the  most
important  field  of  possible  disharmony.  In  a  great  number
of  ways,  and  for  a  great  variety  of  reasons,  poor  people  in
civilised  countries  are  given  help,  in  the  main  through  some
State  agency,  at  the  expense  of  their  better-to-do  fellow
citizens.  Prima  facie  the  transference,  which  this  help  implies,
must  increase,  and  it  can  certainly  be  so  arranged  that  it  shall
increase,  the  real  income  available  for  the  poor.  Hence,  the
question  whether  any  particular  form  of  help  to  the  poor
involves  disharmony  is  often  equivalent  to  the  question
whether  its  indirect  consequence  is  to  increase  or  to  diminish
the  national  dividend.  This  question,  in  one  or  another  of  its
various  aspects,  will  be  the  theme  of  the  next  four  chapters.
But,  before  we  embark  upon  it,  a  brief  comment  is  needed
upon  two  popular  arguments,  one  of  which  asserts  that  no
transference  of  resources  to  the  poor  is  possible,  because,  in
effect,  all  money  taken  from  the  rich  is  really  taken  from  the
poor,  while  the  other  asserts  that  it  is  not  possible,  because
the  beneficiaries  will  give  back  what  they  have  received  by
agreeing  to  accept  lower  wages..

§  2.  The  position  taken  up  in  the  former  of  these  argu-
ments is  that  any  levy  of  money,  whether  voluntary  or
compulsory,  from  the  well-to-do  for  the  benefit  of  some  poor
persons  necessarily  implies  the  infliction  of  a  substantially
equivalent  burden  upon  other  poor  persons,  through  the
reduction    which    the  rich  are  compelled   to  make  in    their

743


1^


744  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

purchases  of  the  services  rendered  by  them.  The  foundation
of  this  view  may  be  set  out  as  follows.  It  is  obvious  that  a
great  part  of  the  expenditure  of  the  rich  involves,  directly  or
indirectly,  the  employment  of  labour ;  and  it  is  equally
obvious  that,  if  the  incomes  of  the  rich  are  diminished  by,
say,  £20,000,000  of  taxation,  their  expenditure  for  consump-
tion and  for  capital  investment  together  must  be  contracted  to
a  corresponding  extent.  Some  persons,  concentrating  attention
upon  this  fact,  immediately  conclude  that  the  workpeople,
whose  services  this  expenditure  would  have  called  into  being
if  the  tax  had  not  been  there — and  an  exactly  analogous
argument  applies  to  a  voluntary  contribution — must  suffer
a  loss  of  income  approximating  to  the  twenty  million  pounds
levied  in  taxation.  To  argue  in  this  way,  however,  is  to
ignore  the  fact  that  the  twenty  million  pounds  collected  from
vj  the  rich  is  transferred  to  the  poor,  and  that  the  expenditure
of  it  by  them  is  likely  to  be  no  less  productive  of  employment
than  the  expenditure  of  it  by  the  rich  would  have  been.  No
doubt,  if  we  are  contemplating  the  immediate  effect  of  the
addition  of  twenty  millions  to  the  taxation  of  the  rich  for  the
benefit  of  the  poor,  it  is  relevant  to  observe  that  the  men  who
lose  jobs  on  the  one  side  will  not  be  the  same  persons  as
those  who  find  them  on  the  other ;  and  that,  therefore,  'a
certain  number  of  men,  who  have  been  trained  to  special
aptitudes,  may  find  their  immaterial  capital  of  acquired  skill
rendered  permanently  worthless.  This  loss,  however,  is  the
result,  not  of  taxation,  but  of  change  in  taxation,  and  would
emerge  equally  in  consequence  of  a  reduction  by  twenty
millions  in  imposts  levied  on  the  rich  for  the  benefit  of
the  poor.  Our  problem  is  not  concerned  with  incidents  of
this  character.  The  comparison  we  have  to  make  is  between
one  permanent  system,  under  which  nothing  is  collected  from
the  rich  and  handed  over  to  the  poor,  and  another  permanent
system,  under  which  twenty  millions  is  so  collected  and
handed  over.  To  this  comparison  the  incident  we  have  just
been  discussing  is  irrelevant.  Speaking  broadly  and  apart
from  special  circumstances,  we  may  say  that  it  makes  very
little  difference  to  the  employment  of,  and  wages  paid  for,
labour,  whether  twenty  millions  is  annually  transferred  or  not


CH.  VII    TEANSFEEENCES  FEOM  EICH  TO  POOE     745

transferred  from  any  one  class  to  any  other  class.  The  idea
that  reactions  in  this  field  will  render  attempts  at  transference
of  no  effect  is,  therefore,  illusory.

§  3.  The  latter  of  the  two  arguments  distinguished  above  ^
asserts  that,  if  any  group  of  poor  persons  are  accorded  any
form  of  subsidy,  they  wiU,  in  consequence,  be  willing  to  work
for  less  than  the  worth  of  their  services  to  their  employer,
and  so  will,  in  effect,  transfer  back  the  subsidy  they  have
received  to  members  of  the  richer  classes.  This  view  rests,
partly,  upon  a  'priori  reasoning  and,  partly,  upon  what  is
called  experience.  It  needs,  therefore,  a  twofold  discussion.
The  a  'priori  reasoning  starts  from  the  fact  that  a  Poor  Law
subsidy  enables  a  person  to  accept  lower  wages  than  it  would
be  possible  for  him  to  accept  otherwise  without  starvation  or,
at  all  events,  serious  discomfort ;  and  it  proceeds  to  assert
that,  if  a  person  is  enabled  to  work  for  less,  he  will  be  willing
to  work  for  less.  Now,  no  doubt,  in  certain  special  circum-
stances, when  a  workman,  in  receipt  of  a  subsidy  insufficient
to  enable  him  to  live  up  to  his  accustomed  standard  of  Ufe,  is
confronted  by  an  employer  occupying  towards  him  the  position
of  a  monopolist,  this  inference  may  be  valid.  In  general,
however,  where  competition  exists  among  employers,  it  is  ^
quite  invalid.  A  person,  who,  by  saving  in  the  past,  has
become  possessed  of  a  competence,  is  enabled  to  work  for  less
than  one  who  has  not.  A  millionaire  is  enabled  to  work  for  less
even  than  a  relieved  pauper.  So  far  from  this  ability  making
it  probable  that  he  will  strike  a  worse  bargain  in  the  higgling
of  the  market,  it  is  likely,  in  general,  to  have  the  opposite
effect.  It  is  not  the  fact  that  the  wife  of  a  man  in  good
work  is  likely  to  accept  abnormally  low  wages.  On  the  con-
trary, the  woman,  who,  for  this  or  any  other  reason,  can  afford
to  "  stand  out,"  is,  in  general,  among  those  who  resist  such
wages  most  strenuously.^  Let  us  turn,  then,  to  the  reasoning
from  what  is  called  experience.  This  starts  from  two  ad-
mitted facts.  The  first  fact  is  that  old  and  infirm  persons
in  receipt  of  a  Poor  Law  subsidy  very  frequently  earn  from
private  employers  considerably  less  than  the  ordinary  wage

^  For  an  illastration  of  this  among  home- working  tailoresses,  cf.  Yesselitsky,
The  Home  Wm-ker,  p.  17.


746  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

per  hour  current  for  the  class  of  work  on  which  they  are
engaged.  The  second  fact — given  in  evidence  before  the  Poor
Law  Commission  of  1832 — is  that  the  refusal  of  guardians  to
grant  relief  in  aid  of  wages  "  soon  had  the  effect  of  making
the  farmer  pay  his  labourers  fairly."  From  these  facts  the
inference  is  drawn  that,  where  a  Poor  Law  subsidy  exists,
workpeople  accept  a  wage  lower  than  the  worth  of  their  work
to  their  employers.  This  inference,  however,  is  illegitimate.
There  is  an  alternative  and  more  probable  explanation.  As
regards  old  and  infirm  persons,  may  it  not  be  that  the  low
wage  per  hour  is  due  to  the  circumstance  that  the  work  they
can  do  in  an  hour  is  poor  in  quality  or  little  in  quantity?
As  regards  the  old  Poor  Law,  may  it  not  be  that  the  un-
reformed  system  of  relief,  so  long  as  it  prevailed,  caused  people
to  work  slackly  and  badly,  that,  when  it  was  abolished,  they
worked  harder,  and  that  this  was  the  cause  of  the  alteration  in
their  wages  ?  The  view  that  the  true  analysis  of  experience
is  to  be  found  along  these  lines,  and  not  in  the  suggestion
that  relieved  persons  work  for  less  than  they  are  worth  to
their  employers,  is  made  likely  by  general  considerations.  It
has  been  further  confirmed  by  recent  investigations, '•which
tend  to  show  that,  where  two  people  differ  solely  in  the  fact
that  one  does,  and  the  other  does  not,  receive  a  Poor  Law
subsidy,  their  wages  are  in  fact  the  same.  Thus,  investigators
appointed  by  the  Poor  Law  Commission  of  1909,  as  a  result  of
their  enquiry  into  the  effects  of  out-relief  on  wages,  write :
"  We  found  no  evidence  that  women  wage-earners,  to  whose
families  out-relief  is  given,  cut  rates.  Such  wage-earners  are
invariably  found  working  at  the  same  rates  of  pay  as  the
much  larger  number  of  women  not  in  receipt  of  relief,  who
entirely  swamp  them.  .  .  .  We  could  find  no  evidence  that
the  daughters  of  paupers  accepted  lower  rates  than  others,  or
earned  less  than  others,  because  of  their  indirect  relation  to
pauperism."  ^  This  argument,  therefore,  like  that  set  out  in
§  2,  breaks  down.  The  direct  transference  of  resources  from
the  relatively  rich  to  the  relatively  poor,  by  way  of  philan-
thropic or   State  action,  whatever  its  ultimate  consequences

*  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Appendix,  vol.  xxxvi.
pp.  vi-vii.


cH.vir    TEANSFEEENCES  FEOM  EICH  TO  POOE    747

may  prove  to  be,  is  at  least  not  impossible.  Of  course,  this
conclusion  does  not  deny  that  additional  work  by  assisted,  or
any  other,  workers  slightly  lowers  the  general  rate  of  wages.
But  that  proposition  is  quite  different  from  the  proposition
that  assistance  to  persons  who  are  working  anyhow  has  this
effect.^

§  4.  In  view  of  this  result  we  may  proceed  undisturbed
to  our  main  problem  —  that  of  determining  the  effect  of
various  sorts  of  transference  upon  the  volume  of  the  national
dividend.  Some  sorts,  it  would  seem,  are  likely  to  increase
that  dividend  and  others  to  diminish  it.  We  have,  therefore,
to  investigate  the  conditions  upon  which  the  occurrence  of
the  one  or  the  other  of  these  opposing  consequences  depends.
These  conditions  can  be  examined  most  effectively  by  means
of  an  analysis,  on  the  lines  set  out  in  Part  IV.,  in  which  the
distinction  between  the  effect  of  the  fact,  and  the  effect  of  the
expectation,  of  transference  is  made  fundamental  Of  course,
when  we  have  to  do  with  a  levy,  which  is  made  once  and  for
all  to  meet  some  exceptional  need,  and  the  regular  continuance
of  which  is  not  anticipated,  effects  operating  through  expecta-
tionudo  not  have  to  be  considered.  In  ordinary  times,  however,
the  fact  of  a  tax  levy  imposed  one  year  carries  with  it  the
expectation  that  it  will  be  continued  in  future  years,  so  that
both  fact  and  expectation  are  relevant.  I  shall  consider  first
the  expectation  of  transferences  from  the  rich ;  secondly  the
expectation  of  transferences  to  the  poor  ;  and  thirdly  the  fact
of  transferences.

^  Cf.  aiite,  Chapter  III.  §  10.  Dr.  Hourwick,  in  his  book  Immigration  and
Labour,  seems  to  miss  this  point ;  for,  having  shown  that  immigrants  into  the
United  States  do  not  earn  less  wages  for  equally  eflBcient  work  than  native
Americans,  he  treats  this  conclusion  as  implying  that  they  do  not  affect  the  wages
of  native  Americans.


CHAPTEE  VIII

THE  EFFECT  ON   THE    NATIONAL    DIVIDEND  OF   THE  EXPECTATION
OF   TRANSFERENCES    FROM    THE    RELATIVELY    RICH

§  1.  The  expectation  of  levies  from  the  relatively  rich,  as
from  any  other  class,  acts  upon  the  national  dividend  differ-
ently according  as  the  levy  is  voluntary  or  coercive.  The
contribution  of  a  voluntary  levy  implies  that  a  new  use  has
been  found,  into  which  people  wish  to  put  some  resources
more  keenly  than  they  wish  to  put  them  into  other  available
uses.  This  means  that  their  desire  to  possess  resources  is
enhanced,  and,  therefore,  that  the  provision  they  are  willing  to
make  of  waiting  and  effort,  in  order  to  obtain  resources,  is  also
enhanced.  Hence,  the  expectation  by  the  rich  of  voluntary
transferences  from  the  rich  is  likely  to  make  for  an  increase
in  the  volume  of  the  national  dividend.  "  Though  it  would
have  disastrous  effects  if  the  State  should  attempt  to  enforce
universal  benevolence,  yet  only  beneficial  results  would  follow
if  all  men  were  to  become  wisely  benevolent."  ^  It  is,  there-
fore, important  to  consider  briefly  what  scope  there  is  in  the
modern  world  for  this  type  of  transference.

§  2.  The  most  obvious  form  which  it  can  and  does  take
is  that  of  generous  conduct  towards  their  workpeople  on  the
part  of  wealthy  employers  of  labour.  Since  these  workpeople
spend  a  great  part  of  their  lives  in  buildings  provided  by
their  employers  and  in  conditions  largely  under  their  control,
the  employers  have  the  power  to  spend  money  in  their
interest  with  exceptional  effect.  Acting  in  careful  collabora-
tion with  chosen  representatives  of  the  workpeople,  they  can

1  Carver,  Social  Justice,  p.  142.
748


OH.  VIII       TEANSFEKENCES  FEOM  THE  EICH  749

contribute  conveniences,  opportunities  for  recreation  and
opportunities  for  education,  and  can  make  it  a  condition  of
employment  for  their  younger  workers  that  these  things  shall
be  used.  Thus,  Messrs.  Cadbury  at  Bournville  require  all
their  employees  under  eighteen  to  take  part  in  regular  gymnastic
classes  and  in  regular  and  elaborate  courses  of  education,  in
part  provided  by,  and  in  part  paid  for  by,  the  firm.^  The
special  opportunities  which  they  enjoy  for  effective  action  may
well  create  in  wealthy  employers  a  special  sense  of  obligation.
This  sense  was  admirably  expressed  by  the  well-known  Dutch
employer  Van  Marken,  when  he  declared :  "  It  seems  to  me
the  duty  of  an  employer  to  aid  his  subordinates  by  every
means  at  his  command — his  heart,  his  intellect,  his  money —
to  attain  that  highest  stage  which  alone  makes  life  worth
living.  My  own  conviction  is  that  in  doing  so  the  employer
will  make  no  sacrifices.  But,  if  he  needs  must  make  them,
be  it  from  the  material  or  the  moral  point  of  view,  let  him
make  them  up  to  the  limit  of  his  capacity.  It  is  his  sacred
duty."  2  With  the  education  of  opinion  among  well-to-do
employers  of  labour  we  may  look  increasingly  for  a  growth
of  this  sense  of  patronal  obligation.  Furthermore,  this  sense
may  be  fortified  and  extended  by  the  egoistic  consideration
that  generous  treatment  of  workpeople  is  often  a  splendid
advertisement,  leading  indirectly  to  large  profits.  On  this
point  I  cannot  do  better  than  adopt  Professor  Ashly's
excellent  words :  "  Instead  of  cynically  pooh-poohing  it
[employers'  welfare  work]  for  that  reason,  I  think  this  is  a
particularly  encouraging  fact,  and  highly  creditable  to  human
nature.  It  shows  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  consumers'
conscience.  The  whole  essence  of  the  Consumers'  League
work  in  America  and  of  the  White  Lists  of  the  Christian
Social  Union  in  this  country  is  to  make  it  '  good  business '
to  be  known  to  manufacture  under  satisfactory  working  con-
ditions ;  and,  with  increasing  publicity  and  an  increasing
fellow-feeling  among  all  classes,  I  expect  that  this  is  going  to
be  the  case  more  and  more."  ^

1  Cf.  Cadbury,  Experiments  in  IndustriaZ  Organisalion,  p.  17.

2  Meakin,  Model  Factories  and  Villages,  p.  27.

3  Preface  to  Cadbury's  Experiments  in  Industrial  Organisation,  p.  xiii.


750  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  v

§  3.  Voluntary  transference  of  resources  may  also  take
the  form  of  generous  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  wealthy  to
those  poor  persons  who  are  united  to  them  through  common
citizenship  of  the  same  town.  Here,  too,  there  is  a  special
relation  and,  consequently,  a  special  spur  towards  generous
action  :  for  the  wealthy  donor  of  such  things  as  public  parks
and  playgrounds  has  the  satisfaction  of  choosing  the  form  of
his  gift,  of  directing  the  use  of  it  in  some  measure,  and  of
seeing  the  fruits  of  it  develop  before  his  eyes.  This  localised
generosity  may  easily  develop  into  a  wider  patriotism,  which
interests  itself,  not  merely  in  fellow-citizens  of  a  common  city,
but  in  fellow-citizens  of  a  common  country.  Pure  public
spirit  often  leads  wealthy  persons  voluntarily  to  provide,
partly  in  their  lifetime  and  partly  by  legacies  at  death,  large
sums  for  the  service  of  the  poor.  Oftener  still  public  spirit
is  reinforced  by  the  craving,  strong  in  some  men,  for  that
sense  of  power  which  the  fact  of  giving  conveys.

§  4.  The  normal  motives  prompting  men  to  these  and
other  forms  of  voluntary  transference  of  resources  to  public
ends  are  already  of  considerable  force,  and  it  is  open  to  us  to
stimulate  them  still  further.  "  No  doubt,"  Dr.  Marshall
writes,  "  men  are  capable  of  much  more  unselfish  service  than
they  generally  render ;  and  the  supreme  aim  of  the  economist
is  to  discover  how  this  latent  social  asset  can  be  developed
more  quickly  and  turned  to  account  more  wisely."  ^  Not
much  has  yet  been  accomplished  in  this  direction.  It  is  well
understood,  however,  that  Government,  if  it  so  chooses,  has
power  to  harness  to  the  nobler  motives  for  generosity  others  of
a  lower  order.  Much  will  be  done  for  the  sake  of  fame  and
praise,  and  fame  of  a  sort  may  be  offered  as  a  reward  for  private
munificence.  Thus,  the  transference  of  resources  from  the  rich
can  be  purchased,  in  a  delicately  veiled  manner,  by  honours
and  decorations  that  cost  nobody  anything.  These  things
are  at  once  symbols  and  conveyers  of  reputation ;  for,  when  a
worthless  man  is  decorated,  those  who  feel,  or  pretend  to  feel,
respect  for  the  decorator,  offer  a  vicarious  respect  to  the
decorated  also.  No  doubt,  in  some  degree,  the  issue  of  fresh
decorations  may  diminish    the    value   to   their  possessors   of

'  Principles  of  Economics,  p.  9.


CH.  VIII       TRANSFERENCES  FROM  THE  RICH         751

those  already  issued.  To  confer  the  Order  of  Merit  broadcast
among  excellent  bricklayers  would  annihilate  its  attractive
power  for  the  class  in  whose  behoof  it  was  originally  designed.
This  difficulty  can,  however,  be  overcome  to  a  great  extent  by
the  creation  of  new  orders,  instead  of  the  extension  of  old
ones.  It  is  not  impossible,  therefore,  that,  along  these  lines,
inducements  might  be  provided,  adequate  to  secure  the
transference  of  a  good  deal  of  income  from  rich  people,  without
the  expectation  of  the  transference  involving  any  diminution,
but,  rather,  some  appreciable  increase,  in  the  waiting  and  effort
furnished  by  them  towards  the  upbuilding  of  the  national
dividend-

§  5.  Unfortunately  it  is  quite  certain  that,  in  present
conditions,  voluntary  transferences  will  fall  very  much  below
the  aggregate  of  transferences  from  relatively  well-to-do
people  which  the  general  sense  of  the  community  demands.  '^
A  considerable  amount  of  coercive  transference  is,  therefore,
also  necessary.  ,  This  means,  in  one  form  or  another,
taxation,  and  probably,  in  the  main,  direct  taxation  graduated
against  large  incomes.  The  effect  upon  the  volume  of  the
national  dividend  of  the  expectation  of  various  sorts  of  taxes
has  been  examined  at  length  in  the  course  of  Part  TV.
Here  it  is  enough  to  observe  generally  that  the  expectation
of  indirect  taxes  tends  to  divert  resources  from  more  to  less
productive  channels,  and  the  expectation  of  direct  taxes  to
lessen  the  inducement  people  have  to  work  and  save.  Broadly
therefore,  unlike  the  expectation  of  voluntary  transferences,  it
will  make  for  a  diminution,  though,  as  was  shown  in  Part  lY,,
not  necessarily  a  very  large  diminution,  in  the  volume  of
the  national  dividend.  Whatever  injury  is  brought  about  in
this  way  wiU  need  to  be  taken  into  account  before  a  final
reckoning  of  the  effect  on  the  dividend  of  any  particular  form
of  transference  is  made.


CHAPTER    IX

THE   EFFECT  ON   THE   NATIONAL   DIVIDEND   OF   THE   EXPECTATION
OF    TRANSFERENCES    TO    THE    POOR

§  1.  In  turning  to  examine  the  effect  on  the  national  dividend
of  the  expectation  of  transferences  to  the  poor,  we  come  at
once  into  contact  with  a  widely  held  opinion.  The  experience
of  the  old  Poor  Law  has  made  people  very  much  afraid  that
any  expectation  of  assistance  from  public  funds  will  tempt  the
poor  into  idleness  and  thriftlessness.  It  is  common — or  at
all  events  was  common  before  the  war — to  hear  proposals  for
State  aid  towards  housing  accommodation,  insurance  premiums,
or  even  education  denounced  on  the  ground  that  they  constitute
relief  in  aid  of  wages,  and  are,  therefore,  a  reversion  to  tJhe
discredited  policy  of  Speenhamland.  This  reasoning  is  based  on
defective  analysis.  Underlying  it  is  the  tacit  assumption
that  the  expectation  of  any  sort  of  transference  to  the  poor
acts  in  the  same  way  as  the  expectation  of  any  other  sort.
In  reality,  different  types  of  transference  act  in  different
ways,  and  nothing  of  importance  can  be  said  that  does  not
take  account  of  this  fact.  The  main  lines  of  division  are
between  transferences  which  differentiate  against  idleness  and
thriftlessness,  transferences  which  are  neutral,  and  trans-
ferences which  differentiate  in  favour  of  idleness  and  thrift-
lessness.

§  2.  The  first  of  these  groups  is*  made  up  of  those  transfer-
ences which  are  conditional  upon  the  recipients  making  pro-
vision for  themselves  on  a  scale  that  is  fairly  representative  of
their  individual  capacity.  These  transferences  can  be  arranged
as  follows.     First,  the  poorer  members  of  the  community  are

752


I


cH.ix  TRANSFEEEXCES  TO  THE  POOR  753

classified  according  to  the  amount  of  provision  that  they  "  could
reasonably  have  been  expected  to  make  "  for  themselves,  apart
from  any  transference  of  resources  in  their  favour.  The
standard  of  capacity  set  up  is,  of  course,  different  for  different
sorts  of  people  with  different  opportunities.  For  example,  the
income  from  savings,  which  a  man  can  reasonably  be  expected
to  have  secured  at  a  given  age  varies  with  his  situation  in
life.  If,  before  the  war,  a  man  on  128.  a  week  had  secured
for  himself  an  annuity  of  Is.  a  week,  his  thrift  was  much  more
real  than  if  a  man  on  50s.  had  got  an  annuity  of  3s.  a  week.
The  classification  of  different  people  into  different  groups  with
different  standards  may  be  carried  out  with  any  degree  of
roughness  or  exactness,  according  to  the  scope  and  skill  of  the
various  classifying  authorities.  In  ideal  conditions  a  separate
standard  capacity  would  be  estimated  for  every  individual.
Secondly,  the  standard  having  been  set  up,  resources  are
transferred  to  poor  persons  on  condition  that  their  productive
activity  comes  up  to  the  standard  assigned  to  them,  an  extra
amount,  perhaps,  being  transferred  in  recognition  of  any  excess
above  standard  to  which  they  may  attain.  It  is  not,  of  course,
necessary  that  the  same  grant  should  be  made  to  all  persons
who  live  up  to  their  capacity ;  and,  in  general,  we  may  presume
that  a  poorer  man  satisfying  this  condition  will  receive  more
than  a  less  poor  man  who  also  satisfies  it.  The  kind  of
arrangement  which  this  policy  embodies  has  been  advocated
for  certain  purposes  by  Dr.  Marshall  "  Should  not  indoor
and  outdoor  relief, "  he  asks, "  be  so  administered  as  to  encourage
providence,  and  to  afford  hope  to  those  whose  means  are  small,
but  who  yet  desire  to  do  right  as  far  as  they  can  ? "  ^  Practically
the  adoption  of  this  ideal  would  mean  that  persons  coming
up  to,  or  exceeding,  the  standard  adjudged  reasonable  for  them
would  be  treated  more  favourably  than  similar  persons  failing
to  do  this.  A  rough  application  of  it  is  made  in  the  rules
governing  the  grant  of  old-age  pensions  in  Denmark.  In
order  to  qualify  for  a  pension,  a  man  must  have  worked  and
saved  enough  to  keep  off  the  rates  between  the  ages  of  fifty
and  sixty.  Under  this  system,  though,  possibly,  thrift,  labour
and  private  charity  are  discouraged,  so  far  as  they  touch  the
^  JBeonomie  Journal,  1891,  p.  189.

3  c


754  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

provision  for  maintenance  after  sixty,  "on  the  other  hand,
both  thrift  and  private  charity  have  been  stimulated,  so  far  as
they  are  concerned  with  provision  for  maintenance,  between
the  ages  of  fifty  and  sixty.  The  motive  for  maintaining
independence  during  these  years  is  strengthened,  and  its
effectiveness  is  greatly  increased,  by  the  consideration  that
a  limited  task,  the  completion  of  which  is  not  so  distant  and
uncertain  as  to  deter  men  from  attempting  it,  is  all  that  is
now  imposed  on  the  honest  and  industrious,  though  indigent,
person,  or  on  friends,  former  employers  or  others,  who  may  be
interested  in  helping  him.  Many  shrink  from  trying  what
seems  impossible  of  achievement,  and  much  effort,  which  would
otherwise  have  remained  latent,  has  been  evoked  by  bringing
the  task  within  the  reach  of  a  wider  circle  of  persons."  ^  There
can  be  little  doubt  that  openings  exist  for  a  further  application
of  methods  of  this  kind.  It  is  plain  that  the  expectation
of  transferences  to  poor  persons,  engineered  by  means  of  them,
will  stimulate,  and  will  not  diminish,  the  contribution  which
potential  receipts  make  towards  the  upbuilding  of  the  national
dividend.

S  3.  The  second  group,  neutral  transferences,  is  made  up  of
those  transferences  which  are  dependent  on  the  attainment  of
some  condition,  not  capable  of  being  varied  by  voluntary  action
in  the  economic  sphere,  on  the  part  of  possible  beneficiaries.
It,  thus,  includes  schemes  for  universal  old-age  pensions  (de-
pendent only  on  the  attainment  of  a  certain  age),  the  universal
endowment  of  motherhood  (dependent  only  on  the  fact  of
motherhood),  or  the  universal  gift  to  everybody  of  a  sum  deemed
sufficient  to  furnish  by  itself  the  essential  means  of  subsistence.
These  wide-reaching  arrangements  are,  hitherto,  nowhere  more
than  projects.  But  less  ambitious  examples  of  neutral  trans-
ferences have  been  embodied  in  actual  law.  Under  them  grants
of  help  are  made  to  depend,  not  on  the  performance  of  the

1  "Denmark  and  its  Aged  Poor,"  Yale  Review,  1899,  p.  15.  The  follow-
ing sentence  from  the  first  report  on  the  working  of  the  British  Unemployment
Insurance  Scheme  is  of  interest  in  this  connection  :  "  Twenty  of  our  Trade
Unions,  with  an  estimated  membership  of  over  86,000  in  the  (compulsorily)
Insured  Trades,  have  begun  to  make  provision  for  unemployment  since  the
passing  of  the  Act ;  while  other  Associations  making  such  provision  have  much
increased  their  membership "  [Cd.  6965],  p.  iv.  The  help  given  towards
insurance  would  thus  seem  to  have  stimulated  private  effort.


I


CH.  IX  TEANSFEEEXCES  TO  THE  POOE  755

recipient,  nor  on  the  relation  between  performance  and  estimated
capacity,  but  upon  estimated  capacity  itself.  The  root  idea
of  this  system  was  approached  in  a  Eeport  made  to  the  Poor
Law  Authority  in  1872  by  Mr.  Wodehouse,  in  which  he
endeavoured  to  distinguish  between  relief  in  aid  of  wages
and  relief  in  aid  of  earnings.  "  Eelief  in  aid  of  earnings,"
he  wrote,  "  is  clearly  inseparable  from  any  system  of  out-relief.
Thus,  in  all  unions,  relief  is  afforded  to  able-bodied  widows
with  children,  and  it  is  clear  that  all  such  relief  is  in  aid  of
an  income  obtained  by  the  widow  by  washing,  charing,  or
other  similar  employments.  So,  again,  in  almost  every  union
that  I  visited,  relief  is  given  to  old  and  infirm  men,  who,
though  past  regular  work,  are  from  time  to  time  employed  on
occasional  odd  jobs  of  various  sorts.  Eelief  to  these  two
classes  of  paupers  may,  I  think,  be  distinguished  from  that
system  of  relief  in  aid  of  wages,  which  was  so  generally
prevalent  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  present  Poor  Law.  "  ^
A  closer  approach  to  the  above  idea  is  made  in  the  treatment
which  many  Boards  of  Guardians  before  the  war  accorded  to
old  and  infirm  women  and  to  widows  with  several  children.
They  appeared  to  hold  that,  whereas  most  of  the  regular  trades
followed  by  men  provide  persons  of  average  capacity,  in  full
employment  and  without  encumbrances,  with  fairly  adequate
earnings,  most  women's  trades  do  not  do  this.  It  is  not  at
all  obvious  that  a  widow  of  ordinary  ability,  even  without
children,  can,  with  reasonable  hours  and  so  forth,  earn  enough
to  "  maintain  herself  and  provide  for  the  ordinary  vicissitudes
of  life."  ^  Hence,  we  read :  "  Once  a  woman  is  put  on  the
roll  (for  out-relief),  provided  she  is  not  guilty  of  immorality  or
frequent  intemperance,  she  is  not  disturbed.  Her  earnings
may  rise  and  fall,  but  the  relief  will  not  vary.     The  inquiry

'  Quoted  in  Appendix  voL  ivii.  to  the  Report  of  the  Boyal  Commission,  on  the
Poor  Laves  [Cd.  4690],  p.  355.

*  Cf.  Report  to  the  Poor  Law  Commigsion  by  Mr.  Steel  Maitland  and  Miss
Squire,  Appendix,  vol.  xvi  p.  5.  The  position  of  widows  is,  of  course,  especially
likely  to  be  diflBcult  in  districts  where  there  is  no  established  women's  trade.
In  such  districts  "  widows  left  destitute  come  at  once  for  poor  relief  and  remain
throughout  their  widowhood  on  the  rates."  "Where  opportunities  for  home  work
exist,  pauperism  may  be  postponed — often  at  the  expense  of  hours  far  longer
than  a  proper  interpretation  of  the  minimum  standard,  to  be  stipulated  for  in
chapter  xii.,  would  allow.     (Cf.  ibid.  p.  182.)


756  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

as  to  her  earnings  is  made  at  her  first  application  and  rarely
afterwards.  .  .  .  One  officer  put  the  common  practice  into  a
few  words :  '  We  never  bother  about  what  the  women  earn.
We  know  they  never  earn  ten  shillings.  They  can  always
find  room  for  half-a-crown.'  It  follows  that,  in  unions  where
minute  inquiry  is  the  exception — that  is  to  say,  in  most
unions — the  pauper  worker  is  not  discouraged  from  working
up  to  her  full  capacity."^  The  French  law  of  1893
concerning  sick  relief  is  of  kindred  character.  It  provides
that  in  every  commune  there  shall  be  drawn  up  periodic-
ally a  list  of  persons  who,  if  they  become  sick,  will  be
entitled  to  assistance,  the  persons  on  the  list  being  placed
there  on  the  ground  that  they  have  not  the  capacity
to  make  provision  against  sickness  for  themselves.  Yet
again,  the  same  principle  is  embodied  in  the  English
system  of  exacting  payment  (whether  through  recoverable
loans  or  otherwise)  from  persons  adjudged  capable  of  making
some  contribution,  to  whom  medical  aid  has  been  given,  or
whose  children  have  been  fed  by  public  authority.  A  charge
is  made,  based,  not  on  what  the  actual  service  rendered  to  the
poor  man  has  cost,  but  on  an  estimate  of  the  provision,  which,
apart  from  the  hope  of  outside  help,  he  might  have  been
expected  to  make.  Thus,  Circular  552  of  the  Board  of
Education  urges  that,  when  the  parents  cannot  pay  the  full
cost  of  meals  provided  for  their  children,  "  it  is  better  that
they  should  pay  what  their  means  permit,  rather  than  that
meals  should  be  given  free  of  cost."  ^     In  other  words,  an

^  Report  to  the  Poor  Law  Commission  by  Miss  Williams  and  Mr.  Jones,
Appendix,  vol.  xvii.  p.  334.

2  Loc.  cit.  Par.  4.  The  Board's  Report  on  the  Working  of  the  Act  in  1910
shows  that  the  amount  of  money  actually  recovered  from  parents  is  insignificant.
([Cd.  5131],  p.  9.)  This,  however,  is  largely  due  to  the  facts  (1)  that  many
local  Education  Boards  deliberately  limit  their  provision  of  meals  to  necessitous
children,  and  (2)  that,  when  they  do  not  do  this,  parents  who  can  afford  to
pay  dislike  sending  their  children  to  meals  where  no  distinction  is  made  between
payers  and  non-payers.  (Cf.  Bulkley,  The  Feeding  of  School  Children,  pp.  107-9.)
In  these  circumstances  not  many  children  whose  parents  are  capable  of  paying
anything  are  likely  to  be  affected.  In  respect  of  lunatics  the  conditions  are
different,  and  considerable  contributions  from  relatives  are  collected.  (Cf.
Freeman,  Economic  Jourv/il,  1911,  pp.  294  et  seq.)  It  must  be  admitted,  however
that  there  are  considerable  practical  difficulties  in  the  way  of  exacting  payment
for  a  service  which  it  is  understood  will  be  rendered  whether  payment  is
made  or  not.     Further   objection  is  often  taken  to  the  device  of  ' '  recoverable


CH.  IX  TEAKSFEEEXCES  TO  THE  POOE  757

attempt  is  made  so  to  arrange  the  State's  contribntion  to
different  families  that  it  shall  depend  upon,  and  vary  in-
versely with,  their  estimated  capacity  to  make  provision  for
themselves.

§  4.  The  way  in  which  the  expectation  of  a  neutral  trans-
ference will    react  on  the  volume  of  the  national  dividend  .
depends  on  the  kind  of  things  in  which  the  transference  is
made.     As  a  general  rule,  of  course,  it  is  made  in  money.     In
these  circumstances  it  might  be  thought  at  first  sight  that  the

o  c  o

contribution  of  effort  and  waiting  which  potential  recipients
make,  and,  therefore,  the  volume  of  the  dividend,  will  be
wholly  unaffected.  This,  however,  is  not  so.  For,  if  a  man  of
any  given  presumed  capacity  knows  that  he  will  receive,  say,  a
pound  a  week  as  a  gift,  independently  of  anything  that  he  may
earn  for  himself,  his  desire  for  any  wth  unit  of  money  earned  by
himself  is  lowered  But  his  aversion  to  any  rth  unit  of  work
that  he  may  do  remains  unaltered ;  or,  since  the  extra  money
creates  new  opportunities  for  a  pleasurable  use  of  leisure,  may
even  be  increased.  Consequently,  if  he  continued  to  do  the
same  amount  of  work  as  before,  his  aversion  to  the  last  unit
of  work  done  would  exceed  his  desire  for  the  money  received
in  exchange  for  it.  It  foUows  that  the  expectation  of  a
weekly  grant  will  cause  the  recipient  to  contract  the  amount
of  work  that  he  does,  and,  therewith,  his  contribution  to  the
national  dividend.^  The  extent  of  this  effect  varies  with  the
magnitude  of  the  grant  and  the  forms  of  (1)  the  schedule
representing  his  desire  for  various  amounts  of  money  and
(2)  the  schedule  representing  his  aversion  from  various  amounts
of  work ;  but,  in  any  event,  some  contraction  in  his  contribu-
tion to  the  dividend  is  likely,  ceteris  paribus,  to  occur.

§  5.  The  transference  may,  however,  be  made  in  the  form,
not  of  money,  but  of  things.  If  these  things  are  things
which,  apart  from  the  transference,  a  recipient  would   have

loans,"  on  the  ground  that  they  divert  energy  from  indostrial  effort  to  attempts
at  evading  payment.  As  Mrs.  Bosanqnet  observes:  "Many  a  shilling  is
recklessly  wasted,  because,  if  not  spent,  it  wiU  only  go  to  the  debt  collector "
{Eeonmnic  Journal,  1896,  p.  223).

*  This  reaction  can  alternatively,  if  it  is  so  desired,  be  brought  under  revievr
as  an  effect  of  the  fact  of  transference,  on  the  line  of  thought  followed  in  Part
IV.  Chapter  II.  §  2.  In  the  present  connection,  however,  the  form  of  analysis
adopted  above  is  more  convenient.


758  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

purchased  out  of  his  own  earnings,  or  if,  not  being  such
things,  they  are  capable  of  being  sold  or  pawned  and  thus
converted  into  money,  the  effect  is  the  same  as  if  money  had
been  transferred.  But  transference  of  objects,  not  capable  of
being  sold  or  pawned,  and  designed  to  satisfy  needs  which,
apart  from  the  transference,  a  recipient  would  have  left  un-
satisfied, have  a  different  effect.  The  last  unit  of  money
which  a  man  earns  for  himself  in  industry  will  be  required
to  satisfy  the  same  needs,  and  will,  therefore,  be  desired  with
the  same  intensity  as  it  would  have  been,  if  no  transference
had  been  made.  Hence,  no  contraction  will  occur  in  the
contribution  which,  by  work  and  waiting,  he  makes  to  the
national  dividend.  Thus,  public  parks  for  the  collective  use
of  the  poor,  or  flowers  for  their  private  use,  can  be  transferred
to  them,  without  the  expectation  of  the  transference  reacting
injuriously  upon  the  dividend.  The  same  remark  holds  good
of  general  sanitary  measures.  The  grant  from  State  funds
of  the  expenses  involved  in  such  things  is  on  a  different
footing  from  the  grant  of  funds  for  ordinary  medical  treatment.
As  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  write :  "  Sanitary  measures,
for  the  most  part,  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  the  individual,  and
are  a  common  need,  which  must  be  provided  for  in  common ;
while  medical  treatment  is  essentially  an  individual  need,*and
is,  for  the  most  part,  easily  attainable  by  the  individual."  ^
Similar  considerations  hold  good,  in  some  degree,  of  the  gift
'  of  free  school  education,  or  of  a  portion  of  the  costs  of  it —
when  the  amount  of  education  to  be  covered  is  authoritatively
fixed — to  the  children  of  the  poor.  For  some  persons  are
so  poor  that,  if  left  to  themselves,  they  could  not  devote  any
of  their  earnings  to  the  purchase  of  school  education,  and,
therefore,  the  free  provision  of  it  by  the  State  does  not  lower
their  desire  for  any  unit  of  these  earnings.  Since,  when
children  are  taken  to  be  educated,  their  parents  are  deprived
of  the  wages  they  might  otherwise  have  obtained,  it  may  be
that,  even  when  to  free  education  free  meals  are  added,  there  is
no  net  lightening  of  the  costs  of  living  to  parents,  and,  there-
fore, no  diminution  in  the  contribution  of  work  and  waiting
which  they  find  it  profitable  to  make.     In  these  circumstances

^  Eeport  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Law,  p.  231.


cH.  IX  TEANSFEEENCES  TO  THE  POOE  759

the  expectation  of  this  variety  of  neutral  transference  will
leave  the  value  of  the  national  dividend  unaltered.

§  6.  There  remains  the  third  possibility.  There  are  some
commodities  and  services,  the  demand  for  which  is  so  correlated
with  that  for  certain  other  commodities  and  services  that  the
gift  of  them  increases  the  recipient's  desire  for  these  others ;
thus  increasing  his  desire  for  any  rth  unit  of  purchasing  power
that  he  may  be  able  to  earn ;  and  thus,  finally,  increasing  the
work  and  waiting  that  he  is  willing  to  provide  in  exchange
for  purchasing  power.  It  is  claimed,  for  example,  that  the
gift  of  medical  treatment  to  children  in  some  elementary
schools  reacts  beneficially  on  the  energy  of  their  parents
by  enlisting  co-operation  and  thought  from  them.  The
possibility  thus  opened  up  is  illustrated  in  the  following
passage  from  Mr.  Paterson's  Across  the  Bridges :

At  present  the  difficulty  of  school  dinners  centres  round  the
position  of  the  mother.  Her  apathy  towards  the  education  of  her
child,  her  severance  from  any  sense  of  partnership  with  the  school,
makes  her  sometimes  ready  to  snatch  advantages,  but  slow  to  bear
her  proper  share.  Her  lack  of  responsibility  arises,  not  from  the
fact  that  so  much  is  done  for  her,  but  that  so  much  is  done  with-
out her.  As  long  as  the  education  of  the  boy  is  taken  completely
out  of  her  hands,  so  long  will  she  be  apt  to  stand  aloof,  regard
every  committee  as  a  natural  enemy,  and  grasp  at  all  that  she
can  by  any  manoeuvre  hope  to  be  given.  The  absence  of  home
work,  visiting,  reports,  and  all  natural  ties  between  school  and
home  are  the  real  enemies  of  parental  responsibility.  No  mother
is  harmed  by  kindness  done  to  her  child,  so  long  as  every  such
kindness  exacts  from  her  a  higher  standard  and  ensures  her  active
co-operation  with  the  school.^

A  like  suggestion  is  contained  in  the  following  extract  from
the  Letters  of  Octavia  Hill :

I  sometimes  dream  about  the  time  that  shall  come,  "  when  we
shall  try  to  keep  up  the  spirit  of  our  poor,"  not  by  shutting  up
their  hearts  in  cold  independence,  but  by  giving  them  others  to
help,  and  thus  rousing  the  deepest  of  all  motives  for  self-help,
that  which  is  the  only  foundation  on  which  to  build  our  service
to  others."^

And  an  illustration  of  what  is  meant  is  furnished  by  the  late
Canon  Barnett  thus :

1  Loc.  cit.  p.  110.  2  Loc.  cii.  p.  207.


760  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

The  Children's  Country  Holiday  Fund,  for  instance,  by  giving
country  holidays  to  town  children,  and  by  making  the  parents
contribute  to  the  expense,  develops  at  once  a  desire  for  the  peace
and  beauty  of  the  country  and  a  new  capacity  for  satisfying  this
desire.  When  parents  realise  the  necessity  for  such  holiday,  and
know  how  it  can  be  secured,  this  fund  will  cease  to  have  a  reason
for  existence.^

In  undertakings  of  this  kind  there  is  a  field  for  neutral
transferences  of  resources,  the  expectation  of  which  not  merely
leaves  the  national  dividend  undiminished,  but,  by  creating

"^  a  new  inducement  for  work  and  saving,  actually  increases  it.
§  7.  We   now  pass   to    the   third  main   group  of   trans-
ferences— namely    those    which    differentiate    in    favour    of
idleness  and  thriftlessness  by  making  the  help  that  is  given

'^  larger,  the  smaller  is  the  provision  the  recipients  have  made
for  themselves.  Some  resort  to  this  type  of  transference  is
involved  in  all  Poor  Law  systems  that  fix  a  state  of  minimum
fortune  below  which  they  will  not  allow  any  citizen  to  fall.
For,  in  so  far  as  they  raise  to  this  level  the  real  income  of  all
citizens  whose  provision  for  themselves  falls  below  it,  they
implicitly  promise  that  any  reduction  in  private  provision  shall
be  made  good  by  an  equivalent  addition  to  State  provision.
It  is  plain  that  the  expectation  of  these  differential
transferences  will  greatly  weaken  the  motive  of  many  poor
persons  to  make  provision  for  themselves.  For,  whatever  the
standard  is  below  which  the  State  has  determined  that  nobody
shall  fall,  any  person,  who  could  not  provide  as  much  as  this
for  himself  but  could  provide  something,  will  be  equally  well
off  if  he  provides  nothing.  In  so  far,  therefore,  as  what  a
person  provides  for  himself  corresponds  to  what  he  contributes

N  to  the  national  dividend,  transferences  that  differentiate  in
favour  of  small  provision  threaten  grave  injury  to  the  national
dividend.

§  8.  A  recognition  of  this  fact  has  led  many  persons  to  con-
sider plans  for  limiting  the  scope  of  this  class  of  differential
transference.  Since  everybody  agrees  that  in  a  civilised  State
no  citizen  shall  be  allowed  to  starve,  this  can  only  be  done
by  80  enlarging  the  scope  of  neutral  transferences  that  the

*  Practicable  Socialism,  p.  237.


OH.  IX  TEANSFEKENCES  TO  THE  POOE  761

elementary  needs  of  practically  all  persons,  whatever  their
income,  are  met  through  them.  The  movement  in  this
direction  is  well  illustrated  by  the  debate  between  advocates
and  opponents  of  a  universalised  system  of  old-age  pensions.^
If,  say  the  advocates  of  this  plan,  all  persons  over  a  given
age,  irrespective  of  their  income,  aie  awarded  a  given  pension,
there  will  he  no  differentiation  tempting  people  in  old  age  to
earn  smaller  incomes  than  they  are  able  to  earn ;  whereas,  if
only  those  persons  above  the  given  age,  who  are  in  receipt  of
an  income  below  some  specified  maximum,  say  £26  a  year,
are  awarded  a  pension  of,  say  5s.,  there  will  be  a  strong
inducement  for  all  persons  who  could  earn  anything  between
£25,  19s.  Od.  and  £38  to  see  to  it  that  in  fact  they  earn
only  £25,  19s.  Od.  On  the  other  side,  however,  it  is  pointed
out,  in  accordance  with  the  reasoning  of  the  last  chapter,  that
money  cannot  generally  be  collected  through  taxation  without
some  injurious  reaction  on  the  national  dividend  being  produced.
This  reaction  is  likely  to  be  more  extensive  the  greater  is  the
amount  of  the  money  that  is  raised.  Since,  therefore,  uni-
versal old-age  pensions  necessarily  cost  more  than  limited  old-
age  pensions,  the  argument  in  favour  of  the  universal  form
is  confronted  with  an  argument  of  the  same  order  that  tells
against  it.  Exactly  the  same  issue,  somewhat  complicated  in
this  instance  by  eugenic  considerations,'  is  raised  between
persons  who  wish  to  confine  State  aid  for  mothers  to  those
families  with  young  children  in  which  the  parents  are  unable,
out  of  their  own  resources,  to  provide  for  their  children
adequately,  and  advocates  of  the  "  endowment  of  motherhood"
generally.  To  strike  a  balance  between  the  conflicting  con-
siderations in  controversies  of  this  kind  is  evidently  a  very
delicate  task,  and  one  that  need  not  be  attempted  here.  If,
however,  the  method  of  obviating  differential  transferences  con-
templated by  the  advocates  of  universal  pensions  and  universal
endowment  of  motherhood  were  itself  universalised,  in  such
wise  that  the  minimum  required  for  subsistence  were  paid  out

*  This  controversy  is  presented  in  a  clear-cut  form  in  the  Report  of  the
Departmental  Committee  on  Old-Age  Pensions  [Cmd.  410]  1919.  The  majority
of  the  Committee  recommend  that  the  means  limit  for  pensions  be  abolished,
but  the  minority  dissent  from  this  recommendation.

2  Cf.  Darwin,  The  Jtaeial  Effects  of  PuUie  Assistance,  pp.  13-15.


762  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  ft.  v

by  the  State  to  everybody,  whatever  his  income  might  be,  the
task  of  balancing  gain  against  loss  would  no  longer  be  delicate.
In  these  circumstances  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  type
of  reaction  described  in  §  7  would  operate  so  strongly  that
the  dividend  would  be  seriously  injured.  In  any  event,
among  practical  politicians  the  device  of  universalising
grants  to  large  categories  of  persons,  irrespective  of  their
individual  needs,  is  greatly  disliked.  There  is  no  real
question  of  pressing  it  far  enough  to  do  away  with  the  need
for  diiSerential  transferences  based  directly  on  the  poverty  of
recipients.

§  9.  The  expectation  of  these  transferences  must,  as  we
have  seen,  damage  the  national  dividend.  If,  however,  to  the
receipt  of  the  help  they  give  deterrent  conditions  are  attached,
the  damage  can  be  mitigated.  Consequently,  the  question
arises,  in  what  circumstances  it  is  desirable,  in  the  interest  of
the  national  dividend,  to  attach  deterrent  conditions  to  State
aid,  and  what  form  the  deterrent  conditions,  if  decided  upon,
can  best  assume.  To  answer  this  question  correctly  we  need  to
revert  to  the  concluding  sentence  of  §  7,  in  which  it  was  indi-
cated that  di£ferentiation  in  favour  of  people  who  make  small
provision  for  themselves  injures  the  national  dividend,  only  in
so  far  as  what  a  person  provides  for  himself  corresponds  -to
what  he  contributes  to  the  national  dividend.  It  is  common
to  assume  that  the  provision  which  a  person  makes  for
himself  must  correspond  exactly  to  his  contribution  to  the
national  dividend,  and  that,  therefore,  the  contraction  of  the
aggregate  provision  thus  made — which  results  from  the
establishment  of  a  system  of  differential  transferences  to  poor
people — implies  an  equal  contraction  of  the  national  dividend.
This  is  substantially  true  of  provision  made  through  work
and  through  savings  invested  in  industry  and  not  sub-
sequently withdrawn.  But  it  is  not  true  of  provision  made
through  contributions  to  the  benefit  fund  of  any  form  of
mutual  insurance  society.  For,  as  will  be  explained  in  detail
in  the  last  chapter  of  Part  VI.,  a  large  part  of  the  income,
which  a  sick  or  unemployed  member  draws  from  this  source,
is  not  the  fruit  of  real  investment,  but  is  a  payment  made  to
him  out  of  the  earnings  of  other  members — a  payment  which


OH.  IX  TEANSFEEENCES  TO  THE  POOE  763

they  are  willing  to  make  in  return  for  a  promise  that  they
themselves  shall,  at  need,  receive  similar  assistance.  In  prac-
tice the  main  part  of  the  pro\ision  which  poor  people  make
for  themselves,  otherwise  than  by  contemporary  work,  is  made
by  way  of  some  form  of  insurance,  though  it  is  loosely  and
popularly  credited  to  saving.  Consequently,  we  may  conclude
broadly  that,  while  any  check,  caused  by  differential  trans-
ferences, to  the  provision  that  poor  people  make  for  themselves
through  contemporary  work  involves  a  corresponding  diminu-
tion of  the  national  dividend,  any  check  to  the  provision  they
make  otherwise  than  through  work  involves  a  very  much
less  than  corresponding  diminution  in  the  dividend.  It
follows  that  there  is  little  to  be  gained  by  imposing  deterrent
conditions  upon  those  recipients  of  State  help  who  have  failed
to  make  this  sort  of  provision.

§  10.  But  differentiation  in  favour  of  small  provision
made  through  contemporary  work  is  a  serious  matter.
If,  for  example,  it  is  understood  that  everybody's  income
will,  at  need,  be  brought  up  by  State  aid  to,  say,  £2
a  week,  it  will,  generally  and  roughly,  be  to  the  interest
of  everybody  capable  of  earning  by  work  any  sum  less  than
£2  a  week  to  be  idle  and  earn  nothing.  This  must  damage
the  national  dividend.  How  much  it  damages  it  will,  of
course,  depend  on  how  large  the  sum  fixed  on  as  a  mini-
mum is,  and  how  many  people  in  the  country  would
normally  earn  by  work  less  than  that  sum.  If  the  sum
exceeds  the  normal  earning  power  of  a  large  part  of  the
community,  the  damage  done  must  necessarily  be  very
great.  It  is  probable  that  this  consideration  lay  behind  the
recommendation  of  the  1832  Commission,  that  "  the  situation
on  the  whole  of  able-bodied  paupers  should  not  be  made
really,  or  apparently,  so  eligible  as  the  situation  of  the
independent  labourer  of  the  lowest  class  " — that  is  to  say,  of
the  ordinary  unskilled  labourer  of  full  age  and  in  good  health.
At  that  time  unskilled  labourers  formed  a  very  large  pro-
portion of  the  population.  To  have  guaranteed  to  everybody
a  situation  better  than  these  labourers  could  ordinarily  earn
would,  therefore,  have  threatened  the  nation  with  the  with-
drawal from  work  of  a  mass  of  people,  whose  aggregate  efforts


764  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

were  responsible  for  an  important  slice  of  the  dividend.  It  may
be  observed,  however,  that  to  guarantee  now  a  situation  better
than  that  represented  by  the  earnings  of  an  unskilled  labourer
of  1832  would  inflict  a  much  smaller  proportionate  injury
upon  the  dividend,  because  the  proportion  of  the  population,
who  are  not  capable  of  earning  a  wage  greater  than  this,  has
become  much  smaller.  And  even  to  guarantee  now  a  situation
represented  by  the  situation  of  the  unskilled  labourer  of  to-day
would  have  a  smaller  proportionate  effect,  because  the  pro-
portion of  the  dividend  contributed  by  unskilled  labour  now
is  smaller  than  it  was  in  1832.  Plainly,  however,  for  the
State,  tacitly  or  openly  to  guarantee  any  standard  high
enough  to  affect  a  substantial  number  of  people  must  threaten
considerable  injury  to  the  dividend.  Here,  therefore,  there  is
real  scope  for  the  association  with  State  help  of  deterrent
conditions.  Of  course,  there  is  no  object  in  attaching  such
conditions  to  help  given  to  a  man  who  is  idle  because  he  is
genuinely  unable  to  find  work.  The  knowledge  that  he
cannot  get  help  without  these  conditions  will  not  remove  this
inability.  But  there  is  an  object  in  attaching  them  to  help
given  to  those  who  are  idle  because  they  are  unwilling  to  find  (or
to  keep)  work.  The  deterrent  conditions  will  make  them  less
unwilling.  Until  recently  the  practical  difficulty  of  distinguish-
ing between  these  two  classes  of  persons,  coupled  with  a  general
and  justified  unwillingness  to  deal  hardly  with  the  former  of
them,  made  it  impossible  to  arrange  these  conditions  satis-
factorily. A  compromise  was  accepted,  under  which,  instead
of  no  deterrence  on  the  one  class  and  strict  deterrence  on  the
other,  mild  deterrence  was  imposed  on  both.  This  plan  did,
indeed,  save  the  innocent  from  gross  tyranny,  but  at  the
expense  of  leaving  the  guilty  relatively  immune  and,  there-
fore, inadequately  deterred.  Of  late  years,  however,  the
establishment  of  employment  exchanges  has  provided  machinery
by  which  the  truth  of  a  man's  plea  to  be  out  of  work  through
no  fault  of  his  own  can  be,  in  some  measure,  tested.  In  trades
where  the  jobs,  once  obtained,  are  of  "  presumed  permanence,"
if  the  employment  exchanges  are  unable  to  find  employment
for  a  man  who  applies  to  them,  more  particularly  if  that  man
has  a  settled  home  and  has  insured  himself  against  unemploy-


cH.ix  TRANSFERENCES  TO  THE  POOR  765

ment,  the  plea  that  he  is  a  victim  of  misfortune  and  not  of
laziness  may  be  provisionally  accepted.  Tliis  test  is,  indeed,
not  easily  applicable  to  casual  trades  where  workpeople
continually  alternate  between  work  and  idleness ;  for  in  these
trades  a  man  might  be  prepared  to  accept  work  for  a  day  or  so,
whenever  it  was  ojffered  through  an  employment  exchange,  and
yet  might  deliberately  spend  a  much  longer  period  out  of  work
than  there  was  any  need  for  him  to  do.  This  difficulty  must
be  recognised ;  and  it  must  be  admitted,  further,  that  in  the
exceptional  period  of  free  insurance  granted  by  the  British
Government  after  the  armistice  of  November  1918,  a  number
of  persons  obtaiued  unemployment  donation,  who  might,  had
they  wished,  have  been  employed.  But,  in  spite  of  this,  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  development  of  employment
exchanges  has  made  it  possible,  over  a  wide  field,  to  distinguish
directly  those  who  cannot,  from  those  who  will  not,  find  work.
Consequently,  since  the  former  class  can  be  withdrawn
altogether  from  the  range  of  deterrent  conditions,  it  is  now
feasible  so  to  stiffen  up  the  conditions  against  the  latter  class
— people  who  are  in  need  because  they  loill  not  work  with
reasonable  continuity  in  private  industry — as  to  make  them
really  effective.

§  11.  Some  guidance  as  to  the  form  that  deterrence  should
take  can  be  obtained  from  English  Poor  Law  experience.  It
is  clearly  suggested,  for  example,  that  some  degree  of  enforced
labour  is  an  essential  ingredient.  The  importance  of  this
element  is  well  illustrated  in  some  of  the  evidence  given  before
the  Royal  Commission  of  1832.  Thus,  one  witness,  in  a
Memorandum  on  Liverpool,  stated :  "  The  introduction  of
labour  thinned  the  house  very  much ;  it  was  sometimes
difficult  to  procure  a  sufficient  supply  of  junk,  which  was
generally  obtained  from  Plymouth ;  when  the  supply  was
known  to  be  scanty,  paupers  flocked  in ;  but  the  sight  of
a  load  of  junk  before  the  door  would  deter  them  for  any  length
of  time."  ^  In  the  same  spirit,  the  Comptroller  of  the  Accounts
for  the  township  of  Salford,  stated :  "  Finding  work  for  those
who  applied  for  relief  in  consequence  of  being  short  or  out  of
work  has  had  a  very  good  effect,  especially  when  the  work

^  Beport  of  the  Poor  Law  Commission  of  1832,  p.  161.


766  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


PT.  V


has  been  of  a  different  kind  from  that  which  they  have  been
accustomed  to.  In  Salford  employment  to  break  stones  on
the  highways  has  saved  the  township  several  hundred  pounds
within  the  last  two  years ;  for  very  few  indeed  will  remain
at  work  more  than  a  few  days,  while  the  bare  mention  of  it
is  quite  sufi&cient  for  others.  They  all  manage  to  find
employment  for  themselves,  and  cease  for  a  time  to  be
troublesome ;  although  it  is  a  singular  fact  that,  when  the
stock  of  stones  on  hand  has  been  completely  worked  up  before
the  arrival  of  others,  they  have,  almost  to  a  man,  applied
again  for  relief,  and  the  overseers  have  been  obliged  to  give
them  relief ;  but,  so  soon  as  an  arrival  of  stones  is  announced,
they  find  work  for  themselves  again,"  ^  The  information
given  in  a  recent  Report  on  the  Poplar  Union  points  in  the
same  direction.  But,  though  enforced  labour  seems  to  be
an  essential  ingredient  in  deterrent  conditions,  it  is  not  by
itself  sufficient.  The  chief  reason  for  this  is  the  extraordinary
difficulty  of  making  a  man  work  for  the  Poor  Law  Authorities
with  anything  approaching  the  energy  that  he  would  need  to
put  forth  for  a  private  employer.  It  is  practically  impossible
to  set  relieved  persons  to  work,  each  at  his  own  trade.  Con-
sequently, some  general  form  of  labour  has  to  be  required :
and  it  is  impossible  to  fix,  for  a  miscellaneous  assortment  of
different  people,  any  single  standard  of  performance.  Hence,
the  standard  exacted  has  to  be  measured  to  each  man  "  with
due  regard  to  his  ordinary  calling  or  occupation,  and  his  age
and  physical  ability."  Since  this  cannot  be  tested  objectively,
"  no  specified  task  can  be  enforced.  The  capability  of  the
persons  employed  varies,  and  it  can  only  be  required  .  that
each  person  shall  perform  the  amount  of  work  that  he  appears
to  be  able  to  accomplish.  .  .  .  The  standard  of  accomplish-
ment is  practically  fixed  by  the  unwilling  worker."  ^  The
fact  that  resort  cannot  be  had  to  the  ordinary  practice  of
dismissal  leaves  the  Poor  Law  Authority  without  any  real
defence  against  this  tendency.  Consequently,  potential  bene-
ficiaries are  aware  that  the  labour,  which  will  be  imposed  upon

1  Ilcport  of  tliA  Poor  Law  Commission  of  18S2,  p.   162.

2  Report  of  the  Commitiee  on  Distress  front  Want  of  EmployTnent,  quoted  by
Beveridge,  Unemployment,  p.  153.


cH.  IX  TRANSFEEEXCES  TO  THE  POOR  767

them,  if,  through  unwillingness  to  work  in  private  industry,  they
become  candidates  for  public  assistance,  will  not  be  severe
labour.  Furthermore,  even  if  this  difi&culty  could  be  over-
come, work  for  the  Poor  Law,  because  its  certainty  and
continuity  absolve  those  engaged  in  it  from  the  risk,  trouble
and  cost  involved  in  occasional  loss  of  employment  and  the
need  of  finding  a  new  job,  might  still  prove  more  attractive
than  independent  labour.  Thus,  for  effective  deterrence
something  more  than  enforced  labour  is  required.  The  addition
of  disenfranchisement  and  the  stigma  of  pauperism  is,  in  the
opinion  of  practical  administrators,  quite  inadequate.  Conse-
quently, for  those  who  need  support,  but  will  not  work  to  get
it,  resort  must  be  had  to  disciplinary  measures.  This  implies  /
detention  under  control  without  excessive  leave  of  absence.  On
the  Continent  of  Europe,  able-bodied  men,  who  fail  to  support
themselves  because  they  will  not  work,  are  subjected  to  long
periods  of  detention  in  labour  colonies.  In  Belgium  such  persons
may  be  committed  to  the  penal  colony  of  Merxplas  for  not  less
than  two  years  nor  more  than  seven  years.^  The  cantonal  law
in  Berne  provides  for  their  internment  in  a  labour  institution
for  any  time  between  six  months  and  two  years."  The  German
Imperial  Penal  Code  has  a  similar  provision.^  The  practice  of
the  Continent  is  coming  to  be  proposed  seriously  for  adoption
in  this  country  also.  Thus,  the  Committee  on  Vagrancy
recommended  "that  a  class  of  habitual  vagrants  should  be
defined  by  Statute,  and  that  this  class  should  include  any
person  who  has  been  three  or  more  times  convicted,  during
a  period  of,  say,  twelve  months,  of  certain  offences  now
coming  under  the  Vagrancy  Act,  namely,  sleeping  out,
begging,  refusing  to  perform  his  task  of  work  in  casual
wards,  or  refusing  or  neglecting  to  maintain  himself  so  that
he  become  chargeable  to  the  poor  rate."*  There  is  no
reason — much  the  contrary — why  the  conditions  of  deter-
rence should  not  be  arranged  with  a  view  to  "  improving  "  the
deterred  persons,  if  that  be  possible ;  for  to  a  man  wishing  to
be  idle  the  prospect  of  improvement,  whether  by  training  or

*  Cf.  Dawson.  The  Vagrancy  Problem ,  p.  136.

2  Ihid.  p.  179.  3  Ibid.  p.  193.

*  Report  of  the  Departmental  Committee  on  Vagrancy,  vol.  i.  p.  59.


768  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

by  education  or  in  any  other  way,  will  be  as  deterrent  as  any-
thing else.  Detention,  however,  is  essential.  Its  adoption —
which  the  development  of  employment  exchanges  as  a  means
of  sifting  the  sheep  from  the  goats  has  made  practicable —
would  enable  a  far  more  effective  system  of  deterrence  to  be
associated  with  State  aid  to  the  deliberately  idle  than  is  at
present  known  in  this  country.  We  cannot,  however,  seriously
expect  that  the  system  will  ever  become  perfect  enough  to
prevent  the  expectation  of  differential  transferences  from
contracting,  in  some  degree,  the  volume  of  the  national
dividend.


CHAPTER    X

BOUNTIES    ON    THINGS    PUBCHASED    BY    THE    POOR

§  1.  So  far  we  have  been  considering  transferences  of  a  direct
kind.    There  remain  transferences  through  bounties  or  devices
substantially  equivalent  to  bounties.     These  take  three  prin-
cipal forms:  first,  bounties,  provided  out  of  taxes,  on  the  whole
consumption  of  particular  commodities  which  are  predomin-  -^
antly  purchased  by  poor  persons ;  secondly,  bounties,  similarly
provided,  but  confined  to  that  part  of  the  whole  consumption
which  is  actually  enjoyed  by  defined  categories  of  poor  pei-sons ;  ►-
thirdly,   authoritative   interference  with  prices,  so  contrived
that  the  richer  purchasers  of  particular  commodities  have  to^
bear  part  of  the  cost  of  what  is  sold  to  poorer  purchasers.
The  first  of  these  methods  is  illustrated  by  the  special  sub-
sidies which  were  paid  on  bread  and  potatoes  during  the  Great
War   to  enable  prices  to  be  kept   down   to  what  was  con- '
sidered  a  reasonable   level.     The  second  and  third  methods
are    only   practicable    in    connection  with    commodities    and
services  which  are  non-transferable  in  the  sense  explained  in
Part  II.  Chapter  XIV.     The  second  is  illustrated  by  the  Irish
Labourers  Act,  under  which,  not   aU   house-building   in  the
districts   affected,  but    only  house -building    for    labourers  is  ^
subsidised,    and    by    the    more    general    arrangements  which
have   been   adopted    to   meet    the    post-war  house   shortage.
The    third    method    is    illustrated    by    special    arrangements
often    made   in    connection   with    the    services    supplied    by
monopolistic    "public    utilities."       "Whether    these    services
are  actually  produced  by  private  concerns  or  by  the  public
authorities  themselves,  public  authorities  can,  if  they  choose,
compel    sales    to    selected    poor    persons    to    be    made    at    a

769  3d


770  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

loss,  and  can  arrange  for  this  loss  to  be  made  good  through
charges  to  other  persons  higher  than  would  otherwise
have  been  permitted.  This  plan  is  adopted  under  a  number
of  Tramway  Acts,  where  provision  is  made  for  a  convenient
service  of  workmen's  cars  at  specially  low  fares.  Thus,  "  a
recent  report  of  the  Highway  Committee  of  the  London
County  Council  estimates  that  the  loss  involved  by  running
the  workmen's  car  service  is  £65,932  per  annum."  ^  The
same  policy  is  illustrated  in  another  connection  by  the  practice
of  the  municipality  of  Wiesbaden,  where  gas  supplied  by
means  of  prepayment  meters — a  more  expensive  method  of
supply — is  charged  for  at  the  same  rate  as  gas  supplied  by
ordinary  meters  to  all  persons  the  annual  rent  of  whose  house
is  less  than  400  marks.^  It  should  be  noted  that  this  method
is  not  necessarily  confined  to  commodities  and  services  pro-
duced under  conditions  of  monopoly.  Provided  that  the
goods  are,  or  can  be  made,  non-transferable,  it  is  open  to
public  authorities  to  fix  a  charge  at  which  anybody  under-
taking a  named  business  or  profession  must  sell  whatever
quantity  of  service  is  demanded  by  persons  in  a  given  category.
The  result  will  be  to  limit  the  number  of  persons  entering
that  business  or  profession,  till  the  expectation  of  earnings
therefrom — derived  jointly  from  sales  to  the  poor  and  to  other
persons  for  whose  purchases  the  charges  are  fixed  by  the
normal  play  of  demand  and  supply — becomes  about  equal  to
that  ruling  in  other  businesses  or  professions  of  a  similar
difficulty  and  disagreeableness  and  involving  an  equally
expensive  training.  This,  of  course,  implies  that  the  low
charges  made  to  the  favoured  category  of  persons  are  asso-
ciated with  charges  to  other  categories  higher  than  would
have  prevailed  if  the  low  charges  had  not  been  enforced.

8  2.  To  all  these  methods  it  has  been  objected  generally
that  they  necessarily  benefit  unequally  different  poor  persons
whose  circumstances  are  substantially  similar.  Professor
Knoop  writes,  for  example:  "  It  is  difficult  to  see  why  artisans,
mechanics  and  day  labourers  who  travel  in  the  early  morning
should  receive  privileges  which  men  and  women  serving
in  shops,  clerks  and  others,  who  are  no  better  off  financially,
^  Knoop,  Principles  of  Mimicipal  Trading,  p.  266.  ^  Ibid.  p.  213.


CH.  X    BOUNTIES  ON  POOE  MEN'S  PUECHASES    77 1

do  not  enjoy."  ^  It  may  be  replied  that,  if  a  thing  is  good
in  itself,  the  partial  realisation  of  it  cannot  rightly  be  con-
demned on  the  ground  that  complete  realisation  is  impractic-
able. We  are  not,  however,  concerned  with  the  validity  either
of  this  objection  or  of  the  different  and  more  forcible  objection,
from  the  side  of  fairness,  which  can  be  urged  specially  against
the  third  method,  namely  that  it  throws  the  cost  of  helping
the  poor  upon  particular  persons  instead  of  upon  the  taxpayers
generally.^  For  the  present  purpose  it  is  enough  to  know
that  all  three  of  the  methods  distinguished  above  have,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  been  adopted  over  a  fairly  wide  field.

§  3.  The  first  of  the  three  necessarily,  and,  if  the
categories  are  so  chosen  that  people  cannot  practically  be
drawn  by  the  bounty  into  a  benefited  category,  the  other  two
also  involve  "  neutral  transferences "  in  the  sense  explained
in  §  3  of  the  last  chapter,  and  not  differential  transferences.
Hence,  they  operate  on  the  productive  activity  of  the  poor
only  through  their  effect  on  the  marginal  desiredness  which
money  has  to  them.  But  they  differ  from  the  kind  of  neutral
transferences  so  far  examined  in  one  respect.  They  will  check
to  a  small  extent  the  contribution  of  work  made  by  the  poor,
if  they  are  granted  upon  things  for  which  the  demand  of  the
poor  has  an  elasticity  less  than  unity ;  but  they  will  increase
this  contribution  to  a  small  extent  if  they  are  granted  on
things  for  which  this  demand  has  an  elasticity  greater  than  "
unity.  For  in  the  former  event  the  marginal  desiredness  of
money  to  the  poor  will  be  lowered,  since  more  is  left  over  for  u
other  things ;  and  in  the  latter  event  it  will  be  raised.  As  a
matter  of  fact  bounties  are  more  likely  to  be  given  on  things  «-
of  urgent  need  and,  therefore,  of  inelastic  demand.  The  check
to  output  resulting  from  the  consequent  relaxation  of  effort  y
on  the  part  of  potential  recipients  means  some,  though
probably  a  very  small,  diminution  of  the  national  dividend.

§  4.  So  far  it  would  seem  that  there  is  little  to  choose
between  help  to  the  poor  by  bounties  and  by  direct  neutral
transferences.  If  the  amount  of  the  bounty-fed  commodity
which  each  recipient  is  to  consume  is  fixed  authoritatively,

*  Principles  and  Methods  of  Municipal  Trade,  p.  266.
2  Cf.  ante,  Part  III.  Chapter  V.  §  7.


772  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

as  under  the  British  system  of  free  and  compulsory  ele-
mentary education,  this  is  in  fact  so.  It  is  so,  too,  if  the
amount  is  not  fixed  authoritatively,  but  is,  for  other  reasons,  not
liable  to  change  in  consequence  of  the  bounty.  Thus,  poor
people  are  accustomed  to  buy  some  things  through  a  common
purchase  fund,  so  organised  that  the  payment  a  member  has
to  make  does  not  vary  with  the  amount  of  his  individual
purchases.  Sick  clubs  are  arranged  on  this  plan.  There  will
be  no  inducement  to  a  member  of  a  sick  club  to  increase
the  amount  of  the  doctor's  services  that  he  calls  for  in  a  year
merely  because  the  fixed  amount  that  he  has  been  accustomed  to
pay  for  membership  of  the  club  is  taken  over  and  paid  by  the
State.  These  conditions,  however,  are  exceptional.  In  general,
when  a  bounty,  or  the  equivalent  of  a  bounty,  is  given  on  any
commodity,  the  beneficiaries  of  the  bounty  will  buy  more  of
it  than  they  would  otherwise  have  done.  In  this  way  resources
are  diverted  out  of  the  natural  channels  of  production,  and
there  is  a  presumption — which  may,  of  course,  as  was
explained  in  Part  II.  Chapter  VIII.,  be  rebutted  by  special
knowledge — that  this  diversion  will  inflict  an  extra  injury  on  the
national  dividend,  over  and  above  that  set  out  in  the  preceding
paragraph.  If  the  bounty  is  large  enough,  it  may  happen  that
the  output  of  bounty-fed  commodity  will  be  expanded  so  ■far
that  to  the  poor  themselves  the  marginal  supply  price,  not
merely  in  terms  of  money,  but  in  terms  of  satisfaction,  exceeds
the  marginal  demand  price,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the
economic  satisfaction  they  get  from  the  last  increment  con-
sumed is  less  than  the  economic  dissatisfaction  involved  in
producing  it.  In  general,  the  expectation  of  a  transference
through  bounties  on  particular  commodities  is  likely  to
damage  the  national  dividend  rather  more  than  the  expecta-
tion of  a  direct  neutral  transference  of  equal  magnitude.  In
spite  of  this,  however,  the  bounty  method  may  still  sometimes
be  better,  not  only  because  there  may  be  special  economic  or
non-economic  reasons  for  encouragiug  the  consumption  of  the
particular  thing  on  which  the  bounty  is  given,  but  also  because
the  element  of  "charity"  is  less  obvious  and,  therefore,  less
damaging  to  the  morale  of  the  beneficiaries,  when  it  is  concealed
in  a  bounty  than  when  it  is  displayed  in  a  direct  dole.


CHAPTER   XI

THE    EFFECT    ON    THE    NATIONAL    DIVIDEND    OF    THE    FACT    OF
TRANSFERENCES  FROM  THE  RELATIVELY  RICH  TO  THE  POOR

§  1.  In  the  three  preceding  chapters  we  have  been  concerned
with  the  effect  on  the  national  dividend  of  the  indirect  checks
upon  productive  activity,  which  may  be  brought  about  by
the  expectation  of  transferences  from  the  rich  to  the  poor.
Obviously,  however,  the  whole  story  has  not  yet  been  told.
For,  in  the  long  run,  it  is  not  merely  the  size  of  the  contribu-
tions made  to  the  national  dividend  by  the  various  parties
concerned,  which  affect  its  volume,  but  also  the  way  in  which
the  dividend  itself  is  employed.  The  reason,  of  course,  is  that
some  of  the  dividend  at  any  one  time  is  the  fruit  of  that  part
of  the  dividend  of  earlier  times  that  has  been  "  invested  "  in
one  or  another  means  of  future  production.  When  resources
are  transferred  from  the  rich  to  the  poor,  the  extent  and  the
character  of  this  investment  is  modified.  The  fact  of  trans-
ference, as  distinguished  from  the  expectation  of  transference,
to  which  it  gives  rise,  is,  thus,  equivalent  to  a  redistribution  of
the  dividend  between  certain  different  uses.  If  things  went
on  "  naturally  "  and  no  transference  took  place,  a  part  of  it
would  assume  the  form  of  goods  consumable  by  the  rich,  a  part
that  of  machines  to  assist  future  production,  and  a  part  that
of  goods  consumable  by  the  poor.  When  a  transference  of
resources  from  the  rich  to  the  poor  takes  place,  the  third  of
these  three  divisions  of  the  dividend  is  increased  at  the
expense  of  the  other  two.  Our  problem  is  to  determine  the
effect  of  this  alteration  in    the  distribution  among  different

773


774  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  t

uses  of  the  dividend  of  one  year  upon  the  magnitude  of  the
dividend  of  future  years.

§  2.  If  no  transference  had  occurred,  the  portion  of  the  divi-
,  dend,  which  would  have  assumed  the  form  of  machines,  would
have  contributed  to  enlarge  the  dividend  in  later  years.  The
portion  devoted  to  the  consumption  of  the  rich,  in  so  far  as
it  served  to  make  them  more  efiBcient  producing  agents,  would
also  have  done  this  to  some  extent.  Among  rich  persons,
however,  it  is  improbable  that  any  practicable  reduction  of  con-
sumption— the  effect  might,  of  course,  be  different  if  a  levy
were  imposed  so  large  as  to  bring  down  incomes  from  £5000
to  £100 — would  diminish  eSiciency  in  an  appreciable  degree.
Hence,  we  may  say  roughly  that  that  part  of  the  dividend,
which,  if  it  had  not  been  transferred  to  the  poor,  would  have
been  converted  into  capital,  is  the  only  part  that  would  have
made  a  substantial  contribution  to  the  national  dividend  of
the  future.  But,  when  any  given  quantity  of  resources  is
collected  from  the  rich,  it  is  practically  certain  that  some  of  it
will  be  taken  from  that  part  of  their  income  which  would  have
been  consumed.  This  implies  that  the  part  which  would
have  become  capital  will  not  be  reduced  by  the  whole  amount
of  the  levy.  It  follows  that  any  given  transference  of  re-
sources from  the  rich  to  the  poor  is  bound  to  increase  the
national  dividend,  provided  that  the  return  yielded  by  "  in-
vestment in  the  poor,"  through  additions  to  their  industrial
efficiency,  is  not  less  than  the  return  yielded  by  investment  in
material  capital,  that  is  to  say  roughly,  than  the  normal  rate
of  interest.

S  3.  Now,  it  must  be  admitted  at  once  that  there  are
certain  classes  of  poor  persons  whom  no  transference  of
,  resources  could  render  appreciably  more  efficient.  These
"  classes  include  the  great  mass  of  those  who  are  morally,
mentally,  or  physically  degenerate.  The  history  of  Labour
Colonies  both  at  home  and  abroad  and  the  experience  of  our
own  special  schools  for  the  feeble-minded  make  it  clear  that,
for  this  class  of  person,  real  "  cure  "  is  practically  impossible.
"  The  officials  of  the  colonies,  on  being  asked  their  opinion  as
to  whether  it  could  be  said  with  truth  that  any  large  pro-
portion   of   the    men    sent    to   Merxplas   were    rehabilitated,


OH.  n  THE  FACT  OF  TRANSFEEENCES  775

morally  or  socially,  by  their  stay  at  Merxplas,  replied  that  in
very  few  cases  is  such  reclamation  effected : "  ^  and  this  is  the
experience  of  more  than  one  colony  elsewhere  devoted  to  the
care  of  the  worst  class  of  the  non-criminal  population/  The
fact  is  that,  in  the  economic  as  in  the  physical  sphere,  society
is  faced  with  a  certain  number  of  "  incurables."  For  such
persons,  when  they  are  found,  the  utmost  that  can  be  done  is
to  seclude  them  permanently  from  opportunities  of  parasitism
upon  others,  of  spreading  their  moral  contagion,  and  of  breed-
ing offspring  of  like  character  to  themselves.  The  residue  of
hopelessly  vicious,  mentally  defective  and  other  unfortunates
may,  indeed,  still  be  cared  for  humanely  by  society,  when  they
come  into  being,  and  it  would  be  wrong  to  neglect  any  method
of  treatment  that  might  raise  the  lives  of  even  a  few  of  them
to  a  higher  plane.  But  our  main  effort  must  be,  by  educa-
tion and,  still  more,  by  restricting  propagation  among  the
mentally  and  physically  unfit,  to  cut  off  at  the  source  this
stream  of  tainted  lives.  To  "  cure  "  them  in  any  real  sense
is  beyond  human  power.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  those
persons  who  suffer  from  no  inherent  defect  and  have  lived
in  their  day  the  life  of  good  citizens,  but  whose  powers
have  been  worn  out  by  age  or  ruined  by  grave  accident.
Here  again,  from  the  standpoint  of  investment,  the  soil  is
barren.  The  transference  of  resources  to  these  persons,  in
whatever  form  it  is  made,  may  be  extremely  desirable  for  other
reasons,  but  it  cannot  yield  any  significant  return  in  industrial
efficiency.

§  4.  Fortunately,  however,  these  classes  constitute  only  a
small  part  of  the  whole  body  of  poor  persons.  With  the  poor
regarded  generally  there  is  no  frozen  fixity  of  quality,  but
investment  is  capable  of  real  effect.  At  a  first  glance  we
might,  perhaps,  expect  the  marginal  return  obtainable  in
this  field  to  be  equal  to  what  it  is  in  industry  proper.  There
is,  however,  reason  to  believe  that  the  ordinary  play  of  economic
forces  tends  unduly  to  contract  investments  in  the  persons  of
the  normal  poor,  with  the  result  that  the  marginal  return  to
resources  invested  in  the  poor  and  their  children  is  higher

'  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Appendix,  vol.  xxxiL
p.  17.


^


776  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.v

than  the  marginal  return  to  resources  invested  in  machines.
The  ground  for  this  belief  is  that  poor  persons  are  with-
out sufficient  funds  to  be  able  themselves  to  invest  ade-
quately in  their  own  and  their  children's  capacities,  while
they  are  also  so  situated  that  other  persons,  who  have  sufficient
funds,  are,  in  great  measure,  debarred  from  doing  this.  Under
a  slave  economy,  or  under  a  social  system  so  organised  that
those,  in  whom  alien  money  was  invested,  could  somehow
pledge  their  capacities  as  security  for  loans,  the  case  would  be
different.  But,  in  the  actual  world,  there  is  no  easy  way  in
which  capitalists  can  ensure  that  any  considerable  part  of  the
return  on  money  invested  by  them  in  the  capacities  of  the
poor  will  come  back  in  any  form  to  themselves.  If  they  make
a  loan,  they  cannot  exact  security  for  repayment ;  if  they
invest  directly,  by  providing  instruction  for  their  own
employes,  they  have  no  guarantee — unless,  indeed,  they  are
manufacturers  of  proprietary  goods  requiring  a  more  or  less
specialised  kind  of  labour,  which  is  of  less  value  to  others  than
to  themselves — that  these  employes  will  not  shortly  quit  their
service ;  and,  even  when  there  is  such  security,  the  employers
must  expect  that  the  workers,  having  become  more  competent,
will  endeavour  to  exact  a  wage  increased  proportionately  to  their
efficiency,  and  so  to  annex  for  themselves  the  interest  on  the
employer's  investment.  In  fact,  investment  in  the  persons  of
the  poor  is  checked  in  a  way  analogous  to  that  in  which  invest-
ment in  land  tenanted  by  rich  occupiers  and  owned  by  poor
men  may  be  checked.  The  owners  cannot  afford  to  invest,
and  the  occupiers,  living  without  proper  security  as  regards
tenants'  improvements,  and  receiving,  therefore,  as  trade  net
product,  only  a  portion  of  the  social  net  product  of  their
investment,  are  unwilling  to  invest  as  much  as  the  interest  of
the  national  dividend  requires.  In  view  of  these  considera-
tions, there  is  strong  reason  to  believe  that,  if  a  moderate
amount  of  resources  were  transferred  from  the  relatively  rich
to  the  relatively  poor,  and  were  invested  in  poor  persons
with  a  single-eyed  regard  to  rendering  the  poor  in  general  as
efficient  as  possible,  the  rate  of  return  yielded  by  these  resources
in  extra  product,  due  to  increased  efficiency,  would  much  exceed
the  normal  rate  of  interest  on  capital  invested  in  machinery


CH.  XI  THE  FACT  OF  TEANSFEEENCES  777

and  plant.^  Of  course,  however,  in  real  life  transferences  from
the  rich  to  the  poor  are  not  all  made  subject  to  the  condition
that  they  shall  he  employed  in  the  way  most  productive  of
efficiency.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  examine  separately
the  efifects  of  certain  principal  sorts  of  transference.

§  5.  First,  consider  transferences  in  the  form  of  industrial
training  to  selected  persons  among  able-bodied  adult  workers.
In  this  class  of  persons  there  are  always  a  number  who  are
making  exceptionally  low  earnings,  because  they  are  ill-
adjusted  to  the  job  in  which  they  are  engaged,  but  who  are,
nevertheless,  of  good  natural  ability.  Eesources  transferred  to
these  persons  in  the  form  of  training  are  likely  to  yield  a  large
return.  This  fact  was  recognised,  not  merely  in  the  special
arrangements  made  for  demobilised  officers  and  men  after  the
war,  but  also  in  the  National  Insurance  Act  of  1911.  The
hundredth  clause  of  that  Act  provided  that,  if,  after  test  and
enquiry,  "  the  insurance  officer  considers  that  the  skill  or
knowledge  of  a  workman  (who  repeatedly  falls  out  of  employ-
ment) is  defective,  but  that  there  is  a  reasonable  prospect  of
the  defect  being  remedied  by  technical  instruction,  the  in-
surance officer  may,  subject  to  any  directions  given  by  the
Board  of  Trade,  pay  out  of  the  unemployment  fund  all  or  any
of  the  expenses  incidental  to  the  provision  of  the  instruction,
if  he  is  of  opinion  that  the  charge  on  the  unemployment  fund
in  respect  of  the  workman  is  likely  to  be  diminished  by  the
provision  of  the  instruction."  The  class  of  persons  to  whom
this  policy  is  especially  applicable  are  workpeople  not  too  far
advanced  in  years,  whose  special  skill  has  been  rendered  useless
by  some  invention  enabUng  the  work  they  have  leamt  to  do
to  be  performed  more  economically  by  unskilled  labour  in
attendance  upon  an  automatic  tooL  They  include,  too,  those
persons  whom  accident  or  iUness  has  deprived  of  some
specialised  capacity,  as  well  as  the  victims  of  permanent
changes  of  fashion.  Money  spent  in  teaching  these  persons  a
new  trade  in  place  of  the  one  they  have  lost  is  likely  to  yield

^  It  should  be  noted  that,  if  the  transference  is  very  large,  the  shortage
of  material  capital  may  cause  the  normal  rate  of  interest  to  increase  appreciably  ;
and  that  then  the  advantage  of  investment  in  the  capacities  of  the  poor  will
have  to  be  balanced  against  the  advantage  of  investment  in  machines  yielding
this  increased  rate.


778  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

a  substantial  return.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  instruction
given  to  those  persons,  if  in  practice  they  can  be  distinguished,
who,  with  an  aptitude  for  one  sort  of  occupation,  have  acci-
dentally, or  through  perversity,  drifted  into  another.  In  this
category  should  be  included  men  bred  in  the  country  and  well
fitted  for  rural  life,  who  have  been  enticed  by  the  glamour  of
some  city  to  abandon  their  proper  vocation.  It  is,  however,
essential  that  the  men  selected  for  agricultural  training
should  be  carefully  chosen  from  among  persons  with  a  real
turn  for  agricultural  life.  Frequently  this  has  not  been  done.^
The  comparative  failure  which  has  attended  British  experi-
ments in  farm  colonies  does  not,  therefore,  afford  a  decisive
argument  against  further  experiments,  or  justify  any  condem-
nation of  these  institutions  when  used  as  training-grounds  for
persons  well  fitted  by  nature  for  agricultural  occupations.
Their  prospects  of  success  would  probably  be  enhanced  if  they
were  not  confined  to  the  service  of  persons  who  have  fallen
out  of  employment,  but  were  general  training  schools  of
agriculture,  open  to  members  of  the  public,  and  so  endowed
with  an  industrial  rather  than  a  remedial  atmosphere.^

§  6.  Secondly,  we  may  distinguish  transferences  in  the  form
^  of  medical  attendance  and  treatment  to  persons  suffering  from
temporary  sickness.  If  these  persons  are  not  assisted  m
time — delayed  help  may  be  comparatively  useless — they
may  well  suffer  a  permanent  break-down  in  health.  Ee-
sources  transferred  to  them  in  the  form  of  medical  care  and
appropriate  food  are  likely  to  prevent  a  large  loss  of  efiiciency.
Of  course,  in  order  that  good  results  may  be  attained,  the
transferences  must  be  adequate  and  the  medical  attendance  or
supervision  must  not  be  abandoned  at  too  early  a  stage.  On
this  point  the  Minority  Eeport  of  Poor  Law  Commissioners
made  a  serious  complaint  against  the  administration  of  English

1  On  the  continent  of  Europe,  "the  Farm  Colonies,  as  distinguished  from
penal  workhouses,  do  not,  in  general,  receive  the  genuine  unemployed,  i.e.  those
who  are  out  of  work  against  their  will.  The  great  majority  of  the  frequenters  are
the  shiftless  loafers,  who,  in  the  severer  seasons  of  the  year  or  in  times  of  special
distress,  seek  the  shelter  they  offer  rather  tlian  expose  themselves  to  continued
want  or  run  the  risk  of  entering  the  penal  workhouse  "  {Bulletin  of  the  United
States  Bureau  of  Labour,  1908,  No.  76,  p.  788).

^  Cf.  Eeport  on  The  Transference  of  FuTictions  of  Poor  Law  Authorities
[Cd.  8917],  p.  26.


CH.  XI  THE  FACT  OF  TRANSFEEENCES  779

Poor  Law  Infirmaries  :  "  No  attempt  is  made  to  follow  into
their  homes  the  hundreds  of  phthisical  and  other  patients
discharged  every  week  from  the  sick  wards  of  the  Workhouses
and  Poor  Law  Infirmaries,  in  order  to  ensure  at  any  rate  some
sort  of  observance  of  the  hygienic  precautions,  without  which
they,  or  their  near  neighbours,  must  soon  be  again  numbered
among  the  sick."  ^  Given,  however,  that  the  transferences  to
sick  persons  are  reasonably  made,  there  is  good  hope  that  they
will  lead  to  a  large  increase  of  efficiency.

§  7.  Thirdly,  attention  may  be  directed  to  transferences  in
the  form  of  training  and  nurture  to  the  normal  children  of  the
poor.  Here  there  is  immense  scope  for  profitable  investment.  It
is  just  when  their  children  are  young,  and,  therefore,  in  many
ways  afford  the  most  fruitful  soil  for  investment,  that  poor
families  find  themselves  in  the  greatest  straits,  and,  therefore,
least  able  to  provide  adequately  for  them.  The  proportion  of
children  who  pass  their  earlier  years  in  great  poverty  is  much
larger  than  the  proportion  of  families  who  are  in  this  condi-
tion at  any  one  time.  Thus,  taking  a  standard  of  life  analogous
to  Mr.  Rowntree's  poverty  line.  Dr.  Bowley  found,  just  before
the  war,  tnat  "  more  than  half  the  working-class  children  of
Reading,  during  some  part  of  their  first  fourteen  years,  live
in  households  where  the  standard  of  life  in  question  is  not
attained."  ^  And  the  same  point  is  brought  out  by  Miss
Davies's  observation  about  the  village  of  Cowley,  that  "  from
the  insignificant  one-eighth  of  the  households  in  primary
poverty,  two-fifths,  or  nearly  haK,  of  all  children  in  the  parish
are  drawn,  and  that  only  one-third  of  all  the  children  are  in
households  above  the  line  of  secondary  poverty."  ^  Properly
arranged  help  for  these  children  may  do  much  towards  build-
ing up,  in  the  most  plastic  period  of  life,  strong  bodies  and
minds  trained,  at  least  in  general  intelligence,  and,  perhaps,
also  in  some  form  of  technical  skill.

Of  course,  if  these  transferences  are  to  be  fruitful,  they
must  be  reasonably  conducted.  It  is  useless,  for  example,  to
spend  money  on  educating  children  while  leaving  them  the

*  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Minority  Beport,  p.  867.
^  JoumaZ  of  the  Royal  Staiislical  Society,  June  1913,  p.  692.     Cf.  also  atite.
Part  I.  Chapter  IV.  §  10.

^  Life  in  an  English  Village,  p.  287.


780  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

prey  to  demoralising  home  conditions.  If  they  are  not  pro-
perly looked  after  at  home,  a  part  of  the  transference  to  them
must  be  utilised  in  boarding  them  out  with  carefully  chosen
families,  or  in  sending  them  compulsorily  to  an  institution  or
industrial  school.  Thus,  both  the  Majority  and  the  Minority
of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  agree  that  children,  who  are
neglected  in  the  homes  of  parents  in  receipt  of  relief,  should  be
forcibly  "  sent  to  an  institution  or  industrial  school,"  ^  and  that,
for  the  children  of  "  ins  and  outs,"  "  power  should  be  taken  to
keep  these  children  in  institutions  while  the  parents  are
detained  in  a  detention  colony."  ^

Again,  it  is  useless,  and  may  be  even  harmful,  to  spend
money  on  educating  children  so  ill-nourished  that  they  cannot
learn  and  merely  exhaust  their  nervous  system  in  trying  to
do  so.^  Underfed  children  must  be  provided  with  meals  as
well  as  with  education,  and,  it  need  hardly  be  added,  these
meals  must  be  regular  and  not  spasmodically  offered  to
different  children  twice  or  three  times  in  a  week.  Probably
the  meals  should  be  continued  during  the  school  holidays,  for
otherwise  much  of  the  benefit  will  be  lost.  In  like  manner,
it  is  useless  to  spend  money  on  educating  children  if,  at  the
same  time  or  immediately  afterwards,  they  are  permitted  to
engage  in  occupations  which  inquiry  shows  to  be  destructive
of  whatever  benefit  education  might  be  expected  to  yield.
There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  many  of  the  forms  of  unskilled
labour  at  present  open  to  boys  not  merely  fail  to  train,  but
positively  untrain,  their  victims.  In  a  report  presented  to
the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Mr.  Jackson  well
writes :  "  Mere  skill  of  hand  or  eye  is  not  everything.  It  is
character  and  sense  of  responsibility  which  requires  to  be
fostered,  and  not  only  morals,  but  grit,  stamina,  mental  energy,
steadiness,  toughness  of  fibre,. endurance,  must  be  trained  and
developed."  But  these  general  qualities  can  ill  withstand  the
conditions,  if  these  are  unalleviated,  of  many  forms  of  unskilled
boy-labour.  Mr.  Jackson  reports  the  view  that  "  the  occupa-
tion of  van-boys  is  very  calculated  to  destroy  industry,"  and

1  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Report,  p.  620.

2  Ibid.  p.  187,

»  Cf.  Bulkley,  The  Feeding  of  School  Children,  p.  179.


cH.xi  THE  FACT  OF  TKANSFEEENCES  781

adds  that  "  opinion  is  practically  unanimous  that  street-selling
is  most  demoralising  to  children.  It  is  not  so  much  a  question
of  a  skilled  trade  not  being  taught,  as  of  work  which  is
deteriorating  absorbing  the  years  of  the  boy's  life  when  he
most  needs  educative  experience  in  the  wider  sense."  ^  It  is
plain  that,  if  investment  in  the  children  of  the  poor  is  to  be
truly  fruitful,  it  must  be  accompanied  by  prohibition,  or  at
all  events  by  restriction,  of  the  right  of  entry  into  these
occupations.

Yet  again,  as  with  the  sick,  so  too  with  the  children,
the  care  expended  on  them  must  be  adequately  prolonged.
"  It  is  not  sufficient  to  send  a  child  of  fourteen  to  a  situation
which  may  prove  unsuitable,  and  leave  it  there  to  look  after
itself."  ^  In  short,  stupidly  organised  investments  in  children's
capacities — like  other  stupidly  organised  investments — will
yield  little  return ;  but  well  organised  investments,  and,  more
especially,  investments  adjusted  in  amount  to  the  natural
abilities  of  the  various  children  affected,  hold  out  large  promise.
Nor  is  this  promise  exhausted  when  account  has  been  taken
of  the  effect  produced  on  average  children.  Among  the  great
number  of  working-class  families  there  are  sure  to  be  born
from  time  to  time  children  of  exceptional  power.  Investment
in  the  education  of  childi-en  generally  should  be  credited  with
the  effect  it  produces  in  these  children.  This  point  and  the
implications  of  it  are  put  with  great  force  by  Dr.  Marshall
in  the  following  passage :  "  There  is  no  extravagance  more
prejudicial  to  the  growth  of  national  wealth  than  the  wasteful
negligence  which  allows  genius  that  happens  to  be  born  of
lowly  parentage  to  expend  itself  in  lowly  work.  No  change
would  conduce  so  much  to  a  rapid  increase  of  national  wealth
as  an  improvement  in  our  schools,  and  especially  those  of  the
middle  grade,  provided  it  be  combined  with  an  extensive
system  of  scholarships,  which  will  enable  the  clever  son  of
a  working  man  to  rise  gradually  from  school  to  school  till  he
has  the  best  theoretical  and  practical  education  which  the  age
can  give."  ^

'  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Appendix,  vol.  xx.  pp.  23-7.
*  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Report,  p.  188.

'  Marshall,   Principles  of  Economics,   p.   213.     Furthermore,  it  should  be
noticed  that  such  a  policy  will  react  to  the  advantage  even  of  those  members  of


782  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

§  8.  Up  to  this  point  we  have  been  considering  trans-
ferences made  in  selected  forms  and  to  selected  groups  among
the  poor ;  and  we  have  seen  that  for  such  transferences  there
are  "  openings,"  in  which  the  return  probably  obtainable  is
very  much  superior  to  that  offered  by  investment  in  machines.
It  follows  that  the  fact  of  these  transferences,  when  they  are
managed  by  competent  persons,  is  practically  certain  to
benefit  the  national  dividend.  The  effect  of  transferences
made  in  a  general  way,  in  the  form  of  command  over  pur-
chasing power,  cannot  be  determined  so  easily.  The  main
difficulty  is  that  many  poor  persons  are  unable,  through  lack
of  knowledge,  to  invest  resources  in  themselves  or  their
children  in  the  best  way.  Thus,  in  a  recent  report  of  the
Board  of  Education,  we  read :  "  A  large  proportion  of  the
badly  nourished  children  suffer  from  unsuitable  food  rather
than  from  lack  of  food.  It  is  probably  no  exaggeration  to  say
that  the  improvement,  which  could  be  effected  in  the  physique
of  elementary  school  children  in  the  poorer  parts  of  our  large
towns,  if  their  parents  could  be  taught  or  persuaded  to  spend
the  same  amount  of  money  as  they  now  spend  on  their
childreti's  food  in  a  more  enlightened  and  suitable  manner,  is
greater  than  any  improvement  which  could  be  effected  by
feeding  them  intermittently  at  the  cost  of  the  rates."  ^  In
like  manner,  Mrs.  Bosanquet  notes  that  some  two-ninths,  out
of  Eowntree's  three-ninths,  of  poverty  is  "  secondary"  poverty.
She  writes :  "  The  weight  of  the  problem  rests  with  the
ignorance  and  carelessness  of  parents,  who  do  not  lack  the
means  to  do  better ;  and  this  view  is  further  enforced  by  the
large  amount  of  evidence  that  most  of  the  malnutrition  is  due
to  misdirected  feeding  rather  than  underfeeding."  ^  To  charge
the  whole  body  of  the  poorer  classes  with  ignorance  and  lack
of  capacity  for  management  would,  indeed,  be  to  utter  a  gross
libel.     A   sharp   distinction    must    be    drawn    between    poor

the  manual  working  class  who  are  not  directly  touched  by  the  improved  educa-
tional opportunities  ;  for  it  will  both  increase  the  demand  for  their  services,  by
increasing  the  number  of  persons  capable  of  acting  as  business  managers,  and  also
diminish  the  supply  of  their  services  by  withdrawing  these  men  from  among  them.

1  [Cd.  5131]  p.  5.

2  "  Physical  Degeneration  and  the  Poverty  Line,"  Contemporary  Review,  Jan.
1904,  p.  72.


cH.  XI  THE  FACT  OF  TEANSFEEENCES  783

families  whose  income,   though  small,   is  fairly  regular,  and
poor  families  where  the  fathers  are  in  casual  and  intermittent
employment.     Families   of   the   latter   class,   disorganised   in
their  mental  habit  no  less  than  in  their  homes,  never  knowing
from  day  to  day  or  week  to  week  what  their  income  will  be,
cannot  arrange  their  expenditure  well.     But  families  of  the
former  class  are  in  a  position,  if  they  choose,  to  build  up  a
fairly  definite  standard  of  life.     Among  them  there  are  many
whose  spending  is  even  now  arranged  with  extraordinary  com-
petence and  wisdom ;  and,  if  they  were  better  off,  so  that  the
wife  was  less  burdened  with  work  and  worry,  it  may  be  sup-
posed that  their  present  high  standard  would  be  still  further
raised.     Still,  though,  as  against  some  members  of  the  poorer
classes,  the  charge  of  incapable  management  is  ridiculous,  as
against  many  members  it  is  undoubtedly  true.     Nor  from  the
nature  of  things  could  it  be  otherwise.     The  art  of  spending
money,  not  merely  among  the  poor,  but  among  all  classes,  is
very  much  less  developed  than  the  art  of  making  it.^     The
investments    which    people    make    in    industry    are    usually
made  with  the  help  of  specialists,  who  are   in   competition
with  one  another  and  among  whom  bad  judgement  ultimately
means  elimination  ;  but  the  investments  which  people  make  in
their  own  efficiency  are  conducted  by  themselves — that  is  to
say,  by  persons  who  are  not  specialists,  acting  in  circumstances
where  the  selective  influence  of  competition  is  excluded.     This
distinction  can  be  brought  out  by  an  illustration  drawn  from
within  the  business  sphere  itself.     Those  entrepreneurs,  who
produce  goods  for  the  market,  are  subject,  in  general,  to  keen
competition  among  themselves.      The  result  is  that  the  stupid
and  ignorant  tend  to  be  extruded,  and  those  only  continue  to
act  as  entrepreneurs,  who  approach  fairly  closely  to  the  average
level  of  intelligence  among  their  class.      In  occupations  where
commodities  are  produced,  not  for  sale  in  the  market,  but  for
domestic  consumption,  and  where,  therefore,  the  competitive
struggle   is  relaxed,  the  standard  of  competence  tends,  other
things  being  equal,  to  be  lowered.     This  point  is  well  illus-
trated by  the  history  of  the  English  textile  industries.     Wool
and  linen,   at    the    time   of   the   industrial   revolution,  were

»  Cf.  avie,  Part  III.  Chapter  IX.  §  2.


784  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  v

associated  with  the  ordinary  routine  of  peasant  life,  but  the
treatment  of  cotton  was  not  so  associated.  "  Everywhere  a
professional  employment,  not  a  by-product,  those  who  followed
it  did  so  for  gain."  ^  The  result  was  that  improvements
developed  and  spread  much  more  rapidly  in  cotton  manufac-
ture than  in  the  other  textiles.  It  is  plain  that  the  conditions
under  which  the  art  of  spending  money  is  conducted  are  on  a
par  with  those  prevailing  in  domestic,  and  not  with  those
prevailing  in  professional,  employments.  It  follows  that
the  main  stimulus  making  for  competence  and  the  power
of  wise  choice  between  different  ways  of  using  resources  is
lacking.  Thus,  Professor  Mitchell  writes :  "  The  limitations  of
the  family  life  effectually  debar  us  from  making  full  use  of  our
domestic  brains.  The  trained  intelligence  and  the  conquering
capacity  of  the  highly  efhcient  housewife  cannot  be  applied  to
the  congenial  task  of  setting  to  rights  the  disordered  house-
holds of  her  inefficient  neighbours.  These  neighbours,  and
even  the  husbands  of  these  neighbours,  are  prone  to  regard
critical  commentaries  upon  their  slack  methods,  however
pertinent  and  constructive  in  character,  as  meddlesome  inter-
ferences. And  the  woman  with  a  consuming  passion  for  good
management  cannot  compel  her  less  progressive  sisters  to  adopt
her  system  against  their  wills,  as  an  enterprising  advertis"fer
may  whip  his  reluctant  rivals  into  line.  For  the  masterful
housewife  cannot  win  away  the  husbands  of  slack  managers,  as
the  masterful  merchant  can  win  away  the  customers  of  the
less  able.  What  ability  in  spending  money  is  developed
among  scattered  individuals  we  dam  up  within  the  walls  of
the  single  household."  ^  The  inevitable  consequence  is  that
among  all  classes,  and  among  the  poor  along  with  the  others,
there  is  a  very  great  amount  of  ignorance  concerning  the
comparative  (marginal)  advantages  of  different  ways  of  spend-
ing money.  Consequently,  it  is  idle  to  expect  that  resources
transferred  to  poor  persons  in  the  form  of  general  purchasing
power  will  be  employed  by  them  exclusively  in  the  openings
that    are    likely    to    yield    the    largest    return   of   efficiency.

^  Of.  Clapham,  Cambridge  Modern  History,  vol.  x.  p.  753.
2  "The  Backward  Art  of  Spending  Money,"  American  Economic  Review,
No.  2,  p.  274.


CH.  XI  THE  FACT  OF  TRANSFERENCES  785

When  the  mistakes  made  are  very  grave,  the  national  dividend
may  gain  less  from  the  improvements  wrought  in  the  efficiency
of  the  poor  than  it  loses  by  the  withdrawal  from  ordinary
investment  of  that  part  of  the  transferred  resources,  which,  if
they  had  not  been  transferred,  would  have  been  invested  in
industry.  There  is  a  danger  that  resources  transferred  to  poor
persons,  in  the  form  of  command  over  purchasing  power,  will,
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  national  dividend,  be  wasted.
The  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws  complain,  for  example,
that  out-relief,  as  administered  in  many  parts  of  the  United
Kingdom,  serves  merely  "  to  perpetuate  social  and  moral  con-
ditions of  the  worst  type."  ^  Many  Boards  of  Guardians  take
no  measures  to  ascertain  what  recipients  do  with  the  relief
granted  to  them.^  "  With  significant  exceptions,  Boards
of  Guardians  give  these  doles  and  allowances'  without  re-
quiring in  return  for  them  even  the  most  elementary  con-
ditions. .  .  .  We  have  seen  homes  thus  maintained  out  of
the  public  funds  in  a  state  of  indescribable  filth  and  neglect,
the  abodes  of  habitual  intemperance  and  disorderly  living."  ^

§9.  The  practical  inference  from  this  discussion  is  that  trans-
ferences to  the  poor,  made  in  the  form  of  command  over  purchas-
ing power,  have  a  much  better  chance  of  benefiting  the  national
dividend  if  they  are  associated  with  some  degree  of  oversight  over
the  persons  to  whom  the  transferences  are  made.  This  oversight,
and  whatever  control  it  may  be  necessary  to  couple  with  it,
must,  of  course,  be  very  carefully  guarded.  It  should  be  based
on  a  full  recognition  of  the  fact  that  people  are  not  machines,
and  that  their  industrial — not  to  speak  of  their  human —
efficiency  is  a  function  of  their  moral,  as  well  as  of  their  material,
surroundings.  If  the  arrangements  are  such  that  persons
hitherto  respectable  are  compelled,  for  any  considerable  time,
to  associate  with  vagabonds  and  ne'er-do-weels,  their  industrial
character  is  endangered.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  gift  of
material  aid  is  accompanied  by  the  interest,  sympathy  and
counsel  of  friends,  willingness  to  work  and  save  may  be  largely
and  permanently  encouraged.     Out  of  a  full  experience  Canon

^  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Majority  Report,  p.  102.

2  Ihid.  p.  267.

^  Ibid.,  Minority :Iteport,  p.  750.

3  E


786  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  tt.v

Barnett  wrote :  "  Many  have  been  the  schemes  of  reform  I  have
known,  but,  out  of  eleven  years'  experience,  I  would  say  that
none  touches  the  root  of  the  evil  which  does  not  bring  helper
and  helped  into  friendly  relatione."  ^  A  system  of  adminis-
tration, in  which,  as  in  the  Elberfeld  and  Bergen  plans — copied
in  essentials  by  the  voluntary  Guilds  of  Help  now  growing  up
in  many  English  towns  ^ — the  elements  of  personal  care  are
largely  utilised,  is,  thus,  likely  to  prove,  even  from  a  purely
monetary  point  of  view,  a  better  investment  than  one  depen-
dent on  mechanical  rules.  This  consideration  emphasises  the
great  importance  of  associating  voluntary  effort  with  the  official
machinery  of  State  aid  to  the  poor.

^  Practicable  Socialism,  p.  104.

^  Cf.  Mr.   Snowden's  Report  of  the  Local  Government  Board  on  Ouilds  of
Help  [Cd.  5664].


•  CHAPTEE    XII

A    NATIONAL    MINIMUM    STANDARD    OF    REAL    INCOME

§  1.  When  we  desire  to  determine  whether  the  fact,  plus  the
expectation  of  the  fact,  of  any  given  annual  transference  of
resources  from  the  relatively  rich  to  the  relatively  poor  is
likely  to  increase  the  national  dividend,  all  the  various  con-
siderations set  out  in  the  preceding  chapters  must  be  taken
into  account  together.  There  can  be  little  doubt  but  that
plans  could  be  devised,  which  would  enable  transferences,
involving  a  very  large  amount  of  resources,  to  be  made  with
results  advantageous  to  production.  Since  the  generality  of
these  transferences  will  also  increase  the  real  incomes  of  the
relatively  poor,  they  must  redound  to  the  advantage  of  economic
welfare  in  a  wholly  unambiguous  way.  Transferences  which
diminish  the  national  dividend,  on  the  other  hand,  are  liable,
through  various  reactions  which  have  been  indicated  in  the
course  of  this  discussion,  to  diminish  the  real  earnings  of  the
relatively  poor;  and,  if  their  amount  is  kept  constant,  they
may  do  this  to  so  great  an  extent  that  the  earnings  of  the  rela-
tively poor  plus  the  transference  made  to  them  will  ultimately
be  less  than  their  earnings  alone  would  have  been,  had  no
annual  transference  been  made.  When  this  happens,  these
transferences  also  affect  economic  welfare  in  an  unambiguous
way :  this  time  by  injuring  it.  There  remains,  however,  one
further  sort  of  transference,  the  results  of  which  cannot  be
unambiguous.  I  refer  to  a  system  of  transferences,  varied  from
year  to  year  in  such  a  way  as  to  compensate  for  any  reduction
that  may  come  about  in  that  part  of  the  income  of  the  poor
which  accrues  to  them  through  earnings.      An  arrangement  of

787


788  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

this  sort  is  implicitly  introduced,  whenever  a  government
establishes  a  minimum  standard  of  real  income,  below  which
it  refuses  to  allow  any  citizen  in  any  circumstances  to  fall.
For  the  establishment  of  such  a  minimum  standard,  implying,

1/  as  it  does,  transferences  to  the  poor  of  a  kind  that  dififerentiate

in  favour  of  poverty,  is  likely  to  diminish  the  national  dividend,

/while  it   will,   at   the    same    time,   for   an   indefinitely  long

V  period,  increase  the  aggregate  real  income  of  the  poor.  To
determine  the  effect,  which  the  establishnfent  of  this  kind  of
minimum  standard  is  likely  to  exercise  upon  economic  welfare,
involves,  therefore,  a  balancing  of  conflicting  considerations.

§  2.  Before  this  balancing  is  attempted,  it  is  desirable  to
obtain  a  clear  notion  of  what  precisely  the  minimum  standard
should  be  taken  to  signify.  It  must  be  conceived,  not  as  a
subjective  minimum  of  satisfaction,  but  as  an  objective  minimum
of  conditions.  The  conditions,  too,  must  be  conditions,  not  in
respect  of  one  aspect  of  life  only,  but  in  general.  Thus,  the
minimum  includes  some  defined  quantity  and  quality  of  house
accommodation,  of  medical  care,  of  education,  of  food,  of  leisure,
of  the  apparatus  of  sanitary  convenience  and  safety  where
work  is  carried  on,  and  so  on.  Furthermore,  the  minimum  is
absolute.  If  a  citizen  can  afford  to  attain  to  it  in  all  depart-
ments, the  State  cares  nothing  that  he  would  prefer  to  fail  In
one.  It  will  not  allow  him,  for  example,  to  save  money  for  a
carouse  at  the  cost  of  living  in  a  room  unfit  for  human  habita-
tion. There  is,  indeed,  some  danger  in  this  policy.  It  is  a
very  delicate  matter  for  the  State  to  determine  authoritatively
in  what  way  poor  people  shall  distribute  scanty  resources
among  various  competing  needs.  The  temperaments  and  cir-
cumstances of  different  individuals  differ  so  greatly  that  rigid
rules  are  bound  to  be  unsatisfactory.  Thus,  Dr.  Bowley  writes :
"  The  opinion  is  quite  tenable  that  the  poor  are  forced  (by  the
effect  of  the  law  to  enforce  a  minimum  quality  and  quantity  of
housing  accommodation)  to  pay  for  a  standard  of  housing
higher  than  they  obtain  in  food,  and  that  they  would  make
more  of  their  income  if  they  were  worse  housed  and  better
fed."  ^  This  danger  must  be  recognised ;  but  the  public  spirit
of  the  time  demands  also  that  it  shall  be  faced.     A  man  must  not

^  The  Measv/reTnent  of  Social  Phenomena,  p.  173.


cH.  XII  A  NATIONAL  MINIMUM  789

be  permitted  to  fall  below  the  minimum  in  one  department
in  order  that  he  may  rise  above  it  in  others.  Again,  if  a
citizen  cannot  afford  to  attain  the  minimum  in  all  departments,
but,  by  failing  in  one,  can  remain  independent,  that  does  not
justify  the  State  in  standing  aside.  The  State  must  not  permit
anywhere  hours  of  child  labour  or  woman  labour  above  the
minimum,  or  the  acceptance  of  house  accommodation  below
the  minimum,  on  the  ground  that,  by  resort  to  them,  some
given  family  could,  and,  without  resort  to  them,  it  could
not,  support  itseK;  for,  if  that  is  the  fact,  the  family
ought  not  to  be  required  to  support  itself.  There  is  no
defence  for  the  policy  of  "  giving  poor  widows  and  in-
capable fathers  permission  to  keep  their  children  out
of  school  and  take  their  earnings."  ^  Eather,  the  Com-
mittee on  the  Employment  of  Children  Act  are  wholly  right
when  they  declare :  "  We  feel,  moreover,  that  the  cases  of
widows  and  others,  who  are  now  too  often  economically  depen-
dent on  child  labour,  should  be  met,  no  longer  by  the  sacrifice
of  the  future  to  the  present,  but,  rather,  by  more  scientific,  and
possibly  by  more  generous,  methods  of  public  assistance."  ^  The
same  type  of  reasoning  applies,  with  even  greater  force,  to  the
common  plea  that  women  should  be  allowed  to  work  in  factories
shortly  before  and  shortly  after  confinement,  because,  if  they
are  not  allowed  to  do  this,  they  and  their  children  alike  will
suffer  shocking  poverty.  In  these  circumstances  it  is  the  duty
of  the  State,  not  to  remit  the  law,  but  to  defend  those  affected
by  it  from  this  evil  consequence.

§  3.  There  is  general  agreement  among  practical  philan-
thropists that  some  minimum  standard  of  conditions  ought
to  be  set  up  at  a  level  high  enough  to  make  impossible  the
occurrence  to  anybody  of  extreme  want ;  and  that  whatever
transference  of  resources  from  relatively  rich  to  relatively  poor
persons  is  necessary  to  secure  this  must  be  made,  without
reference  to  possible  injurious  consequences  upon  the  magni-
tude of  the  dividend.^    This  policy  of  practical  philanthropists

'  Cf.  Henderson,  Industrial  Insurance  in  the  United  States,  p.  301.

'  Report,  p.  15.

^  It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  those  very  improvements  in  the  eflBciency
of  labour,  which  have  been  discussed  in  previous  parts  of  this  book,  are
calculated  to  push  some  men  below  the  minimum  standard.     It  is  true,  as  a


790  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  it.  v

is  justified  by  analysis,  in  the  sense  that  it  can  be  shown  to
be  conducive  to  economic  welfare  on  the  whole,  if  we  believe
the  misery  that  results  to  individuals  from  extreme  want  to
be  indefinitely  large ;  for,  then,  the  good  of  abolishing  extreme
want  is  not  commensurable  with  any  evils  that  may  follow
should  a  diminution  of  the  dividend  take  place.  Up  to  this
point,  therefore,  there  is  no  difficulty.  But  our  discussion
cannot  stop  at  this  point.  It  is  necessary  to  ask,  not  merely
whether  economic  welfare  will  be  promoted  by  the  establish-
ment of  any  minimum  standard,  but  also  by  what  minimum
standard  it  will  be  promoted  most  effectively.  Now,  above
the  level  of  extreme  want,  it  is  generally  admitted  that
increments  of  income  involve  finite  increments  of  satisfaction.
Hence,  the  direct  good  of  transference  and  the  indirect  evil
resulting  from  a  diminished  dividend  are  both  finite  quan-
tities ;  and  the  correct  formal  answer  to  our  question  is  that
economic  welfare  is  best  promoted  by  a  minimum  standard
raised  to  such  a  level  that  the  direct  good  resulting  from  the
transference  of  the  marginal  pound,  which  is  transferred  to
the  poor,  just  balances  the  indirect  evil  brought  about  by  the
consequent  reduction  of  the  dividend.

§  4.  To  derive  from  this  formal  answer  a  quantitative
estimate  of  what  the  minimum  standard  of  real  inconSe
established  in  any  particular  country  at  any  particular  time
ought  to  be,  it  would  be  necessary  to  obtain  and  to  analyse
a  mass  of  detailed  information,  much  of  which  is  not,  in
present  circumstances,  accessible  to  students.  One  practical
conclusion  can,  however,  be  safely  drawn.  This  is  that,  other
things  being  equal,  the  minimum  can  be  advantageously  set
higher,  the  larger  is  the  real  income  per  head  of  the  com-
munity. The  reason,  of  course,  is  that  every  increase  in
average  income  implies  a  diminution  in  the  number  of  people
unable  by  their  own  efforts  to  attain  to  any  given  minimum
standard ;    and,  therefore,  a    diminution,   both    absolute    and

point  of  analysis,  that  increased  efficiency  of  labour  is,  in  effect,  equivalent
to  an  addition  to  its  supply,  and,  therefore,  involves  a  slight  reduction  in  the
real  wage  of  a  labour  unit  of  given  quality.  In  view,  however,  of  the  elastic
character  of  the  demand  for  labour  in  general,  the  number  of  the  unimproved
men  whom  this  change  would  push  over  the  line  of  self-support  would  almost
certainly  be  very  small.


cH.  XII  A  NATIONAL  MINIMUM  791

proportionate,  in  the  share  of  the  dividend  which  an  external
guarantee  of  that  standard  threatens  to  bring  about.  It
foUows  that,  when  we  have  to  do  with  a  group  of  pioneer
workers  in  rough  and  adverse  natural  circumstances,  the
minimum  standard  may  rightly  be  set  at  a  low  leveL  But,
as  inventions  and  discoveries  progress,  as  capital  is  accumu-
lated and  nature  subdued,  it  should  be  correspondingly  raised.
Thus,  it  is  reasonable  that,  while  a  relatively  poor  country
makes  only  a  low  provision  for  its  "  destitute "  citizens,  a
relatively  rich  country  should  make  a  somewhat  better
provision  for  all  who  are  "  necessitous.  "  ^

§  5.  In  this  connection  it  is  important  that  there  should
be  no  confusion  as  to  what  is  meant  by  a  rich  country.  For
the  present  purpose  country  means,  not  Government,  but  people.
There  is  a  widespread  impression  that  a  nation's  duty  to  make
provision  for  its  poorer  citizens  depends  upon  the  amount  of
money  that  the  Government  has  to  provide  for  other  purposes;
and  from  this  it  is  inferred  that  the  great  increase  in  the
British  Budget  required  to  meet  the  annual  charges  on  the
war  debt  justifies,  and  indeed  commands,  large  retrenchments
in  social  expenditure.  As  the  later  chapters  of  Part  IV.  have
already  implicitly  argued,  this  idea  is,  in  great  measure,  illusory.
It  is  true,  of  course,  that  the  indirect  effect  in  checking  pro-
duction of  the  expectation  (as  distinguished  from  the  fact)  of
continuous  taxation  sufficient  to  yield  800  millions  a  year,  is
a  good  deal  greater  than  that  of  the  expectation  of  taxes
yielding  200  millions.  But  no  part  of  the  real  income  of  the
country  is  directly  used  up  when  interest  is  paid  to  domestic
holders  of  Government  securities.  Eesources  are  merely  trans-
ferred from  one  group  of  citizens  to  another.  No  doubt,  when
a  nation  has  to  provide  funds  for  a  large  internal  debt  in
consequence  of  a  war,  this  is  a  sign  that  resources  have  been
expended  on  war  that  might  have  been  expended  on  building
up  capital  equipment  and  so  making  the  real  income  larger.
It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  a  large  part  of
the  resources,  that  were  lent,  for  example,  to  the  British
Government  by  its  citizens  in  the  great  war,  was  not  withdrawn

^  TMs  is  the  term  employed  by  the  Majority  Ck)inmissioners  of  the  1909
Report  on  the  Poor  Laws.


792  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  vt.v

from  what  would  have  been  real  capital,  but  was  the  result  of
economies  in  consumption  and  special  activities  in  production,
which,  but  for  the  war,  would  not  have  taken  place.  Even,
therefore,  as  a  sign  of  a  country's  capacity  to  give  help  to
its  poor  the  magnitude  of  an  internal  war  debt  is  of  little
use.  The  true  test  of  this  capacity  is  the  direct  one — aggre-
gate real  income  compared  with  population.  It  is,  indeed,
proper  to  subtract  from  this  the  resources  which  are  neces-
sarily used  up  in  unproductive  ways.  Thus,  when  a  country
is  80  situated  that  it  has  to  devote  an  exceptionally  large
proportion  of  its  real  income  to  the  upkeep  of  powerful
armaments,  or  to  the  payment  of  interest  to  foreigners
who,  in  the  past,  have  lent  money  to  its  Government,  or
to  machinery  for  preserving  internal  order,  account  must
be  taken  of  these  things.  As  a  rule,  however,  they  are
relatively  unimportant.  The  amount  of  the  aggregate  real
income  in  relation  to  the  number  of  the  population  is  the
dominant  relevant  fact.

§  6.  For  the  United  Kingdom  the  best  available  estimate
gives  an  aggregate  national  income,  for  1913—14,  represented
at  then  prices  by  some  2250  million  pounds.  Deducting
some  250  millions  for  rates  and  taxes  and  some  230  millions
for  new  investments,  we  have  left  a  sum  sufficient,  if  it  could
have  been  divided  up  equally  without  being  diminished  in  the
process,  to  yield  an  income  of  £162  to  each  representative
family  of  4^  persons.^  Of  course,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  would
have  been  quite  impossible  to  pool  the  national  income  in  this
way  without  a  large  part  of  the  flow  of  goods  and  services,
which  this  money  figure  represents,  disappearing  altogether.
Apart  from  great  improvements  in  productive  organisation,
which  may,  perhaps,  be  hoped  for,  but  certainly  cannot  be  pre-
dicted with  confidence,  there  is  no  reason  to  expect  that  the
real  income  per  head  of  the  country — we  need  not  trouble  about
its  swollen  reflex  in  the  glass  of  money — will  be  substantially
greater  in  the  near  future  than  it  was  in  1913-14.  In  view  of
these  facts  it  is  plain  that,  wealthy  as  this  country  is,  as  com-
pared both  with  itself  in  the  past  and  with  most  of  its  neigh-
bours in  the  present,  it  is  not  wealthy  in  an  absolute  sense.     As

'  Cf.  Bowley,  The  Division  of  the  Product  of  Indtistry,  pp.  20  et  seq.


cH.iii  A  NATIONAL  MINIMUM  793

things  are,  it  is  literally  impossible  for  it,  by  any  manipula-
tion of  distribution,  to  provide  for  all  its  citizens  a  really
high  standard  of  living.  In  so  far,  therefore,  as  social
reformers  rely  upon  improvements  in  the  distribution  of
wealth,  as  distinguished  from  improvements  in  production,
they  are  boimd  to  chasten  their  hopes.  The  national  mini-
mimi  may  rightly  be  set  now  much  higher  than  it  could  have
been  set  a  hundred  or  fifty  years  ago.  But,  with  the  national
average  no  lai-ger  than  it  is,  it  is  inevitable  that  the  national
minimum  must  still  be  set  at  a  deplorably  low  level.

§  7.  So  far  nothing  has  been  said  of  the  common  view
that,  in  determining  the  minimum  standard  which  it  will
establish  for  itself,  a  country  must  have  regard  to  the  policy
of  other  countries,  because,  if  it  moves  too  far  ahead  of  its
rivals,  it  will  be  beaten  by  them  in  the  economic  battle.  This
view  has  now  to  be  examined.  It  is  obvious  that,  if  an
injurious  but  cheap  process,  such  as  the  use  of  white  phos-
phorus in  match-making,  is  forbidden  in  this  country  but  is
permitted  in  other  countries  which  compete  with  us  in  our
home  market,  the  British  industry  affected  by  the  prohibition
will  have  less  work  to  do.  But  the  common  inference  that
the  country  as  a  whole  will  have  less  work  to  do  is  not
warranted,  because,  since  imports  are  necessarily  paid  for  by
exports,  an  increase  in  one  sort  of  import  involves  either  a
diminution  in  other  sorts  of  import,  which  relieves  the
competitive  pressure  on  other  British  trades,  or  a  corresponding
increase  in  British  exports,  which  are,  of  course,  produced  by
British  trades.  For  the  same  reason  the  common  view  that
the  abolition  in  England  alone  of  socially  undesirable  methods
common  to  many  industries,  such  as  the  night  work  of  women,
the  use  of  unfenced  machinery,  or  the  building  of  factories
without  proper  sanitary  arrangements,  would  lead  to  a
reduction,  through  foreign  competition,  of  opportunities  for
employment  here  is  illusory.  It  does  not,  however,  follow
from  this  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  country  to  be  injured,
however  far  it  moves  ahead  of  other  countries  in  establishing
minimum  standards  desirable  from  a  general  point  of  view,
but  not  productive  of  economic  efficiency.  For,  if  a  handicap
is  imposed  on  productive  methods  in  one  country  only,  there


V94  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  v

will  be  a  tendency  for  employing  power,  capital  and  labour  to
leave  that  country.  If  all  leave  in  equal  proportions,  the  general
scale  of  the  country's  industry  will  be  correspondingly  reduced,
the  rate  of  pay  per  unit  of  every  factor  remaining  much  as
before.  The  national  dividend  need  not  fall  as  much  as
production  falls,  because  capitalists  may  still  live  and  receive
income  here  while  employing  their  capital  elsewhere.  Since,
in  fact,  capital — at  all  events  if  we  suppose  the  obstacle  of
double  income-tax  to  be  done  away  with  by  international  and
intra-imperial  agreement — is  more  mobile  than  labour,  the
presumption  is  that  capital  will  leave  in  a  somewhat  larger
proportion,  and  that,  therefore,  the  earnings  per  head  of  work-
people will  fall.  In  whatever  way  the  detail  of  the  movement
is  worked  out,  it  is  plain  that  economic  welfare  in
the  country  affected  is  likely  to  be  lessened.  The  injury
thus  inflicted  on  it  cannot,  it  should  be  observed,  be  pre-
vented by  setting  up  a  tariff  against  imports  from  countries
where  labour  legislation  is  less  advanced.  On  the  contrary,
such  a  tariff,  by  interfering  with  the  normal  distribution  of
the  country's  resources  among  different  occupations,  would,  in
general,  make  the  national  dividend  smaller,  and  the  injury,
therefore,  worse.  If,  however,  the  handicap  of  these  high,
minima  is  extended  to  all  important  countries  by  inter-
national labour  legislation,  the  danger  that  our  capital  will
be  driven  abroad  is  removed — at  the  cost  of  some  slight
damage  to  us  in  the  terms  on  which  our  goods  exchange
against  foreign  goods.

^  8.  From  these  considerations  it  appears  that  the  exten-
sion by  international  labour  legislation  of  regulations,  which
are  both  desirable  in  themselves  and  also  a  real  handicap  to
industry,  is  likely,  though  in  a  way  quite  different  from  that
commonly  supposed,  to  lessen  the  burden  which  these  regula-
tions would  inflict  on  any  country  accepting  them  in  isolation.
To  this  extent  it  will,  therefore,  really  be  easier  for  a  country
to  rule  out  injurious  methods  and  processes,  if  it  can  persuade
other  nations  to  move  forward  in  company  with  it.  Moreover,
when  the  injurious  methods  specially  affect  particular  indus-
tries, an  international  agreement  will  really  make  it  easier  for
the  persons  engaged  in  those  industries  to  accept  a  veto  upon


•


cH.  XII  A  NATIONAL  MINIMUM  795

injurious  methods ;   and  it  will  almost  always  be  thought  to
make  this  easier  both  for  those  persons  and  for  the  community
regarded  as  a  whole.     Hence,  the  development  of  machinery
for  international  labour   legislation   may  be  expected  to  ac-
complish   something   solid   in    speeding  up  improvements  in
industrial  conditions.     The  advantage  to  be  looked  for  is  the
greater  in  that  many  improvements  in  method,  which  are  not
really  handicaps  at  all,  but,  through  their  effect  on  efficiency,
net  benefits,  are,  nevertheless,  popularly  believed  to  be  handi-
caps, and  are,  therefore,  unlikely  to  be  adopted  by  cautious
statesmen  without  some  outside  stimulus.     International  nego-
tiation may  often  furnish  such  a  stimulus  and  give  strength
to  reformers  in  a  country  where  the  social  movement  is  slack
or  the  power  of  vested  interests  strong.      There  can  be  little
doubt,  for  example,  that  the  Franco-Italian  treaty  of  1906
led  indirectly  to  a  general  improvement  in  Italian  practice  in
the  supervision  and  enforcement  of  labour  laws.     At  the  same
time  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  expect  from  the  lever  of  inter-
nationalism   more    than   it   has   power   to   give.      Inevitably,
international  minima,  if  they  are  to  secure  general  or  wide
assent,  must  lag  behind  the  practice  of  the  most  advanced
nations.     It  would  be  disastrous  if  a  custom  should  grow  up
of  regarding  these  international  minima  as  national  maxima  ;
for  that  would  check  the  forward  movement  of  pioneer  nations,
and   so   indirectly  of  the   whole   world.     Just  as  a  "  good "
employer,  while  welcoming  the  factory  acts,  will  keep  his  own
practice  well  in  advance  of  the  legal  standards,  so  also  a  "  good  "
nation  will  always   maintain  national   laws  more  ambitious
than  those  which  at  the  time  have  international  sanction.

§  9.  One  word  should  be  added  in  conclusion.  It  was
implied  in  the  argument  of  Part  I.  Chapter  IV.  that,  in  view  of
the  probable  reaction  of  improved  fortunes  upon  the  standard
of  living,  the  establishment  of  a  reasonable  minimum  standard
would  not  lead  to  any  significant  increase  of  births.  We
cannot,  however,  conclude  with  equal  confidence  that,  if
adopted  in  one  country  alone,  it  would  not  lead  to  a
considerable  increase  in  the  numbers  of  the  population
through  the  immigration  of  relatively  inefficient  poor  persons
attracted  by  the  prospect  of  State  aid.      If  it  did  lead  to  this.


796  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


PT.  V


the  new  immigrants  would  consume  more  than  they  con-
tributed to  the  dividend ;  and,  as  their  numbers  grew,  the
portion  of  this  dividend  available  for  distribution  among  the
native-born  citizens  of  the  country  concerned  would,  other
things  being  equal,  continually  and  rapidly  diminish.  It  is,
therefore,  to  the  advantage  of  a  State,  which  has  established
a  minimum  standard  above  that  enjoyed  by  its  neighbours,  to
forbid  the  immigration  of  persons  who  seem  unlikely  to  attain
this  minimum  without  help  from  the  public  funds.  To  this
end  idiots,  feeble-minded  persons,  cripples,  beggars  and
vagrants,  or  persons  over  or  under  a  certain  age  may  be
excluded,  unless  they  are  either  accompanied  by  relatives  able
to  support  them,  or  themselves  possess  an  adequate  income
derived  from  investments.^  But  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to
devise  machinery  which  shall  be  effective  in  excluding  all
"  undesirable  "  immigrants  without  at  the  same  time  excluding
some  that  are  "  desirable."

1  For  a  summary  of  a  number  of  laws  on  this  matter,  cf.  Griinzel,  Economic
Protectionism,  p.  281  et  seq.


PART  VI

THE  VARIABILITY  OF   THE  NATIONAL
DIVIDEND


797


I


CHAPTEE   I

THE   ECONOMIC    BHYTHM

§  1.  If  anyone  were  asked  to  characterise  the  economic
life  of  a  modern  community,  he  would  probably  answer  that
there  is  a  general  trend  towards  increased  production,  both  in
the  aggregate  and  per  head  of  the  population.  This,  asso-
ciated as  it  is  with  mechanical  inventions  and  the  growth
of  capital,  is  observable  throughout  the  greater  part  of  the
civilised  world.  But,  he  would  add,  the  upward  trend  is  not
a  continuous  and  steady  movement.  Eather,  progress  takes
place  by  a  succession  of  jumps  or  spurts,  periods  of  rapid
increase  being  followed  by  periods  of  stagnation  or  even  of
decline ;  so  that,  if  we  were  to  represent  the  movement
pictorially,  our  diagram  would  not  show  a  straight  line  gradu-
ally sloping  upwards,  but  a  wavy,  oscillating  course  with
a  general  upward  tendency.  This  is  what  is  seen,  and  the
interpretation  of  it  is  plain.  The  income-getting  power  of  any
community  consists  of  its  people,  its  machinery  and  its
organisation.  This  expands  with  every  expansion  in  adult
population,  mechanical  equipment  and  industrial  intelligence.
But  the  changes  in  the  volume  of  the  community's  income-
getting  power  are  not  the  only,  or,  indeed,  the  dominant  factor
in  the  oscillating  movement.  Superimposed  upon  them  are
variations  in  the  extent  to  which  the  income-getting  power  of  the
community  is  actually  en^/aged  in  work.  Changes  in  the  volume
of  income-getting  power  are  like  movements  of  the  tide ;  they
alone  signify  from  a  long-period  general  view.  Changes  in
the  proportion  of  the  volume  actually  at  work  are  like  move-
ments of  the  waves;  they  are  of  principal  interest  to  students

799


800  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

of  short  period  efifects.  The  interplay  of  the  two  together
has  an  important  practical  consequence,  which  it  is  the
business  of  the  following  paragraphs  to  display,

§  2.  But,  before  this  task  is  attempted,  it  is  well  to  observe
that  the  volume  of  income-getting  power  actually  set  to  work
varies  considerably  less  than  it  appears  to  do  at  first  sight.
The  reason  is  that  a  diminution  in  the  quantity  of  activity  is
often  correlated  with  an  increase  in  its  intensity.  In  periods
of  depression  the  amount  of  intelligence  put  into  production  is,
in  general,  larger,  partly  because  relatively  inefficient  business
men  are  compelled  to  sell  out  to  others,  but  mainly  because
those  persons  who  remain  in  business  "  are  put  on  their
mettle,  and  exert  themselves  to  their  utmost  to  invent  im-
proved methods  and  to  avail  themselves  of  the  improvements
made  by  others."  ^  In  like  manner,  workpeople,  since  they
are  earning  less,  are  likely,  if  on  piece-wages,  to  work  harder
and  more  intelligently.  Thus,  in  coal-mining,  the  late  Lord
Rhondda  has  shown  :  "  The  better  off  men  were,  and  the  more
easily  they  could  obtain  the  means  of  subsistence,  the  less
energy  they  put  forward;  there  was  a  very  considerable
diminution  in  the  output  per  man  per  annum.  On  the  other
hand,  when  prices  fell  and  wages  followed,  the  fact  that  the
men  worked  harder  accentuated  the  depression  which  followed
from  the  number  of  mines  opened  during  the  period  of  boom."^
These  considerations  must,  of  course,  be  borne  in  mind  through-
out the  discussion  which  follows.

§  3.  When  the  contraction  or  expansion  in  the  volume  of
income-getting  power  at  work  is  given,  it  is,  of  course,  not  to
be  expected  that  the  contraction  or  expansion  in  the  aggre-
gate product  will  be  proportionate  to  this.     Since  machinery

^  Marshall,  Evidence  before  the  Gold  and  Silver  Commission  [Cd.  5512],
Q.  9816.      Cf.  Aftalion,  Les  Crises  p&iodiques  de  surproduction,  vol.  i.  p.  230.

2  Statistical  Joztrnal,  January  1914,  p.  174.  Cf.  Mitchell,  Business  Cycles,
p.  478.  It  should  be  remembered  that  output  per  man  is  not,  in  these  circum-
stances, at  all  an  adequate  test  of  energy,  since  in  good  times  inferior  men  will
be  added  to  the  normal  staff,  and,  after  a  point,  many  firms  will  be  working
beyond  the  output  yielding  maximum  efficiency,  and  so  under  conditions  of
diminishing  returns,  the  workmen  having  to  work  with  too  little  machine
power  per  workman.  M.  Aftalion  quotes  statistics  to  show  that  in  coal  mines,
iron  mines  and  blast  furnaces,  output  per  head  is  less  in  times  of  prosperity
.than  in  times  of  depression  (vol.  i.  p.  195).


CH.  I  THE  ECONOMIC  EHYTHM  801

is  not,  in  general,  hired  for  wages,  but  is  owned  by  the  con-
trollers of  businesses,  a  contraction  in  the  use  of  income-
getting  power  takes  the  form  principally  of  a  reduction  in
the  quantity  of  labour  employed.  But  the  relation  between
a  decrease  or  increase  in  labour  power  and  a  decrease  or
increase  in  production  depends  on  how  far  the  firms
affected  are  working  on  a  scale  corresponding  to  their
maximum  efficiency.  If  we  start  at  a  point  of  great  depres-
sion, it  may  well  be  that  the  change  in  output  would  be
proportionate  to  the  change  in  labour  power ;  but,  if  we  start
from  a  point  of  considerable  expansion,  when  the  normal  firm
i^  already  employing  more  men  than  are  really  appropriate  to
>  plant,  the  change  in  output  would  be  much  less  than
proportionate.  A  "  critical  point  is  reached  in  the  affairs  of
any  enterprise  when  it  has  already  secured  sufficient  orders
to  keep  busy  its  standard  equipment  and  its  regular  staff
of  employees.  To  execute  additional  orders  then  requires
overtime-work,  the  hiring  of  new  and  presumably  less  efficient
hands,  the  starting  of  old-fashioned  machines,  the  installation
of  new  equipment,  or  some  similar  change."  ^  These  considera-
tions are  important.  None  the  less,  when  the  volume  of
income-getting  power  is  given,  variations  in  the  extent  to
which  it  is  set  to  work  are,  in  general,  correlated  with  varia-
tions in  the  same  direction — though  of  smaller  magnitude — in
the  aggregate  volume  of  production.

§  4.  But  this  conclusion  does  not  exhaust  the  facts.
Carrying  our  survey  further,  we  notice  that  the  industries
of  a  modern  community  fall  roughly  into  two  gi'oups,
industries — or  professions — which  serve  the  needs  of  con-
sumption directly,  and  industries  which  serve  these  needs
indirectly  by  the  manufacture  of  instruments  of  production.
It  is  not,  of  course,  possible  to  make  this  distinction  perfectly
ligid  and  clear-cut.  The  building  industry,  for  example,
builds  both  dwelling-houses,  which  serve  consumption  directly,
and  factories,  which  are  instrumental  goods.  But,  blurred  at
the  edges  as  it  may  often  be,  the  distinction  is  still  real.
Any  community's  resources  are  devoted  in  part  to  making
consumers'  goods  and  in  part  to  making  producers'  goods.
1  Cf.  Mitchell,  Busine^  Cycles,  p.  458.

3f


802  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

Furthermore,  these  two  groups  of  industries  behave  in
different  ways.  In  the  periods  of  spurt,  both  sorts  expand,
but  the  instrumental  industries  expand  much  more  largely
than  the  others.  In  the  periods  of  decline  that  follow  each
period  of  spurt,  the  instrumental  industries  greatly  contract
their  product,  but  the  product  of  the  consumers'  industries
merely  ceases  to  expand.  Thus,  a  diagram  showing  the
output  of  the  instrumental  industries  would  be  a  curve  with
large  rises  and  large  falls,  while  one  showing  the  output  of
consumers'  industries  would  consist  of  rises  interspersed  with
horizontal  movements,  like  the  outline  of  a  flight  of  stairs.
Evidence  for  this  statement  is  afforded  by  railway  statistics,
which  indicate  general  expansion  in  boom  periods  but  hardly
any  contraction  in  periods  of  depression.^  The  statistics  of
coal  consumption  2 — in  this  differing  from  the  statistics  of
iron  consumption — and  the  statistics  of  the  quantities  of
foreign  trade  are  of  like  character.  There  may,  indeed,  be
a  momentary  contraction  due  to  shock  in  some  crises,  such
as  that  of  1870,  but  this  will  not  generally  last  long.^
M.  Aftalion,  summarising  a  considerable  inquiry,  writes :
"  Perhaps  reductions  in  the  manufacture  of  objects  of
consumption  have  taken  place  on  the  morrow  of  crises.
Perhaps  also  the  production  of  goods  of  this  kind  declines
in  those  industries  which  are  only  slightly  capitalistic  and
make  use  of  hand- work  and  home-work.  But,  during  a
good  part  of  the  depression,  for  a  number  of  industries
making  consumable  goods,  manufacture  progresses  rather  than
diminishes."  ^

§  5.  The  explanation  of  these  facts  is  that,  in  the  actual
world,  we  have  not  to  do  simply  with  variations  in  the  extent
to  which  income-getting  power  is  employed,  the  volume  of
this  income-getting  power  remaining  constant,  but  with  a  com-
plicated combination  of  these  variations  and  of  secondary
induced  variations  in  the  volume  of  income-getting  power
itself.  In  a  period  of  expanded  activity  many  instruments  of
production  are  being  made  and  other  constructions  are  being
built  up.      It  is  true  that  some  of  the  extra  activity  is  devoted

^  Cf.  Aftalion,  Les  Crises  piriodiques  de  surprod-uction,  ii.  p.  23.

2  Ibid.  ii.  p.  157.  ^  jbid,  a.  p.  26.  *  Ibid.  pp.  174-5.


CH.  I  THE  ECONOMIC  EHYTHM  803

merely  to  the  exploitation  of  mares'  nests,  and  is  thus,  sheer
waste ;  but  there  remains  a  great  deal  that  really  adds  to  the
provision  of  instruments.  It  follows  that,  when  activity
declines;  such  activity  as  is  employed  in  consumption  in-
dustries finds  itself  assisted  by  a  much  larger  supply  of
machinery  and  plant  than  before.  During  the  earlier  part
of  a  depression  the  quantity  of  machinery  is  still  being
increased  through  the  completion  of  machines  ordered  in
the  latter  part  of  the  preceding  boom  period ;  for,  of  course,
it  generally  pays  to  complete  machines  on  which  a  good  deal
of  work  has  been  done,  even  when  it  does  not  pay  to  make
new  ones  from  the  start.  The  creation  and  development  of
railways  in  a  boom  period  acts  in  the  same  way  as  the  creation
of  machinery  in  facilitating  the  production  of  all  forms  of
consumption  goods  in  the  succeeding  period.  In  practice,  the
process  of  events  is  as  follows.  In  a  boom  period  the  amount
of  labour  at  work  expands,  the  expansion  being  large  in  con-
structional industries  and  comparatively  small  in  others.  In
the  succeeding  period  of  depression  the  amount  of  labour  at
work  contracts,  the  contraction  being  large  in  constructional
industries  and  comparatively  small  in  others.  In  the  con-
structional industries  the  large  contraction  in  the  amount  of
labour  at  work  is  accompanied  by  a  large  contraction  in  the
output  of  producers'  goods.  But  in  the  consumption  industries
the  extra  machinery  and  plant  provided  in  consequence  of  the
preceding  boom  so  far  facilitates  production  that  the  com-
paratively small  contraction  in  the  amount  of  labour  at  work
does  not  reduce  output  appreciably  below  what  it  was  in
the  preceding  boom  period.^  Hence,  industrial  fluctuations
involve  large  movements,  not  in  the  consumption  of  the
community  as  a  whole,  but  in  the  demand  for  the  services,
and,  therefore,  in  the  real  income  of  the  labouring  classes.  In
view,  therefore,  of  the  analysis  of  Part  I.  Chapter  IV.,  it  is
plain  that  industrial  fluctuations  are  likely,  other  things  being
equal,  to  prove  very  specially  injurious  to  economic  welfare.

*  It  should  be  noticed  in  this  connection  that  the  turning-point  from
increase  to  decrease  in  the  aggregate  supply  of  machinery  occurs  somewhat
later  than  the  turning-point  in  the  annual  output  of  new  machinery  ;  for  the
aggregate  supply  does  not  begin  to  fall  until  the  annual  output  has  fallen,  not
merely  below  what  it  was  before,  but  below  the  rate  of  anTiual  decay.


804  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

Some  study  of  them  is,  therefore,  essential  to  complete  the
general  plan  of  this  volume.

S  6.  If  our  interest  were  primarily  historical,  we  should  be
compelled  to  investigate  every  single  incident  that  might
prima  facie  be  thought  responsible  for  disturbing  in  any  way
the  surface  of  the  industrial  stream.  The  standpoint  of  my
book,  however,  is  not  historical  but  analytic.  It  does  not  seek
a  detailed  explanation  of  every  expansion  and  contraction  in
industry  and  in  the  demand  for  labour  that  has  occurred  from
time  to  time,  but  rather  a  general  explanation  of  the  main
tendencies  of  the  industrial  movement.  Now,  the  dominant
characteristic  of  that  movement  during  the  last  half  century  in
this  country  is  that  it  has  taken  place  in  a  series  of  waves,
rhythmical  in  character  and  closely  similar  in  length.  Since
1860  the  intervals  between  successive  years  of  minimum
employment,  as  recorded  by  British  Trade  Unions  making
returns,  were  7,  10,  7,  10,  7  and  7  years  respectively;  the
intervals  between  successive  maxima,  6,  11,  7,  7,  11  and  5
years  respectively ;  the  average  length  of  periods  of  lessening
employment  being  ^^-  years,  and  that  of  periods  of  improving
employment  ^  years.  It  is  with  this  regular  rhythmical
movement  that  I  am  concerned  here  to  deal.  For  that
purpose  the  study  of  obviously  sporadic  events,  such  as  wars,
fashion-changes  and  gold-discoveries,  can  only  be  of  secondary
interest.^  There  are  only  two  sorts  of  causes  in  which  we  can
reasonably  hope  that  the  real  explanation  may  be  found.
First,  there  are  causes,  which,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  them-
selves recur  with  a  periodicity  corresponding  in  some  degree

1  To  avoid  misunderstanding  it  should  perhaps  be  added  that  the  only  sort
of  fashion-change  that  could,  in  any  case,  cause  an  alteration  in  the  general
demand  for  labour  would  be  what  one  may  call  a  "net"  fashion-change,  that  is
to  say,  something  more  than  the  mere  substitution  of  one  taste  for  another.  Mr.
Robertson  argues  that  in  practice  fashion-changes  come  to  very  little  as  causes
of  industrial  fluctuations,  and,  in  support  of  this  view,  jiointa  out,  first,  that
even  in  France,  the  great  luxury-producing  country,  only  ^rJ-Ttli  P^rt  of  the
normal  production  is  subject  to  the  influence  of  fashion  ;  and,  secondly,  that
France,  though  the  chief  maker  of  fashion-goods,  is  less  subject  to  general
industrial  fluctuations  than  other  countries,  in  which  fashion-goods  play  a  smaller
part  {A  Study  of  Industrial  Fludiiation,  p.  72).  In  contrast  to  this  type  of
movement  we  may  set  the  enormous  net  change  of  taste  that  occurs  on  the  out-
break of  a  war,  when  the  demand  for  soldiering  and  munitions  represents,  in
great  part,  not  merely  a  transference,  but  an  addition  to  the  aggregate  demand
of  the  community  for  effort  in  general.


CH.  I  THE  ECOXOMIC  EHYTHM  805

with  the  periodicity  of  the  general  industrial  movement.
Secondly,  there  are  causes  the  occurrence  of  which  may  be
sporadic,  but  which,  once  they  have  come  into  play,  do  not
exhaust  themselves  in  a  single  act,  but  stari}  wave  movements
of  a  periodicity  similar  to  that  which  our  records  display.  In
the  following  chapters  we  shall  have  occasion  to  consider
causes  belonging  to  each  of  these  two  types.


CHAPTEK    II


A    FALSE    SCENT


§  1.  Before  this  task  is  seriously  undertaken  it  will  be
well  to  notice  two  methods  of  approach  which  are  plausible,
but  can  be  shown  to  lead  to  no  result.  The  first  of  these  is
favoured  by  Mr.  Hull  in  his  interesting  book  on  Industrial
Depressions.  Mr.  Hull  maintains  that  the  "  causes  of  booms
and  depressions  must  lie  within  the  industries — by  which  he
means  the  constructional  industries — where  great  increases  and
decreases  in  the  volume  of  business  can  and  do  take  place."  -^
The  fact  that  the  greatest  fluctuations  occur  in  this  type  of
industry  is  easily  established  alike  by  indirect  and  by  direct
evidence.  First,  as  M.  Aftalion  points  out,  England,  the
earliest  seat  of  capitalistic  industry,  was  also  the  first  country  to
experience  commercial  crises,  and  these  have  spread  to  other
countries  as  capitalistic  industry  has  spread  to  them.^  More-
over, Mr.  Hull  finds  a  remarkable  correspondence  between
the  rank  of  ten  nations  in  the  production  of  iron,  which  may  be
taken  as  a  rough  index  of  industrial  development,  and  their
rank  in  the  severity  of  industrial  depressions.^  Secondly,  there
is  direct  contemporary  evidence  that  the  variations  in  the
quantity,  and,  still  more  markedly,  in  the  value,  of  output,
which  occur  in  works  of  construction,  are  much  larger  than
those  which  occur  elsewhere.*  The  exceedingly  large  cyclical
fluctuations  of  employment  in  engineering  and  shipbuilding
in  this  country  afford  further  evidence  of  this.     Concerning

'  Industrial  Depressions,  p.  100.

*  Cf.  Aftalion,  Les  Crises  piriodiques  de  surproduction,  ii.  p.  190.
^  Cf.  In/iustrial  Depressions,  p.  83.

♦  Ibid.  p.  82.

806


CH.  n  A  FALSE  SCENT  807

the  fact,  then,  there  need  be  no  dispute.  Does  the  fact
warrant  the  inference  that  the  source  and  cause  of  industrial
fluctuations  lies  within  the  constructional  industries  ?

§  2.  A  definite  answer  can  be  given  to  this  question.
Instrumental  goods  in  general,  unlike  the  main  body  of  con-
sumable goods,  are  goods  that  are  not  destroyed  by  the  process
of  being  used.  Therefore  there  is  always  in  existence  a  much
larger  stock  of  them  relatively  to  the  annual  output  than  there
is  of  consumable  goods  generally.  Hence,  if  it  is  decided  to
increase  the  production  of  cotton  goods  by  20  percent  in  condi-
tions such  that,  in  order  to  do  this,  the  supply  of  cotton  machinery
has  to  be  increased  by  1 0  per  cent,  the  1 0  per  cent  increase  in
the  supply  of  cotton  machinery  will  involve  a  very  much  larger
increase,  perhaps  an  increase  of  80  per  cent  or  100  per  cent,
in  the  tiew  productian  of  that  machinery.  In  like  manner,
when  the  demand  for  the  services  of  houses,  ships  or  rolling-
stock  increases  or  decreases  by  a  given  percentage,  the  demand
for  the  production  of  new  ships,  houses,  or  rolling-stock  neces-
sarily changes  in  a  much  larger  proportion.  Thus,  there  is,
prima  facie,  reason  to  expect  that  a  given  boom  in  the  production
of  consumable  goods  will  involve  a  larger  (percentage)  boom  in
the  production  of  constructional  goods.  Nor  is  this  all.  For,  if
the  boom  of  primary  demand  subsequently  disappears  and  the
old  level  is  resumed,  the  reduced  derived  demand  for  instru-
ments will  find  itself  confronted  with  an  increase  in  the
supply — an  increase  whose  magnitude  varies  directly  with  the
average  intensity,  multiplied  by  the  length,  of  the  preceding
boom  period.^  This,  of  course,  means  that  the  slump  in  the
demand  for  the  new  production  of  instruments  will  be  rein-
forced and  augmented.  Even,  therefore,  if  the  whole  source
of  an  upward  movement  were  an  increased  demand  for
consumption  goods,  it  would  necessarily  happen  that  credits
are  "  transformed  from  liquid  capital  into  fixed  capital  and
investments," "  and  that  "  the  proportion  which  the  capital
devoted  to  permanent  and  remote  investment  bears  to  that
which  is  but  temporarily  invested  soon  to  reproduce  itself " '

^  Cf.  Babson,  Business  Barometers,  p.  96.

^  Lessons  of  the  Financial  Crisis,  p.  30.

3  Jevons,  Investigaiions  in  Currency  and  Finance,  p.  28.


808  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

is  increased.  Wherever,  in  short,  the  causes  of  booms  or
depressions  originate,  the  fluctuations  of  demand  that  are
associated  with  them  would  be  abnormally  large  in  the  indus-
tries making  fixed  capital.  The  fact,  therefore,  that  they  are
abnormally  large  is  no  evidence  that  these  causes  originate
within  these  constructional  industries.


CHAPTER   III

THE  ACCUMULATION  AND  CONVERSION  OF  UNUSED  SAVINGS

§  1.  There  is  a  second  false  scent.  The  way  in  which  varia-
tions in  industrial  activity  and  the  real  demand  for  labour
come  about  is  sometimes  explained  as  follows.  Unused
savings,  it  is  said,  are  gradually  accumulated,  and,  as  soon  as
they  are  massed  in  sufficient  quantities,  are  thrown  forward  into
industry.  Munitions  are,  as  it  were,  built  up  during  several
years  of  trench  warfare  and  then  discharged  in  a  great  att-ack,
and  this  attack,  in  turn,  is  followed  by  another  period  of
quiescence  and  accumulation.  Thus,  M.  Tugan  Baranowsky
draws  a  parallel  for  industry  from  a  steam  engine.  Capital —
in  the  sense  of  unused  savings — accumulates,  he  says,  like
steam  behind  a  piston ;  when  the  pressure  attains  a  certain  in-
tensity, it  drives  the  piston  forward,  and  exhausts  itself  in  doing
so ;  then  a  new  accumulation  takes  place,  until  the  piston  is
again  driven  forward,  and  so  on  continually.^  In  like  manner,  M.
Lescure  writes  :  "  There  are  periods  when  savings  are  employed
in  creating  new  means  of  production,  others  when  they  flow
to  the  banks  or  the  Stock  Exchange  to  be  employed  in  pur-
chasing Government  bonds  or  securities  bearing  fixed  interest,
or  simply  to  slumber  in  the  form  of  deposits."  ^  Discussing
this  idea  in  detail,  he  adds  :  "  The  category  of  production  which
will  first  be  vivified  by  the  outflow  of  savings  towards  industry
wiU  evidently  be  that  of  the  means  of  production.  Of  what
means  of  production  ?  That  will  depend.  At  the  beginning
of  the  nineteenth  century  it  was  the  means  for  sewing  and

^  Ct  Lea  Qrisea  vudMStridUs  en  AngUterre,  p.  273.
*  Des  Crises  geniraUs  et  p6riodiqvtes  de  surptvduetion,  p.  505.

809


810  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

spinning,  in  a  word,  all  kinds  of  textile  machinery ;  a  little
later  it  was  the  formidable  apparatus  of  railways  and  railway
material  and  of  steel  steamships  to  take  the  place  of  wooden
sailing  vessels ;  in  our  own  day  it  is  electrical  energy  and  its
manifold  industrial  applications,  tramways,  electric  railways,
electric  furnaces,  electric  light,  and  so  on.  Manifold  in  their
origin,  savings  have  always  as  their  final  goal  the  satisfaction
of  new  or  more  intense  needs,  and  the  satisfaction  of  these
needs  exacts  the  production  of  new  means  of  production."  ^
The  central  idea  is  that  savings  are  made ;  that,  instead  of
being  turned  at  once  into  industry,  they  are  stored  up  in  the
form  of  non-industrial  capital ;  and  that  eventually,  when  the
due  moment  comes,  they  are  converted  into  industrial  capital
by  means  of  a  process  that  involves  greatly  expanded  industrial
activity.

§  2.  If  we  had  to  do  with  a  single  individual  in  primitive
conditions,  this  explanation,  though  not  probing  very  deep,
would  be  satisfactory  so  far  as  it  went.  Accumulated  savings
not  yet  turned  into  industrial  capital  would  consist,  and  would
consist  only,  of  stored  up  consumable  goods.  These  things
might  be  accumulated  over  any  period  that  we  choose.  They
would  be  turned  into  industrial  capital  when  our  imaginary
individual  had  resort  to  them  for  sustenance,  while  devoting
his  labour,  not  to  the  production  of  consumables,  but  to  the
production  of  some  durable  instrument  of  production.  The
stored  consumable  goods  in  their  natural  state  would  be
savings,  or,  in  one  sense,  capital,  but  not  productive  capital.
"When,  at  the  cost  of  consuming  them,  Robinson  Crusoe  created
his  canoe  or  his  barn  or  his  factory,  they  would  have  been
turned  into  productive  capital.  This  process  of  conversion
might  occur  in  jerks,  while  the  process  of  preliminary  accumu-
lation was  gradual.  There  is  no  difficulty  about  this  concep-
tion. But  it  will  be  perceived  that,  according  to  it,  the
aggregate  amount  of  industrial  effort  is  not  different  in  the
periods  of  conversion  from  what  it  is  in  other  periods.  All
that  happens  is  that  a  given  aggregate  of  effort  is  directed,  at
one  time  to  the  production  of  consumable  goods,  at  another  to
that  of  instruments  of  production.

*  Des  Crises  gSnirales  et  p&nodiques  de  surprodtidion,  p.  412.


CH.  m       CONVEESION  OF   UNUSED  SAVINGS         811

§  3.  We  may  get  nearer  to  reality  by  supposing  that,
alongside  of  Eobinson  Crusoe  on  his  island,  there  exist  a
number  of  men,  who  normally  produce — perhaps  with  a  little
help  from  Eobinson's  charity — enough  to  maintain  themselves
alive,  but  who  ordinarily  possess  a  good  deal  of  unemployed
labour  power.  As  before,  Robinson  saves,  in  the  sense  of
accumulating  a  mass  of  consumable  goods.  When  he  has
been  doing  this  for  some  years,  it  occurs  to  him  to  entice  his
neighbours'  unused  labour  power  into  activity  by  the  offer  of
some  of  his  accumulated  goods  in  return  for  the  manufacture
of  certain  productive  instruments.  If  he  does  this,  his  savings
are,  as  before,  converted  into  productive  capital.  On  this
occasion,  however,  the  conversion  means,  not  that  industrial
effort  has  been  diverted  from  making  consumables  to  making
instrumental  goods,  but  that  new  industrial  effort  destined
to  the  production  of  instrumental  goods  has  been  called  into
play.  This  is  what  we  might  suppose  to  happen  in  the  actual
world,  so  far  as  the  real  wages  paid  to  workpeople,  whose
activity  in  instrumental  trades  is  increased  in  times  of  boom,
are  drawn  from  goods  piled  up  in  shops  and  stores  during  the
preceding  period  of  quietness.

§  4.  If  this  account  gave  a  true  picture  of  the  facts,  the
inference  drawn  in  the  theories  of  Lescure  and  Tugan
Baranowsky  would  be  largely  justified.  For,  •  the  larger  the
volume  of  consumable  goods  in  store  becomes,  the  more  willing
Eobinson  Crusoe — our  representative  of  the  controller  of
industry — will  be  to  "  convert  "  a  given  quantity  of  them  into
productive  capital.  The  store  is  useful  to  him  because  it
constitutes  an  insurance  against  disaster  in  the  event  of  bad
harvests  or  of  a  sudden  need  to  pay  off  debts.  Consequently,
when  the  store  is  small,  the  expectation  of  profit,  which  will  be
needed  to  induce  him  to  convert  a  given  amount  of  it  into
productive  capital,  will  be  larger  than  it  is  when  the  store  is
large.  Hence,  an  expansion  in  the  store  of  savings  would
be  a  true  cause  of  a  boom  in  the  amount  of  labour  that  is  hired
to  make  productive  instruments ;  and  the  using  up  of  the  store
of  savings  would  be  a  true  cause  of  a  check  to  this  boom.  So
soon  as  the  accumulated  savings  of  the  past  have  been  "  used
up "   by  conversion  into   fixed  capital — railways    and    so    on


812  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

— the  boom  must  break.  There  is  no  free  capital — im-
hypotheticated  savings — left,  with  which  to  carry  it  on,  and  it,
thereupon,  comes  to  an  end.

^5.  I  shall  argue  immediately  that  the  foregoing  analysis
cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  facts  of  real  life,  for  the  reason
that  in  practice  unused  savings  are  not  accumulated  in  periods
of  depression  and  are  not  used  up  in  periods  of  boom.     Before,
however,  a  direct  argument  in  this  sense  is  attempted,  it  is
necessary   to    draw   attention    to    an   important   confusion   of
thought.     Everybody  admits  that  in  times  of  depression  many
people  accumulate  purchasing  power  and  pay  it  into  the  banks,
where,  owing  to  the  general  atmosphere  of  caution  that,  in
those  times,  prevails,  most  of  it  tends  to  stagnate  rather  than
to  be  lent  out  again  to  finance  industrial  and  business  ventures.
The  gap  between  the  volume  of  purchasing  power  that  the
public  is  surrendering  to  the  custody  of  banks  and  the  volume
that  the  banks  are  handing  over  to  the  use  of  the  business
community  is,  thus,  much  narrower  than  usual.      The  extent  of
the  narrowing  is  sometimes  believed  to  measure  the  accumula-
tion that  has  been  made  of  "  unused  savings."     The  fact  that
the   gap  is   narrowed  is,  it   is   claimed,  complete  proof  that
unused  savings  must  have  been  accumulated.     This  reasoning
is    incorrect.       By    accumulating    unused    purchasing    power
people  have  not  automatically  accumulated  also  unused  savings
of   real    things.       What    they  have    done    by  not   spending
their  money  has  been  to  reduce  prices  in  general  below  what
they  would  otherwise  have  been,  thus  making  the  money  of
other  people  worth  more  goods  than  it  would  otherwise  have
been  worth,  and  thus  enabling  these  other  people  to  buy  more
goods.     What  they  have  accumulated  by  this  proceeding  is,
not  things,  but  the  power,  when  they  choose  later  on  to  spend
the  money,  to  raise  prices,  reduce  the  purchasing  power  of
other  people's  money,  and  absorb  for  themselves   the   goods
which  have  in  this  way  been  rendered  inaccessible  to  others.
The  accumulation  is,  thus,  an  accumulation  of  claims  upon
other    people.       It   is  not   an  accumulation    of  things,   and
does    not    imply   any   accumulation    of    things,  or,  in    other
words,  any  real  savings,  on  the  part  of  those  who  make  it.
The  question  whether  there  is  in  fact  an  accumulation  of  real


I


cH.iii        CONYEKSION  OF  UNUSED  SAYINGS        813

things  on  the  part  of  the  community  in  general  cannot,
therefore,  be  answered  by  any  direct  appeal  to  monetary
and  banking  changes.  The  question  must  be  examined  on  its
own  merits.

§  6.  It  is  plain  that,  when  a  boom  is  on  the  point  of  break-
ing, and  immediately  after  it  has  broken,  a  very  great  check
to  purchases  of  all  kinds  will  take  place.  The  large  output  that
is  coming  from  the  factories  will  find  the  public  demand
suddenly  and  greatly  contracted.  It  must  necessarily,  there-
fore, pile  itself  up  in  warehouses  and  shops,  just  as  the  water
in  a  lake  would  pile  itself  up,  if  the  outflow  were  suddenly
choked,  while  the  inflow  for  the  moment  remained  unaltered-
But  this  is  only  the  first  stage.  The  blocking  up  of  the  exit
from  the  lake  where  products  are  stored  leads  immediately  to
a  blocking  up  of  the  entrance  also.  As  the  Poor  Law  Com-
missioners write :  "  The  shops,  with  imsold  goods  on  their
shelves  and  diminished  takings  in  their  tills,  cannot  give  the
usual  orders  to  the  merchants  and  manufacturers  who  supply
them."  ^  All  this  is  plain  and  simple.  But  it  does  not  by
itself  throw  light  on  the  question  whether,  during  a  period
of  depression,  unused  real  savings  go  on  accumulating  till
their  volume  is  so  great  that  they  burst  their  way,  as  it  were,
into  productive  industry.  If  that  version  of  the  facts  is  true,
it  must  happen  that,  throughout  periods  of  depression,  the  exit
from  our  lake  continues  to  be  blocked  up  more  thoroughly
than  the  entrance  to  it.  Does  this  in  fact  happen  ?  For
an  absolutely  conclusive  answer  statistical  evidence  is  at
present  lacking.  But  what  evidence  there  is  suggests  that
it  does  not  happen.  The  truth  appears  to  be,  in  Professor
Mitchell's  words,  that,  as  a  depression  proceeds,  "  the  accumu-
lated stocks  of  goods  carried  over  from  the  preceding  period
of  prosperity  are  gradually  disposed  o£  Even  when  current
consumption  is  small,  manufactories  and  merchants  can  reduce
their  stocks  of  raw  materials  and  finished  wares  by  filling
orders  chiefly  from  what  is  on  hand  and  confining  purchases
to  the  small  quantities  needed  to  keep  full  assortments."  -
If  this  view  is  correct,  the  later  part  of  the  period  of  depres-

*  Beport  of  the  Royai  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  p.  331.
^  Business  CyeUs,  pp.  565-6.


814  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

sion  is  responsible,  not  only  for  no  accumulation  of  stocks,  but
for  an  actual  reduction  in  the  stocks  left  over  from  the  pre-
ceding period  of  boom.  Consequently,  the  theory  that  unused
savings  go  on  accumulating  till  their  growing  pressure  bursts
the  dam  that  holds  them  back  from  industry  is  directly
disproved  by  facts.

§  7.  The  preceding  paragraph  does,  indeed,  ignore  one
aspect  of  a  community's  life,  namely  its  trade  relations  with
other  communities.  If  account  is  taken  of  this,  our  conclusion
is  somewhat  modified.  When  there  is  a  depression  in  one
country,  not  merely  absolutely,  but  also  relatively  to  the  rest
of  the  world,  the  low  prices  that  rule  in  that  country  cause
imports  of  goods  to  diminish  and  exports  of  goods  to  increase.
They,  therefore,  cause  either  an  import  of  gold,  or  an  increase
in  the  country's  credit  holdings  abroad,  or  both  these  things
together.  The  extra  gold  and  foreign  credits  constitute  real
accumulated  savings.  In  effect  British  manufacturers  and
others  have  sold  goods  to  foreigners  and  taken  gold  and
credits,  instead  of  goods,  in  exchange  for  them.  The  gold  and
credits  are  not,  of  course,  themselves,  either  consumable  goods
or  instrumental  goods ;  but  they  constitute  a  power  to
purchase  from  foreigners  either  sort  of  goods,  when  their
owners  choose  to  make  use  of  it.  Thus,  when  account  is
taken  of  foreign  trade,  the  "  unused  savings  "  that  accumulate
during  depressions — when  the  depressions  are  peculiar  to
particular  communities — are  not  wholly  imaginary,  but  are
represented  by  a  growing  power  in  the  community  as  a  whole
to  make  effective  claims  upon  foreign  communities.  This
qualification  to  our  general  conclusion  is,  however,  clearly
of  no  significance  from  the  standpoint  of  industrial  fluctua-
tions that  are  spread  over  the  world  in  general,  as,  in  fact,
in  greater  or  less  degree,  most  large  movements  are.  And,
further,  since  the  change  in  the  holdings  of  gold  and
foreign  credits  is  always  small  relatively  to  the  whole  volume
of  industrial  activity,  the  qualification  is  only  of  secondary
importance  from  the  standpoint  of  movements  confined  to
a  single  country.  The  things  that  chiefly  matter  are  goods
stored  in  warehouses  and  shops.  Of  these,  as  has  already
been    observed,   not    only  does   no    continuing    accumulation


cH.iii        CONVERSION  OF  UNUSED  SAVINGS        815

take  place  during  periods  of  depression,  but  the  stocks  that
are  left  over  at  the  end  of  the  preceding  booms,  if  the  scanty
evidence  which  is  available  may  be  trusted,  are  dissipated
rather  than  increased.

§  8.  The  result  of  this  analysis  is  not  doubtful  The
passage  from  the  end  of  a  depression  to  the  beginning  of
a  boom  may,  if  we  will,  be  compared  to  the  discharge  of
a  piston,  but  the  pressure  behind  the  piston  is  no  larger
when  the  passage  is  being  made  than  it  is  at  any  other
time ;  on  the  contrary,  the  strongest  pressure  (in  the
sense  of  masses  of  unused  savings)  is  present  when  the
piston  is  beginning  to  return  to  its  starting  point.  It
is,  therefore,  plain  that  accumulation  of  unused  savings
cannot  rightly  be  regarded  even  as  a  proximate  cause  of
booms,  or  the  using  up  of  these  unused  savings  as  even  a
proximate  cause  of  depressions.  Nor  is  this  alL  For,  even
if  it  were  established  that  accimiulation  and  discharge  of
savings  took  place  in  the  way  that  the  theory  under  discussion
supposes,  we  should  still  be  very  far  from  an  "  explanation  "
of  industrial  fluctuations.  It  would  stiU  be  necessary  to  ask
why  savings  are  accumulated  gradually  and  then  suddenly
discharged  in  bulk,  instead  of  being  utilised  in  production  as
and  when  they  are  made ;  and,  why  the  periods  of  industrial
depression  and  boom,  which,  on  this  theory,  must  coincide
with  the  periods  of  accumulation  and  discharge,  cover  the
intervals  of  time  that  they  do  cover  rather  than  any  other
intervals.  A  theory  that  left  these  fundamental  questions
unanswered  could  not,  in  any  event,  be  accepted  as  an
"  explanation."  ^

1  The  separation  between  changes  in  real  capital  and  changes  in  the
purchasing  power  of  the  business  community,  which  has  been  stressed  in  this
chapter,  must  not,  of  course,  be  treated  as  absolute.  When  purchasing  power
is  given  to  the  business  community,  whether  by  the  creation  of  bank  credits  in
their  favour  or  in  any  other  way,  the  primary  effect  is  merely  to  transfer
command  over  the  productive  power  of  the  country.  But,  if  the  business  com-
munity is  more  willing  than  those  from  whom  the  transference  is,  in  effect,  made,
to  cause  that  productive  power  to  be  exercised,  a  secondary  effect  is  that  more
real  capital  is  created.  So  far  as  this  happens,  the  creation  of  bank  credits  in
favour  of  business  men  is  not,  indeed,  itself  a  creation  of  capital,  but  it  is
a  proceeding  by  which  the  creation  of  capital  is  facilitated.  It  has,  or  may
have,  the  same  sort  of  effect  as  the  transference  of  the  command  of  an  army
from  a  lethargic  to  an  active  generaL  This  consideration  does  not,  however,
affect  the  argument  of  the  text.


CHAPTEE    IV

HAKVEST    VAKIATIONS

§  1.  I  now  propose  in  three  successive  chapters  to  discuss
certain  causes  which,  it  can  be  shown,  would,  if  operating  by
themselves,  produce  some  kind  of  more  or  less  rhythmical
industrial  fluctuation.  The  question  how  far  each  or  all  of
them  "  explain  "  the  fluctuations  that  actually  take  place  is
left  over  for  separate  study  in  Chapter  VII.  Before  that
question  can  be  attacked,  each  of  these  causes  must  first  be
examined  in  detail.  The  first  of  them,  which  Jevons  long
ago  brought  into  strong  light,  consists  in  harvest  variations.

§  2.  To  facilitate  our  analysis  of  the  way  in  which  this
cause  works,  we  may  conveniently  regard  agriculture  and
industry  as  separate  productive  groups,  between  which,  for  the
short  periods  relevant  to  industrial  fluctuations,  mobility  is
practically  excluded.  This  assumption  is  warranted  by  the
fact  that  a  harvest  boom  or  slump  is  not  a  durable  change,
and  that,  therefore,  if  labour  and  capital  are  to  be  transferred
between  agriculture  and  industry,  they  would  need  to  be
instantly  responsive.  No  readiness  to  respond  to  slow  and
continued  pressure  would  suffice  to  constitute  mobility  from
the  present  point  of  view.  It  is  well  known  that  extreme
sensitiveness  to  monetary  impulses  towards  movement  is
not  to  be  found  in  the  comparatively  massive  and  slow-
thinking  agricultural  community.  Furthermore,  the  richest
parts  of  the  agricultural  world  are,  under  present  conditions,
physically  somewhat  distant  from  the  richest  parts  of  the
industrial  world.  This  circumstance  necessarily  obstructs
quick  movement  of  labour  and  capital.  On  this  basis  we
have  to  inquire  in  what  way  a  given   variation  in  harvest-

816


J


CH.1V  HAEVEST  VAEIATIONS  817

yield    might    be    expected    to    react    upon    the    volume    of
industrial  activity  generally.

§  3.  If  the  products  of  agriculture  were  instantly  perish-
able, it  would  be  impossible  for  any  reaction  to  occur,  except
in  so  far  as  the  variations  in  their  yield  could  be  foreseen ;  for,
apart  from  this,  no  group  of  non-agriculturalists  would  have
time  to  alter  their  own  output  with  a  view  to  the  altered
opportunities  offered  for  the  purchase  of  agricultural  products.
Since,  however,  agricultural  products  are  not  in  fact  instantly
perishable  but  are  capable  of  being  stored,  variations  in  their
amount  must  react  upon  industrial  activity,  even  though  they
are  not  foreseen  in  any  degree.  Thus,  the  feasibility  of  fore-
cast does  not  affect  the  nature  of  the  reactions  produced  upon
industrial  activity.  But  it  does  affect  the  interval  of  time
after  which  they  occur.  Clearly,  this  must  depend  on  the
extent  to  which  crop  prospects  are  capable  of  being  foreseen.
If  no  foreknowledge  were  possible,  no  reaction  could  occur
until  the  harvest  had  actually  been  reaped.  In  modern
conditions,  however,  some  considerable  measure  of  fore-
knowledge is  possible.  In  the  United  States  reports  on  the
prospects  of  the  crops  are  issued  monthly  on  the  basis  of  wide-
spread official  inspection.^  Mr.  Brace  finds  a  close  relation
between  prices  on  the  produce  exchanges  and  visible  supply.
He  adds  :  "  Furthermore,  it  is  seen  that  prices  have  a  tendency
to  move  sooner  than  the  visible  supply,  thus  indicating  that
the  market  leaders,  from  the  reports  of  crops  and  acreage,
together  with  other  indications  of  prospective  change  in
demand  and  supply,  were  able  to  predict  what  the  visible
supply  would  be,  and,  hence,  to  initiate  a  price  movement
before  the  demand  and  supply  of  the  actual  commodity  were
reflected  in  the  visible  supply."  ^  Nor  is  this  all.  Means  of  fore-
cast additional  to  those  furnished  by  inspection  of  the  standing
crops  have  recently  become  available.  Thus,  Dr.  Shaw  has
shown  that  in  England  the  wheat  crop  in  any  year  depends
upon,  and  can,  within  close  Hmits  of  error,  be  deduced  from,
the  rainfall  of  the  preceding  autumn;^  and  Professor  Moore

'  Cf.  Babson,  Business  Baronieters,  p.  317.

2  The  Value  of  Organised  Speculation,  p.  133.

3  "  An  Apparent  Periodicity  of  the  Yield  of  Wheat  in  Eastern  England,"
Journal  of  the  RoyaZ  Statistical  Society,  vol.  bcxviii.  pp.  69-76.

3g


818  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vr

has  found  a  similar  correlation  between  the  harvest  and  the
rainfall  of  the  preceding  "  critical  period "  in  the  principal
grain  growing  areas  of  the  United  States.^  As  a  result  of
this  increased  power  of  forecast,  the  interval  between  harvest
causes  and  industrial  effects  appears  in  recent  years  to  have
diminished.  Thus,  Professor  Jevons  writes  :  "  In  the  'seventies
it  took  two  years  for  abundant  harvests  to  work  their  fuU
effect  upon  the  iron  industry.  By  the  early  'nineties  the
activity  of  industry  lagged  but  one  year  behind  the  harvests,
while,  in  recent  years,  its  movement  has  become  simultaneous.
At  the  present  day,  the  growing  crops  are  discounted — literally
turned  into  money  as  they  stand — either  by  the  farmers  them-
selves or  by  the  merchants  to  whom  the  farmers  have  sold
their  crops  in  advance.  Eelying  upon  Government  crop
estimates,  too,  manufacturers  and  wholesale  merchants  anti-
cipate the  demand  which  will  arise  from  an  abundant  harvest,
and  railways  the  call  for  rolling  stock ;  and  they>piace''orders
accordingly,"  ^

§  4.  These  considerations,  however,  lie  outside  the  main
drift  of  our  investigation.  For  we  are  concerned,  not  with
the  time  at  which  reactions  upon  the  volume  of  industrial
activity  occur,  but  with  the  nature  and  scope  of  these  reactions.
The  first  stage  in  this  inquiry  is  to  analyse  the  actual  process
through  which  reaction  takes  place.  A  change  in  the  output
of  agriculturalists  is  seen,  or  expected,  by  industrialists  to
involve  a  change  in  the  aggregate  amount  of  money  which
will  be  paid  to  agriculturalists,  and  which  agriculturalists  can,
therefore,  afford  to  offer  for  the  products  of  industrialists,
thus  making  it  to  the  interest  of  industrialists  to  alter  corre-
spondingly their  own  output.  This  is,  of  course,  merely  a
roundabout  way  of  saying  that  industrialists  will  be  ready
to  create  an  altered  amount  of  their  products  (in  the
manufacture  of  which  they  will  pay  an  altered  aggregate
amount  of  real  wages)  in  return  for  an  altered  amount  of
agricultural  products.     It  is,  however,  convenient  to  conduct

^  Of.  Economic  Cycles,  Chapter  iii.

^  Contemporary  Review,  August  1909,  pp,  177-8.  Professor  Moore  finds
for  the  average  of  the  period  he  has  examined  an  average  lag  of  between  one
and  two  years  {Economic  Cycles,  p.  110).  This,  of  course,  is  not  incompatible
with  Professor  Jevong's  view  that  the  lag  has  now  disappeared.


i


cH.  IV  HAKVEST  YAEIATIONS  819

our  analysis  with  reference  to  the  money  process.  It  is  readily
seen  that  the  kind  of  effect  produced  depends  exclusively  upon
the  elasticity  of  the  general  demand  for  agricultural  com-
modities. If  this  elasticity  is  equal  to  unity,  exactly  the
same  amount  of  money,  and  ultimately  of  goods,  will  be  forth-
coming to  purchase  any  one  quantity  as  would  be  forthcoming
to  purchase  any  other  quantity.  A  variation  in  the  harvest
will,  in  these  conditions,  not  affect  the  activity  of  other  groups
at  alL  If  the  elasticity  of  demand  is  less  than  unity,  less  of
other  things  in  the  aggregate  will  be  offered  for  an  increased
quantity,  and  more  for  a  diminished  quantity.  If  the  elasticity
of  demand  is  greater  than  unity,  more  of  other  things  will  be
offered  for  an  increased  quantity,  and  less  for  a  diminished
quantity.  In  any  event,  the  magnitude  of  the  change  in  the
activity  of  other  groups  will  be  greater,  the  more  widely  the
elasticity  of  the  demand  for  agricultural  produce  diverges
from  imity.^

V  ^5,  Now,  since  agriculture  embraces  a  large  number  of
different  sorts  of  crops,  the  question  whether  the  demand  for
agricultural  produce  has  in  fact  an  elasticity  greater  or  less
than  unity  is  both  ambiguous  and  diflScult.     A  further  com-

*  The  problem  discussed  in  this  section  presents  a  curious  example  of  the  way
in  which  diagrams,  if  carelessly  handled,  may  mislead.  If,  in  an  ordinary
price-amoimt  diagram,  we  represent  the  offer  of  the  group  whose  output  has
expanded  by  a  supply  curve,  and  the  offer  of  the  other  group  by  a  demand
curve,  the  conclusion  of  the  text  is  immediately  established.  But,  if  we  repre-
sent the  offer  of  the  group  whose  output  has  expanded  by  a  demand  curve  and
the  offer  of  the  other  group  by  a  supply  curve,  it  appears,  at  first  sight,  that  a
raising  of  the  demand  curve  must,  in  all  circumstances,  cause  an  increase  in  the
output  of  the  other  group,  and,  therefore,  that  the  conclusion  of  the  text  is
invalid.  This  appearance  is  false.  The  exj>lanation  of  it  is  that  we  are  ac-
customed to  employ  the  price-amount  diagram  to  represent  the  quantity  of
a  single  commodity  demanded  and  supplied  at  various  money  prices.  Since
variations  in  the  supply  of  individual  commodities  (the  case  may  be  different
with  labour)  cannot  react  appreciably  upon  the  marginal  desiredness  of  money,  it
is  impossible  for  the  supply  curve  in  this  type  of  diagram  to  bend  backwards
towards  the  left  in  such  a  way  as  to  cut  a  vertical  line  more  than  once.  In  the
face  of  a  supply  curve  bound  by  this  condition  it  is  true  that  a  raising  of  the
demand  curve  must,  in  all  circumstances,  cause  an  increase  in  output.  But,
when  this  type  of  supply  curve  is  used  to  represent  the  offer  of  things  in  general
for  some  one  thing,  there  is  no  presumption  that  the  marginal  desiredness  of
this  thing  will  be  approximately  unaffected  by  variations  in  the  amount  of  it
that  is  purchased.  Consequently,  there  is  no  presumption  that  the  supply
curve  will  not  bend  backwards  towards  the  left,  and  no  ground  for  the  thesis
that  a  raising  of  the  demand  curve  must,  in  all  circomstances,  cause  an  increase
of  output.


820  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

plication  is  introduced  by  the  fact  that  the  elasticity  of  the
demand  of  any  group  for  the  whole  of  any  kind  of  produce  is
different  from  the  elasticity  of  its  demand  for  that  part  of  the
produce  that   is  grown  in  a  particular  country.     Since  the
supply  from  other  countries  can  be  substituted  for  the  supply
from  any  one  country,  the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  the
part  that  comes  from  one  country  is  always  greater  than  the
elasticity  of  the   demand  for  the  whole.      But  the  relation
between  the  two  elasticities  is  not  fixed.     That  relevant  to  the
produce  of  one  country  falls  more  nearly  to  that  relevant  to
the  whole,  as  the  proportion  which  that  country's  crop  bears
to  the  world  crop  increases.     Thus,  though  the  demand  for
wheat   in   the   aggregate    is    probably   less   elastic  than   the
demand    for    cotton    in    the    aggregate,    yet,    since    America
provides  a  much    larger   share  of   the   world's    cotton    than
of   the    world's    wheat,^    the    demand    for    American    cotton
is  less  elastic  than  the   demand  for  American  wheat.     The
most  useful  form  in  which  the  question  of  elasticity  can  be
posited  from  our  present  point  of  view  is  probably  the  most
general  form.     "Would  an  expansion  in  harvest  yields  through-
out the  world  generally  cause  industrialists  as  a  body,  and
English  industrialists  in  particular,  to  spend  a  larger  or  a
smaller  aggregate  sum  in  the  purchase  of  agricultural  products  ?
Obviously,  no  exact  answer  can   be  given   to  this  question,
because    harvest    yields  in  general    may    expand  in  a  great
number  of  different  ways,  sometimes  through  a  crop  of  in-
elastic demand  and  sometimes  through  one  of  elastic  demand.
Perhaps,  however,  the  difficulty  is  not  really  so  important  as
it  seems.     For  some  degree  of  positive  correlation  appears  to
exist   between    the   variations    that    occur   in    the   yields   of
different  sorts  of  crops  in  the  same  country.^     On  the  whole,
in  spite  of  Mr.  Hull's  assertion  that  small  crops  often  bring  in
as  much  money  to  farmers  as  large  crops,^  there  would  seem
reason  to  accept  Mr.  Eobertson's  view  that  the  elasticity  of  the
demand  for  agricultural  produce,  in  the  rough  sense  indicated
above,  is  somewhat  greater  than  unity.*     We  should,  therefore,

'  Cf.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1906,  p.  340.  ■

■''  Cf.  Robertson,  A  Stvdy  of  Industrial  FlucttuUion,  p.  153.

^  Cf.  Hull,  Industrial  Dej}ressions,  p.  45  et  seq.

*  Cf.  Robertson,  A  Study  of  Industrial  Fltictuation,  p.  135.


I


CH.  lY  HAEVEST  VARIATIONS  821

expect  good  harvests  to  make  for  an  expansion,  and  bad
harvests  for  a  contraction,  in  the  aggregate  real  payment
made  to  agriculturists  by  other  industries,  and  so  in  the
aggregate  real  demand  of  those  industries  for  the  services
of  the  workpeople  whom  they  employ.

§  6.  We  turn  now  to  the  magnitude  of  the  reactions  that
may  be  expected.  This  depends  partly,  as  has  already  been
indicated,  upon  the  extent  to  which  the  elasticity  of  the
demand  for  agricultural  products  diverges  from  unity.  About
this  no  information  is  available.  But  the  extent  of  the
reaction  also  depends  upon  four  other  quantities — (1)  the
elasticity  of  the  community's  demand  (in  terms  of  effort)  for
goods  and  services  other  than  agricultural  produce ;  (2)  the
normal  proportion  between  the  community's  expenditure  on
agricultural  produce  and  on  other  things ;  (3)  the  extent  of
the  variations  that  are  liable  to  occur  in  the  amount  of  the
harvest  yield  ;  and  (4)  the  extent  to  which  these  variations  are
balanced  by  converse  variations  in  the  quantity  of  crops
held  in  store.'

§  7.  Concerning  the  first  of  these  factors  we  do  not  know
much.  Plainly,  however,  the  elasticity  of  demand  in  terms  of
effort  for  non-agricultural  goods  in  general  is  likely  to  be  fairly
large,  and  the  fact  that  many  of  these  goods  are  capable  of
being  stored  and  are  not  iustantaneously  perishable  makes  it
larger  than  it  would  be  otherwise.  This  circumstance  tends
to  limit  the  magnitude  of  the  reactions  upon  aggregate
activity ;  because  it  implies  that,  when  people  increase  or
diminish  the  part  of  their  activity  which  is  directed  to  the
purchase  of  agricultural  products,  they  will  offset  this  change
to  a  considerable  extent  by  diminishing  or  increasing  the
part  that  is  directed  to  satisfying  their  other  wants  directly
and  to  making  goods  for  store.  But  nothing  at  all  precise
is  known  upon  the  subject  of  elasticities,  and  w^e  may,  there-

^  A  careful  analysis  along  these  lines  is  given  in  Mr.  D.  H.  Robertson's  A  Study
of  Industrial  Fluctuation,  pp.  129  et  seq.  Mr.  Robertson  adds  the  interesting
suggestion  that,  since  practice  creates  habit,  and,  therefore,  demands  are  likely
to  be  less  elastic  for  backward  than  for  forward  movements  of  supply,  a  change
that  causes  a  given  increase  in  the  payment  that  has  to  be  made  to  the  group
primarily  atfected  is  likely  to  modify  the  aggregate  output  of  other  groups  to  a
greater  extent  than  a  change  which  causes  an  equal  decrease  in  this  payment.
(Cf.  loc.  cit.  p.  136.)


822  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

fore,  pass  at  once  to  the  other  three  factors  that  have  been
distinguished.

§  8.  We  may  begin  with  the  proportion  of  the  community's
income  that  is  normally  expended  upon  agricultural  products.
If  one-tenth  of  the  whole  income  is  expended  upon  the  output
of  any  one  group,  this  means  that  the  rest  of  the  community
normally  devote  one-ninth  of  their  output  to  purchasing  the
output  of  that  group.  If,  therefore,  their  output  for  other
purposes  suffers  no  reaction,  they  will  be  affected  only  in
respect  of  one-ninth  of  their  output.  Hence,  if  the  effect  on
that  part  of  their  activity,  which  is  directed  to  purchasing
the  product  of  the  one  group,  is,  say,  5  per  cent,  the  effect  on
their  aggregate  activity  will  be  5  per  cent  multiplied  by  one-
ninth.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  percentage  change  in  the  aggre-
gate activity  of  the  other  groups  varies  directly  with  the  propor-
tion of  the  community's  resources  that  are  normally  spent  on  the
product  of  the  group  primarily  affected.  If  9  5  per  cent  of  the
community  look  for  a  10  per  cent  change  in  the  output  of  5  per
cent  of  the  community,  the  percentage  effect  will  normally  be
very  small ;  but,  if  5  per  cent  of  the  community  look  for  a  1 0
per  cent  change  in  the  output  of  9  5  per  cent  of  the  community,
it  will  be  very  large.  The  comparative  size  of  the  community's
expenditure  on  the  products  of  agriculture  and  of  industry  is,
thus,  a  dominant  factor  in  determining  the  extent  of  the  reactions
on  industrial  activity  produced  by  harvest  variations.  It  is,
therefore,  important  to  our  present  purpose  to  know  that,  as
man's  powers  increase,  the  proportion  of  these  that  he  needs  to
expend  in  obtaining  nature's  raw  products  tends,  through
mechanical  inventions  and  so  on,  steadily  to  diminish.  As  a
result,  a  greater  proportion  of  the  community's  total  expendi-
ture is  devoted  to  non-agricultural  goods  than  was  so  devoted  in
earlier  times.  The  proportionate  reactions  on  industrial  activity
due  to  harvest  changes  is,  therefore,  presumably  smaller  than
it  used  to  be.

§  9.  We  come  next  to  the  variability  of  the  harvests  them-
selves. The  magnitude  of  this  variability,  depending,  as  it
does,  upon  "  nature,"  appears  at  first  sight  to  be  outside  human
control.  In  fact,  however,  there  are  a  number  of  ways  in
which  "  progress  "  tends  to  diminish  it.     First,  it  is  plain  that


cH.  IV  HAEVEST  VAEIATIOXS  823

the  variability  of  yield  is  different  in  different  crops.  For
example,  few,  if  any,  agricultural  crops  fluctuate  so  greatly
from  year  to  year  as  hops.  In  the  year  1878,  when  the
largest  number  of  acres  was  under  hops,  viz.  71,789,  the
home  produce  is  estimated  not  to  have  exceeded  700,000  cwt.,
and  in  1907,  when  the  acreage  had  been  reduced  to  48,962,
the  home  produce  feU  little  short  of  700,000  cwt.^  As
civilisation  advances,  mankind  tends  to  substitute  the  use  of
less  variable  kinds  of  produce  for  the  use  of  more  variable  kinds.
The  introduction  of  a  type  of  wheat  immune  to  the  disease
of  rust  is  an  instance  in  point.  Secondly,  the  importance  of
natural  forces  outside  human  control,  in  bringing  about  varia-
bility, is  itself,  in  some  degree,  subject  to  human  control.  As
wealth  increases,  people  are  able  to  afford  more  expenditure  to
buy  off  irregularity  and  uncertainty,  and  so  tend  to  introduce
machines  to  imdertake  tasks  that  were  formerly  left  to  Nature.
In  India,  for  example,  the  development  of  irrigation  works  has
done  much  to  mitigate  the  effect  of  the  vagaries  of  the  seasons
in  rendering  the  crops  variable.^  Thirdly,  the  development  of
the  means  of  communication  tends  greatly  to  diminish  the
variability  of  that  part  of  the  world's  agricultural  produce  that
is  relevant  to  any  particular  country.  For,  as  intercourse  is
opened  up,  different  crops  come  to  be  so  distributed  among
different  countries  that  each  country  becomes  the  producer  of
that  one  which  in  it  is  relatively  invariable.  Moreover,  there
is  a  general  tendency  for  fluctuations,  which  occur  inde-
pendently in  different  parts  of  the  world,  partially  to  com-
pensate one  another — a  tendency  which,  as  the  general  theory
of  probability  proves,  is  stronger  the  more  numerous  are  the
different  independent  sources  of  supply.  Yet  again,  as
some  think,  there  is  a  physical  connection  between  different
parts  of  the  world,  which  directly  and  overtly  makes  for  com-
pensating movements.  "  The  crop  yield,"  it  has  been  said,
"  depends  largely  on  the  moisture  of  the  atmosphere,"  and  "  it
is  physically  impossible  that  there  should  be  at  once  in  all

1  Cf.  Report  of  tlie  Committee  on  Hops,  p.  v.  Of  course,  as  the  Committee
point  out,  allowance  must  be  made  for  the  introduction  of  more  intensive
methods  of  production.  This  consideration  makes  the  illustration  offered  above
less  apposite  than  it  appears  to  be  at  first  sight.

^  Cf.  Morison,  The  Indusirial  Organisation  of  an  Indian  Province,  ■p^  165-61.


824


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


PT.  VI


Europe,  in  Asia,  and  in  all  America  excess  of  dampness  or
excess  of  dryness."  Furthermore,  as  was  well  pointed  out  by
the  Economist  some  years  before  the  war :  "  Sowing  is  taking
place  in  every  month  of  the  year,  and  a  shortage  of  European
harvests  is  apparent  early  enough  to  influence  the  acreage  put
under  wheat  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  in  Australia,  and
Argentina.  The  effect  of  this  system  on  prices  has  been  that,
whereas,  prior  to  1898,  they  showed  big  fluctuations,  since
that  date  they  have  been  remarkably  steady,  though  with  a
slight  upward  tendency."  ^  The  great  practical  importance  of
these  influences  in  combination  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that,
whereas  in  the  ten  year  period  1898-1907  the  wheat  crop  of
the  British  Empire  had  a  variability  of  15  per  cent,  the
variability  of  the  crop  of  the  whole  world  was  only  5^  per  cent.^
The  general  effect  of  these  considerations  is  to  suggest  that
the  percentage  range  of  variability  in  the  annual  volume  of
agricultural  produce  is  not  very  large.

§  1 0.  The  last  influence  we  have  to  consider  is  the  cancelling
effect  exercised  upon  crop  variations  by  the  practice  of  holding
much  larger  supplies  in  store  when  the  crops  are  good  than
when  they  are  bad,  and  thus,  in  a  measure,  equalising  the


table  :


I  Ecmiomist,  April  17,  1909,  p.  811.

'  Economist,  April  24,  1909,  p.  861.     The  details  are  given  in  the  following


Per  cent  Increase

Per  cent  Increase

World's  Crop.

or  Decrease
compared  with

Crop  of  British
Empire.

or  Decrease
compared  with

Previous  Year.

Previous  Year.

Million  bushels.

Million  bushels.

1898

2948

453

•  ••

1899

2765

-    6-2

377

-16-8

1900

2610

-    5-6

428

4-13-5

1901

2898

+  11-0

411

-    4-0

1902

3104

+   7-1

471

+  14-6

1903

3190

+    2-7

572

+  21-6

1904

3152

-    1-2

458

-19-9

1905

3321

+    5-3

565

+  23-3

1906

3435

+    3-4

565

1907

3109

-    9-5

412

-27-1

The  greater  variability  of  the  imperial  crop  is  not,  of  course,  due  merely  to
the  relatively  small  area  of  gi'owth.  It  so  happens  that,  owing  to  climatic
conditions,  India  and  Australia  are  liable  to  almost  complete  crop  failures,  while
the  Canadian  harvest  is  also  extremely  variable.


CH.  IV  HAEVEST  VARIATIONS  825

quantities  of  harvest  products  that  actually  come  upon  the
market  in  successive  years.  This  cancelling  effect  is  made
greater  by  anything  that  causes  people  to  act  upon  better
forecasts  of  future  crop  yields,  and  is,  therefore,  enhanced  by
the  development  of  any  of  the  various  means  of  forecast
indicated  in  §  3,  It  is  further  enhanced  by  the  develop-
ment of  a  speculative  market,  in  which  persons  specialised  in
the  art  of  making  forecasts  come  together  and  by  their  action
affect,  first  prices,  and,  through  prices,  the  stocks  held  back  in
stores  and  shops,  Xo  doubt,  a  speculative  market  may,  on
some  occasions,  be  manipulated,  and,  on  other  occasions,  may
make  mistakes.  On  the  whole,  however,  we  may  safely  con-
clude, that  both  the  wheat  pit  and  cotton  exchange  tend  to
bring  about  the  holding  of  larger  stocks  in  anticipation  of
shortages  and  of  smaller  stocks  in  anticipation  of  bimiper  crops.
Institutions  of  this  kind  thus  lessen  the  reactions  produced
upon  the  volume  of  industrial  activity  by  variations  in  the
harvests.

^11.  The  above  considerations,  though  they  do  not  enable
us  to  establish  any  quantitative  relation  between  harvest  varia-
tions and  consequential  variations  in  industrial  activity,
"levertheless  leave  no  doubt  that  good  world  harvests  lead  to
expansions  and  bad  world  harvests  to  contractions  in  the  activity
of  industry.  If  these  harvest  variations  occurred  in  a  purely
chaotic  and  random  manner,  the  industrial  reactions  caused  by
them  would  not,  of  course,  be  rhythmical  in  any  degree.    Harvest

liations,  in  short,  fall  into  the  first  of  the  two  types  of  causes

uistinguished  at  the  end  of  Chapter  I.,  namely,  causes  which,

to  produce  rhythmical  effects,  must  themselves  occur  at  more

or  less  regular  intervals.      In  actual  fact  there  is  some  measure

f  regularity  in  harvest  variations.      It  is  true  that  on  the

•roblem  of  "  periodicity "  different  writers  have  reached  veiy

ivergent  conclusions.      Dr.  Shaw's  inquiry  into  "  An  apparent

riodicity  in  the  yield  of  wheat  in  Eastern  England  "  appears
reveal  the  existence  of  an  11  year  period  there.  Pro-
jfessor  Moore's  study  of  the  central  grain  district  of  the
^'nited  States  suggests  an  8  year  crop  period,  closely  correlated

:h  an  8  year  rainfall  period.^     Mr.  P.  G.  "Wright  disputes
^  Cf.  Emnomie  Cycles,  Chapters  ii.  and  iii


826  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.vi

Professor  Moore's  analysis  of  the  rainfall  period,  insisting
that  he  has  paid  inadequate  attention  to  the  relation  between
average  annual  rainfall  and  the  critical  period  of  the  year,  but  he
does  not  quarrel  about  the  crop  period.^  Professor  Jevons  claims
to  have  established  a  3|  year  period  for  the  world's  harvests,
connected  with  a  3|  yearly  solar  period  of  varying  average
barometric  pressure ;  ^  and  Mr.  Eobertson  doubts  whether  any
periodicity  is  really  demonstrated  by  his  figures.^  All  these
discrepancies  and  the  general  uncertainty  as  to  whether  any,
and  if  so  what,  crop  period  really  exists  have  been  the  source
of  a  great  deal  of  difficult  discussion.  But  for  our  present
purpose  the  question  whether  or  not  a  definite  period  can  be
established  is  not  important.  All  that  we  need  is  sufficient
regularity  to  afford  the  basis  of  a  more  or  less  loose  rhythm.
That  this  exists  there  can  be  little  doubt.  Consequently,
harvest  variations  must  be  regarded  as  a  true  cause  of  the
observed  industrial  movement,  in  the  sense  that,  if  operating
by  themselves,  they  would  produce  some  kind  of  more  or  less
rhythmical  scheme  of  industrial  fluctuations.

^  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  May  1915,  p.  631  et  seq.
2  The  Sun's  Heat  and  Trade  Activity,  p.  6.
^  A  Study  of  Industrial  Fluctuation,  p.  147.


CHAPTEE    V


INVENTIONS


§  1.  A  SECOND  true  cause  in  this  sense  is  inventions.  An
invention,  such  as  that  of  steam  transport,  which  led  to  our
railway  boom  in  the  'forties,  or  that  of  electric  transport,
which  led  to  great  iron  and  steel  booms  in  Germany
from  1895  to  1900,  causes,  it  may  be  supposed,  a  rise
in  the  demand  for  certain  sorts  of  instrumental  goods,
which  is  not  balanced  by  any  equivalent  fall  in  the
demand  for  other  sorts  of  instrumental  goods.  This  involves
an  increase  in  the  new  production  of  these  instrumental
goods.  It  also  involves  an  increase  in  the  demand  for  a
number  of  other  goods  which  are  subordinate  to  them.  "  To
construct  a  factory  or  a  railway  it  is  necessary  to  procure
materials  of  construction  (wood,  tiles,  iron,  etc.),  machines  and
tools,  and  to  engage  workpeople.  The  materials  of  construc-
tion, like  the  machines,  do  not  fall  from  the  sky;  they  are
furnished  by  other  branches  of  production.  Thus,  the  more
numerous  new  enterprises  are,  the  greater  is  the  demand  for
means  of  production."  ^  Further,  the  workpeople  engaged  in
connection  with  the  invention  are  paid  more  money  and  spend
it  in  the  purchase  of  more  food,  clothes  and  amusement.
Therefore,  the  makers  of  these  things,  finding  their  manufac-
ture more  profitable  than  before,  offer  more  money  to  their
workpeople  in  order  to  evoke  from  them  a  greater  volume
of  activity  and  a  larger  product.  In  this  way  invention  booms
cause  approximately  synchronous  booms,  not  only  in  the  indus-
tries that  make  materials,  but  also  in  those  that  make  the
goods  ordinarily  purchased  by  workpeople.

^  Tugan  Baranowski,  Les  Crises  industrielles  en  Angleterre,  p.  258.

827


828  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

§  2.  If  this  analysis  exhausted  the  matter,  it  would  have
been  shown  that  inventions  are  capable  of  causing  indus-
trial booms,  but  there  would  be  no  reason  to  regard  them  as  a
true  cause  of  more  or  less  rhythmical  industrial  fluctuations.
There  is,  however,  something  further  to  say.  The  effect  of
an  invention  boom  is  not  exhausted  when  the  boom  itself
stops.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  initiated  a  continuing  series
of  events  into  which  rhythm  does  enter.  In  other  words,
inventions  fall  into  the  second  of  the  two  classes  of  causes
distinguished  at  the  end  of  Chapter  I.,  namely,  causes  that  are
capable  of  setting  up  a  rhythmical  effect  without  themselves
recurring  rhythmically.

§  3.  The  first  phase  of  the  process  is  as  follows.  Diiring
the  invention  boom  itself,  in  response  to  the  demand  which
the  invention  has  set  going,  a  great  number  of  durable  things
are  being  created.  So  long  as  they  are  being  created — as  we
may  say,  throughout  the  period  of  gestation — exceptional
activity  continues.  Some  of  them,  of  course,  are  completed
sooner  than  others.  Even  for  the  same  sort  of  thing  the
period  of  gestation  is  not  the  same  when  factories  are  fully
occupied  as  when  they  are  slack.  And  for  different  sorts  of
things  it  naturally  varies  greatly.  An  invention  boom  involves,
as  it  were,  the  sowing  of  a  great  number  of  different  kinds  of
seed,  the  crops  from  which  are  scattered  over  a  considerable
range  of  time.  Some  of  the  seed  will  spring  up  and  flower
immediately ;  some  in  one  year,  some  in  two,  some  in  three,
some  perhaps  in  ten.  The  period  of  gestation  for  ordinary
consumable  goods,  such  as  cotton  cloth,  is  very  short.  Con-
struction goods  in  general  take  a  good  deal  longer  to  make.;
Mr.  Hull  states  that  it  takes  a  year  to  build  an  iron  furnace.
M.  Aftalion  suggests  that  the  gap  between  ordering  and  com-
pletion is,  for  the  rolling  stock  for  railways  some  one  and  &
half  years,  for  locomotives  some  three  years,  and  for  shipping'
some  two  years.  Houses,  according  to  their  size,  may  take
from  one  to  three  years  to  build.  Steam-engines  for  industrial
works  in  France  may  take  one,  two,  or  three  years.  The
period  of  gestation  of  a  coffee  plantation  is  some  five  years<
That  of  a  coal  mine  is  probably,  in  present  conditions,  event
longer.     "  There   is  nowhere,"  Mr.  Eobertson  was  told  by  the


CH.  V  INVENTIONS  829

representative  of  a  large  mixed  iron-works,  "  we  could  sink  a
new  colliery  except  a  few  parts  of  Yorkshire  and  the  south  of
England,  and,  even  so,  we  should  not  see  any  coal  for  years."  ^
The  above  are  not  designed  to  be  more  than  illustrations.  The
essential  fact  is  that  the  period  of  gestation  varies  greatly  for
different  things,  and  is  especially  likely  to  be  long  for  elaborate
constructional  instruments.  We  cannot,  therefore,  say  gener-
ally that  the  period  will  always  be  of  such  and  such  a  definite
length.  But  we  can  say  that,  as  the  different  things,  for  the
production  of  which  an  invention  boom  has  called,  come  to  be
finished,  industrial  activity  dies  down,  and  the  first  phase  of
the  rhythm  comes  to  a  close.

§  4.  The  second  phase  is  one  of  comparative  quiescence.
The  durable  things  called  into  being  by  the  invention  are  there
in  sufficient  quantities,  and  there  is  no  need,  for  the  present,
to  renew  them.  It  is  known,  of  course,  that  they  will  eventu-
ally wear  out  and  will  have  to  be  replaced,  and  it  is  possible,
therefore,  that  some  production  may  be  undertaken  in  antici-
pation of  that  event.  As  a  rule,  however,  this  will  not  happen
at  all  extensively,  partly  because  of  the  loss  of  interest  involved
in  it,  and  partly  because  technical  improvements  are  likely  to
be  invented  that  will  make  machines  and  so  forth  manufactured
now  obsolete  before  renewal  becomes  necessary.

§  5.  The  second  quiescent  phase  is  followed  by  a  third
phase  of  boom,  when  the  life  of  the  things  made  at  the  begin-
ning draws  to  an  end.  Of  course,  different  things  have  lives
of  different  lengths.  Houses,  for  example,  last  much  longer
than  delicate  tools.  But  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  many
different  sorts  of  machinery  enjoy  the  same  sort  of  length  of
Mfe.  Ten  years  seems  to  be,  not  merely  the  average,  but  also
the  markedly  predominant  length.  This,  at  all  events,  is  the
view  of  the  Director  of  the  British  Census  of  Production.^
Hence,  it  would  seem  that  we  can  speak  more  generally  of
length  of  life  than  we  can  of  period  of  gestation,  and  can
suggest  ten  years  as  a  reasonable  allowance.  If  this  be  so,  the
third  phase  of  the  rhythm  set  up  by  an  invention  will  be  a
second  boom  similar  to  the  first,  beginning  about  ten  years

'  A  Stvdy  of  Industr^l  Fluctuation,  p.  1 7.
*  Report,  pp.  35-6.     Cf.  also  otUc,  Part  I.  Chapter  III.  §  6.


830  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

later.  This  boom,  like  its  predecessor,  will  be  followed  by  a
period  of  quiescence,  and,  thereafter,  by  yet  another  boom.
Thus,  a  fairly  definite  rhythm  is  established,  and  invention  is
seen  to  be  a  true  cause  of  industrial  fluctuations.  The  diffi-
culties which  arise  out  of  the  interplay  of  a  number  of  different
inventions  will  be  considered  in  Chapter  VII.


CHAPTEE  VI

THE  PSYCHOLOGICAL  TENDENCIES  OF  THE  BUSINESS  COMMUNITY

§  1.  A  THIRD  true  cause  of  wave  movements  in  industrial
activity  generally  may  be  found  in  the  psychological  tendencies
of  the  business  community.  The  attitude  of  business  men
towards  the  signs  of  the  times  does  not  remain  constant,  but
varies  from  period  to  period  between  errors  of  optimism  and
errors  of  pessimism.  It  is  the  purpose  of  this  chapter  to
study  these  variations.

§  2.  One  primary  difficulty  has  first  to  be  overcome.  It
might  conceivably  be  thought  that,  if  everybody  at  the  same
time  formed  the  ungrounded  opinion  that  everybody  else  was
about  to  be  prosperous  (or  the  reverse),  the  very  universality
of  this  error  would  transmute  it  into  truth.  For  A,  thinking
that  B  is  about  to  be  prosperous  and  so  to  exercise  an  in-
creased demand  for  his  products,  increases  his  output,  and  B,
dominated  by  the  corresponding  thought  about  A,  does  like-
wise. These  increased  outputs,  created  in  error  though  they
are,  nevertheless  constitute  increased  reciprocal  demands  for
one  another.  Therefore,  the  argument  nms,  the  fact  of  A's
error  causes  A  so  to  act  that  B's  error  becomes  the  truth  ;
and  the  fact  of  B's  error  causes  B  so  to  act  that  A's
error  becomes  the  truth.  The  fact  that  all  expectations
have  been  false  causes  each  expectation  to  be  true  !  This
reason,  paradoxical  as  it  is  in  form,  is  not  obviously  fallacious  in
substance.  It  is,  however,  in  fact,  fallacious.  The  nature  of
the  fallacy  involved  can  be  set  out  as  follows.  It  is  perfectly
true  that  an  increase  in  the  output  of  A,  however  caused,
makes  worth  while,  or  "justifies,"  some  increase  in  the  output
of  B.     In  this  sense  Bagehot  is  right  when  he  observes  that

831


832  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

the  prosperity  of  one  industry  reacts  on  all  the  others  "  and  in
a  certain  sense  rebounds."  ^  Professor  Mitchell  seizes  the
same  point  when  he  writes :  "  As  it  spreads,  the  epidemic  of
optimism  helps  to  breed  conditions  which  both  justify  and
intensify  it.  The  mere  fact  that  a  growing  number  of
business  men  are  gaining  confidence  in  the  outlook  becomes  a
valid  reason  why  each  member  of  the  group,  and  outsiders  also,
should  feel  confident.  For  the  hopeful  mood  means  greater
readiness  to  make  new  purchases,  enter  into  new  contracts,
etc., — in  fine,  means  that  the  incipient  revival  of  activity  will
be  supported  and  extended."  ^  All  this  is  true.  But  it  is
not  true  that  a  given  false  expectation  on  the  part  of  A
justifies  an  equal  false  expectation  on  the  part  of  B,  and  vice
versa.  The  two  false  expectations  jointly  do  create  for  one
another  some  justification,  but  not  a  sufficient  justification.
This  can  easily  be  proved.  The  general  laws  of  demand
inform  us  that  A  will  be  prepared  to  offer  a  lower  price  per
unit  for  B's  goods  the  larger  the  quantity  offered  becomes ;
and  that  B  will  stand  in  a  like  relation  to  A's  goods.  Hence,
if  A  thinks  that  B  is  going  to  offer  twice  his  normal  supply
of  goods,  A  will  reply  by  producing,  not  twice  his  normal
supply,  but,  say,  one-and-a-half  times  his  normal  supply ;  and
B,  under  the  influence  of  a  similar  opinion  about  A,  will  act
in  the  same  way.  Hence,  both  A  and  B,  as  a  result  of  their
false  opinions,  produce  one-and-a-half  times  their  normal
output.  But,  ex  hypoihesi,  A  is  willing  to  give  one-and-a-half
times  his  normal  product  in  exchange,  not  for  one-and-a-half
times,  but  for  twice  B's  normal  product ;  and  B  is  in  like
case.  Hence,  the  error  of  the  one,  though  it  makes  the  error
of  the  other  less  glaring  than  it  would  otherwise  be,  does  not
convert  it  into  a  truth.  A  and  B  are  both  disappointed  and
both  find  that  their  expansion  of  output  was  a  mistake.  The
situation  is  exactly  similar  if  each  of  A  and  B  falsely  expects
the  other  to  contract  his  output,  and  contracts  his  own  in
consequence.  In  these  circumstances,  as  Dr.  Marshall  observes:
"  The  chief  cause  of  the  evil  is  want  of  confidence.  The
greater  part  of  it  could  be  removed  almost  in  an  instant
if  confidence  could  return,  touch  all  industries  with  her  magic

*  Lombard  Street,  p.  129.  *  Bvsiness  Cycles,  p.  465.


I


CH  VI  PSYCHOLOGICAL  TENDENCIES  833

wand,  and  make  them  continue  their  production  and  their
demand  for  the  wares  of  others."  ^  In  lack  of  such  revivifica-
tion of  confidence,  both  A  and  B  will  find,  when  their  product
comes  to  be  sold,  that  the  profit  to  be  made  is  exceptionally  larg^,
and  will  realise  that  contraction  of  output  was  a  mistake.
Thus,  the  doubt  whether  general  errors  of  business  optimism
and  business  pessimism  are  possible  may  be  dismissed.

§  3.  Let  us  suppose  the  business  world  to  be  in  a  neutral
position,  not  suffering  from  either  type  of  error.  On  this
situation  there  supervenes  some  real  cause  for  increase  in  the
demand  for  business  activity  ;  a  good  harvest,  the  cessation  of
a  war,  the  sudden  influx  of  new  gold,  a  tariff  change,  a
political  rumour,  or  the  need  of  replacing  in  some  important
constructional  industry  machines  that  have  become  worn  out.
If  all  business  activity  yielded  its  fruits  immediately,  these
causes  of  increased  demand  could  not  lead  to  any  appreciable
error  of  optimism,  because,  should  such  an  error  emerge  and
be  acted  upon,  it  would  instantly  be  detected  and  destroyed.
But  in  actual  life  very  little  industrial  energy  yields  its
profit — not  very  much  yields  its  actual  physical  output —
immediately.  For  most  consumable  goods  take  some  time  to
make,  and  still  more  time  before,  after  passing  through  ware-
>-  houses,  and,  perhaps,  intermediate  agents,  they  reach  purchasers
ready  to  pay  ;  and  the  profits  from  instrumental  goods  are  not,
of  course,  realised  by  the  persons  who  have  bought  them
until  the  consumable  goods  they  help  to  make  have  been
produced  and  sold.  In  different  occupations  different  intervals
of  time  prevail,  but  in  almost  all  occupations  there  is  some
interval  of  time — some  element,  so  to  speak,  of  prospective-
ness.  This  fact  leaves  the  way  open  for  the  development  of
an  optimistic  error  that  is  not  immediately  corrected :  and
several  influences  make  it  probable  that  this  kind  of  error  will
in  fact  develop.

§  4.  First,  the  real  cause  at  the  back  of  the  increased

*  Principles  of  Economies^  p.  711.  Cf.  Kinder  (J%c  Effects  of  recent  Changes
in  Monetary  Standards  upon  the  IHstribtUion  of  Wealth,  p.  499)  :  "  In  a  com-
muuity  where  the  individual  members  are  working  only  half  their  time,  any
inducement,  though  illusory  in  itself,  which  sets  them  at  work  their  full  time,
may  benefit  all  without  necessarily  injuring  any. "  Mr.  Kinder  is  thinking  of
the  possible  efl'ects  of  a  rise  of  i)rices  due  to  monetary  causes.

3  H


834  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

demand  has  probably  brought  improved  present  fortune  to
the  business  men  affected.  There  is,  however,  a  psychological
connection  between  one's  present  fortune  and  one's  attitude
towards  evidence  about  future  fortune.  Happiness  breeds  the
expectation  of  future  happiness,  success  the  hope  of  more
success.  In  this  way  a  tendency  is  created  among  business
men  in  good  times  to  look  on  the  sunnier  side  of  doubt.
Even  in  a  country  where  each  family  or  small  group  was
more  or  less  self-sufficing  and  devoted  the  main  part  of  its
activity  to  the  production' of  things  to  be  consumed  by  itself,
there  would  be  some  scope  for  optimistic  errors  generated  in
this  way.  For  in  the  most  primitive  enterprises  of  hunting
or  of  cultivation  it  is  easy  to  over-emphasise  the  signs  of  a
good  or  a  bad  prospective  yield.  In  modern  conditions,
however,  the  opportunity  for  errors  so  generated  is  much
increased  by  the  fact  that  industry  is  conducted  on  a  basis  of
division  of  labour  and  exchange  of  products.  For,  whereas
in  primitive  times  the  estimate  relevant  to  the  employment
of  industrial  energy  in  any  field  was  a  single  estimate  as  to
the  physical  productivity  of  that  energy,  in  modern  times  it
is  a  double  estimate,  envisaging  both  this  physical  productivity
and  the  rate  at  which  the  thing  produced  can  be  exchanged
against  the  products  of  other  people.  This  circumstance
compels  each  business  man  to  take  account  in  his  reckoning
of  future  prospects,  not  merely  of  his  own  industry,  but  also
of  a  number  of  other  industries,  many  of  which  are  necessarily
unknown  to  him.  For  very  few  sorts  of  goods  are  made  to
order.  "  In  the  general  wholesale  manufactures  production
in  anticipation  of  demand  is  the  almost  universal  rule."  ^
Furthermore,  with  modern  developments  in  the  means  of
communication,  the  area  of  demand  about  which  forecasts  have
to  be  made  has  become  extraordinarily  wide.  This  circum-
stance, giving,  as  it  does,  large  scope  for  ignorance,  naturally
causes  the  optimistic  errors  generated  by  initial  success  to  be
larger  than  they  would  otherwise  be.

§  5.  Secondly,  people  do  not  fully  realise  that  their  own
response  to  a  business  inducement  must  presently  lessen  the
force    of   that    inducement.     When    demand    in    some   field

^  Conant,  The  Principles  of  Money  and  Banking,  ii.  p.  387.


CH.  VI  PSYCHOLOGICAL  TENDENCIES  835

becomes  good,  the  thing  that  is  apparent  to  industrialists  is
the  high  profit  that  is  being  obtained  by  those  who  can  sell
various  sorts  of  goods.  This  high  profit  continues  in  spite  of
the  fact  that  new  machinery  is  being  built  to  enable  supply  to
catch  up  demand,  because  the  new  machinery  will  not  become
available  till  it  is  completed,  and  its  completion  will  take  a
considerable  time.  The  demand  for  the  goods  being  obviously
unsatisfied,  manufacturers  often  fail  to  realise  that  the  means
for  its  complete  satisfaction  are  already  in  process  of  con-
struction, and,  therefore,  unrestrainedly  pile  up  still  further
investments  in  machinery.  "  If,"  writes  M.  AftaUon,  "  to
remedy  the  deficiency  of  heat  in  a  room,  one  revives  the  fire
on  the  hearth,  it  will  be  necessary  to  wait  for  some  time  before
the  desired  temperature  is  obtained.  As  the  cold  continues
and  the  thermometer  continues  to  register  it,  one  would  be
led,  if  one  were  not  instructed  by  experience,  to  throw  more
fuel  on  to  the  fire.  One  would  do  this  even  though  the
quantity  already  accumulated  there  were  such  that,  when
it  is  all  ignited,  it  would  give  out  an  unbearable  amount
of  heat.  In  letting  oneself  be  guided  by  the  sensation  of
present  cold — by  the  present  indications  of  the  thermometer
— one  would  fatally  overheat  the  room."  ^  This  image
exactly  displays  one  aspect  of  the  error  to  which  the
prospectiveness  of  industry  leads  those  who  are  in  control
of  it.  Concentrating  attention  upon  'present  facts,  they
anticipate  profit  from  further  new  investment,  when  already
80  much  new  investment  has  been  prepared  that  all  real
prospect  of  profit  is  destroyed.  Plainly,  the  extent  of  the
error  that  is  liable  to  arise  in  this  way  is  greater,  the  longer
is  the  interval  that  technical  conditions  establish  between
the  will  to  increase  production  and  the  manifestation  of  that
will  in  fact.  "  Large  errors  are  especially  liable  to  occur  in
enterprises  in  new  fields,  whose  limitations  have  not  been
accurately  measured  by  investors,  or  even  by  capitalists  of
proved  judgment  and  experience.  .  .  .  New  discoveries  and
the  opening  of  new  continents  have  contributed  greatly  to
these  mistakes  during  the  modern  commercial   age."  ^     The

*  Aftalion,  Les  Crises  piriodiques  de  surproductum,  vol.  ii.  p.  .361.
^  Cf.  Conant,  History  of  Modem  Banks  of  Issue,  p.  461.


836  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  bt.  vi

opening  up,  at  the  return  of  peace,  of  wide  opportunities  to
make  good  the  wastes  of  war,  acts  in  a  similar  way.  No  less
plainly,  every  development  of  intelligence  and  capacity  to
learn  from  experience  on  the  part  of  entrepreneurs,  and  of
bankers  from  whom  in  part  they  draw  their  funds,  is  likely
to  lessen  the  magnitude  of  the  errors  that  arise  from  this
cause.  It  is  alleged,  for  example,  that  France  has  suffered
less  from  industrial  crises  than  England,  partly  because  her
business  houses  are  more  conservative.^

§  6.  Thirdly,  the  likelihood  that  important  optimistic  errors
will  be  generated  is  enhanced  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  modem
world,  most  industries  are  conducted  by  a  large  number  of
separate  producers.  In  view  of  this  fact,  when  the  demand
for  the  product  of  any  industry  changes  in  a  given  measure,
the  appropriate  action  for  each  producer  in  the  group  depends
both  on  the  magnitude  of  the  change  in  the  demand  and  also
on  the  policy  adopted  by  the  other  producers.  In  so  far  as
the  different  producers  act  independently  of  one  another,
experience  shows  that  each  of  them  is  likely  to  pay  in-
sufficient attention  to  the  effect  which  the  change  of  demand
produces  upon  the  output  of  his  competitors.  In  the  same
spirit,  new  competitors — in  industries  where  the  capital  ^
required  for  a  start  is  not  too  large  to  permit  of  this — come
into  the  business  without  due  consideration  of  the  fact  tliat
those  already  in  it  are  certain  to  increase  their  output.  The
result  is  that  errors  of  optimism  grow  to  larger  dimensions^
than  they  would  otherwise  attain.

§  7.  A  fourth  cause  fostering  error  is  closely  associated
with  that  just  described,  and  depends,  like  it,  upon  the  fact
that  most  industries  are  conducted  by  a  number  of  separate
and  independent  producers.  These  separate  and  independent
producers  are  not,  in  general,  integrated  businesses  completing
the  whole  process  of  manufacture  from  raw  material  to  finished
article.  For  the  most  part  the  entrepreneur  in  control  of  an
industrial  concern  has  to  buy  raw  materials  and  half-manu-
factured goods,  to  engage  labour  and  to  borrow  capital ;  and
the  persons  from  whom  these  things  have  to  be  obtained  are
not  exclusively  lUs  to  him.  When  undertakings,  such  as
*  Cf.  Burton,  Financial  Crises,  p.  39.


CH.  VI  PSYCHOLOGICAL  TEXDENCIES  837

works  of  construction,  occupy  a  long  time  in  execution,
contracts  are  usually  made  in  connection  with  them  months,
or  even  years,  before  much  of  the  labour  and  material
employed  upon  them  will  be  required.  Thus  there  arises  the
practice  of  "  forward  buying,"  firms  engaged  in  the  more
advanced  processes  of  production  contracting  to  make  at  a
future  date  certain  purchases  at  certain  rates  from  those
engaged  in  the  less  advanced  processes.  It  is  not,  however,
in  general,  practicable  for  advanced  contracts  to  be  entered
into  for  labour  or  for  certain  raw  materials.  Consequently,
in  reflecting  on  the  terms  at  which  they  are  prepared  to  sell
for  future  deKvery,  most  of  the  firms  afiected  must  be  content
with  guess-work  concerning  a  considerable  part  of  their  costs.
Each  firm,  however,  in  making  its  guess,  is,  in  general,  without
information  as  to  the  future  contracts  undertaken  by  other
firms,  and  is,  therefore,  apt  to  ignore  the  effect  which  the
execution  of  these  contracts,  when  they  fall  due,  will  have
upon  the  real  price  of  labour  and  materials.  Hence,  a  general
movement  towards  optimistic  expectations  is  likely  to  be
carried  further  than  it  would  be  if  the  making  and  the  execution
of  contracts  synchronised.  These  tendencies,  it  will  be  ob-
served, are  not  dependent  upon  the  modern  practice  of  manu-
facture in  anticipation  of  demand,  but  occur  also  in  respect  of
commodities  that  are  made  to  order.  An  excellent  illustra-
tion is  afforded  by  the  history  of  the  English  munition
contracts  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  Great  War.  Firms  con-
tracted to  deliver  large  quantities  of  shells  on  the  assumption
that  they  would  be  able  to  sub-contract  a  part  of  their  orders
to  other  works,  and  then  discovered  that  these  works  were
also  being  sought  after  for  a  like  purpose  by  rival  firms  ;  with
the  result,  incidentally,  that  the  aggregate  of  shells  actually
delivered  fell  enormously  below  the  aggregate  for  which
contracts  had  been  made.

^8.  It  is  readily  seen  that  the  influences  making  for
error,  which  have  been  discussed  in  the  two  preceding  sections,
would  be  mitigated  if  full  information  were  regularly  issued
concerning  the  amount  of  plant  laid  down,  orders  given,  and
constructions  begun  by  all  the  various  firms  affected.  Mr.
Hull   suggests   that  the  State  should  publish  monthly  "  all


838  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

pertinent  information  in  relation  to  the  existing  volume
of  construction  under  contract  for  future  months."  ^  This
policy  would  necessarily  do  away  with  the  ignorance  of  each
concerning  the  conduct  of  all ;  and  business  men  would  have
better  warning  of  impending  changes  in  the  real  price  of
labour  and  materials.  A  still  more  complete  remedy  would
be  provided  if  all  the  firms  engaged  in  any  given  form  of
production  were  combined  under  a  single  head  in  a  Trust  or
in  a  Kartel  possessing  a  central  office  entrusted  with  the
regulation  of  output.

§  9.  The  above  reasoning,  however,  must  not  be  taken  to
prove  that  the  "  trustification "  of  industries  makes  for
stability  of  output  on  the  whole.  There  is,  indeed,  reason  to
believe  that  the  continuous  exertion  of  monopolistic  power  will
lead  to  about  the  same  degree  of  variability  as  perfectly
intelligent  competitive  action ;  ^  and,  therefore,  presumably  to
a  less  degree  of  variability  than  the  type  of  competitive  action
described  above.  In  practice,  however,  it  frequently  happens
that  monopolistic  power  is  exercised  much  more  rigorously  in
bad  times  than  in  good  times.  A  good  illustration  of  this
tendency  is  furnished  by  the  practice  of  the  master  cotton-
spinners  of  Lancashire,  who,  in  periods  of  booming  trade,
compete  freely  with  one  another,  but,  in  periods  of  depression,
enter  into  a  joint  agreement  to  shut  down  for  so  many  days
per  week.  But  it  is  not  only  under  temporary  joint  agree-
ments that  monopolistic  power  is  exercised  with  unwonted
stringency  in  bad  times.  The  same  thing  happens  whenever
an  industrial  combination  or  other  monopolistic  body  decides,
for  any  reason,  to  prevent  the  price  of  its  product  from
fluctuating.  Partly  for  convenience  and  partly  for  advertise-
ment, monopolistic  bodies  in  fact  frequently  do  this.  For
example,  according  to  the  1907  report  of  the  British  Consul-
G-eneral  for  Frankfort,  "  syndicates  prevented,  during  the  boom,
the  prices  from  rising  to  the  level  to  which  they  would  other-
wise have  risen ;  again,  during  the  beginning  of  the  set-back,

^  Industrial  Depressions,  p.  218.

*  On  the  assumi)tion  that  the  curves  of  demand  and  supply  are  straight
lines,  it  is  easily  shown  that  the  output  proper  to  monopoly  is  always  one-half
of  that  proper  to  simple  competition  ;  so  that  the  percentage  variations  of  output
due  to  changes  of  demand  or  supply  must  be  the  same.


CH.  VI  PSYCHOLOGICAL  TEKDENCIES  839

they  have  made  for  stability  generally."  ^  Again,  according  to
the  same  authority,  "  the  Coal  Syndicate  fixes  its  prices  for  a
year,  from  April  to  April ;  once  such  base-prices  have  been
fixed,  they  are  only  very  exceptionally  liable  to  modifications."  ^
Finally,  it  is  well  known  that  the  United  States  Steel  Corpora-
tion have  from  time  to  lime  endeavoured  with  success  to  keep
the  prices  of  their  products,  and  particularly  the  price  of  steel
rails,  absolutely  stable  in  spite  of  large  fluctuations  of  demand.'
It  is  evident  that  a  monopolistic  body  animated  by  this
purpose  must  act  "  more  monopolistically "  in  times  of  de-
pression than  it  does  in  times  of  boom.  Whenever  this
happens,  output  must  vary  more  extensively  than  it  would  do
if  monopolistic  power  were  either  exercised  continuously  or
not  exercised  at  alL  Of  course,  if  in  bad  times  prices  are
only  maintained  at  home  and  are  allowed  to  fall  abroad,  the
variations  of  output  will  be  smaller  than  they  would  have
been  had  the  policy  of  price  maintenance  been  adopted  in  the
foreign  as  well  as  in  the  home  market ;  but  they  will  not,  in
general,  be  as  small  as  they  would  have  been  if  there  had  been
no  price  maintenance  in  either  market.  Thus,  the  inter-
mittent monopolistic  action  found  in  practice  may  well  cause
greater  fluctuations  of  production  than  even  imperfect  com-
petition. Further,  it  must  be  remembered  that  attempts  at
trustification  often  lead  to  multiple  monopoly  rather  than  to
simple  monopoly.  If  this  happens,  fluctuations  may  be  made
extremely  great  by  causes  other  than  those  specified  so  far.
Even  apart  from  cut- throat  competition,  we  may  get  fluctua-
tions over  the  wide  range  of  indeterminateness  indicated  in
Part  II.  Chapter  XII. ;  and,  if  cut-throat  competition  super-
venes, the  range  of  possible  fluctuations  is  still  further  enlarged.
Finally,  even  if  a  true  monopoly  is  formed  for  a  time,  it  may
presently  break  up  again,  and  so  cause  a  large  fluctuation.
§  10.  When  an  error  of  optimism  has  been  generated,  it

1  Report  [Cd.  3727-167],  p.  64.  2  /^-^   p    75

3  Cf.  Jenks  and  Clark,  The  Trust  Problem,  pp.  168  et  seq.  The  authors
defend  the  policy  adopted  by  the  Steel  Corporation  on  several  grounds,
principally  the  convenience  of  the  railway  companies,  which  are  said
themselves  to  have  first  suggested  a  system  of  fixed  prices.  The  system  con-
tinued for  15  years,  and  only  broke  down  in  1916  after  nearly  two  years  of  the
European  War.


840  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

tends  to  spread  and  grow,  as  a  result  of  reactions  between
different  parts  of  the  business  community.  This  comes  about
through  two  principal  influences.  First,  experience  suggests
that,  apart  altogether  from  the  financial  ties  by  which  different
business  men  are  bound  together,  there  exists  among  them  a
certain  measure  of  psychological  interdependence.  A  change
of  tone  in  one  part  of  the  business  world  diffuses  itself,  in  a
quite  unreasoning  manner,  over  other  and  wholly  discon-
nected parts.  An  expansion  of  business  confidence  "  propagates
itself  by  that  sympathetic  and  epidemic  excitement  which  so
largely  sways  communities  of  men."  ^  There  comes  into  play
a  quasi-hypnotic  system  of  mutual  suggestion :

One  with  another,  soul  with  soul
They  kindle  fire  from  fire.

"  Perhaps  the  buoyancy  of  a  grocer  gives  a  lumber  dealer
no  adequate  reason  for  altering  his  conservative  attitude
towards  the  business  projects  upon  which  he  must  pass.  Yet,
in  despite  of  logic,  he  will  be  the  readier  to  buy  if  his  ac-
quaintances in  any  line  of  trade  have  become  aggressively
confident  of  the  future.  The  fundamental  conditions  affecting
his  own  business  may  remain  the  same ;  but  his  conduct  is
altered  because  he  sees  the  old  facts  in  a  new  emotional
perspective."  ^  This  tendency  is  the  more  marked  in  so  far
as  business  men  are  congregated  in  close  physical  proximity
to  one  another  in  the  business  sections  of  large  cities.^
Secondly,  as  was  explained  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,
an  error  of  optimism  on  the  part  of  one  group  of  business
men  itself  creates  a  justification  for  some  improved  expectation
on  the  part  of  other  groups.  For  the  group  primarily  affected
has  more  product  to  sell,  which  means,  in  effect,  that  it  offers
a  higher  real  demand  for  the  goods  of  other  groups.  The
real  increment  of  prosperity  thus  given  to  these  others
stimulates  in  them  a  spirit  of  optimism,  and  makes  it  more
probable  than  it  would  otherwise  be  that  they  too  will  lean
unduly  to  the  sunnier  side  of  doubt.  The  fact  that  A's
erroneous    optimism    is    a    ground    of   some    small   justified

'  Kemmerer,  Money  and  Prices,  p.  83.
^  Mitchell,  Business  Cycles,  p.  455.
'  Of.  Jones,  Economic  Crises,  p.  204.


I


CH.  Yi  PSYCHOLOGICAL  TENDENCIES  841

optimism  on  the  part  of  B,  C  and  D,  adds  a  material  link  to
the  link  of  sympathy  which  we  have  already  seen  to  bind
business  men  in  different  occupations  together.  These  two
links  act,  as  it  were,  as  conducting  rods  along  which  an  error
of  optimism  once  generated  propagates  itself  with  ever-gather-
ing force  throughout  the  business  world.

§  11.  For  a  time  the  error  of  optimism,  the  fortunes  of
which  we  have  been  describing,  will,  thus,  not  merely  maintain
itself,  but  will  extend  in  scope  and  magnitude.  But  eventu-
ally the  activity  that  has  been  devoted  to  industry  under  its
influence  will  materialise  in  the  form  of  commodities  seeking
a  market.  This  will  happen  after  an  interval  has  elapsed
roughly  equivalent  to  the  "  period  of  gestation "  of  the
principal  new  instrumental  goods  which  have  been  made,  plus
the  time  necessary  to  bring  to  market  the  products  which
they  help  to  make.  Alter  this  interval  the  fact  that  an  error
of  optimism  has  been  made  and  prospective  profits  exaggerated
is  necessarily  discovered ;  and  by  the  fact  of  discovery  the
error  is  destroyed.  As  a  consequence,  the  flow  of  business
activity  is  checked.  But  the  check  does  not  operate  instant-
aneously, because  business  men  who  find  themselves  in
difficulties  are  tempted  to  extend  their  borrowings  and  make
a  desperate  throw  to  restore  their  fortunes.  After  a  little
while,  however,  those  people,  who  have  made  and  acted  upon
errors  of  optimism,  have  to  confess  them — at  least  to  them-
selves,— to  sell  a  mass  of  products  at  a  lower  price  than  they
had  anticipated,  and  to  pocket  the  consequent  loss.  This
leaves  them  in  no  mood  for  any  further  error  of  optimism.

§12.  But  this  is  not  all  In  the  modem  world  a  debtor-
creditor  relation  subsists  between  different  business  men.  In
fact,  most  firms  are  both  borrowers  and  lenders.  They  borrow
from  one  set  of  people  by  buying  materials  from  them  on
credit,  and  they  lend  to  another  set  by  selling  the  fruits  of
their  workmanship  on  credit.  Thus,  we  have,  as  it  were,  a
series  in  the  form  A,  B,  C,  D,  each  member  of  which  is  debtor
to  the  one  preceding,  and  creditor  to  the  one  succeeding,  him-
8el£  Manufacturers  of  raw  material  are  borrowers  from  the
banks  and  lenders  to  manufacturers  of  finished  goods ;  manu-
facturers of  finished  goods  are  borrowers  from  manufacturers


842  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

of  raw  materials  and  lenders  to  wholesale  dealers ;  wholesale
dealers  are  borrowers  from  manufacturers  of  finished  goods  and
lenders  to  retailers,  and  retailers  are  borrowers  from  wholesale
dealers  and  lenders  to  customers  who  buy  on  credit.  This  fact
implies  that,  if  any  good  or  evil  chance  happens  to  one,  its
effects  are  likely  to  be  passed  on  to  the  others.  Further-
more, the  measure  of  this  financial  interdependence  among
business  men  is  increased  by  every  development  of  business
practice  towards  longer  or  larger  credits  between  manu-
facturers of  raw  materials  and  manufacturers  of  finished
products,  between  manufacturers  of  finished  products  and
wholesalers,  and  between  wholesalers  and  retail  trades-
men.^ Hence,  it  is  significant  that,  as  the  tide  of  profits
advances,  credits  do  in  fact  tend  to  become  both  larger  and
longer.  Some  sorts  (though  not  all  sorts)  of  collateral,
being  of  higher  price,  will  command  a  larger  advance,
and,  when  no  collateral  is  employed.  A,  looking  more
optimistically  on  B's  prospects,  will  regard  with  less  critical
eyes  his  request  for  credit.  Thus,  Professor  Chapman  observes :
"  The  longer  the  period  of  good  trade,  the  further  is  forward
buying  drawn  out  and  the  more  involved  do  traders  become.
If  normally  the  rule  is  to  buy  in  October  for  January
deliveries,  towards  the  end  of  a  period  of  good  trade  dealers
will  be  buying  for  January  deliveries,  say,  in  July,  under  the
pressure  of  demands  crowding  in  in  the  face  of  only  slightly
elastic  production."  ^  In  these  circumstances  it  is  evident
that  the  ill-fortune  that  has  accrued  to  the  victims  of
optimistic  error  will  react  upon  a  great  number  of  other
people.  Traders  who  have  done  bad  business  find  that  they
can  no  longer  hold  up  their  goods  from  sale,  are  compelled  to

^  It  may  be  noted  that,  as  between  brokers  and  their  clients,  credits  are
kept  low  by  the  system  of  "short  settlements."  This  system  ''aims  at  reducing
the  risk  of  loss  due  to  the  assumption  by  weak  dealers  of  risks  greater  than  the
funds  at  their  disposal  enable  them  to  cover,  and,  thus,  at  rendering  business
more  secure,  and,  being  more  secure,  capable  of  being  can-ied  on  with  narrower
profits.  The  parties  to  the  contract  may  (or  in  some  cases  must)  deposit  a  sum
of  money  sufficient  to  cover  any  probable  loss  due  to  variation  of  price  for  a  short
time,  and,  if  prices  vary  beyond  what  the  deposit  can  make  good,  must  increase
the  deposit."  {British  Association  Report,  1900,  p.  4.)  This  system,  in  effect,
prevails  both  among  those  who  speculate  on  margins  on  the  Stock  Exchange
and  among  those  who  deal  in  futures  on  the  Produce  Exchanges.

^  Unemployment  in  Lancashire,  p.  95.


CH.  VI  PSYCHOLOGICAL  TENDENCIES  843

accept  a  loss  on  them,  and,  being  thus  impoverished,  endeavour
to  draw  in  their  debts  from  other  houses  directly  associated
with  them.  This  action  on  their  part  causes  the  other  houses  in
turn  to  adopt  a  like  policy.  Hence,  a  fairly  general  liquidation
of  bad  business  sets  in.  "  Once  begun,  the  process  of  liquida-
tion extends  rapidly,  partly  because  most  enterprises,  which
are  called  upon  to  settle  their  monetary  obligations,  in  turn
put  similar  pressure  upon  their  own  debtors,  and  partly
because,  despite  all  efforts  to  keep  secret  what  is  going
forward,  news  presently  leaks  out  and  other  creditors  take
alarm."  ^  This  movement  inevitably  reacts  upon  business
confidence.  Under  its  influence  the  dying  error  of  optimism
gives  birth  to  an  error  of  pessimism.  This  new  error  is  born,
not  an  infant,  but  a  giant ;  for  an  industrial  boom  has  neces-
sarily been  a  period  of  strong  emotional  excitement,  and  an
excited  man  passes  from  one  form  of  excitement  to  another
more  readily  than  he  passes  to  quiescence.

§  13.  The  error  of  pessimism  thus  established  implies  an
unduly  depressed  view  in  all  industries  of  the  prospective
demand  of  other  industries  for  their  products.  Therefore,
in  all  of  them  but  little  activity  is  expended  and  dulness
supervenes.  After  an  interval,  equal,  as  before,  to  the  period
of  gestation  of  the  principal  instrumental  goods  employed
plus  the  time  necessary  for  their  products  to  get  to  market,
this  error  also  is  discovered.  Because  people  have  been  shy
of  directing  industrial  energy  into  any  but  the  very  safest
channels,  a  general  shortage  of  a  number  of  important  com-
modities gradually  makes  itself  apparent,  and  those  persons
who  have  them  to  sell  are  seen  to  be  earning  a  good  real
return.  Thereupon,  certain  of  the  bolder  spirits  in  industry
see  an  opportunity  and  seize  it.  The  prices  of  materials
and  labour  are  low  owing  to  the  general  unwilling-
ness of  industrialists  to  buy  them,  and,  with  the  help  of
adequate  security,  capital  also  can  be  obtained  on  favourable
terms.2  The  new  pioneers  undertake  and  expand  enterprises,
thus  at  once  filling  a  real  need  and  laying  up  good  profit  for
themselves.     Gradually,  as  no  disaster  happens  to  them,  other

1  Mitchell,  Business  Cycles,  p.  576.

2  Cf.  Albert!,  Verso  la  crisi,  p.  101.


844  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

less  bold  spirits  follow  their  example ;  then  others  and  yet
others.  They  are  further  encouraged  by  the  fact,  noted  by
Professor  Mitchell,  that,  during  the  preceding  period  of
depression,  there  has  probably  been  an  accumulation  of
"  technical  improvements  of  which  new  plants  can  take
advantage,  and  therefore  the  greater  becomes  the  inducement  to
invest  in  new  equipment."  ^  Advance  thus  takes  place  all  along
the  line.  "  There  is,  of  course,  no  formal  agreement  between
the  different  trades  to  begin  again  to  work  full  time,  and  so
make  a  market  for  each  other's  wares.  But  the  revival  of
industry  comes  about  through  the  gradual  and  often  simul-
taneous growth  of  confidence  among  various  trades ;  it  begins
as  soon  as  traders  think  that  prices  will  not  continue  to  fall ;
and,  with  a  revival  of  industry,  prices  rise."  ^  The  first-
comers  make  an  addition  to  industrial  energy  that  is  really
needed  to  correct  the  error  that  has  hitherto  prevailed.
Perhaps  those  who  come  in  and  expand  their  business  directly
after  the  beginnings  of  revival  are  also  in  this  class.  The  first
year  or  two,  say,  is  taken  up  with  a  wholly  justified  expansion.
But,  after  the  first  year  or  two,  further  expansion  represents,
not  a  correction  of  the  past  error,  but  the  creation  of  a  new
one,  and,  thereafter,  any  further  expansion  represents  a  growth
of  unjustified  optimism.  The  turn  of  the  tide  from  ebb  to
flow  is  a  slow  and  gradual  process.  Cautiously  and  hesi-
tatingly the  first  steps  on  the  return  journey  towards  the
correct  route  are  taken  ;  some  time  elapses  before  the  route
is  reached ;  when  it  is  reached  it  is  passed,  and  a  new  false
track  on  the  opposite  side  is  entered  upon,  down  which
industry  runs  at  an  accelerating  pace,  until  once  more  the
presence  of  an  error  of  optimism  is  revealed  and,  on  revelation,
destroyed.  An  error  of  pessimism  is  then  again  generated  in
the  way  we  have  described,  and  presently,  when  it  in  turn  has
died,  a  new  wave  of  optimism  begins  to  gather  on  the  same
pattern  as  before.

^  Mitchell,  Business  Cycles,  p.  567.
2  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economics,  p.  711.


CHAPTEE  VII

A    SYNTHETIC    VIEW

§  1.  "With  the  information  at  present  accessible  to  students  it
is  not  possible  to  construct  a  complete  explanation  of  the
rhythmic  industrial  movements  that  are  actually  experienced,
or  to  gauge  the  exact  part  played  by  the  three  sets  of  true
causes  examined  in  the  three  preceding  chapters.  But  a  rough
outline  sketch  may  be  attempted.

§  2.  The  part  played  by  inventions  is  the  easiest  to
determine.  It  is  probably  a  subordinate  one.  If  it  were
independent  and  dominant,  since  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  different  sorts  of  inventions  are  all  made  together,
we  should  have  such  a  large  number  of  discrepant  wave-
movements  set  up  by  different  inventions  that  very  little
general  rhythm  would  be  likely  to  result  from  them.  The
fact  is  that  the  influence  of  inventions  is  subsumed  under  that
of  psychological  movements.  For,  first,  the  adoption  on  a  large
scale  of  an  invention  in  industry  does  not  generally  take  place
at  the  moment  when  the  invention  is  made,  but  rather  waits
till  business  men  are  feeling  confident  and  ready  for  enter-
prise. Thus,  during  slack  periods  technical  devices  and
improvements  accumulate,  but  they  do  not  cause  industrial
activity  to  expand.  It  is  confidence  that  causes  this,  and  the
new  processes  are  merely  the  channels  along  which  it  directs
itseK.  Secondly,  the  reflex  boom,  which  was  spoken  of  in
Chapter  V.  as  liable  to  occur  after  an  interval  equal  to  the
length  of  life  of  the  instrumental  goods  made  in  the  initial
boom,  is  probably  not  of  great  practical  importance.  For
length  of  life  does  not  depend  in  a  rigid  way  upon  physical
conditions.     It  depends  in  great  part  upon  what  the  owners  of

845


846  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  yi

the  instruments  consider  an  appropriate  length  of  life.  There  is,
thus,  a  wide  margin  of  choice  as  to  the  time  at  which  renewals
shall  be  made  ;  and  the  time  chosen  will  generally  be  one  in  which
confidence  is  high.  The  renewal  of  plant  due  to  inventions,  like
the  original  construction  that  embodies  them,  is,  thus,  a  channel,
rather  than  a  cause,  of  expansions  in  industrial  activity.

§  3.  The  place  to  be  assigned  to  harvest  fluctuations  is  not
settled  so  easily.  It  is  apparent  that,  if  good  harvests  had  no
causal  influence  in  bringing  about  the  expansions  that  occur
in  industry,  changes  in  the  price  of  agricultural  produce  and
of  producer's  goods  respectively  would  be  correlated  positively.
For  industrial  activity  is,  in  general,  associated  with  an
expansion  of  credit,  and  this  tends  to  bring  about  a  rise  of
prices  all  round.  In  fact,  however,  there  are  often  downward
kinks  in  the  curve  of  food  prices  in  the  years  that  start
upward  movements  of  industry.  There  is  some  degree  of
negative  correlation  between  movements  of  agricultural  prices
and  movements  in  the  price  of  pig-iron.^  Furthermore,  there
is  a  fairly  well-marked  positive  correlation  between  changes  in
the  volume  of  the  crops  and  immediately  subsequent  changes
in  business  activity.  Professor  Jevons  writes  concerning  this
matter :  "  Tlie  production  of  pig-iron  is  the  best  evidence  of
the  state  of  the  iron  and  steel  trades,  and  these  themselves
vary  with  the  general  state  of  industry  in  the  country  (i.e.  the
United  States),  though  perhaps  in  a  somewhat  exaggerated
manner — I  mean  that  fluctuations  of  the  iron  and  steel  busi-
ness synchronise  closely  with  those  of  other  trades,  but  tend
on  the  whole  to  be  more  violent.  On  calculating  the  produc-
tion of  pig-iron  per  head  of  population  in  the  United  States
year  by  year,  and  plotting  it  as  a  curve  beneath  that  of  the
total  agricultural  production,  the  connection  between  the  two
sets  of  figures  is  obvious.  The  abundant  crops  of  1870  and
1871  were  followed  by  a  great  production  of  iron  in  1872
and  1873  ;  the  big  harvests  of  1879  and  1880  were  followed
by  an  increased  production  of  iron,  which,  again,  culminated
two  years  later,  in  1882  ;  and  the  bountiful  harvest  of  1884

^  This  inference  is  derived  from  Professor  Moore's  proofs  of  positive  correla-
tions between  crop-yield  and  pig-iron  production  and  between  pig-iron  production
and  pig-iron  prices,  and  of  negative  correlation  between  crop-yields  and  agricul-
tural prices.     (Cf.  Economic  Cycles,  Chapters  iv.  and  v.)


cH.  VII  A  SYNTHETIC  VIEW  847

produced  a  spurt  in  the  iron  trade  two  years  later.  In  the
years  1888  to  1895  the  curve  of  pig-iron  production  follows
closely  that  of  agricultural  production,  one  year  later ;  and,
from  1893  onwards,  the  correspondence  of  the  two  curves  is
most  remarkable,  making  due  allowance  for  the  rapid  growth
of  the  iron  and  steel  industry."  ^  The  same  point  is  made,
as  Professor  Jevons  notes,  by  Professor  Piatt  Andrew.  Sum-
marising a  careful  study  of  the  influence  of  crops  on  business
in  America,  that  writer  observes  :  "  One  cannot  review  the  past
forty  years  without  observing  that  the  beginnings  of  every  move-
ment towards  business  prosperity,  and  the  turning-points  to-
wards every  business  decline  (movements  which  frequently,  it
will  be  remarked,  have  antedated  the  actual  outbreak  of  crises
by  several  years),  were  closely  connected  with  the  out-turn  of
crops."  ^  Lastly,  Professor  H.  L.  Moore  has  worked  out,  for
the  period  1870-1907,  the  correlation  coefficient  between
changes  in  the  yield  per  acre  of  certain  American  crops  and
changes  (in  the  subsequent  year)  in  the  quantity  of  pig-iron
produced,  and  has  found  this  coefficient  to  be  very  high.^
The  existence  of  this  high  correlation  clearly  makes  it  probable
that  variations  in  the  crops  exercise  a  causal  influence
upon  the  process  of  industrial  cycles.  It  must  be  noticed,
however,  that  the  observed  correlation  affords  no  evidence
that  this  influence  is  exerted  by  way  of  the  direct  process
described  in  Chapter  IV.  It  may  equally  well  be  exercised
through  the  medium  of  business  confidence.  This  was  fully
realised  by  Stanley  Jevons :  "  Periodic  collapses,"  he  wrote,
"  are  really  mental  in  their  nature,  depending  upon  variations
of  despondency,  hopefulness,  excitement,  disappointment  and
panic.  But  it  seems  to  be  very  probable  that  the  moods  of
the  commercial  mind,  while  constituting  the  principal  part  of
the  phenomena,  may  be  controlled  by  outward  events,  especially
the  condition  of  the  harvests."  *  On  this  view,  the  influence
of  crop  changes  would  be  an  indirect  one,  operating  in  the
main  by  giving  a  fillip  to  optimistic  and  pessimistic  tendencies
in  the  business  world.     Their  direct  influence  would  be  small.

^  Contemporary  Beview,  August  1909,  pp.  177-8.
2  Quarterly  JouTTuU  of  Economics,  1906,  p.  351.
'  Of.  Economic  Cycles,  p.  110.
*  Investigations  in  Currency  and  Finance,  p.  184.


848  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

§  4.  But  whether  their  influence  is  direct  or  indirect,  the
fact  that  they  exercise  an  influence  at  all  makes  it  necessary
to  bring  them  into  relation  with  the  movement  of  business
confidence  described  in  Chapter  VI.  In  my  view,  the  dominant
cause  of  the  rhythmic  fluctuations  that  are  experienced  in
industry  lies  in  these  movements.  But  these  movements  are
not  rigid  and  self-contained.  Thus,  the  normal  period  for  the
discovery  of  an  error  of  optimism  or  pessimism  may  coincide
with  the  occurrence  of  an  exceptionally  good  harvest,  which,
in  a  sense,  justifies  the  error  retrospectively,  and  so  cancels
the  effect  of  its  discovery.  If  this  happens,  the  turn  of  the
tide  may  be  delayed  for  a  while ;  whereas,  -per  contra,  if  a  bad
harvest,  the  outbreak  of  war,  or  other  injurious  event,  occurs,
it  will  be  hastened  and  intensified.  The  length  of  the  period
of  industrial  wave  movements  is,  thus,  not  fixed.  Internal
stresses  do  not  determine  the  form  of  it  in  detail,  but  only  in
a  rough  general  way.  Chapter  VI.,  in  short,  furnishes  the
backbone  of  the  explanation  of  which  we  are  in  search,  but
other  bones  must  be  added  from  elsewhere.  Of  course,  there
is  no  absolute  proof  of  the  justice  of  this  contention.  Still,  on
a  review  of  such  evidence  as  is  available,  it  appears  to  me  that
an  explanation  on  these  general  lines  is  probably  correct.  By
recognising  the  power  of  external  events  to  modify  the  time-
incidence  and  the  magnitude  of  successive  industrial  waves,  it
leaves  room  for  enough  influence  from  the  side  of  good  and  bad
harvests  to  account  for  the  observed  correlations  between  crop
variations  and  industrial  movements.  It  should,  thus,  satisfy
Professor  Jevons,  who,  while  he  claims  that  bumper  crops
occur  at  intervals  of  from  three  to  four  years  and  give  some
impulse  to  industry  each  time  they  occur,  admits  that  they
only  give  an  effeetive  impulse  at  intervals  of  7  or  10^  years,
when  other  conditions  are  ripe.^  The  kernel  of  the  explana-
tion is  that  optimistic  error  and  pessimistic  error,  when  dis-
covered, give  birth  to  one  another  in  an  endless  chain,  and  that
the  interval  between  the  successive  generations  is  mainly,  but  not
exclusively,  determined  by  the  period  of  gestation  of  industrial
plant  and  machinery.

1  Of.  The  Sim's  Heat  and  Trade  Activity,    p.  8.  i


CHAPTEK    VIII

ACCENTUATION   OF    WAVE    MOVEMENTS    DUE   TO    THE    WORKING
OF   THE    MONETARY    SYSTEM

§  1.  In  modem  conditions  the  whole  movement  of  industry
and  business  is  conducted  in  terms  of,  and,  in  large  measure,
through  the  agency  of,  money  or  some  representative  of  money.
The  entrepreneurs,  financiers  and  so  forth,  by  whom  the  stream
of  goods  that  comes  to  completion  every  year  is  legally  owned,
sell  these  goods  for  money  to  wholesale  houses  and  shop-
keepers. The  proceeds  of  this  sale  they  employ,  partly  as
personal  income  for  their  own  use,  partly  in  payment  of
interest  to  those  persons  from  whom  they  hold  loans,  and
partly  in  the  hiring  of  labour  to  be  employed  in  their  enter-
prises. The  money  thus  distributed  is  then  used  by  all  parties
as  a  means  of  purchasing  commodities  from  shopkeepers ;  and,
in  this  way,  the  final  distribution  of  the  inflowing  dividend  is
annually  effected.  In  a  perfectly  stationary  state  the  round-
about character  of  this  procedure  would  not  modify  in  any
respect  the  results  ultimately  achieved.  The  quantity  of
money  passing  from  shopkeepers  to  entrepreneurs,  as  likewise
the  quantity  of  goods  passing  in  exchange  from  entrepreneurs
to  shopkeepers,  is  the  same  every  year ;  the  distribution  of
the  money  by  entrepreneurs  is  the  same ;  and  so  also  is  the
quantity  of  purchases  effected  by  it  when  distributed.  The
quantity  of  commodities  annually  consumed  by  each  several
class  and  the  quantity  permanently  held  in  store  are  not  only
identical  with  themselves  in  every  year,  but  are  also,  at  all  times,
identical  with  what  they  would  have  been  had  the  process
involved  been  direct.     Furthermore,  in  a  state  of  affairs  which

849  3 1


850  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

is  not  stationary,  but  in  which  the  money  system  is  so  arranged
that  prices  are  invariable,  the  existence  of  a  roundabout
process  would  still  leave  the  substance  of  what  happens
unchanged.  For,  though  the  motives  at  work  operate  upon
goods  through  the  medium  of  money  instead  of  directly,  yet,
since  a  unit  of  money  always  controls  the  same  quantity  of
goods,  the  medium  is  absolutely  rigid,  and  always  transfers
power  exactly  as  it  is  received.  Finally,  in  a  state  of
affairs,  which,  though  neither  perfectly  stationary  nor  yet
containing  a  money  system  so  arranged  that  prices  are  invari-
able, is  such  that  all  changes  in  general  prices  are  perfectly
foreseen,  the  intervention  of  the  monetary  medium  is  still
without  effect ;  for  full  allowance  will  be  made  for  future
price  changes  in  all  industrial  contracts,  including  those  which
deal  with  wages.-'  In  actual  fact,  however,  under  the  con-
ditions prevailing  in  all  modern  countries,  general  prices,
besides  being  variable,  are  also  imperfectly  foreseen.  In  these
circumstances,  there  is  clear  prima  facie  ground  for  suspecting
that  the  intervention  of  the  monetary  system  may  modify  the
effect  of  the  forces  whose  application  is  mediated  by  it.
Even  if  the  monetary  and  banking  aspects  of  industrial  fluc-
tuations were  mere  epiphenomena  of  the  real  process,  caused
by  it,  but  not  exercising  themselves  any  reflex  causal  influence,
it  would  still  be  necessary  to  study  them,  before  that  process
could  be  fully  understood.  Since  they  in  fact  do  exercise  a
reflex  causal  influence,  the  necessity  for  doing  this  is  still
more  apparent.

§  2.  In  normal  times,  when   the  general  state   of  their

*  It  should  be  observed,  to  obviate  misapprehension,  that  the  above  state-
ment is  strictly  accurate  only  if  we  assume  that  both  parties  to  all  contracts
purchase  different  sorts  of  commodities  and  services  in  the  exact  proportions  in
which  these  enter  into  the  national  dividend.  If  they  do  not  do  this,  a  knowledge
of  the  way  in  which  the  price  of  "commodities  in  general"  is  going  to  move
will  not  carry  to  any  one  a  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  the  price  of  the
particular  collection  of  commodities  interesting  to  him  is  going  to  move.  -  This,
however,  lies  beside  our  main  argument.  For,  whatever  imperfections  of
adjustment  may  result  from  the  formulation  of  contracts  in  terms  of  "com-
modities in  general,"  additional  imperfections  are  practically  certain  to  result
if  the  standard  actually  employed  is  unstable  relatively  to  commodities  in
general ;  and  these  additional  imperfections  will  be  larger  or  smaller,  according
as  the  variability  of  the  standard  relatively  to  "commodities  in  general"  is
larger  or  smaller.


CH.  VIII  THE  MONETAKY  SYSTEM  851

income  and  their  industrial  activities  is  given,  business  men
like  to  keep  to  their  credit  in  their  banks  a  certain  balance
upon  which  they  can  draw  at  need.  How  big  this  balance  is
depends,  on  the  one  hand,  on  how  far,  in  their  particular
industry,  a  big  balance  is  required  for  convenience  in  business
and  security  against  sudden  calls,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
upon  how  high  is  the  rate  of  interest  which  has  to  be  sacri-
ficed when  resources  are  locked  up  in  unproductive  forms.
For  many  men  this  balance  will  be  the  fruit  of  an  actual  loan
from  their  bankers,  so  that  its  retention  involves,  not  merely
the  sacrifice  of  interest  that  might  have  been  secured  by
investment,  but  the  actual  payment  of  interest.

When  confidence  grows  and  the  business  community  begins
to  look  more  optimistically  at  the  prospective  fruits  of  indus-
trial activity,  their  desire  to  buy  things  and  services  (so  trans-
ferring part  of  their  balance  to  other  people)  relatively  to  their
desire  to  hold  a  big  balance  expands.  This  tendency  has  a
double  cause.  On  the  one  side,  biisiness  men  want  things  and
services  more  ;  on  the  other  side,  feeling  increased  confidence
generally,  they  have  less  fear  of  bad  debts  and  so  attach  less
importance  to  holding  a  balance  against  sudden  calls.  Con-
sequently, they  are  inclined  to  draw  out  funds  and  to  offer
them  in  effective  demand  for  increased  quantities  of  things  and
services.  This  prcfcedure  would,  of  course,  by  itself  cause
prices  to  rise.  But  in  a  modern  community  something  further
happens.  Not  content  with  drawing  on  (and  so  transferring)
their  existing  balances,  business  men  now  think  it  worth
while  to  offer  a  higher  rate  of  interest  to  the  banks  to  induce
them  to  make  new  loans,  to  be  used  in  still  fui-ther  demands  for
things  and  services.  The  banks  consent  to  make  these  loans,
partly  out  of  funds  which  other  people  pay  into  them  under
the  inducement  of  increased  rates  on  deposit  accounts,  but
mainly  out  of  new  bank  money  which  they  themselves  are
tempted  by  the  higher  interest  to  create,  at  the  cost  of  per-
mitting the  ratio  of  their  liabilities  to  their  reserves  to  increase.^

^  It  is,  of  course,  possible  for  an  individual  banker  to  increase  his  loans
without  thereby  causing  the  aggregate  liabilities  of  the  banking  system  as  a
whole  to  increase.  Thus,  he  may  give  a  loan  by  crediting  a  customer  with  a
deposit,  and  the  customer  may  use  this  deposit  to  make  a  payment  to  somebody
who  uses  it  to  discharge  a  debt  to  the  same,  or  some  other,  banker.   If  this  happens,


862  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

Plainly  these  new  balances  augment  the  volume  of  money  that
can  be  offered  in  purchase  of  things  and  services  by  the  busi-
ness men  to  whom  in  the  first  instance  they  are  made  over.
Their  creation,  therefore,  causes  prices,  which  would,  in  any
event,  have  moved  up  to  some  extent,  to  move  up  in  a  larger
measure  than  would  have  been  possible  without  them.

So  far  of  the  period  of  expanding  confidence :  it  remains
to  consider  the  period  of  decline.  As  was  explained  in  Chapter
VI.,  when  a  boom  draws  towards  its  close,  past  invest-
ments are  found  to  yield  less  than  was  looked  for  and  many
expectations  are  disappointed.  Confidence  is,  therefore,  shaken.
Business  men  are  no  longer  so  anxious  to  buy  things,  and  are
much  more  anxious  to  contract  their  indebtedness  to  banks,
and,  if  possible,  to  accumulate  balances  as  a  safeguard  against
possible  disaster.  This  change  of  attitude  does  not,  indeed,
immediately  cause  prices  to  fall,  because,  as  indicated  in
Chapter  VI.  §  11,  most  business  men  do  not  at  once  realise
that  the  tide  has  turned.  Finding  that  they  cannot  sell  their
goods  at  the  high  prices  of  a  moment  before,  they  try  to  hold
them,  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  do  this  in  a  little  while.
There  is  less  money  being  spent,  but  there  are  also  less  com-
modities being  offered  for  sale.  This  state  of  things  may
continue  for  some  little  while  after  confidence  has  broken.  It
explains  the  fact  that  the  check  to  production  is  apt  to  -precede
the  fall  of  prices.  Soon,  however,  it  is  realised  that  further
holding  up  of  stocks  is  impracticable  as  well  as  useless.  The
hope  that  they  will  appreciate  disappears.  The  business
community's  desire  for  them,  relatively  to  its  desire  for
bank  balances,  falls  sharply.  Captains  of  industry  draw  fewer
cheques  for  new  business.  They  spend  less  and  accumulate
more  in  the  banks.  Prices  fall.  Thus,  just  as  the  upward
movement  of  business  confidence  was  associated  with  a  rise  in

the  deposit  at  once  disappears.  Again,  the  banker  may  agree  to  a  customer's
overdrawing  his  account,  and  the  customer  may,  on  the  strength  of  this,  draw
a  cheque  which  enables  somebody  else  to  wipe  out  an  overdraft.  When  this
happens  no  deposit  is  ever  created.  In  general,  however,  when  bankers  make
loans,  whether  by  creating  a  deposit  to  a  customer's  credit  or  by  sanctioning
some  form  of  overdraft,  only  a  comparatively  small  part  of  the  credit  thus  created
will  be  used  in  wiping  out  other  bank-credits.  Though,  therefore,  it  would  be
inaccurate  to  say  that  bankers'  loans  create  equivalent  deposit  liabilities,  it  ia
exactly  true  that  they  create  substantial  deposit  liabilities.


OH.  VIII  THE  MONETAEY  SYSTEM  853

prices,  so  the  downward  movement  is  associated,  after  a  short
interval  of  lagging,  by  a  downward  movement  of  prices.

§  3.  Now,  as  has  already  been  remarked,  if  the  price
movements  described  above  were  perfectly  foreseen  and
allowed  for,  they  would  not  react  in  any  way  upon  the  indus-
trial movements  out  of  which  they  spring.  In  fact,  however,
they  are  not  perfectly  foreseen  and  allowed  for.  When  A,
with  new  money,  buys  B's  services,  B  thinks  of  a  shilling  as
having  for  him  the  purchasing  power  over  the  things  he  is
accustomed  to  buy  that  is  shown  in  the  prices  then  ruling,
and  does  not  take  account  of  the  fact  that,  when  he  (with
others  in  a  like  position)  comes  to  spend  it,  his  act  of  spending
will  force  up  the  prices  of  the  things  he  buys.  C,  who  sells
to  B,  is,  in  turn,  in  like  case,  and  so  on  throughout  the  indus-
trial community.  Nor  is  the  failure  of  adjustment  merely
due  to  lack  of  foresight.  When  prices  actually  have  moved,
people  do  not  for  some  considerable  time  realise  and  allow  for
tlie  movement.  Delay  in  the  perception  of  facts  and  delay  in
the  emergence  of  facts  are  both  at  work.  The  results  are  well
known.  As  Professor  Fisher  has  shown,  contracts  for  interest
are  not  adequately  adjusted.  If  prices  are  going  to  rise  5  per
cent  during  the  year,  in  order  to  get  5  per  cent  real  interest,
we  should  need  to  contract  for  about  10  per  cent  nominal
interest  on  a  one-year  loan.  In  fact  we  do  not  do  this.
Frictibn  and  ignorance  intervene.  Nor,  except  in  the  com-
paratively rare  industries  where  a  sliding  scale  or  some  well-
organised  and  plastic  system  of  conciliation  exists,  can  contracts
concerning  wage  rates  be  properly  adjusted  to  price  changes,
till  a  good  deal  of  friction  has  been  overcome  and  a  good  deal
of  time  wasted.^     Money  rates  of  interest  and  of  wages  alike

'  Cf.  Part  III.  Chapter  XVIII.  §  1.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  objected  that  the  price
of  most  of  the  things  purchased  by  wage-earners,  since  wage-earners  purchase  the
bulk  of  them,  can  only  be  pushed  up  substantially  in  price  in  consequence  of  an
increased  offer  of  money  for  them  on  the  part  of  wage-earners,  this  increased
offer  being,  in  turn,  made  possible  by  the  extra  payments  which  employers
are  prepared  to  make  to  wage-earners  in  periods  of  expansion.  Hence,  it  would
seem  to  foUow  that  the  prices  of  things  of  interest  to  workpeople  cannot  be
pushed  up  in  consequence  of  a  confidence  boom  more  than  in  proportion  to  the
accompanying  increase  in  their  wages.  This  may  well  be  true  of  aggregate  wages,
but,  since  in  times  of  boom  the  number  of  workpeople  employed  is  increased,  it
does  not  warrant  the  inference  that  these  prices  cannot  rise  more  than  in
proportion  to  the  rate  of  wages.


k


854  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

thus  fail  to  rise  sujBiciently  to  prevent  the  rise  of  prices  from
causing  a  fall  in  the  real  rates.  In  like  manner,  when,  other
things  being  equal,  there  are  forces  at  work  making  for
a  decrease  in  the  output  of  industrial  energy,  the  business
world's  borrowings  from  the  banks  decline,  prices  fall,  and  the
fall  is  not  adequately  allowed  for.  Consequently,  money
rates  of  wages  and  interest  fail  to  fall  sufficiently  to  prevent
the  fall  in  prices  from  causing  a  rise  in  the  real  rates.  '  These
failures  of  adjustment  tend  in  two  distinct  ways  to  accentuate
the  fluctuations  that  occur  in  the  volume  of  industrial  energy
that  is  devoted  to  production.

^  4.  When  the  wave  is  mounting,  business  men,  who  are,
in  the  main,  wage-payers  and  borrowers,  are  made  more
prosperous,  at  the  expense  of  wage-earners  and  sleeping
capitalists,  than  they  would  have  been  in  a  world  ringing
perfectly  true  to  the  economic  harmonies.  Conversely,  when
the  wave  is  sinking,  they  are  made  less  prosperous.  Further-
more, besides  the  real  change  in  their  fortunes,  there  is  also  an
element  of  imagined  change.  For,  when  people  have  more
or  less  money  than  usual,  even  though  prices  have  changed
in  precise  correspondence,  the  natural  tendency  to  "  think
in  gold"  is  apt  to  make  them  imagine  themselves  really
richer  or  really  poorer.  But,  as  was  observed  in  Chapter
VI.,  the  judgments  which  people  form  are  biassed  by
their  feelings.  When  they  are,  or  believe  that  they  are,
enjoying  good  fortune,  they  are  apt  to  look  on  the  brighter
side,  and  when  they  are  suffering  bad  fortune,  on  the  darker
side,  of  doubt.  Consequently,  anything  which  improves  the
fortunes  of  business  men  constitutes  a  spur  to  optimistic
error  ;  just  as  anything  which  worsens  their  fortunes  con-
stitutes a  spur  to  pessimistic  error.  In  prosperity  they
borrow  more  money,  and,  thereby,  cause  prices  to  rise  still
further.  By  this  rise,  the  real  rate  of  interest  payable  on
their  past  loans  is  reduced  still  further,  their  fortunes  are
again  improved,  and,  in  consequence,  the  error  of  their  fore-
casts is  again  expanded.  The  process  thus  begun  tends,
until  it  is  interrupted  by  the  shock  of  discovered  reality,
to  continue  indefinitely.  In  periods  of  depression  an  exactly
converse  process  takes  place.     In   both   sorts   of  period  the


CH.  VIII


THE  MONET AEY  SYSTEM  855


error  thus  born  out  of  monetary  movements  allies  itself  with
the  other  more  general  error  that  was  discussed  in  Chapter  VI,,
and  causes  the  output  of  industrial  energy  to  expand  in  good
times  and  to  contract  in  bad  times  beyond  what  it  would
do  in  a  community  made  up  of  perfectly  cool  intelligences.

S  5.  It  is  not,  however,  only  as  a  cause  of  error  that  the
monetary  system  affects  the  steadiness  of  the  output  of
industrial  energy.  It  also  exercises  an  important  influence  of
a  more  direct  kind.  For  it  offers  to  business  men,  if  they  choose
to  raise  money  and  spend  their  balances  in  times  of  rising  prices,
a  gain  derived  from  the  exploitation  of  other  people,  additional
to  that  derived  from  their  own  productivity,  and  it  threatens
them,  if  they  dare  to  do  this  in  times  of  falling  prices,  with
a  loss  due  to  the  exploitation  of  themselves  by  other  people.
The  reason  for  this  is  that  changes  in  general  prices  are
not  merely  imperfectly,  but  are  also  unequally,  foreseen.  The
anticipations  concerning  them  formed  by  the  entrepreneur
class  are,  in  general,  more  nearly  correct  than  those  formed
by  either  sleeping  capitalists  or  the  wage-earning  class.  This
circumstance  implies  that  business  men,  if  they  wish  to  raise
new  resources,  can  reckon,  in  periods  of  rising  prices,  on  finding
capitalists  and  wage -earners  prepared — by  error  and  quite
unknown  to  themselves — to  offer  any  assigned  quantity  of
their  services  at  a  reduced  real  rate  of  payment ;  and,  in
periods  of  falling  prices,  upon  finding  them  insistently
demanding,  for  any  assigned  quantity,  an  increased  real  rate.
When  prices  are  rising,  the  business  world's  expectation  of
profit  from  investment  is  enhanced  by  an  expectation  of
a  kind  of  bonus  at  the  expense  of  capitalists  and  wage-earners  ;
when  prices  are  falling,  it  is  contracted  by  an  expectation
of  a  kind  of  toll,  which  will  have  to  be  paid  in  respect  of  the
services  of  those  classes.  Thus,  as  Professor  Fisher  observes :
"  Inequality  (as  distinguished  from  imperfection)  of  foresight
produces  over-investment  during  rising  prices  and  relative
stagnation  during  falling  prices."  ^  In  times  of  rising  prices
it  is  profitable  for  each  business  man  to  cause  the  group  of
productive  factors  over  which  he  has  control  to  put  forth
more  industrial  energy  than  it  is  profitable  to  the  group  as  a

1  The.  Rate  of  Interest,  p.  286.


856  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  vi

whole  to  put  forth ;  and  in  times  of  falling  prices  it  is
profitable  for  him  to  direct  less  energy  into  industry  than
it  would  pay  this  group  to  direct  there.  This  consideration,
combined  with  that  discussed  in  the  preceding  section,  makes
it  plain  that,  the  less  general  prices  vary  in  conjunction  with
given  variations  in  business  confidence,  the  smaller  the  associ-
ated variations  in  the  output  of  industrial  energy  are  likely  to  be.
§  6.  Under  a  banking  system  of  the  type  of  the  English
system  before  the  Great  War  price  variations  are  held  in
check  by  a  somewhat  complicated  process,  which  has  already
been  summarily  described  in  the  fourth  section  of  Part  IV.
Chapter  X.  When,  in  response  to  the  demands  of  business,
banks  create  new  credits  and  prices  consequently  rise,  it
becomes  convenient  for  members  of  the  general  public  to
carry,  on  the  average,  a  rather  larger  amount  of  currency
in  their  pockets  than  they  have  been  accustomed  to  carry
hitherto.  Furthermore,  in  so  far  as  the  new  bank  loans
are  employed,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  hiring
of  labour,  they  have  necessarily  to  be  broken  up  and  taken
out  in  the  form  of  currency.  In  both  these  ways  an
internal  drain,  for  currency  purposes,  is  set  up  upon  the
reserves  of  the  banks.  At  the  same  time  an  external  drain
also  is  set  up.  For,  prices  here  having  risen,  or,  in  other
words,  gold  here  having  become  cheaper  in  terms  of  things,
foreigners  will  be  tempted  to  send  more  things  here  with
which  to  buy  gold.  Imports  are  encouraged,  exports  are  dis-
couraged, and  gold  tends  to  flow  abroad.  The  joint  action
of  these  two  drains,  by  lessening  the  reserve,  forces  the  Bank
of  England  to  raise  the  discount  rate,  and,  if  necessary,  by
selling  government  securities  or  otherwise,  to  make  the  rise
effective  in  the  market  also.  As  a  result  of  this,  borrowing
on  the  part  of  business  men  is  discouraged,  their  expenditure
is  checked,  and  the  upward  movement  of  prices  thereby
restrained.  In  periods  of  depression,  when,  through  slackened
demands  on  the  part  of  business  men,  prices  are  falling,  a
converse  process  is  set  up.  Gold  flows  into  the  reserve  both
from  the  circulation  and  from  abroad,  discount  rates  fall,
borrowing  and  expenditure  are  encouraged,  and  so  the  fall  in
prices  is  restricted.


CH.  Tin  THE  MONETAEY  SYSTEM  857

§  7.  The  speed  and  efficiency  with  which  these  processes
operated  were  particularly  great  under  the  English  pre-war
system  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  quantity  of  fiduciary
notes  issued  was,  for  practical  purposes,  absolutely  fixed.  To
increase  it  was  illegal  and  to  decrease  it  always  unprofitable.
Under  a  system,  which,  by  permitting  extra  issues  on  the
payment  of  a  tax,  causes  the  note  circulation  to  expand  in
times  of  boom  and  to  contract  in  times  of  depression,  the
internal  drain  upon  the  reserve  set  up  in  periods  of  rising
prices  and  the  replenishment  of  it  in  periods  of  falling  prices
would  both  be  checked.  For  in  prosperous  times  people  would
carry  extra  notes — it  should  be  observed  that  notes  of  large
denominations  would  not  serve  the  purpose — instead  of  extra
gold.  It  is  true  that  their  action  in  doing  this  would  add
to  the  aggregate  liabilities  of  the  banking  system.  But  the
addition  of,  say,  three  million  pounds  to  liabilities  makes  a
very  much  smaller  difference  than  the  subtraction  of  this  sum
from  the  reserve  to  that  proportion  between  liabilities  and
reserve,  which  determines  the  risks  involved  in  the  grant  of
further  loans.  Secondly,  the  English  gold  market  was  absolutely
unhampered,  and  so  the  tendency  to  a  foreign  drain  of  gold  acted
with  full  force.  Evidently  any  arrangement  that  obstructs  the
free  export  of  gold,  whether  a  confessed  embargo,  or  informal
discouragement  by  the  banks,  as  practised  in  pre-war  Germany,
or  the  exercise  of  a  right  to  offer  depreciated  silver  for  export  in
lieu  of  gold,  as  in  pre-war  France,  or  any  arrangement  that
deliberately  manufactures  credit  abroad  to  "protect  the  ex-
changes "  in  times  of  stress,  must  lessen  the  efficacy  of  the
check  exercised  by  foreign  drains  upon  the  expansion  of  bank
loans  and  so  upon  the  upward  movement  of  prices.

§  8.  The  English  gold  standard  plan  has  thus  been  shown
to  accomplish  a  good  deal  in  the  way  of  limiting  the  price
variations  which  oscillations  in  business  confidence  set  up.
Plainly,  however,  even  apart  from  the  lag  that  necessarily  occurs
in  its  corrective  processes,  it  is  impotent  against  fluctuations
that  extend  over  the  commercial  world  generally.  It  tends  to
hold  English  prices  in  the  neighbourhood  of  world  prices  and
to  prevent  them  from  oscillating  much  rovnd  world  prices.  But
it  does  nothing  to  prevent — on  the  contrary  it  assists — them


858  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

to  oscillate  with  world  prices.  The  realisation  of  this  fact
has  led  thinkers  to  inquire  whether  it  might  not  be  possible
to  accomplish  something  more  to  keep  prices  steady  by  a
manipulation  of  the  monetary  mechanism.  The  collapse
of  the  gold  standard  throughout  the  greater  part  of  the
world,  consequent  upon  the  war,  and  the  chaos  of  un-
regulated paper  that  has  supplanted  it,  have  rendered  these
speculations  from  one  point  of  view  more  actual, but  from  another
more  remote.  They  have  rendered  them  more  actual,  because,
whereas  before  the  war  the  then  existing  system,  which  it  was
proposed  to  supplant,  at  all  events  worked  moderately  well,  the
existing  system  of  the  present  time,  over  the  greater  part  of
Europe,  is  altogether  intolerable.  They  have  rendered  them
more  remote,  because  in  a  period  of  chaos  one  naturally
seeks  to  find  again  the  relatively  firm  ground  one  has  left
rather  than  some  new  Utopia.  In  most  countries,  certainly
in  such  a  country  as  England,  effort  and  thought  are  likely
to  be  concentrated  upon  re-establishing  a  definite  relation,  if
possible  the  pre-war  relation,  between  the  currency  and  gold.
Until  this  is  accomplished,  it  will  be  widely  felt  that  attempts  to
improve  on  pre-war  monetary  arrangements,  which  everybody
recognises  to  have  been  enormously  superior  to  the  state  of
things  existing  now,  are  premature.  Nevertheless,  though  it
may  well  be  that,  at  present,  proposals  to  establish  a  currency
stable  in  terms  of  things  are  not  practical  politics,  it  is  the
clear  duty  of  economists  impartially  to  study  them  on  their
merits.

§  9.  The  general  idea  is  to  increase  the  currency  when
prices  show  signs  of  falling  and  to  diminish  it  when  they
show  signs  of  rising.  Something  on  these  lines  was  attempted
under  the  German  currency  law  of  1909,  which,  while  fixing
the  normal  untaxed  limit  of  note  issue  at  550  million  marks,
provided  that  in  the  last  week  of  each  quarter — when  an
exceptional  amount  of  currency  is  apt  to  be  wanted — the  limit
should  be  raised  to  750  millions.  A  much  more  elaborate
and  thorough  application  of  this  general  idea  is  made  in  a
plan  originally  suggested  by  Ricardo,  which  has  been  elaborated
in  detail  by  Professor  Irving  Fisher  in  the  concluding  chapter
of  his  work  on  the  Purchasing  Power  of  Money.      The  proposal


CH.  VIII  THE  MONETAEY  SYSTEM  859

in  broad  outline  is  as  follows.  For  simplicity  we  suppose
provisionally  that  it  is  adopted  in  one  country  only.  In  that
country  the  currency,  whether  made  of  paper  or  of  gold  or  of
anything  else,  should  be  so  constructed  that  the  value  of  the
material  in  a  unit  of  it  is  worth  very  much  less  as  material  than
it  is  when  turned  into  currency.  A  Government  Department
should  publish  month  by  month  an  index  number  repre-
senting the  variations  in  the  purchasing  power  of  a  unit
of  currency.  The  Mint,  or  some  corresponding  Government
agency,  should  always  be  prepared  to  exchange  currency  into
or  out  of  gold  bullion.  But  the  quantity  of  currency  given  or
taken  in  exchange  for  a  given  weight  of  bullion  would  not,
on  Professor  Fisher's  plan,  be  a  fixed  quantity ;  it  would
be  increased  or  diminished  according  as  the  index  number  of
general  prices  showed  a  tendency  to  fall  or  to  rise.  When
general  prices  began  to  fall,  the  Mint  would  sell  cm-rency  for
bullion  below  the  market  rate ;  and,  therefore,  more  of  it
would  get  into  the  bank  reserves  (thus  providing  a  basis  for
further  credit)  and  into  the  circulation.  The  quantity  of
exchange  instruments  being  thus  increased,  while  the  quantity
of  transactions  against  which  they  were  required  remained
the  same,  an  influence  would  be  set  up  making  for  a  rise
of  prices.  In  this  way  the  fall  of  prices,  which  was  threaten-
ing to  come  about,  would  be  checked.  In  like  manner,  when
general  prices  began  to  rise,  the  Mint  would  buy  currency  for
bullion  above  the  market  rate,  the  supply  of  currency  would
be  contracted,  and  the  rise  of  prices,  which  was  threatening  to
come  about,  would  be  checked.^  In  short,  to  employ  Professor
Fisher's  terms,  the  Mint — or  whatever  governmental  authority
might  be  selected  for  the  purpose — would  buy  and  sell
currency  in  terms  of  bullion,  in  such  a  way  as  to  maintain,  so
far  as  possible,  "  a  par,  not  with  a  fixed  weight  of  gold  but
with  such  a  weight  of  gold  as  should  have  a  fixed  purchasing
power."  2

'  Of  course  the  whole  purpose  of  this  arrangement  would  be  upset  if  the
Government  were  to  deposit  the  coined  gold,  which  it  buys  in  order  to  lower
prices,  with  the  banks  ;  it  must  withdraw  it  altogether  from  the  money-providing
machine.  The  Philippine  legislation  sets  a  bad  example  in  this  respect,  in  that
it  allows  a  certain  portion  of  the  Gold  Standard  Fund  to  be  held  on  deposit  in
Manila  banks.     (Cf.  Keramerer,  Modern  Currency  He/arms,  pp.  375-7.)

2  Fisher,  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  p.  342.


860  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

§  10.  It  might  perhaps  be  thought  at  first  sight  that
this  plan,  if  it  succeeded,  would  not  merely  prevent  prices
from  fluctuating  alongside  of  fluctuations  in  business  con-
fidence, but  would  also  prevent  business  men  in  periods  of
optimism  from  making  any  larger  investment  than  in  other
periods ;  because  the  process  by  which  they  are  normally
enabled  to  do  this,  namely  additional  bank  loans,  would  be
done  away.  This,  however,  is  not  really  so.  The  rate  of
discount  going  up  under  the  influence  of  business  demand,
business  men  would  still  get  more  loans  than  usual,  partly  at
the  expense  of  other  would-be  borrowers  who  would  get  less,
and  partly  as  a  result  of  extra  savings  to  which  other  people
would  be  tempted  by  high  deposit  rates.  Thus,  Professor
Fisher's  stabilising  plan  would  allow  the  proportion  of
purchasing  power  designed  for  investment  to  expand  in
good  times,  although  it  would  prevent  the  absolute  quantity
of  purchasing  power  relatively  to  things  offered  for  sale  from
expanding.  The  fear  that  this  plan  would  freeze  industry,  as
well  as  general  prices,  into  stationariness  is  thus  seen  to  rest
on  a  misunderstanding.     There  is  no  real  ground  for  it.

§  11.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  a  second  important  objection
which  naturally  suggests  itself.  As  will  be  made  plain  in  the
following  chapter,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  times  of
panic  that  the  banks  should  lend  freely.  It  might  be  thought
that  Professor  Fisher's  plan  would  prevent  them  from  doing
this.  That  is  a  delusion.  In  ordinary  times,  of  course,  large
bank  loans  mean  large  expenditure  and,  therefore,  a  rise  in
prices ;  and,  when  this  happens,  the  plan  attacks  the  reserve
and  so  checks  lending.  But  in  times  of  panic  people  want
money,  not  to  spend,  but  to  discharge  debts  and  to  hold
against  the  danger  of  failure.  To  this  end  they  offer,  as  in
times  of  boom,  a  high  rate  of  discount,  but  they  also  offer,  at
a  greatly  reduced  rate,  their  holdings  of  commodities.  In
other  words,  the  loans  which  business  men  seek  when
confidence  collapses,  unlike  those  which  they  seek  when  it
expands,  are  associated  with  a  fall  of  prices.^     In  these  circum-

'  Cf.  Kemmerer,  "  A  large  demand  for  call  money  sometimes  is  a  sign  of
low  confidence  and  represents  liquidation,  and  sometimes  is  a  sign  of  high
confidence  and  represents  good  opportunities  for  new  investment "  {Money  and
Prices,  p.  124).


cH.viii  THE  MONETARY  SYSTEM  861

stances,  the  plan,  so  far  from  making  it  more  difficult  for  banks
to  lend  freely  to  check  the  panic,  would,  by  creating  new
reserves  for  them,  make  it  easier  for  them  to  do  this.  Thus
this  objection  also  is  without  substance.

8  12.  There  remain  certain  minor  difficulties,  to  which
Professor  Fisher's  plan  is  exposed,  and  to  which  it  is  well  that
attention  should  be  called.

First,  if  the  supply  of  gold  greatly  expands,  so  that
commodity  prices  in  terms  of  gold  bullion  rise  rapidly,  the
quantity  of  gold  bullion  which  the  Mint  or  Treasury  would
need  to  pay  in  order  to  withdraw  any  given  quantity  of
currency  from  circulation  will  largely  increase.  This  means
that  a  much  larger  bullion  reserve  than  was  thought  necessary
at  first  will  need  to  be  established,  and  the  Treasiiry  will,
therefore,  have  to  buy  or  borrow  in  the  market  a  large  extra
quantity  of  bullion.  This  circumstance,  though  not  of  first-
class  importance,  threatens  a  certain  amount  of  awkwardness
and  expense.^  It  will  be  noticed,  however,  that,  though  the
quantity  of  bullion  which  the  Treasury  will  need  to  hold
will  be  increased,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  aggregate  value  of
it  in  terms  of  things  in  general  will  be  increased.

Secondly,  should  the  supply  of  gold  fail  to  expand,  in  such
wise  that  commodity  prices  in  terms  of  gold  bullion  fall,  then,
if  the  currency  has  been  constructed  of  token  gold  coins,  it
may  happen  that  the  token  coin  will  cease  to  be  a  token,  as
in  fact  the  Indian  rupee  did  as  a  result  of  the  war,  and
even  that,  in.  order  to  carry  out  Professor  Fisher's  plan,  the
Mint  will  have  to  give  a  greater  weight  of  coined  gold  in
return  for  a  given  weight  of  uncoined  gold.''  This  it  obviously
cannot  do  except  at  great  cost.  Consequently,  in  order  that
the  plan  should  continue  in  operation,  it  would  be  necessary
to  reduce  the  weight  of  gold  in  the  token  coin ;  and  this
would  almost  certainly  involve  a  considerable  shock  to  business
confidence.  We  should,  in  short,  be  compelled,  as  the  Govern-
ment of  the  Philippines  was  compelled  for  this  very  reason  in
1906,  to  recoin  the  whole  of  the  currency  into  coins  contain-
ing a  smaller  amount  of  bullion.     The  danger  that  this  might

•  Of.  J.  M.  Clark,  American  Economic  Seview,  Sept.  1913,  pp.  577  et  seq.
*  Cf.  Patterson,  American  Economic  Review ,  Dec.  1913,  p.  864.


862  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

become  necessary  would,  however,  be  very  small  if  the  original
coins  contained  very  little  bullion  and  were  issued  at  a  high
seigniorage.  If  the  currency  were  made  up,  not  of  coins  at
all,  but  of  those  paper  notes  of  low  denominations  with  which
the  war  has  made  everybody  familiar,  it  would  be  done
away  with  altogether.

Thirdly,  for  a  single  country  to  adopt  Professor  Fisher's
plan  would  lead  to  difficulties  in  the  business  of  persons
engaged  in  foreign  trade,  since,  apart  from  special  arrange-
ments, they  might  find  themselves  borrowers  in  terms  of  one
standard  and  lenders  in  terms  of  another.  In  the  present
state  of  the  European  currencies  these  difficulties  must,  of  course,
be  experienced  by  a  gold  standard  country,  and  would  not  be  any
worse  for  a  country  with  a  stabilised  standard.  If,  however,
we  suppose  the  rest  of  the  world  restored  to  a  gold  standard,
a  particular  country,  by  adopting  the  gold  standard,  could  avoid
them,  but,  if  it  adopted  the  stabilised  standard  for  itself  alone,
it  would  have  to  face  them.  Even  so,  however,  the  difficulties
are  liable  to  be  exaggerated.  They  are  in  essence  the  same  as
those  to  which  merchants  in  a  gold  standard  country  are
exposed  in  their  dealings  with  silver  standard  countries,  and
vice  versa.  They  consist  in  the  risk  that,  after  a  sale  has  been
made  in  foreign  currency  and  before  payment  has  been  re-
ceived, the  value  of  foreign  currency  in  terms  of  native
currency  may  have  undergone  a  considerable  change.  In
ordinary  times  this  risk  can  be  shifted — of  course  at  a
price — upon  the  shoulders  of  exchange  banks,  which  will
contract  to  buy  from  exporters  their  prospective  foreign
currency  three  months  hence  at  a  definite  rate  in  native
currency.  In  so  far  as  the  banks  choose  to  hedge,  by  con-
tracting at  the  same  time  to  sell  to  importers  the  foreign
currency  which  they  expect  to  need  three  months  hence  at  the
same  definite  rate  in  native  currency,  the  risk  is,  not  merely
shifted,  but  is  actually  destroyed.^  Thus,  the  exchange  difficulty
is  a  less  serious  one  than  it  is  sometimes  supposed  to  be.

Finally,  apart  from  these  technical  difficulties,  it  is  fairly
plain  that  absolute  stability  of  the  standard  money  in  terms
of  "  commodities  in  general "  could  not  be  obtained  in  any
*  Cf.  Kemraerer,  Modem  Currency  Reforms,  p.  297.


CH.VIII  THE  MONETAEY  SYSTEM  863

country  by  the  adoption  of  Professor  Fisher's  plan ;  for  the
corrective  to  price  variations,  which  the  plan  introduces,  must
act  through  the  quantity  of  money,  and  must,  therefore,  lag
somewhat  behind  the  errors  which  it  seeks  to  overtake ;  and
in  the  sudden  changes  of  commercial  crises  the  lag  might
be  considerable.

§  13.  In  spite,  however,  of  these  difficulties  and  imper-
fections, any  country  adopting  this  plan  would  almost
certainly  enjoy  considerably  greater  stability  of  price  levels
than  prevailed  under  pre-war  arrangements,  and,  of  course,
incomparably  greater  stability  than  the  unregidated  paper
currencies  born  of  the  war  have  afforded.  Moreover,  if  one
country  would  consent  to  Professor  Fisher's  proposal,  any
other  country,  by  basing  its  currency  on  the  currency  of  that
country,  on  the  pattern  of  the  gold  exchange  standard,  could
also  obtain  a  money  whose  purchasing  power  was  fixed  in
respect  of  the  same  index  number.  No  doubt,  this  kind  of
"  derived  "  fixity  would  not  be  ideal,  because  stability  in  terms
of  the  "  things  in  general "  consumed  in  one  coimtry  is  not
likely  to  mean  stability  in  terms  of  the  "  things  in  general "
consumed  in  another.  Still,  it  is  probable  that  "  a  unit  of
fixed  purchasing  power  in  England  gives  a  more  nearly  uniform
purchasing  power  in  any  other  ci\'ilised  country  than  would  an
ounce  of  gold  or  an  ounce  of  silver."  ^

^14.  So  far  of  the  general  consequences  of  Professor  Fisher's
plan.  In  order  to  carry  it  out  in  practice,  the  Board  of  Control,
which  it  would  be  necessary  to  set  up  in  the  country
operating  it,  would,  of  course,  need  to  retain  in  store  a  large
quantity  of  gold.  The  real  annual  cost  of  the  scheme  to
the  country  financing  the  Board  would  be  measured  by  the
interest  which  it  had  to  sacrifice  through  the  retention
of  such  part,  if  any,  of  this  gold  as  was  not  formerly  locked
up  in  its  own  currency  and  bank-reserves.  It  would  be
exactly  analogous  to  the  real  annual  cost  to  the  people  of  India
of  the  exchange  funds  of  gold  and  rupees,  which  they  hold  in
London  and  Calcutta  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  relative
value  of  gold  and  rupees  constant.  The  real  annual  cost
of  the  scheme  to  the  world  would  be  somewhat  less  than  its
*  Marshall,  Contempcrary  JUvievj,  1887,  p.  371.


864  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

cost  to  the  country  financing  the  Board,  because,  in  so  far
as  the  gold  fund  needed  was  taken  from  the  monetary  machines
of  other  countries,  its  withdrawal  would  not  diminish  the
efficiency  of  those  machines.  This  consideration,  together  with
the  fact  that  the  adoption  of  the  scheme  in  one  country  would
make  possible,  in  the  way  that  has  been  explained,  a  steadying
of  prices  in  other  countries  also,  suggests  that  the  Board  of
Control  might  well  be  established  and  financed  on  an  inter-
national basis.  It  cannot  be  rigidly  proved  that,  even  in  that
event,  the  indirect  gain  accruing  from  steadier  prices  would
outweigh  the  direct  costs,  because  there  are  no  means  of
estimating  the  magnitude  of  either  of  these  quantities.  I  am
inclined,  however,  to  believe  that  considerable  net  benefit  to
the  world  would  result  even  as  against  the  pre-war  system,  and,
as  against  the  chaos  of  the  present  time,  enormous  net  benefit.


CHAPTER   IX

WAVE  MOVEMENTS  AND  THE  HANDLING  OF  FINANCIAL  CRISES

§  1.  We  have  not  yet  exhausted  the  influences  upon  which  the
amplitude  of  the  wave  movements  of  industry  depend.  The
analysis  of  Chapter  VI.  has  shown  by  implication  that  the
extent  of  the  revulsion  towards  pessimistic  error,  which
follows  when  optimistic  error  is  disclosed,  depends  upon  the
magnitude  of  the  preceding  optimistic  error.  But  it  does  not
depend  only  upon  this.  It  is  also  affected  by  what  we  may
caU  the  "  detonation,"  which  accompanies  the  discovery  of  a
given  mass  of  optimistic  error.  The  detonation  is  greater  or
less  according  to  the  number  and  scale  of  the  legal  bankruptcies
into  which  the  detected  error  explodes.  These  legal  bank-
ruptcies, or  "  business  failures,"  are  not,  in  themselves,  of  great
industrial  importance.  It  seldom  happens  that,  as  a  result  of
them,  any  business  enterprise  is  abandoned ;  the  normal  course
is  for  it  to  pass,  through  sale  or  through  a  receivership  in  the
interest  of  bond-holders,  into  the  control  of  other — very  prob-
ably more  energetic  and  more  able — ^men,  with  the  net  result
that  a  relatively  competent  entrepreneur  is  substituted  for  one
who  was  relatively  incompetent.  It  is,  thus,  a  true  saying  which
Mr.  Burton  quotes  from  John  Mills  :  "  As  a  rule,  panics  do  not
destroy  capital;  they  merely  reveal  the  extent  to  which  it  has
been  previously  destroyed  by  its  betrayal  into  hopelessly  un-
productive works."  ^  But  business  failures  necessarily  and
always  breed  fear  among  industrialists  that  their  own  debtors
may  fail.  The  more  extensive  they  are — that  is  to  say,  the
louder  the  detonation — the  more  they  shatter  business  con-

*  Burton,  Fivxmcial  Crises^  p.  20.

865  3E


866  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

fidence.  The  influences  by  which  the  detonation  that  accom-
panies any  given  discovery  of  error  is  determined  are,
therefore,  real  causes  affecting  the  amplitude  of  industrial
fluctuations.

§  2.  Among  these  influences  are  the  methods  by  which
industry  is  normally  financed.  When  people  (not  otherwise
in  debt)  make  unsuccessful  investments  with  money  belonging
to  themselves,  the  failure  of  their  ventures  cannot  involve  legal
bankruptcy.  But,  when  they  employ  borrowed  money,  failure
may  involve  this.  From  this  point  of  view,  therefore,  the
highly  developed  credit  arrangements  of  the  modern  world
constitute  a  danger.  The  danger  is  especially  great  when
loans  have  been  taken  up  in  a  form  that  requires  periodic
renewal,  so  that  the  venturer  may  find  himself,  in  his  hour
of  need,  forced  to  pay  back  the  principal  of  his  loan.  In  the
United  States  a  large  share  of  the  capital  required  in  manu-
facturing establishments  and  in  other  enterprises  "  is  furnished
by  discounts  obtained  from  banks  instead  of  by  permanent
capital  or  by  long-time  loans  or  bonds."  ^  This  is  a  risky
arrangement.  If  businesses  find  it  necessary  to  raise  floating
loans,  prudence  requires  that  they  should  fund  them  as  soon  as
possible.^  There  is  danger,  again,  when  creditors  are  ill-
advised  enough,  or  when  their  fortunes  are  so  far  bound
up  with  those  of  potentially  insolvent  debtors  that  they  are
practically  forced,  to  add  loan  to  loan  for  firms,  which,  whether
by  making  new  plunges  of  rash  investment  or  by  holding  up
goods  against  liquidation  as  prices  fall,  are  heading  for  the
rocks.  When  this  happens — it  is  probable  that  the  eventual
collapse  will  be  all  the  more  severe,  just  because  it  has  been
delayed.  For  not  only  is  there  a  presumption  that  a
business  house,  which  has  committed  errors  large  enough
to  render  it  potentially  insolvent,  is  incompetently  managed
and  is  likely  to  commit  further  errors  in  the  future,  even  if
its  business  practice  is  not  worsened ;  but  also  this  practice
is,  in  fact,  likely  to  be  worsened,  because,  since  the  house
is  already  insolvent,  further  losses  will  fall,  not  upon  it,  but

*  Burton,  Financial  Crises,  p.  263.

^  The  increase  in  the  issue  of  securities  that  often  occurs  after  a  crisis  is  due
in  the  main  to  this  process  of  funding.     (Cf.  Mitchell,  Business  Cycles,  p.  405.)


x^ix  FINANCIAL  CEISES  867

upon  its  creditors.  This  danger  can  be  partly  mitigated  by
the  embodiment  in  the  bankruptcy  laws  of  stringent  provisions
against  various  forms  of  fraud  and  sharp  practice.  In
Grermany  an  attempt  is  made  to  do  more  than  this.  As  soon
as  the  balance  sheet  of  a  company  (the  balance  sheet  must  take
account  of  depreciation  of  capital)  shows  an  excess  of  liabilities
over  assets,  compulsory  winding-up  is  required  and  enforced  by
penalties.  English  law,  of  course,  allows  a  company  to  con-
tinue in  business  till  it  actually  becomes  bankrupt.

§  3.  The  above  influences  go  far  to  determine  over  how  wide
a  range,  at  any  given  turning-point  of  confidence,  business
failures  will  be  threatened.  They  do  not,  however,  by  them-
selves determine  what  proportion  of  the  threatened  failures
shall  actually  occur.  This  is  settled  principally  by  the
capacity  and  willingness  of  the  country's  banking-system  to
save  houses  which  are  really  sound — in  the  sense  that  their
assets  are  more  than  sufficient  to  cover  their  liabilities — but
which  cannot  at  the  moment  secure  sufficient  money  to  meet
obligations  immediately  payable  in  that  form.  For,  of  course,
on  these  occasions  it  is  money,  and  money  only,  that  is  wanted.
Commodities  and  securities  are  both  useless  for  the  purpose.
Money  alone  will  save,  and  the  repositories  of  money  are  the
banks.  Hence,  other  things  being  equal,  the  actual  occurrence
of  business  failures  will  be  more  or  less  widespread,  according
as  bankers'  loans  in  the  face  of  crisis  demands  are  less  or  more
readily  obtainable.

§  4.  At  the  time  when  errors  of  optimism  are  discovered,
bankers  are  often  beginning  to  realise,  not  merely  that  their
liabilities  relatively  to  their  cash  reserves  have  become  excep-
tionally large,  but  also  that  an  exceptionally  large  proportion
of  their  loans  are  being  used  in  financing  constructional  enter-
prises, as  distinguished  from  commerce  proper,  and  have,
therefore,  become,  as  it  were,  solidified,  instead  of  liquid,  assets.
Therefore,  it  is  natural  that  they  should  hesitate  to  swell  their
liabilities  still  further,  whether  by  lending  to  sound  houses  or
in  any  other  way.  They  are  themselves  under  contract  to  meet
all  liabilities  with  legal  tender  upon  demand,  and  anything  that
widens  the  gap  between  liabilities  and  reserves  lessens  their
assurance   of  being   able   to   do   this.     It  may,  therefore,  be


868  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.vi

argued,  and  was  argued  by  earlier  bankers,  that,  though  the
public  interest  requires  them  to  lend  freely,  their  own  private
interest  commands,  rather,  a  calling-in  of  their  loans.  Under
a  many-reserve  system,  when  the  separate  banks  are  isolated
from  one  another,  this  reasoning  may^  on  occasions,  be  sound.
Though  it  would  pay  all  banks  to  lend  freely,  it  need  not  pay
any  particular  bank  to  do  so.  For,  if  it  lends  freely,  the  whole
of  its  reserve  may  be  drawn  out  and  paid  over  into  the  coffers
of  its  rivals ;  whereas,  if  it  holds  its  hand,  it  may  possibly
stand  a  rare  survivor  amid  the  general  ruin.  Even  under  a
many- reserve  system,  however,  and  still  more  imder  a
one-reserve  system,  a  selfish  policy  is  dangerous  to  the  banks
that  practise  it,  as  well  as  highly  injurious  to  the  community
as  a  whole.  If  loans  are  withheld  and  sound  houses  fall,  their
fall  will  drag  down  others.  Panic  will  grow  wilder  and  wilder
and  will  eventually  lead  to  distrust  of  the  banks  themselves.
When  this  happens  and  depositors  begin  to  insist  on  their
legal  right  to  actual  currency,  the  safety  of  the  banks  generally
— of  the  selfish  equally  with  the  public-spirited — is  threatened
far  more  seriously  than  it  would  have  been  had  loans  been
made  with  sufficient  freedom  to  nip  the  panic  in  the  bud.  It
follows  that  the  self-interest  of  the  banks,  looked  at  broadly
and  generally,  requires  them  to  lend  freely  in  the  face  of  crisis
demands.  In  other  words,  bank  loans  in  these  circumstances
are,  so  far  as  bankers  recognise  their  own  interest,  readily
granted.  They  will  be  refused  only  if  bankers  fail  rightly
to  analyse  the  situation  and  are  timid  by  mistake.  They
must  lend  freely.  When,  as  in  this  country,  there  is  a
central  banking  institution,  that  institution  especially  must
lend  freely.  This  does  not,  of  course,  mean  cheaply.  On  the
contrary,  since  panic  generally  comes  at  the  apex  of  an  exag-
gerated boom,  when  high  prices  have  led  to  expanded  imports  and
are  inducing  a  heavy  foreign  drain,  the  rates  charged  must  be
high.  But  at  high  rates  loans  must  be  forthcoming.  This  is
Bagehot's  celebrated  advice  to  the  Bank  of  England:  "The
end  is  to  stay  the  panic ;  and  the  advances  should,  if  possible,
stay  the  panic.  And  for  this  purpose  there  are  two  rules.
First,  that  these  loans  should  only  be  made  at  a  very  high  rate
of  interest.  .  .  .  Secondly,  that^at  this  rate  these  advances


CH.IX  FINANCIAL  JCEISES  869

should  be  made  on  all  good  banking  securities,  and  as  largely
as  the  public  ask  for  them."  ^  The  policy  thus  recommended
has  become  a  recognised  part  of  Bank  of  England  practice.
It  necessarily  exercises  a  powerful  effect  in  lessening  the
"  detonation "  of  financial  crises.  It  may,  therefore,  be
credited  with  considerable  influence  in  restricting  the  amplitude
of  confidence  waves,  and,  therewith,  of  industrial  fluctuations.
§  5.  It  should  be  added  that  this  policy  carries  with  it  an
important  practical  corollary.  In  view  of  the  danger  that  a
domestic  panic  may  be  associated  with  a  large  foreign  drain,
it  is  imperative  that,  in  a  country  where  an  effective  gold
standard  is  operating,  the  gold  reserve  of  that  country's  bank-
ing system  shall  be  sufficient,  not  merely  to  meet  any  probable
demand  upon  it,  but  to  leave  such  a  margin  that  no  serious
fear  of  its  exhaustion  will  ever  arise.  This  is  a  necessary
insurance  against  very  severe  panic.  How  large  the  reserve
ought  to  be  in  relation  to  normal  liabUities  will,  of  course,  be
different  in  different  circumstances.  Under  a  one-reserve
system  it  is  not,  of  course,  necessary  to  hold  so  much  as  under
a  many-reserve  system,  where  aU  the  banks  are  independent ;
for  the  maximum  aggregate  drain  that  is  likely  to  occur  at
any  one  time  is  much  smaller  than  the  sum  of  the  maximum
separate  drains  that  occur  at  different  times.  Again,  the
banks  of  a  country  where  the  proportion  of  bullion  reserve  is
low  may  atone  for  this  deficiency  by  a  large  net  holding  of
foreign  bills  of  exchange  payable  in  gold  and  approaching
maturity,"  or  by  a  large  holding  of  first-class  securities
with  an  international  market,  or  even  by  a  great  undocu-
mented power  to  borrow  bullion  from  abroad.  The  United
Kingdom  before  the  war  was  strong  in  all  these  respects.
Not   only   were   we    large    lenders    both    in    the    short    and

I  Lombard  Street,  p.  199.

*  The  special  character  of  foreign,  as  distinguished  from  domestic,  bUls  is
recognised  in  the  Swedish  law,  which  allows  the  National  Bank  to  issue  notes
beyond  the  authorised  limit  "to  an  amount  equal  to  the  funds  of  the  bank
held  in  foreign  countries  on  current  account  with  the  banking  and  mercantile
houses";  and  also  by  the  rule  of  the  late  Austro-Hungarian  Bank,  which  recognised
foreign  three-months'  bills  as  cover  for  notes.  In  Germany,  on  the  other  hand,
no  distinction  between  foreign  and  domestic  bills  is  made  in  the  rule  compelling
the  Reichsbank  to  hold  that  part  of  its  reserve  against  notes,  which  does  not
consist  of  gold,  in  discounted  bills.


870  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  w.  vi

in  the  long  market,  but  also  it  was  very  much  against
the  interest  of  foreigners  to  allow  a  crisis  to  develop  here.
As  the  late  Lord  Goschen  well  observed,  when  the  Bank  of
France  provided  three  millions  to  tide  us  over  the  Baring
crisis,  "  Paris  was  interested  in  saving  the  situation,  let  there
be  no  mistake  about  that."  ^  It  must  be  remembered,  how-
ever, that  our  power  to  draw  gold  from  abroad  had  been
weakened  by  the  adoption  by  foreign  countries,  formerly  on  a
bimetallic  or  paper  basis,  of  the  gold  standard ;  because  this
meant  that  in  crises  they  were  as  eager  to  obtain  gold  as  we.
Moreover,  the  tradition  of  a  free  market  for  gold  in  London,
besides  enabling  us  to  obtain  gold  easily  at  need,  also  made  us
liable  to  exceptionally  large  drains.  A  direct  consequence  of
the  existence  of  that  free  market  was  that,  when  a  foreigner
had  a  claim  on  London  and  wished  to  realise  it,  he  was  not
prevented  from  realising  it  in  gold.  An  indirect  consequence
was  that  many  foreign  traders,  who  expected  to  want  gold  to
finance  their  international  transactions,  regularly  purchased
credits  on  London,  while  some  Continental  institutions,  which
expected  to  want  gold  for  their  reserves,  "  always  kept  a  port-
folio stocked  with  bills  on  London,  constantly  replaced  as  they
matured,  so  that,  in  time  of  need,  they  might  take  gold  from
London  to  replenish  the  basis  of  their  note  issues."  ^  A
further  indirect  consequence  was  that  trade  between  England
and  the  rest  of  the  world  was,  in  general,  financed  by  bills
drawn  on  London,  and  not  on  the  places  to  which  English
traders  sell.  In  short,  London  was  the  regular  centre  to  which,
along  routes  carefully  prepared  beforehand,  foreigners,  who
needed  gold,  were  accustomed  to  present  their  claims.  English
acceptors  and  discounters  were,  of  course,  paid  for  the  services
which  they  rendered — some  estimates  put  these  services  before
the  war  at  eighteen  millions  annually— but,  as  a  penalty
for  rendering  them,  we  were  liable  in  a  higher  degree  than  other
nations  to  foreign  drains  of  gold.  In  determining  the  proper
proportion  of  the  normal  reserve  all  these  considerations  had
to  be  borne  in  mind.  It  was  often  contended  before  the  war
that  in  this  country  the  proportion  between  the  holding  of

'  Goschen,  Essays  and  Addresses,  p.  109.
2  Withers,  The  Meaning  of  Money,  pp.  171-2.


cH.  IX  FINANCIAL  CEISES  871

gold  in  the  banking  department  of  the  Bank  of  England  and
the  aggregate  liabilities  of  the  banking  system  of  the  country
was  dangerously  low.  When  an  effective  gold  standard  is
re-established  and  London  again  becomes  a  free  market  for
gold,  the  question  of  the  size  of  the  reserve  will  resume  its  old
importance.  The  relevant  considerations  will,  however,  be  some-
what different  from  what  they  used  to  be.  If  we  become  less
important  lenders  in  the  short  loan  market  to  foreigners,  the
need  for  a  large  reserve  will  be,  pro  tanto,  increased.  If
certain  foreign  countries,  which  formerly  had  gold  standards,
go  permanently  on  to  an  inconvertible  paper  basis,  there  will  be
fewer  competitors  with  us  for  gold  in  times  of  crisis.  We  may,
therefore,  be  able  to  reckon  more  confidently  on  getting  gold
for  emergencies  when  we  want  it,  and  we  may  not  need  so
large  a  permanent  store.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  decide  to
continue  the  circulation  of  notes  instead  of  sovereigns,  we
shall,  of  course,  need  to  keep  in  the  central  reserve  a  sub-
stantial gold  backing  for  these  notes,  as  well  as  for  those  in
the  ordinary  banking  reserve.  As  was  indicated  in  Part  IV,
Chapter  X.,  the  Committee  on  Currency  and  the  Foreign
Exchanges  tentatively  looked  forward  to  an  aggregate  central
reserve  in  the  neighbourhood  of  150  millions  as  probably
appropriate  to  our  post-war  normal  condition.  Plainly,  how-
ever, no  final  judgment  on  this  issue  can  be  formed  now ;
and  plainly  also,  in  a  matter  of  this  kind,  security  is  a  more
important  consideration  than  economy.

§  6.  In  countries  where  the  cheque  system  is  little  de-
veloped a  large  expansion  of  bank  loans  cannot  practically  be
accomplished  except  with  the  help  of  an  expansion  in  the  note
issue.  Consequently,  the  normal  treatment  of  a  crisis  must
involve  such  an  expansion.  This  is  probably  an  adequate
defence  for  the  elastic  system  of  note  issue  established  in
Germany.  The  loans  required  even  in  a  quite  ordinary  crisis
could  not  be  provided  otherwise.  In  this  country,  however,
where  bankers,  as  a  rule,  lend  by  crediting  their  customers
with  deposits  on  which  cheques  may  be  drawn,  the  position  is
quite  different,  and  there  is,  in  the  ordinary  course,  no  need  to
allow  any  extra  issue  of  notes.  It  may  happen,  however,  in  the
absence,  or  sometimes  in  spite  of,  a  wise  banking  policy,  that


872  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

a  crisis  detonates  with  sufficient  force  to  affect  public  confidence
in  the  banks  themselves.  People,  while  still  content  with  bank
notes,  may  become  afraid  that  their  deposits  with  bankers  are  not
safe,  and  may  demand  actual  currency.  A  panic  of  this  kind
took  place  in  the  United  States  after  the  failure  of  the  Knicker-
bocker Trust  in  1907,  and  in  this  country  after  the  Overend
and  Gurney  smash  in  1866.  The  essence  of  it  is  fear  that
the  bankers  have  not  enough  money  to  meet  their  obligations
in  currency,  and  consequent  urgency  on  the  part  of  each
depositor  to  draw  out  and  hoard  what  is  due  to  him,  before  it
is  absorbed  by  other  depositors.^  In  a  sufiiciently  severe  panic
of  this  type  a  point  may  be  reached  beyond  which  further  loans
of  currency  are  impossible,  because  the  currency  is  not  there
to  lend.  Then  the  only  possible  remedy  is  the  creation  of
currency.  This  means  in  practice  the  creation  of  notes.  In
most  modern  States,  however,  the  freedom  of  banks  to  create
notes  is  in  some  way  limited  by  law.  When  this  is  so
— and  it  does  not  matter  for  this  purpose  whether  the  limit
laid  down  for  the  fiduciary  issue  is  an  amount  or  a  'proportion —
it  is  impossible  for  bankers  to  give  an  assurance  to  depositors
that  sufficient  currency  will  be  forthcoming  to  meet  their
demands  without  the  collaboration  of  the  State.  Elasticity
of  note  issue,  which  is  normally  circumscribed,  has,  therefore,
to  be  specially  expanded  by  the  removal  of  the  normal  restric-
tions. When  people  know  that  the  State  has  intervened
and  emergency  issues  are  sanctioned,  so  that  currency  cannot
run  short,  nothing  further  is  usually  needed.  Knowing
that  they  can  get  currency  if  they  ask  for  it,  people  do
not  ask  for  it.  The  explosion  is  finished  and  normal  life  is
resumed.

§  7.  On  these  grounds  there  is  general  agreement  that,  in
times  of  sufficiently  severe  crisis,  the  national  Bank  of  Issue
must  be  given  the  power  to  add  to  the  supply  of  notes
whatever  extra  amount  may  be  necessary  to  stay  the  panic.
There  is,  however,  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  way  in  which
this   power    should   be   conferred.     In   England   the   method

*  A  very  similar  effect  is  produced  when  the  general  public  is  not  in  fact
running  on  the  banks,  but  when  bankers  are  afraid  that  they  will  do  so,  and,
consequently,  as  in  August  1914,  themselves  demand  currency  for  their  tills  as
a  safeguard.


cH.  IX  FINANCIAL  CEISES  873

adopted  has  been  a  suspension  of  the  Bank  Charter  Act  by
emergency  action,  which  was  technically  illegal,  on  the  part  of
the  Cabinet.  In  Belgium  the  same  thing  could  be  done,  and
technical  illegality  avoided,  under  a  law  which  permitted
the  Finance  Minister  to  set  aside,  at  his  discretion,  the
National  Bank's  obligation  to  keep  specie  in  hand  equal  to
one-third  of  the  combined  amount  of  its  bank-note  circulation
and  other  sight  obligations.  In  pre-war  Grermany  and  in  the
United  States  under  the  Federal  Eevenue  Act  extra  issues  of
notes  beyond  the  normal  provisional  maximum  are  permitted,
on  condition  that  a  tax  is  paid  on  the  excess.  In
criticism  of  the  English  system  it  was  argued  before  the  war
that,  when  a  crisis  has  actually  begim,  doubt  as  to  whether
or  not  the  Bank  Act  will  be  suspended  in  time  terrifies
the  market  and  intensifies  panic.  Under  an  automatic
arrangement  permitting  excess  issue  on  conditions  defined
beforehand  —  the  payment  of  a  tax  on  the  excess,  the
establishment  of  a  high  discount  rate,  the  prevalence  of  an
adverse  exchange — these  unfavourable  reactions  could  not,  it
was  held,  be  set  up.  It  was  replied  that  the  very  rigidity  of
our  system,  and  the  solemnity  of  the  step — a  definite  breach
of  the  law — which  was  needed  to  release  extra  fiduciary
notes,  fortified  the  Bank  of  England  in  a  poUcy  of  caution
and  coDservatism  towards  the  discount  rate  and  the  reserve
well  calculated  to  check  at  an  early  stage  speculation  that
might  otherwise  have  led  to  severe  crises.  Moreover,  any  auto-
matic plan  is  faced  with  the  formidable  difficulty  of  so  defining
the  conditions  of  excess  issue  that  such  issue  shall  always  be
permitted  when  required  to  check  a  panic  and  never  permitted
when  not  so  required.  The  German  system  did  not  accomplish
this,  because,  under  it,  it  might  pay  the  Reichsbank  to  issue
notes  while  a  boom  was  still  imder  way,  thus  intensifying
both  the  boom  itself  and  the  collapse  to  which  it  leads.  After
careful  consideration  of  the  whole  matter  the  Committee  on
Currency  and  the  Foreign  Exchanges  in  1918  unanimously
recommended  the  following  compromise  :  "  The  provision  of
Section  3  of  the  Currency  and  Bank  Notes  Act  1914,  under
which  the  Bank  of  England  may,  with  the  consent  of  the
Treasury,  temporarily  issue  notes  in  excess  of  the  legal  limit,


874  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

should  be  continued  in  force.  It  should  be  provided  by
statute  that  Parliament  should  be  informed  forthwith  of
any  action  taken  by  the  Treasury  under  this  provision  by
means  of  a  Treasury  Minute,  which  should  be  laid  before  both
Houses.  The  statute  should  also  provide  that  any  profit
derived  from  the  excess  issue  should  be  surrendered  by  the
Bank  to  the  Exchequer.  It  will,  of  course,  be  necessary  that
the  bank  rate  should  be  raised  to,  and  maintained  at,  a  figure
sufficiently  high  to  secure  the  earliest  possible  retirement  of
the  excess  issue."  ^

§  8.  There  remains  a  still  severer  form  of  banking  panic.
People  may  lose  confidence,  not  only  in  bank  deposits,  but
also  in  bank  notes,  and  may  threaten  to  present  these  in
large  numbers  for  encashment  in  gold.  For  this  malady  it
is  evident  that  the  issue  of  extra  notes  is  no  sufficient  remedy.
If  nothing  further  is  done,  the  notes  will  be  presented  for  gold ;
the  gold  in  the  reserve  will  not  suffice  for  their  encashment ;
bank  after  bank  will  shut  its  doors :  and  the  whole  monetary
system  of  the  country  will  be  in  chaos.  In  this  type  of
panic,  if  it  goes  far  enough,  free  lending  becomes  no  longer
possible.  There  will  be  no  more  of  the  only  kind  of  currency
that  people  want  available  in  the  bank  reserves.  In  these
circumstances  one  possible  course  of  action  is  for  the  State  itself
to  create  a  new  fiduciary  currency — like  our  Treasury  notes
— in  the  hope  that  the  public  panic  will  not  extend  to  them.
Failing  this  deus  ex  machina,  a  breach  of  contract  on  the  part
of  the  banks  cannot  be  prevented.  All  that  the  State  can  do
is  to  mitigate  the  effects  which  this  breach  must  have  upon
business  confidence  by  making  it  a  legally  allowable  breach.
In  1907  in  several  of  the  Western  States  of  America  this  was
done  by  the  device  of  a  series  of  legal  bank-holidays.  In  most
of  the  other  States  of  the  United  States  the  banks  were
officially  informed  that  they  would  not  be  held  insolvent  if
they  paid  their  depositors  a  limited  amount  of  cash  and
settled  the  balance  by  certified  cheques  or  drafts  on  corre-
spondents. This  was,  of  course,  an  informal  method  of  suspend-
ing specie  payments  ;  and  Professor  Andrew  finds  that  "  roughly
speaking,  in   two-thirds  of  the  cities  of  more   than   25,000

1  Report,  p.  9.


CH.  IX  FINANCIAL  CEISES  875

inhabitants  the  banks  suspended  cash  payments  to  a  greater  or
less  degree."  ^  The  same  end  can  be  accomplished  in  a  more
direct  and  straightforward  manner  by  a  law  temporarily
abolishing  the  issuing  banks'  obligation  to  convert  their  notes
into  gold.  Eemedies  along  these  lines  are,  of  course,  a  pis  alter.
But  nothing  else  is  possible.  They  make  the  detonation  of
the  crisis  less  than  it  would  have  been  without  them,  and,
therefore,  pro  tanto  lessen  the  amplitude  of  the  movements  of
confidence  and  industry."

'  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1908,  pp.  501-2.

2  In  the  text  attention  has  been  confined  to  banking  panics  that  spring  out
of  the  wave  movements  of  business  confidence.  Of  course,  it  is  not  pretended
that  these  panics  only,  or  even  as  a  rule,  arise  in  that  way.  On  the  contrary,
the  most  important  source  of  banking  panics  is  the  outbreak  of  a  great  war,
such  as  the  Napoleonic  wars  or  the  war  of  1914.  The  detonation  and  the
reaction  upon  industrial  confidence  when  banking  panics  are  engendered  in  this
way  are  the  same  as  they  are  in  panics  with  an  industrial  origin  ;  and  the
remedies  required  to  mitigate  their  effects  are  also  the  same.


CHAPTEK   X

SPECIAL    CAUSES    AFFECTING    THE    REAL    INCOME    OF    THE
MANUAL    LABOURING    CLASSES

§  1.  As  was  indicated  in  Chapter  I.  causes  that  bring  about
variations  in  industrial  activity  are  relevant  to  economic
welfare  chiefly  because  they  involve  variations  in  the  real
income  of  the  manual  labouring  class.  It  has  now  to  be  ob-
served that  these  causes  are  not  the  only  causes  of  which
account  needs  to  be  taken.  Besides  those  variations  in  the
demand  for  labour,  through  which  they  work,  there  are  two
other  important  factors  upon  which  the  variability  of  the  real
income  of  workpeople  depends.

§  2.  The  first  of  these  is  the  content  of  the  normal  work-
ing man's  family  budget.  In  real  life  working  men  are  ac-
customed neither  to  purchase  the  same  things,  nor  to  purchase
them  in  the  same  proportions,  as  members  of  the  richer  classes.
If  there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  commodities  which
play  the  chief  part  in  their  consumption  are  either  more  or
less  variable  in  supply  than  commodities  in  general,  this
circumstance  would  not  be  relevant  to  the  present  discussion.
As  a  matter,  of  fact,  however,  observation  brings  out  two
important  points.  First,  the  proportionate  part  played  by
food  products  is  much  larger  in  the  consumption  of  work-
people than  in  that  of  others.  Secondly,  raw  materials  also
play  a  relatively  large  part  in  their  consumption,  since  rich
people  desire  goods  of  high  quality,  in  the  construction  of  which
human  action,  whether  by  way  of  manufacture  or  by  way  of
the  organisation  of  retail  distribution,  and  not  raw  material,
is  of  chief  importance.     Food  and  raw  materials  are,  however,

876


CH.  X      SPECIAL  CAUSES  AFFECTING  LABOUK      877

in  the  main,  grown  upon  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  their
output  is,  therefore,  subject  to  the  varying  influence  of  climate.
Consequently,  to  the  causes  which  determine  the  variability
of  the  real  income  of  the  working  classes  in  terms  of  com-
modities in  general,  namely  the  variability  of  the  real  demand
for  labour,  it  is  necessary  to  add,  as  a  further  cause,  by  which
this  variability  is  somewhat  enhanced,  the  fact  that  the  real
income  of  the  working  classes  is  taken  over  in  the  form,  not
of  commodities  in  general,  but  of  certain  specially  variable
commodities.  This  means  that,  when  the  variability  of  their
income,  in  terms  of  commodities  in  general,  has  been  de-
termined, its  variability  in  terms  of  the  things  which  the
working  classes  actually  purchase — in  the  only  sense,  that  is
to  say,  which  has  interest  for  them — is  likely  to  be  somewhat
larger  than  this.

§  3.  The  second  relevant  factor  is  the  degree  of  plasticity,
in  the  sense  explained  in  the  last  Chapter  of  Part  III.,  which
workpeople's  organisations  allow  to  their  rates  of  wages.  If
the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  labour  is  greater  than  unity,
plastic  wage  rates  will  make  the  earnings  of  labour  less
variable  than  rigid  wage  rates ;  whereas,  if  the  elasticity  of
demand  is  less  than  unity,  rigid  wage  rates  will  make  them
less  variable  than  plastic  wage  rates.  Since,  as  has  been
shown  in  Chapter  III.  of  Part  V.,  the  demand  for  labour  on
the  whole  is  in  fact  highly  elastic,  it  follows  that,  other  things
being  equal,  in  a  country  where  a  system  of  plastic  wage  rates
prevails  generally,  the  aggregate  real  earnings  of  labour  will
be  less  variable  than  they  will  be  in  a  country  where  a  system
of  rigid  wage  rates  prevails  generally.  The  above  two  factors,
though  subordinate  in  comparison  with  the  main  determinants
of  industrial  fluctuations,  are,  nevertheless,  of  real  importance.


CHAPTER  XI

PHILANTHROPIC  AND  STATE  ACTION  DESIGNED  TO  LESSEN  THE
VARIABILITY  OF  INDUSTRIAL  ACTIVITY  AND  THE  DEMAND
FOR    LABOUR

^  1.  After  this  brief  digression  we  may  return  to  the  main
trend  of  the  argument.  The  problem  to  be  considered  is
that  presented  by  interference  with  industrial  fluctuations
deliberately  undertaken  with  a  view  to  increasing  economic
welfare.  Government  authorities  and  private  philanthropists
recognise  that,  other  things  being  equal,  economic  welfare  is
likely  to  be  increased — both  directly  and  also  indirectly
through  reactions  on  efficiency  and,  hence,  on  output — when
the  variability  of  the  real  income  of  the  labouring  class  is
diminished.  They  also  recognise  that  the  contributions  to
welfare,  which  changes  of  this  kind  furnish,  do  not,  in  general,
enter  into  the  calculations  of  private  captains  of  industry.
Consequently,  they  decide,  quite  rightly,  that  there  is  ground
for  philanthropic  or  governmental  action  designed  to  make
the  earnings  of  labour  more  stable,  even  though  such  action
involves  a  certain  amount  of  direct  cost.  The  larger  the
direct  cost,  of  course,  the  less  far  it  will  be  socially  advan-
tageous to  press  equalising  action.  When  such  action
involves  the  setting  of  men  to  work  in  times  of  depression  on
something  which  is  physically  perishable,  or  is  liable  to  lose
its  value  through  a  change  of  fashion,  and,  still  more,  when
it  involves  the  making  of  employment  that  is  avowedly
useless,  the  direct  cost  is  large.  When,  on  the  other  hand,
workpeople,  who  would  otherwise  have  been  unemployed,  can
be  turned  to  some  task  of  "actual  and  substantial  utility,"

878


CH.XI     PHILAXTHEOPIC  AND  STATE  ACTION       879

it  may  be  comparatively  smalL  This  class  of  consideration
helps  to  determine  from  how  large  a  quantity  of  equalising
action  economic  weKare  would  benefit.  Always,  however,
except  in  the  special  circumstances  discussed  in  the  next
chapter,  advantage  can  be  obtained  from  some  quantity  of
equalising  action.  So  much  public  authorities  and  private
philanthropists  often  understand-  On  the  basis  of  this  under-
standing, they  sometimes  deliberately  transfer  a  part  of  their
demand  for  labour  from  times  of  boom  to  times  of  depression,
with  the  express  object  of  making  the  real  income  of  the
working  classes  less  variable.  The  purpose  of  the  present
chapter  is  to  study  the  various  ways  in  which  this  can  be
done.

§  2.  Before  this  study  is  entered  upon,  however,  a
preliminary  objection  must  be  met.  This  objection  is  akin  to
that  considered  in  another  connection  in  Part  V.  Chapter  VII.
It  is  that  philanthropy  and  the  State  are  necessarily
impotent  to  reduce  the  variability  of  the  real  income  of  the
working  classes  as  a  whole.  The  quantity  of  resources
devoted  to  the  purchase  of  labour  at  any  time  is,  it  is
asserted,  rigidly  determined.  Any  resources,  which  the  State
or  private  persons  turn  to  the  purchase  of  extra  labour  at  one
point,  are  necessarily  taken  away  from  the  purchase  of  labour
at  some  other  point.  In  the  words  of  the  Transvaal  Indigency
Commission :  "  Wealth  is  the  only  source  from  which  wages
are  paid,  and  the  State  must  levy  taxation  in  order  to  pay
wages  to  its  workmen.  When,  therefore,  a  Government  gives
work  to  the  unemployed,  it  is  simply  transferring  wage-
giving  power  from  the  individual  to  itself  It  is  diminishing
employment  with  one  hand,  while  it  increases  it  with  the  other.
It  takes  work  from  people  employed  by  private  individuals,
and  gives  it  to  people  selected  by  the  State."  ^  This  contention
is  altogether  erroneous.  It  is  easily  shown  that  the  dividend
of  consumable  products  that  comes  at  any  time  into  the
hands  of  the  people  in  control  of  industry,  is  devoted  to  three
purposes,  i.e.  immediate  consumption  by  entrepreneurs  and
capitalists,  storage,  and  the  purchase  of  labour  engaged  to
produce  goods  for  the  future.     With  this  conception  clearly

•  Report  of  the  Transvaal  Indigency  Commission,  p.  129.


880  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.vi

before  us,  we  can  no  longer  suppose  that  the  labour-purchase
fund  (in  terms  of  real  things),  which  is  available  at  any
time,  is  something  rigidly  fixed  ;  it  can,  obviously,  be  enlarged
or  contracted  by  the  transference  of  resources  between  it  and
the  two  funds  designed  respectively  for  consumption  by
entrepreneurs  and  capitalists  and  for  storage.  Such  trans-
ference may  be  effected  in  times  of  depression  without  it  being
necessary  for  any  transference  to  be  made  in  the  aggregate,  if
resources  are  borrowed  by  philanthropists  or  by  the  State  in
bad  times  and  repaid  with  interest  in  good  times.  It  is,  no
doubt,  true  that  a  part  of  the  resources  borrowed  in  bad  times
would  be  taken  from  funds  which  would  normally  have  been
devoted  by  private  persons  to  investment  involving  the  pur-
chase of  labour.  Another  part,  however,  would  be  taken  from
funds  which  would  normally  have  been  stored  and  from  funds
which  would  normally  have  been  consumed  by  the  relatively
well-to-do.  Consequently,  though  the  net  alteration  in  the
aggregate  resources  devoted  to  labour-purchase  will  be  less
than  the  alteration  in  the  resources  devoted  to  this  use  by
the  State,  there  will  almost  always  be  some,  and  there  will
often  be  a  considerable,  net  alteration  in  these  aggregate
resources.  Nor  is  this  all.  In  civilised  countries  at  the
present  time  there  is  a  further  source — wholly  ignored  by
the  Transvaal  Commissioners — from  which  a  substantial  part
of  the  requisite  resources  could  be  drawn  without  diminish-
ing in  any  degree  the  quantity  of  investment  in  labour-
purchase  by  private  entrepreneurs.  This  source  consists  in
the  large  sums  annually  devoted  by  Charity  and  the  Poor
Law  to  the  relief  of  persons  who  have  been  brought  low
through  the  effects  of  intermittent  employment.  In  so  far
as  the  purchase  of  labour  by  the  State  in  bad  times  checked
unemployment  and  the  resultant  pauperism,  the  expenses
involved  in  it  would  be  balanced  by  a  corresponding  reduction
in  the  expenses  incurred  by  these  agencies.  For  these  reasons
the  objection  referred  to  at  the  beginning  of  this  section  falls
to  the  ground.

§  3.  In  passing  to  the  main  problem  of  the  present
chapter,  we  may  observe  that  no  essential  distinction  exists
between  policies  under  which  public  authorities  manipulate


cH.  XI     PHILANTHROPIC  AND  STATE  ACTION       881

the  demand  for  any  sort  of  labour  by  modifying  the  conduct
of  industries  directly  related  to  themselves,  and  policies
under  which,  by  means  of  boimties  and  taxes,  they  modify
the  conduct  of  industries  in  which  private  persons  are
exclusively  concerned-  No  doubt,  it  may  sometimes  be
practically  easier  for  them  to  take  action  in  industries  where
they  are  themselves  the  employers,  or  where,  through  the
placing  of  government  orders,  their  demand  plays  an  especially
important  part,  than  it  is  in  other  industries.  This,  however,
is  a  secondary  and  subordinate  distinction.  So  much  being
understood,  the  principal  devices  open  to  the  State  or  to
private  philanthropists  may  be  grouped  into  the  following
divisions.  First,  certain  employers,  producing  for  a  market,
in  bad  times  deliberately  manufacture  at  a  loss  for  sale  or
stock,  and  in  this  way  keep  their  hirings  of  labour  more
regular  than,  under  the  existing  circumstances,  is  economically
to  their  advantage.  Secondly,  certain  purchasers  of  a
commodity  dovetail  a  demand  that  necessarily  emerges  at
intervals  into  the  interstices  of  the  demands  of  other
purchasers  of  the  commodity,  thus  making  the  aggregate
demand  for  it  more  regular,  and,  thereby,  indirectly  causing
employers  to  obtain  and  use  funds  for  investment  in  labour
more  regularly.  Thirdly,  certain  purchasers,  whose  demand
is  continuous  but  fluctuating,  take  measures  to  stabilise  that
demand.  Fourthly,  certain  purchasers,  whose  demand  is
normally  stable,  take  measures  to  make  that  demand  fluctuate
in  such  a  way  as  to  compensate  fluctuating  movements  of  an
opposite  character  in  other  demands.  These  four  devices  have
now  to  be  considered  in  turn.

§  4.  Efforts  made  by  employers  (whether  of  their  own
motion  or  under  Government  influence)  to  keep  their  invest-
ment in  labour  more  stable  than  private  economic  interest
suggests  act  somewhat  differently,  according  as  the  redundant
product  in  bad  times  is  principally  sold  on  the  market  or
retained  in  stock.  When  the  greater  part  becomes  stock,
even  a  single  employer  may  produce  a  substantial — or  at  all
events  an  uncounteracted — effect  on  the  stability  of  work-
people's earnings.  When,  however,  the  main  part  of  the
redundant  product  is  thrown  on  the  market,  the  action  of  the

3l


882  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

philanthropic  employer,  who  keeps  his  hands  at  work,  leads
indirectly  to  other  employers  dismissing  more  hands  than
they  would  dismiss  otherwise.  The  reason  is  that  the  larger
sales  by  the  philanthropic  firm  lower  the  price,  and,  therefore,
cause  a  diminution  in  the  output  of  the  others.  If  the
philanthropic  firm  constitutes  only  a  small  part  of  the  total
market,  the  negative  effect  will  be  almost  as  large  as  the
original  positive  effect.^  It  is,  thus,  idle  for  the  State  to
set  men  to  work  in  times  of  depression  at  making  and
offering  for  sale  things  that  are  ordinarily  made  by  private
firms.^  "  Convincing  testimony  was  given  on  behalf  of  the
Firewood  Trade  Association  that  the  adoption  of  wood-
chopping  as  the  task  at  the  Labour  Homes  of  the  Church
Army,  as  well  as  in  many  Workhouses,  had  definitely  resulted
in  ruining  independent  wood-chopping  firms,  in  throwing
many  men  out  of  employment  and  in  reducing  some  actually
to  pauperism."  ^  The  action  of  those  philanthropic  ladies,  who
in  August  1914  started  workrooms  to  give  employment  to
women  thrown  out  of  work  by  the  war  in  making  garments
for  sale,  can,  in  like  manner,  only  have  diverted  work  from
the  ordinary  channels  of  trade  and  done  no  good  to  women
workers  as  a  whole.*  No  such  difficulty  exists  as  regards
action  taken  by  the  general  body  of  employers  in  any  business.
This  point,  if  not  obvious  'prima  fa^ie,  becomes  obvious  on
inspection  of  the  mathematical  note  at  the  foot  of  the  page.
General  action  of  this  sort  might,  of  course,  be  taken  by
voluntary  agreement  among  "  good  "  employers.  It  is,  how-
ever, more  likely  to  come  about  through  the  pressure  either
of  trade  unions  or  of  the  law.     An  example  of  the  former

^  A  mathematical  statement  of  this  proposition  is  as  follows  :  Let  there  be
n  firms,  each  with  an  output  x  and  an  elasticity  of  production  e,  and  let  the
elasticity  of  the  public  demand  for  the  commodity  be  i].  Let  the  output  for
sale  of  one  of  the  firms  be  increased  philanthropically  by  hx  units.  It  can  be
proved  that  the  consequent  net  addition  to  the  output  of  all  the  firms,  including
the  philanthropic  firm,  will  be  equal  (within  the  limits  of  a  first  approximation)

to  hx .     When  n  is  large,  this  is  obviously  small  relatively  to  hx,

(«—  ])  «  +  77

unless  1?  is  very  large  and  e  very  small.

2  Cf.  Pierson,  Priiiciples  of  Economics,  i.  p.  292.

^  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Minority  Report,  p.  1099.

*  Cf.  The  War,  Women,  and  Unemployment,  Fabian  Tract,  No,  178,  p.  11,


cH.  II     PHILANTHROPIC  AND  STATE  ACTION        883

sort  of  pressure  is  given  by  Mr.  Schloss  thus :  "  In  Lancashire,
if  workmen  are  ordered  to  cease  work  owing  to  a  furnace
being  put  out  on  account  of  depression  of  trade,  the  agree-
ment provides  that  an  additional  furnace  shall  not  be  started
within  three  months,  unless  half-wages  are  paid  to  these  men
for  the  time  which  they  have  lost  through  the  stoppage."  ^
An  example  of  the  latter  sort  of  pressure  is  afforded  by
enactments  limiting  the  extent  to  which  systematic  overtime
is  permitted.  In  either  case  some  steadying  effect  upon  the
aggregate  demand  for  labour  is  almost  certain  to  be  exercised.

§  5.  I  pass  to  the  dovetailing  of  consumers'  demands.
Boards  of  Guardians  in  ordering  stores,  the  Board  of
Adndralty  in  ordering  ships,  the  War  Office  in  calling  up
portions  of  the  Special  Keserve  for  training,  and  Municipalities
in  carrying  through  certain  kinds  of  occasional  work — such  as
the  making  of  road  surfaces — exercise  a  demand,  which  neces-
sarily operates,  not  smoothly  and  continuously,  but,  as  it  were,
in  fairly  large  occasional  jets.  To  a  certain  extent  the  public
authorities  concerned  are  free  to  choose  at  what  times  these
separate  intermittent  masses  of  demand  shall  be  brought  into
play.  No  doubt,  in  some  circumstances,  the  moment  of  their
incidence  is  practically  dictated  by  influences  which  it  is
impossible  to  resist  When  a  war  threatens,  for  example,
there  can  be  no  question  of  allowing  care  for  the  steadiness
of  employment  to  affect  the  time  at  which  the  Admiralty  orders
ships.  Often,  however,  it  makes  very  little  difference,  either
to  public  convenience  or  to  the  public  purse,  in  what  way  the
time-incidence  of  these  irregular  demands  is  arranged.  When
this  is  so,  it  is  open  to  public  authorities  considerably  to
lessen  the  fluctuating  character  of  the  demand  for  labour  by
dovetailing  irregular  public,  or  publicly  manipulated,  demands
into  the  interstices  of  the  demands  of  private  industry.
Municipalities  may  build  schools,  or  give  orders  for  building
them,  when  private  building  work  is  dull.  The  War  Office
may  arrange  for  the  periods  of  service  of  the  Special  Reserve
to  vary  in  different  localities,  in  such  wise  that  they  shall
everywhere  occur  in  slack  seasons.*    On  the  same  plan,  educa-

*  Board  of  Trade  Report  on  CoUeeUve  AgreemeTits,  1910,  p.  xxviii.
^  Cf.  Report  of  the  Royal  ComvUsnon  on,  the  Poor  Lavs,  p.  411,  footnote.


884  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

tional  authorities  may  enforce  attendance  at  training  schools
upon  all  youths  up  to  some  defined  age  during  periods  of
unemployment.  "  Up  to  a  given  age — say  19 — [a  youth  out
of  employment]  should  return  [to  the  training  school]  during
any  period  of  unemployment,  and  develop  the  knowledge  and
faculties  gained  in  his  previous  work.  As  soon  as  he  becomes
unemployed,  it  should,  therefore,  be  the  duty  of  the  employer,
under  penalty,  to  advise  the  head  of  the  training  school  of  the
fact,  possibly  through  the  medium  of  the  local  Labour
Exchange.  It  would  forthwith  become  compulsory  for  the
boy  to  re-enter  the  training  school  until  he  was  again  able  to
bring  a  certificate  that  he  had  secured  employment."  ^  A
policy  on  these  general  lines  is  clearly  implied  in  a  "  Circular
concerning  the  Organisation  of  the  Provision  of  Employment,"
issued  by  the  Prussian  Minister  of  Commerce  in  1904,  and
quoted  in  Mr.  Schloss's  Eeport  on  foreign  methods  of  dealing
with  the  Unemployed.  The  Circular  runs :  "  We  further
request  you  to  have  the  goodness  to  direct  your  attention
to  those  measures,  which  are  calculated  to  prevent  the
occurrence  of  want  of  work  on  a  wide  scale  or  to  mitigate
its  effects  when  it  is  unavoidable.  Not  only  the  State,  but
also  the  provinces,  districts  and  communes,  in  their  capacity
as  employers,  are  bound  to  do  their  utmost  to  counteract  the
evil  in  question  by  paying  general  and  methodical  attention  to
the  suitable  distribution  and  regulation  of  the  works  to  be
carried  out  for  their  account.  In  almost  every  industrial
establishment  of  importance  there  are  tasks,  which  do  not
absolutely  need  to  be  performed  at  a  fixed  time ;  just  so  in
every  State  and  communal  administration  there  are  works,  for
the  allotment  of  which  the  time  may,  within  certain  limits,
be  freely  chosen  according  to  circumstances.  If  all  public
administrations,  in  making  their  arrangements,  would  take
timely  care  to  choose  for  such  works  times  in  which  want
of  employment  is  to  be  expected,  if,  especially,  works  in  which
unemployed  people  of  all  kinds,  including,  in  particular,
unskilled  labourers,  can  be  made  use  of,  were  reserved  for
such  times  of  threatening  want  of  employment  as  have  almost
regularly  recurred  of  late  in  winter  in  the  larger  towns  and
*  Rowntree,  UnemploymerU,  p.  21.


CH.  XI     PHILANTHEOPIC  AND  STATE  ACTION       885

industrial  centres,  the  real  occurrence  of  widespread  want  of
employment  could  certainly  be  prevented  in  many  cases,  and
serious  distress  warded  off."  ^  The  same  policy  is  embodied  in
the  proposal  of  the  Poor  Law  Commission  concerning  irregular
municipal  work.  They  write :  "  So  far  as  it  may  be  inevitable
to  employ  occasionally  other  than  their  own  regular  workers,
or  to  place  contracts,  we  think  that  it  may  be  desirable  for
public  authorities  to  arrange  such  irregular  work  so  that,  if
possible,  it  comes  upon  the  labour  market  at  a  time  when
ordinary  regular  work  is  slack.  This  point  has  been  well  put
by  Professor  Chapman,  who  suggests  that,  so  far  as  the  public
authorities'  demand  for  labour  fluctuates,  it  is  desirable  to
liberate  such  demand  from  the  influences  of  good  and  bad
trade  and  seasonality,  and  then  deliberately  to  attempt  to
make  it  vary  inversely  with  the  demand  in  the  open
market."  ■  The  policy  thus  sketched  out  is  sometimes
stimulated  by  the  Central  Government  through  a  judicious
use  of  grants-in-aid  to  municipaKties  in  times  of  depression.
It  might  conceivably  be  stimulated  further  by  the  estab-
lishment of  a  system  of  bounties,  to  be  paid  in  such  times
on  particular  sorts  of  consumption,  the  funds  required
being  raised,  perhaps,  by  corresponding  taxes  in  times  of
boom.  A  step  in  this  direction  was  once  suggested  in  the
House  of  Commons  by  Mr.  Balfour.  He  proposed  that,  when
industry  was  depressed,  a  bounty  should  be  given  to  firms
making  for  foreign  orders,  in  such  wise  as  to  enable  them  to
accept  contracts.  Some  persons  of  less  cosmopolitan  mind
might,  perhaps,  prefer  to  see  the  bounty  given  to  firms  making
for  British  orders,  so  that  the  proceeds  of  it  should  go  to
British  rather  than  to  foreign  consumers ;  but  this  does  not
affect  the  general  idea.

§  6.  The  third  of  the  devices  distinguished  in  §  3  raises
a  more  difficult  problem.  When  the  demand  manipulated  by
a  public  authority  is  not  one  that  recurs  at  intervals,  but  is
more  or  less  continuous,  what  will  be  the  efiect  of  action  on
the  part  of  the  authority  designed  to  render  its  demand  more

^  Report  on  Ageneus  and  Methods  of  dealing  with  the  Unemployed  in  Foreign
Countries,  p.  108.

'  Report  of  the' Roifal.  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  p.  411.


886  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

stable  than  it  would  naturally  be  ?  Grenerally  speaking,
the  fluctuations,  which  normally  occur  in  the  manipulated
demand,  are  not  likely  to  be  directly  compensatory  to  those
which  occur  in  other  demands  for  the  commodity  concerned.
It  is,  therefore,  probable  that  increased  steadiness  in  the
manipulated  demand  will  carry  with  it  increased  steadiness
in  the  manipulated  and  the  other  demands  combined.  When
this  happens,  fluctuations  in  the  aggregate  wages  fund  must
be  diminished.  Hence  it  follows,  in  general,  that  a  policy
designed  to  do  away  with,  or  to  diminish,  such  fluctuations
as  would  normally  occur  in  the  demand  manipulated  by
a  public  authority  for  the  things  made  by  any  class  of  labour
will  probably  diminish  the  variability  of  the  aggregate  earnings
of  labour  as  a  whole.  Public  authorities,  like  private  persons,
but  in  a  much  higher  degree,  have  it  in  their  power  to  lessen
this  variability  by  rendering,  at  a  slight  sacrifice  of  convenience
or  of  money  interest,  their  own  demands  steadier  than  they
tend,  in  the  ordinary  course,  to  be.

§  7.  There  remains  the  device  of  deliberately  rendering  a
stable  demand  unstable  in  such  a  way  as  to  compensate  the
instability  of  some  other  demand.  More  concretely,  this
device  may  be  set  out  as  follows.  The  main  part  of  the
demand  affecting  any  particular  sort  of  labour  is  outside  of
our  control ;  but  some  part  is  within  our  control.  Normally,
we  may  suppose,  the  controlled  part  would  be  fairly  steady,
but  the  other  part  unsteady.  The  policy  we  have  now  in
view  consists  in  the  deliberate  introduction  of  unsteadiness  of  a
compensating  kind  into  the  controlled  part,  in  conditions  where
the  controlled  part  is  not  in  its  nature  intermittent.  This  policy
won  the  approval  of  the  Royal  Commissioners  on  Afforestation.
They  were  concerned  to  satisfy  themselves  that  "  that  part  of
sylvicultural  work  which  requires  most  labour,  namely,  the
establishment  of  the  forest,  is  of  a  sufficiently  flexible  character
to  be  capable  of  being  pushed  on  when  labour  is  abundant,
and  suspended  when  labour  is  scarce  ;  "  ^  and  they  advised  that
it  should  in  fact  be  pushed  on,  and  suspended,  on  those  prin-
ciples. The  same  point  of  view,  in  respect  of  a  much  more
extended  field,  is  adopted  by  the  Minority  of  the  Royal
^  Report  of  Royal  Commission  on  Coast  Erosion  and  Afforestation,  vol.  ii.  p.  1 3.


CH.  XI     PHILANTHROPIC  AND  STATE  ACTION       887

Commissioners  on  the  Poor  Law.     They  write :  "  We  think
that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  out  of  the   150    millions
sterling  annually  expended  by  the  National  and  Local  Autho-
rities on  works  and  services,  it  would  be  possible  to  earmark
at  least  four  millions  a  year,  as  not  to  be  undertaken  equally,
year  by  year,  as  a  matter  of  course  ;  but  to  be  undertaken,  out
of  loans,  on  a  ten  years'  programme,  at  unequal  annual  rates,
to  the  extent  even  of  ten  or  fifteen  millions  in  a  single  year,
at  those  periods  when  the  National  Labour  Exchange  reported
that  the  number  of  able-bodied  applicants,  for  whom  no  places
could  be  found  anywhere  within  the   United  Kingdom,  was
rising  above  the  normal  level.     "When  this  report  was  made
by  the  Minister  responsible  for  the  National  Labour  Exchange
— whenever,  for  instance,  the  Percentage  Unemployment  Index
as  now  calculated  rose  above  four — the  various  Government
Departments  would  recur  to  their  ten  years*  programme  of
capital  outlay ;  the  Admiralty  would  put  in  hand  a  special
battleship    and   augment  its  stock  of  guns   and   projectiles ;
the  War  Office  would  give  orders  for  some  of  the  additional
barracks  that  are   always   being   needed,  and  would   further
replenish  its  multifarious  stores ;   the  Office  of  Works  would
get  on  more  quickly  with  its  perpetual  task  of  erecting  new
post  offices  and  other  Government  buildings  and  of  renewing
the  worn-out  furniture  ;  the  Post  Office  would  proceed  at  three
or  four  times  its  accustomed  rate  with  the  extension  of  the
telegraph  and  telephone  to  every  village  in  the  kingdom  ;  even
the  Stationery  Office  would  get  on  two  or  three  times  as  fast
as  usual  with  the  printing  of  the  volumes  of  the  Historical
Manuscripts  Commission  and  the  publication  of  the  national
archives.     But  much  more  could  be  done.      It  is  plain  that
many  millions  have  to  be  spent  in  the  next  few  decades  in
rebuilding  the  worst  of  the  elementary  schools,  greatly  adding
to  the  number  of  the  secondary  schools,  multiplying  the  tech-
nical institutes  and  training  colleges,  and  doubling  and  trebling
the  accommodation  and  equipment  of  our  fifteen  universities.
All  this  building  and  furnishing  work,  on  which  alone  we
might  usefully  spend  the  forty  millions  per  decade  that  are  in
question,  is  not  in  fact,  and  need  not  be  for  efficiency,  done  in
equal  annual  instalmenta      There  might  well  be  a  ten  years'


888  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

programme  of  capital  grants-in-aid,  made  at  the  periods  when
the  Minister  in  charge  of  the  National  Labour  Exchange
reports  that  the  index  number  of  unemployment  has  reached
the  warning  point,  for  these  works  to  be  put  in  hand  by  the
Local  Education  Authorities  all  over  the  kingdom  to  exactly
the  extent  that  the  situation  demands.  At  the  same  time
the  Local  Authorities  could  be  incited  to  undertake  their
ordinary  municipal  undertakings  of  a  capital  nature,  whether
tramways  or  waterworks,  public  baths  or  electric  power  stations,
artisans'  dwellings  or  town  halls,  drainage  works  or  street
improvements,  to  a  greater  extent  in  the  years  of  slackness
than  in  the  years  of  good  trade.  This,  indeed,  they  are
already  tending  to  do ;  and  to  the  great  development  of
municipal  enterprise  in  this  direction,  setting  up  a  small  ebb
and  flow  of  its  own  to  some  extent  counteracting  the  flow  and
ebb  of  private  industry,  we  are  inclined  to  attribute  the  fact
that  the  cyclical  depressions  of  the  last  twenty  years  have
been  less  severely  felt  in  the  United  Kingdom  than  were  those
of  1878-9  and  of  1839-42."^  The  general  scale  of  the
adjustment  needed  was  indicated  some  years  before  the  war  by
Dr.  Bowley  thus :  "  In  round  numbers  it  may  be  estimated
that  200,000  or  fewer  able-bodied  adult  males  are  out  of
work  for  non-seasonal  causes  one  year  with  another,  and  have
no  sufficient  resources,  and  that  the  number  fluctuates  between
100,000  in  the  best  years  to  300,000  in  the  worst.  There
is,  consequently,  a  need  in  the  worst  year  for  wages  to  the
extent  of  £10,000,000,  to  bring  it  to  a  level  with  the  best,  so
far  as  these  men  are  concerned ;  for  the  whole  of  the  last  ten
years  £40,000,000  would  have  sufficed." ^  It  is  evident  that
the  above  policy,  which  cannot,  of  course,  in  the  concrete
be  always  distinguished  sharply  from  that  discussed  in
§  5,  would  necessarily  render  the  aggregate  real  earnings
of  the  wage-earning  classes  less  variable  than  they  would
normally  be.  As  will  appear,  however,  in  the  next  chapter,
the  question  whether  it  is  on  the  whole  desirable  is  not  settled
by  this  fact.

^  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Minority  Report,  p.  1196.
3  Ibid.  p.  1195.


CHAPTEE  XII

THE  RELATION  BETWEEN  VARIATIONS  IN  THE  REAL  INCOME  OF
LABOUR  AS  A  WHOLE  AND  VARIATIONS  IN  THE  CON-
SUMPTION OF  THE  REPRESENTATIVE  WORKING  MAN

§  1.  Hitherto  attention  has  been  concentrated  upon  the
variability  of  the  real  income  of  the  working  classes  as  a
body.  This  variability  is,  however,  as  was  pointed  out  in
Part  I.  Chapter  IV,,  only  related  to  economic  welfare  in  an
indirect  manner.  What  is  directly  related  to  economic
welfare  is  the  variability  of  the  actual  consumption  of  the
representative  working  man.  The  proposition,  that  economic
welfare  is  greater  the  less  variable  is  the  real  income  of
the  working  classes,  is  only  true  because  it  is  true,  in  general,
that  the  variability  of  the  consumption  of  the  representative
working  man  is  greater  or  less,  according  as  the  variability  of
the  aggregate  real  income  of  the  working  classes  is  greater  or
less.  It  is  thus  seen  that  the  discussion  conducted  so  far  does
not  exhaust  the  whole  of  what  need  be  said.  Generally  speak-
ing, the  introduction  of  a  cause  that  lessens  the  variability  of
the  real  income  of  the  working  classes  wiU  make  for  economic
welfare ;  but  it  is  possible  to  imagine  causes  whose  intro-
duction will  not  have  this  effect.  In  the  light  of  this  con-
sideration it  is  necessary  to  look  again  at  the  several  forms
of  remedial  activity  described  in  the  preceding  chapter.

§  2.  The  essential  point  can  be  put  briefly  as  follows.
It  is  broadly  true  that  the  variability  of  the  income  of  the
representative  working  man  is  not  susceptible  of  diminution,
in  an  important  degree,  by  any  cause  that  does  not,  at  the
same    time,  reduce   the  variability  of  the  aggregate  income

889


890  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  pt.  vi

of  the  working  classes.  But  the  converse  of  this  proposition
does  not  hold  good.  Causes,  which  diminish  the  variability  of
the  aggregate  income  of  the  working  classes,  may  not  merely
fail  to  diminish,  but  may  actually  increase,  the  variability  of
the  income  of  the  representative  working  man.  If,  indeed,  all
labour  were  perfectly  mobile  between  all  places  and  occupations,
this  result  would  not  be  possible.  That  it  is  possible  under
existing  conditions  is,  however,  easily  shown  by  an  imaginary
example.  Let  us  suppose  that  labour  is  demanded  at  two
points  A  and  B,  between  which,  in  contradistinction  to  what
happens  as  between  two  complementary  occupations,  such
as  gas -making  in  summer  and  brick -making  in  winter,
movement  is  absolutely  impossible.  If  the  demand  at  A  is
unsteady,  and  the  demand  at  B  steady,  the  demand  at  A  and
B  jointly  can  be  made  more  steady  by  the  introduction  of
unsteadiness  at  B,  so  arranged  as  to  "  compensate  "  the  un-
steadiness at  A.  The  increased  steadiness  of  the  demand
of  A  and  B  together — implying,  of  course,  increased  steadiness
in  the  aggregate  earnings  of  labour  at  A  and  B  together —
which  is  introduced  in  this  way,  does  not,  however,  diminish
the  variability  of  the  earnings  of  any  workman.  Eather,
it  has  the  contrary  effect ;  for,  while  the  variability  in  respect
of  workmen  at  A  is  left  unaffected,  in  respect  of  workmen  at
B  it  is  increased — a  result  implying,  of  course,  an  increase,
and  not  a  diminution,  in  the  variability  of  the  income  of  the
representative  working  man.  In  real  life,  where  labour  is
neither  perfectly  mobile  nor  perfectly  immobile,  the  result
of  analysis  is  as  follows.  Causes,  which  steady  the  demand
for,  and,  therewith,  the  real  earnings  of,  labour  as  a  whole,
without  unsteadying  the  demand  for  the  labour  of  any  group
of  workpeople,  always  diminish  the  variability  of  the  earnings
of  the  representative  working  man  :  causes,  wliich  steady  the
demand  for,  and  real  earnings  of,  the  whole,  by  unsteadying
the  demand  for  a  part,  do  not  always  increase,  but  sometimes
increase  and  sometimes  diminish,  this  variability.

§  3.  The  application  of  this  analysis  to  concrete  policies  is
easily  made.  All  the  various  ways  of  steadying  the  real
earnings  of  the  labouring  classes  that  were  discussed  in  the
preceding    chapter,    except    only    the    last,    necessarily    also


CH.  XII  AGGREGATE  &  REPEESENTATIVE  INCOME  891

involve  a  steadying  of  the  real  earnings  of  the  representative

working   man.      But   this   last   way,   that   of  unsteadying   a

stable   demand  in  such   wise   as   to   compensate   fluctuations

elsewhere,  is  uncertain  in  its  result.     The  question  whether,

in  any  particular  application,  it  will  render  the  earnings  of

the  representative  working  man  more  or  less  stable  depends

upon  the  degree  of  mobility  that  exists  among  the  workpeople

in    respect   of  whom   it   is   introduced.     "When   a   municipal

enterprise  controls  the  demand  for  only  a  part  of  the  services  of

a  particular  class  of  workpeople,  the  variability  of  the  earnings

of  the  representative  working  man  is  likely  to  be  diminished,

if  the  demand  of  the  municipal  enterprise,  which  might  have

been   constant,   is  made  to  fluctuate  inversely  with  that  of

the  other  establishments  employing  this  class  of  labour  in  the

neighbourhood.      On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  unlikely  that

this  representative  variability  would  be  actually  increased,  if

the  demand  for  labour  upon  State  forests,  which  might  have

been  constant,  were  made  to  fluctuate  inversely  with  that  of

city  businesses  employing  artisans  and  mechanics.^      Anything,

such  as  the  development  of  a  national  system  of  Employment

Exchanges,  or    the   development   of  jobs   common    to   many

industries,  that  makes  for  improved  mobility,  whether  between

places  or  between  trades,  thus  increases  the  probability  that

causes,  which  steady  the  demand  for  the  whole  of  labour  by

introducing   compensating   fluctuations   into   the  demand  for

a   part,  would  lessen   the  variability  of  the  earnings  of  the

representative  workman.     Furthermore,  this  probability  will

be  enhanced  if  the  authorities  entrusted  with  the  management

of    national    and    local    investments    do    not    take    account

merely  of  the  general  percentage  of  unemployment,  but  look

to  the  detailed  figures  of  separate  industries,  and  distribute

their  expenditure  among   them  in  proportion  to  the  extent

of  the  depressions  from  which  they  are  severally  suffering."

^  The  experience  of  Belgium  seems  to  show  that  forest  work  is  well  adapted
to  give  winter  employment  to  unskilled  workmen  engaged  in  the  building  trade
during  the  rest  of  the  year.     (Cf.  Rowntree,  Land  and  Labour,  p.  507.)

^  In  certain  instances  the  policy  of  compensatory  fluctuations  has  been
handicapped  in  practice  by  association  with  the  different,  and  not  necessarily
connected,  policy  of  employing  in  the  compensatory  work  "unemployed
persons"  under  non  -  commercial  conditions.  The  Local  Government  Board
Report  for  1907-8  explains  how  the  Board  gave  grants-in-aid  to  work  proposed


892  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.  vi

by  Distress  Committees,  when  such  work  was  work  of  "actual  and  substantial
utility,"  in  the  execution  of  which  unemployed  persons,  whose  applications  had
been  investigated  by  the  Distress  Committees,  could  be  given  employment
(p.  clxxiv).  "  When  a  grant  was  applied  for  in  aid  of  works,  which  would  be
executed  by  the  town  council  or  urban  district  council  in  the  ordinary  course  of
events,  and  of  which  the  cost  would  normally  be  defrayed  by  the  council  from
their  own  resources,  the  grant  made  by  us  was,  as  a  rule,  limited  to  the  excess
upon  the  cost  of  the  work  estimated  as  likely  to  arise  by  reason  of  the  employ-
ment of  unemployed  persons  "  (p.  clxxvi).  A  policy  of  this  sort  suffers  from  the
grave  disadvantage  of  favouring  inferior  workmen,  under  conditions  highly
adverse  to  efficiency,  at  the  expense  of  better  workmen,  who  do  not  apply  to
Distress  Committees.  Thus,  as  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  quote  from  the
Bethnal  Green  Distress  Committee  :  "  Carrying  out  .  .  .  ordinary  work  at  an
earlier  period  than  is  necessary  is  directly  calculated  to  have  the  effect  of
causing  at  a  future  date  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  men  regularly  employed.
.  .  .  This  means  that  the  better  class  of  workmen  .  .  .  become  unemployed
for  the  sole  reason  that  the  work  .  ,  .  has  been  done  at  an  earlier  period  by
the  unemployed  at  a  much  greater  cost  and  with  far  less  efficiency "  (Eeport,
p.  383).  This  association  with  relief  work  conditions  is  not,  however,  any
essential  part  of  the  policy  of  compensatory  fluctuations.


CHAPTER   XIII

INSUBAITCE

§  1.  The  discussion  of  the  last  chapter  points  the  way  at  once
to  something  that  still  needs  to  be  said.  When  the  varia-
bility of  the  real  income  of  the  representative  working  man  is
given,  economic  welfare  can  still  be  increased  by  arrangements
which  lessen  the  variability  of  his  consumption.  If  the
fortimes  of  the  whole  community  varied  in  exactly  the
same  manner,  the  only  way  in  which  steadiness  in  their
consumption  could  be  promoted  would  be  by  the  accumulation
of  savings  in  the  good  times  against  the  needs  of  the  bad  times.
It  makes  no  essential  difference  whether  saving  takes  place
after  the  bad  times  to  pay  back  debts  contracted  in  them,  or
before  the  bad  times  to  provide  a  fund  that  will  be  drawn
upon  in  them.  In  either  event  the  steadying  cause  is
saving  and  nothing  else.  Plainly,  if  this  device  were  carried
sufficiently  far,  it  would  reduce  the  variability  of  the  repre-
sentative working  man's  consumption  to  zero.  A  less  com-
plete resort  to  it  acts  pro  tanto  in  the  same  way.  It  reduces
the  variability  of  the  representative  working  man's  consump-
tion to  some  extent  below  the  variability  of  his  income.  In
real  life  the  fortunes  of  different  workmen  vary  differently.
This  circumstance  opens  the  way  for  a  second  device  for
steadying  the  consumption  of  the  representative  worker.
This  is  a  mutual  pledge  that  those  who  are  fortunate  at
any  time  shall  hand  on  part  of  their  income  to  those  who  at
that  time  are  unfortunate.  This  device  taken  by  itself  is
imperfect,  because  it  makes  no  provision  against  the  danger  of
common  misfortunes  affecting  a  large  proportion  of  the  work-

893


894  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

people  at  the  same  time.  But,  when  it  is  combined  with  the
device  of  saving,  great  advantages  result.  The  reason  is  that,
though  the  device  of  saving,  taken  alone,  can  reduce  the
variability  of  the  representative  workman's  consumption  to
zero,  it  can  only  do  this  at  the  cost  of  withholding  a  very
large  quantity  of  resources  from  consumption.  Each  member
needs  to  retain,  on  the  average,  a  reserve  large  enough  to
make  good  the  variations  that  occur  in  his  individual  income.
In  any  group  of  persons,  however,  whose  individual  circum-
stances result  from  partially  independent  causes,  the  sum  of
the  variations  from  the  average  of  individual  incomes  in  any
year  will  be  much  larger  than  the  variation  from  the  average
of  the  sum  of  individual  incomes.  It  follows  that,  by  saving  col-
lectively instead  of  individually,  a  group  of  people  can  greatly
lessen  the  amount  of  saving  that  is  required  in  order  to  reduce
the  variability  of  the  representative  man's  consumption  in  any
given  degree.  Hence  arises  that  combination  of  the  device  of
"mutuality"  and  the  device  of  saving  which  is  commonly  known
as  Insurance.  This  method  is  a  cheaper  way  than  saving  alone
of  producing  a  given  increment  of  stability.  Consequently,
among  the  poorer  classes,  to  whom  cheapness  is  of  vital  im-
portance, attempts  to  foster  it  have  been  successful,  where —
witness  the  subsidies  given  under  the  Ghent  system  to  pro-
vision made  individually  against  unemployment — attempts  to
foster  individual  saving  have  failed.^

§  2.  Now,  in  practice,  insurance  cannot  readily  be  applied
directly  to  correct  variations  in  individual  earnings ;  for,  if  it
were  arranged  so  as  to  do  this,  it  would  act  as  a  bounty  on
practices  conducive  to  small  earnings.  Hence,  certain  events
are  selected,  the  occurrence  of  which  is  likely  to  be  correlated
with  diminished  income,  or  increased  needs,  or,  as  in  sickness,
with  both  these  things,  for  the  individual  affected  by  them,
and  insurance  is  taken  out  against  these  events.  The  events
must  be,  so  far  as  possible,  of  such  a  sort  that  insured  persons

*  "The  supplementary  provision  made  at  Client  and  elsewhere  for  un-
organised workmen  has  been  either  a  total  failure  or  a  not  altogether  gratifying
success.  At  Strassburg,  and  in  most  of  the  French  towns,  it  has  been  omitted,
and  the  benefits  of  the  municipal  subvention  have  been  confined  to  members  of
Trade  Unions,  in  spite  of  the  objections  raised  on  social  and  political  grounds  to
thus  forcing  workmen  to  join  such  associations  "  {Kepoi't  of  (lie  Royal  Coj/ijuission
on  the  Poor  Laws,  Appendix,  vol.  ix.  p.  737).


CH.XIII  INSURANCE  895

are  not  likelj  to  be  induced  either  to  bring  them  about
intentionally  or  to  simulate  them.  The  successful  develop-
ment of  insurance  systems  depends  largely  upon  the  extent  to
which  arrangements  can  be  devised  in  conformity  with  this
condition.  Two  events,  namely,  death  and,  subject  to  the
existence  of  an  adequate  system  of  birth  registration,  the
attainment  of  some  specified  age,  are,  broadly  speaking,  free
from  the  risk  either  of  voluntary  creation  or  of  simulation ;
and,  with  only  slightly  reduced  generality,  the  same  remark
applies  to  definite  forms  of  serious  disablement,  such  as  the
loss  of  an  arm  or  leg.  The  other  two  principal  events,  against
which  insurance  on  the  part  of  poor  persons  prevails  ex-
tensively, namely  sickness  and  failure  to  find  work  in  a  man's
accustomed  trade  ^  at  some  agreed-on  wage,^  are,  however,
subject  to  both  the  above  risks.  Consequently,  insurance
against  these  events  has  to  be  hedged  round  with  numerous
defensive  devices.  Of  these  the  most  obvious  is  a  rule  fixing
the  benefits  connected  with  the  occurrence  of  the  event  at  a
figure  considerably  less  than  the  loss  which  the  event  is
likely  to  inflict  on  the  person  subjected  to  it.  Thus,  in  the
organisation  of  out-of-work  benefit  by  trade  unions  provision
is  always  made  (1)  to  place  the  benefit  at  a  much  lower  sum
than  the  insured  man  would  probably  be  earning  if  at  work,
(2)  to  limit  the  duration  of  the  benefit,  and  (3)  to  start  the

1  It  should  be  noticed  that  unemployment  insurance,  arranged,  as  in  practice
it  almost  always  is,  with  this  proviso,  will  injure  the  national  dividend  on
some  occasions  by  checking  the  movement  of  workpeople  in  decaying  trades
away  to  others.  This  evil  is  probably  of  small  importance  in  ordinary  times,
but  it  is  interesting  to  note  that,  in  the  Great  War,  the  official  out-of-work  pay
provided  for  workpeople  in  the  jute  and  cotton  industry,  who  lost  their  jobs
through  the  enforced  closing  down  of  machineiy,  was  not  given  to  persons  who
refused  reasonable  offere  of  other  kinds  of  work.  In  Denmark  the  hindrance  to
mobility  towards  jobs  outside  a  man's  own  trade  is  partly  met  by  an  arrangement
allowing  the  unemployment  fund  to  pay,  to  any  one  accepting  work  at  a  lower
paid  job,  the  difference  between  the  wage  on  that  job  and  the  maximum  of
unemployed  benefit  (Schloss,  Insurance  againM  Unemployment,  p.  61).

2  When  insurance  is  effected  in  a  trade  union,  the  wage  named  is,  of  course,
the  standard  rate  of  the  union.  In  wider  systems  of  unemployment  insur-
ance the  determination  of  this  wage  presents,  however,  some  difficulties.  The
English  National  Insurance  Act,  1911,  determines  it  as  not  lower  than  that  at
which  the  man  concerned  habitually  works,  or,  in  the  event  of  an  offer  of  work  in
another  district,  than  the  rate  current  there.  Strictly,  it  would  seem  that  this
latter  concession  is  right  when  the  lower  rate  in  another  district  is  due  to  the
prevalence  of  a  Igwer  cost  of  living,  but  wrong  when  it  is  due  to  the  existence
there  of  a  lower  average  of  capacity  among  workpeople.


896


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


PT.  VI


benefit  some  days  after  unemployment  has  begun.^  Besides
indirect  protective  devices  of  this  sort,  it  is  often  found
desirable  to  provide  directly  for  supervision  against  fraud.
In  England  it  has  generally  been  held  that  no  form  of  super-
vision is  so  efifective  as  the  informal  inspection  of  the
applicants'  colleagues  on  the  fund.  With  a  view  to  this,  the
sick  benefit  funds  of  English  Friendly  Societies  are,  in  general,
administered  locally,  even  when  they  are  national  in  character.^
In  like  manner,  unemployment  benefit,  where  it  existed,  was,
until  recently,  almost  always  organised  through  unions  of
workpeople  belonging  to  particular  trades  and  working
together  in  groups.  German  experience  in  regard  to  sickness
insurance  suggests,  however,  that  supervision  can  also  be
effectively  undertaken  by  large  centralised  societies,  through
the  agency  of  an  organised  staff  of  inspectors.  As  regards
unemployment  also  new  methods  have  been  coming  into
play.  What  is,  in  effect,  supervision  is  exercised  passively,
both  in  this  country  and  abroad,  by  means  of  the  offers  of
work    made    through    the    growing    system    of  Employment

^  This  policy  of  postponement  does  not  always  seem  to  fulfil  its  purpose.
Thus,  the  Economist  (June  19,  1909)  writes  in  regard  to  workmen's  compensa-
tion :  "  One  clause  in  the  Act  of  1906  especially  encourages  workmen  to  prolong
their  illness  by  making  compensation  payable  from  the  date  of  the  accident,  ijf
the  disability  lasts  more  than  a  fortnight.  The  effect  is  to  put  a  premium  on
illnesses  of  between  a  fortnight  and  three  weeks,  and  a  Mutual  Indemnity
Society  in  South  Wales  shows  that,  since  the  Act,  the  following  curious  change
has  taken  place  in  its  own  experience  : —


First  Half  1907.

Second  Half  1907.

Illnesses  of  more  than   7  and  less  than

14  days

Illnesses  of  more  than  1 4  days

Per  1000  Workmen.

18-89
35-08

Per  1000  Workmen.

7-44
69-26

These  figures  require  no  comment. "  But  a  comment  is  required  ;  namely  that,
though  a  portion  of  the  increase  in  the  length  of  "illness"  may  be  due  to
malingering,  a  larger  portion  may  well  be  due  to  the  fact  that  a  longer  period  of
rest  and  care  for  sickness  is  really  needed  than  the  urgency  of  earning  wages  formerly
made  practicable.     (Cf.  Irving  Fisher,  The  Need  for  Health  Insuraivce,  p.  12.)

^  Of.  Willoughby,  Working  Mens  Insurance,  p.  334.  In  Germany  sick
insurance  was,  by  the  law  of  1883,  "entrusted  to  a  large  number  of  separate
societies,  each  of  which  was  made  absolutely  independent  of  the  others  as  regards
its  receipts  and  expenditures  "  {ibid.  p.  37).  A  more  recent  law  has  changed
this.     (Of.  Frankel  and  Dawson,  Working  Men's  Insurance  in  Europe,  p.  158.)


CH.  XIII  INSUKANCE  897

Exchanges.  "  In  Cologne  and  Berne  the  Insurance  Fund
and  the  public  Labour  Exchange  are  practically  amalgamated.
In  Strassburg,  Milan  and  Antwerp,  receipt  of  subvention  by
an  unemployed  person  under  the  '  Ghent  system '  is  con-
ditional upon  his  registration  at  the  Labour  Exchange.  .  .  .
The  State  subvention  to  unemployed  benefit  in  France  can
only  be  claimed  by  Unions  having  an  organised  method  of
finding  employment  for  their  members."  ^  In  like  manner,
the  administration  of  Part  II.  of  the  National  Insurance  Act
of  the  United  Kingdom — the  Part,  that  is,  which  deals  with
unemployment — is  conducted  in  connection  with,  and  through
the  agency  of,  the  national  system  of  Labour  Exchanges.  Mr.
Beveridge  attaches  such  importance  to  this  point  that  he
writes :  "  Once  the  community  or  the  insurance  fund  under-
takes the  notification  of  work,  the  necessity  of  making  relief
allowances  inadequate  and  degrading  in  order  to  drive  men  on
the  search  for  work  disappears." ""  Thus,  the  informal  super-
vision of  co-workers  is  yielding  place  to  more  highly  elaborated
arrangements.  Supervision  of  some  sort,  however,  still  remains
exceedingly  important.

§  3.  The  obstacles,  which  the  need  of  guarding  against
the  creation  or  simulation  of  insured  events  places  in  the  way
of  insurance,  as  a  means  of  steadying  consumption,  reside  more
or  less  in  the  nature  of  things.  Consequently,  even  if  there
were  no  technical  difficulties,  insurance  would  necessarily  be
carried  a  good  deal  less  far  than  would  suffice  to  render  the
representative  working  man's  consumption  stable.  But,  of
course,  in  fact  there  are  technical  difficulties.  It  is  not,  indeed,
as  might  at  first  sight  be  supposed,  a  real  obstacle  to  insurance
that  all  forms  of  it,  whether  against  fire,  accident,  sickness,
unemployment  or  any  other  "  risk,"  imply  a  surrender  of
income  from  those  who  are  fortunate  and  escape  the  evil  in-
sured against  to  those  who  are  unfortunate  and  fall  victims  to  it.
For  before  the  event,  when  the  bargain  is  entered  into,  it  is  not,
in  general,  known  who  the  fortunate  and  who  the  unfortunate
are  going  to  be.  In  virtue  of  the  law  of  diminishing  utility,
a  chance  of  one  in  a  thousand  that  I  shall  lose  £10,000  is

'  [Cd.  5068],  p.  737.
*  Uiiemployment,  p.  229.     Cf.  ante,  Part  V.  Chapter  IX.  §  10.

3m


898  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

more  burdensome  to  me  than  the  actuarial  value  of  the  chance,
namely,  £10,  and  I  am  willing,  therefore,  to  pay  a  premium
of  more  than  £10  to  guard  myself  against  this  chance.  Hence,
if  there  are  enough  people  in  a  similar  position  to  myself  to
make  a  mutual  insurance  arrangement  fairly  secure  on  the
basis  of  a  premium  of  not  much  more  than  £10,  it  will  pay
all  of  us  to  contribute  the  required  premiums  into  a  fund,
from  which  those  who,  in  fact,  suffer  losses  may  be  compensated.
Furthermore,  it  will  pay  all  of  us  to  do  this,  even  though  the
adjustment  between  the  premiums  paid  and  the  risks  carried
by  different  members  is  imperfect.  Within  limits,  workmen
less  liable  to  accident  or  to  unemployment  will  gain  by  com-
bining for  insurance,  on  an  equal  footing,  with  workmen  more
liable  to  these  evils.  Moreover,  the  limits  are  further  ex-
tended when  persons  not  likely  to  draw  much  benefit  from
insurance  schemes  come  into  them  in  the  hope  of  inducing
less  fortunate  fellow  members  to  adopt  a  line  of  conduct  which
the  more  fortunate  believe  to  be  advantageous  to  themselves.
This  class  of  consideration  is  largely  responsible  for  the
willingness  of  good  workmen  to  allow  bad  workmen  to
associate  with  them  in  the  enjoyment  of  unemployment
benefit  in  their  unions.  That  bad  workmen  are  a  more  or
less  definite  class  is  suggested  by  the  figures  cited  in  Part  III.
Chapter  VITI.,  which  show  that,  in  the  engineering  trade  and
among  the  London  compositors,  most  of  the  unemployment  which
occurs  is  concentrated  upon  a  comparatively  small  number  of
persons.  Bad  workmen  are,  indeed,  partially  excluded  from
trade  unions  by  an  initial  test  on  admission,  by  limitation
of  the  period  during  which  benefits  will  be  paid  (a  long
period  one  year  meaning  a  shorter  period  in  the  following
year),  and  by  the  refusal  of  benefit  till  premiums  have
been  regularly  paid  for  some  time.  This  practice  of  ex-
clusion is,  however,  generally  exercised  in  a  strikingly  lenient
manner.  The  reason  is  that  the  event  insured  against  is,  not
simply  failure  to  find  work,  but  failure  to  find  it  in  the  man's
ordinary  trade,  at  the  rate  which  the  trade  union  considers  a
proper  rate  for  that  trade.  Better  workmen,  being  interested
to  prevent  inferior  workmen  from  cutting  into  the  standard
rate,  are  prepared  to  include  many  of  them  in  their  fund,


cH.  xin  INSUEANCE  899

though  they  know  that,  by  doing  so,  they  suffer  a  direct  loss.
They  have  an  indirect  gain  to  look  to,  for  which  they  are
willing  to  pay.  Hence,  voluntary  insurance  against  unem-
ployment, worked  through  a  trade  society,  will  tend  to  embrace,
at  the  same  premium,  men  of  more  divergent  capacities  than
at  first  sight  seems  to  be  probable.^  The  fact,  that  "  practically
one  set  of  men  continually  pay  more  than  they  receive,  and
another  (smaller)  number  of  men  as  continually  receive  more
than  they  pay,"  ^  is  not  fatal  to  the  voluntary  continuance  of
the  arrangement  by  both  sets  of  men.  But — and  this  is  the
point — though  it  is  not  a  conclusive  obstacle,  it  is  a  very
serious  one.  Though  the  limits,  within  which  advantage  may  be
derived  from  an  insurance  scheme  by  the  less  vulnerable  among
any  group  of  insurers,  are  wider  than  might  perhaps  be  expected,
they  are  still  narrow.  The  ratio  between  the  premiums  charged
and  the  actuarial  value  of  the  different  risks,  with  which  they
are  connected,  must  not  differ  widely.  We  shall  not,  for
instance,  find  a  voluntary  insurance  fund,  paying  a  uniform
benefit  for  sickness  or  for  accident,  that  includes  among  its
members,  at  the  same  premium,  workers  in  safe  and  healthy
trades  and  also  workers  in  dangerous  and  unhealthy  trades.
Nor  shall  we  find  voluntary  life  insurance  associations  accept-
ing obviously  healthy  persons  and  obvious  invalids  on  equal
terms.  Nor,  finally,  shall  we  find  voluntary  schemes  of  insur-
ance against  unemployment  dealing  in  this  way  with  workers
in  the  railway  industry  and  also  with  workers  in  the  highly
fluctuating  building  and  engineering  trades.  Of  course,  the
theoretical  solution  of  this  difficulty  is  obvious,  namely,  to
build  up  an  insurance  scheme  on  a  basis  of  premiums  carefully
adjusted  to  the  varying  risks  included  under  it.  But  in  actual
life  misunderstanding  and  friction  may  easily  make  this  plan
impracticable.       The    technical   difficulty  of   constructing    a

*  For  example :  * '  The  Cigar  Makers'  Union  spends  a  great  deal  of  money
on  out-of-work  benefit,  and  the  managers  of  this  fund  inform  us  that  a  large
number  of  the  recipients  of  this  relief  are  infirm  persons  who  cannot  earn  the
average  wages,  and  that  many  of  these  are  advanced  in  years  "  (Henderson,
Industrial  InsuruTiee  in  the  United  States,  p.  92).  It  should  be  noticed  that
the  danger  to  competent  men  from  the  acceptance  of  low  wages  by  incompetent
men  is  generally  much  exaggerated  in  popular  thought.

*  Third  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Distress  frorni  UnempleymeTit,  Mr.  Booth's
Evidence,  Q.  10,519.


900  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  pt.vi

system  that  will  include  these  adjustments  considerably  re-
stricts the  effective  range  of  mutual  insurance.

§  4.  Nor  must  we  stop  here.  Apart  altogether  from  the
considerations  set  out  in  the  two  preceding  sections,  it  is  very
improbable  that  insurance  would  be  carried  so  far  as  it  is
socially  desirable  that  it  should  be  carried.  There  is  good
reason  to  believe  that  stability  of  consumption  is  one  of  those
remoter  objects,  referred  to  in  Part  I.  Chapter  II.,  the  value
of  which  people  contemplating  the  purchase  of  them  generally
judge  to  be  less  than  it  really  is.  "  The  indefinite  need  for  an
old  age  which  many  may  never  experience,  and  which  is  far
distant  for  all,  the  opportunity  for  an  advanced  education
whose  benefits  are  generally  unknown  because  experienced  by
but  few,  the  opportunity  for  leisure,  which  they  do  not  know
how  to  use  because  of  the  necessity  of  daily  and  continuous
labour,  these,  and  many  other  causes,  have  all  been  responsible
for  the  absence  of  thrift  (and  insurance)  among  the  labouring
class."  ^  The  failure  of  workpeople  to  attain,  in  this  respect,
to  the  ideal  of  perfectly  rational  economic  men  causes  insurance
to  be  pressed  much  less  far  than  it  might,  even  under  existing
circumstances,  be  advantageously  pressed.  This  fact,  together
with  the  causes  lying  behind  it,  was  brought  out  very  clearly  by
Mr.  Kichard  Bell.  He  wrote  :  "During  the  period  of  prosperity,
when  a  large  number  of  workers  are  earning  good  wages,  it  is
regrettable  to  think  that  they  do  not  take  care  of  the  few  extra
shillings  they  then  receive,  but  indulge  so  freely  in  drinking
and  gambling,  so  that,  when  they  are  meeting  with  a  little
depression,  they  are  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the  employers,
and  have  to  put  up  with  circumstances  which  they  otherwise
would  not."  ^  Failure  of  this  kind  to  effect  possible  adjust-
ments is  common  to  the  general  body  of  the  poorer  classes
and,  indeed,  of  all  classes.  It  is  illustrated  by  the  impro-
vidence of  those  poor  persons  whose  income  is  exceptionally
irregular.  The  observation  of  a  witness  before  the  Charity
Organisation  Society's  Committee  on  Unemployment  is  highly
relevant :  "  If  I  may  express  an  opinion  about  the  dock
district,  it  is  that  the  greatest  evil  of  all  is  that  there  is  not

^  Gephart,  Insurance  and  the  State,  pp.  170-1.
2  Rowntree,  Betting  and  Oarribling,  p.  217.


CH.XIII  INSUEANCE  901

what  the  wife  calls  a  Saturday  night.  If  a  man  gets  a  job,  he
is  paid  for  it,  and  the  chances  are  that  the  wife  sees  none  of
the  money."  ^  The  same  point  is  brought  out,  in  a  less  direct
way,  by  the  obstacles  to  a  proper  adjustment  of  expenditure,
which  seem  to  be  experienced  by  persons  in  receipt  of  pay-
ments made  at  long  intervals.  "  Those  who  have  knowledge  of
workhouses  know  how  often  the  army  pensioner  drifts  in  only
because  his  pension  comes  quarterly,  and  he  cannot  keep  it
till  he  needs  it."  ^  It  is  illustrated  again  by  the  claim,  often
made  on  behalf  of  fortnightly  or  weekly,  as  distinct  from
monthly,  "  pays,"  that  they  facilitate  the  organisation  of  the
workpeople's  homes.  A  workman  told  Mr.  Carnegie  that  the
change  from  the  monthly  to  the  fortnightly  system  was
equivalent,  through  the  saving  it  introduced  by  making  cash
payments  more  practicable,  to  an  addition  of  5  per  cent  to
wages.^  The  point,  it  may  be  noted,  is  recognised  in  the
British  Coal  Mines  Act  (1912)  by  the  provision  that
colliers'  wages  shall  be  paid  weekly.  Further  evidence  of
the  inadequate  appreciation  displayed  by  workpeople  for  the
advantages  of  stability  can  be  produced  from  another  side,  by
reference  to  the  devices,  which  philanthropists  and  commercial
companies  alike  find  necessary,  in  order  to  persuade  them  to
make  provision  for  the  future.  Thus,  Mr.  Lee,  in  his  interest-
ing discussion  of  Thrift  Societies,  asserts  that  the  cultivation  of
thrift  among  the  people  is  best  carried  out  by  the  establishment
of  a  "  society  which  seeks  the  family  in  its  home  by  means  of  a
collector,  who  calls  at  stated  times,  usually  once  a  week.  He
reaches  the  people  in  whom  the  germ  of  foresight  hardly  yet
exists,  who,  accordingly,  will  not  save  on  their  own  initiative,
however  little  is  required,  to  whom  thrift  must  come  embodied
in  a  person,  and  must  come  at  regular  intervals,  intervals  not
so  long  but  that  his  next  visit  is  always  within  the  brief
range  of  their  forward  vision."*  It  is  found  necessary,  in
fact,  to  follow  the  lead  given  by  betting  agencies,  with  their

'  Report  on  the  Relief  of  Distress  due  to  Want  of  Employment,  p.  10.

2  Bosanquet,  The  Strength  of  the  People,  p.  263.

3  Cf.  Carnegie,  Problems  of  To-day,  p.  63.  Cf.  also  the  argument  of  the
Minority  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  in  favour  of  the  compulsory  invest-
ment of  sums  paid  in  compensation  for  accidents  (Report,  p.  925).

*  Constructive  and  Preventive  Philanthropy,  p.  22.


902  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

elaborate  staff  of  assistants,  prepared  to  visit  the  wives  of
working  men  when  their  husbands  are  out,  to  tackle  domestic
servants,  and  to  waylay  workmen  in  the  factory  during  the
dinner  hour.^  The  need  for  this  kind  of  action  is  illustrated
by  "the  great  difference  between  the  contributions  to  the
burial  societies  and  other  forms  of  saving."  ^  It  is  brought  out
still  more  vividly  by  the  fact  that  the  Post  Office,  though  giving
considerably  better  terms  for  insurance,  yet,  apparently  because
it  dispensed  with  collectors,  had  before  the  war  a  much  smaller
volume  of  policies  than  the  Prudential  Assurance  Company.^
The  history  of  "War  Savings  Certificates  in  this  country  affords
further  evidence  that  thrift  is  apt  to  wait  on  propaganda.

§  5.  In  view  of  the  evident  failure,  on  the  part  of  the
ordinary  poor  man,  to  press  insurance  for  steadying  his  con-
sumption so  far  as  his  own  economic  interests  suggest,  it  is
open  to  the  State  to  increase  economic  welfare  by  applying
some  spur  to  him  in  this  direction ;  and  the  case  for  doing
this  is,  of  course,  made  still  stronger,  when  attention  is  paid  to
the  indirect  effect,  which,  as  explained  in  Part  III.  Chapter  IX.
§  4,  it  may  be  expected  to  have  in  improving  the  distribution
of  workpeople,  so  as  to  render  the  values  of  the  marginal  net
products  of  labour  in  different  occupations  more  nearly  equal.
Broadly  speaking,  two  forms  of  spur  are  available,  bounty  and
compulsion.  The  spur  of  bounty  has  been  adopted,  in  vary-
ing degrees,  by  a  number  of  governmental  authorities  in
relation  to  private  systems  of  workmen's  insurance.  In  its
mildest  form  it  consists  merely  in  the  supply  of  statistical
material  and  tariffs  of  risks.*  The  importance  of  this  matter
is  illustrated  by  certain  defects  in  the  arrangements  of  the
numerous  local  mutual  aid  associations  in  the  United  States.
"  The  principal  evil  in  connection  with  these  voluntary  local
societies  is  that  they  are  generally  organised  and  administered
without  the  aid  of  competent  actuaries  and  are  utterly  without
scientific  foundations.  A  new  society  copies  the  bye-laws  of
an  older  society,  without  any  kind  of  understanding  of  the

*  Cf.  Rowntree,  Betting  atid  Oambling,  p.  73.

2  Miss  Octavia  Hill,  Royal  Coiamission  on  the  Aged  Poor,  Q.  10,669.
'  Jebb,  Cambridge,  p.  115.

*  Cf.  Lewis,  SImU  Insurance,  p.  49.


cH.  XIII  INSURANCE  903

probable  outcome  of  the  plan."  ^  It  is  clear  that  this  sort  of
difficulty  could  be  partially  mitigated  by  supervising  aid  from
State  officers — though,  no  doubt,  the  local  societies  might  not
always  welcome  very  heartily  such  advice  as  was  offijred.
A  second  stage  of  bounty  is  reached  when  the  Government
provides  an  institution  through  which  insurances  can  be
entered  into,  thus  affording  to  insurers  a  guarantee  against
fraud  or  insolvency.  In  France,  for  example,  there  is  a  Caisse
nationale  des  retraites  pour  la  vieillesse,  which,  besides  offering
facilities  for  individual  insurance,  also  offers  them  for  collective
insurance.^  In  like  manner,  the  Massachusetts  Savings  Bank
Insurance  Act  of  1907  and  the  Canadian  Government
Annuities  Act  of  1908  both  provide  for  the  sale  of  insurance
or  annuities  at  low  rates  under  a  government  guarantee.^  A
third  stage  of  bounty  is  reached  when  the  State  contributes  a
subsidy  in  money.  This  subsidy  may  be  small  and  conceived
on  the  pattern  set  out  by  M.  Andrifford  in  his  Report  on  the
Proposed  French  Law  on  Mutual  Insurance  Societies  in  1889.
He  wrote :  "  To  be  truly  useful,  the  subsidy  of  the  State  ought
to  be  restricted  to  certain  limits,  and  its  true  purpose  preserved.
This  purpose  is  to  provoke  saving  and  providence,  to  encourage
the  indifferent  to  afiiliate  themselves  with  mutual  aid  societies,
to  persuade  the  societies  themselves  to  enter  the  field  of
old-age  insurance,  and,  possibly,  to  come  to  the  aid  of  the
societies  at  the  moment  of  their  organisation,  or  in  times  of
emergency  or  distress  resulting  from  epidemics  or  other  great
misfortunes."  *  An  example  of  this  type  of  subsidy  is  that
furnished  in  England  by  the  exemption  from  income  tax  up
to  a  certain  figure  of  that  part  of  income  which  is  spent  on
premiums  on  life  insurance  policies.  Finally,  the  most
advanced  stage  of  bounty  is  reached  when  the  money  subsidy
granted  is  large.  This  is  so  with  many  of  the  contributions
made  to  insurance  against  unemployment  by  towns  that  have
adopted  the  Ghent  system.^     Such  subsidies  have  amounted

^  Henderson,  Industrial  Insurance  in  the  United  States,  p,  80.

2  Cf.  Willoughby,   Working  Men's  Insurance,  p.  122.

3  Cf.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Econmnics,  1910,  p.  718.
*  Cf.  Willoughby,  Working  Men's  Insurance,  p.  180.

^  This  system,  which  has  spread  widely  in  Belgium,  is  also  largely  adopted
elsewhere.  "In  France  (1905),  Norway  (1906),  and  Denmark  (1907),  it  has
been  adopted  by  the  State.     It  is  applied  by  many  of  the  French  towns  in


904  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

to  as  much  as  50  per  cent  of  the  benefits  paid.  In  Belgium
the  State  subsidy  to  old-age  insurance  amounts  to  60  per  cent.^
The  spur  of  compulsion,  as  applied  to  insurance,  has  been
amply  illustrated  in  the  German  compulsory  insurance  laws
against  sickness  and  accident  and  also  in  those  against  old  age
and  invalidity.  In  the  Hungarian  law  of  1884  there  is  an
interesting  example  of  partial  compulsion,  it  being  provided
that,  "  where  the  majority  of  the  employes  decide  to  found
an  aid  fund,  the  minority  is  also  bound  to  join  and  to  pay
a  certain  percentage  of  their  weekly  wages  for  the  main-
tenance of  the  fund."  ^  Our  own  Insurance  Act  of  1911
adopted  the  method  of  compulsion,  in  respect  of  sickness,  for
all  trades,  and,  in  respect  of  unemployment,  for  the  building
and  engineering  trades ;  and  the  range  of  compulsory  insurance
against  unemployment  is  now  being  greatly  extended.

§  6.  If  it  be  granted,  on  the  strength  of  the  arguments
advanced  in  earlier  sections,  that  some  spur  towards  work-
people's insurance  is  socially  desirable,  it  becomes  important  to
attempt  a  comparison  of  the  two  forms  of  spur  that  I  have

making  grants  to  unemployment  funds.  In  Germany  it  has  been  adopted  by
the  Municipality  of  Strassburg  (1906),  and  has  come  into  the  region  of  practical
politics  in  Munich  (1905)  and  elsewhere.  In  Italy  it  has  been  applied  by  the
Soci^t^  Umanitaria  of  Milan  (1905).  In  Switzerland  it  has  been  adopted,  after
the  failure  of  direct  compulsory  insurance,  in  St.  Gall  (1905),  and  is  now  pro-
posed in  Basle  (1907)  "  (Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,
Appendix,  vol.  ix.  p.  736).  In  England  it  appeared,  in  respect  of  voluntary
insurance  against  unemployment,  in  the  non -scheduled  industries  of  the  National
Insurance  Act  of  1911.

^  Of.  Frankel  and  Dawson,  Working  Men's  Instcrance  in  Europe,  p.  321.
From  the  point  of  view  of  economic  welfare  it  would  seem  that  schemes  of  this
order  would  be  improved  if  the  aggregate  amount  of  subsidy  paid  to  insurance
in  any  industry  were  made  to  vary,  not  only  directly  with  the  amount  of  benefit
privately  provided,  but  also  inversely  with  the  level  of  wage  prevailing  in  the
different  industries  ;  for,  if  this  is  not  done,  prosperous  groups  of  workpeople
will  be  assisted  more  largely  than  poor  groups.  A  step  in  the  direction  indicated
is  taken  in  the  law  governing  State  subsidies  in  France,  according  to  which,  "  if
the  unemployed  benefit  paid  by  a  Fund  is  of  greater  amount  than  Is.  7^.  per
day,  then  no  subsidy  is  to  be  paid  in  respect  of  such  excess  (over  Is.  7jd.)  "
(Schloss,  Insurance  against  Unem,ployment,  p.  44).  It  should  further  be  noticed
that  a  subsidy  to  unemployment  or  sickness  insurance  proportional  to  benefit
paid  is  likely  to  differentiate  in  favour  of  dangerous  and  fluctuating  industries
as  compared  with  others.  This  disadvantage  can  be  obviated  by  arrangements
modelled  on  the  German  sickness  insurance  law,  under  which  subsidies  might  be
made  proportionate  to  the  number  of  persons  attached  to  any  insurance  fund,
on  condition  that  the  fund  provides  a  certain  defined  minimum  rate  of  benefit.

*  Economic  Journal,  1908,  p.  632.


CH.  XIII  INSURANCE  905

been  describing.  In  making  this  comparison  we  must,  of
course,  assume  that  the  method  of  compulsion,  if  adopted,  will
be  worked  out  in  such  a  way  that  the  premiums  charged  to
different  insurers  are  adapted  fairly  closely  to  the  actuarial
values  of  the  risks  they  run.  For,  if  this  is  not  done,  some
workpeople  will  feel  that  they  are  being  taxed  for  the  benefit
of  others,  and,  apart  from  compensation,  in  the  way  either  of  a
State  grant  or  of  the  enforcement  upon  these  others  of  condi-
tions prohibiting  the  offer  of  work  below  the  standard  wage,
will  resent  the  system,  and  will  endeavour,  as  at  St.  Gall,  to
break  away  from  it.  Given,  however,  that  the  method  of  com-
pulsion is  developed  on  a  scientific  plan,  it  has  the  advantage
of  freedom  from  certain  practical  difficulties,  which  the  rival
method  cannot  completely  escape.  For,  if  bounties  are  given,
they  can  hardly  be  given  with  effect  except  through  the  Trade
or  Friendly  Societies  voluntarily  established  by  the  work-
people. In  all  countries,  however,  a  number  of  workpeople
do  not  belong  to  these  societies.  Consequently,  unless  the
bounty  is  to  be  discriminating  in  its  incidence,  a  rule  must  be
made  compelling  the  societies  to  allow  outsiders,  who  will  not
become  regular  members,  nevertheless  to  become  members  in
respect  of  the  fund  subsidised  by  the  State.  A  rule  of  this
sort  prevails  in  Denmark  and  also  in  Norway,^  but  it  is
plainly  unsatisfactory,  and  likely  to  lead — as,  indeed,  in
Norway  it  has  led — to  considerable  friction.  A  compulsory
scheme  is  free  from  this  difficulty.  A  more  weighty  con-
sideration is  as  follows.  Bounties  and  compulsion  are,  neither
of  them,  ends  in  themselves,  but  both  are  means  to  induce
people  to  insure.  Viewed  from  this  standpoint,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  compulsion  is  to  be  preferred,  more  particularly
as  regards  the  poorer  groups  of  workpeople.  For  many  of
these  are  in  such  a  situation  that  to  "  persuade  "  them  to  insure
is  almost  impossible.  Thus,  of  this  country,  it  was  said  before
the  war :  "  The  workers,  to  whom  insurance  is  a  possible
actuarial  proposition,  are  fast  being  restricted  to  men  whose
position  is  almost  professional,  the  spinner,  the  power-loom  over-
looker, the  joiner,  the  engineer,  the  compositor,  the  man,  in
fact,  who  is  in  charge  of  the  very  top  section  of  the  productive

^  Cf.  Gibbon,  Unemployment  Insurance,  p.  192.


906  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  tr.  vi

process.  The  whole  army  beneath  him  lives  in  constant  danger
of  being  '  economically  transformed '  out  of  self-supporting
existence."  ^  This  point  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that,  in
contributory  schemes  for  insurance  against  unemployment,
the  large  bounties  frequently  offered  under  the  Ghent
system,  though  they  extended  the  range  of  insurance  operated
by  unions  already  in  existence,  had  practically  no  effect  in
building  up  trade  union  insurance  among  classes  of  workpeople
hitherto  innocent  of  it.  "  The  great  bulk  of  those  claiming
the  public  subvention  are  drawn  from  highly  skilled  and
organised  trades — such  as  printing,  cigar-making,  diamond
working.  The  unskilled  and  semi-skilled  occupations — in
which  the  bulk  of  distress  through  unemployment  is  found
in  the  United  Kingdom — do  not  appear  as  yet  to  be  touched
by  the  Ghent  system  anywhere.  In  Strassburg  the  hope  of
reaching  these  classes  in  this  way  is  expressly  abandoned,  and
annual  relief  works  are  contemplated  as  the  only  resource  for
the  seasonal  labourers."  ^  In  this  respect  compulsory  insur-
ance is  obviously  a  more  powerful  instrument.  It  does  not,
indeed,  imply,  as  popular  opinion  supposes  it  to  do,  universal
insurance.  For,  since  in  all  systems,  so  far  as  they  are  con-
cerned with  sickness  and  unemployment,  benefits  lapse  after  a
time,  highly  inefficient  men  must  often  become  uninsured  in  spite
of  the  compulsion.  The  English  National  Insurance  Act  of
1911,  for  example,  provides  that  no  workman  shall  receive
unemployment  benefit  for  more  than  one-fifth  of  the  number  of
weeks  during  which  he  has  paid  contributions.  Still,  it  is  plain
that,  though  compulsion  does  not  mean  insurance  for  all  work-
people, it  must,  in  general,  approach  much  more  nearly  towards
this  goal  than  any  system  of  bounties.  "  With  compulsory  in-
surance laws,  the  end  is  reached  in  a  comparatively  short  time;
while,  even  with  State  subsidies,  voluntary  plans  have  only  helped
a  part  of  the  population  imperfectly,  and  those  who  most  need
the  protection  of  insurance  not  at  all."  ^  Furthermore,  it  may
well  be  that  the  bounty  system,  if  it  is  to  be  seriously  efifec-

1  Report  of  Messrs.  Pringle  and  Jackson,  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Law,
Appendix,  vol.  xix.  p.  10.

2  [Cd.  5068],  p.  732.

2  Zacker,  quoted  by  Henderson,  National  Insura/nce  in  the  United  States,
p.  311.


cH.xm  mSUKANCE  907

tive,  will  need  to  be  backed,  as  it  is  backed  in  commercial  life
insurance,  by  a  large  and  expensive  system  of  persuasion,  and
may,  therefore,  prove,  not  only  a  slower,  but  also  a  more  costly,
means  of  attaining  the  end  sought  by  compulsion.  We  are
not,  indeed,  entitled  to  draw  the  inference  that  compulsion  is,
in  this  matter,  universally  superior  to  bounties.  What  people
think  good  in  such  a  matter  goes  a  long  way  towards  deter-
mining what  is  good :  and,  in  a  country  where  the  idea  of
State  compulsion  was  violently  unpopular,  that  fact  might  turn
the  scale  in  favour  of  the  method  of  bovmties.  In  fact,  how-
ever, the  unpopularity  of  compulsion  appears  to  be  imaginary
rather  than  real,  at  all  events  among  the  workpeople  of
western  Europe.  The  device  of  combining  with  compulsion  a
certain  element  of  State  aid,  which  has  been  adopted  in  the
legislation  of  Germany,  France  and  England,  has  apparently
sufficed  to  make  the  "  principle  "  of  compulsion  palatable.^

§  7.  But  this  conclusion  does  not  exhaust  the  problem.
The  end  sought  is  the  provision  of  insurance  benefit  so
arranged  as  to  make  the  consuming  power  of  relatively  poor
persons  less  unstable  than  it  would  otherwise  be.  Hitherto,
we  have  supposed  that  the  funds  out  of  which  those  benefits
are  paid  must  be  constituted,  in  the  main,  from  premiums  paid
by  the  insured.  But  is  this  really  necessary  ?  Would  not
the  whole  scheme  be  greatly  simplified,  and  many  difficulties
avoided,  if  the  funds  were  contributed  from  the  general  tax
revenue  ?  In  the  ninth  chapter  of  Part  V.  it  was  indicated
that  the  effect  upon  the  national  dividend  of  arrangements
that  discourage  people  from  making  provision  for  themselves
by  means  of  insurance  is  much  smaller  than  the  effect  of  equal
discouragement  to  provide  for  themselves  by  way  of  con-
temporaneous work.  This  point  may  be  developed  as  follows.
Suppose  that  a  group  of  persons,  prima  facie  with  similar
prospects,  agree  to  subscribe  annually  for  the  needs  of  any  of
their  number  who  may  suffer  misfortune  in  the  course  of  the
year.  Being  ignorant  as  to  which  of  them  will  so  suffer,  it  is
worth  while  for  all  of  them  to  enter  into  the  contract.  It  is
plain,  however,  that  income  paid  over  in  fulfilment  of  it  is

1  Cf.  Labour  Gaxette,  1911,  p.  116,  for  an  account  of  the  French  law  of  1910
on  old-age  and  inTalidity  pensions.


908  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


PT.  V


simply  income  transferred,  and  does  not  imply  any  equivalent
of  national  dividend  created :  it  is,  in  fact,  exactly  analogous  to
income  obtained  from  the  gift  of  a  friend.  Of  course,  the
insurance  arrangements  of  real  life  are  not  fashioned  in  this
simple  way.  One  obvious  difference  is  that,  since,  in  any
ordinary  insurance  society,  the  annual  payment  of  benefits
is,  within  limits,  variable  and  uncertain,  some  capital  funds
must  be  put  by  to  guard  against  exceptionally  bad  years,  and
the  amount  of  these  funds  must  be  greater,  the  smaller  is  the
range  the  society  covers  and  the  less  independent  are  the  risks
it  assumes.  In  fire  insurance,  for  example,  provision  must  be
made  against  the  danger  of  heavy  drains  through  widespread
conflagrations.  This,  however,  is  not  the  main  point.  Most
of  the  risks  insured  against  by  the  working  classes  are  of
a  kind  to  which  a  man  becomes  more  liable  with  advancing
years.  But  it  is  not  convenient  to  set  up  systems  of  insurance
involving  steadily  increasing  premiums.  Such  systems  have,
indeed,  been  tried,  but,  in  practice,  they  cannot  compete  in
attractiveness  with  systems  based  on  uniform  annual  subscrip-
tions. If,  however,  level-rate  systems  are  to  be  solvent,  in
the  sense  of  being  competent  at  any  time  to  fulfil  the  con-
tracts outstanding  against  them  even  though  the  influx  of
new  members  were  to  cease,  the  annual  premium  must  be
fixed  at  a  rate  exceeding  the  actuarial  value  of  the  annual
risk  involved  in  the  insurance  of  the  younger  among  the
insurers.  This  means,  in  effect,  that  the  insurance  society
holds  as  reserve,  and,  therefore,  presumably  invests,  a  sum  of
money  equal  to  the  present  value  of  the  obligations  which
it  has  contracted  in  favour  of  its  existing  members,  minus  the
present  value  of  the  probable  future  premiums  to  be  paid  by
those  members.^  So  much  is  necessary  to  maintain  technical
solvency.  Under  schemes  of  compulsory  insurance  of  guaran-
teed permanence  the  certainty  that  the  inflow  of  young
members  will  not  be  checked  enables  the  revenue  to  be  safely
maintained  at  a  level  much  below  this.  Thus,  in  the  German
law  of  accident  insurance,  "  provision  is  made  only  for  payment
of  the  benefits  falling  due  during  the  current  year,  leaving  the

1  For  a  good  discussion  of  this  matter  cf.  Gephart,  Principles  of  Insurance,
chapter  viii.


CH.  xin  INSUKANCE  909

payment  of  sums  falling  due  in  subsequent  years  to  be  met
out  of  the  receipts  of  such  years."  ^  In  some  compulsory
schemes,  e.g.  in  the  Norwegian  law  for  compulsory  insurance
against  accidents,  it  is  provided  that  the  finance  shall  be  based
on  "capitalised  values,"  which  means  that  reserves  adequate
to  technical  solvency  have  to  be  built  up.  But,  even  under
voluntary  schemes  and  compulsory  schemes  where  this
rule  prevails,  the  point  made  above  in  regard  to  simple
assessment  societies  still  holds  good  in  great  measure.  The
reserve  required  for  solvency  is  necessarily  much  less  than  the
sum  which  would  yield  interest  sufficient  to  pay  the  benefits
as  they  fall  due,  because,  for  purposes  of  solvency,  the  accumu-
lated capital  must  itself  be  regarded  as  a  distributable  fund.*
In  the  most  completely  solvent  society,  therefore,  the  money
paid  over  in  benefits  in  any  year  will  include,  besides  income
derived  from  invested  funds,  a  large  slice  of  the  subscriptions
received  during  that  year ;  and,  in  societies  that  are  not  com-
pletely solvent,  the  slice  will  be  still  larger.  In  this  country,
combining  the  figures  for  accumulated  funds  and  for  benefits,
given,  in  respect  of  our  principal  Friendly  Societies,  in  the
Abstract  of  Labour  Statistics  for  1907,  we  find  that  the
"  accumulated  funds  "  amounted  to  20^  million  pounds  and
the  benefits  to  3^  million  pounds.  But  a  capital  sum  of
twenty  millions  could  not  then  have  yielded  an  annual  return
of  more  than  one  million.  Hence,  of  the  benefits  paid  by
these  societies,  much  the  greater  part — some  three-quarters
of  the  whole — must  have  come,  not  from  the  fruits  of  invested

1  Frankel  and  Dawson,  Working-men's  Insurance  in  Europe,  p.  112.
"  Employers  prefer  this  arrangement  because  they  can  thus  retain  the  money  in
their  business,  which  sums  would  otherwise  have  been  collected  by  the  associa-
tions and  accumulated  in  the  capitalised  values  "  (ibid.).

2  If  I  be  the  rate  of  interest  and  a  a  given  annuity,  to  begin  next  year  and
last  for  n  years,  the  sum  required  to  yield  that  annuity  at  interest  without

exhausting  the  principal  is  -,  but  if  the  principal  also  may  be  called  upon,  the

sum  required,  even  without  allowing  for  the  future  subseriptions  of  present

members,  is  only  -{  \  -.,  .  ..-  V;  and  when  allowance  is  made  for  these  sab-

scriptions  it  is  smaller  than  that.  It  is,  indeed,  necessary  that,  besides  the
reserves  just  described,  an  insurance  society  should  keep  a  further  reserve  to
guard  against  the  occurrence  in  any  year  of  a  quantity  of  claims  in  excess  of
the  "probable"  annual  amount  In  large  societies,  however,  the  reserve
needed  for  this  purpose  is,  in  general,  small.


910  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  pt.  vi

moneys,  but  from  contemporary  subscriptions  by  other  in-
surers. We  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  income,  which
workpeople  provide  for  themselves  against  sickness,  old  age
and  so  on  by  means  of  friendly  societies,  is  not,  in  the  main,
income  correlated  with  any  substantial  contribution  to  the
national  dividend.  Consequently,  for  the  State,  by  providing
free  insurance,  to  discourage  people  from  making  provision  for
private  insurance,  will  not  involve  a  large  injury  to  the
dividend.  It  will,  of  course,  involve  some  injury,  both  because,
as  explained  above,  a  part  of  insurance  benefits  are  provided
out  of  real  savings,  and  because,  as  was  shown  in  S  4  of
the  ninth  chapter  of  Part  V.,  the  gift  of  anything  that
people  would  have  bought  for  themselves,  if  it  had  not  been
given  to  them,  will  somewhat  lessen  their  motive  to  work.
Still,  the  injurious  effect  on  the  dividend  is  not  likely  to
be  large.  In  view  of  this  conclusion  a  powerful  plea  can  be
built  up  for  making  insurance,  like  education,  free.  But  here
a  distinction  must  be  drawn.  Some  occupations  are  much
more  liable  than  others  to  unemployment,  accidents  and
occupational  diseases.  Consequently,  as  was  pointed  out  in
Part  III.  Chapter  IX.  §  4,  for  the  State  to  charge  itself
with  the  payment  of  insurance  benefits  all  round  would  involve
exceptionally  large  payments  to,  and,  therefore,  differentiation
in  favour  of,  workpeople  engaged  in  the  more  dangerous,
unhealthy  and  fluctuating  occupations.  This  differentiation
would  push  workpeople  into  these  occupations  beyond  the
point  at  which  the  value  of  their  marginal  net  product  there
is  equal  to  what  it  is  in  other  occupations.  Thus,  indirectly,
it  would  inflict  a  real  injury  on  the  national  dividend.  For
this  reason  we  conclude  that,  when  a  risk  is  greater  in
some  occupations  than  in  others,  free  insurance  should  only
be  extended  to  the  minimum  risk  that  is  common  to  all
occupations.  This  conclusion  is  applicable  to  unemployment,
occupational  accidents  and  occupational  diseases.^  But  there
are,  of  course,  other  very  important  "  risks,"  such  as  old  age

1  In  this  connection  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  a  recent  Swiss  law  dis-
tinguishes between  occupational  and  non-occupational  accidents,  throwing  the
whole  cost  of  compensation  for  the  former  upon  the  employer,  while  the  work-
man and  the  State  jointly  provide  against  the  latter  (Labour  Gazette,
May  1912).


OH.  xiii  INSUEA2^CE  911

and  general  sickness,  that  do  not  vary  to  any  significant  extent
in  different  occupations.  Free  State  provision  of  insurance
against  these  risks  would  involve  no  injurious  reaction  upon
the  distribution  of  labour.  The  main  effect  would  be  simply
to  transfer  the  burden  of  supporting  the  sick  and  aged  from
the  shoulders  of  their  fellow  workers  to  those  of  the  tax-
payers as  a  whole.  This  in  itself  would  be  a  good  thing :
and  it  would  have  the  further  advantage,  as  against  com-
pulsory contributory  insurance,  of  administrative  simplicity
and  cheapness.  Mr.  Sidney  Webb  writes  :  "  Eegarded  as  a
method  of  raising  revenue,  compulsory  insurance  of  all  the
wage-earning  population,  with  its  elaborate  paraphernalia  of
weekly  deductions,  its  array  of  cards  and  stamps,  its  gigantic
membership  catalogue,  its  inevitable  machinery  of  identifica-
tion and  protection  against  fraud,  involving,  not  only  a  vast
and  perpetual  trouble  to  every  employer,  but  also  the  appoint-
ment of  an  extraordinarily  extensive  civil  service  staff — is,
compared  with  all  our  other  taxes,  almost  ludicrously  costly
and  cumbersome  to  all  concerned."  ^  For  these  reasons,  within
the  limits  indicated  above,  the  case  for  free  insurance  is  a
very  strong  one.

*  The  Prevention  of  Desiitutum,  p.  170.


APPENDICES

I.  UNCERTAINTY- BEARING  AS  A  FACTOR  OF  PRO-
DUCTION.

II.  THE      MEASUREMENT     OF     ELASTICITIES     OF
DEMAND.

III.  A    DIAGRAMMATIC    TREATMENT    OF    CERTAIN
PROBLEMS  OF  COMPETITION  AND  MONOPOLY.


913  3n


APPENDIX   I

UNCERTAINTY-BEARING   AS   A   FACTOR   OF  PRODUCTION

§  1.  It  is  customary  in  economic  discussion  to  class  together  as
factors  of  production,  along  with  the  services  of  Nature,  waiting
and  various  sorts  of  mental  and  manual  labour.  In  a  world  in
which  all  future  wants  were  perfectly  foreseen  this  catalogue
would  be  substantially  adequate.  But  in  the  actual  world  some
future  wants  are  not  perfectly  foreseen.  On  the  contrary,  in  the
vast  majority  of  enterprises,  in  the  conduct  of  which  resources  are
waited  for,  they  are  also  exposed  to  uncertainty ;  they  are  turned,
that  is  to  say,  into  a  use,  the  result  of  which  cannot  be  certainly
predicted.  In  these  circumstances  it  is  proper  that  there  should
be  added  to  the  list  of  factors  of  production  enumerated  above  a
further  group  comprising  various  sorts  of  uncertainty -bearing.

§  2.  The  principal  reason  why  this  arrangement  is  not  usually
adopted  seems  to  be  that,  in  practice,  uncertainty-bearing  is  bound
up  in  such  intimate  association  with  waiting  that  the  possibility
of  separating  the  two  in  analysis  is  not  immediately  apparent.
Reflection,  however,  makes  it  plain  that  the  connection  between
them  is  not  a  necessary  or  inherent  connection, — that  they  are,  in
fact,  two  things  generally  found  together,  and  not  a  single  thing.
Thus,  let  us  imagine  a  man  in  possession  of  a  vase,  which,  as  a
vase,  is  worth  £100,  but,  if  broken,  would  be  worth  nothing ;  and
let  us  suppose  the  owner  to  know  that  this  vase  contains  something,
whose  value  is  equally  likely  to  be  anything  between  nothing  and
£250.  If  the  owner  breaks  the  vase,  he  is,  then,  equally  likely  to
lose  any  sum  up  to  £100,  or  to  gain  any  sum  up  to  £150.  The
actuarial  value  of  his  chance  is,  therefore,  £25,  and,  if  there  were
a  million  people  in  his  position,  and  they  all  elected  to  break  their
vases,  the  aggregate  wealth  of  them  all  would  probably  be  increased
by  about  £25,000,000.  In  other  words,  the  services  of  these
million  people,  in  bearing  the  uncertainty  of  placing  £100  each  in
a  position  where  it  is  equally  likely  to  become  anything  between
nothing  and  £250,  are  responsible  for  an  addition  of  £25,000,000
to  national  wealth.     This  example  shows  that  uncertainty-bearing,

915


916  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  app.

though  generally  associated  with  waiting,  is  analytically  quite
distinct  from  it.  Nor  was  it  really  necessary  to  seek  an  illustration
so  far  removed  from  actual  life.  If  a  man  contracts  to  deliver  100
bushels  of  wheat  six  months  hence,  with  the  intention  of  buying
them  for  that  purpose  on  the  day  of  delivery  at  a  price  which  he
hopes  will  be  lower  than  his  contract  price,  that  man,  no  less  than
the  breaker  of  the  vase,  provides  uncertainty-bearing  without  pro-
viding any  waiting.  Uncertainty-bearing  is  thus  seen  to  be  an
independent  and  elementary  factor  of  production  standing  on  the
same  level  as  any  of  the  better-known  factors.

§  3.  In  the  way  of  this  general  conception  there  are  two
serious  difl&culties.  The  first  of  them  can  be  set  out  as  follows.
It  is  well  known  that  the  ordinary  factors  of  production  are  two-
dimensional,  in  the  sense  that  a  unit  of  any  of  them  can  only  be
expressed  as  a  quantity  of  stuff  multiplied  by  a  quantity  of  time.
Waiting  consists  in  the  provision  of  a  given  quantity  of  resources,
and  labour  in  the  provision  of  a  given  quantity  of  labour,  during
a  given  period.  Thus,  the  unit  of  waiting  is  said  to  be  a  year-
pound,  and  the  unit  of  labour  a  year-labourer.^  It  would  seem,
therefore,  that,  if  uncertainty -bearing,  as  a  factor  of  production,  is
to  stand  on  a  level  with  waiting  and  labour,  it  must  somehow  bear
a  relation  to  time  analogous  to  that  which  they  bear.  But  un-
certainty-bearing, unlike  waiting  and  labour,  is  in  its  essence
independent  of  time,  and,  so  far  as  pure  theory  goes,  capable  of
instantaneous  consummation.  Consequently,  the  provision  of  a
given  quantity  of  uncertainty -bearing  of  any  sort  for  a  given
period  seems  at  first  sight  a  mere  phrase  without  substantial
meaning.  The  difficulty  thus  suggested  is,  however,  obviated  by
the  fact  that,  as  a  matter  of  practice,  the  consummation  of  any
act  of  uncertainty -bearing  is  not  instantaneous,  but  involves  a
process  in  time.  The  uncertainty-bearing,  for  example,  which  a
company  promoter  undertakes,  is  not  completed  until  the  public
has  come  in  and  allowed  him  to  unload,  and  this,  of  course,  will
not  happen  till  a  considerable  interval  has  elapsed.  This  circum-
stance enables  us  to  fashion  a  unit  of  uncertainty-bearing  on  the
same  plan  as  the  units  of  waiting  and  of  labour.  This  unit  is
the  exposure  of  a  £  to  a  given  scheme  of  uncertainty,  in  an  act
the  consummation  of  which  occupies  a  year.  The  exposure  of
a  £  to  a  succession  of  like  schemes  of  uncertainty  during  a  year,
in  acts  the  consummation  of  which  occupies  on  the  average,  say
ten  days,  will  thus  embrace  ^-^  of  these  units.  We  have  in
this  way  obtained  a  two-dimensional  unit  of  uncertainty-bearing
analogous  to  the  units  of  waiting  and  of  labour,  and  the  difficulty,
which  this  section  was  designed  to  discuss,  has  been  overcome.
'  Ctiante,  pp.  142-3,  footnote.


I


1  UNCERTAINTY-BEAEING  917

§  4.  The  second  difficulty  is  in  this  wise.  Labour  and  wait-
ing are  objective  services,  the  aversion  to  providing  which  may
vary  with  diflferent  people,  but  which,  in  themselves,  are  the  same
for  everybody.  Uncertainty-bearing,  however,  it  may  be  said,  is
in  its  essence  a  subjective  state,  invoked,  indeed,  by  external
conditions  but  bearing  a  quite  different  relation  to  these  conditions
for  people  of  different  temperaments  and  with  different  informa-
tion. It  would  seem,  therefore,  at  first  sight  that  the  amount  of
uncertainty-bearing  involved  in  carrying  through  any  operation
must  depend,  not  only  on  the  nature  of  the  operation,  but  also  on
the  temperament  and  knowledge  of  the  people  who  bear  the  un-
certainty. Such  a  conception,  however,  is  fatal  to  the  symmetry
of  our  analysis.  If  there  is  to  be  any  real  parallel  with  labour
and  waiting,  we  must  define  uncertainty-bearing  objectively.  Thus,
the  uncertainty-bearing  involved  in  the  investment  of  any  given
amount  of  resources  means  for  us  the  uncertainty-bearing  which
that  investment  would  involve  if  it  were  made  by  a  man  of
representative  temperament  and  with  representative  knowledge.
If  the  investment  is  actually  made  by  a  man  who  never  feels
subjective  uncertainty,  whatever  the  evidence,  or  by  a  man  who
possesses  information  adequate  to  destroy  subjective  uncertainty,
we  shall  say  not  that  less  uncertainty-bearing  has  been  taken  up,
but  that  a  given  amount  has  been  taken  up  by  a  person  who,  from
temperament  or  information,  is  an  exceptionally  ready  bearer  of
uncertainty.  There  is,  it  must  be  admitted,  an  arbitrary  and
artificial  appearance  about  this  method  of  defining  our  key  term ;
but  there  appears  to  be  no  way  in  which  this  can  be  avoided.

§  5.  Up  to  this  point  we  have  taken  no  account  of  the  fact
that  uncertainty-bearing,  like  labour,  is  a  term  embracing  a  large
group  of  factors  of  production,  rather  than  a  single  factor.  It
must  now  be  observed,  however,  that,  just  as  there  are  many
different  sorts  of  labour,  so  there  are  many  different  schemes  of
uncertainty,  to  which,  in  the  course  of  industry,  resources  may  be
exposed.  A  scheme  of  uncertainty  can  be  represented  diagram-
matically  in  the  following  manner.  Along  a  base-line  OX  mark
off  all  possible  yields  that  may  result  from  the  exposure  of  a
£  to  the  scheme  in  question ;  and,  through  each  point  on  OX,
draw  an  ordinate  proportionate  to  the  probability,  on  the  evidence,
of  the  corresponding  return.  Join  the  tops  of  all  these  ordinates,
as  in  the  figure  on  the  next  page.  Evidently  any  scheme  of
uncertainty  can  be  represented  by  a  curve  formed  upon  this  plan.
Furthermore,  the  principal  species  of  schemes  that  are  liable
to  occur  can  be  distinguished  into  certain  broad  groups.  Find
on  OX  a  point  B,  such  that  OB  represents  the  actuarial  value
of  the  chances  of  the  returns  indicated  on  the  curve,  or,  in  other


918


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


APP.


words,  such  that  OB  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  products  of  each
several  ordinate  multiplied  by  the  corresponding  abscissa,  divided
by  the  sum  of  the  ordinates ;  and  let  the  ordinate  through  B  cut
the  curve  in  H.  In  like  manner,  find  on  OX  a  point  M,  such  that
OM  represents  the  most  probable,  or  most  "frequent,"  return
relevant  to  the  scheme  of  uncertainty  under  review  ;  and  let  the
ordinate  through  M  cut  the  curve  in  K.  On  this  basis,  we  may
distinguish,  in  the  first  place,  between  curves  which  are  symmetrical,
in  such  wise  that  BH  and  MK  coincide,  and  curves  which  are
asymmetrical.  The  symmetrical  group  includes  schemes  of  such
a  sort  that,  if  r  is  the  actuarial  value  of  a  pound  exposed  to  any
scheme,  the  chance  of  obtaining  a  return  (r  -  h)  is  equal  to  the
chance  of  obtaining  a  return  (r  +  h),  for  all  values  of  h.  The
asymmetrical  group  includes  all  other  schemes.  The  symmetrical
type  is  only  possible  when  the  conditions  are  such  that  the  ex-


posure of  a  pound  to  uncertainty  cannot  yield  a  gain  greater  than
a  pound,  since,  from  the  nature  of  things,  it  cannot  yield  a  loss
greater  than  this.  Secondly,  within  the  symmetrical  group  we  may
distinguish  curves  which  are  spread  out,  like  open  umbrellas,  and
curves  which  are  narrow,  like  closed  umbrellas.  The  former  sort
represent  schemes  in  which  a  wide  divergence,  the  latter  schemes
in  which  only  a  small  divergence,  of  the  actual  from  the  most
probable  return  is  probable.  Thirdly,  within  the  asymmetrical
group  we  may  distinguish  curves  in  which  MK  lies  respectively
to  the  right  and  to  the  left  of  BH.  The  former  sort  represent
schemes  in  which  the  most  probable  outcome  is  a  moderate  gain,
but  a  large  loss  is  more  probable  than  a  large  gain.  A  scheme  of
this  kind  would  be  embodied  in  a  lottery  offering  a  great  number
of  small  prizes  and  one  or  two  blanks.  The  latter  sort  of  curve
represent  schemes  in  which  the  most  probable  outcome  is  a  moderate
loss,  but  a  small  loss  is  more  probable  than  a  small  gain.  A
lottery  of  the  ordinary  kind,  containing  a  few  large  prizes  and


I  UNCEETAINTY-BEARING  919

many  blanks,  affords  an  example  of  this  sort  of  scheme.  Within
each  of  the  groups  thus  distinguished  it  is  obvious  that  an  indefinite
number  of  further  subdivisions  could  be  made.

§  6.  The  great  variety  of  schemes  of  uncertainty,  which
uncertainty-bearing  in  general  is  thus  found  to  include,  might  seem
at  first  sight  to  vitiate  the  attempt,  which  was  made  in  an  earlier
section,  to  treat  "  the  factor  uncertainty-bearing  "  and  "  the  factor
waiting  "*on  the  same  footing.  For,  waiting  is  a  single  thing,  while
uncertainty-bearing  is  a  group  of  different  things.  The  meaning  of
a  change  in  the  supply  of  waiting  is,  therefore,  clear ;  but  how
are  we  to  conceive  of  a  change  in  the  supply  of  uncertainty-
bearing  ?  This  difficulty,  though  it  is  a  natural  one  to  raise,  is
easily  overcome.  For,  after  all,  uncertainty-bearing  in  this  regard
stands  in  exactly  the  same  position  as  labour.  Labour  in  general
includes  an  immense  variety  of  different  sorts  and  qualities  of
labour.  This  circumstance  does  not  prevent  us  from  making  use
of  the  general  concept  labour  alongside  of  the  concept  waiting.
In  order  to  render  this  procedure  legitimate,  all  that  we  need  do
is  to  select  in  an  arbitrary  manner  some  particular  sort  of  labour
as  our  fundamental  unit,  and  to  express  quantities  of  other  sorts
of  labour  in  terms  of  this  unit  on  the  basis  of  their  comparative
values  in  the  market.  In  this  way  all  the  various  sorts  of  labour
supplied  or  demanded  at  any  time  can  be  expressed  in  a  single
figure,  as  the  equivalent  of  so  much  labour  of  a  particular  arbi-
trarily chosen  grade.  Exactly  the  same  device  is  available  for
uncertainty -bearing.  The  exposure  of  a  pound  to  a  particular
arbitrarily  chosen  scheme  of  uncertainty  can  be  selected  as  a
fundamental  unit,  and  the  exposure  of  resources  to  any  scheme  of
uncertainty  can  be  reduced,  on  the  basis  of  comparative  market
values,  to  its  equivalent  in  terms  of  this  unit.  Since,  as  experience
shows,  the  desire  for  an  extra  unit  of  commodity  diminishes  as  the
number  of  units  in  our  possession  grows,  and  since,  therefore,  an
even  chance  of  gaining  or  losing  (x  +  Ax)  units  is  less  desired  than
an  even  chance  of  gaining  or  losing  z  units,  it  follows  that,  other
things  being  equal,  the  exposure  of  £100  to  a  scheme  of  uncertainty-
bearing  whose  range  is  broad  will  be  sold  at  a  larger  price  than
the  exposure  of  £100  to  a  scheme  whose  range  is  narrow.  It
should  be  added  that  the  relative  price  of  different  schemes  of
uncertainty  -  bearing  is  not  determined  solely  by  their  range,
because,  as  with  different  sorts  of  labour,  incidental  associations
may  throw  upon  some  of  them  a  glamour  that  others  lack.  The
uncertainty -bearing  involved  in  gold -mining  is,  for  example,
offered  cheaply  because  of  the  pleasurable  excitement  attaching
to  it.  But  the  way  in  which  the  process  of  reducing  various
schemes  of  uncertainty-bearing  to  a  common  unit  works  out  in


920  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  app.

practice  is  a  secondary  matter.  The  essential  thing  is  that
reduction  is  possible.  So  soon  as  this  is  understood,  an  apparently
formidable  obstacle  in  the  way  of  assimilating  uncertainty-bearing
to  the  other  factors  of  pioduction  can  be  successfully  overcome.

§  7.  When  the  assimilation  is  accomplished,  and  all  the  various
schemes  of  uncertainty,  to  which,  in  different  industries,  people
submit  resources,  are  translated  into  terms  of  some  representative
scheme  of  uncertainty -bearing,  there  will  be  a  supply  schedule  and
a  demand  schedule  for  pounds  to  be  exposed  to  this  scheme,  just
as  there  is  a  supply  and  demand  schedule  for  pounds  to  be  exposed
to  "  waiting."  The  demand  price  or  the  supply  price  for  the
exposure  of  any  given  quantity  of  pounds  is  the  excess  of  money
offered  or  asked  above  the  actuarial  value  of  a  £  so  exposed.^
For  different  quantities  of  uncertainty-bearing  the  demand  price  and
the  supply  price  will,  of  course,  both  be  different.  For  some  quan-
tities the  supply  price  will  be  negative.  Up  to  a  point,  people
will  gamble  because  they  like  it,  though  they  know  that,  on  the
whole,  they  are  likely  to  lose  money.  But,  though  some  amount
of  uncertainty-bearing,  like  some  amount  of  labour,  would  be  forth-
coming for  industry,  even  though  there  were  no  expectation  of
reward,  in  present  conditions  more  is  wanted  than  can  be  obtained
on  those  terms.  Thus,  in  respect  of  such  quantities  of  uncertainty-
bearing  as  are  actually  made  use  of  in  modern  industry,  the  supply
price,  like  the  supply  price  of  the  other  factors  of  production,  is
positive ;  and  the  general  conditions  determining  the  value,  or
price,  of  uncertainty-bearing  are  similar  to  those  determining  the
price  of  those  factors.^

^  The  payment  asked  and  offered  for  uncertainty-bearing  is,  thus,  by  no  means
the  same  thing  as  the  exceptional  profits  obtained  by  persons  who  have  succeeded
in  risky  businesses.  Even  though  no  payment  whatever  were  made  for  uncer-
tainty-bearing, and  the  average  earnings  of  these  businesses  were,  therefore,
equal  to  those  obtained  in  safe  businesses,  the  successful  undertakers  of  a  risky
business  would  still  need  to  make  exceptional  profits  as  an  offset  to  the  excep-
tional losses  of  those  who  fail.  Otherwise  the  whole  body  of  investors  in  the
business,  taken  collectively,  would  be  obtaining  less  than  the  actuarial  value  of
investment  in  it.  The  payment  for  uncertainty-bearing,  therefore,  consists,
not  in  the  whole  of  the  excess  above  normal  profits  earned  by  these  successful
undertakers,  but  only  in  that  (generally  small)  part  of  this  excess  which  is
not  cancelled  by  the  corresponding  losses  of  other  undertakers  who  have  fallen
out  of  the  race.

2  It  is  easily  seen  that  the  quantity  of  uncertainty-bearing  which  any  indi-
vidual will  provide  at  any  given  price  depends,  other  things  being  equal,  upon
his  wealth.  For,  if  he  has  (x-f  100)£,  to  expose  £100  to  a  5  per  cent  range  of
uncertainty  is  to  accept  an  even  chance  of  receiving  (cc-f  105)£  or  £(a;  +  95).
But  there  is  reascjn  to  believe  that,  not  merely  the  desire  for  an  extra  unit  of
resources  in  general,  but  also  the  rate  of  diminution  of  this  desire,  diminishes  as
the  number  of  units  in  our  possession  grows.  It  follows  that  the  probable  loss
of  satisfaction  involved  in  accepting  the  above  even  chance  instead  of  a  certain
(a;-f-100)£  is  smaller  the  larger  is  the  value  of  x.


I  UNCEETAINTY-BEARING  921

§  8.  Like  any  other  factor  of  production,  uncertainty -bearing
may  improve  in  technical  efficiency.  The  central  fact,  upon  which
the  improvements  in  it  that  have  actually  taken  place  depends,  is
that  forecasts  based  upon  existing  knowledge  are,  in  general,  more
certain  when  they  are  made  about  collections  than  when  they  are
made  about  individual  members  of  collections.  This  fact  is
expressed  in  technical  form  in  the  important  corollary  to  the
normal  law  of  error,  which  asserts  that  the  "  precision  of  an  average
is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  number  of  terms  it  con-
tains." ^  It  implies  that,  if  there  is  an  even  chance  that  the  invest-
ment of  £100  in  one  assigned  venture  will  yield  a  return  greater
than  £95  and  less  than  £115,  there  is  an  even  chance  that  £100
scattered  among  a  hundred  similar  investments  will,  if  all  the
causes  affecting  the  different  investments  are  independent,  yield  a
return  lying  between  £104  and  £106.  If  only  some  of  the  causes
are  independent  and  some  common,  the  range  within  which  it  is
more  probable  than  not  that  the  return  will  lie  will  be  greater  than
that  enclosed  between  £104  and  £106,  but  it  will  still  be  smaller
than  that  enclosed  between  £95  and  £115.  It  follows,  in  accord-
ance with  the  argument  of  §  6,  that,  in  general,  the  investment  of
a  sum  of  money  in  equal  parts  in  a  hundred  similar  enterprises
involves  less  uncertainty-bearing  than  the  investment  of  the  same
sum  in  one  of  these  enterprises.  It  follows,  further,  that,  if  out  of
a  hundred  people,  each  of  whom  has  £100  to  invest,  every  one
divides  his  investment  among  a  hundred  enterprises,  the  aggregate
amount  of  uncertainty-bearing  vmdertaken  by  the  group  is  smaller
than  it  would  have  been  had  every  investor  concentrated  on  a
single  enterprise.  The  physical  results  of  the  investments  taken
together  must,  however,  be  the  same.  Therefore,  whenever  more
or  less  independent  uncertainties  are  combined  together,  a  given
result  can  be  attained  by  a  smaller  amount  of  uncertainty-bearing,
or,  to  put  the  matter  otherwise,  the  factor  uncertainty-bearing  has
been  made  technically  more  efficient.-  The  principle  thus  explained
is  fully  recognised  by  business  men,  and  has  long  lain  at  the  root
both  of  insurance  and  of  much  speculative  dealing  on  'Change,
Thus,  the  segregation  of  the  speculative  element  in  certain  forms  of
business  and  its  concentration  upon  a  relatively  small  number  of
speculators  have  not  only  changed  the  distribution,  but  have
reduced  the  aggregate  amount,  of  uncertainty-bearing  required  in

1  Bowley,  Elemenis  of  Statistics,  p.  305.

2  This  circumstance,  of  coarse,  permits  the  release,  partly  for  immediate
consumption  and  partly  for  investment,  of  resources  which  must  otherwise  have
been  stored.  For  example,  the  combination  of  the  community's  gold  reserves  in
a  central  bank  lowers  the  amount  of  aggregate  gold  reserve  necessary,  increases
the  capital  available  for  investment,  and  pro  tanto  lowers  the  rate  of  interest.
(Cf.  H.  Y,  Brown,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1910,  p.  743  c^  seq.)


922  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  app.

industry.^  In  modern  times  the  range  over  which  this  principle
can  be  applied  has  been  greatly  extended  by  two  important
developments.  Of  these  the  one  is  a  legal  change,  namely,  the
concession  to  joint-stock  companies  of  the  privilege  of  limited
liability ;  the  other  an  economic  change,  namely,  the  development
in  the  means  of  transport  and  communication.  The  ways  in
which  these  two  changes  have  facilitated  the  application  of  the
above  principle  may,  therefore,  now  be  examined.

§  9.  So  long  as  liability  was  unlimited,  it  was  often  against  a
man's  interest  to  spread  his  investments ;  for,  if  he  did  so,  he
multiplied  the  points  from  which  an  unlimited  call  on  his  resources
might  be  made.  The  English  Limited  Liability  Act  of  1862  and
its  foreign  counterparts  enabled  investments  to  be  spread  without
evoking  this  danger.  Furthermore,  intermediary  organisations,
themselves  fortified  by  limited  liability,  have  been  developed,
capable  of  spreading  investments  on  behalf  of  persons  whose
resources  are  too  small  to  allow  of  their  spreading  them  for  them-
selves. Since  the  minimum  share  in  industrial  enterprises  is
seldom  less  than  £1,  the  small  investor's  capacity  for  direct
spreading  is  narrowly  restricted.  Savings  banks,  friendly  societies,
trade  unions,  building  societies,  co-operative  societies,  trust  com-
panies and  so  forth — all  of  them  limited  liability  associations — are
able,  however,  to  put  him  in  a  position  as  favourable  in  this
respect  as  is  occupied  by  the  large  capitalist.  Nor  is  it  only
the  spreading  of  investments  that  the  system  of  limited  liability
has  facilitated.  It  has  also  made  possible  the  spreading  or  com-
bination of  risks  in  a  wider  sense.  For,  in  general,  each  business
deals  directly  or  indirectly  with  many  businesses.  If  one  of
them  fails  for  a  million  pounds,  under  unlimited  liability  the  whole
of  the  loss  falls  on  the  shareholders  or  partners — provided,  of
course,  that  their  total  resources  are  adequate  to  meet  it —
but  under  limited  liability  a  part  of  it  is  scattered  among  the
shareholders  or  partners  of  a  great  number  of  businesses.  Hence,
any  shareholder  in  one  business  combines  with  the  uncertainty
proper  to  his  own  business  some  of  that  proper  to  other  busi-
nesses also.  It  follows  that  the  range  of  uncertainty,  to  which
a  normal  £100  invested  in  industry  is  subjected  by  reason  of
failures,  is  still  further  diminished  in  amount.  This  advantage
is  additional  to,  and  quite  distinct  from,  any  direct  national
gain  which  limited  liability  may  give  to  a  country  by  throwing  a
part  of  the  real  cost  of  its  unsuccessful  enterprises  upon  foreigners.

^  In  some  circumstances  the  concentration  together  of  divergent  "risks"
would  lead  to  their  complete  neutralisation,  e.g.  if  outdoor  entertainments  were
insured  'against  wet  weather  on  a  bank  holiday  and  indoor  entertainments
simultaneously  insured  for  an  equal  amount  against  fine  weather.  (Cf.  Marshall,
Industry  and  Trade,  p.  255.)


I  UNCERTAINTY-BEAEING  923

§  10.  There  remains  the  development  in  the  means  of  com-
munication. This  facilitates  the  combination  of  uncertainties
in  one  very  simple  way.  It  puts  investors  into  contact  with
a  greater  number  of  different  openings  than  were  formerly
available.  This  eflFect,  though  of  great  importance,  is  so
obvious  and  direct  that  no  comment  upon  it  is  required.  There
is,  however,  a  more  subtle  way  in  which  the  development  in
the  means  of  communication  works.  Dr.  Cassel  has  observed
that  industrial  firms  have,  in  recent  times,  been  lessening  the
quantity  of  stock  that  they  carry  in  store  waiting  to  be  worked
up,  relatively  to  their  total  business.  The  improvement  in  this
respect  applies  all  round.  As  regards  production,  "  there  is,  in
the  best-organised  industries,  very  little  in  the  way  of  material
lying  idle  between  two  different  acts  of  production,  even  if  these
acts  have  to  be  carried  out  in  different  factories,  perhaps  at  great
distances  from  each  other.  A  modern  iron-works  has  no  large
stock  either  of  raw  materials  or  of  their  product,  yet  there  is  a
continuous  stream  of  ore  and  coal  entering,  and  of  iron  being
turned  out  of  it."  ^  In  like  manner,  factories  are  coming  to  keep
a  smaller  amount  of  capital  locked  up  in  the  form  of  reserve
machines  not  ordinarily  in  use.  The  same  tendency  is  apparent
in  retail  trading.  The  ratio  of  the  average  amount  of  stock  kept
to  the  aggregate  annual  turn-over  is  smaller  than  it  used  to  be.
"  Under  modern  conditions  the  trade  of  the  country  is  conducted
on  a  retail  system  which  is  growing  year  by  year.  The  practice
of  keeping  large  stocks  has  almost  ceased,  and  goods  are  ordered
in  quantities  only  sufiBcient  to  meet  the  current  demands."^  One
reason  for  this  is  the  improvement  in  the  means  of  communi-
cation. "  The  trunk  lines  of  America,  with  their  wide-spreading
branches,  enable  merchants  in  the  cities  and  the  larger  towns
to  replenish  their  counters  and  shelves  every  day.  Stocks,
therefore,  need  not  be  so  large  as  of  old,  when,  let  us  say,
a  whole  winter's  goods  were  laid  in  by  October.  .  .  .  The
inter-urban  roads  are  extending  these  advantages  to  the  village
storekeeper,  who,  in  the  morning,  telephones  his  wants  to  Toledo,
Cleveland,  or  Detroit,  and,  in  the  afternoon,  disposes  the  ordered
wares  on  his  shelves."^  Now,  prima  facie,  this  change  of  custom
would  seem  to  be  of  little  significance.  After  all,  a  reduction  in
the  amount  of  finished  goods  held  by  retailers,  of  reserve  machinery
held  by  manufacturers,  and  so  on,  does  not  necessarily  imply  a
reduction  in  the  aggregate  amount  of  these  things  held  by  the
whole  body  of  industrialists.     On  the  contrary,  we  are  naturally

'   77ie  Nature  and  Necessity  of  Interest,  p.  126.

*  Inglis,  Report  of  the  Board  of  Trade  Bailway  Conference,  1909,  p.  33.

'  lies,  Inventors  at  Work,  p.  483.


924  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE  app.  i

inclined  to  suggest  that  the  wholesaler  and  the  machine-maker
must  increase  their  stocks  pari  passu  with  the  decrease  in  the
stocks  of  their  clients.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  this  sugges-
tion is  incorrect.  The  reason  is  that  the  wholesaler  and  the
machine-maker  represent  points  at  which  uncertainties  can  be
combined.  The  development  of  the  means  of  communication,
therefore,  in  so  far  as  it  directly  transfers  to  them  the  task  of
bearing  uncertainty,  indirectly  lessens  the  amount  of  uncertainty
that  needs  to  be  borne.  Uncertainty-bearing,  in  short,  is  rendered
more  efficient.  The  same  result  as  before  can  be  achieved  with  a
smaller  quantity  of  it,  or,  what  comes  to  be  the  same  thing,  with
a  smaller  quantity  of  waiting  designed  to  obviate  the  need  for
employing  it.


APPENDIX  II

THE   MEASUREMENT   OF  ELASTICITIES   OF  DEMAND

§  1.  With  the  information ^t  present  available  it  is  not  possible
to  lay  down  any  propositions  about  the  elasticity  of  demand  for
different  commodities  beyond  those  general  propositions  that  are
set  out  in  Part  II.  Chapter  XI.  As  has  been  pointed  out  by
Dr.  Marshall/  attempts  to  determine  the  elasticity  of  demand  for
any  commodity  in  any  market  by  a  direct  comparison  of  the  prices
and  the  quantities  consumed  at  different  times  are  exposed  to
very  great  difiBculties.  If  it  could  be  presumed  that  the  reactions
exercised  by  price-changes  upon  quantity  demanded  came  about
immediately,  and  if  allowance  could  be  made  for  those  upward
and  downward  shiftings  of  demand  schedules,  for  which  movements
of  confidence  and  alterations  in  the  supply  of  monetary  purchas-
ing power  are  responsible,  a  comparison  of  the  percentage  changes
of  prices  between  successive  years  with  the  percentage  changes  in
consumption  between  the  same  years  might,  for  commodities  about
which  adequate  statistics  exist,  yield  a  rough  numerical  measure
of  elasticity  for  amounts  of  consumption  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  average  actual  consumption.'^     It  seems  that  for  certain  com-

^  Pritvciples  of  Economics,  p.  109  et  seq.

-  Professor  Moore,  in  his  Economic  Cycles  (Chapters  iv.  and  v.),  makes  calcula-
tions of  the  ' '  elasticity  "  of  demand  for  certain  commodities  without  resort  to  the
allowances  stipulated  for  in  the  text.  But,  as  he  himself  fully  recognises,  the
elasticity,  which  his  method  enables  him  to  measure,  is  not  the  same  thing  as,
and  is  not,  in  general,  equal  to,  the  elasticity  of  demand  as  defined  by  Dr.
Marshall  and  employed  here.  Dr.  Marshall's  elasticity,  if  known,  would  make
it  possible  to  predict  how  far  the  introduction  of  a  new  cause  modifying  supply
in  a  given  manner  would  affect  prices  ;  Professor  Moore's  to  predict  with  what
price-changes  changes  in  supply  coming  about  naturally,  in  company  with  such
various  other  concrete  changes  as  have  hitherto  been  found  to  accompany  them,
are  likely  to  be  associated.  That  this  distinction  is  of  great  practical  importance
is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  whereas  the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  pig-iron,  in
Dr.  Marshall's  sense,  is,  of  cotirse,  negative — that  is  to  say,  an  increase  in
supply  involves  a  fall  in  price — the  elasticity  in  Professor  Moore's  sense,  as  calcu-
lated from  his  statistics,  is  positive.     The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  principal

925


926  ECONOMICS  OF   WELFARE  ;;  app.

modities  the  above  presumption  can  reasonably  be  made.  On
the  basis  of  it  Professor  Lehfeldt  calculated,  immediately  before
the  war,  that  the  general  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  wheat
in  the  United  Kingdom  was  about  0'6.^  But  there  is  little
hope  that  many  elasticities  will  lend  themselves  to  calcula-
tion in  this  direct  way.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to  inquire
whether  any  indirect  method  of  calculation  is  available  for
overcoming  difficulties  due  to  the  slowness  with  which  reactions
work  themselves  out.

§  2.  Some  years  ago  I  devised  a  method,  the  basis  of  which  is
a  comparison  of  the  amount  of  a  commodity  consumed  by  persons
of  different  incomes  at  a  given  price,  instead  of  a  comparison  of  the
amounts  consumed  by  persons  of  given  incomes  at  different  prices.
Statistical  data  needed  for  this  method  are  found  in  family
budgets.  Much  attention  is  now  being  paid  both  by  State
Departments  and  by  private  persons  to  the  study  of  these  budgets;
and  a  number  of  tables  have  already  been  printed  to  show  the
proportion  of  the  income  which  families  in  different  income  groups
expend  upon  the  various  principal  sorts  of  commodities.  It  is
possible  so  to  manipulate  these  data  as  to  facilitate  the  determina-
tion of  certain  elasticities  of  demand,

§  3.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  data  are  better  than  they  are,
and  that  our  tables  give  the  expenditure  of  the  group  of  work-
people whose  wages  lie  between  30s.  and  31s.,  of  the  group  whose
wages  lie  between  31s.  and  32s.,  and  so  on  continually  for  all
wage  levels.  With  this  close  grouping  we  may  fairly  assume  that
the  tastes  and  temperament  of  the  people  in  any  two  adjacent
groups  are  approximately  the  same.  That  is  to  say,  the  desire
for  the  icth  unit  of  any  commodity  (or  group  of  commodities),  the
demand  for  which  is  not  markedly  correlated  with  the  demand  for
other  commodities,  is  equal  for  typical  men  in  the  30s.  to  31s.
group  and  in  the  31s.  to  32s.  group.  Let  the  quantity  of  desire
for  the  xth  unit  of  the  commodity  be  (f){x) :  or,  in  other  words,  y
being  the  desire  for  the  a;th  unit,  let  the  desire  curve  for  the  com-
modity be  represented  hy  y  =  <f>(x).  We  are  entitled  to  assume
further,  in  the  absence  of  special  knowledge  as  to  the  existence
of  correlation,  that  the  desire  curve  of  both  groups  for  the  com-

changes  in  the  price  of  pig-iron  that  have  in  fact  occurred  are  mainly  caused  by
expansions  of  demand  (general  uplifts  in  the  demand  schedule),  and  not  by
changes  in  supply  taking  place  while  the  demand  schedule  is  unaltered.  In
certain  conditions  it  might  be  possible  to  derive  Dr.  Marshall's  elasticity  from
Professor  Moore's  elasticity,  provided  that  the  reactions  exercised  by  supply
changes  upon  prices  could  be  presumed  to  take  place  very  rapidly.  Apart  from
this  presumption  derivation  would  be  impossible,  however  ample  the  statistical
material.

1  Economic  Journal,  1914,  pp.  212  et  seq.


II  :MEASUEEMENT  of  elasticities  of  demand  927

modity  is  independent  of  the  quantity  of  other  commodities
consumed  and,  therefore,  of  the  marginal  desiredness  of  money.
Let  this  marginal  desiredness  to  the  lower  and  higher  income
groups  respectively  be  /x^  and  /Xg,  and  the  quantities  of  the  com-
modity consumed  by  these  groups  x^  and  x.y  Then,  since  the
price  paid  for  the  commodity  must  be  the  same  for  both  groups,

we  know  that  this  price  p  is  equal  both  to  — <t>{^)  and  to  —<f>{x^.

These  two  expressions  are,  therefore,  equal  to  one  another.     But
if,  as  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  when  the  incomes  of  the  two        ig^
groups  are  close  together,  x.^  differs  only  slightly  from  x^,  ^(2^2)  "^^y^CD^
in  general  be  written  4>{^\)  +  (2*2  -  ^4>'{^\)

But  the  elasticity  of  the  desire  curve  in  respect  of  any  consumption
x,  is  known  to  be  equal  to  ,,  \.  Let  this  elasticity  be  written
Vxi-     It  follows  that

rj    ^  ^2  -  ^1  .       /*!

But,  since  a  small  change  in  the  consumption  of  any  ordinary
commodity,  on  which  a  small  proportion  of  a  man's  total  income
is  spent,  cannot  involve  any  appreciable  change  in  the  marginal
desiredness  of  money  to  him,^  the  elasticity  of  the  desire  curve  in
respect  of  any  consumption  x^  is  equal  to  the  elasticity  of  the
demand  curve  in  respect  of  that  consumption.  Therefore,  the
elasticity  of  demand,  as  well  as  the  elasticity  of  desire,  of  the  lower
income  group  in  respect  of  its  consumption  of  x^  units  may  be
represented  by  the  equation  :

'Tl  ~  '

§  4.  If  we  knew  the  relative  values  of  fi^  and  fi^  this  equation
would  enable  us  to  determine  the  elasticity  of  demand  of  the
lowest  income  group  for  any  commodity  the  demand  for  which  is
not  markedly  correlated  with  the  demand  for  other  commodities,

^  Strictly,  of  course,  such  a  change  mast  involve  some  alteration  in  the
marginal  desiredness  of  money,  unless  the  demand  for  the  commodity  in  question
has  an  elasticity  equal  to  unity.  If  the  elasticity  is  anything  other  than  this,
a  change  in  the  consumption  of  the  commodity  will  be  accompanied  by  a  trans-
ference of  money  from  expenditure  upon  it  to  expenditure  upon  other  things,  or
vice  versa.  This  must  affect  the  marginal  desiredness  of  money  spent  on  these
things,  and  its  marginal  desiredness,  if  affected  in  one  field,  is,  since  it  must  be
the  same  in  all,  affected  in  alL


928  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  app.

in  respect  of  such  quantity  of  the  commodity  as  that  group  is
consuming.  Similar  equations  would  enable  us  to  determine  the
corresponding  elasticities  of  each  of  the  other  income  groups.  If
it  is  objected  that  our  result  would  in  practice  be  impaired  by  the
fact  that  the  higher  income  groups  are  apt  to  consume  a  better
quality  of  commodity,  and  not  merely  a  greater  quantity,  than  the
lower  income  groups,  the  difficulty  is  easily  overcome  by  substitut-
ing in  our  formula  for  the  quantities  of  the  commodity  that  are
consumed  by  the  different  groups  figures  representing  their  aggregate
expenditures  upon  it.  This  device  escapes  the  suggested  objection  by
treating  improved  quality  as  another  form  of  increased  quantity.
In  order  to  obtain  the  elasticity  of  demand  for  the  commodity  as
a  whole,  it  would  be  necessary  to  calculate  the  separate  elasticities
for  all  income  groups  and  to  combine  them  on  the  basis  of  the
quantity  of  purchases  to  which  they  respectively  refer.

§  5.  Unfortunately,  we  do  not  know,  and  cannot  ascertain,  the
relative  values  of  /a^  and  fj^.  Consequently,  we  are  estopped  from
using  the  above  analysis  to  determine  the  elasticity  of  the  demand
for  any  commodity  in  absolute  terms.^  But  this  does  not  block
our  investigation.  For,  by  the  process  indicated  above,  the
elasticities  of  demand  in  any  income  group  can  be  determined
for  all  the  things  consumed  in  that  income  group  in  expressions
into  which  /x^  and  fx^  enter  in  exactly  the  same  way,  namely,  as

the  term  "^ — ^.     If,  then,  the  several  elasticities  be  rjx,  rjy,  -qz,

and  so  on,  any  one  of  them  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  any
other  without  reference  to  /t^  and  fi^.  These  unknowns  are
eliminated,  and  we  obtain  the  formula

^  Professor  Vinci,  in  his  very  interesting  monograph  L'  elasticita  del  consumi,
suggests  that  the  method  described  above  can  be  extended  to  jdeld  an  absolute
measure  of  elasticity  by  reference  to  the  distinction  between  nominal  and  real
prices.  The  money  price  paid  by  the  higher  income  group  is  the  same  as  that
paid  by  the  lower  income  group.  But  the  real  price  is,  he  holds,  less  than  this,
in  the  proportion  in  which  the  income  of  the  higher  income  group  exceeds  that  of
the  lower.  Thus,  if  the  higher  income  group  has  10  per  cent  more  income,  an
equal  money  price  paid  by  it  implies  a  real  price  j-^ths  as  great ;  and  the  elasticity
of  demand  is  obtained  by  dividing  a  virtual  price  difference  of  ^^th  into  what-
ever fraction  represents  the  associated  consumption  difference  {loc.  dt.  p.  22).  This
procedure  is,  however,  illegitimate,  because,  on  the  assumptions  taken,  the  virtual
price  of  all  commodities  to  the  higher  income  group  is  ^ths  of  what  it  is  to  the
lower  income  group.  Consequently,  the  difference  in  the  consumption  of  any
particular  commodity  is  not  due  solely  to  the  difference  in  price  of  that  commodity,
and  cannot,  therefore,  in  general,  be  inserted  in  the  formula  for  elasticity  of  demand.
Professor  Vinci  has,  in  fact,  tacitly  assumed  that  the  marginal  desiredness  of  money
is  equal  for  the  two  groups — an  assumption  which  would  only  be  warranted  if
the  demand  of  both  for  the  sum  of  commodities  other  than  the  particular  one
under  investigation  had  an  elasticity  equal  to  unity.


II  MEASUEEMENT  OF  ELASTICITIES  OF  DEMAND  929

^1      ^2  -  yi


Vy  =  Vx


^i-^         Vi


This  result,  it  should  be  observed,  only  follows  directly  from  the
preceding  argument,  provided  that  the  commodities  concerned  are
both  such  that  only  a  small  part  of  a  typical  man's  income  is
normally  spent  upon  them.  In  general,  however,  though  the
absolute  formula  for  elasticities,  from  which  the  result  is  derived,
is  only  valid  on  this  assumption,  the  above  comparative  formula  is
approximately  valid  also  for  two  commodities  on  which  a  large
part  of  a  typical  man's  income  is  spent,  so  long  as  the  part
spent  on  the  one  does  not  differ  greatly  from  that  spent  on  the  other.
The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  errors  in  the  two  formulae  for
absolute  elasticities,  which  have  to  be  combined,  will  tend  to  balance
one  another.  Our  comparative  formula  is  seriously  suspect  only
when  it  is  used  to  obtain  the  relative  elasticities  of  the  demands  of
a  group  for  two  things,  on  one  of  which  that  group  spends  a  large
proportion,  and  on  the  other  a  small  proportion  of  its  income.
Apart  from  this,  the  formula,  when  applied  to  the  statistics  of
quantities  of,  or  expenditures  upon,  different  commodities  by
neighbouring  income  groups,  enables  us  to  determine  numerically
the  ratio  of  the  elasticity  of  demand  of  any  income  group  for  any
one  commodity  (in  respect  of  the  quantity  of  the  commodity
actually  consumed  by  it)  to  the  elasticity  of  demand  of  the  group
for  any  other  commodity.  This  information  will  often  be  valuable
in  itself.  It  is  important  to  know  whether  the  demand  of  workers
with  35s.  a  week  for  clothes  is  about  twice,  or  about  ten  times,  as
elastic  as  their  demand  for  food.  But  the  information  is  also
valuable  indirectly.  For,  if  we  can  in  some  other  way — through
the  examination  of  shoj>-keepers'  books  or  otherwise — determine
the  elasticity  of  demand  of  any  income  group,  or  collection  of  income
groups,  for  one  thing,  we  have  here  a  bridge  along  which  we
may  proceed  to  determine  the  elasticity  of  their  demand  for  all
other  things.

§  6.  In  explaining  the  above  method  I  have,  as  indicated  at
the  outset,  assumed  that  our  data  are  better  than  they  are.  This,
I  think,  is  legitimate,  because  there  is  no  reason  in  the  nature  of
things  why  these  data  should  not  be  improved ;  and,  indeed,
there  is  little  doubt  that  they  will  be  improved.  Even  then,  of
course,  any  one  attempting  a  detailed  application  of  the  method  is
certain  to  encounter  serious  diflRculties,  among  which,  perhaps,  not
the  least  will  be  that  of  deciding  how  far  to  treat  different  com-
modities separately  and  how  far  to  group  them  together  according
to  the  purpose  which  they  jointly  serve.  When  put  to  the  test,
these  difficulties  may,  no  doubt,  in  some  applications,  prove  insur-

3o


930


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


mountable.  From  the  results  of  an  experiment  made  upon  figures
given  in  the  second  Fiscal  Blue-book  (pp.  215  and  217),  I  am,
however,  tempted  to  hope  for  better  things.  The  figures  refer  to
the  expenditure  upon  "  food  "  and  "  clothing  "  of  groups  of  work-
people whose  wages  were  respectively  under  20s.,  between  20s.
and  25s.,  between  25s.  and  30s.,  between  30s.  and  35s.,  and
between  35s.  and  40s.  My  method  gave  the  ratio  of  the
elasticity  of  demand  for  clothes  to  that  for  food  for  the  several
groups  as  follows :


orkmen  under  SOs.       .

1-16

From  20s.  to  25s.

1-31

From  258.  to  SOs.

1-62

From  30s.  to  35s.

1-25

From  35s.  to  408.

2-46

Apart  from  the  drop  in  the  ratio  for  workpeople  earning
from  30s.  to  35s. — and  it  may  be  remarked  in  passing  that  the
instances  from  which  the  average  in  this  group  is  made  up  are
only  half  as  numerous  as  those  in  the  two  adjacent  groups — these
figures  are  continuous  and  in  no  wise  incompatible  with  what  we
should  expect  from  general  observation.  It  is  natural  that  among
the  very  poor  the  demand  for  clothes  should  be  nearly  as  inelastic
as  the  demand  for  food,  and  that,  as  we  proceed  to  groups  of
greater  wealth,  its  relative  elasticity  should  grow.  This  small
experiment,  therefore,  is  not  discouraging,  and  it  is  much  to  be
desired  that  some  economist  should  undertake  a  more  extended
study  along  similar  lines.^

^  Cf.  my  article  "A  Method  of  Determining  the  Numerical  Value  of  Elasticities
of  Demand,"  Economic  Journal  of  December  1910.


APPENDIX   III

A   DIAGRAMMATIC    ANALYSIS    OF   CERTAIN    PROBLEMS   OF
COMPETITION    AND   MONOPOLY


§  1.  Some  of  the  problems  investigated  in  Chapters  VIQ.,  XII.,
XIII.  and  XIV.  of  Part  II.  are  susceptible  of  treatment  by  an  ap-
paratus of  diagrams.  In  the  following  pages  the  general  character
of  this  method  will  be  explained  and  its  uses  illustrated.  To
simplify  the  discussion  it  will  be  assumed  that  the  distinction
between  the  intensity  of  a  desire  and  the  intensity  of  the  satis-  I
faction  yielded  by  the  fulfilment  of  that  desire,  which  is  discussed
in  Part  I.  Chapter  II.,  may  be  ignored.  It  will  also  be  assumed
that  the  distinction  between  trade  net  product  and  social  net  j
product  developed  in  Part  II.  Chapter  VI.  may  be  ignored.
Throughout,  the  point  of  view  taken  will  be  that  of  a  fairly  long
period.

B

A    SYSTEM    OF   CURVES

I  2.  In  what  follows  I  shall  employ  four  types  of  curve,  a  curve
of  marginal  demand  prices,  a  curve  of  marginal  supply  prices,
a  demand  curve  and  a  supply  curve.  These  have  now  to  be
described.

In  any  occupation  the  marginal  demand  price  of  x  units  of
output  is  the  diflFerence  between  the  aggregate  satisfaction
(measured  in  money)  to  the  consumers  that  is  involved  in  the
regular  (say  annual)  purchase  of  x  and  of  (x  +  Aa;)  units  re-
spectively ;  and  the  marginal  supply  price  of  x  units  is  the  difference
between  the  aggregate  dissatisfaction  (measured  in  money)  to  the
producers  that  is  involved  in  the  regular  (say  annual)  production
of  X   and    of  {x  +  Aa;)    units  respectively.^     Construct  curves    of

^  It  most  be  carefully  observed  that  the  difference  between  the  aggregate
expenses  involved  in  the  regular  (say  annual)  production  of  x  and  of  {x+  ax)

931


932


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE


marginal  demand  prices  DDg  and  of  marginal  supply  prices  SSj,
in  such  wise  that,  if  a  perpendicular  be  drawn  from  any  point  on
DDg  to  cut  the  axis  of  X  in  M,  this  perpendicular  represents  the
marginal  demand  price  of  OM  units  of  production,  and,  if  a
perpendicular  be  drawn  from  any  point  on  SSg  to  cut  the  axis  of
X  in  M,  this  perpendicular  represents  the  marginal  supply  price  of
OM  units  of  production.  Let  these  curves  intersect  at  a  point  Q,
and  let  a  perpendicular  QMg  be  drawn  from  Q  to  the  axis  OX.

The  demand  price  of  x  units  of  output  is  the  price  which  in  the
long  run  tends  to  maintain  an  annual  purchase  of  x  units ;  and  the
supply  price  of  z  units  is  the  price  which  tends  injij^ejong  run  to
maintain  an  annual  output  of  x  units.  Construct  a  demand  curve
DDj,  and  a  supply  curve  SS^,  in  such  wise  that,  if  a  perpendicular
be  drawn  from  any  point  on  DD^  to  cut  the  axis  of  X  in  M,  this

perpendicular  represents  the
demand  price  of  OM  units
of  production ;  and,  if  a  per-
pendicular be  drawn  from
any  point  on  SS^  to  cut  the
axis  of  X  in  M,  this  perpen-
dicular represents  the  supply
price  of  OM  units  of  produc-
tion. Let  these  curves  in-
tersect at  a  point  P,  and  let

be
axis


a      perpendicular      PMj

drawn

of  X.


from    P    to    the


§  3.  The  relation  be-
tween the  supply  curve  SS^  and  the  curve  of  marginal  supply
prices  SSg  is  perfectly  definite,  and  can  be  deduced  as  follows.

units  of  output  means  the  difference  between  the  aggregate  annual  expenses  of  an
industry  when  it  is  producing  and  is  fully  adjtisted  to  prodiicing  x  units,  and
when  it  is  producing  and  is  fully  adjusted  to  'producing  (a;+  Ax)  units.  It  does
not  mean  the  difference  made  in  any  one  year  by  the  addition  of  Aa;  units  to  the
output  of  an  industry  adapted  to  the  production  of  x  units.  If  it  meant  this,
we  should  have  to  note  that,  when  a  railway  is  adapted  for  the  transport  of  x
units  of  traffic,  an  extra  parcel  will  involve  very  little  extra  cost,  a  second  will
involve  very  little,  until  at  last  another  extra  parcel  involves  the  putting  on  of
another  truck  and  has  an  enormous  cost ;  the  next  parcel  after  this  involves  a
very  small  cost ;  and  so  on.  On  our  definition,  however,  we  have  not  to  deal
with  this  kind  of  discontinuity.  Whatever  the  flow  of  transport  required,  we
conceive  the  organisation  to  be  adapted  to  the  flow.  The  loading  of  all  the
trucks  will  be  different  according  to  the  total  volume  of  the  flow.  The  next  step
after  40  overloaded  trucks  would  not  be  40  overloaded  trucks  j3/?<s  one  truck  con-
taining one  parcel,  but  41  lightly  loaded  trucks.  In  like  manner,  the  next  step
after  one  set  of  overcrowded  lines  is  not  one  overcix)wded  set  and  one  set  carrying
a  very  small  traflBc,  but  two  moderately  well-filled  lines.  (Cf.  Part  II.
Chapter  II.  §  2.)


A  DIAGEAMMATIC  ANALYSIS


933


The  supply  price  of  any  quantity  of  output  is,  by  definition,
the  price  which  tends  to  call  out  the  production  of  that  quantity
annually.  But,  if,  in  any  industry,  a  price  p-^  prevails  for  an
output  X,  such  that  the  total  receipts  of  the  industry  exceed  the
total  costs,  including  wages  of  management,  interest  at  the
normal  rate  and  rent  of  the  land  used  at  the  normal  rate,
the  resulting  surplus  operates  as  a  force  drawing  resources
into  the  industry.  Hence,  equilibrium  has  not  been  established,
and  p^  is  not  the  supply  price  of  x  units,  but  is  greater  than  this
supply  price.  On  the  other  hand,  if,  in  any  industry,  a  price
P2  prevails  for  an  •output  x,  such  that  the  total  receipts  fall
short  ^of  the  total  costs,  the  resulting  deficit  operates  as  a  force
expelling  resources  from  the  industry.  Hence,  here  also  equili-
brium has  not  been  established,
and  p^  is  not  the  supply  price  of
x  units,  but  is  less  than  this
supply  price.  It  follows  that
the  supply  price  of  any  output
x  must  be  such  that  the  total
receipts  are  equal  to  the  total
costs,  and  that  there  is  no  sur-
plus either  of  a  positive  or  of  a
negative  character.^  This  means
that  the  supply  price  of  x  units
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  mar-
ginal supply  prices  of  each  quan-
tity from  zero  units  to  x  units,
divided  by  a;.    Hence,  a  perfectly

rigid  relation  exists  between  the  supply  curve  and  the  curve
of  marginal  supply  prices  in  any  industry.  To  exhibit  this
relation,  from  any  point  P  on  SS^,  draw  PQM  and  PEN  at  right
angles  to  the  axes  of  X  and  Y  respectively,  and  let  PQM  cut
the  curve  SS^  in  Q.  Then,  if  SS.,  is  given,  SSj  is  necessarily
such  that,  for  all  positions  of  P  and  Q,  the  area  PRQ  is
equal  to  the  area  SRN.  It  follows  that,  when  SSj  is  a
horizontal  line,  SS^  and  SS2  coincide :  when  SS^  is  inclined
positively,  SS^  lies  below  SSg :  when  SS^  is  inclined  negatively,

'  At  first  sight  it  may,  perhaps,  be  thought  that  this  conclusiou  is  incon-
sistent with  the  ordinary  doctrine  of  economic  rent,  because  the  rent  of  land  is,
in  that  doctrine,  regarded  as  a  surplus.  This  objection,  however,  misconceives
the  argument  of  the  text.  It  is  obvious  that,  when  land  is  one  of  the  factors  of
production  employed,  there  is,  in  conditions  of  equilibrium,  a  surplus  of  receipts
over  the  costs  of  production  incurred  in  respect  of  capital  and  labour.  But  it  is
equally  obvious  that  there  is  no  surplus  over  the  costs  of  production  incurred  in
respect  of  all  the  different  kinds  of  resources,  including  land,  of  which  use  is
made.


934  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  app.

SSj  lies  above  SSg.  Furthermore,  the  rapidity  with  which  SS^
and  SSg  diverge  from  one  another,  as  they  move  towards  the
right,  is  greater,  the  sharper  is  the  inclination  of  SSg  in  either  a
positive  or  a  negative  direction.

I  4.  Against  the  above  analysis  two  objections,  both  of  them
focussed  upon  diminishing  returns,  have  been  made.  The  first  is
that,  since,  under  conditions  of  diminishing  returns,  this  analysis
makes  the  supply  price  of  any  quantity  of  output  less  than  the
marginal  supply  price,  it  implies  that  the  marginal  unit  is  continu-
ously produced  at  a  loss  to  the  producer  of  it ;  and  that  this  is
impossible  and  absurd.  This  reasoning  derives  its  plausibility  from
an  implicit  assumption  that  the  curve  of  marginal  supply  prices
employed  here  represents  the  particidar  expenses  of  producing
successive  units  of  the  commodity.  That  assumption  is  not
correct.  The  marginal  supply  price  of  x  units  is,  on  my  definition,
the  difference  between  the  aggregate  expenses  of  the  annual
production  of  x  units  and  of  {x  +  Ax)  units  respectively.  When
X  units  are  being  produced — and  the  same  thing  is  true  when
{x  +  Ax)  units  are  being  produced — the  particular  expense  to  the
representative  producer  of  producing  any  one  unit,  all  costs,
including  the  hire  of  the  necessary  land,  being  reckoned  in,  is  equal
to  the  particular  expense  of  producing  any  other  unit.  It  is
equal,  not  to  the  marginal  supply  price  of  x  units,  but  to  the
aggregate  cost  of  producing  x  units,  divided  by  x,  that  is  to  say,
to  the  supply  price  of  x  units.  In  other  words,  if  the  supply  price
is  equal  to  p,  the  curve  of  particular  expenses,  in  the  sense  here
relevant,  corresponding  to  the  production  of  x  units,  would  be
a  horizontal  line  drawn  parallel  to  the  base  line  at  a  height
representative  of  p.  Hence,  despite  the  fact  that  the  marginal
supply  price,  as  defined  above,  is  greater  than  p,  the  marginal
unit,  when  sold  for  a  price  p,  is  not  being  produced  at  a  loss  to
the  producer  of  it.     This  objection,  therefore,  breaks  down.

§  5.  The  second  and  more  serious  objection  has  been  very  ably
developed  by  Professor  Allyn  Young  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics.  "The  significance  of  the  curve  of  marginal  supply
prices  consists,"  Professor  Young  writes,  "in  the  fact  that  the
expense  of  producing  (x  +  Ax)  units  exceeds  the  expense  of  produc-
ing X  units  by  more  than  the  amount  of  expenses  specifically
incurred  in  producing  the  additional  Ax  units.  This  excess  cost  is
due  to  the  fact  that  increased  production  is  only  possible  at  an
increased  price  per  unit  for  the  product,  which  makes  possible  and
necessary  an  increased  annual  price  for  the  land  (and,  under  some
conditions,  for  other  resources)  used  in  production.  .  .  .  Increased
prices  for  the  use  of  land  and  the  other  factors  in  production  do  not
represent  an  increased  using  up  of  resources  in  the  work  of  produc-


A  DIAGEAMMATIC  ANALYSIS


935


tion.  They  merely  represent  transferences  of  purchasing  power."  ^
In  other  words,  according  to  Professor  Young's  view,  the  excess  of
marginal  supply  prices  in  industries  of  diminishing  returns  over  the
corresponding  supply  prices  is  merely  a  nominal  excess  of  money
paid,  and  not  a  real  excess  representing  resources  employed.  This
criticism  is,  undoubtedly,  very  important.  Furthermore,  if  it  were
directed  against  an  attempt  to  apply  my  duplex  system  of  ciu^es
to  the  output  of  the  whole  body  of  a  country's  resources  lumped
together,  as  it  were,  into  a  single  industry,  it  would,  no  less
evidently,  be  just.  For  the  land  available  for  all  the  industries
collectively  in  a  country  is  fixed ;  any  increase  in  the  money  paid
for  it  is,  therefore,  merely  a  transference  of  purchasing  power ;
and  a  large  part  of  the  additional  money  costs  per  unit  resulting
from  an  increase  in  output  generally  might  consist  in  money  so
paid  But  my  analysis  is  not  designed  for  application  to  the
output  of  the  whole  body  of  a  coun-
try's resources  lumped  together  into
a  single  industry.  Its  purpose,  on  the
contrary,  is  to  provide  machinery  for
studying  the  distribution  of  resources
among  a  great  number  of  different
industries  and  occupations,  each  one  of
which  is  supposed  to  make  use  of  only
a  small  part  of  the  aggregate  resources
of  the  country.  Because  every  occupa-
tion is  thus  relatively  small,  the  price
per  unit  of  the  several  factors  of  pro-
duction in  each  occupation  is  deter-
mined by  general  market  conditions,  and  is  not  affected  to  any
appreciable  extent  by  variations  in  the  quantity  of  them  that  is
employed  in  that  occupation.  No  doubt,  the  price  of  the  factors
will  not  be  wholly  unaffected ;  and,  no  doubt,  therefore,  the
area  QPS  in  the  accompanying  Fig.  3  mil  represent,  in  some
slight  measure,  nominal  exjDenses  and  not  real  expenses.  But
this  error  will  in  general,  like  the  error  that  is  committed  in
all  applications  of  the  doctrine  of  consumers'  surplus,  be  of  the
"  second  order  of  small  quantities."  It  must  be  admitted,  indeed,
that  the  assumption  that  each  industry  only  employs  a  small
part  of  the  several  factors  of  production  is  not  completely  true,
as  regards  land,  of  those  divisions  of  agriculture  which  produce
the  dominant  crops.  In  wheat  production,  for  example,  it
may    well   be    that    a    significant    proportion    of   the   area    QPS

*  Quarterly  JouTTial  of  Economics,  Aug.  1913,  p.  683.  A  kindred  objection
in  a  less  fuliy  elaborated  form  is  suggested  by  Mr.  J.  M.  Clark  in  the  Americati
Economic  Jieview,  Sept.  1913,  p.  624.


Pig.  3.


936  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  app.

represents  additions  to  the  annual  price  of  wheat  land,  instead
of  additions  to  the  quantity  of  wheat  land  and  of  capital  and
labour  applied  to  it.  With  this  reservation,  however,  over  the
limited  field  to  which  it  is  intended  to  apply,  the  relation
exhibited  in  my  analysis  between  supply  prices  and  marginal
supply  prices  expressed  in  money  affords  an  approximately
true  picture  of  the  underlying  relation  that  subsists  between
supply  prices  and  marginal  supply  prices  expressed  in  real  resources.
The  reason  why  diminishing  returns  in  terms  of  money  appear
when  they  do  appear  is,  in  general,  not  that  the  money  price  of
the  factors  employed  is  increased,  but  that  that  proportionate  com-
bination of  different  factors,  which  it  is  most  economical  to  employ
when  (x  +  Ax)  units  of  commodities  are  being  produced,  is  a  less
efficient  proportionate  combination  than  that  which  it  is  most
economical  to  employ  when  x  units  are  being  produced  ;  and  the
extra  cost  involved  in  this  fact  is  real,  not  merely  nominal.  For
these  reasons  Professor  Young's  objection,  as  a  general  objection,
fails  ;  and  the  analysis  set  out  in  §  3  remains  intact.

§  6.  It  remains  to  examine  the  relations  subsisting  between  the
demand  curve  DD^  and  the  curve  of  marginal  demand  prices  DDg,
as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  There  is  here  no  rigid  and  general  relation
analogous  to  that  which  we  have  exhibited  in  connection  with  supply.
It  is  plain,  however,  that,  since  the  demand  price  of  OM  units  of
commodity  measures  the  money  value  of  the  satisfaction  directly
conferred  by  the  OMth  unit  upon  the  purchaser  of  it,  while  the  mar-
ginal demand  price  measures  the  money  value  of  this  satisfaction,
together  with  the  satisfaction  (or  dissatisfaction)  indirectly  conferred
upon  the  purchasers  of  other  units,  the  demand  curve  and  the  curve
of  marginal  demand  price  may  diverge.  For  commodities,  the  desire
for  which  is  partly  a  desire  for  the  uncommon,  the  curve  of
marginal  demand  prices  will  fall  below  the  demand  curve ;  for
commodities,  the  desire  for  which  is  partly  a  desire  for  the  common,
it  will  rise  above  it ;  and  for  commodities  which  are  desired  solely
on  account  of  the  direct  satisfaction  they  confer,  the  two  curves
will  coincide.^

*  The  dual  system  of  curves  was  first  suggested  in  my  article  on  "  Producers'
and  Consumers'  Surplus  "  in  the  Economic  Journal  of  1910  ;  but  the  argument  in
the  text  diverges  from,  and  corrects,  that  employed  in  the  article  in  some  im-
portant respects.  In  what  follows  it  is  assumed  for  simplicity  that  the  various
curves  slope  either  up  or  down  throughout  their  course.  In  exceptional  condi-
tions they  may  run  in  one  direction  in  one  part  of  their  course,  and  in  the
opposite  direction  in  another  part.  These  conditions  can  be  examined  with-
out any  essential  change  in  the  analysis  developed  in  the  text.


A  DIAGEA^IMATIC  ANALYSIS  937


THE    CONNECTION    BETWEEN   THE   CURVES   AND   RELATIVE  VALUES
OF   MARGINAL    NET   PRODUCTS

§  7.  On  the  average  of  "  industries  in  general "  we  may  presume
that  the  earnings  per  unit  of  productive  resources  tend  to  equality
with  the  value  of  the  net  product  of  their  marginal  increment.
That  is  to  say,  the  value  of  the  net  product  of  the  marginal
shilling's  worth  of  resources  in  industries  in  general  is  equal
to  one  shilling.  It  follows  that  the  value  of  the  net  product
of  the  marginal  shilling's-worth  of  resources  in  any  particular
industry  will  be  equal  to  the  value  of  the  net  product  of
the  marginal  shilling's-worth  of  resources  in  industries  in  general,
provided  that  it  also  is  equal  to  one  shilling.  This  condition  is
fulfilled  if  in  that  industry  the  product  of  the  marginal  PM  shillings
has  a  value  equal  to  PM  shillings ;  that  is,  if  the  marginal  supply
price  (i.e.  the  difi'erence  made  to  aggregate  supply  price  by  the
marginal  increment  of  output)  of  the  product  of  that  industry  is
equal  to  the  marginal  demand  price ;  that  is,  if  the  output  of  the
industry  is  represented  in  Fig.  1  on  p.  932  by  the  abscissa  OMj,  corre-
sponding to  the  intersection  of  the  curve  of  marginal  demand  prices
and  the  curve  of  marginal  supply  prices.  This  output  we  may  con-
veniently call  the  id^al  output.  If  the  actual  output  is  less  than
this,  the  value  ol  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  in  our
industry  will  be  greater  than  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product
of  resources  in  general ;  if  the  actual  output  is  greater  than  this,
the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources  in  our  industry
will  be  less  than  the  value  of  the  marginal  net  product  of  resources
in  general.  Our  problem,  therefore,  is  to  determine  the  relation
in  which  actual  output  stands  in  various  circumstances  towards
ideal  output.  The  solution  of  this  problem  depends  upon  the
relations  that  subsist  between  the  curve  of  marginal  demand
prices  and  the  demand  curve  and  between  the  curve  of  marginal
supply  prices  and  the  supply  curve,  together  with  the  choice
that  producers  make  among  the  methods  of  simple  competition,
monopolistic  competition,  simple  monopoly  and  discriminating
monopoly.

D

SIMPLE    COMPETITION

§  8.  Under  simple  competition  it  is  plain  that  the  actual
output  will  be  determined  at  the  amount  corresponding  to  the


938


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


intersection  of  the  demand  curve  and  the  supply  curve.  When,
therefore,  the  demand  curve  and  the  curve  of  marginal  demand
prices  coincide,  it  will  be  greater  or  less  than  the  ideal  output,
according  as  the  supply  curve  lies  below  or  above  the  curve  of
marginal  supply  prices.  In  other  words,  the  actual  output  will
exceed  the  ideal  output  under  conditions  of  diminishing  returns,
will  be  equal  to  it  under  conditions  of  constant  returns ;  and  will
be  less  than  it  under  conditions  of  increasing  returns.  From  an
inspection  of  suitably  drawn  curves  it  is  easily  seen  that  the
extent  of  the  difference  between  actual  and  ideal  output  will  be
greater,  the  more  the  supply  curve  diverges  in  either  direction
from  the  horizontal,  that  is  to  say,  the  more  sharply  either
diminishing  or  increasing  returns  operate.  When  the  supply
curve  and  the  curve  of  marginal  supply  prices  coincide — a  condi-
tion which  only  occurs  under  constant  returns — the  actual  output

will  exceed  the  ideal  output  if
the  demand  curve  lies  above
the  curve  of  marginal  demand
prices ;  will  be  equal  to  it  if
the  demand  curve  coincides
with  the  curve  of  mai'ginal
demand  prices ;  and  will  fall
short  of  it  if  the  demand  curve
lies  below  the  curve  of  marginal
demand  prices.  When  both  the
curve  of  marginal  supply  prices
diverges  from  the  supply  curve

o  F          "^        ^  ^^^   ^^^°   ^^®   curve   of   mar-

ginal demand  prices  diverges
from  the  demand  curve,  it  is  possible  that  the  two  divergencies
may  cancel  one  another,  and  that  the  actual  output  may,  there-
fore, be  identical  with  the  ideal  output.  This  state  of  things  is
illustrated  in  Fig.  4.  Evidently,  however,  such  an  exact  cancel-
lation is  extraordinarily  improbable,  and  it  may  be  presumed
that,  when  either  or  both  sorts  of  divergence  exist,  the  actual
output  will  differ  from  the  ideal  output.  Whenever  this  happens,
some  fiscal  expedient  can  be  conceived,  the  adoption  of  which,
apart  from  practical  difficulties,  would  increase  the  sum  of
economic  satisfaction  measured  in  money  and,  therewith,  on  our
definition,  the  national  dividend  also.  If  X  measures  the  actual
output  of  the  industry  and  Y  the  ideal  output,  all  rates  of  tax
or  bounty  which  cause  output  to  move  from  X  towards  Y,  but
not  to  pass  to  the  other  side  of  Y,  would  act  in  this  way,  and
some  rates  which  cause  output  to  pass  to  the  other  side  of  Y
would  also  act  so.


Ill  A  DIAGRAMMATIC  ANALYSIS  939

£

MULTIPIiE   SOURCES   OF   DEMAND  OR   SUPPLY

§  9.  To  complete  our  analysis  it  is  desirable  to  add  a  study  of
certain  problems  that  arise  when  a  comimodity  is  produced  in  a
number  of  separate  sources  of  supply.  This  study  involves  a
preliminary  conflict  with  commonly  received  opinion.  In  economic
text-books  it  is  generally  assumed  that  an  aggregated  demand  or
supply  schedule  is  always  made  up  by  the  simple  addition  of  a
number  of  independent  demand  or  supply  schedules  belonging
to  the  separate  sources.  It  is  evident  that,  if  and  when  this
assumption  is  justified,  the  demand  or  supply  schedule  of  every
source  of  demand  or  supply  can  be  represented  by  a  plane  curve,
and  the  demand  schedule  of  the  market  by  a  further  curve  obtained
by  the  simple  compounding  of  the  curves  representing  the  several
sources.  The  assumption  is  in  fact  justified,  for  demand,  only
when  the  relation  between  the  sources  is  such  that  the  quantity
obtained  in  any  one  of  them  has  no  eflfect  on  the  demand  schedule
of  any  other ;  and,  for  supply,  only  when  the  relation  is  such
that  the  quantity  produced  in  any  one  has  no  effect  on  the  supply
schedule  of  any  other.  These  conditions  are  necessarily  fulfilled
when  the  demand  curves  and  the  curves  of  marginal  demand
prices,  and  also  the  supply  curves  and  the  curves  of  marginal
supply  prices,  are  identical  for  every  possible  sub-division  of
the  aggregated  market.  When  some  or  all  of  the  sets  of  com-
panion curves  are  not  identical,  they  may  still  be  fulfilled  if  the
aggregated  market  is  divided  up  in  certain  ways  ;  but  there  must
be  certain  other  ways  of  theoretically  |X)ssible  division  for  which
they  will  not  be  fulfilled.

§  10.  When  the  aggregated  demand,  or  supply,  of  a  market
is  separated  into  a  number  of  component  sources,  which  are  not
independent  in  the  sense  contemplated  above,  it  is  evident  that,
though  the  demand  (or  supply)  schedule  of  the  market  can  be
represented  by  a  plane  curve,  the  demand  (or  supply)  schedules  of
the  separate  sources  that  make  up  the  market  cannot  be  so  repre-
sented, and  cannot  be  simply  added  together  to  constitute  the
aggregated  demand  (or  supply)  schedule.  It,  therefore,  becomes
necessary  to  inquire  whether  any  other  assumption  of  a  reasonably
simple  nature  can  be  employed,  instead  of  the  assumption  of  in-
dependent individual  schedules  with  which  it  is  usual  to  work.
One  such  assumption  readily  suggests  itself.  It  is  that  the  price,
at  which  any  source  demands  (or  supplies)  a  given  quantity  of  com-
modity, is  made  up  by  the  addition  of  two  parts,  one  depending  on
the  quantity  that  this  source  itself  demands  (or  supplies),  and  the


940  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


<f>yr  +  H-


This  formula  is  readily  translated  into  the  language  of  diagrams.
The  situation  is  the  same  as  it  would  be  if  the  commodity  con-
sisted of  two  physical  constituents.  For  one  of  the  constituents
the  market  demand  (or  supply)  curve  is  already  in  being,  since  the
demand  (or  supply)  price  is  known  to  depend  in  a  definite  manner
on  aggregate  amount.  The  other  constituent  is  demanded  (or
supplied)  by  the  several  sources  in  such  a  way  that  the  demand  (or
supply)  price  in  each  source  depends  solely  upon  the  amount  in
that  source.  The  market  demand  (or  supply)  curve  for  the  second
constituent  is  thus  found  by  a  simple  addition  of  the  curves  for
the  several  sources.  We  have  only  then  to  superimpose  this  curve
for  the  second  constituent  upon  that  for  the  first  to  find  the  com-
plete market  curve  for  the  commodity.

§11.  For  certain  problems  of  supply  this  instrument  of  analysis
is  valuable  and  enlightening.  In  applying  it  we  are,  it  must  be
granted,  ignoring  the  fact  that  the  effect  on  the  supply  price  of
the  r^^  source  of  supply  brought  about  by  a  given  change  in  the
output  of  that  source  may  itself  be  diiferent,  according  as  the
aggregate  output  of  the  whole  market  is  large  or  small.  Never-
theless, we  are  approaching  much  more  nearly  to  real  life  than  we
are  permitted  to  do  by  the  method  usually  adopted.  In  particular,
we  are  enabled  to  fit  our  analysis  more  closely  to  the  diflficult
problem  of  increasing  returns.  On  the  ordinary  method,  a  market
schedule  indicative  of  increasing  returns  must  be  made  up  of  a
number  of  schedules  for  entirely  independent  sources,  some,  at  least,
of  which  also  indicate  increasing  returns.  A  system  of  that  kind,
however,  is  necessarily  in  unstable  equilibrium.  Apart  from
obstructions  due  to  the  time  element,  to  which  Dr.  Marshall  has
called  attention,  it  would  seem  that  one  of  the  suppliers  must  drive
all  the  others  out  of  the  market.  In  real  life,  however,  when  the
commodity  is  one  the  production  of  which  on  a  large  scale  is
associated  with  "  external  economics,"  the  separate  sources  are  not
entirely  independent.  Consequently,  the  presence  of  increasing
returns  in  the  market  as  a  whole  does  not  imply  its  presence  in
the  parts.  In  the  phraseology  employed  above,  the  "  constituent "
of  the  commodity,  which  the  sources  produce,  as  it  were,  on  their  own
merits,  may  obey  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  in  all  the  sources
for  any  aggregate  of  production,  while  the  other  "constituent"
obeys  the  law  of  increasing  returns  rapidly  enough  to  give  the


A  DIAGEAMMATIC  ANALYSIS


941


character  of  increasing  retui'ns  to  the  supply  schedule  of  the  two
constituents  jointly.  It  is  thus  seen  that  the  apparent  conflict
between  mathematical  analysis  and  experience,  which  has  some-
times perplexed  the  treatment  of  increasing  returns,  may  be
resolved  even  without  reference  to  the  time  element,  if  the
assumptions  from  which  the  mathematical  analysis  starts  are
brought  more  neariy  into  conformity  with  the  facts.

§  12.  For  the  present  purpose  it  is  not  necessary  to  follow  this
line  of  thought  further.  Let  it  be  supposed  that  we  have  to  do
with  a  unified  source  of  demand  and  with  two  sources  of  supply
which  are  entirely  independent,  so  that  the  aggregate  supply  curve
is  made  up  by  a  simple  addition  of  their  separate  supply  curves.
The  problem  could,  indeed,  be  treated  equally  well  if  the  kind  of
dependence  considered  in  the  preceding  section  were  postulated;  but
the  exposition  would  be  more  complicated.  Construct  two  supply
curves  SS^  and  o-cr^,  each  accom-
panied by  their  corresponding
curves  of  marginal  supply  prices
SS2  and  aa-^ ;  and  let  the  diagram
be  completed  as  in  the  annexed
figure.  Let  the  demand  be  such
that  OM  and  Om  are  the  quantities
purchased  from  the  two  sources
at  a  price  PM,  which,  of  course,  is
equal  to  pm.  The  difference  be-
tween the  supply  price  and  the
marginal  supply  price  in  the  two
sources  is  then  represented,  in  the
one  by  QP,  in  the  other  by  qp.  QP  is  such  that  the  area  QFP  is
equal  to  the  area  SFK  :  and  qp  is  such  that  the  area  of  qHp  is  equal
to  the  area  o-HK.  If,  therefore,  the  curves  are  straight  lines,  QP  is
equal  to  SK  and  qp  to  o-K.  Hence,  QP  is  equal  to  qp,  if,  and  only
if,  the  points  S  and  o-  coincide.  Furthermore,  if  the  curves  are  not
straight  lines  but  are  of  precisely  similar  shape,  QP  is  equal  to  qp,
if,  and  only  if,  the  points  S  and  o-  coincide.  If  the  two  curves  are
not  of  precisely  similar  shape,  there  will,  in  general,  be  some  one
value  of  So-,  and  one  only,  that  will  make  QP  and  qp  equal.  It
follows  that  equality  between  these  two  magnitudes  is  exceedingly
improbable.  That  is  to  say,  when  a  market  draws  any  commodity
from  several  sources,  or  regions,  of  supply,  in  which  production  does
not  obey  the  law  of  constant  returns,  it  will  generally  happen,  not
only  that  the  marginal  supply  price  in  each  source  will  differ  from
the  supply  price,  but  also  that  the  amount  of  this  difl"erence  will
vary  in  extent  from  one  source  to  another.  It  follows  that,  in
general,  no  single  rate  of  tax  or  bounty  could  so  change  the  actual


Fig.  5.


942  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE  app.

output  as  to  make  it  equivalent  to  the  ideal  output.  That  result
could  only  be  brought  about  by  the  establishment  of  different  rates
of  tax  or  bounty  in  the  several  sources — the  rate  being  heavier  in
any  source  the  more  steeply,  given  the  output  and  the  price,  the
supply  curve  is  inclined  to  the  horizontal ;  or,  in  other  words,  the
smaller  is  the  elasticity  of  supply  in  respect  of  the  quantities  that
would  be  produced  if  there  were  no  tax  or  bounty.^  It  will  be
noticed  that,  if  the  curves  are  straight  lines,  the  same  absolute
amount  of  differentiation  in  the  rate  of  tax  is  appropriate  between
the  two  sources,  whether  a  heavy  tax  or  a  light  tax  is  imposed  upon
them.  If  the  curves  are  not  straight  lines,  this  proposition  does
not,  of  course,  in  general,  hold  good.

§  13.  To  these  general  conclusions  it  is  possible  to  add  more
particular  results  concerning  rates  of  tax  and  consequent  price
changes.  Let  there  be  two  sources  of  supply  separated  from  one
another  in  such  wise  that,  when  differential  duties  are  imposed,
evasion  through  false  "certificates  of  origin  can  be  prevented.  Let
P  be  the  price  in  the  absence  of  any  tax.  Let  the  taxes  con-
templated be  small,  so  that  the  elasticities  of  demand  and  supply
may  be  regarded  as  approximately  constant  for  the  relevant  parts
of  the  demand  and  supply  curves.  Let  there  be  one  source  of
demand,  D,  of  elasticity,  rj  (77  is  necessarily  negative)  and  two
sources  of  supply,  S^  and  Sg,  of  elasticities,  e^  and  e^;  and  let
D,  Sj  and  Sg  be  the  quantity  demanded  and  the  quantities
supplied  from  the  two  sources  in  the  absence  of  any  tax.  Let
Tj  represent  a  tax  at  a  rate  T  on  S^,  Tg  a  like  tax  on  Sg,  and
Ti+2  a  like  tax  on  both  S^  and  Sg.  Let  AP^,  APg  and  AP^+g
be  the  corresponding  changes  of  price  to  consumers.  Then  it  is
easily  shown  that

e  S

/o\       AP         -T  ^l"l  "^  ^2^2

(.)      Ai:',+,-l,+,.^^g^^^^g^_^^g^^g^^.

It  follows  that,  other  things  being  equal,  when  one  source  of
supply  is  taxed  and  the  other  left  free,  the  rise  of  price  will  be
greater,  the  greater  are  the  output  and  elasticity  of  the  taxed
source  relatively  to  the  untaxed  source.  In  the  special  case  of
perfectly  inelastic  demand  and  equality  of  elasticities  in  the  two
supplies  the  above  formulae  reduce  respectively  to

•  If  Cj  and  62  are  the  respective  elasticities  of  supply  and  PM  the  price  apart
from   taxation,  it  can   be   proved,  on  the  assumption  of  straight  lines,  that

Scr  =  PM(  —  -  -  ).     Hence,  the  condition  for  no  differentiation  being  needed,

namely  that  S  and  <r  coincide,  is  equivalent  to  the  condition  that  ey  =  e.^.


in  A  DIAGRAMMATIC  ANALYSIS  943

(^)  ^-T^s^Ts-;

(2)     AP,+,  =  Tj+2.

§  14.  With  similar  assumptions  it  is  possible  to  elucidate  the
comparative  effects  of  raising  a  given  (small)  revenue  by  taxes
imposed  equally  upon  both  sources  and  upon  one  source  only.  On
the  latter  plan  the  rate  of  duty  required  to  yield  a  given  revenue
is  evidently  higher,  but,  owing  to  the  mitigating  effect  of  the
presence  of  an  untaxed  source,  the  proportion  of  the  rate  of  duty
by  which  the  price  rises  is  smaller.  These  two  considerations  point
in  opposite  directions,  and  it  is  not  obvious  under  which  plan  the
absolute  price  change  will  be  greater.  Mathematical  analysis,  how-
ever, shows  that  a  differential  duty  upon  one  source  raises  price
more  than  a  non-differential  duty  upon  both  sources,  yielding  the
same  revenue,  provided  either  that  the  supply  from  the  taxed
source  is  more  elastic  than  that  from  the  other,  and,  therefore,  than
that  from  both  together,  or  that,  being  less  elastic,  its  defect  of
elasticity  falls  short  of  a  given  small  amount.  The  proof  is  as
follows  :

Let  R  be  the  revenue  required.

Let  Tj,  Tj4.,  be  the  duties  per  unit  necessary  to  yield  this
revenue  when  one  source  (i.e.  S^)  or  both  sources  respectively
are  taxed.

Let  both  sources  obey  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  and  let
both  Tj  and  Tj+,  be  small  relatively  to  P.

It  is  easily  proved,  as  a  first  approximation,  that

-^1*1+2  _  <^A  +  ^2^2     ^1+2

AP,  e,S,       •   T,  •

Therefore,  the  price  rises  more  when  both  sources  are  taxed,  if


We  know  that
R  =


-h^iY  •\s,  +  .^3-^(Si  +  S,)  P|


Similarly


T?-T      h  fl     .  -V(^i^^2)  T^l


.  o  J 1  _  .  -  >/(Si  +  Sg)  T\+2


)]


944  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


The  problem  is  to  find  under  what  conditions  the  root  of  this
equation  when  solved  for  T^+g  >  <    ^  ^  ^  „   T^.
The  equation  may  be  written

where  r  and  q  and  H  are  all  positive  quantities.

Consequently,  it  has  two  positive  roots  :   and  it  can  be  proved

that,  if  a  given  value  y  be  substituted  in  the  left-hand  branch  of

the  equation,  and  if  the  resulting  expression  be  positive,  then  y

must  be  >  the  smaller  root  of  the  equation.      If  the  resulting

expression   is    negative,   y  must  be  <  the    smaller   root    of   the

equation;     It  is  with  the  smaller  root  alone  that  we  are  concerned,

since  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  least  possible  tax  capable  of

raising  the  revenue  required  will  be  imposed.

e  S
Hence,  we  have  merely  to  substitute  T^— ^-^-^— ^-for  T^+^  in  the

left-hand  branch  of  the  above  equation.     If  the  result  be  positive,

e  S
Ti+2  < «    g,  ^  ^  Q  T^,  and,   therefore,  the   price  falls  when   both

sources    are    taxed   instead  of  one ;   if  it  is  negative,  the    price
rises.

Substituting,  and  writing  {^^S^  +  e^Sg  -  r)(S^  +  Sg)}  =  K,  we  get

=  eAV2[p"KG(Si^«2)^(^^«^)^^

+  e^Sj .  e2S2(«iSi  +  62%) J  +  SiSgC^i  -  Cg)  J  •
This  is  positive,  if  the  following  expression  is  positive,  namely

^['A  •  ^282  {  -  Vi^i  +  S2)  +  {eA  +  ^282)}  }  +  8,82(^1  -  e,)

■=  YyA  •  «2S2[  +  8182(^1  -  e^)  =  SiSgj  V2^  +  «i  -  "21  •

The  expression  is  positive  if


Ill  A  DIAGRAMMATIC  ANALYSIS  945

Under  these  conditions,  therefore,

Ti+o  <     o  MqTi  and,  therefore,  AP,+,  <  AP^.

In  other  words,  under  these  conditions  the  price  falls  when
both  sources  are  taxed  instead  of  one.  That  is  to  say,  the  price
is  raised  less  when  the  given  revenue  is  collected  from  both  sources
than  when  it  is  collected  from  the  more  elastic  source  alone,  or  from
the  less  elastic  source  alone,  if  its  elasticity  falls  short  of  that  of
the  other  by  less  than  a  defined  small  proportion.  From  this
result  it  is  an  easily  deduced  corollary  that,  when  the  choice  is,
not  between  the  taxation  of  one  source  and  of  both  sources,  but
between  the  taxation  of  one  source  and  of  the  other  source,  price
will  be  raised  less  if  the  source  in  which  the  supply  is  less  elastic
is  selected.

§  15.  By  similar  methods  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  efiFect
upon  price  of  imposing  a  tax  upon  one  of  two  sources  of  supply
and  distributing  the  proceeds  as  a  bounty  to  the  output  from  the
other  source.  The  solution  is  as  follows.  Let  the  output  in  the
taxed  source  be  S^,  in  the  other  source  Sg.  Let  the  tax  per  unit
be  T  and  of  bounty  V.  Then  the  rise  of  price  is  found  from  our
general  formula  thus  :


AP  =


^1^1  "*■  ^2^2  ~  ^(^1  "•"  ^2)


Cases  of  increasing  returns  are  ruled  out  because  the  existence  of
two  sources,  in  either  of  which  increasing  returns  prevails,  is  incom-
patible with  economic   equilibrium.     Hence,  the  price  must  rise

Te  S
unless   (gjS^T  -  e^S^)  is   negative  ;   that  is,  unless  V  > — ^  •

But,  since  the  taxed  source  must  contract  and  the  bountied  source

g
must  expand  its  production,  we  know  that  V<T^  •  Therefore,

the   price   must  rise  unless  —  is    <  1,  that  is  to  say,  unless  the

.  ^2
bountied  source  of  supply  is  more  elastic  than  the  taxed  source.

This  conclusion  does  not,  of  course,  imply  that,  when  the  bountied
source  is  more  elastic,  the  price  must  fall.  On  the  contrary,  con-
ditions may  well  be  such  that  prices  would  be  raised  both  by  the
taxation  of  the  source  S^  to  provide  a  bounty  for  Sg  and  by  the
taxation  of  Sg  to  provide  a  bounty  for  Sj.

3p


946


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


APP.


F


MONOPOLISTIC    COMPETITION

§  16.  A  condition   of  monopolistic   competition  exists  when
either  of  two  or  more  sellers  supplies  a  considerable  part  of  the

market  with  which
they  are  connected.
Let  us  suppose  that
two  sellers  only,  A
and  B,  are  engaged  in
production  in  a  given
market.  For  this
market  construct  a
diagram,  on  the  plan
of  those  already  em-
ployed, such  that  DD'
represents  the  demand
curve,  SSj  the  supply
curve,  SSg  the  curve  of
marginal  supply  prices,  OM  the  ideal  output,  and  OM'  the  out-
put normal  to  simple  competition.  Let  it  be  assumed,  for  the
sake  of  simplicity,  that  the  demand  curve  DD'  is  also  the
curve  of  marginal  demand  prices.  With  the  help  of  this  diagram,
that  part  of  the  argument  of  Part  II.  Chapter  XII.,  which  deals
with  competing  monopolies,  other  than  those  that  aim  by  sacrifice
in  the  present  at  obtaining  an  advantage  against  rivals  in  the
future,  can  be  slightly  extended.  The  reasoning  of  the  chapter  cited
sufficed  to  show  that  the  aggregate  output  is  indeterminate;  and  that
the  range  of  that  indeterminateness  stretches  from  nothing  at  the
one  extreme  up  to  the  sum  of  the  output  that  would  maximize
A's  monopoly  revenue  in  the  absence  of  B  and  the  output  that
would  maximize  B's  monopoly  revenue  in  absence  of  A.  If  the
curves  of  demand  and  supply  are  all  straight  lines,  these  two  out-
puts are  respectively  one-half  of  what  A  would  produce  under
competitive  conditions  in  the  absence  of  B,  and  one-half  of  what  B
would  produce  under  competitive  conditions  in  the  absence  of  A ;
for,  as  is  well  known,  the  largest  rectangle  which  it  is  possible  to
inscribe  in  a  triangle  will  touch  the  middle  point  of  two  of  its
sides.  Their  sum  is,  therefore,  less  than  the  output  which  would
emerge  under  simple  competition,  if  the  larger  of  the  two  sources
of  supply  were  alone  in  existence.  A  fortimi,  it  is  less  than  the
output  OM',  corresponding  to  the  intersection  of  the  demand  curve
and  the  supply  curve.  If  the  curves  are  not  linear,  this  result,
though  not  certain,  is  still  probable.     Thus,  the  range  of  inde-


A  DIAGKAMMATIC  ANALYSIS


947


terminateness  lies  between  nothing  and  some  ascertainable  quantity,
which  is  different  in  different  circumstances,  but  is,  in  general,
smaller  than  OM'.  When  cut-throat  competition  of  the  type  indi-
cated in  Part  II.  Chapter  XII.  is  not  excluded,  the  argument  of  that
chapter  shows  that  the  output  is  no  longer  indeterminate  between
nothing  and  some  quantity  smaller  than  OM',  but  is  liable  to
exceed  OM'  to  an  extent  determined  by  the  opinion  of  each  of  the
combatants  as  to  the  staying  power  of  his  opponent,  and  by  other
considerations  of  a  strategical  nature.  There  is,  obviously,  no
tendency  for  it  to  approximate  to  the  ideal  output  OM.


6


SIMPLE   MONOPOLY

§  17.  For  the  treatment  of  simple  monopoly  a  similar  diagram
may  be  employed.  We  again  assume,  for  simplicity,  that  the
demand  curve  and  the  curve  of  marginal  demand  prices  are
identical.  As  before,  OM  repre-
sents the  ideal  output  and  OM'
the  output  that  would  come  about
under  simple  competition.  The
output  under  simple  monopoly
will  be  measured  by  OM",  where
OM"  is  such  that  the  rectangle
Q"FHK  is  a  maximum.  A  study  of
the  accompanying  Fig.  7  enables
us  to  reach  the  following  results.
Under  constant  returns  and  in-
creasing returns,  since  OM'  can-
not be  greater  than  OM,  and
OM"  must  be  less  than  OM',  OM"  must  diverge  from  OM  further
than  OM'  diverges  from  it.  Under  diminishing  returns,
however,  OM'  is  necessarily  greater  than  OM,  and,  there-
fore, OM"  may  diverge  from  OM  less  far  than  OM'  diverges
from  it.  The  conditions  under  which  this  possibility  will
be  realised  can  be  determined  without  great  difficulty  in
the  simple  case  where  all  the  curves  involved  are  straight
lines.  As  already  indicated,  OM"  must  then  be  equal  to  one-
half  of  OM'.  It  is  easily  seen  that  OM  must  be  greater  than
one-half  of  OM';  since  it  would  be  equal  to  one-half  of  OM'  if  DD'
were  a  horizontal  line.  Hence,  it  is  impossible  for  OM"  to  have
a  value  greater  than  OM.  The  condition  that  OM"  shall  fall  short
of  OM  by  a  smaller  amount  than  that  by  which  OM'  exceeds  OM
is    equivalent    to   the   condition    that    M"M    shall    be    less    than


948


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


MM'.  This  condition  is  satisfied  if,  in  Fig.  8  below,  the
^HQK  <Z.Q'QK;  that  is,  if  the  ^DSS2<^SDQ.  In  other
words,  the  required  condition  is  that  the  angle  made  with  the
vertical  by  the  curve  of  marginal  supply  prices  is  less  than  the
angle  so  made  by  the  demand  curve.  Of  course,  when  the  curves
are  not  straight  lines  no  such  simple  result  can  be  obtained.

§  1 8.  When  the  State  fixes  a  maximum  price  at  the  competitive
level,  it  is  obvious  that,  if  conditions  of  increasing  returns  or
constant  returns  prevail,  it  will  pay  the  monopolist  to  increase  his
output  up  to  the  amount  that  would  have  been  produced  under
free  competition.  If,  however,  conditions  of  diminishing  returns
prevail,  the  amount  which  it  will  pay  the  monopolist  to  produce,
namely,  the  amount  which  will  maximise  output  multiplied  by  the
excess  of  the  regulated  price  of  sale  over  the  supply  price,  is
necessarily  less  than  the  competitive  output.     It  may  be  either


greater  or  less  than  the  output  that  would  result  under  un-
regulated monopoly.  If  the  curves  of  demand  and  supply  are
both  straight  lines,  it  will  be  exactly  equal  to  this  amount.  This
is  readily  seen  by  inspection  of  a  suitably  drawn  diagram.

§  19.  If,  under  conditions  of  diminishing  returns,  the  State
fixes  a  maximum  price,  less  than  the  monopoly  price  but  greater
than  the  competitive  price,  it  is  probable  in  general  that  the  output
will  be  intermediate  between  the  competitive  output  and  the  output
proper  to  unregulated  monopoly.  If  the  curves  of  demand  and
supply  are  both  straight  lines,  it  can  be  proved  that  this  result  is
certain.  Construct  a  diagram  (Fig.  9),  such  that  PM  represents  the
competitive  price  and  OM  the  competitive  output ;  while  QN  repre-
sents the  monopoly  price,  and  ON  the  monopoly  output.  Let  the
State-controlled  price,  measured  by  OV,  be  greater  than  the  com-
petitive price,  but  less  than  the  monopoly  price.  Through  V  draw
a  horizontal  line  VBT  cutting  DD,  in  B  and  SSj  in  T.     It  is  easily


I


A  DIAGRAMMATIC  ANALYSIS


949


shown  that  the  monopoly  output  ON  is  one-half  of  the  competitire
output  OM,  and  that  the  output  which  it  will  pay  the  monopolist
to  produce  when  the  price  is  fixed  at  OV  will  be  measured  by  one-
half  of  the  line  VT,  drawn  horizontally  through  V  to  cut  SS^  in  T,  or
by  the  line  VB,  according  as  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  lengths  is
smaller.  But,  since  OV  is  greater  than  PM,  it  is  obvious  that  VT
is  greater  than  OM.  Consequently,  one-half  of  VT  is  greater  than
one- half  of  OM  This  proves  that  the  output  at  the  controlled
price  is  greater  than  the  monopoly  output ;  and,  since  VB  must  be
less  than  RP,  it  is  necessarily  less  than  the  competitive  output.
That  is,  it  lies  somewhere  between  the  two.

§  20.  An  extension  of  the  foregoing  argument  shows  that,  in
the  conditions  contemplated,  when  the  demand  and  supply  curves
are  straight  lines,  the  level  of  controlled  price,  which  will  make  the
output  larger  than  any  other  level  would  do,  will  be  that  which
causes  the  intersection  points  of  VT  and  DD^,  namely  the  point  B,
to  be  identical  with  the  middle  point  of  VT,  namely  the  point  H.
If  the  Z.  SDP  be  6  and  the  Z.  DSP  be  ^,  this  output  can  be  shown  to
be  equal  to  the  output  proper  to  simple  competition  multiplied  by
the  fraction

tan  6  +  tan  <p


2  tan  0  4-  tan  ^


H


DISCRIMINATING   MONOPOLY


§  21.  Once  more,  as  in  the  two  preceding  sections,  we  assume,
for  simplicity,  that  the  demand  curve  and  the  curve  of  marginal


demand  prices  are  identical.     Our  first  problem  has  to  do  with
what  I  have  called  in  Part  II.  Chapter  XIV.  ideal  discrimination,  i.e.


950


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE


discrimination  carried  so  far  as  to  permit  of  a  different  price  being
charged  for  any  unit  of  product  sold.  Construct  Figures  10  and
11,  like  those  already  employed,  it  being  understood,  in  the  first
instance,  that  the  point  D  shall  stand  above  the  point  S,  It  is
evident  that,  under  monopoly  plus  ideal  discrimination,  output  will
be  equal  to  OM  units,  the  quantity,  namely,  which  corresponds  to  the
intersection  of  the  demand  curve  and  the  curve  of  marginal  supply
prices.  In  industries  obeying  constant  returns  this  result  is  also
attained  under  simple  competition,  but  in  industries  of  diminishing
and  increasing  returns,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  generality  of  industries,
the  output  OM'  must  under  simple  competition  diverge  from
OM.  The  extent  of  the  divergence  that  discriminating  monopoly
thus  enables  us  to  obviate  is  necessarily  greater,  the  less  far
DD'  diverges  from  the  horizontal,  that  is  to  say,  the  more
elastic  is  the  demand  for  the  commodity  in  question.  It  is  also
necessarily  greater,  the  further  SSg  diverges  from  the  horizontal,
that  is  to  say,  the  more  markedly  the  conditions  of  supply  depart
from  constant  returns,  either  on  the  side  of  diminishing,  or  on  the
side  of  increasing  returns.

§  22.  Hitherto  it  has  been  assumed  that  the  point  D  lies  above
the  point  S.     Let  us  now  consider  an  industry  in  which  D  lies  below

S.  If  DD'  lies  through-
out below  both  SSj  and
SSg,  it  is  obvious  that  no
output  can  occur  under
monopoly  plus  ideal  dis-
crimination, just  as  none
can  occur  under  simple
competition ;  whereas,  if
DD'  passes  through  both
SSj  and  SSg  once,  it  must
also  pass  through  them
both  a  second  time,  and
the  conditions  are  sub-
stantially equivalent  to
Fig.  12.  those    discussed    in    the

preceding  section,  except
that  there  may  be  diflBculty  in  getting  the  industry  started.  It  may
happen,  however,  in  some  industries  of  increasing  returns,  that  DD'
passes  through  SSg,  but  does  not  pass  through  SSj.  Let  DD'
cut  SSg  in  K  and  Q.  Then,  under  conditions  of  simple  competi-
tion, no  output  can  occur.  Under  conditions  of  monopoly  plus
ideal  discrimination,  however,  provided  that  the  area  RQ  is  greater
than  the  area  DRS,  an  output  OM  will  yield  aggregate  receipts
in  excess  of  aggregate  costs  and  will,  therefore,  be  forthcoming.


Ill  A  DIAGKAMMATIC  ANALYSIS  951

This  result  is  more  likely  to  be  achieved,  the  more  steeply  the  curve

SSj  slopes  downward  (that  is  to  say,  the  more  strongly  the  law  of

increasing  returns  works) ;  because,  the  steeper  is  SS^,  the  larger,

when  the  distance  OM  is  given,  is  the  area  PQS,  and,  therefore,

the  greater  is  the  range  of  demand  curves  that  will  make  the  area

RQ  greater  than  the  area  DES.     Given  the  inclination  of  SSp  it  is

also  more  likely  to  be  achieved,  if  the  demand  curve  does  not  slope

downward  steeply  in  its  earlier  stages  (that  is  to  say,  if  the  demand

is  elastic  till  fairly  low  price  levels  have  been  reached).

§  23.  Monopoly  plus  discrimination  of  the  second  degree,  as

defined  on  p.  244,  approximates  in  its  effects  towards  monopoly  plus

ideal  discrimination,  as  the  number  of  different  prices,  which  it  is

possible   for    the   monopolist  to    charge,   increases.     This   result,

which  is  obvious  in   general,   can   be   worked    out  exactly  in  a

particular  case.     Let  the  output  proper  to  ideal  discrimination  be

a,   and   let  n  be  the  number  of  different  price-groups.     On  the

hypothesis  that  DD'  and  SS.,  are  straight  lines,  it  can  be  shown

that,  when  the  supply  of  the  commodity  obeys  the  law  of  constant

returns,  so  that  SSg  lies  horizontally,  the  output  will  be  equal

n
to ra  for  all  values  of  n.     That  is  to  say,  if  one  price  only  can

be  selected,  the  output  will  be  ^a :  if  two  prices  can  be  selected,

2

^a,  and  so  on.     When  the  supply  of  the  commodity  obeys  the  law

of  increasing  returns,  the  output,  if  n  is  equal  to  1,  will  still  be

n
equal  to  ,a,  but,  if  n  is  greater  than  1,  it  will  be  somewhat

less  than  this.

§  24.  Our  next  problem  has  to  do  with  the  relative  outputs
under  discriminating  monopoly  of  the  third  degree — again  as  defined
on    p.    244 — and    of

simple   monopoly    re-  5^d'

spectively.     Let  con-  n.,--^  -ho

ditions  of  constant
returns  prevail,  and
let  there  be  two
markets  only.  Then,
if  the  curves  of  de-
mand in  both  markets
are  straight  lines,  pre-
cise results  can  be  obtained.  Let  D^Dg  and  D'^D'g  represent  the
demand  curves  of  the  two  markets,  and  let  SS'  be  drawn  at  a  vertical
distance  OR  above  the  base  line,  where  OR  measures  the  constant


952  ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE  apf.

cost  of  production.  Produce  D'jD'j  to  cut  D^D^  in  H,  and,  through
H,  draw  a  straight  line  HT,  such  that  PT  is  equal  to  RP'.  Then,
under  discriminating  monopoly  the  output  for  the  two  markets
will  be  respectively  |RP'  and  |RP.  Under  simple  monopoly,  if
PH  is  greater  than  HD^,  the  output  will  be  iRT.  But,  since
PT  is  equal  to  RP',  ^RT  =  |RP'  +  |RP.  Therefore,  subject  to
the  condition  italicised  above,  the  outputs  under  simple  monopoly
and  under  discriminating  monopoly  will  be  the  same.  If  PH  is
less  than  HDj,  the  output  under  simple  monopoly  will,  in  some
conditions,  he  ^RP,  and  there  will  be  no  consumption  in  the  less
favourable  market.  When  these  conditions  prevail,  so  that  under
simple  monopoly  nothing  would  be  consumed  in  one  of  the  two
markets,  the  substitution  of  discriminating  for  simple  monopoly
increases  the  output ;  but  except  in  these  conditions  the  output
is  not  changed.

When  the  assumption  of  constant  returns  is  removed  and  it  is
allowed  that  diminishing  or  increasing  returns  prevail,  the  results
reached  above  are  not  modified,  since  it  is  only  through  a  change
in  the  quantity  of  output  that  diminishing  or  increasing  returns
can  be  called  into  play.^  Increasing  returns,  however,  open  up
a  possibility  referred  to  in  Part  II.  Chapter  XIV.  §  13
and  analogous  to  that  examined  in  §  22  of  this  Appendix,
to  which  the  preceding  discussion  has  no  relevance.  This  is  that,
in  some  conditions  under  which  neither  simple  monopoly  nor
simple  competition  would  have  led  to  any  output,  discriminating
monopoly  may  lead  to  some  output.


FLUCTUATIONS   OF   DEMAND

§  25.  In  conclusion  an  illustration  may  be  offered  of  the
diagrammatic  treatment  of  problems  of  fluctuation.  Let  DD'  and
SS'  be  the  long  period  demand  and  supply  curves  respectively,  and
let  SjSj'  be  the  short  period  supply  curve,  drawn  on  the  assump-
tion that  the  fixed  plant  of  our  industry  has  been  adapted  to
a  normal  output  CM.  For  the  present  purpose  we  may
assume,    though,    in    view    of    the    attention    which    producers

1  In  conditions  such  that  a  simple  monopoly  would  sell  in  market  A  only,
while  a  discriminating  monopoly  would  sell  in  B  also,  it  can  easily  be  shown  that
the  introduction  of  discrimination  will  affect  consumption  and  price  in  A  as
follows.  Under  constant  returns  both  will  remain  unchanged  ;  under  diminish-
ing returns  consumption  will  be  diminished  and  price  increased  ;  under  increasing
returns  consumption  will  be  increased  and  price  diminished.  These  considera-
tions are  of  practical  importance  to  a  Government  considering  whether  native
cartels  should  be  allowed  to  sell  abroad  at  less  than  the  home  price.


A  DIAGRAMMATIC  ANALYSIS


953


in  fact  pay  to  the  danger  of  "  spoiling  th«  market/'  ^  the
aasumption  is  unreal,  that  the  short  period  supply  cunre
represents  the  prime  costs  of  successive  units  of  production.
It  is  evident  that  DD'  and  SS'  and  S^S^'  intersect  at  one  point
P.  Through  P  draw  PM  and  PR  parallel  to  the  axes  of  Y  and
X  respectively.  Then  PRSj  represents  normal  returns  to  sup-
plementary costs,  and  is  equal
to  the  average  of  the  pro-
ducers' surpluses  (from  a  short
period  point  of  view)  that
result  from  the  various  posi-
tions assumed  by  the  demand
schedule  from  time  to  time.
Let  DjDj'  represent  the  short
period  demand  curve  at  any
one  moment,  and  let  it  cut
S^S/  in  Q.  Through  Q  draw
QM'  parallel  to  PM.  Then
QM'  represents  the  price
proper  to  simple  competition
corresponding   to    this   short

period  demand.  For  a  given  variation  of  D^Dj'  from  DD',  the
variation  of  QM'  from  QM  is  greater,  the  steeper  is  SjS^'.  But
PRSj  represents  normal  returns  to  supplementary  costs,  and
PMOSj'  normal  returns  to  prime  costs.  Therefore  S^Sj'  is  steeper
the  more  important  is  the  relative  part  played  by  supplementary
costs.  It  follows  that,  under  competitive  conditions,  the  variations
of  price  which  correspond  to  given  variations  of  demand  are  greater
in  any  industry,  the  larger  is  the  part  played  by  supplementary
costs  relatively  to  prime  costs.

'  Cf.  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economies,  pp.  374-6.


D

'

•s;

P^^^^^v^

#

/

s

"^...I.;-^

^^^^^             ,'

R

^^^"r—-^^^^:::^^^''                   e'

'--..a-'

^ ~

^    '      *

^*'"-^>v^

^'        I

"""■•^          ^*"^

^                 •

" ».

^^"^                    1

*'-,.

,,-''

i'

s,

•-''

M    M
Fig.  14.


INDEX


Abbe,  Dr.,  414

Accidents,  indastrial,  insurance  against,

452-3
Ad  valorem  tax,  616-18
Adjudication,  industrial,  coercive,  391-3
Advertisement,      competitive,      172-5 ;

Purchasers'  Associations  save,  287-8
Advertisement  Regulation  Act,  32  n.
Afforestation  and   unemployment,   886,

891
Aftalion,  M.,  on  variations  in  prodnc-

tion,  800  n.,  802,  806,  828,  835
Age  distribution  and  costs  of  movement,

463-4
Agricultural  Holdings  Acts,  154-7
Agricultural    labourers  :     opportunities

of    advancement    for,     181,    182  ;

wages  of,  427-8,  513-14,  517,  528,

546
Agricultural  Organisation  Societies,  170
Agricultural   products,  expenditure'  on,

822
Agricultural  revolution,  15
Agricultural  training,  182,  778
Agriculture  :     allotments     and,      182 ;

bounties    and,    169-70  ;     industry

and,  816-17,  818,  822,  825-6,  846-

848  ;    inventions    and,    717,    722 ;

Purchasers'  Associations  and,  284-

285,  287-8,  289,  291,  292;   State

encouragement    of,    169-70,    182,

293  ;  wages  of,  427-8,  513-14,  517,

528,  546
Allotments,  182,  467
Amalgamated  Society  of  Engineers  and

standard  rates,  429  n.
America.     See  United  States
American  Civic  Federation  Report,  340,

341  ;     on     public    operation    and

private,  342,  351,  356
Andrew,  Professor  Piatt,  847,  874
Andrifford,  M.,  903
Antwerp  Employment  Bureau,  499
Appeals  Committee,  440
Arable  farming,  causes  of  decline,  517  n.


Arbitration,  industrial,  compolsory,  398-
400,  408-9,  410,  554
voluntary :  disadvantages  of,  376-9,
406-9  ;  referendum  and,  382-4  ;
the  arbitrating  authority,  379-82,
410-11  ;  guarantees,  384-5,  392

Arbitration  Boards,  379-81,  539

Ardrossan  Electric  Lighting  Order,  166

Ashly,  Professor,  749

Askwith,  Lord,  380,  397,  398,  728

Asquith,  Mr.,  387

Australia  :  boycotts  in,  315  ;  compulsory
adjudication  in,  391  ;  compulsory
arbitration  in,  398-400,  546,  554  ;
convict  system  and  labour  supply
in,  15 ;  extensive  agreements  in,
393  ;  labour  conditions  regulated
in,  489,  491  n.,  495,  540-41,  546  ;
land  value  tax  in,  609,  613  :  living
wage  legislation  in,  540-41  ;  mini-
mum wage  in,  553

Australian  Trade  Marks  Act,  489  n.

Austria,  accident  prevention  in.  452  n.

Aves,  Mr.,  433,  727

Bachelors,  taxation  and,  635-6,  687-8

Bacon  on  inventions,  100

Bagehot,  831,  868

Balfour,  Mr.,  and  bounty  system,  885

Banchi  Popolari,  138,  144  n.

Bank  balances,  851-2

Bank  Charter  Act  suspended,  373

Bank  credits  :  in  industry,  668,  815  n.,
851-2,  854,   856-7,  860-61,  866-9,
871-2
in  war  finance,  662,  665,  667-8,  669-
73  ;  consequent  problems,  673-7

Bank  gold  reserve,  856,  867-71

Bank  of  England  :  and  note  issue,  873-
874  ;  its  policy  in  crises,  868-9

Banking  panics,  869,  872-5

Bankruptcies,  865,  866-7

Banks :  boycott  through,  312 ;  com-
pany promotion  by,  135-8  ;  crisis
policy,    867-9;     Exchange,     143;


955


956


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


large-scalt  management  in,  224 ;
Liability,  144  n.  ;  People's,  138,
144

Baranowsky,  M.  Tugan,  809,  811

Bargaining,  176-7  ;  collective,  440-41,
443,  444

Baring  crisis,  870

Barnes,  G.  N.,  M.P.,  on  unions  and
standard  rates,  429  n.

Barnett,  Canon,  49,  759-60,  786

Bateson,  Professor,  on  heredity,  92

Beckhover  and  Keckitt  on  national
guilds,  17  w.

Beethoven's  parentage,  93

Belgium :  afforestation  and  unemploy-
ment in,  891  w.  ;  banks  and  excess
note  issue  in,  873  ;  exploitation  in,
518  ;  insurance  subsidies  in,  903  n. ,
904  ;  labour  colonies  in,  767,  774-
775  ;  land  tenure  and  compensation
arrangements  in,  157  ;  mediation
in,  389  ;  workmen's  tickets  in,
279  n.,  475,  484  n.

Bell,  Mr.  Richard,  on  workers'  thrift-
lessness,  900

Benini  on  income  distribution,  698-9

Bergen  welfare  plan,  786

Berlin  Tramways  concession,  152

Besse,  M,,  on  wages  in  agriculture,  427-
428

Beveridge,  Sir  W. :  on  dock  labour  system,
459 ;  on  drunkenness  and  unem-
ployment, 484  n.  ;  on  earnings
compared  with  prospects,  498  ;  on
Labour  Exchanges,  462,  897  ;  on
pauperism,  483  ;  on  unions  and
standard  rates,  429

Bickerdike,  Mr.,  on  railway  rate  system,
278  w.

Biology :  a  realistic  science,  3,  5,  7 ;
economic  circumstances  and,  91,
95,  97,  101-6  ;  heritable  defects
and  qualities,  91,  92-5,  96-7
national  dividend  in  relation  to  :  dis-
tribution, 104  - 106  ;  expansion,
101-4

Birth-rate:  highest  among  poor,  56  »i.,
62,  104-5  ;  increased  income  and,
59,  60-63,  105-6,  795-6

Black,  Miss,  on  cheap  labour,  518

Blockades,  parallel  between  industrial
disputes  and,  364-5

Board  of  Trade  as  mediator,  387,  389,
390

Bonn,  Professor,  on  Irish  rents,  159

Booms :  industrial,  802,  803,  806-7,
813,  815  ;  invention,  827-30

Boot  and  shoe  trade :  arbitration  of
disputes  in,  376,  378 «.,  384-5  ;
inventions   and    unemployment   in.


717  ;  short-time  niethodi  in,   480  ;
women's  labour  in,  523  n.

Booth,  Charles,  574

Bosanquet,  Mrs.,  733-4,  756  n.,  782

Bounties :

on  industrv  :   national  dividend  and,
122,    128,    129  ;    trade   and    indi-
vidual net  product  and,  193-4,  196  ;
trade  and  social  net  product  and,
168-71,  476
on  insurance,  453,  902-3,  906-7
labour   and :    demand   regulated    by,
881,  885,  887-8,  891  n.  ;  mobility
promoted  by,  475-6
output    and,    diagrammatic    analysis,

App.  III.  940-45
production   directed   by,  205-6,   300,

881,  885
public   authorities   and,    344-6,    886,

891  w.
on  railways,  278-9
transferences  by  means  of,  769

Bowley,  Dr. :  on  distribution  of  income,
54,  55-6,  57  n.,  695  ;  on  standard
of  life  among  poor,  542,  779,  788  ;
on  unemployment  relief,  888

Box-making,  wages  in,  548  n.

Boy  labour  :  choice  of  avocation,  447-8,
780-81  ;  not  steady,  473  n.

Boycott :  as  an  industrial  weapon,  308,
309-12  ;  by  consumer,  494  ;  legis-
lation against,  312-15,  318

Brace,  Mr.,  on  crop  prices  and  supply,
817

Brentano,  Professor,  on  birth-rate  and
prosperity,  61,  106

Bricklaying,  scientific,  186

British  Census  of  Production,  1907,  36,
829

Broadhead,  Mr.,  on  minimum  wage,
432  «.

Brooks,  Mr.,  on  deterioration  of  plant,
570

Building  trades  and  employment :  dis-
missal method  in,  480,  482 ;  in-
formation agencies  in,  458,  460 ;
nominally  high  wages  in,  498  ;
seasonal  variability  in,  577

Burma,  Co-operative  Credit  Societies  in,
137-8

Bums's  Town-Planning  Act,  171

Burton,  Mr.,  on  financial  crises,  865

Business  finance  :  more  publicity  needed,
131-2  ;  conducted  by  professionals,
132-5  ;  conducted  by  banks,  135-
138

Business  organisations :  grading  in  size
desirable,  180-181  ;  small  associa-
tions of  workers,  181-2  ;  large  in-
dustrial     combinations,      182  -  4  ;


INDEX


957


scientific  management,  186  -  8  ;
standardisation,  184-5

Butter :  price  control,  204 ;  trade  in
Denmark  and  France,  284,  285

Butterworth,  Mr.,  Memorandom  to  Rail-
way Conference,  174


•Ca'  canny,"  583-4
Cadbury,  Mr.,  on  piece- wages,  445  n.
Cadbury,   Messrs.,  and  employees'  wel-
fare, 749
Caillaux,  M.,  on  income  t&x,  625
Campbell,  Mr.  G.  F.  C,  on  land  value

taxation,  610-12
Canada  :   agriculttire,  State-encouraged,,
in,     169-170,     292;     Co-operative
Creameries  in,  292  ;    dumping  pro-
hibited   in,    313,    314  ;    Industrial
Combines   Investigation   Act,    324,
325  ;  Industrial  Disputes  Investiga-
tion Act,  395-7,  398,  408,  409  ;  in-
surance  by   Government   in,    903  ;
land  value  tax  in,  609
Cannan,   Professor ;   on  economics,  11  ;
on  limitations  of  self-interest,  112  ;
on  women's  labour,  471,  525
Capital :  definition  of,  99-100,  703
determination  of,  327-9
inventions  and,  716,  719,  723-4
investment  abroad  of,  465  n.,  707-9  ;
owing   to   labour  legislation,    794  ;
owing  to  taxation,  627
labour  supply  and,  711-12
loans  to  Grovemment  and,  646,  647,

650,  663
mobility  ofi  44-7,  465  n.
savings  converted  into,  and  industrial

fluctuations,  809-12,  813
as  social  memory,  99-100
specialisation  of,  146
supply  of,  and  income  of  labour,  703-

704,  707
taxation  and,   594,  596-7,  598  ;  high
income    tax    and,    627-9  ;    special
levy  on   basis  of,    680,   681,   682;
valuation  for  levy  on,  683-5 ;  gradua-
tion of  levy,  686-8
transferences  and,  774,  776-7
units  of,  their  size  and  complexity,

140-148
valuation  of,  683-5
Capital-saving  inventions,  719-20
Carnegie,  Mr.,  642,  901
Carver,     Professor,     38/i.,    49  n.  ;     on
death    duties,     642  ;    on    unit    of
waiting,  142  n.
Casael,  Dr.  :  on  decreasing  stocks,  App.
I. ,  923  ;    on   inventions,  720  ;    on
>raiting,  142  n.


Casual  method  of  engaginz  labour,  499-
500.  501-3,  510-11,^^731  ;  how  to
discourage,  503-4

Census  of  Production,  36.  829

Chain  method  of  [irice  comparison,  79,
90  n.

Chapman,  Professor :  on  cut -de-  sac
employment,  449  n.  ;  on  family
earnings,  57  n. ;  on  forward  buying,
842 ;  on  home  work,  520  n.  ;  on
short  time  and  dismissal  methods,
482  ;  on  unemployment  and  muni-
cipal work,  885 ;  on  wages,  ad-
vantages of  fixed,  562-3

Child  labour,  51 6  n.,  518,  780-81

Children  :  firee  meals  and  education  for,
756,  758,  759,  780,  782  ;  training
and  nurture  of,  779-81

Chinese  immigrants  in  New  Zealand,  705

Clapham,  Dr.,  on  weaving  industry,
454,  567

Clark,  Professor :  on  industrial  com-
binations, 306  ;  on  maintenance  of
competition,  317  ;  on  marginal
increment  of  capital,  115  ;  on  rail-
way rates,  278  n.

Clayton  Law,  301,  315,  317

Clubbing  methods  in  business,  308-12  ;
legislation  against,  312-17,  318

Goal  industry  :  combination  in  Germany,
229  ;  output  and  depression  in,  800,
802 ;  price  control  in,  201,  202,
204  ;  strikes  in,  363,  364  n.,  369,
387  n.  ;  supply  control  in,  215  ;
wage  agreements  in,  585-6  ;  wages
on  sliding  scale  in,  584-5

Cocoa  price  control,  199

Coercive  intervention  in  industrial  dis-
putes :  adjudication,  391-3  ;  arbitra-
tion, 398-400,  408-9,  410,  554;
extension  of  agreements,  393-5 ;
investigation  before  strike,  395-8

Cold  storage  and  prices,  574

Collateral  security,  increase  of,  145

Collective  bargaining,  440-41,  443,  444

Colc^e,  increment  duties  in,  603,  606

Colaon,  M. :  on  concessions,  153  ;  on
railway  rates,  245,  269  n.

Commissions  system,  298-9

Commodities  of  changing  character,  81

Commons,  I'rofessor,  on  municipal
electric  lighting,  352

Company  promotion :  by  banks,  135-
138 ;  by  professionals,  132-6 ;  in
Germany,  135,  178  n.

Compensation  :  for  land  improvements,
154-7,  159  ;  for  unemployment,
487  n.

Compstition :

monopolistic,     232-4  ;    adv«rtiMmeut


958


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


Competition  {contd.) —

and,  172-5  ;  anti-trust  policy  and,
302-3
obstacles  to,  317-19
simple,  235-9  ;   =  cost  of  service  prin-
ciple, 256  ;  discriminating  monopoly
of  third  degree  and,  251-3,  254,  273,
275-9 ;    marginal   trade   and   indi-
vidual net  product   and,    190-196,
303  ;   national  dividend  and,  254  ;
,   output    under,    251-3,    App.    III.
*'    937-8  ;. price  restrictions  and,  211  ;
and    railway    rates,    256,    257-62,
273-9
unfair    methods    of,    234,    308  - 12  ;
legislation  against,  312-17

Comte  on  the  intellect,  5

Concessions  to  companies,  152-3,  164

Conciliation  Boards,  373,  410  ;  constitu-
tion of,  373-6 ;  governmental  and
non-governmental,  387-90  ;  referen-
dum from,  382-3  ;  and  wages,  fair,
536,  639

Conciliation  Council,  International,  409

Confidence  in  business :  and  industrial
fluctuations,  832-3,  847,  848,  851-3;
and  price  variations,  852-3,  855,
856,  857

Conservation  of  resources,  28

Constant  returns  :  discriminating  mono-
poly and,  248,  251  ;  output  and  con-
ditions of,  251,  322,  App.  III.  938

Consumable  commodities,  taxation  of:
general,  616-18,  619 ;  particular,
618-23,  637-8

Consumable  income,  36  ;  variability  of,
64-7

Consumers,  interference  to  raise  wage
rates  by,  488,  494    .

Consumers'  League,  749

Consumption :  and  taste,  49-52,  54,  57  n.,
70-71  ;  economic  welfare  and  varia-
bility of,  65-7

Co-operation  :  rural,  1 6  w, ;  and  welfare,
15-16

Co-operative  Creameries,  284-5,  291,  292

Co-operative  Credit  Societies  in  India
and  Burma,  137-8

Co-operative  Stores,  182,  285-6 ;  economic
advantages  of,  286-90,  723

Co-partnership,  425  ;  in  South  Metro-
politan Gas  Co.,  502 ;  workshops,
181-2

Cost  of  living  :  in  England  and  Germany,
84  n. ;  wages  and,  539-40,  541

Cost  of  production  of  parts  and  wholes,
727-8

Cost  of  service  principle  in  railway  rates,
256-62,  264,  273,  277-9  ;  adjust-
ments required,    280-82  ;    bounties


and,  278-9  ;  national  dividend  and,
272,  277

Costs  of  movement  and  distribution  of
labour,  447,  463-9,  473,  474-6,  486,
508-9  ;  bounties  and,  473,  474-6  ;
short  time  and,  486  ;  unfair  wages
and,  508-9

Cotton  industry :  agreements  between
manufacturers  in,  838  ;  growth  of,
783-4  ;  price  control  in,  206  ;  "  pro-
fessional experts "  in,  372  ;  short
time  in,  481,  482  ;  supply  control
in,  215  ;  unemployment  fund  in,
487
wages  in:  "margins"  and,  581  ;  sliding
scale  a  failure,  394

Cotton  and  wool,  machinery  used  for
either,  454

Cournot  and  resources  under  duopoly,
232

Cradley  Heath  nailmakers,  448

Credit  system,  dangers  of  modem,  866-7

Crompton,  Mr.,  on  conciliation  agree-
ments, 376

Crops:  forecasts  of,  817-18,  824,  825
industrial  fluctuations  and,  817-19
820,  821-2,  825-6,  848  ;  iron  pro
duction  and,  818,  846-7,  848
periodicity  of,  825-6,  848  ;  varia-
bility of,  820,  822-4

Currency  :

paper :  depreciation  of,  673 ;  in
financing  war,  665,  670,  671-7,  873  ;
limitations  of  issue  of,  666,  675,
676-7,  857,  858,  872,  873-4  ;  panics
and,  874-5  ;  post-war,  862,  871
stability  of,  856-9,  861-3

Customs  duties,  617,  621-3

Cut-throat  competition,  234,  308-9,  839  ;
legislation  against,  312-15,  318

Dale,  Sir  David,  380

Darwin,  Major,  299,  342

Davies,  Miss,  on  village  poverty,  779

da  Vinci,  Leonardo,  quoted,  9

Dawson,    Mr.  :    on   Germany,    old   and

modern,    13  ;    on   overcrowding   in

Germany,  170
Dearie,  Mr.,  on  London  building  trades,

457,  498
Death  duties,  597-8,  640,  641-4  ;  special

levy  and,  684-5,  686
Deception  as  to  things  for  sale,  177-9
Deferred  rebates,  311-12,  316
Demand  :

elasticity    of:     for    agricultural    and

non-agricultural  products,  819-21  ;

measurement  of,  App.  II.  925-30!;

monopolisation    and,    225-8,    248,

276  ;  railways  and,  276


INDEX


959


Demand  {cotUd. ) —

employers',  671-6,  679,  580
flactuations  of:  causes  of,  571-6,  576-7,
579  -  80 ;    diagrams    of,    App.    III.
952-3
new,  in  monopoly,  237-8
slackness  o^  methods  of  meeting,  478-87
transferability  of  units  of,  242-3

Demand  for  labour :

elasticity  of :  factors  determining,  726-
731 ;  and  aggr^ate  income,  710-13,
877  ;  and  low  grade  labour,  556  ;
and  movement  of  labour,  510-11  ;
and  wage  fluctiiations,  402,  556, 560-
562,  563-5,  566-77,  731-2
fluctuations  in,  560-62,  563-5,  566-77,

803,  809,  876,  877
inventions  and,  716-19
regulation    of,   by   public   or   private
action,  878-88,  891

Demarcation  of  function,  industrial  dis-
putes over,  367

Denmark  :  co-operation  in,  284,  288  n.,
291  ;  old-age  pensions  in,  753-4  ;
unemplojTnent  benefit  in,  895  n. ,
903  w.,  905

Depression,  industrial,  and  the  provision
of  employment,  878-80,  882-3,  884-
885,  887-8

Desiredness,  23,  67,  616  n.

Desires  and  satisfactions,  23-9

Destructive  dumping,  308-9  ;  legislation
against,  312-15

Detonation  of  financial  crises,  865,  869,
872,  875  n.

Dickinson,  Lowes,  on  European  civilisa-
tion, 13-14

Dietzel,  Professor,  on  special  levy,  686

Diminishing  returns :  analysis  by  dual
curve  system  and,  App.  III.  934-6  ;
investment  and,  248  ;  law  of,  stated,
120  ;  output  under  monopoly  and,
251,  252,  321-2,  App.  III.  948;
output  under  simple  competition
and,  App.  III.  938  ;  taxation  and,
193,  620  ;  trade  and  individual  net
products  and,  193,  233,  236
to  individual  factors  of  production,
704,  710  n.,  713

Diminishing  utility,  law  of,  48,  52

Discriminating  monopoly,  240 ;  con-
ditions favouring,  240-44  ;  degrees
of;  244-6,  247-9 ;  diagrammatic
analysis  of,  App.  III.  949-52;
marg^al  trade  and  individual  net
product  under,  247-9,  250,  253-4  ;
national  dividend  and,  248,  254,
255,  273,  277
of  third  degree,  244,  246-7 ;  output
and  marginal  trade  and  individual


net    product    under,    249-54,    275,
276  ;  and  railway  rates,  273, 275-9  ;
simple  competition  and,  251-3,  254,
273,  275-9  ;  value  of  service  prin-
ciple =,  256
Disharmony  between  national  dividend
and  earnings  of  labour,  691-2,  694  ;
inventions  and,  721,  724  ;  rationing
and,    738,   741  ;    supply  of  capital
and    labour    and,    700,    707,    709 ;
transferences  of  resources  and,  743  ;
uneconomically    high    wages    and,
734-5,  736
Dismissal  during  industrial   depression,
478-81,     482 ;     disadvantages     of
method,  479-80,  482-5  ;  trades  sub-
ject to,  480,  481,  482
Distress  Committees,  891  n.
Distribution  of  labour,  446-7
artificial  restrictions  on,  469-72
costs  of  movement  and,  447,  463-9,

472,  473,  474-6,  486,  508-9
effect  of  ignorance  as  to  prospects,
447-8 ;  aptitudes,  448-50 ;  real
advantages,  450-53 ;  fluctuations,
453-4  ;  comparative  demand  prices,
454-6  ;  employment  opportunities,
456-62
interference  with  wages   and,   507-8,

516,  544-5
methods  of  overcoming  obstacles  to,
472-7
Distribution  of  national  dividend,  693-
700  ;  among  factors  of  production,
701-15
Distribution  of  property,  pre-war  table

of,  683
Distribution   of  taxes  and   loans,   654  ;
between  people  of  equal  and  diff^erent
wealth,  658-60  ;     between  present
and    future,    654-8,    662 ;    in   war
finance,  660-64
Dockers'  romance,  503
Docks,  system  of  employment  at,  459  «.,

500
Domestic  servants,  infertility  o^  62-3
Domestic  workshops,  490,  491
Doncaster,  Dr.,  on  heredity,  93,  96
Drunkenness  and  unemployment,  484
Dumping,  623
Dumping,  destructive,  308-9  ;  legislation

against,  312-15
Dunraven,  Lord,  on  Irish  age  distribu-
tion, 463  n.
Duopoly,  resources  devoted  to  production

under,  232
Durand,  Professor  :  on  anti-trust  legisla-
tion, 303,  307  «.,  338  ;  on  concilia-
tion arrangements,  375
Durham  Wages'  Board,  382


960


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE


Duties  and  revenue,  diagrammatic
analysis  of,  App.  III.  943-5

Economic  rhythms,  799-805 ;  harvest
variations  and,  816-26,  846-8  ;  in-
ventions and,  827-830,  845-6 ;
psychology  of  business  and,  831-44.
850-56,  865-9

Economic  welfare  defined,  11,  30

aggregate  welfare  and,  11,  13-14,  18,
20-22,  101-4  ;  changes  in  taste  and,
49-52  ;  defence  and,  18-20  ;  desires
and  satisfactions,  discrepant,  and,
27-9  ;  disharmony  and,  691-2  ;  in-
dustrial fluctuations  and,  803
labour  and  :  increased  supply  of,  712-

713,  714  ;  variability  of  consump-
tion of,  893  ;  variability  of  income
of,  876,  878,  889

national  dividend  and :  average  volume
of,  43-52,  64,  69,  77  m.,  101,  107,
195  ;  variability  of,  64-7,  101,  107

poor's  share  in  national  dividend  and,
52-64,    101,    107  ;    State   aid   and,

714,  736  ;  transferences  to  increase,
787-8,  790

taxation  and  bounties  and,  196

Economics,  4-10,  11,  20-21  ;  biology
and,  91,  95,  97,  101-6

Edge  worth.  Professor,  20  ;  on  duopoly,
232 ;  on  index  numbers,  88,  89,
90  w.  ;  on  railway  rates,  277

Effertz  quoted,  18  n.

Efficiency :  dismissal  method  and,  480  ;
fatigue  and,  412-18,  420 ;  hours  of
labour  and,  412-18,  420  ;  meaning
of,  527  n.  ;  promotion  for,  433  ;
transferences  from  rich  to  poor  and,
774,  776-81,  785
wages  and,  428-33,  527,  547-52,  555,
563,  564,  567  n.,  789  n.  ;  fair  wages
and,  527  ;  interference  to  raise
wages  and,  547-52,  726  ;  piece-
wages  and,  435-41,  444-5,  551-2,
560  m.;  premium  plans  and,  437-40  ;
task-wages  and,  441-3  ;  time  wages
and,  428-34,  552

Eichholz,  Dr. ,  on  heredity,  97

Elasticity  of  demand.     See  Demand

Elberfeld  welfare  plans,  786

Electric  supply  :

municipal  :  difficulties  in  organising
297-8 ;  gas  company  opposition  and,
164,  166,  167,  347  ;  large  -  scale
distribution  schemes  and,  298,  347,
352,  353,  354
rates  for,  260-61 ;  peak-load  charges,
260,  261,  281  ;  sliding  scales,  336

Elementary  rate-fixing,  531-2

Emary,  Mr.,  on  speculation,  144


Eminent  domain  and  State  intervention,

294-5
Employers :

associations  of,  176,  228-31,  513-14
demand  for  labour  regulated  by,  881-3
Employment  Exchanges  and,  460-62
and  engagement  of  labour,  501,  502
exploitation  by,  511-26,  537
and  female  labour,  471,  521,  523-5
fluctuations   of   demand   and,    571-6,

579,  580  ;  seasonal,  467-8,  479
hours  of  labour  and,  414,  415,  416-18,

422
periods  of  depression   and   retrench-
ment by,  478-80,  487,  501,  881-3
regulations  evaded  by,  490-92,  493
seasonal  fluctuations  and,  467-8,  479
wage  disputes  and,   401-3,   404,  407,

409-10

wage  systems  and :  fixed  wage,  561  ;

piece-wages  and  cutting,  436-9,  440-

441  ;  slidiug-scale,  583,  585-6

welfare  work  by,  16-17,  426  n.,  748-9

Employment    Exchanges.      See   Labour

Exchanges
Employment  termination  due,  503-4
Endowment  of  motherhood,  754,  761
Engagement  of  labour,  methods  of,  497-

504,  510-11,  731
Engineering :  dismissal  method  in,  480,
481,  482  ;  fluctuations  in,  577,  806  ;
unemployment  in,  577
English  land  system,  154-6,  157,  159
Environment :  and  economic  satisfactions,
14-18  ;  and  heredity,    95,   98-101,
102,  104
Equality  of  returns,  126-30

obstructions  to  :  imperfect  knowledge,

131-8 ;     imperfect     divisibility    of

units  of  transactions,  139-40  ;   size

and  complexity  of  units,  140-48

Excess  Profits  Duty,  198, 199,  208  w.,  602

Exchange :    war  finance  and,  666,  668,

673-4,  677,  857
Excise  duties,  622-3

Expenditure :    private,  tax  on,  616-18,

619  ;  and  income  tax,  625-32,  635-6

public,  and  revenue,  589-91,  645

Exploitation  of  labour,  511-19,  537  ;  of

female    labour,    519-26 ;    increased

wages  and,  549,  550

Factors  of  production  :  distribution  of
income  among,  701-3 ;  law  of
diminishing  returns  to  individual,
704,  710  n.  ;  relation  of  quantity  to
reward  of,  705,  710  n.

Factory  and  Workshops  Act,  1901,  455

Factory  work  by  women,  162-3

Fair  Wages  Resolution,  489


INDEX


961


Family  as  the  unit  of  migration,  147,  469

Family  budget,  876-7,  App.  II.  926-7

Farm  colonies,  778

Farm  family  and  town  family,  15

Farmers :  co  -  operation  and,  289  ;
solidarity  of,  513-14,  517

Fashion:  industrial  fluctuations  and,
804  ;  motives  of  followers  of,  195  n.

Fatigue  and  efficiency,  412-18,  420

Fay,  Mr.,  on  co-operation  and  fanning,
289

Federated  Districts  agreement,  586

Feeble-minded,  high  reproduction  rate
among,  93-4

Fiduciary  notes  :  in  war  finance,  665,
670,  671-7,  873 ;  limitations  of
issue  of,  666,  675,  676-7,  857,  858,
872,  873-4  ;  panics  and,  874-5

Financial  crises,  banks  and,  867;^872-5

Financing  of  industry :  by  banks,  135-8  ;
by  public,  133,  146-7

Fines  on  workers,  455,  456

Fisher,  Professor :  on  contracts  for
interest,  853  ;  on  currency  manipu-
lation, 858-9,  860,  861-3  ;  on  invest-
ment, 855  ;  on  millionaire  and  his
heirs,  642  n.  ;  on  national  dividend,
30,  34,  35,  36,  625

Food  prices,  control  of,  199,  204,  205

Food  supply :  control  of,  214,  215-16 ;
national  security  and  imports  of,  19

Foreign  competition  and  elasticity  of
demand,  729-30  ;  industrial  legisla-
tion and,  793-5

Foreign  credits,  814

Foreign  investment,  707-9,  711

Foreign  loan,  646,  647

Foreign  trade  and  industrial  depression,
814

Foreigners  and  English  business  crises,
870

FoviUe,  M.  de,  465

Foxwell,  Professor,  and  personxil  relations
in  industry,  373

Fraction  of  wages,  367,  369

France  :  conservative  policy  of  business
in,  836  ;  Employment  Bureaus  in,
499,  897  ;  industrial  fluctuations  in,
804  n.  ;  inheritance  laws  in,  697  n. ;
movement  of  labour  in,  465  ;  mutual
insurance  in,  903  ;  sick  relief  law
in,  756  ;  unemployment  benefit  in,
894  n.,  897,  903,  904  n.

Franchises  for  public  utility  services,
332-4,  354  «.,  495

Frankfort-on-Main,  increment  duties  in,
603,  606

Free  play  of  self-interest  and  equality  of
returns,  125-6,  129

Friendly  Societies,  896,  905,  909


Fry,  Sir  Edward,  380
Fundholders  and  taxation,  626  n.

Galton,  Sir  Francis,  on  heredity,  93
Gannt  wage  system,  442
Gas  companies,  municipal :  area  of  supply,
354  ;  and  electric  supply,  164,  166,
167,  347  ;  sliding  scale  of  rates  ofi
335-6
Grerm  cells  and  heredity,  96-7
Grermany :    agricultural    policy    against
British  blockade  in,  19 ;    bank  re-
serve in,  869  n.  ;    banks  and  com-
pany  promotion    in,    135-6 ;    coal
industry  combine  in,  229  ;  company
flotation  in,  135-6,  178  «.,  867  ;  con-
cessions  to    companies   in,    152-3;
consumption     ot,     comp>ared    with
English,  70  n.,  74-5  ;  cost  of  living
in,  84  n.  ;  currency  law  in,  858
Employment    Exchanges    in.     458-9,

462,  473  ;  Labour  Bureau,  499
insurance  in  :  accident,  452  «.,  908-9  ;
compulsory,    904  ;    Ghent    system,
903  n.  ;  sick,  896,  904  ;  unemploy-
ment, 896
labour  colonies  in,  767
municipal  government  in,  297,  298
old  and  modem,  13
paper  currency  in,   145  ;   note  issae,

871,  873
railway  rates  in,  272
short-time  methods  in,  481
taxation    in :    capital     levy,     684  n.,
688  n.  ;    on   increment,    603,    606,
608  n.
town-planning  in,  161  n.,  170  n.,  171
unemployment  legislation  in,  487  n.,

884-5,  896
wages  in,  562
Gestation  period  of  production,   828-9

841,  848
Ghent  system  of  unemployment  subsidy,

894,  897,  903,  906
Gibb,  Sir  George  :  on  private  and  public
ownership,  350  ;  on  railway  system,
351,  355
Giffen  quoted,  27,  80
Gilbraith,  Mr.,  and  scientific  bricklaying,

186
GUman  quoted,  16

Gold  :  credit  expansion  and,  673,  856
currency  and,  676-7,  858-63
drain  on,  857,  870  ;  post-war,  673,  675
imports,  depression  and,  814
reserve,   note    issue  and,   675,'-  676-7,

857,  867,  869-71,  921  n.
standard  :   price  variations  and,  856,
857-8,  859,  861-4  :    restoration  of,
674,  675,  871

3Q


962


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


Goldmark,  Miss,  on  overtime  in  canneries,

420  w.
Goodwill :  compensation  for,  157  ;  valua-
tion of,  329,  330
Goschen,  Lord,  on  Baring  crisis,  870
Gould,  Jay,  telegraph  line  monopoly  of,

309
Government :  see  also  under  State

bounties    from,    122-3,    128,    168-71,

300
conservation  of  natural  resources  the

duty  of,  28-9
contracts  from,  and  fair  wages,  489,

494
control    of    industry   by,    28,    208-9,

293-9,  300
control  of  prices  by,  197-210,  738-41  ;
anti- monopolist,      321-2,      335-8;
diagrammatic  analysis  of,  App.  III.
948-9  ;    difficulties  and   expedients
of,  199-206  ;  national  dividend  and,
197,  207-8,  216,  738
control  of  supply  by,  211-17,  738
finance,  590-92  ;  by  bank  credits,  665,
667-77  ;  currency  notes  and,   665,
666,  670,  671-2,  673,  675,  676-7,
872  ;  loans  and  taxes  and,  645-53.
See  Taxation
Graduation  of  taxation,  602  n.,  618,  626-
627,  636-9,  641  ;  special  levy  and,
686-8
Greek  Government  and  currant-growing,

172
Guilds,  17  n.
Guilds  of  Help,  786

Hadley,  Principal,  on  railway  rates,  273-
275

Haggard,  Sir  Rider,  on  co-operative
dairies  in  Denmark,  284

Halsey  wage  system,  438

Harlan,  Justice,  on  anti-trust  legislation,
301

Harvest  variations  :  forecasts  of,  817-18,
824,  825  ;  industrial  fluctuations
and,  817-19,  820,  821-2,  825-6,
848 ;  iron  production  and,  818,
846-7,  848  ;  periodicity  of,  825-6,
848

Heath,  Mr.,  on  short-period  employ-
ment, 473  n.

Heathfield  poultry  trade,  285

Hepburn  law,  323,  324

Heredity ;  economical  circumstances  and,
91,  95,  97,  101-6;  environment
and,  95,  98-101,  102,  104-5  ;  germ-
cells  and,  96-7  ;  transmission  of
desirable  qualities  uncertain,  92-3  ;
unfitness  and,  93-5

Hill,  Octavia,  on  social  service,  759


Hobson,  Mr.,  on  inventions  and  employ-
ment, 717

Home  work  :  attractions  of,  528  ;  in-
dustrial fluctuations  and,  482  n.  ;
labour  regulations  and,  490-91  ;
unfair  wages  in,  57  n.,  508,  509  «.,
745  n.  ;  untrained  persons  adopt,
520  «.

Hop  crop  fluctiiations,  823

Hours  of  labour  ;  efficiency  and,  412-18,
420  ;  income  of  labour  and,  713-14  ;
national  dividend,  and,  43-4,  47,
412,  413,  416,  417,  418,  713-14;
overtime,  419-23;  regulations  as
to,  evaded,  490  ;  wage  rates  and,
57  n.,  41819

Hourwich,  on  immigration  and  labour,
705  w.,  747  ?i.

Hoxie,  Mr.,  on  scientific  management,
443  n.

Hull,  Mr.  :  on  gestation  period,  828  ;  on
crop  variations,  820  ;  on  iron  pro-
duction and  industrial  depression,
806  ;  on  monthly  construction  state-
ments, 837

Hunter,  Mr.,  on  cheap  labour  and  in-
ventions, 518

Immigration :  inducements  to,  63-4,  794  ;
national  minimum  and,  795-6  ;  rail-
way rates  for  immigrants,  268 ;
restrictions  on,  necessary,  796 ;
wages  and,  705,  747  n.
Imports,  taxes  on,  617,  621-3
Improvements  :

in  industrial  conditions,  international,
793-5

in  land :  compensation  for,  154-7,
159  ;  rent  and,  710  n.  ;  taxation  of
land  values  and,  609-12

in  methods  of  production  :  classes  of,
719-21  ;  consumption  by  poor  and,
721-3  ;  labour  and,  716-19,  721-3,
724  ;  marginal  social  net  product
and,  163-6
Income  :  aggregate  national,  792-3  ;  dis-
tribution of,  54-7,  59,  693-700  ;
distribution  among  factors  of  pro-
duction, 701-3

industrial  fluctuations  and,  803

of  labour,  aggregate  and  representa-
tive, 889-91

money,  and  national  dividend,  40-
41

national  minimum  standard  of  real,
788-9  ;  determination  of  level  of,
789-93  ;  foreign  competitors  and,
793-5  ;  immigration  and,  795-6

special  levy  and,  680-81,  682
Income-getting  power,  799-800,  801


INDEX


963


Income  tax,  624-5,  629-33,  651-2
death  dnties  and,  597-8
diflferentiation  in,  633-6,  681  ;  between
earned  and  unearned  income,  633-
635,     640,     663,     682  ;     between
persons  in  different  economic  situa-
tions, 635-6
expenditure  tax  and,  625-33
graduation  of,  636-9

Increasing  returns,  conditions  of:  equality
of  marginal  net  products  and,  120,
121, 191-2;  simple  competition  and,
233,   248  ;    simple    monopoly  and,
235-6,  App.  III.  948  ;  discriminat-
ing monopoly  and,  248,  251,  App,
III.  950,  951,  952
output  under,  251,  322;  diagrammatic
analysis  of,  App.  III.  938,  940-41,
948,  950,  951,  952
railway  invesiiments  and,  275-6
taxation  and,  620

Increment  duties,  603,  605-8

Increments  :  apparent  and  real,  604-6  ;
and  windfalls,  603,  606-8

Indeterminateness,  range  of,  in  wages,
402,  405,  418,  513

Index  numbers  and  price  variations,  81,
84  n.,  88-9

India  :  Co-operative  Credit  in,  137  ;  Ex-
change Banks  in,  143  ;  village  life
in,  15

Indirect  taxes,  618,  620-23

Industrial    combinations,    228-31,    303,
838-9
control    over    monopolistic   power   of^
301,    312-17,    325,    337-8  ;    direct
methods,  319-20  ;  price  regulation,
322-4,    326-38 ;    sanctions   of;   and
penalties  for  evasion,  324-6
cut-throat  competition  by,  234,  304,
308,    312-15;    l^islation    against,
301,  312-17,  325
economy  of,  304-7
price  stability  maintained  by,  838-9

Industrial  Councils,  373-6,  385  ;  Belgian,
389

Industrial  Court,  380,  390

Industrial  depression  :  employers'
methods  of  meeting,  478-87.  881-3  ;
Grovemment  interference  to  relieve,
878-80,  883-8,  891  ;  municipal
work  to  relieve,  883-6,  888,  891  ;
production  during,  802,  803,  806  ;
trade  relations  with  foreign  countries
and,  814-15  ;  unused  savings  and,
812,  813

Industrial  disputes :  analysis  of,  401 ;
classification  of  differences,  367-71  ;
range  of  indeterminateness,  402,
405,  407,  418,  513  ;  range  of  practi-


cable bargains,  403,  405,  406,  407,
409,  410 ;  sticking  point,  402-3,
404-6,  409
damage  done  by,  363-6
direct  negotiation  in :  arbitration,
voluntary,  376-9,  406-9,  410,  411  ;
Conciliation  Boards,  373-6 ;  387-90 ;
guarantees,  384  -  5  ;  referendum,
382-4
mediation  in,  386-90,  397  ;  coercive
adjudication  in,  391-2  ;  compulsorj-
arbitration  in,  398-400,  408-9,  410,
554  ;  extension  of  agreements,  393-
395 ;  investigation  before  strike,
395-8  ;  voluntary  arbitration  in,
376-9,  406-9,  410,  411

Industrial  fluctuations,  799-805 ;  busi-
ness contidence,  variations  in,  and,
831-44,  850-56,  S65-9  ;  employers
and,  881-3  ;  Government  interfer-
ence and,  878-80,  883-8,  891  ;
har>est  variations  and,  816-26,  846-
848  ;  inventions  and,  827-30,  845-
846  ;  monetary  system  and,  849-56,
860

Industrial  organisation :  earnings  and,
532-4  ;  labour  unrest  and,  16-17  ;
scientific  management  in,  186-8 ;
standardisation  in,  184-6

Industrial  remuneration  :  efficiency  and,
428-33,  527,  547-52,  555,  563,  564,
567  n.,  789  n.  ;  output  basis  for,
424-8  ;  piece-wages,  435-41,  444-5  ;
premium  plans,  437-40 ;  task-wages,
441-3  ;  time -wages,  428-34.  See
Wages

Industrial  research,  222-3

Industrial  revolution,  15

Industrial  training,  777-8

Industry  :  factory  r^ulations  and,  793-
795  ;  finance  and  conduct  of;  132-8,
146-7
Government  control  of :  leasing,  339  ;
price  regulation.  197-8,  202,  205-6,
208-10,  322-3,  i338,  602,  738,  739,
769,  App.  III.  948-9
grading  and  opportunities  in,  180-81,

183
public  operation  of :  area  of  operations
for,  352-6  ;  conditions  under,  340-
341  ;  economy  of,  339-40  ;  efficiency
of,  compared  with  private  operation,
341-3 ;  methods  of  competition
under,  344-8  ;  objections  to,  297-9  ;
suitable  industries  for,  356-7  ;  terms
of  purchase  of,  357-9  ;  unenterpris-
ing, 348-52

Inelasticity  of  demand,  conditions  of,
225-8

In&nt  mortality,  102-3


964


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


Inflation,  definition  of,  665-6
Inheritance  laws,  696-8
Insurance,  452-3,  894-5,  897-8,  900-902 ;
accident,     452,     453,     904,     908 ;
national,  452  w.,  453,  897,  907-11  ;
sickness,    452,    895-6,    904,    906  ;
unemployment,  452,  453,   754  n.,
895,  896,  898-9,  903,  904,  906
State   and :    bounties  provided,    453,
902-4,    905,    906  -  7  ;    compulsory,
904,  905-6,  911  ;  free,  907-11
Interdependence   among    business   men,

841-3
International   and    industrial    disputes,

401,  406-7,  408,  409
International  labour  legislation,  794-5
Interpretation   differences   in   industrial

disputes,  370-71
Intoxicants,  social  net  product  of  trade

in,  162,  168
Inventions :    classified,    719-21  ;    condi-
tions favouring,   98  n.,    364  ;    con-
sumption by  poor  and,  721-3  ;  and
industrial  fluctuations,  827-30,  845-
846  ;    labour   and,    716-19,    721-3,
724,  827  ;  labour  troubles  stimulate,
364  ;  public  operation  unfavourable
to,  348-51
Inverse  probability  principle,  83  w.
Investment :    competition   and :    mono-
polistic, 233  ;  simple,  233,  248
deception  and,  178-9
distance  of  returns  and,  26-9,  140-41
foreign,  169,  627  n.,  707-9,  711
franchise  revisions  and,  333,  334
in  the  poor,  774,  775-7,  781,  782-6
limited  liability  and,  144  n.,  App.  I.

922
monopoly  and  :  discriminating,  248  ;

simple,  236,  237
specialisation  in,  146-7
taxation  and,  594-5  ;  income  tax,  627  n.,
630-31  ;  land  and  house  taxes,  624
uncertainty-bearing    in,    142,    143-5,

146-7,  App.  I.  915-24
waiting  in,  142,  143-5,  146
Ireland  :    age   distribution   in,    463  n.  ;
agricultural  associations  in,  289,  291 ;
land  tenure  in,  150,  154,  155,  158
Iron  production  :  harvest  variations  and,

818,  846-7,  848  ;  wages  in,  394
Italy :    income    tax,    633  n.  ;    People's
Banks  in,  138,  144  n.

Jackson,   Mr.,   on  boy  labour,    473  n.,

780
James  of  Hereford,  Lord,  380,  387
Jaures,  M.,  as  arbitrator,  381
Jevons,    Professor    H.    S.,    on    harvest

variations,  818,  826,  846-7,  848


Jevons,  Professor  W.  S. :  on  commodities
of  stable  demand,  571 ;  on  elasticity
of  demand  and  competition,  226  ;
on  harvest  variations,  847;  on  output
other  than  physical,  426 ;  on  tastes
and  welfare,  49,  50  ;  on  training  by
doing,  181

Joint  Boards,  539

Joint  stock  companies.  145,  146,  147  ;
Purchasers'  Associations  as,  286-7,
288,  290,  292

Joint  supply  of  transport,  262-5,  266-7,
273

Jute  Control  unemployment  compensa-
tion, 487  n.

Kartels,  182,  222,  251,  304,  838 ;  Austria
and,  302  ;  coal,  229

Kemmerer  on  demand  for  loans,  860  n.

Kinder,  Mr.,  quoted,  833  n.

Knoop,  Professor :  on  distant  satisfac-
tions, 27  n. ;  on  extension  of  muni-
cipal operations,  353  n.  ;  on  work-
men's tickets,  770

Labour :

consumption  of,  economic  welfare  and,
195,  893

demand  for  :  bounties  regulating,  881,
885,  887-8,  891  n.
elasticity  of :  factors  determining,
726-31  ;  and  aggregate  income,
710-13,  877;  and  low-grade
labour,  556  ;  and  movement  of
labour,  510-11 ;  and  wage-fluctua-
tions, 402,  556,  560-62,  563-5,
566-77,  731-2
fluctuations  in,  560-62,  563-5,  566-

577,  803,  809,  876,  877
inventions  and,  716-19
regulation  of,  by  public  and  philan-
thropic action,  878-88,  891

distribution  of,  44-7,  446-7  ;  artificial
restrictions  on,  469-72  ;  bounties
and,  475-6  ;  costs  of  movement
and,  447,  463-9,  472,  473,  474-6,
486,  504,  508-9  ;  interference
with  wages  and,  507-8,  510,  511,
516,  544-5
obstacles  to  :  ignorance  of  prospects,
447-8  ;  of  aptitudes,  448-50  ;  of
fluctuations,  453-4  ;  of  compara-
tive demand  prices,  445-6  ;  of
employment  opportunities,  456-
462  ;  methods  of  overcoming,
472-7,  891

engagement  of,  methods  of,  497-504,
510-511,  731

exploitation  of,  511-26,  537  ;  increased
wages  and,  549,  550


INDEX


965


Labour  {contd. ) —
houis  of :  efficiency  aud,  412-18,  420  ;
employers  and,  414,  415,  416-18,
422  ;  industrial  fluctuations  and,
482  n.  ;    national  dividend   and,
43-4,  47,  713-14  ;  overtime,  419-
423 ;  regulations  as  to,  evaded,  490 ;
wage  rates  and,  57  n.,  418-19
income  of:  aggr^ate  and  representa-
tive, 889-91  ;  increase  of  capital
and,  703-4,  707,  709  ;  industrial
fluctuations  and,  803  ;  variability
of,  1703,  876-7,  878,  888     .
iuventions   and,  716-19,   721-3,  724,

827
remuneration  of.     See  Wages
supply  of :  disharmony  and,  700,  707,
709  ;  economic  welfare  and,  712-
713,  714  ;   income  and,  709-13,
714  ;  wages  and,  565-6,  567,  568,
569,  571
waiting  and  uncertainty-bearing  and,
706-7
Labour  colonies,  767,  774,  778  n.
Labour  Exchange  460,  473,  887,  897  ;
for  boys  leaving  school,  449  :  casual
method    of    engagement    by,    499-
500  ;    distribution  of  labour  and,
458  -  9,    460  -  62  ;     engagement    of
labour  by,  499  ;    money  advances
by,    473 ;     supervision    of    unem-
ployed and  discrimination  by,  764-
765,  768,  896-7
Labour  QazetU,  458
Labour  legislation,  international,  794-5
Labour  Ministry  as  mediator,  386,  389,

390
Land  taxation,  624  ;  improved  and  un-
improved value   and,    610-12 ;    in-
crements on  value  and,  603-4,  605-
608  ;  public  value  and,  609-15
Land  tenure :    improvement   compensa-
tion,   150-51,   153-9 ;    security   of,
157-9
Large-scale  management,  220-24
Lassalle  quoted,  49  n.
Lazard,  M.,  on  unemployment,  572
League  of  Nations,  408,  409
Leasing   of  industries  by   Government,

339
Lee,  Mr.,  on  thrift  societies,  901
Lehfeldt,     Professor,    on    elasticity    of

wheat  demand,  App.  II.  926
Leisure  :    a   quasi  -  commodity,    57  M.  ;

national  dividend  and,  413,  417
Leroy-Beaulieu :  on  birth-rate  in  rich
districts,  63  n. ;  on  insecurity  of
emplo3rment,  484  ;  on  inventions
and  consumption  by  poor,  722 ;
Lassalle    quoted    by,    49  n.  ;     on


private  enterprise  and  public,  350  ;

on  use  of  increased  resources,  61
Lescnre,  M.,  on  savings,  809-10,  811
Levasseur,    M.,  on  machinery  and  em-
ployment, 717
Levy,  Dr.,  on  demand  for  raw  materials,

228
LiabUity,  limited  and  unlimited,  144  ».,

App.  I.  922
Liefinann,   Dr.,  on  trusts,  222  n.,  229,

305  n.
Liverpool  docks,  labour  engagement  at,

500
Living  wage  and  fair  wage,  540-45
Uoyd,  Mr.,  on  labour  organisation,  490  n.
Loans:  bank,  in  industry,  668,  815 n.,

851-2,  854,  856-7,  860-61,  866-9,

871-2  ;  infl.-.tion  and.  665  n. ;  short

term,  140-41
taxes  and  :  comparative  effects  of^  on

national  dividend,  645-7,  650,  651,

652-3 ;     distribution    of,    654-64 ;

effect  on  future  of,  651-3,  654-8  ;

sources  and  relative   contributions

of,    646-8,    648-52;     war   finance

and,  648,  651-2
Lock,  Mr.,  on  breeding  and  training,  95
London :    as  gold   market,    870,    871  ;

smoke  nuisance  in,  160
Iiondon   building    trades :    employment

agencies  in,    458,   460 ;    nominally

high  wages  in,  498
London     County     Council :      defensive

methods  of,  345  ;  schedule  of  wages,

489
London  Docks  employment  system,  459  m.
London  transport  strike,  393
Low-grade  workers  :  minimum  wage  and,

556-8 ;    raising   of  wage-rate   and,

736-7
Luton  hat  trade  organisation,  467

Macaulay  va  history,  4

McCrosty   on    large-scale    management,

222
McDougall,  Mr.,  on  fashion,  195
Machinery:    average    life   of,   37,   829,
845-6
depreciation  of:    by  improved  types,
164-5 ;   bv  n^lect,   570  ;   by  use,
37,  38-9  '
industrial  fluctuations  and  supply  of,

801,  803
labour  and  :   consumption  of,  721-3  ;
emplorment  o^  164  «.,  518,  717-19,
726-8'
wage  increases  and,  518,  726-7,  728
Mahaim,    Dr.,    on    Belgian    workmen's

tickets  system,  279  n.,  475
Making  for  stock,  421,  573-6,  881-2


966


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


Mallou,  Mr.,  on  Trade  Boards,  517

Malthus  quoted,  60

Mann-Elkins  Railway  Law,  315,  316

Marconi,  10

Marconi  Wireless  Company's  charter,  347

Marginal  demand  price   analysis,   App.

III.  931-53
Marginal  net  product  of  labour  :

fair  wages  and  value  of,  equal,  505,

538
unfair  wages  and  values  of,  unequal ;
in  particular  places,  505-11,  517  ;
owing  to  exploitation,  511-16,  518,
519,  537  ;  owing  to  restricted
labour  supply,  537
Marginal  net  products  of  resources,  114,

115
Marginal  social  net  product  of  resources,
114-16  ;    national   dividend   and
equality  of,  117-24,  125-7  ;  value
of,  114,  116-18
and  trade  net  product,  149-50  ;  organi-
sation of  industry  and,  180-88
under     competition,     monopolistic,

171-5
under  competition,  simple :  invest-
ment in  improvements  and,  150-
159  ;  uncompensated  services  and
uncharged   disservices   and,   159-
168  ;    State  encouragements  and
restraints  and,  168-71
under  monopoly,  bilateral,  175-6  ;
bargaining  and,  176-7  ;  deception
and,  177-9
Marginal  trade  net  product  of  resources,
149
and  individual  net  product :  bounties
and,  122,  193-4,  196,  475  ;  dia-
grammatic analysis  of,  App.  III.
937-53  ;  diminishing  returns  and,
193,  233,  236  ;  increasing  returns
and,  120,  121,  191-2  ;  insurance
devices    and,     452  -  3  ;     national
dividend    and,    117-18  ;    output
and  equality  of,  App.  III.  937
under     competition,     monopolistic,

233-4,  283,  303-4
under  competition,  simple,  190-96,

233,  235,  283
under     monopoly,     discriminating,
247-9,    250,    253-4;     of    third
degree,  249-54,  275,  276
under  monopoly,  simple,  235-9,  283
and  social  net  product.     See  Marginal
social  net  product
Marginal   supply   price    analysis,    App.

III.  931-53
Margins  and  wages,  581-2
Marriage    rate    and    economic    circum-
stances, 60,  61


Marshall,  Dr.  :  on  building  in  crowded
areas,  168 ;  on  business  training,
181,  183  ;  chain  method  of  price,
comparison  by,  79  ;  on  confidence
in  business,  832-3  ;  on  consumption
by  poor,  722,  723  ;  on  co-operation,
286,  290  ;  on  economics  and  quanti-
tative analysis,  8  ;  on  education  of
poor  children,  781  ;  on  elasticity  of
demand,  App.  II.  925  ;  on  environ-
ment and  heredity,  98  n. ,  1 00  ;  on
fair  wages,  505 ;  on  family  migration,
469  ;  on  ignorance  of  business  con-
ditions, 132  ;  on  income  of  labour
and  increase  of  capital,  703-4,  707  ;
yon  inelasticity  of  demand,  225-8  ;
on  land  value,  612-13,  614  ;  on  law
of  substitution,  180  ;  on  monotony,
15  n.  ;  on  national  dividend,  33,  34,
35,  36,  37,  625  ;  on  poor  relief,
753 ;  on  public  bodies'  lack  of
enterprise,  350  ;  on  public  control
of  economic  activity,  113  n.,  168;
on  public  probity  and  efficiency,
297  ;  on  standardisation,  184  n.  ;  on
voluntary  transference  of  resources,
750

Massachusetts  and  women's  wages,  494

Maximum  prices,  198-9,  602,  739-40  ;
schedules,  201,  203,  206-7

Mazzini  on  capital,  17

Measure  of  changes  in  the  national
dividend,  71-84,  117  ;  reliability
of,  84-90

Mediation  in  industrial  disputes,  386-90.
397

Mendel,  7

Mertz,  Dr.,  on  inventions,  348-9

Merxplas  labour  colony,  767,  774-5

Metaphysics,  3

Migration  caused  by  high  taxation,  627-9

Milk  price  control,  201,  203,  204-5

Mill,  J.  S.  :  on  distribution  of  resources,
126  ;  on  economics,  21-22 ;  on
wealth  and  satisfaction,  48

Mills,  John,  on  panics,  865

Minimum  standard  of  real  income,  788-9  ;
foreign  countries  and,  793-5  ;  immi-
gration and,  795-6

Minimum  wage  :  adjustment  to  efficiency
and,  430-33,  493,  533-4,  555-6,
558 ;  day-wage,  492-3,  553  ;  and
demand  for  labour,  569,  727,  729-
730  ;  legislation  for,  430,  493,  633,
534,  553-4  ;  time-wage,  533,  534,
553-8

Mining  industry,  short-time  in,  479,  480,
481

Mint  and  c\irrency  manipulation,  859,
861


INDEX


967


Mitchell,  Professor :  on  business  con-
fidence, 831  ;  on  industrial  depres-
sion, 813,  844  ;  on  mistakes  in
spending,  784  ;  on  price  fluctuations,
80,  89  ;  on  promoters,  133

Mobility  of  labour  :  artificial  restrictions
on,  469-72  ;  between  agriculture  and
industry,  816  ;  bounties  and,  475-6;
costs  of  movement  and,  44-7,  447,
463-9,  472,  473,  474-6,  486,  504,
508-9  ;  wages  and,  507-8,  510,  511,
516,  544-5
See  Distribution  of  labour

Monetary  system  and  industrial  fluctua-
tions, 849-56,  860

Money:  measurement  by,  11,  12,  14,
23,  30,  31,  32  ;  national  dividend
and,  30,  40  ;  wages  and  real  wages,
528,  539-40,  732-4

Monopolisation  :  conditions  of :  combina-
tion among  producers,  228-31  ;  in-
elastic demand,  225-8 ;  large  in-
dividual supply,  218-20  ;  large-scale
control,  220-24

Monopolistic  competition,  232-4  ;  adver-
tisement and,  172-5  ;  anti- trust
policy  and,  302-3 ;  diagrammatic
analysis  of,  App.  III.  946-7

Monopoly  :

discriminating  :  conditions  favouring,
240-44  ;  degrees  of,  244-6,  247-9  ;
diagrammatic  analysis  of,  App.  III.
949-52 ;    marginal    trade    and    in-
dividual net  product  under,  247-9,
250,  253-4  ;  national  dividend  and,
248,  254,  255,  273,  277
discriminating,  of  third  degree  :  output
and  marginal  trade  and  individual
net   product    under,    249-54,    275,
276  ;  and  railway  rates,  273,  275-9  ;
simple  competition  and,  251-3,  254,
273,  275-9  ;   =  value  of  service  prin-
ciple, 256
multiple,  232-4
national  dividend  and,  358-9
output  and,  321,  322,  358-9,  838-9
public  control  of :  destruction  or  pre-
vention   of    combinations,     301-7  ;
legislation   to    control    methods   of
competition,    307-8,    312-19,    325,
337-8  ;  price  regulation,  322-4,  326-
338  ;  purchase  by  Government,  358-
359  ;  sanctions  of,  and  penalties  for
evasion,  324-6
public    operation    of  industries   and,

343-8
simple,  235-9  ;  diagrammatic  analysis,
App.    III.    947-9 ;    output    under,
250-51,  252-3,  273

Monotony  and  welfare,  15


Moore,  Professor :  on  crops  and  iron
production,  847  ;  on  elasticity  of
demand,  App.  II.  925  n.  ;  on  har-
vests and  rainfall,  817,  818  n.,  825,
826  ;  on  wage  variability,  699

Morgenroth,  Herr,  on  Kartels,  304  n.

Morison,  Sir  Theodore,  on  Indian  peasant
borrowers,  137

Motherhood  endowment,  754,  761

Motorists,  taxes  on,  168

Muckergee  on  Indian  village  life,  15

Multiple  monopoly,  232-4

Mundella,  Mr.,  and  arbitration,  381,  391

Municipal  mediation  Boards,  388

Municipalities  :

demand  for  labour  regulated  by,  883-6,

887,  891
electric    supply    by :     difficulties    in
organising,    297-8 ;     gas    company
opposition  and,  164,  166,  167,  347  ;
large-scale  distribution  schemes  and,
298,  347,  352,  353,  354
operation  of  industry  by  :  area  suitable
for,   352-6  ;    economy   of,  339-40  ;
efficiency  of,  compared  with  private
.  operation,  341-3  ;  methods  of  com-
petition  under,    344-8  ;    objections
to,  297-9  ;    suitable  industries  for,
356-7  :  terms  of  purchase  of,  357-9  ;
unenterprising,  348-52

Munition  contracts,  837

Munitions  Act,  393

Munsterberg,  Professor  :  fitness  tests  by,
449,  450  m.  ;  on  monotony,  15  n.

Mutations  in  physical  world  and  world
of  ideas,  98  n.

Nasmyth,  Mr.,  on  benefits  of  strikes,  364
National  debt,  589,  590,  656
National  dividend  :  definition  of,  30-36,
42,  69,  72  n.,  625 ;  evaluation  of,
36-41

average  volume  of,  and  economic  wel-
fare, 42-52,  64,  69.  77 «..  101,
107,  195  ;  share  of  poor  in,  52-64,
101,  107,  691-2;  variability  of.
64-7,  101,  107

bounties  on  industry  and,  122,  128,
129

capital,  supply  of,  and,  703,  707,
711

competition,   simple,  and,    248,    254,
300 ;  cost  of  service  principle  and,
7         272,  277

distribution  of,  693-700 ;  among
factors  of  production,  701-15 ;
population  and,  58-63  ;  share  of
poor  in,  52-64,  101,  107,  691-2,
693,  694,  700

equality  of  values  of  marginal  net  pro-


968


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


7


National  dividend  (contd.) —

ducts  and,  117-24,    125-8,    149,
446;  bounties  and,  122,  128-9

hours  of  labour  and,  43-4,  47,  412,
413,  416,  417,  418,  713-14

income,  money,  and,  40-41  ;  national
minimum  real,  and,  790,  791

industrial  disputes  and,  363-6

insurance  and,  762-3,  895  w.,  907,
910-11

inventions  and  imjirovements  and,
716-21

labour  and  :  distribution  of,  446,  457,
472,  473,  476-7  ;  hours  of,  see
above;  mobility  of,  504,  509,  511  ;
supply  of,  703,  709,  711-12

loans  and  taxes  and,  645-7,  650-53,
654  ;  see  under  taxation  and

measurement  of  changes  in  volume  of,
71-80,  81-4  ;  difficulty  of,  80-82  ;
reliability  of,  84-90

monopoly  and,  358-9  ;  public  opera-
tion of,  300,  340
discriminating,  and,  248,  254,  255,

273,  277
simple,  and,  238,  254,  344

price  regulation  and,  197,  207-8,  216,
738

rationing  and,  215-16,  738,  741

taxation  and,  590,  592,  761  ;  expecta-
tion of,   600,  616  ;  fact  of,  591,
•;  593-9

on  commodities,  616,  619-20,  621,
622  ;  death  duties,  642,  643  ;  on
expenditure,  616-17,  625,  627-30  ;
on  income,  624,  625,  627,  629-32,
634-5,  636,  638-9  ;  on  land  value,
609,  613,  615  ;  on  property,  641  ;
special  levy,  678-9

taxes  aud  loans,  comparative  effect  of,
645-7,  650-53,  654

transferences  of  wealth  and,  743,  747  ;
expectation  of,  748,  751,  752,
754,  757-9,  760,  762-4,  768,  771 ;
fact  of,  52-3,  68,  773-4,  774-86

unemployment  and  short  time  and,
478,  483,  486-7

wages  and,  424-5,  444,  560  ;  fixed  aud
fluctuating,  561,  562-5,  566  ;  in-
terference to  raise  fair,  506,  537-8,
539-40,  543-6,  550,  725,  734-5,
736  ;  interference  to  raise  unfair,
505,  507,  508-11,  516-19,  524-6,
549-50,  555  ;  national  minimum,
555-8  ;  reactions  on  efficiency  of,
549-52
National  income :  aggregate,  792-3 ;  birth-
rate  and,    59-63 ;    distribution   of,
54-7, 59, 693-700 ;  immigration  and,
63-4


National  Insurance  Act :  compulsory,
904,  906  ;  Employment  Exchanges
and,  462,  897 ;  and  engagement
methods,  504  ;  industrial  training
and,  777  ;  sickness  rate  and,  169 ;
unemployment  benefit  limited  under,
906  ;  wage  rate  and,  895  n.

National  minimum  standard  of  real
income,  788-9 ;  foreign  countries
and,  793-5  ;  immigration  and,  795-
796

National  minimum  time- wage,  £53-8

National  Telephone  Company  and  Post
Office,  152  n.,  325,  347,  350

Net  output,  36

New  South  Wales :  arbitration,  industrial,
in,  391,  499,  554  ;  hours  of  labour
in,  490  n.  ;  land  value  tax  in,  609-
610  ;  minimum  wage  in,  553

New  Zealand  :  adjudication  and  arbitra-
tion, industrial,  compulsory,  391,
399,  400,  430  ;  boycotts  illegal  in,
315  ;  combines  controlled  in,  324  ;
hours  of  labour  in,  490  w.  ;  immigra-
tion and,  705  ;  land  tax  in,  609,
610-12 ;  minimum  wage  in,  430,
431,  432-3,  554,  729-30;  price
regulation  in,  324

Newsholme,  Dr.,  on  infant  mortality,
103

"Nibbling"  of  piece-rates,  437,  439,
440-41

Nicefero,  M.,  on  environment,  104  m.

Nicholson,  Professor,  on  improvement
compensation,  157  w.

Norway,  insurance  in,  903  n.,  906,  909

Old-age  pensions :   in  Denmark,   753-4  ;

universal,  761
Ophelimity,  23
Organisation,  industrial :    earnings  and,

532  -  4  ;     labour    unrest    and,    16-

17  ;   scientific  management,  186-8  ;

standardisation,  184-6
Output :  ascertainment  of,  426-8

bounties  or  taxes  and,  diagrammatic

analysis,  App.  III.  940-45
competition  and :  monopolistic,  App.

III.  946-7  ;  simple,  251-3,  App.  III.

937-8
control  of,  838-9
hours  of  labour  and,  412,  413,  414-15,

417  ;  overtime  and,  419-23
increasing    returns    and,    251,    322  ;

diagrammatic   analysis,    App.    III.

938,  940-41,  948,  950,  951,  952
industrial  depression  and,  800,    801,

802,  803,  806
monopoly  and,   838-9  ;    simple,   249,

253,  273-6,  App.    III.  947-9  ;  dis-


INDEX


969


Output  {contd. ) —

criminating,    249-53,    273-6,    App.
III.  949-52
price  regulation  and,  321-2
quality  of,  measured,  427
wages  and,  424-8,  800 ;  piece-wages,
435-41,    444-5,    560  n.  ;    premium
plans,  437-40  ;  task-wages,  441-3  ;
time-wages,  428-34
Out-relief,  785
Overtime,  419-23,  883

Paish,  Sir  (Jeorge,  on  foreign  investments,
708

Paper-box  making,  minimum  wage  in,
493

Paper  currency :  depreciation,  673  ;  in
finance  of  war,  665,  670,  671-7,
873  ;  limitations  of  issue  of,  666,
675,  676-7,  857,  858,  872,  873-4  ;
panics  and,  874-5  ;  post-war,  862,
871

Pareto,  Professor :  on  activities  of  man,
112;  on  birth-rate  among  rich,
105  n.  ;  on  distribution  of  national
dividend,  58,  87 «.,  693-700 ;  on
doctor's  services,  81 ;  on  ophelimity,
23  ;  on  retail  shops  and  stores,  286

Pareto's  Law,  693-700

Particulars  Clause,  455

Patent  laws,  161

Paterson,  Mr.,  on  parents  and  children's
education,  759

Pauperism:  deterrents  firom,  763-8;
poverty  and,  483

Peak-load  service  charges,  260,  261,  281

Pearson,  Professor  Karl,  on  heredity,  94,
95,  103  n.

Pensioners  and  abstention  from  work,
714-15

People's  Banks,  138,  144

Philanthropic  action  to  control  industrial
fluctuations,  878-82

Physical  net  product,  114-15

Piece-wages,  28-34,  435-6,  528-34;
allowances  necessary  under,  529-34 ;
collective  bargaining  and,  440-41  ;
difficulty  of  imposing  scale  of^  492-3 ;
efficiency  and,  435-41,  444-5,  551-2,
560  n. ;  fair  wages  and,  528-9, 551-2 ;
output  and,  435-41,  444-5,  560  n.  ;
rate  -  cutting  bv  emploj'ers  under,
436-9,  440-41,'  493;  short -time
methods  under,  480,  481,  482

Pierson  on  prices,  77  n.

Pig-iron  production  and  crop  variations,
818,  846-7

Plunkett,  Sir  Horace :  on  Agricultural
Organisation  Societies,  170,  289  ;  on
English  administration  of  Ireland,  10


Poincai-e,  M.,  on  science,  7
Poor:

birth-rate  among,  56  n.,  59,  62,  104-

105,  106
consumption  by,  67-8,    721-3,    733 ;

bounties  on,  769-72
inborn  quality  and  status  of,  104-6
inventions  and  consumption  by,  721-

723
investment  in,  774,  775-7,  781,  782-

786
national  dividend,  share  accruing  to,
42-3,  52-64,  101,  107,  691-2,  693,
694,  700
prices,  falling,  and,  722
rationing  and,  738,  740-41
State  aid  to,  557,  735-7,  743,  752
taxation  and,  594,  595,  618
transferences  of  wealth  from  rich  to :
possibility  of,  742-7
bounties  on  consumption  as,  769-72
coercive,  751  ;    voluntary,  748-51,

785-786
national  dividend  and  expectation  of,
743,  747,  748,  751  ;  and  different
types  of,  752-68
national  dividend  and  fact  of,  52-3,
68,  773-4  ;  incurable  classes  and,
774-5  ;    investment   in   training,
health,  and  welfare  and,  773-81  ;
purchasing  power  and,  782-6
wage-earners  and,  702
war  and,  662-4
Poor  Law :  child  training  under,  780  ;
deterrents  under,    765-8 ;    medical
treatment  under,  778-9  ;  relief,  use
made   of,   785  ;   subsidy,  effect  of,
745-7,  752
Population  and  distribution  of  national

income,  58-63
Post  Office  :  insurance  by,  902  ;  National
Telephone    Company  and,    152  n.,
325,  347,  350
Posterity  and  repayment  of  loans,  655
Potato  price  control,  204,  205
Pottery  industry,  women  in,  525
Poultry  trade,  Heathtield,  104-5
Poverty :  inefficiency  and,  104-5 ;  pauper-
ism and,  483
Poverty   line   and    child   welfare,    779,

782
Prato,  Professor,  on  immigration,  705  n.
Preference  method  of  engaging  labour,

499,.500,  501,  502,  510,  731,  736
Premium  plans,  437-40
Price,  Mr.  L.  L.,  and  industrial  negotia-
tions, 369,  583  n.
Price  regulation  bv  State,  209-10,  338,
App.  IIL  948-9
anti-monopolistic,    323-4  ;   difficulties


970


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


Price  regulation  (contd.) —

of  fixing,    326-32,    335 ;    franchise
system,  332-4  ;   sanction  for,  324-
326  ;   sliding  scale,   385-7  ;   vested
interests     and,     337  -  8  ;     involves
expense,  338
war-time,    197-9,    322-3,    602,    738,
739,  769  ;  difficulties  and  expedients
of,  199-207  ;  national  dividend  and,
207-9,  738  ;  rationing  and,  738-42
Prices  :  business  confidence  and,  852-3,
855,  856,  857
comparison    of :     diflSculties,    80-81  ;
index  numbers  and,  81,  84  m.,  88-9
elasticity  of  demand  and,  App.  II.  925
falling,  and  poor,  722
monopolies  and,  838-9
plan  for  studying,  859-64
variations  of :  compared,  80-81,  82-3,
87,    88-9  ;     monetary   system   and
checks  to,  856-64
wage  rates  and,  578-80,  581,  582,  583,
584-5
Pringle  and  Jackson  Report,  54
Printing  trade  :  inventions  cause  unem-
ployment in,  717;  piece-rates  in,  530
Priority  certificates,  213
Privileged    class    method    of    engaging
labour,  499,  500,  502,  510-11,  731
Production  :

factors  of,  703-4  ;  diminishing  returns
to,    704,    710  w.  ;     distribution    of
national    dividend  among,   701-15  ;
quantity  and  reward  of,  705,  710  n.  ;
uncertainty-bearing,  App.  I.  915-24
fluctuations    in :      constructional    in-
dustries    and,     806-8  ;     industrial
depression  and,  800,  801,  802,  803  ;
unused  savings  and,  809-10
national  dividend  and,  43-4,  47
standardised,  184-5
Profiteering,  198,  202,  209-10,  661,  662
Profits  index  to  wages,  582-4
Promotion   and    financing    of    industry,

132-8,  146-7
Property  :  distribution  of,  683  ;  taxation
of,    624-5,  635,  640-44  ;   valuation
of,  684-5
Psychological  tests  of  aptitude,  449-50
Psychology,  4

business,  and  industrial  fluctuations,
831-3,  854-5  ;  optimistic  error,
833-43,  844,  851-2,  854,  856,  860,
865  ;  pessimistic  error,  843-4,  852-
853,  854,  856,  860,  865,  867-9
Public  operation  of  industry :  area  of,  352-
356  ;  economy  of,  339-40 ;  efficiency
of,  compared  with  private  operation,
341  -  3  ;  methods  of  competition
under,  344-348  ;  objections  to,  297-


299  ;  statistics  of,  340-41  ;  suit-
able openings  for,  356-7  ;  terms  of
purchase  of,  357-9  ;  unenterprising,
348-52

Public  utility  services,  franchises  for,
332-4

Punnett,  Professor,  on  biology  and  en-
vironment, 95,  97,  98,  101

Purchasers  and  demand  for  labour,  881

Purchasers'  Associations  :  economy  in,
286-8  ;  education  by,  289  ;  efficiency
of,  284-6  ;  equalising  tendency  of,
283-4  ;  fraud  unlikely  in,  289-90  ;
limitations  of  field  of,  291-2;  loyalty
an  asset  of,  288  ;  public  under-
takings and,  342

Purchasing  power :  accumulation  of,
812  ;  poor  and  transference  of,  782-
786

Quality  of  output,  measurement  of,  427
Queensland,  land  value  tax  in,  609

Rae  on  conditions  favourable  to  inven-
tions, 98  n.

RaifFeisen  Banks,  138,  144  n.

Railway  companies :  agreements  and
amalgamations  by,  237,  302,  303,
319,  326;  boycott  by,  312,  316-
317  ;  competition  wasteful  among,
174,  219,  224,  355-6  ;  elasticity  of
demand  for  services  of,  226  ;  leases
from  Government  to,  339  ;  private
and  public  operation  of,  351-2

Railway  Conciliation  Board,  373

Railway  rates :  bounties  and,  278-80 ;
classification  of  passengers  and
goods  and,  268-72  ;  cost  of  service
principle  (simple  competition)  and,
256,  257-67,  273-9  ;  discriminating
monopoly  and,  241,  243,  245  n.  ;
value  of  service  principle  (dis-
criminating monopoly  of  third
degree),  and,  256,  267-72,  273-9  ;
zone  tariffs  and,  281-2

Rainfall  and  harvest  variations,  817,
818,  825-6

Range  of  indeterminateness,  402,  405,
407,  418,  513

Range  of  practicable  bargains,  403,  405,
406,  407,  409,  410

Rate-cutting  by  employers,  436-9,  440-
441

Rates,  basis  of,  624

Rationing  system,  215-16,  323,  738-42

Rebates,  deferred,  311-12,  316

Reeves,  Mr.  Pember,  on  compulsory
arbitration,  400

Referendum  in  industrial  disputes,  382-
384


INDEX


971


Rent :  fair.  158-9  ;  true,  612,  710  n.
Revenue  and  expenditure.  Government,

589,  590-92,  645
Rew,  Sir  R.  H.,  on  agricultural  organisa-
tion, 285
Rhondda,  Lord,  on  coal  output  fluctua-
tions, 800
Ricardo  and  currency  stability,  858
Rich :   birth-rate  among,   61-3,   105-6  ;
discrimination   against,  56,  268-9  ;
rationing    and,     739,     740,     741 ;
taxation  and,  594,  595-6,  618,  628,
632,  650,   660,   662-4  ;   variabUity
of  consumption  by,  67-8
Rich  and  poor  :  biology  and  distribution
of    national     dividend    between,
104-6 ;  position  of,  during  war,
661-2 ;   relative  satisfactions  of,
51-2,  53, 87
transferences     of     wealth     between :
bounties  on  consumption  as,  769-
772 ;  coercive,  751
national  dividend   and   expectation
of,    743,    747,   748,    751  ;    and
different  types  of,  752-68
national  dividend  and  fact  of,  52-3,
68,  773-4  ;  '  incurables '  and,  774-    j
775 ;     investment     in     training,    }
health,  and  welfare  and,  773-81  ;
purchasing  power  and,  782-6
voluntarj",  748-51,  785-6
Riesser  on  German  paper  wealth,  145
Rignano,  Signor :  on  death  duties,  642-

644  ;  on  satisfactions,  48
Road  maintenance  charges,  168
Robertson,    Mr.  :    on   fashions   and   in-
dustrial   fluctuations,     804  n.  ;    on
gestation   period,  828  ;   on  harvest
variations,  820,  821  n.,  826
Rosebery,  Lord,  as  mediator,  387
Rotation  method  of  meeting  depression,

478,  481
Rothschild  fortunes,  foundation  of,  178  n.
Rousier,  M.  de,  on  range  of  workmen's

movements,  466
Rowan  premium  plan,  438
Rowntree,  Mr.,  on  cheap  labour  and  in-
ventions, 518
Rural  co-operation,  Raiflfeisen,  16  «.
Russell,  Bertrand,  on  pure  and  realistic

mathematics,  5
Russia,    price    regulation    by    combines
forbidden  in,  324

Samuel,  Mr.  Herbert,  on  taxation,  618
Sargent-Florence  on  checking  quality  of

output,  427
Satisfactions  :  desires  and,  23-9

dissatisfactions  and  :  environment  and,
14-18;  national  dividend  and,  43;


determinants  of,  48-9,  51-2,  166-7,
195  ;  security  and,  18-20

Savings :     industrial     fluctuatiouB    and,
809-15  ;    insurance  and,  564,  893-
894,  910
taxation    and,    625,    626,    629  -  35  ;
special  levy  and,  680,  681,  687

Schloss,  Mr.,  on  unemployment,  883,
884

Schmoller  on  paper  wealth,  145

Schultze-Delitsch  People's  Banks,  144  n.

Schultze-Gaevemitz,  Dr.,  on  industrial
disputes,  410

Schuster,  Mr.,  on  inheritance  of  ability,
104  «.

Sciences  :  light -bearing  and  fruit-bearing,
3-4  ;  pure  and  realistic,  5-8

Scienti6c  management,  186-8  ;  psycho-
logical tests  in,  449-50  ;  task-wages
and,  441

Scotland,  land  tenure  in,  155

Scott,  Professor,  on  posterity  and  repay-
ment of  loans,  655,  656,  658

Seasonality  :  organisation  to  overcome,
467-8,  568  ;  short  -  time  method
and,  479  ;  various  trades  and,  577

Securities :  forms  of,  145-6  ;  special
levy  and,  683,  684,  685-6

Security  of  tenure,  157-9

Self-interest :  equality  of  returns  and,
125-6,  149,  189,  218  ;  Stete  inter-
ference and,  111-13,  296-7,  300

SeUgman,  Professor  :  on  American  excess
profits  duty,  602  n.  ;  on  posterity
and  repayment  of  loans,  655,  656,
658

Settlement,  law  of,  469

Shaw,  Dr.,  on  wheat,  crop,  rainfall,  and
periodicity,  817,  825

Shaw,  Mr.  Bernard,  on  liquor  trafiSc,  162

Sherman  Act,  301,  303,  324

Shipbuilding  :  dismissal  method  in,  480,
482  ;  fluctuations  in,  806  ;  unem-
ployment in,  577

Shipping  rings  :  boycotts  by,  311-12  ;
direct  methods  against,  320-21,  323 ;
legislation  on  charges  by,  315,  316

Short  settlements,  842  n.

Short  -  time  labour  during  depression,
478,  479,  480-82,  483  :  objections
to,  486-7

Sick  clubs,  772

Sick  insurance,  452,  895-6,  904,  906

Sick  relief,  756,  778-9

Sidgwick  quoted :  on  population  and
welfare,  60  n.  ;  on  satisfactions,  18,
24 ;  on  services  uncompensated,
160  ;  on  social  net  product  of  hew
niachinery,  164  n.

Silk  industry,  disnils.sal  method  in,  482


972


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFARE


Simple  competition.     See  Competition

Simple  monopoly.     See  Monopoly

Sinking  funds  :  Government,  645,  655  ;
public  authorities  and,  346-7

Site-value  taxation,  604,  613-15

Sliding  scales  :  of  charges,  335-7

of  wages  :  adjusted  to  "  margins,"
581-2  ;  to  output  or  profit,  582-3  ;
to  prices,  369,  394,  569,  578-81,
853  ;  objections  to,  583-5

Smart,  Professor :  on  monotony,  15  n,  ;
on  saving,  564

Smith,  Adam :  on  Government  inter-
ference, 111-12  ;  on  law  of  settle-
ment, 469  ;  on  natural  confidence
in  fortune,  451  ;  on  opulence  and
defence,  18-19

Smith,  Sir  H.  Llewellyn  :  on  choice  of
occupation,  447-8 ;  on  short-time
and  dismissal  methods,  480,  481,
483 ;  on  seasonality  in  different
trades,  577

Smoke  prevention,  160

Sociology,  4  ;  biology  and,  91,  92

South  Africa,  anti-dumj^ing  legislation
in,  313

South  Australia :  minimum  wage  in,
553  ;  land  value  tax  in,  609

South  Metropolitan  Gas  Company,  502

Special  levy,  678-80  ;  basis  for,  680-82  ;
collection  of,  685-6  ;  graduation  of,
686-8  ;  valuation  of  capital  for,
683-5

Specialisation,  industrial,  219,  221

Speculation  :  grades  of,  146  ;  safeguards
in,  142-5

Standard  of  comfort,  increased  income
and,  60-61

Standard  of  living  ;  stability  of  earnings
and,  563 ;  taxation  and,  593-4,
595-6,  597

Standard  Oil  Trust  methods,  309,  312,
315

Standard  wages,  428-33  ;  evasion  of,
489  n.  ;  minimum  wage  and,  430,
431-3  ;  piece-rates,  529-31

Standardisation  in  production,  184-5,
205-6,  575

State:

aid  to  poor  from,  557,  743,  788-9  ;
effect  of,  on  wages,  745-7  ;  un-
economically  high  wages  and,  735-7  ;
transferences  of  wealth  as,  752-68
bounties  from,  122-3,  128,  168-71,
300  ;  on  mobility  of  labour,  475-6  ;
on  railways,  278-9
conservation  of  resources  the  duty  of,

28-9
control   of    industry   by,    28,    208-9,
293-9,  300,  339


1


State  {contd.) —

control  of  monopoly  by :  compared  with
Trust  -  breaking,  301  -  7  ;  clubbing
competition  prevented  under,  308-
17  ;  interference  with  terms  of  sale
and,  319-38;  sanctions  and  penalties
under,  324-6

control  of  prices  by,  197-210,  338,  738-

;  741;  anti-monopolist,  321-2,  335-8;
diagrammatic  analysis  of,  App.
III.  948-9  ;  ditticulties  and  ex-
pedients of,  199-206,  326-32,  335  ;
national  dividend  and,  197,  207-8,
216,  738

control  of  supply  by,  211-17,  738

encouragement  of  agriculture  by,  169,
170,  182,  293

finances  of,  590-92  ;  by  bank  credits,
665,  667-77  ;  currency  notes  and,
665,  666,  670,  671-2,  673,  675,
676-7,  872  ;  loans  and  taxes  and,
645-53.     See  Taxation

hours  of  labour  and,  418

industrial  combinations  and,  183-4,
301-7,  312-17

industrial  disputes  and  :  coercive
action,  391-400  ;  mediation,  386,
389,  390,  397

industrial  fluctuations  and  action  by,
878-88,  891

industrial  standardisation  and,  184,
185,  205-6

insurance  and  :  bounties  on,  453,  902-

903,  905,  906-7  ;   compulsory,  452,

904,  905,  906-7  ;  free,  453,  910-11
"  interference  with  money  and  bank-
ing" by,  666

minimum  standard  of  real  income  and,
788-9  ;  immigration  and,  795-6  ;
international  policy  and,  793-5 ;
level  of,  791-3

self-interest  and  intervention  by,  111-
113

unemployment  and  :  benefits  paid  by,
461-2,551 ;  manipulation  of  demand
for  labour  by,  878-88,  891

wages  and  interference  by,  494-6,  559 ;
minimum  wage,  555-8  ;  raising  of
fair  wages   and  national   dividend,

506,  537-8,  539-40,  543-6,  550,
725,  734-5,  736  ;  raising  of  unfair
wages  and  national  dividend,  505,

507,  508-11,  516-19,  524-6,  549-50,
555

Sterilisation  of  the  insane  and  criminal,

95  m.
Sticking  point  in  wage  disputes,  402-3,

404-6,  409
Stock  Exchange,  141,  145
Stocks,  general  decrease  in,  App.  I.  923-4


INDEX


973


Stoppages  of  work,  363-6,  370.  See
Industrial  disputes

Storage  and  making  for  stock,  574

Strassbnig :  Ghent  system  in,  894,  903  n.,
906  ;  Labour  Exchange,  449

Strikes  and  lock-outs,  363-6,  370  ;  com-
pulsory investigation  before,  395-8  ;
long  engagements  and,  502  :  settle-
ment of ;  see  Industrial  disputes

Sab-contract  and  sweating,  516  n.

Substitution,  law  of,  180

Supply  :  fluctuations  in,  and  wages,  566,
571,  576-7,  580 ;  State  r^olation
of,  211-17

Supply  of  labour  :  disharmony  and,  700,
707,  709  ;  economic  welfare  and,
712-13,  714  ;  income  and,  709-13,
714  ;  wages  and,  565-6,  567,  568,
569,  571

Sweating,  516  n.,  728,  733-4

Switzerland :  insurance  in,  903  n.,  910n. ;
labour  colonies  in,  767

Tailoring   trade :    rotation    method    in,

481-2  :  wages  in,  493,  548
Tarde,  M.,  on  capital,  99
TariflF  on  imports,  794
Task  wages,  441-3
Taste,  changes  in,  and  economic  welfare,

49-51,  70-71,  238,  804  n.
Taussig,  Professor :  on  average  life  of
machinery,  37  ;  on  immigration  and
wages,  705  n.  ;  on  joint  supply  and
railway  rates,  263  -  4,  265  ;  on
maximum  prices,  208  n.  ;  on  mono-
poly control,  330
Taxation,  589-92

as  coercive  transference,  751
on  consumable  commodities  :  general,
616-18,  619  ;  particular,  618-23,
637-8
death  duties,  597-8,  640,  641-4
distribution  of,  654-64
equalitr  of  net  products  and,  168-71,

177,  179,  193-4
on  excess  profits,  198,  602
graduation    of,    602 «.,    618,    626-7,

636-9,  641
on  imports,  617,  621-3
on  income,  624-5,  629-33,  636-9,  651-2
on  increment,  603,  605-8
indirect,  618,  620,  751
on   land,    624  ;     improved    and    un-
improved value,   610-12  ;    incre-
ments   on  value,  603-4,  605-8  ;
public  value,  609-15
loans  and  :    distribution  of,  654-64  ;
national  dividend  and  comparative
effects  of,  645-6,  650,  651,  652-3.
751  ;  sources  of,  646-8


Taxation  {contd.) —

national  dividend  and,  590,  592,  761  ;
and    expectation    of,    600,    616 ;
and  fact  of,  591,  593-9
tax  on  commodities  and,  616,  619-
620,  621,  622  ;  death  duties  and,
642,  643  ;    expenditure  tax  and,
616-17,625.627-30;   income  tax
and,  624,  625,  627,629-32,  634-5,
636,  638-9  ;  land  value  tax  and,
609,  613,  615  ;  property  tax  and,
641  ;  special  levy  and,  678-9
output  and,  App.  III.  938,  941-2
prices  and,  App.  III.   942-5  ;  regula-
tion of,  and,  198-9
on  property,  624-5,  635,  640-44
special  levy,  678-88
war-time,  666
on  windfalls,  600-608
Taylor,  Mr.,  on  improvement  compensa-
tion, 154
Taylor  system  of  scientific  management,
187,  188  ;  task-wage  method,  442,
443  n.
Tenancy  contracts  and  trade  net  prodnct,

150-51,  153-6
Tenants'    improvements  :    compensation
for,  154-7,  159  ;  rent  and,  710  n.  ;
taxation  of  land  values  and,  609-12
Tenure,  security  of,  157-9
Textile  industries  :  depression  in,  482  ;
inventions   and    unemployment   in,
717
Thomson,  Professor  J.  A.,  on  heredity,

97,  104
Thrift  among  workpeople,  900-901
Time- wages :  dismissal  method  and,  480,
481  ;  eflBciency  and,  428-34,  552  ;
fair,  534-6  ;   minimum,  533,  534  ;
national  minimum,  553-8;    output
and,  428-34,  436  n.
Town-planning,  161,  170-71
Town  Tenants  (Ireland),  Act,  155,  157
Trade  Boards,  wage  regulation  by,  491,

492-3,  494,  495,  517,  540
Trade  Unions :  coercive  extension  of
agreements  and,  395  ;  demarcation
rules  of,  469-70  ;  dismissal  method
disliked  by,  480  ;  industrial  dis-
putes and,  367,  368  ;  Labour  Ex-
changes and,  461  ;  mobility  of
labour  restricted  by,  469  -  70 ;
standard  wage-rates  and,  176,  429-
432,  491,  533,  562  ;  unemployment
insurance  and,  754  n.,  894  ».,  895-
896,  898  -  9,  906  ;  women  and,
492
Tradition :  distribution  of  labour  and,
470-72  ;  women's  labour  and,  524,
526  n.


974


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAKE


Training  :  agricultural,  778  ;  industrial,

777-8
Training    schools    and    unemployment,

884
Tramways  Act,  British,  331
Transferability  :  of  units  of  commodity,
240-42,  244-5  ;  of  units  of  demand,
242-3,  244-5
Transferences  from  rich  to  poor  :
bounties  on  consumption  as,  769-72
coercive,  751
conditional,  752-4
differential,  760-65,  768
expectation  of,  and  national  dividend,
743,  747,  748,  751  ;  different  types
of,  752-68
fact  of,  and  national  dividend,  52-3,
68,  773-4  ;  ' incurables '  and,  774-5  ;
investment  in  training,  health,  and
welfare    and,    773-81  ;    purchasing
power  and,  782-6
neutral,  754-60,  771-2
as  purchasing  power,  782-6
voluntary,  748-51,  785-6
Transport :   costs  of,   and  movement  of
labour,  465,  472-6  ;  improved,  74  ;
simple  competition  and,  257-62  {see
Railway  rates)  ;  strike,  393
Transvaal    Indigency    Commission ;    on
Labour  Exchanges,  461  ;  on  unem-
ployment, 434,  485,  879,  880
Tredgold,    Dr.,    on    fertility    of   feeble-
minded, 93
Truck  Acts,  455-6
Trusts,  228-31,  303,  838-9

control    over  monopolistic  power   of,
301,    312-17,    325,    337-8  ;    direct
methods,  319-20  ;  price  regulation,
322-4,    326-38 ;    sanctions   of,  and
penalties  for  evasion,  324-6
cut-throat  competition  by,  234,  304,
308,    312-15  ;    legislation    against,
301,  312-17,  325
economy  of,  304-7
price  stability  maintained  by,  838-9

Uncertainty-bearing,  142,  146,  147,  701,
703,  App.  I.  915-24  ;  labour  co-
operant  with,  703,  706-7  ;  large-
scale  management  and,  223  ;  public
departments  and,  343,  345  n.,  348-
352  ;  waiting  segregated  from,
142-3,  145,  146,  147,  App.  I.
915-16

Under-rate  workers  and  standard  wage,
429-32

Unemployment :

benefit,    491  ;   State   contribution  to,

461-2,  551,  557,  735-6,  765
evil  effects  of,  482-5


Unemployment  {contd.) —

ignorance  of  opportunities,  and  in-
formation agencies  and,  456-62

inefficiency  and,  434,  436,  898-9

insurance,  452,  453,  754  n.,  894,  895-9,
903,  904,  906,  910  ;  supervision
and  differentiation  in,  895-9

inventions  and,  717-18

short-time  versus,  478-87

State,  municipal,  and  philanthropic
action  to  relieve,  878-88

wide  markets  and,  572-3
United  Kingdom  :  aggregate  national  in-
come of,  792 ;  arbitration  in,  376, 400
United  States  :  anti-trust  legislation  in,
301,  302-3,  312-13,  314-15,  325  ;
bank  panics  in,  872,  874-5 ;  coal
strike  in,  364  n.

crops  in  :  business  and,  847  ;  forecasts
of,  817,  818  ;  periodicity  of,  825

excess  profits  duty  in,  602  n.

exchange  with,  673-4

industrial  disputes,  settlement  of,  in :
agreement  extension,  395  ;  arbitra-
tion, 376-7,  381  n.,  391-2  ;  Concilia-
tion Boards,  375  ;  mediation,  388  ;
referendum,  383  n.

insurance  in,  902-3

moulders  and  rate-cutting  in,  437

paper  currency  issue  in,  873

railway  rates  in,  266,  268,  270,  271
323

trusts  and  cut-throat  competition  in,
309,  312-13,  314-17

wages  in :  immigration  and,  705,
747  n. ;  minimum  wage,  432,  554  ;
unions  and  standard  wage,  431,  432

women's  labour   conditions   regulated
in,  490  w.,  494,  495
Units  of  business,  size  of,  353-6
Unskilled  labourers  and  paupers,  763-4
Utah,  minimum  wage  in,  554
Utility  and  desiredness,  23

Vagrancy,  767

Valuation  of  capital  for  levy,  683-5

Value  of  service  principle  in  railway
rates,  256,  267-72  ;  classification  of
goods  and  passengers  under,  268-
272  ;  cost  of  service  principle  and,
272-8  ;  national  dividend  and,  272,
277

Van  Marken  and  welfare  work,  426  «.,
749

Vessellitsky,  Miss,  on  women's  labour,
57  n.

Vested  interests  and  price  control,  337-
338,  359

Victoria  :  labour  conditions  regulated  in,
490  n.,    495 ;    minimum    wage   in.


INDEX


975


553,  727  ;   standard  rates  in,  430,
431
Viaci,  Professor,  on  measnring  elasticity
of  demand,  App.  II.  928  n.

Wage-earners  :  income  of^  55,  57  n.,  59  ;
numbers    of,    702-3 ;    produce    for
wage-earners,  733-4
Wages :

contracts  and  full  information,  455-6

demand  for  labour  and,  402,  556,  560-
562,  563-5,  566-77,  726-31,  732

disputes  about,  analysed,  367,  369,
401-11

eflBciency  and,  428-33,  527,  547-52,
555,  563,  564,  576  n.,  789  n.  ;
fair  wages  and,  527  ;  interference
to  raise  wages  and,  547-52,  726  ;
piece- wages  and,  435-41,  444-5,
551-2,  560  n.  ;  premium  plans
and,  437-40  ;  task  wages  and,
441-3  ;  time- wages  and,  428-34,
552

fair,  505,  527-8 ;  determination  of,
528-36  ;  living  wage  and,  540-45  ;
national  dividend  and  interference
to  raise,  506,  537-8,  539-40,  543-
546,  550,  725,  734-5,  736

fixed  and  Huctuating,  559-60,  565-6  ;
efficiency  and,  563,  564 ;  labour
demand  and  supply  and,  560-65,
566-78  ;  national  dividend  and,
560,  561,  562-5,  566  ;  six  funda-
mental propositions  of,  566-78  ;
sliding  scales  and  indices  for,
578-86

frequent  payment  desirable,  900-901

hours  of  labour  and,  418-19

indices  to  :    margins,  581-2  ;    output,
582;    price,   578-80,   581,   583;
profit,  582-3
objections  to,  583-5

interference  to  raise,  488-96  ;  by  con-
sumers,   488,     494 ;    by    public
authorities,  489,  491-2,  494-6
evasion    of,    490-92,    493,    495-6 ;
sanctions  of,  494-6

iron  law  of,  59

minimum :  adjustment  to  efficiency
and,  430-33,  493,  533-4,  555-6,
558  ;  day-wage,  492-3,  553  ;  and
demand  for  labour,  569,  727,
729-30  ;  legislation  for,  430,  493,

533.  534,  553-4  ;  time-wage,  533,

534,  553-8

national  dividend  and,  424-5,  444,
560  ;  fixed  and  fluctuating,  561,
562-5,  566  ;  interference  to  raise
fair,  506,  537-8,  539-40,  543-6,
550,    725.     734-5.    736;    inter-


Wages  {contd.) —

ference  to  raise  unfair,  505,  507,
508-11,    516-19,    524-6,    549-50,
555  ;  national  minimum,  555-8  ;
wage  reactions  on  eflSciencv,  549-
552
output  and,   424-6,  582 ;  piece-wage,
435-40,  444-5;  time-wage,  428-34
piece-wages,    28-34,    435-6,    528-34  ;
dismissal  method  and,  480 ;  output
and,     435-40,    444-5 ;    scale    of,
4923
plasticity  of,  585-6,  877
premium  plans,  437-40
prices  and,  578-80,  581,  583,  853,  855
profits  and,  582-3
sUding  scales,  369,  507,  529,  569,  578-

586,  853
State   interference   with,   476,   494-6,
559,  745-7  ;  minimum  wage,  555-
558.    See  interference  under  other
sub-headings
task-wages,  441-3

time -wages  :   dismissal   method   and,
480,  481  ;  minimum,  533,  534  ;
national  minimum,  553-8 ;  output
under,  428-34,  436  n.
Truck  Acts  and,  455-6
unfair,  506,  506-7  ;  causes  of,  508-11  ;
exploitation  and,  511-16,  517-19  ;
national  dividend  and  interference
to  raise,  505,  507,  508-11,  516-19,
524-6,    549-50,    555;    women's
labour  and,  519-26
Waiting,  a  factor  of  capital,  142-3,  343,
701,  703 ;  distinct  from  uncertainty-
bearing,    145,    146,    147,    App.    L
915-16,    917,     919,     920;     labour
co-operant     with,     706-7 ;     public
departments  and,  343
Walker,  Mr.,  on  Kartels,  304  m.
Walsh,  Mr.,  on  dock  labour,  503
War :  banking  panics  and,  872  «.,  875  n. ;
economic  welfare  and,  19
finance,    648,    651,    654  ;    by    bank
credits,   665,   667-77  ;   debts,  673,
678  n.,  791-2  ;  currency  notes  and,
665,  666, 670,  671-2,  673,  675,  676-
677,  872  ;  excess  profits  tax,  601-2  ;
loans  and  taxes  and,  651-2,  661-4,
666  ;  special  levy,  678
industry    and :    combination,    183-4,
230  ;  standardisation,  184-5  ;  State
control,  208-9,  293-4
loan  securities  and  special  levy,  683,

685-6,  687
not  productive,  40
price    regulation    during,     197-210,

3-22-3,  738-40,  769
rationing  during,  738-9


976


ECONOMICS  OF  WELFAEE


War  (contd.) —
savings,  902

State  control  and  :  of  industry,  208-9,
293-4  ;    of  prices,   197-210,   322-3,
738-40,  769  ;  of  supply,  211-16
supply  control  during,  211-16
transference  of  money  by,  88
women's  labour  and,  32  w.,  471,  522  n.
Washington,  minimum  wage  in,  554
Wasting  assets,  633

Water  supply  :  area  of,  353,  354  ;  muni-
cipal, 27  n.
Watkins,  Mr.,   on    distribution  of  pro-
perty, 145,  698
Webb,    Mr.    Sidney :    on    biology   and
social  problems,  98  ;  on  compulsory
insurance,  911
and    Mrs.    Webb :     on    conciliation,
387  n.  ;  on  women's  labour,  523  n.
Welfare,   10,   13-14  ;  biology  and,   91  ;
defence  and,   18-20  ;  economic  and
aggregate,     11-14,     20-22,     101-4  ;
modified  by  manner  of  earning  and
spending  income,  14-18
economic.     »See  Economic  welfare
Welfare    work    by    employers,     16-17,

426  m.,  748-9
Wellington,  N.Z.,  standard  rates  in,  431
Westcott,  Bishop,  as  mediator,  387
Western  Australia  :  compulsory  arbitra-
tion in,  399  ;  living  wage  in,  541
Wheat :  crops,  817,  824  ;  periodicity  of,
825-6
price  "control :  United  Kingdom,  201  ;
United  States,  211
Whetham,  Mr.,  on  physics,  7

and  Mrs.  Whetham,  on  heredity,  92
Whitley  Scheme,  373-6
Widows,  aid  to,  755,  789
Williams,  Mr.,  as  arbitrator,  381
Wilson,  Mr.,  on  germ-cells,  96
Windfalls,     600 ;    during    war,    601-2  ;
increments  and,  603-8  ;  integral  and
partial,  601


Windfalls  (contd.)—

taxation  of,  600-601,  603,  613  ;  excess
profits  duty,  602;  increment  taxes
and,  603-8

Window  Glass  Cutters  and  arbitration,
381m.

Wodehouse,  Mr.,  on  relief  in  aid  of
wages  and  of  earnings,  755

Wolff  on  rural  co-operation,  16  n.

Women  :

home  workers,  57  m.,  508,  520
in  industry  :  artificial  restrictions  on,
470-71  ;inUnitedStates,490TC.,  494;
confinement  and,  162-3,  789  ;  hours
of  labour,  57  m.,  413,  420  n.,  422  n.,
789  ;  war  and,  32  n.,  471,  522  n.
relief  for,   745,    746,    755-6 ;    trades
unions   and,    492 ;    unemployment
and,  882
wages  of,  57  m.,   518,  519-26;  living
wage  for,   542,  543  ;  minimum,  in
United  States,  554  ;  out-relief  and,
745,  746  ;  piece-rates,  436  n.

Workers  :  co-partnership  associations  of,
181-2  ;  methods  of  engaging,  497-
504,  510-11,  731  ;  opportunities  for,
180-181, 183  ;  thriftlessness  of,  900-
901 ;  welfare  work  for,  16-17,  426  n.,
478-9.     See  Labour

Workmen  :  and  female  labour,  470-72  ;
value  of  skilled,  479

Workmen's  Compensation  Acts,  452

Workmen's  tickets,  279  m.,  475,  484  m.,
770-71

Works  Committee,  440

Wright,  Mr.  P.  G.,  on  rainfall  period,
825-6

Young,  Professor :  on  depreciation  of
plant,  37  n.  ;  on  marginal  supply
prices,  App.  III.  934-5*

Yule,  Mr.,  on  infant  mortality,' 102

Zone  tariffs,  railway,  281-2


THE    END


'rn'ntedby  R.  &  R.  Clakk,  Limitkd,  Edinburgh.


k


m


BiNDir:c-i-7.FEBt7a(SL


HB     Pigou,  Arthur  Cecil

771     The  economics  of  welfare

P6


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


