The Pillow-Book of Sei Shonagon (Sei Shonagon; Arthur Waley (trans.), 1928)
==========================================================
The Heian court classic of zuihitsu — Sei Shonagon's lists, anecdotes and observations at the court of Empress Teishi (c. 1000) — in Arthur Waley's 1928 English translation, the first to bring it to Western readers. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive 1928 scan (https://archive.org/details/pillowbookofseis0000arth_v1i4).

Shcnits
styistus
«


ata


*


is,
ra
bs
{is
¥


sabes


o
Fa) :


a
stb its


Bae
peat


siehebestearteet
Rriaeriets


i


sSulinahe
2 ee
varie


WITHDRAWN
UTSA Libraries


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation


https://archive.org/details/pillowbookofseisO000arth_v1i4


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF
SEI SHONAGON


TO
HAZEL CROMPTON


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF
SEI SHONAGON


TRANSLATED BY


ARTHUR WALEY


LONDON
GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
MUSEUM STREET


All vights reserved


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
UNWIN BROTHERS, LTD., WOKING


FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1928


PRELIMINARY NOTES


1. I have here translated about a quarter of
the Pillow-Book.t Omissions have been made
only where the original was dull, unintelligible,
repetitive, or so packed with allusion that it
required an impracticable amount of com-
mentary.

2. Short extracts from the Pilow-Book will
be found in Aston’s Fapanese Literature (1899),
Florenz’s Geschichte der fap. Litteratur (1906),
and Revon’s Anthologie dela Littérature faponaise
(1910). Save for a line or two here and there,
and two anecdotes (pp. 78 and 113), parts of
which are translated by Aston and Revon, I
have avoided what has been translated before,
not on principle, but because it seemed to me
that, on the whole, the least interesting passages
had been chosen.?

1 Makura no Soshi, this being a name given at the time
to notebooks in which stray impressions were recorded.


2 Since this was written there has appeared Les Notes de
_ LOreiller, by K. Matsuo and Steinilber-Oberlin, containing


5


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


3. The text I’ have used’ is that Jof ‘the
Makura no Soshi Hyoshaku (first published,
1924; 2nd edition in one volume, 1926), by
Kaneko Moto-omi, to whose commentary I am
greatly indebted. The proofs have been read
by Miss Sybil Pye and Mr. Tadao Doi, to
both of whom I am very grateful.


extracts which amount, like mine, to about a quarter of the
original. My selection was, however, made from a very
different point of view and coincides with theirs only to the
extent of a few pages. The two books are therefore comple-
mentary.


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI
SHONAGON


JALAN IN [HE TENTH CENTURY


Wuen the first volume of The Tale of Genji
appeared in English, the prevailing comment
of critics was that the book revealed a subtle
and highly developed civilization, the very
existence of which had hitherto remained un-
suspected. It was guessed that so curious a
state of society, with its rampant estheticism
and sophisticated unmorality, its dread of the
explicit, the emphatic, must have behind it a
protracted history of undisturbed develop-
ment, or (as others put it) must be the climax
of an age-long decadence.

And it is indeed true that the unique civili-
zation portrayed in the Tale of Genji and The
Pillow-Book of Sei Sh6nagon corresponds to a
unique record of isolation and tranquillity.
The position of Japan, lying on the edge of the


ff


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


Oriental world, has been compared to that of
England always in full communion with Europe,
yet exempt from the worst perils of contiguity
—in fact, ideally ‘semi-detached.’

But the comparison has little force. Japan 1s
eight times farther from the mainland than we
from France. One cannot swim across the
Straits of Tsushima. Yet phase after phase of
civilization—agriculture, tools, domestic ani-
mals at an age long before history, then later,
the Chinese ideograms, Indian religion, Persian
textiles—managed to filter across the Straits;
while invasion, save for an occasional raid of
pirates from China, not merely during those
early years, but until the abortive Mongol
descent in the thirteenth century, was almost
unknown. In Europe and on the continent of
Asia no single strip of land has ever enjoyed
a like immunity. Across France, Hungary,
Poland, Turkestan, how many armies marched
during the long centuries of Japan’s absolute
security! —Thus arose a culture that, among
other peculiarities, had that of not being cos-
mopolitan. Rome, Byzantium, Ctesiphon, even
Ch’ang-an were international cities. In the


8


JAPAN IN THE TENTH CENTURY


streets of Kyoto a stray Korean or Chinaman
were, as specimens of the exotic, the best that
could be hoped for. The world, to a Japanese
of the tenth century, meant Japan and China.
India was semi-mythical, and Persia uncer-
tainly poised somewhere between China and
Japan.

Thus, since the establishment of the capital
at Heian? in 794, had grown up a highly
specialized, intense and uniform civilization,
dominated by one family, the Fujiwara; a state
of society in which the stock of knowledge, the
experience, the prejudices of all individuals
were so similar that the grosser forms of com-
munication seemed no longer necessary. A
phrase, a clouded hint, an allusion half-
expressed, a gesture imperceptible to common
eyes, moved this courtly herd with a facility as
magic as those silent messages that in the
prairie ripple from beast to beast.

It was a purely esthetic and, above all, a
literary civilization. Never, among people of
exquisite cultivation and lively intelligence,
have purely intellectual pursuits played so

1 Often referred to as Kyoto, i.e. the Capital.


9


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


small a part. What strikes us most is that the
past was almosta blank; not least sothe history
of Japan, extending even in mythological theory
only to the seventh century B.c. and remaining
fabulous for fifteen hundred years.

It is indeed our intense curiosity about the
past that most sharply distinguishes us from
the ancient Japanese. Here every educated
person is interested in some form or another of
history. The busiest merchant is an authority
upon snuff-boxes, Tudor London, or Chinese
jade. The remotest country clergyman reads
papers on eoliths; his daughters revive for-
gotten folk-dances. But to the Japanese of the
tenth century, ‘old’ meant fusty, uncouth,
disagreeable. To be ‘worth looking at’ a thing
must be imamekashi, “now-ish,’ up-to-date. By
Shonagon and Murasaki the great collection of
early poetry (the Manydshi), on the rare occa-
sions when they quote it, is always referred to
in an apologetic way, as something which
despite its solid merits will necessarily offend
the modern eye. Nor did they feel that the
future—with us an increasing preoccupation—
in any way concerned them.


Io


JAPAN IN 'THE TENTH CENTURY


Their absorption in the present, the fact that
with them ‘modern’ was invariably a term of
praise, differentiates them from us in a way that
is immediately obvious. The other aspects of
their intellectual passivity—the absence of
mathematics, science, philosophy (even such
amateur speculation as amused the Romans was
entirely unknown)—may not seem at first sight
to constitute an important difference. Scientists
and philosophers, it is true, exist in modern
Europe. But to most of us their pronounce-
ments are as unintelligible as the incantations of
a Lama; we are mere drones, slumbering amid
the clatter of thoughts and contrivances that
we do not understand and could still less ever
have created. If the existence of contemporary
research had no influence except upon those
capable of understanding it, we should indeed
be in much the same position as the people
of Heian. But, strangely enough, something
straggles through; ideas which we do not com-
pletely understand modify our perceptions and
hence refashion our thoughts to such an extent
that the society lady who said ‘Einstein means
so much to me’ was expressing a profound truth.


OE


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


It is, then, not only their complete absorption
in the passing moment, but more generally the
entire absence of intellectual background that
makes the ancient Japanese so different from
us, and gives even to the purely esthetic sides
of their culture a curious quality of patchiness.
At any moment these men and women, to all
appearances so infinitely urbane and sophisti-
cated, may surprise us, even where matters of ©
taste rather than intellect are concerned, by
lapsing into a xiaiserie far surpassing the silli-
ness of our own Middle Ages. It is this inse-
curity which gives to the Heian period that
oddly evasive and, as it were, two-dimensional
quality, its figures and appurtenances seeming
to us sometimes all to be cut out of thin,
transparent paper.

Religious ceremonies were much in vogue,
but were viewed chiefly from an esthetic stand-
point. The recitation of sacred texts was an art
practised by the laity as well as the clergy. An
exacting standard of connoisseurship prevailed,
and if Buddhist services were packed to over-
flowing, it was upon appraising the merits of
the performers rather than upon his own


12


JAPAN IN THE TENTH CENTURY


spiritual improvement that a Heian worshipper
was bent.

Mimes, pageants, processions filled the
Court calendar. Those organized by the Church
had a certain tinge of exotic solemnity; for till
the tenth century Indian Buddhism continued
to send out fresh waves of influence, which now
reached China (and hence Japan) less cir-
cuitously than in former days.

But it would scarcely be an exaggeration to
say that the real religion of Heian was the cult
of calligraphy. Certainly writing was the form
of conduct that was scrutinized most severely.
We find beauty of penmanship not merely
counting for almost as much as beauty of per-
son, but spoken of rather as a virtue than as a
talent, and the epithet ‘good,’ when applied to
an individual, frequently refers not to conduct
but to handwriting. Often in Japanese romances
it is with some chance view of the heroine’s
writing that a love-atfair begins; and if the hero
happens to fall in love with a lady before he has
seen her script, he awaits the first ‘traces of her
hand’ with the same anxiety as that which
afflicted a Victorian gentleman before he had


13


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


ascertained his fiancée’s religious views. It
was as indispensable that a Japanese mistress
should write beautifully as that Mrs. Gladstone
should be sound about the episcopal succession.

Again, a considerable place in the lives: of
the ancient Japanese was given to arts the very
existence of which the West has barely recog-
nized. For example, the art of blending per-
fumes, regarded by us asa mere trade, ranked in
ancient Japan as the equal of music and poetry.

These things, however, are only differences
of emphasis. Calligraphy has perhaps nowhere
else so nearly achieved the status of a religion;
but it has been practised as an art throughout
the East, and was esteemed at certain moments
even in Europe. So recently as the beginning of
the present century a small school, led by Dr.
Bridges, gave it a considerable prominence in
one part of England. And even the burning of
perfumes, though on the whole neglected in
this country, has always been practised here
and there, experimentally, in corners that some
chance has screened from the censure of Nordic
virility.

Again, the purely esthetic approach to

14


JAPAN IN THE TENTH CENTURY


religion, which was the rule in Heian, has often
been fostered in Europe by cliques of excep-
tional people. At first sight, indeed, Buddhism
(with its rosaries, baptism, tonsured monks, and
nuns; its Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell) appears
to have many points of resemblance to Catholic
Christianity. But I fancy, all the same, that the
most fundamental difference between the Japan-
ese (or, for that matter, any Far Eastern nation)
and us is the fact, obvious indeed yet constantly
overlooked, that they were not Christians.

The Buddhist is taught that the world of
appearances, with all its imperfection, is coeval
with Buddha (using the name in its metaphysical
not its historical sense). He is, in fact, this
world, and does not exist outside it. Impossible,
then, to reproach him with its sorrow or in1-
quity. The Christian (or strictly, the adherent
of any Semitic religion; for it holds good of the
Moslem and Jew) alone has compassed the
magnificent conception of a Being all-wise,
all-powerful, the incarnation of Good. But the
world (His creation) is patently evil. Is there
then some mistake? Is this adored Being in
reality powerless against evil, or ignorant, or


15


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


cruel? These are the questions that in all ages
have racked the Christian’s soul. Official solu-
tions (which it was heresy to reject) failed to
satisfy him; the conflict became an agony that
has continually goaded Western man into what
to the East have seemed gratuitous turmoils
and achievements, making his thoughts a hard
bed to lie on, waking him (as uneasy quarters
drive a traveller on to the road at dawn) not
only to fresh adventures but to the discovery of
beauties that, wrapped in morning dreams, the
Fast has ignored.

It has been suggested, as a dominating
characteristic of the ancient Japanese, that they
were without a sense of sin. It would, I main-
tain, be truer to say that they were not troubled
by the Problem of Evil. But a sense of sin they
certainly did not lack. Hell gaped at them per-
petually; no delicately Japanicized variety, but
a true Dantesque inferno, brutally depicted not
only on monastery walls, but even amid the gay
elegancies of the Palace. The period at which
Shonagon wrote her book corresponded with a
time of general panic concerning the Life to
Come. In 985 appeared Eshin Sézu’s O74


16


JAPAN IN 'THE TENTH CENTURY


Yoshi or ‘Essentials of Salvation,’ with its
ghoulish evangelism that culminated in the
great democratic ‘revivals’ of Hénen ShGnin
in the twelfth and Shinran in the thirteenth
century.

And if Eshin’s mission marked the begin-
ning of a new phase in Japanese religion, it was
at the same time associated with the political
counter-currents that ultimately destroyed the
civilization of Heian.

Among Eshin’s aristocratic adherents the
most important were drawn not from the domi-
nant Fujiwara family but its rivals, the Taira
and Minamoto.t One of his most influential
followers was Taira no Koremochi, a lawless
character, possibly the model for Murasaki’s
Taya (the braggadocio suitor of Tamakatsura)
in the third volume of Genji. Koremochi
had a dispute with one of the Fujiwaras
about a piece of land, and failing to win his
case, waylaid and slaughtered his rival. The
consequences of this murder, committed with


1 E.g. Taira no Koremochi and Minamoto no Mitsunaka.
But the point should not be pressed; for Eshin was also
patronized by the Emperor’s mother, who was a Fujiwara.


Ey B


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


complete impunity, were far-reaching. For cen-
turies the Fujiwaras had been hedged round by
a mysterious prestige. Fiefs, titles, offices of
state—all seemed to belong to them by some
inviolable decree, and each fresh claim met only
with a superstitious acquiescence. But now it
had been discovered, to everyone’s astonish-
ment, that even a Fujiwara could crumple at
the touch of steel, ‘roll over like an ox and
vanish unavenged.’ ‘These events took place in
the extreme north of the main Island. Here,
and in all the border provinces the hold of the
Fujiwaras was beginning to weaken. The great
struggle began early in the twelfth century; but
when it came it was a contest not between
civilization and barbarism—for the effeminate
and decadent society of Heian disappeared at
the first breath of conflict—but between a long
series of rival swashbucklers and dictators. And
with the advent of a robust militarism the old
attitude towards religion, half childish, half
cynical, gave way on the one hand to the
intense, peasant faith of Honen, and on the
other to the passionate mysticism of the Né plays.

The life of the Heian Court in the tenth


18


JAPAN IN THE TENTH CENTURY


century 1s known to us chiefly through two
documents, The Tale of Genji, a novel by Mura-
saki Shikibu, and The Pillow-Book by Sei
Shoénagon. The first has, as a document, the
disadvantage of being fiction. Murasaki shows
us the world, particularly the male part of it,
rather as she would like it to have been than as
she actually found it. She dreamed of lovers
who, though in every sense men, should yet
retain the gentleness and grace of her girl
friend Saish6.t How different was the world she
actually lived in we can see in her Diary, which
fortunately is also preserved.

The Pillow-Book, on the other hand, is a
plain record of fact, and being at least ten times
as long as Murasaki’s Diary, and far more
varied in contents, it is the most important
document of the period that we possess.?


1 See A Wreath of Cloud (Genji, part ili), p. 22.

2 In Court Ladies of Old Fapan (Constable, 1921) two
diaries of the period, as well as that of Murasaki, are trans-
lated. Of these, the ‘Diary of Izumi Shikibuw’ is not a genuine
document, but a romance written round the well-known
story of Izumi’s love-affairs; the Sarashina Diary is a much
worked-up and highly literary production. For the Kageré
nikki, ‘Gossamer Diary,’ see introduction to The Tale of
. Genji, vol. ii.


BY


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


Sei Shonagon, the authoress of the Pillow-
Book, was born in 966 or 967, the daughter of
Kiyohara no Motosuke. The Kiyohara clan
was descended from Temmu, the fortieth
Emperor of Japan. For many generations,
Motosuke’s ancestors had held office as pro-
vincial governors, a respectable but undistin-
guished form of employment. Chiefly, however,
they are known for their devotion to learning
and literature. Prince Toneri, the founder of
the family, was one of the compilers of the
Nihongi, or ‘Chronicles of Japan’;! another
ancestor, Natsuno,? who died in 837, was
the author of an important work, the Ryd xo
gige or ‘Commentary on the Penal Code,’
while Sh6nagon’s great-grandfather, Fukayabu,
became the typical Court-poet of the early
tenth century, and his thin elegant verse still
figures in every anthology.

Motosuke held a series of governorships; but
he, too, is best known as a poet and student of
poetry. He lectured upon the text of the Man-


1 Finished in a.p. 720, ‘Translated by W. G. Aston.
2 He also organized the building of the great harbour at
Uozumi.


20


JAPAN IN THE TENTH CENTURY


yoshit, a collection of ancient poems that were
already becoming difficult to understand, and
was one of the compilers of the Gosenshi, the
second official anthology. He was appointed to
his last governorship, that of Bingo, in 986 and
died in 990.

A year later Shonagon, now aged about
twenty-four, entered the service of the little
Empress Sadako, who had arrived at Court the
year before. The Empress, a daughter of the
Prime Minister, Fujiwara no Michitaka, was
now fifteen: she died in childbirth ten years
later, and it is with these years, from ggI1 to
1000, that the Pi//ow-Book deals.

It consists partly of reminiscences, partly of
entries in diary-form. The book is arranged not
chronologically, but under a series of headings,
such as ‘Disagreeable Things,’ ‘Amusing
Things,’ ‘Disappointing Things,’ and the like,
but often this scheme breaks down and the
sequence becomes entirely arbitrary.

To keep some kind of journal was a common
practice of the day. No other miscellany like
the Pillow-Book exists; but there may well have

been others, for Heian literature has not sur-


2!


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


vived in its entirety. Thus, Shonagon gives us
a list of her favourite novels. Out of eleven,
only one (The Hollow Tree) survives; and from
other sources we know the names of. over
twenty novels belonging to this period, all of
which are lost. The question whether the par-
ticular form in which she cast her book, that of
grouping the entries under headings such as
‘disagreeable things,’ “amusing things,’ etc.,
was suggested to her by some previous work is
difficult to decide. There exists a book * by the
Chinese poet Li Shang-yin (813-58) called
Tsa Tsuan, or ‘Miscellaneous Notes,’ which is
arranged on this principle, though its matter is
very different, the author remaining content
with mere enumerations, for example:


Things that certainly won't come.


A dog, if called to by a man with a stick in
his hand.

A singing-girl, if summoned by a penniless
student.


! Only 26 pages long. It is contained in the T’ang Tai
Ts‘ung Shu, or Minor Works of the 'T’ang dynasty.


22


JAPAN IN THE TENTH CENTURY


Inappropriate Things.

For a Persian to be poor. For a doctor to fall
ill. For a schoolmaster not to recognize an ideo-
gram. Fora butcher to recite the Scriptures.:


Things that make a Bad Impression.

To fall off one’s horse at polo, To choke when
eating with one’s superiors. To return to
worldly life after having been in a monastery
or convent. To lie on someone else’s bed with
one’s boots on. To sing love-songs in the
presence of one’s parents.


Whereas ShGnagon almost always illustrates
her categories by long anecdotes and reminis-
cences, the Chinese writer, as we have seen,
confines himself to bald lists. Shénagon is con-
cerned with her own likes and irritabilities; Li
Shang-yin merely expresses a sort of generalized
proverbial wisdom. Her experience is drawn
exclusively from the Court; his illustrations are
drawn from market-place and farm.

Despite these differences, the particular form
in which the Pillow-Book is cast might quite

1 Buddhists being forbidden to kill.


23


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


conceivably be due to the Tsa Tsuan. The difhi-
culty is that Li Shang-yin’s book does not seem
to have reached Japan till many centuries later.
That no single copy of the Tsa Tsuan existed in
Japan at a particular date is a thing that ob-
viously cannot be proved. The question is not
in itself of much importance, but it is worth
mentioning in order to call attention to the
Chinese book, which is a singularly interesting
document of social history.

Shonagon protests, as do most diarists and
makers of journals, that the Pi/low-Book was
intended for herself alone. But it quickly fell
into other hands. In 1002 she writes:


When the present Captain of the Bodyguard
of the Left (Minamoto no Tsunefusa) was
governor of Ise (i.e. in 995 or 996) he one day
called on me at my home. By accident a mattress
that was pushed out into the front room for him
to sit on had my book lying on it. The moment
I realized this I snatched at the book and made
frantic efforts to recover it. But Tsunefusa
carried it off with him and did not return it till
a long time afterwards.


24


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


So far as I remember, this was the beginning
of my book being handed about at Court.


What Tsunefusa saw and handed round in
995-6 was, of course, only part of the work,
most of it having been written later than this.

Printing did not become general in Japan
till the seventeenth century. The editio princeps
of the Pillow-Book is in movable type and is said
to date from the Keicho Period, 1596-1614.
Many medieval manuscript-copies exist; but
their relative age and trustworthiness have not
been fully investigated.


Concerning her arrival at Court, Shonagon
writes as follows:

When I first entered her Majesty’s service |
felt indescribably shy, and was indeed con-
stantly on the verge of tears. When I came on
duty the first evening, the Empress was sitting
with only a three-foot screen in front of her,
and so nervous was I that when she passed me
some picture or book to look at, I was hardly
capable of putting out my hand to take it.
While she was talking about what she wanted
me to see—telling me what it was or who had


25


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


made it—I was all the time wondering whether
my hair was in order. For the lamp was not in
the middle of the room, but on a stand imme-
diately beside where we sat, and we were more
exposed than we should have been even by day-
light. It was all I could do to fix my attention on
what I was looking at. Only part of her Majesty’s
hand showed, for the weather was very cold
and she had muffled herself in her sleeves; but
I could see that it was pink and very lovely. I
gazed and gazed. To an inexperienced home-
bred girl like me it was a wonderful surprise to
discover that such people as this existed on
earth at all. At dawn I hurried away, but the
Empress called after me, saying I seemed to be
as frightened of the daylight as the ugly old
God of Katsuragi.t I lay down again, purposely
choosing an attitude in which she could not get
a full view of me. The shutters had not yet been
opened. But soon one of the ladies came along
and the Empress called out to her, ‘Please open
those things!’ She was beginning to do so,
when the Empress suddenly said, ‘Not now!’


1 Who is so unhappy about his appearance that he hides
all day and only comes out at night.


26


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


and, laughing, the lackey withdrew. Her
Majesty then engaged me in conversation for
some time, and said at last: “Well, I expect you
are wanting to be off. Go as soon as you like.’
‘And come back in good time to-night,’ she
added. It was so late when I got back to my
room that I found it all tidied and opened up
for the day. The snow outside was lovely.
Presently there came a message from the
Empress saying it was a good opportunity for
me to wait upon her in the morning. “The
snow-clouds make it so dark,’ she said, ‘that
you will be almost invisible.’ I could not bring
myself to go, and the message was repeated
several times. At last the head-girl of our room
said: ‘You mustn’t shut yourself up here all
the time. You ought to be thankful to get a
chance like this. Her Majesty would not ask
for you unless she really wanted you, and she
will think it very bad manners if you do not
go.’ So I was hustled off, and arrived once more
in the Imperiai Presence, in a state of miserable
embarrassment and confusion.


Shdnagon goes on to describe the ease and


27


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


nonchalance with which those in attendance
upon the Empress went about their duties or
lay ‘with their Chinese cloaks trailing across the
floor.” ‘How I envied the composure. with
which they took and handed on the Empress’s
notes and letters, standing up and sitting down,
talking and laughing without the slightest trace
of embarrassment! Would a time ever come
when I should feel equally at home in such sur-
roundings? ‘The mere thought made me tremble.
... Presently there were loud cries of ““Make
way!” Someone said it was the Prime Minister,
and a great scuffing began, everyone clutching
at whatever possessions they had left lying
about and making hastily for the alcove.’
Shonagon goes on to tell us that the visitor
turns out to be not Michitaka, the Prime
Minister, but his son, Korechika, the Empress’s
favourite brother, then a lad of eighteen.


KorecuHika. These last two days I have been
supposed to be in retreat.t But I wanted to see
how you were getting on in this tremendous
snow-storm.


1 For Buddhist observances.


28


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


Empress. I did not expect you. I thought
‘no roads were left... .’!

Korecuika. Did you think that would stop
me? I made sure ‘your heart was filled with


DitVie 3k


What, I thought, could have been more
elegant than such a conversation as this? It was
up to the most high-flown passages in any of
the novels I had read.... After a while my
Lord Korechika asked who was behind the
curtains-of-state, and someone having told him
it was I, he rose to his feet, intending, as I first
thought, to go away. But instead, he came close
up to the curtains and spoke about something
that he heard had happened to me before I came
to Court. I had already been feeling utterly
awe-struck as I gazed at him through the
curtains; and now when he actually came
up and began to address me, I almost
fainted.

Sometimes at festivals and processions he


t Jn allusion to the poem: ‘In this mountain village, after
the snow-storm, no roads are left; and my heart is full of pity
for him who I know will come.’ Taira no Kanemori, the
author of this poem, had died a few months before,


29


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


had seemed to be looking in the direction of
our carriage; whereupon we had immediately
made fast the blinds and even hidden our faces
with our fans, lest he should get a momentary
view of our profiles. And now, sitting terror-
stricken before him, I wondered how it was
that I had ever consented to embark upon a
career for which I was so hopelessly ill-qualified.
Even the fan with which I was attempting to
hide my embarrassment he now took from me.
I felt certain at once that my hair was strag-
gling down in the wildest disorder, and whether
it really was or no, probably I looked quite as
distraught as I was feeling. Twisting my fan in
his fingers, he began asking who painted it,
and other questions—I all the while hoping
only that he would soon go away. But it was
clear he had no intention of doing so, for he
was now reclining on his back close to the
curtains. I think her Majesty felt at last that
his long stay was disconcerting me, for she
called to him: ‘Come over here! I want you to
tell me whose writing this is.” How thankful I
felt! But Lord Korechika replied: ‘Send it
along and I will look at it!’ and when she still


30


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


insisted that he should come to her, he said: ‘I
would come; but Shdnagon here has hold of
me and will not let go.’ This, of course, was
whimsical enough, but rather embarrassing for
me, considering the immense difference in our
ages and positions.

Her Majesty was now looking at some piece
or other of writing in cursive syllabary. ‘If you
want to know who wrote it, show it to this lady.
I'll be bound there’s not a hand in the world
that she would not recognize.’ So he went on,
always trying to say something that would get
an answer out of me.

‘Shonagon, do you like me?’ the Empress
asked presently. “Why, Madam, what else do
you suppose?’ I was beginning to reply, when
someone in the breakfast-room sneezed vio-
lently. ‘There!’ cried her Majesty. “That shows
you are not telling the truth. Of course, it
would be nice if you liked me, but it can’t be
helped.’


Next morning, when ShGnagon is in her
room, someone brings her a note written on
light green paper, and very prettily got up. In


31


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


it is the poem: ‘Never had I known, never had
known that false was false; save for the God of
Truth whose voice resounded in the empty
air.” ‘It had been dictated,’ Sh6nagon con-
tinues, ‘to one of her ladies. I felt terribly
mortified and confused. How I should have
liked to get hold of the person who produced
that unlucky sneeze!’

Shdnagon’s reply—‘Thankless my lot who,
for the trespass of another’s nose, am thought
of shallow heart’—contains puns and ingenui-
ties which it would be tedious to explain.

Thus began Shdnagon’s career at Court.
There are, however, in the Pillow-Book two
passages which refer to an earlier period in her
life. In 986, when she was about twenty, she
attended a Buddhist Ceremony at the palace of
Fujiwara no Naritoki, Colonel of the Body-
guard and Assistant Councillor of State. “The
heat,’ she says, ‘was desolating, and we had
things to attend to that could not be left over
till next day; so we meant only to hear a little
of the service and then go home. But such
surging oceans of carriages had pressed in
behind us, that it was impossible to escape.


32


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


When the morning part of the ceremony was
over we sent word to the carriages at the back
of us that we were going away, and being glad
enough to get a little closer, they at once let us
through, and themselves moved up into line.
We had to put up with a good deal of chafing
as we retired.... His lordship Yoshichika !
called to me as we passed: “‘You do well to
vetire.”’ At the moment I was suffering so much
from the heat that I did not see the point: but
afterwards I sent a man to him with the
message: ‘“Among five thousand arrogants, you
too will surely find a place.” ’

The allusion (and nothing would so have
covered Sh6nagon with shame as that it should
be thought she had not recognized it) is to a
passage in the Lotus Satra where five thousand
of Buddha’s hearers walk out during one of his
sermons. Buddha makes no attempt to stop
them, saying only: ‘Arrogant creatures, they do
well to retire.’ It is precisely this part of the
Lotus Sitra that is read at the end of the morn-
ing service on the first day of the ceremony in
question, so that Shénagon, who became the


t Another Fujiwara grandee, a distant cousin of their host.


33 Cc


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


great pastmaster in the art of capping quota-
tions, begins her career with a very light ordeal.

The following passage also seems to belong
to about the year 986:


On that day too (the seventh of the first
month) I loved being taken to see the White
Horses.t We girls living at home used to drive
off to the Palace in a coach marvellously fur-
bished. When we came to the ground-bar of
the Middle Gate, there was always a terrible
bump. Heads knocked together, combs fell out,
and, if one did not instantly rescue them, got
trampled upon and smashed to pieces. Near the
guard-room were a lot of officers, who used to
take bows from soldiers in the procession and
twang them, to make the White Horses prance.
This we found very entertaining. In the dis-
tance, through one of the gates of the Inner
Palace, we could see shutters, behind which
figures were moving to and fro, ladies perhaps
of the Lamp or Wardrobe. How marvellous
they seemed to us—these people who walked
about the Palace as though it belonged to them!


1 ‘Twenty-one of them were led in procession.


34


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


So close did the procession pass that one
could study the very texture of the soldiers’
faces. I remember one who had put on his
powder unevenly, so that here and there his
dark skin showed through, looking like those
black patches in the garden, when the snow has
begun to melt. An absurd sight. But when the
horses reared and plunged wildly about I was
frightened, and shrinking back into our coach
saw nothing more of the show.


Here is an after-breakfast scene in the
Palace, dating from the spring of 994:


Presently we heard those who had been
handing the Imperial Dishes tell the serving-
men they might clear, and a moment later His
Majesty reappeared. He asked me to mix
some ink...and presently folded a white
poem-slip, saying to us gentlewomen: ‘Write
me a few scraps of old poetry—anything that
comes into your head.’ I asked my lord Kore-
chika what he advised me to choose. ‘Don’t ask
me,’ he said. ‘Write something quickly and
hand it in, This is entirely your affair, We men


35


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


are not intended to help you.’ And he put the
inkstand by me, adding: ‘Don’t stop to think!
The Naniwazu ! or anything else you happen to
know....’ Really there was nothing to be
afraid of; but for some reason I felt terribly
confused, and the blood rushed to my face.
Two or three of the upper ladies tried their
hands, one with a spring song, another with a
poem on this or that flower. Then it came to
me, and I wrote out the poem: “The years go
by; age and its evils crowd upon me, but be
this as it may, while flowers are here to see, I
cannot grieve.’ But instead of ‘flowers’ I wrote
‘my Lord.’ ‘T did this out of curiosity,’ said the
Emperor, while he was looking at what I had
written. ‘It is so interesting to see what is going
on in people’s heads.’ A conversation followed,
in the course of which he said: ‘I remember my
father, the late Emperor Enyi, once saying
to his gentlemen-in-attendance: “Here is a
book. Each of you shall write a poem in it.”
Several of them found great difficulty in getting
started. “Don’t bother about your handwriting,”
t The first poem that children learned to write.
2 Probably in 984.
36


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


my father said, ‘‘nor, for that matter, whether
your poems are suitable to the season. It’s all
one to me.” Thus encouraged (but still making
rather a burden of it) they set to work. One of
them was the present Prime Minister! He was
only a captain of the Third Rank then. When it
came to his turn he wrote the old poem: “Like
the tide that rises on the shore of Izumo,
deeper and deeper grows my love for you; yes,
mine.” But he altered “love for you” to “‘devo-
tion to my Sovereign,” which pleased my
father very much.’


Shonagon then tells us of the Emperor’s
astonishment that people should be able to read
such vast quantities of poetry. Twenty chapters
(the length of the Kokinsha, the first official
anthology) was far too much. ‘I am sure for
my part,’ said the Emperor, ‘I shall never
succeed in getting beyond Chapter 2.’


Another extract:

From the beginning of the fifth month," it
had been dark, rainy weather all the time. I
became so bored that at last I suggested we

1 Of the year 995.


37


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


had better go out and see if we couldn’t some-
where hear the cuckoo singing. This idea was
very well received, and one of the girls sug-
gested we should try that bridge behind the
Kamo Shrine (it isn’t called Magpie Bridge,
but something rather like it). She said that
there was a cuckoo there every day. Someone
else said it was not a cuckoo at all, but a cricket.
However, on the morning of the fifth day, off
we went. When we ordered the carriage, the
men said they didn’t suppose that in such
weather as this anyone would mind if we were
picked up outside our own quarters and taken
out by the Northern Gate.t There was only
room for four. Some of the other ladies asked
whether we should mind their getting another
carriage and coming too. But the Empress
said ‘No,’ and though they were very much
disappointed we drove off rather hard-heartedly
without attempting to console them or indeed
worrying about them at all. Something seemed
to be happening at the riding-ground, where
there was a great press of people. When we


' Instead of walking to the Eastern Gate, the only one
which the Palace staff was supposed to use.


38


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


asked what was going on, we were told that
the competitions were being held, and that the
archers were just going to shoot on horseback.
It was said, too, that the Officers of the Body-
guard of the Left were there; but all we could
see, when we had pulled up, was a few gentle-
men of the Sixth Rank wandering vaguely
about. ‘Oh, do let us get on,’ someone said;
‘there’s no one of any interest here.’ So we
drove on towards Kamo, the familiar road
making us feel quite as though we were on our
way to the Festival. Presently we came to my
lord Akinobu’s? house, and someone suggested
we should get out and have a look at it. Every-
thing was very simple and countrified—pictures
of horses on the panels, screens of wattled bam-
boo, curtains of plaited grass—all in a style
that seemed to be intentionally behind the
times. The house itself was a poor affair and
very cramped, but quite pretty in its way. As
for cuckoos, we were nearly deafened! It is
really a great pity her Majesty never hears


t The Kamo festival, in the fourth month.
2 'The Empress’s maternal uncle. The Empress’s mother
came of a comparatively humble family.


39


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


them. And when we thought of the ladies who
had wanted so badly to come with us, we felt
quite guilty. ‘It’s always interesting to see
things done on the spot,’ said Akinobu, and
sending for some stuff which I suppose was
husked rice, he made some girls—very clean’
and respectable—along with others who seemed
to come from neighbouring farms, show us how
the rice was thrashed. Five or six of them did
this, and then the grain was put into a sort of
machine that went round, two girls turning it
and at the same time singing so strange a song
that we could not help laughing, and had soon
forgotten all about the cuckoos. Then refresh-
ments were brought on a queer old tray-stand
such as one sees in Chinese pictures. As no one
seemed much interested in its contents, our
host said: ‘This is rough, country fare. If you
don’t like it, the only thing to do in a place like
this is to go on bothering your host or his ser-
vants till you get something you can eat. We
don’t expect you people from the Capital to be
shy. These fern-shoots, now. I gathered them
with my own hand.’ ‘You don’t want us to
arrange ourselves round the tray-stand like a


40


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


lot of maid-servants sitting down to their
supper?’ I protested.

‘Hand the things round,’ he said... and
while this was going on, in the midst of the
clatter, one of the men came in and said that it
was going to rain, and we hurried back to our
carriage. I wanted to make my cuckoo-poem
before we started; but the others said I could
do it in the carriage. Before going we picked a
huge branch of white-flower and decorated our
carriage with it, great trails of blossom hanging
over the windows and sides, till one would have
thought a huge canopy of white brocade had
been flung across the roof of the coach. Our
grooms, throwing themselves into the thing,
began with shouts of laughter squeezing fresh
boughs of blossom into every cranny that
would hold them. We longed to be seen by
someone on our way back, but not a soul did
we meet, save one or two wretched priests or
other such uninteresting people. When we
were nearly home we made up our minds it
would be too dull to finish the day without any-
one having seen us in our splendour, so we
stopped at the palace in the First Ward and


41


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


asked for the Captain,’ saying we were just
back from hearing the cuckoo. We were told
he had been off-duty for some time and had got
into easy clothes; but was now being helped
into his Court trousers. Wouldn’t we wait? We
said we couldn’t do that, and were driving on
to the Eastern Gate, when he suddenly appeared
running after us down the road. He had cer-
tainly changed in a marvellously short space of
time, but was still buckling his belt as he ran.
Behind him, barefooted in their haste, panted
several dressers and grooms. We called to the
coachman to drive on and had already reached
the gate when, hopelessly out of breath, he
staggered up to us. It was only then that he saw
how we were decorated. “This is a fairy chariot,’
he laughed. ‘I do not believe there are real
people in it. If there are, let them get down and
show themselves.’

‘But, Shénagon, what poems did you make
to-day? That’s what I should like to hear.’
“We're keeping them for her Majesty,’ I
replied. Just then it once more began to rain in


1 Fujiwara no Kiminobu, aged eighteen; cousin of the
Empress.


42


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


earnest. ‘I have always wondered,’ he said, ‘why
when all the other gates have arches, this
Eastern gate should have none. To-day, for
example, one badly needs it.’ ‘What am I to do
now?’ he asked presently. ‘I was so determined
to catch you up that I rushed out without think-
ing what was to become of me afterwards.’
‘Don’t be so ridiculous,’ I said. ‘You can come
with us to the Palace.’ ‘In an eboshi?’ ! he asked.
“What can you be thinking of?’ ‘Send someone
to fetch your hat,’ I suggested. But it was now
raining badly and our men, who had no rain-
coats with them, were pulling in the carriage
as quickly as they could. One of his men pre-
sently arrived from his palace with an umbrella,
and under its shelter he now, with a slow reluc-
tance that contrasted oddly with his previous
haste, made his way home, continually stopping
to look back at us over his shoulder. With his
umbrella in one hand and a bunch of white-
flower in the other, he was an amusing sight.
When we were back in the Palace, her


t A soft, high-crowned cap.
2 'The bulls that drew it had to be unyoked at the Palace


gate.


45


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


Majesty asked for an account of our adventures.
The girls who had been left behind were at
first inclined to be rather sulky; but when we
described how the Captain had run after us
down the Great Highway of the First Ward,
they could not help laughing. Presently the
Empress asked about our poems, and we were
obliged to explain that we had not made any.
‘That is very unfortunate,’ she said. ‘Some of
the gentlemen at Court are bound to hear of
your excursion, and they will certainly expect
something to have come of it. I can quite under-
stand that on the spot it was not very easy to
write anything. When people make too solemn
an affair of such things, one is apt suddenly to
feel completely uninterested. But it is not too
late. Write something now. You’re good for
that much, surely.’ This was all true enough;
but it turned out to be a painful business. We
were still trying to produce something when a
messenger arrived, with a note from the
Captain. It was written on thin paper stamped
with the white-flower pattern, and was attached
to the spray that he had taken from our carriage.
His poem said: ‘Would that of this journey I


44


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


had heard. So had my heart been with you when
you sought the cuckoo’s song.’ Fearing that we
were keeping the messenger waiting, her
Majesty sent round her own writing-case to our
room, with paper slipped into the lid. ‘You
write something, Saish6,’ I said. But Saishd was
determined that I should write, and while we
argued about it the sky suddenly grew dark,
rain began to pour, and there were such deafen-
ing peals of thunder, that we forgot all about
our poem, and frightened out of our wits ran
wildly from place to place, closing shutters and
doors. The storm lasted a long time, and when
at last the thunder became less frequent, it was
already dark. We were just saying we, really
must get on with our answer, when crowds of
visitors began to arrive, all anxious to talk about
the storm, and we were obliged to go out and
look after them. One of the courtiers said that
a poem only needs an answer when it is ad-
dressed to someone in particular, and we
decided to do no more about it. I said to the
Empress that poetry seemed to have a bad
karma to-day, and added that the best thing we
could do was to keep as quiet as possible about


45


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


our excursion. ‘I still don’t see why some of
you who went should not be able to produce a
few poems,’ she replied, pretending to be cross.
‘It isn’t that you can’t; of that I am sure. You
have made up your minds not to.’ “The time
has passed,’ I said. ‘One must do those things
when one is in the right mood.’ ‘Right mood?
What nonsense!’ she exclaimed indignantly.
But all the same, she did not worry me any
more about it.

Two days afterwards Saisho was talking
about our excursion, and mentioned the fern-
shoots that Akinobu had ‘plucked with his own
hand.’ The Empress was amused that Saish6
seemed to have retained a much clearer memory
of the refreshments than of anything else that
happened during the expedition, and picking
up a stray piece of paper she wrote: “The
memory of a salad lingers in her head,’ and
bade me make a beginning for the poem. I
wrote: ‘More than the cuckoo’s song that she
went out to hear.’ ‘Well, Shdnagon,’ she said,
laughing, ‘how you of all people can have the
face to mention cuckoos, I cannot imagine.’ I
felt very crestfallen, but answered boldly: ‘I


46


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


don’t see anything to be ashamed of. I have
made up my mind only to make poems when
1 feel inclined to. If, whenever there is a ques-
tion of poetry, you turn upon me and ask me
to compose, I shall stay in your service no
longer. When I am called upon like that, I
can’t even count the syllables, still less think
whether I am writing a winter song in spring,
or a spring song in autumn.... I know there
have been a lot of poets in my family; and it
would certainly be very nice if, after one of
these occasions, people said: “Of course, hers
was much the best; but that is not surprising,
considering what her father was.” As it is, not
having the slightest degree of special talent in
that direction, I object strongly to being per-
petually thrust forward and made to behave as
though I thought myself a genius. I feel I am
disgracing my father’s memory!’ I said this
quite seriously; but the Empress laughed.
However, she said I might do as I pleased, and
promised that for her part she would never call
upon me again. I felt immensely relieved.
.... Late one night when Korechika came
in and began giving out themes upon which


47


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


the ladies were to write poems, everyone else
was delighted and poems were turned out in
bundles. I meanwhile went on talking to the
Empress about other matters. Presently Kore-
chika caught sight of me and asked why I did
not join the others and make some poems.
‘Come and take your theme,’ he said. I told
him that I had, for good reasons of my own,
given up writing poetry. This he was very loath
to believe. ‘I am sure,’ he said, ‘my sister would
not allow you to do so. It is the most absurd
thing I ever heard of. Well! you may do as you
like on other occasions; but I am not going to
let you off to-night.” However, I took no notice.
While the poems of the other ladies were being
judged, a minute slip of paper was handed to
me by the Empress. On it was the poem: ‘Shall
she, who of the famed Motosuke an offspring
is deemed, alone be missing from to-night’s
great tournament of song?’...To this I
replied: ‘Were I another’s child, who sooner
had enrolled in this night’s tournament of song?’
And I told the Empress, that if I were anyone
else, I should be only too pleased to present
her with thousands of poems.


48


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


A few weeks before the cuckoo-expedition,
the Empress’s father, the Prime Minister
Michitaka had died at the early age of forty-
eight. In the normal course of affairs he would
have been succeeded by his eldest son, Kore-
chika; for already the Fujiwaras had estab-
lished a kind of kingship in Japan, at the
expense of the Mikado, who, though he had to
be handled according to certain fixed rules,
was a mere pawn in their game. But Michitaka’s
brother, Michinaga, still a young man and
with far more gift for politics than his nephew
Korechika, was determined to shift the succes-
sion to his own branch of the family. For this
purpose it was necessary to get up some kind
of popular agitation against Korechika, and if
possible to discredit his sister, the Empress
Sadako, and replace her by a child of Michi-
naga’s own. Just as Genji,! in a rather similar
situation, gave a handle to his enemies by his
impudent escapade with Oborozuki, so the
Empress’s brother Korechika lost no time in
providing the opposing faction with a magnifi-
cent lever for his overthrow.

t See The Sacred Tree, p. 89.


49 D


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


We are now in the fourth month of 995. To
understand how Korechika gave the desired
opportunity to his enemies it is necessary to go
back some years. In 984 the Emperor Kwazan
had ascended the Throne at the age of sixteen.
Almost immediately Kane-iye, the then Prime
Minister, decided that the new Emperor was
inconveniently old. He wanted to make an
Empress of his grand-daughter, Sadako, a child
of about ten. She could enter the Palace in a
couple of years, but it would be a long time
before she could be formally established as
Empress. Meanwhile the Emperor would have
grown to years of unmanageable discretion. A
plot was hatched to replace Kwazan by his
younger cousin, the subsequent Emperor
Ichij6.: The problem was how to induce
Kwazan to retire. The opportunity came when
in 986 one of the Emperor’s Court ladies, a
certain Fujiwara no Tsuneko,? died suddenly.
Kwazan was much affected, and obviously in a
state of mind upon which it would be easy to
work. Kane-iye’s son Michikane went to the


t Thena child of four. His mother was Kane-iye’s daughter.
2 Second daughter of Kane-iye’s brother, Tamemitsu.


5°


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


“£1038 dy OVUT aUTOD JOU seop OY (UMOUYTN aueU) raXSTS Joppa Ue se a19y [,


(NVZVALST (vaIHOaYON — (SunoX parp


Aq paiinos) Aq pajanoo) $ ouIqnouUOoD (19407
Ia}sIg IO}SI¢ S$ ,UeZ@M YI) (,ureydeg ay 7) $s uoseuoYys)
wnoy ayy | pay oy, OMANAS T AGONINIST QGONVaV T, AGONTYVN


| | | | |
ee ee ee


(eXt-ouey Jo roy03q)


ASLINANYV [,
(ssordurq (ssorduy
Ss TyeseinyAy) S,UoseUgYs 199)
ony 946 ur0q ‘OxvayS
ssordurgy ay], ssordug oy 7 VHIHOTUOY
i |
VOVNIHOI[L AINVUIHOIPAT VAVLIHOIPAL


veces tb te geen Noe, nek


GAI-aNVY


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


Palace and after a great harangue on the tran-
sience of all human things, announced that he
was about to enter the priesthood, and called
upon Kwazan to resign the vanities of kingship
and follow him to the cloister. Kwazan agreed,
but saw no necessity for the moment to make
any formal gesture of abdication. Fearing that
he would change his mind, Michikane packed
up the regalia and with his own hand deposited
them in the Heir Apparent’s quarters.
Michikane then led the Emperor to a
monastery on the outskirts of the Capital, and
stood by while he received the tonsure. When
it came to his own turn he said he must first go
back to the City and obtain his father’s consent.
Kwazan saw that he had been the victim of
a plot and burst into tears. The step which he
had taken was irrevocable; it only remained to
make the best of it. Officially he was a monk in
the Flower Mountain Temple; but it began to
be rumoured that under another guise he was
to be seen nightly in Kyéto. Kwazan abdicated
in 986. In 9957 it was said that he was secretly


% The year of the cuckoo-expedition that Shdnagon has
just described.


$2


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


frequenting the palace of the late High Falconer
Tamemitsu—the very house from which ‘the
Captain’ (Fujiwara no Kiminobu) had come
running down the highway in pursuit of
Sh6nagon’s carriage.

In the first month of 996, less than a year
after his father’s death, Korechika gave his
enemies the opportunity for which they had
been waiting.t He had for some while been in
love with one of Kiminobu’s sisters. He got it
into his head that the ex-Emperor Kwazan was
cutting him out. He stationed himself, along
with his brother Taka-iye, outside Kiminobu’s
palace, and when a muffled figure crept out in
the darkness, shot at it with his bow. Kwazan
was wounded in the leg, but managed to crawl
back to his monastery. The story leaked out,
and both brothers were accused of sacrilege
against the Church and the Imperial Family.
It was no very reputable specimen either of
royalty or priesthood who had been thus
assaulted; but popular feeling, as regards the
sanctity both of the Throne and the Church,
was at that time passionate, and amid universal


1 See above, p. 49.
53


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


reprobation Korechika was banished to Kyishi,
his brother to Izumo. The Empress Sadako
seems to have shared to some extent in her
brothers’ disgrace. In the third month of 996
she left the Court and moved into her own
house, the ‘Small Palace in the Second Ward.’
‘There was, however, an adequate reason for this
removal. She was going to have a baby, and
pregnant women were not allowed to remain in
the Palace.

Only when all these commotions were over
did Korechika discover that Kwazan’s visits to
the First Ward had been paid not, as rumour
(which commonly makes light of such details)
had informed him, to the Third Sister but to
the Fourth, a lady in whom Korechika took no
interest whatever.

The banishment of the young lords and the
retirement from the Palace of the Empress
Sadako were events which would in any case
have moved Sei Shonagon very deeply. It so
happened, however, that she herself became
unexpectedly involved. She had for years past
carried on a desultory love-affair with Kimi-
nobu’s brother, Tadanobu. He was naturally


54


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


furious at the scandal of his sister’s connexion
with the ex-Emperor becoming known, and
openly sided with Korechika’s prosecutors. It
is likely enough that on some occasion, at a
time when everyone’s nerves were on edge,
Shonagon flared up on behalf of her lover.

In any case, she was regarded as being ‘on
the other side,’ and after the Empress’s move
to the Second Ward, was allowed to remain
in miserable suspense at her brother’s house.

This went on for about four months. But in
the autumn of 996 a certain captain of the
Bodyguard of the Left told Shonagon that he
had been talking with some of the Empress’s
women, and had gathered from their conversa-
tion that her Majesty would welcome Shona-
gon’s return. ‘At any rate go and have a look,’
said the captain. “The peonies in front of the
terrace give the place an amusingly Chinese air.
I am sure you would be delighted by it.’ ‘No,’
she said, ‘I don’t like people thinking such
things of me as they have thought.’

Shénagon, however, relented, and soon after-
wards we find her in the Small Palace. As I
came from my room, she writes, I passed a


55


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


group of ladies who were whispering together.
I caught something about ‘being in with
Michinaga’s party’; but when they saw me
coming, they stopped talking, and edged away
from me in so hostile a manner that I made up
my mind I would not enter the Presence. This
went on for several weeks, and though I was
constantly asked to return, I would not do so;
for I was sure that those about the Empress
were all the while telling her I was on the other
side, and every sort of other lie. For a long while
her Majesty seemed completely to have
forgotten me.

At last, Shénagon tells us, a messenger
arrived with a letter from the Small Palace. On
opening it she found a single petal of the moun-
tain-azalea, wrapped up in a sheet of paper.
On the paper nothing was written, but on the
petal were the words: ‘My love, long silent... .”1

Then to Shdnagon in her excitement the

1 Tn allusion to the poem: ‘Like a river that has dived into
the earth, but is flowing all the while; so my heart, long
silent, leaps up replenished in its love.’

Moreover, the azalea signifies silence because it is of the


shade of yellow known as kuchinashi and kuchi nashi means
‘mouthless,’ ‘dumb.’


56


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


strangest thing happened. When she sat down
to write her reply she could not remember the
first words of the poem to which she knew the
Empress was alluding. Not to make some
reference to these words would place her under
a suspicion hardly less grave than that from
which she seemed just to be emerging. To side
with Michinaga was indiscreet; but to mis-
understand a literary allusion was disgraceful.
Fortunately a small boy who happened to be in
the room heard Sh6nagon fumbling for the
elusive words and piped out: “Like a river that
Basdiweda.r. .’

When I arrived, continues Shonagon, de-
scribing her meeting with the Empress, I felt
very nervous. ... Her Majesty pretended not
to know me and asked whether I was a new
lady-in-waiting. Then turning to me she said:
‘It was a bad poem that I made use of. But for
a long time I had been feeling that something
of the kind must be said. I am wretched all the
time, when you are not here.’ | could see at
once that everything was right again. Presently
I confessed that I had been in difficulties about
_the beginning of the poem, till a little boy told


57


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


me how it went. She was very much amused.
‘That is just what happens,’ she said. ‘It is
always those old tags that slip one’s memory.
One grows careless about them... .’ |

The banishment of the Empress’s brothers
was not a very serious affair. Korechika paid a
secret visit to the Capital in the late autumn of
996, and in the spring of 997 both brothers
were officially recalled, in consequence of the
general amnesty which celebrated the birth of
the Empress Sadako’s child.

In the summer of that year Sadako and her
ladies returned to the Emperor’s Palace, bring-
ing with them the little princess Osako.

The following extract dates from 998:


While the western side-room was being got
ready for the Continual Service, there were, of
course, a lot of priests about, hanging up
Buddhas and so on. Two days after this we
heard a strange voice out on the veranda
saying: “There’ll be some scraps left from the
offerings, I suppose,’ and one of the priests
replied that it was too early yet to say. We
wondered who it could be, and looking out saw


58


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


an old nun, wearing an extraordinarily grimy
pair of hunting-trousers, very narrow and short,
and something in the nature of a cloak, that
hardly came more than five inches below her
belt and was as dirty as the trousers—the sort
of garment, indeed, that is put on to a perform-
ing monkey. ‘What is she saying?’ I asked, and
the old woman herself in a strange, affected
voice croaked that she was a disciple of Buddha.
‘I am only asking for the Lord Buddha’s
leavings,’ she said. ‘But these monks are stingy
and won’t give me any.’ Her voice was refined
and her speech that of someone who had moved
in good society. I could not help feeling very
sorry that a gentlewoman should have sunk to
so miserable a plight. I said I supposed she
never ate anything but Buddha’s holy leavings,
and said it was an edifying diet. She saw that I
was laughing at her and cried out at once: ‘Not
eat anything else! I don’t eat scraps from the
altar, I can tell you, when I can get anything
better!’ We then put some fruit and some
broad-cakes into a basket and sent them out to
her. When she was feeling thoroughly com-
forted inside, she became very talkative. The


59


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


young girls teased her with questions, asking
whether she had a lover, and where her house
was. Her replies were very lively, not to say
scurrilous. Someone asked her whether she
could sing and dance, which set her off on a
long ballad about ‘With whom shall I sleep
to-night? With the sheriff of Hitachi will I
sleep; for his skin is the best to touch.’ There
was a great deal more of it. This was followed
by ‘Many as the red leaves on the peak of
Mount Otoko are the tongues that whisper my
shame.’ While she was singing, she rolled her
head from side to side in the most extraordinary
manner. We were now all getting rather tired of
her....Some said we ought to give her a
present before we drove her away. The Empress
heard this. ‘I can’t think what possessed you to
let her make such a painful exhibition of her-
self,’ her Majesty exclaimed. ‘Her singing
was really more than I could endure. I was
obliged to stop up my ears. Here, take this
cloak and send her off with it as quickly as
you can.’

‘Her Majesty sends you this cloak,’ we told
her. ‘Your own is rather soiled; it would be nice


60


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


if you were to put on something fresh.’ We
tossed it to her, and she received it with a pro-
found bow; then threw it across her shoulders
and executed a sort of dance. But we could
not stand her a moment longer, and went
indoors.

After this she got into the habit of coming,
and was always trying in one way or another to
call attention to herself. We used to call her
‘the sheriff of Hitachi.’ She still wore the same
filthy cloak, and we wondered how she had
disposed of the one we gave her. She had,
indeed, long ceased to amuse us when one day
Ukon, the Emperor’s waiting-woman, came
over to her Majesty’s apartments and the
Empress began telling her that we had taken
up with this extraordinary old creature, who
was always coming to the Palace. Then she
made Kohydye do her imitation of ‘the sheriff
of Hitachi.’ ‘Do show her to me one day,’ cried
Ukon; ‘I long to see her. Don’t think I shall
run off with her. I quite realize that she is your
perquisite.’

However, soon after this another nun,
crippled but very well-behaved and respectable,


61


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


called us out on to the veranda and begged for
assistance. She seemed so ashamed of having to
beg, that we were sorry for her. When we gave
her some clothes, she did indeed prostrate her-
self profoundly, but in how different a manner
from the other! Just as she was going off, with
tears of gratitude in her eyes, ‘Hitachi’ turned
up. She saw her, and was so jealous that she did
not come near us again for ever so long after-
wards.


A great friend of Sei Shénagon’s was Fuji-
wara no Yukinari, a first cousin of her chief
lover, Tadanobu.


One day! when my lord Yukinari came to
see us, he stayed for an immense while talking
to someone outside. ‘Who was it?’ I asked,
when he at last appeared. “Ben no Naishi’ (one
of the Empress’s gentlewomen), he replied.
“What can you have found to talk about with
her, that took so long?’ I asked, very much
surprised. ‘If the Clerk of the Grand Secre-


? g98, third month. Yukinari was then twenty-six. He
died at the age of fifty-five, in 1027. Often called Kozei.


62


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


tariat ! had come along, you would soon have
found yourself left in the lurch.’ ‘Now who, I
should like to know, has told you about that
business,’ he said, laughing. ‘As a matter of
fact, that was what she was talking to me of
just now. She was trying to persuade me not to
tell anyone about it.’

Yukinari has no particular talents,* or indeed
any characteristic likely to recommend him on
a superficial acquaintance, and everyone else is
content to take him as he seems. But I have had
opportunities of seeing the deeper parts of his
nature, and I know that he is far from being so
ordinary as he appears. I have often said so to
the Empress; and as a matter of fact, she
knows it quite well herself. ... But the young
girls are always abusing him and openly repeat-
ing the most disagreeable stories about him.
“What a wretched sight he is!’ they say. ‘And
why can’t he recite the Scriptures and make


t This gentleman was evidently carrying on an affair with
Ben no Naishi. ‘There was a Clerk of the Left and a Clerk of
the Right. The person referred to is either Minamoto no
Yoriyoshi or Fujiwara no 'Tadasuke.

2 A few years later Yukinari became known as the greatest
calligrapher of his time.


63


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


poems like other prople? He is really very
tiresome.’

The truth is, these ladies do not interest
him and he never addresses a word to them. He
always says: ‘I wouldn’t mind if a woman’s eyes
stood upright in her head, nor if her eyebrows
spread all over her forehead and her nose were
crooked, provided she had a good mouth and a
fine chin and neck. A bad voice I couldn’t, of
course, stand.’ “But come to think of it,’ he
would add, ‘faces are rather important. It és
unpleasant when people are ugly.’ This has
added to the number of his enemies all ladies
who believe themselves to have narrow chins or
mouths that are lacking in charm, and it is they
who have tried to prejudice her Majesty against
him.

As it was I whom he first employed to carry
messages to the Empress, he seems unable to
communicate with her in any other way. If I
am in my room he sends for me to the front of
the house, or else comes right into our quarters.
When I am not at the Palace but in my home,
he follows me there and even if he has written
a note! he brings it in himself, saying that if

™ For the Empress.


64


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


anything prevents my going back to Court
immediately, he will be obliged if I will send a
messenger to her Majesty ‘with instructions to
report what he is now about to tell me,’ and so
forth. It is useless for me to point out that there
are plenty of people in the Palace who would
gladly give a message. He rejects one after
another. Once, with the best intentions, I sug-
gested that it is often a good thing to act
according to circumstances, instead of making
for oneself these hard-and-fast rules. But he
said it came natural to him to live according
to rule, and ‘one can’t change one’s nature.’
‘Don’t stand on ceremony,’ I answered. He did
not see the allusion,! and laughing in a puzzled
way, he said, ‘I am afraid there has been a good
deal of talk lately about our being so friendly.
Well, suppose we are! I don’t see anything to
be ashamed of. I think, by this time, you might
uncover your face, and so on.’ ‘I daren’t,’ I
answered. ‘I have heard how particular you are
about the shape of people’s chins, and mine 1s
very ugly.’ ‘Is it really?’ he asked seriously; ‘I

1 To the Analects of Confucius: ‘If you are wrong, don’t


stand on ceremony with yourself, but change! Yukinari
_ thinks that Shonagon is inviting him to take liberties with her.


65 E


THE, PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


had no idea of that. Perhaps after all you had
better not let me see you.’ After this I always
covered my face on any occasion when he could
possibly have seen me; but I noticed that he
never looked my way, and it seemed clear that
he had taken what I said about my own ugliness
quite seriously.

One morning Shikibu no Omoto [one of the
Empress’s ladies] and I lay in the side-room
(where we had slept that night) till the sun was
well up. Suddenly we heard someone sliding
back the door that leads into the main build-
ing, and there before us stood the Emperor
and Empress! We were so much surprised that
we simply lay helpless, while their Majesties
stood by, laughing immoderately at our con-
fusion. Presently they came across and stood
half hidden behind the pile of rugs and cloaks
(for we had buried ourselves head and all under
our bedding), to watch the people going to and
fro between the Palace and the guard-room.
Several courtiers (not, of course, having the
least idea who was inside the room) came to the
window and saluted us. ‘The Emperor was much
amused and begged me not to give him away.


66


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


When their Majesties went back to the main
building, the Empress said, ‘Come along, both
of you,’ intending us to go on duty that minute.
‘Do at least give us time to make up our faces!’
I answered, and we stayed where we were.
Later on, when Shikibu and I were still talking
about their Majesties’ visit, we became con-
scious of something swarthy which had sud-
denly loomed up close to the front door of our
room, and was visible through a chink in our
curtains, where one flap had got caught up
upon the framework. We thought it was only
Noritaka,! but on looking more closely we saw
that the face was not the least like his.

With a good deal of laughing and scuffling,
we began pulling the curtain back into its
place; but before we had finished doing so, we
realized that it was Yukinari who had been
looking at us. This was very annoying, for I
had made a point of his never seeing me.
Shikibu was sitting with her back to him, so
she came out of it all right. Stepping forward, he
now said: ‘This time I have really managed to

t Brother-in-law of Murasaki, authoress of The Tale of
Genji.

67


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


see you completely.’ ‘We thought it was only
Noritaka,’! I explained, ‘and were careless. I
must say that, for a person who is supposed to
take no interest in women, you stared pretty
hard.’ ‘Someone,’ he answered, ‘told me
recently that there is a particular charm in
women’s faces just at the moment they wake
from sleep; so I came along here this morning
hoping to get a chance of peeping into one of
the bedrooms. I was already watching you
when their Majesties were here, but you did
not notice me.’ Presently he raised the curtains?
and made as though to join us.


[The section which follows dates from 999,
second month. |


When I was away from the Palace on holidays
there were several Court gentlemen who used
to come and visit us. This seemed to agitate the
people of the house. I was, however, not at all
sorry to see it put a stop to, for I had no very

1 Presumably Noritaka was closely related to Shénagon’s
companion.


2 The ladies were dressing in an alcove curtained off from
the rest of the room.


68


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


strong feeling about any of these visitors. But
it was difficult without rudeness to be invariably
‘not at home’ to people who were calling re-
peatedly at all hours of the night and day; all
the more so because, precisely with those whose
visits Were causing most scandal, my acquain-
tance was in reality very slight.

So this time I made up my mind not to let
my whereabouts be generally known, but only
to tell sunefusa,! Narimasa,? and a few others.

To-day Norimitsu came, and told me in the
course of conversation that yesterday my lord
‘Tadanobu had tried to find out from him where
I was, saying that as I was Norimitsu’s ‘sister’ 3
he must surely know my address. ‘He was very


1 Minamoto no ‘I'sunefusa, 969-1023.

2 Minamoto no Narimasa. This gentleman, together with
‘Tsunefusa and ‘Tadanobu, reappears in Murasaki’s Diary.
‘The three make music together at the time of the Empress
Akiko’s confinement (a.p. 1008); ‘but not a regular concert,
for fear of disturbing the Prime Minister.’

3 In early Japanese poetry ‘sister’ means beloved. But at
this period it indicated a platonic relationship and is often
contrasted with words implying greater intimacy. Tachibana
no Norimitsu was famous for his courage; he once coped
single-handed with a band of robbers that had entered
‘Tadanobu’s house.


69


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


insistent,’ Norimitsu said to me, ‘but I was
determined not to give you away. He refused to
believe that I didn’t know, and went on pressing
me in a way that really made me feel very un-
comfortable. Moreover, Tsunefusa was sitting
near by, looking perfectly innocent and uncon-
cerned, and I was certain that if I caught his
eye I should inevitably burst out laughing. In
the end I was obliged to choke my laughter by
seizing upon an odd sort of cloth that was lying
on the table and stuffing it into my mouth.
Everyone must have thought me very greedy,
and wondered what new delicacy I had found
to devour between meals. But I managed all the
same to avoid telling him anything. If I had
laughed, it would of course have been fatal. In
the end, he really thought I did not know. It
was splendid... .!’ I begged him to go on as
he had begun, and for days afterwards heard
no more about it.

But very late one night there was a tre-
mendous banging on the front gate, enough to
have woken a houseful of people at twice the
distance. I sent someone to see what was the
matter, and was told it was an Imperial Guards-


7°


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


man ‘with a letter from the Major of the Body-
guard of the Left,’ that is to say, from Nori-
mitsu. Everyone in the house was in bed, so I
took the letter close to the hall-lamp, and read:
“To-morrow is the last day of the Spring Read-
ing in the Palace. If Tadanobu is there keeping
the penance-day with their Majesties, he may
easily ask me where you are, and if (in front of
everyone) he insists upon my telling him, I
certainly shall not be able to keep up the pre-
tence that I do not know. May I tell him you
are here? I certainly won’t unless I have your
permission to do so.’

I wrote no answer, but sent him a minute
piece of cloth,! wrapped up in paper.

Next time he called, Norimitsu said: ‘He got
me into a corner and went on at me about it
all night. It is really very disagreeable to be
pestered like that, and as you did not answer
the letter in which I asked for your instruc-
tions.... But, by the way, I did receive a
wrapper containing a piece of rag. No doubt in
a moment of absent-mindedness. .. .’


1 Meaning ‘If you are tempted to speak, stuff cloth in
your mouth as you did last time.’


As


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


As if one could conceivably do such a thing
by accident! He still could not in the least
understand what I had meant, and evidently
thought I had merely sent him a very mean and
useless present. Irritated by his stupidity, I
made no reply, but seizing the inkstand wrote
on a scrap of paper the poem: ‘If from the
fishing-girl who dives beneath the waves the
present of a rag you have received, surely she
hints that to the world you should not tell in
what sea-bed she hides.’ *

‘So Madam has started writing poems, has
she?’ he exclaimed. ‘I, for one, shall not read
them,’ and scrunching up the piece of paper,
he marched off.

So it came about that Norimitsu and I, who
had always been such good friends and allies,
were for a while rather cool towards each other.
Soon, however, he wrote to me saying: ‘I may
have been to blame; but even if you don’t wish
to see me, I hope you do not regard our old
alliance as altogether a thing of the past. That,


t An acrostic. There is a series of ingenious puns; for
example, me-kuwase = ‘to hint with a wink,’ but also ‘to
cause to eat rag.’


72


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


after all, would mean the breaking of a good
many promises. .. .’

It was a favourite saying of his that people
never sent him poems so long as they liked
him, ‘It’s a sure sign that they have turned
against one,’ he used to say. ‘When you have
made up your mind that you can bear me no
longer, just send me one of those, and I shall
know what to make of it.’


Despite this warning, Shonagon sent him
another acrostic poem. ‘I don’t suppose he ever
read it,’ she continues, “and in any case he
never answered. Soon afterwards he was pro-
moted to the Fifth Rank and became Lieu-
tenant-Governor of T6t6émi; since when our
friendship has come completely to an end... .”


The following dates from about the same
time:


A Court lady, when she is on holiday, needs
to have both her parents alive.t She will get on
best in a house where people are always going
in and out, where there is a great deal of con-


1 Shdnagon’s father died before she went to Court.


73


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


versation always going on in the back rooms,
and where at the gate there is a continual clatter
of horsemen. Indeed, she would far rather have
too much noise than too little.

It is very annoying if one is living in.some-
one else’s house and a friend comes from Court,
either openly or in secret, just to ask how long
one will be away or to apologize for not having
written (‘I did not even know you were on
holiday . . .”)—it is, as I say, extremely annoy-
ing, particularly if he is a lover, to have the
owner of the house coming and making a
scene (‘very dangerous... at this time of night
too,’ and more in the same style) merely because
one has opened the front door for a moment, to
let the visitor in. Then later on: ‘Is the big gate
locked?’ To which the porter grunts in an
injured tone: “There’s someone here still. Am
I to lock him in?’ ‘Well, lock up directly he
goes,’ says the landlord. ‘There have been a lot
of burglaries round here lately.’ All of which is
not very pleasant to overhear.

After this the master of the house is con-
tinually poking out his head to see whether the
visitor is still there, to the great amusement of


74


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


the footmen whom the guest has brought with
him. Most alarming of all is to hear these foot-
men doing an imitation of the landlord’s voice.
What a row there will be if he hears them!

It may happen that someone, who neither
appears to be nor indeed is in any way a lover,
finds it more convenient to come at night. In
that case he will not feel inclined to put up with
the churlishness of the family, and saying:
“Well, it zs rather late; and as it seems to be
such a business for you to open the gate...’
he will take his departure.

But if it is someone of whom the lady is
really fond, and after she has told him again
and again that she dare not receive him, he
nevertheless goes on waiting outside her room
till dawn; at which point the porter, who has
during his nightly rounds continually lingered
regretfully by the gate, exclaims in a tone
intended to be heard: “The morning’s come’
(as though such a thing had never happened
before!) ‘and that front gate has been :


t 'The adverb he uses (raisd to), evidently a very emphatic
one, was a slang expression of the time, the exact meaning of
which is uncertain.


aS


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


open all night,’ whereupon in broad daylight,
when there is no longer any point in doing so,
he locks the gate—all that sort of thing is very
trying.

As I have said, with real parents of one’s own,
it would be all right. But step-parents can be
a nuisance. One is always wondering how they
will take things; and even a brother’s house can
be very tiresome in this way.

Of course, what I really like is a house where
there is no fuss about the front gate, and no one
particularly minds whether it is midnight or
morning. Then one can go out! and talk to
whoever it may be—perhaps one of the princes,
or of the lords attached to his Majesty’s service
—sit all through a winter’s night with the
shutters open, and after the guest has gone,
watch him make his way into the distance. If
he leaves just at daybreak, this is very agreeable,
particularly if he plays upon his flute as he goes.
Then, when he is out of sight, one does not
hurry to go to bed, but discusses the visitor
with someone, reviews the poems he made, and


so gradually falls to sleep.
1 Out to the front of the house.
76


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


‘I saw someone, who had no business here,
in the corridor early this morning. There was a
servant holding an umbrella over him. He was
just going away... .’ So I heard one of the girls
say, and suddenly realized that it was to a
visitor of mine that she was referring!

However, I really didn’t know why she
should describe him as ‘having no business
here.’ As a matter of fact, he is only a chige,t a
person of quite comfortable eminence, whom I
have every right to know, if I choose.

Presently a letter came from the Empress,
with a message that I was to reply instantly.
Opening it in great agitation, I saw a drawing
of a huge umbrella; the person holding it was
entirely hidden, save for the fingers of one
hand. Underneath was written the quotation:
‘Since the morning when dawn broke behind
the fringe of the Mikasa? Hills... .’

The whole affair was a trivial one, but her
Majesty might easily have been cross about it,
and when the letter came I was actually hoping
that no one would mention the matter to her.


1 A courtier not admitted on to the Imperial dais.
2 Mikasa means “Three Umbrellas.’


fe


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


And now, instead of a scolding, came only this
joke, which, though it humiliated me, was realyy
very amusing. I took another piece of paper
and drawing upon it the picture of a heavy rain-
storm, I wrote underneath: ‘It is a case of much
cry and no rain.’ |


MasaHIRO

Everyone laughs at Masahiro.’ It must really
be very painful for his parents and friends. If
he is seen anywhere with at all a decent-looking
servant in attendance upon him, someone is
sure to send for the fellow and ask him whether
he can be in his senses, to wait upon such a
master. Everything at his house is extremely
well done and he chooses his clothes with
unusually good taste; but the only result is to
make people say: ‘How nice those things would
look on anyone else!’

It is true that he does sometimes talk in the
most peculiar way. For example, he was sending
home some things he had been using when on duty
at the Palace and he called for swo messengers.
One came, saying that there was not more there
than one man could easily carry. ‘You idiot,’ said


t A member of the Minamoto clan; afterwards Governor
of Awa.


78


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


Masahiro, ‘I asked for two messengers because
there is someone else’s things here as well as
my own. You can’t ask one man to carry two
men’s stuff, any more than you can put two
pints into a one-pint pot.’ What he meant no
one knew; but there was loud laughter.

Once someone brought him a letter, asking
for an immediate reply. ‘What a moment to
choose!’ Masahiro cried. ‘I can hear beans
crackling on the stove. And why is there never
either ink or brushes in this house? Someone
must steal them. If it were something to eat or
drink that got stolen, I could understand....’

When the Emperor’s mother, Princess Sen-
shi, was ill, Masahiro was sent from the Palace
to inquire after her. When he came back, we
asked him what gentleman had been in waiting
upon the Princess. ‘So-and-so and so-and-so,’
he said, mentioning four or five names. ‘No one
else?’ we said. ‘Oh yes,’ answered Masahiro,
‘there were others there, only they had gone
away.’

Once when I happened to be alone he came
up to me and said: ‘My dear lady, I have some-
thing I must tell you about at once.’ ‘Well,


19


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


what is it?’ I asked. ‘Something,’ he said, ‘that
I have just heard one of the gentlemen say.’
And coming quite close to my curtain: ‘I over-
heard someone who instead of saying “Bring
your body up closer to mine,” said “Bring your
five limbs!...’ and he went off into fits of
laughter.

Once on the second of the three Appoint-
ment nights ? it fell to Masahiro to go round
oiling the lamps. He rested his foot on the
pedestal of a lamp-stand, and as it happened to
have been recently covered with yutan 3 and was
not yet dry, it stuck to him, and as soon as he
started to move away the lamp-stand toppled
over. So fast was the framework stuck to his
stockinged foot, that the lamp banged along
after him as he walked, causing a regular
earthquake at each step.

The Palace roll-call4 has a special charm.
Those who are actually waiting upon his
Majesty do not have to attend it, but are


1 For ‘five limbs’ the speaker uses a pedantic Chinese
expression, corresponding to a Latinism in English.

2 When the New Year appointments were announced.

3 Cloth soaked in sticky oil.

4 As opposed to the barrack roll-calls.


80


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


checked off on the spot by officers who come
from seat to seat. But the rest all come clatter-
ing out into the courtyard, pell-mell. In our
quarters, if one goes to that side and listens
hard, one can actually hear the names, which
must have caused a flutter in many a susceptible
breast... . Some by their manner of answering
win great approval, while on others very severe
judgments are passed. When it 1s all over, the
watchmen twang their bows, and there is
another great clatter of shoes, among which
is discernible the even heavier tread of the
Chamberlain who is advancing to take up his
position at the north-east corner of the balcony,
where he kneels in the attitude called the High
Obeisance, facing the Emperor’s seat, while
with his back to the watchmen he asks them
who was there....Sometimes, if for one
reason or another a good many courtiers are
absent, no roll-call is held, and when the head-
watchman reports this, the Chamberlain gener-
ally asks him to explain the reason why there


1 The ladies-in-waiting’s quarters in the Empress’s apart-
ments, as opposed to their rooms in the less prominent parts
of the Palace.


81 F


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


was no roll-call, and then retires. But when
Masahiro is on duty he does not listen to what
he is told, and if the young lords try to teach
him his duties, flies into a temper, lectures them
on the impropriety of omitting a roll-call, and is
laughed at for his pains not only by these
lords, but by the very watchmen whom he is
rebuking.

On one occasion Masahiro left his shoes on
the sideboard in the Royal pantry. Everyone
who passed broke into exclamations of disgust
and called upon the owner of the filthy things
to take them away at once. It was very awkward,
for though no one dared mention Masahiro’s
name, everyone knew they were his. ‘Who do
these things belong to? I haven’t the least idea,’
said the Chief Steward or someone of that kind.
Suddenly Masahiro appeared, saying: “Those
dirty things are mine!’ The fact that he had the
face to come for them in person caused a fresh
sensation.

Once when neither of the chamberlains was
on duty and there was no one near the High
Table, Masahiro took a dish of beans that was
lying there and hiding behind the small par-


82


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


tition, began stealthily devouring them. Pre-
sently some courtiers came along and pulled
away the partition. . .

I have a great objection to gentlemen coming
to the rooms of us ladies-in-waiting and eating
there. Some gentlewomen have a tiresome habit
of giving them food. Of course, if he is teased
long enough and told that nothing can happen
till he has eaten, a man will in the end give way.
He cannot very well express disgust at what he
is offered, cover up his mouth, or turn his head
the other way. But for my part, even if they
come very late and very drunk, I| absolutely
refuse to give them even so much as a bowl of
rice. If they think this is mean, and don’t come
again—well then, let them not come!

Of course, if one is at home and food is sent
from the back room, one cannot interfere. But
it is just as unpleasant.


Elsewhere Shonagon says:
The things that workmen eat are most extra-
t A movable partition which concealed the washing-place.


On the inside was painted a cat; on the outside, sparrows and
bamboos.


83


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


ordinary. When the roof of the eastern wing
was being mended, there were a whole lot of
workmen sitting in a row and having dinner. I
went across to that side of the house and
watched. The moment the things were handed
to them, they gulped down the gravy, and then,
putting their bowls aside, ate up all the vege-
tables. I began to think that they were going to
leave their rice, when suddenly they fell upon it
and in a twinkling it had all disappeared. There
were several of them sitting there together and
they all ate in the same way; so I suppose it is a
habit of builders. I can’t say I think that it is a
very attractive one.


Another of Sh6nagon’s butts was Fujiwara no
Nobutsune, Assistant in the Board of Rites.


‘I am very ready at making Chinese poems or
Japanese,’ he said to her one day,! ‘you need
only give me a subject....’ “That is easily
done,’ I said. ‘It shall be a Japanese poem.’
‘Good,’ he cried. “But you had better give me a
whole lot, while you are about it. Oze would

™ Summer, 998 (?).


84


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


hardly be worth while.’ But when I gave him
the subject, he suddenly lost his nerve and said
he must be going. Someone told us it was his
handwriting that he was uneasy about. ‘He
writes an atrocious hand in Chinese and Japan-
ese,’ this lady said, ‘and he has been laughed at
about it so much that he is apt to take fright.’

In the days' when he had an appointment
in the Board of Household Works, he sent a
plan to some craftsman or other with ‘This is
the way I want it done’ written underneath in
Chinese characters of a sort one would never
have supposed anyone in the world could per-
petrate. The document was such a monstrosity
that I seized it and wrote in the margin ‘I should
not do it quite in this way, or you will indeed
produce a queer object.’ The document then
went to the Imperial apartments, where it was
passed from hand to hand, causing a good deal
of amusement.

Nobutsune was very angry about this.


Awnnoyine THINGS
When one sends a poem or a kayeshi (‘return-
1 In 996.
85


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


poem’) to someone and, after it has gone, thinks
of some small alteration—perhaps only a couple
of letters—that would have improved it.

When one is doing a piece of needlework in
a hurry, and thinking it is finished unthreads
the needle, only to discover that the knot at the
beginning has slipped and the whole thing
come undone. It is also very annoying to find
that one has sewn back to front.

Once when her Majesty was staying at my
Lord the Prime Minister’s house,! and she was
with him in the western wing, to which he had
retired in order to make room for her, we
gentlewomen found ourselves herded together
in the central building with very little to occupy
us. We were romping and idling in the corri-
dors, when someone came from the Empress,
saying: “This dress is wanted in a hurry. Please
get together and do it immediately. Her
Majesty wants it back within the hour.’ 2
What we were to make up was a piece of plain,


t The Minami no In, the palace of Michitaka, the Em-
press’s father. This episode must have taken place in the
twelfth month of 992.

2 I.e. two hours, the Japanese hour being twice ours.


86


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


undamasked silk.t We all collected along the
front of the main hall, the work was given out
piecemeal, and there was a wild race to see who
could get her bit finished first. It was a madden-
ing business, for one was not near enough to
some of the others to see what they were
doing.

Nurse Mysbu got hers done in no time, and
laid it down in front of her. She had been told
to sew the shoulders of the bodice, but had care-
lessly put the stuff inside out and without
finishing off the work in any way had just
slammed it down and gone off to amuse herself.
When we came to put the dress together, the
back seams did not fit properly, and it was clear
there had been some mistake. There was a
great deal of laughing and scolding. It was
clearly Mysdbu’s fault and everyone said she
must do her seam over again.

‘I should first like to know who has sewn
anything wrong,’ she burst out. ‘If anyone had
sewn a piece of damask inside out, so that the
pattern was wrong, of course she would have
to do it again. But with plain silk, what differ-


t Reading Airaginu.


87


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


ence can it make? If anyone has got to do it all
over again, I should think it had better be one
of the girls who did not do her share the first
time.’ ‘How can anyone have the face to suggest
such a thing?’ the others cried. But Myobu
could not be prevailed upon, and in the end
Gen Shdnagon and some others were obliged to
unpick the stitches and put the thing right. It
was amusing to watch the expression on their
faces while they did so.

This all happened because her Majesty was
to wait upon the Emperor at dusk and wanted
the dress to be ready in time. ‘I shall know that
the one who gets her work done quickest really
loves me,’ she had said.

It is particularly annoying if a letter goes
astray and gets delivered to someone to whom
one would never have dreamt of showing it. If
the messenger would simply say straight out
that he has made a mistake, one could put up
with it. But he always begins arguing and trying
to prove that he only did as he was told. It is
this that is so trying, and if there was not
always someone looking on, I am sure I should
rush at him and strike him.


88


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


To plant a nice hagit or susuki,? and then
find someone with a long-box and gardening
tools who has dug them up and is carrying them
away—is a painful and annoying experience.
The provoking part of it is that if a male even
of the humblest description were on the spot,
the wretch would never dare to do so. When
one stops him and expostulates, he pretends he
has only thinned them out a bit, and hurries
off. I really cannot tell you how annoying
It 1S.

One is staying with a provincial Governor or
some small official of that kind, and a servant
comes from some grand house. He speaks and
behaves with the utmost rudeness and an air as
much as to say ‘I know I am being rude; but
people like you can’t punish me for it, so what
do I care?’ I find that very annoying.

A man picks up a letter that one does not
want him to see and takes it with him into the
courtyard, where he stands reading it. At the
first moment one rushes after him in rage and
desperation; but at the curtains one is obliged
to stop, and while one watches him reading one


1 Lespedeza bicolor. 2 Eularia japonica.


89


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


can hardly prevent oneself from swooping down
upon him and snatching it away.

A lady is out of humour about some trifle,
and leaving her lover’s side goes and establishes
herself on another couch. He creeps over to her
and tries to bring her back, but she is still cross,
and he, feeling that this time she has really gone
too far, says: “As you please,’ and returns to the
big bed, where he ensconces himself com-
fortably and goes to sleep. It is a very cold night
and the lady, having only an unlined wrap to
cover herself with, soon begins to suffer. She
thinks of getting up; but everyone else in the
house is asleep and she does not know what to
do or where to go. If she must needs have this
quarrel, it would have been better, she thinks,
to start it a little earlier in the evening. Then
she begins to hear strange noises both in the
women’s quarters and outside. She becomes
frightened and softly creeps towards her lover,
plucks at the bedclothes, and raises them. But
he vexingly pretends to be fast asleep; or
merely says: ‘I advise you to go on sulking a
little longer.’

Small children and babies ought to be fat.


go


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


So ought provincial governors, or one suspects
them of being bad-tempered. As regards
appearance, it is most essential of all that the
boys who feed the carriage-oxen should be
presentable. If one’s other servants are not fit
to be seen, they can be stowed away behind
the carriage. But outriders or the like, who are
bound to catch the eye, make a painful impres-
sion if they are not perfectly trim. However, if it
is too obvious that one’s menservants have been
lumped together behind the carriage in order
to escape notice, this in itself looks very bad.

It is a mistake to choose slim, elegant youths
on purpose that they may look well as footmen,
and then let them wear trousers that are grimy
at the ends and hunting-cloaks or the like that
have seen too much wear. The best that can be
hoped is that people will think they are walk-
ing beside your carriage by chance and have
nothing to do with you.

But it is a great convenience that all one’s
servants should be handsome. Then if they
should happen to tear their clothes or make
themselves in any way shabby or untidy, it is
more likely to be overlooked.


gi


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


Officers of State, who have official attendants
allotted to them, sometimes spoil the effect by
allowing their page-boys to go about dirty and
ill-kempt.

Whether a gentleman is at home or. on an
official mission or staying with friends he ought
always to have round him quantities of hand-
some page-boys.

For secret meetings summer is best. It is true
that the nights are terribly short and it begins
to grow light before one has had a wink of
sleep. But it is delightful to have all the shutters
open, so that the cool air comes in and one can
see into the garden. At last comes the time of
parting, and just as the lovers are trying to
finish off all the small things that remain to be
said, they are suddenly startled by a loud noise
just outside the window. For a moment they
make certain they are betrayed; but it turns out
only to be a crow that cried as it flew past.

But it is pleasant, too, on very cold nights to
lie with one’s lover, buried under a great pile of
bed-clothes. Noises such as the tolling of a bell
sound so strange. It seems as though they came
up from the bottom of a deep pit. Strange, too,


g2


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


is the first cry of the birds, sounding so muffled
and distant that one feels sure their beaks are
still tucked under their wings. Then each fresh
note gets shriller and nearer.


Very TirESOME THINGS

When a poem of one’s own, that one has
allowed someone else to use as his, is singled
out for praise.

Someone who is going a long journey wants
introductions to people in the various places
through which he will pass, and asks you for a
letter. You write a really nice letter of recom-
mendation for him to present to one of your
friends who lives at some place through which
he will pass. But your friend is cross at being
bothered and ignores the letter. To be thus
shown up as having no influence is very
humiliating.


MIscELLANEOUS

There is nothing in the whole world so
painful as feeling that one is not liked. It always
seems to me that people who hate me must be
suffering from some strange form of lunacy.


93


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


However, it is bound to happen, whether at
Court or in one’s home, that some people like
one and some don’t; which I find very dis-
tressing. Even for a child of the servant-class
(and much more for one of good-breeding) it is
very painful, after having always been petted at
home, to find itself the object of a disapproving
stare. If the girl in question has anything to
recommend her, one thinks it quite reasonable
that she should have been made a fuss of. But
if she is without attractions of any kind, she
knows that everybody is saying, ‘Fancy anyone
making a pet of a creature like that! Really,
parents are very odd!’ Yes, at home or at Court
the one thing that matters is to be liked by
everyone, from their Majesties downward!


Shénagon elsewhere tells us that she used
often to say to the Empress: ‘I must always
come first in people’s affections. Otherwise, I
would far rather be hated or even actually mal-
treated. In fact, I would rather die than be
loved but come second or third.’


Writing is an ordinary enough thing; yet
94


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


how precious it is! When someone is in a far
corner of the world and one is terribly anxious
about him, suddenly there comes a letter, and
one feels as though the person were actually in
the room. It is really very amazing. And,
strangely enough, to put down one’s thoughts
in a letter, even if one knows that it will prob-
ably never reach its destination, is an immense
comfort. If writing did not exist, what terrible
depressions we should suffer from! And if it is
a relief to put down, once and for all, the things
that have been weighing on one’s mind, with a
vague idea that the person in question may
one day read what one has written, it is
no. exaggeration to say that the arrival of an
answer can sometimes work like a real Elixir
of Life!

The boys employed by magicians are extra-
ordinarily clever. When their master is sent for
to perform a ceremony of purification, these
boys are expected to read the invocations,! and
no one thinks anything of it. But to see them


t Which would be in Chinese, as these magicians worked
according to a method deduced from the Chinese Book of
Changes.


95


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


dash up at exactly the right moment, without a
word from their master, and sprinkle cold
water on the face of the patient, really makes
one envious. I wish I could get hold of boys like
that to wait upon me!

If one hears a servant girl say about anyone,
‘He’s an awfully nice gentleman,’ one at once
feels a slight contempt for the person in ques-
tion. One would really think better of him if
she abused him. Even a lady can lose by being
too much praised in the wrong quarters; and,
considering how much one is certain to suffer
by being decried, it seems a pity that even the
praise one gets should only do one harm!


NarINOBU


Captain Narinobu ! 1s a son of His Highness
the Reverend President of the Board of War.
He is not only very handsome, but also exceed-
ingly intelligent. How that poor daughter of
Kanesuke’s must have suffered at the time he
broke with her, and she was obliged to go off
with her father to lyo, where he had been


1 Minamoto no Narinobu (born a.p. 972) was a son of
Prince Okihira (953-1041).


96


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


appointed Governor! One imagines her being
due to start at dawn, and his coming to say
good-bye the night before. I see him wrapped
in a Court cloak, standing in the pale moon-
light of dawn, as she must then have seen him
tor the last time.

In old days he used frequently to come and
see me. He talked with considerable freedom,
never hesitating to say the most disagreeable
things about those of whom he disapproved.

There was in those days a certain gentle-
woman of her Majesty’s, rather a tiresome
person who made a great fuss about her
penances, and the like. She was known by her
surname, which was Taira or something grand
of that sort. But she had really only been
adopted by these people, and among the other
girls it was considered amusing always to refer
to her by her original name.

She was not at all good-looking—this Taira
girl—nor had she any other quality to recom-
mend her. But she seemed entirely unaware of
her defects and always pushed herself forward
when there was company at the Palace, in a
way that her Majesty particularly disliked,


97 G


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


though no one had the strength of mind to tell
hers0:).0:<

Once, when the Empress said that Shikibu
no Omoto and I were to sleep in her apart-
ments instead of going back to our own room,
we settled down for the night in the southern
ante-room. After a while there was a tremendous
banging on our door. We decided it would be a
nuisance to have anyone coming in, and pre-
tended to be asleep. But the knocking was
followed by violent shouting, and I heard her
Majesty say: ‘Go and wake her up, one of
you. She is only pretending to be asleep.’ The
‘Taira’ girl then came in and tried to wake me;
but she found that I was very fast asleep indeed,
and saying that if I would not stir she must open
the door herself, she went out and began a con-
versation with the visitor. 1 kept on thinking
she would come back, but midnight came and
still she did not appear. I was fairly certain that
the visitor was my lord Narinobu. .. .

Next morning she heard us talking in our
ante-room, and joining us, said to me: ‘I do
think that when a man comes through such
storms of rain as there were last night, you


98


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


ought to treat him better. I know that he has
been behaving very badly lately, and that you
had almost lost sight of him. But I think you
ought to forgive anyone who arrives with his
clothes as wet as that.’

I cannot follow that line of argument. It
seems to me that if a man who comes regularly
every night is not put off even by a heavy shower
of rain, that is something to his credit. But if,
after absenting himself for weeks on end, he is
fool enough to choose such weather as this for
coming back, then all I can say is I would
rather he showed more sense and less devotion.
But I suppose that is a matter of taste.

The case is this. Narinobu likes sometimes to
have dealings with a woman who has observed
and reflected sufficiently to acquire a mind of
her own. But he has many other attachments to
keep up, not to mention his main responsi-
bility, and it would be quite impossible for him
to see me often. His object in choosing so
atrocious a night for his visit was chiefly that
other people might be impressed by his devo-
tion and point out to me how much beholden I
ought to feel. However, I suppose if he did not


99


THE PILLOW BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


care for me at all, he would not think it worth
while to indulge even in such stratagems as
these.

When it is raining I fall into complete gloom,
and even if only a few hours ago the sun was
shining brightly I cannot in the least remember
what things looked like when it was fine.
Everything looks equally disagreeable, so that
it makes no difference to me whether I am in
the loveliest corner of the Palace arcades or in
the most ordinary of houses; so long as it is
raining I can think of nothing else but how long
the rain is going to last.

But if anyone comes on a night when the
moon is up and there is a clear sky, even if it is
ten days, twenty days, a month, a year, yes,
even seven or eight years since his last visit, I
can look back with pleasure on his visit; and
even if the place is not very convenient
for meeting and one must be prepared for
interruption at any moment—even if, at the
worst, nothing more happens than a few
remarks exchanged at a respectful distance—
one feels that next time, if circumstances are
favourable, one will allow him to stay the night.


TOO


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


THE STORM

Among ‘deceptive things’ Shénagon men-
tions boating excursions and tells the following
story: The sun was shining brightly; so calm
was the lake that it looked as though it was
tightly covered from corner to corner with a
sheet of light green, glossy silk. Never can day
have seemed more safe. We young girls had
thrown off our mantles and were helping at the
oars (we had brought some lads to wait upon us
and manage the boat), and singing one song
after another—really the whole excursion was
so delightful we wished a thousand times that
the Empress or some of her family were with
us—when a violent gale sprang up, the lake all
of a sudden became terribly rough, and soon
our only thought was how to get into shelter as
quickly as possible. It seemed impossible that
this lake, whose waves now hung over us as we
rowed with all our might to the shore, was the
same that a little while ago had been so sleepy
and harmless.

When one thinks of it, to be in a boat at all
is a terrible thing! It is bad enough, even in
reasonably shallow water, to trust oneself to


Ior


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


such a conveyance; but where the water may be
any depth—perhaps a thousand fathoms—to
embark upon a thing loaded up with goods and
baggage of all kinds, with only an inch or two
of wood between oneself and the water! How-
ever, the low-class people who manage the boat
do not seem to be in the least frightened, but
run up and down unconcernedly in places
where a single false step would lose them
their lives.

Even the loading of a ship, when they bang
down into the hold huge pine-trees two or three
feet in circumference, sometimes half a dozen
of them at a time, is an amazing thing. Rich
people of course go in ships with cabins, and
those who are lucky enough to be in the middle
of the ship do not get on so badly. But those who
are near the sides get very dizzy. It is extra-
ordinary how little strength there looks to be
in those things they call thongs, which keep the
oars in place. If one of those were to snap, the
oarsman would be drowned in a minute; yet
they are always quite thin.

Our cabin was a very lovely one, with
fringed curtains, double doors, and sliding


102


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


shutters. Of course, it would not have done for
it to be so heavy as the cabins on ships such as
I have been talking about; but all the same, it
was like a complete little house. What fright-
ened me most was looking at the other ships.
Those in the distance, scattered here and there
across the waters, looked like the bamboo
leaves that one sometimes makes into toy boats.
When at last we got back into the harbour it
was full of ships with lighted torches on board,
a wonderful sight. How sorry one was for the
people whom one saw toiling along in those
very small rowing-boats that they call Aashi!...
I can understand why it is that some quite
ordinary people absolutely refuse to go in boats.
It is true that travelling on land is also very
dangerous; but, whatever may happen, it is
always some comfort to have firm ground under
one’s feet.


PitGRIMAGE TO THE HasEDERA!


While they were seeing about our rooms, the
carriage (from which the oxen had been un-
yoked) was pulled up to the foot of the log


1 Temple of Kwannon, near Kydto.


103


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


stairway by which one climbs up to the temple.
Young priests, with nothing but body-belts
under their cassocks, and those clogs they call
ashida on their feet, were all the while hurrying
up and down the stairway without seeming to
take any notice where they stepped, and reciting,
as they went, scraps of the S#ras or stray verses
from the rhythmic portion of the Abhidharma
Kosa,‘ in a manner pleasantly appropriate to
such a place. Our own ascent of the steps was
very much less secure; indeed, we crept up at
the side, never daring to let go of the railings,
in places where these young priests walked as
comfortably as on a board-floor.

“Your rooms are ready; you can come at
once,’ someone said to us, and providing over-
shoes for the whole party he led us in. The
place was already full of pilgrims; some, too
poor to buy new coats, were wearing them with
the lining outside, others in Court robes and
cloaks of Chinese brocade were decked out
with almost too obtrusive a splendour. The


1 Translated by de la Vallée Poussin, Geuthner, 1923
seg.; a treatise by Vasubandhu, expounding the philosophy of
the Sarvastivadins.


104


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


sight of so many soft-boots! and _ slippers
shuffling along the corridor was very amusing,
and indeed reminded me of the Emperor’s
apartments in the Palace.

Several young men who seemed thoroughly
at home in the place (probably retainers attached
to the temple) accompanied us, saying, ‘Now up
a few steps,’ ‘Now down!’ and so on, to prevent
us falling in the dark. There was another party
(I don’t know who they were) close behind us.
Some of them tried to push past, but our guides
asked them to stand back, saying we were a
party from the Palace and they must keep clear
of us. Most of them said ‘Indeed!’ and at once
drew back. But there were others who took no
notice and rushed on as though all they had
come for was to see who could get to the chapel
first. On the way to our rooms we had to pass
between rows of people, and it was not very
pleasant. But once arrived, we got a view right
up to the centre of the altar. The sight was so
strangely moving that I wondered why I had


1 Slipped on over one’s outdoor boots, like the slippers
worn in a Mosque.
2 Literally, the low rails in front of the altar.


105


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


allowed so many months to go by without once
coming here; the old feeling had woken again
within me.

The altar was not lit by the ordinary lamps of
the outer chapel, but by lamps that pilgrims had
laid as offerings within the shrine itself; and in
this terrifying furnace of light the Buddha
flashed and sparkled with the most magnificent
effect. Priest after priest came up to the lectern
in front of the altar and, holding up his scroll in
both hands, read out his prayer.t But so many
people were moving about that it was impossible
to make out what any particular priest was
saying. All we could catch was an occasional
phrase, when one voice for a moment pressed
up from among the rest, such as “These thou-
sand lamps... offered on behalf of ...’; but
the names one could not make out. While with
the streamers of my dress hung back over my
shoulders I was prostrating myself towards the
altar, a priest came up, saying ‘I have brought
you these,’ and I saw that he was carrying a
bough of anise, a courtesy which though


1 The priests were employed to make dedications on
behalf of their patrons.
2 Used in the decoration of Buddhist altars.


106


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


merely pious in intention was very agreeable.
Presently another priest came from the direc-
tion of the altar and said he had recited our
prayers for us ‘very well,’ and wanted to know
how long we were staying. We got him to tell
us the names of some of the other people who
were in retreat at the temple, and hardly had he
left us when another priest came with braziers,
food, and so on. Our washing-water was in a
pot with a spout and our washing-tub had no
handles! “I have given your servants that cell
over there,’ the priest said; and he called them
up one at a time to show them where they had
been quartered. A recitation of the Scriptures
was about to begin, and the temple bell was
ringing. ‘Ringing for our good,’ so we felt,
which gave us a great sense of security.?

Next door to us was an ordinary sort of man
who all the while was quietly prostrating him-
self till his head bumped against the floor. I
thought at first that he must be doing it for
show. But it soon became apparent that he was


« Allusion not identified. Must be to a poem such as:
‘In this mountain temple at evening when the bell sounds,
to know that it is ringing for our good, how comforting the
thought!’


107


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


completely absorbed in his devotions. How
wonderful that anyone can go on like this hour
after hour without falling asleep! When for a
short time he rested from these devotions, we
heard him reciting the Sé#zras in a low voice, so
that we could not hear what he was reading, but
with a very solemn intonation. We were just
wishing he would read a little louder, when he
broke off, and we heard him sniffing, not loudly
enough to be disagreeable, but gently and
secretly. I wondered what sort of trouble he
was in and longed that his prayers might be
answered.

When we had been at the temple several
days, the mornings became very quiet and
uneventful. The gentlemen and boys in atten-
dance upon us usually went off to visit one or
other of the priests in his cell, and we were left
with very little to amuse us. Then suddenly,
from quite close at hand would come the sound
of the conch-shell,t taking us always com-


t When the great scholar Moto-ori visited this temple in
1772 he was startled by the sudden noise of the conch-horn,
blown at the hour of the Serpent (9 a.m.). At once there
came into his mind this passage from The Pillow-Book and


108


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


pletely by surprise. Or a messenger would
come bringing an elegant tatebumi* or stuffs
in payment for some ritual or service, and laying
the things down, would shout for the temple-
servants to come and take them away, shriller
and shriller, till his voice echoed among the
hills. Sometimes the din of the temple gongs
would suddenly rise to an unwonted pitch, and
in answer to our question as to what was afoot,
they would mention the name of some great
mansion, saying ‘It is a service ? for her Lady-
ship’s safe delivery.’ An anxious time for my
Lord. No wonder he could not rest content till
the priests were at their task!

But all this applies only to ordinary times at
‘the figure of Shonagon seemed to rise up before me’ (Suga-
gasa Nikki, third month, seventh day). It is in this same
temple that, in The Tale of Genji, Murasaki lays the scene
of the meeting between Ukon and the long-lost ‘Tamakatsura.
The local people (Moto-ori tells us) had no idea that the
characters in Gezji were imaginary, and pointed out to him
‘the tomb of Tamakatsura.’

t A note folded up and twisted into an elaborate knot. In
this case it would contain instructions for special services or


prayers.
2 A kyoge or ritual for ‘instruction and transformation’ of


evil influences.


10g


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


the temple. At New Year, for example, there is
a never-ending throng of sightseers and
pilgrims, who cause so much disturbance that
the services have often to be abandoned.

One evening a large party arrived from the
City—so late that we were sure they were going
to stay the night. Such tall screens were put up
round their quarters that the little acolytes stag-
gered under the weight of them. We could hear
mats being flopped down, and everyone seemed
to be scurrying about getting things in order.
They were taken straight to their quarters
and great rustling curtains were hung upon
the railings that separated their rooms from the
chapel-enclosure. People, evidently, who were
used to being waited upon and made comfort-
able. Presently there was a great rustling of
skirts, which gradually died away in the dis-
tance. It seemed to proceed from a party of
elderly gentlewomen, very respectable and
discreet. No doubt their services had been
required only for the journey, and they were
now going home. “Don’t be careless about fire,’
we heard someone say, ‘these rooms are very
dangerous.’ Among the party was a boy of


IIo


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


seven or eight, rather spoilt and conceited we
thought, judging from his voice. It amused us
to hear him calling out for the valets and
grooms, and carrying on long conversations
with them. There was also a darling baby of
three or thereabouts that we could hear gurgling
to itself in the way that drowsy children do. We
kept on hoping that the mother or someone
else would call to the nurse by name; then we
should have had some chance of guessing who
the people were.

That night the services went on uninter-
ruptedly till daybreak and the noise was so
great that we got no sleep. After the Goya,' I
dozed off for a while, but was soon woken by a
sound of coarse, noisy chanting, that seemed
intentionally to avoid any kind of beauty or
holiness. We recognized the Sira as that of the
Temple Patron. These rough voices no doubt
belonged to mountain-hermits from far away,
and bursting in upon us thus unexpectedly,
they were strangely moving. ...


1 The early service, at about 3 a.m.
2 J.e. Kwannon, whose s#/ra forms the 25th chapter of the


Hokkekyé.


Ii!


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


During retreats of this kind, or indeed when-
ever I am away from home, I do not find it
sufficient merely to have grooms and servants
with me. One needs several companions of one’s
own class, who are pleased by the same things
as oneself—indeed, it is as well to bring with
one as many friends as possible. There may
among one’s maids be some who are less tire-
some than the rest. But on the whole one knows
all their opinions too well.

Gentlemen appear to share my feelings about
this question; for I notice they always make up
an agreeable party beforehand, when they are
going on pilgrimage toa temple... .

Often the common people who come to
Hasedera show a gross lack of respect for the
better sort of visitors, lining up in front of one’s
pew (¢subone) so close that they brush one with
the tails of their coats. There comes on me
sometimes a strong desire to make this pil-
grimage, and then when I have braved the
terrifying noise of the waters, struggled up the
dangerous causeway, and pressed into my seat,
impatient to gaze at last upon the glorious
countenance of Buddha, it is exasperating to


112


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


find my view barred by a parcel of common
white-robed priests and country-people, swarm-
ing like caterpillars, who plant themselves
there without the slightest regard for those
behind them. Often, while they were perform-
ing their prostrations, I have come near to
rolling them over sideways!

When very grand people come, steps are
taken to keep a clear space in front of them.
But, of course, for ordinary people they won’t
take the trouble to interfere. If one sends for
some priest with whom one has influence and
asks him to speak, he will sometimes go so far
as to say, ‘Would you mind making a little more
room there, please?’ But the moment his back
is turned, it is as bad as before.


Shonagon records that once when she was
attending a great service at the Bodai Temple,
someone sent her a note saying, ‘Come back at
once. I am very lonely.’ ‘As a matter of fact,’
she tells us, ‘I was at the moment so much
worked up by what was going on around me,
that I had quite made up my mind never to
quit the place again (to become a nun); and I


113 H


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


cared as little as old Hsiang Chung ! whether
people at home were waiting for me.


A Recitant ? ought to be good-looking. It is
only if it is a pleasure to keep one’s eyes.on him
all the time that there is any chance of religious
feeling (/dtosa) being aroused. Otherwise one
begins looking at something else and soon
one’s attention wanders from what he is reading;
in which case ugliness becomes an actual cause
of sin.

(Written later)


The time has come for me to stop putting
down ideas of this kind. Now that I am getting
to be a good 3 age, and so on, it frightens me
to discover that I ever wrote such blasphemous
stuff. I remember that whenever any priest was


1 A Chinese who became so completely absorbed in the
Tao Té Ching of Lao Tzu that he sat reading it on the edge
of a river until (according to one version of the story) the
spring floods carried him away.

2 Of the Scriptures.

3 Yoroshi, ‘good,’ is used by Shdnagon just as we use the
word ‘good’ in such expressions as ‘a good while ago,’ etc.
Aston (p. 116) did not understand this and completely mis-
translates the sentence.


114


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


reported to be of particular piety I would rush
off immediately to the house where he was
giving his readings. If this was the state of
mind in which I arrived, I see now that I
should have done better to stay away.

Retired Chancellors... finding time lie
heavy on their hands, often go once or twice
to services of this kind. Soon the habit grows
upon them, and they will come even in the
hottest days of summer, vaunting conspicuous
under-jackets and light purple or blue-grey
trousers; and often one will see one of them
there with a taboo-ticket! in his cap, appar-
ently in the belief that the sanctity of the per-
formance he is attending is such as to excuse
him from any of the observances proper to this
particular day. He bustles in, makes some
remark to the holy man who is occupied with
the service, but even while he is doing so con-
tinually casts back glances at some ladies who
are just being deposited from their carriage,


t It was the anniversary of his father’s death, or the like,
and he should have remained strictly closeted at home. The
‘taboo-ticket,’ mono-imi no fuda, was worn as a sign that he
must not be disturbed.


ITS


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


and indeed seems ready to take an interest in
anything that turns up. Presently he discovers
in the audience some friend whom he has not
seen for a long time, and with many exclama-
tions of astonishment and delight comes across
and sits next to him. Here he chats, nods, tells
funny stories, opens his fan wide and titters
behind it, rattles a string of dandified beads,
fiddles with his hands, and all the while looks
round in every direction. He discusses what
sort of carriages the people come in, finding
fault with some and praising others, compares
the services held recently at various houses—
an Eight Recitations at so-and-so’s, a Dedica-
tion of Scriptures given by someone else—and
all this while he does not hear a word of what
the priest is reading. And indeed, it would not
interest him much if he did; for he has heard it
all so often that it could no longer possibly
make any impression upon him.


Stray Nores


One writes a letter, taking particular trouble
to get it up as prettily as possible; then waits
for the answer, making sure every moment that


116


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


it cannot be much longer before something
comes. At last, frightfully late, is brought in—
one’s own note, still folded or tied exactly as one
sent it, but so finger-marked and smudged that
even the address is barely legible. “The family
is not in residence,’ the messenger says, giving
one back the note. Or ‘It is his day of observance
and they said they could not take any letters in.’
Such experiences are dismally depressing.

One has been expecting someone, and rather
late at night there is a stealthy tapping at the
door. One sends a maid to see who it is, and
lies waiting, with some slight flutter of the
breast. But the name one hears when she
returns is that of someone completely different,
who does not concern one at all. Of all depress-
ing experiences, this is by far the worst.

Someone comes, with whom one has decided
not to have further dealings. One pretends to be
fast asleep, but some servant or person con-
nected with one comes to wake one up, and
pulls one about, with a face as much as to say
‘What a sleep-hog!’ This is always exceedingly
irritating.

If someone with whom one is having an


E17


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


affair keeps on mentioning some woman whom
he knew in the past, however long ago it is
since they separated, one is always irritated.

It is very tiresome when a lover who 1s
leaving one at dawn says that he must look for
a fan or pocket-book that he left somewhere
about the room last night. As it 1s still too dark
to see anything, he goes fumbling about all
over the place, knocking into everything and
muttering to himself, ‘How very odd!’ When
at last he finds the pocket-book he crams it into
his dress with a great rustling of the pages; or
if it is a fan he has lost, he swishes it open and
begins flapping it about, so that when he
finally takes his departure, instead of experi-
encing the feelings of regret proper to such
an occasion, one merely feels irritated at his
clumsiness. . . .

It is important that a lover should know how
to make his departure. To begin with, he ought
not to be too ready to get up, but should require
a little coaxing: ‘Come, it is past daybreak.
You don’t want to be found here...’ and so
on. One likes him, too, to behave in such a way
that one is sure he is unhappy at going and


118


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


would stay longer if he possibly could. He
should not pull on his trousers the moment he
is up, but should first of all come close to one’s
ear and in a whisper finish off whatever was
left half-said in the course of the night. But
though he may in reality at these moments be
doing nothing at all, it will not be amiss that
he should appear to be buckling his belt. Then
he should raise the shutters, and both lovers
should go out together at the double-doors,
while he tells her how much he dreads the day
that is before him and longs for the approach
of night. Then, after he has slipped away, she
can stand gazing after him, with charming
recollections of those last moments. Indeed,
the success of a lover depends greatly on his
method of departure. If he springs to his feet
with a jerk and at once begins fussing round,
tightening in the waist-band of his breeches, or
adjusting the sleeves of his Court robe, hunting-
jacket or what not, collecting a thousand odds
and ends, and thrusting them into the folds of
his dress, or pulling in his over-belt—one
begins to hate him.

I like to think of a bachelor—an adventurous


11g


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


disposition has left him single—returning at
dawn from some amorous excursion. He looks
a trifle sleepy; but, as soon as he is home,
draws his writing-case towards him, carefully
grinds himself some ink and begins to write his
next-morning letter—not simply dashing off
whatever comes into his head, but spreading
himself to the task and taking trouble to write
the characters beautifully. He should be clad
in an azalea-yellow or vermilion cloak worn
over a white robe. Glancing from time to time
at the dewdrops that still cling to the thin
white fabric of his dress, he finishes his letter,
but instead of giving it to one of the ladies who
are in attendance upon him at the moment, he
gets up and, choosing from among his page-
boys one who seems to him exactly appropriate
to such a mission, calls the lad to him, and
whispering something in his ear puts the letter
in his hand; then sits gazing after him as he
disappears into the distance. While waiting for
the answer he will perhaps quietly murmur to
himself this or that passage from the Sétras.
Presently he is told that his washing-water and
porridge are ready, and goes into the back


120


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


room, where, seated at the reading-table, he
glances at some Chinese poems, now and then
reciting out loud some passage that strikes his
fancy. When he has washed and got into his
Court cloak, which he wears as a dressing-gown
(without trousers), he takes the 6th chapter of
the Lotus Scripture and reads it silently. Pre-
cisely at the most solemn moment of his reading
—the place being not far away—the messenger
returns, and by his posture it is evident that he
expects an instant reply. With an amusing if
blasphemous rapidity the lover transfers his
attention from the book he is reading to the
business of framing his answer.

One day when the Lord Abbot ! was visiting
his sister, the Mistress of the Robes, in her
apartment, there came a fellow to her balcony,
saying, “A terrible thing has happened to me,
and I don’t know where to go and complain.’
He seemed to be on the verge of tears. ‘What
is the matter?’ we asked him. ‘I was obliged to
leave home for a little while,’ he replied, ‘and
while I was away my miserable house was
burnt to the ground. For days past I have been

1 ‘The Empress’s brother, Ryii-en.


12!


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


living on charity, squeezed into other people’s
houses, like a gdva 1 in an oyster-shell. The fire
began in one of the hay-lofts belonging to the
Imperial Stables. There is only a thin wall
between, and the young lads sleeping in my
night-room came near to being roasted. alive.
They didn’t manage to save a thing.’

The Mistress of the Robes laughed heartily
at this, and I, seizing a slip of paper, wrote the
poem: ‘If the sunshine of Spring was strong
enough to set the royal fodder ablaze, how
could you expect your night-room to be
spared?’ 2 I tossed this to him, amid roars of
laughter on the part of the other gentlewomen,
one of whom said to the man, “Here’s a present
from someone who is evidently much upset at
your house having been burnt down.’ ‘What’s
the use of a poem-slip to me?’ he asked. ‘It
won't go far towards paying for the things I’ve
lost.” “Read it first!’ said someone. ‘Read it,
indeed!’ he said. ‘I would gladly, if I knew so


t A creature that squeezes its way into the shells of other
fish.

2 There is here a series of puns too complicated for
explanation.


122


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


much as half a letter....’ ‘Well then, get some-
one to read it to you,’ said the same lady. ‘The
Empress has sent for us and we must go to her
at once. But with a document such as that in
your hands, you may be certain that your
troubles are over.’ At this there were roars of
laughter. On our way to the Empress’s rooms,
we wondered whether he really would show it
to anyone, and whether he would be very
furious when he heard what it was.

We told her Majesty the story, and there was
a lot more laughing, in which the Empress
joined. But she said afterwards that we all
seemed to her completely mad.


Prerry THINGS

The face of a child that has its teeth dug into
a melon.

A baby sparrow hopping towards one when
one calls ‘chu, chu’ to it; or being fed by its
parents with worms or what not, when one has
captured it and tied a thread to its foot.

A child of three or so, that scurrying along
suddenly catches sight of some small object
lying on the ground, and clasping the thing in


123


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


its pretty little fingers, brings it to show to some
grown-up person.

A little girl got up in cloister-fashion ! tossing
back her head to get the hair away from her
eyes when she wants to look at something.


CHILDREN

A child of four or five comes in from a
neighbour’s house and gets into mischief,
taking hold of one’s things, throwing them
about all over the room, and perhaps breaking
them. One keeps on scolding the creature and
pulling things out of its hands, and at last it is
beginning to understand that it cannot have
everything its own way, when in comes the
mother, and knowing that it will now get its
way the child points at something that has
taken its fancy, crying ‘Mama, show me this!’
and tugs at the mother’s skirts. ‘I am talking
to grown-up people,’ she says, and takes no
more notice. Whereupon the child, after pulling
everything about, finally extracts the object it
coveted. At this the mother just says ‘Naughty!’

1 What we should call bobbed hair ; standing out fan-wise


behind, and worn about six inches long over the temples.


124


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


without making any attempt to take the thing
away and put it into safety; or perhaps, ‘Don’t
do that; you’re spoiling it,’ but evidently more
amused than angry. One dislikes the parent as
much as the child. It is indeed agonizing to
stand by and see one’s possessions submitted to
such treatment.


Among ‘embarrassing things,’ Shdnagon
mentions ‘An unpleasant-looking child being
praised and petted by parents who see it not as
it is but as they would like it to be. Having to
listen while its parents repeat to one the things
the child has said, imitating its voice.’

And again, ‘Sometimes when in the course
of conversation I have expressed an opinion
about someone and perhaps spoken rather
severely, a small child has overheard me and
repeated the whole thing to the person in ques-
tion. This may get one into a terrible fix...

I have the same feeling if someone is telling
me a sad story. I see the tears in his eyes and
do indeed agree that what he says is very sad;
but somehow or other my own tears will not
flow. It is no use trying to contort one’s face


125


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


into an expression of woe; in fact, nothing is
any good.


Of the gentlewomen’s apartments attached
to the Empress’s own quarters, those along the
Narrow Gallery are the most agreeable. When
the wooden blinds! at the top are rolled up,
the wind blows in very hard, and it is cool even
in summer. In winter, indeed, snow and hail
often come along with the wind; but even so, I
find it very agreeable. As the rooms have very
little depth and boys,? even when so near to the
Imperial apartments, do not always mind their
manners, we generally ensconce ourselves be-
hind screens, where the quiet is delightful, for
there is none of the loud talk and laughter that
disturb one in other quarters of the Palace.

I like the feeling that one must always be on
the alert. And if this is true during the day,
how much more so at night, when one must be
prepared for something to happen at any
moment. All night long one hears the noise of
footsteps in the corridor outside. Every now


t Like our Venetian blinds.
2 Bringing messages from home, or the like.


126


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


and then the sound will cease in front of some
particular door, and there will be a gentle
tapping, just with one finger; but one knows
that the lady inside will have instantly recog-
nized the knock. Sometimes, this soft tapping
lasts a long while; the lady is no doubt pre-
tending to be asleep. But at last comes the
rustle of a dress or the sound of someone
cautiously turning on her couch, and one knows
that she has taken pity on him.

In summer she can hear every movement of
his fan, as he stands chafing outside; while in
winter, stealthily though it be done, he will
hear the sound of someone gently stirring the
ashes in the brazier, and will at once begin
knocking more resolutely, or even asking out
loud for admittance. And while he does so, one
can hear him squeezing up closer and closer
against the door.

In the fifth month I love driving out to some
mountain village. The pools that lie across the
road look like patches of green grass; but while
the carriage slowly pushes its way right through
them, one sees that there is only a scum of
some strange, thin weed, with clear, bright


127


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


water underneath. Though it is quite shallow,
great spurts fly up as our horsemen gallop
across, making a lovely sight. Then, where the
road runs between hedges, a leafy bough will
sometimes dart in at the carriage window; but
however quickly one snatches at it, one is
always too late.

Sometimes a spray of yomogi will get caught
in the wheel, and for a moment, as the wheel
brings it level, a delicious scent hovers at our
window.

I love to cross a river in very bright moon-
light and see the trampled water fly up in chips
of crystal under the oxen’s feet.

In the second month something happens in
the Hall of the Grand Council. I really don’t
know exactly what it is, but they call it the
Tests.t About the same time there is a thing
they call the Shakuden. I believe it is then that
they hang up Kuji2 and the rest. They also

« The examinations for officers of the Sixth Rank and
under.

2 T.e. Confucius. This is the ceremony in honour of Con-
fucius and his disciples. In Chinese, S#i4-tiew. I quote this


passage because it illustrates the extraordinary vagueness of
the women concerning purely male activities.


128


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


present something called the Sdmei to the
Emperor and Empress. It comes in a stone pot
and includes some very queer stuff.

People value sympathy more than anything
in the world. This is particularly true of men;
but I do not exclude women. One always
regrets an unkind remark, even if it was ob-
viously quite unintentional; and it is easy,
without entering very deeply into someone
else’s sorrow, to say “How unfortunate!’ if the
situation is indeed unfortunate, or ‘I can
imagine what he is going through,’ if the per-
son in question is likely to be much perturbed.
And this works even better if one’s remark is
made to someone else and repeated than if it
is heard at first hand.

One ought always to find some way of letting
people know that one has sympathized. With
one’s relations and so on, who expect fond
inquiries, it is difficult to get any special credit.
But a friendly remark to someone who sees no
reason to expect it is always certain to give
pleasure. This all sounds very easy and obvious;
but surprisingly few people put it into practice.
It seems as though people with nice feelings


129 I


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


must necessarily be silly, and clever people
must always be ill-natured, men and women
too. But I suppose really there must be lots of
nice, clever people, if only one knew them.

Features that one particularly likes continue
to give one the same thrill of pleasure every
time one looks at a face. With pictures it is
different; once we have seen them a certain
number of times, they cease to interest us;
indeed, the pictures on a screen that stands
close to your usual seat, however beautiful they
may be, you will never so much as glance at!

Again, an object (such as a fan, mirror, vase)
may be ugly in general, but have some par-
ticular part which we can look at with pleasure.
Faces do not work like this; they affect us
disagreeably unless they can be admired as a
whole.

[Plan for a Story]


A young man, who has lost his mother. The
father is very fond of him, but marries again.
The stepmother is very disagreeable, and the
young man ceases to have any dealings with her
part of the house. There is a difficulty about his
clothes; they have to be mended by his old


130


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


nurse or perhaps by a maid who used to be in
the mother’s service. He is given quarters in
one of the wings, as though he were a guest,
with pictures on the screens and panels, by
first-rate masters too. At Court he cuts a very
good figure and is liked by everyone. The
Emperor takes quite a fancy to him and is
always sending for him to join in concerts and
so on. But the young man is always depressed,
feels out of place, and discontented with his
mode of life. His nature must be amorous to
the verge of eccentricity. He has an only sister,
married to one of the highest noblemen in the
land, who dotes upon her and gratifies her
every whim. To this sister the young man con-
fides all his thoughts, finding in her society his
greatest consolation.


THINGS THAT MAKE ONE Happy

Getting hold of a lot of stories none of which
one has read before.

Or finding Vol. 2 of a story one is in a great
state of excitement about, but was previously
only able to secure the first volume. However,
one is often disappointed.


131


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


To pick up a letter that someone has torn up
and thrown away, and find that one can fit the
pieces together well enough to make sense.

When one has had a very upsetting dream
and is sure it means that something disagree-
able is going to happen, it is delightful to be
told by the interpreter ' that it does not signify
anything in particular.


THINGS THAT GIVE ME AN UNCOMFORTABLE
FEELING


A child that has been brought up by a nasty
foster-mother. Of course, this is not its fault.
But somehow one always thinks of its con-
nexion with such a person as a disagreeable
quality in the child itself. “I can’t understand
why it is’ (says the foster-mother to the father
of the child) ‘that you should be so fond of all
the other young gentlemen, and yet seem to
take no trouble about this child and even to
hate the sight of it.’

She speaks in loud tones of indignation.
Probably the child does not understand exactly


1 T.e. dream-interpreter. Modern experts have seldom
been known to take this reassuring view.


132


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


what is being said; but it runs to the woman’s
knees and bursts into tears.

Another thing that makes me feel uncom-
fortable is when I have said I do not feel well
and some girl of whom I am not very fond
comes and lies by me, brings me things to eat,
pities me, and without any response on my
part, begins following me about and continually
coming to my assistance.


TOOTHACHE

A girl of seventeen or eighteen with very
beautiful hair, which she wears down her back,
spreading in a great, bushy mass; she is just
nicely plump, and has a very pale skin. One can
see that she is really very pretty; but at the
moment she has toothache very badly, her
fringe is all drabbled with tears and (though
she is quite unconscious of the fact) her long
locks are dangling in great disorder. Her cheek,
where she has been pressing it with her hand, is
flushed crimson, which has a very pretty effect.


ILLNESS
It is the eighth month. A girl is wearing an
unlined robe of soft white stuff, full trousers,


133


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


and an aster! mantle thrown across her
shoulders with very gay effect. But she has
some terrible malady of the chest. Her fellow
ladies-in-waiting come in turns to sit with her,
and outside the room there is a crowd of very
young men inquiring about her with. great
anxiety: ‘How terribly sad!’ ‘Has she ever had
such an attack before?’ and so on. With them
no doubt is her lover, and he, poor man, is
indeed beside himself with distress. But as
likely as not it is a secret attachment, and,
fearful of giving himself away, he hangs
about on the outskirts of the group, trying
to pick up news. His misery is a touching
sight.

Now the lady binds back her beautiful long
hair and raises herself on her couch in order to
spit, and harrowing though it is to witness her
pain, there is even now a grace in her move-
ments that makes them pleasurable to watch.
The Empress hears of her condition and at
once sends a famous reciter of the Scriptures,
renowned for the beauty of his voice, to read at
her bedside. The room is in any case very small,

« Light purple, lined with clear blue.


134


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


and now to the throng of visitors is added a
number of ladies who have simply come to
hear the reading. It is impossible to accom-
modate them all behind the screens-of-state.
At this exposed bevy of young women the
priest constantly glances while he reads, for
which he will certainly suffer in the life to
come.

A house with tall pine-trees all round it. The
courtyards are spacious, and as all the hashi}
are raised, the place has a cool, open look. In
the main room there is a four-foot screen, with
a hassock in front of it, on which is seated a
priest about thirty years old or a little more.
He himself is by no means ill-looking; but
what strikes one most is the extreme elegance
of his brown robe and mantle of thin lustrous
silk. He is reciting the spells of the Thousand-
Handed One, fanning himself meanwhile with
a clove-dyed fan.

Within must lie a person gravely afflicted by
some kind of possession; for presently there
edges her way out from the inner room a rather
heavily built girl, who is evidently going to act


1 Partitions made of thin pieces of wood, laid trellis-wise.


135


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


as ‘medium.’! She has fine hair, and is unde-
niably a handsome creature. She is dressed in
an unlined robe of plain silk and light-coloured
trousers. When she has seated herself in front
of a little three-foot screen placed at right-
angles to that of the priest, he wheels round
and puts into her hand a minute, brightly
polished rod. Then in sudden spasms of
sound, with eyes tightly shut, he reads the Spell,
which is certainly very impressive. A number
of gentlewomen have come out from behind
the curtains and stand watching in a group.
Before long a shiver runs through the
medium’s limbs and she falls into a trance. It
is indeed extraordinary to watch the priest at
work and see how stage by stage his incanta-
tions take effect. Behind the medium is...a
slim boy in his teens (perhaps her brother)
with some of his friends. From time to time
they fan her. Their attitude is quiet and
reverent; but if she were conscious, how upset
she would be to expose herself thus in front of


1 The incantations of the priest cause the spirit which is
possessing the sick person to pass into the medium, who, being
young and healthy, easily throws it off.


136


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


her brother’s friends! Though one knows that
she is not really suffering, one cannot help
being distressed by her continual wailing and
moaning. Indeed, some of the sick woman’s
friends, feeling sorry for the medium, creep up
to the edge of her screen and try to arrange her
disordered ciothing in a more decent way.
After a while it is announced that the sick
woman is somewhat better. Hot water and
other necessaries are brought along from the
back of the house by a succession of young
maids, who, tray in hand, cannot forbear to cast
a hurried glance in the direction of the holy
man....At last, at the hour of the Monkey
(4 p.m.), having reduced the possessing spirit
to an abject condition, the priest dismisses it.
On coming to, the medium is amazed to find
herself outside the screen, and asks what has
been happening. She feels terribly ashamed and
embarrassed, hides her face in her long hair, and
glides swiftly towards the women’s quarters.
But the priest stops her for a moment, and,
having performed a few magic passes, says to
her, with a familiar smile that she finds very
disconcerting, “That’s right! Now you’re quite


137


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


yourself again, aren’t you?’ Then he turns to
the others and says: ‘I would stay a little
longer, but I am afraid I am at the end of my
free time. . . .” He is about to leave the house;
but they stop him, crying: ‘We should like so
much to make an offering. Perhaps you would
tellus. ...’ He takes no notice and is hurrying
away, when a lady of good birth, possibly one
of the daughters of the house, comes up to the
curtains that screen off the women’s quarters
and bids her servants tell the holy man that,
thanks to his merciful condescension in visiting
the house, the sick woman’s sufferings had been
much relieved, for which they all wished to
thank him from the bottom of their hearts.
Would he have time to come again to-morrow?
‘The disorder,’ says he, ‘is of a very obstinate
nature, and I do not think it would be safe to
leave off. I am very glad that what I have done
has already had some effect.’ And without
another word he goes away, making everyone
feel as though the Lord Buddha himself had
been with them in the house.


In the eighth month of 998, at the time of
her second confinement, the Empress went to


138


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


stay with Taira no Narimasa,! the Superinten-
dent of her Household, bringing with her
Princess Osako, her first child. The Imperial
Litter, writes Shonagon, was carried in at the
east gate, which had been rebuilt on purpose.
But we ladies were driven round to the small
north gate. We did not think there would be
anyone on duty at the guard-house, and some
of us had let our hair get into great disorder.
We had, indeed, taken for granted that we
should be brought right up to the house itself,
so that it would not matter if we arrived rather
untidy. Unfortunately the gate was so small
that our carriages, with their high awnings,
could not go through. Matting was laid down
for us from here to the house, and in a very bad
temper we all got out and walked. So far from
being deserted, the guard-house was full of
courtiers and servants, who stared in a way that
was very annoying. I told the Empress about
this and she said, laughing, “There are people
here too with eyes in their heads! I do not know
why you should suddenly become so careless.’
‘But we had the carriages all to ourselves,’ |


1 Not to be confused with Minamoto no Narimasa,


mentioned above.


139


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


said, ‘and it would have seemed very odd if we
had begun fussing about how we looked. Any
way, at a house such as this surely all the gates
ought to be big enough to admit a carriage! I
shall make fun of him about it when he comes.’
At this moment Narimasa did indeed arrive,
carrying an inkstand, which he begged me to
accept for her Majesty’s use. ‘We are not best
pleased with you,’ I said. “Why do you live in
a house with such small gates?’ “I am a person
of small importance,’ he answered, smiling,
‘and my gates are built to match.’ ‘Is there not
a story about someone who increased the height
of his gate?’ I asked. This seemed to surprise
him. ‘I know what you are thinking of,’ he said.
‘The story of Yii Ting-kuo. But pardon me, I
thought that only musty old scholars knew of
such things. Even I should not have under-
stood you, did I not happen to have strayed a
little in those paths myself.’ t ‘Paths indeed!’ I


t The story of Yi Kung, who rebuilt his gate because of
a conviction that his son 'Ting-kuo would rise to greatness, is
told in the little handbook of improving anecdotes to which I
refer below (p. 151). Shdnagon is laughing at the fact that
Narimasa should so easily have been impressed.


140


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


exclaimed. ‘I do not think much of your
paths. The matting got buried in them and
we fell about in every direction. An appalling
SCONEIN wet,

“There has been a lot of rain,’ he said. ‘I am
sure you did. Well, well; you’ll be saying some-
thing else unpleasant in a minute. I am going,’
and off he went. ‘What happened?’ asked the
Empress. “You seem to have frightened Nari-
masa away.’ ‘Oh no,’ I said. “I was only telling
him how we could not get through the north
gate.’ Then I went to my own room.

I shared it with several of the younger girls.
We were all so tired that we did not bother
about anything, and went straight to sleep.
Our room was in the east wing, and had a
sliding door leading into the passage under the
eaves at the back of the building. The bolt of
this door was missing, but we did not notice it.
Our host, however, who was naturally familiar
with the peculiarities of the house, presently
came to the door, and, pushing it open an inch
or two, said in a queer, hollow voice: ‘May one
venture?’ This he repeated several times. |
opened my eyes, and there he was, standing


141


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


behind a chink that was now about five inches
wide. No doubt about who it was, for he hap-
pened to be in the full glare of a lamp we had
put behind our screen. It was really very funny.
In an ordinary way he was the last person in
the world to take liberties; but he apparently
had some curious idea that having the Empress
in his house entitled him to treat the other
guests as he pleased. “Look what is there!’ I
cried, waking the girl next to me. ‘Would you
ever have expected it?’ At this they all raised
their heads, and, seeing him still standing at the
door, burst into fits of laughter. ‘Who goes
there?’ I challenged him at last. ‘Show your-
self!’ ‘It’s the master of the house,’ he answered,
‘come to have a word with the lady in charge.’
‘It was your gate I complained of,’ I said. ‘I
never suggested that our door needed atten-
tion.” “Yes, yes,’ he answered, ‘it is just that
business of the gate that I have come about.
Might I venture for one moment. . . .?’ ‘No, of
course he cannot,’ said all the girls in chorus.
‘Just look at the state we are in!’ ‘Ah well, if
there are young persons!...’ and he disap-


1 Shonagon was now about thirty-four; Narimasa was fifty.


142


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


peared, closing the door behind him, amid loud
laughter.

Really, if a man finds the door open, the best
thing he can do is to walk in. If he solemnly
announces himself he can hardly expect
encouragement.

Next day when I was with the Empress I
told her about this. ‘It sounds very unlike him,’
she said, laughing. ‘It must have been your
exploit yesterday (the allusion to the story of
Yii Kung) that interested him in you. But he is
a kind fellow, and I am sorry you are always so
hard upon him.’

Her Majesty had been giving orders about
the costumes for the little girls who were to
wait upon Princess Osako. Suddenly (and this
time I really think one could hardly be expected
not to smile) Narimasa came to ask whether her
Majesty had decided—what colour the facings
of the children’s vests were to be! He was also
worried about the Princess’s meals. ‘If they are
served in the ordinary way,’ he said, ‘it won’t
look well. To my mind, she ought to have a
tayny* platter and a ¢ayny dish-stand. .. .’ “And


t He uses an affected pronunciation.


143


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


be waited upon by the little girls for whom you
have designed such lovely underclothes,’ I
added. “You should not laugh at Narimasa,’ the
Empress said to me afterwards. ‘I know every-
one does it; but he is such a straightforward,
unpretentious creature...’ and I was glad of
this scolding.

One day when I| was with her Majesty and
nothing particular was going on, someone came
and said that the Superintendent wished to see
me. Her Majesty overheard this and said,
laughing: ‘I wonder how he means to make a
butt of himself this time! You’d better go and
see.’ I found him waiting for me outside. ‘I
mentioned that unfortunate business about the
gate to my brother Korenaka,’ he said, ‘and he
thought it was very serious. “‘I should advise
you to obtain an interview with the lady at an
hour when she has leisure to discuss the matter
in all its bearings.” That was what my brother
advised.’

How very interesting! I was wondering
whether he would not make some reference to
his strange visit the other night. But he merely
added: ‘So I trust you will allow me to wait


144


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


upon you in your room. At some spare moment
when you have nothing better to do...’ and
with a bow he took his leave.

When I went back into the room the Empress
asked me what was the matter. I told her what
he had said, adding: “I don’t understand why
he sent for me, specially when I was on duty
too. Surely he might have come round to my
room later on.’ ‘He thought,’ replied the Em-
press, ‘that it would give you pleasure to hear
what a respect Korenaka has for you; that is
why he was in a hurry to tell you. You must
remember that Korenaka is a tremendous
figure in his eyes.’ She looked so charming
while she was saying this!

Three months later, the Empress’s second
child, Prince Atsuyasu,t was born. In the
second month of the next year (a.D. 1000) she
was raised to the rank of Imperial Consort, that
is to say, was made of equal importance with
the Emperor himself, having previously been
merely a sort of chief Queen. In the fourth
month she returned to the Palace, and in the
eighth fell seriously ill.


t Died in 1018, at the age of nineteen.


145 K


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


Meanwhile the Emperor’s attention was con-
centrated chiefly upon his new concubine,
Akiko (daughter of the Prime Minister, Michi-
naga), who had arrived at the Palace just a year
ago, at the age of eleven.

Speaking of this time, the Eigwa Monogatari
(Chapter 7) contrasts the gloom of the sick
Empress’s quarters with the scenes of winter-
carnival that went on in the Emperor’s apart-
ments.

‘Certain princes, still faithful to the Empress,
came constantly to inquire after her, and in
conversation with her ladies-in-waiting de-
scribed how the gosechi festival had been kept
in various great houses of the Capital. These
gentlemen were received by Sei Shonagon or
some other of her Majesty’s ladies.’

On the 29th day of the twelfth month
(a.D. 1000) the Empress Sadako died, having
a few hours previously given birth to a daughter,
the Princess Yoshiko.


What became of Sei Shonagon after her
mistress’s death we do not know. We hear no
more of her till 1009, when Murasaki Shikibu,


146


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


author of The Tale of Genji, writes in her
Diary: ‘Sei Sh6nagon’s most marked character-
istic is her extraordinary self-satisfaction. But
examine the pretentious compositions in
Chinese script which she scatters so liberally
over the Court, and you will find them to bea
mere patchwork of blunders. Her chief pleasure
consists in shocking people; and as each new
eccentricity becomes only too painfully familiar,
she gets driven on to more and more outrageous
methods of attracting notice. She was once a
person of great taste and refinement; but now
she can no longer restrain herself from indulg-
ing, even under the most inappropriate cir-
cumstances, in any outburst that the fancy of
the moment suggests. She will soon have for-
feited all claim to be regarded as a serious
character, and what will become of her when
she is too old for her present duties I really
cannot imagine.’

And what did become of her? There is a
tradition (Kojidan, vol. 11) that when some
courtiers were out one day they passed a dilapi-
dated hovel. One of them mentioned a rumour
that Sei Shonagon, a wit of the last reign, was


147 Ke


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


now living in this place. Whereupon an in-
credibly lean hag shot her head out of the door,
crying: ‘Won’t you buy old bones?’ This, if we
are to accept the story, was the last of Sh6na-
gon’s famous ‘literary allusions’; for there is
here a reference to the story of Kuo Wei, who
maintained that there were racehorses so
precious that even their bones were worth
procuring.

There is, too, in the Zoku Senzaishi (Book
18) a poem sent by Shdnagon ‘when she was
old and living in retirement to someone who
tried to visit her’:


‘Tou hito ni If to those who visit me
‘Ari’ to wa e koso ‘She is at home’
li-hatene I cannot bring myself to say


Ware ya wa ware to Do not wonder, for often in
consternation
Odorokare-tsutsu. I ask myself whether I am I.


The character of Shénagon appears in her
book as a series of contradictions. She is des-
perately anxious not merely to be liked, but to
occupy the foremost place in the affections of
all whom she knows. Yet her behaviour, as she


148


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


herself records it, seems consistently calculated
to inspire fear rather than affection. Again, she
seems at some moments wholly sceptical, at
others profoundly religious; now unusually
tender-hearted, now egotistical and cold. Yet
all this does not imply that her character was in
reality complicated to an unusual degree, but
comes from the fact that she reveals herself to
us entirely and, as it were, from every facet, ~
whereas most writers of diaries and the like,
however little conscious intention they may
have of publishing their confessions, instinc-
tively present themselves always in the same
light. Her detachment about herself is paralleled
by a curious aloofness from all the associated
emotions of a scene, so that she can describe a
sick-bed as though it were a sunset, without
the slightest attempt to arouse pity, or for that
matter the least fear of provoking disgust.
Perhaps the strongest impression we get is
of her extreme fastidiousness and irritability,
which must have made her a formidable com-
panion. She probably got on better with the
Empress than with anyone else because her
reverence for the Imperial Family compelled


149


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


her in the August Presence to keep her nerves
in check.

As a writer she is incomparably the best poet
of her time, a fact which is apparent only in her
prose and not at all in the conventional w/a for
which she is also famous. Passages such.as that
about the stormy lake or the few lines about
crossing a moonlit river show a beauty of
phrasing that Murasaki, a much more deliberate
writer, certainly never surpassed. As for Sh6-
nagon’s anecdotes, their vivacity is apparent
even in translation. Neither in them nor in her
more lyrical passages is there any hint of a
search for literary effect. She gives back in her
pages, with apparently as little effort of her own
as a gong that sounds when it is struck, the
whole warmth and glitter of the life that sur-
rounded her; and the delicate precision of her
perceptions makes diarists such as Lady Anne
Clifford (whose name occurs to me at random)
seem mere purblind Hottentots.

This gift manifests itself incidentally in her
extraordinary power of conveying character.
Yukinari, Masahiro and Narimasa, despite
their uniform absurdity, live with extraordinary


150


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


distinctness; as does the Empress herself, the
only other woman whom the authoress allows
to figure in her pages.

Her style is very much less ‘architected’ than
Murasaki’s; but there are moments when she
begins building up a huge network of depen-
dent clauses in a manner extremely close to
Genji, and often one feels that the earlier book
leads us, so to speak, to the brink of the other.
This fits in with the presumed dates. Genji
was probably begun in too1, when Murasaki
lost her husband, and the Pi//ow-Book seems,
with the possible exception of two or three
entries, to have been written before the
twelfth month of 1000, when the Empress
Sadako died.

Sh6nagon has often been spoken of as
learned. Our only source of information on the
subject is her own book. In it she shows signs
of having read the Méng-ch’iu, a collection of
edifying Chinese anecdotes, much studied by
Japanese children from the ninth to the nine-
teenth century. She knows too some poems
by Po Chii-i (the easiest of Chinese writers)
and refers once to the Analects of Confucius.


ret


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


In Japanese literature she knows the usual
round of poems from the Kokinshi and Gosenshi.
To speak, as European writers have done,
of her vast acquaintance with Chinese litera-
ture, is an anachronism; for in her time
only fragments of this literature had reached
Japan. The great poets of the eighth cen-
tury, for example, were entirely unknown.
But the term ‘learned’ is in any case a relative
one. A modern lady-in-waiting who had read
a little Greek (or even only a little Gilbert
Murray) would certainly pass as learned in
her own circle; while at Girton no one would
be impressed. And it is likely enough that the
attainments by which Shonagon dazzled the
Palace would at the Fujiwara Academy have
passed quite unnoticed.

It is, in fact, her extreme readiness of wit
rather than her erudition that makes Shonagon
remarkable. I have not been able in my extracts
to do her full justice in this respect, because in
order to appreciate her allusions and repartees
one must be in a position to grasp them imme-
diately. Wit, more often than not, evaporates in
the process of explanation.


152


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


But the brilliance of an allusion such as that
to the Analects ! may perhaps be vaguely sur-
mised. That anyone possessed of such a gift
should enjoy using it seems natural enough.
Almost every anecdote in her book centres
round some clever repartee or happy quotation
of her own. For this she has been reproached,
and Murasaki has made her colleague’s shitari-
gao (‘have done it!’ look, i.e. air of self-satisfac-
tion) proverbial. In life Shonagon may indeed
have been as insupportable as Murasaki evi-
dently found her; but in the Pi/low-Book her
famous shitari-gao makes no disagreeable effect.
We feel that Shonagon displays her agile wits
with the same delight as an athlete takes in
running or leaping.

The Japanese excelled at portraiture. But the
portraits that survive are those of statesmen and
priests. The ‘Yoritomo,’ by Takanobu (the
obstinate-looking man in black triangular gar-
ments squatting with a white tablet hugged to
his breast2), and the Shdichi Kokushi (that old
one-eyed priest spread out over a great arm-


t See above, p. 65.
2 There is a good copy of this at the British Museum.


153


5
THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


chair), by Cho Densu, are among the greatest
products of Japanese art. But I recollect no
portraits of women till a much later date.
Murasaki and Shonagon we know only as
posterity imagined them—that is to say, as
conventional. Court beauties of the Heian
period. One does not, however, in reading the
Pillow-Book, get the impression of a woman in
whose life her own appearance figured in any
very important way. Had she, on the other
hand, been downright ugly, it would have been
impossible to secure her a post as lady-in-
waiting. We may suppose then that her looks
were moderate. We certainly cannot accept the
argument of M. Revon: ‘Si elle n’avait pas
été distinguée de sa personne elle n’aurait pas
raillé comme elle fait, les types vulgaires’-—
reasoning which shows a fortunate unfamili-
arity with the conversation of plain women. But
we have no reason to doubt that Shoénagon had
many lovers. Stress is usually laid on her affairs
with Tadanobu, to which, however, she devotes
only some few, rather insipid pages. I imagine
that her real lovers were for the most part
people of her own rank; whereas Tadanobu,


154


*
THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


rather circuitously (it was owing to his
_sister’s marriage with the Empress’s brother)
soon became a pezzo grosso. But in the
"eighties of the tenth century he was well
within ShGnagon’s reach, and if they were
ever lovers, it may have been before her
arrival at Court.

Here is the longest passage which deals with
their relationship:


Tadanobu, having heard and believed some
absurd rumour about me, began saying the
most violent things—for example, that I wasn’t
fit to be called a human being at all and he
couldn’t imagine how he had been so foolish as
to treat me like one. I was told that he was
saying horrible things about me even in the
Imperial apartments. I felt uncomfortable about
it, but I only said, laughing: ‘If these reports
are true, then that’s what I’m like and there is
nothing more to be done. But if they are not
true, he will eventually find out that he has been
deceived. Let usvieave it: at-that....’ Hence-
forward, if he passed through the Black Door
room and heard my voice from behind the


155


#:
THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


screens he would bury his face in his sleeve, as _
though the merest glimpse of me would disgust —
him. I did not attempt to explain matters, but’
got in the habit of always looking in some other
direction.


Two months later matters had advanced
some way towards a reconciliation, for Sh6nagon
writes:


He sent for me to come out to him, and
(though I did not respond) we met later by
accident. ‘Darling,’ he said, ‘why have we given
up being lovers? You know now that I have
stopped believing those stories about you. I
cannot conceive what is the obstacle. Are two
people who have been friends for so many
years really to drift apart in this way? As it is,
my duties bring me constantly in and out of
their Majesties’ apartments. But if that were to
stop, our friendship would simply vanish, with
nothing to show for all that has taken place
between us.’ ‘I have no objection to our coming
together again,’ I said. ‘In fact, there is only
one thing I should be sorry for. If we were
seeing one another in the way you mean, |


156


ae.


__ 'THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


~ should certainly stop praising you '—as I con-

- stantly do at present—in her Majesty’s hearing,
with all the other gentlewomen sitting by. You
won't, I am sure, misunderstand me. One is
embarrassed under such circumstances, some-
thing inside one sticks and one remains tongue-
tied.’ He laughed. ‘Am I then never to be praised
except by people who know nothing about
me?’ he asked. ‘You may be certain,’ I said,
‘that if we become good friends again I shall
never praise you. I cannot bear people, men or
women, who are prejudiced in favour of some-
one they are intimate with or get into a rage if
the mildest criticism of someone they are fond
of is made in their presence.’ “Oh, I can trust
you not to do that!’ he exclaimed.


I will end with a more general question.
Women, it will have struck the reader, seem to
play an inordinately large rédle in the literary
life of the Heian period. How came they here
to secure a position that their sex has nowhere
else been able to achieve?


1 The intimacy would, of course, be secret. Shdnagon’s
embarrassment would proceed solely from her own conscience.


57


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


As far as the production of literature went,
women did not, in fact, enjoy so complete a
monopoly as European accounts of the period
would suggest. But convention obliged men to
write in Chinese,! and not merely to use the
Chinese language, but to compose essays and
poems the whole attitude and content of which
were derived from China. It may be objected
that a potentially great writer would not have
submitted to these restrictions—that he would
have broken out into the vernacular, like Dante
or Paracelsus. But this is to demand that a
literary genius should also possess the many
qualities essential to a successful reformer. The
use of the native kana (the only form of char-
acter in which the Japanese language could be
written with reasonable facility) was considered
unmanly, and to use it would have madea writer
as self-conscious as a London clubman would feel
if he were to walk down Bond Street in skirts.

Women, anthropologists tell us, are often
the repositories of a vanishing or discarded
culture. And their conservatism becomes more


« Except in the case of uta, the small poems of thirty-one
syllables.


158


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


marked where the mastering of a new script is
involved; for women, though quick at acquiring
spoken languages, have seldom shown much
aptitude for the study of difficult scripts. To a
minor degree, the same phenomenon was re-
peated in Japan a thousand years later. While
the energy of male writers was largely absorbed
in acquiring a foreign culture, and their output
was still too completely derivative to be of much
significance, there arose a woman ! whose work,
hitching straight on to the popular novelettes
of the eighteenth century, has outlived the
pseudo-European experimentations of her con-
temporaries. The fact that the men of the
‘nineties in Japan were absorbed in imitating
Turgenev does not, however, explain the
occurrence of such a prodigy as Ichiyd (a
working seamstress who in the years between
nineteen and twenty-four produced twenty-five
longish stories, forty volumes of diary, and six
of critical essays); nor does the convention
which obliged men to write in Chinese explain
the appearance during the Heian period of such
female geniuses as Ono no Komachi, Michi-
t Higuchi Ichiyd (1872-1896).


159


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


tsuna’s mother, Izumi Shikibu, Sei Shénagon
and Murasaki—a state of affairs all the more
remarkable seeing that from the fourteenth
to the end of the nineteenth century not a
single woman writer of any note made her
appearance in Japan. 3


160


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


The following tables will facilitate com-
parison with the original:


‘TRANSLATION ORIGINAL ‘TRANSLATION ORIGINAL
Page Section Page Section

24 yon eke a 96 nie oe

25 ee LOO IOI re 0 PAR

32 Pee 132 103 yee atoe

34 Ne 3 112 gio By

ils grim 20 E13 eee e

37 Pe oO II4 or fo)

56 S524 116 we eet

58 ee 75 118 en? Arve
* pag sea 5 11g a 295

8 coo | Of 121 nO

73 ESO 123 cAsm ES 2enb 33
ibe siemae. 1.4. 125 sn 183, LOO. OF
78 aor 127 ter io3

80 ve 40 128 PES Zane
82 ae ces 129 e232

83 286, 291

e4 Woug 130 woe G45 278
Someries 182 de Lane

go 48 132 sia ells

92 2s 133 ome 2od.

93 ru 00; 230 135 oe weed tf

94 a ib 746200 139 ie 6

95 anEZS 7.1208 res ue etlo


1 Preserved only in the so-called “manuscript with the
side-commentary.’


161


THE PILLOW-BOOK OF SEI SHONAGON


ORIGINAL ‘TRANSLATION ] ORriGINAL "TRANSLATION
Section Page Section Page

3 ne 34 116 or 155

6 rs 138 124 ay 56

20 ae 35 ee Wee 1 na 4 123

21 wat 116 156 ar 73

24 fats 118 POA, 807 tae wag

30 ee II4 194 ae oF,

33 ses 113 200 oe 94

22 as a2 222 oat 129

4.5 ves 62 234 aA 130

46 vee 82 235 ies 131

hi <P ve 2Eo 267 ee 96, 95

% aa ae 263 30 IOI

63 EA 126 368

66 aoe 93 ee 95
Be ote 74, 88 270 ae 121

83 a 125, 90 275 tes 130

86 ae Gi 284, 285... 133, 132
87 rh 94. 286 bra 83

89 18 84. 287 est 112

94 srale 78 295 ace IIg
103 ne IOI 297 eS Ds
ee) dic 128 301 vse 24


162


Other Translations by Arthur Waley


The Tale of Genji


From the Japanese of LADY MURASAKI


Demy 8v0. In Four Volumes 10s. 6d. net per vol.


VoLt. I. THE TALE OF GENJI _ Fifth Impression
VoL. Il. THE SACRED TREE — Second Impression
Vo. Hil. A WREATH OF CLOUD Second Impression


VoL. IV. BLUE TROUSERS


‘“*A subtle and beautiful translation of a great novel.’”—Times Literary
Supplement.


‘«One of the rare masterpieces of translation in the language, just as
the original is one of the great novels of the world.” Manchester Guardian.


“To most readers this book will be a revelation of the exquisite and
highly developed culture which flourished in Japan at a time when
Europe was just beginning to emerge from the dark ages. We can
only thank Mr. Waley for giving us this addition to the world’s classics.’”
—Observer.


Other Translations by Arthur Waley


The No Plays of Japan


Witru Letrrers sy OSWALD SICKERT
Demy 8ve. 18s.


“Tt is indeed the highest tribute to this book that, fascinating as is the
introduction, the text is more fascinating still.’—New Statesman.


The Temple, and other Poems


Cr. 8v0. Second Impression 65.


““There is a beauty and freshness of imagery and pictorial wealth
and a variety of form and movement that are something of a revela-
tion.’’—Manchester Guardian.


More Translations from the Chinese


Second Impression


Cr. 80. Paper Boards, 35.; Cloth, 4s. 6d.


** The highest praise is due to Mr, Waley for the crystal quality of his
verse.’’—Spectator.


“Work admirable both for its historical and for its purely literary
value as English poetry.’’—Observer.


All prices ave net.


LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD


~ DATE DUE.


293


Demco, Inc. 38


COL 77557


Library
oe niversity of Texas


at San Antonio


gf


dela he
Wiese
hes


Prey


vy


q
e]


ate
ist
ae


= toe


uy)
i


Nef
rie
if


aS


eS


i eeatalele
ate agate
alee jele te,
legit ited


LPL eae atin
ata
sete.


ath


ieeiqeart


S5


<=


eae
se


arate.


ae <

gerne Se def
See
4


s


ats
