Medieval Cities (Henri Pirenne (Frank D. Halsey, trans.), 1925)
==========================================================
The Pirenne thesis: cities, trade, and the rebirth of Europe after Islam closed the Mediterranean. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (bwb_P9-ARZ-224).

by Henri Pirenne 


aay 


§ A Doubleday Anchor Book 


Henri Pirenne was born in Belgium in 1862. He lectured 
at the University of Liége, and in 1886 became a pro- 
fessor of medieval and Belgium history at the University 
of Ghent. During World War I, while teaching at the 
University of Ghent, he was arrested and deported to 
Germany as one of the leaders of Belgium’s passive 
resistance. In 1922 he was invited to deliver a series of 
lectures in America. Out of these lectures grew Medieval 
Cities. At the time of his death in 1935 Pirenne was 
professor emeritus at the University of Ghent. 

His works include: History of Belgium, 7 volumes; 
Belgium Democracy: Its Early History; An Economic 
and Social History of Medieval Europe; and Moham- 
med and Charlemagne. 


MEDIEVAL 
CITTES 


Their Origins and the Revival of Trade 
by 


HENRI 
PIRENNE 


Translated from the French by 
Frank D. Halsey 


Doubleday Anchor Books 
DOUBLEDAY & COMPANY, INC. 


GARDEN CITY, N.Y. 


Medieval Cities was originally published in 1925 by 
Princeton University Press. The Anchor Books edition is 
published by arrangement with Princeton University 
Press. 


Anchor Books edition: 1956 


Copyright 1925, by Princeton University Press 
Princeton, New Jersey 
Typography by Diana Klemin 
Cover design by Antonio Frasconi 
Printed in the United States of America 


Preface to the 1925 Edition 


This little volume contains the substance of lectures 
which I delivered from October to December 1922 in 
several American universities. It is an attempt to ex- 
pound, in a general way, the economic awakening and 
the birth of urban civilization in Western Europe during 
the Middle Ages. 

The bibliography placed at the end of the volume will 
permit the reader, who may be interested in the subject 
discussed herein, to inform himself more fully of the 
details and to verify my assertions. It would be obviously 
impossible, in a general outline such as this, to go into 
particulars or take up exceptions and anomalies, and 
still more so to engage in controversy. Here, then, will 
be found only a synthesis, the result of long years of 
study and research. 

It is particularly gratifying to me to see this book 
published by the Press of a University which showed 
me so cordial a sympathy during the war, and to which 
I am very happy to dedicate the work as a mark of my 


profound gratitude. H. P. 


at> Pepa 


Cer gilt ol versvuntinse a 
10 eas? tol to Jen ath aiemdies 


total held dow 
Lorne ltd 
tioichw «)* Lite 


Translator’s Foreword 


Medieval Cities, by Henri Pirenne, was first issued in 
its English text in 1925 and it was not until two years 
later, curiously enough, that the book was published (in 
Brussels) in the language in which it had been written. 
The English version was reprinted in 1934, and the con- 
tinuing interest in this stimulating book has now made a 
new and slightly revised printing advisable. 

The occasion has therefore led the translator to re- 
read, for the first time in nearly fifteen years, the original 
French text. He has as a result been impressed afresh 
with the author’s clarity of thought and facility of ex- 
pression, but at the same time he has been appalled by 
the number of infelicities of translation, at least one of 
which rendered utterly unintelligible the author’s mean- 
ing. It is to be hoped that the most obvious among them 
have been corrected in this present printing. 

If Medieval Cities is not the most important of the 
author’s works—for more than four decades he was a 
productive scholar—it is one of the most interesting. It 
is not only a concise “synthesis . . . of long years of 


Viii TRANSLATOR S FOREWORD 


study and research” by one of the greatest authorities 
in the field of medieval history, but is also a noteworthy 
example of the best sort of contribution to historical 
writing, combining simplicity with erudition and imagi- 
nation with accuracy. And Medieval Cities is possibly of 
even more value today than when first published. In its 
clear account of the part played by the middle class in 
the development of the modern economic system and 
modern culture, it makes us realize how much cities of 
the present have borrowed and are borrowing from 
medieval municipal institutions. It also makes us realize 
a fact which had been forgotten, until the rise to power 
of the Nazis in Germany and the Fascists in Italy demon- 
strated it anew—the importance of the middle class as a 
revolutionary force. In present-day Germany and Italy 
the members of the middle class, like the inhabitants of 
the medieval cities whose economic and in some cases 
whose actual physical descendants they are—those 
“masterless men” who were neither serfs nor seigneurs— 
hold the key to power. 

F. D. HL 


Contents 


PREFACE V 
TRANSLATOR S FOREWORD Vii 


THE MEDITERRANEAN 1 
THE NINTH CENTURY 17 
CITY ORIGINS 39 
THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 55 
THE MERCHANT CLASS 75 
THE MIDDLE CLASS 93 
MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 121 
CITIES AND EUROPEAN 
CIVILIZATION 153 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 169 
INDEX 173 


tf MAZARAGETICNM Sit 
Ye THoTvs) deen sar 
G@& *#MIOIAG ¥TID 
Ge XAVSUMMOCD to Lavivan #eT ., 


¥ 
ae 
c 


K4A09 TRAHOHSEM SRY 

tf #0619 S.GGsm Sar J 
“O°UVUYTTAAT SASLDIE ee 

“AD'‘OHOR QMA EET RS 

get wore eyreartvery 


por VEC AADOLIn1e 
vb eaeaus 


- tm Spacers ag 
3 


THE 
MEDITERRANEAN 


The Roman Empire, at the end of the third century, had 
one outstanding general characteristic: it was an essen- 
tially Mediterranean commonwealth. Virtually all of its 
territory lay within the watershed of that great land- 
locked sea; the distant frontiers of the Rhine, the Dan- 
ube, the Euphrates and the Sahara, may be regarded 
merely as an advanced circle of outer defenses protect- 
ing the approaches. 

The Mediterranean was, without question, the bul- 
wark of both its political and economic unity. Its very 
existence depended on mastery of the sea. Without that 
great trade route, neither the government, nor the de- 
fense, nor the administration of the orbis romanus would 
have been possible. 

As the Empire grew old this fundamentally maritime 
character was, interestingly enough, not only preserved 
but was still more sharply defined. When the former in- 
land capital, Rome, was abandoned, its place was taken 
by a city which not only served as a capital but which 


2 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


was at the same time an admirable seaport—Constanti- 
nople. 

The Empire’s cultural development, to be sure, had 
clearly passed its peak. Population decreased, the spirit 
of enterprise waned, barbarian hordes commenced to 
threaten the frontiers, and the increasing expenses of 
the government, fighting for its very life, brought in 
their train a fiscal system which more and more enslaved 
men to the State. Nevertheless this general deterioration 
does not seem to have appreciably affected the maritime 
commerce of the Mediterranean. It continued to be 
active and well sustained, in marked contrast with the 
growing apathy that characterized the inland provinces. 
Trade continued to keep the East and the West in close 
contact with each other. There was no interruption to 
the intimate commercial relations between those diverse 
climes bathed by one and the same sea. Both manufac- 
tured and natural products were still extensively dealt 
in: textiles from Constantinople, Edessa, Antioch, and 
Alexandria; wines, oils and spices from Syria; papyrus 
from Egypt; wheat from Egypt, Africa, and Spain; and 
wines from Gaul and Italy. There was even a reform 
of the monetary system based on the gold solidus, which 
served materially to encourage commercial operations 
by giving them the benefit of an excellent currency, 
universally adopted as an instrument of exchange and 
as a means of quoting prices. 

Of the two great regions of the Empire, the East and 
the West, the first far surpassed the second, both in 
superiority of civilization and in a much higher level of 
economic development. At the beginning of the fourth 
century there were no longer any really great cities 
save in the East. The center of the export trade was in 
Syria and in Asia Minor, and here also was concen- 
trated, in particular, the textile industry for which the 
whole Roman world was the market and for which 
Syrian ships were the carriers. 


4. 


i. 
pet 
oe 
Ded 

ee 

as 


rwke 


THE MEDITERRANEAN 3 


The commercial prominence of the Syrians is one of 
the most interesting facts in the history of the Lower 
Empire. It undoubtedly contributed largely to that pro- 
gressive orientalization of society which was due even- 
tually to end in Byzantinism. And this orientalization, of 
which the sea was the vehicle, is clear proof of the in- 


_ creasing importance which the Mediterranean acquired 


as the aging Empire grew weak, gave way in the North 
beneath the pressure of the barbarians, and contracted 
more and more about the shores of this inland sea. 

The persistence of the Germanic tribes in striving, 
from the very beginning of the period of the invasions, 
to reach these same shores and to settle there is worth 
special notice. When, in the course of the fourth cen- 
tury, the frontiers gave way for the first time under their 
blows, they poured southward in a living flood. The 
Quadi and the Marcomanni invaded Italy; the Goths 
marched on the Bosporus; the Franks, the Suevi, and 
the Vandals, who by now had crossed the Rhine, pushed 
on unhesitatingly towards Aquitaine and Spain. They 
had no thought of merely colonizing the provinces they 
coveted. Their dream was rather to settle down, them- 
selves, in those happy regions where the mildness of 
the climate and the fertility of the soil were matched 
by the charms and the wealth of civilization. 

This initial attempt produced nothing more perma- 
nent than the devastation which it had caused. Rome 
was still strong enough to drive the invaders back be- 
yond the Rhine and the Danube. For a century and a 
half she succeeded in restraining them, but at the cost 
of exhausting her armies and her finances. 

More and more unequal became the balance of 
power. The incursions of the barbarians grew more re- 
lentless as their increasing numbers made the acquisition 
of new territory more imperative, while the decreasing 
population of the Empire made a successful resistance 


constantly less possible. Despite the extraordinary skill 


4 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


and determination with which the Empire sought to 
stave off disaster, the outcome was inevitable. 

At the beginning of the fifth century, all was over. 
The whole West was invaded. Roman provinces were 
transformed into Germanic kingdoms. The Vandals 
were installed in Africa, the Visigoths in Aquitaine and 
in Spain, the Burgundians in the Valley of the Rhéne, 
the Ostrogoths in Italy. 

This nomenclature is significant. It includes only 
Mediterranean countries, and little more is needed to 
show that the objective of the conquerors, free at last 
to settle down where they pleased, was the sea—that 
sea which for so long a time the Romans had called, 
with as much affection as pride, mare nostrum. Towards 
the sea, as of one accord, they all turned their steps, 
impatient to settle along its shores and to enjoy its 
beauty. 

If the Franks did not reach the Mediterranean at their 
first attempt, it is because, having come too late, they 
found the ground already occupied. But they too per- 
sisted in striving for a foothold there. One of Clovis’s 
earliest ambitions was to conquer Provence, and only 
the intervention of Theodoric kept him from extending 
the frontiers of his kingdom as far as the Céte d’Azur. 
Yet this first lack of success was not due to discourage 
his successors. A quarter of a century later, in 536, the 
Franks made good use of Justinian’s offensive against the 
Ostrogoths and wrung from their hard-pressed rivals the 
grant of the coveted territory. It is interesting to see how 
consistently the Merovingian dynasty tended, from that 
date on, to become in its turn a Mediterranean power. 

Childebert and Clotaire, for example, ventured upon 
an expedition beyond the Pyrenees in 542, which, how- 
ever, proved to be ill-starred. But it was Italy in partic- 
ular that aroused the cupidity of the Frankish kings. 
They formed an alliance, first with the Byzantines and 
then with the Lombards, in the hope of setting foot south 


_— 


ae 


nt 


he eg 


ay. eG 


THE MEDITERRANEAN 5 


_ of the Alps. Repeatedly thwarted, they persisted in fresh 


attempts. By 539, Theudebert had crossed the Alps, and 
the territories which he had occupied were reconquered 
by Narses in 553. Numerous efforts were made in 


_ 584-585 and from 588 to 590 to get possession anew. 


The appearance of the Germanic tribes on the shore 
of the Mediterranean was by no means a critical point 
marking the advent of a new era in the history of 
Europe. Great as were the consequences which it en- 
tailed, it did not sweep the boards clean nor even break 
the tradition. The aim of the invaders was not to destroy 
the Roman Empire but to occupy and enjoy it. By and 
large, what they preserved far exceeded what they de- 
stroyed or what they brought that was new. It is true 
that the kingdoms they established on the soil of the 
Empire made an end of the latter in so far as being a 
State in Western Europe. From a political point of view 
the orbis romanus, now strictly localized in the East, lost 
that ecumenical character which had made its frontiers 
coincide with the frontiers of Christianity. The Empire, 
however, was far from becoming a stranger to the lost 
provinces. Its civilization there outlived its authority. By 
the Church, by language, by the superiority of its in- 
stitutions and law, it prevailed over the conquerors. In 
the midst of the troubles, the insecurity, the misery and 
the anarchy which accompanied the invasions there was 
naturally a certain decline, but even in that decline there 
was preserved a physiognomy still distinctly Roman. The 
Germanic tribes were unable, and in fact did not want, 
to do without it. They barbarized it, but they did not 
consciously germanize it. 

Nothing is better proof of this assertion than the per- 
sistence in the last days of the Empire—from the fifth 
to the eighth century—of that maritime character 
pointed out above. The importance of the Mediterra- 
nean did not grow less after the period of the invasions. 
The sea remained for the Germanic tribes what it had 


6 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


been before their arrival—the very center of Europe, the — 
mare nostrum. The sea had had such great importance 
in the political order that the deposing of the last Roman 
Emperor in the West (476) was not enough in itself to 
turn historical evolution from its time-honored direction. 
It continued, on the contrary, to develop in the same 
theater and under the same influences. No indication 
yet gave warning of the end of that commonwealth of 
civilization created by the Empire from the Pillars of 
Hercules to the Aegean Sea, from the coasts of Egypt 
and Africa to the shores of Gaul, Italy and Spain. In 
spite of the invasion of the barbarians the new world 
conserved, in all essential characteristics, the physiog- 
nomy of the old. To follow the course of events from 
Romulus Augustulus to Charlemagne it is necessary to 
keep the Mediterranean constantly in view. 

All the great events in political history are unfolded 
on its shores. From 493 to 526 Italy, governed by 
Theodoric, maintained a hegemony over all the Ger- 
manic kingdoms, a hegemony through which the power 
of the Roman tradition was perpetuated and assured. 
After Theodoric, this power was still more clearly shown. 
Justinian failed by but little of restoring imperial unity 
(527-565). Africa, Spain, and Italy were reconquered. 
The Mediterranean became again a Roman lake. By- 
zantium, it is true, weakened by the immense effort she 
had just put forth, could neither finish nor even preserve 
intact the astonishing work which she had accomplished. 
The Lombards took Northern Italy away from her 
(568); the Visigoths freed themselves from her yoke. 
Nevertheless she did not abandon her ambitions. She 
retained, for a long time to come, Africa, Sicily, Southern 
Italy. Nor did she loose her grip on the West—thanks to 
the sea, the mastery of which her fleets so securely held 
that the fate of Europe rested at that moment, more 
than ever, on the waves of the Mediterranean. 

What was true of the political situation held equally 


‘6% 


“FW SE os 


z THE MEDITERRANEAN - 


oe well for the cultural. It seems hardly necessary to recall 


that Boéthius (480-525) and Cassiodorus (477-c. 562) 
were Italians as were St. Benedict (480-534) and Greg- 


ory the Great (590-604), and that Isidorus of Seville 


(570-636) was a Spaniard. It was Italy that maintained 


_the last schools at the same time that she was fostering 
__ the spread of monachism north of the Alps. It was in 
Italy, also, that what was left of the ancient culture 
_ flourished side by side with what was brought forth 

anew in the bosom of the Church. All the strength and 


vigor that the Church possessed was concentrated in the 


region of the Mediterranean. There alone she gave evi- 


dence of an organization and spirit capable of initiating 
great enterprises. An interesting example of this is the 
fact that Christianity was brought to the Anglo-Saxons 
(596) from the distant shores of Italy, not from the 
neighboring shores of Gaul. The mission of St. Augustine 
is therefore an illuminating sidelight on the historic in- 
fluence retained by the Mediterranean. And it seems 
more significant still when we recall that the evangeliza- 
tion of Ireland was due to missionaries sent out from 
Marseilles, and that the apostles of Belgium, St. Amand 
(689-693) and St. Remade (c. 668), were Aquitanians. 

A brief survey of the economic development of Eu- 
rope will give the crowning touch to the substantiation 
of the theory which has here been put forward. That 
development is, obviously, a clear-cut, direct continua- 
tion of the economy of the Roman Empire. In it are 
rediscovered all the latter’s principal traits and, above 
all, that Mediterranean character which here is unmis- 
takable. To be sure, a general decline in social activity 
was apparent in this region as in all others. By the last 
days of the Empire there was a clearly marked decline 
which the catastrophe of the invasions naturally helped 
accentuate. But it would be a decided mistake to imag- 
ine that the arrival of the Germanic tribes had as a result 
the substitution of a purely agricultural economy and a 


8 MEDIEVAL CITIES — 


general stagnation in trade for urban life and commercial 
activity.+ 

The supposed dislike of the barbarians for towns is 
an admitted fable to which reality has given the lie. If, 
on the extreme frontiers of the Empire, certain towns 
were put to the torch, destroyed and pillaged, it is none 
the less true that the immense majority survived the in- 
vasions. A statistical survey of cities in existence at the 
present day in France, in Italy and even on the banks 
of the Rhine and the Danube, gives proof that, for the 
most part, these cities now stand on the sites where rose 
the Roman cities, and that their very names are often 
but a transformation of Roman names. 

The Church had of course closely patterned the re- 
ligious districts after the administrative districts of the 
Empire. As a general rule, each diocese corresponded 
to a civitas. Since the ecclesiastical organization suffered 
no change during the era of the Germanic invasions, the 
result was that in the new kingdoms founded by the 
conquerors it preserved intact this characteristic feature. 
In fact, from the beginning of the sixth century the word 
civitas took the special meaning of “episcopal city,” the 
center of the diocese. In surviving the Empire on which 
it was based, the Church therefore contributed very 
largely to the safeguarding of the existence of the Roman 
cities. 

But it must not be overlooked, on the other hand, 
that these cities in themselves long retained a consider- 
able importance. Their municipal institutions did not 
suddenly disappear upon the arrival of the Germanic 
tribes. Not only in Italy, but also in Spain and even in 
Gaul, they kept their decuriones—a corps of magistrates 


1. A. Dopsch, Wirtschaftliche und soziale Grund- 
lagen der europdischen Kulturentwicklung, Vienna, 
1920, Vol. I, p. 527, takes issue strongly with the opin- 
ion that the Germanic invasions put an end to Roman 
civilization. 


THE MEDITERRANEAN 9 


provided with a judicial and administrative authority, 
the details of which are not clear but whose existence 
and Roman origin is a matter of record. There is to be 
noticed, moreover, the presence of the defensor civitatis, 
and the practice of inscribing notarized deeds in the 
gesta municipalia. 

It is also well established that these cities were the 
centers of an economic activity which itself was a sur- 
vival of the preceding civilization. Each city was the 
market for the surrounding countryside, the winter home 
of the great landed proprietors of the neighborhood and, 
if favorably situated, the center of a commerce the more 
highly developed in proportion to its nearness to the 
shores of the Mediterranean. A perusal of Gregory of 
Tours gives ample proof that in the Gaul of his time 
there was still a professional merchant class residing in 
the towns. He cites, in some thoroughly characteristic 
passages, those of Verdun, Paris, Orleans, Clermont- 
Ferrand, Marseilles, Nimes, and Bordeaux, and the in- 
formation which he supplies concerning them is all the 
more significant in that it is brought into his narrative 
only incidentally. Care should of course be taken not to 
exaggerate its value. An equally great fault would be 
to undervalue it. Certainly the economic order of Mer- 
ovingian Gaul was founded on agriculture rather than 
on any other form of activity. More certainly still this 
had already been the case under the Roman Empire. 

But this does not preclude the fact that inland traffic, 
the import and export of goods and merchandise, was 
carried on to a considerable extent. It was an important 
factor in the maintenance of society. An indirect proof 
of this is furnished by the institution of market-tolls 
(teloneum). Thus were called the tolls set up by the 
Roman administration along the roads, in the ports, at 
bridges and fords, and elsewhere. The Frankish kings 
let them all stay in force and drew from them such 
copious revenues that the collectors of this class of taxes 


10 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


(telonearii) figured among their most useful function- 
aries. 

The continued commercial activity after the disap- 
pearance of the Empire, and, likewise, the survival of 
the towns that were the centers thereof and the mer- 
chants who were its instruments, is explained by the 
continuation of Mediterranean trade. In all the chief 
characteristics it was the same, from the fifth to the 
eighth centuries, as it had been just after Constantine. 
If, as is probable, the decline was the more rapid after 
the Germanic invasions, it remains none the less true 
that there is presented a picture of uninterrupted inter- 
course between the Byzantine East and the West domi- 
nated by the barbarians. By means of the shipping which 
was carried on from the coasts of Spain and Gaul to 
those of Syria and Asia Minor, the basin of the Mediter- 
ranean did not cease, despite the political subdivisions 
which it had seen take place, to consolidate the economic 
unity which it had shaped for centuries under the im- 
perial commonwealth. Because of this fact, the economic 
organization of the world lived on after the political 
transformation. 

In lack of other proofs, the monetary system of the 
Frankish kings would alone establish this truth con- 
vincingly. This system, as is too well known to make 
necessary any lengthy consideration here, was purely 
Roman or, strictly speaking, Romano-Byzantine. This is 
shown by the coins that were minted; the solidus, the 
triens, and the denarius—that is to say, the sou, the third- 
sou and the denier. It is shown further by the metal 
which was employed: gold, used for the coinage of the 
solidus and the triens. It is also shown by the weight 
which was given to specie. It is shown, finally, by the 
effigies which were minted on the coins. In this con- 
nection it is worth noting that the mints continued for a 
long time, under the Merovingian kings, the custom of 
representing the bust of the Emperor on the coins and 


a THE MEDITERRANEAN 11 


of showing on the reverse of the pieces the Victoria 
Augusti and that, carrying this imitation to the extreme, 
when the Byzantines substituted the cross for the symbol 
of that victory they did the same. Such extreme servility 
can be explained only by the continuing influence of the 
Empire. The obvious reason was the necessity of preserv- 
ing, between the local currency and the imperial cur- 
rency, a conformity which would be purposeless if the 
most intimate relations had not existed between Mer- 
Ovingian commerce and the general commerce of the 
Mediterranean. In other words, this commerce continued 
to be closely bound up with the commerce of the By- 
zantine Empire. Of such ties, moreover, there are abun- 
dant proofs and it will suffice to mention merely a few 
of the most significant. 

It should be borne in mind, first of all, that at the start 
of the eighth century Marseilles was still the great port 
of Gaul. The terms employed by Gregory of Tours, in 
the numerous anecdotes in which he happens to speak 
of that city, make it seem a singularly animated economic 
center. A very active shipping bound it to Constantino- 
ple, to Syria, Africa, Egypt, Spain and Italy. The prod- 
ucts of the East—papyrus, spices, costly textiles, wine 
and oil—were the basis of a regular import trade. For- 
eign merchants, Jews and Syrians for the most part, had 
their residence there, and their nationality is itself an 
indication of the close relations kept up by Marseilles 
with Byzantium. Finally, the extraordinary quantity of 
coins which were struck there during the Merovingian 
era gives material proof of the activity of its commerce. 
The population of the city must have comprised, aside 
from the merchants, a rather numerous class of artisans.” 


2. It is impossible, in fact, not to infer that at Mar- 
seilles there was a class of artisans at least as important 
as that which still existed at Arles in the middle of the 
sixth century. See F. Kiener, Verfassungsgeschichte der 
Provence, Leipzig, 1900, p. 29. 


12 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


In every respect it seems, then, to have accurately pre- 
served, under the government of the Frankish kings, the 
clearly municipal character of Roman cities. 

The economic development of Marseilles naturally 
made itself felt in the hinterland of the port. Under its 
attraction, all the commerce of Gaul was oriented to- 
ward the Mediterranean. The most important market- 
tolls of the Frankish kingdom were situated in the neigh- 
borhood of the town at Fos, at Arles, at Toulon, at 
Sorgues, at Valence, at Vienne, and at Avignon. Here 
is clear proof that merchandise landed in the city was 
expedited to the interior. By the course of the Rhéne 
and of the Saone, as well as by the Roman roads, it 
reached the north of the country. The charters are still 
in existence by which the Abbey of Corbie (Depart- 
ment of Pas-de-Calais) obtained from the kings an ex- 
emption from tolls at Fos on a number of commodities, 
among which may be remarked a surprising variety of 
spices of eastern origin, as well as papyrus. In these cir- 
cumstances it does not seem unwarranted to assume that 
the commercial activity of the ports of Rouen and 
Nantes, on the shores of the Atlantic Ocean, as well as 
of Quentovic and Duurstede, on the shores of the North 
Sea, was sustained by the ramifications of the export 
traffic from far-off Marseilles. 

But it was in the south of the country that this effect 
was the most appreciable. All the largest cities of Mer- 
ovingian Gaul were still to be found, as in the days of 
the Roman Empire, south of the Loire. The details which 
Gregory of Tours supplies concerning Clermont-Ferrand 
and Orleans show that they had within their walls veri- 
table colonies of Jews and Syrians, and if it was so with 
those towns which there is no reason for believing en- 
joyed a privileged status, it must have been so also with 
the much more important centers such as Bordeaux or 
Lyons. It is an established fact, moreover, that Lyons 


. 


‘ 
; 


& Nee 


- 


THE MEDITERRANEAN 13 


still had at the Carolingian era a quite numerous Jewish 
population. 

Here, then, is quite enough to support the conclusion 
that Merovingian times knew, thanks to the continuance 
of Mediterranean shipping and the intermediary of Mar- 
seilles, what we may safely call a great commerce. It 
would certainly be an error to assume that the dealings 
of the oriental merchants of Gaul were restricted solely 
to articles of luxury. Probably the sale of jewelry, en- 
amels and silk stuffs resulted in handsome profits, but 
this would not be enough to explain their number and 
their extraordinary diffusion throughout all the country. 
The traffic of Marseilles was, above all else, supported 
by goods for general consumption such as wine and oil, 
spices and papyrus. These commodities, as has already 
been pointed out, were regularly exported to the north. 

The oriental merchants of the Frankish Empire were 
virtually engaged in wholesale trade. Their boats, after 
being discharged on the quays of Marseilles, certainly 
carried back, on leaving the shores of Provence, not only 
passengers but return freight. Our sources of information, 
to be sure, do not tell much about the nature of this 
freight. Among the possible conjectures, one of the most 
likely is that it probably consisted, at least in good part, 
in human chattels—that is to say, in slaves. Traffic in 
slaves did not cease to be carried on in the Frankish 
Empire until the end of the ninth century. The wars 
waged against the barbarians of Saxony, Thuringia and 
the Slavic regions provided a source of supply which 
seems to have been abundant enough. Gregory of Tours 
speaks of Saxon slaves belonging to a merchant of Or- 
leans, and it is a good guess that this Samo, who de- 
parted in the first half of the seventh century with a 
band of companions for the country of Wends, whose 
king he eventually became, was very probably nothing 
more than an adventurer trafficking in slaves. And it is 
of course obvious that the slave trade, to which the Jews 


14 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


still assiduously applied themselves in the ninth century, 
must have had its origin in an earlier era. 

If the bulk of the commerce in Merovingian Gaul was 
to be found in the hands of oriental merchants, their 
influence, however, should not be exaggerated. Side by 
side with them, and according to all indications in con- 
stant relations with them, are mentioned indigenous 
merchants. Gregory of Tours does not fail to supply in- 
formation concerning them, which would undoubtedly 
have been more voluminous if his narrative had had 
more than a merely incidental interest in them. He shows 
the king consenting to a loan to the merchants of Verdun, 
whose business prospers so well that they soon find them- 
selves in a position to reimburse him. He mentions the 
existence in Paris of a domus negociantum—that is to 
say, apparently, of a sort of market or bazaar. He speaks 
of a merchant profiteering during the great famine of 
585 and getting rich. And in all these anecdotes he is 
dealing, without the least doubt, with professionals and 
not with merely casual buyers or sellers. 

The picture which the commerce of Merovingian Gaul 
presents is repeated, naturally, in the other maritime 
Germanic kingdoms of the Mediterranean—among the 
Ostrogoths of Italy, among the Vandals of Africa, among 
the Visigoths of Spain. The Edict of Theodoric contained 
a quantity of stipulations relative to merchants. Carthage 
continued to be an important port in close relations with 
Spain, and her ships, apparently, went up the coast as 
far as Bordeaux. The laws of the Visigoths mentioned 
merchants from overseas. 

In all of this is clearly manifest the vigorous continuity 
of the commercial development of the Roman Empire 
after the Germanic invasions. They did not put an end 
to the economic unity of antiquity. By means of the 
Mediterranean and the relations kept up thereby be- 
tween the West and the East, this unity, on the contrary, 
was preserved with a remarkable distinctiveness. The 


THE MEDITERRANEAN 15 


great inland sea of Europe no longer belonged, as before, 
to a single State. But nothing yet gave reason to predict 
that it would soon cease to have its time-honored im- 
portance. Despite the transformations which it had un- 
dergone, the new world had not lost the Mediterranean 
character of the old. On the shores of the sea was still 
concentrated the better part of its activities. No indica- 
tion yet gave warning of the end of the commonwealth 
of civilization, created by the Roman Empire from the 
Pillars of Hercules to the Aegean Sea. At the beginning 
of the seventh century, anyone who sought to look into 
the future would have been unable to discern any reason 
for not believing in the continuance of the old tradition. 

Yet what was then natural and reasonable to predict 
was not to be realized. The world-order which had sur- 
vived the Germanic invasions was not able to survive the 
invasion of Islam. ; 

It is thrown across the path of history with the ele- 
mental force of a cosmic cataclysm. Even in the lifetime 
of Mahomet (571-632) no one could have imagined 
the consequences or have prepared for them. Yet the 
movement took no more than fifty years to spread from 
the China Sea to the Atlantic Ocean. Nothing was able 
to withstand it. At the first blow, it overthrew the Persian 
Empire (637-644). It took from the Byzantine Empire, 
in quick succession, Syria (634-636), Egypt (640— 
642), Africa (698). It reached into Spain (711). The 
resistless advance was not to slow down until the start 
of the eighth century, when the walls of Constantinople 
on the one side (713) and the soldiers of Charles Martel 
on the other (732) broke that great enveloping offensive 
against the two flanks of Christianity. 

But if its force of expansion was exhausted, it had 
none the less changed the face of the world. Its sudden 
thrust had destroyed ancient Europe. It had put an end 
to the Mediterranean commonwealth in which it had 
gathered its strength. 


16 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


The familiar and almost “family” sea which once 
united all the parts of this commonwealth was to become 
a barrier between them. On all its shores, for centuries, 
social life, in its fundamental characteristics, had been 
the same; religion, the same; customs and ideas, the 
same or very nearly so. The invasion of the barbarians 
from the North had modified nothing essential in that 
situation. 

But now, all of a sudden, the very lands where civili- 
zation had been born were torn away; the Cult of the 
Prophet was substituted for the Christian Faith, Moslem 
law for Roman law, the Arab tongue for the Greek and 
the Latin tongue. 

The Mediterranean had been a Roman lake; it now 
became, for the most part, a Moslem lake. From this 
time on it separated, instead of uniting, the East and 
the West of Europe. The tie which was still binding the 
Byzantine Empire to the Germanic kingdoms of the 
West was broken. 


| 


{ Maia “i x 


we 


THE NINTH 
CENTURY 


The tremendous effect the invasion of Islam had upon 
Western Europe has not, perhaps, been fully appreci- 
ated. 

Out of it arose a new and unparalleled situation, un- 
like anything that had gone before. Through the Phoeni- 
cians, the Greeks, and finally the Romans, Western Eu- 
rope had always received the cultural stamp of the East. 
It had lived, as it were, by virtue of the Mediterranean; 
now for the first time it was forced to live by its own 
resources. The center of gravity, heretofore on the shore 
of the Mediterranean, was shifted to the north. As a 
result the Frankish Empire, which had so far been play- 
ing only a minor réle in the history of Europe, was to 
become the arbiter of Europe’s destinies. 

There is obviously more than mere coincidence in the 
simultaneity of the closing of the Mediterranean by Is- 
lam and the entry of the Carolingians on the scene. 
There is the distinct relation of cause and effect be- 
tween the two. The Frankish Empire was fated to lay 
the foundations of the Europe of the Middle Ages. But 


18 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


the mission which it fulfilled had as an essential prior 
condition the overthrow of the traditional world-order. 
The Carolingians would never have been called upon to 
play the part they did if historical evolution had not 
been turned aside from its course and, so to speak, “de- 
Saxoned” by the Moslem invasion. Without Islam, the 
Frankish Empire would probably never have existed and 
Charlemagne, without Mahomet, would be inconceiv- 
able. 

This is made plain enough by the many contrasts 
between the Merovingian era, during which the Medi- 
terranean retained its time-honored historical impor- 
tance, and the Carolingian era, when that influence 
ceased to make itself felt. These contrasts were in evi- 
dence everywhere: in religious sentiment, in political 
and social institutions, in literature, in language and 
even in handwriting. From whatever standpoint it is 
studied, the civilization of the ninth century shows a 
distinct break with the civilization of antiquity. Nothing 
would be more fallacious than to see therein a simple 
continuation of the preceding centuries. The coup d état 
of Pepin the Short was considerably more than the sub- 
stitution of one dynasty for another. It marked a new 
orientation of the course hitherto followed by history. 
At first glance there seems reason to believe that Char- 
lemagne, in assuming the title of Roman Emperor and 
of Augustus, wished to restore the ancient tradition. In 
reality, in setting himself up against the Emperor of 
Constantinople, he broke that tradition. His Empire was 
Roman only in so far as the Catholic Church was Roman. 
For it was from the Church, and the Church alone, that 
came its inspiration. The forces which he placed at her 
service were, moreover, forces of the north. His principal 
collaborators, in religious and cultural matters, were no 
longer, as they had previously been, Italians, Aquita- 
nians, or Spaniards; they were Anglo-Saxons—a St. Boni- 
face or an Alcuin—or they were Swabians, like Einhard. 


THE NINTH CENTURY 19 


In the affairs of the State, which was now cut off from the 


Mediterranean, southerners played scarcely any rdle. 
The Germanic influence commenced to dominate at the 
very moment when the Frankish Empire, forced to turn 
away from the Mediterranean, spread over Northern 


_ Europe and pushed its frontiers as far as the Elbe and 
_ the mountains of Bohemia.1 


In the field of economics the contrast, which the 


_ Carolingian period shows to Merovingian times, is espe- 


cially striking. In the days of the Merovingians, Gaul 


was still a maritime country and trade and traffic 


flourished because of that fact. The Empire of Charle- 
magne, on the contrary, was essentially an inland one. 
No longer was there any communication with the exte- 
rior; it was a closed State, a State without foreign 
markets, living in a condition of almost complete isola- 
tion. 

To be sure, the transition from one era to the other 
was not clear-cut. The trade of Marseilles did not sud- 
denly cease but, from the middle of the seventh cen- 
tury, waned gradually as the Moslems advanced in the 
Mediterranean. Syria, conquered by them in 633-638, 
no longer kept it thriving with her ships and her mer- 
chandise. Shortly afterwards, Egypt passed in her turn 
under the yoke of Islam (638-640), and papyrus no 
longer came to Gaul. A characteristic consequence is 
that, after 677, the royal chancellery stopped using 


1. The objection may be raised that Charlemagne 
conquered in Italy the kingdom of the Lombards and 
in Spain the region included between the Pyrenees and 
the Ebro. But these thrusts towards the south are by 
no means to be explained by a desire to dominate the 
shores of the Mediterranean. The expeditions against 
the Lombards were provoked by political causes and 
especially by the alliance with the Papacy. The expedi- 
tion in Spain had no other aim than the establishing 
of a solid frontier against the Moslems. 


20 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


oe 


papyrus.? The importation of spices kept up for a while, — 
for the monks of Corbie, in 716, believed it useful to — 


have ratified for the last time their privileges of the 
tonlieu of Fos. A half century later, solitude reigned in 
the port of Marseilles. Her foster-mother, the sea, was 
shut off from her and the economic life of the inland 
regions which had been nourished through her inter- 
mediary was definitely extinguished. By the ninth cen- 
tury Provence, once the richest country of Gaul, had 
become the poorest. 

More and more, the Moslems consolidated their 
domination over the sea. In the course of the ninth cen- 
tury they seized the Balearic Isles, Corsica, Sardinia, 
Sicily. On the coasts of Africa they founded new ports: 
Tunis (698-703); later on, Mehdia to the south of this 
city; then Cairo, in 973. Palermo, where stood a great 
arsenal, became their principal base in the Tyrrhenian 
Sea. Their fleets sailed it in complete mastery; com- 
mercial flotillas transported the products of the West to 
Cairo, whence they were redispatched to Bagdad, or 
pirate fleets devastated the coasts of Provence and Italy 
and put towns to the torch after they had been pillaged 
and their inhabitants captured to be sold as slaves. In 
889 a band of these plunderers even laid hold of 
Fraxinetum (the present Garde-Frainet, in the Depart- 
ment of the Var) not far from Nice, the garrison of 
which, for nearly a century thereafter, subjected the 


2. Imports, however, had not completely ceased at 
that date. The last reference we know to the use of 
Pes in Gaul is in 737; see M. Prou, Manuel de 
paléographie, 3rd edit., p. 17. In Italy, it was continued 
to be used up to the eleventh century; see A. Giry, 
Manuel de diplomatique, p. 494. It was imported there 
either from Egypt or, more probably, from Sicily (where 
the Arabs had introduced its manufacture) by the ship- 
ping of the Byzantine cities of the South of the Penin- 
eat or by that of Venice, which will be discussed in 

ap. I. 


rs 


ty) 
SAN 


THE NINTH CENTURY 21 


neighboring populace to continual raids and menaced 


the roads which led across the Alps from France to Italy. 

The efforts of Charlemagne and his successors to pro- 
tect the coasts from Saracen raiders were as impotent 
as their attempts to oppose the invasions of the Norse- 
men in the north and west. The hardihood and sea- 
manship of the Danes and Norwegians made it easy for 
them to plunder the coasts of the Carolingian Empire 
during the whole of the eleventh century. They con- 
ducted their raids not only from the North Sea, the 
Channel, and the Gulf of Gascony, but at times even 
from the Mediterranean. Every river which emptied into 
these seas was, at one time or another, ascended by 
their skilfully constructed barks, splendid specimens 
whereof, brought to light by recent excavations, are now 
preserved at Oslo. Periodically the valleys of the Rhine, 
the Meuse, the Scheldt, the Seine, the Loire, the 
Garonne and the Rhéne were the scene of systematic 
and persistent pillaging. The devastation was so com- 
plete that, in many cases indeed, the population itself 
disappeared. And nothing is a better illustration of the 
essentially inland character of the Frankish Empire than 
its inability to organize the defense of its coasts, against 
either Saracens or Norsemen. For that defense, to be 
effective, should have been a naval defense, and the 
Empire had no fleets, or hastily improvised ones at best. 

Such conditions were incompatible with the existence 
of a commerce of first-rate importance. The historical 
literature of the ninth century contains, it is true, 
certain references to merchants (mercatores, nego- 
ciatores) ,3 but no illusion should be cherished as to their 


3. A. Dopsch, Die Wirtschaftsentwicklung der Karol- 
ingerzeit, Vol. Il, pp. 180 ff., has, with very great 
erudition, cited a number of them. We must, however, 
bear in mind that many among them belong to the 
Merovingian period and that many others are far from 
having the significance which he attributes to them. See 


22 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


ll come 


importance. Compared to the number of texts which — 


have been preserved from that era, these references are 


extremely rare. The capitularies, those regulations — 


touching upon every phase of social life, are remarkably 
meagre in so far as applies to commerce. From this it 
may be assumed that the latter played a rdle of only 
secondary, negligible importance. It was only in the 
north of Gaul that, during the first half of the ninth 
century, trade showed any signs of activity. 

The ports of Quentovic (a place now vanished, near 
Etaples in the Department of Pas-de-Calais) and 
Duurstede (on the Rhine, southwest of Utrecht) which 
under the Merovingian monarchy were already trading 
with England and Denmark, seem to have been centers 
of a widely extended shipping. It is a safe conjecture 
that because of them the river transport of the Friesians 
along the Rhine, the Scheldt and the Meuse enjoyed an 
importance that was matched by no other region dur- 
ing the reigns of Charlemagne and his successors. The 
cloths woven by the peasants of Flanders, and which 
contemporary texts designate by the name of Friesian 
cloaks (pallia fresonica), together with the wines of 
Rhenish Germany, supplied to that river traffic the sub- 
stance of an export trade which seems to have been 
fairly regular up to the day when the Norsemen took 
possession of the ports in question. It is known, moreover, 
that the deniers coined at Duurstede had a very exten- 
sive circulation. They served as prototypes for the oldest 
coins of Sweden and Poland, evident proof that they 
early penetrated, no doubt at the hands of the Norse- 
men, as far as the Baltic Sea. Attention may also be 
called, as having been the substance of a rather exten- 
sive trade, to the salt industry of Noirmoutier, where 
Irish ships were to be seen. Salzburg salt, on the other 


also J. W. Thompson, “The Commerce of France in the 
Ninth Century,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1915, 
Vol. XXII, p. 857. 


THE NINTH CENTURY 23 


hand, was shipped along the Danube and its affluents to 
a the interior of the Empire. The sale of slaves, despite the 
_ prohibitions that were laid down by the sovereigns, was 
_ carried on along the western frontiers, where the pris- 
oners of war taken from among the pagan Slavs found 
numerous purchasers. 

_ The Jews seem to have applied themselves particu- 
larly to this sort of traffic. They were still numerous, 
_ and were found in every part of Francia. Those in the 
south of Gaul were in close relations with their coreli- 
gionists of Moslem Spain, to whom they are accused of 
having sold Christian children. 

It was probably from Spain, or perhaps also from 
Venice, that these Jews obtained the spices and the 
valuable textiles in which they dealt. However, the 
obligation to which they were subjected of having their 
children baptized must have caused a great number of 
them to emigrate south of the Pyrenees at an early date, 
and their commercial importance steadily declined in 
the course of the ninth century. As for the Syrians, they 
were no longer of importance at this era.* 

It is, then, most likely that the commerce of Carolin- 
gian times was very much reduced. Except in the neigh- 
borhood of Quentovic and Duurstede, it consisted only 
in the transport of indispensable commodities, such as 
wine and salt, in the prohibited traffic of a few slaves, 
and in the barter, through the intermediary of the Jews, 
of a small number of products from the East. 

Of a regular and normal commercial activity, of steady 
trading carried on by a class of professional merchants, 
in short, of all that constitutes the very essence of an 
economy of exchange worthy of the name, no traces 


4. The ingenious attempt of Mr. J. W. Thompson to 
prove the contrary, in his work cited in note 3 above, 
raises philological difficulties which prevent our adopt- 
ing it. The Greek origin of the work Cappi, upon which 
it is based, cannot be accepted. 


24 MEDIEVAL CITIES— 
are to be found after the closing off of the Mediter- — 
ranean by the Islamic invasion. The great number of - 
markets (mercatus), which were to be found in the 
ninth century, in no way contradicts this assertion. They 
were, as a matter of fact, only small local market-— 
places, instituted for the weekly provisioning of the pop- 
ulace by means of the retail sale of foodstuffs from the 
country. As a proof of the commercial activity of the 
Carolingian era, it would be equally beside the point 
to speak of the existence of the street occupied by mer- 
chants (vicus mercatorum) at Aix-la~-Chapelle near the 
palace of Charlemagne, or of similar streets near certain 
great abbeys such as, for example, that of St. Riquier. 
The merchants with whom we have to do here were not, 
in fact, professional merchants but servitors charged 
with the duty of supplying the Court or the monks. 
They were, so to speak, employees of the seignorial 
household staff and were in no respect merchants. 

There is, moreover, material proof of the economic 
decline which affected Western Europe from the day 
when she ceased to belong to the Mediterranean com- 
monwealth. It is furnished by the reform of the mone- 
tary system, initiated by Pepin the Short and completed 
by Charlemagne. That reform abandoned gold coinage 
and substituted silver in its place. The solidus which had 
heretofore, conforming to the Roman tradition, consti- 
tuted the basic monetary unit, was now only nominal 
money. The only real coins from this time on were the 
silver deniers, weighing about two grams, the metallic 
value of which, compared to that of the dollar, was ap- 
proximately eight and one-half cents. The metallic value 
of the Merovingian gold solidus being nearly three dol- 
lars, the importance of the reform can be readily appre- 
ciated. Undoubtedly it is to be explained only by a 
prodigious falling off of both trading and wealth. 

If it is admitted, and it must be admitted, that the 
reappearance of gold coinage, with the florins of Flor- 


ae 


OTHE NINTH CENTURY 25 


“ence and the ducats of Venice in the thirteenth century, 
ecactoxiced the economic renaissance of Europe, the 
inverse is also true: the abandoning of gold coinage in 
_ the eighth century was the manifestation of a profound 
_ decline. It is not enough to say that Pepin and Charle- 
_ magne wished to remedy the monetary disorder of the 
last days of the Merovingian era. It would have been 
quite possible for them to find a remedy without giving 
‘up the gold standard. They gave up the standard, 
obviously, from necessity—that is to say, as a result of 
_ the disappearance of the yellow metal in Gaul. And 
_ this disappearance had no other cause than the inter- 
ruption of the commerce of the Mediterranean. The 
proof of this is given by the fact that Southern Italy, 
remaining in contact with Constantinople, retained like 
the latter a gold standard, for which the Carolingian 
sovereigns were forced to substitute a silver standard. 
The very light weight of their deniers, moreover, testifies 
to the economic isolation of their Empire. It is incon- 
ceivable that they would have reduced the monetary 
unit to a thirtieth of its former value if there had been 
preserved the slightest bond between their States and 
the Mediterranean regions where the gold solidus con- 
tinued to circulate. 

But this is not all. The monetary reform of the ninth 
century not only was in keeping with the general im- 
poverishment of the era in which it took place, but with 
the circulation of money which was noteworthy for both 
lightmess and inadequacy. In the absence of centers of 
attraction sufficiently powerful to draw money from 
afar, it remained, so to speak, stagnant. Charlemagne 
and his successors in vain ordered that deniers should 
be coined only in the royal mints. Under the reign of 
Louis the Pious, it was necessary to give to certain 
churches authorization to coin money, in view of the 
difficulties, under which they labored, of obtaining cash. 
From the second half of the ninth century on, the au- 


26 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


thorization to establish a market was almost always ac-_ 
companied by the authorization to establish a mint in — 
the same place. The State could not retain the monopoly 
of minting coins. It was consistently frittered away. And 
that is again a manifestation, by no means equivocal, of 
the economic decline. History shows that the better com- 
merce is sustained, the more the monetary system is 
centralized and simplified. The dispersion, the variety, 
and in fact the anarchy which it manifests as we follow 
the course of the ninth century, ends by giving striking 
confirmation to the general theory here put forward. 

There have been some attempts to attribute to 
Charlemagne a far-seeing political economy. This is to 
lend him ideas which, however great we suppose his 
genius to have been, it is impossible for him to have had. 
No one can submit with any likelihood of truth that the 
projects which he commenced in 793, to join the Rednitz 
to the Altmiihl and so establish communication between 
the Rhine and the Danube, could have had any other 
purpose than the transport of troops, or that the wars 
against the Avars were provoked by the desire to open 
up a commercial route to Constantinople. The stipula- 
tions, in other respects inoperative, of the capitularies 
regarding coinages, weights and measures, the market- 
tolls and the markets, were intimately bound up with 
the general system of regulation and control which was 
typical of Carolingian legislation. The same is true re- 
garding the measures taken against usury and the pro- 
hibition enjoining members of the clergy from engaging 
in business. Their purpose was to combat fraud, disorder 
and indiscipline and to impose a Christian morality on 
the people. Only a prejudiced point of view can see in 
them an attempt to stimulate the economic development 
of the Empire. 

We are so accustomed to consider the reign of Charle- 
magne as an era of revival that we are unconsciously led 
to imagine an identical progress in all fields. Unfor- 


ae 
b 


“THE NINTH CENTURY 27 


“tunately, what is true of literary culture, of the religious 
‘State, of customs, institutions and statecraft is not true 
of communications and commerce. Every great thing 
that Charlemagne accomplished was accomplished either 
by his military strength or by his alliance with the 
Church. For that matter, neither the Church nor arms 
could overcome the circumstances in virtue of which 
the Frankish Empire found itself deprived of foreign 
markets. It was forced, in fact, to accommodate itself to 
a situation which was inevitably prescribed. History is 
obliged to recognize that, however brilliant it seems in 
other respects, the cycle of Charlemagne, considered 
from an economic viewpoint, is a cycle of regression. 

The financial organization of the Frankish Empire 
makes this plain. It was, indeed, as rudimentary as could 
be. The poll tax, which the Merovingians had preserved 
in imitation of Rome, no longer existed. The resources 
of the sovereign consisted only in the revenue from his 
demesnes, in the tributes levied on conquered tribes 
and in the booty got by war. The market-tolls no longer 
contributed to the replenishment of the treasury, thus 
attesting to the commercial decline of the period. They 
were nothing more than a simple extortion brutally 
levied in kind on the infrequent merchandise trans- 
ported by the rivers or along the roads. The sorry pro- 
ceeds, which should have served to keep up the bridges, 
the docks and the highways, were swallowed up by the 
functionaries who collected them. The missi dominici, 
created to supervise their administration, were impotent 
in abolishing the abuses which they proved to exist be- 
cause the State, unable to pay its agents, was likewise 
unable to impose its authority on them. It was obliged 
to call on the aristocracy which, thanks to their social 
status, alone could give free services. But in so doing it 
was constrained, for lack of money, to choose the in- 
struments of power from among the midst of a group 
of men whose most evident interest was to diminish that 


28 MEDIEVAL CITIES_ 


power. The recruiting of the functionaries from among 
the aristocracy was the fundamental vice of the Frankish 
Empire and the essential cause of its dissolution, which 
became so rapid after the death of Charlemagne. Surely, 
nothing is more fragile than that State the sovereign of 
which, all-powerful in theory, is dependent in fact upon 
the fidelity of his independent agents. 

The feudal system was in embryo in this contradictory 
situation. The Carolingian Empire would have been 
able to keep going only if it had possessed, like the 
Byzantine Empire or the Empire of the Caliphs, a tax 
system, a financial control, a fiscal centralization and a 
treasury providing for the salary of functionaries, for 
public works, and for the maintenance of the army and 
the navy. The financial impotence which caused its 
downfall was a clear demonstration of the impossibility 
it encountered of maintaining a political structure on an 
economic base which was no longer able to support the 
load. 

That economic base of the State, as of society, was 
from this time on the landed proprietor. Just as the 
Carolingian Empire was an inland State without foreign 
markets, so also was it an essentially agricultural State. 
The traces of commerce which were still to be found 
there were negligible. There was no other property than 
landed property, and no other work than rural work. As 
has already been stated above, this predominance of 
agriculture was no new fact. It existed in a very distinct 
form in the Roman era and it continued with increasing 
strength in the Merovingian era. As early as the close of 
antiquity, all the west of Europe was covered with great 
demesnes belonging to an aristocracy the members of 
which bore the title of senators (senatores). More and 
more, property was disappearing in a transformation into 
hereditary tenures, while the old free farmers were 
themselves undergoing a transformation into “cultiva- 
tors” (coloni) bound to the soil, from father to son. The 


_ THE NINTH CENTURY 29 


Germanic invasions did not noticeably alter this state of 
things. We have definitely given up the idea of picturing 
the Germanic tribes in the light of a democracy of 
peasants, all on an equal footing. Social distinctions were 
very great among them even when they first invaded 
the Empire. They comprised a minority of the wealthy 
and a majority of the poor. The number of slaves and 
half-free (liti) was considerable. 

The arrival of the invaders in the Roman provinces 
brought with it, then, no overthrow of the existing order. 
The newcomers preserved, in adapting themselves 
thereto, the status quo. Many of the invaders received 
from the king or acquired by force or by marriage, or 
otherwise, great demesnes which made them the equals 
of the “senators.” The landed aristocracy, far from dis- 
appearing, was on the contrary invigorated by new 
elements. 

The disappearance of the small free proprietors con- 
tinued. It seems, in fact, that as early as the start of the 
Carolingian period only a very small number of them 
still existed in Gaul. Charlemagne in vain took measures 
to safeguard those who were left. The need of protec- 
tion inevitably made them turn to the more powerful in- 
dividuals to whose patronage they subordinated their 
persons and their possessions. 

Large estates, then, kept on being more and more 
generally in evidence after the period of the invasions. 
The favor which the kings showed the Church was an 
additional factor in this development, and the religious 
fervor of the aristocracy had the same effect. Monas- 
teries, whose number multiplied with such remarkable 
rapidity after the seventh century, were receiving boun- 
tiful gifts of land. Everywhere ecclesiastical demesnes 
and lay demesnes were mixed up together, uniting not 
only cultivated ground, but woods, heaths and waste- 
lands. 

The organization of these demesnes remained in con- 


Rie) MEDIEVAL CITIES 


formity, in Frankish Gaul, with what it had been in ; 
Roman Gaul. It is clear that this could not have been © 


otherwise. The Germanic tribes had no motive for, and 


were, furthermore, incapable of, substituting a different — 
organization. It consisted, in its essentials, of classifying — 


all the land in two groups, subject to two distinct forms 
of government. The first, the less extensive, was directly 
exploited by the proprietor; the second was divided, 
under deeds of tenure, among the peasants. Each of 
the villae of which a demesne was composed comprised 
both seignorial land (terra dominicata) and censal land, 
divided in units of cultivation (mansus) held by heredi- 
tary right by manants or villeins (manentes, villani) in 
return for the prestation of rents, in money or in kind, 
and statute-labor.® 

As long as urban life and commerce flourished, the 
great demesnes had a market for the disposal of their 
produce. There is no room for doubt that during all the 
Merovingian era it was through them that the city 
groups were provisioned and that the merchants were 
supplied. But it could not help be otherwise when trade 
disappeared and therewith the merchant class and the 
municipal population. The great estates suffered the 
same fate as the Frankish Empire. Like it, they lost their 
markets. The possibility of selling abroad existed no 
longer because of the lack of buyers, and it became 
useless to continue to produce more than the indispen- 


5. The registry of rents of the Abbot Irminon is the 
principal source of knowledge of this organization. The 
prolegomena of Guérard in the edition which he issued 
in 1844, should, however, be read. One should also con- 
sult, on this point, the famous Capitulare de Villis. K. 
Gareis has issued a good commentary: Die Land- 
guterordnung Karls des Grossen, Berlin, 1895. On the 
recent controversies over the import and the date of the 
Capitulare, see M. Bloch, “L’origine et la date du Ca- 
pitulare de Villis,” Revue Historique, 1923, Vol. CXLIII, 
p. 40. 


_ THE NINTH CENTURY 31 


sable minimum for the subsistence of the men, proprie- 
tors or tenants, living on the estate. 

For an economy of exchange was substituted an 
economy of consumption. Each demesne, in place of 
continuing to deal with the outside, constituted from 
this time on a little world of its own. It lived by itself 
and for itself, in the traditional immobility of a patriar- 
chal form of government. The ninth century is the 
golden age of what we have called the closed domestic 
economy and which we might call, with more exacti- 
tude, the economy of no markets.® 

This economy, in which production had no other aim 
than the sustenance of the demesnial group and which 
in consequence was absolutely foreign to the idea of 
profit, can not be considered as a natural and spontane- 
ous phenomenon. It was, on the contrary, merely the 
result of an evolution which forced it to take this char- 
acteristic form. The great proprietors did not give up 
selling the products of their lands of their own free will; 
they stopped because they could not do otherwise. 
Certainly if commerce had continued to supply them 
regularly with the means of disposing of these products 
abroad, they would not have neglected to profit thereby. 
They did not sell because they could not sell, and they 
could not sell because markets were wanting. The closed 
demesnial organization, which made its appearance at 
the beginning of the ninth century, was a phenomenon 


6. Certain authors have believed that demesnial 
products were destined for sale. See, for example, F. 
Keutgen, Amter und Ziinfte, Jena, 1903, p. 58. It is a 
fact that in certain exceptional cases and, for example, 
in times of famine, selling took place. But as a general 
rule there was certainly no selling. The texts alleged to 
pave the contrary are too few in number and too am- 

iguous to carry conviction. It is evident that the whole 
economy of the demesnial system of the early Middle 
Ages is in flagrant opposition to this idea of profit. 


32 MEDIEVAL CITIE 


due to compulsion. That is merely to say that it was 
abnormal phenomenon. 

This can be most effectively shown by comparing the - 
picture, which Carolingian Europe presents, with that of 
Southern Russia at the same era. | 

We know that bands of sea-faring Norsemen, that is 
to say of Scandinavians originally from Sweden, estab- 
lished their domination over the Slavs of the watershed 
of the Dnieper during the course of the ninth century. 
These conquerors, whom the conquered designated by 
the name of Russians, naturally had to congregate in 
groups in order to insure their safety in the midst of the 
populations they had subjected. 

For this purpose they built fortified enclosures, called 
gorods in the Slavic tongue, where they settled with 
their princes and the images of their gods. The most 
ancient Russian cities owe their origin to these en- 
trenched camps. There were such camps at Smolensk, 
Suzdal and Novgorod; the most important and the most 
civilized was at Kiev, the prince of which ranked above 
all the other princes. The subsistence of the invaders 
was assured by tributes levied on the native population. 

It was therefore possible for the Russians to live off 
the land, without seeking abroad to supplement the 
resources which the country gave them in abundance. 
They would have done so, without doubt, and been con- 
tent to use the prestations of their subjects if they had 
found it impossible, like their contemporaries in Western 
Europe, to communicate with the exterior. But the posi- 
tion which they occupied must have early led them to 
practise an economy of exchange. 

Southern Russia was placed, as a matter of fact, be- 
tween two regions of a superior civilization. To the east, 
beyond the Caspian Sea, extended the Caliphate of 
Bagdad; to the south, the Black Sea bathed the coasts of 
the Byzantine Empire and pointed the way towards 
Constantinople. The barbarians felt at once the effect of 


a= 
”~ 


es 
oe 


THE NINTH CENTURY oo 


these two strong centers of attraction. To be sure, they 


_ were in the highest degree energetic, enterprising and 
adventurous, but their native qualities only served to 
_ turn circumstances to the best account. Arab merchants, 


Jews, and Byzantines were already frequenting the 


_ Slavic regions when they took possession, and showed 


them the route to follow. They themselves did not hesi- 
tate to plunge along it under the spur of the love of 
gain, quite as natural to primitive man as to civilized. 

The country they occupied placed at their disposal 
products particularly well suited for trade with rich 
empires accustomed to the refinements of life. Its im- 
mense forests furnished them with a quantity of honey, 
precious in those days when sugar was still unknown, 
and furs, sumptuousness in which was a requisite, even 
in southern climes, of luxurious dress and equipment. 

Slaves were easier still to procure and, thanks to the 
Moslem harems and the great houses or Byzantine work- 
shops, had a sale as sure as it was remunerative. Thus 
as early as the ninth century, while the Empire of 
Charlemagne was kept in isolation after the closing of 
the Mediterranean, Southern Russia on the contrary was 
induced to sell her products in the two great markets 
which exercised their attraction on her. The paganism 
of the Scandinavians of the Dnieper left them free of 
the religious scruples which prevented the Christians of 
the west from having dealings with the Moslems. Be- 
longing neither to the faith of Christ nor to that of 
Mahomet, they only asked to get rich, in dealing im- 
partially with the followers of either. 

The importance of the trade which they kept up as 
much with the Moslem Empire as with the Greek, is 
made clear by the extraordinary number of Arab and 
Byzantine coins discovered in Russia and which mark, 
like a golden compass needle, the direction of the com- 
mercial routes. 

In the region of Kiev they followed to the south the 


34 MEDIEVAL sa 


course of the Dnieper, to the east the Volga, and to the 
north the direction marked by the Western Dvina or the 
lakes which abut the Gulf of Bothnia. Information from 
Jewish or Arab travellers and from Byzantine writers 
fortunately supplements the data from archaeological — 
records. It will suffice here to give a brief résumé of 
what Constantine Porphyrogenetus reports in the ninth 
century. He shows the Russians assembling their boats 
at Kiev each year after the ice melts. Their flotilla slowly 
descends the Dnieper, whose numerous cataracts pre- 
sent obstacles that have to be avoided by dragging the 
barks along the banks. The sea once reached, they sail 
before the wind along the coasts towards Constanti- 
nople, the supreme goal of their long and perilous voy- 
age. There the Russian merchants had a special quarter 
and made commercial treaties, the oldest of which dates 
back to the ninth century, regulating their relations with 
the population. Many of them, seduced by its attrac- 
tions, settled down there and took service in the Im- 
perial Guard, as had done, before that time, the Ger- 
mans in the legions of Rome. 

The City of the Emperors (Czarograd) had for the 
Russians a fascination the influence of which has lasted 
across the centuries. It was from her that they received 
Christianity (957-1015); it was from her that they bor- 
rowed their art, their writing, the use of money and a 
good part of their administrative organization. Nothing 
more is needed to demonstrate the réle played by 
Byzantine commerce in their social life. It occupied so 
essential a place therein that without it their civiliza- 
tion would remain inexplicable. To be sure, the forms 
in which it is found are very primitive, but the important 
thing is not the forms of this traffic; it is the effect it had. 

Among the Russians of the late Middle Ages it ac- 
tually determined the constitution of society. By striking 
contrast with what has been shown to be the case with 
their contemporaries of Carolingian Europe, not only the 


_ THE NINTH CENTURY 35 


_ importance but the very idea of real estate was unknown 


_ to them. Their notion of wealth comprised only personal 


property, of which slaves were the most valuable. They 
were not interested in land except in so far as, by their 
control of it, they were able to appropriate its products. 


_ And if this conception was that of a class of warrior-con- 


querors, there is but little doubt that it was held for so 
long because these warriors were, at the same time, mer- 


_ chants. We might, incidentally, add that the concentra- 


tion of the Russians in the gorods, motivated in the be- 
ginning by military necessity, is itself found to fit in 
admirably with commercial needs. An organization 
created by barbarians for the purpose of keeping con- 
quered populations under the yoke was well adapted 
to the sort of life which theirs became after they gave 
heed to the economic attraction of Byzantium and Bag- 
dad. Their example shows that a society does not neces- 
sarily have to pass through an agrarian stage before 
giving itself over to commerce. Here commerce appears 
as an original phenomenon. And if this is so, it is be- 
cause the Russians instead of finding themselves isolated 
from the outside world like Western Europe were on the 
contrary pushed or, to use a better word, drawn into 
contact with it from the beginning. Out of this derive 
the violent contrasts which are disclosed in comparing 
their social state with that of the Carolingian Empire: 
in place of a demesnial aristocracy, a commercial aris- 
tocracy; in place of serfs bound to the soil, slaves con- 
sidered as instruments of work; in place of a population 
living in the country, a population gathered together 
in towns; in place, finally, of a simple economy of con- 
sumption, an economy of exchange and a regular and 
permanent commercial activity. 

That these outstanding contrasts were the result of 
circumstances which gave Russia markets while depriv- 
ing the Carolingian Empire of them, history clearly 
demonstrates. The activity of Russian trade was main- 


36 MEDIEVAL a 


tained, indeed, only as long as the routes to Constanti- — 
nople and Bagdad remained open before it. It was not 
fated to withstand the crisis which the Petchenegs 
brought about in the eleventh century. The invasion of 
these barbarians along the shores of the Caspian and 
the Black Seas brought in their train consequences iden- 
tical to those which the invasion of Islam in the Medi- 
terranean had had for Western Europe in the eighth 
century. 

Just as the latter cut the communications between 
Gaul and the East, the former cut the communications 
between Russia and her foreign markets. And in both 
quarters, the results of this interruption coincide with a 
singular exactitude. In Russia as in Gaul, when means of 
communication disappeared and towns were depopu- 
lated and the populace forced to find near at hand the 
means of their subsistence, a period of agricultural econ- 
omy was substituted for a period of commercial economy. 
Despite the differences in details, it was the same pic- 
ture in both cases. The regions of the south, ruined and 
troubled by the barbarians, gave way in importance to 
the regions of the north. Kiev fell into a decline as 
Marseilles had fallen, and the center of the Russian State 
was removed to Moscow just as the center of the 
Frankish State, with the Carolingian dynasty, had been 
removed to the watershed of the Rhine. And to end by 
making the parallel still more conclusive, there arose, in 
Russia as in Gaul, a landed aristocracy, and a demesnial 
system was organized in which the impossibility of ex- 
porting or of selling forced production to be limited to 
the needs of the proprietor and his peasants. 

So, in both cases, the same causes produced the same 
effects. But they did not produce them at the same date. 
Russia was living by trade at an era when the Carolin- 
gian Empire knew only the demesnial régime, and she 
in turn inaugurated this form of government at the very 
moment when Western Europe, having found new mar- 


THE NINTH CENTURY 37 


kets, broke away from it. We shall examine further how 
this break was accomplished. It will suffice for the mo- 
ment to have proved, by the example of Russia, the 
theory that the economy of the Carolingian era was not 
the result of an internal evolution but must be attributed 
to the closing of the Mediterranean by Islam. 


= 
~~ « 
—_ o” 


a 


-~- - ee 


a a 


i a ee 


Page wt es ee 
A. oe a en ne 
Peat ad n.- 
a 2 aaa 
~- i. eres 


o-- Sa 
MS ps" 
dh eat a 


“oe © gp the 
og Re hg 
a I 
= > Ca Bie es 
a" Se Ae 
9 exeuber 44 
~ogacty, hee) 
wer eek 
Lee ail 
"a aul A 
" yg “ 
Oo im lies 


a: 


ETE. 


= (eto, fe - 
% Ute opal 
= @ara Mae 
sone, wanes 
cht of fire ve 
. pagcheh eal aan 


CITY 
ORIGINS 


An interesting question is whether or not cities existed 
in the midst of that essentially agricultural civilization 
into which Western Europe had developed in the course 
of the ninth century. The answer depends on the mean- 
ing given to the word “city.” If by it is meant a locality 
the population of which, instead of living by cultivating 
the soil, devotes itself to commercial activity, the answer 
will have to be “No.” The answer will also be in the 
negative if we understand by “city” a community en- 
dowed with legal entity and possessing laws and insti- 
tutions peculiar to itself. On the other hand, if we think 
of a city as a center of administration and as a fortress, 
it is clear that the Carolingian period knew nearly as 
many cities as the centuries which followed it must have 
known. That is merely another way of saying that the 
cities which were then to be found were without two 
of the fundamental attributes of the cities of the Middle 
Ages and of modern times—a middle-class population 
and a communal organization. 

Primitive though it may be, every stable society feels 


40 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


the need of providing its members with centers of as- 
sembly, or meeting places. Observance of religious rites, 
maintenance of markets, and political and judicial gath- 
erings necessarily bring about the designation of locali- 
ties intended for the assembly of those who wish to or 
who must participate therein. 

Military needs have a still more positive effect. Popu- 
lations have to prepare refuges where will be found 
momentary protection from the enemy in case of inva- 
sion. War is as old as humanity, and the construction 
of fortresses almost as old as war. The first buildings 
erected by man seem, indeed, to have been protecting 
walls. Even today, there is hardly a barbaric race among 
whom this tendency is not found and, as far back as we 
may go in the past, the situation remains the same. The 
acropoles of the Greeks, the oppida of the Etruscans, 
the Latins, and the Gauls, the burgen of the Germans, 
the gorods of the Slavs, like the kraals of the Negroes 
of South Africa, were in the beginning no more than 
places of assembly and, especially, of protection. Their 
plan and their construction depended naturally upon 
the conformation of the terrain and upon the building 
materials at hand. But the general arrangement of 
them was everywhere the same. It consisted of a space, 
square or circular in shape, surrounded by ramparts 
made of trunks of trees, or mud or blocks of stone, pro- 
tected by a moat and entered by gates. In short, it was 
an enclosure. And it is an interesting fact that the words 
which in modern English and in modern Russian (town 
and gorod) designate a city, originally designated an 
enclosure. 

In ordinary times, these enclosures remained empty. 
The people resorted to them only on the occasion of 
religious or civic ceremonies, or when war constrained 
them to seek refuge there with their herds. But, little 
by little with the march of civilization, their intermit- 
tent animation became a continuous animation. Temples 


iy ee 


CITY ORIGINS 41 


arose; magistrates or chieftains established their resi- 
dence; merchants and artisans came to settle. What first 
had been only an occasional center of assembly became 
a city, the administrative, religious, political and eco- 
nomic center of all the territory of the tribe whose name 
it customarily took. 

This explains why, in many societies and particularly 
in classic antiquity, the political life of the cities was 
not restricted to the circumference of their walls. The 
city, indeed, had been built for the tribe, and every 
man in it, whether dwelling within or without the walls, 
was equally a citizen thereof. Neither Greece nor Rome 
knew anything analogous to the strictly local and par- 
ticularist bourgeoisie of the Middle Ages. The life of 
the city was blended with the national life. The law of 
the city was, like the religion itself of the city, common 
to all the people whose capital it was and who consti- 
tuted with it a single autonomous republic. 

The municipal system, then, was identified in ‘antiq- 
uity with the constitutional system. And when Rome 
extended her dominion over all the Mediterranean 
world, she made it the basis of the administrative system 
of her Empire. This system withstood, in Western Eu- 
rope, the Germanic invasions.1 Vestigial but thoroughly 
definite relics of it were still to be found in Gaul, in 
Spain, in Africa, and in Italy, long after the fifth century. 
Little by little, however, the increasing weakness of so- 
cial organization did away with most of its characteristic 
features. By the eighth century, neither the decuriones, 
nor the gesta municipalia, nor the defensor civitatis were 
longer in existence. At the same time the thrust of Islam 
in the Mediterranean, in making impossible the com- 
merce which up to now had still sustained a certain 
activity in the cities, condemned them to an inevitable 
decline. But it did not condemn them to death. Curtailed 


1. See chapter above, The Mediterranean. 


42 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


and weakened though they were, they survived. Their 
social function did not altogether disappear. In the agri- 
cultural social order of the time, they retained in spite 
of everything a fundamental importance. It is necessary 
to take full count of the réle they played, in order to 
understand what was to befall them later. 

As has been stated above, the Church had based its 
diocesan boundaries on the boundaries of the Roman , 
cities.2 Held in respect by the barbarians, it therefore 
continued to maintain, after their occupation of the 
provinces of the Empire, the municipal system upon 
which it had been based. The dying out of trade and 
the exodus of foreign merchants had no influence on the 
ecclesiastical organization. The cities where the bishops 
resided became poorer and less populous without the 
bishops themselves feeling the effects. On the contrary, 
the more that general prosperity declined, the more their 
power and their influence had a chance to assert itself. 
Endowed with a prestige which was the greater be- 
cause the State had disappeared, sustained by donations 
from their congregations, and partners with the Carolin- 
gians in the governing of society, they were in a com- 
manding position by virtue of, at one and the same time, 
their moral authority, their economic power, and their 
political activity. 

When the Empire of Charlemagne foundered, their 
status, far from being adversely affected, was made still 
more secure. The feudal princes, who had destroyed the 
power of the monarchy, did not touch that of the 
Church, for its divine origin protected it from their at- 
tacks. They feared the bishops who could fling at them 
the terrible weapon of excommunication. They revered 
them as the supernatural guardians of order and justice. 
In the midst of the anarchy of the tenth and eleventh 
centuries the ascendancy of the Church remained, there- 


2. See chapter above, The Mediterranean. 


CITY ORIGINS 43 


fore, unimpaired, and it appeared to merit that good 
fortune. To combat the plague of the private wars which 
the Crown was now incapable of repressing, the bishops 
organized in their dioceses the institution of the “Truce 
of God.” 

This prestige of the bishops naturally lent to their 
places of residence—that is to say, to the old Roman 
cities—considerable importance. It is highly probable 
that this was what saved them. In the economy of the 
ninth century they no longer had any excuse for exist- 
ence. In ceasing to be commercial centers they must 
have lost, quite evidently, the greatest part of their pop- 
ulation. The merchants who once frequented them, or 
dwelt there, disappeared and with them disappeared 
the urban character which they had still preserved dur- 
ing the Merovingian era. Lay society no longer had the 
least use for them. Round about them the great de- 
mesnes lived their own life. There is no evidence that 
the State, itself constituted on a purely agrarian basis, 
had any cause to be interested in their fate. It is quite 
characteristic, and quite illuminating, that the palaces 
(palatia) of the Carolingian princes were not located 
in the towns. They were, without exception, in the coun- 
try, in the demesnes of the dynasty: at Herstal, at 
Jupille, at Meersen in the valley of the Meuse; at In- 
gelheim in that of the Rhine; at Attigny in that of the 
Seine; and so on. 

The fame of Aix-la-Chapelle should not lead to any 
illusion as to the character of that locality. The resplend- 
ency in which it temporarily gloried under Charlemagne 
was due only to its fortune in being the favorite residence 
of the emperor. After the reign of Louis the Pious, it fell 
back into insignificance. It was to become a real city only 
four centuries later. 

The State, on its part, in exercising administrative 
powers could contribute in no way to the continued 
existence of the Roman cities. The counties which 


44 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


formed the political districts of the Empire were without 
their chief-towns, just as the Empire itself was without 
a capital. The counts, to whom the supervision of them 
was entrusted, did not settle down in any fixed spot. 
They were constantly travelling about their districts in 
order to preside over judicial assemblies, to levy taxes, 
and to raise troops. The centers of their administrations 
were not their places of residence but their persons. It 
was therefore of little importance whether they had or 
did not have their domicile in a town. Recruited from 
among the great proprietors of the region, they were, 
after all, most accustomed to live on their estates. Their 
chateaux, like the palaces of the emperors, were custom- 
arily in the country.’ 

On the contrary, the immobility which ecclesiastical 
discipline enforced upon a bishop permanently held him 
to the city where was established the see of his particular 
diocese. Though they had lost their function in civil 
administration, the cities therefore continued to serve 
as the key points in religious administration. Each dio- 
cese comprised the territory about the city which con- 
tained its cathedral, and kept in constant touch with it. 
The change in meaning of the word civitas from the 
beginning of the ninth century throws interesting light 
on this point. It became synonymous with the bishopric 
and the episcopal city. The phrase civitas Parisiensis was 
used to designate the diocese of Paris as well as the city 
of Paris itself, where the bishop had his residence. Thus 
under this double connotation was preserved the mem- 
ory of the ancient municipal system adopted by the 
Church for her own ends. 

In short, what happened in the impoverished and 
depopulated Carolingian towns is a striking parallel of 


3. This is particularly true for Northern Europe. In 
Southern France and in Italy, on the contrary, where 
the Roman municipal organization had less completely 
disappeared, the counts ordinarily lived in the towns. 


a 


CITY ORIGINS 45 


what, in a rather more important theater, happened at 
Rome itself when, in the course of the fourth century, 
the Eternal City had ceased to be the capital of the 
world. In leaving it for Ravenna and then for Constanti- 
nople, the emperors abandoned it to the Pope. What it 
no longer was in the government of the State, it con- 
tinued to be in the government of the Church. 

The imperial city became the pontifical city. Its his- 
torical prestige enhanced that of the successor of St. 
Peter. Isolated, he seemed the greater, and he became 
at the same time more powerful. Men now saw only 
him; in the absence of the old rulers, men now obeyed 
only him. By continuing to dwell in Rome, he made it 
his Rome, just as each bishop made the city where he 
dwelt his city. 

During the last days of the Lower Empire, and still 
more during the Merovingian era, the power of the 
bishops over the city populace consistently increased. 
They had profited by the growing disorganization of civil 
society to accept, or to arrogate to themselves, an au- 
thority which the inhabitants did not take pains to dis- 
pute with them, and which the State had no interest in 
and, moreover, no means of denying them. The privi- 
leges which the clergy began to enjoy after the fourth 
century, in the matters of jurisdiction and taxes, en- 
hanced still further their status. It became more conspic- 
uous through the granting of charters of immunity which 
the Frankish kings issued in their favor. By virtue of 
these the bishops were freed from the interference of 
the counts in their ecclesiastical demesnes. They were 
invested from that time on—the eighth century—with a 
complete suzerainty over their people and their lands. 
To the ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the clergy which 
they already had was added lay jurisdiction, entrusted 
to a tribunal, created by them, whose principal seat was 
fixed, naturally, in the town where they had their resi- 
dence. 


46 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


When the disappearance of trade, in the ninth cen- 
tury, annihilated the last vestiges of city life and put 
an end to what still remained of a municipal population, 
the influence of the bishops, already so extensive, be- 
came unrivalled. Henceforward the towns were entirely 
under their control. In them were to be found, in fact, 
practically only inhabitants dependent more or less di- 
rectly upon the Church. 

Though no precise information is available, it is, never- 
theless, possible to conjecture as to the nature of this 
population. It was composed of the clerics of the cathe- 
dral church and of the other churches grouped nearby; 
of the monks of the monasteries which, especially after 
the ninth century, came to be established, sometimes in 
great numbers, in the see of the diocese; of the teachers 
and the students of the ecclesiastical schools; and finally, 
of servitors and artisans, free or serf, who were indis- 
pensable to the needs of the religious group and to the 
daily existence of the clerical agglomeration. 

Almost always there was to be found in the town a 
weekly market whither the peasants from roundabout 
brought their produce. Sometimes, even, an annual fair 
was held there. At the gates a market-toll was levied on 
everything that came in or went out. A mint was in 
operation within the walls. There were also to be found 
there a number of keeps occupied by vassals of the 
bishop, by his advocate or by his castellan. To all of this 
must be added, finally, the granaries and the storehouses 
where were stored the harvests from the monastical de- 
mesnes brought in, at stated periods, by the tenant- 
farmers. At the great yearly festivals the congregation 
of the diocese poured into the town and gave it, for 


several days, the animation of unaccustomed bustle and 
stir.4 


4. The towns of the ninth and tenth centuries have 
not yet been adequately studied. What is said of them 
here, and later, is borrowed from various passages in 


- 


CITY ORIGINS 47 


All this little world accepted the bishop as both its 
spiritual and temporal head. Religious and secular au- 
thority were united or, to put it better, were blended 
in his person. Aided by a Council formed of priests and 
canons, he administered the city and the diocese in con- 
formity with the precepts of Christian morality. His 
ecclesiastical tribune, presided over by the archdeacon, 
had singularly enlarged its sphere, thanks to the impo- 
tency, and still more to the favor, of the State. Not only 
were all the clerics subject to it in every particular, but 
to it also pertained jurisdiction over a number of matters 
affecting the laity: matters of marriage, of wills, of civil 
position, etc. The province of the lay court, which was 
presided over either by the castellan or the advocate, 
had profited by a similar increase in scope. After the 
reign of Louis the Pious its jurisdiction had been en- 
larged by gradual infringements which the more and 
more flagrant disorders of the public administration ex- 
plain and justify. Those affected by the charters of 
immunity were not the only ones subject thereto. It 
seems quite certain that, at least within the actual limits 
of the town, everybody came under its jurisdiction and 
that it had been substituted, in fact, for the jurisdiction 
which the count still possessed, in theory, over the free- 
men.® In addition, the bishop enjoyed very loosely de- 
fined police powers, under which he supervised the mar- 


the capitularies as well as from certain scattered texts 
in the chronicles and the lives of the Saints. For the 
towns of Germany, unfortunately much less numerous 
and less important than those of Gaul, the reader should 
consult the interesting work of S. Rietschel, Die Civitas 
auf deutschem Boden bis zum Ausgange der Karolinger- 
zeit, Leipzig, 1894. 

5. I am seeking, naturally, to characterize only the 
general situation. I am aware that numerous exceptions 
must be made; but they cannot modify the general im- 
pression which comes from an examination of the data 
available. 


48 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


kets, regulated the levying of tolls, took care of the 
bridges and the ramparts. In short, there was no longer 
any field in the administration of the town wherein, 
whether by law or by prerogative, he did not intervene 
as the guardian of order, peace, and the common weal. 
A theocratic form of government had completely re- 
placed the municipal regimen of antiquity. The populace 
was governed by its bishop and no longer asked to have 
even the least share in that government. True, it some- 
times happened that a disturbance broke out in the town. 
Bishops were assailed in their palaces and sometimes 
even obliged to flee. But it is stretching a point to find in 
these events the least trace of a municipal spirit. They 
are rather to be explained by intrigues or personal rival- 
ries. 

It would be thoroughly fallacious to consider them 
the precursors of the communal movement of the eley- 
enth and twelfth centuries. Moreover, they were very 
rare. Everything indicates that the episcopal administra- 
tion was in general beneficent and popular. 

This administration, as pointed out above, was not 
confined to the limits of the town. It extended through- 
out the bishopric. The town was its center, but the dio- 
cese was its sphere. Under it the urban population en- 
joyed in no particular a privileged status. The regimen 
under which it lived was the regimen of the common 
law. The knights, the serfs, and the freemen whom it 
contained were distinguished from their congeners out- 
side only by being grouped in one locality. Of the special 
laws and the autonomy which the bourgeoisie of the 
Middle Ages was to enjoy, there was not yet a single 
trace to be discovered. The word civis (citizen) by 
which contemporary texts designated the inhabitant of 
the town was only a simple topographical appellation; 
it did not yet have legal significance. 

These towns were fortresses as well as episcopal resi- 
dences. In the last days of the Roman Empire they had 


bv e} 


CITY ORIGINS 49 


been enclosed by walls as a protection against the bar- 
barians. These walls were still in existence almost every- 
where and the bishops busied themselves with keeping 
them up or with restoring them with the greater zeal in 
that the incursions of the Saracens and the Norsemen 
had given increasingly impressive proof, during the 
ninth century, of the need of protection. The old Roman 
enclosures continued, therefore, to protect the towns 
against new perils. 

Their form remained, under Charlemagne, what it 
had been under Constantine. As a general rule, it took 
the shape of a rectangle surrounded by ramparts flanked 
by towers and communicating with the outside by gates, 
customarily to the number of four. The space so enclosed 
was very restricted and the length of its sides rarely 
exceeded four to five hundred yards. Moreover, it was 
far from being entirely built up; between the houses 
cultivated fields and gardens were to be found. The out- 
skirts (suburbium), which in the Merovingian era still 
extended beyond the walls, had disappeared. Thanks to 
their defenses, the towns could almost always victori- 
ously oppose the assaults of the invaders from the north 
and the south. It will suffice here to recall the famous 
siege of Paris by the Norsemen in 885. 

The episcopal cities naturally served as a refuge for 
the populations of their neighborhood upon the ap- 
proach of the barbarians. There monks came, even from 
very far away, to seek an asylum, as did, for example, 
those from St. Vaast in 887 at Beauvais and those from 
St. Quentin at Laon. 

In the midst of the insecurity and the disorders which 
imparted so lugubrious a character to the second half 
of the ninth century, it therefore fell to the towns to 
fulfill a true mission of protection. They were, in every 
sense of the word, the ramparts of a society invaded, 
under tribute, and terrorized. Soon, from another cause, 
they were not to be alone in filling that réle. 


50 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


It is obvious that the anarchy of the ninth century 
hastened the inevitable decomposition of the Frankish 
State. The counts, who were the biggest proprietors of 
their districts, profited by existing conditions to arrogate 
to themselves a complete autonomy, to make of their 
office an hereditary estate, to combine in their hands, 
with the private powers they exercised over their own 
demesnes, the public powers which were delegated to 
them, and finally to amalgamate under their domination, 
in a single principality, all the counties they could lay 
hold of. The Carolingian Empire was thus parcelled out, 
after the middle of the ninth century, into a number of 
territories subject to as many local dynasties, and at- 
tached to the Crown only by the fragile bond of feudal 
homage. The State was too feeble to resist this disinte- 
gration. It was accomplished, unquestionably, by means 
of violence and abominable perfidies. Nevertheless it 
was, on the whole, beneficial for society. In seizing 
power, the princes forthwith accepted the obligations 
it imposed. Their most evident interest was to defend 
and protect the lands and the people who had become 
their lands and their people. They did not fail in a task 
which a purely selfish concern for personal power had 
imposed upon them. As their power grew and was con- 
solidated, they became more and more preoccupied with 
giving their principalities an organization capable of 
guaranteeing public order and peace. 

The first need which was manifest was that of defense, 
as much against the Saracens or the Norsemen as against 
the neighboring princes. Fortresses, therefore, sprang up 
everywhere at the beginning of the ninth century.® 
Contemporary texts give them the most diverse names: 
castellum, castrum, oppidum, urbs, municipium; the 


6. Before the arrival of the Norsemen, there were not 
any, or hardly any, fortified localities outside of the 
episcopal cities. Hariulphe, Chronique de labbaye de 
Saint-Riquier, edit. F. Lot, Paris, 1894, p. 118. 


CITY ORIGINS 51 


most usual and in any case the most technical of these 
appellations is that of burgus, a word borrowed from 
the German by the Latin of the Lower Empire and 
which is preserved in all the modern languages: burg, 
borough, bourg, borgo." 

Of these burgs of the late Middle Ages no trace re- 
mains in our day. The sources of information, however, 
fortunately make it possible to form a fairly accurate 
picture of them. They were walled enclosures of some- 
what restricted perimeter, customarily circular in form 
and surrounded by a moat. In the center was to be 
found a strong-tower and a keep, the last redoubt of 
defense in case of attack. A permanent garrison of 
knights (milites castrenses) was kept stationed there. 
This was placed under the orders of a castellan (castel- 
lanus). The prince had a home (domus) in each of the 
burgs of his territory where he stayed with his retinue 
in the course of the continual changes of residence which 
war or administerial duties forced upon him. Very often 
a chapel, or a church flanked by the buildings necessary 
to house the clergy, raised its belfry above the battle- 
ments of the rampart. Sometimes there were also to be 
found by the side of it quarters intended for the judicial 
assemblies whose members came, at fixed periods, from 
outside to assemble in the burg. Finally, what was never 
lacking were a granary and cellars where was kept, to 
supply the necessities of a siege should the case arise 
and to furnish subsistence to the prince during his stays, 
the produce of the neighboring demesnes which he held. 
Prestations in kind levied on the peasants of the dis- 
trict assured the subsistence of the garrison, on its part. 
The upkeep of the walls devolved upon these same peas- 


7. On the meaning of these words, see K. Hegel, 
Neues Archiv der Gesellschaft fiir dltere deutsche 
Geschichtskunde, 1892, Vol. XVIII, and G. Des Marez, 
“Le sens juridique du mot oppidum,” Festschrift fiir H. 
Brunner, Berlin, 1910. 


52 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


ants who were compelled to do the work by statute 
labor. 
Although from country to country the picture, which 
- has just been drawn, naturally differed in details, the 
same essential traits were to be found everywhere. The 
similarity between the bourgs of Flanders and the 
boroughs of Anglo-Saxon England is a striking one.® 
And this similarity unquestionably proves that the same 
needs brought in their train like results everywhere. 

As can be easily seen, the burgs were, above all, mili- 
tary establishments. But to this original function was 
early added that of being administrative centers. The 
castellan ceased to be solely the commandant of the 
knights of the castral garrison. The prince delegated to 
him financial and juridical authority over a more or less 
extensive district round about the walls of the burg and 
which took, by the tenth century, the name of castellany. 
The castellany was related to the burg as the bishopric 
was related to the town. In case of war, its inhabitants 
found there a refuge; in time of peace, there they re- 
paired to take part in the assemblies of justice or to pay 
off the prestations to which they were subject. Neverthe- 
less the burg did not show the slightest urban character. 
Its population comprised, aside from the knights and 
the clerics who made up its essential part, only men em- 
ployed in their service and whose number was certainly 

8. F. W. Maitland, Township and Borough, 1898. 
The reader should also compare the burgs of the west 
with those built in the tenth century as a defense against 
the Slavs, along the Elbe and the Saale, by Henry the 
Fowler. D. Schafer, “Die Milites agrarii des Witukinds,” 
Abhandlungen der Berliner Akademie, 1905, p. 572. For 
the social réle of the burgs, we restrict ourselves to cit- 
ing the following text which seems to be thoroughly 
characteristic; it had to do with the founding in 996 of 
Cateau-Cambrésis: “ut esset obstaculum latronibus 
praesidiumque libertatis circum et circa rusticanis cul- 


toribus.” “Gesta episcoporum Cameracensium,” Monu- 
menta Germaniae Historica, Vol. VII, p. 450. 


CITY ORIGINS 53 


of very little importance. It was a fortress population; it 
was not a city population. Neither commerce nor industry 
was possible or even conceivable in such an environment. 
It produced nothing of itself, lived by revenues from 
the surrounding country, and had no other economic 
réle than that of a simple consumer. 

It is therefore a safe conclusion that the period which 
opened with the Carolingian era knew cities neither in 
the social sense, nor in the economic sense, nor in the 
legal sense of that word. The towns and the burgs were 
merely fortified places and headquarters of administra- 
tion. Their inhabitants enjoyed neither special laws nor 
institutions of their own, and their manner of living did 
not distinguish them in any way from the rest of society. 

Commercial and industrial activity were completely 
foreign to them. In no respect were they out of key with 
the agricultural civilization of their times. The groups 
they formed were, after all, of trifling importance. It is 
not possible, in the lack of reliable information, to give 
an exact figure, but everything indicates that the popu- 
lation of the burgs never consisted of more than a few 
hundred men and that that of the towns probably did 
not pass the figure of two to three thousand souls. 

The towns and the burgs played, however, an essen- 
tial rdéle in the history of cities. They were, so to speak, 
the stepping-stones thereto. Round about their walls 
cities were to take shape after the economic renaissance, 
whose first symptoms appeared in the course of the tenth 
century, had made itself manifest. 


4 a. - = 
* agp bbs atuatbct 4st 
a Ow ea 4 
© OWS, gp ab xe 
» ephbuch pty “i “38 


4 


- ‘ ,iuZ 
- SR 


L WAS LAB 


THE 
REVIVAL 
OF 
COMMERCE 


The end of the ninth century was the moment when 
the economic development of Western Europe that fol- 
lowed the closing of the Mediterranean was at its low- 
est ebb. It was also the moment when the social dis- 
organization caused by the raids of the barbarians and 
the accompanying political anarchy reached a maxi- 
mum. 

The tenth century, if not an era of recovery, was at 
least an era of stabilization and relative peace. The sur- 
render of Normandy to Rollo (g12) marked in the west 
the end of the great Scandinavian invasions, while in 
the east Henry the Fowler and Otto I checked and held 
the Slavs along the Elbe and the Hungarians in the val- 
ley of the Danube (934, 955). At the same time the 
feudal system, which had definitely displaced the mon- 
archy, was established in France on the débris of the 
old Carolingian order. In Germany, on the contrary, the 
somewhat later development of society enabled the 
princes of the House of Saxony to resist the encroach- 
ments of the lay aristocracy. On their side they had the 


56 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


powerful influence of the bishops and used it to restore 
the ascendancy of the monarchy. In assuming the title 
of Roman Emperor, they laid claim to the universal au- 
thority which Charlemagne had exercised. 

If all this was not accomplished without bitter con- 
flicts, nevertheless it was decidedly productive of good. 
Europe ceased to be overrun by ruthless hordes. She 
recovered confidence in the future, and, with that con- 
fidence, courage and ambition. The date of the renewal 
of a cooperative activity on the part of the people might 
well be ascribed to the tenth century. At that date, like- 
wise, the social authorities began once more to acquit 
themselves in the réle which it was their place to play. 
From now on, in feudal as well as in episcopal princi- 
palities, the first traces could be seen of an organized 
effort to better the condition of the people. The prime 
need of that era, hardly rising above anarchy, was the 
need of peace, the most fundamental and the most es- 
sential of all the needs of society. 

The first Truce of God was proclaimed in 98g. Pri- 
vate wars, the greatest of the plagues that harassed 
those troubled times, were energetically combated by 
the territorial counts in France and by the prelates of 
the imperial Church in Germany. 

Dark though the prospect still was, the tenth cen- 
tury nevertheless saw in outline the picture which the 
eleventh century presents. The famous legend of the 
terrors of the year 1000 is not devoid, in this respect, 
of symbolic significance. It is doubtless untrue that men 
expected the end of the world in the year 1000. Yet 
the century which came in at that date is characterized, 
in contrast with the preceding one, by a recrudescence 
of activity so marked that it could pass for the vigor- 
ous and joyful awakening of a society long oppressed 
by a nightmare of anguish. In every demesne was to be 
seen the same burst of energy and, for that matter, of 
optimism. The Church, revivified by the Clunisian re- 


en 


i om 


dy \ e el 


THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 57 


form, undertook to purify herself of the abuses which 
had crept into her discipline and to shake off the bond- 
age in which the emperors held her. A mystic enthusi- 
asm of which she was the inspiration, animated her con- 
gregations and launched them upon the heroic and 
grandiose enterprise of the Crusades which brought 
Western Christianity to grips with Islam. The military 
spirit of feudalism led her to initiate and to succeed in 
epic undertakings. Norman knights went to battle with 
Byzantines and Moslems in Southern Italy, and founded 
there the principalities out of which was later to arise 
the Kingdom of Sicily; other Normans, with whom were 
associated Flemings and Frenchmen from the north, 
conquered England under the leadership of Duke Wil- 
liam. South of the Pyrenees the Christians drove before 
them the Saracens of Spain; Toledo and Valencia fell 
to their hands (1072-1109). 

Such undertakings testify not only to energy and vigor 
of spirit; they testify also to the health of society. They 
would have obviously been impossible without that na- 
tive strength which is one of the characteristics of the 
eleventh century. The fecundity of families seemed, at 
this date, to be as general among the nobility as among 
the peasants. Younger sons abounded everywhere, feel- 
ing themselves crowded for room on their natal soil and 
eager to try their fortunes abroad. Everywhere were to 
be met adventurers in search of money or work. The 
armies were full of mercenaries, “Coterelli” or “Bra- 
bantiones,” letting their services to whoever wished to 
employ them. From Flanders and Holland bands of 
peasants were setting out, by the beginning of the 
twelfth century, to drain the Mooren on the banks of 
the Elbe. In every part of Europe labor was offered in 
superabundant quantity and this is undoubtedly the ex- 
planation of the increasing number, from then on, of 
great reclamation projects in clearing land and diking 
streams, 


58 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


It does not appear that, from the Roman era to the 
eleventh century, the area of cultivated land had been 
perceptibly increased. Save in the Germanic countries, 
the monasteries had hardly altered, in this respect, the 
existing situation. They were almost always established 
on old estates and did nothing to decrease the extent 
of the woods, the heaths and the marshes contained 
within their demesnes. But it was quite a different mat- 
ter when once the increase of population permitted 
these unproductive terrains to be put to good use. Just 
about the year 1000 there began a period of reclama- 
tion which was to continue, with steady increase, up to 
the end of the twelfth century. Europe “colonized” her- 
self, thanks to the increase of her inhabitants. The 
princes and the great proprietors turned to the founding 
of new towns, where flocked the “younger sons” in quest 
of lands to cultivate. The great forests began to be 
cleared. In Flanders appeared, about 1150, the first pol- 
ders. (A “polder” is diked land, reclaimed from the 
sea.) The Order of the Cistercians, founded in 1098, 
gave itself over at once to reclamation projects and the 
clearing of the land. 

It is easy to see that the increase in population and 
the burst of renewed general activity of which it was 
both cause and effect, operated from the very first to 
the benefit of an agricultural economy. But this con- 
dition should, before long, have had its effect upon 
trade as well. The eleventh century, in fact, brings us 
face to face with a real commercial revival. This revival 
received its impetus from two centers of activity, one 
located in the south and the other in the north: Venice 
on one side and the Flemish coast on the other. And 
this is merely another way of saying that it was the re- 
sult of an external stimulus. The contact with foreign 
trade, maintained at these two points, first caused it to 
appear and spread. Quite likely it could have come 
about in some other way. Commercial activity might 


AN es ee 


THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 59 


have been revived by virtue of the trend of general 
economic life. The fact is, however, that this was not 
the case. Just as the trade of the west disappeared with 
the shutting off of its foreign markets, just so it was re- 
newed when these markets were reopened. 

Venice, whose influence was felt from the very first, 
has a well recognized and singular place in the economic 
history of Europe. Like Tyre, Venice shows an exclu- 
sively commercial character. Her first inhabitants, fleeing 
before the approach of the Huns, the Goths and the 
Lombards, had sought (in the fifth and sixth centuries) 
a refuge on the barren islets of the lagoons at Rialto, at 
Olivolo, at Spinalunga, at Dorsoduro. To exist in these 
marshes they had to tax their ingenuity and to fight 
against Nature herself. Everything was wanting: even 
drinking water was lacking. But the sea was enough for 
the existence of a folk who knew how to manage things. 
Fishing and the preparation of salt supplied an immedi- 
ate means of livelihood to the Venetians. They were able 
to procure wheat by exchanging their products with the 
inhabitants of the neighboring shores. 

Trade was thus forced upon them by the very con- 
ditions under which they lived. And they had the en- 
ergy and the genius to tum to profit the unlimited 
possibilities which trade offered them. By the eighth 
century the group of islets they occupied was already 
thickly populated enough to become the see of a special 
diocese. 

At the date when the city was founded, all Italy still 
belonged to the Byzantine Empire. Thanks to her insular 
situation, the conquerors who successively overran the 
peninsula—first the Lombards, then Charlemagne, and 
finally, still later, the German emperors—were not suc- 
cessful in their attempts to gain possession. She re- 
mained, therefore, under the sovereignty of Constanti- 
nople, thus forming at the upper end of the Adriatic 
and at the foot of the Alps an isolated outpost of By- 


60 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


zantine civilization. While Western Europe was detach- 
ing herself from the east, she continued to be part of it. 
And this circumstance is of capital importance. The con- 
sequence was that Venice did not cease to gravitate in 
the orbit of Constantinople. Across the waters, she was 
subject to the attraction of that great city and herself 
grew great under its influence. 

Constantinople, even in the eleventh century, ap- 
pears not only as a great city, but as the greatest city 
of the whole Mediterranean basin. Her population was 
not far from reaching the figure of a million inhabitants, 
and that population was singularly active. She was not 
content, as had been the population of Rome under the 
Republic and the Empire, to consume without produc- 
ing. She gave herself over, with a zeal which the fiscal 
system shackled but did not choke, not only to trading 
but to industry. For Constantinople was a great port and 
a first-rate manufacturing center as well as a political 
capital. Here were to be found every manner of life 
and every form of social activity. Alone, in the Christian 
world, she presented a picture analogous to that of great 
modern cities with all the complexities, all the defects 
but also with all the refinements of an essentially urban 
civilization. An uninterrupted shipping kept her in touch 
with the coasts of the Black Sea, Asia Minor, Southern 
Italy, and the shores of the Adriatic. Her war fleets se- 
cured to her the mastery of the sea, without which she 
would not have been able to live. As long as she re- 
mained powerful, she was able to maintain, in the face 
of Islam, her dominion over all the waters of the Eastern 
Mediterranean. 

It is easy to understand how Venice profited by her 
alliance with a world so different from the European 
west. To it she not only owed the prosperity of her com- 
merce, but from it she first learned those higher forms of 
civilization, that perfected technique, that business en- 
terprise, and that political and administrative organiza- 


| 


THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 61 


tion which gave her a place apart in the Europe of the 
Middle Ages. By the eighth century she was devoting 
herself with greater and greater success to the provision- 
ing of Constantinople. Her ships transported thither the 
products of the countries which were contiguous to her 
on the east and the west: wheat and wine from Italy, 
wood from Dalmatia, salt from the lagoons, and, in spite 
of the prohibitions of the Pope and the Emperor him- 
self, slaves which she easily secured among the Slavic 
peoples of the shores of the Adriatic. Thence they 
brought back, in return, the precious fabrics of By- 
zantine manufacture, as well as spices which Asia fur- 
nished to Constantinople. By the tenth century the ac- 
tivity of the port had already attained extraordinary 
proportions. And with the extension of trade, the love 
of gain became irresistible. No scruple had any weight 
with the Venetians. Their religion was a religion of busi- 
ness men. It mattered little to them that the Moslems 
were the enemies of Christ, if business with them was 
profitable. After the ninth century they began more and 
more to frequent Aleppo, Cairo, Damascus, Kairwan, 
Palermo. Treaties of commerce assured their merchants 
a privileged status in the markets of Islam. 

By the start of the eleventh century, the power of 
Venice was making as marvellous progress as her wealth. 
Under the Doge Pietro II Orseolo, she cleared the 
Adriatic of the Slavic pirates, subjected Istria and had 
at Zara, Veglia, Arbe, Trau, Spalato, Curzola, and 
Lagosta settlements or military establishments. John the 
Deacon extols the splendor and the glory of Venetia 
Aurea, and William of Apuleia vaunts the city “rich in 
money, rich in men,” and declares that “no people in 
the world are more valorous in naval warfare, more skil- 
ful in the art of guiding ships on the sea.” 

It was inevitable that the powerful economic move- 
ment, of which Venice was the center, should be com- 
municated to the countries of Italy from which she was 


62 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


separated only by the lagoons. There she obtained the 
wheat and wine which she either consumed herself or 
exported, and she naturally sought to create there a 
market for the eastern merchandise which her mariners 
unloaded in greater and greater quantity on the quays 
by the Po. She entered into relations with Pavia, which 
was not long in being animated by her infectious ac- 
tivity. She obtained from the German emperors the 
right to trade freely first with the nearby cities and then 
with all Italy, as well as the shipping monopoly for all 
goods arriving in her port. 

In the course of the tenth century Lombardy was in- 
spired, by her example, with commercial life. Trade 
rapidly spread from Pavia to the neighboring cities. All 
of them made haste to share in the traffic of which 
Venice had given them the outstanding example and 
which it was to her interest to stimulate among them. 
The spirit of enterprise developed in one place after 
another. 

It was not only products of the soil which kept the 
commercial relations with Venice flourishing. Industry 
was already commencing to appear. Early in the elevy- 
enth century, for example, Lucca turned to the manu- 
facture of cloths and kept at it until much later. Prob- 
ably a great many more details would be known about 
the beginnings of this economic revival in Lombardy if 
our sources of information were not so deplorably 
meagre, 

Preponderant as the Venetian influence had been in 
Italy, it did not make itself felt there exclusively. The 
south of the peninsula beyond Spoleto and Benevento 
was still, and so remained until the arrival of the Nor- 
mans in the eleventh century, under the power of the 
Byzantine Empire. Bari, Tarentum, Naples and above all 
Amalfi, kept up relations with Constantinople similar to 
those of Venice. They were very active centers of trade 


* 


raked 


ARIE 


¥ 


THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 63 


and, no more than Venice, did not hesitate to traffic 
with Moslem ports. 

Their shipping was, naturally, fated to find com- 
petitors sooner or later among the inhabitants of the 
coastal towns situated further to the north. And, in fact, 
after the beginning of the eleventh century we see first 
Genoa, then Pisa soon after, turning their attention to 
the sea. In 935 the Saracen pirates had again pillaged 
Genoa. But the moment was approaching when she was 
in her turn to take the offensive. There could be no ques- 
tion of her concluding commercial arrangements, as had 
Venice or Amalfi, with the enemies of her Faith. The 
mystic, excessive scrupulousness of the west in religious 
matters did not permit it, and too many hates had ac- 
cumulated in the course of the centuries. The sea could 
be opened up only by force of arms. 

In 1015-1016 an expedition was undertaken by 
Genoa, in cooperation with Pisa, against Sardinia. 
Twenty years later, in 1034, they got possession for a 
time of Bona on the coast of Africa; the Pisans, on their 
part, victoriously entered the port of Palermo in 1062 
and destroyed its arsenal. 

In 1087 the fleets of the two cities, encouraged by 
Pope Victor III, attacked Mehdia. All these expeditions 
were due as much to religious enthusiasm as to the spirit 
of adventure. With a quite different viewpoint from that 
of the Venetians, the Genoese and the Pisans con- 
sidered themselves soldiers of Christ and of the Church, 
opponents of Islam. They believed they saw the Arch- 
angel Gabriel and St. Peter leading them into battle 
with the Infidels, and it was only after having massa- 
cred the “priests of Mahomet” and pillaged the mosque 
of Mehdia that they signed an advantageous treaty of 
commerce. The Cathedral of Pisa, built after this tri- 
umph, admirably symbolized both the mysticism of the 
conquerors and the wealth which their shipping was be- 
ginning to bring to them. Pillars and precious marble 


64 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


brought from Africa served to decorate it—it seems as if 
they had wished to attest by its splendor the revenge of 
Christianity upon the Saracens whose opulence was a 
thing of scandal and of envy. Those, at least, are the 
sentiments which an enthusiastic contemporary poem ex- 
presses: 


Unde tua in aeternum splendebit ecclesia 
Auro, gemnis, margaritis et palliis splendida® 


Before the counter-attack of Christianity, Islam thus 
gave way little by little. The launching of the First Cru- 
sade (1096) marked its definite recoil. In 1097 a Geno- 
ese fleet sailed towards Antioch, bringing to the Cru- 
saders reinforcements and supplies. Two years later 
Pisa sent out vessels “under the orders of the Pope” to 
deliver Jerusalem. From that time on the whole Medi- 
terranean was opened, or rather reopened, to western 
shipping. As in the Roman era, communications were re- 
established from one end to the other of that essentially 
European sea. 

The Empire of Islam, in so far as the sea was con- 
cerned, came to an end. To be sure, the political and 
religious results of the Crusade were ephemeral. The 
kingdom of Jerusalem and the principalities of Edessa 
and Antioch were reconquered by the Moslems in the 
twelfth century. But the sea remained in the hands of 
the Christians. They were the ones who held undis- 
puted economic mastery over it. All the shipping in the 
ports of the Levant came gradually under their control. 
Their commercial establishments multiplied with surpris- 
ing rapidity in the ports of Syria, Egypt and the isles 
of the Ionian Sea. The conquest of Corsica (1091), of 
Sardinia (1022) and of Sicily (1058-1090) took away 
from the Saracens the bases of operations which, since 


* “Thy church will be resplendent for eternity, 
Dazzling with gold, with gems, with pearls and 
precious cloths.” 


SE 


THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 65 


the ninth century, had enabled them to keep the west 
in a state of blockade. The ships of Genoa and Pisa 
kept the sea routes open. They patronized the markets 
of the east, whither came the products of Asia, both 
by caravan and by the ships of the Red Sea and the 
Persian Gulf, and frequented in their turn the great port 
of Byzantium. The capture of Amalfi by the Normans 
(1073), in putting an end to the commerce of that city, 
freed them from her rivalry. 

But their progress immediately aroused the jealousy 
of Venice. She could not bear to share with these new- 
comers a trade in which she laid claim to a monopoly. 
It was of no moment that she professed the same Faith, 
belonged to the same people and spoke the same lan- 
guage; since they had become rivals she saw in them 
only enemies. In the spring of the year 1100 a Vene- 
tian squadron, lying in wait before Rhodes for the return 
of the fleet which Pisa had sent to Jerusalem, fell upon 
it unawares and ruthlessly sank a large number of ves- 
sels. So began between the maritime cities a conflict 
which was to last as long as their prosperity. The Medi- 
terranean was no more to know that Roman peace which 
the Empire of the Caesars had once enjoined upon her. 
The divergence of interests was hereafter to sustain on 
the sea a hostility, sometimes secret and sometimes 
openly declared, between the rivals who contested for 
supremacy. The quarrels of the Italian republics of the 
Middle Ages are still duplicated in modern times by the 
continued wrangling of the States whose coasts the Med- 
iterranean washes. 

In developing, maritime commerce must naturally 
have become more generalized. By the beginning of the 
twelfth century it had reached the shores of France and 
Spain. After the long stagnation into which the city had 
fallen at the end of the Merovingian period, the old port 
of Marseilles took on new life. In Catalonia, Barcelona, 
out of which the kings of Aragon had driven the Mos- 


66 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


lems, profited in turn by the opening up of the sea. 
However, Italy undoubtedly kept the upper hand in that 
first economic revival. Lombardy, where from Venice 
on the east and Pisa and Genoa on the west all the 
commercial movements of the Mediterranean flowed 
and were blended into one, flourished with an extraor- 
dinary exuberance. On that wonderful plain cities 
bloomed with the same vigor as the harvests. The fer- 
tility of the soil made possible for them an unlimited 
expansion, and at the same time the ease of obtaining 
markets favored both the importation of raw materials 
and the exportation of manufactured products. There, 
commerce gave rise to industry, and as it developed, 
Bergamo, Cremona, Lodi, Verona, and all the old towns, 
all the old Roman municipia, took on new life, far more 
vigorous than that which had animated them in antiq- 
uity. Soon their surplus production and their fresh en- 
ergy were seeking to expand abroad. In the south 
Tuscany was won. In the north new routes were laid 
out across the Alps. By the passes of the Spliigen, St. 
Bernard and the Brenner, their merchants were to bring 
to the continent of Europe that same healthy stimulus 
which had come to them from the sea. They followed 
those natural routes marked by river courses—the Dan- 
ube to the east, the Rhine to the North, and the Rhéne 
to the west. In 1074 Italian merchants, undoubtedly 
Lombards, are made mention of at Paris; and at the 
beginning of the twelfth century the fairs of Flanders 
were already drawing a considerable number of their 
compatriots. 

Nothing could be more natural than this appearance 
of southerners on the Flemish coast. It was a conse- 
quence of the attraction which trade spontaneously ex- 
erts upon trade. 

It has already been shown that, during the Carolin- 
gian era, the Netherlands had given evidence of a com- 


ee THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 67 


ES mercial activity not to be found anywhere else.1 This 

___is easily explained by the great number of rivers which 
_ flow through that country and which there unite their 
waters before emptying into the sea: the Rhine, the 
Meuse and the Scheldt. England and the Scandinavian 
countries were so near that land of large and deep 
estuaries that their mariners naturally frequented it at 
an early date. It was to them, as we have seen above, 
that the ports of Duurstede and Quentovic owed their 
importance. But this importance was ephemeral. It could 
not survive the period of the Norseman invasions. The 
easier access was to a country, the more it lured the 
invaders and the more it had to suffer from their devas- 
tations. The geographical situation which, at Venice, 
had safeguarded commercial prosperity was, here, nat- 
urally due to contribute to its destruction. 

The invasions of the Norsemen had been only the 
first manifestation of the need of expansion felt by the 
Scandinavian peoples. Their overflowing energy had 
driven them forth, towards Western Europe and Russia 
simultaneously, upon adventures of pillage and con- 
quest. They were not mere pirates. They aspired, as had 
the Germanic tribes before them with regard to the Ro- 
man Empire, to settle in countries more rich and fertile 
than was their homeland, and there to create colonies 
for the surplus population which their own country 
could no longer support. In this undertaking they even- 
tually succeeded. To the east, the Swedes set foot along 
those natural routes which led from the Baltic to the 
Black Sea by way of the Neva, Lake Ladoga, the Lovat, 
the Volchof, the Dvina and the Dnieper. To the west, 
the Danes and the Norwegians colonized the Anglo- 
Saxon kingdoms north of the Humber. In France, they 
had ceded to them by Charles the Simple the country 


1. See above, pp. 22-23. 


68 MEDIEVAL CITIES 
on the Channel which took from them the name of Nor- 
mandy. 


These successes had for their result the orientation in 
a new direction of the activity of the Scandinavians. 
Starting at the beginning of the tenth century, they 
turned away from war to devote themselves to trade. 
Their ships plowed all the seas of the north and they 
had nothing to fear from rivals since they alone, among 
the peoples whose shores those seas bathed, were navi- 
gators. It is enough to peruse the delightful tales of the 
sagas to get an idea of the hardihood and the skill of 
the barbarian mariners whose adventures and exploits 
they recount. 

Each spring, once the water was open, they put out 
to sea. They were to be met in Iceland, in Ireland, in 
England, in Flanders, at the mouths of the Elbe, the 
Weser, and the Vistula, on the islands of the Baltic Sea, 
at the head of the Gulf of Bothnia and the Gulf of Fin- 
land. They had settlements at Dublin, at Hamburg, at 
Schwerin, on the island of Gotland; thanks to them, the 
current of trade, which starting from Byzantium and 
Bagdad crossed Russia by way of Kiev and Novgorod, 
was extended up to the shores of the North Sea and 
there made felt its beneficent influence. In all history 
there is hardly a more curious phenomenon than that 
effect wrought on Northern Europe by the superior 
civilizations of the Greek and Arab Empires, and of 
which the Scandinavians were the intermediaries. In this 
respect their rdle, despite the differences of climate, so- 
ciety and culture, seems quite analogous to that which 
Venice played in the south of Europe. Like her, they 
renewed the contact between the east and the west. And 
just as the commercial activity of Venice did not long 
delay in involving Lombardy in the movement, so like- 
wise Scandinavian shipping brought about the economic 
awakening of the coast of Flanders. 

The geographical situation of Flanders, indeed, put 


enn 


- 


THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 69 


her in a splendid position to become the western focus 


_ for the commerce of the seas of the north. It formed the 


natural terminus of the voyage for ships arriving from 
Northern England or which, having crossed the Sound 
after coming out of the Baltic, were on their way to 
the south. As has already been stated, the ports of 
Quentovic and Duurstede had been frequented by the 
Norsemen before the period of the invasions. First one 
and then the other disappeared before the storm. 
Quentovic did not rise again from her ruins and it was 
Bruges, whose situation at the head of the Gulf of Zwyn 
was the better one, that became her heritor. As for 
Duurstede, Scandinavian mariners reappeared there at 
the beginning of the tenth century. Yet her prosperity 
did not last very long. As commerce flourished it was 
concentrated more and more about Bruges, nearer to 
France and kept in a more stable condition of peace by 
the Counts of Flanders, whereas the neighborhood of 
Duurstede was too exposed to the incursions of the still 
half-barbaric Friesians to enjoy security. Be that as it 
may, it is certain that Bruges attracted to her port, more 
and more, the trade of the north, and that the disap- 
pearance of Duurstede, in the course of the eleventh 
century, definitely assured her future. The fact that 
coins of the Counts of Flanders, Arnold II and Baldwin 
IV (g56—-1035), have been discovered in considerable 
numbers in Denmark, in Prussia, and even in Russia, 
would attest, in the lack of written information, to the 
relations with those countries which Flanders kept up 
after this date with the help of Scandinavian mariners. 

Communication with the nearby English coast was to 
become still more active. It was at Bruges, for example, 
that the Anglo-Saxon Queen Emma, expelled from Eng- 
land, settled about 1030. In 991-1002 the list of market- 
tolls at London makes mention of the Flemings as if 
they were the most important group of foreigners carry- 
ing on business in that city. 


70 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


Among the causes of the commercial importance 
which so early characterized Flanders, should be 
pointed out the existence in that country of an in- 
digenous industry able to supply the vessels that landed 
there with a valuable return cargo. From the Roman 
era and probably even before that, the Morini and the 
Menapii had been making woollen cloths. This primitive 
industry was due to be perfected under the influence 
of the technical improvements introduced by the Roman 
conquest. The peculiar fineness of the fleece of the sheep 
raised on the humid meadows of the coast was the final 
factor needed to insure success. The tunics (saga) and 
the cloaks (birri) which it produced were exported as 
far as beyond the Alps and there even was at Tournai, 
in the last days of the Empire, a factory for military 
clothing. The Germanic invasion did not put an end to 
this industry. The Franks who invaded Flanders in the 
fifth century continued to carry it on as had the older 
inhabitants before them—there is no doubt but that the 
Friesian cloaks of which the ninth century historiogra- 
pher speaks were made in Flanders. They seem to be 
the only manufactured products which furnished, in the 
Carolingian era, the substance of a regular trade. The 
Friesians transported them along the Scheldt, the Meuse 
and the Rhine, and when Charlemagne wanted to reply 
with gifts to the compliments of the Caliph Harun-al- 
Rashid, he found nothing better to offer him than “pallia 
fresonica.” It is to be supposed that these cloths, as re- 
markable for their beautiful colors as for their softness, 
must have immediately attracted the attention of the 
Scandinavian navigators of the tenth century. Nowhere, 
in the north of Europe, were found more valuable prod- 
ucts, and they undoubtedly had a place, side by side 
with the furs of the north and the Arab and Byzantine 
silk fabrics, among the most sought-after export goods. 
According to every indication, the cloths which were 
made mention of in the London market about the year 


;| 


4 


% F Ag 


THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 71 


1000 were cloths from Flanders. And the new markets 


_ which shipping was now offering to them could not have 


failed to give a fresh impulse to their manufacture. 

Thus commerce and industry, the latter carried on 
locally and the former originating abroad, joined in giv- 
ing Flanders, after the tenth century, an economic ac- 
tivity that was to continue developing. In the eleventh 
century the advances made were already surprising. 
Thenceforth Flanders traded with the north of France 
the wines of which she exchanged for her cloths. The 
conquest of England by William of Normandy bound to 
the Continent that country which heretofore had gravi- 
tated in the orbit of Denmark, and multiplied the re- 
lations which Bruges had already been maintaining with 
London. By the side of Bruges, other mercantile centers 
appeared: Ghent, Ypres, Lille, Douai, Arras, Tournai. 
Fairs were instituted by the Counts of Thourout at Mes- 
sines, Lille and Ypres. 

Flanders was not alone in experiencing the salutary 
effects of the shipping of the north. The repercussion 
made itself felt along the rivers which end in the Nether- 
lands. Cambrai and Valenciennes on the Scheldt, Liége, 
Huy and Dinant on the Meuse had already, in the tenth 
century, been mentioned as centers of trade. This was 
true also of Cologne and Mainz, on the Rhine. The 
shores of the Channel and of the Atlantic, further re- 
moved from the seat of activity of the North Sea, do 
not seem to have had the same importance. Hardly any 
mention was made of them, with the exception of Rouen, 
naturally in close contact with England, and, further 
south, Bordeaux and Bayonne whose development was 
much slower. As for the interior of France and Germany, 
they were affected only very slightly by the economic 
movement which little by little spread in that direction, 
either coming up from Italy or coming down from the 
Netherlands. 

It was only in the twelfth century that, gradually but 


72 MEDIEVAL CITIES © 


definitely, Western Europe was transformed. The eco- — 


nomic development freed her from the traditional im- — 


mobility to which a social organization, depending solely — 


on the relations of man to the soil, had condemned her. 
Commerce and industry did not merely find a place 
alongside of agriculture; they reacted upon it. Its prod- 
ucts no longer served solely for the consumption of the 
landed proprietors and the tillers of the soil; they were 
brought into general circulation, as objects of barter or 
as raw material. The rigid confines of the demesnial sys- 
tem, which had up to now hemmed in all economic ac- 
tivity, were broken down and the whole social order was 
patterned along more flexible, more active and more 
varied lines. As in antiquity, the country oriented itself 
afresh on the city. Under the influence of trade the old 
Roman cities took on new life and were repopulated, or 
mercantile groups formed round about the military burgs 
and established themselves along the sea coasts, on river 
banks, at confluences, at the junction points of the natu- 
ral routes of communication. Each of them constituted 
a market which exercised an attraction, proportionate 
to its importance, on the surrounding country or made 
itself felt afar. 

Large or small, they were to be met everywhere; one 
was to be found, on the average, in every twenty-five 
square leagues of land. They had, in fact, become indis- 
pensable to society. They had introduced into it a divi- 
sion of labor which it could no longer do without. Be- 
tween them and the country was established a reciprocal 
exchange of services. An increasingly intimate solidarity 
bound them together, the country attending to the pro- 
visioning of the towns, and the towns supplying, in re- 
turn, articles of commerce and manufactured goods. The 
physical life of the burgher depended upon the peasant, 
but the social life of the peasant depended upon the 
burgher. For the burgher disclosed to him a more com- 
fortable sort of existence, a more refined sort, and one 


aS 


THE REVIVAL OF COMMERCE 73 


_ which, in arousing his desires, multiplied his needs and 


_ raised his standard of living. And it was not only in this 


respect that the rise of cities strongly stimulated social 


_ progress. It made no less a contribution in spreading 


throughout the world a new conception of labor. Before 
this it had been serf; now it became free, and the con- 
sequences of this fact, to which we shall return, were 


_ incalculable. Let it be added, finally, that the economic 


revival of which the twelfth century saw the flowering 
revealed the power of capital, and enough will have 
been said to show that possibly no period in all history 
had a more profound effect upon humanity. 

Invigorated, transformed and launched upon the 
route of progress, the new Europe resembled, in short, 
more the ancient Europe than the Europe of Carolin- 
gian times. For it was out of antiquity that she regained 
that essential characteristic of being a region of cities. 
And if, in the political organization, the réle of cities 
had been greater in antiquity than it was in the Middle 
Ages, in return their economic influence in the latter era 
greatly exceeded what it had ever been before. Gen- 
erally speaking, great mercantile cities were relatively 
rare in the western provinces of the Roman Empire. 
Aside from Rome herself, there were scarcely any at all 
except Naples, Milan, Marseilles and Lyons. Nothing of 
the sort was then in existence which might be compa- 
rable to what were, at the beginning of the tenth cen- 
tury, ports like Venice, Pisa, Genoa or Bruges, or centers 
of industry such as Milan, Florence, Ypres, and Ghent. 
In Gaul, in fact, the important place held in the twelfth 
century by ancient cities such as Orleans, Bordeaux, 
Cologne, Nantes, Rouen, and others, was much superior 
to what they had enjoyed under the emperors. Finally, 
the extension of the economic development of medieval 
Europe went well beyond the limits it had reached in 
Roman Europe. Instead of halting along the Rhine and 
the Danube, it overflowed widely in Germany and 


74 MEDIEVAL CITIES 
reached as far as the Vistula. Regions which had been 


travelled over, at the beginning of the Christian era, only 


by infrequent traders in amber and furs and which 
seemed as inhospitable as the heart of Africa might 
have seemed to our ancestors, now burgeoned with 
cities. The Sound, which no Roman trading vessel had 
ever crossed, was animated by the continual passage of 
ships. They sailed the Baltic and the North Sea as they 
had sailed the Mediterranean. There were almost as 
many ports on the shores of the one as on the shores of 
the other. 

From two quarters, trade made use of the resources 
which Nature had placed at its disposal. It dominated 
the two inland seas which between them bounded the 
admirably indented coast line of the continent of Eu- 
rope. Just as the Italian cities had driven back the Mos- 
lems from the Mediterranean, so in the course of the 
twelfth century the German cities drove back the Scan- 
dinavians from the North Sea and the Baltic, on which 
hereafter were spread the sails of the Hanse Towns. 

Thus the commercial expansion which first made its 
appearance at the two points at which Europe came in 
contact with it—by Venice with the world of the east, 
by Flanders with the Russo-Scandinavian world—spread 
like a beneficent epidemic over the whole Continent. In 
reaching inland, the movement from the north and the 
movement from the south finally met each other. The 
contact between them was effected at the midpoint of 
the natural route which led from Bruges to Venice—on 
the plain of Champagne, where in the twelfth century 
were instituted the famous fairs of Troyes, Lagny, 
Provins and Bar-sur-Aube, which up to the end of the 
thirteenth century fulfilled, in medieval Europe, the 
functions of an exchange and of a clearing house. 


THE 
MERCHANT 
CLASS 


Almost always, in questions of origin, the amount of in- 
formation available is far from satisfactory. It is there- 
fore impossible to reconstruct an exact picture of the 
rise of the merchant class which inspired the commercial 
movement and caused it to spread over all Europe. 

In certain countries, trade appears as an original and 
spontaneous phenomenon. This was the case, for ex- 
ample, at the dawn of history in Greece and Scandi- 
navia. There, navigation was at least as old as agricul- 
ture. Everything led men to engage in it: the deep con- 
formation of the coast lines, the abundance of harbors, 
and the subtle attraction of those islands and low-lying 
shores which were visible on the horizon and which 
made a sea-faring life seem the more tempting because 
there was so little to be hoped for from a soil as barren 
as was that of the homeland. The proximity of older and 
poorly defended civilizations held out, in addition, the 
lure of rich plunder. Piracy was the initiator of maritime 
trade among the Greeks of the Homeric era, as among 


76 MEDIEVAL cra 


the Norse vikings; for a long time the two vocations 
developed in concert. ; 

Nothing of the sort, however, was to be found in the — 
Middle Ages. There was no sign of that heroic and bar- 
barian occupation. The Germanic tribes that invaded 
the Roman provinces in the fifth century were complete 
strangers to a maritime life. They contented themselves 
with appropriating the soil, and the shipping of the Med- 
iterranean continued, as in the past, to fill the peaceful 
réle which had fallen to it under the Empire. 

The Moslem invasion which caused its ruin and closed 
the sea provoked no reaction. The situation was taken 
for granted, and the continent of Europe, deprived of its 
traditional markets, remained an essentially rural civili- 
zation. The sporadic trade which Jews, peddlers and 
occasional merchants still carried on during the Carolin- 
gian era was too feeble and was too effectively discour- 
aged by the invasions of the Norsemen and Saracens 
to lend support to the belief that it was the precursor 
of the commercial revival whose first symptoms were 
visible in the tenth century. 

It would seem natural to suppose, at first glance, that 
a merchant class grew up little by little in the midst of 
the agricultural masses. Nothing, however, gives cre- 
dence to that theory. In the social organization of the 
late Middle Ages, where each family from father to son 
was bound to the soil, it is hard to see what possibly 
could have induced men to exchange, for a livelihood 
made sure by the possession of the soil, the aleatory 
and precarious livelihood of the trader. The love of gain 
and the desire to ameliorate one’s condition must have 
carried, at best, very little weight with a population ac- 
customed to a traditional way of living, having no con- 
tact with the outside world, in which no novelty, no 
curiosity stirred the imagination, and in which the spirit 
of initiative was probably completely lacking. Though 
they frequented the small local markets the peasants 


errs MERCHANT CLASS 77 


never made enough money out of them to be inspired 


_ with the desire for, or even to be inclined to envisage 


the possibility of, a manner of life based on trade. Theirs 
must have seemed to them merely a normal and cus- 
tomary occupation. The idea of selling one’s land in or- 
der to procure liquid assets certainly did not occur to 
any of them. The state of society and the general out- 
look on life was entirely opposed to it. There is not the 
slightest proof that anybody had ever dreamed of a 
transaction so bizarre and so hazardous. 

Certain historians have sought to set up as the fore- 
runners of the merchants of the Middle Ages those 
servitors whom the great abbeys charged with procur- 
ing, from without, the indispensable commodities for 
their subsistence and to whom they sometimes entrusted 
the selling, in the neighboring markets, of the surplus 
of their own harvests and vintages. This hypothesis, in- 
genious as it is, does not stand up under examination. 
In the first place, the “abbey-merchants” were too few 
in number to have an influence of any great moment. 
In the second place, they were not free agents, but em- 
ployees exclusively in the service of their masters. It is 
not apparent that any of them ever carried on business 
on his own account. No attempt has been successful, and 
none, certainly, ever will be successful, to establish a 
connecting link between them and the merchant class 
whose origins we are looking for here. 

All that can be asserted with certainty is that the com- 
mercial profession appeared in Venice at a period when 
nothing yet gave reason to expect its spread in Western 
Europe. Cassiodorus, in the sixth century, describes the 
Venetians as even then a sailor- and merchant-folk. It 
is an established fact that in the ninth century some very 
great fortunes were founded in the city. The treaties 
of commerce which Venice later concluded with the 
Carolingian emperors or with those of Byzantium, fur- 
thermore, leave no room for doubt as to the nature of 


; 
78 MEDIEVAL CITIES. 


the life of her inhabitants. Unfortunately there are no 
existing data on the manner in which their capital was 
accumulated and their business carried on. It is more 
than probable that salt, prepared on the islets of the 
lagoons, formed at an early date the substance of a 
lucrative export trade. The coastal trade along the shores 
of the Adriatic and especially the relations of the city 
with Constantinople resulted in still greater profits. The 
extent to which the technique of Venetian commerce 
had already been perfected by the tenth century is ex- 
traordinary. 

At a period when everywhere else in Europe instruc- 
tion was the exclusive monopoly of the clergy, the ability 
to write was widespread in Venice. It is perfectly ob- 
vious that there was a close relation between this cu- 
rious phenomenon and the development of trade. 

It was the credit system, which, with the greatest 
probability, helped commerce to reach at an early date 
the point it had attained. To be sure, there are no rec- 
ords bearing on the matter, earlier than the first part of 
the eleventh century. But the custom of maritime loans 
seems to have already been so highly developed at this 
period that their origin must necessarily be dated much 
earlier. 

The Venetian merchant was in the habit of borrowing 
from a capitalist the money necessary for financing a 
cargo, at a rate of interest which averaged in general 
about twenty per cent. A ship was loaded by several 
merchants acting in common, and the perils of naviga- 
tion led maritime expeditions to be made up of fotillas 
comprising several vessels manned by large and care- 
fully armed crews. Everything tends to show that the 
profits were extremely high. If, in this respect, Venetian 
documents hardly give precise information, we can com- 
pensate for their silence by means of Genoese sources. 
In the twelfth century maritime loans, the equipments 
of ships, and business methods were alike in both cities. 


THE MERCHANT CLASS 79 


_ What we know about the enormous profits realized by 
23 _ Genoese mariners must then hold equally true for their 
precursors of Venice. And we know enough about it to 
be able to state that trade and trade alone, in the one 
quarter as in the other, could have enabled those, whose 
fortunes were favored by energy and intelligence, to 

_ acquire abundant capital. 
But the secret of the rapid and early fortunes of the 
_ Venetian merchants is undoubtedly to be found in the 
_ close relationship which bound their commercial organi- 
zation to that of Byzantium, and through Byzantium to 
the commercial organization of antiquity. In reality 
Venice belonged to the west only by her geographical 
location; in the life that animated her and the spirit that 
inspired her, she was foreign to it. The first colonists of 
the lagoons, fugitives from Aquileia and neighboring 
cities, brought there the economic technique and tools 
of the Roman world. The constant and increasingly ac- 
tive relations which, from then on, continued to bind the 
city to Byzantine Italy and Constantinople, protected 
and developed that important commercial center. In 
short, between Venice and the east, where was pre- 
served the thousand-year-old tradition of civilization, 
contact was never lost. Venetian navigators may be con- 
sidered as the successor of those Syrian mariners who 
were so active, up to the time of the Moslem invasion, 
in the port of Marseilles and the Tyrrhenian Sea. They 
had no need of a long and painful apprenticeship to fit 
them for a great commerce. The tradition of it had, with 
them, never been lost, and that is enough to explain the 
peculiar place they occupy in the economic history of 
Western Europe. It is impossible to deny that the com- 
mercial law and customs of antiquity were the cause of 
the superiority which they manifested and which they 
enjoyed from the very start. Thorough research will, 
some day, doubtless supply definite proof of what is 
here merely asserted. There is no doubt, meanwhile, but 


80 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


that the Byzantine influence, so characteristic of the po- 
litical constitution of Venice during the early centuries, 
had also impregnated its economic constitution. In the 
rest of Europe the commercial profession was tardily 
evolved from a civilization in which every former trace 
of it had long since been lost. In Venice it appeared at 
the same time as the city itself; there it was a survival 
from the Roman world. 

Venice naturally exercised a profound effect upon the 
other maritime cities which, in the course of the eleventh 
century, commenced to appear: Pisa and Genoa first, 
later Marseilles and Barcelona. But she does not seem 
to have contributed to the formation of the merchant 
class by virtue of which commercial activity spread little 
by little from the shores of the sea towards the interior 
of the Continent. Here we find ourselves in the presence 
of a quite different phenomenon, one which there are 
no grounds for believing was connected with the eco- 
nomic organization of antiquity. To be sure, Venetian 
merchants were to be met with at an early date not only 
in Lombardy but even north of the Alps. But it is not 
apparent that they founded colonies anywhere. The 
conditions underlying commerce on the land were, after 
all, too different from those of commerce on the sea to 
make it likely that they had an influence. There are, 
furthermore, no existing records to that effect. 

It was in the course of the tenth century that there 
reappeared in continental Europe a class of professional 
merchants whose progress, very slow at first, gathered 
speed as the following century moved forward. The in- 
crease in population, which began to be manifest at the 
same era, is certainly in direct relation to this phenom- 
enon. It had as a result the detaching from the land 
an increasingly important number of individuals and 
committing them to that roving and hazardous existence 
which, in every agricultural civilization, is the lot of 
those who no longer find themselves with their roots in 


THE MERCHANT CLASS 81 


the soil. It multiplied the crowd of vagabonds drifting 
about all through society, living from day to day by 
alms from the monasteries, hiring themselves out at 
harvest-time, enlisting in the armies in time of war and 
holding back from neither rapine nor pillage when oc- 
casion presented. It is among this crowd of foot-loose 
adventurers that the first adepts of trade must, with- 
out any doubt, be looked for. 

Their manner of life naturally drove them towards 
all those localities where the affluence of the inhabitants 
gave them the hope of gain or offered some fortunate 
opening. If they assiduously took part in pilgrimages, 
they were certainly no less drawn by the ports, the 
markets, and the fairs. There they hired themselves out 
as sailors, as boatmen, as stevedores or porters. Energetic 
characters, tempered by the experience of a life full of 
the unexpected, must have abounded among them. 
Many knew foreign languages and were conversant 
with the customs and needs of divers lands. Let a lucky 
chance present itself—and heaven knows that chances 
are numerous in the life of a vagabond—they were re- 
markably well equipped to profit thereby. And a small 
profit, with skill and intelligence, can always be turned 
into a big profit. This must have been particularly true 
in an era when the insufficiency of communications and 
the relative rarity of merchandise offered for sale must 
have naturally kept prices at a very high level. Famines 
were multiplied throughout Europe, sometimes in one 
province and sometimes in another, by that inadequate 
system of communications, and increased still more the 
opportunities, for those who knew how to make use of 
them, of getting rich. A few timely sacks of wheat, trans- 
ported to the right spot, sufficed for the realizing of huge 
profits. For a man, adroit and sparing no pains, Fortune 
then held out the prospect of fruitful operations. It was 
certainly not long before nouveaux riches made their ap- 


82 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


pearance in the midst of this miserable crowd of im- 
poverished, bare-foot wanderers in the world. 

Fortunately there happen to be sources of informa- 
tion which supply proof that this was in fact the case. 
It will suffice to cite here the most characteristic of them, 
the biography of St. Godric of Finchale. 

He was born towards the end of the eleventh cen- 
tury in Lincolnshire, of poor peasant stock, and he must 
have been put to it from early childhood to find a means 
of livelihood. Like many other unfortunates in every age, 
he was a beachcomber, on the lookout for wreckage cast 
up by the waves. Next, perhaps following some lucky 
find, he played the réle of peddler and went about the 
country with a pack on his back. Eventually he ac- 
cumulated a little capital and, one fine day, he joined 
a band of merchants met in the course of his peregrina- 
tions. With them he went from market to market, from 
fair to fair, from town to town. Thus become a merchant 
by profession, he rapidly realized profits big enough to 
enable him to form an association with his fellows, to 
load a ship in common with them and to engage in 
coastal trade along the shores of England, Scotland, 
Denmark and Flanders. The company prospered to the 
fullest. Its operations consisted in shipping abroad goods 
which were known to be scarce, and there picking up 
in return merchandise which it took care to dispose of 
in places where the demand was the greatest and where 
might be realized, in consequence, the largest profits. 
At the end of several years this prudent custom of buy- 
ing cheap and selling dear made of Godric a very rich 
man. It was then that, moved by grace, he suddenly 
renounced the life he had led until then, turned over 
his possessions to the poor, and became a hermit. 

The story of St. Godric, if we eliminate from it the 
mystic ending, was that of a great many others. It shows, 
with the utmost clearness, how a man, starting with 
nothing, was able in a relatively short time to amass 


THE MERCHANT CLASS 83 


considerable money. Circumstances and luck probably 
contributed largely to the making of his fortune. But 
the essential cause of his success, and the contemporary 
biography to which we owe the account lays abun- 
dant stress thereon, was intelligence, or rather business 
sense.1 Godric seems to have been a shrewd calculator 
gifted with that commercial instinct which it is not al- 
together rare to meet, in any age, among enterprising 
natures. The quest of profit guided all his actions and 
in him can be easily recognized that famous “capitalistic 
spirit” (spiritus capitalisticus) which some would have 
us believe dates only from the Renaissance. It is pre- 
posterous to submit that Godric carried on his business 
merely to provide for his daily needs. In place of hoard- 
ing in the bottom of some chest the money he gained, 
he used it only to maintain and extend his trading. It 
is not employing too modern an expression to say that the 
profits he realized were put to work as fast as possible 
to augment his revolving capital. For that matter, it is 
somewhat surprising to observe that the conscience of 
this future monk was completely free of all religious 
scruple. His zeal in searching out for every commodity 
the market where it would produce the maximum profit 
was in flagrant opposition to the disapproval with which 
the Church looked upon every kind of speculation, and 
to the economic doctrine of “fair price.” 


1. “Sic itaque puerilibus annis simpliciter domi trans- 
actis, caepit adolescentior prudentiores vitae vias ex- 
colere et documenta secularis providentiae sollicite et 
exercitate perdicere. Unde non agriculturae delegit ex- 
ercitia colere, sed potius quae sagacioris animi sunt 
rudimenta studuit, arripiendo exercere. Hinc est quod 
mercatoris aemulatus studium, coepit mercimonii fre- 
quentare negotium, et primitus in minoribus quidem et 
rebus pretii inferioris, coepit lucrandi officia discere; 
postmodum vero paulatim ad majoris pretii emolumenta 
adolescentiae suae ingenia promovere.” Libellus de Vita 
S. Godrici, p. 25. 


84 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


The fortune of Godric is not to be explained merely 
by business ability. In a society still as crude as that 
of the eleventh century, private initiative could succeed 
only by having recourse to cooperation. Too many perils 
threatened the wandering existence of the merchant not 
to impose on him first of all the fundamental necessity 
of forming in groups for the sake of common defense. 
Still other motives impelled him to unite with his fel- 
lows. At fairs and markets, should a dispute arise, he 
found in them favorable witnesses, or bondsmen who 
would be security for him in a court of justice. In com- 
mon with them he was able to buy at wholesale mer- 
chandise which, left to his own resources, he would have 
been unable to get. His credit was increased by the col- 
lective credit of which he supplied a part, and thanks 
thereto he was able more easily to come out on top in 
competition with his rivals. The biography of Godric in- 
forms us in its own very words that from the day when 
its hero associated himself with a band of merchants 
his fortunes took their upward turn. In taking this step 
he merely conformed to custom. Trade in the late Mid- 
dle Ages was known only in that primitive form of which 
the caravan is the characteristic manifestation. Maritime 
or land trade was possible only by grace of the mutual 
assurance an association inspired in its members, of the 
discipline which it imposed upon them, of the regula- 
tions to which it subjected them. And this feature was 
always in evidence. Boats sailed only when assembled 
in flotillas, just as merchants travelled the country only 
in bands. Security existed for them only if guaranteed 
by force, and force was an attribute of collectivity. 

It would be a complete mistake to see in the mer- 
chant associations, of which traces may be found in the 
tenth century, a peculiarly German phenomenon. It is 
true that the terms which were used to designate them 
in the north of Europe—gild and hanse—came originally 
from Germany. But this habit of cooperating is to be 


THE MERCHANT CLASS 85 


found everywhere in economic life and, whatever may 
have been the differences in the details, in what was 
essential it was everywhere the same, because every- 
where there were the same conditions which made it 
indispensable. In Italy as in the Netherlands, trade was 
able to expand only by cooperation. The frairies, the 
charités, the merchant compagnies of the countries of 
the Roman tongue were exactly analogous to the gilds 
and hanses of the German territories.2 What determined 
the economic organization was not “national genius,” but 
_ social necessity. The primitive institutions of trade were 
as cosmopolitan as those of the feudal system. 

The sources of information make it possible to obtain 
an excellent idea of the merchant troops which, begin- 
ning with the tenth century, were to be found in greater 
and greater numbers in Western Europe. They should 
be pictured as armed bands, the members of which, 
equipped with bows and swords, encircled the horses 
and wagons loaded with bags, packs and casks. At 
the head of the caravan marched a standard-bearer. A 
chief, the Hansgraf or the Doyen, exercised his author- 
ity over the company. This latter was composed of 
“brothers,” bound together by an oath of fidelity. A 
spirit of close solidarity animated the whole group. The 
merchandise, apparently, was bought and sold in com- 
mon and the profits divided pro rata, according to the 
share of each one in the association. 

It seems that these companies, as a general rule, made 
very long journeys. It would be a decided mistake to 
conceive of the commerce of this era as a local com- 
merce, strictly confined within the orbit of a regional 
market. It has already been seen that Italian traders 
went as far as Paris and Flanders. At the end of the 


2. We even find a similar organization in Dalmatia. 
See C. Jirecek, “Die Bedeutung von Raguza in der 
Handelsgeschichte des Méittelalters,” manak der 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, in Wien, 1899, p. 382. 


86 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


tenth century the port of London was regularly fre- 
quented by merchants from Cologne, Huy, Dinant, 
Flanders and Rouen. A contemporary text speaks of men 
from Verdun trading with Spain. In the valley of the 
Seine, the Parisian hanse of river merchants was in con- 
stant relations with Rouen. The biography of Godric, in 
chronicling his distant expeditions in the Baltic and the 
North Sea, at the same time throws light on those of 
his fellows. 

It was therefore trade on a big scale or, if you prefer 
a more precise term, trade over long distances, that was 
characteristic of the economic revival of the Middle 
Ages. Just as the shipping of Venice and Amalfi and 
later that of Pisa and Genoa launched forth from the 
very beginning on long sea voyages, so did the mer- 
chants of the Continent lead their vagabond life over 
wide territories. It is quite clear that this was for them 
the sole means of realizing big profits. To get high prices 
it was necessary to seek afar the products which were 
there found in abundance, in order to be able to resell 
them later at a profit in places where their rarity in- 
creased their value. The more distant the journey of 
the merchant, the more profitable was it for him. And 
it is easily appreciated how the desire for gain was strong 
enough to counterbalance the hardships, the risks and 
the dangers of a wandering existence open to every 
hazard. Except during the winter, the merchant of the 
Middle Ages was continually on the road. English texts 
of the twelfth century picturesquely designated him un- 
der the name of piepowdrous—“dusty-foot.” 

This rover, this vagabond of trade, by the strange- 
ness of his manner of life must have, from the very first, 
astonished the agricultural society to all of the customs 
of which he went counter and in which no place was 
set aside for him. He brought mobility to the midst of 
people attached to the soil; he revealed, to a world faith- 
ful to tradition and respectful of a hierarchy which fixed 


THE MERCHANT CLASS 87 


the rédle and the rank of each class, a shrewd and ra- 
tionalist activity in which fortune, instead of being meas- 
ured by social status, depended only on intelligence and 
energy. And so it is not surprising that he gave offense. 
The nobility never had anything but disdain for these 
upstarts come from no one knew where, and whose in- 
solent good fortune they could not bear. They were in- 
furiated to see them better supplied with money than 
themselves; they were humiliated by being obliged to 
have recourse, in time of trouble, to the purse of these 
newly rich. Save in Italy, where aristocratic families did 
not hesitate to augment their fortunes by having an in- 
terest in commercial operations in the capacity of money- 
lender, the prejudice that it was degrading to engage 
in business remained deep-rooted in the heart of the 
feudal caste up to the time of the French Revolution. 

As to the clergy, their attitude in regard to merchants 
was still more unfavorable. In the eyes of the Church, 
commercial life was dangerous to the safety of the soul. 
“The merchant,” says a text attributed to St. Jerome, 
“can please God only with difficulty.” Trade seemed to 
the canonists to be a form of usury. They condemned 
profit-seeking, which they confounded with avarice. 
Their doctrine of “fair price” was meant to impose a 
renouncement of economic life and, in short, an asceti- 
cism incompatible with the natural development of the 
latter. Every form of speculation seemed to them a sin. 
And this severity was not entirely caused by the strict 
interpretation of Christian morality. Very likely, it should 
also be attributed to the conditions under which the 
Church existed. The subsistence of the Church, in fact, 
depended exclusively on that demesnial organization 
which, as has been seen above, was so foreign to the 
idea of enterprise and profit. If to this be added the 
ideal of poverty which Clunisian mysticism gave to re- 
ligious fervor, it can be readily understood why the 
Church took a defiant and hostile attitude toward the 


88 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


commercial revival which must, from the very first, have 
seemed to it a thing of shame and a cause of anxiety. 

We must admit, however, that this attitude was not 
without its benefits. It certainly resulted in preventing 
the passion for gain from spreading without limit; it pro- 
tected, in a certain measure, the poor from the rich, 
debtors from creditors. The scourge of debts, which in 
Greek and Roman antiquity so sorely afflicted the peo- 
ple, was spared the social order of the Middle Ages, 
and it may well be that the Church contributed largely 
to that happy result. The universal prestige it enjoyed 
served as a moral check-rein. If it was not strong enough 
to subject the traders to the doctrine of “fair price,” it 
was strong enough to restrain them from giving way en- 
tirely to greediness for profits. They were certainly very 
uneasy over the peril to which their way of living ex- 
posed their eternal salvation. The fear of the future life 
tormented their conscience. Many there were who, on 
their death beds, founded by their wills charitable in- 
stitutions or appropriated a part of their wealth to re- 
imburse sums unjustly acquired. The edifying end of 
Godric testifies to the inner conflict which must often 
have been waged in their souls, torn between the ir- 
resistible seductions of wealth and the austere prescrip- 
tions of religious morality which their profession obliged 
them, in spite of their veneration, to violate unceasingly.4 

The legal status of the merchants eventually gave 
them a thoroughly singular place in that society which 
they astonished in so many respects. By virtue of the 
wandering existence they led, they were everywhere 


3. “The Life of Saint Guidon of Anderlecht,” Acta 
Sanctorum, Vol. IV, p. 42, speaks of the “ignobilis mer- 
catura” and calls a merchant who advised the saint to 
apply himself to it a “diaboli minister.” 

4. An ele of the conversion of a merchant quite 
analogous to that of Godric and at the same Faas is 


iven by the “Vita Theogeri,” Monumenta Germaniae 
istorica, Vol. XI, p. 457. 


THE MERCHANT CLASS 89 


regarded as foreigners. No one knew the origins of these 
eternal travellers. Certainly the majority among them 
were born of nonfree parents, from whom they had early 
taken leave in order to launch upon adventures. But 
serfdom was not to be presumed: it had to be proven. 
The law necessarily treated as a free man one who could 
not be ascribed to a master. It therefore came about 
that it was necessary to treat the merchants, most of 
whom were without doubt the sons of serfs, as if they 
had always enjoyed freedom. In detaching themselves 
from their natal soil they had freed themselves in fact. 
In the midst of a social organization where the populace 
was attached to the land and where everyone was de- 
pendent upon a liege lord, they presented the strange 
picture of circulating everywhere without being claimed 
by anyone. They did not demand freedom; it was con- 
ceded to them because no one could prove that they 
did not already enjoy it. They acquired it, so to speak, 
by usage and limitation. In short, just as agrarian civili- 
zation had made of the peasant a man whose normal 
state was servitude, trade made of the merchant a man 
whose normal condition was liberty. From that time on, 
in place of being subject to seignorial and demesnial 
jurisdiction, he was answerable only to public jurisdic- 
tion. Alone competent to try him were the tribunals 
which still kept, above the multitude of private courts, 
the old framework of the judicial constitution of the 
Frankish State. 

Public authority at the same time took him under its 
protection. The local princes whose task it was to pre- 
serve, in their territories, peace and public order—to 
which pertained the policing of the highways and the 
safeguarding of travellers—extended their tutelage over 
the merchants. In doing so they did nothing more than 
to continue the tradition of the State, the powers of 
which they had usurped. In that agricultural empire of 
his, Charlemagne himself had given careful attention to 


go MEDIEVAL CITIES 


the maintenance of the freedom of circulation. He had 
issued edicts in favor of pilgrims and traders, Jew or 
Christian, and the capitularies of his successors attest to 
the fact that they remained faithful to that policy. The 
emperors of the House of Saxony followed suit in Ger- 
many, and the kings of France, after they came into 
power, did likewise. The princes had, furthermore, ev- 
ery interest in attracting numerous merchants to their 
countries, whither they brought a new animation and 
where they augmented bountifully the revenues from 
the market-tolls. The counts early took active measures 
against highwaymen, watching over the good conduct 
of the fairs and the security of the routes of communi- 
cation. In the eleventh century great progress had 
been made and the chroniclers state that there were 
regions where one could travel with a sack full of gold 
without running the risk of being despoiled. On its part, 
the Church punished highwaymen with excommunica- 
tion, and the Truces of God, in which it took the 
initiative in the tenth century, protected the merchants 
in particular. 

But it was not enough that merchants be placed un- 
der the safeguard and the jurisdiction of the public 
authority. The novelty of their profession had further 
consequences. It forced a law, made for a civilization 
based on agriculture, to become more flexible and to 
adapt itself to the fundamental needs which this novelty 
imposed upon it. Judicial procedure, with its rigid and 
traditional formalism, with its delays, with its methods 
of proof as primitive as the duel, with its abuse of the 
absolutory oath, with its “ordeals” which left to chance 
the outcome of a trial, was for the merchants a perpetual 
nuisance. They needed a simpler legal system, more ex- 
peditious and more equitable. At the fairs and markets 
they elaborated among themselves a commercial code 
(jus mercatorum) of which the oldest traces may be 
noted by the beginning of the eleventh century. Most 


THE MERCHANT CLASS gl 


probably it was introduced very early into the legal 
practice, at least for suits between merchants. It must 
have constituted for them a sort of personal law, the 
benefits of which the judges had no motive for refusing 
them. The contemporary texts which make allusion to 
it unfortunately do not make clear its terms. There is, 
however, no doubt but that it was a collection of usages 
born of business experience and which spread from 
place to place commensurately with the spread of trade 
itself. The great fairs whither came, periodically, mer- 
chants from divers countries and which had a special 
tribunal charged with the rendering of speedy justice, 
must have seen from the very first the elaboration of a 
sort of commercial jurisprudence, the same everywhere 
despite the differences in country, language, and na- 
tional laws. 

The merchant thus seems to have been not only a 
free man but a privileged man to boot. Like the cleric 
and the noble, he enjoyed a law of exception. Like them, 
he escaped the demesnial and seignorial authority which 
continued to bear down upon the peasants. 


THE 
MIDDLE 
CLASS 


In no civilization is city life evolved independently of 
commerce and industry. Neither antiquity nor modern 
times show any exception to this rule. Diversity of cli- 
mates, peoples or religions is as immaterial as diversity 
of eras. It is a rule which held true, in the past, in the 
cities of Egypt, Babylonia, Greece, and the Roman and 
Arab Empires, just as in our day it has held true in the 
cities of Europe, America, India, Japan, and China. 

Its universality is explained by exigence. A city group, 
in fact, can live only by importing its food supply from 
outside. But with this importation must correspond, on 
the other hand, an exportation of manufactured prod- 
ucts constituting a counterpart or countervalue. Thus is 
established, between the city and the surrounding coun- 
try, a close interrelation of services. Commerce and in- 
dustry are indispensable to the maintenance of this 
reciprocal dependence; without the first, to assure a 
steady traffic, without the second, to furnish goods for 
exchange, the city would perish.1 


1. This is true, naturally, only for towns placed under 


94 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


This condition is obviously subject to any quantity of 
variations. Depending on time and place, sometimes 
commercial activity and sometimes industrial activity is 
the dominant characteristic of a city population. In an- 
tiquity, of course, a considerable section of the city pop- 
ulation was made up of landed proprietors, living either 
by the cultivation of or by the revenue from the lands 
which they owned outside. But it remains none the less 
true that commensurately with the development of 
cities, artisans and traders became more and more 
numerous. The rural economy, older than the urban 
economy, continued to exist side by side with the latter; 
the one did not prevent the other from developing. 

The cities of the Middle Ages present a very different 
picture. Commerce and industry made them what they 
were. They did not cease to grow under that influence. 
At no era in history is there so marked a contrast as 
that which their social and economic organization pre- 
sented to the social and economic organization of the 
country. Never before had there existed, it seems, a 
class of men so specifically and strictly urban as was 
the medieval bourgeoisie.” 

That the origin of these cities is directly related, as 
an effect to its cause, to the commercial revival of which 
we have spoken in the preceding chapters, it is impos- 


normal conditions. The State has often had to maintain 
city populations much too numerous to be able to take 
care of their own subsistence. This, for example, had 
been the case with Rome since the end of the Republic. 
But the increase of the population in Rome was the re- 
sult of political, not economic, causes. 

2. There were certainly in the Middle Ages numbers 
of localities bearing the title “city” and endowed with 
city franchises, of which the inhabitants were much 
more occupied with agriculture than with commerce or 
industry. But in this case they were the product of a 
later era. We are alluding here to the middle class as 
it was first constituted and as it continued to exist in 
the characteristic centers of city life. 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 95 


sible to doubt. The proof is to be found in the striking 
correspondence which is to be noted between the ex- 
pansion of trade and the rise of cities. Italy and the 
Netherlands, where commerce first showed itself, are 
precisely the countries where cities made their first ap- 
pearance and where they developed most rapidly and 
vigorously. It is easy to mark how, in step with the prog- 
ress of trade, towns multiplied. They appeared along all 
the natural routes by which trade spread. They were 
born, so to speak, under its footsteps. They are found, 
at first, only along sea coasts and rivers. Then, as the 
commercial penetration spread, others were founded 
along the transverse roads which connected these first 
centers of activity with each other. 

The case of the Netherlands is quite typical. In the 
tenth century the earlier towns were founded on the 
shore of the sea or on the banks of the Meuse and the 
Scheldt; the intermediate region, Brabant, did not yet 
know them. We must wait until the twelfth century be- 
fore they make their appearance on the route which lay 
between those two great rivers. Similar observations 
may be made anywhere. A map of Europe on which was 
marked the relative importance of the commercial high- 
ways would coincide very closely with an abstract of 
the relative importance of the city groups. 

The towns of the Middle Ages showed an extraordi- 
nary diversity. Each had a distinctive physiognomy and 
particular characteristics. Every one of them differed 
from the others just as men differ among themselves. 
They can, however, be classified according to certain 
general types. And these types themselves resemble one 
another in their essential traits. It is therefore not a hope- 
less task to try to depict, as we shall endeavor to do here, 
the evolution of city life in the west of Europe. Doubt- 
less the picture will necessarily be a little too schematic, 
not fitting exactly any one particular case but rather be- 
ing the description of what is common to a whole species, 


96 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


an abstract of individual characteristics. Only the gen- 
eral outlines will appear, as in a landscape viewed from 
a mountain top. 

The subject, however, is less complicated than would 
appear at first glance. It is futile, indeed, in an outline 
of the origin of European cities, to take count of the in- 
finite complexity which they manifested. City life was 
developed first of all in only a quite restricted number 
of localities in Northern Italy, in the Netherlands, and 
in neighboring regions. It will be enough if we confine 
ourselves to these latter, neglecting the later develop- 
ments which, whatever might be of interest in them, 
were actually only duplicate phenomena.’ Yet in the 
following pages a privileged place will be accorded to 
the Netherlands. This is because that country supplies 
the historian with more abundant illumination on the 
early days of city evolution than any other region of 
Western Europe. 

The organization of commerce in the Middle Ages, 
as it has been described in the preceding chapter, 
obliged the peripatetic merchants or “merchant adven- 
turers,” on whom it relied, to settle at fixed points. In 
the interval between their trips and especially during 
the bad season which made the sea, the rivers and the 
roads impassable, they necessarily had to gather at cer- 
tain places in the region. It was naturally in localities of 
which the site, by its facilities in the matter of com- 
munications, lent itself best to the exigencies of trade 
and where they could at the same time place their 
money and goods in security, that the merchants estab- 


3. The most important towns for the study of the 
origins of city institutions are evidently the Bee it is 
there that the middle class arose. It is a faulty method 
to seek to explain the latter by relying on towns of later 


mete 2 such as those of Germany be- 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 97 


lished their residence. They therefore repaired to the 
towns and burgs which best met these conditions. 

The number of them was considerable. The site of 
the towns had been determined by the conformation of 
the terrain or the direction of the river courses—in short, 
by conditions of nature, which were precisely what de- 
termined the direction of trade and so steered the mer- 
chants towards them. In the same way the burgs, which 
had been designed to resist enemies or furnish a shelter 
to the population, were naturally built in localities par- 
ticularly easy of access. It was by the same routes the 
invaders passed that the merchants travelled, and the 
result was that fortresses erected against the former were 
excellently situated for attracting the latter to their walls. 
Thus it came about that the first commercial groups were 
formed in neighborhoods which Nature had predisposed 
to become—or to become again—the focal points of 
economic circulation. 

There are apparent grounds for belief, and certain 
historians have in fact believed, that these first agglom- 
erations were due to the markets established in such 
great number, beginning with the ninth century. Invit- 
ing as it seems at first glance, this opinion does not bear 
scrutiny. The markets of the Carolingian era were simple 
local markets, frequented by peasants from roundabout, 
and by a few peddlers. They had as their sole aim the 
provisioning of the towns and burgs. They were not held 
more than once a week and their operations were 
limited by the household needs of the inhabitants, very 
few in number, for whose benefit they had been in- 
stituted. Markets of this sort have always existed and 
still exist in our own day in thousands of little towns and 
villages. Their attraction was not strong enough nor 
widespread enough to draw and hold a mercantile pop- 
ulation. We know, moreover, of any number of places 
which, although equipped with markets of this sort, 
never rose to the rank of cities. Such, for example, was 


98 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


the case with those which the Bishop of Cambrai and 
the Abbot of Reichenau established, the one in 1001 
at Le CAateau-Cambrésis and the other in 1100 at 
Radolfzell. Yet Le Cateau and Radolfzell never were 
anything but insignificant localities from an economic 
viewpoint, and the failure of the attempts of which they 
were the object clearly shows that markets of this sort 
were wanting in that influence which one is sometimes 
minded to accord them. 

As much might be said of the fairs (fora), and yet 
the fairs in contrast to the markets do not show a strictly 
local character; they were instituted to serve as a peri- 
odic meeting place for the professional merchants, to 
put them in touch with each other, and to get them to 
gather there at fixed seasons. In fact, the importance of 
many of these fairs was very great. In Flanders those of 
Thourout and Messines and in France those of Bar-sur- 
Aube and Lagny figured among the principal centers 
of medieval trade up to near the end of the twelfth cen- 
tury. It may therefore seem strange that none of these 
localities became a city worthy of the name. This is be- 
cause whatever activity they showed was lacking in that 
permanent character which is necessary for the fixation 
of trade. Merchants directed their steps toward them 
because they were situated on the great route of travel 
running from the North Sea to Lombardy, and because 
they enjoyed special franchises and privileges there. 
They were points of assembly and places of exchange 
where buyers and sellers from the north and south were 
to be encountered. After a few weeks their exotic 
clientéle dispersed, not to return before the following 
year. 

It probably happened—and it very often did happen, 
as a matter of fact—that a fair was located at the spot 
where already existed a mercantile group. The one may 
have assisted the development of the other. But it is 
impossible to hold that this was the real cause of its ex- 


he ee 


THE MIDDLE CLASS | 99 


istence. Several great cities can be named, which never 
had a privileged market or which did not have one until 
very late. Worms, Speyer, or Mainz never was the seat 
of a fair; Tournai had one only in 1284, Leyden in 1304, 
and Ghent in the fifteenth century only. The fact there- 
fore remains that geographical advantages plus the 
presence of a town or a fortified burg seems the essential 
and necessary condition for a colony of merchants. 

Nothing is less artificial than the development of a 
colony of this sort. The fundamental needs of commerce 
—ease of communication and security—account for it in 
the most natural way. In a more advanced era, when 
better methods would permit man to conquer Nature 
and to force his presence upon her despite handicaps of 
climate or of soil, it would doubtless have been possible 
to build towns anywhere the spirit of enterprise and the 
quest of gain might suggest a site. But it was quite an- 
other matter in a period when society had not yet ac- 
quired enough vigor to rise above the physical condi- 
tions in the midst of which it developed. It naturally 
adapted itself to them and in accordance with them its 
life was regulated. In short, the towns of the Middle 
Ages were a phenomenon determined as much by physi- 
cal surroundings as the course of rivers is determined by 
the conformation of the mountains and the direction of 
the valleys. 

As the commercial revival in Europe gained headway 
after the tenth century, the merchant colonies estab- 
lished in the towns or at the foot of the burgs enjoyed 
an uninterrupted growth. Their population increased 
through the action of economic vitality. Up to the end 
of the thirteenth century, the progress which had been 
manifest from the start continued steadily. No other 
course was open. Each of the focal points of international 
traffic naturally shared in this activity, and the multipli- 
cation of merchants naturally resulted in an increase of 
their number in all the spots where they had first set- 


100 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


tled, for these spots were exactly the ones most favorable 
to commercial life. If they had attracted the traders 
sooner than others did, it is because they, better than 
the others, satisfied their professional requirements. 
Here, therefore, is a thoroughly satisfactory explanation 
of the fact that, as a general rule, the greatest commer- 
cial cities in a region were also the oldest. 

There is by no means enough information to sat- 
isfy our curiosity concerning these primitive mercantile 
groups. The historiography of the tenth and eleventh 
centuries is completely unconcerned with social and 
economic phenomena. Written exclusively by clerics or 
by monks, it naturally measured the importance and the 
value of events according to how they affected the 
Church. Lay society did not claim their attention save 
in so far as it related to religious society. They could 
not neglect the recital of the wars and political conflicts 
which reacted on the Church, but there was no reason 
for them to have taken pains to note the beginnings of 
city life, for which they were lacking in comprehension 
no less than in sympathy.* A few allusions made inciden- 
tally, a few fragmentary annotations upon the occasion 
of a disorder or an uprising—this is what the historian 
is obliged to content himself with. We must go to the 
twelfth century to get, here and there from some rare 
layman dabbling in writing, a little more substantial 
prize. Maps and records supplement this poverty to a 
certain extent. Yet they are rare indeed for the period of 
origins. It is only by the end of the eleventh century 
that they begin to throw a little more abundant illumina- 
tion. As for first-hand sources—that is to say, written and 


_ 4. The chronicler Gilles d’Orval, for example, speak- 
ing of the franchises granted the town of Huy by the 
Bishop of Liége in 1066, mentions a few points and 
passes over the rest in silence “in order not to bore the 
reader.” He is evidently thinking of the ecclesiastical 
public for which he is writing. 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 101 


compiled by townsmen—none exist earlier than the end 
of the twelfth century. It is therefore necessary, although 
there are a few, to ignore them and to have recourse, too 
often, to inference and hypothesis in this study of origins. 

Details are lacking concerning the gradual peopling 
of the towns. It is not known how the first traders, who 
came to locate there, settled in the midst of the pre-ex- 
isting population. The towns, whose precincts frequently 
included unoccupied areas given over to fields and gar- 
dens, must have furnished them at the start with a place 
which soon became too restricted. It is certain that in 
many of them, from the tenth century on, they were 
forced to locate outside the walls. At Verdun they built 
a fortified enclosure (negotiatorum claustrum), joined 
to the city by two bridges. At Ratisbonne the “city of 
merchants” (urbs mercatorum) arose beside the episco- 
pal city, and the same thing is to be seen at Strasbourg 
and elsewhere.’ At Cambrai the newcomers surrounded 
themselves with a palisade of wood which a little later 
was replaced by a stone rampart. At Marseilles the cir- 
cuit of the city must have been enlarged at the begin- 
ning of the eleventh century. It would be easy to 
multiply these examples. They establish beyond ques- 
tion the rapid extensions undergone by the old cities 
which had not hitherto witnessed any growth since the 
Roman era. 

The peopling of the burgs was due to the same causes 
as that of the towns, but it worked out under quite differ- 
ent conditions. Here, in fact, available space was not 
to be had by the new arrivals. The burgs were merely 
fortresses whose walls enclosed a strictly limited area. 
The result was that, at the start, the merchants were 
driven to settle outside this area because there was no 
other place for them. They built beside the burgs an 
“outside burg”—that is to say, a “faubourg” (forisburgus, 


5. In the old municipal laws of Strasbourg, the new 
agglomeration is called “urbs exterior.” 


AL CITIES 
102 MEDIEV 


suburbium). This suburb was called, by contemporary 

texts, the “new burg” (novus burgus), in contrast a the 

feudal burg or “old burg” (vetus burgus) to which it 
‘oined. In the Netherlands and in England there 

was joined. 

was a word used to designate it which corresponded 

admirably to its nature—portus. 

In the administrative terminology of the Roman Em- 
pire, not a sea port, but an enclosed place serving as 
storehouse or transfer point for merchandise was called 
a portus. The expression was passed on, with hardly 
any change, to the Merovingian and Carolingian eras. 
It is obvious that all the places to which it was applied 
were situated on watercourses and that market-tolls 
were collected in them. They were, therefore, landing 
places where was accumulated in the natural course of 
trading operations merchandise destined to be shipped 
further.® 

Between a portus and a market or a fair the distinc- 
tion is very clear. While the latter were periodic meet- 
ing places of buyers and sellers, the former was a 
permanent place of trade, a center of uninterrupted 
traffic. After the seventh century Dinant, Huy, Valen- 
ciennes and Cambrai were places with a portus, and in 
consequence transfer points. The economic slump of the 
eighth century and the Norseman invasions naturally 
ruined their business. It was not until the tenth century 
that the old portus took on new life or new ones were 
established, as at Bruges, Ghent, Ypres, St. Omer, and 
elsewhere. At the same date there appears in Anglo- 
Saxon texts the word “port,” employed as a synonym for 
the Latin words urbs and civitas, and even at the present 


6. In the twelfth cen the word still retained its 
original meaning of landing place: “Infra burgum 
Brisach et Argentinensem civitatem, nullus erit portus 
qui vulgo dicitur Ladstadt, nisi apud Brisach,” H. @. 
Gengler, Stadtrechtsaltertiimer, p. 44. : 


' og 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 103 


day the term “port” is commonly met with in the names 
of cities of every land of English speech. 

Nothing shows more clearly the close connection that 
existed between the economic revival of the Middle 
Ages and the beginnings of city life. They were so in- 
timately related that. the same word which designated 
a commercial settlement served in one of the great 
idioms of Europe to designate the town itself. Old Dutch 
supplies a similar instance. In it the word poort and the 
word poorter are both employed, the first with the mean- 
ing of “town” and the second with that of “townsman.” 

It can be definitely assumed that the portus, so fre- 
quently spoken of during the tenth and eleventh cen- 
turies, at the foot of the burgs of Flanders and con- 
tiguous regions, were made up of merchant groups. 
Several passages in the chronicles or lives of the saints 
which deal with the subject, though in scant detail, 
leave no room for doubt on this point. It will be enough 
to cite here the curious narrative of the Miracula St. 
Womari, written about 1060 by a monk who was an eye- 
witness of the events he reported. Here we have to do 
with a band of monks arriving in procession at Ghent. 
The inhabitants go out to meet them, “like a swarm of 
bees.” They conduct their pious visitors first to the 
Church of St. Pharailde, situated within the limits of the 
burg. The next day they leave the latter to repair to 
the Church of St. John the Baptist, recently erected in 
the portus. It therefore seems that here is a case of the 
juxtaposition of two residential centers of different origin 
and nature. The one, the older, is a fortress and the 
other, the more recent, is a place of trade, and it is from 
the gradual fusion of these two elements, of which the 
first is absorbed little by little by the second, that the 
city is born. 

It will be well to take note, before going further, of 
the fate of those towns and burgs whose location did 
not favor their becoming commercial centers. Typical 


104 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


examples, without going outside the Netherlands, were 
Térouanne or the burgs built about the monasteries of 
Stavelot, Malmédy, Lobbes, etc. In the agricultural and 
demesnial civilization of the Middle Ages, all these 
places were notable for their wealth and their influence. 
But, situated too far from the great highways of com- 
munication, they were not affected by the economic 
revival nor, so to speak, fecundated thereby. In the 
midst of the flowering which it inspired, they remained 
sterile, like seed fallen upon stony ground. None of them 
rose above the rank of mere half-rural market-towns.” 
And it is not to the point, furthermore, to show that in 
the evolution of the city, the towns and the burgs had 
on the whole only an auxiliary function. Adapted to a 
social order very different from that which witnessed 
the birth of cities, they could not have been able to 
create the latter out of their own resources. They were, 
so to speak, the crystallization points of commercial ac- 
tivity. This did not originate in them—it came to them 
from without, when favorable conditions of site brought 
it their way. Their réle was essentially a passive réle. 
In the history of the development of cities, the com- 
mercial suburb was considerably more important than 
the feudal burg. It was the suburb that was the active 
element, and, as will be seen later, therein lies the ex- 
planation of that renewal of municipal life which was 
merely the consequence of the economic revival.8 


7. We may make the same observation concerning 
the towns of Bavai and Tongres, which had been im- 
portant administrative centers in the North of Gaul dur- 
ing the Roman era. Not being situated on any water- 
course, they did not profit by the commercial revival. 
Bavai disappeared in the ninth century; Tongres has re- 
mained without any importance up to our own day. 

8. Naturally, no claim is made that the evolution took 
place in exactly the same way in every city. The mer- 
chant suburb is not everywhere so clearly Gotingdiched 
from the original burg as it is, for instance, in Flemish 


me 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 105 


A striking characteristic of the merchant groups was 
their uninterrupted growth, beginning with the tenth 
century. Therein they show the most violent contrast to 
the immobility in which the towns and the burgs, at the 


_ feet of which they were located, persisted. They con- 


tinually drew to themselves new inhabitants. They ex- 
panded steadily, covering a larger and larger area, so 
much so that in many places they had, by the start of 
the twelfth century, already surrounded on all sides the 
original fortresses about which their houses pressed. 
After the beginning of the twelfth century, it became 
necessary to create new parishes for them. At Ghent, 
at Bruges, at St. Omer, and in many other places, 
contemporary texts remark the construction of these 
churches, due often to the initiative of wealthy mer- 
chants.® 

Only a general idea can be formed of the arrange- 
ment and disposition of the suburb, for exact details are 
lacking. The original type, however, was universally very 
simple. There was, of course, a market, always estab- 
lished on the bank of the stream which passed by the 
locality. This was the junction point of the streets 
(plateae) leading from it towards the gates giving access 
to the open country. For the merchant suburb was sur- 
rounded by defense works, one of its most important 
features. 

These defense works were, of course, absolutely nec- 
essary in a society where, despite the efforts of the 
princes and the Church, violence and rapine continued 
to be in universal evidence. Before the dissolution of the 


cities. According to local conditions, the immigrant mer- 
chants and artisans formed their colonies in divers ways. 
Here merely the main outlines of the subject can be 
indicated. 

g. In 1042 the church of the burghers at St. Omer 
was built at the expense of a certain Lambert who was 
most probably himself a burgher. A. Giry, Histoire de 
St. Omer, Paris, 1877, p. 369. 


106 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


Carolingian Empire and the Norseman invasions, the 
monarchy had succeeded fairly well in guaranteeing 
public security, and as a result the portus of that time, 
or at least the greater number of them, remained un- 
fortified. But by the second half of the ninth century 
there no longer existed any guarantee for the safety of 
personal property, other than the protection of ramparts. 
A capitulary of 845-856 clearly indicates that the rich 
men and the few merchants who still were left sought 
refuge in the towns. The new prosperity of trade at- 
tracted the attention of highwaymen of all sorts to such 
an extent that mercantile centers felt a pressing need 
for adequate protection against them. Just as merchants 
did not venture on the highways unless armed, so also 
they made of their collective residences a sort of strong- 
hold. The settlements which they founded at the foot of 
the towns or burgs bring to mind the close parallel ex- 
isting in the forts and the blockhouses built by the Eu- 
ropean immigrants in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries in the colonies of America and Canada. Like 
the latter, they were customarily defended merely by a 
solid palisade of wood pierced with gates and sur- 
rounded by a moat. An interesting souvenir of these first 
urban fortifications survives in the custom, long pre- 
served in heraldry, of symbolizing a city by a sort of 
circular hedge. 

It is certain that this rude enclosure of timber had 
no other purpose than the parrying of unexpected at- 
tacks. It constituted a security against bandits; it would 
not have been able to withstand a regular siege.1° In 
case of war it had to be abandoned and put to the torch 
in order to prevent the enemy from turning it to his own 
ends, while refuge was sought in the stronger citadel of 
a town or burg. It was not until about the beginning of 


10, At Bruges, at the beginning of the twelfth cen- 
tury, the town was still defended only by wooden 
palisades. 


| THE MIDDLE CLASS 107 


the twelfth century that the growing prosperity of the 
merchant colonies enabled them to make their security 
somewhat more certain by building solid ramparts of 
stone, flanked by towers, and capable of facing a serious 
attack. Thereafter they became fortresses in themselves. 
The old feudal or episcopal enclosure which continued 
_to stand in their center thus lost all reason for existence. 

Little by little their useless walls were allowed to fall 
in ruin. Houses leaned up against them, and they were 
broken open to make way for new streets. Very often 
it happened that the towns bought them back from the 
count or the bishop, for whom they no longer repre- 
sented anything but idle capital, demolished them and 
transferred the ground they had covered into building 
lots. 

In the need of security which the merchants felt there 
lies, therefore, the explanation of the fundamental char- 
acteristic of the towns of the Middle Ages. They were 
strongholds. It is impossible to imagine a town existing 
at that era without walls. It was an attribute by which 
towns were distinguished from villages. It was a right, 
or, to use the expression of that time, it was a privilege 
which none of them lacked. Here again heraldry con- 
forms very exactly to reality, in surmounting the crests 
of cities by a walled crown. 

But the rampart was not only the symbol of the city; 
it was from it also that came the name which served 
and which still serves to designate the population. Be- 
cause of the very fact that it was a fortified place, the 
town became a burg. The mercantile center, as has been 
shown above, was designated by the name of “new 
burg” to distinguish it from the original “old burg.” And 
hence its inhabitants, at the beginning of the eleventh 
century at the latest, received the name of “burghers” 
(burgenses). The first known mention of this word oc- 
curs in France in 1007. It appears again in Flanders, at 
St. Omer, in 1056; then it passes into the Empire by the 


108 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


intermediary of the region of the Moselle, where it crops 
up at Huy in 1066. It was therefore the inhabitants of 
the “new burg,” that is to say of the merchant burg, who 
received, or more probably who created it to describe 
themselves, the appellation of “burghers.” It is curi- 
ous to see that it was never applied to those of the 
“old burg.” These latter were known as castellani or 
castrenses. And this is further, and particularly signifi- 
cant, proof that the origins of city populations should 
be sought not in the older population of the early for- 
tresses but in the immigrant population which trade 
brought to them and which, in the eleventh century, 
began to absorb them. 

The appellation of “burgher” did not immediately 
come into universal use. Along with it, that of cives 
(citizen) was still employed, in conformity with the an- 
cient tradition. In England and Flanders there are also 
found the words poortmanni and poorters, both of 
which fell into disuse about the end of the Middle Ages 
but confirm in the happiest manner the identity, which 
has elsewhere been established, between the portus and 
the “new burg.” Strictly speaking, they were really one 
and the same thing, and the synonymity which language 
shows between the poortmannus and the burgensis 
would be enough to attest to it even if sufficient proof 
had not been already adduced. 

It is somewhat difficult to define this original middle 
class of the commercial centers. Evidently it was not 
composed exclusively of those wide-travelled merchants 
spoken of in the preceding chapter. It must have com- 
prised, besides them, a more or less important number 
of men engaged in the unloading and the transporting of 
merchandise, in the rigging and the equipping of the 
boats, in the manufacture of carts, casks, chests or, in a 
word, of all the necessary accessories for carrying on 
business. As a result, men from the whole neighboring 
territory were drawn to the nascent city in search of a 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 109 


profession. A definite and positive attraction by the ur- 
ban population for the rural population is clearly mani- 
fest by the beginning of the eleventh century. The 
greater the concentration of population, the greater the 
effect it had roundabout. It needed, for its daily exist- 
ence, not only a quantity but also an increasing variety 
of skilled workmen. The few artisans who heretofore had 
sufficed for the limited needs of the towns and the burgs 
evidently could not satisfy the multiplied exigencies of 
the newcomers. Members of the most indispensable pro- 
fessions therefore had to come from outside—bakers, 
brewers, butchers, smiths, and so on. 

But trade itself stimulated industry. In every region 
where industry was carried on in the country, trade 
made a successful effort first to lure it to the city and 
then to concentrate it there. 

Flanders supplies one of the most instructive exam- 
ples in this respect. It has already been shown that ever 
since the Celtic era the trade of cloth-making was widely 
carried on in the country. The peasants, thanks to the 
preservation of processes and of Roman methods, there 
manufactured cloth capable of supplying the basis of a 
regular and profitable export trade. The merchants of 
the towns did not fail to take advantage thereof. By the 
end of the tenth century they were shipping cloth to 
England.11 They soon learned to know the excellent 
quality of the native wool and sought to introduce it 
into Flanders, where they could have it worked up un- 
der their supervision. Thus they made themselves givers 
of work and naturally attracted to the cities the weavers 
of the country.12 These weavers thereafter lost their 


11. See chapter above, The Rival of Commerce. 

12. Ghent must have already been an important 
weaving center in the eleventh century, since the “Vita 
Macarii,” Monumenta Germaniae historica, Vol. XV, p. 
616, speaks of the proprietors of the neighborhood 
bringing their wool thither. 


110 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


rural character and became simple employees in the 
service of the merchants. 

The increase of the population naturally favored in- 
dustrial concentration. Numbers of the poor poured into 
the towns where cloth-making, the activity of which 
trade grew proportionately with the development of 
commerce, guaranteed them their daily bread. Their 
condition there, however, seems to have been very mis- 
erable. The competition which they maintained with 
each other in the labor market allowed the merchants 
to pay them a very low wage. Existing information, of 
which the earliest dates back to the eleventh century, 
shows them to have been a brutish lower class, unedu- 
cated and discontented. The social conflicts which in- 
dustrial life must have fomented, and which were so 
terrible in the Flanders of the thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries, were already in embryo in the very period of 
city evolution. The antagonism between capital and la- 
bor is thereby revealed to be as old as the middle class. 

The old rural industry very quickly disappeared. It 
could not compete with that of the town, abundantly 
supplied with the raw material of commerce, operating 
at lower prices, and enjoying more advanced methods. 
For the merchants, with an eye to selling, did not fail 
to improve the quality of the goods they exported. They 
organized and themselves directed the workshops where 
the cloths were milled and dyed. In the twelfth century 
they had come to be without rivals, in the markets of 
Europe, for the fineness of their weaves and the beauty 
of their colors. They increased the dimensions also. The 
old square “cloaks” (pallia) which the weavers of the 
country districts had formerly made, were replaced by 
pieces of cloth thirty to sixty ells in length, more econom- 
ical to make and easier to ship. 

The cloths of Flanders thus became one of the most 
sought-after general articles of merchandise. The con- 
centration of this industry in the towns remained, until 


7 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 111 


the end of the Middle Ages, the chief source of their 
prosperity and helped to make them virtually great 
manufacturing centers, of which Douai, Ghent and 
Ypres were distinctive types. 

Although cloth-making was the dominant industry in 
Flanders it was, naturally, far from being restricted to 
that country alone. Many of the towns of the north and 
the south of France, of Italy and Rhenish Germany, 
were also successfully engaged in it. Cloth, more than 
any other manufactured product, was the basis of the 
commerce of the Middle Ages. Metallurgy enjoyed far 
less importance. It was confined almost entirely to brass- 
working, to which certain cities, and particularly Dinant 
in Belgium, owe their fortune. But whatever might be 
the nature of industry in other respects, everywhere it 
obeyed that law of concentration which was operative 
at such an early date in Flanders. Everywhere the city 
groups, thanks to commerce, drew rural industry to 
them.18 

In the era of demesnial economy, each agricultural 
center, big or little, supplied in the largest measure pos- 
sible its own wants. The great proprietor maintained in 
his “court” artisan-serfs, just as each peasant built his 
own house or made with his own hands the furniture or 
the utensils he needed. The peddlers, the Jews, the in- 
frequent merchants who passed through the markets at 
great intervals supplied the rest. They lived under con- 
ditions very similar to those which still exist, or at least 
existed until very lately, in many regions of Russia. All 
this was changed when the towns began to offer to the 
rural population industrial products of every sort. It re- 
sulted in an exchange of commodities between the mid- 


13. In the eleventh century the “Miracula Sancti 
Bavonis,” Monumenta Germaniae historica, Vol. XV, p. 
594, mentioned at Ghent the “laici qui ex officio ag- 
nominabantur coriarii.” There is no doubt but that these 
artisans had come there from without. 


112 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


dle classes and the rural population, as has been pointed 
out above. The artisans who supplied the town people 
found in the rural classes another assured clientéle. 
There came about a sharp division of labor between 
town and country. The latter gave itself over to agricul- 
ture exclusively, the former to industry and commerce, 
and this state of things was to endure as long as the social 
order of the Middle Ages. It was, incidentally, much 
more advantageous to the middle classes than to the 
peasants. 

The towns, therefore, energetically bent their efforts 
to safeguard it. They never failed to oppose every at- 
tempt to introduce industry into the country districts. 
They jealously watched over the monopoly which guar- 
anteed their existence. It was not until the dawn of the 
modern era that they were willing to give up an ex- 
clusivism no longer compatible with economic progress. 

The middle classes whose double activity—commer- 
cial and industrial—has just been outlined, were faced by 
innumerable difficulties which they overcame only as 
time went on. No provision had been made for their 
reception in the towns and burgs where they settled 
down. There they were a cause of perturbation at first, 
and probably they were very often greeted as unde- 
sirables. First of all they had to come to terms with the 
proprietors of the soil. Sometimes it was the bishop, 
sometimes a monastery, sometimes a count or a seigneur 
who owned the land and there administered justice. 
Frequently it even happened that the space occupied 
by the portus or the “new burg” was amenable to the 
jurisdiction of several tribunals and of several demesnes. 
It was intended for agriculture, and the immigration of 
the newcomers changed it all at once into ground for 
building. A certain time was needed before the owners 
perceived the profit they could make out of it. At first 
they particularly resented the inconvenience caused by 
the appearance of these colonies given over to a sort of 


= ar ae neem damn 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 113 


life which went counter to custom or which shocked 
traditional ideas. 

Conflicts immediately arose. They were inevitable, in 
view of the fact that the newcomers, who were strangers, 
were hardly inclined to value the interests, rights and 
customs which inconvenienced them. Room had to be 
made for them as best as could be done, and as their 
numbers increased their encroachments became more 
and more bold. 

In 1099, at Beauvais, the chapter was obliged to 
bring action against the dyers who had so obstructed 
the course of the river that its mills could no longer 
function. Elsewhere, from time to time, a bishop or a 
monastery disputed with the burghers the lands they 
occupied. But whether they willed or not, they had to 
come to terms. At Arras the abbey of St. Vaast ended 
by parting with its tillages and parcelling them out. 
Similar cases occurred at Ghent and Douai. Despite the 
penury of existing information, it must be assumed that 
arrangements of this sort were very common. Even at 
the present day the names of streets recall, in many 
cities, the agricultural character which was theirs at the 
beginning. At Ghent, for example, one of the principal 
arteries is still designated under the name of “Field 
Street” (Veldstraat) and near it is to be found “Hus- 
bandry Square” (place du Kouter) .14 

To the multiplicity of proprietors corresponded the 
multiplicity of forms of government to which the lands 
were subject. Some were subject to land-taxes and 
statute-labor, others to prestations destined for the 
maintenance of the knights who formed the permanent 


14. For the status of real estate in the towns, see G. 
Des Marez, Etude sur la propriété fonciére dans les 
villes du Moyen-dge et spécialement en Flandre, Ghent, 
1898. The oldest known reference to the enfranchise- 
ment of city land dates back to the beginning of the 
eleventh century. 


114 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


garrison of the “old burg”; still others to dues collected 
by the castellan or by the bishop or by an attorney under 
the authority of the chief justiciary. All, in short, bore 
the stamp of an era in which economic organization, like 
political organization, had been based entirely on pos- 
session of the soil. To that were added the formalities 
and the taxes customarily levied at the time of the trans- 
fer of real estate, and which singularly complicated, if 
they did not actually make impossible, purchase and 
sale. 

Under such conditions the land, burdened by the ac- 
cumulated vested interests which weighed heavily upon 
it, could not play any part in business operations, acquire 
a market value, or serve as a basis of credit. 

The multiplicity of jurisdictions complicated still more 
a situation already so intricate. It was rare indeed that 
the land occupied by the burghers belonged to only a 
single seigneur. Each of the proprietors, among whom it 
was shared, had his demesnial court which alone was 
competent in matters of real estate. Some of these courts 
administered, in addition, either high justice or low jus- 
tice. The confusion of competencies aggravated still fur- 
ther the confusion of jurisdictions. The result was that 
the same man was dependent at the same time on sev- 
eral tribunals, according to whether it was a question 
of debts, of crimes, or simply of the possession of the 
land. The difficulties which resulted therefrom were the 
greater in that these tribunals were not all held in the 
town, and it was sometimes necessary to travel a long 
distance to plead before them. Furthermore, they dif- 
fered among themselves, in their composition as well as 
in the law they administered. Side by side with the 
demesnial courts there existed almost always an older 
tribunal of aldermen set up, it might be, either in the 
town or in the burg. The ecclesiastical court of the dio- 
cese drew to it not only matters relevant to canonical 
law, but even all those in which a member of the clergy 


i 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 115 


was interested, without taking count of the number of 
questions of successions, civil status, marriage, etc. 

A glance at the condition of individuals, makes the 
complexity seem greater yet. As the composition of the 
city took form, every contrast and every gradation in 
the status of individuals was to be found. Nothing could 
be more bizarre, in fact, than this nascent middle class. 
The merchants, as has been seen above, were de facto 
free men. But this was not the case with a very great 
number of the immigrants who, lured by the hope of 
finding work, flocked to the towns. They were almost 
always natives of the nearby countryside and so could 
not dissemble their civil status. The seigneur of the de- 
mesne from which they had escaped could easily seek 
them out and identify them; people from their own vil- 
lage ran into them when they came to town. Their par- 
ents were known, and it was therefore evident that they 
had been born into serfdom, since serfdom was the gen- 
eral status of the rural class. It was therefore impossible 
for them to claim, like the merchants, a freedom which 
these latter enjoyed only because their true civil status 
was unknown. Thus the majority of artisans kept, in the 
town, the status of serfdom in which they had been 
born. There was, to be sure, an incompatibility between 
their new social status and their traditional legal status. 
They had ceased to be peasants but they were not able 
to efface the original stain with which serfdom had 
marked the rural class. If they sought to dissemble it 
they did not fail to be rudely recalled to reality. It 
sufficed for their seigneur to claim them; they were 
obliged to follow him and be returned to the demesne 
whence they had fled. 

The merchants themselves indirectly resented the 
wrongs of serfdom. If they wished to marry, the woman 
they chose belonged almost always to the serf class. Only 
the richest among them could aspire to the honor of 
espousing the daughter of some knight whose debts he 


116 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


had paid. For the others, their union with a serf would 
have for its consequence the serfdom of their children. 
Common law ascribed to children, in fact, the legal 
status of their mother by virtue of the adage partus 
ventrem sequitur, and it is easy to imagine the absurd 
consequences which arose out of this principle for fam- 
ilies. Marriage caused serfdom to reappear in the house- 
hold. Rancors and conflicts were inevitably born of so 
contradictory a situation. The ancient law, in seeking to 
impose itself upon a social order for which it was not 
adapted, ended in manifest absurdities and injustices 
which called irresistibly for reform. 

On the other hand, while the middle class grew larger 
and with its numbers acquired power, the nobility little 
by little retreated and gave way before it. The knights 
who were settled in the town or in the burg no longer 
had any reason for living there after the military im- 
portance of these old fortresses had disappeared. There 
was a distinct tendency, at least in the north of Europe, 
to retire to the country and to leave the towns. Only in 
Italy and in the south of France did the nobles continue 
to have their residences in the town. 

This fact must be attributed to the preservation, in 
those countries, of the traditions and, in a certain meas- 
ure, of the municipal organization of the Roman Empire. 
The cities of Italy and Provence had been too intimately 
a part of the territories of which they were the admin- 
istrative centers not to have preserved, at the time of 
the economic decline of the eighth and ninth centuries, 
closer relations with it than anywhere else. The nobility, 
whose fiefs were scattered all over the country, did not 
acquire that rural character which typified the nobility 
of France, Germany or England. They stayed in the 
towns, where they lived on the revenues from their lands. 
There they built, in the late Middle Ages, those towers 
which today give so picturesque an aspect to so many of 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 117 


the old cities of Tuscany. They did not divest themselves 
of the urban stamp with which ancient society had been 
so strongly marked. The contrast between the nobility 
and the middle class, therefore, appears less striking in 
Italy than in the rest of Europe. At the era of the com- 
mercial revival, the nobles of the cities of Lombardy 
even interested themselves in the business of the mer- 
chants and put some of their income into business enter- 
prises. It is in this way, perhaps, that the development 
of Italian cities differs most profoundly from that of the 
cities of the north. 

In these last it is only in a quite exceptional case that 
we find here and there, as if gone astray in the midst 
of middle class society, a family of knights. In the twelfth 
century the exodus of the nobility to the country was 
completed almost everywhere. This is a development, 
however, which is still very little understood, and it is 
to be hoped that further researches will throw greater 
light upon it. Meanwhile it may be assumed that the 
economic crisis, to which the nobility were prey follow- 
ing the diminution of their revenues in the thirteenth 
century, was not without its influence in their disappear- 
ance from the towns. They must have found it advan- 
tageous to sell to the burghers the lands they owned, 
the altering of which into ground for building had 
enormously augmented their value. 

The status of the clergy was not sensibly modified by 
the influx of the middle class to the towns and burgs. 
Out of it arose a few inconveniences for them, but also 
a few advantages. The bishops had to battle to main- 
tain intact, in the presence of the newcomers, their rights 
of justice and their rights of demesne; the monasteries 
and the chapters saw themselves forced to permit 
houses to be built on their fields or on their tillages. The 
patriarchal and demesnial form of government to which 
the Church had been accustomed suddenly found itself 


118 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


at grips with unexpected claims and needs, out of which 
was to result, at the start, a period of uneasiness and in- 
security. 

On the other hand, however, compensations were not 
lacking. The rental or tribute levied on the lots of land 
given over to the burghers formed an increasingly fruit- 
ful source of revenue. The increase in population 
brought with it a corresponding increase in the perqui- 
sites supplied by baptisms, marriages and deaths; the 
yield from offerings went on increasing unceasingly; 
merchants and artisans formed pious confraternities 
affiliated to a church or to a monastery in return for 
annual dues. The creation of new parishes, proportion- 
ately as the number of inhabitants mounted, multiplied 
the numbers and the resources of the secular clergy. 
After the beginning of the eleventh century abbeys, on 
the contrary, were founded in towns only in very ex- 
ceptional cases. They were not able to accustom them- 
selves to that life, too blustering and busy, and in 
addition it was no longer possible to find the room neces- 
sary for a great religious house with the accessory 
services it required. The Cistercian Order, which spread 
so widely through Europe in the course of the twelfth 
century, organized only in the country. 

It was only in the following century that the monks 
were to come back to the towns again. The mendicant 
friars, Franciscans and Dominicans, who were to come 
and settle there, were not merely a normal development 
arising from the new orientation which religious fervor 
took. The principle of poverty which they professed 
made them break with the demesnial organization, here- 
tofore the support of monastic life. By them monasticism 
was found to be wonderfully well adapted to a city 
atmosphere. They asked no more of the burghers than 
their alms. In place of isolating themselves in the center 
of vast, silent enclosures, they built their convents along 


lt ee 


THE MIDDLE CLASS 119 


the streets. They took part in all the agitations, all the 
miseries as well, and understood all the aspirations of 
the artisans, whose spiritual directors they well deserved 
to become. 


7 re ~ 
So deal a ae 
- ee eee 
_ a a =. az lal aad wry 7 


7 “a os hear 
i re mt ca 4 
’ = antes corse 
Lor sae 7 4 


> hime aah te ’ 
=o Ge (hele “weasel 


Lr the elty 
Ss. Seceelions nate 
' Sap 


MUNICIPAL 
INSTITUTIONS 


Cities, in their formative period, found themselves in a 
singularly complicated situation. They were faced with 
problems of all sorts. In them there existed side by side 
two populations which did not mix, and which presented 
all the contrasts of two distinct worlds. The old de- 
mesnial organization with all the traditions, all the 
opinions, all the ideas which may not have been born 
of it but which received from it their particular stamp, 
came to grips with wants and aspirations which had 
taken it by surprise, which went counter to its interests, 
to which it was not adapted and which, from the very 
first, it opposed. If it gave ground, that was in spite of 
itself and because the new conditions which had to be 
faced were due to causes too profound and irresistible 
for their effect not to be felt. 

The consequences of facts which are so little affected 
by human wishes as the increase of population and the 
expansion of trade could not be avoided. Probably those 
in positions of authority in the social order were not able 
to appreciate the import of the changes that were taking 


122 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


place about them. The old order of things sought, at 
first, to maintain its position. Only later, and usually too 
late, did it try to adapt itself. As always happens, the 
change did not come about all at once. And it would 
be improper to attribute, as has frequently been done, 
to “feudal tyranny” or to “sacerdotal arrogance” an op- 
position which is to be explained by more natural in- 
centives. There happened in the Middle Ages what has 
happened so often since then. Those who were the 
beneficiaries of the established order were bent upon 
defending it, not so much, perhaps, because it guaran- 
teed their interests, as because it seemed to them indis- 
pensable to the preservation of society. 

It should be borne in mind, moreover, that this social 
order the middle classes accepted. Their demands and 
what might be called their political program did not 
aim in any way at its abolition; they took for granted the 
privileges and the authority of the princes, the clergy, 
and the nobility. They merely wished to obtain, because 
it was necessary to their existence, not an overthrow of 
the existing order but simple concessions. And these con- 
cessions were limited to their own needs. They were 
completely uninterested in those of the rural population 
from which they had sprung. In short, they only asked 
of society to make for them a place compatible with the 
sort of life they were leading. They were not revolution- 
ary, and if they happened to turn to violence it was not 
through hate against the government but quite simply 
to force compliance. 

A brief review of the principal points in their program 
will be enough to show that they did not go beyond an 
indispensable minimum. What they wanted, first of all, 
was personal liberty, which would assure to the mer- 
chant or the artisan the possibility of going and coming, 
of living where he wished and of putting his own person 
as well as that of his children under the protection of the 
seignorial power. Next came the creation of a special 


————— 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 123 


tribunal by means of which the burgher would at one 
stroke escape the multiplicity of jurisdictions to which 
he was amenable and the inconveniences which the 
formalistic procedure of ancient law imposed upon his 
social and economic activity. Then came the instituting 
in the city of a “peace”—that is to say, of a penal code— 
which would guarantee security. And then came the 
abolition of those prestations most incompatible with the 
carrying on of trade and industry, and with the pos- 
session and acquisition of land. What they wanted, in 
fine, was a more or less extensive degree of political 
autonomy and local self-government. 

All of this was very far from forming a coherent whole 
and being based on theoretical principles. Nothing was 
further from the mind of the original middle classes than 
any conception of the rights of man and citizen. Personal 
liberty itself was not claimed as a natural right. It was 
sought only for the advantages it conferred. This is so 
true that at Arras, for example, the merchants tried to 
have themselves classed as serfs of the Monastery of St. 
Vaast in order to enjoy the exemption from the market- 
tolls which had been accorded to the latter. 

It was not until the beginning of the eleventh century 
that the first direct action was taken by the middle 
classes against the order of things they suffered from. 
Their efforts thereafter never halted. Despite vicissitudes 
and reverses, the movement of reform advanced unhesi- 
tatingly towards its goal, broke by main force, if neces- 
sary, the opposition that stood in the way and ended, 
in the course of the twelfth century, by giving the towns 
those essentially municipal institutions which were to be 
the basis of their constitutions. 

Everywhere it was the merchants who took the ini- 
tiative and directed events. Nothing was more natural 
than that. They were the most active, the richest, the 
most influential element in the city population and they 
endured with so much the more impatience a situation 


124 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


which clashed with their interests and sapped their con- 
fidence in themselves. The réle they then played, de- 
spite the enormous difference in time and conditions, 
may fittingly be compared with that which the capital- 
istic middle class assumed after the end of the eight- 
eenth century in the political revolution which put an 
end to the old order of things. In the one case as in the 
other, the social group which was the most directly in- 
terested in the change assumed the leadership of the 
opposition, and was followed by the masses. Democracy 
in the Middle Ages, as in modern times, got its start 
under the guidance of a select few who foisted their 
program upon the confused aspirations of the people. 

The episcopal cities were the first to be the scene of 
combat. It would be a decided mistake to attribute this 
fact to the personality of the bishops. A great number 
of them distinguished themselves, on the contrary, by 
their manifest solicitude for the public weal. Excellent 
administrators, whose memory has remained with the 
people throughout the centuries, were by no means rare 
among them. At Liége, for example, Notger (972-1018) 
attacked the castles of the robber barons who infested 
the neighborhood, and turned from its course a branch 
of the Meuse to make the city more healthy and to 
strengthen its fortifications. 

Similar examples could easily be cited in the case of 
Cambrai, Utrecht, Cologne, Worms, Mainz and a num- 
ber of cities of Germany where the emperors strove, up 
to the time of the investiture struggle, to name prelates 
notable equally for their intelligence and their energy. 

But the more the bishops were conscious of their du- 
ties, the more also they had to defend their government 
against the demands of their subjects and endeavor to 
keep them under an authoritative, patriarchal regimen. 
The confusion of spiritual power and temporal power in 
their hands, moreover, caused every concession to seem 
to them to be a peril to the Church. It must also not be 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 125 


forgotten that their functions obliged them to reside per- 
manently in their cities and that they feared, with good 
reason, the difficulties which would be caused them by 
the autonomy of the burghers in whose midst they lived. 
Finally, it has already been seen that the Church had | 
little sympathy with trade. This unsympathetic attitude 
must naturally have made the Church deaf to the wishes 
of the merchants and of the people who were grouped 
behind them, have prevented an understanding of their 
wants, and given a false impression of their real power. 
Out of this came misunderstandings, clashes, and soon 
an open hostility which, after the beginning of the 
eleventh century, was to end in the inevitable.1 

The movement began in Northern Italy. There, com- 
mercial life was older and there the political conse- 
quences of it were likewise earlier. Unfortunately very 
few details are known concerning these events. It is cer- 
tain that the troubles to which the Church was then 
prey could hardly have delayed their precipitation. The 
inhabitants of the towns sided passionately with the 
monks and the priests who were waging a campaign 
against the evil customs of the clergy, attacking simony 
and the marriage of priests, and condemning the inter- 
vention of lay authority in the administration of the 
Church, to the profit of the papacy. The bishops, named 
by the emperor and compromised by that fact in itself, 
thus found themselves face to face with an opposition in 
which mysticism, the claims of the merchants and the 
discontent caused by the misery of the industrial workers 
were allied and mutually strengthened. It is certain that 
the nobles took part in the agitation, for it gave them the 
opportunity to shake off episcopal suzerainty, and made 
common cause with the burghers and the patarenes—the 


1. We find in the English clergy the same _hostili 
towards the middle class, as in the German and Frenc 
clergy. 


126 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


name by which the conservatives contemptuously desig- 
nated their adversaries. 

In 1057 Milan, even then the queen of the cities of 
Lombardy, was in open revolt against the archbishop. 
The vicissitudes of the investiture struggle naturally 
spread the disturbances and gave them a turning more 
and more favorable to the insurgents, proportionately as 
the cause of the pope got the better of that of the em- 
peror. There were established, either by the consent of 
the bishops or by force, magistrates with the title of 
“consuls” and charged with the administration of the 
towns. The first of these consuls to be mentioned, but 
probably not the first to exist, appear at Lucca in 1080. 
There is a record as early as 1068 of a “communal court” 
in that city, a characteristic feature of city autonomy 
which surely must have existed at the same date in 
plenty of other places. The consuls of Milan are not 
cited before 1107, but they were surely much earlier in 
origin than that. From the time they are first mentioned, 
they show the distinctive physiognomy of communal 
magistrates. They were recruited among divers social 
classes—among the capitanei, the valvassores, and the 
cives—and represented the communio civitatis. 

The most typical feature of this magistracy was its 
yearly character, wherein it was in distinct contrast to 
the offices for life which alone the feudal régime knew. 
This yearly feature of the offices was the consequence of 
their elective nature. In laying hold of power, the city 
population entrusted it to delegates named by itself. 
Thus was affirmed the principle of control at the same 
time as that of election. Municipal democracy, from its 
first attempts at organization, created the instruments 
necessary to its proper functioning and unhesitatingly 
set foot on the path which has been followed ever since. 

From Italy, the “consulate” soon spread to the cities 
of Provence, evident proof of its perfect adaptation to 
the needs which were felt by the middle class. Marseilles 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 127 


had consuls at the start of the twelfth century, or at the 
latest by 1128; we find them next to Arles and at Nimes, 
until little by little they spread in the south of France as 
commerce made headway from place to place and, with 
it, the political transformation which it brought in tow. 

Nearly at the same time as in Italy, municipal institu- 
tions arose in the region of Flanders and the north of 
France. There is nothing surprising in this, since that 
country, like Lombardy, had been the scene of vigorous 
commercial activity. Fortunately the sources of informa- 
tion here are more abundant and more precise. They 
make it possible to follow fairly accurately the march of 
events. 

It is not the episcopal cities alone which here hold 
the stage. Side by side with them are to be observed 
other centers of activity, though it is within their walls 
that were formed those communes whose nature it is 
most important to consider. The oldest, and fortunately 
also the best known, is that of Cambrai. 

During the eleventh century the prosperity of this city 
was well advanced. At the foot of the original town 
clustered a commercial suburb, which had been sur- 
rounded in 1070 by a wall. The population of this 
suburb endured with scant patience the authority of the 
bishop and his castellan. It prepared in secret for revolt 
when, in 1077, Bishop Gerard II had to absent himself to 
go receive in Germany the investiture at the hands of the 
emperor. He was hardly en route before, under the 
direction of the richest merchants of the town, the peo- 
ple arose, took possession of the gates and proclaimed 
a commune. The poor, the artisans, and the weavers, in 
particular, launched themselves still more passionately 
into the fray when a reformer-priest called Ramihrdus 
denounced to them the bishop as a simoniac and in- 
spired in the depths of their hearts the mysticism which, 
at that same era, was arousing the Lombard patarenes. 
As in Italy, religious fervor lent its strength to the politi- 


128 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


cal demands and the commune was sworn in the midst 
of general enthusiasm. 

This commune of Cambrai was the oldest of all that 
are known north of the Alps. It seems to have been both 
a fighting organization and an instrument of public 
safety. It was necessary, in fact, to await the return of 
the bishop and to prepare to cope with him. The need 
of unanimous action was imperative. An oath was ex- 
acted from all, establishing among them the necessary 
solidarity, and it was this association, sworn to by the 
burghers on the eve of battle, which was the essential 
characteristic of that first commune. 

Its success, however, was only ephemeral. The bishop, 
upon receiving the news, hastened back and succeeded 
in restoring his authority for the time being. But the 
experiment of the Cambresians was not long in being 
imitated. The following years were marked by the 
establishment of communes in the majority of the towns 
of Northern France; at St. Quentin about 1080, at Beau- 
vais about 1099, at Noyon in 1108-1109, at Laon in 
1115. During the initial period the middle class and the 
bishops lived in a state of permanent hostility and, as it 
were, on the point of open war. Force alone was able to 
prevail between such adversaries, equally convinced of 
their due rights. Ives of Chartres exhorted the bishops 
not to give ground and to consider as void the promises 
which, under the threat of violence, they had hap- 
pened to make to the burghers. Guibert of Nogent, on 
his part, spoke with mingled contempt and fear of those 
“pestilential communes” which the serfs had set up 
against their lords, to escape authority and to do away 
with the most legitimate rights. 

In spite of all, however, the communes prevailed. Not 
only did they have the strength that numbers give, but 
the monarchy which in France, starting with the reign 
of Louis VI, was beginning to regain lost ground, inter- 
ested itself in their cause. Just as the popes, in their 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 129 


conflict with the German emperors, had relied upon the 
patarenes of Lombardy, so the Capetian monarchs of 
the twelfth century favored the efforts of the middle 
classes. 

There can probably be no question of ascribing to 
them a political principle. At first glance their conduct 
seems full of contradictions. Yet it is none the less true 
that they evinced a general tendency to take the part 
of the towns. The clear interest of the monarchy was to 
support the adversaries of high feudalism. Naturally, 
help was given whenever it was possible to do so with- 
out becoming obligated to these middle classes who in 
arising against their lords fought, to all intents and pur- 
poses, in the interests of royal prerogatives. To accept 
the king as arbitrator of their quarrel was, for the parties 
in conflict, to recognize his sovereignty. The entry of 
the burghers upon the political scene had as a conse- 
quence the weakening of the contractual principle of 
the Feudal State to the advantage of the principle of the 
authority of the Monarchial State. It was impossible that 
royalty should not take count of this and seize every 
chance to show its good-will to the communes which, 
without intending to do so, labored so usefully in its 
behalf. 

In specially designating by the name of “communes” 
those episcopal cities of the north of France where 
municipal institutions were the result of insurrection, it 
is well to exaggerate neither their importance nor their 
originality. There is no reason for claiming that there 
was any essential difference between commune-cities 
and other cities. They were distinguished from one an- 
other only by incidental characteristics. At bottom their 
nature was the same, and in reality all were equally 
communes. In all of them, in fact, the burghers formed a 
corps, a universitas, a communitas, a communio, all the 
members of which, conjointly answerable to one another, 
constituted the inseparable parts. Whatever might be 


1390 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


the origin of its enfranchisement, the city of the Middle 
Ages did not consist in a simple collection of individuals; 
it was itself an individual, but a collective individual, a 
legal person. All that can be claimed in favor of the com- 
munes stricto sensu is a particular distinctiveness of in- 
stitutions, a clearly established separation of the rights of 
the bishop and those of the burghers, and a manifest 
preoccupation to safeguard the rights of the latter by a 
powerful corporate organization. But all of that derived 
from the circumstances which presided over the birth of 
the communes. Although they preserved the traces of 
their insurrectionary composition, it does not necessarily 
follow that they should be assigned, for that reason, a 
special place in the ensemble of cities. It can even be ob- 
served that certain ones among them enjoyed preroga- 
tives less extensive, a jurisdiction and an autonomy less 
complete, than those of localities in which the commune 
was only the mark of the advent of a peaceful evolution. 
It is a manifest error to reserve for them, as is sometimes 
done, the name of “collective seigniories.” We shall see 
later that all fully developed cities were such seigniories. 

Violence, therefore, was far from being an essential 
factor in the creation of municipal institutions. In the 
majority of towns subject to the power of a lay prince, 
their growth was accomplished, in general, without need 
of recourse to force. And it is not necessary to attribute 
this situation to the particular good-will which the lay 
princes had shown towards political liberty. On the other 
hand all the incentives which inspired the bishop to 
oppose the burghers carried no weight with the princes. 
They professed no hostility in regard to trade; on the 
contrary, they were experiencing its good effects. It 
increased traffic in their territories, and by that very fact 
augmented the revenues from their tolls and the activity 
of their mints which were forced to meet an increasing 
demand for currency. Having no spot as capital and in- 
cessantly travelling about their demesnes, they lived in 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 131 


their towns only at rare intervals and therefore had no 
reason for quarreling with the burghers over the admin- 
istration of them. It is quite characteristic that Paris, the 
only city which before the end of the twelfth century 
could be considered a real capital, did not succeed in 
obtaining an autonomous municipal constitution. But the 
interest which impelled the King of France to keep con- 
trol of his customary residence was completely lacking 
with the dukes and counts, as peripatetic as the king was 
sedentary. Lastly, they did not view altogether with dis- 
pleasure the act of the burghers in seizing the power 
from the castellans who had become an hereditary class 
and whose strength was a cause of uneasiness to them. 
They had, in short, the same incentives as the King of 
France for looking with favor upon these tendencies, 
since they weakened the status of their vassals. It is not 
on record, however, that they systematically lent them 
their aid. They confined themselves, in general, to let- 
ting them alone and their attitude was almost always 
one of benevolent neutrality. 

No region offers a better chance for studying munici- 
pal origins in a purely lay environment than does 
Flanders. In this great country, which stretched from 
the shores of the North Sea and the Zealand Islands to 
the frontiers of Normandy, the episcopal cities never 
rivalled in importance and wealth the commercial and 
industrial cities. Térouanne, the diocese of which com- 
prised the watershed of the Yser, was and always re- 
mained a half-rural hamlet. Arras and Tournai, which 
extended their spiritual jurisdiction over the rest of the 
territory, developed to an appreciable extent only in 
the course of the twelfth century. On the contrary, 
Ghent, Bruges, Ypres, St. Omer, Lille and Douai, where 
were gathered together in the course of the tenth cen- 
tury active merchant colonies, give an unusually clear 
picture of the birth of municipal institutions. They lend 
themselves to this so much the better in that, all being 


132 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


organized in the same way and showing the same char- 
acteristics, the information of which each gives us its 
share can be safely combined into one general picture. 

All these cities show, first, the distinctive feature of 
having been organized around a central burg which 
was, so to speak, their nucleus. At the foot of this burg 
was grouped a portus, or “new burg,” populated by mer- 
chants to whose numbers were soon added artisans, 
either free or serf, and where, after the eleventh cen- 
tury, the textile industry came to be concentrated. Over 
the burg as over the portus extended the authority of 
the castellan. More or less important parcels of land oc- 
cupied by the immigrant population belonged to the 
abbeys, others to the Count of Flanders. A tribunal of 
aldermen had its seat in the burg under the presidency 
of the castellan. This tribunal had in other respects no 
competency relative to the city. Its jurisdiction extended 
over all the castellany of which the burg was the center, 
and the members who composed it resided in that same 
castellany and came to the burg only on the days of 
hearings. For ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to which were 
amenable a number of matters, it was necessary to go to 
the episcopal court of the diocese. 

A variety of obligations weighed upon the land and 
the inhabitants, whether of the burg or of the portus: 
ground rents, prestations in money or in kind destined 
for the upkeep of the knights charged with the defense 
of the burg, and tolls levied on all merchandise brought 
by land or water. 

All this was of long standing, created at the height 
of the demesnial and feudal régime, and was in no way 
adapted to the new needs of the merchant population. 
Not being made for it, the organization which had its 
seat in the burg not only rendered no service but on the 
contrary interfered with activities. The survivals of the 
past bore down with all their weight upon the needs of 
the present. Obviously, for reasons which have been 


= 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 133 


given above and to which it is unnecessary to return, 
the middle class felt far from content and exacted the 
reforms necessary to their free expansion. 

In these reforms it devolved upon them to take the 
initiative, for they could not rely on either the castel- 
lans, the monasteries, or the barons whose lands they 
occupied, to bring them about. But it was also neces- 
sary, in the midst of a population so heterogeneous as 
that of the portus, for a group of men to take control of 
the mass and to have enough power and prestige to give 
it direction. The merchants, in the first half of the 
eleventh century, resolutely assumed this réle. Not only 
did they constitute the wealthiest element in each town, 
the most active and the most desirous of change, but 
they had in addition the strength that union gives. The 
needs of commerce early impelled them, as has been 
seen above, to organize in confraternities called gilds or 
hanses—autonomous corporations independent of all 
authority and in which their will alone made the law. 
Freely elected chiefs, “deans” or “counts of the hanse” 
(Dekanen, Hansgrafen), supervised the maintenance of 
a voluntarily accepted discipline. At regular intervals 
the colleagues assembled to drink and deliberate over 
their interests; a treasury, supported by their contribu- 
tions, provided for the needs of the society; a commu- 
nity house (Gildhalle) served as the place of their meet- 
ings. Such was the Gild of St. Omer, about 1050, and 
it may be assumed from this instance that very probably 
similar associations existed at the same period in all the 
merchant colonies of Flanders. 

The prosperity of trade was so intimately bound up 
with the organization of the towns in which it had 
located that the members of the gild were almost auto- 
matically charged with making provision for the needs 
that were most pressing. The castellans had no reason 
to restrain them from meeting, through their own re- 
sources, those emergencies that were clearly apparent. 


134 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


They permitted them to “extemporize,” as it were, in 
official communal administration. At St. Omer an ar- 
rangement made between the gild and the castellan, 
Wulfric Rabel (1072-1083), permitted the former to 
attend to the cases of the burghers. Thus, without hav- 
ing any legal warrant therefor, the merchant associa- 
tion devoted itself of its own accord to the organization 
and the management of the nascent city. It made up 
for the impotence of public power. At St. Omer the gild 
devoted a part of its revenues to the construction of 
defense works and to the maintenance of the streets. 
There is no doubt but that other Flemish towns, its 
neighbors, did the same. The name of “counts of the 
hanse” which the treasurers of the city of Lille kept all 
through the Middle Ages is sufficient proof, in the 
absence of other records, that there also the chiefs of 
the voluntary corporation of merchants drew upon the 
treasury of the gild for the benefit of their fellow citizens. 
At Audenarde the name of Hansgraf was borne up to 
the fourteenth century by a magistrate of the commune. 
At Tournai, as late as the thirteenth century, city 
finances were placed under the control of the Charité 
St. Christophe, that is to say of the merchant gild. At 
Bruges the contributions of the “brothers of the hanse” 
supported the municipal treasury up until its disappear- 
ance at the time of the democratic revolution of the 
fourteenth century. 

The result of all this, manifestly, was that the gilds 
were, in the region of Flanders, the initiators of city 
autonomy. Of their own accord they charged them- 
selves with a task which no one else had been able to 
carry out. Officially they had no right to act as they 
did; their intervention is to be explained solely by the 
cohesion which existed among their members, by the 
influence their group enjoyed, by the resources they dis- 
bursed, and finally by the understanding they had of 
the collective needs of the middle-class population. It 


Se pe se 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 135 


can be stated, without exaggeration, that in the course 
of the eleventh century the chiefs of the gild performed, 
de facto, the functions of communal magistrates in every 
town. 

They were doubtless the ones, also, who led the 
counts of Flanders to take an interest in the develop- 
ment and the prosperity of the towns. In 1043 Baldwin 
IV obtained from the monks of St. Omer the concession 
on the basis of which the burghers built their church. 
At the beginning of the reign of Robert the Friesian 
(1071-1093), exemptions from tolls, grants of land, 
privileges limiting the episcopal jurisdiction or the re- 
quirements of military service were granted in consider- 
able number to the cities then in process of formation. 
Robert of Jerusalem favored the city of Aire with 
“liberties” and exempted, in 1111, the burghers of Ypres 
from the judiciary duel. 

The result of all this was that little by little the middle 
class stood out as a distinct and privileged group in the 
midst of the population of the country. From a simple 
social group given over to the carrying on of commerce 
and industry, it was transformed into a legal group, 
recognized as such by the princely power. And out of 
that legal status itself was to come, necessarily, the 
granting of an independent legal organization. The new 
law needed as its organ a new tribunal. The old alder- 
manic district courts, sitting in the burgs and administer- 
ing justice in accordance with a custom that had be- 
come archaic and incapable of accommodating its rigid 
formalism to the needs of a community for which it had 
not been created, had to give way to courts whose mem- 
bers, recruited from among the burghers, were able to 
render them a justice adequate to their desires and 
conforming to their aspirations—a justice, in fine, which 
was their justice. It is impossible to say exactly when this 
important development took place. The oldest reference 
in Flanders to an aldermanic court—that is to say of such 


136 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


a court peculiar to one city—dates back to the year 1111 
and has to do with Arras. But there is nothing to pre- 
vent the assumption that aldermanic courts of this kind 
must have already existed at the same period in the 
more important localities such as Ghent, Bruges or 
Ypres. Whatever may have been the case elsewhere, the 
beginning of the twelfth century saw this decided in- 
novation come to pass in all the cities of Flanders. The 
disturbances which followed the assassination of Count 
Charles the Good, in 1127, permitted the burghers to 
realize in full their political program. The pretenders 
to the county, William of Normandy, and later Thierry 
of Alsace, in order to rally them to their cause conceded 
to them the demands they addressed. 

The charter granted to St. Omer in 1127 may be con- 
sidered as the point of departure of the political program 
of the burghers of Flanders. It recognized the city as a 
distinct legal territory, provided with a special law com- 
mon to all inhabitants, with special aldermanic courts 
and a full communal autonomy. Other charters in the 
course of the twelfth century ratified similar grants to 
all the principal cities of the county. Their status was 
thereafter secured and sanctioned by written warrants. 

On the other hand care must be taken not to attribute 
to the city charters an exaggerated importance. Neither 
in Flanders nor in any other region of Europe did they 
embrace the whole of the city law. They limited them- 
selves to fixing the principal outlines, to formulating 
some of the essential principles, to settling a few partic- 
ularly important conflicts. Most of the time they were 
the product of special circumstances and they took 
count only of matters which were under debate at the 
time they were drawn up. They cannot be considered as 
the result of systematic planning and legislative deliber- 
ation similar to that out of which are born, for example, 
modern constitutions. If the middle classes have kept 
watch over them throughout the centuries, with an ex- 


nr aaa 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 137 


traordinary solicitude, preserving them under triple lock 
in chests of iron and surrounding them with a quasi- 
superstitious respect, it is because they considered them 
as the palladium of their liberty. It is because they per- 
mitted them, in case of violation, to justify their rebel- 
lion, but it is not because they included the whole of 
their rights. They were not, so to speak, more than the 
framework of the latter. Round about their stipulations 
existed and continued unceasingly to develop a thick 
overgrowth of rights, usages, and unwritten but none 
the less indispensable privileges. This is so true that a 
number of charters themselves foresaw and recognized 
in advance the further development of city law. The 
chronicler Galbert informs us that the Count of Flanders 
accorded to the burghers of St. Omer in 1127: “ut die 
in diem consuetudinarias leges suas corrigerent’—that is 
to say, the power of correcting from day to day their 
municipal laws. There was, therefore, more in the law of 
the city than what was contained in the terms of the 
charters. They specified merely fragments of it. They 
were full of gaps; they were concerned with neither 
order nor system. We need not expect to find in them 
the fundamental principles out of which came later 
evolutions, as for example, Roman law evolved from the 
law of the Twelve Tables. 

It is possible, however, in examining their principles 
and supplementing one by another, to characterize in 
its general traits the city law of the Middle Ages as it 
developed in the course of the twelfth century in the 
different regions of Western Europe. There is no need 
to take account, since we are seeking only to trace the 
general outline, either of the difference in States or even 
in nations. City law was a phenomenon of the same 
nature as, for example, that of feudalism. It was the 
consequence of a social and economic situation common 
to all peoples. Taking it by regions, there are of course 
numerous differences in detail. But at bottom it was 


138 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


everywhere the same and it is solely concerning this 
permanent basis that we shall deal in the following 
paragraphs. 

The first thing which should be considered is the 
status of the individual as it was when city law was 
definitely evolved. That status was one of freedom. It 
is a necessary and universal attribute of the middle 
class. Each city established a “franchise” in this respect. 
Every vestige of rural serfdom disappeared within its 
walls. Whatever might be the differences and even the 
contrasts which wealth set up between men, all were 
equal as far as civil status was concerned. “The air of 
the city makes free,” says the German proverb (Die 
Stadtluft macht frei), and this truth held good in every 
clime. Freedom, of old, used to be the monopoly of a 
privileged class. By means of the cities it again took its 
place in society as a natural attribute of the citizen. 
Hereafter it was enough to reside on city soil to acquire 
it. Every serf who had lived for a year and a day within 
the city limits had it by definite right: the statute of 
limitations abolished all rights which his lord exercised 
over his person and chattels. Birth meant little. What- 
ever might be the mark with which it had stigmatized 
the infant in his cradle, it vanished in the atmosphere of 
the city. This freedom, which at the beginning only 
merchants had enjoyed de facto, was now the common 
right of all the burghers de jure. 

If a few serfs could still exist, here and there among 
them, they were not members of the city population. 
They were hereditary servitors of the abbeys or of the 
seigniories which retained in the cities bits of land not 
subject to city law and where the old state of things 
was prolonged. Burgher and freeman had become syn- 
onymous terms. Freedom, in the Middle Ages, was an 
attribute as inseparable from the rank of citizen of a 
city as it is in our day of that of the citizen of a State. 

With freedom of person there went on equal footing, 


h- 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 139 


in the city, the freedom of the land. In fact, in a mer- 
chant community, land could not remain idle and be 
kept out of commerce by unwieldy and diverse laws that 
prevented its free conveyance and restrained it from 
serving as a means of credit and acquiring capital value. 
This was the more inevitable in that land, within the 
city, changed its nature—it became ground for building. 
It was rapidly covered with houses, crowded one against 
the other, and increased in value in proportion as they 
multiplied. Thus it automatically came about that the 
owner of a house acquired in the course of time the 
ownership, or at least the possession, of the soil upon 
which it was built. Everywhere the old demesnial land 
was transformed into “censal estate,” or “censal allo- 
dium.” City hold thus became free hold. He who oc- 
cupied it was not bound by more than the land taxes 
due to the owner of the land, when he did not happen 
to be himself the owner. He could freely transfer it, 
convey it, mortgage it and make it serve as security for 
capital he might borrow. In selling a mortgage on his 
house, the burgher procured the liquid capital he 
needed; in buying a mortgage on the house of another, 
he assured himself of an income proportionate to the 
sum expended. He placed, as we would say today, his 
money out at interest. Compared to the old feudal or 
demesnial tenures, tenure in city law—tenure in Weich- 
bild or Burgrecht as they called it in Germany, or 
bourgage in France—thus showed a well marked in- 
dividuality. 

Subject to new economic conditions, city land ended 
by acquiring a new law, suited to its nature. The old 
land-courts probably did not abruptly disappear. The 
enfranchisement of the soil did not have as consequence 
the spoliation of the old proprietors. Very often they 
kept, when it was not bought back from them, portions 
of the land of which they had been lords. But the 
seigniory which they still exercised over them no longer 


140 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


carried with it the personal dependence of the tenants. 

City law not only did away with personal servitude 
and restrictions on land, but also caused the disappear- 
ance of the seignorial rights and fiscal claims which in- 
terfered with the activity of commerce and industry. 
The market-tolls (teloneum) which were such a handi- 
cap to the free circulation of goods were particularly 
odious to the burghers, and they early made the effort 
to get rid of them. The chronicler Galbert shows that 
this was, in Flanders in 1127, one of their chief preoc- 
cupations. It was because the pretender, William of 
Normandy, did not keep his promise in this particular 
that they rose against him and called Thierry of Alsace. 
In the course of the twelfth century, everywhere, volun- 
tarily or under compulsion, the market-tolls were modi- 
fied. Here, they were bought off by means of an annual 
fee; there, the manner of levying them was changed. In 
almost every case they were placed under the super- 
vision, and subject to the jurisdiction, of the city 
authorities. It was the city’s magistrates who henceforth 
took charge of supervising trade and who took the place 
of the castellans and the old demesnial functionaries in 
the standardization of weights and measures and in the 
judical administration of markets and industry generally. 

If the market-tolls were modified in passing under 
the authority of the city, it was otherwise with the other 
seignorial rights which, incompatible with the free 
functioning of the life of the city, were inevitably con- 
demned to disappear altogether. Mention might be 
made of the surviving characteristics of the agricultural 
era which had been left impressed on the physiognomy 
of the city: common ovens and mills, at which the 
seigneur compelled the inhabitants to grind their wheat 
and bake their bread; monopolies of every sort, by vir- 
tue of which he enjoyed the privilege of selling at cer- 
tain periods, without competition, the wine from his 
vineyards or the meat from his cattle; the right of 


: 
: 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 141 


i shelter, which imposed upon the burghers the obliga- 


tion of furnishing him lodging and subsistence during 
his stays in the city; the right of requisition, by which 
he appropriated to his service the boats or the horses 
of the inhabitants; the right of summons to arms, impos- 
ing the obligation of following him to war; customs of 
every sort and every origin which had become oppres- 
sive and vexatious because they had long since become 
useless, such as that which forbade the building of 
bridges over the water courses or that which com- 
pelled the inhabitants to assist in the maintenance of the 
knights composing the garrison of the “old burg.” Of all 
this there remained, at the end of the twelfth century, 
hardly more than the memory. The lords, after having 
tried resistance, finished by giving way. They realized, 
in the course of time, that their manifest interest com- 
manded them not to hinder the development of the 
cities, in order to preserve a few meagre revenues, but 
to favor it by doing away with the obstacles that stood 
in its path. They began by taking count of the incom- 
patibility of these old prestations with the new state of 
things, and they ended by themselves qualifying them 
as “plunderings and extortions.” 

Like the status of individuals, the governing of the 
land, and the fiscal system, the fundamental character 
of the law itself underwent a transformation in the cities. 
The complicated and formalistic procedure, the compur- 
gations, the ordeals, the judiciary duel—all these crude 
methods of proof which too often let chance or sheer 
luck decide the issue of a trial, were not long, in their 
turn, in adapting themselves to the new conditions of a 
city environment. The old rigid forms of contract, which 


-custom had established, disappeared as rapidly as 


economic life became more complicated and active. The 
judiciary duel evidently could not be long retained in 
the midst of a population of merchants and artisans. 
Proof through witnesses was likewise early substituted 


142 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


in place of proof through compurgators, before the city — 
magistracy bench. The Wergild, the old blood-price, 
gave way to a system of fines and corporal punishments. 
Finally, legal delays, originally so long, were consider- 
ably reduced. 

It was not only procedure that was modified. The very 
content of the law evolved in parallel fashion. In ques- 
tions of marriage, succession, liens, debts, mortgages, 
and particularly in questions of business law, a whole 
new body of legislation was coming into being in the 
cities, and the jurisprudence of their tribunals created 
a civil practice, increasingly amplified and exact. 

City law was characterized no less from the criminal 
point of view than from the civil. In such aggregations 
as the cities were, of men from every station in life, in 
this environment where abounded wanderers, vagabonds 
and adventurers, a rigorous discipline was necessary to 
the maintenance of security. It was equally necessary 
for intimidating the thieves and bandits who, in every 
civilization, are drawn towards commercial centers. This 
is so true that as early as the Carolingian era the towns, 
within the walls of which the wealthy class sought 
shelter, seemed to enjoy a special “peace.” This is that 
same word “peace” which was used in the twelfth cen- 
tury to designate the criminal law of the city. 

This city peace was a law of exception, more severe, 
more harsh, than that of the country districts. It was 
prodigal of corporal punishments: hanging, decapita- 
tion, castration, amputation of limbs. It applied in all its 
rigor the lex talionis: an eye for an eye, a tooth for a 
tooth. Its evident purpose was to repress derelictions, 
through terror. All who entered the gates of the city, 
whether nobles, freemen or burghers, were equally sub- 
ject to it. Under it the city was, so to speak, in a perma- 
nent state of siege. But in it the city found a potent in- 
strument of unification, because it was superimposed 
upon the jurisdictions and seigniories which shared the 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 143 


| soil; it forced its pitiless regulation on all. More than 
community of interests and residence, it contributed to 
| make uniform the status of all the inhabitants located 
within the city walls and to create the middle class. The 
| burghers were essentially a group of homines pacis—men 
of the peace. The peace of the city (pax villae) was at 
the same time the law of the city (lex villae). The 
emblems which symbolized the jurisdiction and the 
| autonomy of the city were above all emblems of peace: 
4 such as were, for example, the cross or the symbolic set 

of stone steps in the market-place, the belfries (Berg- 
} fried), the towers of which arose from the heart of the 
cities of the Netherlands and Northern France, and the 
statues of Roland, which were so numerous in Northern 
Germany. 

By virtue of the peace with which it was endowed, 
the city formed a distinct legal district. The legal prin- 
ciple of territoriality carried with it that of personality. 
Equally subject to the same penal law, the burghers in- 
evitably shared, sooner or later, in the same civil law. 
| The practice of the city was extended up to the limits 
} of the peace and the city formed, within the circum- 
ference of its ramparts, a community of law. 

The peace, on the other hand, contributed largely in 
making the city a commune. It had, in effect, the oath 
as its sanction. It supposed a conjuratio of all the city 
population. And the oath taken by the burgher was not 
| confined to a simple promise of obedience to municipal 
| authority. It involved strict obligations and imposed a 
strict duty to maintain and respect the peace. Every 
juratus—that is to say, every burgher sworn—was obliged 
to lend a helping hand to any burgher calling for help. 
| Thus the peace created, among all its members, a per- 

manent solidarity. Hence the term “brothers” by which 
they were sometimes designated, or the word amicitia 
' used at Lille, for example, as synonym for pax. And 
since the peace covered the whole city population, the 


144 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


latter, therefore, was a commune. The very names which 
the municipal magistrates bore in a number of places— 
“warders of the peace” at Verdun, “reward of friend- 
ship” at Lille, “jurors of the peace” at Valenciennes, 
Cambrai and many other cities—make it easy to see the 
close relationship between the peace and the commune. 

Other causes naturally contributed to the birth of city 
communes. The most potent among them was the need, 
early felt by the burghers, of a tax system. Funds were 
necessary for public works of the most pressing nature, 
and, above all, for the construction of the city wall. Ev- 
erywhere the need of building this protecting rampart 
was the point of departure for city finances. In the cities 
of the region of Liége the communal tax bore the char- 
acteristic name of firmitas (“firmness”). At Angers the 
oldest municipal accounts were those of the “clouaison, 
fortification et emparement” of the city. Elsewhere part 
of the fines were appropriated ad opus castri—for the 
improvement of the fortifications. 

Taxes, naturally, provided the means of securing the 
needed resources. To subject the taxpayers thereto, 
recourse had to be had to compulsion. Everyone was 
obliged to participate, according to his means, in the 
expenses incurred in the interests of all. Whoever re- 
fused to support the charges which they involved was 
barred from the city. The latter was therefore a com- 
mune, an obligatory association, a moral personality. 
According to the phrase of Beaumanoir, it formed a 
“compaignie, laquelle ne pot partir ne desseurer, angois 
convient qu'elle tidgne, voillent les parties ou non qui en 
la compaignie sont.” That is to say, a society which could 
not be dissolved, but which must needs exist independ- 
ently of the wishes of its members. 

Thus the city of the Middle Ages was simultaneously 
a legal district and a commune. 

There remain to be examined the agencies by which 
were met the demands its nature imposed. 


ee 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 145 


First of all, inasmuch as it was an independent legal 
district, it by all means had to have its own jurisdiction. 
City law being bounded by the city walls, in contrast to 
the regional law, the law of without, a special tribunal 
had to be charged with applying it and the burghers 
had to have, in consequence, the assurance of their 
privileged status. This is a clause which is lacking in 
hardly any municipal charter: that the burghers could 
be tried only by their own magistrates. The latter, as a 
necessary consequence, were recruited from their midst. 
It was essential that they be members of the commune 
and naturally the latter, to a greater or less degree, took 
part in their nomination. Here, it had the right of desig- 
nating them to the seigneur; there, the more liberal 
system of election was applied; still elsewhere, recourse 
was had to complicated formalities: elections in several 
steps, drawing by lot, and so on, which manifestly had 
for their purpose the obviating of bribery and corruption. 
Most often, the president of the tribunal (mayor, bailiff, 
etc.) was an officer of the seigneur’s. It happened, never- 
theless, that the city had something to say in his choos- 
ing. It had in every case an assurance, in the oath which 
he must take to respect and defend its privileges. 

By the beginning of the twelfth century, and in some 
cases even by the end of the eleventh, a few cities were 
already in possession of their special tribunal. In Italy, 
in the south of France, in several parts of Germany, its 
members bore the name of “consuls.” In the Netherlands 
and in Northern France they were called échevins, or 
aldermen. In still other places they were designated as 
jurés, or jurors. In accordance with the locality, the ex- 
tent of the jurisdiction they exercised also varied quite 
noticeably. They did not have it everywhere in its en- 
tirety. It frequently happened that the seigneur reserved 
to himself certain special cases. But these local differ- 
ences are of little importance. The essential thing is that 
every city, by the very fact that it was recognized as a 


146 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


legal district, had its own judges. Their competency was 
set by the law of the city and limited to the territory in 
which it applied. Sometimes in place of a single body of 
magistrates there were several of them, each having its 
own special attributes. In many cities, and particularly 
in the episcopal cities where municipal institutions were 
the result of insurrection, were to be seen, side by side 
with the aldermen over whom the seigneur had more 
or less influence, a body of jurors presiding over matters 
of peace and specially competent in cases arising out of 
the communal statutes. But it is impossible to go into de- 
tails here; it will suffice to have indicated the general 
evolution, without regard to its innumerable modifica- 
tions. 

In its status as a commune, the city was administered 
by a council (consilium, curia, etc.). This council some- 
times coincided with the tribunal, and the same indi- 
viduals were at once both judges and administrators for 
the middle class. Most often, however, it had its own 
individuality. Its members received their authority from 
the commune. They were its delegates, but it did not 
abdicate entirely in their favor. Nominated for a very 
short time, they could not usurp the power that was 
entrusted to them. Not until later, when the constitution 
of the city had been developed and when administration 
had become complicated, did they form a real assembly 
upon which the influence of the people made itself felt 
but feebly. At the start it was quite otherwise. The orig- 
inal jurors, charged with watching over the public weal, 
were only representatives very similar to the select- 
men of New England towns, mere executors of the 
collective will. The proof of this lies in the fact that at 
first they lacked one of the fundamental characteristics 
of every organized body—a central authority, a presi- 
dent. The “burgomasters” and the “mayors” of the com- 
munes were, in fact, of relatively recent creation. They 
did not exist much before the thirteenth century. They 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 147 


_ belong to an era in which the character of institutions 
was tending to be modified, and in which the need of a 
greater centralization and a more independent power 
was being felt. 

The council carried on the routine administration. It 
had charge of finances, commerce, and industry. It or- 
dered and supervised public works, organized the pro- 
visioning of the city, regulated the equipment and the 
deportment of the communal army, founded schools for 
children, provided for the upkeep of almshouses for the 
old and the poor. The statutes it decreed formed a gen- 
uine body of municipal legislation of which there ex- 
isted, north of the Alps, scarcely any prior to the 
thirteenth century. But a close study of these statutes 
leads to the conviction that they merely developed and 
clarified an older form of government. 

Nowhere, perhaps, was the spirit of innovation and 
the practical judgment of the middle class more highly 
manifest than in the realm of administration. The work 
done there seems the more noteworthy in that it was an 
original creation. Nothing in the prior state of things 
could have served as a model for it, since the needs for 
which it provided were new needs. This is made clear 
by a comparison, for example, of the financial system of 
the feudal era with that which the city communes in- 
stituted. In the first, taxes were merely a fiscal prestation, 
an established and perpetual obligation taking no count 
of the means of the taxpayer, bearing down only on the 
people, and the proceeds of which were added to the 
demesnial resources of the prince or seigneur who col- 
lected them, without any part of them being directly 
appropriated for the public interest. The second, on the 
contrary, recognized neither exceptions nor privileges. 
All burghers, enjoying equally the advantages of the 
commune, were equally obligated to contribute towards 
the expenses. The quota of each was in proportion to 
his means. At the start it was generally calculated on 


148 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


the basis of income. Many cities kept consistently to this 
practice up to the end of the Middle Ages. Others sub- 
stituted for it the excise—that is to say, the indirect tax 
levied on articles of consumption and especially on food- 
stuffs—in such a way that the rich and the poor were 
taxed according to their expenditures. But this city-ex- 
cise was in no way connected with the old market-tolls. 
It was as flexible as the latter were strict, as variable in 
accordance with the circumstances or the needs of the 
public as the latter were immutable. But whatever might 
be the form they took, the proceeds of these taxes were 
entirely devoted to the needs of the commune. By the 
end of the twelfth century, a fiscal system had been 
developed and at this era can be discovered the first 
traces of municipal accounts. 

The provisioning of the city and the regulating of 
commerce and industry testify more clearly still to the 
burghers’ aptitude for solving the social and economic 
problems which their conditions of existence put up to 
them. They had to provide for the subsistence of a con- 
siderable population, obliged to get its food supply from 
without; to protect their workmen from foreign competi- 
tion; to make certain of their supply of raw materials 
and to insure the exporting of their manufactures. They 
accomplished it by a system of regulation so marvelously 
adapted to its purpose that it may be considered a mas- 
terpiece of its kind. The city economy was worthy of the 
Gothic architecture with which it was contemporary. It 
created with complete thoroughness—and, it may well 
be said, it created ex nihilo—a social legislation more 
complete than that of any other period in history, in- 
cluding our own. In doing away with the middlemen 
between buyer and seller, it assured to the burgher the 
benefit of a low cost of living; it ruthlessly pursued fraud, 
protected the worker from competition and exploitation, 
regulated his labor and his wage, watched over his 
health, provided for apprenticeship, forbade woman- 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 149 


and child-labor, and at the same time succeeded in 
keeping in its own hands the monopoly of furnishing the 
neighboring country with its products and in opening 
up distant markets for its trade. 

All this would have been impossible if the civic spirit 
of the burghers had not been equal to the tasks that 
were laid upon them. It is necessary, in fact, to go back 
to antiquity to find as much devotion to the public good 
as that of which they had given proof. Unus subveniet 
alteri tamquam fratri suo—“let each help the other like 
a brother’—says a Flemish charter of the twelfth cen- 
tury, and these words were actually a reality. As early 
as the twelfth century the merchants were expending a 
good part of their profits for the benefit of their fellow 
citizens—building churches, founding hospitals, buying 
off the market-tolls. The love of gain was allied, in them, 
with local patriotism. Every man was proud of his city 
and spontaneously devoted himself to its prosperity. 
This was because, in reality, each individual life de- 
pended directly upon the collective life of the municipal 
association. The commune of the Middle Ages had, in 
fact, all the essential attributes which the State exercises 
today. It guaranteed to all its members the security of 
his person and of his chattels. Outside of it he was in a 
hostile world, surrounded by perils and exposed to ev- 
ery risk. In it alone did he have a shelter, and for it he 
felt a gratitude which bordered upon love. He was ready 
to devote himself to its defense, just as he was always 
ready to bedeck it and make it more beautiful than its 
neighbors. Those magnificent cathedrals which the thir- 
teenth century saw erected would not have been con- 
ceivable without the joyous alacrity with which the 
burghers contributed, by gifts, to their construction. 
They not only were houses of God; they also glorified 
the city of which they were the greatest ornament and 
which their majestic towers advertised afar. They were 


' 


150 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


for the cities of the Middle Ages what temples were for 
those of antiquity. 

To the ardor of local patriotism corresponded its ex- 
clusivism. From the very fact that each city constituted 
a State, cities saw in one another only rivals or enemies. 
They could not rise above the sphere of their own in- 
terests. They were self-centered, and the feeling which 
they bore for their neighbors resembles very closely, 
within narrower limits, the nationalism of our day. The 
civic spirit which animated them was singularly egoistic. 
They jealously reserved to themselves the liberties they 
enjoyed within their walls. The peasants who dwelt 
round about them did not seem to them to be com- 
patriots at all. The one thought was to exploit them 
profitably. With all their might they stood on guard to 
prevent the peasants from freeing themselves from the 
industrial system of which the cities had a monopoly. 
The task of provisioning these cities was likewise im- 
posed upon the peasants, who were subjected to a 
tyrannical protectorate whenever it was possible to do 
so, as in Tuscany, for example, where Florence subjected 
to its yoke all the surrounding countryside. . 

We are, however, touching here upon events which 
were not manifest with all their consequences until the 
beginning of the thirteenth century. It will suffice to 
have briefly sketched a tendency which, in the period of 
origins, was hardly more than a suggestion of what was 
to come. Our intention has been merely to define the 
city of the Middle Ages after having depicted its origin. 
Furthermore, it has been possible to note only its prin- 
cipal traits. The physiognomy which has been outlined — 
resembles those portraits obtained by superimposing 
photographs one on the other. The contours of it give a 
countenance common to all and belonging to none of 
them. 

If we wished, in ending this too-long chapter, to sum 
up its essential points in one phrase, perhaps it would 


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 151 


be possible to say that the city of the Middle Ages, as 
it existed in the twelfth century, was a commercial and 
industrial commune living in the shelter of a fortified 
enclosure and enjoying a law, an administration and a 
jurisprudence of exception which made of it a collective, 
privileged personality. 


iets wich 2 ate vai 

Vee a Bete Neen ottian | Ff pet” 

8 egy Be on on hets ivory eth ae ig 
© *m6T, Zz U7 epee oe b 


tey ane ; 

es Lavine epee timate 
TS, 6 act tees aa 
*) llth: 2eag tea 
a ee. 

re ecole aa 

tsHenieg: har Sige 


ache, tacky ti sa 


woe + as 


ag ngs 


het ah 


' 
| 


CITIES 
AND 
EUROPEAN 
CIVILIZATION 


The birth of cities marked the beginning of a new era 
in the internal history of Western Europe. Until then, 
society had recognized only two active orders: the 
clergy and the nobility. In taking its place beside them, 
the middle class rounded the social order out or, rather, 
gave the finishing touch thereto. Thenceforth its com- 
position was not to change; it had all its constituent ele- 
ments, and the modifications which it was to undergo 
in the course of centuries were, strictly speaking, noth- 
ing more than different combinations in the alloy. 

Like the clergy and like the nobility, the middle class 
was itself a privileged order. It formed a distinct legal 
group and the special law it enjoyed isolated it from 
the mass of the rural inhabitants which continued to 
make up the immense majority of the population. In- 
deed, as has already been seen, it was obliged to pre- 
serve intact its exceptional status and to reserve to itself 
the benefits arising therefrom. Freedom, as the middle 
class conceived it, was a monopoly. Nothing was less 
liberal than the caste idea which was the cause of its 


154 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


strength until it became, at the end of the Middle Ages, 
a cause of weakness. Nevertheless to that middle class 
was reserved the mission of spreading the idea of liberty 
far and wide and of becoming, without having con- 
sciously desired to be, the means of the gradual enfran- 
chisement of the rural classes. The sole fact of its exist- 
ence was due, indeed, to have an immediate effect upon 
these latter and, little by little, to attenuate the contrast 
which at the start separated them from it. In vain it 
strove to keep them under its influence, to refuse them 
a share in its privileges, to exclude them from engaging 
in trade and industry. It had not the power to arrest an 
evolution of which it was the cause and which it could 
not suppress save by itself vanishing. 

For the formation of the city groups disturbed at once 
the economic organization of the country districts. Pro- 
duction, as it was there carried on, had served until then 
merely to support the life of the peasant and supply the 
prestations due to his seigneur. Upon the suspension of 
commerce, nothing impelled him to ask of the soil a sur- 
plus which it would have been impossible for him to get 
rid of, since he no longer had outside markets to call 
upon. He was content to provide for his daily bread, 
certain of the morrow and longing for no amelioration 
of his lot, since he could not conceive the possibility of 
it. The small markets of the towns and the burgs were 
too insignificant and their demand was too regular to 
rouse him enough to get out of his rut and intensify his 
labor. But suddenly these markets sprang into new life. 
The number of buyers was multiplied, and all at once he 
had the assurance of being able to sell the produce he 
brought to them. It was only natural for him to have 
profited from an opportunity as favorable as this. It de- 
pended on himself alone to sell, if he produced enough, 
and forthwith he began to till the lands which hitherto 
he had let lie fallow. His work took on a new signifi- 
cance; it brought him profits, the chance of thrift and 


— ha tee 


CITIES AND CIVILIZATION 155 


of an existence which became more comfortable as it 
became more active. The situation was still more favor- 
able in that the surplus revenues from the soil belonged 
to him in his own right. The claims of the seigneur were 
fixed by demesnial custom at an immutable rate, so that 
the increase in the income from the land benefited only 
the tenant. 

But the seigneur himself had a chance to profit from 
the new situation wherein the development of the cities 
placed the country districts. He had enormous reserves 
of uncultivated land, woods, heaths, marshes and fens. 
Nothing could be simpler than to put them under culti- 
vation and through them to profit from these new outlets 
which were becoming more and more exigent and re- 
munerative as the towns grew in size and multiplied in 
number. The increase in population would furnish the 
necessary hands for the work of clearing and draining. 
It was enough to call for men; they would not fail to 
show up. 

By the end of the eleventh century the movement 
was already manifest in its full force. Monasteries and 
local princes thenceforth were busy transforming the 
idle parts of their demesnes into revenue-producing 
land. The area of cultivated ground which, since the end 
of the Roman Empire, had not been increased, kept 
growing continually greater. Forests were cleared. The 
Cistercian Order, founded in 1098, followed this new 
path from its very origin. Instead of adopting for its lands 
the old demesnial organization, it intelligently adapted 
itself to the new order of things. It adopted the principle 
of farming on a big scale and, depending upon the re- 
gion, gave itself over to the most remunerative form of 
production. In Flanders, where the needs of the towns 
were greater since they themselves were richer, it en- 
gaged in raising cattle. In England, it devoted itself par- 
ticularly to the sale of wool, which the same cities of 
Flanders consumed in greater and greater quantity. 


156 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


Meanwhile, on all sides, the seigneurs, both lay and 
ecclesiastic, were founding “new” towns. So was called 
a village established on virgin soil, the occupants of 
which received plots of land in return for an annual 
rental. But these new towns, the number of which con- 
tinued to grow in the course of the twelfth century, were 
at the same time free towns. For in order to attract the 
farmers the seigneur promised them exemption from the 
taxes which bore down upon the serfs. In general, he 
reserved to himself only jurisdiction over them; he abol- 
ished in their favor the old claims which still existed 
in the demesnial organization. The charter of Lorris 
(1155) in the Gatinais, that of Beaumont in Champagne 
(1182), that of Priches in the Hainault (1158) present 
particularly interesting types of charters of the new 
towns, which were also to be found everywhere in neigh- 
boring countries. That of Breteuil in Normandy, which 
was taken over in the course of the twelfth century by 
a number of localities in England, Wales, and even 
Ireland, was of the same nature. 

Thus a new type of peasant appeared, quite different 
from the old. The latter had serfdom as a characteris- 
tic; the former enjoyed freedom. And this freedom, the 
cause of which was the economic disturbance commu- 
nicated by the towns to the organization of the country 
districts, was itself copied after that of the cities. The 
inhabitants of the new towns were, strictly speaking, 
rural burghers. They even bore, in a good number of 
charters, the name of burgenses. They received a legal 
constitution and a local autonomy which was manifestly 
borrowed from city institutions, so much so that it may 
be said that the latter went beyond the circumference 
of their walls in order to reach the country districts and 
acquaint them with liberty. 

And this new freedom, as it progressed, was not long 
in making headway even in the old demesnes, whose 
archaic constitution could not be maintained in the midst 


— ome 


CITIES AND CIVILIZATION 157 


of a reorganized social order. Either by voluntary eman- 
cipation, or by prescription or usurpation, the seigneurs 
permitted it to be gradually substituted for the serfdom 
which had so long been the normal condition of their 
tenants. The form of government of the people was there 
changed at the same time as the form of government of 
the land, since both were consequences of an economic 
situation on the way to disappear. Commerce now sup- 
plied all the necessaries which the demesnes had 
hitherto been obliged to obtain by their own efforts. It 
was no longer essential for each of them to produce all 
the commodities for which it had use. It sufficed to go 
get them at some nearby city. The abbeys of the Nether- 
lands, which had been endowed by their benefactors 
with vineyards situated either in France or on the banks 
of the Rhine and the Moselle where they produced the 
wine needed for their consumption, began, at about the 
start of the thirteenth century, to sell these properties 
which had now become useless and whose working and 
upkeep henceforth cost more than they brought in. 

No example better illustrates the inevitable disap- 
pearance of the old demesnial system in an era trans- 
formed by commerce and the new city economy. Trade, 
which was becoming more and more active, necessarily 
favored agricultural production, broke down the limits 
which had hitherto bounded it, drew it towards the 
towns, modernized it, and at the same time set it free. 
Man was therefore detached from the soil to which he 
had so long been enthralled, and free labor was substi- 
tuted more and more generally for serf labor. It was only 
in regions remote from commercial highways that there 
was still perpetuated in its primitive rigor the old per- 
sonal serfdom and therewith the old forms of demesnial 
property. Everywhere else it disappeared, the more 
rapidly especially where towns were more numerous. In 
Flanders, for example, it hardly existed at all after the 
beginning of the thirteenth century, although, to be sure, 


158 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


a few traces were still preserved. Up to the end of the 
old order there were still to be found, here and there, 
men bound by the law of mortemain or subject to forced 
labor, and lands encumbered by various seignorial 
rights. But these survivals of the past were almost al- 
ways simple taxes and he who paid them had, for all 
that, full personal liberty. 

The emancipation of the rural classes was only one 
of the consequences provoked by the economic revival 
of which the towns were both the result and the instru- 
ment. It coincided with the increasing importance of 
liquid capital. During the demesnial era of the Middle 
Ages, there was no other form of wealth than that which 
lay in real estate. It ensured to the holder both personal 
liberty and social prestige. It was the guaranty of the 
privileged status of the clergy and the nobility. Exclu- 
sive holders of the land, they lived by the labor of their 
tenants whom they protected and whom they ruled. The 
serfdom of the masses was the necessary consequence 
of such a social organization. There was no alternative 
save to own the land and be a lord, or to till it for an- 
other and be a serf. 

But with the origin of the middle class there took its 
place in the sun a class of men whose existence was in 
flagrant contradiction to this traditional order of things. 
The land upon which they settled they not only did not 
cultivate but did not even own. They demonstrated and 
made increasingly clear the possibility of living and 
growing rich by the sole act of selling, or producing 
exchange values. 

Landed capital had been everything, and now by the 
side of it was made plain the power of liquid capital. 
Heretofore money had been sterile. The great lay or 
ecclesiastic proprietors in whose hands was concentrated 
the very scant stock of currency in circulation, by means 
of either the land taxes which they levied upon their 
tenants or the alms which the congregations brought to 


CITIES AND CIVILIZATION 159 


the churches, normally had no way of making it bear 
fruit. To be sure, it was often the case that monasteries, 
in time of famine, would agree to usurious loans to nobles 
in distress who would offer their lands as security. But 
_ these transactions, forbidden otherwise by canonical 
law, were only temporary expedients. As a general rule 
cash was hoarded by its possessors and most often 
changed into vessels or ornaments for the Church, which 
might be melted down in case of need. Trade, naturally, 
released this captive money and restored its proper func- 
tion. Thanks to this, it became again the instrument of 
exchange and the measure of values, and since the 
towns were the centers of trade it necessarily flowed 
towards them. In circulating, its power was multiplied 
by the number of transactions in which it served. Its use, 
at the same time, became more general; payments in 
kind gave way more and more to payments in money. 

A new notion of wealth made its appearance: that 
of mercantile wealth, consisting no longer in land but in 
money or commodities of trade measurable in money. 
During the course of the eleventh century, true capital- 
ists already existed in a number of cities; several exam- 
ples have been cited above, to which it is unnecessary 
to refer again here. These city capitalists soon formed 
the habit of putting a part of their profits into land. The 
best means of consolidating their fortune and their credit 
was, in fact, the buying up of land. They devoted a 
part of their gains to the purchase of real estate, first 
of all in the same town where they dwelt and later in 
the country. But they changed themselves, especially, 
into money-lenders. The economic crisis provoked by the 
irruption of trade into the life of society had caused 
the ruin of, or at least trouble to, the landed proprietors 
who had not been able to adapt themselves to it. For in 
speeding up the circulation of money a natural result 
was the decreasing of its value and by that very fact the 
raising of all prices. The period contemporary with the 


160 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


formation of the cities was a period of high cost of living, 
as favorable to the business men and artisans of the mid- 
dle class as it was painful to the holders of the land who 
did not succeed in increasing their revenues. By the end 
of the eleventh century many of them were obliged to 
have recourse to the capital of the merchants in order to 
keep going. In 1127 the charter of St. Omer mentioned, 
as a current practice, the loans contracted among the 
burghers of the town by the knights of the neighbor- 
hood. 

But more important operations were already current 
at this era. There was no lack of merchants rich enough 
to agree to loans of considerable amount. About 1082 
some merchants of Liége lent money to the abbot of 
St. Hubert to permit him to buy the territory of 
Chavigny, and a few years later advanced to Bishop 
Otbert the sums necessary to acquire from Duke God- 
frey, on the point of departing for the Crusades, his 
chateau of Bouillon. The kings themselves had recourse, 
in the course of the twelfth century, to the good serv- 
ices of the city financiers. William Cade was the money- 
lender to the King of England. In Flanders, at the be- 
ginning of the reign of Philip Augustus, Arras had 
become pre-eminently a city of bankers. William the 
Breton describes it as full of riches, avid of lucre and 
glutted with usurers: 


Atrabatum . . . potens urbs . . . plena 
Divitiis, inhians lucris et foenore gaudens. 


The cities of Lombardy and, following their example, 
those of Tuscany and Provence, went much further in 
carrying on that commerce which the Church vainly 
sought to oppose. By the beginning of the thirteenth 
century, Italian bankers had already extended their 
operations north of the Alps and their progress there was 
so rapid that a half century later, thanks to the abun- 
dance of their capital and the more advanced technique 


CITIES AND CIVILIZATION 161 


| of their procedure, they had everywhere taken the place 


of the local lenders. 

The power of liquid capital, concentrated in the cities, 
not only gave them an economic ascendancy but con- 
tributed also towards making them take part in politi- 
cal life. For as long as society had known no other power 
than that which derived from the possession of the land, 
the clergy and the nobility alone had had a share in 
the government. The feudal hierarchy was made up en- 
tirely on the basis of landed property. The fief, in reality, 
was only a tenure and the relations which it created 
between the vassal and his liege lord were only a par- 
ticular modality of the relations which existed between 
a proprietor and a tenant. The only difference was that 
the services due from the first to the second, in place 
of being of an economic nature, were of a military and 
political nature. Just as each local prince required the 
help and counsel of his vassals so, being himself a vassal 
of the king, was he held on his part to similar obligations. 
Thus only those who held land entered into the direc- 
tion of public affairs. They entered into them, more- 
over, only in paying through their own person; that is 
to say, using the appropriate expression, consilio et 
auxilio—by their counsel and help. Of a pecuniary con- 
tribution towards the needs of their sovereign there 
could be no question at an epoch when capital, in the 
form of real estate alone, served merely for the main- 
tenance of its possessors. Perhaps the most striking char- 
acter of the feudal State was its almost absolute lack 
of finances. In it, money played no réle. The demesnial 
revenues of the prince replenished only his privy purse. 
It was impossible for him to increase his resources by 
taxes, and his financial indigence prevented him from 
taking into his service revocable and salaried agents. In- 
stead of functionaries, he had only hereditary vassals, 
and his authority over them was limited to the oath of 
fidelity they gave him. 


162 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


But as soon as the economic revival enabled him to 
augment his revenues, and cash, thanks to it, began to 
flow to his coffers, he took immediate advantage of cir- 
cumstances. The appearance of bailiffs, in the course of 
the thirteenth century, was the first symptom of the po- 
litical progress which was going to make it possible for 
a prince to develop a true public administration and to 
change his suzerainty little by little into sovereignty. For 
the bailiff was, in every sense of the term, a functionary. 
With these revocable officeholders, remunerated not by 
grants of land but by stewardships, there was evinced 
a new type of government. The bailiff, indeed, had a 
place outside the feudal hierarchy. His nature was quite 
different from that of the old justices, mayors, or castel- 
lans who carried on their functions under an hereditary 
title. Between them and him there was the same dif- 
ference that there was between the old serfholds and 
the new freeholds. Identical economic causes had 
changed simultaneously the organization of the land and 
the governing of the people. Just as they enabled the 
peasants to free themselves, and the proprietors to sub- 
stitute the quit-rent for the demesnial mansus, so they 
enabled the princes, thanks to their salaried agents, to 
lay hold of the direct government of their territories. 
This political innovation, like the social innovations with 
which it was contemporary, implied the diffusion of 
ready cash and the circulation of money. This is quite 
clearly shown to be the case by the fact that Flanders, 
where commercial life and city life were developed 
sooner than in the other regions of the Netherlands, 
knew considerably in advance of these latter the in- 
stitution of bailiffs. 

The connections which were necessarily established 
between the princes and the burghers also had political 
consequences of the greatest import. It was necessary 
to take heed of those cities whose increasing wealth gave 
them a steadily increasing importance, and which could 


CITIES AND CIVILIZATION 163 


put on the field, in case of need, thousands of well 
equipped men. The feudal conservatives had at first 
only contempt for the presumption of the city militia. 
Otto of Freisingen was indignant when he saw the com- 
munes of Lombardy wearing the helmet and cuirass and 
permitting themselves to cope with the noble knights of 
Frederick Barbarossa. But the outstanding victory won 
by these clodhoppers at Legnano (1176) over the troops 
of the emperor soon demonstrated what they were 
capable of. In France, the kings did not neglect to have 
recourse to their services and to ally them to their own 
interests. They set themselves up as the protectors of 
the communes, as the guardians of their liberties, and 
made the cause of the Crown seem to them to be 
solidary with the city franchises. Philip Augustus must 
have garnered the fruits of such a skilful policy. The 
Battle of Bouvines (1214), which definitely established 
the sway of the monarchy in the interior of France and 
caused its prestige to radiate over all Europe, was due 
in great part to military contingents from the cities. 

The influence of the cities was not less important in 
England at the same era, although it was manifest in 
a quite different way. Here, instead of supporting the 
monarchy, they rose against it by the side of the barons. 
They helped, likewise, in the creation of parliamentary 
government, the distant origins of which may be dated 
back to the Magna Charta (1215). 

It was not only in England, furthermore, that the 
cities claimed and obtained a more or less large share 
in the government. Their natural tendency led them to 
become municipal republics. There is but little doubt 
but that, if they had had the power, they would have 
everywhere become States within the State. But they 
did not succeed in realizing this ideal save where the 
power of the State was impotent to counterbalance their 
efforts. 

This was the case with Italy, in the twelfth century, 


164 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


and later, after the definite decline of the imperial 
power, with Germany. Everywhere else they had not 
succeeded in throwing off the superior authority of the 
princes, whether, as in Germany and France, the mon- 
archy was too powerful to have to capitulate before 
them, or whether, as in the Netherlands, their partic- 
ularism kept them from combining their efforts in order 
to attain an independence which immediately put them 
at grips with one another. They remained as a general 
tule, then, subject to the territorial government. 

But this latter did not treat them as mere subjects. 
It had too much need of them not to have regard for 
their interests. Its finances rested in great part upon 
them, and to the extent that they augmented the power 
of the State and therewith its expenses, it felt more and 
more frequently the need of going to the pocketbooks 
of the burghers. It has already been stated that in the 
twelfth century it borrowed their money. And this 
money the cities did not grant without security. They 
well knew that they ran great risks of never being re- 
imbursed, and they exacted new franchises in return 
for the sums which they consented to loan. Feudal law 
permitted the suzerain to exact of his vassals only cer- 
tain well defined dues which were restricted to partic- 
ular cases always identical in character. It was therefore 
impossible for him to subject them arbitrarily to a poll- 
tax and to extort from them supplies, however badly 
needed. In this respect the charters of the cities granted 
them the most solemn guaranties. It was, then, impera- 
tive to come to terms with them. Little by little the 
princes formed the habit of calling the burghers into 
the councils of prelates and nobles with whom they con- 
ferred upon their affairs. The instances of such convoca- 
tions were still rare in the twelfth century; they mul- 
tiplied in the thirteenth; and in the fourteenth century 
the custom was definitely legalized by the institution of 
the Estates in which the cities obtained, after the clergy 


e 


CITIES AND CIVILIZATION 165 


and the nobility, a place which soon became, although 
the third in dignity, the first in importance. 

Although the middle classes, as we have just seen, 
had an influence of very vast import upon the social, 
economic and political changes which were manifest in 
Western Europe in the course of the twelfth century, 
it does not seem at first glance that they played much 
of a réle in the intellectual movement. It was not, in 
fact, until the fourteenth century that a literature and 
an art was brought forth from the bosom of the middle 
classes, animated with their spirit. Until then, learning 
remained the exclusive monopoly of the clergy and em- 
ployed no other tongue than the Latin. What literature 
was written in the vernacular had to do solely with the 
nobility, or at least expressed only the ideas and the 
sentiments which pertained to the nobility as a class. 
Architecture and sculpture produced their masterpieces 
only in the construction and omamentation of the 
churches. The markets and belfries, of which the oldest 
specimens date back to the beginning of the thirteenth 
century—as for example the admirable Cloth Hall of 
Ypres, destroyed during the Great War—remained still 
faithful to the architectural style of the great religious 
edifices. 

Upon closer inspection, however, it does not take long 
to discover that city life really did make its own con- 
tribution to the moral capital of the Middle Ages. To 
be sure, its intellectual culture was dominated by prac- 
tical considerations which, before the period of the Ren- 
aissance, kept it from putting forth any independent ef- 
fort. But from the very first it showed that characteristic 
of being an exclusively lay culture. By the middle of 
the twelfth century the municipal councils were busy 
founding schools for the children of the burghers, which 
were the first lay schools since the end of antiquity. By 
means of them, instruction ceased to be furnished ex- 
clusively for the benefit of the novices of the monas- 


166 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


teries and the future parish priests. Knowledge of read- 
ing and writing, being indispensable to the practice of 
commerce, ceased to be reserved for the members of 
the clergy alone. The burgher was initiated into them 
long before the noble, because what was for the noble 
only an intellectual luxury was for him a daily need. 
Naturally, the Church immediately claimed supervision 
over the municipal schools, which gave rise to a number 
of conflicts between it and the city authorities. The ques- 
tion of religion was naturally completely foreign to these 
debates. They had no other cause than the desire of the 
cities to control the schools created by them and the 
direction of which they themselves intended to keep. 

However, the teaching in these communal schools 
was limited, until the period of the Renaissance, to ele- 
mentary instruction. All who wished to have more were 
obliged to turn to the clerical establishments. It was 
from these latter that came the “clerks” who, starting 
at the end of the twelfth century, were charged with 
the correspondence and the accounts of the city, as well 
as the publication of the manifold Acts necessitated by 
commercial life. All these “clerks” were, furthermore, 
laymen, the cities having never taken into their service, 
in contradistinction to the princes, members of the clergy 
who by virtue of the privileges they enjoyed would have 
escaped their jurisdiction. 

The language which the municipal scribes employed 
was naturally, at first, Latin. But after the first years 
of the thirteenth century they adopted more and more 
generally the use of national idioms. It was by the cities 
that the vulgar tongue was introduced for the first time 
into administrative usage. Thereby they showed an in- 
itiative which corresponded perfectly to that lay spirit 
of which they were the pre-eminent representatives in 
the civilization of the Middle Ages. 

This lay spirit, moreover, was allied with the most 
intense religious fervor. If the burghers were very fre- 


CITIES AND CIVILIZATION 167 


quently in conflict with the ecclesiastic authorities, if 
the bishops thundered fulsomely against them with sen- 
tences of excommunication, and if, by way of counter- 
attack, they sometimes gave way to decidedly pro- 
nounced anti-clerical tendencies, they were, for all of 
that, none the less animated by a profound and ardent 
faith. For proof of this is needed only the innumerable 
religious foundations with which the cities abounded, 
the pious and charitable confraternities which were so 
numerous there. Their piety showed itself with a na- 
iveté, a sincerity and a fearlessness which easily led it 
beyond the bounds of strict orthodoxy. At all times, they 
were distinguished above everything else by the ex- 
uberance of their mysticism. It was this which, in the 
eleventh century, led them to side passionately with the 
religious reformers who were fighting simony and the 
marriage of priests; which, in the twelfth century, 
spread the contemplative asceticism of the Beguines 
and the Beghards; which, in the thirteenth century, ex- 
plained the enthusiastic reception which the Franciscans 
and the Dominicans received. But it was this also which 
assured the success of all the novelties, all the exaggera- 
tions and all the deformations of religious thought. After 
the twelfth century no heresy cropped out which did 
not immediately find some followers. It is enough to re- 
call here the rapidity and the energy with which the 
sect of the Albigenses spread. 

Both lay and mystic at the same time, the burghers 
of the Middle Ages were thus singularly well prepared 
for the réle which they were to play in the two great 
future movements of ideas: the Renaissance, the child 
of the lay mind, and the Reformation, towards which 
religious mysticism was leading. 


—-) eager tm Amer 4 1. 
Perse Owe ee ~ 
ld el ee 


Se a 


_ of db eee 


cane dy , —— : 
nore — . me o. 
kw ihstw ype oe hos ‘ibis Site 


, owe Sp Sete 
eichyrsid aif A0~H @pact sett twWatzne image 
ayy Ux” yields aset now en 4 bias 
ST Ne Oo! yt veel etewh cad i olute» lleliieees 
hMMS <4 =o opheaal-aqd) pemebl Sa 
OD nerd! ier sE.<6) Dee beta eet alte 
fetinel: Rh UG Ai eecrigtion” 
‘ ‘eo in 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ASHLEY, W. J., “The Beginnings of Town Life in the 
Middle Ages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 
x, 1896 

BALLARD, A., The English Borough in the Twelfth Cen- 
tury. Cambridge, 1914 

BATERON, M., “The Laws of Breteuil,” English His- 
torical Review, Vol. xv, 1900 

BELOW, G. v., “Zur Entstehung der deutschen Stadt- 
verfassung,” Historische Zeitschrift, Vols. LvuI—LIx 
Die Entstehung der deutschen Stadtgemeinde. 
Diisseldorf, 1889 
Der Ursprung der deutschen  Stadtverfassung. 
Diisseldorf, 1892 

BLANCHET, A., Les enceintes romaines de la Gauile. 
Paris, 1907 

BLOMMAERT, w., Les chdtelains de Flandre. Ghent, 
191 

the bE E., Le tiers-état daprés la charte de Beau- 
mont et ses filiales. Paris, 1884 

DES MAREZ, G., Etude sur la propriété fonciére dans les 
villes du Moyen-dge et spécialement en Flandre. 
Ghent, 1898 


170 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


DOREN, A. J., Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Kauf- 
mannsgilden des Mittelalters. Leipzig, 1893 

ESPINAS, G., La vie urbaine de Douai au Moyen-dge. 
4 vols., Paris, 1913 

FLACH, J., Les origines de Tancienne France, Vol. u. 
Paris, 1893 

GENESTAL, R., La tenure en bourgage. Paris, 1900 

GERLACH, w., Die Entstehungszeit der Stadtbe- 
festigungen in Deutschland. Leipzig, 1913 

ciry, A., Histoire de la ville de Saint-Omer et de ses 
institutions jusqu’au XIV® siécle. Paris, 1877 
Les établissements de Rouen. 2 vols., Paris, 1883- 
1885 

cross, c., The Gild Merchant. 2 vols., Oxford, 1890 

HEGEL, K., Die Entstehung des deutschen Staidtewesens. 
Leipzig, 1898 
Stddte und Gilden der germanischen Volker im Mit- 
telalter. 2 vols., Leipzig, 1891 

HEMMEON, M. dew., “Burgage Tenure in Medieval Eng- 
land,” Harvard Historical Studies, Vol. xx, 1914 

HUVELIN, P., Essai historique sur le droit des marchés 
et des foires. Paris, 1897 

KEUTGEN, F., Untersuchungen iiber den Ursprung der 
deutschen Stadtverfassung. Leipzig, 1895 

LABANDE, H. L., Histoire de Beauvais et de ses institu- 
tions communales. Paris, 1892 

LUCHAIRE, A., Les communes francaises a Tépoque des 
Capétiens directs, new edition, with introduction by 
L. Halphen. Paris, 1911 

MAITLAND, F. W., Township and Borough. Cambridge, 
1898 

OTTOKAR, N., Opiti po istorii franzoukish gorodov. Perm, 
1919 

PETIT-DUTAILLIS, C. E., L’origine des villes en Angle- 
terre, Vol. 1 of the French translation of Stubbs’ Con- 
stitutional History 

PIRENNE, B., “L’origine des constitutions urbaines au 
Moyen-dge,” Revue historique, Vols. tm, Lvu, 1893, 
1895 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 171 


“Villes, marchés et marchands au Moyen-Age,” Revue 
historique, Vol. Lxvu, 1898 
“La hanse flamande de Londres,” Bulletin de l’Aca- 
_ demie de Belgique, Classe des lettres, 1899 
“Les villes flamandes avant le xu? siécle,” Annales de 
Est et du Nord, Vol. 1, 1905 
Belgian Democracy—Its Early History. Manchester, 
1915 
PROU, M., Les coutumes de Lorris. Paris, 1884 
RIETSCHEL, S., Markt und Stadt in ihrem rechtlichen 
Verhiltniss. Leipzig, 1897 
Das Burggrafenamt. Leipzig, 1905 
Die civitas auf deutschem Boden. Leipzig, 1894 
ROUND, J. H., “The Castles of the Norman Conquest,” 
Archaeologia, Vol. tym, 1903 
SoHM, R., Die Entstehung des deutschen Stddtewesens. 
Leipzig, 1890 
VANDERKINDERE, L., “La premiére phase de Yévolution 
constitutionelle des villes flamandes,” Annales de 
(Est et du Nord, Vol. 1, 1905 
“La notion juridique de la commune,” Bulletin de 
l' Academie de Belgique, Classe des lettres, 1906 
VANDER LINDEN, H., Les gildes marchandes dans les 
Pays-Bas au Moyen-dge. Ghent, 1896 
wautTers, A., De lorigine des premiers développements 
des libertés communales en Belgique. Brussels, 1869 


The numerous monographs devoted, in each country, 
to the particular history of a city must of course also 
be consulted. A list of them can be found in the national 
bibliographies and especially, for England, in the Bib- 
liography of British Municipal History of Charles Gross. 

On the other hand, it is useless to mention, despite 
the importance which they had in their own times, a 
number of works which have become antiquated today. 
The chief characteristics of the most important among 
them will be found in H. Pirenne, “L’origine des con- 
stitutions urbaines au Moyen-dge,” Revue historique, 


172 MEDIEVAL CITIES 


Vol. xm, 1893. For England, see J. Tait, “The Study 
of Early Municipal History in England,” Proceedings of 
the British Academy, Vol. x, 1922. 

As to information on the sources of city law, it will 
suffice to mention here: 


BALLARD, A., British Borough Charters, 1042-1216. 
Cambridge, 1913 

GAUPP, E. T., Deutsche Stadtrechte des Mittelalters. 2 
vols., Breslau, 1851 

GENGLER, H. G., Deutsche Stadtrechte des Mittelalters. 
Erlangen, 1852-1866 
Codex juris municipalis Germaniae medii aevi. 
Erlangen, 1863 

ciry, A., Documents sur les relations de la royauté avec 
les villes en France de 1180 d 1314. Paris, 1885 

KEUTGEN, F., Urkunden zur stédtischen Verfas- 
sungsgeschichte. Berlin, 1901 


INDEX 


abbey-merchants, 77 

acropoles, 40 

Africa, 2 

agrarian stage, not neces- 
sary to introduce com- 
mercial stage, 35 

agriculture, as basis of me- 
dieval civilization, 76 

Aire, 135 

Aix-la-Chapelle, 24, 43 

Albigenses, 167 

Alcuin, 18 

Aleppo, 61 

Alexandria, 2 

Altmiihl, 26 

Amalfi, 62, 63, 65, 86 

amber, 74 

amicitia, 143 

Angers, 144 

Antioch, 2, 64 

Aquileia, 79 

Aquitaine, 3, 4 


Arab merchants, 33 

Arbe, 61 

Arles, 12, 127 

Arnold II, 69 

Arras, 71, 113, 131, 1936, 
160 

Attigny, 43 

Audenarde, 134 

Avars, 26 

Avignon, 12 


Bagdad, 20, 35, 36, 68 

bailiff, 162 

Baldwin IV, 69, 135 

Balearic Isles, 20 

Baltic, 67, 68, 69, 74, 86 

bankers, 159, 160, 161 

barbarians, 3, 6, 8, 16; in- 
vasions of, 3, 4, 6; and 
social disorganization, 55, 

Barcelona, 65, 80 

Bari, 62 


174 


Bar-sur-Aube, 74, 98 

Bavai, 104 

Bayonne, 71 

Beaumanoir, 144 

Beaumont, 156 

Beauvais, 49, 113, 128 

Beghards, 167 

Beguines, 167 

Belgium, evangelization 
of, 7 

Benevento, 62 

Bergamo, 66 

Bergfried, 143 

birri, 70 

Bishop of Cambrai, 98 

bishops, attitude towards 
trade, 124, 125; influ- 
ence of, 55, 56; perma- 
nence of residence of, 
44, 45; power over peo- 
ple, 45, 46; prestige of, 
42, 43; solicitude for 
public weal, 124, 125; 
temporal power of, 47, 
48, 124 

Black Sea, 67 

Boéthius, 7 

Bohemia, 19 

Bona, 63 

Bordeaux, 9, 12, 14, 71, 73 

borgo, 51 

borough, 51, 52 

Bosphorus, 3 

Bouillon, 160 

bourg, 51, 
burg 

bourgage, 139 

bourgeoisie, 41, 48, 94; 
see also middle class 

Bouvines, Battle of, 163 

Brabant, 95 


52; see also 


MEDIEVAL CITIES 


Brabantiones, 57 

brass-working, 111 

Brenner, 66 

Breteuil, 156 

“brothers,” 143 

Bruges, 69, 71, 73, 74> 
102, 105, 106, 131, 134, 
136 

burg, 51, 132; of Middle 
Ages, nature of, 51-53; 
réle in history of cities, 
53; status of inhabitants 
of, 52-53 

burgen, 40 

burgenses, 107, 108, 156 

“burghers,” 107 

“burgomasters,” 146 

Burgrecht, 139 

Burgundians, 4 

burgus, 51 

Byzantium, 2, 4, 6, 11, 18, 
26, 32, 35, 36, 57, 60, 
62, 65, 68, 78, 79, 80; 
commerce of, 11 ff., 60— 
61; fascination of, for 
Russians, 34; population 
of, 60 


Cairo, 20, 61 

Cambrai, 71, 101, 
124, 127, 128, 144 

capital, 161; antagonism 
between labor and, 110; 
importance of liquid, 
158-59; power of, 73, 
160, 161 

“capitalistic spirit,” 83 

capitanei, 126 

Carolingian Empire, agri- 
cultural character of, 


102, 


INDEX 


28; weak economic base 
of, 28 

Carthage, 14 

cash, 159, 162; see also 
coins and currency 

Caspian Sea, 32 

Cassiodorus, 7, 77 

castellanus, 51, 108 

castellum, 50 

castrenses, 108 

castrum, 50 

cathedrals, 149 

Champagne, 74 

Channel, 21, 71 

Charité St. Christophe, 
ey 

charités, 85 

Charlemagne, 6, 18, 21, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 
33; 42, 49, 56, 59, 70, 89 

Charles the Good, 136 

Charles Martel, 15 

Charles the Simple, 67 

charters of immunity, 45 

Chavigny, 160 

child-labor, 149 

Childebert, 4 

Christianity, 5, 7 

Church, 5, 7, 8, 18,.27, 29, 


42, 56, 87, 88, 103, 
124-25; attitude to- 
wards trade, 125-26; 


prestige of, 88; strength 
OL, % 

Church of St. Pharailde, 
103 

churches, authorized to 
coin money, 25 

Cistercian Order, 58, 118, 


155 
cities, 8; defined, 39; dif- 


175 


ference between Italian 
and Northern, 117; dis- 
tinctive features of, 39, 
132; formative period 
of, 121; mark beginning 
of new era, 153; as mar- 
kets, 72; political life of, 
not restricted to walls, 
40-41; Roman, 8; and 
share in government, 
163-64; and surviving 
characteristics of agri- 
cultural era, 140-41 

city, definition of medie- 
val, 151; law, 137-41, 
145-46; militia, 163; or- 
igins, 39; peace, 142 

city charters, 137 

civilization, ninth century 
contrasted with antiq- 
uity, 18 

civis, 48, 108, 126 

civitas, 8, 44 

clergy, attitude toward 
commerce, 87-88; and 
middle class, 117-19; 
privileges of, 45; status 
Diy 157 

clerks, 166 

Clermont-Ferrand, 9, 12 

closed domestic ecunomy, 
golden age of, 31 

Clotaire, 4 

cloth-making, 
111 

Cloth Hall of Ypres, 165 

cloths, 22, 62, 70, 109, 110 

Clovis, 4 

Clunisian mysticism, 87 

CJunisian reform, 56 

coins, 10-12, 22, 24, 83, 


109, 110, 


176 


69; see also cash and 
currency 

Cologne, 71, 73, 86, 124 

coloni, 28 

commerce, Carolingian, 
23-24; centers of, 58; 
code, go; and end of 
demesnial system, 156—- 
58; importance of mone- 
tary system to, 25; and 
industry, reaction on ag- 
riculture, 71-72; in- 
land, g; late appearance 
of in Europe, 80; long- 
distance, 86; Merovin- 
gian, 10; prejudice 
against, 87-88; as a pro- 
fession, 77-81; revival, 
58; as spontaneous phe- 
nomenon, 75; spread of, 
74; Venetian technique 
of, 78 

communal 
126 ff. 

commune cities, 127-30, 
143-45 

communio, 129 

communio civitatis, 126 

communitas, 129 

compagnies, 85 

condition of the people, 
attempts to better, 56 

confidence, renewal of, 56 

conjuratio, 143 

consilium, 146 

Constantine Porphyrogen- 
etus, 34 

Constantinople, see Byzan- 
tium 

“consuls,” 126, 145 

cooperative activity, re- 


magistrates, 


MEDIEVAL CITIES 


newal of, 56 
Corbie, 20 
Corbie, Abbey of, 12 
corporal punishment, 142 
Corsica, 20, 64 
Céte d’Azur, 4 
Coterelli, 57 
council, city, 146-47 
counts, without fixed ad- 
ministrative centers, 43—- 


as 

“counts of the hanse,” 134 

credit system, 78 

Cremona, 66 

Crusades, 57, 64 

cultivated land, area of, 
58 

cultural situation, Roman 
Empire, 7 

curia, 146 

currency, 2, 10, 11, 24, 
158, 159; see also cash 
and coins 


Curzola, 61 


Damascus, 61 

Danes, 67 

Danube, 1, 3, 8, 23, 26, 55, 
66, 73 

debts, 88 

decuriones, 8, 41 

defenser civitatis, 9, 41 

Dekanen, 133 

demesnes, 28, 29, 31; or- 
ganization of, 29-30 

denarius, 10 

deniers, 16, 22, 24, 25 

Denmark, 69, 71 

Dinant, 71, 86, 102, 111 

diocese, 8; boundaries cor- 


- INDEX 


respond to city bound- 
aries, 42 
Dnieper, 32, 34, 67 
Dominicans, 118, 167 
domus negociantum, 14 
Dorsoduro, 59 
Douai, 71, 111, 113, 131 
Doyen, 85 
Dublin, 68 
ducats, 25 
“dusty-foot,” 86 
Duurstede, 12, 22, 23, 67, 
69 
Dvina, 34, 67 


ecclesiastical organiza- 
tions, 8-9; schools, 46 

échevins, 145 

economic activity, survival 
of, g; order of Merovin- 
gian Gaul, agricultural 
basis of, 9; revival and 
beginnings of city life, 
103 ff.; rivalries of Ital- 
ian towns, 63-64, 65-— 
66 

economy of exchange, 31; 
of Roman Empire, Med- 
iterranean character of, 


7 
Edessa, 2, 64 
Edict of Theodoric, 14 
Egypt, 2, 11, 19, 64 
Einhard, 18 
Elbe, 19, 55, 57, 68 
eleventh century, charac- 
teristics of, 77 
Emma, Queen, 69 
enamels, 13 
enclosures, see fortresses 
England, 57, 67, 68, 69, 


177 


71, 102 
established order, 121-22 
Etaples, 22 
Euphrates, 1 
Europe, economic trans- 

formation of, 72 
excommunication, 42, 167 
export trade, 2, 109 


fabrics, 61 

“fair price,” 83, 88 

fairs, 46, 66, 71, 74, 91, 98 

famine, 14, 31, 81, 159 

fecundity, 57 

feudal princes, 43, 49-50 

feudal system, 28; finances 
of, 161; military spirit 
of, 57 

firmitas, 144 

First Crusade, 64 

fishing, 59 

Flanders, 22, 57, 58, 66, 
68, 69, 70, 71, 74, 85, 
86, 98, 109, 127; de- 
veloping economic ac- 
tivity of, 71; favorable 
position of, 68—69 

Flemish coast, 58 

Florence, 24, 73, 150 

florins, 24 

forisburgus, 101 

fortresses, 32, 50; a5 prim- 
itive cities, 40; plan of, 
40-41 

Fos, 12, 20 

fraries, 85 

Franciscans, 118, 167 


Frankish kings, alliance 
with Byzantines, 4; with 
Lombards, 4 


Frankish state, 3, 4, 70; 


178 


decomposition of, 50; 
increasing importance 
of, 17 ff.; inland charac- 
ter of, 21 

Fraxinetum, 20 

Frederick Barbarossa, 163 

freedom, attribute of mid- 
dle class, 138-39; 
spread of idea of, 156— 


Friesian cloaks, 22, 70 
functionaries, recruited 

from aristocracy, 28 
furs, 33, 70, 74 


Galbert, 137, 140 

Garde-Frainet, 20 

Garonne, 21 

Gaul, 2; commerce of, 
11 ff.; as inland country, 
19; as maritime country, 
19 

Genoa, 63, 65, 66, 73, 79, 
80, 86 

Gerard II, 127 

Germanic tribes, 3, 5, 7, 8, 
30, 67-68, 76; invasions 
of, 8, 10, 14, 15, 29, 41, 
70; reach Mediterra- 
nean, 5; social distinc- 
tions among, 29 

gesta municipalia, 9, 41 

Ghent, 71, 73, 99, 102, 
103, 105, 109, 111, 113, 
131, 136 

Gildhalle, 133 

gilds, 85, 133, 134 

Gilles d’Orval, 101 

Godfrey, Duke, 160 

Godric, 82, 83, 84, 86, 88 

gold, 10, 24, 25 


MEDIEVAL CITIES 


gold standard, 25 

gorods, 32, 35, 40 

Goths, 3, 59 

Gotland, 68 

Greeks, 17 

Gregory the Great, 7 

Gregory of Tours, 9, 11, 
12, 13 

Guérard, 30 

Guilbert of Nogent, 128 

Gulf of Bothnia, 34, 68 

Gulf of Finland, 68 

Gulf of Gascony, 21 

Gulf of Zwyn, 69 


Hamburg, 68 

handwriting, 18 

hanse, 85, 133 

Hanse Towns, 74 

Hansgraf, 85, 133, 134 

Harun-al-Rashid, 70 

Henry the Fowler, 55 

Herstal, 43 

high cost of living, 160 

highwaymen, go 

historical evolution, course 
of, 18 

honey, 33 

Hungarians, 55 

Huns, 59 

Huy, 71, 86, 100, 102, 108 


Iceland, 68 

income tax, 148 

indirect tax, 148 

individuals, contrasts in 
status, 115; free, 138 

industry, concentration in 
towns, 110-11; effect on 
rural population, 111- 
12 


INDEX 


Ingelheim, 43 

initiative, spirit of, 76 

investiture struggle, 124 

Treland, 68; evangelization 
of, 7 

Irish ships, 22 

Irminon, Abbot, 30 

Isidorus of Seville, 7 

Islam, 15, 18, 19, 20, 57, 
64; invasions, 15, 16, 
17 ff., 76; see also Mos- 
lems and Saracens 

Istria, 61 

Ttalian merchants, 66 

Italy, 2, 4, 6, 7, 11, 95, 96, 
126 

Ives of Chartres, 128 


Jerusalem, 64 

jewelry, 13 

Jews, 11, 12, 13, 23, 33; 
Cate eee 


John the Deacon, 61 
Jupille, 43 

jurés, 145 

jurisdiction, multiplicity 


of, 112, 114, 115; pro- 
cedure made more flex- 
ible, go—91 

Justinian, 4, 6 


Kairwan, 61 

Kiev, 32, 33, 36, 68 
King of France, 131 
kraals, 40 


labor, 73; antagonism be- 
tween. capital and, 110; 
condition of, 110; free 
and serf, 157 

Lagny, 74, 98 


179 


Lagosta, 61 

Lake Ladoga, 67 

Lambert, 105 

land-courts, 139 

landed proprietor, 28, 29 

Laon, 128 

large estates, increase of, 
29 

law, fundamental transfor- 
mation of character, 
141 ff. 

Le Cateau-Cambrésis, 98 

Legnano, 163 

lex talionis, 142 

lex villae, 143 

Leyden, 99 

Liége, 71, 124, 144, 160; 
Bishop of, 100 

Lille, ..71,,.131,..134,,,343, 


144 
literacy, 78, 165-67 
liti, 29 
loans, 159, 160 
Lobbes, 104 
Lodi, 66 
Loire, 12, 21 
Lombards, 4, 6, 19, 59, 66 
Lombardy, 62, 66, 68, 80, 
98, 117,126, 127 
London, 69, 70, 71, 86 
Lorris, 156 
Louis the Pious, 25, 43, 47 
Louis VI, 128 
Lovat, 67 
love of gain, 76 
low cost of living, 148 
Lucca, 62, 126 
Lyons, 12, 73 


Magna Charta, 163 
Mahomet, 15, 18 


180 


Mainz, 71, 99, 124 

Malmédy, 104 

manentes, 30 

mansus, 30, 162 

Marcomanni, 3 

maritime loans, 78 

markets, 24, 72, 97, 98, 
154; and portus, distine- 
tion between, 102; lo- 
cal character of, 98; 
weekly, 46 

market-tolls, 9, 12, 46, 69, 
90, 102, 140, 148, 149 

Marseilles, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 
19, 20, 36, 73, 79, 80, 
101, 126; revival of, 65; 
stagnation of, 20 

“mayors,” 146 

Mediterranean, 4, 6, 7, 9, 
11, 14, 15, 17, 21, 33; 
characteristic of Roman 
Empire, 1; historical in- 
fluence of, 7; reopened, 
64-65; trade, 2, 10 

Meersen, 43 

Mehdia, 20, 63 

Menapii, 70 

mendicant friars, 118 

mercantile cities, 73-74 

mercatores, 21, 9O 

mercatus, 24 

“merchant 
96 

merchant associations, 85; 
colonies, g9—100 

merchants, 9, 11, 14, 23, 
24, 35, 75, 76; of Gaul, 
13; growth in numbers, 
105; legal status of, 88— 
91, 115-16; location of, 
96-98; multiplication 


adventurers,” 


MEDIEVAL CITIES 


of, 99; need for cooper- 
ation, 84-85; need for 
protection, 105-107; po- 
litical influence of, 123- 


24, 133-35; _ profes- 
sional, 98; residence of, 
96-97 
Messines, 71, 98 
metallurgy, 111 


Meuse, 21, 22, 43, 67, 70, 
71, 95, 124 

middle class, 153, 154; ad- 
ministrative ability of, 
147-49; and city char- 
ters, 136-37; civic spirit 
of, 149-50; composition 
of, 108-9; direct action 
by, 123; as disturber of 
economic organization, 
154-55; early charac- 
teristics of, 94-95; and 
established order, 122— 
23; and intellectual 
movement, 165-67; le- 
gal status of, 115-16, 
135-36; political pro- 
gram of, 122-23, 136; 
power of, 116; as priv- 
ileged group, 135, 153- 
54; reforms exacted by, 
133; regarded as unde- 
sirable, 112-13; Renais- 
sance and Reformation, 
167; spread idea of lib- 
erty, 154; see also bour- 
geoisie 

Milan, 73, 126 

milites castrenses, 51 

mints, 25, 46 

missi dominici, 27 

monasteries, 29, 46, 58 


INDEX 


- monasticism and city at- 

_ mosphere, 118-19 

monetary reform, 2, 25 

money, circulation of, 159— 
60, 162 

money lenders, see bank- 
ers 

- monks, 118 

Mooren, 57 

Morini, 70 

Moscow, 36 

Moselle, 108 

Moslems, 20, 57; invasions, 
76; see also Islam and 
Saracens 

municipal systems, as basis 
of Roman administra- 
tive system, 41; and de- 
mocracy, 126-27; iden- 
tified with constitutional 
system, 41 

municipium, 50, 66 

mysticism, 167 


names of Roman cities, 8 

Nantes, 12, 73 

Naples, 62, 73 

Narses, 5 

negociatores, 21 

negotiatorum 
101 

Netherlands, 95, 96, 102; 
commercial activity of, 
66 

Neva, 67 

“new burg,” 102, 107, 108, 
112, 132 

Nice, 20 

Nimes, 9, 127 

nobility, gives way to mid- 
dle class, 116-18 


claustrum, 


181 


Noirmoutier, 22 

Normandy, 55, 68, 131 

Normans, 57, 62, 65 

Norsemen, 21, 22, 32, 49, 
50, 67, 69, 76 

North Sea, 21, 71, 74, 86, 
98, 131 

Norwegians, 67 

Notger, 124 

nouveaux riches, 81, 87 

Novgorod, 32, 68 

novus burgus, 102 

Noyon, 128 


oil, 2, 11, 13 

“old burg,” 102, 107, 108, 
114, 141 

Olivolo, 59 

oppidum, 40, 50 

orbis romanus, 5 

oriental merchants, 14 

orientalization of society, 3 

Orleans, 9, 12, 73 

Oslo, 21 

Ostrogoths, 4, 14 

Otbert, Bishop, 160 

Oito I, 55 

Otto of Freisingen, 163 


palatia, 43 

Palermo, 20, 61, 63 

pallia, 110; fresonica, 70 
papyrus, 2, 11, 12, 13, 20 
Paris, 9, 14, 49, 66, 85, 131 
patarenes, 127, 129 
Pavia, 62 

pax villae, 143 

peace, need of, 56 

“peace,” 142 

peddlers, 76, 97, 111 
Pepin the Short, 18, 24 


182 


Persian Gulf, 65 
Petchenegs, 36 
‘Philip Augustus, 160, 163 
Phoenicians, 17 
piepowdrous, 86 

Pietro II Orseolo, 61 

piracy as initiator of trade, 


7a 

Pisa, 63, 64, 65, 66, 73, 
80, 86; cathedral of, 63 

plateae, 105 

Po, 62 

Poland, 22 

polders, 58 

poll tax, 27 

poort, 103 

poorter, 103, 108 

poortmannus, 108 

Pope, 45 

population, increase in, 58, 
80, 110, 121, 155; of 
Episcopal towns, 46 

port, synonyms for, 102-3 

portus, 102, 103, 106, 108, 
112, 132, 133 

Priches, 156 

princes and middle class, 
164-65; and _ political 
liberty, 130-31 

profit, desire for, 83; idea 
of, 31 

Provence, 4, 13, 20 

Provins, 74 

Prussia, 69 

Pyrenees, 4 


Quadi, 3 
Quentovic, 12, 22, 23, 67, 
69 


Radolfzell, 98 


MEDIEVAL CITIES 


Ramihdrus, 127 

Ratisbonne, 101 

raw material, 72 

real estate, 114, 139, 158, 
159, 161; idea of, 35 

reclamation projects, 57 ff., 
155 

Red Sea, 65 

Rednitz, 26 

Reformation, 167 

Reichenau, Abbot of, 98 

religious spirit, 166-67 

Renaissance, 165, 167 

Rhine, 1, 3, 8, 21, 22, 26, 
36, 43, 66, 67, 70, 71, 
73; traffic on, 22 

Rhodes, 65 

Rhéne, 4, 12, 21, 66 

Rialto, 59 

Robert the Friesian, 135 

Robert of Jerusalem, 135 

Rollo, 55 

Roman Empire, 1, 3, 17, 
73; civilization of, 2; de- 
creasing population of, 
3; destruction of, not in- 
tentional, 5; economic 
development of, 2; law, 
137; longevity of civili- 
zation, 5; maritime char- 
acter of, 5-6; Mediter- 
ranean characteristic of, 


1 

Romulus Augustulus, 6 

Rouen, 12, 71, 73, 86 

Russia, 32, 35, 36, 37, 67, 
69, 111; merchants, 33- 
34; trade, interrupted, 
35-36 


saga, 70 


— —~ Ve men 


INDEX 


Sahara, 1 

St. Amand, 7 

St. Augustine, 7 

St. Benedict, 7 

St. Bernard, 66 

St. Boniface, 18 

St. Godric, see Godric 

St. Hubert, 160 

St. Jerome, 87 

St. John the Baptist, 103 

St. Omer, 102, 105, 107, 
131, 133, 134, 135, 136, 
137, 160 

St. Quentin, 49, 128 

St. Remade, 7 

St. Riquier, 24 

St. Vaast, 49, 113 

St. Womarus, 103 

salt, 22, 23, 59, 61, 78 

Salzburg, 22 

Samo, 13 

Saone, 12 

Saracens, 21, 49, 50, 57; 
64, 76; see also Is 
and Moslems 

Sardinia, 20, 64 

Scandinavians, 32, 67, 74; 
as intermediaries of 
Greek and Arab civili- 
zation, 68; navigators as 
traders, 67-68 

Scheldt, 21, 22, 67, 70, 71, 


95 

Schwerin, 68 

sea, objective of invaders, 
4 5-6 

Seine, 21, 43 

senators, 28 

serfs, 35, 89, 138 

Sicily, 6, 20, 64 

silk, 13, 70 


183 


silver, 24 

silver standard, 25 

slaves, 13, 20, 23, 33, 35, 
61 

Slavs, 32, 55 

small land holders, disap- 
pearance of, 29-30 

Smolensk, 32 

social legislation, com- 
pleteness of, 148-49; 
progress, stimulated by 
cities, 73 

solidus, 2, 10, 24 

Sorgues, 12 

sou, 10 

Sound, 74 

Spain, 2, 3, 4, 6, 11 

Spalato, 61 

Speyer, 99 

Spices,,.24, 11, 12,.,19, 20, 
23, 61 

Spinalunga, 59 

Spliigen, 66 

Spoleto, 62 

standard of living, 73 

Stavelot, 104 

Strasbourg, 161 

street names, 113 

suburb, 105-6 

suburbium, 49, 102 

Suevi, 3 

Suzdal, 32 

Sweden, 22, 32, 67 

Syria, 2, 11, 19, 64 

Syrians, 11, 12, 23; com- 
merce of, 3; mariners, 
79; shipping, 2, 19 


Tarentum, 62 
tax system, 144, 147-48 
telonearii, 10 


184 


teloneum, 9, 140 

tenth century, as era of 
stabilization, 55 

Térouanne, 104, 131 

terra dominicata, 30 

textiles, 2, 11, 23 

Theodoric, 4, 6; Edict of, 


Ly 

Theudebert, 5 

Thierry of Alsace, 136, 140 

third-sou, 10 

Thourout, 98 

Thuringia, 13 

Toledo, 57 

Tongres, 104 

Toulon, 12 

Tournai, 70, 71, 99, 131, 
134 

town, 40 

towns, 35; barbarians’ dis- 
like for, 8; and burgs, 
function in evolution of 
cities, 104; increase in 
population, 101; medie- 
val diversity of, 95; mul- 
tiplication of, 95; old 
Roman, 66; protective 
function of, 49; survival 
of, 10 

trade, 2; and the Church, 
conflicts between, 124- 
26; of Russians with 
Moslems and Byzan- 
tines, 33-34 

Trau, 61 

triens, 10 

Troyes, 74 

Truce of God, 43, 56, go 

tunics, 70 

Tunis, 20 

Tuscany, 66, 117 


MEDIEVAL CITIES 


twelfth century, profound 


effect on humanity, 
73 . 
Twelve Tables, 137 


Tyrrhenian Sea, 20 


universitas, 129 

urban fortifications, 106 

urban population, status 
of, 48 

urbs, 50 

urbs mercatorum, 101 

Utrecht, 124 


vagabonds, 81, 86, 142 

Valence, 12 

Valencia, 57 

Valenciennes, 71, 102, 144 

valvassores, 126 

Vandals, 3, 4, 14 

Veglia, 61 

Venice, 25, 58, 59, 60, 61, 
62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 
73> 74, 77, 79, 80, 86; 
commercial relations 
with Byzantium, 79-80; 
influence of Constanti- 
nople on, 60-61; lack of 
scruple, 61; as manufac- 
turing and industrial 
center, 62 

Verdun, 9, 14, 86, 101, 
144 

vetus burgus, 102 

Victor ITI, Pope, 63 

Vienne, 12 

villae, 30 

villani, 30 

Visagoths, 4, 6, 14 

Vistula, 68, 74 

Volchof, 67 


— > 


INDEX 


Volga, 34 


walls as attribute of towns, 
107 

wealth, new notion of, 159 

Weichbild, 139 

Wends, 13 

Wergild, 142 

Weser, 68 

wheat, 2, 59, 61, 62 

William of Apuleia, 61 

William the Breton, 160 

William Cade, 160 

William of Normandy, 57, 
71, 136, 140 


185 


wine, 2, 11, 13, 22, 23, 61, 
62 

wood, 61 

wool, 109 

Worms, 99, 124 

Wulfric Rabel, 134 


year 1000, legend of ter- 


rors, 56 

Ypres, 71, 73, 102, 111, 
131, 135, 136 

Yser, 131 

Zara, 61 


Zealand Islands, 131 


ANCHOR BOOKS 


BRITISH FICTION 


cary, Joyce An American Visitor, A352 

— A House of Children, A315 

—— The Moonlight, A292 

CONRAD, JOSEPH Chance, A113 

The Rescue, A199 

The Rover, A240 

The Secret Agent, A8 

The Shadow-Line, Typhoon and The Secret Sharer, A178 

Tales of the East, A256 

Under Western Eyes, ed. Zabel, A323 

Victory, A106 

Youth, Heart of Darkness and The End of the Tether, A173 

GREEN, HENRY Loving, A18 

KIPLING, RUDYARD The English in England: Short Stories by Rudyard 
Kipling, ed. Jarrell, A362 

— Inthe Vernacular: The English in India, ed. Jarrell, A363 

PETERSON, SPIRO, ed. The Counterfeit Lady Unveiled, A232 

SNOW, C. P. The Masters, A162 


TTT 


CONTINENTAL FICTION 


ALAIN-FOURNIER, HENRI The Wanderer, A14 

CHEKHOV, ANTON Early Stories, A261 

— Ward No. 6 Six Russian Short Novels, ed. Jarrell, A348 

COLETTE My Mother’s House and The Vagabond, A62 

DOSTOEVSKY Three Short Novels of Dostoevsky, A193 

FLORES, ANGEL, ed. Nineteenth Century German Tales, A184 

GOGOL, NIKOLAI The Overcoat Six Russian Short Novels, ed. Jarrell, A348 

JARRELL, RANDALL, ed. Six Russian Short Novels, A348 

LERMONTOV, MIHAIL A Hero of Our Time, A133 

LESKOY, NIKOLAI The Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District Six Russian 
Short Novels, ed. Jarrell, A348 

MAURIAC, FRANCOIS Thérése, A79 

MERWIN, W.S., trans. The Life of Lazarillo de Tormes, A316 

PROUST, MARCEL Pleasures and Days, A97 

SERGE, VICTOR The Case of Comrade Tulayev, A349 

STENDHAL The Charterhouse of Parma, Al 

TOLSTOY, LEO The Death of Ivan Ilych and Master and Man Six Russian 
Short Novels, ed. Jarrell, A348 

TURGENEV, IVAN A Lear of the Steppes Six Russian Short Novels, ed. 
Jarrell, A348 

— Selected Tales of Ivan Turgenev, trans. Magarshack, A203 

YARMOLINSKY, AVRAHM, ed. Soviet Short Stories, A218 


ORIENTAL LITERATURE 
MURASAKI, LADY The Tale of Genji, trans. Waley 
Vol. I—A55 
Vol. Il—The Sacred Tree, A176 


scoTT, A.c, Literature and the Arts in Twentieth Century China, A343 
TSAO HSUEH-CHIN Dream of the Red Chamber, trans. Wang, A159 


a ape 


ANCHOR BOOKS 


ANCIENT CIVILIZATION 


ALBRIGHT, WILLIAM FOXWELL From the Stone Age to Christianity, A100 

ARISTOPHANES Five Comedies of Aristophanes, trans. Rogers, A57 

BURCKHARDT, JACOB The Age of Constantine the Great, A65 

CASSON, LIONEL, ed, & trans, Selected Satires of Lucian, A295 

COULANGES, FUSTEL DE The Ancient City, A76 

CROSS, FRANK MOORE, JR. The Ancient Library of Qumran, A272 

FORSTER, E. M. Alexandria: A History and a Guide, A231 

FRANKFORT, HENRI The Birth of Civilization in the Near East, A89 

FRAZER, J. G. The New Golden Bough, ed. Gaster, A270 

GASTER, THEODOR H. The Dead Sea Scriptures, A92 

—— Thespis: Ritual, Myth and Drama in the Ancient Near East, A230 

GRAVES, ROBERT, ed. The Comedies of Terence, A305 

HADAS, MOSES, trans. & ed. A History of Rome, A78 

HOMER The Odyssey, trans. Fitzgerald, A333 

KITTO, H. D. F. Greek Tragedy, A38 

KRAMER, SAMUEL NOAH History Begins at Sumer, A175 

, ed. Mythologies of the Ancient World, A229 

MOSCATI, SABATINO’ The Face of the Ancient Orient, A289 

MURRAY, GILBERT Five Stages of Greek Religion, A51 

NEHRU, JAWAHARLAL The Discovery of India, A200 

PLAUTUS Six Plays of Plautus, trans. Casson, A367 

SENECA The Stoic Philosophy of Seneca, trans. & ed. Hadas, A148 

SOMERVILLE, JOHN, & SANTONI, RONALD, eds. Social and Political Philos- 
ophy: Readings from Plato to Gandhi, A370 

TAYLOR, A. E. Socrates, A9 

TREVELYAN, G. M. A History of England: Vol. I—From the Earliest Times 
to the Reformation, A22a 

yirci The Aeneid of Virgil, trans. Lewis, A20 

WALEY, ARTHUR Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China, A75 

WRIGHT, G. ERNEST, & FREEDMAN, DAVID NOEL, eds. The Biblical Archae- 
ologist Reader, A250 


ANCHOR BOOKS 


EUROPEAN HISTORY 


ADAMS, HENRY Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres, A166 

BARK, WILLIAM CARROLL Origins of the Medieval World, A190 

BARZUN, JACQUES Darwin, Marx, Wagner, A127 

BURKE, EDMUND Edmund Burke: Selected Writings and Speeches, ed. 
Stanlis, A334 

BUTTERFIELD, HERBERT, & OTHERS A Short History of Science, A180 

CASTIGLIONE, BALDESAR The Book of the Courtier, A186 

CROMBIE, A.C. Medieval and Early Modern Science, 2 vols. 
Vol. I—V-XIII Centuries, A167a 
Vol. II—XIIJ-XVII Centuries, A167b 

FORSTER, E.M. Alexandria: A History and a Guide, A231 

GALILEO Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo, trans. Drake, A94 

HOLT, ELIZABETH G. A Documentary History of Art 
Vol. I—The Middle Ages and Renaissance, Ali4a 
Vol. II—Michelangelo and the Mannerists, Al14b 

HOOVER, CALVIN B. The Economy, Liberty and the State, A241 

HUIZINGA, J. The Waning of the Middle Ages, A42 

KROPOTKIN, PETER Memoirs of a Revolutionist, ed. Rogers, A287 

LEWIS, W. H. The Splendid Century, A122 

—— The Sunset of the Splendid Century: The Life and Times of Louis 
Auguste de Bourbon, Duc du Maine, 1670-1736, A355 

LUKACS, JOHN A History of the Cold War, A322 

MARX, KARL, & ENGELS, FRIEDRICH Basic Writings on Politics and Phi- 
losophy, A185 

MEYERHOFF, HANS, ed. The Philosophy of History in Our Time, A164 

MILL, JOHN STUART John Stuart Mill: Essays on Politics and Culture, 
ed. Himmelfarb, A373 

NEALE, J. E. Queen Elizabeth I, A105 

NEVINS, ALLEN The Gateway to History, A314 

PIRENNE, HENRI A History of Europe 
Vol. I—From the End of the Roman World in the West to the Be- 

ginnings of the Western States, Al56a 
Vol. Il—From the Thirteenth Century to the Renaissance and Ref- 
ormation, A156b 

— Medieval Cities, A82 

POWER, EILEEN Medieval People, A32 

SERGE, VICTOR The Case of Comrade Tulayev, A349 

SHATTUCK, ROGER The Banquet Years, A238 

SYPHER, WYLIE Four Stages of Renaissance Style, A45 

TOCQUEVILLE, ALEXIS DE The European Revolution and Correspondence 
with Gobineau, A163 

—— The Old Regime and the French Revolution, A60 

TREVELYAN, @. M. History of England 
Vol. I—From the Earliest Times to the Reformation, A22a 
Vol. Ii—The Tudors and the Stuart Era, A22b 
Vol. I11—From Utrecht to Modern Times, A22c 

TROTSKY, LEON The Russian Revolution, A170 

VICO, GIAMBATTISTA The New Science of Giambattista Vico, trans. Bergin 
& Fisch, A254 

WADDELL, HELEN The Wandering Scholars, A63 

WEDGWOOD, C. V. The Thirty Years War, A249 

WHYTE, LANCELOT LAW The Unconscious Before Freud, A286 

WILLEY, BASIL The Seventeenth Century Background, A19 

WILLIAMS, RAYMOND Culture and Society, 1780-1950, A220 

WILSON, EDMUND To the Finland Station, A6 


Medieval Cities 
by Henri Pirenne 


Amidst the ruins left first by the breakdown of classical 
civilization, and then by the fury of the Northmen, trade 
and urban life began to revive in Europe in the tenth and 
eleventh centuries, ending the Dark Ages and opening the 
period of Medieval civilization. Medieval Cities is the story 
of this revival. “At once plain and scholarly . . . it is one of 
the best sort of contributions to historical writing — those 
which combine simplicity with erudition and imagination 
with accuracy.” The New Statesman 


SS =. 


—o=- 


serseescaseee 


i fe 
Oe 
ly 


| 


a1/ Ji 


y77-Zuv-6d 
UN UMMN WANES 


