PISTIS SOPHIA


PISTIS SOPHIA


A GNOSTIC MISCELLANY : BEING FOR THE
MOST PART EXTRACTS FROM THE BOOKS
OF THE SAVIOUR, TO WHICH ARE ADDED
EXCERPTS FROM A COGNATE LITERATURE.


ENGLISHED (WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND ANNOTATED
BIBLIOGRAPHY)


BY
G. R. 8S. MEAD


AUTHOR OF
*THRICE-GREATEST HERMES,’ ‘FRAGMENTS OF A FAITH FORGOTTEN,’
’ECHOES FROM THE GNOSIS,’ ETC.


Celephais Press


(lthar ~ Sarkomand ~ Inquanok - Leeds
2007 E.V.


First edition 1896
Second completely revised edition
London: John M. Watkins 1921
Reprinted 1947, 1955


This electronic text issued by Celephais Press,
somewhere beyond the Tanarian Hills;
manifested in the waking world
in Leeds, England,

2007


This work is in the public domain.


CONTENTS


PAGE

Preface ‘ : : : A : ‘ ; ‘ xvii
INTRODUCTION

The Askew Codex . . : : . , . : xxi
The Scripts. ; ‘ i: : 3 ‘ : ‘ xxii
The Contents. Z 7 ‘ ‘ ‘ ? : i xxiii
The Title . : F E ‘ é é . xxiv
The Date of the MS. 4 ; ‘ : : i XXV
Translated from the Greek . : F d : i F Xxvi
Original Composed in Egypt ‘ . x . . j xxviii
Date : The 2nd-century Theory. : : , : : xxix
The 3rd-century Theory. . : F i i . xxix
The ‘Ophitic’ Background . : A 5 Hi : é xxxi
Three vauge Pointers , : : 7 3 : xxxii
The libertinist Sects of Epiphanius. : : : ‘i . XXxiv
The Severians ‘ ‘ j ‘ j ‘ j 5 XXXV
Bruce Codex . ‘ é 5 ‘ , < ‘ é xxxvi
The Berlin Codex. : ‘ ‘ : : ‘ xxxvii
The Sethians . : ‘ ‘ . : ‘ XXXViii
The present Position of the Baguley ‘ F ; . xxviii
The new and the old Perspective in Gnostic Siidigs : ‘ i xxxix
The Ministry of the First Mystery . ¢ é . . : xl
The post-resurrectional Setting ‘ : A é : xli
The higher Revelation within this Seuiies ‘ : F 4 xlii
The £on-lore : ¢ : y : : , xlii
The Sophia Episode . i ‘ ; i . A xliii
The ethical Interest . A é : F 4 3 y xliii
The Mysteries . : ‘i . . : f . xliv
The astral Lore i: i i. i 5 i ‘ A xlv
Transcorporation . : ‘ : ‘ 7 : : xlv
The magical Element . : : : : . 7 xlvi
History and psychic Story . : ‘ ‘ : : ‘ xlvii
The P.S. a reserved Document : . , . : . xl viii
Its general Value ‘ . ‘ : ‘ ‘ xlix
A Skeleton of the Scheme GE the Syston £ P ? 3 ‘ 1
Annotated Bibliography —. : ‘ : é : lit


vi PISTIS SOPHIA


TRANSLATION


DIVISION I.


THE FIRST BOOK OF PISTIS SOPHIA


Jesus hitherto instructeth his disciples only up to the regions of


the First Mystery
What the First Mystery sieeandeds
The regions of the great Invisible
The Treasury of the Light
The Light-world
Jesus and his disciples ate sense: on the NBane of Giives
A great light-power descendeth on vs
It surroundeth him entirely
Jesus ascendeth into heaven
The confusion of the powers and the erent eahquake
Jesus descendeth again
The nature of his glory
Jesus addresseth them.
He draweth his light unto fiitatelé
He promiseth to tell them all things :
How the Vesture of Light was sent unto him .
Of the souls of the disciples and their incarnation
Of the incarnation of John the Baptizer
That John was Elias in a former birth
Of his own incarnation through Mary . 3
Mote concerning the light-powers in the disciples
Why they should rejoice that the time of his investiture had come
he mystery of the five words on the vesture .
he solution thereof
he three robes of light .
he first vesture
he seoond vesture
he third vesture . 3
he day of ‘Come unto us’
Jesus putteth on his vesture
He entereth the firmament


Hadas


adore him
He entereth the first splierd


adore him
He entereth the seenndl sphete


adore him.
He entereth the zons

The powers of the zons ate seeed wad fall daida ind sdake him
Adamas and the tyrants fight against the light .

He taketh from them a third of their power

He changeth the motion of their spheres


The powers of the firmament ate amazed and fall down and
The powers of the first sphere are seared ane fall dow seich


The powers of the seoond sphere are Leneed tana fall den and


PAGE


OPP BRWWNHNNNP PF


CONTENTS


Mary Magdalene asketh and receiveth permission to speak

Marty interpreteth the discourse from the words of Isaiah ,

Jesus commendeth Mary. She further questioneth him on the
changing of the spheres

Jesus explaineth further the conversion of the gulieres

Philip questioneth Jesus . ‘

Why the path of the zons was change ;

Mary questioneth him again

The coming of Melchisedec. .

Of the fashioning of the souls of men .

The rulers devour their matter so that souls may not be fdhhesnat

Adamas and the tyrants fight against the light vesture . F

Jesus taketh from them a third of their power and changeth their

course .

hey no more have the poet ot deveutie their matter

he powers adore the light-vesture

he tyrants become as the dead . :

Jesus entereth the thirteenth zon and findeth Pistis. Sophia

Sophia and her fellow powers behold the light .

Marty desireth to hear the story of Sophia


Hac


THE STORY OF PISTIS SOPHIA


Sophia desireth to enter the Light-world

The rulers hate her for ceasing in their mystery

Self-willed uniteth himself with the rulers of the eae aeons sind
emanateth a lion-faced power to plague Sophia

Sophia taketh the lion-faced power of Self-willed on ie true
Light . ; :

She descendeth to the eis zeons and anes into aire finds .

The emanations of Self-willed squeeze the light-powers out of

Sophia.

The first repentance of Sophia.

Marty interpreteth the first repentance from Beatin ivi,

The second repentance of Sophia

Peter complaineth of Mary

Peter interpreteth the second fepeliance from Pistia ie

Jesus promiseth to perfect the disciples in all things

The third repentance of Sophia .

Martha asketh and receiveth permission to peal

Martha interpreteth the third repentance from Psalm lxix.

The fourth repentance of Sophia

John asketh and receiveth permission to speak.

John interpreteth the repentance from Psalm ci.

Jesus commendeth John . : : 3 : : 5

The emanations of Self-willed again squeeze the light out of

Sophia.

The fifth repentance of Baphin. é

Philip the scribe complaineth :

Jesus explaineth that the appointed peabeees are Philip and ‘Thomas aiid

Matthew

Marty interpreteth the sete of ear concerning the ie witnesses

Philip is now given permission to speak

Philip javenpreteth the fifth repentance from Psalm er


vil


PAGE


viii PISTIS SOPHIA


Philip is commended and continueth writing

The sixth repentance of Sophia . :

Andrew interpreteth the sixth repentance oe esiae CXxix.

Jesus commendeth Andrew. He promiseth that the tyrants shall be jidged
and consumed by the wise fire

Marty interpreteth the words of Jesus ; : ;

The repentance of Sophia is not yet aceesied: ‘Gig is mocked by

the zons

The seventh repentance of Sophia

Thomas interpreteth the seventh repentance fea fils xxiv

Jesus commendeth Thomas

Jesus leadeth Sophia to a less conkncd region, bint siehioue the

commandment of the First Mystery

The emanations of Self-willed cease for a time to oppress Sophia

The eighth repentance of Sophia ‘ .

The emanations of Self-willed oppress her again

She continueth her repentance

Matthew interpreteth the eighth repentance Gani Peale XXX.

Jesus commendeth Matthew and promiseth his disciples that fey
shall sit on thrones with him

Mary interpreteth the words of Jesus

The ninth repentance of Sophia .

James interpreteth the ninth repentance from Psalm Xxxiv. :

Jesus commendeth James and promiseth the first place unto the
disciples

Mary interpreteth she seis of Jesus

The repentance of Sophia is accepted. Jesus is sent to help het

The tenth repentance of Sophia .

Peter interpreteth the tenth repentance from Peale cxix.

Jesus commendeth Peter .

The eleventh repentance of Sophia

Salome interpreteth the eleventh repentance eon Pealnn li.

Jesus commendeth Salome

Self-willed aideth his emanations and thie? again oppress Sophia

The twelfth repentance of Sophia

Andrew interpreteth. the twelfth repentanee froin Pealtii cviil.

The thirteenth repentance of Sophia 7

Martha interpreteth the thirteenth repentance from ais 1.

Jesus sendeth forth a light-power to help Sophia

Sophia uttereth a song of praise .

Salome interpreteth the song of Sophia Gon the Odes of Salomon,

The power sent by Jen formeth a light-wreath on Sophia s
head i

Sophia uttereth another song oft ptaise .

Marty, his mother, asketh and receiveth permission to speak.

Marty, his mother, hain the song of ves from the sixth Ode oe
Solomon é i :

Jesus commendeth his othe

The commandment o! the First Myst stery is ‘fulfilled for king Soph.
entirely out of the chaos

The First Mystery and Jesus send “forth two light- beware to help
Sophia. .

Mary Magdalene intetpreteth ies myteey fori Psalm rise

Mary, the mother, further interpreteth the scripture


PAGE
61
61
62


63
63


64
64
67
68


69
70
70
71
71
73


74
74
75
78


81
81
81
83
83
84
84
85
86
86
87
90
92
93
93
94
95


96
97
97


98
98


98
98


99
100


CONTENTS


The story of the phantom spirit .

Of the Spiritual and material bodies na

The other Mary further interpreteth the same scene foun the bapesn
of Jesus

Mary, the mother, sain faithiee interpreteth ‘the same sculpture
from the meeting of herself with Elizabeth, mother of John the
Baptizer

Of the incarnation of ee


THE NOTE OF A SCRIBE


A note by a later hand, copied from another scripture.


DIVISION II.
SUPERSCRIPTION:


THE SECOND BOOK OF PISTIS SOPHIA


John further interpreteth the same scripture ;

Of Sabaoth, Barbelo, Yabradth and the light-vesture .

Gabriél and Michaél are summoned to help Pistis Sophia

The light-stream restoreth the light-powers to Sophia. ‘ <

The light-stream, Pate accomplished its purpose, departeth from

Spent ‘

Peter interpreteth the narrative Soa tie Odes ee Salaman ‘

The emanations of Self-willed cry aloud to him for help :

He sendeth forth another more violent power like unto a flyi ing

arrow . :

The fashioning of the serpet baltic inal dusees Bowe

The demon power of Adamas dasheth eee down .

Sophia again crieth to the Light .

Gabriel and Michaél and the light-stream again go to he ae

The transfiguration of Sophia : :

Jesus, the First Bel haa writhowe enaesth Sophia to

triumph 4 <

James interpreteth the narrative from Psalm xc.

Sophia singeth a song of praise .

Thomas interpreteth the song of Sophia from ane Odes of Sis aoe

Sophia singeth another song of praise

Matthew intetpretet the song of Sophia from fig Cee of Salman

Sophia continueth to sing

Maty is afraid of Peter F : ‘ é

Marty interpreteth the song of Sophia. from Psalm xxix.

Sophia continueth her song

Martha interpreteth from Psalm xxix.

Sophia oontinueth her song

Marty interpreteth from Psalm cii. ;
Sophia is led to a region below the higmecth zeon ea given a new

mystery
She continueth to sing


ix
PAGE
101
102


103


104
104


105


x PISTIS SOPHIA


Andrew interpreteth from Psalm xxxix.

The conversation of Sophia and the Light

The Light promiseth to seal the regions of Self- wilted.

How Sophia will know that the time of her final deliviseanicé hath
come .

What will come to pass at alae time

The time for the final deliverance of Sophia is éompleted :

Adamas sendeth forth two emanations of darkness to plague
Sophia.

Sophia again singeth a song to thé Light

James interpreteth the song from Psalm vii.

Sophia addresseth Adamas and his rulers

Sophia again singeth to the Light

Martha interpreteth the words of Sophia from Baan vil.

Jesus bringeth Sophia again to the thirteenth 2on

Sophia singeth the praises of the Light to her fellow-inv: igibles
Philip interpreteth the song from Psalm cvi.


END OF THE STORY OF PISTIS SOPHIA


Mary questioneth Jesus P

Of the glory of the four-and-twenty taebies ‘

Of the glory of the Fate .

Of the glory of the twelve ons .

Of the glory of the thirteenth 2on

Of the glory of the Midst.

Of the glory of the Right .

Of the glory of the Treasury

Of the glory of the Inheritance .

Marty again questioneth Jesus

Of the twelve saviours and their fovions in the Taheremice
Of the ascension of those of the Treasury into the Inheritance
Of their respective ranks in the kingdom

Of the powers of the Right and their emanation eee ascension
Of the powers of the Midst and their ascension

But this shall not take place till the consummation of the zon
Of the ascension of the souls of the perfect

Of the rank of the souls of the perfect .

Marty interpreteth the discourse from the scriptures

Of the last Helper .

That the regions beyond the Helpers are cddlcseaabi

Mary further questioneth Jesus .

Of the second Helper

Of the third, fourth and fifth Helpers

Mary again questioneth Jesus

Of those who receive the mystery in the: last loa:

John questioneth Jesus

Of the first Commandment

Of the first space .

Of the second space

Of the third space .

Of the Thrice-spirituals in die thitd space, i¢. ‘he ate space ‘E die
Ineffable i

Of the master-mystery


PAGE
139


CONTENTS


Of the gnosis of the master-mystery . ;

Of the gnosis of the mystery of the Ineffable .

The disciples lose courage F s ‘4 : ‘

Jesus explaineth that that mystery is really pee than all
mysteries

Of the rending asin sae emanation of ie Bowers BE the
universe :

Of those of the second apace of ine Taeabte ‘

Of those of the first space of the Ineffable

Jesus promiseth to explain further all in detail .

Of the mystery succinctly. :

Of the one and only word of the inetale :

Of the ascension of the soul of him who shall receive ihe one stad only

mystery

Of the rank of such a Saat

Such souls are one with the First Nees

Of the dignity of the thrones in the kingdom .

Of the gnosis of the word of the Ineffable

Of the distinction between the gnosis of the universe aad the
mysteries of the Light

Of the ascension of the souls oF ies ne teeaive ie Sieive
mysteries of the First Mystery

Mary again questioneth Jesus

Of the ee mysteries and five mysteries

Of the first mystery

Of the second mystery

Of its efficacy

Of the third mystery

Of its efficacy for the uninitiated

Of the three and five mysteries .

Of the mysteries of the three spaces. Fi

Of the reign of a thousand years of the Light .

What is a year of the Light

Of those of the first space in the tinedam of the doueand years

Of those of the second space

Of those of the third space, the first From wiciouk

Of the Books of Yew

Andrew questioneth Jesus

That the disciples and the powers are from the same interes

Of transcorporation and purification

Of the purifying mysteries ;

That all who are purified will be nn a :

That finally they will be higher than all péwes:

Jesus pardoneth the ignorance of Andrew


SUB-SCRIPTION:
A PORTION OF THE BOOKS OF THE SAVIOUR


xl
PAGE
73
176
81


82


83
183
186
88
88
89


89
191
92
93
94


94


96
97
97
98
198
99
200
200
201
201
202
203
203
204
204
205
206
206
207
208
209
209
210


xil PISTIS SOPHIA


DIVISION III.
THE CONCLUSION OF ANOTHER BOOK


Of the Limbs of the Ineffable
The Saviour is their treasury ‘
Of the dignity of those who have peceeA ree mysteries


A THIRD BOOK


Of the proclamation of the disciples

What men should renounce

The boundaries of the ways of the orilly

Unto whom are the mysteries of the Light to be given

The mysteries are for the forgiveness Be sins

Marty questioneth the Saviour

Of the soul of the righteous man acho hath not recened the mysteries
at death

John questioneth Jesus : ;

The disciples are to forgive many times seven times

Of the reward of the savers of souls

John continueth his questioning . .

That the mysteries shall be given aie: unto a fepentant beeches
even up to the three of the second space . -

The limit of the power of the disciples to aes sins .

A former saying explained

Of the master-mystery of the forgiveriess of sins

John continueth his questioning .

Further of the forgiveness of sins

John continueth his questioning .

Of pretenders who receive the mysteries

A former saying explained

Mary again questioneth Jesus é

How ie souls of those who have come out e the beatae may ba
helped by those on earth

Mary continueth her questioning

How he who possesseth the mysteries can come fa out vat the
body without suffering

Mary continueth her questioning

The mystery of the raising of the dead . ;

The disciples became frenzied at the sublimity of the prospect

How the disciples shall make eae

What mysteries they shall give é

The mystery of the raising of the dead not to be given to any

Of the constitution of man

Of the counterfeiting spirit é

The state of the sinful soul after death .

How a sinful soul is brought baok to birth

Of the ascension after death of the good soul that ‘hath econ
the mysteries .

Of the state after dei of one dhe hath Aeccivell the ap steties |
yet hath transgressed


PAGE
210
211
211


213
213
217
218
218
219


219
221
222
222
222


223
224
224
225
225
225
227
228
228
229


230
231


231
232
233
233
233
234
234
236
236
236
238


238


240


CONTENTS


The apology of the rulers of the ways of the midst
The apology of the rulers of the Fate %

Of the ascension of that soul into the Inheritance
Marty interpreteth from former sayings .

The piece of money which was brought unto Jesus
A saying of Paul

The foes of one’s own house

A former saying ooncerning rebirth

Mary continueth to question Jesus

Of the retributive servitors

How the soul of the sinner is stamped with ig: sins
How the baptisms purify sins

The separation of the portions by the enysiety of baptism
Marty interpreteth the same from a former saying
Mary further questioneth Jesus


Of the forgiveness of sins according to ha highée mysteries .


Marty interpreteth the same from the Psalm xxxi.


Of forgiveness even unto twelve times of those who have tecsivedl


the mysteries of the First Mystery . ;
Of such initiated who sin and die witbout repentance .


Of the unending forgiveness of those who have received the my: er at


the Ineffable . é
Of suoh initiated who sin and dic athanik pepentance,
Marty interpreteth the same from a former saying


Of the unending compassion of the great mysteries for the repentant


Of the unrepentant
Marty interpreteth from a een eine.


If even men on earth are compassionate, how ‘aie more thes die highest


mysteries?
Jesus trieth Peter .
Marty interpreteth the incident from a former ee


In the case of repentance only higher mysteries daa Hose pre-


viously received can remit sins


There is no limit to the number of igstarieg he faithful may


receive


The fate of the Sovitic KG annedk. is more eutble iA that of ihe


ignorant sinner
Marty interpreteth the same fom a formes saying
Of those who procrastinate, saying they have
before them .
Of the time of the completion .
Those who procrastinate are excluded oy he Light.
Their entreaties at the gates of the Light
Marty interpreteth the same


A FOURTH BOOK


Of the dragon of the outer darkness ,
Of the pulers of the twelve dungeons and tice: names
Of the doors of the dungeons

The angels who watch the doors.


many


births


xiii
PAGE
241
241
242
243
243
244
245
245
246
247
248
249
249
249
251
251
252


253
253


253
254
256
256
256
257


257
258
259


260
261


261
261


262
263
263
263
264


265
265
267
267


xiv PISTIS SOPHIA


What souls pass into the dragon, and how

The nature of the names of the dragon .

Of the severity of the chastisements of the dragon

Of the degrees of the fires of the chastisements

The disciples bewail the fate of sinners .

Mary further questioneth Jesus .

How to save the souls of the sinners

A summaty of the formule

Of the light-beams and light-streams

Mary pleadeth for those aie have neglected the mysteries
Of the efficacy of the names of the twelve angels

The souls who know the names escape and are taken to Yew
Of their subsequent fate .

Marty interpreteth the same from a focher sane

Of the light of the sun and the darkness of the dragon
Of the cup of forgetfulness < : Fi
Of the counterfeiting spirit

Of the fashioning of a new soul .

Of the inbreathing of the power .

Jesus promiseth to reveal all in detail

Of the light-power and the counterfeiting spirit

The parents we are to abandon .

Salome is in doubt.

Mary removeth the doubt of Salome

Of the charge given to the counterfeiting spirit

Of the charge given to the servitors

Of conception

Of the compulsion of Hie Barents

Of the process of gestation

Of the incarnation aoe the soul

Of the sealing of the plasm

Of the destiny

Of how a man cometh fy his dent

There is no escape from the destiny

Of the keys of the mysteries

The mysteries are all for men

A ptophecy of John the Baptizer

The criterion of orthodoxy

The Books of Yew

Few only will accomplish the mystery oF the First Mystery


No soul had entered into the Light before the coming of the Ficse


Mystery
Of the prophets
Of the patriarchs . :
Of the souls of the righteous a ‘Raia to ee
The disciples know of a surety that Jesus is the Great Taidiator


SUB-SCRIPTION:


A PORTION OF THE BOOKS OF THE SAVIOUR


PAGE
267
268
268
268
269
269
270
270
272
273
275
275
276
277
277
278
278
278
279
280
281
281
282
282
283
284
285
286
286
286
287
288
288
289
289
290
290
291
292
292


293
293
293
294
294


CONTENTS


DIVISION IV.


A FIFTH BOOK


The disciples gather round Jesus.
The invocation of Jesus é

The grouping of the disciples

The interpretation of ia0 .

He continueth to make invocation

The apocalypse of the heavens

The figures of the disk of the sun and in the moon

Jesus a the disciples are transported to the ways of the midst
Of the repentant and unrepentant rulers


Of the hierarchies of the unrepentant rulers and the names of icid five


regents ‘

Of the powers which Yew bend into fhe Ave fopehts
Of the functions of Zeus, the chief regent

The incorruptible names of the regents .

Marty questioneth Jesus on the ways of the midst

Of the mysteries which Jesus will give unto his disciples
Of the constitution of the ways of the midst

Of Paraplex

Of Yew and Miaichiseaee

How the demon tulers carry off souls

The chastisements of Parapléx

Of Ariouth the Athiopian

Of triple-faced Hekaté

Of Parhedron Typhon

Of Yachthanabas . :

The disciples beseech Jesus to have mercy ion sinners
Jesus encourageth his disciples

Jesus and his disciples ascend higher

He breatheth into their eyes

Their eyes are opened :

Jesus explaineth the vision of fire and water, and wine aed bleed
The same explained from former sayings

Jesus and his disciples descend to earth .


The mystic deine:

The invocation -

The rite is consummated . :

Directions as to the future use of the rite

Of three other mystic rites

Of the highest mysteries and of the poe name
Of the efficacy of that name


A SIXTH BOOK


Of the chastisement of the curser
Of the chastisement of the slanderer
Of the chastisement of the murderer
Peter protesteth against the women


Jesus promiseth to give them the mystery of the foiirente ot sins .


xv


WwW WW


Xvi PISTIS SOPHIA


Of the chastisement of the thief

Of the chastisement of the arrogant

Of the chastisement of the blasphemer

Of the chastisement of him who hath intercourse with males

Of the chastisement of a foul act of sorcery

Of the after-death state of the righteous man who hath not been
initiated

Of the cup of wisdom

A sinner suffereth for each separate sin

Even the greatest of sinners, if he repent, shall inherit the kingdom

Of the time favourable for the birth of those who shall find the
mysteries

The disciples beseech Jesus to have meroy upon them


A LATER POSTSCRIPT


The proclamation of the disciples


PAGE


318
319
320
321
322


322
323
323
324


324
324


325


PREFACE


IN the Introduction (pp. xxxv f.) to the first
edition (1896), the translator wrote:

“Tn presenting the following translation to the
English-reading public, I may say that I should
not have ventured on such an undertaking if any
Coptic scholar had undertaken the task, or I had
heard that such a task was contemplated. In a
matter of so great difficulty every possible liability
to error should be eliminated, and it stands to
reason that the translation of a translation must
needs be but an apology for a first-hand version.
Nevertheless I am not without predecessors.
The Coptic MS. itself is in the first place a trans-
lation, so that even Coptic scholars must give us the
version of a translation. I am persuaded also
that the anonymous and very imperfect French
translation (1856) in the Appendix to Migne’s
Dictionnaire des Apocryphes (vol. 1.) is made from
Schwartze’s Latin version (1851) and not from
the Coptic text. C. W. King in The Guostics and
their Remains (2nd ed., 1887) has also translated
a number of pages of the Pistis Sophia from
Schwartze. Some three or four years ago Mr.
Nutt, King’s publisher, sent out a notice proposing
the publication of the whole of King’s translation,


XVil


XV1ll PISTIS SOPHIA


but the project fell through. Last year (1895) I
offered to edit this translation of King’s, but was
informed that the literary legatee of the deceased
scholar was of the opinion that it would be unfair
to his memory to publish a MS. that was in so
incomplete a condition.

“Tn 1890 I had already translated Schwartze’s
Latin version into English and published pages
1 to 252, with comments, notes, etc., in magazine-
form from April 1890 to April 1891. But I
hesitated to put it forward in book-form, and
should not have done so, but for the appearance
of Amélineau’s French translation in 1895. I
then went over the whole again and checked it by
Amélineau’s version. I was further induced to
venture on this undertaking, because the narra-
tive, though dealing with mystical and therefore
obscure subjects, is in itself exceedingly simple,
and therefore mistakes cannot so readily creep in
as into a difficult philosophical work. I, there-
fore, present my translation with all hesitation,
but at the same time think that the English
public, which is steadily increasing its interest
in mysticism and allied subjects, will be better
satisfied with half a loaf than with no bread.”

A quarter of a century has rolled away; much
water has flowed under the bridges of scholarly
research whence the general stream of Gnostic-
ism has been surveyed with greater accuracy,
and much good work been done on the special
subject of the Coptic Gnostic documents. Though
the first edition of this book was quickly exhausted
and many requests were made for a second, I


PREFACE xix


had hitherto refused to accede to this demand,
still hoping that some English Cop tic scholar
would take the matter in hand. Indeed, at one
time I was in high expectation that this would
be achieved. Shortly before the War a friend,
whom I had interested in the work, completed a
version of the fine Untitled Apocalypse of the
Bruce Codex, and was next to have attempted a
translation of the P.S. But pressing interests
and activities of a totally different nature con-
nected with the War and its aftermath have
absorbed all my friend’s energies, and the version of
the P.S. has been definitely abandoned. Nor
can I hear of any other project of translation.
This being the case, and as the utility of even
a translation of a translation is evidenced by the
keen demand for the volume in the second-
hand market, I have at last decided to repeat
my venture.

Nevertheless a reprint of the first edition was
not to be thought of. Introduction and trans-
lation needed revision in the light of twenty-five
years’ further study of the work of specialists.
To this end the most valuable help, not to speak
of his long labours on the allied documents, is
afforded by Carl Schmidt’s admirable German
translation of the P.S. (1905).

Schwartze’s Latin translation was good for its
date (1851), and scholars still quote it to-day;
Amélineau’s French rendering (1895) was some-
what of an improvement; but Schmidt’s version
is unquestionably the best. I have therefore
revised my prior Englishing from the former


XX PISTIS SOPHIA


two by the finer work of the latter. Schmidt is
exceedingly careful throughout, and not only have
I taken his decision where Schwartze and
Ameélineau differ, but have generally preferred
him for consistency in phrasing. In my humble
opinion it will be long before we have a better
rendering than that of this ripe Coptic scholar.

But not only has the Translation been thor-
oughly revised; the Introduction has been
entirely rewritten and the Annotated Biblio-
graphy corrected and brought up to date. The
second edition is practically a new book.

The Schwartze-Petermann marginal pagination,
which is the usual scheme of reference, and which
in the first edition was shown in brackets in the
text, is now indicated at the side of the page.
I have also adopted Schmidt’s division into
chapters as an additional convenience for more
general reference, and have numbered the verses of
the Psalms and of the Odes of Solomon for
easier comparison with the Repentances and
Songs of Sophia. It should, of course, be under-
stood that the detailed paragraphing does not
exist in the original, which runs on for the most
part monotonously without break.

G.R. S. M.


KENSINGTON,
July 1921.


INTRODUCTION


THE unique MS. of the Coptic Gnostic document
commonly called ‘Pistis Sophia’ was bought
by the British Museum in 1785 from the heirs
of Dr. Askew, and is now catalogued as MS. Add.
5114. The title on the back of the modern
binding is ‘ Piste Sophia Coptice” On top of the
first page of the MS. is the signature ‘A. Askew,
M.D. On the first page of the binding is the
following note, probably in the hand of Woide, the
most famous Coptic scholar of those days and
Librarian of the Museum:

“Codex dialecti Superioris Aigypti, quam Sahi-
dicam seu Thebaidicarn vocant, cujus  titulus
exstat pagina 115: Pmeh snaou ntomos ntpiste
Sophia—Tomos secundus fidelis Sapientia—deest pagina
337-344.”

The title ‘ Piste Sophia’ is incorrect. Nowhere
is this form found in the very numerous instances
of the name in the text, and the hastily suggested
“emendation’ of Dulaurier and Renan to read
‘Piste Sophia’ thoughout has perforce recetved
no support.

Woide, in a letter to Michaelis (Bibliography, 4),
says that Askew bousht the MS. from a book-
seller (apparently in London); its previous


Xxi


The Askew
Codex.


The Scripts.


Xxil PISTIS SOPHIA


history is unknown. Crum informs us in an
official description (Bib. 46, p. 173) that at the
end of a copy in the B.M. of the sale-catalogue
of Askew’s MSS. is the entry: ‘Coptic MS.
£10. 10. 0., and that this refers presumably to
out Codex—a good bargain indeed !

The best descriptions of the MS. are by Schmidt
(Introd. to his Trans., Bib. 45, pp. xi f.), and
Crum (4c). The Codex is of parchment and
contains 178 leaves = 356 pages 4to (89/4 X 61/2 in.).
The writing is in two columns of from 30 to 34
lines each. There are 23 quires in all; but the
first has only 12 and the last 8 pages, of which
the last page is left blank. It is; as a whole,
in an exceptionally well-preserved state, only 8
leaves being missing (see ch. 143, end).

The writing as a whole is the work of two
scribes, whose entirely different hands are very
clearly distinguishable. The first (MS. pp. 1-22,
196-354) wrote a fine, careful, old uncial, and the
second (MS. pp. 23-195) in comparison a careless,
clumsy hand with signs of shakiness which S.
thinks might suggest the writing of an old man.
They used different inks and different methods
both of paging and correction, not to speak of
other peculiarities. These scribes must have been
contemporaries and divided the task of copying
fairly equally between them. So far Crum and
Schmidt are in complete agreement; they differ
only as to the handwriting of a note on MS.
p. 114, col. 2, of the superscription on p. 115
and of the last page (see pp. 105, 106 and 325
of Trans.).


INTRODUCTION XXill


From an external point of view the contents fall The Con-
into 4 main Divisions, generally referred to as “"*
Books i.-iv.

i. The first extends to the end of ch. 62, where
in the MS. more than a column and a half
has been left blank, and a short, but entirely
irrelevant, extract has been copied on to the
second column, presumably from some other
book of the general allied literature.

There is no title, either superscription or sub-
scription, to this Div. Why the second scribe
left a blank here in his copying is a puzzle, for
the text which follows on MS. p. 115 runs straight
on without a break of subject or incident.

ii. The next page is headed ‘The Second
Book (or Section) of Pistis Sophia.” Crum assigns
this superscription to the second hand, and the
short extract on the second column of the pre-
ceding page to the first. But Schmidt thinks
that both are later additions by another hand,
and this is borne out both by the colour of the ink
and also by the very important fact that the
older Coptic MSS. have the title at the end and
not at the beginning of a volume, conserving the
habit of the ancient roll-form. And as a matter
of fact we find at the bottom of MS. p. 233,
col. 1, the subscription: ‘ A Portion of the Books
(or Texts) of the Saviour’ (see end of ch. 100).

iit. There follows a short piece on the Gnosis
of the Ineffable (ch. 101), which is without any
setting and entirely breaks the order of sequence
of ideas and is the end of a larger whole. It is
clearly an extract from another ‘ Book.’


The Title.


XXIV PISTIS SOPHIA


After this again with ch. 102 we have a very
distinct change of subject, though not of setting,
from the ending of it, so that, in my opinion, it
is difficult to regard it as an immediate continua-
tion. Later, at ch. 126, occurs another abrupt
change of subject, though not of setting, preceded
by a lacuna in the text. At the end of ch. 135
(bottom of MS. p. 318, col. 1) we have again the
subscription: ‘A Portion of the Books of the
Saviout.’

iv. The last piece has no title, either superscrip-
tion or subscription. From the change of setting
in its introduction and the nature of its con-
tents it is generally assigned to an earlier phase
of the literature. Here again a complete change
of subject occurs with ch. 144, after a lacuna of
8 leaves. Finally, on the last page is an appendix,
somewhat in the style of the Mark-conclusion,
beginning quite abruptly in the middle of a
sentence and presumably part of a larger whole.
The contents, measurements and writing make
it almost certain that it formed no part of the
original copy. At the very end two lines sur-
rounded by ornamentation are erased. These
may have contained the names of the owner or
scribes, or possibly a general subscript title.

From the above indications and from a detailed
study of the contents it is evident that, though
the episode of the adventures of Pistis Sophia,
her tepentances and songs and their solutions
(chh. 30-64), occupy much space; it is by no
means the principal theme of the collection; it is
rather an incident. The blundering heading of a


INTRODUCTION XXV


later scribe, “The Second Book of Pistis Sophia,’
some two-thirds of the way through this episode,
has misled earlier scholars and set up the bad
habit of referring to the whole document as the
‘Pistis Sophia’—a habit it is now too late to
change. If there is any general title to be
derived from the MS. itself, it should be rather
‘A Portion’ or ‘Portions of the Books of the
Saviour. Whether this title can be made to
cover Div. iv. is an open question. In any case
we have before us extracts from a more extensive
literature which belonged to the same group,
and of which there were at least two strata.
The contents of the Askew Codex are thus a
collection or a miscellany, and not a single con-
sistent work. It is very difficult, therefore, to
distinguish the contents by any consistent nomen-
clature. I have followed the usual custom of
calling the whole ‘Pistis Sophia, and let Divv.
i. and i. stand as Books 1. and it, as is usually
done, though this is clearly improper, judged
from the point of view of contents. Thereafter
I have distinguished the extracts in Div. it. as
being from two different “Books’ (apart from the
short insertion at the beginning), and again those
in Div. iv. as being from two different ‘Books,’
these ‘Books’ meaning simply subdivisions of
or excerpts from larger wholes.

It seems highly probable that our scribes did
not do the extracting themselves, but found it
already done in the copy which lay before them.

The date of our MS. is undecided, owing to The Date
the difficulty of making exact judgments in %%°™*


Translated
from the
Greek.


Xxvi PISTIS SOPHIA


Coptic paleography. The general view assigns
it with Schmidt to the 5th century. It may be
noted that Woide (Bib. 3) assigned it to the 4th,
and Crum seems to agree with him. Hyvernat
(Bib. 21) suggests the 6th, and Wright (Bib. 16)
the 7th. Amelineau (Bib. 35) goes to a ridi-
culous extreme by placing it in the 9th or 10th
century, but his too radical views have been
severely criticized.

The Coptic of the P.S. is in pure Sahidic—that
is, the dialect of Upper Egypt,—preserving many
features of antiquity. It is, however, clearly not
the original language in which the extracts were
written. These, like the rest of the extant Coptic
Gnostic documents, were originally composed in
Greek. This is shown by the very large number of
Greek words, not only names, but substantives,
adjectives, verbs, adverbs, and even conjunctions,
left untranslated, on well-nigh every page, and
this applies to the O.T. and N.T. quotations
equally with the rest. The Schwartze-Petermann
Latin version preserves every Greek word through-
out untranslated, and Schmidt’s German trans-
lation invariably adds them in brackets. In
the P.S. a large number of abstract qualificative
general names of exalted super-zonic orders is
given, such as ‘Unapproachables,’ ‘Uncontain-
ables, which could not possibly be native to
Coptic diction. In a number of passages again,
where the translator had difficulty, he slavishly
follows the Greek construction. Frequently also
he gives alternative renderings. The fact of
translation from the Greek is well-nigh universally


INTRODUCTION XXVil


acknowledged; and indeed we now possess de-
cisive objective proof, for one of the documents
in the Berlin Codex, which presents identical
linguistic phenomena, lay before Irenzus in its
Greek original form (Bib. 47). Nevertheless
Granger (Bib. 44) and Scott-Moncrieff (Bib. 56)
have questioned this fact of translation, and
quite recently Rendel Harris (Bib. 60), after
accepting the general consensus of opinion (Bib.
49), has changed his mind and thinks that the
matter should be reinvestigated. None of these
scholars, however, has set forth any objective
grounds for his opinion. It is difficult to believe
that anyone who has laboured through the
versions line by line and word by word can have
the slightest doubt on the matter. The whole
style of the work is foreign to the Coptic idiom,
as may be seen from Amélineau’s Introduction to
his French version (Bib. 85), where he writes (p. x):
“Whoever has any knowledge of the Coptic
language knows that this idiom is foreign to long
sentences; that it is a tongue eminently analytic
and by no means synthetic; that its sentences
are composed of small clauses exceedingly precise,
and almost independent of each other. Of course
all Coptic authors are not equally easy, some of
them are even exceedingly difficult to understand;
but this much is certain, that. never under any
circumstances in Coptic do we come across those
periods with complicated incidental sentences,
of three or four different clauses, whose elements
are synthetically united together so that the
sense of the entire sentence cannot. be grasped


XXVHl PISTIS SOPHIA


before we atrive at the last clause. Nevertheless,
this is just what the reader meets with in this
work. The sentences are so entangled with
incidental and complicated propositions, that
often, indeed very often, the Coptic translator
has lost the thread, so to say, and made main
propositions out of incidental clauses. . . . The
one thing that it conclusively proves is that
the book was originally written in a learned
language.”

Ameélineau makes rather too much of the
abstruse nature of the subject; for, though many
passages are transcendental or mystical, neverthe-
less the whole is conceived in a narrative or descrip-
tive style. There is no attempt at philosophical
argument, no really involved logical propositions.
We may then take it as sufficiently established
that Greek originals underlay the whole contents
of the Askew Codex. It is on this basis at any
rate that rests every methodical attempt which
has hitherto been made to determine the most
probable place and date of origin and to discover
the school or circle to which the P .S. miscellany
can be referred.

Originals Amid much else that is uncertain no one has


composed


inEgypt. Questioned that the immediate place of origin


must be sought in an Egyptian environment. In
other words, the ‘ Books’ of the miscellany were
all composed or compiled in Egypt, though
where precisely it is impossible to conjecture.
But the clearly Egyptian elements are not the
more numerous; moreover, they do not seem to
be the most fundamental, but are blended with, or


INTRODUCTION XXix


rather superimposed upon, others which clearly
did not originate in Egypt.

The date of composition is a difficult problem,
and is bound up with the more puzzling question
of the sect to which the PS. literature should be
asctibed. There is as yet no certainty; it is
a matter of cumulative probabilities at best.

The earlier view ascribed. the P.S. to Valen-
tinus, who died probably about the middle of the
2nd century, or a decade later, or alternatively
to an adherent of the Valentinian school. We
may call it the 2nd-century theory. A succession
of scholars were of this opinion, among whom
may be mentioned Woide, Jablonski, La Croze,
Dulaurier, Schwartze, Renan, Revillout, Usener
and Amélineau. This earlier view can hardly
be said to have been supported by any great
show of detailed argument, except by the French
Egyptologist and Coptic scholar Amélineau, who
was its most stalwart supporter. Seven years prior
to his translation of P.S. in 1895, Amelineau
devoted 156 pp. of a voluminous essay (Bib. 19),
in which he sought to prove the Egyptian origins
of Gnosticism—a general thesis which can hardly
be maintained in the light of more recent research,
—to a comparison of the system of Valentinus
with that of the P.S.

Meantime in Germany, shortly after the appear-
ance of Schwartze’s Latin version in 1851, the
careful analysis of the system of the P.S. by
Ko6stlin in 1854 gave rise to or confirmed another
view. It abandoned the Valentinian origin, and
pronounced generally in favour of what may be


Date: The
2nd-century
Theory.


The
3rd-century
Theory.


XXX PISTIS SOPHIA


called an ‘ Ophitic’ derivation. Kostlin placed
the date of the P.S. in the 1st half of the 3rd cen-
tury, and Lipsius (Bib. 15) and Jacobi (Bib. 17)
accepted his finding. We may call this alterna-
tive general view the. Srd-century theory.

In 1891 Harnack, accepting Kostlin’s analysis
of the system, attacked the problem from another
point of view, basing himself chiefly on the use of
scripture, as shown in the quotations from the
O.T. and N.T., and on the place of the doctrinal
ideas and stage of the sacramental practices in
the general history of the development of Chris-
tian dogma and rites. He pointed out also one
or two other vague indications, such as a reference
to persecution, from which he concluded that it
was written at a date when the Christians were
‘lawfully’ persecuted. These considerations led
him to assign the most probable date of composi-
tion to the 3nd half of the 3rd century. Schmidt
in 1892 accepted this judgment, with the modifi-
cation, however, that Div. iv. belonged to an older
stratum of the literature, and should therefore
be placed in the 1st half of the century. This
general view has been widely adopted as the more
probable. In Germany it has been accepted by
such well-known specialists as Bousset, Preuschen
and Liechtenhan; and in France by De Faye.
Among English scholars may be mentioned chiefly
E. F. Scott, Scott-Moncrieff and Moffat.

The only recent attempt to return to the earlier
2nd-century view is that of Legge in 1915 (Bib. 57),
who roundly plumps for Valentinus as the author.
In order to do this he thinks it necessary first of


INTRODUCTION Xxx


all to get out of the way Harnack’s parallels in
P.S. with the fourth gospel. They may just as
well, he contends, be compilations from the synop-
tics. One clear parallel only can be adduced,
and this may be due to a common source. I am
not convinced by this criticism; nor do I think
it germane to Legge’s general contention, for
it is precisely in Valentinian circles that the
fourth gospel first emerges in history. In the
Introduction to the first editjon of the present
work I registered my adhesion to the Valentinian
hypothesis, but, as I now think, somewhat too
precipitously. On general grounds the 3rd-cen-
tury theory seems to me now the more probable;
but, even if Harnack’s arguments as a whole hold,
I see no decisive reason why the P.S. may not
equally well fall within the 1st half as within the
2nd half of the century.

The question of the sect or even grouping to
which the P.S. literature should be assigned is
still more difficult. To call it ‘Ophitic’ is
nebulous at best. Ophitism in Gnosticism 1s ill-
defined, if not chaotic, owing to the confusing
indications of the Church Fathers. They called
Ophitic or classed as Ophitic very different sects
who never used the name for themselves. It
ought to mean people either who worshipped the
serpent or in whose symbolism or mythology the
serpent played the most characteristic or dom-
inant ro. But most of what we are told of the
views and doctrines of circles directly referred
to under this opprobrious designation (as it is
clearly intended to be by the heresiologists) and


The
“Ophitic’
Background.


Three vague
; 2
Pointers.


XXxll PISTIS SOPHIA


of those brought into close connection with them,
has not the slightest reference to what by hypo-
thesis should have been their chief cult-symbol.
Sed et serpens 1s conspicuous by its absence. All
that we can legitimately say is that along this
confused line of heredity we have to push back
our researches in any endeavour to discover the
earliest developments of Gnosticism in Christian
circles. These took place unquestionably first
on Syrian ground, and doubtless had already a
long heredity behind them, former phases of
syncretism, blendings of Babylonian, Persian,
Semitic and other elements. The ‘ Ophitic’
elements in P.S. are of Syrian origin, but de-
veloped on Egyptian soil. If there is also a slight
Hellenistic tinging, it is not of a philosophizing
nature.

Can we, however, find any indications in the
P.S. which might be thought to direct us whither
to search in the jumble of sects which the chief
heresiological Fathers bring into an ‘ Ophitic’
connection? There are three vague pointers:
(1) Philip is declared pre-eminently (chh. 22, 42)
to be the scribe of all the deeds and discourses of
the Saviour, but with him are associated Thomas
and Matthew (ch. 48); (2) in Div. wt. Mary
Magdalene stands forth as the chief questioner,
no less than 39 of the 42 questions being put in
her mouth; (3) in Div. iv. a foul act of obscene
sorcery is condemned as the most heinous of
all sins (ch. 147).

Now, Epiphanius (writing about 374-377 A.D.)
groups together certain sects under the names


INTRODUCTION XXxiii


Nicolaltans, Gnostics, Ophites, Cainites, Sethians
and Archontics; these possessed a rich apoca-
lyptic literature. Among the titles of their
books reference is made to a Gospel of Philip
(Her, xxvi. 13) and Questions of Mary, both
The Great and The Little (ib. 8). A quotation
is given from the former, and several from the
latter. But in both cases they are of an obscene
nature and have clearly nothing whatever to to
with P.S. in any way. It is true that the more
abundant quotations are from The Great Oues-
tions, and this has led Harnack and others to
assume that The Little Questions may have been
of a different and even ascetic character. But
Epiphanius classes the two writings together
without distinction; and even if the _ title
Questions of Mary could be legitimately given to
part of the contents of P.S., surely these would
be more appropriately styled The Great and not
The Little Questions? Finally, the document
from which Epiphanius quotes belongs to a
differint type of setting. Mary questions apart,
is alone with Jesus. She is not with the rest of
the disciples, as in the P.S.

In describing these sects Epiphanius repeatedly
dwells on certain unspeakably foul rites and
practices which he would have us believe were
widely spread among them. P.S. condemns with
even greater severity a similar obscene abomi-
nation, introducing this stern reprobation with
the solemn words, the only instance of such an
outbreak in the whole narrative: “Jesus was
wroth with the world in that hour and said unto


The liber-
tinist Sects
of Epi-
phanius.


The


Severians.


XXXIV PISTIS SOPHIA


Thomas: ‘ Amén, I say unto you: This sin is more
heinous than all sins and all  iniquities.’”
There is, however, no indication that in the
experience of the writers of the P.S. such a prac-
tice was widespread; on the contrary, it would
seem for them to have been a rare occurrence—
indeed, the most horrible thing of which they had
ever heard. If Epiphanius is to be relied on
here, it is vain to look for the Gnostics of the PS.
in such an environment. But Epiphanius has no
great reputation for accuracy in general, and it
is very difficult to believe in such widespread
iniquity of so loathsome a nature. In any case
he is writing at a later date. Liechtenhan’s
hypothesis (Bib. 41), that a certain common
body of literature was rewritten—on the one hand
to serve libertinist propensities, and on the other
in the interest of ascetic tendencies,—though more
ot less accepted by Harnack, seems to me to be
too facile a generalization to meet the special
difficulty with which we are confronted.  Ept-
phanius in his youth had certain unfortunate
experiences with the adherents of a libertinist sect
in Egypt, and the moral shock it gave him seems
to have warped his judgment as a historian in
this part of his work; it led him to collect every
scrap of evidence of obscenity he could lay
hands on and every gross scandal that had come
to his ears, and freely to generalize therefrom.

Into relation with the above-mentioned Epi-
phanian group of names Schmidt brings the
ascetic Severians; these, according to our heresio-
logist (xlv.), still in his own day maintained a


INTRODUCTION XXXV


miserable existence in the upper Thebaid. To
them S. would specifically refer the PS. But,
in my opinion, it is very difficult indeed to fit in
what Epiphanius tells us so sketchily of these
people, however skilfully it is analyzed, with the
main doctrines and practices in the PS.

With nothing but Patristic indications before
us, no matter what pains are taken to submit
them to microscopic critical inspection, it seems
impossible to place the P.S. precisely. But our
Codex does not stand in isolation as the only
directly known Christian Gnostic document—that
is to say, as coming straight from the hands of the
Gnostics themselves, though by way of trans-
lation. We have first of all the two MSS. of the
Bruce Codex in the Bodleian, Oxford. One of
these, The Book of the Great Logos according to
the Mystery, is closely connected with the litera-
ture from which the P.S. miscellany is excerpted,
especially with Div. iv. We can say with a high
degree of conndence that it belonged to the same
tradition, though whether to an earlier or later
stratum is not quite decided. There are, however,
no indications in it which will further help us as
to date or name of sect. The second MS., a
lofty apocalypse, which unfortunately bears no
title, is of another line; of tradition or type of
interest. Schmidt. in the Introduction to his
translation (p. xxvi, Bib. 45), thinks he can refer
it with certainty to the Sethian-Archontic group,
placing it in the 1st half of the Srd century, in-
stead of, as previously (Bib. 28), in the last
quarter of the 2nd. His reason for this change


The Bruce
Codex.


The Berlin
Codex.


XXXV1 PISTIS SOPHIA


of view may be seen from the following obser-
vations, which introduce us to the third extant,
but unpublished, collection of Coptic Gnostic
works.

On July 16, 1896, Schmidt surprised and de-
lighted students of Gnosticism by reporting, at a
sitting of the Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences,
on the contents of a precious Coptic Gnostic
Codex which had in January of the same year
been procured by Dr Reinhardt at Cairo from a
dealer in antiquities from Akhmim, and is now
in the safe custody of the Berlin Egyptian
Museum (Sztzungsberichte d. k. p. Akad. d. Wis-
sensch. xu Berlin, xxxvi). This notice and a more
detailed study of one of the treatises by S. in 1907
(Bib. 47) give us all the information we possess
so far concerning this very important Codex.
In 1900 I summarized S.’s first notice in the first
edition of my Fragments of a Faith Forgotten
(pp. 579-592). The Codex consists mainly of
three original Greek Gnostic works in Coptic
translation: (1) The Gospel of Mary; (2) The
Apocryphon of John; (3) The Wisdom of Jesus
Christ. At the end there is an extract from The
Alets of Peter, which are also of Gnostic origin,
setting forth an episode from the healing wonders
of the Apostle.

The Gospel of Mary relates visions of John and
Mary Magdalene, but Schmidt gives us none of
their contents. He is equally reserved as to the
contents of The Wisdom of Jesus Christ, giving
only the introduction. After the resurrection
the twelve disciples and seven women-disciples


INTRODUCTION XXXVIi


of Jesus go into Galilee to a certain mountain
(as in Div. iv. of P.S.). To them Jesus appears
as a great angel of light and bids them lay all
their questions before him. The disciples bring
forward their questions and receive the desired
replies. Schmidt must have told Harnack more
about the contents, for in an appendix to the
report, the latter ventures on the suggestion
that it may possibly be found that this treatise
is the lost book of Valentinus referred to under
the title of Wasdom.

It is the second treatise, Ihe Apocryphon of
John, to which S. devotes most of his attention
in both the papers to which we are referring, the
titles of which are respectively, “A Pre-irenzic
Gnostic Original Work in Coptic’ and ‘ Irenzeus
and his Source in Ad. Her. i. 29, S. proves
beyond a shadow of doubt that the Greek original
of this Gnostic apocryphon lay before Irenzeus
(c. 190 A.D.), and that the Church Father’s method
of quotation and summarizing is, to say the least
of it, misleading, for it practically makes nonsense
of what is by no means absurd. The treatise tells
us much of interest concerning the part played by
Barbelo, ‘the perfect Power,’ ‘the Zon per-
fect in glory’; the system is of the philosophized
type and by no means inconsistent. Hitherto
the clumsy treatment of it by Irenreus has been
generally referred to as descriptive of the tenets
of the Barbelo-Gnostics, and to them Scott (Bib.
54) and Moffat (Bib. 58) have sought variously
to ascribe the P.S. These Gnostics are brought
by Irenzus into a confused relationship with


The so-
called
Barbelo-
Gnostics.


The


Seth-


jans.


The


present


Position of


the I


Enquiry.


XXXVIil PISTIS SOPHIA


some of the sects of the group on which Epi-
phanius two centuries later animadverted so
severely.

Schmidt, however, has shown that the docu-
ment in question belongs immediately to the
literature of the Sethians, to whom also he now
asctibes the Untitled Apocalypse of the Bruce
Codex. The <Apocryphon of John is clearly im-
bued with a very similar spirit of philosophizing to
that of the Valentinian school, and Schmidt
promises to compare the two systems in detail,
so as to determine their relationship, when he
publishes his translation of these new documents,
which are of so great importance for the history of
the Christianized Gnosis.

What precise light the publication of Schmidt’s
labours will throw, directly or indirectly, on the
puzzling question of the exact placing of the P.S.
literature, we must wait to see; it is highly
probable, however, that it will throw some light
on its problems. But from what we glean so far
from the above indications it may be again
suggested that, though the Valentinian hypothesis
will have to be definitely abandoned, there seems
nothing to compel us to lean to the 2nd rather
than to the 1st half of the 3rd century for the date.
Here the view of Lipsius (Bib. 20) and Bousset
(Bib. 48), that similar features in the P.S. and
the religion of Mani are in a more primitive form
in the former than in the latter, has to be con-
sidered. Manicheism emerged somewhere about
265 A.D., but it is very difficult to say what was
its precise original form. The similarities in the


INTRODUCTION XXXix


two systems may of course be due to their coming
from a common soutce.

What is certain is that we have in the contents
of the Askew, Bruce and Berlin Codices a rich
material which hands on to us valuable direct
information concerning what I have called ‘The
Gnosis according to its Friends,’ in distinc-
tion from what previously used to be our only
sources, the polemical writings of the heresiological
Fathers, which set forth “The Gnosis according to
its Foes.’ We have thus at last a new standpoint
from which to review the subject, and therewith
the opportunity of revising our impressions in a
number of respects; a considerably different
angle of vision must needs change the perspective
of no little in the picture.

The chief business or interest of the orthodox
Fathers was to select and stress what appeared
to them to be the most bizarre points and ele-
ments, all that was most absurd in their judg-
ment, in the many Gnostic systems, and of course,
and rightly, everything that could be thought to
be ethically reprehensible. Good, bad and in-
different were only too frequently lumped together.
It was of no interest to this polemic to mention
similarities in belief and practice between the
heretics and their opponents, to dwell on the lofty
faith of numbers of these Gnostics in the trans-
cendent excellence and overmastering glory of the
Saviour, or on many signs of spiritual inwardness,
and especially of high virtue, in which they were
at the least not less scrupulous than their critics.
Doubtless there were sects and groups whose tenets


The new
and the old
Perspective
in Gnostic
Studies


The Ministry
of the First
Mystery..


xl PISTIS SOPHIA


were absurd at any valuation, and some whose
laxity of ethics demanded severe reprobation. But
the majority could not be accused on the score of
moral delinquency, indeed no few were rigidly
ascetic; and some of their speculations again have
a sublimity of their own, and in a number of cases
anticipated Catholic dogma. If we turn to our
direct sources in Coptic translation, we find that
the ethic is admirable, even if we ate averse from
over-asceticism in the religious life, and that
their whole-souled devotion to and worship of the
Saviour is unbounded.

It is no part of the plan of this translation to
attempt anything in the nature of a commentary.
That would mean a second volume, and would in
any case be an unsatisfactory performance; for
much would still remain obscure, even if every
ray of light shed on this or that special point by
those who have most deeply studied the subject,
were gathered together. One or two very general
remarks, however, may be ventured.

In the P.S. Jesus is everywhere pre-eminent
and central. He is here revealed as Saviour and
First Mystery, who knows all and unveils all,
infinite in compassion. As such he is pre-exis-
tent from eternity, and his ministry is not only
earthly, but cosmic and supercosmic; indeed, it
is the chief feature in the divine economy. Yet
nowhere is he called the Christ. If this is inten-
tional, no reason seems to be assignable for such
an abstention. There is no sign of antagonism
to Judaism or to the O.T. On the contrary, the
psalms and other utterances which are quoted,


INTRODUCTION xli


are validated by the theory that it was the Power
of the Saviour which so prophesied of old through
the mouth of a David, a Solomon, or an Isaiah.

The whole setting is post-resurrectional. In
Divv. i-iti. Jesus has already, for eleven years
after the crucifixion, been instructing his dis-
ciples, men and women, in the Gnosis. The
scene now depicts the disciples as gathered round
the Saviour on the Mount of Olives on earth.
The range and scope of this prior teaching may be
seen in Div. tv., where the introductory words
speak of it as taking place simply after the cruci-
fixion. In this stratum the scene is different.
The sacramental rite is solemnized on earth; it
takes place, however, on the Mount of Galilee and
not on the Mount of Olives. But the scene is
not confined to earth only, for the disciples are
also taken into some of the regions of the invisible
world, above and below, have vision there con-
ferred upon them, and are instructed on its mean-
ing. Now in Divv. 1.-iti. Jesus promises to take
the disciples into the spheres and heavens for the
direct showing of their nature and quality and
inhabitants, but there is no fulfilment of this
promise in the excerpts we have from “The Books
of the Saviour. It is not to be supposed, how-
ever, that Div. tv. is part of the fulfilment of the
high promise made in the prior extracts; for in
it we move in an earlier phase of the instruction
and in an atmosphere of lesser mysteries than
those indicated in the preceding part.

Divv. 1.-iit. throughout proclaim the revelation
of higher mysteries. This is only now made


The post-
resurrec-
tional
Setting.


The higher
Revelation
within this
Setting.


The Zon-
lore.


xlii PISTIS SOPHIA


possible by the supremely joyous fact that in
the twelfth year of the inner-teaching-ministry
a great, if not supreme, moment in the life of the
Saviour has been accomplished: his earthly
ministry is now achieved, and he is invested with
the full radiance of his triple robe of glory,
which embraces the whole powers of the universe.
He ascends into heaven in dazzling light which
blinds the disciples. After thirty hours he re-
turns again, and in compassion withdraws his
blinding splendour, so as to give his final teaching
to his faithful in his familiar form. This means
that ‘The Books of the Saviour’ purport to
contain not only a post-resurrectional teaching,
and therefore a Gnostic revelation supplementary
to the public preaching before the crucifixion,
but also a still higher and more intimate unveiling
within the post-resurrectional instruction already
current in the tradition. If there had been
apocalyptic elements and visions in the prior
literature, there were to be still more transcen-
dental revelations now on the completion of
the ministry. Until the investiture, or rather
reinvestiture, had taken place according to the
divine command, it had not been possible for the
Saviour to speak in utter openness face to face
on all things; now it is possible. Such is the
convention.

In Divv. 1-tii. there is presupposed throughout
a system of zons and the rest, which is already
highly complex and shows manifest signs of con-
sisting of stages once severally at the summit of
earlier systems, but now successively subordin-


INTRODUCTION xliti


ated. It is clear then that, if still loftier hier-
archies are to be brought on to the stage, it can
only be by again reducing what had previously
been regarded as ‘the end of all ends’ to a sub-
ordinate position. ‘This is the method adopted,
and we lose ourselves in the recital of the designa-
tions and attributes of ever more transcendental
beings and spaces and mysteries.

In all of this, however, there is no sign of
interest in metaphysical specuation; there is
no philosophizing. It is then not any element of
Hellenic thought proper in the zonology, which
is said to have been so strongly the case with the
teaching of Valentinus himself, that has led so
many to conjecture a Valentinian derivation.
It is rather the long episode of the sorrowing
Sophia which has influenced them. This episode
reflects on a lower level of the cosmic scale some-
what of the motif of the ‘tragic myth’ of the
world-soul, the invention of which is generally
asctibed to Valentinus himself, though he may
possibly have transformed or worked up already
existing materials or notions. It is this long
Sophia episode and its skilfully inverted mystical
exegesis and allegorical interpretation, following
the methods developed by Alexandrine contem-
platives, which has produced the impression on
many that it was of fundamental importance for
the system of the P 5S.

It is certainly an indication of the deep interest
of the circle in repentance and the penitential
psalms. But the interest is here ethical rather
than cosmological. Pistis Sophia would seem to


The Sophia
Episode.


The ethical
Interest.


The Mys-


teties.


xliv PISTIS SOPHIA


be intended to represent the type of the faithful
repentant individual soul. Throughout, the chief
interest is in salvation and redemption. This is
to be acquired by repentance and by renuncia-
tion of the world, its lures and cares, but above
all by faith in the Saviour, the Divine Light,
and his mysteries. The first requisite is sincere
repentance. The chief topic round which all the
ethical teaching naturally centres, is sin, its
cause and its purification, and the revelation of
the mystery of the forgiveness of sins and of
the infinite compassion of the First Mystery.
Though there is very much also concerning the
complex schematology of the invisible worlds
and the hierarchies of being, much concerning
the soul and its origin, of how it comes to
birth and departs from earth-life, much of the
light-power, the spiritual element in man,—all is
subordinated to the ethical interest in the first
place, and in the second to the efficacy of the high
mysteries of salvation.

The whole is set forth in terms of these mys-
teties, which are now conceived in a far more vital
way than was apparently the case in the earlier
literature. On the lower side the mysteries still
in some respects keep in touch with the tradition
of words-of-power, authentic and incorruptible
names, and so forth, though there is little of this
specifically in Divv. 1-1. But it is evidently
intended that the higher mysteries should now
be conceived in the light of the fact that the
Saviour himself is in himself concretely the First
Mystery and indeed the Last Mystery, and that


INTRODUCTION xlv


the mysteries are not so much spiritual powers
as substantive beings of transcendent excellence.
The light-robe is a mystery of mysteries, and they
who have received of the high mysteries become
light-streams in passing from the body. ‘The
mysteries are closely intertwined with the lore of
the glory and its modes.

One of the main elements in the lower sche-
matology is the ancient astral lore, those ground-
conceptions of sidereal religion which dominated
the thought of the times and upheld their sway
directly and indirectly for long centuries after.
But here again our Gnostics, while retaining the
schematology for certain purposes, placed it low
in the scale. Moreover, while not denying that
previously there was truth even in the astro-
logical art, they reduced the chances of the
horoscope-casters to zero, by declaring that the
Saviour in the accomplishment of his cosmic
ministry had now drastically changed the revolu-
tion of the spheres, so that henceforth no calcu-
lations could be counted on; these were now of
no more value than the spinning of a coin.

Our Gnostics were also transmigrationists;
transcorporation formed an integral part of their
system. They found no difficulty in fitting it into
their plan of. salvation, which shows no sign of
the expectation of an immediate end of all things
—that prime article of faith of the earliest days.
So far from thinking that reincarnation is alien to
gospel-teaching, they elaborately interpret certain
of the most striking sayings in this sense, and
give graphic details of how Jesus, as the First


The astral
Lore.


Trans-
corporation.


The magical
Element.


xlvi PISTIS SOPHIA


Mystery, brought to rebirth the souls of John the
Baptizer and of the disciples, and supervized the
economy of his own incarnation. In this respect
the P.S. offers richer material for those interested
in this ancient and widespread doctrine than can
be found in any other old-world document in the
West.

A far more distressingly puzzling immixture is
the element of magic. In Div. tv. especially there
are invocations and many names which resemble
those found in the Greek magical papyri and
other scattered sources. But no one has so far
thrown any clear light on this most difficult
subject of research in general, much less on its
relation to the P.S. It is evident that the writers
of Div. iv. and of the first treatise of the Bruce
Codex set a high value on such formule and on
authentic names; nor are these entirely absent
from the excerpts from ‘'The Books of the Saviour,’
as witness the five words written on the light-
robe. Our Gnostics unquestionably believed in a
high magic, and were not averse from finding in
what was presumably its most reputable tradition,
material which they considered to be germane to
their purpose. In this tradition there must have
been a supreme personage possessing character-
istics that could be brought into close connection
with their ideal of the Saviour, for they equate a
certain Aberamentho with him. The name occurs
once ot twice elsewhere; but who or what it
suggested, we do not know. In any case, as
they utilized and attempted to sublimate so
much else which was considered by many in those


INTRODUCTION xvii


days to be most venerable, in order that they
might the more extend and exalt the glory of
the Saviour and take up into it what they con-
sidered the best of everything, so did they with
what was presumably the highest they could find
in the hoary tradition of magical power, which
had enjoyed empery for so long in the antique
world and still continued to maintain itself even in
relicio-philosophical circles, where we should, from
the modern standpoint, least expect to find it.

As to the setting of the narrative—if we had
not such an abundance of mstances of pseudo-
historic and pseudo-epigraphic  scripture-writing,
if this were not, so to speak, the commonplace,
not only of apocryphal and apocalyptic literature,
but also of no little that falls within the borders
of canonical sanction, we might be more surprized
than we are at the form in which the composers
or compilers have framed their work. It is clear
that they loved and worshipped Jesus with an
ecstasy of devotion and exaltation; they do not
fall short in this of the greatest of his lovers.
What sort of authority, then, could they have
supposed they had for conceiving the setting
of their narrative in the way they have?

Objective physical history, in the rigid sense
in which we understand it to-day, was of second-
ary interest to them, to say the least; indeed, it
was apparently of little moment to the Gnostics
of any school, and their opponents were not in-
frequently rowing in the same boat. The Gnos-
tics were, however, less disingenuous; they
strenuously declared their belief in continued


History
and psychic
Story


The P.S. a
reserved
Document.


xviii PISTIS SOPHIA


revelation, they delighted in apocalyptic and in
psychic story. The belief in a post-resurrectional
teaching had doubtless existed for long in many
forms in Gnostic circles. It must have been
widespread; for, as shown by Schmidt quite
recently (Bib. 59), a Catholic writer in Asia Minor
found himself compelled to steal the fire of the
Gnostics and adopt the same convention in an
orthodox document that was intended to be a
polemic against Gnostic ideas, somewhere in the
3rd quarter of the 2nd century. However they
arrived at their conviction, it seems highly prob-
able that the writers of the P.S. must have sin-
cerely believed they had high authority for their
proceeding, and were in some way emboldened
by ‘inspiration’ to carry out their task. As far
as they were concerned, they do not by any
means seem conscious of belonging to a decadent
movement or of deterioration in the quality of
the ideas they were attempting to set forth, as
so many modern critics would have it. On the
contrary, they thought they were depositories or
recipients of profound mysteries never hitherto
revealed, and that by a knowledge of these
mysteries they could the more efficiently evan-
gelize the world.

It is evident, however, that the P.S. was never
intended to be circulated as a public gospel.
Certain things are to be preached or proclaimed
to the world, but only certain things. Certain
mysteries, again, the recipients were to bestow
under certain conditions, but others were to be
reserved. The ‘Books of the Saviour’ are, there-


INTRODUCTION xlix


fore, to be regarded as apocrypha in the original
sense of the word—that is, ‘withdrawn’ or
‘reserved’ writings. As such they fell within
the proscriptions of artificial secrecy common to
all the initiatory institutions of the time and of
all time. And artificial secrecy can with diffi-
culty, if ever, avoid the moral and intellectual
hazard of its innate obscurations. ‘The P.S. was
intended for already initiated disciples, for chosen
learners, though no pledge of secrecy is men-
tioned. It was intended, above all, for would-be
apostles, for those who should go forth to pro-
claim what was for them the best of good news;
it is clearly the inner instruction of a zealously
propagandist sect.

If ‘The Books of the Saviour’ in their full tts general
original form—for in the extant P.S. we have but a
selections from them and the formule of the
higher mysteries are omitted,—and if what is given
of the lower mysteries in Div. tv. were held back
from public perusal owing partly at least to the
fear of the unworthy making improper use of
them, there is little danger to-day on this score,
for this part of the miscellany remains so far the
most securely incomprehensible. And indeed no
little else remains obscure, even when we ate of
those who have made a protracted study of the
psychical elements in mysticism and of the general
psychology of religious experience. But there is
much also in our Codex which has a charm of its
own. ‘There are things of rare, if exotic, beauty,
things of profound ethical significance, things of
delicate spiritual texture.


1 PISTIS SOPHIA


In any case, however all these very various
elements and features in the syncretism be judged
and evaluated, the Pistis Sophia is unquestion-
ably a document of the first importance, not only
for the history of Christianized Gnosticism, but
also for the history of the development of religion
in the West.

ASkeletonof In conclusion, a skeleton of the scheme under-


the Scheme


of the lying the P.S. is added. It may prove of service
sytem generally to assist the reader in the maze of
details.
The Ineffable.
The Limbs of the Ineffable.
I. The Highest Light-world or Realm of Light
i. The First Space of the Ineffable.
ii. The Second Space of the Ineffable,
ot The First Space of the First
Mystery.
it. The Third Space of the Ineffable, or
The Second Space of the First
Mystery.


Il. The Higher (or Middle) Light-world.
i. The Treasury of the Light
1. The Emanations of the Light.
2. The Orders of the Orders.
ii. The Region of the Right.
it. The Region of the Midst.


III. The Lower Light or Zon-world, or The
Mixture of Light and Matter.
i. The Region of the Left.
1. The Thirteenth Zon.
2. The Twelve /Zons.


INTRODUCTION hi


3. The Fate.
4, The Sphere.
5. The Rulers of the Ways of the
(Lower) Midst.!
6. The Firmament.
iii The World (Kosmos), especially
Mankind.
iii. The Under-world.
1. The Amente.
2. The Chaos.
3. The Outer Darkness.


Finally, the bibliography which follows is
not simply a list of authors’ names and of the
titles of their contributions to the subject, but is
furnished with notes which may serve briefly to
indicate the chief moments in the development
of the literature and in the history of opinion.
There doubtless are a few articles hidden away
in the back numbers of periodicals which should
be added fully to complete the list; but they
cannot be of any importance, or they would have
been referred to by some one or other of the
subsequent writers.


! T have printed this without a capital in the text to
distinguish it from the higher Midst above.


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY


1.1770. Art in Brittische theol. Magazin (?); see Késtin below, 13.
2.1773. Woide (C.G.). Art. in Journal des Savants (Paris).


3. 1778. Woide (C.G.). Art. in J.A. Cramer’s Beytrage zur Beforderung
theologischer und andrer wichigen Kenntnisse (Kiel u.
Hamburg), iii. 82 ff.

It was by W. that the New Testament, according to the
text of the famous Codex Alexandrinus, was edited, in uncial
types cast to imitate those of the MS., in 1786. In an
Appendix to this great undertaking, in 1799 (see below, 5),
he added certain fragments of the New Testament in the
Thebaico-Coptic dialect, together with a dissertation on the
Coptic version of the New Testament. The date of the C.A.
is generally assigned to the 5th cent., and, with the exception of
the Codex Vaticanus and the Codex Sinaiticus, which are
sometimes assigned to the 4th cent., is the oldest extant MS.
of the New Testament. This being the case, it is of interest to
quote from the Beztrige W.’s opinion on the date of the MS.
of P.S., which was lent to this careful scholar by Dr. Askew
and which he copied from the first word to the last:

“Tt [P.S.] is a very old MS. in 4to on parchment in Greek
uncial characters, which are not so round as those in the
Alexandrine MS. in London, and in the Claromontain MS.
in Paris [Codex Regius Parisiensis, also an Alexandrine text].
The characters of the MS. [P.S.] are somewhat longer and
more angular, so that I take them to be o/der than both the
latter MSS., in which the letters eta, theta, omicron, rho and
sigma are much rounder.”

Thus W. would date the MS. towards the end of the 4th
cent.


4.1794. Buhle (J. G.).  Literarischer Briefwechsel von Johann David
Michaelis (Lepizig), 3 vols., 1794-6, ill. 69.

Under date 1773 there is a letter from Woide to Michaelis,
in which the former says in reference to the P.S. Codex that
Askew had picked it up by chance in a book-shop. There
follows a description of the MS.


li


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY hit


5.1799. Woide (C. G.). Appendix ad Editionem Novi Testamenti
Graci e Codice MS. Alexandrio . . . cum Dissertatione de
Versiones Bibliorum Aigypriaca quibus subjictur Codicis
Vaticani Collatio (Oxford), p. 137.
W. gives the date of the P.S. Codex as about the 4th cent., and
considers the writer of the Greek original to have been
Valentinus.


6.1812. Minter (F.). Ose Gnostice Salomoni Tribute, Thebaice et
Latine, Prefatione et Adnotationibus philologicis illustrate
(Hafiz).

Bishop Munter, a learned Dane, probably got his text
from Woide’s copy. His brief pamphlet is of no partioular
importance; nevertheless it was solely upon these few
selections, the ftve Odes of Solomon, that, with the exception
of Dulaurier, scholars formed their opinion of the P.S. up to
the time of the publication of Sohwartze’s translation in 1851.
Minter believed that the original treatise belonged to the 2nd
cent. For Odes of Solomon see below, 49, 53 and 60.


7. 1838. Dulaurier (F.). Art. in Le Monitenr (sept. 27).


8. 1843. Matter (J.). Histoire Critique du Gnosticisme et de son In-
fluence sur les Sectes religieuses et philosophiques des six
premiers Siécles de l’Era chrétienne (Paris), 2nd ed., ii.
41 ff, 350 ff. The first edition appeared in 1828 and
contains no reference to P.S. In Dérner’s German trans-
lation the references are ii. 69 ff. and 163 ff.

M. rejects the authorship of Valentinus, though he bases
himself otherwise entirely on Woide. He vaguely places the
date of the original treatise between the end of the 2nd and
the end of the 5th oent., but gives no opinion as to the school
to which it belongs (p. 352).


9. 1847. Dulaurier (F.). Art. in the Journal Asiatique, 4¢ série,
tom. ix., juin, pp. 534-548, ‘Notice sur le Manuscript copte-
thébain, intitulé La Fidele Sagesse; et sur la Publication
projetée du Texte et de la Traduction francaise de ce
Maunscript,

D. had prepared a translation of the P.S. He writes:
“The translation of the Pistis Sophia and the glossary which
forms a complement to it are finished, and will be sent to the
printers, when I have convinced myself that I have fulfilled
the requirements that this task imposes, taking into con-
sideration the present state of science and my own capa-
bilities. The MS. from which I have made my translation is a
copy which I have taken from the original, during my stay
in England in 1838-1840, when I was charged by MM. de


liv PISTIS SOPHIA


Salvandy and Villemain, successive ministers of public
instruction, with the commission of proceeding to London to
study this curious monument” (p. 542). D., however, did
not publish his labours, nor have I as yet come across any
recotd of the fate of his MS. He ascribes the treatise to
Valentinus.


10. 1851. Schwartze (M.. G.). Péstis Sophia, Opus Gnosticum Valentino
adjudicatum, e Codice Manuscripto Coptico Londinensi
descriptum. Latine vertit M. G. Schwartze, edidit J. H.
Petermann (Berlin).

In 1848 Schwartze made a copy of the Codex in London,
but unfortunately died before the completion of his labours on
the P.S., and the MS. translation he left behind contained a
number of blanks and passages which he intended to fill up
and correct. His friend Petermann confined himself in his notes
strictly to verbal corrections and suggestions as to
varie lectiones. "The consequence is that we have a trans
lation without the notes of the translator and without a word of
introduction. P. says the task of editing was so severe
that he frequently suffered from fits of giddiness. In spite of
numerous blemishes this first edition is said to be ‘an
outstanding achievement.’ S. considers the original treatise,
as we see from the title ot his work, to have been written by
Valentinus; but P. is of the opinion that it is the work of
an Ophite, and promises to set forth his reasons at length in a
treatise, which has unfortunately never seen the light. A
review of S.’s work appeared in the Journal des Savants of


1852 (p. 333).


11.1852. Bunsen (C. C. J.). Hippolhtus und seine Zeit, Anfange und
Alussithten des Christenthums und der Menscheit (Leipzig),
i. 47, 48. Hippolytus and his Age (London, 1852), i. 61,
62.


“ Great, therefore, were my hopes in 1842, that the ancient
Coptic manuscript of the British Museum, inscribed Sophia,
might be a translation, or at least an extract, from that lost text-
book of Gnosticism [the work quoted by Hippolytus,
sub Valent.]: but unfortunately the accurate and trust-
worthy labours of that patient and conscientious Coptic
scholar, Dr. Schwartze, so early taken away from us, have
proved to me (for I have seen and perused his manuscript,
which 1 hope will soon appear), that this Coptic treatise is a
most worthless (I trust, purely Coptic) offshoot of the
Matrcosian heresey, of the latest and stupidest mysticism about
letters, sounds and words.”


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY lv


B.’s_Marcosian theory has been partially revived by
Legge (below, 57), but is supported by no one else, and we
doubt whether B. could have read Schwartze’s MS. with
any great care.


12.1853. Baur (F. C.). Das Christenthum und die christliche Kirche der
drei ersten Jahrhunderte (Tubingen), notes on pp. 185,
186, and 205, 206.

B. evidently added these notes at the last moment before
publication. On page 206 he leans to the idea of an
Ophite origin.

13. 1854. Kostlin (K. R.). Two arts. in Baur and Zeller’s Theologische
Jahrbiicher (Tubingen), xiii. 1-104 and 137-196, ‘Das
gnostische System des Buches Pistis Sophia?

K. was the first to make an exhaustive analysis of the
contents of the treatise, with the special object of setting
forth the system of P.S., and his labours were used later by
Lipsius in his art. in Smith and Wace’s Dictionary of Christian
Biography (below, 20). He assigns its date to the first half
of the 3rd cent., and thinks that it is of Ophite origin. In a
note to page 1, K. writes:

“The MS. from which the work is published belongs to the
collection of MSS. collected by Dr. Askew of London during
his travels in Italy and Greece, of which The British Theo-
logical Magazine (Das Brittische theol. Magazin) for the year
1770 (vol. i. part 4, p. 223) gives more particulars.”

We know nothing of these travels, and there is no such
magazine in the catalogue of the British Museum. The
Theological Repository for 1770 contains no information on
the subject; and no permutation of names solves the
mystery. There were very few magazines published at that early
date, so that the choice is limited.


14.1856. An Anonymous Translation in Migne’s Dictionnaire des
Alpocryphes, tom. i. app. part. ii coll. 1181-1286; this
tome forms vol. xxiii. of his third Encyclopédie
Théologique.

The translation is a sorry piece of work, more frequently
a mere paraphrase from Schwartze’s version than  trans-
lation; there are also frequent omissions, sometimes as
many as 40 pages of Schwartze’s text; e.g. pp. 18, 19,36 ff,
50, 51, 72, 73, 86-90, 108-135, 139, 157-160, 162, 171, 179,
180, 184-186, 221-243, '245-255, 281-320, 324-342. These
are some of the omissions; but there are many more. It is,
therefore, entirely useless to the student. The anonymous


lvi PISTIS SOPHIA


writer vaguely suggests a late date for the treatise because of the
complicated nature of the system.


15. 1860. Lipsius (R. A.). Art. “Gwosticismus, in Ersch and Grubet’s
Encyclopadie, separately published at Leipzig, 1860,
pp. 95 ff. and 157 ff.

L. considers P.S. an LEgypto-Ophite treatise, and with

K6stlin assigns its date to the first half of the 3rd cent.

See his Art. in Dict. of Christ. Biog. (1887).


16. 1875-1883. The Paleographical Society, Facsimiles of MSS. and
Inscriptions, Oriental Series, ed. by William Wright
(London).

Plate xlii. The editor says that the original is later than
Valentinus, and places the MS. in the 7th cent. There is a
careful analysis of the text from the technical standpoint, and the
facsimile is of f. 11 a.


17. 1877. Jacobi (H.). Art.. “Gnosis,” in Herzog’s Theolog. Real Encyclo-
padie (Leipzig). 2nd ed., 1888; Translation (New York),
1882, 1883.
J. believes in an Ophite origin.


18. 1887. King (C. W.). The Gnostics and their Remains, Ancient and
Medieval (London); 2nd ed. The first ed. appeared in
1864, but oontains no reference to P.S.

K. regards the P.S. as the most precious relic of Gnosticism.
Besides many references scattered throughout the volume,
there are translations from Schwartze of pages 227-239,
242-244, 247-248, .255-269, 261-268, 282-292, 298-808,
341, 342, 358, 376. K. does not venture an opinion on either
the date or author.


19.1887. Amélineau (E.). Essai sur le Gnosticisme égyptien, ses
Développements et son Origine égyptienne, in Annals du
Musée Guimet (Patis), xiv.
See the third part for system of Valentinus and of
P.S., pp. 166-322.


20. 1887. Lipsius (R. A.). Art. ‘Pistis Sophia,’ in Smith and Wace’s
Dict. of Christ. Biog. (London), iv. 405-415.

A still valuable study. “We may regard ourselves as
justified in assigning (with Petermann and Kostlin) the book
Pistis Sophia to one of the large groups of Ophite sects,
though nevertheless the system it contains is not identical
with any one ef the other Ophite systems known to us.” Of
importance is L.’s suggestion that P.S. may be indirectly
one of the sources of the Manichean religion. In any case,


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY lvii


“it may be assumed as probable that the book Pistis Sophia was
written before the time of the Manichzan system, and therefore
before A.D. 270. Moreover, as the system contained in it is
evidently more recent than the other Ophitic systems known to
us, we shall have, with Koéstlin, to assign its composition to the
first half of the Srd cent.” (p. 414b).


21. 1888. Hyvemat (H.). Album de Paléographie Copte (Patis-Rome).

Pl. ii. is a reproduction of a page of our Codex, showing the
work of the second scribe. H. dates it “ about the end of the
6th cent.” but without a word of justification for this
ascription.


22. 1889. Harnack (A.). Crit. of Amélineau's Essai (above, 19), in
Theolog. Literaturzeitung (Leipzig), viii. 199-211.


23.1890. Amélineau (E.). Art. ‘Les Traités gnostiques d’Oxford: Etude
critique, in the Revue de [Histoire des Religions (Patis),
xxi. no. 2. 178-260.

Practically the Introduction to his publication of the Text
and Translation of the Bruce Codex (24, below). In it A.
sets forth the results of “the researches and studies, the
hypotheses and convictions of seven years” of labour (p. 4
offprint).


24.1891. Amélineau (E.). Notice sur le Papyrus gnostique Bruce,
Texte et Traduction, in Notices et Extraits des Manuscripts
de la Bibliotheque Nationale et Autres Bibliothéeques
(Paris), xxix. pt. 1. 64-305.

These views have been severely criticized, especially by

Schmidt (below, 28; also 25-27).


24a.1891. Harnack (A.). Uber das gnostische Buch Pistis-Sophia
(Leipzig). (Texte u. Untersuch. vii. 2.)

A study (144 pp.) of the first importance, in which this high
authority on the history and chronology of early Christian
literature and the history of the development of dogma
submits the contents of the Latin version of Schwartze to a
cateful analysis, and gives 8/9 reasons for placing the P.S.
in the second half of the 3rd cent. H. is mainly valuable in
his analysis of the Biblical references in the P.S., especially
the uses it makes of the N.T., and in his estimate of the
stage of development of the general Christian and Catholic
elements in P.S. H. thinks that Div. iii, should be called
“Questions of Mary’ (pp. 94, 108). Unknown to H., Renan
(Mare Aurék, p. 120) had already hazarded the suggestion
that the whole P.S. might be identical with the Little Questions


lviii PISTIS SOPHIA


of Mary, mentioned by Epiphanius. But R. shows (p. 145)
that he has no direct acquaintance with the subject.  H.
assigns the P.S. to an ‘ Ophitic’ sect, but not the ‘ Ophites ’
in the narrower meaning, for here, as elsewhere often in the
use of the name, no sign of the worship of the serpent is
found (p. 110). He brings the P.S. sect into close connection
with the Syrian Ophitic group, which had offshoots in Egypt,
and opens up those investigations into the statements of
Epiphanius which Schmidt has surveyed in greater detail in
his edition of the Codex Brucianus (below, 28). In fact these
two scholars have been in close touch with one another in
their work on the P.S. as to its origin, date and place. The
concluding remark of H. on the general religious status of the
P.S.—that is to say, its bearing on Early Christian and
Catholic religion, in other words its place within the general
history of Christianity—is noteworthy. He writes (p. 114):
“Tn this respect the P.S. is a document of first rank, for we
possess no second work which brings before our eyes so
clearly the previous history, of Catholic sacramentism.
What we meet with here more sharply brought out and at
one stroke among the Gnostics of the end of the third cen-
tury, was accomplished by the Catholic Church toilsomely
and gradually in the following century. This Gnosticism is
not the father of Catholicism, but rather an elder brother
who gained by assault what the younger brother attained
subsequently amid a thousand exigencies."


25.1891. Schmidt (C.). Gétting. Gelehrte Anzeigen (GOttingen), Nr.
xvii. 640-675.

A very damaging review of Amelineau's edition of the
Bruce Codex (above, 23).


26.1891. Amélineau (E.). Art. ‘Le Papyrus Brace: Réponse aux
Gottingische Gelehrte Anzeigen, in Revue de l’Histoire des
Refigions (Paris), xxiv. no. 3. 376-380.
Avs reply to Schmidt's criticisms.


27.1892. Schmidt (C.). Gétting. Gelehrte Anzeigen (Gottingen), Nr. 6.
201-202.
S.’s further rejoinder to A.


28.1892. Schmidt (C.). Guostiche Schriften in koptische Sprache aus
dem Codex Brucianus (Leipzig), 692 pp. (T. a. U. viii.)

S.’s masterly edition entirely supersedes that of Amélineau,

who worked on Woide’s copy of the confused heap of leaves

preserved in the Bodleian. His minute examination of the


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY lix


original discovered that the chaos could first of all be sorted
out into two totally different MSS. The larger work is
entitled The Book of the Great Logos according to the Mystery.
The contents fall naturally into two divisions, which S. calls
respectively ‘The First’ and ‘The Second Book of Jeu.’
The system is closely related to that of the P.S. miscellany.
S. devotes pp. 334-538 to a penetrating study of this relation-
ship, in which he makes a most valuable contribution to the
analysis of the contents of the P.S. His labours here are
practically an Introduction to his subsequent translation of
the P.S. in 1905 (below, 45). Among much else of the
greatest value he gives us a minutely detailed investigation
of the system of the P.S., which supersedes Kostlin’s pains-
taking pioneer effort (1854). S. is rightly of opinion that
P.S. is a more or less happy compilation from other works
(p. 318), as Kostlin had already pointed out (p. 344). He
seems to think little of the possible objection that, whereas
the ‘Two Books of Yew,’ mentioned twice in the P.S., are
said to have been dictated to Enoch by Jesus before the
Flood and hidden away, the contents of the first document
of the C.B. are revealed by Jesus himself to the disciples
(p. 343). The statement in the P.S. is in keeping with
common apocalyptic claims, and in any case the sect as a
matter of fact did possess two Yew Books, and the contents
of C.B. I. are what we should expect from the references in
the PS. while the intimate relationship between
P.S. Div. iv. and C.B. Ib is patent to the most casual reader.
He agrees with Harnack as to the date of the P.S.—namely,
the latter half of the 3rd cent. for Divv. i.-ili, and a few
decades earlier for Div. iv. C.B. I. is thus to be placed in
the first half of the 3rd cent. (pp. 540, 598). C.B. II. is a
work without a title, the contents of which have roused
S. to enthusiasm (pp. 34, 35). It is plainly of an earlier
date, and so S. here conjectures for it about 160-200 A.D.
(p. 542); but he has subsequently changed his view as to
date (see 47, below).

After a close methodical investigation, in which in pat-
ticular he submits the statements of Epiphanius to a searching
criticism, S. thinks that everything points to the Severians as
being most probably the sect to which the writings contained
in P.S. and C.B. I. can be attributed (p. 596). C.B. IL, he
concludes, may be assigned to Sethian-Archontics (p. 659). But
the whole question bristles with difficulties when precise
names are in question. It is to be noted that in his researches


Ix PISTIS SOPHIA


S. lays under contribution as very pertinent to the inquiry
his prior labours on the puzzling problem of the Gnostics of
Plotinus, in his treatise Plotin’s Stellung zum Gnosticismus und
kircklichen Christentum (Leipzig), 1900, 168 pp. (I. «a U.
N.F. v. 4... There is much criticism of Amélineau's work
and views scattered throughout this C.B. volume.


29.1892. Schmidt (C.). De Codice Bruciano seu de Libris gnosticis qui
in Lingua copitea extant Commentatio (Leipzig), Pars i.,
30 pp.
No other part has been published, and there is nothing in it,
as far as I am aware, which has not appeared in C.’s larger
works.


30. 1893. Crum (W. E.). Coptic Manuscripts brought from the Fayyum
by W. M. Flinders Petrie (London).
C. seems almost to allow that the copy of P.S. might have
been made in the 4th cent. (p. 24).


31. 1893. Legge (G. F.). Art. ‘Some Heretic Gospels’ in The Scottish
Review (London), xxii. 133-162.
Pp. 134-157 are devoted to P.S., the rest to the documents
of the Bruce Codex. L.’s_ Forerunners (1915) gives his
maturer views (see below, 57).


32.1893. Harnack (A.). Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur bis
Eusebius (Leipzig), 1. i. 171 f.
A summary description of the contents of the P.S. and
Cod. Bruc. from his important study, Uber d gnost. Buch
P.S. (above, 24a), based on Schwartze’s Latin version.


33. 1894. Preuschen (E.). Rev. of Schmidt’s Gwostiche Schriften in
ke S. aus ad. Cod. Brac. (1892), in Theolog. Literatur-
zeitung (Leipzig), Nr. vii. 183-187.
P.’s main criticism is that S.’s identification of the two
parts of the first treatise of the Bruce Codex with ‘The
Books of Yew’ mentioned in P.S. is mistaken.


34.1894. Schmidt (C.). ‘Die in dem koptisch-gnostischen Codex
Brucianus  enthaltenen “Beide Bacher Jew? in ihrem
Verhaltnis xu der Pists Sophia? in Zeitschr. f wissen-
schaft. Theolog. (Leipzig), xxxvii. 555-585.
S.’s reply to P.’s criticism.
85. 1895. Amélineau (B.) Péstis-Sophia, Ouvrage gnostique de Valentin,
traduit du copte en francais, avec une Introduction (Paris),
xxxli + 204 pp.
A. advocates strongly the Valentinian origin of the treatise,


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY lxi


and leans almost exclusively to an Egyptian origin of the
ideas. "These views have been severely criticized, especially
by Schmidt. The MS. itself, however, A. places very late,
writing on page xi of his Introduction as follows:—* After
an examination of the enormous faults which the scribe has
committed, I cannot attribute to the MS. which has preserved
the Pistis-Sophia to us, a date later than the ninth or tenth
century, and that too the minimum. For this I have several
reasons. Firstly, the MS. is written on parchment, and
parchment was hardly ever commonly used in Egypt before
the sixth or seventh century. Secondly, the writing, which
is uncial, though passable in the first pages of the MS.,
becomes bastard in a large number of leaves, when the
sctibe’s hand is fatigued; no longer is it the beautiful
writing of the Egyptian scribes of the great periods, but
slack, inconsistent, almost round and hurried. Thirdly, the
faults of orthography in the use of Greek words evidently
show that the scribe belonged to a period when Greek was
almost no longer known.”

In a footnote Amelineau says that he is perfectly aware
that this opinion of his will ‘ raise a tempest, and begs for a
suspension of judgment till he has published his reasons,
especially as to the late use of parchment, at greater length.
The storm broke, and no one has accepted A.’s arguments.
Among other things he failed to notice that in the first place
the Askew Codex is the work of two scribes, and not of one,
and that the various portions of their common task can be
unquestionably assigned to each. The parchment argument
has never seen the light, as far as 1 am aware.


36. 1896. Mead (G. R. S.). Piéstis Sophia: A Gnostic Gospel (with
extracts from the Books of the Saviour appended), ori-
ginally translated from Greek into Coptic, and now for the
first time Englished from Schwartze’s Latin Version of the
only known Coptic MS. and checked by Amélinean’s
French Version (London).

The first edition of the present work.


37. 1898. Schmidt (C.). Goring. Gelehrte Anzeigen (Gottingen), Nr. vi.
436-444. .
A. severely critical review of Amelineau's Introduction to
his Translation of P.S. (above, 35).
38. 1899. Crum (W. E.). Egyptian Extoration Fund, Archeological
Reports, 1897/1898 (London), p. 62.
Description of MS. of P.S., which is, however, improved
upon below (46).


Ixii PISTIS SOPHIA


39.1900. Mead (G. R. S.). Fragments of a Faith Forgotten: Some
Short Sketches among the Gnostics (London), 1st ed.
(2nd ed. 1906), “The Gnosis according to its Friends.’
pp. 451-602.

“The Askew and Bruce Codices’ (pp. 453-458); ‘ Summary
of the Contents of the So-called Pistis Sophia Treatise’
(pp. 459-506); ‘Summary of the Extracts from the Books
of the Saviour’ (pp. 507-517); ‘Selections from the
Untitled Apocalypse of the Codex Brucianus’ (pp. 547-566);
‘Notes on the Contents of the Bruce and Askew Codices ’
(pp. 567-578); ‘The Akhmim Codex’ [now called the
Berlin Codex] (pp. 579-592).


40.1901. Rahlfs (A.). Die Berliner Handschrift des sabidischen Psalters
(Berlin). Abbhand. d. konigh Gesellschaft d. Wiassen-
schaft xu Gottingen.  Philol hist. K. N.F. Bd. iv.
Nr. 4.

On p. 7 R calls attention to a remarkable difference in
the versions of the Psalms quoted in the P.S.. While the
citations in pp. 53-82 and 111-181 (Schw.-Pet. ed.) vary
relatively only slightly from the usual Sahidic version, those
in pp. 86-110 are so totally different that they must be an
independent translation from the Greek. If this is so, we
are confronted by the high probability that Repentances
8-13 are a later addition, and that there were thus originally only
7 Repentances. If this hypothesis stands, it is of great
importance for the internal analysis of the literature.  R.’s
view is criticized by Rendel Hams (below, 60).


41.1901. Liechtenhan (R.). ‘Untersuchungen zur koptisch-gnostichen
Literatur, in Zeitschr. f- wissenschaft. Theologie, Bd. xliv.
H. it. 236-253.

In his analysis of the composition of the P.S., L. introduces
a novelty. He thinks that pp. 128 (ch. 64)-175 (end of ch.
80), subsequent to the thirteen Repentances, are a later
insertion in the Sophia-episode, and regards the opening lines
of ch. 81 (“It came to pass after all this”) as a redactor’s
connecting paragraph.

With regard to the appropriateness of the suggested title,
‘The Questions of Mary,’ for Div. ii, and of ‘The Gospel of
Philip ’ (P.S. ch. 42) as a possible title for Divv. i. and ii.—he
tries to get over the difficulty that those two titles are
mentioned by Epiphanius among the books of a group of
sects to which the Church Father ascribes the most filthy,
blasphemous and obscene rites, in the following conjecture
(p. 242):—“* A Gnostic sect in Egypt possessed a rich, apo-


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY Ixiii


calyptic literature, among which was to be found a Gospel of
Philip and Questions of Mary. This sect was divided into
an ascetic and a libertinist branoh, and each group worked
over the sacred literature which had come down to them.”
Epiphanius (Her. xxvi.) got hold of the libertinist redaotion;
the asoetic is preserved for us in P.S., Divv. i-iii. Div. iv. is
an earlier stratum. ‘The Books of Yew’ mentioned in PS.
are said to have been revealed to Enoch; accordingly, like
Preusohen, he thinks that these cannot be the treatise of the
Bruoe Codex to which Schmidt has assigned this title, for the
latter is revealed to the Disciples (p. 251).


42.1904. Harnack (A.). Die Chronologie der altchristlichen Literatur
(Leipzig), II. ii. 193-195, ‘Die Pistis Sophia und die in
Papyrus Bracianus Sac. V. vel. V 1. enthaltenen gnostischen
Schriften,

H. repeats, from his detailed study (above, 24a), his
reasons for assigning the oontents of P.B. Divv. 1.-tii, to
the latter half of 3rd cent. He says that Liechtenhan's final
opinion (above, 41) on ‘The Questions of Mary’ problem is
not far from his own view. Why H. assigns the treatises of the
Bruoe Codex to the 5th or 6th cent. (!) is not set forth.


43.1904. Liechtenhan (R.). Art. ‘Ophiten, in Schaff-Herzog’s Real-
encycl. f. protest. Theologie, 3rd ed., vol. xiv.
L. (p. 405) includes the P.S. among a score of sects which
he brings together under this too general heading of ‘ Ophites.’
(A shortened form of the above appears in The New
Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge (New York),
1910, vol. viii.)


44,1904. Granger (F.). Art. ‘The Poemandres of Hermes Trismegistus,’
in The Journal of Theological Studies (London), v. 395-412.

G. (p. 401) questions whether the P.S. is a translation from
the Greek; but the only reason he advanoes is the hazardous
statement that: “The Egyptian Gnostic writings of the
third century exhibit the same qualities of style as the
Coptic biographies and apocalypses of the fourth and follow-
ing centuries.”


45.1905. Schmidt (C.).  Koptisch-gnostische Schriften. Bd. 1. Die
Pistis Sophia. Die beiden Biicher des Jet. UnbeRanntes
altgnostiches Werk (Leipzig), xxvii + 410 pp.

Bd. II. is to oontain the three unpublished works of the

Berlin Codex entitled: (1) The Gospel of Mary, (2) The

Apocryphon of John; (3) The Wisdom of Jesus Christ. (See


lxiv PISTIS SOPHIA


my Fragments of a Faith Forgotten, 2nd ed., London, 1906,
pp. 579-592, for a summary of Schmidt’s notice of the
Codex, published in Svtgungsber. der Kénigh Preuss. Akdemie
d. Wissensch, Berlin, 1896 pp. 839 ff, entitled “Ein vorire-
naeisches — gnostisches Original-werk in koptischer — Sprache.’)
This long-expected second volume has not yet seen the light.
The contents ate of great value, for The Apocryphon of John,
in its original Greek form, lay before Irenzus, and in an
appendix to Schmidt’s notice Harnack ventures the query:
Can The Wisdom (Sophia) of Jesus Christ possibly be the lost
famous writing of Valentinus so entitled?

In the Introduction (pp. ix-xviii) S. sums up the results
of his prior studies. The Translation of the P.S. occupies
pp. 1-254, and is deserving of the highest praise.


46.1905. Crum (W. E.). Catalogue of the Coptic MSS. in the British
Museum (London), p. 173.
The B.M. official description of the Askew Codex.


47.1907. Schmidt (C.). Art. ‘Irendus und seine Quelle in Adv. Har. I.
29, in Philotesia. Paul Kkinert su, LXX. Geburtstag
dargebracht von Adolf Harnack, u.s.w., pp. 317-336.

This is a very important study, in which S. again treats
of The Apocryphon of John in the unpublished Coptic Gnostic
Berlin Codex, on which he had already specially dwelt in
reporting for the first time the contents of the Codex to the
Prussian Academy in 1896. The Greek original is early, and
a copy of it lay before Irenzus. We are thus in a position
to estimate the nature of the Church Fathet’s method of
quotation and summarizing, and it is clearly proved to be
unreliable. S. definitely assigns this special document to a
Bathian circle in Egypt, and brings its «on-lore into
close touch with Valentinian ideas. He says nothing, un-
fortunately, of how this document and the other two of the
Codex—namely, The Gospel of Mary and The Wisdom of
Jesus Christ—bear on the line of descent of the doctrines
of the P.S. Doubtless he is reserving his treatment of the
subject for his long-expected edition of the whole Berlin
Codex, which for the first time will give us first-hand know-
ledge of second-century Gnosticism, and, judging by what
little S. has already disclosed to us, throw a brilliant light
on some of the most puzzling obscurities in the history of the
development of Gnostic doctrine.


48.1907. Bousset (W.). Haupiprobleme der Gnosis (G6ttingen), 398 pp.
This is a study of the greatest value from the comparative


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY Ixv


standpoint. Though Lipsius (above, 20) had already drawn
attention to the point, B. goes further by showing in
detail the close connection between some main notions of the
Manichezan religion and some features of the P.S., whereas
Schmidt (1892, pp. 375, 404, 417, 564) had previously drawn
attention to isolated parallels only. In dealing with the
system of the P.S. (pp. 346-350) B. writes: “'There can be
no doubt at all on the affinity between the two systems.
The only possible question whioh remains is whether in the
P.S. and I. Jet direct dependence on the Manichzan system
oomes up for discussion, or whether a common sourtoe under-
lies both systems. The latter appears to me provisionally
to be the more probable hypothesis. Many of the kindred
ideas appear in the P.S. in their more original and purer
form, the figure of the Virgin of Light has in the P.S. meaning
and great importanoe, whereas in the Maniohman system she
is a shadowy form by the side of the Third Envoy. If the
latter supposition proves correct, Mani would have far less
right of claim to originality for his system than has hitherto
seemed to be the oase.”


49.1909. Rendel Harris (J.). The Odes and Psalms of Solomon, now
first published from the Syriac Version (Cambridge).
The editio princeps of the now recovered 42 Odes;
previously only the five in the P.S. were known.

R. H. devotes pp. 16-35 to treating of the use of the Odes
in the PS. On p. 35 he writes: “The Pzstis Sophia, in
which the Odes are imbedded, dates from the third oentury,
and the author of the Péstis had, as we have shown, the
Odes bound up with his Canonioal Psalter; at the time
intimated there was no Coptic [Thebaic] Bible from which
the extraots could have been made; so we may be sure the
Odes were taken from a Greek Bible, and, with almost equal
certainty, that the Pistis Sophia itself was a Greek book.”

For R. H.’s change of opinion see below, 60.


50.1909. Arendzen (J. P.). Art. ‘Gnosticism, in The Catholic
Encyclopedia (New York), vol. vi.
P. S. is summarily and inadequately dealt with on p. 600.


51.1910. Bousset (W.). Art. ‘Gnosticism,’ in Encyclopedia Britannica
(London), 11th ed.

B., following the prevailing German view, assigns P.S. to
the 2nd half of 3rd cent.; he, however, thinks that both
treatises of the Bruce Codex are later than P.S., but does
not argue this important question.


Ixvi PISTIS SOPHIA


52.1912. Bousset (W.). Arts. ‘Gwosi® and ‘Gnostiker, in Paulys
Real-Encyklopadie der — dassischen —_Altertumswissenshaft
(ed. Wissowa-Kroll, Berlin).

B. here, in § 10, treats of the P.S. and the C.B. as belong-
ing to the period when Gnostioism had got out of hand or was
running wild (Die Verwilderung der Gnosis’). He does
not, however, repeat his view of the later date of C.B., and
says that the esohatology of the P.S. is strongly reminiscent
of Valentinian speoulations.


53. 1912. Worrell (WW. H.). Art. ‘The Odes of Solomon and the Pistis
Sophia,’ in The Journal of Theological Studies (London),
xiii, 29-46.

An interesting study. Gives translations of the five Odes
from the Coptic and Syriac and seems to blame R. Harris
for using Schwartze’s Latin version instead of Schmidt’s
more modern rendering in his quotations from the P.S.


54.1913. Scott (E. F.). Art. ‘ Gnosticism,’ in Hastings’ Eneycl. of
Refig. and Ethics (Edinburgh), vi. 231-242.

“There can be little doubt that the Coptic writings (Pésts
Sophia, etc.) present a variety of the Barbelo-Gnosis ”
(p. 239a). P.S. was written in Egypt at close of 3rd cent.
(p. 241b). This is by no means certain; we must wait for
Schmidt’s full translation and commentary on The Apocry-
phon of John before any definite conclusion can be reached.


55.1913. De Faye (E.). Gwostiques et Gnosticisme: Etude critique des
Documents du Gnosticisme chrétien aux Il et Ie Siécles
(Paris). Pt. iti. “Eerits gnostiques en Langue copte,
pp. 247-311.

D. F. agrees with Hamack and Schmidt as to the most
probable date being the 2nd half of the 3rd cent. (p. 254).
He thinks that Div. iti. is the lost Lite Questions of Mary,
favouring Harnack against Schmidt, whom he blames (p. 266)
for abandoning this view in the Introduction (p. xviii) to
his Translation (above, 45), after first adopting it in his
earlier work. He thinks that Schmidt has made out his
case for the two Jed Books against the reservations of
Preuschen and Liechtenhan (p. 291). D. F. is strongly
opposed to the hypothesis of a Valentinian origin (p. 251);
he is also very critical of the general Ophite theory (p. 327) and
of the special Severian theory of Schmidt (p. 355). He has
no precise view of his own as to origin; but, in keeping with
his general thesis, which would make most, if not all, of the
anonymous and pseudonymous systems later and degenerate


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY Ixvii


forms of the more metaphysical views of a Basilides, a
Valentinus and a Marcion, he is content to leave the P.S. to
a later period of degeneration. His general metaphysical
test can hardly be said to be a criterion for history. Meta-
physic does not come first; philosophizing is a secondary
stage, and this is certainly the case in the general develop-
ment of the Gnosis which starts in a strongly mythological
and apocalyptic circle of ideas.


56. 1913. Scott-Monorieff (P. D.). Paganism and Christianity in
Egypt (Cambridge), pp. 148-182, ch. vii.., “Some Aspeots
of Gnosticism: Pistis Sophia.’

After a review of contents and literature, with regard to
place of origin the author writes (p. 175): “But if of
Syrian origin the scheme betrays here and there marked
signs of Egyptian influence, and the fact that the work was
sufficiently important to be translated into the native tongue
shows without doubt that the sect which inspired it was
an Egyptian branch who dwelt in Egypt.” ‘This is of course
generally evident. S.-M. thinks, however, that the question
of translation may be pressed too much. Without attempt-
ing any justification of his opinion, he asserts that “ the
Coptic text is at the earliest a fifth-century work when
Gnosticism was fast dying out and could only be practised
furtively.” Surely the author is here confusing the probable date
of the Askew Codex copy with the question of date of
the original?


57.1915. Legge (G. F.). Forerunners and Rivals of Christianity:
Being Studies in Religious History from 330 B.C. to
330 A.D. (Cambridge), 2 vols., ii. 134-202, ch. x., “The

System of the Pistis Sophia and its Related Texts.;
Divv. i. and ii. presuppose belief in a system resembling
those of the Ophites and of Valentinus (p. 135). Divv. tii.
and iv. are probably Marcosian in origin (p. 173), in any
case later (!) than Divv. i. and ti. (p. 184). In this L. partially
revives Bunsen’s rejected theory (above, 11). He accepts
translation from a Greek original, and continues (p. 177):
“We must... look for an author who, though an Egyptian
and acquainted with the native Egyptian religion, would
naturally have written in Greek; and on the whole there
is no one who fulfils these requirements so well as Valentinus
himself. The fact that the author never quotes from the
Gospel according to St. John indicates that it had not come
to his knowledge.” L.’s criticism (pp. 161 f.) of Harnack’s
parallels from this Gospel (above, 24a), however, does not seem


Ixvili PISTIS SOPHIA


to me satisfactory. The first commentary on the Fourth
Gospel was made by a Valentinian. L.’s view of authorship
of the P.S. revives the Valentinian hypothesis in its most
radical form. The two books of the Bruce Codex, which
Schmidt calls ‘The Books of Jeu,’ are not the books referred
to in the P.S. “which therefore remains the parent docu-
ment.” (p. 194).


58. 1918. Moffat (J.). Art. ‘Pistis Sophia,’ in Hastings’ Excel. of Relig.
and Ethics (Edinburgh), x. 45-48.

This is a useful, if brief, summary of contents and prior
opinions. M. takes up a moderate position when he says
that, though the P.S. is to be assigned to some Gnostic
circles in Egypt, its particular type of Gnosticism cannot be
identified. He thinks, however, on the whole that the
occurrence of the name Barbelo assigns our miscellany “ to
some citcle more or less allied to the pious theosophists of
the 2nd cent. whom we know as the Ophites collectively,
and as the Nicolaitans, Simonians and Barbelo-Gnostics
specifically.” H. thinks the Yew Books mentioned in the
P.S. can hardly be the books of C.B. I.


59. 1919. Schmidt (C.).  Gesphrache Jesu mit seinen Jiingern nach der
Auferstehbung. — Ein katholisch-apostolisches Sendschrieben
des 2. Jahrhunderts nach einem kRoptischen Papyrus des
Institut de la Mission Archéolog. Francaise au Caire,
unter Mitarbeit von Herr Pierre Lacau . . . General
Director d. Agpt. Mus . Ubersetzung des dthiopischen
Texts von Dr Isaak Wajnberg (Leipzig). (T. wu U. Bd.
xiii.)

The external form of this interesting and important
document is an Epistle, resembling that of the Catholic
Epistles of the N.T. But within, it passes into the form of
an apocalypse, and that too of Discourses between Jesus
and his Disciples after the Resurrection. This latter char-
acteristic is otherwise not found in Catholic documents; it
is a Gnostic peculiarity, of which the P.S. is a classical
example, the other instances being what Schmidt calls the
“Two Books of Jeu’ of the Bruce Codex and of The Gospel
of Mary and of The Wisdom of Jesus Christ of the Berlin
Codex. The Questions of Mary, The Great and The Little, of
Epiphanius’ ‘Gnostici’? were also of this post-resurrectional
type of discourses (p. 206).

S. does not re-discuss the question of date of the P.S. by
the light of this new find, but it is clearly of importance,
seeing that with regard to the new document he concludes


ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY lxix


(p. 402): “The Epistola Apostolorum is written by a repre-
sentative of the Catholic Church with the intention of
attacking the Gnostic heresies, especially Docetism. The
country of origin is Asia Minor, and the date is the second
half of the second century, more precisely 160-170 A.D.”


60. 1920. Rendel Harris JJ.) and Mingana (A.). The Odes and Psalms
of Solomon, re-edited for the Governors of the John
Rylands Library (Manchester), 2 vols. Text, 1912; Tr.
and Notes, 1920.

Here R. H. entirely changes his view of P.S. being a
translation from the Greek. He now thinks that (p. 117):
“Unless . . . the P.S. has substituted the Sahidic [Bible]
version for some other version which lay before the author, of
which he has avoided the trouble of making a fresh trans-
lation, there is a strong presumption that the P.S. is a
genuine Coptic book, and not a rendering of some other work
(Greek or Syriac) into Coptic.” He rejects (p. 183) Worrell’s
theory (above, 53) of a Gnostic Hymn- and Psalm-book, and
criticizes (pp. 186 f.) Rahlfs’ discovery of two versions of the
Psalms (above, 40). He is accordingly opposed to the general
view of translation from the Greek, and suggests (p. 186)
that the matter needs some further elucidation. It cannot,
however, be said that his argument is in any way convincing.

As to the Odes of Solomon themselves, which have pro-
duced so large and instructive a literature since the first
edition was published, their lucky discoverer and able
editor, in reviewing the whole question, thinks we cannot
go far wrong if we conclude that they were written at Antioch in
the 1st century (p. 69).


[THE FIRST BOOK OF]
PISTIS SOPHIA


IT came to pass, when Jesus had risen from the cHapP.1.
dead, that he passed eleven years discoursing a
with his disciples, and instructing them only up hitherto
to the regions of the First Commandment and eure
up to the regions of the First Mystery, that within pos
the Veil, within the First Commandment, which Ara
is the four-and-twentieth mystery without and ~
below—those [four-and-twenty] which are in the

second space of the First Mystery which is before

all mysteries,—the Father in the form of a dove.

And Jesus said to his disciples: “I am come What the
forth out of that First Mystery, which is the last an
mystery, that is the four-and-twentieth mystery.” und
And his disciples have not known nor understood
that anything existeth within that mystery; but
they thought of that mystery, that it is the
head of the universe and the head of all existence;
and they thought it is the completion of all com-
pletions, because Jesus had said to them concern-
ing that mystery, that it surroundeth the First
Commandment and the five Impressions and the
great Light | and the five Helpers and the 2.
whole Treasury of the Light.

And moreover Jesus had not told his disciples


1


The regions
of the great
Invisible.


The Trea-
sury of the
Light.


The Light-
world.


2 PISTIS SOPHIA


the total expansion of all the regions of the great
Invisible and of the three triple-powers and of
the four-and-twenty invisibles, and all their
regions and their zons and their orders, how they
are extended—those which are the emanations
of the great Invisible—and their ungenerated
and their self-generated and their generated and
their light-givers and their unpaired and_ their
rulers and their authorities and their lords and
their archangels and their angels and their decans
and their servitors and all the houses of their
spheres and all the orders of every one of them.

And Jesus had not told his disciples the total
expansion of the emanations of the Treasury, nor
their orders, how they are extended; nor had he
told them their saviours, according to the order of
every one, how they are; nor had he told them
what guard is at every [gate] of the Treasury of
the Light; nor had he told them the region of
the Twin-saviour, who | is the Child of the Child;
not had he told them the regions of the three
Améns, in what regions they are expanded; nor had!
he told them into what region the five Trees are
expanded; nor as to the seven Améns, that is the
seven Voices, what is their region, how they are
expanded.

And Jesus had not told his disciples of what
type are the five Helpers, nor into what region they
are brought; nor had he told them how the
great Light hath expanded itself, nor into what
region it hath been brought; nor had he told
them of the five Impressions, nor as to the First
Commandment, into what region they have been
brought. But he had discoursed with them gener-
ally, teaching that they exist, but he had not told


FIRST BOOK 5


them their expansion and the order of their
regions, how they are. For this cause they have
not known that there were also other regions
within that mystery.

And he had not told his disciples: “I have
gone forth out of such and such regions until I
entered into that mystery, and until I went forth
out of it’; but, in teaching them, he said to them:
“T am come forth from that mystery.” For this
cause then they thought of that mystery, that it is
the completion | of completions, and that it is
the head of the universe and that it is the total
Fulness. For Jesus had said to his disciples:
“That mystery surroundeth that universe of
which I have spoken unto you from the day when
I met with you even unto this day.” For this
cause then the disciples thought there is nothing
within that mystery.

It came to pass then, when the disciples were


4.


CHAP. 2.


sitting together on the Mount of Olives, speaking Jesus and


of these words and rejoicing in great joy, and
exulting exceedingly and saying one to another:
“Blessed are we before all men who are on the
eatth, because the Saviour hath revealed this unto
us, and we have received the Fulness and the total
completion,’—they said this to one another, while
Jesus sat a little removed from them..

And it came to pass then, on the fifteenth day
of the moon in the month Tybi, which is the day on
which the moon is full, on that day then, when
the sun had come forth in his going, that there
came forth behind him a great light-power
shining most exceedingly, and there was no meas-
ure to the light conjoined with it. For it came
out of the Light of lights, and it came out of the


his disciples
are seated

on the Mount
of Olives.


A great
light-power
descendeth
on Jesus.


It surround-
eth him en-
tirely.


6.

CHAP. 3.
Jesus as-
cendeth
into heaven.


The confu-
sion of the
powers and
the great
earthquake.


4 PISTIS SOPHIA


last mystery, which is the four-and-twentieth |
mystery, from within without, those which are
in the orders of the second space of the First
Mystery. And that light-power came down over
Jesus and surrounded him entirely, while he was
seated removed from his disciples, and he had
shone most exceedingly, and there was no measure
for the light which was on him.

And the disciples had not seen Jesus because of
the great light in which he was, or which was about
him; for their eyes were darkened because of the
great light in which he was. But they saw only
the light, which shot forth many light-rays. And
the light-rays were not like one another, but the
light was of divers kind, and it was of divers type,
from below upwards, one [ray] more excellent
than the other, . . . , in one great immeasurable
glory of light; it stretched from under the earth
right up to heaven.—And when the disciples saw
that light, they fell into great fear and great
agitation. |

It came to pass then, when that light-power
had come down over Jesus, that it gradually sur-
rounded him entirely. Then Jesus ascended or
soared into the height, shining most exceedingly in
an immeasurable light. And the disciples gazed
after him and none of them spake, until he had
reached unto heaven; but they all kept in deep
silence. This then came to pass on the fifteenth
day of the moon, on the day on which it is full in
the month Tybi.

It came to pass then, when Jesus had reached
the heaven, after three hours, that all the powers
of the heaven fell into agitation, and all were set in
motion one against the other, they and all their


FIRST BOOK 5


eons and all their regions and all theit orders, and
the whole earth was agitated and all they who
dwell thereon. And all men who are in the world
fell into agitation, and also the discipes, and
all thought: Peradventure the world will be
rolled up.

And all the powers in the heavens ceased not
from their agitation, they and the whole world,
and all were moved one against the other, from
the third hour of the fifteenth day of the moon of
Tybi until the ninth hour of the morrow. And
all the angels and their archangels and all the
powers of the height, all sang praises to the inter-
iors of the | interiors, so that the whole world
heard their voices, without their ceasing till the
ninth hour of the morrow.

But the disciples sat together in fear and were
in exceedingly great agitation and were afraid
because of the great earthquake which took place,
and they wept together, saying, “What will
then be? Peradventure the Saviour will destroy
all regions?” Thus saying, they wept together.


a


CHAP. 4.


While they then said this and wept together, Jesus de-


then, on the ninth hour of the morrow, the heavens
opened, and they saw Jesus descend, shining
most exceedingly, and there was no measure for
his light in which he was. For he shone more
[radiantly] than at the hour when he had ascended
to the heavens, so that men in the world cannot
describe the light which was on him; and it shot
forth light-rays in great abundance, and there was
no measure for its rays, and its light was not alike
together, but it was of divers kind and of divers
type, some [rays] being more excellent than
others . . . ; and the whole light consisted to-


scendeth
again.


The nature
of his glory.


CHAP. 5.
Jesus ad-
dresseth
them.


CHAP. 6.


He draweth
his light
unto him-
self.


6 PISTIS SOPHIA


gether. It was of threefold kind, and the one
[kind] was more excellent than the other... .
The second, that in the midst, was more excellent
than the first which was below, and the third,
which was above them all, was more excellent than
the two which were below. And the first glory,
which was placed below them all, was like to the
light which had come over Jesus before he had
ascended | into the heavens, and was like only
itself in its light. And the three light-modes
were of divers light-kinds, and they were of
divers type, one being more excellent than the
Other. y...4-4

And it came to pass then, when the disciples
saw this, that they feared exceedingly, and were
in agitation. Then Jesus, the compassionate and
tender-hearted, when he saw his disciples, that
they were in great agitation, spake with them,
saying: “ Take courage. It is I, be not afraid.”

It came to pass then, when the disciples had
heard this word, that they said: “Lord, if it be
thou, withdraw thy light-glory into thyself
that we may be able to stand; otherwise our eyes
are darkened, and we are agitated, and the whole
wotld also is in agitation because of the great light
which is about thee.”

Then Jesus drew to himself the glory of his
light; and when this was done, all the disciples
took courage, stepped forward to Jesus, fell down
all together, adored him, rejoicing in great joy,
and said unto him: “Rabbi, whither hast thou
gone, or what was thy ministry on which thou hast
gone, or wherefor rather were all these confusions
and all the earth-quakings which have taken
place?”


FIRST BOOK 7


Then Jesus, the compassionate, said unto them:
“ Rejoice and exult from this hour on, for I have
gone to the regions out of which I had come forth.
From this day on then will I discourse with you
in openness, | from the beginning of the Truth
unto its completion; and I will discourse with
you face to face without similitude. From this
hour on will I not hide anything from you of the
[mystery] of the height and of that of the region
of Truth. For authority hath been given me
through the Ineffable and through the First
Mystery of all mysteries to speak with you,
from the Beginning right up to the Fulness, both
from within without and from without within.
Hearken, therefore, that I may tell you all things.

“Tt came to pass, when I sat a little removed
from you on the Mount of Olives, that I thought
on the order of the ministry for the sake of which
I was sent, that it was completed, and that the
last mystery, that is the four-and-twentieth
mystery from within without,—those which are
in the second space of the First Mystery, in the
orders of that space,—had not yet sent me my
Vesture. It came to pass then, when I had known
that the order of the ministry for the sake of
which I had come, was completed, and that that
mystery had not yet sent me my Vesture, which
I had left behind in it, until its time was com-
pleted—thinkine then this, I sat on the Mount
of Olives a little removed from you.

“Tt came to pass, when the sun rose in the east,
thereafter then through the First Mystery, which
existed from the beginning, on account of which


He pro-
miseth to
tell them all
things.


9.


CHAP. 7.


the universe hath arisen, | out of which also I am 10.


myself now come, not in the time before my


How the
Vesture of
Light was
sent unto
him.


Of the souls
of the disci-
ples and
their incar-
nation.

11.


8 PISTIS SOPHIA


crucifixion, but now,—it came to pass, through
the command of that mystery, that there should
be sent me my Light-vesture, which it had given
me from the beginning, and which I had left be-
hind in the last mystery, that is the four-and-
twentieth mystery from within without,—those
which are in the orders of the second space of the
First Mystery. That Vesture then I left behind
in the last mystery, until the time should be com-
pleted to put it on, and I should begin to discourse
with the race of men and reveal unto them all
from the beginning of the Truth to its completion,
and discourse with them from the interiors of the
interiors to the exteriors of the exteriors and from
the exteriors of the exteriors to the interiors of
the interiors. Rejoice then and exult and rejoice
more and mote greatly, for to you it is given that I
speak first with you from the beginning of the
Truth to its completion.

“For this cause have I chosen you verily from
the beginning through the First Mystery. Rejoice
then and exult, for when I set out for the world, |
I brought from the beginning with me twelve
powers, as I have told you from the beginning,
which I have taken from the twelve saviours of the
Treasury of the Light, according to the command
of the First Mystery. These then I cast into the
womb of your mothers, when I came into the
world, that is those which are in your bodies to-
day. For these powers have been given unto you
before the whole world, because ye are they who
will save the whole world, and that ye may be able
to endure the threat of the rulers of the world and
the pains of the world and its dangers and all its
persecutions, which the rulers of the height will


FIRST BOOK 9


bring upon you. For many times have I said
unto you that I have brought the power in you out
of the twelve saviours who are in the Treasury
of the Light. For which cause I have said unto
you indeed from the beginning that ye are not
of the world. I also am not of it. For all
men who are in the world have gotten their souls
out of [the power of] the rulers of the zons. But
the power which is in you is from me; your souls
belong to the height. I have brought twelve
powers of the twelve saviours of the Treasury
of the Light, taking them out of the portion of
my power which | I did first receive. And
when I had set forth for the world, I came into
the midst of the rulers of the sphere and had the
form of Gabriel the angel of the eons; and the
rulers of the eons did not know me, but they
thought that I was the angel Gabriel.

“Tt came to pass then, when I had come into
the midst of the rulers of the eons, that I looked
down on the world of mankind, by command
of the First Mystery. I found Elizabeth, the
mother of John the Baptizer, before she had
conceived him, and I sowed into her a power
which I had received from the little lad, the Good,
who is in the Midst, that he might be able to
make proclamation before me and make ready
my way, and baptize with the water of the
forgiveness of sins. That power then is in the
body of John.

“Moreover in place of the soul of the rulers
which he was appointed to receive, I found the
soul of the prophet Elias in the eons of the
sphere; and I took him thence, and took his
soul and brought it to the Virgin of Light, and


12.


Of the in-
carnation
of John the
Baptizer.


That John
was Elias in
a former


birth.


CHAP. 8.


Of his own
incarnation
through
Marty.


10 PISTIS SOPHIA


she gave it over to her receivers; they brought
it to the sphere of the rulers and cast it into the
womb of Elizabeth. So the power of the little
Iao, who is in the Midst, and the soul of the pro-
phet Elias, they were bound into the body of
John the Baptizer. For this cause then were
ye in doubt aforetime, | when I said unto you:
‘John said: I am not the Christ, and ye said
unto me: ‘It standeth written in the scripture:
When the Christ shall come, Elias cometh before
him and maketh ready his way. But when
ye said this unto me, I said unto you: ‘Elias
verily is come and hath made ready all things,
as it standeth written, and they have done unto
him as they would. And when I knew that
ye had not understood that I had discoursed
with you concerning the soul of Elias which is
bound into John the Baptizer, I answered you
in the discourse in openness face to face: ‘If
ye like to accept John the Baptizer: he is Elias,
of whom I have said that he will come.’ ”

And Jesus continued again in the discourse
and said: “It came to pass then thereafter,
that at the command of the First Mystery I
looked down on the world of mankind and found
Mary, who is called ‘my mother’ according to
the body of matter. I spake with her in the type
of Gabriel, and when she had turned herself to
the height towards me, I cast thence into her the
first power which I had received from Barbelo—
that is the body which I have borne in the height.
And instead of the soul I cast into her the power
which | I have received from the great Sabaoth,
the Good, who is in the region of the Right.

“And the twelve powers of the twelve saviours


FIRST BOOK 11


of the Treasury of the Light which I had received
from the twelve ministers of the Midst, I cast
into the sphere of the rulers. And the decans of
the rulers and their servitors thought that they
wete souls of the rulers; and the servitors
brought them, they bound them into the body
of your mothers. And when your time was
completed, ye were born in the world without
souls of the rulers in you. And ye have recetved
your portion out of the power which the last
Helper hath breathed into the Mixture, that
[power] which is blended with all the invisibles
and all rulers and all zons,—in a word, which
is blended with the world of destruction which
is the Mixture. This [power], which from the
beginning I brought out of myself, I have cast
into the First Commapdment, and the First
Commandment cast a portion thereof into the
great Light, and the great Light cast a portion
of that which it had received, into the five
Helpers, and the last Helper took a portion of
that which it received, and cast it into the
Mixture. And [this portion] is in all who are in
the Mixture, | as I have just said unto you.”

This then Jesus said to his disciples on the Mount
of Olives. Jesus containued again in the discourse
with his disciples [and said]: “Rejoice and exult
and add joy to your joy, for the times are com-
pleted for me to put on my Vesture, which hath
been prepared for me from the beginning, which
I left behind in the last mystery until the time
of its completion. Now the time of its com-
pletion is the time when I shall be commanded
through the First Mystery to discourse with
you from the beginning of the Truth to the


Mote con-
cerning the
light-

powers in the
disciples.


15.


Why they
should re-
joice that the
time of his
investi-

ture had
come.


CHAP. 9.


16.


CHAP. 10.


The mys-
tery of the
five words
on the
vesture.


The solution
thereof.


12 PISTIS SOPHIA


completion thereof, and from the interiors of
the interiors [to the exteriors of the exteriors],
for the world will be saved through you. Rejoice
then and exult, for ye are blessed before all
men who are on the earth. It is ye who will save
the whole world.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
saying these words to his disciples, that he
continued again in the discourse, and said unto
them: “Lo, I have then put on my Vesture,
and all authority hath been given me through
the First Mystery. Yet a little while and I
will tell you the mystery of the universe and the
fulness of the universe; and I will hide nothing
from you from this hour on, but in fulness will
I perfect you in all fulness and | in all perfection
and in all mysteries, which are the perfection
of all perfections and the fulness of all fulnesses
and the gnosis of all gnoses,—those which are
in my Vesture. I will tell you all mysteries
from the exteriors of the exteriors to the interiors
of the interiors. But hearken that I may tell
you all things which have befallen me.

“Tt came to pass then, when the sun had
risen in the east, that a great light-power came
down, in which was my Vesture, which I had
left behind in the four-and-twentieth mystery,
as I have said unto you. And I found a mystery
in my Vesture, written in five words of those from
the height: ama rama oxza rachama 6zai,—
whose solution is this:

“*QO Mystery, which is without in the world,
for whose sake the universe hath arisen,—this
is the total outgoing and the total ascent, which
hath emanated all emanations and all that is


FIRST BOOK 13


therein and for whose sake all mysteries and all
their regions have arisen,—come hither unto us,
for we are thy fellow-members. We are all
with thyself; we are one and the same. Thou
art the First Mystery, | which existed from 17.
the beginning in the Ineffable before it came
forth; and the name thereof are we all. Now,
therefore, are we all come to meet thee at the
last limit, which also is the last mystery from
within; itself is a portion of us. Now, there-
fore, have we sent thee thy Vesture, which hath
belonged to thee from the beginning, which
thou hast left behind in the last limit, which
also is the last mystery from within, until its
time should be completed, according to the
commandment of the First Mystery. Lo, its
time is completed; put it on [thee].

“*Come unto us, for we all draw nigh to thee rhe three
to clothe thee with the First Mystery and _ all i o
his glory, by commandment of himself, in that
the First Mystery hath given us it, consisting
of two vestutes, to clothe thee therewith, besides
the one which we have sent thee, for thou art
worthy of them, since thou art prior to us, and
existeth before us. For this cause, therefore,
hath the First Mystery sent thee through us the
mystery of all his glory, consisting of two vestures.

“In the first is the whole glory of all the The first
names of all mysteries and all emanations of “““~
the orders | of the spaces of the Ineffable. 18.

“* And in the second vesture is the whole glory The second
of the name of all mysteries and all emanations ““""*
which are in the orders of the two spaces of the
First Mystery.

“* And in this [third] vesture, which we have


The third


vesture.


14 PISTIS SOPHIA


just sent thee, is the glory of the name of the
mystery of the Revealer, which is the First
Commandment, and of the mystery of the five
Impressions, and of the mystery of the great
Envoy of the Ineffable, who is the great Light,
and of the mystery of the five Leaders, who are
the five Helpers. There is further in this vesture
the glory of the name of the mystery of all orders
of the emanations of the Treasury of the Light
and of their saviours, and [of the mystery] of
the orders of the ordets, which are the seven
Améns and the seven Voices and the five Trees
and the three Améns and the Twin-saviour, that
is the Child of the Child, and of the mystery of
the nine guards of the three gates of the Treasury
of the Light. There is further therein the whole
glory of the name [of all those] which are in the
Right, and of all those which are in the Midst.
And further there is therein the whole glory of
the name of the great Invisible, | which is the
great Forefather, and the mystery of the three
triple-powers and the mystery of their whole
region and the mystery of all their invisibles
and of all those who are in the thirteenth on,
and the name of the twelve zons and of all their
rulers and all their archangels and all their
angels and of all those who are in the twelve
eons, and the whole mystery of the name of all
those who are in the Fate and in all the heavens,
and the whole mystery of the name of all those
who are in the sphere, and of its fimaments
and of all who are in them, and of all their
regions.

“*To, therefore, we have sent thee this vesture,
which no one knew from the First Command-


FIRST BOOK 15


ment downwards, for the glory of its light was
hidden in it, and the spheres and all regions from
the First Commandment downwards [have not
known it}. Haste thee, therefore, clothe
thyself with this vesture and come unto us.
For we draw nigh unto thee, to clothe thee by
command of the First Mystery with thy two
vestutes [other] which existed for thee from the
beginning with the First Mystery until the time
appointed by the Ineffable is completed. | Come,
therefore, to us quickly, that we may put them
on thee, until thou hast fulfilled the total ministry
of the perfection of the First Mystery which is
appointed by the Ineffable. Come, therefore,
to us quickly, in order that we may clothe thee
with them, according to. the command of the
First Mystery. For yet a little while, a very
little while, and thou shalt come unto us and leave
the world. Come, therefore, quickly, that thou
mayest receive thy whole glory, that is the glory
of the First Mystery.’

“Tt came to pass then, when I saw the mystery
of all these words in the vesture which was sent
me, that straightway I clothed myself therewith,
and I shone most exceedingly and soared into
the height.

“T came before the [first] gate of the firmament,
shining most exceedingly, and there was no
measure for the light which was about me, and
the gates of the firmament were shaken one
over against another and all opened at once.

“And all rulers and all authorities and all
angels therein were thrown all together into
agitation because of the great light which was on
me. And they gazed at the radiant vesture of


The day of
‘Come unto


>


us.


20.


CHAP. 11.


Jesus
putteth on
his vestures.


He enter-
eth the
firmament.


The powers

of the firma-

ment are

amazed and

fall down

and adore
im.


21.


CHAP. 12.


He entereth
the first
sphere.


The powers
of the first
sphere are
amazed and
fall down
and adore
him.


22.


16 PISTIS SOPHIA


light with which I was clad, and they saw the
mystery which contains their names, | and they
feared most exceedingly. And all their bonds
with which they were bound, were unloosed and
every one left his order, and they all fell down
before me, adored and said: ‘How hath the
lord of the universe passed through us without
out knowing?’ And they all sang praises to-
gether to the interiors of the interiors; but me
they saw not, but they saw only the light. And
they were in great fear and were exceedingly
agitated and sang praises to the interiors of the
interiors.

“ And I left that region behind me and ascended
to the first sphere, shining most exceedingly,
forty-and-nine-times more brightly than I had
shone in the firmament. It came to pass then,
when I had reached the gate of the first sphere,
that its gates were shaken and opened of them-
selves at once.

“T entered into the houses of the sphere,
shining most exceedingly, and there was no
measure to the light that was about me. And
all the rulers and all those who are in that sphere,
fell into agitation one against another. And
they saw the ereat light that was about me,
and they gazed upon my vesture and saw thereon
the mystery of their name. And they fell into
still greater agitation, and were in great fear;
saying: ‘How hath the lord of the universe
passed through us without our knowing?’ |
And all their bonds were unloosed and _ their
regions and their orders; and everyone left his
order, and they fell down all together, adored
before me, or before my vesture, and all sang


FIRST BOOK 17


praises together to the interiors of the interiors,
being in great fear and great agitation.

“And I left that region behind me and came
to the gate of the second sphere, which is
Fate. Then were all its gates thrown into
agitation and opened of themselves. And I
entered into the houses of the Fate, shining most
exceedingly, and there was no measure for the
light that was about me, for I shone in the Fate
forty-and-nine times more than in the [first]
sphere.

“And all the rulers and all those who are in
the Fate, were thrown into agitation and fell
on one another and were in exceeding great fear
on seeing the great light that was about me.
And they gazed on my vesture of light and saw
the mystery of their name on my vesture and fell
into still greater agitation; and they were in
great fear, saying: “How hath the lord of the
universe passed through us without our knowing?’
And all the bonds of their regions and of their
orders and of their houses were unloosed; they
all came at once, fell down, adored before me
and sang praises all together | to the interiors
of the interiors, being in great fear and great
agitation.

“ And I left that region behind me and ascended
to the great aeons of the rulers and came before
their veils and their gates, shining most exceed-
ingly, and there was no measure for the light
which was about me. It came to pass then,
when I arttived at the twelve eons, that their
veils and their gates were shaken one over against
the other. Their veils drew themselves apart
of their own accord; and their gates opened one


CHAP. 13.


He entereth
the ssecond
sphere.


The powers
of the sec-
ond sphere
are amazed
and fall
down and
adore him.


23.


CHAP. 14.


He entereth
the xons.


The powers
of the zons
are amazed
and fall
down and
adore him.


24.


18 PISTIS SOPHIA


over against the other. And I entered into the
eons, shining most exceedingly, and there was
no measure for the light that was about me,
forty-and-nine times more than the light with
which I shone in the houses of the Fate.

“And all the angels of the sons and _ their
archangels and their rulers and their gods and
their lords and their authorities and their tyrants
and their powers and their light-sparks and their
light-givers and their unpaired and their in-
visibles and their forefathers and their triple-
powers saw me, shining most exceedingly, and
there was no measure for the light which was
about me. And they were thrown into agitation
the one over against the other and great fear
fell upon them, when they saw the great light
that was about me. And in their great agitation
and their great fear they withdrew as far as |
the region of the great invisible Forefather, and
of the three great triple-powers. And because of
the great fear of their agitation, the great
Forefather, he and the three triple-powers, kept
on running hither and thither in his region,
and they could not close all their regions because
of the great fear in which they were. And they
agitated all their sons together and all their
spheres and all tbeir orders, fearing and being
greatly agitated beeause of the great light which
was about me—not of the former quality that it
was about me when I was on the earth of man-
kind, when the light-vesture came over me,—
for the world could not bear the light such as it
was in its truth, else would the world at once
be destroyed and all upon it but the light
which was about me in the twelve sons was


FIRST BOOK 19


eight-thousand-and-seven-hundred-myriad times
greater than that which was about me in the
world among you.

“Tt came to pass then, when all those who
are in the twelve zons saw the great light which
was about me, that they were all thrown into
agitation one over against the other, and ran
hither and thither in the eons. And all eons
and all heavens and their whole ordering were
agitated one over against the other | on account
of the great fear which was on them, for they
knew not the mystery which had taken place.
And Adamas, the great Tyrant, and all the
tyrants in all the eons began to fight in vain
against the light, and they knew not against
whom they fought, because they saw nothing
but the overmastering light.

“Tt came to pass then, when they fought against
the light, that they were weakened all together
one with another, were dashed down in the zons
and became as the inhabitants of the earth,
dead and without breath of life.

“And I took from all a third of their power,
that they should no more be active in their evil
doings, and that, if the men who are in the world,
invoke them in their mysteries—those which
the angels who transgressed have brought down,
that is their sorceries,—in order that, therefore,
if they invoke them in their evil doings, they
may not be able to accomplish them.

“And the Fate and the sphere over which
they rule, I have changed and brought it to pass
that they spend six months turned to the left
and accomplish their influences, and that six
months they face to the right and accomplish


CHAP. 15.


Adamas
and the
tyrants
fight
against the


light.


25.


He taketh
from them
a third of
their power.


He
changeth
the motion
of their
spheres.


26.


CHAP. 16.


CHAP. 17.


Mary
Magdalene
asketh and
receiveth
permission
to speak.


CHAP. 18.


27.


20 PISTIS SOPHIA


their influences. For by command of the First
Commandment and by command of the First
Mystery | Yew, the Overseer of the Light, had
set them facing the left at every time and accom-
plishing their influences and their deeds.

“Tt came to pass then, when I came into their
region, that they mutinied and fought against
the light. And I took the third of their power,
in order that they should not be able to accomplish
their evil deeds. And the Fate and the sphere,
over which they rule, I have changed, and set
them facing the left six months and accomplishing
their influences, and I have set them turned
another six months to the right and accomplishing
their influences.”

When then he had said this to his disciples,
he said unto them: “ Who hath ears to hear,
let him hear.”

It came to pass then, when Mary had heard
the Saviour say these words, that she gazed
fixedly into the air for the space of an hour.
She said: “ My Lord, give commandment unto me
to speak in openness.”

And Jesus, the compassionate, answered and
said unto Mary: “Mary, thou blessed one,
whom I will perfect in all mysteries of those of
the height, discourse in openness, thou, whose
heart is raised to the kingdom of heaven more
than all thy brethren.”

Then said Mary to the Saviour: “My Lord,
the word which thou hast spoken unto us: ‘ Who
| hath ears to hear, let him hear,’ thou sayest
in order that we may understand the word which
thouhast spoken. Hearken, therefore, my Lord,
that I may discourse in openness.


FIRST BOOK 21


“The word which thou hast spoken: ‘T
have taken a third from the power of the rulers
of all the sons, and changed their Fate and their
sphere over which they rule, in order that, if the
race of men invoke them in the mysteries—
those which the angels who transgressed have
taught them for the accomplishing of their evil
and lawless deeds in the mystery of their sorcery,’
—in order then that they may no more from
this hour accomplish their lawless deeds, because
thou hast taken their power from them and from
their horoscope-casters and their consulters
and from those who declare to the men in the
world all things which shall come to pass, in order
that they should no more from this hour know
how to declare unto them any thing at all which
will come to pass (for thou hast changed their
spheres, and hast made them spend six months
turned to the left and accomplishing their in-
fluences, and another six months facing the right
and accomplishing their influences),—concerning
this word then, my Lord, the power which was
in the prophet Isaiah, hath spoken thus and
proclaimed aforetime in a _ spiritual — simili-
tude, discoursing on the ‘ Vision about Egypt’:
‘Where then, O Egypt, where are thy consulters
and horoscope-casters and those who cry | out
of the earth and those who cry out of their belly?
Let them then declare unto thee from now on the
deeds which the lord Sabaoth will do!’

“The power then which was in the prophet
Isaiah, prophesied before thou didst come,
that thou wouldst takeaway the power of the
rulers of the sons and wouldst change their
sphere and their Fate, in order that they might


Mary inter-
preteth the
discourse
from the
words of
Isaiah.


CHAP. 19.


20.


Jesus com-
mendeth
Mary. She
further
questioneth
him on the
changing of
the spheres.


CHAP. 20.


22 PISTIS SOPHIA


know nothing from now on. For this cause it
hath said also: ‘ Ye shall then know not of what
the lord Sabadth will do’; that is, none of the
rulers will know what thou wilt do from now on,
—for they are ‘Egypt’ because they are matter.
The power then which was in Isaiah, prophesied
concerning thee aforetime, saying: ‘From now
on ye shall then know not what the lord Sabaoth
will do.’ Because of the light-power which thou
didst teceive from Sabaoth, the Good, who is
in the region of the Right, and which is in thy
material body to-day, for this cause then,
my Lord Jesus, thou hast said unto us: ‘Who
hath ears to hear, let him hear,—in order that
thou mightest know whose heart is ardently raised
to the kingdom of heaven.”

It came to pass then, when Mary had finished
saying these words, that he said: “ Well said, Mary,
for thou art blessed before all women on the earth, |
because thou shalt be the fulness of all fulnesses
and the perfection of all perfections.”

Now when Mary had heard the Saviour speak
these words, she exulted greatly, and she came
before Jesus, fell down before him, adored
his feet and said unto him: “ My Lord, hearken
unto me, that I may question thee on this word,
before that thou discoursest with us about the
regions whither thou didst go.”

Jesus answered and said unto Mary: “ Dis-
course in openness and fear not; all things on
which thou questionest, I will reveal unto thee.”

She said: “ My Lord, will all the men who know
the mystery of the magic of all the rulers of all
the zons of the Fate and of those of the sphere,
in the way in which the angels who transgressed


FIRST BOOK 23


have taught them, if they invoke them in their
mysteries, that is in their evil magic, to the
hindering of good deeds,—will they accomplish
them henceforth from now on or not?”


Jesus answered and said unto Mary: “ They Jesus ex-


will not accomplish them as they accomplished
them from the beginning, because I have taken
away a third of their power; but they will raise a
loan from those who know the mysteries of the
magic of the thirteenth zon. And if they invoke
the mysteries of the magic of those who are in the
thirteenth zon, | they will accomplish them
well and surely, because I have not taken away
power from that region, according to the command
of the First Mystery.”

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished
saying these words, that Mary continued again
and said: “ My Lord, will not then the horoscope-
casters and consulters from now on declare unto
men what will come to pass for them?”

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary:
“Tf the horoscope-casters find the Fate and the
sphere turned towards the left, according to their
first extension, their words will come to pass,
and they will say what is to take place. But
if they chance on the Fate or the sphere turned to
the right, they are bound to say nothing true,
for I have changed their influences and _ their
squares and their triangles and their octagons;
seeing that their influences from the beginning
onwards were continuously turned to the left and
their squares and their triangles and their
octagons. But now I have made them spend
six months turned to the left and six months
turned to the right. | He who then shall find their


plaineth
further the
conversion
of the
spheres.


CHAP. 21.


31.


32.


24 PISTIS SOPHIA


reckoning from the time when I changed them,
setting them so as to spend six months facing
towards their left. and six months facing their
right paths——he who then shall observe them
in this wise, | will know their influences surely
and will declare all things which they will do.
In like manner also the consulters, if they invoke
the names of the rulers and chance on them
facing the left, will tell [men] with accuracy all
things concerning which they shall ask their
decans. On the contrary, if the consulters invoke
their names when they face to the right, they
will not give ear unto them, because they are
facing in another form compared with their former
position in which Yew had established them;
seeing that other are their names when they are
turned to the left and other their names when
they are turned to the right. And if they invoke
them when they are turned to the right, they
will not tell them the truth, but they will con-
found them with confusion and threaten them
with threatening. Those then who do not know
their path, when they are turned to the right,
and their triangles and their squares and all
their figures, will find nothing true, but will be
confounded in great confusion and will find
themselves in great delusion, because I have
now changed the works which they effected
aforetime in their squares, when turned to the
left, and In their triangles and in their octagons,
in which they were busied continuously turned
to the left; and I have made them spend six
months forming all their configurations turned to
the right, in order that they may be confounded in
confusion in their whole range. | And moreover


FIRST BOOK 25


I have made them spend six months turned to the
left and accomplishing the works of their influences
and all their configurations, in order that the rulers
who are in the zons and in their spheres and in
their heavens and in all their regions, may be
confounded in confusion and deluded in delusion,
so that they may not understand their own paths.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished CHapP. 22.

saying these words, while Philip sat and wrote all Phillip
the words that Jesus spake,—thereafter then a
it came to pass that Philip came forward, fell
down and adored the feet of Jesus, saying:
“My Lord and Saviour, grant me authority to
discourse before thee and to question thee on
this word, before thou discoursest with us con-
cerning the regions whither thou didst go because
of thy ministry.”

And the compassionate Saviour answered and
said unto Philip: “ Authority is given thee to
bring forward the word which thou willest.”

And Philip answered and said unto Jesus:

“My Lord, on account of what mystery hast
thou changed the binding of the rulers and their
eons and their Fate and their sphere and all
their regions, and made them confounded in
confusion on their path and deluded in their
course? Hast thou then done this unto them
for the salvation of the world or hast thou not?”

And Jesus answered and said unto Philip and to CHapP. 23.
all the disciples together: “I have | changed 33.
their path for the salvation of all souls. Amén, eres
amén, I say unto you: If I had not changed «ons was
their path, a host of souls would have been ae
destroyed, and they would have spent a long
time, if the rulers of the zons and the rulets of


CHAP. 26.


Mary ques-
tioneth him
again..


34.


CHAP. 25.


26 PISTIS SOPHIA


the Fate and of the sphere and of all their regions
and all their heavens and all their aeons had
not been brought to naught; and the souls
would have continued a long time here outside,
and the completion of the number of perfect
souls would have been delayed, which [souls]
shall be counted in the Inheritance of the Height
through the mysteries and shall be in the Treasury
of the Light. For this cause then I have changed
their path, that they might be deluded and _ fall
into agitation and yield up the power which is
in the matter of their world and which they
fashion into souls, in order that those who shall
be saved, might be quickly purified and raised
on high, they and the whole power, and that
those who shall not be saved, might be quickly
destroyed.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
saying these words unto his disciples, that Mary,
the fair in her discourse and the blessed one,
came forward, fell at the feet of Jesus and said:
“My Lord, suffer me that I speak before thee,
and | be not wroth with me, if oft I give thee
trouble questioning thee.”

The Saviour, full of compassion, answered and
said unto Mary: “Speak the word which thou
willest, and I will reveal it to thee in all openness.”

Mary answered and said unto Jesus: “ My
Lord, in what way will the souls have delayed
themselves here outside, and in what type will
they be quickly purified?”

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary:
“Well said, Mary; thou questionest finely with
thy excellent question, and thou throwest light
on all things with surety and precision. Now,


FIRST BOOK 27


therefore, from now on will I hide nothing from
you, but I will reveal unto you all things with
surety and openness. Hearken then, Mary, and
give ear, all ye disciples: Before I made pro-
clamation to all the rulers of the zons and to all
the rulers of the Fate and of the sphere, they were
all bound in their bonds and in their spheres
and in their seals, as Yew, the Overseer of the
Light, had bound them from the beginning;
and every one of them remained in his order,
and every one journeyed according to his course,
as Yew, the Overseer of the Light, had estab-
lished them. And when the time of the number
of Melchisedec, the great Receiver of the Light,
came, he was wont to come into the midst of the
eons and of all the rulers | who are bound in
the sphere and in the Fate, and he carried away
the purification of the light from all the rulers
of the zons and from all the rulers of the Fate
and from those of the sphere—for he carried
away then that which brings them into agitation
—and he set in motion the hastener who is over
them, and made them turn their circles swiftly,
and he [sc. the hastener] carried away their power
which was in them and the breath of their
mouth and the tears [44 waters] of their eyes
and the sweat of their bodies.

“And Melchisedec, the Receiver of the Light,
purifieth those powers and carrieth their light into
the Treasury of the Light, while the servitors of
all the rulers gather together all matter from them
all; and the servitors of all the rulers of the Fate
and the servitors of the sphere which is below
the «ons, take it and fashion it into souls of men
and cattle and reptiles and wild-beasts and birds,


The coming
of Melchise-
dec.


35.


Of the
fashioning
of the souls
of men.


36.


CHAP. 26.


28 PISTIS SOPHIA


and send them down into the world of mankind.
And further the receivers of the sun and the
receivers of the moon, if they look above and see
the configurations of the paths of the zons and the
configurations of the Fate and those of the
sphere, then they take from them the _light-
power; and the | receivers of the sun get it
ready and deposit it, until they hand it over to
the receivers of Melchisedec, the Light-purifier.
And their material refuse they bring to the
sphere which is below the zons, and fashion it
into [souls of] men, and fashion it also into souls
of reptiles and of cattle and of wild-beasts and of
birds, according to the circle of the rulers of that
sphere and according to all the configurations of
its revolution, and they cast them into this world
of mankind, and they become souls in this region,
as I have just said unto you.

“This then they accomplished continuously
before their power was diminished in them and
they waned and became exhausted, or powerless.
It came to pass then, when they became power-
less, that their power began to cease in them,
so that they became exhausted in their power,
and their light, which was in their region, ceased
and their kingdom was destroyed, and the uni-
verse became quickly raised up.

“Tt came to pass then, when they had perceived
this at the time, and when the number of the
cipher of Melchisedec, the Receiver [of the Light],
happened, then had he to come out again and
enter into the midst of the rulers of all the zons
and into the midst of all the rulers of the Fate
and of those of the sphere; and he threw them
into agitation, and made them quickly abandon


FIRST BOOK 29


their circles. And forthwith they were con-
strained, and cast forth the power out of them-
selves, out of the breath of their mouth and
the | tears of their eyes and the sweat of their
bodies.

“And Melchisedec, the Receiver of the Light,
purifieth them, as he doth continually; he carrieth
their light into the Treasury of the Light. And
all the rulers of the zons and the rulers of the
Fate and those of the sphere turn to the
matter of their refuse; they devour it and do not
let it go and become souls in the world. They
devour then their matter, so that they may not
become powerless and exhausted and their power
cease in them and their kingdom become destroyed,
but in order that they may delay and linger a
long time until the completion of the number of
the perfect souls who shall be in the Treasury of
the Light.

“Tt came to pass then, when the rulers of the
eons and those of the Fate and those of the
sphere continued to carry out this type,—turning
on themselves, devouring the refuse of their
matter, and not allowing souls to be born into
the world of mankind, in order that they might
delay in being rulers, and that the powers
which are in their powers, that is the souls,
might spend a long time here outside,—they
then persisted doing this continually for two
circles.

“Tt came to pass then, when I wished to ascend
for the ministry for the sake of which I was
called | by command of the First Mystery, that
I came up into the midst of the tyrants of the
rulers of the twelve zons, with my light-vesture


37.


The rulers
devour their
matter so
that souls
may not be
fashioned.


CHAP. 27.


Of the
fashioning
of the souls
of men.


Amadas and
the tyrants
fight against
the light-


vesture.


Jesus tak-
eth from
them a
third of
their power
and chang-
eth their
course.


39.


30 PISTIS SOPHIA


about me, shining most exceedingly, and there was
no measure for the light which was about me.

“Tt came to pass then, when those tyrants saw
the great light which was about me, that the
great Adamas, the Tyrant, and all the tyrants
of the twelve zons, all together began to fight
against the light of my vesture, desiring to hold
it fast among them, in order to delay in their
tulership. This then they did, not knowing
against whom they fought.

“When then they mutinied and fought against
the light, thereon by command of the First
Mystery I changed the paths and the courses of
their sons and the paths of their Fate and of
their sphere. I made them face six months towards
the triangles on the left and towards the squares
and towards those in their aspect and towards
their octagons, just as they had formerly been.
But their manner of turning, or facing, I changed
to another order, and made them other six
months face towards the works of their in-
fluences in the squares on the right and in their
triangles and in those in their aspect and in their
octagons. And I made them to be confounded
in great confusion and deluded in great delusion |
—the rulers of the eons and all the rulers of
the Fate and those of the sphere; and I set them
in great agitation, and thence on they were no
longer able to turn towards the refuse of their
matter to devour it, in order that their regions
may continue to delay and they [themselves]
may spend a long time as rulers.

“But when I had taken away a third of their
power, I changed their spheres, so that they
spend a time facing to the left and another time


FIRST BOOK 31


facing to the right. I have changed their whole
path and their whole course, and I have made the
path of their course to hurry, so that they may
be quickly purified and raised up quickly. And I
have shortened their circles, and made their path
more speedy, and it will be exceedingly hurried.
And they were thrown into confusion in their
path, and from then on were no more able to
devour the matter of the refuse of the purification
of their light. And moreover I have shortened
their times and their periods, so that the perfect
number of souls who shall receive the mysteries
matter. and be in the Treasury of the Light, shall be
quickly completed. For had I not changed
their courses, and had I not shortened their
periods, they would not have let any soul come
into the world, because of the matter of their
refuse | which they devoured, and they would
have destroyed many souls. For this cause I
said unto you afore time: ‘I have shortened the
times because of my elect; otherwise no soul
would have been able to be saved.’ And I have
shortened the times and the periods because of
the perfect number of. the souls who shall receive
the mysteries, that is to say, the ‘elect’; and
had I not shortened their periods, no material
soul would have been saved, but they would have
perished in the fire which is in the flesh of the
rulers. This then is the word on which thou dost
question me with precision.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
speaking these words unto his disciples, that they
fell down all together, adored him and said to
him: “ Blessed are we before all men, for unto us
thou hast revealed these great exploits.”


They no
mote have
the power
of devour-
ing their
matter.


CHAP. 28.


The powers
adore the
light-ves-
ture.


41.


The tyrants
become as


the dead.


32 PISTIS SOPHIA


And Jesus continued again in his discourse and
said unto his disciples: “ Hearken concerning the
things which befell me among the rulers of the
twelve eons and all their rulers and their lords
and their authorities and their angels and their
archangels. When then they had seen the vesture
of light which was about me, they and their
unpaired, then every one of them saw the mystery
of his name, that it was on my | vesture of light,
which was about me. ‘They fell down all to-
gether, adored the vesture of light which was
about me, and cried out all together, saying:
‘How hath the lord of the universe passed
through us without our knowing it?? And they
all sang praises together to the interiors of the
interiors. And all their triple-powers and _ their
great forefathers and their ungenerated and their
self-generated and their generated and their gods
and their light-sparks and their light-bearers—in a
word all their great ones—saw the tyrants of
their region, that their power was diminished in
them. And they were in weakness and them-
selves fell into great and immeasurable fear. And
they gazed on the mystery of their name on my
vestute, and they had set out to come and adore
the mystery of their name which was on my
vesture, and they could not because of the great
light which was about me; but they adored a
little removed from me, and they adored the light
of my vesture and all cried out together, singing
praises to the interiors of the interiors.

“Tt came to pass then, when this befell among
the tyrants who are below these rulers, that they
all lost power and fell down to the ground in
their aeons and became as the dead _ world-


FIRST BOOK 33


dwellers with no breath in them, as they | be-
came in the hour when I took from them their
power.

“Tt came to pass then thereafter, when I left
those eons, that everyone of all those who were
in the twelve eons, was bound to their order all
together, and they accomplished their works as
I have established them, so that they spend six
months turned to the left and accomplishing
their works in their squares and their triangles
and in those which are in their aspect, and that
further they spend another six months facing to
the right and towards their triangles and their
squares and those which are in their aspect.

Thus then will those who are in the Fate and in
the sphere travel.

“Tt came to pass then thereafter that I ascended CHAP. 29.
to the veils of the thirteenth zon. It came to Jesusen-
pass then, when I had arrived at their veils, that oie
they drew apart of their own accord and opened 25ar4..
themselves for me. I entered in into the thir- tsSophia
teenth zon and found Pistis Sophia below the
thirteenth zon all alone and no one of them with
her. And she sat in that region grieving and
mourning, because she had not been admitted
into the thirteenth eon, her higher region.

And she was moreover grieving because of the
torments which Self-willed, who is one of the
three triple-powers, had inflicted on her. But
this.—when I shall come to speak with you
respecting their expansion, | I will tell you the 43.
mystery, how this befell her.

“Tt came to pass then, when Pistis Sophia saw sophia and
me shining most exceedingly and with no measure Pile"


powers be-


for the light which was about me, that she was in Toke the


CHAP. 30.
Mary desir-
eth to hear
the story

of Sohpia..


44.


Sophia de-
sireth to
enter the
Light-word.


34 PISTIS SOPHIA


great agitation and gazed at the light of my
vestute. She saw the mystery of her name on
my vesture and the whole glory of its mystery,
for formerly she was in the region of the height,
in the thirteenth zon-——but she was wont to
sing praises to the higher light, which she had seen
in the veil of the Treasury of the Light.

“Tt came to pass then, when she persisted in
singing praises to the higher light, that all the
rulers who are with the two great triple-powers,
and her invisible who is paired with her, and the
other two-and-twenty invisible emanations gazed
[at the light ],—in as much as Pistis Sophia and
her pair, they and the other two-and-twenty
emanations make up four-and-twenty emanations,
which the great invisible. Forefather and the two
great triple-powers have emanated.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had said this
unto his disciples, that Mary came forward and
said: ““ My Lord, I have heard thee say aforetime:
‘Pistis Sophia is herself one of the four-and-
twenty emanations,—how then is she not in
their region? | But thou hast said: ‘I found
her below the thirteenth zon.’ ”


[THE STorRY OF PIsTIs SOPHIA]


And Jesus answered and said unto his disciples:
“Tt came to pass, when Pistis Sophia was in the
thirteenth zon, in the region of all her brethren
the invisibles, that is the four-and-twenty emana-
tions of the great Invisible,—it came to pass then
by command of the First Mystery that Pistis
Sophia gazed into the height. She saw the light
of the veil of the Treasury of the Light, and she


FIRST BOOK 35


longed to reach to that region, and she could not
reach to that region. But she ceased to perform
the mystery of the thirteenth zon, and sang
praises to the light of the height, which she had
seen in the light of the veil of the Treasury of the
Light.

“Tt came to pass then, when she sang praises
to the region of the height, that all the rulers in
the twelve eons, who are below, hated her, because
she had ceased from their mysteries, and because
she had desired to go into the height and be above
them all. For this cause then they were enraged
against her and hated her, [as did] the great triple-
powered Self-willed, that is the third triple-power,
who is in the thirteenth zon, he who had become
disobedient, in as much as he had not emanated
the whole purification of his power in him, and
had not given the purification of his light at the
time when the rulers gave their purification, in
that he desired to rule over the whole thirteenth
zon | and those who are below it.

“Tt came to pass then, when the rulers of the
twelve zons were enraged against Pistis Sophia,
who is above them, and hated her exceedingly,
that the great triple-powered Self-willed, of whom I
have just now told you, joined himself to the
rulers of the twelve zons, and also was enraged
against Pistis Sophia and hated her exceedingly,
because she had thought to go to the light which
is higher than her. And he emanated out of
himself a great lion-faced power, and out of his
matter in him he emanated a host of other very
violent material emanations, and sent them into
the regions below, to the parts of the chaos, in
order that they might there lie in wait for Pistis


The rulers
hate her
for ceasing
in their
mystery.


45.


Self-willed
uniteth him-
self with

the rulers of
the twelve
zeons and
emanateth

a lion-faced
power to
plague
Sophia.


36 PISTIS SOPHIA


Sophia and take away her power out of her,
because she thought to go to the height which is
above them all, and moreover she had ceased to
perform their mystery, and lamented continu-
ously and sought after the light which she had
seen. And the rulers who abide, or persist, in
performing the mystery, hated her, and all the
guards who are at the gates of the eons, hated
her also.

“Tt came to pass then thereafter by command
of the First Commandment that the great triple-
powered Self-willed, who is one of the three |

46. triple-powers, pursued Sophia in the thirteenth
zon, in otder that she should look towards the
parts below, so that she might see in that region
his lion-faced light-power and long after it and
go to that region, so that her light might be taken


from her.
CHaP.31. “It came to pass then thereafter that she looked
Sophia below and saw his light-power in the parts below;


lionfeed and she knew not that it is that of the triple-
ae powered Self-willed, but she thought that it
the ere came out of the light which she had seen from the
: beginning in the height, which came out of the
veil of the Treasury of the Light. And she
thought to herself: I will go into that region
without my pair and take the light and thereout
fashion for myself light-zons, so that I may go
to the Light of lights, which is in the Height of
heights.
She de- “This then thinking, she went forth from her
scendet® © own tegion, the thirteenth won, and went down
wons and, to the twelve zons. The rulers of the zons


thechaos. pursued her and were enraged against her,
because she had thought of grandeur. And she


FIRST BOOK 37


went forth also from the twelve eons, and came
into the regions of the chaos and drew nigh to
that lion-faced light-power to devour it. But all |
the material emanations of Self-willed surrounded
her, and the great lion-faced light-power devoured
all the light-powers in Sophia and cleaned out her
light and devoured it, and her matter was thrust
into the chaos; it became a lion-faced ruler in
the chaos, of which one half is fire and the other
darkness,—that is Yaldabaoth, of whom I have
spoken unto you many times. When then this
befell, Sophia became very greatly exhausted,
and that lion-faced light-power set to work to
take away from Sophia all her light-powers, and
all the material powers of Self-willed surrounded
Sophia at the same time and pressed her sore.

“And Pistis Sophia cried out most exceedingly,
she cried to the Light of lights which she had seen
from the beginning, in which she had had faith,
and uttered this repentance, saying thus:

““1.0 Light of lights, in whom I have had
faith from the beginning, hearken now then,
O Light, unto my repentance. Save me, O Light,
for evil thoughts have entered into me.

“2.1 gazed, O Light, into the lower parts and
saw there a light, thinking: I will go to that
region, | in order that I may take that light.
And I went and found myself in the darkness
which is in the chaos below, and I could no more
speed thence and go to my region,- for I was
sore pressed by all the emanations of Self-willed,
and the lion-faced power took away my light
in me. .

“*3, And I cried for help, but my voice hath
not reached out of the darkness. And I looked


CHAP. 32.


The first
repentance


of Sophia.


49.


38 PISTIS SOPHIA


unto the height, that the Light, in which I had had
faith, might help me.

“4. And when I looked unto the height, I saw
all the rulers of the zons, how in their numbers
they looked down on me and rejoiced over me,
though I had done them no ill; but they hated
me without a cause. And when the emanations
of Self-willed saw the rulers of the zons rejoicing
over me, they knew that the rulers of the sons
would not come to my aid; and those emanations
which sore pressed me with violence, took
courage, and the light which I had not taken
from them, they have taken from me.

“<5. Now, therefore, O Light of Truth, thou
knowest that I have done this in my innocence,
thinking that the lion-faced light-power belonged
to thee; and the sin which I have done is open
before thee.

“*6, Suffer me no mote to lack, O Lord, for
I have had faith in thy light from the beginning;
O Lord, O Light of the powers, suffer me no
more to lack my light.

“<7. For because of thy inducement and for
the sake of thy light am I fallen into this oppres-
sion, and shame hath covered me.

“<8. And because of | the illusion of thy light,
I am become a stranger to my brethren, the
invisibles, and to the great emanations of Barbélo.

“<9. This hath befallen me, O Light, because
I have been zealous for thy abode; and the wrath
of Self-willed is come upon me—of him who had
not hearkened unto thy command to emanate
from the emanation of his power—because I was
in his zon without performing his mystery.

“10, And all the rulers of the zons mocked me.


FIRST BOOK 39


“11, And I was in that region, mourning and
seeking after the light which I had seen in the
height.

“*12. And the guards of the gates of the
zons seatched for me, and all who remain in
their mystery mocked me.

“* 13, But I looked up unto the height towards
thee and had faith in thee. Now, therefore, O
Light of lights, I am sore pressed in the darkness
of chaos. If now thou wilt come to save me,—
great is thy mercy,—then hear me in truth and
save me.

“*14. Save me out of the matter of this
darkness, that I may not be submerged therein,
that I may be saved from the emanations of god
Self-willed which press me sore, and from their
evil doings.

“*15, Let not this darkness submerge me,
and let not this lion-faced power entirely devour
the whole of my power, and | let not this chaos
shroud my power.

“*16. Hear me, O Light, for thy grace is
precious, and look down upon me according to
the great mercy of thy Light.

“17. Turn not thy face from me, for I am
exceedingly tormented.

“18. Haste thee, hearken unto me and save
my power.

“*19. Save me because of the rulers who hate
me, for thou knowest my sore oppression and my
torment and the torment of my power which
they have taken from me. ‘They who have set
me in all this evil are before thee; deal with them
according to thy good pleasure.

“20. My power looked forth from the midst


51.


40 PISTIS SOPHIA


of the chaos and from the midst of the darkness,
and I waited for my pair, that he should come and
fight for me, and he came not, and I looked that
he should come and lend me power, and I found
him not.

“*21. And when I sought the light, they gave
me darkness; and when I sought my power,
they gave me matter.

“© 22. Now, therefore, O Light of lights, may
the darkness and the matter which the emana-
tions of Self-willed have brought upon me, be
unto them for a snare, and may they be ensnared
therein, and recompense them and may they be
made to stumble and not come into the regign of
their Self-willed.

“°23. May they remain in the darkness and
not behold the light; may they behold the chaos
for ever, and let them not look unto the height.

“24. Bring upon them their revenge, and
may thy judgment lay hold upon them.

“*25. Let them not henceforth | come into
their region to their god Self-willed, and let not
his emanations henceforth come into their regions;
for their god is impious and self-willed, and he
thought that he had done this evil of himself,
not knowing that, had I not been brought low
according to thy command, he would not have
had any authority over me.

“26. But when thou hadst by thy command
brought me low, they pursued me the more, and
their emanations added pain to my humiliation.

“*27, And they have taken light-power from
me and fallen again to pressing me sore, in
order to take away all the light in me. Because
of this in which they have set me, let them not


FIRST BOOK 41


ascend to the thirteenth zon, the region of
Righteousness.

“28. But let them not be reckoned in the
lot of those who purify themselves and_ the
light, and let them not be reckoned with those
who will quickly repent, that they may quickly
receive mysteries in the Light.

“<29. For they have taken my light from me,
and my power hath begun to cease in me and I
am destitute of my light.

“* 30. Now, therefore, O Light, which is in
thee and is with me, I sing praises to thy name,
O Light, in glory.

“* 31. May my song of praise please thee, O
Light, as an excellent mystery, which leadeth to
the gates of the Light, which they who shall
repent will utter, and the light of which will
purify them.

“© 32. Now, therefore, let | all matters rejoice; 52.
seek ye all the Light, that the power of the stars
which is in you, may live.

“© 33. For the Light hath heard the matters,
nor will it leave any without having purified them.

“34. Let the souls and the matters praise
the Lord of an zons, and [let] the matters and all
that is in them [praise him].

“© 35. For God shall save their soul from all
matters, and a city shall be prepared in the Light,
and all the souls who are saved, will dwell in that
city and will inherit it.

“© 36. And the soul of them who shall receive
mysteries will abide in that region, and they
who have received mysteries in its name will
abide therein.’ ”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had spoken CHap. 33.


53.


Mary inter-
preteth the
first repent-
ance from
Psalm Ixviii.


42 PISTIS SOPHIA


these words unto his disciples, that he said unto
them: “This is the song of praise which Pistis
Sophia uttered in her first repentance, repenting
of her sin, and reciting all which had befallen
her. Now, therefore: ‘Who hath ears to hear, let
him heat.’ ”

Mary again came forward and said: “My
Lord, my indweller of light hath ears, and I
hear with my light-power, and thy spirit which
is with me, hath sobered me. Hearken then that
I may speak concerning the repentance
which Pistis Sophia hath uttered, speaking of |
her sin and all that befell her. Thy light-power
hath prophesied thereof aforetime through the
prophet David in the sixty-eighth Psalm:

“<1, Save me, O God, for the waters are come
in even unto my soul.

“2.1 sank, or am submerged, in the slime of
the abyss, and power was not. I have gone
down into the depths of the sea; a tempest hath
submerged me.

“*3,1 have kept on crying; my throat is
gone, my eyes faded, waiting patiently for God.

“*A4 They who hate me without a cause
are more than the hairs of my head; mighty
are my foes, who violently pursued me. They re-
quired of me that which I took not from them.

“*5,.God, thou hast known my foolishness,
and my faults are not hid from thee.

“*6,Let not them that wait on thee, O
Lord, Lord of powers, be ashamed for my sake;
let not those who seek thee be ashamed for my
sake, O Lord, God of Israel, God of powers.

“<7. Ror for thy sake have I endured shame;
shame hath covered my face.


FIRST BOOK 43


“*8.I am become a stranger to my brethren,
a stranger unto the sons of my mother.

“*9. For the zeal of thy house hath con-
sumed me; the revilings of them that revile
thee have fallen upon me.

“10.1 bowed my soul with fasting, and it
was turned to my reproach.

“11.1 put on sackcloth; I became unto
them a bye-word.

“12. They who sit at the gates, chattered at
me; and they who drink wine, harped about me.

“ “13. But I prayed with my soul unto thee, |
Lord; the time of thy well-liking is [now],
O God. In the fulness of thy grace give ear
unto my salvation in truth.

“<14, Save me out of this slime, that I sink
not therein; let me be saved from them that
hate me, and from the deep of waters.

“*15, Let not a water-flood submerge me,
let not the deep swallow me, let not a well close
its mouth above me.

“*16, Hear me, O Lord, for thy grace is good;
according to the fulness of thy compassion look
down upon me.

“17. Turn not thy face away from thy servant,
for I am oppressed.

“18. Hear me quickly, give heed to my soul
and deliver it.

“19. Save me because of my foes, for thou
knowest my disgrace, my shame and my dis-
honour; all my oppressors are before thee.

“*20. My heart awaiteth disgrace and misery;
I waited for him who should sorrow with me,
but I could not come at him, and for him who
should comfort me, and I found him not.


54.


55.


44 PISTIS SOPHIA


“21. They gave me gall for my meat; and
in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.

“*22. Let their table be unto them for a
trap and for a snare and for a retribution and
for a stumbling-block.

“23. Mayest thou bend their backs at all
time.

“24. Pour out thy anger upon them, and let
the wrath of thy anger lay hold upon them.

“25. Let their encampment be desolate, let
there be no dweller in their habitations.

“<26. For they persecuted him whom thou
hast smitten, and added to the smart of their
woundines.

“27. They added iniquity to their iniquities;
let them not come into I thy righteousness.

“*28. Let them be wiped out of the book of
the living, and let them not be written in among
the righteous.

“*29.1 am a poor wretch who is heart-broken
too; it is the salvation of thy face which hath
taken me unto itself.

“© 30. I will praise the name of God in the ode,
and exalt it in the song of thanksgiving.

“* 31. This shall please God better than a
young bull which putteth forth horns and hoofs.

“*32. May the wretched see and make merry;
seek ye God, that your souls may live.

“© 33. For God hath heard the wretched and
despiseth not the prisoners.

“34. Let heaven and earth praise the Lord,
the sea and all that is therein.

“ «35. For God will save Zion, and the cities
of Judza will be built up, and they will dwell there
and inherit it.


FIRST BOOK 45


“* 36. The seed of his servants shall possess
it, and they who love his name shall dwell
therein.’ ”

It came to pass then, when Mary had finished cHap. 34.
speaking these words unto Jesus in the midst of
the disciples, that she said unto him: “My Lord,
this is the solution of the mystery of the repen-
tance of Pistis Sophia.” |

It came to pass then, when Jesus had _ heard 56.
Mary speak these words, that he said unto
her: “Well said, Mary, blessed one, the fulness, or
all-blessed fulness, thou who shalt be sung of as
blessed in all generations.”

Jesus continued again in the discourse and said: CHAP. 35.
“Pistis Sophia again continued and _ still sang The second
praises in a second repentance, saying thus: of Sophia.

“<1. Light of lights, in whom I have had
faith, leave me not in the darkness until the end
of my time.

“*2.Help me and save me _ through thy
mysteries; incline thine ear unto me and save
me.

“* 3, May the power of thy light save me and
carry me to the higher Zons; for thou wilt save me
and lead me into the height of thy ons.

“4 Save me, O Light, from the hand of
this lion-faced power and from the hands of the
emanations of god Self-willed.

“<5, For it is thou, O Light, in whose light I
have had faith and in whose light I have trusted
from the beginning.

“*6, And I have had faith in it from the time
when it emanated me, and thou thyself didst
make me to emanate; and I have had faith
in thy light from the beginning.


57.


CHAP. 36.


46 PISTIS SOPHIA


“<7, And when I had faith in thee, the rulers
of the sons mocked at me, saying: She hath
ceased in her mystery. Thou art my saviour
and thou art my deliverer and thou art | my
mystery, O Light.

“*8.My mouth was filled with glorifying,
that I may tell of the mystery of thy grandeur
at all times.

“<9. Now, therefore, O Light, leave me not
in the chaos for the completion of my whole
time; forsake me not, O Light.

“10. For all the emanations of Self-willed
have taken from me my _ whole light-power
and have surrounded me. ‘They desired to take
away my whole light from me utterly and have
set a watch on my power,

“11. Saying one to another together: The
Light hath forsaken her, let us seize her and take
away the whole light in her.

“*12. Therefore then, O Light, cease not from
me; turn thee, O Light, and save me from the
hands of the merciless.

“13. May they who would take away my
power, fall down and become powerless. May
they who would take away my _light-power
from me, be entrapped in darkness and sink
into powerlessness.’

“This then is the second repentance which
Pistis Sophia hath uttered, singing praises to
the Light.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
speaking these words unto his disciples, that he
said unto them: “Do ye understand in what
manner I discourse with you?”

And Peter started forward and said unto Jesus:


FIRST BOOK 47


“My Lord, we will not endure this woman, Peter com-

plaineth of
for she taketh the opportumty from us and hath Marvy.
let none of us speak, but she discourseth many
times.”

And Jesus answered and said unto his disciples:

“Let him in whom the power of his spirit shall
seethe, so that he understandeth what I say, |
come forward and speak. But now, Peter, I 58.
see thy power in thee, that it understandeth
the solution of the mystery of the repentance
which Pistis Sophia hath uttered. Now, there-
fore, Peter, speak the thought of her repentance
in the midst of thy brethren.”

And Peter answered and said unto Jesus: Peter inter-
“© Lord, give ear that I may speak the thought Pest
of her repentance, of which aforetime thy power Pentre
prophesied through the prophet David, uttering b«.
her repentance in the seventieth Psalm:

“*1.0 God, my God, I have trusted in thee,
let me no more be put to shame for ever.

“*2.Save me in thy righteousness and _ set
me free; incline thine ear unto me and save me.

“*3,Be unto me a strong God and a firm
place to save me; for thou art my strength and
my refuge.

““4.My God, save me from the hand of the
sinner and from the hand of the transgressor
and from the impious [one].

“*5, For thou art my endurance, O Lord,
thou art my hope from my youth up.

“6.1 have trusted myself to thee from my
mother’s womb; thou hast brought me out of
my mother’s womb. My remembrance is ever in
thee.

“7.1 have become as the crazy for many; |


59.


CHAP. 37.


Jesus pro-
miseth to
perfect the
disciples in
all things.


60.


48 PISTIS SOPHIA


thou art my help and my strength, thou art my
deliverer, O Lord.

“*8.My month was filled with glorifying,
that I may praise the glory of thy splendour the
whole day long.

“<9. Cast me not away in the time of age;
if my soul fades, forsake me not.

“10. For mine enemies have spoken evil
against me and they who lay in wait for my
soul, have taken counsel against my soul,

“*11. Saying together: God hathforsaken him;
pursue and seize him, for there is no saviour.

“* 12. God, give heed to my help.

“13. Let them be ashamed and destroyed
who calumniate my soul. Let them be enwrapped
in shame and disgrace who seek evil against me.’

“This then is the solution of the second re-
pentance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Peter:
“Finely, Peter; this is the solution of her
repentance. Blessed are ye before all men on
the earth, because I have revealed unto you
these mysteries. Amén, amen, I say unto you: |
I will perfect you in all fulness from the mysteries
of the interior to the mysteries of the. exterior
and fill you with the spirit, so that ye shall be
called ‘ spiritual, perfected in all fulness.’ And,
amén, amén, I say unto you: I will give unto
you all the mysteries of all the regions of my
Father and of all the regions of the First Mystery,
so that he whom ye shall admit on earth, shall
be admitted into the Light of the height; and
he whom ye shall expel on earth, shall be expelled
from the kingdom of my Father in the heaven.
But hearken, therefore, and give ear attentively


FIRST BOOK 49


to all the repentances which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered. She continued again and uttered the
third repentance, saying:

“<1. O Light of powers, give heed and save me.

“© 2, May they who would take away my light,
lack and be in the darkness. May they who
would take away my power, turn into chaos and
be put to shame.

“*3,May they turn quickly to darkness,
who press me sore and say: We have become
lords over her.

“°4. May rather all those who seek the Light,
rejoice and exult, and they who desire thy mystery,
say ever: May the mystery be exalted.

“<5, Save me then now, O Light, for I lacked
my light, | which they have taken away, and I
needed my power, which they have taken from me.
Thou then, O Light, thou art my saviour, and
thou art my deliverer, O Light. Save me quickly
out of this chaos.’ ”

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished
speaking these words unto his disciples, saying:
“This is the third repentance of Pistis Sophia,”
that be said unto them: “Let him in whom a
sensitive spirit hath arisen, come forward and
speak the thought of the repentance which Pistis
Sophia hath uttered.”

It came to pass then, before Jesus had finished
speaking, that Martha came forward, fell down
at his feet, kissed them,. cried aloud and wept
with lamentation and in humbleness, — saying:
“My Lord, have mercy upon me and have com-
passion with me, and let me speak the solution
of the rfepentance which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered.”


The third
repentance


of Sophia.


CHAP. 38.


Martha
asketch and
receiveth
permission
to speak.


Martha in-
terpreteth
the third
repentance
from Psalm
lxix.


62.


CHAP. 39.


63.


50 PISTIS SOPHIA


And Jesus gave his hand unto Martha and said
unto her: “Blessed is every one who humbleth
himself, for on him they shall have mercy. Now,
therefore, Martha, art thou blessed. But pro-
claim then the solution of the thought of the
repentance of Pistis Sophia.”

And Martha answered and said unto Jesus in
the midst of the disciples: “Concerning the
repentance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered,
O | my Lord Jesus, of it thy light-power in David
prophesied aforetime in the sixty-ninth Psalm,
saying:

“*1.O Lord God, give heed to my help.

“*2.Let them be put to shame and con-
founded who seek after my soul.

“<3, May they turn straightway and be put
to shame, who say unto me: Ha, ha.

“4 May all who seek thee, be joyful and
exult because of thee, and they who love thy
salvation, say ever: May God be exalted.

“*5, But I am wretched, I am poor; O Lord,
help me. Thou art my helper and defence; O
Lord, delay not.’

“This then is the solution of the third repen-
tance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered, singing
praises to the height.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
Martha speak these words, that he said unto her:
“ Well said, Martha, and finely.”

And Jesus continued again in the discourse
and said unto his disciples: “ Pistis Sophia
again continued in the fourth repentance, reciting
it before she was oppressed a second time, in
otder that the lion-faced power and | all the
matetial emanations with it, which Self-willed


FIRST BOOK 51


had sent into the chaos, might not take away her
total light in her. She uttered then this repen-
tance as follows:

“*1,.O Light, in whom I have trusted, give
ear to my repentance, and let my voice reach
unto thy dwelling-place.

“<2. Turn not away thy ligbt-image from me,
but have heed unto me, if they oppress me; and
save me quickly at the time when I shall cry unto
thee.

“*3,.For my time is vanished like a breath
and I am become matter.

““4.They have taken my light from me,
and my power is dried up. I have forgotten
my mystery which heretofore I was wont to
accomplish.

“*5. Because of the voice of the fear and the
power of Self-willed my power is vanished.

“*6,I am become as a demon apart, who
dwelleth in matter and light is not in him, and I
am become as a counterfeiting spirit, which is
in a material body and light-power is not in it.

“*7, And I am become as a decan who is
alone in the air.

“<8. The emanations of Self-willed have sore
oppressed me, and my pair hath said unto
himself:

“9 Instead of with light which was in her,
they have filled her with chaos. I have dev.oured
the sweat of my own matter and the anguish
of the tears from the matter of my eyes, so that
they who oppress me may not take the rest.

“10. All this hath befallen me, O Light,
by thy | commandment and thy command, and
it is thy commandment that I am here.


The fourth
repentance


of Sophia.


64.


65.


52 PISTIS SOPHIA


“11. Thy commandment hath brought me
down, and I am descended as a power of the
chaos, and my power is numbed in me.

“12. But thou, O Lord, art Light eternal,
and dost visit them who are for ever oppressed.

“* 13. Now, therefore, O Light, arise and seek
my power and the soul in me. Thy command-
ment is accomplished, which thou didst decree
for me in my affiictions. My time is come,
that thou shouldst seek my power and my soul,
and this is the time which thou didst decree
to seek me.

“14. For thy saviours have sought the power
which is in my soul, because the number is com-
pleted, and in order that also its matter may be
saved.

“15, And then at that time shall all the rulers
of the material zons be in fear of thy light, and
all the emanations of the thirteenth material
zon shall be in fear of the mystery of thy light,
so that the others may put on the purification of
their light.

“*16, For the Lord will seek the power of your
soul. He hath revealed his mystery,

“*17.So that he may regard the repentance
of them who are in the regions below; and he
hath not disregarded their repentance.

“18. This is then that mystery which is
become the type in respect of the race which
shall be born; and the race which shall be born
will sing praises to the height.

“19. For the Light hath looked down from
the height of its light. It will look down on | the
total matter,

“*20.To hear the sighing of those in chains,


FIRST BOOK 53


to loose the power of the souls whose power is
bound,—

“*21.So that it may lay its name in the soul
and its mystery in the power.’ ”

It came to pass while Jesus spake these words CHAP. 40.
unto his disciples, saying unto them: “ This is Johnask-

eth and re-
the fourth repentance which Pistis Sophia hath ceiveth per-
uttered; now, therefore, let him who under- pene "
standeth, understand,’—it came to pass then,
when Jesus had spoken these words, that John
came forward, adored the breast of Jesus and
said unto him: “My Lord, give commandment
to me also, and grant me to speak the solution of
the fourth repentance which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered.”

Jesus said unto John: “I give thee command-
ment, and I grant thee to speak the solution
of the repentance which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered.”

John answered and said: “My Lord and
Saviour, concerning this repentance which Pistis
Sophia hath uttered, thy light-power which was
in David, hath prophesied aforetime in the one-
hundred-and-first Psalm:

“1. Lord, give ear unto my _ supplication, John inter-
and let my voice reach unto thee. ae

“*2. Turn not away thy face from me; incline fom Ps!m
thine ear unto me in the day when I am oppressed;
quickly give ear to me on the day when [I shall
cry unto thee.

“*3,For | my days are vanished as smoke, 66.
and my bones are parched as stone.

“*4.T am scorched as the grass, and my
heart is dried up; for I have forgotten to eat my


bread.


54 PISTIS SOPHIA


“<5, From the voice of my groaning my bones
cleaved to my flesh.

“*6.I am become as a pelican in the desert;
I am become as a screech-ow] in the house.

“<7,.1 have passed the night watching; I
am become as a sparrow alone on the roof.

“<8. My enemies have reviled me all the day
long, and they who honour me, have injured me.

“<9. Por I have eaten ashes instead of my
bread and mixed my drink with tears,

“*10. Because of thy wrath and thy rage;
for thou hast lifted me up and cast me down.

“*11. My days have declined as a shadow, and
I am dried up as the grass,

“12. But thou, O Lord, thou endurest for
ever, and thy remembrance unto the generation of
generation|s].

“13, Arise and have mercy upon Zion, for
the time is come to have mercy upon her; the
proper time is come.

“<14. Thy servants have longed for her stones,
and will take pity on her land.

“*15. And the nations will have fear of the
name of the Lord, and the kings of the earth have
fear of thy sovereignty.

“*16. For the Lord will build up Zion and
reveal himself in his sovereignty.

“*17. He hath regarded the prayer of the
humble and hath not despised their supplication.

“*18. This shall be recorded for another
generation, and the people who shall be created
will praise the Lord.

“*19. Because he hath looked down on his
holy height; the Lord hath looked down from the
heaven on the earth,.


FIRST BOOK 55


“20. To hear the sighing | of those in chains, 67.
to loose the sons of those who are slain,

“*21.To proclaim the name of the Lord in
Zion and his praise in Jerusalem.’

“This, my Lord, is the solution of the mystery
of the repentance which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered.”

It came to pass then, when John had finished cHap. 41.
speaking these words to Jesus in the midst of his Jesus com
disciples, that he said unto him: “ Well said, John.
John, the Virgin, who shalt rule in the kingdom
of the Light.”

And Jesus continued again in the discourse and ‘The emana-
said unto his disciples: “It came to pass again ae
thus: The emanations of Self-willed again op- ae ag
pressed Pistis Sophia in the chaos and desired to Enron ee
take from her her whole light; and not yet was”
her commandment accomplished, to lead her out of
the chaos, and not yet had the command reached
me through the First Mystery, to save her out
of the chaos. It came to pass then, when all
the material emanations of Self-willed oppressed
her, that she cried out and uttered the fifth re-
pentance, saying:

“<1. Light of my salvation, I sing praise The fifth
unto thee in the region of the height and again Ofeoohia,
in the chaos.

“2.1 sing praise unto thee in my hymn with
which I sang praise in the height and with which
I sang praise unto thee when I was in the chaos.

Let it come into thy presence, and give heed, O
Light, to my repentance.

“<3. For my power is filled up with | darkness, 6s.
and my light hath gone down into the chaos.

““4.T am myself become as the rulers of the


69.


56 PISTIS SOPHIA


chaos, who ate gone into the darknesses below;
I am become as a material body, which hath no
one in the height who will save it.

“*5.IT am become also as matters from which
their power hath been taken, when they are cast
down into the chaos,—| matters] which thou hast
not saved, and they are condemned utterly by thy
commandment.

“*6, Now, therefore, have they put me into
the darkness below,—in darknesses and matters
which are dead and in them [is] no power.

“*7.Thou hast brought thy commandment
upon me and all things which thou hast decreed.

“*8, And thy spirit hath withdrawn and
abandoned me. And moreover by thy com-
mandment the emanations of my «on have not
helped me and have hated me and_ sepat-
ated themselves from me, and yet am I not
utterly destroyed.

“<9, And my light is diminished in me, and I
have cried up to the light with all the light in me,
and I have stretched forth my hands unto thee.

“*10. Now, therefore, O Light, wilt thou not
accomplish thy commandment in the chaos,
and will not the deliverers, who come according
to thy commandment, arise in the darkness and
come and be disciples for thee?

“11, Will they not utter the mystery of thy
name in the chaos?

“12. Or will they not rather utter thy name
in a matter of the chaos, in which thou wilt not
[thyself] purify?

“13. But I have sung praises unto thee, O
Light, and my repentance will reach unto thee |
in the height.


FIRST BOOK 5:7


“*14, Let thy light come upon me,

“*15. For they have taken my light, and I
am in pain on account of the Light from the
time when I was emanated. And when I had
looked into the height to the Light, then I looked
down below at the light-power in the chaos; I
rose up and went down.

“*16. Thy commandment came upon me,
and the terrors, which thou didst decree for me,
have brought me into delusion.

“*17, And they have surrounded me, in
numbers as water, they have laid hold on me
together all my time.

“18. And by thy commandment thou hast
not suffered my fellow-emanations to help me,
nor hast thou suffered my pair to save me out
of my afflictions.’

“This then is the fifth repentance which Pistis
Sophia hath uttered in the chaos, when all the
material emanations of Self-willed had continued
and oppressed her.”

When then Jesus had spoken these words
unto his disciples, he said unto them: “ Who
hath ears to hear, let him hear; and let him
whose spirit seetheth up in him, come forward
and speak the solution of the thought of the fifth
repentance of Pistis Sophia.”

And when Jesus had finished saying these
words, Philip started forward, held up and laid
down the book in his hand,—for he is the scribe
of all the discourses which Jesus spake, and of
all of that which he did,—Philip then | came for-
ward and said unto him: “ My Lord, surely then
it is not on me alone that thou hast enjoined
to take care for the world and write down all


CHAP. 42.


Philip the
sctibe com-


plaineth.


Jesus ex-
plaineth
that the
appointed
scribes are
Philip and
Thomas
and Mat-
thew.


CHAP. 43.


71,

Mary inter-
preteth the
words of
Jesus con-
cerning the
three wit-
nesses.


58 PISTIS SOPHIA


the discourses which we shall speak and [all we
shall] do? And thou hast not suffered me to
come forward to speak the solution of the mysteries
of the repentance of Pistis Sophia. For my
spirit hath oft times seethed in me and been un-
loosed and constrained me to come forward and
speak the solution of the repentance of Pistis
Sophia; and I could not come forward because
Iam the scribe of all the discourses.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
Philip, that he said unto him: “ Hearken,
Philip, blessed one, that I may discourse with
thee; for it is thou and Thomas and Matthew on
whom it is enjoined by the First Mystery to write
all the discourses which I shall speak and [all
which I shall] do, and all things which ye shall
see. But as for thee, the number of the dis-
courses which thou hast to write, is so far not yet
completed. When it is then completed, thou
att to come forward and proclaim what pleaseth
thee. Now, therefore, ye three have to write
down all the discourses which I shall speak
and [all things which I shall] do and which ye
shall see, in order that ye may bear witness to
all things of the kingdom of heaven.”

When then Jesus had said this, he said unto
his disciples: “Who hath ears to hear, let him
hear.”’ |

Mary started forward again, stepped into the
midst, placed herself by Philip and said unto
Jesus: “My Lord, my in-dweller of light hath
ears, and I am ready to hear with my power,
and I have understood the word which thou
hast spoken. Now, therefore, my Lord, hearken
that I may discourse in openness, thou who hast


FIRST BOOK 59


said unto us: ‘Who hath ears to hear, let him
heat.’

“Concerning the word which thou hast

spoken unto Philip: ‘It is thou and Thomas
and Matthew on whom it hath been enjoined—
to you three by the First Mystery, to write all
the discourses of the kingdom of the Light and
thereto to bear witness’; hearken, therefore,
that I may proclaim the solution of this word.
This is what thy light-power prophesied aforetime
through Moses: ‘ By two or three witnesses shall
every matter be _ established.’ The three
witnesses are Philip and Thomas and Matthew.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard philip is
this word, that he said: “Well said, Mary, this jernission
is the solution of the word. Now, therefore, do sp:
thou, Philip, come forward and proclaim the
solution of the fifth repentance of Pistis Sophia,
and thereafter take thy seat and write all the
discourses which I shall speak, until the number
of thy portion which thou hast to write of the
words of the kingdom of the Light is completed.
Then shalt thou come forward and speak what
thy spirit shall understand. But do thou then |
now proclaim the solution of the fifth repentance 72.
of Pistis Sophia.”

And Philip answered and said unto Jesus:
“My Lord, hearken that I may speak the solution
of her repentance. For thy power hath pro-
phesied aforetime concerning it through David
in the eighty-seventh Psalm, saying:

“1. Lord, God of my salvation, by day and philip in-


; ; t teth
by night have I cried unto thee. asa ees
els . ae 1 pentance

2. Let my weeping come before thee; incline penwire


thine ear to my supplication, O Lord. bexxvii,


73.


60 PISTIS SOPHIA


“*3, For my soul is full of evil, my life hath
drawn nigh to the world below.

“*A'T am counted among them who _ have
gone down into the pit; I am become as a man
who hath no helper..

“<5. The free among the dead are as the slain
who are thrown away and sleep in tombs, whom
thou no more rememberest, and they are destroyed
through thy hands.

“*6, They have set me in a pit below, in dark-
ness and shadow of death.

“<7. Thy wrath hath settled down upon me
and all thy cares have come upon me. (Selah.)

“<8. Thou hast put away mine acquaintances
far from me; they have made me an abomi-
nation for them. They have abandoned me,
and I cannot go forth.

“*9. My eye hath become dim in my misery;
I have cried unto thee, O Lord, the whole day and
have stretched forth my hands unto thee.

“10. Wilt thou not surely work thy wonders
on the dead? Will not surely the physicians arise
and confess thee?

“11. Will they not surely proclaim thy name
in the | tombs,

“12. And thy righteousness in a land which
thou hast forgotten?

“*13, But I have cried unto thee, O Lord, and
my prayer shall reach thee early in the morning.

“*14. Turn not thy face away from me.

“*15, For I am miserable, I am in sorrow
from my youth up. And when I had exalted
myself, I humbled myself and arose.

““16. Thy angers are come upon me and thy
terrors have brought me into delusion.


FIRST BOOK 61


“17. They have surrounded me as_ water;
they have seized upon me the whole day long.

“<18. My fellows hast thou kept far from me
and my acquaintances from my misery.’

“This is then the solution of the mystery of
the fifth repentance which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered, when she was oppressed in the chaos.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard cuap. 44.
Philip speak these words, that he said: “Well Philip's |
said, Philip, well-beloved. Now, therefore, come, and con-
take thy seat and write thy portion of all the oe
discourses which I shall speak, and [of all things
which I shall] do, and of all that thou shalt see.”

And forthwith Philip sat down and wrote.

It came to pass thereafter that Jesus continued
again in the discourse and said unto his disciples:
“Then did Pistis Sophia cry to the Light. It
forgave her sin, in that she had left her region
and gone down into the darkness. She uttered
the sixth repentance, saying thus:

“1.1 have sung praises | unto thee, O Light, 74.
in the darkness below. pea

“<2. Hearken unto my repentance, and may gi Sophie.
thy light give heed to the voice of my supplication.

“*3,O0 Light, if thou thinkest on my sin, I
shall not be able to stand before thee, and thou
wilt abandon me,

“*4, Por thou, O Light, art my saviour;
because of the light of thy name I have had faith
in thee, O Light.

“*5.And my power hath had faith in thy
mystery; and moreover my power hath trusted
in the Light when it was among those of the
height; and it hath trusted in it when it was in
the chaos below.


CHAP. 45.


75.


Andrew in-
terpreteth
the sixth
reprentance
from Psalm
CXxix.


62 PISTIS SOPHIA


“6, Let all the powers in me trust in the
Light when I am in the darkness below, and may
they again trust in the Light if they come into
the region of the height.

“7, Ror it is [the Light] which hath com-
passion on us and delivereth us; and a great
saving mystery is in it.

“8, And it will save all powers out of the
chaos because of my transgression. For I have
left my region and am come down into the chaos.’

“Now, therefore, whose mind is exalted, let
him understand.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
speaking these words unto his disciples, that he
said unto them: “Understand ye in what
manner I discourse with your”

Andrew came forward and said: “My Lord,
concerning the solution of the sixth repentance
of Pistis Sophia, thy light-power prophesied
aforetime through David in the one-hundred-
and-twenty-ninth Psalm, saying: |

““1, Out of the depths I have cried unto thee,
O Lord.

“<2. Hearken unto my voice; let thine ears
give heed to the voice of my supplication.

“*3,O0 Lord, if thou heedest my iniquities,
who will be able to pass [the test]?

“*4,Por pardon is in thy hands; for the sake
of thy name have I waited for thee, O Lord.

“<5, My soul hath waited for thy word.

“*6, My soul hath hoped in the Lord from the
morning until the evening. Let Israel hope in
the Lord from the morning until the evening.

“<7, Por grace standeth by the Lord and with
him is great redemption.


FIRST BOOK 63


“*8, And he will deliver Israel from all his
iniquities.’ ”

Jesus said unto him: “Well said, Andrew, Jesus com-
blessed one. ‘This is the solution of her repen- ees


Andrew.
tance. Amén, amén, I say unto you: I will Hepromis
ce Z ‘ : eth that the
perfect you in all mysteries of the Light and all tpn
sna iC.


gnoses from the interiors of the interiors to the judged and
exteriors of the exteriors, from the Ineffable down ree
to the darkness of darkness, from the Light of
lights down to the .... of matter, from all the

gods down to the demons, from all the lords down

to the decans, from all the authorities down to

the servitors, from the creation of men down to

[that] of the wild-beasts, of the cattle and of the
reptiles, in order ,that ye may be called perfect,
perfected in | all fulness. Amén, amen, I say 75.
unto you: In the region where I shall be in the
kingdom of my Father, ye will also be with me.

And when the perfect number is completed, so

that the Mixture shall he dissolved, I will give
commandment that they bring all tyrant gods,

who have not given up the purification of their

light, and will give commandment to the wise

fire, over which the perfect pass, to eat into those
tyrants, until they give up the last purification

of theit light.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished Mary inter-
speaking these words unto his disciples, that he P's '°
said unto them: “ Understand ye in what manner Jes:

I speak with you?”

Mary said: “Yea, Lord, I have understood
the word which thou hast spoken. Concerning
then the word which thou hast said: At the
dissolution of the whole Mixture thou shalt take
thy seat on a light-power and thy disciples,


77.


CHAP. 46.
The repent-


ance of
Sophia is
not yet ac-
cepted. She
is mocked
by the zons.


The seventh
repentance


of Sophia.


64 PISTIS SOPHIA


that is ourselves, shall sit on the right of thee, and
thou shalt judge the tyrant gods, who have not
given up the purification of their light, and the
wise fire will bite into them, until they give up
the last light in them,—concerning this word then
thy light-power prophesied aforetime through
David, in the eighty-first Psalm, saying:

“God shall sit in the assembly (synagogue) |
of the gods and try the gods.’ ”

Jesus said unto her: “ Well said, Mary.”

Jesus continued again in the discourse and
said unto his disciples: “It came to pass, when
Pistis Sophia had finished uttering the sixth
repentance for the forgiveness of her trans-
gression, that she turned again to the height, to
see if her sins were forgiven her, and to see
whether they would lead her up out of the chaos.
But by commandment of the First Mystery not
yet was she hearkened to, so that her sin should be
forgiven and she should be led up out of the chaos.
When then she had turned to the height to see
whether her repentance were accepted from her,
she saw all the rulers of the twelve zons mocking at
her and rejoicing over her because her repentance
was not accepted from her. When then she saw
that they mocked at her, she grieved exceedingly
and lifted up her voice to the height in her
seventh repentance, saying:

“*1.O Light, I have lifted up my power unto
thee, my Light.

“*2.On thee have I had faith. Let me not
be scorned; let not the rulers of the twelve
eons, who hate me, rejoice over me.

“*3. For all who have faith in thee shall not
be put to shame. Let them who have taken


FIRST BOOK 65


away my power, remain in darkness; and let
them not get from it any profit, but let it be taken
away from them. |

“*4-O Light, show me thy ways, and I shall
be saved in them; and show me thy paths,
whereby I shall be saved out of the chaos.

“*5, And guide me in thy light, and let me
know, O Light, that thou art my saviour. On
thee will I trust the whole of my time.

“*6, Give heed that thou save me, O Light,
for thy mercy endureth for ever.

“*7, As to my transgression, which I have
committed from the beginning in my ignorance,
put it not to my account, O Light, but rather
save me through thy great mystery of the for-
giveness of sins because of thy goodness, O Light.

“*8. For good and sincere is the Light. For
this cause will it grant me my way, to be saved
out of my transgression;

“<9. And for my powers, which are diminished
through the fear of the material emanations of
Self-willed, will it draw near after its command-
ment, and will teach my powers, which are
diminished because of the merciless, its gnosis.

“10. For all gnoses of the Light are saving
means and are mysteries for all who seek the
regions of its Inheritance and its mysteries.

“*11. For the sake of the mystery of thy name,
O Light, forgive my transgression, for it is great.

“*12.To everyone who trusteth in the Light
it will give the mystery which suiteth him;

“13, And his soul will abide in the regions of
the Light and his power will inherit | the Trea-
sury of the Light.

“14. The Light giveth power to them who


78.


79.


66 PISTIS SOPHIA


have faith in it; and the name of its mystery
belongeth to those who trust in it. And it will
show them the region of the Inheritance, which
is in the Treasury of the Light.

“15, But I have ever had faith in the Light,
for it will save my feet from the bonds of the
darkness.

“*16. Give heed unto me, O Light, and save
me, for they have taken away my name from me
in the chaos.

““17. Because of all the emanations my
afflictions and my oppression have become exceed-
ingly manifold. Save me out of my transgression
and this darkness.

“18. And look upon the grief of my oppres-
sion and forgive my transgression.

“19. Give heed to the rulers of the twelve
zeons, who have hated me through jealousy.

“*20. Watch over my power and save me,
and let me not remain in this darkness, for I have
had faith in thee.

“21. And they have made of me a great fool
for having had faith in thee, O Light.

“© 22. Now, therefore, O Light, save my powers
from the emanations of Self-willed, by whom I am
oppressed.’

“Now, therefore, who is sober, let him be
sober.”

When then Jesus had spoken this unto his
disciples, Thomas came forward and said: “ My
Lord, I am sober, I am plentifully sober, and
my spirit is ready in me, and I rejoice exceedingly
that thou hast revealed these words unto us.
But indeed I have borne with my brethren until
now, so that I should not anger them; nay


FIRST BOOK 67


rather I have borne with everyone that he should
come before thee and speak | the solution of the
repentance of Pistis Sophia. Now, therefore,
my Lord, concerning the solution of the seventh
repentance of Pistis Sophia thy light-power hath
prophesied. through the prophet David in the
twenty-fourth Psalm, thus:

“*1.O0 Lord, unto thee have I lifted up my
soul, O my God.

“*2.1 have abandoned myself unto thee;
let me not be put to shame and let not mine
enemies mock at me.

“3, For all who wait upon thee shall not be
put to shame; let them be put to shame who do
iniquity without a cause.

“*4_O Lord, show me thy ways and teach me
thy paths.

“*5.Lead me in the way of thy truth and
teach me, for thou art my God and my saviour;
on thee will I wait all the day long.

“*6. Call to remembrance thy mercies, O
Lord, and the favours of thy grace, for they are
from eternity.

“7, Remember not the sins of my youth and
those of my ignorance. Remember me according
to the fulness of thy mercy because of thy good-
ness, O Lord.

“<8. The Lord is gracious and sincere; there-
fore will he instruct sinners in the way.

“<9. He will guide the tender-hearted | in the
judgment and will teach the tender-hearted his
ways.

“*10. All the ways of the Lord are grace and
truth for them who seek his righteousness and
his testimonies.


Thomas in-
terpreteth
the seventh
repentance
from Psalm
Xxiv.


82.


Jesus.com-
mendeth
Thomas.


68 PISTIS SOPHIA


“11. For thy name’s sake, O Lord, forgive
me my sin, [for] it is exceedingly great.

“12. Who is the man who feareth the Lord?
For him will he establish laws in the way which
he hath chosen.

“* 13. His soul will abide in good things and
his seed will inherit the land.

“14. The Lord is the strength of them who
fear him; and the name of the Lord belongeth
to them who fear him, to make known unto them
his covenant.

“15. Mine eyes are raised ever unto the Lord,
for he will draw my feet out of the snare.

“*16. Look down upon me and be gracious
unto me, for I am an only-begotten; I am
wretched.

““17. The affiictions of my heart have in-
creased; bring me out of my necessities.

“<18. Look upon my abasement and my woe,
and forgive me all my sins.

“19. Look upon mine enemies, how they have
increased themselves and hated me with unjust
hatred.

“<20. Preserve my soul and save me; let me
not | be put to shame, for I have hoped on
thee.

“*21.The simple and sincere have joined
themselves to me, for I have waited on thee,
O Lord.

“¢92.0O God, deliver Israel from all his
afflictions.’ ”’

And when Jesus had heard the words of Thomas,
he said. unto him: “ Well said, Thomas, and
finely. This is the solution of the seventh repen-
tance of Pistis Sophia. Amen, amen, I say unto


FIRST BOOK 69


you: All generations of the world shall bless
you on earth, because I have revealed this unto
you and ye have received of my spirit and
have become understanding and spiritual, under-
standing what I say. And hereafter will I fill
you full with the whole light and the whole
power of the spirit, so that ye may understand
from now on all which shall be said unto you and
which ye shall see. Yet a little while and I will
speak with you concerning the height without
within and within without.”

Jesus continued again in the discourse and said CHAP. 47.
unto his disciples: “It came to pass then, when roo
Pistis Sophia had uttered the seventh repentance to toa less
in the chaos, that the commandment through carne
the First Mystery had not come to me | to save Wtnoutthe


command-


her and lead her up out of the chaos. Neverthe- oa
less of myself out of compassion without com- tery.
mandment I led her into a somewhat spacious **
region in the chaos. And when the material
emanations of Self-willed had noticed that she

had been led into a somewhat spacious region in

the chaos, they ceased a little to oppress her, for

they thought that she would be led up out of the
chaos altogether. When this then took place,
Pistis Sophia did not know that I was her helper;

nor did she know me at all, but she continued

and persisted withal singing praises to the Light of

the Treasury, which she had seen aforetime and

on which she had had faith, and she thought that

it [sc. the Light] also was her helper and it was

the same to which she had sung praises, thinking

it was the Light in truth. But as indeed she had

had faith in the Light which belongeth to the
Treasury in truth, therefore will she be led up out


The emana-


tions of
Self-willed
cease fora
time to
oppress
Sophia.


84.


The eighth
repentance


of Sophia.


70 PISTIS SOPHIA


of the chaos and her repentance will be accepted
from her. But the commandment of the First
Mystery was not yet accomplished to accept her
repentance from her. But hearken now in order
that I may tell you all things which befell
Pistis Sophia.

“Tt came to pass, when I had led her unto a
somewhat spacious region in the chaos, that the
emanations of Self-willed ceased entirely to
oppress her, thinking that she would be led up
out of the chaos altogether. It came to pass
then, when | the emanations of Self-willed had
noticed that Pistis Sophia had not been led up out
the chaos, that they turned about again all to-
gether, oppressing her vehemently. Because of
this then she uttered the eighth repentance, because
they had not ceased to oppress her, and had turned
about to oppress her to the utmost. She uttered
this repentance, saying thus:

“*1,On thee, O Light, have I hoped. Leave
me not in the chaos; deliver me and save me
according to thy gnosis.

“*2.Gitve heed unto me and save me. Be
unto me a saviour, O Light, and save me and lead
me unto thy light.

“<3, For thou art my saviour and wilt lead me
unto thee. And because of the mystery of thy
name lead me and give me thy mystery.

“4. And thou wilt save me from this lion-
faced power, which they have laid as a snare for
me, for thou art my saviour.

“*5, And in thy hands will I lay the purifi-
cation of my light; thou hast saved me, O Light,
according to thy gnosis.

“*6. Thou art become wroth with them who


FIRST BOOK 71


keep watch over me and will not be able to lay
hold of me utterly. But I have had faith in the
Light.

“*7,1 will rejoice and will sing praises that
thou hast had mercy upon me and hast heeded
and saved me from the oppression in which I
was. And thou wilt set free my power out of
the chaos.

“*8, And thou hast not left me in the hand of
the lion-faced power; but thou hast led me into
a region which is not oppressed.’ ”

When then Jesus had said this unto his dis- CHAP. 48.
ciples, he answered again and said unto them: [h< mane
“Tt came to pass then, when the lion-faced Self-willed
power had noticed that Pistis Sophia had not shin =
been led up altogether out of the chaos, | that it 3.
came again with all the other material emanations
of Self-willed, and they oppressed Pistis Sophia
again. It came to pass then, when they oppressed
her, that she cried out in the same repentance,
saying:

“<9, Have mercy upon me, O Light, for they she con-
have oppressed me again. Because of thy com- ee
mandment, the light in me is distracted and my
power and my understanding.

“10. My power hath begun to wane whiles
I am in these affiictions, and the number of my
time whiles I am in the chaos. My light is
diminished, for they have taken away my power
from me, and all the powers in me are tossed
about.

“11.1 am become powerless in the presence
of all the rulers of the eons, who hate me, and
in the presence of the four-and-twenty emanations,
in whose region I was. And my brother, my


86.


CHAP. 49.


72 PISTIS SOPHIA


pair, was afraid to help me, because of that in
which they have set me.

“12. And all the rulers of the height have
counted me as matter in which is no light. I am
become as a material power which hath fallen out
of the rulers,

“13. And all who are in the eons. said:
She hath become chaos. And thereafter all the
pitiless powers encompassed me together and
proposed to take away the whole light in me.

“*14, But I have trusted in thee, O Light,
and said: Thou art my saviour.

“15. And my commandment, which thou hast
decreed for me, is in thy hands. Save me out of
the hands of the emanations of Self-willed, which
oppress me and persecute me.

“16. Send thy light over me, for I am as
naught before thee, | and save me according to
thy compassion.

““17, Let me not be despised, for I have
sung praises unto thee, O Light. Let chaos cover
the emanations of Self-willed, let them be led
down into the darkness.

“*18. Let the mouth of them be shut up, who
would devour me with guile, who say: Let us
take the whole light in her,—although I have
done them no ill’ ”

And when Jesus had spoken this, Matthew came
forward and said: “My Lord, thy spirit hath
stirred me and thy light hath made me sober to
proclaim this eighth repentance of Pistis Sophia.
For thy power hath prophesied thereof afore-
time through David in the thirtieth Psalm,
saying :

“*1,On thee, O Lord, have I hoped. Let


FIRST BOOK 73


me never be put to shame; save me according Matthew in-


: terpreteth
to thy righteousness. eae
2. Ineline thie. “Gar sinto:» me, - “Save. mie: Pere


quickly. Be thou unto me a protecting God and »«.
a house of refuge to save me.

“<3, For thou art my support and my refuge;
for thy name’s sake thou wilt guide me and
feed me.

“*4. And thou wilt draw me out of this snare,
which they have laid privily for me; for thou
art my protection.

“5. Into thy hands I will render my spirit;
| thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, God of Truth. 87.

“*6. Thou hast hated them who hold to vain
emptiness; but I have trusted.

“7, And I shall rejoice because of my Lord
and make merry over thy grace. For thou hast
looked down upon my humbleness and saved my
soul out of my necessities.

“<8. And thou hast not shut me up in the
hands of my foes; thou hast set my feet on a
broad space.

“<9. Be gracious unto me, O Lord, for I am
afflicted; my eye is distracted in the wrath and
my soul and my body.

“10. For my years have wasted away in sad-
ness and my life is wasted in sighing. My power
is enfeebled in misery and my bones are distracted.

“*11.1 am become a mockery for all my foes
and my neighbours. | I am become a fright ss.
for my acquaintances, and they who saw me, are
fled away from me.

““12.1 am forgotten in their heart as a corpse,
and I have become as a ruined vessel.

“13, For I have heard the scorn of many who


CHAP. 50.


Jesus com-
mendeth
Matthew
and pro-
miseth his
disciples that
they shall

sit on
thrones with
him.

89.


Mary inter-
preteth the
words of
Jesus.


74 PISTIS SOPHIA


encompass me round about. Massing themselves
together against me, they took counsel to take
away my soul from me.

“14, But I have trusted in thee, O Lord. I
said: Thou art my God.

“15. My lots are in thy hands. Save me
from the hand of my foes and free me from my
persecutors.

“*16, Reveal thy face over thy slave, and free
me according to thy grace, O Lord.

“17, Let me not be put to shame, for I have
cried unto thee. Let the impious be put to
shame and turn towards hell.

“18. Let the crafty lips be struck dumb,
which allege iniquity against the righteous in
pride and scorn.’ ”

And when Jesus had heard these words, he
said: “Finely [said] Matthew. Now, therefore,
amén, I say unto | you: When the perfect number
is completed and the universe is raised hence,
I will take my seat in the Treasury of the Light,
and ye yourselves will sit on twelve light-powers,
until we have restored all the orders of the twelve
saviours to the region of the inheritances of every
one of them.”

And when he had said this, he said: “‘ Under-
stand ye what I say?”

Mary came forward and said: “O Lord,
concerning this matter thou hast said to us
aforetime in similitude: “Ye have awaited with
me in the trials, and I will bequeath unto you a
kingdom, as my Father hath bequeathed it unto
me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in
my kingdom; and ye shall sit on twelve thrones
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.’ ”


FIRST BOOK 75


He said unto her: “ Well said, Mary.”

Jesus continued again and said unto his dis-
ciples: “It came to pass then thereafter, when
the emanations of Self-willed oppressed Pistis
Sophia in the chaos, that she uttered the ninth
repentance, saying:

““1.0O Light, smite down them who have The ninth
taken away my power from me, and take away soni 2
the power from them who have taken away mine
from me.

“*2.For I am thy power and thy light.
| Come and save me. 90.

“<3, Let great darkness cover my oppressors.
Say unto my power: I am he who will save
thee.

“4 Let all those who would take away my
light from me utterly, lack their power. Let
them face about unto the chaos and become
powerless, who would take away my light from
me utterly.

“<5, Let their power be as dust, and let Yew,
thy angel, smite them.

“6. And if they would go into the height,
let darkness seize upon them and let them slip
down and turn to the chaos. And let thy angel
Yew pursue them and cast them down into the
darkness below.

“<7. For they have set a lion-faced power as
a trap for me, although I have done them no ill,
from which its light will be taken; and they have
oppressed the power in me, which they will not
be able to take away.

“<8. Now, therefore, O Light, take away the
purification from the lion-faced power without its
knowing it,—the thought which Self-willed hath


91.


76 PISTIS SOPHIA


thought, to take away my light; take away his
own and let the light be taken away from the
lion-faced power, which set the trap for me.

“<9. But my power will exult in the Light
and rejoice that he will save it.

“*10. And all the portions of my power shall
say: There is no saviour but thee. For thou
wilt save me out of the hand of the lion-faced
power, which hath taken away my power from
me, and thou savest me out of the hands of them
who have taken away my power and my light
from me.

““11. For they have risen up against me,
lying against me and saying | that I know the
mystery of the Light which is In the height,
[the Light] in which I have had faith. And they
have constrained me, [saying:] Tell unto us the
mystery of the Light in the height—that which
I know not.

“12. And they have requited me with all
this ill because I have had faith in the Light of
the height; and they have made my power
lightless.

“13, But when they constrained me, I sat in
the darkness, my soul bowed down in mourning.

“14, And do thou, O Light—for that reason
sing I praise to thee—save me. I know that thou
wilt save me because I fulfilled thy will ever
since I was in my zon. I fulfilled thy will, as
the invisibles who are in my region, and as my
pair. And I mourned, looking unceasingly and
searching for the Light.

“*15. Now, therefore, have all the emanations
of Self-willed surrounded me and rejoiced over
me and sore oppressed me without my knowing


FIRST BOOK 77


[them]. And they have fled away and ceased
from me but have had no pity upon me.

“16. They have returned again and made
trial of me and they have oppressed me in great
oppression and ground their teeth against me,
desiring to take away my light from me utterly.

“* 17, How long, therefore, O Light, dost thou
suffer them, that they oppress me? Save my
power from their evil thoughts and save me from
the hand of the lion-faced power; for I alone
of the invisibles am in this region.

“18. I will sing praises unto thee, O Light,
| in the midst of all who are gathered together
against me, and I will cry unto thee in the midst
of all who oppress me.

“19. Now, therefore, O Light, let not them
who hate me and desire to take away my power
from me, rejoice over me—who hate me and flash
their eyes against me, though I have not done
anything unto them.

“*20. For indeed they have fawned upon me
with sweet words, asking me concerning the
mysteries of the Light which I know not, and have
craftily spoken against me and been enraged
against me, because I have had fajth in the
Light in the height.

“21. They have opened their chops against
me and said: Well indeed, we will take from her
her light.

“*22. Now, therefore, O Light, thou hast
known their guile; suffer them not and let
not thy help be far from me.

“23. Quickly, O Light, vindicate and avenge
me,

“*24. And give judgment on me _ according


93.


CHAP. 51.


James in-
terpreteth
the ninth
repentance
from Psalm
XXxiv.


78 PISTIS SOPHIA


to thy goodness. Now, therefore, O Light of
lights, let them not take away my light from me,

“*25. And let them not say in their heart:
Our power is glutted with her light. And let
them not say: We have consumed her power.

“26. But rather let darkness come upon
them, and let those who long to take away my
light from me, become powerless, and let them
be clothed with chaos and darkness, who say
there: We will take away her light and her
power.

“*27. Now, therefore, save me that I may
rejoice, for I long for the thirteenth zon, the
region of Righteousness, and | I shall say ever-
more: May the light of thy angel Yew shine
more and more.

“28. And my tongue will sing praises to
thee in thy gnosis my whole time in the thirteenth
aon.” ”

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished saying
these words unto his disciples, that he said unto
them: “Who is sober among you, let him pro-
claim their solution.”

James came forward, kissed the breast of Jesus
and said: “My Lord, thy spirit hath sobered
me, and I am ready to proclaim their solution.
Concerning them indeed thy power hath pro-
phesied aforetime through David in the thirty-
fourth Psalm, saying thus concerning the ninth
repentance of Pistis Sophia:

“*1, Give sentence, O Lord, on them who do
me injustice, and fight against them who fight
against me.

“*2.Lay hand on weapon and shield and
stand up to help me.


FIRST BOOK 79


“<3. Draw forth a sword and conceal it [sz]
from my oppressors. Say unto my soul: I am
thy salvation.

“*4, Let them be put to shame and abashed
who strive after my soul; let them fall back
and be put to shame who imagine evil against
me.

“<5, Let them be as chaff | before the wind,
and let the angel of the Lord pursue after them.

“*6, Let their way be darkness and slippery,
and let the angel of the Lord oppress them.

“<7, Por without cause have they hid a snare
for me for their own spoiling, and they have
mocked at my soul in vain.

“<8, Let a snare come upon them which they
know not, and let the net which they have hid
for me, catch them, and let them fall into this
snare.

“<9. But my soul will exult in the Lord and
rejoice in its salvation.

“10. All my bones shall say: O Lord, who
can be like unto thee?—thou who settest free
the wretched from the hand | of him who is
stronger than him; and thou savest a wretched
and poor [one] from the hands of them who
spoil him.

“<11. Unjust witnesses came forward and have
asked me that which I knew not.

“*12. They have requited me evil for good
and childlessness for my soul.

“*13. But when they molested me, I clothed
me in a sack and humbled my soul with fasting,
and my prayer will return into my breast.

“*14.I was pleasing unto thee, as unto my
neighbour and as unto my brother; and I


96.


97.


80 PISTIS SOPHIA


humbled myself as one in mourning and as one
who is sad.

“15, They have rejoiced over me, and they
are put to shame.  Scourges have gathered
themselves together against me and I knew not;
they were cut off and were troubled.

“16. They have brought me to trial and
mocked me with mocking; they have ground |
their teeth against me.

“*17.,O Lord, when wilt thou look upon me?
Restore again my soul from their evil works and
save my only one from the hands of the lions.

“18.1 will confess to thee, O Lord, in the
great assembly, and I will sing praises to thee
in the midst of a countless people.

“19. Let not them who unjustly treat me
as a foe, rejoice over me, who hate me without
a caqse and wink with their eyes.

“20. For indeed they discourse with me with
wotds of peace, though they plot wrath with craft.

“21. They opened their chops wide against
me and said: Well indeed, our eyes have filled
our sight with him.

“*22. Thou hast seen, O Lord. Keep not
silence, O Lord, withdraw not thyself from me.

“© 23. Arise, O Lord, | and give heed to my
vindication, give heed to my vengeance, my God
and my Lord.

“<24. Judge me, O Lord, according to thy
justice; let them not rejoice over me, my God.

“*25. And let them not say: Well done, our
soul. Let them not say: We have consumed
him.

“*26. Let them be put to shame and _ be
scorned, who rejoice at my mischance. Let


FIRST BOOK 81


them be clothed with shame and disgrace who
speak boastingly against me.

“27. Let them who desire my justification,
exult and rejoice and let them who desire the
peace of his slave, say: May the Lord be great
and arise.

“28. My tongue will exult over thy justi-
fication and over thy honour all the day long.’”’ |

When James then had said this, Jesus said unto 98.
him: “Well said, finely, James. This is the CHAP. 52.
solution of thecinth repentance of Pistis Sophia. Dart
Amén, amén I say unto you: Ye shall be the Jemesand


romiseth
first in the kingdom of heaven before all invisibles Hei
and all gods and rulers who are in the thirteenth thediecicles
eon and in the twelfth zon; and not only ye,
but also everyone who shall accomplish my
mysteries.”

And when he had said this, he said unto them:
“Understand ye in what manner I discourse
with your”

Mary started forward again and Said: “ Yea, Mary inter-
O Lord, this is what thou didst say unto us afore- bor

‘The last shall be first and the first shall /*°*

be last.’ The first then, who were created before
us, ate the invisibles, for indeed they arose before
mankind, they and the gods and the tulers;
and the men who shall receive mysteries, will
be first into the -kingdom of heaven.”

Jesus said unto her: “ Well said, Mary.”

Jesus continued again and said unto his dis- The repent-

ance of

ciples: “It came to pass then, when Pistis Sophia sophia is
had proclaimed the ninth repentance, that the oe
lion-faced power oppressed her again, desiring ae
to take away all powers from her. She cried out


again to the Light, saying: |


99.


100.


82 PISTIS SOPHIA


“*O Light, in whom I have had faith from the
beginning, for whose sake I have endured these
great pains, help me.’

“And in that hour her repentance was
accepted from her. The First Mystery hearkened
unto her, and I was sent off at his command.
I came to help her, and led her up out. of the
chaos, because she had repented, and also because
she had had faith in the Light and had endured
these great pains and these great perils. She
had been deluded through the god-like Self-
willed, and had not been deluded through any-
thing else, save through a light-power, because
of its resemblance to the Light in which she had
had faith. For this cause then was I sent forth
at the command of the First Mystery to help her
secretly. I did not however yet go to the region
of the zons at all; but I passed down through
the midst out of them, without any single power
knowing it, either those of the interior of the in-
terior or those of the exterior of the exterior,
save only the First Mystery.

“Tt came to pass then, when I came into the
chaos to help her, that she saw me, that I was
understanding and shone exceedingly and was
full of compassion for her. For I was not self-
willed as the lion-faced power, which had taken
away the light-power from Sophia, and had also
oppressed her in order to take a way from her the
whole light in her. Sophia then saw me, that
I shone ten-thousand times more than the lion-
faced power, | and that I was full of compassion
for her. And she knew that I came out of the
Height of heights, in whose light she had had
faith from the beginning. Pistis Sophia then


FIRST BOOK 83


took courage and uttered the tenth repentance,
saying:
“*1.1 have cried unto thee, O Light of lights, The tenth
in my oppression and thou hasthearkened unto me. (fscphia
“*2.O Light, save my power from unjust and
lawless lips and from crafty traps.
“*3.The light which was being taken from
me in crafty snaring, will not be brought unto
thee.
“* 4. For the traps of Self-willed and the nooses
of the merciless [one] are spread out.
“<5, Woe unto me, that my dwelling was far
off, and I was in the dwellings of the chaos.
“6, My power was in regions which are not
mine.
“<7. And I entreated those merciless [ones];
and when I entreated them, they fought against
me without a cause.’ ”
When then Jesus had said this unto his dis- CHAP. 53.
ciples, he said unto them: “Now, therefore, let
him whom his spirit stirreth, come forward and
speak the solution of the tenth repentance of
Pistis Sophia.”
Peter answered and said: “ O Lord, concerning
this thy light-power prophesied aforetime through
David in the one-hundred-and-nineteenth Psalm,


saying:
“*1.1 cried unto thee, O Lord, in my opptes- Peter inter-
: preteth the
sion, and thou hearkenest unto me. tenth de:
“*2.O0 Lord, save | my soul from unjust pentance
lips and from crafty tongues. cxix,


“<3. What will be given unto thee or what


will be added unto thee with a crafty tongue?
“4. The arrows of the strong [one] are made
sharp with the coal of the desert.


Jesus com-
mendeth
Peter.


CHAP. 54.


The
eleventh re-
pentance
of Sophia.


102.


84 PISTIS SOPHIA


“*5,Woe unto me, that my dwelling is far
off, and I dwelt in the tents of Kedar.

“*6, My soul hath dwelt in many regions as
a guest.

“<7. 7 was peaceful with them who hate peace;
if I spake unto them, they fought against me
without a cause.’

“This is now, therefore, O Lord, the solution
of the tenth repentance of Pistis Sophia, which
she hath uttered when the material emanations
of Self-willed oppressed her, they and his lion-
faced power, and when they oppressed her
exceedingly.”

Jesus said unto him: “Well said, Peter,
and finely. This is the solution of the tenth
repentance of Pistis Sophia.”

Jesus continued again in the discourse and
said unto his disciples: “It came to pass then,
when this lion-faced power saw me, how I drew
nigh unto Pistis Sophia, shining very exceedingly,
that it grew still more furious and emanated
from itself a multitude of exceedingly violent
emanations. When this then befell, Pistis Sophia
uttered the eleventh repentance, saying:

“1. Why hath the mighty power raised itself
in evil?

“*2.Its plotting taketh away the light from
me all the time, and as sharp iron have they
taken away power | from me.

“* 3.1 chose to descend into the chaos rather
than to abide in the thirteenth zon, the region
of Righteousness.

““4-And they desired to lead me craftily,
in order to consume my whole light.

“5. For this cause then will the Light take


FIRST BOOK 85


away their whole light, and also their whole matter
will be made naught. And it will take away their
light and not suffer them to abide in the thir-
teenth zon, their dwelling-place, and will not have
their name in the region of those who shall live.

“*6. And the four-and-twenty emanations
will see what hath befallen thee, O lion-faced
power, and will be afraid and not be dis-
obedient, but give the purification of their light.

“<7, And they will see thee and will rejoice
over thee and say: Lo, an emanation which hath
not given the purification of its light, so that it
may be saved, but boasted itself in the abun-
dance of the light of its power, because it did not
emanate from the power in it, and hath said:
I will take away the light from Pistis Sophia,
which will now be taken from it.’

“Now, therefore, let him in whom his power
is raised, come forward and proclaim the solution
of the eleventh repentance of Pistis Sophia.”

Then Salome came forward and said: “My
Lord, concerning this thy light-power prophesied
aforetime through David in the fifty-first Psalm,
saying:

“*1, Why doth the mighty [one] boast him-
self in | his wickedness?

“<2.Thy tongue hath studied unrighteous-
ness all the day long; as a sharp razor hast thou
practised craft.

“* 3. Thou lovedst wickedness more than good-
ness; thou lovedst to speak unrighteousness
more than righteousness.

“4. Thou lovedst all words of submerging
and a crafty tongue.

“5, Wherefor will God bring thee to naught


103.


Salome in-
terpreteth

the repent-
ance from

Psalm li.


104.


Jesus com-
mendeth
Salome.


CHAP. 55.


Self-willed
aideth his
emanations
and they
again op-


press Sophia.


105.


86 PISTIS SOPHIA


utterly, and will uproot thee and drag thee out
from thy dwelling-place, and will root out thy
root and cast it away from the living. (Selah.)

“6. The righteous will see and be afraid,
and they will mock at him and say:

“<7, Lo, a man who made not God for his
helper, but trusted to his great riches and was
mighty in his vanity.

“*8, But I am as a | fruit-bearing olive-tree
in the house of God. I have trusted in the grace
of God from all eternity.

“*9 And I will confess unto thee, for thou
hast dealt faithfully with me; and I will wait
on thy name, for it is auspicious in the presence
of thy holy [ones].’

“This then is now, therefore, my Lord, the
solution of the eleventh repentance of Pistis
Sophia. While thy light-power hath roused me,
I have spoken it according to thy desire.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
these words which Salome spake, that he said:
“Well said, Salome. Amen, amen, I say unto
you: I will perfect you in all mysteries of the
kingdom of the Light.”

And Jesus continued again in the discourse
and said unto his disciples: “It came to pass
then thereafter, that I drew near unto the chaos,
shining very exceedingly, to take away the light
from that lion-faced power. As I shone exceed-
ingly, it was in fear and cried out to its self-
willed god, that he should help it. And _ forth-
with the self-willed god looked out of the thirteenth
zon, and looked down into the chaos, exceedingly
wrathful | and desiring to help his lion-faced
power. And forthwith the lion-faced power, it


FIRST BOOK 87


and all its emanations, surrounded Pistis Sophia,
desiring to take away the whole light in Sophia.
It came to pass then, when they oppressed Sophia,
that she cried to the height, crying unto me
that I should help her. It came to pass then,
when she looked to the height, that she saw Self-
willed exceedingly wrathful, and she was in fear,
and uttered the twelfth repentance because of
Self-willed and his emanations. She cried on
high unto me, saying:

“<1. O Light, forget not my praise-singing. The twelfth

“<2. For  Self-willed and his _ lion-faced OfSophia,
have opened their chops against me and have
acted craftily against me.

“<3. They have surrounded me, desiring to
take away my power, and have hated me, because
I have sung praises unto thee.

““4. Instead of loving me they slandered me.
But I sang praises.

“<5. They plotted a plot to take away my
power, because I have sung to thee praises, O
Light; and hated me, because I have loved thee.

“*6, Let the darkness come over Self-willed,
and let the ruler of the outermost darkness
abide at his right hand.

“<7, And when thou passest sentence, take
from him his. power; and the deed which he
hath plotted, to take from me my light,—mayest
thou take his from him.

“<8, And may all his powers of his light in him
finish, and let | another of the three triple- 106.
powers receive his sovereignty.

“*9. May all the powers of his emanations
be lightless and may his matter be without any
light in it.


107.


88 PISTIS SOPHIA


“<10. May his emanations remain in the chaos
and not dare to go to their region. May their
light in them die away and let them not go to
the thirteenth zon, their region.

“11. May the Receiver, the Purifier of the
lights, purify all the lights which are in Self-
willed, and take them from them.

“12. May the rulers of the lower darkness
tule over his emanations, and let no one give them
shelter in his region; and let no one hearken to
the power of his emanations in the chaos.

“*13. Let them take away the light in his
emanations and blot out their name from the
thirteenth zon, yea rather take his name for ever
out of that region.

“14, And on the lion-faced power let them
bring the sin of him who emanated it, before
the Light, and not wipe out the iniquity of the
matter which hath brought him [se Self-willed]
forth.

“15. And may their sin be altogether before
the Light eternally, and may they let them not
look beyond [the chaos] and take their names out
of all regions;

“*16. Because they have not spared me and
have oppressed him whose light and | whose
power they have taken away, and also conformably
with those who set me therein, they desired to
take away my whole light from me.

““17. They loved to descend to the chaos;
so let them abide therein, and they shall not be
brought up [therefrom] from now on. They
desired not the region of Righteousness for dwell-
ing-place, and they shall not be taken thither
from now on.


FIRST BOOK 89


““18. He put on darkness as a garment, and it
entered into him as water, and it entered in into
all his powers as oil.

“19. Let him wrap himself into the chaos
as into a garment, and gird himself with the
darkness as with a leathern girdle for ever.

“20. Let this befall them who have brought
this upon me for the Light’s sake and have said:
Let us take away her whole power.

“21. But do thou, O Light, have mercy upon
me for the sake of the mystery of thy name, and
save me in the goodness of thy grace.

“°22.For they have taken away my light
and my power; and my power hath inwardly
tottered, and I could not stand upright in their
midst.

“*23,1 am become as matter which is fallen;
I am tossed hither and thither as a demon in the
air.

“*24. My power hath perished, because I
possess no mystery; and my matter hath become
dwindled because of my light, for they have taken
it away.

“25. And they mocked me; they looked at
me, nodding at me.

“© 26. Help me according to thy mercy.’ |

“Now, therefore, let him whose spirit is ready, 10s.
come, forwatd and utter the solution of the
twelfth repentance of Pistis Sophia.”

And Andrew came forward and said: “ My cHap. 56.
Lord and Saviour, thy light-power hath pro-
phesied aforetime through David concerning
this repentance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered,
and said in the one-hundred-and-eighth Psalm:

“<1. God, keep not silent at my praise-singing.


Andrew in-
terpreteth
the twelfth
repentance
from Psalm
cviil.


109.


90 PISTIS SOPHIA


“*2.For the mouths of the sinner and crafty
have opened their chops against me and with
crafty deceitful tongue have talked behind me.

“<3. And they have surrounded me_ with
words of hate and have fought against me with-
out a cause.

“A Instead of loving me they have slandered
me. But I prayed.

“<5. They showed evil against me for good
and hate for my love.

“*6,Set a sinner over him, and let the
slanderer stand at his right hand.

“<7, When sentence is passed upon him,
may he go forth condemned and his prayer become
sin.

“<8. May his days be shortened and another
receive his overseership.

“*9.May his children become orphans and
his wife a widow.

“<10. May his children be carried away and
be driven forth and beg; may they be thrown
out of their houses.

“11. May the money-lender sift out all that
he hath, | and may strangers plunder all his
best efforts.

“12. Let there be no man to back him, and
no one to take pity on his orphans.

“*13. May his children be exterminated and
his name blotted out in a single generation.

“<14. Let the sin of his fathers be remembered
before the Lord, and the sin of his mother be not
blotted out.

“15, Let them be ever present to the Lord
and his memory be rooted out from the earth;

“16. In that he hath not thought of using


FIRST BOOK 91


mercy and hath persecuted a poor and wretched
man and hath persecuted a sorry creature to
slay him.

““17, He loved cursing,-and it shall come
unto him. He desired not blessing,—it shall
stay far from him.

“*18. He clothed himself with cursing as with
a vesture, and it entered into his bowels as water,
and it was as oil in his bones.

“<19. May it be for him as a garment in which
he shall be wrapped, and as a girdle with which
he shall ever be girded.

“20. This is the work of them who slander
[me] before the Lord, and speak unlawfully
against my soul.

“21. But do thou, O Lord God, be gracious
unto me; for thy name's sake save me.

“22. For I am poor and I am _ wretched;
my heart is tumult within me. |

“*23.1 am carried away in the midst as a 10.
shadow which hath sunk down, and I am shaken
out as grass-hoppers.

“<24. My knees have become weak from fast-
ing, and my flesh is altered from [lack of] oil.

“*25,. But I have become a mock unto them;
they saw me and wagged their heads.

“* 26. Help, O Lord God, and save me accord-
ing to thy grace.

“*27. May they .know that this is thy hand,
and that thou, O Lord, hast fashioned them.’

“This is then the solution of the twelfth
repentance which Pistis Sophia uttered, when
she was in the chaos.”

And Jesus continued again in the discourse CHAP. 57.
and said unto his disciples: “It came to pass


The thir-
teenth re-
pentence of
Sophia.


111.


92 PISTIS SOPHIA


again thereafter that Pistis Sophia cried unto me,
saying:

“*Q Light of lights, I have transgressed in
the twelve eons, and have descended from
them; wherefor have I uttered the twelve
repentances, [one] for each zon. Now, therefore,
O Light of lights, forgive me my transgression,
for it is exceedingly great, because I have aban-
doned the regions of the height and have come to
dwell in the regions of the chaos.’

“When then Pistis Sophia had said this, she
continued again in the thirteenth repentance,
saying:

““1,Hearken unto me singing praises unto
thee, O Light of lights. Hearken unto me
uttering the repentance for the thirteenth zon,
the region out of which I have come down, in
order that the thirteenth repentance of the thir-
teenth zon may be accomplished,—those [eons] |
which I have overstepped and out of which I
have come down.

“2. Now, therefore, O Light of lights, hearken
unto me singing praises unto thee in the thirteenth
zon, my region out of which I have come down.

“*3,Save me, O Light, in thy great mystery
and forgive my transgression in thy forgive-
ness.

“*4 And give unto me the baptism and for-
give my sins and purify me from my transgression.

“*5. And my transgression is the lion-faced
power, which will never be hidden from thee;
for because of it have I gone down.

“*6, And I alone among the invisibles, in
whose regions I was, have transgressed, and have
gone down into the chaos. Moreover I have


FIRST BOOK 93


transeressed, that thy commandment may be
accomplished.’

“This then Pistis Sophia said. Now, there-
fore, let him whom his spirit urgeth to understand
her words, come forward and proclaim her
thought.”

Martha came forward and said: “My Lord,
my spirit urgeth me to proclaim the solution
of that which Pistis Sophia hath spoken; thy
power hath prophesied afore time concerning it
through David in the fiftieth Psalm, saying thus:

“1, Be gracious unto me, O God, according Martha in-


to thy | great grace; according to the fulness Pee"

of thy mercy blot out my sin. aie
“<2. Wash me throughly from my iniquity. pom vale
“* 3, And may my sin be ever present to thee, 112.


“*4 That thou mayest be justified in thy
words and prevail whep thou judgest me.

“This is then the solution of the words which
Pistis Sophia hath uttered.”

Jesus said unto her: “Well said, finely,
Martha, blessed [one].”

And Jesus continued again in the discourse and CHAP. 58.
said unto his disciples: “It came to pass then, Jesus
when Pistis Sophia had said these words, that the fortha
time was fulfilled that she should be led out of nj"
the chaos. And of myself, without the First SP
Mystery, I despatched out of myself a light-
power, and I sent it down to the chaos, so that
it might lead Pistis Sophia forth from the deep
regions of the chaos, and lead [her] to the higher
regions of the chaos, until the command should
come from the First Mystery that she should be
led entirely forth out of the chaos. And my light-
power led Pistis Sophia up to the higher regions


94 PISTIS SOPHIA


of the chaos. It came to pass then, when the
emanations of Self-willed had noticed that Pistis
Sophia was led forth into the higher regions of
the chaos, that they also sped after her upwards,
desiring to bring her again into the lower regions
of the chaos. And my light-power, which I had
sent to lead up Sophia out of the chaos, shone
exceedingly. It came to pass then, when the
113. emanations of Self-willed pursued Sophia, | when
she had been led into the higher regions of the
chaos, that she again sang praises and cried out
unto me, saying:
Sophia “* 1,1 will sing praises unto thee, O Light, for I
eee desired to come unto thee. I will sing thee praises,
praise. OQ Light, for thou art my deliverer.

«<2, Leave me not in the chaos. Save me,
O Light of the Height, for it is thou that I
have praised.

“<3. Thou has sent me thy light through
thyself and hast saved me. Thou hast led me to
the higher regions of the chaos.

“4 May the emanations of Self-willed which
pursue me, sink down into the lower regions of
the chaos, and let them not come to the higher
regions to see me.

“*5,And may great darkness cover them
and darker gloom come over them. And let
them not see me in the light of thy power, which
thou hast sent unto me to save me, so that they
may not again get dominion over me.

“6, And let not their resolution which they
have formed, to take away my power, take effect
for them. And as they have spoken against me,
to take from me my light, take rather from them
theirs instead of mine.


FIRST BOOK 95


“<7, And they have proposed to take away
my whole light and have not been able to take it,
for thy light-power was with me.

“<8. Because they have taken counsel with-
out thy commandment, O Light, therefore have
they not been able to take away my light.

“<9. Because I | have had faith in the Light,
I shall not be afraid; and the Light is my de-
liverer and I shall not fear.’

“Now, therefore, let him whose power is
exalted, speak the solution of the words which
Pistis Sophia nath uttered.”

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished
speaking these words unto his disciples, that
Salome came forward and said: “My Lord,
my power constraineth me to speak the solution
of the words which Pistis Sophia hath uttered.
Thy power hath prophesied aforetime through
Solomon, saying:

“1.1 will give thanks unto thee, O Lord,
for thou art my God.

“«<*2. Abandon me not, O Lord, for thou art
my hope.

“<3. Thou hast given me thy vindication for
naught, and I am saved through thee.

naught, and I am saved through thee..

“*4'Let them who pursue me, fall down and
let them not see me.

“*5, May a smoke-cloud cover their eyes and
an ait-mist darken them, and let them not see
the day, so that they may not seize me.

“6, May their resolution be impotent, and
may what they concoct come upon them.

“* 7. They have devised a resolution, and it hath
not taken effect for them.

“<8, And they are vanquished, although they


Salome in-
terpreteth
the song of
Sophia
from the
Odes of


Solomon.


115.


CHAP. 59.


The power
sent by
Jesus form-
eth a light-
wreath on
Sophia”
head.


96 PISTIS SOPHIA


be mighty, and what they have wickedly pre-
pared is fallen upon them.

“<9. My hope is in the Lord, and I shall not
be afraid, for thou art my God; my Saviour.’ ”

It came to pass then, when Salome had finished
saying these words, that Jesus said unto her:
“Well said, | Salome; and finely. This is the
solution of the words which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered.”

And Jesus continued again in the discourse
and said unto his disciples: “It came to pass
then, when Pistis Sophia had finished saying
these words in the chaos, that I made the light-
power, which I had sent to save her, become a
light-wreath on her head, so that from now on
the emanations of Self-willed could not have
dominion over her. And when it had become
a light-wreath round her head, all the evil matters
in her were shaken and all were purified in her.
They perished and remained in the chaos, while
the emanations of Self-willed gazed upon them
and rejoiced. And the purification of the pure
light which was in Pistis Sophia, gave power to
the light of my light-power, which had become a
wreath round her head.

“Tt came to pass then moreover, when it
surrounded the pure light in Sophia, and her
pure light did not depart from the wreath of
the power of the light-flame, so that the emana-
tions of Self-willed should not rob it from it,—
when then this befell her, the pure light-power
in Sophia began to sing praises. And she praised
my light-power, which was a wreath round her
head, and she sang praises, saying:

“<1. The Light hath become a wreath round my


FIRST BOOK 97


head; and I shall not depart from it, so that the
emanations of Self-willed may not rob it from me.

“<2. And though all the matters be shaken, |
yet shall I not be shaken.

“*3, And though all my matters perish and
remain in the chaos,—those which the emanations
of Self-willed see,—yet shall I not perish.

““4.For the Light is with me, and I myself
am with the Light.’

“These words then Pistis Sophia uttered.
Now, therefore, let him who understandeth the
thought of these words, come forward and pro-
claim their solution.”

Then Mary, the mother of Jesus, came forward
and said: “ My son according to the world, my
God and Saviour according to the height, bid
me proclaim the solution of the words which
Pistis Sophia hath uttered.”

And Jesus answered and said: “Thou also,
Mary, hast recetved form which is in Barbelo,
according to matter, and hast received likeness
which is in the Virgin of Light, according to light,
thou and the other Mary, the blessed one; and
on thy account the darkness hath arisen, and
moreover out of thee did come forth the material
body in which I am, which I have purified and
refined,—now, therefore, I bid thee proclaim the
solution of the words which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered.”

And Mary, the mother of Jesus, answered and
said: “My Lord, thy light-power hath  pro-
phesied afore time concerning these words through
Solomon in the nineteenth Ode and said:

“1. The Lord is on my head as a wreath,
and I shall not depart from him.


Sophia
uttereth an-
other song
of praise.


116.


Mary, his
mother,
asketh and
receiveth
permission
to speak.


98 PISTIS SOPHIA


117. “*2. The wreath in truth | is woven for me;
Mary, bis _ and it hath caused thy twigs to sprout in me.

mother, in- eet : .
terpreteth “<3 For it is not like unto a wreath withered
the song of


Sophia from that sprouteth not. But thou art alive on my


to Roo. Head and thou hast sprouted upon me.

ae “<4. Thy fruits are full and perfect, filled with
thy salvation.’ ”

Jesuscom- It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard

mendeth bs his mother Maty say these words, that he said


unto her: “Well said, finely. Amen, amén, I
say unto thee: They shall proclaim thee blessed
from one end of the earth to the other; for the
pledge of the First Mystery hath taken up its
abode with thee, and through that pledge shall
all from the earth and all from the height be saved,
and that pledge is the beginning and the end.”
CHAP.60. And Jesus continued again in the discourse
Thecom and said unto his disciples: “It came to pass
of the First When Pistis Sophia had uttered the thirteenth
Pee. repentance,—in that hour was fulfilled the com-
Sat en. mandment of all the tribulations which were de-


trely out creed for Pistis Sophia for the fulfilment of the
of the chaos. ~ eo
First Mystery, which was from the beginning, and
the time had come to save her out of the chaos and
lead her out from all the darknesses. For her
repentance was accepted from her through the
First Mystery; and that mystery sent me a
ereat light-power out of the height, that I might
118. help Pistis Sophia | and lead her up out of the
The First Chaos. So I looked towards the eons into the
oe height and saw that light-power which the First


jorth two Mystery had sent me, that I might save Pistis
ight-powers :
tohelp = Sophia out of the chaos. It came to pass, there-
Sphia. : :

fore, when I had seen it, coming forth from the


eons and hastening down to me,—I was above


FIRST BOOK 99


the chaos,—that another light-power went forth
out of me, that it too might help Pistis Sophia.
And the light-power which had come from the
height through the First Mystery, came down
upon the light-power which had gone out of me;
and they met together and became a great stream
of light.”

When then Jesus had said this unto his disciples,
he said: “Understand ye in what manner I
discourse with your”

Mary started forward again and said: “My
Lord, I understand what thou sayest. Concerning
the solution of this word thy light-power hath
prophesied aforetime through David in the eighty-
fourth psalm, saying:

“*10. Grace and truth met together, and
righteousness and peace kissed each other.

“11. Truth sprouted forth out of the earth,
and righteousness looked down from heaven.’

““Grace’ then is the light-power which hath
come down through the First Mystery; for the
First Mystery hath hearkened unto Pistis Sophia
and hath had | mercy on her in all her tribulations.
‘Truth’ on the other hand is the power which
hath gone forth out of thee, for that thou hast
fulfilled the truth, in order to save her out of the
chaos. And ‘righteousness’ again is the power
which hath come forth through the First Mystery,
which will guide Pistis Sophia. And ‘ peace’
again is the power which hath gone forth out of
thee, so that it should enter into the emanations
of Self-willed and take from them the lights
which they have taken away from Pistis Sophia,—
that is, so that thou mayest gather them together
into Pistis Sophia and make them at peace with


Mary Mag-
dalene inter-
preteth the
mystery from
Psalm Ixxxiv.


119.


CHAP. 61.


120.


Marty, the
mother,
further in-
terpreteth
the scrip-
ture.


100 PISTIS SOPHIA


her power. ‘Truth’ on the other hand is the
power which went forth out of thee. when thou
wast in the lower regions of the chaos. For this
cause thy power hath said through David: ‘
Truth sprouted out of the earth, because
thou wert in the lower regions of the chaos.
‘Righteousness’ on the other hand which hath
‘looked down from heaven,—it is the power which
hath come down from the height through the
First Mystery and hath entered into  Pistis
Sophia.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
these words, that he said: “Well said, Mary,
blessed one, who shalt inherit the whole Light-
kingdom.”

Thereon Mary, the mother of Jesus, also came
forward and said: “My Lord and my Saviour,
give commandment unto me also that I repeat
this word.”

Jesus said: “Whose spirit is understanding,
him I do not prevent, but I urge him on still
more to speak the thought which hath moved
him. | Now, therefore, Mary, my mother accord-
ing to matter, thou in whom I have sojourned,
I bid thee that thou also speak the thought of
the discourse.”

And Mary answered and said: “My Lord,
concerning the word which thy power hath
prophesied through David: ‘Grace and_ truth
met together, righteousness and peace kissed
each other. Truth sprouted forth out of the
earth, and righteousness looked down from
heaven,—thus hath thy power prophesied this
word aforetime about thee.

“When thou wert little, before the spirit had


FIRST BOOK 101


come upon thee, whilst thou wert in a vineyard The story
with Joseph, the spirit came out of the height as
and came to me in my house, like unto thee; ‘P"*
and I had not known him, but I thought that
thou wast he. And the spirit said unto me:
“Where is Jesus, my brother, that I meet with
him?’ And when he had said this unto me,

I was at a loss and thought it was a phantom to

try me. So I seized him and bound him to the
foot of the bed in my house, until I went forth

to you, to thee and Joseph in the field, and I
found you on the vineyard, Joseph propping
up the vineyard. It came to pass, therefore,
when thou didst hear me speak the word unto
Joseph, that thou didst understand the word,
wert joyful and saidest: ‘Where is he, that I
may see him; else I await him in this place.’
And it came to pass, when Joseph had heard
thee say these words, that he was startled. And

we went down | together, entered the house and 121.
found the spirit bound to the bed. And we
looked on thee and him and found thee like unto
him. And he who was bound to the bed was
unloosed; he took thee in his arms and kissed
thee, and thou also didst kiss him. Ye became
one.

“This then is the word and its solution.
‘Grace’ is the spirit which hath come down out
of the height through the First Mystery, for it
hath had mercy on the race of men and sent its
spirit that he should forgive the sins of the whole
world, and they should receive the mysteries
and inherit the Light-kingdom. ‘Truth’ on
the other hand is the power which hath sojourned
with me. When it had come forth out of Barbelo,


Of the spir-
itual and
material
bodies of


Jesus.


122.


CHAP. 62.


102 PISTIS SOPHIA


it became material body for thee, and hath made
proclamation concerning the region of Truth.
‘Righteousness’ is thy spirit, who hath brought
the mysteries out of the height to give them to
the race of men. ‘Peace’ on the other hand
is the power which hath sojourned in thy material
body according to the world, which hath baptized
the race of men, until it should make it stranger
unto sin and make it at peace with thy spirit, so
that they may be at peace with the emanations
of the Light; that is, “Grace and truth kissed each
other.’ As it saith: ‘Truth sprouted forth out
of the earth,—‘truth’ is thy material body |
which sprouted forth out of me according to the
world of men, and hath made proclamation con-
cerning the region of Truth. And again as it
saith: ‘ Righteousness [looked down] from heaven’
—‘ righteousness’ is the power which looked out
of the height, which will give the mysteries of
the Light to the race of men, so that they will
become righteous and good, and inherit the Light-
kingdom.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
these words which his mother Mary spake, that
he said: “ Well said, finely, Mary.”

The other Mary came forward and said: “ My
Lord, bear with me and be not wroth with me.
Yea, from the moment when thy mother spake
with thee concerning the solution of these words,
my power disquieted me to come forward and like-
wise to speak the solution of these words.”

Jesus said unto her: “I bid thee speak their
solution.”

Mary said: “My Lord, ‘Grace and truth
met together, —‘ grace’ then is the spirit who hath


FIRST BOOK 103


come upon thee, when thou didst receive the
baptism from John. ‘Grace’ then is the godly
spirit who hath come upon thee; he hath had
mercy on the race of men, hath come down and
hath met with the power of Sabaoth, the Good,
which is in thee and which hath made proclama-
tion concerning the regions of Truth. It hath
said again: ‘Righteousness and peace kissed
each other,—‘ righteousness’ then is the spirit
of the Light, which did come upon thee and
hath brought the mysteries of the height, | to
give them unto the race of men. ‘Peace’ on
the other hand is the power of Sabaoth, the Good,
which is in thee,—he who hath baptized and hath
forgiven the race of men,—and it hath made them
at peace with the sons of the Light. And more-
over as thy power hath said through David:
‘Truth sprouted forth out of the earth,—that is
the power of Sabaoth, the Good, which sprouted
forth out of Mary, thy mother, the dweller on
eatth. ‘Righteousness,’ which ‘looked down
from heaven,’ on the other hand is the spirit in
the height who hath brought all mysteries of the
height and given them to the race of men; and
they have become righteous and good, and have
inherited the Light-kingdom.”

And it came to pass, when Jesus had heard
Mary speak these words, that he said: “ Well
said, Mary, inheritress of the Light.”

And Mary, the mother of Jesus, again came
forward, fell down at his feet, kissed them and
said: “My Lord, my son and my Saviour, be
not wroth with me, but pardon me, that I may
once more speak the solution of these words.
“Grace and truth met together,—it is I, Mary,


The other
Mary fur-
ther.inter-
preteth the
same scrip-
ture from
the baptism
of Jesus.


Marty, the
mother,
again
further in-
terpreteth
the same
scripture
from the
meeting of
herself with
Elizabeth,
mother of
John the
Baptizer.
124.


Of the in-
carnation
of Jesus.


104 PISTIS SOPHIA


thy mother, and Elizabeth, mother of John,
whom I have met. | ‘Grace’ then is the power
of Sabaoth in me, which went forth out of me,
which thou art. Thou hast had mercy on the
whole race of men. ‘Truth’ on the other hand
is the power in Elizabeth, which is John, who did
come and hath made proclamation concerning
the way of Truth, which thou art,—who hath made
proclamation before thee. And again, ‘Grace and
truth met together,—that is thou, my Lord,
thou who didst meet John on the day when thou
hadst to recetve the baptism. And again thou
and John are ‘Righteousness and peace kissed
each other.—‘ Truth hath sprouted forth out
of the earth, and righteousness looked down from
heaven,—this is, during the time when thou
didst minister unto thyself, thou didst have the
form of Gabriel, thou didst look down upon me
from heaven and speak with me. And when thou
hadst spoken with me, thou didst sprout up in
me,—that is the ‘truth’ that is the power of
Sabaoth, the Good, which is in thy material body,
that is the ‘truth’ which ‘ sprouted up out of the
earth.’ ”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
his mother Mary speak these words, that he said:
“Well said, and finely. This is the solution of
all the words concerning which my light-power
hath prophesied aforetime through the prophet
David.”


FIRST BOOK 105


[THE NOTE OF A SCRIBE]


(Now these are the names which I will give


125.


from the Boundless onward. Write them with a 4note by


sign, that the Sons of God may be revealed
from here on.

This is the name of the Immortal: aaa, 600;
and this is the name of the Voice, for the sake
of which the Perfect Man hath set himself in
motion: 7. And these are the interpretations
of the names of these mysteries: the first [name],
which is aaa, its interpretation is fff the second,
which is mmm ort 000, its interpretation is aaa;
the third, which is pspsps, its interpretation is 000;
the fourth, which is ff, its interpretation is nan;
the fifth, which is ddd, its interpretation is aaa.
He on the throne is aaa. This is the interpreta-
tion of the second: aaaa, aaaa, aaaa; this is the
interpretation of the whole name.)


a later hand,
copied from
another
scripture.


CHAP. 63.
126.


John further


interpreteth
the same
scripture.


127.


THE SECOND BOOK OF
PISTIS SOPHIA


JOHN also came forward and said: “O Lord,
bid me also speak the solution of the words which
thy light-power hath prophesied aforetime through
David.”

And Jesus answered and said unto John:
“To thee too, John, I give commandment to
speak the solution of the words which my light-
power hath prophesied through David:

“*10. Grace and truth met together, and
righteousness and peace kissed each other.

“11. Truth hath sprouted forth out of the
earth, and righteousness looked down from
heaven.’ ”

And John answered and said: “This is the
word which thou hast said unto us aforetime:
‘I have come out of the Height and entered into
Sabaoth, the Good, and embraced the light-
power in him.’ Now, therefore, ‘Grace and
truth? which ‘met together,—thou art ‘ grace,’
thou who art sent out of the regions of the Height
through thy Father, the First Mystery which
looketh within, in that he hath sent thee, | that
thou mayest have mercy on the whole world.
‘Truth’ on the other hand is the power of


106


SECOND BOOK 107


Sabaoth, the Good, which bound itself in thee
and which thou hast cast forth to the Left,—thou
the First Mystery which looketh without. And
the little Sabaoth, the Good, took it and cast it
forth into the matter of Barbelo, and he made
proclamation concerning the regions of Truth
to all the regions of those of the Left. That
matter of Barbelo then it is which is body for
thee to-day.

“And ‘righteousness and peace’ which
‘kissed each other,—“‘ righteousness’ then art
thou who didst bring all the mysteries through
thy Father, the First Mystery which looketh
within, and hast baptized this power of Sabaoth,
the Good; and thou didst go to the region of the
rulers and didst give unto them the mysteries
of the. Height; they became righteous. and good.

“*Peace’ on the other hand is the power
of Sabaoth, that is thy soul, which did enter into
the matter of Barbelo, and all the rulers of the
six eons of Yabraoth have made peace with the
mystery of the Light.

“And ‘truth’ which ‘sprouted forth out of
the earth, —it is the power of Sabaoth, the Good,
which came out of the region of the Right, which
lieth outside the Treasury of the Light, and which
hath come into the region of those of the Left; |
it hath entered into the matter of Barbélo, and
hath made proclamation concerning the mysteries
of the region of Truth.

“*Righteousness’ on the other hand which
‘looked down from heaven,’ is thou the First
Mystery which looketh down without, as thou
didst come out of the spaces of the Height with
the mysteries of the Light-kingdom; and thou


Of Sabaoth,
Barbélo,
Yabraoth
and the
light-vesture.


CHAP. 64.
Gabriel and
Michaél are
summoned
to help Pistis
Sophia.


129.


108 PISTIS SOPHIA


didst come down upon the light-vesture which
thou didst receive from the hand of Barbélo,
which [vesture] is Jesus, our Saviour, in that
thou didst come down upon him as a dove.”

It came to pass then, when John had brought
forwatd these words, that the First Mystery
which looketh without, said unto him: “ Well
said, John, beloved brother.”

The First Mystery again continued and said:
“Tt came to pass therefore that the power
which had come out of the Height, that is I, in
that my Father sent me to save Pistis Sophia out
of the chaos, [that] I, therefore, and also the power
which did go from me, and the soul which I had
received from Sabaoth, the Good,—they drew
towards one another and become a single light-
stream, which shone very exceedingly. I called
down Gabriél and Michaél out of the AZons, at
the command of my Father, the First Mystery
which looketh within, and I gave unto them the
light-stream and let them go down into the chaos |
to help Pistis Sophia and to take the light-powers,
which the emanations of Self-willed had taken
from her, from them and give them to Pistis
Sophia.

“And straightway, when they had _ brought
down the light-stream into the chaos, it shone
most exceedingly in the whole of the chaos, and
spread itself over all their regions. And when the
emanations of Self-willed had seen the great light
of that stream, they were terror-stricken one with
the other. And that stream drew forth out of
them all the light-powers which they had taken
from Pistis Sophia, and the emanations of Self-
willed could not dare to lay hold of that light-


SECOND BOOK 109


stream in the dark chaos; nor could they lay
hold of it with the art of Self-willed, who ruleth
over the emanations.

“And Gabriel and Michael led the light-stream The light-
over the body of the matter of Pistis Sophia and Sic the
poured into her all the light-powers which they Son
had taken from her. And the body of her matter
became shining throughout, and all the powers
also in her, whose light they had taken away,
took light and ceased to lack their light, for they got
their light which had been taken from them,
because the light was given them through me.
And Michaél and Gabriél, who ministered and
had brought the light-stream | into the chaos, 130.
will give them the mysteries of the Light; it is
they to whom the light-stream was entrusted,
which I have given unto them and brought into
the chaos. And Michael and Gabriel have taken
no light for themselves from the lights of Sophia,
which they had taken from the emanations of
Self-willed.

“Tt came to pass then, when the light-stream
had ingathered into Pistis Sophia all her light-
powers, which it had taken from the emanations
of Self-willed, that she became shining through-
out; and the light-powers also in Pistis Sophia,
which the emanations of Self-willed had not taken,
became joyful again and filled themselves with
light. And the lights which were poured into
Pistis Sophia, quickened the body of her matter,
in which no light was present, and which was
on the point of perishing or perished. And they
raised up all her powers which were on the point
of being dissolved. And they took unto them-
selves a light-power and became again as they


The light-
stream,
having ac-
complished
its purpose,
departeth
from Sophia.


131.


CHAP. 65.


Peter inter-
preteth the
narrative
from the
Odes of


Solomon.


110 PISTIS SOPHIA


were before, and they increased again in their
sense of the Light. And all the light-powers
of Sophia knew themselves mutually through my
light-stream and were saved through the light of
that stream. And my light-stream, when it
had taken away the lights from the emanations
of Self-willed, which they had taken away from
Pistis Sophia, poured them into | Pistis Sophia,
and turned itself about and went up out of the
chaos.”

When then the First Mystery said this to the
disciples, that it had befallen Pistis Sophia in
the chaos, he answered and said unto them:
“Understand ye in what manner I discourse
with you? ”

Peter came forward and said: “My Lord,
concerning the solution of the words which thou
hast spoken, thus hath thy light-power pro-
phesied aforetime through Solomon in his Odes:

“<1. A stream came forth and became a great
wide flood.

“*2.It tore away all to itself and turned it-
self against the temple.

“*3 Dams and buildings could not hold it,
nor could the art of them who hold the waters.

“4. It was led over the whole land and laid
hold of all.

“<5. They who were on the dry sand, drank;
their thirst was quieted and quenched, when the
draught from the hand of the Highest was given.

“*6. Blessed are the ministers of that draught,
to whom the water of the Lord is entrusted.

“<7. They have refreshed parched lips; they
whose power was taken away, have gotten joy
of heart and they have laid hold of souls, having


SECOND BOOK 111


poured in the breath, so that they should not
die.

“<8. They have raised up limbs which were
fallen; they have given power to their openness
and light unto their eyes.

“9. For they all have known themselves in
the Lord and are saved through the water of Life
eternal.’

“Hearken, therefore, my Lord, that I may
set forth the word in openness. As thy | power
hath prophesied through Solomon: ‘A stream
came forth and became a great wide flood,—
this is: The light-stream hath spread itself out
in the chaos over all the regions of the emanations
of Self-willed.

“And again the word which thy power hath
.poken through Solomon: ‘It tore away all to
itself and led it over the temple,—that is: It
drew all the light-powers out of the emanations
of Self-willed, which they had taken from Pistis
Sophia, and poured them anew into Pistis Sophia.

“And again the word thy power hath spoken:
"The dams and buildings could not hold it,—
that is: The emanations of Self-willed could
not hold the light-stream within the walls of the
darkness of the chaos.

“And again the word which it hath spoken:
“It was led over the whole land and filled all,
—that is: When Gabriel and Michael had led it
over the body of Pistis Sophia, they poured into
her all the lights which the emanations of Self-
willed had taken from her, and the body of her
matter shone.

“And the word which it hath spoken: ‘ They
who were in the dry sand, drank,—that is:


133.


134.


112 PISTIS SOPHIA


All in Pistis Sophia whose light had before been


taken away, got light.
“And the word which it hath spoken: ‘ Their
thirst was quieted | and quenched,’—that is:


Her powers ceased to lack the light, because
their light, which had been taken from them, was
given them [again].

“And again as thy power hath spoken: ‘The
draught through the Highest was given them,—
that is: The light was given unto them through
the light-stream, which came forth out of thee,
the First Mystery.

“And as thy power hath spoken: ‘ Blessed
are the ministers of that draught,—this is the
wotd which thou hast spoken: ‘Michael and
Gabriel, who have ministered, have brought
the ijght-stream into the chaos and also led it
forth again. They will give them the mysteries
of the Light of the Height, they to whom the light-
stream is entrusted.’

“And again as thy power hath spoken: ‘ They
have refreshed parched lips,—that is: Gabriel
and Michael have not taken for themselves from
the lights of Pistis Sophia, which they had spoiled
from the emanations of Self-willed, but they have
poured them into Pistis Sophia.

“And again the word which it hath spoken:
‘They whose power was taken away, have gotten
joy of heart,—that is: All the other powers of
Pistis Sophia, which the emanations of Self-willed
have not taken, are become exceedingly merry
and have filled themselves with light from their
light-fellows, for these have poured it into them. |

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
“They have quickened souls, having poured in


SECOND BOOK 113


the breath, so that they should not die,—that is:
When they had poured the lights into Pistis
Sophia, they quickened the body of her matter,
from which they had before taken its lights, and
which was on the point of perishing.

“And again the word which thy power hath
spoken: ‘They have raised up limbs which were
fallen, or that they should not fall,—that is:
When they poured into her her lights, they raised
up all her powers which were on the point of being
dissolved.

“And again as thy light-power hath spoken:
“They have received again their light and have
become as they were before’; and again the
word which it hath spoken: ‘They have given
light unto their eyes,—that is: They have
received sense in the Light and known the light-
stream, that it belongeth to the Height.

“And again the word which it hath spoken:
‘They all have known themselves in the Lord,—
that is: All the powers of Pistis Sophia have
known one another through the light-stream.

“And again the word which it hath spoken:
‘They are saved through water of Life eternal,—
that is: They are saved through the whole light-
stream.

“And again the word which it hath spoken:
‘The light-stream tore all to itself and drew it over
the temple,—that is: When the light-stream had
taken all the light-powers of Pistis Sophia | and
had spoiled them from the emanations of Self-
willed, it poured them into Pistis Sophia and
turned itself about and went out of the chaos
and came over thee,—thou who art the temple.

“This is the solution of all the words which


114 PISTIS SOPHIA


thy light-power hath spoken through the Ode of
Solomon.”

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had heard Peter speak these words, that he said
unto him: “ Well said, blessed Peter. This is
the solution of the words which have been
spoken.”

cHap.65. And the First Mystery continued again in the
Theemena- discourse and said: “It came to pass then,
Self-willed before I had led forth Pistis Sophia out of the
Kies: chaos, because it was not yet commanded me
help: through my Father, the First Mystery which
looketh within,—at that time then, after the
emanations of Self-willed had perceived that my
light-stream had taken from them the light-
powers which they had taken from Pistis Sophia,
and had poured them into Pistis Sophia, and
when they again had seen Pistis Sophia, that
she shone as she had done from the beginning,
that they were enraged against Pistis Sophia
and cried out again to their Self-willed, that he
should come and help them, so that they might
take away the powers in Pistis Sophia anew.
Hesendeth “And Self-willed sent out of the height, out
forthan’ . of the thirteenth aon, and sent another great
roket pewerlight-power. It came down into the chaos | as
flying arrow. a flying arrow, that he might help his emanations,
si so that they might take away the lights from
Pistis Sophia anew. And when that light-power
had come down, the emanations of Self-willed
which were in the chaos and oppressed Pistis
Sophia, took great courage and again pursued
Pistis Sophia with great terror and great alarm.
And some of the emanations of Self-willed
oppressed her. One of them changed itself into


SECOND BOOK 115


the form of a great serpent; another again
changed itself also into the form of a seven-headed
basilisk; another again changed itself into the
form of a dragon. And moreover the first power
of Self-willed, the lion-faced, and all his other very
numerous emanations, they came together and
oppressed Pistis Sophia and led her again into the
lower regions of the chaos and alarmed her again
exceedingly.

“Tt came to pass then that there looked down
out of the twelve zons, Adamas, the Tyrant,
who also was wroth with Pistis Sophia, because
she desired to go to the | Light of lights, which
was above them all; therefore was he wroth with
her. It came to pass then, when Adamas, the
Tyrant, .had looked down out of the twelve
zons, that he saw the emanations of Self-willed
oppressing Pistis Sophia, until they should take
from her all her lights. It came to pass then, when
the power of Adamas had come down into
the chaos unto all the emanations of Self-willed,—
it came to pass then, when that demon came down
into the chaos, that it dashed down Pistis Sophia.
And the lion-faced power and the serpent-form
and the basilisk-form and the dragon-form and
all the other very numerous emanations of' Self-
willed surrounded Pistis Sophia all together,
desiring to take from her anew her powers in
her, and they oppressed Pistis Sophia exceedingly
and threatened her. It came to pass then, when
they oppressed her and alarmed her exceedingly,
that she cried again to the Light and sang praises,
saying:

“1.1 Light, it is thou who hast helped me;
let thy light come over me.


The fashion-
ing of the
serpent-,
basilisk- and
dragon-
powers.


The demon-
power of
Adamas
dasheth
Sophia down.
137.


Sophia
again crieth
to the Light.


Gabriel and
Michael
and the
light-stream
again go to
her aid.
138.


116 PISTIS SOPHIA


“<2. For thou art my protector, and I come
hence unto thee, O Light, having faith in thee,
O Light.

“* 3, For thou art my saviour from the emana-
tions of Self-willed and of Adamas, the Tyrant,
and thou shalt save me from all his violent
threats.’

“And when Pistis Sophia had said this, then
at the commandment | of my Father, the First
Mystery which looketh within, I sent again
Gabriel and Michael and the great light-stream,
that they should help Pistis Sophia. And I gave
commandment unto Gabriel and Michael to bear
Pistis Sophia in their hands, so that her feet should
not touch the darkness below; and I gave them
commandment moreover to guide her in the
regions of the chaos, out of which she was to
be led.

“Tt came to pass then, when the angels had
come down into the chaos, they and the light-
stream, and moreover [when] all the emanations
of Self-willed and the emanations of Adamas had
seen the light-stream, how it shone very exceed-
ingly and there was no measure for the light
about it, that they became terror-stricken and
quitted Pistis Sophia. And the great light-
stream surrounded Pistis Sophia on all sides
of her, on her left and on her right and on all her
sides, and it became a light-wreath round her
head.

“Tt came to pass then, when the light-stream
had surrounded Pistis Sophia, that she took
great courage, and it ceased not to surround her
on all her sides; and she was no longer in fear
of the emanations of Self-willed which are in the


SECOND BOOK 117


chaos, nor was she any more in fear of the other
new power of Self-willed which he had cast down
into the chaos | as a flying arrow, nor did she any 139.
more tremble at the demon power of Adamas
which had come out of the zons.

“And moreover by commandment of myself, The trans-

the First Mystery which looketh without, the ee =
light-stream which surrounded Pistis Sophia on
all her sides, shone most exceedingly, and Pistis
Sophia abode in the midst of -the light, a great
light being on her left and on her right, and on
all her sides, forming a wreath round her head.
And all the emanations of Self-willed [could] not
change their face again, nor could they bear the
shook of the great light of the stream, which
was a wreath round her head. And all the emana-
tions of Self-willed,-many of them fell at her
right, because she shone most exceedingly, and
many others fell at her left, and were not able
at all to draw nigh unto Pistis Sophia because of
the great light; but they fell all one on another,
or they all came near one another, and they could
not inflict any ill on Pistis Sophia, because she
had trusted in the Light.

“And at the commandment of my Father, Jesus, the
the the First Mystery which looketh within, I myself ee
went down into the chaos, shining most exceed- without


causeth


ingly, | and approached the lion-faced power, Sophia ts
which shone exceedingly, and took its whole light a
in it and held fast all the emanations of Self-
willed, so that from now on they went not into
their region, that is the thirteenth eon. And I
took away the power of all the emanations of
Self-willed, and they all fell down in the chaos


powerless. And I led forth Pistis Sophia, she


118 PISTIS SOPHIA


being on the right of Gabriel and Michael. And
the great light-stream entered again into her.
And Pistis Sophia beheld with her eyes her foes,
that I had taken their light-power from them.
And I led Pistis Sophia forth from the chaos,
she treading under foot the serpent-faced emana-
tion of Self-willed, and moreover treading under
foot the seven-faced-basilisk emanation, and tread-
ing under foot the lion- and dragon-faced power.
I made Pistis Sophia continue to stand upon the
seven-headed-basilisk emanation of Self-willed;
and it was more mighty than them all in its
evil doings. And I, the First Mystery, stood by
it and took all the powers in it, and made to
perish its whole matter, so that no seed should arise
from it from now on.” |

141. And when the First Mystery said this unto his

CHAP. 67. disciples, he answered and_ said: “ Understand
ye in what manner I discourse with you?”

James came forward and said: “My Lord,
concerning then the solution of the words which
thou hast said, thus hath thy light-power pro-
phesied thereon aforetime through David in the
ninetieth Psalm:

James in- “1. Whoso then dwelleth under the help of

wrpreteth the Most High, will abide under the shadow of

from Psiam the God of heaven.

- “*2.He will say unto the Lord: Thou art
my succour and my place of refuge, my God, in
whom I trust.

“*3.For he will save me out of the snare
of the hunters and from mighty word.

“*A\ He will shade thee with his breast, and
thou shalt have trust beneath his wings; his
truth shall surround thee as a shield.


SECOND BOOK 119


“*5. Thou wilt not be afraid of terror by night
nor of an arrow which flieth by day,

“*6,Of a thing which slinketh in the dark-
ness, of a mischance and a demon at mid-day.

“<7. A thousand will fall on | thy left, and ten
thousand at thy right hand; but they shall not
come nigh thee.

“*8. Nay rather with thine eyes wilt thou
behold, thou wilt see the requital of the sinners.

“*9.For thou, O Lord, art my hope. Thou
hast established the Most High for thyself as
refuge.

“10. Harm will not come nigh unto thee;
scourge will not come nigh thy dwelling.

“*11. For he will give commandment to
his angels on thy behalf that they guard thee on
all thy ways,

“12. And bear thee on their hands, that thou
mayest never strike with thy foot against a
stone.

“13. Thou wilt stride over the serpent and
basilisk and tread on lion and dragon.

“<14, Because he hath trusted in me, I will
save him; I will overshadow him, because he
hath known my name.

“*15.He will cry unto me and I= shall
hearken unto him; I am at his side in his tribu-
lation and will save him and honour him,

“*16. And increase him with many days and
show him my salvation.’

“This, my Lord, is the solution of the words
which thou hast said. Hearken therefore, that
I may say it in openness.

“The word then which thy power hath spoken
through David: ‘Whoso then dwelleth under


143.


120 PISTIS SOPHIA


the help of the Most High, will abide under the
shadow of the God of heaven,—that is: When
Sophia had trusted in the Light, she abode under
the light of the light-stream, which through thee
came out of the Height.

“And the word which thy power hath spoken
through David: ‘I will say unto the Lord: Thou
art my succour and my refuge, my God, in whom
I trust,—it is the word with which Pistis Sophia
hath sung praises: | ‘Thou art my succour, and
I come unto thee.’

“And again the word which thy power hath
spoken: ‘My God, in whom I trust, thou wilt
save me out of the snare of the hunters and from
mighty word,—it is what Pistis Sophia hath said:
‘O Light, I have faith in thee, for thou wilt save
me from the emanations of Self-willed and from
those of Adamas, the Tyrant, and thou wilt save
me also from all their mighty threats.’

“And again the word which thy power hath
spoken through David: ‘ He will shade thee with
his breast, and thou wilt have trust beneath his
wings, —that is: Pistis Sophia hath been in the
light of the light-stream, which hath come from
thee, and hath continued in firm trust in the
light, that on her left and that on her right, which
are the wings of the light-stream.

“And the word which thy light-power hath
prophesied through David: ‘Truth will surround
thee as a shield, —it is the light of the light-stream
which hath surrounded Pistis Sophia on all her
sides as a shield.

“ And the word which thy power hath spoken:
“He will not be afraid of terror by night,—that
is: Pistis Sophia hath not been afraid of the


SECOND BOOK 121


terrors and alarms into which she had been
planted in the chaos, which is the * night.’

“ And the word which thy power hath spoken: |
‘He will not be afraid of an arrow which flieth by
day, —that is: Pistis Sophia hath not been afraid
of the power which Self-willed hath sent last of
all out of the height, and which hath come into
the chaos as it were a flying arrow. Thy light--
power therefore hath said: ‘Thou wilt not be
afraid of an arrow which flieth by day,-—for that
power hath come out of the thirteenth eon, it
being that which is lord over the twelve cons,
and which giveth light unto all the zons; where-
fore hath he [David] said ‘ day.’

“And again the word which thy power hath
spoken: ‘He will not be afraid of a thing which
slinketh in the darkness,—that is: Sophia hath
not been afraid of the lion-faced emanation,
which caused fear for Pistis Sophia in the chaos,
which is the ‘ darkness.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
“He will not be afraid of a mischance and of a
demon at mid-day,—that is: Pistis Sophia hath
not been afraid of the demon emanation of Tyrant
Adamas, which hath cast Pistis Sophia to the
ground in a great mischance, and which hath
come forth out of Adamas out of the twelfth
eon; wherefor then hath thy power said: ‘He
will not be afrajd of | the demon mischance at
mid-day, —‘ mid-day,’ because it hath come out
of the twelve zons, which is ‘ mid-day ’; and again
[‘ night,’ because] it hath come out of the chaos,
which is the ‘ night.’ and because it hath come out
of the twelfth zon which is in the midst between
both; therefore hath thy light-power said ‘ mid-


146.


122 PISTIS SOPHIA


day,’ because the twelve eons lie in the midst
between the thirteenth zon and the chaos.

“And again the word which thy light-power
hath spoken through David: ‘A thousand will
fall on his left, and ten thousand at his right hand,
but they shall not come nigh him,—that is:
When the emanations of Self-willed, which are
exceedingly numerous, could not bear the great
light of the light-stream, many of them fell on the
left hand of Pistis Sophia and many at her right,
and they could not come nigh her, to do her [harm].

“And the word which thy light-power hath
spoken through David: ‘Nay rather with thine
eyes wilt thou behold, and wilt see the tre-
quital of the sinners, for thou, O Lord, art my
hope, —that is the word: Pistis Sophia hath with
her eyes beheld her foes, that is the emanations
of Self-willed, who all | have fallen one on another;
not only hath she with her eyes beheld this, but
thou also thyself, my Lord, the First Mystery,
hast taken the light-power which is in the lion-
faced power, and hast moreover taken the power
of all the emanations of Self-willed and moreover
thou hast imprisoned them in that chaos, [so that]
from henceforth they have not gone forth to
their own region. Therefore then hath Pistis
Sophia with her eyes beheld her foes, that is
the emanations of Self-willed, in all which David
hath prophesied concerning Pistis Sophia, saying:
“Nay rather with thine eyes wilt thou behold,
and thou wilt see the requital of the sinners.’
Not only hath she with her eyes beheld, how they
fall one on another in the chaos, but she hath also
seen the requital with which it was requited them.
Just as the emanations of Self-willed have thought


SECOND BOOK 123


to take away the light of Sophia from her, so hast
thou requited them and repaid them in full, and
hast taken the light-power in them instead of the
lights of Sophia, who hath had faith in the Light
of the Height.

“And as thy light-power hath spoken through
David: ‘Thou hast established the Most High for
thyself as refuge; harm will not come nigh unto
thee, scourge will not come nigh thy dwelling,’
—that is: When Pistis Sophia had had faith in
the Light and was afflicted, she sang praises unto
it, and the emanations of Self-willed could not
inflict on her any harm, | nor could they [injure]
her, nor could they at all come nigh her.

“And the word which thy light-power hath
spoken through David: ‘He will give command-
ment to his angels on thy behalf, that they guard
thee on all thy ways and bear thee on their hands,
that thou mayest never strike with thy foot
against a stone, —it is again thy word: Thou hast
given commandment to Gabriel and Michael, that
they guide Pistis Sophia in all the regions of the
chaos, until they lead her forth, and that they up-
lift her on their hands, so that her feet do not
touch the darkness beneath, and [that] on the
other hand they of the lower darkness do not seize
hold of her.

“And the word which thy light-power hath
spoken through David: ‘Thou wilt tread on
serpent and basilisk and tread on lion and dragon;
because he hath trusted in me, I will save him and
I will overshadow him, because he hath known
my name,—that is the word: When Pistis Sophia
was on the point of coming forth out of the chaos,
she trod on the emanations of Self-willed, and she


=


47.


124 PISTIS SOPHIA


trod on the serpent-faced ones and on the basilisk-
faced ones, which have seven heads; and she trod
on the lion-faced power and on the dragon-faced
one. Because she had had faith in the Light, is
she saved from all of them.

“This, my Lord, is the solution of the words
which thou hast spoken.”

cHaP.68. It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had heard these words; that he said: “Well said,
148. James, | beloved one.”

And the First Mystery continued again in the
discourse and said unto his disciples: “ It came to
pass, when I had led Pistis Sophia out of the chaos,
that she cried out again and said:

Sophia sing  ““* 1.1 am saved out of the chaos and loosed
yoke from the bonds of the darkness. I am come unto
thee, O Light.

“*2.For thou wert light on all sides of me,
saving me and helping me.

“<3, And the emanations of Self-willed, which
fought against me, thou hast hindered through
thy light, and they could not come nigh me;
for thy light was with me and saved me through
thy light-stream.

“* 4, Because in sooth the emanations of Self-
willed constrained me, they took from me my
power and cast me out into the chaos with no
light in me. So I became as_ heavy-weighing
matter in comparison with them.

“5. And thereafter came a light-stream unto
me through thee which saved me; it shone on
my left and on my right and surrounded me on
all sides of me, so that no part of me was without
light.

“*6, And thou hast covered me with the light


SECOND BOOK 125


of thy stream and purged from me all my evil
«matters; and I shall be relieved of all my matters
because of thy light.

““7, And it is thy light-stream which hath
raised me up and taken from me the emanations
of Self-willed which constrained me.

“*8.And I | have become sure-trusting in
thy light and purified light in thy stream.

“<9. And the emanations of Self-willed which
constrained me, have withdrawn themselves from
me; and I shone in thy great power, for thou savest
for ever.’

“This is the repentance which Pistis Sophia
hath uttered, when she came forth out of the
chaos and was freed from the bonds. of the chaos.
Now, therefore, who hath ears to hear, let him
hear.”

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had finished saying these words unto his disciples,
that Thomas came forward, and said: “ My Lord,
my light-dweller hath ears and my mind hath
understood the words which thou hast said. Now,
therefore, give commandment unto me to set forth
clearly the solution of the words.”

And the First Mystery answered and said unto
Thomas: “I give thee commandment to set
forth the solution of the song which Pistis Sophia
sang unto me.”


CHAP. 69.


Thomas answered and said: “My Lord, con- Thomas in-


cerning the song which Pistis Sophia hath uttered
because she was saved out of the chaos, thy


terpreteth
>» the song of
Sophia from
the Odes of


light-power prophesied afore time thereon through Solomon.


Solomom, the son of David, in his Odes:


““1.I am saved | from the bonds and am fled 150.


unto thee, O Lord.


151.


126 PISTIS SOPHIA


“*2.For thou hast been on my right hand,
saving me and helping me.

“*3,'Thou hast hindered my adversaries and
they have not been revealed, because thy face was
with me, saving me in thy grace.

“4 T was despised in the sight of many and
cast out; I have become as lead in their sight.

“<5. Through thee I have gotten a power
which helped me; for thou hast set lamps on my
right and on my left, so that no side of me may be
without light.

“6. Thou hast overshadowed me with the
shadow of thy grace, and I was relieved of the
coats of skin.

““7. It is thy right hand which hath raised
me up, and thou hast taken the sickness from
me.

“*8.I have become powerful in thy truth and
purified in thy righteousness.

“*9. My adversaries have withdrawn them-
selves from me, and I am justified by thy goodness,
for thy rest endureth unto all eternity.’

“This then, my Lord, is the solution of the
repentance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered,
when she was saved out of the chaos. Hearken,
therefore, that I may say it in openness.

“The word then which thy light-power hath
spoken through Solomon: ‘I am saved from the
bonds and am fled unto thee, O Lord,—it is the
wotd which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘I am
loosed from the bonds of the darkness and am
come unto thee, O Light.’

“ And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘Thou wert on my right hand, saving | and helping
me,—it is again the word which Pistis Sophia


SECOND BOOK 127


hath spoken: ‘Thou art become a light on all
sides of me, [saving me] and helping me.’

“And the word which thy light-power hath
spoken: ‘Thou hast hindered my adversaries
and they have not been revealed, —it is the word
which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘And _ the
emanations of Self-willed which fought against
me, thou hast hindered through thy light, and
they could not come nigh me.’

“* And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘Thy face was with me, saving me in thy grace,’—
it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath spoken:
‘Thy light was with me, saving me in thy light-
stream.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘I was despised in the sight of many and cast out,’
—it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath spoken:
‘The emanations of Self-willed constrained me
and took my power from me, and I have been
despised before them and cast out into the chaos,
with no light in me.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
“I have become as lead in their sight,—it is the
wotd which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘When
they had taken my light from me, I became as
heavy-weighing matter before them.’

“And moreover the word which thy power
hath spoken: ‘Through thee | I have gotten
power for me which helped me,’—it is again the
wotd which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘ And
thereafter came a light-power unto me through
thee which saved me.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘Thou hast set lamps on my right and on my left,
so that no side of me may be without light,—it


153.


128 PISTIS SOPHIA


is the word which Pistis Sophia hath spoken:
‘Thy power shone on my right and on my left and
surrounded me on all sides of me, so that no part
of me was without light.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘Thou hast overshadowed me with the shadow of
thy grace,—it is again the word which Pistis
Sophia hath spoken: ‘ And thou hast covered me
with the light of the stream.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘I was relieved of the coats of skin,—it is again
the word which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘And
they have purified me of all my evil matters, and
I raised myself above them in thy light.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken
through Solomon: ‘It is thy right hand which
hath raised me up, and hath taken the sickness
from me,’—it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath
spoken: ‘And it is thy light-stream which hath
raised me up in thy light and hath taken from me
the emanations of Self-willed which constrained
nie." |

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘I have become powerful in thy truth and purified
in thy righteousness,—it is the word which Pistis
Sophia hath spoken: ‘I have become powerful
in thy light and purified light in thy stream.’

And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘My adversaries have withdrawn themselves from
me,—it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath
spoken: ‘The emanations of Self-willed which
constrained me, have withdrawn themselves from
mer

“And the word which thy power hath spoken
through Solomon: ‘And I am justified in thy


SECOND BOOK 129


goodness, for thy rest endureth unto all eternity,’
—it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath spoken:
‘I am saved in thy goodness; for thou savest
every one.’

“This then, O my Lord, is the whole solution
of the repentance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered,
when she was saved out of the chaos and loosed
from the bonds of the darkness.”

It came to pass then when the First Mystery
had heard Thomas say these words, that he said
unto him: “Well said, finely, Thomas, blessed
one. This is the solution of the song which Pistis
Sophia hath uttered.”

And the First Mystery continued again and said
unto the disciples: “ And Pistis Sophia continued
and sang praises unto me, saying:

“1.1 sing a song unto thee; | through thy
commandment hast thou led me down out of the
higher zon which is above, and hast led me up to
the regions which are below.

“*2.And again through thy commandment
thou hast saved me out of the regions which are
below, and through thee hast thou taken there
the matter in my light-powers, and I have seen it.

“*3, And thou hast scattered far from me the
emanations of Self-willed which constrained me
and were hostile to me, and hast bestowed power
on me to loose myself from the bonds of the emana-
tions of Adamas.

“4. And thou hast smitten the basilisk with
the seven heads and cast it out with my hands
and hast set me above its matter. Thou hast
destroyed it, so that its seed may not raise itself
up from now on...

“<5, And thou wert with me, giving me power


CHAP. 70.


154.


Sophia

singeth an-
other song
of praise.


155.


CHAP. 71.


130 PISTIS SOPHIA


in all this, and thy light surrounded me in all
regions, and through thee hast thou made all the
emanations of Self-willed powerless.

“*6. For thou hast taken the power of their
light from them and made straight my way to
lead me out of the chaos.

“*7, And thou hast removed me from the
material darknesses and taken from them all my
powers, from which the light had been taken.

“<8. Thou hast put into them purified light
and unto all my limbs, | in which was no light,
thou hast given purified light from the Light of
the Height.

“<9. And thou hast made straight the way for
them [sc. my limbs], and the light of thy face hath
become for me life indestructible.

“*10. Thou hast led me forth above the chaos,
the region of chaos and extermination, in order
that all the matters in it which are in that region,
might be unloosed and all my powers be renewed
in thy light, and thy light be in them all.

“11. Thou hast deposited the light of thy
stream in me and I am become purified light.’

“This again is the second song which Pistis
Sophia hath uttered. Who then hath under-
stood this repentance, let him come forward and
speak it.”

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had finished saying these words, that Matthew
came forward and said: “I have understood the
solution of the song which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered. Now, therefore, give commandment
unto me, that I speak it in openness.”

And the First Mystery answered and_ said:
“T give commandment unto thee, Matthew, to


SECOND BOOK 131


set forth the interpretation of the song which
Pistis Sophia hath uttered.”

And Matthew answered and said: “ Concerning
the interpretation of the song which Pistis Sophia
hath uttered, thus thy light-power prophesied
aforetime thereon through the Ode of Solomon:

““1.He who hath led me down out of the
higher regions which are above, hath led me up
out of | the regions which are in the bottom below.

“«¢*2. Who hath there taken those in the midst,
Solomon. he hath taught me concerning them.

“*3.Who hath scattered my foes and my
adversaries, he hath bestowed power on me over
the bonds, to unloose them.

““4./Who hath smitten the serpent with the
seven heads with my hands, he hath set me up
above its root, that I may extinguish its seed.

“5. And thou wert with me, helping me; in
all regions thy name surrounded me.

“*6. Thy right hand hath destroyed the
venom of the slanderer; thy hand hath cleared
the way for thy faithful.

“<7. Thou hast freed them out of the tombs
and haat removed them from the midst of the
corpses.

“*8. Thou hast taken dead bones and hast
clothed them with a body and to them who
stirred not, hast thou given the activity of life.

“<9.Thy way is become  indestructibleness
and thy face [also].

“*10. Thou hast led thy zon above decay, so
that they all may be loosed and renewed and thy
light become a foundation for them all.

“11. Thou hast piled thy riches upon them
and they have become a holy dwelling-place.’


Matthew
interpreteth
the song of
Sophia from
the Odes of


Solomon.


156.


157.


158.


132 PISTIS SOPHIA


“This then, my Lord, is the solution of the song
which Pistis Sophia hath uttered. Hearken,
therefore, that I may say it in openness.

“The word which thy power hath spoken
through Solomon: ‘Who hath led me down out
of the higher regions which are above, he hath also
led me up out of the regions which are in the
bottom below, —it is the word | which Pistis Sophia
hath spoken: ‘I sing praises unto thee; through
thy commandment hast thou led me down out of
this higher zon which is above, and hast led me to
the regions below. And again through thy com-
mandment thou hast saved me and led me up out
of the regions which are below.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken
through Solomon: ‘Who hath there taken those
in the midst and hath taught me concerning them,’
—it is the word which Pistis Sophis hath spoken:
‘And again through thy commandment hast thou
caused the matter in the midst of my power to be
purified, and I have seen it.’

“ And moreover the word which thy power hath
spoken through Solomon: ‘Who hath scattered
my foes an,d my adversaries, —it is the word which
Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘Thou hast scattered
far from me all the emanations of Self-willed
which constrained me and were hostile to me.’

“ And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘Who hath bestowed on me wisdom over the bonds,
to unloose them,—it is the word which Pistis
Sophia hath spoken: ‘And he hath bestowed on
me wisdom to loose myself from the bonds of
those emanations.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘Who hath smitten | the serpent with the seven


SECOND BOOK 133


heads with my hands, he hath set me up above its
root, that I may extinguish its seed,—it is the
wotd which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘ And
thou hast smitten the serpent with the seven heads
through my hands and set me up above its matter.
Thou hast destroyed it, so that its seed may not
raise itself up from now on.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
“And thou wert with me, helping me,’—it is the
word which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘ And thou
wert with me, giving me power in all this.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
“And thy name surrounded me in all regions, —
it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath spoken:
* And thy light surrounded me in all their regions.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘And thy right hand hath destroyed the venom of
the slanderers,—it is the word which Pistis
Sophia hath spoken: ‘And through thee the
emanations of Self-willed became powerless, for
thou hast taken from them the light of their power.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
“Thy hand hath cleared the way for thy faith-
ful,y—it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath
spoken: ‘Thou hast made straight my way to
lead me out of the chaos, because I have had faith
in thee.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘Thou hast freed them out of the tombs and hast
removed them from the midst of the corpses,’
—it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath spoken:
‘Thou hast freed me out of the chaos and removed
me out of the material darknesses, that is | out 159.
of the dark emanations which are in the chaos,
from which thou hast taken their light.’


160.


134 PISTIS SOPHIA


“ And the word which thy power hath spoken:
Thou hast taken dead bones and hast clothed
them with a body, and to them who stirred not,
thou hast given activity of life,—it is the word
which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: *‘ And thou hast
taken all my powers in which was no light, and
hast bestowed on them within purified light, and
unto all my limbs, in which no light stirred, thou
hast given life-light out of thy Height.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
Thy way is become indestructibleness, and thy
face [also],—it is the word which Pistis Sophia
hath spoken: ‘And thou hast made straight
thy way for me, and the light of thy face hath
become for me life indestructible.’

“And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘Thou hast led thy zon above decay, so that all
might be loosed and renewed,—it is the word
which Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘Thou hast
led me, thy power, up above the chaos and above
decay, that all the matters in that region may be
loosed and all my powers renewed in the Light.’

“ And the word which thy power hath spoken:
‘And thy light hath [become] foundation for
them all,—it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath
spoken: ‘ And thy light hath been in them all.’ |

“And the word which thy light-power hath
spoken through Solomon: ‘Thou hast put thy
riches over him, and he hath become a _ holy
dwelling-place,—it is the word which Pistis
Sophia hath spoken: ‘Thou hast stayed the light
of thy stream over me, and I have become a
purified light.’

“This then, my Lord, is the solution of the song
which Pistis Sophia hath uttered.”


SECOND BOOK 135


It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had heard Matthew speak these words, that he
said: “ Well said, Matthew, and finely, beloved.
This is the solution of the song which Pistis Sophia
hath uttered.”

And the First Mystery continued again and said:

“1.1 will declare: Thou art the higher
Light, for that hast saved me and led me unto
thee, and thou hast not let the emanations of Self-
willed, which are hostile unto me, take my light.

“*2.O Light of lights, I sing praises unto
thee; thou hast saved me.

“*3,.O Light, thou hast led up my power out
of the chaos; thou hast saved me from them
which have gone down into the darkness.’

“These words again hath Pistis Sophia uttered.
Now, therefore, whose mind hath become under-
standing, comprehending the words which Pistis
Sophia hath uttered, let him come forward and
set forth their solution.”

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had finished speaking these words unto the
disciples, that Mary came forward and said:

“My Lord, my | mind is ever understanding, at
every time to come forward and set forth the
solution of the wolds which she hath uttered;
but I am afraid of Peter, because he threatened
me and hateth our sex.”

And when she had said this, the First Mystery
said unto her: “Everyone who shall be filled
with the spirit of light to come forward and set
forth the solution of what I say,—no one shall be
able to prevent him. Now, therefore, O Mary,
set forth then the solution of the words which
Pistis Sophia hath uttered.”


CHAP. 72.


Sophia con-
tinueth to
sing.


Mary is
afraid of
Peter.


161.


Mary inter-
preteth the
song of
Sophia from


Psalm xxix


CHAP. 73.


162.


Sophia con-
tinueth her
song,


Martha in-
terpreteth
from Psalm
xxix,


136 PISTIS SOPHIA


Then Mary answered and said unto the First
Mystery in the midst of the disciples: “ My
Lord, concerning the solution of the words which
Pistis Sophia hath uttered, thus hath thy light-
power prophesied aforetime through David:

“1.1 will exalt thee, O Lord, for thou hast
received me, and thou hast not made glad my
foes over me.

“<2. O Lord, my God, I cried up unto thee,
and thou hast healed me.

“*3.O Lord, thou hast led up my soul out of
hell; thou hast saved me from them which have
gone down into the pit.’ ”

And when Mary had said this, the First Mystery
said unto her, “ Well said, finely, Mary, blessed
one.”

And he continued again | in the discourse and
said unto the disciples: “ Sophia again continued
in this song and said:

“<1. The Light hath become my saviourt.

“<2. And it hath changed my darkness into
light, and it has rent the chaos which surrounded
me and girded me with light.’ ”

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had finished saying these words, that Martha
came forward and said: “My Lord, thy power
hath prophesied aforetime through David con-
cerning these words:

“*10. The Lord hath become my helper.

“*11. He hath changed my lamentation into
joy; he hath rent my mourning-robe and girded me
with joy.’ ”

And it came to pass when the First Mystery had
heard Martha speak these words, that he said:
“ Well said, and finely, Martha.”


SECOND BOOK 137


And the First Mystery continued again and said
unto the disciples: “ Pistis Sophia a.gain continued
in the song and said:

“<1. My power, sing praises to the Light and
forget not all the powers of the Light which it
her hath given unto thee.

“*2.And the powers which are in thee, sing
praises to the name of his holy mystery;

“*3, Who forgiveth all thy transgression, who
saveth thee from all the afflictions with which
the emanations of Self-willed have constrained
thee;

“*4, Who hath saved thy light | from the
emanations of Self-willed which belong to de-
struction; who, hath wreathed thee with light
in his compassion, until he saved thee;

“5. Who hath filled thee with purified light;
and thy beginning will renew itself as an invisible
of the Height.’

“With these words Pistis Sophia sang praises,
because she was saved and remembered all things
which I had done unto her.”

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had finished setting forth these words unto
the disciples, that he said unto them: “ Who hath
understood the solution of these words, let him
come forward and say it in openness.”

Mary again came forward and said: “ My Lord,
concerning these words with which Pistis Sophia
hath sung praises, thus thy light-power pro-
phesied them through David:

“<1. My soul, praise the Lord, let all that is
in me praise his holy name.

“*2. My soul, praise the Lord and forget not
all his requitals.


Sophia con-
tinueth her
song,


CHAP. 74.


Mary inter-
preteth from
Psalm cii.


164.


Sopia is

led toa
region be-
low the thir-
teenth zon
and given a
new mys-
tery.


She con-
tinueth to
sing.


138 PISTIS SOPHIA


“*3, Who forgiveth all thy iniquities; who
healeth all thy sicknesses;

“*4, Who tedeemeth thy life from decay;
who wreatheth thee with grace and compassion;

“<5, Who  satisfieth thy longing with good
things; thy youth will renew itself as an eagle’s.’

“That is: Sophia will be as the invisibles who
are in the Height; he hath, therefore, said ‘as an
eagle,’ because the dwelling-place of the eagle is
in the height, and the | invisibles also are in the
Height; that is: Pistis Sophia will shine as the
invisibles, as she was from her beginning.”

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery
had heard Mary say these words, that he said:
“ Well said, Mary, blessed one.”

It came to pass then thereafter, that the First
Mystery continued again in the discourse and said
unto the disciples: “I took Pistis Sophia and led
her up to a region which is below the thirteenth
zon, and gave unto her a new mystery of the Light
which is not that of her zon, the region of the
invisibles. And moreover I gave her a song of the
Light, so that from now on the rulers of the zons
could not [prevail] against her. And I removed
her to that region until I should come after her
and bring her to her higher region.

“Tt came to pass then, when I had removed her
to that region, that she again uttered this song
thus:

“*1.In faith have I had faith in the Light;
and it remembered me and hearkened to my
song.

“2. It hath led my power up out of the chaos
and the nether darkness of the whole matter and it
hath led me up. It hath removed me to a higher


SECOND BOOK 139


and surer zon, lofty and firm; it hath changed
my place on the way which leadeth to my region.

“3, And it hath given unto me a new mystery,
which is not that of my zon, and given unto me a
song of the Light. Now, therefore, O Light, all
the rulers will see what thou hast done unto me,
and | be afraid and have faith in the Light.’

“This song then Pistis Sophia uttered, rejoicing
that she had been led up out of the chaos and
brought to regions which are below the thirteenth
zon. Now, therefore, let him whom his mind
stitreth, so that he understandeth the solution of
the thought of the song which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered, come forward and say it.”

Andrew came forward and said: “My Lord,
this is concerning what thy light-power hath pro-
phesied aforetime through David:

““1.In patience I tarried for the Lord; he
hath given heed unto me and ear unto my
weeping.

“*2.He hath led up my soul out of the pit of
misery and out of the filthy mire; he hath set my
feet on a rock and made straight my steps.

“*3,.He hath put in my mouth a new song, a
song of praise for our God. Many will see and
be afraid and hope in the Lord.’ ”

It came to pass then, when Andrew had set
forth the thought of Pistis Sophia, that the First
Mystery said unto him: “Well said, Andrew,
blessed one.”

And he continued again in the discourse and
said unto the disciples: “These are all adven-
tures which have befallen Pistis Sophia. | It
came to pass then, when I had led her to the region
which is below the thirteenth eon, and was


Andrew in-
terpreteth
from Psalm
XXxix.


CHAP. 75.


The con-
versation of
Sophia and
the Light.


The Light
promiseth
to seal the
regions of
Self-willed.


CHAP. 76.
167.


140 PISTIS SOPHIA


about to go unto the Light and depart from her,
that she said unto me :

“ *O Light of lights, thou wilt go to the
Light and depart from me. And Tyrant Adamas
will know that thou hast departed from me and
will know that my saviour is not at hand. And
he will come again to this region, he and all his
tulers who hate me, and Self-willed also will
bestow power unto his lion-faced emanation, so
that they all will come and constrain me all
together and take my whole light from me, in
order that I may become powerless and again
without light. Now, therefore, O Light and my
Light, take from them the power of their light, so
that they may not be able to constrain me from
now on.’

“Tt came to pass then, when I heard these
wotds which Pistis Sophia had spoken unto me,
that I answered her, saying: ‘My Father, who
hath emanated me, hath not yet given me com-
mandment to take their light from them; but
I will seal the regions of Self-willed and of all his
rulers who hate thee because thou hast had faith
in the Light. And I will also seal the regions of
Adamas and of his rulers, so that none of them
may be able to fight with thee, until their time
is completed and the season cometh that my
Father give me commandment to take their
light from them.’

“And thereafter I said again unto her:
‘“Hearken that I | may speak with thee about
their time, when this which I have said unto
thee, will come to pass. It will come to pass
when [the] three times are completed.’

“Pistis Sophia answered and said unto me:


SECOND BOOK 141


‘O Light, by what shall I know when the three
times will take place, so that I may be glad and
rejoice that the time is near for thee to bring me
to my region, and moreover rejoice therein that
the time is come when thou wilt take the light-
power from all them which hate me, because I
have had faith in thy light?’

“And I answered and said unto her: ‘If thou
seest the gate of the Treasury of the Great Light
which is opened after the thirteenth zon, and that
is the left [one]—-when that gate is opened, then
are the three times completed.’

“Pistis Sophia again answered and said: ‘O
Light, by what shall I know,—for I am in this
region,—that that gate is opened?”

“And I answered and said unto her: ‘When
that gate is opened, they who are in all the zons
will know because of the Great Light which will
obtain in all their regions. But see, I have now
settled that they shall venture no ill against thee,
until the three times are eompleted. And thou
wilt have the power of going down into their
twelve cons, | when it pleaseth thee, and also of
returning and going into thy region, which is
below the thirteenth zon, and in which thou now
art. But thou wilt not have the power of passing
through the gate of the Height which is in the
thirteenth zon, so as to enter into thy region
whence thou didst come down. Moreover, if then
the three times are completed, Self-willed and all
his rulers will again constrain thee, to take thy
light from thee, being enraged against thee and
thinking that thou hast imprisoned his power
in the chaos, and thinking that thou hast taken
its light from it. He will then be embittered


How Sophia
will know
that the
time of her
final de-
liverance
ath come.


What will
come to
pass at that
time.


169.


The time
for the final
deliverance
of Sophia is
completed.


142 PISTIS SOPHIA


against thee, to take from thee thy light, in order
that he may send it down into the chaos and it
may get down to that emanation of his, so
that it may be able to come up out of the chaos
and go to his region. Adamas will attempt this.
But I will take all thy powers from him and give
them unto thee, and I will come to take them.
Now, therefore, if they constrain thee at that time,
then sing praises to the Light, and I will not delay
to help thee. And I will quickly come unto thee
to the regions which are below thee. And I will
come down to their regions to take their light
from them. And I will come to this region
whither I have removed thee, and which is below
the thirteenth | zon, until I bring thee to thy
region whence thou art come.’

“Tt came to pass then, when Pistis Sophia had
heard me say these words unto her, that she re-
joiced with great joy. But I removed her to the
region which is below the thirteenth zon. I
went to the Light and departed from her.”

And all these adventures the First Mystery told
to the disciples, that they should come to pass for
Pistis Sophia. And he sat on the Mount of
Olives, narrating all these adventures in the midst
of the disciples. And he continued again and said
unto them: “And it came to pass again after
this, while I was in the world of men and sat in
the way, that is in this region which is the Mount
of Olives, before my vesture was sent unto me,
which I had deposited in the four-and-twentieth
mystery from the interior, but the first from the
exterior, which is the Great Uncontainable, in
which I am enwrapped, and before I had gone
to the Height to receive my second vesture,—


SECOND BOOK 143


while I sat with you in this region, which is the
Mount of Olives, that the time was completed
of which I had said to Pistis Sophia: ‘ Adamas and
all his rulers will constrain thee.’

“Tt came to pass then, when that time came on,—
and I was in the world of men, | sitting with you
in this region, which is the Mount of Olives,—
that Adamas looked down out of the twelve zons
and looked down at the regions of the chaos and
saw his demon power which is in the chaos, that
no light at all was in it, because I had taken its
light from it; and he saw it, that it was dark and
could not go to his region, that is to the twelve
eons. ‘Thereon Adamas again remembered Pistis
Sophia and became most exceedingly wroth
against her, thinking that it was she who had im-
prisoned his power in the chaos, and thinking that
it was she who had taken its light from it. And
he was exceedingly embittered; he piled wrath on
wrath and emanated out of himself a dark emana-
tion and another, chaotic and evil, the violent
[one], so as through them to harass Pistis Sophia.
And he made a dark region in his region, so as to
constrain Sophia therein. And he took many of
his rulers; they pursued after Sophia, in order
that the two dark emanations which Adamas had
emanated, might lead her into the dark chaos
which he had made, and constrain her in that
region and harass her, until they should take her
whole light from her, and Adamas should take
the light from Pistis Sophia and give it to the
two dark violent emanations, and they should
catty it to the great chaos which is below and
dark, | and cast it into his dark power which is
chaotic, if perchance it might be able to come to his


CHAP. 77.
70.


=


Adamas
sendeth
forth two
emanations
of darkness
to plague
Sophia.


171.


Sophia again
singeth a
song to the
Light.


172.


144 PISTIS SOPHIA


region, because it had become exceedingly dark,
for I had taken its light-power from it.

“Tt came to pass then, when they pursued
after Pistis Sophia, that she cried out again and
sang praises to the Light, since I had said unto
her: ‘If thou shalt be constrained and singest
praises unto me, I will come quickly and help
thee.’ It came to pass then, when she was con-
strained,—and I sat with you in this region, that
is on the Mount of Olives,—that she sang praises
to the Light, saying:

“*1.O0 Light of lights, I have had faith in
thee. Save me from all these rulers who pursue
after me, and help me,

“<2. That in sooth they may never take from
me my light, as the lion-faced power [did]. For
thy light is not with me and thy light-stream to
save me. Nay, Adamas is the more enraged
against me, saying unto me: Thou hast impri-
soned my power in the chaos.

“<3. Now, therefore, O Light of lights, if I
have done this and have imprisoned it, if I have
done any injustice at all to that power,

“*A Or if I have constrained it, as it hath
constrained me, then let all these rulers who
pursue after me, take my light from me and leave
me empty;

“*5.And let foe Adamas pursue after my
power and seize upon it and take my light from
me and cast it into his dark power which is in
the chaos, and keep my power | in the chaos.

“*6, Now, therefore, O Light, lay hold on me
in thy wrath and lift up thy power above my
foes who have lifted themselves up against me to
the very end.


SECOND BOOK 145


“<7, Quicken me quickly, as thou hast said
unto me: I will help thee.’ ”

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery CHap. 78.
had finished saying .these words unto the disciples,
that he said: “Who hath understood the words
which I have spoken, let him come forward and
set forth their solution.”

James came forward and said: “My Lord,
concerning this song which Pistis Sophia hath
sung, thus thy light-power hath prophesied afore-
time through David in the seventh Psalm:

“*1,.O0 Lord, my God, in thee have I hoped. James in-
Free me from my pursuers and save me, Nes es

“*2. That in sooth he may never steal away fom Psim
my soul as a lion, without anyone to deliver and —
save.

“*3.O Lord, my God, if I have done this, if
injustice is on my hands,

“A Tf I have requited those who requite me
with evil, then let me fall down empty through
my foes.

“5. And let the foe pursue after my soul
and selze it, and trample my life to the ground
and lay my honour in the dust. (Selah.)

“*6, Arise, O Lord, in thy wrath, raise thyself
up for the end of my foes.

“<7. Arise according to the commandment
which thou hast commanded.’ ” |

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery 172.
had heard James speak these words, that he said:
“ Well said, James, beloved.”

And the First Mystery continued again and CHAP. 79.
said unto the disciples: “It came to pass then,
when Pistis Sophia had finished uttering the
words of this song, that she turned herself back


Sophia ad-
dresseth
Adamas and
his rulers.


174.


146 PISTIS SOPHIA


to see whether Adamas and his rulers had turned
back to go to their eon. And she saw them,
how they pursued after her. Then she turned
unto them and said unto them:

““1.Why pursue ye after me and say: I
should not have help, that it [sc the Light]
should save me from you?

“*2.Now, therefore, my vindicator is the
Light and a strong [one]; but it is long-suffering
until the time of which it hath said unto me:
I will come and help thee. And it will not bring
its wrath upon you always. But this is the time
of which he hath spoken unto me.

“<3, Now, therefore, if ye turn not back and
cease not to pursue after me, then will the Light
make ready its power, and it will make itself
ready in all its powers.

““4.And in its power hath it made itself
ready, so that it may take your lights which are
in you, and ye may become dark; and its power
hath brought it to pass, so that it may take your
power from you and ye go to ground.’

“And when Pistis Sophia had said this, she
looked at the region of Adamas and saw the dark
and chaotic region | which he had made, and saw
also the two dark exceedingly violent emanations
which Adamas had emanated, in order that they
might seize Pistis Sophia and cast her down into
the chaos which he had made, and constrain
and harass her in that region, until they should
take her light from her. It came to pass then,
when Pistis Sophia had seen those two dark
emanations and the dark region which Adamas
had made, that she feared and cried unto the
Light, saying:


SECOND BOOK 147


eT e@)" aight, “lo| Adamas, the doer of Sophia again
violence, is wrathful; he hath made a dark elighe
emanation,

“*2.And he hath also emanated another
chaos and hath made another dark and chaotic
[one] and made it ready.

“*3,Now, therefore, O Light, the chaos
which he hath made, in order to cast me down
therein and take from me my light-power, take
then from him his own.

“*4.And the plan which he hath devised, to
take my light—they are to take his own from
him; and the injustice which he hath spoken, to
take my lights from me,—take then all of his.’

“These are the words which Pistis Sophia
hath uttered in her song. Now, therefore, who
is sober in spirit, let him come forward and set
forth the solution of the words which Pistis Sophia
[hath uttered] in her song.”

Martha again came forward and said: “ My cHap.79.
Lord, | I am sober in my spirit and understand 175.
the words which thou sayest. Now, therefore,
give me commandment to set forth their solution
in openness.”

And the First Mystery answered and said unto
Martha: “I give thee commandment, Martha,
to set forth the solution of the words which
Pistis Sophia hath uttered in her song.”

And Martha answered and said: “My Lord,
these arte the words which thy light-power
hath prophesied aforetime through David in the
seventh Psalm, saying:

“*12. God is a righteous vindicator and strong
and long-suffering, who bringeth not on his
wrath every day.


Martha in-
terpreteth
the words
of Sophia
from Pslam
vii.


CHAP. 81.
Jesus bring-
eth Sophia
again to the
thirteenth
zon.


176.


148 PISTIS SOPHIA


“<13.1f ye turn not, he will whet. his sword;
he hath bent his bow and made it ready.

““14, And he hath made ready for him
instruments of death; he hath made his arrows
for those who will be burnt up.

“*15. Behold, injustice hath been in labour,
hath conceived wrong and brought forth iniquity.

“* 16. It hath digged a pit and hollowed it out.
It will fall into the hole which it hath made.

““17. Its wrong will return on its own head,
and its injustice will come down on its pate.’ ”

When Martha had said this, the First Mystery
which looketh without, said unto her: “ Well
said, finely, Martha, blessed [one].”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
telling his disciples all the adventures which
had befallen Pistis Sophia when she was in the
chaos, and the way | she had sung praises to the
Light, that it should save her and lead her out
of the chaos, and lead her into the twelve zons,
and also the way it had saved her out of all her
afllictions with which the rulers of the chaos had
constrained her, because she longed to go to
the Light, that Jesus continued again in the dis-
course and said unto his disciples: “It came to
pass then after all this, that I took Pistis Sophia
and led her into the thirteenth zon, shining most
exceedingly, there being no measure for the light
which was about me. I entered into the region
of the four-and-twenty invisibles, shining most
exceedingly. And they fell into great commotion;
they looked and sawSophia, who was with me.
Her they knew, but me they knew not, who I was,
but held me for some sort of emanation of the
Light-land.


SECOND BOOK 149


“Tt came to pass then, when Pistis Sophia
saw her fellows, the invisibles, that she rejoiced
in great joy and exulted exceedingly and desired
to proclaim the wonders which I had wrought
on her below in the earth of mankind, until I
saved her. She came into the midst of the | in- 177.
visibles, and in their midst sang praises unto me,
saying:
“* 1.1 will give thanks unto thee, O Light, for sophia
thou att a saviour; thou art a deliverer for all time. ‘seh


raises of
“2.1 will utter this song to the Light, for it the pipe
hath saved me and saved me out of the hand of invisibles.
the rulers, my foes.
“*3, And thou hast preserved me in all the
regions, thou hast saved me out of the height
and the depth of the chaos and out of the zons of
the rulers of the sphere.
“<4. And when I was come out of the Height,
I wandered round in regions in which is no light,
and I could not return to the thirteenth zon,
my dwelling-place.
“<5, Por there was no light in me nor power.
My power was utterly weakened (?).
“*6,.And the Light saved me in all my
afflictions. I sang praises unto the Light, and
it hearkened unto me, when I was constrained.
“*7.It guided me in the creation of the
zons to lead me up into the thirteenth zon, my
dwelling-place.
“8,1 will give thanks unto thee, O Light,
that thou hast saved me, and for thy wondrous
works unto the race of men.
“<9, When I failed of my power, thou hast
given me power; and when I failed of my light,
thou didst fill me with purified light.


178.


150 PISTIS SOPHIA


“<10. I was in the darkness and in the shadow
of the chaos, bound with the mighty fetters of
the chaos, and no light was in me.

““11. For I have provoked the commandment
of the Light and have transgressed, and I have
made wroth the commandment of the Light,
because I had gone out of my region.

“12. And when I | had gone down, I failed
of my light and became without light, and no one
had helped me.

“13, And in my aflliction I sang praises unto
the Light, and it saved me out of my afllictions.

“14. And it hath also broken asunder all my
bonds and led me up out of the darkness and the
aflliction of the chaos.

“15.1 will give thanks unto thee, O Light,
that thou hast saved me and that thy wondrous
works have been wrought in the race of men.

“16. And thou hast shattered the upper
gates of the darkness and the mighty bolts of
the chaos.

“17, And thou didst let me depart out of the
region in which I had transgressed, and my light
was taken, because I have transgressed.

“*18. And I ceased from my mysteries and
went down to the gates of the chaos.

“*19. And when I was constrained, I sang
praises to the Light. It saved me out of all my
afflictions.

“*20. Thou sentest thy stream; it gave me
power and saved me out of all my afllictions.

“<21.1 will give thanks unto thee, O Light,
that thou hast saved me, and for thy wondrous
works in the. race of men.’

“This then is the song which Pistis Sophia


SECOND BOOK 151


hath uttered in the midst of the four-and-twenty
invisibles, desiring that they should know all the
wondrous works which I had done for her, and
desiring that they should know that I have gone
to the world of men and have given them the
mysteries of the Height. Now, therefore, who is
exalted in his thought, let him come forward and
say the solution of the song which Pistis Sophia.
hath uttered.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus | had finished CHapP. 82.
saying these words, that Philip came forward and 179.
said: “Jesus, my Lord, my thought is exalted,
and I have understood the solution of the song
which Pistis Sophia hath uttered. The prophet
David hath prophesied concerning it aforetime
in the one-hundred-and-sixth Psalm, saying:

“<1. Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for he is philip in-
good, for his grace is eternal. ener

“*2.Let the delivered of the Lord say this, fom Psim
for it is he who hath delivered them out of the
hand of their foes.

“*3,.He hath gathered them together out of
their lands, from the east and from the west and
from the north and from the sea.

“4. They wandered round in the desert, in
a waterless country; they found not the way to
the city of their dwelling-place.

“<5, Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in
them.

“6, He saved them out of their necessities.
They cried unto the Lord and he hearkened unto
them in their affliction.

“<7. He led them on a straight way, that they
might go to the region of their dwelling-place.

“*8, Let them give thanks unto the Lord for


180.


152 PISTIS SOPHIA


his graciousness and his wondrous works unto
the children of men.

“9. For he hath satisfied a hungering soul;
he hath filled a hungering soul with good
things,

“*10.Them who sat in darkness and the
shadow of death, who were fettered in misery and
iron.

“11. For | they had provoked the word of
God and made wroth the determination of the
Most High.

“*12. Their heart was humbled in their
miseries; they become weak and no one helped
them.

“* 13, They cried unto the Lord in their afflic-
tion; he saved them out of their necessities.

“*14, And he led them out of the darkness
and the shadow of death and brake their bonds
asunder.

“15, Let them give thanks unto the Lord for
his graciousness and his wondrous works unto
the children of men.

“16. For he hath shattered the gates of brass
and burst the bolts of iron asunder.

“*17. He hath taken them unto himself out
of the way of their iniquity. For they were
brought low because of their iniquities.

“<18. Their heart abhorred all manner of meat
and they were near unto the gates of death.

“19. They cried unto the Lord in their
affliction and he saved them out of their
necessities.

“*20. He sent his word and healed them and
freed them from their miseries.

“21. Let them give thanks unto the Lord for


SECOND BOOK 153


his graciousness and his wondrous works unto
the children of men.’

“This then, my Lord, is the solution of the song
which Pistis Sophia hath uttered. Hearken,
therefore, my Lord, that I may say it clearly,
The word in sooth which David hath spoken:
“Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for he is good,
for his grace is etemal,—it is the word which
Pistis Sophia hath spoken: ‘I will give thanks
unto thee, O Light, for thou art a saviour and
thou art a deliverer for all time.’

“And the word which hath David spoken: |
“Let the delivered of the Lord say this, for he 181.
hath delivered them out of the hand of their
foes,—it is the word which Pistis Sophia hath
spoken: ‘I will utter this song to the Light, for
it hath saved me and saved me out of the hand of
the rulers, my foes.’ And the rest of the Psalm.

“This then, my Lord, is the solution of the
song which Pistis Sophia hath uttered in the
midst of the four-and-twenty invisibles, desiring
that they should know all the wondrous works
which thou hast done for her, and desiring that
they should know that thou hast given thy
mysteries to the race of men.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
Philip say these words, that he said: “ Well said,
blessed Philip. This is the solution of the song
which Pistis Sophia hath uttered.”


[END OF THE STORY OF PISTIS SOPHIA]


It came to pass then again, after all this, that CHAP. 83.
Mary came forward, adored the feet of Jesus and Mary ques-


tionet


said: “My Lord, be not wroth with me, if I Jesus.


182.


154 PISTIS SOPHIA


question thee, because we question concerning
everything with precision and certainty. For
thou hast said unto us aforetime: ‘Seek that ye
may find, and knock that it may be opened unto
you. For every one who seeketh shall find, and
to every one who knocketh it shall be opened.’
Now, therefore, my Lord, who is it whom I shall
seek, ot who is it at whom we shall knock? Or
who rather is able to give us the decision upon
the words concerning which we shall question
thee? Or | who rather knoweth the power of the
words concerning which we shall question?
Because thou in the mind hast given us mind of
the Light and hast given us sense and an exceed-
ingly exalted thought; for which cause, there-
fore, no one existeth in the world of men nor any
one in the height of the zons, who can give the
decision on the words concerning which we
question, save thee alone, who knoweth [sz] the
universe, who is perfected in the universe; because
we do not question in the manner in which the
men of the world question, but because we ques-
tion in the gnosis of the Height which thou hast
given unto us, and we question moreover in the
type of the excellent questioning which thou hast
taught us, that we may question therein. Now,
therefore, my Lord, be not wroth with me, but
reveal unto me the matter concerning which I shall
question thee.”

It came to pass, when Jesus had heard Mary
Magdalene say these words, that he answered and
said unto her: “ Question concerning what thou
desirest to question, and I will reveal it unto thee
with precision and certainty. Amén, amen, I
say unto you: Rejoice in great joy and exult


SECOND BOOK 155


most exceedingly. If ye question concerning
all with precision, then shall I exult most exceed-
ingly, because ye question concerning all with
precision and question in the manner in which it
beseemeth to question. Now, therefore, question
concerning what thou wouldst question, | and I
will reveal it unto thee with joy.”

It came to pass then, when Mary had heard
the Saviour say these words, that she rejoiced
in great joy and exulted most exceedingly and
said unto Jesus: “My Lord and Saviour, of
what manner then are the four-and-twenty in-
visibles and of what type, or rather of what
quality are they, or of what quality is then their
light”

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary:
“What is there in this world which is like unto
them, or rather what region is there in this world
which is comparable to them? Now, therefore,
to what am I to liken them, or rather what am I
to say concerning them? For nothing existeth in
this world to which I shall be able to liken them,
and no form existeth in it which is able to be like
them. Now, therefore, nothing existeth in this
world which is of the quality of the heaven. [But]
amén, I say unto you: Everyone of the invisibles
is nine times greater than the heaven and the
sphere above it all4 the twelve eons all together,
as I have already said unto you at another time.
And no light existeth in this world which is more
excellent than the light of the sun. Amen, amen,
I say unto you: The four-and-twenty invisibles
shine ten-thousand times more than the light of
the sun which is in this world, as, I have already |
said unto you at another time. For the light


183.


CHAP. 84.


Of the glory
of the four-
and-twenty

invisibles.


184.


Of the glory
of the Fate.


185.


Of the glory


of the twelve
eons.


156 PISTIS SOPHIA


of the sun in its shape in truth is not in this world,
for its light pierceth through many veils and
regions. But the light of the sun in its shape in
truth, which is in the region of the Virgin of
Light, shineth ten-thousand times more than the
four-and-twenty invisibles and the great invisible
forefather and also the great triple-powered god,
as I have already said unto you at another time.

“Now, therefore, Mary, there is no form in
this world, nor any light, nor any shape, which is
comparable to the four-and-twenty invisibles, so
that I may liken it to them. But yet a little while
and I will lead thee and thy brethren and
fellow-disciples into all the regions of the Height
and will lead you into the three spaces of the
First Mystery, save only the regions of the space
of the Ineffable, and ye shall see all their shapes
in truth without similitude.

“ And if I lead you into the height and ye shall
see the glory of them of the height, then will ye
be in very great amazement.

“ And if I lead you into the region of the of the
rulers of the Fate, then will ye see the glory in
which they are, and because of their overtowering
great glory ye will deem this world before you as
darkness of darknesses, and | ye will look at
the whole world of men, how it will have the
condition of a speck of dust for you because of
the great distance it is far distant from it, and
because of the great condition it is considerably
greater than it.

“And if I lead you into the twelve zons, then
will ye see the glory in which they are; and
because of the great glory the region of the
rulers of the Fate will count for you as the dark-


SECOND BOOK 157


ness of darknesses, and it will have for you the
oondition of a speck of dust because of the great
distance it is far distant from it and because of
the great condition it is considerably greater
than them, as I have already ,said unto you at
another time.

“ And if I lead you moreover into the thirteenth
zon, then will ye see the glory in which they are;
the twelve zons will count for you as the darkness
of darknesses, and ye shall look at the twelve
eons, how it [sc their region] will have for you
the likeness of a speck of dust because of the
great distance it is far distant from it, and be-
cause of the great condition it is considerably
greater than the former.

“And if I lead you into the region of those
of the Midst, then will ye see the glory in which
they are; the thirteen zons will count for you as
the darkness of darknesses. And again ye will
look at the twelve eons | and upon the whole
Fate and the whole ordering and all the spheres
and all the others in which they are; they will
have for you the condition of a speck of dust
because of the great distance it [sc their region]
is distant from it and because of the great con-
dition it is considerably greater than the former.

“And if I lead you into the region of those
of the Right, then will ye see the glory in which
they are; the region of those of the Midst will
count for you as the night which is in the world
of men. And if ye look at the Midst, it will
have for you the condition of a speck of dust
because of the great distance the region of those
of the Right is considerably distant from it.

“And if I lead you into the Light-land, that


Of the glory
of the thir-


teenth zon.


Of the glory
of the Midst.


Of the glory
of the
Right.


Of the glory
of the Trea-
sury.


Of the glory
of the In-
heritance.


187.


CHAP. 85.


158 PISTIS SOPHIA


is into the Treasury of the Light, and ye see the
glory in which they are, then will the region of
those of the Right count for you as the light at
mid-day in the world of men, when the sun is
not out; and if ye look at the region of those
of the Right, it will have for you the condition of
a speck of dust because of the great distance
the Treasury of the Light is distant from it.

“And if I lead you into the region of those
who have received the inheritances and have
received the mysteries of the Light, and ye see
the glory of the Light in which they are, then the
Light-land will count for you as the light of the
sun which is in the world of men. And if ye look
upon the Light-land, | then will it count for you
as a speck of dust because of the great distance
the Light-land is distant from it, and because
of the greatness [by which] it is considerably
greater than the former.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
speaking these words unto his disciples, that
Mary Magdalene started forward and said:
“My Lord, be not wroth with me if I question
thee, because we question thee concerning all
with precision.”

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary:
“ Question concerning what thou desirest to ques-
tion, and I will reveal it unto thee in openness
without similitude, and all concerning which
thou questionest, I will say unto thee with pre-
cision and certainty. I will perfect you in all
power and all fulnesses, from the interior of the
interiors to the exterior of the exteriors, from
that Ineffable to the darkness of darknesses, so
that ye shall be called ‘the fulnesses perfected


SECOND BOOK 159


in all gnoses.’ Now, therefore, Mary, question
concerning what thou mayest question, and I
will reveal it to thee with great joy and great
exultation.”

It came to pass then, when Mary had heard
the Saviour say these words, that she rejoiced in
exceedingly great joy and exulted, and _ said:
“My Lord, will then the men of the world who
have received the mysteries of the Light, | be
superior to the emanations of the Treasury in
thy kingdom? For I have heard thee say:
‘If I lead you into the region of those who have
received the mysteries of the Light, then will the
region of the [emanations of the] Light-land
count for you as a speck of dust because of the
great distance in which it is distant from it, and
because of the great light in which it is,—that
is the Light-land is the Treasury, the region of the
emanations,—will therefore then, my Lord, the
men who have received the mysteries, be superior
to the Light-land and superior to those [emana-
tions] in the kingdom of the Light?”

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary:
“Finely indeed dost thou question concerning
all with precision and certainty. But hearken,
Mary, that I may speak with thee about the
consummation of the zon and the ascension of
the universe. It will not yet take place; but I
have said unto you: “If I lead you into the region
of the inheritances of those who shall receive the
mystery of the Light, | then will the Treasury of
the Light, the region of the emanations, count
for you asa speck of dust only and as the light of
the sun by day.’

“T have therefore said: ‘This will take place


Mary again
questioneth


Jesus..


188.


CHAP. 86.


189.


Of the
twelve
saviour and
their re-
gions in the
Inheritance.


190.


160 PISTIS SOPHIA


at the time of the consummation [and] of the
ascension of the universe.’ The twelve saviours
of the Treasury and the twelve orders of every
one of them, which are the emanations of the
seven Voices and of the five Trees, they will be
with me in the region of the inheritances of the
Light; being kings with me in my kingdom,
and everyone of them being king over his emana-
tions, and moreover everyone of them being king
according to his glory, the great according to
his greatness and the little according to his
littleness.

“And the saviour of the emanations of the
first Voice will be in the region of the souls of
those who have received the first mystery of the
First Mystery in my kingdom.

“And the saviour of the emanations of the
second Voice will be in the region of the souls of
those who have received the second mystery of
the First Mystery.

“Tn like manner also will the saviour of the
emanations of the third Voice be in the region of
the souls of those who have received the third
mystery of the First Mystery in the | inheritances
of the Light.

“And the saviour of the emanations of the
fourth Voice of the Treasury of the Light will be
in the region of the souls of those who have
received the fourth mystery of the First Mystery
in the inheritances of the Light.

“And the fifth saviour of the fifth Voice of
the Treasury of the Light will be in the region of
the souls of those who have recetyed the fifth
mystery of the First Mystery in the inheritances
of the Light.


SECOND BOOK 161


“And the sixth saviour of the emanations of
the sixth Voice of the Treasury of the Light will
be in the region of the souls of those who have
received the sixth mystery of the First Mystery.

“And the seventh saviour of the emanations
of the seventh Voice of the Treasury of the Light
will be in the region of the souls of those who
have recetved the seventh mystery of the First
Mystery in the Treasury [sz] of the Light.

“And the eighth saviour, that is the saviour
of the emanations of the first Tree of the Treasury
of the Light, will be in the region of the souls of
those who have received the | eighth mystery of 191.
the First Mystery in the inheritances of the Light.

“ And the ninth saviour, that is the saviour of
the emanations of the second Tree of the Treasury
of the Light, will be in the region of the souls of
those who have received the ninth mystery of the
First Mystery in the inheritances of the Light.

“ And the tenth saviour, that is the saviour of
the emanations of the third Tree of the Treasury
of the Light, will be in the region of the souls of
those who have received the tenth mystery of the
First Mystery in the inheritances of the Light.

“Tn like manner also the eleventh saviour,
that is the sa vigur of the fourth Tree of the
Treasury of the Light, will be in the region of
the souls of those who have received the eleventh
mystery of the First Mystery in the inheritances of
the Light.

“And the twelfth saviour, that is the saviour
of the emanations of the fifth Tree of the Treasury
of the Light, will be in the region of the souls of
those who have received the twelfth mystery of the
First Mystery in the inheritances of the Light.


192.

Of the as-
cension of
those of the
Treasury in-
to the In-
heritance.


Of their re-
spective
ranks in the
kingdom.


Of the
powers of
the Right,
and their
emanation
and ascen-
sion.


193.


162 PISTIS SOPHIA


“ And the seven | Amens and the five Trees and
the three Amens will be on my right, being kings
in the inheritances of the Light. And the Twin-
saviours, that is the Child of the Child, and the
nine guards will bide also at my left, being kings in
the inheritances of the Light.

“And everyone of the saviours will rule over
the orders of his emanations in the inheritances
of the Light as they did also in the Treasury of
the Light.

“And the nine guards of the Treasury of the
Light will be superior to the saviours in the in-
heritances of the Light. And the Twin-saviours
will be superior to the nine guards in the kingdom.
And the three Améns will be superior to the Twin-
saviours in the kingdom. And the five Trees
will be superior to the three Améns in the in-
heritances of the Light.

“And Yew and the guard of the veil of the
Great Light, and the receiver of Light and the
two great guides and the great Sabaoth, the Good,
will be kings in the first saviour of the first Voice
of the Treasury of the Light, [the saviour] who
will be in | the region of those who have received
the first mystery of the First Mystery. For in
sooth Yew and the guard of the region of those
of the Right and Melchisedec, the great receiver
of the Light, and the two great guides have come
forth out of the purified and utterly pure light of
the first Tree up to the fifth.

“Yew in sooth is the overseer of the Light, who
hath come forth first out of the pure light of
the first Tree; on the other hand the guard of
the veil of those of the Right hath come forth
out of the second Tree; and the two guides again


SECOND BOOK 163


have come forth out of the pure and _ utterly
purified light of the third and fourth Trees of
the Treasury of the Light; Melchisedec again
hath come forth out of the fifth Tree; on the
other hand Sabaoth, the Good, whom I have
called my father, hath come forth out of Yew,
the overseer of the Light.

“These six then by command of the First
Mystery the last Helper hath caused to be in the
region of those of the Right, for the economy of
the ingathering of the upper light out of the zons
of the rulers and out of the worlds and all races
in them,—of every one of whom I will tell you
the employment over which he hath been set in
the expansion of the universe. Because, there-
fore, of the importance of the employment over
which they have been set, | they will be fellow-
kings in the first [saviour] of the first Voice of the
Treasury of the Light, who will be in the region
of the souls of those who have received the first
mystery of the First Mystery.

“And the Virgin of Light and the great guide
of the Midst, whom the rulers of the xons are
wont to call the Great Yew after the name of a
great ruler who is in their region,—he and the
Virgin of Light and his twelve ministers, from
whom ye have recetved your shape and from whom
ye have received the power, they all will be kings
with the first saviour of the first Voice in the
region of the souls of those who will receive the
first mystery of the First Mystery in the in-
heritances of the Light.

“And the fifteen helpers of the seven virgins
of the Light who are in the Midst, they will expand
themselves in the regions of the twelve saviours,


194.


Of the
powers of
the Midst
and their
ascension.


But this
shall not
take place
till the con-
summation
of the zon.


195.


Of the as-
cension of
the souls of
the perfect.


164 PISTIS SOPHIA


and the rest of the angels of the Midst, every
one of them according to his glory, will rule with
me in the inheritances of the Light. And I shall
rule over them all in the inheritances of the Light.

“All this then whieh I have said unto you,
will not take place at this time, but it will take
place at. the consummation of the eon, that is
at the ascension of the universe; that is at the
dissolution of the universe and at the total
ascension of the numbering | of the perfect souls
of the inheritances of the Light.

“Before the consummation, therefore, this
which I have said unto you, will not take place,
but everyone will be in his own region, into which
he hath been set from the beginning, until the
numbering of the ingathering of the perfect souls
is completed.

“The seven Voices and the five Trees and the
three Ameéns and the Twin-saviours and the nine
guards and the twelve saviours and those of the
region of the Right and those of the region of the
Midst, everyone will abide in the region in
which they have been set, until the numbering
of the perfect souls of the inheritances of the
Light shall be raised up all together.

“And also all the rulers who have repented,
they also will abide in the region into which they
have been set, until the numbering of the souls
of the Light shall be raised up all together.

“The souls] will all come, everyone at the time
when he will recetve the mysteries; and all the
rulers who have repented, will pass through
and come into the region of the Midst. And those
of the Midst will baptize them and give unto them
the spiritual unction and seal them with the


SECOND BOOK 165


seals of their mysteries. And they will pass
through those of all the regions of the Midst, and
they will pass through the region of the Right
and the interior of the region of the nine guards
and the interior of the region of the Twin-
saviours and the interior of the region of the
three | Ameéns and of the twelve saviours and the
interior of the five Trees and of the seven Voices.
Every one giveth unto them his seal of his mys-
tery, and they pass into the interior of them all
and go to the region of the inheritances of the
Light; and everyone bideth in the region up to
which he hath recetved mysteries in the inheri-
tances of the Light.

“Tn a word, all the souls of men who shall
receive the mysteries of the Light, will precede
all the rulers who have repented, and they will
precede all those of the region of the Midst and
those of the whole region of the Right, and they
will precede those of the whole region of the
Treasury of the Light. In a word, they will
precede all those of the region [of the Treasury],
and they will precede all those of the regions of
the first Commandment, and they will pass into
the interior of them all and go into the Inheritance
of the Light up to the region of their mystery; and
everyone abideth in the region up to which he
hath recetved mysteries. And those of the region
of the Midst and of the Right and those of the
whole region of the Treasury, everyone abideth in
the region of the order into which he hath been
set from the beginning on, until the universe shall
be raised up. And everyone of them accom-
plisheth his economy to which he hath been set,
in respect of the ingathering of the souls who


196.


Of the rank
of the souls
of the per-
fect.


197.


CHAP. 87.


Mary inter-
preteth the
discourse
from the
scriptures.


198.


166 PISTIS SOPHIA


have received the mysteries, in respect of this
economy, so that they may seal | all the souls who
will receive the mysteries and who will pass
through their interior towards the Inheritance of
the Light.

“Now, therefore, Mary, this is the word con-
cerning which thou dost question me with pre-
cision and certainty. For the rest now then, who
hath ears to hear, let him hear.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
speaking these words, that Mary Magdalene
started forward and said:

“My Lord, my indweller of light hath ears
and I comprehend every word which thou sayest.
Now, therefore, my Lord, on account of the word
which thou hast spoken: ‘Al the souls of the
race of men who shall receive the mysteries of
the Light, will go into the Inheritance of the
Light before all the rulers who will repent, and
before those of the whole region of the Right
and before the whole region of the Treasury of
the Light,—on account of this word, my Lord,
thou hast said unto us aforetime: ‘The first will
be last and the last will be first,—that is, the
‘last’ are the whole race of men which will
enter into the Light-kingdom sooner than all
those of the region of the Height, who are the
‘first On this account, therefore, my Lord,
hast thou said unto us: ‘Who hath ears to hear,
let him hear,—that is thou desirest to know
whether we | comprehend every word which thou
speakest. This, therefore, is the word, my Lord.”

It came to pass then, when Mary had finished
saying these words, that the Saviour was greatly
astonished at the definitions of the words which


SECOND BOOK 167


she spake, for she had become pure spirit utterly.
Jesus answered again and said unto her: “ Well
said, spiritual and pure Mary. This is the
solution of the word.”

It came to pass then again after all these CHAP. 88.
words, that Jesus continued in the discourse and
said unto his disciples: “ Hearken, that I may
discourse with you concerning the glory of those
of the Height, how they are, according to the
manner in which I discoursed with you unto this
day.

“ Now, therefore, if I lead you into the region of Of the last
the last Helper, who surroundeth the Treasury
of the Light, and if I lead you into the region of
that last Helper and ye see the glory in which he
is, then will the region of the Inheritance of the
Light count for you only for the size of a city
of the world, because of the greatness in which
the last Helper is, and because of the great light
in which he is.

“And thereafter I will discourse with you also That the
concerning the glory of the Helper who is above aoe
the little Helper. But I shall not be able to jispersare
discourse with you concerning the regions of those able.
who are above all Helpers; | for there existeth 199.
no type in this world, to describe them, for there
existeth in this world no likeness which is like
unto them, that I may compare them therewith,
nor greatness nor light which is like unto them,
not only in this world, but they also have no like-
ness with those of the Height of Righteousness
from their region upwards. On this account,
therefore, there existeth in fact no manner of
describing them in this world because of the great
glory of those of the Height and because of the


200.


CHAP. 89.


Marty fur-
there ques-
tioneth
Jesus.


168 PISTIS SOPHIA


great immeasurable greatness. On this account,
therefore, -there existeth no manner to describe it
in this world.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
speaking these words unto his disciples, that
Mary Magdalene came forward and said unto Jesus:
“My Lord, be not wroth with me if I
question thee, because I trouble repeatedly.
Now, therefore, my Lord, be not wroth with me
if I question thee concerning all with precision
and certainty. For my brethren will herald it
among the race of men, so that they may hear
and repent and be saved from the violent judg-
ments of the evil rulers and go to the Height and
inherit the Light-kingdom; because, my Lord,
we ate compassionate not only towards ourselves,
but compassionate towards the whole race of
men, so that they may be saved from all the
violent judgments. Now, therefore, my Lord, on
this account we question concerning all with
certainty; for my brethren herald it to the whole
race of men, | in order that they may escape
the violent rulers of the darkness and be saved out
of the hands of the violent receivers of the outer-
most darkness.”

It came to pass, when Jesus had heard Mary
say these words, that the Saviour answered in
great compassion towards her and said unto
her: “Question concerning what thou desirest
to question, and I will reveal it unto thee with
precision and certainty and without similitude.”

It came to pass then, when Mary had heard
the Saviour say these words, that she rejoiced
with great joy and exulted exceedingly and
said unto Jesus: “My Lord, by how much


SECOND BOOK 169


greatness then is the second Helper greater than
the first Helper? By how much distance is he
distant from him, or rather how many times more
does he shine than the latter?”

Jesus answered and said unto Mary in the
midst of the disciples: ““ Amen, amén, I say unto
you: The second Helper is distant from the first
Helper in great immeasurable distance in regard
to the height above and the depth below and the
length and the breadth. For he is exceedingly
distant from him in great immeasurable distance
through the angels and all the archangels and
through the gods and all the invisibles. And he
is very considerably greater than the latter in
an incalculable measure | through the angels and
archangels and through the gods and all the
invisibles. And he shineth more than the latter
in an utterly immeasurable measure, there being
no measure for the light in which he is, and no
measure for him through angels and archangels
and through the gods and all the invisibles, as
I have already said unto you at another time.

“In like manner also the third Helper and
fourth and fifth Helper,—one is greater than the
other . . . and shineth more than the latter and
is distant from him in a great immeasurable
distance through the angels and archangels and
the gods and all the invisibles, as I have already
said unto you at another time. And I will tell
unto you also the type of everyone [of them]
at their expansion.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
saying these words unto his disciples, that Mary


Of the
second


Helper.


201.


Of the third,
fourth, and
fifth
Helpers.


CHAP. 90.
Mary again
questioneth


Magdalene came forward again, continued and Jesus.


said unto Jesus: “My Lord, in what type will


Of those
who receive
the mystery
in the last
Helper.


202.


170 PISTIS SOPHIA


be those who have received the mystery of the
Light, in the midst of the last Helper?”

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary in the
midst of the disciples: “They who have received
the mystery of the Light, if they come out of |
the body of the matter of the rulers, then will
everyone be in his order according to the mystery
which he hath received. Those who have received
the higher mysteries, will abide in the higher
otder; those who have received the lower mys-
teries will be in the lower orders. In a word, up
to what region every one hath received mysteries,
there will he abide in his order in the Inheritance
of the Light. For which cause I have said unto
you aforetime: ‘Where your heart is, there will
your treasure be,—that is up to what region
every one hath received mysteries, there shall he
be.”

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished saying
these words unto his disciples, that John came
forward and said unto Jesus: “ My Lord and my
Saviour, give me also commandment that I dis-
coutse before thee, and be not wroth with me if
I question concerning all with precision and
certainty; for thou, my Lord, hast promised
me in a promise to make revelation unto us of
all concerning which Ishall question thee. Now,
therefore, my Lord, hide nothing from us at
all in the matter on which we shall question
thee.”

And Jesus answered in great compassion and
said unto John: “To thee also, blessed John,
and beloved, I give commandment to speak the
wotd which pleaseth thee, and I will reveal it
unto thee face to face without similitude, and I


SECOND BOOK 171


will say unto thee | all on which thou wilt question
me with precision and certainty.”


203.


And John answered and = said unto Jesus: John ques-


“My Lord, will then every one abide in the region
up to which he hath received the mysteries, and
hath he no power to go into other orders which
are above him; and hath he no power to go into the
orders which are below him?”

And Jesus answered and said unto John:
“Finely indeed do ye question on all with pre-
cision and certainty. But now, therefore, John,
hearken that I may discourse with thee. Every
one who hath received mysteries of the Light,
will abide in the region up to which everyone hath
received mysteries, and he hath not the power
to go into the height into the orders which are
above him.

“So that he who hath received mysteries in
the first Commandment, hath the power to go
into the orders which are below him, that is into
all the orders of the third [?] space; but he hath
not the power to go into the height to the orders
which are above him.

“And he who shall receive the mysteries of
the First Mystery, which is the four-and-twen-
tieth mystery from without and the head of the
first space which is without,—he hath the power
to go into all the orders which are without
him; but he hath not the power to go into the
regions which are above him or to pass through
them.

“ And of those who have received the mysteries
in the orders of the four-and-twenty mysteries, |
every one will go into the region in which he
hath recetved mysteries, and he will have the


tioneth


Jesus.


CHAP. 91.


Of the first
Command-
ment.


Of the first


space.


Of the
second
space.
204.


Of the third


space.


Of the
Thrice-spirit-
uals.


205.


172 PISTIS SOPHIA


power to pass through all the orders and spaces
which are without him; but he hath not the power
to go into the higher orders which are above him
or to pass through them.

“And he who hath received mysteries in the
orders of the First Mystery which is in the third
space, hath the power to go into all the lower
orders which are below him and to pass through
all; but on the other hand he hath not the power
to go into the regions which are above him or to
pass through them.

“And he who hath received mysteries of the
first Thrice-spiritual, which ruleth over the four-
and-twenty mysteries all together which tule
over the space of the First Mystery, of whose
region at the expansion of the universe I will tell
you—he, therefore, who shall receive the mystery
of that Thrice-spiritual, hath the power to go
down into all orders which are below him; but
he hath not the power to go into the height into
the orders which are above him, that is into all
the orders of the space of the Ineffable.

“ And he who hath received the mystery of the
second Thrice-spiritual, hath the power to go
into all the orders of the first Thrice-spiritual |
and to pass through them all and all their orders
which are in them; but he hath not the power
to go into the higher orders of the third Thrice-
spiritual.

“And he who hath received the mystery of
the third Thrice-spiritual, which ruleth over the
three Thrice-spirituals and the three spaces of
the First Mystery all together, [hath the power
to go into all the orders which are below him];
but he hath not the power to go into the height


SECOND BOOK 173


into the orders which are above him, that is
into the orders of the space of the Ineffable.

“And he who hath received the master-
mystery of the First Mystery of the Ineffable,
that is the twelve mysteries of the First Mystery
all together, which rule over all the spaces of the
First Mystery,—he, therefore, who shall receive
that mystery, hath the power to pass through all
the orders of the spaces of the three Thrice-
spirituals and the three spaces of the First Mys-
tery and all their orders, and hath the power to
pass through all the orders of the inheritances
of the Light, to pass through them from without
within and from within without and from above
below and from below | above and from the height
to the depth and from the depth to the height and
from the length to the breadth and from the
breadth to the length; in a word, he hath the
power to pass through all the regions of the in-
heritances of the Light, and he hath the power to
bide in the region where he pleaseth, in the
Inheritance of the Light-kingdom.

“And amen, I say unto you: That man will
at the dissolution of the world be king over all
the orders of the Inheritance of the Light. And he
who shall receive that mystery of the Ineffable
which I am,—

“That mystery knoweth why the darkness
hath arisen and why the light hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the darkness
of the darknesses hath arisen and why the light
of the lights hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the chaos
hath arisen and why the treasury of the light
hath arisen.


Of the
master-.mys-
tery.


Of the
gnosis of the
master-mys-
tery.


207.


208.


174 PISTIS SOPHIA


“ And that mystery knoweth why the judgments
have arisen and why the light-land and the region
of the inheritances of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the chastise-
ments of the sinners have arisen and why the
rest of the kingdom of the light hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth | why the sinners
have arisen and why the inheritances of the
light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the impious
have arisen and why the good have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the chastise-
ments and judgments have arisen and why all
the emanations of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the sins
have arisen and why the baptisms and the mys-
teries of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the fire of
chastisement hath arisen and why the seals of
the light, so that the fire should not harm them,
have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why wrath hath
arisen and why peace hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why slander hath
arisen and why songs of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the prayers
of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why cursing hath
arisen and why blessing hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why knavery
hath arisen and why deceit hath arisen.

“And that mystery | knoweth why the slaying
hath arisen and why the quickening of the souls
hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why adultery


SECOND BOOK 175


and fornication have arisen and why purity hath
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why intercourse
hath arisen and why continenc,e hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why insolence
and boasting have arisen and why humbleness
and meekness have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why tears have
arisen and why laughter hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why slander hath
arisen and why good report hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why appreciation
hath arisen and why disdain of men hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why murmuring
hath arisen and why innocence and humbleness
have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why sin hath
atisen and why purity hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why strength
hath arisen and why weakness hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why | motion of
body hath arisen and why its utility hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why poverty
hath arisen and why wealth hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the freedom
[P] of the world hath arisen and why slavery hath
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why death hath
arisen and why life hath arisen.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
saying these words unto his disciples, that they
rejoiced in great joy and exulted when they
heard Jesus say these words.

And Jesus continued again in the discourse and
said unto them: “ Hearken, therefore, now still


CHAP. 92.


176 PISTIS SOPHIA


further, O my disciples, so that I discourse with
you concerning the whole gnosis of the mystery
of the Ineffable.
Of the gnosis. “* That mystery of the Ineffable knoweth why
ofthe unmercifulness hath arisen and why mercifulness
Ineffable. hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why ruin hath
arisen and why everlasting eternity hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the reptiles
have arisen and why they will be destroyed.

“And that mystery knoweth why the wild

210. beasts have arisen | and why they will be
destroyed.

“And that mystery knoweth why the cattle
have arisen and why the birds have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the moun-
tains have arisen and why the precious stones
therein have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter
of gold hath arisen and why the matter of silver
hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter
of copper hath arisen and why the matter of
iron and of stone hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter
of lead hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter
of glass hath arisen and why the matter of wax
hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why herbs, that
is the vegetables, have arisen and why all matters
have arisen.

“And the mystery knoweth why the waters
of the earth and all things in them have arisen
and why also the earth hath arisen.


SECOND BOOK 177


“And that mystery knoweth why the seas |


and the waters have arisen and why the wild 2u.


beasts in the seas have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter
of the world hath arisen and why it [the world]
will be utterly destroyed.”

Jesus continued again and said unto his dis-
ciples: “Yet further, O my disciples and com-
panions and brethren, let everyone be sober in
the spirit which is in him, let him understand and
comprehend all the words which I shall say
unto you; for from now on will I begin to dis-
course with you concerning all the gnoses of that
Ineffable.

“That mystery knoweth why the west hath
arisen and why the east hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the south
hath arisen and why the north hath arisen.

“Yet further, O my disciples, hearken and con-
tinue to be sober and hearken to the total gnosis of
the mystery of the Ineffable.

“That mystery knoweth why the demons have
arisen and why mankind hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the heat
hath arisen and why the pleasant air hath
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the stars
have arisen and why the clouds have arisen. |

“And that mystery knoweth why the earth
became deep and why the water came thereon.

“And that mystery knoweth why the earth
became dry and why the water came thereon.

“And that mystery knoweth why famine hath
arisen and why superfluity hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the hoar-


CHAP. 93.


213.


178 PISTIS SOPHIA


frost hath arisen and why the healthful dew hath
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the dust
hath arisen and why the delightsome freshness
hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the hail hath
arisen and why the pleasant snow hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the west
wind bath arisen and why the east wind hath
arisen.

(“And that mystery knoweth why the fire of
the height hath arisen and why the waters have
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the east
wind hath arisen. [? miscopied.])

“And that mystery knoweth why the south
wind hath arisen and why the north wind hath
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the stars of
the heaven and the | disks of the light-givers
have arisen and why the firmament with all its
veils hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the rulers
of the spheres have arisen and why the sphere
with all its regions hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the rulers of
the zons have arisen and why the zons with their
veils have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the tyrant
rulers of the zons have arisen and why the rulers
who have repented have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the ser-
vitors have arisen and why the decans have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the angels
have arisen and why the archangels have arisen.


SECOND BOOK 179


“And that mystery knoweth why the lords
have arisen and why the gods have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the jealousy
in the height hath arisen and why concord hath
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why hate hath
arisen and why love hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why discord hath
arisen and why concord hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why avarice | hath 214.
arisen and why renunciation of all hath arisen
and love of possessions hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why love of the
belly hath arisen and why satiety hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the paired
have arisen and why the unpaired have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why impiety
hath arisen and why fear of God hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the light-
givers have arisen and why the sparks have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the thrice-
powerful have arisen and why the invisibles have
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the fore-
fathers have arisen and why the purities have
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the great
self-willed hath arisen and why his faithful have
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the great
triple-powerful hath arisen and why the great
invisible forefather hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the thir-
teenth zon hath arisen and why the region | of 215.
those of the Midst hath arisen.


216.


CHAP. 94.


180 PISTIS SOPHIA


“And that mystery knoweth why receivers of
the Midst have arisen and why the virgins of the
light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the ministers
of the Midst have arisen and why the angels of the
Midst have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the light-
land hath arisen and why the great receiver of
the light hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the guards
of the region of the Right have arisen and why
the leaders of them have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the gate of
life hath arisen and why Sabaoth, the Good, hath
arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the region
of the Right hath arisen and why the light-land,
which is the treasury of the light, hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the emana-
tions of the light have arisen and why the
twelve saviours have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the three
gates of the treasury of the light have arisen
and why the nine guards have arisen.

“And | that mystery knoweth why the twin-
saviours have arisen and why the three Ameéns
have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the five
Trees have arisen and why the seven Ameéns have
arlsen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the Mixture
which existeth not, hath arisen and why it is
purified.”

And Jesus continued again and said unto his
disciples: “Still further, O my disciples, be


SECOND BOOK 181


sober and let everyone of you bring hither the
power of sensing the Light before him, that ye
may sense with sureness. For from now on I
will discourse with you concerning the whole
region in truth of the Ineffable and concerning
the manner, how it is.”

It came to pass then, when the disciples had
heard Jesus utter these words, that they gave
way and let go entirely.

Then Mary Magdalene came forward, threw her-
self at the feet of Jesus, kissed them and wept aloud
and said: “Have mercy upon me, my Lord,
for my brethren have heard and let go of the words
which thou saidest unto them. Now, therefore,
my Lord, concerning the gnosis of all the things
which thou hast said, that they are in the mys-
tery | of the Ineffable; but I have heard thee
say unto me: ‘From now on I will begin to dis-
course with you concerning the total gnosis of the
mystery of the Ineffable,—this word, therefore,
which thou saidest, thou hast not gone forward
to complete the word. For this cause, therefore,
my brethren have heard and have let go and
ceased to sense in what manner thou discoursest
with them. Concerning the word which thou
saidest unto them, now, therefore, my L.ord, if
the gnosis of all. this is in that mystery, where is
the man who is in the world, who hath the ability
to understand that mystery with all its gnoses
and the type of all these words which thou hast
spoken concerning it?”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
Mary say these words and knew that the disciples
had heard and had begun to let go, that he en-
couraged them and said unto them: “ Grieve


The dis-
ciples lose
courage.


CHAP. 95.


216.


Jesus ex-
plaineth
that that
mystery is
really sim-
pler than all


mysteries.


219.


182 PISTIS SOPHIA


no more, my disciples, concerning the mystery of
the Ineffable, thinking that ye will not under-
stand it. Amen, I say unto you: That mystery
is yours, and every one’s who will give ear unto
you, so that they renounce this whole world and
the whole matter therein and renounce all the
evil thoughts therein and renounce all the cares
of this zeon.

“Now, therefore, I say unto you: | For every
one who will renounce the whole world and all
therein and will submit himself to the godhead,
that mystery is far easier than all the mysteries
of the Light-kingdom and it is sooner to under-
stand than them all and it is easier [?] than them
all. He who reacheth unto the gnosis of that
mystery, renounceth this whole world and all the
cares therein.

“Bor this cause have I said to you aforetime:
‘All ye who are heavy under your burden, come
hither unto me, and I will quicken you. For
my burden is easy and my yoke is soft. Now,
therefore, he who will receive that mystery,
renounceth the whole world and the cares of all
the matter therein. For this cause, therefore,
my disciples, grieve not, thinking that ye will
not understand that mystery. Amen, I say unto
you: That mystery is far sooner to understand
than all mysteries. And amén, I say unto you:
That mystery is yours and every one’s who will
renounce the whole world and the whole matter
therein.

“Now, therefore, hearken, my disciples and
my companions and my brethren, that I may
urge you on to the gnosis of the mystery of the
Ineffable | concerning which I discourse with you,


SECOND BOOK 183


because I have in sooth gotten as far as to tell
you the whole gnosis at the expansion of the
universe; for the expansion of the universe is its
gnosis.
“But now then hearken that I may discourse
with you progressively concerning the gnosis of
that mystery.
“That mystery knoweth wherefor the five ofthe rend
Helpers have rent themselves asunder and where- 7874"


and emana-
for they have come forth from the Fatherless [p/]. Sena

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the the universe.
great Light of lights hath rent itself asunder and
wherefor it hath come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
first Commandment hath rent itself asunder and
wherefor it hath divided itself into the seven
mysteries and wherefor it is named the first
Commandment and wherefor it hath come forth
from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
Great Light of the Impressions of the Light hath
rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath set itself
up without emanations and wherefor it hath
come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
First Mystery, that is the four-and-twentieth
mystery from without, hath rent itself asunder
and wherefor it imitated in itself the twelve
mysteries according to the number of the
numbering of the Uncontainables | and Bound- 220.
less and wherefor it hath come forth from the
Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the of those of
twelve Immoveables have rent themselves asunder (¢Sco"t


space of the
and wherefor they have set themselves with all Incffble.


221.


184 PISTIS SOPHIA


their orders and wherefor they have come forth
from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
Unwaverables have rent themselves asunder and
wherefor they have set themselves up, divided
into twelve orders, and wherefor they have come
forth from the Fatherless, which belong to the
orders of the space of the Ineffable.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
Incomprehensibles, which pertain to the second
space of the Ineffable, have rent themselves
asunder and wherefor they have come forth from
the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
twelve Undesignatables have rent themselves
asunder and wherefor they have set themselves
up after all the orders of the Unindicatables,
themselves being uncontainable and boundless,
and wherefor they have come forth from the
Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor these
Unindicatables have rent themselves asunder,—
[they] who have not indicated themselves nor
brought themselves into publicity according to the
economy of the One and Only, the Ineffable,
and wherefor they have come forth | from the
Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
Super-deeps have rent themselves asunder and
wherefor they have distributed themselves, being
a single order, and wherefor they have come
forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
twelve orders of the Unspeakables have rent
themselves asunder and wherefor they have


SECOND BOOK 185


divided themselves, being three portions, and
wherefor they have come forth from the Father-
less.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the
Imperishables, being their twelve orders, have
rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
settled themselves, being expanded in a single
order, and wherefor they have divided themselves
and formed different orders, being uncontainable
and boundless, and wherefor they have come
forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
Impassables have rent themselves asunder and
wherefor they have set themselves up, being
twelve boundless spaces, and have settled them-
selves, being three orders of spaces, according to
the economy of the One and Only, the Ineffable,
and wherefor they have come forth from the
Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
twelve Uncontainables, which belong to the
orders | of the One and Only, the Ineffable, have
rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
come forth from the Fatherless, until they were
brought to the space of the First Mystery, which
is the second space.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
four-and-twenty myriads of Praise-singers have
rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
extended themselves outside the veil of the First
Mystery, which is the twin-mystery, that which
looketh within and without, of the One and Only,
the Ineffable, and wherefor they have come forth
from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the


Of those of
the first
space of the
Ineffable.


223.


186 PISTIS SOPHIA


Uncontainables have rent themselves asunder—
[those], which I have just named, which are in the
regions of the second space of the Ineffable, which
is the space of the First Mystery, and wherefor
those Uncontainables and Boundless have come
forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
four-and-twenty mysteries of the first Thrice-
spiritual have rent themselves asunder and where-
for they are called the four-and-twenty spaces
of the first Thrice-spiritual and wherefor they
have come forth from the second Thrice-
spiritual.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
four-and-twenty mysteries of the | second Thrice-
spiritual have rent themselves asunder and
wherefor they have come forth from the third
Thrice-spiritual.

“And that mystery knoweth why the four-
and-twenty mysteries of the third Thrice-spiritual
—that is the four-and-twenty spaces of the third
Thrice-spiritual—have rent themselves asunder
and wherefor they have come forth from the
Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
five Trees of the first Thrice-spiritual have rent
themselves asunder and wherefor they have
extended themselves, standing one behind the
other and moreover bound one to the other with
all their orders, and wherefor they have come
forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
five Trees of the second Thrice-spiritual have
rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
come forth from the Fatherless.


SECOND BOOK 187


“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
five Trees of the third Thrice-spiritual have rent
themselves asunder and wherefor they have come
forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth why the Fore-
uncontainables of the first Thrice-spiritual have
rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
Fore-uncontainables of the second Trispiritual
have rent themselves asunder and wherefor |
they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth. wherefor all the
Fore-uncontainables of the third Thrice-spiritual
have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they
have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the first
Thrice-spiritual from below—those who belong
to the orders of the One and Only, the Ineffable—
hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath
come forth from the second Thrice-spiritual.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the
third Thrice-spiritual—that is the first Thrice-
spiritual from above—hath rent itself asunder
and wherefor it hath come forth from the twelfth
Pro-thrice-spiritual, which is in the last region
of the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the
regions which are in the space of the Ineffable,
and all those in them, have expanded themselves,
and wherefor they have come forth from the last
Limb of the Ineffable.

“And that mystery knoweth itself, wherefor
it hath rent itself asunder to come forth from the
Ineffable,—that is from That which ruleth them


224.


225.
CHAP. 96.


Jesus pro-
miseth to
explain fur-
ther all in
detail.


Of the mys-
teries suc-
cinctly.


226.


188 PISTIS SOPHIA


all and which expanded them all according to |
their orders.

“Of all these then will I speak unto you
at the expansion of the universe—in a word,
all those whom I have spoken of unto you:
those who will arise and those who will come,
those who emanate, and those who come forth,
and those who ate without over them, and those
who are implanted in them, those who will con-
tain the region of the First Mystery and those
who ate in the space of the Ineffable—of these
will I speak unto you, because I will reveal them
unto you, and I will speak of them unto you
according to every region and according to every
order, at the expansion of the universe. And I
will reveal unto you all their mysteries which
tule over them all, and their Pro-thrice-spirituals
and their Super-thrice-spirituals which rule over
their mysteries and their orders.

“Now, therefore, the mystery of the Ineffable
knoweth wherefor all these have arisen of whom
I have spoken unto you in openness, and through
which all these have arisen. It is the mystery
which is in them all; and it is the out-going of
them all, and it is the up-going of them all, and
it is the setting-up of them all.

“And the mystery of the Ineffable is the
mystery which is in. all these of whom I have
spoken unto you, and of whom I will speak unto
you at the expansion of the universe. And it is
the mystery which is in them all, and it is the
one only mystery of the Ineffable and the gnosis
of all these | of whom I have spoken unto you,
and of whom I will speak unto you, and of whom
I have not spoken. Of these will I speak unto


SECOND BOOK 189


you at the expansion of the universe and of their
total gnosis one with another, wherefor they
have arisen. It is the one and only word of the
Ineffable.

“And I will tell you the expansion of all
mysteries and the types of every one of them
and the manner of their completion in all their
ficures. And I will tell you the mystery of the
One and Only, the Ineffable, and all its types,
all its figures and its whole economy, wherefor
it hath come forth from the last Limb of the
Ineffable. For that mystery is the setting-up
of them all.

“And that mystery of the Ineffable is more-
over also a one and only word, which existeth
in the speech of the Ineffable, and it is the
economy of the solution of all the words which I
have spoken unto you.

“And he who will receive the one and only
word of that mystery which I shall now say unto
you, and all its types and all its figures, and the
manner of accomplishing its mystery,—for ye
are perfect and all-perfect and ye will accomplish
the whole gnosis of that mystery with its whole
economy, for unto you all mysteries are entrusted,
—hearken, therefore, now, that I may tell you that
mystery, which is [... ?].

“He | then, who shall recetve the one and only
word of that mystery, which I have told you, if
he cometh forth out of the body of the matters of
the rulers, and if the retributive receivers come
and free him from the body of matter of the
rulers,—that is those [recetvers] who free from
the body all out-going souls,—when, therefore,
the retributive receivers free the soul which


Of the one
and only
word of the
Ineffable.


227.
Of the as-


cension of
the soul of
him who
shall receive
the one and
only mys-
tery.


228.


190 PISTIS SOPHIA


hath received this one and only mystery of the
Ineffable, which I have just told you, then will
it straightway, if it be set free from the body
of matter, become a great light-stream in the
midst of those receivers, and the. receivers will
be exceedingly afraid of the light of that soul,
and the receivers will be made powerless and
fall down and desist altogether for fear of the
great light which they have seen.

“And the soul which receiveth the mystery
of the Ineffable, will soar into the height, being
a great light-stream, and the receivers will not be
able to seize it and will not know how the way
is fashioned upon which it will go. For it be-
cometh a great light-stream and soareth into the
height, and no power is able to hold it down at all,
nor | will they be able to come nigh it at all.

“But it will pass through all the regions of
the rulers and all the regions of the emanations
of the Light, and it will not give answers in any
region, nor giveth it any apologies, nor giveth it
any tokens; neither will any power of the rulers
nor any power of the emanations of the Light
be able to come nigh that soul. But all the
regions of the rulers and all the regions of the
emanations of the Light,—every one singeth unto
it praises in their regions, in fear of the light of
the stream which envelopeth that soul, until
it passeth through them all, and goeth to the
region of the inheritance of the mystery which
it hath recetved,—that is to the mystery of
the One and Only, the Ineffable——and until it
becometh one with its Limbs. Amen, I say
unto you: It will be in all the regions in the
time a man shooteth an arrow.


SECOND BOOK 191


“Now, therefore, amen, I say unto you:
Every man who will receive that mystery of the
Ineffable and accomplish it in all its types and
all its figures,—he is a man in the world, but he
towereth above all angels and will tower still
more above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all archangels and will tower still more
above | them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all tyrants and. will raise himself above
them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all lords and will raise himself above them
all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all gods and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the,world, but he towereth
above all light-givers and will raise himself above
them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all pure [ones] and will raise himself above
them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all triple-powers and will raise himself above
them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all forefathers and will raise himself above
them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all invisibles and will raise himself above
them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above the great invisible forefather and will raise
himself above him.


Of the rank
of such a
soul.


229.


230.


Such souls
are one with
the First
Mystery.


192 PISTIS SOPHIA


“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above all those of the Midst and will raise him-
self above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above the emanations of the Treasury of the
Light and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above the Mixture | and will raise himself entirely
above it.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth
above the whole region of the Treasury and will
raise himself entirely above it.

“He is a man in the world, but he will rule
with me in my kingdom.

“He is a man in the world, but he is king
in the Light.

“ He is a man in the world, but he is not one
of the world.

“And amen, I say unto you: That man is
I and I am that man.

“And at the dissolution of the world, that is
when the universe will be raised up and when the
numbering of the perfect souls will be raised
up all together, and when I am king in the midst
of the last Helper, being king over all the emana-
tions of the Light and king over the seven
Amens and the five Trees and the three Ameéns
and the nine guards, and being king over the
Child of the Child, that is the Twin-saviours,
and being king over the twelve saviours and over
the whole numbering of the perfect souls who
shall receive the mysteries in the Light,—then
will all men who shaH receive the mysteries in
the Ineffable, be fellow-kings with me and will
sit on my right and on my left in my kingdom.


SECOND BOOK 193


“And amen, I say unto you: Those men are I,
and I am they.

“On this account have I said unto you afore-
time: ‘Ye will sit on your | thrones on my right
and on my left in my kingdom and will rule with
me.’

“On this account, therefore, I have not hesi-
tated nor have I been ashamed to call you
my brethren and my companions, because ye
will be fellow-kings with me in my kingdom.
This, therefore, I say unto you, knowing that
I will give you the mystery of the Ineffable;
that is: That mystery is I, and I am that mystery.

“Now, therefore, not only will ye reign with
me, but all men who shall recetve the mystery
of the Ineffable, will be fellow-kings with me
in my kingdom. And I am they, and they are I.
But my throne will tower over them. [And]
because ye will suffer sorrows in the world
beyond all men, until ye herald forth all the
wotds which I shall speak unto you, your
thrones shall be joined to mine in my kingdom.

“On this account I have said unto you afore-
time: ‘Where I shall be, there will be also my
twelve ministers.’ But Mary Magdalene and
John, the virgin, will tower over all my disciples
and over all men who shall receive the mysteries
in the Ineffable. And they will be on my
right and on my left. And I am they, and
they are I.

“And they will be like unto you in all things
save that your thrones will tower over theirs,
and my throne | will tower over yours.

“And all men who will find the word of the
Ineffable-—amen, I say unto you: The men


Of the dig-
nity of the
thrones in


the kingdom.


232.


194 PISTIS SOPHIA


Of the gnosis Who shall know that word, will know the gnosis

ore re" of all these words which I have spoken unto you,

eHable. both those of the depth and those of the height,
those of the length and those of the breadth;
in a word, they will know the gnosis of all these
words which I have spoken unto you and which
I have not yet spoken unto you, which I will
speak unto you, region by region and order by
order, at the expansion of the universe.

“And amén, I say unto you: They will know
in what manner the world is established, and they
will know in what type all those of the height
are established, and they will know out of what
ground the universe hath arisen.”

cHaP.97. When then the Saviour had said this, Mary
Magdalene started forward and said: “ My Lord,
bear with me and be not wroth with me, if I
question on all things with precision and cer-
tainty. Now, therefore, my Lord, is then another
the word of the mystery of the Ineffable and
another the word of the whole gnosis?”

The Saviour answered and said: “ Yea, another
is the mysteryef the Ineffable and another the word
of the whole gnosis.”

And Mary answered again and said unto the
Saviour: “ My Lord, bear with me, if I question
thee, and be not wroth with me. Now, there-
fore, my Lord, unless we live and know the gnosis
of the whole word of the Ineffable, shall we not
be able to inherit the Light-kingdomp”

233. And the Saviour answered | and said unto
Of the diss Mary: “ Surely; for every one who shall receive


tinction

between the a mystery of the Light-kingdom, will go and
gnois of the . . 5 .

universe and Inherit up to the region up to which he hath
the mys. ne received mysteries. But he will not know the
Light.


SECOND BOOK 195


enosis of the universe, wherefor all this hath
arisen, unless he knoweth the one and only word
of the Ineffable, which is the gnosis of the universe.
And again in openness: I am the gnosis of the
universe. And moreover it is impossible to
know the one and only word of the gnosis, unless
a man first recetve the mystery of the Ineffable.
But all the men who shall receive mysteries
in the Light,—every one will go and inherit up
to the region up to which he hath received
mysteries.

“On this account I have said unto you afore-
time: ‘He who hath faith in a prophet, will
receive a prophet's reward, and he who hath
faith in a righteous [man] will receive a righteous
[man’s] reward,—that is: Everyone will go to
the region up to which he hath _ received
mysteries. He who receiveth a lesser mystery,
will inherit the lesser mystery, and he who
receiveth a higher mystery, will inherit the higher
regions. And everyone will abide in his region
in the light of my kingdom, and everyone will
have power over the orders which are below
him, but he will not have the power to go to the
otdets which ate above him; but he will abide in
the region of the Inheritance of the Light | of 234.
my kingdom, being in a great light immeasurable
for the gods and all the invisibles, and he will
be in great joy and great jubilation.

“But now, therefore, hearken, that I may dis-
course with you concerning the grandeur of those
who shall receive the mysteries of the First
Mystery.

“He, therefore, who shall receive the [first]
mystery of that First Mystery, and it shall be


Of the as-
cension of
the souls of
those who
receive the
twelve mys-
teries of the
First Mys-
tery.


235.


196 PISTIS SOPHIA


at the time that he cometh out of the body of
the matter of the rulers,—then the retributive
receivers come and lead the soul of that man out
of the body. And that soul will become a great
light-stream in the hands of the retributive
receivers; and those receivers will be afraid of
the light of that soul. And that soul will go
upwards and pass through all the regions of the
rulers and all the regions of the emanations of the
Light. And it will not give answers nor
apologies nor tokens in any single region of the
Light nor in any single region of the rulers;
but it will pass through all the regions and cross
over them all, so that it goeth and ruleth over all the
regions of the first saviour.

“Tn like manner also he who shall receive the
second mystery of the First Mystery and the
third and fourth, until he shall receive the twelfth
mystery of the First Mystery, if it shall be at the
time | that he cometh out of the body of the matter
of the rulers——then the retributive receivers
come and lead the soul of that man out of the
body of matter. And those souls will become
a great light-stream in the hands of the retri-
butive feceivers; and those receivers will be
afraid of the light of those souls and will become
powerless and fall on their faces. And those
souls will straightway soar upwards and cross
over all the regions of the rulers and all the regions
of the emanations of the Light. They will not
give answers nor apologies nor tokens in any
single region; but they will pass through all the
regions and will cross over them all and rule
over all the.regions of the twelve saviours, so that
they who receive the second mystery of the First


SECOND BOOK 197


Mystery, will rule over all the regions of the second
saviour in the inheritances of the Light.

“In like manner also those who receive the
third mystery of the First Mystery and the
fourth and fifth and sixth up to the twelfth—
every one will rule over all the regions of the
saviour up to whom he hath received the mystery.

“And he who shall receive in sequence the
twelfth mystery of the First Mystery, that is
the master-mystery concerning which I discourse
with you,—| and he who, therefore, shall receive 236.
those twelve mysteries which belong to the
First Mystery, if he goeth forth out of the world,
will pass through all the regions of the rulers
and all the regions of the Light, being a great
light-stream, and he will moreover rule over all
the regions of the twelve saviours; but they will
not be able to be like unto those who receive
the one and only mystery of the Ineffable. But
he who shall receive those mysteries will abide
in those orders, because they are exalted, and he
will abide in the orders of the twelve saviours.”

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished CHap. 98.
speaking these words unto his disciples, that Bice
Mary Magdalene came forward, kissed the feet Jesus.
of Jesus and said unto him: “My Lord, bear
with me and be not wroth with me, if I question
thee; but have mercy upon us, my Lord, and
reveal unto us all things on which we shall question
thee. Now, therefore, my Lord, how doth the
First Mystery possess twelve mysteries, [and] the
Ineffable possess a one and only mystery?”

Jesus answered and said unto her: “ Indeed of the three
it possesseth a one and only mystery, yet that rive.
mystery constituteth three mysteries, although ™s*"*s:


198 PISTIS SOPHIA


it is the one and only mystery; but the type of
everyone of them is different. And moreover
it constituteth five mysteries, although it is a
one and only [one]; but the type of every one
is different. So that these five mysteries are alike

237. with one another in the mystery | of the kingdom
in the inheritances of the Light; but the type
of each of them is different. And their kingdom
is higher and more exalted than the whole king-
dom of the twelve mysteries together of the
First Mystery; but they are not alike in the
kingdom [with the one and only mystery] of the
First Mystery in the Light-kingdom.

“In like manner also the three mysteries
are not [P|] alike in the Light-kingdom; but
the type of everyone of them is different. And
they themselves also are not alike in the kingdom
with the one and only mystery of the First
Mystery in the Light-kingdom; and the type
of every one of the three of them, and the type
of the configuration of each of them, is different
from one another.

Ofthe first “The first [mystery of the First Mystery],—
meres if thou accomplishest its mystery altogether
and standest and accomplishest it finely in all
its figures, then dost thou come straightway
out of thy body, become a great light-stream
and pass through all the regions of the rulers
and all the regions of the Light, while all are in
fear of that soul, until it cometh to the region of


its kingdom.
Of the “The second mystery of the First Mystery,
a ™* on the other hand—| if thou accomplishest it
238. finely in all its figures,—the man, therefore, who


shall accomplish its mystery, if he speaketh that


SECOND BOOK 199


mystery over the head of any man who goeth
forth out of the body, and he speaketh it into
his two ears, if indeed the man who goeth
forth out of the body hath receiyed mysteries
for the second time and is sharing in the word
of truth—amen, I say unto you: That man,
if he goeth forth out of the body of matter, then
will his soul become a great light-stream and pass
through all the regions, until it cometh to the
kingdom of that mystery.

“But if that man hath received no mysteries
and is not sharing in the words of truth,—if
he who accomplisheth that mystery, speaketh
that mystery over the head of a man who cometh
forth out of the body and who hath received no
mysteries of the Light, and shareth not in the
words of truth—amén, I say unto you: That
man, if he cometh forth out of the body, will be
judged in no region of the rulers, nor can he be
chastized in any region at all, nor will the fire
touch him, because of the great mystery of the
Ineffable which is with him.

“And they will hasten quickly and hand him
over one to another in turn and lead him from
region to region and | from order to order, until
they bring him before the Virgin of Light, while
all the regions are in fear of the mystery and the
sien of the kingdom of the Ineffable which is
with him.

“And if they bring him before the Virgin of
Light, then the Virgin of Light will see the sign
of the mystery of the kingdom of the Ineffable
which is with him; the Virgin of Light marvelleth
and proveth him, but suffereth them not to bring
him to the Light, until he accomplisheth the total


Of the effi-
cacy for the
uninitiated.


Of the third


mystery.


240.


Of its effi-
cacy.


200 PISTIS SOPHIA


citizenship of the light of that mystery, that is
the purities of the renunciation of the world and
also of the total matter therein.

“The Virgin of Light sealeth him with a higher
seal, which is this [...?], and letteth him
in that month in which he hath come out of
the body of matter, light down into a_ body
which will be righteous and find the godhead in
truth and the higher mysteries, so that he may
inherit them and inherit the Light eternal, which
is the gift of the second mystery of the First
Mystery of the Ineffable.

“The third mystery of that Ineffable on the
other hand,—the man indeed who shall accomplish
that mystery, not only if he [himself] cometh
forth out of the body, will he inherit the kingdom
of the mystery, but if he complete that mystery
and accomplish it with | all its figures, that is if
he go through with that mystery and accomplish
it finely and pronounce the name of that mystery
over a man who cometh forth out of the body and
hath known that mystery,—let the former have
delayed or rather not have delayed,—one who is
in the dire chastisements of the rulers and in their
dire judgments and their manifold fires,—amen,
I say unto you: The man who hath come forth
out of the body,—if the name of this mystery
is pronounced on his behalf, they will hasten
quickly to bring him over and hand him over
one to another, until they bring him before
the Virgin of Light. And the Virgin of Light
will seal him with a higher seal, which is this
[...?], and in that month will she let him light
down into the righteous body which will find the
godhead in truth and the higher mystery, so that


SECOND BOOK 201


he inherit the Light-kingdom. This, therefore,
is the gift of the third mystery of the Ineffable.

“Now, therefore, everyone who shall receive ofthe three
one of the five mysteries of the Ineffable,—if he cane
cometh forth out of the body and inheriteth up —
to the region of that mystery, then is the kingdom
of those five mysteries higher than the kingdom
of the twelve mysteries of the First Mystery,
and it is higher than all the mysteries | which are 241.
below them. But those five mysteries of the
Ineffable are alike with one another in their king-
dom, yet are they not alike with the three
mysteries of the Ineffable.

“He on the other hand who receiveth of the
three mysteries of the Ineffable, if he cometh
forth out of the body, will inherit up to the
kingdom of that mystery. And those three
mysteries are alike with one another in the king-
dom and they are higher and more exalted than
the five mysteries of the Ineffable in the kingdom,
but they are not alike with the one and only
mystery of the Ineffable.

“He on the other hand who receiveth the one ofthe
and only mystety of the Ineffable, will inherit "SS"...
the region of the whole kingdom according to ‘Paces
its whole glory, as I have already told you at
another time. And everyone who shall receive
the mystery which is in the space of the universe
of the Ineffable, and all the other mysteries
which ate united in the Limbs of the Ineffable,
concerning which I have not. yet spoken unto you,
and concerning their expansion and the manner
of their setting-up and the type of everyone,
how it is and wherefor it is named the Ineffable
ot wherefor it standeth expanded with all its


242.


243.


Of the reign
of a thou-
sand years


of the Light.


202 PISTIS SOPHIA


Limbs and how many Limbs are in it and all
its economies, | of which I will not tell you now,
but when I come to the expansion of the universe
I will tell you all severally,—to.wit, its expansions
and its description, how it is, and the aggregation
[?] of all its Limbs, which belong to the economy
of the One and Only, the unapproachable God
in truth,—up to what region, therefore, every one
shall receive the mysteries in the space of the
Ineffable, up to that region will he inherit up to
which he hath recetved. And those of the whole
region of the space of that Ineffable give no
answers in that region, nor give they apologies,
nor give they tokens, for they are without tokens
and they have no receivers, but they pass through
all the regions, until they come to the region of
the kingdom of the mystery which they have
received.

“Tn like manner also those who shall receive
mysteries in the second space, they have no
answers nor apologies, for they are without tokens
in that world, which is the space of the first
mystery of the First Mystery.

“ And those of the third space, which is without,
which is the third space from without [? within],
—evety region in that space hath | its receivers
and its explanations and its apologies and _ its
tokens, which I will one day tell you when I
come to speak of that mystery, that is when I
shall have told you of the expansion of the
universe.

“ Albeit at the dissolution of the universe,
that is when the number of the perfect souls is
completed and the mystery [through] which the
universe altogether hath risen, is completed, I


SECOND BOOK 203


will pass a thousand years according to the years
of the Light, being king over all the emanations
of the Light and over the whole number of the
perfect souls who have received all mysteries.”

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished CHAP. 99.
speaking these words unto his disciples, that
Mary Magdalene came forward and said: “ My
Lord, how many years of the years of the world
is a year of the Light?”

Jesus answered and said unto Mary: “A day whatisa
of the Light is a thousand years in the world, ta
so that thirty-six-myriads of years and a_half-
myriad of years of the world are a single year
of the Light.

“T shall, therefore, pass a thousand years of
the Light being king in the midst of the last
Helper, and being king over all the emanations
of the Light and over the whole number of the
perfect souls who have received the mysteries
of the Light.

“And ye, my disciples, and everyone who shall of those of
receive the mystery of the Ineffable, will | abide ee Abe
with me on my tight and on my left, being kings (nsfom of
with me in my kingdom. sand years.

“ And they who shall receive the three mysteries “*
of that Ineffable, will be fellow-kings with you in
the Light-kingdom; but they will not be alike
with you and with those who receive the mystery
of the Ineffable, but they will rather abide behind
you, being kings.

“And they who receive the five mysteries
of the Ineffable, will also abide behind the three
mysteries, being also kings.

“And moreover they who receive the twelfth
mystery of the First Mystery, will also again


245.


Of those of
the second
space.


Of those of
the third
space, the
first from
without.


204 PISTIS SOPHIA


abide behind the five mysteries of the Ineffable,
being also kings according to the order of every
one of them.

“And all who receive of the mysteries in all
the regions of the space of the Ineffable, will
also be kings and abide before those who receive
the mystery of the First Mystery, expanded
according to the glory of every one of them, so
that those who recetve the higher mysteries,
will abide in the higher regions, and those who
receive the lower mysteries, will abide in the lower
regions, being kings in the light of my kingdom.

“These alone are the allotment of the kingdom
of the first space of the Ineffable. |

“They on the other hand who receive all the
mysteries of the second space, that is of the space
of the First Mystery, will again abide in the light
of my kingdom, expanded according to the glory
of every one of them, and everyone of them being
in the mystery up to which he hath received.
And those who receive the higher mysteries,
will also abide in the higher regions, and those
who receive the lower mysteries, will abide in
the lower regions in .the light of my kingdom.

“This is the allotment of the second king for
those who receive the mystery of the second
space of the First Mystery .

“Those on the other hand who receive the mys-
teries of the third space, that is of the first
space from without, those again will abide behind
the second king, expanded in the light of my
kingdom, according to the glory of every one of
them, every one abiding in the region up to which
he hath received mysteries, so that those who
receive the higher mysteries, will abide in the


SECOND BOOK 205


higher regions, and those who receive the lower
mysteries, will abide in the lower regions.

“These are the three allotments of the Light-
kingdom.

“The mysteries of these three allotments of
the Light are exceedingly numerous. Ye shall find
them in the two great Books of Yew. But I
will give you and tell you the great mysteries | of
every allotment, those which are higher than
every region, that is the heads according to
every region and according to every order which
will lead the whole race of men into the
higher regions, according to the space of the
Inheritance.

“Of the rest of the lower mysteries, therefore,
ye have no need; but ye will find them in the
two Books of Yew, which Enoch hath written
whilst I spake with him out of the tree of gnosis
and out of the tree of life in the paradise of Adam.

“Now, therefore, when I shall have explained
unto you the wbole expansion, I will give you and
tell you the great mysteries of the three allot-
ments of my kingdom, that is the heads of the
mysteries which I will give you and tell you in
all their figures and all their types and in their
ciphers and the seals of the last space, that is the
first space from without. And I will tell you
the answers and the apologies and the tokens
of that space.

“The second space which is within, possesseth no
answers nor apologies nor tokens nor ciphers nor
seals; but it possesseth only types and figures.”

When the Saviour had finished saying all this
unto his disciples, | Andrew came forward and
said: “ My Lord, be not wroth with me, but have


Of the Books
of Yew.


CHAP. 100.
247.


Andrew
questioneth
Jesus.


That the
disciples and
the powers
are all from
the same
Mixture.


248.


206 PISTIS SOPHIA


mercy upon me and reveal unto me the mystery
of the word concerning which I shall question
thee, for it hath been hard for me and I have
not understood it.”

The Saviour answered and said unto him:
“Question concerning that on which thou de-
sirest to question, and I will reveal it unto thee
face to face without similitude.”

And Andrew answered and said: “My Lord,
I am astonished and marvel exceedingly, how
the men who are in the world and in the body
of this matter, if they come forth out of this
world, will pass through these firmaments and all
these rulers and all lords and all gods and all
these great invisibles and all those of the region
of the Midst and those of the whole region of
the Right and all the great [ones] of the emana-
tions of the Light, and enter into them all and
inherit the Light-kingdom. This matter, there-
fore, is hard for me.”

When then Andrew had said this, the spirit
of the Saviour was roused in him; he cried out
and said: “How long am I to endure you?
How long am I to bear with your Have ye
then not even yet understood and are ye ignorant?
Know ye then not and do ye not understand
that ye and all angels and all archangels and the
gods and the lords and all the rulers and all the
great invisibles | and all those of the Midst and
those of the whole region of the Right and all
the great [ones] of the emanations of the Light
and their whole glory,—that ye all one with
another are out of one and the same paste and the
same matter and the same substance, and that
ye all are out of the same Mixture.


SECOND BOOK 207


“And at the commandment of the First
Mystery the Mixture was constrained, until all
the great [ones] of the emanations of the Light and
all their glory purified themselves, and until they
purified themselves from the Mixture. And they
have not purified themselves of themselves, but
they have purified themselves by necessity
according to the economy of the One and Only,
the Ineffable.

“They indeed have not at all suffered and have
not at all changed themselves in the regions,
nor at all torn themselves asunder nor poured
themselves into bodies of different kinds and from
one into another, nor have they been in any
affliction at all.

“Ye then in particular are the refuse of the
Treasury and ye are the refuse of the region of
the Right and ye are the refuse of the region of
those of the Midst and ye are the refuse of all
the invisibles and of all the rulers; in a word,
ye are the refuse of all these. And ye are in
great sufferings and great afflictions in your
being poured from one into another of different
kinds of bodies | of the world. And _ after
all these sufferings ye have struggled of your-
selves and fought, having renounced the whole
world and all the matter therein; and ye have
not left off seeking, until ye found all the mysteries
of the kingdom-of the Light, which have purified
you and made you into refined light, exceedingly
purified, and ye have become purified light.

“For this cause have I said unto you afore-
time: “Seek, that ye may find.’ I have, there-
fore, said unto you: Ye are to seek after the
mysteries of the Light, which purify the body


Of trans-
corporations
and purifi-


cation.


Of the puti-
fying mys-
teries.


250.


208 PISTIS SOPHIA


of matter and make it into refined light ex-
ceedingly purified.

“Amen, I say unto you: For the sake of the
race of men, because it is material, I have torn
myself asunder and brought unto them all the
mysteries of the Light, that I may purify them,
for they are the refuse of the whole matter of
their matter; else would no soul of the total
race of men have been saved, and they would
not be able to inherit the kingdom of the Light,
if I had not brought unto them the purifying
mysteries.

“For the emanations of the Light have no
need of the mysteries, for they are purified;
but it is the race of men which hath need of them,
because they all are material refuse [p/]. For this
cause, therefore, have I said unto you aforetime:
‘The healthy have no need | of the physician, but
the sick,—that is: Those of the Light have no
need of the mysteries, for they are purified
lights; but it is the race of men which hath need
of them, for [they] are material refuse [p/].

“For this cause, therefore, herald to the whole
race of men, saying: Cease not to seek day and
night, until ye find the purifying mysteries;
and say unto the race of men: Renounce the
whole world and the whole matter therein. For
he who buyeth and selleth in the world and he
who eateth and drinketh of its matter and who
liveth in all its cares and in all its associations,
amasseth other additional matters to the rest
of his matter, because this whole world and all
therein and all its associations are material
refuse [p/], and they will make enquiry of every
one concerning his purity.


SECOND BOOK 209


“For this cause, therefore, I have said unto
you aforetime: Renounce the whole world and
the whole matter therein, that ye may not amass
other additional matter to the rest of your
matter in you. For this cause, therefore, herald
it to the whole race of men, saying: Renounce
the whole world and all its associations, | that
ye may not amass additional matter to the rest
of your matter in you; and say unto them:
Cease not to seek day and night and remit not
yourselves until ye find the purifying mysteries
which will purify you and make you into a refined
light, so that ye will go on high and inherit the
light of my kingdom.

“Now, therefore, Andrew and all thy brethren
thy co-disciples, because of your renunciations
and all your sufferings which ye have endured
in every region, and because of your changes
in every region and of your being poured from one
into another of different kinds of bodies and
because of all your affiictions, and after all this
ye have received the purifying mysteries and are
become refined light exceedingly purified,—for
this cause, therefore, ye will go on high and
penetrate into all the regions of all the great
emanations of the Light and be kings in the
Light-kingdom for ever.

“But if ye come forth out of the body and
come on high and reach unto the region of the
rulers, then will all the rulers be seized with shame
before you, because ye are the refuse of their
matter and have become light more purified than
them all. And | if ye reach unto the region of
the Great Invisible and unto the region of those
of the Midst and of those of the Right and unto


That all who
are purified
will be


saved.


That finally
they will be
higher than
all powers.


210 PISTIS SOPHIA


the regions of all the great emanations of the
Light, then will ye be revered among them all,
because ye are the refuse of their matter and are
became light more purified than them all. And
all the regions will sing praises before you, until
ye come to the region of the kingdom.

“This is the answer to the words on which ye
question. Now, therefore, Andrew, art thou still
in unfaith and unknowing?”!

Jesus When the the Saviour said this, Andrew knew

he eae clearly, not only be but also all the disciples

of Andrew. knew with precision that they should inherit the
Light-kingdom. They all threw themselves down
together at Jesus’ feet, cried aloud, wept and
besought the Saviour, saying: “Lord, forgive
our brother the sin of unknowing.”

The Saviour answered and said: “I forgive
and will forgive; for this cause, therefore, hath
the First Mystery sent me, that I may forgive
everyone his sins.”


[SUB-SCRIPTION:]
A PORTION OF THE BOOKS OF THE SAVIOUR


[THE CONCLUSION OF ANOTHER BOOK]


cHaP.101. “AND those who are worthy of the mysteries
Peeks which abide in the Ineffable, which are those
Ineffable. which have not gone forth,—these exist before the
First Mystery, and to use a likeness and similitude,
that ye may understand it, they are as the Limbs
of the Ineffable. And everyone existeth accord-


ing to the dignity of its glory: the head according


' These two sentences are placed at the end of the preced-
ing paragraph, but clearly belong here.
§ patagrap y 8


SECOND BOOK 211


to the dignity of the head and the eye according to
the dignity | of the eyes and the ear according to 253.
the dignity of the ears and the rest of the Limbs
[in like fashion]; so that the matter is manifest:
There is a multitude of limbs but one only body.
Of this indeed have I spoken in a pattern and
similitude and likeness, but not in a form in
truth; nor have I revealed the word in truth,
but the mystery [only] of the Ineffable.

“ And all the Limbs which are in it,—according ‘the Saviour
to the word with which I have made comparison,— oe
that is, those which abide on the mystery of the
Ineffable, and those which abide in it, and also
the three spaces which are after them according to
the mysteries,—of all these in truth and verity I
am their treasury beside whom there is no other
treasury, who hath not his like in the world; but
there are still words and mysteries and other
regions.

“Now, therefore, blessed is he who hath found of the
the [words of the] mysteries [of the first space] (&to',
which is from without; and he is a god who hath Bver, |
found these words of the mysteries of the second mysteries.
space, which is in the midst; and he is a saviour
and an uncontainable who hath found the words
of the mysteries of the third space, which is
within, a.nd he is more excellent than the universe
and like unto those who are in that third space.
Because he hath found the mystery in which
they are and in which they stand,—| for this cause, 254.
therefore, is he like unto them. He on the other
hand who hath found the words of the mysteries
which I have described unto you according to a
likeness, that they are the Limbs of the Ineffable,
—amén, I say unto you: That man who hath


212 PISTIS SOPHIA


found the words of these mysteries in divine
truth, is the first in truth and like unto him
[sc. the First, ze the Ineffable], for through those
words and mysteries ... and the universe it-
self standeth through that First. For this cause
he who hath found the words of those mysteries,
is like unto the First. For it is the gnosis of the
enosis of the Ineffable concerning which I have
discoursed with you this day.”


A THIRD BOOK


JESUS continued again in the discourse and said CHAP. 108.
unto his disciples: “When I shall have gone Of the pro-
into the Light, then herald it unto the whole ofthe dis-
world and say unto them: Cease not to seek alee
day and night and remit not yourselves until ye

find the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, which

will purify you and make you into refined light

and lead you into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Renounce the whole world what men
and the whole matter therein and all its cares PoNl"*
and all its sins, in a word all its | associations 255.
which are in it, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from all the
chastisements which are in the judgments.

“Say unto them: Renounce murmuring, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the fire of the dog-faced [one].

“Say unto them: Renounce eavesdropping [P],
that ye may [be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light] and be saved from the judgments of the
dog-faced [one].

“Say unto them: Renounce litigiousness  [?],
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light and be saved from the chastisements of
Ariél.

“Say unto them: Renounce false — slander,
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the


213


256.


214 PISTIS SOPHIA


Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of the
dog-faced [one].

“Say unto them: Renounce false witness,
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light and that ye may escape and be saved from
the fire-rivers of the dog-faced [one].

“Say unto them: Renounce pride and haughti-
ness, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of
the Light and be saved from the fire-pits of
Ariél.

“Say unto them: Renounce belly-love, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the judgments of Amente.

“Say unto them: Renounce babbling, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the fires of Amente.

“Say unto them: | Renounce craftiness, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the chastisements which
are in Amente.

“Say unto them: Renounce avarice, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the fire-rivers of the dog-faced
fone].

“Say unto them: Renounce love of the world,
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light and be saved from the pitch- and fire-
coats of the dog-faced [one].

“Say unto them: Renounce pillage, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the fire-rivers of Ariel.

“Say unto them: Renounce evil conversation,
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light and be saved from the chastisements of
the fire-rivers. ...


THIRD BOOK 215


“Say unto them: Renounce wickedness, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the fire-seas of Ariel.

“Say unto them: Renounce pitilessness, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the judgments of the dragon-
faced [ones].

“Say unto them: Renounce wrath, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the fire-rivers of the dragon-
faced [ones.|

“Say unto them: Renounce cursing, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the fire-seas of the dragon-
faced [ones]. |

“Say unto them : Renounce thieving, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the bubbling seas of the
dragon-faced [ones].

“Say unto them: Renounce robbery, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from Yaldabaoth.

“Say unto them: Renounce slandering, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the fire-rtvers of the lion-
faced [one].

“Say unto them: Renounce fighting and
strife, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of
the Light and b.e saved from the seething rivers
of Yaldabaoth.

“Say unto them: Renounce all unknowing,
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light and be saved from the servitors of Yalda-
baoth and the fire-seas.

“Say unto them: Renounce evil doing, that


257.


258.


216 PISTIS SOPHIA


ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from all the demons of Yaldabaoth
and all his judgments.

“Say unto them: Renounce sloth, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and
be saved from the seething pitch-seas of Yalda-
baoth.

“Say unto them: Renounce adultery, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light-
kingdom and be saved from the sulphur- and
pitch-seas of the lion-faced [one].

“Say unto them: Renounce murder, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the crocodile-faced ruler,—
this one who is in the cold, | is the first chamber
of the outer darkness.

“Say unto them: Renounce pitilessness and
impiety, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from the rulers of the
outer darkness.

“Say unto them: Renounce atheism, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the howling and grinding of
teeth.

“Say unto them: Renounce [magic] potions,
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light and be saved from the great cold and the
hail of the outer darkness.

“Say unto them: Renounce blasphemy, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and be saved from the great dragon of the outer
darkness.

“Say unto them: Renounce the doctrines of
error, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from all the chas-


THIRD BOOK 217


tisements of the great dragon of the outer
darkness.

“Say unto those who teach the doctrines of
error and to everyone who is instructed by them:
Woe unto you, for, if ye do not repent and abandon
your error, ye will go into the chastisements
of the great dragon and of the outer darkness,
which is exceedingly evil, and never will ye be
cast [up] into the world, but will be non-existent
until the end. |

“Say unto those who abandon the doctrines
of truth of the First Mystery: Woe unto you,
for your chastisement is sad compared with
[that of] all men. For ye will abide in the great
cold and ice and hail in the midst of the dragon
and of the outer darkness, and ye will never from
this hour on be cast [up] into the world, but ye
shall be frozen up [?] in that region and at the
dissolution of the universe ye will perish and be-
come non-existent eternally.

“Say rather to the men of the world: Be
calm, that ye may receive the mysteries of the
Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye loving-unto-men,
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye gentle, that ye
may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on
high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye peaceful, that ye
may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on
high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye merciful, that ye
may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on
high into the Light-kingdom.


259.


The bound-
aries of the
ways of the
worthy.


260.


Unto whom
are the mys-
teries of the
Light to be
given.


The mys-
teries are
for the for-
giveness of
suns.


218 PISTIS SOPHIA


“Say unto them: Give ye alms, that ye may
receive the mysteries of the Light and go on
high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Minister unto the poor and
the sick and distressed, that ye may receive
the mysteries | of the Light and go on high
into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye _ loving-unto-God,
that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light
and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye righteous, that ye
may teceive the mysteries [of the Light] and go
on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be good, that ye may
receive the mysteries [of the Light] and go on high
into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Renounce all, that ye may
receive the mysteries of the Light and go on
high into the Light-kingdom.

“These are all the boundaries of the ways for
those who are worthy of the mysteries of the Light.

“Unto, such, therefore, who have renounced
in this renunciation, give the mysteries of the
Light and hide them not from them at all, even
though they are sinners and they have been in
all the sins and all the iniquities of the world,
all of which I have recounted unto you, in order
that they may turn and repent and be in the
submission which I have just recounted unto you.
Give unto them the mysteries of the Light-
kingdom and hide them not from them at all;
for it is because of sinfulness that I have
brought the mysteries into the world, that I
may forgive all their sins which they have com-
mitted from the beginning on. For this cause


THIRD BOOK 219


have I said unto you afore time: ‘I am not come
to call the righteous.’ Now, | therefore, I have
brought the mysteries that [their] sins may
be forgiven for everyone and they be received
into the Light-kingdom. For the mysteries are
the gift of the First Mystery, that he may wipe
out the sins and iniquities of all sinners.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished
saying these words unto his disciples, that Mary
came forward and said to the Saviour: “My
Lord, will then a righteous man who is perfected
in all righteousness, and that man who hath no
sin at all, will such an one be tormented in the
chastisements and judgments or not? Or will
rather that man be brought into the kingdom of
heaven or not?”

And the Saviour answered and said unto Marty:
“A righteous man who is perfected in all righteous-
ness and who hath never committed any sin of
any kind, and such an one who never hath
received mysteries of the Light, if the time is
at hand when he goeth forth out of the body,
then straight way come the receivers of one of the
great triple-powers,—those among whom there
is a great [one],—snatch away the soul of that
man from the hands of the retributive receivers
and spend three days circling with it in all the
creatures of the world. After three days they
lead it down into the chaos, so as to lead it into
all the chastisements of the judgments and to dis-
patch it to all the judgments. The fires of the |
chaos do not trouble it greatly; but they will
trouble it partly for a short time.

“And with haste they take pity on it quickly,
to lead it up out of the chaos and lead it on the


261.


CHAP. 103.
Mary ques-
tioneth the
Saviour.


Of the soul
of the rigtht-
ours man
who hath not
received the
mysteries at


death.


262.


263.


220 PISTIS SOPHIA


way of the midst through all the rulers. And they
[sc. the rulers] do not chastize it in their harsh
judgments, but the fire of their regions troubleth
it partly. And if it shall be brought into the
region of Yachthanabas, the pitiless, then will he
indeed not be able to chastize it in his evil judg-
ments, but he holdeth it fast a short time, while
the fire of his chastisements troubleth it partly.

“And again they take pity on it quickly,
and lead it up out of those regions of theirs and
they do not bring it into the zons, so that the
rulers of the zons do not carry it away ravishingly;
they bring it on the way of the sun and bring it
before the Virgin of Light. She proveth it and
findeth that it is pure of sins, but letteth them
not bring it to the Light, because the sign of
the kingdom of the mystery is not with it. But
she sealeth it with a higher seal and letteth it
be cast down into the body | into the eons of
righteousness,—that body. which will be good
to find the signs of the mysteries of the Light
and inherit the Light-kingdom for ever.

“Tf on the contrary he hath sinned once or
twice or thrice, then will he be cast back into the
world again according to the type of the sins
which he hath committed, the type of which I
will tell you when I shall have told you the ex-
pansion of the universe.

“But amen, amén, I say unto you: Even if
a tighteous man hath committed no sins at- all,
he cannot possibly be brought into the Light-
kingdom, because the sign of the kingdom of
the mysteries is not with him. In a word, it is
impossible to bring souls into the Light without
the mysteries of the Light-kingdom.”


THIRD BOOK 221


It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished CHapP. 104.
saying these words unto his disciples, that John Jobs ques
came forward and said: “My Lord, suppose Jesus.
a sinning and a law-breaking man is te-
plete in all iniquities, and he hath ceased from
these for the sake of the kingdom of heaven
and renounced the whole world and the whole
matter therein, and we give him from the be-
ginning onwards the mysteries of the Light which
are in the first space from without, and if he
receiveth the mysteries, and after a little while
again if he returneth and transgresseth, and there-
after again if he turneth and ceaseth from all
sins and turneth and | renounceth the whole world 264.
and the whole matter therein, so that he cometh
again and is in great repentance, and if we
know truly in truth that he longeth after God,
so that we give him the second mystery of the
first space which is from without;—in like manner
if he turneth anew and transeresseth and is
again in the sins of the world, and again if he
thereafter turneth and ceaseth from the sins of
the world and again renounceth the whole world
and the whole matter therein and again is in
great repentance, and we know it with certainty
that he is not a play-actor, so that we turn and
give him the mysteries of the beginning, which
[are] in the first space from without;—in like
manner, if he turneth again and sinneth and is
in every type [of sin];—desirest thou that we
forgive him unto seven times and give him the
mysteries which are in the first space from with-
out, unto seven times or not?”

The Saviour answered again and said unto
John: “Not only forgive him unto seven times,


The dis-
ciples are to
forgive many
times seven
times.


265.


Of the re-
ward of the
savers of
souls.


CHAP. 105.


John con-
tinueth his
questioning.


266.


222 PISTIS SOPHIA


but amen, I say unto you: Forgive him unto
many times seven times, and every time give
him the mysteries from the beginning onwards
which are in the first space from without. Per-
chance ye win the soul of that brother and he
inheriteth the Light-kingdom.

“Bor this cause, therefore, when ye questioned
me aforetime, | saying: ‘If our brother sin against
us, desirest thou that we forgive him unto seven
times?’—I answered and spake unto you in
a similitude, saying: ‘Not only unto seven
times, but unto seventy times seven.’

“Now, therefore, forgive him many times and
every time give him the mysteries which are in
the first space which is from without. Perchance
ye win the soul of that brother and he inheriteth
the Light- kingdom.

“Ameén, amen, I say unto you: He who shall
keep in Life and save only one soul, besides
the dignity which he possesseth in the Light-
kingdom, he will receive yet another dignity
for the soul which he hath saved, so that he who
shall save many souls, besides the dignity which
he possesseth in the Light he will receive many
other dignities for the souls which he hath saved.”

When then the Saviour had said this, John
started forward and said: “My Lord, bear
with me if I question thee, for from now on I
will begin to question thee on all things con-
cerning the manner, how we ate to herald it to
mankind.

“Tf, therefore, I give that brother a mystery
out of the mysteries of the beginning which are
in the first space from without, and if I give
him many mysteries and he doeth not what | is


THIRD BOOK 223


worthy of the kingdom of heaven,—desirest thou
that we let him pass through to the mysteries
of the second space? Perchance we win the
soul of that brother, and he turneth, repenteth
and inheriteth the Light-kingdom. Desirest thou
that we let him pass through to the mysteries
[which are in the second space] or not?”

And the Saviour answered and said unto John:
“Tf it is a brother who is not play-acting, but
in truth longeth after God, if ye have given
him many times the mysteries of the beginning
and because of the necessity of the elements of
the Fate he hath not done what is worthy of
the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, then forgive
him, let him pass through and give him the
first mystery which is in the second space. Per-
chance ye win the soul of that brother.

“And if he hath not done what is worthy
of the mysteries of the Light and hath committed
transgression and divers sins, and thereafter hath
turned again and been in great repentance and hath
renounced the whole world and ceased from all
the sins of the world, and ye know with certainty
that he doth not play-act but in truth longeth after
God, then turn ye anew, forgive him, let him pass
on through and give him the second mystery in
the second | space of the First Mystery. Per-
chance ye win the soul of that brother and he
inheriteth the Light-kingdom.

“And again if he hath not done what is worthy
of the mysteries, but hath been in transgression and
divers sins, and thereafter again hath turned
and been in great repentance and hath renounced
the whole world and the whole matter therein
and ceased from the sins of the world, so that


That the
mysteries
shall be
given again
unto a fe-
pentant
rother
even up to
the space of
the second
space.


The limit of
the power
of the dis-
ciples to for-
give sins.


268.


A former
saying ex-


plained.


224 PISTIS SOPHIA


ye know truly that he is not play-acting but
longeth truly after God, then turn ye anew,
forgive him and receive his repentance, because
the First Mystery is compassionate and merciful-
minded; let also that man pass through and
give him the three mysteries together which are in
the second space of the First Mystery.

“Tf that man [then] transgresseth and is in
divers sins, from that moment onwards ye are
not to forgive him nor to receive his repentance;
but let him be among you as a stumbling-block
and as a transgressot.

“For, amen, I say unto you: Those three
mysteries will be witnesses for his last repentance,
and he hath not repentance from this moment
onwards. For, amén, I say unto you: The soul
of that man will not | be cast back into the world
above from this moment onwards, but will be in
the abodes of the dragon of the outer darkness.

“For regarding the souls of such men I have
spoken unto you afore time in a similitude, say-
ing: ‘If thy brother sinneth against thee, bring
him over between thee alone and him. If he
hearkeneth unto thee, thou wilt win thy brother;
if he hearkeneth not unto thee, take with thee yet
another. If he hearkeneth not unto thee and the
other, bring him to the assembly. If he hearken
not unto the others, let him be for you as a trans-
eressor and as a stumbling-block.—That is: If
he is not usable in the first mystery, give him
the second; and if he is not usable in the second
give him the three, assembled together, which is
‘the assembly’; and if he is not usable in the
third mystery, let him be for you as a stumbling-
block and as a transeressor.


THIRD BOOK 225


“ And the word which I have spoken unto you ofthe
aforetime: ‘So that through two to three witnesses (iy ofthe
every word may be established,—it is this: forsiveness
Those three mysteries will witness for his last.
repentance. And amen, | I say unto you: If 209.
that man repenteth, no mystery can forgive him
his sins, nor can his repentance be received,
nor can he at all be hearkened to through any
mystery, save through the first mystery of the
First Mystery and through the mysteries of the
Ineffable. It is these alone which will receive
the repentance of that man and forgive his sins;
for those mysteries in sooth ate compassionate
and merciful- minded and forgiving at every
time.”

When then the Saviour had said this, John CHAP. 106.
continued again and said to the Saviour: “ My John con.
Lord, suppose an exce,edingly sinful brother who questioning.
hath renounced the whole world and the whole
matter therein and all its sins and all its cares,
and we shall prove him and know that he is not
in deceit and play-acting but that in uprightness
and in truth he longeth [after God], and we know
that he hath become worthy of the mysteries
of the second space or of the third,—desirest
thou that we give him of the mysteries of the
second space and of the third, before he hath
at all received mysteries of the Inheritance of the
Light or not? Desirest thou that we give or
note”

And the Saviour answered and said unto John Farther of
in the midst of the disciples: “If ye know with Mefosvs
certainty that that man | hath renounced the 270.
whole world and all its cares and all its associations
and all its sins, and if ye know in truth that he


271.


226 PISTIS SOPHIA


is not in deceit, neither that he was play-acting
nor that he was curious to know the mysteries,
how they are brought to pass, but that he longeth
after God in truth, hide them not from such an
one, but give him of the mysteries of the second
and third space and try even of what mystery
he is worthy; and that of which he is worthy,
give him and hide it not from him, for if ye hide
it from him, ye may be guilty of a great con-
demnation.

“Tf ye give him once [of the mysteries] of the
second space or of the third and he turneth again
and sinneth, ye are to continue again the second
time up to the third time. If he still sinneth,
ye shall not continue to give him, for those three
mysteries will be witnesses unto him for his
last repentance. And amen, I say unto you:
He who shall give that man anew mysteries of the
second space or of the third, is guilty of a great
condemnation. But let him be for you as a
transgressor and as a stumbling-block.

“Amen, I say unto you: The soul of that man
cannot be cast back into the world | from this
moment onwards; but his habitation is in the
midst of the jaws of the dragon of the outer
darkness, the region of howling and grinding of
teeth. And at the dissolution of the world his
soul will be frozen up [?] and perish in the violent
cold and exceedingly violent fire and will be non-
existent eternally.

“Even if he yet again turneth and renounceth
the whole world and all its cares and all its sins,
and he is in great citizenship and great repentance,
no mystery can receive from him his repentance,
nor can it hearken unto him, to have mercy


THIRD BOOK 227


upon him and receive his repentance and for-
give his sins, save the mystery of the First
Mystery and the mystery of the Ineffable. It
is these alone which will receive the repentance
of that man and forgive his sins; for in sooth
those mysteries are compassionate and merciful-
minded and forgiving of sins at every time.”

And when the Saviour had said this, John CHap. 107.
continued again and said: “My Lord, bear Joba con
with me, if I question thee, and be not wroth questioning.
with me, for I question concerning all things
with surety and certainty for knowledge of the
manner, how we ate to herald it to the men of the
world.”

And the Saviour answered and said unto John:

“ Question concerning all things on which thou
questionest, and I will reveal them unto thee,
face to face | in openness without similitude, or 272.
with surety.”

And John answered and said: “My Lord,
if we go forth and herald it and come into a city
or a village, and if the men of that city come forth
to meet us without our knowing who they are,
and if they receive us unto themselves in great
deceit and great play-acting and bring us into
their house, desiring to make trial of the mys-
teries of the Light-kingdom, and if they play-act
with us in submission and we suppose that they
long after God, and we give them the mysteries
of the Light-kingdom, and if we thereafter know
that they have not done what is worthy of
the mystery, and we know that they have play-
acted with us, and have been deceitful against
us and that they have also made a show of the
mysteries region by region, making trial of us


Of pre-
tenders who
receive the
mysteries.


273.


A former
saying ex-


plained.


228 PISTIS SOPHIA


and also of our mysteries,—what is then the thing
which will befall such?”

And the Saviour answered and said unto John:
“Tf ye come into a city or a village, where ye
enter into the house and they receive you unto
themselves, give them a mystery. If they are
worthy, ye will win their souls and they will
inherit the Light-kingdom; but if they are not
worthy but are deceitful against you, and if
they also make a show of the mysteries, making
trial of you and also of the mysteries, then
invoke | the first mystery of the First Mystery
which hath mercy on everyone, and say: Thou
Mystery, which we have given unto these impious
and iniquitous souls who have not done what is
worthy of thy mystery but have made a show
of us, turn back [then] the mystery unto us
and make them for ever strangers to the mystery
of thy kingdom. And shake ye off the dust of
your feet as a witness against them, saying:
May your souls be as the dust of your house.
And amen, I say unto you: In that hour all the
mysteries which ye have given unto them, will
return unto you, and all the words and all the
mysteries of the region up to which they have
received figures, will be taken from them.

“Concerning such men, therefore, have I
aforetime spoken unto you in similitude, saying:
“Where ye enter into a house and are received,
say unto them: Peace be with you. And if they
are worthy, let your peace come upon them; and
if they are not worthy, let your peace return unto
you, —that is: If those men do what is worthy
of the mysteries and in truth long after God,
give them the mysteries of the Light-kingdom;


THIRD BOOK 229


but if they play-act with you and are deceitful
against you, without your having known it, |
and if ye give them the mysteries of the Light- 274.
kingdom, and again thereafter they make a
show of the mysteries and they make also trial of
you and also of the mysteries, then perform the
first mystery of the First Mystery, and it will
turn back unto you all the mysteries which ye
have given unto them, and it will make them
strangers to the mysteries of the Light for ever.

“And such men will not be led back to the

world from this moment onwards; but amén,
I say unto you: Their dwelling is in the midst
of the jaws of the dragon of the outer darkness.
And if they still at a time of repentance renounce
the whole world and the whole matter therein
and all the sins of the world, and they are in
entire submission to the mysteries of the Light,
no mystery can hearken unto them nor forgive
their sins, save this same mystery of the Ineffable,
which hath mercy on everyone and forgiveth
everyone his sins.”

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished CHapP. 108.
saying these words unto his disciples, that Mary as
adored the feet of Jesus and kissed them. Mary Jesus.
said: “My Lord, bear with me, if I question
thee, and be not wroth with me.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“Question concerning what thou desirest to
question, and I will reveal it | unto thee in 275.
openness.”

And Mary answered and said: “My Lord,
suppose a good and excellent brother whom we
have filled with all the mysteries of the Light,
and that brother hath a brother or kinsman, in a


How the
souls of
those who
have come
out of the
body may
be helped
by those on
earth.


276.


230 PISTIS SOPHIA


word he hath in general [any] man, and this [man]
is a sinner and impious or better he is no sinner,
and such an one hath gone out of the body, and
the heart of the good brother is grieved and
mourneth over him, that he is in judgments
and chastisements,-now, therefore, my Lord,
what are we to do to remove him out of the
chastisements and harsh judgments?”

And the Saviour answered and said unto Marty:
“Concerning this word, therefore, I have already
spoken unto you at another time, but hearken
that I may say it again, so that ye may be per-
fected in all mysteries and be called ‘the per-
fected in every fulness.’

“ Now, therefore, all men, sinners or better who
are no sinners, not only if ye desire that they be
taken out of the judgments and violent chastise-
ments, but that they be removed into a righteous
body which will find the mysteries of the godhead,
so that it goeth on high and inheriteth the Light-
king¢dom,—then perform the third mystery of
the Ineffable | and say: Carry ye the soul of
this and this man of whom we think in our hearts,
carry him out of all the chastisements of the rulers
and haste ye quickly to lead him before the
Virgin of Light; and in every month let the Virgin
of Light seal him with a higher seal, and in every
month let the Virgin of Light cast him into a
body which will be righteous and good, so that it
goeth on high and inheriteth the Light-kingdom.

“And if ye say this, amen, I say unto you:
All who serve in all the orders of the judgments
of the rulers, hasten to hand over that soul from
one to the other, until they lead it before the
Virgin of Light. And the Virgin of Light sealeth


THIRD BOOK 231


it with the sign of the kingdom of the Ineffable
and handeth it over unto her receivers, and the
receivers will cast it into a body which will be
righteous and find the mysteries of the Light,
so that it will be good and goeth on high and
inheriteth the Light-kingdom. Lo, this is it on
which ye question me.”

And Mary answered and said: “ Now, therefore,
my Lord, hast thou then not brought mysteries
into the world that man | may not die through the
death which is appointed him by the rulers of
the Fate,—be it that it is appointed one to die
by the sword or die by the waters or through
tortures and torturings and acts of violence
which are in the law, or through any other evil
death,—hast thou then not brought mysteries
into the world that man may not die with them
through the rulers of the Fate, but that he may
die by a sudden death, so that he endure no
sufferings through such kinds of death? For
they are exceedingly numerous who persecute us
because of thee, and numerous those who per-
secute us because of thy name, in order that, if
they torture us, we may speak the mystery and
straight way go out of the body without having
endured any sufferings at all.”

The Saviour answered and said unto all his
disciples: “Concerning this word on which ye
question me, I have spoken unto you at another
time; but hearken again that I may say it unto
you anew: Not only ye, but every man who will
accomplish that first mystery of the First Mystery
of the Ineffable——he who, therefore, shall per-
form that mystery and accomplish it in all its
figures and all its types and all its stations, in


CHAP. 108.


Mary con-
tinueth her
questioning.
271.


How he who
possesseth
the mys-
teries can
come forth
out of the
body
without
suffering.


278.


CHAP. 110.


Mary con-
tinueth her
questioning.


279.


232 PISTIS SOPHIA


performing it, he will not come out of the body;
but after he hath accomplished that mystery in
all its figures | and all its types, thereafter then at
every time when he shall speak the name of that
mystery, he will save himself from all that which
is appointed him by the rulers of the Fate. And
in that hour he will come forth out of the body
of the matter of the rulers, and his soul will be-
come a great light-stream, so that it soareth on
high and penetra teth all the regions of the rulers
and all the regions of the Light, until it reacheth
the region of its kingdom. Neither giveth it
answers nor apologies in any region at all, for it
is without tokens.”

When then Jesus had said this, Mary con-
tinued, threw herself at Jesus’ feet, kissed them
and said: “My Lord, still will I question thee.
Reveal [it] unto us and hide [it] not from us.”

Jesus answered and said unto Mary: “ Question
on what ye question, and I will reveal [it] unto
you in openness without similitude.”

Mary answered and said: “My Lord, hast
thou then not brought mysteries into the world
because of poverty and riches, and because of
weakness and streneth, and because of . . . and
healthy bodies, in a word because of all such, so
that, if we go into the regions of the land, and
they do not have faith in us and they hearken
not unto our words, and we perform any such
mysteries in those regions, they may know truly
in truth that we | herald the words [of the God]
of the universe?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary in
the midst of the disciples: ‘Concerning this
mystery on which ye question me, I have given


THIRD BOOK 233


it unto you at another time; but I will repeat
it and speak the word unto you:

“Now, therefore, Mary, not only ye, but The mystery
every man who shall accomplished the mystery of mectne’
the raising of the dead,—that which healeth the +
demons and all pains and all sicknesses and the
blind and the lame and the maimed and the
dumb and the deaf, which I have given unto you
aforetime,—he who shall receive [that] mystery
and accomplish it, thereafter then, if he ask for all
things, for poverty and riches, for weakness and
streneth, for ... and healthy body, and for all
healings of the body and for the raising of the
dead and for healing the lame and the blind
and the deaf and the dumb and all sicknesses
and all pains,—in a word, he who shall accomplish
that mystery and ask for all the things which I
have just said, then will they quickly come to
pass for him.”

When then the Saviour had said this, the tThedis-
disciples came forward, cried out all together oPS?©


come
and said: “O Saviour thou hath made us very fenziedt
exceedingly frenzied because of the great deeds limity of the
of which thou tellest us; and because thou hast ae
borne up our souls, they have pressed to go forth

out of us | unto thee, for we issue from thee. 280.
Now, therefore, because of these great deeds of

which thou tellest us, our souls have become
frenzied and they have pressed very exceedingly,
yearning to go forth out of us on high to the region

of thy kingdom.”

When then the disciples had said this, the CHapP. 111.
Saviour continued again and said unto his dis- duces
ciples: “If ye go into cities or kingdoms orf shall make
countries, proclaim first unto them, saying: ees


What mys-
teries they
shall give.


The mystery
of the rais-
ing of the
dead not to
be given to
any.


281.


234 PISTIS SOPHIA


Search ever and cease not, until ye find the
mysteries of the Light which will lead you into
the Light-kingdom. Say unto them: Beware
of the doctines of error. For many will come in
my name and say: It is I. And it is not I, and
they will lead many astray.

“Now, therefore, unto all men who come unto
you and have faith in you and hearken unto your
words and do what is worthy of the mysteries of
the Light, give the mysteries of the Light and
hide them not from them. And unto him who
is worthy of the higher mysteries, give them,
and to him who is worthy of the lower mysteries,
give them, and hide not anything from anyone.

“The mystery of the raising of the dead and
of the healing of the sick, on the other hand,
give unto no one nor give instruction in it, for
that mystery belongeth to the rulers, it and all
its namings. For this cause, therefore, give it |
unto no one, nor give instruction in it until ye
establish the faith in the whole world, in order
that, if ye come into cities or into countries, and
they do not receive you unto themselves, and do
not have faith, and do not hearken unto your
wotds, ye may raise the dead in those regions
and heal the lame and the blind and manifold of
sicknesses in those regions. And through all
such they will have faith in you, that ye herald
the God of the universe, and will have faith in all
the words of you. or this cause, therefore,
have I given unto you that mystery, until ye
establish the faith in the whole world.”

When then the Saviour had said this, he con-
tinued again in the discourse and said unto Mary:
“Now, therefore, hearken, Mary, concerning the


THIRD BOOK 235


wotd on which thou hast questioned me: Who
constraineth the man until he sinneth? Now,
therefore, hearken:

“Ts the babe born, the power is feeble in it,
and the soul is feeble in it, and also the counter-
feiting spirit is feeble in it; in a word, the three
together are feeble, without anyone of them
sensing anything, whether good or evil, because
of the load of forgetfulness which is very heavy.
Moreover the body also is feeble. And the babe
eateth of the delights of the world of the rulers;
and the power draweth into itself from the
portion of the power which | is in the delights;
and the soul draweth into itself from the portion
of the soul which is in the delights; and the coun-
terfeiting spirit draweth into itself from the
portion of the evil which is in the delights and in
its lusts. And on the other hand the body
draweth into itself the matter which senseth not,
which is in the delights. The destiny on the
contrary taketh nothing from the delights,
because it is not mingled with them, but it
departeth again in the condition in which it
cometh into the world.

“ And little by little the power and the soul and
the counterfeiting spirit grow, and every one of
them senseth accor.ding to its nature: the power
senseth to seek after the light of the height;
the soul on the other hand senseth to seek after
the region of righteousness which is mixed, which
is the region of the commixture; the counter-
feiting spirit on the other hand seeketh after all
evils and lusts and all sins; the body on the con-
trary senseth nothing unless it taketh up force
out of the matter.


Of the con-
stitution of
man.


282.


Of the coun-
terfeiting
spirit.

283..


284.
The state of


the sinful
soul after


death.


236 PISTIS SOPHIA


“And straightway the three develop sense,
everyone according to its nature. And _ the
retributive receivers assign the servitors to follow
them and be witnesses of all the sins which they
commit, with a view to the manner and method
how they will chastize them in the judgments.

“And after this the counterfeiting spirit |
contriveth and senseth all sins and the evil which
the rulers of the great Fate have commanded
for the soul, and it maketh them for the soul.

“And the inner power stirreth the soul to seek
after the region of the Light and the whole god-
head; and the counterfeiting spirit leadeth away
the soul and compelleth it continually to do all
its lawless deeds, all its mischiefs and all its
sin, and is persistently allotted to the soul and
is hostile to it, and making it do all this evil
and all these sins.

“And it goadeth on the retributive servitors,
so that they are witnesses in all the sins which it
will make it do. Moreover also if it will rest in
the night [or] by day, it stirreth it in dreams or in
lusts of the world, and maketh it to lust after all
the things of the world. In a word, it driveth [?]
it into all the things which the rulers have com-
manded for it and it is hostile to the soul,
making it do what pleaseth it not.

“Now, therefore, Mary, this is in fact the
foe of the soul, and this compelleth it until it
doeth all sins.

“Now, therefore, if | the time of that man
is completed, first cometh forth the destiny and
leadeth the man unto death through the rulers
and their. bonds with which they are bound
through the Fate.


THIRD BOOK 237


“And thereafter the retributive receivers come
and lead that soul out of the body. And there-
after the retributive recetvers spend three days
circling round with that soul in all the regions
and dispatch it to all the sons of the world.
And the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny
follow that soul; and the power returneth to
the Virgin of Light.

“And after three days the retributive receivers
lead down that soul to the Amente of the chaos;
and when they bring it down to the chaos, they
hand it over to those who chastize. And the
retributive receivers return unto their own
regions according to the economy of the works
of the rulers concerning the coming-forth of the
souls.

“And the counterfeiting spirit becometh the
receiver of the soul, being assigned unto it and
transferring it according to the chastisement
because of the sins which it hath made it commit,
and is in great enmity to the soul.

“And when the soul hath finished the chastise-
ments in the chaos according to the sins | which it
hath committed, the counterfeiting spirit leadeth
it forth out of the chaos, being assigned unto it
and transferring it to every region because of the
sins which it hath committed; and it leadeth it
forth on the way of the rulers of the midst.
And when it reacheth them, [the rulers] question
it on the mysteries of the destiny; and if it hath
not found them, they question their destiny.
And those rulers chastize that soul according
to the sins of which it is guilty. I will tell you
the type of their chastisements at the expansion
of the universe.


285.


How a sin-
ful soul is
brought bac
to birth.


286.


CHAP. 112.
Of the as-


cension after
death of the
good soul
that hath
received the
mysteries.


238 PISTIS SOPHIA


“When, therefore, the time of the chastise-


ments of that soul in the judgments of the rulers


of the midst shall be completed, the counter-
feiting spirit leadeth the soul up out of all the
regions of the rulers of the midst and bringeth it
before the light of the sun according to the com-
mandment of the First Man, Yew, and bringeth it
before the judge, the Virgin of Light. And she
proveth that soul and findeth that it is a sinning
soul, and casteth her light-power into it for its
standing-upright and because of the body and
the community of sense,—the type of which I
will tell you at the expansion of the universe.
And the Virgin of Light sealeth that soul and
handeth it over to one of her receivers | and will
have it cast into a body which is suitable to the
sins which it hath committed.

“And amén, I say unto you: They will not
discharge that soul from the changes of the body
until it hath yielded its last circuit according to
its merit. Of all these then will I tell you their
type and the type of the bodies into which it
will be cast according to the sins of each soul.
All this will I tell you when I shall have told you
the expansion of the universe.”

Jesus continued again in the discourse and said:
“Tf on the contrary it is a soul which hath
not hearkened unto the counterfeiting spirit in
all its works, but hath become good and hath
received the mysteries of the Light which are
in the second space or even those which are in
the third space which is within, when the time
[of the coming-forth] of that soul out of the
body is completed, then the counterfeiting spirit
followeth that soul, it and the destiny; and


THIRD BOOK 239


it followeth it on the way on which it will go
above.

“And before it temoveth itself above, it
uttereth the mystery of the undoing of the seals
and all the bonds of the counterfeiting spirit
with which the rulers have bound it to the soul;
and when it is uttered, the bonds of the counter-
feiting spirit undo themselves, and it ceaseth
to come into that soul and treleaseth the soul
according to the commandments which | _ the
rulers of the great Fate have commanded it,
saying: “Release not this soul until it tell thee
the mystery of the undoing of all the seals with
which we have bound thee to the soul.’

“Tf then the soul shall have uttered the mystery
of the undoing of the seals and of all the bonds of
the counterfeiting spirit, and if it ceaseth to
come into the soul and ceaseth to be bound to
it, then it uttereth in that moment a mystery
and releaseth the destiny to its region to the rulers
who are on the way of the midst. And it uttereth
the mystery and releaseth the counterfeiting
spirit to the rulers of the Fate to the region in
which it was bound to it.

“And in that moment it becometh a great
light-stream, shining exceedingly, and the retri-
butive receivers who have led it forth out of the
body, are afraid of the light of that soul and
fall on their faces. And in that moment that
soul becometh a great light-stream, it becometh
entirely wings of light, and penetrateth all the
regions of the rulers and all the orders of the Light,
until it reacheth the region of its kingdom up to
which it hath received mysteries.

“Tf on the other hand it is a soul which hath


287.


Of the state
after death
of one

hath re-
ceived the
mysteries,


and yet hath .


transgressed.


288.


289.


240 PISTIS SOPHIA


received mysteries in the first space which is
without, and if after it | hath received the
mysteries it hath accomplished them, it [then]
turneth and committeth sin after the accomplish-
ing of the mysteries, and if the time of the
coming-forth of that soul is completed, then the
retributive receivers come to lead that soul out of
the body.

“And the destiny and the counterfeiting
spirit follow that soul. Because the counter-
feiting spirit is bound to it with the seals and the
bonds of the rulers, it followeth thus that soul
which travelleth on the ways with the counter-
feiting spirit.

“Tt uttereth the mystery of the undoing of
all the bonds and all the seals with which the
tulers have bound the counterfeiting spirit to
the soul. And when the soul uttereth the
mystery of the undoing of the seals, straightway
the bonds of the seals which are bound in the
counterfeiting spirit to the soul undo themselves.
And when the soul uttereth the mystery of the
undoing of the seals, straightway the counter-
feiting spirit undoeth itself and ceaseth to be
assigned to the soul. And in that moment
the soul uttereth a mystery and restraineth the
counterfeiting spirit and the destiny and dis-
chargeth them which follow it. But no one of
them is in its power; | but it is in their power.

“ And in that moment the receivers of that soul
come with the mysteries which it hath received,
come and snatch that soul out of the hands of the
retributive receivers, and the [latter] receivers
go back to the works of the rulers for the purpose
of the economy of the leading-forth of the souls.


THIRD BOOK 241


“And the recetvers of that soul on the other

hand who belong to the Light, become wings of
light for that soul and become vestures of light
for it and they do not lead it into the chaos,
because it is not lawful to lead into the chaos
souls which have recetved mysteries, but they
lead it on the way of the rulers of the midst.
And when it reacheth the rulers of the midst,
those rulers meet the soul, they being in great
fear and violent fire and with different faces, in
a word in great immeasurable fear.

“And in that moment the soul uttereth the
mystery of their apology. And they are ex-
ceedingly afraid and fall on their faces, being in
fear of the mystery which it hath uttered, and of
their apology. | And that soul surrendereth their 290.
destiny, saying unto them: Take your destiny ! The apology
I come not to your regions from this moment eee
onwards. I have become a sttanger unto you ‘he midst
for ever, being about to go unto the region of
my inheritance.

And when the soul shall have said this, the
receivers of the Light fly with it on high and lead
it into the roons of the Fate, it giving every region
its apology and its seals——which I will tell you
at the expansion of the universe. And it giveth
the counterfeiting spirit to the rulers and telleth
them the mystery of the bonds with which it is
bound to it, and sayeth unto them: There have The apology

tae oe of the rulers
ye your counterfeiting spirit! I come not to ¢rine Fate.
your region from this moment onwards. I have
become a stranger unto you for ever. And it
giveth everyone his seal and his apology.

“ And when the soul shall have said this, the
receivers of the Light fly with it on high and lead


291.


Of the as-
cension of
that soul


into the In-


heritance.


292.


242 PISTIS SOPHIA


it | out of the zons of the Fate and lead it up into
all the zons [above], it giving to every region its
apology and the apology of all the regions and
the seals to the tyrants of the king, the Adamas.
And it giveth the apology of all the rulers of all
the regions of the Left,—whose collective apolo-
gies and seals I will one day tell you when I shall
tell you the expansion of the universe.

“And moreover those receivers lead that soul
to the Virgin of Light and that soul giveth the
Virgin of Light the seals and the glory of the
songs of praise. And the Virgin of Light and also
the seven other virgins of the Light together prove
that soul and find together their signs in it and
their seals and their baptisms and their chrism.
And the Virgin of Light | sealeth that soul and
the receivers of the Light baptize that soul and
give it the spiritual chrism; and everyone of
the virgins of the Light sealeth it with her seals.

“And moreover the receivers of the Light
hand it over to the great Sabaoth, the Good,
who is at the gate of the Life in the region of
those of the Right, who is called ‘ Father.” And
that soul giveth him the glory of his songs of
praise and his seals and his apologies. And
Sabaoth, the Great and Good, sealeth it with his
seals. And the soul giveth its science and the
glory of the songs of praise and the seals to the
whole region of those of the Right. They all
seal it with their seals; and Melchisedec, the
great Receiver of the Light who is in the region of
those of the Right, sealeth that soul and all the
receivers of Melchisedec seal that soul and lead it
into the Treasury of the Light.

“And it giveth the glory and the honour and


THIRD BOOK 243


the laud of the songs of praise and all the seals
of all the regions of the Light. And all those of the
region of the Treasury of the Light seal it
with their seals and it goeth unto the region of
the Inheritance.”

When then the Saviour had said this unto his
disciples | he said unto them: “Understand ye
in what manner I discourse with you?”

And Mary again started forward and_ said:
“Yea, my Lord, I understand in what manner
thou dost discourse with me, and I will compre-
hend them all [sc thy words]. Now, therefore,
concerning these words which thou sayest, my
mind hath brought forward four thoughts in me
and my light-man hath led me and exulted and
seethed, desiring to come forth out of me and enter
into thee. Now, therefore, my Lord, hearken
that I may tell thee the four thoughts which have
arisen in me.

“The first thought hath arisen in me con-
cerning the word which thou hast spoken: *‘ Now,
therefore, the soul giveth the apology and seal
unto all the rulers who are in the region of the
king, the Adamas, and giveth the apology and the
honour and the glory of all their seals and the
songs of praise to the region of the Light,—con-
cermng this word then thou hast spoken unto us
aforetime, when they brought thee the piece of
money and thou didst see that it was of silver and
copper and didst ask: ‘Whose is this image?’
They said: ‘The king’s” And when thou
sawest that it was of silver and copper mixed,
thou saidst: ‘Give therefore the king’s unto the
king and God’s unto God,—that is: If the soul
receiveth mysteries, it giveth the apology to


CHAP. 113.
290.


Mary inter-
preteth from
former say-
ings.


The piece

of money

which was

brought unto
esus.


294.


A saying of
Paul.


295.


244 PISTIS SOPHIA


all the rulers and to the region | of the king, the
Adamas; aud the soul giveth the honour and the
glory to all those of the region of the Light. And
the word: ‘It hath glistened, when thou didst
see that it is made up of silver and copper, —it
is the type thereof, that in it [sc the soul] is
the power of the Light, which is the refined
silver, and that in it is the counterfeiting spirit,
which is the material copper. This, my Lord,
is the first thought.

“The second thought is on the other hand
that. which thou hast just said unto us con-
cerning the soul which receiveth the mysteries:
‘If it cometh into the region of the rulers of the
way of the midst, they come forth to meet it in
exceedingly great fear and they are afraid of it.
And the soul giveth the mystery of the fear unto
them and they are afraid before it. And it giveth
the destiny to its region, and it giveth the counter-
feiting spirit to its own region, and it giveth the
apology and the seals to every one of the rulers
who are on the ways, and it giveth the honour and
the glory and the laud of the seals and the songs
of praise to all those of the region of the Light,—
concerning this word, my Lord, thou hast spoken
aforetime through the mouth of our brother
Paul: ‘Give tax to whom tax is due, give fear
to whom fear is due, give tribute to whom tribute
is due, give honour to whom honour is due, and
give laud to whom laud is due, and owe not any
other anything,’ |—that is, my Lord: The soul
which receiveth mysteries, giveth apology to all
regions. This, my Lord, is the second thought.

“The third thought on the other hand concern-
ing the word which thou hast aforetime spoken


THIRD BOOK 245


unto us: ‘The counterfeiting spirit is hostile to The foes of
the soul, making it do all sins and all mischiefs, p*<°°""
and it transferreth it in the chastisements because
of all the sins which it hath made it commit;
in a word, it is hostile to the soul in every way, —
concerning this word, therefore, thou hast said
unto us aforetime: ‘The foes of the man are the
dwellers in his house,—that is: The dwellers
in the house of the soul are the counterfeiting
spirit and the destiny, which are hostile to the
soul the whole time, making it commit all sin and
all iniquities. Lo this, my Lord, is the third
thought.

“The fourth thought on the other hand con-
eerning the word which thou hast said: ‘If the
soul goeth forth.out of the body and travelleth on
the way with the counterfeiting spirit, and if it
hath not found the mystery of the undoing of
all the bonds and the seals which are bound to
the counterfeiting spirit, so that it may cease to
haunt or be assigned to it,—if it then hath not
found it, the counterfeiting spirit leadeth the soul
to the Virgin of Light, the judge; and the judge,
the Virgin of Light, proveth the soul and findeth |
that it hath sinned and, as she also hath not found 296.
the mysteries of the Light with it, she handeth it
over to one of her receivers, and her receiver
leadeth it and casteth it into the body, and it
cometh not out of the changes of the body
before it hath yielded its last circuit,—concerning
this word, then, my Lord, thou hast said unto us
aforetime: ‘Be reconciled with thy foe as long A former
as thou art on the way with him, lest perchance ee
thy foe hand thee over to the judge and the judge >’
hand thee over to the servant and the servant


297.


CHAP. 114.


Mary con-
tinueth to
question
Jesus.


246 PISTIS SOPHIA


cast thee into prison, and thou shalt not come
forth out of that region till thou hast yielded the
last farthing.’

“Because of this manifestly is thy word:
Every soul which cometh forth out of the body
and travelleth on the way with the counter-
feiting spirit and findeth not the mystery of the
undoing of all the seals and all the bonds, so that
it may undo itself from the counterfeiting spirit
which is bound to it,—that soul which hath not
found mysteries of the Light and hath not found
the mysteries of detachment from the counter-
feiting spirit which is bound to it,—if then it
hath not found it, the counterfeiting spirit
leadeth that soul to the Virgin of Light, and the
Virgin of Light, yea that judge, handeth over that
soul | to one of her receivers, and her receiver
casteth it into the sphere of the zons, and it
cometh not out of the changes of the body before
it hath yielded the last circuit which is appointed
for it. This then, my Lord, is the fourth
thought.”

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard
Mary say these words, that he said: “ Well said,
all-blessed Mary, spiritual [one]. These are the
solutions of the words which I have spoken.”

Mary answered and said: “Still, my Lord,
do I question thee, because from now on I will
begin to question thee on all things with sureness.
For this cause, therefore, my Lord, be patient
with us and reveal unto us all things on which
we shall question thee for the sake of the manner,
how my brethren are to herald it to the whole
race of men.”

And when she had said this to the Saviour,


THIRD BOOK 247


the Saviour answered and said unto her in
great compassion towards her: “ Amén, amen,
I say unto you: Not only will I reveal unto you
all things on which ye shall question me, but
from now on I will reveal unto you other things
on which ye have not thought to question, which
have not entered into the heart of man, and which
also all the gods, who are below man, know not.
Now, therefore, Mary, question on what thou
mayest question, and I will reveal it unto thee
face to face without similitude.”

And Mary answered and said: “My Lord,
in what type then do I the baptisms forgive sins?
I heard thee say: ‘The retributive servitors
follow the soul, being witnesses to it for all the
sins which it committeth, that they may convict
it in the judgments.’ Now, therefore, my Lord,
do the mysteries of the baptisms wipe out the
sins which are in the hands of the retributive
setvitors, so that they forget them? Now, there-
fore, my Lord, tell unto us the type, how they
forgive sins; nay, we desire to know it with
sureness.”

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“Finely hast thou spoken. The servitors indeed
are they who bear witness to all sins; but they
abide in the judgments, seizing the souls and con-
victing all the souls of sinners who have received
no mysteries; and they keep them fast in the
chaos, chastizing them. And those retributive
receivers cannot overstep the chaos to reach to the
otdets which are above the chaos, and convict
the souls which come forth out of those regions.
Now then it is not lawful to use force on the
souls which receive mysteries, and lead them into


CHAP. 115.


Of the re-
tributive
servitots.


299.


How the
soul of the
sinner is
stamped
with his sins.


300.


248 PISTIS SOPHIA


the chaos, so that the retributive servitors may
convict them. But the retributive  servitors
convict the | souls of the sinners and they keep
fast those who have received no mysteries which
may lead them out of the chaos. The souls on
the other hand which receive mysteries,—they
have no power of convicting them, because they
do not come forth out of their regions, and also,
if they come forth into their regions, they are not
able to obstruct them; nay, they cannot lead
them into that chaos.

“Hearken moreover that I may tell you the
word in truth, in what type the mystery of
baptism forgiveth sins. Now, therefore, if the
souls sin when they are still in the world, the
retributive servitors indeed come and are witnesses
of all the sins which the soul committeth, lest in
sooth they should come forth out of the regions of
the chaos, in order that they may convict them
in the judgments which are outside the chaos.
And the counterfeiting spirit becometh witness
of all the sins which the soul shall commit, in order
that it may convict it in the judgments which are
outside the chaos, not only that it may bear witness
of them, but—all the sins of the souls—it sealeth
the sins and maketh them fast on to the soul, in
order that all the rulers of the chastisements of
the sinners may recognize it, that it is a sinning
soul, and that they may know of the number of
sins which it hath committed, by the seals which
the counterfeiting spirit hath made fast on to it,
so that it shall be chastized according to | the
number of sins which it hath committed. This
do they with all sinning souls.

“Now, therefore, he who shall receive the


THIRD BOOK 249


mysteries of the baptisms, then the mystery of How the
them becometh a great, exceedingly violent, wise eo
fire and it burneth up the sins and entereth into

the soul secretly and consumeth all the sins which

the counterfeiting spirit hath made fast on to it.

And when it hath finished purifying all the sins the separa-
which the counterfeiting spirit hath made fast on to cee
the soul, it entereth into the body secretly and ee
pursueth all the pursuers secretly and separateth

them off on the side of the portion of the body.

For it pursueth the counterfeiting spirit and the
destiny and separateth them off from the power

and from the soul and putteth. them on the side

of the body, so that it separateth off the counter-

feiting spirit and the destiny and the body into

one portion; the soul and power on the other

hand it separateth into another. The mystery of
baptism on the contrary remaineth in the midst of

the two, continually separating them from one
another, so that it maketh them clean and puti-

fieth them, in order that they may not be stained

by matter.

“Now, therefore, Mary, this is the way in
which the mysteries of the baptisms forgive sins
and all iniquities.”

When then | the Saviour had said this, he said CHap. 116.
unto his disciples: “Understand ye in what 30
manner I discourse with you?”

Then Mary started forward and said: “ Yea, Mary inter-
my Lord, in truth I enquire closely into all the Pe?
words which thou sayest. Concerning the word oa
then of the forgiveness of sins thou hast spoken ~
unto us in similitude afore time, saying: ‘I am
come to cast fire on the earth,’ and again: ‘ What
will I that it burn?’ And again thou hast distin-


302.


250 PISTIS SOPHIA


guished it clearly, saying: ‘I have a baptism, to
baptize in it; and how shall I endure until it
is accomplished? ‘Think ye I am come to cast
peace on the earth? Nay, but I am come to
cast division. For from now on five will be in
one house; three will be divided against two,
and two against three. This, my Lord, is the
word which thou hast spoken clearly.

“The word indeed which thou hast spoken:
‘I am come to cast fire on the earth, and what
will I that it burn?—that is, my Lord: Thou
hast brought the mysteries of the baptisms into
the world, and thy pleasure is that they should
consume all the sins of the soul and purify them.
And thereafter again thou hast distinguished it
clearly, saying: “I have a baptism, to baptize
in it; and | how shall I endure until it is accom-
plished?’—that is: Thou wilt not remain in the
world until the baptisms are accomplished and
purify the perfect souls.

“And moreover the word which thou hast
spoken unto us aforetime: ‘Think ye I am come
to cast peace on the earth? Nay, but I am come
to cast division. For from now on five will be in
one house; three will be divided against two, and
two against three,—that is: Thou hast brought
the mystery of the baptisms into the world, and
it hath effected a division in the bodies of the
world, because it hath separated the counter-
feiting spirit and the body and the destiny into
one portion; the soul and the power on the
other hand it hath separated into another portion;
—that is: Three will be against two, and two
against three.”

And when Mary had said this, the Saviour


THIRD BOOK 251


said: “Well said, thou spiritual and light-pure
Marty. This is the solution of the word.”

Mary answered again and said: “My Lord,
I will still continue to question thee. Now,


CHAP. 117.


Mary further
uestioneth


therefore, my Lord, bear with me questioning Jesus.


thee. Lo, in openness have we known the type
in which the baptisms forgive sins. Now on the
other hand the mystery of these three spaces
and the mysteries of this First Mystery and the
mysteries of the Ineffable, in what type do they
forgive sins? Do they forgive in the type | of
the baptisms, or not?”

The Saviour answered again and said: “ Nay,
but all the mysteries of the three spaces forgive
the soul in all the regions of the rulers all the sins
which the soul hath committed from the begin-
ning onwards. They forgive it, and moreover they
forgive the sins which it thereafter will commit,
until the time up to which everyone of the
mysteries shall be effective,—the time up to which
everyone of the mysteries shall be effective I
will tell you at the expansion of the universe.

“And moreover the mystery of the First
Mystery and the mysteries of the Ineffable for-
give the soul in all the regions of the rulers all the
sins and all the iniquities which the soul hath
committed; and [not only] do they forgive it
all, but they impute unto it no sin from this hour
unto all eternity, because of the gift of that great
mystery and its prodigiously great glory.”

When then the Saviour had said this, he said
unto his disciples: “Understand ye in what
manner I speak with you?”

And Mary answered again and said: “ Yea,
my Lord, already have I seized on all the words


Of the for-
giveness of
sins accord-
ing to the
higher mys-
teries.


CHAP. 116.


Mary inter-


preteth the
same from


Psalm xxxi.


304.


305.


252 PISTIS SOPHIA


which thou sayest. Now, therefore, my Lord,
concerning the word which thou sayest: | ‘ All
the mysteries of the three spaces forgive sins
and cover their [sc the souls’] iniquities,—
David, the prophet, then hath prophesied afore-
time concerning this word, saying: ‘ Blessed
arte they whose sins are forgiven and whose ini-
quities are covered.’

“And the word which thou hast spoken: ‘’ The
mystery of the First Mystery and the mystery of
the Ineffable forgive all men who shall receive
those mysteries, not only the sins which they
have committed from the beginning onwards,
but also they impute them not to them from
this hour unto all eternity,—concerning this
wotd David hath prophesied aforetime,  say-
ing: ‘Blessed are those to whom the Lord God
will not impute sins,—that is: Sins will not
be imputed from this hour to those who
have received the mysteries of the First Mystery
and who have received the mystery of the Ineffa
ble.”

He said: “Well said, Mary, thou spiritual
and light-pure Mary. This is the solution of
the word.”

And Mary continued again and said: “ My
Lord, if the man receiveth mysteries from the
mysteries | of the First Mystery and again turneth
and sinneth and transeresseth, and if he there-
after again turneth and repenteth and prayeth
in any [mystery] of his mystery, will it be for-
given him, or not?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Marty:
“Amen, amén, I say unto you : Everyone who
shall receive the mysteries of the First Mystery,


THIRD BOOK 253


if he again turneth and transegresseth twelve times Of forgive-
and again twelve times repenteth, praying in the tito wet


unto twelve
mystery of the First Mystery, it will be forgiven. eae
“But if after the twelve times he again trans- have te-


ceived the


gresseth and turneth and transegresseth, it will mysteries of
not be forgiven him for ever, so that he should bia
turn himself to any [mystery] of his mystery;
and this [ man] hath not repentance unless he
receiveth the mysteries of the Ineffable, which
have compassion at every time and forgive at
every time.”

Mary continued again and said: “My Lord, cHap. 119.
but if on the other hand they who have received
the mysteries of the First Mystery, turn and trans-
gress, and if they come out of the body before they
have repented, will they inherit the kingdom or
not, because indeed they have received the gift
of the First Mystery?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: of such ini-
“ Amén, amén, I say unto you: every man who {dyno


sin and die
hath received mysteries in the First Mystery, | eat
having transgressed for the first and the second 306.
and the third time, and if he cometh out of the
body before he hath repented, his judgment is far
sorer than all the judgments; for his dwelling is
in the midst of the jaws of the dragon of the outer
darkness, and at the end of all this he will be
frozen up [?] in the chastisements and perish for
ever, because he hath received the gift of the First
Mystery and hath not abided in it [se the gift].

Mary answered and said: “My Lord, all men ofthe un-
who shall receive the mysteries of the mystery ‘ple '"


giveness of
2


of the Ineffable, and have turned again, have {hose who
transeressed and have ceased in their faith, and eset Oe
mystery o


again thereafter, when they are still in life, the tnctfable.


307.


Of such ini-
tiated who
sin and die
without te-
pentance.


254 PISTIS SOPHIA


have turned and have repented, how many times
will it be forgiven then?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Marty:
“Amén, amén, I say unto you: To every man
who shall recetve the mysteries of the Ineffable,
not only if he transeresseth once, turneth again
and repenteth, will it be forgiven, but if at any
time he transeresseth, and if, when still in life,
he turneth again and repenteth, without play-
acting, and again if he turneth and repenteth and
prayeth in any of his mysteries, then will it be
forgiven him, because he hath received of the gift
of | the mysteries of the Ineffable, and moreover
because those mysteries are compassionate and
forgive at every time.”

And Mary answered again and said unto
Jesus: “My Lord, those who shall receive
the mysteries of the Ineffable, and have again
turned, have transgressed and have ceased in
their faith and are moreover come out of the
body before they have repented, what will befall
such?”

And the Saviour answered and said unto Marty:
“Amen, amen, I say unto you: All men who
shall recetve the mysteries of the Ineffable-—
blessed indeed are the souls which shall receive
of those mysteries; but if they turn and trans-
gress and come out of the body before they
have repented, the judgment of those men is sorer
than all the judgments, and it is exceedingly
violent, even if those souls are new and it is
their first time for coming into the world. They
will not return to the changes of the bodies from
that hour onwards and will not be able to do any-
thing, but they will be cast out into the outer


THIRD BOOK 255


darkness and perish and be non-existent for
ever.”

And when the Saviour had said this, he said CHAP. 120.
unto his disciples: “Understand ye in what
manner I speak with your”

Mary answered I and said: “I have seized on 30s.

the words which thou hast said. Now, there- se a
fore, my Lord, this is the word which thou hast ane Gon
said: ‘They who shall recetve the mysteries of eats
the Ineffable——blessed indeed are those souls;
but if they turn, transeress, and cease in their
faith, and if they go forth out of the body without
having repented, they are no more fit from this
hour onwards to return to the changes of the
body, nor for anything at all, but they are cast
out into the outer darkness, they will perish in
that region and be non-existent for ever,—con-
cerning [this] word thou hast spoken unto us
aforetime, saying: ‘Salt is good; but if the salt
becometh sterile, with what are they to salt it?
It is fit neither for the dunghill nor for the earth;
but they throw it away,—that is: Blessed are all
the souls which shall recetve of the mysteries of
the Ineffable; but if they once transgress, they
are not fit to return to the body henceforth from
this hour onwards nor for anything at all, but they
are cast into the outer darkness and perish in
that region.”

And when she had said this, the Saviour said:
“Well said, thou spiritual light-pure Mary. This
is the solution of the word.”

And Mary continued again | and said: “ My 309.
Lord, all men who have received the mysteries
of the First Mystery and the mysteries of the In-
effable, those who have not transgressed, but


Of the un-
ending com-
passion of
the great
mysteries for
the repen-
tant.


Of the un-
repentant.


307.


256 PISTIS SOPHIA


whose faith in the mysteries was in sincerity,
without play-acting,—they then have again sinned
through the compulsion of the Fate and have
again turned and repented and again prayed in
any of the mysteries, how often will it be forgiven
them?”

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary
in the midst of his disciples: “ Amén, amen, I
say unto you: All men who shall receive the
mysteries of the Ineffable and moreover the
mysteries of the First Mystery, sin every time
through the compulsion of the Fate, and if they,
when they are still in life, turn and repent and
abide in any of their mysteries, it will be forgiven
them at every time, because those mysteries are
compassionate and forgiving for all time. For this
cause then have I said unto you before: Those
mysteries will not only forgive them their sins
which they have committed from the beginning
onwards, but they do not impute them to them
from this hour onwatds,—of which I have said
unto you that they receive repentance at any
time, and that they also will forgive the sins
which they commit anew.

“Tf on the other hand those who shall receive
mysteries of | the mystery of the Ineffable and
of the mysteries of the First Mystery, turn and
sin and come out of the body without having
repented, then they will be even as those will be
who have transgressed and not repented. Their
dwelling also is in the midst of the jaws of the
dragon of the outer darkness and they will perish
and be non-existent for ever. For this cause have
I said unto you: All men who shall receive the
mysteries, if they knew the time when they come


THIRD BOOK 257


out of the body, would watch themselves and not
sin, in order that they may inherit the Light-
kingdom for ever.”

When then the Saviour had said this unto his
disciples, he said unto them: “ Understand ye
in what manner I speak with you?”

Mary answered and said: “Yea, my Lord,
with precision have I precisely followed all the
words which thou hast said. Concerning this
word then thou hast spoken unto us aforetime:
“If the house-holder knew at what hour in the
night the thief cometh to break into the house,
he would keep awake and not suffer the man
to break into his house.’ ”

When then Mary had said this, the Saviour
said: “Well said, thou spiritual Mary. This
is the word.”

The Saviour continued again and said unto his
disciples: “Now, therefore, herald ye unto all
men who shall recetve mysteries in the Light, and
speak | unto them, saying: Keep watch over
yourselves and sin not, lest ye heap evil on evil
and go out of the body without having repented
and become strangers to the Light-kingdom for
ever.”

When the Saviour had said this, Mary answered
and said: “ My Lord, great is the compassion of
those mysteries which forgive sins at every time.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary in
the midst of the disciples: “If to-day a king
who is a man of the world, giveth a gift to men of
his like, and also forgiveth murderers and those
who have intercoutse wlth males, and the rest of
the very grievous sins which are deserving of
death,—if it becometh him who is a man of the


CHAP. 121.


Marty inter-
preteth from
a former
ssaying.


311.


If even men
on earth are
compassion-
ate, how
much more
then the
higher mys-
teries?


CHAP. 122.
312.


Jesus trieth
Peter.


258 PISTIS SOPHIA


world, to have done this, much more then have
the Ineffable and the First Mystery, who are the
lords of the universe, the authority to act in all
things as it pleaseth them, that they forgive
everyone who shall receive mysteries.

“Or if on the other hand a king to-day in-
vesteth a soldier with a royal vesture and sendeth
him into foreign regions, and he committeth
murders and other grievous sins which are de-
serving of death, then they will not impute them
to him, and are not able to do him any evil be-
cause he is invested with the royal vesture,—how
much more then those who wear the mysteries
of the vestures of the Ineffable and those of the
First Mystery, who are lords over all those of
the height and all those of the depth!”

Thereafter Jesus saw a woman who came to
make repentance. | He had baptized her three
times, and yet she had not done what was worthy
of the baptisms. And the Saviour desired to try
Peter, to see if he was compassionate and forgiv-
ing, as he had commanded them. He said unto
Peter: “Lo, three times have I baptized this
soul, and yet at this third time she hath not done
what is worthy of the mysteries of the Light.
Wherefor then doth she make her body good for
nothing? Now, therefore, Peter, perform the
mystery which cutteth off the souls from the
inheritances of the Light; perform that mystery
in order that it may cut off the soul of this woman
from the Inheritance of the Light.”

When then the Saviour had said this, he
tried [Peter] to see whether he was compassionate
and forgiving.

When then the Saviour had said this, Peter


THIRD BOOK 259


said: “My Lord, let her yet this time, that we
may give her the higher mysteries; and if she is
fit, then hast thou let her inherit the Light-king-
dom, but if she is not fit, then hast thou [to] cut
her off from the Light-kingdom.”

When then Peter had said this, the Saviour
knew that Peter was compassionate as he and
forgiving.

When then all this was said, the Saviour said
unto his disciples: ““ Have ye understood all these
words and the type | of this woman?”

Mary answered and said: “My Lord, I have
understood the mysteries of the things which
have fallen to this woman’s lot. Concerning the
things then which have fallen to her lot, thou
hast spoken unto us aforetime in similitude,
saying: ‘A man owned a fig-tree in his vineyard;
and he came to look for its fruit, and he found
not a single one on it . He said to the vine-
dresser: Lo, three years do I come to look for
fruit on this fig-tree, and I have not any produce
at all from it. Cut it down then; why doth it
make the ground also good for nothing? But
he answered and said unto him: My lord, have
patience with it still this year, until I dig round it
and give it dung; and if it beareth in another
year, thou hast let it, but if thou dost not find
any [fruit] at all, then hast thou [to] cut it down.’
Lo, my Lord, this is the solution of the word.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“Well said, spiritual [one]. This is [the solution
of] the word.”

Mary continued again and said unto the
Saviour: “My Lord, a man who hath received
mysteries and hath not done what is worthy of


313.


Mary inter-
preteth the
incident
from a
former say-


ing.


CHAP. 123.


314.


In the case
of repen-
tance only
higher
mysteries
than those
previously
received can
remit sins.


315.


260 PISTIS SOPHIA


them, but he hath turned and hath sinned, there-
after he hath again repented and hath been
in great repentance,—is it then lawful for my
brethren to renew for him the mystery which he
hath received, or | rather give him a mystery out of
the lower mysteries,—is it lawful, or not?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“Ameén, amén, I say unto you: Neither the
mystery which he hath received, nor the lower
hearken unto him, to forgive his sins; but it is
the mysteries which are higher than those which
he hath received, which hearken unto him and
forgive his sins. Now, therefore, Mary, let thy
brethren give him the mystery which is higher
than that which he hath received, and they are
to accept his repentance from him and forgive
his sins,—the latter indeed, because he hath
received it once more, and the former, because he
hath towered over them [the lower mysteries]
upward,—the latter indeed hearkeneth not unto
him to forgive his sin; but it is the mystery which
is higher than that which he hath received, that
forgiveth his sins. But if on the other hand he
hath received the three mysteries in the two spaces
or in the third from within, and he hath turned
and transgressed, no mystery hearkeneth unto
him to help him in his repentance, neither the
higher nor the lower, save the mystery of the
First Mystery and the mysteries of the Ineffable,
—it is they which hearken unto him and accept
his repentance from him.”

Mary answered and said: “My Lord, a man
who hath recetved mysteries up to two or three |
in the second or third space, and he hath not
transgressed, but is still in his faith in upright-


THIRD BOOK 261


ness and without play-acting, [what will befall
him]?”

And the Saviour answered and said unto Marty:
“Every man who hath recetved mysteries in
the second and in the third space, and hath
not transgressed, but is still in his faith without
play-acting, it is lawful for such an one to receive
mysteries in the space which pleaseth him, from
the first to the last, because they have not
transgressed.”

Mary continued again and said: “My Lord,
a man who hath known the godhead and hath
received of the mysteries of the Light, and hath
turned and transgressed and done lawlessly and
hath not turned to repent, and a man on the other
hand who hath not found the godhead nor known
it, and that man is a sinner and moreover impious,
and they both have come out of the body,—which
of them will get more suffering in the judgments?”

The Saviour answered again and said unto
Mary “Amen, amén, I say unto thee: The
man who hath known the godhead and hath
received the mysteries of the Light and sinned
and hath not turned to repent, he will get suffer-
ing in the chastisements of the judgments in
great sufferings and | judgments exceedingly far
more in comparison with the impious and law-
breaking man who hath not known the godhead.
Now, therefore, who hath ears to hear, let him
hear.”

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary
started forward and said: “My Lord, my light-
man hath ears, and I have understood the whole
wotd which thou hast spoken. Concerning this
word then thou hast spoken unto us in a simili-


There is no
limit to the
number of
mysteries

the faithful


may receive.


CHAP. 124.


The fate of
the gnostic
who sinneth
is more
terrible than
that of the
ignorant
sinner.


316.


Mary inter-
preteth the
same from
a former
saying.


262 PISTIS SOPHIA


tude: ‘The slave who knew the will of his lord
and made not ready nor did the will of his lord,
will receive great blows; but he who knew not
and did not, will be deserving of less. For from
everyone to whom more is entrusted, of him will
more be demanded, and to whom much is handed
over, of him much is required,—that is, my Lord:
He who knew the godhead and hath found the
mysteries of the Light and hath transgressed,
will be chastized in a far greater chastisement
than he who hath not known the godhead. This,
my Lord, is the solution of the word.”

CHAP. 125. Mary continued again and said unto the Saviour:
“My Lord, if the faith and the mysteries shall
have revealed themselves,—now, therefore, if
souls come into the world in many circuits and
are neglectful of receiving mysteries, hoping that,
if they come into the world at any other circuit,
they will recetve them, will they not then be in

317. danger | of not succeeding in receiving the
mysteries?”

ee The Saviour answered and said unto his dis-

ats, iyi ciples: “ Herald unto the whole world and say

many births UNto men: Strive thereafter that ye may receive

before them. the mysteries of the Light in this time of afflic-
tion and enter into the Light-kingdom. Join not
one day to another, or one circuit to another,
hoping that ye may succeed in receiving the
mysteries if ye come into the world in another
circuit.

“And these know not when the number of
the perfect souls will be at hand; for if the
number of the perfect souls shall be at hand, I
will now shut the gates of the Light, and no
one from this hour onwards will enter in, nor will


THIRD BOOK 263


anyone hereafter go forth, for the number of the
perfect souls is completed and the mystery of the
First Mystery is completed, for the sake of which
the universe hath arisen—that is: I am_ that
Mystery.

“And from this hour onwards no one will be
able to enter into the Light and no one be able to
go forth. For at the completion of the time of
the number of the perfect souls, before I have set
fire to the world, in order that it may purify the
eons and the veils and the firmaments and the
whole earth and also all the matters which are on
it, mankind | will be still existing.

“At that time then the faith will reveal
itself still more and the mysteries in those days.
And many souls will come by means of the circuits
of the changes of the body, and coming back into
the world are some of those in this present time
who have hearkened unto me, how I taught, who
at the completion of the number of the perfect
souls will find the mysteries of the Light and
receive them and come to the gates of the Light
and find that the number of the perfect souls
is complete, which is the completion of the First
Mystery and the gnosis of the universe. And
they will find that I have shut the gates of the
Light and that it is impossible that any one
should enter in or that anyone should go forth
from this hour.

“Those souls then will knock at the gates of the
Light, saying: Lord, open unto us! And I
will answer unto them: I know you not, whence
ye are. And they will say unto me: We have
received of thy mysteries and fulfilled thy whole
teaching and thou hast taught us on the high


Of the time
of the com-
pletion.


318.
Those who


procrastin-
ate are ex-
cluded from
the Light.


Their en-
treaties at
the gates of
Light.


319.


Mary inter-
preteth the


same.


264 PISTIS SOPHIA


ways. And I will answer and say unto them:
I know you not, who ye are, ye who are doers of
iniquity and of evil even unto now. Wherefor
go into the outer darkness. And | from that hour
they will go into the outer darkness, there where
is howling and grinding of teeth.

“For this cause then, herald unto the whole
world and say unto them: ‘Strive thereafter,
to renounce the whole world and the whole matter
therein, that ye may receive the mysteries of
the Light before the number of the perfect souls
is completed, in order that they may not make
you stop before the gates of the Light and lead
you away into the outer darkness.’

“Now, therefore, who hath ears to hear, let
him hear.”

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary
started forward again and said: “My Lord,
not only hath my light-man ears, but my soul
hath heard and understood all the words which
thou sayest. Now, therefore, my Lord, concern-
ing the words which thou hast spoken: ‘ Herald
unto the men of the world and say unto them:
Strive thereafter, to receive the mysteries of the
Light, in this time of affiiction, that ye may
inherit the Light-kingdom. . . .


[A CONSIDERABLE LACUNA HERE OCCURS IN
THE TEXT) ]


A FOURTH BOOK


AND Mary continued again and said unto Jesus:
“In what type is the outer darkness; or rather
how many regions of chastisement are there in
i

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary:
“The outer darkness is a great dragon, whose
tail is in his mouth, outside the whole world and
sutrounding the whole world. And _ there
are many regions of chastisement within it.
There are twelve mighty | chastisement-dungeons
and a ruler is in every dungeon and the face
of the rulers is different one from another.

“ And the first ruler, who is in the first dungeon,
hath a crocodile's face, whose tail is in his mouth.
And out of the jaws of the dragon cometh all
ice and all dust and all cold and all different
diseases. This [is] he who is called with his
authentic name in his region * Enchthonin.’

“ And the ruler who is in the second dungeon,—
a cat’s face is his authentic face. This [is] he
who is called in his region ‘ Charachat.'

“ And the ruler who is in the third dungeon,—
a dog’s face is his authentic face. This [is] he
who is called in his region ‘ Archaroch.’

“ And the ruler who is in the fourth dungeon,—
a serpent’s face is his authentic face. ‘This [is]
he who is called in his region ‘ Achrochat.’


265


CHAP. 126.


Of the
dragon of
the outer
darkness.


320.


Of the rulers
of the
twelve
dungeons
and their
names.


321.


322.


266 PISTIS SOPHIA


“And the ruler who is in the fifth dungeon,—
a black bull’s face is his authentic face. This |is]
he who is called in his region * Marchur.’

“And the ruler who is in the sixth dungeon,—
a wild boar's face is his authentic face. This [is]
he who is called in his region * Lamchamot.’

“ And the ruler who is in the seventh dungeon,
|—-a bear’s face is his authentic face. ‘This [is]
he who is called in his region with his authentic
name ‘ Luchat.’

“And the ruler of the eighth dungeon,—a
vulture’s face is his authentic face, whose name
in his region is called ‘ Laraoch.’

“And the ruler of the ninth dungeon,—a
basilisk’s face is his authentic face, whose name
in his region is called ‘ Archeoch.’

“And in the tenth dungeon is a multitude of
rulers, and every one of them hath seven dragon’s
heads in his authentic face. And he who is
over them all is in his region with his name called ,
* Xarmaroch.’

“And in the eleventh dungeon is a multitude
of rulers,—and every one of them hath seven cat-
faced heads in his authentic face. And the
great one over them is called in his region
* Rochat.’

“And in the twelfth dungeon is an exceedingly
great multitude of rulers, and every one of them
hath seven dog-faced heads in his authentic face.
And the great one over them is called in his region
* Chremaot.’

“These rulers then of these twelve dungeons
are inside the dragon of the outer darkness, each
and everyone | of them hath a name every hour,
and everyone of them changeth his face every


FOURTH BOOK 267


hour. And moreover everyone of these dungeons
hath a door opening upwards, so that the dragon
of the outer darkness hath twelve dark dungeons,
and every dungeon hath a door opening up-
wards. And an angel of the height watcheth
each of the doors of the dungeons,—whom
Yew, the First Man, the overseer of the Light,
the envoy of the First Commandemnt, hath
established as watchers of the dragon, so that
the dragon and the rulers of his dungeons which
are in him, may not mutiny.”

When the Saviour had said this, Mary Ma-
dalene answered and said: “ My Lord, will then
the souls which shall be led into that region, be
led through these twelve doors of the dungeons,
everyone according to the judgment of which it is
deserving?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“No soul at all will be led into the dragon
through these doors. But the soul[sJ of the blas-
phemers and of those who are in the doctrines of
error and of all who teach doctrines of error, and
of those who have intercourse with males, and
of those stained and impious men and of atheists
and murderers and adulterers and sorcerers,—all
such souls then, if while still in life they do not
repent but | remain persistently in their sin, and
all the souls which have stayed behind without,—
that is those which have had the number of the
circuits which are appointed them in the sphere,
without having repented,—well, at their last
circuit will those souls, they and all the souls of
which I have just told you, be led out of [P| the
jaws of the tail of the dragon into the dungeons
of the outer darkness. And when those souls


Of the doors
of the
dungeons..


The angels
who watch
the doors.


CHAP. 127.


What souls
pass into
the dragon,


and how.


323.


The nature
of the
names of


the dragon.


324.


Of the
severity of
the chastise-
ments of the
dragon.


Of the de-
grees of the
fires of the
chastise-
ments.


268 PISTIS SOPHIA


have been led into the outer darkness into the
jaws of his tail, he turneth his tail into his own
mouth and shutteth them in. Thus will the souls
be led into the outer darkness.

“And the dragon of the outer darkness hath
twelve authentic names on his doors, a name on
everyone of the doors of the dungeons. And
these twelve names are different one from another;
but the twelve are one in the other, so that he
who speaketh one name, speaketh all. These then
will I tell you at the expansion of the universe.
Thus then is fashioned the outer darkness,—that
is the dragon.”

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary
answered and said | unto the Saviour: “My
Lord, are then the chastisements of that dragon
far more terrible compared with all the chastise-
ments of the judgments?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“Not only are they more painful compared with
all the chastisements of the judgments, but all
the souls which are led into that region, will be
frozen up [?] in the violent cold and the hail and
exceedingly violent fire which is iri that region,
but also at the dissolution of the world, that is
at the ascension of the universe, those souls will
perish through the violent cold and the exceed-
ingly violent fire and be non-existent for ever.”

Mary answered and said: “ Woe unto the souls
of sinners! Now, therefore, -my Lord, is the fire
in the world of mankind fiercer, or the fire in
Amente?”’

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“Amen, I say unto thee: The fire in Amente is
nine times fiercer than the fire in mankind.


FOURTH BOOK 269


“And the fire in the chastisements of the great
chaos is nine times more violent than that in
Amente.

“ And the fire in the chastisements of the rulers
who [are] on the way of the midst, is nine times
more violent than the fire of the chastisements
in the great chaos.

“And the fire | in the dragon of the outer dark-
ness and in all the chastisements in him is seventy
times more violent than the fire in all the chastise-
ments and in all the judgments of the rulers
who [are] on the way of the midst.”

And when the Saviour had said this unto Mary,
she smote her breast, she cried out and wept,
she and all the disciples together, and _ said:
“Woe unto sinners, for their chastisements ate
exceedingly numerous!”

Mary came forward, she fell down at the feet
of Jesus, kissed them and said: “My Lord,
bear with me if I question thee, and be not wroth
with me, that I trouble thee oft; for from now
on I will begin to question thee on all things with
determination.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“ Question concerning all things on which thou
desirest to question, and I will reveal them unto
thee in openness without similitude.”

Mary answered and said: “ My Lord, if a good
man hath accomplished all the mysteries and he
hath a kinsman, in a word he hath a man, and
that man is an impious [one] who hath com-
mitted all sins and is deserving of the outer dark-
ness, and he hath not repented, or he hath com-
pleted his number of circuits in the changes of
the body, and that man hath done nothing useful,


325.


CHAP. 128.
The dis-
ciples bewail
the fate of
sinners.


Marty further
questioneth


Jesus..


326.


How to save
the souls of
sinners.


A summaty
of the for-


mule.


327.


270 PISTIS SOPHIA


and he hath come out of the body, and we have
known certainly of him, that he hath sinned | and
is deserving of the outer darkness,—what are
we to do with him, to save him from the chastise-
ments of the dragon of the outer darkness, and
that he may be removed into a righteous body
which shall find the mysteries of the Light-
kingdom, in order that it may be good and go
on high and inherit the Light-kingdom?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“Tf a sinner is deserving of the outer darkness, or
hath sinned according to the chastisements of
the rest of the chastisements and hath not te-
pented, or a sinning man who hath completed
his number of circuits in the changes of the body
and hath not repented—if then these men of
whom I have spoken, shall come out of the body
and be led into the outer darkness, now, there-
fore, if ye desire to remove them out of the
chastisements of the outer darkness and all the
judgments and to remove them into a righteous
body which shall find the mysteries of the Light,
that it may go on high and inherit the Light-
kingdom,—then perform this same mystery of
the Ineffable which forgiveth sins at every time,
and when ye have finished performing the mystery
then say:

“The soul of such or such a man of whom I
think in my heart,—if it is in the region of the
chastisements of the dungeons of the outer dark-
ness, ot if it is in the rest of the chastisements of
the dungeons of the outer darkness and in the rest
of the chastisements | of the dragons,—then is it
to be removed out of them all. And if it hath
completed its number of its circuits of the changes,


FOURTH BOOK 271


then is it to be led before the Virgin of Light, and
the Virgin of Light is to seal it with the seal of
the Ineffable and cast it down in whatever month
into a righteous body which shall find the mysteries
of the Light, so that it may be good, go on high
and inherit the Light-kingdom. And moreover
if it hath completed the circuits of changes, then
is that soul to be led before the seven virgins
of the Light who [are set] over the baptisms, and
they are to apply them to the soul and seal it
with the sign of the kingdom of the Ineffable
and lead it into the orders of the Light.

“This then will ye say when ye perform the
mystery.

“Amen, I say unto you: The soul for which ye
shall pray, if it indeed is in the dragon of the outer
darkness, he will draw his tail out of his mouth
and let go that soul. And moreover if it is in
all the regions of the judgments of the rulers,
amén, I say unto you: The receivers of Mel-
chisedec will with haste snatch it away, whether
the dragon let it go or it is in the judgments of
the rulers; in a word, the receivers of Melchisedec |
will snatch it away out of all the regions in which 328.
it is, and will lead it into the region of the Midst
before the Virgin of Light, and the Virgin of Light
proveth it and seeth the sign of the kingdom of
the Ineffable which is on that soul.

“And if it hath not yet completed its number
of circuits in the changes of the soul, or [in the
changes] of the body, the Virgin of Light sealeth
it with an excellent seal and hasteth to have it cast
down in any month into a righteous body
which shall find the mysteries of the Light, be
good and go on high into the Light-kingdom.


320.
CHAP. 129.


Of the light-
beams and
light-


streams.


272 PISTIS SOPHIA


“And if that soul hath had its number of the
circuits, then the Virgin of Light proveth it, and
doth not have it chastized, because it hath had
its number of circuits, but handeth it over to the
seven virgins of the Light. And the seven virgins
of the Light prove that soul, baptize it with their
baptisms and give it the spiritual chrism and
lead it into the Treasury of the Light and put it
in the last order of the Light until the ascension
of all the perfect souls. And when they prepare
to draw apart the veils of the region of those of
the Right, they cleanse that soul anew and purify
it and put it in the orders of the first saviour
who [is] in the | Treasury of the Light.”

It came to pass then, when the Saviour had
finished speaking these words unto his disciples,
that Mary answered and said unto Jesus: “ My
Lord, I have heard thee say: ‘He who shall
receive of the mysteries of the Ineffable or who
shall receive of the mysteries of the First Mystery,
—they become flames of light-beams and light-
streams and penetrate all the regions until they
reach the region of their inheritance.’ ”

The Saviour answered and said unto Marty:
“If they receive the mystery when still in life,
and if they come out of the body, they become
light-beams and light-streams and penetrate all the
regions until they reach the region of their
inheritance.

“But if they are sinners and are come out of
the body and have not repented, and if ye perform
for them the mystery of the Ineffable, in order
that they may be removed out of all the chastise-
ments and be cast into a righteous body, which is
good and inheriteth the Light-kingdom or is


FOURTH BOOK 273


brought into the last order of the Light, then they
will not be able to penetrate the regions, because
they do not perform the mystery [themselves].
But the receivers of Melchisedec follow them and
lead them before the Virgin of Light. And | the
servitors of the judges of the rulers make frequent
haste to take those souls and hand them over
from one to the other until they lead them before
the Virgin of Light.”

And Mary continued and said unto the Saviour:
“My Lord, if a man hath received the mysteries
of the Light which [are] in the first space from
without, and when the time of the mysteries up
to which they reach, is completed, and if that
man continueth anew to receive mysteries of
the mysteries which [are] within the mysteries
which he hath already received, and moreover
that man hath become negligent, not having
prayed in the prayer which taketh away the evil
of the victuals which he eateth and drinketh,
and through the evil of the victuals he is bound to
the axle of the Fate of the rulers and through the
necessity of the elements he hath sinned anew
after the completion of the time up to which the
mystery reacheth—because he hath become
negligent and hath not prayed in the prayer
which taketh away the evil of the souls and puri-
fieth them,—and that man is come out of the
body before he hath repented anew and anew
received the mysteries of the mysteries which [are]
within the mysteries which he hath already re-
ceived,—those which accept repentance from him
and forgive his sins,—and when he | came forth
out of the body and we knew with certainty
that they have carried him into the midst of the


330.


CHAP. 130.
Mary plead-
eth for those
who have
neglected the
mysteries.


331.


332.


274 PISTIS SOPHIA


dragon of the outer darkness because of the sins
which he committed, and that that man hath no
helper in the world nor anyone compassionate,
that he should perform the mystery of the In-
effable until he should be removed out of the midst
of the dragon of the outer darkness and led into
the Light-kingdom,—now, therefore, my Lord,
what will befall him until he save himself from
the chastisements of the dragon of the outer
darkness? By no means, O Lord, abandon him,
because he hath endured sufferings in the persecu-
tions and in the whole godhood in which he is.

“Now, therefore, O Saviour, have mercy with
me, lest one of our kinsmen should be in such a
type, and have mercy with all the souls which
shall be in this type; for thou art the key which
openeth the door of the universe and shutteth
the door of the universe, and thy mystery com-
prehendeth them all. Have then mercy, O Lord,
with such souls. For they have called on the
name of thy mysteries, [were it but] for one single
day, and have truly had faith in them and were
not in play-acting. Give them then, O Lord, a
gift in thy goodness and give them rest in thy
mercy.”

When then Mary had said this, the Saviour
called her most exceedingly blessed because of
the words | which she had spoken. And the
Saviour was in great compassion and said unto
Mary: “Unto all men who shall be in this type
of which thou hast spoken, unto them while they
[are] still in life, give ye the mystery of one of the
twelve names of the dungeons of the dragon of
the outer darkness,—those which I will give you
when I have ended explaining unto you the uni-


FOURTH BOOK 275


verse from within without and from withdut
within.

“And all men who shall find the mystery of Of the effi-
one of the twelve names of that dragon of the sear
outer darkness and all men even if they are eee
very great sinners, and they have first received
the mysteries of the Light and thereafter have
transeressed, or they have performed no mystery
at all, then if they have completed their circuits
in the changes, and if such men go forth out of the
body without having repented anew, and if they
are led into the chastisements which [are] in the
midst of the dragon of the outer darkness, and
remain in the circuits and remain in the chastise-
ments in the midst of the dragon,—these, if they
know the mystery of one of the twelve names of
the angels while they are in life and are in the
world, and if they speak one of their names
while they are in the midst of the chastisements
of the dragon,—then, at the hour when they shall
speak it, the whole dragon will be tossed about
and most exceedingly convulsed, and the door of
the dungeon in which the souls | of those men 333.
are, openeth itself upward, and the ruler of the
dungeon in which .those men are, casteth the souls
of those men out of the midst of the dragon of
the outer darkness, because they have found the
mystery of the name of the dragon.

“ And when the ruler casteth out souls, straight- The souls
way the angels of Yew, the First Man, who watch yr? knov


the names
the dungeons of that region, hasten to snatch sscape and
away those souls to lead them before Yew, the t Yew.
First Man, the Envoy of the First Commandment.

And Yew, the First Man, seeth the souls and


proveth them; he findeth that they have com-


Of their
subsequent
fate.


334.


276 PISTIS SOPHIA


pleted their circuits and that it is not lawful to
bring them anew into the world, for it is not law-
ful to bring anew into the world all souls which
are cast into the outer darkness. [But J if they
have not yet completed their number of circuits
in the changes of the body, the receivers of Yew
keep them with them until they perform for them
the mystery of the Ineffable, and remove them
into a good body which shall find the mysteries
of the Light and inherit the Light-kingdom.

“But if Yew proveth them and findeth that
they have completed their circuits and that it
is not lawful to [reJturn them anew to the world,
and that also the sign of the Ineffable | is not
with them, then Yew hath compassion upon them
and leadeth them before the seven virgins of the
Light. They baptize them with their baptisms,
but they do not give them the spiritual chrism.
And they lead them into the Treasury of the
Light, but they do not put them in the orders of
the Inheritance, because no sign and no seal of
the Ineffable is with them. But they save them
from all chastisements and put them into the
light of the Treasury, separated and apart by
themselves alone until the ascension of the uni-
verse. And at the time when they will draw
apart the veils of the Treasury of the Light,
they cleanse those souls anew and purify them
most exceedingly and give them anew mysteries
and put them in the last order which [is] in the
Treasury, and those souls will be saved from all
the chastisements of the judgments.”

And when the Saviour had said this, he said
unto his disciples: “Have ye understood in
what manner I discourse with your”


FOURTH BOOK 277


Mary then answered and said: “My Lord,
this is the word which thou hast spoken unto us
aforetime, in a similitude, saying: ‘Make to
yourselves a friend out of the Mamon of unright-
eousness, so that if ye remain behind, he may
receive you into | the everlasting tents.’ Who
then is the Mamon of unrighteousness, if not the
dragon of the outer darkness? ‘This is the
word: He who shall understand the mystery
of one of the names of the dragon of the outer
darkness, if he remaineth behind in the outer
darkness or if he hath completed the circuits of
the changes, and speaketh the name of the dragon,
he will be saved and go up out of the darkness
and be received into the Treasury of the Light.
This is the word, my Lord.”

The Saviour answered again and said unto
Mary: “Well said, spiritual and pure [one].
This is the solution of the word.”

Mary continued again and said: “My Lord,
doth the dragon of the outer darkness come into
this world or doth he not come?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“When the light of the sun is outside [? above the
world] he covereth the darkness of the dragon:
but if the sun is below the world, then the dark-
ness of the dragon abideth as veiling of the sun
and the breath of the darkness cometh into the
world in form of a smoke in the night,—that is,
if the sun withdraweth into himself his rays,
then indeed the world is not able to endure the
darkness of the dragon in its true form; other-
wise would it be dissolved and go to ruin withal.”

When the Saviour had said this, Mary con-
tinued again and said unto the Saviour: “ My


Mary inter-
preteth the
same from
a former
saying.


CHAP. 131.


Of the light
of the sun
and the
darkness of
the dragon.


278 PISTIS SOPHIA


336. Lord, still do I question thee and | hide [it] not
from me. Now, therefore, my Lord, who com-
pelleth then the man until he sinneth?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“Tt is the rulers of the Fate who compel the man
until he sinneth.”

Mary answered and said unto the Saviour:
“My Lord, surely the rulers do not come down to
the world and compel the man until he sinneth?”

Of the cupof The Saviour answered and said unto Marty:

forgetfulness. << They do not come down in this manner into the
wotld. But the rulers of the Fate, when an old
soul is about to come down through them, then
the rulers of that great Fate who [are] in the
regions of the head of the zons,—which is that
region which ift called the region of the kingdom
of Adamas, and which is that region which is in
face of the Virgin of Light,—then the rulers of
the region of that head give the old soul a cup
of forgetfulness out of the seed of wickedness,
filled with all the different desires and all forget-
fulness. And straightway, when that soul shall
drink out of the cup, it forgetteth all the

337. regions to which it hath gone, | and all the
chastisements in which it hath travelled. And

Of the coun- that cup of the water of forgetfulness becometh

pees body outside the soul, and it resembleth the soul
in all [its] figures and maketh [itself] like it,—
which is what is called the counterfeiting spirit.

Ofthe fash) “If on the other hand it is a new soul which

oning 8 theyhave taken out of the sweat of the rulers
and out of the tears of their eyes, or far rather
out of the breath of their mouths,—in a word, if
it is one of the new souls or one of such souls,
if it is one out of the sweat, then the five great


FOURTH BOOK 279


rulers of the great Fate take up the sweat of all
the rulers of their zons, knead it together withal,
portion it and make it into a soul. Or far
rather if it is refuse of the purification of the
Light, then Melchisedec taketh it up from the
rulers. The five great rulers of the great Fate
knead the refuse together, portion it and make
it into different souls, so that everyone of the
rulers of the eons, everyone of them putteth his
portion into the soul. For this cause they knead
it jointly, so that all may [par]take of the soul.

“And the five great rulers, if they portion it
and make it into souls, bring it out of the sweat |
of the rulers. But if it is one out of the refuse
of the purification of the Light, then Melchisedec,
the great Receiver of the Light, taketh it [sc the
refuse] up from the rulers, or far rather if it is out
of the tears of their eyes or out of the breath of
their mouth,—in a word, out of such souls, when
the five rulers portion it and make it into different
souls,—or far rather if it is an old soul, then the
ruler who is in the head of the zons, himself
mixeth the cup of forgetfulness with the seed of
wickedness, and he mixeth it with everyone of
the new souls at the time when he is in the region
of the head. And that cup of forgetfulness
becometh the counterfeiting spirit for that soul,
and bideth outside the soul, being a vesture for
it and resembling it in every way, being envelope
as vesture outside it.

“And the five great rulers of the great Fate
of the eons and the ruler of the disk of the sun
and the ruler of the disk of the moon inbreathe
within into that soul, and there cometh forth out
of them a portion out of my power which the


Of the in-
breathing of
the power.


339.


Jesus pro-
miseth to
reveal all in
detail.


340.


280 PISTIS SOPHIA


last Helper hath cast into the Mixture. And the
portion of that power remaineth within in the
soul, | unloosed and existing on its own authority
for the economy unto which it hath been inset,
to give sense unto the soul, in order that it may
seek after the works of the Light of the Height
always.

“And that power is like the species of the soul
in every form and resembleth it. It cannot be
outside the soul, but remaineth inside it, as I
have commanded it from the beginning. When
I willed to cast it into the first Commandment,
I gave it commandment to remain outside
[P inside] the souls for the economy of the First
Mystery.

“And so I will tell you at the expansion of the
universe all these words concerning the power and
also concerning the soul, after what type they
are fashioned, or what ruler fashioneth them,
or what are the different species of the souls.
And so will I tell you at the expansion of the uni-
verse how many fashion the soul. And I will tell
you the name of all of them who fashion the soul.
And I will tell you the type, how the counter-
feiting spirit and the destiny have been prepared.
And I will tell you the name of the soul before
it is purged, and moreover its name when it hath
been purged and become pure. And I will tell
you the name of the counterfeiting spirit; and
I will tell you the name of the destiny. And I
will tell you the name of all the bonds with which
the rulers bind the counterfeiting spirit | to the
soul. And I will tell you the name of all the
decans who fashion the soul in the bodies of the
soul in the world; and I will tell you in what


FOURTH BOOK 281


manner the souls are fashioned. And I will tell
you the type of every one of the souls; and I
will tell you the type of the souls of the men and
of those of the birds and of those of the wild
beasts and of those of the reptiles. And I will
tell you the type of all the souls and of those of
all the rulers which are sent into the world, in
order that ye may be completed in all gnosis.
All this will I tell you at the expansion of the
universe. And after all this I will tell you
wherefor all this hath come to pass.

“Hearken, therefore, that I may discourse ofthe light-
with you concerning the soul according as I have "24.
said: The five great rulers of the great Fate of fiting spit
the zons and the rulers of the disk of the sun
and the rulers of the disk of the moon breathe
into that soul, and there cometh out of them a
portion of my power, as I have just said. And
the portion of that power remaineth within the
soul, so that the soul can stand. And they put |
the counterfeiting spirit outside the soul, watching
it and assigned to it; and the rulers bind it to the
soul with their seals and their bonds and seal it
to it, that it may compel it always, so that it
continually doeth its mischiefs and all its ini-
quities, in order that it may be their slave always
and remain under their sway always in the
changes of the body; and they seal it to it that
it may be in all the sin and all the desires of the
world.

“ For this cause, therefore, have I in this manner ‘the parents
brought the mysteries into this world which undo Yhinjon
all the bonds of the counterfeiting spirit and all
the seals which are bound to the soul,—those
which make the soul free and free it from its


we


41.


CHAP 132.
342.


Salome is in


doubt.


Mary re-
moveth the
doubt of


Salome.


282 PISTIS SOPHIA


parents the rulers, and make it into refined light
and lead it up into the kingdom of its father, the
first Issue, the First Mystery, for ever.

“For this cause therefore, have I said unto
you aforetime: ‘He who doth not abandon
father and mother and come and follow after me,
is not worthy of me.’ I have, therefore, said at
that time: Ye are to abandon your parents the
rulers, that I may make you sons of the First
Mystery for ever.”

And when | the Saviour had said this, Salome
started forward and said: “My Lord, if our
parents are the rulers, how standeth it written in
the Law of Moses: ‘He who shall abandon his
father and his mother, let him die the death’?
Hath not thus the Law made statement thereon?”

And when Salome had said this, the light-
power in Mary Magdalene bubbled up in her and
she said to the Saviour: “My Lord, give com-
mandment unto me that I discourse with my
sister Salome to tell her .the solution of the word
which she hath spoken.”

It came to pass then, when the Saviour had
heard Mary say these words, that he called her
most exceedingly blessed. The Saviour answered
and said unto Mary: “I give commandment
unto thee, Mary, that thou speak the solution of
the word which Salome hath spoken."

And when the Saviour had said this, Mary
started forward to Salome, embraced her and said
unto her: “My sister Salome, concerning the
wotd which thou hast spoken: It  standeth
written in the Law of Moses: ‘He who shall
abandon his father and his mother, let him die
the death,—now, therefore, my sister Salome,


FOURTH BOOK 283


the Law hath not said this concerning the soul
nor concerning the body nor concerning the
counterfeiting spirit, for all these are sons | of
the rulers and are out of them. But the Law
hath said this concerning the power which hath
came fotth out of the Saviour, and which is the
light-man within us to-day. The Law hath more-
over said: Every one who shall remain without
the Saviour and all his mysteries, his parents,
will not only die the death but go to ruin in
destruction.”

When then Mary had said this, Salome
started forward to Mary and embraced her anew.
Salome said: “The Saviour hath power to make
me understanding like thyself.”

It came to pass, when the Saviour had heard
the words of Mary, that he called her most
exceedingly blessed. The Saviour answered and
said unto Mary in the midst of his disciples:
“ Hearken, therefore, Mary, who it is who com-
pelleth the man until he sinneth.

“Now, therefore, the rulers seal the counter-
feiting spirit to the soul, [but] so that it doth not
agitate it every hour, making it do all sins and all
iniquities. And they give commandment more-
over unto the counterfeiting spirit, saying: ‘If
the soul cometh out of the body, do not agitate
it, being assigned to it and transferring it to all
the regions of the judgments, region by region,
on account of all the sins which thou hast made it
do, in order that it may be chastized in all the
regions of the judgments, so that it may not be
able to go | on high to the Light and return into
changes of the body.'

“In a word, they give commandment to the


343.


Of the
charge given
to the coun-
terfeiting
spirit.


344.


Of the
charge given
to the ser-
vitors.


345.


284 PISTIS SOPHIA


counterfeiting spirit, saying: “Do not agitate
it at all at any hour unless it doth not speak
mysteries and undo all the seals and all the bonds
with which we have bound thee to it. [But]
if it sayeth the mysteries and undoeth all the seals
and all the bonds and [sayeth] the apology of
the region, and if it cometh, then let it go forth,
for it belongeth to those of the Light of the Height
and hath beeome a stranger unto us and unto thee,
and thou wilt not be able to seize it from this
hour onwards. If on the contrary it sayeth not
the mysteries of the undoing of thy bonds and of
thy seals and of the apologies of the region, then
seize it and let it not out; thou shalt transfer it
to the chtistisements and all the regions of the
judgments on account of all the sins which thou
hast made it do. After this lead [such souls]
before the Virgin of Light, who sendeth them once
more into the circuit.’

“The rulers of the great Fate of the sons
hand these over to the counterfeiting spirit; and
the rulers summon the setvitors of their zons, to
the number of three-hundred-and-sixty-and-five,
and give them the soul and the counterfeiting
spirit, which are bound to one another. The
counterfeiting spirit is the without of the soul,
and the compound of the power is the within of the
soul, being within both of them, in order that they
may be able to stand, for | it is the power which
keepeth the two up-right. And the rulers give
commandment to the servitors, saying unto them:
‘This is the type which ye are to put into
the body of the matter of the world. They
say unto them indeed: ‘Put the compound of
the power, the within of the soul, within them


FOURTH BOOK 285


all, that they may be able to stand, for it is their
up-rightness, and after the soul put the counter-
feiting spirit.’

“Thus they give commandment to their ser-
vitors, that they may deposit it into the bodies
of the antitype. And following this fashion the
servitors of the rulers bring the power and the
soul and the counterfeiting spirit, bring them
down to the world, and pour [them] out into
the world of the rulers of the midst. The rulers
of the midst look after the counterfeiting spirit;
and also the destiny, whose name is Moira, leadeth
the man until it hath him slain through the death
appointed unto him, which the rulers of the great
Fate have bound to the soul. And the servitors
of the sphere bind the soul and the power and
the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny. And
they portion them all and make them into two
portions and seek after the man and also after
the woman in the world to whom they have
given signs, in order that they may | send them
into them. And they give one portion to the man
and one portion to the woman in a victual of
the world or in a breath of the air or in water or
in a kind which they drink.

“All this I will tell unto you and the species
of every soul and the type, how they enter into
the bodies, whether of men or of birds or of
cattle or of wild beasts or of reptiles or of all the
other species in the world. I will tell you their
type, in what type they enter into men; I will
tell it you at the expansion of the universe.

“Now, therefore, when the servitors of the
rulers cast the one portion into the woman and
the other into the man in the fashion which I


Of concep-
tion.


346.


Of the com-
position of
the parents.


Of the pro-
cess of ges-
tation.


347.


Of the in-
carnation of
the soul.


286 PISTIS SOPHIA


have told you, then the servitors secretly compel
them, even if they are removed at very great
distance from one another, so that they concert to
be in a concert of the world. And the counterfeit-
ing spirit which is in the man, cometh to the
portion which is entrusted to the world in the
matter of his body, and lifteth it and casteth
it down into the womb of the woman [into
the portion] which is entrusted to the seed of
wickedness.

“And in that hour the three-hundred-and-
sixty-and-five servitors of the rulers go into her
womb and take up their abode in it. The servitors
bring the two portions the one to the other, and
moreover the servitors withhold | the blood of all
the food of the woman which she will eat and
which she will drink, and they withhold [it] in the
womb of the woman up to forty days. And
after forty days they knead the blood of the power
of all the food and knead it well in the woman’s
womb.

“After forty days they spend another thirty
days in building its members in the image of the
body of the man; each buildeth a member. I
will tell you the decans who will build it [sc the
body]; I will tell them you at the expansion of
the universe.

“Tf then after this the servitors shall have com-
pleted the whole body and all its members in
seventy days, after this the servitors summon
into the body which they have built,—first indeed
they summon the counterfeiting spirit; thereafter
they summon the soul within them; and there-
after they summon the compound of the power
into the soul; and the destiny they put outside


FOURTH BOOK 287


them all, as it is not blended with them, [but]
following them and accompanying them.

“And after this the servitors seal them one
to the other with all the seals which the rulers
have given them. [And] they seal the day on
which they have taken up their abode in the womb
of the woman,-they seal [it] on the left hand | of
the plasm; and they seal the day on which they
have completed the body, on the right hand;
and they seal the day on which the rulers have
handed it over to them, on the middle of the skull
of the body of the plasm; and they seal the day
on which the soul hath come forth out of the
rulers, they seal it on the [left of] the skull of the
plasm; and they seal the day on which they
kneaded the members and separated them for
a soul, they seal it on the right of the skull of the
plasm; and the day on whieh they have bound
the counterfeiting spirit to it [the soul], they seal
on the back of the skull of the plasm; and the
day on which the rulers have breathed the power
into the body, they seal on the brain which is
in the midst of the head of the plasm and also
on the inside [? the heart] of the plasm; and the
number of years which the soul will spend in
the body, they seal on the forehead which is on
the plasm. And so they seal all those seals on
the plasm. I will tell you the names of all these
seals at the expansion of the universe; and after
the expansion of the universe I will tell you where-
for all hath come to pass. And, if ye could
understand it, I am that mystery.

“Now, therefore, the servitors complete the
whole man. And of all these seals with which
they have sealed the body, | the servitors carry the


Of the seal-
ing of the
plasm..


349.


Of the
destiny.


350.


Of how a
man cometh


by this death.


288 PISTIS SOPHIA


whole peculiarity and bring it to all the retributive
rulers who [ate] over all the chastisements of
the judgments; and these hand it over to their
receivers, in order that they may lead their
souls out of the bodies,—they hand over to them
the peculiarity of the seals, in order that they
may know the time when they are to lead the
souls out of the bodies, and in order that they
may know the time when they are to bring to
birth the body, so that they may send their ser-
vitors in order that they may draw near and follow
the soul and bear witness of all the sins it shall
do,—they and the counterfeiting  spirit—on
account of the manner and way, how they shall
chastize it in the judgment.

“And when the servitors have given the
peculiarity of the seals to the retributive rulers,
they withdraw themselves to the economy of
their occupations which is appointed unto them
through the rulers of the great Fate. And
when the number of months of the birth of the
babe is completed, the babe is born. Small in
it is the compound of the power, and small in it is
the soul; and small in it is the counterfeiting
spirit. The destiny on the contrary is large,
as it is not mingled into the body for their
economy, but followeth the soul | and the body
and the counterfeiting spirit, until the time when
the soul shall come forth out of the body, on
account of the type of death by which it shall
slay it [the body] according to the death appointed
for it by the rulers of the great Fate.

“Ts he to die by a wild beast, the destiny
leadeth the wild beast against him until it slay
him; or is he to die by a serpent, or is he to fall


FOURTH BOOK 289


into a pit by mischance, or is he to hang himself,
or is he to die in water, or through such [kinds of
death], or through another death which is worse
or better than this,—in a word, it is the destiny
which forceth his death upon him. This is the
occupation of the destiny, and it hath no other
occupation but this. And the destiny followeth
every man until the day of his death.”

Mary answered and said: “’To all men then CHap. 133.
who are in the world, will all which is appointed
them through the Fate, whether good or bad or
sin or death or life—in a word, will all which is
appointed them through the rulers of the Fate,
have to come unto them?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: There is no
“ Amén, I say unto you: All which is appointed ae
unto everyone through the Fate, whether all
good or all sins,—in a word, all which is appointed
them, cometh unto them.

“For this cause, therefore, have I brought | the 3s1.
keys of the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; capt
otherwise no flesh in the world would be saved. teties. ”
For without mysteries no one will enter into the
Light-kingdom, be he a righteous or a sinner.

“Bor this cause, therefore, have I brought the
keys of the mysteries into the world, that I may
free the sinners who shall have faith in me and
hearken unto me, so that I may free them from
the bonds and the seals of the zons of the rulers
and bind them to the seals and the vestures
and the orders of the Light, in order that he
whom I shall free in the world from the bonds and
the seals of the zons of the rulers, may be freed
in the Height from the bonds and seals of the
zons of the rulers, and in order that he whom I


352.


The mys-
teries are
for all men.


A ptophecy
of John the
Baptizer.


290 PISTIS SOPHIA


shall bind in the world to the seals and the vestures
and the orders of the Light, may be bound in the
Light-land to the orders of the inheritances of
the Light.

“For the sake of sinners, therefore, have I
torn myself asunder at this time and have brought
them the mysteries, that I may free them from the
eons of the rulers and bind them to the inherit-
ances of the Light, and not only the sinners, but
also the righteous, in order that I may give them
the mysteries and that they may be taken into
the Light, for without mysteries they cannot | be
taken into the Light.

“For this cause, therefore, I have not hidden
it, but I have cried it aloud clearly. And I have
not separated the sinners, but I have cried it
aloud and said it unto all men, unto sinners and
righteous, saying: ‘Seek that ye may find,
knock that it may be opened unto you; for
everyone who seeketh in truth, will find, and who
knocketh, to him it will be opened.’ For I have
said unto all men: They are to seek the mysteries
of the Light-kingdom which shall purify them and
make them refined and lead them into the Light.

“For this cause, therefore, hath John the
Baptizer prophesied concerning me, saying: ‘I
indeed have baptized you with water unto repent-
ance for forgiveness of your sins. He who
cometh after me, is stronger than me. Whose
fan is in his hand, and he will purify his floor.
The chaff indeed he will consume with un-
quenchable fire, but the wheat he will gather into
his barn.’ The power in John hath prophesied
concerning me, knowing that I would bring the
mysteries into the world and purify the sins of


FOURTH BOOK 291


the sinners who shall have faith in me and hearken
unto me, and make them into refined light and
lead them into the Light.”

When then Jesus had said this, Mary answered CHAP. 134.
and said: “ My Lord, if men go to seek and they
come upon the doctrines of error, | whence then 382.
are they to know whether they belong to thee
or not?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Marty: The ctite-
“JT have said unto you aforetime: ‘Be ye as aares
skilful money-changers. Take the good, throw
the bad away.’

“Now, therefore, say unto all men who would
seek the godhead: ‘If north wind cometh,
then ye know that there will be cold; if south
wind cometh, then ye know that there will be
burning and fervent heat.’ Now, therefore, say
unto them: ‘If ye have known the face of the
heaven and of the earth from the winds, then
know ye exactly, if then any come now unto you
and proclaim unto you a godhead, whether their
words have harmonized and fitted with all your
words which I have spoken unto you through two
up to three witnesses, and whether they have har-
monized in the setting of the air and of the
heavens and of the circuits and of the stars and
of the light-givers and of the whole earth and all
on it and of all waters and all in them.’ Say
unto them: ‘Those who shall come unto you,
and their words fit and harmonize in the whole
gnosis with that which I have said unto you, I
will recetve as belonging unto us.’ This is what
ye shall say unto men, if ye make proclamation
unto them in order that they may guard them-
selves from the doctrines of error. |


384.


The Books
of Yew.


Few only


will accom-


plish the
mystery of
the First
Mystery.
355.


292 PISTIS SOPHIA


“Now, therefore, for the sake of sinners have
I rent myself asunder and am come into the
world, that I may save them. For even for the
righteous, who have never done any evil and have
not sinned at all, it is necessary that they should
find the mysteries which are in the Books of Yew,
which I have made Enoch write in Paradise,
discoursing with him out of the tree of the Gnosis
and out of the tree of the Life. And I made him
deposit them in the rock Ararad, and set the ruler
Kalapatauroth, who is over Skemmut, on whose
head is the foot of Yew, and who surroundeth all
eons and Fates,—I set up that ruler as watcher
ovet the Books of Yew on account of the flood,
and in order that none of the rulers may be envious
of them and destroy them. These will I give you,
when I shall have told you the expansion of the
universe.”

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary
answered and said: “My Lord, who now then
is the man in the world who hath not sinned at
all, who is pure of iniquities? or if he is pure
of one, he will not be able to be pure of another,
so that he may find the mysteries which are in the
Books of Yew? For I say: A man in this world
will not be able to be pure of sins; for if he is
pure of one, he will not be able to be pure of
another.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“T say unto you: They will find one in a thousand
and two in ten-thousand for the accomplishment |
of the mystery of the First Mystery. This will
I tell unto you when I have explained to you the
expansion of the universe. For this cause, there-
fore, I have rent myself asunder and have brought


FOURTH BOOK 293


the mysteries into the world, because all are under
sin and all are in need of the gift of the mysteries.”

Mary answered and said unto the Saviour:
“My Lord, before thou didst come to the region
of the rulers and before thou didst come down
into the world, hath no soul entered into the
Light?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary:
“ Amén, amen, I say unto you: Before I did come
into the world, no soul hath entered into the
Light. And now, therefore, when I am come,
I have opened the gates of the Light and opened
the ways which lead to the Light. And now, there-
fore, let him who shall do what is worthy of the
mysteries, receive the mysteries and enter into
the Light.”

Mary continued and said: “But, my Lord,
I have heard that the prophets have entered into
the Light.”

The Saviour continued and said unto Mary:
“Amen, amén, I say unto you: No prophet hath
entered into the Light; but the rulers of the zons
have discoursed with them out of the zons and
given them the mystery of the zons. And when
came to the regions of the zons, I have turned
Elias and sent him into the body of John the
Baptizer, and the rest also I turned into righteous
bodies, which will find the mysteries | of the Light,
go on high and inherit the Light-kingdom.

“Unto Abraham on the other hand and Isaac
and Jacob I have forgiven all their sins and their
iniquities and have given them the mysteries
of the Light in the zons and placed them in the
region of Yabraoth and of all the rulers who have
repented. And when I go into the Height and


CHAP. 135.


No soul had
entered into
the Light
before the
coming of
the First
Mystery.


Of the
prophets.


Ww


56.


Of the
patriarchs.


Of the souls
of the right-
eous from
Adam to


Jesus.


357.


The dis-
ciples know
of a surety
that Jesus is
the Great
Initiator.


294 PISTIS SOPHIA


am on the point of going into the Light, I will
carry their souls with me into the Light. But,
amén, I say unto you, Mary: They will not go
into the Light before I have carried thy soul and
those of all thy brethren into the Light.

“The rest of the patriarchs and of the righteous
from the time of Adam unto now, who ate in the
eons and all the orders of the rulers, when I
came to the region of the zons, I have through
the Virgin of Light made to turn into bodies
which will all be righteous,—those which will
find the mysteries of the Light, enter in and in-
herit the Light-kingdom.”

Mary answered and said: “Blessed are we
before all men because of these splendours which
thou hast revealed unto us.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary
and all the disciples: “I will still reveal unto
you all the splendours of the Height, from the
interiors of the interiors to the exteriors of the
exteriors, | that ye may be perfected in all gnosis
and in all fulness and in the height of the heights
and the depths of the depths.”

And Mary continued and said to the Saviour:
“To, my Lord, we have openly; exactly and
clearly known that thou hast brought the keys
of the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, which
forgive souls sins and purify them and make
them into refined light and lead them into the
Light.”


[SUB-SCRIPTION: |
A PORTION OF THE BOOKS OF THE SAVIOUR


A FIFTH BOOK


IT came to pass then, when Jesus our Lord had cnap. 138.
been crucified and had risen from the dead on Ge uke
the third day, that his disciples gathered round round
round. him, adored him and said: “ Our Lord, have ‘““*
mercy upon us, for we have abandoned father and

mother and the whole world and have followed

thee:*

At that time Jesus stood with his disciples on The invo-
the water of the Ocean and made invocation with jo. =
this prayer, saying: “Hear me, my Father,
father of all fatherhood, boundless Light: aeézou0 ia0
aot dia ~—sipsinother thernops  nopsither xagoureé
pagouré nethmomaoth  nepsiomadth  marachachtha
thobarrabau tharnachachan zorokothora ieou |= Yeu]
sabaoth.”

And while Jesus said this, | Thomas, Andrew, 358.
James and Simon the Cananite were in the west ie
with their faces turned towards the east, and disciples.
Philip and Bartholomew were in the south turned
towards the north, and the rest of the disciples
and the women-disciples stood back of Jesus.

But Jesus stood at the altar.

And Jesus made invocation, turning himself The inter-
towatds the four corners of the world with his Prer°!
disciples, who were all clad in linen garments,
and saying: “7zao iad iad.’ ‘This is its inter-
pretation: 7dfa, because the universe hath gone


295


He continu-
eth to make
invocation.


The apoca-
lypse of the


heavens.


359.


The figures
of the disk
of the sun
and of the


moon.


296 PISTIS SOPHIA


forth; a/pha, because it will turn itself back
again; omega, because the completion of all the
completeness will take place.

And when Jesus had said this, he said: “ zaphtha
taphtha mounaer mounaér ermanouér  ermanouer.”
That is: “ O father of all fatherhood of the bound-
less [spaces], hear me for the sake of my disciples
whom I have led before thee, that they may have
faith in all the words of thy truth, and grant all
for which I shall invoke thee; for I know
the name of the father of the Treasury of the
Light.”

Again did Jesus,—that is Aberamentho,—
make invocation, speaking the name of the father
of the Treasury of the Light, and said: “ Let all
the mysteries of the rulers and the authorities
and the angels and the archangels and all powers
and | all things of the invisible god Agram-
machamarei and Barbelo draw near the Leech
[BdellaJ on one side and withdraw to the right.”

And in that hour all the heavens went to the
west, and all the zons and the sphere and their
rulers and all their powers flew together to the
west to the left of the disk of the sun and the
disk of the moon.

And the disk of the sun was a great dragon
whose tail was in his mouth and who reached
to seven powers of the Left and whom four powers
in the form of white horses drew.

And the base of the moon had the type of a ship
which a male and a female dragon steered and
two white bulls drew. The figure of a babe was
on the stern of the moon who guided the dragons
who robbed the light from the rulers. And on
its prow was a cat’s face.


FIFTH BOOK 297


And the whole world and the mountains and
the seas fled together to the west to the left.

And Jesus and his disciples remained in the Jesus and
midst in an aéry region on the ways of the way eee
of the midst, which lieth below the sphere. And St
they came to the first order of the way of the of the of the midst.
midst. And Jesus stood in the air of its region
with his disciples.

The disciples of Jesus said unto him: “ What
is this region | in which we are?” 360.

Jesus said: “These are the regions of the way ofthe re-
of the midst. For it came to pass, when the eae
rulers of Adamas mutinied and persistently ™e.
practised congress, procreating rulers, archangels,
angels, servitors and decans, that Yew, the father
of my father, came forth from the Right and bound
them to a Fate-sphere.

“Bor there are twelve zons; over six Sabaoth,
the Adamas, ruleth, and his brother Yabraoth
tuleth over the other six. At that time then
Yabraoth with his rulers had faith in the
mysteries of the Light and was active in the
mysteries of the Light and abandoned the mystery
of congress. But Sabaoth, the Adamas, and his
rulers have persisted in the practice of congress.

“And when Yew, the father of my father, saw
that Yabradth had faith, he carried him and all
the rulers who had had faith with him, took him
unto himself out of the sphere and led him into
a purified air in face of the light of the sun between
the regions of those of the midst and between [?]
the regions of the invisible god. He posted
him there with the rulers who had had faith
in him.

“ But he carried Sabaoth, the Adamas, and his


298 PISTIS SOPHIA


rulers who had not been active in the mysteries
of the Light, but have been persistently active
in the mysteries of congress, and inbound them
into the sphere.
Of the “He bound eighteen-hundred rulers in every
herchies eon, and set three-hundred-and-sixty | over them,


repentant and he set five other great rulers as lords over the


rulers and


fearmean three-hundred-and-sixty and over all the bound
regents. | tulers, who in the whole world of mankind are
201: called with these names: the first is called
Kronos, the second Arés, the third Hermés, the
fourth Aphrodite, the fifth Zeus.”
CHAP. 137. Jesus continued and said: “Hearken then,
Of the that I may tell you their mystery. It came to
powers whPoass then, when Yew had thus bound them,
ee fve that he drew forth a power out of the great In-
visible and bound it to him who is called Kronos.
And he drew another power out of Ipsantachoun-
chainchoucheoch, who is one of the three triple-
powered gods, and bound it to Ares. And he drew
a power out of Chainchoodch, who also is one of
the three triple-powered gods, and bound it to
Hermés. Again he drew a power out of the
Pistis, the Sophia, daughter of Barbelo, and
bound it to Aphrodite.
Ofthefune- “* And moreover he perceived that they needed
Ssegtie a helm to steer the world and the exons of the
chief regent. sohere, so that they might not wreck it [the world]
in their wickedness. He went into the Midst,
drew forth a power out of the little Sabaoth, the
Good, him of the Midst, and bound it to Zeus,
because he is a good [regent], so that he may steer
them in his goodness. And he set thus estab-
362. lished the circling of his order, | that he should


spend thirteen [? three] months in every zon,


FIFTH BOOK 299


confirming [it], so that he may set free all the
rulers over whom he cometh, from the evil of
their wickedness. And he gave him two eons,
which ate in face of those of Hermés, for his
dwelling.

“T have told you for the first time the names The incorrup-
of these five great rulers with which the men of "7m
the world are wont to call them. Hearken now 8:
then that I may tell you also their incorruptible
names, which are: Orimouth correspondeth to
Kronos; Mounichounaphor correspondeth to
Ares; Tarpetanouph correspondeth to Hermes;

Chosi correspondeth to Aphrodite; Chonbal cor-
respondeth to Zeus. These are their incorrup-
tible names.”

And when the disciples had heard this, they CHap. 138.
fell down, adored Jesus and said: “Blessed are
we beyond all men, because thou hast revealed
unto us these great wonders.”

They continued, besought him and said: “We
beseech thee, reveal unto us: What are then these
ways?”

And Mary drew nigh unto him, fell down, Mary ques-
adored his feet and kissed his hands and said: Deere
“Yea, my Lord reveal unto us: What is the wasofthe
use of the ways of the midst? For we have heard
from thee that they are set over great chastise-
ments. How then, my Lord, will we remove
or escape from them? Or in what way do they
seize the souls? Or | how long a time do they 363.
spend in their chastisements? Have mercy upon
us, out Lord, our Saviour, in order that the re-
ceivers of the judgments of the ways of the midst
may not carry off our souls and judge us in their
evil judgments, so that we ourselves may inherit


Of the mys-
teries which
Jesus will
give unto


his disciples.


364.


CHAP. 139.


300 PISTIS SOPHIA


the Light of thy father and not be wretched and
destitute of thee.”

When then Mary said this weeping, Jesus
answered in great compassion and said unto them:
“Truly, my brethren and beloved, who have
abandoned father and mother for my name’s sake,
unto you will I give all mysteries and all gnoses.

“T will give you the mystery of the twelve
eons of the rulers and their seals and_ their
ciphers and the manner of invocation for reach-
ing their regions.

“T will give you moreover the mystery of the
thirteenth zon and the manner of invocation
for reaching their regions, and I will give you their
ciphers and their seals.

“And I will give you the mystery of the bap-
tism of those of the Midst and the manner of in-
vocation for reaching their regions, and I will
announce unto you their ciphers and their seals.

“And I will give you the baptism of those of
the Right, our region, and its ciphers and its
seals and the manner of invocation for reaching
thither.

“And I will give you the great mystery of
the Treasury of the Light and | the manner of
invocation for reaching thither.

“JT will give you all the mysteries and all the
enoses, in order that ye may be called ‘ children
of the fulness, perfected in all the gnoses and all
the mysteries.’ Blessed are ye beyond all men
on earth, for the children of the Light are come
in your time.”

Jesus continued in the discourse and said:
“Tt came to pass then thereafter, that the father
of my father,—that is Yew,—came and_ took


FIFTH BOOK 301


other three-hundred-and-sixty rulers from the
rulers of Adamas who had not had faith in the
mystery of the Light, and bound them into these
aérial regions, in which we are now, below the
sphere. He established another five great rulers
over them,—that is these who are on the way of
the midst.

“The first ruler of the way of the midst is
called Paraplex, a ruler with a woman’s shape,
whose hair reacheth down to her feet, under whose
authority stand  five-and-twenty archdemons
which rule over a multitude of other demons.
And it is those demons which enter into men
and seduce them, raging and cursing and slander-
ing; and it is they which carry off hence and in
ravishment the souls and dispatch them through
their dark smoke and their evil chastisements.”

Mary said: | “I shall behave badly to question
thee. Be not wroth with me if I question on
all things.”

Jesus said: “ Question what thou wilt.”

Mary said: “ My Lord, reveal unto us in what
manner they carry off hence the souls in ravish-
ment, that also my brethren may understand it.”

Jesus,—that is Aberamentho,—said: “ Since
indeed the father of my father,—that is Yew,—
is the fore-minder of all the rulers, gods and
powers who have arisen out of the matter of the
Light of the Treasury, and Zorokothora Melchise-
dec is the envoy to all the lights which are purified
in the rulers, leading them into the Treasury of the
Light,—these two alone are the great Lights,
and their ordinance is that they down go to the
rulers and purify them, and that Zorokothora
Melchisedec carrieth away the purification of


Of the con-
stitution of
the way of
the midst.


Of Paraplex


365.


Of Yew and
Melchisedec.


366.


How the
demon
rulers carry
off souls.


The chastise-
ments of
Paraplex.


302 PISTIS SOPHIA


the lights which they have purified in the rulers
and leadeth them into the Treasury of the Light,
—when the cipher and the time of their ordinance
cometh, that they go down to the rulers and
oppress and constrain them, carrying a way the
purification from the rulers.

“But straightway when they shall cease from
the oppressing and constraining and return to the
regions of the Treasury of the Light, it cometh
to pass that, if they reach the regions of the Midst,
Zorokothora Melchisedec carrieth off the lights
and leadeth them unto | the gate of those of the
Midst and leadeth them into the Treasury of the
Light, and that Yew withdraweth himself into the
regions of those of the Right.

“Up to the time of the cipher for them to
come forth again, the rulers mutiny through the
wrath of their wickedness, going straight way up
to the lights, because they [Yew and Melchisedec]
are not with them at that time, and they carry
off the souls which they may be able to snatch
away in tavishment, and destroy them through
their dark smoke and their evil fire.

“At that time then this authority, with name
Paraplex, along with the demons which stand
under her, carrieth off the souls of the violently
passionate, of cursers and of slanderers and dis-
patcheth them through the dark smoke and
destroyeth them through her evil fire, so that
they begin to be undone and dissolved. One-
hundred - and - thirty - and - three years and nine
months do they spend in the chastisements of her
regions, while she tormenteth them in the fire of
her wickedness.

“Tt cometh to pass then after all these times,


FIFTH BOOK 303


when the sphere turneth itself and the little
Sabaoth, Zeus, cometh to the first of the zons
of the sphere, which is called in the world the
Ram of Boubastis, that is of Aphrodité; [and]
when she [Boubastis] cometh to the seventh
house of the sphere, that is to the Balance, then
the veils which are between those of the Right
and those of the Left, draw themselves aside,
and there looketh from the height out of those
of the Right the | great Sabaoth, the Good; and
the whole world and the total sphere [become
alarmed] before he hath looked forth. And he
looketh down on the regions of Paraplex, so t.hat
her regions may be dissolved and perish. And
all the souls which ate in her chastisements, are
carried and cast back [up] into the sphere anew,
because they are ruined in the chastisements of
Paraplex.”

“ He continued in the discourse and said: “The
second order is called Ariouth the Ethiopian, a
female ruler, who is entirely black, under whom
stand fourteen other [arch] demons which tule
over a multitude of other demons. And it is
those demons which stand under Ariouth the
“Ethiopian, that enter into strife-seekers unti Ithey
stir up wars and murders arise, and they harden
their heart and seduce it to wrath in order that
murders may arise.

“And the souls which this authority will carry
off in ravishment, pass one-hundred-and-thirteen
yeats in her regions, while she tormenteth them
through her dark smoke and her wicked fire so
that they come nigh unto destruction.

“And thereafter, when the sphere turneth it-
self, and the little Sabaoth, the Good, who is called


CHAP. 140.
Of Ariouth the


Ethiopian.


368.


Of Triple-
faced
Hekate.


369.


304 PISTIS SOPHIA


in the world Zeus, cometh, and he cometh to the
fourth AZon of the sphere, that is the Crab, and
Boubastis, who is called in the world Aphrodite,
cometh into the tenth on of the sphere which is
called the | Goat, at that time the veils which
ate between those of the Left and those of the
Right, draw themselves aside, and Yew looketh
forth to the right; the whole world becometh
alarmed and is agitated together with all the ons
of the sphere. And he looketh on the dwellings of
Ariouth the Ethiopian, so that her regions
ate dissolved and ruined, and all the souls which
are in her chastisements are carried off and cast
back into the sphere anew, because they are ruined
through her dark smoke and her wicked fire.”

He continued further in his discourse and
said: “The third order is called Triple-faced
Hekate, and there are under her authority
seven-and-twenty [arch]demons, and it is they
which enter into men and seduce them to per-
juries and lies and to covet that which doth not
belong to them.

“The souls then which Hekate beareth hence
in ravishment, she handeth over to her demons
which stand under her, in order that they may
torment them through her dark smoke and her
wicked fire, they being exceedingly afflicted
through the demons. And they spend one-
hundred-and-five years and six months, being
chastized in her wicked chastisements; and they
begin to be dissolved and destroyed.

“And thereafter, when the sphere turneth
itself, and the little Sabaoth, the Good, he of the
Midst, who is called in the world Zeus, cometh,
and he cometh to the | eighth Zon of the sphere


FIFTH BOOK 305


which is called the Scorpion, and when Bou-
bastis, whom they call Aphrodite, cometh, and
she cometh to the second zon of the sphere which
is called the Bull, then the veils which are between
those of the Right and those of the Left draw
themselves aside and Zorokothora Melchisedec
looketh out of the height; and the world and the
mountains are agitated and the zons become
alarmed. And he looketh on all .the regions of
Hekate, so that her regions are dissolved and
destroyed, and all the souls which are in her chas-
tisements, ate carried off and cast back anew into
the sphere, because they are dissolved in the fire of
her chastisements.”

He continued and said: “The fourth order
is called Parhedron Typhon, who is a mighty
ruler, under whose authority are two-and-thirty
demons. And it is they which enter into men
and seduce them to lusting, fornicating, adultery
and to the continual practice of intercourse. The
souls then which this ruler will carry off in ravish-
ment, pass one-hundred - and - twenty - and - eight
years in his regions, while his demons torment
them through his dark smoke and his wicked fire,
so that they begin to be ruined and destroyed.

“Tt cometh to pass then, when the sphere
turneth itself and the little Sabaoth, | the Good,
he of the Midst, who is called Zeus, cometh, and
when he cometh to the ninth zon of the sphere
which is called the Archer, and when Boubastis,
who is called in the world Aphrodite, corneth,
and she cometh to the third zon of the sphere
which is called the Twins, then the veils which are
between those of the Left and those of the
Right, draw themselves aside, and there looketh


Of Parhedron
Typhon.


370.


Of Yacthan-


abas.


371.


306 PISTIS SOPHIA


forth Zarazaz, whom the frulers call with the
name of a mighty ruler of their regions *‘ Maskelli,’
and he looketh on the dwellings of Parhedron
Typhon, so that his regions are dissolved and
destroyed. And all the souls which are in his
chastisements are carried and cast back anew into
the sphere, because they are reduced through his
dark smoke and his wicked fire.”

Again he continued in the discourse and said
unto this disciples: “The fifth order, whose ruler
is called Yachthanabas, is a mighty ruler under
whom standeth a multitude of other demons.
It is they which enter into men and bring it
about that they have respect of persons,—
treating the just with injustice, and favour the
cause of sinners, taking gifts for a just judgment
and perverting it, forgetting the poor and needy,
—they [the demons] increasing the forgetfulness
in their souls and the care for that which |
bringeth no benefit, in order that they may not
think of their life, so that when they come out
of the body, they are carried in ravishment.

“The souls then which this ruler will carry
off in ravishment, are in his chastisements one-
hundred-and-fifty years and. eight months; and
he destroyeth them through his dark smoke and
his wicked fire, while they are exceedingly afflicted
through the flames of his fire.

“And when the sphere turneth itself and the
little Sabaoth, the Good, who is called in the world
Zeus, cometh, and he cometh to the eleventh
zon of the sphere which is called the Water-man,
and when Boubastis cometh to the fifth zon of
the sphere which is called the Lion, then the veils
which are between those of the Left and those


FIFTH BOOK 307


of the Right, draw themselves aside, and there
looketh out of the height the great Iao, the
Good, he of the Midst, on the regions of Yach-
thanabas, so that his regions are dissolved and
destroyed. And all the souls which are in his
chastisements are carried off and cast back anew
into the sphere, because they are ruined in his
chastisements.

“These then are the doings of the ways of the
midst concerning which ye have questioned me.”

And when the disciples had heard this, they CHapP. 141.
fell down, adored him and said: "Help us now, av eee
Lord, and have mercy upon us, in order that Jesus to have
we may be preserved from these wicked chastise- Ynnes.
ments which are prepared for the sinners. Woe |
unto them, woe unto the children of men! For 372.
they grope as the blind in the darkness and see
not. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, in this
great blindness in which we are. And have
mercy upon the whole race of men; for they
have lain in wait for their souls, as lions for their
ptey, making it [sc. the prey] ready as food for
their [sc. the rulers’] chastisements because of the
forgetfulness and unknowing which is in them.

Have mercy then upon us, our Lord, our Saviour,
have metcy upon us and save us in this great
stupefaction.”

Jesus said unto his disciples: “ Be comforted and Jesus en-
be not afraid, for ye ate blessed, because See
I will make you lords over all these and put
them in subjection under your feet. Remember
that I have already said unto you before I was
crucified: ‘I will give you the keys of the
kingdom of heaven.’ Now, therefore, I say unto
you: I will give them unto you.”


Jesus and
his disciples
ascend
higher.


He breath-
eth into
their eyes.


373.


Their eyes
are opened.


Jesus ex-
plaineth the
vision of fire,
and water,
and wine,


and blood.


308 PISTIS SOPHIA


When then Jesus said this, he chanted a song
of praise in the great name. The regions of the
ways of the midst hid themselves, and Jesus
and his disciples remained in an air of exceedingly


strong light.
Jesus said unto his disciples: “ Draw near
unto me.” And they drew near unto him.


He turned himself towards the four corners
of the world, said the great name over their
heads, blessed them and breathed into their
eyes.

Jesus said unto them: “Look up and_ see
what ye may see.”

And they raised their eyes and saw a | great,
exceedingly mighty light, which no man in the
world can describe.

He said unto them anew: “Look away out
of the light and see what ye may see.”

They said: “We see fire, water, wine and
blood.”

Jesus,—that is Aberamentho,—said unto his
disciples: “Amén, I say unto you: I have
brought nothing into the world when I came,
save this fire, this water, this wine and this blood.
I have brought the water and the fire out of the
region of the Light of the lights of the Treasury
of the Light; and I have brought the wine and
the blood out of the region of Barbelo. And
after a little while my father sent me the holy
spirit in the type of a dove.

“And the fire, the water and the wine are for
the purification of all the sins of the world. The
blood on the other hand was for a sign unto me
because of the human body which I received in
the region of Barbelo, the great power of the


FIFTH BOOK 309


invisible god. The breath on the other hand
advanceth towards all souls and leadeth them
unto the region of the Light.

“For this cause have I said unto you: ‘I
am come to cast fite on the earth,—that is: I
am come to purify the sins of the whole world
with fire.

“And for this cause have I said to the Samari-
tan woman: ‘If thou knewest of the gift of
God, and who it is who saith unto thee: Give
me to drink,—thou wouldst ask, and he would
give thee | living water, and there would be in
thee a spring which welleth up for everlasting
life.’

“And for this cause I took also a cup of
wine, blessed it and give it unto you and said:
“This is the blood of the covenant which will
be poured out for you for the forgiveness of
your sins.’

“And for this cause they have also thrust the
spear into my side, and there came forth water
and blood.

“ And these are the mysteries of the Light which
forgive sins; that is to say, these are the namings
and the names of the Light.”


The same
explained
from former
sayings.


It came to pass then thereafter that Jesus Jesus and


gave command: “Let all the powers of the Left
go to their regions.’ And Jesus with his dis-
ciples remained on the Mount of Galilee. The
disciples continued and besought him: “ For how
long then hast thou not let our sins which we
have committed, and our iniquities be forgiven
and made us worthy of the kingdom of thy
father?”

And Jesus said unto them: “Amen, I say


his disciples
descend to
earth.


Jesus pro-
miseth to
give them
the mystery
of the for-
giveness of
sins.


CHAP. 142.


375.
Thy mystic
offering.


The invoca-
tion.


310 PISTIS SOPHIA


unto you: Not only will I purify your sins, but
I will make you worthy of the kingdom of my
father. And I will give you the mystery of the
forgiveness of sins, in order that to him whom ye
shall forgive on earth, it will be forgiven in heaven,
and he whom ye shall bind on earth, will be
bound in heaven. I will give you the mystery
of the kingdom of heaven, in order that ye your-
selves may perform them [sc the mysteries] for
men.”

And Jesus | said unto them: “Bring me fire
and vine branches.” They brought them unto
him. He laid out the offering, and set down two
wine-vessels, one on the right and the other on
the left of the offering. He disposed the offering
before them, and set a cup of water before the
wine-vessel on the right and set a cup of wine
before the wine-vessel on the left, and laid loaves
according to the number of the disciples in the
middle between the cups and set a cup of water
behind the loaves.

Jesus stood before the offering, set the disciples
behind him, all clad with linen garments, and in
their hands the cipher of the name of the father
of the Treasury of the Light, and he made in-
vocation thus, saying: “Hear me, O Father,
father of all fatherhood, boundless Light: 7aé
Zoud iad adi dia psinother theropsin  opsither
nephthomaoth nephiomadth marachachtha marmar-
achtha tana menaman amanéi (of heaven) israi
amen améen soubaibai appaap amén améin deraarai
(behind) amén amén  sasarsarton amén  amén
koukiamin miai amén amen tai iai touap ameén
amen amen main mart marié maret amen amen
amen.


FIFTH BOOK 311


“ Hear me, O Father, father of all fatherhood.
I invoke you yourselves, ye forgivers of sins,
ye purifiers of iniquities. | Forgive the sins of 376.
the souls of these disciples who have followed
me, and purify their iniquities and make them
worthy to be reckoned with the kingdom of my
father, the father of the Treasury of the Light,
for they have followed me and have kept my
commandments.

“Now, therefore, O Father, father of all
fatherhood, let the forgivers of sins come, whose
mames ate these: séphirepsnichieu zenei berimou
sochabrichér euthari na nai (have mercy upon me)
dieisbalméerich meunipos chirie entair mouthiour
smour peuchér oouschous minionor isochobortha.

"Hear me, invoking you, forgive the sins of
these souls and blot out their iniquities. Let
them be worthy to be reckoned with the kingdom
of my father, the father of the Treasury of the
Light.

“T know thy great powers and invoke them:
auér bebro athroni & oureph &€ one souphen knitou-
sochreoph  mauonbi mneuor souoni  chocheteoph
choche eteoph memoch anémph.

“Forgive [simg] the sins of these souls, blot
out their iniquities which they have knowingly
and unknowingly committed, which they have
committed in fornication and adultery unto this
day; forgive them then and make them worthy
to be reckoned with the kingdom of my father, so
that they are worthy to receive of this offering,
holy Father.

“Tf thou then, Father, hast heard me and for-
given the sins of these souls | and blotted out 377.
their iniquities, and hast made them worthy to


The rite is
consum-
mated.


Directions
as to the

future use
of the rite.


CHAP. 143.


Of three
other mystic
rites.


378.


312 PISTIS SOPHIA


be reckoned with thy kingdom, may est thou give
me a sign in this offering.”

And the sign which Jesus had said [? besought|
happened.

Jesus said unto his disciples: “ Rejoice and
exult, for your sins are forgiven and your ini-
quities blotted out, and ye are reckoned with the
kingdom of my father.”

And when he said this, the disciples rejoiced in
great joy.

Jesus said unto them: “This is the manner
and way and this is the mystery which ye are to
perform for the men who have faith in you,
in whom is no deceit and who hearken unto you
in all good words. And their sins and_ their
iniquities will be blotted out up to the day on
which ye have performed for them this mystery.
But hide this mystery and give it not unto all
men, but unto him who shall do all the things
which I have said unto you in my commandments.

“This then is the mystery in truth of the
baptism for those whose sins are forgiven and
whose iniquities are blotted out. This is the
baptism of the first offering which showeth the
way to the region of Truth and to the region of
the Light.”

Thereafter his disciples said unto him: “ Rabbi,
reveal unto us the mystery of the Light of thy
father, since we heard thee say: ‘There is still
a fire-baptism and there is still a baptism of the
holy spirit of the Light, and there is | a spiritual
chrism; these lead the souls into the Treasury
of the Light.’ Tell us, therefore, their mystery,
so that we ourselves may inherit the kingdom of
thy father.”


FIFTH BOOK 313


Jesus said unto them: “There is no mystery of the high-
which is more excellent than these mysteries on ‘iced
which ye question, in that it will lead your souls ofthe sre
into the Light of the lights, into the regions of
Truth and Goodness, into the region of the Holy
of all holies, into the region in which there is
neither female nor male, nor are there forms in
that region, but a perpetual indescribable Light.
Nothing more excellent is there, therefore, than
these mysteries on which ye question, save only
the mystery of the seven Voices and their nine-
and-forty powers and their ciphers. And there
is no name which is more excellent than them all,
the name in which are all names and all lights
and all powers.

“Who then knoweth that name, if he cometh of the
out of the body of matter, nor smoke nor darkness oe
nor authority nor ruler of the Fate-sphere nor
angel nor archangel nor power can hold down the
soul which knoweth that name; but if it cometh
out of the world and sayeth that name to the
fire, it is quenched and the darkness withdraweth.

“And if it sayeth it to the demons | and to 379.
the receivers of the outer darkness and their rulers
and their authorities and their powers, they will
all sink down and their flame will burn and they
will cry out: ‘Holy, holy art thou, most holy
of all holies.’

“And if one sayeth that name to the receivers
of the wicked chastisements and their authorities
and all their powers and also to Barbelo and the
invisible god and the three triple-powered gods,
straightway if one will say this name in those
regions, they will all fall one on another, will
be undone and destroyed and cry out: ‘O Light


314 PISTIS SOPHIA


of all lights, which is in the boundless lights,
remember us and purify us.’ ”

And when Jesus had finished saying these
words, all his disciples cried out, wept with loud
sobbing, saying: . . .


[LACUNA OF EIGHT LEAVES.]


A SIXTH BOOK


. [and lead them- forth to the fire-rivers CHAP. 144.
and fire-seas] and take vengeance on it therein Of the chas
for another six months and eight days. There- the curser.
after they lead it up on the way of the midst,
and everyone of the rulers of the way of the
midst chastizeth it in his chastisements another
six months and eight days. Thereafter they lead
it to the Virgin of Light, who judgeth the good
and the evil, that she may judge it. And when
the sphere turneth itself, she handeth it over to
her receivers, that they may cast it into the
eons of the sphere. And the servitors of the
sphere lead it forth to a water which is below
the sphere; and it becometh | a seething fire 380.
and eateth into it, until it purifieth it utterly.

“And then cometh Yaluham, the receiver of
Sabaoth, the Adamas, who handeth the souls the
cup of forgetfulness, and he bringeth a cup filled
with the water of forgetfulness and handeth
it to the soul, and it drinketh it and forgetteth
all regions and all the regions to which it hath
gone. And they cast it down into a body which
will spend its time continually troubled in its
heart.

“This is the chastisement of the curser.”

Mary continued and said: “My Lord, the man


315


Of the chas-
tisement of
the slanderer.


381.


316 PISTIS SOPHIA


who persistently slandereth, if he cometh out
of the body, whither shall he get or what is his
chastisement?”’

Jesus said: “ A man who persistently slandereth,
if his time is completed through the sphere, that
he cometh out of the body, then Abiout and
Charmon, the teceivers of Ariél, come, lead his
soul out of the body and spend three days going
round with it and instructing it concerning the
creatures of the world.

“Thereafter they lead it below into Amente
before Ariél, and he chastizeth it in his chas-
tisements eleven months and_ twenty-and-one
days.

“Thereafter they lead it into the chaos before
Yaldabaoth and his forty-and-nine demons, and
everyone of his demons fall upon it another
eleven months and twenty-and-one days, scourg-
ing it with fiery whips.

“Thereafter | they lead it into fire-rivers
and boiling fire-seas, to take vengeance on it
therein another eleven months and twenty-and-
one days.

“And thereafter they carry it on to the way
of the midst, and everyone of the rulers on the
way of the midst chastizeth it in his chastise-
ments another eleven months and twenty-and-
one days.

“Thereafter they carry it to the Virgin of
Light, who judgeth the righteous and the sinners,
that she may judge it. And when the sphere
turneth itself, she handeth it over to her receivers,
that they may cast it into the AZons of the sphere.
And the servitors of the sphere will lead it to a
water which is below the sphere; and it becometh


SIXTH BOOK 317


a seething fire and eateth into it until it purifieth
it utterly.

“And Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaoth, the
Adamas, bringeth the cup of forgetfulness and
handeth it to the soul, and it drinketh it and
forgetteth all regions and all things and all the
regions through which it hath gone. And they
deliver it unto a body which will spend its time
being affiicted.

“ This is the chastisement of the slanderer.”

Mary said: “ Woe, woe, unto sinners!”

Salome answered and said: "My Lord Jesus,
a murderer who hath never committed any sin
but murdering, if he cometh out of the body,
what is his chastisement?”

Jesus answered and said: “A murderer who
hath never committed any sin but murdering, if
his time is completed through the sphere, that he
cometh out of the body, the receivers of Yalda-
baoth come and lead his soul out of the body
and bind it by its feet to a great demon with a
horse’s face, and he spendeth three days circling
round with it in the world.

“Thereafter they lead it into the regions of
the cold and of the snow, and they take vengeance
on it there three years and six months.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the chaos
before Yaldabaoth and his forty-and-nine demons,
and everyone of his demons scourgeth it another
three years and six months.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the chaos
before Persephoné and take vengeance on it with
her chastisements another three years and six
months.

“Thereafter they carry it on to the way of


CHAP. 145.


Of the chas-
tisement of
the mur-
derer.


382.


CHAP 146.
383.

Peter pro-
testeth
against the
women.


Of the chas-
tisement of


the thief.


318 PISTIS SOPHIA


the midst, and everyone of the rulers of the way
of the midst taketh vengeance on it with the chas-
tisements of its regions another three years and
six months.

“Thereafter they lead it unto the Virgin of
Light, who judgeth the righteous and the sinners,
that she may judge it. And when the sphere
turneth itself, she commandeth that it shall be
cast into the outer darkness until the time when
the darkness of the midst shall be up-raised; it
[the soul] will be destroyed and dissolved.

“This is the chastisement of the murderer.”

Peter said: “ My Lord, let the women | cease
to question, in order that we also may question.”

Jesus said unto Mary and the women: “ Give
Opportunity to your men brethren, that they also
may question.”

Peter answered and said: “My Lord, a robber
and thief, whose sin is this persistently, when he
cometh out of the body, what is his chastise-
ment?”

Jesus said: “If the time of such an one is
completed through the sphere, the receivers of
Adonis come after him, and lead his soul out of
the body, and they spend three days circling round
with it and instructing it concerning the creatures
of the world.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the Amente
before Ariel, and he taketh vengeance on it in
his chastisements three months, eight days and
two hours.

“Thereafter they lead it into the chaos before
Yaldabaoth and his forty-and-nine demons, and
every one of his demons taketh vengeance on it
another three months, eight days and two hours.


SIXTH BOOK 319


“Thereafter they lead it on to the way of the
midst, and everyone of the rulers of the way of
the midst taketh vengeance on it through his
dark smoke and his wicked fire another three
months, eight days and two hours.

“Thereafter they lead it up unto the Virgin of
Light, who judgeth the righteous and the sinners,
that she may judge it. And when the sphere
turneth itself, she handeth it over to her receivers,
that they may cast it into the eons of the sphere.
And they lead it forth into a water which is
below the sphere; | and it becometh a seething 384.
fire and eateth into it until it purifieth it
utterly.

“Thereafter cometh Yaluham, the receiver of
Sabaoth, the Adamas, bringeth the cup of forget-
fulness and handeth it unto the soul; and it
drinketh it and forgetteth all things and all the
regions to which it had gone. And they cast it
into a lame, halt and blind body.

“ This is the chastisement of the thief.”

Andrew answered and said: “An arrogant,
overweening man, when he cometh out of the
body, what will happen to him?”

Jesus said: “If the time of such an one is Of the chas-
completed through the sphere, the receivers of oe
Ariel come after him and lead out his soul [out
of the body] and spend three days travelling
round in the world [with it] and instructing
it concerning the creatures of the world.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the Amente
before Ariel; and he taketh vengeance on it
with his chastisements twenty months.

“Thereafter they lead it into the chaos before
Yaldabaoth and his forty-and-nine demons; and


385.


Of the chas-
tisement of
the blas-
phemer.


320 PISTIS SOPHIA


he and his demons, one by one, take vengeance
on it another twenty months.

“Thereafter they carry it on to the way of
the midst; and everyone of the rulers of the way
of the midst taketh vengeance on it another
twenty months.

“And thereafter they lead it unto the Virgin
of Light, that she may judge it. And when the
sphere turneth itself, she handeth it over to her
receivers, that they may cast it into the eons
of the sphere. And the servitors of the sphere |
lead it into a water which is below the sphere;
and it becometh a seething fire and eateth into
it until it purifieth it.

“And Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaoth, the
Adamas, cometh and bringeth the cup with the
water of forgetfulness and handeth it to the soul;
and it drinketh and forgetteth all things and all
the regions to which it had gone. And they cast
it up into a lame and deformed body, so that
all despise it persistently.

“This is the chastisement of the arrogant and
overweening man.”

Thomas said: “A persistent blasphemer, what
is his chastisement?”

Jesus said: “If the time of such an one is
completed through the sphere, the receivers of
Yaldabaoth come after him and bind him by his
tongue to a great demon with a horse’s face;
they spend three days travelling round with him
in the world, and take vengeance on him.

“Thereafter they lead him into the region of
the cold and of the snow, and take vengeance
on him there eleven years.

“Thereafter they lead him down into the


SIXTH BOOK 321


chaos before Yaldabaoth and his forty-and-nine
demons, and every one of his demons taketh
vengeance on him another eleven years.

“Thereafter they lead him into the outer
darkness until the day when the great ruler
with the dragon’s face | who encircleth the dark-
ness, shall be judged. And that soul becometh
frozen up [?] and destroyed and dissolved.

“This is the judgment of the blasphemer.”

Bartholomew said: “A man who hath inter-
course with a male, what is his vengeance?”

Jesus said: “The measure of the man who
hath intercourse with males and of the man
with whom he lieth, is the same as that of the
blasphemer.

“When then the time is completed through
the sphere, the receivers of Yaldabaoth come
after their soul, and he with his forty-and-nine
demons taketh vengeance on it eleven years.

“Thereafter they carry it to the fire-rivers
and seething pitch-seas, which are full of demons
with pigs’ faces. They eat into them and take
vengeance on [?] them in the fire-rivers another
eleven years.

“Thereafter they carry them into the outer
darkness until the day of judgment when the
great darkness is judged; and then they will be
dissolved and destroyed.”

Thomas said: “We have heard that there are
some on the earth who take the male seed and
the female monthly blood, and make it into a
lentil porridge and eat it, | saying: ‘We have
faith in Esau and Jacob.’ Is this then seemly or
not”

Jesus was wroth with the world in that hour


CHAP. 147.


Of the chas-
tisement of
him who
hath inter-
course with
males.


Of the chas-
tisement of

a foul act of
sorcery.


Of the after-
death state
of the
righteous
man who
hath not
been ini-
tiated.


388.


322 PISTIS SOPHIA


and said unto Thomas: “Amen, I say: This
sin is more heinous than all sins and iniquities.
Such men will straight way be taken into the outer
darkness and not be cast back anew into the
sphere, but they shall perish, be destroyed in
the outer darkness in a region where there is
neither pity nor light, but howling and grinding
of teeth. And all the souls which shall be brought
into the outer darkness, will not be cast back
anew, but will be destroyed and dissolved.”

John answered [and said]: “A man who hath
committed no sin, but done good persistently,
but hath not found the mysteries to pass through
the rulers, when he cometh out of the body, what
will happen unto him?”

Jesus said: “If the time of such an one is
completed through the sphere, the receivers of
Bainchoooch, who is one of the triple-powered
gods, come after his soul and lead his soul with
joy and exultation and spend three days circling
round with it and instructing it concerning the
creations of the world with joy and exultation.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the Amente
and instruct it concerning the instruments of
chastisement in the Amente; but they will
not take vengeance on it therewith. But they
will only instruct it concerning them, and the
smoke of the flame of the chastisements | catcheth
it only a little.

“Thereafter they carry it up unto the way of
the midst and instruct it concerning the chastise-
ments of the ways of the midst, the smoke from
the flame catching it a little.

“Thereafter they lead it unto the Virgin of
Light, and she judgeth it and depositeth it with


SIXTH BOOK 323


the little Sabaoth, the Good, him of the Midst,
until the sphere turneth itself, and Zeus and
Aphrodite come in face of the Virgin of Light,
while Kronos and Arés come behind her.

“At that hour she taketh that righteous soul
and handeth it over to her receivers, that they
may cast it into the sons of the sphere. And
the servitors of the sphere lead it forth into a
water which is below the sphere; and a seething
fire ariseth and eateth into it until it purifieth it
utterly.

“Thereafter cometh Yaluham, the receiver of
Sabaoth, the Adamas, who giveth the cup of
forgetfulness unto the souls, and he bringeth
the water of forgetfulness and handeth it to the
soul; [and it drinketh it] and forgetteth all
things and all the regions to which it had gone.

“Thereafter there cometh a receiver of the little of the cup
Sabaoth, the Good, him of the Midst. He himself °°"
bringeth a cup filled with thoughts and wisdom,
and soberness is in it; [and] he handeth it to the
soul. And they cast it into a body which can
neither sleep nor forget because of the cup of
soberness which hath been handed unto it; but |
it will whip its heart persistently to question about
the mysteries of the Light until it find them,
through the decision of the Virgin of Light, and
inherit the Light for ever.”

Mary said: “A man who hath committed all CHap. 147.
sins and all iniquities and hath not found the
mysteries of the Light, will he receive the chastise-
ments for them all at once?”

Jesus answered: “Yea, he will receive  it;. A sinner
if he hath committed three sins, he will receive “yo f°"


each sepat-


chastisement for three. ate sin.


Even the
greatest of
sinners, if

he repent,
shall inherit
the kingdom.


Of the time
favourable
for the birth
of those who
shall find the


mysteries.


390.


The dis-
ciples be-
secch Jesus
to have
mercy upon
them


324 PISTIS SOPHIA


John said: “ A man who hath committed all
sins and all iniquities, but at last hath found the
mysteries of the Light, is it possible for him to be
saved?”

Jesus said: “Such a man who hath committed
all sins and all iniquities, and he findeth the mys
teries of the Light, and performeth and fulfilleth
them and ceaseth not nor doeth sins, will inherit
the Treasury of the Light.”

Jesus said unto his disciples: ““ When the sphere
turneth itself, and Kronos and Arés come behind
the Virgin of Light and Zeus and Aphrodité shall
come in face of the Virgin, they being in their own
zeons, then the veils of the Virgin draw themselves
aside and she falleth into joy in that hour when
she seeth these two light-stars before her. And
all the souls which she shall cast at that hour into
the circuit of the zons of the sphere, that they |
may come into the world, will be righteous and
good and find at this time the mysteries of the
Light; she sendeth them anew that they may find
the mysteries of the Light.

“Tf on the other hand Arés and Kronos come
in face of the Virgin and Zeus and Aphrodite
behind her, so that she seeth them not, then all
the souls which she shall cast in that hour into the
creatures of the sphere, will be wicked and wrath-
ful and do not find the mysteries of the Light.”

When then Jesus said this unto his disciples
in the midst of the Amente, the disciples cried
and wept, [saying]: “Woe, woe unto sinners,
on whom the negligence and the forgetfulness of
the rulers lie until they come out of the body and
ate led to these chastisements! Have mercy
upon us, have mercy upon us, son of the Holy


SIXTH BOOK 325


[One], and have compassion with us, that we may
be saved from these chastisements and_ these
judgments which are prepared for the sinners; for
we also have sinned, our Lord and our Light.”


[A LATER POSTSCRIPT]


. the righteous [man]. They went forth three the pro-
by three to the four zones of heaven and they $2724"
proclaimed the goodness of the kingdom in the *Postes:
whole world, the Christ inworking with them
through the words of confirmation and the signs
and the wonders which followed them. And thus
was known the kingdom of God on the whole
eatth and in the whole world of Israel as a
witness for all the nations which are from the
rising unto the setting [of the sun ].


[Two LINES ERASED. ]


THE END.


C elephais Press


Clthar - Sarkomand |nquanok = Leeds
